Hakluytus Posthumus, or Purchas His Pilgrimes, Vol. 10 (Samuel Purchas, 1625)
==========================================================
Purchas His Pilgrimes (1625) - the 17th century's great sequel to Hakluyt; the largest voyage collection of its age, preserving dozens of narratives otherwise lost. The 20-volume MacLehose reprint (Glasgow, 1905-07), the standard complete edition. Vol. 10 of 20.

Hakluytus  Posthumus
or

Purchas His  Pilgrimes

In Twenty  Volumes

Volume  X

GLASGOW
PRINTED AT THE UNIVERSITY PRESS BY
ROBERT MACLEHOSE &  COMPANY LTD. FOR
JAMES MACLEHOSE AND SONS, PUBLISHERS
TO THE UNIVERSITY OF GLASGOW

MACMILLAN AND CO. LTD.  LONDON

THE MACMILLAN CO.  NEW YORK

SIMPKIN, HAMILTON AND CO.  LONDON

MACMILLAN AND BOWES  CAMBRIDGE

DOUGLAS AND FOULIS  EDINBURGH

MCMV

v  Hakluytus Posthumus

or

Purchas His Pilgrimes

Contayning a History of  the World

in Sea Voyages and Lande Travells

by Englishmen and others

By
SAMUEL PURCHAS^  B.D.

VOLUME  X- 1  0

e<.y°

Glasgow
James MacLehose and Sons

Publishers  to  the  University

.

DEC

■  rr

THE TABLE

The  Contents  of  the  Chapters  and  Paragraphs  in
the  tenth  Booke  of  the  first  part  of
Purchas  his  Pilgrims.

CHAP. I.

Briefe  Collections  of  Voyages,  chiefly  of  Spaniards  and
Portugals,  taken  out  of  Antonie  Galvanos  Book  of
the  Discoveries  of  the  World.  ....

Madera  discovered  by  an  Englishman.  Portugall  Dis-
coveries. Porto  Santo.  Canarie  Hands.  Coasting  the
African  shore.  Indulgences.  Garze  Hands.  The
Azores  first  inhabited.  The  Countrie  of  Guiney
farmed.  Hands  discovered.  First  Discoveries  of
America.  Line  of  partition.  Cabotas  Discoveries.
Trinidada,  Brasil,  Calicut,  first  found.  Spanish  and
Portugall  Discoveries  in  the  East  and  West.  The
Discoveries  of  Bastidas,  Almeida,  Acunna,  and  others.
Discoveries  by  Portugals,  and  Spaniards,  in  the  E.
and  W.  Indies.  Countrie  of  Sian.  Hands  of  Javos.
Ternate.  Amboina,  Banda,  Moluccas,  with  the  rarities
thereof.  Florida  discovered.  Persia  famous  for  beauti-
full  Women.  Voyages  and  Northrene  Discoveries.
Crueltie  of  Savages.  Voyage  for  Slaves.  Aide^desired,
and  obtained.  Discoveries  and  Conquests.  Allume
hills.  Gunpowder  made.  Murther.  Map  of  Cotton-
wooll.  Fleet.  Northerne  Discoveries.  Warre  be-
twixt the  Spaniard  and  Portugall.  Fire  unknowne.
Float-wood.  Sea  passages  in  the  West  Indies.  Famous
Portugall  Travellers.  Incense  Trees.  Snowe.  Car-
tier, Mendoza, Alcazava, Cortes, their Discoveries.

PAGE

THE TABLE

The  Contents  of  the  Chapters — Continued.  page

Hands  where  Devils  familiarly  converse  with  the  People.
Mindanao.  Strange  hogs,  trees,  crabs,  stones,  birds,
snakes.  Springs  of  Tarre,  Salt  Lakes  and  Rockes.
Foules  and  Sheepe  of  Peru.  Discoverie  of  Pizarro
and  Orellana.  First  sight  of  Japon.  Discoveries  in
the  South  Sea,  from  America  to  the  Philippinas.  New
Guinea. Philippinas.

CHAP. II.

The  summe  of  a  Letter  of  Nicholas  Trigautius  a  Jesuite,
touching  his  Voyage  to  India,  and  of  the  State  of
Christianitie  in  China  and  Japan.  A  Letter  also  of
Captaine  R.  Cocke,  and  Relations  of  Master  Roberts
wracke  on  the  Coast  of  China  in  the  Unicorne. .  74

Portugals  compound.  Jesuite-Bishop.  Later  Jesuiticall
intelligence from China  and  Japon.

Extracts  out  of  Trigautius  his  Martyrologe,  or  five  Bookes
of  Christian  Triumphs  among  the  Japonians,  before
mentioned. ........  77

Japonian  Warres.  Emperours  Death.  Rebellion  against
the  New.

A  Letter  concerning  later  Occurrents  in  Japon  from  Master
R.  Cocke  to  Captaine  Saris,  written  at  Firando  in
Japon,  the  thirteenth  of  December 1622.  .  .  80

Japonian  Revenues. Englishmens  usage  in  China.

A  note  of  the  Unicornes  company  in  China. .  .  .  82

CHAP. III.

Letter  touching  Japon  with  the  Government  Affaires
and  later  Occurrents  there  ;  written  to  mee  by  Master
Arthur  Hatch  Minister,  lately  returned  thence.  .  83

Japon  ; the Emperour  ; his Councell, Riches, Presents
policie. Ozaca. Japonian  Rites,  Lawes,  Executions,
Names,  Letters,  Feasts,  Fasts.
vi

THE TABLE

The  Contents  of  the  Chapters — Continued.  page

CHAP.  IIII.

Extracts of  Master Caesar  Frederike  his eighteene  yeeres

Indian  Observations. ......  88

Ormus,  Cambaietta,  strange  Tides.  Many  profits  of  the
Coco-tree.  Coco- commodities.  Bezeneger  sacked.
Treason.  Tyrannic  Wife  burned  with  the  dead
Husband.  Poorer  wives  immured.  Citie,  Court,
Apparell,  Seasons  and  Merchandize  of  Bezeneger.
Goa.  Onor.  Cananor.  Cranganor.  Cochin  devided
into  two  Cities.  Cochin.  Amochi,  and  wide-eared
Nairi.  Jesuites.  Pearle-fishing.  Manar.  Zeilan.
Cinamon-Trees  ;  how  cut  and  used.  S.  Thome.
Andeman.  Huge  Armie  from  Pegu  against  Siam.
Want  of  water.  Marchandise  of  Orisa.  Strong  Tides.
Satagan.  Ethnicke  rites  at  Ganges.  Tanasary.
Nyper  wine.  Siam.  Tortoises.  Tavay.  Martavan.
Pegu.  Huge  Tides.  Great  Tides.  Description  of
Pegu.  Elephants  how  taken.  Foure  white.  Taking
and  taming  of  Elephants.  Greatnesse  of  the  King  of
Pegu.  Riches.  Pompe,  Justice  of  the  King  of  Pegu.
Merchandise.  S.  Tome.  Peguan  commodities  :  Rigor-
ous customing  :  Fertilitie,  Delings.  Bankrupt-law.
Instruction  for  Pegu  Trade.  Their  money  and
Varellas.  Cheap  Rubies  :  honest  Heathens  :  strange
Bargain-rite  :  terrible  TufFon.  Fertile  Sondiva.  Chati-
gan  in  Bengala.  Rachim  or  Arracan.  Journey  betwixt
Aleppo  and  Bagdet.  Recoverie  of  goods  of  Deceased.
Pegu-apparell.

CHAP. V.

Gasparo  Balbi  his  Voyage  to  Pegu,  and  observations  there,

gathered  out  of  his  owne  Italian  Relation.  .  . 143

Course  downe  the  River  Euphrates.  Places  thereon.  Places
on  Euphrates  and  Tigris.  Killing  wind.  Jesuiticall
miracle.  Funerall  Rites.  Devotions  brutish,  cruell,
distracted,  diabolicall.  Troublesome  Talipois  and
Flies.  Tigres  terrible.  Phantasticall  Barke.  Dogon
Varella,  Talipois,  Pilgrimage,  Apes,  Mart,  great  Bell.

THE TABLE

The  Contents  of  the  Chapters — Continued.

Tigres  prevented  by  ladders  and  Buffalos,  Monkies
respected.  800.  Elephants.  Combat  of  two  Kings.
Peguan  crueltie.  Peguan  warres,  Elephants,  Colosses.
Moveable  houses. Siam  invaded.

CHAP. VI.

The  Voyage  of  Master  Ralph  Fitch,  Merchant  of  London,
to  Ormus,  and  so  to  Goa  in  the  East  India,  to  Cambaia,
Ganges,  Bengala  ;  to  Bacola,  and  Chonderi,  to  Pegu,
to  Jamahay  in  the  Kingdome  of  Siam,  and  backe  to
Pegu,  and  from  thence  to  Malacca,  Zeilan,  Cochin,  and
all  the  Coast  of  the  East  India  :  begun  in  the  yeere  of
our  Lord  1  583.  and  ended  1  59 1 . .... 165

Fitches  Voyage  from  Aleppo  to  Bagdet.  Pitch-fountaine.
Basora.  Ormus  and  rites  there.  Diu.  Daman.
Chaul.  Coco-tree.  Pythagoreans.  Fitches  flight  from
Goa.  Echebar  the  Mogol.  Fitch,  Newberie  and
Leades.  Indian  Journey.  Mandoa.  Agra.  Monstrous
Begger.  Pilgrimage  to  Ganges.  Image  of  Ada.  Rites
of  buriall,  physike.  Gold  neere  Ganges.  Lubberly
Prophet.  Hospitals  for  beasts.  Respect  of  Ganges.
Botanter-eares.  Ganges.  Sundiva.  Negrais.  Ladder-
houses.  Shoulder-coaches.  King  of  white  Elephants ;
their  taking  and  imployment.  Odia.  Fitch.  Idols,
Writing,  Scarlets,  Money  and  Merchandize  of  Pegu.
Priests  of  Pegu,  Orders,  Begging.  Devill-physicke.
Fitch.  Funerals.  Gemmes.  Pegu  Yard-bals,  Sutes,
Beards.  Malacca.  Macao.  Jamba-gold.  Zeilan
described.  Elephants  there.  Swoln-legd  Christians.
Samorin  Enemie  to  the  Portugals.  Indian  Spices,
where  growing.

CHAP. VII.

Indian  Observations  gathered  out  of  the  Letters  of  Nicholas
Pimenta,  Visiter  of  the  Jesuites  in  India,  and  of  many
others  of  that  Societie,  written  from  divers  Indian
Regions  ;  principally  relating  the  Countries  and
accidents  of  the  Coast  of  Coromandel,  and  of  Pegu.  .  205
viii

THE TABLE

The  Contents  of  the  Chapters — Continued.  page

Letters  of  Pimenta  and  Fernandes.  Jesuites  Exemptions,
&c.  Pearle-fishing.  Idol-chariots.  Cidambaran-holies.
Jogues  madnesse.  Vencatapadins  proud  Title.  Peguan
Conquests.  Successors  tyrannic  The  Subjects  rebell,
and  perish.  The  Land  a  Wildernesse.  Pest.  King
of  Pegu  beheaded.  His  immense  treasures  sacked :
Jogues.  Cholgonas  charmes.  Naichus  credulitie.
Blacke  Santus  Procession.  Idol-feasts.  Idle-busie  bellies.
300.  women  burne  with  their  husbands.  Portugal
Indian  wages  &  voyage.

CHAP. VIII.

John Huighen van Linschoten his Voyage  to Goa,  and

observations  of  the  East  Indies,  abbreviated. ,  . 222

Of  the  Towne  and  Hand  of  Goa,  chiefe  Citie  of  India. . 225

Description  of  Goa.  Linschoten.  Bardes.  Salsette.
Villages  of  Canariins.  Portugall  government.  Cus-
tomes  of  the  Portugals  which  live  in  India.  Linschoten.
Diversitie  of  Indian  Portugals,  and  manner  of  their  life
at  Goa.  Portugall  Visitations,  Weddings,  Christenings,
Souldiers  at  Goa.  The  life  of  Souldiers,  Portugals,
Mesticos  and  Slaves  in  Goa.  Goan  Jealousie.  Deu-
troan  Divels,  Poysoners,  Neatnesse,  Idlenesse.  Idlenesse
&  Lust  of  the  women  of  Goa.  Viceroy,  Jesuites,
Ethnikes,  &c.  Goan  Idols,  Oracles,  Priests,  South-
sayers,  Houshold-furniture.  Goan  Ethnikes,  Physicians,
Mungrell-Christians,  Seasons,  Diseases.  The  winds,
Summer  and  Winter  in  divers  places  of  India.  Indian
diseases,  dayes,  Bramenes,  Religion,  Marriages,  Attire.
Wife-burning.  Gusarates  &  Banians  will-foole  Fasting,
&c.  Decan  brutish  Holies,  Marriages,  Oathes,  Fasts.
Canariins.  Canariins  customes  in  Child-birth,  long
Life,  Funerals,  Proud  Mariners.  East-African  Cafres.
Ridiculous  Chaine  and  filthy  Honour,  &c.  Malabars.
Nayros  Armes,  Insolencies,  Lusts,  Habit,  Superstition.
Nairos,  Bramenes  &  Polias.  Moores  &  Jewes  in  India,
their  rites.  Image-scruple.  Pagod  described.  Devils-
martyrs.  Idol-sacrary.  Pagode-superstitions.  Indian
Beasts  tame  &  wild.  Bats,  Rats,  Crowes.  Ants  great
and  hurtfull,  and  wormes.  Wilde  beasts,  Monkies,
Elephants. Strange naturall qualities of Elephants

THE TABLE

The  Contents  of  the  Chapters — Continued.  page

related  by  Linschoten.  Gratefull  Elephant.  Historie
of  Rhinoceros.  No  other  Unicorne  knowne.  Sharke-
storie.  Monstrous  Fishes.  Huge  Crabs  and  Shells.
Ananas.  Naturall  historie  of  Indian  Drugges  by
Linschoten.  Jambos.  Strange  tree.  Indian  fruits
and  drugs.  Linschoten.  Indian  figtree  of  divers  sorts  ;
Batatas  and  profitable  Palmetree.  Coco  and  the  mani-
fold commodities  thereof.  Linschoten.  Oile,  Vineger,
Wine,  Sugar,  Paper,  Ships,  Tackling,  Wares,  &c.
Coco.  Description  of  strange  tree,  the  Root-tree,
Night-tree  and  Bettele.  Indians  daily  taking  Arecca
&  Bettele.  The  dangerous  herb  Dutroa.  Homes
taking  root  like  trees,  Pepper,  Cinamon,  Ginger-trees.
Cloves,  Nutmeg,  Cardamomum  Trees,  Lack.  Indian
Drugges  described  by  Linschoten.

CHAP. IX.

Relation  of  Ormuz,  and  of  the  late  taking  thereof  by  the

English  and  Persians. .  .  .  .  .  .318

§.  1.  A  Relation  of  the  Kings  of  Ormuz,  and  of  the  founda-
tion of  the  Citie  of  Ormuz,  taken  out  of  a  Chronicle
which  a  King  of  the  same  Kingdome  composed,  called
Pacaturunxa,  written  in  Arabicke. H. .  .  . 318

K.  Pachaturunxas  history  of  the  foundation  &  proceeding  of
Ormus.  History  of  Ormuz,  Cherman,  Kishme,  Cays,
Jarum,  &c.

§.  2.  Relation  of  Ormuz  businesse  by  Master  W.  Pinder. . 324

Arab  Kings  relation  of  Ormus.  Pinders  Indian  Voyage.
Indian  bold  coast.  English  Sea-fight  with  Portugals.
C.  Shilling  slain.  Kishme  yeelded.  Baffin  slaine.
Ormus  besieged. English  Fleet.

§.  3.  Part  of  a  Letter  written  to  Sir  John  Wostenholme  by
T.  Wilson  Chyrurgion  ;  containing  many  particulars  of
the  Ormus  warre,  and  cause  thereof;  as  also  of  the
most  admirable  taking  of  a  great  Portugall  Ship  well
manned,  by  a  small  English  Pinnesse.  .  .  . 332

x

THE TABLE

The  Contents  of  the  Chapters — Continued.  PAGE

Ruy  Frera  taken.  His  Commission  &  offers.  Kishme
Castle  described.  Filps  an  English  Mastive  taketh
and  tameth  an  Indian  Elephant.  Disastrous  accident
upon  the  firing  of  a  ship,  ships  sunke.

§.  4.  Relation  of  the  late  Ormuz  businesse,  gathered  out  of
the  Journall  of  Master  Edward  Monoxe  the  Agent  of
the  East  Indian  Merchants  trading  in  Persia. .  . 342

Monox.  Can  of  Xiras  desireth  and  exacteth  English  aide
against  Ormus.  Kishme  yeelded  to  the  English.
Ormus  taken,  the  Castle  assaulted.  Portugals  ships
sunke.  Cause  of  the  War  betwixt  the  Port.  &  Persians.
Siege  of  Ormuz  Castle  by  English  forced  forces  and
the  Persians.  Siege  of  Ormus  by  the  Persians  and
Occurrents  therein.  Portugal  powder  Pots,  poore
estate,  desperate  Counsels  at  Ormuz.  Occurrents  in
the  Siege  of  Ormus  Castle.  Port.  Letter  to  England.
Ormuz  Castle  yeelded.  English  kindnes.  Persian
rudenes  to  the  Port.  Letter  of  the  Mamede  Xa  King
of  Ormuz,  to  the  King  of  Spaine.

Letter  and  Certificates  of  divers  Portugals  to  the  English.

The  Vice-Admirall  his  second  Letter. . .  .  .368

A  Certificate  made  by  sundrie  Portugals,  how  the  Treasure,
Jewels,  &c.  belonging  to  the  King  and  his  Vizeer  of
Ormus,  which  were  secretly  conveyed  out  of  the  Castle
of  Ormus  by  the  Persians.  .  .  .  .  .368

A  Certificate  from  the  Portugals,  of  their  kind  usage,  wherein

was  performed  more  then  was  promised  them. .  . 369

Letters  and  Certificates  of  divers  Portugals  to  the  English.

A  Letter  written  from  Ruy  Frera  Dandrada,  and  sent
aboord  the  Jonas,  by  one  of  his  Captaines,  named
Alfonso  Borgea,  at  our  first  arrivall  neare  the  Castle
ofKeshme 370

Another  Certificate  of  the  kinde  usage  of  the  Portugals. . 371

A  third  Certificate. 372

English  sicknes  at  Ormuz  by  immoderate  heat.

xi

THE TABLE

The  Contents  of  the  Chapters — Continued.  page

CHAP. X.

A  briefe  memoriall  of  the  travels  of  the  Right  honorable
Sir  Robert  Sherley  Knight,  Count  and  Knight  of  the
Sacred  Empire,  now  Ambassadour  from  the  Persian
King  to  His  Majestie  and  other  Christian  Kings.  . 374

S.  R.  Sherly  Pers,  Emb.  Briefe  memoriall  of  the  Travells
and  Honors  of  S.  R.  Sherly.  P.  Emb.  His  Patent
whereby  he  was  created  Knight  &  Count  by  Emp.
Rud.  Imperiall  Patent  creating  Sir  R.  Sherly  Knight
&  Count  of  the  Empire.  Imperiall  Patent  to  Sir  Rob.
Sherley.

CHAP. XI.

The  Epitaphs  on  the  Tombe  of  Jacob  Almansor  the  Sara-
cenicall  Emperour,  under  whose  reigne  Spaine  was
subdued  to  the  Moores,  written  by  Mahomet  Algazeli
a  learned  Arabian,  and  graven  in  the  foure  stones  of  his
sumptuous  Monument. .  .  .  . . .386

Epitaphs  of  Jacob  Almansor.  Arabike  Epitaphs  written  on
Almansors  Tombe.

CHAP.  XII.

Master  Thomas  Coryates  Travels  to,  and  Observations  in
Constantinople,  and  other  places  in  the  way  thither,
and  his  Journey  thence  to  Aleppo,  Damasco  and
Jerusalem. .  .  . .  . .  .  389

M.  Coryats  Maturities  or  Observations  in  His  last  and  fatall
Voyage.  Commodities  and  customes  of  Zant  and  Sio
by  Master  Coryat.  Coryats  maturities,  or  observations
in  his  last  Voyage.  Coriats  Maturities.  Survay  of
the  ruines  of  Troy.  New  Trojan  spirit  walking  in  and
talking  of  the  ruines  of  old  Troy.  Troyes  ruines
described  by  a  trustie  Trojan.  New  Knighthood.
Sir  Tom  of  Troy.

THE TABLE

The  Contents  of  the  Chapters — Continued.  PAGE

Master  Coiyates  Oration.  Purus,  putus  Coriatus,  Quint-
essence of  Coryat. ....... 406

Trojan  Oration  more  then  Oratorian.  Oration  more  then
Oratorian  made  by  T.  Coryat  at  Troy.  Coryat  of
Coryat,  or  his  survay  of  Trojan  ruines.

Master  Coryats  Constantinopolitan  Observations  abridged.  . 414

Coryats  Maturities.  Popish  merit  how  allowable.  Toms
false  Fortune.  Colledge  of  Darvises  ;  their  Habit,
giddy  Holies  and  turning  Dances.  Darvises  devotion.
Fire  at  Const.  &  cruell  Custome.  Lampe-feasts.
Turks  entrance  into  Constantinople,  his  pompous
state.  Grashoppers.  Coryats  maturities  :  Turkish  and
Constantinopolitan  observations.  Jew  and  Turke  Cir-
cumcised. 20000.  Dogs  banished.  Muftis  charitie.
Turkes  solemnities.  Fire-workes.  Jewish  Tabernacle-
feast-rites.  Jewish  Circumcision,  Tabernacle-feast.
Greek  Vines.  Turks  Zeale.  Drunkards  punishment  :
beastly  Butter,  bad  Cheese.  Const.  Patriarks  house.
Pelican  described.  Parishes  &  Churches  of  Const.
Debts.  Abcdaries.  View  of  Scanderone,  Salt-Vally.
Damasco,  Holy  Land  Armenians.  Fire  stones,  Lots
wife,  Temple-filth,  Easter  light,  Girdles,  Keys.

CHAP.  XIII.

Relations  of  the  Travels  of  W.  Lithgow  Scot  in  Candie,
Greece,  the  Holy  Land,  Egypt,  and  other  parts  of  the
East

Rome,  the  Vatican  Library,  S.  Peters  ;  Naples.  Loretta
Pilgrims.  Loretan  Legend.  Pilgrime-rites  and  fond
conceits.  Lithgoes  Travels.  His  Meditaranean-Sea-
Observations.  Lithgowes  Adriatike  Observations,  and
of  the  Midland-Sea.  Sea-fight  betwixt  Christians  and
Turkes  at  Lepanto.  Survay  of  Arcadia  and  Athens.
Description  of  Candie.  Lithgoe.  Cretan  places  of
note.  Theeves.  Foure  strong  Cities.  Labyrinth.
Ida  described.  Candie.  Canea.  Archipelago.  Angusa.
Pathmos.  Nicaria.  Authors  shipwrack.  Homers
Tombe.  Proud  women  of  Syo.  Jewish  University
at  Salonica,  Pernassus,  Troy.  Janizaries  wages.
xiii

447

THE TABLE

The  Contents  of  the  Chapters — Continued.  page

Gallipoli,  Cenchrea,  Ephesus,  Rhodes,  the  Colosse,
Cyprus,  Tarsus.  Voyage  to  Cyprus  and  Tripoli.
Cedars  and  Greeke  Monks  described.  Eden,  Libanus,
Mouslee-tree.  Turkes  sitting  and  lying  in  bed.
Nazareth  Armenian  Patriarch.  Cruell  extortion  of
Turkes,  &c.  Arabs.  Sychar.  Rama.  Faith,  patience,
money,  Pilgrim-graces  at  Jerus.  Sodome  and
Gomorha.  Jordan  and  Tigris  compared.  Jericho.
Turkish  Moone  in  the  3. Change.

CHAP.  XIIII.

Later  Intelligence  out  of  Turkie,  touching  the  resignation
of  Mustapha,  and  the  advancing  of  Amurath  a
yonger  brother  of  the  lately  murthered  Osman ;  with
other  later  occurrents. ...... 492

Daout  degraded.  Huzin  succeedeth.  Turkish  broiles.  Mus-
tapha resigneth.  Amurath  succeedeth  :  later  Letter.
Late  newes  from  Constantinople.  Cossacks  boldnesse.
Cities  feare.

CHAP.  XV.

Briefe  Extracts  of  a  Journall  of  Arnold  Brown  his  Indian
Voyage,  sayling  divers  times  and  courses  in  five  yeeres
space  to  Bantam,  Patanie,  Japan,  the  Manillas,  Macau,
and  the  coast  of  China,  with  other  Indian  ports.  . 499

Sunnes  irrecoverable  descent.  Dutch  Lion  burned.  Japan
voyage.  Acts  of  the  English  and  Dutch  at  Manilla  in
two  voyages.  Browne.  Indian  Tuffon  or  tempest  at
Sea  :  worse  on  Land  at  Amboyna.

CHAP. XVI.

The  Dutch  late  proceedings  at  Amboyna  in  cruell  torturing
and  executing  of  divers  English  men  ;  with  other  their
like  Acts  to  the  Natives  in  Banda  ;  published  lately
by  the  English-East-Indian  Societie  ;  here  much
abbreviated. .  . .  . .  .  .  507

THE TABLE

The  Contents  of  the  Chapters — Continued.

Tragedie  of  Amboyna.  Cruell  tortures  of  the  English  there.
Tragedie  at  Amboyna  and  at  the  Hands  of  Banda.
Bandeneses  tortured.  What  Dutchmen  the  Indian
sort  are.

PAGE

CHAP. XVII.

A  true  Description  of  the  Bay  Todos  los  Santos  in  Brasil,
and  taking  the  Towne  Salvador  by  the  Admirall
Master  Jacob  Wilkins, 1624. .

Bay  of  All  Saints  described  :  taken  by  the  Dutch  Fleet.
Saint  Salvador  taken.  Rich  spoyles.  Lirma  taken,
if  true.

522

xv

ILLUSTRATION

PAGE

Hondius  His  Map  of  Morea, .... 464

THE  TENTH  VOLUME

OF

Purchas His Pilgrimes

Contayning Praeteritorum  or  Discoveries of

the World,  specially  such as in

the  other  Bookes  are

omitted

Praeteritorum,

or  Discoveries  of  the  World,  specially  such  as
in  the  other  Bookes  are  omitted.

[Ii.x.1671.]

THE TENTH  BOOKE.

Chap.  I.

Briefe  Collections  of  Voyages,  chiefly  of  Spaniards
and  Portugals,  taken  out  of  Antonie  Galvanos
Booke  of  the  Discoveries  of  the  World.

N  the  yeere  n 53.*  in  the  time  of
Fredericke  Barbarossa  it  is  written,  that
there  came  to  Lubec,  a  Citie  of  Germanie,
one  Canoa  with  certaine  Indians,  like  unto
a  long  Barge :  which  seemed  to  have
come  from  the  coast  of  Baccalaos,  which
standeth  in  the  same  latitude  that  Ger-
manie doth :  The  Germaines  greatly  wondered  to  see  such
a  Barge,  and  such  People,  not  knowing  from  whence  they
came,  nor  understanding  their  speech,  especially  because
there  was  then  no  knowledge  of  that  Countrie,  as  now
there  is :  it  may  be  credible  that  though  the  Boate  was
small  in  respect  of  those  huge  Seas,  yet  the  Winde  and
Water  might  bring  them  thither :  as  wee  see  in  these  our
dayes,  that  the  Almadie,  which  is  but  a  small  Boate,
commeth  notwithstanding  from  Quiloa,  Mosambique,  and

*  This  Author
writ  in  Portu-
gal/ a  Sum-
marie  of
Discoveries  in
Chronologic  all
order  from  the
beginning  of
the  world:
hee  was  trans-
lated and
published  in  a
small  book  in
quarto,  An.
1 60 1.  by
Master  Hak-
luyt,  I  have
chosen  these,
which  follow,
out  of  his
booke;  those
which  are  here
omitted,  I  have
more  fully
delivered  in
other  parts  of
this  voluminous
work.

A.D.

"53-

Joannes  Leo
African  us.
Ramusius  I.
vol.fol.  373,

Tombuto.

The  Canarie
Hands.

[II.  x.  1672.]

The  Hand  of
Madera  dis-
covered by
Macham  an
English  man.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Sofala,  to  the  Hand  of  Saint  Helena,  being  a  small  spot  of
Land  standing  in  the  mayne  Ocean  off  the  coast  of  Bona
Speranca  so  farre  separated.

In  the  yeere  1300.  after  the  comming  of  Christ,  the
great  Soldan  of  Cairo  commanded,  that  the  Spiceries  and
Drugs,  and  merchandises  of  India  should  be  carried
through  the  Red  Sea,  as  it  was  used  before :  at  which  time
they  unladed  on  the  Arabian  side,  at  the  Haven  of  Juda,
and  carried  them  unto  the  house  at  Mecca,  and  the
Carriers  of  it  were  the  Pilgrims.  So  that  each  Prince
used  a  custome  to  augment  the  honour,  and  increase  the
profite  of  his  countrie.  And  these  Soldans  had  speciall
regard  to  Cairo,  from  whence  the  wares  were  carried  unto
the  Countries  of  Egypt,  Lybia,  Africa,  the  Kingdomes  of
Tunez,  Tremessen,  Fez,  Marocco,  Suz :  and  some  of  it
was  carried  beyond  the  Mountaines  of  Atlas  unto  the
Citie  of  Tombuto,  and  the  Kingdome  of  the  Jalophos ;
untill  afterwards  that  the  Portugals  did  bring  it  about  the
Cape  of  Bona  Speranca  unto  the  Citie  of  Lisbone,  as  in  the
place  convenient  we  purpose  to  shew  more  at  large.

In  the  yeere  1344.  King  Peter  the  fourth  of  that  name
reigning  in  Arragon,  the  Chronicles  of  his  time  report,  that
one  Don  Luis  of  Cerda,  sonne  unto  the  sonne  of  Don
John  of  Cerda,  craved  aide  of  him  to  goe  and  to  conquere
the  lies  of  the  Canaries,  standing  in  28.  degrees  of  latitude
to  the  North,  because  they  were  given  unto  him  by  Pope
Clement  the  sixt,  which  was  a  French  man.  Whereby
in  those  dayes  there  grew  a  knowledge  of  those  Hands  in
all  Europe,  and  specially  in  Spaine  :  for  such  great  Princes
would  not  begin  nor  enterprise  things  of  such  moment
without  great  certaintie.

About  this  time  also  the  Hand  of  Madera  was  discovered
by  an  English  man,  called  Macham :  who  sailing  out  of
England  into  Spaine,  with  a  woman  of  his,  was  driven
out  of  his  direct  course  by  a  tempest,  and  arrived  in  that
Hand,  and  cast  his  anker  in  that  Haven,  which  now  is
called  Machico,  after  the  name  of  Macham.  And  because
his  Lover  was  then  Sea-sicke,  hee  there  went  on  Land

ANTONIO GALVANO  a.d.

1415.

with  some  of  his  companie,  and  in  the  meane  time  his  ship

weyed  and  put  to  Sea,  leaving  him  there :  whereupon  his

Lover  for  thought  died. Macham,  which  greatly  loved

her,  built  in  the  Hand  a  Chappell  or  Hermitage  to  burie

her  in,  calling  it  by  the  name  of  Jesus  Chappell :  and  wrote

or  graved  upon  the  stone  of  her  Tombe  his  name  and  hers,

and  the  occasion  whereupon  they  arrived  there. After

this  hee  made  himselfe  a  Boate  all  of  a  Tree,  the  trees

being  there  of  a  great  compasse  about,  and  went  to  Sea

in  it  with  those  men  of  his  companie  that  were  left  with

him,  and  fell  with  the  coast  of  Africke  without  Saile  or

Oare,  and  the  Moores  among  whom  hee  came  tooke  it

for  a  miracle,  and  presented  him  unto  the  King  of  that

countrie :  and  that  King  also  admiring  the  accident,  sent

him  and  his  companie  unto  the  King  of  Castile.

In  the  yeere  1395.  King  Henrie  the  third  of  that  name

reigning  in  Castile,  the  information  which  Macham  gave

of  this  Hand,  and  also  the  ship  wherein  hee  went  thither,

mooved  many  of  France  and  of  Castile  to  goe  and  discover

it,  and  the  great  Canarie : And  they  which  went  were

principally the Andaluzes, the Biscaines, and the

Guepuseoes,  carrying  with  them  many  people  and  horses.

But  I  know  not  whether  the  charge  of  that  voyage  was

theirs  or  the  Kings. But  by  whomsoever  it  was  set  out,  The  first  dis-

they  seeme  to  bee  the  first  that  discovered  the  Canaries,  ^"rifst*

and  landed  in  them :  where  also  they  tooke  one  hundred  t^e  christians

and  fiftie  of  the  Ilanders  prisoners. Concerning  the  time 1405.

of  this  discoverie, there  is  some  difference  among  the

Writers : for  some  affirme  this  to  bee  done  in  the  yeere

1405.

THe  Chronicles  of  Portugall  have  this  record,  That  The  first  be-
after  the  Incarnation  of  Christ  141 5.  King  John  the  f^jf*
first  of  that  name  King  of  Portugall,  departed  from  the  Discoveries.
Citie  of  Lisbone  with  the  Prince  Don  Duarte  or  Edward,
and  Don  Peter,  and  Don  Henrie  his  sonnes,  with  other
Lords,  and  Nobles  of  his  Realme,  and  sailed  into  Africa,
where  he  tooke  the  great  Citie  of  Ceuta,  standing  on  the

3

A.D.
1415.

John  de
Barros  Asice,
Dec  ad.  1.
lib.  1.  cap.  2.

Cape  de  Non.

Cape  Bojador.

The  Canarie
Hands  con-
quered.

Porto  Santo.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

North  side  thereof  betweene  35.  and  36.  degrees  in  1
latitude :  which  was  one  of  the  principall  causes  of  the  1
enlarging  of  the  Dominions  of  Portugall.

When  they  were  come  from  thence,  Henrie,  the  Kings  J
third  sonne,  desirous  to  enlarge  the  Kingdome,  and  to  I
discover  strange  and  unknowne  Countries,  being  then  in  J
Algarbe,  gave  direction  for  the  discoverie  of  the  coast  of  I
Mauritania. For  in  those  dayes  none  of  the  Portugals  had  1
ever  passed  the  Cape  de  Non,  standing  in  29.  degrees  of  I
latitude. And for the better accomplishing of this  j
discoverie,  the  aforesaid  Don  Henrie  prepared  a  fleete,  and  j
gave  commandement  to  the  chiefe  Captaines  to  proceede  in  \i
discoverie  from  the  aforesaid  Cape  forward :  Which  they  I
did. But when they came to another Cape named
Bojador,  there  was  not  one  of  them  that  durst  goe  farther  .
or  beyond  it :  at  which  fearfull  and  cowardly  faintnesse  of
theirs,  the  Prince  was  exceedingly  displeased.

In  the  yeere  141 7.  King  John  the  second  reigning  in  j :
Castile,  and  his  mother  Lady  Katharine  then  using  the
government,  one  Monsieur  Ruben  of  Bracamonte,  which !
was  then  Admirall  of  France,  craved  the  conquest  of  the
Hands  of  the  Canaries,  with  the  title  to  be  King  of  them,
for  a  kinsman  of  his,  called  Monsieur  John  Betancourt :  I
which  being  granted  him  by  the  Queene,  and  farther  also
partly  furnished  out,  he  departed  from  Sivil  with  a  good
armie :  But  the  chiefe  or  principall  cause  that  moved  him
to  enter  into  this  action,  was  to  discover  and  perfectly  to
take  a  view  of  the  Hand  of  Madera,  whereof  Macham
before  had  given  so  much  information.  But  for  all  that
he  went  unto  the  Canaries,  and  carried  with  him  a  Friar,
called  Mendo,  to  bee  as  Bishop  thereof,  admitted  by  Pope
Martin  the  flft.  When  they  were  landed,  they  wonne
Lancerota,  Forteventura,  Gomera,  and  Ferro :  fromjj
whence  they  sent  into  Spaine  many  Slaves,  Hony,  Waxe,
Comfora  or  Camfire,  Hides,  Orchall,  Figs,  Sanguis
Draconis,  and  other  merchandises,  whereof  they  made
good  profit :  And  this  Armie  also,  as  they  report,  dis-
covered Porto  Santo. The  Hand  that  they  inhabited  was

ANTONIO GALVANO  ad.

1420.

Lancerota,  where  they  built  in  it  a  Castle  of  stone  for
their  better  defence  and  securitie.

In  the  yeere  141 8.  one  John  Gonzales  Zarco,  and  John  de
Tristam  Vaz  Teixera,  houshold  Gentlemen  unto  Don  ar^f0S  *ca  '
Henrie  the  Kings  third  sonne,  perceiving  the  desire  that
their  Master  had  to  discover  new  Countries,  and  willing
in  that  course  to  doe  him  some  service,  craved  of  him  a
Barke,  and  licence  to  undertake  the  action :  which  they
obtayned,  and  sailed  to  the  coast  of  Africa :  where  they
were  overtaken  with  a  terrible  tempest ;  but  they  were
succoured  by  falling  with  the  Land,  and  entring  into  an
Haven  called  Santo,  where  they  landed,  and  remayned
two  yeeres.

In the yeere 1420. they discovered the Hand of  BarrosDecad.
Madera,  where  they  found  the  Chappell  and  the  Stone l', n°^'\
and  Tombe,  whereupon  the  foresaid  Macham  had  graven  buntL
his  name. There  are  others  that  write,  that  a  certaine  Macham
Castillian,  perceiving  the  desire  and  favour  to  Navigation,  found  in
which  Don  Henrie  had,  told  him  that  they  had  found  the  ^dera\
Hand  of  Porto  Santo  ;  which  being  but  a  small  thing  they  pQ'rt0  Santo
made  no  reckoning  of  it. Don  Henrie  sent  Bartholomew
Perestrello,  John  Gonzales  Zarco,  Tristam  Vaz  Teixera,
and  by  the  signes  and  likelihoods  that  they  had  received,
they  went  to  Porto  Santo,  and  there  remayned  two  yeeres :
and  after  that,  namely,  in  the  yeere  1420.  they  sailed  also
to  the  Hand  of  Madera,  where  they  found  the  memoriall
and moniment of the aforesaid Macham the English
man.

As for Monsieur Betancourt, who entred into the
Conquest  of  the  Canaries,  as  is  above  mentioned,  he  was
slaine  in  the  middest  of  the  action,  and  left  behinde  him
for  his  heire  a  kinsman  of  his,  called  Monsieur  Menante,
who  after  that  sold  the  said  Hands  of  the  Canaries  unto  The  Canarie
one  Peter  Barba  of  Sivil. There  are  other  which  speake  llands  sold
otherwise,  and  say,  that  Monsieur  John  Betancourt  went  °sZnfard
into  France  to  prepare  a  new  Armie  about  this  Conquest,
and  left  there  a  Nephew  of  his ;  who  because  he  heard  no
more  of  his  Uncle,  and  saw  that  hee  could  not  maintaine

A.D.

1420.

Barros  Decad.
1.  lib.  1.
cap.  12.

The  Canaries
came  to  the
Crowne  of
Spaine  in  the
yeere  1431.
Description  of
the  Canaries.

The  ancient
manners  of
Canarians.

The  commodi-
ties of  the
Canaries.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

the  warres  any  longer,  he  sold  the  Canaries  to  Don  Henrie
the  King  of  Portugals  third  sonne,  for  a  certaine  thing
that  he  gave  him  in  the  Hand  of  Madera.

In  the  yeere  1424.  they  write  that  the  said  Don  Henrie
prepared  a  Navie  and  Armie  to  conquer  these  Hands,
wherein  there  went  as  Captaine  Generall,one  Don  Fernando
de  Castro  ;  and  by  reason  of  the  valiantnesse  and  warlike
behaviour  of  the  people,  they  had  the  repulse  :  whereupon
Don  Ferdinando,  considering  the  great  charge,  and  little
or  no  good  successe,  hee  gave  over  the  action,  and  returned
back  againe.  After  this  Don  Henrie  resigned  over  these
Hands  to  the  Crowne  of  Castile,  in  consideration  of  the
aides  which  Betancourt  had  received.  But  the  Castillians
agree  not  unto  this  report.  For  they  say,  that  neither  the
Kings  of  Portugall,  nor  Don  Henrie  would  render  the
Hands,  till  they  came  in  question  before  Pope  Eugenius
the  fourth ;  who  fully  understanding  the  matter,  gave  the
Conquest  of  the  Hands  by  order  of  judgement  unto  the
King  of  Castile  in  the  yeere  1431.  whereupon  this  con-
tention ceased  touching  the  Title  of  the  Canaries,  betweene
the  Kings  of  Portugall  and  of  Castile.

These  Hands  being  in  number  seven,  were  called  by  the
name  of  Fortunatae,  standing  in  28.  degrees  to  the  North  :
where  the  longest  day  is  but  thirteene  houres,  and  the
longest  night  as  much,  lying  distant  from  Spaine  two
hundred  leagues,  and  from  the  Coast  of  Africa  eighteene
leagues.  The  people  were  Idolaters,  and  did  eate  their
flesh  raw  for  want  of  fire :  they  had  no  Iron,  and  sowed
without  any  toole :  they  tilled  and.raised  the  ground  with
Oxe  homes,  and  Goats  homes.

Every  Hand  did  speake  a  severall  language.  They
tooke  many  wives,  and  knew  them  not  carnally  untill  they
had  delivered  them  to  the  Superiours.  They  had  divers
other  Paganish  customs :  but  now  the  Christian  faith  is
planted  among  them.  The  commodities  of  these  Hands
are  Wheat,  Barly,  Sugar,  Wine,  and  certaine  birds,  called
Canarie  birds,  much  esteemed  in  Spaine  and  other  places.

In  the  Hand  of  Ferro  they  have  none  other  water,  but

6

ANTONIO GALVANO  a.d.

H34-

that  which  proceedeth  in  the  night  from  a  Tree,  compassed  *  Treeyeeld-

with  a  cloud,  whence  water  issueth, serving  the  whole  ™f£J££fa*

Hand  both  Men  and  Cattell,  a  thing  notorious  and  knowne  Ferr0m

to  very  many.  See  Tom.  2.

In  the  yeere  1428.  it  is  written  that  Don  Peter,  the  /•  7-  '•  5- M-

King  of  Portugals  eldest  sonne,  was  a  great  traveller. He  i^^ZTJe

went  into  England,  France,  Almaine,  and  from  thence  into  J

the  Holy  Land,  and  to  other  places ; and  came  home  by

Italie,  taking  Rome  and  Venice  in  his  way :  from  whence

hee  brought  a  Map  of  the  World,  which  had  all  the  parts  £^^

of  the  World  and  Earth described. The Streight of  Map rthe

Magelan  was  called  in  it,  The  Dragons  taile  :  The  Cape  of  world.

Bona  Speranca,  The  forefront  of  Afrike,  and  so  forth  of  A  great  helpe

other  places: by  which Map, Don  Henrie  the  Kings  to  Don  Henrie

third sonne, was much helped and furthered in his  '* '.
. J  *  coveries.

Discoveries.

It  was  told  mee  by  Francis  de  Sosa  Tavares,  that  in  the
yeere 1528.  Don  Fernando  the  Kings  sonne  and  heire
did  shew  him  a  Map,  which  was  found  in  the  studie  of
Alcobaza,  which  had  beene  made  one  hundred  and  twentie
yeeres  before,  which  Map  did  set  forth  all  the  Navigation
of  the  East  Indies,  with  the  Cape  of  Bona  Speranca,
according  as  our  later  Maps  have  described  it. Whereby
it  appeareth,  that  in  ancient  time  there  was  as  much  or  As  much  dis-
more  discovered, then now there is. Notwithstanding  covere<l™
all  the  travaile,  paines,  and  expences  in  this  action  of  Don  a  "  •
Henrie,  yet  he  was  never  wearie  of  his  purposed  Dis- BarrosDecad.
coveries. At  length,  there  was  a  servant  of  his,  called 1.  lib,  1.  cap,
Gilianes,  that  first  passed  the  Cape  Bojador,  a  place  before  4-
terrible  to  all  men :  and  hee  brought  word  that  it  was  not  ^ff^fr
so  dangerous,  as  it  was  reported :  for  on  the  other  side  of  Anno  w\z.
it  he  went  on  land,  and  in  manner  of  taking  possession,
set  in  the  ground  a  Crosse  of  wood,  to  bee  as  a  marke  and
token  afterwards  of  his  discoverie  so  farre. In  the  yeere  The  death  of
1433.  in  the  moneth  of  August,  Don  John  died,  and  his 'Don  John  the
sonne Don Duarte or Edward succeeded him in his  firstofPortu-
Kingdome.  <  zL™/W

In  the  yeere  1434.  Don  Henrie  set  out  one  Alfonso \Jib.i.cap$.

A.D.

1434-

The  death  of
Don  Duarte
King  of
Portugal/.

[II.  x.  1674.]

Barros  Decad.
1.  lib.  1.  cap.

7-

Cape  Blanco.

Indulgences
granted  to
encourage  to
this  enter-
prise.

Rio  de  Oro,
why  so  called.

The  Hands  of
Arguin.

The  Hands  of
Garze.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Gonsales  Baldaia,  and  Gilianes  aforesaid,  and  they  went
to  another  Cape,  which  was  beyond  the  former,  and  going
on  land  perceived  the  Countrie  to  be  inhabited :  and
because  they  were  desirous  to  satisfie  Don  Henrie,  with  as
much  relation  and  knowledge  as  they  could  get,  they
continued  their  voyage,  and  went  forward,  till  they  came
to  a  certaine  point  of  Land,  from  whence  they  turned
backe  againe.  In  the  yeere  1438.  King  Edward,  whom
the  Portugals  call  Don  Duarte,  died,  and  Don  Alphonso
the  Prince  being  yong,  Don  Peter  his  Uncle,  governed
the  Kingdome.

In  the  yeere  1441.  Don  Henrie  sent  out  two  ships,  and
the  Captaines  were  in  the  one  Tristan,  and  Antonie
Gonsales  in  the  other.  Being  put  to  Sea  they  tooke  a
prize  upon  the  Coast ;  and  sailed  on  to  Cape  Blanco,  that
is,  the  White  Cape,  standing  in  20.  degrees,  and  informed
Don  Henrie  of  the  state  of  that  Countrie  by  the  Moores,
which  they  brought  from  thence.  Whereupon  hee  sent
one  Fernan  Lopez  de  Savado,  to  give  knowledge  thereof
to  Pope  Martin,  trusting  to  make  these  things  commodious
to  Holy  Church.  Upon  which  knowledge  the  Pope
granted  Indulgences  and  everlasting  pardon,  and  all  other
things  demanded  of  him,  unto  those  which  should  die  in
this  enterprise.  After  this,  in  the  yeere  1443.  Don  Henrie
commanded  Antonie  Gonsales  to  carry  backe  the  slaves
which  he  had  brought,  and  to  ransome  them  in  their
Countrie :  Which  he  did,  and  the  Moores  gave  them  in
trucke  for  them  againe  blacke  Moores  with  curled  haire,
and  some  gold ;  so  that  now  that  place  is  called  Rio  de
Oro,  that  is,  the  Golden  River ;  whereby  the  desire  of  the
Discoverie  might  be  the  more  increased.

Not  long  after  he  sent  out  another,  named  Nunnez
Tristan,  who  came  unto  the  Hands  of  Arguin,  where  he
tooke  more  slaves,  and  brought  them  to  Portugall  in  the
yeere  1444.  Hereupon  also  one  Lansarote,  a  Groome  of
Don  Gilians  chamber,  with  others  associated  with  him,
armed  out  certaine  ships,  which  went  coasting  till  they
came  to  the  Hands  of  Garze,  where  they  tooke  two  hundred

8

ANTONIO GALVANO  a.d.

1 447-

slaves  :  which  were  the  first  that  were  brought  from  thence
to  Portugal!

In  the  yeere  1445.  there  went  as  Captaine  of  a  Barke
one  Gonsalo  de  Syntra,  an  Esquire  belonging  to  Don
Henrie  into  those  parts ;  and  he  went  on  Land,  where  he
was  taken  with  sixe  or  seven  more  of  his  companie,  which
place  was  therefore  called  after  his  name,  Angra  de  dngra  de
Gonsalvo  de  Syntra.  This  was  the  first  losse,  which  the  f™"*™  de
Portugals  received  in  their  Discoveries.  yn ra'

In  the  yeere  following,  Don  Henrie  sent  out  three
Caravels,  wherein  went  as  Captaines  Antonie  Gonsales,
Diego  Aloizio,  and  Gomes  Perez,  who  had  their  direction,
not  to  enter  into  Rio  de  Oro,  nor  to  beare  themselves
disorderly,  but  to  travaile  in  peace,  and  to  convert  as  many
Infidels  as  they  could  to  Christianitie.  But  none  of  these
things  were  performed  by  them  ;  for  they  returned  without
doing  any  memorable  act.  In  the  same  yeere  1446.
another  Esquire  belonging  to  the  King  of  Portugall,
called  Denis  Fernandes,  of  the  Citie  of  Lisbone,  entred
into  these  Discoveries,  more  to  win  fame  then  to  reape
commoditie  by  them.  And  he  being  in  his  voyage  came
to  the  River  of  Sanaga,  standing  betweene  15.  and  16.  The  River  of
degrees  of  latitude  towards  the  North,  where  he  tooke  SanaSa-
certaine  Negroes ;  and  not  contented  therewith,  hee  went
forward  and  discovered  Cape  Verde,  standing  in  14.  Cape  Verde.
degrees  on  the  same  side ;  and  there  hee  set  up  upon  the
Land  a  Crosse  of  wood,  and  then  returned  with  great
contentation.

In  the  yeere  1447.  one  Nunnez  Tristan  went  forth  to
discover  in  a  Caravell,  and  he  passed  the  aforesaid  Cape
Verde,  and  Rio  Grande,  and  went  past  it  unto  another,  Rio  Grande.
standing  beyond  it  in  12.  degrees,  where  he  was  also  taken
with  eighteene  Portugals  more :  but  the  ship  came  home
againe  in  safetie,  conducted  by  foure  or  five  which  escaped
the  hands  of  the  Negroes.

In  this  yeere  also  1447.  it  hapned  that  there  came  a
Portugall  ship  through  the  Streight  of  Gibraltar;  and
being  taken  with a  great  tempest, was  forced to  run

9

A.D.

1447-

A  strange
report,  if  true.
The  Hand  of
seven  Cities.

Don  Alfonso
King  of  Portu-
gal! come  to
age.

The  Azores
first  inhabited.
Alcazer
taken.

The  Castle  of
Arguin
builded.

The  lies  of
Cape  Verde
discovered  by
three
Genowais.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Westwards  more  then  willingly  the  men  would,  and  at
last  they  fell  upon  an  Hand  which  had  seven  Cities,  and
the  people  spake  the  Portugall  tongue,  and  they  demanded
if  the  Moores  did  yet  trouble  Spaine,  whence  they  had
fled  for  the  losse  which  they  received  by  the  death  of  the
King  of  Spaine,  Don  Roderigo.  The  Boatswaine  of  the
ship  brought  home  a  little  of  the  Sand,  and  sold  it  unto  a
Gold-smith  of  Lisbon,  out  of  the  which  hee  had  a  good
quantitie  of  gold.  Don  Pedro  understanding  this,  being
then  Governour  of  the  Realme,  caused  all  the  things  thus
brought  home,  and  made  knowne,  to  be  recorded  in  the
house  of  Justice.  There  be  some  that  thinke,  that  those
Hands  whereunto  the  Portugals  were  thus  driven,  were
the  Antiles,  or  New  Spaine,  alleaging  good  reasons  for
their  opinion,  which  here  I  omit,  because  they  serve  not
to  my  purpose.  But  all  their  reasons  seeme  to  agree,
that  they  should  be  that  Countrie,  which  is  called  Nova
Spagna.

In  the  yeere  1449.  tne  King  Don  Alfonso  gave  licence
unto  his  Uncle  Don  Henrie,  to  inhabit  the  Hands  of  the
Acores,  which  were  long  before  discovered.  And  in  the
yeere  1458.  this  King  went  into  Africa,  and  there  hee
tooke  the  Towne,  called  Alcacor.  And  in  the  yeere  1461.
hee  commanded  Signior  Mendez,  a  Gentleman  of  his
House,  to  build  the  Castle  of  Arguin,  whereof  he  gave
unto  him  the  government,  as  to  his  Lieutenant.

In  the  yeere  1462.  there  came  into  the  Realme  of
Portugall  three  Genowais  of  good  parentage,  the  chiefe
of  whom  was  called  Antonie  de  Noli,  and  of  the  other
two,  the  one  was  his  brother,  the  other  was  his  nephew,
and  each  of  these  had  his  severall  ship,  craving  libertie  of
Don  Henrie  to  discover  the  Hands  of  Cape  Verde,  which
was  granted  them.  Others  say,  that  the  places  which  they
discovered,  were  those  which  Antiquitie  called  the  Gor-
gades,  Hesperides,  and  Dorcades :  but  they  named  them
Mayo,  Saint  Iago,  and  Saint  Philip,  because  they  dis-
covered them  on  those  Saints  dayes :  but  they  are  also
called  by  some,  the  Hands  of  Antonio.

10

ANTONIO GALVANO  a.d.

1481.

In  the  yeere  following  1463.  this  good  noble  man  Don  The  death  of
Henrie  died,  leaving  from  Cape  De  Non,  discovered  unto °" enrie
the  mountaine  called  Sierra  Leona,  standing  on  this  side  sierra  Leona.
the  Line  in  eight  degrees  of  latitude,  where  no  man  had
beene  before  that  time.

In  the  yeere  1469.  the  King  of  Portugall  did  let  out  LILx'I,675j-'
for  yeerely  Rent  the  trade  of  Guiney  unto  one  called  J  aJ£"2 *  2#l
Fernan  Gomez,  which  Countrie  afterwards  was  called  The  The  Countrie
Mine. He  let  it  out  for  five  yeeres,  for  two  hundred  of  Guiney  let
thousand  Reyes  by  the  yeere  (which  is  of  our  English  outtofarme.
money, one hundred thirty eight pounds seventeene l
shillings  nine  pence  halfpeny)  and  added  unto  his  lease
this  condition, that  every  yeere  he  should  discover  an
hundred leagues. In the yeere following, which was
1470.  this  King  went  into  Africa,  with  his  sonne  Prince
John,  where  they  tooke  the  Towne  of  Arzila,  and  the  drzih  taken.
people  of  the  Citie  of  Tanger  fled  out  for  feare,  and  that  Tanger  taken.
he  took  also. It  seemeth  that  good  fortune  followeth  a
couragious  attempt.

In  the  yeere  147 1.  Fernan  Gomes  gave  commandement  Ibidem.

that  the  Coast  should  be  discovered  as  it  lay. Which  was

undertaken  by  John  de  S.  Aren,  and  John  de  Scouar ; and

they  went  and  found  the  Mine  in  5.  degrees  of  latitude.  La  Mina.

And  the  next  yeere,  which  was  1472.  one  Fernando  de  Ibidem.

Poo  discovered  the  Hand  now  called  after  his  name. Also  ^ f

about  this  time  the  Hands  of  Saint  Thomas,  and  Del  Poo

Principe  were  discovered,  standing  under  the  Line,  with  Sainct  Thome.

the  firme  Land  also,  wherein  is  the  Kingdome  of  Benin,  RhadelPrin-

reaching  to  the  Cape  De  Santa  Katarina,  standing  on  the  cj?e\

South  side  of  the  Line  in  7.  degrees. The  man  that  made  nJU'i*  ***,**
^- -r\-  •  i- 1 tr-  11-  Lapede  banta

this  Discovene  was  a  servant  or  the  Kings,  and  his  name  Katarina.

was  Sequeira. Many  suppose,  that  then  also  there  were

those  places,  Countries  and  Hands  discovered,  which  before

were  never  knowne  to  us  since  the  Floud.

In  the  yeere  1480.  the  valiant  King  Don  Alfonso  died,

and  left  many  things  worthie  of  memorie  behind  him ; on °  n  f  e

and  his  sonne  Don  John  the  Second  succeeded  him. Who  Barns  decad.

in  the  yeere  148 1.  gave  direction  for  the  building  of  the  1.  /.  3.  c.  2.

n

A.D.
1 48  I.

Castle  de
Mlna  built.

Rio  de  Congo.

Discoverie
neere  unto  the
Tropike  of
Capricorne.

Pepper  of
Benin.

Barros  decad.
1./.  3.  c.  5.
Pedro  de
Covillan  and
Alfonso  de
Payva  sent  to
discover  India.

Alexandria.

Cairo.

Toro.

Aden.

Cananor.
Calicut.
Goa.
Sofala.

Mosambique.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Castle  De  Mina  to  one  Diego  d'Azambuxa ;  who  did  so,
and  was  made  Captaine  of  it.

In  the  yeere  1484.  the  foresaid  King  John  sent  out  one
Diego  Caon  a  Knight  of  his  Court  to  discover :  and  he
went  to  the  River  of  Congo,  standing  on  the  South  side
in  7.  or  8.  degrees  of  latitude;  where  he  erected  a  Pillar
of  stone  with  the  Royall  Armes  and  Letters  of  Portugall,
wherein  he  wrote  the  commandement  that  he  had  received
from  the  King,  with  the  time  and  day  of  his  being  there.
From  thence  he  went  unto  a  River  neere  the  Tropike  of
Capricorne,  setting  still  up  Pillars  of  stone  where  he
thought  it  convenient,  and  so  came  backe  againe  unto
Congo,  and  to  the  King  of  that  Countrie :  who  there-
upon sent  an  Ambassador  and  men  of  credit  into
Portugall.

In  the  next  yeere  or  the  second  following,  one  John
Alonso  dAveiro  came  from  the  Kingdome  of  Benin,  and
brought  home  Pepper  with  a  taile :  which  was  the  first  of
that  kind  seene  in  Portugall.

In  the  yeere  1487.  King  John  sent  to  discover  India
over  Land.  In  which  Journey  went  one  Pedro  de
Covillan  a  servant  of  the  Kings,  and  Alfonso  de  Payva,
because  they  could  speake  the  Arabian  tongue.  They
went  out  in  the  moneth  of  May,  and  the  same  yeere  they
tooke  shipping  at  Naples,  and  arrived  in  the  He  of  Rhodes,
and  lodged  in  the  house  that  was  provided  for  the
Portugall  Knights  of  that  order :  from  thence  they  went
to  Alexandria,  and  so  to  Cairo,  and  thence  to  the  Haven
of  Toro  in  the  companie  of  the  Caravans  or  Carriers  which
were  Moores.  There  they  tooke  shipping,  and  being  on
the  Red  Sea  they  arrived  at  the  Citie  of  Aden,  and  there
they  separated  themselves :  for  Alfonso  de  Payva  went
towards  ^Ethiopia,  and  Pedro  de  Covillan  into  India.
Who  came  into  the  Cities  of  Cananor  and  Calicut,  and
came  backe  unto  Goa :  where  he  tooke  shipping  unto
Sofala,  being  on  the  Coast  of  Africa  in  the  Southerne
latitude  of  20.  degrees,  to  see  the  Mines  that  were  of  so
great  name. From  Sofala  he  turned  backe  to  Mosam-

12

ANTONIO GALVANO  a.d.

1490.

bique, and  unto the  Cities  of  Quiloa, Mombaza, and Qpiloa.
Melinde, till  he  came  backe  againe  unto the  Citie  of  M°eJin^a'
Aden  : where  he  and  Alfonso  de  Payva  divided  them-
selves :  and  thence  hee  sayled  againe  through  the  Red  Sea
unto  the  Citie  of  Cayro,  where  he  thought  to  have  met
with  his  companion : but  there  hee  heard  that  he  was
i  dead  by  the  Letters  that  he  received  from  King  John  his
Master; in  which  Letters  he  was  farther  commanded  to
travell  into the  Countrie  and  Dominions  of  Presbyter
John. Upon this  commandement he  provided  for his  TaeFoyageof
farther  Journey,  and  from  Cayro  went  backe  againe  to  the  Qovman  unt0
Haven  of  Toro,  and  from  thence  to  Aden,  where  hee  had  tne  Countrie
beene  twice  before :  and  there  hearing  of  the  fame  of  the  ofPreteJanni.
Citie  of  Ormuz,  he  determined  to  goe  thither ;  and  there-
fore  went along the Coast of Arabia unto the Cape  CaPe  Razal-
Razalgate  standing  under  the  Tropike  of  Cancer,  and  from  g
thence  he  went  to  Ormuz,  standing  in  27.  degrees  on  that  Ormuz.
side. There  he  learned  and  understood  of  the  Straight  of
Persia,  and  of  that  Countrie : and  entred  there  into  the
Red  Sea,  and  passed  over  to  the  Realme  of  the  Abassini,  Abassini.
which  commonly  is  called  Presbyter  Johns  Countrie  or
^Ethiopia :  and  there  he  was  detained  till  the  yeere  1520.
when  there  came  thither  the  Ambassador  Don  Roderigo  de
Lima  :  This  Pedro  de  Covillan  was  the  first  Portugal!  that  Pedro  de

ever  knew  and  saw  the  Indias  and  those  Seas,  and  other £ov[  £n  [ „

,  ...  .  first  Portugal!

places  adjoyning  thereunto. ^  that  came  int0

In  the  yeere 1490. the  King  sent  unto  Congo one  the  East  India
Gonzalo  de  Sosa  a  Gentleman  with  three  ships,  and  in  and  Ethiopia
them  sent  home  the  Ambassador  of  Congo,  which  was  ^  the  Red
sent  unto  Portugall,  whom  Diego  Caon  had  brought  from  Garros  decad.
thence:  who  at  his  being  in  Portugall  was  baptised  both  1.  lib.  i.e.y.
himselfe and others or his companie. The aforesaid
Gonzalo  de  Sosa  died  in  that  Journey  by  the  way,  and  in  [II.  x.  1676.]
his  roome  they  chose  his  Nephew  Ruy  de  Sosa  for  their
Captaine ; and  so  being  come  unto  Congo,  the  King  was
very  glad  of  their  comming,  and  yeelded  himselfe,  and  the  0ff^%^
greater  part  of  his  Realme  to  be  baptized : whereof  the  dome  of  Congo
Portugals  had  good  cause  to  re  Joyce,  seeing  by  them  so  baptized.

13

A.D.

1490.

The  first  that
in  sayling  are
thought  to  have
observed  lati-
tudes. See  of
this  Voyage
sup.  I.  2 .  pag.
11.

Contention
betweene  the
Kings  of
Spaine  and
Portugal!.

The  Bull  of
donation.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

many Infidels were converted from Gentilisme and;
Paganisme  to  Christianitie.

In  the  yeere  1492.  in  the  time  of  Don  Ferdinando  King
of  Castile,  he  being  at  the  siege  of  Granada,  dispatched
one  Christopher  Columbus  a  Genoway  with  three  ships  to
goe  and  discover  Nova  Spagna :  who  first  had  offered  hisj
service  for  a  Westerne  discoverie  unto  King  John  of)
Portugall ; but  he  would  not  entertaine  him.

Hee  being  sufficiently  furnished  for  this  enterprise
departed  from  the  Towne  of  Palos  the  third  day  of
August,  having  with  him  as  Captaines  and  Pilots  Martin
Alfonso  Pinzon,  Francis  Martinez  Pinzon,  Vincent  Yannes;
Pinzon,  and  Bartholomew  Columbus  his  brother,  with  an:
hundred  and  twenty  persons  more  in  his  companie :  and  i
some  affirme  that  they  were  the  first  that  sayled  by(
latitudes.

Hereupon  there  grew  such  a  common  desire  of  travellj
among  the  Spaniards,  that  they  were  ready  to  leape  into
the  Sea  to  swimme,  if  it  had  beene  possible,  into  those!
new-found  parts. The  aforesaid  companie  of  Columbus,
at  their  comming  home,  tooke  in  their  way  the  lies  of  the  1
Acores,  and  the  fourth  day  of  March  in  the  yeere  1493.
they  entred  into  the  barre  of  Lisbon : which  discoverie
pleased  not  the  King  of  Portugall. Whereupon  rose  a
contention  betweene  those  two  Kings.

Christopher  Columbus  being  arrived,  went  presently
into  Castile  with  the  newes  of  all  things,  and  acquainted
the  King  Fernando  with  the  discontentednesse  of  the  King
of  Portugall :  whereupon  he  and  the  Queene  Isabella  his
wife  sent  streight  word  thereof  unto  Pope  Alexander  the
Sixt,  whereat  he  and  the  Italians  were  in  great  admiration,
marvelling  that  there  was  any  more  Land  besides  that
which  was  under  the  Romanes.  But  the  end  of  this
matter  was  this  :  Alexander  the  Pope  gave  these  Countries
by  his  Judgement  unto  the  Kingdomes  of  Leon  and
Castile ;  with  this  condition,  That  they  should  labour  to  |
extirpate  Idolatrie,  and  plant  the  holy  Faith  in  those
Countries.

14

ANTONIO GALVANO  a.d.

H93-

Fernando  the  King  having  received  this  answere,  was
glad  of  it,  and  sent  Christopher  Columbus  againe  on  the
Former  Voyage,  having  made  him  Admirall,  and  given  him
other  honours,  with  particular  Armes,  and  a  Posie  written  Gomara  his-
about  his  Armes  to  this  effect. For  Castile  and  for  Leon,  Jn*  ^[1  '
A  new  world  found  out  Colon.

In  the  yeere  1493.  the  five  and  twentieth  of  the  moneth  ffj^^
of  October  Christopher  Columbus  went  back  unto  the  s  co ^  *
Antiles,  and  from  Cadiz  he  tooke  his  course,  having  in  his
companie  seventeene  ships,  and  fifteene  hundred  men  in
them, with his brethren Bartholomew Columbus, and
Diego  Columbus,  with  other  Knights,  Gentlemen,  men
of  Law,  and  Religious  men,  with  Chalices,  Crosses,  rich
ornaments,  and  with  great  power  and  dignitie  from  Pope
Alexander; and  the  tenth  day  after  their  setting  forth,
they  arrived  at  the  Canaries ; and  from  thence  in  five  and
twenty  or  thirty  dayes  they  sayled  unto  the  Antiles ; and
the  first  Hand  that  they  saw  standeth  in  14.  degrees  towards
the  North,  due  West  from  Cape  Verde  on  the  coast  of
Africa. They  say  that  the  distance  from  thence  to  the
Canaries  is  eight  hundred  leagues. The  name  they  gave  L>eseada  dis-
it  was  Deseada,  that  is,  the  Desired  or  wished  Hand,  for  covered-
the  great  desire  which  the  companie  had  to  come  to  sight
of  Land. After  that  they  discovered  many  more  which
they named the Virgines, which the Naturals of the  Las  Virghes.
Countrie call the Caribas, for that the men of that  Caribas.
Countrie  are  good  warriers, and shoot  well in Bowes.
They  poison  their  Arrowes  with  an  herbe,  whereof  he  that
is  hurt  dieth,  biting  himselfe  like  as  a  madde  Dog  doth.

From  these  Hands  and  others  they  went  unto  the
principall  Hand  there,  which  they  of  the  Countrie  doe  call
Boriquen,  and  the  Spaniards  call  it  Saint  John,  and  thence  Boriquen  or
to  Hispaniola  or  Isabella,  where  they  found  all  the  men  s-Johnde
dead  which  there  they  had  left.  Here  the  Admirall  left
the  most  part  of  the  people  to  plant  it,  and  appointed  his
brethren  to  bee  Governours  there :  and  so  tooke  tv/o
ships,  and  went  to  discover  the  other  side  of  the  Hand  of
Cuba,  and  from  thence  to  Jamaica. All  these  Hands  stand  Jamaica.

15

A.D.

H93-

See  sup.  I.  2.
c  i.  §.  7.

The  first  line
of  partition.

The  death  of
Don  John  the
Second.

[II.  x.  1677.]

The  great  dis-
covery of  John
Cabota  and
the  English.
His  sonne
Sebastian  was
the  chiefe  Dis-
coverer of  the
American
Continent  on
the  Easterne
shores  that
ever  hath
lived,  as  in  the
next  tome  will
often  appeare.
The  Countrey
now  called
New  Scotland

PURCHAS HIS PILGBIMES

from  16.  unto  20.  degrees  of  Northerly  latitude.  In  the
meane  time  that  the  Admirall  sayled  about,  his  brethren  and
they  that  were  left  with  them  were  much  troubled,  because
the  Savages  did  rise  against  them.  So  that  Christopher
Colon  went  backe  againe  into  Spaine,  to  tell  the  King  and
Queene  of  his  adventures.

In  the  yeere  1494.  and  in  the  moneth  of  January  there
was  an  agreement  made  of  the  differences  which  were
betweene  the  two  Kings  of  Spaine  and  Portugall.  For
the  which  agreement  there  were  sent  out  of  Portugall  Ruy
de  Sosa,  and  Don  John  his  sonne,  and  the  Doctor  Ayres
de  Almada :  and  for  the  King  of  Spaine  there  were  Don
Henry  Henriques,  Don  John  de  Cardenas,  and  the  Doctor
Maldonado.  All  these  met  in  the  Towne  of  Tordesillas,
and  they  divided  the  World  from  the  North  to  the  South
by  a  Meridian  which  standeth  West  from  the  Hands  of
Cape  Verde  300.  leagues :  so  that  the  one  halfe  which  lay
to  the  East  should  belong  unto  Portugall,  and  that  which
lay  to  the  West  to  the  King  of  Spaine,  whereby  notwith-
standing libertie  to  travell  was  left  equall  unto  both.  In
the  yeere  following  1495.  John  King  of  Portugall  died,
and  Emmanuel  his  Cousin  began  to  raigne.

In  the  yeere  1496.  there  was  a  Venetian  in  England,
called  John  Cabota,  who  having  knowledge  of  such  a  new
Discoverie  as  this  was,  and  perceiving  by  the  Globe,  that
the  Hands  before  spoken  of  stood  almost  in  the  same
Latitude  with  his  Countrey,  and  much  neerer  to  England
then  to  Portugall,  or  to  Castile,  hee  acquainted  King
Henrie  the  seventh  then  King  of  England  with  the  same,
wherewith  the  said  King  was  greatly  pleased,  and  furnished
him  out  with  two  Ships  and  three  hundred  men :  which
departed  and  set  sayle  in  the  Spring  of  the  yeere,  and  they
sayled  Westward  till  they  came  in  sight  of  land  in  45.
degrees  of  Latitude  towards  the  North,  and  then  went
straight  Northwards  till  they  came  into  60.  degrees  of
Latitude,  where  the  day  is  eighteene  houres  long,  and
the  night  is  very  cleere  and  bright.  There  they  found  the
ayre  cold,  and  great  Hands  of  ice,  but  no  ground  in  an

16

ANTONIO GALVANO  a.d.

1497.

hundred  fathoms  sounding: and  so  from  thence  finding  discovered  by
the  land  to  turne  Eastwards,  they  trended  along  by  it  £«*■*  «*"*
discovering  all  the  Bay  and  River  named  Descada,  to  see  cofomlusfad
if  it  passed  on  the  other  side : Then  they  sayled  backe  seen  tfo  Qon-
againe  till  they  came  to  38.  degrees  toward  the  Equinoctiall  tinent.
line,  and  from  thence  returned  into  England. There  be
others  which  say,  that  hee  went  as  farre  as  the  Cape  of
Florida,  which  standeth  in  25.  degrees.

In  the  yeere  1497.  the  King  of  Spaine  Don  Fernando  Columbus
sent  out  Christopher  Columbus  with  sixe  ships,  and  hee  f" ®a&'
himselfe  provided  two  ships  at  his  owne  cost,  and  sending  histor.  general.
his  brother  before,  he  made  sayle  from  the  Bay  of  Cadiz,  lib. \. cap. 21.
carrying  with  him  his  Son  Don  Diego  Colon. It  was
then  reported  that  he  went  to  take  the  Hand  of  Madera,
because  he  mistrusted  the  French-men,  &  therfore  sent
thither  three  ships : others  say  it  was  to  the  Canaries.
But  howsoever  it  was,  this  is  true,  that  he  and  three  more
went  unto  the  Hands  of  Cape  Verde,  and  ranne  along  by
the  line  finding  great  calmes  and  raine,  and  the  first  land
which  they  came  unto  of  the  Antiles  was  an  Hand  standing
in  9.  degrees  of  Latitude  towards  the  North  joyning  fast
unto  the  maine  land,  which  they  called  La  Trinidada ; Trinidada.
and  so  he  entred  into  the  Gulfe  of  Paria,  and  came  out  of
the  mouth  which  they  name  Bocca  de  Dragone,  or  the
Dragons  mouth :  and  they  tooke  their  course  hard  by  the
Coast,  where  they  found  three  small  Hands,  which  they  Testigos.
named  Los  Testigos,  that  is  to  say,  The  Witnesses,  beyond  jpiFf'o  I
which standeth the Hand of  Cubagua, where is great  ^railes
fishing  of  muscle  Pearles :  where  also,  as  they  say,  there  Roaues,
springeth  a  Well  of  oyle : and  beyond  that  Hand  they  4ruba,Cura-
came  to  the  lies  of  Frailes,  Roques,  Aruba,  and  Curacao,  C~^CJ  v  ,
with  other  small  ones  all  along  the  Bay :  and  they  came  to  ^eata.
the  point  of  Cabo  de  Vela,  and  discovered  along  the  Coast  Barm  decad.
almost  two  hundred  leagues,  from  whence  they  crossed 1.  /.  4.  c.  2.
over  to  Hispaniola,  having  had  also  sight  of  the  Hand  and  t0  the  cnd
called  Beata.  cfal.^Sce

In  this  same  yeere  1497.  on  the  twentieth  day  of  the  Sup.'l.2.c.  i.
moneth  of  June,  one  Vasques  de  Gama,  sayled  from  Lisbon  ss.  7.
x  17  B

A.D.

H97-

The  Cape  of
Bona
Speranza.
Mosambique.

Mombaza.
Mellnde.

Los  Baxos  de
Padua.

Calicut.

Gomara
histor.  general.
lib.

Brasil  dis-
covered.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

by  the  King  Emmanuels  commandement  to  India  with
three  ships,  wherein  there  went  for  Captaines  Vasques  de
Gama,  Paulus  de  Gama  his  brother,  and  Nicolas  Coello
with  one  hundred  and  twentie  men  ;  with  whom  also  there
went  one  ship  laden  onely  with  victuals,  and  in  fourteene
dayes  they  came  unto  Cape  Verde,  unto  the  Hand  of  Saint
Iago,  where  they  refreshed  themselves,  and  from  thence
they  went  along  the  coast  beyond  the  Cape  of  Bona
Speranza,  whereupon  they  erected  certayne  Pillers  of
stone,  and  so  came  unto  Mosambique,  standing  in  15.
degrees  to  the  South  of  the  line,  where  they  stayed  not
long,  but  went  from  thence  to  Mombaza,  and  unto
Melinde :  where  the  King  of  that  place  gave  them  Pilots,
which  conducted  them  into  India,  in  which  discoverie  they
found  out  Los  Baxos  do  Padua,  that  is  to  say,  the  flats  of
Padua.

In  the  yeere  1498.  in  the  moneth  of  May,  they  came  toi
an  anker  before  the  Citie  of  Calicut,  and  Panana,  where;
they  remained  all  the  winter :  and  the  first  day  of
September  they  set  sayle  towards  the  North,  discovering
the  Coast  all  along  till  they  came  to  the  Hand  of  Angediva
which  standeth  on  that  side  in  15.  degrees  of  latitude,
where  they  came  to  an  anker  in  the  beginning  of  October
and  so  they  departed  from  Angediva  in  Februarie,  in  th<
yeere  1499.  an^  came  m  sight  of  the  coast  of  Africa  about
Melinde  towards  the  North  3.  or  4.  degrees,  and  from:
thence  they  sayled  unto  the  said  Citie,  and  so  untol
Mozambique  againe,  and  to  the  Cape  of  Bona  Speranza
sayling  along  by  the  Coast,  and  then  they  came  to  the
Hands  of  Cape  Verde,  and  last  of  all  to  the  Citie  of
Lisbon  in  the  moneth  of  September,  having  beene  in  th
voyage  six  and  twentie  moneths.

In  the  yeere  1499.  on  the  thirteenth  day  of  the  moneth
of  November,  there  departed  from  Palos  one  Vincent
Yannez  Pinson  and  his  nephew  Aries  Pinson,  with  foun
ships  well  appointed  at  their  owne  cost  and  charges,  to
discover  the  new  world  under  the  licence  of  the  King  of
Castile,  and  with  commandement  not  to  touch  there,  where

18

ANTONIO GALVANO  a.d.

1500.

the  Admirall  Columbus  had  beene. And  so  they  went  to
the Hands  of  Cape  Verde, and  passed the  line  to the
Southward,  and  discovered  the  Cape  of  Saint  Augustine, The  Cape  of
standing  on  that  side  in  8.  degrees  of  latitude,  and  there ' u&us  tne-
they  wrote  on  the  rindes  of  Pine  trees  the  names  of  the
King  and Queene, also the  yeere  and day  when they
arrived  there. They  fought  with  the  people  of  Brasil,  but
got  nothing,  they  tooke  their  course  all  along  the  coast
towards  the  West  unto  the  River  Maria  Tambal,  and  at  Rio  de  Maria
that  time  they  had  taken  thirtie  and  odde  Prisoners. The
chiefe  places  where  they  touched  were  the  Cape  of  S.
Augustine,  and  the  angle  or  point  of  S.  Luke,  and  Tierra  ^ngla  de  San
de  los Humos, the Rivers of Marannon, and of the  rjj  ''16781
1  Amazones,  and  Rio  dolce,  or  the  Sweet  River,  and  other fte  rivers  of
'■  places  along  the  Coast:  and  they  came  to  10.  degrees  of  Marannon,
latitude  on  the  North  side,  where  they  lost  two  ships  and  Amazones,
i  their  companie,  and  remained  in  that  Voyage  of  disco verie  andRloDolce-
I  ten  moneths  and  fifteene  dayes.

In  the  yeere  1500.  and  in  the  moneth  of  March,  one  Barros  decad.
Pedro  Alvarez  Cabral  sayled  out  of  Lisbon  with  thirteene *'  l  '  5* ca?'
ships,  with  commandement  not  to  come  neere  the  coast  of
Africa  to  shorten  his  way ; and  he  losing  the  sight  of  one
J  of  his  ships,  went  to  seeke  her,  and  in  seeking  of  her  lost
1  his  course,  and  sayled  till  he  came  within  sight  of  the  land.
The  Generall  was  so  long  in  seeking  his  ship,  that  the
'  companie  were  wearie  of  it,  and  entreated  him  to  leave
his  enterprise. The  next  day  they  fell  in  sight  of  the
Coast  of  Brasil : whereupon  the  Generall  commanded  a
Barke  to  goe  to  land  and  seeke  a  haven :  which  they  did,
and  found  a  good  and  safe  haven,  and  they  named  it
Puerto  Seguro,  that  is  to  say,  The  safe  Haven,  standing  on Puerto  Seguro
the  South  side  in  17.  degrees  of  latitude. From  thence  tn  BrasiL
J  they sayled towards the Cape of Bona Speranca, and
I  Melinde,  and  crossed  over  to  the  River  of  Cochin,  which
before  was  not  knowne,  where  they  laded  themselves  with
Pepper,  and  at  their  returne  Sancho  de  Thouar  discovered
the  Citie  of  Sofala  upon  the  coast  of  Africa.  Sofa/a.

In  this  same  yeere 1500.  it  is  reported  that  Gaspar

19

A.D.

1500.

Cortereals
Discover'ie  of
the  'North  of
America,
divers  y  ceres
after  Cabots
and  the
English.

Many

entrances  of
Rivers  in  the
North-west.

Barros  decad.
I.  lib.  5.  cap.
10.

Isla  de  Ascen-
sion.

The  lie  of
Santa  Helena.

Bezequiche.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Cortereal  craved  a  generall  licence  of  the  King  Emmanuel
to  discover  the  New  found  land.  Hee  went  from  the
Hand  Tercera  with  two  ships  well  appointed  at  his  owne
cost,  and  hee  sayled  unto  that  climate  which  standeth  under
the  North  in  50.  degrees  of  latitude,  which  is  a  land  now
called  after  his  name ;  and  hee  came  home  in  safetie  unto
the  Citie  of  Lisbon :  And  making  another  time  this
voyage,  the  ship  was  lost  wherein  he  went,  and  the  other
came  backe  into  Portugall.  Wherefore  his  brother
Michael  Cortereal  went  to  seeke  him  with  three  ships  well
appointed  at  his  owne  cost ;  and  when  they  came  unto  that;
Coast,  and  found  so  many  entrances  of  Rivers  and  Havens
every  ship  went  into  her  severall  River,  with  this  rule  and
order,  that  they  all  three  should  meet  againe  the  twentieth!:
day  of  August.  The  two  other  ships  did  so,  and  they
seeing  that  Michael  Cortereal  was  not  come  at  the  day!
appointed,  nor  yet  afterwards  in  a  certaine  time,  returned!
backe  into  the  realme  of  Portugall,  and  never  heard  any
more  newes  of  him,  nor  yet  any  other  memorie.  But;
that  Countrey  is  called,  The  land  of  Cortereall  unto  this
day.

In  this  yeere  rjoi.  in  the  moneth  of  March,  John  de
Nova  departed  from  the  Citie  of  Lisbon  with  foure  ships.;
and  passed  the  line  on  the  South  side  into  8.  degrees  of
latitude,  and  he  discovered  an  Hand,  which  he  called  the
He  de  Ascension  :  and  hee  went  unto  Mosambique,  and  tc
Melinde,  and  from  thence  he  crossed  over  unto  the  othei
side,  where  they  tooke  lading,  and  so  came  backe  and
doubled  the  Cape,  and  found  an  Hand  called  Santa  Helena
being  but  a  small  thing,  but  yet  of  great  importance  ir
respect  of  the  situation  thereof.

In  this  same  yeere  1501.  and  in  the  moneth  of  May
there  departed  out  of  Lisbon,  three  ships  upon  the  com-
mandement  of  Emmanuel  the  King  to  discover  the  coasi
of  Brasil :  and  they  sayled  in  the  sight  of  the  Canaries
and  from  thence  to  Cape  Verde,  where  they  refreshec
themselves  in  the  Towne  of  Bezequiche,  and  passed  fron
thence  beyond  the  line  Southward,  and  fell  with  the  lane

20

ANTONIO GALVANO  a.d.

1502.

of  Brasill  in  5.  degrees  of  latitude,  and  so  went  forward  Srastldts-

till  they  came  in  32.  degrees  little  more  or  lesse,  according  '£' 32'

as  they  accounted  it,  and  from  thence  they  came  backe  in

the  moneth  of  Aprill,  because  it  was  there  at  that  time

cold  and  tempestuous. They  were  in  that  voyage  fifteene

moneths,.  and  came  to  Lisbon  againe  in  the  beginning  of

September,  1502.

In  the  yeere  1502.  one  Alfonso  Hoieda  went  to  dis-  Gomarahist.

cover  Terra  firma,  and  followed  his  course  till  he  came  to  g^^a'  *

the  Province  of  Uraba.  ^  Although  this

The  next  yeere  following,  also  one  Roderigo  Bastidas  of  Tome  doe  not

Sivill  went  out  with  two  Caravels  at  his  owne  cost,  and  the  properly  con-

first  land  of  the  Antiles  that  hee  saw  was  an  Hand  which  ^  0CQcur~

he  named  Isla  Verde,  that  is,  the  Greene  Hand,  standing  jmer-lca:  »et

fast  by  the  Hand  of  Guadalupe,  towards  the  land : and  because  in  this

'  from  thence  they  tooke  their  course  towards  the  West  to  Chrono/ogie

I  Santa  Martha,  and  Cape  De  la  Vela,  and  to  Rio  Grande,  *Jjj*%™

y  or  the  Great  river,  and  they  discovered  the  Haven  of  Zltothe^ast

](  Zamba,  the  Coradas,  Carthagena,  and  the  Hands  of  Saint  partly  Spanish

: Barnard,  of  Baru,  and  Islas  de  Arenas,  and  went  forward  to  the  West,

unto  Isla  fuerte,  and  to  the  point  of  Caribana,  standing  at  **  cottff  not

1 the  end  of  the  Gulfe  of  Uraba,  where  they  had  sight  of  J  5  °w  T!

s  the  Farrallones  standing  on  the  other  side  hard  by  the  may  also  serve

I  River  of  Darien,  and  from  Cape  De  la  Vela  unto  this  as  a  Preface

place  are  two  hundred  leagues : and  it standeth in 9.  or  Prologue  to

\  degrees  and  two parts  of  latitude. From  thence they  the  follozvtn&
.0,1 ° j  riTiir-r-  1  1 American

.crossed over unto the Hand or Jamaica, where they  reiat\mu

V  refreshed  themselves. In  Hispaniola  they  graved  their

' ships  because  of  the  holes  which  certaine  wormes  of  the

h  water  had  eaten  into  the  plankes. In  that  Countrey  they

got  foure  hundred  markes  of  Gold,  although  the  people
!  there  be  more  warlike  then  in  Nova  Spania : for  they
^y\  poison  their  arrowes  which  they  shoote.

In  this  same  yeere  1502.  Christopher  Columbus  entred

the  fourth  time  into  his  discoverie  with  foure  ships,  at  the
j  commandement  of  Don  Fernando  to  seeke  the  Straight,

which  as  they  said  did  divide  the  land  from  the  other  side,
,  and  he  carried  with  him  Ferdinando  his  sonne. They

21

A.D.

1502.

[II.  x.  1679.]

Cabo  Gracias
a  Dios.
Veragua.

Rio  de

Chagres.

Is  la  de  Basti-
mentos.
Puerto  Bello.
N ombre  de
Dios.

The  Cape  of
Marble.

Barros  decad,
8.  lib.  6.  cap.

The  Hand  of
Mosambique.

Cattell  and
Camels  fed
with  dried
fish.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRTMES

went  first  to  the  Hand  of  Hispaniola,  to  Jamaica,  to  the
River  Azua,  to  the  Cape  of  Higueras,  and  unto  the  Hands
Gamares,  and  to  the  Cape  of  Hunduras,  that  is  to  say,
the  Cape  of  the  Depthes  :  from  thence  they  sayled  towards
the  East  unto  the  Cape  Gracias  a  Dios  and  discovered  the
Province  and  River  of  Veragua,  and  Rio  Grande,  and
others  which  the  Indians  call  Hienra.  And  from  thence
he  went  to  the  River  of  Crocodiles,  which  now  is  called
Rio  de  Chagres,  which  hath  his  springs  neere  the  South
sea,  within  foure  leagues  of  Panania,  and  runneth  into  the
North  Sea :  and  so  he  went  unto  the  Hand  which  hee
called  Isla  de  Bastimentos,  that  is  the  He  of  Victuals,  and
then  to  Puerto  Bello,  that  is,  the  Faire  Haven,  and  so
unto  Nombre  de  Dios,  and  to  Rio  Francisco,  and  so  to  the
Haven  of  Retrete,  and  then  to  the  Gulfe  of  Cabesa
Cattiva,  and  to  the  Hands  of  Caperosa,  and  lastly  to  the
Cape  of  Marble,  which  is  two  hundred  leagues  upon  the
Coast :  from  whence  they  began  to  turne  againe  unto  the
Hand  of  Cuba,  and  from  thence  to  Jamaica,  where  he
grounded  his  ships  being  much  spoyled  and  eaten  with
Wormes.

In  this  yeere  also  1502.  Don  Vasques  de  Gama  being
now  Admirall,  went  againe  into  India  with  nineteene  or
twentie  Carvels.  Hee  departed  from  Lisbon  the  tenth
day  of  Februarie,  and  by  the  last  day  of  that  moneth  he
came  to  an  anker  at  Cape  Verde,  and  from  thence  he  went
unto  Mosambique,  and  was  the  first  that  crost  from  that
Hand  into  India  :  and  hee  discovered  another  in  4.  degrees
of  Latitude,  which  he  called  the  Hand  of  the  Admirall,
and  there  he  tooke  his  lading  of  Pepper  and  Drugs,  and
left  there  one  Vincent  Sodre  to  keepe  the  Coast  of  India
with  five  ships.  These  were  the  first  Portugals  that  with
an  Armie  did  runne  along  the  Coast  of  Arabia  Foelix.  It
is  there  so  barren,  that  their  Cattell  and  Camels  are  onely
maintayned  with  drie  Fish  brought  from  the  sea ;  whereof
there  is  such  plentie  and  abundance,  that  the  Cats  of  the
Countrey  doe  use  to  take  them.

In  the  yeere  following,  as  it  is  reported,  one  Antonie  de

22

ANTONIO GALVANO  a.d.

1505.

ie  Saldania,  discovered  the  Hand  which  in  old  time  was  called

is  Coradis,  and  now  Socotora,  and  the  Cape  of  Guardafu,  Socotora.

•  which  adjoyneth  unto  that  Countrey  %tr%fi.

Is In the yeere 1504. Rodengo de Bastidas obtayned

e  licence  of  King  Ferdinando,  and  by  the  meanes  of  John

d  de  Ledesma,  and  others  of  Sivill,  armed  and  furnished  out

e  two  ships,  having  for  his  Pilot  one  John  de  Cosa  of  Saint

i  Marie  Port,  and  he  went  to  discover  that  part  of  Tierra

L  firma, where now standeth Carthagena, being in 10.  Carthagena.

e  degrees  and  a  halfe  of  Northerly  latitude. And  it  is  said

e  that  they  found  the  Captaine  Luis  de  la  Guerra  ;  and  they

i  together  tooke  land  in  the  He  of  Codego,  where  they  tooke  Codego.

)|  sixe  hundred  persons  of  the  Savages:  And  going  farther

t  along  the  Coast  they  entred  into  the  Gulfe  of  Uraba, Uraba.

1  where  they  found  Sand  mingled  with  Gold,  being  the  first  Golden  sand.

\  that  was  brought  to  the  King  Don  Ferdinando  : from

; thence  they  returned  to  the  Citie  of  Santo  Domingo  laden

:  with  Slaves  without  victuals,  because  they  of  the  Countrey

:  would  not  bargaine  with  them,  which  grew  to  their  great

trouble  and  griefe. In  the  latter  end  of  this  yeere  dyed  The  death  °f

Ladie  Isabella  Queene  of  Castile : Which  Queene  while  £***  Is*~
I  she  lived  would  not  suffer  any  man  of  Arragon,  Catalunia,

Valencia,  nor  any  borne  in  the  Countrey  of  Don  Fernando

her  husband  to  enter  into  these  discoveries,  save  those

which  were  there  Servants,  or  by  speciall  commandement,
jl  but  onely  the  Castillians,  Biscaines,  and  those  which  were

of  her  owne  Signories,  by  whom  all  the  lands  aforesaid  were

discovered.

In the yeere 1505. upon our Lady day in March,  Barrosdecad.

Francisco  de  Almeida  Viceroy  of  India,  tooke  his  course  lm  llh-  8-  caP-
\  with  two  and  twentie  sayles  towards  India  as  now  is  accus-  3'
i  tomed. He  came  unto  the  Citie  of  Quiloa,  where  he  built  ^  Fort  huilt

a  Fort, appointing  one  Peter Fereira  to  bee  Captayne  m  Qmioa-
I  thereof :  and  beyond  Melinde  hee  traversed  to  the  Hand

of  Angediva,  where  he  placed  as  Captaine  one  Emmanuell  dngediva
!  Passavia. In  Cananor  also  he  built  another  Fort,  giving  ^f0*^  '.*,  ,
I  the  Captainship  of  it  to  Laurence  de  Brito. In  Cochin  he  in  Qananor
I  did  the  like,  where  Don  Alfonso  de  Noronia  was  made  and  in  Cochin.

23

A.D.

1505.
A  Fortbuilded
in  Sofa/a.

Hands  of
Maldiva.

Ceilan.

J  dams  foot-
step.

The  death  of
Philip  the  first
King  of
Spaine.  1506.

The  death  of

Christopher

Columbus.

Bezequiche  is
by  Cape
Verde.
The  lies  of
Tristan  de
Acunnain  37.
degrees.
[II.  x.  1680.]

Samatra  dis-
covered.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Captayne.  This  yeere  one  Peter  de  Amhaya  did  build
the  Fortresse  of  Sofala,  whereof  also  himselfe  was  made
Captayne.  In  the  latter  end  of  this  yeere,  the  Viceroy
commanded  his  Sonne,  whose  name  was  Don  Laurenzo  to
make  some  entrie  upon  the  Hands  of  Maldiva,  and  with
contrarie  weather  he  arrived  at  the  Hands,  which  of  ancient
time  were  called  Traganae,  but  the  Moores  called  them
Yiterubenero,  and  wee  call  them  Ceilan :  where  he  went
on  land,  and  made  peace  with  the  people  there,  and  after-
ward came  backe  unto  Cochin,  sayling  along  the  Coast  and
fully  discovering  it.  In  the  middest  of  this  Hand,  there
stands  a  Rocke  of  stone  very  high  having  the  signe  of
the  foot  of  a  man  upon  the  top  of  it,  which  they  say  to  be
the  footstep  of  Adam,  when  he  went  up  into  the  Heavens,
and  the  Indians  have  it  in  great  reverence.

In  the  yeere  1506.  after  the  death  of  the  Queene  of
Spaine,  King  Philip  and  Queene  Joan  his  wife,  came  into
Spaine  to  take  possession  thereof,  and  King  Don  Fernando
went  into  Arragon  being  his  owne  Patrimonie.  In  this
same  yeere  the  said  King  Philip  dyed,  and  then  Fernando
came  againe  to  governe  Spaine,  and  hee  gave  licence  unto
all  Spaniards  to  goe  unto  the  New  Land,  &  to  the  Antiles,
but  not  to  the  Portugals.  In  this  yeere  &  in  the  month  of
May  Christopher  Columbus  dyed,  and  his  Son  Don  Diego
Columbus  succeeded  in  his  roome  (Admirall  of  the  West
Indies).  In  the  yeere  1506.  in  the  moneth  of  March
Tristan  de  Acunna  and  Alfonso  de  Albuquerque  went  into
India  with  14.  ships  in  their  company,  &  sayled  til  they
came  to  an  anker  at  the  Town  of  Bezequiche,  where  they
refreshed  themselves  :  and  before  they  came  to  the  Cape  of
Bona  Speranca  in  37.  degrees  they  found  certaine  Hands,
which  now  are  named  the  Isles  of  Tristan  de  Acunna,
where  they  had  such  a  tempest  that  therewithall  the  Fleet
was  disperced.  Tristan  de  Acunna  and  Alfonso  de
Albuquerque  went  unto  Mosambique,  and  Alvara  Telez
ranne  so  farre  that  he  came  to  the  Hand  of  Samatra,  and
so  backe  againe  unto  the  Cape  of  Guardafu ;  having
discovered  many  Hands,  Sea,  and  Lands  never  seene  before

24

ANTONIO GALVANO  a.d.

1509.

that  time  of  any  Portugall. Emmanuel  Telez  de  Meneses

was  also  driven  without  the  great  Hand  of  S.  Laurence,  and

he  ran  along the  coast thereof,  and  arrived  at  last  at

Mosambique,  and  there  met  with  Tristan  de  Acunna,  who

was  the  first  Captaine  that  wintred  there ; and  by  them  it

was  told,  that  in  this  Hand  was  much  Ginger,  Cloves  and

Silver : whereupon  he  went  and  discovered  much  of  it  The  Inland

within the  land; but  finding nothing he came backe  ^.fjf"™"

againe  unto  Mosambique; from  whence  he  sayled  unto

Melinde,  and  ran  along  that  coast  and  entred  into  Brava, Brava.

and  from  thence  they  crost  over  to  the  Hand  of  Socotora,

where  they  built  a  Fortresse,  and  made  one  Don  Antonio  d  Fortresse

de  Noronia  Captaine  thereof.  ^fjn

In  the  yeere  1507.  in  the  moneth  of  August,  Tristan  b  arm  dec  ad.
de  Acunna tooke shipping for India, and  Alfonso de  2.  lib.  2.  cap.
Albuquerque  remained  there  with  five  or  sixe  ships  to 1.
keepe  the  coast  and  entrie  of  the  Straight ; but  being  not
therewith  satisfied  hee  tooke  his  course  over  unto  Arabia,
and  running  along  that  coast  he  doubled  the  Cape  of  The  Cape  of
Rosalgate,  standing  under  the  Tropike  of  Cancer.  Rosalgate.

In  the  yeere  1509.  one  Diego  Lopez  de  Sequeira  went  Barrosdecad.
out of  Lisbon  with foure sayle  unto the Hand of S. 2- ltb-  +• caP-
Laurence,  and  continued  in  his  voyage  almost  a  yeere,  The  lie  of  S.
and  in  the  moneth  of  May  the  same  yeere  he  arrived  in  Laurence.
Cochin,  where  the  Viceroy  gave  him  one  ship  more :  and
in  the  beginning  of  the  moneth  of  September,  he  tooke
his  course  unto  Malacca  passing  between  the  Hands  of  The  Hands  of
Nicubar,  and  many  others : He  went  also  to  the  land  of  Nkubar.
Samatra  to  the  Cities  of  Pedir  and  Pacem,  and  all  along  by Samatra.
all  that  Coast  unto  the  Hand  of  A  Poluoreira,  and  the  The  lie  of  A
flats  of  Capacia : and  from  thence  hee  went  over  unto  P^uomra-
Malacca,  standing  in  2.  degrees  of  latitude  toward  the  r^^T
North : but in that Citie the people killed & tooke  Malacca.
Prisoners  some  of  his  men : and  thereupon  he turned
backe  againe  into  India,  having  discovered  in  this  voyage
500. leagues. This Hand  of  Samatra  is the  first  land  Rarities  in
wherein  wee  knew  Mans-flesh  to  bee  eaten  by  certaine Samatra-
people  which  live  in  the  Mountaines  called  Bacas,  who  use

25

A.D.

I509.

In  Samatra
Bttffes,  Kine,
fcf  Hens,

have  flesh  as
blacke  as  inke.
People  having
tailes  like
sheepe.
River  ofOyle.

Strange  Tree.

Gold  coyned
in  Samatra.

Gomara.  hist,
gen.  lib.  3.  c.

7-

Castilia  del
Oro.

The  booke  of
the  Bacheler
Anciso  of  these
discoveries.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

to  gild  their  teeth.  They  hold  opinion  that  the  flesh  of
the  black  people  is  sweeter  then  the  flesh  of  the  white.
The  Buffes,  Kine  and  Hens  which  are  in  that  Countrey
are  in  their  flesh  as  blacke  as  any  inke.  They  say  that
there  are  certaine  people  there  called  Daraqui  Dara,  which
have  tailes  like  unto  sheepe ;  and  some  of  their  Wells
yeeld  Oyle.

The  King  of  Pedir  is  reported  to  have  a  River  in  his
land  running  with  Oyle :  which  is  a  thing  not  to  be
marvelled  at,  seeing  it  is  found  written,  that  in  Bactria
there  is  also  a  Well  of  Oyle :  it  is  farther  said,  that  there
groweth  here  a  Tree,  the  Joyce  whereof  is  strong  poyson,
and  if  it  touch  the  blood  of  a  man,  he  dyeth  immediately :
but  if  a  man  doe  drinke  of  it,  it  is  a  soveraigne  remedie
against  poyson,  so  serving  both  for  life  and  death.  Here
also  they  doe  coyne  pieces  of  Gold  which  they  call
Drachmas,  brought  into  the  land  as  they  say  by  the
Romans :  which  seemeth  to  have  some  resemblance  of
truth :  because  that  from  that  place  forward  there  is  no
coyned  gold  :  but  that  which  is  thus  coyned  doth  run
currant  in  the  buying  of  Merchandise  and  other  things.

In  the  yeere  1508.  one  Alfonso  de  Hoida  with  the
favour  of  Don  Fernando  purposed  to  goe  unto  Tierra
firma  to  conquer  the  Province  of  Darien.  He  went  forth
at  his  own  charges,  and  discovered  The  firme  Land,  where
it  is  called  Uraba,  which  he  named  Castilia  del  Oro,  that  is
Golden  Castilia,  because  of  the  Gold  which  they  found
among  the  sand  along  the  Coast :  And  they  were  the  first
Spaniards  that  did  this.  Alfonso  de  Hoida  went  first  from
the  Hand  of  Hispaniola  and  the  Citie  of  San  Domingo
with  foure  Ships  and  three  hundred  Souldiers,  leaving
behind  him  the  Bacheler  Anciso,  who  afterwards  compiled
a  Booke  of  these  Discoveries.  And  after  him  there  went
also  one  ship  with  victuals,  munition,  and  150.  Spaniards.
He  went  on  land  at  Carthagena :  but  there  the  people  of
the  Countrey  tooke,  slew  and  eate  seventie  of  his
Souldiers,  whereupon  he  grew  very  weake.  In  this  yeere
1508.  one  Diego  de  Niquesa,  prepared  seven  ships  in  the

26

ANTONIO GALVANO  a.d.

1511.

Port  of  Beata  to  goe  unto  Veragua,  and  carried  in  them Boata  is  a
almost  800.  men. When  he  came  to  Carthagena,  he  found  Proz'ince  in
there  Alfonso  de Hoieda  sore spoyled  with  his  former  l/^ispamola
losse : but  then  they  both  joyned  together,  and  went  on
land  and  avenged  themselves  of  the  people. And  in  this
voyage  Diego  de  Niquesa  went  and  discovered  the  Coast
called  Nombre de  Dios, and  went  unto the sound of  Sombre  de
Darien,  and  called  it  Puerto  de  Misas,  which  is  upon  the  Q0°^ar  Ren
River  of  Pito. When  they  were  come  unto  Veragua,  he  hist.  lib.  3.
went  on  shore  with  his  Armie,  his  Souldiers  being  out  of  cap.  6.
hope  to  returne  to  Hispaniola. Alfonso  de  Hoida  began
a  Fortresse  in  Caribana  against  the  Caribes ; which  was
the  first  Towne  that  the  Spaniards  builded  in  the  Firme
land : and  in  Nombre  de  Dios  they  built  another,  and
called  it  Nuestra  Sennora  de  la  Antigua. They  builded  Nuestra
also  the  Towne  of  Uraba. And  there  they  left  for  their  ^{aJe  la
Captaine  and  Lieutenant  one  Francis  Pizarro,  who  was  ^/£^
there  much  troubled. They  builded  other  Townes  also,  Pizarro  the
whose  names  I  here  omit. But  these  Captaines  had  not  Conqueror  of
that  good  successe  which  they  hoped  for.  Paru-

In  the  yeere 1509. the  second  Admirall  Don  Diego
Columbus  went  into  the  Hand  of  Hispaniola  with  his  wife
and  houshold : And she  being a  Gentlewoman carried  Many  Gentle-
with  her  many  other  women  of  good  Families,  which  were  women  went
there  married,  and  so  the  Spaniards  &  Castilians  began  to „. .  *
people  the  Countrey : for  Don  Fernando  the  King  had
given  them  licence  to  discover  and  people  the  Townes  of
Hispaniola ; so  that  the  same  place  grew  to  bee  famous
and  much  frequented. The  foresaid  Admirall  also  gave
order  to  people  the  Hand  of  Cuba,  which  is  very  great Cuba  peopled.
and  large  and  placed  there  as  his  Lieutenant  one  Diego  [II.  x.1681.]
Velasques,  who  went  with  his  father  in  the  second  voyage.

In  the  yeere  1 5 1 1 .  in  the  moneth  of  Aprill  Alfonso  de  Barros  decad.

Albuquerque  went  from  the  Citie  of  Cochin  unto  Malacca. 2- lth-  5;:/^*

In which yeere and moneth the Chineans went from *° I  '
a/ti  *  1 •  i/\ir  -1 caP-  2.  Jsarros

Malacca  into  their  owne  countrey,  and  Alfonso  sent  with  decad.  2.  lib.

them  for Master  a  Portugall called Duarte Fernandes,  6.  cap.  5.

with  letters  also  and  order  unto  the  King  of  the  Mantias,

27

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1511.

which  now  is  called  Sian  standing  in  the  South. They

The  Stretght passed through the Streight of Cincapura, and sailed

f  Cincapura.  towarcis  the  North,  went  along  the  coast  of  Patane  unto

Odiathechiefe  the  Citie  of  Cuy,  and  from  thence  to  Odia,  which  is  the

"*'  chiefe  Citie  of  the  Kingdome,  standing  in  14.  degrees  of

Northerly latitude. The King greatly honoured and

welcomed  Duarte  Fernandes  being  the  first  Portugall  that

hee  had  seene,  and  with  him  hee  sent  backe  Ambassadours

to  Albuquerque. They  passed  over  land  towards  the  west

Tanazerim. unto  the  Citie  of  Tanazerim  standing  upon  the  sea  on  the

other  side  in  12.  degrees,  where  they  imbarked  themselves

in  two  ships,  and  sailed  along  the  coast  unto  the  Citie  of

Master  Ralph  Malacca,  leaving  it  all  discovered.

Fitch  which  -pke  people  of  this  countrey  of  Sian  are  people  that

this  countrey  eate  °^  an<  kinde  of  beasts,  or  vermine.  They  have  a
brought  divers  delight  to  carrie  round  bels  within  the  skin  of  their  privie
of  these  bels  members  :  which  is  forbidden  to  the  King  and  the  religious
into  England.  pe0ple.  \t  '1S  s^  that  of  all  other  people  of  those  parts
those  Kin?-  tne7  De  most  vertuous  and  honest.  They  commend  them-
domes  have  selves  much  for  their  chastitie  and  povertie.  They  bring
often  altera-  no  hennes  nor  doves  up  in  their  houses.  This  Kingdome
tions,  as  any  ^{h  in  length  two  hundred  and  fiftie  leagues,  and  in
can  overtop  his  breadth  eiRhtie. Of  this  only  Kingdome  the  King  may

neighbours  so . . r &  . r .  . ,  . J . &  &  /

that  in  one  age  bring  rorth  into  the  held  tnirtie  thousand  Elephants,  when
the  King  is  a  hee  goeth  to  warre,  besides  those  which  remaine  in  the
mightie  Cities  for  the  guarde  of  them. The  King  much  esteemeth

Potentate,  and  a  white  Eiephant  and  a  red  one  also,  that  hath  his  eyes  like

in  another  the  n .  r r  J

King  of  the  unto  flaming  fire.  #

same  state  is  a  There is  in this countrey  a  certaine small  vermine,

meanevassall:  which  useth  to  cleave  fast  to  the  trunke  of  the  Elephant,

as  betwixt  anj  dnrweth  tne  bloud  of  the  Elephant,  and  so  he  dieth

thTkram'as  tnere°f- The  skull  of  this  vermine  is  so  hard,  that  the

hath  beene  sn°t  of  an  handgun  cannot  enter  it : they  have  in  their

seene.  livers  the  figures  of  men  and  women,  which  they  call

The  Liver  of  Toketa,  and  are  much  like  unto  a  Man-drake. And  they

i *oofaainst  affirme>  tnat  hee  which  natn  one  °f  tnem  about  him  cannot
any  wound  of  die  with  the  stroke  of  any  iron.  They  have  also  wilde
iron.  Kine  in  this  countrey,  in  the  heads  of  whom  they  finde

28

ANTONIO GALVANO  ad.

1511.

stones,  which  are  of  vertue  to  bring  good  hap  and  fortune
to  Merchants.

After that Duarte Fernandes had beene with the
Mantales  or  people  of  Sian,  Alfonso  de  Albuquerque  sent
thither  a  Knight  called  Ruy  Nunnez  de  Acunna  with
letters  and  Ambassage  unto  the  King  of  the  Seguies,  which  Pegu.
we  call  Pegu. He  went  in  a  Junco  of  the  countrey  in
sight  of  the  Cape  Rachado,  and  from  thence  went  unto  the
Citie  of  Pera  which  standeth  fast  by  the  River  Salano,  Pera.
and  many  other  Villages  standing  all  along  this  River,  Master  Ralph
where  Duarte  Fernandes  had  beene  before,  unto  the  Cities .  %^w  f ,"
of  Tanazenm  and  or  Martavan,  standing  in  15.  degrees  Cap.  Saris,
toward  the  North,  and  the  Citie  of  Pegu  standeth  in  17. i$c.
This was the first Portugull, which travailed in that
Kingdome : and hee gave good information of that
Countrey,  and  of  the  people  which  use  to  weare  bels  in
their  privities  even  as  the  Mantales  doe.

In  the  end  of  this  yeere  1 5 1 1 .  Alfonso  de  Albuquerque  Bar.  decad.  2.
sent  three  ships  to  the  Hands  of  Banda,  and  Maluco. And  *•  6-  caP-  7-
there  went  as  Generall  of  them  one  Antonio  de  Breu,  and ^ J °%
with  him  also  went  one  Francis  Serrano : and  in  these  j^aiucco
ships  there  were  120.  persons. They  passed  through  the
Streight  of  Saban,  and  along  the  Hand  of  Samatra,  and
ethers,  leaving  them  on  the  left  hand,  towards  the  east :
and  they  called  them  the  Salites. They  went  also  to  the  The  Salites.
Hands  of  Palimbam  and  La  Puparam ; from  whence  they
sailed  by  the  noble  Hand  of  Java,  and  they  ranne  their  java,
course  East,  sailing  betweene  it  and  the  Hand  Madura.  Madura.
The  people  of  this  are  very  warlike  and  strong,  and  doe
little  regard  their  lives. The  women  also  are  there  hired  Women
for  the  wars  and  they  fall  out  often  together,  and  kill  one  warnors-
another,  as  the  Mocos  doe,  delighting  onely  in  shedding
of  bloud.

Beyond  the  Hand  of  Java  they  sailed  along  by  another
called  Bali :  and  then  came  also  unto  others  called  Aviave,  Bali.
Zambaba,  Solor,  Galao,  Mallua,  Vitara,  Rosalanguin,  and  *Or  Guliam.
Arus,  from  whence  are  brought  delicate  birds,  which  are  of  Or  Aru.
great  estimation  because  of  their  feathers :  they  came  also  Polo>  ^c'

29

A.D.
I5II,

The  people  of
the  lies  of
Maluco  weave
such  apparell.
Governors
carrying  red
staves  like
those  of
China.

Tern  ate.
[II.  x.  1682,

Burro.

Amboino.
Guliguli.

Cloves,  nut-
megs, and
mace  in  S.de.
toward  the
South.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

to  other  Hands  lying  in  the  same  parallell  on  the  South
side  in  7.  or  8.  degrees  of  Latitude.  And  they  be  so
neere  the  one  to  the  other,  that  they  seeme  at  the  first  to
bee  one  entire  and  maine  land.  The  course  by  these  I
Hands  is  above  five  hundred  leagues.  The  Ancient  I
Cosmographers  call  all  these  Hands  by  the  name  Javos :  I
but  late  experience  hath  found  their  names  to  bee  verie  |
divers,  as  you  see.  Beyond  these  there  are  other  Hands  1
toward  the  North,  which  are  inhabited  with  whiter  people
going  arraied  in  shirts,  doublets  and  slops  like  unto  the  I
Portugals,  having  also  money  of  silver.  The  Governours  \
among  them  doe  carrie  in  their  hands  red  staves,  whereby  |
they  seeme  to  have  some  arnnitie  with  the  people  of  China.  1
There  are  other  Hands  and  people  about  this  place,  which  J
are  redde,  and  it  is  reported  that  they  are  of  the  people  I
of  China.

Antonie  de  Breu  and  those  that  went  with  him,  tooke I
their  course  toward the  North,  where  is  a  small  Hand  :
called  Gumnape  or  Ternate,  from  the  highest  place  whereof  ! ;
there  fall  continually  into  the  Sea  flakes  or  streames  like  j
unto  fire  ; which  is  a  wonderfull  thing  to  behold. From  [J
thence  they  went  to  the  Hands  of  Burro  and  Amboino,  j|
and  came  to  an  anchor  in  an  haven  of  it  called  Guliguli,  ;
where  they  went  on  land  and  tooke  a  Village  standing
by  the  River,  where  they  found  dead  men  hanging  in
the  houses ; for  the  people  there  are  eaters  of  mans  flesh.
Here the Portugals burnt the ship wherein Francis
Serrano  was,  for  she  was  old  and  rotten. They  went  to  ail
place  on  the  other  side  standing  in  8.  degrees  toward  the  J
South,  where  they  laded  cloves,  nutmegs,  and  mace  in  a
Junco or Barke which Francis Serrano brought here.  \i
They  say  that  not  farre  from  the  Hands  of  Banda  there  is
an  Hand,  where  there  breedeth  nothing  else  but  Snakes,
and  the  most  are  in  one  cave  in  the  middest  of  the  land.
This  is  a  thing  not  much  to  be  wondred  at ; for  as  much
as  in  the  Levant  Sea  hard  by  the  lies  of  Majorca  and i
Minorca  there  is  another  Hand  of  old  named  Ophiusa,  j
and  now  Fornientera,  wherein  there  is  great  abundance

30

ANTONIO GALVANO

of  these  vermine  :  and  in  the  rest  of  the  Hands  lying  by
it  there  are  none.

In  the  yeere  1512.  they  departed  from  Banda  toward
Malacca,  and  on  the  Baxos  or  flats  of  Luzapinho,  Francis
Serrano  perished  in  his  Junke  or  Barke,  from  whence
escaped  unto  the  He  of  Mindanao  nine  or  ten  Portugals
which  were  with  him,  and  the  Kings  of  Maluco  sent  for
them.  These  were  the  first  Portugals  that  came  to  the
Hands  of  Cloves,  which  stand  from  the  Equinoctiall  line
towards  the  North  in  one  degree,  where  they  lived  seven
or  eight  yeeres.

The  Hand  of  Gumnape  now  called  Ternate  is  much  to
be  admired,  for  that  it  casteth  out  fire.  There  were  some
Princes  of  the  Mores  and  couragious  Portugals  which
determined  to  go  neere  to  the  firie  place  to  see  what  it
was ;  but  they  could  never  come  neere  it.  But  Antonie
Galvano  hearing  of  it,  undertooke  to  goe  up  to  it,  and
did  so,  and  found  a  river  so  extreame  cold  that  he  could
not  suffer  his  hand  in  it,  nor  yet  put  any  of  the  water
into  his  mouth :  And  yet  this  place  standeth  under  the
line,  where  the  sunne  continually  burneth.  In  these
Hands  of  Maluco  there  is  a  kinde  of  men  that  have
spurres  on  their  ankles  like  unto  Cocks.  And  it  was  told
me  by  the  King  of  Tydore,  that  in  the  Hands  of  Batochina
there  were  people  that  had  tayles,  and  had  a  thing  like
unto  a  dug  betweene  their  cods,  out  of  the  which  there
came  milke.  There  are  small  hennes  also  which  lay  their
egges  under  the  ground  above  a  fathome  and  a  halfe,  and
the  egges  are  bigger  then  ducks  egges,  and  many  of  these
hennes  are  blacke  in  their  flesh.  There  are  hogs  also  with
homes,  and  parats  which  prattle  much,  which  they  call
Noris.  There  is  also  a  river  of  water  so  hot,  that  what-
soever living  creature  commeth  into  it,  their  skins  will
come  off,  and  yet  fish  breede  in  it.  There  are  crabs  which
be  verie  sweete,  and  so  strong  in  their  clawes,  that  they
will  breake  the  iron  of  a  Pikeaxe.  There  bee  others  also
in  the  sea  little  and  hairie,  but  whosoever  eateth  of  them
dieth  immediately. There  be  likewise  certaine  oysters,

31

A.D.
1512.

Mindanao.
Maluco.

Molucco  rari-
ties observed
by  the  Author.

Galvano  the
author  of  this
discourse.
Heat  and  cold
in  extremitie.

Monstrous
men.

Batochina.

Strange  hens.

Horned  hogs.
Hot  River.
Strong  crabs.
Strong  poison.
Huge  oysters.

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1512.

which  they  doe  call  Bras,  the  shels  whereof  have  so  large!
a  compasse,  that  they  doe  Christen  in  them. In  the  Seaj
Growing R\so  there  are  lively  stones,  which  doe  grow  and  increase
like  unto  fish,  whereof  verie  good  lime  is  made :  and  if
they  let  it  lye  when  it  is  taken  out  of  the  water,  it  loseth  I
Tjf  ^n0Ctts' f  tne  strength  and  it  never  burneth  after. There  is  also  a  |
XUtmZnd certame  tree>  which  beareth  flowers  at  the  sun  set,  which |
Arbor tristis &U  downe  as  soone  as  they  be  growne. There  is  a  fruit!
are  such. also,  as  they  say,  whereof  if  a  woman  that  is  conceaved  of  1
Pregnant cnii^ eateth, the  child  by  and  by mooveth. There  is
S*  h  -h furtner  a  kind  of  herbe  there  growing,  which  folio  weth
the  Sunne,  and  remooveth  after  it,  which  is  a  verie  strange
and  marvailous  thing.
Sar™  decad- In  the  yeere  15 12.  In  the  moneth  of  Januarie  Alfonsus
-I'Cap.i.  ^e  Albuquerque  went  backe  from  Malaca  unto  Goa,  and
the  ship  wherein  he  went  was  lost,  and  the  rest  went  from
his  companie. Simon  de  Andrada,  and  a  few  Portugals
The  Iks  of were  driven  unt0  the  Hands  of  Maldiva,  being  many  and
full  of  palme  trees : and  they  stand  lowe  by  the  water :
which  stayed  there  til  they  knew  what  was  become  of
their  Governour. These  were  the  first  Portugals  that  had
seene  those  Hands,  wherein  there  growe  Cocos,  which  are
verie  good  against  all  kind  of  poyson.
John  de  So/is. In  this  yeere  15 12.  there  went  out  of  Castile  one  John
de Solis  borne in  Lisbon, and  chiefe Pilot  unto Don
Fernando. And  he  having  licence  went  to  discover  the
coast of Brasil. Hee tooke the like course that the
Pinsons  had  done : hee  went  also  to  the  Cape  of  Saint
Augustine,  and  went  forwards  to  the  South,  coasting  the
shoare  and  land,  and  he  came  unto  the  Port  De  Lagoa :
and  in  35  degrees  of  southerly  latitude  he  found  a  river
which  they  of  Brasil  call  Parana-guazu,  that  is,  The  great
Water. He  saw  there  signes  of  silver, and  therefore
Rio  de  plata. called  it  Rio  de  Plata,  that  is,  The  River  of  silver. And
it  is  said  that  at  that  time  he  went  farther  because  he  liked
the  countrey  well : but  he  returned  backe  againe  into
Spaine,  and  made  account  of  all  things  to  Don  Fernando,
demaunding  of  the  King  the  government  thereof,  which

32

ANTONIO GALVANO  a.d.

1513-

[e  the  King  granted  him. Whereupon  he  provided  three  P**>  Martyr.
a  ships  and  with  them  in  the  yeere  151 5.  he  went  againe  decad-l-c-lo>
>e  into  that  Kingdome ; but  he  was  there  slaine. These
if  Solisses  were  great  discoverers  in  those  parts,  and  spent
li  therein  their  lives  and  goods.

a In  the  same  yeere  15 12.  John  Ponce  of  Leon,  which  Pet.  Martyr.
\  had  beene  governour  of  the  lie  of  Saint  John  armed  two  J^lr!/^7/
it  ships  and  went  to  seeke  the  He  of  Boyuca,  where  the  gen%  $, '  2
I  naturals  of  the  countrey  reported  to  be  a  Wei,  which  c.  10.
§  maketh  olde  men young. Whereupon he  laboured to
li  finde  it  out,  and  was  in  searching  of  it  the  space  of  sixe
e  moneths,  but  could  finde  no  such  thing. Hee  entered

into  the  He  of  Bimini ; and  discovered  a  point  of  the  Bimhillands.
\  firme  land,  standing  in  29. degrees  towards  the  North  [II.  x.  1683.]
i  upon  Easter-day,  and  therefore  he  named  it  Florida. And Flortda
]  because  the  Land  seemed  to  yeeld  Gold  and  Silver  and  ^L°V^e  •'  . j
§  great  riches,  hee  begged  it  of  the  King  Don  Fernando,  ca//  faster
j  but  hee  died  in  the  Discoverie  of  it,  as  many  more  have  Pascha
:  done.  Florida.

f In  the  yeere  1513.  Vasco  Nunnes  de  Valboa  hearing  PeL  Mar-
1  speech  and  newes  of  the  South  Sea,  determined  to  goe ecad'l'caP-l>
:  thither,  although  his  companie  disswaded  him  from  that

action.  But  being  a  man  of  good  valour  with  those
1  Souldiers  that  he  had,  being  two  hundred  and  ninetie,  hee
1  resolved  to  put  himselfe  into  that  jeoperdie.  Hee  went
j  therefore  from  Dariene  the  first  day  of  September,  carying
:  some  Indians  of  the  Countrie  with  him  to  be  his  Guides,
t  and  he  Marched  overthwart  the  Land  sometimes  quietly,
:  sometimes  in  Warre :  and  in  a  certaine  place  called  Careca

he found Negroes Captives with Curled haire. This
•  Valboa  came  to  the  sight  of  the  South  Sea  on  the  25.  day  The  South  Sea
:  of  the  said Moneth,  and  on  Saint Michaels  day  came  disco™-*d-
;  unto  it :  where  hee  Imbarked  himselfe  against  the  will  of
I  Chiapes,  who  was  the  Lord  of  that  Coast,  who  wished

him  not  to  do  so  because  it  was  verie  dangerous  for  him.

But  he  desirous  to  have  it  knowne,  that  he  had  beene

upon  those  Seas,  went  forwards,  and  came  backe  againe

to  Land  in  safetie,  and  with  great  contentment,  bringing
x  33  c

AD-  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1513-

with  him  good  store  of  Gold,  Silver,  and  Pearles,  which
there  they  tooke.  For  which  good  service  of  his  Don
Ferdinando  the  King  greatly  favoured  and  honoured  him.

f/™  dTad' This  yeere  *&&  in  the  Moneth  of  Februarie,  Alfonsus;
/>•/•  ^e  Albuquerque  went  from  the  Citie  of  Goa  towards  the
^muhlfrof  Strei&ht  of  Mecha  with  twentie  Ships. They  arrived  at
the  Red  Sea tne  Citie  of  Aden  and  battered  it,  and  passed  forward  and
discovered. entred  into  the  Streight. They  say  that  they  saw  a  Crosse!
in  the  Element  and  worshipped  it. They  Wintered  ini
The  lie  of tfe Hand of Camaran. This was the first Portugall
Captain  that  gave  information  of  those  Seas,  and  of  that
of  Persia,  being  things  in  the  World  of  great  accompt.

In  the  yeere  15 14.  and  in  the  Moneth  of  May,  there
went  out  of  Saint  Lucar,  one  Pedro  Arias  de  Avila  at  the  |
commandement  of  Don  Ferdinando. He  was  the  fourth  1
Governour  of  Castillia  del  Oro  or  Golden  Castile :  for  so  I
they  named  the  Countries  of  Dariene,  Carthagena,  and
Uraba,  and  that  Countrie  which  was  newly  Conquered.!
Hee  carried  with  him  his  Wife  the  Ladie  Elizabeth,  and  I
one  thousand  five  hundred  men  in  seven  Ships; and  the
King  appointed,  Vasco  Nunnez  de  Valboa  Governour  of
the  South  Sea  and  of  that  Coast.

In  the  beginning  of  the  yeere 151 5.  the  Governour j

Pedro  Arias  de  Avila,  sent  one  Gaspar  Morales  with  oneli

hundred  and  fiftie  men  unto  the  Gulfe  of  Saint  Michael,  to  i

The  Hand  of  Discover  the  Hands  of  Tararequi,  Chiapes,  and  Tumaccus.  1

rrare!jut  or There  was  a  Casique  Valboas  friend,  which  gave  him  many

the  South  sea. Canoas  or  Boates  made  of  one  Tree  to  Rowe  in,  wherein :

Martyr  they  passed  unto  the  Hand  of  Pearles  :  the  Lord  whereof  i

decad.  3.  cap.  resisted  them  at  their  comming  on  Land. But  Chiapes  1

*°*  and  Tumaccus  did  pacifie  him  in such  order,  that  the|

histor. general  Captaine  of  the  Isle  had  them  home  unto  his  House,  andj

lib.  6.  c  2. made  much  of  them,  and  received  Baptisme  at  their  hands,

naming  him  Pedro  Arias  after  the  Governours  name,  and!

hee gave unto them for this a Basketfull of Pearles,  j

waying  one  hundred  and  tenne  pounds,  whereof  some

were  as  bigge  as  Hasell-nuts,  of  twentie,  twentie  five,|

twentie  sixe,  or  thirtie  one  Carats : and  everie  Carat  is|

34

ANTONIO GALVANO  a.d.

1517.

foure  Graines.  There  was  given  for  one  of  them,  one
thousand  and  two  hundred  Duckets.  This  Hand  of
Tararequi  standeth  in  five  Degrees  of  Latitude  towards
the  North.

In this verie yeere 151 5. in the Moneth of May,  Barros  decad.
Alfonsus  de  Albuquerque  Governour  of  India,  sent  from  *'  '  *
the  Citie  of  Ormuz  one  Fernando  Gomes  de  Lemos  as  Osorius  lib.
Ambassadour  unto  Xec  or  Shaugh  Ismael  King  of  Persia  : 10.  pag.  277.
and  it  is  reported  that  they  travailed  in  it  three  hundred  AnAmbassage
Leagues, and that it  is  a pleasant Countrie like unto  *>t™aeJKi<*&
France. This  Xec  or  Shaugh  Ismael  went  on  Hunting
and  fishing  for  Troutes,  whereof  there  are  many. And
there  be  the  fairest  Women  in  all  the  world. And  so
Alexander  the  Great  affirmed,  when  hee  called  them  The
Women  with  Golden  eyes. And  this  yeere  this  worthie
Vice-roy  Alfonsus  de  Albuquerque  died.

In  the  yeere  1516.  and  one  hundred  yeeres  after  the
taking of Ceuta in Barbarie, Lopez Suares being
Governour  of  India,  there  was  a  dispatch  made  by  the
commandement of the Kings Highnesse, unto one
Fernando  Perez  de  Andrada  to  passe  to  the  great  Countrie
and  Kingdome  of  China. He  went  from  the  Citie  of
Cochin  in  the  Moneth  of  Aprill. They  received  Pepper,  Bepper  a
being  the  principall  Marchandise  to  be  sold  in  all  China  Merchandise  in
of  any  value : And  hee  was  farther  commanded  by  the  china.
King  Don  Emmanuel  to  goe  also  to  Bengala  with  his
Letter  and  dispatch  to  a  Knight  called  John  Coelo. This
was  the  first  Portugall  as  farre  as  I  know,  which  drunke  of
the  water  of  the  River  Ganges. This  yeere  15 16.  died  The  death  of
Don  Fernando  King  of  Spaine.  KitTtf°

In  the  yeere  151 7.  this  Fernando  Perez  went  unto  the  spaine.
Citie  of  Malacha,  and  in  the  Moneth  of  June  he  departed Osorius  lib.
from thence towards China with eight Sailes, foure 11.  fil*  3I2«
Portugals and the others Malayans. He arrived in  China
China  :  And  because  hee  could  not  come  on  Land  without tscovere  '
an  Ambassage,  there  was  one  Thomas  Perez  which  had
order  for  it :  and  he  went  from  the  Citie  of  Canton,  where  Canton.
they came to an Anker : They went by Land foure

35

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

I5I7*

hundred  Leagues,  and  came  unto  the  Citie  of  Pekin,

where  the  King  was  for  this  Province  and  Countrie  is  the

biggest  that  is  in  the  World. It  beginneth  at  Sailana  in

twentie  Degrees  of  Latitude  towards  the  North,  and  it

*Or  Pakin, endeth  almost  in  fiftie*  Degrees. Which  must  be  five

or  Pequm. hundred  Leagues  in  length  :  and  they  say  that  it  containeth

three  hundred  Leagues  in  bredth,  Fernando  Perez  was

[II.  x.  1684.]  fourteene  Moneths  in  the  Isle  Da  Veniaga,  learning  as

y  a .  much  as  he  could  of  the  Countrie,  according  as  the  King

Tama  accord-  n^s Master had commanded him. And although one

ing  to  Osorius.  Raphael  Perestrello  had  beene  there  in  a  Junke  or  Barke  j

of  certaine  Marchants  of  Malaca,  yet  unto  Fernando  Perez

there  ought  to  be  given  the  praise  of  this  Discoverie :  as

wel  for  that  he  had  commandement  from  the  King,  as  in

discovering  so  much  with  Thomas  Perez  by  Land,  and

George  Mascarenhas  by  Sea,  and  for  coasting  unto  the

Foquiem. Citie  of  Foquiem  standing  in  twentie  foure  Degrees  of

Latitude.

The  commtng jn  tne  same  yeere  1 517.  Charles,  which  afterward  was

%ft  \  L *  C  Emperour,  came  into  Spaine  and  tooke  possession  thereof.

Spaine.  And  in  the  same  yeere  Francis  Fernandes  de  Gordova,  I

Gomar.  hist. Christopher Morantes, and Lopez Ochoa armed three  1

gen.Hb.^.c.z.  Ships  at  their  owne  proper  charges  from  the  Hand  of  I

Cuba. They had also with them a Barke of Diego  \

Velasques,  who  then  was  Governour :  They  came  on  Land

Iucatan.  in  Iucatan  standing  in  twentie  Degrees  of  Latitude,  at  a  i

Point  which  they  called  Punta  de  las  Duennas ; that  is

to  say,  The  point  of  Ladies,  which  was  the  first  place

wherein  they  had  seene  Temples  and  Buildings  of  Lime  ,

&  Stone. The  people  here  goe  better  Apparelled  then  in  {

any  other  place.

Castagneda  jn  tne  yeere  1 5 1 8 .  Lopez  Suares  commanded  Don  John  ;

.  4.  c  3  .  13  ^e  Silveira  to  goe  to  the  Hands  of  Maldiva :  and  he  made

Osorius.  1. 1 1 peace  with  them :  and  from  thence  hee  went  to  the  Citie

fil.$i$.pag.z.  of  Chatigam,  situated  on  the  mouth  of  the  River  Ganges,

Chatigam  in under  the  Tropicke  of  Cancer. For  this  River,  and  the

Bengala. River  Indus,  which  standeth  an  hundred  Leagues  beyond  I

the  Citie  of  Diu,  and  that  of  Canton  in  China,  doe  all  I

36

ANTONIO GALVANO  a.d.

1518.

fall  into  the  Sea  under  one  Paralell  or  Latitude.  And
although  before  that  time  Fernando  Perez  had  beene  com-
manded to  goe  to  Bengala,  yet  notwithstanding  John  de
Silveira  ought  to  beare  away  the  commendation  of  this
Discoverie :  because  he  went  as  Captaine  Generall,  and
remained  there  longest,  learning  the  commodities  of  the
Countrie,  and  maners  of  the  people.

In  the  said  yeere  151 8.  the  first  day  of  May,  Diego  Pet  Martyr.
Velasques  Governour of the Hand of  Cuba, sent his  %^'cahfsf'
Nephew John de Grisalva, with foure Ships and two j  \  c'
hundred  Souldiers  to  discover  the  Land  of  Iucatan. And  14.  y  c.  17.
they  found  in  their  way  the  Hand  of  *Cosumel,  standing  *Or  Acuza-
towards  the  North  in  nineteene  Degrees,  and  named  it  ml'
Santa  Cruz,  because  they  came  to  it  the  third  of  May.
They  coasted  the  Land  lying  on  the  left  hand  of  the  Gulfe,
and  came  to  an  Hand  called  Ascension,  because  they  came  Tfo  lie  of

unto  it  upon  Ascension  day : They  went  unto  the  end  J[ensJ?n'  r
c •  i- • •  t^  J c t • 1 c  The  Bay  of

or it standing  in sixteene  Degrees  or Latitude : rrom  Hunduras.

whence  they  came  backe  because  they  could  finde  no  place
to  goe  out  at :  and  from  hence  they  went  round  about  it
to  another  River,  which  they  called  The  River  of  Grisalva,  Rio  de
standing  in  seventeene  Degrees  of  Latitude :  the  People  Grisalva>
thereabout  troubled  them  sore,  yet  notwithstanding  they
brought  from  thence  some  Gold,  Silver,  and  Feathers,
being  there  in  great  estimation,  and  so  they  turned  backe
againe  to  the  Hand  of  Cuba.

In  the  same  yeere  1 5 1 8 .  one  Francis  Garay  armed  three  Gomar.  hist.
Ships  in  the  He  of  Jamaica  at  his  owne  charges,  and  went  &en  rj"s  c'
towards  the  Point  of  Florida, standing  in  twentie  five
Degrees  towards  the  North,  seeming  to  them  to  be  an
Hand  most  pleasant,  thinking  it  better  to  people  Hands
then  the  firme  Land,  because  they  could  best  Conquer
them  and  keepe  them. They  went  there  on  Land,  but
the  people  of  Florida  killed  many  of  them,  so  that  they
durst  not  Inhabit  it. So  they  Sayled  along  the  Coast,
and  came  unto  the  River  of  Panuco,  standing  h\t  hundred  Panuco.
Leagues  from  the  point  of  Florida  in  Sayling  along  the
Coast ; but  the  People  resisted them in everie  place.

37

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGR1MES

1518.

Many  of  them  also  were  killed  in  Chila,  whom  the  Savages
Flayed  and  eate,  hanging  up  their  Skinnes  in  their
Temples,  in  memoriall  of  their  valiantnesse.  Notwith-
standing all  this,  Francis  de  Garay  went  thither  the  next
yeere  and  begged  the  Government  of  that  Countrie  of
the  Emperour,  because  he  saw  in  it  some  shew  of  Gold
and  Silver.

In the yeere 151 9. in the Moneth of Februarie,
Of  Cortes  his  Fernando  Cortes  went  from  the  Hand  of  Cuba,  to  the
MtsseeTo.i.  Lanc[  which  is  called  Nova  Spania  with  eleven  ships  and
9-  five  hundred  and  fiftie  Spaniards  in  them.

The  Countrie  of  Tenich  and  up  the  River  were  not

subject  to  Mutecuma,  but  had  Warre  with  him,  and  would

not  suffer  the  Mexicans  to  enter  into  their  Territorie.

They sent Ambassadours unto Cortes with presents,

offering  him  their  estate,  and  amitie ;  whereof  Mutecuma

was nothing glad. They which went to Tututepec

standing  neere  the  South  Sea,  did  also  bring  with  them  |j

examples  of  Gold,  and  praised  the  pleasantnesse  of  the  I

Countrie,  and  the  multitude  of  good  Harbours  upon  that  jj

Indian  Map. Coast,  shewing  to  Cortes  a  Cloth  of  Cotten  Wooll,  all  I]

Woven  with  goodly  workes,  wherein  all  the  Coast  with  j

Gomara  hist, the  Havens  and  Creekes  were  set  foorth. But  this  thing

gen.  lib.  2.  c.  tjien  coui(j  not  kg  prosecuted,  by  reason  of  the  comming

Pamphilus  de °^  Pamphilus  de  Narvaez  into  the  Countrie,  who  set  all

Narvaez. the  Kingdome  of  Mexico  in  an  uprore.

In  this  yeere  15 19.  the  tenth  day  of  August,  one
Fernande  de  Magallanes,  departed  from  Sivill  with  five
Ships  toward  the  Hands  of  Maluco.

About  this  time  Pope  Leo  the  tenth,  sent  one  Paulis

Centurio  as  Ambassador  to  the  great  Duke  of  Moscovie,

to  wish  him  to send  into India  an  Armie  alongst  the

Magal.  his. Coast  of  Tartaric And  by  the  reasons  of  this  Ambas-

voy  age  see  sup.  sadour,  the  said  Duke  was  almost  perswaded  unto  that

action,  if  other  inconveniences  had  not  letted  him.
Gomar.lib.^. In  this  same  yeere  1520.  in  Februarie  Diego  Lopes  de
cap.  17.  Sequeir,  Governour  of  India,  went  towards  the  Streight  of

Mecha, and carried with him the Ambassadour of

38

ANTONIO GALVANO  ad.

1522.

Presbyter  John,  and  Roderigo  de  Lima  who  also  went  as  [II.  x.  1685.]
Ambassador to him. They came unto the Hand of
Macua  standing  in  the  Red  Sea  on  the  side  of  Africa  in  Mafua.
17. degrees towards the North: where he set the
Ambassadors  on  land,  with  the  Portugals  that  should  goe
with  them. Peter  de  Covillan  had  beene  there  before,  Rajnustus  1.
being  sent  thither  by  King  John  the  Second  of  Portugall : VOmJ°  -  19°-
but  yet  Francis  Alvarez  gave  principall  light  and  know-
ledge of  that  Countrie.

In  the  yeere 1520. the  Licenciate  Lucas  Vasques  de  Gomar.hist.
Aillon  and  other  Inhabitants  of  Saint  Domingo  furnished  "  "
two  ships,  and  sent  them  to  the  lies  of  Lucayos  to  get
slaves,  and  finding  none  they  passed  along  by  the  firme
land  beyond  Florida  unto  certaine  Countries  called  Chicora  Chicora.
and  Gualdape,  unto  the  River  Jordan  and  the  Cape  of  Gualdape.
Saint  Helena  standing  in  32.  degrees  toward  the  North.
They  of  the  Countrie  came  downe  to  the  Sea  side  to  see
the  ships,  as  having  never  before  seene  the  like : The
Spaniards  went  on  land,  where  they  received  good  enter-
tainment, and  had  given  unto  them  such  things  as  they
lacked. But  they  brought  many  of  them  into  their  ships,
and  then  set  sayle  and  brought  them  away  for  slaves :  but
in  the  way  one  of  their  ships  sunke,  and  the  other  was
also  in  great  hazard. By  this  newes  the  Licenciate  Aillon
knowing  the  wealth  of  the  Countrie,  begged  the  govern-
ment thereof  of  the  Emperour,  and  it  was  given  him :
whither  he  went  to  get  money  to  pay  his  debt.

In  the  yeere 1521.  in  December  Emmanuel  King  of  Emmanuels

Portugall  died,  and  after  him  his  sonne  King  John  the  d™th" ..,
T,  . ,& •  ,  '  & J  Osor.hb.  12.

Third  raigned.  ,  >  <  fil  s66

In  the  yeere  1522.  in  Januarie  one  Gilgonzales  armed  Gomar.hist.
foure  ships  in  the  Hand  of  Tararequi standing  in the  gen.  lib.  6.
South  Sea,  with  intent  to  discover  the  Coast  of  Nicaragua,  caP-  4-
and  especially  a  Straight  or  Passage  from  the  South  Sea
into  the  North  Sea. And  sayling  along  the  Coast  hee
came  unto  an  Haven  called  Saint  Vincent,  and  there  landed
with  an  hundred  Spaniards  and  certaine  horsemen,  and
went  within  the  Land  two  hundred  leagues,  and  he  brought

39

A.D.
1522.

Tecoantepec.

Gomar.  hist,
gen.  fib.  6.
c.  12.
Castagneda
Historia  delle
Indie

Orientali  tib.
6.  c  +,.
T:v:  Hands  in
16.  degrees  of
Northerly
latitude.

42.  degrees  of

Northerly

latitude.

Gomar.  hist,
gen.  lib.  6.
c.  12.

The  South  Sea
first  searched
by  Cortes  his
Pilots.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

with  him  two  hundred  pesoes  of  gold,  and  so  came  backe
againe  to  Saint  Vincent :  where  he  found  his  Pilot  Andrew
Nigno,  who  was  as  farre  as  Tecoantepec,  in  16.  degrees
to  the  North,  and  had  sailed  three  hundred  leagues :  from
whence  they  returned  to  Panama,  and  so  over  land  to:
Hispaniola.

In  the  same  yeere  1522.  in  the  moneth  of  Aprill  the
other  ship  of  Magallanes  called  The  Trinitie  went  from
the  Hand  of  Tidore,  wherein  was  Captaine  Gonzalo  Gomez
de  Espinosa,  shaping  their  course  toward  Nova  Spania :
and  because  the  winde  was  scant,  they  steared  toward  the
North-east  into  16.  degrees,  where  they  found  two  Hands,
and  named  them  the  lies  of  Saint  John,  and  in  that  course
they  came  to  another  Hand  in  20.  degrees,  which  they
named  La  Griega,  where  the  simple  people  came  into  their
ships,  of  whom  they  kept  some  to  shew  them  in  Nova
Spania  :  They  were  in  this  course  foure  moneths,  untill
they  came  into  42.  degrees  of  Northerly  latitude,  where
they  did  see  Sea-fishes  called  Seales  and  Tunies.  And  the
climate  seemed  unto  them  comming  newly  out  of  the
heate,  to  be  so  cold  and  untemperate,  that  they  could  not
well  abide  it,  and  therefore  they  turned  backe  againe  to
Tidore,  being  thereunto  enforced  also  by  contrary  windes.
These  were  the  first  Spaniards  which  had  beene  in  so  high
a  latitude  toward  the  North.  And  there  they  found  one
Antonie  de  Britto  building  a  Fortresse,  which  tooke  from
them  their  goods,  and  sent  eight  and  forty  of  them
prisoners  to  Malaca.

In  this  yeere  1522.  Cortes  desirous  to  have  some  Havens
on  the  South  Sea,  and  to  discover  the  Coast  of  Nova
Spania  on  that  side,  whereof  he  had  knowledge  in
Mutecuma  his  time,  (because  he  thought  by  that  way  to
bring  the  drugs  from  Maluco  and  Banda,  and  the  spicery
from  Java,  with  lesse  travell  and  danger)  he  sent  foure
Spaniards  with  their  Guides  to  Tecoantepec,  Quahute-
mallan,  and  other  Havens  :  where  they  were  well  received,
and  brought  some  of  the  people  with  them  to  Mexico :  I
And  Cortes  made  much  of  them ; and  afterwards  sent  ten  j

40

C. 12.

ANTONIO GALVANO  ad.

1523.
Pilots  thither  to  search  the  Seas  thereabout.  They  went
seventy  leagues  in  the  Sea  but  found  no  Haven.  One
Casique  or  Lord  called  Cuchataquir  used  them  well,  and
sent  with  them  to  Cortes  two  hundred  of  his  men  with  a
Present  of  gold  and  silver,  and  other  things  of  the
Countrie :  and  they  of  Tecoantepec  did  the  like :  and  Tecoantepec
not  long  after,  this  Casique  sent  for  aide  to  Cortes  against
his  neighbours  which  did  warre  against  him.

In  the  yeere  1523.  Cortes  sent  unto  him  for  his  aide  Omar,  hist.
Peter  de  Alvarado,  with  two  hundred  Souldiers  footmen,  Sm-  llb-  6-
and  fortie  horsemen,  and  the  Casiques  of  Tecoantepec  and
Quahutemallan  asked  them  for  the  Monsters  of  the  Sea
which  came  thither  the  yeere  past,  meaning  the  ships  of
Gil  Gonzales  de  Avila,  being  greatly  amazed  at  the  sight
of  them,  and  wondring  much  more  when  they  heard,  that
Cortes  had  bigger  then  those  :  and  they  painted  unto  them  A  witty
a mightie Carrake with sixe Masts, and Sayles and  stratageme-
Shroudes,  and  men  armed  on  horsebacke. This  Alvarado
went  through  the  Countrie  and  builded  there  a  Citie  of
Saint  Iago  or  Saint  James,  and  a  Towne  which  he  called  Sant  Iago
Segura  leaving  certaine  of  his  people  in  it.  hmlL

In  the  same  yeere  1523.  in  the  moneth  of  May  Antonie  Castagneda
de  Britto  being  Captaine  of  the  lies  of  Maluco  sent  his  hjst'^"e
Cousin  Simon  de  Breu  to  learne  the  way  by  the  He  of  Qrienta/i  I.  6.
Borneo  to  Malaca :  They  came  in  sight  of  the  Hands  of  c.  42.
Manada and Panguensara : They went through the  Manada.
Straight  of  Treminao  and  Tagui ; and  to  the  Hands  of  Pang"™'*™.
Saint  Michael  standing  in 7.  degrees,  and  from  thence  s  j^^jf
discovered  the  Hands  of  Borneo,  and  had  sight  of  Pedra  Borneo.
branca  or  the  White  stone,  and  passed  through  the  Straight  Pedra  Branca.
of  Cincapura,  and  so  to  the  Citie  of  Malaca.

In  this  same  yeere  1 523.  Cortes  went  with  three  hundred  [H. x- 1686.]
footmen,  and  an  hundred  and  fifty  horsemen,  and  forty  Gomara  hu*-
thousand  Mexicans,  to  Panuco,  both  to  discover  it  better,  gen'  '7"c'
and  also  to  inhabite  it,  and  withall  to  bee  revenged  upon
them  which  had  killed  and  eaten  the  Souldiers  of  Francis
Garay. They  of  Panuco  resisted  him,  but  Cortes  in  the
end  overthrew  them,  and  conquered  the  Countrie : And

41

A.D.

1523.

Santo  Stephano
del  puerto.

Gomara  hist,
gen.  I.  2.C.61
y  en  la  Con-
questa  de
Mexico.

Rio  de  las
Palmas.

Rio  Montalto.
Child.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

hard  by  Chila  upon  the  River  he  built  a  Towne,  and
named  it  Santo  Stephano  del  puerto,  leaving  in  it  an
hundred  footmen,  and  thirty  horsemen,  and  one  Peter  de
Valleio  for  Lieutenant.  This  Journey  cost  him  seventy
sixe  thousand  Castillians,  besides  the  Spaniards,  Horses,
and  Mexicans  which  died  there.

In  this  yeere  1523.  Francis  de  Garay  made  nine  Ships
and  two  Brigandines  to  goe  to  Panuco,  and  to  Rio  de  las
Palmas,  to  be  there  as  Governour :  for  that  the  Emperour
had  granted  unto  him  from  the  Coast  of  Florida  unto
Panuco,  in  regard  of  the  charges  which  hee  had  beene  at
in  that  Discoverie.  He  carried  with  him  eight  hundred
and  fifty  Souldiers,  and  an  hundred  and  fortie  Horses,  and
some  Men  out  of  the  Hand  of  Jamaica,  where  he  furnished
his  Fleet  with  munition  for  the  warre :  and  he  went  unto
Xagua  an  Haven  in  the  Hand  of  Cuba,  where  he  under-
stood that  Cortes  had  peopled  the  coast  of  Panuco :  &
that  it  might  not  happen  unto  him  as  it  did  to  Pamphilus
de  Narvaez,  he  determined  to  take  another  companion
with  him,  and  desired  the  Doctor  Zuazo  to  goe  to  Mexico
and  procure  some  agreement  betweene  Cortes  and  him.
And  they  departed  from  Xagua  each  one  about  his
businesse.  Zuazo  came  in  great  jeopardie,  and  Garay
went  not  cleere  without.  Garay  arrived  in  Rio  de  las
Palmas  on  Saint  James  his  day,  and  then  he  sent  up  the
River  one  Gonsalvo  de  Ocampo,  who  at  this  returne
declared  that  it  was  an  evill  and  desart  Countrie :  but
notwithstanding  Garay  went  there  on  land  with  fbure
hundred  footmen  and  some  horsemen  ;  and  he  commanded
one  John  de  Grijalva  to  search  the  Coast,  and  he  himselfe
marched  by  land  towards  Panuco,  and  passed  a  River  which
hee  named  Rio  Montalto ;  he  entred  into  a  great  Towne
where  they  found  many  Hennes,  wherewith  they  refreshed
themselves,  and  he  tooke  some  of  the  people  of  Chila
which  he  used  for  messengers  to  certaine  places :  And
after  great  travell  comming  to  Panuco  they  found  no
victuals  there  by  reason  of  the  warres  of  Cortes,  and  the
spoile  of  the  Souldiers. Garay  then  sent  one  Gonzalo  de

42

ANTONIO GALVANO  a.d.

1523-

Ocampo  to  Sant  Istevan  del  puerto  to  knowe  whether  they
would  receive  him  or  no.  They  had  a  good  answere.
But  Cortes  his  men  privily  by  an  ambushment  tooke  forty
of  Garayes  horsemen,  alleaging  that  they  came  to  usurpe
the  government  of  another :  and  besides  this  misfortune
he  lost  foure  of  his  ships :  whereupon  he  left  off  to
proceed  any  farther.

While  Cortes  was  preparing  to  set  forward  to  Panuco  : Gomar.  en  la
Francis  de  las  Casas,  and  Roderigo  de  la  Paz  arrived  at  S*^^
Mexico  with  Letters  Patents,  wherein  the  Emperour  gave  2*£*c  ^° '
the  government  of  Nueva  Spagna  and  all  the  Countrie
which  Cortes  had  conquered  to  Cortes,  and  namely  Panuco.
Whereupon  he  stayed  his  Journey. But  hee  sent  Diego
de  Ocampo  with  the  said  Letters  Patents,  and  Pedro  de
Alvarado  with  store  of  footmen  and  horsemen. Garay
knowing  this  thought  it  best  to  yeeld  himselfe  unto  Cortes
his  hands,  and  to  goe  to  Mexico ; which  thing  he  did
having  discovered  a  great  tract  of  Land.

In this  yeere 1523. Gil  Gonzales de  Avila made a  Gomar.  en  la

Discoverie,  and  peopled  a  Towne  called  San  Gil  de  buena  G°n<iuest"de

vista, standing in 14. degrees toward the North, and  2?*m

almost  in  the  bottome  of  the  Bay  called  the  Ascension  or  San  Gil  de

the  Honduras. He  began  to  conquer  it  because  he  best  buena  Vista  in

knew  the  secrets  thereof, and that  it  was  a  very  rich  the  Bay  °f
/-. . •  Honduras.

Countrie.

In  this  yeere  1523.  the  sixt  day  of  December  Peter  de  Gomara  en  la
Alvarado  went  from  the  Citie  of  Mexico  by  Cortes  his  Gonquistade
commandement  to  discover  and  conquer  Qualiutemallan,  22^y^
Utlatlan,  Chiaepa,  Xochnuxco,  and  other  Townes  toward  sequentib.
the South Sea. He had with him three hundred
Souldiers, an hundred and seventy Horsemen, foure
Field-pieces,  and  some  Noblemen  of  Mexico,  with  people
of  the  Countrie  to  aide  him  as  well  in  the  warre,  as  by  the
way  being  long. Hee  went  by  Tecoantepec  to  Xoch-
nuxco, and  other  places  abovesaid  with  great  travell  and
losse  of  his  men  :  but  he  discovered  and  subdued  all  the
Countrie. There  are  in  those  parts  certaine  Hills  that  A  Hume  Hills.
have  Alume  in  them,  and  out  of  which  distilleth  a  certaine

43

A.D.

1523.

Oile  distil  ling
out  of  Hills.
Ibid.fol.  230.

Satit  lago  de

Quahute-

mallan.

Gomara  en  la
Conquista  de
Mexico  fol.

233-
Villa  del

Espiritu  santo.
Chamolla.

Gomara  en  la
Conquista  de
Mexico  fol.

234-

Gomara  hist,
gen.  lib.  3.
c.  21.

[II.  x.  1687.]

Gomara

his  tor.  general.

lib.  2.  c.  7.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

liquor  like  unto  Oyle,  and  Sulphur  or  Brimstone,  whereof
the  Spaniards  made  excellent  Gun-powder.  He  travelled
foure  hundred  leagues  in  this  Voyage,  and  passed  certaine
Rivers  which  were  so  hot,  that  they  could  not  well  endure
to  wade  thorow  them.  Hee  builded  a  Citie  calling  it
Sant  lago  de  Quahutemallan.  Peter  de  Alvarado  begged
the  government  of  this  Countrie,  and  the  report  is  that  it
was  given  him.

In  the  yeere  1523.  the  eight  day  of  December  Cortes
sent  Diego  de  Godoy  with  an  hundred  Footmen  and
thirty  Horsemen,  two  Field-pieces,  and  many  of  his  friends
Indians  unto  the  Towne  Del  Espiritu  santo :  He  joyned
himselfe  with  the  Captaine  of  that  Towne,  and  they  went
to  Chamolla  the  head  Citie  of  that  Province,  and  that
being  taken  all  the  Countrie  grew  quiet.

In  the  yeere  1524.  in  Februarie  Cortes  sent  one
Roderigo  Rangel  with  an  hundred  and  fifty  Spaniards  &
many  of  the  Tlaxcallans  and  Mexicans  against  the
Zapotecas  and  Nixticas,  and  unto  other  Provinces  and
Countries  not  so  well  discovered :  they  were  resisted  at
the  first,  but  quickly  put  the  people  to  the  worst,  and  kept
them  for  ever  after  in  subjection.  In  this  same  yeere
1524.  one  Roderigo  de  Bastidas  was  sent  to  discover,
people,  and  governe  the  Countrie  of  Santa  Martha  :  where
he  lost  his  life  because  hee  would  not  suffer  the  Souldiers
to  take  the  spoile  of  a  certaine  Towne.  They  joyned
with  Peter  Villa-forte,  and  he  being  sometimes  his  entire
friend  did  helpe  to  kill  him  with  Daggers  lying  in  his
Bed.  Afterward  Don  Pedro  de  Lugo,  and  Don  Alfonso
his  sonne  were  Governours  of  that  place,  which  used
themselves  like  covetous  Tyrants ;  whereof  grew  much
trouble.

In  this  same  yeere  also  1524.  after  that  the  Licenciate
Lucas  Vasques  de  Aillon  had  obtained  of  the  Emperour
the  government  of  Chicora,  he  armed  for  that  purpose
certaine  Ships  from  the  Citie  of  Santo  Domingo  and  went
to  discover  the  Countrie,  and  to  inhabite  it :  but  he  was
lost  with  all  his  companie,  leaving  nothing  done  worthie

44

ANTONIO GALVANO  a.d.

1524.

of  memorie.  And  I  cannot  tell  how  it  commeth  to  passe,
except  it  bee  by  the  just  judgement  of  God,  that  of  so
much  Gold  and  Precious  stones  as  have  beene  gotten  in
the  Antiles  by  so  many  Spaniards,  little  or  none  remaineth,
but  the  most  part  is  spent  and  consumed,  and  no  good
thing  done.

In  this  yeere  1524.  Cortes  sent  one  Christopher  de  Olid  Gomar.  hist.
with  a  Fleet  to  the  Hand  of  Cuba,  to  receive  the  victuals  &n-  ltb-  z-
and  munition  which  Alonso  de  Contreras  had  prepared,  wiaConquista
and  to  discover  and  people  the  Countrey  about  Cape  De  de  Mexico  foL
;  Higueras, and the Honduras ; and to send Diego  243.
;,  Hurtada  de  Mendoca  by  sea,  to  search  the  Coast  from
thence  even  to  Darien,  to  finde  out  the  Straight  which  was
thought  to  runne  into  the  South  sea,  as  the  Emperour  had
commanded. He  sent  also two ships  from  Panuco to
search  along  the  coast  unto  Florida. Hee  commanded
also  certaine  Brigandines  to  search  the  coast  from  Zaca-
tullan  unto  Panama. This  Christopher  de  Olid  came  to
1  the Hand of Cuba, and made a league with Diego
Volasquez  against  Cortes,  and  to  set  sayle  and  went  on
land  hard  by  Puerto  de  Cavallos  standing  in  10.  degrees
to  the  North,  and  built  a  Towne  which  he  called  Triumpho
de  la  Cruz. Hee  tooke  Gil  Gonzales  de  Avila  prisoner,
I  and  killed  his  nephew  and  the  Spaniards  that  were  with
■  him,  all  saving  one  Childe,  and  shewed  himselfe  an  enemy
I  to Cortes, who had spent in that expedition thirtie
,  thousand  Castellans  of  gold  to  doe  him  pleasure  withall.
;  Cortes  understanding  hereof  the  same  yeere  1524.  in  the  Gomar.  hist.
,  moneth  of  October  he  went  out  of  the  Citie  of  Mexico,  gen. lib.  2. cap.
[  to  seeke  Christopher  de  Olid  to  bee  revenged  of  him,  and  c  ' .  en  f
1  also  to  discover,  carrying  with  him  three  hundred  Spanish  Mexico  fol.
footmen  and  horsemen,  and  Quahutimoc  King  of  Mexico,  2.  fc?  251.
,  and  other  great  Lords  of  the  same  Citie. And  comming
,  to the Towne called La villa del Espiritu santo, he
i  required  guides  of  the  Lords  of  Tavasco  and  Xicalanco  :
l  and  they  sent  him  ten  of  their  principall  men  for  guides : * „
,  who  gave  him  also  a  Map  of  Cotton-wooll,  wherein  was  iarge  map  0f
,  painted the situation of the whole Countrey from  Cotton  woo//.

45

A.D.
1524.

Gomar.  hist,
gen.  lib.  2.  c.
67.  tf  68.13
en  laConquista
de  Mexico  fol.
257.

Mazatlan.
Tiaca.

Zuzullin.
Gomara  in  the
Conquest  of
Mexico  fol.
268.

Natividad  de
Nuestra
Sennora.
Truxillo.
Honduras.
Gomara  in  the
Conquest  of
Mexico  fol.
270.  £ff  273.

See  Pizarros
acts  Tom.  2.
/.  7.  cap.  n.
12. 15. 16.17.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Xicalanco  unto  Naco,  and  Nito,  and  even  as  farre  as
Nicaragua,  with  their  Mountaines,  Hils,  Fields,
Meadowes,  Vallies,  Rivers,  Cities,  and  Townes.  And
Cortes  in  the  meane  time  sent  for  three  ships  which  were
at  the  Haven  of  Medellin  to  follow  him  along  the  coast.

In  this  yeere  1524.  they  came  to  the  Citie  of  Izancanac,
where  hee  understood  that  the  King  Quahutimoc  and  the
Mexicans  that  were  in  his  company  were  conspired  against
him  and  the  Spaniards :  for  the  which  he  hanged  the
King  and  two  others  of  the  chiefe :  and  so  came  to  the
Citie  of  Mazatlan,  and  after  that  to  Tiaca,  the  head  Citie
of  a  Province  so  called  standing  in  the  middest  of  a  Lake :
and  heere  about  they  began  to  finde  the  traine  of  the
Spaniards,  which  they  went  to  seeke,  and  so  they  went  to
Zuzullin,  and  at  length  came  to  the  Towne  of  Nito :
from  Nito  Cortes  with  his  owne  companie  and  all  the
Spaniards  that  hee  found  there,  departed  to  the  shore  or
strand  called  La  Baia  de  Sant  Andres,  and  finding  there  a
good  haven  hee  builded  a  Towne  in  that  place  and  called
it  Natividad  de  nuestra  Senora.  From  hence  Cortes  went
to  the  Towne  of  Truxillo  standing  in  the  haven  of  the
Honduras,  where  the  Spaniards  dwelling  there  did  enter-
taine  him  well :  and  while  hee  was  there,  there  arrived  a
ship  which  brought  newes  of  the  stirre  in  Mexico  in  Cortes
his  absence :  whereupon  hee  sent  word  to  Gonsola  de
Sandoval  to  march  with  his  companie  from  Naco  to
Mexico  by  land  toward  the  South  sea  unto  Quahutemallan,
because  that  is  the  usuall  plaine  and  safest  way,  and  hee
left  as  Captaine  in  Truxillo  Fernando  de  Saavedra  his
Cousen :  and  he  himselfe  went  by  sea  along  the  Coast  of
Iucatan,  to  Chalchicoeca,  now  called  Sant  Juan  de  Ullhua,
and  so  to  Medellin,  and  from  thence  to  Mexico,  where  hee
was  well  received,  having  beene  from  thence  eighteene
moneths,  and  had  gone  five  hundred  leagues  travelling
often  out  of  his  way,  and  enduring  much  hardnesse.

In  the  yeere  1525.  Francis  Pizarro  and  Diego  dej
Almagro,  went  from  Panama  to  discover  Peru  standing
beyond the line toward the South, which they called

46

:

ANTONIO GALVANO

Nueva  Castillia.  The  Governour  Pedro  Arias  would  not
entermeddle  with  this  expedition,  because  of  the  evill
newes  which  his  Captayne  Francis  Vezerra  had  brought.

In  the  same  yeere  1525.  there  was  sent  out  of  Spaine  a
Fleet  of  seven  ships,  whereof  was  Captayne  generall  Don
Garsia  de  Loaisa  to  the  Hands  of  Maluco.  They  went
from  the  Citie  of  the  Groine  and  passed  by  the  Hands  of
the  Canaries,  and  went  to  Brasil,  where  they  found  an
Hand  in  two  degrees,  and  named  it  Saint  Mathew :  and  it
seemed  to  be  inhabited,  because  they  found  in  it  Orenge
trees,  Hogs,  and  Hens  in  caves,  and  upon  the  rindes  of
most  of  the  trees  there  were  graven  Portugall  letters,
shewing  that  the  Portugals  had  beene  there  seventeene
yeeres  before  that  time.  A  Patach  or  Pinnesse  of  theirs
passed  the  straight  of  Magellane,  having  in  her  one  John
de  Resaga,  and  ranne  all  along  the  coast  of  Peru  and
Nova  Spagna  :  They  declared  all  their  successe  unto  Cortes,
and  told  him,  that  Frier  Garsia  de  Loaisa  was  passed  to
the  Hands  of  Cloves.  But  of  this  fleete  the  Admirall
onely  came  thither,  wherein  was  Captayne  one  Martin
Mingues  de  Carchova  :  for  Loaisa  and  the  other  Captaines
dyed  by  the  way.  All  the  Moores  of  Maluco  were  found
well  affectioned  to  the  Spaniards.

In  the  same  yeere  1525.  the  Pilot  Stephen  Gomes,
went  from  the  Port  of  the  Groine  toward  the  North  to
discover  the  straight  unto  the  Malucos  by  the  North,  to
whom  they  would  give  no  charge  in  the  fleete  of  Frier
Garsia  de  Loaisa.  But  yet  the  Earle  Don  Fernando  de
Andrada,  and  the  Doctor  Beltram,  and  the  Merchant
Christopher  de  Sarro  furnished  a  Gallion  for  him,  and
hee  went  from  the  Groine  in  Galicia  to  the  Hand  of  Cuba,
and  to  the  point  of  Florida,  sayling  by  day  because  he
knew  not  the  land.  He  passed  the  bay  Angra,  and  the
river  Enseada,  and  so  went  over  to  the  other  side.  It  is
also  reported  that  he  came  to  Cape  Razo  in  46.  degrees  to
the  North :  from  whence  he  came  backe  againe  to  the
Groine  laden  with  Slaves.  The  newes  hereof  ranne  by
and  by  through  Spaine,  that  hee  was  come  home  laden

47

A.D.
1525.

Pet.  Martyr.
decad.S.cap.q.
Gomar.  hist,
gen.  lib.  4.  cap.
12.

The  He  ofS.
Mathew.
Gomara  in  the
Conquest  of
Mexico  p.

[II.  x.  1688.]

Gomez  his
Northern
discoverie.
Pet.  Martyr,
decad.  $.p.
601.

Gomar.  hist,
gen.  I.  i.e.  5.
One  inquiring
at  their  return
what  they  had
brought:  they
said  Esclavos  :
he  mistaking,
rode  to  the
Court  to  tell
that  they  had
broughtClavos
and  occasioned
at  first  much
joy,  after
turned  into
laughter.

A.D.
1525.

The  lie  of
Batochina  by
Gilolo.

S.  Cabotaborn
at  Br  is  tow.
In  the  Map  in
the  Privie
Galerie,  to  his
picture  is
added  Seb.
Cab.  Angl

Rio  Parana.

Rio  Paragioa,

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

with  Cloves  as  mistaking  the  word :  and  it  was  carried  to
the  Court  of  Spaine :  but  when  the  truth  was  knowne  it
turned  to  a  pleasant  jest.  In  this  voyage  Gomes  was
ten  moneths.

In  this  yeere  1525.  Don  George  de  Meneses  Captayne
of  Maluco,  and  with  him  Don  Garcia  Henriques,  sent  a
foyst  to  discover  land  towards  the  North,  wherein  went  as
Captaine  one  Diego  de  Rocha,  and  Gomes  de  Sequeira
for  Pilot.  In  9.  or  10.  degrees  they  found  certaine  Hands
standing  close  together,  and  they  called  them  the  Hands
of  Gomes  de  Sequeira,  hee  being  the  first  Pilot  that
discovered  them,  and  they  came  backe  againe  by  the  Hand
of  Batochina.

In  the  yeere  1526.  there  went  out  of  Sivill  one  Sebastian
Cabota  a  Venetian  by  his  father,  but  borne  at  Bristoll  in
England,  being  chiefe  Pilot  to  the  Emperour,  with  foure
ships  toward  Maluco.  They  came  to  Pernambuco,  and
stayed  there  three  moneths  for  a  winde  to  double  the  Cape
of  Saint  Augustine.  In  the  Bay  of  Patos  or  of  Ducks,
the  Admirall  ship  perished ;  &  being  without  hope  to  get
to  the  lies  of  Maluco,  they  there  made  a  Pinnesse  to  enter
up  the  River  of  Plate,  and  to  search  it.  They  ranne  60.
leagues  up  before  they  came  to  the  barre :  where  they  left
their  great  ships,  and  with  their  small  Pinnesses  passed  up
the  River  Parana,  which  the  Inhabitants  count  to  bee  the
principall  River.  Having  rowed  up  one  hundred  and
twentie  leagues,  they  made  a  Fortresse  and  stayed  there
above  a  yeere  :  and  then  rowed  further  till  they  came  to  the
mouth  of  another  River  called  Paragioa,  and  perceiving
that  the  Countrey  yeelded  Gold  and  Silver  they  kept  on
their  course,  and  sent  a  Brigandine  before ;  but  those  of
the  Countrey  tooke  it :  and  Cabote  understanding  of  it
thought  it  best  to  turne  backe  unto  their  Fort,  and  there
tooke  in  his  men  which  he  had  left  there,  and  so  went
downe  the  River  where  his  ships  did  ride,  and  from  thence
he  sailed  home  to  Sivill  in  the  yeere  1530.  having  dis-
covered about  two  hundred  leagues  within  this  River,
reporting  it  to  bee  very  Navigable,  and  that  it  springeth

48

ANTONIO GALVANO  a.d.

1527.

out  of  a  Lake  named  Bombo. It  standeth  in  the  firme

land of the Kingdome of  Peru, running through the  Thefiuntaine

Vallies  of  Xauxa,  and  meeteth  with the  Rivers  Parso,  p^ weroJ

Bulcasban,  Cay,  Parima,  Hiucax,  with  others  which  make

it  very  broad  and  great. It  is  said  also,  that  out  of  this

Lake  runneth  the  River  called  Rio  de  San  Francesco  ; and

by  this  meane  the  Rivers  come  to  bee  so  great. For  the

Rivers  that  come  out  of  Lakes  are  bigger  then  those  which

proceed  from  a  Spring.

In  the  yeere  1527.  one  Pamphilus  de  Narvaez  went  out  Ram"siUS  3-
of  Saint  Lucar  de  Barameda,  to  bee  Generall  of  the  coast  ™eefnf'tom.  2.
and  land  of  Florida,  as  farre  as  Rio  de  las  Palmas,  and  had  t.$.c.  i.fcf  2.
with  him  five  Ships,  sixe  hundred  Souldiers,  one  hundred
1  Horses,  besides  a  great  summe  and  quantitie  of  Victuals,
1  Armour,  Clothing  and  other  things. Hee  could  not  goe
;  on  land  where  his  desire  was  but  went  on  land  somewhat
j  neere  to  Florida  with  three  hundred  of  his  companie,  some
»  Horses,  and  some  victuals,  commanding  the  ships  to  goe
to  Rio  de  las  Palmas ; in  which  voyage  they  were  almost
t  all  lost : and  those  which  escaped  passed  great  dangers,
r  hunger  and  thirst.

This yeere 1527. when Cortes understood by the  Gomar.  hist.
j  Pinnesse  aforesaid,  that  Don  Garcia  de  Loaisa  was  passed  &en' '  ,2'  f*
3  by  the  Straight  of  Magelan,  toward  the  Hands  of  Cloves,  Conquest  of
\  hee  provided  three  ships  to  goe  seeke  him,  and  to  discover  Mexico  fo/.
j  by  that  way  of  New  Spaine  as  farre  as  the  lies  of  Maluco.  281.
5  There  went  as  Governour  in  those  ships  one  Alvaro  de
5  Saavedra  Ceron,  cousen  unto  Cortes,  a  man  fit  for  that
,  purpose. Hee  made  sayle  from  Civatlaneio,  now  named
\  Saint  Christopher  standing  in  twentie  degrees  toward  the
(  North  on  All  Saints  day. They  arrived  at  the Hands
I  which  Magelan  named  The  Pleasures : and  from  thence
.  sayled  to  the  Hands,  which  Gomes  de  Sequeira  had  dis-
t  covered,  and  not  knowing  thereof,  they  named  them  Islas  Islas  de  los
,  de  los  Reyes,  that  is  to  say,  The  lies  of  the  Kings,  because  Reyes-
.  they came unto them on Twelfe day. In the way
Saavedra  lost  two  ships  of  his  company,  of  which  they
1  never  after  heard  newes. But  from  Hand  to  Hand  hee

X  49  D

A.D.

^ 1527.

Candiga.

[II.  x.  1689.]
Warre
betzvlxt  the
Span,  and
Pot  tug.  in  the
friend-foes
Indies.

Gomar.  hist,
gen.  lib.  2.
cap.  73-

Gomar.  hist,
gen.  lib.  2.
c.  72.
Terra
Australis
Nova  Guinea.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

still  sayled  and  came  to  the  Hand  of  Candiga,  where  he
bought  two  Spaniards  for  seventie  Ducats,  which  had
beene  of  the  companie  of  Frier  Loaisa,  who  was  lost
thereabout.  In  the  yeere  1528.  in  March,  Saavedra
arrived  at  the  Hands  of  Maluco,  and  came  to  an  anker
before  the  He  of  Gilolo  :  hee  found  the  sea  calme  and
winde  at  will,  without  any  tempests :  and  he  tooke  the
distance  from  thence  to  Nova  Spagna  to  bee  two  thousand
and  fiftie  leagues.  At  this  time  Martin  Yuniguez  de
Carquicano  dyed,  and  Fernando  de  la  Torre  was  chosen
their  Generall,  who  then  was  in  the  Citie  of  Tidore,  who
had  there  erected  a  Gallowes  and  had  fierce  warre  with
Don  George  de  Meneses  Captaine  of  the  Portugals :  and
in  a  fight  which  they  had  the  fourth  day  of  May,  Saavedra  j
tooke  from  him  a  Galiot  and  slew  the  Captaine  thereof
called  Fernando  de  Baldaya,  and  in  June  hee  returned
towards  New  Spaine,  having  with  him  one  Simon  de  Brito
Patalin,  and  other  Portugals,  and  having  beene  certayne
moneths  at  Sea,  he  was  forced  backe  unto  Tidore,  where
Patalin  was  beheaded  and  quartered,  and  his  companions
hanged.

In  this  yeere  1528.  Cortes  sent  two  hundred  Footmen
and  60.  Horsmen,  and  many  Mexicans  to  discover  and
plant  the  Countrey  of  the  Chichimecas,  for  that  it  was
reported  to  be  rich  of  Gold.  This  being  done  he  shipped
himselfe,  and  came  into  Castile  with  great  pompe,  and  |
brought  with  him  250000.  markes  of  Gold  and  Silver:
and  being  come  to  Toledo  where  the  Emperour  then  lay,
hee  was  entertayned  according  to  his  deserts,  and  the
Emperour  made  him  Marquesse  Del  Valle,  and  married
him  to  the  Lady  Jane  de  Zuniga,  Daughter  unto  the
Earle  De  Aguilar,  and  sent  him  backe  againe  to  be
Generall  of  New  Spaine.

In  the  yeere  1529.  in  May,  Saavedra  returned  backe
againe  towards  New  Spaine,  and  hee  had  sight  of  a  land
toward  the  South  in  two  degrees,  and  he  ranne  East  along
by  it  above  five  hundred  leagues  till  the  end  of  August.
The  Coast  was  cleane  and  of  good  ankerage,  but  the  people

,5°

ANTONIO GALVANO  a.d.

1529.

blacke  and  of  curled  hayre ; from  the  girdle  downward,

they  did  weare  a  certayne thing  plaited to  cover  their

lower  parts. The  people  of  Maluco  call  them  Papuas,  Os  Papuas  are

because  they  bee  blacke  and  frizeled  in  their  hayre :  and fj  Jfatd

so  also  doe  the  Portugals  call  them. Saavedra  having  ha„re^

sayled  4.  or  5.  degrees  to  the  South  of  the  line,  returned

unto  it,  and  passed  the  Equinoctiall  towards  the  North,

and discovered an Hand which hee called Isla de los  Id*  &  I°s

Pintados,  that  is  to  say,  The  He  of  painted  people : for  Ptntados-

the  people  thereof  bee  white,  and  all  of  them  marked  with

an  Iron  :  and  by  the  signes  which  they  gave  hee  conceaved

that  they  were  of  China. There  came  unto  them  from  the

shore  a  kinde  of  Boate  full  of  these  men,  making  tokens

of  threatnings to the Spaniards ; who seeing that the

Spaniards  would  not  obey  them,  they  began  to  skirmish

with  flinging  of  Stones,  but  Saavedra  would  suffer  no

shot  to  bee  shot  at  them,  because  their  stones  were  of  no

strength,  and  did  no  harme. A  little  beyond  this  Hand

in  10.  or  12.  degrees,  they  found  many  small  low  Hands

full  of  Palme trees  and  grasse, which  they  called  Los  Los  Jardines.

Jardines,  and  they  came  to  an  anker  in  the  middest  of

them, where they tarried certayne dayes. The people

seemed  to  descend  from  them  of  China,  but  by  reason  of

their  long  continuance  there  they  are  become  so  brutish,

that  they  have  neither  Law,  nor  yet  give  themselves  to

any  honest  labour. They  weare  white  clothing  which  they

make  of  Grasse. They  stand  in  marvelous  feare  of  fire,  Fire  unknown.

because  they  never  saw  any. They  eate  Cocos  in  stead  of

Bread,  breaking  them  before  they  bee  ripe,  and  putting

them  under  the  sand,  and  then  after  certayne  dayes  they

take  them  out  and  lay  them  in  the  Sunne,  and  then  they

will  open. They  eate  Fish  which  they  take  in  a  kinde  of

boat  called  a  Parao,  which  they  make  of  Pine  wood,  which  Flote  wood.

is  driven  thither  at  certayne  times  of  the  yeere,  they  know

not  how,  nor  from  whence,  and  the  tooles  wherewith  they

make  their  boates  are  of  shells.

Saavedra  perceiving  that  the  time  and  weather  was  then
somewhat  better  for  his  purpose,  made  sayle  towards  the

51

A.D.
1529.

Foure  narrow
passages  from
sea  to  sea  in
the  West
Indies.
Gomar.  hist,
gen.  lib.  4.
c.  14.

The  North-
west passage
very  bene-
ficiall.

Dam.  a  Goes
his  Travels,

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

firme  land  and  Citie  of  Panama,  where  hee  might  unlade
the  Cloves  and  merchandise  which  he  had,  that  so  in  Cartes
it  might  bee  carried  foure  leagues  to  the  River  of  Chagre,
which  they  say  is  Navigable  running  out  into  the  North
sea,  not  farre  from  Nombra  de  Dios,  where  the  ships  ride,
which  come  out  of  Spaine :  by  which  way  all  kinde  of
goods  might  be  brought  unto  them  in  shorter  time,  and
with  lesse  danger,  then  to  sayle  about  the  Cape  of  Bona
Speranza.  For  from  Maluco  unto  Panama  they  sayle
continually  betweene  the  Tropikes  and  the  line :  but  they
never  found  winde  to  serve  that  course,  and  therefore  they
came  backe  againe  to  Maluco  very  sad,  because  Saavedra
dyed  by  the  way :  who  if  hee  had  lived  meant  to  have
opened  the  land  of  Castillia  del  Oro  and  New  Spaine  from
sea  to  sea.  Which  might  have  beene  done  in  foure  places  :
namely  from  the  Gulfe  of  S.  Michael  to  Uraba,  which  is
five  and  twentie  leagues,  or  from  Panama  to  Nombre  de
Dios  being  seventeene  leagues  distance :  or  through
Xaquator,  a  River  of  Nicaragua,  which  springeth  out  of
a  Lake  three  or  foure  leagues  from  the  South  sea,  and
falleth  into  the  North  sea ;  whereupon  doe  sayle  great
Barks  and  Crayers.  The  other  place  is  from  Tecoantepec
through  a  River  to  Verdadera  Cruz,  in  the  Bay  of  the
Honduras,  which  also  might  be  opened  in  a  straight.
Which  if  it  were  done,  then  they  might  sayle  from  the
Canaries  unto  the  Malucos  under  the  climate  of  the
Zodiacke  in  lesse  time  and  with  much  lesse  danger,  then
to  sayle  about  the  Cape  de  Bona  Speranza,  or  by  the
straight  of  Magelan,  or  by  the  Northwest.  And  yet  if
there  might  bee  found  a  straight  there  to  sayle  into  the
sea  of  China,  as  it  hath  beene  sought,  it  would  doe  much
good.

In  this  yeere  1529.  one  Damian  de  Goes  a  Portugall
being  in  Flanders,  after  that  he  had  travelled  over  all
Spaine,  was  yet  desirous  to  see  more  Countries  and
fashions,  and  diversities  of  people ;  and  therefore  went
over  into  England  and  Scotland,  and  was  in  the  Courts
of  the  Kings  of  those  parts :  and  after  that  came  againe

52

ANTONIO GALVANO  a.d.

1529.
into  Flanders,  and  then  travelled  through  Zealand,
Holland,  Brabant,  Luxenburgh,  Suitzerland,  and  so
through  the  Cities  of  Colen,  Spyres,  Argentine,  Basill,
and  other  parts  of  Almaine,  and  then  came  backe  againe
into  Flanders :  and  from  thence  hee  went  into  France
through  Picardie,  Normandie,  Champaine,  Burgundie,
the  Dukedome  of  Borbon,  Gascoigne,  Languedoc,  [II.  x.  1690.]
Daulphinie,  the  Dukedome  of  Savoy,  and  passed  into
Italie  into  the  Dukedome  of  Millaine,  Ferrara,  Lorn-
bardie,  and  so  to  Venice,  and  turned  backe  againe  to  the
territorie  of  Genoa,  and  the  Dukedome  of  Florence
through  all  Tuscane :  and  hee  was  in  the  Citie  of  Rome,
and  in  the  Kingdome  of  Naples  from  the  one  side  to  the
other.  From  thence  hee  went  into  Germanie  to  Ulmes,
and  other  places  of  the  Empire,  to  the  Dukedome  of
Snevia,  and  of  Bavier,  and  the  Archdukedome  of  Austrich,
the  Kingdome  of  Boeme,  the  Dukedome  of  Moravia,  and
the  Kingdome  of  Hungarie,  and  so  to  the  Confines  of
Grecia.  From  thence  he  went  to  the  Kingdome  of  Poland,
Prussia,  and  the  Dukedome  of  Livonia,  and  so  came  into
the  great  Dukedome  of  Moscovia.  From  whence  hee
came  backe  into  high  Almaine,  and  through  the  Countries
of  the  Lantzgrave,  the  Dukedome  of  Saxonie,  the
Countries  of  Denmarke,  Gotland,  and  Norway,  travelling
so  farre,  that  hee  found  himselfe  in  70.  degrees  of  latitude
toward  the  North.  He  did  see,  speake  and  was  con-
versant with  all  the  Kings,  Princes,  Nobles,  and  chiefe
Cities  of  all  Christendome,  in  the  space  of  two  and  twentie
yeeres :  So  that  by  reason  of  the  greatnesse  of  his  travell,
I  thought  him  a  man  worthie  to  be  heere  remembred.

In  the  yeere 1529. or 1530. one  Melchior  de  Sosa  Travels  from
Tavarez  went  from  the  Citie  of  Ormuz  unto  Balsera  and  the  Persian
the  Hands  of  Gissara  with  certaine  ships  of  warre,  and  Gulfe  ttP  and
passed  up  as  farre  as  the  place  where  the  Rivers  Tygris  over  knd'
and  Euphrates  meete  one  with  the  other. And  although
other  Portugals  had  discovered  and  sailed thorow  that
Strait,  yet  never  any  of  them  sailed  so  farre  upon  the
fresh  water  till  that  time,  when  hee  discovered  that  River

53

A.D.

[53°-

Coutinhos
Travels.

Gomar.  hist,
gen.  lib.  3.
'.  37-

The  famous

River

Maragnon.

JohndeBarros
Factor  of  the
House  of
India.
Incense  trees.

Great
Emerald.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

from  the  one  side  to  the  other,  wherein  he  saw  many
things  which  the  Portugals  knew  not.  Not  long  after  this,
one  Ferdinando  Coutinho  a  Portugall  came  unto  Ormuz,
and  being  desirous  to  see  the  world,  he  determined  to  goe
into  Portugall,  from  thence  over  land  to  see  Asia  and
Europe ;  And  to  doe  this  the  better,  he  went  into  Arabia,
Persia,  and  upwards  the  River  Euphrates  the  space  of  a
moneth,  and  saw  many  Kingdomes  and  Countries,  which
in  our  time  had  not  beene  seene  by  the  Portugals :  He
was  taken  prisoner  in  Damasco,  and  afterward  crost  over
the  Province  of  Syria,  and  came  unto  the  Citie  of  Alepo.
He  had  beene  at  the  holy  Sepulchre  in  Jerusalem,  and  in
the  Citie  of  Cayro,  and  at  Constantinople  with  the  Great
Turke ;  and  having  seene  his  Court  he  passed  over  unto
Venice,  and  from  thence  into  Italie,  France,  Spaine,  and
so  came  againe  to  Lisbon.  So  that  he  and  Damian  de
Goes  were  in  our  time  the  most  noble  Portugals,  that  had
discovered  and  seen  most  Countries  and  Realmes  of  their
owne  affections.

In  the  yeere  1 53 1.  there  went  one  Diego  de  Ordas  to
be  Governour  in  the  River  of  Maragnon,  with  three  ships,
sixe  hundred  Souldiers,  and  thirty  five  Horses.  He  died
by  the  way,  so  that  the  intention  came  to  none  effect.
After  that,  in  the  yeere  1534.  there  was  sent  thither  one
Hierome  Artal  with  an  hundred  and  thirty  Souldiers,  yet
he  came  not  to  the  River,  but  peopled  Saint  Michael  de
Neveri,  and  other  places  in  Paria.  Also  there  went  unto
this  River  Maragnon  a  Portugall  Gentleman  named  Aries
Dacugna,  and  hee  had  with  him  ten  ships,  nine  hundred
Portugals,  and  an  hundred  and  thirty  horses.  Hee  spent
much,  but  hee  that  lost  most  was  one  John  de  Barros.
This  River  standeth  in  3.  degrees  toward  the  South,
having  at  the  entrance  of  it  fifteene  leagues  of  bredth  and
many  Hands  inhabited,  wherein  growe  trees  that  beare
Incence  of  a  greater  bignesse  then  in  Arabia,  gold,  rich
stones,  and  one  Emerald  was  found  there  as  bigge  as  the
palme  of  a  mans  hand.  The  people  of  the  Countrie  make
their  Drinke  of  a  kind  of  Dates,  which  are  as  big  as  Quinces.

54

ANTONIO GALVANO  a.d.

1534-

In  the  same  yeere  1531.  one  Nunnez  de  Gusman  went  See  to.  2.  IS.
from the Citie  of Mexico towards the North-west to  c^mar  hUt
discover and conquer the Countries of Xalisco, Cein-  gen^  ^  6  '
tiliquipac, Ciametlan, Tovalla, Cnixco, Ciamolla, Cul-  cap.  16.
huacan,  and  other  places. And  to  doe  this  he  carried  with
him two hundred and fifty Horses, and five hundred
Souldiers. He  went  thorow  the  Countrie  of  Mechuacan,
where  he  had  much  Gold,  ten  thousand  Markes  of  Silver,
and sixe thousand Indians to carrie burdens. He
conquered  many  Countries,  called  that  of  Xalisco  Nueva  Nueva
Galicia,  because  it  is  a  ragged  Countrie,  and  the  People  Galtcta-
strong. He  builded  a  Citie  which  he  called  Compostella,  ComposteUa.
and  another  named  Guadalajara,  because  hee  was  borne  in
the  Citie  of  Guadalajara  in  Spaine. Hee  likewise  builded  Guadalajara.
the  Townes  De  Santo  Espirito,  De  la  Conception,  and  Santo  Espirito.
De  San Miguel  standing  in 24. degrees  of  Northerly  ^ ^'
latitude.  _ San  Miguel.

In  the  yeere  1532.  Ferdinando  Cortes  sent  one  Diego  Gomar.  hist.
Hurtado  de  Mendoca  unto  Acapulco  seventy  leagues  from  Sen- lih-  2-
Mexico,  where  he  had  prepared  a  small  Fleet  to  discover  c'  74*
the Coast of the South Sea as he had promised the
Emperour. And  finding  two  ships  ready,  he  went  into
them,  and  sailed  to  the  Haven  of  Xalisco,  where  he  would
have  taken  in  Water  and  Wood  :  but  Nunnez  de  Gusman
caused  him  to  be  resisted,  and  so  he  went  forward : but
some  of  his  men  mutined  against  him,  and  hee  put  them
all  into  one  of  the  shippes,  and  sent  them  backe  into
New Spaine. They  wanted water, and  going to take
some  in  the  Bay  of  the  Vanderas,  the  Indians  killed  them.
But  Diego  Hurtado  sailed  two  hundred  leagues  along  the
Coast,  yet  did  nothing;  worth  the  writing.

In  the  yeere  1533.  Francis  Pizarro  went  from  the  Citie en  /  ',  c  5
of Tumbes to Caxamalca, where he tooke the King  7<  y^
Attabalipa. Peter  Alvarado found Mountaines full of  Cruel/  snowe
Snowe,  and  so  cold,  that  seventy  of  his  men  were  frozen  under  the /we.
to  death. When  he  came  unto  Quito,  he  began  to  inhabite  G°™af'6  huL
it,  and  named  it  S.  Francis.  c  Iq

In  the  yeere  1534.  a  Briton  called  Jaques  Cartier,  with  [II.  x.  1691.]

55

discovered.

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1534-

The  Bay  of three  ships  went  to  the  land  of  Corterealis,  and  the  Bay

S  Laurence Qf  Saint  Laurence,  otherwise  called  Golfo  Quadrato,  and

fell  in  48.  degrees  and  an  halfe  towards  the  North; and

so  he  sailed  till  he  came  unto  51.  degrees  hoping  to  have

passed  that  way  to  China,  and  to  bring  thence  drugs  and

other  merchandise  into  France. The  next  yeere  after  he

made  another  Voyage  into those  parts, and  found  the

Countrie abounding with Victuals, Houses, and good

Habitations,  with  many  and  great  Rivers. He  sailed  in

one  River  toward  the  South  west  three  hundred  leagues,

and named  the  Countrie  thereabout  Nova  Francia : at

length  finding  the  water  fresh,  he  perceived  he  could  not

passe  thorow  to  the  South  Sea,  and  having  wintered  in

those  parts,  the  next  yeere  following  he  returned  into  France.

Gomar.  hist. In  the  yeere  1535.  or  in  the  beginning  of  the  yeere

#?*./.  2.  <■.  74. 1536.  Don  Antonie  de  Mendoza  came  unto  the  Citie  of

2- c-  9  •  Mexico,  as  Vice-roy  of  New  Spaine. In  the  meane  while

Cortes  was  gone  for  more  men  to  continue  his  Discoverie,

which  immediatly  he  set  in  hand  sending  forth  two  ships

from Tecoantepec  which hee had made ready. There

went  as  Captaines  in them  Fernando de  Grijalva,  and

Diego  Bezerra  de  Mendoza,  and  for  Pilots  there  went  a

Portugall  named  Acosta,  and  the  other  Fortunio  Ximenez

a Biscaine. The first night they divided themselves.

Fortunio  Ximenez  killed  his  Captaine  Bezerra,  and  hurt

many  of  his  confederacy : and  then  he  went  on  land  to

Plata  de  Santa  take  Water  and  Wood  in  the  Bay  of  Santa  Cruz,  but  the

Cruz.  Indians  there  slue  him,  and  above  twenty  of  his  companie.

Two  Mariners  which  were  in  the  Boat  escaped,  and  went

unto  Xalisco,  and  told  Nunnes  de  Gusman  that  they  had

found  tokens  of  Pearles : hee  went  into  the  ship,  and  so

went  to  seeke  the  Pearles,  he  discovered  along  the  Coast

above an hundred and Mty leagues. They said that

Ferdinando  de  Grijalva  sailed  three  hundred  leagues  from

Tecoantepec  without  seeing  any  land,  but  onely  one  Hand

The  lie  of which  he  named  The  He  of  Saint  Thomas,  because  he

S.  Thomas. came  unto  it  on  that  Saints  day  :  it  standeth  in  20.  degrees

of  latitude.

56

ANTONIO GALVANO  a.d.

1535.
In this same yeere 1535. Nunnez Dacunna being
Governour  of  India,  while  he  was  making  a  Fortresse  at  The  Fortmse
the  Citie  of  Diu,  he  sent  a  Fleet  to  the  River  of  Indus,  °f Dtu-
being  from  thence  ninety  or  an  hundred  leagues  towards
the  North  under  the  Tropike  of  Cancer. The  Captaines
name was Vasques Perez de San Paio : also he sent
another  Armie  against  Badu  the  King  of  Cambaia,  the  Badu  King  of
Captaine  whereof  was  Cosesofar  a  Renegade They  came  Cambaia-
to the  barre  of  that mighty River  in the moneth  of
December,  of  the  water  whereof  they  found  such  triall
as  Quintus  Curtius  writeth  of  it,  when  Alexander  came
thither.

In  this  yeere  1535.  one  Simon  de  Alcazava  went  from Gomar.  hut.

Sivill  with  two  ships  and  two  hundred  and  forty  Spaniards  &*' ^'

in  them. Some  say  they  went  to  New  Spaine,  others  that

they  went  to  Maluco,  but  others  also  say  to  China,  where

they had beene with Ferdinando Perez de Andrada.

Howsoever  it  was,  they  went  first  unto  the  Canaries,  and

from  thence  to  the  Straight  of  Magelan,  without  touching

at  the  Land  of  Brasill,  or  any  part  at  all  of  that  Coast.

They  entred  into  the  Straight  in  the  moneth  of  December

11 J  with  contrary  windes  and  cold  weather. The  Souldiers

would  have  had  him  turne  backe  againe,  but  he  would

not. Hee  went  into  an  Haven  on  the  South  side  in  $3.

t  degrees : There  the  Captaine  Simon  of  Alcazava  com-

)  manded  Roderigo  de  Isla  with  sixty  Spaniards  to  goe  and

:  discover  Land:  but  they  rose  up  against  him  and  killed

him,  and  appointed  such  Captaines  and  Officers  as  pleased

:  them, and  returned. Comming  thwart of  Brasill  they

i  ilost  one  of  their  ships  upon  the  Coast,  and  the  Spaniards

0  that  escaped  drowning  were  eaten  by  the  Savages. The

i!  other  ship  went  to  Saint  Iago  in  Hispaniola,  and  from

i!  thence  to  Sivill,  in  Spaine.

r In  this  same  yeere  1535.  Don  Pedro  de  Mendoza  went  Gomar.  hist.
d  from  Cadiz  towards  the  River  of  Plate  with  twelve  ships,  Sen- llb-  3-
it  and  had  with  him  two  thousand  men  : which  was  the «  39' ,
i  greatest  number  of  ships  and  men,  that  ever  any  Captaine  c%  ,.  y  u.
carried  into  the  Indies. Hee  died  by  the  way  returning

57

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

*535«

homewards.  The  most  part  of  his  men  remained  in  that  I
River,  and  builded  a  great  Towne  contayning  now  two
thousand  houses,  wherein  great  store  of  Indians  dwell!
with  the  Spaniards.  They  discovered  and  conquered  the
The  River  of  Countrie  till  they  came  to  the  Mines  of  Potossi,  and  to  the
Plata  mnneth  Towne  La  Plata,  which  is  five  hundred  leagues  distant!

up  to  Potossi. r  ^  &

1  from  them.

Gomar.  hist: \n  the  yeere  1536.  Cortes  understanding  that  his  ship

f?"  -2-^74-  wherein  Fortunio  Ximenez  was  Pilot  was  seized  on  by
Nunnez  de  Guzman,  hee  sent  forth  three  ships  to  the  I
place  where  Guzman  was,  and  he  himselfe  went  by  Land
well  accompanied,  and  found  the  ship  which  he  sought  all
spoiled  and  rifled.  When  his  three  other  ships  were  come
about,  hee  went  aboord  himselfe  with  the  most  part  of  his1
Men  and  Horses,  leaving  for  Captaine  of  those  which
remained  on  land  one  Andrew  de  Tapia.  So  he  set  sayle,
and  comming  to  a  Point  the  first  day  of  May  he  called  it|

Saint  Iago  Ik.  S.  Philip,  and  an  Hand  that  lieth  fast  by  it  he  called  Sant,
Iago.  Within  three  dayes  after  he  came  into  the  Bayj
where  the  Pilot  Fortunio  Ximenez  was  killed,  which  hee

La  plaia  de called  La  plaia  de  Santa  Cruz,  where  he  went  on  land,  and !

Santa  Cruz. COmmanded  Andrew  de  Tapia  to  discover. Cortes  tooke !

Rio  de  S. shipping  again,  and  came  to  the  River  now  called  Rio  de

Pedro,  y  San gan  pe<Jro  y  5an  paul0)  where  by  a  tempest  the  ships  were
separated, one  was  driven to the Bay  de  Santa  Cruz,;

GuajavalRio.  another  to  the  River  of  Guajaval,  &  the  third  was  driven

on  shore  hard  by  Xalisco,  and  the  men  thereof  went  by

land  to  Mexico. Cortes  long  expected  his  two  ships  that

a*L  nmu°  be  wanted  :  but  they  not  coming  he  hoised  saile  and  entred
or  the  Gulfe .  .  -r  y n 1 -* /r &  1 ,-.  a/t tt

of  California. lnto  tne  Gulfe  now  called  Mar  de  Cortes,  Mar  Vermejo,

[II.  x.  1692.]  or  the  Gulfe  of  California,  and  shot  himselfe  fiftie  leagues

Gomara  in  the  within  it : where  he  espied  a  ship  at  anker,  and  sayling ;

mxkTfof. towards ner hee nad beene lost i]f tnat shiP nad notl
290.  291 .' succoured  him. But  having  graved  his  ship,  hee  departed
292.  with  both  the  ships  from  thence. He  bought  victuals  at  a :

deare rate at Saint Michael of  Culhuacan ; and from
thence  he  went  to  the  Haven  of  Santa  Cruz,  where  hee]
heard  that  Don  Antonio  de  Mendoca,  was  come  out  of

58

ANTONIO GALVANO  a.d.

i536-
at  Spaine  to  be  Viceroy. He  therefore  left  to  be  Captayne
%  of  his  men  one  Francis  de  Ulloa,  to  send  him  certaine
i  ships  to  discover  that  Coast.

til While  he  was  at  Acapulco,  messengers  came  unto  him
h;  from  Don  Antonio  de  Mendoca,  the  Viceroy,  to  certifie
n;  him  of  his  arrivall :  and  also  hee  sent  him  the  copie  of  a
Letter  wherein  Francis  Pisarro  wrote,  that  Mango  Ynga
ijr  was  risen  against  him,  and  was  come  to  the  Citie  of  Cusco
bv  with  an  hundred  thousand  fighting  men,  and  that  they
hi  had killed his brother  John Pisarro, and above foure
n[  hundred Spaniards, and  two  hundred Horses, and  hee
al  himselfe  was  in  danger  so  that  hee  demanded  succour  and
nt  ayde. Cortes  being  informed  of  the  state  of  Pisarro,  and
il  of  the  arrivall  of  Don  Antonio  de  Mendoca,  because  he
ci  would  not  as  yet  bee  at  obedience  ; First  he  determined  to
i  send  to  Maluco  to  discover  that  way  along  under  the
i;  Equinoctiall  line,  because  the  Hands  of  Cloves  stand  under
m  that  paralell :  And  for  that  purpose  hee  prepared  two  ships
la  with  provision,  victuals  and  men,  besides  all  other  thinges
ie|  necessarie. Hee  gave  the  charge  of  one  of  these  ships  to
nj  Ferdinando de Grijalva, and of the other unto one
iki  Alvarado  a  Gentleman. They  went  first  to  Saint  Michael
(ji  de  Tangarara  in  Peru  to  succour  Francis  Pisarro, and
»r(  from  thence  to  Malucco  all  along  neere  the  line  as  they
JZ  were  commanded. And  it  is  declared  that  they  sayled
er  above  a  thousand  leagues  without  sight  of  land,  on  the
k  one  side,  nor  yet  on  the  other  of  the  Equinoctiall. And
Ml  in  2.  degrees  toward  the  North  they  discovered  one  Hand
:ej  named  Asea,  which  seemeth  to  be  one  of  the  Hands  of  Asea  Hand.
Cloves :  five  hundred  leagues  little  more  or  lesse  as  they
sayled, they  came  to the sight of  another  which they
named  Isla  de  los  Pescadores. Going  still  in  this  course  Is/a  de  los
they  saw  another  Hand  called  Hayme  towards  the  South,  Pescadores.
and  another  named  Apia : and  then they  came  to the  jS^i/and  '
sight  of  Seri :  turning  towards  the  North  one  degree,  they  Sen.
came  to  anker  at  another  Hand  named  Coroa,  and  from  Coroa.
thence they came to another under the line named  Meousum.
Meousum,  and  from  thence  unto  Bufu,  standing  in  the  Bufu.

59

A.D.

1536.

Os  Papuas.

These  secme
to  be  the  Erne,
of  which  there
is  one  at  St.
James.

Gue//es
Hands.

Terenate.
Molucca.

More.

Antonie  Gal-
vano  the
Author  of  this
booke.

The  case  now
is  much
altered.

Pedro  de
Cieca  parte
primera  de  la
Chronica  del
Peru  cap.  9.
fcf  cap.  107.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

same  course.  The  people  of  all  these  Hands  are  blacke
and  have  their  haire  frizled,  whom  the  people  of  Malucc
doe  call  Papuas.  The  most  of  them  eate  mans  flesh,  anci
are  Witches,  so  given  to  divelishnesse,  that  the  Divels:
walke  among  them  as  companions.  If  these  wickec
spirits  doe  flnde  one  alone,  they  kill  him  with  cruel!
blowes  or  smoother  him.  Therefore  they  use  not  to  goe,
but  when  two  or  three  may  bee  in  a  companie.

There  is  heere  a  Bird  as  bigge  as  a  Crane :  hee  flyeth
not,  nor  hath  any  winges  wherewith  to  flie,  he  runneth
on  the  ground  like  a  Deere :  of  their  small  feathers  they
doe  make  haire  for  their  Idols.  There  is  also  an  Herbe,
which  being  washed  in  warme  water,  if  the  leafe  thereof
be  laid  on  any  member  and  licked  with  the  tongue,  it  will!
draw  out  all  the  blood  of  a  mans  body :  and  with  this;
leafe  they  use  to  let  themselves  blood.  From  these  Hands!
they  came  unto  others  named  the  Guelles  standing  one!
degree  towards  the  North-east,  and  West  from  the  Ilej
Terenate,  wherein  the  Portugals  have  a  Fortresse :  these;
men  are  haired  like  the  people  of  the  Malucos.  These!
Hands  stand  one  hundred  and  foure  and  twentie  leaguesi
from  the  Hand  named  Moro  ;  and  from  Terenate  betweene1
fortie  and  fiftie.  From  whence  they  went  to  the  He  of  j
Moro,  and  the  Hands  of  Cloves,  going  from  the  one  unto
the  other.  But  the  people  of  the  Countrey  would  not
suffer  them  to  come  on  land,  saying  unto  them  :  Goe  unto
the  Fortresse  where  the  Captayne  Antonie  Galvano  is,
and  we  will  receive  you  with  a  good  will :  for  they  would
not  suffer  them  to  come  on  land  without  his  licence :  for  i
hee  was  Factor  of  the  Countrey,  as  they  named  him.  A
thing  worthie  to  be  noted,  that  those  of  the  Countrey
were  so  affectioned  to  the  Portugals,  that  they  would
venter  for  them  their  lives,  wives,  children  and  goods.

In  the  yeere  1537.  the  Licenciate  John  de  Vadillo
Governour  of  Cartagena,  went  out  with  a  good  Armie
from  a  port  of  Uraba  called  Saint  Sebastian  de  buena
Vista,  being  in  the  Gulfe  of  Uraba,  and  from  thence  to
Rio  verde,  and  from  thence  by  land  without  knowing  any

60

ANTONIO GALVANO

way,  nor  yet  having  any  Carriages,  they  went  to  the  end
of  the  Countrey  of  Peru,  and  to  the  Towne  La  plata,  by
the  space  of  one  thousand  two  hundred  leagues :  a  thing
worthie  of  memorie.  For  from  this  River  to  the
Mountaines  of  Abibe  the  Countrey  is  full  of  Hils,  thicke
Forests  of  trees,  and  many  Rivers :  and  for  lacke  of  a
beaten  way,  they  had  pierced  sides.  The  Mountaines  of
Abibe  as  it  is  recorded  have  twentie  leagues  in  bredth.
They  must  be  passed  over  in  Januarie,  Februarie,  March,
and  Aprill.  And  from  that  time  forward  it  raineth  much,
and  the  Rivers  will  be  so  greatly  increased,  that  you
cannot  passe  for  them.  There  are  in  those  Mountaines
many  heards  of  Swine,  many  Dantes,  Lions,  Tygres,
Beares,  Ounses,  and  great  Cats,  and  Monkies,  and  mightie
Snakes,  and  other  such  vermine.  Also  there  bee  in  these
Mountaines  abundance  of  Partridges,  Quailes,  Turtle
doves,  Pigeons,  and  other  Birds  and  Fowles  of  sundrie
sorts.  Likewise  in  the  Rivers  is  such  plentie  of  Fish,  that
they  did  kill  of  them  with  their  staves :  and  carrying
Canes  and  Nets,  they  affirme  that  a  great  armie  might  bee
sustained  that  way  without  being  distressed  for  want  of
victuals.  Moreover  they  declared  the  diversities  of  the
people,  tongues,  and  apparell  that  they  observed  in  the
Countries,  Kingdomes,  and  Provinces  which  they  went
through,  and  the  great  travels  and  dangers  that  they  were
in  till  they  came  to  the  towne  called  Villa  de  la  Plata,  and
unto  the  sea  thereunto  adjoyning.  This  was  the  greatest
discoverie  that  hath  beene  heard  of  by  land,  and  in  so
short  a  time.  And  if  it  had  not  beene  done  in  our  dayes,
:he  credit  thereof  would  have  beene  doubtfull.

In  the  yeere  1538.  there  went  out  of  Mexico  certaine
Friers  of  the  order  of  Saint  Francis  towards  the  North  to
breach  to  the  Indians  the  Catholike  Faith.  He  that  went
rarthest  was  one  Frier  Marke  de  Nizza,  who  passed
:hrough  Culhuacan,  and  came  to  the  Province  of  Sibola,
,vhere  he  found  seven  Cities.

In  the  same  yeere  1538.  Antonie  Galvano  being  chiefe
:aptaine  in  the  lies  of  Maluco  sent  a  ship  towards  the

61

A.D.
1538.

La  plata.

The  Moun-
taines of
Abibe.

[II.  x.  1693.]

Villa  de  la
Plata.

Ramusius  3.
vol.fol.  356.
See  torn.  2.  lib.
8.  cap.  3.
Frier  Marke
de  Nizza.
Sibola.
Gomar.  hist,
gen.  lib.  5.
cap.  34.
Antonie
Galvano  chiefe
Captain  of
Maluco  author
of  this  zuorke.

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1538.

North,  whereof  one  Francis  de  Castro  was  captaine,  having
commandement  to  convert  as  many  as  he  could  to  the
Faith.  He  himselfe  christened  many,  as  the  Lords  of  the
Celebes,  Macasares,  Amboynos,  Moros,  Moratax,  and
divers  other  places.  When  Francis  de  Castro  arrived  at
the  Hand  of  Mindanao,  sixe  Kings  received  the  water  of
Baptisme,  with  their  wives,  children  and  Subjects  :  and  the
most  of  them  Antonie  Galvano  gave  commandement  to  be
called  by  the  name  of  John,  in  remembrance  that  King
John  the  third  raigned  then  in  Portugall.

The  Portugals  and  Spaniards  which  have  beene  in  these

Strange  Hogs.  Hands  affirme,  that  there  be  certaine  hogs  in  them,  which
besides  the  teeth  which  they  have  in  their  mouthes,  have
other  two  growing  out  of  their  snouts,  and  as  manie
behinde  their  eares  of  a  large  span  and  an  halfe  in  length.

Strange  trees  Likewise  they  say  there  is  a  tree,  the  one  halfe  whereof,
which  standeth  towards  the  east  is  a  good  medicine  against
all  poyson,  and  the  other  side  of  the  tree  which  standeth!
toward  the  West  is  very  poyson ;  and  the  fruit  on  thatj
side  is  like  a  bigge  pease ;  and  there  is  made  of  it  the|
strongest  poyson  that  is  in  all  the  World.  Also  they
report  that  there  is  there  another  tree,  the  fruit  whereof!
whosoever  doth  eate,  shall  bee  twelve  houres  besided
himselfe,  and  when  he  commeth  againe  unto  himselfe,  h(j
shall  not  remember  what  hee  did  in  the  time  of  his  mad-!
nesse.  Moreover  there  are  certaine  crabs  of  the  land.;
whereof  whosoever  doth  eate  shall  be  a  certaine  space  oui

Strangest 0f  his  wits. Likewise  the  countrey  people  declare  thai!

Stone.  there  is  a  stone  in  these  Hands  whereon  whosoever  sitteti

shall  be  broken  in  his  bodie.  It  is  farther  to  be  noted
that  the  people  of  these  Hands  doe  gild  their  teeth.

C^otnar hist

HI *2 ' In  the  yeere  1539.  Cortes  sent  three  ships  with  Francii'

74.  13.  Villoa  to  discover  the  coast  of  Culuacan  Northward. The)

Ramusius  3.  went  from  Acapulco,  and  touched  at  Saint  Iago  de  buen<;

vol.fil.  339.  speranza,  and  entred  in  the  gulfe  that  Cortes  had  dis-'

th  6  °ifmf  covered,  and  sailed  till  they  came  in  32.  degrees,  which  h

California  almost  the  farthest  end  of  that  gulfe,  which  place  the)

discovered.  named  Ancon  de  Sant  Andres,  because  they  came  thithei

62

ANTONIO GALVANO  a.d.

!539-

on  that  Saints  day :  Then  they  came  out  a  long  the  coast

on  the  other  side,  and  doubled  the  point  of  California  and  Cfllft™ia

entred  in  betweene  certaine  Hands  and  the  point,  and  so

sailed  along  by  it,  till  they  came  to  32.  degrees,  from

whence  they  returned  to  New  Spaine,  enforced  thereunto

by  contrary  windes  and  want  of  victualls  ; having  been

out  about  a  yeere. Cortes  according  to  his  account,  spent

two  hundred  thousand  ducats  in  these  discoveries.

From  Cabo  del  Enganno  to  another  Cape  called  Cabo Cabo  del

de  Liampo  in  China  there  are  one  thousand  or  twelve  j?/^™'

hundred  leagues  sayling. Cortes  and  his  Captaines  dis-  betzveene

covered  new  Spaine,  from 12.  degrees  to  32,  from  the  America  and

South  to  the  North,  being  seven  hundred  leagues,  finding  China  in  32.

it  more  warme  then  cold,  although  Snow  doe  lie  upon  *e&eests

9 «  T -vt  1 000.  leagues

certaine mountaines most part  of  the  yeere. In New  Qoman  £sL

Spaine  there  be  many  trees,  flowers  and  fruits  of  divers  gen.  lib.  6.  cap.
sorts  and  profitable  for  many  things. The  principall  tree 17-
is  named  Metl. It  groweth  not  very  high  nor  thicke.  Metlanexcel-
They  plant  and  dresse  it  as  we  doe  our  vines. They  mam  m^
say  it  hath  fortie  kinde  of  leaves  like  woven  clothes,  which
serve  for  many  uses. When  they  be  tender  they  make
conserves  of  them,  paper,  and  a  thing  like  unto  flaxe :
they  make  of  it  mantles,  mats,  shooes,  girdles,  and  cordage.
These  trees  have  certaine  prickles  so  strong  and  sharpe,
that  they  sewe  with  them. The  roots  make  fire  and  ashes,
which  ashes  make  excellent  good  lie. They  open the
earth  from  the  root  and  scrape  it,  and  the  juyce  which
commeth  out  is  like  sirrupe. If  you  doe  seeth  it,  it  will
become  honie ; if  you  purifie  it,  it  will  be  sugar. iUso
you  may  make  wine  and  vineger  thereof. It  beareth  the
Coco. The  rinde  rosted  and  crushed  upon  soares  and
hurts  healeth  and  cureth. The  juyce  of  the  tops  and  roots
mingled  with  incense  are  good  against  poyson,  and  the
biting  of  a  Viper. For  these  manifold  benefits  it  is  the
most  profitable  tree  knowne  to  grow  in  those  parts. Also
there  be  there  certain  small  birds  named  Vicmalim,  their  Oviedo  calls
3il  is  smal  &  long. They  live  of  the  dew,  and  the  juyce  them  Tminos-
}f  flowers  and  roses. Their  feathers  bee  verie  small  and

63

A.D.

1538-

The  revived
Bird.

[II.  x.  1694.]

Gomar.  hist,
gen.  lib.  5.  cap.
35-

Chili.

A  relation

scarcely

probable.

This  might  be
the  Temple  in
the  Lake  of
Titicaca.
Cieza  cap.
103.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

of  divers  colours.  They  be  greatly  esteemed  to  worke
gold  with.  They  die  or  sleepe  every  yeere  in  the  moneth
of  October,  sitting  upon  a  little  bough  in  a  warme  and
close  place :  they  revive  or  wake  againe  in  the  moneth  of
Aprill  after  that  the  flowers  bee  sprung,  and  therefore
they  call  them  the  revived  birdes.

Likewise  there  be  Snakes  in  these  parts,  which  sound
as  though  they  had  bels  when  they  creepe.  There  be  I
other  which  engender  at  the  mouth,  even  as  they  report
of  the  Viper.  There  bee  hogges  which  have  a  navell  on
the  ridge  of  their  backes,  which  assoone  as  they  bee  killed
and  cut  out,  will  by  and  by  corrupt  and  stinke.  Besides
these  there  be  certain  fishes  which  make  a  noyse  like  unto
hogs,  and  will  snort,  for  which  cause  they  bee  named
Snorters.

In the yeere 1538. and 1539. after that Diego de
Almagro  was  beheaded, the Marquesse  Francis  Pisarra
was  not  idle. For  he  sent  straight  one  Peter  de  Baldivia  |
with  a  good  companie  of  men  to  discover  and  conquer  the !
countrey  of  Chili. He  was  well  received  of  those  of  the
countrey,  but  afterwards  they  rose  against  him  and  would
have  killed  him  by  treason. Yet  for  all  the  warre  that
hee  had  with  them,  he  discovered  much  Land,  and  the  |
coast  of  the  Sea  toward  the  South-east,  till  he  came  intoi
40.  degrees  and  more  in  Latitude. While  he  was  in  these
discoveries  he  heard  newes  of  a  King  called  Leucengolina,  (
which commonly brought to the field two hundred:
thousand  fighting  men  against  another  King  his  neighbour,
and  that  this  Leucengolina  had  an  Hand,  and  a  Temple
therein  with  two  thousand  Priests :  and  that  beyond  them
were  the  Amazones,  whose  Queene  was  called  Guanomilla,
that  is  to  say,  The  golden  heaven. But  as  yet  there  are*
none  of  these  things  discovered. About  this  time  Gomez
de  Alvarado  went  to  conquer  the  Province  of  Guanuco :
and  Francis  de  Chavez  went  to  subdue  the  Conchincos,
which  troubled  the  towne  of  Truxillo,  and  the  countreys
adjoyning. Peter  de  Vergara  went  to  the  Bracamores,  a
people  dwelling  toward  the  North  from  Quito. John  Perez

64

ANTONIO GALVANO  a.d.

«53$

de  Vergera  went  against  the  Ciaciapoians :  Alfonsus  de
Mercadiglio  went  unto  Mulubamba.  Ferdinando  and
Gonzalvo  Pisarros  went  to  subdue  Collao,  a  countrey  very
rich  in  golde.  Peter  de  Candia  went  to  the  lower  part  of
Collao.  Peranzures  also  went  to  conquer  the  said
countrey.  And  thus  the  Spaniards  dispersed  themselves,
and  conquered  above  seven  hundred  leagues  of  countrey
in  a  very  short  space,  though  not  without  great  travailes
and  losse  of  men.

The  countreyes  of  Brasill  and  Peru  stand  East  and
West  almost  eight  hundred  leagues  distant.  The  neerest
is  from  the  Cape  of  Saint  Augustine  unto  the  haven  of
Truxillo  :  for  they  stand  both  almost  in  one  parallell  and
Latitude.

In  some  places  of  the  Andes  and  Countries  the  earth  is  Earth  °f

:  of  divers  colours,  as  blacke,  white,  red,  greene,  blew, ***?**' jjf*

11  • i  «ii  i«i  •  i  800"  t0  tye

1  yellow,  and  violet,  wherewith  they  die  colours  without  w\thaU.

any  other mixture. There  grow  on these mountaines

if  many  turneps,  rapes,  and  other  such  like  rootes  and  herbes.

i;  One  there  is  like  unto  Aipo or  Rue  which  beareth  a  Strange  root,

i  yellow  flower,  and  healeth  all  kinde  of  rotten  sores,  and  if

t  you  apply  it  unto  whole  and  cleane  flesh  it  will  eate  it

;  unto  the  bone : so  that  it  is  good  for  the  unsound  and

!  naught  for  the  whole.

Those  which  live  on  the  tops  of  these  mountaines  of

ii  Andes  betweene  the  cold  and  the  heat  for  the  most  part

n  be  blinde  of  one  eye,  and  some  altogether  blinde,  and

it  (scarce  you  shall  finde  two  men  of  them  together,  but  one  of

t  them  is  halfe  blinde. Also  there  groweth  in  these  fieldes,

lit  notwithstanding  the  great  heate  of  the  sand  good  Maiz,

Ii  and  Potatoes,  and  an  herbe  which  they  name  Coca,  which  4*  hearbe

t  they  carrie  continually  in  their  mouthes  (as  in  the  East  na?M  Coca

id  ilndia  they  use  another  herbe  named  Betele)  which  also  sat\sfieth

o:  (they  say)  satisfieth  both  hunger  and  thirst. Also  they  hunger  and

o<  sow  much  cotton  wooll,  which  of  nature  is  white,  red,  thirst.

if  blacke,  greene,  yellow,  orange  tawnie,  and  of  divers  other

,!  colours.

re: Likewise  they  affirme,  that  from  Tumbez  Southward  it

x  65  E

A.D.

1539-

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

doth  neither  raine,  thunder,  nor  lighten,  for  the  space  of
five  hundred  leagues  of  land : but  at  some  times  there
falleth  some  little  shower. Also  it  is  reported,  that  from
Tumbez  to  Chili  there  breede  no  Peacocks,  Hens,  Cocks
nor  Eagles,  Falcons,  Haukes,  Kites,  nor  any  other  kinde
of  ravening  Fowles,  and  yet  there  are  of  them  in  all  other
FowleofPeru.  regions  and  countreyes  :  but  there  are  many  Ducks,  Geese,
Herons, Pigeons Partridges, Quailes, and many other
kinds  of  birdes. There  are  also  a  certaine  kinde  of  foule,
like  unto  a  duck  which  hath  no  wings  to  flie  withall,  but
it  hath  fine thinne  feathers  which  cover  all  the  bodie.
Likewise  there  are  Bitters  that  make  warre  with  the  sealej
or  Sea-wolfe :  for  finding  them  out  of  the  water  they  will  j
labour  to  picke  out  their  eyes,  that  they  may  not  see  tol
get  to  the  water  againe,  and  then  they  doe  kill  them,  j
They  say  it  is  a  pleasant  sight  to  behold  the  fight  betweenel
the  said  Bitters  and  Seales. With  the  beards  of  these
Seales  men  make  clean  their  teeth,  because  they  bee  whole-  j  j
some  for  the  tooth-ache. There  are  certaine  beasts  which i  I
those  of  the  countrey  call  Xacos,  and  the  Spaniards  sheepe.  I
because  they  beare  wooll  like  unto  a  sheepe,  but  are  made
much  like  unto  a  Deere,  having  a  saddle  backe  like  untcjl
a  Camell. They  will  carrie  the  burthen  of  an  hundrec
weight. The Spaniards ride upon them, and wher
they  be  wearie  they  will  turne  their  heads  backeward
and  voide  out  of  their  mouthes  a  wonderfull  stinking  |
water.

From  the  River  of  Plata  and  Lima  Southward  then  j
breede  no  Crocodiles  nor  Lizards,  nor  Snakes,  nor  am;!
kinde  of  venemous  vermine,  but  great  store  of  goocj
fishes  breede  in  those  Rivers.  On  the  coast  of  Sainl
Michael  in  the  South  Sea  there  are  many  rockes  of  sal  (
covered  with  egges.  On  the  point  of  Saint  Helena  aril
certaine  Well  springs  which  cast  forth  a  liquor,  that  servetli  j
in  stead  of  pitch  and  tarre.  They  say  that  in  Chili  ther
is  a  fountaine,  the  water  whereof  will  convert  wood  int«;  j
stone.  In  the  haven  of  Truxillo  there  is  a  Lake  of  fres!, }
water,  and  the  bottome  thereof  is  of  good  hard  salt. I ;  I

66

Xacos  a  kind  of
great  sheepe
that  men  ride
upon.

Salt  rockes
covered  with
egs.

Strange
waters.

ANTONIO GALVANO  AD

1540.

the  Andes  beyond  Xavxa  there  is  a  river  of  fresh  water,
in  the  bottome  whereof  there  lieth  white  salt.

In  the  yeere  1540.  the  Captaine  Ferdinando  Alorchon  RTfS!us )'
went  by  the  commandement  of  the  Vice-roy  Don  Antonio
;  de  Mendoza  with  two  ships  to  discover  the  bottome  of  the
gulfe  of  California,  and  divers  other  countries.

In  this  yeere  1540.  Gonsalvo  Pisarro  went  out  of  the  [II.  x.  1695.]
Citie  of  Quito,  to  Discover  the  Countrie  of  Canell  or
Cinamome,  a  thing  of  great  fame  in  that  Countrie.  Hee
had  with  him  two  hundred  Spaniards,  Horse-men  and
Foote-men,  and  three  hundred  Indians  to  carie  burthens.
Hee  went  forward  till  he  came  to  Guixos,  which  is  the
farthest  place  governed  by  the  Ingas :  where  there  hapned  Gomar-  hisL

.  •  •  •  • 1 PC71  lib £ CClt>

a  great  Earthquake with Raine and Lightning, which  6$
sunke seventie Houses. They passed over cold and  Earthquake.
Snowie  hils,  where  they  found  many  Indians  Frozen  to  Cold  hills
death,  marvelling  much  of  the  great  Snow  that  they  found  under theLtne.
|  under  the  Equinoctiall  line. From  hence  they  went  to  a
Province  called  Cumaco,  where  they  taried  two  Moneths,  Gumaco
because  it  Rained  continually. And  beyond  they  saw  the
- 1  Cinamome-trees,  which  be  very  great,  the  Leaves  thereof  Ctnamm
i  |  resembling  Bay-leaves,  both  Leaves,  Branches,  Rootes,  and
t  all  tasting  of  Cinamome. The  Rootes  have  the  whole
'■ '  taste  of  Cinamome. But  the  best  are  certaine  knops  like
k  I  unto  Alcornoques  or  Acornes,  which  are  good  merchandise.
\  It  appeareth  to  be  wild  Cinamome,  and  there  is  much  of  Wlldpin*-

it  in  the  East  Indies,  and  in  the  Hands  of  Jaoa  or  Javai.  uandsofJava.
a  From  hence  they  went  to  the  Province  and  Citie  of  Coca,  Coca.
i where  they  rested  fiftie  dayes. From  the  place  forwards
>  they  travelled  along  by  a  Rivers  side  being  sixtie  Leagues
r  long,  without  finding  of  any  Bridge,  nor  yet  any  Foorde
a  to  passe  over  to  the  other  side. They  found  one  place  of
i  this  River,  where  it  had  a  fall  of  two  hundred  fathoms  Elpongo,  a
t  deepe,  where  the  Water  made  such  a  noyse,  that  it  would  ^f^/^  ^
t  make  a  man  almost  deafe  to  stand  by  it. And  not  farre  The Incas  used
if,  ibeneath  this  fall,  they  say  they  found  a  Channell  of  stone  to  make  such
it;.  Iverie  smooth,  of  two  hundred  foote  broad,  and  the  River  Chanels,
I  (runneth  by :  and  there  they  made  a  Bridge  to  passe  over

67

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1540.

on  the  other  side,  where  they  went  to  a  Countrie  called  '■
Guema.  Guema,  which  was  so  poore,  that  they  could  get  nothing

to  eate,  but  onely  Fruites  and  Herbes. From  that  place  ;
forward they  found  a  people  of  some  reason, wearing
certaine  Clothing  made  of  Cotton-wooll,  where  they  made
a  Brigandine,  and  there  they  found  also  certaine  Canoas,  I
wherein  they  put  their  Sicke  men,  and  their  Treasure  and
best  Apparell,  giving  the  charge  of  them  to  one  Francis
de  Orellana : and  Gonsalvo  Pizarro  went  by  Land  with
the  rest  of  the  Companie  along  by  the  Rivers  side,  and  |
at  night  went  into  the  Boates,  and  they  travelled  in  this
order two hundred Leagues as it appeareth. When
Pizarro  came  to  the  place  where  he  thought  to  finde  the  \
Brigandine  and  Canoas,  and  could  have  no  sight  of  them
nor  yet  heare  of  them,  he  thought  himselfe  out  of  all
hope, because hee  was in a strange Countrie  without
Victuals, Clothing, or  any thing else : wherefore they
were  faine  to  eate  their  Horses,  yea  and  Dogs  also,  because !
the  Countrie  was  poore  and  barren,  and  the  Journey  long,  i
Pizarros  hard  j-0  g0e  to  Quito. Yet  notwithstanding,  taking  a  good
journey.  heart  to  themselves  they  went  on  forward  in  their  Journey,;

travelling continually eighteene Moneths ; and it is  |
reported, that  they  went  almost  five  hundred  Leagues,;
wherein  they  did  neither  see  Sunne  nor  any  thing  else,  1
whereby they might be comforted, wherefore of two!
hundred  men  which  went  forth  at  the  first,  there  returned;
not  backe  past  ten  unto  Quito,  and  these  so  weake,  ragged
See  Orel/anas  anc[  disfigured,  that  they  knew  them  not. Orellana  went;
TI^H  Z ^ve  nundred  or  sixe  hundred  Leagues  downe  the  River,
seeing  divers  Countries  and  people  on  both  sides  thereof,
among  whom  he  affirmed  some  to  bee  Amazones. He
came  into  Castile,  excusing  himselfe,  that  the  water  and
streames  drave  him  downe  perforce. This  River  is  named
Rio  de  the  River  0f  Orellana,  and  other  name  it  the  River  of  the

re  ana. Amazones,  because  there  be  Women  there  which  live  like
^at^ unto  them.

See  this  voyage ^n  tne  yeere 1540. Cortes  went  with  his  Wife  into
sup.  1.  7.  c  6.  Spaine,  where  hee  died  of  a  Disease  seven  yeeres  after.

68

ANTONIO GALVANO  a.d.

1542.

In  the  yeere  1541.  it  is  recorded  that  Don  Stephan  de
Gama  Governour  of  India,  Sayled  toward  the  Streit  of
Mecca.

In  the  same  yeere  1541.  Don  Diego  de  Almagro  killed
the  Marques  Francis  Pizarro,  and  his  brother  Francis
Martinez  of  Alcantara  in  the  Citie  de  los  Reyes,  otherwise
called  Lima,  and  made  himselfe  Governour  of  that
Countrie.

In  the  yeere  1 540.  the  Vice-roy  Don  Antonie  de  See  tom-  2-  l-
Mendoza,  sent  one  Francis  Vasquez  de  Coronado  by  Land  '  cap.z.%.z.
unto  the  Province  of  Sibola,  with  an  Armie  of  Spaniards  Kenjib.e.Cap.
and  Indians.  7.

In  the  yeere  of  our  Lord  1542.  one  Diego  de  Freitas,  Sibola.
being  in  the  Realme  of  Siam,  and  in  the  Citie  of  Dodra  as
Captaine  of  a  Ship,  there  fled  from  him  three  Portugals
in  a  Junco  (which  is  a  kind  of  Ship)  towards  China. Their
names were Antonie de Mota, Francis Zeimoro, and
Anthonie  Pexoto,  directing  their  course  to  the  Citie  of
Liampo,  standing  in  thirtie  and  odde  Degrees  of  Latitude.
There  fell  upon  their  Sterne  such  a  storme,  that  it  set  them
off  the  Land,  and  in  fewe  dayes  they  saw  an  Hand  towards
the  East  standing  in  thirtie  two  Degrees,  which  they  doe
name  Japan,  which  seemeth  to  be  the  He  of  Zipangri,  Japan  dis-
whereof  Paulus  Venetus  maketh  mention,  and  of  the  riches  cTf y
thereof. And  this  Hand  of  Japan  hath  Gold,  Silver,  and
other  riches.

In  this  yeere  1542.  Don  Antonio  de  Mendoca  Vice-roy
of  Nueva  Spagna,  sent  his  Captaines  and  Pilots  to
Discover  the  Coast  of  Cape  del  Enganno,  where  a  Fleete
of  Cortez  had  beene  before.  They  Sailed  till  they  came
to  a  place  called  Sierras  Nevadas,  or  The  Snowie
mountaines,  standing  in  fortie  Degrees  toward  the  North,
where  they  saw  Ships  and  Merchandises,  which  carried  on
their  Stems  the  Images  of  certaine  Birds  called  Alcatarzi,
and  had  the  Yardes  of  their  Sailes  gilded,  and  their  Prowes
laide  over  with  silver.  They  seemed  to  be  of  the  lies  of  Gomar.  hist.
Japan,  or  of  China;  for  they  said  that  it  was  not  above  gW'hb.&.cap.
thirtie  dayes  sayling  into  their  Countrie.

69

A.D.

1542.
[II.  x.  1696.]

Gomar.  hist,
gen.  lib.  4.  cap.

13.

Ramusius  1.
vol.fol.  375.
pag.  2.

Saint  Thomas.

La  Nublada.
Roca  Partida.

Baxos.

Los  Reyes.

The  lies  of
Matelotes.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

In  the  same  yeere  1542.  Don  Anthonie  de  Mendoca,
sent  unto  the  Hands  of  Mindanao  a  Fleete  of  sixe  Ships
with  foure  hundred  Souldiers,  and  as  many  Indians  of  the
Countrie,  the  Generall  whereof  was  one  Rui  Lopez  de
villa  Lobos,  being  his  Brother  in  law  and  a  man  in  great
estimation.  They  set  Sayle  from  the  Haven  of  Natividad
standing  in  twentie  Degrees  towards  the  North,  upon  All
Saints  Eeve,  and  shaped  their  course  towards  the  West.
They  had  sight  of  the  Hand  of  Saint  Thomas,  which
Hernando  de  Grijalva  had  Discovered,  and  beyond  in
seventeene  Degrees  they  had  sight  of  another  Hand  which
they  named  La  Nublada,  that  is,  The  Cloudie  Hand.
From  thence  they  went  to  another  Hand  named  Roca-
partida,  that  is ;  The  Cloven  Rocke.  The  third  of
December  they  found  certaine  Baxos  or  Flats  of  sixe  or
seven  Fathoms  deepe.  The  fifteene  of  the  same  Moneth
they  had  sight  of  the  Hands,  which  Diego  de  Roca,  and
Gomez  de  Sequeira,  and  Alvaro  de  Saavedra  had  Dis-
covered, and  named  them  Los  Reyes,  because  they  came
unto  them  on  Twelfe-day.  And  beyond  them  they  found
other  Hands  in  ten  Degrees  all  standing  round,  and  in  the
midst  of  them  they  came  to  an  Anker,  where  they  tooke
fresh  water  and  wood.

In  the  yeere  1543.  in  Januarie  they  departed  from  the
foresaid  Hands  with  all  the  Fleete,  and  had  sight  of
certaine  Hands,  out  of  which  there  came  unto  them  men
in  a  certaine  kind  of  Boates,  and  they  brought  in  their
hands  Crosses,  and  saluted  the  Spaniards  in  the  Spanish
tongue,  saying,  Buenas  dias,  Matelotes,  that  is  to  say,
Good  morrow  companions ;  whereat  the  Spaniards  much
marveiled,  being  then  so  farre  out  of  Spaine,  to  see  the
men  of  that  Countrie  with  Crosses,  and  to  bee  saluted  by
them  in  the  Spanish  tongue,  and  they  seemed  in  their
behaviour  to  encline  somewhat  to  our  Catholicke  Faith.
The  Spaniards  not  knowing,  that  many  thereabout  had
beene  Christned  by  Francis  de  Castro,at  the  commandement
of  Antonie  Galvano,  some  of  them  named  these  Hands,
Islas  de  las  Cruzes,  and  others  named  them  Islas  de  los

70

ANTONIO GALVANO

Matelotes.  In  the  same  yeere  1543.  the  first  of  Februarie
Rui  Lopez,  had  sight  of  that  noble  Hand  Mindanao
standing  in  nine  Degrees :  they  could  not  double  it  nor
yet  come  to  an  Ancre  as  they  would,  because  the
Christened  Kings  and  people  resisted  them,  having  given
their  obedience  to  Anthonie  Galvano,  whom  they  had  in
great  estimation,  and  there  were  five  or  sixe  Kings  that  had
received  Baptisme,  who  by  no  meanes  would  incurre  his
displeasure.  Rui  Lopez  perceiving  this,  and  having  a
contrarie  wind,  Sayled  along  the  Coast  to  find  some  ayde :
and  in  foure  or  five  Degrees,  hee  found  a  small  Iland
which  they  of  the  Countrie  call  Sarangam,  which  they
tooke  perforce,  and  in  memorie  of  the  Vice-roy  who  had
sent  them  thither,  they  named  it  Antonia,  where  they
remained  a  whole  yeere.  In  the  same  yeere  1543.  and  in
the  moneth  of  August,  the  Generall  Rui  Lopez  sent  one
Bartholomew  de  la  torre  in  a  small  Ship  into  new  Spaine,
to  acquaint  the  Vice-roy  Don  Antonio  de  Mendoca  with
all  things.  They  went  to  the  Hands  of  Siria,  Gaonata,
Bilaia,  and  many  others,  standing  in  eleven  and  twelve
Degrees  towards  the  North,  where  Magellan  had  beene,
and  Francis  de  Castro  also,  who  there  Baptized  many,  and
the  Spaniards  called  them  the  Philippinas  in  memorie  of
the  Prince  of  Spaine.  Here  they  tooke  victuals  and
wood,  and  hoysed  Sayles,  they  Sayled  for  certaine  dayes
with  afore  wind,  till  it  came  upon  the  skanting,  and  came
right  under  the  Tropicke  of  Cancer.  The  twentie  five  of
September  they  had  sight  of  certaine  Hands,  which  they
named  Malabrigos,  that  is  to  say,  The  evill  Roades.
Beyond  them  they  Discovered  Las  des  Hermanas,  That
is,  The  two  Sisters.  And  beyond  them  also  they  saw
foure  Hands  more,  which  they  called  los  Volcanes.  The
second  of  October  they  had  sight  of  Farfana,  beyond  which
there  standeth  an  high  pointed  Rocke,  which  casteth  out
Fire  at  five  places.  So  Sayling  in  sixteene  Degrees  of
Northerly  Latitude,  from  whence  they  had  come,  as  it
seemeth  wanting  Wind,  they  arrived  againe  at  the  Hands
of  the  Philippinas. They  had  sight  of  sixe  or  seven  Hands

A.D.

1543-

Mindanao.

Sarangam.

The  relation  of
John  Gaietan
in  the  first  vol.
of  Ramusius.
fol.

The  Philip-
pinas.

Malabrigos.
Las  dos
Hermanas.

Los  Volcanes.
La  Farfana.

Sixe  or  seven
Hands  more.

A.D.

1543-

An  Archipela-
gic of  Hands.

Pilots  for
China.

[II.  x.  1697.]
Gomar.  hist,
gen.  lib.  4.

c.  14.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

more,  but  they  Ankered  not  at  them.  They  found  also  an
Archipelagus  of  Hands,  well  Inhabited  with  people,  lying
in  fifteene  or  sixteene  Degrees :  the  people  be  White,  and
the  Women  well  proportioned,  and  more  beautifull  and
better  Arraied  then  in  any  other  place  of  those  parts,
having  many  Jewels  of  Gold,  which  was  a  token,  that  there
was  some  of  that  Mettall  in  the  same  Countrie.  Heere
were  also  Barkes  of  fortie  three  Cubits  in  length,  and  two
Fathoms  and  a  halfe  in  breadth,  and  the  Plankes  five
Inches  thicke,  which  Barkes  were  rowed  with  Oares.  They
told  the  Spaniards,  that  they  used  to  Saile  in  them  to
China,  and  that  if  they  would  goe  thither  they  should
have  Pilots  to  conduct  them,  the  Countrie  not  being  above
five  or  sixe  dayes  Sayling  from  thence.  There  came  unto
them  also  certaine  Barkes  or  Boates  handsomely  decked,
wherein  the  Master  and  principall  men  sate  on  high,  and
underneath  were  very  Black  moores  with  Frisled  haire :
and  being  demanded  where  they  had  these  Black  moores,
they  answered,  that  they  had  them  from  certaine  Hands
standing  fast  by  Sebut,  where  there  were  many  of  them,
a  thing  that  the  Spaniards  much  marvailed  at,  because
from  thence  it  was  above  three  hundred  Leagues  to  the
places  where  the  Blacke  people  were.  Therefore  it1
seemed,  that  they  were  not  naturally  borne  in  that  Climate,
but  that  they  be  in  certaine  places  scattered  over  the  whole
circuit  of  the  World.  For  even  so  they  be  in  the  Hands
of  Nicobar  and  Andeman,  which  stand  in  the  Gulfe  of
Bengala,  and  from  thence  by  the  space  of  five  hundred
Leagues,  we  doe  not  know  of  any  Blacke  people.  Also
Vasco  Nunez  de  Vaiboa  declareth,  that  as  he  went  to
Discover  the  South  Sea,  in  a  certaine  Land  named  Quareca,
he  found  Blacke  people  with  Frisled  haire,  whereas  there
were  never  any  other  found  either  in  Nova  Spagna,  or  in
Castilia  del  Oro,  or  in  Peru.

In  the  yeere  1544.  Don  Gutierre  de  Vargas  Bishop  of
Placenza  sent  a  Fleet  from  the  Citie  of  Sivill  unto  the
Straits  of  Magellan  :  which  is  reported  to  have  beene  done
by  the  counsell  of  the  Vice-roy  Don  Antonie  de  Mendoca

72

ANTONIO GALVANO  a.d.

I545-

his  Cousin. Some  suspected,  that  they  went  to  Maluco,  See  torn.  2 ./.  7.

others  to  China,  others,  that  they  went  onely  to  discover  c'  llt
tithe  Land  betwixt  the  Strait  and  the  Land  of  Peru  on  the
\  other  side  of  Chili,  because  it  was  reported  to  bee  very

rich  in  Gold  and  Silver. But  this  Fleet  by  reason  of
'V,  contrary  windes  could  not  passe  the  Strait,  yet  one  small

Barke  passed  the  same,  and  sayled  along  the  coast,  and

discovered  all  the  Land,  till  he  came  unto  Chirimai,  and

Arequipa.

In  the  yeere  1545.  and  in  the  moneth  of  January  Rui

Lopez  de  villa  Lobos,  and  Giraldo  with  the  Castilians  came
' to  the  Hand  of  Moro,  and  the  Citie  of  Camafo,  where  they  The  lle  °f

were  well  received  of  the  Kings  of  Gilolo  and  Tidore, °'
[ and of the people of the Countrie (because Antonie  dntmie  Gal-
I Galvano  was  gone)  and  put  the  Captaine  Don  George  de  VfTEne?  °ut

Castro  to  great  trouble,  as  appeared  by  those  things  which

passed  betweene  him  and  the  Portugals,  and  the  great

expences  whereunto  he  put  the  Fortresse.

In  the  same  yeere  1545.  Rui  Lopez  de  villa  Lobos  sent
1  from  the  Hand  of  Tidore  another  ship  towards  New  Spaine
*  by  the  South  side  of  the  Line,  wherein  was  Captaine  one
t  ilnigo  Ortez  de  Rotha,  and  for  Pilot  one  Jaspar  Rico.

They  sailed  to  the  Coast  of  Os  Papuas,  and  ranged  all  Ox  Papuas.
K  along  the  same,  and  because  they  knew  not  that  Saavedra
)<  had  been  there  before, they  chalenged  the  honour  and
c  fame  of  that  Discoverie. And  because  the  people  there
i  were  blacke  and  had  frisled  haire,  they  named  it  Nueva  Nueva  Guinea
t  Guinea. For  the  memory  of  Saavedra  as  then  was  almost  d*$c°vere*
i  lost,  as  all  things  else  doe  fall  into  oblivion,  which  are  not

recorded,  and  illustrated  by  writing,
oj In  this  yeere  1545.  and  in  the  moneth  of  June,  there
:;  went  a  Junke  from  the  Citie  of  Borneo,  wherein  went  a
;  Portugall  called  Peter  Fidalgo,  and  by  contrary  winds  he

was  driven  towards  the  North ; where  he  found  an  Hand

standing  in  9.  or  10.  degrees,  that  stretched  it  selfe  to  22.

degrees  of  latitude,  which  is  called  The  He  of  the  Lucones,  The  lle  °f

because  the  Inhabitants  thereof  were  so  named. It  may  Lucones-

have  some  other  name  and  harbours,  which  as  yet  we

73

A.D.

1545'

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

know  not :  it  runneth  from  the  North  unto  the  Southwest,
and  standeth  betweene  Mindanao  and  China.  They  say
False  reports,  they  sayled  along  by  it  250.  leagues,  where  the  Land  was
fruitfull  and  well  covered,  and  they  affirme,  that  there  they
will  give  two  Pezos  of  gold  for  one  of  silver,

Chap. II.

The  summe  of  a  Letter  of  Nicolas  Trigautius  ai
Jesuite,  touching  his  Voyage  to  India,  and  of
the  State  of  Christianitie  in  China  and  Japan.:
A  Letter  also  of  Capt.  R.  Cocke,  and  Rela-i
tions  of  Master  Roberts  wracke  on  the  Coast'
of  China  in  the  Unicorne.

Ee  set  sayle  from  Lisbon,  the  sixteenth  off
Aprill,  1 61 8.  being  three  ships:  fourel
and  thirty  of  the  society  were  distributed !
into  two  ships :  one  of  them  called  Saint
Maure  carried  twelve  destined  for  Japon.
Bish.ofJapon. (SSffi^ffl&f °^  which was  the Reverend  Lord, L.

James Valent Bishop of Japon of oui
societie. Father Gabriel Matos was Superiour of the
other ten. In the other ship two and twenty of us|
were  carried  for  China,  ten  Portugals,  three  Italians,  four*i
Germans, and  besides  my  selfe, foure  Belgians. Wee-
sayled  prosperously,  saving  that  all  Ours  were  Sea-sicHj
till  we  came  to  the  Canaries. There  I  know  not  how  th<i
ships  parted  companie. Wee  sayled  to  the  Torrid  Zone
pleasantly  appointing  set  and  distinct  houres  for  taking  call
of  the  sicke,  for  Sermons,  the  Masse  (almost  daily)  Case:
of  Conscience,  Mathematicall  disciplines,  exercise  of  th
China  Language,  &c. About  the  Line  we  were  infestec
with  Fevers,  all  save  one,  and  five  died ; lastly,  I  and  mi
brother  Philip  were  sicke,  and  kept  our  beds  fifty  dayes
They  passe  the  insomuch  as  I  received  Unction  likely  in  few  hours  t(
Cape.  die. Wee  passed  the  Cape  on  Saint  James  his  Day,  anc

74

22.  J e suites
for  China.

< '

NICHOLAS TRIGAUTIUS  a.©.

1618.

a  few  dayes  after  (having  hitherto  had  no  tempest)  were

three  nights  together  horribly  tossed. The  Captaine  of

Dur  ship  also  died,  and  scarcely  could  another  succeed  in

peace.

After  five  moneths  and  a  halfe  sayling,  wee  came  to

3oa. The  Saint  Maure  came  thither  a  moneth  after  us,  Goa.

une of our Societie (an Italian) being dead. The

^dmirall  a  fortnight  after  that,  arrived  with  disgrace,  for

:hat  having  fallen  in  companie  with  sixe  English  ships,

>hee  chose  rather  with  eighty  thousand  pieces  of  money  The  Portugal*

,vhich  they  call  Patacas, to  redeeme  the  fight, then to  | v*~*

ight  it  out  with  victorie  or  death. For  which  cause  the  80000.  Rials

.  ^dmirall  and  some  other  Officers  are  deprived  and  sent  of  eight  rather

I  Dacke  to  the  King  in  bonds  to  be  punished,  or  to  render  th™  *k?  W'M

iccounts  of  their  fact. A  few  dayes  after,  my  brother  $&  tm

alls  sicke  and  dieth. The  rest  follow  their  studies  at

i  joa,  till  affaires  of  China  and  Japon  bee  more  quieted.

r  7or  howsoever  I  had  left  the  China  businesse  quiet,  and

i  magined  still  the  same,  yet  they  which  aspire  now  to

r  heir  helpe  must  propound  crosses  and  martyrdome to

:;  hemselves.

At  Nanquin  Christianitie  thrived  well  and  in  other  our  China  pro-

u  louses. Thence arose the beginning of evill. A  ceetnSsfr?e-

o  Or  •  cedinps  in

I  hiefe  Judge  in  the  third  Tribunall  named  Xin,  a  great  christianitie.

II  dolater,  sought  to  chase  Christianitie  out  of  the  King-  [II.  x.  1698.]
d  lome,  and  therefore  opposed  Ours  by  putting  up  many

\  Petitions  fraught  with  calumnies,  which  he  sent  secretly
:fc  jo  the  King.  But  after  often  petitioning  obtayning  no
;l  escript,  he  employeth  others  &  useth  bribes,  getting  to
M  lis  party  the  chief  President  of  the  Third  Tribunal,  to

I  vhich  Court  belongs  the  knowledge  of  forren  affaires,
%  fnd  of  Religion.  He  also  petitions  the  King,  but  with
i  uch  effect,  that  the  King  makes  no  answere  (which  with
M  he  Chinois  is  a  denyall)  and  at  last  he  writes  to the

II  ving,  that  according  to  his  Office  he  will  send  them  out  Persecution
t  >f  the  Kingdome,  such  excepted  as  remained  in  the  Royall  and  martV~
\  Citie. This  he  did,  but  the  Magistrates  of  those  Cities om'

jj  yhere  Ours  resided  dissembled  the  matter,  except  that

75

A.D.
l6l8.

Jesuits  dis-
missed from
Pequin.

Idolatrous
rage.

Tares  amongst
Wheat.

Japon  affaires.
Daifus  death.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Nanquin  adversarie,  which  apprehended  two  Priests  and
a  Brother,  their  Pupils,  Servants,  and  some  new  Converts,
but  durst  not  send  them  away  before  the  Kings  answer.
Meane  while  he  exercised  them  all  in  divers  Courts  about
nine  moneths  space,  and  some  were  often  whipped  after
their  cruell  manner ;  one  or  two  died  in  prison  by  force
of  the  torments.  Many  of  the  Ethnikes  favoured  Ours ;
but  the  Christian  Magistrates  Paulus,  Michael,  Leo  did
marvellously  bestirre  themselves.  Nor  did  any  Convert
apostatise,  but  beyond  the  China  pusillanimitie  were  both
constant  and  cheerfull  in  their  sufferings.

At  last  our  Nanquin  adversarie  bribing  the  Eunuchs
with  ten  thousand  pieces  of  Gold  extorted  from  the  King
that  Ours  should  be  sent  backe  to  their  owne,  but  noi
(which  he  sought) their  death. Ours  therefore  honor-
ably dismissed  from  Pequin,  came  to  Canton. Those  oi
Nanquin were sent away with shame, and two wenj
carried  in  Cages  to  Canton. In  other  residencies  the]!
were  more  gently  used,  and  all  continued  in  the  King,
dome  but  two  of  Pequin  and  two  of  Nanquin. Afte:
this  the  Pequin  Magistrate  was  deprived  and  sent  homi
with  dishonour: he  of  Nanquin  also  fell  sicke,  and  los!
his  onely  daughter,  which  the  Chinois  esteeme  a  grea
evill ; for  which  cause  in  great  rage  he  burned  a  certain
Idoll  to  which  hee  had  commended  that  his  daughter
Ours  adorned  a  new  seat  or  residence  in  Xausi. Fathe
Felicianus  a  Sylva  a  Portugall,  his  carkasse  having  Her
foure  yeeres  in  the  Coffin,  kept  at  home  after  the  Chin
fashion,  was  opened  and  found  entire  with  his  garments
The  skie  suddenly  overcast  was  calmed  on  the  shutting  0
the  Coffin ; a  horrible  thing  to  the  Chinois,  which  arlj
very  scrupulous  to  open  Graves. His  body  was  burie
in  the  fields,  and  is  reported  to  worke  miracles,  and  t\
be  frequented  of  the  New  Converts. I  am  called  by  m|
Superiours  with  all  speed,  and  there  is  hope  that  all  thing
will  bee  amended.

Now  for  the  Japonian  Church. Daifu,  after  that  nob]
victorie  which  he  obtained  against  Fideiori  and  Zaca,  i

76

NICHOLAS TRIGAUTIUS  a.d.

1618.

dead :  in  the  glorie  whereof  his  sonne  obtained  the
Empire  without  tumult.  The  Church  had  quiet  a  yeere
md  halfe ;  but  by  the  indiscreet  zeale  of  some  Religious
it  Nangasaque,  the  sore  brake  out  againe.  Foure  men,
■  Dominican,  Austinian,  Franciscan,  and  Jesuite,  have
Deene  martyred,  other  two  continued  in  prison.  Twenty
in  all  Japon  have  died  for  the  Faith,  others  have  beene
exiled  and  punished,  the  story  whereof  is  not  unlike  to
those  which  I  left  in  Europe  comprehended  in  foure
Bookes  of  Japonian  triumphs,  which  I  hope  ere  this  have
seene  the  light.  I  looke  for  other  intelligence  within
these  two  moneths,  which  I  will  leave  in  Latine  before  I
^oe  for  the  next  ships.

In  India  things  remayne  in  the  wonted  state.  At
Bazain  was  an  unwonted  tempest,  whereupon  Processions
were  made  in  all  India.  Two  Comets  were  seene  at  the  Two  Comets.
same  time,  one  fourteene  dayes  after  the  other :  the  later
directed  his  course  to  the  North,  and  still  is  seene  whiles
I  write  these  things  the  twentieth  of  December,  beginning
to  appeare  the  eleventh  of  November,  161 8.

Extracts  out  of  Trigautius  his  Martyrologe,  or
Five  Bookes  of  Christian  Triumphs  among
the  Japonians  before  mentioned.

THe  Japonian  State  being  oppressed,  He  is  Emperour  L.  1.  c  1.
which  possesseth  the  Imperiall  Provinces  called  Tenca
i!  (or  Tensa)  a  name  received  of  the  Chinois,  of  whom  the
:  Japonian Hands are a Colonie (by the Chinois called
Jepuen, the beginning of the Sunne, by themselves
Gitpon or Nitpon) and that which the Chinois call  L.  4.  c  16.
i  Thienhia, that is, Whatsoever is under Heaven, the
1  laponians  terme  Tenca, expressed  with  the  same  char-
acters, howsoever differing in pronunciation. Taico-
;  same  died  An.  1598.  and  left  for  his  Heire  a  childe  called
Fideyeri. Daifusama  King  of  Quanto  with  others  were  Fiden,  or
appointed  his  Tutors  or  Protectors,  which  quarrelling  for  FindeorFide-
,  themselves, A. 1600. Daifusama getting the better,  yon'

77

A.D.
I6l8.

PURCHAS HIS PILGR1MES

Surunga.
See  sup.  I.  4.

c  1.  y  2.

*Shougasama.

Ozaca.

entituled  himselfe  Xogun  or  Cubosama. He  left  Fide-
yori  in  the  most  famous  Fort  of  Japon,  with  a  tolerable
revenue. This continued till the yeere 16 14. He
removed  the  Imperiall  seat  from  Miaco  to  Surunga  the
chiefe  Citie  of  the  Kingdome  of  Fuchu,  and  built  there  a
Castle  to  keepe  his  treasure :  his  Sonne,*  destined  to  the
Inheritance,  he  placed  at  Yendo  (or  Edoo)  and  married
him  to  the  Neece  of  Nabunanga,  which  was  next  Emper-
our  before  Taicosama,  and  Aunt  to  Fideyori,  being  Sister
to his Mother. This Fideyori being now growne in
yeeres  at  his  Castle  of  Ozaca,  Daifusama  fearing  that  he
might  intervert  the  Inheritance  from  his  Sonne,  devised
trickes  first,  which  being  eluded  brake  forth  into  open
warre.
[II.  x.i 699.] He  had  set  Fideyori  on  worke  to  build  a  sumptuous
Temple  in  the  Suburbs  of  Miaco,  in  which  Daibut  (that
is,  a  great  Idoll  or  Colosse  of  guilded  Brasse,  his  thumbe
a  spanne  compasse  and  the  rest  proportionable,)  should  be!
worshipped. His  Father  Taicosama  had  before  built  atj
great  expence  this  Temple,  but  the  fire  had  consumed  it,1
and  the  Sonne  was  incited  to  renue  it  by  him,  which!
sought by that meanes to exhaust his Treasures, the'
sinewes  of  warre. This  Temple  at  the  eighth  Moone
(which  is  our  September)  was  to  be  dedicated  by  three;
thousand Priests thither assembled with great pompe,
the  Emperour  meane  while  intending  to  seize  on  Ozaca.
To  this  end  hee  had  sent  for  Ichinocam  the  Governour  of
the  Citie  and  wonne  him  to  his  part. But  at  his  returne
upon  suspition  he  was  forced  to  quit  the  Towne,  and  the
Emperours intents  made knowne, and that  Dedication
deferred. The Emperour came before Ozaca with al
great  Armie  of  two  hundred  thousand,  of  which  he  lost
thirtie  thousand  in  the  Siege,  and  was  forced  to  depart
with  dissembled  Conditions  of  Peace,  in  Januarie  1615.I
This  lasted  but  few  moneths,  and  hee  returned  with  an-!
other  Armie  as  great  as  the  former. Fideyori is  also  j
reported to  have two hundred thousand in  his  armie.
Sacay  was  burned,  and  in  two  Battels  Fideyori  had  the  I

78

See  sup,  I.  4
c.  2.  the

Japonian
Letters.

Ozaca  des-
troyed.

NICHOLAS TRIGAUTIUS  a.d.

1618.

better. In  the  third  the  Emperour  was  so  out  of  hope
that  hee  thought  there  to  have  ended  his  dayes,  and  spake
to  some  to  dispatch  him,  if  they  saw  no  meanes  for  him
to escape his Enemies hands. But Samandonus the
Generall  seeing  the  Victorie  sure,  sent  for  Fideyori  that  hee
should  come  to  have  the  honour  thereof,  who  in  youth-
full  hast  neglecting  his  old  Captaines,  they  enraged  at  this
seeming  contempt,  and  perhaps  corrupted  by  Cubosamas
money, set fire on the Castle. This forced Fideyori  Trecherie.
backe  to  save  his  Mother,  Wife,  and  what  he  could  from
the  flames,  preferring  safetie  before  honour. But  hee  lost
both,  with  himselfe  together,  no  man  yet  knowing  what
became  of  him. Ozaca  was  quite  destroyed  in  July  161 5.
and  the  Emperour  returned  Victorious  to  Surunga,  and
magnified  his  Idols  which  had  done  him  this  Honour  for
his zealous persecution of Christians. But in March
1616.  this  Tryumph  was  turned  to  his  Funerall. Hee
was  buried  in  his  Castle  Cuno,  where  his  Treasure  was
kept. One  of  his  Sonnes  hee  would  not  see,  his  other
sonne  succeeded,  who  is  thought  not  likely  to  containe
the  mutable  Japonian  spirits  in  order :  Two  other  sonnes
he  left,  of  which  hee  gave  order,  that  if  they  would  not
otherwise bee ordered they should lose their Heads.
Some  hopes  by  his  death  befell  the  Christians  of  more
libertie,  and  they  have  since  performed  their  holies,  but
secretly,  least  they  should  seeme  to  insult  on  the  Dead.
For  in  pretence  of  wrongs  by  Portugall  Merchants,  and
Contempts  of  his  Imperiall  Edicts,  and  of  Death,  and
the reports of  worshipping some executed Christian
Malefactors (at whose death some kneeling had com-
mended them  to  Christ,  which  was  thus  Paganly  miscon-
strued) hee  had  exiled  many,  and  done  many  to  divers
dndes  both  of  tortures  and  death ; which  our  Author
landles  at  large  in  five  *  Bookes,  where  they  which  please
may both read and see in Pictures their diversified
I  passions :  which  also  from  Captaine  Saris,  Captaine  Cocke
md  others,  wee  have  in  part  before  delivered,  with  an-
Dther Cause inciting the Emperour thereto, namely

79

Exiles,  with
Maiming,
Heading,
Cutting  a
sunder,
Crucifying,
burning,  £jJV.
*  A  fifth  is
added  since  to
the  four e
mentioned.

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1618.

Jesuiticall  hypocrisie,  who  under  pretence  of  Converting
soules,  had  become  Factors  and  Agents  for  the  Portugall
Merchants.  But  we  shall  give  you  further  and  later
Japonian  intelligence  from  our  owne  Countrymen.

A  Letter  concerning  later  Occurrents  in  Japon
from  Master  R.  Cocke  to  Captaine  Saris,
written  at  Firando  in  Japon,  the  31.  of
December. 1622.

Captayne  Saris :

I  Have  written  you  two  former  Letters  to  one  effect,
the  one  dated  the  Fourteenth  ultimo,  sent  by  a  Scotch-  j
man  called  John  Portis,  in  the  Ship  Moone.  And  the
other  kept  till  the  Twentieth  ditto,  and  sent  per  Master1
John  Munden,  in  the  ship  Bull.  In  both  which  Letters,!
I  wrote  you  at  large  as  time  then  offered,  unto  the  which  I
I  referre  me,  not  doubting,  but  one  of  them  will  come;
to  your  hands,  if  not  both.

Since  which  time  I  am  informed  of  the  greatest  Con-
spiracie  that  ever  was  heard  of  in  Japon,  pretended  against
the  person  of  Shouga  Samma,  the  Emperour  of  Japon
now  raigning,  the  Factors  being  such  great  personages,
that  it  is  thought  the  Emperour  dare  not  meddle  with
them,  but  winke  at  it  and  make  Peace  with  them.  Nine
of  them  being  named  as  followeth,  viz.

Cangano  Figen  Dono,  the  Emperours  kinsman,  and  of
the  greatest  revenues  in  Japon,  per  Annum  200.  Man-
gocas.  (Which  Master  G.  Saris  calculated  at  1875000.
pounds  sterling  money :  and  so  of  the  rest  proportion-
ably.)

Shimaszu  Dono,  King  of  Xaxica  and  Liqueas,  most
feared  of  any  Prince  in  Japon,  for  the  strength  of  his
Countries  and  valiantnesse  of  his  Souldiers,  his  revenues
more  then  per  annum  100.  Mangocas.

Miacavano  Camy  Dono,  Sonne  to  this  Emperours  eldest
Brother,  called  by  the  same  name,  a  valiant  man,  but

80

RICHARD COCKE  ad.

1622.

disinherited  by  Ogosho  Samma  his  Father,  because  hee

had  lost  his  Nose  by  too  much  Venerie,  and  Shougosame  [II.  x.  1700.]

his  brother  (now  Emperour) Constituted  in  his  place :

this  mans  revenues  rated  at  70.  Mangocas.

Massamoneda  Dono,  King  of  Oshew,  per  annum  70.
Mangocas.

Mengamy  Dono,  King  of  ,  per  annum  35.

Mangocas.

Yechew  Dono,  King  of  Cocora,  per  annum  34.  Man-
gocas.

Catto  Samma  Dono,  King  of  I.  O.  per  annum  30.
Mangocas.

Nancobo  Dono,  High  Priest  or  Bonse  of  Edo,  and
second  to  the  Daire  in  Church  matters,  and  Tutor  to  this
Emperour  Shouga  Sama,  per  annum  001.  Mangoco.

Codgsque  Dono,  Secretarie  to  Ogosho  Samma  when
you  were  in  Japon,  then  had  3.  Mangocas,  but  advanced
per  Shougo  Samma,  per  annum  to  015.  Mangocas.

Every Mangoca  is 10000. Gocas, and  each  Goca  is  Rule  to  summe
100.  Gantas  of  Rice,  and  each  Ganta  may  be  some  three  the  Re™nues
Ale  pintes  in  England,  for  it  is  above  three  Wine  pintes
as  I  have  seene  it  proved  per  an  English  wine  pinte  in
Japon. And  this  King  *  (or  Tono)  of  Firando,  hath  but  *f*z-  °J
■ six Mangocas, as I thinke you doe remember, yet is Jran  °'
;  esteemed  as  much  as  the  greatest  Earledome  in  England,
hee  being  stinted  at  foure  thousand  Souldiers  or  men  at
Armes,  two  thousand  to  keepe  his  owne  Countrey,  and
:wo  thousand  to  serve  the  Emperor  at  demand,  but  is  able
^1  to  set  out  many  thousands  more  if  need  require.

And  it  is  now  some  sixe  or  seven  yeere  past,  that  Calsa

1C  Samma  this  Emperours  second  Brother,  (who  is  married

o  Massamonedas  Daughter)  was  upon  suspition  disin-

; lerited  by  his  Brother,  and  shaven  a  Pagan  Bonse  or

Vlonke, and Confined into a  Pagan Monasterie, with

r guards  set  about  him. Attending  ever  since  when  the

Emperour  his  brother  would  command  him  to  cut  his

:i: >elly,  but  yet  living.

Thus  much  I  thought  good  to  advise  you  of  the  pre-
x  81  F

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1622.

sent  state  of  Japon,  much  altered  from  that  it  was  at  your
being  heere ;  and  for  the  rest,  I  hope  to  tell  you  by  word
of  mouth  at  my  returne  into  England,  which  I  hope  to
doe  the  next  yeere,  God  sparing  me  life  and  libertie.

Master  Edmond  Sayer  departed  from  hence  towards
Edo,  the  tenth  day  of  this  moneth  of  December ;  as  the
Hollanders  did  the  like,  to  carry  Presents  to  the  Emper-
our :  and  wee  have  newes  that  they  arrived  at  Osaca
tenne  dayes  past.  And  now  this  Ship  the  Elizabeth  being
ready  to  depart  towards  Bantam,  and  so  I  thinke  from
thence  for  England,  I  thought  it  good  to  write  you  these
few  lines  of  Advise ;  and  so  end  with  my  heartie  Com-
mendations to  your  selfe,  not  forgetting  all  the  rest  of
our  friends  and  acquaintance.

A  Note  of  the  Unicornes  Companie  in  China.

ALthough  wee  have  referred  China  relations  to  another  1
Tome,  yet  because  in  Captayne  Prings  former  rela-  1
tions,  mention  is  made  of  the  Unicorne  wracked  by  foule  !
weather  on  the  dangerous  shores  of  China ; I  thought
good  to  mention  thus  much  heere. I  spake  with  Master ;
Roberts  the  Master  of  the  Ship,  also  with  Master  Picker-
ing another  of  the  companie : which  both  told  me,  that
their  Ship  being  lost,  the  Companie  saved  themselves  and  1
with  part  of  the  goods  went  a  shore. The  rude  Chinois
would  have  assaulted  and  rifled  them,  but  they  stood  to
their defence, till an Officer or Magistrate came and
relieved  them  from  the  vulgar : after  which  they  found
both  just  dealing  and  kind  usage. They  were  permitted
to  buy  for  their  money  two  Vessels  with  all  necessarie
provisions  for  their  departure,  and  one  part  of  the  Com-
panie went to Japon, the other (as I remember) to
Malacca. If  thou  hast  no  compleater  storie  (of  those,
the  onely  English-men  which  I  know  to  have  been  on
land  in  China)  I  must  excuse  my  selfe  by  their  promises
of  perfecter  Relations,  which  whiles I expected, I  was
lesse inquisitive then otherwise I would have beene.
They  fay  led  me,  and  as  I  heare,  are  returned  to  the  Indies :

82

ARTHUR HATCH  aj>.

1623.

and  I,  if  I  seeme  to  fayle  heere,  shall  in  the  next  Tome
repay  thee  with  use.

Chap. III.

A  Letter  touching  Japon  with  the  Government,
Affaires  and  later  Occurrents  there,  written
to  me  by  Master  Arthur  Hatch  Minister,
lately  returned  thence.

Salutem  in  authore  salutis.

Worthy  Sir  :

Aving  promised  to  impart  unto  you  some
observations  of  those  Countries  where
I  have  travelled,  especially  of  Japan,  I
was  loath  either  to  breake  my  promise,  or
in  the  least  respect  frustrate  your  expec-
tation. Late  performance  is  better  then
none ;  but  the  multiplicitie  of  my  busi-
nesse  hath  beene  the  occasion  of  my  late  writing  unto
you,  which  I  hope  you  will  excuse ;  and  being  now  called
into  the  Countrey,  and  so  barred  from  conference  with
you,  I  know  not  how  or  in  what  manner  fully  to  accom-  [II.  x.  1701.]
plish  your  desire ;  and  therefore  I  intend  at  this  time  to
make  relation  unto  you  of  some  particular  passages  onely,
untill  I  heare  farther  from  you,  but  if  I  may  stand  you  in
any  stead  for  the  furtherance  of  your  intended  purpose,  I
would  intreat  you  to  acquaint  me  with  your  request,  and
you  shall  finde  me  most  ready  and  willing  to  the  utter-
most of  my  slender  power  to  accomplish  it.

The  Countrey  of  Japan  is  very  large  and  spacious,  con-
sisting of  severall  Hands  and  pettie  Provinces ;  it  is
Mountainous  and  craggie,  full  of  Rockes  and  stonie
places,  so  that  the  third  part  of  this  Empire  is  not  in-
habited or  manured ;  neither  indeed  doth  it  affoord  that
accommodation  for  Inhabitants  which  is  needfull,  or  that
fatnesse  and  conveniencie  for  the  growth  of  Corne,  Fruit,
and  small  grayne  as  is  requisite  ;  which  causeth  the  people

83

Description  of
Japon.

A.D.

1623.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Climate.

Stormes.
Earthquakes.

Emperour  and
Government.
65.  Vassals.

Councell.

to  select  the  choysest  and  plainest  parts  and  places  of  the
land  both  to  till  and  dwell  in.  The  Climate  is  temper-
ate and  healthie  not  much  pestred  with  infectious  or
obnoxious  ayres,  but  very  subject  to  fierce  windes,  tem-
pestuous stormes,  and  terrible  Earthquakes,  insomuch
that  both  Ships  in  the  harbour  have  beene  over-set,  and
driven  a  shore  by  the  furie  of  the  one,  and  Houses  on
the  land  disjoynted  and  shaken  to  pieces  by  the  fearefull
trembling  of  the  other.

It  is  governed  by  an  Emperour  who  hath  threescore
and  five  Kings  under  his  command ;  they  have  but  small
and  pettie  Kingdomes,  yet  all  of  them  challenge  and
assume  to  themselves  that  Royall  state  and  dignitie,  which
may  well  become  the  persons  of  farre  more  famous
Princes.  There  are  but  five  of  the  Emperours  privie
Counsell,  who  commonly  are  such,  that  for  Wisdome,
Policie,  and  carefull  vigilancie  in  managing  the  State
affaires,  in  preventing  of  Treasons  and  Rebellions,  in
executing  of  Justice  and  continuing  of  peace  and  quiet-
nesse  may  bee  compared  with  many,  nay  most  in  Chris-
tendoms No  man  may  make  knowne  any  cause  unto
the  Emperour  himselfe,  either  by  word  of  mouth  or
petition,  but  every  one  must  acquaint  the  Counsell  with
his  cause,  and  if  they  approve  it,  the  Emperour  shall
know  of  it,  if  not,  you  must  be  content  to  have  it  drowned
Magnificence,  in  oblivion.  The  Emperour  lives  in  great  Royaltie  and
seldome  goes  abroad  either  to  Hawke  or  Hunt  without  a
thousand  followers  at  least  to  attend  him :  he  hath  but
one  Wife,  and  it  is  generally  reported  that  hee  keepes
companie  with  no  other,  but  her  onely ;  and  if  it  bee  true
as  it  is  thought,  hee  may  in  that  respect  be  tearmed  the
Phoenix  of  all  those  parts  of  the  world :  as  for  those
within  his  owne  Dominions  they  are  so  farre  either  from
imitating  or  following  him,  that  one  is  scarcely  contented
with  a  hundred  women,  and  they  are  so  shamelesse  in  that
kinde,  that  they  will  boast  of  it,  and  account  it  a  glory
unto  them  to  make  relation  of  the  multitude  of  women
which  they  have  had  the  use  of. Consuetudo  peccandi

84

Chastitie.

ARTHUR HATCH  ad.

1623.
tollit  sensum  peccati.  This  Emperour  hath  abundance
of  Silver  and  Gold,  and  not  onely  his  Coffers  but  whole  Riches.
Store-houses  are  cramm'd  with  coyne ;  hee  hath  some
balls  of  Gold  which  were  brought  to  his  Court  from
Ozechya  Castle  of  that  waight  and  magnitude,  that  fifteene
or  sixteene  men  are  scarcely  able  to  beare  one  of  them.

All  Rivers  doe  in  a  kinde  of  thankfull  renumeration
returne  their  waters  to  the  Sea,  because  they  tooke  them
from  thence,  but  the  Princes  of  Japon  doe  cleane  contrarie,
for  they  receive  nothing  from  the  Emperour,  and  yet  they
give  all  to  the  Emperour,  for  they  doe  even  impoverish
themselves, by enriching him by presents ; nay, they  Presents.
strive  and  contend  who  may  give  the  greatest  and  chiefest  Jealousie.
Present. And each of those severall Princes must
alwayes  bee  either  himselfe in  person, or  his Brother,
eldest  Sonne,  or  the  chiefe  Nobleman  within  his  Realme
at  the  Emperours  Court ; the  reason  of  it  is  not  well
knowne,  but  it  is  pretended,  that  it  is  done  to  keepe  the
severall Kingdomes in quiet, and free from tumults,
treasons  and  rebellions. The  Emperour  doth  ordinarily
requite  his  Princes  presents  after  this  manner :  hee  gives
them  a  Feather  for  a  Goose,  some  few  Kerrimoones  or
Coates,  for  Gold,  Silver  or  other  precious  and  rare  com-
modities ; and  that  they  may  not  grow  rich,  and  of  suffi-
cient abilitie  to  make  head  against  him,  he  suffers  not  their
Fleeces  to  grow,  but  sheares  them  off,  by  raising  Taxes  Polide  to
on  them  for  the  building  of  Castles,  and  the  repairing  of  mP°verish
Fortifications,  and  yet  they  are  not  suffered  to  repaire u  Jec  Sm
their  owne,  or  any  way  to  fortifie  themselves.

Ozechya  is  the  most  famous  Castle  that  the  Emperour  Osaca  or
hath,  or  that  is  within  the  Empire ; it  is  of  an  extraordi- 0zechta-
narie  bignesse  and  compassed  round  with  three  severall
walls ; the  Castle  of  Edo  is  likewise  walled  and  moated,  Edo  and  other
having  some  few  Ordnance  on  it ; at  Crates  and  Falkata  Castles-
there  are  likewise  Castles  both  walled  and  moated,  the
circumference  of  each  of  them  is  neere  about  two  mile.
The  chiefe  Noble-men  of  those  Kingdomes  have  Houses
within  the  Castle  walls  to  come  and  live  there,  either  at

85

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGR1MES

1623.

the  Kings  or  their  owne  pleasures,  within  each  of  those
Castles  there  is  a  Storehouse  kept  ordinarily  full  of  Rice,
which  may  serve  for  their  provision  at  all  occasions  and
Falcata  needs. At  Falkata  there  is  a  Wood  of  Pine  trees  neere

neatnesse  iff about  three  mile  square,  which  is  all  the  Summer  time
em^e  swept  and  kept  so  cleane,  that  you  shall  hardly  see  any

small  twig  bough,  or  leafe  under  the  Trees,  and  the  trees
stand  so  close  together,  that  you  may  solace  and  recreate
your  selfe  there  at  all  houres  of  the  day  without  any  hurt
or  heat  of  the  Sunne. In  the  midst  of  it  there  is  a  great
Pagod  or  Church  very  richly  adorned  with  gilded  Images,
and  all  sorts  of  curious  carved  workes.
Customes  of The  people  are  generally  Courteous,  affable  and  full  of
the  people. Complements,  they  are  very  punctuall  in  the  entertayning
*-  >2"J  of  Strangers,  and  they  will  assoone  lose  a  limbe  as  omit  one

Ceremonie  in  welcomming  their  friend ;  they  use  to  give
and  receive  the  emptie  Cup  at  one  the  others  hands,  and
before  the  Master  of  the  house  begins  to  drinke,  hee  will
proffer  the  Cup  to  every  one  of  his  Guests,  making  shew
to  have  them  to  begin  though  it  bee  farre  from  his  inten-
tion ;  they  feed  not  much  upon  varietie ;  for  Fish,  Rootes
and  Rice  are  their  common  junkates,  and  if  they  chance
to  kill  a  Hen,  Ducke  or  Pigge,  which  is  but  seldome,  they
will  not  like  Churles  eate  it  alone,  but  their  friends  shall
be  surely  partakers  of  it.  Their  ordinary  drinke  is
Water,  and  that  is  made  most  times  hot,  in  the  same  pot
where  they  seeth  their  Rice,  that  so  it  may  receive  some
thicknesse  and  substance  from  the  Rice.  They  have
strong  Wine  and  Rack  distill' d  of  Rice,  of  which  they  will
sometimes  drinke  largely,  especially  at  their  Feasts  and
meetings,  and  being  moved  to  anger  or  wrath  in  the  heate
of  their  Drinke,  you  may  assoone  perswade  Tygres  to
patience  and  quietnesse  as  them,  so  obstinate  and  wilfull
they  are  in  the  furie  of  their  impatience.  Their  Lawes
are  very  strict  and  full  of  severitie,  affoording  no  other
kinde  of  punishment  but  either  Death  or  Banishment :
Murther,  Theft,  Treason,  or  the  violation  of  any  of  the  ,
Emperours  Proclamations  or  Edicts,  are  punished  with

86

ARTHUR  HATCH  a.u.

1623.

death ;  so  is  Adulterie  also  if  it  bee  knowne  and  the
parties  pursued,  but  the  Devill  their  master  in  those
actions  hath  taught  them  such  cleanly  conveyances,  that
seldome  or  never  are  they  apprehended ;  they  proceed
both  in  Controversies  and  criminall  causes  according  to
the  verdict  of  the  produced  witnesses,  and  the  Sentence
being  once  past,  they  will  not  revoake  or  mittigate  the
severitie  of  it,  but  if  the  parties  attached  have  deserved
death  they  shall  surely  have  it,  and  for  the  manner,  they
are  either  Beheaded  or  Crucified ;  hee  kneeles  downe  on
his  knees  and  then  comes  the  Executioner  behind  him
and  cuts  off  his  head  with  a  Catan  or  their  Countrie-sword,
and  his  head  being  off,  the  young  Cavalleers  trie  their
weapons  on  his  limbes,  and  prove  whether  they  can  cut
off  an  Arme  or  Leg  at  a  blow ;  the  other  have  their  armes
and  legges  spread  abroad  on  a  Crosse,  which  done,  they
set  the  Crosse  upright  in  the  ground,  and  then  comes  one
either  with  a  Lance  or  Speare  and  runnes  the  partie
through  the  bodie,  where  hee  hangs  untill  he  rots  off,  no
man  being  suffered  to  take  him  downe.

Every  one  may  change  his  Name  three  times,  when  he
is  a  childe,  when  he  is  a  young-man,  and  when  he  is  old ;
some  change  their  names  more  often,  every  one  as  hee
pleaseth  may  make  choyse  of  his  owne  name,  and  they  are
commonly  named  either  by  the  King,  or  else  by  some
Noble  or  Great  man  with  whom  they  are  chiefely  in  favour.

They  have  the  use  of  Writing  and  Printing,  and  have
had  the  space  of  many  yeeres,  no  man  knowes  certainly
how  long.  They  have  seven  sorts  of  Letters,  each  single
letter  serving  for  a  word,  and  many  of  them  in  their  plac-
ing serve  for  sixe  or  seven ;  and  each  Alphabet  hath  eight
and  fortie  Letters,  and  yet  with  all  these  letters  they  are
not  able  to  write  our  Christian  names ;  they  have  not  the
true  pronounciation  of  H.  B.  T.  and  some  other  letter,
and  a  Chinesse  if  his  life  lay  on  it,  cannot  truely  pro-
nounce D.

They  observe  no  Sabbath,  but  certaine  Feast  dayes
according  to  the  Moone,  as  the  first  of  the  Moone,  the

87

A.D.
1623.

The  Authors
going  from
Venice  to
Cyprus  \$
Tripo/y.
Touching  the
way  from
Aleppo  to
Bagdet,  See
sup.  I.  9.  c.  1.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

15.  or  28. ;  on  these  dayes  they  goe  to  the  Church,  visit
the  Sepulchers  of  the  dead,  and  use  many  foolish  and
apish  Ceremonies,  which  time  will  not  permit  me  now  to
relate.

The  ninth  day  of  the  Moone  throughout  the  yeere  they
hold  for  accursed,  and  therefore  in  that  day  they  will  not
begin  or  undertake  any  worke  of  consequence  and
importance.

They  strictly  observe  a  Fast  on  that  day  of  the  moneth,
in  which  their  Father  or  Mother  dyed,  which  they  doe  so
precisely  keepe,  that  they  will  not  touch  or  eate  any  thing
that  hath  blood.

Kind  Sir,  if  I  have  not  in  this  satisfied  you  according
to  your  expectation,  yet  I  will  assure  you  it  is  according
as  the  time  and  my  wayward  affaires  will  now  permit  me ;
I  would  intreat  to  heare  from  you,  and  God  willing  as  I
have  leasure  I  will  more  fully  declare  unto  you  my
particular  observations  of  Japon,  in  the  meane  time  I
will  pray  for  your  health  and  good  successe  in  all  your
affaires  and  godly  enterprises.

From  Wingham  in  Kent  the
25.  of  November,  1623.

Resting  yours  to  use  in  what  hee  may :

Arthur  Hatch.

Chap.  IIII.

Extracts  of  Master  Caesar  Frederike  his  eighteene

yeeres  Indian  Observations.

N  the  yeere  of  our  Lord  God  1563,  1
Caesar  Fredericke  being  in  Venice,  and
very  desirous  to  see  the  East  parts  of  the
World,  tooke  my  journey  to  Alepo.
and  there  I  acquainted  my  selfe  with
Merchants  of  Armenia,  and  Moores,  thai
were  merchants,  and  consorted  to  goe
with  them  to  Ormus,  and  wee  departed  from  Alepo,  anc
in  two  dayes  journey  and  a  halfe,  we  came  to  a  Citie  called

88

CAESAR FREDERICK  ad.

1563.
Bir. (Thence  to  Babyion  or  Bagdet,  and  so  to  Basora
and  Ormus.)

Ormus  hath  a  Moore  King  of  the  race  of  the  Persians,  [H-x.  1703.]
who  is  created  and  made  King  by  the  Captaine  of  the  ™fj?*Vf
Castle,  in  the  name  of  the  King  of  Portugall. At  the  0rmuSm
creation  of  this  King  I  was  there,  and  saw  the  ceremonies
that  they  use  in  it,  which  are  as  followeth. The  old  King
being  dead,  the  Captaine  of  the  Portugals  chuseth  another
of  the  bloud  Royall,  and  maketh  this  election  in  the  Castle
with  great  Ceremonies,  and  when  hee  is  elected,  the  Cap-
!  taine  sweareth  him  to  be  true  and  faithfull  to  the  King
of  Portugall,  as  his  Lord  and  Governour,  and  then  he
j  giveth him the Scepter regall. After this with great
j  feasting and pompe, and with great company, he is
:  brought  into  the  royall  Palace  in  the  Citie. This  King
keepeth  a  good  traine,  and  hath  sufficient  revenues  to
1  maintayne  himselfe  without  troubling  of  any,  because  the
Captaine  of  the  Castle  doth  maintayne  and  defend  his
»i  *ight,  and  when  that  the  Captaine  and  he  ride  together,
le  is  honoured  as  a  King,  yet  he  cannot  ride  abroad  with
lis  traine,  without  the  consent  of  the  Captaine  first  had :
t  behooveth  them  to  doe  this,  and  it  is  necessarie,  because
}f  the  great trade that is  in this Citie : their  proper
anguage  is  the  Persian  tongue. There  I shipped  my
;elfe to goe for Goa, a Citie in the Indies, in
.vhich  passage  the  first  Citie  that  you  come  to  in  the
Indies,  is  called  Diu,  and  is  situate  in  a  little  Hand  in  the  Diu.
£ingdome of  Cambaia, which is the  greatest strength
hat  the  Portugals  have  in  all  the  Indies,  yet  a  small  Citie,
)ut  of  great  trade,  because  there  they  lade  very  many
*reat  ships  for  the  straights  of  Mecca  and  Ormus  with
narchandise,  and  these  ships  belong  to  the  Moores  and
Christians,  but  the  Moores  cannot  trade  neither  saile  into
hose  seas  without  the  licence  of  the  Vice-roy  of  the  King
)f  Portugall,  otherwise  they  are  taken  and  made  good
go  arises. The merchandise that they lade these ships
a  vithall  commeth  from  Cambaietta  a  Port  in  the  King-  Cambaietta.
iome  of  Cambaia,  which  they  bring  from  thence  in  small

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1563.

barkes,  because  there  can  no  great  shippes  come  thither,
by  reason  of  the  sholdnesse  of  the  water  thereabouts,  and
these  sholdes  are  an  hundred  or  fourescore  miles  about  in
Macareo, a  straight  or  gulfe,  which  they  call  Macareo,  which  is  as
great  Tides.  mucn  to  saV)  as  a  race  0f  a  ^{^  because  the  waters  there
run  out  of  that  place  without  measure,  so  that  there  is  nc
place  like  to  it,  unlesse  it  be  in  the  Kingdome  of  Pegu,
where  there  is  another  Macareo,  where  the  waters  run
out  with  more  force  then  these  doe. Cambaietta  is  situate
on  the  seas  side,  and  is  a  very  faire  Citie. The  time  that
I  was  there,  the  Citie  was  in  great  calamitie  and  scarce-
nesse,  so  that  I  have  seene  the  men  of  the  country  thai
were  Gentiles  take  their  children,  their  sonnes  and  theii
daughters,  and  have  desired  the  Portugals  to  buy  them,
and  I  have  seene  them  solde  for  eight  or  ten  Larins  aj
piece, which may bee of our money ten shillings or
thirteene  shillings  foure  pence. For  all  this,  if  I  had  noli
seene  it,  I  could  not  have  beleeved  that  there  should  beei
such  a  trade  at  Cambaietta  as  there  is :  for  in  the  time  of  1
every new Moone and every full Moone, the small,
barkes (innumerable) come in and out, for at those  1
times of the Moone the tides and waters are
higher then at other times they be. These barkes
be laden with all sorts of spices, with silke oi;
China,  with Sandols,  with  Elephants teeth,  Velvets  of
Vercini,  great  quantitie  of  Pannina,  which  commeth  from
Mecca,  Chickinos  which  be  pieces  of  gold  worth  seven
shillings  a  piece  sterling,  with  money,  and  with  divers
sorts  of  other  merchandise. Also  these  barkes  lade  out.
as  it  were,  an  infinite  quantitie  of  cloth  made  of  Bumbast
of  all  sortes,  as  white  stamped  and  painted,  with  great,
quantitie  of  Indico,  dried  ginger  and  conserved,  Myra-i
bolans  drie  and  condite,  Boraso  in  paste,  great  store  of)
Sugar,  great  quantitie  of  Cotton,  abundance  of  Opium.
Assa  Fetida,  Puchio,  with  many  other  sorts  of  drugges,
Turbants  made  in  Diu,  great  stones  like  to  Corneolaes,
Granats,  Agats,  Diaspry,  Calcidonii,  Hematists  and  some
kinde  of  naturall  Diamonds.

90

CAESAR FREDERICK  ad.

1563-
During  the  time  I  dwelt  in  Cambaietta,  1  saw  very  A  marvellous
marvellous things: there were an infinite number of  f™^g
Artificers  that  made  Bracelets  called  Mannii,  or  bracelets
if  Elephants  teeth,  of  divers  colours,  for  the  women  of
the  Gentiles, which  have  their  armes  full  decked  with
:hem. And in this occupation there are spent every
y^eere  many  thousands  of  crownes :  the  reason  whereof  is
phis, that when there dieth any whatsoever of their
cindred,  then  in  signe  and  token  of  mourning  and  sorrow,
:hey  breake  all  their  bracelets  from  their  armes,  and  pre-
sently they  goe  and  buy  new  againe,  because  that  they
lad  rather  bee  without their  meat then without their
)racelets.

There come every yeere to Chaul from Cochin, &
rom  Cananor  ten  or  fifteen  great  ships  laden  with  great
sluts  cured,  and  with  Sugar  made  of  the  selfe  same  Nuts
ailed  Giagra : the  tree  wheron  these  Nuts  doe  grow  is
ailed  the  Palmer  tree,  and  thorow  out  all  the  Indies,  and
specially  from  this  place  to  Goa,  there  is  great  abund-
1 nee  of  them,  and  it  is  like  to  the  Date  tree. In  the  whole
vorld  there  is  not  a  tree  more  profitable  and  of  more  good-
1  lesse  then  this  tree  is,  neither  doe  men  reape  so  much
»  »enefit  of  any  other  tree  as  they  doe  of  this,  there  is  not
ny  part  of  it  but  serveth  for  some  use,  and  none  of  it  is
worthy  to  be  burnt. With  the  timber  of  this  tree  they Coco  tree  and
lake  Ships  without  the  mixture  of  any  other  tree,  and  ^f**  almost
/ith  the  leaves  thereof  they  make  Sayles,  and  with  the  pientifullin
«  buit  thereof,  which  bee  a  kinde  of  Nuts,  they  make  Wine,  the  lies  of  the
nd  of  the  wine  they  make  Sugar  and  Placetto,  which  Maldives.
Vine  they  gather  in  the  spring  of  the  yeere :  out  of  the
;: liddle  of  the  tree  where  continually  there  goeth  or  run-
eth  out  white  liquor  like  unto  water,  in  that  time  of  the
1 eere they put a vessell under every tree, and every
vening  and  morning  they  take  it  away  full,  and  then  dis-
:: lling  it  with  fire  it  maketh  a  very  strong  liquor : and
it  I pen  they  put  it  into  Buts,  with  a  quantity  of  Zibibbo,  [II.  x.  1704.]
rhite  or  blacke  and  in  short  time  it  is  made  a  perfect
Vine. After  this  they  make  of  the  Nuts  great  store  of

91

A.D.
1563.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Oyle  :  of  the  tree  they  make  great  quantitie  of  boord
and  quarters  for  buildings.  Of  the  barke  of  this  tree  the]
make  Cables,  Ropes,  and  other  furniture  for  ships,  and
as  they  say,  these  Ropes  be  better  then  they  that  are  madii
of  Hempe.  They  make  of  the  Bowes,  Bedsteds,  afte,
the  Indies  fashion,  and  Scavasches  for  merchandise.  Th,
leaves  they  cut  very  small,  and  weave  them,  and  so  mak
Sayles  of  them,  for  all  manner  of  shipping,  or  else  ver,
fine  Mats.  And  then  the  first  rinde  of  the  Nut  thej
stampe,  and  make  thereof  perfect  Ockam  to  calke  ship!;
great  and  small :  and  of  the  hard  barke  thereof  they  mak
Spoones  and  other  vessels  for  meate,  in  such  wise  thaj
there  is  no  part  thereof  throwne  away,  or  cast  to  the  fin.
When  these  Mats  be  greene  they  are  full  of  an  exceller,
sweet  water  to  drinke :  and  if  a  man  bee  thirsty,  with  th,
liquor  of  one  of  the  Mats  he  may  satisfie  himselfe :  anj
as  this  Nut  ripeneth,  the  liquor  thereof  turneth  all  tj
kernell.

In  the  yeer  of  our  Lord  1567.  I  went  from  Goa  t .
Bezeneger  the  chiefe  Citie  of  the  Kingdom  of  Narsing'
eight  dayes  journey  from  Goa,  within  the  Land,  in  th
companie  of  two  other  Merchants  which  carried  witj
them  three  hundred  Arabian  Horses  to  that  King :  b(
cause  the  Horses  of  that  Countrie  are  of  a  small  stature;
and  at  the  going  out  of  Goa  the  Horses  pay  custome,  twj.
and  forty  Pagodies  for  every  Horse,  which  Pagody  majj
be of sterling money sixe shillings eight pence, thej

A  very  good be  pieces  of  gold  of  that  value. So  that  the  Arabia;

sale  fir  horses.  Horses  are  of  great  value  in  those  Countries,  as  300
400.  500.  and  to  1000.  Duckets  a  Horse.

^dakan*'  HHHe  Citie  of  Bezeneger  was  sacked  in  the  yeere  156 1
Xamalucco.  -I  DV  foure  Kings  of  the  Moores,  which  were  of  gre
i$c.  power  and  might : the  names  of  these  foure  Kings  wei

A  most  unkind  these  following: the  first  was  called  Dialcan,*  the  secorl:
and  wicked ' Zamaiuc the  third  Cotamaluc,  and  the  fourth  Viridy
treason  against ,  J.  r  __.  .  .  /

their  Prince :  ano-  yet  these  roure  Kings  were  not  able  to  overcome  th;
this  they  have  Citie  and  the  King  of  Bezeneger,  but  by  treason. Th

92

CAESAR FREDERICK  a.d.

1565.

iCing  of  Bezeneger  was  a  Gentile,  and  had,  amongst  all  for  giving
rther  of  his  Captaines,  two  which  were  notable,  and  they  credlte  t0
vere Moores : and these two Captaines had either of  YJthfr  then  to
hem  in  charge  threescore  and  ten  or  fourescore  thousand  their  owne
nen. These  two  Captaines  being  of  one  Religion  with  native  people.
he  foure Kings  which  were Moores, wrought meanes
vith  them  to  betray  their  owne  King  into  their  hands.
The  King  of  Bezeneger  esteemed  not  the  force  of  the
bure  Kings  his  enemies,  but  went  out  of  his  Citie  to
yage battell with them in the fields ; and when the
:  Irmies  were  joyned,  the  battell  lasted  but  a  while,  not  the
pace  of  foure  houres,  because  the  two  traiterous  Cap-
:  aines,  in  the  chiefest  of  the  fight,  with  their  companies
:  urned  their  faces  against  their  King,  and  made  such  dis-
irder  in  his  Armie,  that  as  astonied  they  set  themselves  to
light. Thirty  yeeres  was  this  Kingdome  governed  by
hree  brethren  which  were  Tyrants, the  which  keeping
he  rightfull  King  in  prison,  it  was  their  use  every  yeere
mce  to  shew  him  to  the  people,  and  they  at  their  plea-
1  ures  ruled  as  they  listed. These  brethren  were  three
U  Captaines  belonging  to  the  father  of  the  King  they  kept
ii  p  prison,  which  when  he  died,  left  his  sonne  very  young,
'■  nd  then  they  tooke  the  government  to  themselves. The
ffl  hiefest  of  these  three  was  called  Ramaragio,  and  sate  in

0  he  Royall  Throne,  and  was  called  the  King :  the  second
!r  /as  called  Temiragio,  and  he  tooke  the  government  on
t  im :  the  third  was  called  Bengatre,  and  he  was  Captaine
t)i  lenerall  of  the  Armie.  These  three  brethren  were  in  this
jc  attell,  in  the  which  the  chiefest  and  the  last  were  never

eard  of  quicke  nor  dead. Onely  Temiragio  fled  in  the
attell,  having  lost  one  of  his  eyes. When  the  newes  The  sacking  of
j(  ame  to  the  Citie  of  the  overthrowe  in  the  battell,  the  the  Citie.
f  ;ives  and  children  of  these  three  Tyrants,  with  their  law-
t  all  King  (kept  prisoner)  fled  away,  spoyled  as  they  were,

1  nd  the  foure  Kings  of  the  Moores  entred  the  Citie
id  >ezeneger  with  great  triumph,  and  there  they  remained

xe  moneths, searching  under  houses  and  in  all  places
)r  money  and  other  things  that  were  hidden,  and  then

93

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1565.

they  departed  to  their  owne  Kingdomes,  because  they,
were  not  able  to  maintayne  such  a  Kingdome  as  that  was,:
so  farre  distant  from  their  owne  Countrie.

When  the  kings  were  departed  from  Bezeneger,  this
Temiragio  returned  to  the  Citie,  and  then  beganne  for,
to  repopulate  it,  and  sent  word  to  Goa  to  the  Merchants,
if  they  had  any  Horses,  to  bring  them  to  him,  and  heti
would  pay  well  for  them,  and  for  this  cause  the  aforesaid,
two  Merchants  that  I  went  in  companie  withall,  carried
those  Horses  that  they  had  to  Bezeneger.  Also  this
Policy  to  Tyrant  made  an  order  or  law,  that  if  any  Merchant  hadjj

entrap  men.  any  Qf  tfe  Horses  that  were  taken  in  the  aforesaid  battel)
or  warres,  although  they  were  of  his  owne  marke,  that  he
would  give  as  much  for  them  as  they  would  :  and  beside  he
gave  generall  safe  conduct  to  all  that  should  bring  them
When  by  this  meanes  hee  saw  that  there  were  great  store
of  Horses  brought  thither  unto  him,  he  gave  the  Mer-|
chants  faire  words,  untill  such  time  as  he  saw  they  coulc,
bring  no  more.  Then  hee  licenced  the  Merchants  tc
depart,  without  giving  them  any  thing  for  their  Horses
which  when  the  poore  men  saw,  they  were  desperate,  ancj
as  it  were  mad  with  sorrow  and  griefe.

I  rested  in  Bezeneger  seven  moneths,  although  in  ond
moneth  I  might  have  discharged  all  my  businesse,  for  il
was  necessarie  to  rest  there  untill  the  wayes  were  cleen
of  Theeves,  which  at  that  time  ranged  up  and  downe
And  in  the  time  I  rested  there,  I  saw  many  strange  anc  |
[II.  x.i 705.]  beastly  deeds  done  by  the  Gentiles. First,  when  there  ijl
any  Noble  man  or  woman  dead,  they  burne  their  bodies
and  if  a  married  man  die,  his  wife  must  burne  herself
alive,  for  the  love  of  her  husband,  and  with  the  body  o
her  husband : so  that  when  any  man  dyeth,  his  wife  willj
take  a  moneths  leave,  two  or  three,  or  as  shee  will,  t<i
Wives  burned  burne  herselfe  in,  and  that  day  being  come,  wherein  sh<,J
with  thetr ought  to  be  burnt,  that  morning  she  goeth  out  of  he
scribed  house  very  earely,  either  on  Horsebacke  or  on  an  Elephant

or  else  is  borne  by  eight  men  on  a  small  stage :  in  one  0
these  orders  shee  goeth,  being  apparelled  like  to  a  Bride  |

94

CAESAR FREDERICK  ad

1567.

carried  round  about  the  Citie,  with  her  haire  downe  about
her  shoulders,  garnished  with  Jewels  and  Flowers,  accord-
ing to  the  estate  of  the  partie,  and  they  goe  with  as  great
joy  as  Brides  doe  in  Venice  to  their  Nuptials :  she  car-
rieth  in  her  left  hand  a  looking-glasse,  and  in  her  right
hand  an  arrow,  and  singeth  through  the  Citie  as  she
passeth,  and  saith,  that  she  goeth  to  sleepe  with  her  deere
spouse  and  husband.  Shee  is  accompanied  with  her  kin-
dred and  friends  untill  it  be  one  or  two  of  the  clocke  in
the  afternoone,  then  they  goe  out  of  the  Citie,  and  going
along  the  Rivers  side  called  Nigondin,  which  runneth  A  description
under  the  walls  of  the  Citie,  untill  they  come  unto  a  place  «££  burnmg
where  they  use  to  make  this  burning  of  Women,  being
widdowes,  there  is  prepared  in  this  place  a  great  square
Cave,  with  a  little  pinnacle  hard  by  it,  foure  or  five  steps
up :  the  aforesaid  Cave  is  full  of  dryed  wood.  The
woman  being  come  thither,  accompanied  with  a  great
number  of  people  which  come  to  see  the  thing,  then  they
make  ready  a  great  banquet,  and  she  that  shall  bee  pasting  and
burned  eateth  with  as  great  joy  and  gladnesse,  as  though  tfj^jfaj/*
it  were  her  Wedding  day :  and  the  feast  being  ended,
then  they  goe  to  dancing  and  singing  a  certaine  time,
according  as  she  will.  After  this,  the  woman  of  her
swne  accord,  commandeth  them  to  make  the  fire  in  the
square  Cave  where  the  drie  wood  is,  and  when  it  is
Kindled,  they  come  and  certifie  her  thereof,  then  presently
she  leaveth  the  feast,  and  taketh  the  neerest  kinsman  of
her  husband  by  the  hand,  and  they  both  goe  together  to
:he  banke  of  the  foresaid  River,  where  she  putteth  off  all
ler  jewels  and  all  her  clothes,  and  giveth  them  to  her
parents  or  kinsfolke,  and  covering  herselfe  with  a  cloth,
Decause  shee  will  not  bee  seene  of  the  people  being  naked,
;he  throweth  herselfe  into  the  River,  saying :  O  wretches,
.vash  away  your  sinnes.  Comming  out  of  the  water,  she
•owleth  herselfe  into  a  yellow  cloth  of  fourteene  braces
ong :  and  againe  she  taketh  her  husbands  kinsman  by
he  hand,  and  they  goe  both  together  up  to  the  pinnacle
)f  the  square  Cave  wherein  the  fire  is  made. When  shee

95

mourne.

A.D.

1567.

Dissolute  reso-
lutcnesse.

Mourning
when  they
should  rejoyce.

Another
fashion  for
poorer  wives
to  die  with
their  husbands.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

is  on  the  pinnacle,  she  talketh  and  reasoneth  with  the
people,  recommending  unto  them  her  children  and  kin-:
dred.  Before  the  pinnacle  they  use  to  set  a  Mat,  because
they  shall  not  see  the  fiercenesse  of  the  fire,  yet  there  areji
many  that  will  have  them  plucked  away,  shewing  therein!
an  heart  not  fearefull,  and  that  they  are  not  affraid  of  that
sight.  When  this  silly  woman  hath  reasoned  with  the
people  a  good  while  to  her  content,  there  is  another  woman
that  taketh  a  pot  with  oyle,  and  sprinkleth  it  over  her
head,  and  with  the  same  shee  annointeth  all  her  body,
and  afterwards  throweth  the  pot  into  the  fornace,
and  both  the  woman  and  the  pot  goe  together  into  the!
fire,  and  presently  the  people  that  are  round  about  the!
fornace  throw  after  her  into  the  cave  great  pieces  of  woody
so  by  this  meanes,  with  the  fire  and  with  the  blowes  that
shee  hath  with  the  wood  throwen  after  her,  she  is  quickly
dead,  and  after  this  there  groweth  such  sorrow  and  such
lamentation  among  the  people,  that  all  their  mirth  isi
turned  into  howling  and  weeping,  in  such  wise,  that  a  man!
could  scarce  beare  the  hearing  of  it.  I  have  seene  many
burnt  in  this  manner,  because  my  house  was  neere  to  the
gate  where  they  goe  out  to  the  place  of  burning :  anqj
when  there  dyeth  any  Great  man,  his  Wife  with  all  hi?
Slaves  with  whom  hee  hath  had  carnall  copulation,  burne
themselves  together  with  him.  Also  in  this  Kingdome  1
have  seene  amongst  the  base  sort  of  people  this  use  and
order,  that  the  man  being  dead,  hee  is  carried  to  the  place
where  they  will  make  his  sepulcher,  and  setting  him  as  in
were  upright,  then  commeth  his  wife  before  him  on  her
knees,  casting  her  armes  about  his  necke,  with  imbracing
and  clasping  him,  untill  such  time  as  the  Masons  have
made  a  wall  round  about  them,  and  when  the  wall  is  as
high  as  their  neckes,  there  commeth  a  man  behind  the
woman  and  strangleth  her :  then  when  shee  is  dead,
the  workmen  finish  the  wall  over  their  heads,  and  so  the)
lie  buried  both  together.

In  the  yeere  of  our  Lord  God  1567.  for  the  ill  success<
that  the  people  of  Bezeneger  had,  in  that  their  Citie  wa^

96

CAESAR FREDERICK  a.d.

1567.

sacked  by  the  foure  Kings,  the  King  with  his  Court  went
to  dwell  in  a  Castle  eight  dayes  journey  up  in  the  land
from  Bezeneger,  called  Penegonde.  Also  sixe  dayes  jour-  Penegonde.
ney  from  Bezeneger,  is  the  place  where  they  get  Diamants  :
I  was  not  there,  but  it  was  told  me  that  it  is  a  great  place,
compassed  with  a  wall,  and  that  they  sell  the  earth  within
the  wall,  for  so  much  a  squadron,  and  the  limits  are  set
how  deepe  or  how  low  they  shall  digge.  Those  Diamants
that  are  of  a  certaine  size  and  bigger  then  that  size  are
all  for  the  King,  it  is  many  yeeres  agone,  since  they  got
any  there,  for  the  troubles  that  have  beene  in  that  King-
dome.  The  first  cause  of  this  trouble  was,  because  the
sonne  of  this  Temeragio  had  put  to  death  the  lawfull
King  which  hee  had  in  Prison,  for  which  cause  the  Barons
and  Noblemen  in  that  Kingdome  would  not  acknow-
ledge him  to  be  their  King,  and  by  this  meanes  there  are
many  Kings,  and  great  division  in  that  Kingdome,  and
the  Citie  of  Bezeneger  is  not  altogether  destroyed,  yet
the  houses  stand  still,  but  emptie,  and  there  is  dwelling
in  them  nothing,  as  is  reported,  but  Tygres  and  other
wild  beasts.  The  circuit  of  this  Citie  is  foure  and  twentie  Bezeneger 2 4..
miles  about,  and  within  the  walls  are  certaine  Mountaines.  ?**?*  ahouL
The  houses  stand  walled  with  earth,  and  plaine,  all  saving  L  '-"

:he  three  Palaces  of  the  three  tyrant  Brethren,  and  the
Pagodes  which  are  Idoll  houses :  these  are  made  with
Lime  and  fine  Marble.  I  have  seene  many  Kings  Courts,
■ind  yet  have  I  seene  none  in  greatnesse  like  to  this  of
Bezeneger,  I  say,  for  the  order  of  his  Palace,  for  it  hath
line  Gates  or  Ports.  First  when  you  goe  into  the  place
yhere  the  King  did  lodge,  there  are  five  great  ports  or
*ates :  these  are  kept  with  Captaines  and  Souldiers :  then
vithin  these  there  are  foure  lesser  gates,  which  are  kept
vith  Porters.  Without  the  first  Gate  there  is  a  little
)orch,  where  there  is  a  Captaine  with  five  and  twentie
>ouldiers,  that  keepeth  watch  &  ward  night  and  day :  and
vithin  that  another  with  the  like  guard,  where  thorow
hey  come  to  a  very  faire  Court,  and  at  the  end  of  that
"ourt  there  is  another  porch  as  the  first,  with  the  like
x  97  G

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1567.

guard,  and  within  that  another  Court.  And  in  this  wise
are  the  first  five  Gates  guarded  and  kept  with  those  Cap-
taines :  and  then  the  lesser  Gates  within  are  kept  with  a
guard  of  Porters :  which  gates  stand  open  the  greatest
part  of  the  night,  because  the  custome  of  the  Gentiles  is
to  doe  their  businesse,  and  make  their  feasts  in  the  night,
rather  then  by  day.  The  Citie  is  very  safe  from  Theeves,
for  the  Portugall  Merchants  sleepe  in  the  streets,  or  under
Porches,  for  the  great  heat  which  is  there,  and  yet  they
never  had  any  harme  in  the  night.  At  the  end  of  two;
moneths,  I  determined  to  goe  for  Goa  in  the  company  of
two  other  Portugall  Merchants,  which  were  making  ready
to  depart,  with  two  Palanchines  or  little  Litters,  which;
are  very  commodious  for  the  way,  with  eight  Falchines
which  are  men  hired  to  carry  the  Palanchines,  eight  for  aj
palanchine,  foure  at  a  time :  they  carry  them  as  we  use
Men  ride  on  to  carry  Barrowes.  And  I  bought  me  two  Bullocks,  one
Bullockes,and  0f  them  to  ride  on,  and  the  other  to  carry  my  victuals,
them  on  the  anc^  Provisi°n>  f°r  m  tnat  Countrey  men  ride  on  bullocks
way.  with  pannels,  as  wee  terme  them,  girts  and  bridles,  and.

they  have  a  very  good  commodious  pace. From  Beze-
neger  to  Goa  in  Summer  it  is  eight  daies  journey,  butjj
we  went  in  the  midst  of  Winter,  in  the  month  of  July,
and  were  fifteene  dayes  comming  to  Ancola  on  the  Sean
coast,  so  in  eight  dayes  I  had  lost  my  two  Bullocks :  for  ;j
he  that  carried  my  victuals  was  weake  and  could  not  goe.
the  other,  when  I  came  unto  a  River  where  was  a  little  1
bridge  to  passe  over,  I  put  my  Bullocke  to  swimming,
and  in  the  middest  of  the  River  there  was  a  little  Hand,
unto  the  which  my  bullocke  went,  and  finding  pasture
there  hee  remained  still,  and  in  no  wise  we  could  come  to  A
him  : and  so  perforce,  I  was  forced  to  leave  him,  and  at
that  time  there  was  much  raine,  and  I  was  forced  to  got
seven  dayes  a  foot  with  great  paines :  and  by  great  chana
I  met  with  Falchines  by  the  way,  whom  I  hired  to  can*}
my  clothes  and  victuals. We  had  great  trouble  in  ou:|jl
journey,  for  that  every  day  we  were  taken  Prisoners,  b}
reason  of  the  great  dissention  in  that  Kingdome : anc

98

CAESAR FREDERICK  a.d.

1567.

every  morning  at  our  departure  we  must  pay  reseat  foure
or  five  Pagies  a  man. And  another  trouble  wee  had  as
bad  as  this,  that  when  as  we  came  into  a  new  Governours
Country,  as  every  day  we  did,  although they  were  all
tributarie  to  the  King  of  Bezeneger,  yet  every  one  of
them  stamped  a  severall  coyne  of  Copper,  so  that  the
money  that  wee  tooke  this  day  would  not  serve  the  next :
at  length,  by  the  helpe  of  God,  we  came  safe  to  Ancola,
which  is  a  Countrey  of  the  Queen  of  Gargopam,  tribu-
tarie to  the  King  of  Bezeneger. The  Merchandize  that
went  every  yeere  from  Goa  to  Bezeneger  were  Arabian TheMerchan-
Horses, Velvets, Damaskes, and Sattens, Armesine of  ?"%?"?£
Portugall,  and  pieces  of  China,  Saffron  and  Scarlets  :  and  Bezeneger
from  Bezeneger  they  had  in  Turkie  for  their  commodi-  every  yeere.
ties,  Jewels,  and  Pagodies  which  be  Ducats  of  gold :  the
apparell that they  use in Bezeneger is  Velvet, Satten, The  apparell
Damaske,  Scarlet,  or  white  Bumbast  cloth,  according  to  of  those  people.
the  estate  of  the  person,  with  long  Hats  on  their  heads,
called  Colae,  made  of  Velvet,  Satten,  Damaske,  or  Scarlet,
girding themselves  in stead of  girdles  with some  fine
white  Bumbast  cloth : they  have  breeches  after  the  order
of  the  Turkes  :  they  weare  on  their  feet  plaine  high  things
called  of  them  Aspergh, and  at their  eares  they  have
hanging  great  plentie  of  Gold.

Returning  to  my  voyage,  when  we  were  together  in
Ancola,  one  of  my  companions  that  had  nothing  to  lose,
tooke  a  guide,  and  went  to  Goa,  whither  they  goe  in  foure
dayes,  the  other  Portugall  not  being  disposed  to  goe,
tarried  in  Ancola  for  that  Winter.  The  Winter  in  those  Their  Winter
parts  of  the  Indies  beginneth  the  fifteenth  of  May,  and  is  our  Summer.
lasteth  unto  the  end  of  October :  and  as  we  were  in
Ancola,  there  came  another  Merchant  of  Horses  in  a
Palanchine,  and  two  Portugall  Souldiers  which  came  from
Zeilan,  and  two  carriers  of  Letters,  which  were  Christians
borne  in  the  Indies :  all  these  consorted  to  goe  to  Goa
together,  and  I  determined  to  go  with  them,  and  caused
a  pallanchine  to  be  made  for  me  very  poorely  of  Canes ;
and  in  one  of  them  Canes  I  hid  privily  all  the  Jewels  I

99

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1567.

had,  and  according  to  the  order,  I  tooke  eight  Falchines
to  carie  me :  and  one  day  about  eleven  of  the  clocke  we
set  forwards  on  our  journey,  and  about  two  of  the  clocke
in  the  afternoone,  as  we  passed  a  Mountaine,  which
divideth  the  territorie  of  Ancola  and  Dialcan,  I  being  a
little  behind  my  company,  was  assaulted  by  eight  theeves,
foure  of  them  had  swords  and  targets,  and  the  other  foure
had  bowes  and  arrowes.  When  the  Falchines  that  carried
me  understood  the  noise  of  the  assault,  they  let  the  Palla-
chine  and  me  fall  to  the  ground,  and  ranne  away  and  left
me  alone,  with  my  clothes  wrapped  about  me :  presently
the  theeves  were  on  my  necke  and  rifling  me,  they  stripped
me  starke  naked,  and  I  fained  my  selfe  sicke,  because  I
would  not  leave  the  Pallanchine,  and  I  had  made  me  a
little  bed  of  my  clothes ;  the  theeves  sought  it  very  nar-
rowly and  subtilly,  and  found  two  Purses  that  I  had,  well
[II.  x.i  707.]  bound  up  together,  wherein  I  had  put  my  Copper  money
which  I  had  changed  for  foure  Pagodies  in  Ancola.  The
theeves  thinking  it  had  beene  so  many  Ducats  of  gold,
searched  no  further :  then  they  threw  all  my  clothes  in  a
bush,  and  hied  them  away,  and  as  God  would  have  it,  at
their  departure  there  fell  from  them  an  hankercher,  and
when  I  saw  it,  I  rose  from  my  pallanchine  or  couch,  and
tooke  it  up,  and  wrapped  it  together  within  my  pallan-
chine. Then  these  my  Falchines  were  of  so  good
condition,  that  they  returned  to  seeke  me,  whereas  I
thought  I  should  not  have  found  so  much  goodnesse  inj
them :  because  they  were  payed  their  money  aforehand,
as  is  the  use,  I  had  thought  to  have  seene  them  no  more.
Before  there  comming  I  was  determined  to  plucke  the;
Cane  wherein  my  Jewels  were  hidden,  out  of  my  coutch,
and  to  have  made  me  a  walking  staffe  to  carry  in  my
hand  to  Goa,  thinking  that  I  should  have  gone  thither  01
foot,  but  by  the  faithfulnesse  of  my  Falchines,  I  was  ridj
of  that  trouble,  and  so  in  foure  dayes  they  carried  me  tc
Goa,  in  which  time  I  made  hard  fare,  for  the  theeves  left
me  neither  money,  gold,  nor  silver,  and  that  which  I  die
eate  was  given  me  of  my  men  for  Gods  sake :  and  aftei

CAESAR FREDERICK  a.d.

1567.
at  my  comming  to  Goa  I  payed  them  for  every  thing
royally  that  I  had  of  them.  From  Goa  I  departed  for
Cochin,  which  is  a  voyage  of  three  hundred  miles,  and
betweene  these  two  Cities  are  many  holds  of  the  Portu-
gals,  as  Onor,  Mangalor,  Barzelor,  and  Cananor.  The
Hold  or  Fort  that  you  shall  have  from  Goa  and  Cochin  Foure  small
that  belongeth  to  the  Portugals,  is  called  Onor,  which  is  F°rts  °fthe
in  the  Kingdom  of  the  Queen  of  Bartacella,  which  is  oru£as-
tributarie  to  the  King  of  Bezeneger :  there  is  no  trade
there,  but  onely  a  charge  with  the  Captaine  and  companie
hee  keepeth  there.  And  passing  this  place,  you  shall
come  to  another  small  Castle  of  the  Portugals  called
Mangalor,  and  there  is  very  small  trade  but  onely  for  a
little  Rice :  and  from  thence  you  goe  to  a  litle  Fort  called
Barzelor,  there  they  have  good  store  of  Rice  which  is
carried  to  Goa :  and  from  thence  you  shall  goe  to  a  Citie
called  Cananor,  which  is  a  Harquebush  shot  distant  from
the  chiefest  Citie  that  the  King  of  Cananor  hath  in  his
Kingdome  being  a  King  of  the  Gentiles :  and  hee  and  his
are  very  naughtie  and  malicious  people,  alwayes  having
delight  to  bee  in  warres  with  the  Portugals,  and  when
they  are  in  peace,  it  is  for  their  interest  to  let  their  Mer-
chandise passe :  there  goeth  out  of  this  Kingdom  of
Cananor,  all  the  Cardamomum,  great  store  of  Pepper,
Ginger,  Honie,  ships  laden  with  great  Nuts,  great  quan-
tise of  Archa,  which  is  a  fruit  of  the  bignesse  of  Nutmegs,
which  fruit  they  eate  in  all  those  parts  of  the  Indies,  and
beyond  the  Indies,  with  the  leafe  of  an  Herbe  which  they
call  Bettell,  the  which  is  like  unto  our  Ivie  leafe,  but  a  Bettell  is  a
litle  lesser  and  thinner:  they  eate  it  made  in  plaisters  wry  profitable
with  the  lime  made  of  Oistershels,  and  thorow  the  Indies  q^^I
they  spend  great  quantitie  of  money  in  this  composition,
and  it  is  used  daily,  which  thing  I  would  not  have
beleeved,  if  I  had  not  seene  it.  The  customers  get  great
profit  by  these  Herbes,  for  that  they  have  custome  for
them.  When  this  people  eate  and  chawe  this  in  their
mouthes,  it  maketh  their  spittle  to  be  red  like  unto  blood,
and  they  say,  that  it  maketh  a  man  to  have  a  very  good

IOI

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1567.

stomacke  and  a  very  sweet  breath,  but  sure  in  my  judge-
ment they  eate  it  rather  to  fulfill  their  filthie  lusts,  and  of
a  knaverie,  for  this  Herbe  is  moist  and  hote,  and  maketh
a  verie  strong  expulsion.  From  Cananor  you  goe  to
Cranganor,  which  is  another  small  Fort  of  the  Portugals
in  the  land  of  the  King  of  Cranganor,  which  is  another
King  of  the  Gentiles,  and  a  Countrey  of  small  import-
ance, and  of  an  hundreth  and  twentie  miles,  full  of
Theeves,  being  under  the  King  of  Calicut,  a  King  also  of
Enemies  to  the  the  Gentiles,  and  a  great  enemie  to  the  Portugals,  which
King  of  when  he  is  alwaies  in  warres,  he  and  his  Countrie  is  the

nest  and  resting  for  stranger  Theeves,  and  those  be  called
Moores  of  Carposa,  because  they  weare  on  their  heads
long  red  Hats,  and  these  Theeves  part  the  spoiles  that
they  take  on  the  Sea  with  the  King  of  Calicut,  for  he
giveth  leave  unto  all  that  will  goe  a  roving,  liberally  to
goe,  in  such  wise,  that  all  along  that  Coast  there  is  such
a  number  of  Theeves,  that  there  is  no  sailing  in  those
Seas  but  with  great  ships  and  very  well  armed,  or  else
they  must  goe  in  companie  with  the  armie  of  the
Portugals. From  Cranganor  to  Cochin  is  fifteene  miles.

WUhinCochin  /^\  Ochin  is  next  unto  Goa,  the  chiefest  place  that  the
is  the  Kingdom  \^j  Portugals  have  in  the  Indies,  and  there  is  great  trade
The  Peeper  °^  Spices,  Drugges,  and  all  other  sorts  of  Merchandize
that  the  Portu-  for  the  Kingdome  of  Portugall,  and  there  within  the  land
gals  bring,  is  is  the  Kingdome  of  Pepper,  which  Pepper  the  Portugals
not  so  good  as iac[e  jn  their  shippes  by  bulke,  and  not  in  Sackes : the

t  ali°AC  Pepper  that  goeth  for  Portugall  is  not  so  good  as  that
goethfor  K\  , &r ,  ,  . &  . . . &  .

Mecca.  which  goeth  for  Mecca,  because  that  in  times  past  the

The  Moores  Officers  of  the  King  of  Portugall  made  a  contract  with
buy  the  best  by  tne  King  of  Cochin,  in  the  name  of  the  King  of  Portu-
gall, for  the  prices  of  Pepper,  and  by  reason  of  that  agree-
ment between  them  at  that  time  made,  the  price  can
neither  rise  nor  fall,  which  is  a  verie  low  and  base  price,
and  for  this  cause  the  villaines  bring  it  to  the  Portugals,
greene  and  full  of  filth.  Cochin  is  two  Cities,  one  of  the
Portugals,  and  another  of  the  King  of  Cochin : that  of

102

CAESAR FREDERICK  ad.

1567.

the  Portugals  is  situate  neerest  unto  the  Sea,  and  that  of
the  King  of  Cochin,  is  a  mile  and  a  halfe  up  higher  in  the
land,  but  they  are  both  set  on  the  bankes  of  one  River
which  is  verie  great  and  of  a  good  depth  of  water,  which
River  commeth  out  of  the  Mountaines  of  the  King  of  the
Pepper,  which  is  a  King  of  the  Gentiles,  in  whose  King-
dome  are  many  Christians  of  Saint  Thomas  order :  the
King  of  Cochin  is  also  a  King  of  the  Gentiles,  and  a  great
faithfull  friend  to  the  King  of  Portugall,  and  to  those
Portugals  which  are  married,  and  are  Citizens  in  the  Citie
of  Cochin  of  the  Portugals.  And  by  this  name  of  [II.  x.  1708.]
Portugals  throughout  all  the  Indies,  they  call  all  the  Chris-  Great  Privi-
tians  that  come  out  of  the  West,  whether  they  bee  Italians,  le^es  that  jf*
Frenchmen,  or  Almaines,  and  all  they  that  marrie  in  Qo^nfave
Cochin  doe  get  an  Office  according  to  the  Trade  he  is  of :
this  they  have  by  the  great  priviledges  which  the  Citizens
have  of  that  Citie,  because  there  are  two  principall  com-
modities that  they  deale  withall  in  that  place,  which  are
these.  The  great  store  of  Silke  that  commeth  from
China,  and  the  great  store  of  Sugar  which  commeth  from
Bengala :  the  married  Citizens  pay  not  any  custome  for
these  two  commodities :  for  all  other  commodities  they
pay  foure  per  cento  custome  to  the  King  of  Cochin,  rating
their  goods  at  their  owne  pleasure.  Those  which  are  not
married  and  Strangers,  pay  in  Cochin  to  the  King  of
Portugall  eight  per  cento  of  all  manner  of  Merchandise.

This  King  of  Cochin  is  of  a  small  power  in  respect  of
the  other  Kings  of  the  Indies,  for  he  can  make  but
seventie  thousand  men  of  Armes  in  his  Campe :  he  hath  a
great  number  of  Gentlemen  which  he  calleth  Amochi,  Amochi  and
and  some  are  called  Nairi :  these  two  sorts  of  men  esteeme  Nairi-
not  their  lives  any  thing,  so  that  it  may  bee  for  the  honour
of  their  King,  they  will  thrust  themselves  forward  in  every
danger,  although  they  know  they  shall  die.  These  men
goe  naked  from  the  girdle  upwards,  with  a  cloth  rolled
about  their  thighes,  going  bare-footed,  and  having  their
haire  very  long  and  rolled  up  together  on  the  top  of  their
heads,  and  alwayes  they  carrie  their  Bucklers  or  Targets

103

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1567.

with  them  and  their  Swords  naked,  these  Nairi  have  their
wives  common  amongst  themselves,  and  when  any  of  them
goe  into  the  house  of  any  of  these  women,  hee  leaveth
his  Sword  and  Target  at  the  doore,  and  the  time  that  he
is  there,  there  dare  not  any  bee  so  hardie  as  to  come  into
that  house. The  Kings  children  shall  not  inherite  the
Kingdome after their Father, because they hold this  j
opinion, that  perchance  they  were  not  begotten  of  the  J
King  their  Father,  but  of  some  other  man,  therefore  they  I
accept  for  their  King,  one  of  the  sonnes  of  the  Kings!
sisters,  or  of  some  other  woman  of  the  blood  Royall,  for,l
that  they  bee  sure  they  are  of  the  blood  Royall.
Huge  huge  The  Nairi  and  their  Wives  use  for  a  braverie  to  make  1

Eares.  great holes  in their  Eares, and  so  big  and  wide, thatjl

it is incredible, holding this opinion, that the;!
greater  the  holes  bee,  the  more  Noble  they  esteeme  them-J
selves. I  had  leave  of  one  of  them  to  measure  the  cir-i
cumference  of  one  of  them  with  a  threed,  and  within  that  I
circumference  I  put  my  arme  up  to  the  shoulder,  clothed;!
as  it  was, so that  in  effect they  are  monstrous  great.,!
Thus  they  doe  make  them  when  they  be  little,  for  them*
they  open  the  eare,  and  hang  a  piece  of  gold  or  lead*
thereat,  and  within  the  opening,  in  the  hole  they  put  a;i
certaine leafe that they have for that purpose, whicb;|
maketh  the  hole  so  great.
Note  the  de- The  ships  every  yeere  depart  from  Cochin  to  goe  foil
parting  of  the Portugall,  on  the  fifth  day  of  December,  or  the  fifth  day  \
*  Cochin™ °^  Januar7- Now  to  follow  my  voyage  for  the  Indies  :j  1
Coulam.  From  Cochin I  went  to  Coulam, distant  from  Cochiril

seventie  and  two  miles,  which  Coulam  is  a  small  Fort  of  {-I
the  King  of  Portugals,  situate  in  the  Kingdome  of,  ||
Coulam,  which  is  a  King  of  the  Gentiles,  and  of  smaJB
trade  :  at  that  place  they  lade  onely  halfe  a  ship  of  Pepper  q
and  then  she  goeth  to  Cochin  to  take  in  the  rest,  and  from  1
thence  to  Cape  Comori  is  seventie  and  two  miles,  anc  a
there  endeth  the  coast  of  the  Indies :  and  alongst  thi?«l
Coast,  neere  to  the  water  side,  and  also  to  Cape  Comori  |
downe  to  the  low  land  of  Chilao,  which  is  about  two  hum'  jj

104

CAESAR FREDERICK  a.d.

1567.

dred  miles,  the  people  there  are  as  it  were  all  turned  to

the  Christian  Faith :  there  are  also  Churches  of  the  Friers  Christians.

of  Saint  Pauls  order,  which  Friers  doe  very  much  good

in  those  places  in  turning  the  people,  and  in  converting

them,  and  take  great  paines  in  instructing  them  in  the  law

of  Christ.

THe  Sea  that  lyeth  betweene  the  Coast  which  descen-
deth  from  Cape  Comori,  to  the  low  land  of  Chilao,
and  the  Hand  Zeilan,  they  call  The  fishing  of  Pearles,
which  fishing  they  make  every  yeere,  beginning  in  March
or  Aprill,  and  it  lasteth  fiftie  dayes,  but  they  doe  not  fish
every  yeere  in  one  place,  but  one  yeere  in  one  place,  and
another  yeere  in  another  place  of  the  same  Sea.  When
the  time  of  this  fishing  draweth  neere,  then  they  send
very  good  Divers,  that  goe  to  discover  where  the  greatest
heapes  of  Oysters  bee  under  water,  and  right  against  that
place  where  greatest  store  of  Oysters  be,  there  they  make
or  plant  a  Village  with  houses  and  a  Bazaro,  all  of  stone,
which  standeth  as  long  as  the  fishing  time  lasteth,  and  it
is  furnished  with  all  things  necessarie,  and  now  and  then
it  is  neere  unto  places  that  are  inhabited,  and  other  times
farre  off,  according  to  the  place  where  they  fish.  The
Fishermen  are  all  Christians  of  the  Countrey,  and  who  so
will  may  goe  to  fishing,  paying  a  certaine  dutie  to  the
King  of  Portugall,  and  to  the  Churches  of  the  Friers  of
Saint  Paul,  which  are  in  that  Coast.  All  the  while  that
they  are  fishing,  there  are  three  or  foure  Fusts  armed  to
defend  the  Fishermen  from  Rovers.  It  was  my  chance
to  bee  there  one  time  in  my  passage,  and  I  saw  the  order
that  they  used  in  fishing,  which  is  this.  There  are  three
or  foure  Barkes  that  make  consort  together,  which  are  like
to  our  little  Pilot  boates,  an  a  little  lesse,  there  goe  seven
or  eight  men  in  a  Boat :  and  I  have  seene  in  a  morning  a
great  number  of  them  goe  out,  and  anker  in  fifteene  or
eighteene  fathom  of  water,  which  is  the  ordinarie  depth  of
ill  that  Coast.  When  they  are  at  anker,  they  cast  a  rope
into  the  Sea,  and  at  the  end  of  the  rope,  they  make  fast

105

The  order  how
they  fish  for
Pearles.

Jesuites  are
called  F.  of
Saint  Paul  in
the  Indies,  by
reason  of  their
Colledge  of
that  name  in
Goa.

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1567.

a  great  stone,  and  then  there  is  readie  a  man  that  hath  his  |
nose  and  his  eares  well  stopped,  and  annointed  with  Oyle,  I

[II.  x.  1709.]  and  a  basket  about  his  necke,  or  under  his  left  arme,  then  j
hee  goeth  downe  by  the  rope  to  the  bottome  of  the  Sea,
and  as  fast  as  he  can  he  filleth  the  basket,  and  when  it  is  |
full,  hee  shaketh  the  rope,  and  his  fellowes  that  are  in  the
Barke  hale  him  up  with  the  Basket : and  in  such  wise
they  goe  one  by  one  untill  they  have  laden  their  Barke  i
with  Oysters,  and  at  evening  they  come  to  the  Village,  and  ,
then  every  companie  maketh their  mount  or  heape  of  |
Oysters  one  distant  from  another,  in  such  wise  that  youj
shall  see  a  great  long  row  of  mounts  or  heapes  of  Oysters,
and  they  are  not  touched  untill  such  time  as  the  fishing
be  ended,  and  at  the  end  of  the  fishing  every  companie  j
sitteth  round  about  their  mount  or  heape  of  Oysters,  and
fall to opening of them, which they may easily doe :
because they be dead, drie and brittle : and if  every  f

These  Pearks  oyster  had  pearles  in  them,  it  would  bee  a  very  goodj

ate  prised purchase,  but  there  are  very  many  that  have  no  pearles

according  to  the .  '  '

Caract s  which  m  them  :  when  the  fishing  is  ended,  then  they  see  whether;

they  weigh, it  bee  a  good  gathering  or  a  bad  :  there  are  certaine  expert!

every  caract  is  in the  Pearles,  whom  they  call  Chitini,  which  set  and;'

*"?*?*"' make the price of  Pearles according to their  carracts.

that  prise  them  Deautie  and  goodnesse,  making  foure  sorts  of  them. The

have  an  first  sort  be  the  round  Pearles,  and  they  be  called  Ajaj

Instrument  of  of  Portugall,  because  the  Portugals  doe  buy  them. The

Copper  wuh seconc[  sort  which  are  not  round,  are  called  Aja  of  Bengala.j

whldkbemade  ^ne  third  sort  which  are  not  so  good  as  the  second,  the);

by  degrees  for  call  Aja  of  Canara,  that  is  to  say,  The  Kingdome  of  Beze-

to  sort  the neger. The  fourth  and  last  sort,  which  are  the  least  ancj:

P earls withall  worst  sort,  are  called  Aja  of  Cambaia. Thus  the  price;

being  set,  there  are  Merchants  of  every  Countrey  whicr1

are  readie  with  their  money  in  their  hands,  so  that  in  few

dayes  all  is  bought  up  at  the  prises  set  according  to  the!

goodnesse  and  carracts  of  the  Pearles.

In  this  Sea  of  the  fishing  of  Pearles,  is  an  Hand  callec

Manar.  Manar,  which  is  inhabited  by  Christians  of  the  Countre]

which  first  were  Gentiles,  and  have  a  small  hold  of  th<

106

CAESAR FREDERICK  a.d.

1567.

Portugals  being  situate  over  against  Zeilan  :  and  betweene

these  two  Hands  there  is  a  Channell,  but  not  very  bigge,

and  hath  but  a  small  depth  therein  : by  reason  whereof

)  there  cannot  any  great  Ship  passe  that  way,  but  small  Ships,

;i  and  with  the  increase  of  the  water  which  is  at  the  change,

15  or  the  full  of  the  Moone,  and  yet  for  all  this  they  must

:  unlade  them  and  put  their  goods  into  small  vessels  to

::  lighten  them  before  they  can  passe  that  way  for  feare  of

i;  Sholdes  that  lie  in  the  Channell,  and  after  lade  them  into

;  their  ships  to  goe  for  the  Indies,  and  this  doe  all  small

),J  ships  that  passe  that  way,  but  those  ships  that  goe  for  the

s  Indies  Eastwards,  passe  by  the  Coast  of  Coromandel,  on

I  the  other  side  by  the  land  of  Chilao,  which  is  betweene  the

■  firme  land  and  the  Hand  Manor : From  Cape  Comori  to

1  the  Hand  Zeilan  is  one  hundred  and  twentie  miles  over-

«  thwart.

K  HF  Eilan  is  an  Hand,  in  my  judgement,  a  great  deale  Zeilan.

"-^  b^ger  tnen  Cyprus :  on  that  side  towards  the  Indies
]?:  lying  Westward  is  the  Citie  called  Columba,  which  is  a
er  hold  of  the  Portugals,  but  without  walls  or  enemies.  It
11  hath  towards  the  Sea  a  free  Port,  the  lawfull  King  of  that
to  Hand  is  in  Columbo,  and  is  turned  Christian  and  main-
h  tained  by  the  King  of  Portugall,  being  deprived  of  his
ty  Kingdome.  The  King  of  the  Gentiles,  to  whom  this
1  Kingdome  did  belong,  was  called  Madoni,  which  had  two
lis  sonnes,  the  first  named  Barbinas  the  Prince ;  and  the
to  second  Ragine.  This  King  by  the  policie  of  his  younger
zt  Sonne,  was  deprived  of  his  Kingdome,  who  because  hee
is;  had  entised  and  done  that  which  pleased  the  Armie  and
rifl  Souldiers,  in  despight  of  his  Father  and  Brother  being
lid  Prince,  usurped  the  Kingdome,  and  became  a  great
fei  Warriour.  First,  this  Hand  had  three  Kings  ;  the  King  of
th  Cotta  with  his  conquered  Prisoners :  the  King  of  Candia,

which  is  a  part  of  that  Hand,  and  is  so  called  by  the  name
lit  bf  Candia,  which  had  a  reasonable  power,  and  was  a  great
tra  rriend  to  the  Portugals,  which  said  that  hee  lived  secretly
tk  p.  Christian ; the  third  was  the  King  of  Gianifampatan.

107

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1567.

In  thirteene  yeeres  that  this  Ragine  governed  this  Hand,
he  became  a  great  Tyrant.

In  this  Hand  there  groweth  fine  Sinamom,  great  store

of  Pepper,  great  store  of  Nuts  and  Arochoe : there  they

Calroisastuffe  make  great  store  of  Cairo  to  make  Cordage :  it  bringeth

to tthsZuh ake  forth  great  store  of  Cnrista11  Cats  eyes> or  °chi  de  Gati>

the  which  is and  tne7  say  tnat  tney  6nde  there  some  Rubies,  but  I  have

the  barke  of  a  sold  Rubies  well  there  that  I  brought  with  me  from  Pegu.

Tree.  I  was  desirous  to  see  how  they  gather  the  Sinamom,  or

take  it  from  the  tree  that  it  groweth  on,  and  so  much  the

rather,  because  the  time  that  I  was  there,  was  the  season

which  they  gather  it  in,  which  was  in  the  moneth  of  Aprill,

at  which  time  the  Portugals  were  in  Armes,  and  in  the

field,  with  the  King  of  the  Countrey ; yet  I  to  satisfie  my

desire,  although  in  great  danger,  tooke  a  guide  with  me

and  went  into  a  Wood  three  miles  from  the  Citie,  in  which

wood  was  great  store  of  Sinamom  trees  growing  together

among  other  wild  trees ; and  this  Sinamom  tree  is  a  smali

tree,  and  not  very  high,  and  hath  leaves  like  to  our  Bay-|

tree. In  the  moneth  of  March  or  Aprill,  when  the  sappe

goeth  up  to  the  top  of  the  Tree,  then  they  take  thd

The  cutting Sinamom from that tree in this wise. They cut the

and  gathering  barke  off  the  tree  round  about  in  length  from  knot  to  knot

of  Sinamom. or  from  joynt  to  joynt,  above  and  below,  and  then  easil)

with  their  hands  they  take  it  away,  laying  it  in  in  the

Sunne  to  drie,  and  in  this  wise  it  is  gathered,  and  yet  foi:

A  rare  thing,  all  this  the  Tree  dyeth  not,  but  against  the  next  yeere  in

will  have  a  new  barke,  and  that  which  is  gathered  even

yeere  is  the  best  Sinamom :  for  that  which  groweth  two  o:

three  yeeres  is  great,  and  not  so  good  as  the  other  is ; anc'

in  these  woods  groweth  much  Pepper.

[II.  x.i  710.]  TjPR-om  the  Hand  of  Zeilan  men  use  to  goe  with  smal

Negapatan. -T ships to Negapatan, within the firme land, anc

seventie  two  miles  off  is  a  very  great  Citie,  and  ver;

populous  of  Portugals  and  Christians  of  the  Countrey

and  part  Gentiles :  it  is  a  Countrey  of  small  trade.

108

I

CAESAR FREDERICK  a.d.

1567.

FRom  Negapatan  following  my  voyage  towards  the  Saint  Thomas
East  an  hundred  and  fiftie  miles,  I  found  the  House  or  San  Tme-
of  blessed  Saint  Thomas,  which  is  a  Church  of  great  %j$J™hts
devotion,  and  greatly  regarded  of  the  Gentiles,  for  the
great  Miracles  they  have  heard  to  have  beene  done  by  that
blessed  Apostle :  neere  unto  this  Church  the  Portugals
have  builded  them  a  Citie  in  the  Countrey  subject  to  the
King  of  Bezeneger,  which  Citie  although  it  bee  not  very
great,  yet  in  my  judgement  it  is  the  fairest  in  all  that  part
of  the  Indies.  It  is  a  marvellous  thing  to  them  which
have  not  seene  the  lading  and  unlading  of  men  and
merchandize  in  Saint  Tome  as  they  doe :  it  is  a  place  so
dangerous,  that  a  man  cannot  bee  served  with  small  Barkes,
neither  can  they  doe  their  businesse  with  the  Boates  of  the
ships,  because  they  would  be  beaten  in  a  thousand  pieces,
but  they  make  certaine  Barkes  (of  purpose)  high,  which
they  call  Masadie,  they  be  made  of  little  boards;  one
board  being  sowed  to  another  with  small  cordes,  and  in
this  order  are  they  made.  And  when  they  are  thus  made,
and  the  owners  will  embarke  any  thing  in  them,  either
men  or  goods,  they  lade  them  on  land,  and  when  they  are
laden,  the  Barke-men  thrust  the  Boate  with  her  lading  into
the  streame,  and  with  great  speed  they  make  hast  all  that
they  are  able  to  row  out  against  the  huge  waves  of  the
Sea  that  are  on  that  shore  untill  that  they  carrie  them  to
the  ships :  and  in  like  manner  they  lade  these  Masadies  at
the  ships  with  merchandise  and  men.  When  they  come
neere  the  shore,  the  Bark-men  leape  out  of  the  Barke  into  Dangerous
the  Sea  to  keepe  the  Barke  right  that  shee  cast  not  thwart  surSe  and
the  shore,  and  being  kept  right,  the  Suffe  of  the  Sea  setteth  shores'
her  lading  drie  on  land  without  any  hurt  or  danger,  and
sometimes  there  are  some  of  them  that  are  overthrowen,
but  there  can  bee  no  great  losse,  because  they  lade  but  a
little  at  a  time.  All  the  Merchandize  they  lade  outwards,
they  emball  it  well  with  Oxe  hides,  so  that  if  it  take  wet,
it  can  have  no  great  harme.

In  my  voyage,  returning  in  the  yeere  of  our  Lord  1566.
I  went  from  Goa  unto  Malacca,  in  a  ship  or  Gallion  of  the

109

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1567.

In  the  Hand  of  King  of  Portugall,  which  went  unto  Banda  for  to  lade

fadet'utme  s Nutme&s and Maces : &om Goa to Malacca are on<

for  there™ key thousand  eight  hundred  miles, wee  passed  without  the  Ilanc

grow.  Zeilan,  and  went  through  the  Channell  of  Nicubar,  or  els<

through  the  channell  of  Sombrero,  which  is  by  the  middL

of  the  Hand  of  Sumatra,  called  in  old  time  Taprobana :

and  from  Nicubar  to  Pegu,  is  as  it  were  a  rowe  or  chain<

of an infinite number of Hands, of which many an

inhabited  with  wild  people,  and  they  call  those  Hands  th<

In  the  Hands Hands  of  Andemaon,  and  they  call  their  people  Savage  o:

oj  dndemaon,  ^jjj^  because  they  eate  one  another : also  these  Hand:

another.  have  warre  one  with  another,  for  they  have  small  Barkes

and  with  them  they  take  one  another,  and  so  eate  on<

another :  and  if  by  evill  chance  any  Ship  bee  lost  on  thos<

Hands,  as  many  have  beene,  there  is  not  one  man  of  thos<

ships  lost  there  that  escapeth  uneaten  or  unslaine. Thes<

people  have  not  any  acquaintance  with  any  other  people

neither  have  they  trade  with  any,  but  live  onely  of  sucl

Fruites  as  those  Hands  yeeld :  and  if  any  Ship  come  neer<

unto  that  place  or  Coast  as  they  passe  that  way,  as  in  mj

voyage  it  hapned  as  I  came  from  Malacca  through  th<

channell  of  Sombrero, there  came  two  of  their  Barkej

neere  unto  our  Ship  laden  with  Fruit,  as  with  Moucej

which  we  call  Adams  Apples,  with  fresh  Nuts,  and  with  U

fruit  called  Inani,  which  fruit  is  like  to  our  Turneps,  bul

is  very  sweet  and  good  to  eate :  they  would  not  come  intcj

the  ship  for  any  thing  that  wee  could  doe :  neither  would

they  take  any  money  for  their  Fruit : but  they  wouk!

trucke  for  olde  Shirts  or  pieces  of  old  Linnen  breeches  j

These  ragges  they  let  downe  with  a  rope  into  their  Barkij

unto  them,  and  looke  what  they  thought  those  things  t<|

bee  worth,  so  much  fruit  they  would  make  fast  to  the  rop<!

and  let  us  hale  it  in  :  and  it  was  told  me  that  at  sometime!

a  man  shall  have  for  an  old  Shirt  a  good  piece  of  Amber.

Sion  or  Stem,  Olon  was  the  Imperiall  seat,  and  a  great  Citie,  but  ii
O  the  yeere  of  our  Lord  God  1567.  it  was  taken  by  th<;
King  of  Pegu,  which  King  made  a  voyage  or  came  by  lane

CAESAR FREDERICK  ad.

1567.

i  foure  moneths  journey  with  an  Armie  of  men  through  his
'  land,  and  the  number  of  his  Armie  was  a  million  and  foure
!:  hundreth  thousand  men  of  Warre :  when  he  came  to  the  A  Prtnje  °fa
s  Citie,  hee  gave  assault  to  it,  and  besieged  it  one  and  strel  th  Jnj
:  twentie  moneths  before  he  could  winne  it,  with  great  losse  power.
1  of  his  people,  this  I  know,  for  that  I  was  in  Pegu  sixe
1  moneths  after  his  departure,  and  saw  when  that  his  Officers
1  that  were  in  Pegu,  sent  five  hundreth  thousand  men  of
1  warre  to  furnish  the  places  of  them  that  were  slaine  and
c:  lost  in  that  assault :  yet  for  all  this,  if  there  had  not  beene
<*  Treason  against  the  Citie,  it  had  not  beene  lost :  for  on  a
8  night  there  was  one  of  the  Gates  set  open,  through  the
f  which  with  great  trouble  the  King  gate  into  the  Citie,
and  became  Governour  of  Sion :  and  when  the  Emperour
1 !  saw  that  hee  was  betrayed,  and  that  his  Enemie  was  in  the
^  Citie,  he  poysoned  himselfe  :  and  his  Wives  and  Children,
]][[  Friends  and  Noblemen,  that  were  not  slaine  in  the  first
1C  affront  of  the  entrance  into  the  Citie,  were  all  carried
ei  Captives  into  Pegu,  where  I  was  at  the  comming  home  of
■  the  King  with  his  tryumphs  and  victorie,  which  comming
'r  home  and  returning  from  the  warres  was  a  goodly  sight  to
h  behold,  to  see  the  Elephants  come  home  in  a  square,  laden  [II.  x.  171 1.]
<*  with  Gold,  Silver,  Jewels,  and  with  Noble  men  and  women
h-  that  were  taken  Prisoners  in  that  Citie.

Now  to  returne  to  my  Voyage  :  I  departed  from  Malacca
in  a  great  Ship  which  went  for  Saint  Tome,  being  a  Citie
situate  on  the  Coast  of  Coromandell :  and  because  the
Captaine  of  the  Castles  of  Malacca  had  understanding  by
es  advise  that  the  King  of  *Assi  would  come  with  a  great  *Or  Achen.
irk  Armie  and  power  of  men  against  them,  therefore  upon
st  this  hee  would  not  give  licence  that  any  Ships  should
op  depart :  Wherefore  in  this  Ship  we  departed  from  thence  in
nit  jthe  night,  without  making  any  provision  of  our  water :  Want  of
er.  and  we  were  in  that  Ship  foure  hundreth  and  odde  men  : water-

wee  departed  from  thence  with  intention  to  goe  to  an  Hand
t  i  to  take  in  water,  but  the  winds  were  so  contrarie  that  they
■I  would  not  suffer  us  to  fetch  it,  so  that  by  this  meanes  wee
Is:  were  two  and  fortie  dayes  in  the  Sea  as  it  were  lost,  and

ITI

A.D.
I567.

The  moun-
taities  of
Zerzerline.

Hot  Wines.

Deere  water.

Of  the  King-
dome  ofOrisa,
and  the  River
Ganges.

The  commo-
dities that  go
out  ofOrisa.
This  cloth  wee
call  Nettle
cloth.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

we  were  driven  too  and  fro,  so  that  the  first  Land  that
wee  Discovered,  was  beyond  Saint  Tome,  more  then  five
hundred  miles  which  were  the  Mountaines  of  Zerzerline,
neere  unto  the  Kingdome  of  Orisa,  and  so  we  came  to
Orisa  with  many  Sicke,  and  more  that  were  dead  for  want
of  water :  and  they  that  were  Sicke  in  foure  dayes  died :
and  I  for  the  space  of  a  yeere  after  had  my  Throate  so  sore
and  hoarse,  that  I  could  never  satisfie  my  thirst  in  drinking
of  water  :  I  judge  the  reason  of  my  hoarsenesse  to  be  with
Sops  that  I  wet  in  Vineger  and  Oyle,  wherewith  I  susteined
my  selfe  many  dayes.  There  was  not  any  want  of  Bread
nor  of  Wine :  but  the  Wines  of  that  Countrie  are  so  hot
that  being  drunke  without  Water  they  will  kill  a  man :
neither  are  they  able  to  drinke  them :  when  we  began  to
want  water,  I  saw  certaine  Moores  that  were  officers  in
the  ship,  that  solde  a  small  dishfull  for  a  Duckat,  after  this
I  saw  one  that  would  have  given  a  barre  of  Pepper,  which
is  two  quintals  and  a  halfe,  for  a  little  measure  of  water,
and  he  could  not  have  it.  Truely  I  beleeve  that  I  had
died  with  my  slave,  whom  then  I  had  to  serve  mee,  which
cost  me  very  deare :  but  to  provide  for  the  danger  at
hand,  I  solde  my  Slave  for  halfe  that  he  was  worth,  because
that  I  would  save  his  drinke  that  he  drunke,  to  serve  my
owne  purpose,  and  to  save  my  life.

ORisa  was  a  faire  Kingdome  and  trusty,  through  the
which  a  man  might  have  gone  with  gold  in  his  hand
without  any  danger  at  all,  as  long  as  the  lawfull  King
reigned  which  was  a  Gentile,  who  continued  in  the  Citie
called  Catecha,  which  was  within  the  Land  sixe  dayes
journey.  This  King  loved  strangers  marveilous  well,
especially  merchants  which  had  trafficke  in  and  out  of  his
Kingdome,  in  such  wise  that  hee  would  take  no  Custome
of  them,  neither  any  other  grievous  thing.  Onely  the
Ship  that  came  thither  payde  a  small  thing  according  to
her  portage,  and  every  yeere  in  the  Port  of  Orisa  were
laden  five  and  twentie  or  thirtie  ships  great  and  small,  with
Rice  and  divers  sorts  of  fine  white  bumbast  cloth,  oyle  of

112

CAESAR FREDERICK  a.d.

1567.

Zerzeline,  which  they  make  of  a  seede,  and  it  is  very  good

to  eate  and  to  frye  fish  withall,  great  store  of  Butter  Lacca,

long  Pepper,  Ginger,  Mirabolans  drie  and  condite,  great

store  of  cloth  of  Herbes,  which  is  a  kind  of  silke  which

groweth  amongst  the  woods  without  any  labour  of  man,

and  when  the  bole  thereof  is  growne  round  as  bigge  as  an

Orenge,  then  they  take  care  onely  to  gather  them. About

sixteene  yeeres  past,  this  King  with  his  Kingdome  were

destroyed  by  the  King  of  Patane,  which  was  also  King  of

the  greatest  part  of  Bengala,  and  when  he  had  got  the

Kingdome,  he  set  custome  there  twentie  pro  cento,  as

Merchants paide in his Kingdome : but this Tyrant

enjoyed  his  Kingdome  but  a  small  time,  but  was  conquered

by  another  Tyrant,  which  was  the  great  Mogol  King  of

Agra,  Delly,  and  of  all  Cambaia,  without  any  resistance.

I  departed  from  Orisa  to  Bengala,  to  the  harbour  Piqueno,

which  is  distant  from  Orisa  towards  the  East  an  hundred

and  seventie  miles. They  goe  as  it  were  rowing  alongst

the  coast  flftie  and  foure  miles,  and  then  we  enter  into  the

river  Ganges : from  the  mouth  of  this  River,  to  a  City

called  Satagan,  where  the  Merchants  gather  themselves

together  with  their  trade,  are  an  hundred  miles,  which

they  rowe  in  eighteene  houres  with  the  increase  of  the

water :  in  which  river  it  floweth  and  ebbeth  as  it  doth  in

the  Thames,  and  when  the  ebbing  water  is  come,  they  are

not  able  to  rowe  against  it,  by  reason  of  the  swiftnesse  of

the  water,  yet  their  barks  be  light  and  armed  with  Oares,

like to Foistes, yet they cannot prevaile against that  Strong  Tides.

Streame,  but  for  refuge  must  make  them  fast  to  the  banke

of  the  River  untill  the  next  flowing  water,  and  they  call

these  Barkes  Bazaras  and  Patuas :  they  rowe  as  well  as  a

Galliot,  or  as  well  as  ever  I  have  seene  any. A  good

Tides  rowing  before  you  come  to  Satagan,  you  shall  have

a  place  which  is  called  Buttor,  and  from  thence  upwards  the

Ships  doe  not  goe,  because  that  upwards  the  River  is  very

Shallow,  and  little  water. Every  yeere  at  Buttor  they

make  and  unmake  a  Village,  with  Houses  and  Shops  made

of  Straw,  and  with  all  things  necessarie  to  their  uses,  and

X  113  H

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1567.

this  Village  standeth  as  long  as  the  Ships  ride  there,  and
till  they  depart  for  the  Indies,  and  when  they  depart,  everie
man  goeth  to  his  plot  of  Houses,  and  there  setteth  fire
on  them,  which  thing  made  me  to  marvaile.  For  as  I
passed  up  to  Satagan,  I  saw  this  Village  standing  with  a
great  number  of  people,  with  an  infinite  number  of  Ships
and  Bazars,  and  at  my  returne  comming  downe  with  my
Captaine  of  the  last  Ship,  for  whom  I  tarried,  I  was  all
amazed  to  see  such  a  place  so  soone  razed  and  burnt,  and
nothing  left  but  the  signe  of  the  burnt  Houses.  The
small  Ships  goe  to  Satagan,  and  there  they  lade.

[II.  x.i 71 2.]  "JN  the  Port  of  Satagan  every  yeere  they  lade  thirtie  or

The  commo-
dities that  are

The  commo- J^  £ve  ancj  thirtie  ships  great  and  small,  with  Rice,  Cloth

laden  in ***  °^  Bombast  of  divers  sorts,  Lacca,  great  abundance  of

Satagan.  Sugar,  Mirabolans  dried  and  preserved,  long  Pepper,  Oyle

of  Zerzeline,  and  many  other  sorts  of  merchandise. The

Citie  of  Satagan  is  a  reasonable  faire  Citie  for  a  Citie  of

the  Moores,  abounding  with  all  things,  and  was  governed

by  the  King  of  Patane,  and  now  is  subject  to  the  Great

Mogol. I  was  in  this  Kingdome  foure  moneths,  whereas

many Merchants did buy or fraight boates for their

benefits,  and  with  these  Barkes  they  goe  up  and  downe

the  River  of  Ganges  to  Faires,  buying  their  commoditie

with  a  great  advantage,  because  that  every  day  in  the

weeke  they  have  a  Faire,  now  in  one  place,  and  now  in

another,  and  I  also  hired  a  Barke  and  went  up  and  downe1

the  River  and  did  my  businesse,  and  so  in  the  night  I  saw'

Bengalaisnow  many  strange  things. The  Kingdome  of  Bengala  in  times

in  great  part past  ^fa  beene  as  it  were  in  the  power  of  Moores,  never-

sLJ0ec///°  *  e thelesse  there  is  great store  of  Gentiles  among  them :

alwaies whereas I have spoken of Gentiles, is to be

understood  Idolaters,  and  whereas  I  speake  of  Moores  It

meane  Mahomets  Sect. Those  people  especially  that  bei

Ganges  rites. within  the  Land  doe  greatly  worship  the  River  of  Ganges  : j

1&"g  »//7  j^  ^or  wnen  any  *s  S1C^  ne  is  brought  out  of  the  Countrey  tcl

when  they  are  tne  banke  of  the  River,  and  there  they  make  him  a  small

dead.  Cottage  of  strawe,  and  every  day  they  wet  him  with  that

114

CAESAR FREDERICK

A.D.
I567.

water,  whereof  there  are  many  that  die,  and  when  they

are  dead,  they  make  a  heape  of  stickes  and  boughes  and

lay  the  dead  bodie  thereon,  and  putting  fire  thereunto,

they  let  the  bodie  alone  untill  it  be  halfe  rosted,  and  then

they  take  it  off  from  the  fire,  and  make  an  emptie  Jarre

fast  about  his  necke,  and  so  throw  him  into  the  River.

These  things  every  night  as  I  passed  up  and  downe  the

River  I  saw  for  the  space  of  two  moneths,  as  I  passed  to

the  Fayres  to  buy  my  commodities  with  the  Merchants.

And  this  is  the  cause  that  the  Portugals  will  not  drinke  of

the  water  of  the  River  Ganges,  yet  to  the  sight  it  is  more

perfect  and  clearer  then  the  water  of  Nilus  is. From  the

Port  Piqueno I went to Cochin, and from Cochin to  Port  Piqueno,

Malacca,  from  whence  I  departed  for  Pegu  being  eight

hundred  miles  distant. That  voyage  is  wont  to  bee  made

in  five  and  twentie  or  thirtie  dayes,  but  we  were  foure

moneths,  and  at  the  end  of  three  moneths  our  ship  was

without  victuals. The  Pilot  tolde  us  that  wee  were  by  his

Altitude  not  farre  from  a  Citie  called  Tanasary,  in  the Tanasari.

Kingdome  of  Pegu,  and  these  his  words  were  not  true,  but

wee  were  (as  it  were)  in  the  middle  of  many  Hands,  and

many uninhabited rockes, and there were also some

Portugals  that  affirmed  that  they  knew  the  Land,  and

knew  also  where  the  Citie  of  Tanasary  was.

This  Citie  of  right  belongeth  to  the  Kingdome  of  Sion,

-  which  is  situate  on  a  great  Rivers  side,  which  commeth  out
of  the  Kingdome  of  Sion :  and  where  this  River  runneth
into  the  Sea,  there  is  a  Village  called  Mirgim,  in  whose
Harbour  every  yeere  there  lade  some  ships  with  Verzina,
Nypa,  and  Benjamin,  a  few  Cloves,  Nutmegs  and  Maces
which  come  from  the  coast  of  Sion,  but  the  greatest
marchandise  there  is  Verzin  and  Nypa,  which  is  an  excel-
lent Wine,  which  is  made  of  the  floure  of  a  tree  called

r  Nyper. Whose liquor they distill, and so make an

e;  excellent  drink  cleare  as  Christall,  good  to  the  mouth,  and
better  to  the  stomacke,  and  it  hath  an  excellent  gentle

,,,  vertue,  that  if  one  were  rotten  with  the  French  poxe,
1  inking  good  store  of  this,  hee  shall  bee  whole  againe,

115

Marchandise
comming  from
Sion.

s :

r

Nyper  wine
good  to  cure
the  French
disease.

A.D.

I567.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

and  I  have  seene  it  proved,  because  that  when  I  was  in
Cochin,  there  was  a  friend  of  mine,  whose  nose  began  to
drop  away  with  that  disease,  and  he  was  counselled  of  the
Doctors  of  Phisick  that  he  should  goe  to  Tanasary  at  the
time  of  the  new  Wines,  and  that  hee  should  drinke  of  the
Nyper  wine,  night  and  day,  as  much  as  hee  could  before  it
was  distilled,  which  at  that  time  is  most  delicate,  but  after
that  it  is  distilled,  it  is  more  strong,  and  if  you  drinke  much
of  it,  it  will  fume  into  the  head  with  drunkennesse.  This
man  went  thither,  and  did  so,  and  I  have  seene  him  after
with  a  good  colour  and  sound.  This  Wine  is  very  much
esteemed  in  the  Indies,  and  for  that  it  is  brought  so  farre
off,  it  is  very  deare :  in  Pegu  ordinarily  it  is  good  cheape,
because  it  is  neerer  to  the  place  where  they  make  it,  and
there  is  every  yeere  great  quantitie  made  thereof.  And
returning  to  my  purpose,  I  say,  being  amongst  these
rockes,  and  farre  from  the  Land  which  is  over  against
Tanasary,  with  great  scarcitie  of  victuals,  and  that  by  the
saying  of  the  Pilot  and  two  Portugals,  holding  them  firme
that  wee  were  in  front  of  the  aforesayde  harbour,  wee
determined  to  goe  thither  with  our  boat  and  fetch  victuals,
and  that  the  ship  should  stay  for  us  in  a  place  assigned.
Wee  were  twentie  and  eight  persons  in  the  boat  that  went
for  victuals,  and  on  a  day  about  twelve  of  the  clocke  wee
went  from  the  ship,  assuring  our  selves  to  bee  in  the
III  voyage,  harbour  before  night  in  the  aforesaid  Port,  wee  rowed  all
that  day,  and  a  great  part  of  the  next  night,  and  all  the
next  day  without  finding  harbour,  or  any  signe  of  good
land,  and  this  came  to  passe  through  the  evil  counsell  o
the  two  Portugals  that  were  with  us.

For  wee  had  overshot  the  harbour  and  left  it  behind'
us,  in  such  wise  that  wee  had  lost  the  land  inhabited
together  with  the  ship,  and  wee  eight  and  twentie  mo-
nad no  manner  of  victuall  with  us  in  the  boate,  but  r
was  the  Lords  will  that  one  of  the  Mariners  had  brough
a  little  Rice  with  him  in  the  boat  to  barter  away  for  son*
other  thing,  and  it  was  not  so  much  but  that  three  o
foure  men  would  have  eaten  it  at  a  meale : I  tooke  th<

Hunger  in

great

extremitie.

116

CAESAR FREDERICK  a.d.

1567.

government  of  this  Rice,  promising  that  by  the  helpe  of
God  that  Rice  should  be  nourishment  for  us  until  it  pleased
God  to  send  us  to  some  place  that  was  inhabited :  and
when  I  slept  I  put  the  Rice  into  my  bosome  because  they
should  not  rob  it  from  me :  we  were  nine  dayes  rowing
alongst  the  coast,  without  finding  any  thing  but  Countries
uninhabited,  and  desert  Hands,  where  if  we  had  found  but
grasse  it  would  have  seemed  Sugar  unto  us,  but  we  could  [II.  x.  171 3.]
not  finde  any,  yet  we  found  a  few  leaves  of  a  tree,  and
they  were  so  hard  that  we  could  not  chew  them,  we  had
water  and  wood  sufficient,  and  as  we  rowed,  we  could  go
but  by  flowing  water,  for  when  it  was  ebbing  water  we
made  fast  our  Boat  to  the  banke  of  one  of  those  Hands,
and  in  these  nine  dayes  that  wee  rowed,  wee  found  a  Cave
or  Nest  of  Tortoise  egges,  wherein  were  144.  egges,  the  Tortoise  Egs.
which  was  a  great  helpe  unto  us  :  these  egges  are  as  big  as
a  Hennes  cggt^  and  have  no  shell  about  them  but  a  tender
skinne,  every  day  we  sod  a  Ketle  full  of  those  Egges,
with  a  handfull  of  Rice  in  the  broth  thereof:  it  pleased
God  that  at  the  end  of  nine  dayes  we  discovered  certaine
Fisher-men  fishing  with  small  Barkes,  and  we  rowed
towards  them,  with  a  good  cheere,  for  I  thinke  there  were
never  men  more  glad  then  we  were,  for  wee  were  so  sore
afflicted  with  penurie,  that  wee  could  scarce  stand  on  our
legges.  Yet  according  to  the  order  that  wee  set  for  our
Rice,  when  wee  saw  those  Fisher-men,  there  was  left
sufficient  for  foure  daies.  The  first  Village  that  wee  came
to  was  in  the  Gulfe  of  Tavay,  under  the  King  of  Pegu,  Tavay  under
whereas  we  found  great  store  of  victuals :  then  for  two  the  Q*&  °f
or  three  dayes  after  our  arrivall  there,  we  would  eate  but  Pe&Um
little  meate  any  of  us,  and  yet  for  all  this,  wee  were  at
the  point  of  death  the  most  part  of  us.  From  Tavay  to
Martavan  in  the  Kingdome  of  Pegu,  are  seventy  two
miles.  We  laded  our  Boat  with  victuals  which  were
abundantly  sufficient  for  sixe  moneths,  from  whence  wee
departed  for  the  Port  and  Citie  of  Martavan,  where  in
short  time  we  arrived,  but  we  found  not  our  ship  there
as  we  had  thought  we  should,  from  whence  presently  we

117

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1567.

made  out  two  barkes  to  goe  to  looke  for  her.  And  they
found  her  in  great  calamitie,  and  need  of  water,  being  at
an  anchor  with  a  contrary  winde,  which  came  very  ill  to
passe,  because  that  shee  wanted  her  Boat  a  moneth,  which
should  have  made  her  provision  of  wood  and  water,  the
ship  also  by  the  grace  of  God  arrived  safely  in  the  foresaid
Port  of  Martavan.

Martavan  a T  T  7"Ee  found  in  the  Citie  of  Martavan  ninety  Portugals

Citle  under \\ Qf  Merchants  and  other  base  men,  which  had  fallen

Peru  m^ at  difference  with  the  Rector  or  Governour  of  the  Citie,

and all for  this  cause, that  certaine vagabonds of  the

Portugals  had  slaine  five  Falchines  of  the  King  of  Pegu,

which  chanced  about  a  moneth  after  the  King  of  Pegu  was

gone  with  a  million  and  foure  hundred  thousand  men  to

A  custom  that  conquere  the  Kingdome  of  Sion. They  have  for  custome

these  people 'm  tnjs  Countrie  and  Kingdome,  the  King  being  where-

Ktils^nfhe  soever  ms  pleasure  is  to  be  out  of  this  Kingdom,  that

warres.  every  fifteene  dayes  there  goeth  from  Pegu  a  Caravan  of  I

Falchines,  with  every  one  a  basket  on  his  head  full  of  some

Fruits  or  other  delicates  of  refreshings,  and  with  cleane

clothes  :  it  chanced  that  this  Caravan  passing  by  Martavan,

and resting themselves there a night, there happened

betweene  the  Portugals  and  them  words  of  despight,  and

from  words  to  blowes,  and  because  it  was  thought  that

the  Portugals  had  the  worse,  the  night  following,  when

the Falchines were a sleepe with their companie, the

Portugals  went  and  cut  off  five  of  their  heads. Now

A  law  in  Pegu  there  is  a  law  in  Pegu,  that  whosoever  killeth  a  man,  he

fir  killing  of snan  buy  the  shed  bloud  with  his  money,  according  to

the  estate  of  the  person  that  is  slaine,  but  these  Falchines

being  the  servants  of  the  King,  the  Retors  durst  not  doe

any  thing  in  the  matter,  without  the  consent  of  the  King,

because  it  was  necessary  that  the  King  should  knowe  of

such  a  matter. When  the  King  had  knowledge  thereof,

he  gave  commandement  that  the  malefactors  should  b

kept  untill  his  comming  home,  and  then  he  would  duely  >l

minister  justice,  but  the  Captaine  of  the  Portugals  woul'

118

men

CAESAR  FREDERICK  ad.

1567.

not  deliver  those  men,  but  rather  set  himselfe  with  all  the  Great  pride  of
rest  in  Armes, and  went  every  day through the  Citie  *jjf  Portugal*.
marching  with  his  Drumme  and  Ensignes  displayed. For  mnf™yreof
at  that  time  the  Citie  was  empty  of  men,  by  reason  they  t^e  juthor
were  gone  all  to  the  warres  and  in  businesse  of  the  King  : relate th  at
in  the  middest  of  this  rumour  wee  came  thither,  and  I  forge,  here
thought  it  a  strange  thing  to  see  the  Portugals  use  such  omtted-
insolency  in  another  mans  Citie.

From  Martavan  I  departed  to  goe  to  the  chiefest  Citie
in  the  Kingdome  of  Pegu,  which  is  also  called  after  the  Pegu.
name  of  the  Kingdome,  which  Voyage  is  made  by  Sea  in
three  or  foure  dayes ; they  may  goe  also  by  Land,  but  it
is  better  for  him  that  hath  merchandise  to  goe  by  Sea,
and  lesser  charge. And  in  this  Voyage  you  shall  have  a
Macareo,  which  is  one  of  the  most  marvellous  things  in  Admirable
the  world  that  Nature  hath  wrought,  and  I  never  saw  any  Ttdes-
thing  so  hard  to  bee  beleeved  as  this,  to  wit,  the  great
encreasing  and  diminishing  of  the  water  there  at  one  push
or  instant,  and  the  horrible  Earth-quake  and  great  noise
that the Macareo maketh where it commeth. Wee
departed  from  Martavan  in  Barkes,  which  are  like  to  our
Pilot-Boats,  with  the  encrease  of  the  water,  and  they  goe
as  swift  as  an  Arrowe  out  of  a  Bowe,  so  long  as  the  Tide
runneth  with  them,  and  when  the  water  is  at  the  highest,
then  they  draw  themselves  out  of  the  channell  towards
some  banke,  and  there  they  come  to  anchor,  and  when
the  water  is  diminished,  then  they  rest  on  drie  land :  and
when the  Barkes  rest  drie, they  are  as  high  from  the
bottome  of  the  channell,  as  any  house  top  is  high  from  the
ground. They  let  their  Barkes  lie  so  high  for  this  respect, This  tide  is
that  if  there  should  any  ship  rest  or  ride  in  the  channell,  ll^e  t0. the
with  such  force  commeth  in  the  water,  that  it  would  over-  %eJerm0ftr
throwe  Ship  or  Barke :  yet  for  all  this,  that  the  Barkes  be Severne :  but
so  farre  out  of  the  channel,  and  though  the  water  hath  lost  it  seemeth
her  greatest  strength  and  furie  before  it  come  so  high,  greater.
yet  they  make  fast  their  Prow  to  the  streame,  and  often-
times it  maketh  them  very  fearefull,  and  if  the  anchor  did
not  hold  her  Prow  up  by  strength,  shee  would  be  over

119

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1567.
[II.  x.  1 714..]  throwne  and  lost  with  men  and  goods. When  the  water
beginneth  to  encrease,  it  maketh  such  a  noise,  and  so  great,
that  you  would  thinke  it  an  Earthquake,  and  presently  at
These  Tides the  first  it  maketh  three  waves. So  that  the  first  washeth
make  their over  fae  Barke,  from  stemme  to  sterne,  the  second  is  not
JoursC°doeSe so  furi°us  as  tne  first>  and  the  third  raiseth  the  anchor,
and  then  for  the  space  of  sixe  houres  while  the  water
encreaseth,  they  rowe  with  such  swiftnesse  that  you  would
thinke  they  did  flie :  in  these  tides  there  must  be  lost  no
jot  of  time,  for  if  you  arrive  not  at  the  stagions  before  the
Tide  bee  spent,  you  must  turne  backe  from  whence  you
came. For  there  is  no  staying  at  any  place  but  at  these  j
stagions,  and  there  is  more  danger  at  one  of  these  places  j
then  at  another,  as  they  bee  higher  and  lower  one  then  j
another. When  as  you  returne  from  Pegu  to  Martavan,  j
they  goe  but  halfe  the  Tide  at  a  time,  because  they  will  I
lay  their  Barkes  up  aloft  on  the  bankes,  for  the  reason  |
aforesaid. I  could  never  gather  any  reason  of  the  noise  I
that  this  water  maketh  in  the  encrease  of  the  Tide,  and  in  |
This  Macareo  diminishing  of  the  water. There  is  another  Macareo  in  1
is  a  Tide  or  a  Cambaya,  but  that  is  nothing:  in  comparison  of  this.

lUTVPflt  Ol

By  the  helpe  of  God  we  came  safe  to  Pegu,  which  are
two  Cities,  the  old  and  the  new,  in  the  old  Citie  are  the  |
Merchant  strangers,  and  Merchants  of  the  Countrie,  for  i
there  are  the  greatest  doings  and  the  greatest  trade. This  j
Citie  is  not  very  great,  but  it  hath  very  great  Suburbs,  j
Homes  made Their  houses  be  made  with  canes,  and  covered  with  leaves,
of  canes,  and or  with  straw,  but  the  Merchants  have  all  one  house  or  <
haves  of  trees Magason,  which  house  they  call  Godon,  which  is  made  of
Godon  is  a brickes,  and  there  they  put  all  their  goods  of  any  value,  to  t
place  or  house save  them  from  the  often  mischances  that  there  happen  to
for  Merchants  houses  made  of  such  stuff  e. In  the  new  Citie  is  the

Vods  inhdr PalaCe °f the KinS> and his abiding Place with a11 his

The  forme  of Barons  and  Nobles,  and  other  Gentlemen  ;  and  in  the  time
the  building  of  that  I  was  there,  they  finished  the  building  of  the  new
the  new  Citie  Citie : it  is  a  great  Citie,  very  plaine  and  flat,  and  foure 1
of  Pegu.  square,  walled  round  about,  and  with  Ditches  that  compassei

the  Walls  about  with  water,  in  which  Ditches  are  many'  |

CAESAR FREDERICK  ad.

1567.

Crocodiles. It  hath  no  Draw-bridges,  yet  it  hath  twenty

Gates,  five  for  every  square  on  the  Walls,  there  are  many

places  made  for  Centinels  to  watch,  made  of  Wood  and

covered  or  gilt  with  Gold, the  Streets  thereof  are  the

fairest  that  I  have  seene,  they  are  as  streight  as  a  line  from

one  Gate  to  another,  and  standing  at  the  one  Gate  you

may  discover  to  the  other,  and  they  are  as  broad  as  ten  or

twelve  men  may  ride  a-breast  in  them :  and  those  Streets

that  be  thwart  are  faire  and  large,  these  Streets,  both  on

£ the  one  side  and  the  other,  are  planted  at  the  doores  of  the

Houses  with Nut trees  of  India, which make  a  very

t  commodious  shadow,  the  Houses  be  made  of  wood,  and

covered  with  a  kind of tiles  in forme  of  Cups, very

i necessary  for  their  use :  the  Kings  Palace  is  in  the  middle

of  the  Citie,  made  in  forme  of  a  walled  Castle,  with  ditches

full  of  water  round  about  it,  the  Lodgings  within  are  made

)E  of  wood  all  over  gilded,  with  fine  pinacles,  and  very  costly

s  worke,  covered  with  plates  of  gold. Truly.it  may  be  a

r  Kings  house :  within  the  gate  there  is  a  faire  large  Court,  A  rich  \3

ii  from  the  one  side  to  the  other,  wherein  there  are  made  stateh Palace-

places  for  the  strongest  and  stoutest  Elephants,  hee  hath
is  foure  that  be  white,  a  thing  so  rare,  that  a  man  shall  hardly  Foure  white
k  finde  another  King  that  hath  any  such,  as  if  this  King  ElePhanU-
t  knowe  any  other  that  hath  white  Elephants,  he  sendeth
\i  for  them  as  for  a  gift. The  time  that  I  was  there,  there
b  were  two  brought  out  of  a  farre  Countrie,  and  that  cost
e me  something  the  sight  of  them,  for  that  they  command
:  the  Merchants  to  goe  to  see  them,  and  then  they  must
o!  give  somewhat  to  the  men  that  bring  them :  the  Brokers
:  of  the  Merchants  give  for  every  man  halfe  a  Ducket,  which
they  call  a  Tansa,  which  amounteth  to  a  great  summe,  for  This  money
the  number  of  Merchants  that  are  in  that  Citie  ;  and  when  c?lled  Tansa
they have payd the aforesaid Tansa, they may chuse  JpJ^*^
whether  they  will  see  them  at  that  time  or  no,  because  may  fo  three
that  when  they  are  in  the  Kings  stall,  every  man  may  see  shillings  and
them  that  will : but  at  that  time  they  must  goe  and  see  foure  Pence-
them,  for  it  is  the  kings  pleasure  it  should  be  so.

This  King  amongst  all  other  his  Titles,  is  called  The

121

A.D.

1567,

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

A  warlike
policy.

King  of  the  white  Elephants,  and  it  is  reported,  that  if
this  King  knew  any  other  King  that  had  any  of  these  white
Elephants,  and  would  not  send  them  unto  him,  that  he
would hazard  his whole  Kingdome to  conquere them.
He  esteemeth  these  white  Elephants  very  deerely,  and
they  are  had  in  great  regard,  and  kept  with  very  meet
service,  every  one  of  them  is  in  a  house,  all  gilded  over,,
and  they  have  their  meate  given  them  in  vessels  of  silver;
and  gold. There  is  one  blacke  Elephant, the  greatest
that  hath  beene  seene,  and  he  is  kept  according  to  his
bignesse ; he  is  nine  cubits  high,  which  is  a  marvellous
thing. It  is  reported  that  this  King  hath  foure  thousand
Elephants  of  warre,  and  all  have  their  teeth,  and  they
use  to  put  on  their  two  uppermost  teeth  sharpe  pikes  of
Iron,  and  make  them  fast  with  rings,  because  these  beasts
fight  and  make  battell  with  their  teeth ;  hee  hath  also  very;!
many  young  Elephants  that  have  not  their  teeth  sprouted  [:
forth : also  this  King  hath  a  brave  devise  in  hunting  to  I
take  these  Elephants  when  he  will,  two  miles  from  the
Citie. He  hath  builded  a  faire  Palace  all  gilded,  and,
within  it  a  faire  Court,  and  within  it  and  round  about,
there  are  made  an  infinite  number  of  places  for  men  tcj
stand  to  see  this  hunting : neere  unto  this  Palace  is  H
mighty  great  Wood,  through  the  which  the  Hunts-men,
of  the  King  ride  continually  on  the  backes  of  the  female;
Elephants, teaching them in this businesse. Ever),
Hunter carrieth out with him five or sixe of these  j
females,  and  they  say  that  they  anoint  the  secret  place
with  a  certaine  composition  that  they  have,  that  when  the  1
[II. x.  171 5.]  wilde  Elephant  doeth  smell: hereunto,  they  follow  theji
females  and  cannot  leave  them : when  the  Hunts-mer
have  made  provision,  and  the  Elephant  is  so  entangled ,  J
they  guide  the  females  towards  the  Palace  which  is  callec  i
Tambell,  and  this  Palace  hath  a  doore  which  doth  oper  j
and  shut  with  engines,  before  which  doore  there  is  a  lon£ ,
straight  way  with  trees  on  both  the  sides,  which  covered  I
the  way  in  such  wise,  as  it  is  like  darkenesse  in  a  corner :  a
the  wilde  Elephant  when  he  commeth  to  this  way  thinketl

An  excellent
devise  to  hunt
and  take  wilde
Elephants.

CAESAR FREDERICK  a.d.

1567.

I  that  hee  is  in  the  Woods.  At  the  end  of  this  darke  way
1  there  is  a  great  field :  when  the  Hunters  have  gotten  this

-  prey,  when  they  first  come  to  this  field,  they  send  presently
j  to  give  knowledge  thereof  to  the  Citie,  and  with  all  speed
I  there  goe  out  fifty  or  sixty  men  on  horsebacke,  and  doe
1! beset  the  field  round  about: in  the  great  field  then  the

females  which  are  taught  in  this  businesse  goe  directly  to
the  mouth  of  the  darke  way,  and  when  as  the  wilde
Elephant  is  entred  in  there,  the  Hunters  shoute  and  make
a  great  noise,  as  much  as  is  possible,  to  make  the  wilde
Elephant  enter  in  at  the  gate  of  that  Palace,  which  is  then
open,  and  as  soone  as  he  is  in,  the  gate  is  shut  without  any

:  :  noise,  and  so  the  Hunters  with  the  female  Elephants  and
the  wilde  one  are  all  in  the  Court  together,  and  then
within  a  small  time  the  females  withdraw  themselves  away
one  by  one  out  of  the  Court,  leaving  the  wilde  Elephant

:  alone :  and  when  hee  perceiveth  that  hee  is  left  alone,  hee
is  so  mad  that  for  two  or  three  houres  to  see  him,  it  is  the  An  excellent
greatest  pleasure  in  the  world  : he  weepeth,  he  flingeth,  Pf£* 'J e  °f the

1  !he  runneth, he  justleth, he  thrusteth  under  the  places *  an  '

1  where  the  people  stand  to  see  him,  thinking  to  kill  some
of  them,  but  the  posts  and  timber  is  so  strong  and  great

:  that  he  cannot  hurt  any  body,  yet  he  oftentimes  breaketh
his  teeth  in  the  grates. At  length  when  he  is  weary,  and

-  hath  laboured  his  body  that  he  is  all  wet  with  sweat,  then
c  he  plucketh  in  his  trunke  into  his  mouth,  and  then  he

throweth  out  so  much  water  out  of  his  belly,  that  he
'  sprinkleth  it  over  the  heads  of  the  lookers  on,  to  the
■■  uttermost  of  them,  although  it  be  very  high : and  then

when  they  see  him  very  weary,  there  goe  certaine  Officers
1 into  the  Court  with  long  sharpe  canes  in  their  hands,  and  These  canes
■■  pricke  him  that  they  make  him  to  goe  into  one  of  the  are  ll^e  t0  .

houses  that are made alongst the Court for the same  f^*ff^/
r purpose : as  there  are  many  which  are  made  long  and  Loco  de  tore.
1  jnarrow,  that  when  the  Elephant  is  in,  hee  cannot  turne
::  himselfe  to  goe  backe  againe. And  it  is  requisite  that
:  these  men  should  bee  very  wary  and  swift,  for  although
v their  canes  be  long,  yet  the  Elephant  would  kill  them  if

123

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1567.

they  were  not  swift  to  save  themselves : at  length  when
they  have  gotten  him  into  one  of  those  houses,  they  stand
over  him  in  a  loft,  and  get  ropes  under  his  belly  and  about
his  neck,  &  about  his  legs,  and  bind  him  fast,  and  so  let
him  stand  foure  or  five  dayes,  and  give  him  neither  meate
A  strange nor  drinke. At  the  end  of  these  foure  or  five  dayes,  they
thing  that  a uniOOSe  him,  and  put  one  of  the  females  unto  him,  and
should  in  so Slvt  tnem meate  and  drink, and  in  eight  dayes  he  is
short  time  be become  tame. In  my  judgement  there  is  not  a  beast  so
made  tame. intellective  as  are  these  Elephants,  nor  of  more  under-
standing in  all  the  world : for  he  will  doe  all  things  that
his  keeper  sayth,  so  that  he  lacketh  nothing  but  humane
speach.
The  greatest It  is  reported  that  the  greatest  strength  that  the  King
strength  that 0f  pegU  hath,  is  in  these  Elephants,  for  when  they  goe  to
fp  u  hath Dattell,  they  set  on  their  backes  a  Castle  of  wood  bound '
thereto, with bands under their  bellies : and in  every  |
Castle  foure  men  very  commodiously  set  to  fight  withl
Harquebusses,  with  Bowes  and  Arrowes,  with  Darts  and
Pikes,  and  other  lancing  weapons:  and  they  say  that  the1
skinne  of  this  Elephant  is  so  hard,  that  an  Harquebusse
will  not  pierce  it,  unlesse  it  be  in  the  eye,  temples,  or
some other tender place of his body. And besides
this,  they  are  of  great  strength,  and  have  a  very  excellent  i
A  goodly  order  order  in  their  battell,  as  I  have  seene  at  their  Feasts  which
in  a  barbarous  they  make  in  the  yeere,  in  which  Feasts  the  King  makes
people.  Triumphs,  which  is  a  rare  thing  and  worthie  memorie,  thai;

in  so  barbarous  a  People  there  should  bee  such  goodly
orders  as  they  have  in  their  Armies,  which  be  distinct  irJ
squares  of  Elephants,  of  Horsemen, of  Harquebussen
and  Pikemen,  that  truly  the  number  of  them  are  infinite:
The  order  of but  their  armour  and  weapons  are  very  naught  and  weake
their  weapons  ^  as  weUL  t^e  one  as  tne  other: they  have  very  bad  Pikes,
their  Swords  are  worse  made,  like  long  Knives  without
points,  his  Harquebusses  are  most  excellent,  and  alwaie;
in  his  warres  he  hath  eighty  thousand  Harquebusses,  and.
the  number  of  them  encreaseth  daily. Because  the  Kin£
will  have  them  shoot  every  day  at  the  Planke,  and  so  b)'

124

and  number  of
his  men

CAESAR FREDERICK  ad.

1567.

continuall  exercise  they  become  most  excellent  shot :  also
he  hath  great  Ordnance  made  of  very  good  metall ; to
conclude,  there  is  not  a  King  on  the  Earth  that  hath  more
power  or  strength  then  this  King  of  Pegu,  because  hee  hath
twenty  and  sixe  crowned  Kings  at  his  command. Hee  26-  crowned
can  make  in  his  Campe  a  million  and  an  halfe  of  men  of  Ktn&  at  hts
warre  in  the  field  against  his  Enemies. The  state  of  his  lrOOOOQ^
Kingdome, and maintenance of  his  Armie, is a thing  men  in  one
incredible  to  consider,  and  the  victuals  that  should  main-  campe.
tayne  such  a  number  of  people  in  the  warres :  but  he  that
knoweth  the  nature  and  qualitie  of  that  people,  will  easily
beleeve  it. I  have  seene  with  mine  eyes,  that  those  people
and  Souldiers  have  eaten  of  all  sorts  of  wilde  beasts  that
are  on  the  earth,  whether  it  be  very  filthie  or  otherwise
all  serveth  for  their  mouthes :  yea,  I  have  seene  them  eate
Scorpions  and  Serpents,  also  they  feed  of  all  kinde  of  herbes  Eating  of
and  grasse. So  that  if  such  a  great  Armie  want  not  Water  i>erPents-
and  Salt,  they  will  maintayne  themselves  a  long  time  in  a
bush  with  rootes,  flowers,  and  leaves  of  trees,  they  carrie
Rice  with  them  for  their  Voyage,  and  that  serveth  them  in
stead  of  Comfits,  it  is  so  dainty  unto  them.

This  King  of  Pegu  hath  not  any  Armie  or  power  by  Sea,  Kings  power.
but  in  the  Land,  for  People,  Dominions,  Gold  and  Silver,  [II.  x.  171 6.]
he  farre  exceeds  the  power  of  the  great  Turke  in  treasure
and  strength. This  King  hath  divers  Magasons  full  of  The  rlches  °f
treasure,  as  Gold,  and  Silver,  and  every  day  he  encreaseth  **f g  °*
it  more  and  more,  and  it  is  never  diminished. Also  hee  is
Lord  of  the  Mines  of  Rubies,  Saphirs,  and  Spinels. Neere
unto  his  Royall  Palace  there  is  an  inestimable  treasure
whereof  he  maketh  no  account,  for  that  it  standeth  in  such
a  place  that  every  one  may  see  it,  and  the  place  where  this
treasure  is,  is  a  great  Court  walled  round  about  with  walls
of  stone,  with  two  gates  which  stand  open  every  day.
And  within  this  place  or  Court  are  foure  gilded  houses
covered  with  Lead,  and  in  every  one  of  these  are  certaine
heathenish  Idols  of  a  very  great  valure. In  the  first  house
there  is  a  Statue  of  the  image  of  a  Man  of  gold  very  great,
and  on  his  head  a  Crowne  of  gold  beset  with  most  rare

125

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1567.

Rubies  and  Saphires,  and  round  about  him  are  foure  little
children  of  gold.  In  the  second  house  there  is  the  Statue
of  a  Man  of  silver,  that  is  set  as  it  were  sitting  on  heapes
of  money :  whose  stature  in  height,  as  he  sitteth,  is  so
high,  that  his  highnesse  exceeds  the  height  of  any  one  roofe
of  an  house ;  I  measured  his  feet,  and  found  that  they
were  as  long  as  all  my  body  was  in  height,  with  a  Crowne
on  his  head  like  to  the  first.  And  in  the  third  house  there
is  a  Statue  of  brasse  of  the  same  bignesse,  with  a  like
Crowne  on  his  head.  In  the  fourth  and  last  house,  there
is  a  Statue  of  a  Man  as  big  as  the  other,  which  is  made  of
Gansa,  which  is  the  metall  they  make  their  money  of,  and
this  metall  is  made  of  Copper  and  Lead  mingled  together.
This  Statue  also  hath  a  Crowne  on  his  head  like  the  first :
this  treasure  being  of  such  a  value  as  it  is,  standeth  in  an
open  place  that  every  man  at  his  pleasure  may  goe  and
see  it :  for  the  keepers  thereof  never  forbid  any  man  the
sight  thereof.  I  say  as  I  have  said  before,  that  this  King
every  yeere  in  his  feasts  triumpheth :  and  because  it  is
worthie  of  the  noting,  I  thinke  it  meet  to  write  thereof,

The  great which  is  as  followeth. The  King  rideth  on  a  triumphant

pompe  of  the  Cart  or  Wagon  all  gilded,  which  is  drawne  by  sixteene
tn&  goodly  Horses :  and  this  Cart  is  very  high  with  a  goodly

Canopie  over  it,  behind  the  Cart  goe  twenty  of  his  Lords
and  Nobles,  with  every  one  a  rope  in  his  hand  made  fast
to  the  Cart  for  to  hold  it  upright  that  it  fall  not.  The
King  sitteth  in  the  middle  of  the  Cart ;  and  upon  thei
same  Cart  about  the  King  stand  foure  of  his  Nobles  mosti
favoured  of  him,  and  before  this  Cart  wherein  the  King  is,
goeth  all  his  Armie  as  aforesaid,  and  in  the  middle  or  his
Armie  goeth  all  his  Nobilitie,  round  about  the  Cart,  that!
are  in  his  Dominions,  a  marvellous  thing  it  is  to  see  sol
many  people,  such  riches  and  such  good  order  in  a  People,
so  barbarous  as  they  be.  This  King  of  Pegu  hath  one
principall  wife  which  is  kept  in  a  Seralio,  hee  hath  three
hundred  Concubines,  of  whom  it  is  reported  that  he  hath

The  order  of ninety  children.

Justice.  This  King  sitteth  every  day  in  person  to  heare  the  suits

126

CAESAR FREDERICK  a.d.

1567.

of  his  Subjects, but  he  nor  they  never  speake  one  to
another,  but  by  supplications  made  in  this  order. The
King  sitteth  up  aloft  in  a  great  Hall,  on  a  Tribunall  seate,
and  lower  under  him  sit  all  his  Barons  round  about,  then
those  that  demand  audience  enter  into  a  great  Court  before
the  King,  and  there  set  them  downe  on  the  ground  forty
paces  distant  from  the  Kings  person,  and  amongst  those
people  there  is  no  difference  in  matters  of  audience  before  No  difference
the  King, but  all  alike, and there  they sit  with their  fj^^Kin
supplications  in  their  hands,  which  are  made  of  long  leaves -J contro-
of  a  tree,  these  leaves  are  three  quarters  of  a  yard  long,  venies  or  in
and  two  fingers  broad,  which  are  written  with  a  sharpe  Iron  Justice.
made  for  the  purpose,  and  in  those  leaves  are  their  suppli-
cations written,  and  with  their  supplications,  they  have  in
their  hands  a  present  or  gift,  according  to  the  weightinesse
of  their  matter. Then  come  the Secretaries  downe  to
reade  these  supplications,  taking  them  and  reading  them
before  the  King,  and  if  the  King  thinke  it  good  to  doe  to
them  that  favour  or  justice  that  they  demand,  then  hee
commandeth  to  take  the  presents  out  of  their  hands :  but
if  he  thinke  their  demand  be  not  just  or  according  to  right,
he  commandeth  them  away  without  taking  of  their  gifts
or  presents.

In  the  Indies  there  is  not  any  merchandise  that  is  good
to  bring  to  Pegu,  unlesse  it  be  at  some  times  by  chance  to
bring  Opium  of  Cambaia,  and  if  hee  bring  money  hee
shall  lose  by  it. Now  the  commodities  that  come  from  The  commo-
Saint  Tome  are  the  onely  merchandise  for  that  place,  which  dtttes  thf. are
is  the  great  quantitie  of  Cloth  made  there,  which  they  use  *pezu
in  Pegu ; which  Cloth  is  made  of  Bombast  woven  and
painted,  so  that  the  more  that  kinde  of  Cloth  is  washed,
the  more  lively  they  shew  their  colours,  which  is  a  rare
rhing,  and  there  is  made  such  account  of  this  kinde  of
31oth  which  is  of  so  great  importance,  that  a  small  bale  of
t  will  cost  a  thousand  or  two  thousand  duckets. Also
rom  Saint  Tome  they  lade  great  store  of  red  yarne,  of
3ombast  died  with  a  root  which  they  call  Saia,  as  aforesaid,
tfhich  colour  will  never  out. With  which  merchandise

127

A.D.

I567.

Note  the
departure  of
the  ships  from
Saint  Tome  to
Pegu.

[II.x.1717.]

Commodities
brought  into
Pegu.

The  Chikinos
are  pieces  of
gold  worth
sterling  seven
shillings.

*Achen.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

every  yeere  there  goeth  a  great  ship  from  S.  Tome  toi
Pe^u,  of  great  importance,  and  they  usually  depart  from
Saint  Tome  to  Pegu  the  eleventh  or  twelfth  of  September,:
and  if  shee  stay  untill  the  twelfth,  it  is  a  great  hap  if  shee>
returne  not  without  making  of  her  Voyage. Their  use
was  to  depart  the  sixt  of  September,  and  then  they  made
sure  Voyages,  and  now  because  there  is  a  great  labour  about
that  kinde  of  Cloth  to  bring  it  to  perfection,  and  that  iti
bee  well  dried,  as  also  the  greedinesse  of  the  Captaine  that
would  make  an  extraordinary  gaine  of  his  fraight,  thinking
to  have  the  winde  alwaies  to  serve  their  turne,  they  stay
so  long,  that  at  sometimes  the  winde  turneth. For  in
those  parts  the  winds  blowe  firmely  for  certaine  times,
with  the  which  they  goe  to  Pegu  with  the  wind  in  poope.
and  if  they  arrive  not  there  before  the  winde  change,  and
get  ground  to  anchor,  perforce  they  must  returne  backe
againe : for  that  the  gales  of  the  winde  blowe  there  for
three  or  foure  moneths  together  in  one  place  with  greal
force. But  if  they  get  the  coast  and  anchor  there,  ther
with  great  labour  they  may  save  their  Voyage. Also  there
goeth  another  great  ship  from  Bengala  every  yeere,  lader
with  fine  cloth  of  Bombast  of  all  sorts,  which  arriveth  ir1
the  Harbour  of  Pegu,  when  the  ship  that  commeth  fron
Saint  Tome  departeth. The  Harbour  where  these  twcii
ships  arrive  is  called  Cosmin. From  Malaca  to  Martavan
which  is  a  Port  in  Pegu,  there  come  many  small  ships
and  great,  laden  with  Pepper,  Sandolo,  Porcellan  of  China
Camfora,  Bruneo,  and  other  merchandise. The  ships  tha
come  from  Mecca  enter  into  the  Port  of  Pegu  and  Cirion
and  those  ships  bring  cloth  of  Wooll,  Scarlets,  Velvets
Opium,  and  Chickinos,  by  the  which  they  lose,  and  the;
bring  them  because  they  have  no  other  thing  that  is  gooc
for  Pegu : but  they  esteem  not  the  losse  of  them,  fo:
that  they  make  such  great  gaine  of  their  commodities
that  they  carrie  from  thence  out  of  that  Kingdome. Als<
the  King  of  Assi  *  his  ships  come  thither  into  the  saim .
Port  laden  with  Pepper ; from  the  coast  of  Saint  Tom' )
of  Bengala  out  of  the  Sea  of  Bara  to  Pegu  are  thre

128

CAESAR FREDERICK  a.d.

1567.

I  hundred  miles,  and  they  goe  it  up  the  River  in  foure  dayes,
with  the  encreasing  water,  or  with  the  floud,  to  a  Citie
called  Cosmin,  and  there  they  discharge  their  ships,  whither
the  Customers  of  Pegu  come  to  take  the  note  and  markes
of  all  the  goods  of  every  man,  and  take  the  charge  of  the
goods  on  them,  and  convey  them  to  Pegu,  into  the  Kings
house,  wherein  they  make  the  Custome  of  the  merchandise.
When  the  Customers  have  taken  the  charge  of  the  goods,
ind  put  them  into  Barkes,  the  Retor  of  the  Citie  giveth
licence  to  the  Merchants  to  take  barke,  and  goe  up  to
Pegu  with  their  merchandise ;  and  so  three  or  foure  of
them  take  a  Barke  and  goe  up  to  Pegu  in  companie.
Sod  deliver  every  man  that  he  give  not  a  wrong  note,  Great  rigour
md  entrie,  or  thinke  to  steale  any  Custome :  for  if  they  gfCmtomes^
loe,  for  the  least  trifle  that  is,  he  is  utterly  undone,  for
:he  King  doeth  take  it  for  a  most  great  affront  to  bee
leceived  of  his  Custome  ;  and  therefore  they  make  diligent

:  searches,  three  times  at  the  lading  and  unlading  of  the
*oods,  and  at  the  taking  of  them  a  land. In  Pegu  this

r  ;earch they  make  when they  goe  out of  the ship for

Is  diamonds, Pearles, and fine Cloth which taketh little
oome : for  because  that  all  the  Jewels  that  come  into

0  3egu,  and  are  not  found  of  that  Countrie,  pay  Custome,

1  nit  Rubies,  Saphyrs  and  Spinels  pay  no  Custome  in  nor
:  mt : because  they  are  found  growing  in  that  Countrie.

jr  Vll  Merchants  that  meane  to  goe  thorow  the  Indies,  must  Merchants
i:  :arrie  all manner  of  houshold-stuffe with them which  ™f/?™e
i  Is  necessary  for  a  house,  because  that  there  is  not  any  vis-t0„s  for
i odging,  nor  Innes,  nor  Hosts,  nor  chamber  roome  in  that  there  are  no
f  Countrie,  but  the  first  thing  a  man  doth  when  hee  com-  Innes.

neth to  any  Citie is to hyre a  house, either  by the

reere,  or  by  the  moneth,  or  as  hee  meanes  to  stay  in

hose  parts.
:  I In  Pegu  their  order  is  to  hire  their  houses  for  sixe
\ loneths. Now  from  Cosmin  to  the  Citie  of  Pegu  they

oe  in  sixe  houres  with  the  floud,  and  if  it  be  ebbing
ater,  then  they  make  fast  their  Boate  to  the  River  side,
t  nd  there  tarrie  untill  the  water  flowe  againe. It  is  a
x  129  1

A.D.
I567.

Description  of
the  fruitful-
nesse  of  that
soyle.

Deling  is  a
small  litter
carried  with
men  as  is
aforesaid.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

very  commodious  and  pleasant  Voyage,  having  on  both
sides  of  the  Rivers  many  great  Villages,  which  they  call
Cities : in the  which Hennes, Pigeons, Egges, Milke,
Rice,  and  other  things  bee  very  good  cheape. It  is  all
plaine,  and  a  goodly  Countrie,  and  in  eight  dayes  you  may
make your  Voyage up to Macceo, distant from  Pegu
twelve  miles,  and  there  they  discharge  their  goods,  and
lade  them  in  Carts  or  Waines  drawne  with  Oxen,  and  the
Merchants  are  carried  in  a  Closet  which  they  call  Deling,
in  the  which  a  man  shall  be  very  well  accommodated,  with
Cushions  under  his  head,  and  covered  for  the  defence  of
the  Sunne  and  Raine,  and  there  he  may  sleepe  if  he  have
will  thereunto  :  and  his  foure  Falchines  carrie  him  running
away,  changing  two  at  one  time,  and  two  at  another. The
custome  or  Pegu  and  fraight  thither,  may  amount  untc
twenty  or  twenty  two  per  cento,  and  twenty  three  according
as  he  hath  more  or  lesse  stolne  from  him  that  day  they
custome  the  goods. It  is  requisite  that  a  man  have  his
eyes  watchfull, and  to  bee  carefull, and  to  have  man)
friends,  for  when  they  custome  in  the  great  Hall  of  the
King,  there  come  many  Gentlemen  accompanied  with  1
number of  their slaves, and these  Gentlemen have  nc
shame  that  their  slaves  robbe  strangers : whether  it  b(
Cloth  in  shewing  of  it,  or  any  other  thing,  they  laugh  a*  i
it. And  although  the  Merchants  helpe  one  another  tc  \
keepe  watch,  and  looke  to  their  goods,  they  cannot  look<
thereto  so  narrowly  but  one  or  other  will  robbe  something  i
either  more  or  lesse,  according  as  their  merchandise  is  mor<
or  lesse :  and  yet  on  this  day  there  is  a  worse  thing  thei  i
this :  although  you  have  set  so  many  eyes  to  looke  ther-  \
for  your  benefit,  that  you  escape  unrobbed  of  the  slaves
a  man  cannot  choose  but  that  hee  must  be  robbed  of  th«i
Officers  of  the  Custome  house. For  paying  the  custom*!
with  the  same  goods  oftentimes  they  take  the  best  tha  )
you  have,  and  not  by  rate  of  every  sort  as  they  ought  t< )
doe,  by  which  meanes  a  man  payeth  more  then  his  dutie  v
At length when the goods be dispatched out of th
Custom-house  in  this  order,  the  Merchant  causeth  them  t  J

130

CAESAR FREDERICK

A.D.

I567.

be  carried  to  his  house,  and  may  doe  with  them  at  his
pleasure.

There  are  in  Pegu  eight  Brokers  of  the  Kings,  which  Brokers.
are  called  Tareghe,  who  are  bound  to  sell  all  the  merchan-
dise which  come  to  Pegu,  at  the  common  or  the  current
price :  then  if  the  Merchants  will  sell  their  goods  at  that
price,  they  sell  them  away,  and  the  Brokers  have  two  in
the  hundred  of  every  sort  of  merchandise,  and  they  are
bound  to  make  good  the  debts  of  those  goods,  because
they  bee  sold  by  their  hands  or  meanes,  and  on  their  words,
and  oftentimes  the  Merchant  knoweth  not  to  whom  he  [II.  x.  171 8.]
giveth  his  goods,  yet  he  cannot  lose  any  thing  thereby,
for  that  the  Broker  is  bound  in  any  wise  to  pay  him,  and  if
the  Merchant  sell  his  goods  without  the  consent  of  the
Broker,  yet  neverthelesse  hee  must  pay  him  two  per  cento,
and  bee  in  danger  of  his  money :  but  this  is  very  seldome
seene,  because  the  Wife,  Children  and  Slaves  of  the  debtor
are  bound  to  the  Creditor,  and  when  his  time  is  expired
and  paiment  not  made,  the  creditor  may  take  the  debtor  A  law  fir
and  carrie  him  home  to  his  house,  and  shut  him  up  in  a  BankruPts-
Magasin,  whereby  presently  hee  hath  his  money,  and  not
being  able  to  pay  the  creditor,  he  may  take  the  Wife,
Children,  and  Slaves  of  the  debtor,  and  sell  them,  for  so
is  the  Law  of  that  Kingdome. The  currant  money  that
is  in  this  Citie,  and  throughout  all  this  Kingdome  is  called
Gansa  or  Ganza,  which  is  made  of  Copper  and  Lead  :  It  is
not  the  money  of  the  King,  but  everie  man  may  stampe  it  Every  man
that  will,  because  it  hath  his  just  partition  or  value :  but  may  stamPe
they  make  many  of  them  false,  by  putting  overmuch  lead  ^lee  will^
into  them,  and  those  will  not  passe,  neither  will  any  take
them. With  this  money  Ganza,  you  may  buy  Gold  or
Silver,  Rubies  and  Muske,  and  other  things. For  there
is  no  other  money  currant  amongst  them. And  Gold,
Silver  and  other  Merchandize  are  at  one  time  dearer  then
another,  as  all  other  things  bee.

This  Ganza  goeth  by  weight  of  Byze,  and  this  name  of

Byza  goeth  for  the  account  of  the  weight,  and  commonly

- a  Byza  of  a  Ganza  is  worth  (after  our  account)  halfe  a

131

A.D.

I567.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Hotv  a  man
may  dispose
himself e  for
the  trade  in
Pegu.

Good  instruc-
tions.

albeit  that  Gold  and
yet the Byza never

Ducket,  litle  more  or  lesse : and
Silver is more or lesse in price.

changeth :  everie  Byza  maketh  a  hundreth  Ganza  of
weight,  and  so  the  number  of  the  money  is  Byza.  He
that  goeth  to  Pegu  to  buy  Jewels,  if  hee  will  doe  well,
it  behooveth  him  to  bee  a  whole  yeere  there  to  doe  his
businesse.  For  if  so  be  that  he  would  returne  with  the
Ship  he  came  in,  hee  cannot  doe  any  thing  so  conveniently
for  the  brevitie  of  the  time,  because  that  when  they
custome  their  goods  in  Pegu  that  come  from  Saint  Tome
in  their  ships,  it  is  as  it  were  about  Christmas :  and  when
they  have  customed  their  goods,  then  must  they  sell  them
for  their  credits  sake  for  a  moneth  or  two  :  and  then  at  the
beginning  of  March  the  ships  depart.  The  Merchants
that  come  from  Saint  Tome  take  for  the  paiment  of  their
goods,  Gold  and  Silver,  which  is  never  wanting  there.
And  eight  or  ten  dayes  before  their  departure  they  are  all
satisfied :  also  they  may  have  Rubies  in  paiment,  but  they
make  no  account  of  them  :  and  they  that  will  Winter  there
for  another  yeere,  it  is  needfull  that  they  bee  advertized,
that  in  the  sale  of  their  goods,  they  specifie  in  their
bargaine,  the  terme  of  two  or  three  moneths  paiment,  and
that  their  paiment  shall  be  in  so  many  Ganza,  and  neither
Gold  nor  Silver :  because  that  with  the  Ganza  they  may
buy  and  sell  everie  thing  with  great  advantage.  And  how
needfull  is  it  to  be  advertized,  when  they  will  recover  their
paiments,  in  what  order  they  shall  receive  their  Ganza?
Because  he  that  is  not  experienced  may  doe  himselfe  great
wrong  in  the  weight  of  the  Ganza,  as  also  in  the  falsenesse
of  them :  in  the  weight  hee  may  bee  greatly  deceived,
because  that  from  place  to  place  it  doth  rise  and  fall
greatly :  and  therefore  when  any  will  receive  money  or
make  paiment,  hee  must  take  a  publike  weigher  of  money,
a  day  or  two  before  he  goe  about  his  businesse,  and  give
him  in  paiment  for  his  labour  two  Byzaes  a  moneth,  and
for  this  hee  is  bound  to  make  good  all  your  money,  and
to  maintaine  it  for  good,  for  that  he  receiveth  it  and  seales
the  bags  with  his  seale :  and  when  he  hath  received  any

132

CAESAR FREDERICK  a.d.

1567.
store,  then  he  causeth  it  to  be  brought  into  the  Magason
of  the  Merchant,  that  is  the  owner  of  it.

That  money  is  verie  weightie,  for  fortie  Byza  is  a  strong
Porters  burthen ;  and  also  where  the  Merchant  hath  any
paiment  to  bee  made  for  those  goods  which  hee  buyeth,
the  Common  weigher  of  money  that  receiveth  his  money
must  make  the  paiment  thereof.  So  that  by  this  meanes,
the  Merchant  with  the  charges  of  two  Byzes  a  moneth,
receiveth  and  payeth  out  his  money  without  losse  or
trouble.  The  Mercandizes  that  goe  out  of  Pegu,  are  The  Mar-
Gold,  Silver,  Rubies,  Saphires,  Spinelles,  great  store  of  ^e^utofPeitu
Benjamin,  long  Pepper,  Lead,  Lacca,  Rice,  Wine,  some
Sugar,  yet  there  might  be  great  store  of  Sugar  made  in
the  Countrey,  for  that  they  have  abundance  of  Canes,
but  they  give  them  to  Eliphants  to  eate,  and  the  people
consume  great  store  of  them  for  food,  and  many  more  doe
they  consume  in  vaine  things,  as  these  following.  In  that
Kingdome  they  spend  many  of  these  Sugar-canes  in
making  of  Houses  and  Tents  which  they  call  Varely  for
their  Idols,  which  they  call  Pagodes,  whereof  there  are
great  abundance,  great  and  small,  and  these  houses  are
made  in  forme  of  little  Hils,  like  to  Sugar-loaves  or  to
Bels,  and  some  of  these  houses  are  as  high  as  a  reasonable
Steeple,  at  the  foot  they  are  verie  large,  some  of  them
be  in  circuit  a  quarter  of  a  mile.  The  said  houses  within
are  full  of  earth,  and  walled  round  about  with  Brickes  and
dirt  in  stead  of  lime,  and  without  forme,  from  the  top  to
the  foot  they  make  a  covering  for  them  with  Sugar-canes,
and  plaister  it  with  lime  all  over,  for  otherwise  they  would
bee  spoyled,  by  the  great  abundance  of  Raine  that  falleth
in  those  Countries.  Also  they  consume  about  these  Varely  Idol-houses
or  Idol-houses  great  store  of  leafe-gold,  for  that  they  covered  with
overlay  all  the  tops  of  the  houses  with  Gold,  and  some  of  °  '
them  are  covered  with  gold  from  the  top  to  the  foot :  in
covering  whereof  there  is  great  store  of  Gold  spent,  for
that  every  ten  yeeres  they  new  overlay  them  with  gold,
from  the  top  to  the  foot,  so  that  with  this  vanitie  they
spend  great  abundance  of  Gold. For  every  ten  yeeres  the

133

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1567.

raine  doth  consume  the  gold  from  these  houses. And  by
this  meanes  they  make  gold  dearer  in  Pegu  then  it  would
[II.  x.i  719.]  bee,  if  they  consumed  not  so  much  in  this  vanitie. Also
it  is  a  thing  to  bee  noted  in  the  buying  of  Jewels  in  Pegu,
that  he  that  hath  no  knowledge  shall  have  as  good  Jewels,
and  as  good  cheape,  as  hee  that  hath  beene  practised  there
a  long  time,  which  is  a  good  order,  and  it  is  in  this  wise.
There  are  in  Pegu  foure  men  of  good  reputation,  which
are  called  Tareghe,  or  Brokers  of  Jewels. These  fbure
men  have  all  the  Jewels  or  Rubies  in  their  hands,  and  the
Merchant  that  will  buy  commeth  to  one  of  these  Tareghe
and  telleth  him,  that  hee  hath  so  much  money  to  imploy  in
Rubies. For  through  the  hands  of  these  foure  men  passe
Rubies  exceed-  all  the  Rubies : for  they  have  such  quantitie,  that  they
ing  cheape  in know  not  what  to  doe  with  them,  but  sell  them  at  most
**"  vile  and  base  prices. When  the  Merchant  hath  broken  his

mind  to  one  of  these  Brokers  or  Tareghe,  they  carrie  him
home  to  one  of  their  shops,  although  hee  hath  no  know-
ledge in  Jewels :  and  when  the  Jewellers  perceive  that  hee
will  employ  a  good  round  summe,  they  will  make  a
bargaine,  and  if  not,  they  let  him  alone.  The  use
generally  of  this  Citie  is  this ;  that  when  any  Merchant
hath  bought  any  great  quantitie  of  Rubies,  and  hath
agreed  for  them,  hee  carrieth  them  home  to  his  house,  let
them  bee  of  what  value  they  will,  he  shall  have  space  to
looke  on  them  and  peruse  them  two  or  three  dayes :  and
if  hee  hath  no  knowledge  in  them,  he  shall  alwayes  have1
many  Merchants  in  that  Citie  that  have  very  good  know-
ledge in  Jewels ;  with  whom  hee  may  alwayes  conferre
and  take  counsell,  and  may  shew  them  unto  whom  he!
will ;  and  if  he  finde  that  he  hath  not  employed  his  money
well,  he  may  returne  his  Jewels  backe  to  them  whom  he
had  them  of,  without  any  losse  at  all.  Which  thing  is
such  a  shame  to  the  Tareghe  to  have  his  Jewels  returne,
that  he  had  rather  beare  a  blow  on  the  face  then  that  it
should  bee  thought  that  he  sold  them  so  deare  to  have
them  returned.  For  these  men  have  alwayes  great  care'
that  they  affoord  good  penniworths,  especially  to  those

i34

CAESAR FREDERICK  a.d.

1569.

that  have  no  knowledge. This  they  doe,  because  they

would  not  lose  their  credite :  and  when  those  Merchants

that  have  knowledge  in  Jewels  buy  any,  if  they  buy  them

deare,  it  is  their  owne  faults  and  not  the  Brokers :  yet  it  is

good  to  have  knowledge  in  Jewels,  by  reason  that  it  may

somewhat  ease  the  price. There  is  also  a  very  good  order  An  honest  care

which  they  have  in  buying  of  Jewels,  which  is  this ;  There  °fHeathen

are  many  Merchants  that  stand  by  at  the  making  of  the  *eo*

bargaine,  and  because  they  shall  not  understand  how  the

Jewels  bee  sold,  the  Broker  and  the  Merchants  have  their

hands  under  a  cloth,  and  by  touching  of  fingers  &  nipping  Bargaines

the  joynts  they  know  what  is  done,  what  is  bidden,  and  ^^f/^

what  is  asked. So  that  the  standers  by  know  not  what  fingers  under

is  demanded  for  them,  although  it  be  for  a  thousand  or  ten  a  cloth.

thousand  Duckets. For  every  joynt  and  every  finger  hath

his  signification. For  if  the Merchants that stand by

should understand the bargaine, it would breed great

controversie  amongst  them. And  at  my  being  in  Pegu

in  the  moneth  of  August,  in  Anno  1569.  having  gotten

well  by  my  endevour,  I  was  desirous  to  see  mine  owne

Countrey,  and  I  thought  it  good  to  goe  by  the  way  of

Saint  Tome,  but  then  I  should  tarie  untill  March.

In which journey I was counsailed, yea, and fully

resolved  to  goe  by  the  way  of  Bengala,  with  a  Ship  there

ready  to  depart  for  that  voyage. And  then  wee  departed

from  Pegu  to  Chatigan  a  great  Harbour  or  Port,  from

whence  there  goe  small  ships  to  Cochin,  before  the  Fleet

depart  for  Portugall,  in  which  ships  I  was  fully  determined

to  goe  to  Lisbon,  and  so  to  Venice. When  I  had  thus

resolved  my  selfe,  I  went  a  boord  of  the  ship  of  Bengala,

at  which  time  it  was  the  yeere  of  Touffon : concerning  This  Touffon

which  Touffon  you  are  to  understand,  that  in  the  East  orTuffbysan

Indies oftentimes, there are not stormes as in other  extraor  %*f?
^  .  ,  '  .  storme  at  bea.

Lountnes ; but  every  ten  or  twelve  yeeres  there  are  such

tempests  and  stormes,  that  it  is  a  thing  incredible,  but  to

those  that  have  seene  it,  neither  doe  they  know  certainly

what  yeere  they  will  come.

Unfortunate  are  they  that  are  at  Sea  in  that  yeere  and

A.D.
1569.
The  Touffon
commeth  but
every  10.  or
12.  y  ceres.

A  manifest
token  of  the
Ebbing  and
flow  in  gin  those
Countries.

[II.  x.i  720.]

This  Hand  is

called

Sondiva.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

time  of  the  Touffon,  because  few  there  are  that  escape
that  danger.  In  this  yeere  it  was  our  chance  to  bee  at
Sea  with  the  like  storme,  but  it  happened  well  unto  us,
for  that  our  ship  was  newly  over-plancked,  and  had  not
any  thing  in  her  save  victuall  and  balasts,  Silver  and  Gold,
which  from  Pegu  they  carrie  to  Bengala,  and  no  other  kind
of  Merchandize.  This  Touffon  or  cruel  storme  endured
three  dayes  and  three  nights :  in  which  time  it  carried
away  our  sayles,  yards,  and  rudder;  and  because  the
ship  laboured  in  the  Sea,  wee  cut  our  Mast  over-boord
which  when  we  had  done,  shee  laboured  a  great  deale
more  then  before,  in  such  wise,  that  she  was  almost  full
with  water  that  came  over  the  highest  part  of  her  and  so
went  downe :  and  for  the  space  of  three  dayes  and  three
nights,  sixtie  men  did  nothing  but  hale  water  out  of  her
in  this  wise,  twentie  men  in  one  place,  and  twentie  men  in
another  place,  and  twentie  in  a  third  place :  and  for  all  this
storme,  the  ship  was  so  good,  that  she  tooke  not  one  jot
of  water  below  through  her  sides,  but  all  ranne  downe
through  the  hatches,  so  that  those  sixtie  men  did  nothing
but  cast  the  Sea  into  the  Sea.  And  thus  driving  too  and
fro  as  the  wind  and  Sea  would,  wee  were  in  a  darke  night
about  foure  of  the  clocke  cast  on  a  shold :  yet  when  it  was
day,  we  could  neither  see  Land  on  one  side  nor  other,  and
knew  not  where  we  were.  And  as  it  pleased  the  Divine
power,  there  came  a  great  wave  of  the  Sea,  which  drave
us  beyond  the  shold.  And  when  wee  felt  the  ship  afloat,
we  rose  up  as  men  revived,  because  the  Sea  was  calme  and
smooth  water,  and  then  sounding  we  found  twelve  fathom
water,  and  within  a  while  after  wee  had  but  sixe  fathom,
and  then  presently  wee  came  to  anker  with  a  small  anker
that  was  left  us  at  the  sterne,  for  all  our  other  were  lost
in  the  storme :  and  by  and  by  the  ship  strooke  a  ground,
and  then  wee  did  prop  her  that  shee  should  not  overthrow.
When  it  was  day  the  ship  was  all  drie,  and  wee  found
her  a  good  mile  from  the  Sea  on  drie  land.  This  Touffon
being  ended,  wee  discovered  an  Hand  not  farre  from  us,
and  we  went  from  the  ship  on  the  sands  to  see  what  Hand

136

CAESAR  FREDERICK  a.d.

1569.
it  was :  and  wee  found  it  a  place  inhabited,  and,  to  my
judgement  the  fertilest  Hand  in  all  the  world,  the  which
is  devided  into  two  parts  by  a  channell  which  passeth
betweene  it,  and  with  great  trouble  wee  brought  our  ship
into  the  same  channell,  which  parteth  the  Hand  at  flowing
water,  and  there  we  determined  to  stay  fortie  dayes  to
refresh  us.  And  when  the  people  of  the  Hand  saw  the
ship,  and  that  we  were  comming  a  land :  presently  they
made  a  place  of  Bazar  or  Market,  with  Shops  right  over
against  the  ship  with  all  manner  of  provision  of  victuals
to  eate,  which  they  brought  downe  in  great  abundance,
and  sold  it  so  good  cheape,  that  wee  were  amazed  at  the
cheapnesse  thereof.  I  bought  many  salted  Kine  there,  for
the  provision  of  the  ship,  for  halfe  a  Larine  a  piece,  which
Larine  may  be  twelve  shillings  sixe  pence,  being  very  good
and  fatte ;  and  foure  wilde  Hogges  ready  dressed  for  a
Larine ;  great  fat  Hennes  for  a  Bizze  a  piece,  which  is  at
the  most  a  Penie :  and  the  people  told  us  that  we  were
deceived  the  halfe  of  our  money,  because  we  bought  things
so  deare.  Also  a  sacke  of  fine  Rice  for  a  thing  of  nothing,
and  consequently  all  other  things  for  humaine  sustenance
were  there  in  such  abundance,  that  it  is  a  thing  incredible
but  to  them  that  have  seene  it.  This  Hand  is  called  Son-  Smdiva  is  the
diva  belonging  to  the  Kingdome  of  Bengala,  distant  one  fi^tfuliest%
hundred  and  twentie  miles  from  Chatigan,  to  which  place  J^^w^rld
we  were  bound.  The  people  are  Moores,  and  the  King  a
very  good  man  of  a  Moore  King,  for  if  he  had  bin  a
Tyrant  as  others  bee,  he  might  have  robbed  us  of  all,
because  the  Portugall  Captaine  of  Chatigan  was  in  armes
against  the  Retor  of  that  place,  and  every  day  there  were
some  slaine,  at  which  newes  wee  rested  there  with  no  small
feare,  keeping  good  watch  and  ward  aboord  every  night  as
the  use  is,  but  the  Governour  of  the  Towne  did  comfort  us,
and  bad  us  that  we  should  feare  nothing,  but  that  we
should  repose  our  selves  securely  without  any  danger,
although  the  Portugals  of  Chatigan  had  slaine  the
Governour  of  that  Citie,  and  said  that  we  were  not
culpable  in  that  fact ; and  moreover  he  did  us  every  day

i37

A.D.

I569.

Chatigan  is  a
portinBengala
whither  the
Portugals  goe
with  their
ships.

The  King  of
Rachim  or
Aracam,
neighbour  to
Bengala.

Or,  Aracam.

He  made
another  voyage
to  Pegu  here
omitted.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

what  pleasure  he  could,  which  was  a  thing  contrarie  to  our
expectations  considering  that  they  and  the  people  of
Chatigan  were  both  subjects  to  one  King.

Wee  departed  from  Sondiva,  and  came  to  Chatigan  the
great  Port  of  Bengala,  at  the  same  time  when  the  Portugals
had  made  peace  and  taken  a  truce  with  the  Governours  of
the  Towne,  with  this  condition  that  the  chiefe  Captaine  of
the  Portugals  with  his  ship  should  depart  without  any
lading :  for  there  were  then  at  that  time  eighteen  ships  of
Portugals  great  and  small. This  Captaine  being  a  Gentle-
man and  of  good  courage,  was  notwithstanding  contented
to  depart  to  his  greatest  hinderance,  rather  then  he  would
seeke  to  hinder  so  many  of  his  friends  as  were  there,  as  j
also  because  the  time  of  the  yeere  was  spent  to  goe  to  the
Indies. The  night  before  hee  departed,  every  ship  that
had  any  lading  therein,  put  it  aboord  of  the  Captaine  to  I
helpe  to  ease  his  charge  and  to  recompence  his  courtesies.  |
In  this  time  there  came  a  messenger  from  the  King  of  j
Rachim  to  this  Portugall  Captaine,  who  said  in  the  behalfe  \
of  his  King,  that  hee  had  heard  of  the  courage  and  valour
of  him,  desiring  him  gently  that  hee  would  vouchsafe  to  J
come  with  the  ship  into  his  Port,  and  comming  thither  he
should be very well intreated. This Portugall wenti
thither  and  was  very  well  satisfied  of  this  King.

This  King  of  Rachim  hath  his  seate  in  the  middle  coast  ;j
betweene  Bengala  and  Pegu,  and  the  greatest  enemie  he  j
hath  is  the  King  of  Pegu :  which  King  of  Pegu  deviseth  j
night  and  day  howT  to  make  this  King  of  Rachim  his!
subject,  but  by  no  meanes  hee  is  able  to  doe  it:  because
the  King  of  Pegu  hath  no  power  or  armie  by  Sea. And
this  King  of  *  Rachim  may  arme  two  hundreth  Gallies  or
Fusts  by  Sea,  and  by  land  hee  hath  certaine  Sluces  with
the  which  when  the  King  of  Pegu  pretendeth  any  harme
towards  him,  hee  may  at  his  pleasure  drowne  a  great  part
of  the  Countrey. So  that  by  this  meanes  hee  cutteth  off
the  way  whereby  the  King  of  Pegu  should  come  with  his
power  to  hurt  him.

Now  to  returne  to  my  voyage,  when  I  came  to  Ormus,

138

CAESAR FREDERICK  ad.

l579-

I  found  there  Master  Francis  Berettin  of  Venice,  and  we

fraighted  a  Barke  together  to  goe  for  Basora  for  seventie

Duckets,  and  with  us  there  went  other  Merchants,  which

did  ease  our  fraight  and  very  commodiously  wee  came  to

Basora,  and  there  we  stayed  fortie  daies  for  providing  a

Carovan  of  Barkes  to  goe  to  Babilon,  because  they  use  not

to  goe  two  or  three  Barkes  at  once,  but  five  and  twentie

or  thirtie,  because  in  the  night  they  cannot  goe,  but  must

make  them  fast  to  the  bankes  of  the  River,  and  then  wee

must  make  a  very  good  and  strong  guard,  and  bee  well

provided  of  armour,  for  respect  and  safegard  of  our  goods,

because  the  number  of  Theeves  is  great  that  come  to  spoile

and  rob  the  Merchants.

And  when  we  depart  for  Babilon  wee  goe  a  little  with  An  order  how

our  sayle,  and  the  voyage  is  eight  and  thirtie  or  fortie  dayes  t0  Promde  i0

/» •  •  poe  over  the

long,  but  we  were  fiftie  daies  on  it. When  we  came  to  jyesertfrom

Babilon  we  stayed  there  foure  moneths,  untill  the  Carovan  Babilon  to
was  readie  to  goe  over  the  Wildernesse  or  Desert  for  Alepo.
Alepo ;  in  this  Citie  we  were  sixe  Merchants  that  accom-
panied together,  five  Venetians  and  a  Portugall ;  whose
names  were  as  followeth,  Messer  Florinasa  with  one  of  his
kinsmen,  Messer  Andrea  de  Polo,  the  Portugall,  and
Master  Francis  Berettin  and  I,  and  so  we  furnished  our
selves  with  victuals  and  Beanes  for  our  horses  for  fortie  [II.  x.  1721.]
dayes ;  and  wee  bought  Horses  and  Mules,  for  that  they
be  very  good  cheape  there.  I  my  selfe  bought  a  Horse
there  for  eleven  Akens,  and  sold  him  after  in  Alepo  for
thirtie  Duckets.  Also  we  bought  a  Tent  which  did  us
very  great  pleasure :  we  had  also  amongst  us  two  and
thirtie  Camels  laden  with  Merchandise  :  for  the  which  wee
paid  two  Duckets  for  every  Camels  lading,  and  for  every
ten  Camels  they  made  eleven,  for  so  is  their  use  and
custome.  We  take  also  with  us  three  men  to  serve  us  in
the  voyage,  which  are  used  to  goe  in  those  voyages  for
five  Duckets  a  man,  and  are  bound  to  serve  us  to  Alepo :
so  that  we  passed  very  well  without  any  trouble :  when
the  Camels  cryed  out  to  rest,  our  Pavilion  was  the  first  that
was  erected. The  Carovan  maketh  but  small  journies

139

A.D.

I580.

36.  Dales

journey  over
the  Wilder-
nesse.

An  order  how
to  provide  for
the  going  to
Jerusalem.

PURCHAS HIS PILGR1MES

about  twentie  miles  a  day,  and  they  set  forwards  everie
morning  before  day  two  houres,  and  about  two  in  the
afternoone  they  sit  downe.  We  had  great  good  hap  in  our
voyage,  for  that  it  rained :  for  which  cause  we  never
wanted  water,  but  every  day  found  good  water,  so  that
wee  could  not  take  any  hurt  for  want  of  water.  Yet  we
carried  a  Camell  laden  alwaies  with  water  for  every  good
respect  that  might  chance  in  the  Desert,  so  that
we  had  no  want  neither  of  one  thing  nor  other  that  was  to  :
be  had  in  the  Countrey.  For  we  came  very  well  furnished
of  everie  thing,  and  everie  day  we  eate  fresh  Mutton,
because  there  came  many  Shepheards  with  us  with  their
flocks,  who  kept  those  sheepe  that  wee  bought  in  Babilon,
and  everie  Merchant  marked  his  sheepe  with  his  owne
marke,  and  we  gave  the  shepheards  a  Medin,  which  is  two
pence  of  our  money,  for  the  keeping  and  feeding  our
sheepe  on  the  way,  and  for  killing  of  them.  And  beside  1 ;
the  Medin  they  have  the  Heads,  the  Skinnes,  and  the
intrals  of  everie  sheepe  they  kill.  Wee  sixe  bought
twentie  sheepe,  and  when  we  came  to  Alepo  we  had  seven
alive  of  them.  And  in  the  Carovan  they  use  this  order,
that  the  Merchants  doe  lend  flesh  one  to  another,  because
they  will  not  carrie  raw  flesh  with  them,  but  pleasure  one
another  by  lending  one  one  day,  and  another  another  day.

From  Babilon  to  Alepo  is  fortie  daies  journey,  of  the  j
which  they  make  sixe  and  thirtie  daies  over  the  Wilder-
nesse,  in  which  sixe  and  thirtie  dayes  they  neither  see
House,  Trees  nor  people  that  inhabite  it,  but  onely  a
Plaine,  and  no  signe  of  any  way  in  the  world.  The  Pilots
goe  before,  and  the  Carovan  followeth  after.  And  when
they  sit  downe,  all  the  Carovan  unladeth  and  sitteth  downe,
for  they  know  the  stations  where  the  wells  are.  I  say,  in
sixe  and  thirtie  dayes  we  passe  over  the  Wildernesse.
For  when  we  depart  from  Babilon  two  dayes  wee  passe  by
Villages  inhabited  untill  we  have  passed  the  River
Euphrates.  And  then  within  two  dayes  of  Alepo  wee
have  villages  inhabited.  In  this  Carovan  there  goeth
alway  a  Captaine  that  doth  Justice  unto  all  men : and

140

CAESAR FREDERICK  a.d.

1581.

every  night  they  keepe  watch  about  the  Carovan,  and

comming  to  Alepo  we  went  to  Tripoli,  whereas  Master

Florin,  and  Master  Andrea  Polo,  and  I,  with  a  Frier,  went

and  hired  a  Barke  to  goe  with  us  to  Jerusalem. Departing

from  Tripolie,  wee  arrived  at  Jaffa :  from  which  place  in  a

day  and  a  halfe  we  went  to  Jerusalem,  and  wee  gave  order

to  our  Barke  to  tarie  for  us  untill  our  returne. Wee

stayed  in  Jerusalem  fourteene  dayes,  to  visit  those  holy

places :  from  whence  we  returned  to  Jaffa,  and  from  Jaffa

to  Tripolie,  and  there  we  shipped  our  selves  in  a  ship  of

Venice  called  the  Bagazzana : And  by  the  helpe  of  the  The  Aut^or

Divine  power,  we  arrived  safely  in  Venice  the  fifth  of  rj?u™et  *°Q-.

November  1581. I  will  not  bee  unmindrull  to  put  them

in  remembrance,  that  have  a  desire  to  goe  into  those  parts,

how  they  shall  keepe  their  goods,  and  give  them  to  their

heires  at  the  time  of  their  death,  and  how  this  may  be  done

very  securely. In  all  the  Cities  that  the  Portugals  have  A Jer\g0°i

in  the  Indies,  there  is  a  House  called  the  schoole  of  Sancta  °LZ if*i.«??
>  .  r  nave  in  those

misencordia  comissana :  the  Governours  whereof,  it  you  Countries  for
give  them  for  their  paines,  will  take  a  copie  of  your  Will  the  recovering
and  Testament,  which  you  must  alwayes  carrie  about  you  ;  °f the  £°°ds  °f
and  chieflie  when  you  goe  into  the  Indies.  In  the
Countrey  of  the  Moores  and  Gentiles,  in  those  voyages
alwaies  there  goeth  a  Captaine  to  administer  Justice  to  all
Christians  of  the  Portugals.  Also  this  Captaine  hath
authoritie  to  recover  the  goods  of  those  Merchants  that  by
chance  die  in  those  voyages,  and  they  that  have  not  made
their  Wills  and  registred  them  in  the  aforesaid  Schooles,
the  Captaines  will  consume  their  goods  in  such  wise,  that
little  or  nothing  will  be  left  for  their  heires  and  friends.
Also  there  goeth  in  these  same  voyages  some  Merchants
that  are  Commissaries  of  the  Schoole  of  Sancta  miseri-
cordia,  that  if  any  Merchant  die  and  have  his  Will  made,
and  hath  given  order  that  the  Schoole  of  Misericordia
shall  have  his  goods  and  sell  them,  then  they  send  the
money  by  exchange  to  the  Schoole  of  Misericordia  in
Lisbon,  with  that  copie  of  his  Testament,  then  from
Lisbon  they  give  intelligence  thereof,  into  what  part  of

141

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1581.

Christendome  so  ever  it  be,  and  the  heires  of  such  a  one
comming  thither,  with  testimoniall  that  they  bee  heires,
they  shall  receive  there  the  value  of  his  goods :  in  such
wise  that  they  shall  not  lose  any  thing.  But  they  that  die
in  the  Kingdome  of  Pegu  lose  the  third  part  of  their  goods
by  ancient  custome  of  the  Countrey,  that  if  any  Christian
dieth  in  the  Kingdome  of  Pegu,  the  King  and  his  Officers
rest  heires  of  a  third  of  his  goods,  and  there  hath  never
beene  any  deceit  or  fraud  used  in  this  matter.  I  have
knowne  many  rich  men  that  have  dwelled  in  Pegu,  and
in  their  age  they  have  desired  to  goe  into  their  owne
Countrey  to  die  there,  and  have  departed  with  all  their
goods  and  substance  without  let  or  trouble.
Order  of  jn  pegU  the  fashion  of  their  apparell  is  all  one,  as  well

Pern  ^ ln tne  Nobleman,  as  the  simple : the  onely  difference  is  in
the  finenesse  of  the  Cloth,  which  is  cloth  of  Bombast  one
[II.  x.  1722.]  finer  then  another,  and  they  weare  their  apparell  in  this
wise : First,  a  white  Bombast  cloth  which  serveth  for  a  I
shirt,  then  they  gird  another  painted  Bombast  cloth, of
fourteene  braces,  which  they  bind  up  betwixt  their  legs,
and  on  their  heads  they  weare  a  small  Tocke  of  three
braces,  made  in  guise  of  a  Myter,  and  some  goe  without
TockeSj  and  carrie  (as  it  were)  a  Hive  on  the  heads,  which
doeth  not  passe  the  lower  part  of  his  eare,  when  it  is  lifted
up  :  they  goe  all  bare-footed,  but  the  Noblemen  never  goe
on  foot,  but  are  carried  by  men  in  a  seate  with  great
reputation,  with  a  Hat  made  of  the  leaves  of  a  tree  toji
keepe  him  from  the  Raine  and  Sunne,  or  otherwise  they
ride  on  horsebacke  with  their  feet  bare  in  the  stirrops.
The  order  of All  sorts  of  women  whatsoever  they  be,  weare  a  smocke
the  women J0wne  to  the  girdle,  and  from  the  girdle  downewards  to
p*gjt in the  foot  they  weare  a  cloth  of  three  braces,  open  before,
so  straight  that  they  cannot  goe,  but  they  must  shew  their
secret  as  it  were  aloft,  and  in  their  going  they  faigne  to
hide  it  with  their  hand,  but  they  cannot  by  reason  of  the
straightnesse  of  their  cloth. They  say  that  this  use  was
invented  by  a  Queene  to  be  an  occasion  that  the  sight
thereof  might  remove  from  men  the  vices  against  nature,

142

CAESAR FREDERICK  a.d.

1579-

which  they  are  greatly  given  unto :  which  sight  should
cause  them  to  regard  women  the  more.  Also  the  women
goe  bare-footed,  their  armes  laden  with  hoopes  of  Gold
and  Jewels :  And  their  fingers  full  of  precious  Rings,  with
their  haire  rolled  up  about  their  heads.  Many  of  them
weare  a  cloth  about  their  shoulders  in  stead  of  a  Cloake.

Chap. V.

Gasparo  Balbi  his  Voyage  to  Pegu,  and  observa-
tions there,  gathered  out  of  his  owne  Italian
Relation.

Nno  1579.  on  the  thirteenth  of  December
Gasparo  Balbi  a  Jeweller  of  Venice
travelled  with  the  Caravan  from  Aleppo
towards  Bagdet  and  the  East  Indies :  the
first  day  came  to  Bebbe,  the  second  to  Townes  on  the
Saguir,  the  third  to  Bir,  or  Albir  on  the  hanhsofFrat.
banke  of  Euphrates  on  the  left  hand,  and
there  embarked  their  goods  for  Felugia.  They  stayed  till
the  eleventh  of  Januarie  in  cold  and  snowe  to  expect  five
other  Barkes.  These  Barkes  of  Albir  are  double  keeled
or  botomed  to  prevent  harmes.  On  the  twelfth  they  came
to  Tellevivi  much  afflicted  with  winde,  snowe  and  cold.
Thence  to  Matao  Lantache  on  the  right  hand :  and  so  on
to  Calatelnegiur  a  dishabited  Castle,  to  Zoxeniasir,  to
Miserafi,  to  Blis  (many  dangerous  shelves  and  trunkes  of
trees  are  in  that  dayes  way)  to  Meliolzura,  to  Chalagiabar,
to  Elaman,  to  Suriech,  to  Raccha,  to  Elamora,  to  Aman,
to  Avagia  Abulena,  to  Casabi,  to  Celibi,  the  ruinous  Castle
Zelebe,  and  the  same  day  halfe  an  houre  together  under
mountainous  beetlebrowed  overlookers  threatning  to  fall  Overhanging
on  them,  many  stones  whereof  lying  falne  in  the  water  Htlls-
made  it  more  dreadfull  (the  Mountaine  is  called  Eltoref-
trovil)  and  the  next  day  came  to  two  Falls  or  Precipices  Falls.
caused  by  the  stones  carried  thither  from  that  overhanging
Hills  ruines,  so  heightning  the  water,  that  the  Fall  was
ten  cubits,  every  one  there  making  his  prayer  for  a  good

143

A.D.
1579-

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Elersi  perhaps
Edessa.

DenuorElder  Voyage. At  night  they  came  to  Elder  on  the  right  hand
ajaire ttte. Qf  ^  River,  anciently  called  Port  of  the  Chaine,  in  which
was  a  Turkish  Saniak  and  Cadi,  goodly  men  and  fairer
women then in the rest of those parts. Thence to
CabraRwer  Muachesir, to Elpisara, the River Cabur falling into
oj e wa  er.  £Up}irat:es  (comming  from  Merdin)  of  reddish  colour,  to
Rahabi,  to  Zoxosuldan,  to  Siara,  to  Gorur,  and  then  under
a  Mountaine  hollowed  by  the  course  of  the  water,  called
Carteron,  minacing  a  downfall  upon  us,  made  the  more
fearefull  by  a  threefold  fissure  and manifold  ruines  of
stones ; which  passed  in  a  quarter  of  an  houre,  they  came
to  Sora  a  Castle  neere  to  a  great  ruined  Citie  dishabited  on
the  left  hand  seeming  to  them  greater  then  Cairo ; the
Mariners  affirmed  that  they  had  heard  their  Progenitors
tell,  that  there  had  beene  in  it  three  hundred  sixty  and
sixe  Gates ; it  is  called  Elersi,  and  rowing  downe  the
streame  with  foure  Oares  from  morning  to  noone,  we
hardly  passed  beyond  one  side  thereof. Thence  to  Anga
another ruined Citie, with many Mills, whereby it
appeareth  that  Euphrates  hath  now  a  larger  chanell  then  in  i
those  times. Next  was  Chaime,  and  neere  it  an  Engine
to  throwe  water  into  a  chanell  to  water  the  fields ; to
Sema, to Carpilchelbi, to Fochelcurmi, to Edir, to
Rechtalmel,  to  Zafara,  beyond  which  are  straight  passages,  1
and  a  Sepulchre  which  they  held  in  veneration,  and  each  i
Mariner  threw  in  a  Bisket  superstitiously  to  prevent  Ship-
wracke :  to  Elcuxi,  to  Elmesetana,  to  Castle  Anna,  neere
to  which  in  Diana,  Aborise  an  Arabian  Lord  Hveth ; to
the  lie  Anatelbes ; after  dangerous  passages  to  Beggian
another  He  full  of  Date  trees,  to  Cabin,  to  Sberie, to
Zovia,  to  Giera,  Germa,  Benexi,  Duletgidit,  then  to  two
Hands namelesse being newly made by the River, to
Zibida,  Urasa,  Fuochelbera,  Abusabur,  Aditi  (in  which
an Arabike Saniak keepeth) to Zezirnalus, to Giuba,
(residence  of  a  Saniak)  to  Nausa,  to  Eit,  neere  to  which  is
a  boiling  Fountaine  of  Pitch,  wherewith  the  Inhabitants
build  their  houses,  daubing  it  on  boughes  cut  from  trees,
so  that  they  may  seeme  rather  of  Pitch  then  Wood,  every

144

Fountaine  of
Pitch.

GASPARO BALBI  ad.

1580.

one  taking  what  him  pleaseth  freely ;  and  if  the  over-
flowing Euphrates  should  not  carrie  away  the  Pitch
throwne  into  the  field  where  it  ariseth,  they  say  there
would  be  hills  raised  by  it.  Against  the  forcible  streame
of  the  River  is  no  rowing,  or  so  difficult  that  a  Boat  in  Bir  [II»x.  1723.]
costing  five  and  twenty  Duckets  in  Eit  or  Felugia  is  not  ^a/V^F
worth  above  five.  Following  their  Voyage  they  came  to
Caraguol,  the  Inhabitants  whereof  speake  Arabike,
Turkish  and  Persian.  To  water  their  fields  they  use
abundance  of  skin-bottles  (fastned  to  a  chaine  with  cords)
drawne  up  by  Oxen  in  a  Mill  (as  in  the  Water-house  at
London)  which  empty  themselves  into  water-passages.
These  mens  Religion  is  reputed  a  Gallimaufrey  or  Heresie.
On  the  one  and  twentieth  of  Februarie  they  arrived  at
Felugia.  On  the  foure  and  twentieth  at  Sunne-rising  they
passed  a  Bridge  over  a  Streame  which  runneth  when  the
water  is  high  from  Euphrates  to  Tigris,  and  came  at  noone
to  the  ruines  of  a  Citie  called  Sendia,  and  then  halfe  an
houre  after  to  the  beginnings  of  old  Babylon,  and  going  Old  Babylon.
along  by  the  same,  at  night  came  to  Nareisa,  midway  from
Felugia  to  Bagdet,  a  place  perilous  for  Robbers  and  Lions.
Before  Sun-rising  next  day  we  travelled  againe  alongst
those  ruines  leaving  them  on  the  left  hand,  seeing  pieces  of
great  walls  ruined,  and  one  piece  of  the  great  Tower  of
Babylon,  till  comming  to  Mascadon  they  saw  the  Towers
of  Bagdet  or  new  Babylon.  From  Felugia  thither  the
soyle  seemes  good,  yet  neither  is  there  Tree  or  greene
Grasse,  House  or  Castle :  but  Mushromes  so  good  that
the  Moores  eate  them  raw.  They  were  nine  and  forty
dayes  from  Bir  to  Bagdet  by  reason  of  the  Winter.

The  thirteenth  of  March,  1580.  they  departed  from
Bagdet  towards  Balsara,  embarked  in  the  Tigris,  a  River  Tigris.
seeming  like  Nilus,  not  so  endangered  with  shelves  and
bodies  of  trees  as  Euphrates.  At  Elmaca  the  River  is
divided  into  two,  one  running  after  into  Euphrates,  the
other  to  Balsara.  The  Inhabitants  on  the  right  hand  are
Arabs,  on  the  left  Gurgi.  On  the  eighteenth  they  came
co  Cher.  There  are  many  Lions,  and  Arab  Theeves.
x  145  k

A°-  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1580.

There  are  alsv.  many  keepers  of  Oxen,  Sheepe  and  Goats.
Thence  to  Encaserami,  where  each  Mariner  cast  in  a
Bisket  for  devotion  to  a  holy  man  there  buried.  Hitherto
both  in  Euphrates  and  Tigris  they  had  good  aire ; but

III  sent.  there  they  began  to  have  an  ill  sent  of  the  River,  very

noisome,  and  they  were  in  the  night  endangered  with  a

Whirlepook.  kinde  of  whirlepoole,  and  were  faine  to  call  to  their
consorts  which  towed  them  out.  The  next  day  they  came
to  Casale,  a  Saniaks  residence,  where  the  Persian  River
Maroan  disembogueth.  Heere  the  Tide  was  first  encoun-
tred  out  of  the  Persian  Gulfe.  A  little  beyond  at  Calaetel
they  fasten  their  Barkes  when  the  Tide  ariseth,  which
otherwise  could  force  them  backe.  The  Champaines  are
well  inhabited.  They  entred  Corno,  and  a  little  beyond
encountred  a  piece  of  Euphrates  joyning  with  Tigris,
where  abide  many  Souldiers  with  a  Saniak  to  prevent
theeves,  which  by  hundreds  in  a  companie  use  to  robbe.
Here  the  River  (which  in  some  places  had  beene  like
Brent) was  as  large  as  Nilus, and  well  inhabited. At

j^Jk?**  •  j  certaine  times  it  is  here  so  hote  that  many  die  thereof :
and  in  this  Voyage  foure  persons  wearied  with  heate  and
travell  sate  downe  to  refresh  themselves  a  while,  and  were
overcome  by  a  hote  winde  which  strangled  them  all  foure.
The  one  and  twentieth  they  arrived  at  Balsara.

The  Authors  Voyage  from  Balsara  to  Ormus,  Diu,  Goa,
Cochin,  Cananor,  Seilan,  Negapatan,  I  omit,  and  will  first
welcome  him  to  Saint  Thome.

On  the  nine  and  twentieth  of  May,  1582.  in  the  name
of  Christ  wee  set  sayle,  directing  our  Prow  towards  the
North  to  avoide  certaine  shelves  which  are  very  perilous ;
we  saw  many  Fishers,  which  tooke  great  store  of  fish,
which  they  eate  with  Rice.  All  that  night  we  sayled  with  I
a  South  winde  Northerly. About  three  of  the  clocke  the

Seven  Pagods.  next  morning  we  came  to  a  place  which  is  called  the  Seven
Pagods,  upon  which  are  eight  pleasant  hillockes  not  very  j
high,  which  are  seven  leagues  from  Saint  Thomas,  right  i
over  against  it,  where  wee  arrived  about  noone  the  thirtieth
pf  May,  saluting  it  with  three  Peeces  of  Ordnance. The

146

GASPARO BALBI  a.d.

1582.

Citie  of  Saint  Thomas  is  so  called  of  the  Reliques  of  that  Saint  Thomas.
Saint,  which  are  kept  here  with  great  veneration ;  it  is
scituated  in  13.  degrees  and  a  third  part.  The  Front  is
towards  the  West,  very  strong  by  reason  of  the  Blocke-
houses,  which  are  upon  the  Port,  along  towards  the  Sea,
this  Port  is  so  low  that  Elephants  cannot  enter  in  at  it,  for
the  Horses  enter  with  not  a  little  trouble.  There  are
three  Churches :  one  very  faire,  of  Saint  Thomas,  which  is
well  served  with  Priests,  the  chiefe  of  them  is  a  Vicar
(for  so  they  call  him)  who  was  sent  thither  by  the  Arch-  Jesuits  miracle
.  bishop  of  Goa. There  is  another  of  Saint  Francis,  very  ^ttlTre^L

wel  served  with  Capuchins : and  another  of  Saint  John  in  a  casua//
■■ the Baptist, where the Fathers of Saint Paul of the  accident.
:  Companie  of  Jesus,  are  in  continuall  prayer ; to  build  this
i,  they  had  not  so  many  transomes  as  were  sufficient,  when
I  miraculously  a  great  piece  of  timber  was  cast  up  by  the
: Sea,  which  seemed  to  be  made  by  the  line  and  measure  of
:t  that  Church. I  was  here  when  this  piece  of  timber  was
1!  cast  up  ; for  one  day  going  to  Masse  to  the  Church  of  our
:  Lady,  I  saw  great  concourse  of  people  running  to  the
i  Sea-side,  and  I  went  also  to  see  what  was  the  matter,  and
rt  saw  this  piece  of  timber  cast  upon  the  shoare. Then  the
t  Church  of  Saint  John  Baptist  was  finished,  but  because
they  wanted  transomes  to  make  the  roofe  they  covered  it
ii  with  straw. This  was  held  for  a  great  miracle,  that  so
•s!  great  a  piece  of  timber  should  bee  cast  up  by  the  Sea,
the  point  lay  towards  the  Quire  of  the  Church. Moreover,
I  when  they  sawed  this  piece  of  wood,  they  perceived  in
\t  the  outside  of  it,  as  also  within  it  a  stinke  of  *  Oase,  so  *Marinaccio.
is;  that  they  could  not  come neere  * it : whereupon they  *Dan.  3.  The
i  judged,  that  it  was  caused  by  the  abundance  of  water,  smelloffire
it;  wherewith  it  was  involved  in  the  Sea,  and  that  it  came  persons
tli!  from  some  farre  Countrie. But  after  a  while  they  set  it  miraculously
t  3n  end ; and  now  it  is  so  hard,  that  the  Portugals  may  delivered:  but
er,  make  use  of  it. The  foresaid  Fathers  of  Saint  Paul  have  puking  stuffe
,\\  mother  Church  in  the  Citie,  dedicated  to  Our  Lady,  where  ^If^lcle-
\i  :hey  baptise  the  Gentiles,  and  exhort  and  instruct  them  monger.
p n  matters  of  Faith. There  is  another  Church  called  Our  [II.  x.  1724.]

i47

A.D.
1582.

Burning  the
dead.

Wife  buried
alive.

Brutish
deities.

Devotions
stinking.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Lady  of  Light,  which  is  served  by  Saint  Thomas  his
Priests ;  but  it  is  three  miles  out  of  the  Towne.  There
is  also  another  called  Our  Lady  of  the  Mount,  and
another  of  the  Crosse,  here  is  also  the  Church  of  Mercy ;
out  of  the  Towne  there  is  one  of  Saint  Lazarus,  and  many
others  well  served.  Saint  Thomas  is  as  faire  a  Citie  as  I
saw  any  in  that  Countrie,  and  the  houses  joyne  one  to  the
other,  so  to  be  able  to  succour  one  another.  Without
the  Citie  of  Saint  Thomas  is  another  Citie  environed  with
walls,  made  of  earth,  and  inhabited  with  Gentiles  Souldiers,
whose  Chieftaine  is  called  Adicario,  who  hath  power  to
execute  justice.  They  observe  the  custome  to  burne  their
Dead  in  this  Citie,  as  at  Negapaton ;  but  neere  to  this  is
a  Citie  called  La  Casta  de  gli  Orefici,  Goldsmiths  rowe;
they  have  a  custome  when  the  Husband  is  dead,  to  make
a  pit  in  the  earth,  and  there  to  place  the  dead  corps  crosse-
legged ;  and  on  the  other  side  set  his  living  Wife  in  the
same  manner,  and  their  kindred  cast  earth  upon  her,
pressing  her  downe,  that  shee  may  die  also ;  and  when
they  wive,  they  marrie  with  their  Comperes,  as  a  Carpenter
takes  the  daughter  of  a  Carpenter,  and  so  of  others.  The
foresaid  Inhabitants  worship  sometimes  the  figure  of  a
Kow,  and  otherwhiles  of  a  Serpent  called  Bittia  di  Cappella,
whose  biting  is  deadly,  and  it  hath  one  part  of  the  flesh
from  the  middle  inverted  towards  the  head.

The  Bramins  are  wont  to  burne  Kowes  excrements,
and  with  the  ashes  for  devotion  meeting  with  the  Gentiles
to  dawbe  their  forehead  and  nose ;  who  so  painted  wash
not  that  day  for  devotion  of  the  Kow.  The  men  which
are  devoted  to  the  Pagod  or  Statue,  after  they  have  lived
a  whole  yeere  after  their  will  in  carnall  pleasures,  are  wont
to  take  a  Bowe  and  an  Arrowe,  and  shoot  their  owne  flesh
aloft  in  the  aire,  which  they  slash  off  in  morsels,  and  when
they  can  continue  no  longer  in  this  manner,  they  cut  their
owne  throat,  thus  sacrificing  their  body  to  the  Pagod.
There  are  some  also  which  are  called  Amocchi,  who  are  a
kinde  of  people  called  Chiavi,  and  are  not  of  those  Gentiles
of  Saint  Thomas,  but  of  the  Coast  of  Chiava,  who  being

148

GASPARO BALB1  a.d.

1582.

weary  of  living,  set  themselves  in  the  way  with  a  weapon
in  their  hands,  which  they  call  a  Crise,  and  kill  as  many  Desperate.
as  they  meete  with,  till  some  body  killeth  them ;  and  this
they  doe  for  the  least  anger  they  conceive,  as  desperate
men.  These  Gentiles  are  very  different  in  their  adoration,  Diversified.
for  some  worship  the  image  of  a  Man,  some  of  a  Kow,
others  of  Serpents ;  others  the  Sunne,  or  the  Moone,
some  a  Tree  or  the  Water,  and  other  things.  They  are
accustomed  to  celebrate  many  Feasts ;  but  in  the  moneth
of  Septemb.  I  saw  one :  the  people  planted  a  tree  in  the  All  devillish.
ground  like  the  Mast  of  a  ship,  with  the  Main-yard  acrosse,
upon  which  Main-yard  were  two  hooks  fastned  :  and  there
are  many  which  desire  to  free  themselves  from  some
trouble  or  misery,  who  make  a  vow  to  the  Pagod,  to
hooke  or  ganch  themselves ;  and  for  this  there  are  some
deputed  that  stand  there,  who  seeing  any  that  will  ganch
themselves  for  devotion,  they  first  make  an  offering,  and
then  they  loosen  a  cord  and  let  downe  the  hookes,  and
with  them  they  fasten  the  shoulders  of  him  that  will  hooke
himselfe,  and  then  they  hoise  him  up  aloft,  making  him
turne  his  face  to  the  Pagod,  and  salute  it  three  times  with
his  hands  in  suppliant  wise  before  his  breast,  and  make
him  play  with  a  weapon,  which  hee  carrieth  in  his
hands  while  he  is  in  drawing  up :  and  after  a  while
they  let  him  downe,  and  colour  the  tree  with  his  bloud,
saying  they  doe  it  in  reverence  to  the  Pagod ;  and  then
they  let  him  downe,  and  put  a  rope  thorow  the  holes
which  the  hookes  made,  and  fastning  that  cord  to  the
Pagod,  they  draw  him  by  little  and  little  to  the
Statue  by  that  cord  ;  then  the  women  of  the  Pagod  conduct
him  to  the  Statue  to  reverence  it,  and  after  this  they  take
i  care  to  heale  him  if  they  can.  And  this  they  doe  by  a
vow  or  promise  to  the  Pagod  to  obtaine  any  thing,  or
in  sicknesse  to  recover  health.  They  have  another  Feast
by  night  which  dureth  eight  nights  in  a  long  street  of  the
Citie  full  of  lights  on  both  sides,  and  three  or  foure  persons
take  one  another  by  the  hands,  who  have  on  their  armes
certaine  baskets  full  of  viands  made  of  Rice  and  Milke,

149

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1582.

and  then  they  runne  and  cast  that  meate  behind  them,

which  they  say  the  Devill  eats  who  runnes  behind  them,

and  while  they  are  in  this  motion  they  never  looke  behind

them ; for  they  say,  if  they  doe,  they  shall  suddenly  die :

and  this  is  sufficient  for  the  mad  customes  of  this  Countrie.

On  the  thirteenth  of  September,  1583.  in  the  name  of

Jesus  Christ,  after  wee  had  laded  our  merchandise,  and

payd  our  Customes,  we  went  a  shipboord ;  And  having

sailed  untill  the  three  and  twentieth  of  this  moneth,  we

Macareo  is  a found  our  selves  neere  to  Maccareo,  it  is  very  strange

strong  race  of  wnicn  is  reported  of  the  ebbings  and  flowings  of  the  water,

larls^Seesufir anc^  certamly  ne  which  hath  not  seene  them  will  scarcely

in  Fred.  beleeve  them ; Certaine  Pilots  goe  from Martovan,  as

swift  as  an  Arrow  in  the  encreasing  of  the  water,  as  long

Huge  Tides, as  the  Floud  lasteth,  and  the  Tide  being  at  the  height,  they

turne  out  of  the  chanell,  and  there  ride ; when  the  water

is  fallen  on  drie  land ; and  the  bore  or  tide  comes  as  some

great  tree : and  in  such  a  time  they  oppose  the  Prow

against  it,  and  so  expect  the  furie  of  the  water,  which

resembleth the noise  of  a  great  Earthquake : so that

maugre  their  strength  and  skill  the  Barke  is  washed  from

head  to  stearne,  and  with  that  violence  is  carried  swiftly

into  the  chanell. After  that,  the  winde  blew  from  the  I

South-west, and  wee  sailed  to  the  North-west, till  the

morning,  when  we  found  our  selves  at  Bara,  right  over

Negrais.  Negrais  (they  call  so  in  their  language  the  Haven  which

goeth  into  Pegu)  where  wee  discovered  on  the  left  side  of

the  River  a  Pagod  or  Varella  all  gilded  over,  which  is  seene

afarre  off  by  the  vessels  that  come  from  the  Maine,  and

especially  when  the  Sunne  shines,  which  makes  it  glister

[II.  x.  1725.]  round  about  as  farre  as  it  is  seene. And  because  the  raine

washeth  it  often  and  consumeth  the  gold,  the  men  of  that

place  often  regild  it,  that  the  ships  by  the  splendor  thereof

may  have  this  benefit,  to  know  the  Haven :  and  they  doe

it  for  devotion  and  reverence  to  the  place. Wee  then  all

rejoyced at that time, and made merrie ; because we

considered  that  if  we  had  arrived  there  foure  or  five  dayes

later  we  could  not  have  entred  the  Haven  by  reason  of  the

150

GASPARO BALBI  ad.

1583.
continual  winds  which  blowe  there  with  great  furie.  Then
casting  anchor,  to  expect  the  floud,  so  to  shunne  some
Rockes  which  are  under  the  water :  we  saw  a  place  very
curiously  adorned  with  Bowers  and  a  Church  (where  the
Talipois  reside,  which  are  there  as  the  Friers  with  us)  Talipots.
where  the  people  of  this  Countrie  assemble  to  pray.  It  is
reported  that  in  this  place  there  are  abundance  of  Tigres  Tigres.
which  devoure  the  men  and  beasts  of  the  Countrie.  On
the  foure  and  twentieth  of  September,  there  came  a  little
Barke  neere  us  called  a  Salangara,  whereby  the  Captaine
of  our  ship  sent  a  Portugall  with  a  present  to  the  King,
to  give  him  notice  of  our  arrivall,  and  the  evening  follow-
ing wee  drew  neere  to  the  Hand  of  Flies,  so  called  of  the  Hand  of  Flies.
multitudes  of  them  there  caused  from  the  abundance  of
fish  there  salted,  wherewith  also  we  furnished  our  ship.
In  the  meane  time  the  ship  went  to  Cosmi,  to  the  Lord  Cosmi.
of  the  Countrie,  who  sent  twenty  Boats  with  eight  Oares
a  piece,  and  a  royall  Almadie,  which  is  a  certaine  long
Barke,  rowed  with  many  Oares,  and  it  beganne  to  put
forth,  and  two  dayes  after  the  Lord  of  Cosmi  came
together  with  the  ship,  who  presented  our  Moorish
Captaine  with  great  faire  Hennes,  of  a  very  good  taste,
and  many  Oranges,  which  growe  in  great  quantitie  in  the
Countrie.  The  said  Lord  was  rowed  in  a  Barke  made
very  fantastically,  it  was  of  the  length  of  a  Foist ;  but  so
narrow  that  in  the  middle  it  seemed  not  to  be  above  one
pace  over,  at  the  head  and  stearne  it  was  as  narrow  as
our  Gondolos ;  but  it  was  very  high,  and  there  were  more
then  an  hundred  Rowers,  which  rowe  at  the  side  with  an
hundred  Oares  like  stickes,  and  they  did  observe  in  their
rowing  to  draw  the  water  towards  them  all  together  by
reason  of  foure  Trumpeters,  which  sound  when  they
should  rowe,  and  sit  in  the  middle  of  the  Barke ;  the
Signior  was  in  a  high  Cabbin  made  in  the  middle  of  the
Boat  covered  after  the  manner  of  the  middle  part  of  a
Gondolo,  but  greater,  with  a  Port  before  to  shut,  and  open
as  he  pleaseth.

Now  the  fift  of  October  we  came  to  Cosmi,  whose

151

A.D.

I583-

Dangerous
Tigres.

Pain  Per  Ion.
MarmaMala.

Jaccubel.

Dian.

Gungiebui.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Territories  on  both  sides  are  woody,  and  frequented  with
Parrots,  Tigres,  wilde  Boares,  Apes,  and  such  like
creatures.  Cosmi  is  seated  in  16.  degrees  and  a  third
part,  and  hath  the  houses  made  of  great  Indian  canes,
and  covered  with  straw,  fronted  towards  the  North-east,
scituate  in  a  very  fine  place,  but  subject  to  the  ravening
of  Tigres,  which  often  enter  into  the  Towne,  and  catch
men  and  beasts,  and  devoure  them ;  but  this  they  doe  in
the  night,  for  they  abide  in  the  Woods  all  day.

Wee  departed  from  Cosmi  the  sixe  and  twentieth  of
October,  with  a  little  Paro,  which  is  to  say,  a  voyage
Barke,  having  committed  our  merchandise  to  the  Guardian
of  the  great  Paro,  and  sayling  down  the  River,  at  even  we
arrived  at  a  Village  on  the  left  hand  of  the  River  called
Pain  Perlon ;  and  about  three  of  the  clocke  the  next
morning  at  Marma  Mala,  and  about  the  evening  before
a  great  Citie  on  the  left  hand  of  the  River  called
Jaccubel ;  and  an  houre  after  at  another  on  the  right  side
called  Tegiatden.  The  morning  following  we  came  to  a
place  called  Balatin,  where  they  make  Pots  and  Jarres  of  I
excellent  fine  earth,  and  a  little  after  we  saw  Dian  ai
fertile  Countrie,  plentifull  in  timber  both  for  Houses,  Ships,  j
and  Barkes,  where  they  have  certaine  vessels  like  Galeasses,  1
which  have  on  both  sides  from  head  to  sterne  Cabbins  with  \
divers  merchandises,  and  in  the  middle  in  stead  of  the:
Mast  there  is  a  house  like  ours,  so  that  within  them  theyi
trainque  for  store  of  Muske,  Benjamin,  and  divers  Jewels.  '.
On  the  nine  and  twentieth  day  we  saw  the  Land  of:
Bedogiamana,  Lagapala,  and  Purdabui,  and  the  evening
wee  came  to  a  great  Countrie  called  Gungiebui,  where  wee
tarried  with  great  feare  of  being  assaulted  by  theeves,
who  under  the  shew  of  friendship  betray  dispersed
passingers ;  and  in  like  manner  we  avoyded  the  danger1
of  the  multitude  of  Tigres,  which  in  these  parts  assaile1
men,  and  destroy  as  many  as  they  can  get.  For  this  cause
we  strengthned  our  selves  in  the  middle  of  the  River  ;i
yet  they  report,  that  the  fiercenesse  of  this  creature  is  such
that  he  will  prey  in  the  water. The  day  following  wee

152

A.D.

I583-

Brent  the
River  which
goethjrom
Padua  towards
Venice.
Coilan.

Tuvaguedan.
Leungon.

Silvansedi.
Moggio.

GASPARO BALBI

went  in  a  narrow  River  like  our  Brent  by  Padua,  which  is

shadowed  with  Palme  trees  that  growe  in  great  abundance

in  both  sides  of  the  River ; there  is  the  great  Citie  of

Coilan,  which  is  a  league  long  on  each  side,  which  being

a  perfect  square  make  twelve  of  our  miles. After  that,

we  came  by  another  Citie  called  Tuvaguedan,  where  are

1  many  Pagods  and  Statues ; and  at  evening  we  arrived  at

Leungon  a  very  faire  Citie,  seated  in  a  pleasant  Territorie,

replenished  with  Palme  trees : parting  from  thence  after

(  wee  had  seene  many  buildings  on  both  sides  of  the  River,

1  about  morning  we  came  to  a  great  populous  Citie  called

d  Silvansedi,  and  at  evening  before  another  called  Moggio,

x  where  were  infinite  store  of  great  and  small  vessels,  all

{  covered  from  head  to  sterne  with  straw,  within  which  are

i\  the  families  of  one  house,  so  that  they  serve  for  convenient

it  habitations,  they  use  to  drinke  in  them  hot  waters  made  of  Boat-houses.

i  Rice,  as  strong  as  our  Aquavitae,  these  Barkes  sell  fresh

k  fish,  and  salted  and  dressed  in  divers  fashions,  and  other

1  j  sorts  of  provision,  so  that  along  that  River,  to  the  mouth

oi  of  the  Sea,  which  is  fresh  water,  they  may  sayle  without

1  carrying  any  victuals,  but  only  money  to  spend. The

p  second  of  November  we  came  to  the  Citie  of  Dala,  where  Da/a.

;es  besides  other  things  are  ten  large  roomes  full  of  Elephants  : [n.  x.  1726.]

it;  which  are  kept  there  by  divers  servants  of  the  King  of

tk  Pegu. The  day  following  we  came  to  the  faire  Citie  of

he  Dogon,  it  is  finely  seated,  and  fronted  towards  the  South-  Dogon.

el  west,  and  where  they  land  are  twenty  long  steps,  as  from

oi  the  Pillar  of  Saint  Marke  to  the  Straw-bridge,  the  matter

lie;  }f  them  is  strong  and  great  pieces  of  timber,  and  there

f.  ire  great  currents  of  water  both  at  ebbe  and  floud,  because

vei  t  is  a  place  neere  Maccareo,  which  entreth  and  goeth  out

$;  )f  the  mouth  of  Sirian,  which  is  a  Sea-port :  and  alwaies

nerd  when  the  water  encreaseth,  they  goe  upon  the  Staires  :  and

sJii;  vhen  it  is  ebbe,  it  discovers  all  about,  and  makes  it  a

;ali?  rreat  way  drie  land. On  both  sides  the  River,  at  the

[Ve:  md  of  the  banke,  or  at  the  staires,  is  a  woodden  Tigre,

, rery  great,  and  painted  after  the  naturall  colour  of  a  Tigre  ;

, nd  there  are  two  others  in  the  midst  of  the  staires,  so

J53

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1583.

farre  one  from  another,  that  they  seeme  to  share  the  staires
equally.  They  stand  with  open  mouth,  shewing  their
teeth  and  tongue,  with  their  clawes  lifted  up  and  stretched
forth,  prepared  to  assaile  him  that  lookes  on  them.
Concerning  these  they  told  mee  a  foolish  beliefe  which  they
have,  that  they  stand  there  to  guard,  for  if  any  should  be
Idol  guard,  so  bold  to  displease  the  Pagod,  those  Tigers  should  defend
him,  for  he  would  give  them  life.  After  we  were  landec
we  began  to  goe  on  the  right  hand  in  a  large  street  aboui
fifty  paces  broad,  in  which  wee  saw  woodden  houses  gilded
and  adorned  with  delicate  gardens  after  their  custome
wherein  their  Talapois,  which  are  their  Friers,  dwell,  anc|

dTT  °f looke  to  the  Pag°d>  or  Varella  of  Dogon. The  left  sift
is  furnished  with  Portals  and  Shops,  very  like  the  nev
Procuratia  at  Venice :  and  by  this  street  they  goe  toward:
the  Varella,  for  the  space  of  a  good  mile  straight  forwards
either  under  painthouses,  or  in  the  open  street,  which  ij
free  to  walke  in. When  we  came  at  the  Varella,  we  foune
a  paire  of  staires  of  ninety  steps,  as  long  in  my  judgement
as  the  chanell  of  the  Rialto  at  Venice. At  the  foot  of  th
first  staire  are  two  Tigres,  one  at  the  right  hand,  and  th
other  at  the  left,  these  are  of  stone,  and  stand  in  the  sam
fashion  that  they  doe  on  the  shoare-side. The  staires  ar
divided  into  three,  the  first  is  forty  steps,  the  second  thirty
and  the  third  twenty,  and  at  the  top  of  each  of  them  is
plaine  spacious  place. On  the  last  step  are  Angels  of  stone
each  with  three  Crowns  one  upon  the  other ; but  so,  tha
that  which  is  undermost  is  the  greatest,  and  that  which  i
next  lesser  then that, yet  greater then the  uppermosi
which  is  the  least. They  have  the  right  hand  lifted  up
ready  to  give  the  benediction,  with  two  fingers  stretche
out. The  other  hand  of  the  one  is  layd  upon  the  head  of
Childe,  and  of  the  other  upon  the  head  of  an  Ape ; thos
Statues  are  all  of  stone. At  the  right  hand  is  a  Varell
gilded  in  a  round  forme,  made  of  stone,  and  as  much  i
compasse  as  the  streete  before  the  Venetian  Palace,  if  :
were  round : and  the  height  may  equall  Saint  Marke
Bell-tower,  not  the  top  of  it,  but  the  little  Pinnaces. A

iS4

GASPARO BALBI  a.d.

x583-
the  left  hand  is  a  faire  Hall  carved  and  gilded  within  and
without. And  this  is  the  place  of  devotion,  whither  the
people  goe  to  heare  the  Talapois  preach : the  streete  is
greater  then  Saint  Markes,  at  the  least  larger. And  this  is
a  place of  great devotion amongst them, and yeerely
multitudes  of  people  come  by  Sea  and  by  Land. And
when  they  celebrate  a  solemne  Feast,  the  King  in  person
goeth  before  them  all, and  with  him  the  Queene, the
Prince,  and  his  other  sonnes,  with  a  great  traine  of  Nobles
and  others,  who  goe  to  get  a  pardon. And  on  this  day  Pilgrimage
there  is  a  great  Mart  where  are  all  sorts  of  merchandises  lnd™&nces
which  are  current  in  those  Countries,  which  they  frequent
in  great  multitudes,  which  come  thither  not  so  much  for
devotion  as  traffique,  and  wee  may  freely  goe  thither  if  wee
will. Round  about  this  and  upon  another  Varella  were
Apes  running  up  and  downe,  the  great  and  small  staires  Apes  sutabk
also  are  full  of  them. After  wee  had  seene  this,  at  the  t0  aPls}
foot  of  the  first  staire  when  I  went  downe  I  turned  my
face  to  the  left  side,  and  with  some  Portugals  which  were
in  my  companie  found  in  a  faire  Hall  a  very  large  Bell,  Great  Bell.
which  we  measured,  and  found  to  be  seven  paces  and  three
;  hand  bredths,  and  it  is  full  of  Letters  from  the  top  to  the
bottome, and  so neere together  that one  toucheth  the
other,  they  are  very  well  and  neatly  made :  but  there  was
no  Nation  that  could  understand  them,  no  not  the  men
of  Pegu,  and  they  remember  not  whence,  nor  how  it  came
thither.

At  the  evening  about  one  of  the  clocke  at  night  wee
went  from  this  place,  and  about  three  we  came  among
some  Fishers  Nets,  which  almost  shipwrackt  us,  as  they
idid  one  of  our  companie,  who  being  entangled  in  them
went  under  them,  and  so  was  sunke,  and  this  was  through
'the  negligence  of  some  Fishers,  who  when  they  lay  forth
such  Nets,  ought  to  have  a  barke  with  a  light  or  fire  all
the  night  to  give  warning  to  Saylers,  that  they  come  not
on  that  side.  But  praised  be  God,  we  freed  our  selves  in
the  best  manner  we  could ;  that  day  after  the  Sunne  was
up  wee  arrived  over  against  the  mouth  of  Sirian,  which  Sirian.

i55

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1583-

is  on  the  South  side,  where  with  some  difficulty  we  landed,
for the  violence  of  the  water  drew  us  into Maccareo.
Sirian  was  an  Imperiall  Citie,  where  an  Emperour  resided,  1
the  Walls  and  Bulwarkes  are  ruined,  by  which  one  may
see  that  it  hath  beene  very  strong,  and  almost  impregnable :
but  Anno  1567.  it  was  subdued  by  the  King  of  Pegu,  who
to  take  it  sent  a  million  and  an  halfe  of  men ; and  after  he
had  besieged  it  two  yeeres  with  the  losse  of  halfe  a  million:
of  his  men,  he  tooke  it  by  treason. Which  when  the1
Emperour  understood  he  poisoned  himselfe,  and  the  restl
of  his  familie  were  carried  away  prisoners  upon  Elephants,:
who  returned  in  great  numbers  laden  with  Gold,  Jewels,'
and other precious things : departing from Sirian we

[II.  x.  1727.]  followed  our  Voyage,  seeing  many  inhabited  Townes  called;
by divers names. Finally we came to a place called

Meccao.  Meccao,  where  we  disimbarqued  to  goe  by  land  to  Pegu,;

being  about  twelve  miles.  Over  against  Meccao  are
certaine  habitations  where  the  King  of  Pegu  was  then  for
his  disport,  who  causeth  there  beautifull  gilded  vessels  tc
be  made,  beseeming  such  a  King.  From  Cosmi  tc
Meccao  we  were  eleven  dayes  in  our  Voyage,  sayling
alwaies  by  Rivers  of  fresh  water,  which  ebbe  and  flowej
and  on  both  sides  there  are  houses  and  habitations  made

Prevention  of  UpQn  piles  planted  in  the  earth,  so  that  the  Tigres  cannot

Ttgres.  molest  the  Inhabitants,  they  goe  up  to  them  upon  Ladder:

made  of  light  wood,  which  they  draw  up. Some  of  th<

Bufalos.  Inhabitants  keepe  Bufalos  in  their  houses ; for  they  say;

that  the  Tigres  will  not  come  neere  the  places  where  thes<
beasts  are,  by  reason  of  their  ill  favour :  they  are  in  thes<
Countries  of  unmeasurable  greatnesse  and  thicknesse.  FoJ
the  Voyage  of  Saint  Thomas  to  Pegu,  it  is  good  to  carri<
Bracelets,  which  they  make  of  glasse  in  Saint  Thomas,  fo
with  these  better  then  with  money  you  may  buy  victuals
and  there  in  the  Citie  where  you  buy  them  they  are  sok
at  a  lowe  price,  but  if  they  are  enamelled  they  sell  then
deare.  The  number  of  Pagods  or  Varellas  which  wee  sav
in  this  Voyage  I  write  not,  for  they  are  innumerable,  an(
in  divers  shapes ;  but  I  onely  say,  that  on  the  shoare  wher

156

GASPARO BALBI

wee  landed  to  goe  to  Dogon,  which  is  made  of  large
strong  timbers,  are  two  Statues,  which  resemble  two  Boyes
from  the  head  downewards,  their  faces  after  the  likenesse
of  Devils  with  two  wings.  There  are  some  Varellas  gilded,
and  set  in  faire  places,  to  which  they  come  and  offer  Gold
and  other  merchandise  in  great  quantitie,  to  maintayne
their  gilding,  for  the  raine  spoiles  it.  About  these  Varellas
are  found  tyed  many  Apes  of  that  kinde  which  resemble
Mountain-cats,  which  wee  call  Monkeyes ;  they  keepe
them  very  carefully,  holding  them  to  be  creatures  beloved
of  God,  because  they  have  their  hands  and  feet  like  humane
creatures ;  and  therefore  their  Woods  are  full  of  them,
for  they  never  take  any,  except  for  their  Varellas  and
Statues.

There  are  two  Cities  of  Pegu,  the  old  and  the  new ;  in
the  former  Strangers  and  Merchants  inhabite,  who  are
many,  and  utter  great  store  of  merchandise,  in  this  also  is
the  Kings  Nobles,  and  Gentlemen,  and  other  people.  The
new  is  not  very  large,  it  was  built  by  the  father  of  the
present  King,  on  a  sudden,  in  a  very  neat  fashion  and
with  wonderfull  strength :  The  old  is  very  ancient  and
reasonable  great,  with  many  houses  made  of  great  caves,
and  many  Magasins  of  brick  to  keepe  wares  in :  and  to
speake  of  the  old  Citie  of  Pegu,  as  of  the  nobler,  because
of  the  Kings  residence  in  it,  and  of  all  his  Court,  you  must
knowe  that  the  Citie  is  pleasantly  seated  in  the  altitude
3f  1 6.  degrees  and  a  third  part,  it  is  environed  with  walls,
md  hath  the  forme  of  a  perfit  square,  and  in  every  square
ire  five  gates :  round  about  it  are  many  ditches  full  of
water,  which  continues  all  the  yeere,  and  in  them  are
nany  Crocodiles,  which  are  put  there,  that  if  any  will
wade  over  these  ditches  they  may  be  taken  and  killed.

After  that  I  was  provided  of  a  good  Druggerman  and
interpreter,  the  noise  of  Trumpets  was  heard,  which
signified  wee  should  see  the  King  and  have  audience  of
urn,  wee  entred  within  the  second  gate,  whereby  they
^oe  into  the  Court-yard,  and  the  Interpreter  and  I  cast
)ur  selves  upon  our  knees  on  the  ground,  and  with  our

!57

A.D.
1583.

Diversity  of
Varellas.

Monkies  in
respect.

described.

Crocodile-
guard.

Audience
before  the
King.

A-°-  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1583.

hands  elevated  in  humble  wise,  and  making  a  shew  three
times  before  we  rose  of  kissing  the  ground ; and  three
other  times  we  did  thus  before  wee  came  neere  to  the
place  where  the  King  sate  with  his  Semini,  prostrate  on
the  earth  (for  no  Christian,  how  neere  soever  to  the  King,
Tig  King  and  nor  Moorish  Captaines,  except  of  his  Semini,  come  in  that
which  are  'his place  so  neere  the  King)  I  heard  all  his  Speach,  but  under-
Courtien. stood  it  not :  I  gave  the  Emeralds  to  the  Interpreter,  who  j
lifted  them  up  over  his  head,  and  againe  made  reverence,
of  them  called  Rombee :  and  as  soone  as  the  King  saw  it,
a  Nagiran,  that  is  to  say,  the  Lord  of  his  words,  or  Inter- 1
preter, making the  like  Rombee, tooke the  Emeralds,
and  gave  them  into  the  Kings  hand,  and  then  went  out  of
his  presence,  who  a  little  while  after  called  him,  com-
manding him  as  Lord  of  his  words,  that  he  should  aske
mee  what  Countriman  I  was,  how  many  yeeres  it  was  sincej
I  left  my  Countrie,  and  what  was  my  name,  and  from  what;
place I had brought those Emeralds, and I with thej
accustomed  Rombee  (for  at  every  word  they  speake  theyl
must  make  such  an  obeisance)  answered  that  my  name  was;
Gaspar  Balbi,  that  I  had  beene  in  my  Voyage  foure  yeeres.;
and  that  I  brought  the  Emeralds  from  Venice  to  give  his,
Majestie,  the  fame  of  whose  bountie,  courtesie  and  great-!
nesse  was  spread  over  the  world,  and  especially  in  our
parts,  to  be  the  greatest  King  in  the  world ; all  this  wail
written  in  their  letters,  and  read  by  the  Lord  of  his  word^l
to  his  Majestie. He  commanded  to  aske  me  in  what  part:!
Venice  was  seated,  and  what  King  governed  it ; and  |
told  him  that  it  was  in  the  Kingdome  of  Italie,  and  that  i
was  a  Republike  or  free  State,  not  governed  by  any  King
When  the  King  heard  this,  he  greatly  wondered ; so  tha
he  began  to  laugh  so  exceedingly,  that  hee  was  overcome
of  the  cough,  which  made  him  that  hee  could  hardly  speakt
to  his  Great  men. Lastly,  hee  demanded,  if  that  Kin^
which  last  tooke  Portugall  were  as  great,  and  if  Venio;
were  warlike. To  which  I  answered,  that  King  Phili]f
that  had  taken  Portugall  was  the  potentest  King  amon|
the  Christians,  and  that  the  Venetians  were  in  league  wit)

158

GASPARO BALBI  a.d.

1583.
him,  but  had  no  feare  of  any,  yet  sought  friendship  with
all. And then I reported the overthrow which the
Venetians  gave  the  Emperour  of  the  Turkes. Ametbi,
who  at  that  time  was  at  Mecca,  confirmed  this  to  be  true  of
the  defeat  of  the  Turkish  Armado. Then  he  gave  me
i  Cup  of  gold,  and  five  pieces  of  China  Damaske  of  divers  Kings  bounty.
:olours,  and  bad  them  tell  me,  that  he  gave  me  these,  and  [IL  x.  1728.]
did  not  so  pay  me  for  my  Emeralds,  for  which  I  should
3e contented of his publike Terreca, which are his
Treasurers. This  was  holden  for  novelty  with  them  that
;aw  it,  for  it  was  not  the  Kings  custome  to  present  any
hing  to  any. Moreover,  the  King  ordered  that  for  the
vares  which  I  had  brought,  the  Decacini  should  not  make
ne  pay  any  Taxe  or  Custome.

The  King  nourisheth  at  his  charges  more  then  eight  Store  °f

mndred  domesticall  Elephants  of  warre ; but  for  wilde *?  am

1  >nes  they  may  have  as  many  as  they  will,  for  the  Woods

re  full  of  them. The  Bufalos  of  this  Countrie  are  of

terettine  colour,  but  so  great,  that  they  are  like  Elephants.

1  There  are  other  creatures  as  with  us,  and  many  also  of

: ther  kinds. When  he  goeth  to  his  recreations  solemnely,

r  in  his  Robes,  foure  white  Elephants  goe  before  him

i  ested  with  Gold,  having  their  teeth  inclosed  in  a  sheath

!i  wrought  with Jewels. The  King of  Pegu hath great

n  tore  of  Artillarie  of  all  sorts ; but  he  wants  men to

i  mnage  them,  he  might  make  as  many  Gallies,  Foists  &

ir  xalleasses  as  he  would,  if  he  had  men  to  governe  them,

d  nd  to  make  them,  and  therefore  makes  none :  yet  when

iti  e  undertakes  any  enterprise,  he  carries  with  him  small

|.  )rdnance, which are governed by certaine Gunners,

\i  loores  of  Bengala,  of  whom,  as  of  strangers,  he  hath

on  nail  confidence.

;, The  King  of  Avva,  being  subject  to  the  King  of  Pegu,  KingofAvva
(ii  id  Brother  to  his  Father,  had  a  purpose  to  make  himselfe  °'  "f™  hu
>, laster  of  his  Nephewes  Kingdome,  and  to  make  himselfe
f ing,  because  he  was  the  ancienter  of  the  Royall  branch ;
terefore  at  the Inauguration  of  the  present  King, he
r  ould  not  come  to  doe  him  homage  as  he  ought,  and  as

x59

AD-  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1583.

other  Kings  and  Dukes  his  subjects  did ; he  did  not  onely
absent  himselfe,  but  also  kept  backe  the  Present  of  Jewels'
which  he  was  wont  to  give,  and  restrained  also  the  trade,
from  his  Countrie  to  Pegu,  not  suffering  any  Merchant  to
passe,  but  sought  to  conspire  with  his  chiefe  Courtiersi
against  the  King  of  Pegu,  who  as  a  good  Nephew  dis-
sembled it,  the  said  King  of  Avva  being  recommended  to'
him  from  his  Father  before  his  death. Finally,  the  Kingj
of  Pegu,  willing  to  cleare  himselfe  of  the  ill  will  conceived
against the  King  of  Avva  his Uncle, sent  one  of  hisJ
Messenger  houshold  servants  to  him,  who  was  slaine  by  the  King  of
slame. Avva  because  of  the  warre,  trusting  that  the  Grandes  ofj
the  Kingdome  of  Pegu  would  favour  his  part,  and  revolli;
from  their  naturall  Lord,  to  set  Him  in  his  place. There-
fore the  King  of  Pegu  proclaimed  warre  against  Avva
and  called  to  him  his  Bagnia  and  Semini,  and  gave  ordeij
to  his  Decagini,  that  as  they  came  he  should  put  them  iri
prison  ;  which  being  performed  by  the  Decagini,  the  Kin^|
ordained  that  the  morning  following  they  should  make  ail
eminent  and  spacious  Scaffold,  and  cause  all  the  Grande
Terrible to  come  upon  it,  and  then  set  fire  to  it,  and  burne  then>
execution. arj  ai;ve> gut  f-0  shew  that  he  did  this  with  justice,  h<,
sent  another  mandate,  that  he  should  doe  nothing  till  h<i
had  an  Olla  or  Letter  written  with  his  hand  in  letters  01
gold,  and  in  the  meane  time  he  commanded  him  to  retain,
all  the  prisoners  of  the  Grandes  families  unto  the  womeii
great  with  child,  and  those  which  were  in  their  swadlinji
clothes,  and  so  he  brought  them  all  together  upon  the  sail  \
Scaffold ; and  the  King  sent  the  Letter  that  he  shouL
burne  them,  and  the  Decagini  performed  it,  and  burner
them  all,  so  that  there  was  heard  nothing  but  weepings
shrikings, cryings,  and  sobbings : for  there  were  four
thousand  in  this  number  which  were  so  burned  great  an<J
small,  for  which  execution  were  publike  Guards  placed  b
the  King,  and  all  of  the  old  and  new  Citie  were  forced  til
assist  them ; I  also  went  thither,  and  saw  it  with  grea
compassion  and  griefe,  that  little  children  without  any  fau.
should  suffer  such  martyrdome,  and  among  others  ther

160

GASPARO BALBI  ad.

1583.
was  one  of  his  chiefe  Secretaries,  who  was  last  put  in  to  be
burned,  yet  was  freed  by  the  Kings  order ; but  his  legge
was  begunne  to  be  burnt,  so  that  he  was  lame.

And  after  followed  this  order  from  his  Majestie,  that
those  other  Captaines  which  remained  should  come  to  him,
and  he  said  to  them,  You  have  seene  what  we  have  done
to  Traitors,  but  be  faithfull,  and  set  in  order  all  the  people
as  you  can,  for  I  am  a  Captaine  that  warre  justly,  going
without  any  feare  of  not  overcoming  :  and  so  on  a  sudden,  Expedition
and  within  few  dayes,  he  gathered  together  out  of  both  aZainst  Ava-
the  Cities  more  then  three  hundred  thousand  persons,  and
encamped  without  the  Citie.  Ten  dayes  after  that  I  saw
the  King  upon  an  Elephant  all  over  covered  with  Gold  and
Jewels,  goe  to  the  warre  with  great  courage,  with  a  Sword
after  our  custome  sent  him  by  the  Vice-roy  of  Goa,  the
hilt  whereof  was  gilded  :  the  said  Vice-roy  was  called  Don
Luis  di  Zuida :  he  left  the  white  Elephants  in  the  Citie.
After  that,  the  King  fell  sicke  of  the  small  poxe,  but  when
he  was  well,  he  encountred  with  the  King  of  Avva,  and  Combat  of
they  two  fought  body  to  body  without  any  hinderance  of  KinSs-
the  Armies ;  who  being  equally  matched,  as  their  use  is,
combated  bravely,  as  did  also  the  Guard  of  this  King  with
that  of  the  other,  and  after  the  Kings  had  fought  a  while
hand  to  hand,  first  with  Harquebusses,  then  with  Darts,
and  lastly  with  the  Sword,  the  Elephant  of  the  King  of
Pegu  brake  his  right  tooth  with  charging  that  of  Avva,  in
which  furie  he  so  coupled  with  the  other  Elephant,  that
the  King  of  Pegu  killed  the  King  of  Avva,  and  he
remained  lightly  wounded  on  one  arme,  and  in  the  meane
while  his  Elephant  fell  dead  under  him,  and  the  King  of
Pegu  mounted  upon  that  of  Avva.  But  when  the  Armie
of  Avva  saw  their  King  dead,  they  ceased  to  fight,  and
demanded  pardon  of  the  King  of  Pegu,  who  with  a  joy  full
countenance  praising  their  valour  pardoned  them  all,  and  4ooooo smen
making  a  muster,  found  that  of  three  hundred  thousand  slaine.
which  hee  brought  from  Pegu,  there  died  in  that  battell  [II.  x.  1729.]
more  then  200000.  and  little  lesse  of  those  of  Avva.
After  this  victorie  he  ordered  that  Avva  should  be
x  161  l

A.D.

1583.

Ava  dis-
peopled.

Warre
betwixt  Pegu
and  Siamy  of
which  see
Pimenta.

Elephants
piety  or
loyaltie.

Statues  and
Colosses.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

destroyed,  and  all  the  people  made  prisoners,  among  which
was  the  Queene  taken  prisoner,  who  was  sister  of  the  King
of  Pegu,  and  confined,  during  her  life  in  a  large  house
with  many  royall  attendants ;  but  shee  agreed  never  to
goe  forth.  The  rest  of  the  Citizens  were  banished  to  live
in  Woods  among  Tigres,  and  other  creatures,  and  this  was
because  the  King  of  Pegu  could  not  finde  the  great  treasure
which  the  King  of  Avva  had.  This  warre  was  in  the
beginning  of  the  moneth  of  Aprill,  when  in  that  Countrie
fall  great  store  of  raines,  causing  great  cold  in  a  place
called  Meccao ;  and  the  fourteenth  day  of  July,  in  sixe
dayes  he  returned  unexpectedly  to  Pegu,  not  finding  the:
Citie  with  those  guards  which  his  Majestie  had  appointed,
but  at  the  request  of  the  Prince  his  sonne  he  did  no  other
justice.

At  this  his  arrivall  he  understood,  that  when  hee  wasl
at  the  warre,  there  was  arrived  under  excuse  to  come  to;
his  favour  in  the  old  Citie  of  Pegu  the  sonne  of  the;
Emperour  of  Silon  (or  Siam)  with  fifty  Elephants  of;
warre,  and  eight  hundred  Horses,  besides  Harquebussers,
Pikemen,  and  Souldiers  with  swords,  who  were  sent  to-1
wards  Avva  by  the  great  Brama;  but  in  stead  of  taking1
his  way  towards  that  coast  he  returned  to  Silon.

In  the  mean  time  was  brought  into  Pegu  the  Elephant
of  the  King  of  Avva,  which  was  so  much  discontented,
that  all  the  day  long  he  mourned,  I  my  selfe  saw  him
lament,  and  that  hee  would  eate  but  very  little ;  and  this
I  saw  in  the  lodging  where  the  King  of  Pegu  was  wont
to  keepe  his,  where  continually  were  two  Semini,  that
prayed  him  to  eate,  and  mourne  no  longer,  but  be  merry,
for  he  was  come  to  serve  a  King  greater  then  his  own.
Notwithstanding  the  said  Elephant  would  not  cease  from
teares,  and  alwaies  in  token  of  sorrow  held  down  his
trunk  :  and  thus  he  continued  the  space  of  15.  dayes,  and
then  he  began  to  eate,  to  the  Kings  great  content.  With
the  teeth  of  the  Kings  Elephant  which  died  in  battell  by
command  from  his  Majestie  were  made  certaine  Pagods
or  Statues?  which  were  layd  up  to  bee  kept  among  the

162

GASPARO BALBI

Pagods  of  gold  and  silver.  After  the  King  made  five
other  of  *  Gonza,  which  was  a  marvellous  thing  to  see,
for  sitting  crosse-legged,  they  were  as  high  as  a  strong
man  could  fling  a  stone,  and  they  were  ingraved  fairely
and  curiously :  one  toe  of  the  foot  was  greater  than  a
man,  and  the  said  Pagods  were  set  in  publike  before  the
Palace,  and  bespangled  with  gold.

The  warre  of  Avva  being  now  finished,  the  King  of

Silon,  who  was  subject  to  the  King  of  Pegu,  sent  one  to

his  Majestie  to  tell  him,  that  it  grieved  him  that  a  slave

had  given  answer  to  his  sonne,  whom  he  had  sent  to  aide

the  King  himselfe,  and  therfore  now  he  made  no  more

account  of  him,  nor  held  him  for  his  Lord ; therefore

the  King  of  Pegu  sent  forth  a  great  Armie  against  Silon,

under  the  conduct  of  the  great  Brama,  who  after  he  had

lost  many  people  through  the  heat ; &  through  the  great

fortitude  of  Silon,  could  obtaine  nothing  of  him  but  this,

that  if  the  King  of  Pegu  would  come  to  the  campe  he

would  reverence  him,  but  he  would  not  yeeld  himselfe  to

his  inferior ; and  the  King  of  Pegu  answered,  that  he

would  have  his  least  slave  subdue  his  subject. Although

i they  kept  a  straight  siege  against  Silon,  yet  the  Citie  stood

it  out  manfully. It  hath  beene  an  Imperiall  Citie ; the

u  houses  are  of  timber,  built  high  because  of  the  over-

i  flowing  of  the  River. In  Winter  every  house  hath  a

ii  Boat  to  transport  their  people  from  one  side  of  the  River

1 to  the  other : there  are  many  houses  of  poore people

oi  made  upon  great  plankes  with  edifices  of  wood  or  great

:  canes  built  on  them,  which  they  guide  whither  they  will,

nj  to  buy  and  sell  any  sort  of  merchandise,  which  is  exer-

f  cised  by  women,  who  when  a  ship  comes  to  that  place,

doe  not  unlade  it ; but  goe  themselves  upon  these  Rafts

to  negotiate, buy  and sell. The  people of  Silon are

a:  Gentiles,  as  those  of  Pegu,  they  are  white  and  beautifull ;

i 'hey  feare  not  to  bee  overcome  by  the  King  of  Pegu

1:  ifter  this  manner; for  his  father  brought  them  to  his

obedience,  going  in  person,  and  accompanied  with  eight

lundred  thousand  men,  neither  had  he  taken  it,  if  it  had

163

A.D.

1583.

*  Gonza  is  a
mixt  me  tall  of
brasse  and  tin
whereof  they
make  money.

Invasion  of
Si  am.

Moveable
houses.

See  before  in
Ccesar  Fre-
derik,  which
was  then  in
Pegu.

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1583.

not  beene  by  treason,  by  opening  a  Gate,  there  were  many
Portugals  then  taken  prisoners,  who  were  freed  by  the:
present  King  of  Pegu,  with  commendations  for  doing;
what  the  King  of  Silon  commanded  them.  In  the  meane
time  there  was  a  great  fire  kindled  in  a  street  of  the
Portugals  in  Pegu,  by  the  diversitie  of  winds  which  blew,
it  burned  more  then  3800.  houses,  and  some  Pagods,  and
praying  places :  and  because  it  is  a  custome,  that  the  King
of  Pegu  in  such  cases  proceeds  against  those  which  are
authors  of  such  a  fire,  there  was  search  made  who  kindled
the  fire,  and  he  was  certified,  that  it  was  in  the  house  of
a  Portugall  Pilot  which  brought  us  to  the  Citie.  The
King  made  no  shew  of  judging  this  to  have  beene  for!
malice : but  we  were  in  continuall  feare  of  burning,  and  1.

Devlllish  so  much  the  rather,  because  one  of  the  Kings  Diviners;

counsel/,  told  him,  that  if  hee  would  have  the  victorie  of  Silon,  hee
must  burne  a  Citie,  as  his  father  did ;  and  therefore  wei
doubted  that  hee  would  destroy  this  old  Citie  of  Pegu  ;i
but  he  was  disswaded  from  it  by  the  Prince  his  sonne.j
who  is  very  courteous  and  pleasant,  and  much  delighted
in  discharging  Harquebusses,  and  to  shoot  in  Bowes;
hee  is  of  great  stature,  and  browne,  as  his  father ;  when1
he  goes  abroad  he  is  carried  up  in  a  Palamkin  very  pom-;
pously  (as  his  other  three  little  brothers  are  also)  under  n
Cloth  of  state  openly.

Our  Author  proceedeth  in  large  discourses  of  this
Countrie,  and  the  occurrents  of  that  time,  which  (so  much
as  is  necessary)  we  have  in  some  of  our  other  Peguari
Relators,  Frederike,  Fitch,  or  the  Jesuites,  and  are  there-
fore here  omitted.

164

RALPH FITCH

A.D.
1583-91,

Chap. VI.

The  Voyage  of  Master  Ralph  Fitch  Merchant
of  London  to  Ormus,  and  so  to  Goa  in  the
East  India,  to  Cambaia,  Ganges,  Bengala  ;  to
Bacola,  and  Chonderi,  to  Pegu,  to  Jamahay
in  the  Kingdome  of  Siam,  and  backe  to  Pegu,
and  from  thence  to  Malacca,  Zeilan,  Cochin,
and  all  the  Coast  of  the  East  India  :  begun  in
the  yeere  of  our  Lord  1583.  and  ended  1591.

N  the  yeere  of  our  Lord  1583.  I  Ralph
Fitch  of  London  Merchant,  being  desir-
ous to  see  the  Countries  of  the  East
Indie,  in  the  companie  of  Master  John
Newberie  Merchant,  (which  *  had  beene
at  Ormus  once  before)  of  William  Leedes
Jeweller,  and  James  Storie  Painter,  being
chiefly  set  foorth  by  the  right  Worshipfull  Sir  Edward
Osborne  Knight,  and  Master  Richard  Staper  Citizens  and
Merchants  of  London,  did  ship  my  selfe  in  a  Ship  of
London  called  the  Tygre,  wherein  wee  went  for  Tripolis
in  Syria :  and  from  thence  wee  tooke  the  way  for  Alepo,
which  we  went  in  seven  dayes  with  the  Carovan.  Being
in  Alepo  and  finding  good  companie,  we  went  from
thence  to  Birra,  which  is  two  dayes  and  a  halfe  travell
with  Camels.

Birra  is  a  little  Towne,  but  very  plentifull  of  victuals :
and  neere  to  the  wall  of  the  Towne  runneth  the  River
Euphrates.  Here  wee  bought  a  Boate  and  agreed  with
a  Master  and  Bargemen,  for  to  goe  to  Babilon.  These
Boates  be  but  for  one  voyage ;  for  the  streame  doth  runne
so  fast  downwards  that  they  cannot  returne.  They  carry
you  to  a  Towne  which  they  call  Felugia,  and  there  you
sell  the  Boat  for  a  little  money,  for  that  which  cost  you
fiftie  at  Birra,  you  sell  there  for  seven  or  eight.  From
Birra  to  Felugia  is  sixteene  dayes  journey,  it  is  not  good

165

[II.  x.  1730.]

*See  Master
Nezubery  his
voyage  to
Ormus,  sup.  I.
9.  c.  3.  \3
18. I  had
thought  to
have  left  out
this  voyage  of
Master  Fitch,
as  being  before
published  by
Mr.  Hakluit
but  seeing  none
other  of  our
English  tra-
vellers have
seene  divers
Countries  here
Discovered,
for  the  better
knowledge  of
him  and  them,
I  have  added
it  here  also.
Birra.

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRTMES

1583-91.

that  one  Boat  goe  alone,  for  if  it  should  chance  to  breake,
you  should  have  much  adoe  to  save  your  goods  from  the
Arabians,  which  bee  alwayes  thereabouts  robbing :  and
in  the  Night  when  your  Boates  be  made  fast,  it  is  neces-
sarie  that  you  keepe  good  watch.  For  the  Arabians  that
be  Thieves,  will  come  swimming  and  steale  your  goods
and  flee  away,  against  which  a  Gunne  is  very  good,  for.
they  doe  feare  it  very  much.  In  the  River  of  Euphrates
from  Birra  to  Felugia,  there  bee  certaine  places  where  you  I
pay  Custome,  so  many  Medines  for  a  some  or  Camels
lading,  and  certaine  Raisens  and  Sope,  which  is  for  the
sonnes  of  Aborise,  which  is  Lord  of  the  Arabians  and  all
that  great  Desart,  and  hath  some  Villages  upon  the  River.
Felugia.  Felugia  where  you  unlade  your  goods  which  come  from

Birra,  is  a  little  Village :  from  whence  you  goe  to  Babilon
in  a  day.
Babilon  (so  Babilon  is  a  Towne  not  very  great  but  very  populous,,

Vffa[\  'Ut anc^  °^  great  traffique  of  Strangers,  for  that  it  is  the  way,
called)  the  true  to  Persia,  Turkia,  and  Arabia :  and  from  thence  doe  goe:
name  is  Bag-  Carovans for these and other places. Here are great
dety  See  sup.  I.  store  of  victuals,  which  come  from  Armenia  downe  the;
9.  c.  9.  touch-  R}ver  0f  Tygris. They  are  brought  upon  rafts  made  of!
is  now  Babel Goat-skinnes  blowne  full  of  winde  and  bords  layd  upon
indeed,™  thing  them : and  thereupon  they  lade  their  goods  which  are!
but  ruine  and brought  downe  to  Babilon,  which  being  discharged  they
confusion. open  their  skinnes,  and  carrie  them  backe  by  Camels,  to!
serve  another  time. Babilon  in  times  past  did  belong  to
the  Kingdome  of  Persia,  but  now  is  subject  to  the  Turke.
Over  against  Babilon  there  is  a  very  faire  Village  from
whence  you  passe  to  Babilon  upon  a  long  Bridge  made  of
Boates,  and  tyed  to  a  great  Chayne  of  Iron,  which  is  made
fast  on  either  side  of  the  River. When  any  Boates  arel;
to  passe  up  or  downe  the  River,  they  take  away  certaine
of  the  Boates  untill  they  be  past.
The  Tower  of The  Tower  of  Babell  is  built  on  this  side  the  River
Babel.  Tygris,  towards  Arabia  from  the  Towne  about  seven  or

eight  miles,  which  Tower  is  ruinated  on  all  sides,  and
with  the  fall  thereof  hath  made  as  it  were  a  little  Moun-

166

RALPH FITCH  a.d.

1583-91.
taine,  so  that  it  hath  no  shape  at  all :  it  was  made  of
Brickes  dryed  in  the  Sunne,  and  certaine  Canes  and  leaves
of  the  Palme  tree  layed  betwixt  the  Brickes.  There  is
no  entrance  to  be  seene  to  goe  into  it.  It  doth  stand  upon
a  great  Plaine  betwixt  the  Rivers  of  Euphrates  and
Tygris.

By  the  River  Euphrates  two  dayes  journey  from  Babilon
at  a  place  called  Ait,  in  a  Field  neere  unto  it,  is  a  strange
thing  to  see :  a  mouth  that  doth  continually  throw  foorth  Boyling  Pitch
against  the  ayre  boyling  Pitch  with  a  filthy  smoake  :  which  ™nt{nua"y
Pitch  doth  runne  abroad  into  a  great  field  which  is  alwayes  the  efrth
full  thereof. The  Moores  say  that  it  is  the  mouth  of
Hell. By  reason  of  the  great  quantitie  of  it,  the  men  of
that  Countrey  doe  pitch  their  Boats  two  or  three  inches
thicke  on  the  out-side,  so  that  no  water  doth  enter  into
them. Their  Boates  bee  called  Danec. When  there  is
great  store  of  water  in  Tygris,  you  may  goe  from  Babilon
to  Basora  in  eight  or  nine  dayes :  if  there  be  small  store
it  will  cost  you  the  more  dayes.

Basora  in  times  past  was  under  the  Arabians,  but  now
is  subject  to  the  Turke.  But  some  of  them  the  Turke
cannot  subdue,  for  that  they  hold  certaine  Hands  in  the
River  Euphrates,  which  the  Turke  cannot  winne  of  them.
They  be  Thieves  all  and  have  no  setled  dwelling,  but
remove  from  place  to  place  with  their  Camels,  Goates,  [II.  x.  1731.]
and  Horses,  Wives  and  Children  and  all.  They  have
large  blew  Gownes,  their  Wives  eares  and  noses  are  ringed
very  full  of  rings  of  Copper  and  Silver,  and  they  weare
rings  of  Copper  about  their  legs.

Basora  standeth  neere  the  Gulfe  of  Persia,  and  is  a
Towne  of  great  trade  of  Spices  and  Drugs  which  come
from  Ormus.  Also  there  is  great  store  of  Wheat,  Rice,
and  Dates  growing  thereabout,  wherewith  they  serve
Babilon  and  all  the  Countrey,  Ormus,  and  all  the  parts  of
India.  I  went  from  Basora  to  Ormus  downe  the  Gulfe  of
Persia,  in  a  certaine  ship  made  of  bordes,  and  sowed
together  with  Cayro,  which  is  threed  made  of  the  huske
of  Cocoes,  and  certaine  Canes  or  straw  leaves  sowed  upon

167

A.D.
I583-9I.

Ormus.

*Imo  habu'i
Chreme. The
Persians  have
lately  taken  it.

Fashions  of
Ormus.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

the  seames  of  the  bordes  which  is  the  cause  that  they
leake  very  much.  And  so  having  Persia  alwayes  on  the
left  hand,  and  the  Coast  of  Arabia  on  the  right  hand  wee
passed  many  Hands,  and  among  others,  the  famous  Hand
Baharim,  from  whence  come  the  best  Pearles  which  be
round  and  Orient.

Ormus  is  an  Hand  in  circuit  about  five  and  twentie  or
thirtie  miles,  and  is  the  dryest  Hand  in  the  world :  for
there  is  nothing  growing  in  it  but  onely  Salt ;  for  their
water,  wood,  or  victuals,  and  all  things  necessary  come
out  of  Persia,  which  is  about  twelve  miles  from  thence.
All  thereabout  be  very  fruitfull,  from  whence  all  kind  of
victuals  are  sent  unto  Ormus.  The  Portugals  have  a
Castle  *  here  which  standeth  neere  unto  the  sea,  wherein
there  is  a  Captaine  for  the  King  of  Portugall,  having
under  him  a  convenient  number  of  Souldiers,  whereof
some  part  remaine  in  the  Castle,  and  some  in  the  Towne.
In  this  Towne  are  Merchants  of  all  Nations,  and  many
Moores  and  Gentiles.  Here  is  very  great  trade  of  all
sorts  of  Spices,  Drugs,  Silke,  cloth  of  Silke,  fine  Tapestrie
of  Persia,  great  store  of  Pearles  which  come  from  the  He
of  Baharim,  and  are  the  best  Pearles  of  all  others,  and
many  Horses  of  Persia,  which  serve  all  India.  They
have  a  Moore  to  their  King  which  is  chosen  and  governed
by  the  Portugals.  Their  Women  are  very  strangely
attired,  wearing  on  their  Noses,  Eares,  Neckes,  armes
and  legges,  many  rings  set  with  Jewels,  and  lockes  of
Silver  and  Gold  in  their  eares,  and  a  long  barre  of  gold
upon  the  side  of  their  Noses.  Their  Eares  with  the
weight  of  their  Jewels  be  worne  so  wide,  that  a  man  may
thrust  three  of  his  fingers  into  them.  Here  very  shortly
after  our  arrivall  wee  were  put  in  Prison,  and  had  part  of
our  goods  taken  from  us  by  the  Captaine  of  the  Castle,
whose  name  was  Don  Mathias  de  Albuquerque ;  and
from  hence  the  eleventh  of  October  hee  shipped  us  and
sent  us  for  Goa  unto  the  Vice-roy,  which  at  that  time  was
Don  Francisco  de  Mascarenhas.  The  ship  wherein  wee
were  imbarked  for  Goa  belonged  to  the  Captaine,  and

168

RALPH FITCH  a.d.

1583-91.
carried one hundred twentie and foure Horses in it.
All  Merchandize  carried  to  Goa  in  a  ship  wherein  are  *lf  there  bee
Horses,*  pay  no  Custome  in  Goa. The  Horses  pay  cus-  twentte-
tome,  the  goods  pay  nothing ; but  if  you  come  in  a  ship
which  bringeth  no  Horses,  you  are  then  to  pay  eight  in
the  hundred  for  your  goods. The  first  Citie  of  India
that  wee  arrived  at  upon  the  fifth  of  November,  after
wee  had  passed  the  Coast  of  Zindi,  is  called  Diu,  which  Diu.
standeth  in  an  Hand  in  the  Kingdome  of  Cambaia,  and  is
the  strongest  Towne  that  the  Portugals  have  in those
parts. It  is  but  little,  but  well  stored  with  Merchandize ;
for  here  they  lade  many  great  ships  with  divers  commodi-
ties for  the  straights  of  Mecca, for  Ormus,  and  other
places,  and  these  bee  ships  of  the  Moores  and  of  Chris-
tians. But  the  Moores  cannot  passe,  except  they  have  a
Pasport  from  the  Portugals.

Cambaietta  is  the  chiefe  Citie  of  that  Province,  which

is  great  and  very  populous, and fairely builded for a

Towne  of  the  Gentiles :  but  if  there  happen  any  Famine,

the  people  will  sell  their  Children  for  very  little. The

;  last  King  of  Cambaia  was  Sultan  Badu,  which  was  killed

at  the  siege  of  Diu,  and  shortly  after  his  Citie  was  taken

by  the  great  Mogor,  which  is  the  King  of  Agra  and  of

Delli,  which  are  for  tie  dayes  journey  from  the  Countrey

;  of  Cambaia. Here  the  Women  weare  upon  their  armes

:  infinite  numbers  of  rings  made  of  Elephants  teeth,  wherein

they  take  so  much  delight,  that  they  had  rather  bee  with-

'c  but  their  meat  then  without  their  Bracelets. Going  from

Diu  wee  come  to  Daman,  the  second  Towne  of  the  Portu-  Daman.
i'  gals  in  the  Countrey  of  Cambaia,  which  is  distant  from
\  Diu  fortie  leagues.  Here  is  no  trade  but  of  Corne  and
o!  Rice.  They  have  many  Villages  under  them  which  they
i  quietly  possesse  in  time  of  Peace,  but  in  time  of  Warre
he  enemie  is  master  of  them.  From  thence  wee  passed
nl  )y  Basaim,  and  from  Basaim  to  Tana,  at  both  which  places  Basaim.
s  small  trade  but  onely  of  Corne  and  Rice.  Tana.

The  tenth  of  November,  wee  arrived  at  Chaul  which Chanl
tandeth  in  the  firme  land. There  bee  two  Townes,  the

169

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1583-91.

one  belonging  to  the  Portugals,  and  the  other  to  the
Moores.  That  of  the  Portugals  is  neerest  to  the  Sea,
and  commandeth  the  Bay,  and  is  walled  round  about.  A
little  above  that,  is  the  Towne  of  the  Moores  which  is
governed  by  a  Moore  King  called  Xa-Maluco.  Heere
is  great  traffique  for  all  sorts  of  Spices,  and  Drugges,  Silke,
and  cloth  of  Silke,  Sandales,  Elephants  teeth,  and  much
China  worke,  and  much  Sugar  which  is  made  of  the  Nut

Coco-tree.  called  Gagara :  the  Tree  is  called  the  Palmer :  which  is
the  profitablest  Tree  in  the  world :  it  doth  alwayes  beare
fruit,  and  doth  yeeld  Wine,  Oyle,  Sugar,  Vinegar,  Cordes,
Coles,  of  the  leaves  are  made  Thatch  for  the  houses,
Sayles  for  ships,  Mats  to  sit  or  lie  on :  of  the  branches
they  make  their  Houses,  and  broomes  to  sweepe,  of  the
Tree  wood  for  ships.  The  wine  doth  issue  out  of  the
top  of  the  tree.  They  cut  a  branch  of  a  bough  and  binde:
it  hard,  and  hang  an  earthen  pot  upon  it,  which  they,
emptie  every  morning  and  every  evening,  and  still  it  and!

[II.  x.  1732.]  put  in  certaine  dried  Raisins,  and  it  becommeth  veryi
strong  Wine  in  short  time.  Hitherto  many  ships  come
from  all  parts  of  India,  Ormus,  and  from  Mecca :  heere,
bee many Moores and Gentiles. They have a very

Khe-devotion strange order  among them, they  worship a Cow, and;

Pythagorian esteeme  much  of  the  Cowes  dung  to  paint  the  walls  of

superstition.  their  houses.  They  will  kill  nothing  not  so  much  as  2
Louse :  for  they  hold  it  a  sinne  to  kill  any  thing.  The)|
eate  no  flesh,  but  live  by  Roots,  and  Rice,  and  Milke,

Mad  reason  of  And  when  the  husband  dyeth  his  wife  is  burned  witr

burning  the  y^  •£  s^tt  De  alive  :  if  shee  will  not,  her  head  is  shaven:
and  then  is  never  account  made  of  her  after.  They  sa)
if  they  should  bee  buried,  it  were  a  great  sinne,  for  oi
their  bodies  there  would  come  many  Wormes  and  othei
vermine,  and  when  their  bodies  were  consumed,  thost
Wormes  would  lacke  sustenance,  which  were  a  sinne
therefore  they  will  bee  burned.  In  Cambaia  they  wil
kill  nothing,  nor  have  any  thing  killed :  in  the  Town<
they  have  Hospitals  to  keepe  lame  Dogs  and  Cats,  an
for  Birds. They  will  give  meate  to  the  Ants.

170

RALPH FITCH

Goa  is  the  most  principall  Citie  which  the  Portugals
have  in  India,  wherein  the  Vice-roy  remaineth  with  his
Court.  It  standeth  in  an  Hand,  which  may  be  five  and
twentie  or  thirtie  miles  about.  It  is  a  fine  Citie,  and
for  an  Indian  Towne  very  faire.  The  Hand  is  very  faire,
full  of  Orchards  and  Gardens,  and  many  Palmer  trees,
and  hath  some  Villages.  Here  be  many  Merchants  of
all  Nations.  And  the  Fleet  which  commeth  every  yeere
from  Portugall,  which  be  foure,  five,  or  sixe  great  ships,
commeth  first  hither.  And  they  come  for  the  most  part
in  September,  and  remaine  there  fortie  or  fiftie  dayes ;  and
then  goe  to  Cochin,  where  they  lade  their  Pepper  for
Portugall.  Oftentimes  they  lade  one  in  Goa,  the  rest  goe
to  Cochin,  which  is  from  Goa  an  hundred  leagues  South-
ward. Goa  standeth  in  the  Countrey  of  Hidalcan,  who
lyeth  in  the  Countrey  sixe  or  seven  dayes  journey.  His
chiefe  Citie  is  called  Bisapor.  At  our  comming  we  were
cast  into  Prison,  and  examined  before  the  Justice  and
demanded  for  Letter,  and  were  charged  to  bee  spies,  but
they  could  prove  nothing  by  us.  Wee  continued  in
Prison  untill  the  two  and  twentie  of  December,  and  then
wee  were  set  at  libertie,  putting  in  sureties  for  two  thou-
sand Duckets  not  to  depart  the  Towne ;  which  sureties
Father  Stephens  an  English  Jesuite  which  wee  found
there,  and  another  religious  man  a  friend  of  his  procured
for  us.  Our  sureties  name  was  Andreas  Taborer,  to
whom  we  payd  two  thousand  one  hundred  and  fiftie
Duckets,  and  still  he  demanded  more :  whereupon  we
made  sute  to  the  Vice-roy  and  Justice  to  have  our  money
again,  considering  that  they  had  had  it  in  their  hands
neere  five  moneths  and  could  prove  nothing  against  us.
The  Viceroy  made  us  a  very  sharpe  answer,  and  said  we
should  bee  better  sisted  before  it  were  long,  and  that
they  had  further  matter  against  us.

Whereupon  wee  presently  determined  rather  to  seeke
our  liberties,  then  to  bee  in  danger  for  ever  to  be  Slaves
in  the  Countrey,  for  it  was  told  us  wee  should  have  the
Strapado. The  fifth  day  of  Aprill  1585.  in  the  morning

171

A.D.
I583-9I,

Goa.

I  dak  an.

Bisapor.
This  was  the
twentieth  of
'November.

Theyfiedfrom
Goa.  See  hereof
Linschoten  in
fine  lib.  1 .

A.D.
I583-9I

Bellergan  a
Towne.

Bisapor.

Gulconda.

Jppatell.

Masulipatan.
See  sup.  lib.  3.
c.  ult.  of
English  trade
there.

Servidore.

Bellaport.

riTRCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

wee  ranne  from  thence.  And  being  set  over  the  River,
we  went  two  daies  on  foot  not  without  feare,  not  know-
ing the  way  nor  having  any  guide,  for  we  durst  trust
none.  One  of  the  first  Townes  which  we  came  unto,  is
called  Bellargan,  where  there  is  a  great  Market  kept  of
Diamants,  Rubies,  Saphires,  and  many  other  soft  Stones.
From  Bellergan  wee  went  to  Bisapor,  which  is  a  very
great  Towne  where  the  King  doth  keepe  his  Court.  He
hath  many  Gentiles  in  his  Court  and  they  be  great
Idolaters.  And  they  have  their  Idols  standing  in  the
Woods,  which  they  call  Pagodes.  Some  bee  like  a  Cow,
some  like  a  Monkie,  some  like  Buffles,  some  like  Pea-
cockes,  and  some  like  the  Divell.  Here  bee  very  many
Elephants  which  they  goe  to  warre  withall.  Here  they
have  good  store  of  Gold  and  Silver :  their  houses  are  of
stone  very  faire  and  high.  From  hence  we  went  for
Gulconda,  the  King  whereof  is  called  Cutup  de  lashach.
Here,  and  in  the  Kingdome  of  Hidalcan,  and  in  the  Coun-
trey  of  the  King  of  Decan,  be  the  Diamants  found  of  the
olde  water.  It  is  a  very  faire  Towne,  pleasant,  with  faire
houses  of  Bricke  and  Timber,  it  aboundeth  with  great
store  of  Fruits  and  fresh  water.  Here  the  men  and  the
women  doe  goe  with  a  cloth  bound  about  their  middles,
without  any  more  apparell.  We  found  it  here  very
hote.

The  Winter  beginneth  here  about  the  last  of  May.  In
these  parts  is  a  Port  or  Haven  called  Masulipatan,  which
standeth  eight  dayes  journey  from  hence  toward  the  Gulfe
of  Bengala,  whether  come  many  ships  out  of  India,  Pegu,
and  Sumatra,  very  richly  laden  with  Pepper,  Spices,  and
other  commodities.  The  Countrey  is  very  good  and
fruitfull.  From  thence  I  went  to  Servidore,  which  is  a
fine  Countrey,  and  the  King  is  called,  The  King  of
Bread.  The  houses  here  bee  all  thatched  and  made  of
Lome.  Here  be  many  Moores  and  Gentiles,  but  there  is
small  Religion  among  them.  From  thence  I  went  tc1
Bellapore,  and  so  to  Barrampore,  which  is  in  the
Countrey of Zelabdim Echebar. In this place

172

RALPH FITCH

A.D.
I583-9I,

their  money  is  made  of  a  kind  of  Silver  round
and  thicke,  to  the  value  of  twentie  pence,  which  is
very  good  silver.  It  is  marvellous  great  and  a  populous
Countrey.  In  their  Winter  which  is  in  June,  July,  and
August,  there  is  no  passing  in  the  streets  but  with
Horses,  the  waters  bee  so  high.  The  houses  are  made  of
lome  and  thatched.  Here  is  great  store  of  Cotton-cloth
made,  and  painted  clothes  of  Cotton-wooll :  here  groweth
great  store  of  Corne  and  Rice.  We  found  Marriages
great  store  both  in  Towne  and  Villages  in  many  places
where  wee  passed,  of  Boyes  of  eight  or  ten  yeeres,  and
Girles  of  five  or  sixe  yeeres  old.  They  both  doe  ride
upon  one  Horse  very  trimly  decked,  and  are  carried
through  the  Towne  with  great  piping  and  playing,  and
so  returne  home  and  eat  of  a  Banquet  made  of  Rice  and
Fruits,  and  there  they  dance  the  most  part  of  the  night,
and  so  make  an  end  of  the  marriage.  They  lie  not
together  untill  they  bee  ten  yeeres  old.  They  say  they
marrie  their  Children  so  young,  because  it  is  an  order,
that  when  the  man  dyeth,  the  woman  must  be  burned
with  him :  so  that  if  the  Father  die,  yet  they  may  have  a
Father  in  law  to  helpe  to  bring  up  the  Children  which  be
married :  and  also  that  they  will  not  leave  their  Sonnes
without  Wives,  nor  their  Daughters  without  Husbands.

From  thence  we  went  to  Mandoway,  which  is  a  verie
strong  Towne.  It  was  besieged  twelve  yeeres  by  Zelab-
dim  Echebar,  before  hee  could  winne  it.  It  standeth  upon
a  verie  great  high  Rocke  as  the  most  part  of  their  Castles
doe,  and  was  of  a  very  great  circuit.  From  hence  wee
went  to  Ugini  and  Serringe,  where  we  overtooke  the
Ambassadour  of  Zelabdim  Echebar  with  a  marvellous
sreat  companie  of  men,  Elephants,  and  Camels.  Here
is  great  trade  of  Cotton  and  Cloth  made  of  Cotton,  and
^reat  store  of  Drugs.  From  thence  we  went  to  Agra,
Dassing  many  Rivers,  which  by  reason  of  the  raine  were
?o  swollen,  that  we  waded  and  swamme  oftentimes  for  our
ives.  Agra  is  a  very  great  Citie  and  populous,  built  with
;tone,  having  faire  and  large  streets,  with  a  faire  River

i73

Strange
Marriages.

[II.  x.  1733.]

Mandoa,  or
Mandoway,  a
very  strong
Towne.

Ugini.

Agra  a  great
Citie.

A.D.
I583-9I,

Zeb.  Echebar
the  great
Mogor;  Father
toSelim  which
now  raigneth,
of  whom  see
sap.  L  $.13  4.
in  Hawkins,
Finch  iff  Sir
Tho.  Roe,  13c.

Buls  draw
Coches  or
Carts.

Newberies
Journey  in
which  it
seemeth  he
died,  unknown
how  or  where.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

running  by  it,  which  falleth  into  the  Gulfe  of  Bengala.
It  hath  a  faire  Castle  and  a  strong,  with  a  very  faire  Ditch.
Here  bee  many  Moores  and  Gentiles,  the  King  is  called
Zelabdim  Echebar :  the  people  for  the  most  part  call  him
The  great  Mogor. From  thence  we  went  for  Fatepore,
which  is  the  place  where  the  King  kept  his  Court. The
Towne  is  greater  then  Agra,  but  the  houses  and  streets
bee  not  so  faire. Here  dwell  many  people  both  Moores
and  Gentiles. The  King  hath  in  Agra  and  Fatepore,  as
they  doe  credibly  report,  one  thousand  Elephants,  thirtie;
thousand  Horses,  one  thousand  and  foure  hundred  tamej
Deere,  eight  hundred  Concubines :  such  store  of  Ounces,
Tygres,  Buffles,  Cockes  and  Hawkes,  that  is  very  strange  (
to see. He keepeth a great Court, which they call'
Dericcan. Agra  and  Fatepore  are  two  very  great  Cities,
either  of  them  much  greater  then  London,  and  very  popu-
lous. Betweene  Agra  and  Fatepore  are  twelve  miles,  and
all  the  way  is  a  Market  of  victuals  and  other  things,  as
full  as  though  a  man  were  still  in  a  Towne,  and  so  many
people  as  if  a  man  were  in  a  Market. They  have  many
fine  Carts, and  many  of  them  carved  and  gilded  with
Gold,  with  two  wheeles  which  bee  drawne  with  two  little
Bulls  about  the  bignesse  of  our  great  Dogs  in  England,;
and  they  will  runne  with  any  Horse,  and  carrie  two  or|
three  men  in  one  of  these  Carts : they  are  covered  with!
Silke  or  very  fine  cloth,  and  bee  used  here  as  our  Coaches j
be in England. Hither is great resort of Merchantsj
from  Persia,  and  out  of  India,  and  very  much  Merchan-j
dize  of  Silke  and  Cloth,  and  of  precious  Stones,  both
Rubies,  Diamants,  and  Pearles. The  King  is  apparellec
in  a  white  Cabie  made  like  a  Shirt  tyed  with  strings  or;
the  one  side,  and  a  little  cloth  on  his  head,  coloured  often-
times with  red  and  yellow. None  come  into  his  house
but  his  Eunuches  which  keepe  his  women.

Here  in  Fatepore  wee  stayed  all  three  untill  the  eigh
and  twentieth  of  September  1585.  and  then  Master  Johr
Newberie  tooke  his  journey  toward  the  Citie  of  Lahor
determining  from  thence  to  goe  for  Persia,  and  then  fo:

i74

RALPH FITCH  ad.

1583-91.

Aleppo  or  Constantinople,  whether  hee  could  get  soonest
passage  unto ; and  directed  me  to  goe  to  for  Bengala  and
for  Pegu,  and  did  promise  me,  if  it  pleased  God,  to  meet
me in Bengala  within two yeeres  with a ship out of
England. I  left  William  Leades  the  Jeweller,  in  service  WiU.Leades
with  the  King  Zelabdim  Echebar  in  Fatepore,  who  did  Sj[^0f€
entertayne  him  verie  well,  and  gave  him  an  House  and Cambaia.
five  Slaves,  an  Horse,  and  every  day  sixe  S.  S.  in  money.

I  went  from  Agra  to  Satagam  in  Bengala,  in  the  com-
panie  of  one  hundred  and  fourescore  Boates  laden  with
Salt,  Opium,  Hinge,  Lead,  Carpets,  and  divers  other
commodities  downe  the  River  Jemena.  The  chiefe  Mer-
chants are  Moores  and  Gentiles.  In  these  Countries  they
have  many  strange Ceremonies. The  Bramenes  which The  suPer~

are  their  Priests,  come  to  the  water  and  have  a  string  s**tlfJ  5T
'  'oil  monies  of  the

about  their  necks  made  with  great  ceremonies,  &  lade  up  Bramenes,  like

water  with  both  their  hands,  and  turne  the  string  first  those  of  the

with  both  their  hands  within,  and  then  one  arme  after  the  antient  Gym-

other  out. Though  it  be  never  so  cold,  they  will  wash  ^phistsin

,  i-ii  •  >-ni  r> m otrabo,  CSV.

themselves  in  cold  water  or  in  warme. lhese  Gentiles

will  eate  no  Flesh,  nor  kill  any  thing. They  live  with

Rice,  Butter,  Milke,  and  Fruits. They  pray  in  the  water

naked,  and  dresse  their  meat  and  eate  it  naked,  and  for

their  penance  they  lie  flat  upon  the  earth,  and  rise  up  and

turne  themselves  about  thirtie  or  fortie  times,  and  use  to

In  leave  up  their  hands  to  the  Sunne,  and  to  kisse  the  earth,

in!  vvith  their  armes  and  legs  stretched  along  out,  and  their

r -ight  leg  alwayes  before  the  left. Every  time  they  lie Devotions  (as

)0i  lowne,  they  make  a  score  on  the  ground  with  their  finger,  onBeads)more

i  0  know  when their stint is finished. The Bramenes  %e?lehtthen by

s narke  themselves in the  foreheads, eares, and throats,

t  vith  a  kind  of  yellow  geare  which  they  grind,  and  every

c norning they doe it. And they have some  old men

vhich  goe  in  the  streets  with  a  boxe  of  yellow  Powder,

:, nd  marke  men  on  their  heads  and  neckes  as  they  meet

1 hem. And  their  wives  doe  come  by  ten,  twentie,  and

ak  hirtie  together,  to  the  water  side  singing,  and  there  doe

/ash themselves, and then use their Ceremonies, and

i75

A.D.
I583-9I.

Polygamy.
[II.  x.  1 734.]

Prage.
Ganges.

Tygris.
Holy  holy
Beggers.

Ganges  water.
Bannaras.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

marke  themselves  in  their  foreheads  and  faces,  and  carrie
some  with  them,  and  so  depart  singing.  Their  Daughters
bee  married,  at,  or  before  the  age  of  ten  yeeres.  The
men  may  have  seven  wives.  They  be  a  kind  of  craftie
people,  worse  then  the  Jewes.  When  they  salute  one;
another,  they  heave  up  their  hands  to  their  heads,  and  say,
Rame,  Rame.

From  Agra  I  came  to  Prague,  where  the  River  Jemena
entreth  into  the  mightie  River  Ganges,  and  Jemena  loseth
his  name. Ganges  commeth  out  of  the  Northwest,  and
runneth  East  into  the  Gulfe  of  Bengala. In  those  parts
there  are  many  Tygres,  and  many  Partridges  and  Turtle-
doves, and  much  other  Fowle. Here  be  many  Beggers  in:
these  Countries  which  goe  naked,  and  the  people  make
great  account  of  them : they  call  them  Schesche. Here
I  saw  one  which  was  a  Monster  among  the  rest. He
would  have  nothing  upon  him,  his  beard  was  very  long,:
and  with  the  haire  of  his  head  hee  covered  his  privities.
The  nailes  of  some  of  his  fingers  were  two  inches  long,
for  he  would  cut  nothing  from  him,  neither  would  he
speake. He  was  accompanied with eight or ten, and
they  spake  for  him. When  any  man  spake  to  him,  he|
would  lay  his  hand  upon  his  brest  and  bowe  himselfe,  bull  I
would  not  speake. Hee  would  not  speake  to  the  King
We  went  from  Prague  downe  Ganges,  the  which  is  here
very  broad. Here  is  great  store  of  Fish  of  sundrie  sorts1
and  of  wild  Fowle,  as  of  Swannes,  Geese,  Cranes,  and  1
many  other  things. The  Countrey  is  very  fruitfull  ano
populous. The  men  for  the  most  part  have  their  face:
shaven,  and  their  heads  very  long,  except  some  which  be
all  shaven  save  the  crowne : and  some  of  them  are  a:  I
though  a  man  should  set  a  dish  on  their  heads,  and  shav<
them  round,  all  but  the  crowne. In  this  River  of  Gange
are  many  Hands. His  water  is  very  sweet  and  pleasant
and  the  Countrey  adjoyning  very  fruitfull.

From  thence  we  went  to  Bannaras  which  is  a  grea  \\
Towne,  and  great  store  of  Cloth  is  made  there  of  Cotton  |1
and  Shashes  for  the  Moores. In  this  place  they  bee  al

176

RALPH FITCH  a.d.

1583-91.

Gentiles,  and  be  the  greatest  Idolaters  that  ever  I  saw.

To  this  Towne  come  the  Gentiles  on  Pilgrimage  out  of  A  Pilgrimage

farre  Countries. Here  alongst  the  waters  side,  bee  very  °jo  ^  ^lJ$

many  faire  houses,  and  in  all  of  them,  or  for  the  most  Ganges.

part  they  have  their  Images  standing, which  bee  evill  Images.

favoured, made  of  stone  and  wood, some  like  Lyons,

Leopards,  and  Monkies,  some  like  Men  and  Women,  and

Peacockes,  and  some  like  the  Divell  with  foure  armes  &

foure  hands. They sit  crosse  legged, some  with one

thing  in  their  hands,  and  some  another,  and  by  breake  of

day  and  before,  there  are  men  and  women  which  come  out

of  the  Towne  and  wash themselves in Ganges. And

there  are  divers  old  men,  which  upon  places  of  earth  made

for  the  purpose,  sit  praying,  and  they  give  the  people  three

or  foure  strawes,  which  they  take  and  hold  them  betweene

their  fingers  when  they  wash  themselves : and  some  sit

to  marke  them  in  the  foreheads,  and  they  have  in  a  cloth

a  little  Rice,  Barlie,  or  money,  which,  when  they  have

washed  themselves,  they  give  to  the  old  men  which  sit

there  praying. Afterwards  they  goe  to  divers  of  their

Images,  and  give  them  of  their  Sacrifices. And  when  they

give,  the  old  men  say  certaine  prayers,  and  then  is  all  holy.

And  in  divers  places  there  standeth  a  kind  of  Image  which

in  their  language  they  call  Ada. And  they  have  divers  4^a  an  ^ '

great  stones  carved,  whereon  they  powre  water,  &  throw  ^fj^^whom

thereupon some  Rice, Wheat, Barley, and some  other  some  have

things. This  Ada  hath  foure  hands  with  clawes. More-  dreamed  to

over,  they  have  a  great  place  made  of  Stone  like  to  a  Well  have  ^

with  steps  to  goe  downe ; wherein  the  water  standeth  sixes*  J",

r ri  S » 1 1  r  1  • •  r  foure  hands,

very foule and stinketh : for the great quantitie or ^Cm  ajter
Flowers,  which  continually  they  throw  into  it,  doe  make  divided  into
it  stinke. There  be  alwayes  many  people  in  it :  for  they  Mate  and
say  when  they  wash  themselves  in  it,  that  their  sinnes  be  Female-
forgiven  them,  because  God,  as  they  say,  did  wash  him-
selfe  in  that  place. They  gather  up the sand  in the
bottome  of  it,  and  say  it  is  holy.

They  never  pray  but  in  the  water,  and  they  wash  them-
selves over  head,  and  lade  up  water  with  both  their  hands,
c  177  M

A.D.
I583-9I

Idolatrous
rites.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Funerals  by
burning.
[II.  x.  1735.]

Apparell.

and  turne  themselves  about,  and  then  they  drinke  a  little
of  the  water  three  times,  and  so  goe  to  their  Gods  which
stand  in  those  houses.  Some  of  them  will  wash  a  place
which  is  their  length,  and  then  will  pray  upon  the  earth
with  their  armes  and  legges  at  length  out,  and  will  rise
up  and  lie  down,  and  kisse  the  ground  twentie  or  thirtie
times,  but  they  will  not  stirre  their  right  foot.  And  some
of  them  will  make  their  Ceremonies  with  fifteene  or  six-
teene  pots  little  and  great,  and  ring  a  little  Bell  when  they
make  their  mixtures  ten  or  twelve  times :  and  they  make
a  circle  of  water  round  about  their  pots  and  pray,  and
divers  sit  by  them,  and  one  that  reacheth  them  their  Pots :
and  they  say  divers  things  over  their  pots  many  times,  and
when  they  have  done,  they  goe  to  their  Gods,  and  strow
their  Sacrifices  which  they  thinke  are  very  holy,  and  marke
many  of  them  which  sit  by,  in  the  foreheads,  which  they
take  as  a  great  gift.  There  come  fiftie  and  sometime  an
hundred  together,  to  wash  them  in  this  Well,  and  to  offer
to  these  Idols.  They  have  in  some  of  these  Houses  their
Idols  standing,  and  one  sitteth  by  them  in  warme  weather
with  a  fanne  to  blow  winde  upon  them.  And  when  they
see  any  companie  comming,  they  ring  a  little  Bell  which
hangeth  by  them,  and  many  give  their  almes,  but  especi-
ally those  which  come  out  of  the  Countrey.  Many  of
them  are  blacke  and  have  clawes  of  brasse  with  long
nayles,  &  some  ride  upon  Peacocks  &  other  Fowles  which
bee  evill  favoured,  with  long  hawkes  bills,  and  some  like
one  thing  and  some  another,  but  none  with  a  good  face.
Among  the  rest  there  is  one  which  they  make  great
account  of:  for  they  say  hee  giveth  them  all  things  both
food  and  apparell,  and  one  sitteth  alwayes  by  him  with  a
fanne  to  make  winde  towards  him.

Here  some  bee  burned  to  ashes,  some  scortched  in  th
fire  and  throwne  into  the  water,  and  Dogs  and  Foxes  d
presently  eate  them. The  Wives  here  doe  burne  wi
their  Husbands  when  they  die,  if  they  will  not,  their  head
be  shaven,  and  never  account  is  made  of  them  afterward.
The  people  goe  all  naked  save  a  little  cloth  bound  abou

1.78

RALPH FITCH  a.d.

1583-91.

their middle. Their women have their neckes, armes
and  eares  decked  with  rings  of  Silver,  Copper,  Tinne,  and
with  round  hoopes  made  of  Ivorie,  adorned  with  Amber
stones,  and  with  many  Agats,  and  they  are  marked  with  a
great  spot  of  red  in  their  foreheads,  and  a  stroke  of  red
up  to  the  crowne,  and  so  it  runneth  three  manner  of  wayes.
In  the  Winter,  which  is  our  May,  the  men  weare  quilted
Gownes  of  cotton  like  to  our  Mattraces  and  quilted  Caps
like  to  our  great  Grocers  morters,  with  a  slit  to  looke  out
at,  and  so  tyed  downe  beneath  their  eares. If  a  man  or  a
woman  be  sicke  and  like  to  die,  they  will  lay  him  before  Foolish
their  Idols  all  night,  and  that  shall  helpe  him  or  make  an  Phystck-
end  of  him. And  if  he  doe  not  mend  that  night,  his
friends  will  come  and  sit  with  him  a  little  and  crie,  and
afterwards  will  carrie  him  to  the  waters  side,  and  set  him
upon  a  little  raft  made  of  reeds,  and  so  let  him  goe  downe
the  River. When they  bee  married  the  man  and  the  Marrlage
woman  come  to  the  water  side,  and  there  is  an  old  man
which  they  call  a  Bramane,  that  is,  a  Priest,  a  Kow,  and  a
Calfe,  and  a  Kow  with  Calfe. Then  the  Man  and  the
Woman,  the  Kow  and  Calfe,  and  the  old  man  goe  into
the  water  together,  and  they  give  the  old  man  a  white
cloth  of  foure  yards  long,  and  a  basket  crosse-bound  with
divers  things  in  it : the  cloth  hee  layeth  upon  the  backe
of  the  Kow,  and  then  he  taketh  the  Kow  by  the  end  of  the
tayle,  and  sayeth  certaine  words :  and  shee  hath  a  Copper
or  a  Brasse  pot  full  of  water,  and  the  man  doeth  hold  his
hand  by  the  old  mans  hand,  and  the  wives  hand  by  her
husbands,  and  all  have  the  Kow  by  the  tayle,  and  they
powre  water  out  of  the  pot  upon  the  Kowes  tayle,  and  it
runneth  through  all  their  hands,  and  they  lade  up  water
with  their  hands,  and  then  the  old  man  doeth  tye  him  and  ™s  9*n&  °S
4er  together  by their  clothes. Which done, they  goe  J^ks  ^Xr
"ound  about  the  Kow  and  Calfe,  and  then  they  give  som-  by  the  clothes,
what  to  the  poore  which  be  alwaies  there, and  to the  was  used  by
Bramane  or  Priest  they  give  one  Kow  and  Calfe, and  ^Mexicans
ifterward  goe  to  divers  of  their  Idols  and  offer  money,
ind  lie  downe  flat  upon  the  ground  and  kisse  it  divers

179

A.D.
1583-91,

Ugly  Idols.

Patenazv.

Bredth  of
Ganges  in  time
ofraine  beyond
kenne.

Prides  punish-
ment.

Gold  found,

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

times,  and  then  goe  their  way.  Their  chiefe  Idols  be
blacke  and  evill-favored,  their  mouthes  monstrous,  their
eares  gilded,  and  full  of  Jewels,  their  teeth  and  eyes  of
Gold,  Silver,  and  Glasse,  some  having  one  thing  in  their
hands,  and  some  another.  You  may  not  come  into  the
houses  where  they  stand,  with  your  shooes  on.  They
have  continually  Lampes  burning  before  them.

From  Bannaras  I  went  to  Patenaw  downe  the  River
Ganges  :  where  in  the  way  wee  passed  many  faire  Townes,
and  a  Countrie  very  fruitfull :  and  many  very  great  Rivers
doe  enter  into  Ganges,  and  some  of  them  as  great  as)
Ganges,  which  cause  Ganges  to  be  of  a  great  bredth,  and;
so  broad  that  in  the  time  of  raine  you  cannot  see  fromi
one side to the  other. These Indians when they  be
scorched  and  throwne  into  the  water,  the  men  swimme
with  their  faces  downewards,  the  women  with  their  faces
upwards,  I  thought  they  tyed  something  to  them  to  cause
them  to  doe  so : but  they  say  no. There  bee  very  many'
Thieves  in  this  Countrie,  which  bee  like  to  the  Arabians : !
for  they  have  no  certaine  abode,  but  are  sometime  in  one
place,  and  sometime  in  another. Here  the  women  be  so
decked  with  Silver  and  Copper,  that  it  is  strange  to  see,
they  use  no  shooes  by  reason  of  the  rings  of  Silver  and
Copper  which  they  weare  on  their  toes. Here  at  Patanaw
they  finde  Gold  in  this  manner. They  dig  deepe  pits  in
the  earth,  and  wash  the  earth  in  great  bolls,  and  therein
they  find  the  Gold,  and  they  make  the  pits  round  about
with  bricke,  that  the  earth  fall  not  in. Patanaw  is  a  very
long  and  a  great  Towne. In  times  past  it  was  a  King-
dome,  but  now  it  is  under  Zelabdim  Echebar  the  Great
Mogor. The Men are tall and slender, and hav<
many  old  folkes  among  them : the  Houses  are  simple
made  of  earth,  and  covered  with  straw,  the  Streets  art
very  large. In  this  Towne  there  is  a  trade  of  Cotton
and  cloth  of  Cotton,  much  Sugar,  which  they  carrie  fron
hence  to  Bengala  and  India,  very  much  Opium,  and  othe
commodities. Hee  that  is  chiefe  here  under  the  King,  \\
called Tipperdas, and is of  great account among the

180

RALPH FITCH  ad.

1583-91.

people.  Here  in  Patanaw  I  saw  a  dissembling  Prophet  False  Prophet.
which  sate  upon  an  Horse  in  the  Market  place,  and  made
as  though  he  slept,  and  many  of  the  people  came  and
touched  his  feet  with  their  hands,  and  then  kissed  their
hands.  They  tooke  him  for  a  great  man,  but  sure  he  was
a  lasie  lubber.  I  left  him  there  sleeping.  The  people  of
these  Countries  be  much  given  to  such  prating  and
dissembling  hypocrites.

From  Patanaw  I  went  to  Tanda,  which  is  in  the  Land  Tanda  in
of  Gouren.  It  hath  in  times  past  beene  a  Kingdome,  but  Gouren-
now  is  subdued  by  Zelabdim  Echebar.  Great  trade  and
traffique  is  here  of  Cotton,  and  of  cloth  of  Cotton.  The
people  goe  naked  with  a  little  cloth  bound  about  their
waste.  It  standeth  in  the  Countrie  of  Bengala.  Here
be  many  Tigres,  wilde  Buffes,  and  great  store  of  wilde
Fowle :  they  are  very  great  Idolaters.  Tanda  standeth
from  the  River  Ganges  a  league,  because  in  times  past,
the  River  flowing  over  the  bankes  in  time  of  raine  did
drowne  the  Countrie  and  many  Villages,  and  so  they  doe
remaine.  And  the  old  way  which  the  River  Ganges  was
wont  to  runne,  remaineth  drie,  which  is  the  occasion  that
the  Citie  doeth  stand  so  farre  from  the  water.  From
Agra  downe  the  River  Jemena,  and  downe  the  River
Ganges,  I  was  five  moneths  comming  to  Bengala,  but  it  Five  moneths
may  be  sayled  in  much  shorter  time.  passage.

I  went  from  Bengala  into  the  Countrie  of  Couche,  which  Couche.
lieth  five  and twenty dayes  journey Northwards from  [II.  x.  1736.]
Tanda. The King is a Gentile, his name is Suckel
Counse : his  Countrie  is  great,  and  lieth  not  farre  from
Cauchin China ; for they say they have  Pepper  from
thence. The  Port  is  called  Cacchogate. All  the  Coun-  Countrie  set
trie  is  set  with  Bambos  or  Canes  made  sharpe  at  both  the  mth  Canes'
ends  and  driven  into  the  earth,  and  they  can  let  in  the
water  and  drowne  the  ground  above  knee  deepe,  so  that
Men  nor  Horses  can  passe. They  poison  all  the  waters
if  any  warres  bee. Here they have much Silke and
Muske, and cloth made of Cotton. The people
have eares which be marvellous great of a spanne

181

A.D.
1583-91.

Pythagorean
Gentilisme.

In  Mexico
they  use  like-
wise for  small
money  the  fruit
Cacao,  which
are  like
Almonds.
Hugeli.

Porto  Angeli.

Orixa.

The  like  cloth
may  be  made
of  the  long
grasse  in
Virginia.

Satagam.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

long,  which  they  draw  out  in  length  by  devices  when  :
they bee young. Here they be all Gentiles, and
they  will  kill  nothing. They  have  Hospitals  for  Sheepe,
Goats,  Dogs,  Cats,  Birds,  and  for  all  other  living  creatures.
When  they  be  old  and  lame  they  keepe  them  untill  they
die. If  a  man  catch  or  buy  any  quicke  thing  in  other  1
places  and  bring  it  thither,  they  will  give  him  money  for ;
it,  or  other  victuals,  and  keepe  it  in  their  Hospitals,  or
let  it  goe. They  will  give  meat  to  the  Ants. Their  small
money  is  Almonds,  which  oftentimes  they  use  to  eate.

From  thence  I  returned  to  Hugeli,  which  is  the  place
where  the  Portugals  keepe  in  the  Countrie  of  Bengala  1
which  standeth  in  23.  degrees  of  Northerly  latitude,  and
standeth a league from Satagan : they call it Porto
Piqueno. We  went through the  Wildernesse, because
the  right  way  was  full  of  thieves,  where  we  passed  the
Countrie  of  Gouren,  where  we  found  but  few  Villages,
but  almost  all  Wildernesse,  and  saw  many  Buries,  Swine  1
and  Deere,  Grasse  longer  then  a  man,  and  very  manyi
Tigres. Not  farre  from  Porto  Piqueno  South-westward,
standeth  an  Haven  which  is  called  Angeli,  in  the  Coun-
trie of  Orixa. It  was  a  Kingdome  of  it  selfe,  and  the
King  was  a  great  friend  to  strangers. Afterwards  it  was
taken  by  the  King  of  Patan,  which  was  their  neighbour,!
but  he  did  not  enjoy  it  long,  but  was  taken  by  Zelabdimi
Echebar, which  is  King  of  Agra,  Delli,  and  Cambaia. ;
Orixa  standeth  sixe  dayes  journey  from  Satagan  South-
westward. In  this  place  is  very  much  Rice,  and  cloth
made  of  Cotton,  and  great  store  of  cloth  which  is  made
of  Grasse,  which  they  call  Yerua,  it  is  like  a  Silke. They
make  good  cloth  of  it  which  they  send  for  India,  and
divers other places. To this Haven of  Angeli come
every  yeere  many  ships  out  of  India,  Negapatan,  Sumatra,
Malacca,  and  divers  other  places ; and  lade  from  thence
great  store  of  Rice,  and  much  cloth  of  Cotton  wooll,
much  Sugar,  and  long  Pepper,  great  store  of  Butter  and
other  victuals  for  India. Satagam  is  a  faire  Citie  for  a
Citie  of  the  Moores,  and  very  plentifull  of  all  things.

182

RALPH FITCH  a.d.

1583-91.

Here  in  Bengala  they  have  every  day  in  one  place  or

other  a  great  Market  which  they  call  Chandeau,  and  they

have  many  great  Boats  which  they  call  Pericose,  where-

withall  they  goe  from  place  to  place  and  buy  Rice,  and

many  other  things :  these  Boats  have  foure  and  twenty  or

sixe  and  twenty  Oares  to  rowe  them,  they  be  great  of

burthen,  but  have  no  coverture. Here  the  Gentiles  have

the  water  of  Ganges  in  great  estimation,  for  having  good  Ganges  water

water  neere  them,  yet  they  will  fetch  the  water  of  Ganges  Prectous'

a  great  way  off,  and  if  they  have  not  sufficient  to  drinke,

they  will  sprinkle  a  little  on  them,  and  then  they  thinke

themselves  well. From  Satagam  I  travelled  by  the  Coun-

trie  of  the  King  of  Tippara  or  Porto  Grande,  with  whom  Tippara  or

the  Mogores  or  Mogen  have  almost  continuall  warres.  Porto  Grande.

The  Mogen  which  be  of  the  Kingdome  of  Recon  *  and  *Arracan.

Rame,  be  stronger  then  the  King  of  Tippara,  so  that

Chatigan  or  Porto  Grande  is  oftentimes  under  the  King

of  Recon.

There  is  a  Countrie  foure  dayes  journey  from  Couche

before  mentioned,  which  is  called  Bottanter,  and  the  Citie  Bottanter  a

Bottia,  the  King  is  called  Dermain ; the  people  whereof  ^J*^™

are  very  tall  and  strong,  and  there  are  Merchants  which  Merchants  of

come  out  of  China,  and  they  say  out  of  Muscovia  or  China,  Mus-

Tartarie. And  they  come  to  buy  Muske,  Cambals,  Agats,  cov'te  and

Silke,  Pepper, and Saffron  like the Saffron of  Persia. Tartarie-

The Countrie is very great, three moneths journey.

There  are  very  high  Mountaines  in  this  Countrie,  and

one  of  them  so  steepe,  that  when  a  man  is  sixe  dayes

journey off it he may see it perfectly. Upon these

Mountaines  are  people  which  have  eares  of  a  spanne  long  : Large  eares.

if  their  eares  be  not  long  they  call  them  Apes. They  say  ^hesf  sem  t0

l  1  1 1  1 a  /r  •  1  J .  .  J be  the  moun-

tnat  when  they  bee  upon  the  Mountaines,  they  see  ships  tainesoflmaus

in  the  Sea  sayling  to  and  fro ; but  they  know  not  from  called  by  the
whence  they  come, nor  whither  they  goe. There  are  People  Cumao.
Merchants  which  come  out  of  the  East,  they  say,  from
under  the  Sunne,  which  is  from  China,  which  have  no
beards,  and  they  say  there  it  is  somthing  warme. But
those  which  come  from  the  other  side  of  the  Mountaines,

183

A.D.
I583-9I.

The  apparell
of  the  Tartarie
Merchants.

Kow  tayles  in
great  request.

Bacola.

Houses  and
apparell.

[II.  x.  1737.]

Serrepore.

Sinnergan.

Houses  how
made  to  pre-
vent Tigres.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

which  is  from  the  North,  say  there  it  is  very  cold.  These
Northerne  Merchants  are  apparelled  with  woollen  Cloth
and  Hats,  white  Hosen  close,  and  Boots  which  bee  of
Muscovia  or  Tartarie.  They  report  that  in  their  Coun-
trie  they  have  very  good  Horses,  but  they  bee  little :
some  men  have  foure,  five,  or  sixe  hundred  Horses  and
Kine :  they  live  with  Milke  and  Flesh.  They  cut  the
tayles  of  their  Kine,  and  sell  them  very  deare,  for  they
be  in  great  request,  and  much  esteemed  in  those  parts.
The  haire  of  them  is  a  yard  long,  the  rumpe  is  above  a
spanne  long :  they  use  to  hang  them  for  braverie  upon
the  heads  of  their  Elephants :  they  be  much  used  in  Pegu!
and  China :  they  buy  and  sell  by  scores  upon  the  ground.
The  people  be  very  swift  on  foot.

From  Chatigan  in  Bengala,  I  came  to  Bacola ;  the  King
whereof  is  a  Gentile,  a  man  very  well  disposed,  and
delighteth  much  to  shoot  in  a  Gunne.  His  Countrie  is,
very  great  and  fruitfull,  and  store  of  Rice,  much  Cotton
cloth,  and  cloth  of  Silke.  The  Houses  be  very  faire  and
high  builded,  the  Streets  large,  the  People  naked,  except
a  little  cloth  about  their  waste.  The  Women  weare  great
store  of  silver  hoopes  about  their  neckes  and  armes,  and
their  legs  are  ringed  with  Silver  and  Copper,  and  rings
made  of  Elephants  teeth.

From  Bacola  I  went  to  Serrepore  which  standeth  upon
the  River  of  Ganges,  the  King  is  called  Chondery.  They
be  all  hereabout  Rebels  against  the  King  Zelabdim:
Echebar :  for  here  are  so  many  Rivers  and  Hands,  that
they  flee  from  one  to  another,  whereby  his  Horsemen
cannot  prevaile  against  them.  Great  store  of  Cotton
cloth  is  made  here.

Sinnergan  is  a  Towne  sixe  leagues  from  Serrepore,
where  there  is  the  best  and  finest  cloth  made  of  Cotton
that  is  in  all  India.  The  chiefe  King  of  all  these  Coun-
tries is  called  Isacan,  and  he  is  chiefe  of  all  the  other
Kings,  and  is  a  great  friend  to  all  Christians.  The
Houses  here,  as  they  be  in  the  most  part  of  India,  are
very  little,  and  covered  with  straw,  and  have  a  few  mats

184

RALPH FITCH  ad.

1583-91.
round  about  the  walls,  and  the  doore  to  keepe  out  the
Tigres  and  the  Foxes.  Many  of  the  people  are  very
rich.  Here  they  will  eate  no  flesh,  nor  kill  no  beast :  they  Pythagoreans.
live  of  Rice,  Milke,  and  fruits.  They  goe  with  a  little
cloth  before  them,  and  all  the  rest  of  their  body  is  naked.
Great  store  of  Cotten  cloth  goeth  from  hence,  and  much
Rice,  wherewith  they  serve  all  India,  Ceilon,  Pegu,
Malacca,  Sumatra,  and  many  other  places.

I went from Serrepore the eight and twentieth of
November, 1586.  for  Pegu  in  a  small  Ship  or  Foist  of
one  Albert  Caravallos,  and  so  passing  downe  Ganges,  and
passing  by  the  Hand  of  Sundiva,  Porto  Grande,  or  the  Sundiva
Countrie  of  Tippera,  the  Kingdome  of  Recon  and  Mogen,  lk*d*
leaving  them  on  our  left  side  with  a  faire  winde  at  North-
west :  our  course  was  South  and  by  East,  which  brought
us  to  the  Barre  of  Negrais  to  Pegu :  if  any  contrary  winde  Barre  of
had  come,  wee  had  throwne  many  of  our  things  over-  Negrais.
boord : for  we  were  so  pestered  with  people  and  goods,
that  there  were  scant  place  to  lie  in. From  Bengala  to
Pegu  is  ninety  leagues. We  entred  the  Barre  of  Negrais,
which  is  a  brave  Barre,  and  hath  foure  fathomes  water
where  it  hath  least. Three  dayes  after  we  came  to  Cosmin, Cosmin.
which  is  a  very  pretie  Towne,  and  standeth  very  plea-
santly, very  well  furnished  with  all  things. The  people
be  very  tall  and  well  disposed ; the  women  white,  round
faced,  with  little  eyes :  the  houses  are  high  built,  set  upon
great  high  posts,  and  they  goe  up  to  them  with  long
Ladders  for  feare  of  the  Tigres  which  be  very  many.  Ladders  used
The  Countrie  is  very  fruitfull  of  all  things. Here  are  t0  avoide  the
very  great  Figs,  Oranges,  Cocoes,  and  other  fruits. The  fajfj.
Land  is  very  high  that  we  fall  withall ; but  after  we  be
entred  the  Barre,  it  is  very  lowe  and  full  of  Rivers,  for
they  goe  all  to  and  fro  in  Boats,  which  they  call  Paroes,  Dwelling  in
and  keepe  their  houses  with  wife  and  children  in  them. Boats.

From  the  Barre  of  Nigrais  to  the  Citie  of  Pegu  is  ten
dayes  journey  by  the  Rivers.  We  went  from  Cosmin  to
Pegu  in  Paroes  or  Boats,  and  passing  up  the  Rivers  wee
came  to  Medon,  which  is  a  pretie  Towne,  where  there  be  Medon.

185

A.D.

I583-9I,

Dela.

Cirion.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

a  wonderfull  number  of  Paroes,  for  they  keepe  their
Houses  and  Markets  in  them  all  upon  the  water.  They
rowe  to  and  fro,  and  have  all  their  merchandises  in  their
Boats  with  a  great  Sombrero  or  Shadow  over  their  heads  1
to  keepe  the  Sunne  from  them,  which  is  as  broad  as  a(
great  Cart  wheele  made  of  the  leaves  of  the  Coco  trees
and  Figge  trees,  and  is  very  light.

From  Medon  we  went  to  Dela,  which  is  a  very  faire
Towne,  and  hath  a  faire  Port  into  the  Sea,  from  whence
goe  many  ships  to  Malacca,  Mecca,  and  many  other  places.
Here  are  eighteene  or  twenty  very  great  and  long  houses,
where  they  tame  and  keepe  many  Elephants  of  the  Kings :
for  there  about  in  the  Wildernesse  they  catch  the  wildei
Elephants.  It  is  a  very  fruitfull  Countrie.  From  Dela
wee  went  to  Cirion,  which  is  a  good  Towne,  and  hath  a
faire  Port  into  the  Sea,  whither  come  many  ships  from
Mecca,  Malacca,  and  Sumatra,  and  from  divers  other,
places.  And  there  the  ships  stay  and  discharge,  and  send
up  their  goods  in  Paroes  to  Pegu.

From  Cirion  we  went  to  Macao,  which  is  a  pretie  Town,
where  we  left  our  Boats  and  in  the  morning  taking  Delin-;
geges,  which  are  a  kinde  of  Coaches  made  of  cords  and,
cloth  quilted,  and  carried  upon  a  stang  between  three  or
foure  men :  we  came  to  Pegu  the  same  day. Pegu  is  a
Citie  very  great, strong,  and  very  faire,  with  walls  of
stone,  and  great  ditches  round  about  it. There  are  two
Townes,  the  old  Towne  and  the  new. In  the  old  Towne
are  all  the  Merchants  strangers,  and  very  many  Merchants!
of  the  Countrie. All  the  goods  are  sold  in  the  old  Towne
which  is  very  great,  and  hath  many  suburbs  round  about
Cane-houses,  it,  and  all  the  houses  are  made  of  Canes  which  they  call
Bambos, and  be  covered  with straw. In  your House
you  have  a  Ware-house,  which  they  call  Godon,  which  is
made  of  bricke,  to  put  your  goods  in,  for  oftentimes  they
take  fire  and  burne  in  an  houre  foure  or  five  hundred
houses :  so  that  if  the  Godon  were  not,  you  should  bee  in
danger  to  have  all  burned,  if  any  winde  should  rise,  at  a|t
trice. In  the  new  Towne  is  the  King,  and  all  his  Nobilitie

186

Macao.

Coaches  car-
ried on  mens
shoulders.

RALPH FITCH

A.D.
1583-91.

Crocodiles.
Gates  20.

Palm-tree-
streets.

and  Gentrie. It  is  a  Citie  very  great  and  populous,  and

is  made  square  and  with  very  faire  Walls,  and  a  great

Ditch  round  about  it  full  of  water  with  many  Crocodiles

in  it :  it  hath  twenty  Gates,  and  they  be  made  of  stone,  for

every  square  five  Gates. There  are  also  many  Turrets

for  Centinels  to  watch,  made  of  wood,  and  gilded  with

Gold  very  faire. The  Streets  are  the  fairest  that  ever  I

saw,  as  straight  as  a  line  from  one  Gate  to  the  other,  and

so  broad,  that  ten  or  twelve  men  may  ride  afront  thorow

them. On  both  sides  of  them  at  every  mans  doore  is  set

a  Palmer  tree,  which  is  the  Nut-tree  which  make  a  very

faire  shew  and  a  very  commodious  shadow,  so  that  a  man  [II.  x.  1738.]

may  walke  in  the  shade  all  day. The  houses  be  made  of

wood,  and  covered  with  tiles.

The  Kings  house  is  in  the  middle  of  the  Citie,  and  is  Gilded  houses.
walled  and  ditched  round  about :  and  the  buildings  within
ire  made  of  wood  very  sumptuously  gilded,  and  great
workmanship  is  upon  the  fore-front,  which  is  likewise
very  costly  gilded.  And  the  house  wherein  his  Pagode
or  Idoll  standeth  is  covered  with  tiles  of  silver,  and  all
the  walls  are  gilded  with  gold.  Within  the  first  Gate  of
the  Kings  house  is  a  great  large  roome,  on  both  sides
whereof  are  houses  made  for  the  Kings  Elephants,  which
bee  marvellous  great  and  faire,  and  are  brought  up  to
warres  and  in  service  of  the  King.  And  among  the  rest
hee  hath  foure  white  Elephants,  which  are  very  strange
md  rare :  for  there  is  none  other  King  which  hath  them
3ut  hee ;  if  any  other  King  hath  one,  hee  will  send  unto
Kim  for  it.  When  any  of  these  white  Elephants  are
Drought  unto  the  King,  all  the  Merchants  in  the  Citie
ire  commanded  to  see  them,  and  to  give  him  a  present  of
lalfe  a  Ducat,  which  doth  come  to  a  great  summe :  for
:hat  there  are  many  Merchants  in  the  Citie.  After  that
/ou  have  given  your  present  you  may  come  and  see  them
it  your  pleasure,  although  they  stand  in  the  Kings  house.
This  King  in  his  Title  is  called  the  King  of  the  white
Elephants.  If  any  other  King  have  one,  and  will  not
;end  it  him,  hee  will  make  warre  with  him  for  it :  for  hee

187

Foure  white
Elephants.

The  King  of
the  white
Elephants.

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1583-91.

had  rather  lose  a  great  part  of  his  Kingdome,  then  not  to
conquer  him. They  doe  very  great  service  unto  these
white  Elephants  ;  every  one  of  them  standeth  in  an  housej
gilded  with  gold,  and  they  doe  feed  in  vessels  of  silver
and  gilt. One  of  them  when  hee  doth  goe  to  the  River
to  bee  washed,  as  every  day  they  doe,  goeth  under  a
Canopie  of  cloth  of  gold  or  of  silke  carried  over  him  by
sixe  or  eight  men,  and  eight  or  ten  men  goe  before  him
playing  on  Drummes,  Shawmes,  or  other  Instruments :
and  when  hee  is  washed  and  commeth  out  of  the  River,
there  is  a  Gentleman  which  doth  wash  his  feet  in  a  silver
Basin  :  which  is  his  office  given  him  by  the  King. There
is  no  such  account  made  of  any  blacke  Elephant,  bee  he
never  so  great. And  surely  there  bee  wonderfull  fain
and  great,  and  some  bee  nine  cubits  in  height. And  the)
doe  report  that  the  King  hath  above  five  thousand  Ele-
phants of  warre,  besides  many  other  which  be  not  taugh:
to  fight.
Taking  of This  King  hath  a  very  large  place  wherein  hee  taketll
Elephants.  t^t  wjlde  Elephants. It  standeth  about  a  mile  from  Pegu
builded  with  a  faire  Court  within,  and  is  in  a  great  Grov<
or  Wood : and  there  be  many  Hunts-men,  which  go<;
into  the  Wildernesse  with  shee  Elephants : for  withou
the  shee  they  are  not  to  be  taken. And  they  be  taught  fo
that  purpose : and  every  Hunter  hath  five  or  sixe  o:
them : and  they  say  that  they  anoint  the  shee  Elephant;
with  a  certaine  ointment,  which  when  the  wilde  Elephan
doth smell, he  will not  leave her. When they hav<i
brought  the  wilde  Elephant  neere  unto  the  place,  the;
send  word  unto  the  Towne,  and  many  Horsemen  anc
footmen  come  out  and  cause  the  shee  Elephant  to  ente
into  a  straight  way  which  doth  goe  to  the  Palace,  and  th
shee  and  hee  doe  runne  in : for  it  is  like  a  Wood :  and
when  they  be  in,  the  gate  doth  shut. Afterward  the;
get  out  the  female : and  when  the  male  seeth  that  he  i
left  alone,  he  weepeth  and  crieth,  and  runneth  against  th<
walls,  which  be  made  of  so  strong  trees,  that  some  0
them  doe  breake  their  teeth  with  running  against  them

188

battell.

RALPH FITCH  ad.

1583-91.

Then  they  pricke  him  with  sharpe  canes,  and  cause  him

to  goe  into  a  strait  house,  and  there  they  put  a  rope

about  his  middle  &  about  his  feet,  and  let  him  stand  there

three  or  foure  dayes  without  eating  or  drinking  :  and  then

they  bring  a  female  to  him,  with  meate  and  drinke,  and

within  few  dayes  he  becommeth  tame. The  chiefe  force  of

the  King  is  in  these  Elephants. And  when  they  goe  into  Use  of  them  in

the  warres  they  set  a  frame  of  wood  upon  their  backes,

bound  with  great  cords,  wherein  sit  foure  or  sixe  men,

which  fight  with  Gunnes,  Bowes  and  Arrowes,  Darts  and

other  weapons. And  they  say  that  their  skinnes  are  so

thicke  that  a  pellet  of  an  Harquebusse  will  scarce  pierce

them,  except  it  bee  in  some  tender  place. Their  weapons

be  very  bad. They  have  Gunnes,  but  shoot  very  badly

in  them,  Darts  and  Swords  short  without  points.

The  King  keepeth  a  very  great  State  :  when  hee  sitteth  King  sits  twice
ibroad,  as  hee  doth  every  day  twice,  all  his  Noblemen  a y'
which  they  call  Shemines,  sit  on  each  side,  a  good  distance
off,  and  a  great  guard  without  them. The  Court  yard  is
very  great. If  any  man  will  speake  with  the  King,  hee
is  to  kneele  downe,  to  heave  up  his  hands  to  his  head,
and  to  put  his  head  to  the  ground  three  times,  when  hee
entreth,  in  the  middle  way,  and  when  hee  commeth  neere
to  the  King :  and  then  hee  sitteth  downe  and  talketh  with
the  King :  if  the  King  like  well  of  him,  hee  sitteth  neere
him  within  three  or  foure  paces : if  hee  thinke  not  well
of  him, hee sitteth further off. When hee goeth to  Kings  power.
iwarre,  hee  goeth  very  strong. At  my  being  there  hee
went  to  Odia  in  the  Countrie  of  Siam  with  three  hundred  p^w  a  Citie
thousand men, and five thousand Elephants. Thirty  m  Siam'
thousand  men  were  his  Guard. These  people  doe  eate
Roots,  Herbes,  Leaves,  Dogs,  Cats,  Rats,  Serpents,  and
Snakes ; they  refuse  almost  nothing. When  the  King
rideth  abroad,  he  rideth  with  a  great  Guard,  and  many
Noblemen,  oftentimes  upon  an  Elephant  with  a  fine  Castle
upon  him  very  fairely  gilded  with  gold ; and  sometimes
upon  a  great  frame  like  an  Hors-liter,  which  hath  a  little
louse  upon  it  covered  over  head,  but  open  on  the  sides,

189

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1583-91.

This  manner which  is  all  gilded  with  gold,  and  set  with  many  Rubies
of  carriage  on  anc}  Saphires,  whereof  hee  hath  infinite  store  in  his  Coun- i
"is'useYin  ^  tr*e> anc^ 1S carr*ed upon sixteene or eighteene mens
Peru,  and  in shoulders. This  Coach  in  their  Language  is  called  Serrion.
Florida.  Very  great  feasting  and  triumphing  is  many  times  before;

[II.  x.i 739.]  tne  King  both  of  men  and  women. This  King  hath  little1
force  by  Sea,  because  he  hath  but  very  few  ships.

Hee  hath  houses  full  of  Gold  and  Silver,  and  bringeth
in  often,  but  spendeth  very  little,  and  hath  the  Mines  of  i
Rubies  and  Saphires,  and  Spinelles.  Neere  unto  the
Palace  of  the  King,  there  is  a  Treasure  wonderfull  rich;:
the  which  because  it  is  so  neere,  hee  doth  not  account  ofi
it :  and  it  standeth  open  for  all  men  to  see  in  a  great'
walled  Court  with  two  Gates,  which  bee  alwayes  open.i
There  are  foure  Houses  gilded  very  richly,  and  covered1
Huge  Idols.  with  Lead :  in  every  one  of  them  are  Pagodes  or  Images
of  huge  stature  and  great  value.  In  the  first  is  the  Picture!
of  a  King  in  Gold  with  a  Crowne  of  gold  on  his  head,  fullj
of  great  Rubies  and  Saphires,  and  about  him  there  standi
foure  Children  of  Gold.  In  the  second  house  is  the]
picture  of  a  Man  in  Silver  wonderfull  great,  as  high  as
an  house ;  his  Foot  is  as  long  as  a  man,  and  hee  is  made
sitting,  with  a  Crowne  on  his  head  very  rich  with  Stones.
In  the  third  house  is  the  picture  of  a  Man  greater  then  the
other  made  of  Brasse,  with  a  rich  Crowne  on  his  head.
In  the  fourth  and  last  house  doth  stand  another  made  of
Brasse,  greater  then  the  other,  with  a  Crowne  also  on  his!
head  very  rich  with  Stones.  In  another  Court  not  farre!
from  this,  stand  foure  other  Pagodes  or  Idols,  marvellousi
great  of  Copper,  made  in  the  same  place  where  they  dod
stand ;  for  they  bee  so  great,  that  they  be  not  to  be|
removed :  they  stand  in  foure  Houses  gilded  very  faire.
and  are  themselves  gilded  all  over  save  their  heads,  anc;
they  shew  like  a  blacke  Morian.  Their  expences  ir
gilding  of  their  Images  are  wonderfull.  The  King  hath
one  Wife  and  above  three  hundred  Concubines,  by  which
they  say  he  hath  fourescore  or  fourescore  &  ten  Children
He  sitteth  in  Judgement  almost  every  day. They  ust

190

RALPH FITCH  a.d.

1583-91.

no  speech,  but  give  up  their  supplications  written  in  the

Leaves  of  a  Tree  with  the  point  of  an  Iron  bigger  then  a  PaPer  °fthe

Bodkin. These  Leaves  are  an  elle  long,  and  about  two onL  eaves  °J

inches  broad  ; they  are  also  double. Hee  which  giveth

in  his  supplication,  doth  stand  in  a  place  a  little  distance

off  with  a  present. If  his  matter  bee  liked  of,  the  King

accepteth  of  his  present, and  granteth his  request : if

his  sute  be  not  liked  of,  hee  returneth  with  his  present ;

for  the  King  will  not  take  it.

In  India  there  are  few  commodities  which serve  for
Pegu,  except  Opium  of  Cambaia,  painted  Cloth  of  Saint
Thome,  or  of  Masulipatan,  and  white  cloth  of  Bengala,
which is spent there in great quantitie. They bring
thither  also  much  Cotton,  Yarne  red  coloured  with  a  Root  An  exce{^
which  they  call  Saja,  which  will  never  lose  his  colour :  it  RoQt  cane/
is  very  well  sold  here,  and  very  much  of  it  commeth  Saja.
yeerely  to  Pegu. By  your  money  you  lose  much. The
ships  which  come  from  Bengala,  Saint  Thome,  and  Masuli-
patan, come  to  the  barre  of  Nigrais  and  to  Cosmin. To
Martavan  a  port  of  the  Sea  in  the  Kingdome  of  Pegu,
come  many  ships  from  Malacca  laden  with  Sandall,  Porce-
lanes,  and  other  wares  of  China,  and  with  Camphora  of
Borneo,  and  Pepper  from  Achen  in  Sumatra. To  Cirion
•  a  Port  of  Pegu  come  ships  from  Mecca  with  Woollen Woollen  cloth
I  cloth,  Scarlets,  Velvets,  Opium,  and  such  like. There  Zi^pfu
t  are  in  Pegu  eight  Brokers,  whom  they  call  Tareghe,  which
are  bound  to  sell  your  goods  at  the  price  which  they  bee
worth,  and  you  give  them  for  their  labour  two  in  the
.  hundred : and  they  be  bound  to  make  your  debt  good,
because  you  sell  your  Merchandizes  upon  their  word. If
|i  the  Broker  pay  you  not  at  his  day,  you  may  take  him
[!  lome,  and  keepe  him  in  your  house : which  is  a  great
,  shame  for  him. And  if  hee  pay  you  not  presently,  you
nay  take  his  Wife  and  Children  and  his  Slaves,  and  bind
:hem  at  your  doore,  and  set  them  in  the  Sunne ; for  that
s  the  Law  of  the  Countrey. Their  current  money  in The  money  °f
hese  parts  is  a  kind  of  brasse  which  they  call  Gansa, Pegu'
therewith  you  may  buy  Gold,  Silver,  Rubies, Muske,

191

A.D.
I583-9I.

The  several/
Merchandizes
of  Pegu.

The  forme  of
their  Temples
or  Varellaes.

The  Tallipoies
or  Priests  of
Pegu.

Beautifull
Temple.

[II.  x.  1740.]

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

and  all  other  things.  The  Gold  and  Silver  is  Merchan-
dise, and  is  worth  sometimes  more,  and  sometimes  lesse,
as  other  wares  bee.  This  brasen  money  doth  goe  by  a
weight  which  they  call  a  Biza ;  and  commonly  this  Biza
after  our  account  is  worth  about  halfe  a  Crowne  or  some-
what lesse.  The  Merchandize  which  bee  in  Pegu,  ares
Gold,  Silver,  Rubies,  Saphires,  Spinells,  Musk,  Benjamin
or  Frankincense,  long  Pepper,  Tinne,  Lead,  Copper,
Lacca  whereof  they  make  hard  Waxe,  Rice,  &  Wine  made
of  Rice,  and  some  Sugar.

The  Elephants  doe  eate  the  Sugar  Canes,  or  else  they
would make very much. And they consume many
Canes likewise in making of their Varellaes or Idoll
Temples,  which  are  in  great  number  both  great  and  small.
They  bee  made  round  like  a  Sugar  loafe,  some  are  as  high
as  a  Church,  very  broad  beneath,  some  a  quarter  of  a
mile  in  compasse : within  they  be  all  earth  done  about
with  stone. They  consume  in  these  Varellaes  great  quan-
tise of  Gold ; for  that  they  bee  all  gilded  aloft : and
many  of  them  from  the  top  to  the  bottome : and  everyp
ten  or  twelve  yeeres  they  must  be  new  gilded,  because
the  raine  consumeth  off  the  Gold : for  they  stand  oper
abroad. If  they  did  not  consume  their  gold in these
vanities,  it  would  bee  very  plentifull  and  good  cheape  ir
Pegu. About  two  dayes  journey  from  Pegu,  there  is  <\
Varelle  or  Pagode,  which  is  the  Pilgrimage  of  the  Pegues :
it  is  called  Dogonne,  and  is  of  a  wonderfull  bignesse,  ana
all  gilded  from  the  foot  to  the  top. And  there  is  ar
house  by  it,  wherein  the  Tallipoies  which  are  their  Priest  1
doe  Preach. This  house  is  five  and  fiftie  paces  in  length
and  hath  three  pawnes  or  walkes  in  it,  and  fortie  grea
Pillars  gilded,  which  stand  betweene  the  walkes ; and  i
is  open  on  all  sides  with  a  number  of  small  pillars,  whicl
bee  likewise  gilded : it  is  gilded  with  Gold,  within  am
without. There  are  houses  very  faire  round  about  fo
the  Pilgrimes  to  lie  in  : and  many  goodly  Houses  fo
the  Tallipoies,  to  Preach  in,  which  are  full  of  Images  bot.
of  men  and  women,  which  are  all  gilded  over  with  Golc

192

\l !

RALPH FITCH

It  is  the  fairest  place,  as  I  suppose,  that  is  in  the  world :
it  standeth  very  high,  and  there  are  foure  wayes  to  it,
which  all  along  are  set  with  Trees  of  fruits,  in  such  wise
that  a  man  maygoe  in  the  shade  above  two  miles  in  length.
And  when  their  Feast  day  is,  a  man  can  hardly  passe  by
water  or  by  land  for  the  great  presse  of  people ;  for  they
come  from  all  places  of  the  Kingdome  of  Pegu  thither  at
their  Feast.

In  Pegu  they  have  many  Tallipoies  or  Priests,  which
Preach  against  all  abuses.  Many  men  resort  unto  them.
When  they  enter  into  their  Kiack,  that  is  to  say,  their
holy  place  or  Temple,  at  the  doore  there  is  a  great  Jarre
of  water  with  a  Cocke  or  ladle  in  it,  and  there  they  wash
their  feet ;  and  then  they  enter  in,  and  lift  up  their  hands
to  their  heads,  first  to  their  Preacher,  and  then  to  the
Sunne,  and  so  sit  downe.  The  Tallipoies  goe  very
strangely  apparelled,  with  one  Camboline  or  thinne  cloth
next  to  their  bodie  of  a  browne  colour,  another  of  yellow,
doubled  many  times  upon  their  shoulder :  and  those  two
bee  girded  to  them  with  a  broad  Girdle :  and  they  have
a  Skinne  of  leather  hanging  on  a  string  about  their  neckes,
whereupon  they  sit,  bare  headed  and  bare  footed ;  for
none  of  them  weareth  Shooes ;  with  their  right  armes
bare,  and  a  great  broad  Sombrero  or  shadow  in  their
hands  to  defend  them  in  the  Summer  from  the  Sunne,  and
in  the  Winter  from  the  Raine.  When  the  Tallipoies  or
Priests  take  their  Orders,  first  they  goe  to  Schoole  untill
they  bee  twentie  yeeres  old  or  more,  and  then  they  come
before  a  Tallipoie,  appointed  for  that  purpose,  whom  they
call  Rowli :  hee  is  of  the  chiefest  and  most  learned,  and
hee  opposeth  them,  and  afterward  examineth  them  many
times,  whether  they  will  leave  their  Friends,  and  the
companie  of  all  Women,  and  take  upon  them  the  habite
of  a  Tallipoie.  If  any  be  content,  then  he  rideth  upon
an  Horse  about  the  streets  very  richly  apparelled,  with
Drums  and  Pipes,  to  shew  that  he  leaveth  the  riches
of  the  world  to  bee  a  Tallipoie.  In  few  dayes  after,  he
is  carried  upon  a  thing  like  an  Horslitter,  which  they  call
x  193  N

A.D.
I583-9I.

Solemne  Feast.

The  Preaching
and  apparell
of  the  Priests.

Row  lie  or  high
Priest.

Orders  how
taken.

A.D.

I583-9I.

Houses  and

Observation  of
new  Moones.

Jamahey  Jive
and  twentie
dayes  journey
'Northeast-
ward from
Pegu.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

a Serion, upon ten or twelve mens shoulders in the
apparell  of  a  Tallipoie,  with  Pipes  and  Drums,  and  many
Tallipoies  with  him,  and  all  his  friends,  and  so  they  goe
with him to his House, which standeth without the
Towne,  and  there  they  leave  him. Every  one  of  them
hath  his  House,  which  is  very  little,  set  upon  sixe  or  eight
Posts,  and  they  goe  up  to  them  with  a  Ladder  of  twelve
or  fourteene  staves. Their  Houses  bee  for  the  most  part
by  the  high  wayes  side,  and  among  the  Trees,  and  in  thei
Woods. And  they  goe  with  a  great  Pot  made  of  wood
or  fine  earth,  and  covered,  tyed  with  a  broad  girdle  upon
their  shoulder,  which  commeth  under  their  arme,  where-
with they  goe  to  begge  their  victuals  which  they  eate,
which  is  Rice,  Fish,  and  Herbes. They  demand  nothing,
but  come  to  the  doore,  and  the  people  presently  doe  give
them,  some  one  thing,  and  some  another : and  they  put
all  together  in  their  Pot :  for  they  say  they  must  eate  of
their  Almes, and therewith content themselves. They
keepe  their  Feasts  by  the  Moone : and  when  it  is  new
Moone they keepe their  greatest feast : and then the!
people  send  Rice  and  other  things  to  that  Kiack  or  Churcr
of  which  they  bee ; and  there  all  the  Tallipoies  doe  meete
which  bee  of  that  Church,  and  eate  the  victuals  which  an
sent  them. When  the  Tallipoies  doe  Preach,  many  ol
the  people  carrie  them  gifts  into  the  pulpit  where  they  si
and  preach. And  there  is  one  which  sitteth  by  them  tx
take  that  which  the  people  bring. It  is  divided  amon[
them. They have none other Ceremonies  nor  serviol
that  I  could  see,  but  onely  Preaching.

I  went  from  Pegu  to  Jamahey,  which  is  in  the  Countre;;
of  the  Langeiannes,  whom  wee  call  Jangomes ;  it  is  fiv<
and  twentie  dayes  journey  Northeast  from  Pegu.  L
which  journey  I  passed  many  fruitfull  and  pleasant  Coun
tries.  The  Countrey  is  very  low,  and  hath  many  fair
Rivers.  The  Houses  are  very  bad,  made  of  Canes,  ani
covered  with  Straw.  Here  are  many  wilde  Buffes,  an
Elephants.  Jamahey  is  a  very  faire  and  great  Towne
with  faire  houses  of  stone,  well  peopled,  the  streetes  ar

194

RALPH FITCH  a.d.

1583-91.

very  large,  the  men  very  well  set  and  strong,  with  a  cloth
about  them,  bare  headed  and  bare  footed  :  for  in  all  these
Countries  they  weare  no  Shooes.  The  Women  bee
much  fairer  then  those  of  Pegu.  Heere  in  all  these
Countries  they  have  no  Wheat.  They  make  some  cakes
of  Rice.  Hither  to  Jamahey  come  many  Merchants  out
of  China,  and  bring  great  store  of  Muske,  Gold,  Silver,
and  many  other  things  of  China  worke.  Heere  is  great
store  of  Victuals :  they  have  such  plentie,  that  they  will
not  milke  the  Buries,  as  they  doe  in  all  other  places.
Heere  is  great  store  of  Copper  and  Benjamin.  In  these
Countries  when  the  people  bee  sicke  they  make  a  vowe  Phy  sicke  in  the
to  offer  meat  unto  the  Divell,  if  they  escape :  and  when  Dwels  name-
they  bee  recovered  they  make  a  Banquet  with  many  Pipes
and  Drums  and  other  Instruments,  and  dauncing  all  the
night,  and  their  friends  come  and  bring  gifts,  Cocos,
Figges,  Arrecaes,  and  other  Fruits,  and  with  great  daunc-
ing and  rejoycing  they  offer  to  the  Divell,  and  say,  they
give  the  Divell  to  eate,  and  drive  him  out.  When  they
bee  dauncing  and  playing  they  will  cry  and  hallow  very
loud  ;  and  in  this  sort  they  say  they  drive  him  away.  And
when  they  be  sicke  a  Tallipoie  or  two  every  night  doth
sit  by  them  and  sing,  to  please  the  Divell  that  hee  should
not  hurt  them.  And  if  any  die  hee  is  carried  upon  a
great  frame  made  like  a  Tower,  with  a  covering  all  gilded
with  gold  made  of  Canes,  carried  with  fourteene  or  six-
teene  men,  with  Drums  and  Pipes  and  other  instruments
playing  before  him  to  a  place  out  of  the  Towne  and  there
is  burned.  He  is  accompanied  with  all  his  Friends  and  They  hurne
Neighbours,  all  men  :  and  they  give  to  the  Tallipoies  or  their  Dead'
Priests  many  Mats  and  Cloth :  and  then  they  returne  to
the  house  and  there  make  a  Feast  for  two  dayes :  and
then  the  Wife  with  all  the  neighbours  Wives  and  her  [II.x.1741.]
friends,  goe  to  the  place  where  he  was  burned,  and  there
they  sit  a  certaine  time  and  cry,  and  gather  the  peeces  of
bones  which  bee  left  unburned  and  burie  them,  and  then
returne  to  their  houses  and  make  an  end  of  all  mourning.
4nd  the  men  and  women  which  bee  neere  of  kin  doe  shave

i95

A.D.

I583-9I.

Caplan  is  the
place  where

the  Rubles  and

other  precious

Stones  are
found.

Anthony  Gal-
vano  writeth
of  these  Bals.
Captaine  Saris
also  and  others.

PURCHAS HTS PILGRIMES

their  heads,  which  they  do  not  use  except  it  be  for
the  death  of  a  friend :  for  they  much  esteeme  of  their
haire.

Caplan  is  the  place  where  they  finde  the  Rubies,
Saphires,  and  the  Spinelles :  it  standeth  sixe  dayes  jour-
ney from  Ava  in  the  Kingdome  of  Pegu.  There  are
many  great  high  Hills  out  of  which  they  digge  them.
None  may  goe  to  the  Pits  but  onely  those  which  digge
them.

In  Pegu,  and  in  all  the  Countries  of  Ava,  Langeiannes,
Siam,  and  the  Bramas,  the  men  weare  bunches  or  little
round  balls  in  their  privie  members :  some  of  them  weare
two  and  some  three. They  cut  the  skinne  and  so  put
them  in,  one  into  one  side  and  another  into  the  other
side ; which  they  doe  when  they  bee  five  and  twentie  or  j
thirtie  yeeres  old,  and  at  their  pleasure  they  take  one  or,
more  of  them  out  as  they  thinke  good. When  they  be
married  the  Husband  is  for  every  Child  which  his  Wife;
hath,  to  put  in  one  untill  hee  come  to  three,  and  then  noi
more : for  they  say  the  women  doe  desire  them. They
were  invented  because  they  should  not  abuse  the  Male
sexe. For  in  times  past  all  those  Countries  were  so  given
to  that  Villanie,  that  they  were  very  scarce  of  people. It
was  also  ordayned,  that  the  Women  should  not  have  past
three  cubites  of  Cloth  in  their  nether  clothes,  which  they
bind  about  them ; which  are  so  strait,  that  when  they
goe  in  the  streets,  they  shew  one  side  of  the  legge  bare
above  the  knee. The  bunches  aforesaid  bee  of  diven
sorts : the  least  be  as  bigge  as  a  little  Walnut,  and  very
round : the  greatest  are  as  bigge  as  a  little  Hens  tggt :
some  are  of  Brasse,  and  some  of  Silver: but  those  of
silver  bee  for  the  King  and  his  Noblemen. These  an
gilded  and  made  with  great  cunning,  and  ring  like  a  little
bell. There  are  some made  of  Lead,  which they  cal
Selwy,  because  they  ring  but  little :  and  these  be  of  lesse:
price  for  the  poorer  sort. The  King  sometimes  taketl
his  out,  and  giveth  them  to  his  Noblemen  as  a  great  gift
and because hee hath used them, they esteeme therr

196

RALPH FITCH

A.D.

I583-9I

greatly. They  will  put  one  in  and  heale  up  the  place  in
seven  or  eight  dayes.

The  Bramas  which  bee  of  the  Kings  Countrey  (for  the
King  is  a  Brama)  have  their  legges  or  bellies,  or  some  part
of  their  body,  as  they  thinke  good  themselves,  made
blacke  with  certaine  things  which  they  have :  they  use  to
pricke  the  skinne,  and  to  put  on  it  a  kind  of  Anile  or
Blacking,  which  doth  continue  alwayes.  And  this  is
counted  an  Honour  among  them :  but  none  may  have  it
but  the  Bramas  which  are  of  the  Kings  kindred.

These  people  weare  no  Beards :  they  pull  out  the  haire  The  people  of
on  their  faces  with  little  pinsons  made  for  that  purpose.  pegu™eareno
Some  of  them  will  let  sixteene  or  twentie  haires  grow
together,  some  in  one  place  of  his  face  and  some  in
another,  and  pulleth  out  all  the  rest :  for  he  carrieth  his
pinsons  alwayes  with  him  to  pull  the  haires  out  assoone
as  they  appeare.  If  they  see  a  man  with  a  beard  they
wonder  at  him.  They  have  their  teeth  blacked  both  men
and  women,  for  they  say  a  Dog  hath  his  teeth  white,
therefore  they  will  blacke  theirs.

The  Pegues  if  they  have  a  sute  in  the  law  which  is  so
doubtfull  that  they  cannot  well  determine  it,  put  two  long
Canes  into  the  water  where  it  is  very  deepe  :  and  both  the
parties  goe  into  the  water  by  the  poles,  and  there  sit  men
to  Judge,  and  they  both  doe  dive  under  the  water,  and  he
which  remaineth  longest  under  the  water  doth  winne  the
sute.

The  tenth  of  Januarie  I  went  from  Pegu  to  Malacca,  Malacca.
passing  by  many  of  the  Ports  of  Pegu,  as  Martavan,  the
Hand  of  Tavi,  from  whence  commeth  great  store  of  Tinne
which  serveth  all  India,  the  Hands  of  Tanaseri,  Jun-
salaon,  and  many  others ;  and  so  came  to  Malacca  the
eight  of  Februarie,  where  the  Portugals  have  a  Castle
which  standeth  neere  the  Sea.  And  the  Countrey  fast
without  the  Towne  belongeth  to  the  Malayos,  which  is  a
kind  of  proud  people.  They  goe  naked  with  a  cloth
ibout  their  middle,  and  a  little  roll  of  cloth  about  their
'leads. Hither  come  many  ships  from  China,  and  from

Trial/  of
suites.

\

197

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1583-91.

the  Malucos,  Banda,  Timor,  and  from  many  other  Hands

of  the  Javas,  which  bring  great  store  of  Spices  and  Drugs,

and  Diamants  and  other  Jewels. The  voyages  into  many

of  these  Hands  belong  unto  the  Captaine  of  Malacca :  so

that  none  may  goe  thither  without  his  licence : which

yeeld  him  great  summes  of  money  every  yeere. The

Portugals  heere  have  oftentimes  warres  with  the  King  of

Achem,  which  standeth  in  the  Hand  of  Sumatra : from

whence  commeth  great  store  of  Pepper  and  other  Spices

every  yeere  to  Pegu  and  Mecca,  within  the  Red  Sea,  and

other  places.

The  Voyage  to When the Portugals goe from Macao in China to

Japan.  Japan,  they  carrie  much  white  Silke,  Gold,  Muske,  and1

Porcelanes : and they bring from thence nothing but

Silver. They  have  a  great  Caracke  which  goeth  thither

every  yeere,  and  shee  bringeth  from  thence  every  yeere

Eight  hundred  above sixe  hundred thousand Crusadoes : and all this

thousand  Silver  of  Japan,  and  two  hundred  thousand  Crusadoes

siZrimp/oyed  more. in  silver  which  tney  bring  yeerely  out  of  India, :

yeere/y  by  the  tney  imploy  to  their  great  advantage  in  China :  and  they'

Portugals  in bring  from  thence  Gold,  Muske,  Silke,  Copper,  Porce-1

China.  lanes, and many other things very costly and gilded.

When  the  Portugals  come  to  Canton  in  China  to  traffique,

they  must  remaine  there  but  certaine  dayes : and  when

they  come  in  at  the  Gate  of  the  Citie,  they  must  enter

their  names  in  a  booke,  and  when  they  goe  out  at  night

they  must  put  out  their  names. They  may  not  lie  in!

the  Towne  all  night,  but  must  lie  in  their  Boats  without

[II.  x.  1742.]  the  Towne. And  their  dayes  being  expired,  if  any  man

remaine  there,  they  are  evill  used  and  imprisoned. A

man  may  keepe  as  many  Concubines  as  hee  will,  but  one

Thewritingof  Wife  onely. All  the  Chineans,  Japonians,  and  Cauchin

the  people  of Chineans  doe  write  right  downwards,  and  they  doe  write

with  a  fine  Pensill  made  of  Dogs  or  Cats  haire.

Laban.  Laban  is  an  Hand  among  the  Javas  from  whence  come

Diamants. the  Diamants  of  the  New  water. And  they  find  them

in  the  Rivers :  for  the  King  will  not  suffer  them  to  digge

Jamba.  the  Rocke. Jamba  is  an Hand  among  the  Javas  also.

198

RALPH FITCH  ad.

1583-91.

from  whence  come  Diamants.  And  the  King  hath  a
masse  of  earth  which  is  Gold ;  it  groweth  in  the  middle  Gold.
of  a  River :  and  when  the  King  doth  lacke  Gold,  they  cut
part  of  the  earth  and  melt  it,  whereof  commeth  Gold.
This  masse  of  earth  doth  appeare  but  once  in  a  yeere ;
which  is  when  the  water  is  low :  and  this  is  in  the  moneth
of  Aprill.

Bima  is  an  other  Hand  among  the  Javas,  where  the Bima.
Women  travell  and  labour  as  our  men  doe  in  England,
and  the  Men  keepe  house  and  goe  where  they  will.

The  nine  and  twentieth  of  March  1588.  I  returned  He  returned
from  Malacca  to  Martavan,  and  so  to  Pegu,  where  I  from  Malacca.
remained  the  second  time  untill  the  seventeenth  of  Sep-
tember, and  then  I  went  to  Cosmin,  and  there  tooke
shipping  :  and  passing  many  dangers  by  reason  of  contrarie
winds,  it  pleased  God  that  wee  arrived  in  Bengala,  in  Bengala.
November  following :  where  I  stayed  for  want  of  passage
untill  the  third  of  Februarie  1589.  and  then  I  shipped
my  selfe  for  Cochin.  In  which  Voyage  wee  endured
great  extremitie  for  lacke  of  fresh  water :  for  the  weather
was  extreame  hot,  and  we  were  many  Merchants  and
Passengers,  and  we  had  verie  many  calmes,  and  hot
weather.  Yet  it  pleased  God  that  we  arrived  in  Ceylon  Ceylon.
the  sixth  of  March,  where  we  staied  five  daies  to  water
and  to  furnish  our  selves  with  other  necessarie  provision.
This  Ceylon  is  a  brave  Hand,  verie  fruitfull  and  faire ;
but  by  reason  of  continuall  Warres  with  the  King  thereof,
all  things  are  verie  deare :  for  he  will  not  suffer  any  thing
to  be  brought  to  the  Castle  where  the  Portugals  be :
wherefore  oftentimes  they  have  great  want  of  victuals.
Their  provision  of  victuals  commeth  out  of  Bengala
everie  yeere.  The  King  is  called  Raja,  and  is  of  great
force;  for  hee  commeth  to  Columbo,  which  is  the  place
where  the  Portugals  have  their  Fort,  with  an  hundred
thousand  men,  and  many  Elephants.  But  they  be  naked
people  all  of  them ;  yet  many  of  them  bee  good  with
their  Pieces  which  be  Muskets.  When  the  King  talketh
with  any  man,  hee  standeth  upon  one  legge,  and  setteth

199

A.D.

I583-9I,

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Gemmes.

the  other  foot  upon  his  knee  with  his  Sword  in  his  hand :
it  is  not  their  order  for  the  King  to  sit  but  to  stand.  His
apparell  is  a  fine  painted  cloth  made  of  Cotton-wooll  about
his  middle :  his  haire  is  long  and  bound  up  with  a  little
fine  cloth  about  his  head  :  all  the  rest  of  his  bodie  is  naked.
His  Guard  are  a  thousand  men,  which  stand  round  about
him,  and  hee  in  the  middle  ;  and  when  he  marcheth,  many
of  them  goe  before  him,  and  the  rest  come  after  him.
They  are  of  the  race  of  the  Chingalayes,  which  they  say
Large  Eares.  are  the  best  kind  of  all  the  Malabars.  Their  Eares  are
verie  large;  for  the  greater  they  are,  the  more  Honour-
able they  are  accounted.  Some  of  them  are  a  spanne
long.  The  Wood  which  they  burne  is  Cinamon  wood,
and  it  smelleth  verie  sweet.  There  is  great  store  of
Rubies,  Saphires,  and  Spinelles  in  this  Hand :  the  best
kinde  of  all  bee  here;  but  the  King  will  not  suffer  the
Inhabitants  to  digge  for  them,  lest  his  Enemies  should
know  of  them,  and  make  Warres  against  him,  and  so  i
drive  him  out  of  his  Countrey  for  them.  They  have  not
Horses  in  all  the  Countrey.  The  Elephants  bee  not  soj
great  as  those  of  Pegu,  which  bee  monstrous  huge :  but
they  say  all  other  Elephants  doe  feare  them,  and  none
dare  fight  with  them,  though  they  bee  verie  small.  Their
Women  have  a  cloth  bound  about  them  from  their  middle:
to  their  knee :  and  all  the  rest  is  bare.  All  of  them  bee
Blacke  and  but  little,  both  Men  and  Women.  Their
Houses  are  verie  little,  made  of  the  branches  of  the;
Palmer  or  Coco-tree,  and  covered  with  the  Leaves  of  the
same  tree.

The  eleventh  of  March  wee  sayled  from  Ceylon,  and
so  doubled  the  Cape  of  Comori.  Not  farre  from  thence,
betweene  Ceylon  and  the  maine  land  of  Negapatan,  they
fish  for  Pearles.  And  there  is  fished  every  yeere  verie
much ;  which  doe  serve  all  India,  Cambaia,  and  Bengala,
it  is  not  so  orient  as  the  Pearle  of  Baharim  in  the  Gulfe
of  Persia.  From  Cape  de  Comori,  wee  passed  by  Coulam,
which  is  a  Fort  of  the  Portugals :  from  whence  commeth
great  store  of  Pepper,  which  commeth  for  Portugall :  for

Blacke  and
little  people.

Cape  de
Comori.

Coulam.

200

RALPH FITCH

oftentimes  there  ladeth  one  of  the  Carackes  of  Portugall.
Thus  passing  the  Coast  we  arrived  in  Cochin  the  two  and
twentieth  of  March,  where  wee  found  the  weather  warme,
but  scarcitie  of  Victuals :  for  here  groweth  neither  Corne
nor  Rice :  and  the  greatest  part  commeth  from  Bengala.
They  have  here  very  bad  water,  for  the  River  is  farre  off.
This  bad  water  causeth  many  of  the  people  to  bee  like
Lepers,  and  many  of  them  have  their  legges  swollen  as
big  as  a  man  in  the  waste,  and  many  of  them  are  scant
able  to  goe.  These  people  here  be  Malabars,  and  of  the
race  of  the  Naires  of  Calicut :  and  they  differ  much  from
the  other  Malabars.  These  have  their  heads  very  full  of
haire,  and  bound  up  with  a  string  :  and  there  doth  appeare
a  bush  without  the  band  wherewith  it  is  bound.  The
men  be  tall  and  strong,  and  good  Archers  with  a  long
Bow  and  a  long  Arrow,  which  is  their  best  weapon :  yet
there  bee  some  Calivers  among  them,  but  they  handle
them  badly.

Here  groweth  the  Pepper ;  and  it  springeth  up  by  a
Tree  or  a  Pole,  and  is  like  our  Ivie  berry,  but  something
longer  like  the  Wheat-eare :  and  at  the  first  the  bunches
are  greene,  and  as  they  waxe  ripe  they  cut  them  off  and
drie  them.  The  leafe  is  much  lesser  then  the  Ivie  leafe
and  thinner.  All  the  Inhabitants  here  have  very  little
houses,  covered  with  the  leaves  of  the  Coco-trees.  The
men  be  of  a  reasonable  stature ;  the  women  little ;  all
blacke,  with  a  cloth  bound  about  their  middle  hanging
downe  to  their  hammes :  all  the  rest  of  their  bodies  be
naked :  they  have  horrible  great  Eares  with  many  rings
set  with  Pearles  and  Stones  in  them.  The  King  goeth
incached,  as  they  doe  all ;  he  doth  not  remaine  in  a  place
above  five  or  sixe  dayes :  he  hath  many  houses,  but  they
:>e  but  little :  his  Guard  is  but  small :  he  removeth  from
one  house  to  another  according  to  their  order.  All  the
Pepper  of  Calicut  and  course  Cinamom,  groweth  here  in
this  Countrey.  The  best  Cinamom  doth  come  from
Ceylon,  and  is  pilled  from  fine  young  Trees.  Here  are
/erie  many  Palmer  or  Coco-trees,  which  is  their  chiefe

201

A.D.
I583-9I.

Cochin.

People  with
swollen  legges
mentioned  also
by  Job.
Huygen.

How  Pepper
groweth.

[II.  x.  1743.]
Blacke  people.

A.D.
1583-91.

The  King
of  Calicut.

Goa.

Chaul.

Ormus.

The  Pepper
tree.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

food  :  for  it  is  their  meat  and  drinke :  and  yeeldeth  many
other  necessarie  things,  as  I  have  declared  before.

The  Naires  which  be  under  the  King  or  Samorin,  which
bee  Malabars,  have  alwayes  Warres  with  the  Portugals.
The  King  hath  alwayes  peace  with  them ;  but  his  people
goe  to  the  Sea  to  rob  and  steale.  Their  chiefe  Captaine
is  called  Cogi  Alii ;  he  hath  three  Castles  under  him.
When  the  Portugals  complaine  to  the  King,  he  saith  he
doth  not  send  them  out :  but  hee  consenteth  that  they  goe.
They  range  all  the  Coast  from  Ceylon  to  Goa,  and  goe  by
foure  or  five  Parowes  or  Boates  together ;  and  have  in
every  one  of  them  fiftie  or  threescore  men,  and  boord
presently.  They  doe  much  harme  on  that  Coast,  and  take
every  yeere  many  Foists  and  Boates  of  the  Portugals.
Many  of  these  people  bee  Moores.  This  Kings  Countrey
beginneth  twelve  leagues  from  Cochin,  and  reacheth  neere
unto  Goa.  I  remained  in  Cochin  untill  the  second  of
November,  which  was  eight  moneths ;  for  that  there  was
no  passage  that  went  away  in  all  that  time :  if  I  had  come
two  dayes  sooner  I  had  found  a  passage  presently.  From:
Cochin  I  went  to  Goa,  where  I  remained  three  dayes.
From  Cochin  to  Goa,  is  an  hundred  leagues.  From  Goa
I  went  to  Chaul,  which  is  threescore  leagues,  where  l|
remained  three  and  twentie  dayes :  and  there  making  my
provision  of  things  necessarie  for  the  Ship,  from  thence  I
departed  to  Ormus  ;  where  I  stayed  for  a  passage  to  Balsora
fiftie  dayes. From  Goa  to  Ormus  is  foure  hundred  leagues.

Heere  I  thought  good,  before  I  make  an  end  of  this  my;
Booke,  to  declare  some  things  which  India  and  the!
Countrey  farther  Eastward  doe  bring  forth.

The  Pepper  groweth  in  many  parts  of  India,  especially
about  Cochin  :  and  much  of  it  doeth  grow  in  the  Fields
among  the  bushes  without  any  labour :  and  when  it  is;
ripe  they  goe  and  gather  it.  The  Shrub  is  like  unto  oui;
Ivie-tree :  and  if  it  did  not  runne  about  some  Tree  oi
Pole,  it  would  fall  downe  and  rot.  When  they  first  gathei
it,  it  is  greene ;  and  then  they  lay  it  in  the  Sunne,  and  ii
becometh  blacke.

202

RALPH FITCH

The  Ginger  groweth  like  unto  our  Garlike,  and  the
root  is  the  Ginger :  it  is  to  bee  found  in  many  parts  of
India.

The  Cloves  doe  come  from  the  lies  of  the  Moluccoes,
which  bee  divers  Hands  :  their  Tree  is  like  to  our  Bay-tree.

The  Nutmegs  and  Maces  grow  together,  and  come  from
the  lies  of  Banda :  the  tree  is  like  to  our  Walnut-tree,  but
somewhat  lesser.

The  white  Sandoll  is  wood  very  sweet  and  in  great
request  among  the  Indians ;  for  they  grind  it  with  a  little
water,  and  annoint  their  bodies  therewith :  it  commeth
from  the  He  of  Timor.

Camphora  is  a  precious  thing  among  the  Indians,  and  is
sold  dearer  then  Gold.  I  thinke  none  of  it  commeth  for
Christendome.  That  which  is  compounded  commeth  from
China :  but  that  which  groweth  in  Canes  and  is  the  best,
commeth  from  the  great  He  of  Borneo.

Lignum  Aloes  commeth  from  Cauchinchina.

The  Benjamin  commeth  out  of  the  Countries  of  Siam
and  Jangomes.

The  Long  Pepper  groweth  in  Bengala,  in  Pegu,  and  in
the  Hands  of  the  Javas.

The  Muske  commeth  out  of  Tartarie,  and  is  made
after  this  order,  by  report  of  the  Merchants  which  bring  it
to  Pegu  to  sell ;  In  Tartarie  there  is  a  litle  beast  like  unto
a  yong  Roe,  which  they  take  in  snares,  and  beat  him  to
death  with  the  blood :  after  that  they  cut  out  the  bones,
ind  beat  the  flesh  with  the  blood  very  small,  and  fill  the
skin  with  it :  and  hereof  commeth  the  Muske.

Of  the  Amber  they  hold  divers  opinions  ;  but  most  men
say  it  commeth  out  of  the  Sea,  and  that  they  finde  it  upon
:he  shores  side.

The  Rubies,  Saphires,  and  Spinelles,  are  found  in
Pegu.

The  Diamants  are  found  in  divers  places,  as  in  Bisnagar,
n  Agra,  in  Delli,  and  in  the  Hands  of  the  Javas.

The  best  Pearles  come  from  the  Hand  of  Baharim  in  the
Persian  Sea,  the  worser  from  the  Piscaria,  neere  the  He  of

A.D.

1583-91.

Ginger.

Cloves.

Nutmegs  and
Maces.

Camphora.

Lignum  Aloes.

Long  Pepper.
Muske.

Amber.

Rubies,
Saphires,  and
Spinelles.
Diamants.

\

203

A.D.

I583-9I.

Spodium.

Basora.
Babilon.

[II.  x.  1744.

Mosul.
Merdin.

Or/a.

Bir.

Aleppo.
Tripolis.

PUKCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Ceylon,  and  from  Aynam  a  great  Hand  on  the  Southermost
Coast  of  China.

Spodium  and  many  other  kindes  of  Drugges  come  from
Cambaia.

Now  to  returne  to  my  Voyage ;  from  Ormus  I  went  to
Balsora  or  Basora,  and  from  Basora  to  Babilon :  and  wee
passed  the  most  part  of  the  way  by  the  strength  of  men
by  hailing  the  Boat  up  the  River  with  a  long  cord.  From
Babilon  I  came  by  land  to  Mosul,  which  standeth  neere
to  Ninive,  which  is  all  ruinated  and  destroyed  ;  it  standeth
fast  by  the  River  of  Tigris.  From  Mosul  I  went  to
Merdin,  which  is  in  the  Countrey  of  the  Armenians ;  but
now  there  dwell  in  that  place  a  people  which  they  call
Cordies,  or  Curdi.  From  Merdin  I  went  to  Orfa,  which
is  a  very  faire  Towne,  and  it  hath  a  goodly  Fountaine  full
of  Fish ;  where  the  Moores  hold  many  great  Ceremonies
and  opinions  concerning  Abraham :  for  they  say  hee  did
once  dwell  there.  From  thence  I  went  to  Bir,  and  t;o
passed  the  River  of  Euphrates.  From  Bir  I  went  to
Aleppo,  where  I  stayed  certaine  moneths  for  companie;
and  then  I  went  to  Tripolis ;  where  finding  English
shipping,  I  came  with  a  prosperous  voyage  to  London,
where  by  Gods  assistance  I  safely  arrived  the  nine  and
twentieth  of  Aprill  1 591.  having  beene  eight  yeeres  out
of  my  native  Countrey.

204

JESUIT OBSERVATIONS OF INDIA

A.D.

1599-

Chap.  VII.

Indian  Observations  gathered  out  of  the  Letters
of  Nicolas  Pimenta,  Visiter  of  the  Jesuites  in
India,  and  of  many  others  of  that  Societie,
written  from  divers  Indian  Regions ;  prin-
cipally relating  the  Countries  and  accidents  of
the  Coast  of  Coromandel,  and  of  Pegu.

Icholas  Pimenta,  the  Indian  Visiter  in  his  N.  Pimentas
Letter  to  Claudius  Aquaviva  the  Generall  Letter.
of the Jesuites, relateth his visitation-
Voyage from Goa in December 1597.
To  Cochin  first, the  occurrents  wherein
hee  had  certified  by  Letter  in  the  Vice-
royes  ship  or  Caracke,  which  being  richly
laden  was  accidentally  and  irrecoverably  fired,  the  Ordnance Carrick
thundring  Death  and  lightning  manifold  mischieves  to  the  burnt.
Rescuers. Hee  sent  from  Cochin  a  Mission  to  Bengala,
Francis  Fernandes,  and  Dominicke  Sosa  ;  another  to  Pegu,
Melchior Fonsera, and Andrew Boves. The effect
whereof  appeared  in  their  letters. Fernandes  writ  from  Letter  of
Siripur  in  Bengala,  in  Januarie  1599.  the  dangers  of  their  Francis
Voyage  by  Malabar  Pirats,  a  three  dayes  Tempest,  the  Fernandes-
shelves  of  Ganges,  before  they  arrived  at  Gullum,  two
hundred  and  ten  miles  up  that  River : where  they  left
one  of  their  Societie  which  could  meanly  write  to  teach
that  Schoole. Sosa  indevoured  to  learne  the  Bengalan
Language  and  translated  into  it  a  tractate  of  Christian
Religion, in which were confuted the Gentile and
Mahumetan errours : to which was added a short
Catechisme by way of Dialogue, which the Children
frequenting  the  Schoole  learned  by  heart,  and  taught  the
Servants  in  their  Families,  with  the  signe  of  the  Crosse
and  other  things  belonging  to  Christianitie. They  per-
swaded  them  to  erect  an  Hospitall,  buying  a  house  and
housholdstuffe  to  that  purpose,  and  reformed  the  courses
of  many  which  lived  in  Piracie,  and  loose  lusts : and  in

m

A.D.

*599-

Ckaudecan.

Lac.

Note  the  cause
why  Jesuites
&  Friers  have
so  much  pre-
vailed; viz.
their  exemp-
tions from
ordinarie
Jurisdiction
&  priviiedges
above  it  by
Papa//  grants.
Boyes  sent.
N.  Pimenta.

Porca.
Cou/an.
Travancor.
Madure.

C.  Cori.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

October  departed  thence  to  the  Great  Port  sixe  hundred
miles  from  the  Small  Port  or  Porto  Pequeno,  not  without
dangers  from  Tigres  and  Theeves.  In  the  midway  in  the
Kingdome  of  Chandecan,  where  they  stayed  a  moneth  to!
reforme  disorders  by  Lusts  and  Discord,  and  Baptised  two  i
hundred ;  The  King  gave  them  a  place  to  build  a  Church
in,  and  monies  to  that  purpose,  with  libertie  to  Preach  the
Gospell.  In  the  Woods  of  that  Kingdome  great  store  of.
Waxe  is  made  which  is  thence  transported  to  other  parts
of  India.  At  Siripur  in  December,  they  arrived  and  were
received  as  Angels  from  Heaven,  by  reason  the  Bishop  of
Cochin  had  Excommunicated  the  new  Captayne  with  his*
followers,  from  which  Sentence  they  hoped  the  Jesuites
would  exempt  them  :  and  although  wee  were  loth  to  inter-
meddle, yet  could  we  not  but  give  answer  to  them.  At
Siripur  the  Governour  gave  us  leave  to  Preach  and  assigned
sixe  hundred  peeces  of  Gold  for  revenue,  and  roome  to
build  a  Church,  with  promise  of  all  necessaries.  I  send
you  two  Boyes  of  Bengala  to  bee  instructed  in  the  Col-
ledge,  and  next  yeere  will  send  two  others  as  your  Worship
commanded.  When  we  came  to  Chatigan  wee  learned
that  the  King  of  Aracan  was  gone  to  the  warre  of  Pegu.
Thus  farre  Fernandes.

Father  Baltasar  Sequeira  was  Elected  to  the  Peguan
mission, which  went to the Towne of Saint Thomas,
thence  to sayle  with  the  first  opportunitie  with  Father
John  Costa  for  Pegu : but  wee  arrived  at  Saint  Thomas
before  they  were  gone. We  departed  from  Cochin,  ancj
in  the  way  visited  the  new  Church  in  the  Kingdome  of
Porca ; thence  came  to  Coulan,  and  passed  the  rest  of  th(
way  with  great  feare ; for  the  King  of  Travancor  hac
certified  us,  that  the  King  of  Madure  was  comming  agains
him with seventie thousand armed men, and man)
Elephants. But  wee  visited  three  and  thirtie  Churches  ir
his  Kingdome,  and  turned  to  the  Promontorie  Cori,  anc
beyond  that  to  the  Fishing  Coast  even  to  Turacurin. h
the  Towne  Punicale,  I  met  F.  Henrie  whom  F.  Xavier  i
had  there  left  two  and  fiftie  yeeres  before,  still  of  abl<

206

JESUIT OBSERVATIONS OF INDIA

bodie,  and  daily  writing  in  the  Malabar  language  to
illustrate  the  Christian  Religion.  Periapatan  is  the  chiefe
Citie  of  the  Paravelines,  where  wee  left  a  Residence  of  two
Priests,  which  might  passe  as  farre  as  Tripalacur,  which  two
places  by  Cape  Ramanaucor  are  made  farre  distant  by  Sea,
but  by  Land  are  neere  each  other.  We  passed  that  Cape
and  came  to  Talemanare  at  the  entrance  of  the  He  Manare,
and  having  visited  the  Churches  in  that  Hand,  passed  the
River  and  went  by  land  to  the  Pearle-fishing.

Wee  rested  all  night  in  the  Tents  of  Fishermen,  which
with  many  lights  round  about  prohibited  the  assaults  of
Elephants.  But  we  saw  nothing  but  Peacockes ;  and  a
Viper  had  conveyed  herselfe  into  our  stuffe,  which  useth
to  kill  within  seven  houres  after  her  striking,  which  was
espied.  There  come  from  the  Regions  about  sixtie
thousand  into  these  Tents  of  Fishermen,  bringing  all  their
Families :  Our  Priests  say  Masse  in  the  Churches  erected
on  the  shore,  appease  tumults  and  have  care  of  good  order,
without  whom  all  that  companie  would  bee  dissolved.
Wee  passed  from  Manare  not  without  great  perill  by
tempest  to  Negapatan,  where  Father  Francis  Paez  lieth
buried,  whom  the  Inhabitants  worship  as  a  Saint.  Many
Portugals  dwell  there,  and  many  winter  there,  which  come
from  the  Coast  of  China,  Bengala,  Pegu,  and  Malaca.
They  buy  a  place  for  five  hundred  Duckets  for  a  new
Residence  of  ours.

The  Naich  of  Tanjaor  desired  a  Church  in  his  Port,  and
at  Trangobar  sixe  miles  from  Negapatan  another  was
begun.  From  hence  wee  went  by  land  to  Saint  Thomas,
travelling  twelve  dayes  in  a  pleasant  Countrey,  beautified
with  Groves  and  Streames,  enriched  with  a  fertile  soile  and
wholsome  eyre.  But  so  prodigious  and  innumerable  were
their  Idols,  in  many  very  faire  Temples,  and  other  lesse
Oratories  almost  without  number,  that  Superstition  con-
tended with  Ambition ;  and  the  Colosses  of  their  Idols
were  removed  from  place  to  place  in  Chariots  as  high  as
steeples,  by  thousands  of  men  setting  their  shoulders  to

I  the  Wheeles. In  our  way  wee  saw  Cidambaran  the  mother
207

A.D.
1599.

Periapatan.
Tripalacur.

[H.  x.i 745.]
He  Manare.

The  fishing
Coast.

Peacockes.
Viper.

Pearle-fishing.

Negapatan.
F.  Paez
worshipped.

Naichus  or
King  of
Tanjoar.
Trangobar.

Idols  and  Idol-
chariots.

Cidambaran.

A.D.

1599-

Naichus  or
King  o/Gingi.

Superstitious
madnesse  of
Jogues.

Hanimants

Legend.

Ape-deitie.

Legendarie

lies.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Citie  of  their  Superstitions,  furnished  with  gorgeous
Temples.  Their  Brachmanes  have  thirtie  thousand
Duckets  revenue,  whereof  but  twelve  thousand  are  now
payed.

The  Naichus  of  Gingi  was  come  thither,  in  whose  j
Dominion  it  standeth.  Hee  commanded  that  we  should
be  brought  to  his  Presence.  Before  us  two  hundred
Brachmanes  went  in  a  ranke  to  sprinkle  the  house  with
Holy  water,  and  to  prevent  Sorcerie  against  the  King,
which  they  use  to  doe  every  day  that  the  King  first  entreth
into  any  house.  We  found  him  lying  on  a  silken  Carpet
leaning  on  two  Cushions,  in  a  long  silken  Garment,  a  great
Chaine  hanging  from  his  necke,  distinguished  with  many
Pearles  and  Gemmes,  all  over  his  brest,  his  long  haire
tyed  with  a  knot  on  the  crowne,  adorned  with  Pearles;:
some  Princes  and  Brachmanes  attended  him.  He  enter-
tained us  kindly,  and  marvelled  much  that  wee  chewed  notj
the  leaves  of  Betele  which  were  offered  us,  and  dismissed
us  with  gifts  of  precious  Clothes  wrought  with  Gold,
desiring  a  Priest  of  us  for  his  new  Citie  which  hee  was
building.  The  next  day  wee  went  away,  which  we  had
not  done,  had  any  told  us  of  a  strange  Spectacle  that  day
there  to  bee  seene,  which  wee  after  came  certainly  to
know.

There  were  twentie  Priests  which  they  call  Jogues,,
which  threw  themselves  from  the  highest  pinnacle  of  the
Temple  for  this  cause.  There  is  a  Temple  of  Perimal,
in  which  is  worshipped  an  Ape  called  Hanimant,  whom
they  report  to  have  beene  a  God,  and  for  I  know  not
what  offence,  with  many  other  thousands  of  Gods  (in  like
wise  metamorphosed)  to  have  beene  transformed  into  an
Ape,  and  to  have  ruled  over  all  those  Apes  in  that  place.
But  having  necessarie  occasion  to  passe  from  Ramanancoi
to  Ceilan,  wanting  shipping,  hee  leaped  over  the  waters,  anc
at  every  leape  made  an  Hand  or  hill  of  Sands,  so  making
way  for  himselfe  and  his.  They  say  it  was  his  Tooth,
which  the  Viceroy  Constantine  cast  into  the  fire,  notwith-
standing the  Ethnikes  offer  of  three  hundred  thousand

208

I JESUIT OBSERVATIONS OF INDIA  a.d.

1599.

Duckets  for  the  Redemption. These  Ethnikes  also  fable,

that  a  holy  man  at  Cidambaran  for  penance  sake  kept  his

foot  many  yeeres  nayled  thorow  with  an  Iron  nayle ; and

when  God  forbad  him  that  penance,  hee  refused  and  said

he  would  never  give  it  over,  till  hee  might  see  God  dancing

about  him. At  length  God  yeelded  to  him,  and  with  the

Sunne,  Moone,  and  Starres  danced  before  that  Saint,  they

playing  on  Instruments  and  dancing. From  God,  as  he

danced,  fell  a  Gold  chaine  off  his  foot,  whence  Cidambaran

received  the  name,  signifying  A  Golden  Chaine. Now

at this time was a great Controversie amongst these

Gentiles,  whether  it  were  lawfull  to  place  the  Signe  of

Perimal  (which  is  nothing  but  a  Mast  or  Pole  gilded,  with

an  Ape  at  the  foot)  in  the  Temple  of  Cidambaran. Some

refused,  others  by  their  Legats  importunatly  urged,  and

the  Naichus  of  Gingi  Decreed  to  erect  it  in  the  Temple,

the  Priests  of  the  Temple  which  were  the  Treasurers,

withstanding,  and  threatning  if  it  were  done  to  cast  downe

themselves  from  the  top. The  Brachmanes  of  the  Temple

sware  to  doe  the  like  after  they  had  buried  the  former,

which  yet  after  better  advise  they  performed  not. About

twentie  had  perished  in  that  precipitation  on  that  day  of

our  departure ; whereat  the  Naichus  angrie,  caused  his

Gunners  to  shoot  at  the  rest,  which  killed  two  of  them,

the  rest  wandring  in  uncertaine  places. A  Woman  also

was  so  hote  in  this  zealous  quarrell  that  shee  cut  her  owne

throat. The Mast with the Ape was neverthelesse

rected.

Wee  travelled  by  the  favour  of  the  Naichus  and  the

Princes  of  Trividin,  and  Salavaccha  his  Subjects,  to  Saint  Saint  Thomas

Thomas. This  was  the  ancient  Citie  Meliapor,  sometimes  or  Me/iapor.

:hiefe  Citie  of  the  Kingdome  of  Coromandel,  now  subject

:o  the  Ragiv  or  King  of  Vissanagor,  (by  the  Portugals

:alled  Bisnaga, and  by  Writers termed  Narsinga,  of  a  Prodigious  title

King  of  that  name)  who  of  the  Ethnikes  in  those  parts  is °ffhe  KinS°f

icknowledged  with  this  portentuous  Stile. The  Husband BlsnaSar-

)f  Subvast  (that  is)  of  good  Fortune,  God  of  great  Pro- [II.  x.  1746.]

/inces,  King  of  the  greatest  Kings,  and  God  of  Kings,

x  209  o

A.D.

J599-

Chandegrin.

Relations  of
Pegu.

*Fredericke
saith,  that  this
King  had  26.
Kings  subject
to  him.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Lord  of  all  Horse-forces,  Master  of  those  which  know  not;
how to Speake, Emperour of three Emperours, Con-j
querour  of  all  which  hee  seeth,  and  Keeper  of  all  which
hee  hath  overcome ; Dreadfull  to  the  eight  Coasts  of  the
world,  the  Vanquisher  of  Mahumetan  Armies,  Ruler  of
all  Provinces  which  hee  hath  taken,  Taker  of  the  Spoilesi
and  Riches  of  Ceilan ; which  farre  exceedeth  the  most
Valiant  men,  which  cut  off  the  head  of  the  Invincible
Viravalalan ; Lord  of  the  East,  South,  North,  West,  andi
of the Sea ; Hunter  of  Elephants ; which liveth  and
glorieth  in  virtue Militarie. Which  titles  of  Honour
enjoy eth the  most  Warlike  Vencatapadin  Ragiv  Deva-
magan Ragel, which now raigneth and  governeth this
World. Hee  now  resideth  in  Chandegrin,  and  in  times
past raigned farre and wide, from Cape Cori to the;
Kingdomes  adjoyning  to  Goa,  on  the  Coasts  of  both  Seas,
till  Idalcan  and  others  (as  the  Naichi  before  mentioned)
shooke  off  his  yoke. Hee  was  now  embroiled  in  warn,
with  the  Naichus  of  Madure. I  appointed  Father  Simor
Sa  Rector  of  the  Colledge  of  Saint  Thomas,  to  begin  si
Mission  thither  as  soone  as  hee  could. A  Seminarie  was'
erected  at  Meliapor,  of  the  chiefe  Children  of  the  Bada-
gades  by  the  almes  of  Devout  men,  and  a  Schoole  of  th(j
Malabars  adjoyned,  in  which  is  taught  the  Tongue  oi
Tamul  (or  vulgar)  and  the  Badagan  used  by  the  Courtiers;
Whiles  a  new  Peguan  mission  was  talked  of,  there  cam(
ships  from  Pegu  which  related  the  turbulent  state  of  tha;
Kingdome,  and  I  will  heere  adjoyne  what  I  learned  0
credible  persons  which  a  long  time  had  beene  eye-witnessei
of  Pegues  prosperitie  and  adversitie.

THe  King  of  Pegu,  Father  of  the  present,  of  the  raa
of  the  Bramas,  was  the  mightiest  of  all  which  have
raigned  in  Pegu.  For  hee  subdued  twelve  Kingdome
to  his  Empire  *  viz.  the  Kingdome  of  Cavelan,  wheno;
come  the  best  Saphires  and  Rubies ;  Ava,  in  which  ar<
Mines  of  Ciprian  Brasse,  Lead  and  Silver ;  Bacan,  ii
which  are  many  Gold  mines; Tangram,  which  abound

JESUIT OBSERVATIONS OF INDIA

with  Lead  and  Lac ;  Prom,  which  aboundeth  also  in  Lead
and  Lac ;  Jangoma,  stored  with  Copper,  Muske,  Pepper,
Silke,  Gold,  Silver ;  Lawran,  where  is  store  of  Bejoine,
enough  to  lade  ships ;  the  eight  and  ninth,  are  the
Kingdomes  of  Trucon,  whence  many  China  wares  are
transported  to  us ;  the  tenth  and  eleventh,  are  the
Kingdomes  of  Cablan  abounding  in  Gemmes,  neere  to
the  Kingdome  of  Aava,  betwixt  it  and  China.  The
twelfth,  is  the  Kingdome  of  Sion  (or  Siam)  which  he
subdued  last,  and  in  that  Expedition  is  said  to  have  armed
1060000.  men,  taking  one  of  ten  with  him  to  that  warre.
Hee  raigned  sixe  and  thirtie  yeeres  in  such  affluence  of  all
things,  that  one  hundred  Ships  laden  with  Rice  would
not  have  seemed  to  diminish  the  store.  The  plentie  of
Gemmes  was  such,  that  in  one  moneth  a  man  might  have
bestowed  many  talents  of  Gold  thereon.  Yet  now  there
are  scarcely  found  in  all  that  Kingdome  any  men,  but  a
few  which  with  the  King  have  betaken  themselves  to  the
Castle,  which  with  Women  and  Children  are  said  not  to
exceed  seven  thousand.  For  in  late  times  they  have  beene
brought  to  such  miserie  and  want,  that  they  did  eate  Mans
flesh  and  kept  publike  shambles  thereof,  Parents  abstained
not  from  their  Children,  and  Children  devoured  their
Parents.  The  stronger  by  force  preyed  on  the  weaker,
and  if  any  were  but  skinne  and  bone,  yet  did  they  open
their  intrailes  to  fill  their  owne  and  sucked  out  their
braines.  The  women  went  about  the  streets  with  knives
to  like  butcherly  purposes.  The  cause  of  this  misery
was  this.

The  former  King  being  dead, his  Sonne  the  second
moneth  of  his  Raigne  hearing  that  the  King  of  Ava  his

;  Uncle  affected  some  change  of  State,  and  that  fortie  of
lis  Grandes  had  conspired  with  him,  committed  those
ortie  and  Burned  them  all,  together  with  their  Wives,

:  Children,  Friends  and  Familiers,  causing  all  that  fled  out
}f  the  fire  to  bee  Cut  in  peeces.  This  estranged  his  Sub-
ects  hearts,  whereof  hee  had  experience  in  the  Warre
igainst  his  Uncle,  and  therefore  off  ered  him  single  Combate

A.D.

1599.

See  Fredericke
of  this  Expe-
dition, then  in

Miseries  of
Pegu:  and
how  caused.

Miserable
execution.

See  this  Com-
bate before  in
Ba/bi,

211

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1599.

upon  an  Elephant,  the  survivor  to  possesse  the  Scepter.
In  this  Combat,  the  King  of  Pegu  slew  his  Uncle  of  Ava.
But  whiles  hee  was  in  that  expedition,  the  King  of  Siam
entred  the  Peguan  Confines  with  an  Armie  as  farre  as  a
Towne  called  Satan,  divulging  a  rumour  that  hee  came  to
ayde  his  Lord  the  King.  This  was  much  stomacked  by
the  King  of  Pegu,  who  sent  an  Armie  against  him,  com-
manding the  Generall  to  bring  him  Captive.  But  this
Armie  disposed  it  selfe,and  neglecting  the  Kings  command,
returned  to  their  homes.  The  King  after  his  returne  sent
to  the  Siamite  to  come  to  him,  who  offered  to  continue
his  Tribute,  but  refused  to  come.

Siam  invaded.  Two  yeeres  after,  the  Peguan  with  an  Armie  of  nine
hundred  thousand  men,  marcheth  against  Siam  and
besiegeth  it.  The  Siamite  makes  him  faire  offers,  but
protracted  the  time  till  the  third  moneth,  that  in  the
inundation  which  happeneth  in  March,  the  Kings  Armie
might  be  indammaged.  That  River  like  Nilus  (but  in
another  moneth)  useth  to  cover  one  hundred  and  twentie
miles  circuit  in  ground,  and  so  overwhelmed  this  Armie,

Peguan  losses,  that  scarcely  seventy  thousand  of  that  great  multitude
returned  to  Martavan,  and  those  without  Horses  and
Elephants.  The  King  of  Pegu  having  once  and  agaitie
made  such  Expeditions  in  vaine,  at  length  hee  sent  hij
Brother  the  King  of  Jangoma  with  many  Commanders
twise  also  hee  sent  his  Sonne  thither  with  a  great  Armie :
which  committed  hostile  spoyles,  but  yet  ever  returnee
with  the  losse  of  more  then  halfe  their  Armie :  and  hi;
Sonne  in  the  last  Expedition  was  killed  with  shot  of  1
Piece. Thus  enraged  and  resolved  to  revenge,  hee  mad(

[II.  x.  1747.]  great  preparations  three  yeeres  together,  and  then  though
to  carrie  with  him  all  the  Peguans  to  this  warre.  But  oi
them,  presenting  the  former  dreadfull  slaughters  and  losse
to  their  mindes,  some  became  Talapoies  (Friers  in  thei
Ethnicisme)  others  hid  themselves  in  Desarts,  and  Woods
and  many  sold  themselves  for  Slaves.  The  King  cause(
Ximibogo  his  Uncle  to  search  the  publike  Records,  and  t<
presse  one  halfe  to  the  warres,  he  also  proclaimed  that  al

212

JESUIT OBSERVATIONS OF INDIA  a.d.

1599.
which  in  such  a  space  had  turned  Talapoies  should  returne
secular ;  the  young  should  be  compelled  to  the  warres,  the
old  to  be  exiled  into  the  Region  of  the  Bramas,  whom  hee
after  changed  away  for  Horses.  Hee  ordained  also  that
all  the  Peguans  should  be  branded  in  the  right  hand,  that
every  mans  name,  Countrie  and  condition  might  be  known.
They  seeing  themselves  thus  opprobriously  branded,
Talapoies  forced  to  returne  Secular,  and  old  men  exchanged
for  Horses,  began  to  rebell.

The  Cosmians  first  set  a  King  over  them,  against  whom  Cosmi
the  King  sent  an  Armie,  which  spoiled  all  the  Countrie,  destr°yd-
and  brought  many  Captives,  whom  the  King  caused  to  be
burned : and  continuing  his  warre  upon  them,  forced  by
famine,  they  yeelded  to  his  mercy,  but  he  with  exquisite
torments  slue  them  all. The  next  stage  of  his  furie  was
the  Kingdome  of  Ava,  where  hee  commanded  his  sonne  Ava
the  Governour  to  bring  them  all  into  the  Kingdome  of  &&#&&
Pegu,  now  so  destitute  of  Inhabitants ; but  the  aire  not
agreeing,  they  brake  out  in  pushes  and  diseases,  which
also  infected  the  Natives,  that  some  with  impatience  of
the  torture  threw  themselves  into  the  River. Some  of  the
Pegusians  in  this  time  had  with  the  Siamites  help,  brought
the  Castle  of  Murmulan  into  their  possession,  whom  the  Murmukm
King  besieged  a  yere  together. And  the  Siamites  com-  abated,
ming  on  them  unexpected,  overthrew  his  Armie,  killed
his  Horses  and  Elephants,  slue  and  drowned  many,  tooke
others : and  so  became  Lords  of  all  that  Countrie,  and
many Peguan Peeres fled to them ; whose wives,
:hildren,  and  families  the  King  after  his  manner  destroyed
itterly  with  fire,  sword  and  water. And  thus  the  whole
:ract from Pegu to Martavan and Murmulan, was  Martavan
>rought  to  a  Wildernesse.  desolate.

Whiles  hee  besieged  Murmulan,  hee  sent  for  his  sonne
:he  Vice-roy  of  Prom,  who  imagined  that  it  was  to
)roclaime  him  Heire  apparant  and  so  preferre  him  to  his
dder  brother  the  Prince  of  Ava :  but  when  he  came  was
sent  to  the  siege  of  Murmulan,  which  he  excusing  was
hreatned by his father, and commanded presently to

213

A.D.

J599-

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Prom
threatned.

Forsaken.

salute  his  brother,  and  bee  gone  thither.  Hee  returned
to  Prom,  and  rebelled  against  his  father.  In  these  broiles
the  Siamite  taketh  opportunitie,  and  marcheth  against
Pegu  in  harvest  time.  Some  of  their  fruits  were  hastily
inned,  the  rest  burned  by  the  Kings  command.  The
Pegu  besieged.  Siamite  layeth  siege  to  Pegu,  in  which  were  then  numbred
an  hundred  and  fifty  thousand  Peguans,  Bramans,  and  of
other  Nations ;  three  thousand  peeces  of  Ordnance,  one
thousand  of  them  brasse.  The  siege  continued  from
Januarie  to  Aprill,  1596.  By  the  helpe  of  some  Portugals
and  Turkes,  the  Citie  escaped,  and  the  rumour  of
Portugals  comming  by  the  way  of  Camboia  raised  the
siege,  the  Siamite  fearing  to  lose  his  owne,  whiles  he
sought  to  winne  that  which  was  anothers.  But  Famine
succeeded  with  a  worse  siege,  which  made  the  forren
Souldiers  leave  the  Citie,  a  few  remayning  which  were
fled  from  Tangu.  The  King  hereupon  commanded  the
King  or  Vice-roy  of  Tangu,  to  gather  the  harvest  then
ripe,  and  to  imbarke  it  and  the  people  for  Pegu.  Hee
answered  that  hee  would  send  halfe,  and  that  he  or  his
sonne  would  come.  The  King  sends  foure  principall  men
to  fetch  him  and  the  provision  by  force.  The  Tanguan
kills  those  Commissioners,  possessed  himselfe  of  the  ships
and  Souldiers,  and  by  Proclamation  prohibiteth  returne
and  aide  to  Pegu.  Thus  the  famine  encreased  in  the
Citie,  insomuch  that  they  killed  and  did  eate  each  other.
The  King  caused  the  people  to  be  numbred,  and  there
finding  seven  thousand  Siamites,  caused  them  all  to  be'
slaine,  and  divided  the  provision  to  the  rest,  of  which
there  were  not  of  all  ages  and  sexes  above  thirty  thousand
remayning.

The  King  of  Prom  held  out  three  yeeres  against  his
father,  and  then  repenting,  sent  messengers  that  he  would
bring  all  the  people  of  Prom,  which  were  50000.  to  the
Citie.  Hereupon  the  King  pardoned  him,  and  sent  him
presents.  But  his  chiefe  Counsellour  which  had  set  him
on  worke,  fearing  his  head  would  be  the  price  of  his,
reconciliation,  poisoned  this  young  Prince,  and  aspiring

Famished.

214

JESUIT OBSERVATIONS OF INDIA

A.D.

*599-

Prom  made  a
Wildernesse.

Trie  kes  for
treason.

Great
treasures.

to  the  Kingdome,  was  within  seven  dayes  after  killed  by
the  Grandes,  of  whom  every  weeke  almost  yeelded  a
rising  Sunne  setting  in  a  bloudy  Cloude  :  insomuch  that
in  two  moneths  space,  of  fifty  thousand  scarcely  fifty  men
remained,  which  going  to  Pegu,  left  Prom  to  the  habita-
tion of  wilde  beasts.  Many  Pegusians  yet  remained  in
other  Countries  whither  they  had  fled,  as  in  Jangoma,
Arracan,  Siam.  The  Talipois  perswaded  the  Jangoman,
brother  to  the  King  of  Pegu,  to  usurpe  the  Kingdome,
which  he  refused,  pretending  his  Oath.  They  replied,
that  no  Religion  hindered,  if  he  placed  his  brother  in  the
Vahat,  that  is  a  Golden  throne,  to  be  adored  of  the  people
for  a  God.  He  also  found  out  another  tricke,  that  his
brother  of  Pegu  was  borne  before  his  father  was  enthron-
ized,  himselfe  after  he  was  now  King,  begotten  also  of  the
old  King  of  Pegus  daughter,  whereas  the  Kings  mother
was  not  a  Kings  daughter.  The  King  is  said  to  have
killed  two  hundred  Eunuches,  lest  they  should  betray
his  huge  treasures :  it  is  also  reported,  that  his  father
caused  to  be  cast  three  hundred  sixty  sixe  Combalengas
of  Gold  (a  great  kinde  of  Gourd)  which  none  knoweth
where  they  be.  He  hath  also  sixty  seven  Idols  of  Gold
adorned  with  Jewels  of  all  sorts,  foure  Store-houses  with
great  plenty  of  Lead,  Brasse,  Ordnance,  without  weight.  [II.  x.  1748.]
This  was  then  the  state  of  the  Kingdome  of  Pegu,  brought
to  one  Citie,  and  that  almost  destroyed.

The  rest  wee  will  supply  out  of  the  Epistle  of  Andrew
Boves,  and  Francis  Fernandes,  Jesuites.  This  writes
concerning  Martavan,  that  it  is  a  large  Kingdome,  but  now
desolate  by  the  Siamites  warre  no  lesse  then  Pegu.  But
two  hundred  thousands  of  the  Inhabitants  lurke  in  Woods
and  Mountaines.  The  King  hath  only  two  or  three
fortified  Cities,  not  able  to  withstand  the  Siamite.  The
fertilitie  of  that  Countrie  is  such,  that  it  yeeldeth  yeerely  a
threefold  Harvest,  and  at  what  time  of  the  yeere  soever
they  sowe,  the  seeds  come  to  ripenesse.  Cochin  and
Malaca  alone  carrie  from  thence  yeerely  thirty  ships  laden
with  Graine. The  Woods  also  abound  with  divers  Fruit-

215

Fernandes  his
Letter.

Martavans
fertilitie.

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1599.

trees ;  the  Herbes  are  almost  all  both  odoriferous  and
medicinable.  It  is  able  to  lade  yeerely  twenty  of  the
greatest  ships  with  Pitch  and  Timber.  Their  Fountaines,
Rivers,  wilde  and  tame  Beasts,  Mines  of  Gold,  Silver,
Brasse,  Iron,  and  Lead,  also  of  Rubies  and  Gemmes,
likewise  their  commodious  Ports  I  omit :  as  also  the
temperature  of  the  aire,  and  the  hopes  of  converting  the
countrie,  since  frustrated.
Boves  his  Boves  writeth,  the  eight  and  twentieth  of  March,  1 600,

J-ter ' fP  tnat  tne  King  of  Pegu  beleagred  with  a  straight  siege  by
taken.  ^e Kings of Tangu and Arracan, delivered himselfe

(unable  to  hold  out  any  longer)  to  the  King  of  Tangu,
which  caused  his  head  and  the  Queenes  also  to  bee  cut  off.
The  like  he  did  to  his  sonne  the  Prince. After  this  he
went  to  the  Tower  where  the  Kings  treasure  was  kept, ,
600.  which  was  so  much  that  scarcely  sixe  hundred  Elephants

Elephants  and  anc[  as  manv  Horses  were  sufficient  to  carrie  away  the
burdens  of  Gold  and  Gemmes  onely.  For  I  say  nothing  of  the
gold  and  gems  Silver  and  other  Metals,  as  things  of  no  price.  The  King
taken.  of  Arracan  then  absent,  hearing  that  the  King  of  Tangu

against  his  agreement  with  him  had  taken  all  this  treasure
for  himselfe,  and  dismissed  the  Armie  without  his  Know-
ledge, came  thither  with  the  aide  of  the  Portugals  to
invade  Tangu.  I  went  thither  with  Philip  Brito,  and  in
Sirian.  fifteene  dayes  arrived  at  Sirian,  the  chiefe  Port  in  Pegu.

Miserable  It  is  a  lamentable  spectacle  to  see  the  bankes  of  the  Rivers
spectacle.  set  wjt]1  mfinite  fruit-bearing  trees,  now  overwhelmed
with  ruines  of  gilded  Temples,  and  noble  edifices ;  the
wayes  and  fields  full  of  skulls  and  bones  of  wretched
Peguans,  killed  or  famished  and  cast  into  the  River,  in;
such  numbers  that  the  multitude  of  carkasses  prohibiteth.
the  way  and  passage  of  any  ship ;  to  omit  the  burnings
and  massacres  committed  by  this  the  cruellest  of  Tyrants
that  ever  breathed.
Silver  and  The  King  of  Arracan  is  now  ending  his  businesse  ati

Brasse.  fat  Tower  of  Macao,  carrying  thence  the  Silver  which  the

King  of  Tangu  had  left,  exceeding  three  millions,  besides
many  and  rare  pieces  of  brazen  Ordnance  remayning  in

216

JESUIT OBSERVATIONS OF INDIA

A.D.

1599.

that  Castle. The  Kings  of  Siam  and  Jangoma  with  great

forces  have  invaded  the  King  of  Tangu  to  despoile  him  of

his  spoiles. The  King  of  Arracan  is  yet  Lord  of  Pegu,

though not  acknowledged by those which fled or hid

themselves,  and  hath  delivered  the  Port  of  Sirian  to  Philip

de  Brito,  that  the  Peguan  fugitives  might  have  refuge

under Portugall protection. Brito is in hand with

building  the  Fort,  and  is  earnest  for  a  Residence  of  our

Society. The  King  of  Siam  in  his  way  towards  Tangu

made  irruption  into  the  Kingdome  of  Martavan,  but  was

twice  repelled  with  losse ; and  hath  therefore  reenforced

his  Armie,  withall  commanding  two  of  his  Captaines,  for Hot  punish-

negligence  and  cowardise  to  bee  drowned  in  Caldrons  of

scalding  Oile,  after  which  entring  a  third  time  hee  hath

subdued that Kingdome of Martavan. What after

happened  in  Pegu  and  Siam,  See  before  in  Master  Floris

his Journall. Wee will returne to Coromandel with

Pimenta.  Pimenta.

courage.
Pet.  Williams.
Floris.,  sup.  I.
I.  cap.  14.

THe  Towne  of  Saint  Thomas  is  famous  by  the
Cathedrall  Church,  the  Apostles  Sepulchre,  his  house
in  the  little  Hill,  his  martyrdome  in  the  great  Hill,  and
the  miracle  of  the  Crosse.  Wee  went  thence  to  Gingi ;
the  greatest  Citie  we  have  seene  in  India,  and  bigger  then
any  in  Portugall,  Lisbon  excepted.  In  the  midst  thereof
is  a  Castle  like  a  Citie,  high  walled  with  great  hewen  stone
and  encompassed  with  a  ditch  full  of  water  :  in  the  middle
of  it  is  a  Rocke  framed  into  Bulwarkes  and  Turrets,  and
made  impregnable.  The  Naicus  shewed  us  his  golden
stuffe,  amongst  which  were  two  great  Pots  carried  on
their  shoulders  full  of  water  for  the  King  to  drinke.  The
Jogues  which  had  returned  by  land  from  Bengala,  brought
in  such  vessels  water  from  Ganges  for  the  Courtiers,  they
were  encompassed  with  filthie  base  clothes,  which  they
hissed  as  holy  vessels  notwithstanding.  The  Naicus
ippointed  our  lodging  in  the  Tower,  but  the  heat  forced
as  to  the  Grove  (though  consecrated  to  an  Idoll)  the  Jogues
imbitiously  affecting  applause  by  tolerating  in  the  open

217

Town  of  Saint
Thomas.

Gingi.

Jogues  succes-
sors of  Gym-
nosophists.
They  have
another  sort
called  Sanas-
ses,  which  live
inDesarts,and
sometimes  come
forth  starke
naked,  as  those
mentioned  by
Onesicritus
and  Megas-
thenes,  but  not
so  learned.

A.D.

1599-

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Court the most intolerable Sun-beames, sometimes at
noone (but sildome) interposing  a thinne  Vaile. Wee
saw  one  of  them,  which  being  shut  up  in  Iron  Cage  had
there  made  himselfe  perpetuall  prisoner,  so  walking  with
his  head  and  feet  out, that  he  never  could  sit  nor  lie
downe. At  the  sides  of  the  Cave  hung  forth  an  hundred
Lampes, which at certaine times foure Jogues his
attendants lighted. He jetted with great jollitie and
glorie  as  if  he  gave  light  to  the  world  by  his  splendour.
The  next  day  the  inner  part  of  the  Castle  was  shewed  us,:
having  no  entrance  but  by  the  Gates  which  are  perpetually;
guarded. In  the  Court  the  younger  sort  were  exercised  in;
Tilts. Wee  saw  much  Ordnance,  Powder,  and  Shot ; a,
[II.  x.i  749.] Spring  also  of  cleare  water. The  Naicus  had  beene  here
kept  by  his  Uncle,  whom  yet  by  helpe  of  his  friends  he
forced  to  become  in  the  same  place  his  unwilling  suc-i
cessour, having put out his eyes. He was guarded
homeward  with  a  thousand  armed  men  : in  the  Streete
were  ranked  three  hundred  Elephants  as  it  were  fitted  to
the  warre. At  the  Porch  one  entertained  him  with  an
Oration in his praise, a thing usuall  in their solemne
pompes. Christapanaichus  (that  is  his  name)  shewed  us
another  day  his  store  of  Jewels,  and  gave  us  leave  in  his
new Citie, which hee called Christapatama, to fixe a
residence  and  erect  a  Church,  two  hundred  pieces  of  gold
being  assigned  to  the  Priest  thereof,  his  Letters  Patents
written  in  the  Tamulan  and  Badagan  Languages. This
new  Citie  is  seated  in  the  Land  Arungor,  neere  the  mouth
of  the  River  Velarius. Thence  we  came  to  the  River
Colocam. Cholgana  a  great  man  received  us  with  great
kindnesse. Hee is old and severe, and hath caused
Crocodiles to bee put in his River for his securitie,
charging  them  not  to  hurt  his  owne  people. They  never-;
thelesse  killed  a  man,  whereupon  I  knowe  not  by  what  arts
hee  tooke  two  of  them  which  were  the  malefactors,  and
put  chaines  about  their  neckes,  and  cast  them  into  a  miry
place,  there  to  bee  stoned  by  the  people,  and  to  die  of]
famine. One  of  these  we  saw.

218

Cholganas
Crocodiles
charmed.

JESUIT OBSERVATIONS OF INDIA

Wee  passed  thence  to  Trangambaran,  and  thence  to
Tanjaor,  the  walls  whereof  are  built  of  hewen  stone,  and
it  is  the  seat  of  another  Naichus,  who  had  lately  renounced
the  world  and  prepared  himselfe  for  death,  accompanied  in
that  devotion  by  his  seventy  wives,  all  which  were  to  be
burned  in  the  same  fire  with  his  carkasse.  Hee  had
bestowed  five  thousand  pieces  of  gold  in  sweet  woods
against  that  day.  The  Naichus  of  Madure  is  very  super-
stitious, and  resigned  his  Palace  to  his  Idol  Chochanada,
upon  the  authoritie  of  a  Priest  which  said  the  Idoll  by
night  had  bidden  him  tell  the  King,  that  hee  or  I  must
dwell  in  this  house.  Hee  daily  sits  in  judgement,  a
Bramene  standing  by,  which  ever  and  anone  whineth  out
the  name  of  the  Idoll  Aranganassa ;  and  when  one  is
weary  another  succeedeth,  and  continueth  that  acclamation,
though  hee  sits  sixe  houres.

Simon  Sa  writes  from  Meliapor,  the  twentieth  of
November,  1598.  amongst  many  other  things  of  Papa-
ragiu,  which  in  one  house  kept  three  hundred  Brachmans,
and  gave  hospitalitie  to  the  Pilgrims  which  went  to,  or
came  from  Tripiti,  a  famous  Idoll  three  miles  from
Chandegrin.  They  purge  their  sinnes  by  washing  their
bodies  and  shaving  their  heads  and  beards.  The  Idoll
is  in  a  cold  hill  compassed  with  fertile  valleyes  abounding
with  fruits,  which  none  dare  touch.  There  are  plenty  of
Apes,  which  are  so  tame,  that  they  will  take  meate  out
of  ones  hand.  The  people  take  them  for  a  Nation  of
gods  which  hold  familiaritie  with  Perimal.  They  worship
Perimal  in  many  figures,  of  a  Man,  an  Oxe,  Horse,  Lion,
Hog,  Ducke,  Cocke.

The  Archbishop  of  Goa  Alexius  Menesius  visited  the
Diocesse  of  Angamala,  the  Archbishop  there  being  dead :
he  caused  their  bookes  to  be  purged  from  innumerable
Nestorianismes,  appointed  eighty  Parishes,  kept  a  Synode,
and  tooke  away  those  things,  which  in  their  bookes  were
against  the  Pope.

Emanuel  Carvalius  in  his  Letters  from  Malaca,  in  Janu-
arie,  1599.  writeth  of  an  Embassage  sent  thither  from  the

219

A.D.

1599.

Trangu-

baram.

Tanjaor.

70.  Wives
burned  with
their  Hus-
bands car-
kasse. See
after.

Simon  Sa  his
Letter.

Reformation  of
Saint  Thomas
Christians.

Letter  of
Carvalius

A.D.

1599.

Camboya.

The  Laos.  See
Frier  Gaspar
Cruz.  to.  2.
lib.  1.  cap.  10.

Letters  of
Veiga.

Trivalur.
Idol-proces-

BlackeSantus.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

King  of  Camboia  to  obtaine  some  of  the  Fathers  of  Saint \
Paul  (so  the  Jesuites  are  called  in  the  East  Indies)  to  bee
sent  into  his  Kingdome.  This  Kingdome  of  Camboia
hath  Cauci  of  Cochinchina  on  the  North,  Sion  (or  Siam)
on  the  South,  which  also  lieth  in  the  midst  betwixt,1
Pegu  and  Camboia,  the  Sea  on  the  other  side.  It  hath  a.
River  which  overfloweth  yeerely.  The  Region  is  fertile,
and  hath  also  store  of  Bejoine  and  other  merchandise.
Within  twenty  yeeres  last  past  this  numerous  people  hathi
beene  much  diminished  by  warres  with  Siam.  Beyond:
Camboia  are  the  Laos,  which  inhabite  on  the  Rivers  sides,:
and  Lakes  made  by  it.  For  the  River  runneth  twelve
hundred  miles,  and  the  head  thereof  is  not  knowne  byj
the  Camboyans.  The  Laos  which  dwelt  above  on  the
River  twenty  yeeres  agoe,  would  needs  come  downe  the
River  with  an  Armie  of  two  hundred  thousand  men,  which
all  perished,  and  the  King  of  Camboia  perished  also  in|
the  battell.  His  sonne  by  helpe  of  the  Portugals  expelled
the  Laos,  which  ten  yeeres  together  infested  the  Countrie.l
They  have  many  Cities  and  Temples  like  the  Chinois  and
Japonians,  with  their  Bonzos.

Emanuel  de  Veiga  from  Chandegrin,  in  September,
1599.  writeth  of  his  Voyage  from  Saint  Thomas  thither.
The  second  day  at  night  they  lay  at  Trivalur,  where  they
saw  their  Idols  solemne  Procession  by  night,  carried  into
the  street  by  eight  Porters  in  a  high  Throne :  the  Image
it  selfe  not  above  three  spannes  long  clothed  with  an  upper
garment  of  red  silke,  an  inner  shirt  of  linnen.  An  Ele-
phant went  before  the  pompe,  consecrated  to  the  Idoll,
carrying  a  white  Banner  on  his  backe  ;  and  after  him  three
Oxen  sacred  also  thereto,  on  which  sate  Drummers :
after  them  Trumpetters  and  Pipers  with  diversified  Instru-
ments, straight,  crooked,  great,  small.  These  all  made  a
confused  sound,  without  any  observation  of  order  and
time.  After  these  came  30.  women-dancers,  which  have
devoted  themselves  to  the  Idols  perpetuall  service,  which
may  not  marrie,  but  prostitute  themselves  for  the  most
part,  all  goodly  and  richly  arrayed,  all  carrying  Lampes

220

JESUIT OBSERVATIONS OF INDIA

A.D.

1599.

burning.  And  the  Idol  came  in  the  Rere  with  his  Porters
and  Priests,  living  on  the  revenues  of  the  Temple.  The
common  people  followed  with  lights.  They  passed  foure
streets,  and  in  their  returne  set  the  Idoll  in  a  place  erected
with  pillars  with  a  stone  roofe,  and  all  the  companie  com-
passed the  Idoll  three  times,  which  done,  they  carried
him  to  the  Temple,  where  foure  Brachmanes  entertained  [II.  x.  1750.]
him,  which  bowed  their  heads  to  the  Idoll ;  one  of  them
bringing  on  his  head  a  basket  of  boyled  Rice  for  the  Idols
supper,  attended  with  Fanners  to  scarre  away  Flies.  When
the  meate  was  set  downe,  a  Curtaine  was  drawne,  lest  any
might  see  the  Idoll  eating,  the  Instruments  sounding  the
while.  Soone  after  the  Curtaine  was  drawne  againe,  the
Rice  removed,  the  Ministers  gone  in,  and  one  comes  forth
which  makes  an  Oration  in  his  praise,  and  then  all  went
into  the  Temple,  where  foure  houres  were  spent  in  idle-
idol-rites.  The  King  of  Bisnagar  gave  us  leave  to  erect
a  Church  and  make  residence  there,  and  was  much  de-
lighted with  the  picture  of  Our  Lady,  and  the  things
uttered  by  Father  Ricius.  This  Father  Francis  Ricius
writ  at  the  same  time  of  the  great  pleasure  which  the  King
tooke  in  beholding  the  Image  of  our  Saviour,  and  of  the
blessed  Virgin  advocatae  nostrae,  (these  are  his  words)  by
whose  intercession  the  King  and  Nobilitie  became  so  kinde
to  us  to  give  us  leave  to  build  a  Church,  erect  Crosses,
and  convert  men,  insomuch  that  fifty  families  were  to  give
place,  and  depart  from  the  ground  thereto  assigned  us.
The  King  of  Bisnagar  writ  a  Letter  to  Pimenta,  begin-
ning thus,  The  King  of  Kings  and  Great  Lord,  the  Knight
of  Knights,  Ovencatepati,  that  is,  King  after  God,  &c.

Melchior  Cotignus  his  Letter  of  that  Mission  men-
tioned Alexander  an  Englishman  a  Brother  of  the
Jesuiticall  Order  (Linschoten  cap.  92.  mentioneth  New-
bury, Fitch,  and  two  other  Englishmen  imprisoned  at
Goa,  where  a  Jesuite  sought,  in  hope  so  to  get  the  wealth
of  the  Merchants  in  their  hands,  to  bring  them  to  their
Order,  whereto  one  was  perswaded,  a  Painter,  of  which
facultie  they  have  few  in  the  Indies,  and  so  made  use  of

Letter  of
Ricius.

Letter  of

Cotignus.

Alexander  an

English-

Indian-

Jesuite.

221

A.D.

1599.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Perimals

feasts  and
legend.

him,  hoping  also  to  winne  the  rest,  which  after  escaped :'

Fitches  Voyage you have before) He mentioneth alscj

Greater  edips  their  superstitious  opinion  touching  the  Sunnes  Eclipse.

°{unnethCn thC  cause<^>  as  tnat  °f  tne  Moone>  wnen  tne  Dragon  (one  of.
their  constellations)  biteth  either  of  them ;  for  which
cause  they  all  fast  that  day,  crying  out  that  the  Dragon
devoureth  the  Sunne.  At  the  Feast  of  Perimals  marriage
was  such  concourse  of  people,  that  that  dayes  offering
amounted  to  two  hundred  thousand  Ducats,  the  King.,1
Queene  and  Courtiers  being  present.  The  Idoll  was  earn
ried  in  a  great  triumphall  Chariot  drawne  by  ten  thousand
men,  about  midnight,  a  mile  and  an  halfe.  The  Feast  of
Kowes  was  solemnized  a  moneth  before,  and  all  the  wayes
rilled  with  them :  for  they  hold  Perimal  to  have  beene  the
sonne  of  a  Kow.  The  rumour  was  that  the  King  would
warre  upon  the  Naichus  of  Tangaor  called  Astapanaicus.
but  his  death  prevented  it,  his  three  hundred  Concubines
being  burned  with  him  to  honour  his  Exequies,  willingly
leaping  into  the  flames.  Three  Tribes  are  the  principal.
Inhabitants  of  Chandegrin,  Bramenes,  Rajus,  and  Cietius.!
of  which  they  say  that  Perimal  brought  forth  the  first
out  of  his  head,  the  second  out  of  his  breast,  the  third
out  of  his  bellie,  the  rest  as  baser  vulgar  from  his  feet
No  marvell  that  they  are  all  so  apish  from  such  original.

Chap. VIII.

John  Huighen  van  Linschoten  his  Voyage  to  Goa.
and  observations  of  the  East  Indies,  abbreviated.

Pon  the  eight  of  Aprill,  being  Good-
friday,  in  the  yeere  of  our  Lord  1583
which  commonly  is  the  time  when  theii
ships  set  sayle  within  foure  or  five  dayei
under  or  over,  wee  all  together  issued  oui
of  the  River  of  Lisbon,  and  put  to  Sea
setting  our  course  for  the  Hands  of
Madera.

The  ships  are  commonly  charged  with  foure  or  five

Chap.  3.
The  manner
and  order  used
in  the  ships  in
their  Indian
Voyages.

222

JOHN HUIGHEN VAN LINSCHOTEN  a.d.

1583.
hundred  men  at  the  least,  sometimes  more,  sometimes
lesse,  as  there  are  Souldiers  and  Saylers  to  be  found.
When  they  goe  out  they  are  but  lightly  laden,  onely  with
certaine  pipes  of  Wine  and  Oyle,  and  some  small  quan-
tise of  merchandise,  other  thing  they  have  not  in,  but
balast,  and  victuals  for  the  companie,  for  that  the  most  and
greatest  ware  that  is  sent  into  India,  are  Rials  of  eight,
because  the  principall  Factors  for  Pepper  doe  every  yeere
send  a  great  quantitie  of  money,  wherewith  to  buy  Pepper,
as  also  divers  particular  Merchants,  as  being  the  least
ware  that  men  can  carrie  into  India  :  for  that  in  these  Rials
of  eight  they  gaine  at  the  least  forty  per  cento  :  when  the
ships  are  out  of  the  River,  and  enter  into  the  Sea,  all
their  men  are  mustered,  as  well  Saylers  as  Souldiers,  and
such  as  are  found  absent  and  left  on  land,  being  registred
in  the  Bookes,  are  marked  by  the  Purser,  that  at  their
returne  they  may  talke  with  their  Sureties,  (for  that  every
man  putteth  in  Sureties)  and  the  goods  of  such  as  are
absent,  being  found  in  the  ship  are  presently  brought  forth
and  prised,  and  an  Inventorie  being  made,  it  is  left  to  be
disposed  at  the  Captaines  pleasure.  The  like  is  done  with
their  goods  that  die  in  the  ship,  but  little  of  it  commeth
to  the  owners  hands,  imbeseled  and  privily  made  away.

The  Master  and  Pilot  have  for  their  whole  Voyage
forth  and  home  againe,  each  man  an  hundred  and  twenty
Milreyes,  every  Milrey  being  worth  in  Dutch  money  seven
Gilders,  and  receive  before  hand,  each  man  foure  and
twenty  Milreyes,  besides  that  they  have  Chambers  both
under  in  the  ship,  and  Cabbins  above  the  hatches,  as  also
Primage,  and  certaine  tunnes  fraight.  The  like  have  all  [II.ac.1751.]
the  other  Officers  in  the  ship  according  to  their  degrees,
;and  although  they  receive  money  in  hand,  yet  it  costeth
them  more  in  gifts  before  they  get  their  places,  which
are  given  by  favour  and  good  will  of  the  Proveador.

The  chiefe  Boat-swain  hath  for  his  whole  pay  50.
Milreyes,  and  receiveth  10.  in  ready  money.  The
Guardian,  that  is  the  quarter  master,  hath  1400.  Reyes
*:he moneth, and for fraught 2800. and receiveth 7.

223

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1583.

Milreyes  in  ready  money.  The  Seto  Piloto,  which  is  the|
Masters  mate,  hath  1200.  Reyes,  which  is  three  Duckets
the  moneth,  and  as  much  fraught  as  the  quarter  Master:
Two  Carpenters,  and  two  Callafaren  which  helpe  them,
have  each  man  foure  Ducats  a  moneth,  and  3900.  Milreyes
fraught.  The  Steward  that  giveth  out  their  meate  and
drinke,  and  the  Merinho,  which  is  he  that  imprisoneth
men  aboord,  and  hath  charge  of  all  the  Munition  and
Powder,  with  the  delivering  forth  of  the  same,  hath  eacr
man  a  Milreye  the  moneth,  and  2340.  Reyes  fraught,
besides  their  Chambers  and  freedome  of  Custome,  as  alsc1
all  other  Officers,  Saylers,  Pikemen,  Shot,  &c.  have  ever)
man  after  the  rate,  and  every  one  that  serveth  in  the  ship
The  Cooper  hath  three  Duckets  a  moneth,  and  3900
Reyes  fraught.  Two  Strinceros,  those  are  they  whidi
hoise  up  the  Main-yard  by  a  wheele,  and  let  it  down?
againe  with  a  wheele  as  neede  is,  have  each  man  one
Milrey  the  moneth,  and  2800.  Reyes  fraught.  Three  anc
thirty  Saylers  have  each  man  one  Milrey  the  moneth,  anc
2800.  Reyes  fraught.  Seven  and  thirty  Rowers  have  eacl
man  660.  Reyes  the  moneth,  and  i860.  Reyes  fraught
foure  Pageants,  which  are  Boyes,  have  with  their  fraugh;
443.  Reyes  the  moneth,  one  master  Gunner,  and  eigh
under  him,  have  each  man  a  different  pay,  some  more
some  lesse.  The  Surgeon  likewise  hath  no  certaine  pay
The  Factor  and  Purser  have  no  pay  but  onely  thei
Chambers,  that  is  belowe  under  hatches,  a  Chamber  o
twenty  pipes,  for  each  man  ten  pipes,  and  above  hatche
each  man  his  Cabbin  to  sleepe  in,  whereof  they  mak
great  profit.  These  are  all  the  Officers  and  other  person
which  sayle  in  the  ship,  which  have  for  their  portion  ever
day  in  victuals,  each  man  alike,  as  well  the  greatest  as  tlM
least,  a  pound  and  three  quarters  of  Bisket,  halfe  a  Can  o
wine,  a  Can  of  water,  an  Aroba  which  is  32.  pound  0
salt  flesh  the  moneth,  some  dried  Fish,  Onions  and  Gar
leeke  are  eaten  in  the  beginning  of  the  Voyage,  as  bein[
of  small  value  ;  other  provisions,  as  Sugar,  Honie,  Raisins
Prunes,  Rice,  and  such  like,  are  kept  for  those  which  ar

224

JOHN HUIGHEN VAN LINSCHOTEN  a.d.

1583.
sicke :  yet  they  get  but  little  thereof,  for  that  the  Officers
keepe  it  for  themselves,  and  spend  it  at  their  pleasures,
not  letting  much  goe  out  of  their  fingers :  as  for  the
dressing  of  their  meate,  Weede,  Pots,  and  Pannes,  every
man  must  make  his  owne  provision :  besides  all  this  there
is  a  Clarke  and  Steward  for  the  Kings  Souldiers  that  have
their  parts  by  themselves,  as  the  Saylers  have.

This  is  the  order  and  manner  of  their  Voyage  when
they  sayle  unto  the  Indies,  but  when  they  returne  againe,
they  have  no  more  but  each  man  a  portion  of  Bisket  and
Water  untill  they  come  to  the  Cape  de  Bona  Esperance,
and  from  thence  home  they  must  make  their  owne  pro-
visions. The  Souldiers  that  are  passengers  have  nothing
else  but  free  passage,  that  is  roome  for  a  Chest  under
hatches,  and  a  place  for  their  Bed  in  the  Orloope,  and
may  not  come  away  without  the  Vice-royes  pasport,  and
yet  they  must  have  beene  five  yeeres  Souldiers  in  the
Indies  before  they  can  have  licence,  but  the  Slaves  must
pay  fraught  for  their  bodies,  and  custome  to  the  King.
The  one  and  twentieth  of  September  wee  entred  the  River
into  the  Road  under  the  Land  of  Bardes.

Of  the  Towne  and  Hand  of  Goa,  chiefe  Citie

of  India.

THe  Citie  of  Goa,  is  the  Metropolitan  or  chiefe  Citie Chap.  28.
of  all  the  Orientall  Indies,  where  the  Portugals  have
their  traffique,  where  also  the  Vice-roy,  the  Arch-bishop,
the  Kings  Counsell,  and  Chancerie  have  their  residence,
and  from  thence  are  all  places  in the  Orientall  Indies,
governed  and  ruled. There  is  likewise  the  Staple  for  all
,  Indian  commodities,  whither  all  sorts  of  Merchants  doe
.  resort,  comming  thither  both  to  buy  and  sell,  and  out  of
Arabia,  Armenia,  Persia,  Cambaia,  Bengala,  Pegu,  Sian,
Malacca, Java, Molucca, China, &c. The Citie and
[land  of  Goa  lieth  under  15.  degrees,  on  the  North  side,
;  |md  is  distant  from  the  Equinoctiall,  (by  the  way  that  the
Dortugals ships doe come thither from Mossambique)
oure  hundred  miles. It  is  an  Hand  wholly  compassed
x  225  p

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

J583-

about  with  a  River,  and  is  above  three  miles  great,  it

lieth  within  the  Coast  of  the  Firme  Land,  so  that  the

Hand,  with  the  Sea  coast  of  the  Firme  Land,  doe  both

reach  as  farre  each  as  other  into  the  Sea. It  is  onely

separated  from  the  firme  Land,  by  an  arme  of  the  Sea,  or|

of  the  River,  that  runneth  in  by  the  North  side  of  the

Towne,  and  so  round  about  the  Hand  to  the  South  side,

where  it  entreth  againe  into  the  Sea,  and  is  in  forme  almost

like  a  Halfe-moone. The  River  runneth  even  unto  thej

Towne,  and  is  indifferent  broad,  there  are  betweene  thej

Firme  Land  and  the  Hand,  certaine  small  Hands  that  are|

all  inhabited  by  the  naturall  borne  Countrimen,  and  on  the

other  side  of  the  Towne  the  River  is  there  so  small,  thati

in  Summer  time,  by  wading  to  the  knees  in  water,  a  man

may  passe  it  over  on  foot. On  the  which  side  the  Hand

hath  a  wall  with  certaine  Bulwarkes,  which  the  Portugals

of  late  yeeres  have  caused  to  be  made,  to  defend  them

from  the  Firme  Land  in  time  of  warre,  as  it  often  hapneth,

for  it  hath  divers  times  beene  besieged  by  Dialcan  or

Hidalcam,  at  the  mouth  and  the  entrie  of  the  River. On

the  North  side  lieth  the  Land  of  Bardes,  which  is  high

[II.  x.i 75 2.]  Land,  under  which  Land  the  Portugals  doe  anchor  safely
out  of  all  danger,  and  there  they  have  a  place  to  lade  and

Bardes.  unlade  their  wares. This  Land  of  Bardes  is  also  under  the

Portugall  subjection,  and  is  full  of  Villages  inhabited  witl"
people  that  are  of  the  Firme  Land,  lying  above  it,  callec

CanaHins.  Canariins,  who  for  the  most  part  are  Christians,  but  observe
their  owne  manner  of  apparell,  which  is  to  goe  all  nakedi
their  privie  members  onely  covered.  This  Land  is  full  oii
Indian  Palme  trees,  whereon  the  Indian  Nuts  called  Coco:
doe  growe,  as  also  all  the  other  Hands  lying  in  the  River
This  Hand  of  Bardes  is  separated  from  the  Firme  Land  b]
a  small  River,  which  is  so  little,  that  it  cannot  almost  b»
discerned  from  the  Firme  Land.  On  the  South  side  o
the  Hand  of  Goa,  where  the  River  runneth  againe  int<
the  Sea,  there  commeth  even  out  with  the  coast  a  Lan<

Sahette.  called  Salsette,  which  is  also  under  the  subjection  of  th

Portugals,  and  is  inhabited,  and  planted  both  with  peopl

226

JOHN HUIGHEN VAN LINSCHOTEN  a.d.

1583.

and  fruit,  like  the  Land  of  Bardes,  and  is  likewise  parted

with  a  little  River  from  the  Firme  Land. Betweene  this

Land  of  Salsette,  and  the  Hand  of  Goa,  lie  also  some  small

Hands,  all  full  of  Indian  Palme  trees,  and  by  the  mouth

or  issue  of  the  River,  lieth  an  Hand  which  is  called  Goa

Velha,  that  is  old  Goa,  from  whence  there  commeth  no

speciall  thing,  neither  is  it  much  inhabited. Those  Lands

of  Bardes  and  Salsette,  are  by  the  Kings  of  Portugall  let

out  to  farme,  and  the  rents  thereof  are  employed  to  the

payment  of  the  Arch-bishop,  Cloisters,  Priests,  and  other

the  Kings  Officers,  yeerely  stipends,  which  is  granted  them

by  speciall  Priviledges  and  Patents  from  the  King. The

Hand  is  very  hilly,  and  in  some  places  so  desart  and  rough,

that  on  some  sides  men  can  hardly  travell  over  land  (but

with  great  labour)  to  the  Towne  of  Goa. The  Hand  even

to  the  Sea  side  is  full  of  Villages,  and  inhabited  by  the

Canariins  which  are  the  naturall  borne  people  of  the  Land,

and  doe  altogether  live  by  working  upon  the  Land,  and

by  their  Palme trees. The  Villages and dwellings of

these  Canariins  are  most  round  about  the  Hand,  and  on

the  water  sides, or  by  small  Lakes,  whereof  there  are

some  few  within  the  Hand,  and  the  cause  why  they  dwell

thus,  is  for  that  the  Palme  trees  will  not  growe  in  any

other  place  but  on  lowe  ground,  by  the  waters,  specially

in  sandy  ground :  so  that  there  are  no  Palme  trees  to  bee

found  on  the  high  land  within  the  Countrie  unlesse  it

bee  upon  sandy  grounds  on  the  Sea  Coast,  or  Rivers  sides.

On  the  East  side  of  the  Towne  of  Goa  upwards,  into

the  River,  about  three  miles  from  the  Towne  of  Bardes,

lieth  a  place  where  the  Portugals  ships  doe  anchor,  the

River  hath some  creekes, and  a ship  of  two hundred

tunnes  or  there  abouts,  may  easily  discharge  before  the

Towne, but the Portugals great ships must discharge

themselves  at  Bardes  :  which  being  done,  they  may  if  they

will  freely  goe  and  lie  before  the  Towne. The  Towne  is

well  built  with  faire  houses  and  streets,  after  the  Portugall

manner,  but  because  of  the  heate  they  are  somewhat  lower.

They  commonly  have  their  Gardens  and  Orchards  at  the

227

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1583.

back-side  of  their  houses,  full  of  all  kind  of  Indian  fruits :
as  also  the  whole  Hand  through,  they  have  many  pleasant
Gardens  and  Farmes,  with  houses  to  play  in,  and  trees  of
Indian  fruits  whether  they  goe  to  sport  themselves,  and
wherein  the  Indian  women  take  great  delight.  The
Towne  hath  in  it  all  sorts  of  Cloysters  and  Churches  as
Lisbon  hath,  onely  it  wanteth  Nunnes,  for  the  men  cannot
get  the  women  to  travell  so  farre,  where  they  should  bee
shut  up,  and  forsake  Venus.

Touching  the  Portugals  justice  and  ordinances,  as  well
in  worldly  as  spiritual  causes,  they  are  all  one  as  they  arei
in  Portugall.  They  dwell  in  the  Towne  among  all  sorts
of  Nations,  as  Indians,  Heathens,  Moores,  J  ewes,
Armenians,  Gusarates,  Benianes,  Bramenes,  and  of  all
Indian  Nations  and  People,  which  doe  all  dwell  and
traffique  therein,  every  man  holding  his  owne  Religion,
without  constraining  any  man  to  doe  against  his  conscience,
onely  touching  their  ceremonies  of  burning  the  dead,  and,
the  living,  of  marrying  and  other  supperstitions,  and
devillish  inventions,  they  are  forbidden  by  the  Arch-
bishop to  use  them  openly,  or  in  the  Hand,  but  they  may
freely  use  them  upon  the  Firme  Land,  and  secretly  in
their  houses,  thereby  to  shunne  and  avoide  all  occasions
of  dislike  that  might  be  given  to  Christians,  which  are}
but  newly  baptised :  but  touching  the  worldly  policy  oi,
good  government  of  the  Countrie,  and  executing  oij
justice,  as  also  for  the  ruling  of  the  Townes-men  in  the
Citie :  it  is  common  to  them  all,  and  they  are  under  the
Portugals  law,  and  hee  that  is  once  christned,  and  is  aftei
found  to  use  any  heathenish  superstitions,  is  subject  tc
Inquisition,  the  Inquisition,  whatsoever  he  be,  or  for  any  point  ol
Religion  whatsoever.

The  Hand  hath  nothing  of  it  selfe  to  nourish  it  withall
but  only  some  Cattell,  Hennes,  Goats,  Doves,  &c.  bu(
very  few,  because  of  the  barrennesse  and  evill  situation  o
the  place,  which  is  a  most  hilly,  barren,  and  wild-
Countrie,  and  full  of  waste  ground :  all  their  necessaries
as  Beasts,  Hennes,  Hogges,  Egges,  Milke,  &c.  come  fron

228

JOHN HUIGHEN VAN LINSCHOTEN  a.d.

1583.
Salsette  and  Bardes,  but  most  part  out  of  the  Firme  Land,
Corne,  Rice,  and  other  Graine :  also  Oyle,  and  all  other
necessaries  come  from  other  Countries,  and  are  brought
in  by  the  River,  as  from  Cambaia  on  the  North  side,  and
from  the  coast  of  Malabar,  and  other  places,  as  in  the
description  of  the  coast  we  have  in  part  declared  :  of  Wine
called  Wine  of  Palme  trees,  they  have  enough,  and  so
much  that  they  have  to  spare  for  other  places.  They
have  but  little  fresh  water,  but  onely  one  Well,  called
Banganiin,  which  standeth  about  a  quarter  of  a  mile
without  the  Citie,  wherewith  the  whole  Towne  is  served,
which  the  slaves  fetch  in  Pots  and  sell  it  in  the  Towne,
and  is  very  good  to  drinke :  for  water  to  dresse  meate,
wash,  and  doe  other  things  withall,  they  commonly  have
Wells  within  their  houses :  the  Land  of  it  selfe  is  very
stony  and  drie,  having  a  kind  of  red  earth,  so  that  some
Italian  Alchimists  have  promised  to  get  Copper  and  Gold  [II.  x.  1753.]
out  of  the  same,  which  neither  the  King  nor  Vice-roy
would  ever  consent  unto,  fearing  lest  the  report  of  such  Mines
treasure  would  bee  occasion  of  greater  trouble.  dangerous.

THe  Portugals  in  India,  are  many  of  them  married  Chap.  29.

with  the  natural  born  women  of  the  Countrie,  and  Ofthecus-

the  children  proceeding  of  them  are  called  Mesticos,  that  p^tufals  and

is,  half-countrimen. These Mesticos  are  commonly  of  such  as  are

yellowish  colour,  notwithstanding  there  are  many  women  issued  from

among  them,  that  are  faire  and  well  formed. The  children  *^»i/«^W

of  the  Portugals,  both  boyes  and  girles,  which  are  borne  jJIf^comtri-

in  India,  are  called  Casticos,  and  are  in  all  things  like  unto  men<t  as  wellof

the  Portugals,  only  somwhat  diffring  in  colour,  for  they  Goa,  as  of  all

draw toward a yellow colour : the children of those  the  OrientaU

Casticos  are  yellow,  and  altogether  like  the  Mesticos,  and  C™nt!'ies-

the  children  of  Mesticos  are  of  colour  and  fashion  like  Casticos.
the  naturall  borne  Countrimen  or  Decaniins  of  the
Countrie,  so  that  the  posteritie  of  the  Portugals,  both
men  and  women  being  in  the  third  degree,  doe  seeme  to
be  naturall  Indians,  both  in  colour  and  fashion.  Their
livings  and  daily  traffiques  are  to  Bengala,  Pegu,  Malacca,

229

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1583-

Cambaia,  China,  and  every  way,  both  North  and  South :  i

Exchange,  also  in  Goa  there  is  holden  a  daily  assemblie  or  meeting ,
together,  as  well  of  the  Citizens  and  Inhabitants,  as  of  alii
Nations  throughout  India,  and  of  the  Countries  bordering  1
on  the  same,  which  is  like  the  meeting  upon  the  Burse  inj
Antwerpe,  yet  differeth  much  from  that,  for  that  hithen
in  Goa  there  come  as  well  Gentlemen,  as  Merchants  andj
others,  and  there  are  all  kindes  of  Indian  commodities  toj
sell,  so  that  in  a  manner  it  is  like  a  Faire. This  meeting;
is  onely  before  noone, every  day  in  the  yeere, except
Sundayes  and  Holidayes :  it  beginneth  in  the  morning  at.
seven  of  the  clocke,  and  continueth  till  nine  of  the  clocke,;
but  not  in  the  heate  of  the  day,  nor  after  noone,  in  the!
principall  street  of  the  Citie,  named  the  Straight  street,
and  is  called  the  Leylon,  which  is  as  much  to  say,  as  anj
outroop :  there  are  certaine  Criers  appointed  by  the  Citie;
for  the  purpose,  which  have  of  all  things  to  be  cried  and
sold : these  goe  all  the  time  of  the  Leylon  or  Outroop,!
all  behanged about  with  all sorts of  gold chaines, al
kinds of costly Jewels, Pearles, Rings, and Preciou
stones : likewise  they  have  running  about  them,  man
sorts  of  Captives  and  Slaves,  both  men  and  women,  young,
and  old,  which  are  daily  sold  there,  as  beasts  are  sold  with
us,  where  every  one  may  chuse  which  liketh  him  best.
every  one  at  a  certaine  price. There  are  also  Arabiar
Horses, all kind of Spices and dried Drugs, sweet:
Gummes,  and  such  like  things,  fine  and  costly  Coverlets
and  many  curious  things,  out  of  Cambaia,  Sinde,  Bengala
China,  &c.  and  it  is  wonderfull  to  see  in  what  sort  many  of
them  get  their  livings,  which  every  day  come  thither  tc
buy  wares,  and  at  another  time  sell  them  again. Anc
when  any  man  dieth,  all  his  goods  are  brought  thithei
and sold to the  last peniworth, in the same outroop
whosoever  they  be,  yea  although  they  were  the  Vice-roye:
goods : and  this  is  done  to  doe  right  and  justice  untc
Orphans  and  Widowes ; and  that  it  may  bee  sold  witl

the  first,  where  every  man  may  see  it,  so  that  every  yeer
there  is  great  quantitie  of  ware  sold  within  that  Citie,  fo:

230

JOHN HUIGHEN VAN LINSCHOTEN  a.d.

1583.
that  there  die  many  men  within  the  Towne,  by  meanes  of
their  disordered  living,  together  with  the  hotnesse  of  the
Countrie  :  the  like  assemblie  is  holden  in  all  places  of  India,
where  the  Portugals  inhabite.  There  are  some  married
Portugals  that  get  their  livings  by  their  slaves,  both  men
and  women,  whereof  some  have  12.  some  20.  and  some
30.  for  it  costeth  them  but  little  to  keep  them.  These
slaves  for  money  do  labor  for  such  as  have  need  of  their
helpe,  some  fetch  fresh  water,  and  sell  it  for  money  about
the  streets  :  the  women  slaves  make  all  sorts  of  confectures
and  conserves  of  Indian  fruits,  much  fine  needleworke,
both  cut  and  wrought  workes,  and  then  their  masters
send  the  fairest  and  the  youngest  of  them  well  drest  up
with  their  wares  about  the  streets  to  sell  the  same,  that
by  the  neatnesse  and  beauty  of  the  said  women  slaves,  men
might  be  moved  to  buy,  which  hapneth  more  for  the  affec-
tion they  have  to  the  slaves,  &  to  fulfill  their  pleasure  with
them,  then  for  any  desire  to  the  conserves  or  needle-
workes :  for  these  slaves  do  never  refuse  them,  but  make
their  daily  living  thereby,  and  with  the  gaines  that  they
by  that  meanes  bring  home,  their  masters  may  well  keepe
and  maintayne  them.  There  are  others  that  use  exchang-
ing of  moneyes,  and  to  buy  money  when  it  commeth,  as
time  serveth  to  sell  it  again,  for  they  buy  the  Rials  of
eight,  when  the  ships  come  from  Portugall,  whereof  some
buy  at  the  least  ten  or  twelve  hundred,  and  keepe  them
till  the  moneth  of  April,  which  is  the  time  when  the  ships
sayle  to  China,  for  then  are  the  Rials  of  eight  sought  for
to  carrie  thither,  &  are  commonly  worth  five  and  twenty
I  or  thirty  in  the  hundred  profit,  and  then  they  receive  for
them  a  certaine  money,  which  at  the  same  time  is  brought
from  Ormus,  called  Larriins,  that  come  out  of  Persia,
which  they  buy  for  eight  or  ten  in  the  hundred  profit,
and  keep  them  till  the  Portugals  on  the  moneth  of
September  come  thither,  and  so  deliver  them  againe  for
twenty  or  five  and  twenty  in  the  hundred  profit,  in
exchange  for  Rials  of  eight,  as  I  said  before,  for  they  must
have  these  Larriins  with  them  to  Cochin,  to  buy  Pepper

231

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1583-

and  other  wares,  for  that  it  is  the  best  and  most  profitable
money.  There  are  yet  other  sorts  of  money  called  Pagods,
Venetianers,  and  Santhones,  which  are  gold,  all  which  they
doe  likewise  buy  and  sell,  so  that  there  are  many  that  doe
nothing  else,  and  become  rich,  specially  he  that  hath  a
good  stocke.  This  exchange  commeth  most  commonly
from  the  Spiritualtie,  who  doe  secretly  use  it,  by  other
mens  meanes,  without  any  let  or  hinderance.  Some  there
are  that  live  upon  their  rents  which  they  have  by  their
Palme  trees.
[II.  x.i  754.]  There  are  among  them  but  two  manner  of  people,  that
is,  Married  men,  and  Souldiers,  for  that  all  Young  men
unmarried  are  named  Souldiers,  which  is  the  best  name
that  a  man  can  have ;  not  that  the  Souldiers  are  any  wayes
bound  or  under  the  commandement  and  Regiment  of  any
Captaine,  which  throughout  India,  is  not  used,  but  when
the  Portugals  come  into  India  out  of  Portugall,  and  are
arrived  there,  every  man  goeth  where  he  thinketh  best,
although  in  Portugall  every  mans  name  that  goeth  in  the!
ship  is  written  and  registred,  which  is  done  in  this  sort :
every  man  is  written  up,  both  his  name  and  sirname,  with
a  note  what  pay  they  receive  of  the  King,  whereof  some
beare  the  title  of  Fidalgo  da  Caza  del  Rey  nossas  Senor,
that  is,  a  Gentleman  of  the  Kings  House,  which  is  the
chiefest  title :  there  are  others  named  Mozos  Fidalgos,
which  is  also  an  Honourable  title,  and  they  are  commonly
Gentlemens  Sonnes,  or  by  the  Kings  favour  advanced
thereunto  :  There  are  yet  others  that  are  named  Cavalhiero
Fidalgo,  which  is  not  so  much  as  the  other  two,  yet  it  is
an  Honourable  title,  and  is  the  title  of  a  Knight,  who  for
some  Valiant  act  by  him  done  is  made  Knight,  which  they
doe  for  a  small  matter :  for  that  if  he  doe  any  Act  to  be
accounted  of,  or  be  in  a  manner  of  such  an  action  doing,
presently  he  is  of  a  Captaine  or  a  Gentleman  made  a
Knight,  whereof  they  much  boast  themselves :  and  it  is
now  growne  so  common  among  them,  that  very  Cookes
Boyes  and  others  as  meane  as  they,  are  made  Knights:
there  are  others  also  that  are  named  Mosos  da  Camara,  dc

232

JOHN HUIGHEN VAN LINSCHOTEN

Numero,  e  do  Servico,  which  is  servants  to  the  King,  some
of  his  Chamber,  some  of  his  Accounts,  and  some  for  his
Service,  this  is  the  first  Title  or  Degree  of  credite,  whereby
through  their  good  service  they  attaine  unto  better,  and
are  more  glorious  of  their  Titles,  then  of  all  the  riches  in
the  world.  There  are  also  that  are  named  Escuderos
Fidalgos,  that  is  Esquires,  which  is  likewise  a  degree  of
credit :  Others  are  named  Hommes  honorados,  which  is
men  of  Honour,  and  the  poorest  among  them  (which  are
not  named  by  any  title)  are  set  downe  for  Souldiers,  which
are  the  common  and  Rascal!  sort :  these  are  every  man
paied  their  wages  according  to  their  Titles,  and  may  each
man  in  his  qualitie  (by  long  service,  or  some  good  action,
but  most  by  favour)  rise  to  higher  degree ;  for  that
according  to  their  Titles  their  service  is  rewarded.  The
Portugals  which  sayle  for  India,  being  thus  registred  and
written  downe,  the  said  Register  at  their  arrivall  there,  is
delivered  to  be  kept  by  one  of  the  Kings  Officers  thereunto
appointed,  which  every  three  yeeres  is  likewise  changed,
as  other  Officers  are,  and  is  called  the  chiefe  Clerke  of  the
Matricola  Generall.

THe  Portugals,  Mesticos,  and  Christians,  keepe
Worshipfull  and  bountifull  Houses,  having  com-
monly (as  it  is  said  before)  five,  sixe,  ten,  twentie,  some
more,  some  lesse  Slaves,  both  men  and  women,  in  their
houses  every  man  according  to  his  estate  and  qualitie.  I
meane  Married  men.  They  are  very  cleanly  and  sweet  in
all  things  belonging  to  their  Houses,  specially  in  their
Linnen,  for  that  every  day  they  change  Shirts  and  Smockes
both  men  and  women,  and  their  Slaves  and  Servants  like-
wise, with  other  things  that  they  weare,  which  they  doe
because  of  the  great  heat  in  that  Land.  The  Portugals
are  commonly  served  with  great  gravitie,  without  any
difference  betweene  the  Gentleman  and  the  common
Citizen,  Townesman  or  Souldier,  and  in  their  going,
curtesies,  and  conversations,  common  in  all  things :  when
they  goe  in  the  Streets  they  step  very  softly  and  slowly

233

A.D.

1583.

Chap.  30.
Of  the  Por-
tugals and
Mesticos,  their
Houses,  Curte-
sies, Marri-
ages, and  other
Customes  and
manners  of
India.

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1583.

forwards,  with  a  great  pride  and  vaine-glorious  majestie,  i
with  a  Slave  that  carrieth  a  great  Hat  or  vayle  over  their
heads,  to  keepe  the  Sunne  and  Raine  from  them.  Also
when  it  raineth  they  commonly  have  a  Boy  that  beareth
a  Cloake  of  Scarlet  or  of  some  other  Cloth  after  them,  to
cast  over  them :  and  if  bee  before  Noone,  he  carrieth  a
Cushion  for  his  Master  to  kneele  on  when  he  heareth
Masse,  and  their  Rapier  is  most  commonly  carried  after
them  by  a  Boy,  that  it  may  not  trouble  them  as  they
walke,  nor  hinder  their  Gravities.  When  they  meet  inj
the  streets  a  good  space  before  they  come  together,  they,
begin  with  a  great  Besolas  manos,  to  stoope  with  their
bodies,  and  to  thrust  forth  their  foot  to  salute  each  other,
with  their  Hats  in  their  hands,  almost  touching  thej
ground :  likewise  when  they  come  into  the  Church  where
they  have  Stooles  readie,  which  their  Slaves  have  prepared
for  them :  all  that  are  by  him  that  commeth  in,  doe  stand
up,  and  with  the  same  manner  of  bowing  their  bodies  doe
him  great  Reverence,  and  if  it  chanceth  that  any  doth
him  reverence  (as  the  manner  is)  and  that  hee  to  whom  it
is  done  doth  not  greatly  esteeme  thereof,  so  that  he  doth
him  not  the  like  curtesie,  they  doe  altogether  for  that
cause  goe  after  him,  and  cut  his  Hat  in  peeces,  saying
that  he  had  disgraced  the  partie,  wherein  it  is  not  for  them
to  aske  wherefore  they  should  so  doe,  for  it  would  bee  the
greatest  shame  and  reproach  in  the  world  unto  them,  if
they  should  not  revenge  so  great  an  injurie :  and  when
they  seeke  to  be  revenged  of  any  man  that  hath  shewen
them  discurtesie,  or  for  any  other  cause  whatsoever  it!
bee,  they  assemble  ten  or  twelve  of  their  Friends,  acquaint-
ance or  companions,  and  take  him  wheresoever  they  find
him,  and  beat  him  so  long  together,  that  they  leave  him
for  dead,  or  verie  neare  dead,  or  else  cause  him  to  be
stabbed  by  their  Slaves.  But  if  they  desire  not  to  kill
him,  they  baste  him  well  about  the  ribbes  and  all  his
bodie  over  with  a  thicke  Reed,  as  big  as  a  mans  legge,
which  is  called  Bambus,  whereby  for  eight  daies  after  and
more  he  hath  enough  to  doe  to  keepe  his  Bed,  and  some-

234

JOHN HUIGHEN VAN LINSCHOTEN  a.d.

1583.
time  in  that  manner  they  leave  him  for  dead.  This  is
their  common  Custome,  and  is  never  looked  unto  or  once  [II.  x.  1755.]
corrected.  Also  they  use  long  bagges  full  of  Sand,
wherewith  they  will  give  such  blowes  each  upon  other,
that  therewith  they  will  breake  each  others  limbes,  and
for  ever  after  make  them  lame.

When  any  man  goeth  to  visit  another  in  his  House,
although  he  which  is  visited  bee  one  of  the  principall
Gentlemen  of  the  Citie,  and  the  visitor  but  a  simple
Souldier,  or  some  other  man,  it  is  the  manner  that  hee
which  is  visited  commeth  unto  the  doore  of  his  House,
with  his  Hat  in  his  hand,  and  with  great  curtesie  to  receive
him  that  commeth  to  visit  him,  and  so  leadeth  him  up
into  his  Hall  or  Chamber,  wherein  hee  will  speake  with
him,  where  he  offereth  him  a  Chaire  to  sit  downe,  and
then  he  himselfe  sitteth  by  him,  then  he  asketh  him  what
hee  would  have,  which  having  understood  hee  bringeth
him  downe  againe  to  the  doore  in  the  like  sort,  and  so
with  a  Besolas  manos  biddeth  him  farewell,  and  if  hee
should  not  doe  so,  or  when  he  giveth  him  a  Stoole,  should
give  him  one  unlined,  or  one  that  is  lesse  or  lower  then
that  he  taketh  for  himselfe,  hee  that  visiteth  him  would
take  it  in  evill  part,  esteeming  it  a  great  scorne,  and  seeke
to  be  revenged  on  him  for  the  same.

When  they  have  any  Weddings  and  are  married,
whosoever  they  bee  if  they  have  any  wealth,  all  the  Friends
and  Neighbours  come  together,  every  man  on  Horsebacke,
and  hee  that  hath  not  a  Horse  will  borrow  one,  and  are
every  man  very  costly  Apparelled,  at  the  least  some  fiftie
or  a  hundreth  Horses  little  more  or  lesse,  as  the  person  is
of  qualitie,  and  so  they  ride  altogether  in  good  order  unto
the  Church  with  their  Servants,  and  every  man  his  Hat
for  the  Sunne,  the  Parents  and  Friends  in  the  hinder  part,
and  in  the  last  row  the  Bridegroome  betweene  two  of  them,
whom  they  call  Gossops :  after  them  followeth  the  Bride
betweene  two  Commeres,  each  in  their  Pallamkin,  which
is  most  costly  made,  and  after  follow  the  Slaves  both  men
and  women  going  in  Troupes,  as  if  they  ranne  to  Hunt,

235

a.o.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1583.

and so comming to the Church, and being Married
according  to  the  order  used  in  the  Church  of  Rome :  they
are  in  the  same  order  brought  home  againe,  and  passing
through  the  streets,  the  neighbours  leaning  upon  Indian
Carpets  looke  out  of  the  windowes,  and  throw  Rose  water
upon  the  Bride  and  Bridegroome,  and  other  sweet  smelling
waters,  with  Roses  and  Sugar  Comfets,  or  Corne. In  the
meane  time  their  Slaves  play  upon  Shalmes  and  Trumpets
most  pleasant  and  melodious  to  heare,  and  comming  to:
the  House  where  the  Bride  and  Bridegroome  dwell,  with
great  reverence  and  courtesie  bowing  downe  their  bodies,
they  take  their  leaves  of  all  the  Companie,  which  are  all  on
Horsebacke about the doore. And so the Bride, the
Bridegroome  and  the  Commeres,  goe  up  and sit  with
great  gravitie  in  a  Window,  and  then  begin  the  Horsemen
that  led  them  to  Church,  in  honour  of  the  Married  couple,
one  after  the  other  to  runne  a  course,  the  Gossops  begin-
ning first,  and  the  rest  following  twice  or  thrice  one  after;
the  other,  with  continuall  playing  on  Shalmes,  which  are!
very  common  in  India,  for  that  he  which  is  of  any  wealth
hath  them  of  his  owne  within  his  House. This  being;
ended,  they  all  passe  before  the  window  where  the  Bride
&  Bridegroome  sit  with  a  great  reverence,  and  so  passe1
on  all  saving  the  Gossops,  for  they  goe  up  to  the  Bride
and  Bridegroome,  and  bid  God  give  them  Joy ; then  is'
there some  Comfets  and Marchpane  brought  forth, to
drinke  a  Cup  of  water  withall,  and  after  some  curteous
salutations  and  congratulations  to  the  new  Married  couple,
they  take  their  leaves  and  depart :  so  there  remaineth  with1
the  Bride  and  Bridegroome  but  three  or  foure  of  their
nearest  friends  and  kinsmen,  for  whom  there  is  a  Dinner'
prepared,  with  litle  meat,  yet  very  costly,  which  they  passe
over  very  lightly,  and  not  many  words,  which  done  they
presently bring the Bride to Bed, without any other
Ceremonies  or  Charges,  wherewith  the  Marriage  is  done
and  ended. Oftentimes  it  chanceth,  that  they  goe  to  bed
at  the  least  two  houres  before  Sun-setting,  not  having  the
patience  to  stay  so  long  as  wee  doe  in  these  Countries.

236

JOHN HUIGHEN VAN LINSCHOTEN  a.d.

1583.

When  a  Child  is  to  bee  Christened,  it  is  likewise  in
the  same  sort  led  to  Church  with  Horses,  and  last  of  all
commeth  the  Father  alone,  after  whom  followeth  two  men
on  Foot,  the  one  with  a  great  Silver  or  Gilt  vessell  full  of
Bread  baked  like  Cracklings,  which  in  Portugall  are  called
Rosquilhos,  and  in  the  middle  a  great  Waxe  candle,  well
made  and  gilded,  thrust  through  with  some  peeces  of
money  of  Gold  and  Silver,  for  an  Offering  to  the  Priest
that  baptiseth  the  Child,  and  all  over  strowed  and  covered
with  Roses :  the  other  carrieth  a  great  Silver  or  gilt  Salt-
seller  in  one  of  his  hands,  and  a  Lampe  of  the  same  stuffe
in  his  other  hand,  each  with  rich  and  costly  Towels  on
their  shoulders :  after  that  followeth  two  Pallamkins,  on
the  one  side  the  Commere,  on  the  other  side  the  Midwife
with  the  Child,  covered  with  a  costly  Mantle,  made  for
the  purpose,  and  so  the  ceremonies  of  Baptisme  being
ended  in  the  Church,  it  is  againe  in  the  like  sort  brought
home,  and  being  there,  they  have  the  like  manner  of
Musicke  &  Shalmes,  running  and  leaping  with  their
Horses  before  the  window  where  the  Commere  sitteth,
with  the  same  Ceremonies  as  at  the  Wedding.  This  is
the  manner  and  custome  of  those  that  are  Married  and
keepe  House.

But  concerning  the  Souldier  that  is  unmarried,  thus  it
is. They  goe  in  the  Summer  time  into  the  Armado  lying
on  the  water,  and  being  within  the  Townes  and  on  the
Land, they  are  verie  stately  apparelled, and  goe  verie
gravelie  along  the  streets  with  their  Slaves  or  men  hired
for  the  purpose,  that  beare  a  Hat  over  them  for  the  Sunne
and  Raine  :  for  there  are  many  Indians  that  are  daily  hired  [II.  x.  1756.]
for  the  purpose,  and  have  twelve  Basarucos  the  day,  which
is  as  much  as  two  Stivers  or  a  Stoter,  and  they  serve  such
as  have  no  slaves,  and  that  will  not  keepe  any  to  that  end.
The  Souldiers  dwell  at  least  ten  or  twelve  in  a  house,  Beggerly
where  they  have  among  them  a  slave  or  hired  Indian  or  ?
two  which  serveth  them,  and  washeth  their  Shirts,  and
have  foure  or  five  Stooles  with  a  Table,  and  everie  man  a
Bed. Their  meat  is  Rice  sodden  in  water,  with  some

237

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1583-

salt  Fish,  or  some  other  thing  of  small  value  (without
Bread)  and  cleare  Fountaine  water  for  their  drinke,  where-
with they  are  well  pleased. They  have  amongst  them  all
one  or  two  good  suites  of  Apparell,  all  of  Silke  as  the
manner  is  there,  and  when  one  goeth  abroad,  the  other
stay  at  home, for  in  the  house  they  have  no  need  of
Clothes,  (but  sit  whosoever  they  be)  in  their  Shirts  and  a
paire  of  linnen  Breeches,  and  so  as  it  were  naked  by  reason
of  the  great  heat,  for  if  some  of  them  have  occasion  to  goe
out  twentie  times  in  one  day,  they  must  so  often  lend  him
their  Apparell,  and  he  must  likewise  put  off  his  clothes,
as  often  as  he  commeth  home  againe. Some  Souldiers  have
a  Gentleman  or  Captaine  to  their  friends  which  lendeth
them  money  to  apparell  themselves  withall,  to  the  end
when  Summer  time  commeth,  they  may  bee  readie  to  goe
with  them  in  Fleet  to  Sea,  as  also  to  have  their  friendship,
by  night  and  at  other  times  to  beare  them  companie,  or
to  helpe  them  to  be  revenged  of  any  injurie  by  them
received,  as  I  said  before :  for  that  he  which  in  India  hath
most  Souldiers  to  his  friends,  is  most  regarded  and  feared.
So  that  to  be  short,  in  this  manner  they  doe  maintaine
themselves  in  common,  whereby  they  are  able  to  come  in  j
presence  of  the  best  of  the  Countrey. Many  and  most
of  them  have  their  chiefe  maintenance  from  the  Portugals
and  Mesticos  wives,  as  also  the  Indian  Christians  wives,
which  doe  alwaies  bestow  liberall  rewards  and  gifts  upon
them  to  fulfill  their  unchaste  and  filthie  desires,  which  they
know  very  well  how  to  accomplish,  and  secretly  bring  to
passe. There  are  some  likewise  that  get  their  living  by
their  Friends,  travelling  for  them  from  place  to  place  with
some  wares  and  Merchandizes,  and  they  are  called  Chattiins.
These  doe  give  over  and  leave  the  office  of  a  Souldier  in
the  Fleet,  and  the  Kings  service :  and  now  likewise  they
are  all  given  to  scraping  and  catching,  as  well  the  Vice-roy,
Governours, and others, as also the Church-men and;
Spiritualtie,  little  passing  or  esteeming  the  common  profit
or the  service  of  the  King, but  onely their  particular
profites,  making  their  account,  that  the  time  of  their  abode

238

JOHN HUIGHEN VAN LINSCHOTEN

is  but  three  yeeres :  wherefore  they  say  they  will  not  doe
otherwise  then  those  that  were  before  them  did,  but  say
that  others  which  come  after  them  shall  take  care  for  all :
for  that  the  King  (say  they)  gave  them  their  Offices,
thereby  to  pay  them  for  their  services  in  times  past.

THe  Portugals,  Mesticos,  and  Indian-Christian  women
in  India,  are  little  seene  abroad,  but  for  the  most
part  sit  still  within  the  house,  and  goe  but  seldome  forth,
unlesse  it  bee  to  Church,  or  to  visit  their  friends,  which  is
likewise  but  verie  little,  and  when  they  goe  abroad,  they
are  well  provided  not  to  be  seene,  for  they  are  carried  in  a
Pallamkin  covered  with  a  Mat  or  other  cloth,  so  that  they
cannot  be  seene.

When  they  goe  to  Church,  or  to  visit  any  friend,  they

put  on  very  costly  apparell,  with  bracelets  of  Gold,  and

Rings  upon  their  armes,  all  beset  with  costly  Jewels  &

Pearles,  &  at  their  eares  hang  laces  full  of  Jewels. Their

clothes  are  of  Damaske,  Velvet,  and  cloth  of  Gold,  for

Silke  is  the  worst  thing  they  doe  weare. Within the

house they goe  bare headed, with a  Wastcoate called

Baiu,  that  from  their  shoulders  covereth  their  navels,  and

is  so  fine  that  you  may  see  all  their  body  through  it,  and

downwards  they  have  nothing  but  a  painted  cloth  wrapped

three  or  foure  times  about  their  bodies. These  clothes

are  very  faire,  some  of  them  being  verie  costly  wrought

with  Loome-worke,  and  divers  figures  and  flowers  of  all

colours,  all  the  rest  of  the  body  is  naked  without  any  hose,

but  onely  bare-footed  in  a  paire  of  Moiles  or  Pantofles,

and  the  men  in  like  sort. This  is  their  manner  in  the

House  both  old  and  young,  rich  and  poore,  none  excepted,

for  they  goe  forth  but  very  little,  and  then  they  are  both

covered  and  carried,  and  what  they  need  abroad,  that  the

Slaves  both  men  and  women  doe  fetch  in. The  Women

eate  no  Bread  or  very  little,  nor  yet  the  Slaves,  not  that

they  refuse  it  for  the  dearnesse  or  want  of  bread,  (for  they

have  enough  and  great  abundance)  but  they  are  so  used  to

eate  Rice,  that  they  desire  no  other,  which  they  seeth  with

239

A.D.

1583.

Chap.  31.
Of  the  manner
and  Customes
of  Portugal/
and  Mesticos
women  in
India.

Their  pride.

Their  feeding.

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1583.

water  and  eate  it  with  some  salt  Fish,  or  a  kind  of  saltj
fruit  called  Mangas,  or  with  some  other  composition  both!
of  Fish  and  Flesh,  with  Pottage  which  they  powre  upon,
it,  and  so  eate  it  with  their  hands :  for  there  they  eatej
nothing  with  Spoones,  and  if  they  should  see  any  man  doei
so,  they  would  laugh  at  him.  When  they  drinke  they
have  certaine  pots  made  of  blacke  earth  verie  fine  and
thinne,  much  like  those  that  wee  use  in  Holland  fori
Flower-pots,  having  in  the  necke  thereof  a  partition  full;
of  holes  with  a  spout,  (and  these  Cruses  are  called  Gor-
goletta,)  to  this  end,  that  when  they  drinke,  they  mayj
hold  the  pot  on  high,  and  touch  it  not  with  their  mouthes,
but  the  water  running  from  the  spout  falleth  into  their
mouthes,  never  spilling  drop,  which  they  doe  for
cleanlinesse,  because  no  man  should  put  it  to  his
mouth,  and  when  any  man  commeth  out  of  Portugal!
and  then  beginneth  to  drinke  after  their  manner,  because
he  is  not  used  to  that  kind  of  drinking,  hee  spilleth  it  in
his  bosome,  wherein  they  take  great  pleasure  and  laugh  at

[II.  x.i 757.]  him,  calling  him  Reynol,  which  is  a  name  given  in  jest
to  such  as  newlie  come  from  Portugall,  and  know  nol
how  to  behave  themselves  in  such  grave  manner,  and  witr
such  ceremonies  as  the  Portugals  use  there  in  India :  scj
that  at  the  first  they  are  much  whooped  and  cried  at  ir
the  streets,  untill  by  use  and  practice  they  have  learneci
the  Indian  manner,  which  they  quicklie  doe. The  mer|

Jealousie.  are  very  jealous  of  their  Wives,  for  they  will  never  brint;
any  man  into  their  houses,  how  speciall  a  friend  soever  hee
be,  that  shall  see  their  Wives  or  their  Daughters,  unlesse
it  be  some  gossip  or  other  married  man  with  his  wife  ir
companie.  When  they  will  goe  together  to  some  place
to  sport  and  solace  themselves,  they  are  alwaies  wel
guarded  by  their  Slaves,  both  men  and  women,  both  foi
their  safetie  and  service.  If  any  man  commeth  to  the
doore  to  aske  for  the  Master  of  the  House,  presentl)
their  Wives  and  their  Daughters  runne  to  hide  them,  anci
so  leave  the  man  to  answer  him  that  standeth  at  the  doore :
likewise  they  suffer  no  man  to  dwell  within  their  houses

240

JOHN HUIGHEN VAN LINSCHOTEN  a.d.

1583.

where  the  Women  and  Daughters  be,  how  neere  kinsman

soever  he  bee  unto  them,  being  once  fifteene  yeeres  of

age,  nor  their  owne  Sonnes,  but  have  certaine  Chambers

and  places  beneath,  or  besides  their  house  where  they  lie,

and  may  in  no  sort  come  among  the  women,  and  thither

they  send  them  their  meat  and  other  provisions,  for  it

hath  oftentimes  beene  seene  in  those  Countries,  that  the

Nephew  hath  layne  by  his  Aunt,  and  the  Brother  by  the

Brothers  wife,  and  the  Brother  with  his  Sister : whereof

I have knowne some that have been taken with the

manner,  and  that  both  they  and  the  woman  have  beene

slaine  by  the  Husbands. The  women  are  very  Luxurious  Luxurie  and

and  unchaste,  for  there  are  very  few  among  them,  although  *"*$  Lusts'

they  be  married,  but  they  have  besides  their  husbands  one

or  two  of  those  that  are  called  Soldiers,  with  whom  they

take  their  pleasures : which to  effect, they  use  all  the

slights  and  practises  they  can  devise,  by  sending  out  their

Slaves  and  Baudes  by  night,  and  at  extraordinary  times,

over  Walls,  Hedges,  and  Ditches,  how  narrowly  soever

they  are  kept  and  looked  unto. They  have  likewise  an

Hearbe  called  Deutroa,  which  beareth  a  seed,  whereof  Deutroa.

brusing  out  the  sap, they  put  it  into  a  Cup  or  other

vessell,  and  give  it  to  their  Husbands,  either  in  meat  or

drinke,  and  presently  therewith,  the  man  is  as  though  he-

if  were  halfe  out  of  his  wits,  and  without  feeling,  or  else

irunke,  doing  nothing  but  laugh,  and  sometime  it  taketh

: him  sleeping,  whereby  he  lyeth  like  a  dead  man,  so  that  in

\,  fiis  presence  they  may  doe  what  they  will,  and  take  their

s  (pleasure  with  their  friends,  and  the  husband  never  know

: Df  it. In  which  sort  he  continueth  foure  and  twentie

k  taures  long,  but  if  they  wash  his  feet  with,  cold  water  hee

t  presently reviveth, and knoweth nothing thereof, but

:hinketh  hee  had  slept.

There  are  many  men  poysoned  by  their  wives,  if  once  Cunning

r  ;:hey  be  moved: for  they  know  how  to  make  a  certaine  plotters.

1  Poyson or Venome, which shall kill the person that

ri  jirinketh  it,  at  what  time  or  houre  it  pleaseth  them :  which

$  (x>yson  being  prepared,  they  make  it  in  such  sort,  that  it

X  241  Q

'

A.D.

1583.

Neatnesse.

Idlenesse  and
costlinesse.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

will  lie  sixe  yeeres  in  a  mans  body,  and  never  doe  him
hurt,  and  then  kill  him,  without  missing  halfe  an  houres
time.  They  make  it  also  for  one,  two,  or  three  yeeres,
moneths  or  dayes,  as  it  pleaseth  them  best,  as  I  have  seene
it  in  many,  and  there  it  is  very  common.  There  are)
likewise  many  women  brought  to  their  ends  by  meanes
of  their  Husbands,  and  slaine  when  soever  they  take  them
in  Adulterie,  or  that  they  doe  but  once  suspect  them ;!
which  if  they  doe,  presently  they  cut  their  throats,  and
bring  three  or  foure  witnesses  to  testifie  that  strange  men
entred  into  their  houses  by  night,  at  unaccustomed  times,!
or  else  by  day,  and  had  their  pleasures  of  their  Wives,  on
in  other  sort  as  they  will  devise  it ;  whereby  they  are)
presently  discharged  of  the  crime,  according  to  the  Lawes*
and  Ordinances  both  of  Spaine  and  Portugall,  and  pre-
sently may  marrie  with  another  wife.  This  notwith-
standing is  no  meanes  to  make  the  Women  feare,  or  once
to  leave  their  filthy  pleasures,  although  there  are  every
yeere  many  women  without  number  so  dispatched  and
made  away  by  their  husbands,  and  it  is  so  common  with1
them,  that  no  man  thinketh  it  strange,  or  once  wondereth
thereat,  because  of  the  Custome.  The  Women  also  fori
their  part  say  and  flatly  affirme,  that  there  can  be  no  better
death  then  to  die  in  that  manner,  saying  that  so  they  arej
sacrificed  for  Love,  which  they  thinke  to  be  a  great  Honour
unto  them.

The  women  are  by  nature  very  cleanly  and  neat,  as  well
in  their  Houses  as  in  Apparell,  for  that  although  all  what-
soever shee  putteth  on  her  bodie  every  day,  is  both  white,
cleane  and  fresh  :  yet  they  have  a  manner  every  day  tq  j
wash  themselves  all  the  bodie  over,  from  head  to  foot,  and
sometimes  twice  a  day,  in  the  morning  and  at  evening :
and  as  often  as  they  ease  themselves  or  make  water,  01
else  use  the  companie  of  their  Husbands,  every  time  they
doe  wash  themselves,  were  it  a  hundreth  times  a  day  and
a  night :  they  are  no  great  workers,  but  much  delighted  in
sweet  Hearbes,  and  in  perfumes  and  Frankincense,  and
to  rub  their  bodies  and  their  foreheads  with  sweet  Sanders

242

JOHN HUIGHEN VAN LINSCHOTEN  a.d.

1583.

and  such  like  woods,  which  with  water  they  doe  steepe

or  breake  in  peeces : also  the  whole  day  long  they  doe

nothing,  but  sit  and  chaw  Leaves  or  Herbes,  called  Bettele, Bettele  and

with  Chaulke  and  a  certaine  Fruit  called  Arrequa,  whereof  '  rre1ua'

in  another  place  among  Fruits  and  Herbes  I  will  speake

more. This  Arrequa, some  of  it is  so strong, that  it

maketh men almost  drunke, and  wholly  out of sence,

although  in  shew  and  in  taste  it  is  almost  like  Wood  or

Rootes : these  three  things  they  sit  all  the  whole  day

chawing  in  their  mouthes,  like  Oxen  or  Kine  chawing  the

cudde :  they  let  the  sap  goe  downe  into  their  throats,  and

spit  the  rest  out  of  their  mouthes,  whereby  they  make

their  mouthes  so  red  and  blackish,  that  to  such  as  know  it  [II.  x.1758.]

not  it  is  strange  to  see : all  which,  with  their  washing,

Frankinsence,  and  rubbing  with  Sanders,  they  have  learned

jand  received  of  the  Indian  Heathens,  which  have  had

those  Customes  of  long  time,  and  yet  till  this  day  use

them : they say it  preserveth the Teeth, and keepeth

:  them  sound,  good  for  the  mawe,  and  against  a  stinking

t  Imouth  and  evill  breath,  insomuch  as  they  are  so  used  to

:haw  it,  that  wheresoever  they  goe  or  stand,  they  must

ilwaies  have  of  those  Leaves  caried  with  them,  and  the

:  women  Slaves  doe  likewise  goe  alwaies  chawing,  and  are

50  used  thereunto,  that  they  verilie  thinke,  that  without

t  they  can  not  live,  for  their  common  worke  is  to  sit  all

lay,  when  their  Husbands  are  out  of  doores,  behind  the

Vlat  which  hangeth  at  the  window,  alwaies  chawing  the

1  lerbe  Bettele,  seeing  those  that  passe  by  in  the  streets,

md  no  man  seeth  them :  but  as  any  man  passeth  by  which

iketh  them,  and  they  will  let  them  have  a  sight,  they  lift

3 ip  the Mat, whereby they  doe the  passenger  a  great

t  favour,  and  with  that  manner  of  shewing  themselves  and

asting  lookes,  they  make  their  beginnings  of  Love,  which  Otia  si  talks,
\  >y  their  slavish  women  they  bring  to  effect :  to  the  which  PjPfre  Cupi-
1 nd  they  have  all  divellish  devises  that  possible  may  bee
d  Invented,  for  that  both  night  and  day  they  doe  practise
1  Nothing  else,  but  make  it  their  onely  worke,  and  to  make
■ature  more  lively  to  abound  and  move  them  thereunto,

243

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1583.

they  doe  use  to  eate  those  Betteles,  Arrequas  and  Chaulke,
and  in  the  night  it  standeth  by  their  bed  sides,  this  they
eate,  whole  handfuls  of  Cloves,  Pepper,  Ginger,  and  ai
baked  kind  of  meat  called  Chachunde,  which  is  mixed  and
made  of  all  kindes  of  Spices  and  Herbes,  and  such  like
meates,  all  to  increase  their  leacherie.

And  they  are  not  content  therewith,  but  give  their
Husbands  a  thousand  Herbes  for  the  same  purpose  to
eate,  they  not  knowing  thereof,  thereby  to  fulfill  their
pleasures,  and  to  satisfie  their  desires,  which  can  not  by
any  meanes  bee  satisfied.  They  are  likewise  much  used
to  take  their  pleasures  in  Bathes,  by  swimming  therein,;
which  they  can  verie  well  doe,  for  there  are  verie  few  of;
them,  but  they  would  easilie  swim  over  a  River  of  halfe
a  mile  broad.

Chap.  32. IT1  Verie  three  yeeres  there  is  a  new  Vice-roy  sent  into
Of  the  \^j  jncjia)  an(j  sometime  they  stay  longer,  as  it  pleaseth

PomzJl  and  ^e  King,  but  verie  f*ew  °f  them,  he  continueth  in  Goa.
of  his  Govern-  In  the  Hall  of  his  Palace  stand  the  Guard,  and  in  the
ment  in  India,  great  Hall,  where  his  Councell  sit,  are  painted  all  the
Viceroyes,  that  have  governed  in  India,  since  the  firsl
Discoverie  and  Conquest  thereof,  and  as  they  new  come
their  Pictures  are  likewise  placed  there.  These  Viceroye;
have  great  revenues,  they  may  spend,  give,  and  keepe  the
Kings  treasure,  which  is  verie  much,  and  doe  with  it  wha
pleaseth  them,  for  it  is  in  their  choise,  having  full  anc
absolute  power  from  the  King,  in  such  sort,  that  the]
gather  and  hoord  up  a  mightie  quantitie  of  Treasure,  foi
that  besides  their  great  allowance  from  the  King,  the]
have  great  Presents  and  Gifts,  bestowed  upon  them.  Fo:
it  is  the  custome  in  those  Countries,  when  any  Vicero]
commeth  newly  over,  that  all  the  Kings  bordering  abou
Goa,  and  that  have  peace  and  friendship  with  th<
Portugals,  doe  then  send  their  Ambassadours  unto  him
to  confirme  their  Leagues  with  great  and  rich  Presents
therewith  likewise  to  bid  the  Viceroy  welcome,  whicl
amounteth  to  a  great  masse  of  Treasure :  these  Present

244

JOHN HUIGHEN VAN LINSCHOTEN  a.d.

1583.
in this sort  given, the  Jesuites  by their  practises had  Jesuites  goe  to
obtained  of  the  King,  and  for  a  time  enjoyed  them  at  * ^^
their  pleasure  (looking  verie  narrowly  unto them, that  J
they  might  not be  deceived) untill  long time  since, a
Viceroy  named  Don  Lois  de  Taide  Earle  of  Atougia  came
thither,  and  refused  to  let  them  have  them,  saying  that  the
King  being  in  Portugall  knew  not  what  was  given  him  in
India,  and  that  those  Presents  were  given  unto  the  Vice-
roy and  not  to  the  King,  and  said  the  King  had  no  power
to  give  them  to  the  Jesuites : so  that  hee  kept  them  for  Jesuites
himselfe,  which  the  Jesuites  tooke  in  evill  part,  and  said,  her.es.H [f>a
the  Viceroy  was  an  Hereticke. Yet  from  his  time  ever  aj m-^ .
since  the  Viceroys  have  used  to  keepe  them  for  themselves, nihil  heberi,
They  say,  and  it  is  found  to  bee  most  true,  that  the  first  religio  est
yeere  of  the  Viceroyes  time,  he  hath  enough  to  doe  to  dieere.  Ter.
repaire  and  furnish  his  House,  and  to  know  the  manners
and customes of the Countries, without any further
troubling of himselfe. The second yeere to gather
Treasure,  and  to  looke  unto  his  particular  profits,  for  the
which cause he  came into India. The third and last
yeere  to  prepare  himselfe  and  set  all  things  in  order,  that
he  bee  not  overtaken  or  surprised  by  the  new  Vice-roy
when  hee  commeth,  but  that  he  may  returne  into  Portugall
with  the  goods  which  he  had  scraped  together. The  same
is  to  bee  understood  of  all  the  Captaines  in  the  Fortes,

and  of  all  other  Officers  in  India.

Chap.  33.

IN  the  Towne  and  Hand  of  Goa,  are  resident  manie  j{eatlens
Heathens, Moores, (which  are Mahumetans) Jewes,  Indians, '
and  all  strange  Nations  bordering  thereabout,  everie  one  and  other
of them using severall customes and superstitions in  itrang?rs
Religion. The Moores eate  all things except Swines  d™™in&tn
flesh, and dying are buried like the Jewes ; but the  Varietie  of
Heathens,  as  Decaniins,  Gusarates,  and  Canaras,  and  other  Religions.
Indians  being  dead,  are  burnt  to  ashes,  and  some  Women  Of  their
being  alive  are  burned  with  them,  that  is,  such  as  are  Reli&ms> see
Gentlemen  or  Noblemen,  and  the  Wives  of  the  Bramenes,  fa  my  pif-
which are their Idolatrous Priests. Also for the  grimag.lib.$.

245

A.D.
1583.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Merchants,  some  of  them  eate  all  things,  except  Kowes,
or  Buffles  flesh,  which  they  esteeme  to  bee  Holy.  Others
eate  not  any  thing  whatsoever,  that  hath  either  life  or  bloud
in  it,  as  those  of  Gusarata,  and  the  Banianes  of  Cambaia,
[II. x.  1759.]  which  observe  Pythagoras  Law:  most  of  them  pray  unto
the  Sunne  and  Moone,  yet  they  doe  all  acknowledge  a
God  that  made,  created  and  ruleth  all  things,  and  that
after  this  life  there  is  another,  wherein  men  shall  be
rewarded  according  to  their  workes.  But  they  have  Idols
and  Images,  which  they  call  Pagodes,  cut  and  formed
most  uglie,  and  like  monstrous  Divels,  to  whom  daily
they  offer,  and  say,  that  those  Holy  men  have  beene  living
among  them,  whereof  they  tell  so  many  Miracles,  as  it  is
wonderfull,  and  say,  that  they  are  intercessours  betweene
them  and  God.  The  Divell  oftentimes  answereth  them
out  of  those  Images,  whom  they  likewise  know,  and  doe
him  great  honour  by  offering  unto  him  to  keep  friendship
with  him,  and  that  hee  should  not  hurt  them.  They  have
a  Custome,  when  any  Maide  is  to  be  married,  and  that!
they  will  honour  their  Pagode,  for  the  more  credit  to  the!
Bridegroome,  they  bring  the  Bride  with  great  Triumph
and  Musicke  before  their  Pagode,  which  is  made  with  a
Pinne  of  Ivorie  bone,  to  whom  the  nearest  friends  and
kinswomen  of  the  Bride,  together  with  the  Bride  doe  goe,
and  by  force  make  the  Image  to  take  the  Brides  maiden-
head, so  that  the  blood  remaineth  still  upon  the  Image,
for  a  remembrance  thereof,  and  then  after  other  divellish
Superstitions  and  Ceremonies,  having  made  their  Offerings,
they  bring  the  Bride  home,  where  shee  is  delivered  to
the  Bridegroome,  hee  being  very  joyfull  and  proud,  that
their  Pagode  hath  honoured  him  so  much  and  eased  him
of  so  much  labour.  They  have  for  the  most  part  a
custome  to  Pray  unto  the  first  thing  they  meet  withall  in
the  Morning,  and  all  that  day  after  they  pray  unto  it,  bee
it  Hog,  or  any  other  thing.  And  if  in  the  morning  they
goe  out,  they  chance  at  the  first  sight  to  see  a  Crow
(whereof  there  are  great  numbers  in  India)  they  will  not
goe  forth  of  their  doores  all  that  day,  no  not  for  all  the

246

Ugly  Idols  and
Idolatry  more
ugly.

Oracles.

Divellish
custome  for
Brides.

Hog-god.

JOHN HUIGHEN VAN LINSCHOTEN  a.d.

1583-
goods  in  the  world,  for  they  esteeme  it  an  evill  signe,  and
an  unluckie  day.  They  pray  likewise  to  the  New  Moone,
and  when  shee  first  appeareth,  they  fall  upon  their  knees,
and  salute  her  with  great  Devotion.  There  are  among
them  certaine  people  called  Jogos,  which  are  such  as  we  Jogues,  Friers
call  Hermits,  &  those  doe  they  esteem  for  Holie  men,  or  Hermts-
these  men  live  a  verie  strict  life  with  great  Abstinence,
and  make  the  common  people  beleeve  many  strange  things.
They  have  likewise  many  Southsaiers  and  Witches,  which
use  Jugling,  and  travell  through  the  out  Countrie,  having
about  them  many  live  Snakes,  which  they  know  how  to
bewitch,  and  being  shut  up  in  little  Baskets,  they  pull
them  out  and  make  them  dance,  turne,  and  winde  at  the
sound  of  a  certaine  Instrument,  whereon  they  play,  and
speake  unto  them.  They  wind  them  about  their  neckes,
armes,  and  legges,  kissing  them,  with  a  thousand  other
devises,  onely  to  get  money.  They  are  all  for  the  most
part  verie  skilfull  in  preparing  of  Poysons,  wherewith  they
doe  many  strange  things,  and  easilie  poyson  each  other,
their  dwellings  and  Houses  are  verie  little  and  low,
covered  with  Straw,  without  windowes,  and  verie  low  and
narrow  doores,  so  that  a  man  must  almost  creepe  upon
his  knees  to  goe  in  ;  their  Housholdstuffe  is  Mats  of  Homely  hous-
straw,  both  to  sit  and  lie  upon,  their  Tables,  Table-clothes,  ^  stuffe-
land  Napkins,  are  made  of  the  great  Indian  Fig-leaves,
they  serve  them  not  onely  for  Tables,  Sheets,  and  other
Linnen,  but  also  for  Dishes,  wherein  they  put  their  meat,
which  you  shall  likewise  see  in  the  Grocers,  and
Pothecaries  shops,  to  put  and  wrap  in  all  things  what-
soever they  have  within  their  shops,  (as  wee  doe  in  Paper.)
They  likewise  joyne  them  together  in  such  sort,  that  they
can  put  both  Butter,  Oyle,  and  such  liquid  stuffes  therein,
and  also  whatsoever  commeth  to  hand.  To  dresse  their
meat  they  have  certaine  Earthen  pots  wherein  they  seeth
Rice,  and  make  holes  in  the  ground,  wherein  they  stampe
it,  or  beat  it  with  a  woodden  Pestell  made  for  the  purpose,
and  they  are  so  miserable,  that  they  buy  the  Rice  in  the
Huskes,  as  it  groweth  on  the  ground,  and  some  of  them

247

A.D.
1583.

Flea-bane.

The  Divell
never  hinders
the  quantitie
butthequal'itie
of  Devotion :
for  false-
hood makes
it  his,  whereof
he  is  ambitious.

[II.  x.i  760.]

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

have  Rice  sowen  behind  their  House  to  serve  their
necessarie  use.  They  use  to  drinke  out  of  a  Copper
kanne  with  a  spout,  whereby  they  let  the  water  fall  downe
into  their  mouthes,  and  never  touch  the  Pot  with  their;
lippes.  Their  Houses  are  commonly  strawed  with  Kow-
dung,  which  (they  say)  killeth  Fleas.  They  are  verie
cleane  on  their  Bodies,  for  everie  day  they  wash  themselves
all  their  bodie  over,  as  often  as  they  ease  themselves  or
make  water,  both  men  and  women,  like  the  Moores  and
Mahometans.  They  wash  themselves  with  the  left  hand,
because  they  eate  with  the  right  hand,  and  use  no  Spoones.
They  doe  keepe  and  observe  their  Ceremonies  and  Super-
stitions, with  great  devotion,  for  they  never  goe  forth
without  praying,  when  they  travell  by  the  way.  They
have  on  every  Hill,  Cliffe,  Hole,  or  Denne  their  Pagodes
and  Idols  in  most  devillish  and  deformed  shapes,  cut  and
hewed  out  of  the  stones  and  rockes,  with  their  Furnaces
hard  by  them,  and  a  Cisterne  not  farre  from  them,  which  is
alwaies  full  of  water,  and  every  one  that  passeth  by, ;
washeth  their  feet  therein,  and  so  fall  downe  before  their
Idoll,  some  setting  before  him  for  an  offering  Fruits,  Rice,
Egges,  Hennes,  &c.  as  their  devotions  serve,  and  then
commeth  the  Bramene  their  Priest  and  taketh  it  away  and
eateth  it,  making  the  common  people  beleeve  that  the
Pagode  hath  eaten  it.

When  they  will  make  a  voyage  to  Sea,  they  use  at  the
least  fourteene  daies  before  they  enter  into  their  Ships,  toi
make  so  great  a  noise  with  sounding  of  Trumpets,  and
to  make  Fires,  that  it  may  bee  heard  and  seene  both  by
night  and  day,  the  Ship  being  hanged  about  with  Flagges,
wherewith  (they  say)  they  feast  their  Pagode,  that  they
may  have  a  good  Voyage.  The  like  doe  they  at  their
returne  for  a  Thanksgiving  fourteene  daies  long,  &  thus
they  use  to  doe  in  all  their  Feasts,  Faires,  Manages,
Childbirths,  &  at  other  times  of  the  yeere,  as  Sowing,  &
Mowing,  &c.

The  Heathenish  Indians  that  dwell  in  Goa  are  very  rich
Merchants,  and  traffique  much,  there  is  one  street  within

248

JOHN HUIGHEN VAN LINSCHOTEN  a.d.

1583.
the  Towne,  that  is  full  of  shops  kept  by  those  Heathenish
Indians,  that  not  onely  sell  all  kinds  of  Silkes,  Sattins,
Damaskes,  and  curious  workes  of  Porceline  from  China
and  other  places,  but  all  manner  of  wares  of  Velvet,  Silke,
Sattin  and  such  like,  brought  out  of  Portugall,  which  by
meanes  of  their  Brokers  they  buy  by  the  great,  and  sell
them  againe  by  the  piece  or  elles,  wherein  they  are  very
cunning,  and  naturally  subtile.  There  is  also  another
street,  where  the  Benianes  of  Cambaia  dwell,  that  have
all  kinds  of  wares  out  of  Cambaia,  and  all  sorts  of  precious
stones,  and  are  very  subtile  and  cunning  to  bore  and  make
holes  in  all  kinds  of  stones,  Pearles,  and  Corrals :  on  the
other  side  of  the  same  street  dwell  other  Heathens,  which
sell  all  sorts  of  Bedsteads,  Stooles,  and  such  like  stuffe,
very  cunningly  covered  over  with  Lacke,  most  pleasant  to
behold,  and  they  can  turne  the  Lacke  into  any  colour  that
you  will  desire.  There  is  also  a  street  full  of  Gold  and
Silver  Smiths  that  are  Heathens,  which  make  all  kind  of
workes,  also  divers  other  Handicrafts  men,  as  Copper-
smiths, Carpenters,  and  such  like  Occupations,  which  are
all  Heathens,  and  every  one  a  street  by  themselves.  There
are  likewise  other  Merchants  that  deale  all  by  great,  with
Corne,  Rice,  and  other  Indian  wares  and  merchandises,  as
Wood  and  such  like.  Some  of  them  farme  the  Kings
Rents  and  Revenues,  so  that  they  are  skilfull  every  way  to
make  their  profits.  There  are  also  many  Heathen
Brokers,  very  cunning  and  subtile  in  buying  and  selling,
and  with  their  tongues  to  pleade  on  both  sides.

There  are  in  Goa  many  Heathen  Physicians  which
observe  their  gravities  with  Hats  carried  over  them  for
the  Sunne,  like  the  Portugals,  which  no  other  Heathens
doe,  but  onely  Ambassadors,  or  some  rich  Merchants.
These  Heathen  Physicians  doe  not  onely  cure  their  owne
Nations  and  Countrimen,  but  the  Portugals  also,  for  the
Vice-roy  himselfe,  the  Arch-bishop,  and  all  the  Monkes
and  Friers  doe  put  more  trust  in  them  then  in  their  owne
Countrimen,  whereby  they  get  great  store  of  money,  and
are  much  honoured  and  esteemed. The  Countrimen  in

249

A.D.

I583.

Mungrell
Christians.

Trade-
constancy.

PURCHAS HIS PILGR1MES

the  Villages  round  about  Goa,  and  such  as  labour  and
till  the  land  are  most  Christians :  but  there  is  not  much
difference  among  them  from  the  other  Heathens,  for  that
they  can  hardly  leave  their  Heathenish  superstitions,  which
in  part  are  permitted  them,  and  is  done  to  draw  the  other
Heathens  to  bee  christened,  as  also  that  otherwise  they
would  hardly  bee  perswaded  to  continue  in  the  Christian
Faith.  There  is  in  every  place  of  the  street  Exchangers
of  money,  by  them  called  XarafFos,  which  are  all  Christian
Jewes.  They  are  very  ready  and  expert  in  all  manner  of
accounts,  and  in  knowing  of  all  sorts  of  money,  without
whose  helpe  men  dare  not  receive  any  money,  because
there  is  much  counterfeit  money  abroad,  which  is  hard  to
be  knowne  from  the  good,  were  it  not  for  these  Xaraffos,
which  can  discerne  it  with  halfe  an  eye.  The  Indian
Heathens  have  a  custome,  that  no  man  may  change  nor
alter  Trade  or  Occupation,  but  must  use  his  fathers  Trade,
and  marrie  mens  daughters  of  the  same  Occupation,  Trade,
or  dealing,  which  is  so  neerely  looked  unto,  that  they  are
divided  and  set  apart,  each  Occupation  by  it  selfe,  as,
Countries  and  Nations  are,  and  so  they  call  one  another :
for  if  they  speake  to  a  man,  they  aske  him  of  what  Trade
he  is,  whether  he  be  a  Goldsmith,  Barber,  Merchant,
Grocer,  Fisherman,  or  such  like.  They  give  no  houshold-
stuffe  with  their  daughters,  but  onely  Jewels,  and  pay  the
charges  of  the  Wedding.  The  Sonnes  inherite  all  their
goods.

Chap.  34. r  I  ^He  times  and  seasons  of  the  yeeres  are  as  followeth.

Of  the  times  of X Winter  beginneth  on  the  last  of  Aprill,  throughout*

Inlm1  and  of  tne  wno^e  coast  which  is  called  India,  from  Cambaia  to'

their' diseases,  tne  Cape  de  Comorin,  and  commeth  with  a  Westerne

&c  winde,  which  bloweth  out  of  the  Sea  upon  the  Coast :

the  beginning  thereof  is  with  thunder  and  lightning,  and'

after  that  a  stedfast  and  continuall  raine,  which  lasteth

night  and  day  till  the  moneth  of  September,  and  then

Winter  endeth  with  thunder  and  lightning  :  and  by  reason

of  that  continuall  raine,  it  is  called  Winter,  as  also  because

250

JOHN HUIGHEN VAN LINSCHOTEN  a.*.

1583.
at  that  time  they  cannot  travell  on  the  Seas.  But  in
warme  weather,  when  fruit  time  commeth  on,  it  is  then
right  Summer :  for  the  time,  which  in  India  is  called
Summer,  because  of  the  clearnesse  and  drinesse  of  the
weather,  is  the  colder  and  the  wholsomer,  and  then  there
blowe  East  windes,  so  that  the  nights  are  then  very  coole,
and  somewhat  sharpe  ;  and  then  there  are  no  special!  kindes
of  fruits  in  season,  but  such  as  growe  continually  all  the
yeere.  Against  the  Winter  commeth,  every  man  maketh
his  provision  of  victuals,  and  all  other  necessaries,  like  as
in  a  ship  that  is  to  make  a  Voyage  of  five  or  sixe  moneths ;
also  all  their  ships  are  brought  into  the  River,  and  un-
furnished of  tacklings,  and  every  thing  being  taken  out
of  them  they  are  covered  with  Mats,  otherwise  they  would
rot  with  the  raine,  which  is  so  stedfast  and  continuall  all
the  Winter,  that  many  times  divers  houses  by  reason  of
the  great  moistnesse  doe  fall  unto  the  ground :  and  as
soone  as  Winter  beginneth,  there  driveth  into  the  mouth
of  the  Haven  great  bankes  and  shoales  of  sands,  which
stop  it  up,  so  that  neither  Ship  nor  Boat  can  either  goe
out  or  in :  and  the  Sea  both  there  and  along  the  coast
maketh  so  great  a  roaring  and  noise,  that  men  can  neither
heare  nor  see :  also  the  water  of  the  River  of  Goa  which
runneth  about  the  Hand  in  Winter,  by  meanes  of  the
land-waters  that  by  the  continuall  raine  falleth  from  the
Hills,  is  cleane  fresh  water,  and  of  a  red  colour,  which
in  Summer  is  cleane  contrarie  and  like  sea- water,  by  reason  [II.  x.  1761.]
of  the  concourse  it  hath  with  the  Sea.  In  the  Moneth  of
September,  when  Winter  endeth,  the  bankes  of  sand  doe
1  fleet  and  vade  away  out  of  the  River,  so  that  not  onely
small  ships  may  come  in  and  goe  out,  but  also  the  great
Portugall  ships  of  sixteene  hundred  tunnes  may  freely
enter  without  a  Pilot,  for  it  is  deepe  enough,  and  without
danger.  In  Winter  it  is  a  heavy  and  melancholike  being
there,  for  there  is  no  other  exercise  to  be  used,  but  onely
to  sit  in  their  shirts,  with  a  pair  of  linnen  breeches,  and
goe  and  passe  the  time  away  with  their  neighbours,  in
playing  and  such  exercises,  for  that  throughout  the  whole

251

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1583.

Towne  there  is  no  other  doing.  The  women  and
Mesticos  take  great  pleasure  in  the  Winter  time  when  it
raineth,  with  their  husbands  and  slaves  to  goe  into  the
fields,  or  some  Garden,  whether  they  carrie  good  store  of
victuals,  and  there  in  their  Gardens  have  many  Cesternes
or  Ponds  of  water,  wherein  they  take  their  delights  to
swimme  and  to  bathe  themselves.  In  this  time  most  of
their  Indian  fruit  is  in  season.

The  Summer  beginneth  in  September,  and  continueth
till  the  last  of  Aprill,  and  is  alwaies  cleare  skie  and  faire
weather,  without  once  or  very  little  raining :  Then  all  the
ships  are  rigged  and  made  ready  to  sayle  for  all  places ;
as  also  the  Kings  Armie  to  keepe  the  Coast,  and  to  convoy
Merchants,  and  then  the  East  windes  beginne  to  blowe
from  off  the  Land  into  the  Seas,  whereby  they  are  called
Terreinhos,  that  is  to  say,  the  Land  winds.  They  blowe
very  pleasantly  and  coolly,  although  at  the  first,  by
changing  of  the  weather  they  are  very  dangerous,  and
cause  many  great  diseases,  which  doe  commonly  fall  in
Constancy  of  India,  by  the  changing  of  the  time.  These  winds  blowe
winds.  alwaies  in  Summer,  beginning  at  midnight,  and  continue

till  noone,  but  they  never  blowe  above  ten  miles  into  the
Sea,  from  off  the  coast,  and  presently  after  one  of  the
clocke  untill  midnight  the  West  winde  bloweth,  which
commeth  out  of  the  Sea  into  the  Land,  and  is  called
Virason. These  winds  are  so  sure  and  certaine  at  their
times,  as  though  men  held  them  in  their  hands,  whereby
they  make  the  Land  very  temperate,  otherwise  the  heat(
would  be  unmeasurable.
Winter  and It  is  likewise  a  strange  thing  that  when  it  is  Winter
Summer upon  the  coast  of  India,  that  is  from  Diu  to  the  Cape  dc
Wmile"tn*the C°morm>  on  tne  other  side  of  the  Cape  de  Comorin,  or]
same  height, the  coast  called  Choramandel,  it  is  cleane  contrary,  so  tha;
there  it  is  Summer,  and  yet  they  lie  all  under  one  heigh
or  degrees,  and  there  is  but  seventy  miles  by  land  betweem
both  coasts,  and  in  some  places  but  twenty  miles,  anc
which  is  more,  as  men  travell  over  land  from  Cochin  tc|
Saint  Thomas  (which  lieth  on  the  same  coast  of  Chora-

252

JOHN HUIGHEN VAN LINSCHOTEN  ad.

1583.
mandel)  and  comming  by  the  Hill  of  Ballagatte,  where
men  must  passe  over  to  goe  from  the  one  coast  unto  the
other:  on  the  one  side  of  the  Hill  to  the  top  thereof  it
is  pleasant  cleare  sunne  shining  weather,  and  going  downe
on  the  other  side  there  is  raine,  winde,  thunder  and
lightning,  as  if  the  world  should  end  and  be  consumed :
which  is  to  be  understood,  that  it  changeth  from  the  one
side  to  the  other,  as  the  time  falleth  out,  so  that  on  the
one  side  of  the  Hills  it  is  Winter,  and  on  the  other  side
Summer :  and  it  is  not  onely  so  in  that  place  and  Countrie,
but  also  at  Ormus,  on  the  coast  of  Arabia  Felix  by  the
Cape  of  Rosalgatte,  where  the  ships  lie,  it  is  very  still,
cleare,  and  pleasant  water,  and  faire  Summer  time;  and
turning  about  the  Cape  on  the  other  side,  it  is  raine  and
wind  with  great  stormes  and  tempests,  which  with  the
times  of  the  yeere  doe  likewise  change  on  the  other  side,
and  so  it  is  in  many  other  places  of  the  Orientall
Countries.

The  sicknesses  and  diseases  in  Goa,  and  throughout
India,  which  are  common,  come  most  with  the  changing
of  the  times  and  the  weather,  as  it  is  said  before :  there
raigneth  a  sicknesse  called  Mordexiin,  which  stealeth  upon
men,  and  handleth  them  in  such  sort,  that  it  weakneth
a  man,  and  maketh  him  cast  out  all  that  he  hath  in  his
body,  and  many  times  his  life  withall.  This  sicknesse  is
very  common,  and  killeth  many  a  man,  whereof  they  hardly
or  never  escape.  The  bloudy  Fluxe  is  there  likewise
very  common  and  dangerous,  as  the  Plague  with  us.  They
have  many  continuall  Fevers,  which  are  burning  Agues,
and  consume  mens  bodies  with  extreme  heate,  whereby
within  foure  or  five  dayes  they  are  either  whole  or  dead.
This  sicknesse  is  common  and  very  dangerous,  and  hath
no  remedie  for  the  Portugals  but  letting  bloud :  but  the
Indians  and  Heathens  doe  cure  themselves  with  herbes,
as  Sanders,  and  other  such  like  ointments,  wherewith  they
ease  themselves.  The  sicknesse  consumeth  many  Portu-
gals every  yeere,  some  because  they  have  little  to  eate,
and lesse to drinke of any meate or drinke that is

253

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1583.

nourishing,  and  use  much  company  of  women,  because  1
that  Land  is  naturall  to  provoke  them  thereunto,  as  alsoi
the  most  part  of  the  Souldiers  by  such  meanes  have  their!
living  and their maintenance, which oftentimes  costeth
them  both  life  and  limme,  for  although  men  were  of  Ironi
or  Steele,  the  unchaste  life  of  a  woman,  with  her  unsatiable
lusts  were  able  to  grind  him  to  powder,  and  sweepe  him  I
away  like  dust,  which  costeth  many  a  mans  life,  as  thei
Kings  Hospitall  can  well  beare  witnesse,  wherein  they!
lodge,  whensoever  they  are  sicke,  where  every  yeere  at
the  least  there  entred  five  hundred  live  men,  and  never;
come  forth  till  they  are  dead,  and  they  are  onely  Portugals,
for  no  other  sicke  person  may  lodge  therein, I  meanei
such  as  are  called  white  men,  for  the  other  Indians  havei
a  Hospitall  by  themselves. In  this  Hospitall  they  arei
very  well  looked  unto  by  the  Jesuites,  and  Gentlemen :
whereof  every moneth one  of  the  best is chosen  andh
appointed,  who  personally  is  there  by  them,  and  giveth  the:
[II. x.  1762.]  sicke  persons  whatsoever  they  will  desire,  and  sometimes1
spend  more  by  foure  or  five  hundred  Duckets  of  their1
owne  purses,  then  the  Kings  allowance  reacheth  unto.

But  returning  to  our  matter  of  sicknesse,  Pockes  and
Piles,  with  other  secret  diseases,  they  are  in  those  Countries:
very  common,  and  not  hidden  or  concealed,  for  they!
thinke  it  no  shame,  more  then  to  have  any  other  disease.
They  heale  them  with  the  root  China :  there  are  some
that  have  had  them  at  the  least  three  or  foure  times,  and  k
are  not  any  thing  at  all  shunned  or  disliked  for  the  same,
but  dare  both  boast  and  bragge  thereof.  It  is  not  any!
thing  perilous  for  the  body,  insomuch  that  they  had  rather
have  them,  and  feare  them  lesse  then  any  of  the  foresaid
diseases.  The  Plague  hath  never  beene  in  India,  neither
is  it  knowne  unto  the  Indians,  but  poisoning,  witchcraft,
and  such  like,  whereby  some  lose  their  healths,  and  some
their  lives,  is  their  daily  exercise,  and  very  common  with
them.  The  stone  gravell,  and  rupture  raigneth  mud
among  them,  specially  among  married  men,  by  reason  of
the  great  quantitie  of  water  that  they  drinke  being  giver

254

JOHN HUIGHEN VAN LINSCHOTEN

to  all  pleasure  and  riotousnesse,  enjoying  all  what  their
hearts  desire,  sitting  alwaies  with  their  bellies  open  in  their
shirts  in  a  Gallerie,  recreating  themselves  with  the  wind
which  cooleth  them,  sometimes  having  a  slave  to  scratch
and  pare  their  nayles  and  feet,  another  the  head,  the  third
holds  a  Fanne  to  drive  away  the  Flies.  This  is  the
common  use  for  two  houres  after  noone,  where  likewise
they  take  an  afternoones  sleepe,  and  ever  as  they  have
thirst,  they  bring  him  a  dish  of  Conserves  or  other
Comfets,  that  the  water  should  not  worke  too  much  in  his
body,  but  taste  the  better.  With  such  and  the  like  exer-
cises they  doe  passe  the  day  till  night  comes  on,  so  that
commonly  they  have  all  swollen  bellies  like  Bacchus,
i  whereby  the  Souldiers  and  other  Indians  call  them
Barrigois,  that  is,  Bellies,  or  Great  bellies.

The  day  both  Summer  and  Winter  is  there  all  of  a

j  length,  not  much  difference,  onely  in  the  change  they  have

about  an  houres  difference. The  Sun  riseth  at  sixe,  and

:  setteth  at  sixe. When  it  is  noone,  commonly  they  have

the  Sunne  in  the  middle  of  the  element  just  over  their

heads,  and  it  giveth  no  shadow,  although  it  stretcheth

somewhat  out  as  the  Sunne  taketh  his  course. In  Goa

t  you  may  see  both  the  Poles  of  the  world,  the  North  and

• South  Starres  stand  not  farre  above  the  Horizon.

it

P^He  Bramenes  are  the  honestest  and  most  esteemed

v A Nation  among  all  the  Indian  Heathens  :  for  they  doe

t  alwaies  serve  in  the  chiefest  places  about  the  King,  as

,,  Receivers,  Stewards,  Ambassadors,  and  such  like  Offices.

lfl  They  are  likewise  the  Priests  and  Ministers  of  the  Pagods,

j  or  devilish  Idols. They  are  of  great  authoritie  among

y  the  Indian  people,  for  that  the  King  doth  nothing  without

|  their  counsell  and  consent,  and  that  they  may  bee  knowne

r  from  other  men,  they  weare  upon  their  naked  bodie,  from

the  shoulder  crosse  under  the  arme  over  their  bodie  downe

to  the  girdle,  or  the  cloth  that  is  wrapped  about  their

middle,  three  or  foure  strings  like  sealing  threed,  whereby

they  are  knowne : which they  never  put  off  although

255

A.D.

1583.

Chap.  36.
Of  the  Indians
called
Bramenesy
which  are  the
Ministers  of
the  Pagods, and
Indian  Idols,
and  of  their
manner  of  life.

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1583-

it  should  cost  them  their  lives,  for  their  Profession  and
Religion  will  not  permit  it.  They  goe  naked,  saving  1
onely  that  they  have  a  cloth  bound  about  their  middles  to!
hide  their  privie  members.  They  weare  sometimes  when
they  goe  abroad,  a  thinne  cotton  linnen  Gowne  called'
Cabaia,  lightly  cast  over  their  shoulders,  and  hanging!
downe  to  the  ground  like  some  other  Indians,  as  Benianes,!
Gusarates,  and  Decaniins.  Upon  their  heads  they  weare
a  white  cloth,  wound  twice  or  thrice  about,  therewith  to!
hide  their  haire,  which  they  never  cut  off,  but  weare  in
long  and  turned  up  as  the  women  doe.  They  have  mostj
commonly  round  rings  of  gold  hanging  at  their  eares,  asj
most  of  the  Indians  have.  They  eate  not  any  thing  that
hath  life,  but  feed  themselves  with  herbes  and  Rice,  neither
yet  when  they  are  sick  will  for  any  thing  be  let  bloud,  but
heale  themselves  by  herbes  and  ointments,  and  by  rubbing
their  bodies  with  Sanders,  and  such  like  sweet  woods.  Ir
Goa  and  on  the  Sea  coasts  there  are  many  Bramenes,  whicr
commonly  doe  maintayne  themselves  with  selling  of  Spice?
and  other  Apothecarie  ware,  but  it  is  not  so  cleane  x
others,  but  full  of  garbish  and  dust.  They  are  ver)
subtile  in  writing  and  casting  accounts,  whereby  they  mak<
other  simple  Indians  beleeve  what  they  will.

Touching  the  points  of  their  Religion,  wherein  the
common  people  beleeve  them  to  bee  Prophets  :  whatsoever
they  first  meet  withall  in  the  streets  at  their  going  forth
that  doe  they  all  the  day  after  pray  unto.  The  womer
when  they  goe  forth  have  but  one  cloth  about  their  bodies
which  covereth  their  heads,  and  hangeth  downe  unto  thei
knees :  all  the  rest  of  the  body  is  naked.  They  hav
rings  through  their  noses,  about  their  legs,  toes,  necke?
and  armes,  and  upon  each  hand  seven  or  eight  rings
bracelets,  some  of  silver  and  gilt,  if  they  be  of  wealth  an
abilitie :  but  the  common  people  of  glasse,  which  is  th
common  wearing  of  all  the  Indian  women.  When  th
woman  is  seven  yeeres  old,  and  the  man  nine  yeeres,  the
doe  marrie,  but  they  come  not  together  before  the  woma
be  strong  enough  to  beare  children. When  the  Bramem

256

JOHN HUIGHEN VAN LINSCHOTEN  ad.

1583.
die,  all  their  friends  assemble  together,  and  make  a  hole
in  the  ground,  wherein  they  throwe  much  wood  and  other
things :  and  if  the  man  bee  of  any  account,  they  cast  in
sweet  Sanders,  and  other  Spices,  with  Rice,  Corne,  and
such  like,  and  much  Oyle,  because  the  fire  should  burne
the  stronger. Which  done,  they  lay  the  dead  Bramenes
in  it : then  commeth  his  wife  with  musike  and  many  of
her  neerest  friends  all  singing  certaine  praises  in  com-
mendation of  her  husbands  life,  putting  her  in  comfort,  [II.  x.  1763.
and  encouraging  her  to  follow  her  husband,  and  goe  with
him into the other world. Then shee taketh all her
Jewels,  and  parteth  them  among  her  friends,  and  so  with
a  cheerfull  countenance,  she  leapeth  into  the  fire,  and  is
presently  covered  with  Wood  and  Oyle  :  so  shee  is  quickly
dead,  and  with  her  Husbands  body  burned  to  ashes :  and
if  it  chance,  as  not  very  often  it  doth,  that  any  woman
refuseth  to  be  burnt  with  her  Husband,  then  they  cut
the  haire  cleane  off  from  her  head :  and  while  she  liveth
she  must  never  after  weare  any  Jewels  more,  and  from
that  time  shee  is  despised,  and  accounted  for  a  dishonest
woman. These  Bramenes  observe  certaine  Fasting  dayes
in  the  yeere,  and  that  with  so  great  abstinence,  that  they
eate  nothing  all  that  day,  and  sometimes  in  three  or  foure
dayes together. They have their Pagodes and Idols,
whose  Ministers  they  are,  whereof  they  tell  and shew
many  Miracles,  and  say  that  those  Pagodes  have  beene
men  living  upon  earth,  and  because  of  their  Holie  lives,
and  good  Workes done here  in this  world, are for  a
reward  thereof,  become  Holie  men  in  the  other  world,
is  by  their  miracles,  by  the  Divell  performed,  hath  beene
nanifested  unto  them,  and  by  their  commandements  their
ormes  and  shapes  are  made  in  most  ugly  and  deformed
manner  that  possible  may  be  devised. Such  they  Pray
md  Offer  unto,  with  many  divellish  Superstitions,  and
tedfastly  beleeve  that  they  are  their  Advocates  and  Inter-
essors  unto God. They  beleeve also that there is a
upreame  God  above,  which  ruleth  all  things,  and  that
aens  soules  are  Immortall,  and  that  they  goe  out  of  this
x  257  R

ad.  TURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1583.

world  into  the  other,  both  Beasts  and  Men,  and  receive
reward  according  to  their  workes,  as  Pythagoras  teacheth,  j
whose  Disciples  they  are.

Chap.  37. 'THHe  Gusarates  and  Banianes,  are  of  the  Countrey  ofj

r  d  Cambaia :  many  of  them  dwell  in  Goa,  Diu,  Chaul,;

Banianes  of Cochin,  and  other  places  of  India,  because  of  their  trade;

Cambaia. and  traffique  in  Merchandise,  which  they  use  much  with:
all  kindes  of  wares,  as  Corne,  Cotton,  Linnen,  Anil,  Rice,:
and other  wares, specially  all kind of  precious Stones)
wherein  they  have  great  skill. They  are  most  subtill  and
expert  in  casting  of  Accounts  and  Writing,  so  that  they
doe  not  onely  surpasse  and  goe  beyond  all  Jewes  and  other
Nations  thereabouts,  but  also  the  Portugals : and  in  this
respect  they  have  no  advantage,  for  that  they  are  ver
perfect  in  the  trade  of  Merchandise,  and  very  readie  fc
deceive  men. They  eate  not  any  thing  that  hath  Life  o
Blood  in  it,  neither  would  they  kill  it  for  all  the  goods  i
the  world,  how  small  or  unnecessarie  soever  it  were,  fi|J
that  they  stedfastly  beleeve,  that  every  living  thing  hath  1
Soule,  and  are  next  after  Men  to  be  accounted  of,  accordi
ing to Pythagoras law, and know it must die : anc
sometimes  they  doe  buy  certaine  Fowles  or  other  Beast
of  the  Christians  or  Portugals,  which  they  meant  to  hav
killed,  and  when  they  have  bought  them,  they  let  then
flee  and  runne  away.

They  have  a  custome  in  Cambaia,  in  the  High-waye?
and  Woods,  to  set  Pots  with  water,  and  to  cast  Corne  an
other  Graine  upon  the  ground  to  feed  Birds  and  Beast
withall :  and  throughout  Cambaia  they  have  Hospitals  t
cure  and  heale  all  manner  of  Beasts  and  Birds  therei
whatsoever  they  ayle,  and  receive  them  thither  as  if  the
were  Men,  and  when  they  are  healed,  they  let  them  fli
or  runne  away  whither  they  will,  which  among  them  is ,;
worke  of  great  Charitie,  saying,  it  is  done  to  their  eve
neighbours.  And  if  they  take  a  Flea  or  a  Louse,  the
will  not  kill  it,  but  take  or  put  it  into  some  hole  or  corner
in  the  wall,  and  so  let  it  goe,  and  you  can  doe  them  r

258

JOHN HUIGHEN VAN LINSCHOTEN  a.d.

1583.
greater  injurie  then  to  kill  it  in  their  presence,  for  they
will  never  leave  intreating  and  desiring  with  all  curtesie
not  to  kill  it,  and  that  man  should  not  seeme  to  commit
so  great  a  sinne,  as  to  take  away  the  life  of  that,  to  whom
God  had  given  both  Soule  and  Bodie :  yea,  and  they  will
offer  much  money  to  a  man  to  let  it  live,  and  goe  away.
They  eate  no  Radishes,  Onions,  Garlicke,  nor  any  kind  of
Herbe  that  hath  any  colour  of  Red  in  it,  nor  Egges,  for
they  thinke  there  is  blood  in  them.  They  drinke  not
any  Wine,  nor  use  any  Vineger,  but  onely  water.  They
are  so  dangerous  of  eating  and  drinking  with  other  men  One  lived  sixe
which  are  not  their  Countrimen,  that  they  would  rather  dpeSrW,ith  th,e
starve  to  death  then  once  to  doe  it.  It  happeneth  oftentimes  JJ5J.  'jJJ
that  they  sayle  in  the  Portugals  ships  from  Goa  to  Cochin,  eate  or  drinke,
to  sell  their  Wares,  and  to  traffique  with  the  Portugals,  and  See  lib. ^.a^.
then  they  make  their  provisions  for  so  long  time  as  they
thinke  to  stay  upon  the  way,  which  they  take  aboord  with
them,  and  thereupon  they  feed.  And  if  the  time  falleth
out  longer,  then  they  made  account  of  their  water  and
provision  being  all  spent,  as  it  happened  when  I  sailed
from  Goa  to  Cochin,  they  had  rather  die  for  hunger  and
thirst  then  once  to  touch  the  Christians  meat.  They  wash
themselves  before  they  eate,  as  the  Bramenes  doe,  as  also
everie  time  when  they  ease  themselves  or  make  water.
They  are  of  a  yellow  colour  like  the  Bramenes,  and  some-
what whiter,  and  there  are  Women  among  them  which
are  much  whiter  and  clearer  of  Complection  then  the
Portugall  women.  They  are  formed  and  made  both  in
Face,  Limbes,  and  in  all  other  things  like  men  of  Europe,
colour  onely  excepted.  Their  Apparell  is  a  thinne  white
Gowne  upon  their  naked  bodies,  from  the  head  to  the
feet,  and  made  fast  on  the  side  under  their  armes,  their
Shooes  of  red  leather,  sharpe  at  the  toes,  and  turning  up
like  hookes,  their  Beards  shaven  like  the  Turkes,  saving
onely  their  Moustachios,  they  weare  on  their  heads  a  white
cloth  three  or  foure  times  wrapped  about  like  the
Bramenes,  and  under  their  haire  a  Starre  upon  their
foreheads,  which  they  rub  every  morning  with  a  little  white  [II.  x.  1764.]

259

A.D.
1583.

Chap.  38.
Of  the
Canaras  and
Decaniins.

Brutish  and
stinking  holies.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Sanders  tempered  with  water,  &  three  or  foure  graines  of
Rice  among  it,  which  the  Bramene  also  doe  as  a  super-
stitious Ceremonie  of  their  Law.  Their  Bodies  are
commonly  anoynted  with  Sanders  and  other  sweet  Woods,
which  they  doe  verie  much  use,  as  also  all  the  Indians.
Their  Women  are  apparelled  like  the  Bramenes  wives,
they  eate  like  the  Mahometans,  and  all  other  Indians  upon
the  ground.  In  their  Houses  or  Assemblies  they  sit  on
the  ground  upon  Mats  or  Carpets,  and  alwayes  leave  their
Shooes  without  the  doore,  so  that  they  are  alwayes  bare-
foot in  their  Houses:  wherefore  commonly  the  heeles  of,
their  shooes  are  never  pulled  up,  to  save  labour  of  untying
or  undoing  them,  they  have  a  thousand  other  Heathenish
superstitions  which  are  not  worth  the  rehearsall.

THe  Canaras  and  Decaniins  are  of  the  Countrey  of
Decam, commonly called Ballagate, lying behind
Goa : many  of  them  dwell  in  Goa. Their  Apparell  is
like the Gusurates  and Benianes, except their Shooes,.
which  they  weare  like  Antiques  with  cut  toes,  and  fastned
above  upon  their  naked  feet,  which  they  call  Alparcas.
They  weare  their  Beards  and  haire  long,  as  it  groweth
without  cutting,  but  onely  turne  it  up,  and  dresse  it  as  the;
Benianes  and  Bramenes  use  to  doe,  and  are  like  them  for
colour,  forme,  and  making. They  eate  all  things  except
Kine,.Hogges,  and  Buffles,  Flesh  and  Fish. They  account
the  Oxe,  Kow  or  Buffle  to  bee  Holie,  which  they  hav<
commonly  in  the  house  with  them,  and  they  besmeere
stroke,  and  handle  them  with  all  the  friendship  in  th<;
world,  and  feed  them  with  the  same  meat  they  use  to  eat<
themselves,  and  when  the  Beasts  ease  themselves, the)
hold  their  hands  under  their  tailes  and  so  throw  the  dun^
away. In  the  night  time  they  sleepe  with  them  in  thei
Houses,  and  to  conclude,  use  them  as  if  they  were  reason!
able  Creatures,  whereby  they  thinke  to  doe  God  grea
service. In  their  Eating,  sitting  in  the  House,  Washing
making  Cleane,  and  other  Ceremonies  and  Superstition
they are  altogether  like the Bramenes, Gusurates, an<|

260

JOHN HUIGHEN VAN LINSCHOTEN  a.d.

1583.
Banianes.  In  their  Marriages  they  contract  each  with
other  at  seven  yeeres,  and  at  eleven  or  twelve  yeeres  they
are  married,  and  dwell  together.  When  they  are  to  bee
married,  they  begin  foureteene  dayes  before  to  make  a
great  sound  with  Trumpets,  Drummes,  and  Fires,  which
continueth  day  and  night  for  all  those  foureteene  dayes,
with  so  great  a  noise  of  songs  and  Instruments,  that  men
can  neither  heare,  nor  see :  On  the  Wedding  day,  all  the
friends  and  kindred  on  both  sides  doe  assemble  together,
and  sit  upon  the  ground,  round  about  a  Fire,  and  goe
seven  times  about  it  uttering  certaine  words,  whereby  the
Wedding  is  done.  They  give  their  Daughters  no
Houshold-stuffe,  but  onely  some  Jewels,  as  Bracelets,
Eare-rings,  and  such  like  of  small  value,  wherewith  their
Husbands  must  be  content,  for  the  Daughters  are  no
Heyres,  but  the  Sonnes  inherite  all,  but  they  keepe  and
maintaine  their  Daughters  and  Sisters  till  they  marrie :
when  they  die,  they  are  likewise  burnt,  and  some  of  their
Wives  with  them,  but  not  so  many  as  of  the  Bramenes.
Every  one  of  them  followeth  his  Fathers  occupation,  and
marrieth  with  the  Daughters  of  such  like  Trades,  which
they  name  Kindreds.  They  have  their  Fasting  dayes,  and
Ceremonies  like  the  Bramenes,  for  they  are  as  the  Laitie,
and  the  Bramenes  as  the  Spiritualtie,  the  Ministers,  Priests,
and  Prophets  of  their  Idols.  They  hire  and  farme  the
Customes  and  Rents  of  the  Portugals,  and  the  Kings
revenues  in  the  Land  of  Bardes,  Salsette,  and  the  Hand  of
Goa,  so  that  oftentimes  for  any  question  or  strife  they
must  appeare  in  Law,  where  they  alwayes  come  without
Councell  or  Atturney,  and  know  so  well  how  to  place  their
words,  according  to  the  Lawes  of  Portugall,  not  onely
Temporall  but  Spirituall,  that  they  are  able  to  set  downe,
and  shew  where  it  standeth  written,  as  well  as  any  Coun-
sellor could  doe,  and  make  their  Petitions  and  Requests
without  any  mans  advise,  that  the  Portugals  doe  wonder
at  their  readie  wits,  as  I  have  oftentimes  found  in  them.
When  they  are  to  take  their  Oathes  to  beare  witnesse  with  Oathes.
any  man,  they  are  set  within  a  Circle  made  of  Ashes  upon

261

A.a  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1583.

the  pavement  where  they  stand,  still  laying  a  few  Ashes  on
their  bare  Heads,  holding  one  hand  on  their  heads,  the
other  on  their  brests,  and  then  in  their  owne  speech  sweare
by  their  Pagode,  that  they  will  tell  the  Truth  without
dissimulation,  whatsoever  shall  bee  asked  them,  for  that
they  certainly  beleeve  they  should  be  damned  for  ever,  if
as  then  they  should  not  say  the  truth,  but  conceale  it.

Chap.  39. nr^He  Canariins  and  Corumbiins  are  the  Countrimen, ;

/ffe.. , JL and  such  as  deale  with  Tilling  the  Land, Fishing
Lanar tins  and .  , «.t -  .  ,~~,  o  .,  .&

Corumbiins  of  anci  sucn  ^^e  labours. 1  hese  are  the  most  contemptible,
India.  and the  miserablest  people  of  all India,  and  live  veryj

poorely,  maintaining  themselves  with  little  meat.  They
eate  all  kind  of  things,  except  Kine,  Oxen,  Buffles,
Hogges,  and  Hens  flesh;  their  Religion  is  like  the
Decaniins  and  Canaras,  for  they  are  all  of  one  Countrey
and  Custome,  little  differing :  they  goe  naked,  their  privie
members  onely  covered  with  a  cloth.  The  Women  goe:
with  a  cloth  bound  about  their  middle  beneath  their  navels,  i
and  hanging  downe  to  the  middle  of  their  thighes,  and
the  other  end  thereof  they  cast  over  their  shoulders,
whereby  halfe  their  brests  are  covered.  They  are  in  a
manner  blacke,  or  of  a  darke  browne  colour,  many  of
them  are  Christians,  because  their  chiefe  habitation  and|
dwelling  places  are  on  the  Sea-side,  in  the  Countries
bordering  upon  Goa,  for  that  the  Palme-trees  doe  grow
upon  the  Sea  coasts,  or  upon  the  bankes  by  River  sides.
Rice  grounds.  The  Rice  is  sowed  upon  low  ground,  which  in  Winter
[II.  x.i 765.]  time  is  covered  with  water,  wherewith  those  Canariins  doe
maintaine  themselves :  these  bring  Hennes,  Fruit,  Milke,
Egges,  and  other  such  like  wares  into  the  Towne  to  sell.
They  dwell  in  little  straw  Houses,  the  doores  whereof  are
so  low,  that  men  must  creepe  in  and  out,  their  houshold-
sturTe  is  a  Mat  upon  the  ground  to  sleepe  upon,  and  a
Pit  or  hole  in  the  ground  to  beat  their  Rice  in,  with  a  Pot
or  two  to  seeth  it  in,  and  so  they  live  and  gaine  so  much
as  it  is  a  wonder.  For  commonly  their  Houses  are  full
of  small  Children,  which  crall  and  creepe  about  all  naked.

262

JOHN HUIGHEN VAN LINSCHOTEN  a.d.

1583.
untill  they  are  seven  or  eight  yeares  old,  and  then  they
cover  their  privie  members.  When  the  women  are  readie
to  travell  with  Child,  they  are  commonly  delivered  when  Childbirth
they  are  all  alone ;  and  their  Husbands  in  the  fields,  as  it
fortuned  upon  a  time,  as  I  and  some  other  of  my  friends
went  to  walke  in  the  fields,  and  into  the  Villages  where  the
Canariins  dwell,  and  having  thirst,  I  went  to  one  of  the
Canariins  houses  to  aske  some  water,  therewith  to  refresh
us,  and  because  I  was  very  thirstie,  I  stooped  downe  and
thrust  my  head  in  at  the  doore,  asking  for  some  water,
where  I  espied  a  Woman  alone  within  the  house,  tying
her  cloth  fast  about  her  middle,  and  before  her  having  a
woodden  Trough  (by  the  Portugals  called  Gamello)  full
of  water,  where  shee  stood  and  washed  a  Child,  whereof
as  then  she  had  newly  beene  delivered  without  any  helpe :
which  having  washt,  she  laid  it  Naked  on  the  ground  upon
a  great  Indian  Figge  leafe,  and  desired  me  to  stay  and  she
would  presently  give  me  water.  When  I  understood  by
\  her  that  she  had  as  then  newly  beene  delivered  of  that
Child  without  any  helpe,  I  had  no  desire  to  drinke  of  her
water,  but  went  unto  another  to  aske  water,  and  perceived
the  same  woman  not  long  after  going  about  her  house,  as
if  there  had  beene  no  such  matter,  and  the  Children  are
brought  up  in  that  manner  cleane  naked,  nothing  done
unto  them,  but  onely  washed  and  made  cleane  in  a  little
cold  water,  and  doe  in  that  sort  prosper  and  come  up  as
well  as  man  would  wish,  or  as  any  Child  within  these
Countries  can  doe  with  all  the  tending  they  have,  and  live
many  times  untill  they  be  a  hundreth  yeares  old,  without
any  Head-ach,  or  Tooth-ach,  or  losing  any  of  their  Teeth.
They  weare  onely  a  tuske  of  haire  on  the  tops  of  their
Heads,  which  they  suffer  to  grow  long :  the  rest  of  their
haire  is  cut  short,  they  are  very  expert  in  Swimming  and
Diving,  they  row  up  and  downe  the  Rivers  in  Boates
called  Almadias,  whereof  some  of  them  are  hewen  out
of  a  peece  of  wood,  and  so  narrow  that  a  man  can  hardly
sit  in  them,  and  it  chanceth  oftentimes  that  they  turne  over
and  over  twice  or  thrice  before  they  passe  the  River,  and

263

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1583.

then  they  leape  out  into  the  water  and  turne  them  up,  and
so  powring  out  the  water  they  get  into  them  againe.  They
are  so  miserable,  that  for  a  Penie  they  would  indure  to  be
Whipped,  and  they  eate  so  little,  that  it  seemeth  they  live
by  the  Aire,  they  are  likewise  most  of  them  leane,  and
weake  of  limbes,  of  little  strength  and  very  Cowards,:
whereby  the  Portugals  doe  them  great  outrage  and  villanie,  1
using  them  like  Dogs  and  Beasts.

In  their  Marriages  and  Deaths  they  observe  the  manner
of  the  Decaniins  and  Canaras,  as  also  in  their  Religion  and|
Ceremonies.  When  the  Man  is  dead  his  body  is  burnt,
and  the  Woman  cuts  her  haire  off,  and  breaketh  all  her
Jewels,  although  they  bee  but  few  and  small,  for  they  are
most  of  Glasse.

Chap.  40.  .nr* Here  are  many  Arabians  and  Abexiins  in  India.  The
°/thre  . A Arabians  observe  Mahomets  Law,  and  the  Abexiins,

Abexiins  some  are  Mahometans,  some  Christians,  after  their
dwelling  in  manner,  for  they  are  of  Prester  Johns  land.  The  Abexiins
India.  that  are  Christians,  have  on  their  Faces  foure  burnt  markes

in  manner  of  a  Crosse,  one  over  their  Nose  in  the  middle
of  the  forehead,  betweene  both  their  eies,  on  each  of  their
Cheekes  one,  betweene  their  eyes  and  their  eares,  and  one
under  their  nether  Lip  downe  to  the  chinne.  These
Abexiins  and  Arabians,  such  as  are  free  doe  serve  in  allj
Pride  of  For-  India  for  Saylers  and  Sea-faring  men.  The  Portugals
tugall  Saylers.  (though  they  serve  for  Saylers  in  the  Portugals  Ships)
that  come  into  India,  and  have  never  beene  other  ir
Portugall  but  Saylers,  yet  are  they  ashamed  to  live  in  that
order,  and  thinke  it  a  great  discredit  unto  them,  togethei
with  a  great  diminishing  of  their  Authorities  and  estima-
tions, which  they  account  themselves  to  hold  in  India,  sc
that  they  give  themselves  out  for  Maisters  of  ships,  ancj
by  their  Captaines  are  also  called  Pilots  and  chiefe  Boat-
swaines,  but  not  lower :  for  if  they  should  descend  bul
one  step  lower,  it  would  be  a  great  blot  and  blemish  untc
them  all  their  lives  after,  which  they  would  not  indure  foi
any  thing  in  the  world. These  Abexiins  and  Arabians

264

JOHN HUIGHEN VAN LINSCHOTEN  a.d.

1583.
serve  for  small  money,  and  being  hired  are  verie  lowly
I  and  subject,  so  that  oftentimes  they  are  beaten  and  smitten,
not  as  Slaves,  but  like  Dogs,  which  they  beare  very
patiently,  not  once  speaking  a  word  :  they  commonly  have
their  Wives  and  Children  with  them  in  the  ship  wherein
they  are  hired,  which  continually  stay  with  them,  what
Voyage  soever  they  make,  and  dresse  their  owne  meat,
which  is  Rice  sodden  in  water  with  salt  Fish  among  it.
The  cause  why  the  Women  saile  in  the  ship,  is,  for  that
in  Summer  and  not  else,  their  ships  goe  to  Sea,  when  they
alwaies  have  calme  water  and  faire  weather,  with  good
windes :  they  have  commonly  but  one  Portugall  or  two
for  Captaine,  Master  and  Pilot,  and  they  have  a  chiefe
Boatswaine,  which  is  an  Arabian,  which  they  call  Mocadon,
and  he  is  ruler  of  the  Arabians  and  Abexiins,  that  are
Sailers,  whom  he  hath  under  his  subjection,  even  as  if
they  were  his  Slaves  or  Subjects.

This Mocadon  is  hee  that  conditioneth and maketh
bargaine  with  the  owners  of  the  Ship,  to  have  so  many  [n.x.  1766.]
Sailers,  and  hee  receiveth  the  monethlie  money  for  their
wages,  and  accounteth  with  the  Sailers  particularly,  but
for  government  of  the  ship  hee  hath  not  to  doe,  neither
troubleth  himselfe  therewith. The  ships  when  they  saile,
use  no  Caske  for  water,  because  there  is  not  any  through-
out all  India,  nor  any  made  there,  save  onely  such  as  come
out  of  Portugall,  and  used  in  the  Portugall  shippes :  but
in  stead  of  Pipes  they  use  a  great  foure  cornered  woodden
Cesterne,  that  standeth  by  the  maine  Mast,  at  the  very
I  foot  thereof,  upon  the  keele  of  the  ship,  which  is  very
1  well  pitched,  and  made  fast,  wherein  they  lade  as  much  Chap.  41.
water  as  they  thinke  will  serve  them  for  their  Voyage. Of  the  blacke
The  Captaine,  Master  or  Pilot,  Marchants  and  Passengers,  ^le  °f
have  everie  man  their  meat  by  themselves,  and  their  water  w^  J-j**9
in  great  Indian  pots  called  Martavans.  called

Caffares,  &  of

THe Blacke people or CafFares of the Land of  '^  ^Zl?
Mosambique, and all the Coast of  Ethiopia, and  "seelfThes?
within  the  land  to  the  Cape  de  bona  Speranza,  goe  all  sup.  9.  c.  12.

265

*d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1583.

naked, although those of Mosambique, (that is the
Women)  doe  a  little  cover  themselves,  which  they  doe  b]
meanes of the daily conversation they have with th(
Portugals. Some  have  all  their  bodies  rased  and  seare(
with  Irons,  and  all  figured  like  rased  Satten  and  Damaske,
wherein  they  take  great  pride,  thinking  there  are  no  fain
people  then  they  in  all  the  world,  so  that  when  they  see
any  white  people,  that  weare  Apparell  on  their  bodies;
they laugh and mocke at them, thinking us to be<
Monsters  and  ugly  people :  and  when  they  will  make  am
divellish  forme  and  Picture,  then  they  invent  one  afte
the  forme  of  a  White  man  in  his  apparell. There  an
among  them  that  file  their  Teeth  as  sharpe  as  Needle*
which  they  likewise  esteeme  for  a  great  ornament.

There  are  some  of  them  that  are  become  Christians  since
the  Portugals  came  thither,  but  there  is  no  great  paine
taken  about  it  in  those  Countries,  because  there  is  n(
profite  to  bee  had,  as  also  that  it  is  an  infectious  anc
Note  of  unwholsome  Countrey :  And  therefore  the  Jesuites  an
Jesuites,  warie  enough  not  to  make  any  Houses  or  habitation:!
therein,  for  they  see  no  great  profite  to  be  reaped  then
for  them,  as  they  doe  in  India  and  the  Hands  of  Japan
and  in  other  places,  where  they  find  great  quantities  oj
Riches,  with  the  sappe  whereof  they  increase  much  anc
fill  their  Beehives,  therewith  to  satisfie  their  thirstie  anc  <
insatiable  desires.

They  have  a  Custome  among  them,  that  when  the)
goe  to  Warre  against  their  enemies,  if  they  winne  th(
Battell,  or  overthrow  each  other,  he  that  taketh  or  killed
most  men,  is  holden  and  accounted  for  the  best  and  braves
man  among  them,  and  much  respected,  and  to  witnesse  th(
same  before  their  Kings,  of  as  many  as  they  have  slain(
or  taken  Prisoners,  they  cut  off  their  privie  members,  tha
if  they  bee  let  goe  againe,  they  may  no  more  bege
Children,  which  in  processe  of  time  might  mischiefe  them
and  then  they  drie  them  well,  because  they  should  not  rot :
which  being  so  dryed,  they  come  before  their  Kings  witl
great  reverence,  in  the  presence  of  the  principall  men  ii

266

or

JOHN HUIGHEN VAN LINSCHOTEN  a.d.

1583.

the  Village,  and  there  take  these  members  so  dried  one  by

one  in  their  mouthes,  and  spit  them  on  the  ground  at  the

Kings  feet,  which  the  King  with  great  thank.es  accepteth,  and

fi  the  more  to  reward  and  recompence  their  Valour,  causeth

1  them  all  to  be  taken  up  and  given  to  them  againe,  for  a

1  signe  and  token  of  Honour,  whereby  ever  after  from  that

e  1  time  forwards  they  are  accounted  as  Knights,  and  they

?i  take  all  those  members,  wherewith  the  King  hath  thus

e  honoured  them,  and  tie  them  all  upon  a  string  like  a

I  Bracelet  or  Chaine,  and  when  they  Marrie,  or  goe  to  any  A  costly  kinde
a  Wedding,  or  Feasts,  the  Bride  or  Wives  of  those  Knights  °f  Chaine  fo
r  doe  weare that Chaine of mens members about their °me" i0

W6QT6,

s  neckes,  which  among  them  is  as  great  an  Honour,  as  it  is

with  us,  to  weare  the  Golden  Fleece.
t From  Mosambique  great  numbers  of  these  Caffares  are
c  carried  into  India,  and  many  times  they  sell  a  Man  or

II  Woman  that  is  growne  to  their  full  strength,  for  two  or
1  three  Duckets.  When  the  Portugals  ships  put  in  there
b  for  fresh  Water  and  other  necessaries,  then  they  are  dearer.
:  In  time  of  Povertie  or  Dearth  the  Fathers  may  sell  their
[  Children,  as  it  happened  in  my  time,  that  there  was  such  a
1  dearth,  and  scarcitie  of  Victuals  in  the  firme  land,  and
1  Countries  bordering  upon  Goa,  that  the  men  of  India
ii  came  to  Goa  (and  other  places  where  the  Portugals  are

resident)  to  sell  their  Children  in  great  numbers,  and  for
small  prices,  to  buy  them  victuals.  I  have  seene  Boyes
1  of  eight  or  ten  yeares,  given  in  exchange  for  five  or  sixe
;  measures  of  Rice,  and  some  for  three  or  foure  Duckets  the
I  peece,  and  some  came  with  their  Wives  and  Children  to
offer  themselves  to  bee  Slaves,  so  that  they  might  have
i meate  and  drinke  to  nourish  their  bodies.

And  because  the  Portugals  have  Trarfique  in  all  places
(as  wee  have  beene  in  many)  it  is  the  cause  why  so  many
are  brought  out  of  all  Countries  to  be  sold,  for  the
Portugals  doe  make  a  living  by  buying  and  selling  of
them,  as  they  doe  with  other  wares.

267

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1583.

Chap.  42. r  I  AHe  Malabares,  are  those  that  dwell  on  the  Sea-coasti

Of  the  Mala- JL betweene  Goa,  and  the  Cape  de  Comorin  Southward1

ares  am  from Goa, where the Pepper groweth. They have  U

India,  with speech  by  themselves,  and  their  Countrey  is  divided  intc

their  manners  many  Kingdomes,  they  goe  all  naked  onely  their  privk

and  custome. members  covered,  the  Women  likewise  have  but  a  clotl

from  their  Navell  downe  to  their  knees,  all  the  rest  is

naked,  they  are  strong  of  limbes,  and  verie  arrogant  and

[II.  x.i  767.]  proud,  of  colour  altogether  blacke,  yet  verie  smooth  bott

of  haire  and  skinne,  which  commonly  they  anoynt  wit!

Oyle,  to  make  it  shine ; they  weare  their  haire  as  long  a

it  will  grow,  tyed  on  the  top  or  crowne  of  their  head

with  a  Lace,  both  men  and  women : the  lappes  of  thei:

Eares  are  open,  and  are  so  long  that  they  hang  downe  ■

their  shoulders,  and  the  longer  and  wider  they  are,  th<T

more  they  are  esteemed  among  them,  and  it  is  though

to  be  a  beautie  in  them. Of  Face,  Bodie  and  Limbes

they are  altogether  like men of  Europe, without an;

difference,  but  onely  in  colour,  the  men  are  commonly

verie hairie, and rough upon the brest, and on thei'

bodies,  and  are  the  most  Leacherous  and  unchaste  Natio.

in all the Orient, so that there  are  verie few  wome:

Children  among  them,  of  seven  or  eight  yeeres  old,  thaj

have  their  Maidenheads : They  are  verie  readie  to  catc

one  from  another,  though  it  bee  but  for  a  small  Penie.

In  their  Houses  they  are  not  verie  curious,  their  house1
and  housholdstuffe,  differeth  not  much  from  the  Canariir
and  Corumbiins  of  Goa.  Their  Idolatrie,  Ceremonk
and  Superstitions,  are  like  the  Heathens.  Of  thes:
Malabares  there  are  two  manner  of  people,  the  one  :
Nayros  Noblemen or Gentlemen, called Nayros, which ai

Souldiers,  that  doe  onely  weare  and  handle  Armes,  tn'
other  is  the  common  people,  called  Polyas,  and  they  mal
weare  no  Weapons,  nor  beare  any  Armes.  The  Nayrc
must  in  all  places  where  they  goe  or  stand,  weare  sue1
Armes  as  are  appointed  for  them,  and  alwayes  be  read:
at  the  Kings  commandement  to  doe  him  service,  some  J
them  doe  alwayes  beare  a  naked  Rapier  or  Courtelas  i

268

JOHN HUIGHEN VAN LINSCHOTEN  a.d.

1583.
their  right  hands,  and  a  great  Target  in  their  left  hand,
those  Targets  are  very  great :  and  made  of  light  wood,
so  that  when  they  will  they  can  cover  their  whole  bodies
therewith ;  they  are  so  well  used  thereunto,  that  they
esteeme  it  nothing  to  beare  them,  and  when  they  travell
on  the  way,  they  may  be  heard  a  great  way  off,  for  that
they  commonly  make  a  great  knocking  with  the  Hilt  of
their  Rapier  against  the  Target,  because  they  would  be
heard.  There  are  some  that  carrie  a  Bow  and  a  venemous
Arrow  upon  their  shoulder,  wherein  they  are  verie  expert,
others  carrie  long  Pikes,  some  Pieces,  with  the  Match
ready  lighted,  and  wound  about  their  armes,  and  have
the  best  Lockes  that  possible  may  be  found  in  all  Europe,
which  they  know  so  well  how  to  use,  that  the  Portugals
can  have  no  advantage  against  them.  Wheresoever  they
goe,  they  must  alwaies  have  their  Armes  with  them,  both
night  and  day.  Not  any  of  them  are  Married,  nor  may
j  not  marrie  during  their  lives,  but  they  may  freely  lie  with
the  Nayros  Daughters,  or  with  any  other  that  liketh  them,
what  women  soever  they  be,  yea  though  they  be  Married
women.  When  the  Nayro  hath  a  desire  thereunto,  hee
entreth  into  a  house  where  he  thinketh  good,  and  setteth
his  Armes  in  the  street  without  the  doore,  and  goeth  in
and  dispatcheth  his  businesse,  with  the  good  Wire  or  the
Daughter,  the  doore  standing  wide  open,  not  fearing  that
any  man  should  come  in  to  let  him  ;  for  whosoever  passeth

■  by,  and  seeth  the  Nayros  armes  standing  at  the  doore,
although  it  be  the  Goodman  himselfe,  hee  goeth  by,  and

I  letteth  him  make  an  end,  and  having  done,  he  taketh  his
Armes  and  departeth  thence,  and  then  the  Husband  may
come  to  the  house  without  making  any  words,  or  once

a  moving  question  about  it.  In  that  manner  they  goe  where
they  will,  and  no  man  may  denie  them.  As  these  Nayros
goe  in  the  streets,  they  use  to  crie  Po,  Po,  which  is  to  say,
Take  heed,  looke  to  your  selves,  or  I  come,  stand  out  of  the
way,  for  that  the  other  sort  of  people  called  Polyas,  that
are  no  Nayros,  may  not  once  touch  or  trouble  one  of  them  ;
for  if  any  of  the  Polyas  should  stand  still,  and  not  give

269

i!

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1583.

them place, whereby he should chance to touch their
bodies,  he  may  freely  thrust  him  through,  and  no  man
aske  him  why  he  did  it. And  when  they  are  once  touched
by  any  Polyas,  or  by  any  other  Nation  except  Nayros,
they must (before they eate, or converse with other
Nayros)  wash  and  cleanse  their  bodies  with  great  Cere-
monies and  Superstitions. Likewise  they  must  not  be
touched  by  any  Christian,  or  any  other  man. And  when
the Portugals came first into India, at Cochin it was,
concluded,  (to  pacifie  the  matter,  and  to  keepe  peace  and)
quietnesse  among  them)  that  two  men  should  be  chosen,,
one  for  the  Nayros,  and  the  other  for  the  Portugals,  thati
should Fight bodie to bodie, and hee that should  be
overthrowne,  that  Nation  should  give  place  unto  the  other,!
this  was  done  in  the  presence  of  both  Nations,  and  the;
Portugall  overcame  the  Nayro,  whom  he  slew  ;  whereupon;
it  was  agreed,  that  the  Nayros  should  give  place  unto  the
Portugall,  and  stand  aside  untill  he  be  past  wheresoever
they  meet. The  Nayros  weare  the  nailes  of  their  hands
very  long,  whereby  they  shew  that  they  are  Gentlemen,
because  the  longnesse  of  the  Nails  doth  let  and  hinder
men  from  working  or  doing  any  labour. They  say  like-
wise that  they  doe  it,  the  better  and  faster  to  gripe  a  thing
in  their  hands,  and  to  hold  their  Rapiers,  which  sormi
Portugals  and  Mesticos  doe  likewise  use,  and  hold  the
same  opinion  with  the  Nayros,  whereof  there  are  many  m
India,  which  let  their  Nailes  grow  for  the  same  cause.

The  principallest  or  chiefest  of  those  Nayros,  which  an;
Leaders  or  Captaines  of  certaine  numbers  of  Nayros,  wean
a  Gold  or  Silver  bracelet,  or  Ring,  about  their  Armes
above  their  elbowes :  as  also  their  Governours,  Ambas-
sadors, and  Kings,  whereby  they  are  knowne  from  othe:
men,  for  otherwise  they  goe  all  naked.  Also  their  Kings
Rulers,  and  other  Captaines  and  Leaders,  when  they  go<
abroad,  are  guarded  and  accompanied  by  other  Nayros;
They  are  verie  good  and  stout  Souldiers,  and  will  set  upoi
a  man  very  fiercely,  they  are  also  verie  full  of  revenge
so  that  whensoever  they  fight  against  their  Enemies  eithe

270

JOHN HUIGHEN VAN LINSCHOTEN  a.d.

1583.
by  water  or  by  land,  and  that  they  chance  to  be  thrust  into  [II.  x.  1768.]
the  bodie  with  a  Pike,  they  are  not  presently  therewith
content  to  lie  downe,  but  if  they  cannot  speedily  plucke
the  Pike  forth,  they  will  not  spare  to  pull  it  forth  with
both  their  hands,  and  draw  it  through  their  bodies,  there-
with to  set  upon  them  that  gave  them  the  wound,  and  to
be  revenged  on  them.

The  King  may  not  Judge  nor  execute  those  Nayros

openly,  for  if  they  have  deserved  Death,  he  causeth  them

by  other  Nayros  to  be  put  to  death. The  Daughters  of

the  Nayros  may  not  have  the  companie  of  any  man,  but

onely  of  Nayros,  although  secretly  they  have  the  company

of  many  Portugals  and  Christians,  but  if  the  Nayros  once

perceived  it,  or  finde  them  in  the  deed  doing,  they  might

kill  them  without  further  question. In  every  place  where

they  dwell,  they  have  a  Pit  or  Well  digged,  wherein  they

1  doe  hold  water,  which  standeth  openly  in  the  way  where

every  man  passeth  by,  wherein  every  morning  when  they

rise,  they  wash  themselves  all  over,  beginning  first  at  the

Foot  and  so  rising  up  to  the  Head,  as  well  Men  as  Women,

without  being  ashamed  to  be  seene  of  such  as  goe  by,  or

looke  upon  them,  and  the  King  himselfe  likewise :  which

water  is  so  greene,  slimie  and  stinking,  that  a  man  can

not  chuse  but  stop  his  Nose  as  he  goeth  by  it :  and  they

certainly  beleeve,  that  whensoever  they  should  forget  to

wash  themselves  in  that  water,  that  they  should  then  be  Holy  water.

whollie uncleane  and full of sinne : and this washing

or  making  cleane,  must  not  be  done  in  any  running  water,

but  it  must  be  in  a  place  where  the  water  standeth  in  a

Pit  or  Well,  and  by  their  Bramenes  conjured  with  many

s  Words  and  Ceremonies,  otherwise  it  were  of  no  vertue  but

; whollie  unprofitable,  for  their  Idolatrous  services. They

are  like  the  other  Heathens,  and  are  burned  when  they

are  Dead :  their  Sonnes  may  not  be  their  Heyres,  because  Heyres.

they  have  no  Wives,  but  use  all  women,  where  and  when

they  will,  doubting  which  is  their  owne  Sonne : for  the

Bramenes  also  have  the  Kings  wives  at  their  pleasures,  and

doe  him  great  honour  when  it  pleaseth  them  to  lie  with

271

ad  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1583.

their  Queene.  Their  heyres  are  their  Sisters  sonnes,  for
they  say,  although  they  doubt  of  their  Fathers,  yet  they
know  their  Sisters  are  the  Mothers  of  them.  Thus  much
touching  the  Nayros  and  Gentlemen  or  Souldiers.

The other  common people of  the Malabares, called
Poly  as.  Polyas,  are  such  as  are  the  Countrey  Husbandmen  andj

Labourers,  men  of  Occupations,  Fishers,  and  such  like:;
those  are  much  contemned  and  despised,  they  live  miser-
ably, and  may  weare  no  kind  of  Weapon,  neither  yet
touch  or  bee  conversant  with  the  Nayros,  for  as  the  Nayros
goe  on  the  streets,  and  they  heare  him  call,  they  step  aside,
bowing  their  Armes,  and  stooping  with  their  Heads  downe
to  the  ground,  not  daring  so  much  as  once  looke  up
before  the  Nayros  be  past :  in  other  things  they  observe
the  Customes  of  the  other  Indians,  for  that  every  manj
followeth  the  Occupation  of  his  Elders,  and  may  not
change  it  for  any  thing.

Chap.  43. rTRHere  are  great  numbers  of  Moores  and  Jewes  in  al!

°{dkJews°7n ■* plaCCS °f  Itldia' aS  at  G°a' Cochin> and  within the
India.  Land. In their  Houses  and  Apparell  they  follow  the

manner  of  the  Land  wherein  they  are  resident :  amongst

the Indians they  have their  Churches, Sinagogues  anc

Mesquitas,  wherein  they  use  all  Ceremonies  according  tc[

their  Law :  but  in  the  places  where  the  Portugals  inhabit*!

and  governe,  it  is  not  permitted  unto  them  to  use  then

openly,  neither  to  any  Indian,  although  they  have  theii

Families  and  dwelling  Houses,  and  get  their  livings,  and

deale  one  with  the  other : but  secretly  in  their  House:

they  may  doe  what  they  will,  so  that  no  man  take  ofFena

thereat : without  the  Townes  and  where  the  Portugal:

have  no  commandement,  they  may  freely  use  and  exercise

their  Ceremonies  and  Superstitions,  every  one  as  liketf

him  best,  without  any  man  to  let  or  denie  them :  but  ii

they  bee  found  openly  doing  it  in  the  Portugals  Towne:

and  Jurisdictions,  or  that  they  have  any  point  of  Christiar

ceremonies  mingled  among  theirs,  both  men  and  womer

die  for  it,  unlesse  they  turne  unto  the  Christian  Faith :

272

JOHN HUIGHEN VAN LINSCHOTEN  a.d.

1583.
they  are  most  white  of  colour,  like  men  of  Europa,  and
have  many  faire  Women.  There  are  many  of  them  that
came  out  of  the  Countrey  of  Palestina  and  Jerusalem
thither,  and  speake  over  all  the  Exchange  verie  perfect  and
good  Spanish.

The  Moores  likewise  have  their  Mesquitos,  wherein
they  pray,  and  above  the  Church  they  have  many  Sellers
and  Galleries,  where  they  learne  their  Children  their  prin-
ciples of  Religion  before  they  goe  to  Church :  they  wash
their  Feet,  for  the  which  purpose  they  have  alwayes  a
Cesterne  with  water  standing  without  the  Church,  and
leave  their  Alparcos  (which  are  their  Shooes)  standing  at
the  Church  doore  before  they  goe  in,  and  being  in  the
Church  they  fall  flat  on  the  ground  upon  their  faces,  and
so  with  their  armes  and  hands  lifted  up,  make  many
counterfeit  faces.  They  are  also  Circumcised  like  the
Jewes,  and  eate  no  Hogs-flesh,  and  when  they  are  dead
they  are  buried.  In  their  Churches  they  have  not  any
Images,  but  onely  some  Stones  or  round  Pillers  standing
upright  with  certaine  Chaldean  letters  (out  of  their
Alcaron)  graven  upon  them.  As  I  and  a  friend  of  mine
chanced  to  goe  out  of  the  Towne,  wee  were  desirous  to
see  their  Mahometicall  Church,  and  their  manner  of
Service,  which  was  denied  us  by  the  keeper  of  the  doore,
that  bad  us  put  off  our  Shooes,  but  because  we  would
not,  hee  said  it  was  not  lawfull  for  us  to  enter  in  that  sort
into  the  Church:  but  to  let  us  see  it,  hee  suffered  us  to
stand  within  the  doore,  and  opened  some  of  the  windowes,
that  wee  might  see  what  was  within  it :  then  the  Portugall  [II.  x.  1769.]
asked  him  for  their  God  and  their  Saints  which  they  used
to  pray  unto,  because  he  saw  the  Church  emptie,  as  I  said
before :  then  the  Moore  answered  him,  that  They  used
not  to  pray  to  Stockes  and  Stones,  but  to  the  living  God,
which  is  in  Heaven,  and  said,  that  the  proud  Portugall
Christians,  and  the  Heathens  were  all  of  one  Religion,  See  the  proofe
for  that  they  pray  to  Images  made  of  Wood  and  Stones,  hereofi  SUP-
and  give  them  the  Glorie  which  onely  appertaineth  to  the  ^ag'  2  '
living  God :  with  the  which  answer  the  Portugall  was  so
x  273  s

A.D.

1583.

Chap.  44.
Of  their
Pagodes.

Mad  Zeale.

Devils
Martyrs.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

angrie,  that  hee  began  to  chide,  so  that  there  had  growne  a  J
great  quarrell,  had  it  not  beene  for  me.

IN the Kingdome of Narsinga, or the Coast called
Choramandel, there  standeth  a  Pagode, that  is  veryi
great, exceeding rich, and holden in great estimation,
having  many  Pilgrimages  &  Visitations  made  unto  it  from,
all  the  Countries  bordering  about  it,  where  every  yeere  they
have  many  Faires,  Feasts,  and  Processions,  and  there  they
have  a  Waggon  or  a  Cart,  which  is  so  great  and  heavie,
that  three  or  foure  Elephants  can  hardly  draw  it,  and  this
brought  foorth  at  Faires,  Feasts,  and  Processions. At  this(
Cart  hang  likewise  many  Cables  or  Ropes,  whereat  also
all  the  Countrey  people,  both  men  and  women  of  pure
devotion  doe  pull  and  hale. In  the  upper  part  of  rhisj
Cart  standeth  a  Tabernacle  or  Seat,  wherein  sitteth  thej
Idoll,  and  under  it  sit  the  Kings  Wives,  which  after  their
manner  play  on  all  Instruments,  making  a  most  sweet
melodie,  and  in  that  sort  is  the  Cart  drawne  forth,  with
great  Devotions  and  Processions  :  there  are  some  of  themj
that  of  great  zeale  and  pure  devotion  doe  cut  peeces  oi
flesh  out  of  their  bodies,  and  throw  them  downe  befon
the  Pagode : others  lay  themselves  under  the  wheeles  oi|
the  Cart,  and  let  the  Cart  runne  over  them,  whereby  the]
are  all  crushed  to  peeces,  and  pressed  to  death,  and  the]
that  thus  die,  are  acounted  for  holy  and  devout  Martyrs
and  from  that  time  forwards  are  kept  and  preserved  fo;
great  and  holy  Reliques,  besides  a  thousand  other  sucl
like  beastly  Superstitions,  which  they  use,  as  one  of  mi
Chamber  fellowes,  that  had  seene  it  shewed  me,  and  it  i
also  well  knowne  throughout  all  India.

Upon  a  time  I  and  certaine  Portugals  my  friends,  having
licence  from  the  Vice-roy  were  at  a  Banquet  and  meeting
about  five  or  sixe  miles  within  the  firme  Land,  and  wit)
us  wee  had  certaine  Decaniins,  and  naturall  borne  Indians
that  were  acquainted  with  the  Countrey,  the  chiefe  causi
of  our  going,  was  to  see  their  manner  of  burning  the  dea<
Bramene,  and  his  Wife  with  him  being  alive,  because  w

274

JOHN HUIGHEN VAN LINSCHOTEN  a.d.

1583.

had  beene  advertised,  that  such  a  thing  was  to  bee  done.
And  there  among  other  strange  devises  that  we  saw,  we
came  into  some  Villages,  and  places  inhabited  by  the
Indians,  where  in  the  way,  and  at  everie  Hill,  stonie  Rocke
or  hole,  almost  within  a  Pater  noster  length,  we  found  a
Carved  Pagode,  or  rather  Devils,  and  monsters  in  hellish
shapes.  At  the  last  we  came  into  a  Village,  where  stood
a  great  Church  of  stone,  wherein  wee  entred,  and  found
nothing  in  it  but  a  great  Table  that  hung  in  the  middle  of
the  Church,  with  the  Image  of  a  Pagode  painted  therein
so  mishaped  and  deformed,  that  more  monstrous  was
never  seene,  for  it  had  many  Homes,  and  long  Teeth  that
hung  out  of  his  mouth  downe  to  the  knees,  and  beneath
his  navell  and  belly,  it  had  another  such  like  face,  with
;many  homes  and  tuskes.  Upon  the  head  thereof  stood
a  triple  Crowned  Myter,  not  much  unlike  the  Popes  triple
jCrowne,  so  that  in  effect  it  seemed  to  be  a  Monster,  such
as  are  described  in  the  Apocalips.  It  hung  before  a  Wall,
which  made  a  partition  from  another  Chamber,  in  manner
of  a  Quier,  yet  was  it  close  made  up  without  windowes,
or  any  place  for  light,  in  the  middle  whereof  was  a  little
narrow  close  doore,  and  on  both  sides  of  the  doore,  stood
a  small  Furnace  made  within  the  wall,  wherein  were
certaine  holes  or  Lattices,  thereby  to  let  the  smoke  or
savour  of  the  fire  to  enter  into  that  place,  when  any
Offering  should  be  made.  Whereof  we  found  some  there,
as  Rice,  Corne,  Fruits,  Hennes,  and  such  like  things,
which  the  Indians  daily  offered,  but  there  came  so  filthie
a  smoke  and  stinke  out  of  the  place,  that  whosoever  went
neere  it,  was  almost  ready  to  choke,  the  said  place  being  all
black,  smeerie  and  foule  therwith.  Before  this  doore
being  shut,  in  the  middle  of  the  Church,  there  stood  a
Calfe  of  stone,  whereon  one  of  our  companie  leaped,  and
laughing,  began  to  crie  out,  which  the  Bramene  that  kept
the  Church  perceiving,  began  to  call  and  crie  for  helpe,  so
that  presently  many  of  the  neighbours  ranne  thither,  to
see  what  the  cause  might  be,  but  before  the  throng  of
people  came,  we  dealt  so  well  with  the  Bramene  (acknow-

275

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1583.

ledging  our  fault,  and  saying  it  was  unadvisedly  done)
that  he  was  well  content,  and  the  people  went  home  againe.
Then  we  desired  the  Bramene  to  open  us  the  doore  that
stood  shut,  which  after  much  intreatie  hee  yeelded  unto,
offering  first  to  throw  certaine  Ashes  upon  our  foreheads,
which  we  refused,  so  that  before  he  would  open  us  the!
doore,  we  were  forced  to  promise  him  that  we  would  not'
enter  further  in,  then  to  the  doore.

Like  lips  like  t he  doore  of  their  Sancta  Sanctorum,  or  rather
Diabolorum,  being  opened,  it  shewed  within  like  a  Lime-
kill,  being  close  vaulted  round  about,  over  the  head
without  either  hole  or  window  to  cast  in  light,  but  onely
at  the  doore,  neither  was  there  any  light  in  all  the  Church,
but  that  which  came  in  at  the  doore  we  entred  by.  Within
the  said  Cell  or  Vault,  there  hung  at  the  least  one  hundred:
burning  Lamps,  in  the  middle  whereof  stood  a  litle  Altar,
&  covered  over  with  cloth  made  of  Cotton-wooll,  and  over'
that  with  pure  Gold,  under  the  which  (as  the  Bramene  told
us)  sate  the  Pagode  being  of  cleane  Gold,  of  the  bignesse1

[II.  x.i  770.]  of  a  Puppet  or  a  Babie  sold  in  Faires  :  hard  by  the  Church
without  the  great  doore,  stood  within  the  earth  a  great:
foure  cornered  or  square  Cesterne,  hewed  out  of  Free!
stone,  with  stayres  on  each  side  to  goe  downe  into  it,  full
of  greene,  filthie  and  stinking  water,  wherein  they  wash
themselves  when  they  meane  to  enter  into  the  Church  tc
pray. From  thence  wee  went  further,  and  still  as  we  went1
in  every  place  we  found  Pagodes  hewed  out  of  hard  Stones
and  standing  in  their  holes, of  such  lively  shapes  anc
figures  as  we  told  you  before. These  stand  in  the  waye
under  certaine  covertures,  without  the  Churches,  and  hav<
hard  by  each  of  them  a  small  Cesterne  of  water,  cut  out  o
the  stone  to  wash  their  feet,  with  halfe  an  Indian  Nut,  tha
hath  a  handle  and  hangeth  there  to  take  up  water  withall
And  this  is  ordayned  for  Travellers  that  passe  by,  wh<
commonly  at  every  one  of  those  Pagodes  doe  fall  down
and make their  Prayers, and wash their feet in thos
Cesternes. By  the  said  Pagodes,  commonly  doe  stan<
two  little  Furnaces,  with  a  Calfe  or  Kow  of  stone,  befor

276

JOHN HUIGHEN VAN 'LINSCHOTEN  a.d.

1583-

the which they  set their  Offerings, which  are  of  such

things,  as  are  to  bee  eaten,  every  man  as  his  Devotion
serveth,  which  they  thinke  the  Pagode  eateth  in  the  Night,
but  it  is  taken  away  by  the  Bramene.  We  found  in
every  place  such  Offerings  standing,  but  we  had  little
desire  once  to  taste  thereof,  it  looked  so  filthily,  and  as  we
had  sufficiently  beholden  their  mishapen  figures  and
monstrous  Images,  we  returned  againe  into  the  Village,
wherein  we  saw  the  stone  Church,  because  the  Bramene
had  advertised  us,  that  the  same  day  about  Evening,  the
Pagode  should  be  carried  in  Procession,  to  sport  it  selfe  in
the  Fields,  and  to  fetch  a  circuit,  which  we  desired  to  see.
And  about  the  time  which  hee  appointed,  they  rung  a
little  Bell,  which  they  had  gotten  of  the  Christians,  where-
with all  the  people  began  to  assemble,  and  tooke  the
Pagode  out  of  his  diabolicall  Cell,  which  with  great  rever-
ence, they  set  in  a  Palamkin  borne  by  the  chiefe  men  of
the  Towne,  all  the  rest  with  great  devotion  following  after,
with  their  usuall  noyse  and  sounds  of  Trumpets  and  other
Instruments,  wherewith  they  went  a  reasonable  way  round
about  a  Field,  and  then  brought  him  to  the  stone  Cesterne,
where  washing  him  very  cleane  (although  he  were  very
filthie  stinking)  they  carried  him  againe  into  his  Cell,
leaving  him  shut  herein  withall  his  Lampes,  to  make  good
cheere,  and  having  made  a  foule  smoake  and  stinke  about
him,  and  every  man  left  his  Offering  behind  him,  they  went
home  to  their  houses,  leaving  the  Bramene  alone,  who  in
stead  of  the  Pagode,  made  good  cheere  at  their  costs  with
his  Wife  and  Familie.

THere  is  over  all  India  great  store  of  Cattell,  as  Oxen,  Chap.  45.
Kine,  Sheepe,  Hogges,  Goates,  Kids,  and  such  like,  Of  all  the  kind
and  very  good  cheape,  and  in  great  abundance,  although  °£ //'[<;
the  flesh  is  not  of  so  good  a  taste  as  that  in  Europe,  which  Fowles'in
proceedeth  from  the  heat  of  the  Countrey,  and  therefore  India.
it  is  not  much  esteemed. A  man  may  buy  the  best  Kow  Kine.
in  Goa,  for  five  or  sixe  Pardawes. Oxen  are  there  little  Ox£n.
killed  to  eate,  but  are  most  kept  to  till  the  Land,  all  other

277

A.D.

1583.

Mutton.
Hogs.

Sheepes  tailes.

Bufflcs  and
their  Mllke.

Cheeses.
Wild  Beasts.

Few  small
Birds.

Great  Bats
and  hurtfulh

I  have  heard
that  they
breed  &  have
many  young  as
Rats  with  us.

Crowes  bold.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

things  as  Hogs,  Sheepe  and  Goates,  are  sold  after  the
rate.  Mutton  is  little  esteemed  of,  and  not  much  used  to
be  eaten,  for  it  is  forbidden  to  such  as  are  sicke,  and  the
Hogs  flesh  is  much  better  and  sounder,  which  is  rather
permitted  unto  sicke  persons  then  Mutton.  There  are
Sheepe  in  that  Countrey,  of  five  quarters  in  quantitie,  fori
that  the  tayle  is  as  great,  and  hath  as  much  flesh  upon  it,;
as  any  of  the  quarters,  there  are  many  Buffles,  but  nothing
good  to  bee  eaten,  unlesse  it  be  by  poore  people,  but  their
Milke  is  very  good,  and  is  very  well  sold  and  ordinarily
eaten,  for  you  shall  see  the  Slaves  and  Canariins  in  great
numbers,  all  day  going  about  the  streets  to  sell  the  Milke
of  Buffles,  and  Goates,  and  excellent  sweet  Creame,  andi
fresh  Butter  in  small  peeces.  They  make  likewise  some
small  white  Cheeses,  but  they  are  very  salt  and  drie:
wilde  Bores,  some  Hares,  Conies,  Harts,  and  Hindes  arei
there  also  to  be  found,  but  not  many  Cockes,  Capons,!
Pheasants,  and  Doves  are  there  in  great  abundance  and1
good  cheape.  In  the  Hand  of  Goa  and  thereabout  are]
Sparrowes,  and  some  other  small  Birds,  yet  not  many:
but  on  the  Coast  of  Cochin  and  Malabar,  there  are  very
few  Sparrowes,  nor  any  such  like  small  birds.  There  are
in  India  many  Battes,  and  some  of  them  so  great,  that  it  is!
incredible  to  tell.  They  doe  great  mischiefe  to  Trees,
Fruits  and  Herbes,  whereby  the  Canariins  are  constrained
to  set  men  to  watch  in  their  Trees,  and  yet  they  canji
hardly  rid  them  away.  The  Indians  eate  them,  and  sayj
they  are  as  good  meat  as  a  Partridge.

There  is  a  most  wonderfull  number  of  blacke  Crowes,
which  doe  much  hurt,  and  are  so  bold  that  oftentimes  they
come  flying  in  at  their  windowes,  and  take  the  meat  outL
of  the  dish,  as  it  standeth  upon  the  Table,  before  them
that  are  set  downe  to  eate :  and  as  I  my  selfe  sate  writing
above  in  a  Chamber  of  the  house,  the  windowes  being
open,  one  of  those  Crowes  flew  in  at  the  window,  and
picked  the  Cotton  out  of  mine  Inke-horne,  and  blotted  all
the  paper  that  lay  on  my  Table,  doe  what  I  could  to  leg  J
him. They  sit  commonly  upon  the  Buffles  backes,  and

278

JOHN HUIGHEN VAN JLINSCHOTEN  ad.

pecke  off  their  haire,  so  that  you  shall  find  very  few
Buffles  that  have  any  haires  upon  their  backes,  and  there-
fore to  avoyd  the  Crowes  they  get  themselves  into
Marishes,  and  watrie  places,  where  they  stand  in  the  water
up  to  the  neckes,  otherwise  they  could  never  be  rid  of
them.

There  are  likewise  great  numbers  of  Rats,  and  some  as  Great  Rats.
bigge  as  young  Pigges,  so  that  the  Cats  dare  not  touch
them. Sometimes  they  digge  downe  the  Houses,  for  that
they  undermine  the  walles  and  foundations  through  and
through,  whereby  many  times  the  houses  fall  downe  and  [II.  x.1771.]
are  spoyled. There  is  another  sort  of  Rats,  that  are  little  Muske-rats:
and  reddish  of  haire. They  are  called sweet smelli  ng  suc}  a/e  in
Rats,  for  they  have  a  smell  as  if  they  were  full  of  Muske.  Vlr&mia-

Of  Ants  or  Pismires  there  is  so  great  abundance  Ants  hurtfull.
throughout  all  India,  and  so  noisome,  that  it  is  incredible
to  such  as  have  not  seene  it :  for  that  men  may  set  nothing
whatsoever  it  be,  that  is  to  be  eaten,  or  fatty,  nor  yet  their
clothes  nor  linnen,  but  you  shall  presently  find  at  the  least
a  thousand  upon  it :  and  in  the  twinkling  of  an  eye  they
will  presently  consume  a  loafe  of  bread  :  wherefore  it  is  the
manner  throughout  India,  to  make  all  the  Cupboords
wherein  they  keepe  their  victuals,  and  Chests,  where  their
linnen  and  apparell  lieth,  with  foure  feet  or  pillars,  and
under  every  foot  or  pillar  a  stone  or  woodden  Cesterne  full
of  water,  and  place  the  Cupboord  or  Chest  in  the  middle
of  the  roome,  not  neere  the  wall,  whereby  they  cannot
come  at  it,  otherwise  it  would  be  spoiled,  and  if  they  doe
never  so  little  forget  to  powre  water  into  the  Cesterns,
if  it  be  but  a  Pater  noster  while,  presently  there  will  be  so
many  Pismires  crawling  all  over  it,  that  it  is  wonderfull :
so  that  it  seemeth  to  be  a  curse  or  plague  of  God  sent
upon  that  Countrie.  There  are  some  likewise  that  use
such  Cesternes  of  water  under  their  bedstead,  because  they
would  not  be  troubled  with  them  as  they  lie  in  their  Beds,
and  also  under  their  Tables.  Some  men  which  keepe
Canarie  birds,  or  such  small  fowles  (that  are  brought
thither  from  Portugall,  or  out  of  Turkie  and  Persia  for

279

A.D.

•583.

Great  Ants.

Wormes.

They  are
called  Wall-
lice,  because
they  breed  in
Wals :  but  in
true  English
they  are  called
Midges,  and
in  Latin,
Cimices.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

their  pleasures)  are  forced  to  set  them  on  a  sticke  or
pearch  made  for  the  purpose,  with  a  Cesterne  of  water
under  it,  otherwise  it  would  presently  be  killed  by  the
Pismires :  and  though  it  hangeth  in  the  top  of  the  house,
yet  they  will  come  at  it  if  it  have  a  string,  to  hold  it  by.
The  Souldiers  and  poore  people  (that  have  not  the  meanes
to  buy  Cupboords,  with  Cesternes)  put  the  bread  and  other
victuals  which  they  leave  (which  is  not  overmuch)  in  a;
cloth  tied  on  knots,  and  hang  it  on  a  naile  against  the  wall,
and  make  a  circle  about  it  of  Charcole,  so  that  the  Pismires
cannot  get  over,  nor  come  at  it.  There  is  another  sort  of;
Pismires  which  are  almost  a  finger  long,  and  reddish  of
colour :  they  runne  into  the  fields,  and  doe  great  hurt  to
the  herbes,  fruits,  and  plants.

Moths  and  wormes  which  creepe  and  eate  through  mens
clothes,  are  there  in  great  abundance,  whereby  men  must
use  no  more  clothes  nor  linnen  in  those  Countries  then  that ;
he  necessarily  and  daily  weareth  on  his  backe,  otherwise
they  are  presently  moth-eaten  and  spoiled.  They  can)
hardly  keepe  any  Paper  or  Bookes  from  wormes,  which  arei
like  eare-wormes,  but  they  doe  often  spoile  and  consume;
many  Papers  and  evidences  of  great  importance.  There:
are  also  many  Wall-lice.  There  is  a  kind  of  beast  that:
flieth,  twice  as  bigge  as  a  Bee,  and  is  called  Baratta  :  These:
creatures  also  doe  much  hurt,  and  are  commonly  in  Sugar,
Honie,  Butter,  Oile,  and  all  fat  wares  and  sweet  meates.
Many  of  them  likewise  come  into  their  Chests  among
their  clothes  and  linnen,  which  they  doe  also  spoile  andl
spot.  They  are  in  great  numbers  and  very  hurtfull.!
There  can  be  nothing  so  close  shut  or  made  fast,  but  they
will  get  in  and  spoile  it,  for  where  they  lie  or  be,  they  spot
all  things  with  their  egges,  which  sticke  as  fast  as  sirop
upon  a  Paper,  so  that  they  may  be  esteemed  as  a  plague
like  to  the  Pismires.

Within  the  Land  there  are  also  Tigres :  other  cruel]
beasts,  as  Lions,  Beares,  and  such  like  there  are  few  ot
none :  but  venomous  beasts,  as  Snakes,  Lizards,  and  sucr
like  there  are  many,  for  the  Lizards  will  clime  and  creepe

280

JOHN HUIGHEN VAN LINSCHOTEN  a.d.

1583.
jpon  the  walls  in  their  houses,  and  oftentimes  fall  upon
nen,  as  they  lie  in  their  Beds  and  sleepe,  and  therefore
nany  men  that  are  of  abilitie,  doe  hang  Testers  and
Curtaines  over  and  about  their  Beds.  There  are  likewise
many  Chamelions,  which  are  said  to  live  by  the  aire,  but
they  are  not  hurtfull.

There  are  many  Monkies  or  Marmosets,  that  doe  great  Monkies.
hurt  to  the  Palme  trees,  wherein  the  Indian  Nut  or  Cocus
doth  growe.  In  those  trees  you  shall  commonly  see
certaine  little  beasts,  called  Bichos  de  Palmeyras,  that  is,
Beasts  of  the  Palme  trees :  They  are  much  like  Ferrets,
wherewith  men  use  to  hunt  and  catch  Cunnies,  and  have  a
taile  like  the  Penner  of  an  Ink-horne,  and  grayish  speckled
haire :  they  are  pretie  beasts  to  keepe  and  to  passe  the
time  withall.  Parrots  are  there  in  great  numbers,  and
flie  abroad  in  the  Woods.  There  commeth  in  India  out
jof  the  Hand  of  Molucas  beyond  Malacca,  a  kind  of  birds,
called  Noyras :  they  are  like  Parrots,  but  they  have  many
red  feathers,  and  speake  like  Parrots :  they  are  worth  in
India  twenty  or  thirty  Pardawes  the  piece :  they  are  very
faire  to  looke  on,  and  speake  sweetly :  they  claw  or  tickle
men  with  their  tongues  upon  their  heads  and  beards,  and
make  them  cleane  at  the  roots,  as  also  their  eares  and  their
teeth,  so  that  they  are  very  pleasant  to  keepe  in  a  house,
for  that  both  in  colour  and  beauty  of  feathers  they  surpasse
all  birds  and  Parrots  whatsoever :  but  there  could  never
yet  be  any  of  them  brought  living  into  Portugall,  although
they  have  sought  and  used  all  the  meanes  they  could  to
bring  them  for  a  Present  to  the  King,  which  he  greatly
desireth :  but  they  die  upon  the  way,  for  they  are  very
delicate,  and  will  hardly  be  brought  up.

ELephants  are  in  many  places  of  India. In  the  Hand  chap.  46.
of  Seelon  there  are  also  great  numbers,  which  are  Of  the
esteemed  the  best  and sensiblest  of  all  the  world, for  ^lePhant-
wheresoever they meet with any other  Elephants (the
Indians  report  for  a  truth,  that  they  have  tried  it)  those
Elephants  of  other  Countries  doe  reverence  and  honour  to

281

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1583.

the  Elephants  of  Seylon.  The  most  service  that  they  usti
them  for  in  India,  is  to  draw  their  Pipes,  Buts,  Packes
[II.  x.  1772.]  and  other  goods,  and  to  ship  them,  all  which  they  doe  with
Elephants.  They  are  kept  at  the  Kings  charges,  and  he
that  needeth  them,  speaketh  to  their  Keepers,  and  agreed
with  them  for  a  price  to  have  their  labour:  Then  the
Keeper  getteth  upon  the  necke  of  the  Elephant,  anc
thrusteth  his  feet  under  his  eares,  having  a  hooke  in  hi?
hand,  which  he  sticketh  on  his  head,  where  his  stones  lie
that  is  to  say,  above  betweene  both  his  eares,  which  is  the
cause,  that  they  are  so  well  able  to  rule  them  :  and  comming
to  the  thing  which  they  are  to  draw,  they  bind  the  Fat  011
Packe  fast  with  a  rope  that  he  may  feele  the  weight  thereof
and  then  the  Keeper  speaketh  unto  him :  whereupon  hee
taketh  the  corde  with  his  snout  and  windeth  it  about  hi*!
teeth,  and  thrusteth  the  end  into  his  mouth,  and  so  drawetr
it  hanging  after  him,  whither  they  desire  to  have  it.  If
it  be  to  be  put  into  a  Boat,  then  they  bring  the  Boat  closq
to  the  shoare  of  the  Key,  and  the.  Elephant  putteth  it  intc!
the  Boat  himselfe,  and  with  his  snout  gathereth  stoned
together,  which  he  layeth  under  the  Fat,  Pipe,  or  Packe  >
and  with  his  teeth  striketh  and  thrusteth  the  Packe  01
Vessell,  to  see  if  it  lie  fast  or  not.  It  will  draw  any  greai:
shot  or  other  Iron  worke,  or  metall  being  made  fast  untel
it,  be  it  never  so  heavie.  They  draw  Fusts,  small  Galliesi
and  other  great  Boats,  as  Carvels,  and  such  like,  as  easily
out  of  the  water  upon  the  land,  as  if  no  man  were  in  them  :
so  that  they  serve  their  turnes  there,  even  as  our  Sleds  oij
Carts  with  Horses  doe  heere,  to  carrie  our  wares  and
merchandises.  Their  meate  is  Rice  and  water,  they  sleep*'
like  Kine,  Oxen,  Horses,  and  all  foure-footed  beasts,  and
bow  their  knees  and  all  their  members  as  other  beasts  doe!
In  Winter  when  it  beginneth  to  raine,  then  they  art
unquiet,  and  altogether  mad,  so  that  their  Keepers  cannol
rule  them,  and  then  they  are  let  some  whither  out  of  the
Towne  to  a  great  tree,  and  there  tied  unto  it  by  the  legs
with  a  great  Iron  chaine,  where  they  carrie  him  meate.
and  so  he  lieth  in  the  open  aire,  as  long  as  he  is  mad,

282

JOHN HUIGHEN VAN LINSCHOTEN  a.d.

ISH-

which  is  from  Aprill  to  September,  all  the  Winter  time
when  it  raineth,  and  then  he  commeth  to  himselfe,  and
beginneth  to  serve  againe  as  tamely,  that  a  man  may  lie
under  his  bellie,  so  you  doe  him  no  hurt :  but  he  that
hurteth  him,  he  must  take  heed,  for  they  never  forget
when  any  man  doth  them  injurie,  untill  they  be  revenged.
They  are  very  fearefull  of  a  Rat  or  Mouse,  and  also  of  the
Pismires,  because  they  feare  they  would  creepe  into  their
snouts.  They  are  likewise  afraide  of  gun-shot  and  of  fire,
unlesse  by  length  of  time  they  be  used  unto  them.  When
they  have  the  companie  one  of  the  other,  the  male
Elephant  standeth  upon  the  higher  ground,  and  the  female
somewhat  lower.  As  they  goe  along  the  way,  although
you  see  them  not,  you  may  heare  them  a  farre  off  by
the  noise  of  their  feet  and  clapping  of  their  eares,  which
they  continually  use.  They  are  as  swift  in  going  almost
as  a  Horse,  and  are  very  proude,  and  desirous  of  honour.
When  there  is  any  great  Feast  or  Holiday  kept  in  Goa,
with  solemne  Procession,  commonly  the  Elephants  goe
with  them,  the  young  before,  and  the  old  behind,  and  are
all  painted  upon  their  bodies  with  the  Armes  and  Crosses
of  Portugall,  and  have  every  one  five  or  sixe  Trumpetters
or  players  upon  the  Shalmes,  sitting  upon  them  that  sound
very  pleasantly,  wherewith  they  are  as  well  pleased,  and  goe
with  as  great  gravitie,  and  in  as  good  order,  as  if  they  were
men.  It  happened  in  Goa,  that  an  Elephant  should  draw
a  great  Fust  out  of  the  water  unto  the  land,  which  Fust
was  so  great  and  heavie,  that  he  could  not  doe  it  alone,  so
that  they  must  have  another  to  helpe  him  :  whereupon  the
Keeper  chid  him,  using  many  hard  words,  saying,  that  he
was  idle  and  weake,  and  that  it  would  be  an  everlasting
shame  for  him,  that  they  must  fetch  another  to  helpe  him,
wherewith  the  Elephant  was  so  desperate,  that  hee  thrust
away  his  fellow  (which  was  brought  to  helpe  him)  and
beganne  freshly  againe  to  draw,  with  so  great  force,  more
then  he  was  well  able  to  doe,  that  with  extreme  labour  he
burst  and  fell  downe  starke  dead  in  the  place.  At  such
time  as  I  was  to  make  my  Voyage  from  Cochin  to  Portugall,

283

ad.  PURCHAS HIS  PILGRIMES

the  Rudder  of  our  ship  was  out  of  order,  so  that  it  must
of  force  be  brought  on  land  to  make  it  fit  againe,  and  so
it  was  drawne  to  the  Rivers  side  at  the  sterne  of  the  Boat,
which  the  Elephant  should  draw  on  land  upon  two  boords,
that  it  might  slide  up,  and  because  it  was  heavie,  (as  the
Rudder  of  a  ship  of  fourteene  hundred  or  sixteene  hundred
tunnes  requireth)  as  also  that  the  Elephant  was  as  yet  but
young,  and  not  growne  to  his  full  strength,  so  that  he  could
not  draw  it  out  alone,  yet  he  did  the  best  he  could:  but
seeing  he  could  not  doe  it,  he  fell  on  his  fore-legs,  and)
beganne  to  crie  and  weepe,  that  the  teares  ranne  out  of  his
eyes,  and  because  many  of  us  stood  upon  the  shoare  toj
behold  this  sight,  the  Keeper  began  to  chide  him,  and  with
hard  words  to  curse  him,  because  he  shamed  him  thus  ini
presence  of  so  many  men,  not  to  be  able  to  draw  up  such
a  thing :  but  what  strength  or  labour  soever  the  Elephant
used,  he  could  not  doe  it  alone,  but  when  they  brought
another  Elephant  to  helpe  him,  they  both  together  drew
it  halfe  out  of  the  water,  so  that  it  lay  partly  upon  thei
boords.  The  first  Elephant  perceiving  that,  with  his  head
and  teeth  thrust  the  other  Elephant  away,  and  would  have
no  more  helpe,  but  drew  it  out  himselfe.

They  are  likewise  very  thankful  &  mindful  of  any  good
done  unto  them.  When  new  yeres  day  commeth,  theii
keepers  use  of  common  custome  to  aske  new  yeeres  gifts
of  the  Viceroy,  the  Archbishop,  and  other  Governours  anc
Gentlemen,  and  then  the  Elephants  come  to  the  doore  anc
bow  their  heads  downe,  and  when  any  thing  is  given,  the)
kneele  on  their  knees  with  great  lowlinesse,  and  thankful-
nesse,  for  the  good  deedes  so  done  unto  their  keeper:
(which  they  thinke  to  be  done  unto  themselves.)  The]
use  as  they  passe  by  such  houses,  to  bow  their  heads  a:
[II.  x.i 77 3.]  the  dores,  as  also  when  they  passe  by  the  Church  doores
and  by  Crosses,  which  their  Masters  teach  them.  The^
have  a  custome  that  they  goe  often  into  the  Market  when
hearbs  are  sold,  as  Reddish,  Lettice,  Coleworts,  and  sucl
like  stuffe,  and  those  that  are  liberall  to  the  Elephant
doe  use  to  throw  something  before  him. Among  the  res

284

JOHN HUIGHEN VAN LINSCHOTEN  a.d.

1583.

there  was  one  hearbe  wife  which  alwayes  used  to  throw
something  of  her  wares  before  the  Elephant.  Now  when
the  time  came  on  that  the  Elephant  groweth  mad,  as  I  said
before,  they  use  to  goe  with  them  three  or  foure  dayes,  or
a  weeke  about  the  streets  before  they  binde  them  up,  (being
as  then  but  halfe  mad)  to  aske  something  of  every  bodie
for  the  feeding  of  the  mad  Elephant  in  the  winter  time.
And  going  thus  about  the  streets,  the  Master  is  not  able
to  rule  him,  for  hee  runneth  about  with  his  head  down-
ward, and  by  his  roaring  giveth  the  people  warning  to
beware,  and  when  he  findeth  or  seeth  no  man,  hee  leapeth
and  overthroweth  whatsoever  he  meeteth  withall,  whereby
hee  maketh  great  sport  and  pastime,  much  like  to  the
baiting  of  Oxen  in  Spaine,  which  never  ceaseth,  untill  one,
two,  or  more  of  them  be  slaine,  the  like  rule  is  kept  with
the  mad  Elephant  in  India.  It  chanced  in  this  running
about  that  the  Elephant  ranne  through  the  streetes,  and
in  haste  at  unawares  came  into  the  market,  throwing  downe
all  that  was  in  his  way,  whereat  every  man  was  abasht,
and  leaving  their  ware,  ranne  to  save  themselves  from
being  over  runne  by  the  Elephant,  and  by  meanes  of  the
noyse  and  prease  of  people,  they  fell  one  over  another,  as
in  such  cases  is  commonly  seene.  Among  them  was  this
woman,  that  alwayes  used  to  give  the  Elephant  something
to  eate,  which  had  a  little  childe  in  the  market  lying  by
her  in  a  basket,  and  by  the  hastie  rising  up  and  throng  of
the  people,  the  woman  ranne  into  a  House,  not  having
time  to  snatch  up  her  Child,  and  take  it  with  her ;  and
when  the  Elephant  was  alone  in  the  Market  place,  where
hee  roared  up  and  downe,  overthrowing  all  things  that
were  before  him,  hee  came  by  the  Child  (that  as  I  said)
lay  still  in  the  Market,  and  as  everie  man  looked,  specially
the  Mother,  which  cried  out,  and  verily  thought  that  the
Elephant  had  taken  it  and  cast  it  on  his  shoulder  and
spoyled  it  as  he  did  all  other  things.  He  on  the  contrarie
notwithstanding  all  his  madnesse,  being  mindfull  of  the
good  will  and  liberalise  of  the  Childes  Mother  dayly  used
unto  him,  tooke  up  the  Child  handsomely  and  tenderly

285

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1583.

with  his  Snout,  and  laide  it  softly  upon  a  Stall  by  a  Shop'
side,  which  done,  he  began  againe  to  use  the  same  order  1
of  stamping,  crying,  and  clapping  as  he  had  done  at  the|
first  to  the  great  wondering  of  all  that  beheld  it,  specially
to  the  ease  and  joy  of  the  Mother,  that  had  recovered  hen
Child  sound  and  well  againe.

Chap.  47. r  1  ^He  Abada  or  Rhinoceros  is  not  in  India,  but  onely
Abadas  or  *n  Bengala  and  Patane. They  are  lesse  and  lower

Rhinocerots.  tnen  tne  Elephant. It  hath  a  short  home  upon  the  nose,'
in  the  hinder  part  somewhat  bigge,  and  toward  the  end
sharper,  of  a  browne  blew,  and  whitish  colour ; it  hath  a
snout  like  a  Hog,  and  the  skin  upon  the  upper  part  of  his;
body  is  all  wrinckled,  as  if  it  were  armed  with  Shields  or
Targets. It  is  a  great  enemie  of  the  Elephant. Some
thinke  it  is  the  right  Unicorne,  because  that  as  yet  there:
hath  no  other  beene  found,  but  onely  by  heare-say,  and
by  the  Pictures  of  them. The  Portugals  and  those  of
Bengala  affirme,  that  by  the  River  Ganges  in  the  Kingdome
of  Bengala,  are  many  of  these  Rhinocerots,  which  when
they  will  drinke,  the  other  beasts  stand  and  waite  upon
them,  till  the  Rhinoceros  hath  drunke,  and  thrust  their
home  into  the  water,  for  hee  cannot  drinke  but  his  home;
must  be  under  the  water,  because  it  standeth  so  close  unto1
his  nose,  and  muzzle : and  then  after  him  all  the  other
beasts doe drinke. Their homes in India are much;
esteemed  and  used  against  all  venome,  poyson,  and  many
other  diseases :  likewise  his  teeth,  clawes,  flesh,  skin,  and
bloud,  and  his  very  dung  and  water  and  all  whatsoever  is
about  him,  is  much  esteemed  in  India,  and  used  for  thei
curing  of  many  diseases  and  sicknesses,  which  is  very  good
and  most  true,  as  I  my  selfe  by  experience  have  found.
But  it  is  to  bee  understood,  that  all  Rhinoceros  are  not  a
like  good,  for  there  are  some  whose  homes  are  solde  for
one,  two  or  three  hundred  Pardawes  the  piece,  and  there
are  others  of  the  same  colour  and  greatnesse  that  are  sold
but  for  three  or  foure  Pardawes,  which  the  Indians  know
and  can  discerne. The  cause  is  that  some  Rhinocerots.

286

JOHN HUIGHEN VAN L1NSCHOTEN  a.d.

1583.
which  are  found  in  certaine  places  in the  Countrie  of
Bengala  have  this  vertue,  by  reason  of  the  hearbs  which
that  place  onely  yeeldeth  and  bringeth  forth,  which  in  other
places  is  not  so,  and  this  estimation  is  not  onely  held  of
the  home,  but  of  all  other  things  in  his  whole  bodie,  as  I
said  before. There  are  also  by  Malacca,  Sion,  and  Bengala
some  Goates  that  are  wilde,  whose  homes  are  esteemed  Goats  hornes
for  the  best  hornes  against  poyson,  and  all  venome  that  Sood  aSatnst
may  be  found : they  are  called  Cabras  de  Mato,  that  is, y

wilde  Goates.

1 1

TT^Ish  in  India  is  very  plentifull,  and  some  very  pleasant Ch^P-  48-
J? and  sweete. Most  of  their  fish  is  eaten  with  Rice,  a{J 0ethe*S  *'
that  they  seeth  in  broth  which  they  put  upon  the  Rice,  Beasts  in  the
and  is  somewhat  sowre,  as  if  it  were  sodden  in  Goose-  Seas  of  India.

Sherries,  or  unripe  Grapes,  but  it  tasteth  well,  and  is  called

iCarriil,  which  is  their  daily  meate,  the  Rice  is  in  steade  of

bread :  there  are  also  good  Shads,  Soales,  and  other  sorts

of  fishes. The  Crabs  and  Crevishes  are  very  good  and  Grabs  lest  at

marveilous  great,  that  it  is  a  wonder  to  tell,  and  that  which  theful1-

I  is  more  wonderfull,  when  the  Moone  is  in  the  full,  here
with  us  it  is  a  common  saying,  that  then  Crabs  and
Crevishes  are  at  the  best,  but  there  it  is  cleane  contrarie :

;  for  with  a  full  Moone  they  are  emptie  and  out  of  season,

and  with  a  new  Moone  good  and  full. There  are  also  [II.  x.  1774.]

Musckles  and  such  like  Shel-fishes  of  many  sorts,  Oysters

very  many,  specially  at  Cochin ; and  from  thence  to  the

Cape  de  Comorin. Fish  in  India  is  very  good  cheape,

for  that  with  the  valew  of  a  stiver  of  their  money,  a  man

may  buy  as  much  fish  and  Rice  to  it,  as  will  serve  five  or

sixe  men  for  a  good  meale.

As  our  ship  lay  in  the  River  of  Cochin,  readie  to  sayle
from  thence  to  Portugall,  it  hapned  that  as  wee  were  to
hang  on  our  Rudder,  which  as  then  was  mended,  the
Master  of  the  Ship,  with  foure  or  five  Saylers,  went  with
the  boate  to  put  it  on,  and  another  Sayler  beeing  made  fast
with  a  corde  about  his  middle,  and  tied  to  the  Ship,  hung
downe  with  halfe  his  bodie  into  the  water  to  place  the

287

A.D.
I583-

Sharkes
sharking.

Monstrous
fish.

Masseus
reports  it  also.
Hist.Ind.l.j.
but  somewhat
differing.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

same  upon  the  hookes,  and  while  hee  hung  in  the  water,
there  came  one  of  those  Hayens,  and  bit  one  of  his  legs,
to  the  middle  of  his  thigh,  cleane  off  at  a  bit,  notwith-
standing that  the  Master  strooke  at  him  with  an  Oare,  and
as  the  poore  man  was  putting  downe  his  arme  to  feele  his
wound,  the  same  fish  at  the  second  time  for  another  biti
did  bite  off  his  hand  and  arme  above  the  elbow,  and  also  a
peece  of  his  buttocke.

In  the  River  of  Goa  in  winter  time,  when  the  mouth  of
the  River  was  shut  up,  as  commonly  at  that  time  it  is,  the*
fishermen  tooke  a  Fish  of  a  most  wonderfull  and  strange
forme,  such  as  I  think  was  never  seene  either  in  India,  or
in  any  other  place,  which  for  the  strangenesse  thereof  was
presented  to  my  Lord  the  Archbishop,  the  picture  whereof
by  his  commandement  was  painted,  and  for  a  wonder  sent
to  the  King  of  Spaine.

It  was  in  bignesse  as  great  as  a  middle  sized  dog,  with
a  snout  like  a  Hog,  small  eyes,  no  eares,  but  two  holes
where  his  eares  should  bee,  it  had  foure  feete  like  am
Elephant,  the  tayle  beginning  somewhat  upon  the  backe
broad,  and  then  flat,  and  at  the  very  end  round  and
somewhat  sharpe.  It  ranne  along  the  Hall  upon  the
floore,  and  in  every  place  of  the  house  snorting  like  a
Hog.  The  whole  bodie,  head,  tayle,  and  legs  being
covered  with  scales  of  a  thumb  breadth,  harder  then  Iron,
or  Steele  :  Wee  hewed  and  layd  upon  them  with  weapons,
as  if  men  should  beate  upon  an  Anvill,  and  when  we
strooke  upon  him,  he  rouled  himselfe  in  a  heape,  head  anc|
feet  altogether,  so  that  hee  lay  like  a  round  ball,  we  not
being  able  to  judge  where  he  closed  himselfe  together,
neyther  could  we  with  any  instrument  or  strength  of  hand!
open  him  again,  but  letting  him  alone  and  not  touching
him,  he  opened  himselfe  and  ranne  away  as  I  said  before,  j

A  Ship  sayling  from  Mosambique  into  India,  having
faire  weather,  a  good  fore  winde,  as  much  as  the  sayle?
might  beare  before  the  winde  for  the  space  of  foureteem
dayes  together,  directing  their  course  towards  the  Equi-
noctiall  line,  every  day  as  they  tooke  the  height  of  tht

288

JOHN HUIGHEN VAN LINSCHOTEN  a.d.

1583.
Sunne,  in  steade  of  diminishing  or  lessening  their  degrees,
according  to  the  winde  and  course  they  had  and  helde,
they found themselves still contrarie, and every day
further  backewardes  then  they  were.

At  the  last  the  chiefe  Boteson  whom  they  call  the
Masters  mate,  looking  by  chance  over-boord  towards  the
beake-head  of  the  ship,  he  espied  a  great  broad  taile  of  a
Fish  that  had  winded  it  selfe  as  it  were  about  the  beake
head,  the  body  thereof  being  under  the  keele,  and  the
head  under  the  Rudder,  swimming  in  that  manner,  and
drawing  the  shippe  with  her  against  the  winde  and  their
right  course :  whereby  presently  they  knew  the  cause  of
their  so  going  backwards :  so  that  having  at  the  last
stricken  long  with  staves  and  other  weapons  upon  the
fishes  tayle,  in  the  end  they  stroke  it  off,  and  thereby  the
Fish  left  the  ship,  after  it  had  layen  fourteene  dayes  under
the  same,  drawing  the  ship  with  it  against  winde  and
weather :  for  which  cause  the  Vice-roy  in  Goa  caused  it  to
be  painted  in  his  palace  for  a  perpetuall  memory,  where  I
have  often  reade  it,  with  the  day  and  time,  and  the  name
both  of  the  Ship  and  Captaine.

There  are  by  Malacca  certaine  fish  shels  found  on  the
shoare,  much  like  Scalop  shels,  so  great  and  so  heavie,
that  two  strong  men  have  enough  to  doe  with  a  Leaver
to  draw  one  of  them  after  them.  Within  them  there  is  a
fish  which  they  of  Malacca  doe  eate.  There  were  some
rf  those  shels  in  the  ballast  of  the  ship  that  came  from
Malacca,  and  kept  companie  with  us  from  the  Hand  of
Saint  Helena,  to  the  Hand  of  Tercera,  where  the  ship  was
:ast  away,  and  some  of  the  shels  taken  out  of  her,  which
the  Jesuites  of  Malacca  had  sent  unto  Lisbon,  to  set  in  the
wals  of  their  Church  and  Cloyster,  which  they  there  had
:aused  to  bee  made,  and  most  sumptuously  built.  The
ike  happened  to  a  ship  called  Saint  Peter  that  sayled  from
Cochin  towards  Portugall,  that  fell  upon  a  Sand,  which
it  this  day  is  called  after  the  same  ships  name  Saint  Peters
Sand,  lying  from  Goa  South  South-east  under  6.  degrees
lpon the South side, where it was cast away, but

A.D.

1583.

PURCHAS HTS PTLGRTMES

all  the  men  saved  themselves,  and  of  the  wood  of
the  ship  that  was  cast  away,  they  made  a  small
Barke  or  Carvell,  wherewith  they  all  arrived  in  India:
and  while  they  were  busied  about  building  of  their
Great  Crabs,  ship,  they  found  such  great  Crabs  upon  that  Sand,  and  in
so  great  numbers,  that  they  were  constrayned  to  make  a
sconce,  and  by  good  watch  to  defend  themselves  from
them,  for  that  they  were  of  an  unreasonable  greatnesse,
so  that  whomsoever  they  got  under  their  clawes,  it  cost
him  his  life.

Chap.  49.
Of  all  Fruits,
Trees,  Plants,
and  common
hearbs  in  India
and  first  of  a
certaine  fruit
called  Ananus.
[II.  x.  1775.]

ANanas  is  one  of  the  best  fruits,  and  of  best  taste  in  all
India,  but  it  is  not  a  proper  fruit  of  India,  but  a  J
strange  fruit,  for  it  was  first  brought  by  the  Portugals  out
of  Brasill,  so  that  at  the  first  it  was  sold  for  a  noveltie,  at  aj
Pardaw  the  piece,  and  sometimes  more,  but  now  there  are;
so  many  growne  in  the  Countrie,  that  they  are  very  good
cheape. The  time  when  they  are  ripe  is  in  Lent,  for  then
they  are  best  and  sweetest  of  taste. They  are  as  bigge  as  al
Melon,  and  in  forme  like  the  head  of  a  Distaffe,  without
like  a  Pine  apple,  but  soft  in  cutting :  of  colour  red  and
greenish : They  growe  about  halfe  a  fathome  high  from
the  ground,  not  much  more  or  lesse. The  leaves  are  like!
the  herbe  that  is  brought  out  of  Spaine,  called  Aloe,  orj
Semper  viva,  because  it  is  alwaies  greene,  (and  therefore
it is  hanged on the  beames of  houses) but somewhat
smaller,  and  at  the  ends  somewhat  sharpe,  as  if  they  were
cut  out. When  they  eate  them,  they  pull  off  the  shell,
and  cut  them  into  slices  or  pieces,  as  men  desire  to  have
them  drest. Some  have  small  kernels  within  them,  like
the  kernels  of  Apples  or  Peares. They  are  of  coloui
within  like  a  Peach,  that  is  ripe,  and  almost  of  the  same)
taste, but in sweetnesse they surpasse  all  fruits. Th(
juyce  thereof  is  like  sweet  Must,  or  new  Renish  Wine :  1
man  can  never  satisfie  himselfe  therewith. It  is  very  ho
of  nature,  for  if  you  let  a  Knife  sticke  in  it,  but  halfe  ar
houre  long,  when  you  draw  it  forth  againe  it  will  be  halfi
eaten  up,  yet  it  doth  no  particular  hurt,  unlesse  a  mar

290

JOHN HUIGHEN VAN LINSCHOTEN

should  eate  so  much  thereof,  that  hee  surfet  upon  them.
The  sicke  are  forbidden  to  use  them.

A.D.
1583.

Aacas  growe  on  great  trees  like  Nut  trees,  and  onely  on  Chap.  50.

the  Sea  shoares,  that  is  to

say,

in  such  Countries  as

border  on  the  Seas,  cleane  contrarie  unto  all  other  fruits,
for  they  growe  above  the  earth,  upon  the  trunkes  or
bodies  of  the  trees,  and  upon  the  great  thicke  branches,
but  where  the  branches  spread  abroad,  being  small  and
full  of  leaves,  their  groweth  none :  they  are  as  bigge  as  a
great  Melon,  and  much  like  it  of  fashion,  although  some
of  them  are  as  great  as  a  man  can  well  lift  up,  and  out-
wardly are  like  the  Ananas,  but  smoother,  and  of  a  darke
greene  colour,  the  fruit  within  is  in  husks,  like  Chesnuts,
but  of  another  forme,  and  every  huske  hath  a  Nut,  which
is  halfe  white,  the  rest  yellowish,  and  sticketh  to  a  mans
hands  like  Honie,  when  it  is  in  Bee-hives  among  the
Wax,  and  for  toughnesse  and  in  taste  for  sweetnesse  not
much  unlike.  The  fruit  is  on  the  outside  like  a  Chesnut,
and  in  forme  or  fashion  like  an  Acorne,  when  the  greene
knob  that  groweth  under  it  is  taken  away,  and  of  that
bignesse  and  somewhat  bigger :  this  fruit  that  is  outmost
being  eaten,  the  rest  is  good  to  be  rosted  or  sodden,  and
are  not  much  unlike  in  taste  to  the  Chesnuts  in  Europa.
There  are  of  these  huskes  in  every  Iaacca  an  hundred  and
more  according  to  the  greatnesse  thereof.  There  are  two
sorts  of  them,  the  best  are  called  Girasal,  and  the  common
and  least  esteemed,  Chambasal,  although  in  fashion  and
trees  there  is  no  difference,  save  that  the  Girasals  have  a
sweeter  taste.

Of  J  aqua  or
Jaacca.

MAngas  groweth  upon  trees  like  Iaacca  trees  :  they  are  Chap.  5 1 .
as  big  as  a  great  Peach,  but  somwhat  long,  and  a  OfMangas.
little  crooked,  of  colour  cleere,  greene,  somwhat  yellowish,
and  sometimes  reddish :  it  hath  within  it  a  stone  bigger
then  a  Peach  stone,  but  it  is  not  good  to  be  eaten  :  the
Mangas  is  inwardly  yellowish,  but  in  cutting  it  is  waterish,
yet  some  not  so  much : they  have  a  very  pleasant  taste,

291

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1583.

better  then  a  Peach,  and  like  the  Annanas,  which  is  the
best  and  the  most  profitable  fruit  in  all  India,  for  it
yeeldeth  a  great  quantitie  for  food  and  sustenance  of  the
Countrie  people,  as  Olives  doe  in  Spaine  and  Portugall :
they  are  gathered  when  they  are  greene,  and  conserved,
and  for  the  most  part  salted  in  Pots,  and  commonly  used  to
be  eaten  with  Rice,  sodden  in  pure  water,  the  huske  being
whole,  and  so  eaten  with  Salt  Mangas,  which  is  the
continuall  food  for  their  slaves  and  common  people,  or
else  salt  dried  fish  in  stead  of  Mangas,  without  Bread,  for
Rice  is  in  divers  places  in  stead  of  Bread.  These  salted
Mangas  are  in  cutting  like  the  white  Spanish  Olives,  and
almost  of  the  same  taste,  but  somewhat  savory  and  not
so  bitter,  yet  a  little  sowre,  and  are  in  so  great  abundance,
that  it  is  wonderfull :  there  are  others  that  are  salted  and
stuffed  with  small  pieces  of  greene  Ginger,  and  Garleeke
sodden :  those  they  call  Mangas  Recheadas  or  Machar :
they  are  likewise  much  used,  but  not  so  common  as  the
other,  for  they  are  costly  and  more  esteemed :  these  are  1
kept  in  Pots  with  Oyle  and  Vineger  salted.  The  season
when  Mangas  are  ripe  is  in  Lent,  and  continueth  till  the
moneth  of  August.

Chap.  52.  /^Aivs  Groweth  on  trees  like  Apple  trees,  and  are  of
OfCaions.  \^j  fat  bignesse  of  a  Peare,  at  one  end  by  the  stalke
somwhat  sharpe,  and  at  the  head  thicker,  of  a  yellowish
colour,  being  ripe  they  are  soft  in  handling :  they  grower
very  like  Apples,  for  where  the  Apples  have  a  stalke,  these
Caivs  have  a  Chesnut,  as  bigge  as  the  fore-joynt  of  a  mans
thumbe :  they  have  another  colour  and  fashion  then  thei
Chesnuts  of  Jaqua,  and  are  better  and  more  savorie  tojj
eate,  but  they  must  be  rosted :  within  they  are  white  like
the  Chesnuts  of  Europa,  but  have  thicker  shells,  which
are  of  colour  bluish  and  darke  greene.  When  they  are
raw  and  unrosted,  you  must  not  open  them  with  your
mouth,  for  as  soone  as  you  put  them  to  your  mouth,  the)
make  both  your  tongue  and  your  lips  to  smart,  whereby
such  as  knowe  it  not  are  deceived :  wherefore  you  must

292

JOHN HUIGHEN VAN LINSCHOTEN  a.d.

1583.
open  their  shells  with  a  Knife,  or  rost  them,  and  then  they
will  peele.  This  fruit  at  the  end  where  the  stalke  groweth,
in  the  eating  doth  worke  in  a  mans  throat,  and  maketh
it  swell,  yet  it  is  of  a  fine  taste,  for  it  is  moist  and  full  of
juyce ;  they  are  commonly  cut  in  round  slices,  and  layd
in  a  dish  with  Water  or  Wine,  and  Salt  throwne  upon  them.

THe  trees  whereon  the  Jambos  doe  grow  are  as  great  as  [II.  x.  1776.]
Plum  trees,  and  very  like  unto  them :  it  is  an  excel-  ^?£*  53-
lent  and  a  very  pleasant  fruit  to  looke  on,  as  big  as  an *
Apple : it  hath  a  red  colour  and  somewhat  whitish,  so
cleare  and  pure,  that  it  seemeth  to  be  painted  or  made  of
Wax :  it  is  very  pleasant  to  eate,  and  smelleth  like  Rose
water ; it is white within, and in eating moist and
waterish ; it  is  a  most  dainty  fruit,  as  well  for  beauty  to
the  sight,  as  for  the  sweet  savour  and  taste :  it  is  a  fruit
that  is  never  forbidden  to  any  sick  person,  as  other  fruits
are,  but  are  freely  given  unto  sicke  men  to  eate,  that  have
a  desire  thereunto,  for  it  can  doe  no  hurt. The  blossoms
are  likewise  very  faire  to  the  sight,  and  have  a  sweet  smell :
they  are  red  and  somewhat  whitish  of  colour. This  tree
beareth  fruit  three  or  foure  times  every  yeere,  and  which
is  more  wonderfull,  it  hath  commonly  on  the  one  side  or  Summer  and
halfe  of  the  tree  ripe  Jambos,  and  the  leaves  fallen  off, Winter  at  once

and  on  the  other  side  or  halfe  it  hath  all  the  leaves,  and  tn  the  same

tree
beginneth  againe  to  blossome,  and  when  that  side  hath

fruit, and  that the  leaves  fall  off, then the  other  side

beginneth  againe  to  have  leaves,  and  to  blossome,  and  so

it  continueth  all  the  yeere  long :  within  they  have  a  stone

as  great  (and  very  neere  of  the  same  fashion)  as  the  fruit

of  the  Cypresse  tree.

THere  is  a  fruit  called  Jangomas,  which  groweth  on  Chap.  54.
trees  like  Cherrie  trees : they  are  in  bignesse  like  Of  the  fruits
small  round  Plummes  of  a  darke  red  colour,  they  have  m n  ta'
no  stones  in  them,  but  some  small  kernels : they  are  of
taste  much  like  Plummes,  whereof  there  are  very  many,
but  not  much  esteemed  of.

293

a°  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1583.

There  is  another  fruit  called  Carambolas,  which  hath
eight  corners,  as  big  as  a  small  Apple,  sowre  in  eating,  like
unripe  Plummes,  and  most  used  to  make  Conserves.

There  are  yet  other  fruits,  as  Brindoiins,  Duriindois,
Jamboloens,  Mangestains,  and  other  such  like  fruits ;  but
because  they  are  of  small  account,  I  thinke  it  not  requisite
to  write  severally  of  them,  but  onely  of  two  of  them.

The  barkes  of  these  trees  are  kept  and  brought  over
Sea  hither,  and  are  good  to  make  Vinegar  withall,  as  some
Portugals  have  done.

There  is  also  a  fruit  that  came  out  of  the  Spanish
Indies,  brought  from  beyond  the  Philipinas  or  Lusons  to
Malacca,  and  from  thence  to  India,  it  is  called  Papaios,  and
is  very  like  a  Melon,  as  big  as  a  mans  fist,  and  will  not
growe,  but  alwaies  two  together,  that  is  male  and  female :
the  male  tree  never  yeeldeth  any  fruit,  but  onely  the
female  ;  and  when  they  are  divided,  and  set  apart  one  from
the  other,  then  they  yeeld  no  fruit  at  all.  It  is  a  tree
of  the  height  of  a  man,  with  great  leaves.  This  fruit  at
the  first  for  the  strangenesse  thereof  was  much  esteemed,
but  now  they  account  not  of  it.  There  are  likewise  in
India  some  Fig  trees  of  Portugall,  although  the  fruit  doth
never  come  to  good  perfection.  Oranges,  Limons,
Citrons,  and  such  like  fruit,  are  throughout  all  India,  in
great  abundance,  and  for  goodnesse  and  taste  surpasse
those  of  Spaine.  Grapes  are  not  there  to  be  found,  but
onely  upon  some  houses,  as  we  have  them  in  Netherland :
yet  against  Christmas  and  Lent,  there  are  Raisins  brought
into  Goa,  by  the  Decanaes  and  Indians  out  of  the  Firme
Land,  and  from  Ballagate,  but  they  are  not  so  good  as
those  in  Spaine,  and  very  few  they  are,  but  for  price  as
good  cheape  as  other  fruits.  There  are  also  in  India  many
Melons,  but  not  so  good  as  those  in  Spaine,  for  that  they
must  be  eaten  with  Sugar,  if  you  will  have  any  sweetnesse
in  them :  but  there  is  another  sort  like  Melons,  called
Patecas  or  Angurias,  or  Melons  of  India,  which  are  out-
wardly of  a  darke  greene  colour,  inwardly  white  with  black
kernels : they  are  very  waterish  and  hard  to  bite,  and  so

294

JOHN HUIGHEN VAN LINSCHOTEN  a.d.

1583
moist,  that  as  a  man  eateth  them,  his  mouth  is  full  of

water,  but  yet  very  sweet,  and  very  cold  and  fresh  meat,

wherefore  many  of  them  are  eaten  after  Dinner  to  coole

men. Cucumbers  and  Radices  are  there  in  great  numbers,

also  Coleworts,  but  not  so  good  as  in  Europe,  for  the

Coleworts  never  growe  to  their  full  growth,  but  are  loose

with  their  leaves  open. They  have  likewise  some  Sallet

herbes,  but  very  little  :  herbes  whereof  men  make  Pottage

are  not  there  to  be  had,  nor  many  sweet  smelling  herbes

nor  flowers,  as  Roses,  Lilies,  Rosemarie,  and  such  like

sorts  of  flowers  and  plants  there  are  none,  yet  they  have

some  few  Roses,  and  a  little  Rosemarie,  but  of  no  great

smell. The  fields  never  have  any  other  flowers  in  them,

but  onely  grasse,  and  that  is  in  Winter  when  it  raineth,

for  in  Summer  it  is  cleane  burnt  off  with  the  exceeding

heate  of  the  Sunne. There  is  onely  a  kind  of  blossomes

of  trees,  which  growe  all  the  yeere  long,  called  Fulle,  that

smell  very  sweet :  the  women  doe  ordinarily  throwe  them

among  their  linnen  and  apparell to make them sweet.

They  likewise  make  Collars  or  strings  full  of  them,  which

they  weare  about  their  neckes,  and  strew  them  in  their

Beds,  for  they  are  very  desirous  of  sweet  savours,  for  other

sorts  of  sweet  flowers  and  herbes,  whereof  thousands  are

found  in  Europe,  they  are  not  in  India  to  be  had :  so  that

when  you  tell  them  of  the  sweet  flowers  and  herbes  of

these  Countries,  they  wonder  much  thereat,  and  are  very

desirous  of  them.

INdian  Figs  there  are  many  and  of  divers  sorts,  one  Chap.  55.
better  then  the  other,  some  small,  some  great,  some  Of  the  Indian
thicke,  some  thinne,  &c.  but  in  generall  they  are  all  of  one *&'
forme  and  colour,  little  more  or  lesse,  but  the  trees  are
all  one,  and  of  the  height  of  a  man  : the  leaves  are  of  a
fathome  long,  and  about  three  spannes  broad,  which  the
Turkes  use  in  stead  of  browne  Paper,  to  put  Pepper  in. [II.  x.  1777.]
In  the  Tree  there  is  no  Wood,  but  it  may  rather  bee  called
a  Reede  then  a  Tree. The  bodie  of  the  tree  (I  meane
that  which  covereth  the  outward  part  when  it  beginneth

295

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1583.

somewhat  to  grow)  is  in  a  manner  very  like  the  inner  part
of  a  Sive  made  of  haire,  but  in  shew  somewhat  thicker,  and
is  (as  it  were)  the  barke  of  it :  but  when  you  open  it,  it
is  full  of  leaves,  closed  and  rowled  up  together,  of  the
height  of  halfe  a  mans  length,  and  somewhat  higher.
These  leaves  doe  open  and  spread  abroad  on  the  top  of
the  Tree,  and  when  those  that  are  within  the  bodie  doe
in  their  time  thrust  themselves  forth  upwardes  out  of
the  innermost  part  of  the  Tree,  then  doe  the  outmost
leaves  beginne  to  dry,  and  fall  off,  untill  the  Tree  bee
come  to  his  full  growth,  and  the  fruit  to  their  perfect
ripenesse.  The  bodie  of  the  Tree  may  be  a  spanne
thicke  at  the  most.  The  leaves  have  in  the  middle  of  them
a  very  thicke  and  gray  veine  which  runneth  cleane  through
them,  and  devideth  them  out  of  the  middest  of  the
leaves,  which  are  in  the  innermost  part  of  the  Tree  at
their  springing  up,  there  commeth  forth  a  flowre,  as  bigge
as  an  Estridge  Egge,  of  colour  russet,  which  in  time
groweth  to  be  long,  with  a  long  stalke,  and  it  is  no
Wood,  but  rather  like  a  Colewort  stalke :  This  stalke
groweth  full  of  figs,  close  one  by  the  other,  which  at  the
first  are  in  fashion  like  greene  Beanes,  when  they  are  yet
in  the  huskes,  but  after  grow  to  halfe  a  spanne  in  length,
and  three  or  foure  inches  broad,  as  thicke  as  Cucumbers,
which  stalke  beareth  at  the  least,  some  two  hundred  figges,
little  more  or  lesse,  and  grow  as  close  together  as  Grapes :
the  clusters  are  so  great  as  two  men  can  scarcely  beare  upon
a  staffe,  they  are  cut  off  when  they  are  but  halfe  ripe,  that
is  to  say,  when  they  are  as  yet  halfe  greene,  and  halfe
yellow,  and  hanged  up  in  their  houses  upon  beames,  and
so  within  foure  or  five  dayes  they  will  be  fully  ripe  and  all
yellow.  The  Tree  or  Plant  yeeldeth  but  one  bunch  at  a
time,  which  being  ripe,  they  cut  the  whole  Tree  downe  to
the  ground,  leaving  only  the  root,  out  of  the  which  pre-
sently groweth  another,  and  within  a  moneth  after  beareth
fruit,  and  so  continueth  all  the  yeere  long,  and  never
leaveth  bearing :  they  are  in  all  places  in  so  great
abundance,  and  so  common  throughout  all  India  that  it  is

296

JOHN HUIGHEN VAN LINSCHOTEN  a.d.

1583-
wonderfull,  being  the  greatest  meate  and  sustenance  of
the  Countrey  :  they  are  of  a  marvellous  good  taste  :  when
they  eate  them,  they  pull  off  the  shels. The  most  and
:ommonest  sort  are  by  the  Portugals  called  Figos  dorta,
that  is,  Garden  figges,  those  are  somewhat  thicke ; there
ire  others  which  are  smaller,  and  thinne  without,  and  are  Many  kinds  of
:alled  Senoriins,  which  are  of  the  best  sort : they  smell  them%
well,  and  are  very  good  of  taste.

There  is  another  sort  called  Cadoliins,  which  are  like-
wise well  esteemed,  but  the  best  of  all  are  called  Chin-
:apoloyns,  and  are  most  in  the  Countrey  of  Malabar :
:hese  are  but  a  little  yellow,  but  they  continue  commonly
un  the  outside  greene,  and  are  small  and  long,  with  a
;peciall  sweet  smell,  as  if  they  were  full  of  Rose  Water.
There  are  yet  many  sorts,  some  that  are  very  great,  about
1  span  long,  and  in  thicknesse  correspondent :  these  grow
nuch  in  Cananor,  and  in  the  Coast  of  Malabar,  and  are
)y  the  Portugals  called  Figges  of  Cananor  :  and  by  reason
)f  the  great  quantitie  thereof  are  dried,  their  shels  being
:aken  off,  and  so  being  dried  are  carried  over  all  India  to
)e  sold.  These  when  they  are  ripe  are  most  roasted,  for
:hey  are  but  seldome  eaten  raw,  as  other  Figges  are,  they
ire  somewhat  harsh  in  swallowing,  and  inwardly  red  of
:olour,  and  being  roasted  they  are  shaled  or  pilled  like  the
others,  and  so  cut  in  slices,  which  done,  they  cast  some
)eaten  Sinamon  upon  them,  steeping  them  in  Wine,  and
hen  they  taste  better  then  roasted  Quinces ;  they  are  cut
op  in  the  middle,  as  all  the  other  kind  of  Figges  use  to  be,
md  then  boyled  or  fried  in  Sugar,  which  is  a  very  daintie
neat,  and  very  common  in  India :  to  conclude,  it  is  one
)f  the  best  and  necessariest  fruits  in  all  India,  and  one  of
he  principallest  sustenances  of  the  common  people,  they
.re  found  in  all  places  of  the  Indies  and  Orientall  Countries.
They  are  also  found  in  Arabia,  and  are  called  Musa,  as
ilso  in  Jerusalem,  Damasco,  and  Cairo,  as  I  have  beene
ruly  informed  by  credible  persons,  which  daily  travell
ind  traffique  into  India.  And  they  doe  beleeve  that  this
s  the  same  fruit,  which  Adam  did  eateiwhen  he  sinned  first.

297

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1583.

There  grow  in  India  many  Iniamos  and  Batatas.  These;
Iniamos,  are  as  bigge  as  a  yellow  Root,  but  somewhat
thicker  and  fuller  of  knots,  and  as  thicke  on  the  one  place.
Earth  Nuts,  as  in  the  other,  they  grow  under  the  Earth  like  Earth
Nuts,  and  of  a  Dun  colour,  and  white  within  like  Earth
Nuts,  but  not  so  sweet.

The  Batatas  are  somewhat  red  of  colour,  and  of  fashion
almost  like  the  Iniamos,  but  sweeter,  of  taste  like  an  Earth
Nut. These  two  fruits  are  very  plentifull.

Chap.  56.  HpHis  is  the  most  profitable  tree  of  all  India.  Th<
°{  theJhf™n  A  tree  waxeth  very  high  and  straight,  of  the  thickness*
the  Indian  nuts  °f  a  small  sPan  little  more  or  lesse,  it  hath  no  branche
called  Cocus  but  in  the  uppermost  part  thereof,  and  in  the  top  grov
grow.  the  leaves,  which  spread  like  unto  Date  trees,  and  unde

the  leaves  close  to  the  tree  grow  the  Coquos  together
commonly  ten  or  twelve  one  close  by  another,  but  yoi
shall  seldome  find  one  of  them  growing  alone  by  it  selfe
The  blossome  of  this  fruit  is  very  like  the  blossome  of
Chestnut. The  wood  of  the  tree  is  very  sappy  like  f
Sponge,  and  is  not  firme,  they  doe  not  grow  but  on  th
Sea  sides,  or  bankes  of  Rivers  close  by  the  strand,  and  i
sandy  grounds,  for  there  groweth  none  within  the  Lane;
They  have  no  great  Rootes,  so  that  a  man  would  thinke  :
were  impossible  for  them  to  have  any  fast  hold  within  th;
[II.  x.i  778.]  Earth,  and  yet  they  stand  so  fast  and  grow  so  high,  that  j
maketh  men  feare  to  see  men  climbe  upon  them,  lest  the:
should  fall  downe. The  Canariins  climbe  as  nimbly,  an
as  fast  upon  them,  as  if  they  were  Apes,  for  they  mak
smal  steps  in  the  trees  like  staires,  whereon  they  step,  an.
so  climbe  up,  which  the  Portugals  dare  not  venter ; the
planting  is  in  this  manner. They  first  plant  the  Coqu(
or  Nuts  whereof  the  trees  doe  spring,  and  when  they  aij  I
about  the  height  of  a  man,  in  winter  time  they  plant  thei
againe,  and  dung  them  with  ashes,  and  in  Summer  tin
water them. They grow well about houses, becau
commonly  there  they  have  good  earth,  and  beeing  we
looked  unto  &  husbanded  they  yeeld  fruit  in  few  yeere

298

JOHN HUIGHEN VAN LINSCHOTEN  a.d.

1S83.

Those  trees  are  more  abundant  with  them  then  Olive  trees
a  Spaine,  or  Willow  trees  in  the  Low  Countreyes.  The
>rofits  they  reape  thereby  are  these.

First,  the  wood  is  very  good  for  many  things,  although  The  uses  °fthe
t  be  spongious  and  sappy,  by  reason  of  the  length  of  it,  00  '
or  in  the  Hands  of  Maldiva  they  make  whole  ships
hereof,  without  any  Iron  naile  in  them,  for  they  sow  them
ogether  with  the  Cords  that  are  made  of  the  said  Cocus,
>r  Nut,  the  Ropes  and  Cables  being  likewise  of  the  same
ree,  as  also  the  Sailes  which  they  make  of  the  leaves,
yhich  leaves  are  called  Olas.  They  serve  likewise  to  make
he  Canariins  houses,  and  for  Hats  which  they  use  to
arrie  over  their  heads,  for  the  Sunne  or  the  raine ;  they
nake  also  Mats  or  Tents  that  lie  over  the  Palamkins  when
t  raineth,  to  cover  the  women  when  they  are  carried
broad,  and  such  like  things :  they  likewise  make  thereof
rery  fine  Hattes,  that  are  much  esteemed,  and  cost  three
>r  foure  Pardawes  the  piece,  which  they  weare  in  Summer
or  lightnesse.  The  Nuts  are  as  great  as  an  Estridge
lggcy  some  smaller,  and  some  greater  and  are  outwardly
:overed  with  a  huske  or  shell,*  which  as  long  as  it  groweth
)n  the  tree,  is  greene  without,  like  an  Acorne  with  his
mske  or  cup.

This  huske  being  dry  and  pulled  off,  is  haire  like  The  hairie
irlempe,  whereof  all  the  Coards  and  Cables  that  are  used  hus^  Coords
hroughout  all  India  are  made,  as  well  upon  the  Land  as
n  the  Ships.  It  is  of  colour  very  like  the  Ropes  of  Sparta
n  Spaine,  they  are  very  good,  but  they  must  bee  kept  in
salt  water,  whereby  they  continue  very  long,  but  in  fresh
Dr  raine  water  they  doe  presently  rot,  because  they  are  not

*  The  Indian  Nuts  are  covered  over  with  two  sorts  of  huskes  or  shels,
vhereof  the  uttermost  is  hairie,  and  of  it  they  make  Cairo,  that  is,  all
heir  Cables  and  Ropes,  and  stop  and  make  their  shippes  close  with  it
n  stead  of  Ocam  or  Tow,  for  that  it  keepeth  the  ships  closer  in  salt
vater  then  our  Ocam  or  Tow,  because  in  salt  water  it  closeth  and
hutteth  it  selfe  closer  together.  Of  the  other  they  make  not  onely
Irinking  Cups,  in  India,  but  here  with  us  also,  for  that  the  common
people  beleeve  there  is  a  certaine  vertue  in  them  against  stirring  of
he  bodie,  but  it  is  not so.

299

and  Cables.

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

drest  with  Pitch,  and  Tarre  as  our  ships  are.  The  shi
wherein  I  came  out  of  India  into  Portugall,  had  no  othe
Ropes  nor  Cables,  nor  any  such  kind  of  stuffe,  but  such  a
were  made  of  the  Indian  Cocus,  called  Cairo,  whic,
continueth  very  good,  saving  only  that  we  were  force
every  fourteene  daies  to  wash  our  Cables  in  the  Se;
whereby  they  served  us  as  well  as  Cables  of  Hempe.  Th
fruit  when  it  is  almost  ripe  is  called  Lanha,  and  within  i

Water,  full  of  water,  and  then  it  is  white  of  colour,  thinne  anj

soft,  and  the  longer  the  Cocus  is  on  the  tree,  the  moi)
the  water  groweth  and  changeth  into  white,  which  is  th
meate  of  the  Nut  within,  and  tasteth  much  like  a  Has<
Nut,  but  somwhat  sweeter.  The  Lanhos  have  withi
them  a  good  draught  of  water,  which  is  very  cleere,  swee
and  coole  to  drinke.  It  is  at  the  least  halfe  a  Kan  full,  an
when  men  walke  abroad  and  are  thirstie,  they  goe  unt
the  Canariins,  who  presently  with  a  great  Knife  in  the
hands  come  up  to  the  tree,  and  cut  off  as  many  Lanhos  ;,
a  man  desireth,  selling  them  for  a  Basaruco,  or  two  a  pieo
which  they  make  verie  readie  and  cleere  to  be  drunk;

Inner  shell.  The  first  shell  that  is  over  the  inward  fruit  (which  as  t\
Nut  is  come  to  his  full  ripenesse,  becommeth  almost  ij
be  wood)  is  then  but  thinne  and  soft,  and  very  pleasant  I
eate  with  Salt  and  doe  taste  almost  like  Artichokes,  a  ma
may  drinke  as  much  of  this  water  as  he  will,  for  it  wij
not  hurt  him,  but  is  a  very  pleasant  drinke ;  when  tl
fruit  is  ripe,  there  is  not  so  much  water  in  it,  and  is  whi
within,  and  somewhat  thicker  of  substance,  and  then  tl
water  is  not  so  good  as  it  was  before  beeing  Lanhos,  f(
then  it  becommeth  somewhat  sowre.

Uses  of  the  These Cocus beeing yet in their huskes, may b<

shel1'  carried  over  the  whole  World,  and  not  once  hurt  or  bruise

and  it  happeneth  oftentimes  that  by  continuance  of  tim
the  water  within  the  Cocus  doth  convert,  and  congeale  im
a  certaine  kind  of  yellow  Apple,  which  is  very  savourie  ar
sweet.  The  huske  being  taken  off,  the  shell  serveth  f<
many  uses,  as  to  make  Ladles  with  woodden  handles,  ar
also  certaine  little  pots,  which  beeing  fastned  to  a  stick

300

JOHN HUIGHEN VAN LINSCHOTEN

A.D.

1583.

hey  doe  therewith  take  and  lade  water  out  of  their  great

>ots,  they  make  thereof  also  small  vessels  to  beare  Wine

a  when  they  walke  into  the  fields,  and  a  thousand  other

hings. These shels  are  likewise  burnt, and  serve  for

oales  for  Goldsmiths,  which  are  very  good  and  excellent.

)f  the  white  of  these  Nuts  in  India  they  make  pottage,  Of  the  white

nd  dresse  meate  withall,  strayning  and  pressing  out  the  meate-

vlilke,  wherein  with  many  other  mixtures  they  seeth  their

lice,  and  to  bee  short,  they  never  dresse  any  Rice,  which

hey  call  Carriil,  and  is  the  sawce  to  their  meate  thereunto,

>ut  they  put  some  of  their  Cocus  Milke  into  it,  else  the

"ocus  is  but  little  eaten,  for  there  it  is  not  esteemed  of,

)ut  serveth  for  meate  for  the  slaves,  and  poore  people.

They  likewise  breake  the  Cocus  in  pieces,  and  taking  off

he  shell  they  dry  the  fruit  or  white  meate  that  is  within

t,  and  it  is  carried  in  great  quantities  out  of  Malabar  to

Cambaya,  and  Ormus,  and  to  the  Northerne  Coasts  and

patters  beyond  Goa,  as  also  to  the  Countrey  of  Ballagate,  [n.x.  1779.]

md  Traffique  much  therewith. Of  this  white  substance

"hey  make Oile,f  which they  stampe in Cisternes like  oue.

Olives,  and  it  maketh  very  good  Oile,  as  well  to  eate  as  to

burne,  which  is  likewise  very  medicinable.

This  dried  Cocus  which  is  so  carried  abroad,  is  called
Copra.  When  they  desire  to  have  no  Cocus  or  fruit
thereof,  they  cut  the  blossomes  of  the  Cocus  away,  and
binde  a  round  Pot  with  a  narrow  mouth,  by  them  called
Callao,  fast  unto  the  Tree,  and  stop  the  same  close  round
about  with  pot  earth,  so  that  neither  Wind  nor  Aire  can
either  enter  in,  or  come  forth,  and  in  that  sort  the  Pot  in
short  space  is  full  of  water,  which  they  call  Sura,  and  is  Sura  water.

f  There  are  two  sorts  of  Oile  made  of  these  Nuts,  one  out  of  the
fresh  or  greene  Nuts,  stamped  and  mixed  with  warme  water,  which
being  pressed  forth  the  Oile  swimmeth  above  the  water  :  this  Oile
is  used  to  purge  the  maw  and  the  guts,  for  it  purgeth  very  gently,
and  without  hurt  some  mixe  therewith  the  juyce  of  Thamarindes,
and  maketh  thereof  a  very  wholsome  Medicine,  the  other  Oile  is
prest  out  of  the  dried  Cocus,  which  is  called  Copra,  and  is  good
also  to  purge  the  maw,  and  against  the  shrinking  of  the  sinewes  ;  as
also  for  old  aches  and  paines  in  the  joynts  and  limbes.

!  301

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1583.

very  pleasant  to  drinke  like  sweete  Whay,*  and  somewhat
better.

The  same  water  standing  but  one  houre  in  the  Sunne.
is  very  good  Vineger,  and  in  India  they  have  none  other.
Viniger  and This  Sura  being  distilled,  is  called  Fula,  or  Nipe,  and  is  as
Winc-  excellent  Aqua  vitae,  as  any  is  made  in  Dort  of  their  best

Rhenish  Wine,  but  this  is  of  the  finest  kind  of  Distillation,
The  second  Distillation  thereof  is  called  Uraca,  which  is
very  good  Wine,  and  is  the  Wine  of  India,  for  they  have
no  other  Wine.  It  is  very  hot  and  strong,  yet  the  Indians
drinke  it  as  if  it  were  water,  and  the  Portugals  use  it  ir
this  sort.  They  put  it  into  Vessels,  and  to  a  Pipe  ofj
Uraca,  they  put  three  or  foure  Hands  of  Raisons  that  are
brought  for  Merchandise  into  India  from  Ormus,  (every
Hand  is  twelve  pounds)  which  being  washed  they  put  intc
the  Vessell  leaving  the  bung  open,  and  the,  Pipe  not  being
full,  for  if  it  were  it  would  burst,  by  reason  of  the  heat  <
because  therewith  it  seetheth  in  the  Pipe  like  water  on  the
fire,  and  boyling  so,  it  is  stirred  every  day  for  the  space  oil
fourteene  or  fifteene  dayes,  in  which  time  the  Uraca  getteth
as  faire  a  red  colour,  as  if  it  were  Portugall  Wine,  anc
differeth  not  much  in  taste,  but  yet  sweeter  and  hotter  oil
it  selfe,  howbeit  it  is  altogether  as  faire,  and  of  as  good  i\
colour  as  their  Portugall  Wine,  so  that  they  can  hardly  betj
discerned  one  from  the  other :  this  Wine  is  called  Win<j
of  Passa,  or  Raisons.  With  this  Wine  there  is  grea:
Traffique  used  to  Bengala,  Malacca,  China,  and  othe;
places,  and  every  Pipe  thereof  costeth  within  Goa  thirtid
Pardawen  the  piece,  little  more  or  lesse.  Of  the  aforesak.
Sugar.  Sura  they  likewise  make  Sugar,  which  is  called  Jagra :,

they  seeth  the  water,  and  set  it  in  the  Sunne,  whereof  if
becommeth  Sugar,  but  it  is  little  esteemed  because  it  i;
of  a  browne  colour,  and  for  that  they  have  so  grea
quantitie  and  abundance  of  white  Sugar  throughout  al
India. The  innermost  part  of  the  tree  or  trunke  is  callec

*  This  water  being  drunke,  is  very  good  against  the  heate  of  th>
Liver  and  the  Kidneyes,  and  clenseth  the  yard  from  corruption  anc
filthy  matter.

302

JOHN HUIGHEN VAN LINSCHOTEN  ad.

1583.
Palmito,  and  is  the  pith  or  heart  of  the  same  trunke,  which  The  Palmite.
s  much  esteemed,  and  sent  for  a  present  unto  men  of  great
iccount.  It  is  as  thin  as  Paper,  and  also  white,  and  is  as
f  it  were  pleated  or  prest  together,  as  they  use  to  pleate
ind  presse  womens  Huykes  in  the  Low  Countreyes :  it  is
ilso  long  and  slender,  and  hath  sometimes  fifty  or  sixty
:olds  or  pletes  in  it  like  a  Paper-book.  This  the  Indians
ase  for  Paper  and  Bookes,  which  continueth  in  the  same
olds,  whereon  they  write  when  it  is  greene,  and  so  let  it
iry,  and  then  it  is  impossible  to  get  the  Letters  out  againe,
ror  it  is  printed  therein  with  a  kind  of  Iron  Instrument :
The  Indians  call  it  Olla,  whereof  all  their  Bookes,  Writings,
md  Evidences  are  made,  which  they  can  seale,  and  shut
ap  as  wee  doe  our  Letters.

Those  Hands  have  no  other  dealing  or  living,  but  with
2airo,  whereof  they  make  Ropes  and  Cables,  and  with  the
2opra,  or  the  white  substance  of  the  Cocus,  whereof  Oile
is  made,  so  that  they  doe  oftentimes  come  into  India,
when  the  ship  and  all  the  furniture,  victuall  and  Mer-
:handise  is  onely  of  those  Palme-trees.

DUryoen  is  a  fruit  that  only  groweth  in  Malacca,  and  is  chap.  57.
so  much  commended  by  those  which  have  prooved  Of  the
the  same,  that  there  is  no  fruit  in  the  World  to  be  com-  Duryoem,  a
pared  with  it :  for  they  affirme,  that  in  taste  and  goodnesse  ^Vt1 ,  °*
it  excelleth  all  kind  of  fruits,  and  yet  when  it  is  first
opened,  it  smelleth  like  rotten  Onions,  but  in  the  taste
the  sweetnesse  and  daintinesse  thereof  is  tryed. It  is  as
great  as  a  Mellon,  outwardly  like  the  Jaacka,  whereof  I
have  spoken,  but  somewhat  sharper  or  pricking,  and  much
like  the  huskes  of  Chesse-nuts. It  hath  within  it  certaine
partitions like the Jaacka, wherein the fruit groweth,
beeing  of  the  greatnesse  of  a  little  Hennes  Egge,  and
therein  are  the  Nuts  as  great  as  Peach-stones. The  fruit
is  for  colour  and  taste  like  an  excellent  meate,  much  used
in  Spaine,  called  Mangiar  Blanco,  which  is  made  of  Hennes
flesh,  distilled  with  Sugar:  The  trees  are  like  the  Jaacka
trees,  the  blossomes  white,  and  somewhat  yellowish : the

3°3

A.D.
1583.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

leaves  about  halfe  a  span  broad,  somewhat  sharpe  at  th(
end,  within  light  greene,  and  without  darke  greene.

[II.  x.  1780.]  rTRHere  is  a  tree  in  India  called  Arbore  de  Rays,  that  is
A to  say,  a  Tree  of  Roots  :  this  tree  is  very  wonderfull
to  behold,  for  that  when  it  groweth  first  up  like  all  other
trees,  and  spreadeth  the  branches  :  then  the  branches  grow
full  of  roots,  and  grow  downwards  againe  towards  the
Earth,  where  they  take  root  againe,  and  so  are  fast  againe
bus,  01  reed  of  ^^in  trie  ground,  and  in  length  of  time,  the  broader  thei
Flcus  Indica tree  1S>  and  tnat  tne  branches  doe  spread  themselves,  the
more  rootes  doe  hang  upon  the  branches,  and  seeme  afarre
off  to  be  Cordes  of  Hempe,  so  that  in  the  end  the  tree
covereth  a  great  piece  of  ground,  and  crosseth  one  rool
within  the  other  like  a  Maze. I  have  seene  trees  thai
have  contayned  at  the  least  some  thirty  or  fortie  paces  ir
compasse,  and  all  out  of  the  roots  which  came  from  above
yeeres  at  Goa->  one  of  the  branches,  and  were  fast  growne  and  had  taker
root  againe  within  the  Earth,  and  in  time  waxed  so  thicke
that  it  could  not  be  discerned,  which  was  the  chiefe  01
principall  trunke  or  bodie  of  the  tree :  in  some  places  yo\j
may  creepe  betweene  the  roots,  and  the  more  the  tret
spreadeth,  so  much  the  more  doe  the  roots  spring  out  o
the  same  branches,  and  still  grow  downe  till  they  come  t<
Indians  made  Earth,  and  there  take  roote  againe  within  the  ground,  am
galleries  and still  increase  with  rootes,  that  it  is  a  wonder. This  tre!
chambers  by kath  no  fruit  that  is  worth  the  eating,  but  a  small  kiw
W^f  and  that  °^  ^ruit  ^e  Olives,  and  good  for  nothing  but  for  Bird
it  yeelded  an
eccho,  and  he
had  seene  som
time  800.  or
1000  sha-
dowed under
one,  able  to

Of  the  tree
Arbore  de
Rays,  that  is,
root  tree,
and  the  Bam

secundum
Clusium
Fabricius
Mordents  a
great  travelle
which  had
dwelt  some

that  some  of
these  trees  by
reason  of  this
multiplication
contained  a
miles  compasse,
fcf  that  the

to  eate.

There  are  in  India  other  wonderfull  and  thicke  trees
whereof  shippes  are  made :  there  are  trees  by  Cochin,  tha1
are  called  Angelina,  whereof  certayne  Scutes  or  Skiffe
called  Tones  are  made :  there  are  of  those  Tones  that  wi?
lade  in  them  at  the  least  twentie  or  thirtie  Pipes  of  watei
receive  3000.  anc[  are  cut  out  0f  one  piece  of  Wood,  without  any  piec

Oviedos  West  •  11  11  •

Indian  or  seame>  or  any  J°7nts  :  whereby  men  may  well  conjectur

Mangle  is tne  thicknesse  of  the  tree,  and  it  is  so  strong  and  hard

of  the  same  or  like  kind  and  Lopes  his  African  Enzanda.

304

JOHN HUIGHEN VAN LINSCHOTEN  a.d.

1583.
Wood,  that  Iron  in  tract  of  time  would  bee  consumed
thereby,  by  reason  of  the  hardnesse  of  the  Wood.  There
are  also  over  all  India  many  Sugar-canes  in  all  places,  and
in  great  numbers,  but  not  much  esteemed  of :  and  all
along  the  Coast  of  Malabare  there  are  many  thicke  Reedes,
specially  on  the  Coast  of  Choramandell,  which  Reedes  by
the  Indians  are  called  Mambu,  and  by  the  Portugals
Bambu :  these  Mambus  have  a  certaine  matter  within
them,  which  is  (as  it  were)  the  pith  of  it,  such  as  Quils
have  within  them,  which  men  take  out  when  they  make
them  Pens  to  write :  the  Indians  call  it  Sacar  Mambu,
which  is  as  much  to  say,  as  Sugar  of  Mambu,  and  is  a
very  medicinable  thing  much  esteemed,  and  much  sought
for  by  the  Arabians,  Persians,  and  Moores,  that  call  it
Tabaxiir.

Those  Reeds  grow  most  in  the  Coast  of  Choramandell  Reeds.
in  Bisnagar,  and  Malacca  in  many  places,  and  in  great
abundance :  they  grow  very  high,  and  are  divided  in
each  joynt  one  from  another,  at  the  least  a  span  and  a  halfe,
and  rather  more,  and  are  as  thicke  as  a  mans  legge  above
the  knee :  they  doe  commonly  grow  upright,  and  most  of
them  as  high  as  the  highest  house  in  the  Low-countreyes :
they  bow  them  many  times  in  growing,  that  they  may
bring  them  into  a  forme  or  fashion  to  serve  for  their
Pallamkins,  wherein  the  Portugals  and  Indian  Lords  are
carried,  as  I  said  before :  the  leaves  of  those  Reeds  or
Bambus  grow  wide  one  from  another,  and  have  almost  the
fashion  of  an  Olive  leafe.

THe  tree  called  Arbore  Triste,  that  is,  the  Sorrowfull  Chap.  59.
Tree,  is  so  called,  because  it  never  beareth  blossomes lyf^t
but  in  the  night  time,  and  so  it  doth  and  continueth  all  Triste
the  yeere  long :  it  is  a  thing  to  bee  wondred  at :  for  that
so  soone  as  the  Sunne  setteth,  there  is  not  one  blossome
seene  upon  the  tree,  but  presently  within  halfe  an  houre
after,  there  are  as  many  blossomes  upon  it,  as  the  tree
can  beare  :  they  are  very  pleasant  to  behold,  and  smell  very
sweet,  and  so  soone  as  the  day  commeth  on, and the
x  305  u

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGMMES

1583.

Sunne  is  rising,  presently  all  the  blossomes  fall  off,  and
cover  all  the  ground,  so  that  there  remayneth  not  one  to
bee  seene  upon  the  tree :  the  leaves  shut  themselves  close
together,  so  that  it  seemeth  as  though  it  were  dead,  untill
Evening  commeth  againe,  and  then  it  beginneth  to
blossome  as  it  did  before  :  the  tree  is  as  great  as  a  Plumme
tree,  and  is  commonly  planted  behind  mens  houses,  in
their  Gardens  for  a  pleasure,  and  for  the  sweet  smell :  it
groweth  very  quickly  up,  for  that  many  young  plants  doe
spring  out  of  the  roote,  and  as  soone  as  those  young  plants
bee  above  halfe  a  fadome  high,  they  have  presently  asi
many  blossoms  upon  them  as  the  branches  on  the  trees,  &
although they  cut the tree downe to the  ground,  yet

A  marvellous within  lesse  then  half  a  yeere  there  wil  branches  spring;

growth.  out  0f  the  root)  and  likewise  if  you  breake  a  branch  off;

from  the  tree  and  set  it  on  the  earth,  it  will  presently  take
root  and  grow,  and  within  few  dayes  after  beareth
blossomes :  the  blossomes  are  in  a  manner  like  Orange
tree  blossomes,  the  flowre  being  white,  and  in  the  bottome
somewhat  yellow  and  reddish,  which  in  India  they  use  foi
Saffron,  therewith  to  dresse  their  meates,  and  to  die  with
all  as  we  doe  with  our  Saffron,  but  it  is  neither  so  good,
nor  of  so  pleasant  a  taste,  yet  it  serveth  there  for  want  of
the  other.

Chap.  60. T)Ettle  is  a  leafe  somewhat  greater  and  longer  out  ther
Bettek.  ±_} Orange  leaves,  and  is  planted  by  stickes,  whereupor

it  climeth  like  Ivie  or  Pepper,  and  so  like  unto  Pepper
that  a  farre  off  growing  each  by  other  they  can  hardly  b(
discerned.  It  hath  no  other  fruit  but  the  leaves  onely,  i|
is  much  dressed  and  looked  unto,  for  that  it  is  the  dail)
bread  of  India.  The  leaves  being  gathered  do  continu(
long  without  withering,  alwaies  shewing  fresh  and  greene
[II.  x.  1 78 1.]  and  are  sold  by  the  dozen,  and  there  is  not  any  woman  01
man  in  all  India,  but  that  every  day  eateth  a  dozen  or  twc
of  the  same  leaves  or  more :  not  that  they  use  them  foi
food,  but  after  their  meale  tides,  in  the  morning  anc
all  the  day  long,  as  likewise  by  night,  and  as  they  got

306

JOHN HUIGHEN VAN LINSCHOTEN  aj>.

1583.
abroad  in  the  streets,  wheresoever  they  be  you  shall  see
them  with  some  of  these  leaves  in  their  hands,  which
continually  they  are  chawing.  These  leaves  are  not  used
to  bee  eaten  alone,  but  because  of  their  bitternesse  they
are  eaten  with  a  certaine  kind  of  fruit,  which  the  Malabares
and  Portugalls  call  Arecca,  the  Gusurates  and  Decaniins  drecca.
Suparii  and  the  Arabian  Fauffell.  This  fruite  groweth
on  trees  like  the  Palme  trees,  that  beare  the  nut  Cocus  in
India,  but  they  are  somewhat  thinner,  with  leaves  some-
what longer  and  smaller.  The  fruit  is  much  like  the  fruit
that  groweth  on  Cypresse  trees,  or  like  a  Nutmeg,  though
some  of  them  are  on  the  one  side  flat,  and  on  the  other  side
thicker,  some  being  somewhat  greater  and  very  hard.
They  cut  them  in  the  middle  with  a  knife,  and  so  chaw
them  with  Bettele,  they  are  within  full  of  veines,  white,
somewhat  reddish.

There  is  a  kind  of  Arecca  called  Cechaniin,  which  are
lesse,  blacker,  and  very  hard,  yet  are  likewise  used  with
Bettele,  and  have  no  taste  but  only  of  the  Wood,  and  yet
it  moisteneth  the  mouth,  and  coloureth  it  with  red  and
black,  whereby  it  seemeth  that  the  lippes  and  teeth  are
painted  with  blacke  bloud,  which  happeneth  when  the
Arecca  is  not  well  dried.  There  is  another  sort,  which  in
the  eating  or  chawing  being  swallowed  downe,  maketh
men  light  in  the  head,  as  if  they  had  drunke  wine  all  the
day  long,  but  that  is  soone  past.  They  use  yet  another
mixture  which  they  eate  withall,  that  is  to  say,  a  cake  or
role  made  of  a  certaine  wood  or  tree  called  Kaate,  and  then
they  anoint  the  Bettele  leaves  with  chalke  made  of  burnt
oyster  shels,  which  can  doe  no  hurt  in  their  bodies,  by
reason  of  the  small  quantitie  of  it ;  all  this  being  chawed
together,  and  the  Juice  swallowed  downe  into  their  bodies,
for  all  the  rest  they  spit  forth  :  they  say  it  is  very  good  for
the  maw,  and  against  a  stinking  breathe,  a  soveraigne
medicine  for  their  teeth,  and  fastning  of  gummes,  and  very
good  against  the  Schorbuck,  &  it  is  most  true  that  in
India  very  few  men  are  found  with  stinking  breaths,  or
toothaches,  or  troubled  with  the  Schorbuck  or  any  such

307

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1583.

diseases,  and  although  they  be  never  so  old,  they  alwayes
have  their  teeth  whole  and  sound,  but  their  mouthes  and:
teeth  are  still  as  if  they  were  painted  with  black  bloud,  as
I  said  before,  and  never  leave  spitting  reddish  spittle  like
bloud.  The  Portugall  women  have  the  like  custome  ofl
eating  these  Bettele  leaves,  so  that  if  they  were  but  one!
day  without  eating  their  Bettele,  they  perswade  themselves
they  could  not  live :  Yea,  they  set  it  in  the  night  times  by
their  beds  heads,  and  when  they  cannot  sleepe,  they  doe!
nothing  else  but  chaw  Bettele  and  spit  it  out  againe.  In
the  day  time  wheresoever  they  doe  sit,  goe,  or  stand,  they
are  continually  chawing  thereof,  like  Oxen  or  Kine  chawing;
their  cud.

The  Noblemen  and  Kings,  wheresoever  they  goe,  stand
or  sit,  have  alwaies  a  servant  by  them,  with  a  Silver  Ketle
in  their  hand  full  of  Bettele  and  their  mixtures,  and  when
they  will  eat,  give  them  a  leafe  readie  prepared.  And
when  any  Ambassadour  commeth  to  speake  with  the  King,
although  the  King  can  understand  them  well,  yet  it  is
their  manner  (to  maintaine  their  estates)  that  the  Ambassa-;
dour  speaketh  unto  them  by  an  Interpreter  that  standeth
there  in  presence,  which  done,  hee  answereth  againe  by  the
same  Interpreter.  In  the  meane  time  the  King  lieth  on  A
bed,  or  else  sitteth  on  the  ground  upon  a  Carpet,  and  hi:
servant  standing  by  readie  with  the  Bettele,  which  he<j
continually  chaweth,  and  spitteth  out  the  Juyce  anc
remainder  thereof  into  a  Silver  Bason  standing  by  him,  o:j
else  holden  by  some  one  of  his  slaves  or  his  wives,  anc
this  is  a  great  honour  to  the  Ambassadour,  especially  li
hee  profereth  him  of  the  same  Bettele  that  he  himself
does  eate.

Chap.  61.  r  1  ^He  Herbe  called  Dutroa  is  very  common  in  India,  ano
Of  the  Herbe  J[  groweth  in  every  field.  The  leafe  thereof  is  sharpe  a
Plant  called  tne  enc^  ^e  the  point  of  a  Speare,  and  is  indented  on  th
Herba  Sen-  edges  like  the  leafe  of  Beares-claw,  and  about  that  bignesse
tida>  or  the  having  in  it  many  long  threeds  or  veines,  it  groweti
feeling  Hearb.  without taste or moysture, and somewhat bitter an<

308

JOHN HUIGHEN VAN LINSCHOTEN  a.d.

1583-

smelling  like  a  Raddish. The  flower  or  blossome  of  this

Plant,  is  very  like  unto  the  blossome  of  Rose-mary  in

colour : and  out  of  this  blossome  groweth  a  bud,  much

like  a  bud  of  Popie,  wherein  are  certaine  small  kernells

like  the  kernells  of  Melons,  which  being  stamped  and

put  into  any  meat,  wine,  water,  or  any  other  drinke  or

composition,  and  eaten  or  drunke  therewith,  maketh  a  man

in  such  case  as  if  hee  were  foolish  or  out  of  his  wits,

so  that  hee  doth  nothing  else  but  laugh, without  any

understanding  or  sence  once  to  perceive  any  thing  that  is

done  in  his  presence. And  some  time  it  maketh  him

sleep  as  if  hee  were  dead,  in  that  sort  he  continueth  for  the

space  of  twentie  foure  houres :  but  if  his  feet  be  washed

with  cold  water,  then  hee  cometh  to  himselfe  againe  before

the twentie foure houres bee expired. There is yet

another  Herbe  in  India,  called  by  the  Portugalls  Herba  Herba

Sentida  or  feeling  Hearbe,  the  cause  why  it  is  called  so,  Sentida.

is  for  that  if  any  man  passeth  by  it  and  toucheth  it,  or  p~?*

throweth  either  Sand  or  any  other  thing  upon  it,  presently  jfr-tca  m£

it  becommeth  as  though  it  were  withered,  and  closeth  the  America  as  in

leaves  together  and  commeth  not  to  it  selfe,  and  to  his  first  Jobson  andM.

force  againe  as  long  as  the  man  standeth  by  it :  but  pre-  Harecourt you

sently  when  the  man  is  gone  and  turneth  his  backe,  it  fflJ/if!,  'Jl
111  ■  j  1  '  rr  r ■  • it  be  the  same :

openeth  the  leaves  againe,  and  becommeth  stiffe  and  raire  for  those  are

againe,  as  though  they  were  newly  growne :  and  touching  bushes  liker

it  againe,  it  shutteth  and  becommeth  withered  as  before, Roses  and  not

so  that  it  is  a  pleasure  to  see  it,  and  strange  to  bee  observed. J.a1  s'  a[,
A1  .  .r  .  .  . 7  . p  .  , this  seemeth.

Also there  is  a  thing to be  wondred  at, and seemeth

unpossible  to  such  as  have  not  seene  it: and  this  it  is,  [II. x.  1782.]

within  the  Towne  and  Hand  of  Goa,  at  the  one  end  of

the  Towne,  where  the  Kine,  Oxen,  Sheepe,  and  all  kind

of  Cattle  are  killed  and  slaine  to  be  sold  for  meat  for  the

Inhabitants,  called  Matanaquas :  in  that  place  there  lie  all

the  Homes  of  the  said  beasts  scattered  and  throwne  about,

as if they were altogether unprofitable, because the

Portugalls  and  Indians  use  them  not,  and  it  is  likewise  a

great  dishonour  and  injury  to  the  Spaniards  and  Portugalls

to  have  any  Homes,  or  once  to  shew  a  Home  to  each  other,

309

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

J583-

or  to  throw  it  before  his  doore,  for  revenge  of  which  act

they  would  kill  each  other,  and  there  is  sharpe  Justice  used,
if  any  man  doe  offend  in  that  sort,  by  shewing  his  neigh-
bour the  Home,  or  naming  it  unto  him,  for  that  thereby
they  meane  he  is  a  man  that  is  made  cookold  by  his  wife.
Horn-plant.  These  homes  having  layne  there  a  certaine  time,  doe  sticke
fast  in  the  earth  (I  meane  the  inner  part  of  the  home)  and
there  it  taketh  roote  as  if  it  were  a  tree,  as  I  my  selfe  have
seene  and  pulled  forth  many  of  them  that  had  rootes  of
two  or  three  spannes  in  length,  which  was  never  seene  in
any  place  of  the  World.

Of  the  Spices,  Drugs,  Plants,  and  StufFes  for
Physicians  and  Apothecaries,  ordinarily  used
in  India,  and  of  their  growing.

C.  62.  T)Epper  is  of  divers  sorts,  that  is  to  say,  blacke,  white,

XT  and  Long-pepper  is  called  Canariin,  the  blacke  is  the
commonest.  Pepper  groweth  and  is  planted  at  the  foot
of  another  tree,  and  most  part  at  the  foot  of  the  Tree
called  Arecca,  or  some  such  like  Tree,  and  groweth  upon
the  tree  like  Bettele  or  Ive.  The  leaves  of  Pepper  are
like  Orange  leaves  but  somewhat  smaller,  they  are  greene
and  sharpe  at  the  ends,  in  chawing  it  biteth  the  tongue,
and  tasteth  much  like  to  Bettele,  it  growes  in  bunches
like  Grapes,  but  a  great  deale  lesser  and  thinner,  yet  some
what  thicker  then  Gooseberries :  they  are  alwayes  greene
till  they  begin  to  drie  and  to  ripen,  which  is  in  December
and  January,  for  at  that  time  they  are  gathered.  The  long
Pepper  groweth  in  Bengala,  and  some  in  the  Hand  of  Java,
and  is  another  kind  of  tree,  the  long  Pepper  is  of  the
length  of  a  needle,  or  the  tagge  of  a  point,  but  somewhat
thicker,  and  all  of  a  like  thicknesse  :  it  is  outwardly  rugged
and  of  an  ashie  colour,  and  within  somewhat  white,  with;
small  seeds,  but  in  taste  and  use  it  is  like  the  other  blacke
and  white  Pepper.  The  white  Pepper  (as  I  said)  is  like
the  black,  both  in  taste  and  forme,  yet  it  is  accounted  for
better  and  stronger,  and  is  not  in  so  great  quantitie  as  the

310

JOHN HUIGHEN VAN L1NSCHOTEN  a.d.

1583-
black.  The  Pepper  called  Canariins  in  the  Countrey  of
Goa  and  Malabar,  almost  of  the  fashion  of  Panike  :  it  is  an
ashe  colour,  and  hollow  within,  with  some  small  kernells,
which  in  eating  tasteth  and  heateth  like  other  Pepper,  yet
it  is  used  only  by  the  poore  people,  and  therefore  is  called
Canariin  Pepper,  that  is  to  say,  Countrey  mens  Pepper  or
poore  peoples  Pepper :  therefore  it  is  never  laden  away,
for  it  is  very  course  and  of  a  little  value,  neither  would
it  bee  able  to  raise  the  fraight,  and  therefore  is  it  left  in
the  Countrey.

CInamon  trees  are  as  great  as  olive  trees,  &  some  lesser,  C.  63.
with  leaves  of  Colmi  like  Bay  leaves,  but  of  fashion  Cinamon.
like  Citron  leaves,  though  somewhat  smaller.  They  have
white  blossomes,  and  a  certaine  fruit  of  the  greatnesse  of
blacke  Portugall  Olives,  whereof  also  Oyle  is  made,  which
-is  used  for  many  things.  The  tree  hath  two  Barks,  but
the  second  Barke  is  the  Cinamon,  it  is  cut  off  in  foure
squares  peeces,  and  so  laid  to  dry,  at  the  first  it  is  ashe
colour,  after  as  it  beginneth  to  dry,  it  rolleth  together  of
itselfe,  and  looketh  of  the  colour  as  it  commeth  hither,
which  proceedeth  of  the  heat  of  the  Sun.  The  tree  from
whence  the  Barke  is  taken  they  let  it  stand,  and  within
three  yeers  after  it  hath  another  Barke  as  it  had  before.
These  trees  are  in  great  abundance,  for  they  grow  of
themselves  without  planting,  in  the  open  fields  like  bushes  ;
the  root  of  this  tree  yeeldeth  a  water  which  smelleth  like
Camphora,  it  is  forbidden  to  bee  drawne  forth  for  spoyling
the  trees.  The  Cinamon  that  is  not  well  dried  is  of  ashe
colour,  and  that  which  is  overmuch  dried,  blackish,  but  the
best  dried  is  reddish :  there  is  much  and  excellent  water
distilled  out  of  Cinamon  while  it  is  halfe  greene,  which
is  much  used  in  India,  and  many  times  carried  into
Portugall  and  other  places :  it  is  very  pleasant  both  to
drinke  and  to  smell,  but  very  hot  and  strong :  it  is  used
against  the  Colicke  and  other  diseases  proceeding  of  cold,
it  is  likewise  good  against  stinking  breath,  and  evill  favor
of  the  mouth. There  is  likewise  a  water  made  of  the

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1583.

blossomes of this tree, but not so  good, nor so well

esteemed  as  that  of  Cinamon  it  selfe. The  places  where

Cinamon  groweth,  is  most  and  best  in  the  Hand  of  Seylon,

wherein  there  is  whole  Woods  full  of  Cinamon  trees :  in

the  coast  of  Malabar  there  groweth  likewise  great  store,

and  some  Woods  of  Cinamon,  but  not  halfe  so  good,  and

lesser  trees,  the  barke  being  grayer  and  thicker  and  of

small  vertue.

C.  64.  /^1  Inger  groweth  in  many  places  of  India,  yet  the  best  and

G

Ginger.  \jf  most  carried  abroad,  is  that  which  groweth  in  the  Coast

of  Malabar :  it  groweth  like  thin  and  young  Netherland
Reedes  of  two  or  three  spannes  high,  the  Roote  whereof
is  Ginger,  being  greene,  it  is  much  eaten  in  India  for
Sallets,  as  also  sodden  in  Vineger,  which  they  call  Achar,
as  I  said  of  Pepper,  and  other  Fruits  that  are  used  in  that
manner  throughout  all  India  :  the  time  when  they  are  most
gathered  and  begun  to  bee  dried,  is  in  December  and

[II.  x.  1783.]  Januarie  :  they  drie  it  in  this  sort,  that  is  they  cover  it  with
pot-earth,  which  they  do  to  stop  &  fil  up  the  holes,  &  therby
to  make  it  continue  the  fresher,  for  the  Pot-earth  preserveth
it  from  wormes,  without  the  which  it  is  presently  consumed
by  them :  it  is  little  esteemed  in  India,  notwithstanding
there  is  much  shipped,  as  well  to  the  Red  Sea,  as  to  Ormus,
Arabia  and  Asia.

C.  65.  HPHe  Trees  whereon  Cloves  grow  are  like  Bay  Trees,

Cloves.  JL the  blossomes  at  the  first  white,  then  greene,  and  at

last  red  and  hard,  which  are  the  Cloves,  and  when  the
blossomes  are  greene,  they  have  the  pleasantest  smell  in
all  the  world.  The  Cloves  grow  very  thicke  together  and
in  great  numbers,  they  are  gathered  and  then  dried,  their
right  colour  when  they  are  drie  is  a  darke  yellow,  and  to
give  them  a  blacke  colour  they  are  commonly  smoked.
The  Cloves  that  stay  on  the  Tree  ungathered  are  thicke,
and  stay  on  till  the  next  yeere,  which  are  those  that  are
called  the  Mother  of  Cloves.  And  in  the  place  where  the
Trees  stand,  there  groweth  not  any  grasse  or  greene  hearbe

312

JOHN HUIGHEN VAN LINSCHOTEN  ad.

1583.
,t  all,  but  it  is  wholly  drie,  for  that  those  Trees  draw  all
he  moisture  unto  them.  That  which  the  Portugalls  call
3aston,  or  with  us  the  Stocke  of  the  Clove  (and  is  the
italke  whereby  they  hang  on  the  trees)  is  gathered  with
he  Cloves,  and  so  they  are  mingled  together :  for  that  in
Vialuco  they  never  garble  their  Cloves,  but  in  India  they
ire  many  times  parted,  though  verie  little :  for  they  are
nost  part  sold  and  used  with  dust  and  stalkes,  and
dtogether ;  but  such  as  are  to  bee  sent  to  Portugall  are
;evered  and  clensed.  The  Cloves  are  so  hotte  of  nature,
hat  whensoever  they  are  made  cleane,  and  seperated  from
heir  garbish,  if  there  chance  to  stand  either  tubbe  or  payle
)f  water  in  the  chamber  where  they  dense  them,  or  any
)ther  vessell  with  wine  or  any  kind  of  moisture,  it  will
within  two  daies  at  the  furthest  bee  wholly  soken  out
ind  dried  up,  although  it  stand  not  neere  them,  by  reason  Their  heat.
)f  the  great  heat  of  the  Cloves  that  draw  all  moisture  unto
;  :hem,  as  by  experience  I  have  often  seene.  The  same
lature  is  in  the  unspun  Silke  of  China,  so  that  whensoever
:he  Silke  lieth  any  where  in  a  house  upon  the  flowre,  that  Note.
i  s  to  say,  upon  boords,  a  foot  or  two  above  the  ground,
:  ind  that  the  flowre  is  sprinkled  and  covered  with  water,
ilthough  it  toucheth  not  the  Silke,  in  the  morning  all  that
water  will  bee  in  the  Silke,  for  that  it  draweth  it  all  unto
it.  And  this  tricke  the  Indians  oftentimes  use  to  make
their  Silk  weigh  heavie  when  they  sell  it,  for  it  can  neither
3e  seene  nor  found  in  the  Silke.

THe  Nutmeg  Tree  is  like  a  Peare  Tree,  or  a  Peach  tree,  C.  66:
but  that  they  are  lesse,  and  it  hath  round  leaves.  Nutmeg.
These  Trees  grow  in  the  Hand  of  Banda,  not  farre  from
Maluco,  and  also  in  the  Hands  of  Javas  and  Sunda,  from  There  are  two
whence  they  are  carried  to  China  and  Malacca,  and  also  sorts  0f^ut-
into  India  and  other  places. The  fruit  is  altogether  like  JJj§jJj  js&mjt
great  round  Peaches,  the  inward  part  whereof  is  the  Nut-  the  female
meg. This  hath  about  it  a  hard  shell  like  Wood,  wherein  round.
the  Nut  lieth  loose : and  this  woodden  shell  or  huske  is
covered  over  with  Nutmeg  flower,  which  is  called  Mace,

3*3

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1583.  .  I

and  over  it  is  the  fruit,  which  without  is  like  the  fruit,

of  a  Peach.

C.  67.  /^Ardamomum  is  a  kind  of  spice,  which  they  use  much

Cardamomum.  v_>4  in  India  to  dresse  with  their  meates,  and  commonly
they  have  it  in  their  mouthes  to  chaw  upon.  It  is  very
good  against  a  stinking  breath  and  evill  humours  in  the
head,  and  serveth  also  for  other  thing  in  medicines :  it
groweth  like  other  graines,  and  is  very  like  to  Panyke.
but  of  a  white  colour  drawing  somewhat  towardes  yellow
The  huskes  are  as  great  as  the  huskes  of  Panyke  grains,
but  somewhat  small :  within  there  is  about  ten  or  twelve
graines  of  berries,  which  is  the  Cardamomum.  There
are  two  sorts  of  Cardamomum,  that  is  to  say,  great  anc
small ;  most  of  it  groweth  in  Calecut  and  Cananor,  placet:
on  the  Coast  of  Malabar :  it  is  likewise  in  other  places  of:
Malabar,  and  in  the  Hand  of  Java,  and  from  the  Countries
aforesaid  it  is  most  carried  into  other  places,  but  little
brought  into  Portugall,  because  of  the  great  charges  anc
long  way  :  yet  many  times  the  Saylers  and  other  Traveller!
bring  it.  They  seeth  no  flesh  in  India,  but  commonly
they  put  Cardomomum  into  the  pot,  it  maketh  the  meat*
to  have  as  good  a  savor  and  a  taste  as  any  of  the  othen
Spices  of  India.

C.  68.  T Acke  by  the  Malabares,  Bengalers,  and  Decaniins,  is;

Lac  \^j  called  Assii,  by  the  Moores  Lac ; the  men  of  Pegi

(where  the  best  is  found,  and  most  trafficked  withall)  doe
call  it  Treck,  and  deale  much  therewith  by  carrying  it  untcj
the  Hand  of  Sumatra  (in  time  past  called  Taprobana)  anci
there  they  exchange  it  for  Pepper,  and  from  thence  it  it
carried  to  the  Red  Sea,  to  Persia  and  Arabia,  whereupor
the  Arabians,  Persians,  and  Turkes  call  it  Loc  Sumutri.
that  is,  Lac  of  Sumatra,  because  it  is  brought  from  thena
into  their  Countries.  The  manner  how  it  is  made  \i\
thus :  in  Pegu,  and  those  places  from  whence  it  commeth.
there  are  certaine  very  great  Pismires  with  wings,  which
fly  up  the  trees  that  are  there  like  Plum  trees,  and  such

314

JOHN HUIGHEN VAN LINSCHOTEN  a.d.

1583.
)ther  trees,  out  of  the  which  trees  comes  a  certaine  gumme,
>vhich  the  Pismires  sucke  up,  and  then  they  make  the
Lac  round  about  the  branches  of  the  trees,  as  Bees  make
Hony  and  Waxe,  and  when  it  is  full,  the  owners  of  the
:rees  come,  and  breaking  off  the  branches  lay  them  to
irie,  and  being  drie  the  branches  shrinke  out,  and  the
Lac  remaineth  behind  like  a  Reed :  sometimes  the  Wood
Dreaketh  within  them,  but  the  lesse  Wood  it  hath  within
t  the  better  it  is:  the  peeces  and  crummes  that  fall  upon  [II. x.  1784.]
:he  ground,  they  melt  them  together,  but  that  is  not  so  They  beate  the
?ood,  for  it  hath  filth  and  earth  within  it : it  happeneth  ^J%£ r'
oftentimes  that  they  finde  the  Pismires  wings  within  the  andsomixeatt
*aw  Lac. When  the  Lac  is  raw,  as  it  commeth  from  the  manner  of
Tree, it is  a  darke  red  colour, but being  refined and  colors  uP°n  'lt
:lensed,  they  make  it  of  all  colours  in  India.  as  *he9  lts*>

greene, yellow,

BEnioin  is  a  kinde  of  stuff e,  like  Frankinsence  and  or  any  other
Myrrhe,  but  more  esteemed,  for  it  serveth  for  many  colour,  and
nedicines,  and  other  things.  make  peeces

As  when  they  make  Balles  or  peeces  of  Amber  and  tfr/jJ#Xr<?
Muske,  they  must  alwaies  have  Benioin  with  it  to  make  to  seale  letters
it  perfect,  it  groweth  much  in  the  Kingdome  of  Syan,  in  withall
the  Hand  of  Sumatra,  in  the  Hands  of  Javas,  and  the  See  71-
Countrey  of  Malacca,  they  are  high  Trees  full  of  branches,
with  leaves  like  Lemmon  Tree  leaves,  with  a  thicke  and
high  stemme  or  stocke  in  the  middle,  from  whence  pro-
ceedeth  the  Gumme,  which  is  the  Benioin. When  the
Tree  is  young,  then  it  yeeldeth  the  best  Benioin,  which  is
blackish  of  colour,  and  of  a  very  sweet  smell,  and  is  called
Benioin  de  Boninas,  that  is  to  say,  Benioin  of  the  Flowers,
because  of the perfect smell. The second Benioin, is
called  Benioin  Amendoado,  that  is,  Benioin  of  Almondes,
because  it  is  mixed  with  pieces  of  white  Benioin  among  the
blacke,  like  to  Almondes  that  are  cut  in  pieces. This
Benioin  is  not  so  good,  because  the  white  Benioin  is  of
the  old  Trees.

[Frankinsence  groweth
315

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1583.
Ca.  72. T7^  Rankinsence  groweth in Arabia, it is the Gumme
-I? that floweth out of the bodies of Trees, like:
Benioin.

Mirre  by  the  Indians  is  called  Bola,  it  groweth  in  the'
same  that  Benioin  and  Frankinsence  doth,  and  commeth
also  out  of  Arabia  Faelix,  but  most  out  of  the  Countrie
of  Abexin  from  the  inward  parts  of  the  Countrie,  lying
betweene  Mosambique,  and  the  red  Sea,  which  is  called
Prester  Johns  Land.

Ca.  74,  'THHere  are  three  sorts  of  Sanders,  that  is,  white,  yellow
-L  and  red  :  the  white  and  the  yellow,  which  is  the  best,
come  most  out  of  the  Hand  of  Tymor,  which  lieth  byj
Java.  This  Hand  hath  whole  woods  and  wildernesses  of
Sanders,  both  of  white  and  yellow,  and  from  thence  it  is
carried  throughout  all  India,  and  other  Countries,  and
traffique  much  therewith  :  the  red  Sanders  groweth  most  in
the  coast  of  Choramandel  and  Tanassariin,  which  is  in  the
Countrie  of  Pegu  :  the  trees  of  Sanders  are  like  Nut  trees
and  have  a  certaine  fruit  upon  them  like  Cherries,  at  tht
first  greene,  and  after  blacke,  but  of  no  taste  nor  any  thin£
worth,  for  it  presently  falleth  off,  onely  the  wood  of  the;
tree  is  accounted  of,  which  is  the  Sanders.

Ca.  75.  O  Nakewood  is  most  in  the  Island  of  Seylon :  it  is  s
O  lowe  Tree :  the  roote  thereof  being  the  Snake-wood
is  of  colour  white,  shewing  somewhat  yellow,  very  hare
and  bitter  in  taste,  it  is  much  used  in  India :  they  stamp<
and  bruise  it  like  Sanders,  in  water  or  wine,  and  so  drink*
it,  it  is  very  good  and  well  proved  against  all  burning
Feavers  :  one  ounce  thereof  bruised  and  mixed  with  wate
is  good  against  all  poison  and  sicknesse,  as  the  collicke
wormes,  and  all  filthy  humors  and  coldnesse  in  the  body
and  specially  against  the  stinging  of  Snakes,  whereof  i'
hath  the  name :  it  was  first  found  by  meanes  of  a  littL
beast  called  Quil,  or  Quirpele,  which  is  of  bignesse  ver
like  a  Ferret  (wherewith  in  those  Countries  they  use  U
drive  Cunnies  out  of  their  holes, and so  catch them

316

I JOHN HUIGHEN VAN LINSCHOTEN  a.d.

1583.
whereof  in  India  they  have  many  in  their  houses,  which
they  play  withall  to  passe  the  time  away,  as  also  to  kill
their  Mice  and  Rats,  and  to  drive  them  away.  This
Beast  by  nature  is  a  great  enemy  to  the  Snake,  so  that
wheresoever  she  findeth  any,  she  fighteth  with  them :  and
because  it  is  often  bitten  by  the  Snake,  it  knoweth  how
to  heale  it  selfe  with  this  Snake-wood,  whereof  there  is
much  in  Seylon,  where  also  are  many  of  those  Beasts,  and
great  store  of  Snakes)  so  that  if  it  be  never  so  sore  bitten,
having  eaten  of  this  wood,  it  is  presently  healed,  as  if  it
had  never  beene  hurt.

THe  Lignum  Aloes  which  in  India  is  called  Calamba  Ca.  76.
and  Palo  D'aguilla,  is  most  in  Malacca,  in  the  Hand  Lignum  Aloes.
of  Sumatra,  Camboia,  Sion,  and  the  Countries  bordering
on  the  same :  the  trees  are  like  Olive  trees,  and  somewhat
greater :  when  it  is  cut  off,  it  smelleth  not  so  well,  because
it  is  greene,  for  the  drier  it  is,  the  better  it  smelleth :  the
best  and  that  which  smelleth  most  is  the  innermost  part  of
the  wood :  some  of  it  is  better  then  the  rest,  which  the
Indians  doe  presently  know  how  to  finde  out :  the  best  and
finest  is  called  Calamba,  and  the  other  Palo  Daguilla.
Now  to  know  which  is  the  best,  you  must  understand  that
the  wood  that  is  very  heavie  with  blacke  and  browne
veines,  and  which  yeeldeth  much  Oyle  or  moistnesse  (which
is  found  by  the  fire)  is  the  best,  and  the  greater  and  thicker
it  is,  the  better  it  is,  and  hath  the  more  vertue.  Of  this
wood  they  make  many  costly  things,  and  it  hath  a  speciall
and  precious  smell,  so  that  it  is  greatly  esteemed  :  specially
the  Calamba,  which  if  it  be  good,  is  sold  by  weight  against
Silver  and  Gold.  The  Palo  Daguilla  next  after  the
Calamba  is  much  accounted  of.  There  is  another  kinde
of  Palo  Daguilla,  which  is  called  Aquilla  Brava,  or  wilde  Aquilla
Aquilla,  and  is  also  much  esteemed :  for  the  Indians  use  hrava-
it  therewith  to  burne  the  bodies  of  their  Bramenes,  and
other  men  of  account,  when  they  are  dead:  and  because  [II.  x.  1785.]
it  is  costly,  therefore  it  is  a  great  honour  to  those  that  are
burnt  therewith,  as  it  is  to  those  that  with  us  are  buried

3J7

A.D.

I583.

The  Author
proceedeth  in
a  large  dis-
course of  other
Drugs,  Gems,
and  Indian
occurrents
which  I  have
omitted.

PURCHAS HIS PILGR1MES

in  Tombes  of  Marble  stones :  but  it  is  not  comparable  td
the  other  Palo  Daguilla,  nor  the  Calamba.  The  wildt
Aguilla  groweth  most  in  the  Island  of  Seylon,  and  on  th^
coast  of  Choramandel,  and  the  best  Palo  Daguilla,  anci
Calamba  groweth  in  Malacca.  These  costly  woods  ar<!
much  used  in  India  for  Beades,  and  Crucifixes,  which  ar<|
holden  in  great  reverence.

Chap. IX.

Relations  of  Ormuz,  and  of  the  late  taking  thereo
by  the  English  and  Persians.

§.  1.

A  Relation  of  the  Kings  of  Ormuz,  and  of  th<
foundation  of  the  Citie  of  Ormuz,  taken  out  0
a  Chronicle  which  a  King  of  the  same  King
dome  composed,  called  Pachaturunxa,  writter
in  Arabicke.

A  man.  i^sE^TIIng  Mahomet  raigning  in  Aman,  which  i\

within  Arabia  felix  : in  the  beginning  o:j
his  reigne,  desiring  to  amplifie  his  King-
dome  and  fame,  assembled  all  the  grea
men  of  his  Kingdome,and  said  unto  them
how  the  Countries  of  the  Coast  of  Persi;
had  beene  his  predecessours,  and  by  negli
gence of some of them they were lost, disinhabited
and  unprofitable :  that  hee  determined  with  the  principal
of  his  Kingdome  that  would  follow  him  to  goe  thither  ii
person,  and  with  some  of  the  common  sort  for  to  buik
some  Cities  and  Townes  in  that  Countrie,  and  that  i|
might  be  cultivated,  seeing  it  was  a  good  Countrie. An(
so  would  his  Kingdome  and  his  fame  be  augmented,  anc;
that  he  would  leave  for  the  government  of  Arabia  hii
Sonne, which  was  a man  able to  rule  well. All  con:
descending  that  his  determination  seemed  them  well,  h<
commanded  presently  to  prepare  much  people,  many  of  th<

318

RELATIONS OF ORMUZ  a.d.

1622.

}rincipals  following  him  ;  and  departing  from  Aman,  they
:ame  to  Calciate,  which  is  neere  the  Sea  in  the  same  Arabia.  Caltiate.
Hee  thought  good,  and  his  also  to  build  in  that  port  a
Ditie,  because  it  was  a  place  disposed  for  them  of  the
3ountrie  to  traffique  with  the  Ships  that  should  passe  that
#ay :  for  the  which  his  Sonne  remained  there  with  much
Deople,  putting  in  effect  the  determination  of  his  Father
md  of  his  Counsell ;  and  the  Citie  in  time  did  so  prosper,
:hat  at  this  day  in  the  ruines  it  showeth  to  have  beene  a
/ery  great  and  noble  Citie.  After  that  King  Mahomet
lad  ordained  the  matters  of  Arabia  and  of  Calciate,  he
jmbarked  with  the  people  he  had  for  his  company  divided
n  many  ships,  which  hee  caused  to  be  made  ready,  and
massed  to  the  side  of  the  coast  of  Persia,  and  arrived  at
:he  Cape  of  Jasques,  that  is  where  Ormuz  doth  now  stand,  Jasques.
hirty  leagues  without  the  straight.  And  seeing  that
Country,  and  the  disposition  of  it  not  convenient  to  settle
limselfe,  journying  along  the  coast,  hee  arrived  at  a
3ountrie  which  then  was  called  Harmuz,  which  is  neere  Harmuz.
:o  that  which  now  is  called  Magostan,  and  Braami,  which  Magostan.
iow  at  this  day  they  call  Costeca,  it  stands  right  against  B™amu
that  which  now  is  called  Harmuz,  in  the  coast  of  Persia.
And  the  King  with  his  contenting  themselves  with  the
Countrie,  determined  to  settle  themselves  in  it  and  to
inhabit,  and  so  they  tooke  in  hand  presently  to  build
bouses,  and  to  husband  the  ground.

And  because  this  King  was  very  liberall,  and  favoured  First  Ormuz
much  the  poore  people  of  the  Country,  and  the  husband-  b"tlt  tn
men,  and  received  strangers  lovingly,  hee  was  well  beloved
generally  of  all  that  had  notice  of  him.  And  the  fame  of
his  vertues  speading  abroad,  and  his  noblenesse  through
ill  the  place  round  about,  many  people  came  unto  him  to
dwell  under  his  defence  and  government.  This  was  the
cause  whereby  this  new  Citie  was  much  enobled.  The
fame  of  his  vertues  and  goodnesse  was  spread  abroad
imong  all  the  Kings  of  that  straight,  as  well  of  Persia  as
of  other  parts  of  Arabia,  all  of  them  sent  to  visit  him
with  great  presents,  shewing  the  great  contentment  they

319

A.D.

l622.

PURCHAS HIS PILGMMES

[II.

Custome  of

succession.

Genealogies

had  with  his  good  neighbourhood.  When  this  King  saw
himselfe  prosper,  and  favoured  of  all  about  him,  and  with
many  people,  to  purchase  more  the  love  of  all  men,  he
commanded  money  to  be  coined,  for  there  was  none  in  the
Countrey,  which  increased  greatly  the  love  of  all  men
toward  him,  and  jointly  the  prosperity  of  his  Country
For  this  benefit  which  hee  did  to  all  that  Countrie  in  thi
inventing  mony  for  them,  they  called  him  generall)
Deranquu,  which  is  to  say,  seale  of  money.  After  th
Citie  of  Ormuz  built  in  the  coast  of  Persia,  and  prosperous
with  many  people  and  riches,  the  King  commanded  his
great  men  to  goe  through  the  Countries  of  Magostan,  anc
every  one  should  take  that  which  best  liked  him,  for  tc
786.]  cultivate,  inhabite,  and  build  in  it  divers  Townes.  The)
did  so,  and  every  one  tooke  the  countrie  that  liked  hiir
best,  and  inhabited  and  husbanded  it,  and  every  one  gav(
his  owne  name  to  the  Countrie  he  tooke,  of  whom  thost
Countries  are  nominated  to  this  day.  And  because  th<
Kings  that  succeeded  Mahomet  were  mighty  and  good  11
their  government,  they  held  the  Countrie  in  their  succes
sions,  increasing  alwaies  in  people  and  noblenesse.  Anc
their  children  that  descended  of  them  were  such  con
tinually,  that  the  Fathers  in  their  life  time  gave  them  th<
government  of  the  Kingdome,  and  they  rested  in  thei
old  age.

It  was  the  custome  among  these  Kings,  because  th
memory  of  their  forefathers  might  not  perish,  when  the;
came  to  the  tenth  generation,  they  began  their  denomina
tions  anew,  the  tenne  following  tooke  the  names  of  the  tei
before.  In  sort  that  the  first  of  the  number  of  the  tei
was  to  take  the  name  of  the  founder ;  and  so  in  order  ti
the  number  of  ten  were  ended.  This  order  continue*
some  yeeres,  the  reigne  going  by  a  direct  line.  Afterwan
this  order  and  custome  perished,  because  that  one  fo
covetousnesse  of  reigning  did  kill  the  other,  and  man
were  made  blinde  by  others  that  would  have  the  govern
ment  of  the  Kingdome.  But  there  is  one  great  an
notable  thing  in  this  Kingdome,  that  although  there  wer

320

RELATIONS OF ORMUZ

A.D.
l622.

many  that  reigned  tyrannously, murthering  the  lawfull

Kings,  yet  unto  this  day  there  never  reigned  any  that  was

not  of  the  bloud  Royall. Onely  Hormuz,  being  in  the

side  of  Persia, one  that  then  reigned  being  dead,  and

having  none  of  the  bloud  royall  in the  Countrie, the

Goazill  (which  is  the  Governour  of  the  Kingdome)  did  The  Goaz.HL

make  himselfe  King. At  this  time  a  Sonne  in  law  of  the

King  deceased  which  was  his  Nephew,  was  with  a  great

Armie  of  men  of  warre,  by  commandement  of  his  Uncle,

igainst  the  Hand  and  Citie  of  Cays. Newes  were  brought  Cays.

him  how  his  Uncle  was  dead,  and  how  the  Goazil  had

made  himselfe  King ; wherefore  hee  raised  presently  the

siege  from  against  Cays,  and  came  with  all  the  men  he  had

to  Ormuz :  and  assoone  as  he  came  he  was  received  of  all

yith  great  contentments  and  feasts,  for  they  were  very  sorry

:o  have  for  their  King  a  man  that  was  not  of  the  bloud

royall,  wherefore  with  great  feasts  they  tooke  the  Kings

Nephew  for  their  King. Which  commanded presently

:o  behead  the  Goazill  which  had  made  himselfe  King,  and

ill  his  associates  and  allies.

After  that  the  direct  line  was  broken  in  the  succession  of
:he  Kingdome,  there  was  no  such  good  government  in
:he  Kingdome, neither  did  the  things  thereof  prosper,
out  went  rather  to  decay  and  diminution,  whereby  there
ras  not  already  so  much  resistance  against  their  adver-
saries, the  warres  of  the  neighbour  Kings  increasing,  the
fCing  of  Chreman  chanced  to  come,  which  is  within  the  Creman  or
and  of  Persia,  with  a  great  armie, and  very  puissant  ^nerman-
igainst  Hormuz,  for  to  destroy  it. The  King  Cabadim
vhich  reigned  at  that  time  in  Hormuz, not  daring  to
ibide  the  encounter  and  power  of  the  King  of  Chreman,
:mbarked  himselfe  with  all  the  people  hee  could,  and  the
3ountrey  forsaken,  withdrew  himselfe  to  the  Hand  that
s  called  Quexome,  which  is  neere  the  Hand  of  Ormuz.  /.  Quexome,
Vnd  being  in  it  a  few  daies,  and  thinking  he  was  not  safe  or  Ktshme-
n  it,  being  somewhat  too  bigge,  and  in  it  he  could  not
veil  defend  himselfe,  he  passed  then  with  his  people  to
he  Hand  which  now  is  called  Hormuz,  because  it  was

321

A.D.

l622.

/.  Ormus
before  called
Jarum,
described.

A  place  and
fruit  so  called.

Why  J  arum
was  called
Ormuz.

Cays.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

closer,  holding  that  in  it  he  might  defend  himselfe  from
whatsoever  enemies.  This  Hand  was  before  desert,  and
had  no  more  but  a  few  poore  Fishermen,  and  they  called
it  Jarum,  which  is  to  say  a  Wood.  For  as  the  Iland  is
almost  all  of  Salt,  and  the  grounds  almost  all  saltish,
because  some  Rivers  that  run  through  it,  which  come
from  a  Mountaine  that  is  in  the  middest  of  it,  are  of  the
salt  water,  and  by  the  sides  of  the  water  lieth  the  Salt
white  as  Snow,  and  hee  that  is  to  passe  the  River  must
step  over  the  Salt.  And  the  stones  of  the  hill  in  some
places  are  salt,  which  the  shippes  doe  carrie  for  balast  unto
India.  Notwithstanding  about  the  Iland  there  grow  some
very  thin  Woods  and  Trees  like  Apple  trees  of  Anafega,
which  beare  a  Fruite  that  the  Portugals  doe  call  small
Apples,  like  the  Apples  of  Anafega,  which  doe  not  eate
well,  for  they  are  sustained  and  live  by  the  raine  water.
So  that  because  the  Iland  is  barren,  and  beareth  nothing
but  that  which  I  said :  because  it  is  so  salt,  they  call  it
Jarum.  Also  because  it  was  not  inhabited,  it  was  in  times
past  smaller  and  closer  then  now  it  is,  as  even  to  this  day,
the  Inhabitants  doe  shew  the  places  where  the  Sea  did
reach.  The  King  Cabadin  landing  now  in  this  Iland,  and;
determining  to  settle  himselfe  in  it,  began  to  build  houses
for  himselfe  and  his  to  inhabit.  They  remedied  them-
selves with  that  which  they  went  to  seeke  in  the  Countries
round  about.  And  also  because  the  King  of  Cremar
returned  to  his  owne  Countrey,  they  went  from  thence
to  maintaine  the  places  which  before  they  did  possesse.
cultivating  them.  And  because  the  Citie  built  in  the
Iland  of  Jarum  prospered,  they  made  it  the  head  of  theii
Kingdome.  Those  which  succeeded  them  named  v
Hormuz,  which  remaineth  to  this  day,  which  was  thfi
name  of  the  principall  Citie  which  they  had  on  the  firme
land,  that  the  King  of  Geman  destroyed  and  arruinated.
It  is  to  be  noted  that  this  straight  of  Harmuz,  some
leagues  within  from  Ormuz,  is  an  Iland  called  Cays ;  ir
the  which  was  built  in  times  past  a  very  rich  and  nobL
Citie,  whereof  at  this  day  there  is  a  remembrance  amon[

322

RELATIONS OF ORMUZ  a.d.

1622.

them  of  the  Country,  and  now  the  Hand  is  desart,  in  the
which  appeare  the  memory  of  the  old  buildings  that  were
in  it.  This  Hand  and  Citie  was  very  rich,  populous,  and
very  prosperous,  because  of  the  great  resort  of  Ships  that
resorted  from  all  parts  of  India,  with  great  riches  and  great
store  of  goods,  and  for  the  great  concourse  of  people  that
from  Persia  and  Arabia  come  to  it  to  seeke  such  goods  as  [II.  x.  1787.]
came  thither  from  India,  bringing  also  very  rich  mer-
chandise, in  change  of  the  which  or  for  mony  which  they
made  of  them  they  bought  those  that  from  India  came
thither.  In  sort  that  all  the  riches  which  now  Hormuz
hath,  &  all  the  traffick  then  the  Hand  of  Cays  had,  that
which  now  is  called  Hormuz,  being  as  I  have  said
unhabited.

The  King  of  Hormuz  seeing  the  evils  that  had  befallen  The  Author
to  him  by  meanes  of  the  Goazil  of  Cays  (which  had  here  relateth
provoked  the  King:  of  Xiras  against  him)  he  went  against  ffe  wars  ,

•  4 • • <  •  • betwixt  the

him  with  a  great  Armie,  and  besieging  him  some  daies,  ^\nzofxiras

and  not  being  able  to  subdue  him,  he  returned  to  Hormuz,  \n  behalfe  of '

because  winter  came  on : and  the  next  yeere  he  went  Cays  against

against  it,  and  tooke  and  sacked  it,  and  left  in  it  a  Goazill  Ormuzswhich

made  with  his  owne  hand,  with  great  store  of  people. -^

The  Goazill  overcome  had  meanes  to  escape,  and  he  fled

in  a  Terrada  to  the  Hand  of  Baren  :  and  made  him  strong  Hand  Baren.

againe  in  Baren,  with  the  favour  of  the  Goazill  of  Baren,

and  returned  againe  against  Cays,  and  craftily  comming

to  a  parley  with  the  Goazil  which  the  King  of  Hormuz

had  left  there  for  safegard  of  the  Citie,  he  tooke  him  and

pulled  out  both  his  eyes,  and  possest  him  againe  of  the

Citie.

But Pacaturunxa succeeding in the Kingdome of  Pachaturunxa
Hormuz  (which  was  the  Author  of  this  Chronicle,  and  King  fcf
reigned about 300. yeeres agoe, little more or lesse)  author-
brought  it  under  his  subjection,  and  from  thence  forward
it  remained  subject  to  the  Kingdome  of  Hormuz. And
presently  this  Pachaturunxa  subdued  the  Hand  of  Baren,
in  punishment  for  the  favour  that  hee  gave  to  the  Goazil
of  Cays :  and  so  the  Kings  of  Hormuz  were  prosperous,

323

A.D.

l622.

Observations
of  the
Dominican
Translator.
Riches  of
Ormus.

The  World  a
ring,  and
Ormus  the
gem.

Custome  house
a  silver
chanel.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

so  that  they  subdued  all  the  Hands  that  were  in  all  the
straight  and  all  the  Countrie  along  the  coast  of  Arabia
unto  Lassa  and  CatifFa,  and  others  also  on  the  side  of
Persia,  whereby  it  was  made  a  very  great  Kingdome  and  a
rich  and  very  prosperous :  chiefly  that  all  the  traffick  of
Cays  was  passed  to  the  Hand,  which  now  is  called
Hormuz :  whereby  Cays  was  utterly  lost,  as  well  in  her
buildings  as  in  her  riches,  and  now  it  is  altogether
destroyed  and  unhabited,  having  beene  the  principall  Hand
in  all  those  parts.  And  Hormuz  being  a  barren  and
unhabited  Hand,  and  a  Mountaine  of  Salt,  is  among  the
richest  Countries  of  the  India  one  of  the  richest,  for  the
many  and  great  merchandize  that  come  to  it  from  all
places  of  India,  and  from  all  Arabia,  and  from  all  Persia,
even  of  the  Mogores,  and  from  Russia  and  Europe  I  saw
Merchants  in  it,  and  from  Venice.  And  so  the  Inhabiters
of  Hormuz  doe  say,  that  all  the  world  is  a  ring,  and
Hormuz  is  the  stone  of  it.  Whereby  it  is  commonly
said,  that  the  Custome-house  of  Hormuz  is  a  channell  of
Silver  which  alwaies  runneth.  The  last  yeere  that  I  was
in  Hormuz,  having  continued  there  three  yeeres,  the
Officers  affirmed  to  mee  that  the  Custome-house  did  yeeld
150000.  Pardaos  to  the  King  of  Portugall,  besides  that
which  is  presumed  the  Moores  and  the  Goazill  did  steale,
which  are  Officers  of  the  Custome-house.  And  although
this  Hand  yeeldeth  no  fruit,  neither  hath  water  nor
victualls,  yet  it  hath  great  abundance  of  flesh,  bread,  rice,
and  great  store  of  fish,  and  many  and  good  fruits,  whereof
it  is  provided  from  many  places,  especially  from  Persia,  &c.

M.  Pindar
had  bin  before
in  East  Indies,
with  those
ships  which  the
Company  there

§.  11.

Relation  of  Ormuz  businesse  by  Master  W.  Pinder.

Briefe  of  some  passages  and  accidents  of  a  Voyage
to  the  East  Indie  in  the  London,  Captaine  Andrei
Shilling  Commander  of  her,  and  three  other  Ship?
in the Company, namely the Hart, wherein Mastei
Richard Blith was Viceadmirall, the Roe Bucke Ren

324

Relations
following.

RELATIONS OF ORMUZ  a.d.

1621.

admirall, Master Richard Swan Master of her, and  tooke. He

Christopher  Browne  Master  of  the  Egell,  being  the  fourth  »f»^/»

Ship,  the  five  and  twentieth  of  March  1620. These  foure  ^usi„es  tas  j

Ships  set  saile  from  the  Downes  the  foure  and  twentieth  remember)

of  Aprill. All  foure  Ships  got  into  Saldany  Bay,  whose  Master  of  the

latitude  is  33.  degrees  57.  minutes,  and  29.  degrees,  48.  If1*0*-

minutes,  to  the  Easterne  of  the  Lizart  in  Cornwall,  and  it ls  Pro™t5e

11  •  tit  1  • •  t»i as  a  "retace

hath 2. degrees 27. minutes Westerly variation. Ihe  to  the  larger

same  day  arived  Captaine  Fitz-Harbord  with  the  Exchange  Ormusian
and  Unitie,  who  came  from  England  in  our  Company  with
three  Ships  under  his  command,  and  left  our  company
the  fourth  of  Aprill :  there  was  in  the  Bay  an  English
Ship  that  came  from  Surat,  named  the  Lyon,  Captaine
Widdall  in  her :  also  there  were  ten  Dutch  Ships,  bound
for  Jaccatra.

The  thirtieth  of  June  our  Ships  were  watered,  being
the  chiefe  cause  of  putting  into  that  Bay,  but  formerly
there  hath  bin  plenty  of  Oxen  and  Sheepe,  to  bin  bought
for  small  value,  but  by  some  abuse  to  the  people,  there  is
nothing  to  be  had,  except  water :  by  some  neglect,  our
continuance  was  untill  the  25.  of  July,  with  much  hassard
and  prejudice  to  our  passage:  so  plying  for  Surat,  with
purpose  to  have  gone  within  the  Iland  of  S.  Lawrence,
we  were  forst  to  goe  without  the  Iland,  being  the  first
passage  of  any  English  without,  to  the  cost  of  India :  and
the  eight  of  October  wee  came  to  sight  of  certaine  Hands,
in  latitude  tenne  degrees  fiftie  one  minutes  of  North,  and
longitude  from  the  Cape  of  Good  hope,  Easterly  fiftie  five
degrees  58.  minutes,  and  variation  thirteene  degrees  fiftie
foure  minutes  Westerly.  These  Hands  affords  good
reliefe,  and  are  worth  discovery,  their  owne  Inhabitants
report.  Fom  these  lies  we  ran  with  the  coast  of  Indie,
and  first  sight  thereof  was  Mount  Delin,  which  is  the
highest  hill  in  India,  our  latitude  at  sight  of  it  was  11.
degrees  47.  minutes,  longitude  56.  degrees  51.  minutes,
variation  15  degrees  43.  minutes,  the  tenth  of  October.  [II.  x.  1788.]
The  Coast  of  India  is  bold  to  runne  with  all  dangers,
sheweth  it  selfe  from  Cape  Commeren,  you  may  bee  bold

325

A»  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1 62 1.

to  runne  all  the  Coast  to  Diu  head  in  tenne  fathom  the
darkest  night  that  may  bee,  and  good  anchoring  off,  to
thirtie  or  fortie  fathome  depth  from  the  Coast ;  and
from  September  untill  Februarie,  you  may  saile  to  and
fro  on  that  Coast,  having  the  Land  wind  turnes  at  night,
and  Sea  wind  turnes  at  day,  proved  by  many  trials.  The
thirteenth  of  October,  the  Ship  anchored  in  twelve
fathoms,  five  leagues  from  the  Coast,  in  the  latitude  13.
degrees  Northerly,  14.  minutes,  longitude  58.  degrees
Easterly,  12.  min.  from  Cape  Bonasperanca  the  sixteenth,
certaine  Boats  brought  us  fish  with  some  small  store  of
fruit,  and  hence  from  the  shoare  riding  then  in  the
latitude,  13.  degrees  33.  minutes,  and  14.  degrees  44.
variation  so  plying  toward  Surat :  the  seven  and  twentieth
we  anchored  some  seven  mile  and  a  halfe  from  Dabull,  in
eight  fathome  and  a  halfe  depth,  the  Towne  bearing  East
by  North,  by  the  Compasse.  From,  this  place  we  had
good  provision  for  our  men,  who  were  most  sickly,  but
God  restored  health  in  short  time  to  them,  the  latitude  of
it  is  17.  degrees  Northerly,  38.  minutes  Easterly.  From
Dabul,  on  the  third  of  November  wee  plied  for  Surat,  and
on  the  sixth,  in  latitude  19.  degrees  51.  minutes,
Capt.  Shilling  sent  the  Hart  and  Egell  toward  Persia,
for  Cape  Jasquis  being  so  appointed  by  the  worshipfull
Company.  The  ninth,  the  London  and  Row  Buck  arrived
at  the  Port  of  Swally  neere  Surat,  whose  latitude  is  21.
degrees  Northerly  16.  minutes;  there  understood  we  that
the  Portugall  lay  with  a  Fleet  of  Ships  to  surprise  those
that  should  come  to  Jasques  in  the  Persian  Gulfe,  which
to  prevent  we  made  all  the  hast  that  might  be  to  strengthen
our  friends,  and  prevent  their  plot,  and  on  the  one  and
Fight  with  the  twentieth  of  November,  wee  surprised  one  of  their  Ships
Portugalls.  Qf  some  two  hundred  and  fiftie  tun,  who  came  from
Arabia ;  this  Ship  wee  manned  landing  all  the  Portugalls,
and  plied  for  Jasques,  and  on  the  fifth  of  December,  we
met  the  Hart  and  Egell  forced  from  Jasques  by  the
Portugall,  and  had  turned  off  a  Ship  of  theirs  the  which
they  tooke  in  their  passage. Our  forces  united  wee  made

326

RELATIONS OF ORMUZ  a.d.

i  62  i.

hast  to  our  Port,  the  which  the  fifteenth  of  December  wee
had  sight  of,  and  also  of  the  Portugall  Fleet,  who  assaulted
us  the  seventeenth,  but  let  them  boast  their  entertainment,
praise  to  the  Lord  he  fought  for  us,  and  if  the  firing  of  a
Ship,  that  should  have  fired  them  had  taken  effect,  their
glorious  pride  had  beene  quailed  that  day.  Yet  were  we
Commanders  under  God  of  the  Rood,  while  hee  sent  to
Ormus  to  renew  his  forces,  and  on  the  twentieth  came
towards  us,  and  then  thought  by  often  waying  and  tiring
our  men,  being  not  accustomed  to  those  hot  parts  to  bee
master  of  us ;  but  on  the  eight  and  twentieth  hee  was
taught  a  better  lesson,  with  Gods  guard,  and  use  of  our
Powder  and  Shot :  which  had  it  not  failed  us,  they  had
scarce  any  of  them  troubled  Englishmen  more  ;  but  I
referre  to  them  how  they  sped.  Our  Capt.  Andrew
Shilling  received  a  mortall  wound,  the  sixth  shot  that  past
this  eight  and  twentieth,  yet  was  valiant  and  spake
cheerefull,  with  thankefulnesse  to  God  the  last  minute  of
his  life,  which  ended  the  sixth  of  Januarie.  Hee  was
buried  the  ninth,  and  on  the  fourteenth  we  set  saile  for
Surat  from  Jasques,  whose  latitude  is  twentie  five  degrees
Northerly,  twentie  foure  minutes,  and  eleven  degrees
twentie  minutes  Northerly  to  the  Wester  of  Damans
meridian,  some  18.  degrees  40.  minutes  variation.  On
the  seven  and  twentieth  of  Januarie,  wee  tooke  a
Portugall  in  our  returne,  which  on  the  first  of  Februarie
we  brought  to  Swalle,  our  Port  of  Surrat  and  rebuilt  her,
sending  the  Portugalls  to  their  homes.  And  on  the  fifth
of  Aprill,  1 62 1.  having  laden  the  Hart  and  Row  Buck  to
goe  for  England  with  foure  saile,  under  the  command  of
Captaine  Blith  wee  put  to  Sea,  the  time  being  to  late  for
the  laden  Shippes  to  goe  for  England,  it  was  thought  fit
to  goe  for  the  Red  Sea,  there  to  stay  untill  the  next  season,
in  which  passage  we  met  a  Portugall  Ship  of  two  hundred
and  fiftie  tunne  laden  with  Rice  and  Cordige  of  bast,  for
to  supply  those  wee  formerly  fought  with.  Also  the
seventh  of  May  we  tooke  another  of  one  hundred  tunne.
With  these  two  prizes  the  London  and  Andrew  went  for

327

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1621.

Cape  Rosselgate,  and  the  Hart  and  Row  buck  went  for
Mercera.  Being  neither  of  us  able  to  get  into  the  Red
Sea,  the  times  so  farre  past,  the  Ships  seperated.  As  soone
as  the  London  came  to  Zor,  where  formerly  I  had  been,
there  we  made  hast  to  provide  us  water,  and  put  many
Portugals  on  shore,  many  other  with  their  Moores  made
their  escape.

Then  plied  we  for  Tewe,  where  the  Arabs  used  us
courteously,  so  that  from  the  seventh  of  June  to  the
ninth,  wee  had  filled  ninetie  tunne  of  water :  on  the
fourteenth  came  order  from  Muscat  to  the  Arabs,  to  with-
stand our  watering ;  with  the  Portugalls  aide  they  did
their  best,  some  seven  or  eight  hundred  of  them  with
small  Shot  and  Bow,  and  Arrowes,  but  the  Lord  fought
our  battell,  so  that  but  one  of  our  men  were  lost,  yet
landed  we  daily  with  Brasse,  Base,  and  small  Shot,  untill
all  our  Ships  were  watered,  it  standeth  in  the  latitude  22.
degrees  Northerly  fiftie  minutes,  and  some  twelve  leagues
within  Cape  Rosselgate,  and  hath  twentie  degrees  five
minutes  variation,  the  coast  bold  from  Rosselgate  to  it.
On  the  two  and  twentieth  of  June,  setting  saile  from
thence  for  Zor,  where  wee  made  fall  of  the  Rice  taken,
and  after  broke  and  burned  the  Ship  by  reason  of  her
wants,  to  bring  provision  of  victual!  for  our  men,  and
there  daily  watering  on  our  guard,  having  newes  over
Land  from  the  Hart  and  Row  buck,  to  whom  was  returned
answere,  that  they  should  meet  us  at  a  brave  Harbour
some  league  within  Rosselgate,  it  hath  latitude  22.  degrees
Northerly  32.  minutes,  being  by  the  chiefest  of  our  Fleet
called  Londons  Hoope,  (it  hath  Wood  and  Water  on  the
West  side  of  the  Bay,  also  multitude  of  fish)  the  eight  of
August  the  Hart  &  Row  buck  came  to  us,  and  on  the
[II.  x.  1789.]  fifteenth,  we  all  set  saile  for  India  to  stop  the  Ports  for
entry  of  certaine  Ships,  their  Prince  having  much
wronged  our  Masters,  promising  them  free  passage
through  his  Countrey  with  their  goods,  but  when  it  came
within  it,  he  presently  made  bootie  of  it  with  his  Souldiers ;
so  Captaine  Blith  with  the  London  and  Primrose,  one  of

328

RELATIONS OF ORMUZ  ad.

1621.

tie prizes formerly taken lay before the Harbour of

)abull,  and  Master  Keridge  in  the  Hart,  Master  Browne

a  the  Roe  Bucke,  my  selfe  in  the  Andrew,  so  named,

>eing  the  first  Prize  taken  after  the  Death  of  Captaine

•hilling,  and  with  her  the  other  were  taken. These  three

ast specified, lay before Chaul, from the thirtieth of

August,  untill  the  thirtieth  of  September,  on  which  Night

was  sent  to  goe  for  Surat  in  the  Andrew,  by  order  from

"aptaine  Blith,  and  to  advertise  Master  Thomas  Rastell  of

>ur  Passage  he  being  Chiefe  in  the  Factorie,  and  in  my

>assage  for  Surrat, I  surprised  a  Ship  of  that  Princes,

yhich  had  formerly  wronged  our  Masters,  and  carried  her

0  Surrat  surrendring  her  to  the  chiefe  Factor :  there  found

riding  Captaine  Weddall  in  the  Jonas,  Master  Wood-

ocke  in  the  Whale,  Master  Stephenson  in  the  Dolphin,

Vlaster  Beverson  in  the  Lyon,  Master  Johnson  in  the  Rose,

Vlaster  Davis  in  the  Richard,  a  Pinnesse  who  had  taken  a

>rize  from  the  Portugals  the  twentieth  of  October. The

^ondon,  Hart,  Roe  Bucke,  and  Primrose,  came  to  Swalle

vith  a  Prize  by  them  taken. We  continued  there  till  the

ixe  and  twentieth  of  November,  at  which  time  with  nine

;ayle  of  Ships  for  Persia,  and  the  Hart  and  Egell  for

ingland. The  nine  that  went  for  Persia  were  under  the

Command  of  Captaine  Blith,  and  Captaine  Weddall,  and

m  the three and twentieth of  December we came to

3ustacke,  some  seven  and  twenty  leagues  from  Jasquis,

md  lyeth  Latitude  26.  degrees,  40  minutes. Ormus  in

iight  of  it  bearing  West  Northwest,  by  a  Meridian  Com-

3asse some  ten  leagues  from  it. Our  Persian Factors

idvertised  us  that  after  our  Fight  the  former  yeare,  the

3hieftaine of the Portugals had erected a Castle on  Kishme

Kishme,  an  He  in  sight  of  Ormus,  the  which  the  Persian Castle.

lad  layne  siege  unto  some  seven  or  eight  moneths,  and

ost  some eight or nine thousand men in siege of  it.

Wherefore  he  required  our  ayde  in  these  Warres  if  we  English  forced

would  have  our  Masters  goods  from  his  Countrey,  telling  t0  he¥e  the

as  it  was  our  Enemy  as  well  as  his  ;  therefore  if  wee  would  Peman-

lave  our  Masters  goods  or  Trade  with  him,  we  must

329

A.D.
I  62  I.

Kishme
yeelded.

Master  Baffin
slaine :  a
Mathema-
tician and
Mariner,  to
zvhom  our
Northeme  £ff
Northwestern
Voyages  are
muchindebted.

Ormus
besieged.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

ayde  him,  and  then  we  should  have  the  halfe  bootie  gotten
by  the  Victorie,  also  great  Priviledges  for  the  future  good
of  our  Masters.  On  these  tearmes  we  Condiscended  and
went  for  Kishme  on  the  nineteenth  of  January  from
Custacke,  and  the  three  and  twentieth  Besieged  it  by  Sea,
and  the  Persian  by  Land  with  some  of  our  ayde,  so  that  onl
the  nine  &  twentieth  of  January  they  came  to  Parley,  and
it  was  Concluded  that  they  should  part  with  Bag  and!
Baggage  ;  provided,  they  went  not  for  Ormus,  onely  their
Commander  to  remaine  as  pledge.  There  were  two  of
our  people  slaine  at  this  service,  the  one  at  the  surrender
namely  Master  Baffin,  there  were  some  one  thousand  of
all  sorts  in  this  Castle,  and  the  Portugals  with  some
Moores  were  sent  away,  but  the  Persian  required  certaine
Moores  which  had  revolted  from  him  as  hee  pretended.
So  those  being  delivered  him,  though  he  had  formerly
promised  them  mercy,  yet  he  put  them  all  to  death.  This
Castle  had  in  it  17.  Pieces  of  Ordnance,  one  Brasse  Cannon
Pedro,  two  Brasse  Culvering,  2.  Iron  Demiculvering,  4.1
Brasse  Sackers,  2.  Iron  Minion,  6.  Iron  Falken,  therein
left  to  English-men,  to  hold  possession  with  the  Persian
in  the  behalfe  of  the  English  part.

On  the  fourth  of  February,  we  all  set  sayle  for  Com-
broon,  which  is  on  the  mayne  of  Persia  some  three  leagues!
within  Ormus.  Then  was  sent  the  Portugall  Commandei'
of  the  aforesaid  Castle  by  Master  Beversam  in  the  Lyor
for  Surrat,  also  Master  Johnson  in  the  Rose,  Master  Davis
in  the  Richard,  these  went  for  Surrat,  and  the  London
Jonas,  Whale,  Dolphin  with  two  Prizes,  each  some  twe
hundred  and  fiftie  or  neere,  these  sixe  stayed  to  waft  the
Persian,  for  his  securer  landing  on  Ormus.  On  the  nintl
of  February  he  landed,  and  with  small  losse  got  possessior
of  the  Towne,  for  the  Portugals  retired  to  their  Castle
and  then  the  Persian  began  presently  to  intrench,  anc
gathered  daily  nearer  the  Castle,  and  with  our  helpes  madt
Bulwarks  for  Ordnance,  and  Sconces  for  securing  his  men
With  our  Ordnance  we  galled  their  Ships,  forcing  then
to hale  close  under  the Castle, and  on the 24th  witl

330

RELATIONS OF ORMVZ  a.d.

1622.

foure  of  our  Boats  fired  one  of  their  Gallions,  the  second

of  March  sunke  another,  the  17th  of  March  there  was

made  a  Breach  by  blowing  up  part  of  the  Castle  wall,  so

the  Persian  sought  to  enter  but  repulsed  with  losse  and

hurt  of  most  of  his  best  Souldiers. The  19th  one  Gallion

more  sunke,  and  on  the  20th  and  23rd  two  other  Gallions

sunke. The  27th  the  Portugals  desired  parley,  the  which 1622.

they  had  but  no  Conclusion,  so  that  the  second  of  Aprill

another  breach  was  made  by  blowing  up  the  wall  neere  the

first,  and  the  14th  another  Flanker  blowne  up. Also  the

1 8  th  another  breach,  on  which  the  Persian  made  all  his

Forces  to  assault,  and  possest  some  part  of  the  Castle.

Then  on  the  21st  the  Portugals  being  bestraited,  proferred

by  Parley  to  deliver  the  Castle  to  the  English,  if  they

would  save  their  lives,  the  which  was  granted  &  performed,

and  in  the  two  ships  of  250.  Tunnes  they  were  shipt  some

2400.  of  them,  and  some  200.  left  untill  we  had  procured

shipping  for  their  transport,  which  was  performed. The

22nd  being  possest  of  the  Castle,  there  were  in  it 53. Ordnance  in

Pieces  of  Ordnance  mounted,  4.  Brasse  Cannon,  6.  Brasse  the  Castle.

Demicannon,  16.  Cannon  Pedro  of  Brasse,  9  Brasse  whole

Culvering,  2.  Demiculvering,  3.  Iron  Demiculvering,  10.

brasse  Basses,  one  Iron  Minion, 1.  whole  Culvering  of

Iron,  and 1. Iron  Cannon  Pedro; also  there  were  92.

Brasse  pieces  of  Ordnance  more  unmounted,  &  7.  Brasse

Bastels  which  they  had  landed  out  of  their  ships  that  we

sunke. This Castle and Ordnance were left with the

Persian,  onely 10.  Pieces  of  the  92.  on  the  former,  we

tooke  in  our  ships  to  make  good  what  we  had  broken  and  [II.  x.  1790.

spoyled  out  of  our  ships  in  their  Service. I  judge  the

Latitude  27. degrees  2.  minutes,  &  Variation 16.  deg.

34.  min. So  the  first  of  September  we  left  the  Port,  and

on  the  24. th  arrived  at  Swalle,  where  we  in  the  London

laded,  and  so  did  the  Jonas  &  Lyon  for  England ; the

time  of  our  stay  there  was  untill  the  30-th  of  December, 1622.

there  heard  we  of  the  sinking  of  three  Caracks  by  the

English  and  Dutch  of  the  Port  of  Mosambique.

[§.  ni.

33 1

A.D.
l622.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

§.  III.

Part  of  a  Letter  written  to  Sir  John  Wostenholme,
by  T.  Wilson  Chyrurgion  ;  contayning  many*
particulars  of  the  Ormus  warre  and  cause!
thereof;  as  also  of  the  most  admirable  taking
of  a  Great  Portugal  Ship  well  manned,  by  a
small  English Pinnesse.

Right  Worshipfull:

RfBHY  dutie  remembred  unto  you  Sir,  I  am  glad  to  heare
|^&a of your good health and welfare, and shall be
heartily  glad  to  see  you  and  all  yours,  the  which

I  hope  will  be  very  shortly. Sir,  I  am  very  much  bound
unto  you,  that  I  know  not  how  I  shall  make  requitall  for
the  same,  in  that  in  my  absence  you  have  shewed  unto
me  that  kindnesses  for  it  which  as  at  all  other  times  I  have
found  you  the  best  friend  that  I  have  in  the  world,  I  doe,
give  you  a  thousand  thankes,  and  will  by  Gods  helpe
make  part  requitall  for  the  same,  and  I  shall  be  ready  at
all  times  to  doe  any  thing  for  you  that  in  me  lyeth,  to  the
uttermost  of  my  power  or  to  any  of  yours. I  would  have
writ  unto  you  concerning  our  Voyage,  but  I  cannot  be!
so  briefe  as  to  send  it  in  a  Letter,  but  I  make  no  doubt!
but  you  will  heare  more  of  the  passages  thereof,  then  I
can  certifie  or  at  least  wise  have  heard  alreadie,  for  there
were  Letters  sent  out  of  Persia  over  land  to  the  Company,
concerning  the  taking  of  Kishme  Castle  and  the  Citie  of1
Ormus  with  the  Castle,  with  the  spoyling  of  five  Ships  and;
one  great  Galley,  one  ship  burned  and  the  rest  sunke,  the
which  I  pray  God  may  stand  to  the  good  liking  of  you  all,
for  we  had  a  terrible  time  in  Ormus,  having  pestilentiall
Fevers  with sodaine deaths, and among the Portugals
famine,  and  that  terrible  contagious  heat  that  in  my  dayes
I  never  felt  the  like,  and  such  sents  of  Dead  bodies  lying
in  the  streets  without  heads  being  unburned,  and  Cats  &
Dogs  eating  them,  within  Oast  end  was  never  the  like

332

RELATIONS OF ORMUZ

seene,  with  infinite  many  Flies,  and  that  the  Persians
would  not  let  the  dead  bodies  be  buried.  We  had  such
mortalitie  among  our  men,  that  we  thought  we  should
have  perished,  all  the  ships  before  mentioned  were  they
which  fought  with  Captaine  Shilling,  we  tooke  their
principall  Commander  prisoner,  whose  name  was  Ruy
Frera  with  his  Viceadmirall.  This  Ruy  Frera  did  proffer
unto  our  Captaine  that  if  he  would  let  him  goe,  hee  would
give  him  a  thousand  pound,  although  he  had  no  money
of  his  owne,  yet  he  would  procure  it  of  the  Clergie  men,
the  which  our  Captaine  refused,  and  sent  him  to  Surrat
in  the  Lyon  to  the  President,  giving  them  strait  command
of  his  safe  looking  to.  And  when  he  came  to  Surrat,  he
in  the  Night  made  his  escape  with  the  Ship-boat  for  want
of  the  better  Watch  keeping.  He  was  a  proper  tall
Gentleman,  swarthie  of  colour,  sterne  of  Countenance,
few  of  words,  and  of  an  excellent  spirit,  he  had  lived  here
in  India  many  yeares.  Hee  got  Commission  of  their  King
for  three  severall  Designes,  the  first  was  to  have  sufficient
Ships  and  Men  with  Munition,  for  the  rooting  out  of  the
English  out  of  India,  the  which  he  made  no  question
to  performe,  and  did  begin  with  Captaine  Shillings  Fleet :
but  God  bee  thanked  therein  he  fayled  as  it  fell  out  to  his
great  griefe  and  all  our  comforts.  The  second  thing  that
he  was  to  performe,  was  to  erect  a  Castle  upon  the  Hand
of  Kishme,  the  which  he  did  :  for  when  we  came  thither  he
had  scarce  furnisht  it.  Hee  brought  the  frame  thereof
ready  made  in  his  Ships  and  got  it  a  shore  with  great
resistance,  but  so  many  as  would  not  yeeld  unto  him,  hee
put  to  the  Sword,  and  so  many  as  would  serve  him  he
allowed  meanes.  Now  the  place  where  this  Castle  was  to
be  erected,  was  about  certaine  Wels  of  fresh  water  the
which  was  for  the  use  of  Ormus,  because  upon  that  Hand
there  was  none.  Now  for  the  building  of  this  Castle  they
pulled  downe  a  fine  Towne  with  Churches  and  Tombes,
onely  for  the  Stones,  some  of  which  he  burned  and  made
Lime,  and  with  the  other  he  made  the  Castle  wall  of  a
great height and thicknesse, with halfe Moones and

333

A.D.

l622.

Three-fold
Commission.

Kishme  Castle
described,
occasion  of  the
warre.

Natives  cause
of  Indignation.

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1622.

Flankers  very  artificially,  which in  five  moneths  and  a|
halfe  hee  had  finished  : a  thing  wonderfull  in  so  short  al
time  to  be  effected,  and  with  a  great  deepe  drie  Moat
round  about. He  had  erected  on  the  Castle  12.  Pieces:
of  great  Ordnance,  to  the  great  annoyance  of  the  Persian
Armie,  which  had  almost  beleaguered  it  round ; onely  a!
small  passage  which  they  had  towards  the  Sea,  on  either
side  of  it  beset  with  Pallesadoes  for  the  better  going  to;
their Boates  and Frigots  in safetie, though scarse  able!
without  great  perill. Hee  meant  to  take  the  whole  Hand
of  Kishme  in  their  owne  hands,  being  a  very  fruitfull  place,;
abounding  with  all  manner  of  Fruits,  Beasts,  and  fresh
Water, whereof  the Hand  of  Ormus  hath  none. The
Portugals  when  they  were  first  scituated  in  Ormus,  did!
agree  with  the  King  of  the  Sea-coast  upon  the  mayne,
which  was  a  Kingdome  of  it  selfe,  and  since  hath  beene
Conquered  of  the  Persians  to  pay  to  the  aforesaid  King
certaine  tributes  or  customes  upon  every  head  of  Cattell,|
[II.  x.i  791.]  pots  of  Water  and  such  like,  which  did  yeerely  amount
unto  a  great  summe  of  money,  which  the  Portugals  have
not  payed  a  long  time,  at  least  this  thirtie  yeares : and|
having  been  demanded it, since the  English  hath  hadj
trade  heere  in  Persia,  they  have  refused  to  pay  the  same.
Moreover  they  have  gotten  into  their  possession  great
quantitie  of  Silke,  which  they  have  refused  to  pay  also.
For  that  reason  the  Persians  would  not  let  the  Portugals!
have  Cattell  nor  refreshing  from  the  mayne,  (for  it  was
Death unto them that sold them any) which was  the)
reason  of  building  the  Castle  upon  the  Hand  of  Kishme.1
Now  the  Portugals  policie  thought  it  was  good  to  have
two  strings  to  his  bow,  as  this  was  one ; the  other  wasi
this  at  Muskat,  a  certaine  place  which  the  Portugals  have
upon  Arabia. They  made  a  great  Feast  and  invited  the
King  of  Arabia  unto  the  feast,  and  violently  brought  him
away  unto  Ormus,  and  there  made  him  King  of  the  Hand,
and  allowed  him  certaine  Customes  yeerely  for  his  main-
tenance. By this meanes they had Cattell  and  Water
sufficient  in  great  quantities,  brought  thither  in  Arabian

334

RELATIONS OF ORMUZ  ad.

1622.

Boates,  with  Fruits,  Fish  and  all  other  things,  which  was
every  day  sold  in  the  Market  (by  report)  very  plentifully.
Likewise  the  Arabian  Boats  did  fetch  them  water  from
Kishme,  and  were  conducted  with  their  Gallies  and
Frigots  against  the  Persians.  The  King  of  Arabia  was
Prisoner  in  the  Castle  of  Ormus,  unto  the  Persian.  The
Portugals  in  these  parts  will  not  let  any  Commoditie  passe
to  and  againe  upon  the  Seas,  unlesse  it  be  first  brought
unto  Ormus,  and  there  to  be  Customed  upon  losse  thereof
being  taken  by  their  Gallies  or  Frigots,  whereof  they  have
heere  great  store  that  carrie  pieces  of  Ordnance  and  other
Munition :  they  trade  to  and  fro  in  them  and  so  are
become  Masters  of  the  Seas  in  these  parts.  The
Customes  of  Ormus  did  yeerly  amount  as  I  have  heard
reported  to  a  hundred  thousand  pounds,  besides  Rents
and  other  Duties  which  they  taxed  the  Inhabitants  with.
This  Towne  or  Citie  of  Ormus,  was  of  great  bignesse,
the  Houses  all  built  of  stone,  and  seemed  a  most  famous
thing  to  looke  upon  from  the  ships  with  Steeples  and
Towres :  they  had  faire  and  large  Churches  in  it,  strong
&  stately  Buildings ;  the  Castle  of  Ormus  was  the  fairest,
largest  and  strongest  that  ever  I  saw.  Towards  the
Towne  it  had  three  Walls  one  within  another,  and  well
furnished  with  great  Ordnance  of  Brasse,  as  Cannon,
Demicannon,  Cannon-Pedro,  whole  Culverings  and
Basiliskes  of  22.  foot  long.

Now  concerning  the  third  thing  which  was  about  the
fishing  for  Pearle,  he  had  but  little  leisure,  by  reason  of
these  turmoiles  (and  Warres  in  building  of  the  Castle  of
Kishme,  and  the  building  of  a  Wall  and  a  Moat  about
Ormus,  which  was  begun  in  severall  places)  he  had  burnt
up  all  the  Boates  both  of  the  Persians  and  Arabians,  by
the  reason  they  should  not  fish  for  Pearle,  and  burnt  all
the  fishing  Townes.  Now  they  that  had  any  Boats  were
forced  to  carrie  them  up  into  the  Countrey  to  hide  them
from  the  Portugals :  but  when  the  Persians  were  to  goe
over  for  Ormus,  the  Arabians  did  voluntary  (both  they
'&  their  Boats  to  the  quantitie  of  400.  Boats)  carrie  the

335

A.D.
l622.

Great  Ship
taken  by  a
small  Pin-
nesse,  having
but  two
Pieces.
Filps  or
Philips  chiefe
cause  of  her
taking.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Persian  souldiers  over  to  Ormus,  against  the  Portugals.
which  otherwaies  had  never  got  over ;  for  the  Arabian*
could  wish  all  the  Portugals  throats  cut  by  the  reason
of  their  great  hinderances  in  burning  of  their  Boats  and
Townes,  and  Slavery  which  they  daily  did  sustaine.

I  will  certifie  you  concerning  the  wonderfull  and  strange,
manner  of  the  Richards  taking  a  Portugall  ship  that  came
from  Bumbasse  ;  she  was  a  rich  Prize  laden  with  Elephant*
teeth,  Turtle  shels  in  Barrels,  with  Wax,  Sea-horse  teeth
and  a  certaine  Gumme,  the  which  I  make  no  doubt  but
you  have  heard  already ; the  chiefe  cause  of  her  taking
was  John  Filps,  who  bad  them  be  of  good  cheare  being
but  thirteene  Men  and  Boyes,  and  told  them  he  would
dismount  their  Piece  presently  (which  they  were  a  dis-
charging) the  which  he  did. Plying  the  two  Pieces,  il
was  his  fortune to  kill  the  chiefe Merchant, who  was:
going  to  encourage  his  men  to  Fight :  which  the  Gunner
perceiving,  traverssed  another  Piece  of  Ordnance  againslj
them  :  hee  was  no  sooner  espied  by  this  Filps,  but  he  made;
a  shot  at  the  Piece  but  mist  it ; the  shot  flew  betweene
the  Gunners  legs  as  he  was  going  to  give  fire ; hee  forth-
with threw  away  his  Linstocke  like  a  man  distract  and|
full  of  feare,  and  told  them  it  was  their  fortunes  to  be
taken. But  the  Richard  plied  still  both  her  Pieces,  and
comming  neerer  unto them, this  Filps stept  upon the
Forecastle  bidding  them  amaine,  which  they  presently  didi
and  lowed  all  her  sayles. So  they  called  unto  them  tc|
bring  aboord  their  Master,  Merchant,  Pilot,  and  Boat
swaine ; they  puld  up  their  Boat  and  did  it,  when  they
came  aboord  they  were  bound  and  put  into  hold. There
were  two  Merchants  in  this  Ship,  the  one  killed,  and  the
other  was  he  which  came  aboord,  who  confessed  that  the
Elephants  teeth  which  were  in  her  cost  6000.  pounds,  at
the  first  Penny  in  Bumbasse,  which  to  be  carried  from
Goa  to  Cambaia,  would  yeeld  at  the  least  18000.  pounds,
besides eight Barrels of  Turtle shels, which were the
Merchants  that  was  slaine,  and  that  hee  had  in  that  ship
of  his  owne  3000.  pounds  more  which  was  in  Wax,  Sea-

336

RELATIONS OF ORMUZ  a.d.

1622.

horse  teeth,  Gumme  and  Negroes.  They  sent  the
Boatswaine  for  the  rest  of  the  Portugals  who  brought
fourteene  more,  which  every  of  them  brought  their
Skreetaries  and  Keyes  and  presented  them  to  Mr.  Davis,
who  carefully  layd  them  up.  These  14.  Portugals
remained  in  the  Boat ;  they  thought  them  to  be  all  the  How  t
Portugals.  how  little  is

This  Filps  or  Phillips  went  aboord  with  three  Men  and  the  heart  of
three  Boyes. They  had  no  sooner  entred  the  Ship  and  Manp  m™ed
veered  the  Boat  a  sterne  with  the  Portugals,  but  the  Ship  ^Jdow  l/the
seemed  to  be  full  of  people : there  were  in  all  of  the  Divine  hand,
Portugals  seventie  five,  of  the  Negroes, Men,  Women  which  fits  one,
and  Children ninetie, likewise  fortie  Chaul  men  which  empties
were  their  Mariners,  which  strucke  such  an  amazement  moi  er  °J .
among  them  being  but  seven,  that  it  daunted  them  much.  pieaseth  him.
This  Phillips  bidding  them  be  of  good  courage  for  hee  [II.  x.  1792.]
would  lessen  their  number  presently : the  which  hee  in
two  houres  times  effected,  he  placed  his  men  upon  the
poope  and  halfe  decke,  with  their  Peeces  pruned,  and  their
Matches  cockt,  if  they  should  resist :  that  done,  hee  went
with his Sword and disarmed all the Portugals, and
caused their  weapons to  be  layd on the  poope, which
were thirty Muskets ready laden and pruned, forty  The  40.  Chaul
Rapiers besides Swords and Poniards, sixty Powder  Mariners
pots matched and pruned, forty Pikes and Launces,  freed  to  helpe
fifteene great Chambers belonging to eight peeces of e ngts  '
Ordnance  ready  pruned. Then  he  found  great  store  of
Musket  shot  which  he  brought  up  also, he  tooke the
Chambers  and  opened  them,  and  tooke  out  of  every  of
them a good quantitie of  Powder, and in the roome
thereof  he  put  in Musket  shot, and tamked  them  up
againe. This  done, he  bound them  fast to the  decke
round about him and pruned them, and causes three
Linslockes  to  be  lighted,  and  with  his  small  Shot  standing
by  him ; which the  Portugals seeing, it strucke such
amazement  among  them,  that  it  made  them  to  tremble,
not  knowing  what  they  did  determine. Hee  giving  order
unto  his  small  Shot,  that  if  any  should  resist  him,  they
x  337  v

AD-  PURCHAS HIS PILGR1MES

1622.

should  let  flie  as  they  thought  fit :  he  steps  forth  into  the
wast,  and  called  the  Boat-swaine  unto  him,  demanding  of
him  how  many  of  his  Countrimen  there  were  in  the
shippe  ?  Who  said  there  were  forty ;  so  hee  promised
them  to  stay,  if  so  be  they  would  bee  willing,  and  to  doe
their  best  indeavours,  that  he  would  advance  their  meanes,
and  their  adventures,  rather  then  to  diminish  any  part
thereof :  which  words  greatly  revived  them,  and  they
all  said,  they  were  willing.  Then  presently  hee  called
the  Blackes,  to  hayle  up  the  Boat,  placing  two  of  his  men
with  their  Muskets  bent  to  the  Boat,  that  none  of  the
Portugals  which  were  therein  should  enter  the  ship.
Which  done,  he  drew  his  Sword,  and  commanded  all  the
Portugals  upon  their  lives  to  avoide  the  shippe  immedi-
atly ;  which  they  did,  and  happie  was  hee  which  could  get
into  the  Boat  first ;  for  some  lept  into  the  water  for  feare.
Besides  those  which  they  tooke  into  the  Boat  to  them,
there  were  other  three  which  hid  themselves  in  the  shippe
that  they  knew  not  of,  being  almost  starved  and  durst  not;
come  forth  in  sight  for  feare.

When  we  came  to  Kishme  Castle,  where  out  of  each
shippe  was  carried  Ordnance  to  batter  against  the  Castle
with  Powder  and  Shot  fitting,  where  our  Gunners  and
others  went  to  trie  their  valorous  skill,  when  they  had;
beene  two  dayes  on  shoare  at  that  exercise,  Master  Baffin!
being  then  aboord,  promised  he  would  goe  ashoare  to
make  a  shot  or  two  :  this  Philips  got  leave  of  our  Captaine
for  the  like ;  and  seeing  their  worke  of  battering,  who
finding  their  plat-forme  of  the  one  side  hollow,  resting!
upon  a  Basket  within  the  reverse  of  the  Peece,  which  at:
firing  caused  the  Peece  to  deliver  contrary,  which  when
hee  had  perceived,  caused  the  plat-forme  to  be  new  cast ;
Another  act  of  an(j  fa  plankes  layd  firme,  he  loaded  the  Peece  himselfe,
1  ***'  and  placed  it  to  his  best  levell  towards  a  peece  of  Ordnance

which  lay  on  the  Castle  wall,  which  the  Portugall  was
even  ready  to  give  fire  unto,  for  they  were  at  that  time  a!
leavelling,  he  fired  his  Peece  so  leavelled,  which  dis-
mounted their  Peece,  split  the  carriage,  and  killed  sixe  men,

3&

RELATIONS OF ORMUZ  a.d.

1622.

whereof  the  Captaine  of  the  Castle  was  one ; which  the

Persians  seeing,  gave  a  great  shout,  and  happy  was  he  that

could  come  to  embrace  him  first,  which  was  a  great  credit

to  our  Captaine,  and  our  English  Nation. He  made  but

two  shots,  by  reason  there  was  no  more  Shot  on  shoare.

Master Baffin went on shoare with his Geometricall

Instruments,  for  the  taking  the  height  and  distance  of  the

Castle  wall,  for  the  better  leavelling  of  his  Peece  to  make

his  shot : but  as  he  was  about  the  same,  he  received  a  Boffins  death.

small  shot  from  the  Castle  into  his  belly,  wherewith  he

gave  three  leapes,  by  report,  and  died  immediatly.

When  Ormus  was  besieged,  and  the  Persians  had  taken
the  Towne  with  small  resistance,  for  they  fled  into  the
Castle,  and  we  had  brought  our  ships  on  the  other  side
of  the  Hand  without  shot  of  the  Castle,  all  our  English
Boats,  as  Barges  and  Skiffes  did  over  night  goe  and  lie
within  Musket  shot  of  the  Castle  with  all  the  Arabian
Boats,  to  keepe  that  no  Frigats  of  the  Portugals  should  Frigats  how
either  come  in  or  out,  either  for  the  bringing  in  of  Jurnts  e  '
Souldiers  or  reliefe,  or  the  carrying  away  of  their  treasure.
The  Arabians  one  night  being  very  darke,  went  in  close
under  the  wall  of  the  Castle,  and  brought  out  two  of  the
Portugals  Frigats ;  whereof  our  Captaine  gat  one,  and
Captaine  Blithe  the  other ;  and  fitted  as  followeth,  shee
had  one  Sacar  of  Brasse,  one  great  Brasse  peece,  which
went  with  Chambers,  and  would  carrie  a  Demi-culvering
shot  of  stone,  one  other  small  Brasse  peece,  two  Iron
Bases,  and  two  of  the  ships  Murtherers,  thirty  Muskets,
Powder  and  Shot  munition  fitting,  with  foure  and  thirty
Englishmen,  whereof  five  were  Trumpetters  and  one
Drumme,  where  our  Captaine  placed  this  Philips  Com-
mander, they  had  fifty  Blackes  to  rowe  and  trimme  their
Sailes.  Likewise  the  Londons  Frigat  was  so  fitted.  The
Frigats  all  the  day  rode  at  an  anchor  without  shot  of  the
Castle,  but  at  night  they  set  their  watch  with  a  vollie  of
small  Shot,  Drumme  and  Trumpets,  which  the  Portugals
might  easily  heare  and  see,  and  as  it  grew  darker,  they
went  neerer  the  Castle,  and  the  Arabian  Boats  with  them,

339

A.D.

l622.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

11

1793-

The  Portugals  at  the  first  made  as  if  they  would  come
forth  with  the  ships,  which  was  but  a  shew,  for  we  waited
the  time,  but  yet  they  came  not.  They  rode  a  pretie
distance  from  the  wal,  but  still  under  command  of  the
Castle,  thinking  we  would  have  come  in  to  them.  Within
three  dayes  they  got  close  under  the  wall :  then  our
Commander  though  fit,  that  the  first  businesse  that  was
to  bee  done,  was  for  the  destroying  of  those  ships,  for
feare  of  any  others  comming  to  succour  them  :  wherefore
it  was  promised  to  our  men,  that  they  that  would  goe  in
our  Barges  for  the  firing  of  them,  should  be  royally
rewarded  for  their  paines.  So  certaine  of  them  agreed,
and  got  things  ready  that  night  with  their  fire-workes  in
each  Barge,  they  went  and  boorded  Ruy  Frera  his  ship,
Ship  fired.  &  set  her  on  fire  which  in  lesse  then  a  quarter  of  an  houre
was  all  in  a  light  flame.  But  in  the  firing  of  her  in  our
Barge  unfortunatly  having  a  quantitie  of  Powder  in  one
of  the  Lockers,  one  of  the  fireworkes  being  flung  against
the  ship  strucke  against  some  Iron,  and  rebounded  backe
againe,  and  strucke  into  his  body  that  flung  it,  and  tore
out  his  stomacke  that  hee  died  withall,  set  the  Powder  ini
the  Locker  on  fire,  and  blew  one  man  cleane  away,  burning
sixe  others  very  shrewdly.  They  attempted  the  firing  of
another  ship,  having  sixe  of  the  Countrie  Boats  chained;
together,  with  Tarre,  Occam,  Billet  of  wood,  spits,  and
other  trumperie  in  them  for  the  fire-workes,  so  to  drive
them  thwart  their  Halser ;  they  went  also  with  their
Barges  to  cast  fire-works  into  her,  and  one  they  cast,  but
it  fell  off,  being  espied  by  the  Portugals.  They  shot  ai
small  shot  thorow  both  the  knees  of  one  of  the  men  in
the  Whales  Barge,  which  is  come  home  here  in  our  ship.
The  Boats  which  were  chained  together  were  set  on  fire,
and  the  Tide  drove  them  cleane  besides  the  ship.

Now  this  Philips  seeing  this  enterprise  tooke  none
effect,  towards  the  evening  came  close  under  the  Castle
with  his  Frigat  (having  an  eye  to  the  Ports  of  the  Castle)
and  hearing  that  they  had  got  the  Ordnance  out  of  their
ships  while  it  was  yet  day  went  in  resolutely  and  dis-

340

Disastrous
accident.

Another
exploit  of
Philips.

RELATIONS OF ORMUZ  ad.

1622.

charged  his  sacar,  being  lowe  water  and  the  ships  aground,

shot  one  of  the  ships  thorow  her  Skeg  or  Run,  close  by  the  Skegis  the

water ; the  Persians  seing  the  shot  strucke  against  the  Wanting  part

or  the  keele  a
wall,  and  when  the  water  flowed  her  hold  rilled,  the  water  jittle  w-lthout

ebbing  againe  shee  cleane  overset,  and  brake  all  her  fasts  the  stern-post.

that  shee  had  on  the  wall,  which  were  Cables  and  Hawsers. Run  is  that

This  ship  was  the  Admirall  that  came  from  Goa,  called  part  of  the  hull

Todos  los  Santos,  shee  was  of  burthen  fifteene  hundred ,.,  J*

tunnes,  and  carried  in  her  forty  five  pieces  of  Ordnance  degrees  corns

of  Brasse,  the  least  whereof  was  Demiculvering. This  from  the  floor-

ship  was  the  cause  of  the  rest  oversetting  which  lie  by  her  timbers  to  the

with  their  toppes  in  the  water. Her  Vice-admirall  was  stern~P0St-

named Nostra Senhora de Victoria, being of burthen

fourteene  hundred  tunnes  with  forty  peeces  of  Ordnance.

The Vice-admirall unto Ruy Frera was named Saint

Martin, which lieth sunke by her  being of the same

burthen,  and  the  like  force  Ruy  Frera  his  Rere-admirall

being  a  Flemming,  of  burthen  foure  hundred  tunnes,  with

twenty  two  peeces  of  Ordnance,  named  Saint  Antonie  de

cosso :  she  stands  almost  upright,  but  bulged  close  under

the  Castle  wall. Then  Ruy  Frera  his  Admirall,  which

was  fired,  lieth  three  leagues  from  Ormus  at  Combrone

sunke  under  water ; her  name  was  Saint  Pedro,  being

of  burthen fourteene  hundred tunnes,  and forty  foure

peeces  of  Ordnance. Shee  had  Iron  peeces  in  her  hold,

and  a  great  deale  of  Shot. There  was  also  a  Galley  sunke

under  the  wall  which  had  three  peeces  of  Ordnance. Ruy  The  rest  and

Frera  his  Vice-admirall  that  was  when  they  fought  with  all  the  land-

Captaine  Shilling  was  broke  up  in  Ormus,  shee  proved  so  servuey°u

leake  after  the  fight,  her  timbers  served  for  the  building  tmpietejour.

of  Kishme  Castle,  &c.  nail  fallowing.

[§.  nil.
341

A.D.
l62I.

PURCHAS HIS PILGMMES

First

Consultation.

§.  IIII.

Relation  of  the  late  Ormuz  businesse,  gathered  out
of  the  Journall  of  Master  Edward  Monoxe  the
Agent  for  the  East  Indian  Merchants  trading
in  Persia.

T  a  consultation  in  Swally  Road,  the  fourteenth  of
November,  1621.  commission  was  given  by  Master
Thomas  Rastell  President, and the  Counsell  of
the Merchants of Surat, to Richard Blithe, and John
Weddell  bound  for  Jasques  (a  Persian  Port)  with  five  good
ships  and  foure  Pinnaces  (whereof  the  London,  and  Pin-
nace Shilling  under  Captaine  Blithe ; the  Jonas,  Whale,
Dolphin,  Lion,  with  their  Pinnaces  the  Rose,  Robert,  and
Richard,  under  command  of  Captaine  Weddell)  to  set  sayle
with  the  soonest  opportunitie  towards  Port  Jasques,  and  1
to  keepe  together  in  such  sort  as  they  should  thinke  fittest  i
for  their  defence  against  the  common  enemie ; and  seeing  1
the  Portugals  had  disturbed  their  trade  by  the  slaughter, ,
mayming  and  imprisoning  of  their  men,  and  had  made:
sundry  assaults  against  their  shipping,  that  therefore  it
should  be  lawfull  to  them  to  chase  and  surprize  what-
soever vessels  pertayning  to  the  Ports,  and  Subjects  under
the  Vice-roy  of  Goa,  thereof  to  be  accountable,  &c. And
if  they  met  with  any  of  Decannee,  Dabul,  Chaul,  or  anyf
Port  belonging  to  the  Samorin  of  Calecut,  to  arrest  them
upon account of  just pretences for  goods  robbed and
spoiled  &c.  without  imbezelling  any  part  thereof,  that  full
restitution  may  be  made  after  satisfaction  on  their  parts
rendred :  A  sixt  part  of  goods  gotten  from  the  Portugall
to be distributed, and their persons to bee reserved
prisoners, that in exchange our Countrimen by them
miserably  captived  may  be  delivered  :  to  haste  their  lading
and  dispatch  at  Jasques,  if  possible  within  thirty  dayes :
[II.  x.i  794.]  anc[  seeing  the  reinforced  Enemie  Ruy  Frera  with  his  i
Portu  ^ll  l  €  Armada of sixe  Galliones  and other small  Vessels  are  i
Admirall. attending  on  the  Persian  coast,  in  likelihood  to  assault

342

RELATIONS OF ORMUZ  ad.

1621.

their  Fleet,  that  therefore  it  should  be  lawfull  not  defen-
sively alone,  but  offensively  to  await  all  advantages,  even
in  their  owne  Ports  if  there  be  apparance  of  performance
approved  by  generall  counsell  warrantably  to  be  under-
taken, &c.

In  Costack  Road,  the  sixe  and  twentieth  of  December,  Second
1 62 1. A consultation was holden aboord the Jonas,  consultation.
whereat were present John Weddell, Richard Blithe,
Edward  Monoxe,  William  Baffin,  and  many  others. The
Can  or  Duke  of  Xiras  had  by  his  Ministers  desired  the
aide of their Ships against the common Enemie the
Portugall. The  Articles  being  translated  into  the  Persian
Tongue  were  dispeeded  by  Xareeali  Governour  of  the
Province  of  Mogustan  towards  the  said  Duke  who  was
then  upon  the  way  towards  Mina ; the  summe  whereof  t^EnzlUhm
folio  weth .  those  parts  and

For  so  much  as  by  severall  conferences  had  with  divers  Ports  to  assist
and  sundry  of  the  Chan  or  Duke  of  Xiras  his  Ministers  the  Persian:
and  chiefe  Commanders  in  the  present  warres,  we  have  -y" a  r6cret h
well  observed  they  are  fully  determined  and  resolved  to  persian
require  the  aide  of  our  ships  and  people  in  this  intended  detayningthe
Expedition  for  the  vanquishing  not  onely  the  Portugall  English  goods
Armada,  but  likewise  for  the  taking  and  surprizing  of  the  on  s/l0re  a"d
Hand  and  Castle  of  Ormuz : and  we  are  very  confident  wrnw  fs
they  will  use  their  indeavours  to  inforce  us  unto  the  said  before;  which
service  by  imbarging  our  goods  upon  the  shoare :  which  also  would
we  have  well  understood  by  the  Governour s  refusall  to  have  broken
furnish  us  with  Camels  to  bring  our  goods  from  Mina  to  °\  rJSL
the Port ; Edward Monox late Agent, propounded  w-lth  danger
whether  they  might  undertake  that  service  or  no. The  likely  to  their
proposition  being  well  debated,  and  the  Factors  commis-  persons,  goods
sion  from  Surat  warranting  to  right  themselves  of  the  great  ? m^II'
losses  and  hinderances  sustained  by  the  Portugall,  inter-  Qpen  y  0ften
rupting  their  peaceable  Trade  both  in  India  and  Persia,  force  and  hos-
(the  last  yeeres  attempt  of  Ruy  Frera  against  Captaine  tilitie {whereof
Shillings  Fleet  at  Jasques,  to  the  losse  of  that  worthie  ^firmer
Commander, and other his Majesties Subjects, being  J^^LJ"^
yet  fresh)  and  for  so  much  as  the  Persian  now  seeketh  Portugall.

343

A.D.

l62I.

They  made  a
vertue  of

necessitie.

Articles.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Persian
victorie  in
Arabia.

our  aide  (and  in  manner  forceth  it)  it  is  good  to
thinke  on  such  conditions  as  may  be  for  the  publike
benefit,  and  not  to  omit  this  opportunitie  of  a  peaceable
and  profitable  trade,  the  same  to  be  sent  unto  the  Chan
in  these  Articles.

First,  In  case  God  shall  be  pleased  to  deliver  the  Hand
and  Castle  of  Ormuz  into  the  hands  of  the  Persian  by  our
aide,  the  moitie  of  the  spoile  and  purchase  of  both  to
remaine  to  the  English,  the  other  moitie  to  the  Persian.
Secondly,  The  Castle  of  Ormuz  to  be  delivered  to  the
possession  of  the  English,  with  all  the  Ordnance,  Armes
and  Munition  thereto  belonging,  and  the  Persian  to  build
another  for  themselves  at  their  owne  charges.  Thirdly,
The  Customes  to  bee  equally  divided,  the  English  to  bee
for  ever  Custome-free.  Fourthly,  That  all  Christian
Captives  should  be  at  the  English  disposing,  the  Mussel-
mans  at  the  Persian.  Fiftly,  The  Persian  to  bee  at  halfe
the  ships  charge  for  victual!,  wages,  weare  and  teare,  and
to  furnish  them  at  his  charge  with  sufficient  Powder  andi
Shot.  Divers  other  Articles  were  concluded  to  be  pre-
sented to  the  Chan ;  After  his  comming  to  Mina,  Master
Bell,  and  Master  Monox,  the  eight  of  Januarie  were  sent
to  him  and  entertained  with  a  sumptuous  banket :  a  great
feast  and  triumph  was  also  made  for  the  joy  full  newes.
of  the  Kings  taking  in  of  a  great  Countrie  in  Arabia,  and
of  Aweiza  the  chiefe  Citie  of  that  Countrie.

The  next  day  the  Duke  sent  his  Visier  accompanied
with  Sabandar  Sultan  and  Xareearee  with  answer  to  the
former  Articles  :  The  first  was  approved  :  For  the  second,
the  Castle  should  be  equally  possessed  by  both  till  thel
Kings  pleasure  were  knowne.  The  third  granted,  pro-
vided onely,  that  the  Kings  and  Dukes  goods  from  India
should  also  passe  custom-free.  To  the  fourth,  they  made
reservation  of  the  two  principall  Captaines  Ruy  Frera
Captaine  of  Kishme  Castle,  and  Simon  de  Mela  Captaine
of  the  Castle  of  Ormuz,  till  the  Kings  pleasure  knowne.
Other  Articles  agreed  on,  and  ordered  also  that  no  change
of Religion should be admitted on either side ; and

344

RELATIONS OF ORMUZ  ad.

1621.
charges  of  Powder  and  Shot  to  be  divided : The  Duke  Note.
and  Master  Bell  signed,  and  presently  the  English  goods
were  laden  on  the  Dukes  owne  Camels  on  fire  cost,  which
before  no  money  could  procure.

On  the  tenth  we  turned  to  Costack.  We  got  aboord
and  acquainted  the  Commanders  with  the  successe  of  our
Journey,  which  being  divulged  and  made  known  amongst
the  severall  ships  Companies,  it  seemes  they  consulted
together  with  one  voice  to  refuse  the  businesse :  the  Opposition.
Londons  companie  beginning,  fifty  or  sixty  appearing
therein,  Captaine  Blithe  taking  much  paines  to  suppresse
their  disorder,  and  in  the  end  prevayling  with  them,  they
promising  to  goe  whither  he  would.  The  other  ships  in
a  day  or  two  were  in  like  opposition,  alleaging  it  was  no
merchandizing  businesse,  nor  were  they  hired  for  any  such
exploit,  nor  could  hee  tell  whether  it  might  not  be  a
breach  of  the  peace  (said  a  favourer  of  that  Religion)  till
protests  being  made  against  each  ships  companie,  what
with  feare  to  lose  their  wages,  and  promise  of  a  moneths
pay,  they  at  last  yeelded.

The  nineteenth  of  Januarie  we  set  sayle  toward  Ormuz,
where  we  arrived  the  two  and  twentieth,  and  that  night
anchored  in  sight  of  the  Towne,  about  two  leagues  from
the  Castle,  in  expectation  that  the  Enemies  Armada,  con-
sisting of  five  Galeons  and  some  fifteene  or  twenty  Frigats,
would  have  come  forth  to  fight  with  us. But  they  hailed
so  neere  the  Castle  that  wee  could  not  come  at  them.  [II.  x.  1795.]
Which  we  perceiving,  and  understanding  that  our  vowed
Enemie Ruy Frera was in his new erected Castle of
Kishme,  the  next  day  wee  addressed  our  selves  towards
the  said  Castle,  where  we  arrived  in  fit  time  to  save  both
the  lives  and  reputations  of  the  Portugals,  not  able  long
to  hold  out  against  the  Persian  siege,  and  willing  rather
to  yeeld  to  us. The  first  of  February  they  yeelded  both  Kishme  Castle
their  persons  and  Castle  after  many  meetings  and  treaties  Ve^ed-
into  our  possession. The  fourth,  we  set  sayle  towards
Gombrone,  where  we  were  royally  feasted  by  the  Duke, Gombrone.
who  was  discontent  that  Ruy  Frera  was  not  delivered  to

345

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1621.

him,  nor  some  of  the  Moores,  contrarie  to  my  liking;
especially  for  the  Moores :  the  Duke  dissembling  hi*;
discontent,  in  regard  of  further  need  of  our  helpe  at
Ormuz,  and  after  his  feast  vesting  all  the  English  present
according  to  their  qualitie.

Ormuz  The  ninth  of  Februarie  we  set  sayle  towards  Ormu2i

besieged,  ^\\\\  about  two  hundred  Persian  Boats  great  and  smal;
with  two  Frigats  in  our  companie,  and  in  them  five  anq
twenty  hundred  or  three  thousand  Persian  Souldiers  oil
all  sorts,  and  anchored  that  night  about  two  leagues  frorr
the  Castle.  The  next  day  before  noone  the  Persians  wen
all  landed,  and  marched  in  a  confused  manner  towards  the
Citie,  which  they  entred  as  farre  as  the  Mydan  or  Market
place  without  meeting  resistance.  Which  Market  place
they  found  barricadoed  against  them,  and  defended  witr.
Shot  and  Pike  of  the  Portugals.  But  the  Persians  soone
made  way,  and  the  Portugals  like  so  many  sheepe  tookt
their  heeles  into  their  Castle.  One  Persian  onely  which
first  entred  was  slaine  with  a  Pike,  and  he  which  slue  him
lost  his  head  in  the  Market  place,  his  heeles  being  toc|

The  Citie heavy  to  carrie  it  away. Some  eight  or  ten  more,  found
forsaken. scattered  in  severall  houses  of  the  Citie,  were  in  the  same!
places  executed.

The  Persian  Generall  named  Einam  culibeg  at  his  first
entrance  into  the  Citie  placed  his  Captaines  and  Souldiers
in  severall  places  of  the  Citie,  and  proclaimed  upon  painei
of  death  every  man  to  looke  to  his  quarter,  and  none  to  fall
on  pillaging.  Which  some  infringing  were  severely
executed :  he  hanged  some,  cut  off  eares  and  noses  of!
others,  and  others  he  bastonadoed  even  for  trifles.  Yel
within  two  or  three  dayes  after  shops  and  houses  were
broken  open,  and  every  man  wearied  with  carrying  and  i
recarrying  spoiles  all  day,  and  sleeping  so  securely  at  night,
that  easily  the  Portugals  in  a  sallie  might  have  slaine  many.
The  same  night  we  entred,  I  tooke  possession  of  a  very
commodious  house  to  settle  a  factorie  there,  which  for;
convenience  of  roomes  I  think  exceeds  any  Factorie  the
Companie  hath. But  on  the  thirteenth  it  proved  too  hot;

346

RELATIONS OF ORMUZ  a.d.

1621.
for  me,  being  set  on  fire  in  the  night  by  one  of  the  Masters
mates  of  the  Whale  with  other  his  Consorts  after  I  was  in
bed, carelesly with Candles romaging for pillage, and
firing  a  roome  in  which  were  goods  given  me  by  the
Generall. But  the  winde  favoured  us,  so  that  the  house
was  not  consumed. When  I  consider  the  strength  of  the  Strength  of
Citie,  and  almost  of  every  house,  being  a  little  Castle,  I 0rmuz-
cannot  but  marvell  that  the  Portugall  would so soone
abandon  the  same. But  it  seemes  they  feared  the  Persian
would  have  intercepted  their  way  to  the  Castle,  or  that  the
Moores  their  neighbours  would  have  betrayed  them.

The  foure  and  twentieth  of  February  our  men  by  a  Port,
stratagem of fire burned the Saint Pedro, quondam  ddmrall
Admirall  of  Ruy  Freras  Fleet,  which  indangered  all  the urne  '
rest,  but  the  Tide  carried  her  off  to  Sea  ;  and  her  Reliques
by  the  Arabs  and  other  Countrie  Boats  were  towed  on
shoare  at  Gombrone,  and  some  Iron  Ordnance  and  Shot
taken  out  of  her  burnt  Carkasse. At this  exploit  the
Duke  much  rejoyced. The  seventeenth  of  March  the
Persians  having  placed  above  forty  barels  of  Powder  in  a
Mine  which  they  had  made  under  one  of  the  Flankers  of
the  Castle,  fired  the  same,  and  blew  up  the  corner  of  the
wall  making  a  faire  breach,  where  they  gave  a  fierce  assault  Breach  and
till  nine  at  night. But  the  Portugals  made  a  manfull  assault.
defence,  and  with  Powder  pots,  scalding  Lead,  and  other
fiery  instruments  did  much  hurt  to  the  assailants,  burning,
scalding, stoning many. Sha Culibeg notwithstanding,
with  two  hundred  of  his  most  resolute  men  get  up  into  one
of  the  Flankers, which they  maintayned  at  least three
houres, but in the end were fired out, the Portugals
bestowing  Powder  pots  as  liberally  as  if  they  had  come  from
Hell  mouth. The  same  day  the  Citie  was  set  on  fire  in
divers  places,  as  it  was  reported,  by  the  Generals  command,
for  that  the  Arabs  lurked  therein,  and  could  not  be  gotten
forth  to  doe  any  service. Wee  lay  here  foure  or  five
thousand  men  in  a  barren  Hand  which  yeelds  nothing  but  Barrennesse
Salt  of  it  selfe,  and  I  knowe  not  what  policy  the  Generall  qfOrmuz.
had  to  send  away  all  the  Rice,  and  our  provision  for  victuall

347

A.D.
l62I.

Water.

Persians
ignorant  of
militar'ie  arts.

Armes.

[II.  x.  1796.]

P  or  tugals  ships
sunke.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

and  water  wholly  to  depend  on  the  Continent,  so  that  it
a  Fleet  of  Frigats  had  come,  as  was  expected,  they  must
have  famished  in  the  Hand  ;  the  Countrie  Boats  not  daring
to  adventure  to  and  from  the  Maine. The  raine  water  in
Cisternes  abroad  daily  wasted  and  waxed  brakish,  no  care
being  taken  to  fill  therewith  the  Jarres  and  Cisternes  whiles
it  is  good,  provided  almost  in  every  house  for  that  purpose.
The  Persians  are  ignorant  of  the  art  of  warre,  for  they
entred  without  feare  or  wit  and  lost  with  shame  what  they
might  have maintayned  with honour. Other  defects  I
observed  in  the  very  sinewes  of  warre,  such  that  I  cannot;
but  wonder  that  one  of  the  wonders  of  our  age  Sha  Abas
should  send  over  an  Armie  so  weakly  provided  of  money,
armes,  munition,  ships  and  all  necessarie  furniture. Foil
the  first,  I  thinke  the  Dukes  treasure  was  consumed  ir
one  moneths  pay  unto  our  ships,  and  I  feare  we  shall  stay
for  the  rest  till  money  be  made  of  the  spoile. For  Arme:
and Munition they have no other then small Pieces'
Bowes  and  Arrowes,  Swords  by  their  sides,  and  some  01
their  chiefes  have  Coates  of  Maile :  Powder  so  scarce  tha
after  blowing  up  the  Castle  they  had  scarcely  Powder  td
plie  their  small  Shot  to  enter  the  breach,  and  yet  wen
furnished  with  twentie  or  five  and  twentie  Barrels  fron
our  Ships. They  had  not  one  scaling  Ladder  to  help
their  entrance. Sould  wee  forsake  them,  they  would  soon
be  at  a  stand,  and  yet  they  have  broken  Conditions  wit.'
us  in  severall  things : and  yet  I  feare  when  all  is  done
wee  shall  bee  served  with  reversions  and  what  themselve
please.

Till  the  three  and  twentieth,  our  Ordnance  from  th
shore  so  galled  the  Vice-admirall  and  Reere-admirall  ol
Ruy  Freras  Fleet,  that  they  and  the  Galley  are  all  thre
sunke  close  under  the  Castle  wall ;  and  the  last  night  th|
Admirall  that  came  last  from  Goa,  yeelded  her  broad  sid
to  the  mercy  of  the  water,  having  learned  the  same  of  hdj
Consort  who  the  night  before  shewed  her  the  way,  and  si
all  the  Portugall  Armado  are  come  to  ruine :  These  tw
last  Ships  I  thinke  were  voluntarily  lost  by  the  Captainc

348

RELATIONS OF ORMUZ  ad.

1621.

3olicy,  to  leave  the  Portugals  without  meanes  to  escape
:he  more  manfully  to  fight  it  out.  Some  thinke  they
mnke  by  hurts  received  from  sunken  Rockes  in  haling
:hem  so  neere  to  the  Castle  to  be  out  of  danger  from  our
Drdnance ;  and  others,  by  leakes  from  our  Shot :  how
pver  we  saw  the  destruction  of  them  that  were  designed
instruments  for  ours ;  for  which  great  mercy  of  the  most
High  towards  us  most  sinfull  men,  his  holy  Name  be  ever
praised  and  magnified.

March  the  seven  and  twentieth,  newes  was  brought  me  Portugall
that  some  of  the  Portugals  were  come  out  of  the  Castle  Treatte-
to  treat  of  Peace,  whereupon  I  made  my  repaire  unto  the
Generals  Tent  to  understand  the  truth  of  the  businesse
where  I  found  our  two  Commanders  sitting,  by  whose
countenance  I  well  perceived  that  my  comming  was  not
very  welcome  unto  them. But  to  requite  them  before
our  departure,  both  they  and  I  perceived  that  neither  of
our  being  there  was  acceptable  to  the  Persian. Yet  there  Persian
we  sate  almost  an  houre  in  expectation  of  the  Portugals  ^0U^ttnS-
comming,  which  was  purposely  deferred  in  hope  we  would
have  avoyded,  but  Night  approaching,  and  the  Persian
perceiving  we  purposed  to  stay  the  Messengers  comming,
at  length  he  was  brought  in. Who  entring  rudely  without
any  great  complement,  delivered  as  extravagant  a  Speech
or  Message,  yet  with  a  kind  of  forced  voyce  as  though
he  had  been  the  prologue  to  some  Play. The  effect  of
his  Speech  was  this : His  Captaine  had  sent  him  to  kisse
the  hands  of  the  Generall,  and  to  know  how  he  did,  (this
was  his  Complement)  and  for  what  cause  hee  moved  this
Warre  against  him,  for  the  Portugals  were  the  Persians
S  friends,  and  so  had  beene  for  many  yeeres,  and  now  for  so
small  a  matter,  onely  for  a  Well  or  two  of  Water  that  so Cause  of  the
great  Warre  should  bee  made,  and  the  antient  League  and  Warre,Portu-
friendship  which  had  beene  betwixt  their  King  and  the  fj^p^^
King  of  Persia,  and  the  people  of  both  Nations  should  bee  ^  puy  prera
extinguished. Besides,  his  Captaine  nor  the  Inhabitants  at  Kishme,
of  Ormus,  was  not  to  bee  blamed  for  what  Ruy  Frera &c-
had  acted  at  Kishme,  yet  were  they  willing  so  farre  as

349

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1621.

might  stand  with  the  Honour  of  their  King  to  purchase
their  Peace :  which  they  need  not  doe  either  through
feare  or  want,  for  they  had  within  their  Castle  one  thousand
able  men,  and  provisions  both  of  Victuals  and  Water  to
serve  them  for  many  moneths.  Besides,  they  expected
daily  new  succours  from  Goa.  And  if  the  Persian  didj
thinke  to  get  the  Castle  by  force,  hee  would  find  it  a  hard]
matter  to  accomplish  :  for  they  were  resolved  to  Fight  itj
out  to  the  last  man.

The  latter  part  of  which  speech  being  onely  Portugal!
bravadoes,  was  not  pleasing  to  the  Persian.  Wherefore
the  Generall  willed  him  to  declare  the  cause  of  hid
comming,  to  which  hee  answered,  his  Captaines  desirei
was  to  know  what  the  Persian  would  have.  To  which  the
Persian  replied  he  would  have  their  Castle,  and  that  was  iti
he  came  for.  With  which  speech  the  Messenger  was
dismissed  (without  so  much  as  being  offered  a  cup  ofi
wine,  had  not  I  caused  one  to  bee  given  him)  but  notwith-;
standing,  what  is  here  related,  I  cannot  be  perswaded  bull
he  came  with  a  more  substantial  message  then  he  delivered;
which  he  omitted  by  reason  of  our  being  there,  wheruntc
he  was  formerly  instructed  by  Sha  Cullibeg,  in  whos<
house  hee  was  at  least  an  houre  before  he  was  brought  tc
the  Generall.  Wherefore  I  feare  some  sinister  dealing  ol
the  Persian,  which  in  five  dayes  will  bee  discovered  :  th<|
Portugall  dismissed.  Our  Captaines  by  their  Interpreter::
moved  privately  their  private  businesse  to  the  Generall
to  which  he  gave  no  great  eare,  but  in  conclusion  hij
answer  was,  they  would  deferre  that  businesse  till  sornd
other  time :  yet  himselfe  had  written  to  them  in  grea)
haste,  that  day  to  furnish  him  from  the  ships  with  I
quantitie  of  powder,  that  night  to  attempt  the  blowing
up  of  the  Castle  :  for  their  mines  were  all  readie,  and  the}
wanted  nothing  but  powder.  Which  request  of  his,  ou
Captaines  were  so  forward  to  consent  unto,  that  presently
they  brought  on  shoare  foure  and  thirtie  barrells  o
powder,  for  which  their  forwardnesse  I  feare  the  compani*
at  home  will  give  them  but  little  thankes,

35°

RELATIONS OF ORMUZ  a.d.

1622.
. The  eight  and  twentieth  ditto. I  went  in  companie  of  Another
the  Commanders  to  the  Generals  Tent  for  that  wee  under-  treatie-
stood  two  chiefe  men  of  the  Portugals  were  in  Sha  Cullibeg
his  house,  where  they  had  beene  in  conference  with  the
Persian  foure  or  five  houres ; unto  which  treatie  none  of
us  were  called,  nor  by  any  meanes  made  acquainted  with  it,
which  encreased  our  suspition  of  the  Persians  fraudulent
dealing  with  us. Wherefore  comming  unto  the  Generall,
wee  made  knowne  our  dislike  of  the  manner  of  proceeding,
for  wee  were  partakers  in  this  warre  with  you,  wherein
wee  had  hazarded  our  lives,  ships,  and  Merchants  goods  :
besides  the  hinderance  wee  sustaine  by  the  losse  of  our  [ll.x.  1797.]
Monson  : and  as  wee  were  partakers  and  associates  with
them  in  the  undertaken  enterprise,  wee  ought  likewise  to
be  of  Counsell  with  them  in  all  treaties  and  proceedings,
and  therefore  desired  to  know  what  they  had  done,  or
what  they  entented  to  doe,  to  which  he  answered  they  had
done  nothing,  neither  would  he  so  much  as  drinke  a  cup
of  water  without  acquainting  us  therewith ; which  was  a
prettie  complement  where  all  his  actions  shewed  nothing
lesse. But  we  must  bee  content  to  undergoe  all  with  Note:  the
patience,  yet  were  it  not  for  our  Merchants  and  their  goods  %*&&&
that  are  in  the  countrie,  and  subject  to  whatsoever  they  e"Jorce y
will  impose  upon  them,  wee  could  remedie  this  businesse  occasions  to
well  enough,  and  bring  the  Persian  nolens  volens  unto  engage  them-
another  reckoning :  but  we  are  tied  from  that,  and  there-  selves  in  this
fore  must  of  necessitie  be  subject  to  accept  the  measure
they  please to lay upon us, which I feare will prove
immeasurable  ill :  yet  they  tell  us  all  things  shall  be  to  our
owne  content,  but  howsoever,  it  is  vied  and  must  now  be
seene. About  noone  this  present  day,  seeing  many  pike
and  shot,  all  Arabs  in  the  street,  which  formerly  I  have  not
seene  so  armed,  desiring  to  know  the  cause,  at  length  I
perceived  they  were  ranged  on  both  sides  the  street,  called
the  Mydan  or  Market  place,  where  shortly  after  passed
two  Cavaliers  of  the  Portugals,  attended  with  their  Pages
and  Servants,  to  the  number  of  sixe  or  eight,  whereof
one  carried  a  faire  Quintasol  over  the  two  Cavaliers,  who

351

warre.

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGR1MES

1622.

were  accompanied  by  Sha  Cullabeg  and  other  chiefe  meij
of  the  Persians,  and  conducted  to  the  house  of  Agariza  ofl
Dabul : whither  though  unsent  for,  or  uninvited,  I  also
addressed  my  selfe,  where  unexpected,  I  found  the  Persiar
Generall  accompanied  with  other  chiefe  men,  his  Assistant?
and  Counsell,  into  whose  presence  I  entruded  my  selfe
The  Generall  gave  mee  a  kind  welcome,  and  caused  mee  tc|
sit  downe  next  unto  him,  which  I  would  not  refuse,  foi
that  the  Portugall  should  see  our  Nation  was  in  grace  and
favour  with  them,  where  being  set,  having  done  my  dutie
to  the  Persians  first,  I  after  saluted  the  Cavaliers  which
was  requited  with  like  complement ; with  whom  I  hac
some  discourse  of  matters  nothing  pertaining  to  the  pre'
sent  occasion,  for  that  I  would  not  presume  to  talke  olj
that, till the Persian himselfe did first minister th<
occasion  : which  was  not  before  wee  had  eaten  a  Persiar;
Third  treatie.  collation  of  Pilaw,  &c. Which  being  done,  the  General:
demanded  the  Portugals  what  was  their  request  or  desirei
to  which  they  answered,  the  Captaine  of  the  Castle  hacj
given  them  instructions  in  writing  but  his  desire  was  the]
should  propound  the  same  unto  the  Duke  himselfe,  I
they  might  bee  permitted  to  goe  unto  him,  who  is  novl
at Gombrone. To which the  Generall  replied, it  waj
more  then  he  durst  doe  without  first  acquainting  the  Duki
therewith, by  which I  well  perceived they  were  onel>
delayes  and  distractions  on  both  sides,  and  to  gaine  timi
for  effecting  their  severall  designes. Then  the  Portugal
proceeded  to  their  usuall  complayning  against  Ruy  Frerc1
as  if  Ruy  Frera  as  a  private  man  and  without  order  fror
the  King  his  master  had  presumed  to  doe  that  which  h
had done, and to excuse themselves, demanded wha!
reason or  justice it  was to punish the Father for th
Childrens  offence  :  besides  the  matter  in  it  selfe  was  smali
onely  for  a  Well  of  water  or  two,  to  which  the  Persia
Generall  replied  againe,  let  the  cause  be  what  it  woulc
they  had  moved  warre  against  the  King  of  Persia  an
his  Subjects,  for  which  their  Castle  of  Ormus  must  mak
satisfaction  : wherefore  if  without  more  bloudshed  the

352

RELATIONS OF ORMUZ  ad.

1622.

would  surrender  their  Castle  and  come  forth  into  the  Citie,
they  should  finde  good  quarter  and  bee  well  used ;  to
which  the  Portugals  made  answere,  they  had  no  Com-
mission from  their  Captaine  to  treat  of  any  such  matter,
with  which  they  were  dismissed.  Notwithstanding  the
deniall  was  made  to  the  Portugals  request  for  going  to  the
Chan,  yet  the  same  night  they  had  License  and  were  sent
unto  him  to  treat  their  businesse  with  his  Excellencie.
The  certaintie  of  the  Treatie  I  had  no  meanes  to  know,
yet  what  I  heard  reported  shall  be  here  inserted.  First,
their  demand  was  that  the  Duke  would  vouchsafe  to  with-
draw his  Siege  from  their  Castle  and  suffer  them  to  enjoy
the  same  as  in  former  times,  in  consideration  whereof  they
would  give  him  two  hundred  thousand  Tomans  in  hand,
and  also  the  rent  annually  they  had  in  former  times  given
to  the  King  of  Ormus  out  of  the  revenue  of  the  Custome
house ;  which  as  hath  beene  reported  unto  mee  is  but  one
hundred  and  fortie  thousand  Rials  of  eight  per  annum,
but  some  report,  they  offer  the  Chan  besides  the  two
hundred  thousand  Tomans  in  hand,  as  much  yeerely ;  and
his  demand  was  five  hundred  thousand  Tomans  in  hand
(which  amounteth  to  1 7241 3.  pounds  ten  shillings  seven
pence  sterling,  or  thereabouts)  the  yeerely  rent  of  two
hundred  thousand  Tomans.

The  second  of  Aprill,  the  Persian  with  the  ayde  of  the  New  breach.
English  did  blow  up  two  other  Mines,  with  which  was
made  a  very  faire  and  passable  breach,  wherein  they  might
have  entred  without  any  great  difficultie  :  but  there  was  no
assault  given  thereunto  at  all.  The  passage  of  this
businesse  being  well  observed,  Captaine  Weddell  and  my
selfe  made  our  repaire  to  the  Persian  Generall,  to  under-
stand his  purpose  and  resolution ;  who  to  excuse  the
hackwardnesse  of  his  people  in  not  assaulting  the  Breach,
told  us  it  was  very  difficult  and  not  to  bee  entred ;  of
which  we  were  contented  to  give  him  the  hearing,  howbeit
we  were  offered  the  contrarie,  for  that  an  English  youth  Bold  Boy.
who  is  servant  to  the  Master  of  the  Jonas,  more  bold  then
any  Persian,  went  up  the  breach  to  the  very  top  of  the
x  353  z

A.D.

l622.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Pitiful/
pillage.

Persian
powder.

Portugals
wants,  and
miseries.
Fluxe  how
caused.

Castle  wall :  who  told  us  the  way  was  as  easie  as  to  goe
up  a  paire  of  stayres,  and  spacious  enough  for  many  men
to  goe  up  a  brest.  Wherefore  wee  demanded  to  know  his
resolution  for  further  proceeding :  who  told  us  within
three  dayes  he  would  be  fitted  for  another  Mine,  and  I
beleeve  it  well ;  for  his  mining  is  for  Gold,  not  to  make
[II.  x.i  798.]  breaches  unlesse  it  bee  breach  of  promises  unto  us,  which
he  can  doe  daily;  for  of  late  they  performe  with  us  in
just  nothing,  yet  all  this  cannot  warne  us  to  be  circum-
spect to  looke  unto  our  selves.

The  greatest  hurt  the  Portugall  did  unto  the  Persian  in
assaulting  the  Castle  was  with  Powder  pots,  wherewith
many  were  scalded  and  burnt :  for  prevention  whereof
the  Chan  hath  now  sent  over  store  of  Coates  and  Jackets:
made  of  Leather,  which  indeed  are  nothing  so  subject  tc:
take  fire  as  are  their  Callico  Coats  bumbasted  with  Cotton
wooll.  But  as  the  English  proverbe  is,  The  burnt  Child
dreads  the  fire,  for  notwithstanding  their  Leather  coates.
there  was  none  so  hardie  to  attempt  the  breach  that  is  now
made  (albeit  much  more  easier  to  enter  then  the  last  was"
further  then  to  pillage  certaine  balls  of  Bastas  and  other
stuffes  which  were  fallen  downe  from  the  Baricado,  the
Portugals  made  for  their  defence  against  the  Persians  shot :
in  this  adventure  one  lost  both  his  armes  taken  awa)
with  a  great  shot,  by  which  meanes  hee  was  faine  to  com*
backe  againe  without  any  Bastas  or  other  Pillage.

The  fifth  of  Aprill,  newes  was  brought  to  the  General
of  100500.  manes  powder  then  arrived  from  Bahrine
The  twelfth  ditto  came  a  Portugall  unto  the  Persiai
Generall  who  escaped  out  of  the  Castle,  and  declared  th<
great  wants  and  weake  estates  the  Souldiers  were  ii!
generall,  insomuch  that  daily  did  die  six,  seven  or  eigh
of  the  Flux,  which  is  chiefely  occasioned  through  drinking
their  corrupt  water.  For  the  small  quantitie  of  wate
which  they  have  in  their  Cesternes,  is  growne  so  brackis
and  salt,  that  it  infects  them  all  with  the  Flux,  and  beside
the  badnesse  of  it  they  are  put  to  such  strait  allowanc
that  many  die  with  thirst. Besides  for  victuall,  they  hav

354

RELATIONS OF ORMUZ  a.d.

1622.

onely  Rice  and  salt  Fish,  two  very  good  preparatives  to  a
Cup  of  good  drinke  if  they  had  it.  Notwithstanding  all
which  the  Persian  deferres,  yea  I  may  say  wasteth  time  in
making  new  Mines,  whereof  hee  hath  no  lesse  then  three
in  hand  at  this  present,  as  if  he  would  blow  up  all  the
Castle  wall  round  about  before  hee  will  make  his  entrie.
The  twelfth  at  night  one  of  our  Frigots  namely  the
Londons,  being  appointed  to  her  quarter  for  keeping  in  of
the  Portugall  Frigots,  that  none  of  them  should  make
escape  riding  single  and  alone  by,  her  selfe,  the  Portugals
perceiving  it,  sent  off  two  of  her  Frigots  which  clapped  her
aboord  but  found  her  too  hot  for  their  handling,  and
therefore  forsooke  her ;  with  what  hurt  to  themselves  I
know  not,  but  of  the  Londons  men  were  slaine  two  out-
right, and  seven  more  hurt  and  wounded.  And  had
not  their  blackes  that  rowed  the  Frigot  forsaken  them,  they
would  have  put  hard  to  have  surprised  the  surprisers.

The  fourteenth  Ditto,  the  Persian  sprung  another  of
his  Mines  wherewith  a  very  enterable  breach  was  made
but  no  assault  given,  nor  yet  shew  of  entrie  made  :  but  the
troth  is,  hee  was  forced  to  blow  up  the  Mine  before  his
time.  For  the  Portugall  from  within  the  Castle  was  come
so  neere  unto  him,  that  hee  was  in  doubt  he  would  have
defeated  the  same  before  he  could  place  his  powder.  The
fifteeene  Ditto,  came  another  fugitive  from  the  Castle  who
confirmed  the  report  of  the  others  who  came  from  thence
in  like  manner  before,  and  with  all  how  the  two  Frigots
which  fought  with  our  single  Frigot  above  mentioned,
came  from  Muscat  wherein  was  the  deceased  Don  Fran-
cisco de  Sosa,  late  Captaine  of  the  Castle  his  sonne,
who  came  purposely  to  fetch  away  his  Mother  and  other
women  that  are  in  the  Castle.  Those  Moores  in  the  Moores  at  last
Castle  of  Kishme  who  yeelded  themselves  into  our  hands  ^iv^ed

upon  the  instant  request  of  the  Generall,  were  (partly  with  accor f  t0
,r  .  \ 1 i»  1  1  •  11  covenant.

their  owne  consent)  delivered  unto  him,  whom  hee  pro-
mised should  have  pardon  for  the  errour  they  had  fallen
!  into,  to  serve  the  Portugals  against  their  owne  King  and
iCountrey,  and  that  they  should  also  be  provided  for  and

355

A.D.

l622.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Persian
perfidie.

Second  assault.

have  imployment  in  the  then  intended  expedition  for
Ormus.  Which  promise  of  his  both  to  them  and  us  in
their  behalfes,  hee  seemed  to  ratefie  by  using  some  of  the
principals  in  our  presence  and  gracing  them  by  other
seeming  curtesies :  notwithstanding  all  which,  the  next
morning  hee  cut  off  eightie  of  their  Heads,  and  those
which  he  had  made  so  fine  in  new  Vests  to  the  number
of  five  or  sixe  of  the  principall,  he  sent  them  over  to
Coombrone  to  the  Duke,  by  him  to  receive  their  fatall
Sentence.  Which  was  not  long  deferred,  but  they  were
made  to  drinke  of  the  same  Cup  their  fellowes  had  formerly
drunken  of.  Meer  Senadine  who  was  the  chiefe  Captaine
of  them,  was  executed  by  the  hands  of  Sherie  Allie
Governour  of  Mogustan,  who  had  married  his  Daughter,
which  hee  performed  upon  his  Father  in  law  with  as  much
willingnesse  as  if  he  had  beene  his  mortall  Enemie.

The  seventeenth  Ditto,  they  sprung  another  Mine
adjoyning  to  the  first  Mine  was  sprung,  wherein  was
placed  about  sixtie  Barrels  of  Powder,  which  tooke  not
the  effect  which  was  expected,  for  it  flew  out  at  the  side  and
carried  part  of  the  Wall  out  with  it,  but  strucke  nothing
at  all  upward,  whereby  the  first  breach  was  very  little
bettered,  which  was  the  thing  the  Persian  aymed  at,  yet
was  it  sufficient  to  give  him  encouragement  to  make  his
second  assault,  which  was  done  with  at  least  two  thousand
Souldiers,  who  very  resolutely  ranne  up  the  breach  into  a  |
part  of  a  Bulwarke  which  they  might  wholly  have  possessed
that  very  instant,  had  they  not  at  first  made  such  haste  to  |
runne  their  resolution  out  of  breath  ;  insomuch  that  onely
eight  or  ten  Portugals  and  a  few  Negros,  made  them
onely  with  their  Rapiers  to  give  ground  and  to  retire
themselves  unto  the  very  outward  skirt  of  the
[II.  x.i  799.]  Bulwarke,  where  they  had  not  roome  for  fortie  men
to  stand  in  the  face  of  their  Enemie,  yet  there  they
barracadod  themselves.  Which  before  they  could  effect
to  their  purpose,  the  Portugall  plyed  two  or  three  Pieces
of  Ordnance  from  one  of  his  Flankers  that  lay  open  unto
them,  in  such  sort,  that  they  sent  some  scores  of  them  to

356

RELATIONS OF ORMUZ  a.d.

1622.

carrie  newes  unto  their  Prophet  Mortus  Ali,  that  more  of
his  Disciples  would  shortly  be  with  him.  Which  accord-
ingly was  effected  and  proceeded  chiefely  out  of  their
owne  ignorance  and  dastardly  Cowardise ;  for  had  they
not  made  their  stand  in  that  place,  but  entred  pell-mell
with  the  Portugals  into  the  Castle,  with  the  losse  of  halfe
those  men  they  lost  that  day,  they  might  have  gayned
the  Victorie,  and  with  much  lesse  paine  unto  themselves,
who  from  that  time  the  Mine  was  blowne  up  (which  was
about  nine  of  the  clocke  before  Noone)  the  whole  day
stood  flocking  together  in  the  Sunne  without  either  meat
or  drinke,  which  was  sufficient  to  have  killed  halfe  of
them ;  notwithstanding  the  Portugals  made  very  slender
resistance.  The  most  that  was  done  was  by  the  Negroes,
whom  the  Portugals  did  beat  forwards  to  throw  powder
Pots,  with  which  many  of  the  Persians  were  pittifully
scalded  and  burnt.  Had  I  not  seene  it,  I  should  hardly
have  beleeved  that  such  had  beene  the  grosse  ignorance
of  the  Persian,  that  having  two  breaches,  the  one  not
much  inferiour  to  the  other  for  his  entrance,  that  he  would
apply  all  his  Souldiers  to  the  assault  of  the  one  and  none
at  all  to  the  other.  Besides  having  provided  at  least
eightie  or  a  hundred  scaling  Ladders,  never  so  much  as
brought  one  of  them  neere  unto  the  Castle  walls.  But
such  as  their  proceedings  are,  such  is  also  like  to  be  their
successe.  For  his  Souldiers  hang  in  a  cluster  upon  the
breach  just  as  a  swarme  of  Bees  upon  a  tree  or  bush  that
want  a  Hive  ;  or  like  a  flocke  of  Sheepe  at  a  gappe,  where
none  is  so  hardie  to  enter,  and  the  Portugals  to  put  them
out  of  that  paine  gleaneth  away  foure,  five,  sixe,  some-
times more  at  a  shot ;  insomuch  that  I  cannot  but  pittie
them  to  see  it.

The  eighteenth  Ditto,  the  Persian  continued  his  assault  Portugals
but  with more paines to himselfe then hurt unto the  Poore  estate-
Portugals. The  last  night  two  Captive  Negroes  made
signes  unto  the  Persian  that  they  were  desirous  to  come
unto  them,  so  the  Persians  let  downe  ropes  unto  them  and
so  plucked  them  up  unto  them,  who  declared  that  the

357

;

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1622.

Captaine  of  the  Castle  had  gotten  a  hurt  on  his  head  with  j
a  Stone,  and  how  there  were  not  above  a  hundred  Souldiers
in  the  Castle  able  to  manage  their  Armes,  their  water:
growne  scant  and  daily  worse  and  worse,  which  also!
increased  mortalitie  amongst  them:  how  there  is  likewise!
difference  among  themselves,  being  of  different  opinions,1
some  holding  it  best  to  adventure  their  escape  by  Sea  with
those  Frigots  they  have,  others  are  contrary  minded,  and
hold  it  more  honour  to  sell  their  lives  at  the  dearest  rate
and  defend  their  Castle  so  long  as  they  may,  and  when
Desperate  they  can  no  longer,  then  to  put  their  Women  and  Children1
Counsels.  wjt}1  an  tfie'ir  treasure  into  a  house,  and  blow  them  all  up1
with  Gunpowder  (that  the  Turkes  should  neither  injoy
their  wealth  nor  abuse  their  Wives)  which  done,  they
would  thrust  themselves  pell-mell  with  the  Persians,  and
so  end  their  dayes.

The  nineteenth  Ditto,  at  Even  being  the  third  day  the

Persian  that  had  lien  resting  himselfe  in  the  breach,  never1

offering to advance himselfe, did then set forward,1

whereby he got himselfe better footing and possessed

himselfe  of  all  the  Bulwarke,  and  forced  the  Portugal!  to'

forsake  the  same  and  retire  himselfe  further  within  the|

Castle : in  which  conflict  many  of  the  Portugals  werei

wounded  and  scalded  with  fire  Pots,  wherein  the  Persian

is  now  as  cunning  as  themselves,  though  many  of  them

have  payed  deare  for  their  learning. In  the  said  conflict

Quanto  doctlor  were likewise foure Portugals slaine and their heads

tanto  ncquior. brought before the Generall to witnesse the same.

Yet  this  is  the  therein  all  the  Persians  are  very  well  seene ; for  I  doej

that  they  are not  thinke  there  is  any  Hangman  in  all  Germanie  that

good  Swords- can  goe  beyond  them  in  that  Art ;  for  he  no  sooner  layeth

men,  the  Turks  hold  on  his  Enemie,  but  presently  at  one  blow  with  his

ftotandblZees Sw0rd> °ff S°eth hiS head' *^ ^^ WkH hlS Knife H
with  them" thrusts  a  hole  either  in  the  Eare  or  through  one  of  the

Cheekes,  and  so  thrusting  his  finger  in  at  the  mouth  and:

out  at  the  hole  in  the  cheeke,  brings  sometimes  two,  three,

or  foure  of  them  before  the  Generall  together,  in  such  sort!

that  not  a  Butcher  in  East-cheape  could  doe  it  better.

358

RELATIONS OF ORMUZ

A.D.

l622.

But  if  (as  commonly  it  happeneth)  that  these  Heads  of
their  Enemies  so  taken  in  the  warres  be  sent  to  the  view
of  the  King  of  Chan,  then  are  they  no  lesse  cunning  to
flea  off  the  skinne  of  the  whole  head  and  face  and
stuffe  the  same  with  Straw  like  a  football,  and  so
send  them  by  whole  sackfuls  together.  This  night
one  of  the  Frigots  that  came  from  Muscat  for  the  Frigot
Donna  Sosa,  made  her  escape  and  got  away,  no  doubt  very  escaPeth-
richly  fraighted.  Her  consort  was  chased  in  againe,  which
was  likewise  going :  that  which  escaped,  being  haled  by
the  Arab  Boates,  that  lay  in  wayte  to  intercept  their  going,
used  the  Watchword  usuall  betwixt  the  English  and  Arabs,
which  was  onely  Ingres  Ingresses ;  which  Watchword
hath  never  beene  changed  nor  once  altered  since  our  first
attempting  the  businesse.  Wherin  both  Persians  &
English  are  much  to  be  blamed ;  for  by  the  common  use
of  that  one  Watchword,  the  Portugals  have  come  to  the
knowledge  of  it,  and  have  made  good  use  of  it  to  their
owne  benefites,  which  is  their  gayne  and  our  losse.

The  twentieth  Ditto  at  night,  the  other  Frigot  above
mentioned  offering  to  escape,  was  taken  by  the  Londons
men  in  her  Frigot  and  Pinnace.  She  was  sent  to  carry
away  the  Almirante  named  Luis  de  Britto,  a  kinsman  of
the  Viceroy  of  Goa,  whom  the  Captaine  of  the  Castle
would  not  suffer  to  depart :  wherefore  the  Portugals  which
were  taken  in  her,  being  fearefull  of  the  successe  of  the  [n.  x.
Castle,  and  that  it  was  not  able  long  to  hold  out,  for  safetie
of  their  owne  lives  being  seven  persons,  held  it  their  best
course  to  adventure  their  escape  in  the  said  Frigot,  and
in  the  night  stole  her  away,  and  were  taken  as  above
mentioned.  The  one  and  twentieth  Ditto,  the  Persian
made  preparation  and  shew,  as  if  at  once  they  would  make
short  worke  to  possesse  themselves  of  the  rest  of  the
Castle ;  but  where  we  expected  to  see  them  put  the  same
in  execution,  I  perceived  that  they  and  the  Portugals  were
in  parley  together,  wherefore  I  addressed  my  selfe  to  know  Parley.
the  cause  or  so  sodaine  an  alteration ;  and  as  I  was  fitting
my  selfe  to  goe  unto  the  Persian  Generall  for  that  purpose,

359

One  Watch-
word no
Watchword.
Frigot  taken.

800.]

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1622.

I  incountred  a  Messenger  from  our  English  Commanders
who  sent  me  word,  that  a  Boat  from  the  Castle  was  gone
with  a  Flag  of  truce  aboord  their  Ships,  and  they  desired
my  company  aboord  with  them  to  understand  what  the
businesse  was ;  and  comming  aboord  the  London,  found
two  Portugals  with  Letters  from  the  Captaine  of  the
Castle  and  from  the  Almirante,  contayning,  viz.

THere  hath  beene  such  antient  friendship  betwixt  the
Portugals  and  the  English,  that  considering  the
Warres  which  at  this  present  wee  have  in  this  place,  wee
ought  one  to  understand  the  other,  for  it  seemeth  to  me
when  I  see  the  Mines  are  made  by  the  Moores,  that  onely
by  your  ayde  Warre  is  made  against  me,  with  which  one
of  my  Bulwarkes  is  gotten  from  me ;  wherefore  your
Worships  would  bee  pleased  to  doe  me  the  favour  to  bee
a  meanes  to  make  Peace  betwixt  me  and  those  Moores,  if
the  same  shall  stand  with  their  and  your  good  liking,
provided  it  bee  in  that  manner,  that  I  lose  not  my  credit,
neither  your  selves  leave  to  gaine  Honour  in  a  Time  so
favourable  unto  you ;  Thus  not  else  our  Lord  keepe
you,  &c.

Symon  de  Mela  Perera.

THis  Fort  is  so  beset  and  oppressed,  that  the  Moores
require  us  to  deliver  the  same  up  on  Composition,
the  which  wee  will  not  doe  by  any  meanes,  for  when  wee
shall  bee  forced  to  make  Composition  wee  will  call  your
Worships :  for  it  is  not  reason  we  should  treate  with
Moores  where  you  are  present.  For  wee  hold  it  better
to  deliver  our  innocent  Women  and  other  unnecessarie
people,  to  the  rigour  of  our  Weapons,  then  to  the
clemencie  of  the  Moores,  and  for  that  the  knowledge
hereof  should  not  bee  wanting  to  your  Worships,  I  have
written  this  besides  what  accompanieth  the  same  from  the
Captayne,  and  for  what  else  you  desire  to  know  you  may
informe  your  selves  from  this  messenger,  to  whom  you  may

360

RELATIONS OF ORMUZ  ad.

1622.
give  the  same  credit  as  unto  my  owne  person,  and  so  God
keepe  your  Worships,  &c. The  first  of  May  1622.

De  V.  S.  Luis  de  Brito  Dareto.

The  request  of  the  Portugals  contayned  in  their  severall
Letters  on  the  other  side,  being  had  to  consideration  and
commiseration  had  of  them  as  Christians,  it  was  resolved
to  give  them  a  comfortable  answer  unto  their  demands ;
which  in  effect  was  as  followeth,  but  want  of  time  the
businesse  requiring  expedition,  would  not  permit  to  keepe
Copie  of  the  said  answers  which  was  first  unto  theCaptaine
Simon  de  Melles,  to  give  him  notice  of  the  receit  of  his
Letter,  and  whereas  the  chiefe  point  therein  was,  that  we
would  bee  Terceras  for  them  to  procure  them  such  condi-
tions of  agreement  with  the  Persians,  as  that  might  be  to
the  saving  of  the  lives  of  so  many  Christian  soules  as  were
with  him  in  the  Castle ;  our  answer  was,  that  such  had  English
beene  our  care  to  provide  for  them,  that  it  was  in  our  owne  Clemencie  to
power  to  grant  that  request,  which  we  were  not  onely  ready  Portugals.
to  doe,  but  likewise  to  shew  them  any  other  curtesie,  or  per-
forme  any  Christian  dutie  towards  them  that  might  anyway
tend  to  their  good.  Therefore  advised  him  to  set  downe
his  Demands,  and  send  the  same  unto  us  with  as  much
brevitie  as  was  possible,  and  to  the  like  purpose  and  effect
was  our  answer  unto  the  Almirant  his  letter,  with  which
the  two  Messengers  were  dispeeded  in  one  of  our  owne
Barges,  who  returned  with  another  Letter  both  from  the
Captaine  and  Almirant,  that  viz.  The  necessitie  of  the  busi-
nesse so  requiring  the  Commanders  and  my  selfe,  would
not  lose  so  much  time  to  write  any  other  answer  unto  the
said  Letters,  least  the  Persian  should  take  advantage  of
the  opportunitie,  and  sodainly  presse  in  upon  them  and
put  them  all  to  the  Sword :  wherefore  we  addressed  our
selves  unto  the  Persian  Generall,  to  be  suiters  unto  him
in  the  distressed  Christians  behalfe,  that  hee  would  hold
his  promise  with  them  of  a  faithfull  Truce  for  two  dayes,
in  which  time  wee  might  treate  with  them  of  such
Conditions  as  should  bee  as  well  behovefull  and  beneficiall

361

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1622.

for  the  Persian  as  for  our selves,  and  that  there  might  be  j
no  more  effusion  of  blood  on  either  side. At  length  my  I
selfe  and  a  Persian  Gentleman  with  me,  was  appointed  to
goe  with  the  Portugals  to  the  Castle,  and  to  treat  the  I
businesse  with  the  Captaine  of  the  Castle,  &c. And  also  j
they  desired  that  our  Vice-admirall  (Master  Woodcocke)
might come along with us. So with consent of the
General]  we  went  all  three  of  us  to  the  Castle  gate,  but
were not admitted to goe in. Where wee met with
Signior  Leuis  de  Britto  the  Almirant  of  the  Portugals,
accompanied  with  five  or  sixe  Cavaliroes  but  did  not  see;
the  Captaine,  for  the  truth  is,  the  under  Captaines  andfc
Muttnieinthe  Souldiers  had  mutined  against  him  and  detayned  him  as  i
Castle.  Prisoner,  so  that  all  our  Conference  was  onely  with  the  f

Almirante,  and  his  speech  chiefely  addressed  unto  Master
Woodcocke  our  Almirant  or  Vice-admirall.
[II.x.  1801.]  Meer  Abel  Hassan,  and  Pulot  Beg  were  after  sent  to
the  Ship  (where  some  had  imbezled  some  treasure)  to
request  their  company  &  conference  from  the  Chan.,
Comming  on  shoare  to  the  English  house,  they  began
with  a  long  speech,  how  kindly  the  Duke  did  take  thej
severall  services  and  helpes  we  had  given  them  in  this!
their  warre,  and  how  the  same  in  his  part  should  neither;
be  forgotten,  nor  goe  unrewarded  in  a  larger  measure;;
then  either  he  had  promised,  or  was  bound  unto.  The;
next  was  to  make  knowne  the  Chans  resolution  to  proceede
both  to  the  invasion  of  Sware  and  Muscat,  and  therefore
that  they  should  not  suffer  the  Portugals  to  depart  unto
any  of  those  places.  The  third  and  last  part  of  his  speech
was  most  base  and  very  dishonourable,  tending  to  this,
purpose,  that  we  should  betray  into  their  hands,  after  they
were  under  our  protection,  the  Captaine,  and  five  or  sixei
more  of  the  principall  of  the  Portugals,  alleadging  that  iti
Perfidy  and  would  be  much  to  the  Chans  honour  to  have  them  to
honesty.  present unto the Sha  Abas ; which  vilde dishonorable

motion,  when  I  heard,  I  absented  my  selfe,  hating  my
eares  for  being  guilty  of  the  hearing  of  the  same ;  and|
much more the tongue that could utter so odious a

362

RELATIONS OF ORMUZ  ad.

1622.

businesse ; and  for  my  farewell,  told  them,  I  would  not
be  guiltie  of  such  a  thing  for  the  house  full  of  Gold.

The  23.  Ditto,  the  Portugals  (whose  meere  necessity
and  pittifull  estate  wherein  they  were,  had  forced  them  to
surrender  their  Castle  upon  any  conditions,  whereby  they
might  have  any  hope  at  all  to  save  their  lives,  which  stood
then  in  great  hazard  to  be  spoiled  by  the  Persians)  sent  Portugals  in
this  morning  to  give  notice  unto  us,  they  were  contented  0r^S  3*1.
to  put  themselves  into  our  hands,  on  condition  that  we
should  give  them  means  to  be  transported  either  for
Muscat  or  India,  which  was  promised  them  and  Captaine
Blith  with  my  selfe  went  as  hostages  into  the  Castle,  to  see
the  setting  of  them  out,  and  the  Persian  promised  that  not
one  Souldier,  or  man  of  his,  should  enter  the  Castle  till
they  were  dispended  and  sent  away,  and  how  that  onely
three  of  them  and  three  of  us,  or  our  people  should  sit  at
the  gate  to  see  that  they  should  carry  nothing  of  valew
with  them :  which  on  their  parts  was  so  neerely  seene  into,  Persians
that  most  basely  they  searched  and  abused  the  very  women.  Partialltie-
But  the  King  of  Ormuz  together  with  his  rich  Vesier,  their
Treasure,  women  and  servants  were  all  conveied  over  the
wals  or  breach,  and  not  an  English  man  either  called  or
suffered  to  see  what  they  carried  out  with  them :  and  not
onely  these,  but  all  other  Moores  and  Banyans  with  their
Treasure  and  best  things,  conveied  forth  the  same  way :
yea,  whole  bales  of  goods,  Chests,  and  Suppetas,  with  God
knoweth  what  in  them,  carried  over  the  breaches.  And
no  sooner  were  the  Gates  open  to  passe  out  the  Portugals,
but  there  was  at  least  fortie  Persians  here  and  there  in  the
Castle,  yea  and  some  of  the  ruder  sort  of  the  English  also,
whose  comming  in  I  may  justly  feare  was  cause  the  Persians  Rascatt
came  in  with  them,  judging  themselves  as  worthy  of  that  rudenesse-
liberty  as  our  people.

The  24.  Ditto  before  noone,  the  Persians  and  English
began  to  pillage  in  such  sort  that  I  was  both  grieved  and
ashamed  to  see  it ; but  could  devise  no  remedie  at  all
for  it : the  Persians  driving  out  the  sicke,  maimed,  and  Pittifull
burnt  Christians  that  were  not  able  to  helpe  themselves,  Pllla&mg-

363

A.D.

l622.

Good

Ordnance  i
the  Castle.

Persian
inhumanity.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

that  made  my  very  heart  to  earne  in  my  body  to  see  it;'
and  in  the  evening,  the  Chan  in  person  came  as  it  were  in1
triumphing  manner  to  see  the  Castle,  and  to  view  the  great
Ordnance,  whereof  there  are  neere  upon  three  hundred:
peeces  of  Brasse,  the  most  of  them  Cannon,  Demicanon,:
Culvarin  and  Demiculvarin,  part  whereof  were  Ordnance
belonging  to  the  Gallions,  the  rest  belonging  unto  the
Castle ;  which  purchase  if  wee  can  possesse,  will  be  the:
greatest  matter  will  fall  to  our  share.  This  evening  the1
Commanders  and  my  selfe  desiring  to  remaine  in  possession
of  the  Church,  whither  wee  had  conveied  some  quantitie
of  Plate  and  money,  for  the  better  and  safer  keeping
thereof  from  being  imbezelled,  our  motion  was  utterly
denied  by  Pullot  Beg,  who  told  the  Commanders  in  plaine
tearmes,  they  might  lye  without  the  doores :  whereat  they
grew  in  choler  (as  they  had  just  cause)  and  so  we  came  all;
three  of  us  out  of  the  Castle  together :  the  Captaines  went
aboord  their  shippes,  and  my  selfe  to  the  Citie ;  but  the1
Sea  being  up,  and  want  of  a  Boate  staied  me  at  the  Castle
wals  till  it  was  neere  midnight :  at  which  time  came  no:
lesse  then  sixtie  Persians  by  their  owne  report,  sent  by  the
Chan  to  watch  that  no  Arabs  should  come  and  convey
away  any  of  the  Ordnance  that  lieth  upon  the  Sea  strand ;
but  I  feare  if  the  truth  were  knowne,  their  comming  was
to  cut  the  poore  Christians  throates,  that  lay  at  the  Sea
side  for  want  of  Boates  to  carrie  them  away,  if  they  had
not  found  them  to  be  guarded  by  the  English ;  or  else  to;
see  that  wee  should  not  convey  away  any  of  the  Ordnance
aforesaid :  our  chiefe  businesse  this  day  was  to  see  the
poore  Christians  dispeeded  out  of  the  Castle,  the  greatest
number  of  them  so  weakened  with  severall  sorts  of
maladies,  but  chiefely  with  famine,  and  many  so  noysome
both  to  themselves  and  others  with  their  putrified  wounds
and  scaldings  with  Gunpowder,  and  so  pittifull  were  their
severall  complaints  and  cries,  that  it  would  have  moved
a  heart  of  stone  to  pittie  them ;  yet  such  was  the  dogged
nature  of  the  Persians,  that  they  drove  them  and  hunted
them  out  of  the  Castle  like  so  many  dogges,  pillaging

364

RELATIONS OF ORMUZ  ad.

1622.
many  of  them  to  the  very  shirts. The  27.  ditto  at  Even,
we  licensed the  Portugall to  depart to the number  of
2500.  men,  women,  and  children,  to  whom  we  gave  a  passe
to  free  them  from  molestation,  in  case  they  met  with  any
of  our  ships  at  Sea  : also  our  two  prises  the  Robert  and
Shilling  to  passe  them  in,  with  victuals  and  water  necessary
to  the  voyage ; and  besides  these,  wee  sent  away  upwards  2600.  persons
a  hundred  persons  maimed  and  sicke,  that  could  not  be  sent  azvay  h
dispeeded  for  want  of  shipping.  the  EnZhsh'

The  King  of  Ormus  was  poore,  and  lived  chiefly  upon  [II.  x.  1802.]
his  140000.  exhibition  from  the  King  of  Spaine,  and  some
helpes  from  the  Custome-house  in  reservation  of  some
pettie  Customes.  In  romaging  there  amongst  his  Papers
was  found  this  Letter  written  by  him  to  the  King  of
Spaine ; the  translated  Copie  whereof  I  here  present.

THe  Letters  which  for  three  yeeres  last  past  I  have
written  unto  your  Majestie,  both  by  Sea  and  Land
are  as  yet  unanswered,  which  I  daily  expect ; for  the  same
doth  much  import  this  Kingdome  of  Ormus  and  service
of  your  Majestie,  under  whose  protection  I  have  life  and
meanes  thereof. In  June  last,  1620,  arrived  at  this  Fort
the  foure  Galleons,  of  which  is  Captaine  Generall  Ruy
frere  Dandrada,  who  fitted  himselfe  with  all  things  neces-
sarie  to  goe  and  attend  the  comming  of  the  English  Ships  at
Jasques,  which  accordingly  he  did  ;  of  whose  successe  therin
I  shall  not  need  to  treate  in  particular,  which  is  done  by
himselfe  by  this  Post,  who  is  sent  at  my  charge  and  his ;
yet  thus  much  I  will  say,  this  Gentleman  laboured  all  that  An  excuse
was  possible  to  keepe  the  English  from  carrying  away  their  f^T'A  lnf  ,
silke,  wherein  hee  performed  the  uttermost  of  his  dutie, r^/um-
like  a  resolute  and  valiant  Captaine :  but  by  tempest  and  You  have  the
stormie  weather  his  Ships  were  more  separated  then  his  story  sup.  7.5.
enemies,  by  which  occasion  they  had  opportunitie  to  carry  The  storme

away  their  silke,  which  cost  the  life  of  their  chiefe  Com-  w*\  mikn

their  tearefuu
mander,  who  was  slaine  in  the  fight,  in  which  also  died  hearts.

two  of  our  Captaines.

By  this  occasion,  and  in  the  time,  the  Captaine  Generall

365

A.D.

l622.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

was incumbred with the English, the

King

of Persia

commanded  his  Vassalls  to  send  people  into  Arabia,  to
bring  the  same  under  his  subjection,  being  without  any  to;
give  him  impediment :  Yet  before  they  went  I  requiredi
the  Captaine  of  this  Fort,  also  the  Veeder  Dafazenda,  to'
send  some  Frigats  in  favour  of  the  Arabs  (who  are  your
Majesties  Subjects)  that  might  defend  them :  for  without
such  ayde  it  was  not  possible  for  them  to  defend  them-
selves :  and  for  this  effect  came  thither  certain  Xegues  to
demand  succour,  which  was  not  granted  them ;  but  the
most  the  Captaine  did,  was  to  enjoyne  mee  to  send  a
kinsman  of  the  Queene  my  wife,  whom  presently  I  sent,
spending  therein  more  then  I  was  able  or  had  to  spare:!
yet  his  going  was  to  no  effect  for  want  of  Frigats,  which
onely  might  hinder  the  Boates  wherein  the  Persians  passed;
over,  for  which  cause  this  day  the  King  of  Persia  is  become;
Lord  of  Arabia  ;  and  I  also  feare  that  verie  shortly  hee  will
come  against  this  Fort,  because  of  all  this  Kingdome  no
more  is  left  mee,  save  onely  this  Hand  of  Salt  without
water  to  drinke  :  for  all  things  pertaining  to  the  sustenance
of  mans  life,  come  from  such  places  as  the  King  of  Persia
possesseth.  The  losse  and  overthrow  of  this  Kingdome  of
///  Captaines.  Ormus  proceedeth  altogether  from  the  Captaines  your
Majestie  placeth  therein,  who  for  their  particular  interest,
are  content  to  dissemble  and  consent  that  the  Kingdome
bee  taken,  without  cost  of  bloud,  or  labour  unto  the  King:
of  Persia  his  Ministers,  and  this  is  so  apparent  that  I  need
not  write  thereof,  but  that  which  I  will  speake  with  truth
is,  if  that  your  Majestie  bee  pleased,  that  this  Kingdome
and  Fort  shall  enjoy  either  peace  or  meanes  to  subsist,  you
must  send  such  Captaines  as  are  no  Merchants,  because  the
Mariners  which  might  serve  in  your  Majesties  Navie  tc
keepe  this  streit,  are  all  imployed  in  the  Captaines  Ships
and  Frigats,  which  hee  onely  imployeth  in  Trade  of  Mer-
chandise, in  which  Ships  serve  likewise  the  Souldiers  of!
the  Fort,  insomuch  that  many  times  it  is  left  with  very  few
But  so  long  as  this  continueth,  there  shall  ever  bee  wanting
both  Mariners  and  Souldiers  to  your  Navy,  to  defend  anc

366

Ormus,  an
Hand  of  Salt
without  water

RELATIONS OF ORMUZ  a.d.

1622.

keepe  this  Hand  from  the  power  of  the  King  of  Persia,

which  at  this  day  hath  more  then  a  thousand  Boates,  and

is  commander  of  this  streit  more  then  is  your  Majestie,

and  all  by  the  fault  of  those  Captaines,  which  for  twentie  or

five  and  twentie  yeeres  past  have  served  in  this  place.

Those  in  former  times  contented  themselves  with  the  gaine

of  fortie  or  50000.  Cruzados  for  their  three  yeeres  service,

but  now  they  are  not  contented  with  200000. Likewise

in  former  times  they  had  onely  two  Shippes  when  most,

but  now  they  have  foure  and  as  many  Frigats,  and  there

is  nothing  wanting  unto  them ; but  it  seemeth  not  just,

that  to  satisfie  the  covetousnesse  of  one,  who  aymeth  at

nothing  but  his  owne  profit, the  weale  publike  should

perish,  and  that  every  one  should  have  but  little  that  onely

one  may  live  to  injoy  much. From  hence  is  growne  and

groweth  all  the  evills  of  this  Kingdome,  proceeding  from

such  Ministers  as  are  placed  by  your  Majestie,  granting

unto  them  the  command,  which  heretofore  the  Kings  my

predecessours  ever  held. But  I  am  now  brought  so  low,

and  such  as  are  under  mee,  that  we  remaine  altogether

unable  to  repaire  the  necessities  that  are  daily  offered,  as

appeareth  by  this  of  Arabia ; by  which  your  Majestie  will

bee  forced  to  make  warre,  and  continuall  warre  by  Sea

against  this  enemy,  for  that  by  Land  you  have  no  power  to

conquer  him,  who  is  not  contented  with  the  taking  away

the  firme  Land  of  this  Kingdome  altogether,  with  the  lies

of  Barem  and  Kishme,  but  further,  in  confidence  of  his  Kishme9o\

great  number  of  Boats,  having  none  to  resist  him,  hath Quixome.

taken  from  us  Arabia,  which  was  the  onely  remedie  of  this

Hand. Of  the  truth  of  what  hath  herein  beene  spoken,

your  Majesties  Ambassador  Don  Garcia  de  Sylva  (God

sending  him  well  to  your  Majestie)  shall  be  a  good  wit-

nesse,  to  whose  report  I  referre  mee,  and  to  all  others

which  goe  from  hence  ;  God  keepe  your  Majesty. Ormus

the  twelfth  of  February,  1621.

Mamede  Xa  Rey  de  Ormus.
To  this  Letter,  I  have  added  the  translated  Copies  of
divers  other  Letters,  for  the  Readers  more  full  satisfaction.

367

A.D.

l622.

[II.  x.  1803.]

English  kind-
nesses acknow-
ledged, which
upbraideth
the  Portugalls
ungratitude
cause  of  this
warre.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

The  Vice  Admirall  his  second  Letter.

ILlustrissrs.  I  kisse  the  hands  of  your  Ss.  for  writing  unto
mee ;  and  beleeve  mee  I  esteeme  the  same  as
becommeth  a  Gentleman,  whom  adverse  fortune  in  the
warres  hath  no  whit  disanimated.  The  Captaine  hath  writ
unto  you,  and  all  the  Portugalls  recommend  themselves,
and  doe  desire  you,  and  I  for  them,  that  you  will  deale  with
them  as  Christians,  and  the  Nation  who  so  many  times
have  joyned  in  Armes  with  them  against  the  Moores.
To  morrow  shall  you  see  in  what  manner  they  desire  to
bee  dealt  with  all,  God  keepe  you  with  all  the  rest  of  your
company,  &c.  Primo  May  1622.

De  V.  S.  Luis  de  Brito  Bareto.

A  Certificate  made  by  sundry  Portugalls,  how  the
Treasure,  Jewells,  &c.  belonging  to  the  King
and  his  Vizeer  of  Ormus,  which  were  secretly
conveyed  out  of  the  Castle  of  Ormus  by  the
Persians.

WE  whose  names  are  hereunder  written,  do  certifie  our
knowledge  how  that  Byram  Aga  with  other  Turkes,
by  the  commandement  of  their  superior,  went  unto  the
house  of  the  Goasil,  within  the  Fort  to  watch  the  goods
that  there  remained  ;  also  the  money  and  riches  which  was
therein  at  the  time  when  the  Fort  was  delivered  up  unto
the  English.  And  the  same  night  many  other  Turkes  by
the  Trenches  of  the  Bulwarke,  named  Saint  Iago,  unseene
of  the  English,  by  the  breach  in  the  Cisterne  adjoyning
to  the  said  Trench,  and  also  through  the  said  Trenches
conveyed  much  riches  belonging  to  the  said  Gosil,  and
King  of  Ormus,  and  also  of  their  women  and  kinsfolkes.
In  witnesse  of  the  truth  wee  have  hereunder  written  our!
names :  Ormus  the  twentie  five  of  May.  1622.

Balthisar  Carborius.
Salvador  de  Campos.

Utte  Vallente.
Iodo.  Vallente.
368

Franco  Gomes.
Batta  Javs,  &q

RELATIONS OF ORMUZ  a.d.

1622.

A  Certificate  from  the  Portugalls,  of  their  kind
usage,  wherein  was  performed  more  then  was
promised  them.

WEe  all,  whose  names  are  here  under  written  and
mentioned,  Housholders  and  Souldiers,  Inhabitants
of  Ormus.  Viz.  Pe.  visente  Serentnio  rig.  &  Salvador
de  Campo,  provider  of  the  holy  House,  and  Balthesar
Francisco,  chiefe  Physician,  and  Don  Antonio  da  silva
soldado,  and  Visente  Vallente,  and  Antonio  Autunes,  and
Gaspar  Soares,  and  Francisco  Gomes,  and  Jacamo  Artiquo,
i  and  Baltasar  Borges,  with  others  doe  witnesse,  how  it  is
true  the  English  Captaines  have  performed  their  promise
made  upon  yeelding  up  of  the  Castle,  by  giving  two  of
their  owne  ships  or  pinnasses  to  carry  away  all  the  people
whither  they  would  goe,  also  by  defending  them,  that  at
no  time  neither  Moore  nor  Infidell  should  doe  them  any
hurt :  and  forasmuch  as  the  said  Pinnasses  could  not  con-
taine  all  the  people,  the  same  being  dispeeded,  they
procured  and  did  whatsover  from  them  might  be  expected
to  accommodate  the  sending  away  in  safetie  of  such  as
remained,  to  which  end  and  purpose  they  requested  Boats
and  Mariners,  from  the  Persians,  but  the  Moores,  as
enemies  to  all  Christians,  refused  to  give  either  Mariners
or  other  helpe :  Whereupon  the  English  Captaines
resolved,  without  being  thereto  any  way  oblieged,  to  send
one  of  their  owne  Frigats,  with  three  small  Boats  with
thirty  or  forty  Englishmen  well  armed  for  our  safety  and
defence,  untill  we  should  bee  safely  landed  in  some  secure
place ;  yea  by  the  grace  of  God  in  Musquate  it  selfe
without  any  impeachment  or  Embargo  by  the  Turkes,  and
more  they  have  given  hospitality  to  our  sicke  and  wounded,
which  are  neere  about  two  hundred  at  the  least,  whom
they  have  sustained  and  cured  with  as  great  care  and
diligence,  as  if  they  had  beene  their  owne  brothers,  without
being  therunto  bound  nor  comprehended  in  the  agreement.
Also  those,  which  at  this  present  remain  sicke,  and  not  in
case  to  bee  sent  away,  being  to  the  number  of  thirty  or
x  369  2  A

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1622.

forty,  they  have  taken  upon  their  charge,  both  to  feed  and;
also  to  cure,  till  such  time  as  we  can  send  Boats  for  them,1
and  others  of  the  Country  which  remaine  here,  the  Boats;
not  being  able  to  carry  any  more.  And  as  the  said  Englishl
Captaines  have  done  more  for  us  then  they  promised,  and
given  us  more  then  wee  could  expect,  we  remaine  obliegedi
to  answere  their  favours  and  friendship  aforesaid :  where-
upon wee  doe  promise  and  bind  our  selves  that  are  here
present,  to  intreat  with  much  faithfulnesse,  love,  and  amitiq
those  English  which  for  our  good  and  safetie  doe  goe  in)
our  company,  that  none  shall  doe  them  evill  or  offence,
neither  in  their  goods,  nor  yet  in  their  returne,  that  they
may  safely  and  freely  both  passe  and  returne  with  their  said
Vessells,  who  are  not  tied  to  stay  longer  for  the  Boats  wee
are  to  send  for  our  said  people,  that  here  remaine  them
three  dayes  naturall.  In  witnesse  of  the  truth,  the  above-
named  with  others  have  joyntly  subscribed  their  names,1
May  the  twenty  five,  1622.

[II. x.  1804.]  A  Letter  written  from  Ruy  frera  dandrada,  and
sent  aboord  the  Jonas,  by  one  of  his  Captaines.
named  Alfonso  Borgea,  at  our  first  arrivall  neere
the  Castle  of  Keshme.

COurtesie  is  the  daughter  of  Nobilitie,  as  ever  it  hath
beene  found  in  the  English  Caveleers,  from  which  1
inferre  that  in  these  occasions  may  be  drawne  the  same
example,  whereby  in  Europe  may  bee  made  publike  youi<
valours,  and  unto  his  Majestie  may  bee  presented  the  great
service  unto  him  is  done :  that  from  the  estimation  thereof
may  arise  to  bee  made  a  good  peace  and  conformitie,  which1
wee  will  all  write  into  India  to  that  effect,  as  ministers  ofj
the  same,  if  it  shall  seeme  good  unto  you.  Therefore  wee
request  you  not  to  move  warre  in  favour  of  the  King  of
Persia,  thereby  to  diminish  the  glory  of  your  Nation,  with
which  so  many  times  they  have  helped  us  against  the
Moores,  whereby  wee  gained  Lisbone  in  the  dayes  of  King
Don  Antonio  the  first,  and  afterwards  King  Don  second.

37o

RELATIONS OF ORMUZ  a.d.

1622.

was  aided  by  the  Duke  of  Lancaster  in  the  action  of
Castile :  but  if  these  obligations  are  small  on  your  part,
and  that  ours  now  may  bee  made  greater,  in  which  wee  will
remaine,  if  you  will  but  suffer  us  to  prosecute  our  warre
against  the  Persian,  without  your  valorous  spirits  hindering
what  wee  are  able  to  sustaine,  and  thereby  impeach  the
commerce  in  Spaine  to  the  hindrance  of  both  Nations,  and
to  the  damage  both  of  Shippes  and  Merchants  of  which  I
doubt  not,  when  his  Majesty  shall  bee  advised  in  what
manner  the  English  doe  carry  themselves,  so  that  wee  may
reserve  our  dissentions  for  other  voyages,  in  which  by
valorous  contending  may  bee  satisfied  those  wrongs  that
cannot  well  bee  remembred  in  such  times  as  these  are,  and
for  that  the  same  may  with  due  interest  and  conformitie
of  both  Nations  English  and  Portugalls,  I  returne  to  put
you  in  remembrance  of  the  above  written,  which  ought  to
be  discoursed  with  good  understanding,  as  a  matter  in
which  your  Worships  may  amplifie  and  advance  the
generositie  of  your  Nation,  and  retaine  us  as  friends  unto
your  affaires,  giving  us  motive  to  procure  in  acknowledge-
ment of  this  benefit  all  peace  and  quietnesse,  and  if  you
shall  disesteeme  the  same,  the  first  wee  hope  for  is  no  more
then  to  provide  our  selves  to  die,  defending  that  with
Armes,  we  have  gotten  by  Armes,  &c.  the  first  of
February,  11.  1622.

Ruy  Frera  Dandrade.

Another  Certificate  of  the  kind  usage  of  the
Portugalls.

WE  the  Captaines,  Souldiers,  and  Inhabitants  of  the
Castle  of  Ormus,  now  in  the  possession  of  the
English  doe  say  and  affirme  for  truth,  that  they  the
said  English  have  performed  all  what  was  promised  by
them,  and  more  in  giving  us  shipping  of  their  owne  to
transport  us  for  India  with  victualls  and  all  things  else
necessary,  and  delivered  us  from  the  hands  of  the  Turkes
who  sought  our  destruction,  and  also  suffered  us  freely  to
passe  out  of  the  Castle  with  our  apparell  and  bedding,  and

371

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGBIMES

1622.

needfull  money  in  our  pockets.  And  commanded  our
sicke  and  maymed  people  to  be  cured  by  their  owne
Surgeons,  sending  them  daily  food  in  great  abundance,
and  would  not  suffer  any  of  the  Moores  to  hurt  them  iij
any  case.  In  witnesse  of  the  truth  wee  have  here  undei
written  our  names: Ormus  the  seventh  of  May,  1622.  !

Joan  de  Mello. Costodio  Pimentel.
M.  de  Samperas. Symao  de  Mello.

A  third Certificate.

LEt  it  bee  graunted,  that  the  warres  and  offence;
received  therein  provoke  a  man  to  revenge,  notwith-
standing wee  cannot  deny  unto  your  Worships,  and  untc!
all  the  rest  of  your  Company,  how  much  we  are  indebted
for  the  good  intreatie  shewed  unto  these  which  yeeldec1
themselves  unto  you :  and  it  shall  for  ever  live  in  oui
memories  those  benefits,  for  which  when  time  and  fortune'
shall  minister  occasion,  wee  will  indevour  to  shew  oui'
selves  gratefull  with  other,  no  lesse  tokens  of  love  du(
unto  a  Nation,  which  ever  have  been  so  affectionatec
towards  us :  and  evill  be  to  him  that  hath  caused  discorc
betwixt  us,  for  it  evidently  appeareth  how  greatly  tin
English  and  Portugall  Nations  doe  love  together,  and  ij
doth  well  appeare  wee  doe  all  of  us  adore  one  onely  God
for  notwithstanding  the  warre,  you  doe  use  so  man)
principles  by  the  which  it  is  not  greatly  to  bee  marvellec1
at,  that  in  you  there  are  such  good  workes,  and  in  us  sucl
a  thankefulnesse  as  may  bee  eternall,  with  a  great  desin
that  all  discord  may  cease,  and  that  wee  may  returne  to  th(
antient  amitie  in  which  I  hope,  and  in  the  noble  word  anc
qualitie  of  your  person  and  persons,  and  for  that  I  wil
not  bee  further  troublesome  unto  your  Worships,  botl
in  curing  and  sustaining  those  poore  people  that  are  witl
you,  I  have  sent  these  foure  Boates  to  fetch  them  away
and  if  it  shall  seeme  good  to  your  Worships,  and  the  res'
with  you,  to  continue  your  former  courtesies  unto  the  end
in  performing  the  word  of  Conquerours  and  Christians

372

RELATIONS OF ORMUZ  ad.

1622.
is  formerly  you  have  done,  now  at  this  present  to  give
:hem  a  guard,  that  they  may  come  safe  from  the  Moores ;
x>r  that  like  yeelded  they  have  neither  Armour  to  defend
:hemselves,  nor  yet  strength  to  use  them,  if  you  like  noble
3onquerours  give  them  not  convoy  ;  in  whose  word  I  am  ni.  x.  1805.]
:onfident :  Thus  as  your  servant  in  what  your  Worships
m\  command  mee,  I  rest. Soar  27.  of  July,  1622.

Amaro  Roiz.

Powlet  Beg  the  chiefe  Commissioner,  when  the  English  /  have  heard
expected  to  have  received  1200.  Tomanes  pay,  hee  made  that  the
:hem  more  in  his  debt,  the  fruit  of  some  Mariners  private  j[*<S*. .
discourse and imbezelling. The  English returned de-  If  the  Kins  of
maunds  of  a  greater  summe  due  from  the  Persian  in  like  Persiazoooo,
:ase. At  last  three  moneths  pay  was  allowed,  and  they  pounds.
shifted  off  from  their  other  demands,  hee  forsooth,  having
10  power  thereto  without  the  Cans  Order. It  is  said,  that
me  Portugalls  not  onely  kept  the  King  bare,  but  tooke
Dribes  of  his  substitutes  in  other  Provinces,  to  protect
mem  from  their  lawfull  King,  whereby  he  was  used  more
like  a  Portugall  Slave  then  an  Arab  King.

After  our  businesse  ended,  our  misery  began,  occasioned
3y  the  unsufferable  heat,  and  partly  by  the  disorders  of  our
Dwne  people  in  drinking  Rack,  and  using  other  exercises
no  lesse  hurtfull :  whereby  grew  such  a  mortalitie,  that
three  fourths  of  our  men  were  dangerously  sicke,  and
many  died  so  suddenly,  that  they  feared  the  plague,
whereof  yet  no  tokens  appeared.  This  extremitie  lasted
but  fourteene  daies,  in  which  time  sixe  or  seven  died
svery  day.  After  which  it  pleased  God  to  stay  it,  and
the  rest  recovered.

This  Persian  businesse  hath  invited,  and  almost  enforced
mee  to  remember  our  noble  Persian-English  Sherlies,
especially  the  present  honourable  Embassadour  Sir  Robert
Sherly,  Count  and  Knight  of  the  Empire,  and  therein
advanced  to  many  priviledges :  of  whom  so  much  hath
before  beene  occasionally  recited.  I  much  desired  to  have
obtained  some  Relations  from  his  Lordship : but  having

373

A.D.

l622.

A

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

late  acquaintance,  and  hee  much  and  weightie  businesse,
which  hee  hath  beene  forced  to  attend  farre  from  the  Citie,
I  rather  thought  fit  to  insert  what  by  his  humanitie  and
conference,  I  learned  onely  at  one  dinner  with  him  (not
knowing  that  I  would  publish  what  I  then  received)  then
not  to  imbellish  these  discourses,  with  so  illustrious  an
English  Travellers  Name  and  Memory

Chap. X.

briefe  Memoriall  of  the  Travells  of  the  Right
Hon.  Sir.  Rob.  Sherly  Knight,  Count  and
Knight  of  the  Sacred  Empire,  now  Embas-
sador from  the  Persian  King  to  His  Majesti
and  other  Christian  Kings.

Mongst  our  English  Travellers,  I  know  not
whether  any  have  merited  more  respec
then  the  Honorable,  I  had  almost  sai
Heroike  Gentlemen,  Sir  Anthony  &  Sii
Robert  Sherleys.  And  if  the  Argonaut
of  old,  and  Graecian  Worthies,  were
worthily  reputed  Heroicall  for  Europaear

exploits  in  Asia  :  what  may  wee  thinke  of  the  Sherley
Brethren,  which  not  from  the  neerer  Graecian  shoares,  bu
from  beyond  the  Europaean  World,  Et  penitus  toto  divisi
Orbe  Britannis  ;  have  not  coasted  a  little  way  (as  did  those
but  pierced  the  very  bowells  of  the  Asian  Seas  and  Lands
unto  the  Persian  Centre :  and  that  not  by  a  combinatio:
of  Princes,  as  those  former ;  but  (God  directing  thei
private  Genius  for  publike  benefit)  to  kindle  a  fire  betwix
the  two  most  puissant  of  both  Asian  and  Mahumetar
Princes,  that  by  their  division  and  diversion  of  Turkish
invasions,  Christian  Princes,  Countries,  and  States  migh
bee  indebted  to  their  private  undertaking :  Nor  hath  te
yeeres  detained  them  at  one  Citie,  or  one  voyage  finishe<
their  worthy  indevours,  as  theirs  at  Troy  and  to  Colchos
but  about  twentie  yeeres  together,  all  Turkie  hath  groaned
in  which  shee  hath  lost  two  millions  of  her  unhallowec

374

SIR ROBERT SHERLEY  ad.

1609.
*  Children  ;  remoter  India,  Moscovia,  Africa  hath  felt  the  */  have  heard
Sherlian  working,  Poland,  Spaine,  the  Emperour  and  Pope  Sir  #•  s-
have  admired  and  adorned  the  English  Name  of  Sherley.  a^rm  thts'
These  indeed,  especially  Sir  Robert  (the  subject  of  our
present  Discourse)  I  shall  honour  for  that  Divina  Palladis
Arte,  that  Ulyssean  twentie  yeeres  travell,  and  getting
both  Troies  Palladium  and  Achilles  his  Armour ;  as  also
for  Jasonian  sowing  the  Dragons  teeth  indeed  (beyond
Poeticall  Fables)  whereby  Mahumetans  have  killed  each
others,  whiles  Christendome  might  have  gotten  the  Golden
Fleece,  the  usuall  fruit  of  peace.  Let  mee  admire  such  a
Traveller,  which  travells  not  of  and  for  some  vaine  dis-
course, or  private  gaine  or  skill,  but  still  travelleth  and  is
delivered  of  the  publike  good,  accounting  his  Countrey
his  Garden,  Christendome  his  Orchard,  the  Universe  his
Field,  for  this  happy  seed  of  publike  beneficence.  Who
ever  since  the  beginning  of  things  and  men,  hath  beene  so
often  by  Royall  Employment  sent  Embassadour  to  so
many  Princes,  so  distant  in  place,  so  different  in  rites?
Two  Emperours  Rudolph  and  Ferdinand,  two  Popes
Clement  and  Paul,  twice  the  King  of  Spaine,  twice  the
Polonian,  the  Muscovite  also  have  given  him  audience.
And  twice  also  (which  I  last  mention,  as  most  knowne
and  at  home,  though  not  the  least  for  a  borne  subject  to
be  Embassadour  to  his  Soveraigne.)  His  Majestie  hath
heard  his  Embassage  from  the  remote  Persian.  I  omit
his  employment  from  the  Emperour  Rudolph  with  the
Persian,  his  annuall  pay  of  5000.  duckets,  besides  other
Imperiall  graces.  Noble  attempt  to  goe  meet  the  Sunne !
and  from  the  West  and  North  where  he  was  borne,  to  [Ii.x.  1806.]
visit  the  East  and  South,  and  that  both  in  overland
Diameter  first,  and  Sea  circumference  after,  coasting  the
Europaean  and  Asian,  compassing  the  African  shores,
piercing  the  Persian  Gulfe,  and  passing  the  Indus  and
Indian  Continent,  climbing  the  Candahar  Hills,  into,  and
over,  and  thorow  and  thorow  Persia  ;  passing  the  Caspian,
and  penetrating  the  Deserts  more  then  Tartarian  fortie  two
daies  together,  thorow  high-troublesome  grasse,  without

375

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1609.

the  sight  of  any  man,  but  his  retinue,  and  sixtie  persons

A  Roble  is of  his  guard,  each  of  which  cost  him  a  Roble  a  day  all  that

about aMarke  time : Extra  Anni Solisque  vias,  beyond,  farre  beyond

English.  jDOtj1  Xropikes,  the  Southerne  Soldanian,  the  Northerne

Russian, the many many Tartar Hoords, the Mogoll

Emperour,  the  treacherous  Buloches,  the  Goan  Vice-roy,

the !  but  what  should  I  read  a  Geographicall  Lecture  in  one

man's  travells,  in  one  mans  Embassages? Quae  regio  in

terris  Sherlii  non  plena  laboris? These  have  seene  him,

and hee hath seene them  with Eyes more then of  a

Traveller,  more  then  his  owne,  Himselfe  being  the  Eyes

of  a  mightie  Monarch,  which  in  his  person  visited  so  many

Countries,  Cities,  and  Courts.

The  mightie  Ottoman,  terror  of  the  Christian  World,
quaketh  of  a  Sherly-Fever,  &  gives  hopes  of  approching
fates.  The  prevailing  Persian  hath  learned  Sherlcian  Arts
of  War,  and  he  which  before  knew  not  the  use  of
Ordnance,  hath  now  500.  Peeces  of  Brasse,  &  60000.
Musketiers ;  so  that  they  which  at  hand  with  the  Sword
were  before  dreadfull  to  the  Turkes,  now  also  in  remoter
blowes  and  sulfurian  Arts  are  growne  terrible.  Hence
hath  the  present  Abas  won  from  the  Turke  seven  great
Provinces,  from  Derbent  to  Bagdat  inclusively,  and  still
hath  his  eyes,  mouth,  and  hands  open  to  search,  swallow,
and  acquire  more.  In  the  renowmed  battell  with  Cigala
Bassa,  of  160000.  2000  onely  remained  to  flee  with  the
Generall,  who  yet  would  not  remaine  after  that  disaster,
but  by  poyson  prevented  domestike  shame :  and  there  did
our  Noble  Countryman  receive  three  wounds,  as  a  triple
testimony  of  his  love  and  service  to  Christendome.  Great
Abas,  great  by  his  Persian  Inheritance,  is  now  made  greater
by  English  Merchants,  Mariners,  Souldiers,  which
advanced  his  conquest  of  Ormuz,  expelling  those  Portugals
which  had  denied  the  English  trade  in  Persia,  from  Persian
neighbourhood  ;  and  greatest  by  victories  against  the  Great
Ottoman,  moved  thereto,  assisted  and  guided  therein  by
the  English  Sherleys.  And  he  againe  hath  gratified  the
Sherleyan  name  with  competent  reciprocall  greatnesse ;  not

376

SIR ROBERT ^SHERLEY  ad.

1609.
in  titles  of  Honor,  and  honorable  employments  alone,  but
in  rewards,  This  Mans  Bread  is  Baked  for  Sixtie  Yeeres,
being  the  formall  words  of  his  Royall  Charter  to  him
(which  he  that  understandeth  the  Easterne  phrase  of  daily
bread  in  his  pater  noster,  knows  how  to  interprete)  with  an
explication added of the allowance to Him and his
Assignes  for  that  space,  whether  he  liveth  himselfe,  or
leaveth  it  to  others  injoying. The  Great  Mogol  (whom  The  Mogoll
he  commends  for  the  goodnesse  of  his  disposition,  of  his  payeth  44.
owne  naturall  inclination not  bloudy, but  humane  and  m  lons  f

1  •  r 11  i r 1  •  1  1  • a  r  crowns  to  his

bountirull ;  and  for  his  yeerly  pay  to  his  Army  or  44.  jrmy  yeer/y  .
millions  of  Crowns)  entertained  him  liberally,  offered  him  besides  other
the  pay  of  400.  Horse  if  hee  would  serve  him ;  which,  expences,  of
had  not  fidelity  and  Persian  confidence  prevented,  hee  had  ™hi^  see  su?'
accepted ;  the  zeale  whereof,  in  some  harsh  reflection  of  Hawkins.  1. 3.
wordes  spoken  somewhat  too  liberally  against  his  Master,
by  him  with  like  liberty  retorted,  ecclipsed  the  Mogolls
benevolence  towards  him,  which  otherwise  might  have
beene  worth  50000.  pounds,  and  neverthelesse  was,  in
Elephants,  huge  massie  Coines  (inscribed,  Consolation  of
Strangers)  and  other  gifts,  not  lesse  valuable  then  eight  or
9000.  pounds.  As  for  other  Princes  Real  and  Royall
acknowledgements  of  his  loyall  service  to  the  Christian
affaires,  I  omit.  But  his  high  valuation  with  the
Emperour  Rudolph,  I  could  not  passe  by,  I  having  seene
the  Originall  Imperiall  Charter  under  the  Great  Seale,  and
subscribed  by  the  Emperor  himselfe.  I  have  seene  also
the  Originall  Breve  of  Pope  Paulus  Quintus,  sub  annulo
Piscatoris,  wherein  the  said  Pope  doth  constitute  him
Earle  of  the  sacred  Laterane  Palace,  and  Chamberlaine,
with  power  to  legitimate  Bastards,  for  which  many
thousands  at  Goa  were  sutors  to  him  (such  is  the  Portugall
dissolutenesse  in  those  parts)  the  Archbishop  there  having
under  his  hand  acknowledged  the  said  Grant,  besides  the
priviledges  (allowances  also  annexed  of  so  much  bread,
flesh,  fish,  a  crowne  a  day,  &c.)  But  the  Imperiall  Grant
(to  me  of  more  respect  and  validity)  I  have  here  delivered
verbatim,  translated  out  of  the  Originall  Latine,  that  his

377

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1609.

noble  and  great  worth  might  by  noblest  and  greatest
testimony  bee  acknowledged :  the  rather  because  I  have
seene  the  same  Title  given  him  by  his  Majesty,  in  his
Letters  commendatory  of  the  said  Noble  Count  to  other
Princes,  and  subscribed  with  his  Royall  hand  and  name,
Jacobus.

R

Udolphus  the  Second,  by  the  Divine  mercie  Elect
Emperour  of  the  Romanes,  Alwayes  Augustus,  and-
of  Germanie,  of  Hungarie,  Bohemia,  Dalmatia,  Croatia,
Sclavonia,  &c. King,  Archduke  of  Austria,  Duke  of  Bur-
gundie,  Brabant,  Stiria,  Carinthia,  Carniola,  &c. Marquesse
of  Moravia,  &c. Duke  of  Lucemburge,  and  of  the  higher ,
and lower Silesia, Wirtemberge and Teck ; Prince of
Suevia,  Earle  of  Habspurge,  Tirol,  Terret,  Kiburge  and,
Goritia. Landgrave  of  Alsatia. Marquesse  of  the  holy;
Romane  Empire,  of  Burgonie,  and  of  the  higher  and  lower
Lusatia ; Lord  of  the  Marches  of  Sclavonia,  the  Port  of
Naon  and  Salines,  &c. To  the  Noble  and  of  Us  entirely-
beloved  Count  Robert  Sherley  Knight  and  Earle  of  the!
sacred  Palace of  Laterane, of  Our  Caesars  Court, and!
Imperiall  Consistorie. The  assigned  Embassador  unto
Us  of  the  most  Renowmed  Lord  and  Prince  Abbas,  King
of  Persia,  the  Medes  and  Armenia,  Our  Imperiall  Grace,
[II.  x.  1 807.]  and  all  happinesse. As  the  most  resplendent  beames  of  the
Sunne,  doe  illuminate  with  their  light  the  whole  World,
and  refresh  the  same,  giving  vigour  and  increase  to  the
inferiour  bodies :  So  the  Emperour  of  the  Romanes  being
placed  in  the  height  of  dignitie  by  Almightie  God  (whose
Majestie  as  full  of  the  light  of  honours  and  dignities  is
resplendent  amongst all men) doth of  himselfe spread
farre  and  neere  the  beames  of  his  bountie,  especially  upon
those  who  doe  ennoble  their  owne  worthy  vertuous  Race
by excellent deserts of the Common-wealth and their
Sovereignes  :  Therefore  not  only  for  this  cause,  that  them-
selves may rejoyce, having obtained by desert these
honours from the Imperiall Majestie, but that their
Posteritie  and  others  being  allured  and  inflamed  with  these

378

SIR ROBERT SHERLEY  ad.

1609.
examples  and  beginnings,  may  apply  their  mindes  to  the
most  faire  attempts  of  vertue  and  glory.

Whereupon,  we  by  the  appointment  and  providence  of
the  most  mightie  God,  being  placed  in  this  high  top  of
Our  Imperiall  Throne,  are  desirous  to  observe  the  worthy
Ordinances  of  Our  Predecessors,  as  well  herein  as  in  all
other  things,  that  We  might  entertaine  with  all  favour  and
clemencie,  men  excellent  and  famous  for  their  vertue,  and
such  as  testifie  their  good  will  to  Us,  and  their  singular
love  and  zeale  towards  the  Sacred  Empire,  and  Our  noble
houses  of  Austria  and  Burgundie.

Considering  therefore  the  excellent  parts  of  your  mind,
and  wit  wherwith  you  are  endued.  As  first  being  born  of
such  Parents,  and  such  a  race  in  England,  who  by  birth
themselves  are  noble,  and  besides,  have  borne  place  and
dignitie  in  that  Kingdome :  You  have  from  your  Child-
hood resolved  not  to  degenerate  from  them,  but  by  insist-
ing and  following  their  steps,  and  applying  your  selfe  to
the  studie  of  vertue  and  honourable  actions,  that  you  might
not  only  keepe  and  maintaine  safe  and  sound  your  reputa-
tion at  home,  but  by  your  owne  actions  and  deserts,  more
and  more  adorne  and  advance  the  same,  which  you  have
so  farre  forth  performed,  that  when  you  had  served  by  Sea
and  Land  in  sundry  places  for  certaine  yeeres,  and  had
travelled  through  many  Kingdomes,  and  undertooke  with
a  couragious  minde  a  Journey  into  Persia,  and  together
with  your  Brother  Anthonie  Sherley,  to  the  good  of  all
Christendome,  encouraged  that  King  to  undertake  that
Warre  which  he  did  against  the  Turke  valiantly  and
resolutely,  which  very  happily  fell  out  for  Us  in  Our
Hungarian  Warre :  and  moreover,  since  you  with  your
said  Brother  Anthonie  have  procured  and  brought  to  passe,
that  the  said  King  of  Persia  hath  sent  unto  Us  sundry
Embassages,  which  partly  the  chiefe  of  Persia,  partly  your
Brother  and  your  selfe  have  performed,  and  have  used  all
the  meanes  to  make  a  league,  and  procure  Amitie  between e
Us  and  his  Majestie,  and  have  omitted  nothing  even  in
your  owne  private  thoughts  and  cares,  whereby  you  might

379

A.D.
1609.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

procure  fit  occasions  for  Our  Warre  from  farre  places :  We
have  thought  you  worthy  for  these  commendable  Services
to  bee  graced  by  us  by  some  notable  testimony  of  Our
favour,  and  Imperiall  bountie,  as  We  thinke  may  be  an
Ornament  to  your  Kindred  and  Posteritie.

Therefore  out  of  Our  owne  proper  motion,  out  of  Our
owne  certaine  knowledge,  with  a  deliberate  minde,  and  out
of  the  fulnesse  of  Our  Imperiall  Authoritie,  We  Have
made,  created,  and  ordained  you  the  above  named  Robert
Sherley  a  true  and  a  lawfull  Knight,  and  have  received  you
to  the  state,  degree  and  honour  of  Knighthood,  and  have
adorned  and  invested  you  with  the  Robes  and  Ensignes  of
the  Girdle,  Chaines,  Rings,  Spurres,  and  other  Ornaments
appertayning  to  the  Order  of  Knighthood  according  to
Our  custome,  as  by  the  force  of  these  presents,  We  doe
make,  create,  nominate,  appoint,  receive,  invest  and  adorne,
girding  you  with  the  Sword  of  valour,  and  bestowing  upon
you  all  Armes  and  Ornaments  belonging  to  this  Order,
decreeing  seriously  and  firmely  by  Our  foresaid  Imperiall
Authoritie  that  ever  hereafter  you  ought  to  bee  esteemed,
reputed,  named,  and  honoured  for  a  true  and  lawfull
Knight.  And  that  you  may  without  the  let  and  contra-
diction of  any,  in  all  exercises,  actions  and  enterprises  use,
possesse,  and  enjoy  Chaines,  Sword,  Spurres,  Robes,
Trappings,  and  what  else  soever  Furniture  belonging  to
Horses  either  all  Gold  or  Gilt,  also  whatsoever  Honours,
Prerogatives,  Ensignes,  Priviledges,  Freedomes,  Favours,
and  Liberties  which  the  rest  of  Our  owne  Knights,  the
Knights  of  the  Romane  Empire,  as  also  the  Knights  of
Hierusalem  doe  use,  possesse,  and  enjoy  in  what  manner
soever  either  of  right  or  custome,  none  whosoever  for-
bidding the  Contrary.

And  that  you  may  be  graced  with  some  singular
testimony  of  Our  bountie,  of  Our  aforesaid  proper  motion,
and  out  of  the  fulnesse  of  Our  Imperiall  Authoritie  with
deliberate  advise,  and  out  of  our  owne  knowledge  We
have  made,  created,  and  ordained  you  Robert  Sherley,
Earle  of  the  Sacred  Palace  of  Laterane,  of  Our  Caesars

380

SIR ROBERT SHERLEY  a.d.

1609.

Court,  and  Imperiall  Consistorie,  and  favourably  have
honoured  you  with  the  Title  of  an  Earle  Palatine,  as  by
the  force  of  these  presents  we  doe  make,  create,  erect,
advance,  entitle  you,  and  doe  take,  ascribe  and  entertaine
you  into  the  Order  and  Fellowship  of  other  Earles
Palatines.

Decreeing,  and  by  this  our  Imperiall  Patent,  firmely
ordaining  that  from  this  time  henceforth  so  long  as  you
shall  live,  you  shall  be  able  to  enjoy,  use,  and  possesse  all
.  and  singular  Priviledges,  Favours,  Rights,  Immunities,
Honours,  Exemptions,  Customes,  and  Liberties,  which
other  Earles  of  Our  Sacred  Palace  of  Laterane  heretofore
have  used  and  enjoyed,  or  do  use  by  right  or  custome
howsoever.  Giving  and  granting  to  you  the  said  Robert
Sherley  full  authoritie  and  power,  by  which  you  may  and
shall  bee  able  throughout  the  whole  Romane  Empire,  and
what  place  or  Countrey  else  soever  create  and  make  publike  [II.  x.  1808.]
Notaries  or  Registers,  and  ordinary  Judges,  and  to  give
and  grant  the  Office  of  Notarie  or  Register,  and  Judge
ordinarie  to  any  persons  who  shall  be  meete  and  fit  for  the
same  (which  we  leave  to  your  owne  conscience)  and  to
invest  them,  and  every  one  of  them  by  the  Pen  and
Penner  according  to  the  custome,  in  the  aforesaid  places.
Provided  that  of  the  aforesaid  publike  Notaries  and  Judges
ordinary  by  you  to  bee  created,  and  of  every  of  them  in
the  Name  of  us,  and  the  Sacred  Romane  Empire,  and  for
the  Romane  Empire  it  selfe  you  take  a  corporall  and
personall  Oath  according  to  the  custome  in  this  manner.
That  they  shall  be  true  and  faithfull  unto  Us,  and  to  the
Sacred  Romane  Empire,  and  to  all  Our  Successors
Emperours  of  the  Romanes  lawfully  possessing  the  same,
neither  shall  they  bee  present  where  Our  danger  is
practised,  but  they  shall  defend  and  faithfully  maintaine
Our  good  and  safetie,  and  they  shall  avoid  and  put  by  as
much  as  in  them  lyeth  whatsoever  may  be  to  Our  damage.
Moreover,  they  shall  write  all  Instruments  as  well
publike  as  private,  Last  Wils  and  Testaments,  Enrowl-
ments,  Legacies,  all  Decrees  of  Judgement  what-soever,

381

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1609.

and  all  and  singular  other  things,  which  shall  belong  unto
them,  or  to  any  one  of  them  to  be  made  or  written  (accord-
ing as  the  place  of  the  said  Offices  shall  require)  justly,
sincerely  and  faithfully,  all  dissimulation,  cunning,  plotting,
falshood,  and  deceit  being  set  apart,  also  reade,  make  and
pronounce  the  same,  respecting  neither  hatred,  money,
gifts,  or  any  passions  or  favours.

Their  writings  which  they  ought  to  draw  in  publike
forme,  they  shall  write,  reade,  make,  rehearse  in  faire
Parchment,  not  in  paper  or  sheetes  torne  and  razed.  They
shall  further  to  their  power  the  causes  of  Hospitals,  and
of  poore  people,  also  see  to  Bridges  and  High-wayes.
They  shall  secretly,  and  faithfully  keepe  depositions  and
verdicts  of  witnesses,  untill  they  shall  be  published  and
approved,  and  they  shall  doe  all  and  singular  other  things
rightly,  justly,  and  sincerely,  which  shall  any  wayes  apper-
taine  to  their  Offices  either  of  custome  or  right,  and  that
these  publike  Notaries,  or  Registers  and  Judges  ordinarie
to  bee  elected  by  you,  may  and  shall  bee  able  throughout
the  whole  Romane  Empire,  and  in  all  places  and  Coun-
treyes  else  write,  and  publish  Contracts,  Decrees  of
Judgements,  Instruments,  last  Wils,  also  to  insert  Decrees
and  Authorities,  in  all  Contracts  whatsoever  requiring  the
same,  and  to  doe,  publish,  and  exercise  all  other  things
which  are  knowne  to  belong  and  appertaine  to  the  publike
Office  of  a  Notarie,  or  Register,  or  ordinary  Judge,
decreeing  that  absolute  credit  be  given  to  all  Instruments,
and  writings  to  be  written  by  these  publike  Notaries,  or
Registers,  or  Judges  ordinary,  in  Judgement  and  without,
Constitutions,  Statutes,  and  whatsoever  else  shall  make
for  the  contrarie  notwithstanding.

Moreover,  we  doe  grant  and  give  to  you,  the  aforesaid
Robert  Sherley  full  power,  that  you  may  and  shall  be  able
to  legitimate  Bastards  of  what  kinde  soever,  Incestuous
persons  whether  they  be  together  or  separated,  and  who-
soever else  of  that  sort,  yea,  though  they  bee  Infants
present  or  absent,  alreadie  begotten  or  to  be  begotten  of
unlawfull  and  disallowed  conjunction,  Males  and  Females,

382

I  SIR ROBERT SHERLEY  a.d.

1609.

by  what  name  soever  they  be  called,  whether  the  lawfull
Sonnes  be  knowne  or  no,  and  no  further  inquirie  made,
whether  their  Parents  bee  living  or  dead  (only  the
Children  of  great  Princes,  Earles  and  Barons  excepted)  and
to  restore  them  and  every  one  of  them,  to  all  and  singular
their  Rights  and  Titles,  and  altogether  to  abolish  the
imputation  of  base  birth  by  restoring  and  enabling  them
to  all  and  their  singular  Rights  of  succession,  Heredita-
ments of  their  Father  and  Mothers  goods,  though  they
died  Intestate,  also  of  their  Kinsmen  and  Kinswomen,  and
to  all  Honours,  Dignities,  and  all  lawfull  actions,  as  well  by
contract  as  by  last  Will  bestowed,  or  howsoever  else  as
well  in  Judgement  as  without.  Even  as  if  they  had  beene
borne  in  lawfull  Matrimonie,  the  objection  of  Bastardie  for
ever  resting ;  And  we  will  that  their  legitimation  made  as
above-said,  may  be  held  for  good  and  lawful,  as  wel  as  it
had  beene  performed  with  all  Rites  and  Solemnities,  the
defect  whereof  wee  will  supply  with  our  Imperiall
Authoritie.  Provided  the  legitimations  of  this  kind  bee
not  prejudiciall  to  the  lawfull  Sonnes  and  Heires,  and
those  that  are  naturally  and  rightly  borne ;  but  those  that
are  to  be  made  legitimate,  after  they  shal  be  legitimated,  let
them  be  thought  and  named ;  for  so  they  ought  to  be
named  and  held  in  all  places  as  legitimate  and  lawfully
borne  of  the  House,  Family,  and  Linage  of  their  Parents,
and  that  they  may  beare  and  carrie  their  Armes  and
Ensignes.  Withall  let  them  be  made  Noble  if  their
Parents  have  beene  nobly  borne.  Notwithstanding  cer-
taine  Lawes  by  which  it  is  provided,  that  Naturals,
Bastards  and  Incestuous  persons,  either  joyntly  or  severally
or  any  other  whosoever  either  alreadie  begotten,  or  to  be
begotten  by  unlawfull  copulation,  neyther  may,  nor  ought
to  be  legitimated,  naturall  and  children  lawfully  begotten
remayning,  or  without  the  will  and  consent  of  the  true  and
naturall,  Sonnes,  or  Kinsmen,  or  the  Lords  of  their  Land,
and  you  may  especially  reade  in  the  Authentike  after  what
manner  a  child  is  naturalized.  Et  quibus  modis  Nat.  effic.
sui  per  totum  &  §.  Naturales  li.  de  fee  do  fuerit  con  trovers.

3*3

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1609.

inter  Domin.  &  Agnat.  &  L.  Jubemus  C.  de  emancipat
liberorum  &  similibus  aliis.  Which  Lawes  and  every  one
of  which  willingly  and  expresly  we  will  to  be  of  no  force.
Yea  notwithstanding  in  certaine  of  the  aforenamed  cases, j
the  depositions  of  the  Plaintiffes,  and  the  last  Wils  of  the1
dead,  other  Lawes,  Statutes  and  Customes  of  other  places,i
although  they  were  such  which  ought  to  be  expressed,  or|j
of  which  speciall  mention  here  ought  to  be  made.  All
which  notwithstanding,  and  of  their  power  being  otherwise
able  to  make  of  none  effect,  the  premises  onely  in  this  case;
[II.  x.i  809.]  out  of  our  owne  knowledge,  and  the  fulnesse  of  ouri
Imperiall  Authoritie  we  will  wholly  that  they  be  of  noi
force  at  all.

Hereto  moreover,  we  doe  give  and  grant  unto  the  afore-:
said  Robert  Sherley,  that  you  may  and  shall  be  able  toi
confirme  assistants  and  over-seeers,  and  the  same  againe!
upon  lawfull  cause  to  deprive  &  displace.  Moreover,  to;
restore  such  as  are  notoriously  infamous  as  wel  by  Fact  asj
by  Law  againe  to  their  former  credit,  and  from  them  to!
take  away  all  note  of  Infamie  as  well  alreadie  imposed  upon:
them,  or  to  be  hereafter  layed  to  their  charge,  so  that;
afterward  they  may  be  accounted  meete  and  fit  to  bel
preferred  to  all  and  singular  lawfull  actions.  Besides,
to  adopt  and  ordaine  Children,  and  to  make,  ordaine  and
to  confirme  them  as  adopted,  and  acknowledged  for  lawfull.
Moreover,  to  make  free  children  legitimate,  or  to  be  made
legitimate,  also  those  that  be  adopted,  and  to  give  your
consent  to  all  Adoptions,  Naturallizings,  and  Freedomes
whatsoever,  of  all  and  every  one,  as  well  Infants  as  young1
men.  And  also  to  give  them  time  and  yeeres  if  they
sue  unto  you,  and  in  every  thing  hereunto  appertayning  toi
interpose  your  authoritie.  Moreover,  to  make  servants1
free,  in  what  kind  soever,  with  or  without  the  allegation
and  alienations,  or  transactions  of  their  necessary  main-
tenance, and  also  herein  to  interpose  your  authoritie.  Also
to  restore  the  lesser  Churches,  and  Immunities  to  their
former  use  wholly,  the  one  part  having  beene  called  before
in  question,  and  to  grant  the  whole  restitution  unto  them

384

SIR ROBERT SHERLEY  ad.

1609.

igaine,  or  to  one  of  them.  Notwithstanding  a  course  of
Law  being  observed.  These  aforesaid  premises  shal  not
be  prejudiced  by  any  Lawes  whatsoever,  Constitutions,
Decrees,  Customes,  Ordinances,  Reformations,  Priviledges.
Exemptions,  Favours,  and  Prerogatives,  by  what  name
soever  they  be  called,  or  of  what  tenour  and  force  soever
they  be,  as  well  made  all  readie,  as  to  be  made  hereafter,  by
us,  our  Predecessours,  our  Successours,  or  by  what  Princes
soever,  Dukes,  Marquesses,  Earles,  Universities,  or  others
of  what  kind  or  condition  soever,  under  what  clauses  or
sxpresse  words  soever,  although  such  things  and  the  like
should  come  to  passe,  of  which  it  should  bee  needful  here
to  make  mention  word  for  word,  to  those  that  should
lttempt  the  contrary.  From  all  and  every  of  which  by
our  Imperial  Authoritie,  and  out  of  the  fulnesse  of  our
own  proper  motion,  and  out  of  our  own  knowledge  above
rehearsed,  by  these  presents  as  farre  forth  as  they  may
derogate  from  this  Our  Graunt  and  Patent,  we  will  the
force  and  vigour  to  be  taken  away.  Wherefore  it  shall  be
lawfull  for  no  man  of  what  state,  degree,  ranke,  condition,
dignitie,  or  preeminence  he  shall  be,  to  infringe  or  teare
this  Graunt  of  Our  Creation,  Erection,  Allowance,  Gift,
Patent,  Decree,  Pleasure,  Priviledge,  and  Favour,  or
contradict  it  by  any  rash  attempt  whatsoever.

If  any  man  shall  presume  to  doe  it,  let  him  know  that
he  shall  incurre  ipso  facto  Our  heavie  displeasure,  and  of
the  whole  Empire.  Moreover,  the  punishment  of  fiftie
Markes  of  pure  Gold,  halfe  of  which  shall  be  confiscate  to
Our  Imperiall  Treasurie,  and  the  rest  to  bee  imployed  to
his  or  their  uses  that  have  had  the  wrong  without  release.
By  the  testimonie  of  these  Our  Letters  subscribed  with
Our  owne  hand,  and  confirmed  with  the  putting  to  of  our
Imperiall  Seale.

Given  at  Our  Court  at  Prague,  the  second  day  of  the
moneth  of  June.  In  the  yeere  of  our  Lord  1609.  ^n
the  35.  yeere  of  Our  Kingdomes  of  Romanes.  Of
Hungarie  the  37.  and  of  Bohemiah  in  like  manner  the  34.
Rudolph.

x  385  2  B

A.D.

c-  775-

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Chap.  XI.

This  Epitaph  The  Epitaphs  on  the  Tombe  of  Jacob  Almansor
the  Saracenicall  Emperour,  under  whose
Reigne  Spaine  was  subdued  to  the  Moores,
written  by  Mahomet  Algazeli  a  learned
Arabian,  and  graven  in  the  foure  stones  oj
his  sumptuous Monument

is  taken  out  of
the  said  Jacobs
life  by  Alii
Abensusian,  in
Arabike.

*This  like
agreeth  with
Christian
stories. It
seemes  they
were  Arabian
Princes  or
Heads  of
Tribes  before
Mahomets
time.

Eighty  Col-
ledges  or
Schooles  of
Learning.
One  of  these
had  a  Library
0/^5  5000.
Bookes;  to
redeeme  which
{for  hee  gave
all  his  goods  at
[II.x.1810.]
his  death  in
almes)  hee
charged  his
Son  to  marrie
1000.
Orphans
giving  to  each
1000.
Miticals.

The  first  Epitaph  historicall.

Ere  lyeth  buried  the  high  and  highly
reverenced  King  of  most  noble  birth
famous  race  and  linage,  descended  oi
eightie  *  and  two  Kings,  Abilgualit  Mira
mamolim,  Jacob  Almansor  who  wa:
worthily  called  the  Conquerour,  bein^
never  overcome ;  the  famousest  of  th<|
Sonnes  of  Nasts  Abu  Malique,  seeing  hee  wanne  eightie,
and  six  battailes  by  Sea  and  by  Land,  and  tooke  fivij
Kings ;  subdued  three  parts  of  the  World,  Asia,  Afrik
and  Europe,  and  gave  peace  and  tranquillitie  to  hi
subjects,  observing  Justice  with  benignitie  and  mercie
This  is  he  that  used  Charitie  and  augmented  his  Religioi
having  at  his  owne  cost  builded  in  his  Kingdome  fivi
hundred  and  six  principall  Mezquitas,  eightie  and  tw<
Hospitals  with  as  many  Royal  Colledges,  and  endowe<
them  with  large  and  sumptuous  Revenues.  This  is  h
that  married  every  yeere  at  his  charge  a  thousand  Orphan*
he  that  banished  ignorance,  and  embraced  Learning.  He
that  gave  to  all  the  World  examples  of  life  in  his  saying
and  sentences,  and  notable  deeds  of  Armes.  He  who  wa
our  example  of  good  and  laudable  customes.  Hee  thai
killed  the  hunger  and  thirst  and  nakednesse  of  his  subject
with  his  large  and  liberall  hands.  Let  immortall  fame  eve
attend  on  this  Sepulchre  acknowledge  him  that  lyet
therein  for  her  King  and  Lord,  seeing  by  him  shee  is  mad
triumphant and victorious over all Ages. This grea

386

EPITAPHS ON ALMANSORS TOMB  a.d.

c.  775.
Monarch  died  continuing  in  his  invocation  of  the  mercifull
God  the  Creatour  of  Heaven  and  Earth  without  ceasing,
so  much  as  a  moment  untill  his  last  gaspe,  imploring  his
incomprensible  mercie  and  fearing  his  high  Justice. The
third  day  of  the  Moone  of  Rageb,  the  night  before  Friday  4.D. this ,
after  the  last  Watch  in  the  hundreth  and  second  yeere  of  agreeth  wtth
the  Hixera. Praised  bee  God  and  blessed  bee  his  most
holy  Name  for  ever. Amen.

O  how  great  is  the  misery  of  men,  which  hath  brought  The,  second
a  King  of  so  great  power,  Empire,  and  command  to  the  A1  a*L '
estate  wherein  hee  is  at  this  present,  who  as  yesterday  was
honoured,  reverenced,  and  beloved  of  his  people,  and  is
now  forgotten  and  forsaken  of  them  all,  and  remaineth
solitarie  in  the  darke  Caves  of  the  earth.  He  which  was
wont  to  bee  clad  in  silke  and  cloth  of  gold  and  silver,
and  to  sleepe  in  the  softest  and  sweetest  beds  curiously
and  richly  decked  and  adorned,  lieth  heere  buried  in  the
hard  Earth.  He  which  used  to  goe  perfumed  with  Muske
and  Amber  and  other  excellent  odours,  now  yeeldeth  in  his
base  estate  a  noysome  and  stinking  smell.  He  that  as
yesterday  did  eate  the  choicest  meates,  and  dranke  the  most
delicate  drinkes  is  heere  become  himselfe  to  be  the  meate
of  wretched  and  loathsome  Wormes.  O  mortall  men,  let
none  put  confidence  in  the  delights  of  this  life :  take
example  of  him  that  lyeth  heere  buried :  who  having
possessed  them,  observe  how  little  while  they  continued.
There  is  no  confidence  to  bee  placed  in  any  but  in  God  and
in  things  eternall :  let  these  terrene  transitorie  worldly
things  to  be  forgotten  for  his  love  and  reverence.  Let  us
follow  good  and  holy  workes  which  endure  for  ever,  that
with  them  through  his  grace  and  mercie  we  may  obtaine
that  eternall  life  which  endureth  for  ever  and  ever.
Amen.

Here  lieth  buried  the  terrour  and  feare  of  the  Moores,  The  third
Christians  and  Gentiles,  that  ploughed  up  the  Sea,  and  EPlfa?h'
made  the  Land  even  and  plaine. Hee  that  subdued  the  exemp/ary  t0
Nations  of  the  World. The  example  and paterne  of  Kings.
benignitie  and  mercie,  and  the  right  rule  of  executing

387

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

c.  775.

Justice  severely  for  the  chastisement  of  those  which  doe  not!
live  vertuously  as  the  Sovereigne  God  commanded. Here
resteth  that  liberall  hand,  that  was  never  shut  or  closed  to
any  that  sought  the  reliefe  thereof. The  protector  of  the;
poore ; the  father  of  the  Orphans; the  refuge  of  the;
Widdowes  ;  the  zeale  of  chastitie  ;  the  mirrour  of  honestie
and shamefastnesse accompanied with Modestie ; the
paterne of Princes ; the modell of government ; the
picture  of  puritie  and  cleannesse ; the  type  of  Nobilitie ; ,
the  preserver  of  truth  in  his  tongue ; the  banisher  of  lies,
the  true  lover  of  Learning,  he  that  hath  left  a  living  fame
of  himselfe  for  the  future  Ages  ;  and  a  worthy  example  of,
such  lasting  memorie  as  time  cannot  consume,  which  hath
consumed  the  great  deeds  and  exploits  of  Kings,  Princes
and  Emperours  burying  their  memory  in  oblivion. O  yee
mortall  men  let  us  pray  to  our  Sovereigne  God,  that  he
vouchsafe to prosper and augment his memorie for
example  of  the  Kings  to  come,  that  by  imitation  of  him
they  may  governe  their  Common  weales  in  peace,  directing
us  also  to  his  holy  service,  and  filling  us  with  his  grace.
Amen.
The  fourth  Even  as  gold  is  refined  and  purified  in  the  Crusible,  or

Epitaph, placed  on  the  fire  which  discovereth  the  finenesse  therof

Moonshh  and  r  - n  o  • r  1  1  i_  •

naturally  among  the  names :  bo  a  sinful  man  who  preserves  his
Theological!,  patience  in  the  persecutions  of  this  life  doth  purifie  &
perfect  himselfe  therby.  A  man  ought  to  consider  that
'  he  was  borne  to  suffer,  and  he  may  comfort  himselfe  in
this,  that  all  the  travels  of  this  life  shall  have  an  end  with
him  at  his  death,  and  that  only  the  good  and  holy  workes
are  they  which  remayne  for  ever,  being  accepted  and
regarded  of  our  Sovereigne  God.  O  man,  consider  that
he  created  thee  for  his  service :  and  that  thou  ungratefully
hast  departed  from  him  without  recompence  of  amends.
Behold,  how  lukewarme  thy  love  is  towards  him,  and  that
of  thy  Creator  towards  thee  is  constant  and  true,  having
given  thee  thy  being  and  accomplishment  for  his  mercie.
Consider  with  how  high  a  prize  he  bought  thee,  and  gave
thee  meanes  to  save  thy  selfe  by  using  well  thy  libertie  and

388

EPITAPHS ON ALMANSOR'S TOMB

freedome  as  he  hath  commended  thee.  And  therefore  doe
il  admonish  thee  that  thou  loose  not  the  much  for  the
little,  the  certaine  for  the  uncertaine,  for  if  so  thou  doe,
thou  wilt  flnde  thy  selfe  deceived.  Consider  how  misery
and  povertie  consists  not  in  the  wanting  of  Parents,  or
kindred,  or  of  temporall  goods,  but  in  the  want  of  the
favour  of  God  and  of  his  benediction.  Imploring  there-
fore his  mercie  and  grace,  let  us  humbly  intreate  him  to
grant  us  the  same,  and  hold  us  with  his  hand. Amen.

Chap. XII.

Master  Thomas  Coryates  travels  to,  and  Observa-
tions in  Constantinople  and  other  places  in
the  way  thither,  and  his  Journey  thence  to
Aleppo, Damasco,  and  Jerusalem.

E  have  alreadie  seene  Master  Thomas
Coryate  in  his  Indian  peregrination.  The
beginning  of  which  his  Journy  we  could
not  then  give  you  for  want  of  that  Intel-
ligence which  since  is  comne  to  my  hands,
namely  his  owne  Bookes ;  out  of  which
I  have  presented  thee  his  Observations  of
Zante,  Syo,  and  Constantinople,  with  some  other  places
in  his  way  to  Jerusalem,  from  whence  he  pierced  Persia
and  India.  Hee  set  forth  October  the  twentieth,  Anno
1612.  and  Januarie  the  thirteenth  arrived  in  Zante.  Out
of  his  large  Journall  I  have  briefly  presented  this,

The  houses  of  this  Towne  are  built  with  stone,  such
as  is  digged  out  of  the  Rockie  side  of  the  Mountaine.
They  are  somewhat  lower  then  I  have  observed  in  other
Townes :  their  Roofes  are  somewhat  flatte  according  to
the  forme  of  the  Italian  Building,  with  a  prettie  round
stone  inserted  into  the  middle  of  the  out-side,  which
maketh  the  House  there  somewhat  like  to  the  broad
Thrumbe  Caps,  that  some  of  the  olde  women  of  the  West
parts  of  England,  were  wont  to  weare  for  some  twentie
yeeres  since. Neither  doth  their  manner  of  tiling  differ

389

A.D.
l6l2.

[II.X.I8II.]

Houses  in
Zante.

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1612.

from  that  of  Italy,  being  made  all  hollow  within  side,
which  is  used  severally  over  all  Italie,  and  many  parts  of]
France.  I  could  see  no  glasse  windowes  in  their  houses,
but  all  Lattice  made  of  Firre  which  I  observe  to  bee  gener-
ally used  amongst  them.  Which  Lattice  leaves  in  the
Summer  time  they  doe  commonly  take  of,  and  then,  see-
ing they  are  Greekes,  and  merrie  Greekes  too,  they  may  be
very  properly  said  to  keepe  open  houses.  Now  concerning:
their  lowe  houses,  the  reason  why  they  build  them  so  lowe
Earthquakes  is,  because  of  the  manifold  Earthquakes  which  doe  as  much
oft  and  short.  snare  tnis  Hanc[  as  anv  other  place  in  the  World.  The
Earthquakes  are  so  frequent  with  them,  that  sometimes
they  feele  ten  of  them  in  a  moneth.  At  the  time  of  my:
being  in  the  same  there  was  a  little  feeling  of  an  Earth-
quake, which  was  perceived  for  some  five  or  sixe  dayes
together.  For  which  cause  on  Munday  being  the  eleventh
of  January,  about  tenne  of  the  clocke  in  the  morning  there
was  a  Procession  about  the  Castle  solemnized  by  the
Greeks  Priests  that  prayed  to  God  to  cease  the  Earth-
quake. Sometimes  when  it  is  any  thing  vehement,  they
use  to  ring  out  the  Bels  of  all  their  Churches.  The
motion  of  the  Earth  doth  never  last  above  a  quarter  of  an
houre  at  the  most,  when  it  continueth  longest  most  com-
monly but  two  or  three  minutes ;  during  which  time  it
often  falleth  out  to  bee  so  violent,  that  people  fearing
least  the  houses  would  fall  downe  then  have  beene  driven
out  of  doores,  even  out  of  their  naked  beds,  men  in  their
shirts,  women  in  their  smockes,  carrying  their  clothes
with  them,  that  they  have  hastily  caught  up,  and  have  at
leisure  put  them  on  afterward.  The  time  of  the  Earth-
quake is  uncertaine,  sometimes  it  commeth  by  day,  and
sometimes  by  night.  The  naturall  cause  of  them  is
unknowne  unto  me :  though  some  of  the  Englishmen
that  dwelt  in  the  Towne  doe  conjecture  that  it  proceedeth
from  the  hollow  Caves  and  Cavernes  that  are  in  the  bowels
of  the  Earth.  It  is  observed,  that  their  Earthquakes  doe
most  commonly  happen  when  there  is  a  sudden  calme  in
the  Sea  and  quiet  weather,  and  the  winds  which  doe  for

390

THOMAS CORYAT  a.d.

1612.

the  most  part  accompany  it,  or  rather  goe  before  it,  and
partly  cause  the  same  are  West  and  by  North  and
Westerly.  Neither  is  this  Hand  only  subject  to  these
Terremotes,  but  also  the  next  He  neere  at  hand  called
Cephalonia,  which  is  more  shaken  with  the  same  then  Cephaknia.
Zante :  which  are  the  only  two  places  of  the  whole  Coun-
trey  thereabout,  that  are  annoyed  with  Earthquakes.  For
neither  Morea  neere  at  hand,  nor  Arcadia,  doe  at  any
time  feele  these  shakings,  therefore  the  frequencie  of  those
foresaid  Earthquakes  is  the  reason  of  the  low  building  of
the  houses  which  would  the  sooner  fall  downe  with  the
forcible  motion  of  the  Earth,  if  they  were  very  high.
Howbeit  as  lowe  as  they  are  sometimes  two  or  three
houses  have  fallen  downe  with  the  Earthquakes,  being
rooted  out  from  the  very  foundations,  and  have  beene
afterward  reedified.

Now  I  will  mention  a  matter  of  this  Towne,  which  unto
most  that  shall  read  it  will  seeme  almost  incredible ;  that
albeit  it  be  no  more  then  two  miles  and  a  halfe,  or  at  the
uttermost  three  miles  in  compasse,  yet  it  should  containe
three  and  for  tie  Churches  and  Chappels.  A  thing  so  Churches.
absolutely  true  that  there  is  no  contradiction  to  be  made
against  it :  only  they  are  so  little  that  a  faire  Towne
Church  of  England,  will  make  very  neere  halfe  a  score  of
them.  These  are  the  particular  names  of  the  totall
number ;  first  three  in  the  Castle,  Saint  Francis,  Saint
Katharines,  Saint  Markes,  Saint  Maries  in  the  Towne,  in
the  Yard  or  Court  of  which  before  I  came  into  any  part
of  the  Church  I  saw  a  very  remarkable  Monument  that
shall  not  passe  unmentioned,  the  Sepulchre  of  Marcus  Ciceros
Tullius  Cicero  and  his  Wife  Terentia,  but  such  an  obscene  SePulchre-
and  ignoble  grave,  that  I  could  not  but  condole  the  mis-
fortune of  that  famous  and  incomparable  Orator,  from  the
inexhausted  Fountaine  of  whose  incomparable  Learning,
so  many  excellent  Orators  have  drawne  liquor  of  Rhetori-
call  invention,  to  the  great  garnishing  and  adorning  of
their  polite  lucubrations.  For  it  standeth  sub  dio.  in  the  [II.x.  1812.]
open  Aire,  without  any  Sepulchrate  or  Titulararie  stone,

39i

A.D.
[6l2.

Wine, Oik, \3
Currans  com-
modities of
Zant.

Marriages.

Caloieri  not
Priests,  but
GreekeMonks.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

that  might  testifie  to  the  Reader  who  lieth  there ;  which
cannot  but  strike  a  kinde  of  veneration  into  any  man  that
hath  any  sparke  of  learning.  But  belike  the  Urne  wherein
his  ashes  were  laid  may  remaine  there,  though  the  Vene-
tians have  robbed  the  place  of  the  Monument,  which  I
know  to  be  very  true,  by  a  certaine  ancient  Inscription
that  I  read  in  a  stone  in  the  Quadrangle  of  a  Clarissimoes
house  adjoyning  to  the  Piazza  of  Saint  Marke  in  Venice,
which  I  have  mentioned  in  my  former  Book,  viz.  Marce
Tulli  Cicero,  have  &  tu  Terentia  Antoniana.  These  foure
Churches  belong  to  the  Italians,  all  the  rest  (being  39.)  to
the  Greekes.

Famous  is  this  Citie  over  most  part  of  Europe,  Asia,
and  Africa  for  three  principall  Commodities  which  the
Hand  doth  minister  to  the  same,  and  the  Citie  again  to
many  remote  Countries,  Wine,  Oile,  and  Currans.

I  observed  a  strange  custome  in  this  Hand  the  day  of
their  Marriages  :  for  whensoever  any  of  the  Kindred  is
married,  all  the  day,  all  of  the  same  consanguinity  do  hang
out  of  their  Windowes  certaine  Carpets,  by  which  it  is
generally  knowne  in  theTowne  that  such  a  one  is  married  :
and  they  hang  out  most  commonly  two  Carpets  in  every
house.  I  have  observed  also  a  custome  amongst  their
women  which  I  never  read  or  heard  of  amongst  any  other
women.  They  ride  on  Asses  astride ;  and  that  upon
Morocco  Saddles,  but  all  those  that  I  saw  ride  were
Gentlewomen  of  the  better  sort,  attired  in  their  Silkes  or
Damaskes,  very  seemely  to  behold,  beeing  attended  by  a
Page  that  walketh  along  by  their  sides,  many  of  them
slaves  that  they  bought  with  their  money.

The  first  Caloieri  that  ever  I  saw  were  in  this  Towne  of
Zante,  which  are  certaine  Greekish  Priests,  whose  names
are  derived  from  these  two  Greeke  words  koXos  and  lepeos,
that  is,  an  honest  or  good  Priest.  They  are  such  as  have
undertaken  the  Vow  of  single  life.  But  there  are  other
Priests  among  them  that  are  suffered  to  marry,  but  having
buried  one  Wife  they  may  not  matrimony.  Their  ordi-
narie fasting  Dayes of  the weeke are  Wednesday  and

392

THOMAS CORYAT  a.d.

i  612.

Friday,  in  which  they  will  neither  eate  flesh  nor  any  fish
that  hath  any  bloud  in  it,  also  they  observe  foure  Lents
every  yeere.  And  now  we  will  follow  our  Author  to
Syo.  Syo.

Out  of  Syo  a  great  Tribute  of  twentie  thousand
Chicquins  ariseth  unto  the  Grand  Signior,  out  of  a  prin-
cipall  Commoditie  that  this  Hand  yeeldeth,  viz.  Masticke,  Mastick  Tree
which  groweth  heere  only  of  all  the  places  of  the  World,  descnbed-
the  Tree  that  beareth  it  is  a  prettie  kinde  of  shrub  like
unto  that  Lentiscus,  that  groweth  in  some  parts  of  France
and  Italie,  this  shrub  groweth  low  by  the  ground  and
beareth  crooked  little  boughes  and  leaves,  they  are  not
dispersed  over  the  whole  Hand,  but  grow  only  in  one
place  of  it  some  sixe  miles  from  the  Citie,  the  juyce  of  it
is  white,  and  in  the  moneth  of  August  they  begin  their
Recolta,  that  is,  their  Masticke  Harvest ;  the  men  that
are  set  a  worke  about  that  business,  cutting  the  barke  of
the  Tree  with  their  Iron  Instruments,  which  are  like
Pix-axes,  and  it  is  almost  three  moneths  before  they  end
their  Recolta,  the  Gum  distilling  incessantly  for  that
space.

Besides,  there  is  another  Commoditie  that  they  sell  in  Cotton  shrubs,
this  Hand,  Cotton,  which  groweth  very  plentifully  in
sundry  places  of  the  same.  The  shrub  or  bush  that
beareth  it  is  as  low  as  the  lowest  sort  of  Vines,  and  there
is  a  great  multitude  of  plots  of  it  neere  to  the  Towne
and  in  other  parts  of  the  Countrie.  The  downie  or
woolly  substance  which  proceedeth  from  the  Cod  of  the
shrub  doth  yeeld  that  matter,  of  which  the  Ilanders  doe
make  a  certaine  sturTe  called  Dimitie,  and  another  called  Dimitie  and
Scammatie.

The  day  before  we  departed  from  Syo,  I  rode  into  the
Countrey  upon  an  Asse  (according  to  the  custome  of  the
Hand)  being  accompanied  with  some  other  of  my  Coun-
treymen,  whereof  the  chiefe  was  one  Master  Richard
Southerne  that  had  lived  a  prettie  while  in  those  parts,
and  used  mee  passing  lovingly  in  the  Towne  of  Syo,  also
Master Robert Eldred, and Master Richard Lamplin.

393

Scamatie.

A.D.

1612.

Homers
Sepulchre.

Monasterie
[II.  x.  181

3-]

PURCHAS HIS PILGR1MES

We  tooke  our  Journey  to  a  thing  very  famous  and  worthy
to  be  seene  by  every  learned  Traveller,  if  that  bee  true
that  the  Inhabitants  doe  report  of  it.  Namely,  the
Sepulchres  of  the  Prince  of  all  Poets  Divine  Homer,  my
Master  for  many  yeeres  since

-A  quo,  ceu  fonte  perenni

quo,

Vatum  Pieriis  ora  rigantur  aquis.

for  indeed  they  doe  confidently  affirme,  that  hee  was  borne
in  this  Hand,  and  buried  heere  also.  Yet  there  are  fivt
Cities  more  doe  challenge  him  as  well  as  Syo,  according
to  an  old  Distich  in  the  Methologie  of  Greeke  Poets  that
read  long  since

'EwTa  7roAa?  ep[^ov<ri  irep\  piXav  'O/mrjpov
Hiuupva,  r'Po<^09,  Ko\o(j)(iov,  ^aXajuh,  Xios,  "Apyos,  'A6r]vij.

But  our  sinister  fortune  was  to  goe  too  late  out  of  the
Towne  that  we  could  not  possibly  reach  thither  that  night
over  the  dangerous  precipices  and  difficult  passages  of
Rocks  and  home  againe,  for  it  was  about  some  twelve
miles  to  the  place.  But  insteed  of  going  thither  (whither
if  wee  had  gone  wee  could  not  have  seene  any  Monument
at  all,  but  only  a  Vineyard  that  yeeldeth  excellent  Wine,
which  was  once  a  part  of  the  possessions  of  that  peerelesse
Poet,  and  in  which  they  say  his  bodie  lieth  interred)  wee
went  to  a  goodly  Monasterie  called  Emonia,  which  is  by
many  degrees  the  fairest  of  the  whole  Hand  :  it  is  inhabited
by  Greeke  Monkes  called  Caloieri,  which  are  in  number
two  hundred,  their  revenewes  are  at  the  least  five  thousand
Dollars  by  the  yeere,  which  make  a  thousand  pound
starling.  The  Monasterie  standeth  upon  the  side  of  an
hill,  and  was  built  about  sixe  hundred  yeeres  since,  by  the,
Emperour  Constantinus  Monomachus ;  the  Chappell  is  a
very  beautifull  building,  being  built  all  round,  and  beauti-
fied with  divers  faire  Marble  Pillars.  There  I  saw  the;
goodliest  waxe  Candle  that  ever  I  saw  in  my  life,  some
eight  foote  high  fastned  to  a  wall,  &  so  bigge  as  my
middle,  for  I  measured  it  with  my  girdle  :  the  first  Monke
thereof  was  one  Nicetus. I know  not  what  kinde  of

394

THOMAS CORYAT  ad.

1612.

learned  men  the  Monkes  of  this  place  have  bin  in  former
times,  but  now  they  are  so  unlearned,  that  they  can  onely  Monkes
read  in  their  owne  Manuscript  Greeke  Bookes,  but  can  meainc  •
neither  understand  nor  speake  any  learned  Greeke,  but
the  moderne  ; for  I  could  not  finde  as  much  as  one  learned
man  of  the  whole  two  hundred. They  have  a  notable
cisterne  of  water  in  their  Monastery  which  is  alwaies  full
of  water, to the  end to serve their  turne in time  of
necessitie,  if  they  should  be  besieged  by  the  enemy. This
Monastery  is  famous  for the  Bels that  are therein, in  Bets.
number  foure,  not  for  the  greatnesse  thereof,  but  that  those
Coloiri  onely  of  all  the  other  Greekish  Monkes  of  the
whole  Greekish  territorie,  are  suffred  to  use  them. In
this  Hand  is  the  Cave  of  Sibilla  Hellespontia,  but  the Sybilla.
shortnesse  of  time  bared  mee  of  the  opportunitie  to  see  it.
The  whole  Hand  is  one  hundred  miles  in  compasse,  and
there  are  in  it  about  eightie  thousand  soules.

FRom  this  Towne  I  sailed  in  an  English  Ship,  to  the
Trojan  shoare,  where  I  landed  Feb.  22.  with  foure-  Troy.
teene  English  men  more  and  a  Jew  or  Druggerman,  all
well  weaponed  for  feare  of  any  hostile  inusion  by  the
Turkes  :  by  the  way  as  we  were  going  thither,  we  found
a  bare  little  plot  of  ground,  not  farre  from  the  Sea,  where
their  Oxen  trode  out  wheate,  according  to  the  custome  of  Oxe-
most  of  these  Asiaticke  Countries ; we  walked  towards  ihreshtnS-
the  mould  or  haven  of  Troy ; but  before  we  came  thither
we  observed  divers  antiquities  worthy  the  relation : first
on  the  left  hand  of  us  we  left  the  ruines  of  a  goodly  Ruines  °f
Fortresse ; then  a  hillocke  which  was  built  in  a  round roy'
forme  ; there  remained  onely  the  lower  part  of  the  wall,
without  doubt  it  was  a  very  strong  fortification  before  it
i  was  destroyed  : afterward  on  the  right  hand  of  us,  wee
saw  a  peece  of  a  wall  under  the  shoare  hard  by  the  Sea
side,  but  the  breadth,  height,  and  length  of  it  we  did  so
exactly  behold, because  we  were  a  prettie  way  distant
from  it : likewise  we  saw  a  great  many  round  Marble
Pillars  standing  upright  in  the  ground,  and  dispersed  in

395

ad  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1612.

divers  parts  of  the  lower  side  of  the  Citie  that  lay  neere
to  the  Sea-shoare  :  these  Pillars  are  most  of  gray  Marble,
but  of  no  such  notable  bignesse  as  I  saw  afterward,  most
of  them  stood  in  the  ground  which  was  sowne  with
Wheate,  which  ground  was  so  covered  over  with  little
broken  stones,  that  I  did  very  much  marvell  how  it  was
possible  that  Corne  should  grow  in  that  place ;  as  for  the
Pillars,  we  beleeved  that  as  much  of  every  Pillar  lay  buried
under  the  ground,  as  appeared  above  the  ground.
Once  I  was  about  to  number  these  Pillars,  but
by  reason  that  they  were  so  extreamely  scattered,
I  found  an  extreame  difficultie  in  it,  and  could  not
doe  it  truely  and  exactly  without  a  longer  time  then  was
limited  me,  but  surely  I  thinke  there  were  no  lesse  then
one  hundred  of  them,  most  of  them  were  growne  very
rough  and  scabrous,  which  happened  by  the  injurie  of  all
manner  of  weather  in  so  long  antiquitie  of  time ;  only
one  of  them  in  a  low  plot  of  ground  neere  to  the  Sea,
was  passing  smooth  and  plaine,  like  a  sleeking  stone,  and
the  fairest  for  length  and  compasse  that  I  could  see  in  the
whole  number :  neere  unto  some  of  these  Pillars  there  be
foure  or  five  goodly  Marble  Sepulchers  of  a  great  length,
one  of  which  I  measured,  and  found  it  to  be  nine  of  my
feete  long.  These  Tombes  consist  of  one  intire  Marble
stone,  even  of  white  Marble ;  upon  every  corner  of  one
whereof  are  foure  round  knobs,  made  in  the  forme  of  little
pillowes,  and  the  middle  part  riseth  with  a  sharpe  line,
like  unto  the  sharpe  part  of  a  Costlet  or  breast  plate ;  like-
wise there  was  another  of  white  Marble,  on  the  left  side
whereof  the  whole  proportion  of  two  hands  (which  I
conjecture  to  have  bin  the  hands  of  some  great  Lady)
were  so  curiously  expressed,  that  it  is  impossible  for
Praxiteles  or  any  other  that  was  the  most  excellent  carver
in  the  World  to  surpasse  it.  I  finde  Petrus  Bellonius
his  observations  of  these  Sepulchers  to  be  very  true ;  for
that  which  hee  writeth  of  them  is  very  certaine,  that  they
are  excavated,  that  is,  made  hollow  in  the  inside,  in  the
forme  of  a  Chest,  &  that  the  corners  doe  remaine  whole

396

THOMAS CORYAT  a.d.

2.

and  entire.  I  finde  this  to  be  true  by  my  ocular  experi-
ence:  but  most  of  these  Sepulchers  lye  loosely  upon  the
ground,  as  having  bin  digged  from  the  places  where  they
were  setled,  over  the  bodies  which  lye  underneath  them :
to  what  end  I  know  not,  onely  I  thinke  that  some  imagin-
ing there  might  be  treasure  hid  under  them,  might  digge
them  up  in  hope  to  finde  some  Gold  or  Silver  under  these
tombes :  but  whosoever  doe  digge  up  the  Sepulchers  of
dead  men  for  gaine  or  treasure,  I  wish  they  may  be  as
much  frustrated  of  their  hopes  as  he  was  that  in  the  Citie
of  Babilon  did  digge  up  the  Monument  of  Nitocris,
Queene  of  the  Babylonians,  and  the  wife  of  King
Nebuchadnezer,  in  the  outside  of  whose  Tombe  stone,
there  was  written  a  certaine  Epitaph,  by  some  one  or
other  that  ment  to  delude  the  Reader,  for  though  the
Epitaph  promised  treasure  to  him  that  should  digge  up
the  Monument,  yet  after  he  had  rooted  it  up  from  the
ground,  instead  of  treasure  he  found  this  memorable
inscription ;  Nisi  auri  insatrabile  cupiditate  flagrasses,
nunquam  in  defunctorum  cadavera  saevitiam  tuam  exer-
cuisses.  It  grieved  me  to  the  heart  that  I  could  not  learne
either  by  inscriptions,  or  any  other  meanes,  whose  Monu-
ments these  were:  for  it  is  vaine  to  be  induced  by  [II. x.  1814.]
conjectures,  to  say  they  were  these  or  these  mens  ;  onely  I
hope  no  man  will  taxe  me  of  a  rash  opinion,  if  I  beleeve
one  of  them  might  be  the  Monument  of  King  Ilus,  the
enlarger  of  the  Citie  of  Troy ;  for  I  remember  that
Homer  saith  in  his  eleventh  iEneid,  that  Ilus  was  buried
in  the  open,  as  this  was ;  and  that  another  of  them  might
be  the  Monument  of  King  Priamus,  it  is  not  altogether
unlikely,  for  Virgil  writeth  in  his  second  iEneid  that  King
Priamus,  after  the  late  fatall  destruction  of  the  Citie,  was
slaine  by  Pyrrhus  the  Sonne  of  Achilles,  neere  the  Trojan

shoare  :  for  thus  saith  he jacet  ingens  littore  truncus.

Now  though  mercilesse  Achilles  persecuted  the  dead
carkase  of  Hector  with  that  barbarous  crueltie,  as  to
dragge  him  starke  naked  at  a  Carts  taile,  three  times  about
the  wals  of  the  Citie :  yet  it  is  likely  they  would  so  much

397

a.d.  PITRCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1612.

honour  the  old  silver  haired  King  Priamus  (especially
since  they  had  now  fully  satisfied  their  furie,  both  by
burning  of  the  Citie  and  massacring  of  all  the  most  Noble
Citizens,  and  with  the  rest  their  last  King)  as  to  cover
his  body  with  some  royall  monument  beseeming  his
regall  state :  pardon  me  (gentle  reader)  for  this  my  con-
jecture. I  affirme  nothing  certainely,  onely  I  gesse,  as
another  industrious  traveller  would  doe,  that  hath  or
shall  observe  the  same  things  that  I  have  done,  that  one
of  those  goodly  Monuments  might  be  the  Sepulcher  of
King  Priamus.

From  the  place  where  these  Tombes  lay,  we  went  toward
the  haven  or  mould  of  Troy,  which  seemeth  to  have  bin
a  notable  place  in  former  times ;  for  there  remaine  worthy
steps  of  antiquity  to  this  day,  a  little  on  this  side  the  water
wee  saw  a  very  delicate  trough  of  white  Marble,  which
whether  it  served  for  women  to  wash  cloathes  in,  or  for
any  beasts  (as  horses)  to  drinke  in,  I  know  not,  the  mould
was  in  former  times  a  convenient  harbour  for  little  vessels,
as  Carmisals  Gallies,  Frigats,  but  I  doubt  whether  any
great  Ships  could  securely  ride  at  anchor  there ;  for  the
water  is  so  shallow,  that  I  thinke  a  vessell  of  any  great
burthen  will  quickly  touch  ground,  although  perhaps  in
those  daies,  when  the  Citie  did  flourish,  the  water  neere
the  shoare  might  be  much  deeper  then  it  is  now,  by
reason  of  the  continuall  scouring  and  clensing  of  the
channell.  There  remaine  certaine  memorable  antiquities
at  this  mould :  certaine  faire  gray  Marble  Pillars,  in
number  ten,  that  appeare  above  the  water,  being  infixed
in  the  ground ;  more  then  the  halfe  of  them  I  beleeve
are  buried  in  the  water :  all  these  stand  somewhat  neere
together,  almost  in  a  rowe.  It  is  likely  that  they  were
heretofore  placed  there  to  this  end,  that  Barges,  Boates,
and  such  kinde  of  vessels  as  anchored  there,  might  by
the  meanes  of  cables,  or  other  roapes  be  staied  or  tied
thereto.  There  also  I  saw  a  very  stately  and  gallant
ascent  from  the  landing  place  upwards  towards  the  Citie,
a  faire  kinde  of  pile  built  in  the  water,  reaching  up  at  the

398

THOMAS CORYAT  a.d.

1612.

least  two  but  lengths  (according  to  my  opinion)  till  it
joyneth  with  the  land,  and  made  in  the  forme  of  a  wall :
It  is  so  broade  that  I  beleeve  three  Carts  might  easily  goe
together  side  by  side  upon  it : it  is  greatly  ruined  and
broken  downe,  the  stones  being  dissipated  and  scattered
a  sunder  ;  onely  the  foundation  of  a  part  of  it  that  joyneth
almost  to  the  land,  remaineth  very  entire  to  this  day,  for
as  I  walked  up  from  the  water  towards  the  land  by  chance,
I  cast  mine  eyes  upon  the  left  side  of  the  mould,  and
found  it  a  very  notable  foundation ; and  to  the  end  I
might  the  more  exactly  view  it,  I  leaped  downe  upon  the
sand  to  survey  the  same :  that  part  of  the  pile  consisteth
of a faire and strong white stone, squared out very
artificially,  and  of  a  great  length  and  thicknesse. As  you
walke  up  from  this  mould  towards  the  Citie,  you  may  see
the  stately  Pallace  of  the  King  before  you,  standing  in  a
direct  line  opposite  to  your  face :  by  the  consideration  of
which  I  did  the  better  confirme  that  beliefe  in  my  selfe,
that  the  Pallace,  which  I  will  shortly  speake  of,  might
be  the  place  of  the  Kings  royall  residence : for  it  was  a
very  delicate  passage  for  the  King,  either  in  a  Chariot  or
a  Horse  backe  from  this  mould  through  a  stately  faire
streete,  to  his  owne  Pallace,  distant  but  a  little  mile  from
the  water :  from  this  mould  wee  went  to  a  standing  poole
but  a  little  remote  from  the  shoare,  being  I  thinke  well
neere  a  mile  in  compasse :  which  I  first  thought  to  have
bin  fresh  water,  but  when  I  tasted  it,  I  found  it  salt,  and
therefore  I  gather  that  this  is  nothing  but  the  inundation
of  the  Sea,  when  it  doth  sometimes  exceede  his  bankes :
hard  by  one  side  of  the  Poole  I  saw  a  principall  relique  of
antiquitie,  a  goodly  grey  Marble  Pillar,  the  fairest  that
ever  I  saw  in  my  life  till  then,  lying  on  the  ground,  and
broken in the very middest : it was three and thirty
Geometricall  foot  long  (for  I measured  it  very  exactly
with  a  Carpenters  rule  of  twelve  inches)  and  five  thicke :
neere  to  the  same  Pillar  there  is  a  broken  fragment  of
Marble,  lying  in  the  water,  of  the  same  colour  and  pro-
portion with  the  former  Pillar,  whereby  I  know  that  it

399

A.D.

1612.

[II x.1815.]

Let  the  Reader
pardon  this
long  descrip-
tion ofTroies
Ruines  {some
digressions  I
have  cut  off)
for  I  would  at
once  present
Troy  acted  by  a
Trojan  spirit,
which  may
both  profit  the
studious  anti-
quarie,  and
serve  to  resolve
and  thaw  the
most  frozen
spirit  of  severe
gravity  or
stupidest
stoike;  melting
some  delights
if  not  extort-
ing laughter
from  him.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

was  part  of  the  same  Pillar :  this  was  the  very  head  of
the  Pillar,  being  wrought  with  such  a  kinde  of  worke  as
is  used  about  the  heads  of  Pillars :  this  part  was  five  foot
long,  so  that  the  whole  Pillar  was  eight  and  thirty  foot
long,  being  of  one  entire  stone  as  I  thinke,  though  it  be
now  broken  in  three  peeces,  which  came  to  passe  by  the
violent  fall  thereof.

But  a  little  from  this  goodly  Pillar,  which  I  have  now
mentioned,  there  is  another  almost  as  great,  lying  on  the
ground,  and  so  covered  with  Brambles  and  Briers,  that  I
could  not  perfectly  observe  the  length  of  it.  Againe,
about  a  butt  length  further,  there  is  one  very  memorable
gray  Marble  Pillar  more,  lying  on  the  ground,  some
thirty  foot  long,  foure  foot  thicke,  and  broken  in  the
middest.  As  we  ascended  higher  from  the  Poole  towards
the  Pillar,  wee  observed  a  very  lamentable  rubbish  of
stones  intermingled  here  and  there  with  a  few  little  frag-
ments of  Brickes,  and  dispersed  over  those  fields  that  were
once  filled  up  with  houses,  so  that  I  could  not  tread  upon
any  plot  of  ground  from  the  mould,  till  I  came  to  the
Pallace,  but  I  found  round  about  me  old  broken  stones ;
in  some  places  whereof  I  saw  greene  Corne  growing,
whereof  I  did  not  a  little  wonder,  because  I  could  not
conceive  how  they  should  plough  up  such  hard  stony
earth :  on  the  left  hand  of  us,  as  we  ascended  the  side  of
the  hill,  we  left  the  wall  of  the  Citie,  which  by  the  ruines
that  remaine  there  to  this  day,  seemeth  to  have  bin  a  most
stately  thing  indeede.  Some  thinke  it  is  at  the  least
thirty  foot  high,  and  of  a  great  thicknesse,  it  consisteth  of
faire  and  great  ashler  stones  of  a  white  colour,  being  built
with  the  same  from  the  very  foundation,  till  towards  the
top ;  and  then  are  built  againe  upon  the  same  with
certaine  lesse  stones :  so  that  the  whole  in  one  part  con-
sisteth of  two  kinde  of  stones,  a  great  faire  ashler,  and  a
little  rough  stone  in  another  part  of  the  ashler  onely:
this  wall  runneth  up  a  great  way  into  the  Country,  being
in  some  places  broken  and  interrupted.

In  the  outside  of  this  Wall,  which  wee  left  on  the  left

400

THOMAS CORYAT  a.d.

IDI2.

hand,  wee  observed  divers  faire  buttresses,  which  were
made  for  the  strengthening  of  the  same,  by  whom  those
wals  were  built :  I  am  uncertaine,  but  this  I  have  read,
that  Ilus  the  fourth  King  of  the  Citie,  who  enlarged  the
same,  built  some  part  of  the  wals  of  the  Citie ;  and  that
Laomedon  finished  the  same  wals,  which  being  by
Hercules  destroyed,  King  Priamus  being  restored  into  his
Country,  after  he  was  carried  away  captive  into  Greece,
reedified  them  last  of  all :  as  we  ascended  the  hill,  wee
left  a  little  on  the  left  hand  of  us  the  ruines  of  a  faire  and
stately  building,  which  seemed  to  be  the  Pallace  of  some
eminent  Noble  man,  or  Gentleman  of  the  Citie,  a  good
part  of  the  wall  remained  and  was  of  a  faire  height,  having
in  the  outside  certaine  faire  peeces  of  white  and  red  Marble
curiously  wrought,  standing  in  the  very  corner  of  the
wall :  not  farre  from  that  we  found  a  prettie  Well,  having
a  white  Marble  Pillar,  which  I  therefore  mention,  because
1 1  have  read  that  Wels  are  very  scarse  in  this  part  of  the
Trojan  territory.

In  our  journey  to  the  Pallace,  wee  found  certaine  faire
peeces  of  stone,  as  curiously  carved  and  wrought  with
exquisite  borders  and  workes  as  ever  I  saw.  In  one  great
peece,  but  broken,  I  found  an  inscription,  which  what  it
ment  I  could  not  devise,  it  was  written  in  Latine  char-
acters, viz.  the  word  Numinid :  likewise  after  I  found  a
stately  peece  of  white  Marble  of  some  foure  foot  long,
and  two  foot  broad,  on  the  which  was  a  very  ancient
inscription  in  Latine  words  written  with  Capitall  Letters,
but  they  are  such  exoticke  characters,  and  so  worne  out
with  antiquitie,  that  neither  I  my  selfe,  nor  any  else  of
my  whole  Company  could  perfectly  read  it :  againe,  after
that  wee  found  the  ruines  of  a  stately  building  neere  to
this  Towne,  built  in  a  round  forme,  which  without  all
question  was  a  Temple,  dedicated  to  one  of  their  heathen
Gods,  and  therefore  wee  conjectured  it  to  be  a  Religious
House,  because  the  manner  of  the  structure  thereof
differed  much  from  the  forme  of  all  the  other  buildings
that  we  saw  there :  in  the  inside  a  little  under  the  higher
x  401  2  c

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGR1MES

1612.

part  of  the  wall,  we  perceived  some  five  or  sixe  peeces
of  white  Marble  standing  round  in  a  rowe,  and  very
artificially  wrought.

A  little  from  this  Temple  wee  found  a  vault  in  the-
ground,  which  I  thinke  in  former  times  had  bin  a  large
thing,  and  of  a  goodly  length,  but  now  it  is  almost  stopped)
up.  I  with  some  few  more  of  our  Company  entred  this
vault,  and  found  it  full  of  ordure  and  dung  of  Cattle. 1
Againe  a  little  above  this  we  came  into  another  vault,
built  with  faire  free  stone,  and  stately  arched,  this  vault
was  of  a  goodly  height  and  length,  and  distinguished  with
many  arches  throughout  the  whole  length  thereof :  all
our  company  entered  it  at  one  end,  and  went  forth  at
another :  here  also  wee  saw  abundance  of  ordure  where-
with the  bottome  of  the  vault  was  filled  from  one  end  toj
the  other ;  the  reason  of  it  is  because  the  poore  Heards-,
men  doe  oftentimes  in  the  winter  put  their  Cattle  all  the
night  in  these  places :  after  that  wee  saw  two  more  vaults,
under  the  ground,  but  entred  neither:  being  now  come,
something  neere  to  the  Pallace,  wee  left  on  the  right  hand
a  ruined  Castle  or  Fortresse,  built  upon  a  Mount,  about .
the  lower  part  whereof  were  sundry  arches ;  this  Fort
(for  so  I  take  it  to  have  bin)  was  built  round,  and  those
arches  stand  in  a  faire  row  round  about  the  same,  an
ornament  passing  faire  to  the  building  when  it  was
entire :  a  great  part  of  the  ground  betwixt  the  mould
and  the  Pallace  is  beset  with  certaine  Trees  of  divers
kindes,  as  Mulberry  trees,  Figge  trees,  Boxe  trees,  Olive
trees,  Live  Oake  trees,  Almond  trees,  whereof  some  wee
saw  beare  blossomes  when  wee  were  there :  also  it  beareth
Broome  of  a  great  height,  and  such  as  yeeldeth  a  prettie
kinde  of  sent :  the  next  thing  of  remarke  that  presented
it  selfe  unto  us,  immediately  before  wee  entered  the
Pallace,  was  a  certaine  heape  of  stones  upon  the  top  of  a
Mount  neere  to  the  foote  of  the  Castle,  and  dispersed
about  the  sides  of  the  same  Mount :  these  are  free
stones,  many  whereof  presented  a  blackish  hewe,  and
were cunningly squared out, as our ashler stones of

402

THOMAS CORYAT  a.d.

1612.

England  for  building.  I  never  saw  fairer  stones  in  my
ife  to  adorne  the  frontispice  of  any  Pallace  then  these
were,  and  being  so  neere  unto  the  Pallace,  I  am  per-
vaded they  are  the  ruines  of  some  part  thereof.

Having  now  beheld  these  foresaid  square  stones,  we
ipproached  neere  to  the  foot  of  the  Pallace  which  I  thinke  [II.  x.  18 16.]
was  by  the  ancient  Poets  both  Greeke  and  Latine  called
Pergamum,  by  which  word,  whether  they  understood  the
principall  Castle  of  the  Citie,  or  the  Palace  wherein  the
indent  Kings  kept  their  Court,  I  cannot  certainly  affirme.
The  whole  Frontispice  consisted  of  a  most  beautiful  white
stone,  cut  square  like  our  Azure  stones  in  England,  the
fairest  for  the  breadth,  length,  and  thicknesse  that  ever  I
saw ;  though  now  through  Antiquitie  of  time  the  beauti-
full  grace  of  the  stone  is  somewhat  diminished.  The
whole  front  of  the  Palace  saving  a  little  at  the  top  con-
sisted of  such  square  stones.  Every  stone  hath  in  the
middle  part  of  the  front  thereof  a  certaine  little  hole,
which  to  what  end  it  served  I  know  not.  This  front  for
\  piece  of  plaine  stone  Worke  doth  yeeld  the  fairest  shew
that  ever  I  saw  in  any  Palace  in  my  life.  And  though
I  thinke  it  is  as  ancient  as  the  Citie  of  Troy,  yet  to
strangers  that  saile  upon  the  Channell  neere  at  hand  it
presenteth  such  a  faire  white  shew,  that  the  first  time  I
looked  upon  it  without  the  helpe  of  an  Opticke  Glasse,  I
thought  it  had  beene  some  new  Building  raised  within
these  few  yeeres.

The  front  is  beautified  with  three  Arches,  whereof  that
in  the  rundle  (which  I  thinke  served  for  a  Gate)  is  farre
the  fairest,  the  other  two  standing  in  the  same  row,  each
on  each  side  of  the  middle  Arch,  are  by  halfe  lesser  then
that  in  the  middle,  which  for  height  and  breadth  is  by
many  degrees,  the  most  magnificent  that  ever  I  saw,  fairer
not  only  then  the  goodliest  Palace  Gate  that  ever  pre-
sented it  selfe  to  mine  eyes  till  then,  but  also  then  the
greatest  Gate  of  any  Church  that  ever  I  beheld,  which
doth  argue  the  incomparable  magnificence  of  the  Palace,
when  it  flourished  in  his  glory. It  is  some  fortie  Geo-

403

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGKIMES

1612.

metricall  foote  broad,  and  sixe  and  thirtie  foot  high,  but
from  the  very  top  of  the  Frontispice  from  the  ground,  II
take  it  to  bee  eightie  foot  high,  for  I  tooke  the  Altitude
and  Latitude  of  it  by  a  Mathematicall  Instrument.  Now
in  that  I  call  it  a  Gate,  you  must  conceive  (I  meane)  not
the  Instrument  of  a  Gate  which  serveth  to  shut  and  open
(for  there  remaines  not  the  least  step  of  any  such  thing)
but  a  voide  and  open  space  which  (as  it  is  credible)  was-
once  furnished  with  a  stately  Gate,  which  Gate  now  it  is
probable,  consisted  of  two  leaves.  Neither  of  those  leaves
if  it  were  strengthened  with  great  barres  of  Iron  and
Nailes  correspondent  to  the  proportion  of  such  a  Gate  (as
goodly  Gates  are  now  adayes)  I  beleeve  could  hardly  bee
opened  or  shut  without  the  maine  strength  of  ten  exceed-
ing strong  men.  The  most  entire  and  solid  piece  of
Worke  that  I  saw  standing  amongst  all  the  ruines  of  Troy,
was  this  front  of  the  Palace,  which  standeth  so  perfectly,
that  I  could  not  perceive  the  least  blemish  or  cracke  in  the
whole  Frontispiece  saving  in  the  upper  part  thereof,  about
the  top  which  consisteth  of  Bricke,  and  is  built  in  a
bending  form.  Besides,  there  is  one  little  defect  more
for  certaine  stones  of  white  Marble,  which  are  pretily
contrived  in  a  row  above  the  top  of  the  Gate,  and  curi-
ously wrought,  are  somewhat  broken.  At  the  corners  of
the  middle  Arch  there  are  two  pieces  of  white  Marble
very  exquisitely  carved  with  curious  Borders  and  Workes
expressed  therein,  the  like  also  is  in  the  further  corner  of;
the  wall  of  this  stone,  from  the  which  I  brake  of  certaine
stones  to  carrie  with  mee  into  my  Countrey,  and  tc
reserve  them  in  my  safe  custodie  for  memorable  Antiqui-
ties while  I  live ;  at  the  top  of  the  middle  Arch,  there  are
two  prettie  holes  in  which  Bees  doe  breed  honey  at  a
certaine  season  of  the  yeere,  as  a  certaine  Turke  that
shewed  us  these  Antiquities  did  inforce  us.  Halfe  of  the
middle  Arch  is  now  stopped  up  with  the  like  kinde  of
great  stones  as  are  compacted  into  the  Frontispice  :  and  in
the  other  halfe  which  is  partly  open,  there  remaines  divers
confused  heapes  of  the  like  stones.

404

THOMAS CORYAT  ad.

1612.
It  happened  that  when  wee  had  thoroughly  satiated
Dur  eyes,  with  contemplation  of  these  ancient  mines,  the
Chiefetaine  of  the  company,  a  sworne  Brother  of  mine,
whom  I  have  often  named  before  in  this  my  Booke.
Master  Robert  Rugge,  observing  that  I  had  taken  paines
for  some  few  houres  in  searching  out  the  most  notable
Antiquities  of  this  the  worthiest  part  of  Troy  to  yeeld
mee  some  kinde  of  guerdon  or  renumeration  for  my
paines,  in  a  merrie  humour  drew  his  Sword  out  of  his
Scabberd,  and  ascending  to  one  of  these  great  stones  that
lye  in  the  open  part  of  this  middle  Gate  Knighted  mee,  Master
that  kneeled  upon  another  stone  on  my  right  knee,  by  9V??/!
the  name  of  the  first  English  Knight  of  Troy,  and  at  the
Knighting  of  mee,  pronounced  those  wittie  Verses  ex
tempore.

Coryate  no  more,  but  now  a  Knight  of  Troy,

Odcombe  no  more,  but  henceforth  Englands  Joy.

Brave  Brute  of  our  best  English  wits  commended ;
True  Trojane  from  iEneas  race  descended.

Rise  top  of  wit,  the  honour  of  our  Nation,
And  to  old  Ilium  make  a  new  Oration.

Two  poore  Turkes  that  stood  but  a  little  way  from  us
when  hee  drew  his  naked  Sword,  thought  verily  hee  meant
to  have  cut  off  my  head  for  some  notorious  villany  that  I
had  perpetrated.  Those  Verses  I  answered  ex  tempore,
also  our  Musketeeres  discharged  two  volleyes  of  shot  for
joy  of  my  Knighthood.

Loe  heere  with  prostrate  knee  I  doe  embrace  His  Verses.

The  gallant  title  of  a  Trojane  Knight.
In  Priams  Court  which  time  shall  ne're  deface;  [II.  x.  1817.]

A  grace  unknowne  to  any  Brittish  Wight.
This  noble  Knighthood  shall  Fames  Trumpe  resound,

To  Odcombes  honour  maugre  Envie  fell,
O're  famous  Albion  throughout  that  Hand  round,

Till  that  my  mournfull  friends  shall  ring  my  knell.

Withall  I  pronounced  this  extemporall  Oration  stand-
ing upon  a  high  stone  at  the  entrance  of  the  great  Gate,

405

M

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1612.

calling  my  Countrimen  my  Commilitones,  because  I  wa^i
at  that  time  their  Captaine  and  Leader  next  to  the  Chiefe-
taine.  By  Commilitones,  I  understand  fellow  Souldiers,
which  terme  Livie  doth  often  use  in  his  feigned  Orations,;
that  hee  bringeth  Captaines  in  speaking  to  their  Souldiers.

Master  Coriats  Oration,  Purus,  putus  Coriatus.
Quintessence  of  Coriat.

Y  worthy  Commilitones,  that  which  in  the  whole;

race  of  my  life  heretofore  I  neither  wished  nou
hoped  for,  much  lesse  expected,  loe  now  by  the  decree
and  ordinance  of  the  Fates  hath  most  fortunately  hapned
unto  mee.  I  am  arrived  (with  the  rest  of  my  deere
Countrimen)  after  so  many  bitter  stormes,  and  cruel!
conflicts  of  the  winds,  in  the  most  renowmed  place  of  the
whole  World  (only  Gods  sacred  Citie  of  Jerusalem
excepted)  ancient  Troy,  old  decayed  Ilium,  the  Ladie  or
rather  Queene  of  all  Asia ;  yea  the  principall  and  most,
noble  part  thereof,  is  the  most  Noble  place  which  our
Brittish  feete  doe  now  tread  upon.  Me  thinkes,  we
being  conducted  hither  by  our  good  Genius  have  even!
aspired  to  the  eminent  degree  of  happinesse  which  thou-;
sands  of  our  Countrimen  that  have  passed  alongst  this
Coast,  being  carried  away  with  a  prosperous  gale  of  wind
have  wished  to  attaine  unto,  but  have  beene  frustrated  of
opportunity  to  enjoy  these  noble  ruines  that  you  here
see  have  had  the  attractive  vertue  like  the  Adamant  or
Loadstone  to  draw  hither  some  of  the  most  famous  persons
of  the  World  to  contemplate  the  same.  Hither  came'
the  greatest  and  most  victorious  Monarch  that  ever  lived
Alexander  the  Great  who  having  erected  an  Altar  to  the
honour  of  Achilles  from  whose  stocke  he  was  lineally
descended  by  his  Mother  Olympias,  to  the  end  to  offer
Sacrifice  upon  it  to  his  Ghost  hard  by  his  Tombe,  which
to  this  day  remaines,  hee  pronounced  him  happie,  for  that
after  his  death  he  had  gotten  so  Noble  a  Poet  as  Homer
to  emblason  and  celebrate  his  invincible  courage.  Hither
came the Learned Emperour Adrian ; Our Emperour

406

THOMAS CORYAT  ad.

1612.

Septimius  Severus  after  he  had  destroyed  Byzantium,  his
Sonne  and  Successour  in  the  Empire  Antonius  Bassianus
Caracalla  with  many  thousand  worthy  Peeres  (I  dare  con-
fidently affirme)  that  from  time  to  time  to  come  hither  to
survey  these  (that  I  may  speake  with  the  Prince  of  Latine

'  Campos  ubi  Troja  fuit.

behold  (my  loving  Commilitones)  that  lamentable  rubbish
of  stones  which  hath  beene  honoured  by  the  most  elegant
and  singular  Poets  that  ever  handled  Quill.  This  ruinous
Palace  which  you  see  heere  was  the  place  without  all  ques-
tion of  the  Royall  Court  of  the  most  ancient  Trojane
Kings  (as  by  the  magnificence  of  these  Arches,  goodly
squared  stones  and  other  remarkeable  steps  of  venerable
antiquitie  is  very  infallibly  to  be  gathered)  namely  King
Ilus,  whom  I  take  to  be  the  first  Founder  thereof,
Laomedon  and  his  unfortunate  Sonne  Priamus  the  last
Trojane  King.  There  you  see  those  loftie  and  stately
walls,  which  though  they  were  for  thousands  of  yeeres
since  subverted  first  by  Hercules,  and  afterward  by  the
hostile  force  of  the  warlike  Graecians :  yet  you  see  the
foundations  thereof  were  not  rooted  up  from  the  ground,
but  that  to  this  day  most  notable  ruines  thereof  (observe
I  pray  you  with  an  exact  and  accurate  view  the  thicknesse,
the  height  of  them,  the  goodlinesse  of  the  squared  stones)
doe  present  themselves  as  wofull  spectacles  to  all  strangers,
and  are  objects  of  sympathy  and  commiseration  to  the
most  Adamantine  heart  in  the  World :  there  you  may  see
decayed  Castles  and  Fortifications :  there  also  in  another
place  subterranean  Crypts  and  Vaults,  which  I  beleeve,
served  partly  for  Granaries  and  Magazines  of  Corne  in  the
time  of  the  decennall  siege  of  the  Citie,  and  partly  to
containe  Cisternes  of  water  for  the  publike  use  of  the
Citizens.  Beneath  also  you  may  see  a  great  multitude  of
broken  Marble  Pillars  standing  upon  the  ground,  and  dis-
persed over  many  parts  of  the  old  Citie.  Cast  your  eyes
againe  upon  some  other  parts,  where  you  may  behold
greene Wheate growing amidst the old fragments of

407

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1612.

stones,  and  then  remember  the  notable  speech  of  the  Poet
Ovid,  Jam  seges  est  ubi  Troja  fuit,  &c.  by  all  these  pitifull
rudera,  I  find  that  memorable  sentence  of  the  Greeke  Poet
Hesiod  to  be  verified.

0<

■to.  kcli  virepTepa  vepTepa  ueaei

prepa  veprepc
Zeo?  vyjsi/3pe/uL6Tr)$.

That  is,  Thunder  thumping  Jove  can  make  the  loftiest
matters  the  most  low  and  despicable?  Alas  (my  Com-
militones)  can  you  behold  these  things  with  irrelenting
and  dry  eyes  ;  let  mee  tell  you  as  the  wandering  Prince  oft
Troy  Noble  iEneas  told  the  Punicke  Queene  Dido  in  his
Harangue  unto  her  concerning  the  destruction  of  this
Citie

Risum  teneatis Quis  talia  fando

amici?  Myrmidonum,  Dolopumve  aut  duri  miles  Ulysses,

Temperet  a  lachrymis?

[II.  x.i  8 18.]  Certainly,  the  consideration  of  this  grievous  desolation
may  justly  draw  both  sorrow  from  the  hearts  and  teares
from  the  eyes  of  all  such  as  are  endued  with  a  true  instinct
of  humanitie,  for  what  more  Tragicall  example  can  you
find  in  the  whole  Universe  of  the  inconstancie  and  muta-
bilitie  of  fortune  then  in  this  quondam  gallant  Citie?  it:
flourished  once  in  as  great  glorie  as  any  Citie  upon  the!
Earth  did  in  her  time,  and  her  glorie  was  untainted  andi
unstained  for  the  space  of  three  hundred  yeeres  wanting
one,  being  governed  by  six  potent  Kings,  the  first  of
which  being  Dardanus,  reigned  sixe  and  thirty  yeeres,
Ericthonius,  seventie  five ;  Tros,  sixtie ;  Ilus  a  great
amplifier  and  enlarger  of  the  City  55.  Laomedon  sixe
and  thirtie.  Priamus  the  last  Prince  fortie :  in  all  which
time  Fortune  shined  as  merrily  upon  her  as  upon  any  other
Citie  then  extant  in  the  World,  saving  for  the  ten  yeeres
of  Priamus,  in  which  it  was  besieged  by  the  Greekes.
But  at  last  after  the  revolution  and  period  of  that  ten
yeeres  siege,  it  suffered  such  a  rufull  devastation  by  the
meanes  of  that  fatall  Horse  of  armed  men,  that  was  con-
veyed within  the  walls  of  the  Citie,  the  mercilesse  rage  of

408

THOMAS CORYAT  a.d.

1612.

the  fire  that  was  scattered  every  where  by  the  hostile  hand,
and  carried  to  and  fro  by  the  wings  of  the  wind,  spoiling
and  depopulating  all  it  met  with  all,  that  after  that  time
never  was  there  found  any  man  that  would  reedifie  any
part  thereof.  This  happened  n  83.  yeeres  before  the
Incarnation  of  Christ,  and  430.  yeeres  before  the  found-
ing of  Rome  by  Romulus,  and  in  the  time  that  Jephta
judged  Israel.  The  like  elsewhere  hath  happened  to
many  other  ancient  and  noble  Cities  that  now  lie  buried
in  their  owne  ruines :  as  to  Ninivie,  Babylon,  Tyrus,
Carthage,  Sangunton,  and  Numantia  in  Spaine ;  Athens,
Thebes,  Lacedemon  and  Corinth  in  Greece ;  Ptolemais
now  called  Aeon  in  Syria,  and  divers  other  notable  Cities ;
none  of  which  I  beleeve  doe  yeeld  those  stately  ruines
that  you  now  behold  in  this  part  of  the  Trojane
Territorie.

You  may  also  observe  as  in  a  cleere  Looking-glasse  one
of  the  most  pregnant  examples  of  Luxurie,  that  ever  was
in  the  World  in  these  confused  heapes  of  stones,  that  lie
before  your  eyes.  For  Adulterie  was  the  principall  cause
of  the  ruines  of  this  Citie,  which  is  well  knowne  to  all
those  that  have  a  superficiall  skill  in  Historie,  by  the
remembrance  whereof  I  will  now  take  occasion  to  wish
one  charitable  wish  to  the  Metropolitane  Citie  of  mine
owne  Countrie,  and  with  the  same  as  with  an  Epilogue
conclude  my  speech,  that  as  Luxurie  destroyed  this  Citie
of  old  Troy,  to  which  most  ardent  petitions  upon  my
prostrate  knee,  I  beseech  the  great  Jehova,  which  is  the
rewarder  of  Chastitie,  and  severe  punisher  of  Incontinence,
to  avert  the  punishment  from  our  new  Troy,  (for  indeed,
London  was  in  former  times  called  Troynovant)  which  I
thinke  is  as  much  polluted  and  contaminated  with  extra-
vagant lusts,  as  ever  was  this  old  Troy.

Fcelix  quern  faciunt  aliena  pericula  contum.

Directly  beyond  this  foresaid  middle  gate  as  you  goe
forward  into  the  inward  part  of  the  Palace,  there  standeth
another  stately  Arch,  which  (I  thinke  in  former  times  was

409

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1612.

garnished  with  a  Gate  also  : this  Arch  is  almost  as  large
as  the  greatest  at  comming  into  the  Palace,  likewise  on
each  side  of  them  both  on  the  right  hand  and  left  hand,  as
you  goe  betwixt  the  middle  Arch  at  the  entrance  of  the
Palace,  and  the  opposite  Arch  which  I  have  last  mentioned,
there  is  another  stately  Arch  which,  I  thinke,  served  for
an  entrance  into  the  same  of  the  principall  parts  of  the
Palace. After  this  we  saw  another  part  of  the  Palace,
which  is  very  worthy  the  mention,  tenne  stately  Arches
standing  in  a  row  joyntly  together. These  stand  intire
without  any  diminution  or  impayring,  even  on  the  left
hand  of  the  Palace,  and  make  a  beautifull  shew. These
are  fourteene  foot  high,  and  ten  foot  and  a  halfe  thicke,
and  are  built  with  the  like  hard  stone  as  the  wals  of  the
Citie. There  are  three  Arches  more  above  the  same,  halfe
buried  in  the  ground. Then  at  the  very  corners  above  the
last  of  these  three  Arches  there  standeth  the  ruine  of
another most magnificent  Arch  raised to  a  very  loftie
height,  but  broken  about  the  top,  at  which  Arch  there
beganne  the  South  wall  of  the  Palace,  betwixt  that  goodly
Arch and another just correspondent to the same in
symmetric  of  workmanship. There  are  sixe  more  of  a
lesser  quantitie,  but  much  more  ruined  then  the  ten  intire
Arches that I have alreadie mentioned. Againe there
ranne  on  in  the  same  series  of  building  betwixt  the  middle
great  arch,  and  another  of  the  same  quantitie,  that  standeth
at  the  farther  corner,  sixe  Arches  more  like  the  former,  so
that  in  that  row  there  are  twelve  Arches,  and  three  more
of  a  very  sumptuous  and  goodly  Architecture,  which  when
they  all  stood  intire  beautified  with  their  severall  orna-
ments which  are  now  abolished,  presented  to  the  beholder,
without  all  doubt,  a  most  stately  shew. Againe,  on  the
right  hand  of  the  Palace,  but  a  little  distant  from  the  same,
there  remayneth  the  ruine  of  a  very  ancient  Building,
which wee conjectured to have beene some Temple
dedicated  to  the  Ethnike  Gods. From  the  Palace  wee
were  conducted  by  our  Turkish  guides,  to  another  old
ruined  Building  some  quarter  of  a  mile  off ; very  little

410

THOMAS CORYAT  a.d.

1612.

whereof  doth  appeare  above  the  ground,  but  if  you
descend  into  certaine  Vaults  under  the  ground,  you  may
observe  many  memorable  ruines.  Divers  stately  Arches
standing  intirely,  wonderfull  thicke  wals,  arched  roofes
made  by  Geometricall  worke,  as  (I  suppose)  without  any
Iron  or  Timber.  The  Turkes  told  us  that  this  was  once
a  passing  faire  Palace,  the  other  parts  of  the  Building
being  cleane  defaced  and  demolished,  so  that  not  so  much
as  any  little  ruines  thereof  are  left,  the  stones,  Marble
Pillers  and  other  ornaments  beeing  carried  away  into
other  Countries.  For  divers  of  these  Trojane  ruines
have  beene  transferred  to  many  of  the  Neighbour  Coun-
tries to  serve  for  their  publike  and  private  Buildings,  as
to  Constantinople,  Lemnos,  Lesbos,  Natolia,  Syo,  and
divers  other  parts.  Yea  the  Turkes  from  some  part  or
other  of  the  Trojane  Territories  doe  daily  carry  away
stones  in  their  Gallies.  Moreover,  they  told  us  that  this
Palace  served  for  the  Trojan  Queene  to  inhabite  and  [II.  x.  18 19.
keepe  her  Court  in.  Heere  at  this  ruine  they  shewed  us
a  certaine  Vault  under  the  ground,  wherein  there  was
found  great  Treasure  within  these  few  yeeres,  by  certaine
men  that  searched  it  out  very  diligently  with  Candles  and
Torches  in  their  hands,  and  the  same  Treasure  was  put
into  the  Coffers  of  the  present  Great  Turke  that  liveth
now,  Sultan  Achmet.

Having  seene  all  these  things,  wee  went  towards  the
Sea-side  to  take  Boat  and  to  goe  backe  to  our  Ship,  but
betwixt  the  Palace  and  the  Ship  we  observed  these  three
things  worthy  the  relation ;  first  a  stately  Arch  standing
alone  by  it  selfe,  which  heretofore  served  for  a  Spring  or
Fountaine,  but  I  could  not  see  the  least  drop  of  water
about  the  Arch,  for  the  Spring  is  utterly  dried  up,  onely
there  is  a  Well  neere  to  the  same.  Secondly,  the  ruines
of  a  Wall  that  runneth  up  into  the  Southerne  part  of  the
land,  which  is  of  such  a  marveilous  thicknesse  that  unto
most  of  the  readers  it  will  seeme  perhaps  incredible.  For
it  was  at  the  least  thirtie  Geometricall  foot  thicke,  for  I
measured  it  very  exactly. The  stones  of  which  it  was

411

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1612.

built  were  rough  and  hard,  but  a  little  further  up  in  the
Countrey  we  observed  some  other  part  of  the  same  Wall
to  stand  more  intirely,  and  to  be  built  with  such  goodly
square  Ashler  stone  as  is  in  the  great  wall  before  men-
tioned. Thirdly,  a  ruined  old  Castle  or  Fortification
erected  upon  a  Mount,  a  Fort  of  great  strength  and
beautie  in  ancient  times :  now  it  is  onely  a  Shepheards
habitation.  We  perceiving  that  it  was  Inhabited  by  some
people  went  into  it,  hoping  to  have  bought  some  Wine
for  the  refreshing  of  our  selves.

But  when  wee  entred  the  same,  in  stead  of  people  wee
found  onely  the  excrements  of  Cattell,  and  a  place  where
some  Shepheard  or  Heardsman  had  reposed  himselfe.
Also  wee  observed  a  very  miserable  rubbish  of  Stones
that  were  dissipated  and  scattered  over  the  face  of  the
whole  ground  every  where  within  and  without  the  Walles,
after  that  I  went  to  a  plot  of  arable  Ground,  where  I  saw
a  Plough-man  hold  the  Plough,  and  my  selfe  and  one
Master  Francis  Flyer  did  the  like  one  after  another,  that
if  wee  live  to  be  Old  men  we  may  say  in  our  old  age,  we
had  once  holden  the  Plough  in  the  Trojane  Territorie,
especially  in  that  part  we  saw  the  Citie  stood.  After  this
we  saw  Mount  Ida,  being  by  my  estimation  some  two
miles  distant  from  that  place,  but  we  had  not  the  oppor-
tunitie  to  goe  so  neere  to  it  as  to  view  it  exactly.  I
wonder  that  the  Epithets  of  Nemorosa  should  be  given  to
it  by  the  Poets,  for  I  could  perceive  no  Tree  at  all  growing
about  it,  and  doubt  whether  any  grew  upon  it  in  former
times,  by  reason  of  the  rockie  and  stonie  matter  it  con-
sisteth  of,  wee  onely  discerned  the  loftie  toppe  of  it  called
by  the  antient  Poets,  both  Gargarus  and  Dyndima,  upon
which  Cybiles  Priests  were  called  Idaei.  Dactyli,  Galli,
and  Curetes,  did  celebrate  their  Sacrifices  in  honour  of
her,  being  the  Mother  of  the  Gods.  I  understand  that
store  of  Turpentine  doth  grow  upon  the  Hill  and  the
sides  of  it.

These  notable  things  that  I  have  seen  in  Troy  are  so
worthy  the  observation,  that  I  would  not  for  five  hundred

412

THOMAS CORYAT  a.d.

1612.

pounds  but  I  had  seene  them,  and  had  I  not  seene  them
now,  I  thinke  I  should  have  taken  a  journey  out  of
England  of  purpose  to  see  the  same.  Therefore  let  me
advise  all  my  Country-men  that  meane  to  travell  into  the
world  for  observation,  to  see  this  famous  place  in  their
Travels,  as  being  farre  the  most  worthiest  of  all  the  ruined
places  in  the  world  that  are  not  Inhabited.

At  last  when  wee  came  to  the  shoare  side  to  enter  our
Boat  before  wee  left  the  land,  we  ascended  a  little  Mount
scituate  hard  by  the  Sea,  which,  it  is  likely  to  have  beene
made  by  the  Art  of  man  and  not  by  Nature,  and  that  in
the  time  of  the  tenne  yeares  Warres  betwixt  the  Grecians
and  Trojanes.  Another  artificiall  Mount  of  the  same
kind  I  observed  beyond  that  also.  By  whom  (whether  by
the  Grecians  or  by  the  Trojanes)  and  to  what  end  they
were  raised,  I  doe  not  know.  Onely  I  conjecture  they
were  made  by  the  Trojanes,  to  the  end  that  from  the
same  they  might  looke  over  the  Walls,  which  I  thinke
were  built  alongst  the  Sea-coast,  and  so  by  Darts,  Slings,
Stones,  Arrowes,  and  such  other  war-like  Instruments  to
annoy  the  Greekes  riding  at  Anchor  neere  to  the  shoare.

Besides the fruitfull Valley that I have mentioned,  Bellonius  /.  2.
which  lyeth  at  the  backside  of  the  Promontorie  Sygeum,  . f>escrtb-
through  which  runneth  the  River  Simois,  there  is  another  Trojan  mines
most  fertile  and  delicious  Valley,  that  lyeth  by  the  Sea-  saith  that
side  opposite  to  Tenedos,  which  I  thinke  is  as  pleasant  Simois  and
and  fat  a  Valley  as  any  in  the  world,  being  extended  at  the  Xanthus  have
least  a  dozen  miles  in  length  alongst  the  Sea-coast,  and  enouzjl  -in
some  ten  miles  as  I  conjecture  in  bredth,  the  ground  being  winter  for  a
as  fruitfull  to  produce  all  manner  of  Commodities  as  any  goose  to  swim,
plot  of  ground  under  the  Sunne,  but  by  reason  that  the  and tn Summer
Inhabitants  of  the  Countrey  are  oftentimes  infested  by  f?  ***  *.  ™e\
Pirats  and  men  of  Warre,  which  take  away  from  them  Baths,  tsV.
what  they  list,  they  cannot  find  any  secure  place  of  habita-
tion in  all  that  tract : by  meanes  whereof  it  commeth  to
passe,  that  there  are  few  dwelling  Houses  there,  and  so
consequently  the  Coast  is  more  untilled  and  unmannured
then  otherwise  it  would  bee. Notwithstanding  there  are

4J3

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1612.

divers  goodly  plots  of  Corne,  onely  Wheat  to  be  seene  in
sundry  parts  of  the  Valley  neere  to  the  Sea-side,  but  the
other  parts  of  the  Valley  further  in  the  Countrey  seeme
unto  those  that  behold  it  a  farre  off  upon  the  Sea,  to  bee
covered  wholly  with  Wood,  which  consisteth  especially  of
Live-Oake-  live  Oake-trees.  By  a  live  Oake-tree,  I  meane  a  strange
S3?"  ,  kind  of  Oake  which  groweth  in  divers  parts  of  Asia  as

well  as  heere,  that  differeth  much  from  our  English  Oake,
the  body  or  trunke  of  it  is  much  lesser  then  of  our
Forrest  Oakes,  that  are  but  of  an  ordinarie  size,
also  they  are  much  lower  then  ours.  As  for  the
wood  of  this  Tree  it  seemeth  to  be  of  an  inpene-
trable  hardnesse,  such  as  no  Axe  can  cleave  or  devide  a
sunder  without  a  great  deale  of  difficultie  when  it  is  dry,
but  being  greene  it  is  easily  hewed  downe.  It  beareth  a
kind  of  Fruit  or  Acorne  somewhat  differing  from  ours,
which  is  called  Valania,  which  serveth  for  divers  uses.
For  besides  that  it  feedeth  and  fatneth  Hogges  making
the  flesh  eate  passing  sweetly,  they  tanne  their  Leather
with  it,  moreover  most  of  the  Turkish  Ships  are  made  of
this  Wood,  but  it  lyeth  a  long  time  in  the  water  before
they  cleave  it  and  worke  it  for  the  Ship  timber.

But  me  thinkes  I  heare  some  Trojan  complaine  of
another  tedious  ten-yeeres  Siege  :  I  will  therefore  abruptly
breake  off  the  rest,  with  his  comming  to  Constantinople,
Entertainment  there,  his  Oration  to  the  Lord  Ambassa-
dour,  Sir  Paul  Pinder,  and  manifold  kindnesses  from  him,
and  other  Constantinopolitan  English  :  I  will  suddenly
bring  you  in  upon  him  in  a  Franciscan  Frierie,  beholding
a  Superstitious  Tragedie,  which  you  shall  heare  from  him-
selfe,  with  other  Relations  of  that  Citie.

Master  Coryats  Constantinopolitan  Observations

abridged.

THe  first  of  Aprill  being  Thursday,  and  the  day
immediately  before  Good-friday,  I  with  divers  of
my  Countrimen  went  about  midnight  to  the  Monastery
of  the  Franciscan  Friers,  where  within  a  little  after  I  came

414

THOMAS CORYAT  a.d.

1613.

thither,  I  observed  a  very  rigorous  and  austere  kind  of
Discipline,  whereof  indeed  I  had  often  heard  before  that
time,  but  never  saw  till  ther. Just  about  the  point  of
Midnight  a  little  after  Masse  was  begun,  certaine  fellowes
prostrating  themselves  in  the  middle  of  the  Quire  of  the
Church,  directly  before  the  high  Altar,  Whipped  them-  Self-whipping.
selves verie cruelly, and continued in the mercilesse  ?^J*jJ^
punishment  of  themselves  at  the  least  an  houre  and  a  herein  we
halfe. At  the  first  I  thought  they  had  beene  some  of  the  will  allow  the
Friers  themselves  but  therein  I  erred,  for  they  love  to  Popish  Doc-^
spare  their  flesh  though  it  be  otherwise  reported  of  them. ^ ^mtm
There  were  of  those  some  foure  or  five  and  were  indeed  k'ipocrites
certaine Galley Slaves, that in lieu of  the punishment  which  doe
which they did undergoe for other men, that against Penance  by
Easter  had  confessed  their  sinnes,  and  were  enjoyned  a  ot^rsmustgoe
certaine  for  their  offences,  were  to  be  released  from  the °pro^^0 y
Gallies. This  I  understand  to  bee  the  Custome  every
yeere,  that  the  richer  sort  of  people  having  confessed  their
sinnes  to  the  Priest,  and  thereupon  required  to  performe
such  a  Penance,  doe  procure  these  kind  of  Slaves  upon
condition  of  Libertie  to  undertake  this  punishment  for
them. The poore Villaines did endure such bitter
chastisement  which  they  inflicted  upon  themselves,  that  I
could  scarce  behold  them  with  drie  eyes ; their  Faces  were
covered  with  Canvasse  vayles  so  that  no  man  could  per-
ceive any  of  them,  and  all  the  middle  part  of  their  backe
was  naked  which  they  lashed  with  certaine  Napkins,  at
the  ends  whereof  were  Sitters,  and  againe  at  the  end  of
those  Sitters  were  inclosed  certaine  little  sharp  peeces  of
Iron,  made  like  the  straight  part  of  the  rowell  of  a  Spurre,
which  at  the  very  first  blow  that  it  layd  upon  the  skinne
did  easily  draw  blood. They  kept  a  certaine  order  in
laying  on  their  blowes,  now  on  the  right  shoulder,  &  after
over  the  left,  in  the  space  of  a  quarter  of  an  houre,  I  saw
one  of  them  that  dealt  somwhat  roughly  with  himselfe
by  redoubling  his  blowes  a  little  faster  then  the  rest,  did
fetch  off  all  the  skin  from  the  middle  part  of  his  backe,
which  was  a  very  dolefull  and  tragicall  Spectacle,  and  when

4i5

A.D.
1613.

Master
Cory  at s  For-
tune; but  it
fortuned  to
prove  a  lie;
the  more  the
pi  tie,  not  for
Odcombes  sake
so  much  and
the  Syrenaica/f
crue,  as  for  the
curious
diligence  of
many  of  his
observations,
which  might  to
the  wisest
have  proved
profitable.
[II.x.1821.]

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

hee  had  very  bitterly  whipped  himselfe,  there  came  a  cer-  j
taine  fellow  with  a  Cloth  in  his  hand  steeped  in  Vineger,
with  which  he  wiped  away  the  blood  that  it  should  not
rankle.  After  which  the  Slave  continued  whipping  of  |
himselfe  after  a  very  terrible  and  cruell  manner,  but  most
of  the  rest  favoured  themselves  much  more  then  this  man
did.  Amongst  divers  other  Gentlemen  of  qualitie  that
came  thither  to  behold  this  spectacle,  the  French  Ambassa-
dour  presented  himselfe  with  great  Devotion.  This
severe  Discipline  being  now  ended,  one  of  the  Friers
ascended  the  Pulpit  and  made  a  Sermon  in  the  Italian
Tongue  concerning  the  Passion  of  Christ.

The  Tuesday  in  the  Easter  week  my  Lord  went  to  the;
Captaine  Bashawes,  and  my  selfe  attended  upon  him.
At  his  returne  from  the  Bashawes  Palace,  his  Lordship
espying  a  certaine  Turkish  Fortune-teller  called  Rama,
Fishing  under  the  wall  of  the  Seraglia  neere  to  a  holy
Well,  the  water  whereof  is  good  (He  was  Fortune-teller
to  the  Grand  Signior  himselfe)  one  that  was  a  kinsman  of:
Mahomets,  for  hee  ware  a  Turbet  of  a  very  deepe  green
die.  Unto  him  my  Lord  sent  me  with  Master  Edward
Connock  his  Secretary  and  one  of  his  Druggermen,  to  the
end  he  should  tell  me  my  Fortune,  whereupon  he  delivered
unto  me  two  Dice,  and  willed  them  to  cast  them  upon  a|
certaine  smooth  greene  Stone  that  lay  before  him,  which
when  I  had  done,  hee  wrote  with  his  Pen  certaine  Turkish
Characters  upon  the  same  stone,  by  vertue  whereof  he
Prognosticated  my  Fortune  and  presaged  to  this  effect,
as  the  Druggerman  interpreted  his  speech,  viz.  That  I
was  a  man  desirous  to  Travell  into  remote  Regions,  that
according  to  my  desire  I  should  travell  farre,  and  should
be  in  danger  for  my  Religion  sake,  and  should  also  escape
that  danger,  after  that  I  should  come  to  a  great  Citie
(perhaps  he  meant  London)  where  many  would  flocke
about  me  to  heare  me  Discourse  of  those  things  that  I
had  seene  and  done  in  my  Travels.  At  last  Master
Secretary  gave  him  certaine  Aspers  for  a  gratuitie :  hee
said  also  that  I  should  write  a  Booke  of  my  Travels,  and

416

Friers.

THOMAS CORYAT  a.d.

1613.

publish  it  to  the  benefit  of  my  Countrymen,  and  many
thousands  besides.

There  is  a  Colledge  of  Turkish  Monkes  in  Galata,  that  Darvises,  a
are  called  Darvises,  neere  to  one  of  their  publike  Buriall  kind  of
places,  who  every  Tuesday  and  Friday  (which  is  the  Turkish
Turkish  Sabbath)  doe  performe  the  strangest  exercise  of
Devotion  that  ever  I  saw  or  heard  of.  It  was  my  chance
to  see  it  the  ninth  of  Aprill,  with  some  other  English-men
that  went  thither  to  observe  the  same,  and  therefore  I  will
write  a  little  of  it  according  to  mine  owne  experience.
About  halfe  an  houre  after  twelve  of  the  clocke  the  same
day,  I  entred  a  prettie  faire  roome,  to  which  I  passed
through  an  outward  Court,  which  roome  was  before
almost  full  of  Turkes  that  came  thither  to  serve  God  in
their  superstitious  kind,  and  had  put  off  their  Shooes
(according  to  their  wonted  custome)  and  placed  them
upon  Shelfes.  Some  parts  of  the  walls  of  this  roome
were  in  the  inside  decked  with  Inscriptions  and  Poesies
written  in  the  Turkish  language,  one  directly  over  the
Interpreter  or  Expounder  of  the  Law,  and  others  heere
and  there,  all  tending  to  Religion.  The  middle  part  of
the  roome  which  is  formed  out  square,  is  voyd,  and
reserved  onely  for  the  Religious  men  to  sit  in ;
but  all  the  foure  parts  round  about  served  for
the  Spectators  to  behold  that  which  I  will  now
expresse,  which  Spectators  were  as  well  Christians
as  Turkes.  For  hither  the  Turkes  will  suffer  the
Christians  to  have  accesse,  though  not  to  their  Mosquies.
There  are  other  inner  roomes  also  somewhat  neere  this
where  Women  sate  apart  by  themselves,  with  their  Maskes
before  their  Faces.  A  little  after  I  came  into  the  roome
the  Darvises  repayred  into  the  middle  voyd  space,  sitting
Crosse-legged,  bending  their  Bodies  lowe  towards  the
floore  for  Religion  sake,  even  almost  flat  upon  their  Faces,
and  that  by  murmuring  out  certaine  Religious  tearmes :
the  whole  companie  of  them  were  about  two  and  fiftie.
Their  habits  differing  much  from  the  other  Turkes,  first  pas^m  0f
the  covering  of  their  Head  was  of  a  differing  sort  from  their  Habite.

X  417  2D

A.D.
1613.

Mahumetan
Holies.

Dervises

strange

turnings.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

the  other,  for  they  weare  certaine  gray  Felts  made  in  a
forme  not  unlike  the  blockes  of  Hats  that  we  use  in
England,  some  whereof  about  the  lower  end  are  covered
with  a  little  white  Shash,  likewise  the  Cloake  or  upper  Vest
of  most  of  them  was  exceedingly  patched,  and  mended
with  a  great  multitude  of  severall  peeces,  to  which  torne
Gowne  I  thinke  they  attribute  matter  of  Holinesse.

The  whole  company  of  them  being  now  setled  in  their
places,  and  holding  their  Turkish  manuscript  Bookes  in
their  hands,  a  certaine  Singing-man  sitting  a  part  in  an
upper  roome  began  to  sing  certaine  Hymnes,  but  with  the
most  unpleasant  and  harsh  notes  that  ever  I  heard,  exceed-
ingly differing  from  our  Christian  Church  singing,  for
the  yelling  and  disorderly  squeaking  of  them  did  even
grate  mine  eares.  Whensoever  hee  pronounced  the  Name
of  Mahomet,  all  of  them  did  cast  downe  their  Heads  to
their  knees.  After  hee  had  done,  the  Interpreter  of  the
Law  ascended  into  a  Chaire,  and  read  a  certaine  Turkish
Booke  for  some  halfe  houre  to  the  Assembly,  which  con-
tayned  the  Mahometane  Doctrine,  but  when  hee  named
him  they  fell  prostrate  upon  their  Faces  and  kissed  the
ground.  Almost  a  quarter  of  an  houre  before  he  had
done,  three  Pipers  sitting  in  the  roome  with  the  Singer,
began  to  play  upon  certaine  long  Pipes  not  unlike  Tabors,
which  yeelded  a  very  ridiculous  and  foolish  Musicke,  and
continued  so  very  neere  a  quarter  of  an  houre  after  the
Clergie  man  had  ended  his  Lecture :  and  with  them  there
played  another,  that  strucke  with  his  hands  a  strange  kind
of  Instrument  made  of  Mettall,  in  the  forme  of  a  kind  of
Bason.  Having  played  very  neere  a  quarter  of  an  houre,
upon  a  sodaine  they  sounded  much  louder  then  ordinarie,
whereupon  some  five  and  twentie  of  the  two  and  fiftie
Darvises,  suddainly  rose  up  bare  legged  and  bare-footed,
and  casting  aside  their  upper  Garment  some  of  them
having  their  brests  all  uncovered,  they  began  by  little  and
little  to  turne  about  the  Interpreter  of  the  Law  turning
gently  in  the  middest  of  them  all,  afterward  they  redoubled
their  force  and  turned  with  such  incredible  swiftnesse,  that

418

THOMAS CORYAT  a.d.

1613.

I  could  not  chuse  but  admire  it.  Amongst  the  rest,  there
was  one  little  Boy  of  some  twelve  yeares  of  age,  that
turning  in  a  corner  of  the  roome  strucke  no  small
admiration  in  all  the  Spectators  that  were  Strangers.
This  turning  they  kept  for  the  space  of  one  whole
houre  at  the  least :  during  which  time,  sometimes  they
turned  exceeding  swiftly,  sometimes  very  gently.  After
they  had  halfe  done,  the  Singer  in  the  upper  roome  began
to  sing  againe,  at  the  pronunciation  of  some  of  whose
words,  the  Darvises  sodainly  mumbled  out  certaine  strange
tearmes,  with  a  most  hideous  kind  of  murmuring  that  did
in  a  manner  terrifie  and  astonish  us  that  were  meere
strangers  to  these  Ceremonies.  This  they  did  three  or
foure  severall  times  with  an  acclamation  of  all  the  Turks
that  stood  by.  The  forme  of  their  Dauncing  is  as  strange
as  the  continuance  of  their  swiftnesse,  for  sometimes  they
stretch  out  their  Armes  as  farre  as  they  can  in  length,
sometimes  they  contract  them  in  a  lesser  compasse,  some-
times they  hold  them  about  their  Heads,  sometimes  againe
they  performe  certaine  merry  gestures,  as  if  they  were
drawing  a  Bow  and  shooting  forth  an  Arrow.  Likewise
some  of  them  did  continue  turning  during  the  whole
time  in  one  and  the  selfe  same  place,  and  others  more
forward  from  one  corner  to  another.  This  exercise  now
driving  to  an  end,  one  of  the  Darvises  beginneth  some
Prayer  in  Arabicke,  and  continually  turning  about  with  [II.  x.  1822.]
the  rest  of  the  Company,  pronounceth  it  with  a  very
audible  voyce,  and  his  Prayer  being  ended  there  is  an
upshot  of  this  ridiculous  and  Ethnike  devotion  for  this
time,  after  it  had  continued  almost  an  houre  and  a  halfe.
The  violence  of  their  turning  is  so  great,  that  I  have  heard
some  of  them  have  fallen  downe  dead  in  the  place,  through
the  extremitie  of  their  swift  Circumgyration,  and  whoso-
ever hee  is  that  doth  so,  is  esteemed  for  a  Saint.  These
Feasts  are  like  those  Trietericall  Orgia  that  were  per-
formed by  the  furious  Myrmalores  the  Priests  of  Bacchus,
to  the  honour  of  their  drunken  God,  upon  the  Mountaines
of  Citheron  in  Basotia.

419

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1613.

These  Darvises  though  they  are  Religious  men  have
no  lands  to  maintaine  them  as  the  Christian  Monasteries
have,  but  a  certaine  stipend  payed  them  every  day,  partly
by  the  Grand  Signior,  and  partly  by  certaine  Bashawes,
and  it  is  esteemed  for  so  Holy  an  order,  that  divers
Bashawes  have  renounced  their  Dignitie  and  pompe  of
the  world,  and  entred  themselves  into  this  Order  for  the
Mmtapha, better salvation of  their  soules. And  at this  day  the

TmpnouT'  Grand  Signior  hath  a  Brother  of  this  Societie  that  liveth
and  thrice  m  tne  Seraglia,  whom  he  hath  often  intended  to  put  to
Religious  or  Death,  according  to  the  old  principle  of  State  that  hath
Darvise.  beene  these  many  yeares  observed  amongst  the  Turkish

Emperours,  but  hee  hath  hapned  to  fall  into  some  bitter
Disease whensoever he hath thought upon any such
matter,  which  is  the  reason  that  he  yet  suffereth  him  to
live.
Great  Fire.  The  twentieth  of  Aprill,  there  began  a  Fire  in  Con-

stantinople about  midnight,  which  was  like  to  have  done
much  hurt,  if  it  had  not  beene  prevented  by  the  care  and
industrie  of  the  Captaine  Bashaw.  For  hee  came  thither
a  little  after  it  began  with  a  great  multitude  of  men  to
represse  the  furie  of  the  flame  as  much  as  in  them  lay.
Hee  was  so  furious  at  that  time,  that  with  a  certaine  war-
like Instrument  called  in  the  Turkish  Tongue  a  Capooch,
which  is  somewhat  like  a  Mace,  he  strucke  a  Janizarie
that  he  saw  rifling  of  a  House,  so  fiercely  upon  the  head,
that  immediately  he  fell  downe  dead  in  the  place :  and
had  done  the  like  to  some  other  Janizaries  that  were  the
adherents  of  the  other,  in  his  enterprise  of  ransacking
other  mens  goods,  if  they  had  not  sodainly  escaped  by
flight.  For  indeed  it  doth  happen  that  Janizaries  doe  of
purpose  set  Houses  on  fire,  even  to  the  great  endangering
of  the  Citie  for  prey  and  spoyle  sake,  especially  the  houses
of  Jewes.  For  which  cause  the  Jewes  within  these  few
yeares,  have  both  made  their  Houses  stronger  then  they
were  wont  to  be,  and  also  have  made  Vaults  under  their
houses,  into  the  which  they  may  conveigh  their  Goods,
whensoever there chanceth any sodaine Fire. At the

420

THOMAS CORYAT  a.d.

1613.

time  of  this  Fire  there  came  the  Bustan  which  is  a  great
man  of  the  Grand  Signiors,  with  two  thousand  men  out
of  the  Seraglia,  for  the  helping  of  the  Bashaw.  For
indeed  it  behoved  the  Bashaw  to  looke  to  the  maine
chance  for  the  quenching  of  the  Fire,  in  the  time  of  the
Grand  Signiors  absence,  least  if  there  should  have  beene
any  great  hurt  done,  perhaps  he  might  have  lost  his  Head
after  the  Kings  returne  to  the  Citie,  but  the  hurt  was  not
so  great  as  it  was  feared  to  have  beene,  for  there  were  not
above  fiftie  Houses  burnt.  It  is  the  Custome  that  when-
soever any  Fire  riseth  in  the  Citie,  to  Hang  up  him  in
whose  House  it  beginneth,  as  now  a  Cooke  in  whose
house  it  began  was  Hanged  presently  after  the  Fire  ceased.
The  like  kinde  of  Fires  and  much  more  furious  have
beene  often  seene  in  this  Citie,  as  they  are  mentioned  by
the  antient  Historiographers,  which  have  wasted  not  only
the  private  Houses  of  the  Inhabitants,  but  also  Temples,
Statues,  Pillers  and  other  beautifull  Ornaments  of  the
Citie.

The  one  and  twentieth  of  Aprill  about  sixe  of  the
clocke  at  night,  I  saw  the  most  resplendent  and  glittering
shew  that  ever  I  did  in  my  life.  For  the  Turkes  hanged
all  their  Turkish  Mosquies  both  of  Constantinople  and
Galata  with  Lampes;  which  stood  in  a  very  decent  and
comely  order  round  about  the  circle  of  their  slender
Towers,  where  the  Priest  doth  use  to  call  the  people  to
Prayers  at  certaine  houres  limited  with  a  very  loude
voyce.  Some  of  these  Towers  have  two  and  some  three
Circles  in  them,  each  above  another,  the  shew  at  the  first
hanging  out  of  the  Lampes  seemed  strange  unto  me,  that  Lampes.
never  had  seene  the  like  before;  but  about  Mid-night
when  it  was  much  darker,  then  when  they  were  first
hanged  out,  they  yeelded  a  passing  glorious  and  refulgent
Spectacle,  for  it  was  my  hap  to  see  them  againe.  Above
all  the  rest  of  the  Towers  those  foure  that  belong  to  the
Temple  of  Solyman  the  magnificent,  made  a  most  incom-
parable bright  shew,  for  two  of  the  foure  being  adorned
with  three  Circles  had  three  rowes  of  Lampes  hanged  out,

421

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1613.

and  the  other  two  with  two  Circles  had  two  more ;  the
Towers  of  which  Temple  made  the  bravest  shew  of  all
the  Towers  of  the  whole  Citie.  These  Lampes  hanged
till  foure  of  the  clocke  in  the  Morning,  and  were  then
taken  downe.  The  occasion  of  the  hanging  out  of  them,
was  because  that  Night  Mahomet  was  borne  in  the  Citie
of  Medina  in  Arabia.  These  kind  of  Lampes  they  hang
out  at  foure  times  of  the  yeare  besides ;  as  in  the  time  of
Ramazan,  which  is  their  Lent  and  lasteth  thirtie  dayes,
during  which  time,  it  is  not  lawfull  for  any  Turke  to  eate
or  drinke  before  Night,  and  then  they  use  to  recompence
their  day  Abstinence  with  their  night  Gluttonie.  Also  in
that  space  Janizaries  commit  insolencies  against  Chris-
tians, taking  money  from  whomsoever  they  meet  by  the
way.  The  second  beginneth  in  December  and  lasteth
three  dayes,  and  is  called  Hodglar-byram,  &c.
[II.  x.i 823.]  The  eight  and  twentieth  of  April,  being  Wednesday,
Pompe  of  about  five  of  the  clocke  in  the  morning,  my  Lord  and  his
Company  (whereof  my  selfe  was  one)  went  into  Adrinople
street  in  Constantinople  neere  to  the  gate  of  Adrinople,
to  see  the  Grand  Signior  come  into  the  Citie  from
Adrinople,  whether  hee  went  upon  the  one  and  twentieth
day  of  December  last,  the  pompe  of  it  was  so  gallant  that
I  never  saw  the  like  in  my  life ;  neither  doe  I  thinke  that
the  like  hath  beene  used  amongst  any  Princes  of  the
world  saving  these  Musulmen,  since  the  time  of  the
triumphs  of  the  Romane  Emperours,  when  they  went  to
the  Capitol,  after  the  conquering  of  some  famous  Country  :
the  place  where  hence  he  came  that  morning  is  called
Dowt  Bashaw,  a  place  standing  by  it  self  in  the  Countrey
some  three  miles  from  Constantinople,  the  people  that
attended  upon  his  person  at  that  time,  were  said  to  amount
to  the  number  of  15000.  First  rode  the  Subbashaw  of
Constantinople  and  Galata,  with  one  hundred  men  on
horsebacke,  and  other  servants  also  they  had  which  went
a  foot,  carrying  certaine  Muskets  in  their  hands.  Next
followed  French  Souldiers,  a  company  of  fugitive  Rogues,
that  to  get  a  large  pay  somewhat  more  then  they  have,

422

THOMAS CORY  AT  a.d.

1613.

either  in  their  owne  Countrey,  or  could  get  in  the  Low
Countries  fled  to  Constantinople  to  bee  entertained  by
the  Grand  Signior,  of  whom  the  greatest  part  of  them
doth  receive  halfe  a  Doller  a  day  for  their  pay :  their
Collonell  rode  with  some  twentie  of  his  principall  men,  and
all  the  rest  to  the  number  of  one  hundred  with  Muskets
on  foot,  after  them  the  Officers  of  the  Arsenall  a  foot,  with
the  chiefe  of  them  a  horsebacke,  certaine  of  them  carrying
a  Gallie  with  a  man  in  it,  a  verie  strange  and  ridiculous
conceit :  for  indeed  everie  one  laughed  heartily  at  it ;
after  them  came  Squibsters,  but  how  many  in  number  I
could  not  understand ;  then  came  a  great  multitude  of
Gemiglandes  all  on  foot,  whereof  one  had  a  feather  stick-
ing in  his  flesh,  even  in  his  face  somewhat  neere  to  his
right  eye  :  then  a  Coach  covered  with  cloth  of  Gold,  which
served  for  the  Grand  Signiors  riding,  wherein  himselfe  and
his  Sultana  did  use  to  ride :  then  a  Delee,  that  is  a  foole
with  a  Bears  skinne  upon  his  backe,  then  Chauses  on
horsebacke,  with  Brasse  and  Iron  Maces  in  their  hands,
which  they  carried  upon  their  right  shoulders,  these  were
in  number  200.  and  their  servants  a  foot  sixe  hundred,  and
after  them  seven  Coaches,  then  came  Janizaries  on  foot
foure  thousand  with  Muskets ;  some  of  these  weare  Beares
skinnes ;  and  after  them  other  Janizaries  on  horsebacke,
everie  one  having  a  Speare  in  his  hand,  with  a  little  Flag
in  the  same ;  after  them  againe  other  kind  of  Janizaries
that  weare  leather  Cappes,  on  the  top  of  which  were  great
white  Ostriches  feathers :  then  came  certaine  Horses
driven  by  men  of  purpose,  that  carried  water  in  Leather
Bottles  for  men  to  drinke  in  :  then  certaine  Turkish  Saints
with  verie  long  haire  and  ragged  clothes.  Next  followed
a  black  Elephant,  after  them  Ladies,  hundred  &  twelve  on
horsebacke,  with  three  hundred  men  attending  on  them,
and  the  Muftie :  then  head  Visiers,  being  eight  or  nine  of
the  most  principall  of  Turkie,  with  one  hundred  Chauses
their  attendants ;  then  squeaking  Musicke  both  Vocall  and
Instrumentall.  The  Darvises  a  foot  using  a  ridiculous
shooting  and  elevation  of  their  voyce. Then  some  one

423

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1613.

hundred  Pikemen  a  foot,  who  besides  their  Pikes  carried
also  Bowes  and  Arrowes.  Then  Mahomets  kinsmen  a
horsebacke,  with  greene  Halberts.  Then  Vice  Cadies  on
horsebacke,  then  Ladies  againe  ;  then  nine  goodly  Horses
of  the  Kings  led  by  Chiauses,  verie  richly  adorned  with
Saddles  and  Horse  clothes  of  great  price,  a  mervellous
rich  Target,  being  hanged  at  the  Pomell  of  the  Saddle  of
each  Horse  made  of  massie  beaten  Gold,  and  garnished
with  varietie  of  precious  Stones,  each  of  these  Horses  is
saide  to  be  worth  two  hundred  pound  sterling.  Next  the
Kings  Grey-hounds,  being  ledde  and  clothed  with  cover-
ings of  Cloth  of  Gold :  of  these  there  were  at  the  least
one  hundred.  Then  came  Chiauses  on  horsebacke,
namely,  twentie  to  attend  the  Kings  person,  and  had  fiftie
servants  more  attending  upon  them :  then  rode  one  with
a  Streamer  of  greene  TarTata,  wherein  was  an  Arabian
Inscription  in  very  great  Letters  ;  this  is  said  to  have  beene
used  by  Mahomet  himselfe  their  Prophet,  in  his  warres
with  Cosoroes  King  of  Persia  and  others  also.  Neere
unto  this  Ensigne,  was  carried  another  Ensigne  (which  is
the  common  Standard  that  they  use  in  their  warres,  as
heeretofore  the  Romanes  used  the  Eagle)  that  is  the  taile
of  the  Horse  fastened  upon  the  toppe  of  a  long  Staffe.
Next  went  his  Archers,  called  Solackes,  with  Bowes  and
Arrowes  attired  in  fine  linnen  shirts  that  reached  to  the
calfe  of  their  legges  and  long  sleeves  curiously  wrought
with  delicate  seames  of  Needle  Worke.  Also  they  had
coverings  for  their  head  (Hattes  I  cannot  fitly  call  them)
which  consisted  of  Silver  fairely  guilt,  with  long  feathers,
&c.  The  one  and  twentieth  of  May  happened  a  terrible
fire :  three  great  fiers  had  fallen  out  betwixt  the  twentieth
of  April,  and  the  one  and  twentieth  of  May.
Grashoppers.  Grashoppers  sometimes  doe  fall  so  thick  in  Constanti-
nople, and  the  Territories  about  the  Citie  in  the  Summer
time,  and  that  especially  in  June  or  July,  being  brought
in  with  an  Easterne  wind,  that  a  man  cannot  passe  in  the
streets  of  Constantinople  or  Galata,  but  hee  shall  everie
where  tread  upon  them. Also  they  flie  so  thicke  upon

424

THOMAS CORYAT  a.d.

1613.

the  tops  of  houses,  that  they  doe  even  cover  the  tiles  :  and
in  Medowes,  Pastures,  and  upon  Hills,  lie  in  such
infinite  and  innumerable  multitudes,  that  they  seeme  to
cover  the  grasse,  and  in  the  high-wayes  horses  that  goe
tread  upon  them  and  kill  them  in  their  journey ;  likewise
upon  trees  of  all  sorts,  Vines,  Corne,  &c.  they  fall  in  such
abundance,  that  sometimes  they  annoy  and  spoile  great
store  of  Fruit ;  besides  they  are  much  greater  then  ours
are  in  the  West  parts  of  Europe.

I  observed  in  Constantinople  in  the  moneth  of  May,  [II.  x.  1824.]
certaine  Butter-flies as  great  as Reare-mise  with foure  Butterflies
wings, each whereof distinguished  with a  round spot  &reat'
made  circularly, consisting of  two colours  Purple and
Blacke,  and  two  Homes  in  their  head  made  in  the  forme
of  branches of  a  Tree ; they spawne thirtie  or  fortie
Spawnes  in  a  night.

All  the  Turkes  and  others,  that  doe  ride  in  Constanti-
nople or  Galata,  doe  cover  the  backe  and  buttocks  of  the
Horse  with  a  faire  cloth.  The  Turkes  are  exceedingly
given  to  Sodomie,  and  therefore  divers  keep  prettie  boyes  Sodomie.
to  abuse  them  by  preposterous  venerie.  A  Cock  and
Hen  of  Phesants  sold  for  sixtie  Aspers,  and  Partridges  Cheapnesse.
for  twentie  Aspers  a  paire.  Hawkes  called  Fawlcons  so
cheape,  that  a  man  may  buy  one  young  for  twentie  Aspers,
being  bred  within  five  or  sixe  miles  of  the  Citie.

In  the  moneth  of  May  and  July,  I  observed  every  even-
ing in  Constantinople  about  seven  of  the  clocke,  certaine
little  Flies  flying  abroad  in  the  aire  with  fiery  tailes,  which  Fiery  Flies.
seemed  to  mee  the  first  time  that  I  saw  them,  certaine
little  sparkes  of  fire  flying  to  and  fro  in  the  aire.  After-
ward having  taken  one  of  them  and  opened  his  bellie,  I
found  a  certaine  bright  and  glistering  sparke  of  fire  in
his  taile,  which  I  never  saw  before.  These  kinde  of  Flies
doe  much  use  to  flie  abroad  in  the  Summer  time  in  Con-
stantinople, onely  in  the  evening,  which  a  stranger  that
never  saw  them  before,  would  take  to  be  true  flakes  of
fire.  There  are  in  the  Turkish  Empire  two  men  of  great
authoritie  like  the  Lord  Chancellors,  called  Cadileskeers,  Cadileskiers.

425

A.D.
1613.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

the  one  of  Romalia,  the  other  of  Natolia ;  hee  of
Romalia  hath  the  authoritie  to  remove  Cadys  from  their
places  in  Romalia,  and  to  substitute  others  in  their  roomes,
the  like  hath  he  of  Natolia.  Also  they  are  to  sit  in  the:
Divan  with  the  Visiers  and  Bashawes,  to  give  their  verdict
in  cases  of  Justice ;  without  whose  opinion  and  sentence
nothing  can  be  certainely  determined.

The  Turkes  will  not  suffer  these  three  things  to  be
medled  withall  by  a  Christian  or  Jew,  viz.  his  Religion,'
his  Women,  his  Slave.  Those  kind  of  Flies  that  troubled
me  in  Italy,  did  in  the  night  time  as  much  infect  mee  in
Constantinople,  as  being  as  familiar  to  Thrace  as  to  Italy ;

Cimkes.  Imeane  the  Cimices,  after  that  being  once  taken  and  bruised
upon  the  naile  of  a  man,  doth  cover  the  whole  naile  with;
bloud  and  stinke.  The  Turke  doth  never  at  the  saluting  of
his  friend  at  any  time  of  the  day,  or  when  hee  drinketh  to
him  at  dinner  or  supper,  put  off  his  Turbant  (as  wee  Chris-

Courtesie.  tians  doe  our  Hats  one  to  another)  but  boweth  his  head
and  putteth  his  right  hand  upon  his  brest,  so  that  hee|
utterly  disliketh  the  fashion  that  is  used  amongst  us  of
putting  off  our  Hattes,  therefore  when  hee  wisheth  any
ill  to  his  Enemie,  he  prayeth  God  to  send  him  no  more
rest  then  to  a  Christians  Hat.

The  Turkes,  as  they  shave  publikely  in  the  streets,  like-
wise they  let  bloud  oftentimes  in  the  streets,  but  so  indis-1

Phkbotomie.  creetly,  that  they  suffer  sometimes  a  man  to  bleed  at  the
least  two  or  three  pounds  of  bloud,  to  the  extreme  weak-
ning  of  their  bodies :  wheras  few  of  our  men  suffer  their,

Superstition.  Patient  to  bleed  above  halfe  a  pound.  The  true  Musul-
man  wil  scarce  kill  a  louse,  if  he  find  him  in  his  apparell,
but  throwes  him  away,  affirming,  that  it  is  contrary  to  the
rules  of  charitie  to  kill  him,  or  any  thing  else  that  hath
life  in  it,  except  those  things  that  they  kill  for  their
sustenance.  And  as  for  Birds  that  they  see  inclosed  in  a
Cage,  they  will  buy  them  for  some  money  of  the  owner.
and  after  let  them  flie  out  of  the  cage,  for  they  thinke  that
there  is  injurie  done  to  them  to  debar  them  of  their
liber  tie. After  the  moneth  of  May,  you  shall  scarce  see

426

THOMAS CORYAT  a.d.

1613.

till  the  end  of  September,  any  green  grasse  growing
abroad  in  the  Medowes  or  Fields,  because  after  that  time
it  is  all  scorched  away  with  the  heat  of  the  Sunne.  So  it
falleth  out  in  most  of  those  Easterne  Countries,  otherwise
then  it  doth  here  in  England.

The  pride  of  the  Turkish  Visiers  or  Bashawes  is  so  Pride.
great, that when a Christian Ambassador doth either
bring  them  or  send  them  a  Present  of  great  worth,  they
have  not  the  honestie  as  to  thanke  him. Whensoever  the
Turks  or  Greeks  fall  to  buffets,  they  neither  strike  one  Boxing.
another  with  their  fists,  but  altogether  with  the  palme  of
their  hands,  which  I  have  often  observed  amongst  them.
In  England  onely  our  women,  and  those  gentle  doe  carry
Fannes  in  their  hands  made  of  Ostrich  Feathers,  blacke,  Fames.
blue,  red,  yellow,  &c.  but  no  Gentlemen  whatsoever ; but
here  in  Constantinople  I  have  observed  the  contrary,  that
onely  men,  and  those  Turkes,  Greekes,  and  Franks  doe
carry  these  kind  of  Fannes,  and  never  any  woman  that  I
could  perceive.

The  seventh  of  August  being  Saturday,  my  courteous
friend  Master  William  Pearch  being  desirous  to  gratifie
mee  in  a  matter  for  the  which  I  had  often  before  sollicited
him,  invited  mee  and  Master  William  Ford,  Preacher  to
our  Nation,  to  the  house  of  a  certaine  English  Jew,  called  Amt\  an
Amis,  borne  in  the  Crootched  Friers  in  London,  who  hath  Enghsh  Jezv'
two sisters more of his owne Jewish Religion, Com-
morant  in  Galata,  who  were  likewise  borne  in  the  same
place ; to  this  mans  house  I  say  wee  came,  the  foresaid
day  about  nine  of  the  clocke  in  the  morning  to  see  a
matter,  which  in  my  former  travells  I  wished  to  have
seene,  especially  in  Venice,  but  never  till  then  had  the
opportunitie  to  attaine  unto,  namely  a  circumcision. It  Rites  of  ^
was  done  in  a  private  house,  according  to  the  custome  of  Ctrcumcmon>
the  Jewes  resident  in  Constantinople,  and  not  in  a  Syna-
gogue as  it  is  with  the  Jewes  in  other  Countries. This
foresaid Amis, for the love hee bore to our English
Nation,  in  the  which  hee  lived  till  hee  was  thirtie  yeeres
of  age,  being  at  the  time  of  my  residence  in  Constanti-

427

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1613.

nople  sixtie,  as  also  for  his  good  will  sake,  which  hee  bor<
to  my  foresaid  friend  Master  William  Pearch,  received  u

[II.  x.i  82 5.]  with  very  courteous  entertainment,  presenting  unto  us  a;
a  Table  in  a  fine  little  roome  where  he  placed  us  diver:'
delicate  dishes  and  fruits  with  a  cup  of  most  excellent
Wine,  often  welcomming  us  with  many  heartie  and  wel:
wishing  speeches.  While  wee  were  at  breakfast,  diver:
Jewes  came  into  the  roome,  and  sung  certaine  Hebrev
Songs ;  after  which  the  child  was  brought  to  his  Father
who  sate  downe  in  a  chaire,  and  placed  the  child  bein£
now  eight  dayes  old  in  his  lap.  The  whole  company
being  desirous  that  we  Christians  should  observe  their
ceremonie,  called  us  to  approach  neere  to  the  child.  Anc;
when  we  came,  a  certaine  other  Jew  drawing  forth  a  little1
Instrument  made  not  unlike  those  smal  Cissers  that  ouJ
Ladies  and  Gentlewomen  doe  much  use,  did  with  the  sam<
cut  off  the  Prepuce  or  fore-skinne  of  the  child,  and  after
a  very  strange  manner  unused  (I  beleeve)  of  the  ancien
Hebrewes,  did  put  his  mouth  to  the  childs  yard,  and
sucked  up  the  bloud.  All  his  Privities  (before  hee  cam<
into  the  roome)  were  besprinkled  with  a  kind  of  powder
which  after  the  Circumciser  had  done  his  businesse,  wa:
blowed  away  by  him,  and  another  powder  cast  on  immedia-
tely. After  he  had  dispatched  his  worke,  the  same  alsc
after  his  worke  was  done,  tooke  a  little  strong  Wine  thai
was  held  in  a  Goblet  by  a  fellow  that  stood  neere  him,  anc
powred  it  into  the  childs  mouth  to  comfort  him  in  the
middest  of  his  paines,  who  cried  out  very  bitterly.  The
paine  being  for  the  time  very  bitter  indeed,  though  it  wil
be  (as  they  told  me)  cured  in  the  space  of  foure  anc
twentie  houres.  But  those  of  any  riper  yeeres  that  are
circumcised  (as  it  too  often  commeth  to  passe,  that  Chris-
tians which  turne  Turkes)  as  at  fortie  or  fiftie  yeeres  oi
age,  doe  suffer  great  paine  for  the  space  of  a  moneth,  the
Prepuce  that  was  cut  off  was  carried  to  the  Mother,  whe
keepeth  it  very  preciously  as  a  thing  of  worth.

Lamfes.  The  twelfth  of  August  being  Thursday,  the  Turkes

about  eight  of  the  clocke  at  night,  illuminated  the  steeples

428

THOMAS CORYAT  a.d.

1613.

)f  their  Moskies,  with  abundance  of  Lampes  over  all
Constantinople  and  Galata,  (as  they  did  upon  Mahomets
>irth  day  before  mentioned  by  mee)  as  being  the  Eve  of
heir  first  Sabbath  in  the  Moneth  or  Moone  of  Regepf,
>y  way  of  preparation  for  their  great  Feast  of  Ramazan,
vhich  followed  afterward,  which  custome  they  observe
rvery  yeere  upon  the  foresaid  day.

The  eleventh  of  September,  some  of  the  learned  Turkes
hat  were  skilfull  in  their  Law,  observing  that  the  conta-
gion of  the  Plague  was  lately  dispersed  over  divers  places
)f  the  Citie,  had  recourse  to  some  of  their  Musulman
3ookes,  to  the  end  they  might  informe  themselves  of  some
:onvenient  and  discreet  course  to  be  taken  for  the  preven-
tion of  the  sicknesse,  and  finding  in  one  of  them,  that
iome  thirtie  yeeres  since  there  was  made  an  Edict  for  the  Dogs  banished
)anishing  of  all  the  Dogs  out  of  the  Towne,  as  being  to  prevent
orincipall  Instruments  of  scattering  the  Plague,  by  reason  Pestllence-
)f  their  free  passing  up  and  downe  from  one  house  to
mother,  they  held  it  meet  to  imitate  that  example,  and
0  doe  the  like.  So  that  the  matter  being  now  propounded
:o  the  Grand  Signior,  it  was  at  last  determined,  that  the
Dogges  should  be  banished,  and  for  the  better  perform-
ance of  the  matter,  finally,  they  concluded  thus,  that  every
Christian  and  Jew  dwelling  in  Constantinople  should  by
It  day  limited  (under  the  paine  of  forfeiting  foure
Chiquins)  present  a  Dogge  to  the  Cadie,  and  taking  of
lim  a  Teskeria  (this  is  a  Turkish  word  that  signifieth  a
Certificate  written  under  his  hand)  for  a  testimonie  of
Derformance  of  the  same  should  afterward  bring  him  to
:he  water  side,  and  see  him  imbarked  for  Saitani  for  there
were  certaine  vessels  not  much  unlike  our  lighters  at
London,  assigned  only  for  transporting  the  Dogges,  the
Naulum  or  passage  being  an  Asper  for  every  Dogge :  by
meanes  whereof  it  came  to  passe  that  within  one  weeke
!here  were  no  lesse  then  twentie  thousand  Dogges  even  a
2reat  Armie  of  them  carried  over  to  Santan :  and  whereas
the  Citie  did  not  yeeld  Dogges  enough  for  the  severall
Families  of  Christians  and  Jewes  to  present  to  the  Cadie,

429

A.D.
1613.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Charitie.

The  Visiers

sonnes

circumcised.

those  of  Galata  bought  Dogges  at  a  deere  rate  to  trans-
port them  over  to  Constantinople,  and  to  sell  them  there
much  deerer.  Mungrels  and  masterlesse  Curres  that
before  strayed  up  and  downe  the  Citie,  being  now  worth
twenty  or  thirty  Aspers.  Now  whereas  the  Grand
Signior  held  it  fit  that  they  should  be  all  killed  when  they
came  to  the  Saitanicall  shoare,  the  Muftie  who  is  the
Turkish  Oracle,  would  not  give  his  consent  to  that,
affirming,  that  it  would  be  a  very  uncharitable  action.

The  twentieth  of  September,  three  of  the  Visiers  sonnes
Rod  up  and  downe  in  the  Citie  in  great  pompe  being
accompanied  with  many  Spahies  mounted  upon  their
goodly  Palfreyes  that  were  richly  furnished.  And  thei
same  three  were  that  day  circumcised,  the  custome  beeing
such,  that  when  the  Sonnes  of  any  eminent  Turke  is
circumcised,  a  little  before  they  performe  the  act  upon
him,  he  rideth  up  and  downe  the  City  with  great  solem-
nity with  divers  Jewels  of  great  prize  in  his  Turbant,  his:
long  lock  hanging  downe  behind  his  back  artificially
woven  and  wrought  in  with  curious  pleites  and  tresses,
and  adorned  with  Diamonds  and  other  sparkling  stones  of
great  value.  Likewise  they  have  two  long  Pendants  made
of  Gold  Plate,  that  hang  downe  in  the  like  manner  over)
their  backe.  In  their  Turbant  besides  their  Jewels  they
weare  blacke  Ostridge-feathers.  Some  of  them  weare
upper  Vests  of  Cloth  of  Gold,  and  Cimiters  by  their  sides
with  a  marvellous  rich  handle  and  scabberd :  their  horses
very  lustie,  worth  sometimes  a  hundred  pounds  sterling
a  Horse,  garnished  with  most  rich  Furniture,  the  fore-
part and  hinder  of  the  Saddle  being  of  massie  Silver  Plate
double  gilded  :  the  headstall  of  his  Bridle  and  Pithell
consisting  of  the  like  silver  double  gilded ;  a  Horse
cloth  covering  all  the  buttockes  of  the  Horse,  worth
[II.  x.i 826.]  perhaps  some  two  hundred  Dollers.  Before  the  youths
certaine  Gemilands  walke  afoot,  carrying  certaine  strange
devices  of  a  prettie  height  in  their  hands,  made  partly  of
little  shreds  of  Paper,  and  partly  of  thinne  Silver  Plate
with  round  Figures  made  in  the  forme  of  the  World.

43°

THOMAS CORYAT  a.d.

1613.

Likewise  neere  to  them  goe  certaine  Flutes  that  yeeld  a

very  ridiculous  and  squeaking  Musicke  with  their  Flutes.

The  Horsemen  rode  very  orderly  in  their  rankes, two

and two together. After all this, returning to their

Fathers House, they are feasted with much good

cheere.

This  day  did  these  youths  present  themselves  to  the
Grand  Signior  to  kisse  his  hand,  who  bestowed  upon  each
of  them  two  upper  Vests  of  Cloth  of  Gold,  two  Jewels
ind  two  rich  Goblets.  The  same  day  about  seven  of  the
clocke  at  night,  their  Father  the  Visier  made  notable
shewes  upon  the  water  before  the  Grand  Signior  with
fire-workes.  For  there  were  sixteene  Boates  that  served
for  the  same  purpose,  wherein  prettie  Castles  were  con-
trived, the  people  in  which  skirmished  together  at  the
least  an  houre,  spending  such  abundance  of  Powder  in
their  fire-workes,  that  I  never  saw  the  like  before,  sending  Fire-workes.
up  divers  of  their  flashes  in  the  Aire,  as  high  as  the
highest  Steeple  in  Constantinople ;  a  sight  most  notable
to  observe  so  many  Boats  with  their  fire-workes  encounter
so  long  together,  in  which  space  there  was  no  cessation  or
intermission,  but  that  you  should  sometimes  see  foure,
sometimes  sixe  fierie  Steeples  ascending  into  the  Aire
together  with  many  burning  lines  passing  too  and  fro
upon  the  water  in  divers  severall  formes.  Amongst  the
rest  of  these  fire-workes  I  observed  some  made  upon  the
very  shoare  it  selfe  with  singular  cunning  resembling
the  shape  of  Cypresse-trees ;  a  very  pleasing  and  delect-
able object  to  behold.

The  twentieth  of  September  being  Munday,  the  Jewes  Jewes  feast  of
of  Constantinople and Galata, beganne their Feast of  Tabernacles,
Tabernacles  which  lasted  till  the  eight  and  twentieth  of  mne  da^es%
the  same  month,  that  is  just  nine  dayes  in  which  they
differ  from  the  ancient  Jewes  who  were  commanded  by
Almightie  God  to  spend  only  eight  dayes  in  the  celebra-
tion of  their  Feast. I  talked  with  a  Jew  concerning  the
reason  of  this  their  difference,  who  told  me  that  it  was
because  being  so  farre  from  Jerusalem,  as  in  Constanti-

43 1

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1613.

nople  they  did  not  altogether  so  certainly  know  the  first
day  according  to  the  course  of  the  Moone,  as  those  Jewes
that  live  in  Jerusalem,  and  therefore  for  the  better  assur-
ance of  this  matter,  they  adde  a  day  to  the  number  that
God  limited  and  appointed  their  forefathers,  whereas  the
Jewes  that  live  in  Jerusalem,  and  the  parts  of  the  Holy
Land,  neere  thereabout,  by  the  course  of  the  Moone
more  certainly  knowing  the  precise  time  of  the  beginning
doe  spend  only  eight  dayes  in  their  Feast  and  no  more.
Againe,  they  do  in  another  respect  differ  from  Gods
Institution.  For  he  commanded  only  two  dayes  to  bee
more  solemnely  celebrated  then  the  rest,  that  is,  the  first
and  the  last,  but  they  celebrate  two  at  the  beginning,  and
two  also  at  the  last.  But  as  of  the  former  two,  the  first
day  is  the  chiefest,  being  kept  with  more  solemnitie  then
the  second :  so  also  of  the  two  later,  the  last  of  all  is
more  ceremoniously  observed  then  the  former.  In  this
space  they  are  much  given  to  holinesse,  resting  from  all,
labour  during  the  whole  nine  dayes,  and  they  sometimes  1
eate  and  drinke  in  their  Tabernacles,  which  are  made
partly  in  their  private  Houses,  or  the  corner  of  some-
Gallerie  belonging  thereto,  at  the  least  if  they  have  any,j
and  partly  neere  to  their  Synagogues.  They  make  thel
sides  of  their  Tabernacles  of  Reeds  of  Bulrushes,  and;
cover  them  at  the  top  with  Bayes. It  was  my  hap  to  beei

Synagogue,  in  one  of  them  that  was  made  neere  to  a  Synagogue.  Also
the  ninth  day  which  was  the  last  of  their  Feast  about  foure;

Lyturgie.  of  the  clocke  in  the  afternoone,  I  was  at  their  Lyturgie
in  one  of  their  Synagogues,  being  admitted  to  sit  downe

Irreverence,  among  them.  I  find  the  irreverence  of  the  Jewes  ini
Venice,  &  of  those  of  Constantinople  to  be  like  in  the;
service  of  God.  They  neither  uncover  nor  kneele  the
whole  time  of  their  Prayer,  somtimes  they  stand  alto-
gether, &  sometimes  they  sit  altogether.  For  some
quarter  of  an  houre  after  the  beginning  of  the  reading  of
their  Law,  they  weare  nothing  over  their  backe,  but  their:
ordinary apparell, but then all of  them put on their

Ephod.  Ephod  both  men  and  children ; which  Ephod  is  made  of

432

I  THOMAS CORYAT  a.d.

1613.

the  same  white  stufFe,  as  the  Turkish  Turbants  are,  these
hang  over  their  backes  and  reach  downe  to  the  middle  part
of  their  bodies,  after  a  looser  manner  then  I  thinke  the
ancient  Jewes  were  wont  to  weare  them,  for  I  read  in  the
2.  Sam.  the  6.  Chapter,  and  14.  Verse,  that  King  David
girt  it  about  his  middle  when  he  danced  before  the  Arke :
but  they  hang  it  loose  about  their  bodies.  This  Ephod
many  of  them  carried  in  a  little  scrip  from  their  houses,
and  backe  againe  after  the  end  of  their  Lyturgie.  When
they  sat  at  their  devotion  they  used  a  most  ridiculous  and
unseemly  gesture ;  for  they  alwayes  mooved  their  bodies
up  and  downe  very  strangely,  the  head  being  in  a  con-
tinuall  motion  without  any  cessation.  After  that  they
moove  their  right  side  then  their  left  and  lastly  their
forepart  forward ;  which  kind  of  wagging  of  their  bodies
by  interchangeable  turnes  they  use  during  the  whole  time

iof  their  service.
The  forme  of  their  Synagogue  is  built  foure  square,  Synagogue.
having  abundance  of  little  Glasses  hanging  round  about,
that  serve  to  containe  Lampes,  and  some  also  of  silver.
The  Priest  beeing  in  the  middle  roome,  which  is  made  in
the  same  forme  as  those  of  Venice.  That  I  saw  described
in  my  former  Booke  bellowed  like  an  Oxe  with  a  very  ■
hideous  and  roaring  exaltation  of  his  voyce  at  their  ser-
vice, they  sung  in  Hebrew  (in  which  Language  their
whole  Service  is  said)  the  nine  and  twentieth  Psalme,
though  nothing  at  all  pertinent  to  their  Feast,  at  the  upper
end  of  their  Synagogue  they  have  three  distinct  places
drawne  over  with  branched  Velvet  in  the  middle  whereof  [II.  x.  1827.]
was  placed  their  Law,  which  consisted  of  tenne  distinct
parcels,  each  part  contayning  the  selfe  same  matter  written
therein  that  the  other  doe,  beeing  folded  up  with  two
Silver  handls  at  the  ends ;  at  the  top  of  each  whereof  is  a
Silver  Pomegranate,  with  many  Bels  hanging  round  about
the  same  :  within  the  which  their  Law  is  written  in  a
Roll  of  Parchment.  One  of  these  parcels  consisted  of  a
>  goodly  Plate  of  Silver  of  no  small  price,  all  which  tenne
\  were  carried  in  the  middest  of  their  Lyturgie  round  about
x  433  2  e

A.D.
1613.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

the  inside  of  the  Synagogue,  the  Cachan  (which  is  their
Priest)  being  the  Ringleader  of  the  company,  before
whom  divers  of  the  Jewes  in  a  merrie  manner  went
dancing  as  they  also  did  that  carried  the  said  parcels.
The  Rose-water  that  was  spirted  by  little  young  Jewes,
out  of  Silver  Vessels  upon  all  those  that  carried  about  the
Law  was  so  much,  that  the  Christian  Spectators  thought

Sprinkling  of  that  they  would  have  halfe  drowned  them  in  Rose-water.

Rose-water.  The  ceremonie  was  such  at  that  time,  that  a  little  after  our
company  departed  thence,  our  Emperours  Ambassadour
came  to  see  their  fashions.

The  day  in  which the  Jewes  by  night should  have
taken  downe  their  Tabernacles,  that  is,  the  Munday  being
the  eighth  day,  after  the  beginning  of  their  Feast  (which
was  woont to  bee the  last  day) the  Christians  of  the
Countrey  beganne  to  erect  their  Tabernacles  or  Pavilions
for  their  Vintage  in  all  their  Vineyards  about  Pera,  and  on
both  sides  of  the  Bosphorus  towards  the  blacke  Sea,  which ;
Vintage  lasted  sixe  dayes. In  each  of  these  dayes  you|
might  have  seene  the  greatest  part  of  the  way  betwixt  the
farther  end  of  Pera,  and  the  Vineyards  full  of  Horses  that
went  to  and  fro  from  morning  to  night,  to  carrie  away
into  the  Towne  the  Grapes  in  certaine  deepe  woodden:
pots  after  they  were  cut  in  the  Vineyard: likewise  the
owners  of  the  Vineyards  with  their  Families  going  and,
comming. And in these Pavilions was much solace
amongst  the  Christians  for  this  time  with  good  cheere,
Musicke,  &c. During  the  time  of  their  Raccolta,  what-
soever strangers  came  into  their  Vineyard  might  freely
take  as  many  Grapes  as  they  were  able  to  eate,  which  at'
another  time  they  could  not  doe,  for  if  before  that  they
should  be  apprehended  stealing  Grapes  in  a  Vineyard  by
any  Janizaries,  and  carried  to  the  Subbashaw  of  Galata,
perhaps  he  might  have  twentie  or  fortie  blowes  upon  the;
feet. Besides  an  Imposition  of  a  thousand  Aspers. Of
those Vineyards many belonged to Turkes, to whom
it  was  lawfull  to  drinke  Wine  only  at  that  time,  while  it!
was  Must,  but  not  else. I  found  not  small  recreation  in

Turkes  dis-
tinction for
wine.

434

THOMAS CORYAT  a.d.

1613.

expatiating  abroad  sometimes  in  the  time  of  their  Vintage
to  their  Vineyards,  where  for  exercise  sake  I  holpe  the
poore  Greeks  both  to  gather  their  Grapes  and  to  stampe
some  of  their  wine.  For  in  certaine  Buts  and  other  lesser
Vessels  they  bruised  many  of  their  Grapes  in  the  Vine-
yards themselves,  and  afterward  in  their  private  houses
finished  the  making  of  their  Wine.  Their  vines  grow  not  Greeke  Fines.
as  in  France  and  Germany,  being  underpropped,  with
little  stalkes  but  rather  as  little  small  shrubs  which  grow
so  stiffe,  that  they  need  not  any  stakes  to  support  them.

The  third  of  October  being  Sunday,  my  Lord  being
accompanied  with  the  greatest  part  of  our  English  Nation
resident  in  Galata,  over  and  above  his  owne  retinue  went
to  congratulate  the  Polonian  Ambassadours  prosperous
arrivall  in  Constantinople,  who  with  much  courtesie  gave
i  him  an  Accoglienza  speaking  only  in  the  Latine  tongue ;
and  using  sometimes  in  his  discourse  a  certaine  word  that
was  never  yet  allowed  by  the  Criticall  censures  of  our
time,  namely  Illustritas.

There  happened  one  very  memorable  thing  this  Summer
in  Galata,  which  shall  not  escape  my  pen.  A  certaine
Jew  turned  Turke,  and  after  his  conversion  to  that  Reli-
gion, buying  once  an  Aspers  worth  of  Fruit  of  a  certaine
poore  Turke,  because  he  observed  that  the  Turke  did  not
deliver  him  so  much  as  did  countervaile  his  Asper,  the
Jewish  Turke  strooke  the  other  about  the  face  with  some

:  Instrument  that  he  held  in  his  hand,  which  gave  him  such
a  sound  blow  that  hee  brake  his  face,  insomuch  that  the
bloud  ran  verie  swiftly  downe  his  face :  another  Jew  that
well  knew  this  foresaid  Jewish  Turke,  and  saw  the  blow
given  by  him  to  the  poore  Turke,  came  to  the  Turke,  and

:  demanded  of  him  why  hee  did  so  patiently  suffer  that
man  to  abuse  him  so  outrageously,  encouraging  him  to
give  him  a  blow,  because  otherwise  everie  one  that  saw
him  put  up  that  wrong  so  lightly,  would  take  him  for  a
ranke  coward.  I  do  not  at  all  regard  this  blow  (quoth  ^  ,
the  poore  Turke)  because  it  is  given  mee  by  one  that  is  zealous
late  made  a  Musulman,  and  I  will  not  dishearten  him  by  mildnesse.

435

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1613.

giving  him  another  for  the  same ;  but  will  as  quietly  take
as  much  at  his  hands,  as  I  have  alreadie  received,  if  hee
thinke  fit  to  strike  mee  once  more :  yea  I  tell  the  Jew
(quoth  hee)  that  I  will  give  thee  leave  to  draw  as  much
bloud  from  mee  as  hee  hath  done,  without  offering  any
revenge  at  all,  if  thou  also  wilt  turne  Musulman :  a
notable  example  if  it  bee  well  considered.

The  fourth  of  October,  being  Munday,  the  Turkish
Ramazan  or  lent  called  Ramazan  began  which  continueth  till  the
Turkish  Lent,  fourth  day  of  November,  at  which  time  they  hanged  out
Lampes.  Lamps  about  their  Steeples,  in  the  manner  as  they  did

twice  before,  that  since  the  time  of  my  arrivall  in  Con-
stantinople which  burned  till  foure  of  the  clocke  in  the
morning,  even  till  that  time  when  the  Turke  cryeth  with
a  loud  voice,  &c.  but  it  happened  that  their  Lamps  were
hanged  out  much  later  this  night  then  I  have  observed  at
other  times.  For  before,  they  used  to  hang  them  out
about  the  closing  of  the  Evening,  even  about  Sun-set.
But  this  night  they  did  not  before  midnight,  which  came
[II.  x.i  828.]  to  passe  by  reason  that  they  could  not  see  the  Moone,
notwithstanding  the  Grand  Signior  being  advertised  by
his  expert  Astronomers  about  ten  of  the  clocke  at  night,
that  it  was  very  likely  the  Moone  was  risen,  though
being  darkened  by  clouds  it  did  not  shine,  commanded
that  there  should  bee  an  expresse  order  given  forthwith
that  they  should  hang  forth  their  Lamps ;  whereupon
within  the  space  of  two  houres,  the  Steeples  belonging
to  all  the  Moskies  in  Constantinople  and  Galata  shined
suddenly  with  Lamps,  a  shew  indeed  very  glorious  and
refulgent,  some  of  their  Steeples  having  onely  one  row
of  Lampes,  which  contained  some  fiftie  particulars ;  some
three  rowes  which  make  a  very  beautiful  shew,  yea  each
of  the  foure  Steeples  belonging  to  the  Moskee  of  Sultan
Solyman,  had  not  onely  three  distinct  rowes  of  Lampes,
which  hanged  about  as  many  severall  pertitions  in  each
Tower ;  but  also  three  subdivided  rowes  or  series  that
pertained  to  the  said  severall  pertitions,  which  Lampes
were  covered  with  certaine  woodden  Boxes  to  the  end  to

436

THOMAS CORYAT  a.d.

1613.
keepe  out  the  raine  and  the  wind  that  they  may  not  be
blowne  out ;  these  Lampes  were  hanged  out  every  night
after  the  first, about the  setting  of  the Sunne, before
which  time  it  was  not  lawfull  for  any  man  to  eat  or  drinke  ;  Strict  fast.
only  sick  folke  and  little  children  excepted  that  are  not
circumcised. If  in  the  space  of  this  Ramazan  any  Turke
should  bee  found  drunke  hee  is  punished  with  death,  as  Drunkennesse
it  happened  to  one  when  I  was  in  Constantinople,  who  by  severely
the  expresse  commandement  of  the  Visier  had  hote  burn-  Puntshed-
ing  Lead  powred  into  his  mouth  and  eares : and  as  for
those  that  by  reason  of  sicknesse  have  beene  constrained
to  violate  this  fast,  looke  how  many  dayes  they  have  eaten
in  the  Ramazan,  they  are  to  fast  as  many  afterwarde  to
recompence the same. This manner of fast betwixt
sunne  and  sunne  was  instituted  by  Mahomet  himselfe.
Immediately  after  the  Lampes  are  hanged  out,  and  the
Talisman  hath  cryed  out,  it  is  lawfull  for  people  to  eate,
but  not  before : for  though  it  bee  not  death  for  any  one
that  shall  bee  found  eating  or  drinking  (saving  onely  for
Wine,  for  that  is  death  without  redemption)  yet  there
is  a  certaine severe  punishment to  bee inflicted upon
him.

There  is  great  quantitie  of  Butter  made  in  Turkie,  but  sluttish
the  most  filthy  and  unsavorie  that  is  made  in  any  other  Butter.
part  of  the  world ;  for  besides  that  it  is  defiled  with  many
haires,  it  is  also  stained  with  many  colours,  as  blue,  redde,
greene,  and  all  the  other  colours  of  the  Raine-bow.  It
is  made  commonly  in  Moldavia,  Walachia,  Mengrelia,
and  in  some  parts  of  Asia.  Those  that  buy  it  in  Con-
stantinople refine  it  by  setting  it  over  the  fire,  and  letting
it  settle,  in  melting  whereof  there  is  a  most  noysome  and
distastefull  smell ;  then  they  poure  out  the  cleere  sub-
stance, and  the  eight  part  remaineth  as  a  muddy  soot,  or
setling  in  the  bottome.  This  Butter,  though  it  bee  so
filthy,  yet  they  preferred  it  before  the  best  Butter  that  any
of  our  Christians  doe  bring  to  the  Citie.  Againe,  whereas
wee  make  our  Butter  in  all  parts  of  Christendome  with
churning, they  never  doe  so,  but  in  this  manner  they

437

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1613.

make  it.  They  set  the  Creame  over  the  fire,  and  so  the
grosse  substance  descendeth  to  the  bottome,  and  the
Butter  swimmeth  to  the  top,  which  they  skimme  with  a
Ladle,  and  after  poure  it  into  the  Hide  of  a  Buffallo  or  an
Oxe.  This  being  cold  looketh  rather  like  Grease  then
Butter.  They  bring  it  to  Constantinople  in  Buffallo
Hides,  which  when  they  transport  from  Galata  to  Con-
stantinople, they  throw  it  downe  into  the  water  and  dragge
it  at  a  Boates  taile  through  the  Sea  and  before  they  put
it  out  at  the  shoare  of  Constantinople,  they  dragge  it  also
through  a  great  deale  of  mud.  One  of  these  Hides  is
so  great  that  when  it  is  carried  into  the  Citie  eight  men
doe  usually  carrie  it  upon  their  backes  by  the  helpe  of
Levers  and  Ropes.  The  use  of  this  Butter  is  verie  fre-
quent, by  reason  of  the  abundance  of  Pillane  that  is  eaten
in  Constantinople,  and  in  most  places  of  Turkic  When
they  sell  this  Butter  in  their  Shops,  they  hang  it  up  in
the  verie  same  BurTallo  skinnes  wherein  they  first  brought
it :  and  cut  open  the  bellie,  where  they  discover  the  fore-
said colours.  Their  Butter  hath  little  Salt  mingled  with
it,  which  is  the  cause  of  the  ranke  savour  thereof.  Their
Cheese.  Cheese  likewise  is  brought  in  lesser  skinnes,  as  of  Goates
and  Sheepe  to  the  Citie,  not  pressed  as  our  Cheese  is,  but
in  crumbles.  It  is  verie  leane  and  drie,  but  fierie  salt.
But  one  Prison  in  all  Constantinople,  where  there  are  but
a  few  prisoners,  because  whensoever  a  man  is  committed
to  prison  for  any  offence,  hee  is  quickly  brought  to  his
triall.

The  seventh  of  January,  being  Thursday,  I  went  with

Patriarch  of  a worthy Greeke, Michael Cavacco to Timotheus the

Constan- Patriarch  of  Constantinople,  whose  house  is  in  that  part  of

mope. Constantinople, which is  called  Phariaria, he is  a  man

unlearned  and  verie  unworthy  of  the  place. When  wee

came  to  the  doore  of  his  Conclave,  wee  did  put  off  our

shooes,  and  leaving  them  without  the  doore  went  in  to

him  ;  and  sate  upon  our  tailes  crosse-legged  as  the  Turkes

doe  upon  certaine  Carpets,  without  either  Chaire,  Stoole,

or  Forme  to  sit  on,  he  himselfe  sate  in  the  like  manner,

438

I  THOMAS CORYAT  ad.

1613.
lad  in  a  black  broad  cloth  Gowne  that  was  furred,  and  a
lacke  habit  of  Say  over  his  head  like  to  the  Coloires ;
is  revenue  is  one  yeere  with  another  at  the  least  6000.
Ihicquins.  Neere  to  his  house  is  a  Church  of  the
Greekes,  in  which  the  foresaid  Greeke  Michael  shewed
me  a  certaine  piece  of  a  blacke  Marble  Pillar  some  five
foot  long,  that  he  said  was  brought  from  Jerusalem,  and
that  our  Saviour  was  tied  to  the  same  when  he  was
scourged.  Hee  told  mee  that  the  Greekes  doe  esteeme
it  so  deerely,  that  though  the  Duke  of  Florence  did  offer
foure  thousand  Chicquins  for  the  same,  they  will  not  leave  [n.  x.  1829.]
it.  It  standeth  in  a  corner  of  the  Church,  on  the  right
hand  as  you  goe  into  their  Chancell.

On  Saturday,  being  the  ninth  of  January,  was  pre-
sented to  my  Lord,  about  five  of  the  clocke  in  the  after-
noone,  the  strangest  Bird  that  ever  I  saw  in  my  life,  a
Pellican  killed  in  the  Sea  by  a  servant  of  our  English  A  Pellkan
Councel,  Master  Abbot  with  a  Musket :  it  was  white  and  described.
much  greater  then  any  Bird  that  ever  I  saw  before.  His
wings  being  stretched  out  were  so  long,  that  betwixt  the
extremitie  of  them  both  there  was  at  the  least  nine  foot
distance,  each  wing  contained  fortie  great  feathers,  which
feathers  yeelded  so  great  a  quill,  that  it  was  almost  as
great  as  an  ordinarie  finger :  but  the  strangest  thing  in
him  was  his  beake,  which  yeelded  two  matters  worthy  the
observation ; first  the  length,  which  was  not  so  little  as  a

!  Geometricall  foot,  and  a  quarter  long,  the  top  of  the
upper  part  of  which  bill  was  hooked  like  to  the  bill  of  an
Eagle,  and  covered  cleane  over  the  lower  parts  of  the
beake. Secondly,  the  greatnesse  of  the  jaw  or  chap  in

i  the  lower  part  of  the  beake,  being  a  kind  of  thinne
fleshie  substance,  which  indeed  was  so  large  that  I  saw
a  dogge  of  a  prettie  bignesse  put  within  it,  and  it  con-

1  tained  the  whole  bodie  thereof.  I  heard  that  it  would
containe very neere a pecke of wheat, he is a great

I  devourer  of  fish,  and  having  once  got  it  within  his  jaw,
his  prey  is  certainely  become  his  owne.  Great  plentie  of
these  Birds  are  in  the  Propontis  and  Hellespont,  and  doe

439

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1613.

live  partly  upon  the  Land,  and  partly  upon  the  Sea,  but
most  upon  the  Sea.

In Constantinople, Pera, and Galata there are five
Parishes  and  thousand  and  seven  hundred  and  fiftie  Parishes,  of  the
Churches. Turkes  Turkish  Muskies  great  and  little  seven  hundred
Hospitals. and seventie : Karabassaries  or  Xenodochia  foure  hun-
dred  and eighteen ; publike Fountaines or Wells six
hundred  and  fiftie, private  foure  hundred  and ninetie
eight ; Ovens  or  Bake-houses  three  hundred  and  eightie
five ; horse-mills  five  hundred  and  eightie  three ; Chris-
tian Churches  an  hundred  and  fiftie ; Synagogues  thirtie
sixe ; a  hundred  thousand  Houses,  and  amongst  them
five  thousand  Shops. As  for  the  Bird  before  mentioned,
Tale.  the  Turkes  say  that  when  Mecca  was  building,  these  to

helpe  forward  the  worke  brought  stones  in  their  bills,
that  served  for  the  building  of  the  Walles  of  the  Citie:
G.S.  trade,  the  Grand  Signior  is  of  the  company  of  the  Archers,  as
most  of  the  Sultans  of  the  Ottoman  Familie  have  beene
free  of  some  company  or  other.  His  Father  Mahomet
was  of  the  Company  of  the  Ring-makers,  those  I  meane
that  make  Rings  of  the  teeth  of  a  certaine  Sea-fish,  which
Rings  are  very  commonly  worne  by  the  Turkes.  They
hold  it  a  bad  omen,  when  the  Grand  Signior  on  any
occasion  goeth  out  of  Constantinople  to  meet  in  his  way
a  Christian,  for  which  onely  fault  one  of  Sir  Thomas
Glovers  men,  was  taken  and  had  so  many  blowes  on  his
buttockes  (his  breeches  betwixt)  that  he  died  thereof
within  few  daies  after.  The  Greekes  that  cannot  pay
their  debts  are  delivered  to  a  Turk,  who  leads  him  with  a
chaine  about  his  necke,  the  other  end  fastned  to  the
Keepers  middle  to  begge  till  he  hath  paid.  Sometimes
at  the  great  Bayram,  the  Sultan,  or  Visier,  or  Bassas  will
pay  halfe  the  debts.

The  Turkish  Boyes  that  learne  the  first  Alphabet,
observe  the  strangest  custome  that  ever  I  saw,  for  sitting
crosse-legged  as  their  father  doe,  and  holding  their  festers
in  their  hands,  they  move  themselves  up  and  downe
towards  their  booke  that  lieth  before  them,  a  motion  so

440

THOMAS CORY  AT  a.d.

1613.
quaint  that  1  could  not  chuse  but  laugh  at  them,  and
so  did  many  other  Christians  beside  my  selfe.  This  I
saw  to  be  observed  by  the  Turkish  boyes  of  Constanti-
nople, Gallipoli  and  Syo,  and  I  thinke  it  is  used  in  all
parts  of  the  Turkish  Dominion.  I  departed  from  Con-
stantinople towardes  Jerusalem,  in  an  English  Ship,  called
the  Great  Defince,  which  about  a  month  before  came  from
Syo  to  Constantinople,  which  are  at  the  least  eighty
leagues  asunder,  in  the  space  of  forty  two  houres,  a  thing
that  I  name  for  the  raritie  thereof,  because  there  are  few
Ships  that  performe  it  in  so  short  a  space,  for  the  Ship  in
the  which  I  went,  being  called  the  Samaritane,  was  almost
sixe  weekes  performing  it.  I  departed  I  say  there  hence,
the  one  and  twentieth  of  January  being  Friday,  about
eight  of  the  clocke  in  the  morning,  in  as  tempestuous  and
extreame  a  season  as  ever  I  travelled  in  my  life,  either  by
Land  or  water,  for  the  snow  which  fell  incessantly  for  the
space  of  almost  two  dayes  and  two  nights,  bred  such  a
rigid  cold  that  some  of  us  were  even  benummed.  Besides,
the  contrarie  winds  so  crossed  our  passage,  that  we  found
it  a  very  fastidious  and  tedious  voyage.  Notwithstand-
ing the  adverse  windes  when  we  came  within  three  or
foure  miles  of  Gallipoli,  by  tacking  about  and  turning  to
windward,  as  they  call  it  (those  are  nauticall  words)  by
the  which  is  meant  sailing  against  the  winde ;  with  some
kind  of  difficultie  we  entred  into  the  Port.  After  we
were  come  in,  a  certaine  Jew  that  was  in  our  Ship  per-
ceiving that  wee  sailed  so  bravely  against  the  winds,  told
me  that  the  Englishmen  by  reason  of  their  dexteritie  in
sailing,  might  bee  not  improperly  called  the  fishes  of  the
Sea :  there  we  tarried  three  dayes,  partly  for  the  dispatch
of  our  businesse  with  the  Turkish  Magistrates  of  the
Towne,  and  partly  by  a  thicke  mist  upon  the  Sea,  during
which  wee  could  not  securely  goe  forward  for  feare  of
falling  into  shallow  parts  of  the  Sea.  This  Gallipoli  is  Gallipoli.
some  ninetie  leagues  distant  from  Constantinople :  there
endeth  the  Propontis  and  beginneth  the  Hellespont.
The fourteenth of Februarie wee went ashoare at

441

A.D.

1613.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Lesbos,  now  called  Mitylene :  it  is  very  mountainous  and
rough.  The  Sheepe  bare  the  coursest  Wooll  that  ever  I
saw,  like  Goats  haire.  The  people  flocked  about  us,
many  of  them  women,  the  ugliest  sluts  that  ever  I  saw,
[II.  x.i 830.]  saving  the  Armenian  trulls  of  Constantinople.  Februarie
eighteene  we  came  to  Syo.  On  the  twentieth  sayling  by
the  Saniian  Coast  wee  discerned  Pathmos,  and  passed
neere  Cos  the  birthplace  of  Hippocrates.  On  the  twentie
three,  wee  espied  the  tops  of  Ararat  said  to  bee  eightie
leagues  within  Land,  and  wee  fourteene  from  shoare.  On
the  twentie  foure  we  landed  at  Scanderone,  infamous  for
the  infectious  aire  caused  by  foggie  clouds  after  Sun-set,
and  till  nine  in  the  morning  hovering  about  the  moun-
taines,  and  letting  fall  an  unwholsome  dew,  the  waters
being  also  pestiferous ;  which  cause  many  to  leave  their
Jackalls.  carkasses there to be devoured of the Jackals, which

scrape  them  out  of  their  graves.  I  saw  one  somewhat
like  a  Mastive  Dog,  but  somewhat  lesse,  his  taile  as  long
as  of  a  Foxe.  They  are  therefore  forced  to  fetch  their
water  from  a  Fountaine  sixe  miles  off.  Scanderone  hath
about  fortie  Houses,  the  poorest  Cotages  that  ever  I
saw,  being  but  a  few  boards  weakly  compact  and  covered
Scanderone.  with  Reeds.  Our  journey  thence  to  Scandarone  is  about
fiftie  sixe  miles.  The  first  day  wee  rode  twelve ;  the
second  sixteene ;  the  third  sixteene ;  the  fourth  ten.
The  Right  Worshipfull  Consull  of  the  English  Nation,
Commorant  in  Aleppo,  Master  Bart.  Haggat  my  worthy
Countryman  borne  in  Summersetshire  at  Welles,  amongst
Poole  of  Giab-  other  favours  rode  with  mee  to  the  Vallie  of  Salt  men-
tors*//, tioned,  2.  Sam.  8.  13.  In  the  way  wee  seemed  to  see  a
Deceptiovisus.  Towne  standing  like  an  Hand  in  water,  and  when  wee
came  thither  found  no  waters,  but  a  kind  of  shrub  like
wild  withered  Time,  which  covering  the  Mountaine  made
with  the  white  sprigs  a  shew  of  water  a  farre  off.  The
Villages  in  the  way  are  inhabited  with  Bedwines.  The
Poole  where  the  Salt  is  made  is  twentie  miles  long,  and
two  broad,  exceedingly  frequented  with  plentie  and
varietie  of  Fowle. The  water  continueth  all  the  yeere

442

THOMAS CORY  AT  a.d.

i6i3«
saving  July,  August,  September,  at  which  time  it  is  quite

dried  up,  beginning  to  wast  (or  to  change  into  Salt)  in
July :  and  then  is  there  nothing  but  a  hard  massie  Salt,
which  appeareth  like  hard  Ice  digged  thence  with  Mat-
tocks, heaped  hillocks  &  carried  to  Giabbul  a  village,  on
Camels  and  Asses,  and  there  customed.  It  is  as  fine  &
excellent  as  any  in  the  world.  In  Oct.  it  beginneth
again  to  break  out  of  certain  springs  with  much  vehe-
mency,  &  after  one  month  inundateth  the  whole  place.
It  yeelds  20000.  dollars  yeerly  to  the  Grand  Signior.
March,  15.  1613.  I  and  my  countryman  Henry  Allard
of  Kent,  began  our  Pilgrimage  a  foot  to  the  holy  Citie

of  Jerusalem. The  26.  in  Damascus  I  saw  Roses

but  wee  have  travelled  with  so  many  Travellers  to
Damascus,  and  thence  to  Jerusalem,  and  observed  so
much  on  those  parts,  that  I  dare  not  to  obtrude  Master
Coryats  prolixitie  on  the  patientest  Reader.  He  was
indeed  a  curious  viewer  of  so  much  as  his  bodily  eyes
could  comprehend,  to  which  he  added  (not  so  faithfull
j  intelligence  of)  his  inquisitive  eares ;  for  mysteries  of
State  and  Religion  hee  would  be  a  safe  traveller,  and
free  from  suspition.  I  confesse  I  found  much  pleasure
in  walking  with  him  in  his  tenne  dayes  journey  to
Damascus,  and  spending  a  little  while  to  view  his  foure  Damasco  «
dayes  view  of  Damascus,  Abana  and  Pharphar  flowing  Sham.
from  the  Hill  on  which,  part  of  the  Towne  standeth,  to
the  Houses  whereof  above  one  thousand  Conduits  of
most  pure  waters  are  thence  conveyed ;  the  Darvises
Monastery,  garden  and  turnings  ;  the  buildings,  of  which
the  chiefe  Moskee  (before  Saint  Zacharies  Temple)  hath
one  thousand  unglased  Windowes,  and  as  many  Pillars
as  are  dayes  in  the  yeere,  with  five  brazen  Gates,  one
fortie  foot  high ;  the  Cloister,  Bazestans  Castle,  and  other
Moskees,  shady  penthoused  Streets,  all  superlative ;  ten
Gates,  1 00000.  Inhabitants,  Fruits  innumerable  and
dilicious,  victualls  so  cheap  that  at  a  Cookes,  he  and  his
companion  dined  well  for  three  farthings  a  man,  and  all
things  conspiring  to  an  earthly  Paradise :  for  which  cause

443

A.D.
1613.

Armenian  B.
Patriarch.

Arabian

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

it  is  said  the  Grand  Signior  may  not  reside  there,  least
he  should  forfeit  his  hopes  of  a  future  Paradise :  his
further  journey  to  Jordans  swift  and  sounding  streame,
to  Tabors  Holies,  Samarias  Well,  and  the  centre  of
Earthly  sanctitie,  Jerusalem ;  his  companie  of  Armenians,
with  their  Patriarch  or  Bishop,  with  a  Crosier  in  his  hand
of  an  ordinary  peece  of  Hasill,  with  a  little  crooke  at  the
end  of  the  same  piece  of  Wood,  with  a  Turbant  of  white
and  blue  on  his  head ;  their  cruell  usage  by  the  Moores
the  Bedwine  sluts  painted  under  the  nosthrills  and  ringed
on  the  right  nosthrill  unto  the  spoyle  of  kissing,  the
Sugar  loafed  Houses,  and  other  rarities,  in  as  rare  a  stile
of  big  swolne  strange-tired  travelling  words  expressed :
all  this  and  the  rest  of  Master  Coryats  long  long  journey
I  dare  not  hither  adde  for  feare  you  grow  weary  of  him
and  mee.  Yet  I  will  adde  a  little  of  Jerusalem  that  yee
may  know  hee  was  there.  Hee  entered  it  the  twelfth  of
April,  1 6 14.  Besides  the  Holies  observed  in  Sandys,
Sanderson,  Timberley,  Biddulph,  and  others,  hee  lay  in
the  Temple  on  Palmesunday  even,  in  the  upper  Gallery,
where  hee  was  roused  out  of  sleepe  by  the  turbulent  cries
of  the  Greekes,  who  came  foorth  of  their  Quire  with  a
very  clamorous  noyse,  having  eleven  Banners  of  Silke
and  cloth  of  Gold  carried  before  them,  each  of  which  had
three  Streamers,  and  on  the  top  of  the  Staffe  a  guilded
Crosse.  A  world  of  Lamps  was  carried  before  and  behind
them,  men,  women,  children  confusedly,  crying,  Kyrie
eleeson.  The  next  day  the  other  Nations  joyned  with
them,  displaying  their  Banners  also,  viz.  the  Armenians,
Maronites,  Jacobites,  Cophties,  and  Abassines.  The
Armenians  made  the  bravest  shew.  Their  Patriarch
weare  a  cope  of  cloth  of  Gold,  a  Miter  of  like  cloth  on
his  head  beautified  with  many  rich  stones,  with  a  Crucifix
in  his  hand  beset  with  Diamonds,  Rubies,  Amethists,
Saphires,  and  other  Stones  of  great  worth ;  his  Priests
also  sumptuously  attired,  wearing  imbroidered  Caps  of
Velvet  and  Sattin  with  Crosses  on  the  tops.  Some  carried
Olive  boughes  in  their  hands,  with  burning  Waxe  Candles

444

THOMAS CORYAT  a.d.

1614.

therein,  and  one  a  branch  of  Palme-tree. Some  of  the
Priests  went  before, the  Patriarch  backward perfuming
him. Some carried Drums on their shoulders, which
others  behinde  them  did  strike  upon. The  Cophties  and
Abassines  had  also  certaine  clappers  of  Brasse  and  Wood,
which made strange Musicke. They continued foure [II.x.1831.]
houres  their  circumgyration  about  the  Sepulchre,  which
vociferations  such  as  did  amaze  the  beholders :  the  people
ready  to  goe  together  by  the  eares  for  these  holy  branches.
The  eight  and twentieth  we  went to  visite Jordan,
when  they  were  some  fifteene  miles  from  Jerusalem  in  the
way,  the  stones  of  that  soile  put  together  burne  being
kindled  as  wood,  and  the  combustible  matter  in  them
being  spent,  are  blacke  and  not  consumed  to  ashes,  the
smell  is  like  brimstone,  as  neere  to  Gomorha. Twenty
of  these  fires  were  made  on  a  hill. At  Jordan  all  made
great  applause ; men,  women  and  children  stripped  them-
selves starke naked, having opinion that that water
washeth  away  all  their  sinnes. It  is  very  muddy,  and  he
was  up  to  the  middle  in  mud  neere  the  bankes. There
grow  abundance  of  tamariskes  of  which  they  make  wands
which  they  carry  into  their  Countries. The  River  there
is  scarcely  one  hundred  foot  broad,  but  in  the  middle  said
to  be  twenty  foot  deepe. Halfe  a  mile  beyond  are  the
Arabian  hils. They  passed  within  halfe  a  mile  of  the
Lake  Asphaltitis,  environed  on  both  sides  with  high  hils.
On  the  hither  side  is  the  Pillar  of  Lots  wife  in  Salt  with
her  childe  in  her  armes,  and  a  pretty  Dogge  *  also  in  Salt  *He  sazv  not
by  her,  about  a  bow  shot  from  the  water. The  Inter-  &'%£]$
preter  said  his  father  fiftie  yeere  before,  when  some  of  his  amt£r  an4
company  had  broken  off  a  peece,  saw  it  growne  up  againe  seemeth  by  this
miraculously  as  if  it  had  not  beene  touched. He  tooke  chi^e  an^
notice  of  two  things,  the  slow  motion  of  the  water,  or  i°j/°je-a
rather  none,  standing  like  a  quagmire ; and  the  foggie,  word  or  7n
clowdie  matter  upon  it,  yeelding  an  unwholesome  smell,  deede.
The  Vallie  which  they  passed  is  sterile  as  ever  hee  passed
any  Country,  a  chalkie  soile  utterly  destitute  of  plants,
not  to  be  bettered  by  industry  of  man. The  two  and

445

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1614.

twentieth  of  Aprill  he  went  the  third  time  into  the
Temple,  in  which  were  then  assembled  1000.  Armenians,
as  many  as  of  all  the  other  Nations,  2000.  in  all.  Here
was  buying  and  selling  in  the  Temple  of  girdles,  garters,
bread,  &c.  they  then  remaining  there  eight  and  forty
houres  5  yea,  they  defiled  it  with  their  excrements,  and
made  it  a  metamorphosis  of  Ajax,  and  that  not  for  want
of  necessarie  places,  which  there  were  publike  and  com-
mon, but  through  meere  beastlinesse  in  superlative
degrees.  Their  meeting  then  is,  with  banners,  flags,
crucifixes,  musicall  instruments,  and  fervent  praiers  to
bring  the  holy  Ghost  from  heaven  in  visible  forme  of  fire.
The  Latins  herein  dissent  from  all  the  other  sects,  and
count  it  an  imposture.  The  other  six  companies  meet
on  Saturday  at  eleven  of  the  clock  and  lock  and  bolt  the
doore  of  the  Sepulcher.  They  walke  round  about  till
five  of  the  clock  in  the  afternoone  without  intermission,
most  of  them  carrying  a  bundle  of  white  wax  candle  in
their  right  hands,  bound  about  with  the  holy  thred  or
garters  which  have  touched  holy  places,  about  forty  in  a
bundle  lifted  over  their  heads,  invocating  the  holy  Ghost,
the  Greekes  crying  Kvpiee\evi<Tov,  the  rest  in  Arabian,  with
such  stentorean  outcries,  for  that  six  houres  procession,
thinking  therewith  to  pierce  the  heavens  as  hath  not  else-
where beene  heard.  About  three  quarters  of  an  houre
after  foure,  the  doore  was  unlocked,  and  the  Patriarks  of
the  Greeks  &  Armenians  went  in,  with  an  Abassine.  This
last  entreth  into  the  grotta  and  there  in  hugger  mugger
continueth  his  businesse,  and  having  beene  there  a  quarter
of  an  houre,  commeth  forth  with  his  bundle  of  lights
lighted,  and  leaping  furiously  forth  is  caught  by  the  zeal-
ous people  ravished  with  joy  at  this  appearance,  the  Priest
in  danger  of  stifling  whiles  each  strives  to  light  his  candle
first.  All  were  kindled  in  a  quarter  of  an  houre.  Jeru-
salem is  but  meanly  peopled,  there  being  scarce  10000.  so
few  walking  in  the  streets  as  except  in  Padua  he  hath  not
seene  in  any  Citie.  The  soyle  is  stonie  or  rather  chalkie,
and  fertile  ; it  is  plentifull  of  provisions,  corne  growing

446

THOMAS CORYAT

A.D.

1614.

there  in  reasonable  quantitie,  but  not  so  high,  nor  so
thicke  as  in  fruitful!  places  of  England.  Girdles  &
garters  are  there  made  and  thence  carried  to  all  places.
The  ancient  forme  of  building  there,  &  in  Samaria,  of
most  of  their  streets  is  fornica  to  opere,  with  vaulted
roofes.  Betwixt  April  and  October  it  seldome  raineth.
No  Jew  may  appeare  neere  the  Sepulcher,  for  any  Chris-
tian may  stone  him,  or  bring  him  to  the  Officer  to  be
executed.  347  lamps  ordinarily  burne  in  the  Temple
(besides  at  Easter)  thorow  the  yeere.  Their  wodden
Keyes  in  this  Country,  and  other  his  observations  very
very  many  I  omit.  His  journey  from  thence  to  Aleppo  Sup.  I.  4.  c
and  thence  into  Mesopotamia,  Persia,  India,  you  have
before  related  in  his  owne  Epistles.

Chap.  XIII.

Relations  of  the  Travels  of  W.  Lithgow  a  Scot,  in
Candy,  Greece,  the  Holy-land,  Egypt,  and
other  parts  of  the  East.

Pon  the  fortieth  day  after  my  departure
from  Paris,  I  arrived  at  Rome,  of  the
which  I  will  memorize,  some  rarest  things,
and  so  proceede.  This  Citie  of  Rome,  A  briefe
now  extant,  is  not  that  old  Rome,  which  description  of
Romulus  founded;  for  after  the  Mon-  Rome'
archy  of  the  Romans  had  attained  to  the
full  height,  the  Gothes,  a  base  and  unknowne  people,  dis-
playing their  banner  against  this  glorious  and  imperiall
Citie,  in  the  end  razed,  and  subverted  their  Pallaces,
equalizing  the  wals  with  the  ground.  After  the  which
detriment,  and  overthrow  (the  late  subdued  Romans,
recovering  their  ruinous  habitation)  were  inforced,  to
withdraw  the  scituation  of  the  Towne,  a  little  more  down-
ward, neare  the  bankes  of  the  Tibris :  And  transported  the
stones,  of  these  ransacked  buildings,  to  reedifie  their  new
dwelling  places :

447

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1614.

Hie  ubi  nunc  Roma  est,  olim  fuit  ardua  silva,
Tantaque  res  paucis,  pascua  bobus  erat.
Many  have  wrote,  of  the  singularities  of  old  Rome,
and  I  will  also  recite  some  decaied  Monuments  thereof,
which  I  have  seene : The  speciall  object  of  Antiquitie  I

[II.  x.i 832.]  saw,  being  never  a  whit  decaied  to  this  day,  is  the  Tem-
plum  omnium  Deorum,  but  now,  omnium  sanctorum,
builded  in  a  rotundo,  and  open  at  the  top,  with  a  large
round,  like  to  the  quire  of  the  holy  grave. And  a  pretty

Monuments  of  way  from  this,  are  the  remainants  of  that  ancient  Amphi-

Antiqmty.  theatre  beautified  with  great  Columnes,  of  a  wonderfull
bignesse  and  height ;  the  reason  why  it  was  first  devised,
the  ghosts  of  the  slaughtered  Sabines  may  testifie.  To  be
briefe,  I  saw  the  decaied  house  of  worthy  Cicero,  the
high  Capitoll,  the  Pallace  of  cruell  Nero,  the  Statues  of
Marcus  Aurelius,  Alexander,  and  his  horse  Bucephalus.
The  greene  hill  like  unto  Mount  Cavallo,  that  was  made
of  the  ^Pottars  shards  at  one  time,  which  brought  the  tribu-
tarie  Gold  to  this  imperiall  seat,  the  seven  hils  whereon
she  stands,  and  their  seven  Pyramides,  the  Castell  Saint
Angelo,  which  Adrian  first  founded,  and  their  doubtfull
transported  Reliques  from  Jerusalem,  with  many  other
things  I  diligently  remarked,  some  whereof  were  frivolous,
some  ambiguous,  and  some  famous.  Besides  all  these  I
saw  one  most  sight-worthy-spectacle,  which  was  the
Library  of  the  ancient  Romans,  being  licenciated  to  enter
with  two  Gentlemen,  Sir  William  Kerre,  and  James
Aughtermuty  my  Countrey-men,  where  when  I  was  come,
I  beheld  a  word  of  old  Bookes,  the  first  whereof,  was  an
infinite  number  of  Greeke  Bibles  subscribed  with  the
hands  of  these  holy  Fathers,  who  (as  they  say)  translated
them  out  of  the  Hebrew  tongue.

The  original! \ saw ajso the Academies of  Aristotle, wherein he

opiesyst  ey  treateth  0f  the  Soule,  health,  life,  nature,  and  qualities  of
say)  of  famous  .  . . A  _ '  >  >  r  '  7[  I

Authors.  men,  with  the  Medicaments  or  Galen,  tor  the  diseases  and

infirmities  of  man  : The  familiar  Epistles  of  Cicero,  the

Aeneidos  of  Virgil,  the  Saphicke  Verses  of  that  Lesbian

Sapho, the Workes of Ovid, Plinie, Plutarke, Titus

448

WILLIAM LITHGOW  ad.

1614.

Livius,  Horatius,  Strabo,  Plato,  Homer,  Terentius,  Cato,
Hippocrates,  Josephus,  Pythagoras,  Diodorus  Siculus,
Eusebius,  Saint  Augustine,  Saint  Ambrose,  Saint  Cyprian,
Saint  Gregory,  and  likewise  the  workes  of  other  excellent
Philosophers,  Divines,  and  Poets  :  all  wrote  with  their
owne  hands,  and  sealed  with  their  names,  and  manuell
subscriptions.  I  saw  also  the  forme  of  the  first  ancient
Writing,  which  was  upon  leaves  of  trees,  cakes  of  lead,
with  their  fingers  on  ashes,  barkes  of  trees,  with  strange
figures,  and  unknowne  Letters,  that  was  brought  from
Egypt :  for  the  ^Egyptians  first  devised  the  use  thereof,
and  the  sight  of  infinitie  Obligatorie  Writings,  of  Emper-
ours,  Kings,  and  Princes,  which  I  omit  to  relate,  referring
the  same  to  be  registred,  by  the  next  beholder.

Bidding  adew  to  my  Company,  and  this  Library,  I
longed  to  view  the  gorgeous  Mosaicall  worke  of  Saint
Peters  Church :  The  matter  was  no  sooner  conceived,  but
I  went  to  the  doore,  yet  afraid  to  enter,  because  I  was  not
accustomed,  with  the  carriage,  and  ceremonies  of  such  a
Sanctum  Sanctorum.  But  at  the  last,  abandoning  all
scrupulositie,  I  came  in  boldly,  and  on  my  right  hand,  as
I  entred  within  the  doore,  I  espied  the  portraied  image  of  The  brasen
Saint  Peter,  erected  of  pure  Brasse,  and  sitting  on  a  brazen  ImaSe  of  Saint
Chaire.  The  fashion  of  the  people  is  this,  entring  the  eter'
Church,  they  goe  strait  to  this  Idoll,  and  saluting  with
many  crosses  his  senselesse  body,  kisse  his  feete ;  and
every  one  of  his  severall  toes :  next,  they  lay  their  heads
under  the  soale  of  his  right  foot,  and  arising  rub  their
Beads  on  his  hard  costed  belly :  thus  adoring  that  breath-
lesse  masse  of  mettall,  more  then  though  it  were  a  living
creature.

The  period  of  Time,  after  eight  and  twenty  dayes
abode,  wishing  my  departure,  I  hardly  escaped  from  the
hunting  of  these  bloud-sucking  Inquisitors,  of  whom  the
most  part  were  mine  owne  Countrimen ;  for  I  may  justly
affirme  it,  man  hath  no  worser  Enemie  then  his  owne
supposed  friend.  And  the  Italian  saieth  in  his  Proverbe ;
God  keepe  me  from  the  hurt  of  my  friends,  for  I  know
x  449  2  F

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1614.

well  how  to  keepe  me  from  mine  Enemies.  From  thence
bound  Eastward,  I  visited  Naples,  the  commendation  of
which,  I  onely  revolve  in  this  Verse :

Inclyta  Parthenope  gignit  Comitesque  Ducesque.

Among  many  other  remarkeable  things,  neare  to  this
Citie  (as  Lacus  Avernus,  Sibillaes  Cave,  Puteoli ;  the
Sulphurean  Mountaine,  Capua  and  Cuma,  where  banished
iEneas  from  Troy,  and  Carthage  arrived)  I  saw  the  Monu-
ment of  Virgils  buriall.

In  the  meane  while,  having  alwaies  a  regard,  of  my
hasty  dispatching  from  Christendome,  I  returned,  address-
ing my  selfe  to  Venice  for  transportation. But  by  your
leave,  let  me  lay  down  before  your  eyes,  some  notable
Lady  of  illusions  of  Madonna  di  Loretta.

Loretto.  Before  I  came  neere  to  Loretta,  by  ten  miles,  I  over-

Foure  Roman  tooke  a  Caroch,  wherein  were  two  Gentlemen  of  Rome,
Pi/grimes.  and  their  two  Concubines :  Who,  when  they  espied  me,
saluted  me  kindely,  enquiring  of  what  Nation  I  was?
whither  I  was  bound?  and  what  pleasure  I  had  to  travell
alone?  After  I  had  to  these  demands  given  satisfaction,
they  intreated  me  to  come  up  to  the  Caroach,  but  I  thank-
fully refused,  and  would  not,  replying  the  way  was
faire,  the  weather  seasonable,  and  my  body  unwearied.
At  last  they  perceiving  my  absolute  refusall,  presently  dis-
mounted on  the  ground,  to  recreate  themselves  in  my
company :  and  incontinently,  the  two  yong  unmarried
Dames,  came  forth  also,  and  would  by  no  perswasion  of
me,  nor  their  familiars,  mount  againe ;  saying,  They  were
all  Pilgrimes,  and  bound  to  Loreta  (for  devotions  sake)
in  pilgrimage,  and  for  the  penance  enjoy ned  to  them  by
their  Father  Confessour.  Truely,  so  farre  as  I  could
judge,  their  penance  was  small,  being  carried  with  horses,
and  the  appearance  of  devotion  much  lesse :  for  lodging
at  Riginati,  after  supper,  each  youth  led  captive  his  dearest
Darling  to  an  unsanctified  bed,  and  left  me  to  my  accus-
tomed repose.
[II. x.i 833.] When  the  morning  Starre  appeared,  wee  embraced  the

45°

WILLIAM LITHGOW  a.d.

1614.

way  marching  toward  Loretta,  and  these  Vermilion
Nimphs,  to  let  me  understand  they  travelled  with  a
cheereful  stomacke,  would  oft  run  races,  skipping  like
wanton  Lambes  on  grassie  Mountaines,  and  quenching
their  follies  in  a  Sea  of  unquenchable  fantasies.  Approach-
ing neere  the  gate  of  the  Village,  they  pulled  off  their
shooes  and  stockings,  walking  bare-footed  through  the
streets,  to  this  ten  thousand  times  polluted  Chappell,
mumbling  Pater  nosters,  and  Ave  Mariaes  on  their
Beades.,  When  they  entred  the  Church,  wherein  the
Chappell  standeth,  I  stood  at  the  entrie  beholding  many
hundreds  of  bare-footed  blinded  bodies,  creeping  on  their
knees  and  hands :  Thinking  themselves  not  worthy  to
goe  on  foot  to  this  idely  supposed  Nazaretaene  House,
like  to  this  saying ;

Laurentum  nudis  pedibus,  plebs  crebra  frequentat,
Quam  movet  interius  religionis  amor.

Unto  this  falsly  patronized  Chappell,  they  offer  yeerely  Turseiline  the
many  rich  gifts,  amounting  to  an  unspeakable  value,  as  Jestdte  hath
Chaines, and  Rings  of  Gold  and Silver, Rubies, Dia-  w^stethe
monds,  silken  Tapestries,  and  such  like. The  Jesuiticall  Loretan  holies
and  Pcenitentiall  Fathers  receive  all,  but  who  so  injoy  all,  and  miracles,
let  Camera  reverenda  Romana,  grant  certification  to  this  which  some
Loretan  avariciousnesse,  who  fill  their  coffers  twice  in  the  suPerm*ts**
yeere  therewith. My  foure  Pilgrimes  having  performed  translated  Into
their ceremoniall customes, came backe laughing, and English.
asked  why  I  did  not  enter? But  I  as  unwilling  to  shew
them  any  further  reason,  demanded  what  the  matter  was  ?
O  (said  the  Italians)  Jurando  per  il  Cielo  e  Iddio  Sacra-
tissimo  ; This  is  the  House  wherein  the  Virgin  Marie
dwelt  in  Galile : and  to  the  confirmation  of  these  words
shewed me a Booke, out of which I extracted these
Annotations.

This  Chappell,  they  hold  it  to  be  the  house,  in  which  Damnable
Mary  was  annunced  by  Gabriel,  and  wherein she  con-  tUusioiu  of
ceived  Jesus,  by  operation  of  the  holy  Ghost. And  in  Loreta-
the  meane  time,  that  devotion  waxed  scant,  amongst  the
Christians  of  the  Primitive  Church,  in  the  Holy  Land :

45i

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1 614.

Many strangers tyrannizing over the territories of

Canaan,  as  Heraclius,  Costroes  King  of  Persia,  Saracens,

and  Harancone  King  of  Egypt ; it  came  to  passe  in  the

yeere  of  our  Lord  1291.  and  in  the  time  of  Pope  Nicholas

the  fourth,  that  it  being  shaken  off  the  foundation,  was

A  fake  transported  miraculously  by  Angels  in  the  night,  from

assertion.  Nazareth  in  Gallile,  to  Torsalto  in  Slavonia. And  in  the

morning,  Sheepheards  comming  to  the  place  of  pastorage,

found this house, wherewith being astonished, they

returned in haste, and  told S. George  Allesandro, the

Prior  of  Torsalto,  who  in  that  meane  while  was  lying

sicke. He  being  stricken  in  admiration  with  these  newes,

caused  himselfe  to  be  borne  thither,  and  laid  before  the

Altar,  and  falling  in  a  marvellous  trance,  the  Virgin  Mary

A  Simonaicall  by  a  heavenly  Vision  appeared  to  him,  saying  after  this

Vision.  manner :

A  Papistical!  Behold,  thou  hast  often  pierced  the  heavens,  with  invo-
aream  d  of  cations  for  thy  reliefe,  and  now  I  am  come,  not  onely  to
restore  thee  to  thy  health,  but  also  to  certifie  thee,  that
thou  doubt  nothing  of  this  House ;  for  it  is  holy  in
respect  of  me,  the  chaste  immaculate  Virgin,  ordained
before  all  eternitie,  to  be  the  Mother  of  the  most  High.
It  was  in  this  Chamber  my  Mother  Anna  conceived  me,
nourished  me,  and  brought  me  up,  in  singing  Psalmes,
Hymns,  &  Praises  to  the  glory  of  God :  and  also  I  kept
in  this  roome  the  blessed  infant  Jesus,  very  God,  and  very
Man,  without  any  grievance  or  paine,  brought  him  up
with  all  diligent  observation  :  And  when  cruell  Herod
sought  the  babes  life,  by  the  advertisement  of  the  Angell,
I,  and  my  husband  Joseph,  who  never  knew  my  body,
fled  with  him  downe  to  Egypt.  And  after  his  passion,
death,  and  ascension  to  Heaven,  to  make  a  reconciliation
of  humane  nature,  with  the  Court  Celestiall :  I  staied  in
this  house  with  John,  and  the  other  Disciples :  Who  con-
sidering after  my  death,  what  high  mysteries  had  beene
done  into  it,  consecrated  and  converted  the  same  to  a
Temple,  for  a  commemoration  of  Christs  sufferings,  the
chiefe  of  Martyrs. Also  that  resplending  Image  thou

452

WILLIAM LITHGOW  a.d.

1614.

I  seest,  was  made  by  S.  Luke  (my  familiar)  for  eternizing
I  the  memory  of  my  portraiture  as  I  was  alive,  by  the  com-
mandement  of  him,  who  doth  all  things,  and  shall  conserve
this  sacred  Image  to  the  worlds  end :  That  Crosse  of
Cedar,  which  standeth  at  the  side  of  the  little  westerne
window,  was  made  by  the  Apostles :  These  Cinders  in  the
Chimney  touch  not,  because  they  are  the  fragments  of  the
last  fire  I  made  on  earth  :  And  that  Shelfe  whereon  my
linnen  cloathes,  and  prayer  Bookes  lay,  Let  no  person
come  neere  it,  for  all  these  places  are  sanctified  and  holy.
Wherefore  my  Son,  I  tell  thee,  Awake,  and  goe,  recite  the
same  which  I  have  told  thee  unto  others ;  and  to  confirme
thy  beliefe  therein,  the  Queene  of  Heaven  giveth  thee
freely  thy  health.

Frier  Alexander  being  ravished (say  they) with this  The  shame  full
Vision,  went  and  reported  it  to  Nicholas  Frangipano,  Lord  °Pintons  °f the
of  that  Country. And  incontinently  he  sent  this  Prior  cfm!ngLoreta
and  other  foure  Friers  to  Nazareth,  whereby  he  might
know  the  truth  thereof,  but  in  that  journey  they  died.
The Virgin Mary perceiving their incredulitie, caused
Angels  the  second  time  to  transport  the  house  over  the
gulfe  of  Venice,  to  a  great  wood  neere  by  the  Sea  side,  in
the  territory  of  Riginati. Which,  when  the  Countrimen
had  found,  and  remarking  the  splendor  of  the  illuminating
Image,  dispersed  these  newes  abroad. And  the  Citizens
of  Riginati,  having  seene  what  great  miracles  were  daily
done,  by  the  vertue  of  this  Chappell,  imposed  to  it  this
name, Madonna di Loretta. A little while after the
people  resorting  to  it  with  rich  gifts,  there  hanted  in  the
wood many theeves, and cut-throates, who robd and
murdred the Pilgrims. Which innocent spilt bloud,
pricking  her  to  the  heart,  shee  made  the  Angels  transport
it  the  third  time,  &  set  it  on  the  top  of  a  little  Mountain,
belonging  to  two  brethren  in  heritage  : But  they  upon  a
day  quarrelling,  &  discording,  about  the  utility  of  the  Foure  times
offerings to this house, the  Angels  did  remove  it the  transported.
fourth  time,  &  placed  it  in  a  high  broad  way,  where  it  [II.  x.  1834.]
standeth  unremoved  to  this  day. This  was  confirmed  by

453

A.D.
1614.

A  confirmation
by  the  Popes.

*  Borne  at  St.
Andrew  in
Scotland.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

the  Papall  Authoritie  to  bee  of  an  undoubted  truth,  after  a
hundred  and  fiftie  three  yeeres  deliberation.  I  have  added
nothing  to  the  Authors  description,  but  onely  collected
these  speciall  Warrants.

I  embarqued  at  Ancona,  in  a  Frigato  ;  and  by  accident
I  heere  encountred  with  a  most  courteous  and  discreet
Gentleman  James  Arthur,*  whose  companie  was  to  me
most  acceptable,  wee  arrived  at  Saint  Markes  place  in
Venice.

Brazza.

Porno.

The  lies
Tremiti.

AFter  foure  and  twentie  dayes  attendance,  and  expect-
ing for  passage,  I  embarqued  in  a  Carmoesalo,  being
bound  to  Zara  Nova  in  Dalmatia.

Zara  is  the  Capitall  Citie  of  Dalmatia,  called  of  old
Jadara :  the  Inhabitants  are  governed  by  a  Camarlingo,
in  the  behalfe  of  Venice.  The  walls  whereof,  are
strongly  rampired  with  earth ;  surpassing  the  tops  of  the
stone  worke :  and  fortified  also  with  high  Bulwarkes,  and
planted  Cannons  on  elevated  rampires  of  earth  :  which
are  above  fortie  Cubites  higher  then  the  walls  and  Bul-
warkes, standing  in  the  foure  severall  corners  of  the
Citie.

From  Zara  I  embarqued  in  a  small  Frigot  bound  for
Lesina,  with  five  Slavonian  Marriners,  who  sometimes
sayled,  and  sometimes  rowed  with  Oares  :  In  our  way
wee  passed  by  the  He  of  Brazza,  which  is  of  no  great
quantitie,  but  fertile  enough  for  the  Inhabitants,  and  kept
by  a  Gentleman  of  Venice.  It  lyeth  in  the  mouth  of  the
Gulfe  Narento,  that  divideth  Dalmatia  from  Slavonia.
Many  conceive  in  effect  that  these  two  Kingdomes  are  all
one,  but  I  hold  the  contrary  opinion,  both  by  experience
and  by  antient  Authors.  Having  passed  Cape  di  Costa,
which  is  the  beginning  of  Slavonia.  I  saw  upon  my
right  hand,  a  round  Rocke  of  a  great  height,  in  forme  of
a  Pyramide.

A  little  beyond  that  Rocke,  I  saw  the  three  lies
Tremiti :  The  chiefest  whereof  is  called  Teucria,  but  they
are  vulgarly  called  the  lies  of  Diomedes,  who  was  King

454

WILLIAM LITHGOW  ad.

1614.

of  Etolia.  They  are  right  opposite  to  Mount  Gargano,
now  called  Saint  Angelo,  and  distant  from  the  maine  land
of  Pulia  in  Italie  about  nine  miles.

The  poore  Slavonians  being  fatigated  in  their  hunger-
starving  Boat,  with  extraordinary  paines  (for  we  had  three
dayes  calme,  which  is  not  usually  seene  in  these  Seas)
were  inforced  to  repose  all  night,  at  the  barren  He  of
Saint  Andrew.  This  He  is  of  Circuit  foure  miles  but  Saint  Andrew.
not  Inhabited :  the  excessive  Raine  that  fell  in  the  Even-
ing made  us  goe  on  shoare,  to  seeke  the  coverture  of  some
Rocke ;  which  found,  wee  lay  all  night  on  hard  stones,
and  with  hungry  bellies  :  for  our  provision  was  spent.
The  breach  of  day  giving  comfort  to  our  distressed
bodies,  with  favourable  windes  at  the  Garboe  ponente,
we  set  forward,  and  about  midday  wee  arrived  in  the
Port  of  Lesina,  of  which  the  He  taketh  the  name.

This  He  of  Lesina  is  of  Circuit,  a  hundred  and  fiftie  Ik  Lesina.
miles,  and  is  the  biggest  Hand  in  the  Adriaticke  Sea.  It
is  exceeding  fertile  and  yeeldeth  all  things  plentifully,
that  is  requisite  for  the  sustenance  of  man.  The  Citie  is
unwalled,  and  of  no  great  quantitie,  but  they  have  a  strong
fortresse,  which  defendeth  the  Towne,  the  Haven,  and
the  vessels  in  the  rode.  The  Governour  who  was  a
Venetian,  after  he  had  enquired  of  my  intended  Voyage,
most  courteously  invited  me  three  times  to  his  Table,  in
the  time  of  my  five  dayes  staying  there.  And  at  the  last
meeting,  he  reported  the  storie  of  a  marvellous  mis-
hapen  Creature  borne  in  the  Hand,  asking,  if  I  would  goe
thither  to  see  it :  Wherewith  (when  I  perfitely  understood
the  matter)  I  was  contented :  The  Gentleman  honoured
me  also  with  his  company,  and  a  Horse  to  ride  on,  where
when  we  came,  the  Captaine  called  for  the  Father  of  that
Monster,  to  bring  him  forth  before  us.  Which  unnaturall  A  Monster
Child  being  brought,  I  was  amazed  in  that  sight,  to  behold  bornf  %n
the  deformitie  of  Nature  ;  for  below  the  middle  part  there  £/'***'
was  but  one  Bodie,  and  above  the  middle  there  was  two
living  Soules,  each  one  seperated  from  another  with
severall  members. Their  heads  were  both  of  one  big-

455

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1614.

nesse,  but  different  in  Phisnomie :  The  belly  of  the  one
joyned  with  the  posteriour  part  of  the  other,  and  their
faces  looked  both  one  way,  as  if  the  one  had  carried  the
other  on  his  back,  and  often  before  our  eyes,  hee  that  was
behind,  would  lay  his  hands  about  the  necke  of  the  for-
most.  Their  eyes  were  exceeding  big,  and  their  hands
greater  then  an  Infant  of  three  times  their  age.  The
excrements  of  both  Creatures,  issued  forth  at  one  place,
and  their  thighes  and  legges  of  a  great  growth,  not
semblable  to  their  Age,  being  but  sixe  and  thirtie  dayes
old ;  and  their  feet  were  proportionably  made  like  to  the
foot  of  a  Camell,  round,  and  cloven  in  the  middest.
They  received  their  food  with  an  insatiable  desire,  and
continually  mourned  with  a  pitifull  noise ;  that  sorrow-
full  man  told  us,  that  when  the  one  slept,  the  other
awaked,  which  was  a  strange  disagreement  in  Nature.
The  Mother  of  them  bought  deerly  that  birth,  with  the
losse  of  her  owne  life ;  and  as  her  Husband  reported,
unspeakable  was  that  torment  shee  endured,  in  that  woful-
wrestling  paine.  I  was  also  informed  afterwards,  tha,t
this  one  or  rather  twofold  wretch  lived  but  a  short  while.

I  hired  a  Fisher-boat  to  goe  over  to  Clissa,  being
twelve  miles  distant.  This  He  of  Clissa  is  of  length
twentie,  and  of  circuit  three  score  miles :  It  is  beautified
with  two  profitable  Sea-ports,  and  under  the  Signiorie  of
Venice.  Upon  the  South-side  of  this  Hand  lyeth  the  lie
Pelagusa.

Departing from thence in a Carmoesalo bound to

[II.  x.  1835.]  Ragusa,  wee  sayled  by  the  three  lies  Brisca,  Placa,  Igezi ;
And  when  we  entred  into  the  Gulfe  of  Cataro,  we  fetched

Melida.  up  the  sight  of  the  lie  Melida,  called  of  old  Meligna.

Before  wee  could  attaine  unto  the  Haven,  wherein  our
purpose  was  to  stay  all  night,  we  were  assayled  on  a
sodaine  with  a  deadly  storme :  Insomuch  that  every
swallowing  wave  threatened  our  death,  and  bred  in  our
brests  an  intermingled  sorrow  of  feare  and  hope.  The
winds  becomming  calme,  and  our  desired  safetie  enjoyed,
we  set  forward  in  the  Gulfe  of  Cataro,  and  sayled  by  the

456

WILLIAM L1THGOW  a.d.

1614.

Ila  Curzola. In  this  Hand  I  saw  a  walled  Towne  called  Curzola.

Curzola,  which  hath  two  strong  Fortresses  to  guard  it.

It  is  both  commodious  for  the  traffique  of  Merchandise

they  have,  and  also  for  the  fine  Wood  that  groweth  there,

whereof  the  Venetian  Ships  and  Gallies  are  made : An

Hand  no  lesse  delightfull  then  profitable ; and  the  two

Governours thereof, are changed every eighteene

moneths,  by  the  State  of  Venice.

It  was  of  old  called,  Curcura,  Melana,  and  of  some
Concira  nigra,  but  by  the  Modernes,  Gurzola.  Continu-
ing our  course,  wee  passed  by  the  lies  Sabionzello,  Tor-
quolla,  and  Catza  Augusta,  appertaining  to  the  Republike
of  Ragusa.  They  are  all  three  well  inhabited,  and  fruit-
fall,  yeelding  Cornes,  Wines,  and  certaine  rare  kindes  of
excellent  Fruits.  It  is  dangerous  for  great  Vessels  to
come  neare  their  Coasts,  because  of  the  hidden  shelves
that  lie  off  in  the  Sea,  called  Augustini,  where  divers  ships
have  beene  cast  away  in  foule  weather ;  upon  the  second
day  after  our  loosing  from  Clissa,  we  arrived  at  Ragusa.

Ragusa  is  a  Common-weale  governed  by  Senators,  and  Ragusa.
a  Senate  Counsell :  It  is  wonderfull  strong,  and  also  well
guarded,  being  scituate  by  the  Sea-side,  it  hath  a  fine
Haven  and  many  goodly  shippes  thereunto  belonging.
The  greatest  Trarrique  they  have,  is  with  the  Genueses.
Their  Territorie  in  the  firme  land  is  not  much,  in  respect
of  the  neighbouring  Turkes,  but  they  have  certaine  com-
modious Hands,  which  to  them  are  profitable.  And  not-
withstanding of  the  great  strength  and  riches  they
possesse,  yet  for  their  better  safegard  and  liberty,  they  pay
a  yeerely  tribute  unto  the  great  Turke,  amounting  to
fourteene  thousand  Chickenes  of  Gold  :  yea,  and  also  they
pay  yeerely  a  tributarie  pension  unto  the  Venetians,  for
the  lies  reserved  by  them  in  the  Adriaticall  Gulfe.  The
most  part  of  the  civill  Citizens,  have  but  the  halfe  of
their  heads  bare,  but  the  baser  sort  are  all  shaven.

This  Citie  is  the  Metropolitan  of  the  Kingdome  of
Slavonia. Slavonia  was  first  called  Liburnia,  next  Iliria,  Slavonie.
of  Ilirio  the  sonne  of  Cadmus  :  But  lastly,  named  Slavonia,

457

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1614.

of  certaine  Slaves,  that  came  from  Sarmatia  passing  the
River  Danubio,  in  the  time  of  the  Emperour  Justinian.
So  much  as  is  called  Slavonia,  extendeth  from  the  River
Arsa  in  the  West,  the  River  Drino  in  the  East,  on  the
South  bordereth  with  the  Gulfe  of  Venice,  and  on  the
North  with  the  Mountaines  of  Croatia :  These  Moun-
taines  divide  also  Ragusa  from  Bosna.

The  next  two  speciall  Cities  in  that  Kingdome,  are
Sabenica  and  Salona.  The  Slavonians  are  of  a  robust
Nature,  Martiall,  and  valiant  fellowes,  and  a  great  helpe
to  maintaine  the  right  and  libertie  of  the  Venetian  state.
From  Ragusa  I  embarqued  in  a  Tartareta,  loaden  with
Cornes,  and  bound  to  Corfu,  being  three  hundred  miles
distant.

In  all  this  way  we  found  no  Hand,  but  sayled  along  the
maine  land  of  the  Ilirian  shoare  :  having  passed  the  Gulfe
of  Cataro,  and  Capo  di  Fortuna,  I  saw  Castello  novo,
which  is  a  strong  Fortresse,  scituate  on  the  top  of  a
Rocke :  wherein  one  Barbarisso,  the  Captaine  of  Soly-
man,  starved  to  death  foure  thousand  Spaniards.  Having
left  Ilyria  and  Valona  behind  us,  wee  sayled  by  Capo  di
Palone.  This  high  land  is  the  furthest  part  of  the  Gulfe
of  Venice,  and  opposite  against  Capo  di  Sancta  Maria,  in
Pulia,  each  one  in  sight  of  another,  and  fourteene  leagues
distant.  Continuing  our  Navigation,  we  entred  into  the
Sea  Ionium,  and  sayled  along  the  Coast  of  Epire,  which
was  the  famous  Kingdome  of  the  Epirotes.  This  is
the  first  land  of  Greece,  and  upon  the  sixt  day  after  our
departure  from  Ragusa,  we  arrived  at  Corfu.
Corfu.  Corfu  is  an  Hand,  no  lesse  beautifull  then  invincible :

it  lyeth  in  the  Sea  Ionean,  the  Inhabitants  are  Greekes,
and  the  Governours  Venetians.  This  lie  was  much
honoured  by  Homer,  for  the  pleasant  Gardens  of  Alcivo,
which  were  in  his  time  :  it  is  of  Circuit  one  hundred  and
twentie,  and  fiftie  miles  in  bredth.  The  Citie  Corfu,
T  from  which  the  He  hath  the  name,  is  scituate  at  the  foot

Castles  in  the  °f  a  Mountaine,  whereupon  are  builded  two  strong  For-
lle  Corfu. tresses,  and  invironed  with  a  naturall  Rocke : the  one

458

WILLIAM LITHGOW  a.d.

1614.

is  called  Fortezza  nova,  and  the  other  Fortezza  vechia :
they  are  well  governed  and  circumspectly  kept,  least  by
the  instigation  of  the  one  Captaine,  the  other  should
commit  some  treasonable  effects :  and  for  the  same  pur-
pose, the  Governours  of  both  Castles,  at  their  Election,
before  the  Senatours  of  Venice  are  sworne ;  neither  pri-
vatly  nor  openly  to  have  mutuall  Conference ;  nor  to
write  one  to  another  for  the  space  of  two  yeares,  which  is
the  time  of  their  Government.  These  Castles  are  inac-
cessable  and  unconquerable,  if  that  the  Keepers  be  loyall,
and  provided  with  Naturall  and  Martiall  furniture.  They
are  vulgarly  called,  The  Forts  of  Christendome,  by  the
Greekes  ;  but  more  justly,  The  strength  of  Venice  :  for  if
these  Castles  were  taken  by  the  Turkes,  the  Trade  of  the
Venetian  Merchants  would  bee  of  none  account ;  yea,
the  very  meane  to  overthrow  Venice  it  selfe.

From  thence,  I  embarked  in  a  Greekish  Carmoesalo,
with  a  great  number  of  passengers,  Greekes,  Slavonians,
Italians,  Armenians,  and  Jewes,  that  were  all  mindfull  to
Zante.

Biding  farewell  to  Zante,  I  embarked  in  a  Frigato
going  to  Petrasso  in  Morea,  which  is  called  Peloponnesus  :  [u.  x.  1836.]
and  by  the  way  in  the  Gulfe  Lepanto  (which  divideth
Etolia  and  Morea :  the  chiefest  Citie  in  Etolia  is  called
Lepanto :  from  thence  Westward  by  the  Sea-side,  is
Delphos,  famous  for  the  Oracle  of  Apollo)  wee  sayled  by
the  lies  Echinidi,  but  by  Moderne  Writers,  Curzolari :
where  the  Christians  obtained  the  Victorie  against  the
Turkes,  for  there  did  they  fight,  after  this  manner.

In  the  yeere 1571. and the  sixth of  October, John  The  Battell
Duke  of  Austria,  Generall  for  the  Spanish  Gallies,  Marco  betweene  the
Antonio  Colonna,  for  Pope  Pio  Quinto  ; and  Sebastiano
Veniece,  for  the  Venetian  Armie,  convened  altogether  in  i7panto
Largostolo  at  Cephalonia :  having  of  all  two  hundred  and
eight  Gallies,  sixe  Galliasses,  and  five  and  twentie  Frigots.
After  a  most  resolute  deliberation,  these  three  Generals
went  with  a  valiant  courage  to  encounter  with  the  Turkish
Armado,  on  the  Sunday  morning  the  seventh  of  October :

459

Christians  and
Turkes  at

A.D.

[614.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

who  in  the  end  through  the  helpe  of  Christ,  obtayned  a
glorious  Victorie.  In  that  Fight  there  was  taken  and
Drowned  one  hundred  and  eightie  of  Turkish  Gallies ;
and  there  escaped  about  the  number  of  sixe  hundred  and
fiftie  Ships,  Gallies,  Galeotes,  and  other  Vessels :  there
was  fifteene  thousand  Turkes  killed,  and  foure  thousand
taken  Prisoners,  and  twelve  thousand  Christians  delivered
from  their  slavish  Bondage.  In  all,  the  Christians  but
loosed  eleven  Gallies,  and  five  thousand  slaine.  At  their
returne  to  Largostolo,  after  this  victorious  Battell,  the
three  Generals  divided  innumerable  spoyles,  to  their  well-
deserving  Captaines  and  worthy  Souldiers.

After  my  arrivall  in  Peterasso,  the  Metropolitan  of
Peloponnesus,  I  left  the  turmoyling  dangers  of  the  indi-
cated lies  of  the  Ionean  and  Adriaticall  Seas,  and  advised
to  travell  in  the  firme  Land  of  Greece,  with  a  Caravan  of
Greekes  that  was  bound  for  Athens.  But  before  hee
admitted  me  into  his  companie,  he  was  wonderfull  inquisi-
tive, for  what  cause  I  travelled  alone  ?  and  of  what  Nation
I  was?  To  whom  I  soberly  excused,  and  discovered  my
selfe  with  modest  answers.  Which  pacified  his  curiositie ;
but  not  his  avaritious  minde :  for  under  a  pretended  pro-
tection he  had  of  me,  hee  extorted  the  most  part  of  my
money  from  my  purse,  without  any  regard  of  Con-
science.
[II.  x.  1837.]  In  the  first,  second,  and  third  daies  Journeying,  we  had
faire  way,  hard  lodging,  but  good  cheere,  and  kind  enter-
tainment for  our  money  :  But  on  the  fourth  day,  when  wee
entred  in  the  Hilly  and  barren  Countrie  of  Arcadia  ;  for  a
daies  Journie  we  had  no  Village,  but  saw  abundance  of  Cat-
tell  without  Keepers.  In  this  Desart  way,  I  beheld  many
singular  Monuments,  and  ruinous  Castles,  whose  names
I  knew  not,  because  I  had  an  ignorant  Guide :  But  this  I
remember,  amongst  these  Rockes  my  belly  was  pinched,
and  wearied  was  my  bodie,  with  the  climbing  of  fastidious
Mountaines,  which  bred  no  small  griefe  to  my  breast.
Yet  notwithstanding  of  my  distresse,  the  remembrance  of
these  sweet  seasoned  Songs  of  Arcadian  Shepherds,  which

460

Although
Arcadia  in
former  times
was  pleasant,
yet  it  is  now
for  the  most
part  wast  and
disinhabited.

WILLIAM LITHGOW  a.d.

1614.

pregnant  Poets  have  so  well  penned,  did  recreate  my
fatigated  corps,  with  many  sugred  suppositions.  These
sterile  bounds  being  past,  we  entred  in  the  Easterne  Plaine
of  Morea,  called  anciently  Sparta,  where,  that  sometimes
famous  Citie  of  Lacedemon  flourished,  but  now  sacked,  Lacedemon  in
and  the  lumpes  of  ruines  and  memorie  onely  remaynes.  sParta-
Marching  thus,  wee  left  Modena,  and  Napoli  on  our  right
hand,  toward  the  Sea  side,  and  on  the  sixt  day  at  night,  we
pitched  our  Tents,  in  the  disinhabited  Villages  of  Argo
and  Micene,  from  the  which  unhappie  Helene  was
ravished.  Heere  I  had  the  ground  to  be  a  Pillow,  and
the  World-wide-fields  to  bee  a  Chamber,  the  whirling-
windy-skies,  to  be  a  roofe  to  my  Winter-blasted  lodging,
and  the  humide  vapours  of  cold  Nocturna,  to  accompany
the  unwished-for-bed  of  my  repose.

In  all  this  Countrie  I  could  find  nothing,  to  answere
the  famous  Relations,  given  by  ancient  Authors,  of  the
excellencie  of  that  Land,  but  the  name  onely ;  the  bar-
barousnesse  of  Turkes  and  Time,  having  defaced  all  the
Monuments  of  Antiquitie :  No  shew  of  honour,  no
habitation  of  men  in  a  honest  fashion,  nor  possessors  of
the  Countrie  in  a  Principalitie.  But  rather  Prisoners  shut
up  in  Prisons,  or  addicted  slaves  to  cruell  and  tyrannicall
Masters.

Departing  from  Argo,  upon  the  seventh  day  wee  arrived
at  Athens :  Athens  is  still  inhabited,  standing  in  the  East  Athens.  See  of
part  of  Peloponnesus,  neere  to  the  Frontiers  of  Macedon  : lt  W  PtlSrm~
It  was  first  called  Cecropia,  and  lastly  Athens  of  Minerva.  sMorCaha-
This  Citie  was  the  Mother  and  Wel-spring  of  all  Liberall  sidas  writes
Arts  and  Sciences,  but  now  altogether  decayed :  The  cir-  that  there  are
cuit  of  old  Athens  hath  beene  according  to  the  f  undamen-  7°«  Dialects  of
tall  Wals  yet  extant  about  sixe  Italian  miles,  but  now  of  no °  £*e ,
great  quantitie,  nor  many  dwelling  Houses  therein. They  WQrst  of  which
have  abundance  of  all  things,  requisite  for  the  sustenance  is  that  of
of  humane  life,  of  which  I  had  no  small  proofe  :  for  these  Athens.
Athenians  or  Greekes, exceeding  kindly  banqueted me  Kind
foure  daies,  and  furnisht  mee  with  necessarie  provision  Athenians.,
for  my  Voyage  to  Creta. And  also  transported  mee  by

461

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGBIMES

1614.

Sea in  a  Brigandino  freely  to  Serigo,  being  foure  and
fortie  miles  distant.

Serigo  is  an  Island  in  the  Sea  Cretico.  It  was  anciently
called  Cytherea.  It  is  of  circuit  sixtie  miles,  having  but
one  Castle  called  Capsallo :  which  is  kept  by  a  Venetian
Captaine  :  here  it  is  said  that  Venus  did  first  inhabit,  and
I  saw  the  ruines  of  her  demolished  Temple  on  the  side  of  a
Mountaine  yet  extant.  A  little  more  downward  below
this  Temple  of  Venus,  are  the  relikes  of  that  Palace,
wherein  Menelaus  did  dwell,  who  was  King  of  Sparta,  and
Lord  of  this  He.  The  Greekes  of  the  He  told  me  there
Wild  Asses,  were  wild  Asses  there,  who  had  a  stone  in  their  heads,
which  was  a  sovereigne  remedie  for  the  Falling-sicknesse,
and  good  to  make  a  woman  be  quickly  delivered  of  her
birth.

THe  He  of  Candy  was  called  Creta :  It  is  a  most
famous  and  ancient  Kingdome  :  By  moderne  Writers,
it  is  called  Queene  of  the  lies  Mediterrane :  It  had  of  old
a  hundred  Cities,  whereof  it  had  the  name  Hecatompolis,
but  now  onely  foure,  Candia,  Canea,  Rethimos,  and
Scythia,  the  rest  are  but  Villages  and  Bourges.  It  is  of
length,  to  wit,  from  Capo  Ermico  in  the  West,  called  by
Plinie,  Frons  arietis,  and  Capo  Salomone  in  the  East,  two
hundred  and  fortie  miles,  large  threescore,  and  of  circuite
sixe  hundred  and  fiftie  miles.  This  is  the  chiefest
Dominion,  belonging  to  the  Venetian  Republike  :  In  every
one  of  these  foure  Cities  there  is  a  Governour,  and  two
A  description  Counsellors,  sent  from  Venice  every  two  yeeres.  The
ofCandie.  Countrey  is  divided  into  foure  parts,  under  the  jurisdiction
See  the  Map,  Qf  tjje  foure  Cities,  for  the  better  administration  of
S\tfTg'  Justice :  and  they  have  a  Generall,  who  commonly
remayneth  in  the  Citie  of  Candie  (like  to  a  Vice-roy)  who
deposeth  or  imposeth  Magistrates,  Capitaines,  Souldiers,
Officers,  and  others  whatsoever,  in  the  behalfe  of  Saint
Marke,  or  Duke  of  Venice.  The  Venetians  detaine  con-
tinually a  strong  Guard,  divided  in  Companies,  Squadrons,
and  Garrisons,  in  the  Cities  and  Fortresses  of  the  Hand :

462

WILLIAM LITHGOW  a.d.

1614.

which  doe  extend  to  the  number  of  twelve  thousand
Souldiers  kept,  not  only  for  the  incursion  of  Turkes,  but
also  for  feare  of  the  Cretans  or  Inhabitants,  who  would
rather  if  they  could  (as  some  say)  render  to  the  Turke,
then  to  live  under  the  subjection  of  Venice.  This  He
produceth  the  best  Malvosey,  Muscadine,  and  Leaticke,
that  supposedly  are  in  the  World.  It  yeeldeth  Orenges,
Limons,  Melons,  Citrons  Grenadiers,  Adams  Apples,
Raisins,  Olives,  Dates,  Honey,  Sugar,  Vua  di  tre  Volte,
and  all  other  kinds  of  fruit  in  abundance.  But  the  most
part  of  their  Cornes  are  brought  yeerely  from  Archipelago
and  Greece.  This  much  of  the  lie  in  generall ;  and  now
in  respect  of  my  travelling  two  times  through  the  bounds
of  the  whole  Kingdome,  which  was  never  before  atchieved
by  any  Traveller  of  Christendome ;  I  will  as  briefly  as  I
can  in  particular  relate  a  few  of  these  miseries  indured  by
me  in  this  Land,  with  the  nature  and  qualitie  of  the
people.

This  aforesaid  Carabusa,  is  the  principall  Fortresse  of  [II.  x.  1838.]
Creta,  being  of  it  selfe  invincible,  and  is  not  unlike  to
the  Castle  of  Dunbertan,  which  standeth  at  the  mouth
of  Clyd ; upon  which  River  the  most  worthy  renowmed,
and  anciently  ennobled  Citie  of  Lanerke  is  situated  :  For  The  old  and
it  is  environed  with  a  Rocke  higher  then  the  wals,  and  Amous  Cttte  of
joyneth with Capo Ermico : having learned of the anet
Theevish  way,  I  had  to  Canea,  I  advised  to  put  my  money
in  exchange,  which  the  Captaine  of  that  strength,  very
courteously  performed ; And  would  also  have  diswaded
mee  from  my  purpose,  but  I  by  no  perswasion  of  him
would stay. From thence departing, scarcely was 1
advanced  twelve  miles  in  my  way,  when  I  was  beset  on
the skirt of a Rockie Mountaine, with three Greeke
Renegadoes,  and  an  Italian  Bandido : who  laying  hands
on  me,  beat  me  most  cruelly,  robbed  me  of  all  my  clothes,
and  stripped  me  naked,  using  many  invective  speeches.
At  last,  the  Italian  perceiving  I  was  a  stranger,  and  could
not  speake  the  Cretan  Tongue,  began  to  aske  mee  in  his
owne  Language,  where  was  my money? To  whom I

463

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1614.

soberly  answered,  I  had  no  more  then  he  saw,  which  was
eightie  Bagantines :  But  he  not  giving  credit  to  these
words,  searched  all  my  clothes,  and  Budgeto,  yet  found
nothing  except  my  Linnen,  and  Letters  of  recommenda-
tion, I  had  from  divers  Princes  of  Christendome :  Which
A  happie  deli-  when  he  saw,  did  moove  him  to  compassion,  and  earnestly
verancefrom  entreated  tne  other  three  Theeves  to  grant  me  mercie
and  save  my  life :  A  long  deliberation  being  ended,  they
restored  backe  againe  my  Pilgrimes  clothes,  and  Letters,
but  my  blue  Gowne  and  Bagantines  they  kept :  Such  also
was  their  theevish  courtesie  toward  mee,  that  for  my  better
safegard  in  the  way,  they  gave  me  a  stamped  piece  of
Clay,  as  a  token  to  shew  any  of  their  companions,  if  I
encountred  with  them  ;  for  they  were  about  twentie  Rascals
of  a  confederate  band,  that  lay  in  this  Desart  passage.
Leaving  them  with  many  counterfeit  thankes,  I  travelled
that  day  seven  and  thirtie  miles,  and  at  night  attained  to
the  unhappy  Village  of  Pickhorno :  where  I  could  have
neither  meate,  drinke,  lodging,  nor  any  refreshment  to
my  wearied  bodie.  These  desperate  Candiots  thronged
about  mee  gazing  (as  though  astonished)  to  see  mee  both
want  companie,  and  their  Language,  and  by  their  cruell
lookes,  they  seemed  to  bee  a  barbarous  and  uncivill  people.
For  all  these  High-landers  of  Candie,  are  tyrannicall,
bloud-thirstie,  and  deceitfull.  The  consideration  of
which,  made  me  to  shun  their  villanie,  and  privately
sought  for  a  secure  place  of  repose  in  a  darke  Cave  by  the
Seaside ;  in  which  I  lay  till  morning  with  a  crazed  bodie,
and  hungrie  belly.

Upon  the  appearing  of  the  next  Aurora  I  embraced  my
Canea.  unknowne  way,  and  about  midday  came  to  Canea  :  Canea

is  the  second  Citie  of  Creete,  exceeding  populous,  well
walled,  and  fortified  with  Bulwarkes :  It  hath  a  large
Castle,  contayning  ninety  seven  Palaces,  in  which  the
Rector  and  other  Venetian  Gentlemen  dwell.  There  lie
continually  in  it  seven  Companies  of  Souldiers,  who  keepe
Centinell  on  the  wals,  guard  the  Gates,  and  Market  places
of  the  Cities  :  Neither  in  this  Towne  nor  Candia,  may  any

464

oroha  tietines c

. .  ,  .  "Jhtiriiim

j ! i.  ivy, -  : V; et

Meridi **

HONDIUS HIS MAP OF MOREA

WILLIAM LITHGOW  a.d.

1614.

Countrey  Peasant  enter  with  weapons  (especially  Harque-
buzes)  for  that  conceived  feare  they  have  of  Treason.
Truly  this  Citie  may  equall  in  strength,  either  Zara  in
Dalmatia,  or  Luka,  or  Ligorne,  both  in  Tuscana :  for
these  foure  Cities  are  so  strong,  that  in  all  my  travels  I  Fo^re  strong
never  saw  them  matched.  They  are  all  well  provided
with  Artillery,  and  all  necessary  things  for  their  defence,
especially  Luka,  which  continually  reserves  in  store  pro-
vision of  victuals  for  twelve  yeeres  siege.  Being  here
disappointed  of  transportation  to  Archipelago,  I  advised
to  visit  Candie  :  and  in  my  way  I  saw  the  large  Haven  of
Suda,  which  hath  no  Towne  or  Village,  save  onely  a
Castle,  situated  on  a  Rocke  in  the  Sea,  at  the  entry  of  the
Bay :  the  bounds  of  that  Harbour  may  receive  at  one
time  above  two  thousand  ships  and  Gallies,  -.md  is  the
onely  Key  of  the  Hand :  for  the  which  place,  the  King  of
Spaine  hath  oft  offered  an  infinite  deale  of  money  to  the
Venetians,  whereby  his  Navie  which  sometimes  resort  in
the  Levante,  might  have  accesse  and  reliefe ;  but  they
would  never  grant  him  his  request.

Upon  the  third  dayes  journey  from  Canea,  I  came  to
Rethimos  ;  This  Citie  is  somewhat  ruinous,  and  unwalled,  Rethlmos.
but  the  Citizens  have  newly  builded  a  strong  Fortresse,
which  defendeth  them  from  the  invasion  of  Pirates  :  it
standeth  by  the  Sea  side,  and  in  the  yeere  1597.  it  was
miserably  sacked,  and  burned  with  Turkes.  Continuing
my  Voyage,  I  passed  along  the  skirt  of  Mount  Ida,  accom-
panied with  Greekes  who  could  speake  the  Italian  Tongue,
on  which,  first  they  shewed  me  the  Cave  of  King  Minos,  Minos.
but  some  hold  it  to  be  the  Sepulchre  of  Jupiter.  That
Groto  is  of  length  eightie  paces,  and  eight  large :  This
Minos  was  said  to  be  the  Brother  of  Radamanthus,  and
Sarpedon  ;  who,  after  their  succession  to  the  Kingdome,
established  such  equitable  lawes,  that  by  Poets  they  are
feigned  to  be  the  Judges  of  Hell.  I  saw  also  there,  the
place  where  Jupiter  (as  they  say)  was  nourished  by
Amalthes,  which  by  Greekes  is  recited,  as  well  as  Latine
Poets. Thirdly,  they  shewed  me  the  Temple  of  Saturne,  Saturne.

X  465  2G

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGKIMES

1614.

which  is  a  worke  to  be  admired,  of  such  Antiquitie,  and  as
yet  undecayed ;  who  (say  they)  was  the  first  King  that
inhabited  there.  And  neere  to  it,  is  the  demolished
Temple  of  Matelia,  having  this  superscription  above  the
doore,  yet  to  be  seene  Make  cleane  your  feet,  wash  your
Labyrinth  of  head  and  enter.  Fourthly,  I  saw  the  entrie  to  the  Laby-
Lrete.  rinth  of  Dedalus,  which  I  would  gladly  have  better  viewed,

but  because  wee  had  no  Candlelight,  we  durst  not  enter :
for  there  are  many  hollow  places  within  it ;  so  that  if  a
man  stumble,  or  fall,  he  can  hardly  be  rescued  :  It  is  cut
forth  with  many  intricating  wayes,  on  the  face  of  a  little
hill,  joyning  with  Mount  Ida.
[II.  x.  1839.]  Mount  Ida  is  the  highest  Mountaine  in  Creta,  and  by
*  the  computation  of  Shepherds  feete,  amounteth  to  sixe

miles  of  height :  It  is  over-clad  even  to  the  top  with
Cypresse  trees,  and  good  store  of  medicinable  herbs :
insomuch  that  the  beasts  which  feed  thereupon,  have  their
teeth  gilded,  like  to  the  colour  of  Gold :  It  is  said  by
some  Historians,  that  no  venemous  animall  can  live  in  this
He  ;  but  I  saw  the  contrarie  :  for  I  kild  upon  one  day  two
Serpents  and  a  Viper :  Wherefore  many  build  upon  false
reports,  but  experience  teacheth  men  the  truth.  Descend-
ing from  this  Mountaine,  I  entred  in  a  faire  Plaine
beautified  with  many  Villages ;  in  one  of  which  I  found
a  Grecian  Bishop,  who  kindly  presented  me  with  Grapes
of  Malvasie,  and  other  things,  for  it  was  in  the  time  of
their  Vintage.  To  carrie  these  things  hee  had  given  mee,
hee  caused  to  make  readie  an  Asse,  and  a  Servant,  who
went  with  mee  to  Candie,  which  was  more  then  fifteene
miles  from  his  House.  True  it  is,  that  the  best  sort  of
Greekes,  in  visiting  other,  doe  not  use  to  come  emptie
handed,  neither  will  they  suffer  a  stranger  to  depart,
without  both  gifts  and  Convoy.
Candle.  Candie  is  a  large  and  famous  Citie,  situated  on  a  Plaine

by  the  Sea  side,  having  a  goodly  Haven  for  ships,  and  a
faire  Arsenall  wherein  are  six  and  thirtie  Gallies :  It  is
exceeding  strong,  and  daily  guarded  with  two  thousand
Souldiers, and the Wals in compasse are about three

466

WILLIAM LITHGOW  a.d.

1614.

leagues :  Candie  is  distant  from  Venice  thirteene  thousand
miles,  from  Constantinople  seven  hundred,  from  Fama-
gosta  in  Cyprus  sixe  hundred,  from  Alexandria  in  iEgypt
five  hundred,  and  from  the  Citie  of  Jerusalem  nine
hundred  miles.  The  Candeots  through  all  the  Hand,  make
Mustars  every  eighth  day,  before  the  Serjant  Majors,  or
Officers  of  the  Generall,  and  are  well  provided  with  all
sorts  of  Armour ;  yea,  and  the  most  valorous  people  that
hight  the  name  of  Greekes.  It  was  told  me  by  the
Rector  of  Candie,  that  they  may  raise  in  Armes  of  the
Inhabitants  (not  reckoning  the  Garrisons)  above  sixtie  Note.
thousand  men,  all  able  for  Warres,  with  fiftie  foure  Gallies,
and  twentie  foure  Galleots  for  the  Sea.  In  all  my  travels
through  this  Realme,  I  never  could  see  a  Greeke  come
forth  of  his  house  unarmed :  and  after  such  a  martiall
manner,  that  on  his  head  hee  weareth  a  bare  Steele  Cap,  a
Bow  in  his  hand,  a  long  Sword  by  his  side,  a  broad  Poynard
overthwart  his  belly,  and  a  round  Target  hanging  at  his
Girdle.  They  are  not  costly  in  Apparell,  for  they  weare
but  Linnen  Clothes,  and  use  no  Shooes,but  Bootes  of  white
Leather :  by  nature  they  are  craftie  and  subtile,  as  Paul
mentioneth,  Titus,  1.  12.  Their  Harvest  is  our  Spring:
for  they  manure  the  ground,  and  sow  the  Seed  in  October,
which  is  reaped  in  March  and  Aprill.  Being  frustrate  of
my  intention  at  Candie,  I  was  forced  to  returne  to  Canea,
where  I  stayed  five  and  twentie  dayes  before  I  could  get
passage,  for  I  purposed  to  view  Constantinople.  I
travelled  on  foot  in  this  He  more  then  foure  hundred
miles,  and  upon  the  fiftie  day  after  my  first  comming  to
Carabusa,  I  embarked  in  a  Fisher-boate  that  belonged  to
Milo,  being  a  hundred  miles  distant,  which  had  beene
violently  driven  thither  with  stormie  weather.

Milo  was  called  by  Aristotle,  Melada ;  and  by  others,
Mimalida,  Melos :  And  lastly,  Milo ;  because  of  the  fine
Mil-stones  that  are  got  there,  which  are  transported  to
Constantinople,  Greece,  and  Natolia.  This  He  is  one  of
the  lies  Cyclades,  or  Sporades,  but  more  commonly  Archi-  Archipelago.
pelago,  or  the  Arch-Hands,  and  standeth  in  the  beginning

467

AD-  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1614.

of  the  iEgean  Sea :  The  Inhabitants  are  Greekes,  but
slaves  to  the  Turke,  and  so  are  all  the  fifty  three  lies  of
the  Cyclades,  save  onely  Tino,  which  holdeth  of  the
Venetians.

M'll°-  From  Milo  I  came  to  Zephano,  an  Hand  of  circuit  about

twentie  miles  :  The  Inhabitants  are  poore,  yet  kind  people  :

^  There  are  an  infinite  number  of  Partridges  within  this  He,

of  a  reddish  colour,  and  bigger  then  ours  in  Britaine :
They  are  wild,  and  onely  killed  by  small  shot ; but  I  have

PtrtrifT"  seene  in  °ther  Ilands  flockes  of  them  feeding  in  the  fields,
and  usually  kept  by  Children  :  Some  others  I  have  seene
in  the  streets  of  Villages,  without  any  Keeper,  even  as

Fountains  of  our  Hens  doe  with  us.  I  saw  Fountaines  heere,  that
naturally  yeeld  fine  Oyle  which  is  the  greatest  advantage
the  Islanders  have.

From  thence  I  embarked,  and  arrived  at  Angusa,  in

Parir.  Parir :  This  lie  is  fortie  miles  long,  and  sixe  miles  broad  :

being  plentifull  enough  in  all  necessary  things  for  the  use
of  man  :  In  Angusa  I  stayed  sixteene  dayes,  stormested
with  Northerly  winds  ;  and  in  all  that  time  I  never  came  in
bed  :  for  my  lodging  was  in  a  little  Church  without  the
Village,  on  hard  stones ;  where  I  also  had  a  fire,  and
dressed  my  meate.  The  Greekes  visited  me  oftentimes,
and  intreated  me  above  all  things,  I  should  not  enter
within  the  bounds  of  their  Sanctuarie ;  because  I  was  not
of  their  Religion.  These  miserable  Islanders,  are  a  kind
of  silly  poore  people ;  which  in  their  behaviour,  shewed
the  necessitie  they  had  to  live,  rather  then  any  pleasure  in
their  living.  From  thence  I  arrived  in  the  He  of  Mecano,
where  I  but  onely  dined,  and  so  set  forward  to  Zea.
Symonides  the  Poet,  and  Eristato  the  excellent  Physician,
were  borne  in  it.  The  next  He  of  any  note  we  touched  at,
was  Tino  :  This  Hand  is  under  the  Signorie  of  Venice,  and
was  sometimes  beautified  with  the  Temple  of  Neptune.
By  Aristotle  it  was  called  Idrusa ;  of  Demosthenes  and
^Eschines,  Erusea :  It  hath  an  impregnable  Castle,  builded
on  the  top  of  a  high  Rocke ;  so  that  the  Turkes  by  no
meanes  can  conquer  it.

468

WILLIAM L1THGOW  a.d.

1614.

From  this  He  I  came  to  Palmosa,  sometime  Pathmos,  Pathmos.
which  is  a  Mountaynous  and  barren  Hand : It  was  heere
that  Saint  John  wrote  the  Revelation  after  hee  was  banished
by  Domitianus  the  Emperour. Thence  I imbarked  to  [II.  x.  1840.]
Nicaria,  and  sailed  by  the  He  Scyro ; which  of  olde  was  Nicario.
the  Signiory  of  Licomedes,  and  in  the  Habit  of  a  Woman,
was  Achilles  brought  up  heere : who  in  that  time,  begot
Pyrrhus  upon  Deidamia,  the  Daughter  of  Licomedes,  and
where  the  crafty  Ulysses  did  discover  this  fatall  Prince  to
Troy. As  we  fetched  up  the  sight  of  Nicaria,  wee  espied
two  Turkish  Galliots,  who  gave  us  the  Chace,  and  pursued
us  straight  unto  a  Bay,  betwixt  two  Mountaines,  where  we
left  the  loaden  Boat,  and  fled  to  the  Rockes :  But  in  our
flying,  the  Master  was  taken,  and  other  two  old  men ; Greekes  taken
whom  they  made  Captives  and  Slaves : and  also  seized CaPtives-
upon  the  Boat,  and  all  their  goods : The  number  that
escaped,  were  nine  persons. This  He  Nicaria,  was  anciently
called Doliche, and Ithiosa, and is somewhat barren ;
having  no  Sea-port  at  all :  It  was  here,  the  Poets  feigned,
that  Icarus  the  Sonne  of  Dedalus  fell,  when  as  hee  tooke  Icarus.
flight  from  Creta,  with  his  borrowed  wings,  of  whom  it
hath the name. Expecting certaine dayes here, in a
Village  called  Laphantos, for  passage  to Sio, at  last I
found  a  Brigandino  bound  thither,  that  was  come  from  the
fruitfull He of Stalimene, of  old  Lemnons, wherein I
imbarked,  and  sailed by  the  He  Samos,  which  is  opposite
to  Caria,  in  Asia  Minor :  It  is  of  circuit  one  hundred  and
sixtie,  and  of  length  fortie  miles : It  was  of  old  named
Drivsa, and Melanphilo, in  which  was  Pythagoras  the
Philosopher,  and  Lycaon  the  excellent  Musitioner  borne.

As  we  left  the  lie  Veneco  on  our  left  hand,  and  entred
the  Gulfe  betweene  Sio  and  Eolida,  there  fell  downe  a
deadly  storme,  at  the  Greco  e  Levante,  which  split  our
Mast,  carrying  Sailes  and  all  over-boord :  Whereupon
every  man  looked  (as  it  were)  with  the  stampe  of  death
in  his  pale  visage.  The  tempest  continuing  (our  Boat  not  shipwrack.
being  able  to  keepe  the  Seas)  wee  were  constrained  to
seeke  into  a  Creeke  betwixt  two  Rockes,  for  safetie  of  our

469

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1614.

lives ;  where,  when  wee  entred,  there  was  no  likelihood
of  reliefe  :  for  we  had  a  shelfie  shoare,  and  giving  ground
to  the  Anchors,  they  came  both  home.  The  sorrowfull
Master  seeing  nothing  but  shipwracke,  tooke  the  Helme  in
hand,  directing  his  course  to  rush  upon  the  face  of  a  low
Rocke,  whereupon  the  Sea  most  fearefully  broke.  As
wee  touched,  the  Mariners  contending  who  should  first
leape  out,  some  fell  overboord,  and  those  that  got  Land,
were  pulled  backe  by  the  reciprocating  waves :  Neither
in  all  this  time  durst  I  once  move ;  for  they  had  formerly
sworne,  if  I  pressed  to  escape,  before  the  rest  were  first
forth,  they  would  throw  me  head-long  into  the  Sea :  So
being  two  wayes  in  danger  of  death,  I  patiently  offered  up
my  Prayers  to  God.

At  our  first  incounter  with  the  Rockes  (our  fore-deckes,
and  Boates  Gallerie  being  broke,  and  a  great  Lake  made)
the  recoyling  waves  brought  us  backe  from  the  shelfes
a  great  way ;  which  the  poore  Master  perceiving,  and
that  there  were  seven  men  drowned,  and  eleven  persons
alive,  cried  with  a  loud  voice :  Be  of  good  courage,  take
up  Oares,  and  row  hastily ;  it  may  bee,  before  the  Barke
sinke,  we  shall  attaine  to  yonder  Cave.  Every  man
working  for  his  owne  deliverance  (as  it  pleased  God)  we
got  the  same  with  good  fortune :  for  no  sooner  were  we
disbarked,  but  the  Boat  immediately  sunke.  There  was
nothing  saved  but  my  Cofrino,  which  I  kept  alwaies  in  my
armes ;  for  the  which  safetie  of  my  things,  the  Greekes
were  in  admiration.  In  this  Cave,  which  was  thirtie
paces  long,  within  the  Mountaine,  we  abode  three  daies,
without  both  meate  and  drinke :  upon  the  fourth  day  at
morne,  the  tempest  ceasing,  there  came  Fisher-boates  to
relieve  us,  who  found  the  ten  Greekes  almost  famished
for  lacke  of  foood.

The  dead  men  being  found  on  shoare,  we  buried  them,
and  I  learned  at  that  instant  time,  there  were  seventeene
Boats  cast  away  on  the  Coast  of  this  Hand,  and  never  a
man  saved  :  in  this  place  the  Greekes  set  up  a  stone  Crosse
in  the  memoriall  of  such  a  wofull  mischance,  and  mourned

470

WILLIAM LITHGOW  a.d.

1614.
heavily,  fasting  and  praying.  I  rejoycing,  and  thanking
God  for  my  safetie  (leaving  them  sorrowing  for  their
friends  and  goods)  tooke  Journey  through  the  Hand  to
Sio :  for  so  is  the  Citie  called.  In  my  way  I  past  by  an
old  Castle  standing  on  a  little  Hill,  named  Gasbos,  or
Helias ;  where  (as  I  was  informed  by  two  Greekes  in  my
company)  the  Sepulchre  of  Homer  was  yet  extant :  for  this  The  Tombe  of
is  one  of  the  seven  lies  that  contended  for  his  birth  :  and  I  Homr-
willing  to  see  it,  entreated  them  to  accompany  me  thither ;
where,  when  we  came,  we  descended  by  sixteene  degrees
into  a  darke  Cell ;  and  passing  that,  we  entred  in  another
foure  squared  Roome,  in  which  I  saw  an  ancient  Tombe,
whereon  were  ingraven  Greeke  Letters,  which  we  could
not  understand  for  their  Antiquitie ;  but  whether  it  was
this  Tombe  or  not,  I  doe  not  know,  but  this  they  related.

The  Women  of  the  Citie  Sio,  are  the  most  beautifull
Dames,  of  all  the  Greekes  in  the  World,  and  greatly  given
to  Venery :  They  are  for  the  most  part  exceeding  proud,  The  pride  of
and  sumptuous  in  apparell,  and  commonly  goe  (even  Oreekish
Artificers  Wives)  in  Gownes  of  Sattin  and  TarTetay ;  yea  whoores-
of  Cloth  of  Silver  and  Gold,  and  are  adorned  with  Precious
Stones  and  Gemmes,  and  Jewels  about  their  neckes  and
hands.  Their  Husbands  are  their  Pandors,  and  when
they  see  any  stranger  arrive,  they  will  presently  demand
of  him,  if  hee  would  have  a  Mistris :  and  so  they  make
Whoores  of  their  owne  wives,  and  are  contented  for  a
little  gaine,  to  weare  Homes :  such  are  the  base  mindes  of
ignominious  Cuckolds :  After  some  certaine  dayes  attend-
ance, I  imbarked  in  a  Carmoesalo,  bound  for  Nigroponti,
which  was  forth  of  my  way  to  Constantinople,  but  because
I  would  gladly  have  seene  Macedonia,  I  followed  that
determination :  In  our  way  wee  sayled  by  Mytelene,  an
Hand  of  olde  called  Isa  :  next  Lesbos  :  and  lastly  Mytelene,
of  Milet  the  Sonne  of  Phoebus.

Nigroponti  is  separated  from  the  firme  Land  of  Thes-  [II.x.  1841.]
salia,  with  a  narrow  channell,  over  the  which  in  one  part
there  is  a  bridge  that  passeth  betweene  the  He  and  the
mayne  continent,  and  under  it  runneth  a  marvellous  swift

471

A.D.

1614.

Salonica,

Jewish
Universitie,

Pemassus
described.

Thebes.
Tenedos.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

current  or  tyde  :  Within  halfe  a  mile  of  the  Bridge  I  saw  a
Marble  columne  standing  on  the  toppe  of  a  little  Rocke,
whence  (as  the  Ilanders  tolde  mee)  Aristotle  leaped  in,
and  drowned  himselfe,  after  that  hee  could  not  conceive
the  reason  why  this  Channell  so  ebbed  and  flowed.  This
He  bringeth  forth  in  abundance,  all  things  requisite  for
humane  life,  and  decored  with  many  goodly  Villages.
From  thence  I  arrived  at  a  Towne  in  Macedonia,  called
Salonica,  but  of  olde  Thessalonica,  where  I  staied  five
daies,  and  was  much  made  of  by  the  Inhabitants :  It  is  a
Citie  full  of  rich  commodities,  and  is  the  principall  place
of  Thessalie,  which  is  a  Province  of  Macedon,  together
with  Achaia  and  Myrmedon,  which  are  two  Provinces  of
the  same.  There  is  an  Universitie  of  Jewes  here,  who
professe  onely  the  Hebrew  Tongue.  About  this  Citie  is
the  most  fertile  Countrey  in  all  Greece.

In  Salonica  I  found  a  Germe  bound  for  Tenedos,  in  the
which  I  embarked :  As  we  sailed  along  the  Thessalonian
Shoare,  I  saw  the  two  topped  Hill  Pernassus,  where  it  was
said  the  nine  Muses  haunted :  but  as  for  the  fountaine
Helicon,  I  leave  that  to  be  searched,  and  seene  by  the
imagination  of  Poets ;  for  if  it  had  beene  objected  to  my
sight,  like  an  insatiable  drunkard,  I  should  have  drunke
up  the  streames  of  Poesie,  to  have  enlarged  my  poore
poeticall  veine.  The  Mountaine  it  selfe  is  somewhat
steepe  and  sterile,  especially  the  two  toppes,  the  one
whereof  is  drie  and  sandie,  signifying  that  Poets  are
alwayes  poore  and  needie :  The  other  top  is  barren  and
rockie,  resembling  the  ingratitude  of  wretched  and  nig-
gardly Patrons :  the  vale  betweene  the  tops  is  pleasant
and  profitable,  denoting  the  fruitfull  and  delightful  soile,
which  painefull  Poets,  the  Muses  plowmen  so  industri-
ously manure.  A  little  more  Eastward,  as  we  fetcht  up
the  Coast  of  Achaia,  the  Master  of  the  vessell  shewed  mee
a  ruinous  Village  and  Castle ;  where  hee  said  the  admired
Citie  of  Thebes  had  beene.

Upon  the  third  day  from  Salonica,  wee  arrived  in  the
Road  of  Tenedos,  which  is  an  Hand  in  the  Sea  Pontus  or

472

WILLIAM LITHGOW  ad.

1614.
Propontis :  it  hath  a  Citie  called  Tenedos,  built  by  Tenes,
which  is  a  gallant  place,  having  a  Castle  and  a  faire  Haven
for  all  sorts  of  Vessells  :  it  produceth  good  store  of  Wines,
and  the  best  supposed  to  be  in  all  the  Southeast  parts  of
Europe.

In  Tenedos  I  met  by  accident,  two  French  Merchants  of
Marseills,  intending  for  Constantinople,  who  had  lost  their
Ship  at  Sio,  when  they  were  busie  at  venereall  tilting  with
their  new  elected  Mistresses,  and  so  a  second  remedie
were  glad  to  come  thither  in  a  Turkish  Carmoesalo.  The
like  of  this  I  have  seene  fall  out  with  Sea-faring  men,
Merchants  and  Passengers,  who  buy  sometimes  their  too
much  folly  with  too  deare  repentance.  They  and  I
resolving  to  view  Troy,  did  hire  a  Janizarie  to  be  our
conductor  &  protector,  &  a  Greeke  to  be  our  Interpreter.
Where  when  we  landed,  we  saw  here  &  there  many  relicts
of  old  walls,  as  we  travelled  through  these  famous  bounds.
And  as  we  were  advanced  toward  the  East  part  of  Troy,
our  Greeke  brought  us  to  many  Tombes  which  were
mightie  ruinous,  and  pointed  us  particularly  to  the  Tombes  The  Tombs  of
of  Hector,  Ajax,  Achilles,  Troylus,  &  many  other  valiant  Trojans.
Champions,  with  the  Tombes  also  of  Hecuba,  Cresseid,
and  other  Trojane  Dames :  Well  I  wote,  I  saw  infinite  old
Sepulchres,  but  for  their  particular  names  and  nomination
of  them  I  suspend,  neither  could  I  beleeve  my  Interpreter,
sith  it  is  more  then  three  thousand  and  odde  yeeres  agoe
that  Troy  was  destroied  :  Hee  shewed  us  also  the  ruines  of
King  Priams  Palace,  and  where  Anchises  the  father  of
iEneas  dwelt.  At  the  North-east  corner  of  Troy,  which
is  in  sight  of  the  Castles  of  Hellesponte,  there  is  a  Gate  yet
standing,  and  a  piece  of  a  reasonable  high  Wall ;  upon
which  I  found  three  pieces  of  rusted  mony,  which  after-
wards I  gave  to  the  two  younger  brethren  of  the  Duke  of
Florence.

Where  the  pride  of  Phrygia  stood,  it  is  a  most  delect-  J  description
able  Plaine,  abounding  now  in  Cornes,  Fruits,  and  Wines,  of  Troy.
and may be called the Garden of Natolia : yet not
populous,  for  there  are  but  only  five  scattered  Villages  in

473

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1614.

all  that  bounds  :  The  length  of  Troy  hath  been,  as  may  be
discerned,  by  the  fundamental  Walls  yet  extant  about
twenty  miles :  the  ruines  of  which  are  come  to  that
Poeticall  Proverbe  : Nunc  seges  est  ubi  Troia  fuit.

Leaving the Fields of  noble Illium, we  crossed the
River  of  Simois,  and  dined  at  a  village  named  Extetash;

Note.  I  remember,  discharging  our  covenant  with  the  Janizarie,

who  was  not  contented  with  the  former  condition,  the
Frenchmen  making  obstacle  to  pay  that  which  I  had  given,
the  wrathful  Janizary  belaboured  them  both  with  a  cudgel,
til  the  bloud  sprung  from  their  heads ;  &  compelled  them
to  double  his  wages.  This  is  one  true  note  to  a  traveller
(whereof  I  had  the  ful  experience  afterward)  that  if  he
cannot  make  his  own  part  good,  he  must  alwaies  at  the
first  motion  content  these  Raskalls ;  otherwise  he  will  be
constrained  doubtlesse  with  strokes  to  pay  twice  as  much :
for  they  make  no  account  of  conscience,  nor  are  ruled  by
the  Law  of  compassion,  neither  regard  they  a  Christian
more  then  a  dog  :  but  whatsoever  extortion  or  injurie  they
use  against  him,  he  must  bee  French  like  contented,
bowing  his  head,  and  making  a  counterfeit  shew  of  thanks,
and  happy  too  oftentimes,  if  so  he  escape. Hence  we

Sestos  and arrived  at  the  Castles,  called  of  old  Sestos  and  Abydos,

Jbydos.  which  are  two  Fortresses  opposite  to  other,  the  one  in

Europe,  the  other  in  Asia,  being  a  mile  distant :  They
stand  at  the  beginning  of  Hellesponte,  and  were  also  cog-

[II.  x.  184.2.I  nominate  the  Castles  of  Hero  and  Leander,  which  were
erected  in  a  commemoration  of  their  admirable  fidelitie  in
love.  But  now  they  are  commonly  called  the  Castles  of
Gallipoly,  yea,  or  rather  the  strength  of  Constantinople,
betweene  which  no  Ship  may  enter  without  knowledge
of  the  Captains  :  And  at  their  returne  they  must  stay  three  |
dayes  before  they  are  permitted  to  goe  through.  Betwixt
the  Castles  and  Constantinople  is  about  fortie  leagues :
Here  I  left  the  two  Frenchmen  with  a  Greeke  Barbour,  and
imbarked  for  Constantinople  in  a  Turkish  Frigato.  The
first  place  of  any  note  I  saw  within  these  narrow  Seas,  was
the  ancient  Citie  of  Gallipolis. After  we  had  fetcht  up

474

WILLIAM LITHGOW  a.d.

1614.

1  the  famous  Citie  of  Calcedon  in  Bithinia  on  our  right
j  hand  ; I  beheld  on  our  left,  the  prospect  of  that  little
world,  the  great  Citie  of  Constantinople  ; which  indeed
yeeldeth  such  an  outward  splendor,  to  the  amazed  beholder,
of  goodly  Churches,  stately  Townes,  gallant  Steeples,  and
other  such  things,  whereof  now  the  world  make  so  great
account,  that  the  whole  earth  cannot  equall  it. Beholding
these  delectable  objects,  we  entred  into  the  channel  of  Constantinople
Bosphorus, which divideth Perah from Constantinople,  hath  so  often
And  arriving  at  Tapanau,  where  all  the  Munition  of  the  bin  presented
Great  Turke  lieth,  I  bade  farewell  to  my  company,  and  °^at  "ow  jj^
went  to  a  lodging  to  refresh  my  selfe  till  morning.  willpassebytt.

DEparting  from  Constantinople,  I  came  to  Cenchrea,
being  three  hundred  miles  distant,  where  Saint  Paul
cut  his  haire,  after  his  vow  was  performed,  Act.  18.  18.
from  thence  I  went  to  Smyrna  in  Carmania,  a  famous  Smyrna.
Kingdome  in  Asia  the  Lesser :  This  Citie  was  one  of  the
seven  Churches  mentioned  Revelat.  2.  8.  It  is  a  goodly
place,  having  a  faire  Haven  for  Ships :  They  have  great
trafficke  with  all  Nations,  especially  for  the  fine  Silke,
Cotten-wool,  and  dimmetie  brought  to  it  by  the  Country
Peasants,  which  strangers  buy  from  them.  Truely  neere
unto  this  Citie  I  saw  such  a  long  continuing  Plaine,
abounding  in  Corne,  Wines,  and  all  sorts  of  fruitful
herbage,  and  so  infinitely  peopled,  that  me  thought  Nature
seemed  with  the  peoples  industrie  to  contend,  the  one  by
propagating  creatures,  the  other  by  admirable  agriculture.
Thiatyra,  now  called  Tiria,  one  also  of  the  seven  Churches
is  not  farre  hence.

From  this  Citie  I  imbarked  in  a  Turkish  Carmoesalo,
bound  for  Rhodes.  In  our  sayling  along  the  Coast  of
Asia  Minor,  the  first  place  of  any  note  I  saw,  was  the
ruinous  Citie  of  Ephesus ;  yet  somewhat  inhabited,  and  Ephesus.
pleasantly  adorned  with  Gardens,  faire  Fieldes,  and  greene
Woods  of  Olive  trees,  which  on  the  Sea  doe  yeeld  a
delectable  prospect :  It  was  one  of  the  seven  Churches,
Revel. 2. 1. Over-against  this  Citie  is  the  He  Lango,

475

A.D.

1 6 14.
Hippocrates.
Appelles.

Nixa.

Rhodes.

The  great
Colosse.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

anciently  called  Coos,  wherein  the  great  Hippocrates  was
borne,  and  Appelles,  the  Painter  most  excellent.  It  is
both  fertile  and  populous,  and  of  circuit  about  80.  miles.
There  is  a  kind  of  Serpent  said  to  be  in  it  so  friendly  unto
the  Inhabitants,  that  when  the  men  are  sleeping  under  the
shadow  of  Trees  they  come  crauling,  and  will  linke  or
claspe  themselves  about  their  neckes  and  bodies,  without
doing  any  harme,  neither  when  they  awake  are  the  beasts
afraid.  And  neere  to  Lango  is  the  He  Nixa,  of  old  Stran-
goli ;  and  by  some  called  Dionisa  and  Naxus ;  an  Hand
both  fruitfull  and  delightfull.  As  we  sailed  by  the  West
part  of  the  He,  a  Greeke  Passenger  shewed  mee  the  place,
where  (as  hee  said)  Ariadne  was  deceived  of  Theseus,
which  is  not  farre  from  the  irriguate  Plaine  of  Darmille.
Continuing  our  Navigation  I  saw  a  little  He  called
Ephdosh,  where  the  Turks  told  me,  that  al  the  Ilanders
were  naturally  good  swimmers,  paying  no  more  tribute  to
their  Great  Lord  the  Turke,  save  only  once  in  the  yere,
there  are  certaine  men  and  women  chosen  by  a  Turkish
Captaine,  who  must  swim  a  whole  league  right  out  in  the
Sea,  and  go  downe  to  the  bottome  of  the  waters  to  fetch
some  token  they  have  got  ground :  And  if  they  shall
happen  to  faile  in  this,  the  Hand  will  bee  reduced  againe
to  pay  him  yeerely  rent.  This  I  saw  with  mine  eyes,
whiles  wee  being  calmed,  there  came  a  man  and  two  women
swimming  to  us  more  then  a  mile  of  way,  carrying  with
them  (drie  above  the  water)  baskets  of  Fruit  to  sell,  the
which  made  mee  not  a  little  to  wonder.  Contenting  them
for  their  ware,  upon  the  ninth  day  after  our  departure
from  Smyrna,  wee  arrived  at  the  Citie  of  Rhodes,  so  called
of  the  Hand  wherein  it  standeth.

Rhodes  lieth  in  the  Carpathian  Sea  ;  It  was  of  old  called
Itbrea,  Telchino  and  Phiula :  Plinie  saith  it  was  called
Rhodes,  because  there  were  certaine  Fields  of  Roses  in  it ;
for  Rhodes  in  the  Greeke  tongue  signifieth  a  Floure :
Not  farre  from  the  Citie  I  saw  the  relicts  of  that  huge  and
admiredly-erected  Idoll,  named  Collossus.  This  He  of
Rhodes  was  lost  by  the  Maltazes,  Anno  Dom.  1522.  and

476

chiefest  seat  of
that  country.

WILLIAM LITHGOW  a.d.

1614.

ever  since  is  in  the  fruition  of  Turks :  The  Fortresse  of
Rhodes,  and  that  Fortresse  Famogosta  in  Cyprus,  are
the  two  strongest  Holds  in  all  the  Empire  of  the  Great
Turk.

After  I  had  contented  the  Master  for  my  fraught  and
■victualls  (who,  as  hee  was  an  Infidell,  used  mee  with  an
extraordinarie  exaction) I  found  a  Barke  of  the  Arches
purposed  to  Cyprus,  with  which  I  imbarked,  being  foure
hundred  miles  distant. Having  past  the  Gulfe  of  Sattelia,
we  boorded  close  along  the  firme  Land  of  fruitfull  Pam- Tharsus,  a
philia,  and  on  the  fifth  day  thereafter,  we  fetched  up  the  deca^.f.  Clth
Coast  or  Cilicia,  sustaining  many  great  dangers,  both  or where  §a-int
tempestuous  stormes,  and  invasions  of  damnable  Pirats. Paul  was

Twelve  dayes  was  betweene  Rhodes  and  Limisso  in  borne*  is  the
Cyprus  :  where  arrived,  I  received  more  gracious  demon
strations  from  the  Ilanders,  then  I  could  hope  for  or  wish  ;  "qI^s.
being  far  beyond  my  merit  or  expectation  ;  onely  content-
ling  my  curiositie  with  a  quiet  mind,  I  renderd  thankes
for  my  imbraced  courtesies.  The  second  day  after  my
arrivall,  I  tooke  with  me  an  Interpreter,  and  went  to  [II.  x.  1843.]
see  Nicosia,  which  is  placed  in  the  midst  of  the  Kingdome.  Nicosia.
But  in  my  journey  thither,  extream  was  the  heat  and  thirst
I  endured ;  both  in  respect  of  the  season,  and  also  want  of
water :  And  although  I  had  with  mee  sufficiencie  of  wine,
yet  durst  I  drinke  none  thereof,  being  so  strong,  and
withall  hath  a  taste  of  pitch ;  and  that  is,  because  they
have  no  Barrells,  but  great  Jarres  made  of  Earth,  wherein
I  their  wine  is  put.  Nicosia  is  the  principall  Citie  of
Cyprus,  and  is  invironed  with  Mountaines,  like  unto
Florence  in  Hetruria ;  wherein  the  Vizier  Bashaw
1  remaineth  :  The  second  is  Famogosta,  the  chiefe  strength
and  Sea-port  in  it :  Selina,  Lemisso,  Paphos,  and  Fontana
Morosa,  are  the  other  foure  speciall  Townes  in  the  Hand.

This  He  of  Cyprus  is  in  length  210.  and  large  sixtie,  Cyprus.
\  and  of  circuit  600.  miles. In  this  He  was  Venus  greatly
!  honoured : It  yeeldeth infinite Canes  of Sugar, strong
Wines,  and  Cotten-wooll,  besides  all  other  sorts  of  Fruit
I  in  abundance.

477

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1614.

In  my  returne  from  Nicosia  to  Famogusta,  with  myj
Trenchman,  wee  encountered  by  the  way  with  foure
Turkes,  who  needs  would  have  my  horse  to  ride  upon ;
which  my  Interpreter  refused :  But  they  in  revenge  pulled
mee  by  the  heeles  from  the  horse  backe,  beating  me  most
pittifully,  and  left  mee  almost  for  dead.  In  this  meane
while  my  companion  fled,  and  escaped  the  sceleratenesse
of  their  hands ;  and  if  it  had  not  beene  for  some  compas-
sionable  Greekes,  who  by  accident  came  by  and  relieved
me,  I  had  (doubtlesse)  immediately  perished.  From
Tripoly.  Famogusta  I  imbarked  in  a  Germe,  and  arrived  at  Tripoly.
Tripoly  is  a  Citie  in  Siria,  standing  a  mile  from  the  marine
side,  neere  to  the  foot  of  Mount  Libanus :  since  it  hath
beene  first  founded  it  hath  three  times  beene  scituated  and
removed  in  three  sundrie  places :  First,  it  was  over-
whelmed with  water :  Secondly,  it  was  sacked  with
Cursares,  and  Pirates ;  Thirdly,  it  is  like  now  to  bee  over-
throwne  with  new  made  Mountaines  of  Sand :  There  is
no  Haven  by  many  miles  neere  unto  it,  but  a  dangerous
rode,  where  often  when  Northerly  windes  blow,  Ships  are
cast  away.  The  great  trarrlcke  which  now  is  at  this  place,
was  formerly  at  Scanderona,  a  little  more  Eastward ;  but
by  reason  of  the  infectious  aire  (that  corrupted  the  bloud
of  strangers,  proceeding  of  two  high  mountaines ;  who
are  supposed  to  bee  a  part  of  Mount  Caucasus,  which
withhold  the  prospect  of  the  Sunne  from  the  In-dwellers,
more  then  three  houres  in  the  morning :  So  that  in  my
knowledge  I  have  knowne  dye  in  one  Shippe,  and  a
moneths  time  twentie  Mariners ;  for  this  cause)  the
Christian  ships  were  glad  to  have  their  commodities
brought  to  Tripoly,  which  is  a  more  holesome  and  con-
venient place.

The  daily  Interrogation  I  had  here,  for  a  Carravans
departure  to  Aleppo  was  not  to  me  a  little  fastidious,  being
mindfull  to  visit  Babylon  :  In  this  my  expectation  I  tooke
purpose,  with  three  Venetian  Merchants  to  goe  see  the
Cedars  of  Libanon,  which  was  but  a  daies  journey  thither.
As  we  ascended  upon  the  Mountaine,  our  ignorant  guide

47S

WILLIAM LITHGOW  a.d.

1614.

mistaking  the  way,  brought  us  into  a  laborinth  of  dangers  ;

insomuch  that  wrestling  amongst  intricate  paths  of  Rocks  :

two  of  our  Asses  fell  over  a  Banke  and  broke  their  necks :

And  if  it  had  not  beene  for  a  Christian  Maronite,  who

accidently  encountred  with  us,  in  our  wilsum  wandring

wee  had  beene  miserably  lost; both  in  regard  of  Rockes

and  heapes  of  Snow  we  passed  ;  and  also  of  great  Torrents

which  fell  downe  with  force  from  the  steepie  tops  ;  wherein

lone  of  these  Merchants  was  twice  almost  drowned. When

wee  arrived  to  the  place  where  the  Cedars  grew,  wee  saw

but  twentie  foure  of  all,  growing  after  the manner  of

Oke  trees,  but  a  great  deale  taller,  straighter,  and  greater,

and  the  branches  grow  so  straight  out,  as  though  they  were

kept  by  Art.

Although  that  in  the  daies  of  Salomon,  this  Mountaine

|was  over-clad  with  Forrests  of  Cedars,  yet  now  there  are  Cedars.

'but  only  these,  and  nine  miles  Westward  thence  seventeene

more. The  nature  of  that  Tree  is  alwaies  green,  yeelding

an  odoriferous  smell,  and  an  excellent  kind  of  fruit  like

;unto  Apples,  but  of  a  sweeter  taste,  and  more  holesome  in

digestion. The  Rootes  of  some  of  these  Cedars  are  almost

destroyed  by  Shepheards,  who  have  made  fires  thereat,  and

holes  wherein  they  sleepe,  yet  nevertheless  they  flourish

Igreene  above  in  the  tops  and  branches. The  length  of

this  Mountaine  is  about  fortie  miles,  reaching  from  the

West  to  the  East ; and  continually  Summer  and  Winter,

reserveth  Snow  on  the  tops. It  is  also  beautified  with  all

the  ornaments  of  nature,  as  Herbage,  Tillage,  Pastorage,

fructiferous Trees, fine Fountaines, good Cornes, and

absolutely  the  best  Vines  that  is  bred  on  the  earth. The

Signior  thereof  is  a  Free-holder,  by  birth  a  Turke,  and  wil

inot  acknowledge  any  superior,  but  the  most  part  of  the

inhabited Villages are Christians, called Maronites or

Nostranes,  quasi  Nazaritans,  and  are  governed  by  their

owne  Patriarke. There  are  none  at  this  day  doe  speake

the  Syriack  *  Tongue,  save  onely  these  people  of  Mount  *Arabike.

Libanus ; and  in  that  Language  the  Alcoran  of  Mahomet

is  written. The  kind  Amaronite  whom  wee  met,  and

479

A.D.
1614.

Colters
religious
Greekes  or
Monkes.

[II.  x.i  844-]

Eden.

This  tree  hath
severall
vertues  bear-
ing but  one
Apple  at  once.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

tooke  with  us  for  our  best  guide  in  descending  from  the
Cedars,  shewed  us  many  Caves  and  Holes  in  Rockes,
where  Coliers,  religious  Sirens  and  Amaronites  abide :
Amongst  these  austere  cottages,  I  saw  a  faire  tombe  all  of
one  stone,  being  seventeen  foot  of  length ;  which  (as  he
said)  was  the  Sepulchre  of  the  valiant  Joshua,  who  con-
ducted the  people  of  Israel  in  the  Land  of  Promise.

The  Mahometans  esteeme  this  to  bee  a  holy  place,  and

many  resort  to  it  in  Pilgrimage,  to  offer  up  their  Satanical

praiers  to  Mahomet. I  saw  upon  this  Mountaine  a  sort  of

Fruit called Amazza franchi : that is, the death of

Christians, because  when Italians, or  others  of  Europe

eat any quantitie thereof, they presently fall into the

bloudie  Fluxes,  or  else  ingender  some  other  pestilentious

Fever  whereof  they  die. The  Patriarke  did  most  kindly

entertaine  us  at  his  house ; so  did  also  all  the  Amaronites

of  the  other  Villages,  who  met  us  in  our  way  before  wee

came  to  their  Townes,  and  brought  Presents  with  them  of

Bread,  Wine,  Figs,  Olives,  Sallats,  Capons,  Egges,  and

such  like  as  they  could  on  a  sudden  provide. About  the

Village  of  Eden,  is  the  most  fruitfull  part  of  all  Libanus,

abounding  in  all  sorts  of  delicious  Fruits. True  it  is,  the

variety  of  these  things,  maketh  the  silly  people  thinke,  the

Garden  of  Eden  was  there. There  are  with  this  one,  other

two  supposed  places  of  the  earthly  Paradise  : the  one  is

by  the  Turkes,  and  some  ignorant  Georgians,  holden  to

be  at  Damascus,  for  the  beautie  of  faire  fields,  gardens,  and

excellent fruits there ; especially for the tree called

Mouslee,  which  they  beleeve  hath  grown  there  since  the

beginning  of  the  world. Indeede  it  is  a  rare  and  singular

tree,  for  I  saw  it  at  Damascus,  and  others  also  of  the  same

kinde,  upon  Nylus  in  iEgypt : The  growth  whereof  is

strange ; for  every  yeere  in  September  it  is  cut  downe

hard  by  the  roote,  and  in  five  moneths  the  tree  buddeth  up

a  pace  againe,  bringing  forth  leaves,  floures,  and  fruit.

The  leafe  thereof  is  of  such  a  breadth,  that  three  men  may

easily  stand  under  the  shadow  of  it,  and  the  Apple  is

bigger  then  a  Foot-ball. The  third  place  by  the  Chel-

480

WILLIAM LITHGOW  a.d.

1614.

faines,  is  thought  to  be  in  the  East  part  of  Mesopotamia,

neere  to  the  joyning  of  Tygris  and  Euphrates.

After  my  returne  to  Tripoly,  I  departed  thence  East-
ward, with  a  Caravan  of  Turkes  to  Aleppo,  being  ten  daies
journey  distant.  In  all  this  way  (leaving  Scanderon  and
Antiochia  on  our  left  hand)  I  saw  nothing  worthy  remark-
ing ;  save  onely  a  few  scattered  villages,  and  poore  miser-
able people,  living  in  tents,  and  following  their  flockes,  to
whom  I  payed  sundry  Caffars :  who  remove  their  women,
children,  and  cattell  where  so  they  finde  fountaines,  and
good  pastorage.

Before  my  arrivall  in  Aleppo,  the  Caravan  of  Babylon  Aleppo.
was  from  thence  departed.  I  joyned  with  a  Caravan  of
Armenians  and  Turkes,  that  were  well  guarded  with
Janisaries,  and  Souldiers ;  of  whom  some  were  to  stay  at
Damascus  by  the  way,  and  some  mindefull  to  Jerusalem.
And  for  my  better  safeguard  (being  alwayes  alone,  which
by  all  was  ever  much  admired)  the  Vize  Consull  tooke
surety  of  the  Captaine,  that  he  should  protect  me  safely
from  theeves,  cut-throats,  and  the  exactions  of  tributes
by  the  way,  delivering  mee  freely  into  the  hands  of  the
Padre  Guardiano  at  Jerusalem :  which  being  done,  I  hired
two  Mulets  from  a  Turke,  one  to  ride  upon,  and  another
to  carry  my  victuals ;  and  so  set  forward  with  them.
The  number  of  our  company  were  about  nine  hundred
Armenians,  Christian  pilgrimes,  men  and  women :  sixe
hundred  Turkes,  trafficking  for  their  owne  businesse :  and
one  hundred  Souldiers,  three  Schowsses,  and  six  Janisaries
to  keep  them  from  invasions.

Betweene  Aleppo  and  Damascus,  we  had  nine  dayes
journey,  in  five  of  which,  we  had  pleasant  travelling,  and
good  Canes  to  lodge  in,  that  had  beene  builded  for  the
support  of  Travellers,  and  are  well  maintained  :  But  when
we  passed  Hamsek,  which  is  a  little  more  then  mid-way,
wee  had  dangerous  travelling,  being  oft  assailed  with
Arabs,  fatigated  with  rockie  Mountaines,  and  sometimes
in  point  of  choaking  for  lacke  of  water.  The  confusion
of  this  multitude,  was  not  onely  grievous  in  regard  of  the
x  481  2  H

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1614.

extreame  heate,  providing  of  victuals  at  poore  villages,
and  scarcitie  of  water  to  fill  our  bottles,  made  of  Boare
skinnes,  but  also  amongst  narrow  and  stonie  passages,
thronging,  we  oft  fell  one  over  another,  in  great  heapes ;
in  danger  to  be  smothered :  yea,  and  oftentimes,  wee  that
were  Christians,  had  our  bodies  well  beaten  by  our  con-
ducting Turkes.  At  our  accustomed  dismounting,  to
recreate  our  selves :  and  refresh  the  Beasts,  I  would  often
fetch  a  walke,  to  stretch  my  legs,  that  were  stifled  with  a
stumbling  beast ;  wherewith  the  Turkes  were  mightily
discontented,  and  in  derision,  would  laugh  and  mocke  me :
for  they  cannot  abide  a  man  to  walke  in  turnes,  or  stand  to
eate ;  their  usage  being  such,  that  when  they  come  from
the  horse  backe,  presently  sit  downe  on  ground,  folding

Therepodngof  their  feete  under  them,  when  they  repose,  dine,  and  sup.

the  Turkes.  50  ^oe  ajso  their  Artizans  and  all  the  Turkes  in  the  world
sit  alwaies  crosse-legged,  wrongfully  abusing  the  com-
mendable consuetude  of  the  industrious  Tailors.  In  their
houses  they  have  no  Bed  to  lye  on,  nor  Chaires  to  sit  on,
nor  Tables  to  eate  on,  but  a  bench  made  of  boords,  along
the  house  side,  of  a  foote  height  from  the  fioore,  spread
over  with  a  Carpet ;  whereon  they  usually  sit,  eating,
drinking,  sleeping,  resting,  and  doing  of  manuall  exercises,
all  in  one  place.

They  never  uncloath  themselves,  when  they  goe  to  rest,
neither  have  they  any  bed-cloathes,  save  onely  a  coverlet
above  them :  I  have  seene  hundreds  of  them,  after  this
manner,  lye  ranked  like  durtie  swine  in  a  beastly  stie,  or
loathsome  jades  in  a  filthy  stable.  Upon  the  ninth  day
(leaving  Cotafa  behinde  us  on  the  Mountaines)  wee  entred
in  a  pleasant  plaine  of  three  leagues  in  length,  adorned
with  many  villages,  gardens,  and  rivers ;  and  arriving  at
Damascus,  wee  were  all  lodged  (some  in  Chambers  wanting
beds,  and  others  without,  on  hard  stones)  in  a  great  Cane
called  Heramnen,  where  we  staied  one  day.

Damascus.  Damascus  is  the  Capitall  Citie  of  Syria,  called  by  Turkes,

Shamma,  and  is  scituated  on  a  faire  plaine,  and  beautified
with  many  rivers  on  each  side  (especially  Pharpar  and

482

WILLIAM LITHGOW  a.d.

1614.
Abdenah)  excellent  Orchards,  and  all  other  naturall  objects
of  elegancie : That  for  scituation,  Artizens,  all  manner
Commodities,  and  varietie  of  Fruits,  in  all  the  Asiaticall  [II.  x.  1845.]
Provinces  it  is  not  paraleld. By  Turkes  it  is  called,  the
Garden  of  Turkie.

Betweene  Jacobs  Bridge  and  Jerusalem,  we  had  sixe
dayes  journey.

Aprill  the  tenth  day,  about  ten  of  the  clocke,  (passing
the  River  Kyson)  we  arrived  at  Nazareth,  and  there  reposed
till  the  Evening,  providing  our  selves  of  Victuals  and
Water.  In  this  Towne  dwelt  Joseph,  and  the  Virgin
Mary ;  and  in  which  also  our  Saviour  was  brought  up.
After  we  had  dined,  the  Armenians  arose,  and  went  to  a
heape  of  Stones,  the  ruines  of  an  old  House,  before  the
which  they  fell  downe  upon  their  knees,  praising  God  :  and
that  ruinous  lumpe  (say  they)  was  the  House  where  Mary
dwelt,  when  Gabriel  saluted  her,  bringing  the  Annuncia-
tion of  Salvation  to  the  world.  I  am  fully  perswaded  they
carried  away  above  five  thousand  pounds  weight,  to  keepe
in  a  memoriall  thereof.  Then  did  I  remember  of  the
Chappell  of  Loretta,  and  told  the  Caravan,  that  I  saw  that
House  standing  in  Italie,  which  (as  the  Romanists  say)
was  transported  by  the  Angels.  O,  said  he,  wee
Armenians  can  not  beleeve  that,  neither  many  other
assertions  of  the  Roman  Church ;  for  we  certainly  know
by  Christians,  that  have  from  time  to  time  dwelt  here  ever
since,  that  this  is  both  the  place,  &  stones  of  the  House.
Let  Papists  coyne  a  new  Law  to  themselves  wee  care  not,
for  as  they  erre  in  this,  so  doe  they  in  all,  following  meerlv
the  traditions  of  men,  they  runne  gallopping  post  to  Hell.
The  Patriarch  being  informed  by  the  laughing  Caravan  of  speeches  of  the
these  newes,  asked  mee  in  disdaine  (thinking  it  had  beene  Patnarch-
an  Article  of  my  Beliefe)  if  I  saw  that  House,  or  beleeved
that  the  Chappell  of  Loretta  was  such  a  thing  :  I  answered,
I  did  not  beleeve  it,  affirming  it  was  onely  but  a  devillish
invention,  to  deceive  the  blind-folded  people,  and  to  fill
the  Coffers  of  the  Roman  Priests.

In  the  time  of  our  staying  heere,  the  Emeere  or  Lord  of

483

ad  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1614.

the  Towne,  sent  sixe  Women,  conducted  by  twelve  of

his  Servants,  to  an  Armenian  Prince,  that  was  a  Pilgrime

in  our  companie,  to  be  used  by  him  and  others,  whom  so

he  would  elect  to  bee  his  fellow  labourers :  which  indeed

hee  did  kindly  accept,  and  invited  me  to  that  Feast ; but

I  gave  him  the  refusall,  little  regarding  such  a  frivolous

The  villanie  of  commoditie. Hee,  and  some  of  the  chiefest  Pilgrimes

Armenians. entertained  them  for  the  space  of  three  houres,  and  sent

them  backe,  giving  to  their  Conductors  15.  Piasters,  in  a

reward.

Mount  Approaching  to  Mount  Carmell,  I  beheld  a  farre  off

Camel.  upon  the  top  of  the  Hill,  the  place  where  Elias  ascended

to  Heaven,  when  hee  left  his  Cloake  behind  him  to  Elizeus

his  Disciple. This  Mountaine  is  foure  miles  of  length,

lying  South  and  North,  the  North  end  bordering  with  the

Sea,  neere  to  Acre,  called  antiently  Ptolomais,  and  the

South  end  joyning  with  the  borders  of  Samaria.

Leaving  Samaria  on  our  left  hand,  we  entred  into  a
faire  Plaine,  adorned  with  fruitfull  Trees,  and  all  other
ornaments  that  pleasant  Fields  afford,  but  no  Village  we
saw.  Marching  thus,  about  the  declining  of  the  Sun
from  the  Meridian,  we  came  in  sight  of  two  hundred
Pavillions,  all  piched  in  rankes ;  yeelding  the  prospect
of  a  little  Citie,  by  a  Brooke  side  of  water :  which  being
perceived,  the  Captaine  began  to  censure  what  they  might
bee ;  and  immediatly  there  came  riding  towards  us  sixe
naked  fellowes,  well  mounted  on  Arabian  Geldings,  who
demanded  what  wee  were,  and  whither  we  were  bound ;
and  if  there  were  any  Frankes  of  Christendome  in  our
companie.  To  whom  the  Janizaries  replyed,  wee  were
purposed  to  Jerusalem,  and  that  there  was  but  one  Franke
with  them :  upon  the  which  they  presently  sought  me,
Caffar tribute,  demanding-  Caffar,  Caffar ;  and  caused  me  perforce  to  pav
seven  Chickenes  of  Gold  for  my  head,  because  (said  they)
our  King  is  now  resident  in  these  Tents,  he  must  pay
therefore  so  much  the  more  extraordinarie.

They  returning  backe  to  their  Prince,  with  the  male-
diction of  a  Pilgrimes  purse,  and  wee  marching  on  in  our

484

WILLIAM LITHGOW  ad.

1614.

way,  that  day  wee  travelled  above  three  and  fortie  miles,
and  pitched  at  a  Village  called  Adoash,  where  we  found
good  Hearbs  to  eate,  and  abundance  of  water  to  drinke,
and  also  to  fill  our  emptied  bottles.  As  wee  lay  downe  to
sleepe,  after  a  hungry  Supper  on  the  hard  ground,  and  our
Guard  watching  us  ;  that  same  King  of  the  Arabians,  came
a  little  before  mid-night,  with  foure  and  twentie  well
Horsed  Runagates,  and  naked  Courtiers,  being  armed  with
Bowes  and  Arrowes,  and  halfe  Pikes,  pointed  at  both  ends
with  hard  Steele,  and  asked  for  the  Caravan,  who  presently
awoke,  and  went  to  salute  him,  laying  his  hand  on  his
brest,  bowed  his  head  very  low ;  which  is  the  usuall  The  courtesk
courtesie  amongst  the  Infidels  and  Christians  in  these  parts,  °fTurkes.
for  they  never  uncover  their  Heads  to  any  man  ;  and  after
some  short  parley,  they  sate  all  downe  on  the  grasse.  The
Caravan  presented  his  rude-like  Majestie  with  Water,
Bread,  Hearbs,  Figges,  Garlike,  and  such  things 'as  hee
had.  As  they  were  thus  merrie  at  this  poore  banquet,  the
awfull  King  tooke  the  oath  of  our  Conductor,  if  there  were
any  moe  Frankes  there  then  I ;  and  he  having  sworne  the
truth,  the  King  by  a  malignant  informer,  incontinently
caused  me  to  bee  brought  before  him,  and  staring  me  in
the  face,  asked  by  Interpreter  where  were  my  Companions  ?
who  replyed,  I  had  none.  Then  said  he,  tell  that  Dog,  hee  The  extortion
must  acknowledge  me  with  five  peeces  of  Gold  more,  °ftheJr^i^n
otherwise  (making  a  signe  to  his  owne  throat)  I  shall  cut
off  his  Head.  The  which  I  being  informed,  and  knowing
that  by  no  condition,  there  was  resistance  against  such  a
scelerate  Prince,  gave  it  him  presently  with  a  halfe  smiling
countenance ;  which  he  remarking,  told  the  rest  it  seemed
I  gave  it  with  a  good  heart ;  and  to  recompence  my  out-  [II.  x.  1 846.]
ward  behaviour,  hee  drunke  a  great  draught  of  water  to
me,  thinking  thereby,  he  had  done  me  more  honour,  then
all  the  Chickenes  of  gold  I  gave  him  now,  and  in  the
morning  would  doe  him  profit.  Truely,  this  was  one  of
the  greatest  Tributes  I  payed  for  one  dayes  journey,  that
I  had  in  all  my  voyage  in  Asia.  There  are  two  Kings
in  Arabia,  the  one  who  liveth  on  Euphrates,  the  Desarts

485

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1614.

of  Mesopotamia,  sometimes  in  Arabia  Felix,  and  in  some
parts  of  Siria.  And  the  other,  (which  was  the  King  to
whom  I  payed  this  money)  wandreth  with  his  Tribes,
Tents,  and  Bestiall,  one  while  in  Arabia,  Petrea,  and
Deserta,  and  sometimes  in  the  Holy  Land,  as  hee  findeth
good  Pastorage  and  fresh  Fountaines.  These  two  Kings
are  mortall  enemies ;  and  if  by  accident  they  meet,  they
fight  most  cruelly.

The  next  morning  leaving  Jacobs  well,  and  the  Towne

Sychar  of  old of  Sychar,  on  our  left  hand,  we  marched  through  a  part  of

the  chiefest the  nelds  Qf  Basan,  and  had  exceeding  pleasant  travelling ;

5  »T  r  * an<^  at  m&nt  wee  pitcne(i  by  Lydda  on  the  fields  :  Lydda  is

now  altogether  not  above  ten  miles  from  Cesaria.

ruinated.  Aprill  the  thirteenth,  before  the  breake  of  day,  setting

forward,  scarsely  were  wee  well  advanced  in  our  way,  till
we  were  beset  with  more  then  three  hundred  Arabs,  who
sent  us  an  unexpected  shower  of  Arrowes,  to  the  great
annoyance  of  all  our  companie  :  for  if  it  had  not  been  that
our  Souldiers  shot  off  their  Gunnes  on  a  sudden,  surely
wee  had  then  miserably  perished.  But  the  nature  of  the
Arabs  is  not  unlike  to  the  Jackals :  for  when  any  of  them
heare  the  shot  of  a  Harquebusse,  they  turne  backe  with
such  speed,  as  if  the  fiends  of  the  infernall  Court  were

A  Massacre  of  broken  loose  upon  them. In  that  momentary  conflict,  on

Armenian our  sjje  there  were  killed  nine  Women,  five  men,  and
1  grimes. aDOUt  thirtie  persons  deadly  wounded,  which  to  our  worthie
Captaine  bred  no  small  griefe.

Proceeding  in  our  journey,  in  the  hilly  Countrey  of
Judea  we  entred ;  leaving  Rhama  on  our  right  hand.
Rhama  is  a  Towne  inhabited  by  Christians,  Arabs,
and  Moores ;  not  blacke  Moores,  as  the  Africans
be,  but  they  are  called  Mori,  which  are  a  kind  of
Egyptians,  and  not  naturally  blacke,  but  Sun-burnt
with  the  parching  heat.  The  whole  Territorie  of
Canaan  is  inhabited  with  these  Moores,  some  Turkes,
civill  Arabs,  and  a  few  Christians,  and  scattered  Jewes.
The  Arabians  are  for  the  most  part  Theeves  and  Robbers,
the  Moores  cruell  and  uncivil!,  hating  Christians  to  the

486

WILLIAM LITHGOW  a.d.

1614.
death :  the  Turkes  are  the  best  of  all  the  three,  yet  all
sworne  enemies  to  Christ.  About  two  of  the  clocke  in
the  afternoone  wee  arrived  at  Berah,  called  of  old  Beer-
sheba,  being  eleven  miles  distant  from  Jerusalem.  Having
a  little  reposed,  we  embraced  our  Mountainous  way,  as
cheerfully  as  we  could,  for  we  were  exceeding  faint,  and
travelled  that  day  above  three  and  fortie  miles ;  whereby
we  might  arrive  at  Jerusalem  before  the  Gates  were  shut,
sustaining  drouth,  heat,  hunger,  and  not  a  few  other  incon-
veniences. At  last  we  beheld  the  prospect  of  Jerusalem ;
which  was  not  onely  a  contentment  to  my  wearied  body,
but  also  being  ravished  with  a  kind  of  unwonted  rejoycing,
the  teares  gushed  from  my  eyes  for  too  much  joy.  In
this  time  the  Armenians  began  to  sing  in  their  owne
fashion,  Psalmes  to  praise  the  Lord ;  and  I  also  sung  the
hundred  and  third  Psalme  all  the  way,  till  we  arrived  nere
the  walls  of  the  Citie,  where  we  ceased  from  our  singing
for  feare  of  the  Turkes.

Aprill  the  fourteenth  day,  upon  Palme-sunday  in  the
morning,  we  entred  into  Jerusalem,  and  at  the  Gate  we
were  particularly  searched,  to  the  effect  we  carried  in  no
furniture  of  Armes,  nor  Powder  with  us,  and  the
Armenians  (notwithstanding  they  are  Slaves  to  Turkes)
behoved  to  render  their  weapons  to  the  Keepers,  such  is
the  feare  they  have  of  Christians.  The  Gates  of  the
Citie  are  of  Iron  outwardly,  and  above  each  gate  are
Brasen  Ordnance  planted.

Aprill  the  fourteenth,  on  Palme-sunday  after  dinner,  the
Guardiano  departed  from  Jerusalem  to  Bethphage,  accom-
panied with  twelve  Friers,  and  many  other  Orientall
Christians,  which  were  come  thither  to  that  Festivall  time,
but  I  by  no  meanes  would  goe,  reposing  my  selfe  till  their
returne.  The  ridiculous  Ceremonie  which  that  day  they
use,  is  thus :  In  an  Apish  imitation  of  Christ,  at  the  afore-
said Bethphage,  there  was  an  Asse  brought  to  the  Guardiano,
whereupon  hee  mounted  (being  as  it  were,  the  greater  Asse
riding  upon  the  lesser)  and  came  riding  to  Jerusalem,  the
people  cutting  downe  boughes  of  Trees,  and  also  dispoyl-

487

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1614.

ing  themselves  almost  to  the  skinne,  bestrewed  the  way  as
he  rode  along,  crying,  Hosanna,  Hosanna,  the  Sonne  of
David,  blessed  is  hee  that  commeth  in  the  Name  of  the
Lord,  untill  they  came  to  the  South  gate  of  Sion,  where
he  dismounted.  At  night  after  Supper,  the  Guardiano
knowing  that  I  was  a  Protestant,  and  also  some  other
Franckes,  made  an  Oration,  saying ;  You  Pilgrimes,  who
refuse  to  bee  participant  with  us  in  the  Sacraments,  nor
will  not  adhere  to  the  Processions  and  Ceremonies,  which
wee  follow  of  the  Roman  Church,  I  would  therefore
intreat  you  (your  libertie  being  heere  as  much  as  mine,
whereby  you  may  doe  whatsoever  seeme  good  in  your
owne  eyes)  onely  to  abstaine  from  scandalizing  and  mock-
ing our  Rites  and  ordinary  Customes,  which  at  this  great
Feast  wee  must  performe.  To  the  which  we  condiscended
and  promised  to  give  no  occasion  of  offence.  In  the
conclusion  of  his  long  Exhortation,  he  disclosed  this
admonition,  saying ;  All  of  you  Travellers  must  in
Pilgrims  their  generall  bee  indued  with  these  three  worthy  gifts,  Faith,
graces.  Patience,  and  Money  ;  Faith,  to  beleeve  these  thinges  you

shall see  heere  at Jerusalem ; Patience, to indure the
apparent  injuries  of  Infidels ;  and  Money,  to  discharge  all
Tributes,  and  Costs,  which  heere  (meaning  in  his  owne
Monasterie)  and  about  this  Citie  must  be  defrayed.
[II.  x.i  847.] Earely  upon  Tuesday  morning  *  (being  all  of  us,  both
*Mondaies Friers  and  Pilgrimes,  well  mounted,  Mulets  laden  for  our
klretmittfdm  Provision)  we  departed  from  the  Citie  with  our  Souldiers ;
Sandys  an^  travelled  all  that  day  through  a  barren  and  desart

Timberley, Countrey, till Sun-setting, where wee reposed by a
and  others, standing  Well, till  an  houre  within  night. In  all  this
have  shewed deformed  Countrey,  we  saw  neither  house  nor  Village,  for
"" it  is  altogether  Desartuous,  and  inhabited  onely  by  wilde
Beasts,  and  naked  Arabians. Before  we  came  neere  to
Sodome  and  Gomorha,  by  seven  miles ;  (for  so  we  behoved
to  passe  by  the  East  end  of  it,  before  we  could  arrive  at
that place of Jordan which we intended) wee I say
incountred  with  such  deepe  sandie  ground,  that  the  Mulets
were  not  able  to  carrie  us  through,  whereupon  we  all

488

WILLIAM L1THGOW  ad.

1614.
dismounted,  wrestling,  and  wading  above  the  middle  part
of  our  bodies,  and  sometimes  falling  in  over  our  heads,
we  were in  great danger of  perishing. Even in the
middest  of  this  turmoyhng  paine,  (the  night  being  darke)
the  unwelcommed  Arabs  invironed,  and  invaded  us  with  a  Invasion  of
storme  of  Arrowes,  which  they  sent  from  the  toppes  of  Arabs-
little  hard  Hils  whereupon  they  stood,  for  knowing  the
advantage  of  the  ground,  they  tooke  opportunitie  to  give
the  more  fearefull  assaults ; yet  they  prevailed  nothing
(although  they  wounded  some  of  our  Souldiers)  such  was
the  resolute  courage  of  our  valorous  defendants. True
it  is,  that  in  all  my  travels  I  was  never  so  sore  fatigated,
nor  fearefully  endangered,  as  I  was  that  Night.

A  little  after  mid-night,  we  left  this  troublesome  way,
and  marched  along  the  Lake  of  Sodome. This  Lake  is  A true descrlf-
called  Mare  mortuum,  the  dead  Sea,  for  of  it  selfe  it  is  ton  of  Sodome
unmoveable,  such  is  the  stabilitie  of  the  water. It  is  also  and  Gomorha-
called  so,  because  if  a  Bird  flie  over  it,  shee  presently
falleth  downe  therein  dead :  and  as  Salomon  reporteth  of
it,  Wisd. 10.  7.  it  smoaketh  continually; from  whence
proceed  filthie  vapours,  which  deforme  the  Fields,  lying
about  for  certaine  miles,  as  it  were  blasted,  scorched,  and
made  utterly  barren. This  Lake  is  eightie  miles  in  length,
and  sixe  in  bredth. It  breedeth  nor  reserveth  no  kind  of
Fishes,  and  if  by  the  swelling  of  Jordan,  any  Fishes  be
carried  to  it,  they  immediatly  die. Although  Josephus
witnesseth,  that  in  his  time,  there  was  an  Apple  grew
upon  the  bankes  thereof,  like  to  the  colour  of  Gold ;
and  within  was  rotten,  and  would  consume  to  powder ;
yet  I  affirme  now  the  contrary : for  there  is  not  such  a  Nothing  now
thing,  (whatsoever  hath  beene  in  his  dayes)  as  either  Trees,  growth  neere
or  Bushes,  grow  neere  to  Sodome  by  many  miles,  such  is  $odome; The
the consummation of that pestiferous Gulfe. Divers  reporteci  u
Authors  have  reported,  that  nothing  will  sinke  into  it,  of  Master
any  reasonable  weight, as  Dead men, or Carkasses  of  Eldred.
beasts ; but  by  experience  I  approve  the  contrary,  for  it
beareth  nothing  above  at  all ; yea,  not  the  weight  of  a
Feather. The  water  it  selfe  is  of  a  blackish  colour,  and  at

489

A.D.

1614.

Jordan*  water
is  of  a  whitish
colour.

A  comparison
betwixt
Jordan  and
Tibris,  whose
colour  and
growth,  are
both  alike,  and
their  courses
agreeable
thereunto.

Jericho.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

some  times  in  the  yeare,  there  are  terrible  shapes,  and
showes  of  terrour  in  it,  as  I  was  informed  at  Jericho,  which
is  the  neerest  Towne  that  bordereth  thereupon.

About  the  breake  of  day  on  Tuesday  morning,  we  past
by  the  ruines  of  an  old  House,  where  (as  they  say)  Saint
John  the  Baptist  remained,  when  hee  Baptized  those  that
came  from  Jerusalem,  and  other  Regions  about,  which  is
but  the  flight  of  an  Arrow  from  Jordan.  Approaching  to
the  banke-side,  we  dismounted  and  unclothed  our  selves,
going  in  naked  to  the  River,  wee  washed  us  to  refresh  our
bodies.  In  this  place  as  the  Guardian  said,  was  Christ
Baptized  of  Saint  John,  lying  on  the  banke-side ;  where-
upon are  ingraven  Letters  of  Hebrew,  Greeke,  and  Latine,
testifying  the  same  thing :  and  may  also  bee  so  conjec-
tured, in  regard  of  the  ancient  Habitacle,  of  that  precursor,
which  is  not  farre  from  thence.

This  River  Jordan  beginneth  in  Mount  Libanus,  of
two  Fountaines,  Jore,  and  Dan,  which  run  seperated  till
they  come  to  the  Lake  Maronah ;  and  hence  it  maketh
one  body,  keeping  his  course  through  the  Lake  Genesereth,
endeth  in  Sodome.  The  River  Tibris  at  Rome,  and
Jordan  are  not  much  different  in  quantitie  and  colour,  and
not  unlike  other  in  their  courses :  for  Jordan  falleth  in  the
old  Gomorah,  and  Tibris  runneth  through  the  new
Sodome.  A  historie  of  such  evidence,  as  travell  taught
me  by  experience :  for  it  is  the  Priests  confluence,  which
breeds  in  the  Italians  insolence.  If  I  erre,  I  will  beg
indulgence  of  the  Popes  aureat  magnificence.  The  water
of  Jordan  hath  beene  transported  to  Venice  in  Barrels,  for
that  puritie  it  hath ;  which  will  reserve  unspoyled,  both
moneths  and  yeares,  and  the  longer  it  is  kept,  it  is  the
fresher ;  and  to  drinke  it,  is  an  excellent  remedie  for  the
Fever  quartan,  and  Quotidian.

After  dinner  we  arose,  and  went  to  the  House  of
Zacheus  (this  was  hee  who  sate  upon  a  Tree  to  see  our
Saviour  as  he  passed  by)  the  Walls  whereof  stand  to  this
day.  Jerico,  is  now  a  poore  Village  onely  of  nine  dwelling
Houses,  inhabited  by  a  kind  of  Arabs  (which  are  in  sub-

490

WILLIAM LITHGOW  a.d.

1614.
jection  under  the  Governour  of  Jerusalem,)  but  I  saw
many  ruinous  lumpes  of  the  walls,  and  demolishings  of
the  old  Towne.  Heere  I  saw  two  most  daintie  kind  of
Fruits,  the  one  was  a  little  lesser  then  an  Apple,  but  more  A  rare  kind  of
round  ;  whose  colour  was  like  to  Gold  without,  and  within  Apples.
it  was  white  as  snow,  and  sweet  like  Sugar.  I  would
gladly  have  eaten  of  them :  but  the  Friers  forbade  me,
saying  ;  they  were  the  onely  pest  of  Death  unto  a  Stranger.
The  other  Apple  was  like  to  a  greene  Lemmon,  long,  and
full  of  knots,  of  a  reddish  colour,  like  to  a  Mellone,  being
both  delicate  and  wholsome,  of  which  we  did  eate  to  satisfie
the  naturall  appetite.  From  Jerico  wee  set  forward  in  the
way  of  the  Wildernesse ;  our  determination  being  such,
as  to  view  the  Mountaine  whereon  Christ  fasted  fortie
dayes  :  where  arrived,  being  late,  wee  durst  not  goe  up  till
Morning.  Wherefore  wee  pitched  that  Night  by  the  [II.  x.  1848.]
Fountaine  of  Elizeus ;  the  water  of  which  was  of  old,
naturally  bitter,  but  by  the  Prayers  of  that  divine  Prophet,
was  restored  to  a  sweet  taste.  It  is  also  excellent  in
digestion,  and  will  doe  a  man  no  harme :  for  I  esteeme  it
to  bee  the  lightest  Water  the  earth  yeeldeth :  having  on
the  morrow  filled  a  Boares  skinne  of  it,  to  carrie  with  me
to  the  Mountaine ;  I  found  it  so  light,  that  I  had  no
weight  nor  paine  in  the  bearing  of  it  on  my  shoulders,
notwithstanding,  the  way  of  it  selfe  was  fastidious.

This  Mountaine  is  called  Quarantanam,  or  Quaranto,  The  Mountain
being  of  height  by  the  computation  of  my  painefull  experi-  in  the  Wilder-
ence,  above  sixe  miles,  and  groweth  from  the  bottome  still  ******  ™^e!'e~
smaller  and  smaller,  till  that  the  top  is  covered  with  a  little  pasted  fortie
Chappell,  not  unlike  to  the  proportion  of  a  Pyramede.  dayes.
There  is  no  way  to  ascend  upon  this  Hill,  save  one,  which
hath  beene  hewen  out  of  the  Rocke,  by  the  industrie  of
men,  experimented  in  Masonrie,  (which  was  done  at  the
cost  of  Queene  Helen)  going  up  by  the  degrees  of  five
and  fortie  turnes. In  all  our  Companie  there  were  onely
three  Friers,  foure  Pilgrimes,  and  I,  that  durst  attempt  to
climbe  the  Mountaine. After  divers  dangers  and  narrow
passages,  having  come  to  the  top,  wee  entred  into  a  Cave

49 1

A.D.
1614.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

joyning  to  the  Chappell,  where  (say  they)  in  this  place  did
Christ  fast,  and  heere  it  was,  that  hee  rebuked  Sathan.  In
our  returne  againe,  wee  had  a  most  fearefull  descending :
for  one  Frier  Laurenzo  had  fallen  five  hundred  fathomes
over  the  Rocke,  and  broke  his  necke,  if  it  had  not  beene
for  mee :  who  rashly  and  unadvisedly  endangered  my
owne  life  for  his  safetie,  as  my  Patent  under  the  great
Seale  of  Jerusalem,  beareth  sufficient  testimonie  thereof.
But  wee  will  follow  this  our  Pilgrime  no  further,  in  visiting
these  and  the  iEgiptian  Antiquities,  nor  relating  the  other
perils  of  his  Voyage.

Chap.  XIIII.

Later  Intelligence  out  of  Turkie,  touching  the
Resignation  of  Mustapha,  and  the  advancing
of  Amurath  a  younger  Brother  of  the  lately
Murthered  Osman ;  with  other  later  Occurrents.

Ashaw  Daout,  having  married  the  Daughter
of  Mustaphas  Mother,  and  taking  some
advantage  of  the  lenative  and  tractable
disposition  of  the  Emperour,  projected
without  controversie,  first  to  destroy  the
Brethren  of  Osman,  then  to  make  away
Mustapha  :  and  last  of  all,  to  intrude  some
Children  of  his  owne,  as  if  they  had  beene  the  saved  and
preserved  stocke  of  the  Othoman  formerly :  whereupon
with  the  pernicious  assent  of  his  Mother  in  Law,  he
sendeth  a  secret  Commission  to  the  Capiaga  or  Major
domo  of  the  Seraglia,  to  remove  the  Brethren  of  Osman,
and  strangle  them,  which  hee  did  without  either  the
privitie  of  Mustapha  the  Emperour,  or  any  other  of  the
Vizeers  and  Bashawes.  But  as  these  instruments  of
Villanie  were  readie  to  carrie  away  the  Prince  in  the
tumult,  and  making  a  noyse,  the  Pages  came  in  to  their
rescue,  as  emboldned  by  the  Castiaraga,  who  long  since
grew  jealous  of  Daout  Bashawes  ambition,  and  by  this
time  saw  apparant  signes  of  perfidiousnesse.

492

OCCURHENTS OF TURKEY  a.d.

1624.

The  Pages  thus  set  on  worke,  presently  acquainted  the
Spahies  and  Janizaries,  with  the  accident,  who  as  presently
shewed  themselves  the  servants  of  the  Empire,  and  so
without  further  adoe  or  examination  of  the  matter,  killed
the  Capiaga,  and  hanged  out  his  bodie  for  a  Spectacle  in
the  Hippodrome.  But  not  thus  satisfied,  they  returne  in
furie  to  the  Court,  and  demand  Justice  even  at  the
Emperour  Mustaphas  hand :  hee  againe  disclaimes  his
consent,  or  at  least  out  of  his  simplicitie  maketh  his
Apologie,  that  if  any  thing  were  done  by  the  name  of  an
Emperour,  it  was  enforced  from  him,  and  hee  had  much
adoe  to  preserve  himselfe :  then  they  seeke  and  hunt  after
the  Mother,  who  being  found,  played  a  womans  part,  shed
teares,  wrung  her  hands,  modeld  out  a  dejected  Coun-
tenance, and  by  some  externall  signes  made  an  impression
in  them  of  her  innocencie.  Whereupon  they  repaire  to
the  Vizeer,  who  at  the  first  put  them  off,  that  it  was  a
day  of  Councell ;  and  to  single  them,  bade  them  repaire
to  the  Divan.  But  they  as  it  should  seeme,  outstript  his
policie  by  their  owne  experience,  and  told  him  plainely
they  would  have  no  sitting,  till  this  Treason  were  both
discovered,  and  punished :  at  last  hee  is  degraded  from
the  place,  and  one  Huzin  Bashaw  comming  from  iEgypt,
admitted  in  his  roome.

This  Huzin  Bashaw,  was  neither  knowne  to  Constan-
tinople, nor  Constantinople  unto  him ;  that  is,  the
Courtiers  did  little  looke  for  a  harsh,  barbarous,  insolent,
rich,  and  untractable  man ;  and  he  did  lesse  expect  the
braverie,  pleasures,  popularitie,  wantonnesse,  and  ease  of
a  licentious  Citie :  But  nature  had  quickly  taught  him  a
lesson  of  Corruption,  and  he  begins  a  Phaetons  flourish  of
greatnesse  with  the  Death  of  Daout  Bashaw,  and  insinua-
tion into  Mustaphas  modestie,  or  if  you  will  simplicitie ;
but  of  all  other  to  make  himselfe  strong  with  the  love  and
good  opinion  of  the  Pages,  and  Capogies,  hee  hangeth
many  that  were  consenting  to  Osmans  death.

In  a  word,  for  the  first  yeare  hee  proved  a  wonder  in  the
Empire,  and  by  his  Wisedome,  Courage,  and  Authority  [II.  x.  1849.]

493

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1624.

pacified  such  tumults,  and  fashioned  such  a  government  of
peace  and  tranquility  in  seditious  and  outragious  times,
that  both  Turks,  Jewes,  and  Christians  beganne  to  feare
what  a  man  he  might  prove,  or  Mustapha  proved,  though
never  so  stupid  by  his  Vivification.

Notwithstanding  all  this,  such  is  the  condition  of  great-
nesse,  that  if  it  doe  not  Mole  sua  ruere :  yet  it  may  be  1
watched  by  the  eyes  of  other  men,  who  may  either  con-
found by  opposition,  or  supplant  by  devises  :  thus  had  this
man  two  great  enemies,  the  Bashaw  of  Aleppo,  who  with
open  defiance  acted  a  brave  Scene  of  contestation,  and  the
Bashaw  Chigala  Admirall  of  the  gallies,  who  by  crafty  con-
veyance of  businesse,  lay  still  in  the  winde  to  take
advantage  of  his  contrarious  flights.  With  both  these
was  Huzein  Bashaw  to  deale :  but  such  was  his  fortune,
that  the  Bashaw  of  Aleppo,  for  all  he  had  mustred  a  great
Army  in  Armenia,  was  almost  out  of  countenance,  through
the  rarity  of  the  businesse ;  for  when  he  understood,  that
the  Souldiers  laughed  him  to  scorne,  if  he  pretended  for
himselfe,  or  had  any  conceit  to  share  the  Othoman  Empire ;
and  that  they  of  Constantinople  thought  him  too  danger-
ous, if  he  should  attempt  the  removing  of  Officers,  or  take
upon  him  to  be  so  potent  and  wise,  as  to  practise  the
reformation  or  alteration  of  the  Government ;  he  fairely
and  quietly  dismissed  the  Army,  and  was  contented  to
write  his  minde  to  the  Divan,  or  great  Councell  in  the
great  City.

But  the  Admirall  of  the  gallies  went  another  way  to
work,  having  the  sea  open  to  his  flights  or  retirings ;  and
the  Vizeers  businesse  was  opened  unto  him  by  such  as  he
had  imployed  to  watch  his  proceedings  (by  whose  en-
deavours he  had  notice,  that  the  Vizeer  meant  to  destroy
him  ;  and  ether  to  strangle  him  in  his  Gaily,  or  at  the
next  Councell  to  surprise  him,  and  send  him  to  the  seven
Towers)  whereupon  he  acquaints  the  Emperour,  his
Mother,  and  the  Mufty,  with  the  conjuration,  and  that
he  projected  the  advancing  of  Amurath,  the  second  brother
of  Osman,  and  durst  many  times  repine,  that  so  great  a

494

OCCURRENTS OF TURKEY  a.d.

1624.

burthen  as  the  Turkish  Empire  should  lie  on  so  weake  &
unable  shoulders.

This  never  started  Mustapha  at  all,  but  contrary
to  expectation  hee  acquaints  Huzein  Bashaw  with  the
secret,  and  Huzein  acquaints  himselfe  with  the  danger,  so
that  being  yet  at  liberty  sends  great  store  of  Treasure  to
Gran  Cayro,  and  as  some  have  it,  retires  himselfe  against
all  expectation,  to  the  country  where  hee  had  bin  brought
up,  and  was  fuller  of  Reeds  and  secret  Caves  to  hide  him,
then  other  places  :  that  is,  presuming  on  his  wealth  and  the
peoples  love,  he  verily  conceived  they  would  give  him
leave  to  live  a  private  life :  yet  doe  others  affirme,  that
hee  was  overmatched  and  overtaken,  and  so  cast  into  the
seven  Towers.

When  Mustapha  perceived  to  what  straights  he  was
driven,  and  that  all  this  coile  was  for  the  glory  of
Soveraignty :  of  which  though  he  were  possessed  in  the
highest  degree  of  Majestie,  yet  far  from  security,  in  regard
his  two  Nephewes  lived  of  the  direct  Line  of  the  Othoman
Family,  he  resolved  to  cozen  death,  destruction  and  mis-
fortune, by  a  voluntary  submission  and  resignation  of  his
Crowne.  Whereupon  he  sent  for  his  Mother,  the  Doctors
of  the  Law,  &  some  principall  Officers,  as  the  Teffterdy
(or  Treasurer)  the  Cadiselker  (or  chiefe  Judge)  the  Haga
(or  Captaine  of  the  Janizaries)  and  divers  others  whom  he
had  acquainted  with  his  resolution,  desiring  to  see  his
Nephew  before  he  retired  himselfe  to  the  Prison,  and  so
the  Prince  being  presented  unto  him,  he  only  wished  that
he  would  take  notice  of  his  owne  fortunes :  that  is,  not  to
trust  in  any  condition  of  man  :  not  to  be  peremptory,  or
prejudicate  in  his  owne  opinion :  to  dissolve  if  it  were
possible  that  custome  of  strangling  their  brethren :  to
remember,  that  al  Empires  had  their  beginning,  progres-
sion, and  dissolution :  to  take  heed  of  Flatterers  and
Parasites  :  and  by  no  meanes  to  neglect  the  service  of  God,
but  make  use  of  true  devotion,  in  setting  the  Jewes  before
him,  who  lost  their  glorious  estate,  meerely  through
Idolatrie : and  thus  is  Mustapha  deposed,  and  Amurath

495

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1624.

Osmans  brother  advanced  :  but  herein  consists  the  wonder,
that  all  this  was  done  without  trouble,  terror,  shutting  up
of  a  shop,  disturbing  the  Merchant,  rifling  a  Jew,  or
tumult  of  the  Janizaries.

A  Letter  r  i  ^He  King  of  Persia  hath  besieged  a  strong  castle,
ZColVaJ-0m  within  the  Precinct  of  Arzerum,  the  old  government

tinopky  the  °^  Abassa  Bassa  ;  Whether  this  hath  occasioned  it,  or  that
tenth  of  July,  he  and  the  Vizeer  were  one  afraid  of  another,  a  peace  is
1624.  made  betweene  them,  and  the  government  of  that  Pro-

vince given  him  during  life :  For  defence  whereof,  he  is
directly  marched  thither :  Pardon  and  Honours  are  con-
firmed from  the  Port,  and  whatsoever  the  Rebels  would
propound  for  themselves ;  And  yet  at  this  dishonourable
agreement,  this  State  doth  rejoyce,  as  at  a  great  victory,
and  have  raised  their  hopes  now  of  good  successe  against
the  Persian,  yet  there  rests  some  doubt,  because  neither
part  will  trust  the  other,  but  have  taken  several  waies,  the
Vizeer  directly  towards  Babylon  :  Abassa  to  Aszeron,  from
whence  little  this  yeere  is  expected,  and  few  beleeve  that
the  Persian  will  sell  all  his  conquest,  for  the  noyse  at  first
sight  of  their  Armies.

From  the  Black  Sea,  hath  come  many  advices,  that  the
Prince  of  the  Tartars  sent  from  hence,  is  beaten  from  the
land,  &  that  the  Captain  Bassa  seeking  once  more  to  set
him  on  shore,  hath  received  a  great  foyle  and  losse,  wherein
the  Prince  was  hurt,  if  not  slaine :  of  the  particulars  we
can  have  no  certainty  but  without  doubt,  the  parties  sent
from  hence  have  received  disgrace,  &  the  Tartar  hath
discovered  an  Arcanum  Imperii,  posse  Principem  alibi
quam  Roma  fieri,  they  never  committed  a  greater  error,
though  al  be  one  confusion  of  error  in  government,  then
this,  nor  of  which  they  will  sooner  &  longer  repent,  that
they  would  offer  in  these  times,  when  the  peace  of  Poland
wavered,  when  all  their  forces  were  drawne  into  Asia  to
[II.  x.  1850.]  depose  a  young  Prince  who  was  well  beloved  of  the
people,  to  plant  an  old  goutie  decreped  wretch,  who
the  last  yeere  was  by them deposed for  insufficiency;

496

OCCURRENTS OF TURKEY  a.d.

1624.

and  now  the  quarrell is  on foot, they  know not  how
to  retire.

This  Empire  hath  hereby  lost  or  indangered  one  of  the
greatest  honours  and  prerogatives ;  to  give  that  Nation  a
Prince  at  the  Pleasure  of  the  Grand  Signiour,  whom  now
they  not  onely  refuse,  but  dare  oppose  the  Armies  of  the
Port,  and  send  insolent  letters,  that  it  is  sufficient  for  these
to  governe  Constantinople  if  they  will  not  be  quiet,  but
undertake  to  molest  the  Princes  in  possession ;  that  they
will  esteeme  themselves  as  free  and  as  ancient,  as  the  race
of  Ottoman :  In  conclusion,  I  am  of  opinion,  there  wil  be
found  some  way  (though  with  shame)  to  recall  their  Order,
and  to  confirme  the  present  Prince,  excusing  the  fault  by
misinformation,  which  for  quietnes  he  may  formally  accept.
There  is  not  one  word  or  mention  of  Bethlem  Gabor,
nor  his  designes,  since  the  departure  of  his  Embassadours  :
It  is  beleeved  all  things  are  quieter  there,  then  is  con-
venient for  the  quiet  of  other  Christian  Countries.

Nine  gallies  of  Messena  &  4.  of  Malta  have  met  with
five  Pirat  ships  of  Barbery  entring  into  the  Port  of  Tunis,
and  being  favoured  by  a  calme,  sunke  two  of  them  in
fight,  &  took  the  other  three  with  600.  men  in  them ;
whom  they  have  brought  to  Palermo.  It  is  reported
Sampson  was  Commander,  who  when  hee  must  fall  into
Captivitie  by  two  wounds,  with  his  owne  hands  he  ended
his  wretched  life.  These  13.  Gallies  joyning  with  sixe  of
the  great  Dukes,  within  two  dayes  after  went  out  againe,
understanding  of  seven  Cossires  more ;  now  they  have
opportunity  to  do  any  thing,  if  they  have  courage :  for
there  are  no  Gallies  of  this  Port  in  the  Medeterranium  to
hinder  them.  Tis  thought  that  these  five  Pirates  are  the
same  that  were  at  Cyprus  &  Scandrone.  The  ninth  day
of  this  month,  betweene  70.  and  80.  boats  of  the  Cossacks,
with  fifty  men  apeece,  Rowers  and  Souldiers  (watching
their  opportunitie  of  the  Captaine  Bassas  being  ingaged  in
Tartary)  entred  the  Bospherus  about  breake  of  day,  where
dividing  themselves,  they  sackt  and  burnt  almost  all  the
villages  and  houses  of  pleasure  on  both  sides  the  River,
x  497  21

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1624.

as  farre  as  the  Castles,  and  within  foure  miles  of  this
Citie  :  The  principall  places  were  Bainkderry  and  Genney-
choy,  on  the  Grecian  and  Stenia,  and  on  the  Asian  shore,
where  having  made  rich  and  great  bootie,  they  staied  till
nine  of  the  clock  in  the  forenoone,  and  then  all  this  Citie
and  the  Suburbs  having  taken  the  alarum,  the  Grand
Signior  came  downe  to  the  water  side,  the  Chimacham  to
the  water  Port :  Hally  bassa  made  himselfe  Generall  in
this  tumult,  and  having  not  one  Gaily  ready  for  defence,
they  manned  and  armed  all  the  Ships,  Boats,  Barges,  &
other  small  Wherryes,  to  the  number  of  4.  or  500.  with
such  people  as  they  could  either  get  to  row,  or  hope  to
fight ;  &  dispatched  all  the  Horse  and  Foot  in  the  Citie  to
the  number  of  10000.  to  defend  the  Coast  from  further
spoile.  Never  was  seene  a  greater  feare  and  confusion :
Now  we  expected  that  these  poore  theeves  would  presently
have  retired ;  but  they  seeing  the  Turkes  Boats  making
towards  them,  drew  themselves  into  the  middst  of  the
channell,  and  not  far  above  the  Castles,  and  staid  flrme
upon  their  Oares  in  Battalia  in  forme  of  a  Cressant  expect-
ing the  assault,  the  wind  and  current  being  against  them.
Hally-Bassa  caused  some  shot  to  be  made  a  far  off,  but
they  answered  not  with  one  Musket,  but  hovered  from
one  shoare  to  another  without  any  shew  of  retrait.  Here-
upon the  Generall  seeing  their  forme  and  resolution,
thought  it  not  fit  to  assaile  them  with  such  Boats  as  he
had,  but  esteemed  it  wisdome  enough  to  keepe  them  from
further  attempts,  fearing  if  they  had  broken  his  Fleet  of
Boats  (which  was  easily  to  be  done)  that  they  would  ven-
ture downe  to  Constantinople,  which  was  now  empty  of  all
defence.  And  these  few  Boates  having  first  made  great
spoyle,  lay  the  whole  day  untill  Sun  set,  scaring  and
braving  the  great  and  fearefull  Citie  of  the  world,  and  all
the  force  it  could  make ;  and  departed  with  their  booty,
with  their  Colours  spread,  unsought  and  almost  unresisted.
This  small  action  and  bold  attempt,  to  affront  so  great  an
Empire,  hath  made  a  strange  discovery ;  how  much  under
the  reputation,  the  terror  and  strength  of  this  State  now

498

OCCURRENTS OF TURKEY  a.d.

1618.

is ;  how  weake  and  unprovided  they  are.  But  as  the
Oracles  commanded  them,  first  to  set  over  against  blind
men  :  So  it  hath  bin  their  fortune  unto  this  day  to  have
blind  Enemies.  Philip  of  Macedon  had  never  projected,
nor  his  Sonne  Alexander  ever  adventured  with  so  small
Forces,  the  huge  enterprises  of  subduing  the  Easterne
Empire,  if  they  had  not  discovered  the  effeminate  and
faint  courage  of  the  Asiaticks,  by  the  admirable  retrait  of
Xenophon,  and  swift  incursion  of  Agesilaus  great  Armies,
not  daring  to  oppose  the  vertue  of  their  small  numbers.
Sepe  res  maximae  ex  parvis  principiis  oriuntur.  How
this  attempt  will  be  taken  from  the  Poles,  is  a  question.
For  hereby  the  Treaty  of  Peace  is  absolutely  broken.

Chap.  XV.

Briefe  Extracts  of  a  Journall  of  Arnold  Browne
his  Indian  voyages,  sailing  divers  times  and
courses  in  five  yeeres  space  to  Bantam,  Patania,
Japan,  the  Manillas,  Macau,  and  the  Coast
of  China,  with  other  Indian Ports.

Ebruary 18. 161 7.*  wee  (in  the  Samson)  *In  this
departed from  Tilbery, and  on the 1 1 .  voyage  Sir  T.
came to the  Downes. On the 24. the  D*tT^!
Sunne  and  Moone  came  into  the  Downes.  0ftajl0m  see
The  26.  the  Dragon,  Lion,  and  Expedi-  sup.  /.  5.
tion  set  saile,  &c. June  20. 161 8.  wee  D.  Devill of
got  into  the  Road  of  Soldania,  in  latitude  D-  *?*&*
33. degrees 50. minutes, longitude 28. degrees 3c.  ^Zhtian
minutes,  variation  o.  deg.  50.  min.  the  Northwest  July  13.  sMps.
came  in  the  Devill  of  Delph,  with  a  prize. On  the  30.
wee  tooke  a  Portugall  Ship  bound  for  Mosambique,  which  [II.x.1851.]
had  lost  company  of  three  Carrikes. By  a  Councell  she  was
freed  with  all  in  her. August  14.  we  saw  a  Carrike. On  _^
the  21.  M.  Spalding  was  sent  aboard  her. By  the  24.  wee  Te- t' y
made  an  end  with  her,  and  fetched  *  the  money  from  her.  ietter%  Cm  3>
September  15.  we  espied  Land,  being  the  Hand  of  Ingano.  Ingane.

499

A.D.

I6l8.

Sun  distressed.

Of  such
unhappy
names  seeP  art.
4.pag.  1367.

Sumatra.

Sun  lost.

68.  of  her  men

arrive.

A.  16]

The  fight  you
have  before  in
C.  Pring,  &c.
the  rest  in
F/oris  and
others.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Here  the  Current  setting  to  the  shoare,  the  Sunne  our
Admirall  (her  men  being  very  weake)  seemed  in  great
danger.  Sir  Tho.  Dale  was  aboard  the  Clove,  with  the
President  Cap.  Jordan  :  and  it  was  concluded  that  wee
should  goe  for  Bantam.  The  South  of  Ingano  is  reason-
able high  and  wooddie.  On  the  Southwest  is  false
sounding,  one  cast  twentie ;  the  next  fourteene  or  fifteene
fadome.  It  is  safe  to  keepe  farther  off  in  sixe  or  in  5.
degrees  fiftie  minutes.  November  17.  we  espied  the
Land  of  Sumatra,  the  Southwest  point :  latitude  6.  degrees
15.  minutes  long:  from  Cape  of  Good  Hope  80.  degrees
38.  minutes. The  21.  we  entred  Bantam  Rode.

The  next  day  arrived  sixtie  eight  of  the  Suns  men  in
their  Skiffe,  and  a  small  Boat  which  they  had  built,  having
lost  their  Ship  on  the  fifteenth  split  on  the  shoare.  Yet
it  pleased  God  to  save  neere  one  hundred  of  our  men,  on
whom  the  Cruell  Inhabitants  and  Hunger  made  fresh
assaults,  so  that  some  which  had  escaped,  escaped  not
wounds  or  deaths.  December  the  fourth,  the  Blacke  Lion
yeelded  her  selfe,  which  after  on  the  27.  three  or  foure
drunken  fellowes  stealing  Rackapee  set  on  fire,  so  that
shee  was  lost  with  all  in  her,  &c.  The  fights  with  the
Hollanders,  and  his  Voyage  to  Patania  I  omit.

June  5.  1 61 9.  our  Ships  got  into  the  Rode  of  Patania.
Wee  were  in  great  danger  of  driving  on  a  shoald.  The
President  went  to  the  Queene  with  a  great  Present.  On
the  16.  wee  had  sight  of  foure  Dutch  Ships,  and  fitted
our  selves  to  fight.  No  perswasion  could  move  the
President  to  set  saile,  but  hee  abode  at  an  anchor  till  the
Dutch  Ships  anchored  by  us.  The  next  morning  without
speaking  any  word,  they  shot,  and  wee  answered,  but  in
short  time  wee  had  but  few  left  which  could  do  us  any
pleasure.  The  weather  was  now  calme  and  we  could  not
set  saile,  as  before  wee  might  have  done :  Whereupon  the
President  was  willing  to  come  to  a  parlie.  I  was  shot  in
two  places,  and  perswaded  him  to  fight  it  out :  but  when
I  was  gone  downe  hee  sent  the  Master  aboord  the  Angell
(one  of  the  Dutch  Ships)  to  parly  about  yeelding,  and

500

ARNOLD BROWNE  a.d.

1619.
order  was  presently  given  to  shoot  no  more. At  which
time I was spoiled with  Powder by a shot from the
Admirall,  our  Master  detained,  and  the  President  slaine  C.  Jordan
with  a  shot  thorow  the  bodie,  after  the  Ship  was  yeelded,  slam  aSatnst
as  I  understand. For  the  Master  went  aboord  to  give  up  ^^J°f\
the  Ship,  with  condition  that  the  Company  should  depart  f>9<  &C.12.
with their goods ; which they promised : but after  §.  3.
possession  taken,  heathenlike  they  broke  it. For  mine  The  Samson  13
owne  part,  before  I  understood  of  any  thing,  the  Ship  was  ^^  '**,
full  of  Hollanders,  we  having  at  that  time  eleven  men
slaine,  and  thirtie  three  hurt,  foure  of  which  were  dis-
membred. September 17.  by  reason  of  a  broile  raised
among  the  Slaves  we  had  two  men  slaine,  and  it  was
feared  the  Blackes  would  have  pulled  down  the  Godowne
and  made  pillage  of  all.

Our  men  in  three  Prawes  returned  to  our  Fleet.
November  22.  as  wee  rode  at  Pellambam  wee  saw  one
Dutch  Ship,  and  betwixt  that  and  Pulo  Pemon  ten  more :
but  whiles  we  sought  to  escape  neere  the  shoare,  a  Boat
from  the  first  Ship  came  to  us,  and  said,  that  we  were  all
friends.  We  being  within  Musket  shot  of  two  ships,
must  either  go  aboord  or  ashore  :  we  did  the  first,  but  their
Admirall  bestowed  us  aboord  amongst  their  Ships,  and
tooke  our  Boat  from  us.  The  22.  came  in  the  Dragon,
Beare,  and  Expedition,  to  our  great  griefe  and  their  great
rejoicing,  as  Prizes  taken  at  Tecco.  The  thirtieth  the
Flying  Hart  brought  newes,  that  Sir  Tho.  Dale  was  dead
with  many  others,  at  which  they  greatly  rejoyced.
December  4.  came  in  a  Boat  with  a  Crosse  saile,  being  a
Ships  Boat  called  the  New  Hound,  their  Ship  being  lost  by  Dutch  ship
fire  through  the  Stewards  Mates  negligence  in  drawing  lost-
Aquavitae,  150.  men  lost,  the  rest  in  the  boats  escaping
to  Sumatra,  where  15.  were  slain  by  the  Blackes  and
others  hurt.  The  29.  was  a  solemne  Fast  holden  with
prayer  for  the  conquest  they  had  of  the  English,  with
eating  &  drinking  all  the  day  long.  January  17.  came  in
a  small  Pinnace  from  Jacatra,  and  the  White  Beare  which
had  bin nine months  comming from Holland, &  had

501

A.D.
1619.

1 1 .  Dutch
drowned.
A.  1620.
Peace  betwixt
English  and
Dutch,

Voyage  to
Japan.  See
sup.  in  Saris
fcf  Primil.

Voyage  from
Japan  to
Manillas.

[II.x.1852.]

Bay  of
Manillas.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

throwne  nine  men  overboord  alive,  besides  two  which
saved  them  the  labour,  for  conspiracy.

March  14.  Cap.  Robert  Adams  in  the  Bull  came  in,  and
went  aboard  the  Admirall :  and  April  1.  1620.  all  the
English  prisoners  at  Jacatra  were  freed  &  set  aboord  the
Bull.  On  the  21.  the  Dutch  put  the  Indraught  an  old
Ship  on  shoare,  thinking  to  have  made  a  Bulwarke  of
her  against  Bantam,  but  she  overthrowing  on  the  side
frustrated  their  hopes  and  cost.  May  11.  Capt.  Adams
by  a  Councell  was  made  Admirall  for  the  English  over
five  Ships,  and  five  Dutch  Ships  in  company  were  to  goe
for  Japan,  and  so  for  the  Manillas.  The  21.  the  Hope,
the  Bull  and  the  Elisabeth  departed  from  Jacatra  for  Japan,
with  two  Dutch  Ships,  the  Harlem  &  Hope  in  company.
The  24.  the  Vrede  arrived,  which  brought  conditions  of
peace  out  of  Holland ;  which  on  the  30.  was  proclaimed
ashoare  and  aboord  of  every  Shippe,  with  great  triumph.
June  the  third,  the  Moone  and  the  Palsgrave  set  saile  for
Japan  (I  was  made  Master  of  the  Palsgrave  by  a  generall
Councell  of  Defence)  with  the  New  Bantam  and  the  Trow,
two  Dutch  Ships.  The  voyage  to  Japan  August  the
fifth,  they  came  to  Coochy  road  neere  Firando.  The
31.  our  Captaine  set  forth  of  Firando  to  go  to  the
Emperour,  and  the  Dutch  likewise.  We  delivered  ashore
1547.  barres  of  Lead.

January  the  third,  we  departed  from  the  road  of  Coochy
bound  for  the  Manillas :  The  fourth  the  Hand  Maxima
bore  North  West  five  leagues  off,  the  Land  high  and
ragged.  The  ninth,  the  Hand  of  the  three  Kings  bare
West.  The  10.  the  Iland  called  Long  Iland  bore  East
North  East.  The  12.  the  Northermost  of  the  two  Hands
Buckamegell  bore  North  Northwest.  The  13.  the  biggest
of  the  Babuanis  East.  The  15.  at  noone  Cap.  Bojador
bare  East  of  us  4.  leagues  latitude,  18.  deg.  40.  min.
The  21.  at  noone  within  two  leagues  of  C.  Bullanave  in
16.  deg.  30.  min.  The  24.  we  plied  to  and  fro  off  the
Bay  of  Manilias.  The  26.  the  Dutch  Hope  met  with  a
China  Champan,  and  tooke  her  being  come  from  the  Bay

502

ARNOLD BROWNE  a.d.

1621.
of  Tundo  from  a  China  Junke  bound  for  the  Bay  of
Manillas,  which  the  said  Hope  tooke  on  the  26.  The
27.  two  Champans  more  taken  laden  one  with  Rice,  the
other  with  Timber.  The  31.  two  Boats  more  taken,  and
one  burnt.

From  the  first  of  Feb.  to  the  sixt  we  were  turning  up
from  the  He  Marvels,  &  the  Cavetta  where  the  Spanish
Ships  ride ;  the  Bay  a  very  faire  one,  from  24.  to  six
fathom :  in  the  mid  way  take  heed  you  come  no  neerer
the  shore  on  the  South  then  ten  fathoms,  in  respect  of  a
steep  Bank  that  lieth  off  the  shoare :  otherwise  nothing  in
all  the  Bay  is  to  be  feared  but  one  Rock,  on  the  South  side
also,  halfe  a  league  of  the  Black  point  within  the  Oyster
Rock.  This  Rock  hath  on  it  two  fathoms  water.  At
Cavetta  we  found  riding  six  or  seven  ships,  and  two  of  Cavetta.
them  great  Gallions,  but  all  unrigged.  The  eight  we
passed  by  the  Towne  of  Cavetta  with  our  ships.  The
towne  shot  two  Peeces  at  our  Admirall,  but  could  not
reach  her.  Wee  all  anchored  in  the  Rode  halfe  way
betwixt  Cavetta,  and  the  towne  of  Manillas,  in  seven
and  a  halfe  fathom  ozie  ground.  Cavetta  lieth  from
Manillas  South  Southwest  two  leagues  &  a  halfe  by  Sea,
by  Land  above  3.  From  Cavetta  to  Maravelle  the  Course  Maravelle.
is  west  southwest  somwhat  Southerly.  On  the  north  of
Maravelle  is  good  fresh  water,  but  not  much,  deepe
anchoring  neere  the  shore :  we  went  on  shore  thereon  240.
but  found  no  people.

After  some  time  spent  in  watering,  careening,  discover-  A.  1621.
ing  and  other  affaires,  March  28. 1621.  by  order  of  a
Councell,  the  Fleet  was  dispersed  for  better  looking  out
for  Junkes  comming  from  China  with  the  Coast. I  was
appointed  to  the  Ship  Swan  to  goe  with  it,  two  Frigats  and
two  Boats  into  the  Bay  of  Pangasina  to  fire  a  ship  there  in  Bay  ofPanga-
building ; but  we  found  none  such. April 13.  all  the  sina-
ships went to Hart Bay to water. On the 18. we
boorded a Junke which proved of Japan, having the
Emperours  Passe, and  Letters  from Capt. Cockes  and
the  Dutch  Merchant. The  same  day  the  Harlem  tooke  a

503

A.D.
l62I.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Dutch.

Straits  of
Pescadores.

Returne  to
Japan.

China  Junke,  and  carried  her  into  Witters  Hand.  May
26.  The  Dutch  Frigat  fought  with  a  China  Junke,  but
could  not  take  her ;  wherupon  our  Frigat  went  up  and
Cruelty  of  the  tooke  her ;  and  the  Dutch  comming  aboord  after  they  had
yeelded,  killed,  and  made  leap  over-boord  to  the  quantitie

of  sixtie  or  seventy,  (like  bloudy ) On  the  30.  the

Dutch  Frigat  was  in  fight  with  another  China  Junke  and
could  not  take  her,  having  spent  most  of  their  powder :
and  met  our  Frigat  and  told  them,  which  pursued  her
and  the  next  day  overtooke  her,  and  she  yeelded  to  them :
they  put  the  men  on  shore. The  Dutch  set  fire  on  the

Junk, which  was  one  of  their  ( ) tricks. Jun. 9.

(there  being  no  hopes  of  more  Junkes  that  yeere)  it  was
concluded  that  wee  should  direct  our  course  for  the
Streits  of  Piscadores,  I  would  wish  all  from  the  Manilles
to  Macau  or  Piscadores  to  keepe  it  well  up  to  the  West,
and  not  to  goe  to  the  North  to  prevent  shoalds.

On  the  29.  we  entred  the  Harbour  of  Choochie.  It
was  agreed  that  foure  Ships  should  goe  to  Firando :
whither  wee  went  July  10.  In  September  the  Bull  and
Peppercorne  were  careened.  Richard  Short  one  of  the
Masters  Mates  of  the  Moone  ranne  the  second  time  to
the  Portugalls.  October  the  first,  sixe  more  of  the
Peppercorne  and  Bull  ranne  to  the  Portugalls,  which  were
pursued  and  taken,  and  foure  executed.  Two  of  the
Elisabeths  men  stole  a  praw,  with  intent  to  runne  to  them
also  to  Langasack.  The  eighteenth,  the  Peppercorne  and
the  Moyen  a  Dutch  Shippe  went  for  the  Coast  of  China,
to  lie  there  till  the  comming  of  the  Fleet.  November  the
first,  the  three  English  Store-houses  at  Choochy  were
burned  to  the  ground  by  negligence.

The  23.  we  put  to  Sea  with  all  the  Fleet:  December
the  tenth  they  met  with  the  Peppercorne  and  Moyen,
which  had  beene  sixe  weekes  on  the  Coast  and  taken
nothing.  They  were  now  ten  Ships.  The  twelfth,  a
Frigat  was  taken  laden  with  Canvas  to  make  sailes  for  the
Fleet  at  Manillas.  January  the  third,  the  Countrey
people  (before  unseene)  killed  foure  of  the  Peppercornes

5°4

Second  Voyage
to  Manillas.

ARNOLD BROWNE  a.d.

1622.
men,  in  Witters  Hand  where  they  were  watering,  through
their  owne  securitie. For  ten  of  ours  might  have  kept  off
one  hundreth  of  them. Their  Weapons  are  Bowes  and
Arrowes  not  poysoned.

The thirtieth wee went into the Bay where the
Spaniards  had  foure  great  Ships,  three  small,  and  three
Gallies,  besides  other  small  Frigots. Some  Truce-parlies
passed  and  some  bickerings  also  to  small  purpose. Divers
Fugitives  came  to  us  from  them. The  Fleet  observed
their  opportunities,  but  little  was  done. April  18.  1622. j  jg22
8.  of  the  Moones  men  ran  away  with  her  Shallop  to  the
Manillas. The  Peppercorne  tooke two or three small
Junkes,  but  little  in  them. May  6.  at  Looang  Hand  we  j  iooan„
found  30.  tuns  of  Red  Wood,  a  China  Junke,  a  Portugall,
and  two  or  three  Champans  in  the  River,  which  were
fired,  except  the  Wood. The  9.  foure  ships  were  sent  to  They  saile  to
Macau,  the  rest  to  Piscadores  to  exchange  Portugalls  for  Macau.
our  men,  and  to  intercept  Frigats. The  17.  a  Frigat  of
Macau  was  after  long  fight  taken  by  our  shallops,  with
320. balls of  goods. June 1. we had sight of three
Frigats,  which  went  in  among  the  Hands  for  Macao,  we
not  being  able  to  hinder  them. A  Priest  and  others  came
aboord  with  a  Flag  of  Truce  to  treat  about  their  men.
The  12.  came  in  eleven  Dutch  Ships  to  take  in  Macau,
and  never  offered  to  speake  with  us,  but  went  directly
as  neere  the  Towne  as  they  could,  and  sent  presently  small
vessells  to  sound. They  landed 1000.  men  on  the  14.
against  Macau,  &  after  mutuall  shot  were  repelled,  having  j)utc^  retulse
lost  six  Captains  (as  I  heard)  and  above  200.  men,  besides  at  Macau.
many  hurt;  and  had  they  not  gotten  their  Boats  as  they  [II. x.  1853.]
did,  they  had  beene  all,  by  their  owne  report,  put  to  the
sword. On  the  17.  we  departed  as  it  had  beene  agreed,
and  anchored  under  the  lies  Ladrones  all  night. The  Ladrones.
next  day  we  put  to  Sea  betwixt  the  lies  Supattos  and Their  third
Neme. July  4.  wee  were  close  aboord  the  point  of  Langa-  comming  to
sacke. On the sixth M. Hatch the *  Preacher came  {"£"%  letter
aboord. August  2.  A  Councell  was  called  at  the  Dutch  supCm  ^
house  by  their  Admirall,  in  which  it  was  concluded  to

505

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1622.

dissolve  the  two  Fleets ;  each  to  beare  their  own  adven-
A  Tjfin  or  tures  till  they  came  to  Jacatra.  The  15.  we  had  a  Tyffon
cmell  storme.  Southerly,  and  broke  two  Cables.  The  Dutch  Moone
and  Hound  drove  ashoare,  the  Moone  litle  hurt,  the  other
bilged.  The  Peppercorne  and  Hailem,  drove  ashoare  at
Firando  without  hurt.  This  Tyffon  was  so  sore  at  Sea,
that  the  Moyen  cut  over-bord  her  maine  Mast,  and
threw  out  her  Shallop :  the  Tro  threw  out  300.  sackes  of
Rice,  wet  more,  with  her  Powder,  and  was  so  leake  shee
was  like  to  sinke.  The  Bantam  lost  her  maine  and  misen
Masts,  threw  over-bord  3.  Pieces  of  Ordnance,  2.
Anchors,  a  Shallop,  600.  sackes  of  Rice,  her  Head  and
Gallerie  all  washt  away,  &c.  October  9.  the  Dutch  Moone
and  Hound,  layd  up  sunke.  The  i5»th  we  went  out  into
the  Road,  being  bound  for  Jambee.  Till  the  first  of
November  we  had  no  sight  of  the  Sun  to  make  observa-
tion. The  15-th  we  got  into  the  road  of  Jambee.  The
Anno  1623.  rest  I  omit.  May  28.  they  had  sight  of  Saint  Helena,  and
anchored  next  day  in  Chappell  Bay.  August  26.  they
arrived  at  Erith.

Thus  have  you  seene  the  Dutch  dealings  in  the  Indies
with  the  English  and  Natives ;  agreeing  to  that  which  in
the  third,  fourth,  and  fifth  Bookes  is  more  fully  before
delivered  :  to  which  this  is  here  added  as  later  Intelligence,
and  containing  relation  both  of  the  Manillas  and  of  the
English  industry,  cost  and  dangers  sustained  to  maintaine
termes  of  Peace  according  to  the  league  and  Conditions
articled  betwixt  them.  Now  for  their  correspondence  to
the  English,  thou  mayst  read  in  the  following  Relation,
confirmed  by  the  Oathes  of  divers  thence  returned,  pub-
lished lately  by  the  East  Indian  Societie  and  heere
abbridged,  the  worke  swelling  too  much,  and  a  little  of
such  Discourse  being  more  then  enough.

506

DUTCH  PROCEEDINGS  AT  AMBOYNA  a.d.

1622.

Chap.  XVI.

The  Dutch  late  proceedings  at  Amboyna,  in  cruell
torturing  and  executing  of  divers  English-men  :
with  other  their  like  Acts  to  the  Natives  in
Banda  ;  published  lately  by  the  English-East-
Indian Societie  ; heere  much  abbreviated.

Fter  the  fruitlesse  issue  of  two  severall
Treaties:  the  first  Anno  1613.  in
London;  and  the  other  Anno  161 5.  at
the  Hage  in  Holland,  touching  the  differ-
ences betweene  the  English  and  Dutch  in
the  East-Indies,  at  last  by  a  third  Treatie
Anno  1 619.  in  London,  there  was  a  full
and  solemne  composition  made  of  all  the  said  differences,
and  a  faire  order  set  for  the  future  proceeding  of  the
Supposts  of  both  Companies  in  the  Indies ;  aswell  in  the
course  of  their  Trade  and  Commerce,  as  otherwise.
Amongst  sundry  other  points,  it  was  agreed,  that  in  regard
of  the  great  blood-shed  and  cost,  pretended  to  bee
bestowed  by  the  Hollanders,  in  winning  of  the  Trade  of
the  lies  of  the  Molluccos,  Banda,  and  Amboyna,  from  the
Spaniards  and  Portugals,  and  in  building  of  Forts  for  the
continuall  securing  of  the  same,  the  said  Hollanders  there-
fore should  enjoy  two  third  parts  of  that  Trade,  and  the
English  the  other  third  ;  and  the  charge  of  the  Forts  to  bee
maintained  by  taxes  and  impositions,  to  be  levied  upon  the
Merchandize.  Wherefore,  in  consequence  of  this  agree-
ment, the  English  East  India  Company  planted  certaine
Factories  for  their  share  of  this  Trade ;  some  at  the
Molluccos,  some  at  Banda,  and  some  at  Amboyna.

This  Amboyna  is  an  Hand  lying  neere  Seran,  of  the  Amboyna
Circuit  of  fortie  leagues,  and  giveth  name  also  to  some  described.
other small Hands adjacent. It beareth Cloves ; for
gathering  and  buying  in  whereof,  the  English  Companie
for  their  part  had  planted  five  severall  Factories  :  the  head
and  Rendevouz  of  all,  at  the  Towne  of  Amboyna ; and

507

A.D.

[622.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Dutch  Castle.

therein  first,  Master  George  Muschampe,  and  afterward
Master  Gabriell  Towerson,  their  Agents,  with  directions
over  the  smaller  Factories  at  Hitto  and  Larica,  upon  the
same  Hand,  and  at  Loho  and  Cambello,  upon  a  point  of
their  neighbouring  Hand  of  Seran.

Upon  these  Hands  of  Amboyna,  and  the  point  of  Seran,
the  Hollanders  have  foure  Forts ;  the  chiefe  of  all  is  at  the
said  Towne  of  Amboyna,  and  is  very  strong,  having  foure
Points  or  Bulwarkes  with  their  Curtaines,  and  upon  each
of  these  Points  sixe  great  Pieces  of  Ordnance  mounted,
most  of  them  of  Brasse.  The  one  side  of  this  Castle  is
washed  by  the  Sea,  and  the  other  is  divided  from  the
Land  with  a  Ditch  of  foure  or  five  fathome  broad,  very

Garrison.  deepe,  and  ever  filled  with  the  Sea.  The  Garrison  of  this
Castle  consisteth  of  about  two  hundred  Dutch  Souldiers,
and  a  Company  of  free  Burgers.  Besides  these,  there  is
alwayes  a  matter  of  three  or  foure  hundred  Mardikers
(for  so  they  usually  call  the  free  Natives)  in  the  Towne,
ready  to  serve  the  Castle  at  an  houres  warning.  There
lye  also  in  the  Roade  (for  the  most  part)  divers  good  Ships
of  the  Hollanders,  as  well  for  the  guard  of  the  place  by

[II.  x.  1854.]  Sea,  as  for  the  occasions  of  Traffique  :  this  being  the  chiefe
Rendevouz,  as  well  for  the  Hand  of  Banda,  as  for  the  rest
of  Amboyna.  Heere  the  English  lived ;  not  in  the
Castle,  but  under  protection  thereof,  in  a  house  of  their
owne  in  the  Towne ;  holding  themselves  safe,  as  well  in
respect  of  the  ancient  bonds  of  Amitie  betweene  both
Nations,  as  of  the  strict  conjunction  made  by  the  late
Treatie  before  mentioned.

They  continued  heere  some  two  yeares,  conversing  and
trading  together  with  the  Hollanders,  by  vertue  of  the
said  Treatie.  In  which  time  there  fell  out  sundrie  differ-
ences and  debates  betweene  them ;  The  English  com-
playning  that  the  Hollanders  did  not  onely  lavish  away
much  money  in  Building,  and  unnecessarie  expences,
upon  the  Forts  and  otherwise,  and  bring  large  and  un-
reasonable reckonings  thereof  to  the  common  accompt ;
but  also  did,  for  their  part,  pay  the  Garrisons  with  victuals

508

Subjects.

Ships.

DUTCH  PROCEEDINGS  AT  AMBOYNA  a.d.

1622.

and  cloath  of  Coromandell,  which  they  put  off  to  the
Souldiers  at  three  or  foure  times  the  value  it  cost  them,
yet  would  not  allow  of  the  English  Companies  part  of
the  same  charge,  but  onely  in  ready  money ;  thereby
drawing  from  the  English  (which  ought  to  pay  but  one
third  part)  more  than  two  thirds  of  the  whole  true  charge.
Hereupon,  and  upon  the  like  occasions,  grew  some  dis-
contents and  disputes,  and  the  complaints  were  sent  to
Jaccatra,  in  the  Hand  of  Java  Major,  to  the  Councell  of  J^fJ^
defence  of  both  Nations  there  residing  :  who  also,  not  J^e  Dutch
agreeing  upon  the  points  in  difference,  sent  the  same  Government
hither  over  into  Europe,  to  bee  decided  by  both  Com-  in  the  Indies.
panies  heere ;  or,  in  default  of  their  agreement,  by  the
Kings  Majestie,  and  the  Lords  the  States  Generall,  accord-
ing to  an  Article  of  the  Treatie  of  the  yeare  16 19.  on  this
behalfe.  In  the  meane  time,  the  discontent  betweene
the  English  and  the  Dutch,  about  these  and  other  differ-
ences, continued  and  daily  encreased,  untill  at  last  there
was  a  sword  found,  to  cut  in  sunder  that  knot  at  once,
which  the  tedious  disputes  of  Amboyna  and  Jaccatra
could  not  untie.  And  this  was  used  in  manner  as
folio  we  th.

About  the  eleventh  of  February  1622.  Stilo  veteri,  a
Japoner  Souldier  of  the  Dutch  in  their  Castle  of  Amboyna,
walking  in  the  night  upon  the  wall,  came  to  the  Centinell
(being  a  Hollander)  and  there,  amongst  other  talke,  asked
him  some  questions  touching  the  strength  of  the  Castle,
and  the  people  that  were  therein.  It  is  heere  to  bee  noted,
that  those  Japoners  (of  whom  there  is  not  thirty  in  all
the  Hand)  did,  for  the  most  part,  serve  the  Dutch  as
souldiers,  yet  were  not  of  their  trustie  bands,  alwaies
lodged  in  the  Castle,  but  upon  occasion  called  out  of  the
Towne  to  assist  in  the  Watch.  This  Japoner  aforesaid,
was  for  his  said  conference  with  the  Centinel,  apprehended
upon  suspicion  of  Treason,  and  put  to  the  Torture.
Thereby  (as  some  of  the  Dutch  affirmed)  hee  was  brought
to  confesse  himselfe,  and  sundry  others  of  his  Country-
men there,  to  have  contrived  the  taking  of  the  Castle.

5°9

examined.

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PIL6RIMES

1622.

Hereupon,  other  Japoners  were  examined  and  tortured,
as  also  a  Portugall,  the  Guardian  of  the  Slaves  under  the
Dutch.  During  this  examination,  which  continued  three
or  foure  dayes ;  some  of  the  English  men  went  too  and
from  the  Castle  upon  their  businesse,  saw  the  Prisoners,
heard  of  their  tortures,  and  of  the  crime  laid  to  their
charge  ;  but  all  this  while  suspected  not,  that  this  matter
did  any  whit  concerne  themselves ;  having  never  had  any
conversation  with  the  Japoners,  nor  with  the  Portugall
Abel  Price  aforesaid.  At  the  same  time  there  was  one  Abel  Price,
Chirurgion  of  the  English,  Prisoner  in  the  Castle,  for
offering  in  his  Drunkennesse  to  set  a  Dutch-mans  house
on  fire.  This  fellow  the  Dutch  tooke,  and  shewed  him
some  of  the  Japoners,  whom  they  had  first  most  grievously
tortured,  and  told  him,  they  had  confessed  the  English
to  have  beene  of  their  confederacie,  for  the  taking  of  the
Castle ;  and  that  if  he  would  not  confesse  the  same,  they
would  use  him  even  as  they  had  done  these  Japoners,  and
worse  also.  Having  given  him  the  torture,  they  soone
made  him  confesse  what  ever  they  asked  him.  This  was
the  fifteenth  of  February,  1622.  Stilo  veteri.  Forth-
with, about  nine  of  the  clocke  the  same  Morning,  they
sent  for  Captaine  Towerson,  and  the  rest  of  the  English
that  were  in  the  Towne,  to  come  to  speake  with  the
Governour  in  the  Castle :  they  all  went,  save  one  that  was
left  to  keepe  the  House.  Being  come  to  the  Governour,
he  told  Captaine  Towerson,  that  himselfe  and  others  of
his  Nation  were  accused  of  a  Conspiracie  to  surprise  the
Castle,  and  therefore,  untill  further  triall,  were  to  remaine
Prisoners.  Instantly  also  they  attached  him  that  was  left
at  home  in  the  house,  tooke  the  Merchandize  of  the
English  Companie  there  into  their  owne  custodie  by
Inventorie,  and  seized  all  the  Chests,  Boxes,  Bookes,
Writings,  and  other  things  in  the  English  house.  Cap-
taine Towerson  was  committed  to  his  Chamber  with  a
guard  of  Dutch  Souldiers.  Emanuel  Tomson  was  kept
Prisoner  in  the  Castle,  the  rest,  viz.  John  Beomont,
Edward Collins, William Webber, Ephraim Ramsay,

510

DUTCH  PROCEEDINGS  AT  AMBOYNA

A.D.

l622.

Timothy  Johnson,  John  Fardo,  and  Robert  Browne,  were
sent  aboord  the  Hollanders  ships  then  riding  in  Harbour,
some  to  one  ship,  and  some  to  another,  and  all  made  fast
in  Irons.  The  same  day  also  the  Governour  sent  to  the
two  other  Factories  in  the  same  Hand,  to  apprehend  the
rest  of  the  English  there.  So  that  Samuel  Colson,  John
Clarke,  George  Sharrock,  that  were  found  in  the  Factorie
at  Hitto,  and  Edward  Collins,  William  Webber,  and
John  Sadler  at  Larica,  were  all  brought  Prisoners  to
Amboyna,  the  sixteenth  of  February.  Upon  which  day
also  John  Powell,  John  Wetherall,  and  Thomas  Lad-
brooke,  were  apprehended  at  Cambello,  and  John  Beo-
mont,  William  Grigs,  and  Ephraim  Ramsey,  at  Loho,
and  brought  in  Irons  to  Amboyna  the  twentieth  of  the
same  moneth.

In  the  meane  time,  the  Governour  and  Fiscall  went  to
worke  with  the  Prisoners  that  were  already  there :  And
first  they  sent  for  John  Beomont,  and  Timothy  Johnson,
from  aboord  the  Unicorne ;  who  being  come  into  the
Castle,  Beomont  was  left  with  a  guard  in  the  Hall,  and
Johnson  was  taken  into  another  roome.  Where,  by  and  [II. x.  1855.]
by,  Beomont  heard  him  cry  out  very  pitifully ;  then  to
be  quiet  for  a  little  while,  and  then  loud  againe.  After
taste  of  the  torture,  Abel  Price  the  Chirurgion,  that  first
was  examined  and  tortured  (as  is  above  remembred)  was
brought  in  to  confront  and  accuse  him :  But  Johnson  not
yet  confessing  any  thing,  Price  was  quickly  carried  out,
and  Johnson  brought  againe  to  the  torture,  where  Beo-
mont heard  him  sometime  cry  aloud,  then  quiet  againe,
then  roare  afresh.  At  last,  after  he  had  been  about  an
houre  in  this  second  examination,  he  was  brought  forth
wailing  and  lamenting,  all  wet,  and  cruelly  burnt  in  divers
parts  of  his  body,  and  so  laid  aside  in  a  by  place  of  the
Hall,  with  a  souldier  to  watch  him  that  he  should  speake
with  no  body.  Then  was  Emanuel  Tomson  brought  to
examination  ;  not  in  the  roome  where  Johnson  had  beene,
but  in  another  something  farther  from  the  Hall.  Yet
Beomont  being  in  the  Hall,  heard  him  roare  most  lament-
s'

Emanuel
Tompson
examined.

A.D.

l622.

Robert

Browne

examined.

Edward

Collins

examined.

PURCHAS HIS PILGBIMES

ably,  and  many  times.  At  last,  after  an  houre  &  an  halfe
spent  in  torturing  him,  he  was  carried  away  into  another
roome  another  way,  so  that  hee  came  not  by  Beomont
through  the  Hall.  Next  was  Beomont  called  in,  and
being  demanded  many  things,  all  which  he  denied  with
deepe  oathes  and  protestations,  was  made  fast  to  be  tor-
tured ;  a  cloth  tyed  about  his  necke,  and  two  men  ready
with  Jarres  of  water  to  be  powred  on  his  head.  But  yet
for  this  time  the  Governor  bad  loose  him,  he  would  spare
him  a  day  or  two,  because  he  was  an  Old  man.  This  was
all  Saturdaies  worke,  the  fifteenth  of  February  aforesaid.

Upon  Sunday  the  16.  of  February,  William  Webber,
Edward  Collins,  Ephraim  Ramsey,  and  Robert  Browne,
were  fetcht  from  aboord  the  Rotterdam,  to  be  examined.
At  the  same  time  came  Samuel  Colson,  William  Grigs,
and  John  Clarke,  George  Sharrocke,  &  John  Sadler,  from
Hitto  and  Larica,  and  were  immediatly  upon  their  arrivall,
brought  into  the  Castle-hall.  Robert  Browne  Tailor  was
first  called  in,  &  being  tormented  with  water,  confessed
all  in  order  as  the  Fiscall  asked  him.  Then  was  Edward
Collins  called  in,  and  told,  that  those  that  were  formerly
examined,  had  confest  him  as  accessary  to  the  plot  of
taking  the  Castle.  Which,  when  he  denied  with  great
oathes  &  execrations,  they  made  his  hands  and  feet  fast  to
the  Racke,  bound  a  cloth  about  his  throat,  ready  to  be  put
to  the  torture  of  water.  Thus  prepared,  he  prayed  to  be
respited,  and  he  would  confesse  all.  Being  let  downe,  he
againe  vowed  &  protested  his  innocencie ;  yet  said,  that
because  he  knew  that  they  would  by  torture  make  him
confesse  any  thing,  though  never  so  false,  they  should  doe
him  a  great  favour,  to  tell  him  what  they  would  have  him
say,  and  hee  would  speake  it,  to  avoyd  the  torture.  The
Fiscall  hereupon  said ;  what,  doe  you  mocke  us  ?  and
bad,  Up  with  him  againe ;  and  so  gave  him  the  torment  of
water :  which  he  not  able  long  to  endure,  prayed  to  be
let  downe  again  to  his  confession.  Then  he  devised  a
little  with  himselfe,  and  told  them,  that  about  two  moneths
and  a  halfe  before,  himselfe,  Tomson,  Johnson,  Browne,

512

DUTCH PROCEEDINGS AT AMBOYNA  ad.

1622.
and  Fardo,  had  plotted,  with  the  helpe  of  the  Japoners,
to  surprice  the  Castle.  Here  he  was  interrupted  by  the
Fiscall,  and  asked,  whether  Captaine  Towerson  were  not
of  that  conspiracie.  He  answered,  No.  You  lie,  said
the  Fiscall ;  did  not  hee  call  you  all  to  him,  and  tell  you,
that  those  daily  abuses  of  the  Dutch  had  caused  him  to
thinke  of  a  plot,  and  that  hee  wanted  nothing  but  your
consent  and  secrecie?  Then  said  a  Dutch  Merchant,  one
John  Joost  that  stood  by,  Did  not  you  all  sweare  upon  a
Bible  to  bee  secret  to  him?  Collins  answered  with  great
oathes,  that  hee  knew  nothing  of  any  such  matter.  Then
they  bade  make  him  fast  againe :  whereupon  he  then  said,
All  was  true  that  they  had  spoken.  Then  the  Fiscall
asked  him,  whether  the  English  in  the  rest  of  the  Fac-
tories, were  not  consenting  to  this  plot.  Hee  answered,
No.  The  Fiscall  then  asked  him,  whether  the  President
of  the  English  at  Jaccatra,  or  Mr.  Welden  Agent  in
Banda,  were  not  plotters  or  privie  to  this  businesse.
Againe  he  answered,  No.  Then  the  Fiscall  asked  him  by
what  meanes  the  Japoners  should  have  executed  their  pur-
pose. Whereat,  when  Collins  stood  staggering  and  devis-
ing of  some  probable  fiction,  the  Fiscall  holpe  him,  and
said,  Should  not  two  Japoners  have  gone  to  each  point  of
the  Castle,  and  two  to  the  Governours  Chamber  doore;
and  when  the  hurly-burly  had  beene  without,  and  the
Governour  comming  to  see  what  was  the  matter,  the
Japoners  to  have  killed  him?  Here  one  that  stood  by,
said  to  the  Fiscall,  Doe  not  tell  him  what  he  should  say,
but  let  him  speake  of  himselfe.  Whereupon  the  Fiscall,
without  attending  the  answer  to  his  former  question ;
asked  what  the  Japoners  should  have  had  for  their  reward.
Collins  answered,  1000.  Ryals  a  peece.  Lastly,  he  asked
him,  when  this  plot  should  have  bin  effected.  Wher-
unto  although  hee  answered  him  nothing  (not  knowing
what  to  devise  upon  the  sodaine)  yet  he  was  dismissed,
and  very  glad  to  come  cleere  of  the  torture,  though  with
certain  beleefe  that  he  should  die  for  this  his  Confession.  Samuel  Co/son
Next,  was  Samuel  Colson  brought  in,  being  newly  arrived  examined.

X  513  2K

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1622.

from  Hitto,  as  is  before  touched,  &  was  the  same  day
brought  to  the  torture,  who,  for  feare  of  the  paine  wher-
with  he  saw  Collins  come  out,  in  such  a  case,  that  his  eyes
were  almost  blowne  out  of  his  head  with  the  torment  of
water ;  chose  rather  to  confesse  all  they  asked  him :  and
so  was  quickly  dismissed,  comming  out  weeping,  lament-
John  Clarke  mg?  &  protesting  his  innocencie.  Then  was  John  Clarke,
examined.  that  came  with  QQ\son  from  Hitto,  fetcht  in,  and  a  litle
after  was  heard  (by  the  rest  that  were  without  in  the  Hall)
to  cry  out  amaine.  They  tortured  him  with  water  &  with
fire,  by  the  space  of  2.  houres.  The  maner  of  his  torture
(as  also  of  Johnsons  &  Tomsons)  was  as  followeth :  First,
they  hoised  him  up  by  the  hands  with  a  cord  on  a  large
doore,  where  they  made  him  fast  upon  2.  staples  of  Iron ;
fixt  on  both  sides,  at  the  top  of  the  doore  posts,  haling  his
hands  one  from  the  other  as  wide  as  they  could  stretch.
Being  thus  made  fast,  his  feet  hung  2.  foot  from  the
[II.  x.  1856.]  ground,  which  also  they  stretcht  asunder  as  farre  as  they
would  retch,  and  so  made  them  fast  beneath  unto  the
doore-trees  on  each  side.  Then  they  bound  a  cloth  about
his  necke  and  face  so  close,  that  little  or  no  water  could
goe  by.  That  done,  They  powred  the  water  softly  upon
his  head  untill  the  cloth  was  full,  up  to  the  mouth  and
nostrils,  and  somewhat  higher ;  so  that  hee  could  not
draw  breath,  but  hee  must  withall  sucke  in  the  water :
which  being  still  continued  to  be  powred  in  softly,  forced
all  his  inward  parts,  came  out  of  his  Nose,  Eares,  and
Eyes,  and  often  as  it  were  stifling  and  choaking  him,  at
length  tooke  away  his  breath,  and  brought  him  to  a
swoune  or  fainting.  Then  they  tooke  him  quickly
downe,  and  made  him  vomit  up  the  water.  Beeing  a
little  recovered,  they  triced  him  up  againe,  and  powred  in
the  water  as  before,  eftsoones  taking  him  downe  as  he
seemed  to  be  stifled.  In  this  manner  they  handled  him
three  or  foure  severall  times  with  water,  till  his  bodie  was
swolne  twice  or  thrice  as  bigge  as  before,  his  cheekes  like
great  Bladders,  and  his  eies  staring  and  strutting  out
beyond  his  forehead : yet  all  this  hee  bare,  without  con-

5i4

DUTCH PROCEEDINGS AT AMBOYNA  ad.

1622.

fessing  any  thing ;  insomuch  as  the  Fiscall  and  tormentors
reviled  him,  saying  that  he  was  a  Devill,  and  no  man,  or
surely  was  a  Witch,  at  least  had  some  charme  about  him,
or  was  enchanted,  that  he  could  beare  so  much.  Where-
fore they  cut  off  his  haire  very  short,  as  supposing  he  had
some  Witchcraft  hidden  therein.  Afterwards  they  hoised
him  up  againe  as  before,  and  then  burnt  him  with  lighted
Candles  in  the  bottome  of  his  feete,  untill  the  fat  dropt
out  the  Candles ;  yet  then  applyed  they  fresh  lights  unto
him.  They  burnt  him  also  under  the  elbowes,  &  in  the
palmes  of  the  hands ;  likewise  under  the  arme-pits,  until
his  inwards  might  be  evidently  seene.  At  last,  when
they  saw  he  could  of  himselfe  make  no  hansome  con-
fession, then  they  led  him  along  with  questions  of
particular  circumstances,  by  themselves  framed.  Being
thus  wearied  and  overcome  by  the  torment ;  he  answered,
yea  to  whatsoever  they  asked :  whereby  they  drew  from
him  a  bodie  of  a  confession  to  this  effect ;  to  wit,  That
Captaine  Towerson  had  upon  New-yeeres  day  last  before,
sworne  all  the  English  at  Amboyna  to  bee  secret  and  assis-
tant to  a  plot  that  hee  had  projected,  with  the  helpe  of  the
Japoners,  to  surprize  the  Castle,  and  to  put  the  Governour
and  the  rest  of  the  Dutch  to  death.

Having  thus  martyred  this  poore  man,  they  sent  him
out  by  foure  Blacks ;  who  carried  him  betweene  them  to
a  Dungeon,  where  he  lay  five  or  six  daies  without  any
Chirurgion  to  dresse  him,  untill  (his  flesh  being  putrified)
great  Maggots  dropt  and  crept  from  him  in  a  most  loth-
some  and  noysome  manner.  Thus  they  finished  their
Sabbath  daies  worke ;  and  it  growing  now  darke,  sent
the  rest  of  the  English  (that  came  that  day  from  Hitto,
and  till  then  attended  in  the  Hall)  first  to  the  Smiths  shop,
where  they  were  loaden  with  Irons,  and  then  to  the  same
lothsome  Dungeon  where  Clarke  and  the  rest  were,
accompanied  with  the  poore  Japoners,  lying  in  the  putri-
faction  of  their  tortures.  The  next  morning  being
Munday  the  17.  of  February,  old  Stile,  William  Grigs  and
John  Fardo,  with  certaine  Japoners,  were  brought  into

5i5

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1622.

the  place  of  examination.  The  Japoners  were  first  cruelly
tortured  to  accuse  Grigs ;  which  at  last  they  did :  and
Grigs  to  avoid  the  like  torture,  confessed  all  that  the
Fiscall  demanded.  By  and  by  the  like  also  was  done  by
John  Fardo,  and  other  Japoners :  but  Fardo  himselfe
endured  the  torture  of  water,  and  at  last  confessed  whatso-
ever the  Fiscall  asked  him ;  and  so  was  sent  backe  to
Prison.

I  have  no  heart  to  proceed.  In  like  manner  John
Beomont,  George  Sharrock,  William  Webber,  Gabriell
Towerson,  John  Wetherall,  John  Powle,  Thomas  Lad-
broke,  Ephraim  Ramsay,  John  Sadler,  were  examined  by
torture  of  the  mind  or  bodie,  or  both.  The  Storie  is
fresh  and  lately  printed,  and  long,  to  which  I  referre  the
Reader.  Ten  suffered,  viz.  Mon.  Towerson,  Colson,
Thomson,  Johnson,  Wetherall,  Clarke,  Grigs,  Fardo,
Price,  Browne ; all  protesting  their  innocencie.

They  had  prepared  a  Cloth  of  blacke  Velvet  for
Captaine  Towerson  his  bodie  to  fall  upon ;  which  being
stained  and  defaced  with  his  bloud,  they  afterwards  put
to  the  account  of  the  English  Company.

At  the  instant  of  the  execution,  there  arose  a  great
darknesse,  with  a  sudden  and  violent  gust  of  wind  and
tempest ;  whereby  two  of  the  Dutch  ships,  riding  in  the
Harbour,  were  driven  from  their  Anchors,  and  with  great
labour  and  difficultie  saved  from  the  Rockes.  Within  a
few  dayes  after,  one  William  Dunckin,  who  had  told  the
Governour,  That  Robert  Browne  the  English  Tailour,  had
a  few  moneths  before  told  him,  he  hoped  that  the
English  should  have  as  much  to  doe  in  the  Castle  of
Amboyna,  as  the  Dutch ;  This  fellow  comming  upon  an
Evening  to  the  Grave  where  the  English  were  buried,
being  all  (save  Captaine  Towerson)  in  one  pit,  fell  downe
upon  the  Grave ;  and  having  lien  there  awhile,  rose  up
againe  starke  madde,  and  so  continued  two  or  three  dayes
together,  and  then  died.  Forthwith  also  fell  a  new  sick-
nesse  at  Amboyna,  which  swept  away  about  a  thousand
people, Dutch  and  Amboyners : in the space  wherein,

516

DUTCH PROCEEDINGS AT AMBOYNA  a.d.

1622.

there  usually  died  not  above  thirtie  at  other  Seasons.
These  signes  were  by  the  surviving  English  referred  to
the  confident  prediction  of  Emanuel  Tomson  above-
named,  and  were  by  the  Amboyners  interpreted  as  a
token  of  the  wrath  of  God  for  this  barbarous  tyrannie  of
the  Hollanders.

The  manifold  testimonies  of  their  innocencie  by  their
owne  writings  before  their  death,  devout  and  deep  protes-
tations at  their  death ;  desire  also  to  receive  the  Sacra-
ment to  ratifie  the  same,  and  lastly  the  proofe  thereof  by
many  reasons,  with  the  Objections  answered ;  the  Reader
may  at  large  see  in  the  Booke  set  forth  by  the  Company.
Out  of  which  for  perfecting  our  Banda  Relations,  I  have
added  this.  But  he  could  not  see  the  thirtieth  Article,  [II.  x.  1857.]
which  orders,  that  all  disputes  that  cannot  be  decided  by
the  Councell  of  defence,  should  be  remitted  into  Europe ;
first,  to  the  two  Companies  there ;  and  in  default  of  their
agreement  to  the  King  and  States.  Why  then  was  not
this  dispute  so  proceeded  in?  There  is  nothing  in  the
former  Articles,  to  limit  the  Councell  of  defence  ;  and  this
generall  Article  appeareth  to  be  added  by  way  of  amplia-
tion, to  provide  for  that  which  was  not  particularly  and
expresly  cared  for  in  the  former.  Which  is  most  plaine
by  the  words  of  the  explanation  upon  this  thirtieth  Article,
agreed  upon  at  the  first,  and  subscribed  by  the  Commis-
sioners on  both  sides,  Anno  161 9.  where  this  course  of
proceeding  is  expresly  directed,  not  only  in  disputes  about
the  meaning  of  the  Articles,  but  also  about  any  other
matter  happening  in  their  common  aboad.  Since  which
also  the  Kings  Majestie  hath,  upon  a  smaller  occasion  then
the  life  of  his  Subjects,  cleerely  declared  himselfe  in  the
point  of  Sovereigntie ;  That  both  Nations  in  the  Indies
should  wholly  lay  aside  al  pretence  thereof.  Which
Declaration  was  sent  to  the  Lords  States  General,  &  by
them  accepted  before  this  bloudie  butcherie  was  executed.
But  if  it  were  granted,  that  the  Hollanders  are  absolute
Lords  of  their  partners  the  English  in  those  parts,  with-
out respect  to  the  Treatie,  yet  at  least  the  Hollanders  in

5i7

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

[622.

Amboyna,  are  bound  to  observe  the  Lawes  of  the  united
Provinces  ;  for  so  saith  this  Authour  himselfe.  Doe  these
allow  to  begin  the  Processe  at  the  torture,  and  to  bring
persons  of  honest  fame  to  the  Racke,  upon  others  confes-
sion made  in  the  torture?  Do  their  Lawes  allow  of  the
leading  Interrogatories  above  mentioned,  to  direct  the
Prisoner  what  to  say,  to  avoid  the  torture?  Where,  in
the  united  Provinces,  is  that  drowning  with  water,  in  use  ?
or  the  torture  with  fire,  used  to  Johnson,  Tomson,  and
Clarke  ?  or  especially  the  splitting  of  their  toes,  and  launc-
ing  of  the  brest,  and  putting  in  Gun-powder,  and  then
firing  the  same,  whereby  the  bodie  is  not  left  intire,
neither  for  innocencie,  nor  execution  ?  Clarke  and  Tom-
son  were  both  faine  to  bee  carried  to  their  execution,
though  they  were  tortured  many  dayes  before.

Lastly,  their  confessions  were  contradictory,  apparantly
false,  and  of  things  impossible  to  bee  done,  much  lesse
practised  before  by  the  said  parties ;  and  therfore  ought
not  by  their  Law  to  have  beene  beleeved,  nor  the  Prisoners
to  have  beene  condemned  thereupon,  without  other  suffi-
cient Indicia,  or  evidence  besides.

In  the  last  place,  this  Author  handleth  the  excesse  of
the  torture  whereof  (hee  taketh  notice)  there  is  much
complaint  in  England ;  and  saith,  That  the  Lords  States
Generall  take  great  care  to  enforme  themselves  of  all  the
passages  of  this  busines ;  and  to  that  end  have  desired
to  see  all  the  Letters,  Pieces,  and  Papers  that  concerne
this  Processe  :  by  which  it  appeareth  not,  that  there  was
any  cruell  torture  used.  But  suppose  the  acts  make  no
mention  of  them ;  is  it  any  marvell  that  the  Authors  of
this  murtherous  and  tyrannous  Processe,  being  themselves
the  persons  that  also  formed  the  Acts  would  omit  those
things  that  made  against  them?  It  is  to  bee  presumed
also,  that  the  Acts  kept  by  their  people  at  Poloway  in
Banda,  have  omitted  many  things  of  their  Processe,
against  the  poore  Polaroones,  whom  in  August  1622.
being  about  sixe  monethes  before  this  execution  of  the
English,  their  Governour  there  used  in  like  sort,  as  the

518

DUTCH PROCEEDINGS AT AMBOYNA  ad.

1622.
Governour  of  Amboyna  did  the  English,  and  gave  him  a
modell  and  precedent  of  this  Processe ;  which  it  will  not
be  amisse  to  relate  briefly,  because  this  Authour,  in  the
next  place  alleageth  the  mercifull  disposition  of  the
Netherlands  Nation  in  generall ;  to  inferre  thence,  that  it
is  therefore  unlikely,  that  their  Governour  at  Amboyna
was  so  cruell,  as  is  reported  in  England.

Polaroon  one  of  the  Hands  of  Banda,  was  in  possession
of  the  English  at  the  time  of  the  Treatie,  Anno  161 9.  and
by  the  agreement  was  to  remaine  theirs.  After  the
Treatie  came  unto  the  Indies,  the  Hollanders  forbare  pub-
lishing thereof  in  the  Hands  of  Banda,  untill  they  had
taken  Polaroon.  But,  knowing  that  it  must  be  restored
againe,  according  to  the  Treatie,  they  first  take  all  courses
to  make  the  Hand  little  or  nothing  worth :  they  demolish
and  deface  the  Buildings,  transplant  the  Nutmeg-trees,
plucking  them  up  by  the  Roots,  and  carrying  them  into
their  owne  Hands  of  Nera  and  of  Poloway,  there  to  be
planted  for  themselves ;  and  at  last  finde  a  meanes  to  dis-
people the  Hand,  and  to  leave  it  so,  as  the  English  might
make  no  use  of  it,  worth  their  charge  of  keeping ;  and
that  upon  this  occasion  :  There  was  a  young  man,  the
Sonne  of  an  Orankey,  or  a  Gentleman  in  Polaroon,  that
had  committed  Felonie ;  for  which,  by  the  Lawes  of  his
Countrey,  hee  was  to  die.  This  fellow,  to  save  his  life,
fled  to  another  Hand  of  Banda,  called  Rosinging,  and
there  turned  Christian :  but  quickly  understanding,  that
that  would  not  make  him  safe  from  punishment,  hee  went
backe  secretly  to  his  owne  Countrey  of  Polaroon ;  and,
having  lurked  there  a  few  dayes,  tooke  his  passage  for
Nera,  another  Hand  where  the  Dutch  have  a  Fort ;  and
told  the  Dutch  Governour,  that  the  Orankeyes  of  Pola-
roon had  conspired  to  massacre  the  Dutch  as  well  at
Polaroon,  as  at  Poloway,  with  helpe  of  the  people  of
Seran,  that  should  send  over  thirtie  Curricurries  for  that
purpose.  Immediately  upon  this  Indicium  of  this  Male-
factor, certaine  Prowes  or  Fisherboates  of  the  Polaroons,
that  were  fishing  at  Poloway,  were  seized,  and  the  people

519

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1622.

made  Prisoners,  Command  was  sent  by  the  Dutch  Gover-
nour  to  Polaroon,  that  the  Orankeyes  should  come  over
to  him,  that  there  might  be  further  inquisition  made  of
this  matter.
[II.  x.i  858.]  The  Priest  of  the  Polaroons  and  seventie  Orankeyes
instantly  tooke  a  Prow  or  small  Vessell  of  their  owne,  and
imbarked  themselves  for  Poloway.  As  they  were  at  Sea,
and  yet  out  of  the  sight  of  the  Dutch  Castle,  they  were
met  by  a  Fisher-boat  of  Bandanezes,  and  told,  how  all
the  rest  were  apprehended ;  and  that,  if  they  went  to  Polo-
way,  they  were  all  but  dead  men.  Neverthelesse,  the
Priest  and  the  rest,  although  they  had  space  and  meanes
to  have  escaped  to  Seran  and  other  places  safe  enough
from  the  Hollanders,  yet  were  so  confident  of  their  inno-
cencie,  that  they  would  needs  to  Poloway  to  purge  them-
selves. Where,  assoone  as  they  were  arrived,  they  were
instantly  carried  Prisoners  to  the  Castle :  and  withall  the
Governour,  with  a  force  of  two  hundred  men,  went  pre-
sently for  Polaroon ;  whence  he  fetched  all  the  rest  of
the  Orankeyes,  and  brought  them  Prisoners  to  the  same
Castle.  As  soone  as  they  were  comne,  they  were  pre-
sently brought  to  the  torture  of  Water  and  fire,  even  in
the  same  sort  as  our  people  were  afterward  at  Amboyna ;
onely  herein  differing,  that  of  those  of  Poloway,  two  were
so  tortured,  that  they  died  in  their  tortures  :  the  rest  being
one  hundred  sixtie  two  persons,  were  all  upon  their  owne
forced  confessions,  condemned  and  executed.  The  Priest
when  he  came  to  the  place  of  execution,  spake  these  words
in  the  Mallaian  Tongue :  All  yee,  great  and  small,  rich
and  poore,  black  and  white,  looke  to  it :  we  have  com-
mitted no  fault.  And  when  hee  would  have  spoken  more,
hee  was  taken  by  the  hands  and  feet,  laid  along,  and  cut
in  two  by  the  middle  with  a  Sword.  Forthwith,  the
Governour  caused  the  wives,  children,  and  slaves  of  those
of  Polaroon,  to  be  all  carried  out  of  the  Hand,  and  dis-
tributed in  other  Hands  subject  to  the  Dutch ;  and  so
have  made  a  cleere  Countrey  for  the  English  ;  where  they
may  both  plant  and  gather  themselves  destitute  of  the

520

Waarmond.

DUTCH PROCEEDINGS AT AMBOYNA  a.d.

1622.

helpe  of  any  of  the  Countrie  people; without  whom,
neither  the  English  nor  Hollanders  can  maintaine  their
Trade  in  the  Indies,  And  yet  this  is  not  heere  recited,  to
the  end  thereby  to  charge  the  Netherlands  Nation  with
those  cruell  proceedings,  but  the  persons  themselves,  that
have  commited  those  barbarous  Tyrannies : Who,  if  we
shall  beleeve  an  Authour  of  their  owne,  are  not  of  the
best  of  that  Nation. For  the  Maiores  (as  this  Authour  Noormenduh
sayes)  use  the  Indies  as  a  Tucht-house  or  Bridewell,  to  f^^fj
manage  their  unruly  and  unthriftie  children  and  kindred; ifa2\nder
whom  when  they  cannot  rule  and  order  at  home,  they  the  name  of
send  to  the  Indies,  where  they  are  preferred  to  Offices  and  Tmant  van
places  of  Government. Yea,  saith  he,  they  preferre  such
to  be  Fiscals  there,  as  never  saw  Studie  nor  Law. So  that
it  is  no  marvell,  that  such  persons  proceed  not  with  that
Justice  and  moderation  as  is  used  generally  in  the  Low
Countries,  by  the  choice  of  the  Nation  there. And  this
agreeth  well  with  the  report  of  our  Merchants  of  credit,
that  came  lately  from  Amboyna ;  who  averre,  that  except-
ing the  Governour  himselfe,  who  is  well  stept  in  yeeres,
of  the  rest  of  the  Councell  there,  as  well  the  Fiscall,  as
others,  there  was  scarce  any  that  had  haire  on  their  faces,
yea, that most of them are lewd drunken debauched
persons ; and  yet  must  be  Judges  as  well  of  our  English,
as  the  poore  Indians  there.

WE  have  bin  long  enough  perplexed  with  viewing
Easterne  Tragedies.  Let  us  now  turne  our  Eyes
Westward.  And  lest  any  should  thinke  that  in  hatred  of
the  Dutch  Name  I  have  published  the  last,  or  any  of  the
former  Relations  of  bad  dealing  with  the  English  :  I  have
heere  added  this  that  may  make  for  their  Honour,  an
Act  of  Hostilitie  against  a  knowne  Enemie  :  as  also  every
where  in  this  Worke  I  have  not  wittingly  omitted,  either
publike  Act,  Fleet,  Voyage,  or  Victorie  of  theirs,  which
might  honour  their  Nation  (yea  if  I  found  any  particular
Act  of  kindnesse,  or  any  kinder  person  to  the  English
Name  and  Nation,  I  have  beene  readie  to  mention  the

521

A.D.

[622.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRTMES

same)  so  farre  as  agreeth  with  our  Historic  I  cannot
make  the  East  Indian  Dutch  Case  good,  nor  would  I
make  the  European  bad,  raising  a  Nationall  quarrell
(which  God  forbid,  and  which  the  Devill  there  sought)
out  of  a  personate.

Chap.  XVII.

A  true  description  of  the  Bay  Todos  los  Santos
in  Brasill,  and  taking  the  Towne  Salvador  by
the  Admirall  Master  Jacob Wilkins 1624.

He  Bay  of  Todos  los  Santos,  in  the  Land  of  Brasill
is  situated  upon  thirteene  degrees  of  Southerly
Latitude  an  hundred  leagues  above  Pharnambuco.

It  is  the  place  at  which  the  Governour,  the  Bishop,  and  the
Auditor  Generall  of  all  the  Coasts  of  Brasill  are  resident.
This  place  is  most  inhabited  :  it  hath  three  Townes :  the  one
is  neere  to  the  Barra,  or  comming  in,  and  is  called  Villa
veta,  which  is  the  first  that  was  built  in  this  Jurisdiction.

The  second  is  the  Towne  called  Salvador  (or  Saviour,

[II.  x.i 859.]  in  English)  builded  by  Thomas  de  Sofa,  and  foure  leagues

thence  Landwards  in,  lyeth  the  Village  Paripe. It  hath

many Sugar-mils, although the Inhabitants get their

livings  for  the  most  part  by  Cotton.

Within  the  Towne  are  five  Churches  and  one  Colledge
of  the  Jesuits,  of  which  are  some  eightie  in  the  Towne.
The  Bay  is  some  three  leagues  large,  and  stretched  some
fifteene  Leagues  Landwards  in.  It  hath  many  small
Hands  which  yeeld  great  store  of  Cotton.  It  is  divided
into  severall  parts,  and  hath  many  branches  in  which  the
Inhabitants  use  small  Barkes.

The  Bay  is  (when  the  water  is  reasonable  high)  in  some
places,  twelve,  eighteene,  and  twentie  fathome  deepe,  and
lyeth  inwards  North  North-west.  On  the  corner  of  it  is
a  Castle  built,  which  is  called  Saint  Antonio,  neere  which
lyeth  a  Banke  which  reacheth  a  league  into  the  Sea  South-
eastward. When  the  wind  bloweth  very  strong,  the
water  maketh  there  great  noyse:  but  there  is  no  danger

522

JACOB WILKINS  a.d.

1624.

for  the  ships,  seeing  it  is  five  or  six  fathome  deepe,  and
the  ground  is  sand.  The  corner  on  which  Saint  Anthonio
standeth,  is  but  a  league  distant  from  the  Towne.  The
high  ships  Land  commonly  just  against  the  great  Church.

Now  for  the  taking  of  the  same  by  the  Dutch,  it  is
thus  both  related  and  in  Picture  also  (here  omitted)
described.

The  High  and  Mightie  States,  with  the  advise  of  his
Excellencie  the  Prince  of  Orange,  erected  a  West  India
Company,  and  prepared  a  Navie  of  above  thirtie  ships
strong,  of  which  Master  Jacob  Wilkins  was  chosen
Admirall,  and  the  Lord  of  Dort  appointed  to  be
Generall.

This  Fleet  put  to  Sea  the  two  and  twentieth  of  Dec-
ember, in  the  last  yeere  1623.  and  the  Hand  of  Saint
Vincent  (which  is  one  of  the  Hands  of  Cabo  Verde)  being
appointed  to  bee  the  Rendezvous,  all  the  ships  of  the
Fleete  met  there,  except  that  in  which  the  Generall  was,
who  came  to  Sierra  Liona :  And  the  Fleet  having  tarried
there  the  space  of  five  weekes,  it  departed  on  the  sixe  and
twentieth  day  of  March  thence,  and  came  on  the  eighth
of  May  before  the  Bay  of  Todos  los  Santos,  in  which  he
might  have  sailed  the  same  night,  but  hee  tarried,  for
good  reasons  and  considerations,  till  it  was  day,  and  used
this  stratagem  or  policie,  namely  :  hee  put  all  the  Souldiers
on  foure  of  the  greatest  and  best  shippes,  and  caused
their  Ensignes  on  the  other  still  to  bee  displayed.  The
same  day  hee  landed  fifteene  hundred  men  with  two  light
Peeces  called  Dragons,  who  went  in  the  night  time  into
a  small  Wood  which  lyeth  neere  to  the  Towne.

And  the  Admirall  commanded  afterwards  that  foure
ships  should  saile  directly  to  the  Towne  and  lie  against
the  batterie,  which  they  did,  and  came  so  neere  to  it  that
they  touched  ground ;  whereupon  they  shot  very  fiercely,
both  upon  the  Towne  and  the  batterie,  from  whence  the
Enemy  answered  them  in  the  same  tune,  and  shot  amongst
other,  one  of  our  Captaines  named  Gedulthaber.  The
Captain  Peter  Freecksen  of  Enchuysen  behaved  himselfe

523

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

[624.

amongst  the  rest  very  valiantly,  to  the  great  admiration
of  all  them  that  saw  him :  And  all  the  others  used  like-
wise their  best  endevours ;  but  seeing  that  both  the
Ordnance  of  the  Towne,  and  the  battery  played  so  cruelly
upon  them,  they  resolved  to  land  some  men  with  their
Boats  to  surprise  the  batterie,  although  it  was  defended  by
two  hundred  men,  and  to  make  the  Ordnance  unservice-
able. Which  charge  being  undertaken  by  the  Vice-
admirall  Peter  Petersson  Heyn,  hee  went  with  eight
Boates,  or  Sloopes  (which  were  well  furnished  with  Men,
Muskets,  Skeanes,  Hammers,  and  Nailes)  directly  to  the
battery,  and  as  soone  as  our  men  mounted  upon  the  same,
the  enemies  fled  through  the  water  to  the  Towne.
Whereupon  our  Vice-Admirall  having  nayled  the  Ord-
nance upon  it,  and  cast  it  downe,  hee  returned  againe  with
all  his  men  to  the  ships  without  receiving  any  dammage
by  the  Ordnance  of  the  Towne  which  was  continually
displaied  against  him.  Clayes  Gerritsson  Vos  was  not
one  of  the  least  that  shewed  themselves  valorous  in  this
Enterprise.

The  next  day  being  the  ninth  of  May,  it  was  resolved
that  the  Towne  should  bee  assaulted  on  two  sides,  namely,
from  the  ships  by  the  Mariners,  and  out  of  the  Wood  by
the  Souldiers.  But  the  Townesmen  having  had  the  night
before  an  allarme  or  two  given  unto  them  by  reason  of
the  Souldiers  which  were  come  into  the  Wood,  as  they
learned,  they  fled  all  out  of  the  Towne  with  the  Arch-
bishop, and  in  the  morning  when  our  forces  thought  to
scale  the  wals  of  the  Towne,  there  appeared  an  old  man,
who  said  that  all  the  Burgers  were  runne  away,  and  opened
the  gate :  At  which  time  Captaine  Vogelsanck  of  Amster-
dam marcht  first  into  the  Towne  with  his  Companie,  and
the  other  following  him,  they  beset  the  Market  and  other
passages,  and  afterwards  (when  they  mistrusted  no  enemie)
they  began  to  pillage,  and  every  one  got  rich  prizes,  or
bootie  of  Gold  Chaines,  Duckets,  Rials  of  eight,  gilded
and  silvered  Rapiers,  Swords  and  Daggers,  besides  great
store  of  rich  apparell,  of  which  there  was  such  abundance,

524

JACOB WILKINS  a.d.

1624.

that  every  Souldier  is  provided  with  it,  as  if  he  were  a
Captaine  :  They  found  likewise  at  their  arrivall  the  Tables
yet  covered  in  the  Cloyster,  and  many  other  places,  and
fell  to  the  meate  and  drinke  on  them.  But  because  no
excesse  should  be  commited,  some  hundred  Pipes  or
Vessels  of  Wine  were  presently  knockt  in  pieces.

All  the  houses  were  almost  all  as  Palaces,  and  adorned
and  furnished  with  rich  houshold-stuffe,  of  which  every
one  tooke  as  much  as  he  could  carrie.  When  the  pillage
was  done  there  were  many  inferiour  Souldiers  that  durst
venture  fortie  and  fiftie  pieces  of  eight  Rials,  (which
amount  to  foure  shillings  and  six-pence)  at  a  set  or  gaine.  [II.  x.  i860.]
And  there  are  many  Officers,  which  have  gotten  fourteene
thousand  and  fifteene  thousand  Gilders  for  their  owne
private  bootie,  and  goe  with  Chaines  of  Gold  about  their
necks,  whereby  it  appeareth  that  a  man  may  even  in  one
houre  grow  rich  in  those  parts.

The  Governour  being  with  his  Servants  and  yet  armed  Governour
in  his  Palace,  the  Vice-Admirall  caused  him  to  lay  his  ta^en-
Armes  downe,  and  tooke  him  as  his  Prisoner. Amongst
the other booties and prizes that were found in the
Church,  there  was  a  Crucifixe  of  Silver  some  foure  foot  RicA  Crucifix.
long,  with  the  Image  of  our  Saviour  being  made  of  Gold,
and  was  a  foote  and  a  halfe  long.

When  all  the  tumult  was  ceased,  and  all  things  were
put  in  order,  namely  on  the  twelfth  of  May,  a  Preacher
of  Zealand  gave  in  the  great  Church  the  Almightie
thankes  for  such  a  great  Victorie ;  and  on  the  same  day
came  the  Lord  of  Dort  into  the  Bay,  when  hee  had
wandred  some  five  weekes  about  it.

And  in  the  meane  time  was  the  Ship  de  Vos  (or  Fox  in
English)  loaden  with  foure  hundreth  Chests  of  Sugar,
besides  great  store  of  Tobacco,  and  Hydes,  and  being
sent  thence,  the  Shipper  of  it,  namely,  the  valorous  Claes
Gerritsson  Vos,  arrived  the  five  and  twentieth  of  August,
with  the  same  in  the  United  Provinces,  and  brought  this
good  tydings  to  his  Countrey-men.

Even before the departure of this Shipper, there

525

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

[624.

arrived  yet  in  the  Bay  afore  mentioned,  a  small  Ship  that
came  with  the  Provedidor,  (or  Providor)  of  the  Jesuites,
with  a  great  summe  of  money  that  was  gathered  for  them
that  are  of  his  Order ;  and  hee  being  seized  upon,  the
money  was  presently  made  prize.  On  the  Castles  which
the  Enemie  forsooke,  were  left  five  and  fortie  Pieces  of
Brasse.  There  was  also  presently  order  given  for  the
demolishing  of  the  Castle  that  was  seated  neere  the  Sea,
and  for  the  fortification  of  the  Towne.  The  goods  which
are  taken  and  the  remainder  of  the  Prizes,  are  to  bee
brought  into  the  Low-Countries  with  other  Ships.

As  soone  as  this  tyding  came  into  the  United  Provinces,
there  were  on  a  sodaine  many  Souldiers  leavied  to  goe  to
the  Bay  afore  mentioned,  with  a  Fleet  that  lay  readie  for
the  same  purpose,  seeing  that  there  are  yet  many  other
places  to  bee  taken,  besides  rich  Booties  and  Prizes.

There  is  also  Newes  of  great  preparations  in  Spaine  to

recover  this  losse,  as  also,  of  another  famous  Act  of  the

Hollanders  commanded  by  L'Hermit,  which  are  said  to

have  taken  Lirma  the  chiefe  Citie  in  Peru,  and  other  places

on  the  Peruan  Coast : the  old  Enemy  of  the  Spaniard,

viz.  the  people  of  Chili  being  joyned  with  the  Dutch. If

this  bee  true,  it  is  likely  to  prove  a  Costly  warre  to  the

Spaniard, and Honourable to the  Dutch. For as the

Spanish  Treasure  hath  long  kept  Europe  in  action, so

Peru  is  their  chiefe  Mine,  and  Chili  their  most  prevayling

American  Enemy,  which  hath  not  onelynot  lost,  but  gotten

of  them  now  above  fiftie  yeares  together,  not  Cities  and

Forts  alone,  but  Martiall  skill,  Armes,  and  Horses,

not  fearing  man  to  man  to  dare  and  enter-

taine the proudest. Besides, Chili

it  selfe  is  the  richest  Countrey

for Gold, knowne in

America.

The  end  of  the  tenth  Booke.

END OF VOLUME X.

u

wo-y

974

PLEASE  DO  NOT  REMOVE
CARDS  OR  SLIPS  FROM  THIS  POCKET

UNIVERSITY  OF  TORONTO  LIBRARY

G

159

P985

1905

v.10

cop.  2
