Hakluytus Posthumus, or Purchas His Pilgrimes, Vol. 5 (Samuel Purchas, 1625)
==========================================================
Purchas His Pilgrimes (1625) - the 17th century's great sequel to Hakluyt; the largest voyage collection of its age, preserving dozens of narratives otherwise lost. The 20-volume MacLehose reprint (Glasgow, 1905-07), the standard complete edition. Vol. 5 of 20.

Hakluytus  Posthumus

or

Purchas His Pilgrimes

In Twenty  Volumes

Volume V

GLASGOW

PRINTED AT THE UNIVERSITY PRESS BY

ROBERT  MACLEHOSE  &  COMPANY  LTD. FOR

JAMES MACLEHOSE AND SONS, PUBLISHERS

TO THE UNIVERSITY OF GLASGOW

MACMILLAN AND CO. LTD.  LONDON

THE MACMILLAN CO.  NEW YORK

SIMPKIN, HAMILTON AND CO.  LONDON

MACMILLAN AND BOWES  CAMBRIDGE

DOUGLAS AND FOULIS  EDINBURGH

MCMV

Hakluytus Posthumus

or

Purchas His Pilgrimes

Contayning a History of  the World

in Sea Voyages and Lande Travells

by Englishmen and others

By

SAMUEL PURCHAS, B.D.

VOLUME V

O  a > <3  r  » "  ->  o 0 o

< ■>  *  1/

Glasgow
James MacLehose and Sons

Publishers  to  the  University

MCMV

■

THE TABLE

PAGE

The  Contents  of  the  Chapters  and  Paragraphs  in
the  fift  Booke  of  the  First  part  of  Purchas
his  Pilgrimes.

CHAP. VII.

The  second  Voyage  of  Captaine  Pring  into  the  East  Indies.
Or  a  Relation  of  the  fifth  Voyage  for  the  Joynt  Stock,
set  forth  by  the  Honorable  and  Worshipfull  of  the  East
Indie  Societie  :  consisting  of  five  ships,  viz.  the  James
Royall,  of  burthen  a  thousand  Tunnes,  Rowland
Coytmore  Master :  the  Anne  Royall,  nine  hundred
Tunnes,  Andrew  Shilling  Master ;  the  Gift,  eight
hundred  Tunnes,  Nathaniel  Salmon  Master :  the  Bull,
foure  hundred  Tuns,  Robert  Adams  Master  :  the  Bee,
one  hundred  and  fiftie  Tunnes  ;  John  Hatch  Master.
All  under  the  government  of  Martin  Pring.  .  .  I

§.  i.  Occurrents  in  the  way,  at  Surat,  Bantam,  and  Jacatra.  I

An  Eclipse.  A  dangerous  Leake.  Portugall  Spies.  Per-
fidious people.  Dangerous  Rockes.  Pangrams  injus-
tice. Dutch  injuries  offered  to  the  English.

§.  2. Dutch  wrongs,  and  the  fights  betwixt  Sir  Thomas  Dale

and  them. ........  8

A  generall  Fast.  Blacke  Lion  taken.  A  fight.  Lion  fired.
Jackson  slaine.  Pangrams  Policie.  Hollanders  bravados
to  the  English. They  meet,  fight,  flee.

v

THE TABLE

The  Contents  of  the  Chapters — Continued.  page

§.  3.  Their  departure  for  Coromandell  :  Occurrents  there  :
Sir  Thomas  Dales  death.  English  ships  taken  by  the
Dutch.  Consultation  and  provisions  at  Teco,  and
departure  thence. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  17

The  Governor  of  Vingeron  his  entertainment  of  the  English.
Sr.  T.  Dales  death.  Capt.  Pring,  Admirall  of  the
united  fleet.  Store  of  provision.  Dangerous  Shoalds
and  Rocks.

§.  4.  Newes  of  the  peace  betwixt  English  and  Dutch  :  the
mutuall  congratulation  :  Voyage  to  Japan,  returne
thence  and  home. .......  26

The  happy  uniting  of  the  English  and  Dutch.  Nangasaque
burnt. The  Unicorne  lost.

§.  5.  The  Voyage  from  Bantam  to  Patania,  and  thence  to
Japan,  with  his  returne  to  Jacatra  ;  set  by  it  selfe  for
the  use  of  Mariners.  .  .  .  .  .  .  33

From  Bantam  Sea-turnes  and  Land-turnes.  Voyage  to
Japan.  Store  of  Hands.  Variation  of  depths.  Voyage
to  Patania  in  the  way  to  Japan.  Gurnets  Head.
Dutch  curtesie.  Dangerous  Rockes.  Captaine  Prings
second  Voyage  to  the  East  Indies.  Captaine  Prings
carefull  observations  by  Sea.  East  India  Voyage.
Saddle  Hand.  Dangerous  Leakes.  East  India  Voyages.
Scorpians  heart.  Small  Hands.  Captaine  Prings
arrivall  in  Japan  :  and  returne  thence.

Their  returne.  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  57

Captaine  Prings  returne  from  Japan.  Captaine  Prings
arrivall  in  Japa  from  Japan.

CHAP. VIII.

William  Hores  discourse  of  his  Voyage  in  the  Dragon  and
Expedition,  from  Surat  to  Achen,  Teco  and  Bantam  ;
and  of  the  surprising  the  Dragon,  Beare,  Expedition,
&c.  in  a  Letter  to  the  Companie. ....  64

English  affaires  at  Dabull,  and  with  the  Malabars.  Sprage
abused. Demand  of  debts. Samorines  dissimulation.

vi

THE TABLE

The  Contents  of  the  Chapters — Continued.  page

The  Samorine  denyeth  performance.  Samorine  threat-
ned.  Owen  Bodman  executed.  Rich.  Crane  miracu-
lously delivered.  Treacherie  usuall  in  Teco.  Tucker
stabd  by  a  thiefe.  Murther.  A  tryall  to  find  out  the
Murtherer.  Infidels  more  pitifull,  then  the  Dutch
Christians. Distresse  in  Tecoo. Our  men  murthered.

CHAP. IX.

The  Journall  of  Master  Nathaniel  Courthop,  his  voyage
from  Bantam  to  the  Hands  of  Banda,  being  chiefe
Commander  of  the  two  ships,  the  Swan,  Admirall ;
Master  Davis,  Master  :  and  the  Defence,  Vice-
Admirall  ;  Master  Hinchley,  Master  :  together  with
his  residence  in  Banda,  and  occurrents  there  ;  con-
tayning  the  differences  in  those  parts  betwixt  the  Eng-
lish and  Hollanders  contracted.  ....  86

§.  I.  English  kindnesses  to  the  Dutch  :  the  surrender  of
Poolaroone  to  His  Majestie,  and  the  fortifying  there  by
the  English :  Dutch  hostilitie,  their  taking  the  Swan,
Salomon,  and  Attendance,  and  keeping  the  Defence
betrayed  by  Fugitives. ......  86

English  kindnesses  to  the  Dutch.  Commission  to  maintaine
the  Kings  Majesties  right.  Mart  of  Lies,  marke  of
Theeves.

§.  2.  The  manner  of  taking  the  Salomon  and  Attendance,
in  divers  Letters  described,  Dutch  abusive  devices  by
lyes  to  delude  and  dis-hearten  our  men  :  divers
Extracts  of  Letters  of  M.  Courthop,  with  other
occurrents, ........  94.

The  Devill  a  Lyer  and  Murtherer.  Dutch  force  and  fraud.
Brave  spirits  of  the  Bandanezes.  Dutch  crueltie.
Their  lying  devices.  The  Dutch  killed  our  men  ;
imprisoned  others.  Hollanders  tyrannic  Bandanezes
constancie  to  the  English.  Hollanders  hostility.
Killing  our  men.  Assuming  our  Colours.  Ludgate
or  Newgate  prisoners  more  happy  then  we.  Strife  for
superioritie,  cause  of  destruction.

vii

THE TABLE

The  Contents  of  the  Chapters — Continued.  page

§.  3.  Other  Acts  of  the  Hollanders  in  divers  places  of  the
Indies :  Encouragements  from  Sir  Thomas  Dale,
Master  Jordan  and  others,  and  various  events  in  those
parts  till  his  death. .  .  .  .  .  .  .114.

Captaine  Newports  death.  M.  Jackson  killed.  Sir  T.  Dales
and  Captaine  Jordans  Letters.  Surrender  of  Lantore.
Bachan  taken  by  the  Spaniards.  Seven  English  ships
taken. Captaine  Jordan  slaine.

Sir  Thomas  Dales  Letter.  .  .  .  .  .  .116

The  Presidents  Letters. .  .  .  . .  .  .  .117

CHAP. X.

The  continuation  of  the  former  Journall  by  Master  Robert
Hayes,  contayning  the  death  of  Captaine  Courthop,
succession  of  Robert  Hayes,  surrender  of  Lantore  to
His  Majestie,  newes  of  the  peace,  and  after  the  peace
Lantore  and  Poolaroone  seized  by  the  Dutch. .  . 126

Captaine  Courthops  constancy,  courage  and  death.  Key-
men  chastised.  The  English  and  Dutch  agreed.
Cunning  trickes  of  the  Hollanders  in  Banda.  Hollan-
ders invade  Lantore  and  burne  the  Towne.  Dutch
hostilitie  to  the  English. Seran  treacherie.

CHAP. XL

A  Letter  written  to  the  East  India  Companie  in  England,

from  their  Factors. .  .  .  .  .  .137

The  Hollanders  cruelties  to  the  English  and  Chineses.
Lantore  subdued  by  the  Hollanders  with  much  bloud-
shed.  English  love  and  aide  to  the  Dutch,  ill
requited. Ships  taken  by  the  Hollanders  at  Banda.

Vlll

THE TABLE

The  Contents  of  the  Chapters — Continued.  page

CHAP. XII.

The  Hollanders  declaration  of  the  affaires  of  the  East
Indies  :  faithfully  translated  according  to  the  Dutch
Copie,  printed  at  Amsterdam,  1622.  written  in  answere
to  the  former  reports,  touching  wrongs  done  to  the
English.  And  an  answere  written  by  certaine  Mariners
lately  published  :  with  Depositions  further  opening  the
iniquitie  and  crueltie  of  the  Dutch. .  .  .  .147

.§.  1 .  A  true  Relation  of  that  which  passed  in  the  Hands  of
Banda,  in  the  East  Indies,  in  the  yeere  of  our  Lord
God  1 62 1. And  before  printed  at  Amsterdam,  1622. 147

A  contract  of  peace  betwixt  the  English  and  Dutch.  The
Dutch  excuse  their  owne  wrongs.

§.  2.  An  answere  to  the  Hollanders  declaration  concerning
the  occurrents  of  the  East  India,  contracted  somwhat
briefer  then  in  the  former  Impression. .  .  . 155

The  Hollanders  objections  to  cleere  themselves  of  their
abuses,  prove  themselves  to  be  guiltie.  English
imprisoned,  tortured,  and  killed,  by  the  Dutch.

■§.  3.  Relations  and Depositions touching the Hollanders

brutish  and  cruell  usage  of  the  English. .  .  .162

Captaine  Jordane  trayterously  shot  to  the  heart.  Inhumane
and  brutish  crueltie  of  the  Dutch.  Most  horrible  and
barbarous  impietie  of  Christians.  Perjurie,  insolencie,
and  crueltie  of  the  Dutch.  Whether  the  English  or
Hollander  were  first  cause  of  breach.

CHAP. XIII.

A  pithy  Description  of  the  chiefe  Hands  of  Banda  and
Moluccas,  by  Captaine  Humphrey  Fitz-Herbert,  in  a
Letter  to  the  Companie. .  .  .  .  .  .174

Description  of  the  Hands  of  Banda  and  Amboyna.  Ternate,
seate  of  dissention  betwixt  the  Spaniard  and  Dutch.
The  swelling  Titles  of  Coen  the  Dutch  Generall.

ix

THE TABLE

The  Contents  of  the  Chapters — Continued.  page

CHAP. XIIII.

Three  severall  Surrenders  of  certaine  of  the  Banda  Hands
made  to  the  Kings  Majestie  of  England,  faithfully
translated  out  of  Malahan  into  English  ;  with  a  voyage
also  annexed  of  Sir  Henrie  Middleton. .  .  . 1 8 1

The  Contents  of  the  Surrender  of  the  Hands  of  Pooloway,

and  Poolaroone,  in  Banda,  to  His  Majestie.  .  . 1 8 1

His  Majestie  intituled  King  of  Pooloway  and  Poolaroone.

The  Surrender  of  Rosinging  and  Wayre  to  his  Majestie. . 1 84
Rosinging  and  Wayre  surrendred  to  the  King  of  England,

Translation  of  the  Surrender  of  Lantore,  Cont.  in  the  paper

N.D 186

Lantore  also  surrendred  to  his  Majestie  of  England.

The  voyage  of  Master  Henrie  Middleton  to  the  Moluccas,
(having  sent  Captaine  Colthrust  in  the  Ascension  to
Banda)  with  Letters  of  the  Kings  of  those  parts  to  his
Majestie.  .  . 188

Hollanders  lying  'devices,  to  disgrace  the  English.

The  King  of  Tarnatas  Letter  to  the  King.  .  .  , 191

The King  of  Tydores  Letter to the Kings Majestie of

England.  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .192

The  King  of  Bantam  to  the  King  of  England. .  .  .193

Kings  of  Ternata,  Tydore,  &  Bantam,  their  letters  to  his
Majestie.

CHAP. XV.

The  Dutch  Navigations  to  the  East  Indies,  out  of  their  owne

Journals  and  other  Histories. .  .  .  .  .195

Voyages  to  the  East  Indies  by  the  Dutch.  First  Voyage  of
the  Dutch  to  the  East  Indies.  Hollanders  first  Voyages
to  the  East  Indies.  Mauritius  Hand.  The  Dutch
first  Trade  at  Banda. First  Trade  of  the  Dutch at

THE TABLE

The  Contents  of  the  Chapters — Continued.  page

Banda.  Orankayes  free  States.  Portugall  insolence.
John  de  Austria,  how  King  of  Candie.  Neccius
Voyage  to  China.  The  King  of  Ternata  his  Titles.
A  Dutch  Fleet  of  fourteene  saile  sent  to  the  Indies.
Hollanders  at  Zeilon  and  Patane.  John  of  Austria.
Amboyna  and  Tydore  taken  by  the  Dutch.  Mateliff
at  Malacca.  Mozambique  taken.  The  King  of  Jor
descryed.  The  Hollanders  will  doe  no  right,  nor  take
no  wrong.  Verhuef  the  Dutch  General!,  and  Cap.
Bitter  slaine.

The  gaines  which  the  Hollanders  had  gotten  by  the  East
India  trade,  taken  out  of  a  Booke  translated  out  of  the
Dutch,  perswading  to  a  West  India  Trade.  .  . 227

Dutch  gaynes,  and  present  state  of  their  India  Trade.

The  Relation  of  the  Priest  of  Poolaroone,  touching  the
beginnings  and  occasions  of  quarrels  betwixt  the  Dutch
and  Bandaneses,  written  in  the  Malayan  language  with
his  owne  hand,  in  a  very  faire  Arabick  letter. .  . 231

Contentions  betwixt  the  Hollanders  and  Bandaneses.

A  discourse  of  those  warres  by  the  Author.  .  .  . 232

Banda  case  (cause  of  the  Dutch-English-Indian  Wars)  dis-
cussed. Dutch  Adventurers  complaine  of  Commanders
in  the  Indies.  Basely  and  proudly  insolent  Dutch  by
Dutch  testimonie.

CHAP. XVI.

Extracts  of  a  Journall  of  a  voyage  to  Surat  and  to  Jasques  in

the  Persian  Gulfe,  set  forth  by  the  East  India  Societie

of  Merchants  : wherein were imployed foure new

ships  ; the London, of  eight  hundred  Tunnes,  and

therin Andrew Shilling chiefe Commander of the

whole  Fleet,  William  Baffin  Master  ;  the  Hart,  of  five

hundred  Tunnes,  Richard Blithe Master  ; the Roe

Bucke,  of  three  hundred,  Richard  Swan  Master  ; the

Eagle,  of  two  hundred  and  eightie,  Christopher  Browne

Master. Written  by  Richard  Swan.  .  .  .241

xi

THE TABLE

The  Contents  of  the  Chapters — Continued.  page

East  Indian  Voyages.  A  Portugall  prize.  Preparation  for  a
Sea-fight  of  foure  English  ships.  A  Sea-fight  betwixt
the  English  and  the  Portugals.  East  India  Voyages
performed  by  the  English.

Relation  of  the  fight  of  foure  English  ships  with  foure
Portugall  ships,  two  Galliats,  and  ten  Frigats  in  the
Gulfe  of  Persia,  in  the  moneths  of  December  and
Januarie,  1620. .  .  .  .  .  .  .252

A  wonderfull  victorie  at  Sea  against  the  Portugalls.  The
Portugall  fleet  vanquisht  and  scattered.

Part  of  a  Letter  written  from  Master  Robert  Smith  to  his
brother  Henrie  Smith,  relating  of  a  rare  attempt  and
exploit  of  a  small  English  Pinnasse,  in  taking  a  Portu-
gall ship.  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .256

Giles  Hobbs  his  travaile  from  Musco  to  Spahan,  written  in

a  Letter  by  himselfe  to  the  East  Indian  Companie. . 257

A  Voyage,  and  divers  wayes  from  Russia  by  the  Caspian
Sea  into  Persia.  The  making  of  Caviare  and  Isinglas.
Persian  Trade.

CHAP. XVII.

A  discourse  of  Trade  from  England  unto  the  East  Indies  :
Answering  to  divers  objections  which  are  usually  made
against  the  same. Written  by  T.  Mun, .  .  . 262

A  Discourse  of  Trade  from  England  unto  the  East  Indies.

The  Contents  of  the  Chapters  and  Paragraphs  in
the  sixt  Booke  of  the  First  part  of
Purchas  his  Pilgrimes.

sThe  Epistle  Dedicatorie  to  the  High  and  Mightie  Prince,

George,  Duke,  Marquesse  and  Earle  of  Buckingham. . 305

Xll

THE TABLE

The  Contents  of  the  Chapters — Continued.  page

CHAP. I.

Observations  of  Africa,  taken  out  of  John  Leo  his  nine
Bookes,  translated  by  Master  Pory,  and  the  most
remarkable  things  hither  transcribed.  .  .  . 307

§.  1.  Collections  out  of  the  first  Booke  of  John  Leo,
touching  the  People,  Tribes,  Languages,  Seasons,
Vertues,  Vices,  and  other  more  generall  considera-
tions of  Africa. .  .  .  . .  .  307

The  Description  of  Africa.  Division  of  the  tawny  Moores
into  Tribes  and  Nations.  Gehoar  a  slave  by  condition.
Cairo  built  by  Gehoar.  Arabians  governed,  civill  and
trustie  :  otherwise,  theeves,  etc.  The  Tribes  Casts  or
Kindreds,  inhabiting  the  African  Desarts.  Arabian
Tribes  and  Nations,  warlike  and  valiant.  Manners  and
customes  of  the  Africans.  Their  attire,  etc.  All
learning  and  good  discipline  held  in  contempt.
Arabian  valour.  Portugall  acts  in  Africa.  The
Arabians  neere  Egypt,  their  poverty,  and  want  of
Corne.  The  Faith  and  Religion  of  the  ancient
Africans.  Of  the  dangerous  and  snowie  places  in
Africa.  Danger  by  thirst.  A  deare  price  for  a  cup  of
water.  The  African  seasons  of  the  yeare.  Arabian
and  African  yeeres.  African  lives  and  ages.  Plague
rare  in  Numidia.  Commendable  actions  of  the  Africans.
Moores,  a  people  of  great  fidelitie.  Their  gravitie,
modestie.  Numidians,  ignorant  of  Naturall,  Domes-
ticall  Affaires,  etc.

§.  2.  Collections  of  things  most  remarkable  in  John  Leo  his

second  Booke  of  the  Historie  of  Africa. .  .  . 359

Entertainment  of  Strangers.  Temples  and  Hospitals.  Bar-
barian Barbarisme.  Courteous,  Learned  Barbarians.
An  Apostata  and  pestiferous  Mahumetan  Preacher.
Many  religious  and  devout  Hermites  upon  Mount
Iron.  The  situation  and  estate  of  the  Region  of
Maroco.  First  foundation  of  Maroco.  A  stately
Temple.  Causes  of  the  decay  of  Maroco.  Elmageli  a
factious  preacher.  A  description  of  the  Castle,  con-
tayning  a  famous  Colledge.  Christians  happie  successe
against  the  Moores. Strange  tryals  in  Law. Weekly

xiii

rn

THE TABLE

The  Contents  of  the  Chapters — Continued,  page

Truces.  Hermite  honorable.  Sodomie  punished.
Great  grapes.  Marble  walles.  Description  of  Mount
Dedes.  Trecherous,  Theevish,  Slavish  and  Sluttish
people.

§.  3.  Collections  of  things  most  remarkable  in  John  Leo  his

third  Booke  of  the  Historie  of  Africa.  .  .  . 394

A  dangerous  seducer.  Horrible  slaughter  and  desolation.
English  traffique.  Pilgrimage,  much  frequented.
Bloody  warres.  Fez  besieged  seven  yeeres  together.
An  exact  description  of  the  Citie  of  Fez.  The
admirable  Temple  of  Fez,  rich  revenues,  the  Colledges.
Stately  Colledge,  rich  Hospitals  and  Bathes  in  Fez.
Baths  and  Hot-houses.  Store  of  Innes.  Many  Mills.
A  description  of  the  Occupations,  Shops,  and  Markets
in  Fez.  Trades,  Shops,  and  Markets  of  the  second
part  of  Fez.  Administration  of  Justice.  Punishment
of  Malefactors.  Wearing  of  civill  and  decent  apparell
in  Fez.  Manner  of  Mariage,  and  Circumcision  of
Children  in  Fez.  Festivall  Rites  observed.  Manner
of  mourning.  Fortune-tellers,  Diviners,  Witches,
Juglers,  etc.  Cabalists,  and  the  Art  Cabala  greatly
admired.  Bagdet  sacked.  Sects  and  Sectaries.  Super-
stitious credulitie.  Horrible  villanie.  Cabalists  and
other  Sects.  Alchymists.  Philosophers.  Charmers
and  Inchanters.  Fashions  and  Customes  used  in  the
Kings  Court.  Places  of  dignitie,  both  in  Court  and  in
warre.  The  Revenues,  Progresse,  and  Warfare  of  the
King  of  Fez.  Hunting  of  Lyons.  Fight  betwixt  a
Lyon  and  a  Bull.  Saic  King  of  Fez,  carryed  captive
into  Portugall.  The  King  of  Fez,  and  his  sixe  Sonnes
murthered.  A  Cave  or  hole  that  continually  casteth
up  fire.  Palaces.  Temples,  and  Colledges.  Venera-
tion of  an  old  man.  A  wonderfull  Bridge.  A  fearefull
Pit  or  Hole.  The  Mountaine  of  Ravens.  Tame
Serpents.

§.  4.  The  most  remarkable  things  of  John  Leo,  in  his  fourth

Booke  of  the  Historie  of  Africa.  .... 474

Abuchemmeu  restored  to  his  Kingdome,  by  Charles  the  fifth.
The  King  of  Telensin  his  magnificence.  Christian
Captives  redeemed  by  the  Conquest  of  Oran.  Alger,
Tributarie  to  the  King  of  Spaine.

xiv

THE TABLE

The  Contents  of  the  Chapters — Continued.  page

§.  5.  The  most  remarkable  things  in  John  Leo  his  fifth
Booke  of  the  Historie  of  Africa,  and  a  description  of
the  Kingdomes  of  Bugia  and  Tunis.  .... 486

Inhumane  crueltie,  though  deserved  punishment.  Snaile
Devils.  A  fond  and  senselesse  Superstition.  Rebellious
Tebessians  beheaded,  hanged,  and  their  Citie  sacked.
The  Death  of  Carthage  rising  againe  in  Tunis  and
Cairaoan.  The  King  of  Tunis,  saluted  King  of  all
Africa.  A  merrie  Confection.  The  King  of  Tunis
his  Royaltie.  A  River  of  hot  water.  The  Lake  of
Leapers.  Tripolis  taken  by  the  Genoueses.  Bloody
Arabians.

§.  6.  Collections  taken  out  of  John  Leo  his  sixt  Booke  of

the  Historie  of  Africa. ...... 506

Plowing  with  a  Horse  and  a  Camell.  Great  store  of  Scor-
pions, no  Flies.  Jewes  expelled.  Courteous  enter-
taynment  of  strangers.  Deadly  Scorpions.  A  blind
Guide,  by  smelling  of  sand  conducted  the  Seeing.

§.  7.  Extracts  taken  out  of  John  Leo  his  seventh  Booke  of
the  Historie  of  Africa,  wherein  hee  intreateth  of  the
Land  of  Negros,  and  of  the  Confines  of  Egypt. .  . 517

Tombuto,  Gualata,  and  Guinny.  Nigers  overflowings.
Reverence  used  before  the  King  of  Tombuto.  Shels
used  for  Coine.  Kingdomes  of  Gagoa,  Guber,  Cano,
Casena.  Salt  very  deare.  The  King  of  Zamfara
slaine.  Slaves  exchanged  for  Horses.  Nilus  not
navigable  betweene  Nubia  and  Egypt.

xv

ILLUSTRATIONS

PAGE

Hondius  his  Map  of  the  Islands  of  East  India, .  184

Hondius  his  Map  of  Ceylon,  ....  208

Hondius  his  Map  of  Persia,  .....  256

Hondius  his  Map  of  the  East  Indies, .  .  .  272

Hondius  his  Map  of  Africa,  .....  304

Hondius  his  Map  of  the  Kingdom  of  Morocco, .  368

Hondius  his  Map  of  the  Kingdom  of  Fez, .  .  400

Hondius  his  Map  of  Barbary  and  Egypt, .  .  496

XVll

THE FIFTH  VOLUME

OF

Purchas His Pilgrimes

Contayning  the  further  Navigations  and  Voyages  of
Englishmen  into  the  East  Indies ;  the  Dutch
Navigations  to  the  East  Indies  with  De-
clarations of  the  Contentions  between
the  Hollanders  and  the  English
in  the  East ;  with  Collections
of  Things  most  remarkable
in  the  History  of
Africa

Chap. VII.

The  second  Voyage  of  Captaine  Pring  into  the
East-Indies.  Or  a  Relation  of  the  fifth  Voyage
for  the  Joynt  Stocke,  set  forth  by  the  Honor-
able and  Worshipfull  of  the  East-Indie  Societie:
consisting  of  five  Ships,  viz.  the  James  Royall,
of  burthen  a  thousand  tunnes,  Rowland  Coyt-
more  Master:  the  Anne  Royall,  nine  hundred
tunnes ;  Andrew  Shilling  Master  :  the  Gift,
eight  hundred  tunnes  ;  Nathaniel  Salmon
Master  :  the  Bull,  foure  hundred  tunnes  ;
Robert  Adams  Master  :  the  Bee,  one  hun-
dred and  fiftie  tunnes  ;  John  Hatch  Master.
All  under  the  Government  of  Martin  Pring.

§•  i.

Occurrents  in  the  way,  at  Surat,  Bantam,

and  Jacatra.

Nno  1616.  The  fourth  of  February,  our
Fleet  departed  from  Gravesend.  Thurs-
day the  sixth,  Master  Maurice  Abbot,
Deputie  with  divers  of  the  Commissioners
were  aboord  the  ships,  and  mustered  all
our  men  and  payd  their  Harborough
wages.  The  next  day  they  departed,
and  all  our  men  were  entred  into  whole  pay.  After
much foule weather,  the fift  of  March, wee departed

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1616.

from  the  Downes.  March  the  seventh,  we  had  the
[I.  v.  632.]  Lizard  North  foure  leagues  off,  which  lyeth  in  fiftie
degrees  ten  minutes.  From  the  Lizard  we  steered  away
by  a  Meridionall  Compasse,  giving  allowance  in  all  our
courses  for  the  Variation.  The  seven  and  twentieth,
1 61 7.  at  noone  we  had  in  latitude  twentie  eight  degrees
ten  minutes,  the  North-east  point  of  the  Gran  Canaries
West  North-west  five  leagues  off.

The  two  and  twentieth  of  June,  we  had  sight  of
Soldania  point,  and  the  same  afternoone  anchored  in  the
Bay,  whence  we  departed  on  the  thirteenth  of  July.
On  the  three  and  twentieth,  we  descryed  Terra  de
Natal.

The  third  of  August,  we  descryed  the  land  of  Saint
Laurence,  in  twentie  two  degrees  fortie  sixe  minutes  of
latitude.  On  the  eleventh,  we  saw  the  He  of  Molalia.
The  Kings  name  is  Fanno  Mary  O  Fannadill:  Paemon
*An  Eclipse,  the  name  of  the  Port  where  we  *  road :  Commoro  by  the
Inhabitants  is  called  Angazija.  The  next  Hand  to  the
East  is  Joanna :  and  the  next  to  the  East-ward  of  that  is
Mawotta.

The  sixe  of  August,  at  night  the  Moone  was  totally
eclipsed,  when  the  foot  of  the  Crosiers  was  nine  above
the  Horizon  :  it  began  at  eight,  and  continued  til  it  was
past  eleven,  and  was  totally  eclipsed  for  the  space  of  an
houre  and  halfe.  The  five  and  twentieth  of  August,  at
night  betweene  seven  and  eight  a  clocke  in  South  latitude
foure  degrees  twentie  minutes,  the  water  of  the  Sea
seemed  almost  as  white  as  Milke,  and  so  continued  till  the
next  morning :  and  then  as  the  day  came  on  the  water
began  to  alter  againe.  The  next  night  wee  were  in  the
same  water  againe,  but  not  altogether  so  white.  The
thirtieth,  before  day  we  saw  the  fore-said  white  water
againe:  and  likewise  the  next  night,  but  could  find  no
ground.

The  eight  of  September,  we  mounted  the  rest  of  our
Ordnance ;  this  night  at  twelve  of  the  clocke  we  had  six
foote  and  an  halfe  water  in  hold,  which  in  foure  houres

MARTIN PRING  a.d.

1617.

with  both  Pumps  was  freed,  and  after  that  the  Pumps

did  sucke  so  much  in  the  space  of  halfe  an  houre,  that  it

would  rise  twelve  inches  water.

The  ninth,  in  the  morning,  I  caused  the  Chiefe  Com-
manders of  the  Fleete  to  come  aboord,  where  after  that
I  had  given  them  notice  of  the  Accident,  I  willed  them
to  send  for  their  carpenters  to  have  their  advice  in  search-
ing for  the  Leake,  and  some  of  their  Companies  besides  A  great  and
to  helpe  our  men  to  pumpe ;  others  to  rummage  in  hold,  •wWnwtf
and  the  rest  to  stitch  our  sprit-sayle  with  Ocom,  where-
with we  made  tryall  divers  times  under  the  bildge  of  the
shippe,  but  could  not  find  the  Leake,  yet  by  divers  ex-
periments within  boord,  we  found  that  the  Leake  was
before  the  Mast,  and  therefore  the  next  morning  being
the  tenth,  wee  fitted  our  sprit-sayle  againe,  as  before,  and
let  it  downe  before  the  sterne  of  the  ship,  and  so  brought
it  afterwards  on  by  degrees,  untill  by  our  judgement  it
was  under  the  scarfe  of  the  keele,  and  the  sterne,  and
there  (God  bee  praysed)  our  Leake  was  partly  stopped,
for  it  rose  not  above  sixe  inches  in  a  Glasse,  where  before
it  rose  twelve  inches.  After  this  comfortable  newes,  we
steered  away  our  course,  and  within  three  Glasses  after
the  Ocom  was  washed  out,  so  that  we  came  to  our  old
stint  againe  ;  this  night  we  sent  for  one  of  the  Buls
Pumpes  to  free  our  water  from  before,  where  there  was
alwayes  till  then  a  foot  and  an  halfe  water  more  then  was
in  the  Well.

The  eleventh,  we  fitted  our  sprit-saile  with  Ocom,  and
let  it  downe  againe,  in  which  action  it  pleased  God  so  to
favour  us,  that  within  an  houre  after,  our  shippe  was
thighter  then  at  any  time  before,  which  I  pray  God  long
to  continue.

The  twelfth,  in  the  morning  we  descryed  a  sayle  which  TM$  ship  did
the  Gift  did  fetch  up  in  the  afternoone :  this  was  a  Portu-  pj*l  °n
gall  which  came  from  Mozambique,  having  about  fiftie  Almeyda,  and
Kintals  of  Elephants  teeth.  In  the  morning,  the  Bee  also  mostofthe
came  to  us  from  Swally  Road,  and  gave  us  intelligence  of  g°°ds-
the  rest  of  the  Fleet,  that  they  were  all  in  safetie  in  the  M*«#V**

3

A.D.

1617.

Captain
Neuce  and
Jones.

At  our
arrivall  at
Swally,  wee
heard  of  two
Dutch  ships
cast  away  at
Gowdever,
viz.  the  Rot-
terdam  of  a
thousand
tunnesy  and  a
small  Pin-
as  se  ;  the  one
forced  asho  are
the  18.  the
other y  the
19.  of  July
1 6 1 7.  one  in
sight  of
another.

Portugall
spies.

[I.  v-  633«]

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Road  of  Swally,  which  was  no  small  joy  unto  us.  Like-
wise, we  understood  that  they  had  brought  the  Juncke
and  the  two  shippes,  which  they  chased  the  sixteenth  of
this  moneth,  into  the  Road  with  them ;  the  Juncke  beeing
a  great  ship  of  Surat,  belonging  to  the  Mother  Queene,
the  other  two  English  shippes  which  had  her  in  chase,  the
one  of  the  ships  was  called  the  Francis,  a  ship  of  one
hundred  and sixtie  tunnes,  belonging  to  (  )

the  other  the  Lion  of  one  hundred  and  twentie  tuns,  set
forth  by  Philip  Bernardy,  an  Italian  Merchant  in  London.
The  Captaine  in  the  Francis  was  Neuce,  and  of  the  Lion,
Thomas  Jones,  who  in  former  time  had  beene  Boat-swaine
of  the  Hector.

This  evening  (God  be  praysed)  we  arrived  in  Swally
Road  without  the  Sands,  where  wee  found  the  rest  of  the
Fleet ;  the  fore-said  Juncke,  and  the  two  English-men  of
Warre ;  the  Bull  and  the  Lion  being  got  in  on  the  barre.
The  five  and  twentieth,  I  gave  order  that  the  Francis
should  goe  in  also,  that  we  might  be  more  secure  of  her
and  her  Consort;  the  same  evening,  the  Bee  and  the
Prize  went  in  also.

The  ninth  of  October,  at  night,  I  sent  up  one  and
twentie  chests  of  Corall  to  Surat,  which  was  landed  from
the  Anne  two  dayes  before ;  at  night  I  sent  eight  tunne,
foure  hundred  of  Elephants  teeth  to  Surat  from  the  Prize.
In  the  morning,  wee  had  a  consultation  aboord  the  James,
where  it  was  determined  that  the  Anne  or  Gift,  should
by  Gods  grace  bee  laden  for  England.

This  after noone,  twentie  sayle  of  Frigats  from  Goa,
arrived  at  the  barre  of  Surat,  the  Captaine  Major,  Don
Pedro  de  Asadedo,  from  one  of  those  Frigats,  five  of  the
Countrey  people  came  ashoare  amongst  our  men,  which
being  discovered,  three  of  them  fled  and  two  were  taken
by  our  guard,  who  confessed  that  they  came  from  Goa  a
moneth  before,  being  commanded  by  the  Vice-Regent  to
range  the  Coast,  to  discover  the  English ;  which  found,
they  were  to  returne  againe,  if  not  descryed,  to  proceed
on  for  Cambaya  to  waste  the  Caffallo.

4

MARTIN PRING  ad.

1617.

The fourteenth* in the morning, I sent fourteene  *Thismorn-
tunne  of  Elephants  teeth  to  Surat,  from  the  Prize,  which  in?>  fAfJ7'

, \  ......  .  - saile  of Frigats

were guarded up with  thirtie sixe men that went  for  departed  fir
the Convoy of  our mony  to Amadavar. The seven-  Cambaya,
teenth, wee sent  up twelve tunne, and foure hundred  passing faire
teeth.  h  «*•

The  seventeene  Frigats  aforesaid  returned  againe  faire
by  us,  and  stood  to  the  South-ward,  we  sent  the  rest
of  our  teeth  to  Surat.  On  the  two  and  twentieth,  and
this  afternoone  we  landed  sixteene  chests  of  Corall,  and
two  of  Mors  teeth  from  the  Bull.

The  fourteenth  of  November,  being  Friday,  we  dis-
peeded  the  Bee  for  Jasques,  a  monethes  pay  was  given  to
all  the  Company  in  the  Fleet,  (the  chiefe  Commanders  and
the  Merchants  excepted)  which  amounted  to  three  thou-
sand three  hundred  and  two  Rials  of  eight.  And  after
that,  this  afternoone  we  landed  cloth,  Tinne,  Cases  of
Wine,  and  strong  Waters,  with  the  rest  of  the  Presents
that  were  in  the  Cabbin.

The  seventeenth  of  January,  being  Saturday,  the  Bee
returned  from  Persia :  this  day  seven  Mallabar  Junckes
Road  in  the  offing,  to  whom  I  sent  out  the  Francis,
who  brought  in  two  of  them,  and  the  Bee  other  two.

Thursday,  the  twelfth  of  March,  we  departed  from
Swally  Road,  the  same  evening  we  anchored  neere  the
Barre  of  Surat.  The  seventeenth,  in  the  morning,  the
wind  veered  up  Northerly,  and  in  the  afternoone  the
Anne  departed  from  us,  bound  for  the  Red  Sea.  Tues-
day, the  eighteenth,  I  dispeeded  the  Bull.  At  noone
wee  had  gone  South-east  by  South  twelve  leagues,  latitude,
eleven  degrees  twentie  five  minutes,  the  winds  (as  foure
or  five  dayes  before)  at  night  a  little  breath  off  the  shoare,
by  day  in  the  afternoone  a  fresh  gale  from  the  Sea ;  this
day  in  the  fore-noone  we  saw  eight  sayle  of  ships  to  the
South-wards  of  us,  and  three  betweene  us  and  the  shoare ;
moreover,  two  Gallies  and  ten  Frigats,  these  were  chased
to  the  North-wards,  by  the  Bee  and  the  Francis,  which
I  had  sent  the night  before,  to  keepe faire  the  shoare.

5

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1618.

The  eight  and  twentieth, in  the afternoone the  Francis
and the Bee being neere the shoare, and thwart of
K.  of  Calicut.  Callicut  ; the  King sent  off  a  Boat pretending  to bee
very desirous to speake  with  me, but I  was  too  farre
shot  to  the  South-wards  before  that  I  heard  the  newes.
The second  of  Aprill, 161 8.  in  the  morning,  we  got
Brin  Jan  and  into the Bay  of  Brin  Jan,  where  we  anchored  in  four-
the  refreshing teene  fathome  water,  within  halfe  a  league  of  the  Towne,
a  high  picked  hill  like  unto  a  Sugar-loafe,  bearing  North-
east by  East  by  the  Compasse,  which  is  the  best  marke
if  it  be  cleane,  to  know  the  place  ;  here  is  good  refreshing
to  bee  had,  Hennes  and  Coco  Nuts  in  abundance,  Goates
and  great  store  of  fish,  also  good  fresh  water  springing
from a Rocke  ; but wee were  faine to pay seventie
Rials  of  eight,  a  Vest  of  Cloth,  a  small  Peece,  a  Looking-
glasse,  and  a  Sword,  and  all  too  little  to  give  her  content.
For after the Governour had received the Present
with the mony, and granted us  leave, he  came againe
Perfidious with seven  or  eight  hundred  men,  and  demanded  more
people.  money,  and  had  we  not  kept  a  strong  guard  at  the  spring,

hee  would  have  put  us  by  it  after  our  money  was  paid.
Sunday,  the  fifth,  at  one  of  the  clocke  at  night,  the
wind  comming  off  the  shoare,  we  weighed  anchor  and
departed.  This  evening  we  were  thwart  of  a  headland,
which  lyeth  South-east  by  East  from  Brin  Jan  eight
leagues,  from  whence  unto  the  Cape  East,  two  thirds
South  are  seven  leagues.  Neere  unto  the  first  head-land
Dangerous  lyeth  two  Rockes  a  good  heighth  above  water,  and  a  mile
Rockes.  without them, there  is  a  most  dangerous  Rocke,  which

is  even  with  the  surface  of  the  water,  but  if  you  come
not  within  twentie  sixe  fathome,  you  shall  goe  cleere
enough.
Cape  Commo-  On  the  seventh,  in  the  evening  at  sixe  we  had  Cape
Commorin  North  North-east  one  third,  North  five  leagues
off,  being  in  thirtie  fathome.  The  nineteenth  of  June,
Captaine  Ball  and  Master  Pickham  came  aboord.  This
afternoone  (God  bee  praysed)  wee  arrived  in  the  Roade

of  Bantam.

6

rine.

MARTIN PRING  ad.

1618.

The  foure  and  twentieth,  I  went  to  the  Pangram,  to  Bantam.
compose  the  matter  betweene  Captaine  Ball  and  the
Chineses,  whose  Juncke  Captaine  Ball  had  arrested  for
certaine  debts  due  by  the  Chineses ;  where  (according  to
Captaine  Balls  desire)  I  made  proffer  of  the  re-delivery
of  the  Juncke,  conditionally,  that  the  Pangram  would
doe  us  Justice  ;  which  he  passed  his  word  to  performe.
Munday,  the  sixth  of  July,  in  the  afternoone,  I  went
againe  to  the  Pangram,  Master  George  Ball,  Master  Rich,  Pangram  of
Master  Pickham,  and  divers  other  Merchants  in  company.  Bantam  hts

.  uniustice.

His  malice  was  so  great  against  Master  Ball,  that  he
would  not  grant  him  accesse,  whereupon  I  sent  him  word
that  Master  Ball  had  brought  the  bils  of  debt,  and  was
onely  able  to  give  a  reason  of  all  passages  betwixt  the
English  and  the  Chineses,  whereof  I  was  utterly  ignorant,
his  Messenger  returned  the  second  time,  and  told  me
that  Master  Ball  might  not  be  admitted,  and  so  wee
left  the  Court.

The  first  of  September  in  the  morning,  the  wind  being
off  the  shoare, we weighed, and stood towards Point  Point  Ay  re.
Ayre, keeping  along  in  seven  fathome  upon  the  maine,
untill  wee  were  within three miles of  the  said Point,
where  we  had  seven fathom  wanting  a  quarter  the  one
cast, and the next but three  fathom ;  some  supposing  [I.  v.  634.]
that  our  ship  did  touch,  but  I could not perceive it.
Off  this  Point  there  lieth  a  flat  shoald  almost  with  the
frame  of  the  water,  but  you  have  seven  fathom  within  two
Cables length of  it. This afternoone,  as  we  stood in
with  the  Dutch  ships,  which  rode  in  the  faire  way  betwixt The  Dutch
the  two  Hands,  even  as  wee  came  within  a  mile  of  the *.  3#  &f*
ships,  our  ship came aground, but (God be praysed)  did  ride  right
we  got her  off  againe  without  any hurt at  all,  and so  in  the  way
stood in the Bay, where  againe wee came within two  tnat  wee  were
Cables  length  of  another shoald,  which  lieth South-east  *°t**se-  3-at
by  South  from the Flemmish lies,  one league  and an  p/ace  and  Y
halfe  off.  in  the  Road  of

Wednesday,  the  second  of  September  in  the  afternoone,  Jacatra.
it pleased God to bring  us  into  the  Road of  Jacatra

7

A.D.
l6l8.

Deliverance
from  3.
dangers.
The  \  9.  of  this
moneth,  the
Angel  a  Dutch
ship  of  500.
tunnes,  came
from  Amboyna
laden  with  nuts
Jff  cloves,  and
departed  from
thence  the  25.
of  the  same.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

in  safety,  having  delivered  us  from  three  imminent
dangers  the  day  before,  God  grant  we  may  alwaies  re-
member it  with  praise  and  thankesgiving  to  his  holy
Name.

The  sixe  and  twentieth  of  September,  being  Saturday,
early  in  the  morning,  I  went  to  visite  the  King  the  second
time,  remayning  in  his  Parke ;  and  finding  him  in  a
pleasant  vaine,  I  moved  him  concerning  of  former  busi-
nesse ;  and  before  I  left  him,  we  came  to  a  finall
conclusion,  which  was  this :  First,  in  consideration  of  our
free  importation  and  exportation  of  all  manner  of  Com-
modities, to  give  him  seven  hundred  Rials  of  eight  per
annum,  and  fifteene  hundred  Rials  of  eight,  for  a  plat
of  ground  to  build  on.

§.  n.

Dutch  wrongs,  and  the  Fights  betwixt  Sir  Thomas

Dale  and  them.

Unday,  the  seven  and  twentieth  in  the  evening,
Master  Bishop  arrived  in  this  Road,  in  a  Praw,
which  came  from  Japparra,  wherein  was  a  Cogee
which  brought  the  Matran  his  Letter  to  Captaine  Ball,
wherefore  I  dispeeded  him  for  Bantam  the  same  night :
he  left  two  English  behind  him  at  Japparra,  one  of  them
Dutch  injuries  being  fled  from  the  Dutch,  and  had  Letters  from  divers  of
to  the  Enghsh.  our  pe0ple  that  are  prisoners  in  the  Moluccas,  and
amongst  the  rest,  one  was  directed  unto  me  from  Master
Richard  Tatten,  wherein  he  complaineth  very  much  of  the
boarish  usage  of  the  Dutch,  that  will  hardly  allow  them
Rice  to  put  in  their  bellies,  and  that  upon  every  idle
newes  of  the  comming  of  any  ships,  they  are  still  put
in  Irons.

The  thirteenth  of  October  in  the  evening,  Cornelius
Marthon,  Commander  of  the  French  ship  taken  by  the
Dutch,  came  into  the  Road,  and  the  same  night  came
aboord  of  me,  and  after  some  discourse  told  me,  that  we
had  sixe  ships  comming  for  this  place  out  of  England,  Sir

8

French  ship
taken  by
Dutch.

MARTIN PRING  a.d.

1618.

Thomas Dale Admirall, for some speciall businesse  at  Sir  Thomas

the  Moluccas,  and  that  hee  was  bound  thither  with  the  ^leAdmtrall

French  ship,  the  Souldhailer,  and  the  Neptune,  to  attend  '

the  comming  of  good  friends. The  seven  and  twentieth

in  the  evening,  wee had  foure  foot  and  an halfe water  ^  ^e

in the James Royall, which wee freed in two houres  a&atne-

with  both  our  Pumpes,  and  afterward  kept  our  Pumpe

going  untill  the  next  morning  about  ten  of  the  clocke,  at

which  time  by  letting  downe  of  a  sayle  basted  with  Ocum,

it  pleased  God  to  stop  the  leake  againe. The  one  and

thirtieth, I discovered a place  for  the  careening  of  the

James  Royall,  upon  the  little  Hand,  that  lieth  next  within

Tanium  point  in  the  Bay  of  Bantam,  we  made  all  things  Tanium point.

readie  to  repaire  unto  the  foresaid  Hand.

The  fifteenth  of  November,  the  Rose  arrived  from
Teco,  bringing  newes  that  the  Hollanders  had  a  Factorie
there  established  soone  after  that  ours  was  dissolved.
The  nineteenth,  the  Moone,  the  Clove,  the  Samson,  and
the  Pepper-corne,  arrived  from  England,  and  anchored
betweene  Viun  point,  and  Poolo-Paniang.  This  dav  I  Viun  PoinL
went  aboord  of  them,  taking  with  me  such  fresh  victuals  **

as  our  ship  did  affoord  to  congratulate  their  comming.
Comming  neere,  I  perceived  the  Clove  to  be  Admirall,
and  therefore  went  first  aboord  of  her,  where  I  found  Sir
Thomas  Dale  the  chiefe  Commander,  and  Captaine  Jor-
daine  the  President ;  I  understood  by  them,  that  they  lost
companie  of  the  Globe  to  the  Westward  of  the  Cape,  and
(which  was  farre  worse)  that  they  left  the  Sunne  (Admirall  Sunne  lost  at
of  the  Fleet)  in  great  danger  of  casting  away,  upon  the  niano'
He  of  Engano :  they  themselves  having  much  adoe  to
double  the  Hand.  Two  dayes  they  rode  still  in  this  place
expecting  her  comming,  which  was  long  before  bildged
upon  the  Rockes,  as  afterwards  we  understood  to  our
great  griefe.  The  two  and  twentieth  in  the  morning,
the  foresaid  ships  stood  in  for  Bantam  Road,  and  as  they
passed  by  the  Hand  where  our  ship  lay,  wee  saluted  them
with  fifteene  Peeces  of  Ordnance,  which  we  had  formerly
planted  on  the shoare,  and  withall,  tooke  in our Flag,

9

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1618.

to  shew  our  respect  to  Sir  Thomas  Dale, the  Admirall
of  that  Fleet.

The  eight  and  twentieth  of  November,  came  two  boats

from  Engano,  with  sixtie  eight  of  the  Sunnes  men,  who

brought  lamentable  newes  of  the  losse  of  the  said  ship

with many of  the companie, upon the foresaid  Hand.

The nine and twentieth in the morning, the Globe

Leake  agalne.  arrived ; this  day  our  leake  brake  out  againe,  but  was

quickly  stopped  (God  bee  praised)  by  remooving  of  the

Bonnet. The thirtieth, our ship being cleared from

stemme  to  sterne,  the  Carpenter  went  downe  to  search

for  the  leake,  and  as  they  passed  forward,  still  taking  up

the  seeling  as  they  went, in  the  formost  roome  saving

[I.  y.  635.] one5  they  found  the  leake  being  an  augur  hole  left  open

fi lib  m  t'le  middle  of  the  keele ;  which  was  foure  inches  and

augur  hole  * three  quarters  about,  which  leake,  if  it  had  sprung  upon

left  open. us  alone  in  the  Sea,  would  have  tired  all  our  companie

in  foure  and  twentie  houres,  herein  the  great  mercie  of

God did manifestly  appeare,  in  that it  never  brake  out

but  when  we had  a Fleet about us  for  our  aide,  God

give us  grace alwaies to remember it with  praise  and

thanksgiving  to  his  holy  Name.

The  second  of  December  being  Saturday,  Sir  Thomas

Dale  and  Captaine  Ball  came  aboord,  because  we  had  pro-

A  Fast  in  both  claimed  a  Fast  through  both  the  Fleets,  and  the  Exercise

Fleets.  to jDee  aboord the James the next day,  which  was  the

Sabbath : on which  morning, the  President and divers

Master  Merchants came aboord, bringing Master Wrenne in

C  ?tJn6}  ^ companie : the  Preacher  of  the  Sunne,  who  exercised in

the  fore-noone,  and Master Copeland  our Minister,  in

the  after-noone. This  day  the  Bee  set  saile  for  Engano,

being  formerly  ordained  to  goe  thither,  in  hope  to  recover

some  moneys  and  goods  they  hold  of  the  Sunne. The

fourth in the after-noone,  the Swart  Leo  arrived  from

Potania,  and  rode  to  the  Westward  of  Poolo  Paniang;

Master  Denton  in  regard  of  his  acquaintance  amongst  the

Dutch,  was  sent  aboord  of  her  in  the  barge,  to  enquire

from whence shee came: who when he  came  aboord,

10

MARTIN PKING  ad.

1618.

found  one  Hendricke  Janson  his  old  acquaintance,  a  man

that  had  beene  chiefe  Factor  for  the  Dutch  in  Potania

a  long  time. This man with another  inferiour  Factor

came  aboord  the  Moone  with  Master  Denton,  where  they

were  well  entertained,  till  Sir  Thomas  Dale  came  aboord,

and  soone  after  were  set  on  shoare  at  Bantam  the  same

night, before  day  we resolved to goe forth with foure

ships,  the  Moone,  the  Clove,  the  Globe,  and  the  Samson,

that  we  might  the  better  incompasse  her. At  breake  of

day  wee  were  faire  by  her,  and  after  a  few  exchange  of

Paries,  they  yeelded  up  their  ship,  upon  condition  that  Tie  Blacke

they  might  depart  with  all such goods,  as  did  properly  ™*  a  f*

belong  unto  them. On  the  sixt,  we  brought  her  in  neere

the  Hand  where  we  had  left  the  rest  of  our  Fleet.

The  fourteenth,  the  Bee  returned  againe  beaten  back
with  foule  weather,  that  she  was  not  able  to  get  out
of  the  Straights.  On  the  sixteenth  in  the  after-noone,
there  came  twentie  Portuguezes  aboord  the  James  Royall,
fled  from  the  Dutch  at  Jacatra,  which  were  freely  received,
and  kindly  entertained.  This  evening,  we  were  readie
to  set  saile  with  eleven  ships  great  and  small  for  Jacatra,
in  hope  to  beat  away  the  Dutch  ships  from  thence;  The
names  of  the  ships  were  the  Moone,  in  which  Sir  Thomas  Tie  English
Dale  went,  the  Gift,  wherein  I  went  my  selfe,  the  Uni-  *  l^s'
corne,  the  Clove,  the  Globe,  the  Samson,  the  Pepper-corne,
the  Thomas,  the  Bee,  the  Rose,  and  the  Swart  Leo;
leaving  behind  us  the  James  Royall,  there  to  take  in  her
provisions,  also  the  Prize,  and  the  Advice,  because  they
had  most  of  her  provision  in  them.  The  nineteenth  in
the  morning,  wee  set  saile  with  our  Fleet  aforesaid,  and
the  same  day  wee  anchored  betweene  Poolo  Paniang,  and
Poolo  Tunda.  The  twentieth  in  the  evening,  we  anchored
with  all  our  Fleet  about  a  league  to  the  Northwards  of
Hector-Hand.  This  night  we  sent  the  barge  to  the
Flemmish  Hands,  where  they  found  no  people  at  all  upon
the  Souther  Hand,  there  lay  a  Dutch  Galley  which  they
set  on  fire,  and  so  returned  aboord  the  same  night.  This
evening,  wee  descried  seven  roders  in  the  Bay  of  Jacatra.

11

A.D.
l6l8.

Consultation
for  the  Fight
betwixt  the
English  and
Dutch  Fleets.

The  Fight.
See  Master
CorthopsJour-
nalljZvhere  you
may  read  Sir
Tho.  Dales
Letter^  and
Master
Jordans.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

The  one  and  twentieth  early  in  the  morning,  these  seven
ships  stood  off  with  us  untill  they  were  somewhat  neere
the  Hands,  and  there  they  came  to  an  anchor  altogether.
This  afternoone  we  stood  in  towards  them,  and  anchored
a  mile  to  windward  of  their  Fleet.  This  evening,  we  had
a  consultation  aboord  the  Moone,  where  it  was  resolved,
That  the  next  morning  we  should  assault  the  Holland
Fleet  in  manner  following :  The  Globe,  and  the  Samson,
for  the  Sunne;  and  the  Thomas  to  passe  in  betweene
them,  fitted  with  combustible  matter  to  set  her  on  fire;
the  Moone,  and  the  Clove,  for  the  Golden  Lion;  the
Gift,  and  the  Bee,  for  to  attempt  the  Angell;  the  Uni-
corne,  and  the  Rose,  for  the  Devill  of  Delfe ;  the  Pepper-
corne  was  sent  forth  to  surprise  the  burget  boat  come
from  Jambee ;  riding  about  three  leagues  off;  whose  boat
with  thirteene  men,  our  barge  had  taken  as  shee  was
standing  in  with  the  Holland  Fleet,  about  seven  of  the
clocke  at  night:  this  our  determination  being  written
downe,  we  departed  aboord  every  man  to  his  charge,  but
after  we  were  gone,  Sir  Thomas  Dale  sent  his  boat  aboord
the  Thomas,  for  three  Sakers,  which  held  them  in  worke
till  eight  the  next  morning,  so  that  the  Hollanders  were
all  away  before  these  Ordnance  were  aboord  the  Moone,
which  made  us  all  in  a  hurliburly  to  weigh,  and  get  to
seawards,  that  we  might  have  sea-roome,  and  the  advan-
tage of  the  sea-turne;  the  which  at  length  wee  attained,
getting  without  the  lies  of  Point  Aire :  the  Holland  Fleet
passing  betweene  them  and  the  maine  of  Java.  So  that
the  same  night  they  anchored  faire  above  the  Coast  of
Java;  and  our  Fleet  in  the  offing  without  the  Hands.

On  the  three  and  twentieth,  in  the  morning,  the
Holland  Fleet  stood  off  to  the  Westward  close  under
Anti-Lackie.  The  Devill  of  Delft  borrowing  so  neere
that  shee  came  aground,  and  sate  fast  for  a  quarter  of
an  houre;  which  was  no  sooner  perceived  by  us,  but
forthwith  we  made  towards  them  with  all  our  Fleet ;  yet
before  we  drew  any  thing  neere,  she  was  slipt  off  againe ;
and  shee  with all  the rest  of  the  Fleet  standing  off  to

12

MARTIN PRING  a.d.

1618.

the Northwards: our  Fleet  having  the  weather  gadge,

wee  paid  roome  upon  them,  till  wee  came  within  shot,

and  then  the  Moone,  (wherein  was  Sir  Thomas  Dale  the

Admirall)  beganne  the  fight  with the  headmost  ship  of

the Dutch, named  the  Sunne; our  fight  continued  the

space  of  three  houres,  during  which  time  wee  spent  some

twelve hundred great shot amongst them, and so  left

them  for  that  night; they  standing  off  so  farre  to  the  [I.  v.  636.]

Northwards, that they got the Burger boat into their

companie, and then anchored to the westwards of  us,

about  halfe  a  league : there  they  rode  all night.

The  foure  and  twentieth,  both  Fleets  weighed  anchor,
ours  plying  to  the  westward  to  gaine  the  wind ;  and  the
Hollanders  ranne  in  to  the  shoare,  towards  Point  Aire :
in  the  meane  time  wee  descried  three  Saile  comrning  from
the  westward  afore  the  wind,  which  comrning  neere,  we
perceived  to  be  the  little  James,  the  Hound,  and  the
Francois ;  and  after  they  were  come  neere  us,  we  joyned
all  together,  and  chased  the  Holland  Fleet,  through  the
Bay  of  Jacatra  unto  the  Easterne  point  of  the  same;
where  wee  all  came  to  an  anchor  in  the  evening.  This
night  there  was  a  Junke  sent  from  the  Flemmings  at
Jacatra,  filled  with  combustible  matter,  and  set  on  a  light
fire,  which  came  so  neere  unto  our  Fleet,  that  we  were
faine  to  weigh  our  anchors  and  be  gone.  The  five  and
twentieth,  being  Christmas  day,  wee  saw  the  Flemmish
Fleet  againe,  standing  to  the  Eastwards,  and  the  same
day,  wee  sent  out  our  barge  to  follow  them  all  night,  and
see  what  course  they  tooke,  because  we  had  left  the  James
Royall  in  the  Bay  of  Bantam,  with  the  Advice,  and  the
Prize,  which  ships  they  might  have  surprised,  if  they
should  get  Bantam  before  us ;  for  there  was  no  ship  of
defence,  but  the  James,  and  shee  unprepared,  by  taking
in  of  her  goods.

The seven  and  twentieth  after  midnight, the Blacke
Lion  was  set  on  fire  by  the  wretched  carelesnesse  of  three
wicked fellowes, and burnt downe to the  water. The  went  as^oare
thirtieth  in  the  morning,  the  President  went  ashoare  to  at  Jacatra,

13

A.D.
I6l8.

Master  Jack-
son slaine.

Aide  to  the
King  of
Jacatra.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

the  King  of  Jacatra,  with  Master  John  Jackson  in  com-
panie,  to  view  their  fortifications,  where  an  unfortunate
shot  tooke  away  his  leg,  and  so  consequently  his  life.

The  first  of  Januarie,  the  James  Royall,  the  Advice,
and  the  Prize,  arrived  from  Bantam.  The  second,  Sir
Thomas  Dale  went  a  shoare  to  visite  the  King  of  Jacatra,
and  to  understand  his  resolution  concerning  the  Dutch
Fort :  The  King  gave  both  the  President  and  him  great
content  in  words,  promising  to  grant  any  reasonable
request,  if  the  English  would  assist  him  in  surprising  of
the  Dutch  Castle.  This  morning  before  day,  the  Francois
departed  for  Polaroone,  with  divers  provisions  for  reliefe
of  that  worshipfull  Gentleman,  Master  Nathaniel  Corthop,
and  his  companie,  God  send  her  thither  in  safetie.  The
sixt  day,  we  held  a  consultation  aboord  the  Moone,  where
it  was  resolved,  That  out  of  our  greater  ships  we  should
land  six  Peeces,  three  Culverings,  and  three  Demi-
culverings,  with  powder  and  shot,  convenient  to  assist
the  King  of  Jaccatra  against  the  Dutch,  also  that  Sir
Thomas  Dale  should  remaine  in  the  Road  with  eight
Saile,  to  countenance  the  businesse,  and  my  selfe  with
sixe  ships  to  plie  for  the  Straits  of  Sunda,  to  lie  in  wait
for  the  Holland  Fleet.  The  five  and  twentieth,  being
Munday,  wee  got  into  the  Road  of  Becee,  and  anchored
in  fifteene  fathoms  oze,  about  two  miles  from  the  shoare,
the  South  point  of  Becee,  bearing  South-west  one  quarter
West,  and  the  North  point  of  Sabajoa  (the  Wester  He
of  Poolo  Tiga,  being  shut  in  upon  it)  did  beare  North
by  West  three  leagues  off".  The  twentie  seven  and  twentie
eight,  we  watered  our  ships,  and  cut  wood ;  and  my  selfe
with  Master  Coitmore,  and  other  Masters  went  ashoare
twice,  to  view  the  Harbour ;  which  wee  found  to  bee  an
excellent  place  for  refuge  of  a  small  Fleet  against  a  greater
force.  The  one  and  thirtieth,  by  order  from  the  Presi-
dent, we  put  into  Bantam  Road  with  our  Fleet.

The  first  of  Februarie,  Captaine  John  Jourdan  the
President  came  aboord ;  who  acquainted  me  with  all  the
passages  betwixt  them  and  the  Dutch,  in  the  Castle  of

14

MARTIN PRING  a.d.

1618.

Jacatra,  during  the  time  of  my  absence  ;  which  was  that  THs  agree-
the  Dutch  had  condescended  to  deliver  over  their  Fort  ment  ™as
unto  the  English,  upon  condition  they  might  depart  with  pan\raJ0r
bag  and  baggage,  and  a  ship  for  two  thousand  Rials  of  Bantam  who
eight,  to  carrie  them for  Coromandell. On  the  fourth,  gave  us  leave
Sir  Thomas  Dale  with sixe  ships,  viz.  the Moone,  the  *  °eat  f*f
Clove,  the  James,  the  Peppercorne,  the  Hound,  and  the  thou\ht  him-
Advice,  arrived  in  Bantam Road. This  afternoone,  the  selfe  to  have
rest  of  the  ships  came  in. Here,  after  our  arrivall  under-  caught  the
standing  that  the  Pomgram  of  Bantam  had  dealt  under-  ^r^J>  but  in
hand with the Dutch, to have the Castle of  Jaccatra  ^ . j
delivered  into  his  hands  (who  before  had  unjustly  dis-
appointed us of it) we thought it fitting, that the
President,  and  the  rest  of  the  Principals  should  repaire
aboord, and forthwith to get all their  goods  and pro-
vision  from  the shoare. The tenth, eleventh, twelfth,
thirteenth, fourteenth,  fifteenth,  and sixteenth,  we  were
imployed in  getting  the  Honourable  Companies  moneys
and  goods  aboord  the  ships : during  this  time,  the  Pan-
gram sent  divers  slight messengers  unto  the  President,
to  demand  (as  from  themselves)  the  reason  of  his  depar-
ture, he  (as  he  said)  giving  them  no  other  just  occasion,
so  to  leave  his  Countrey :  whereupon  the President  drew
certaine  Articles  of  the  severall  wrongs  and  grievances,
that  the  English  had  received  from  time  to  time  at  his
hands,  which were  to bee  translated  into  the  Java  lan-
guage, and  sent  unto  him.

The  seventeenth,  Master  Ufflet  advised  from  Jacatra,
that  the  Flemmings  were  fortifying  daily.  And  also,  that
when  the  Messengers  of  the  Pangran  demanded  the
surrender  of  their  Fort,  with  part  of  their  Moneyes,  Goods
and  Ordnances ;  They  answered,  That  it  was  their  Masters
goods,  and  therefore  not  fit  for  them  to  give  them  away.
About  noone,  wee  heard  of  the  arrivall  of  two  Dutch
ships,  in  the  Road  of  Jacatra.  The  same  night,  Sir
Thomas  Dale  with  eight  ships,  went  for  Jacatra,  in  quest
of  the  said  ships,  and  I  remayned  here  with  foure  to
attend  upon  the  President. The  sixe  and  twentieth,  we [I.  v.  637.]

15

A.D.
l6l8.

Dutch
bravery.

Vinivalencie
of  the  Dutch.

Their  flight.

Dutch  ship
burnt,  and
another  cast
.away.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

had  certaine  intelligence  that  foure  Holland  ships  were
at  anchor  in  the  mouth  of  the  streights  of  Sunda :  this
evening  we  went  out  with  the  James  Royall,  the  Gift,
the  Unicorne,  and  the  little  James ;  and  the  next  morn-
ing anchored  neere  Poolo-Pen-Iang,  to  pridy  up  our
ships,  and  to  take  in  water  and  planks  that  lay  by  our
side.

The  first  of  March  in  the  morning,  we  weighed  againe,
and  plyed  towards  the  mouth  of  the  Streights,  where  we
descried  the  foure  Dutch  ships  aforesaid  at  anchor,  neere
unto  the  Hand  called  Tamporon,  which  lyeth  about  three
leagues  to  the  Westward  of  Viun  or  Pallambam  point.
So  soone  as  we  descried  them  we  made  towards  them  with
all  speed :  and  they  in  a  carelesse  fashion  plyed  it  to  and
againe  with  their  top  sailes  halfe  mast  downe,  and  at
length  as  wee  drew  neere  unto  them,  the  Admirall  and
the  rest  bore  up  with  our  ship,  being  the  winder  most  of
our  Fleet ;  and  gave  us  two  shot,  one  through  the  ships
side  under  the  halfe  decke  ;  and  the  other  in  the  steeridge
side.

This  I  declare,  because  men  may  the  better  understand
the  insolencie,  or  rather  vinivalencie  of  this  arrogant
Nation,  to  come  on  with  such  a  Spanish  bravado,  and  so
soone  to  run  away.  They  had  no  sooner  begun,  but  they
were  as  quickly  answered  from  our  ship,  in  such  a
measure,  that  within  the  space  of  two  houres  (by  the
gracious  assistance  of  Almightie  God)  wee  made  them  as
quiet  as  Lambs ;  the  Admirall,  that  first  gave  the  on-set,
being  the  first  that  ran  away,  and  after  him  all  his  Fleet ;
whom  we  chased  untill  night,  and  then  finding  them  too
light  of  foote,  gave  over  the  chase.  The  night  wee  stood
over  towards  Poolo  Tunda.  The  second  in  the  after-
noone,  we  anchored  againe  in  the  Road  of  Bantam  ;  this
day  we  had  newes  from  Jacatra,  that  one  of  the  two
Dutch  ships  aforenamed,  was  fast  on  ground  hard  by  their
Castle,  and  that  they  themselves  at  sight  of  Sir  Thomas
Dales  fleet,  had  set  her  on  fire.  The  other  ship  which
tooke  in  some  rich  goods  out  of  the  Castle,  was  likewise

16

MARTIN PRING  ad.

1619.
cast  away  upon  certaine  Rocks,  ten  leagues  to  the  East-
wards off  Jacatra.  The  fourth  dicto,  we  received  the
Letter  from  Jo.  Powell,  residing  in  Jacatra,  that  Sir  Tho.
Dale  departed  from  thence  the  first  of  March  with  the
Moone,  the  Hound,  the  Rose,  and  the  Bee,  to  search
out  the  Flemming  that  was  cast  away.  The  fourteenth  in
the  forenoone,  we  had  newes  from  Sir  Thomas  Dale,
that  hee  had  gotten  almost  in  shot  of  these  foure  ships ;
and  then  they  were  taken  with  a  calme  the  space  of  twelve
houres,  and  after  this  calme  there  did  arise  a  tempest  A  Tempest.
in  the  night,  which  scattered  them  so  farre  asunder,  that
the  next  morning  they  were  out  of  hope  of  their  chase,
and  so  returned  to  point  Ayre  againe,  determining  forth-
with to  come  unto  us  with  the  Moone,  and  to  leave
the  rest  of  his  Fleet  to  take  in  some  provisions  from
Jacatra.

The  of  March,  we  consulted  aboord  the  Uni-

corne,  of  our  best  course  to  bee  taken  with  the  Fleet,
where  it  was  resolved,  that  we  should  goe  for  the  Coast
of  Coromandell,  which  (as  we  were  informed)  is  a  good
Countrey  for  the  health  of  men,  and  abounding  with
Rice,  Wheat,  Butter,  Gravances,  &c.  which  could  not
here  be  had  for  any  money.

§•  in.

Their  departure  for  Coromandell :  Occurrents
there  :  Sir  Thomas  Dales  death.  English  ships
taken  by  the  Dutch.  Consultation  and  pro-
visions at  Teco,  and  departure  thence.

Prill  19.  1619.  being  Munday,  all  our  ships  being
together  that  were  in  this  place,  and  the  three
Junks  at  anchor  amongst  us,  wee  resolved  in
counsell  to  put  the  honorable  Companies  Commission  in
execution,  which  was  to  appropriate  the  Chineses  goods
unto  them  for  former  debts.  On  Tuesday,  Kewee  came
aboord  to  the  President,  accompanyed  with  the  three
Nochadas  or  Captaines  of  the  Juncks,  to  know  his  intent ;

v  17  B

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1619.

who  answered  them,  That  if  the  young  King  of  Bantam
would  displace  the  Pangran,  he  would  then  come  and
Bichar  with  him,  and  deliver  over  the  Juncks  againe.
The  eight  and  twentieth  in  the  morning,  all  our  Fleet
Morrogh.  being  readie  to  set  saile,  intending  to  goe  for  Morrogh,
there  to  take  in  water,  and  to  discharge  the  Juncks ;  we
descried  a  saile  comming  in  from  the  Westward  about
Pallambam  point,  which  we  found  to  be  a  Portugall
Frigat,  taken  at  Jasques,  and  having  twentie  English  men
aboord  of  her,  and  was  sent  from  Captaine  Bonner,  as  an
advise  to  the  President  in  Bantam.  These  men  gave  us
Sir  Tho.  Roes  to  understand,  that  Sir  Thomas  Roe  the  Lord  Embassador,
returne  to  was  g0ne  for  England  in  the  Anne  Royall,  having  quitted
the  Countrey  with  great  honour  and  reputation,  both
for  himselfe  and  the  honorable  Companie  our  Employers.
Bodman,  who  was  the  cause  of  setting  the  Black  Lion
on  fire,  was  hanged.  On  the  two  and  twentieth  of  May,
this  night  wee  set  saile  from  hence.

The  thirtieth,  we  parted  with  Sir  Thomas  Dale,  who

haled  in  with  his  Fleet,  under  the  Hand :  and  we  held  on

our  course  for  Messulapatan,  having  in  companie  the  Gift,

the Unicorne,  and the Bee. The thirtieth of  June  in

the  morning,  wee  anchored  in nine  fathome  about  two

leagues  of  the  shoare  on  the  Coast  of  Coromandell,  here

[I.  v.  638.] we  roacl  for  the  space  of  foure  dayes,  during  which  time,

The  cause  that  we were har(jiy  able to  Y\s[t  one  another,  by  reason  of

put  us  to  lee-  '  .

wardofMes-  the  West  South-west  windes,  and  the  continuall  Currents

sulapatan.was  setting  to  the  East  North-east.  The  breach  also  was  so
the  violence  of  loftie  on  the  shoare,  that  we  durst  not  adventure  to
the  Westerly . tQ siiQ2ire wjth  any  of  our  boats. At  length  when

winds  and.  the  *•

Current  set-  we  met  together,  Master  Roberts,  Master  of  the  Uni-
ting  so  strong  corne,  gave  me  notice  of  a  Bay,  lying  in  seventeene
to  the  East-  degrees  upon  this  Coast,  about  five  leagues  to  the  East-
ward'  wards  of  Nassapore, where  there  was good riding  for

a  Westerly  Monson,  which  was  the  onely  thing  I  now
desired,  seeing  there  was  no  hope  against  Winde  and
Tyde  to  recover  Messulapatan.  The  fourth  in  the  morn-
ing, we  set  saile  and  stood  to  the  Eastward,  the Coast

18

MARTIN PRING  ad.

1619.
lying  West  South-west,  and  East  North-east,  and  having
run  about  nine  leagues  by  judgement  with  the  Wind  and
Current, wee  found  the  Land to  lye  away  North,  and
North  and by  West, which  gave  mee some hope  of  a
good  Road:  by  this point  of  Land  there  commeth  out  From  the  place
a  great  River,  the  streame  whereof  hath  raised  a  great  Rise ™  wj^rst
or  Shoald  of  the  sharpe  of  the  Point,  extending  it  selfe  the  foresaid
halfe  a  mile into  the  Sea,  which  maketh  the  smoother  point,  which
Road  about  the  point,  for  you  may  bring  the  said  sand  we  supposed  to
South  South-west,  and  ride  in  sixe  degrees  and  an  halfe •  m^jea^es
fathome Oze, two miles off  the  neerest Land. Two  fatnom  water
leagues  from  the Northwards of  this point (which  for  all  alongst  two
distinctions  sake  I  call  Cape  Comfort)  issueth  out  another  leagues  or  two
branch  of  the  former  River,  which  maketh  the  head-land  ff^^i  a
it  selfe  an  Hand,  of  the  mouth  of  this  River  lyeth  likewise  Qzie
a long ridge of  sand which  is drie  at  low  water; the  CapeComfort.
Northermost point of this ridge beareth North-west
halfe  a degree West from us,  where we ride in  sixe
fathome and  an  halfe,  three  miles  off; and  the  shoald
of  Cape  Comfort  beareth  South  South-west  three  miles
from  you,  and  the  neerest  land  between  them  both  about
two miles off: The  next  point to  the  Northwards of
Cape Comfort  is three  leagues  & a  third  part distant
from  it,  and  did  beare  from  us  (whence  we  road)  North
North-west,  halfe  a  degree  West,  two  leagues  and  a  third
part off;  to the Eastward of  this  point lyeth another
sandie  Shoald, the  Eastermost part  of  it  bearing  North
from  us  about  foure  miles  off: in  the  setting  of  all  these
Points  and  Shoalds,  I  have  allowed  the  variation,  which
in  this  place  is  twelve  degrees  neerest.

The  fourth  of  July,  in  the  afternoone,  we  sent  the
Unicornes  Shallop  into  the  second  branch  of  the  River
(which  we  call  Mullet  Sound)  to  see  if  they  could  discover  Mullet  Sound.
any  Towne,  where  they  might  procure  a  Guide  to  con-
duct Robert  Pickering  and  William  Clarke  unto  Messula-
patan,  by  whom  we  had  sent  our  Letter  to  Master
Methwould.  Tuesday,  the  sixt  in  the  morning,  the
Shallop  returned  aboord,  reporting  that  they  had  gotten  a

19

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1619.

Guide  to  direct  our  Messengers  at  a  little  Village  three
leagues  up  the  River;  they  brought  aboord  twentie
Hennes  which  cost  two  shillings.  Friday  in  the  after-
noone,  the  Barge  returned  aboord  from  Captaine  Ball
with  one  and  seventie  Goates  and  Sheepe,  and  nine  and
thirtie  Hennes,  leaving  Captaine  Ball  and  the  rest  at  a
Towne  called  Narsapela,  which  is  sixe  leagues  up  in  the
Countrey.  The  twelfth  in  the  morning,  Master  Meth-
would  came  from  Messulapatan  in  one  of  the  Countrey
Provisions.  Boats,  and  brought  with  him  twentie  Hogs,  two  great
Jarres  of  Racke,  sixe  Goats,  and  two  baskets  of  Bread  ;
hee  brought  us  newes  of  a  Dutch  ship  richly  laden,
in  the  Port  of  Messulapatan,  and  readie  to  depart  for
Holland.

The  sixe  and  twentieth  in  the  evening,  I  went  in  the
Barge  to  seeke  out  some  Barge  which  might  lead  us  unto
Vingeron.  Vingeron,  the  chiefest  Towne  that  is  neerest  the  Sea  side :
Coranga.  The  same  night  I  passed  in  over  the  Barre  of  Coranga,
and  about  two  miles  up  in  the  River,  I  lodged  in  the
town  of  Coranga,  where  I  found  the  chiefest  of  the  town
very  readie  to  entertayne  us  in  the  best  manner  they
could,  and  gave  the  Governour  of  Vingeron  notice  of
my  comming  the  same  night.  The  next  morning,  having
rowed  up  about  three  miles  in  the  mayne  River,  and  two
miles  in  a  little  Creeke  we  had  sight  of  Vingeron  about
twelve  miles  off.  Here  I  landed  and  went  towards  the
Towne ;  but  before  I  came  to  the  Townes  end,  the  Gover-
nour sent  his  Horse  for  mee  with  all  the  musique  that
the  place  affoorded ;  amongst  other  instruments  there
were  two  huge  brasse  Homes  in  stead  of  Trumpets :  The
Governour  received  mee  very  kindly,  but  more  kindly
my  Present,  which  was  two  pieces  China  Velvets,  and
sixe  pieces  China  Taffataes ;  our  congratulations  ended,
I  tooke  my  leave  of  him,  who  had  then  caused  his
Pallankeen  to  be  made  readie  to  conveigh  me  unto  my
lodging,  which  was  an  house  neere  at  hand,  that  he
himselfe  had  alotted  for  mee.

The first of  August, I returned  aboord  the James,

20

MARTIN PRING  ad.

1619.

where to my  griefe I understood, that  the Unicornes

shallop was cast away three dayes before, neere unto

Ponara. Master  Harris  being  drowned  with  two  of  the  Men  drowned

Coxsons gang, and one Blacke ; Captaine Spaulding,  n*ere  t0

Master Yard, and the rest, very hardly escaping  the

danger. Saturday in  the morning, the Governour of

Vingeron  came  aboord  to  see  our  ship,  in  expectation  of

some great Present; on  whom I  bestowed a  piece of

China Damaske, and foure pieces of  China TafFataes,

which  gave  him  more  content  then  the  sight  of  a  thousand

ships, and so hee  departed,  when  he  saw  that begging

could  no  further  prevaile. On  Munday  the  three and

twentieth,  I  caused  our  men  to  repaire  aboord,  intending

to  ply  up  towards  Messulapatan  :  This  evening  wee  got

aboord  two  hundred  and  fiftie  Goats  for  our  provisions

at  Sea.

Tuesday  in  the  afternoone,  here  arrived  a  Ballegat  from
Nassapora, bringing in her twentie sixe Candees of  Provisions.
Gravances,  a  Candee  of  Butter,  and  one  hundred  Gallons
of  Racke ;  this  day  I  received  letters  from  Messulapatan,  [I.  v.  639.]
importing  the  dolefull newes of  the death  of  Sir Tho. The  death  of
Dale,  he  departed  out  of  this  life  the  ninth  of  August,  §lrThi>.Dde.
1 61 9.  in Messulapatan.

Munday,  the  sixt  of  September,  in  the  morning,
having  road  most  part  of  the  former  night  about  three
leagues  South South-east from the Barre  of  Nassapore  Of  the  River

in  nineteene fathome, finding  the  wind  at North-west,  °*  fssa%07J'

*  o  * zve  found  the

we  set saile againe  and  plyed it up towards Messula-  Current  by
patan. This night  we anchored foure leagues to the  day  to  set
Eastwards  of  Messulapatan.  South  Sou*"~

The  seventh  in the morning, wee saw the English  %St\J ^.1
ships in the Road of Messulapatan foure  leagues  off.  east^  after
This afternoone, the  Bee being farre southerly, wee  halfe  a  league
stretcht it alongst the shoare, and in the evening  an  houre.
arrived  in  the  Road  of  Messulapatan  ;  where  we  found  ^^slZZ™*
the  Moone,  the  Clove,  the  Globe,  and  the  Advice,  which  tam%
being found unserviceable was here cast off, and her
provisions  put  aboord  the  Moone  and  the  Clove. Wed-

21

A.D.

1619.

Both  fleets
united.

Capt.  Pring
Admirall  of
both.

The  Lion  at
Mocha  in  the
Red  Sea.
Novemb.  6.
Nassaporpete.

The  longitude
betweene
Engano  and
Masulipatan.

Passaman  in
Sumatra.

Two  Shoalds
and  their
escape.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

nesday,  in  the  morning,  Master  Spaulding,  Master  Ball,
and  Master  Methwould,  came  aboord  the  James,  giving
mee  notice  of  all  matters  that  had  passed  in  my  absence,
also  of  the  state  of  the  honorable  Companies  businesse
at  present.  This  afternoone  I  accompanyed  them  ashoare,
that  we  might  the  better  consult  and  determine  how  to
proceed  in  these  weigh  tie  affaires  ;  the  first  thing  pro-
posed, was  the  union  of  both  Fleets,  which  was  thought
most  necessarie,  and  therefore  soone  concluded,  which
businesse  ended,  they  made  choise  of  me  to  be  Admirall
and  chiefe  Commander  of  all  these  Ships  and  Men  thus
united,  according  to  the  honorable  Companies  direction.
The  eighteenth  of  October,  being  Munday,  here  arrived
a  ship  from  Mocha  belonging  to  the  Towne,  who  brought
us  newes  of  the  Lion  being  at  Mocha,  and  a  small
Frigat  in  her  companie.  The  Bee  arrived  from  Nassa-
porpete, with  provisions  from  the  Fleet.

The  nineteenth,  the  Dragons  Claw  came  from  Nassa-
porpete, almost  laden  with  Rice  and  Paddie.  Thursday,
the  ninth  of  December,  in  the  afternoone,  Master  Ball,
Master  Methwould,  and  the  rest  of  the  Merchants,
that  were  to  remayne  in  this  Countrey,  went  ashoare.

Friday,  the  tenth,  in  the  morning,  we  left  the  Road
of  Messulepatan,  and  in  the  afternoone  anchored  of  the
head-land  to  stay  for  the  Pepper-corne,  which  came  out
to  us  in  the  evening.  Betweene  the  He  Engano  and
Messulepatan,  I  made  nineteene  degrees  and  thirtie  min-
utes of  great  Circle  in  longitude,  which  although  it
give  not  the  true  longitude  in  these  parts  neere  the
Equinoctiall,  custome  hath  called  it  so,  and  so  doe
I,  because  I  would  not  favour  of  innovation.  The
next  morning  very  early,  we  descried  the  Land  of
Sumatra,  the  Hill  of  Passaman,  bearing  East  North-east
halfe  North  twelve  leagues,  and  the  high  land  of  Pria-
man  East  halfe  South  fourteene  leagues  off.  Here  we
met  with  two  Shoalds,  the  one  within  a  mile  to  the
Eastward  of  the  other;  the  Gift  came  over  the  Easter-
most,  and  had  no  lesse  than  foure  fathom  and  a  halfe  :

22

MARTIN PRING  ad.

1619.

over  the Wester Shoald I sent the  Claw,  who found

foure  fathom in the  first  place she  crossed  it,  and had

but  two  fathom  as  shee  returned,  which  was  a  little  more

to  the  Northward. This  morning  before  day,  the  wind

began  to  duller  againe,  which  was  the  onely  meanes  that

pleased  God  to  use  for  our  preservation,  his  holy  Name

bee  praised  for  the same. This morning about nine,

the wind came up South-east,  and so  continued  untill

three in the afternoone, which brought us to the

Southward  of  all  these  Shoalds  againe,  and  so  with  little

wind  we  spent  all  the  next  night  betweene  the  foresaid

Shoalds and the He of Battoo. A sagging Current  lie  Battoo.

setting to the Northwards, brought us  so neere unto

these  Shoalds  ; for  had  the Current,  as  in former time

set  away  to  the  South-east,  our course  would  have  lead

us  neere  unto  Tecoo, but contrarie  to our  expectation, Tecoo.

wee  found that it had carried us to the Northward,

and  this  deceived our  judgement.

The  foure  and  twentieth  of  Januarie  in  the  morn-
ing, the  Hill  of  Passaman  did  beare  East  North-east
one  third  part  Northerly,  and  the  high  land  of  Priaman
East  one  third  part  South  twelve  leagues  :  here  we  saw
a  drie  Shoald  in  form  of  the  Hull  of  a  great  Boat,
lying  South-west  by  West  of  the  Hill  of  Passaman,
about  ten  leagues  from  the  shoare,  and  West  North-
west from  this  Shoald  foure  leagues,  wee  saw  the  breach
of  another  Shoald,  which  by  Gods  gracious  providence
we  happily  escaped.  This  evening  at  sixe  of  the  clocke,
we  had  sight  of  the  lies  of  Tecoo,  and  halfe  an  houre
before  eight,  we  anchored  in  fortie  foure  fathom
streamie  ground,  the  said  lies  of  Tecoo  bearing  East
by  North  seven  leagues  off.  Tuesday,  the  five  and
twentieth  in  the  afternoone,  with  the  first  of  the  Sea-
turne,  we  weighed  againe  and  steered  in  towards  Tecoo.
As  we  drew  neere  we  descried  three  saile,  standing  to  Three  saile  of
the  Northwards  of  the  He  of  Tecoo  ;  which  ships  came  ^n^'l5h-
to  anchor  faire  by  the  shoare  the  same  night;  and  we
with  all  our  fleet  about  a  league  without  them. Thurs-

23

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1619.

day in the morning, they weighed anchor and came

up with us, which were found to bee the  Palsgrave,

the Elizabeth,  and the Hope  ; by  these  wee  heard  the

The  Dragon, dolefull newes of  the taking  of  the  Dragon,  the  Bearey

Beare,  Expe-  tjle Expedition and Rose, by sixe Holland ships, as

ultlOtl  and

Rose  taken  hy  ^ey were at anchor within the lies of  Tecoo  ; also

the  Dutch.  of the losse of  the Starre  in  the  Streights of  Sunda,

The  Starre,  taken by the  Dutch. Moreover, how they had sent

Samson  and  foure  great  ships, double manned, in quest of the

Hound  taken. 0  jtt  j r ,i  c  +_• r 1  • 1 1  •

bamson  and  rlound,  or  the  saretie  or  which  ships  wee
are  very  doubtfull  ;  so  that  the  English  ships  which
they  have  taken,  doe  almost  equall  the  number  of  our
three  Fleets  now  joined  in  one.

Munday,  the  one  and  thirtieth  of  Januarie,  we  held
[I.  v.  640.]  a  consultation  aboord  the  James  Royall,  concerning  our
Lonsuitation.  future  proceeding,  where  it  was  with  one  consent
agreed  and  concluded  to  goe  to  Achin,  in  hope  to
meet  with  our  ships  from  Surat,  that  we  might  keepe
our  Forces  together,  according  to  the  honorable  Com-
panies directions  :  The  reasons  moving  us  hereunto,
were  the  want  of  Rice  and  other  provisions,  which  could
not  at  this  time  bee  procured  at  Bantam.  Secondly,
the  consideration  of  the  Hollanders  forces,  holding  it  no
wisedome  for  us  to  adventure  the  whole  estate,  that  the
honorable  Companie  hath  now  in  India,  upon  such
desperate  termes  ;  they  having  at  this  time  foure  ships
for  one  of  ours.  And  lastly  (Causa  sine  qua  non)  the
necessitie  of  careening  of  three  of  our  ships,  which  may
no  longer  be  differred  without  imminent  danger  of  all
three,  viz.  the  James  Royall,  the  Gift,  and  the  Unicorne.
And  therefore  we  have  resolved,  by  the  grace  of  God,
to  goe  for  Japan,  where  we  are  given  to  understand,
that  there  are  all  things  necessarie  for  the  careening  of
ships,  and  store  of  provisions  for  the  reliefe  of  our  men.
The  eleventh,  at  night,  Master  Mills  arrived  in  the
Bee  with  three  hundred  sacks  of  very  good  Rice,  and
eleven  Hogsheads  of  Oile,  giving  us  great  encourage-
ment to  send  thither  againe. Saturday,  the  twelfth,  at

24

MARTIN PRING  a.d.

1619.

night,  the  Claw was dispeeded againe for Pedang and
Cuttatinga,  to  procure  Rice,  fee-
Tuesday, in the night, we returned the Bee to  Provision.
Priaman  to  provide  more  Rice  and  Oile. Saturday,  in
the  afternoone,  the  Claw  returned  with  foure  and  thirtie
bags  of  Rice,  sixteene  thousand  Coquer-nuts,  ten  Goats.
This  night,  the  Bee arrived from Priaman with nine
hundred  and  eightie  sacks  of  Rice,  procured  by  the  great
labour  and  industrie  of  Master Mills, Merchant  of  the  Master  Mills
Elizabeth.  his  care'

Friday, the  third of March, in the morning, we
departed from the Road  of  Tecoo  ; intending  by the
grace  of  God,  first  to  touch  at  Nimtam,  for  the  dispatch  Nimtam.
of  the  Bee  for  England  ; and  from  thence,  God  willing,
to  goe  for  Achin,  in  hope  to  meete  the  Charles  and  the
Ruby  from Surat. This day  afternoone, wee  anchored
in five and twentie fathom Ozie, the middle He of
Tecoo  bearing East South-east, about two  leagues  off.
Saturday,  in  the  morning,  wee  set  saile  againe  and  stood
off  West and West by South : This afternoone, we  n ,
anchored  againe  in  three  and  fortie  fathom  ground,  the  highest  of  this
lies  of  Tecoo being East from  us  about  eight  leagues  Shoald  our
off,  and  the  White  Rocke  West  by  North  halfe  North Boat  found
foure  leagues off. This  White Rocke  lyeth  West  one  but  threef00t

o  j  zvater.

third  part  North from  the  lies  of  Tecoo,  distant  eleven  prm  \^s

leagues. Sunday,  in the  morning, the wind at North,  Shoald  the

wee  weighed anchor and steered away South-west, for  White  Rocke

that  the  Current  (did  then)  set  to  the  Northwards  :  we  d^fbefeWest

J\ ortri-west

had not  gone  above one league this  Course, but the  roure  iea„ues:

wind veered up at South-west by  West, so that we  and  the  Hay

could lye but South  by East,  and before  we  had run  Reeke,  which

three  miles South South-east, our men from  the  sprit  ts  Me  flattest  oj

/•  the  three  ham~
saile  top  descried  Rocks  under  the  ship,  at  sight  whereof  mocja  t0  the

wee brought our  ship astayes,  and  shot  off  a peece  of  Northwards  of

Ordnance  for  a  warning to  the  Fleet. Before  our  ship Teco,didbeare

was  come  about,  we  had  but  three  fathom  and  a  halfe  ;  East^,°Jp~

yet, I  thanke  God,  we  never  toucht. Our  ships  being  nine  i/agues  '

tacket, we  stood  to the  Northwards,  thinking  the  safest  off.

25

A.D.
1619.

Escape  of
danger  from
Rocks.

Satnanca.

Ballambeen.
Anniar.

Cracatow
and  Becee.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

course  to  returne  the  same  way  we  came  :  but  we  had
not  made  above  two  miles  North  and  by  West,  before
we  saw  other  Rocks  againe  under  our  ships  head,  upon
which  we  had  but  seven  fathom.  The  depth  that  we
found  all  this  day,  when  wee  were  free  from  these
dangers,  was  fortie  and  two  and  fortie  fathom  :  and
therefore,  seeing  it  had  pleased  our  gracious  God  to  free
us  from  both  these  dangers,  we  edged  in  againe  a  mile
or  little  more  within  them,  and  there  anchored  againe
untill  the  next  morning.

The  thirtieth  of  March,  1620.  we  all  anchored  in  the
Bay  of  Samanca,  about  a  mile  off  the  shoare,  where  we
tooke  in  water  and  wood,  and  other  necessaries.  The
last  of  March,  our  shallop  was  sent  unto  the  Bee  at
Ballambeen  to  call  her  away.  The  first  of  Aprill,  wee
sent  the  Unicornes  shallop  for  Anniar,  to  enquire  of  the
Dutch  forces,  and  how  the  Pangram  stood  affected
towards  us.  At  eleven,  at  night,  two  and  twentie  of  our
men  run  away  with  the  Barge :  In  the  morning,  the
shallop  returned  from  Anniar,  and  brought  newes  of
fifteene  sailes  of  Hollanders  at  Bantam  and  Jacatra,
whereupon  we  resolved  to  goe  for  Bantam,  to  treat  with
the  Pangram,  hoping  that  the  Hollanders  would  not
venture  upon  us.  This  afternoone  also,  the  Bee  arrived
with  our  shallop  from  Ballambeen.  The  sixt,  we  set  saile
for  Bantam  :  The  seventh,  wee  came  in  betweene  Crack-
ataw  and  Becee,  where  we  met  with  a  Praw,  with  some
of  our  people,  come  from  Anniar.

§.  IIII.

Newes  of  the  peace  betwixt  English  and  Dutch :
the  mutuall  congratulation  :  Voyage  to  Japan,
returne  thence  and  home.

Aturday the eight in the morning, at foure of
the clocke, we met with the Bull come from
England, with the joyfull tydings of peace
betweene  the Dutch  and  us  ; which  God in  his  mercie

26

MARTIN PRING  a.d.

1620.

long  continue,  shee  had  a small  ship  in her Company

called the Flying Hart, which  was sent  out  with  her,

having  Letters  from  their  Generall  ;  to  advise  us  or  any  [I.  v.  641.]

of  their ships of  the agreement and uniting of  both

the  Honourable  Companies.

This  afternoone  we  anchored  all  together  neere  the
point  of  Pallambam.  On  the  eleventh  of  Aprill,  in
the  morning  wee  descryed  the  Dutch  Fleete,  who
came  from  Jacatra  to  meete  us,  and  to  congratulate  our
arrivall  :  Generall  Coen  beeing  there  himselfe  in  person.  Generall
So  soone  as  the  Hollanders  Generall  was  come  to  C°en-
anchor,  we  began  to  salute  each  other  with  our  great
Ordnances,  to  signifie  unto  the  Countrey  people  our
great  joy,  that  we  conceive  in  this  happy  tydings.

The  twelfth,  we  came  into  Bantam  Road  with  both
our  Fleets ;  ours  consisting  of  twelve  sailes,  theirs  of
fifteeene  ;  besides,  two  of  their  ships,  which  wee  found
in  that  Road.  This  day  Master  Johnson,  Commander
of  the  Dutch  Fleet,  came  to  visit  mee  with  the  Fiscall
and  divers  others  :  Master  Brockendon,  Master  Spalding
and  my  selfe  were  invited  aboord  the  Admirall  shippe,
where  wee  conferred  with  the  Generall  concerning  our
future  businesse ;  and  after  we  had  compared  the  Articles
and  Letters,  he  was  content  that  wee  should  proceed
joyntly  according  to  the  Honourable  Companies  instruc-
tions ;  but  would  not  publish  the  same,  untill  the
arrivall  of  some  ship  from  the  Low  Countries.  Friday
the  fourteenth,  in  the  morning,  by  a  generall  consent,
we  sent  M.  Beamont,  and  Philip  Baduge,  with  one
Dutch  Merchant  ashoare,  to  the  Pangram,  to  make  him  Pangramshate
partaker  of  our  good  newes  ;  and  that  we  being  now  t0  the  Dutc^
united,  desired  onely  a  good  composition  and  reason-
able agreement  that  wee  might  remayne  in  his  Countrey
in  peace,  and  enjoy  free  Trade  as  we  had  in  other
parts  of  India.  But  the  Pangram  was  so  impatient  at
the  newes,  that  he  would  affoord  no  answere  :  but
oftentimes  demanded  of  them,  why  we  would  be  friends
with the Dutch, and so they were faine to returne

27

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1620.

without any  answere. Saturday,  the  fifteenth,  we  sent

the  same  message  againe  unto  him,  but  then  they  were

not  suffered  to  come  on  land.

Voyage  to  Wednesday,  at  foure  in  the  morning,  I  departed  from

Japan.  Bantam  Road  in  the  James  Royall,  having  the  Unicorne

in  Company  intending  by  the  grace  of  God,  to  goe  for

Japon,  there  to  careene  and  trimme our ships  : Master

Brockendon  the  same  time  departing  with  six  ships  for

Jacatra, having resolved about one moneth after our

departure,  to send five good English ships, and five

*The  Voyage  good  ships  of  the  Dutch  after  us  to  Japon,* that  from

1  have  set  in  a  thence  wee  might  take the  fittest  time  of the yeere  to
Paragraph  or  r . A  j? M1  J

Section  by goe  for  the Manillas.

Uselfe:  that  We  arrived  into a Port of  Ferando,  called Cochee,

the  studious  of  which  is about foure English myles and an halfe to

Marine  know-  South-wards  of  the  Haven  Ferando. Tuesday,  the  five

ledge  might  ,  . , r ▼ 1 r*  r^  1

make  use  of anc*  twentieth or July,  Laptaine Cox  sent good store

that,  which  of  Funnies  or toe Boates  aboord  of  our  ship  to  helpe

would  perhaps  us. This day  in  the  afternoone  (God  bee  praysed)  we

to  others  seem  arrivecJ [n the  Port  of  Firando. This  day,  before  wee

VoleZTand  got into Firando,  the Elizabeth  brought in a Frigat

delicateMuses,  with her, wherein there were found certaine Silkes,

with  a  Sea-  Hides,  and  some  Sugar  ; the Mariners  were Japoneses

sicknesse.  with certaine Portugals, whereof some were Fryers  :

the^Swanand  t^ie Elizabeth  came into Cochee  also, Captaine  Adams,

Expedition  Admirall of the United Fleet, arrived in the same

sent  hither,  as  place  about  three  houres  after  me  in  the  Moone  ;  like-

/  suppose,  to  wjse  William  Johnson  in  the  Trow.

/  Ij£r.ace  V The sixe and twentieth,  in the morning:,  a  generall
our  Nation  in  '  '  o' &

those  remote  Councell of English and Dutch were assembled in

parts  of  the  the English house at Firando, where it was resolved

World.  j-}^  the  shippes  which  lay  neere  the  Coasts  of  Sashma,

ey  a  rwe  s}louicj be called in, because wee were certainly in-

at  r  irando.  ^

Sashma.  formed,  that the Frigats  of  Macao  were  newly  arrived

Nangasaque.  in  Nangasaque.  Sunday,  the  thirtieth,  the  King  of
Crats  came  aboord  the  James  Royall,  and  seemed
much  to  rejoyce  to  see  such  an  English  ship,  demand-
ing of  the Jurabassa,  if  this were  one of  the English

28

MARTIN PRING  ad.

1620.

Frigats  ;  whereby  we  supposed  that  the  Dutch  had
given  out,  that  we  had  none  but  small  ships  like  unto
Frigats.

Tuesday,  the  first  of  August,  a  generall  Councell
was  holden  at  the  English  house,  concerning  the  choice
of  two  men,  the  one  English,  the  other  Dutch,  to
carrie  the  Present  to  the  Emperour,  where  (after  it
was  considered,  that  I  could  not  so  long  bee  spared
from  the  Royall  James,  nor  Captaine  Adams  from  his
Fleet)  at  length  we  made  choice  of  Master  Charles  Charles
Cleavengar  Commander  of  the  Palsgrave,  and  Joseph  Cleavengar,
Cockram  Cape  Merchant  of  the  Fleet,  to  goe  in  the
behalfe  of  the  English,  and  Jasques  le  Febre  of  the
Harlam,  with  Matthia  de  Brooke,  for  the  Dutch.  On
the  sixth,  the  Palsgrave  arrived  in  the  Road  of  Cochee.
The  seventh,  the  Bull  came  into  the  Road  of  Cochee,
having  cut  off  all  her  Masts  by  the  board  (as  they
say)  to  save  ship  and  goods  ;  Captaine  Adams  and  I
did  visit  the  King  of  Firando,  carrying  with  us  a
small  Present  which  was  very  well  esteemed,  and  wee
of  our  selves  very  courteously  entertayned.  Wednesday,
the  ninth,  the  King  invited  the  English  and  the  Dutch
to  Dinner,  where  to  shew  his  respect  unto  our  Nation,
he  caused  us  to  sit  downe  on  the  right  hand,  and
the  Dutch  on  the  left  ;  and  the  first  Dish  of  every
course,  was  presented  unto  us.

Munday,  the fourth of  September,  we had a great
Tuffone with the wind Northerly, which forced  the  A  Tuffoone  or
Moone on shore,  and over-set  the  Expedition,  so that  Tempest.
she  sunke downe suddenly. The Trow had likewise
been over-set,  had  not the Master of  her soone pre-
vented it,  by  veering of  her  sterne ashoare. Tuesday,
the  fifth,  I caused  many of  our men to  come  aboord
the  Moone,  to  helpe  hale  her off,  where  we  all  strived
a  long  time  to  no  purpose. The  thirteenth,  the  Moone
was  got off  againe,  to  the  great  joy of  us all,  having
received no hurt at all by her lying so long on  [I.  v.  642.]
shoare. The nineteenth,  the James Royall having all

29

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1620.

things taken out,  but onely  certaine bars of  Lead,  to

helpe  trimme  her over  was  heaved  downe  almost  halfe

way to the keele. Thursday,  the one  and twentieth

The  James \n the  morning, the James Royall was  brought  downe

careened. SQ jQW^ tjiat  wee  saw  part Qf  ker keele,  and  so  began

presently  to  sheath  her.  In  foure  dayes  the  Carpenters
sheathed  one  side  of  the  James,  from  the  keele  up
to  the  lower  bend.  Wednesday,  the  seven  and  twentieth,
I  sent  a  Cooper,  two  quarter  Masters,  and  a  Butcher
to  Nangasaque,  to  kill  and  salt  such  meate  as  was
provided  for  us.

Thursday,  the  twelfth  of  October,  we  had  the  James
downe  to  keele  againe  on  the  other-side,  on  this  side
we  found  foure  dangerous  places,  where  the  maine
planke  was  eaten  thorow  by  the  Wormes  ;  in  each  of
those  places  wee  graved  in  a  piece  of  planke,  and  in
one  of  them  we  drove  a  trunnell,  where  there  was
never  any  before  :  also  wee  nailed  a  piece  of  Lead
upon  the  end  of  the  bolt,  which  was  formerly  driven
through  the  keele  to  stop  our  great  leake  ;  our  ship
was  righted  againe  both  sides,  being  finished  up  to
the  lower  Bends.  Saturday,  the  one  and  twentieth,  the
Moone  was  finished  on  both  sides.  Tuesday,  the  foure
Nangasague  and  twentieth,  we  had  newes  that  Nangasaque  was
burnt.  burnt,  that  a  fire  beginning  in  the  Portugal!  street,  con-

sumed foure  or  five  of  the  richest  streets  in  the  Citie.
Their  depar-  The  seventh  of  Dec.  being  Thursday,  we  departed
turefrom  fr0m  Firando,  and  the  same  evening  wee  anchored  in
the  Bay  of  Cochee.  Saturday,  the  sixteenth,  Captain
Cleavengar,  and  Captaine  Le  Febre  arrived  in  Firando,
from  the  Emperors  Court,  with  the  joyfull  tidings  of
good  successe  in  their  businesse.  Sunday,  the  seven-
teenth in  the  morning,  I  tooke  my  leave  of  them,
and  about  noone,  the  wind  being  faire,  and  the  weather
cleere,  we  left  the  Road  of  Cochee.

Thursday,  the  sixteenth  of  January  in  the  morning,
Commtnzto  see^ng  foure  ships  in  Bantam  Road,  we  weighed  and
Bantam. stood in, a little within Pan-Jang, at length there

30

MARTIN PRING  ad.

1621.
came  the  Pepper-cornes  boate  aboord  our  ship  with
the  Master,  one  Morton,  he  told  me  that  there  were
two  Dutch  shippes  in  the  Road,  and  one  French
ship,  to  whom  the  Pangram  had  granted  Trade,  and
that  the  English  and  Dutch  had  consorted  with  him
to  share  the  Pepper  in  thirds  amongst  them.  I  also
understood  by  him,  that  the  most  part  of  our  lading
was  readie  for  us  at  Jacatra.

Wednesday,  in  the morning,  I set saile for Jacatra,
and the same evening anchored neere unto Antilaky.
Thursday,  the eighteenth,  at night,  we arrived in the  Arrive  at
Bay  of  Jacatra,  where we found  the  Charles,  the  Gift,  Jacatra-
and  the  Clove,  and  two  Dutch ships,  viz.  the  Leyden,
and the Sun,  and at Hector Hand, the Globe, and
the Bee. Here I met with the Master of the
Unicorne, and divers of his Company, who came
hither in a Juncke  : their ship being lost upon the Unicorne  lost
Coast of  China. The James having discharged her  ™  Me  Coast  of
lading,  was readie to  relade  for England. Heere  was
at this time in the  Charles,  the  Clove,  and the  Gift,
about six hundred tuns of Pepper, & the Beare
daily  expected from Jambee with  two hundred tunnes
more,  which  gave us  good  hope  that  wee should  very
neere  make  up  our  ships  lading  with  Pepper,  Benjamin,
Cloves,  and  Silke.

Munday,  the  sixe  and  twentieth  of  February,  in  the
morning,  I  departed  from  the  Road  of  Jacatra  in  the
James  Royall,  having  taken  in  our  whole  lading  of
Pepper,  saving  fiftie  five  Peculs  ;  also,  certaine  Sapetas
of  Silke  and  some  Cloves.  This  businesse  ended  about
ten  of  the  clock  this  fore-noone,  we  set  sayle  for  Returnefor
England.  I  pray  God  in  his  wonted  mercie  to  conduct  En8land-
us  unto  our  Native  Countrie  in  safetie,  in  his  good
time  appointed.

Sunday, the twentieth of  May, 1621 in the after-
noone, wee arrived in the Road of Soldania, where  Soldania*
we found the Anne Royall, and the Fortune, ships
belonging  to  the  Honourable  Company  of  London,  and

31

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1621.

three  Dutch  ships,  viz.  the  Gawda,  the  blacke  Beare
and  the  Herring,  all  bound  for  Bantam  and  Jacatra.
The  one  and  twentieth,  we  romaged  our  ship.  Tuesday
the  two  &  twentieth,  we  sent  some  Water-caskes  on
shoare,  and  set  up  a  Tent  for  our  sicke  men  and
Coopers,  and  sent  five  and  twentie  men  on  land  to
guard  them.  This  night,  I  ordayned  sixtie  men  to
goe  in  company  with  sixtie  Dutch  in  quest  of  Cattle,
who  returned  the  same  night  in  vaine.

The  second  of  June,  in  the  morning,  we  left  the
Road  of  Soldania,  with  the  wind  at  South  South-east,
South-east  from  the  twentieth  at  noone,  untill  the  one
and  twentieth  at  six  in  the  morning,  West  fifteen
leagues at this instant  (God be praysed) we descryed

Saint  Helena,  the  Hand  of  S.  Helena  ;  the  bodie  of  it  (to  our
judgement)  bearing  West,  two  third  parts  North,  about
fifteene  leagues  off.  This  evening,  we  got  within  five
leagues  of  the  Hand,  and  there  plyed  it  off,  and  on
untill  five  the  next  morning,  and  then  we  did  beare
in  about  the  North  point  of  the  Hand,  and  the  same
forenoone,  about  ten  of  the clocke  we  anchored  thwart

ChappellBay.  of  the  Chappell  Bay,  halfe  a  mile  from  the  shoare  in
sixe  and  twentie  fathomes.  The  North  point  of  the
Hand  bearing  North-east  two  third  parts  East,  one
league  off,  and  the  other  point  South-west  by  South
one  league  and  an  halfe  off:  betweene  which  two
points  there  are  seven  Vallies,  and  the  Southermost
of  the  seven,  leadeth  upright  to  the  Limon  Trees.
Munday,  the  five  and  twentieth,  wee  weighed  anchor
againe,  and  road  off  the  Valley,  about  halfe  a  mile
from  the  shoare,  in  twentie  seven  fathomes,  blacke  sand
and  small  Corall,  the  Northermost  picked  point  bearing
North-east  halfe  East  from  us  two  leagues  off,  and
the  Southermost  point  in  sight  South-west  halfe  South,
two  miles  off,  this  is  the  best  Valley  for  refreshing  that
I  know  in  all  the  Hand.

At this Hand we remayned seven dayes, during

[I.  v,  645.] which  time  we filled our  water,  and  got  at  least fiftie

32

MARTIN PRING  ad.

1620.

Hogges  and  Goats,  and  above  foure  thousand  Limons.
Friday,  the  nine  and  twentieth  of  June,  in  the  morn-
ing, at  nine  of  the  clocke,  having  very  well  refreshed
our  selves,  (through  the  good  providence  of  Almightie
God)  we  departed  from  hence,  and  the  same  Evening  at  Tfo  greatest
sixe, we had the bodie of the Hand South-east by  vf%on  0tt

^ the  Vr  estevne
South eight leagues off, the wind at South-east, the  sye  0f§

weather  over-cast.  Helena,  which

The  sixteenth  of  August,  at  noone  we  saw  the  high-  wee  found  was

land  of  Pico  East  North-east  about  fifteene  leaagues  off.  $9  de&  ^
»-w-\  sixe  tnin

The  seventeenth,  at  noone  we  had  the  top  of  Pico  North  Easterh.

sixe leagues off, being in the  latitude of  thirtie  eight

degrees,  twelve  minutes. Whereby  I  perceive  that  the

South-side  of  Pico  lyeth in thirtie eight degrees thirtie

minutes  neerest.

The  fifteenth  of  September,  wee had  the  Lands  end

of  England  eight  leagues  off. Tuesday,  the  eighteenth,

we  arrived  in  the  Downes.

§.  v.

The  Voyage  from  Bantam  to  Patania,  and  thence
to  Japan,  with  his  returne  to  Jacatra ;  set  by
it  selfe  for  the  use  of  Mariners.

He  seven  and  twentieth  of  Aprill,  being  Thursday,
we  tooke  leave  of  this  Fleet,  and  steered  away  ot
the  North-wards,  borrowing  within  halfe  a  league
of  the  Easter  point  of  Poolo  Tunda,  and  in  the  evening,  p00/o  Tunda.
came  to  an  anchor  about  a  league  off  the  North-east  point
of  it in twentie three fathomes  water ozie ; where  we
roade untill  the  Westerne streame  beganne  to returne
to  the  East-ward  againe,  which  was  about  tenne  at  night.
The eight and twentieth at night, we anchored in
twentie eight fathoms ozie, Poolo Antekero bearing  Poolo
North-east  three  leagues  off. Poolo  Antekero  lyeth  from  Antekero.
Poolo  Tunda,  North  North-east  halfe  East  about  eight
leagues off. The depth betweene them from sixteene
fathomes to six and twentie, and  so to twentie two,
v  33  c

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1620.

twentie,  eighteene,  sixteene,  fourteene,  and  twelve  fathomes
ozie.  Poolo  Antekero  is  the  Wester-most  of  all  the  row
of  Hands,  which extend  themselves  from  the  mouth  of

Jacatra  Bay. the  Bay  of  Jacatra,  to  the  West-ward.

Saturday,  the  nine and  twentieth,  to  the  evening,  we

Poolo  Kero.  were  in  fifteene  fathome.  Poolo  Kero  bearing  North  by
East  halfe  East  of  us,  two  leagues  and  an  halfe  off.
Poolo  Kero  lyeth  from  Poolo  Antekero  North  North-
east neerest,  distant  sixe  leagues  from  the  time  that  wee
had  Antekero,  North-east  three  leagues  off,  we  had
twentie,  eighteene,  sixteene,  fourteene,  twelve  fathomes
ozie.

Sunday  at  noon,  we  had  the  Poolo  Kero,  South  halfe
East  six  leagues  off.  Our  depth  continuing  thirteene,
twelve,  and  eleven  fathomes  the  same  ground.

The  first  of  Mav,  at  noone,  we  had  Poolo  Kero  South
halfe  west,  nine  leagues  off,  beeing  as  much  as  we  could
see  it  at  our  top-mast-head,  the  depth  twelve  fathomes.

Latitude.  Here  by  observation  of  the  Sunne  we  were  in  South
latitude  foure  degrees  forty  five  minutes  from  noone,
untill  five,  North  North-east  foure  leagues.  Here  we
anchored  againe  in  twelve  fathomes  ozie,  having  Poolo
Kero,  by  estimation  South  by  West  from  us,  thirteene
leagues  off.  This  night  at  nine,  as  we  were  at  anchor
in  the  same  place,  by  observation  of  the  Crosiers,  I  made
the  ship  to  bee  in  foure  degrees,  fortie  minutes  South
latitude,  allowing  twentie  nine,  for  the  complement  of
the  declination.  Tuesday,  the  second  in  the  morning,
betweene  foure  and  five  of  the  clocke  wee  set  sayle  againe,
and  the  same  day  at  noone  we  had  runne  about  six  leagues
North  North-east.  The  depth  continuing  as  before,
thirteene,  twelve,  eleven  fathomes.  From  the  second  to
the  third,  at  noone  we  made  an  East  by  South  way,  five
leagues,  finding  such  depths  as  the  day  before.  The
ground  from  Bantam  Road  hitherto  all  ozie.  From
Bantam  for  the  space  of  two  dayes  wee  had  Sea-turnes
and  Land-turnes.  From  thence,  untill  the  second  of
May  in  the  afternoone,  the  winds  betweene  the  East  and

34

MARTIN PRING  a.d.

1620.

the South-east, and then  the  wind  came  up  Northerly,

and  so  continued  untill  the  third  at  noone. From  Poolo  Poolo  Peniang.

Peniang  unto Poolo Antekero the Current did set  us  Current

to  the  West-ward,  for  the  most  part  some-what  strong,

but  from  thence  untill  wee  drew  neere  unto  the  Streights

of  wee  found  but  an  easie  Current,  which  did

runne  almost upon all points of  the  Compasse,  every

twentie foure  houres. From the  third  at  noone,  untill

the  fourth  at  noone  North  North-east  eleven  leagues,  the

depth  from  twelve  to  ten,  halfe  a  fathome  ozie. From

noone,  this day  till seven at night,  North  five  leagues

and  a  halfe,  where  we  anchored  in  ten  fathomes  and  an

halfe  lesse.

Friday,  the  fift  in  the  morning,  we  weighed  againe,
having  little  wind  and  variable,  untill  halfe  an  houre  after
sixe,  and  then  the  wind  came  up  at  South-west  and  blew
fresh.  From  foure  to  nine  we  made  North-east  halfe
Easterly  three  leagues :  and  from  nine  until  noon  North-
west by  North  halfe  a  league,  the  depth  ten  fathom
neerest.  This  day  at  noone,  wee  were  in  three  degrees
and  thirtie  minutes  South  latitude,  where  wee  descried
a  little  Hand  North  North-east  halfe  East  foure  leagues  J  little  Hand.
off,  which  appeared  at  first  sight  like  a  great  Tree  rising
out  of  the  Sea,  from  noone  to  sixe  North-west  five  [I.  v.  646.]
leagues:  here  wee  saw  two  or  three  Hummocks  like
Hands  North  by  West  from  seven  leagues  off.  From
hence  until  three  after  mid-night,  West  six  leagues :  at
sixe  we  had  nineteene  fathom,  which  as  wee  stood  to  the
Westward  in  the  night  increased  to  ten,  eleven,  and
twelve  fathom ;  and  afterward  it  decreased  unto  eight
fathom,  where  wee  came  to  an  anchor,  the  streame  by
night  set  South-east,  by  day  North-west.

Saturday  in  the  morning,  we  weighed  at  sixe  againe,
and  steered  away  West  North-west  one  league  and  a  third
part :  here  we  had  sight  of  many  Hummocks  rising  like
Ilands,  which  at  length  we  perceived  to  be  all  one  Land,
as  we  drew  neere  to  it:  after  wee  had  gone  one  league
and  a  third  part  West  North-west,  as  aforesaid,  wee  came

35

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1620.

into  seven  fathom  a  halfe  lesse,  and  therefore  tackt  about
to  the  North-eastwards,  making  a  North  North-east  way
untill  noone,  about  two  leagues  and  a  halfe;  at  which
time  by  observation  of  the  Sunne,  wee  were  in  three
degrees  and  twentie  minutes  neerest  South  latitude,  being
gotten  into  eight  fathom  water  againe  ;  where  we  found
the  Current  to  set  away  North-west  by  West :  here  also
about  noone  this  day,  a  Junck  of  Jore  came  up  with  us,
Cheribon.  which  had  beene  at  Cheribon  upon  Java,  and  was  now
returning  to  Jore.  This  afternoone  wee  steered  in  with
the  Easterne  part  of  this  Hummockie  Land,  and  making
our  way  as  the  Easterne  Point  did  beare  from  us,  which
was  North  North-east  halfe  North,  in  this  our  course  we
came  againe  to  seven  fathom,  and  so  increasing  to  foure
and  twentie  fathom,  and  from  thence  decreasing  to  seven
fathom  a  quarter  lesse,  where  we  anchored  againe  the  said
Point  of  Land,  bearing  North  North-east,  one  third  part
North  foure  leagues  off.

Sunday,  the  seventh  in  the  morning,  we  weighed  and

stood  in  neerer  unto  the  Point,  in  hope  to  have  passed

through  betweene this  Point  and  an  Hand,  which  lyeth

three  leagues  to  the  Eastward  of  it,  but  as  we  stood  in,

we  found  the  depth  of  the  water  first  to  increase  from

seven  fathom  unto  seventeene  fathom  ;  and  from  thence

againe  unto  sixe  and  foure  fathom  a  quarter  lesse. And

about  two  miles  of  the  Point  in  the faire  way,  we  had

but  sixe  foote  water,  which  our  shallop found as shee

was  sounding  of  the  Chanell. To  the  Eastwards  of  this

Many  Hands,  place  there  appeared  many  small  Hands,  and  by  the  report

Sea  full  of of  the  people in  the  Juncke, the Sea is  full  of  Hands

Hands  twixt betweene  the  South-east  end  of  Banco,  and the He  of

Bumeo  Burneo. Now this  was the  South-east end of  Banco,

which did  beare  North  North-east, halfe North about

two  leagues  off;  and  the  Land  from  this  Point  unto  the

entrance of  the Streights of  Banco, did  lye West by

South  neerest  about  thirteene  leagues :  there  as  wee  were

at  anchor,  the  foresaid  Point  bearing  North  by  East  halfe

East  two  leagues  and  a  halfe,  we  found  (by  observation

36

MARTIN PRING  ad.

1620.
of  the  Sunne)  the  ship  to  bee  in  three  degrees  and  eight
minutes  South  latitude.

Munday  in  the  morning, (having  little  hope  to  find
a  passage  betweene  the  South-east  end  of  Banco  and  the
foresaid  Hands,  by  reason  of  the  fearefull  shoaldings  which
wee  had  alreadie  found)  we  resolved  by  the  helpe  of  God
to  goe  through  the  Streights  of  Banco,  and  there  with-  heights  of
all  presently  came  to  saile, steering  off  as neere  as  we anc0'
could  judge,  the  same  course  that  we  came  in :  in  which
course  we  found  more  dangerous  shoalding  in  our  stand-
ing off,  then  wee had  done in  our comming  in  before.
After  we  had  gotten  about  eight  leagues  off  South  South-
west from  the  South-east  point  of  Banco,  we  steered  away
South-west  by West,  the  Current setting North west,  Current.
which  made  a  West  by  South  way  neerest ; this  course
wee  run  five  leagues,  and  anchored  in  eight  fathom  Ozie,
about  nine  at  night.

The  ninth  in  the  morning,  we  descried  Lucepara  Lucepara.
North  North-west  seven  leagues  off,  and  steered  in  neere
with  it  untill  we  had  it  North  two  leagues.  In  this
course  we  came  over  a  spit  where  wee  had  but  foure
fathom  and  a  halfe  and  five  fathom  a  quarter  lesse,  but
drawing  neerer  unto  Lucepara,  we  had  five  fathom  and
a  quarter,  and  when  it  was  North  two  leagues  off  al
Ozie  ground.  And  so  all  the  way  before,  now,  and  after
that  we  had  brought  it  North  two  leagues  off,  as  I  have
said,  we  steered  North-west  by  North,  untill  Lucepara
was  North-east  of  us,  and  had  five  fathom  the  same
ground :  and  then  we  went  West  North-west,  having
alwayes  Ozie  ground  till  we  were  within  two  leagues  of
Sumatra  shoare  in  sixe  fathom.  Here  we  had  our  He
of  Lucepara  East  South-east  three  leagues  and  a  halfe
off.  And  a  Hill  upon  Banco  with  a  deepe  swampe  North
by  West  neerest,  being  a  sailes  breadth  open  of  the  Point
of  Sumatra,  which  was  then  North  by  West  halfe  West
from  us,  about  three  leagues  off:  wee  steered  from  hence
away  with  the  foresaid  Point  North  by  West,  and  had
sixe  and  a halfe  and seven fathom,  soft  ground,  untill

37

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1620.

we  came  within  a  league  of  the  Point,  where  edging
too  neere  the  same,  we  had  but  five  fathom  and  a  halfe,
and  foure  and  a  halfe  in  the  Boat  hard  by  us :  but  had
we  kept  a  little  further  off  that  Point,  wee  might  have
gone  away  in  seven,  eight,  nine,  and  ten  fathom,  and  so
all  the  Streights  alongst,  borrowing  carefully  with  our
Lead  upon  the  Sumatra  shoare;  but  hee  that  keepeth
any  thing  neerer  unto  Banco  then  unto  Sumatra,  shall
have  very  uncertaine  shoalding,  sometimes  deepe  and
otherwhiles  shoald,  and  commonly  foule  ground,  whereas
on  Sumatra  side  if  you  should  come  into  shoald  water,
yet  the  ground  for  the  most  part  is  soft,  ozie,  and  the
sounding  farre  more  certaine ;  all  which  will  more  plainly
appeare  by  my  description  of  this  place.

Friday,  the  twelfth  in  the  evening,  having  brought  the

[I.  v.  647.]  North-west  Point  of  Banco  North-east,  we  opened  two
smooth  Hills  with  a  little  Hummock  betweene  them,
the  Northermost  of  them  being  the  Northermost  Land
of  Banco,  and  bearing  from  the  North-west  Point  afore-
said, North-east  nine  leagues  off.  This  night  we  steered
North  North-east,  to  goe through  the  Chanell  betweene

Lings.  Linga and the North end of Banco, finding twentie

three,  twentie  two,  twentie,  eighteene,  and  sixteene
fathoms  ozie,  untill  we  came  neere  the  entrance,  and
afterwards  fifteen,  fourteene,  thirteene  fathoms,  going
through  the  passage.  Linga  riseth  at  first  in  three  Hands,
the  Northermost  being  bigger  then  both  the  other,  rising
full  of  Hummocks,  being  neere  two  leagues  in  length.
The  lies  of  Linga  have  certaine  fragments  of  lies  inter-
mixt  amongst  them,  shewing  like  Hay-cocks,  which  is
a  good  marke  to  know  them.  From  the  smooth  Hill,
which  is  the  South  end  of  Banco,  untill  the  South  Wester-
most  He  of  Linga,  North  by  West  ten  leagues,  East
North-east  halfe  North.  From  the  middle  of  the  greatest
He  of  Linga  (which  is  the  North  Eastermost  of  them)
lyeth  another  smooth  Hand  nine  leagues  off,  and  about
two  leagues  to  the  East  North-east  halfe  North.  From
that  there  is  another  flat  Hand,  and  off  the  North  Point  of

38

MARTIN PRING  ad.

1620.

the round  smooth Hand, lyeth also a little fragment

like  a  Rocke. In the  way betweene this smooth Hand

and  Linga  you  have  fourteene  and  thirteene  fathom  water,

also  being  in  the  mid-way  betweene  them,  your  course  is

North,  to passe  alongst  by the  Easter-side  of  Bintam.

This  day  at  noone  wee  were  in  one  degree  South  latitude,

the  greatest  He  of  Linga  South-west  five  leagues,  whereby

we gathered that the  great lie  of  Linga  stood in  one

degree  and ten minutes neerest. This afternoone we

saw  a  little Hand  to the  Westward  of  us, about eight  A  little  Hand,

leagues  off",  which  lyeth  North  North-west  neerest  from

Linga.

Sunday,  the  fourteenth  at  noone,  having  made  a
North  way  foure  and  twentie  leagues,  by  helpe  of  the
Wind  and  Current,  which  did  set  North,  we  had  sight  of
the  high  land  of  Bintam,  rising  with  two  Hills  and  a  Bintam,
deepe  swamp  betwixt,  being  to  our  judgement  twelve
leagues  from  us.  At  this  time  also  we  had  sight  of
three  or  foure  Hummocks,  rising  like  Hands,  South-west
by  West  eight  leagues  :  here  we  sounded  and  had
ground  in  twentie  fathom.  From  Linga  unto  this  place
we  had  fourteene,  fifteene,  sixteene,  seventeene,  eighteene,
and  twentie  fathom,  as  wee  supposed,  streamy  ground;
for  wee  had  not  meanes  at  all  times  to  trie  it.  From
mid-day  the  fourteenth  unto  the  fifteenth  at  noone,  North
a  third  part  West,  seven  and  twentie  leagues.  This  foure
and  twentie  houres,  twentie  one,  twentie  two,  twentie
three,  and  twentie  foure  fathom.  This  day  from  twelve
to  three,  three  leagues  and  a  halfe.  Here  wee  saw  Poolo  Poolo  Loar.
Loar,  bearing  North-west  halfe  North  from  us,  by  our
judgement  about  twelve  leagues  off,  at  this  instant  we
had  seven  and  twentie  fathom,  the  ground  like  unto
Fullers  earth  ;  this  night  Poolo  Loar  being  North-west
by  West  eight  leagues  off,  we  had  nine  and  thirtie  fathom
ozie.  From  the  fifteenth  at  noone,  unto  eight  the  next
morning,  we  made  a  North  North-west  halfe  West  way
fifteene  leagues.  The  sixteenth  at  eight,  Poolo  Loar  did
beare  South-west  by  South  off  us  sixe  leagues,  distant  the

39

a.ix  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1620.

Hermano  di very  body  of  the  Hand  Hermano  de  Layo,  West  South-
p^/V  west  halfe  West  seven  leagues  off:  and  Poolo  Tymon

yn'  the  South  end  West  halfe  North  ten  leagues ;  and  the
North-east  end  West  North-west  halfe  west  ten  leagues
off.  This  evening  wee  anchored  within  foure  miles  off
the  North  Point  of  Tymon  in  foure  and  twentie  fathom,
streamy  ground,  the  Point  it  selfe  bearing  West  by
South  halfe  South.  The  evening,  I  sent  our  shallop
about  the  Point,  where  they  descried  a  Towne  and  a
Junke,  riding  close  by  the  shoare,  and  divers  Praws  a
fishing,  whereof  one  came  to  them  to  enquire  what
Nation  they  were,  and  told  them,  that  at  the  Towne  there
was  good  fresh  water,  and  Buffels,  Goats,  and  Hennes.
Wednesday  in  the  morning,  about  foure  of  the  clocke,
wee  sent  the  Unicornes  long  Boat  with  ours  to  the  said
Towne,  who  returned  in  the  afternoone  with  foure  Butts
of  water  a  piece,  not  willing  to  fill  more  because  it  was
A  Juncke  of  brackish.  At  the  watering  place  they  found  a  Junck
Jor'  of  Jor,  which  was  set  out  for  a  man  of  Warre,  and  having

twentie  small  shot  besides  Lances  and  Javelins ;  he
reported  to  our  people  that  he  had  taken  a  China
Juncke,  and  sold  her  on  the  Coast  of  Jor.  And  sent  me
word,  that  he  would  take  my  part  against  the  Portugall,
as  long  as  his  life  did  last.  In  the  next  Bay  to  the
Southwards  of  the  North  Point  of  Poolo  Temon,  wee
found  very  good  fresh  water,  but  we  could  not  con-
veniently take  it  in  with  our  long  Boat,  for  shee  drew
five  foot  water  being  loden.  Thus  having  spent  our  day
in  this  place  to  little  purpose :  I  set  saile  the  first  of
Patania.  the  night,  directing  our  course  for  Patania,  steering  away

due  North  with  little  wind  all  night.

Thursday  at  noone,  we  were  in  three  degrees  and
fortie  minutes  South  latitude,  having  made  a  North  halfe
West  way,  by  meanes  of  the  Current,  which  did  set  a  way
North  by  West  about  a  mile  an  houre.  This  afternoone
at  foure,  having  made  a  North  halfe  West  way  about
eight  leagues,  we  descried  the  He  of  Tingoran  North
North-west fifteene  leagues  off:  This  night  wee  passed

40

MARTIN PRING  ad.

1620.

along  by Poolo Tingoran, about sixe leagues to the  Po°S°
Easterward of  it  having  twentie  eight,  thirtie  and  thirtie  TinSoran-
two  fathoms  soft  ground.

Friday,  at  sixe  in  the  morning,  we  had  Poolo  Tin-
goran, West  South-west  seven  leagues  off :  here  we  had
sixe  and  thirtie  fathom  the  same  ground.  This  day  at
noone  wee  were  in  five  degrees  and  thirtie  minutes.
Tingoran  bearing  South  one  third  part  East  fourteene
leagues  off,  whereby  we  conceived  that  the  He  of  Tingoran
standeth  in  foure  degrees  and  fiftie  minutes.  This  day
at  noone  we  had  likewise  the  South-He  of  Poolo  Rowdon,  [I.  v.  648.]
North-west  by  West  seven  leagues  off:  and  in  the  same
night  at  eight  of  the  clocke,  I  observed  the  Crosiers,  and
made  the  ship  to  be  in  five  degrees  fortie  eight  minutes,
the  Eastermost  (which  is  the  greatest  of  the  lies  of  Poolo  Poolo  Rowdon.
Rowdon),  bearing  West  foure  leagues  off.  From  eight  at
night  untill  noone  the  next  day,  our  way  was  neerest
North-west  by  West  nine  leagues ;  in  this  course  the
depth  we  had  from  twentie  eight  to  seventeene  fathoms :
then  the  Northermost  Hand  of  Poolo  Rowdon  was  South,
one  third  part  East,  foure  leagues  off;  being  a  round
Hummocke  much  like  to  Porno  in  the  Gulph  of  Venice,
but  somewhat  higher,  and  more  compleat :  these  lies  of
Rowdon  are  good  high  land,  and  a  faire  depth  from  the
one  end  to  the  other,  on  all  the  Easter  side,  and  as  I
am  informed  a  faire  Channell  betweene  them  and  the
Maine,  there  are  in  all,  thirteene  or  fourteene  Hands  great
and  small.  Saturday  from  noone,  untill  Sunday,  eight  in
the  morning,  our  way  was  West  North-west  nine  leagues :
here  wee  saw  two  hills  by  the  water  side,  bearing  West  of
us  five  leagues  off,  rising  like  two  Tortugas.  From
Poolo  Tingoran  unto  Potania,  is  very  high  land  alongst
up  in  the  Countrey;  and  low  land  by  the  waters  side,
with  a  sandie  Strand  at  least  twentie  leagues  to  the  South-
ward of  the  Point  of  Potania,  and  how  much  farther
I  know  not :  but  so  farre  I  have  seene.  This  Saturday
in  the  afternoone,  as  we  stood  in  West  North-west  to
the  two  hills  aforesaid,  wee came  from seventeene  unto

41

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1620.

fourteene  and  thirteene  fathomes,  hard  ground ;  and  as
wee  drew  neerer  the  hills,  the  depth  encreased  againe
to  ninteene  fathomes  ozie,  and  thence  to  eighteene  and
seventeene  fathoms,  the  same  ground.

Sunday  the  one  and  twentieth,  from  eight  in  the
morning  unto  seven  at  night,  our  course  was  North-west
three  quarters  West  thirteene  leagues,  keeping  for  the
most  part,  within  foure  leagues  of  the  low  sandie  shoare,
the  depth  all  the  way  fifteene,  fourteene,  and  thirteene
fathoms :  here  at  seven  wee  anchored  in  thirteene  fathoms
and  a  quarter  streamie  ground,  the  Northermost  point  in
sight  (falling  downe  from  a  reasonable  high  land  at  the
end  of  all  the  low  land)  did  beare  West  North-west  halfe
North,  neere  three  leagues  and  an  halfe  off. Sixe  leagues

A  Rocke.  South-east  by  South  from  this  Point  lyeth  a  Rocke,  as
high  above  the  water  as  the  Hull  of  a  small  ship :  we
passed  along  about  a  league  and  an  halfe  to  the  Eastward
of  it,  finding  no  alteration  of  our  former  depth  :  this  point

GumetsHead.  aforesaid  I  call,  the  Gurnets  Head.  From  this  Point,
the  land  trendeth  away  West  North-west,  and  West
by  North,  unto  the  entrance  of  Potania  Road,  being  all
low  land  from  the  Gurnets  Head  unto  the  very  Point  of
the  Road,  and  lowest  of  all  at  the  same  Point.  From
Gurnets  Head  unto  the  said  low  Point,  the  distance  is
sixe  leagues ;  and  all  the  way  of  faire  depth,  untill  you
draw  neere  the  low  Point  of  the  Road :  but  there  you
must  give  a  good  birth,  because  there  lieth  a  shoald  from
it  halfe  way  over  unto  the  Wester  shoare :  therefore  you
must  not  borrow  too  neere  it,  before  you  have  the
shoalding  of  the  Wester  shoare  :  and  there  you  shall  find
the  softest  ground.  From  the  low  Point,  as  you  range
over  the  Bay  unto  the  Wester  shoare,  you  shall  not  have
above  five  fathomes,  and  foure  fathoms  and  an  halfe,
when  you  are  in  the  Road ;  where  you  shall  have  the
low  Point  East  North-east  one  third  part  East,  and
the  highest  mountaine  on  the  Wester  side  of  the
Bay  will  then  beare  South  South-west  one  third  part
West.

42

MARTIN PRING  a.d.

1620.

Thursday,  we  anchored  in the  Road  of  Potania,  where  Anchor  at
we  found  the  Samson,  and  a  Dutch  Pinnasse. The  day  p°tant?i  or
before  we  came into the Road,  I  went  ashoare to the
English  Factorie. Where  I  found  Master  Adam  Denton,
and  Master  Richard  Welding,  lately  come  from  Jambe  in  Jambe.
a  Praw  with divers  English of  the  Samsons  companie,
who  were  all  glad  men  to  see  such  English  ships  in  that
Port. At my comming to the English house, I
acquainted Master  Denton with  the cause of  my  com-
ming, which was,  for  Racke  and  fresh Victuals,  whereof
wee  stood  in  great  need ;  whereupon  he  presently  gave
order,  to  lay  out  for  all  things  necessarie ;  that  within  six
dayes  we  were  furnished  with  sixteene  Buts  of  Rack  and  Racke,  and
Rack-apee, whereof three  Buts of  Rack-apee, we had  Rack'aPee-
from  the Dutch ;  which curtesie  they  did us,  to hasten
our  dispatch  :  Beeves,  Goats,  and  Hennes,  we  had  here  in
plentifull manner. Here  also  we  bought  Dammar  and
Oyle  for  the  trimming  of  our  ships,  because  I  understood
it  was  very  deere  in  Japan. Heere  also  I  found  a  small
Frigat,  bought  by  the  English,  which  being  of  no  great
use  in  this  place,  by  general  consent  it  was  thought  fitting,
that  shee with  most  of  the English  Sailors should  goe
along  to  attend  upon  the  James  Royall.

The  last  of  May,  we  departed  from  Potania.

The  first  of  June,  at  seven  in  the  morning,  wee  descried
a  small Rocke,  which appeared but  little above water,  d  R*k
lying  very  dangerous  for  ships  that  goe  from  Potania  for  dangerous.
the  Head  of  Camboia : when  this  Rocke  did beare  North  Cambria.
North-east halfe  East,  a league  off,  then  the  high-land
over  Gurnets Head was South  South-west halfe  West,
thirteene  leagues  off,  and  by  computation,  the  low  point  of
Potania  Road  was  eighteene  leagues  off,  West  South-west
halfe  South from  us. After  we were  out  of  the Road
of  Potania,  in  seven  fathoms,  the  depth  increased  orderly
to eight, ten, twelve, fourteene, sixteene, eighteene,
twentie,  twentie  two,  and  twentie  foure  fathoms,  untill  we
had  sight  of  the  Rocke ;  and  about  two  leagues  from  the
Rocke,  five  and  twentie  fathoms  ozie : and such  was  all

43

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1620.

the  ground  from  Potania  to  this  place.  This  day  at
noone,  this  Rocke  being  West  from  us  about  foure  leagues
off,  we  found  the  ship  to  bee  in  seven  degrees  twentie
minutes.
[I.  v.  649.]  From  hence  untill  the  third  at  noone,  East  halfe  North
Pooh  Hube.  fortie  five  leagues,  here  we  saw  Poolo  Hube  East  North-
east halfe  North,  eight  leagues  off,  having  fourteene
fathoms  ozie :  all  this  eight  and  fortie  houres  we  had  ozie
ground,  the  depth  from  twentie  seven  to  thirtie  sixe
fathoms,  and  from  thence  decreasing  againe  to  fourteene
fathoms,  which  was  the  depth  wee  had  when  we  saw  this
Hand.  This  Poolo  Hube  riseth  first  with  one  round
hill,  then  as  you  come  neerer,  you  shall  see  a  shoulder  of
somewhat  high  land  rising  in  hummockes  :  but  not  above
two  third  parts  as  high  as  the  round  hill,  being  all  one
land  with  it,  and  then  shall  you  see  another  lesser  round
Hand  rise,  which  is  neere  about  the  highth  of  the  hum-
mockie  land,  and  lieth  close  aboord  the  greater  Hand.
Two  little  At  the  East  end  of  this  lesser  round  Hand,  there  are  two
y**™i  ana  a  little  Hands  very  neere  it,  and  a  mile  to  the  Eastward
of  them  lieth  a  long  Rocke  like  the  Hull  of  a  Galley.
This  night  wee  anchored  in  thirteene  fathomes  and  an
halfe  ozie,  about  three  leagues  off  the  greatest  Hand,
which  was  also  the  highest.  The  next  morning  wee
weighed  againe,  and  stood  away  East  by  South,  and  East
by  East,  having  but  little  wind.  This  evening  at  sixe,  wee
had  the  bodie  of  Hube  West  by  North,  foure  leagues
off.  From  hence  wee  steered  away  East  by  South,  and
Current,  East,  untill  sixe  the  next  morning,  but  the  Current
checked  us  to  the  Northward,  by  which  meanes  we  made
our way  to  the  Northward  of  the  East.

The  fift,  from  sixe  at  night  untill  sixe  in  the  morning,
we  ranne  fifteene  leagues,  the  course  afore-said,  and  here
we  had  sight  of  a  very  little  round  Hand,  bearing  foure
leagues  off;  and  to  the  Southward  of  it  about  a  mile
distant,  a  long  flat  Rocke  a  little  highth  above  water.
From  Poolo  Hube  untill  we  came  three  leagues  off  this
little round Hand, we had  thirteene,  fourteene,  fifteene

44

MARTIN PRING  a.d.

1620.

fathoms,  and  fifteene,  fourteene,  and  thirteene  againe,  all
ozie  ground.  When  we  were  within  two  leagues  of  this
small  Hand,  we  had  thirteene  fathoms  sandie  ground.
Here  we  descried  Poolo  Candor,  the  Norther  end  of  Poo/o  Candor.
it  bearing  East  by  North,  from  this  Hand  about  seven
leagues  off.  This  day  at  noone  wee  found  the  ship  to
bee  in  eight  degrees  fortie  two  minutes  North  latitude,
the  highest  land  on  Poolo  Candor  being  East  from  us
sixe  leagues  off:  from  Potania  untill  wee  were  in  sight  of
Poolo  Candor,  the  winds  for  the  most  part  were  at  South
South-west.  This  day  at  noone  wee  steered  away  North-
east, North-east  by  North,  and  in  the  night  North  North-
east ;  so  that  wee  made  North-east  by  North  in  all  untill
the  next  day  at  noone,  about  foure  and  twentie  leagues :
In  this  course  wee  found  thirteene  and  fourteene  fathoms
ozie.

Tuesday,  the  sixt  at  noone,  we  had  sight  of  two  Hum-
mockes  upon  the  Coast  of  Camboia,  bearing  North  by  Camboia.
East,  and  to  the  Westward  of  that  low  Land.  From
Poolo  Candor  untill  wee  came  in  sight  of  this  Coast,
we  found  the  Current  setting  East  by  North  :  here  also
when  wee  saw  those  Hummockes  bearing  North  by  East
nine  leagues  off,  wee  had  twelve  fathoms  streamie  ground.
Wednesday  the  seventh  at  noone,  wee  found  the  ship  to
bee  in  ten  degrees  fortie  two  minutes,  having  runne  from
the  former  noone  untill  this  present,  North-east  a  quarter
North  five  and  twentie  leagues  :  heereby  wee  found,  that
the  Current  setting  East  by  North,  had  carried  us  ten
miles  to  the  Northwards  of  our  computation,  our  depths
from  twelve  to  sixteene,  twentie,  and  twentie  foure
fathoms ;  and  so  to  twentie,  eighteene,  sixteene,  fourteene,
againe,  sandie  ground.  From  the  afore-said  two  Hum-
mocks, as  wee  did  coast  it  along  within  eight  leagues  off
the  shoare,  and  sometimes  more,  sometimes  lesse,  wee
saw  high  Land  all  along  up  in  the  Countrie,  and  in  many
places  by  the  waters  side,  a  smooth  Land  about  the
highth  of  the  Lizard,  with  many  plots  of  white  sand
upon it,  as  well  as  by  the  waters side. The  first  white

45

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1620.

spots  that  we  saw  upon  the  smooth  Land,  was  upon  the
very  Point that  is  ten  leagues  to  the Westward  of  the

Cape  Cessier.  Cape  Cessier,  which  at  first  seemed  to  bee  a  Towne  with
faire  houses  and  white  walls  :  this  Cape  did  beare  West
North-west  halfe  West  from  us,  about  sixe  leagues  off,
this  present  day  at  noone,  when  we  were  in  ten  degrees
fortie  two  minutes.  Thursday  at  noone,  we  were  in
eleven  degrees  thirtie  minutes,  having  gone  twentie
leagues  North-east  halfe  North,  from  the  former  noone.
The  night  before,  at  eight  of  the  clocke,  we  came  to  an
anchor  in  twentie  two  fathome  streamie  ground,  where  the
Current  did  set  East  halfe  North,  untill  twelve  ;  and  then
finding  that  it  had  recourse  to  the  Westward,  wee  weighed
anchor  againe,  and  steered  away  North-east,  and  North-
east by  North,  all  the  night;  and  so  untill  the  eight
at  noone  afore-said :  in  which  course  we  had  from  twentie
two  to  twentie  eight,  thirtie  two,  thirtie  sixe,  fortie,
fortie  foure  fathoms  ;  and  a  little  before  noone,  fortie
seven,  and  after  that  wee  had  no  ground.  The  cause
why  wee  anchored  that  night  was,  that  wee  found  very
uncertaine  shoalding,  having  had  eighteene,  twentie,
twentie  two,  and  twentie  foure  fathomes :  and  after  noone
on  the  sodaine  we  came  into  sixteene,  fourteene,  twelve,
and  the  Unicorne  being  faire  by  us  had  but  nine  fathoms
and  an  halfe.

From  the  eight  untill  the  ninth  at  noone,  wee  steered
alongst  the  shoare  North  North-east  sixteene  leagues,  North
by  East  six  leagues,  North  six  leagues,  and  North  by  West
nine  leagues  ;  which  made  in  all  a  North  by  East  one
third  part  Easterly  way,  thirtie  six  leagues  : here  we  had

Cape  Cape  Varrella  West  South-west  eight  leagues  off,  being  in

Varella.  the  latitude  of  thirteene  degrees  thirteene  minutes : this

Cape  is  called  by  the  Chineses  (Jentam)  which  in  their
language  doth  signifie  a  Chimney,  because  it  hath  a  sharpe
Hummocke on the  top  of  the hill, much like  unto a

[I.  v.  650.]  Chimney  on  the  top  of  a  house.  From  the  ninth  untill
the  tenth  at  noone,  North  two  third  parts  West  twentie
sixe  leagues,  the  latitude  fourteene  degrees  thirtie  minutes:

46

MARTIN PRING  ad.

1620.
here  we  were  about  ten  leagues  off  the  land ;  and  the
day  before,  wee  came  not  above  sixe  leagues  off  Cape
Varrella,  by  which  I  gather,  that  the  land  trendeth  away
North  by  West  from  Cape  Varrella.  Sunday  at  noone,
we  were  in  sixteene  degrees  ten  minutes,  having  runne
from  the  former  noone  thirtie  three  leagues  and  one
third  part,  due  North.  Munday  at  noone,  twentie  sixe
leagues  North  North-east  halfe  North,  latitude  seventeene
degrees  fortie  minutes,  the  Current  having  set  us  sixe
miles  to  the  Northwards.  This  evening  at  sixe,  we
descried  the  He  of  Aynam,  the  high  land  bearing  North-  Aynam.
west  by  North  twelve  leagues,  wee  having  gone  from
noone  seven  leagues  North-east.  From  hence  untill
noone  the  next  day,  North-east  by  East  twentie  two
leagues :  here  we  were  in  eighteene  degrees  and  an
halfe.  This  morning,  we  chased  a  Portugall  Frigat,  but
shee  was  of  so  light  burthen  that  we  could  not  come
neere  her.

The  fourteenth  day  at  noone,  we  were  in  ninteene
degrees  thirtie  five  minutes,  our  way  from  the  former
noone  North-east  twentie  sixe  leagues  ;  whereby  wee
found  that  the  Current  had  carried  us  foure  leagues  to
the  Northwards  of  our  account :  and  yet  this  day  at
noone,  with  our  boats  in  seventie  three  fathoms  ozie,
and  found  no  Current  at  all.  Here  we  saw  many  Current.
Ripplings  like  over-falls,  as  though  there  had  gone  some  Ripplings.
great  Tide,  but  found  none  as  yet.  This  afternoone  at
sixe,  we  anchored  againe,  with  our  boat  in  sixtie  eight
fathoms  ozie  sand,  and  found  a  small  Current  to  the
Southward.  The  fifteenth  at  noone  wee  had  runne
seventeene  leagues  North-east  by  North  :  here  we  were
in  twentie  degrees  thirtie  minutes,  the  Current  having
carried  us  seven  leagues  to  the  Northward,  here  we  had
fortie  five  fathoms  sandie  ozie.  The  sixteenth  at  noone  in
twentie  one  degrees  and  twentie  minutes  we  had  sight
of  three  Hands ;  the  Eastermost  bearing  North  North-
East,  the  Westermost  North-west,  the  neerest  land  nine
leagues  off :  here  we  had  twentie  two  fathomes  ozie  sand ;

47

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1620.

we  met  with  the  wind  here  at  East  South-east,  which
blew  very  fresh :  but  from  Cape  Varrella  unto  this  place,
wee  had  the  wind  alwayes  from  the  South  South-east
to  the  South-west.  The  next  morning  at  eight  of  the
clocke,  we  had  twentie  eight  fathomes  ozie,  having  runne
from  the  former  noone  South-west  eleven  leagues  :  where
perceiving  the  wind  and  weather  to  encrease,  wee  thought
it  better  to  anchor,  then  to  runne  backe  the  way  that
we  came.

Sunday  the  eighteenth  in  the  morning,  the  weather
somewhat  faire,  we  endeavored  to  weigh  our  anchor;
but  even  as  our  anchor  was  apeeke,  the  cable  brake  in
the  halfe,  being  new,  and  never  wet  before ;  by  which
accident  we  lost  a  good  anchor.  The  Unicorne,  as  wee
were  almost  apeeke,  shot  off  a  Peece,  whereupon  I  sent
the  Shallop  speedily  aboord  her,  to  know  what  was
amisse;  who  brought  me  word,  that  shee  had  sprung
a  great  leake,  which  had  almost  tired  all  their  men  with
baling :  which  as  soone  as  I  heard,  I  sent  thirtie  men
aboord  of  her,  to  ease  their  men  by  spells,  untill  it  should
please  God  to  discover  the  leake :  this  day  the  wind
at  South-east,  which  stood  to  the  Eastward,  making  of
a  North-east  way,  untill  sixe  at  night,  at  which  time
we  saw  the  former  high  Hand  againe,  North  North-east
one  third  part  East,  ten  leagues  off,  having  twentie  three
fathoms.  This  evening,  our  men  returned  from  the
Unicorne,  and  brought  us  newes,  that  the  great  leake
was  firmely  stopt,  whereat  wee  all  rejoyced.  From  sixe  to
twelve  at  night,  we  made  a  North-east  way  fourteene
leagues,  where  we  had  twentie  fathoms  ozie.  From
twelve  to  five  in  the  morning,  wee  stood  to  the  South-
wards, making  a  South-west  way  three  leagues  and  an
halfe ;  here  wee  had  twentie  sixe  fathoms  againe,  ozie
ground.

The  nineteenth,  from  five  this  morning,  we  cast  about
to  the  land,  the  wind  at  South-east,  wherewith  we  made  a
North-east  way  :  and  at  sixe  of  the  clocke  were  within
weight  leagues  of  the  aforesaid  high  Hand,  bearing  North

48

MARTIN PRING  a.d.

1620.

by  East  from  us :  and  at  eight  this  morning,  Master
Roberts,  Master  of  the  Unicorne,  came  aboord  of  us,  Vnicornes
and  told  mee  that  they  had  another  great  leake  broke  out,  ea  es'
and  that  they  must  needs  seeke  out  some  smooth  place  to
ride  in,  the  better  to  search  their  leakes,  and  to  fit  their
fore-mast  better  in  the  step :  hereupon  I  resolved  to
beare  up  under  the  great  Hand,  which  was  now  North
by  East  from  us,  in  hope  to  find  a  smooth  Road,  the
more  speedily  to  effect  their  businesse.  There  were
many  more  Hands  in  sight,  both  to  the  Westward,  and
to  the  Eastward  of  us ;  but  this  being  the  neerest  to
us,  and  the  likeliest,  we  steered  with  it,  being  within  three
leagues  of  it,  the  wind  began  to  duller,  and  the  night
was  at  hand,  therefore  we  plied  it  to  and  againe,  untill  the
twentieth  in  the  morning,  and  then  the  wind  was  so  farre
Northerly,  that  wee  could  not  cease  the  place.  This
day  I  went  aboord  againe  of  the  Unicorne,  to  know  what
they  intended  to  doe ;  where  I  found  them  all  very
willing  to  stand  it  alongst,  because  the  wind  was  faire ;
not  doubting  but  that  they  should  bee  able  to  overcome
it.  When  I  heard  their  resolution,  I  caused  all  my
Laskayres  to  remaine  aboord  the  Unicorne,  to  assist
them  as  occasion  should  require,  and  so  we  stood  away
all  that  afternoone  untill  midnight,  with  a  faire  wind,
and  faire  weather;  but  then  it  began  to  blow  so  much
wind,  that  wee  were  inforced  to  lie  here  a  trie  with
her  maine  course  all  night.

The  one  and  twentieth  in  the  morning,  we  saw  the
Unicorne  a  league  and  an  halfe  asterne  off  us,  having  a
fore-saile  and  a  sprit-saile  out;  which,  as  afterward  I
perceived,  was  to  flat  her  about  for  the  shoare  againe:  [I.  v.  651.]
I  presently  caused  our  fore-course  to  be  made  readie
to  flat  our  ship  after  her,  although  wee  had  little  hope  to
assist  her  in  any  thing,  because  the  sea  was  so  farre
growne,  as  our  men  were  a  losing  of  their  fore-course,
there  came  such  a  violent  gust  that  they  were  faine  to
furle  it  againe  :  if  not,  our  saile  would  have  beene
blowne away. After the gust was over, we set our

v  49  D

A.D.

l620.

They  lose
sight  of  the
Unicorne.

Morocco
Saddle,  or
Saddle-Hand.

Leakes.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

fore-saile,  and  to  make  her  weare  the  rounder,  wee
braled  up  our  maine  course,  part  of  it  being  blowne
out  of  the  boult-rope  before  they  could  furle  it,  after
that  the  main-saile  was  up,  we  put  the  helme  hard
aweather,  thinking  that  the  ship  would  have  come
round,  but  all  in  vaine  :  for  shee  would  not  weare
above  two  or  three  points,  and  then  come  to  againe.
Now  the  sea  was  so  growne,  that  we  durst  not  let
fall  our  sprit-saile  ;  and  the  wind  so  violent,  that  we
could  not  loose  our  fore-top-saile  :  and  this  while  the
Unicorne  was  out  of  sight,  when  we  saw  that  our
ship  would  not  weare,  we  steered  away,  as  neere  as
wee  could  lie  South  by  East,  untill  noone  ;  having
made  our  way  South  by  East  thirteene  leagues  from
the  Southermost  Hand  in  sight  over-night,  which  I
called  the  Morocco  Saddle,  by  reason  of  a  deepe
Swampe  on  the  top  thereof.  This  Saddle-Iland  afore-
said lieth  in  twentie  one  degrees  fortie  five  minutes
North  latitude,  it  hath  on  the  Westerside  foure  or
five  very  small  Hands  close  by  it,  and  on  the  Easterne
side  three  Hands  in  sight,  lying  all  three  next  hand
East  North-east  from  it.  From  Saddle-Ile  to  the
Westward,  there  are  many  Hands ;  some  North-west
from  it,  others  West  North-west,  West  by  North  ;
and  the  Southermost  of  all  those  Hands  in  sight  did
beare  from  this  West,  about  fifteene  leagues  off.
This  afternoone,  our  ship  waxed  very  leake,  having
on  the  sodaine  foure  foot  and  an  halfe  water  in
hold,  which  imployed  both  our  Pumpes  going  a  long
time  before  we  could  free  her.  Towards  the  evening,
it  pleased  God  to  discover  three  or  foure  great  leakes
betweene  wind  and  water,  which  when  our  Carpenters
had  stopped  :  wee  found  great  ease  and  comfort,  for
then  we  could  let  the  Pumpe  stand  still  halfe  an
houre,  and  free  her  againe  with  one  Pumpe  in  little
more  then  a  quarter  of  an  houre.  From  this  day
noone  untill,  the  two  and  twentieth  at  noone,  five
leagues South South-west, with a paire of  Coursers  ;

50

MARTIN PRING  a.d.

1620.

and  nine  leagues  South-west  by  West  a  Hull  :  here
we  had  twentie  seven  fathoms  and  an  halfe  ozie.
The  two  and  twentieth  in  the  afternoone,  the  violence
of  the  wind  began  to  decrease,  and  consequently,  the
furie  of  the  waves  allayed,  which  caused  our  ship  to
grow  the  thighter,  whereby  we  plainely  perceived,  that
the  most  part  of  our  leakes  were  betwixt  wind  and
water,  and  therefore  the  first  faire  weather  I  caused
our  Carpenters  to  search  the  ships  sides,  where  they
found  and  stopped  many  bad  places,  some  of  a  yard
in  length,  where  the  Ocum  was  all  rotten  in  the  seame.

The  foure  and  twentieth  day,  we  had  sight  of  a
great  Hand,  bearing  North  from  us,  about  seaven  Leagues
off,  having  a  high  Hill  on  the  Easterne  end  of  it,  which
was  the  same  Hand  that  did  beare  West  from  Morocco
Saddle,  fifteene  leagues  off  or  thereabouts.  From  hence
untill  the  six  and  twentieth  in  the  evening,  our  way
was  South  by  West  twentie  foure  leagues,  the  depth
increasing  from  nineteene  unto  six  and  thirty  fathoms
ozie  ground  :  Here  we  had  a  little  round  Hand
South-west  by  West  two  leagues  off,  which  lyeth  in
twenty  degrees  and  twenty  minutes  neerest.  This
Hand  hath  foure  small  Hands  in  the  South-west  side
of  it,  but  none  of  them  equall  in  height  with  this,
wee  saw  it  at  least  ten  leagues  off,  rising  like  a
Chineses  hat.  From  hence  untill  the  seven  and
twentieth  at  noone  East  by  North,  two  third  parts
North,  twelve  leagues  :  Here  we  had  one  and  forty
fathoms,  ozie  ground.  This  morning  at  two  of  the
clocke  the  winde  veered  up  at  South  South-east  and
about  noone  at  South.

From  twelve  the  twentie  seven,  unto  twelve  the
twentie  eight,  East  North-east  eighteene  leagues,  here
we  had  almost  one  and  forty  fathoms  ozie  ground.
This  morning  at  two  of  the  clock  the  wind  veered
back  againe  at  South  South-east.  From  the  eight  and
twentieth  untill  noone  the  nine  and  twentieth,  East
North-east eighteen leagues  : Here we were in one

5i

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1620.

and  twenty  degrees  and  ten  minutes,  depth  one  and
forty  fathoms  ozie.  The  wind,  this  twenty  foure
houres,  from  South  to  South-east  by  South,  and  very
faire  weather  ever  since  the  storme.  From  the  nine
and  twentieth  untill  the  thirtieth  at  noone,  East  North-
east eighteene  leagues  latitude,  one  and  twenty  degrees
and  thirty  minutes  depth,  six  and  fifty  fathoms  ozie,
the  winde  South-east  by  South,  somewhat  gustie  weather.
From  the  last  of  June  untill  the  first  of  July  at
noone,  East  North-east  halfe  North,  two  and  twenty
leagues  latitude,  two  and  twenty  degrees  and  ten
minutes,  the  depth  five  and  twenty  fathoms  black
sandy  ozie  :  Here  from  the  top-mast-head  we  saw
land  North  North-west  halfe  North,  the  winde  in  the
night  South  South-east,  by  day  South-east.  This  day
from  noone  to  seven  at  night  North-east  by  North,
sixe  leagues,  twentie  foure  fathoms  black  and  white
sand  with  shels.  From  thence  untill  two  at  noone
South-west  halfe  South,  nine  leagues  and  a  halfe,  foure
and  twenty  fathoms  sandy  ozie.  The  first  of  July,
at  sixe  in  the  afternoone  when  we  were  in  foure  and
twenty  fathoms  sand  and  shels,  wee  saw  three  China
Fisher-boates.  The  winde  came  up  this  evening  at
East  South-east,  with  which  we  stood  off  to  the
Southwards,  and  having  crackt  our  maine  top-mast
but  a  little  before,  which  was  the  cause  that  wee
could  beare  but  course  and  bonnet  of  each,  and
therefore  made  our  way  of  no  better  then  South-
west, as  I  said  before.  From  this  second  day  at
noone  untill  eight  at  night,  our  way  was  South  foure
[I.  v.  652.]  leagues,  depth  seven  and  twenty  fathoms  ozie  ground.
From  eight  at  night  untill  noone  the  next  day  North
North-west  a  quarter  West,  seven  leagues  five  and
twenty  fathoms  blacke  ozie  sand,  like  the  former,
the  winde  at  East  by  North  and  East  North-east  ;
here  wee  saw  that  the  land  from  the  North  to  the
North-east  about  twelve  leagues  off,  rising  in  certaine
Hummocks,  by which  I  conjecture  that  this  land  lyeth

52

MARTIN  PRING  ad.

1620.
in  two  and  twenty  degrees  and  five  and  forty  minutes
neerest.  From  twelve  this  day  to  foure,  North  North-
west three  leagues  five  and  twenty  fathoms  black
sand.  From  foure  to  twelve  the  next  day  South-
east by  South,  ten  leagues  five  and  forty  fathoms
black  sandy  ozie.  From  the  fourth  untill  the  fifth
at  noone  South-East  by  South  six  leagues  no  ground
in  eightie  fathoms.  This  foure  and  twentie  houres
very  little  wind,  for  the  most  part  at  East  North-
east. From  the  fift  to  the  sixt  at  noone  North  by
East  foure  leagues,  here  we  had  no  ground  in  eighty
fathoms.  This  foure  and  twenty  houres,  it  was  for
the  most  part  calme,  that  little  winde  that  blew
was  at  East  and  East  North-east,  when  it  was  flat  calme
wee  made  divers  trialls  with  our  Lead,  and  some-
times wee  should  have  sixty  fathoms,  otherwhiles  fifty
sixe  fathoms,  and  then  we  perceived  that  the  ship  was
carryed  to  the  South  Westward  with  a  sagging
Current,  and  when  the  calme  continued  three  or  foure
houres,  then  no  ground  in  eighty  fathoms,  as  afore-
said. This  afternoone,  it  rained  a  downe-right  showre,
and  after  that,  the  wind  came  up  at  South  and  South
South-west  an  easie  gale  with  fair  weather.  From  the
sixt  unto  the  seventh  at  noone,  North-east  halfe
North  nine  leagues  ;  here  we  had  twenty  sixe  fathoms
black  ozie  ground  :  the  winde  continued  at  South
South-west  with  faire  weather.  From  the  seventh  at
noone  untill  the  eight  at  night,  North-east  by  North
three  leagues  and  a  halfe,  twenty  fathoms  gray  ozie
sand,  here  by  the  Scorpions  heart  I  found  the  ship
to  be  in  two  and  twenty  degrees  and  five  and  thirty
minutes.  From  eight  to  twelve,  the  eight  North-east
by  North  fifteene  leagues,  here  the  Sunne  made  us
in  three  and  twenty  degrees  and  sixe  minutes.  At
this  present  we  had  sight  of  the  high  land  of  Logosse  Logosse.
North-west  by  North  eleven  leagues  off,  having  nine-
teen fathoms,  a  grosse  white  sand  with  smal  shels,
the wind stil continuing at South-west & West

53

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1620.

South-west.  This  morning,  we  saw  eight  or  nine
Fisher-boats,  whereof  one  came  within  hayling  of  us,
but we could not perswade them to come aboord.

A  banke.  This  morning,  we  came  over  a  banke  where  we  had
but  fifteene  fathoms  grosse  ground,  this  afternoone,
from  twelve  to  foure  North  North-east  halfe  North
five  leagues,  twenty  fathoms  sandy  gravell  and  shels,
the  high  land  of  Logosse  bearing  North-west  by  West
nine  leagues  off.  From  foure  to  eight,  North-east  by
North  five  leagues,  two  and  twenty  fathoms  sandy
gravell.  From  eight  to  twelve,  five  leagues  thirty
fathoms  sandy  ozie.  From  twelve  to  twelve  the  ninth,
North-east  twelve  leagues  thirtie  foure  fathome,  blacke
sandie  ozie,  the  wind  at  South-west,  faire  weather,
latitude  twentie  foure  degrees,  twentie  minutes.

From  the  ninth  at  noone,  untill  the  tenth,  North-
east one  quarter  East,  twelve  leagues  thirty  five
fathomes  ozie,  this  night  the  skie  was  all  over-cast,
and  the  wind  over-cast  with  raine.  This  forenoone  it
was  calme,  and  we  making  tryall  with  the  Lead,  found

Current. that the Current did set  us North North-east. Here

Small  Hands,  we  had  sight  of  certaine  small  Hands,  one  of  them
rising  in  forme  of  a  Sugar-loafe,  and  did  beare  West
North-west  from  us  at  noone  about  eight  leagues  off.
This  afternoone  we  hoysed  out  our  little  Boat,  which
the  Carpenters  built  upon  our  fore-Castle  :  by  her  wee
made  tryall  of  the  Current  againe,  and  found  it  to
set  East  North-east.  This  Evening,  at  eight  we
anchored  in  twentie  eight  fathomes,  having  made  no
way  all  this  after-noone,  but  as  the  Current  set  us,
which  was  North-east  about  a  mile  an  houre.  Tuesday,
the  eleventh  in  the  morning,  we  set  saile  againe,  and
so  drove  away  to  the  North-east-ward,  by  means  of
the former  Current,  having no  wind at all : this  day

Formosa.  at  noone,  wee  had  sight  of  the  top  of  Formosa,
above  the  clouds,  the  highest  part  of  it  bearing
South-east by East, about eighteene leagues off, and

China.  the neerest Hand unto us on the Coast of China,

54

MARTIN PRING  a.d.

1620.

was  at  the  same  time  North-west  from  us  seven
leagues  :  heere  wee  had  sight  of  many  great  Fisher-
boates  almost  round  about  us,  who  sent  certaine  little
Boats  aboord  us  with  fish,  for  which  we  paid  them
double  the  value  at  the  first  to  encourage  them  to
come  againe.  This  Evening,  at  sixe,  the  wind  came
up  at  North  North-east,  by  meanes  whereof,  and  a
little  helpe  of  the  Current  setting  towards  the  North-
east by  East,  which  made  an  East  way  nine  leagues
to  the  twelfth  at  noone.  Heere  we  had  the  highest
Land  of  Formosa,  South-east,  the  neerest  land  about
eight  leagues  off,  the  neather  point  of  it  East  by
North  ten  leagues  off  our  depth,  fortie  sixe  fathomes
ozie  :  the  latitude  twentie  five  degrees  twentie  minutes.
From  the  high  land  of  Formosa,  stretcheth  out  a
lower  Land  to  the  water-side,  being  a  white  sandy
shoare,  and  smooth  sand  Hils  farther  up  the  Countrey,
much  like  to  the  Coast  of  Barbary.

Wednesday,  the  twelfth,  from  twelve  to  three  East
two  leagues,  here  we  were  in  the  same  depths,  that
wee  had  at  noone,  viz.  forty  sixe  fathomes,  beeing
foure  leagues  off  the  foresaid  sandy  shoare,  and  seeing
wee  could  lye  no  slent  this  way,  wee  tackt  and  stood
off  againe,  stemming  North-west  and  North-west  by
North,  and  North  by  West,  making  North-west  eight
leagues,  where  we  had  forty  fathomes.  From  hence
we  stood  in  againe  untill  twelve,  the  next  day  our
way  East  by  East  sixe  leagues,  here  we  had  the
Norther  point  of  Formosa,  East  South-east  ten  leagues
off,  being  in  the  latitude  of  twenty  five  degrees,  fortie
minutes,  the  depth  fiftie  six  fathoms  ozie  :  by  this  we  [I.  v.  653.]
perceived  that  the  Current  had  carryed  us  towards  the
East  North-east.  The  thirteenth,  from  noone  until  six,
we  stood  in  East  by  South,  and  East  South-east  untill  we
had  the  foresaid  point  East  South-east  halfe  East,  sixe
leagues  off  forty  two  fathomes.  Here  we  tackt  about  the
North-ward,  lying  North  North-west  and  North-west  by
North,  which  made  a  North-west  by  West  way,  till  two  at

55

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1620.

night  about  one  halfe  league,  then  the  wind  came  up  at
North-west  by  West,  untill  sixe  in  the  morning,  with
which  halfe  a  league  North-east  by  North,  heere  the
foresaid  point  was  East  South-east  halfe  South.  From
sixe  to  twelve,  it  was  calme  with  a  cockling  Sea,  setting  in
upon  the  shoare,  and  yet  by  meanes  of  the  Current
setting  towards  the  East  North-east,  we  had  by  noone
brought  the  said  point  South-east  of  us,  about  five  leagues
off,  having  forty  foure  fathomes  ozie,  the  latitude  twentie
five  degrees  fortie  five  minutes.

Friday,  the  fourteenth  in  the  afternoone,  we  perceived
that  the  former  Current  was  done,  and  that  our  ship  was
driving  to  the  South-west-wards  with  a  contrary  Current,
wherefore  we  anchored,  having  fortie  two  fathomes,  a
browne  glistering  sand,  here  wee  rode  untill  eight  at  night,
Contrary  at  which  time  finding  the  Current  to  set  towards  the
Current.  jrast  North-east :  againe  wee  weighed  with  a  little  breath
of  wind  Southerly,  and  within  an  houre  after,  the  wind
veered  up  at  West  South-west,  and  began  to  blow  fresh.
At  eight  at  night,  the  fourteenth  unto  the  fifteenth  at
noone,  North-east  by  North  halfe  East,  nineteene  leagues,
twentie  sixe  degrees  thirtie  minutes,  the  wind  West  and
West  by  North.  From  the  fifteenth  at  noone,  untill  the
twelfth,  the  sixteenth,  North-east  by  North,  twentie  foure
leagues,  latitude  twentie  foure  degrees  thirtie  minutes,
depth  fifty  five  fathomes,  black,  sandie,  ozie,  the
wind  at  West  by  North.  From  the  twelfth,  the  sixteenth,
untill  the  twelfth,  the  seventeenth,  North-east  by  North,
seven  leagues,  latitude  twentie  eight  degrees  eight  minutes,
by  this  I  perceived,  that  the  Current  had  set  us  North-
east foure  halfe  leagues,  the  wind  West  South-west,  depth
fiftie  fathoms,  blacke,  sandy,  ozie.  From  the  seventeenth,
untill  the  eighteenth  at  noone,  our  way  through  the
water,  East  North-east,  ten  halfe  leagues,  by  the  Current
North-east  one  quarter  East,  five  leagues  latitude  twentie
eight  degrees  thirtie  minutes,  the  wind  North  by  West,
and  North  North-west  faire  weather.  From  the  eigh-
teenth, untill  the nineteenth  at  noone,  our  way  through

56

MARTIN PRING  a.d.

1620.

the water North-east by North thirty foure leagues,

latitude twentie nine  degrees forty  five minutes, depth

sixty  fathomes, sandie, ozie. The  wind  at  first  North

North-west,  and  North North-west  untill  mid-night  with

faire  weather. From thence  untill  noone,  the  next  day

West  South-west  and  South-west  very  foule  weather  with

much  raine. From  the  nineteenth  untill  the  twentieth  at

noone, North-east twentie  eight  leagues,  latitude  thirtie

degrees thirtie  five minutes, depth fiftie  five  fathomes,

sandy,  ozie,  the  wind  for  the  most  part  South-west and

West  South-west,  the  weather  showrie.

Thursday,  the  twentieth,  from  three  to  six  North-east
two  leagues  &  a  half,  depth  thirty  seven  fathomes,
blacke  sand.  From  sixe  to  five,  next  morning,  North-
east by  East  nine  leagues,  eightie  sixe  fathomes,  grosse,
gray  sand  with  some  shels.  From  five  to  twelve,  the  one
and  twentieth,  North-east  nine  leagues  &  a  halfe,  no
ground  in  ninetie  fathomes,  here  we  were  in  one  and
thirtie  degrees  twentie  five  minutes,  South  South-west
South,  and  South  South-east,  here  I  found  that  the  Current  Current.
had  carryed  us  tenne  miles  to  the  North-wards  of  our
computation  in  twentie  foure  houres.  From  twelve,  the
one  and  twentieth  unto  twelve,  the  two  and  twentieth,
North-east  two  third  parts  North,  twentie  five  leagues,
latitude  thirtie  two  degrees  fortie  minutes,  here  the  great
sound  of  Langasaque,  was  East  about  nine  leagues  off,  Sound  of
and  the  South-east  of  Goto  West  by  North  ten  leagues  £*K**f»-
off.

The three and twentieth, we arrived in a  Port of
Firando,  called  Cochee,  which  is  about  foure  halfe  English Cochee.
miles  to  the  South-wards  of  the  Haven  of  Firando.

Their  Returne.

THe  eighteenth  of  December,  Munday  at  noone,  the
lies  of  Mexuma  did  beare  North-west  from  us  foure Iks  of
leagues  off. Our  course  from Porno  being  South  South- Mexuma.
west  twentie five  leagues,  the  wind North-west. From
the  eighteenth,  at  noone  to  the nineteenth,  sixe  leagues

57

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1620.

South-west,  little  wind  &  variable,  yet  faire  weather  (as
before)  here  we  had  the  lies  of  Mexuma,  North-east  by-
North nine leagues off, the latitude one and thirtie
degrees  thirtie  two  minutes,  here  we  had  seventie  eight
fathomes,  streamy  ground  betwixt  with  a  peppery  sand
and  small  shels. From  the  nineteenth to  the  twentieth
at  noone  South-west  fourteene  leagues,  latitude  one  and
thirtie degrees two minutes, the wind from  the West
North-west  to  the  North  North-east,  the  weather  very
faire. From the  twentieth, to the  one and twentieth,
South-west  by  West  thirtie  leagues,  latitude  thirtie  degrees
twentie  three  minutes,  by  this  we  found  that  the  Current
had set us thirteene  miles  to the North-wards  of  our
account,  the  wind  at  North  North-east,  the  weather  faire.
Friday,  the  two  and  twentieth,  (from  the  former  midday)
we  had  made  a South-west  by  West  way  twentie  seven
leagues,  latitude  twentie  nine  degrees  fortie  minutes,  here
our  latitude  course  &  distance  agreed  wel  together. This
day at  noon  we  had  thirtie five  fathoms,  smal  sand &
ozie, the wind  North North-east  and  North-east faire
weather.
[I.  v.  654.] From  Friday,  to  Saturday  at  noone,  South  South-west
thirteene leagues. This morning, we  came up  with a
Juncke  of  Nangasack,  belonging  to  Jan  Jowlson  a  Dutch-
man, and  bound  for  Cambaya. I  caused  the  Captaine  of
her  to  bring  his  Pasport  aboord,  which  I  perceived  to  bee
a  Goshon  from  the  Emperour  of  Japan  ;  I  thereupon  gave
hin  leave  to  depart. This  day,  about  noone,  we  had  one
and  fortie  fathomes  ozie. This  twentie  foure  houres  the
wind  was  very  variable,  the  weather  close  and  some-what
hazie;  at  foure  in  the  afternoone,  fortie  seven  fathomes
ozie. From  Saturday  to  Sunday  noone,  South-west  halfe
South,  forty  leagues,  the  wind  at  North  and  North  North-
west, close  weather.

From  Sunday  noone,  untill  Munday  noone,  being
Christmasse  day,  South-west  halfe  South  fiftie  two
leagues,  here  we  had  sight  of  certaine  Hands,  which  lye
off  the  Coast  of  China,  the  neerest  unto  us  was  a  small

58

MARTIN PRING  a.d.

1620.

Hand  bearing  West  by  South  from  us,  about  three  leagues

off,  and  did  rise  in  the  forme  of  a  Cayman,  the  wind

North  North-east,  and  North-east,  the  depth  in  this  place

about thirty  three  fathomes ozie. This  forenone, wee

came  up  with  a  Juncke  that  kept  the  same  course  as  we

did,  she  had  the  Hollands  Colours  on  her  Poope,  whereby

we  conceived  that  she  had  a  Passe  from  them,  but  had

shee  beene  good  purchas,  wee  could  not  have  dealt  with

her,  because  there  was  much  wind,  a  loftie  Sea.

From  Munday  noone  to  Tuesday  noone,  South-west
by  South,  fiftie  three  leagues,  here  we  had  sight  of  certaine
Hands,  which  lye  off  Logoseo,  bearing  North-west  by
West  nine  leagues  off,  here  wee  had  one  and  thirty
fathomes,  blacke  peppery  sand.  From  hence  wee  steered
in  West  South-west  ten  leagues,  untill  sixe  at  night.  At
which  time  wee  had  the  Rockes  of  the  point  of  Loamb
West  fortie  leagues  off,  our  depth  twentie  two  fathomes,
and  white  sand  mixt.  From  sixe  to  twelve  South-west  by
South,  eleven  leagues,  twentie  five  fathomes  ozie.

From  twelve  to  twelve,  the  seven  and  twentieth,  South-
west halfe  West,  one  and  twentie  leagues.  This  seven
and  twentieth,  it  blew  a  faire  gale  at  North-east  as  before,
and  the  weather  cleered  up,  that  we  had  sight  of  the
Sunne,  which  we  had  not  of  a  long  time  seene  before.
From  noone  untill  mid-night  South-west  halfe  West
nineteene  leagues :  here  by  the  North-star  and  Canopus,  Canopus.
we  were  in  one  &  twentie  degrees  thirtie  minutes,  the
depth  fiftie  five,  sandy,  ozie.  From  mid-night  the  seven
and  twentieth,  unto  mid-night  the  eight  and  twentieth,
South-west  nineteene  leagues :  heere  by  the  Sunne,  we
were  North  twentie  degrees,  forty  five  minutes,  the  wind
still  at  North-east,  the  weather  faire.  From  the  eight
and  twentieth,  untill  the  nine  and  twentieth  at  noone,
South-west  thirtie  eight  leagues,  latitude  nineteene
degrees  fiftie  three  minutes,  the  depth  seventie  five
fathomes,  sandy,  ozie,  the  wind  North-east,  the  weather
faire :  by  this  we  gathered,  that  we  had  made  our  way  to
the  West-ward  of  the  South-west  by  West,  by  meanes  of

59

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1620.

some  Current  setting  to  the  West-ward.  From  the  nine
and  twentieth,  untill  the  thirtieth,  South-west  halfe  South,
thirtie  eight  leagues,  latitude  eighteene  degrees  thirtie
minutes,  the  wind  at  East  North-east  and  East  by  North,  the
weather  very  faire,  no  ground  in  one  hundred  and  twentie
fathomes.  From  Saturday  untill  Sunday  at  noone,
which  was  the  last  of  December,  South-west  by  South,
twentie  seven  leagues  and  a  halfe,  latitude  seventeene
degrees  twentie  minutes,  wind  East  North-east,  weather
faire.

The  first  of  January,  from  the  last  of  December  untill
New-yeeres  day  at  noone,  South-west  by  South  twentie
eight  leagues,  latitude  sixteene  degrees  ten  minutes.  Here
the  wind  came  up  at  North-east  by  North,  the  weather
faire.  From  the  first  of  January,  untill  the  second  at
noone  South  halfe  West,  twentie  eight  leagues,  the  weather
over-cast  the  wind  at  North-east  by  North.  From  this
day  noone,  untill  two  of  the  clocke  in  the  afternoone,
South  South-west  halfe  South  three  leagues,  here  wee  had
sight  of  a  point  of  Land,  bearing  West  from  us  eight
leagues  off.

From  two  in  the  afternoone,  untill  twelve  the  next  day,
South  halfe  East,  fortie  leagues,  here  we  had  Cape  Varella
North-west  by  North  eight  leagues  off.  This  twentie
foure  houres  we  had  much  raine  and  dirtie  weather.
From  the  third  at  noone,  untill  the  fourth  at  sixe  in  the
morning,  our  way  one  with  another  upon  a  straight  Line
South  South-west  halfe  West,  thirtie  leagues,  here  we
were  in  eleven  degrees,  North  latitude,  of  our  depth
twentie  foure  fathomes,  as  neere  as  I  could  ghesse.  Here
also  wee  had  sight  of  Poolo  Cecir,  bearing  South  by  East
Cape  Cecir,  seven  leagues  off,  and  the  Cape  Cecir  North  by  West  sixe
or  Cessir.  leagues  from  us.  From  sixe  untill  noone,  West  South-
west thirteene  leagues.  From  the  fourth  at  noone,  untill
the  fifth  at  noone,  first  South-west  by  West  twentie  two
leagues,  then  South-west  halfe  West  sixe  leagues,  and  then
South  South-west  halfe  South  one  and  twentie  leagues,  here

Poole  Candor,  wee  were  in  nine  degrees. The  body  of  Poolo  Candor,

60

MARTIN PRING  a.d.

1620,

bearing  South  South-west  about  seven  leagues  from  us.
Our  depths  from  the  fourth  at  noone,  were  from  eighteene
to  fourteene  fathomes :  from  sixteene  to  eleven,  wee  felt
a  Current  setting  our  ship  to  the  South-ward  beyond  our  Current.
computation,  this  same  night  at  Sun-setting,  we  found  the
variation  to  be  one  degree  North-westing.  This  evening,
at  sixe  of  the  clocke  we  had  the  South-east  end  of  Poolo
Candor,  North-west  foure  leagues  off,  the  wind  North-
east. From  six  this  evening,  untill  twelve,  the  next  South
South-west  thirtie  leagues,  latitude  seven  degrees  ten
minutes,  the  wind  at  North-east,  the  weather  very  faire.
From  the  sixt  untill  the  seventh  at  noone,  South  South-
west thirtie  six  leagues  &  a  half,  latitude  five  degrees  [I.  v.  655.]
thirtie  minutes,  the  wind  at  North-east,  the  weather  faire.
From  Sunday  the  seventh,  untill  Munday  the  eighth  at
noone  South  South-west  halfe  South  fortie  two  leagues,
latitude  three  degrees  thirtie  minutes,  the  wind  at  North-
east by  East  and  East  North-east,  the  weather  faire.
This  day  at  foure  in  the  afternoone,  we  had  the  North
point  of  Poolo  Timon,  South-west  by  South  about  seven  Poolo  Timon.
leagues  off,  we  having  runne  from  noone  seven  leagues
South  South-west.  From  Munday  to  Tuesday  at  noone,
South  South-west  seven  leagues,  South-east  sixteene
leagues,  and  South  seventeene  leagues,  the  latitude  one
degree  twentie  five  minutes ;  by  this  we  perceived  the
Current  had  carryed  us  sixteene  minutes  to  the  South-
wards of  our  computation.

From  this  twelfth  day  untill  foure  in  the  afternoone
South  sixe  leagues,  our  depth  twentie  foure  fathomes
streamy  ground :  here  we  saw  Poolo  Pengran  South-west
by  South  sixe  leagues,  and  the  head-land  of  Jore  West
South-west  eight  leagues  off.  From  hence  untill  foure
leagues  off  South  South-east  fourteene  leagues  off,
eighteene  fathomes,  the  same  ground:  from  hence  till
noone,  the  tenth,  South  twelve  degrees,  here  wee  had
seventeene  fathomes.  The  tenth  at  noone,  we  had  sight
of  Land.  The  Northermost  high  hummocke  bearing
West  from  us  about  sixe  leagues  off. This  day  at  noone

61

A.D.
l620.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Poolo  Pan.

Mannapin.

by  our  judgement,  we  were  ten  minutes  to  the  South-
ward of  the  Line.

Thursday,  the  eleventh  at  noone,  we  were  in  one
degree  sixteene  minutes  South  latitude,  our  course  from
the  tenth  at  noone,  South  halfe  West  twentie  two  leagues.
Poolo  Tayro.  Here  the  Souther  He  of  Poolo  Tayro,  was  due  East  from
us  three  leagues  off:  our  depth  fourteene  fathomes,  ozie.
This  Poolo  Tayro  consisteth  of  seven  or  eight  Hands  and
Rockes  mixt  together,  the  longest  tract  of  them  is  North
North-west,  and  South  South-east,  the  Northermost  He
is  farre  longer  and  larger  then  any  of  the  rest.  From
this  Norther-most  He  unto  Poolo  Pan,  North-west  halfe
West  nine  leagues,  the  depth  from  the  tenth  at  noone
unto  this  present,  was  from  seventeene  to  fourteene
fathomes  all  alongst  Poolo  Tayro :  when  the  Norther-
most He  of  Poolo  Tayro,  East  North-east  halfe  East  three
leagues  from  us,  then  the  three  hummocks  on  the  North
end  of  Banco  did  beare  South-east  ten  leagues  off;  And
the  high  Land  of  Mannapin  South  by  East  halfe  East.
From  this  day  noone  untill  mid-night,  South  South-west
halfe  South  tenne  leagues :  here  we  anchored  seventeene
fathomes  soft  ground,  where  we  rid  all  night.  The  next
morning,  we  had  the  Hill  of  Mannapin,  South  South-east
halfe  East,  the  low  Land  by  the  water  side  three  leagues
off,  the  next  head-land  to  the  North-wards,  which  riseth
in  three  hummockes,  when  you  are  to  the  North-wards
of  it  East  North-east  halfe  North.  About  six  leagues
off,  the  twelfth  at  noone  being  at  anchor  in  the  same
place,  by  our  observation  wee  were  in  one  degree  one
and  fiftie  minutes  neerest,  the  wind  at  West  North-west,
weather  faire.  This  afternoone  we  weighed  and  stood  in
towards  the  Coast  of  Sumatra,  and  at  mid-night  anchored
in  twelve  fathomes  of  the  River  of  Pallimbam,  finding
nine,  ten,  and  twelve  fathomes  ozie,  as  we  ranged  along.

Saturday,  the  thirteenth  in  the  morning,  we  weighed
againe  (the  wind  Northerly)  and  steered  along  by  the
Sumatra  shoare,  through  the  Streights  of  Banco,  untill
wee  came  betweene  the  first  and  second  point,  which  was

62

Pallimbam.

Sumatra.
Straights  of
Banco.

MARTIN PRING  ad.

1620.
at  eight  at  night,  where  we  anchored  in  sixteene  fathoms
about  two  leagues  off  the  Sumatra  shoare.  From  the  River
of  Pallimbam  unto  this  place,  we  had  nine,  ten,  eleven,
twelve  fathomes  within  two  halfe  leagues  off  the  Sumatra
side,  all  alongst  until  we  came  up  neer  the  second  point
(which  maketh  the  narrowest  of  the  Streights)  &  there
we  found  about  twentie  fathomes  water.  Sunday,  the
fourteenth,  we  set  saile  againe  and  borrowed  faire  aboord
the  Sumatra  side  in  eight,  seven  and  sixe  fathomes  untill
wee  had  Lucepara,  South-east  by  East,  and  then  we  haled
away  South  South-east,  South-east  by  South  and  South-
east finding  all  the  way  five  fathomes  ozie,  untill  wee  had
brought  Lucepara  North  by  West  about  seven  leagues
off,  and  then  the  water  began  to  deepen,  having  five
fathomes  &  a  halfe,  sixe  fathomes.  Munday,  the  fif-
teenth, wee  were  in  foure  degrees  fiftie  eight  minutes,
wee  being  distant  from  Lucepara,  thirtie  sixe  leagues
South  by  East  from  it.  From  hence  untill  foure  in  the
afternoone  South  South-west  foure  leagues.  Here  we
saw  a  shoald  above  the  water,  about  foure  miles  from  us,
West  South-west.  The  two  Hands  on  the  Coast  of
Sumatra,  bearing  upon  the  same  point  seven  leagues  off.
Also  Poolo  Keero  did  beare  East  South-east  halfe  South.
From  this  shoald  five  leagues  off,  and  the  high  land  of
Marrough  was  South-west  from  the  shoald  aforesaid.  Marrougk,
This  Evening,  the  wind  did  hearten  in  at  North-west :
by  which  meanes  we  got  in  neere  unto  Poolo  Peniang
after  mid-night,  and  there  came  to  anchor  untill  the
next  day.

[Chap.  VIII
63

A.D.
I6l8.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

[I.  v.  656.]  Chap.  VIII.

William  Hores  Discourse  of  his  Voyage  in  the
Dragon  and  Expedition,  from  Surat  to  Achen,
Teco  and  Bantam ;  and  of  the  surprising  the
Dragon,  Beare,  Expedition,  &c.  in  a  Letter
to  the  Companie.

To  the  Honorable  Governour  and  Right  Worship-
full  Committees  of  the  Companie  of  the
English trading  in  the East  India,  &c.

Honorable  and Right  Worshipfull  Sirs.

He  passages  of  your  businesse,  in  Captaine
Bonners  Voyage,  to  and  at  Surat  (till
then  and  long  after  very  hopefull)  you
have  by  many  advises  from  themselves,
and  severall  relations  from  others,  largely
and  particularly  understood.  Wherefore
I  shall  therein  be  purposely  silent,  intend-
ing according  to  my  poore  meanes  and  abilitie,  (the  one
being  lost  with  your  ships,  and  the  other  having  alwayes
beene  very  small)  to  acquaint  you  onely  with  such
accidents  as  untill  the  said  ships  taking  hapned.  Wherein
I  shall  humbly  beseech,  that  you  would  be  pleased  to
pardon  my  presumption,  in  offering  to  your  view  these
imperfect  and  unworthy  Lines,  not  doubting  but  others
better  able,  will  more  accurately  performe  (what  is  by
me  omitted  requisite  your  knowledge)  then  my  insuf-
ficiency (especially  at  this  time)  is  able  to  expresse,  and
poore  imployment  in  your  service  affoorded  not  to  be
made  partaker  of.
Dragon  The  Dragon  and  other  ships  of  that  Fleet  parting  with

parted from  the  Anne,  the  seventeenth  of  Februarie,  161 8.  the  one
Febr  "neere  anc^  twentieth  following,  anchored  before  the  Road  and
Surat  before  Towne  of  Dabull,  (it  being  formerly  ordered  by  con-
DabulL  sultation  to  touch  there)  and  not  long  after  came  a  Boat

64

'£53"

WILLIAM HORE  ad.

1618.

from  the  Governour-Deputie,  to  learne  what  and  whence
we were ; whereof  being certified, hee againe returned
ashoare : and  toward  night,  a  grave  man,  Captaine  of  a
Tuncke,  then  in  the  Road,  laden  and  bound  for  the  Red  A  Junke  °f
Sea,  with  his  sonne  came  aboord,  bringing  ten  Oxen,  ten ,,  '  a,  *
Goats,  three  hundred  Hennes,  with  great  store  of  Rice,  the  Red  Sea.
Fruits,  &c.  for  a  Present,  to  conferre  with  our  Captaine
about such things as should be propounded ; and  that
night they lodged aboord. The morrow after (they
remayning for pledges) Master Salbanke and Master
Fursland went  ashoare to the Deputie (the  Governour
himselfe  being  then  at Court,  eight  dayes  journey  dis-
tant). The Chiefes of the Towne, as they affirmed,
entertayned them very kindly, professing likewise that  Kind  enter-
they  were  much  contented  with  the  English  arrivall,  and  *%"?'?/ at
had  long  desired  to have  commerce  with  them,  and  to The Dabullers
that end  in  treated to  have  a Factorie  left,  or  the  ships  desire  Trade
to  ride,  till  notice  thereof  might  be  given  to  the  Gover-  with  us.
nour, because without his approbation they could not
conclude  of  any  thing. We  had  at  this  place  great  store  §tore  °f
of  very  good  refreshing,  indifferently  cheape,  large  Beeves  rtfr*shingat
for  sixe  Rialls  a  piece,  and  Fruits,  &c.  great  plentie  for  ~^  ^w^#
small  prices :  but  none  of  the  old  remnants  in  the  Lion
could  vend,  yet  upon  future  hopes,  they  promising  fairely  Promising  to

to  deale  hereafter for  large quantities of broad  Cloth,  buy  quantum

of  cloth  here-
Lead,  and  other  English  commodities,  Captaine  Bonner  after  &  Lead

deferred inforcing, advising thereof  to Surat, that the  but  we  could

next  yeeres  Fleet  might  doe  to  them  as  occasion  required,  not  put  off  any

The  sixe  and  twentieth,  the  aforesaid  Noghoda  landed,  °fthe  LtGns

to whom was given a faire in-laid Musket  with the

furniture  thereof: He also  earnestly  desired  an  English  The  Captaine

Bible, which being given, he said, he  would carefully  °ftheJuncke
.  o o  7  *  j desired  an

keepe  till  some  English  were  there  resident,  and  then  English  Bible,
with  their  helpe  would  have  it  translated  into  Arabeck  to  cause  to  bee
for his OWne use.  translated  into

It  hath  beene,  I  presume,  long  since  related  unto  your ra  ec  '
Worships,  how  that  during  your  Fleets  aboad  at  Swally,
two  Mallabar  Frigots  put  themselves  under  command  of
v  65  E

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1618.

your  ships,  affirming  themselves  subjects  to  a  Ragia  of
Echaree  neere  Goa,  and  pretending  to  be  sent  by  the
King  their  Master,  to  capitulate  with  the  English  about
establishing  a  Trade  with  him  for  Pepper,  his  Countrey,
by  their  report,  yeelding  yeerly  sufficient  to  lade  two
great  ships,  the  triall  whereof  being  by  consultation
assented  unto,  they  both  attended  the  Fleet  to  this
place  ;  and  here  one  of  them  desired  leave  to  depart
before  to  the  King  to  advize  of  our  comming,  that  his
Pepper  might  bee  in  more  readinesse  against  our  arrivall,
and  that  an  English  Merchant  might  accompanie  him
to  view  the  commodities,  and  cut  price  with  the  King,
for  whom  sufficient  Hostage  should  be  left  aboard  the
The  Hhtorie  Dragon.  Which  was  likewise  agreed  upon,  Master
°Peheefated  Wight>  Merchant,  and  Jno  Tucker  with  him  for  Linguist,
Bataquala.  were  dispeeded  with  him,  and  eight  of  the  Prime  men
in  both  Frigats  left  for  pledges.

The  Lion  being  formerly  disposed  of  for  the  Red  Sea,
it  was ordered that shee  should keepe the  other  ships
companie  to  Dabull, there  to  vent, if  possible,  part or
all  those  remnants  brought  from  the  Red  Sea,  for  readie
money, or to force them Trade, and the proceeding
thereof  to  bee  toward  lading  the  Expedition  with  Pepper
at  Battacala : but  the  unfitnesse  of  those  commodities  for
[I.  v.  657.] the  Dabulleers,  their  faire  promises  and  kind  usage,  pro-
cure  their quiet this  yeere,  for  which cause the  Lions
The  Lion  di- companie  being  judged  needlesse  any  further,  the  seven
sPee^fortne  ancj  twentieth,  shee  was  dispeeded  upon  her  voyage:  but
Sixe  hundred before her departure, sixe hundred  pounds  sterling  in-
pounds  tended to be transported to Surat, was detayned for

detained  for  speedier  lading  the  Expedition :  having  left  Letters  to
the  lading  of  be  sent  to  Surat :  toward  night  the  Dragen,  &c.  set  saile,
t-l0n  intending next for Batachala. At  Dabull enquirie was

made for  Tho. Sprage,  who  was  sent  from  Brampoore
into  Gulcandawe,  to  recover  a debt  due  by  a  Persian  in
that  place,  and at  Surat  it  was  reported,  that the said
heard  off  at Persian was forceably taken from him at this Towne,
Dabull.  and  Sprage  also  very  much  abused. But  they  denie  ever

66

WILLIAM HORE  ad.

1618.
to  have  seene  or  knowne  any  such  men,  but  tooke  notice
from us  to  apprehend  both  or either  if  they  should  at
any  time  happen  on  them.

The  fift  of  March,  we  anchored  at  Batachala,  shooting
three  Peeces  to  give  notice  of  our  arrivall :  and  the  next
day  about  noone,  Master  Wight  with  the  other  Mallabar
Frigat  came  aboord,  by  whom  we  understood,  that  at  the
Kings Towne, some three dayes journey thence, was
Pepper  to  the  quantitie  of  one  hundred  and  fiftie  Tunnes
or  upward,  but  the  price  was  held  hard  at  fiftie  Rialls  of  The  price  of
eight  the  Candee,  and  would  not  be  brought  lower  then  p*PPer  at
fortie  seven ; the  Pepper  worse  then  that  of  Tercoo,  and  rj^e  |^  the
in  all  likelihood  he  had  no  intent  for  to  sell  it,  but  to  Candee.
keepe  it  for  the  Portugalls,  with  whom  he  hath  continuall
Trading,  and  this  to  bee  but  a  device  of  those  Rowers  to
free  themselves  from  command  of  the  English. The  Can-  The  Candee
dee  at  this  place  contayneth  neere  five  hundred  pounds. tund*  **

Our  hopes  of  this  place  proving  no  better :  the  third
present,  we  set  saile  thence.  Running  along  this  Coast,
we  saw  and  met  with  many  Juncks  of  the  Mallabars,  and
not  finding  ought  in  them,  save  Coco-nuts  and  such  trash,
presently  dismissed  them,  one  excepted,  belonging  to  the  -f  Juncke  of

c  '  u-  i_ n  t>  j  %*x. the  Samorine

bamorme,  which  Captaine  Bonner  caused  to  returne  with  jetavnej

him,  the  sooner  to  procure  satisfaction  for  goods  and  debts,

left  there  by  Peter  Needham,  &c.  which  Juncke  certified

of  another  of  the  Samorines  laden  with  Pepper,  riding  at  At  Panana  in

Panana,  some  twelve  leagues  to  the  Southward  of  Calicut,  the  Samorines

and  bound  for  the  Red  Sea,  at  which  place  also  the  Samo-  c°miD  *™elve

rine  then  kept  his  Court,  where  arriving  the  tenth  dicto, l^™+{™™„
r  1  • 1 fe  1  •  -ii  out  at,  was  a

a  Messenger  was  sent  to  advertise  the  ships  arrivall,  to  junk  of  the

require  satisfaction  for  his  debts,  &c.  and  to  renew  a  Trade  Samorinsladen
with  us; all  which  motions  hee  seemed  willing  to  enter-  with  pepper,
taine,  promising  the  twelfth  following  to  meet  and  confer  r*/^  the
with  Captaine  Bonner  upon  the  shoare  neere  the  Sea-side, Satisfaction  of
and  after  an  end  made  of  the  old,  to  begin  a  new  businesse. our  debts
The  King  came  at  the  time  prefixed,  having  the  day  before  demanded  of
drawne  ashoare  and  unladen  his  Juncke,  she  riding  within  *TheSam?n
a  River,  at  the  mouth  whereof  was  a  great  Barre,  hindring  cunn'tngm

67

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1618.

our  seizing  her,  whom  Captaine  Bonner  (attended  with  a

Guard  of  fiftie  small  shot,  &c.)  met,  delivered  our  Kings

Majesties  Letter  with  a  Present  to  him ; and  after  long

debating,  it  was  concluded,  that  in  regard  we  knew  not

the  summe  due  by  goods  left  with  him  and  others,  not

having  any  notice  thereof ;  the  payment  should  be  deferred

till  information  from  Needham  might  be  procured,  and

Pepper  offered  w[x.h  ad  vice  of  his  Merchant  consented  to  sell  us  Pepper  :

rine  fraudu- at  Present>  seven  or  eight  hundred  Candees  or  more,  at

lently.  thirtie  Rialls  of  eight,  free  of  all  charges. The  Candee

The  Candee we  found  by  triall  thereof,  with  our  English  weights,  to

five  hundred COntayne  five  hundred  and  two  pounds  nete ; whereupon

w  io-Z°^°Un resolving, it was  concluded that the next day Master

Wight  and  my  selfe  should  view  the  quantitie  and  qualitie

of  the  commoditie,  which  wee  were  to  certifie  Captaine

Bonner  (then  aboord  the  small  Pinnasse  neere  the  shoare)

who  would  thereupon  have  landed  money,  &c.  and  gone

to  weighing.

TheSamorines But  tjlat  night  the  Kings  mind  changed,  and  we  landing
dissimulations  1  ° r j • 1  .  \r  r 1  j.-l

j ,.  early  next  morning,  were  refused  sight  thereof  unlesse  the

large  discourse.  J  11  1

King  gave  expresse  order  thereto,  to  whom  also  going,
hee  demanded  when  our  Captaine  would  land,  which  wee
certified  him  would  not  bee  till  wee  had  seene  the  Pepper,
and  could  judge  of  the  quantitie,  and  that  then  we  should
make  signe  for  his  comming.  He  then  sent  us  backe  with
one  of  his  Kinsmen  to  the  Merchants  house,  willing  us  there
to  stay  till  he  either  came  himselfe,  or  sent  order  for  dis-
patch :  but  there  we  attended  while  past  noone,  and  then
not  hearing  ought  returned  to  the  King,  who  by  his  Jura-
bassa  fell  to  discoursing  of  our  Countrey  manners,  had
Tumblers  playing  before  him,  and  with  such  trifling  de-
layes  put  off  the  time  till  neere  foure  after  noone,  when
we  entreated  him  to  give  us  an  answere,  that  we  might
returne  to  the  Captaine,  who  all  this  while  expected  our
comming.  Whereupon  taking  us  aside  into  a  roome  from
sight  of  his  people,  he  told  us,  that  he  had  many  matters  of
import  wherof  to  conferre  with  the  Captaine,  which  he
would  not  have  his  owne  people  to  take  notice  off,  and

68

WILLIAM HORE  a.d.

1618.

to  that  end  had  appointed  a  private  house  to  be  prepared
for  his  entertainment  not  far  from  his  Court,  and  therefore
willed  that  Master  Wight  should  tarrie  and  accompanie
him  presently  thither,  and  that  I  should  returne  to  the
Captaine  and  bring  him  to  the  place  assigned.  I  desired
to  see  it,  but  he  refused,  appointing  one  of  his  attendants
to  goe  with  me  to  the  Sea-side,  there  to  tarrie  Captaine
Bonners  landing,  and  conduct  him  to  the  foresaid  house.
But  by  the  way  considering,  how  indiscreet  it  would  seeme,
to  motion  his  going  to  a  place  I  had  neither  seene  nor
knew,  especially  in  such  a  treacherous  place,  I  told  my
Companion,  that  unlesse  I  might  first  see  where  the  King
intended  to  meet,  I  would  not  advise  the  Captaines  land-
ing ;  he  perceiving  me  resolute,  left  me,  and  directed  one
of  his  Slaves  to  shew  it  me ;  who  lead  me  neere  two
English  miles  up  into  the  Countrey,  and  at  length  brought
mee  to  a  little  house  (but  handsome  enough)  sited  in  the  U--  v-  658.]
midst  of  a  small  Wood,  about  which  was  a  faire  plaine  a
quarter  of  a  mile  every  way,  and  without  that,  round
environed  with  thicke  and  high  Woods :  which  place
ministring  justly  great  cause  of  suspition.  I  returned  to
the  King,  whom  I  met  upon  the  way  with  fortie  or  fiftie
attendants  comming  thither,  with  him  also  Master  Wight ;
to  whom  I  shewed  my  opinion  of  the  place,  and  that  it
now  grew  late,  and  therefore  nothing  to  be  done  that
night.

Comming  to  the  house,  the  King  sate  a  good  while
musing  without  speaking,  when  we  desired  leave  to  de-
part, it  being  now  neere  night  and  past  time  for  the
Captaines  landing,  and  that  if  he  pleased  we  should  againe
returne  on  the  morrow,  as  also  to  certifie  his  desire  of
private  conference  with  the  Captaine,  but  withall  intreated,
that  we  might  lose  no  more  dayes,  but  that  according  to
his  former  conclusion,  we  might  dispatch  our  businesse.
After  a  little  pause,  he  commanded  all  his  owne  people
out  of  the  roome,  leaving  none  but  Master  Wight,  Jno.
Tucker  Linguist,  and  my  selfe.  The  doores  being  shut,
hee  beckned  us,  and  then  readily  finding  his  Porteguise

69

A.D.
l6l8.

The  Samorine
denieth  to  per-
form with  us
according,  to
his  promise
under  for  tie
Rialls  the
Candee.

Bonner
threatned  the
Samorine,  to
take  his
Juncke,  and
pay  our  selves.

A  Pinnasse
ordered  to  be
sent  from
Ac  hen  from
Rob.  Bonner
unto  Teco  and
Bantam.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

tongue  (till  then  concealed)  told  us  resolutely,  that  he
could  not  performe  at  the  price  contracted  for  ;  the  Pepper
being  none  of  his  but  the  Merchants  of  the  Towne,  and
that  under  fortie  Rialls  of  eight  the  Candee  he  could  not
accomplish ;  and  if  they  or  any  other  would  sell  cheaper,
he  gave  licence  thereto,  but  if  none,  then  at  that  price
himselfe  would  furnish,  and  that  he  would  satisfie  his  debt
when  we  could  certifie  how  much  and  wherefore  it  was
due :  Also,  that  he  had  other  businesse  to  confer  with  the
Captaine,  which  he  said  should  not  be  mentioned,  unlesse
himselfe  were  present :  with  which  answere  we  returned
aboord  to  Captaine  Bonner,  who  sent  him  word  ashoare  by
one  of  his  servants  who  came  with  us,  that  the  English
should  largely  pay  themselves  upon  his  Juncks,  both  for
the  goods  he  detayned,  and  for  this  abuse  also.

The  fourteenth  of  March  we  departed  thence,  the  nine-
teenth anchored  at  Brimion ;  where  failing  of  refreshing
or  water,  the  people  by  the  Portugalls  instigation,  refusing
to  let  our  Caskes  be  filled  under  eightie  Rialls  of  eight :
the  twentieth,  altogether  that  night  set  saile,  and  that  night
doubled  Cape  Comorine.

The  two  and  twentieth  of  March,  a  consultation  was
held  aboord  the  Dragon,  wherein  was  propounded  and
concluded,  sending  the  Portugall  Pinnasse  for  Bantam :
and  by  the  way  to  touch  at  Teco,  to  learne  the  estate  of
that  Factorie  (if  any  were)  to  stay  there  foure  dayes,  and
at  Bantam  ten,  and  then  unlesse  by  Captaine  Jordaine
detayned  longer,  to  make  all  haste  possible  backe  to  Teco,
there  to  attend  the  Dragons  arrivall  from  Argin,  to  informe
the  Companies  affaires  at  Bantam.  In  her  was  appointed
William  Rickes  Master,  with  twentie  other,  and  my  un-
happy selfe  also,  that  Factorie  being  likeliest  to  want
attendance,  and  I  willing  to  my  best  service,  though  in
so  meane  a  condition,  as  it  hath  pleased  your  Worships
to  dispose  me.

The  foure  and  twentieth  dicto,  about  foure  after  noone
we  parted  with  the  ships,  they  standing  away  for  Achen,
and  we  for  Teco,  of  whose  proceedings  there  I  am  alto-

70

WILLIAM HORE  a.d.

1619.

gether  ignorant,  and  shall  therefore  presume  to  referre
your  Worships  to  Master  Nichols  his  advice  (if  as  I  much
feare  hath  hapned)  the  rest  from  the  Factors  there  have
with  your  ships  miscarried.

The  sixt  of  Aprill,  161 9.  wee  arrived  at  Teco,  and  hear-
ing nothing  at  this  place,  save  what  your  Worships  have
long  since  beene  acquainted  with,  having  watered  and  sent
advice  to  Captaine  Bonner,  of  our  arrivall,  &c.  The
eleventh  following,  we  set  saile  for  Bantam.  Having  had
divers  dayes  calme,  and  sometimes  the  wind  contrarie :
the  three  and  twentieth  dicto,  wee  anchored  twixt  the  salt
Hils  in  the  Streights  of  Sunda :  and  the  seven  and  twen-
tieth toward  night,  a  small  gale  blowing,  we  weighed  and
intended  to  have  put  into  Bantam  Road  before  day,  but
the  usuall  calme  forced  our  anchoring  some  foure  miles
short  of  Poolo-Paniang  :  and  in  the  morning,  readie  to  set
saile,  we  descried  ten  ships  and  foure  Juncks,  riding  under  Tke  Pinnasse
the  foresaid  Hand,  who  with  that  breath  weighed  and  stood  ar  v{.' on^

j  o  OUT  Snips  71C61"

toward  us,  we  knew  not  what  to  conceive  of  them,  little  Bantam,  the

expecting  to  have  found  so  many  English,  especially  those 23.  J  prill.

ships  in  that  place ; the  better  to  make  them,  we  hoysed

out  our  Praw  and  in  her  three  men,  to  row  untill  they

could  make  their  Colours ; and  if  Dutch,  to  repaire  backe

to  us ; if  English,  to  goe  aboord  them,  the  latter  whereof

they  did. Ere  long  the  Admirall  was  thwart  of  us,  whom

Master  Rickes  saluted  with  three  Peeces,  he  answered  with

one,  and  sending  his  Skiffe  aboord,  willed  our  Master  to

weigh  and  stand  after  him  to  Morrogh,  and  me  to  come

aboord  his  ship,  and  bring  such  Letters  as  I  had  with  me,

which I presently did, where I have  related all those

miserable and lamentable accidents, which, I presume,

your  Worships  long  since  understood  by  the  James,  safely

arrived  home.

The  nine  and  twentieth  Dicto,  the  Fleet  anchored  Mor-
rogh, and  the  next  day  Sir  Thomas  Dale,  Captaine  Pring,
&c.  came  aboord  our  Pinnasse,  and  dispeeded  her  for  Ban-
tam, if  possible  to  get  some  provision  for  theshippes,as  also
to  learne  if  any  Flemmish  shippes  were  at  Jacatra  or  there-

71

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1619.

abouts  :  but  speeding  of  neither,  we  returned  to  the  Fleete
the  second  of  May.  The  ten  ships  then  at  Morrogh,  were
the  Moone,  Clove,  Globe,  Pepper-corne,  the  James  Royall,
Capt.  J  ordain  Gift,  Unicorne,  Advice,  Rose  and  Bee :  Captaine  Jour-
tn  the  Samson  jaine  being  some  foureteene  dayes  before  our  comming
went  for  '  gone  with  the  Samson  and  Hound,  for  Jambee,  Patania,
Jambe,  Pata.  Syam,  and  other  places,  besides  the  foure  Juncks,  three
Syam,  to  visit  whereof  were  from  China,  the  other  from  Patania,  and  our
those  Factories  pinnasse  newly  also  by  Sir  Thomas  Dale  ordered  for  to

about  the  Q.  of  j  !• -m •  *

AprilL  attend  hls  Fleete'

The first of May, the China Juncks began to be

[I.  v.  659.]  Romidged,  and  their  goods  taken  into  your  ships,  for  debts

Foure  China  owing  by  the  Chineses  to  your  Worships. After  which,

0 m  h't  7h  '  cutting  downe  their  masts,  yards  and  sayles,  to  prevent

goods  laden  in  their  lading  the  Pepper  at  Bantam,  left  them  there  ryding  :

to  the  James,  the  quantitie  and  qualitie  of  those  goods  exceedes  my

13c  the  1.  knowledge  to  advize,  I  being  both  a  stranger,  and  by  your

May  1 619.  Worships order not to meddle in businesse of that

nature.

OwenBodman  The  foure  and  twentieth  of  May,  Owen  Bodman  was

was  executed  executed  at  the  yard  arme  in  the  Moone.  This  day  the
the  24..  May pjeete  gtte(j  to  g^^  anj  ^  Rose  jn  stea(j  Qf  tjle  pjn_

nasse,  was  intended  for  Teco  and  Achen,  to  advize  Cap-
taine Bonner  of  proceedings  there  with  a  Cargazon  of
Rice,  Steele,  &c.  Consined  to  Master  Fursland  at  Achen ;
In  which  ship  also  it  pleased  Sir  Thomas  to  appoint  my
returne. One  of  the  foresaid  Juncks  being  of  Patania,
and  most  of  her  lading  Rice,  belonging  to  the  Flemmings  :
so  much  thereof  as  was  thought  fitting,  each  ships  provi-
Our  ships  set sion  was  taken  out,  and  she  this  day  dismissed. The  five
saikout  of  the  ancj  twentieth  Dicto  the  Fleete  set  sayle,  Sir  Thomas  Dale
Sunda  fazt Wlt^  ^e  Moone,  Clove,  Globe,  Pepper-corne,  Advice  and
of  May.  Pinnasse,  standing  for  Ingano,  to  recover  (if  possible)  part

A  Junke  of of  the  Monies  lost,  in  the  Sunne,  and  to  releeve  those  men

Rice  belonging  left  there,  if  any  were  alive  ; and  Captaine  Pring  with  the

to  the  Dutch.  °

Our  Fleet,  Sir  Tho.  Dale  being  Admirall,  with  all  the  rest  of  our  ships  did  set  saile  out  of  the
Sir 'eights  of  Sunda,  25.  May,  1619.  Some  went  to  Ingano  to  weigh  the  money  and  ordnance
left  in  the  Sunne.

72

WILLIAM HORE

James  Royall,  Gift,  Unicorne  and  Bee  for  the  Coast :  in-
tending there  all  to  meete,  and  to  come  with  their  joynt
strength  to  Priaman,  there  to  meete  with  the  ships  from
England,  and  also  Captaine  Bonners,  and  altogether  to  goe
to  Bantam.

The  fifteenth  of  June  we  arrived  at  Teco,  where  we
made  little  stay,  but  having  watered,  &c.  and  left  letters
for  Captaine  Bonner,  of  the  past  proceedings  at  Bantam,
and  future  purposes  for  this  place,  departed  thence  the
nineteenth  Dicto  from  Achen,  going  betwixt  the  Mayne
of  Sumatra  and  the  Shoalds,  which  from  Teco  lye  foure
degrees  or  more  of  North  latitude,  and  stopping  every
night :  The  ninth  of  July,  about  sixe  in  the  evening,  a
storme  began  at  North-west  (we  being  then  anchored
some  fifteene  leagues  to  the  Northward  of  Barrous)  which
increased  in  great  extremitie  till  about  mid-night  with
very  fearefull  Thunder,  Lightning,  and  terrible  Raine,  we
had  but  one  anchor  aground,  having  the  Shoalds  and  the
Mayne  on  every  side  of  us  within  two  leagues.  In  this
extremitie,  not  knowing  what  course  to  take,  but  onely
to  attend  Gods  mercy  in  our  deliverance,  our  Cable  brake,
and  we  bare  roome  backe  over  these  Shoalds  in  an  exceed-
ing darke  night,  with  which  formerly  we  durst  scarse  deale
at  noone-day ;  yet  the  never  forsaking  mercy  of  the  Al-
mightie  preserved  us  from  all  those  dangers,  and  with  day-
light also  sent  us  faire  weather,  when  necessitie  enforced
determination  to  beare  backe  againe  for  Teco  :  it  is  said
we  were  the  first  ship  that  ever  went  this  way,  and  I  thinke
no  man  that  dare  depend  upon  his  skill,  to  adventure
without  sight  of  land,  will  ever  saile  that  way  againe.

The  one  and  twentieth  dicto,  we  had  another  great
storm,  which  began  about  two  after  noone,  with  very
much  Wind,  Thunder  and  Raine,  which  lasted  about  foure
houres,  split  our  maine  saile,  and  blue  away  our  sprit-
saile  ;  Rich.  Crane,  one  of  our  companie,  being  then  upon
the  yard  arme,  the  braces,  lifts,  and  all  the  rigging  of  the
sprit-saile  yard  at  once  broke,  and  hee  with  his  head  downe-
wards  hung  (at  every  set  of  the  ship  covered  with  the  Sea)

73

A.D.
1619.

OurFleet  pur-
posed to
returne  again
to  Bantam  by
the  last  of
Sept.

The  Pinnasse
sent  backe
againe  from
Bantam  to
Teco,

Priaman  and
Achen.

The  Pinnasse
passage  from
Teco  to  A  chin.

Rich.  Crane y

miraculously

saved.

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1619.

above  a  glasse  space,  no  man  being  able  by  any  meanes

to succour  him, till  at  last, faintnes  &  wearines made

him  let  goe,  and  as  he  drove  by  the  ships  side  tooke  hold

of  a  Rope,  by  which  meanes,  next  to  the  Almighties  mercy,

his  life  was  beyond  expectation  miraculously  preserved ;

PrkeHawkins  another,  named  Price  Hawks,  standing  in  the  waste,  was

s,.rif  en  mf by  a  flash  of  Lightning  strooke  dumbe  and  lame  over  all

tartly  his  body,  lying  in  most  lamentable  plight  for  many  dayes,

recovered. yet,  God  be  thanked,  his  speech  is  a  little  returned,  but  a

kind  of  dead  numbnesse  in  both  his  legs  and  armes,  maketh

him still  continue  a  very  miserable  man, distressed  as

aforesaid.

The  Pmnasse The  three  and  twentieth  dicto,  we  returned  to  Teco,

—1 !  +?v and  by  reason  of  our  wants,  both  of  Cordage,  Sailes,  and
againetoTeco.  J  e .  , >  &  \  > .

Cjround-tacke,  or  which  there  was  no  more  in  the  ship
then  was  at  that  time  in  use,  no  more  then  one  Hogshead
of  flesh,  no  bread  but  Rice  and  that  not  sweet,  no  other
drinke  for  sicke  men,  &c.  but  water ;  but  nineteene  men
in  the  ship,  whereof  five  very  sicke,  and  divers  others
lame :  It  was  resolved  through  importunitie  of  the  com-
panie  thereto,  to  remayne  there  and  attend  reliefe  from
the  Dragon,  or  other  English ;  but  in  the  interim,  a
rumour  of  Flemmish  ships  comming  from  Bantam,  forced
us  change  resolution :  and  the  sixt  dicto,  with  our  weake
crew  put  to  Sea,  in  hope  either  to  meet  the  ships  from
Achen,  or  to  get  our  intended  parke,  and  by  that  meanes
to  ease  our  selves  of  some  of  those  miseries.  Having  had
since  our  departure  from  Teco  a  very  faire  gale  :  The  tenth
The  Dragon  dicto,  to  our  great  comforts  we  met  the  Dragon  and  Ex-
^  E*£dl*m  pedition,  betwixt  the  Hands  Nimtam  and  Batta :  so  soone
as  we  came  neere,  Captaine  Bonner  sent  his  Skiffe  aboord,
to  whom  I  went  and  delivered  his  Letters  from  Master
Spalding,  Master  Ball,  &c.  Sir  Tho.  Dale  by  reason  of
his  sicknesse  having  also  referred  him  to  them  for  advise.
The  next  morning  at  a  Consultation  it  was  concluded,  that
the  Rose  should  returne  backe  to  Teco,  in  regard  of  her
unfitnesse  for  any  Voyage,  as  also  for  that  the  goods  in  her
would  vend  so  well  here,  or  better  then  at  Achen,  the  In-

74

WILLIAM HORE  ad.

1619.

voice  whereof  was  inclosed  in  a  Letter,  sealed  and  directed
to  Master  Rich.  Fursland,  which  I  then  likewise  delivered  :
By  Captaine  Bonner  I  understood  of  two  moneths  Trade  l^*™0"***'
granted  at  Teco,  of  above  one  thousand  and  three  hundred  Jtaayened  at
Bahars  of  Pepper,  then  in  the  Dragon,  and  of  more  then TeC0m
one  thousand  and  five  hundred  remayning  at  Achen  un-  [I.  v.  660.]
bought,  for  lacke  of  meanes. To  the  end  that  so  little 1  $00.  Bahars
as  might  be  of  our  short  time  should  be  lost ;  the  fifteenth  r™%™ng  at
in  the  night,  Captaine  Bonner  sent  off  his  barge  with  unbOUghtyfor
Master  Nichols  and  my  selfe,  to  goe  ashoare,  and  acquaint  lack  of  meanes.
the  King,  &c.  with  our  licence  for  Trade ; as  also  to  take
an  house,  and  so  much  as  might  be,  to  set  each  thing  in  a
forwardnesse. The  King  seemed  very  willing ; appoint-
ing, as  we  desired,  a  very  convenient  house  close  by  the
sea  side,  next  to  the  Custome-house,  and  promised  so
soone  as  he  saw  the  Kings  Letter,  musters  of  our  goods,
and  had  concluded  of  the  price ;  order  should  be  given  for
present  weighing.

The nineteenth, Master Nichols went aboord the
Dragon,  riding  two  leagues  without  the  Road,  and  brought
the  Kings  Letter  ashoare  with  him,  which  seene  and  read,
Proclamation  thereof  was  presently  sent  into  the  Coun-
trey, and  many  in the  Towne  had  good quantities  of
Pepper,  which  they  would  not  sell  till  the  King  had  first  Pepper  bought
begunne. The  one  and  twentieth,  the  Dragon  &c.  came  atTec0-
into  the  Road,  and  musters  of  goods  landed,  the  greatest
part  whereof  was  Cainkeenes,  blue  Selas ; and  the  price The  price  of
was  concluded,  fiftie  Selas,  thirtie  five  Cainkeenes,  sixteene  PePPer>anj°f
blue  Byronnes,  red  Selas  thirtie  two,  and  of  Bastaes  accord-
ing to  the  goodnesse,  eight,  ten,  and  twelve  Pieces  for  a
Bahar,  which  valued  according  to  the  rates  worth  in  readie
money,  twentie  Rials  the  Bahar ; and  it  was  agreed,  that
the  next  morning  the  King  should  beginne  to  weigh,  the
Custome  of  goods  not  to  be  payed  in  kind ; but  to  land
whatsoever  wee  would,  and  to  pay  fourteene  the  hundred  Fourteene  per
Custome,  in  Rials  of  eight :  for  all  the  Pepper  should  be  c"™5tm
payed,  either  with  goods,  or  money ; a  very  hard  condi-
tion and  wondrous  unadvisedly  consented  to,  by  those

75

A.D.
1619.

Little  hope

ever  to  have  the

great  Custom

abated.

Fire  and  trea-

cherie  usuallin

Teco.

Alteration  of
the  price  of
Pepper.

Bonner  is  very
suspicious  of
theHollanderSy
and  disposed
himself e  for  a
Man  of
Warre.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

formerly  there  employed ;  but  now  it  is  continued,  and
little  hope  to  get  it  ever  reclaymed.  Some  goods  were
this  day  landed,  being  first  opened  above,  and  sent  ashoare
in  bags,  to  prevent  wetting ;  and  small  quantities  at  once,
for  feare  of  fire  and  treacherie,  both  which  are  very  usuall
here  (but  especially  the  latter)  more  then  in  any  part  of
India.

The  two  and  twentieth  dicto,  the  King  &c.  returned  to
the  Bailey,  refusing  their  former  Contract,  and  would  not
himselfe  sell  under  fortie  Cainkeenes,  and  sixtie  blue  Selas
the  Bahar ;  but  gave  free  leave  to  any  other  that  would ;
which  was  nothing :  for  till  he  began,  none  would  sell  a
Catee,  so  that  necessitie  inforced  our  assenting.  The  sixe
and  twentieth  our  trade  began,  and  this  day  weighed  the
first  Pepper,  the  contents  whereof,  and  of  the  succeeding
dayes,  I  forbeare  to  recite,  having  collected  it  together  in
a  note  herewith  unto  your  Worships.  Master  Nichols
&c.  being  aboord  the  Dragon,  this  day  Captaine  Bonner
discoursing  of  the  businesse  past  at  Bantam,  and  his  owne
at  present  in  the  Dragon,  fearing  lest  at  the  Fleets  arrivall,
the  Pepper  in  her  should  be  taken  out,  and  sent  home  upon
some  other  ship  that  had  beene  long  in  the  Countrey,  as
also  dreading  the  Flemmings  arrivall  (of  whom  hee  was
alwayes  wondrous  suspicious)  affirmed,  he  had  no  intent
to  lade  more  Pepper  in  the  Dragon,  till  he  knew  certainly
how  he  should  be  disposed  of ;  but  would  take  it  into  the
Expedition,  whereto  he  said  shee  should  be  presently  fitted,
and  the  Dragon  kept  cleare  and  prettie  for  a  Man  of
Warre,  in  case  the  Flemmings  should  come :  his  reason
was,  that  he  could  not  at  any  time  after  take  it  into  his
ship,  of  which  if  he  could  dispose,  hee  could  likewise  by
the  same  power  command  the  Expedition,  and  goods
therein :  in  which  determination  he  seemed  to  be  firme ;
and  gave  order  for  the  Expeditions  fitting  roomes.  But
the  next  day  after,  arrived  Henry  Bate  Merchant,  from
the  ship  Beare ;  who  the  day  before  anchored  at  Priaman  ;
and  the  eight  and  twentieth  of  August  aforesaid,  arrived
at  Tecoo  : at  instant  of  whose  comming,  but  upon  what

76

WILLIAM HORE  ad.

1619.

presumption  or  reports  I  cannot  certainly  determine,  Cap-
taine  Bonner  changed  resolution,  and  proceeds  to  lade  the uPon  the
Dragon, filling each place with lumber, romaging her  ^™^{^
bread-roomes,  and  so  cloying  her  deckes,  as  was  not  pos-  aitere'd kis
sible  to  use  her  Peeces  in  greatest  extremitie ; by  which  resolution  of
unhappie  accident,  Wee  your  poore  Servants  have  with  fitting  his  ship
losse  of  lives,  or  goods,  or  both,  indured  excesse  of  most  ^^an  °{
base,  and  past  compare,  contemptible  usage,  from  an  in-  lade  h'er  int0
gratefull  and  uncivill  Nation,  with  many  other  never  to  England.
be  satisfied  or  forgotten  injuries.  The  Dragon

The  seven  and  twentieth,  all  night  being  very  tern-  ^^e(L,
pestuous,  fearefull  thunder  and  lightning,  and  abundance  mc'wmm
of  raine,  we  had  under  our  house,  in  a  roome  for  that
purpose,  some  small  store  of  Steele  Bettle  boxes,  and  such
like ;  where  also  lay  two  men,  appointed  by  Capt.  Bonner
to watch the house, the boat being left behind them
ashoare. That  night  John  Cocket  (alias  Tucker)  a  youth,
who  had  long  lived  at  Surat,  and  he  also  lodged  there :
about  midnight  came  theeves  to  open  the  doore,  which  one  Discource  of
within  perceiving,  with  crying  out  scarred  them  away ; ,f* m  Teco\
two  houres  after,  they  returned  ;  and  one  of  them  putting  ^^/^  0f
in  his  arme,  was  strucke  at  with  a  sword,  but  missed,  fled  Aug.
away  the  second  time ; and  they  within  made  the  doore
so  fast  as  they  could  (which  was  but  hurdles.) About
foure  in  the  morning,  comming  againe,  &  opening  the
doore,  one  went  in,  taking  some  Brasse  Bettle  boxes,  our
men being all fast asleepe ; and in  returning, rubbed
against  Tuckers  legs  who  starting  up,  caught  hold  of  him,
and  cried,  A  theefe,  I  have  him ;  which  scarce  pronounced,
with  a  pitifull  accent,  cried  out  againe,  Oh,  hee  is  gone, John  Tucker
and hath stabd mee with his Creeze : which was so  slalne  the
sodainely  done,  as  those  who  lay  by  him  had  not  time  to  ^entkth  of
rescue  him. There  was  at  that  time  aloft  the  Surgeon  of  Aug.
the  Dragon  &c.  who  presently  ran  downe  with  a  light,  but
too  late ; the  villaine  having  with  a  knife  given  him  two
wounds,  one  whereof  to  the  heart,  who  without  speaking
more  words  then,  Lord  have  mercie  upon  me,  presently
died.

77

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1619.

[I.  v.  661.]  Wee  in  vaine  searched  each  bush  and  place  about  our
house,  and  I  went  to  call  the  Cowals  (or  Waiters)  who
every  night  till  this,  kept  watch  in  a  Bailey  within  twenty
paces  of  our  house :  missing  whom,  I  went  instantly  to
the  Pongolo  Cowallas  house,  and  calling  him,  asked  him
where  was  the  Watch ;  he  said,  at  the  Bailey ;  which  I
denying,  he  affirmed  to  have  charged  one  that  night.
Then  I  told  him  we  had  a  man  slaine,  and  willed  him  to
search  narrowly,  if  any  suspicious  person  could  be  appre-
hended, he  forthwith  went  and  acquainted  the  King  there-
with, who  presently  came  downe  with  the  Chiefe  there-
abouts, saw  the  dead  bodie,  and  affirmed,  he  would  doe
what  might  be,  to  find  the  murtherer :  Master  Nichols
charged  the  Cowals  to  bee  actors,  or  authors  hereof,  and
required  to  have  them  all  sent  for,  and  one  after  another
to  touch  the  Corps,  whereto  the  King  gave  order :  and
when  each  one  had  taken  him  by  the  hand,  and  no  cause
to  suspect  any,  appeared ;  Master  Nichols  demanded  if
there  were  no  more  Cowals ;  it  was  answered,  no  more
save  one,  who  was  sicke,  and  kept  his  bed ;  him  the  King
commanded  to  be  sent  for,  whose  very  lookes  and  demean-
our condemned  him  in  the  opinion  of  all,  to  bee  the
villaine  sought  for,  the  King  commanded  to  take  the  dead
man  by  the  hand,  which  with  extreme  quaking,  and  many
distracted  gestures  and  answeres  he  did,  but  would  not
hold  it  any  time.  Master  Nichols  urged  this  to  be  the
A  story  of  trial  man,  and  required  Justice.  The  King  caused  him  to  be
of  a  Male-  bound,  and  professed  in  his  conscience  that  was  the  man
factor  in  a who  j^y  him,  but  that  hee  must  be  tried  by  their  Law

mnner  1 r  11  1

also,  whereto  the  fellow  assented.

And  while  preparation  was  made  thereto,  wee  sent  word
to  Captaine  Bonner,  who  came  ashoare  to  see  the  event
hereof :  presently  after  whose  comming,  a  fire  was  made,
and  an  iron  pan  with  a  gallon  of  oyle  set  thereon ;  which
leasurely  boyled  till  it  came  to  such  a  degree  of  heat,  that
a  greene  leafe  but  dipped  therein  was  sodden  and  shivered.
The  prisoner  then  called,  and  persisting  in  deniall  of  the
fact,  was  in  testimonie  of  his  innocencie,  to  take  out  of  the

78

strange  maner.

WILLIAM HORE  ad.

1619.

said  oyle  a  small  ball  of  brasse,  little  bigger  then  a  Musket
shot,  with  his  naked  hand;  and  that  if  any  burning  or
scalding  appeared  thereon,  hee  was  contented  to  die :
which  hee  addressed  himselfe  to  performe ;  stripping  up
his  sleeve  above  the  elbow,  and  taking  a  kind  of  protesta-
tion, desiring  that  as  he  was  cleare  thereof,  so  he  might
prosper  in  this  act ;  dipped  his  hand  to  the  wrist  in  the  burn-
ing oyle,  tooke  out  the  ball,  held  it  fast,  and  crying,  Olla
Basar,  or,  great  is  the  Lord,  tost  it  up,  caught  it  againe,
and  then  cast  it  on  the  ground ;  shewing  his  hand  unto  all
that  would,  which  had  no  more  signe  of  hurt,  then  if  hee
had  experimented  the  same  in  cold  water.  The  Devill,  it
seemes,  being  loth  at  that  time  to  lose  his  credit.  The
fellow  was  instantly  released,  and  within  an  houre  after
returned  in  his  holiday  apparell,  and  none  so  lustie  as  hee,
though  but  a  little  before  he  had  beene  sicke,  and  so  weake,
as  he  was  faine  to  be  brought  upon  mens  shoulders  to  his
triall :  and  this  was  all  the  justice  we  could  have,  for  our
murdered  man ;  though  in  all  likelihood,  and  their  judge-
ments also,  he  was  the  actor.

This  businesse  ended,  the  King  propounded  to  Captaine
Bonner,  that  our  time  of  Trade  began  now  to  be  short,
and  that  there  was  great  store  of  Pepper  yet  to  be  had,
which  might  speedily  be  bought  for  readie  money :  the
people  being  unwilling  to  deale  for  any  more  Cloth,  in
regard  the  Junkes  from  Argin  were  daily  expected  with
great  store  from  the  King,  who  would  force  their  taking
thereof ;  and  that  having  sold  before  for  readie  money,
they  would  make  the  better  shift :  which  he  said  was  alike
to  us,  our  commodities  being  as  vendible  in  other  places ;
and  the  new  ship  (the  Beare)  having  brought  good  store  of
mony,  which  might  be  wel  imployed :  whereto  consent
being  given,  the  price  was  cut,  twentie  two  Rials  the  Bahar,  Twenty  two
and  the  assemblie  dismissed.  That  night  good  store  of  ^ffjpffa^r
Pepper  was  brought  downe  to  be  weighed  the  next  day,  Tecoo.
many  of  the  Chiefes  affirming,  that  there  was  in  and  about
Tecoo,  above  a  thousand  Bahars  Pepper,  which  so  fast  as
could  be  weighed,  would  be  brought  in. The  King  gave

79

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1619.

The  Dragon  us  leave,  that  if  in  the  night  we  saw  any  about  the  house,

went  out  of  we  should  detaine  them  prisoners  till  the  next  day  ; and

into°deeter  m  case  ^ey  re^used  to  come  unto  us,  being  called,  we

water. A  should  shoot  them,  and  the  perill  to  lie  upon  their  owne

Dhers  boats  heads. The  nine  and  twentieth  dicto,  Captaine  Bonner

laden  with  perceiving  the  Dragon  to  bee  alreadie  deepe,  and  hoping

Pepper  aboord  ere  j haye  her  fou  kdi weighed  out  of  the  Road,

the  Dragon.  ^ s? ^ . .

Our  men  by  the  Hand,  and  anchored  without,  attending  a  wind  to

wearied  about  goe  to  the  Southward  of  those  Hands,  there  to  ride,  and

the  Pepper.  take  the  rest  of  her  lading.

SixHolIanders  The  first  Qf  October,  about  foure  in  the  morning,  the

comming  into  -r^ • 1 1 1 • 1 •  1 1 -n

the  Road  were  Dragon  weighed,  and  neere  eight,  with  the  Breeze  set

adjudged  saile,  and  came  into  the  foresaid  Road ; not  long  after,

English  ships  all  the  boats  and  Skiffes  of  the  Dragon,  Expedition,  and

shewing  no  Rose,  came  ashoare  to  fetch  Pepper,  who  laded  so  fast  as

Found  by  their  ^ey  could ;  but  before  all  were  laden,  sixe  Saile  were  des-

Huls  to  be  cried,  standing  with  a  fresh  gale  at  South,  toward  the  Road

Holland  ships,  of  our  ships. The  Boats  forthwith  put  off,  and  had  very

Set  upon  the  much  labour  to  row  to  windward,  the  men  being  much

v'd^ndh°~  wear^ed  before,  with  mooring  the  ships,  and  carrying  the

men  wearied  bags  of  Pepper :  Captaine  Bonner  judged  them  to  be  Sir

before.  Thomas  Dales  Fleet,  who  had  determined  to  arrive  there,

The  Admirall  by  the  fine  of  September ; and  therefore,  till  they  came

ailj  -  tC$n  j  -  j  within  lesse  then  a  league,  that  their  Hulls  shewed  who

Admirall  laid  . ^ 1 1 • V "1 1

her  aboord  and  they  were>  no  Colours  being  abroad,  not  suspecting  them  :

all  the  other  and  then  before  any  provision  could  be  made  for  defence,

foure  ships  dis-  the  Admirall  and  Vice-Admirall  layed  the  Dragon  aboord,

charged  at  her  ajj  tke  0ther  as  they  went,  by  shooting  so  many  Peeces  as

by;  she  being  cou^  be  brought  to  beare  upon  her,  who  had  that  day

altogether  pes-  taken  in  above  an  hundred  Bahars  of  Pepper,  had  all  her

tered,  no  Peece  men  even  spent  with  labour,  and  was  at  that  time  so  cloyed

freebutone,\3  as  was  never  poore,  all  emptie  and  full  of  caske,  bread,  and

could  come  by  .  1 .  . ,1 1 1 1 j 11  1. 1

no  powder  or  other  provisions  then  upon  her  deckes,  and  all  her  lower

shot.  Gunnes  so  stowed  up  with  lumber,  as  that  in  so  little  time,

£1.  v.  662.]  as  was  then  to  provide,  not  more  then  one  could  be  cleered,

and  that  but  once  discharged ; powder,  and  shot  in  that

extremitie  not  to  bee  come  by. With  those  Ordnance

which  were  cleere, the  Fight  was  maintained  very  hot

80

WILLIAM HORE  a.d.

1619.

about  three  glasse,  or  more ;  till  Captaine  Bonner  (his
worthie  resolution  approving  his  zeale  to  doe  your  Wor-
shippes  his  uttermost  service)  received  a  mortall  wound,
with  a  shot  in  the  right  side,  which  remained  in  his  bodie,
who  being  carried  downe,  the  ship  fired,  in  foure  or  five
severall  places  most  pitifully  torne,  and  many  men  slaine,
shee  became  a  Prey,  rather  then  a  Prize  unto  them.

The  other  foure  Dutch  ships  stood  in  to  the  Beare,  Ex-
pedition, and  Rose ; who  seeing,  as  is  said,  the  Dragons
disaster,  yeelded  also  the  two  first  without  shooting  a  shot. Thf  three
Worthie  Sirs,  I  was  not  at  present  an  actor  at  this  sur-  \a{[n  without
prise,  though  I  shall  have  alwayes  cause  to  bewayle  what  shooting  one
I  then  suffered ; and  therefore  must  beseech  your  favour-  Peece.
able  acceptance  of  this  small  recitall,  till  others  therein
employed, of farre better abilitie then my selfe, shall
largely  acquaint you  with every  circumstance : neither
dare  I  persist  in  this  subject,  lest  just  passion,  caused  by
remembrance  of  so  late  felt,  and  (unlesse  by  your  Wor-
ships clemencie  relieved)  never  to  bee  recovered  miserie,
should  transport  mee  beyond  those  limits,  wherein  I  must oUanders

most  sterne

now  willingly  containe  my  selfe. But  this  much  I  may  \nsuiters  anj
truely  professe,  if  (as  is  a  common  Maxim)  contraries  hold  incomparable
the  same  reason  of  proportion  in  change  of  qualitie,  they  cruell enemies.
may  be  expected  to  be  most  kind  friends  : for  alreadie,  we  7  , Infidels

* * r j ^  • 1^  11  1  had  not  beene

have  round  them  most  sterne  insulters,  and  beyond  com-  mre  mercifun

pare  cruell  enemies : and  had  not  more  true  compassion,  then  the  Hol-

pitie, and reliefe, beene extended to us from Infidell  landers,  three

Moores,  then  from  these  Dutch  Christians,  three  hundred  hunjr^men

of  your  Servants  (unhappie  men)  a  great  number  of  whom,  ^^//^_*

would  not,  a  few  houres  before,  have  changed  fortunes  ders  put  our

even  with  the  chiefest  and  unworthiest  of  that  Crew,  had  men  in  Irons,

left  their  dead  Carcases  a  prey  to  beasts  and  fowles,  and  m  the}r  sh}Ps

subjected  their  living  bodies  to  miserable  servitude,  if  a  *f  nlSlttn

« •  *3  open  ay  re

greater  chastisement  for  our  sinnes  had  not  beene  inflicted.  \n  a  mos/

Being  possessed  of  our  ships,  they  straight  way  sent  the  raynie  and

English  aboord  theirs,  and  for  refreshing  after  so  great  tempestuous

labour,  as  they  had  that  day  sustayned,  set  them  in  Irons  nigh* nmher

\  i  .  1 y • 1 y r • 1 •  1 1 respecttngsicke

upon  the  gratings,  in  such  a  night  of  wind,  raine,  thunder  nor  maymed.
v  81  F

A.D.

1619.

The  next
morning
turned  them
ashoare  with
ragges,
amongst  were
fortie  sixe  of
the  Stars  men,
even  till  now
kept  Prisoners.

Rob.  Bonner
was  sent
ashoare,  offe?*-
ing  to  carrie
away  the  bed
he  lay  upon,
which  for
triple  the  value
was  redeemed.

His  death  with
commendation,
9.  October.

God  mooved
the  Heathen  to
favour  our
people.

The  King  did
visit  Captaine
Bonner,  and
fumisht  him
with  needfull,
and  offering
all  courtesie.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

and  lightning,  as  either  before  or  since  I  never  saw  ;  with-
out respect  to  either  sicke  or  wounded :  many  of  whose
lives  shortly  after  payd  for  that  nights  barbarous  enter-
tainment.

The  next  morning  early,  they  turned  all  ashoare  with
such  poore  ragges,  as  they  would  suffer  them  to  weare  on
their  backes  upon  the  mayne  at  Tecoo,  beeing  the  foresaid
foure  shippes  Company,  and  fortie  sixe  of  the  Starres  men  ;
till  then  also  kept  Prisoners,  there  beeing  then  a  shoare
in  the  Factorie,  William  Nichols,  Henry  Bate,  and  my
selfe ;  where  so  good  order  was  taken  for  the  sicke  and
wounded,  as  the  times  Confusion,  and  poore  meanes  then
there  would  permit.

The  third  day  following,  Captaine  Bonner  was  sent
ashoare  with  a  Gardian,  attending  him  to  the  house  sent
by  the  Dutch  Admirall,  to  carry  backe  even  the  poore  bed
he  lay  upon,  which  for  triple  the  value  was  redeemed,
where  Griefe  and  Anguish  adding  a  violent  Fever  and
Spasma,  to  his  former  deadly  wound :  having  heretofore
well  deserved  the  repute  of  a  Worthy,  now  shewing  no
lesse  a  Christian  man,  and  with  a  resolution  well  fixt  on
the  merits  of  our  Redeemer ;  yeelded  his  soule  into  the
hands  of  the  Almightie,  the  ninth  of  October,  leaving  us
distressed  justly  to  lament  his  losse,  who  were  before
enough  sorrowfull  afflicted  with  remembrance  of  passed
misery,  and  expectation  of  more  and  greater  ensuing
calamitie,  whose  bodie  as  he  desired,  was  buried  upon  the
little  Hand  at  Tecoo,  so  neere  his  brother  Thomas  as  could
be  ghessed.

Somewhat  to  comfort  us  in  this  distresse,  it  pleased  the
Lord  to  give  us  favour  in  those  peoples  sights,  who  used
us  fairely  and  well,  as  could  have  beene  expected  in  any
Christian  part  of  the  World.  The  King  would  divers
times  visit  Captaine  Bonner,  and  each  day  present  him
with  such  Cates  as  were  there  esteemed  fittest  for  so  sicke
a  man,  desiring  him  also  to  bee  comforted,  and  that  both
they  and  Countrey  should  bee  readie  both  to  protect
and  relieve  us,  which  was  well  performed :  for  so  long  as

82

WILLIAM HORE  ad

1619.

the  Flemmings  rode  there,  one  thousand  men  armed  lay

within  a  quarter  of  a  mile  of  our  house  ready  upon  any

occasion  ; and  a  continuall  Market  for  victuall  was  kept  at

our  doore,  wherein  all  provisions  sold  cheaper  then  before  The  names  of

our  ships  were  taken.  the  Holland

The  fifth  dicto,  the  Hollanders  having  taken  in  their  ^  7>«f/f
Pepper  at  Tecoo,  set  sayle  with  these  ships  following,  viz.  prfaman°and
The  Vapan  van  Sealand,  Admirall  in  her ; William  John-  Bantam,
son, Commander of the Fleet; the Huerlam, New  where  they  had
Zeland,  Neptunes,  English  Starre,  Post-part,  the  Dragon,  ^rpfivesdk
Beare,  and  Expedition  for  Priaman,  intending  thence  for  ^anfam
Bantam, to  the  rest  of  their  Fleet,  there  consisting  of  The  Pangram
thirtie  five  sayle  besides  them,  and  were  then  besieging  atBantam.and
Bantam. The  Pangram  and  they  Vying  for  dead  mens  the  Hollander
heads,  one  for  Hollanders  and  the  other  for  Tavas,  giving  veyin&J°

~  o o sLauQhter  one

Rewards  ; and  in  which  deadly  difference,  it  was  unhappie  ofanothers
Diegoes  destinie  to  bee  a  sufferer ; who  after  his  being  people.
taken  in  the  Starre  and  kept  Prisoner,  making  an  escape  U-\  v-  663.]
in  a  Prow  from  Tacatra,  intending  to  have  secured  himselfe r  te&° ,

o  r  ernatiaes

in  the  English  house  at  Bantam,  was  by  the  James  appre-  heheaded
hended  and  beheaded  instead  of  a  Dutchman ; leaving  beingtakenfir
the  Rose  in  the  Road,  having  first  taken  out  all  her  Ord-  an  Hollander.
nances,  Powder,  and  Munition,  and  in  her  twelve  Hogs-  The  R°hse ie^
heads salt flesh, two Buttes of  Wine ; and some few  /Jin  eTJ0f
bagges  of  bread,  and  a  very  small  proportion  of  water-  Road  with  the
caske,  for  the  foresaid  number  of  men,  except  such  as  in  particulars  in
the  interim  ranne  away  into  their  service,  to  transport  our  heJ'
selves  whithersoever  we  could.  MoZlbo,

About  this  time  there  arrived  at  Tecoo  a  man  (as  reported  Capt.
himselfe  said)  belonging  to  Monanchabo ;  who  reported  Jourdainetobe
confidently  (but  whether  by  the  Flemmings  instigation,  or  taken  at
his  owne  knowledge  I  cannot  determine)  that  at  the  place  tZ  men  taken
whence  he  came,  two  ships  and  a  Pinnasse  were  said  to  be  in  the  Starre,
taken  at  Jambee  by  foure  other  ships,  which  is  much  to  doe  report  that
be  doubted  of  Captaine  Jordan,  &c.  The  English  on  the  the  Hollanders
Starre  likewise,  affirming  they  had  heard  of  foure  ships  ZYleVanted
which  were  double  manned,  and  marvellously  well  fitted,  t0  take  C.
sent  purposely  to  take  them,  which  the  Lord,  I  trust,  in  Jordaine.

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS P1LGR1MES

1619.

his  mercy  hath  prevented.  The  foresaid  Blacke  was
thirtie  dayes  from  Monanchabo  thither,  and  though  not
commonly  yet  sometimes  advice  from  Jambee,  commeth
hither  over-land.

During  our  abode  at  Tecoo,  before  the  Rose  could  be
fitted  to  sayle,  it  pleased  the  Almightie  to  take  compassion
on  our  distresse,  and  to  deliver  us  from  the  many  inevit-
able dangers,  yea,  even  confusions,  which  were  likely  pre-
The  sently  to  light  upon  us,  by  sending  in  thither  Captaine

PEl'gTeh  d  Charles  Cliffingham  with  the  Palsgrave,  Elizabeth  and
Hope  Arrive  ^°Pe  5  w^°  by  consultation  at  the  Cape,  were  intended
at  Tecoo  very  for  Priaman,  and  arrived  at  Tecoo,  the  three  and  twentieth
happily,  who  of  October,  aboord  whom  the  men  ashoare  were  forth-with
tooke  in  all  our  dispersed.  M.  Nichols,  and  Henry  Bate  sent  in  a  small
'will  N'  h  l  Praw  to  Achin;  and  the  Rose,  in  that  poore  and  weake
fcf  Henry  state  shee  then  was,  and  no  otherwise  concluded,  to  be  dis-
Bates  go  to  patched  for  England  to  advise  of  these  accidents  and
Achen  to  the  proceedings.  Concerning  the  intendments  of  the  three
Kmgj  to  com- foresajcj  shipS as  also  the  end  of  sending  those  mentioned

filaitie  of  the

Hollanders.  to  Achin,  I  am  ignorant,  and  therefore  shall  humbly
The  Rose  referre  your  Worships  to  their  owne  advices.  The  fore-
ordered  to  be  said  ships  with  the  Rose,  set  sayle  altogether  from  Tecoo,
sent for  Eng-  ^  tcnt^  Qf  November,  &  at  Nimtam  parted  the  four-
The  three  ships  teent^  dicto,  &  the  Lord  of  his  mercie  vouchsafed  us  so
and  Rose  faire  a  passage,  that  with  the  losse  of  but  one  man,  who
depart  out  of  also  was  sicke  before  we  left  Tecoo  ;  (notwithstanding  our
Tecoo  Road  the  harcj  allowance,  most  of  our  Bread,  and  much  of  our  Rice
The  RosT  Seeing  consumed  and  spoyled  with  Wormes  and  Vermine)
arrived  at  Sol-  was  arrived  at  the  Cape  Bonae  Spei,  all  in  sound  health,  the
dania.the  28.  eight  and  twentieth  of  January  161 9.
of  January.  Going  ashoare  at  Soldania,  we  found  Letters  left  by

Capt  Adams  ^aPta^ne  Adams,  (the  Copie  whereof  is  herewith  inclosed)
Letter,  and  of  a^so  °^  two  Dutch  ships  departed  thence  home- ward,  left
z.Dutch ships,  by  an  Englishman,  passenger  in  one  of  them;  the  Copie
whereof  is  herewith  likewise  inclosed.  We  had  our  Sayne
ashoare  to  fish,  and  the  Countrey  people  demeaned  them-
selves as  formerly  they  accustomed,  but  the  next  day
returning  againe  ashoare  to  fish  and  water. The  most

84

WILLIAM HORE  ad.

1620.

tragicall  and  wofull  accident  befell  us,  that  ever  happened

to  any  English  in  these  parts :  eight  of  our  men  going  to  The  ^z'ag^s

the  River  by  Land,  carryed  the  Sayne  with  them  to  fish,  ^e  slaine

and  were  all  by  the  Salvages  either  miserably  slaine  or  kept  e-tgnt  0four

away  from  us ; we  having  found  the  dead  bodies  of  but  men.  Thought

foure  of  them. The  cause  which  should  excite  them  to  to  be  provoked

such  an  horrid  and  unheard  of  attempt  I  cannot  conceive,  * ereunt0  y

.  iii\  rriii wrongs  done

unlesse  (as  is  most  probable)  some  wrong  offered  by  the  t^e  Dutch.
Dutch  lately  gone  hence,  have  moved  them  to  practise  and
exercise  this  Treachery  to  us  now,  and  to  bee  doubted,
will  bee  indeavoured  to  all  that  shall  hereafter  arrive.

Having  watered  our  ship,  buried  so  many  of  the  slaine
men  as  could  bee  found,  and  left  Letters  for  any  that  should
arrive  after  us,  we  set  sayle  from  Soldania. The  second Comejrom
of  February,  about  noone,  past  the  Equinoctiall,  The  fifth  SMafaff,

(*  ■»  r <  1 1  f  % 1  seconci  or  t  eo .

or  March,  and  the  or  arrived  at

in  England.  The  Almightie  having  of  his  inestimable
clemencie  protected  and  delivered  us,  from  the  exceeding
many  and  eminent  dangers  of  a  most  miserable  Voyage,
and  vouchsafe  us  safe  returne  into  our  Native  Countrey,
for  which  and  all  other  gracious  favours  from  our  begin-
nings to  this  day  extended,  his  great  and  glorious  Majestie
be  extolled  and  magnified,  both  now  and  for  evermore.
Amen. Amen.

Your  Worships  poore  Servant  in  all  dutie  and
service  ever  at  your  command,

William  Hoare.

[Chap. IX,
85

A.D.

l6l6.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

[I.  v. 664.]

Let  none  accuse
me  for  tedious-
nesse,  or  being
too  punctual  I  in
this  Relation:
seeing  the
Dutch  pesti-
lence grew
principally
from  hence  ;
and  hence  may
his  Majesties
right  to  these
Islands  bee
knoivne  to
future  Ages:
for  which  I
adde  this  wit-
nesse  after
Spurway.
*  English  kind-
nesse  to  the
Dutch  at  Mac-
casser. Of
these  things  see
before  in  Spur-
way,  Chap.  3.

Chap. IX.

The  Journall  of  Master  Nathaniel  Courthop,  his
Voyage  from  Bantam  to  the  Hands  of  Banda,
being  chiefe  Commander  of  the  two  Ships,  the
Swanne,  Admirall;  Master  Davis,  Master:  and
the  Defence,  Vice-Admirall ;  Master  Hinchley,
Master :  together  with  his  residence  in  Banda,
and  occurrents  there ;  contayning  the  differ-
ences in  those  parts  betwixt  the  English  and
Hollanders  contracted.

§. I.

English  kindnesses  to  the  Dutch ;  the  surrender  of
Poolaroone  to  His  Majestie,  and  the  fortifying
there  by  the  English  :  Dutch  Hostilitie,  their
taking  the  Swanne,  Salomon,  and  Attendance,
and  keeping  the  Defence  betrayed  by  Fugi-
tives, with  other  wrongs.

E  set  saile  from  Bantam  the  last  day  of
October,  161 6.  and  arrived  at  Maccassar,
the  seventeenth  of  November,  with  the
Swanne :  the  Defence  came  in  the  nine-
teenth, where  I  went  on  shoare  to  get
readie  our  provision  of  goods  and  Rice,
having  no  goods  as  then  in  Bantam,  to

serve  those  places ;  but  had  commission  to  take  them
here :  where  I  found  small  store ;  the  chiefest  being  one
hundred  Quians  of  Rice.

The  fift  of  December,  I  spyed  a  boate  alongst  the
shoare,  being  a  Skiffe  of  the  Hollanders  come  from  their
ship  (which  was  in  the  offing)  thinking  they  had  had  a
Factory  here :  but  I  soone  certified  them,  it  was  dissolved,
the  people  their  enemies.  Whereupon  they  intreated  me
to  stand  their  friend :  and  I  forthwith  *  went  to  the  King

86

NATHANIEL COURTHOP  a.d.

1616.

and  intreated  him  to  dismisse  them  in  that  they  came
ignorantly,  who  at  my  request  let  them  goe,  giving  them
warning  not  to  attempt  the  shoare  a  second  time.  So
being  night  I  wished  them  to  goe  aboord  my  ship  to
refresh  themselves,  and  to  depart  at  their  pleasure.  That
night  their  Pinnasse  went  out  to  Sea,  but  missed  their
ship  which  came  the  next  day  into  the  Road,  and  not
understanding  the  newes,  sent  their  long  Boat  towards  the
shoare,  which  the  King  of  Maccasser  perceiving,  sent  a
number  of  Prowes  which  surprized  her,  and  slue  every
man  of  them  being  sixteene  in  number.

The  ninth  of  December,  we  set  saile  for  Banda,  with
the  Hollander  in  our  Company,  and  being  cleere  of  Mac- ®ther  ktn{}~
casser,  relieved  them  at  their  request  with  fresh  water,  and  Hollanders .
sold  them  two  Quoines  of  Rice,  with  some  few  Hennes  good  seed  sowne
and  racke,  keeping  company  as  farre  as  Amboyne. Hence  in  ill  ground.
we  proceeded,  and  the  three  and  twentieth  of  December,
being  neere  Polaroone  sent  my  Skiffe  ashoare  to  under-
stand the  state  of  the  Ilanders,  who  were  glad  of  our  com-
ming,  as  beeing  not  able  to  hold  out  longer  against  the
Hollanders oppression, keeping them from reliefe of
Victuals.

The  same  day  we  came  to  anchor  at  Polaroone,  the
Orankayes  came  aboord,  and  I  enquired  of  them  whether
there  had  beene  any  former  contract  betweene  them  and
the  Hollanders :  who  certified  me,  there  had  beene  none  *  The  Banda-
at  all. Then  according  *  to  my  Commission,  I  required  ne2ies  had
them  to  surrender  their  Land  to  the  Kings  Majestie  of  ^tnlaTto
England,  which  they  presently  did  :  and  drew  Articles  of  the  English,  to
Trade  and  Conditions  to  be  observed  betwixt  us ; which  intreat  Trade
being  agreed  on,  we  spread  Saint  George  upon  the  Hand,  with  them^
and  shot  off  most  of  our  Ordnance.  s'c t  '

The  five  and  twentieth  of  December,  we  saw  a  Hoi-  Elkington,
land  ship  comming  from  the  West- wards,  and  forthwith  p.  516.
upon  Councell  landed  three  Peeces  of  Ordnance  out  of  Polaroone
the  Swanne,  and  mounted  them  on  a  Cliffe  fittest  for  that  r^ffsfiei0  Ms
purpose,  and  made  what  haste  wee  could  to  fit  a  platforme  Fortifying
for  them. We  landed  three  other  Peeces  of  Ordnance,  there.

87

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1616.

and  mounted  them  on  a  point  of  Land  which  commanded
the  Road : thus  fitted,  I  landed  most  of  the  goods  and
setled  a  Factory.
ThreeHolland Upon  the  third  of  January,  there  came  three  Flemmish

fhftn^/iT*  shiPs  into  the  Road>  flourishing  with  their  Trumpets  and
came  to  anchor  by  us.  Wee  fitted  our  shippes  for  fight,  and

I  sent  Master  Muschamp  aboord  the  Admirall,  to  certifie
them  of  the  surrender,  as  also  to  demand  if  they  could  lay
any  clayme  to  the  said  Land.  They  answered,  no.  I
further  offered  them  water  or  any  thing  the  Hand
affoorded ;  but  they  plainly  told  me,  they  came  for  no
such  thing :  whereupon  I  told  them  the  Countrey  people
would  not  suffer  them  to  ride  there  under  their  noses ;
[I.  v.  665.]  and  that  they  had  beene  doing,  but  I  caused  them  to  for-
beare :  and  perceiving  their  intent  to  surprize  us,  and
fearing  they  would  lay  us  aboord  in  the  night,  I  told  them  I
could  not  stay  the  Countrey  people  any  longer,  if  they  were
not  gone  before  two  Glasses  were  runne.  They  thereupon
weighed  and  departed.  The  fourth,  there  came  a  Holland
Boat  and  sounded  all  alongst  the  little  Hand,  at  whom
Master  Hinchley  shot  from  the  Land,  but  hit  her  not,  and
they  departed.

The  Swan  being  delivered,  Master  Davis  would  goe
water  at  Wayre,  obstinately  contrarying  my  command.  I
being  then  very  sicke  came  aboord  the  Defence,  and  sent
Master Sopho-  Sophonie  aboord  the  Swan,  which  departed  Jan.  18.  I
t!  SZ°C  after  had  uncertaine  newes,  that  the  Hollanders  had  taken
taken  by  the  ^er  an(i  sent  the  Sewes  over  to  Lantore  to  heare  the  newes,
Dutch,  Seethe  which  brought  word  that  the  Swan  was  in  Nero  Road.
manner  of On  the  seven  and  twentieth  of  Februarie,  I  sent  Robert

their  unman- R  tQ  the  Hollander  with  a  fla?Re  Qf  Truce to  demand

nerlinesse  in , J  r 1  • 1  t»i •

Spurzvay.  t"e  reason  or  taking  her.  lheir  reason  was,  we  came
Dutchpeevish-  yeerly  to  make  our  voyage  and  lade  our  ships,  and  be
nesse.  gone ; they  had  the  brunt  of  the  Warre,  and  wee  came

sneaking  to  doe  them  injurie.  And  further,  they  said,
that  the  States  of  Holland  and  the  Lords  of  the  Councell
should  conferre  of  this  businesse  :  and  being  demanded
the  manner  of  her  taking,  they  said,  Time  should  bring  it

88

NATHANIEL COURTHOP  a.d.

1616.

forth. And  further,  threatned  to  fetch  the  Defence  out

of  the  Road. They  asked  what  men  wee  had  at  Wayre

and  Rosinging,  and  said,  they  would  fetch  them  out  of

those  places. They  also  sent  a  writing,  the  effect  whereof

was,  that  the  wrongs  we  offered  them  could  no  longer  be

indured,  and  that  they  would  have  one  sent  over  to  come

to  composition  with  them. Hereupon  by  councell  it  was

agreed  for  the  safetie  of  our  ship,  lives  and  goods,  to  land

all  our  provisions  on  the  small  Hand,  with  most  of  the

men  to  manage  the  Ordnance :  which  being  subscribed  by

Corthop,  Spurway,  Hinchley,  Hayes,  Stacy,  Helmore,  and

the  second  of  March  to  be  put  in  execution,  none  else  of Quis  tulerit

the  ships  companie  would  yeeld  thereto,  but  would  keepe Gracchos  de

the  ship  to  death. The  seventh  of  March,  a  Letter  was  ******  ?"*-

brought  from  Nero,  by  a  Hollander,  with  a  flagge  of  Truce Davis  ^n

from Master  Davis, part whereof I have transcribed : Letter.  This

Master  Corthop  commendations,  &c. The  Admirall  and  and  other  Let-

the  rest  have  settled  their  resolutions  to  have  you  off  from  ters  I  nad

Polaroone,  according  to  their  Commission,  and  I  know,  Wi0e^a^c

'.  o  *  ' neve  taken

that  unlesse  you  doe  talke  together,  there  will  be  much  tnat  ^hkh  j
slaughter  about  it. For  they  are  all  double  manned  from  thought  most
their  Castles, and  must  fight  it  out  as I  have  proved  fit,  leaving  the
alreadie. For  they  did  shoote  at  me  twice  before  I  began,  rest:  w!*tch
although  I  was  in  the  Sea  eight  leagues  off  when  they  perfect  -tn
chased  me. We  fought  almost  boord  and  boord  for  the  Master  Con.
space  of  one  houre  and  an  halfe,  untill  they  had  killed  five  Journal/.
men, maymed three, and  hurt eight. And  when  wee  lhadahove
began  we  had  not  thirtie  men  able  to  doe  any  thing,  nor  *,/"  J  ''Z
no  wind  to  worke  withall  &c.  this  and  Mas-

I  answered  by  a  Letter  to  them,  that  we  doubted  of  ter  Hayes
their Message  and  Letter, except they  would send  an  JournaUto
English  man,  one  of  the  ships  companie,  to  notifie  things  ^fwhilhThere
unto  us : that  we  heard  they  had  murthered  our  men  in  have  from  the
cold  bloud :  and  as  they  pretended  commission  to  beat  us  original!  trans-
off,  we  had  commission  to  maintayne  the  Kings  Majesties  Pr'tnted-
right  of  England. We  thus  sought  to  prolong  time  for  ^nlZ  h
our  better  fortification  :  and  the  same  night  sent  Ordnance  p0iaroone
and Munition to the little Hand of  Neylackey which  fortified.

89

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1616.

maketh  the  Road ; and  if  they  had  planted  there  as  they
pretended,  they  would  have  beaten  all  our  ships  out  of
The  Defence the  Road,  and  have  kept  all  reliefe  from  the  great  Hand,
•&r  so  t^iat  we  must  have  beene  gone  for  want  of  food. The

Knaves  to  the  tenth  of  March  came  a  Hollander  with  Master  Davies
Hollanders.  Boy  and  a  Letter  from  him,  to  signifie,  that  after  the
King,  Christ-  Flagge  was  furled  not  one  man  was  meddled  with :
mas,  Howres,  Sophonie  was  the  first  man  was  torne  in  pieces  with  a  great
Bridges  Rock-  s^ot5  &c-  This  Letter  came  with  other  Dutch  Letters :
well,  Carter,  but  we  now  being  almost  readie  for  them,  wrote  them  an
Taylor  and  absolute  answere,  that  if  we  should  come  into  their  sub-
Woodlocke.  jection  as  they  desire,  we  should  shew  our  selves  no  true
a^Dutch  subjects  to  his  Majestie : and  that  our  resolution  was  to

prison  will stand  to  all  hazards  whatsoever,  March  1 1 .
doe;  together On  the  fourteenth  it  was  concluded  by  councell,  to  bring
with  lyingpre-  ashoare  our  Provisions,  and  to  bring  the  ship  about,  her
fences  of  t  e caMes  twice  cut  in  two  with  the  Rocks,  and  now  having

ti.  olldnders  ^

and  fugitives,  but  two  anchors  to  Sea-boord. But  finding  her  leake  and

The  Devill  unlikely  to  be  brought  about,  wee  agreed  to  bring  her

wasalsoaLyer  ashoare  under  the  Defences  Fort. Master  Hinchley,  on

andMur-  the  eighteenth  came  to  an  anchor  neerer  into  the  Bay,

therer  from  the 1 • ° 1  1 t 1 v -n  •  1  •

beginning:  leaving  aboord  John  King  Boatson,  with  some  twentie
Thus  did  the  more.  And  on  the  twentieth  in  the  morning,  the  ship
Dutch  with  was  driven  almost  as  farre  as  Lantore ;  which  when  they
Generall  which  were  a  sleepe  in  the  ship  perceived,  and  asked  the
andall^I  reason>  the  King  answered;  Tell  the  Master  I  had  the
dare  not  say  Watch,  and  being  asleepe,  the  ship  drove.  Thus  some
Lye  all,  in  went  into  the  long  boate,  the  rest  which  were  compacted
pretence  of  stayed  behinde,  and  when  the  long  boat  was  come  away,
andlh^n  '  ^ey  set  their  fore-course  and  went  into  Nero  Roade,  and
Letter.  delivered  the  ship  to  the  Hollanders.

The  first  of  Aprill  161 7.  the  Flemmings  sent  over
letters  with  a  flagge  of  truce ;  one  from  Master  Davis  to
urge  a  composition,  advising  very  passionately,  If  I  lose  any
more  men  by  your  arrogance,  as  here  I  have  lost  by  sick-
nesse  already,  their  lives  and  blouds  shall  rest  upon  your
heads  and  your  faction,  and  this  I  will  write  with  dying
hand,  God  give  me  leave  :  for  what  they  doe  or  have  done,

90

NATHANIEL COURTHOP  a.d.

1617.

their  Commission  will  beare  them  out  in  : and  are  con-
tented to  let  the  Law  decide  betweene  our  Masters  and
theirs,  or  will  come  to  any  reasonable  matter  of  friend-
ship, that  no  more  bloud  may  be  spilt  on  either  side :  For
I  plainely  see  how  you  carry  it. You  have  caused  the
Master  of  the  Defence,  to  land  his  peeces  ashoare  from  his
ship  and  make  wracke  of  her  *  to  drive  up  and  downe. Is  *  Take  this  as
it  in  our  hands  to  defend  an  army  that  have  order  for  what  ^//^//J^
they  doe  ? He  proceedeth  to  an  invective,  that  they  would  ^rs  reports.
defend  trecherous  Bandaneses,  who  are  at  Banda  daily  to  [I.  v.  666.]
make  a  peace  with  the  Hollanders,  that  they  may  have
time  to  cut  vour  throats,  &c.

I  made  answer  to  the  Hollanders,  promising  upon  such
two  stayes  to  come  and  conferre,  withall  redemanding  the
Defence  with  her  men  and  goods.  Those  pledges  came
not,  but  two  others  ;  and  on  the  sixt  went  to  Nero.  Where
the  next  day  the  generall  and  Councell  offered  mee  resti-
tution of  ships,  goods,  men  and  all  losses  whatsoever,  on
condition  that  I  should  take  off  my  Ordnance  from  Pola-
roon  and  Neylackey  and  leave  the  Hand :  to  which  I
answered,  I  could  not  unlesse  I  should  turne  Traitor  unto
my  King  and  Countrey,  in  giving  up  that  right  which  I
am  able  to  hold ;  and  also  betray  the  Countrey  people,  who
had  surrendered  up  their  land  to  our  Kings  Majestie ;  but
promised  to  conferre  with  my  Councell  and  send  him  an
absolute  answer.  I  returned  the  eight,  and  sent  him  his
pledges:  The  next  day  I  called  a  Councell,  shewed  my
Commission,  where  it  was  resolved  to  send  word  to  Ban-
tam, and  a  resolute  answer  to  the  Hollanders,  that  we
could  not  give  away  the  Kings  right  without  treason  ;  and
to  betray  the  Ilanders  his  subjects  twere  both  unchristian
falshood,  and  unreasonable  folly  to  incurre  their  fury.
But  if  the  Dutch  would  restore  the  Defence  with  men  and
goods,  and  helpe  to  convay  them  to  Bantam,  giving  under
their  hands,  that  no  attempt  should  be  made  against  the
two  Hands,  till  it  be  decided  in  England  or  Bantam,  then
&c.  They  returned  the  messenger  to  advise  mee  by  writ-  New  proffers.
ing,  to  consider  of  it,  and  send  my  full  resolution  in  three

9*

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1617.

Rialls  threats,  dayes,  or  else  hee  would  bring  all  his  forces  and  take  us

*TheCopieoj  perforce. He  not  comming,  we  fitted  a  Praw  to  send

the  knrthl  newes  to  Bantam,  and  demand  ayde,  wherein  went  Master

durst  not  tran-  Spurway, Master Hinchley, Christopher the Flemmish

scribe :  a  great  fugitive,  whom  doubting,  I  gave  order  to  leave  at  Mac-

part  being  the  casser. I  wrote  a  letter  of  Occurrents  to  Bantam  ; signi-

samethatbe-  f  • ajSQ  ^  j)utcj1  bravadoes  (which  they  had  made

fore  you  have  • « 1  1  •

'read.  Master  Davis  beleeve)  as  that  they  had  our  Kings  Letters

^Reasonable  to  take  any  of  us  to  the  East  of  Celebes  :  He  offered,  *  If
offers  made,  if  they  could  shew  such  letters,  he  would  give  up  all,  or  if
to  reasonable  ^^y  COuld  shew  any  Surrender  made  to  them  by  the
conscience  is  Natives,  or  if  they  would  carry  us  to  Bantam,  and  not
removed  from  meddle  till  there,  or  in  England,  things  bee  decided  :  that
the  hart  to  the  the  Hollanders  are  hated  of  all  Nations  in  those  parts :
hilt,  and  reason  tjiat  tkey  vaunt  they  have  the  Copies  of  the  Companies
to  the  toint^f  Commission  before  any  ships  come  forth  :  that  no  English
the  Sword,  Generall  hath  the  Kings  Commission  :  that  they  bring
Reason  and  Letters  from  petty  Kings  (which  are  reputed  as  their
Religion  shall  slaves)  as  of  Amboyna  and  Hetto,  with  the  like  :  that  if
1  alt **%thth  ^e  Bandaneses  will  have  their  Countreyes  in  peace,  they
theEnglishand  must  submit  themselves  to  the  Hollanders,  for  that  no
Bandaneses  Nation  can  compare  with  them  :  with  request  of  supply  the
here  were.  next  winds  :  that  he  could  have  had  all  Lantore  Ilands
ih^HoTaid^  delivered  him,  but  did  not  thinke  it  fit,  having  no  goods
can  shew  no  nor  victualls  for  them  ;  which  if  it  come,  in  two  dayes  will
right  to  the  bee  done,  the  small  league  they  enter  with  the  Hollander,
Hands,  but  jus  being  but  to  sustayne  their  hunger ;  all  of  them  being
agreed  to  have  no  other  peace  with  them,  &c.

The  fift  of  June,  the  Holland  Generall  Laurence  Ryall,
in  a  small  ship,  came  within  shot  of  our  Fort,  upon  Ney-
lackey,  having  heard  by  the  Defence-fugitives,  that  most
of  our  men  would  runne  away,  if  they  had  opportunity :
but  he  expecting  them  in  the  Skiffe,  was  welcomed  from
me  with  foureteene  shot,  that  a  man  was  not  seene  to
trimme  the  sailes,  but  they  bore  up  the  helme  and  de-
parted. I  sent  another  Praw  with  advice  for  Bantam,
lest  the  former  might  miscarry  by  Master  Stacy,  which
departed  the  eight  of  July.

92

in  armis.

XATHAX1EL COURTHOP  a.d.

1618.

The  foure  and  twentieth  of  December,  we  had  newes
that  the  men  of  Lantore  had  detayned  seven  Hollanders
of  their  chiefe  and  their  goods,  killing  one  of  them  in  the
taking,  the  other  ransomed  for  eighty  five  Bandaneses  :
and  so  the  league  was  broken.  The  three  and  twentieth
of  Februarv,  I  had  newes  that  the  Praw  in  which  Master
Stacv  went,  was  cast  awav,  and  the  King  of  Botton  lent
them  another  for  Maccasser.  The  twelfth  of  March,  we
felt  a  terrible  earthquake.

The  five  and  twentieth  of  March,  1 6 1 8 .  we  saw  two  of  F:i';;
our  ships  about  some  five  leagues  from  Polaroon  comming J^  *. '
from  the  Westwards,  with  the  very  last  of  the  westerly gum&Jk,  and
windes,  and  as  then  being  taken  with  an  Easterly  winde,
which brought the foure Holland ships (these we had  ships  more,  the
seene  looking  out  from  the  twentieth  day)  up  with  them,  ft°^laZ
the  great  Bantam,  the  Trow,  the  Star  and  the  Swanne  : V^v~  ^eepe
These  fought  with  them  from  two  of  the  clocke  till  nine  Ldtn  zdth
at  night. The  fight  was  in  sight  ot  Polaroon  some  three « ;"■"•  C  *
leagues off. And at midnight came the Attendance  %.^l  ':,
Skiffe  ashoare  at  Polaroon  with  foure  and  twenty  Ban- X7^r<?M  61
daneses, who told us of three ships, the Solomon the  tkt  /rag
Thomas,  and  the  Attendance  ;  and  how  the  Thomas  had  ■**  '
left them in the Streights  of  Desolam, and never  was  sfVte  *
seene  atter ;  and  that  the  ships  could  no  longer  endure  the
fight,  because  the  Salomon,  could  not  use  her  lower  Teere,
and  their  Powder  was  naught. The  sixe  and  twentieth,
we  lost  sight  of  all  the  ships,  and  in  the  nine  and  twen-
tieth, all  six  came  into  Nero  Road,  where  the  Hollanders
wore  our  Colours  under  their  ships  sternes  in  all  disgrace-
full  manner.

[§•  n
93

A.D.
l6l8.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

*In  Master
Corthops  Jour-
nal! are
Copies  of  Let-
ters sent  by
him  or  to  him.

[I.  v.  667.3  §. II.

The  manner  of  taking  the  Salomon  and  Attend-
ance, in  divers  Letters  described,  Dutch  abusive
devises  by  lyes  to  delude  and  dis-hearten  our
men :  divers  Extracts  of  Letters  of  Master
Corthop,  #with  other  Occurrents.

He  first  of  Aprill,  Robert  Fuller  brought  newes
from  Lantore,  that  the  Bandaneses  were  most  of
them  slaine  by  the  Hollanders  (in  taking  the  ships)
and  that  they  fezed  the  Hollanders  twice  over  boord  and
slew  many  of  them,  but  were  oppressed  with  number.
On  the  foureteenth,  a  Hollander  with  a  flag  of  truce
brought  mee  a  letter  from  Master  Cassarian  David,  Com-
mander of  the  three  ships  aforesaid,  in  these  words.

Pooloway,  the  fourteenth  of  April,  1618.

Aster  Corthop,  my  love  premised  unto  your  selfe,
and  the  rest  of  your  good  companie,  I  wish  you  all
health  and  prosperitie.  Having  at  this  time  (through  the
Generalls  permission)  gotten  oportunitie  to  write  unto
you,  I  thought  good  to  let  you  understand  of  that,  which
I  thinke,  you  doe  alreadie  know  too  well,  that  is,  of  our
being  surprized  by  the  Hollanders.  The  Generall  and
his  Councell  doe  alleage,  that  these  Hands  Pooloway  and
Pooloroan  with  the  rest,  is  their  right,  as  you  have  formerly
heard  them  say,  and  that  if  any  of  the  English  came  there
False  pretence  for  Trade,  they  have  a  Commission  to  make  lawfull  prize
of  Commission.  Qf  them)  and  so  late  experience  hath  taught  us  here.  For
my  part  I  cannot  resolve  the  Generall  of  any  determinate
course,  for  want  of  your  advice,  but  I  wish  you  were  all
safe  from  thence.

It  rests  that  you  doe  advise  with  the  Merchants  and
the  rest,  residing  with  you,  and  (if  you  thinke  good)  write
downe  your  determination,  and  send  it  me  by  this  Bearer,
that  I  may  the  better  answere  to  the  Generalls  Proposi-

94

M

NATHANIEL COURTHOP  a.d.

1618,

tions,  which  I  cannot  doe,  till  we  understand  each  others
mind,  as  for  my  consent  it  shall  be  grounded  upon  your
knowledge  and  experience  of  the  Hand,  whether  you  bee
able  to  keepe  it,  or  bee  willing  to  leave  it.

Our  ships,  the  Salomon  and  the  Attendance,  ride  at
Nero,  and  our  men  shared  amongst  the  Dutch  ships,  being
stripped  out  of  all  money  and  clothes.  My  selfe  with  one
English  Boy  to  attend  me,  remayne  upon  Pooloway,  where
the  Generall  and  his  Councell  doe  abide,  at  whose  hands
I  doe  daily  find  much  favour  and  kind  usage,  though
watched  and  looked  unto  as  a  prisoner.  The  Thomas,
which  was  my  Vice-Admirall,  we  lost  in  the  Streights  of
Desalon,  and  by  all  judgement,  shee  is  there  cast  away,
yet  we  have  no  absolute  certaintie  thereof.

I  would  be  glad  to  have  your  presence  here  for  our
better  proceeding  in  the  businesse,  and  the  Generall  is
willing  to  send  to  Pooloroan  a  man  of  fashion  to  stay
there  as  a  pledge  in  your  absence,  but  alwayes  provided,
that  you  enter  into  a  condition  with  the  Countrey  people,
that  the  said  pledge  have  no  wrong  offered  him  in  your
absence,  but  as  you  shall  returne  in  safetie  to  Pooloroan,
so  hee  may  returne  in  safetie  to  Pooloway  againe  ;  of  this,
I  pray  you,  consider,  &c.  and  conferre  with  the  Orankayas,
and  send  it  me  in  writing  by  this  Bearer,  whether  you
may  doe  so  or  not :  If  you  thinke  good  that  it  shall  be
so,  faile  not  to  advise  me  thereof,  and  the  Boat  shall  come
for  you  againe,  and  bring  the  Generalls  pledge.  And  so
I  commit  you  to  the  safe  tuition  of  the  Almightie :  And

Your  ever  loving  Friend,

Cassarian  David.

Aboord  the  Trow  in  Nero  Road,  the  twentie

sixe  of  April,  1618.

MOst  loving  and  kind  friend,  Master  Nathaniel  Cor-
thop,  I  heartily  salute  you,  and  beseech  God  to  send
continuance  of  health  unto  you  all  there :  Your  Letters,
yesterday  being  of  us  safely  received  here,  ministred  much

95

A.D.
I6l8.

Lies  of  English
distresse.

[I.  v.  668.]

Sicknesse  at
Bantam.

French
arrived  at
Bantam,  and
how  welcomed
by  the  Dutch.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

joy  unto  us  all  in  middest  of  our  lamentations  for  you,
understanding  thereby  the  Flemmings  notorious  lyes,  who
can  doe  little  else,  reporting  you  all  to  be  in  all  manner  of
wants  and  miserie  by  the  Bandaneses,  against  whom  they
are  speedily  bent  to  make  an  assault  upon  either  Lantore
or  otherwise  Polaroon  (but  I  hope  you  mistrust  the  worst)
with  five  hundred  Souldiers  at  least,  now  they  having
here  eight  saile  of  ships  of  their  owne,  and  within  two  or
three  dayes  expect  them.

It  pleased  Master  Geo.  Barkley,  the  twentieth  of  Feb-
ruarie,  161 6.  to  send  mee  with  Ric.  Hunt,  (who  died  at
Bantam)  upon  the  attendant  to  your  selfe,  but  the  Monson
being  spent  wee  could  but  fetch  Maccassar,  where  I  stayed
but  eleven  moneths,  in  expectation  of  our  Fleet  for  Banda,
which  was  a  hot  one  when  it  came  (to  incounter  with  such
an  Enemie)  being  but  three  ships,  and  the  best  of  them
run  away  afore-hand,  I  meane  the  Thomas,  Master  William
Hakeridge  leaving  my  selfe  and  his  Mate  Tatten,  and
Purser,  with  five  more  of  his  companie  aboord  the  Salo-
mon, and  God  knoweth  what  is  become  of  them,  which
had  we  beene  together,  doubtlesse  we  had  gelded  them  of
their  great  Bantam,  but  being  as  we  were  so  deepe  ships,
having  upwards  of  two  hundred  quoynes  of  Rice,  besides
Arack  six  hundred  Jarres,  thirtie  foure  bales  of  cloth  with
other  provisions,  as  never  was  Poolaroon  so  fitted,  if  it
had  pleased  God,  wee  had  all  safely  here  arrived,  for  that
wee  were  too  too  much  over-matched  by  their  great  Forces.

There  hath  beene  this  yeare  a  great  mortalitie  in  Ban-
tam, the  chiefe  Factors  there,  with  Generall  Pepwell  and
the  rest  kept  the  ships  there  so  long,  that  there  dyed  above
two  hundred  of  our  men  there  before  their  departure  from
thence.

The  Frenchmen  that  arrived  at  Bantam,  these  Flem-
mings tooke  their  Dutchmen  out  of  them  perforce,  to  the
overthrow  of  their  Voyage,  and  for  any  farther  matter
not  worthy  the  writing  thereof.

Now  to  come  to  our  selves,  and  our  taking,  the  Bantam
being  neerest  us,  of  the  Flemmings  foure  ships,  yet  some

96

NATHANIEL COURTHOP  a.d.

1618.

distance  off,  and  the  five  and  twentieth  of  March  last  past,
about  noone  shot  at  us,  whom  we  soone  answered  againe
with  shot  for  shot  all  that  afternoone,  but  our  Powder  was
naught,  and  could  not  carrie  the  shot  home,  when  theirs
came  over  us,  but  never  touched  us  to  the  setting  of  the
Sunne,  soone  after  the  wind  comming  Easterly,  we  were
in  the  middest  of  our  foes,  and  being  so  much  over-
matched, were  by  them  surprized  and  taken,  but  the  Ban-
danezes  eight  of  them  fought  very  valiantly,  and  killed
the  Flemmings,  three  men  out-right,  and  hurt  them  three
more :  but  the  tall  man  of  Pooloway,  and  another  little
man  with  him,  played  their  parts  excellently,  for  they
drove  the  Flemmings  over-boord,  by  fortie  at  once ;  some
up  into  the  foure  shrouds,  some  one  way,  and  some
another,  that  they  had  scoured  the  Deckes  of  them  all.
I  thinke  if  the  Bandanezes  had  had  them  upon  plaine  Brave  spirits
ground,  they  would  have  put  the  Flemmings  to  the  sword  % / '  an~
every  man  of  them,  for  that  they  were  exceedingly  feare-
full  to  deale  with  them,  but  by  their  Boats  and  subtiltie,
they  killed  the  Bandanezes,  and  tooke  seven  or  eight  Boyes
prisoners,  whereof  one  or  two  of  them  is  runne  away  and
escaped  from  hence  out  of  their  hands,  and  I  hope  got
safely  to  you  there  by  this  time.  Now,  after  that  wee  Base  dea}tn&
came  to  a  parley  with  the  Flemmings,  they  killed  us  three  °puU™ftS
men  basely,  both  against  the  Law  of  Armes  and  all  good
manners  besides  bringing  us  afterwards  to  Nero,  where
they  made  pillage  (by  the  Dutch  Generall  his  order)  of  all
that  we  had,  keeping  our  men  in  Irons,  these  Flemmings
being  so  close  in  all  their  doings,  that  their  owne  Skippers
cannot  know  their  determination  •  and  yet  their  Generall
is  bound  with  them  in  companie,  or  else  I  thinke  little
would  be  by  them  performed,  what  I  can  I  will  advise
you,  though  I  cannot  perswade  you,  but  I  beseech  God
blesse  you,  and  all  with  you.

Master  Cassarian  David  is  kept  by  the  Dutch  Generall
at  Pooloway,  being  sent  by  the  chiefe  Factor  and  counsell
at  Bantam,  Cape  Merchant  of  the  Fleet  upon  the  Salo-
mon, and  my  selfe  his  second  upon  the  Thomas,  consigned
v  97  G

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1618.

all  by  Commission  unto  your  selfe,  and  is  referred  to  your
appointment.  The  first  present  I  writ  Master  Cassarian
at  Pooloway,  advising  him  to  acquaint  you  with  all  Occur-
rences what  hath  passed,  that  you  might  not  be  ignorant
of  any  thing,  nor  frustrate  your  hopes  in  expectation  of
what  now  cannot  be,  I  say,  the  more  to  blame  them  at
Bantam,  so  carlesly  to  keepe  these  ships  there  so  long,  unto
the  eight  of  Januarie,  last  before,  they  sent  them  away
from  thence,  which  hath  brought  upon  us  all  this  miserie.
The  shippes  arrived  at  Maccassar  the  second  of  February
last,  and  through  extremitie  of  foule  weather  it  was  the
seventh  of  March,  before  we  could  set  saile  from  thence.
I  pray  you  returne  my  hearty  commendations  unto  Master
Muschampe,  Master  Hayes,  and  Thomas  Foord,  with  all
the  rest  of  our  loving  friends,  there  likewise  Master  Lane,
Master  Churchman,  Master  Kellum,  and  Thomas  Fowle,
commend  themselves  heartily  unto  you  all,  I  cannot  yet
heare  from  Master  Cassarian,  I  thinke  hereafter  we  shall
goe  for  Amboyna,  where  Master  Davis  is  and  twentie  men
more,  the  rest  are  at  Ternate,  I  pray  you  excuse  my  not
formerly  writing  to  you,  because  I  doubted  the  deliverie,
and  thus  much  at  present  shall  for  this  time  suffice,  and
with  my  kindest  commendations  unto  your  selfe,  I  be-
seech God  to  keepe  you  out  of  the  hands  of  all  your
enemies,  and  make  our  meeting  joyfull  to  each  other,  and
so  in  haste  I  rest,

Want  of  conveyance  maketh  a  long  passage.

Your  ever  loving  friend  here  now  Prisoners,  Geo.
Jackson,  in  the  behalfe  of  Jacob  Lane,  Bartholomew
Churchman  and  the  rest.

This  was^  a  These  Flemmings  report  that  the  day  after  we  were

arriw/fafe  at  ta^en>  t^ie^r  ot^tr  t^ree  S^PS  tooke  up  the  Attendants
Poolaroone,  Skiffe,  halfe  full  of  bloudy  water,  and  thinke  those  Ban-
danezes  that  went  away  in  the  Skiffe,  killed  one  another ;
and  got  not  to  Poolaroone.  Wherefore  in  your  next,  I
pray  you  write  the  certaintie  of  it,  likewise,  they  report
that  our  men  did  not  runne  away  with  the  Defence,  but

98

NATHANIEL COURTHOP  a.d.

1618.

would  have  carryed  her  for  Ceyran,  but  that  the  Flem-
mings  manned  out  two  of  their  long  Boats,  and  tooke  the
Defence,  and  brought  her  into  Nero.

Pro  idem  Geo.  Jackson.

A  Letter  from  Master  Lane  Master  of  the  Salo-  [1.  v.  669.]
mon. From  aboord  the  Trow  of  Amsterdam,
in  Nero  Road  the  twelfth  of  Aprill.

LOving  Friend  Master  Nathaniell  Corthop,  I  heartily
salute,  these  are  to  certifie  you,  the  seventh  of  March
we  departed  out  of  Macasser  Road,  with  the  Salomon,
the  Thomas  and  the  Attendance,  Master  Cassarian  Davis
being  our  chiefe  Commander  of  all  the  ships,  the  thir-
teenth of  the  same  moneth,  being  neere  the  Streights  of
Saler,  we  lost  company  of  the  Thomas,  which  wee  never
heard  of  since  all  of  us  being  bound  directly  for  Poola-
roone :  the  five  and  twentieth  of  the  same  moneth,  beeing
breake  of  the  day,  the  Salomon  and  the  Attendance  beeing
within  foure  or  five  leagues  of  Poolaroone,  we  saw  foure
sayles  of  Dutch  ships,  three  of  them  being  to  the  Easterne
of  us,  the  other  being  their  Admirall,  was  neere  unto  the
Hand  of  Poolaroone,  that  day  beeing  calme  with  little  wind
Easterly,  wee  towed  with  our  Boats  and  made  the  best
meanes  we  could  to  get  the  Hand,  the  Dutch  ships  having
the  wind  of  us,  bore  with  us  at  two  a  clocke  in  the  after-
noone,  the  great  Bantam  Vice-Admirall  got  within  shot
of  us,  and  plyed  her  best  to  us,  and  we  requited  her  to  our
power  at  foure  a  clocke ;  the  Starre  which  tooke  the
Swanne,  and  the  Swanne  likewise  got  within  shot  of  us,
at  eight  a  clocke  at  night.  The  Admirall  got  within  a
ships  length  of  us,  and  plyed  their  great  Ordnance  upon
us,  killing  three  men,  and  hurt  thirteene  or  fourteene  men,
but  would  not  boord  us,  commanding  the  chiefe  of  us  to
come  aboord  their  Admirall,  and  to  strike  downe  our
Sayles,  and  to  take  in  our  Flagge,  which  Master  Cassarian
caused  to  be  done,  and  commanding  the  Skiffe  to  be
manned  to  goe  aboord  of  them,  and  likewise  Master  Jack-

99

A.D.
I6l8.

Dutch
crueltie.

Lye-devices.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

son,  in  another  Boat  to  goe  aboord  another  of  them,  they
being  there,  I  could  heare  no  answere  from  any  of  them,
the  Dutch  having  our  two  Boates  aboord  with  our  chiefe
Commander,  send  their  foure  large  Boats  full  of  men,  to
the  number  of  one  hundred  and  fortie,  or  one  hundred
and  fiftie  men  to  keepe  our  ships,  and  to  take  the  Ban-
daneses  which  they  killed,  the  Arankayes  to  the  number  of
twelve  of  them,  the  rest  they  saved  alive,  and  carry  them
ashoare  to  Nero,  for  Master  Cassarian  hee  is  and  hath  beene
at  Pooloway  since  we  came  in  here,  but  for  my  part  with
my  Mate  Churchman,  and  Master  Jackson,  with  thirteene
men  more,  are  aboord  of  the  Trow  in  Irons  ;  but  we  three,
for  Master  Villes  which  was  Master  of  the  Attendance,
he  is  aboord  the  Starre  with  many  of  his  men,  for  the  rest
of  our  men  they  are  aboord  the  Bantam,  and  the  Swanne
not  suffered  to  goe  to  one  another,  but  lye  and  fare  more
like  slaves  then  men,  which  I  thinke  will  kill  many  of  us.
For  our  things  they  have  taken  away  all  that  every  man
had  to  their  clothes  of  their  backes ;  Sir,  I  understand,
that  your  wants  are  great  at  the  Hand,  and  that  the  Coun-
trey  people  have  got  the  Castles  from  you,  and  that  within
short  time  they  meane  to  send  you  all  over  here  unto  the
hands  of  the  Dutch,  which  I  wish  you  could  rather  get
for  Macasser,  then  to  come  in  their  hands.  The  Dutch
hath  no  ships  at  Buttone,  three  ships  they  have  now  in  the
offing,  or  at  Amboyna  five  ships,  they  have  heard  if,  the
three  ships  get  in  here,  they  purpose  to  come  all  for  Poola-
roone,  otherwise  I  thinke  not  this  yeare,  yet  I  heare  within
this  seven  or  eight  dayes,  the  old  Home  a  ship  of  seven
or  eight  hundred  tunnes,  with  the  small  Gaily  and  other
Boats  are  to  come  for  Poolaroone,  where  they  understand
that  the  small  Castle  shall  be  delivered  up  unto  the  Dutch,
for  the  rest  of  their  ships  that  be  here,  I  heard  within  this
three  weekes  they  are  to  goe  for  Amboyna.  Sir,  I  have
saved  these  two  Letters  which  Captaine  Ball  delivered  me
for  you,  which  I  used  the  best  meanes  I  could  to  save  them
for  you,  and  to  send  them  to  you  with  the  best  meanes  I
could  to  save  them  for  you,  and  to  send  them  to  you  with

100

NATHANIEL COURTHOP  ad.

1618.

the  best  meanes  I  could  use,  which  I  desire  you  may  receive,
and  to  send  me  answere  how  all  businesse  standeth  with
you  in  this  case,  and  I  will  be  glad  to  pay  the  Coat  off  my
backe  to  the  bearer  for  an  answere,  other  Letters  we  have
for  you  and  the  rest  of  your  company  on  the  Hand,  which
if  I  can  shall  be  sent  you.

Sir,  the  Salomon  was  deepe  layd  with  Rice,  the  Thomas
laded  with  Rice  and  Racke,  and  other  provision,  the
Attendance  laded  with  Rice,  Fish  and  Racke  and  other
provision.  Thus  with  my  love  unto  you  with  the  rest  of
your  company,  I  cease,  beseeching  God  to  blesse  you  in
your  proceedings,  and  deliver  us  out  of  the  hands  of  these
Tyrants,  and  send  us  all  a  joyfull  meeting.

Your  Friend  to  his  poore  power  to  command,

Jacob  Lane.

Sir,  the  Generall  of  the  Dutch  had  given  expresse
authoritie  unto  the  Commanders  of  those  ships,  that  if
they  meet  us,  either  to  sinke  or  burne  us  before  wee  should
recover  the  Hand,  or  else  he  would  hang  them  that  should
be  the  occasion.

Adie  in  the  Prison  of  the  Castle  Pooloway,  [I.  v.  670.]

July  the  fifteenth,  161 8.

HOwsoever  William  Hakeridge  hath  dealt  with  me, The  Copie  of
yet  I  rest  much  bound  to  your  selfe  for  your  love  to  aPtece  °f  M-

t  /»  J  &C kSOTLS I  pt—

me,  that  thought  so  well  on  me,  whose  thankerulnesse  should  ter  t0  ^  ^all
undoubtedly  have  turned  to  your  credit,  had  it  not  beene  from  the  Prison
by  these  arrogant  theevish  Flemmings,  and  Master  Hake-  »  Pooloway
ridge :  otherwise  prevented,  which  mischiefe  grew  from  a  £*///*,  July
Molajo  Letter,  written  by  a  Flemming  Whore  in  Mac-
casser,  and  sent  in  a  Trunke  to  Amboyna,  advising  of  our
comming : otherwise  wee  had  beene  at  our  Port  before
that the Flemmings had heard of  us. Hereupon the
Flemmings  layed  waight  for  us,  with  foure  of  their  best
ships  of  Warre,  and  three  more  readie  to  second  them  if
need  required. Now  the  Thomas  being  lost  out  of  our

IOI

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1618.

Company :  we  plyed  our  Voyage  with  the  Salomon,  and
the  Attendant  sayling  to  the  South-ward  of  the  shoalds
that  are  off  a  Buttone. And  the  five  and  twentieth  of
March  last,  by  day  breake  we  had  sight  of  Polaroone,  about
five  leagues  off,  presently  upon  this  we  descryed  three
sayle  of  Flemmings  to  the  North-ward,  and  one  to  the
East- ward,  to  say,  the  Bantam,  the  Trow,  the  Swanne,  and
the  Starre  that  tooke  the  Swanne,  which  of  these  shippes
the  Bantam  came  somewhat  neere  us  about  noone,  and  had
we  here  had  the  Thomas  in  our  Company,  wee  had  surely
Gelded  them  of  their  great  Bantam  for  that  ship  was  some
distance  from  her  Consorts,  and  seeing  our  weaknesse,
began  fight  and  shot  at  us,  whom  we  soone  answered  againe
with  shot  for  shot,  but  our  Powder  was  naught  and  could
not  carry  the  shot  home,  when  the  Flemmings  shot  over
us,  thus  wee  continued  but  no  hurt  done  of  eyther  side  to
the  setting  of  the  Sunne,  for  that  we  were  some  distance
off,  and  being  sent  to  too  late :  the  Monson  fayles  us,  the
wind  comming  now  Easterly,  and  in  the  night  brought  our
enemies  round  about  us,  at  which  time  of  being  sent  by
Master  Cassarian  aboord  their  Vice-Admirall. The  Ban-
tam to  know  their  intent  which  was  according  to  their
protest  made  at  Bantam  against  us,  then  the  Trow  their
Admirall  very  basely  shot  the  Salomon  twice  thorough
and  thorough,  killed  there  foure  men,  and  hurt  us  ten  men
more,  thus  were  we  by  the  Flemmings  surprized,  taken
Prisoners,  and  pillaged  ;  who  kept  us  first  in  their  ships  at
Perfidious Nero,  and  now  close  Prisoners  in  Pooloway  Castle  ten  of
Dutch. us^  ^  rest  are  carryecj  for  Amboyna,  and  the  Moluccas.

Now  if  our  three  ships  had  beene  sent  sooner,  we  had
not  onely  arrived  safely  at  Polaroone  with  two  hundred
and  fiftie  Quiens  of  Rice,  for  that  I  know  there  was  no
lesse  provided  in  Maccasser,  but  also  we  had  gained  the
whole  commoditie  of  Nuts  and  Mace,  with  both  Countrey
of  Banda,  and  people  likewise ;  and  the  Flemmings  could
not  have  bought  two  hundred  Suckles  of  Mace  whereas
now  they  have  bought  at  least  two  hundred  Tunnes.
The  neglect  of  which  thus  much  importeth,  though  it

102

NATHANIEL COURTHOP  ad.

1618.

prove  not  the  losse  of  both  commoditie  and  Countrey
hereafter.

The  five  and  twentieth  of  May  last,  the  Flemmings
marched  with  seven  hundred  and  fiftie  Souldiers  against
Lantore,  but  the  Bandanezes  gave  them  such  a  repulse,
killing  them  foure  men,  and  hurt  them  sixteene  more,
that  the  Flemmings  came  off  againe,  and  never  beate  their
Drumme.  The  Dutch  Generall  would  not  be  intreated  of
us  to  shew  us  any  kindnesse,  neyther  would  he  ransome
us  for  any  money,  it  may  be  that  he  thinketh  the  English
will  take  so  many  of  his  men,  and  so  ransome  one  man  for
another.

Thus  not  willing  to  be  over  tedious,  I  beseech  you  good
Sir,  to  consider  our  misery,  and  doe  what  may  be  for  our
Releasement.

Your  ever  loving  Friend  to  command,

Pooloway,  the  1 8 .  of  September.

George  Jackson.

I  sent  an  answere  offering  upon  pledges  to  come  over
to  Pooloway,  in  the  Vessell  which  they  should  come  in.

The  seventeenth  of  Aprill,  the  Orrenkayes  of  Lantore
came  over  to  me  to  conferre  about  keeping  the  Hand
another  yeare,  which  they  promised  to  keepe  out  the
Hollander  from  trading  with  them,  onely  relying  upon  our
Forces  the  next  yeare.  Wee  agreed  to  hold  it  out  till
the  next  yeare.  The  eighteenth,  by  a  Praw  that  went
to  Bottoone,  I  sent  a  Letter  for  Bantam,  to  be  conveyed  by
that  King  to  our  Factorie  at  Maccasser,  signifying  the  M-  Courthops
taking  of  these  ships,  the  unadvisednesse  in  sending  them  ^  ff r  t0
so  unseasonably  (for  one  day  sooner  had  brought  them  in)
neither  was  there  above  halfe  a  day  of  Westerly  winds  to
bring  them  to  Nero,  that  many  poore  men  were  slaine,
maymed,  or  held  in  slaverie  worse  then  Turkish  slaves ;
and  had  not  foure  or  five  Java  Junckes  come  in,  for  want
of  victuals  we  must  also  have  given  up,  and  still  live  on
Hice  only  with  a  little  fish,  which  in  foule  weather  is  not

103

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1618.

to  be  had ;  daily  expecting  an  assault  from  the  Hollanders,,
and  wish  it  not  so  much  able  to  stand  out,  as  willing  to
make  them  pay  deare,  &c.  He  sent  another  also  for  re-
freshment to  the  Factor  at  Maccasser.

The  twentieth  of  Aprill,  we  were  advertized  that  within
[I.  v.  671.] two  dayes  the  Hollanders  would  assaile  us,  but  they  came
not. The  thirtieth,  they  trayned  their  men,  about  seven
hundred. I  sent  another  Letter  to  Master  Ball  (where,
in  relating  the  fight  these  words  are  used.) The  Attend-
ance before  they  yeelded  gave  the  Bandanezes  their  small
Boat ; so  they  escaped  to  Poolaroone. But  the  Salomon
was  so  belayd  that  the  Bandanezes  could  not  goe  out  of
her. Master  Cassarian  yeelded  in  that  manner  that  if  I
had  beene  in  his  place,  before  I  would  have  done  it,  I
*Thu$  he  did  would  have  sunke  downe  *  right  in  the  Sea. That  was  in
fore-tell  his t^s  manner  :  After  they  had  fought  from  two  till  nine  at
the  cause  and n*&kt,  being  almost  boord  and  boord,  the  Dutch  called
manner.  unto  him  to  take  in  his  Colours,  strike  his  sayles  and  come

himselfe  aboord,  which  all  hee  did,  they  detayned  him  and
his  Boat.  So  our  men  in  the  ship  played  a  good  and  wise
part  likewise :  for  they  perceiving  their  Commander  kept
aboord  the  Dutch  shippes,  went  and  got  the  Bandanezes
Swords,  and  hid  them  from  them :  only  two  of  them  kept
their  Swords  privately :  nineteene  had  no  wreapons,  and
stowed  themselves  in  the  ship,  and  some  eight  or  ten  of
them  with  their  Creezes  and  two  Swords,  at  the  Hollanders
entring  of  our  ship  killed  the  Hollanders  at  least  forty  of
them,  and  hurt  divers  more  of  them ;  most  of  this
slaughter  being  done  by  two  of  the  Bandanezes  only.
For  at  their  entring  our  men  kept  themselves  in  the  fore-
castle apart,  whilest  the  Bandanezes  fought ;  but  at  last
being  taken,  the  Hollanders  killed  some  twelve,  and  saved
seven  of  the  youngest.  So  farre  as  can  I  perceive,  they
neither  respect  right  or  justice,  but  stand  altogether  upon
force  of  Armes.  I  have  but  thirtie  eight  men  to  with-
stand their  force  and  tyranny,  our  wants  extreme :  neither
have  wee  victuals  or  drinke  but  only  Rice  and  water,  they
have  at  present  eight  ships  here  and  two  Gallies,  and  to;

104

NATHANIEL COURTHOP  ad.

1618.

my  knowledge  all  fitted  to  come  against  us.  I  looke  daily
and  howerly  for  them,  &c.  He  signified  also  both  to  him
and  in  a  Letter  to  the  Factor  at  Maccasser,  that  he  had  not,
since  first  hee  came  into  these  Hands,  received  one  Letter
or  advise  from  any  English.

In  a  Letter  from  Master  Lane  to  M.  Courthop,  is
written  that  he  had  sent  away  the  Bandanezes,  but  one
Richard  Tawton  Masters  Mate  of  the  Thomas  would  not
suffer  it,  for  feare  of  the  Dutch  severitie :  and  that  they
seeing  no  remedie,  shot  William  Shoply,  after  Master,  and
cut  the  eare  off  of  the  Gunners  Mate  neere  off ;  another
they  ranne  thorow  the  backe.  This  is  like  to  be  the  cause
of  taking  away  their  Swords.  The  seventh  of  May,  the
Salomon  went  from  Nero  laden.  The  five  and  twentieth,
the  Hollanders  gave  an  assault  on  Lantore  landing  eight
companies  of  Souldiers,  contayning  about  five  hundred
men,  but  were  repulsed  with  losse  of  foure  of  theirs  and
one  Bandaneze.  The  two  and  twentieth,  for  further  cer-
taintie  I  sent  another  Letter  to  Master  Ball.

The  eight  and  twentieth  of  June,  I  had  a  Letter  sent
mee  from  Master  Cassarian  David,  wherein  he  signifieth
the  Dutch  threats  of  perpetuall  imprisonment,  if  I  came
not  to  better  consideration : which  I  answered,  refelling
the  Hollanders  lyes  touching  the  Attendants  Boat  taken Dutch  lyes  to
up  by  them  with  bloud ; and  another,  that  I  should  send  scarre  the
the  Generall  a  Letter  to  surrender  the  small  Hand ; and  same\hei*
that  I  have  but  ten  English  here : also  that  the  Blackes  imprisonment.
had  possession  of  my  Ordenance,  &c.

The  last  of  June,  Master  Balls  Letter  was  sent  me  by
Master  Lane,  which  is  as  followeth.

M Aster  Courthop,  my  heartie  commendations  to  you,
and  all  the  rest  of  your  companie,  with  my  prayers
for  your  health,  and  happinesse,  &c.  Yours  of  the
eleventh  of  Aprill,  by  Master  Thomas  Spurway,  and  the
thirtieth  of  June,  by  Master  Stacy,  I  received  understand-
ing thereby  of  the  Occurrences  happened  in  Banda,  which,
albeit  in  many  things  contrary  to  our  expectation,  yet  as

105

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1618.

now  not  to  be  avoyded,  nor  by  any  faire  course  hoped  to
have  it  amended,  was  it  to  be  doubted  that  surrender
being  made  to  his  Majestie  of  England,  of  those  places,
and  his  subjects  in  possession,  that  in  so  apparant  and  just
cause ;  the  Flemmings  durst  have  fallen  out  into  open
Hostilitie  with  us,  in  taking  the  Swan,  and  making  them-
selves Owners  of  the  Defence,  with  the  imprisonment  of
our  men,  but  now  we  have  too  manifest  a  proofe  of  their
insolencie,  and  that  they  dare  doe  any  thing,  that  is  not
above  their  force,  and  make  the  best  shew  of  a  bad
meaning.

They  pretend  contracts  with  the  King  of  Ternate,  for
defence  of  his  Countries,  and  with  his  subjects  for  their
Spices,  and  all  Trade  whatsoever,  even  to  the  exclusion  of
all  other  Nations,  Justice  is  too  weake  to  deale  with  force,
and  consequently,  no  pleading  with  them  without  force,
which  I  hoped  wee  should  have  beene  able  this  yeare  to
have  effected,  albeit  that  it  fals  out  to  the  contrary,  but
the  next  I  doubt  not,  but  we  shall  have  force  to  make
them  know,  that  free  gift  and  possession  is  better  then
contracts,  and  that  they  are  not  to  conquer  Countries  to
themselves, under pretence of  defending the King of
Ternate,  being  to  them  in  nature  of  a  Prisoner ; that  are
in  no  command  of  him,  in  the  meane  time  our  indeavour
must  be : for  the  right  of  our  King  and  honour  of  our
Countrey,  to  make  good  what  wee  have ; Master  Spur-
way  in  his  returne  was  charged  into  Botone  by  the  Flem-
mings, and  so  belaid  for,  that  had  not  the  King  of  that
place  stood  his  very  good  friend,  hee,  and  his  companie
had  fallen  into  their  hands :  but  by  this  meanes  while  the
Flemmings  waited  before  the  mouth  of  the  River  for  their
comming  out,  they  were  conveyed  over  a  necke  of  Land,
[I.  v.  672.] and  so  escaped  for  Maccasser,  where  meeting  the  Attend-
ance they  tooke  passage,  and  came  hither,  Stacie  that  Owle,
blind  in  his  selfe  will,  cast  away  his  Praw  upon  Botone,
the  goods  all  lost,  the  men  only  saved,  where  he  left  the
Bandanezes,  who  chose  to  stay  there,  in  hope  to  save
something  for  themselves :  and  by  the  Kings  favour  got

106

NATHANIEL COURTHOP  a.d.

1618.

a  Praw,  and  came  thither  by  the  way  of  Maccasser,  all  the
Billes  of  exchange,  only  the  hundred  Rials  of  Peter  van
Loare :  I  payd  also  the  Honourable  our  Imployers,  lose
one  quarter  thereby,  the  Cattee  of  Mace  taken  there  at
a  Riall,  worth  here  not  three  quarters  of  a  Riall,  and  for
him  the  said  van  Loare,  as  he  came  to  you  an  espie  in  that
place,  so  at  his  best  oportunitie  hee  left  us  here ;  leaving,
though  very  loth,  his  money  behind  him.

Captaine  Jordane  departed  hence  in  the  Clove  for  Eng-
land, Christmasse  last  a  yeare,  and  Captaine  Barkley  our
Chiefe,  departed  this  life  the  first  of  March  past :  here
arrived  the  Fleet  of  Captaine  Joseph,  but  not  himselfe,
being  slaine  about  the  Hands  of  Comora,  in  fight  with  a
Carracke ;  who  having  no  meanes  to  escape,  ranne  ashoare
and  fired,  there  was  in  her  besides  goods  of  divers  Fab-
riques,  three  and  twentie  hundred  thousand  pieces  of  eight,
a  prettie  Cargazon,  and  would  have  done  well  in  our
Factories,  but  it  is  fallen  out,  a  lasse,  to  the  Portugals,  and
no  gaine  unto  us,  neither  in  purse  nor  credit,  as  you  may
understand  by  others.

It  is  given  us  to  understand,  by  Letters  from  our  Hon-
ourable Imployers  of  a  second  joynt  Stocke,  subscribed
for  twentie  hundred  thousand  pounds ;  *  It  began  the  first
of  this  yeare,  the  first  joynt  Stocke  ended  in  the  Fleet  of
Captaine  Pring,  consisting  of  seven  shippes,  whereof  two,
to  say,  the  Hope,  and  Hound  came  directly  hither,  the
other  five  went  by,  by  off  Surat,  I  pray  God  to  blesse
them,  and  that  performing  effectually  there,  they  may
arrive  hither  in  safety,  the  Governour  of  the  Flemmings
hath  beene  here,  but  we  conferred  not  together,  the  cause
preceding  of  pride  in  them,  and  no  submission  in  me :
but  to  be  short,  as  they  began,  which  you  see  they  have
continued  unto  us  in  Hostile  manner.  The  sixe  and  twen-
tieth of  November,  the  Speed-well,  Robert  Jackson
Master,  bound  for  Jacatra,  was  taken,  and  the  men  all  (but
one  that  was  slaine. in  the  entring  her,  and  one  that  is
since  dead)  are  in  Chaines,  the  Governour  after  the  taking
of  this  Pinnasse  came  with  sixteene  ships  into  Bantam

107

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1618.

Road,  to  brave  us  which  we  were  content  to  suffer,  in
respect  of  their  too  much  advantage.  And  now  you  may-
understand  I  have  dispeeded  these  two  ships,  the  Salomon
and  Thomas  for  Maccasser,  to  lade  Rice  alreadie  provided
for  them,  with  a  good  Cargazon  of  goods,  besides  of  cloth,
of  divers  sorts  for  Banda,  according  to  the  Invoyce  here
inclosed  sent  you,  whereof  not  doubting  your  care  and
diligence  for  Sales  and  Returnes,  I  omit  in  that  respect  to
insert  to  your  memory.  For  other  Newes  and  Occur-
rents  here  passed  since  your  departure,  I  commend  you
unto  the  Bearers  hereof,  and  so  for  this  time,  I  commit
you  to  the  might  and  mercifull  protection  of  the
Almightie.

Bantam,  the  seventh  of  January,  161 7.

Your  ever  loving  Friend,

Geo.  Ball.

The  seventh  of  July,  I  sent  Robert  Hayes  to  Lantore,
to  view  the  Road,  what  convenient  place  our  ships  might
ride  in,  free  from  shot  of  Nero  Castle,  and  what  place  wee
might  plant  Ordnance  to  defend  our  ships,  and  endamage
the  Hollanders,  which  returned  with  a  draught  of  the
Roads  there,  on  the  eighteenth.  The  two  and  twentieth,
I  wrote  againe  by  a  Java  Juncke  to  Master  Ball  (touching
the  taking  of  the  ships,  the  Hollanders  proud  wearing  our
colours  at  their  sterne,  and  a  long  time  never  ceasing
shooting  day  nor  night,  as  though  they  had  taken  halfe
the  goods  in  the  World.  The  third  of  this  present,  the
Generall  with  five  ships  set  saile  to  the  Westwards,  sending
me  word  some  foure  dayes  before,  that  he  would  come  by
me,  and  send  me  some  flying  Messengers  to  know  how  I
did  :  but  like  a  bragging,  lying,  &c.

The  second  of  August,  I  sent  Master  Muschamp  in  a
Banda  Praw,  with  the  Sabandar  of  Pooloway  and  Inche
Tungull,  to  give  intelligence  at  Bantam :  by  whom  I  writ
touching  the  intollerable  pride  and  tyrannie,  that  the
Hollander  useth  in  these  parts  upon  us  both,  in  bodies,  and

108

NATHANIEL COURTHOP  ad.

1618.

name,  and  that  with  a  good  conscience  we  may  proceed  in
regard  of  the  great  outrage  and  infamie  they  have  offered
us  in  these  parts,  both  in  disgracefull  speeches  to  our  King
and  Nation,  and  in  their  barbarous  tyrannie  they  have
used  to  our  weake  forces,  being  captivated  by  them :  hav-
ing written  how  we  may  offend  them  by  planting  Ord-
nance at  Oretaton,  &c.

The  thirteenth  of  August,  there  came  fifteene  Portugals  *m.  Court-
borne  at  Goa,  which  had  beene  surprized  by  the  Hollan-  hops  magna-
ders,  from  Nero  in  a  Praw,  and  I  gave  them  entertayn-  nmous  mnd
ment. The  fifteenth,  I  received  a  Letter  from  Master  intoita-

Cassarian  David,  in  the  name  of  the  English  at  Pooloway,  standingthe
urging  to  right  what  was  amisse,  * and  to  call  conscience  Hollanders
to  the  Barre  (words  shewing  what  a  hard  imprisonment  wrongs,  then

and  faire  glosses  may  doe  with  impotent  and  impatient  ln eaJtn^t  f
o  J  r  r  impatience  of

spirits)  which  I  answered  the  next  day,  both  with  best  fa  Countrey-
reason,  and  sending  them  reliefe. I  received  also  a  Letter  men  impo-
from  Master  Willes,  as  followeth.  ^nth  ur^g

right.

From  Pooloway,  the  fifteenth  of  August,  161 8. P-  v-  673-]

LOving  Friend,  Master  Courthop  my  love  remembred
to  you  and  to  all  the  rest  of  our  good  friends,  &c.
Master  Courthop,  the  urgent  occasion  at  this  present  is  to
let  you  understand,  about  sending  the  Blackes  ashore  was
this,  first  about  ten  of  the  clocke  the  same  day,  we  being
chased  by  three  sayle,  for  my  part  I  went  aboord  of  the
Salomon,  to  see  what  they  were  minded  to  doe.  Master
Cassarian  willed  me  presently  to  goe  aboord  againe,  and
to  be  readie  to  defend  our  selves,  and  to  keepe  faire  by
him,  which  indeed  I  did,  and  also  I  could  have  gone  from
them  at  first  sight  if  I  would,  but  I  could  not  have  gotten
the  Hand  if  I  had  gone  at  ten  of  the  clocke  at  night,  we
were  faire  by  the  Flemmings,  the  Salomon  beeing  within
call  of  us.  The  Blackes  that  were  in  the  Salomon,  were
got  into  the  ships  Boate  for  to  goe  ashoare,  then  was  I
called  to  to  have  our  Blacks,  for  to  make  themselves
readie  to  goe  with  them,  which  I  did,  and  looking  when
the  Salomons  Boate  would  come,  thinking  they  had  beene

109

ad  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1618.

gone.  I  gave  them  our  small  Boate  to  carry  them :  and
for  my  part  faine  would  I  have  sent  you  a  Letter  or  some
other  thing,  but  being  at  that  time  so  employed,  that  I
had  not  time  to  do  as  I  would :  Faine  would  I  have  writ
more  at  large,  but  that  time  will  not  permit.  So  I  rest,
praying  to  the  Almightie  to  blesse  you  to  in  all  your
affaires.  Yours  to  command,  I  pray  commend  mee  to
Master  Jones. Use  to  his  power  the  Chirurgion,

Matthew  Willes.

LOving  and  kind  Friend,  Master  Courthop,  heartie
commendations  unto  you  and  the  rest  of  your  good
company,  with  all  health  &  prosperity  to  you  in  all  Affaires  :
for  to  relate  of  our  crosse  Voyage  and  misfortunes,  it  is  no
newes.  But  I  hope  to  see  the  proudest  of  them  pulled
downe  one  day,  although  we  indure  the  miserie  of  it  in
the  mean  time :  I  am  glad  to  heare  of  your  good  pros-
peritie  and  wel-fare ;  the  which,  I  much  doubted,  long
since  of  your  wants :  but  God  will  provide  for  his  Ser-
vants, although  he  gives  these  Horse-turds  leave  to
domineere  awhile,  whosoever  lives  wrill  see  their  Pride
abated.  I  must  needs  say  they  doe  use  us  well.  For  I
doe  not  know  to  compare  it  neerer  then  to  Ludgate,  or
Newgate :  not  an  inch  libertie  nor  allowance  more,  then
the  worst  Prisoner  they  have  in  keeping,  which  was  com-
manded at  the  receite  of  your  last  Letter  to  the  Generall,
in  the  which  case  I  wish  you  were  able  to  doe  us  any  good :
but  in  the  mean  time  I  hope  God  will  provide  for  us.
There  is  this  yeere  to  come  to  Bantam  the  best  fleet  of
ships  that  ever  came  out  of  England,  one  Martine  Friend
is  Generall.  The  Horse-turd  that  tooke  us  was  at  the
Cape  with  them,  in  all  five  ships  :  the  Royall  James  a  new
ship  Admirall,  the  Ball  Vice-admirall,  the  Gift  reare-
Admirall,  with  two  ships  more  which  went  to  Surat :  wee
had  the  last  yeare  eleven  ships  at  Bantam,  but  the  reason
of  no  more  comming  this  way,  as  I  heare  was  by  Master
Lucas  his  comming  from  the  coast,  and  setting  Captaine
Ball  and  Captaine  Pepwell  together  by  the  eares :  because

no

NATHANIEL COURTHOP  a.d.

1618.

Lucas  must  have  a  ship  to  goe  home :  for  afore  Lucas
came  Captaine  Pepwell  was  minded  to  come  this  way,  but
time  will  not  permit  to  write  any  more,  so  in  haste  I  take
my  leave.

I  had  a  Box  of  stones  of  yours  which  I  did  imploy  for
your  use  in  Rice.  Some  of  them,  and  the  Remaynder  I
brought  backe,  but  all  is  lost :  for  I  had  some  necessaries
for  you,  as  linnen  and  some  clothes,  but  all  is  gone,  and
not  able  to  helpe  my  selfe  :  you  shall  receive  a  Letter  from
Captaine  Ball,  which  I  got  out  of  the  Salomon  after  she
was  taken,  but  it  was  opened.  I  pray  commend  mee  to
Master  Muschampe,  Master  Hayes,  and  Master  Ford,
Thomas  Miller.

Yours  to  my  power,
Kellum  Throgmorton.

The  nineteenth,  Master  David  sent  me  a  Letter  from
Master Ball, bearing date the sixe and twentieth of
January,  expressing  his  cares  and  endevours  for  furthering
the  Banda  businesse  ;  that  it  falleth  out  so  late  in  the  yeare
before  I  send  unto  you  hath  beene  caused  through  discord J^^f^i
betwixt  Captaine  P.  and  my  selfe,  who  of  himselfe  weake  ^Ltafious '
and  extreame  covetous,  and  instigated  by  his  proud  and  to  the  Dutch :
insolent Masters, did obstinately insist to crosse our  1  had  the  whole
Designes,  thinking  to  bring  us  under  his  command. If  Letter,  which
this  Captaine  and  his  Masters  had  beene,  they  had  this  /™fe°lfess  ^
yeare  come  for  Banda,  to  have  made  further  tryall  of  these  tfos  one/ym
Flemmings,  that  threaten  fire  and  sword ; but  have  sent
only  two  or  three  shippes that  are  worst  able  to  hold  out ;
which  if  not  catched  up  by  the  Flemming,  will  be  suffi-
cient. But  if  taken,  the  losse  will  be  the  lesse  unto  us.
I  shall  not  be  able  to  send  you  Beefe,  Porke,  or  Powder
for  your  reliefe,  because  I  can  get  none  from  these  new-
come  ships,  how  much  it  doth  grieve  us,  that  wee  are  able
to  doe  no  better,  &c.

The  Commander  Captaine  Derickson  used  the  English  Some  °f^e
Prisoners  with  some  kindnesse,  and  more  would,  but  for  D?tct  k)ndh  t0
Rials  strict  command  :  him  therefore  I  did  write  unto,  with

in

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1618.

thankes,  &c.  who  also  passed  on  the  three  and  twentieth

[I.  v.  674.] of  August,  by  the  Hand  of  Neylackey,  and  strooke  his

Dencksons mayne  top-saile  ; and  there  was  shot  in  kindnesse  betwixt

us  on  either  part  some  five  or  sixe  Peeces ; he  going  for

the Moluccas. The  six  and  twentieth, the  Hollanders

Frigat  fetching  water  at  Salamon,  were  beset  by  Lantore

men,  one  killed  and  divers  hurt,  and  had  beene  all  taken

but  for  discovery  by  Salamon  men.

The  Captatm The  tenth  of  September,  I  sent  William  Newbegin  with

ktotteEn'lish  ^Ppty  of  two  Goates  twelve  Hens,  Mackerell,  Oranges,
and  other  trifles  to  the  English  at  Pooloway.  The  Mes-
senger returned  with  a  Letter  from  Master  Cassarian
David,  commending  the  usage  of  the  Captaine  since  the
departure  of  the  Commander,  in  what  he  might  be  bold
without  offending  orders  prescribed  unto  him,  that  the
Salomon  and  Thomas  were  sent  away  with  goods  and
victuals,  and  one  and  twentie  dayes  after  the  Attendance,
wherein  I  was  to  shape  my  course  directly  for  Poolaroone :
English dissen-  bxxt  by  reason  the  Salomon  and  Thomas  both  ware  their
tions\5 vanity.  flagges  'm  ^t  mayne-top,  and  that  in  sight,  in  going  out
of  the  Road  of  Bantam,  the  President  thinking  it  done  in
pride  by  the  two  Ship-masters,  as  also  shaping  a  forbidden
course  for  water  at  Pontang  :  therefore  it  was  decreed  that
I  should  first  goe  to  Maccasser,  there  to  take  the  govern-
ment of  the  three  ships  and  dispose  them  after  the  order
of  a  Fleet.  If  it  had  not  beene  for  striving  for  authoritie
betweene  Captaine  P.  and  Captaine  B.  You  should  have
beene  visited  last  yeare  with  the  Charles  and  the  Unicorne,
and  other  good  ships.  But  multitude  of  Commanders
maketh  a  confused  government,  which  is  the  only  cause  of
ours,  and  your  faring  the  worse  this  yeare,  &c.

Here  followeth  also  a  Letter  from  the  English  at
Amboyna,  to  Master  David.

CAptaine,  I  heartily  commend  me  unto  you  and  to  our
Master  and  his  Mate,  and  all  the  rest  of  the  Com-
panie,  this  is  to  let  you  understand,  that  I  am  in  good
health,  and  all  the  rest  of  our  Company,  only  Andrew

112

NATHANIEL COURTHOP  a.d.

1618.

Keele  and  Thomas  Sweet  is  dead,  but  all  the  rest  are  in
good  health,  but  used  very  basely :  for  we  are  kept  in
Irons  night  and  day,  and  if  we  have  not  a  Releasement  the
sooner,  I  thinke  it  will  make  an  end  of  us  all.  I  marvell
much  we  could  not  heare  from  you  by  the  Frigat,  which
made  me  the  more  forgetfull  to  write  unto  you.  No  more
at  this  time,  but  the  Lord  have  you  in  his  keeping.
From  Amboyna,  this  third  of  October,  161 8.

Your  Friend  to  command  to  his  power,

Richard  Nash.

I  received  Copies  of  certaine  notes,  The  first  a  petition  Petitions  of
of  the  English  for  shift  of  clothes  and  to  be  freed  of  Irons  the  English
in  the  day  time ; which  was  in  some  sort  granted. The l1^ !  1°
second,  that  each  man  might  come  before  the  Generall  to  Genera//
speake  for  his  libertie,  which  would  not  be  granted. The  cruelly
third,  that  the  Dutch  Generall  might  give  us  an  old  ship,  rejected.
Pinnasse  or  Praw  to  carrie  us  to  Bantam  ; or  that  hee
would  set  a  ransome  on  the  English  Prisoners,  which  he
would  neither  grant  nor  heare  of ; but  answered,  that  he
would  keepe  us  Prisoners  so  long  as  any  English  were
upon  Poolaroone. The  seventh  of  June  we  were  sent
for Pooloway. The fourth humble petition of the
Prisoners in Nero Road. The fourth of  June, 161 8.
Humbly  shewing  unto  your  good  Lordship,  that  whereas
your  Lordships  poore  Petitioners  and Prisoners, being
altogether  doubtfull  of  any  speedie  Releasement,  and  de-
sirous to  avoyd  the  dangers  of  sicknesse  and  mortalitie,
incident  to  all  men  in  these  unwholsome  Countries,  do
therefore  beseech  your  Lordship,  that  it  may  stand  with
your  Lordships  pleasure  to  grant  unto  your  Lordships
said  Petitioners,  license  &  favour  to  go  for  Holland  this
yeare  in  your  Lordships  ships. And  so  your  Lordships
poore  Prisoners  shall  doe  our  best  endevours  to  doe  your
Lordships  service in  our  passage,  wishing  there  may  be  a
good  end  of  all  these  differences ; and  thus  hoping  of
your  Lordships  favourable  charitie  herein  towards  us  poore
Prisoners ; we  will  pray  for  the  prosperous  successe  of
v  113  h

A.D.

I6l8.

[I.  v.  675.]

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

your  Lordships  Affaires.  The  Petition  would  bee  granted.
The  fifth,  on  the  second  of  July,  Humbly  sheweth  unto
your  Lordship,  that  we  poore  Prisoners  now  in  this  Castle
of  Pooloway,  doe  petition  unto  your  Lordship,  that  we
may  be  allowed  such  victuals  as  may  sustaine  our  bodies
without  famishment,  and  that  your  Lordship  will  be
pleased  to  spare  us  money  to  buy  such  things  as  are  need-
full  for  us :  for  our  clothing  at  this  time  is  but  very  bare.
Wherefore  we  beseech  your  Lordship  to  take  some  course
for  us  before  your  Lordships  departure  from  hence.  Like-
wise we  beseech  your  Lordship,  that  we  may  be  suffered
to  walke  abroad  at  severall  times,  as  your  Lordship  shall
be  pleased  to  give  order.  And  so  your  Lordships  poore
Prisoners  shall  pray  for  the  good  successe  of  your  Lord-
ships Affaires. Which  would  not  be  granted.

§  in.

Other  Acts  of  the  Hollanders  in  divers  places  of
the  Indies :  Encouragements  from  Sir  Thomas
Dale,  Master  Jordan  and  others,  and  various
events  in those  parts  till  his  death.

He  seven  and  twentieth  of  September,  I  sent  Robert
Hayes  with  a  white  flagge  to  visit  the  English
Prisoners,  and  to  carrie  such  refreshment  as  Poola-
roone  affoordeth,  who  being  kindly  used  by  the  Hol-
landers, returned  that  night. The  eight  and  twentieth  of
October,  I  likewise  sent  Arthur  Atkinson  to  Pooloway
with  refreshing. The  tenth  of  November,  the  Hollanders
made  an  ambushment  ashoare  at  Oretaton,  but  caught  one
slave  only  whom  they  cut  to  pieces. The  thirteenth  of
December,  heere  arrived  a  Keydupa  Prow  laden  with  Coco
Nfwes  °fthe Nuts :  she  brought  newes  that  the  Thomas  was  gone  for
the  Moluccas.

The  fourteenth  of  January,  I  had  provisions  from  Lan-
tore,  with  Abraham  that  went  with  Master  Mustian  for
Maccasser,  who  by  the  unskilfulnesse  of  the  Pilot  fell  with
Rosinging  an  Hand  sixe  leagues  to  lee-wards  to  our  great

114

Thomas,

NATHANIEL COURTHOP

troubles,  to  fetch  provision  in  small  Boats  hither.  He
brought  divers  Letters,  one  from  Master  Staverton,  in
which  is  mention  of  the  Hollanders,  that  through  their
brutish  usage  and  rapine,  taking  of  Junckes  of  all  places,
they  have  excluded  themselves  all  Java,  and  the  Rice  Coun-
tries, except  where  they  hold  by  force  :  for  Bantam,  Jacatra,
and  Japara,  I  referre  you  to  the  Presidents  Letter.

The  two  and  twentieth  of  November  last,  here  came
three  of  their  great  ships  braving,  to  this  place,  and  first
came  to  an  anchor  off  Tennacooke  Castle,  without  shewing
any  Colours.  And  at  night,  it  being  faire  Moone  light,
they  came  neerer  into  the  Road :  and  one  of  them  went
the  road  under  the  Hand  under  point  Jantava.  And  in
the  morning,  they  commanded  two  Java  Junckes  of
Jacatra,  having  in  them  some  fiftie  Quoine  of  Rice,  and
by  the  Java  Nochoda,  sent  a  Letter  ashoare  to  the  King,
and  great  men  of  Maccasser,  pretending  Debts  and  re-
quired satisfaction  for  their  mens  lives  murthered  two
yeares  since,  which  they  would  ballance  with  so  many  lives
of  men  of  qualitie  at  Maccasser.  The  King  sent  an  an-
swere,  what  I  know  not,  and  they  writ  againe,  but  hee
answered  not.  They  burnt  one  of  the  Java  Junckes,  and
on  the  sixe  and  twentieth,  set  sayle  as  we  conjecture  for
Amboyna.  The  last  yeare  I  wrote  what  provision  I  laded
on  the  ship  Salomon,  one  hundred  and  one  Quoyne,  three
hundred  seventie  seven  g.  of  Rice :  on  the  Thomas
seventie  five  q.  eightie  foure  g.  On  the  Attendance  six-
teene  q.  five  hundred  seventie  sixe  g.  (one  hundred  ninetie
three  q.  two  hundred  thirtie  seven  g.)  eight  hundred  sixtie
five  Jarres  of  Aracke,  most  upon  the  Thomas  :  also  sundry
other  provisions  divided  upon  the  ships,  which  with  Racke
and  Rice  amounted  to  three  thousand  nine  hundred  and
sixteene  Mas.  What  provision  was  laden  from  Bantam
and  Jacatra,*  I  know  not,  &c.  The  last  yeare  happened
great  mortalitie ;  there  dyed  out  of  the  Hope,  Captaine
Newport  that  worthy  Seaman  and  Commander,  also
Henry  Ravens  Master,  and  fortie  more  of  that  shippes
company. Out  of  the  James,  Captaine  Childe,  &c.

"5

A.D.
l6l8.

M.  Stavertons
Letter.

The  goods  in
the  ships  which
the  Dutch  took.
*But  for  pro-
lixitie  I  had
added  the
Invoice  of
goods  from
thence  which  I
had  written  by
M.  Ball.
Death  of
many;  of
Captain
Newport.

A.D.
I6l8.

Spaniards  and
Portugals  at
Jortan,  kill
M.  Jackson.

Japara
spoyled.
Jacatra
abused.
Bantam
frighted.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

He  sent  to  me  Master  Balls  Letter  to  him  wherein  is
relation  of  Master  Jacksons  losse  with  Juncke,  goods  and
slaves,  except  three  which  saved  themselves  by  swimming,
as  by  writing  from  his  Father  appeareth.  For  wanting
Rice  and  necessaries  he  put  into  Jortan  to  the  number  of
three  and  twentie,  under  colour  of  bringing  provisions
aboord,  entred  the  Juncke,  and  killed  him  and  all  his
company  but  three  which  lept  over-board,  and  carried  the
Juncke  away :  the  rest  of  the  Port  remayning  ashoare  are
Prisoners  to  the  King  to  answere  for  their  fellowes.  The
Flemmings  landed  at  Japara  by  night,  fired  the  Towne,
and  seven  or  eight  Junckes  in  the  road.  The  people  fled
to  the  Mountaines,  they  have  forcibly  built  a  Fort  upon
the  mayne  at  Jacatra,  and  another  upon  the  Hands  over
against  the  watring  place,  which  makes  the  Pangram  of
Bantam,  looke  about  him.

The  seven  and  twentieth  of  January,  here  arrived  a
small  Pinnasse  called  the  Francis,  with  advice  from  the
Fleet  and  reliefe,  Master  Robert  Jackson,  Master.

Sir  Thomas  Dales  Letter,  as  followeth.

Aster  Courthop,  as  unknowne  I  remember  my  love,
which  I  will  alwayes  be  readie  to  expresse,  in  respect
of  your  worthy  service,  for  the  honour  of  our  Countrey,
and  benefit  of  our  Honourable  Employers  :  and  doe  desire
you  to  proceed  in  your  good  resolution,  with  the  rest  of
your  honest  Companie ;  nothing  doubting  but  that  the
Company  will  recompence  your  deserts  to  the  full.  I
have  sent  you  by  this  Bearer,  only  to  supply  your  present
wants ;  the  particulars  are  enclosed  in  the  Presidents
Letter  :  and  will,  if  God  spare  me  life,  shortly  follow  ;  my
stay  being  only,  to  revenge  in  part  the  abuses  received
from  them,  having  now  an  oportunitie  by  a  difference
betwixt  them  &  the  King  of  Jacatra,  to  put  them  from
thence,  if  God  give  the  blessing,  which  I  intend  forth- with
to  put  in  execution :  If  it  shall  please  God  to  give  good
[I.  v.  676.]  successe,  I  shall  leave  all  safe  behind  me,  and  may  proceed
with  the  better  resolution  :  if  otherwise,  yet  I  must  adven-

116

M

NATHANIEL COURTHOP  a.d.

1618.

ture  forward  to  affront  them  there,  although  I  leave  an  ill
Neighbour  behind  me.  I  have  already  given  them  a  taste
of  twelve  hundred  great  shot  from  six  of  our  ships  within
the  space  of  foure  houres,  betweene  Bantam  and  Jacatra :
which  they  did  so  much  mislike,  that  they  left  us  in  the
plaine  field,  and  fled  before  us  to  the  east-wards  thorow  the
Bay  of  Jacatra,  in  sight  of  their  Castle  Reall.  For  other
newes  I  referre  you  to  the  Presidents  Letter,  not  doubting
but  that  he  hath  satisfied  you  at  large.  And  thus  with  my
best  wishes  for  your  health  and  safetie.  I  take  my  leave
untill  I  come. Remayning  your  assured  Friend,

Tho.  Dale.
The  Presidents  Letters.

M Aster  Nathaniel  Courthop,  we  heartily  salute  you
with  the  rest,  wee  have  thought  it  good  at  present
to  send  you  this  small  Pinnasse,  the  Little  Francis,  as  an
Adviser  with  such  provisions  as  she  is  able  to  carrie,  there-
by to  comfort  you  and  your  Company  in  the  interim,  not
doubting  but  as  you  have  begun,  so  you  will  continue
with  a  constant  resolution  to  defend  the  place :  when  you
are  also  to  incourage  the  Countrey  people  of  Pooloway,
Poolaroone  and  Lantore,  and  for  the  better  satisfaction  of
the  Countrey  people  we  have  sent  in  the  Pinnasse  one  or
two  of  the  Bandanezes ;  to  relate  unto  them  the  just  wars
that  we  have  with  the  Dutch.  For  shortly  after  our
arrivall  at  Bantam,  the  two  and  twentieth  of  November,
with  five  ships,  wherein  is  Admirall  for  the  Sea,  Sir  Thomas
Dale  Knight,  wee  understanding  so  many  injuries  and
insolencies  done  to  our  Nation,  aswell  in  those  parts  as  in
all  other  places  of  the  India,  we  tooke  one  of  their  ships
called  the  Red  Lion,  laden  with  Rice,  Pepper,  and  other
Commodities.  Whereupon  out  of  their  great  pride  they
imprisoned  two  of  our  Merchants  at  Jacatra,  and  chayned
them  in  their  Gate-house,  to  the  view  of  all  the  Countrey
people.  And  not  content  herewith,  their  house  being
strong  fortified  with  much  Ordnance  in  it,  shot  at  our
Goodoung,  and  set  fire  to  it  and  burnt  it  to  the  ground :

117

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1618.

as  also  they  shot  into  the  Java  quarter  into  the  Kings
house,  and  killed  many  Javas,  and  razed  the  China  quarter
to  the  ground  with  their  Ordnance,  and  with  fire.  And
the  King  hath  shot  some  Ordnance  against  their  house  or
Fort,  and  hath  had  many  skirmishes  with  them,  so  that  of
both  sides  there  hath  beene  slaughter,  but  most  of  the
Javas.  Now  the  King  of  Jacatra  seeing  himselfe  in  a
straite,  sent  a  Messenger  to  Bantam,  desiring  ayde  of  us.
And  calling  here  a  Councell,  concluded  to  send  a  fleet  of
eleven  Sayle  of  ships,  wherein  goeth  Sir  Thomas  Dale,
and  Captaine  Pring  Commanders,  not  only  to  surprize
their  ships,  but  also  to  destroy  their  Fort,  if  it  please  God
to  give  a  blessing  thereunto.  Which  being  once  effected,
by  Gods  grace,  we  determine  to  proceed  for  Banda  and  the
Moluccas,  hoping  in  God  that  we  shall  be  able  to  lay  some
part  of  their  insolent  pride.  If  not  altogether  this  yeare,
yet  the  next  we  expect  a  farre  greater  fleet  thereby  at  once
to  finish  all.  And  whereas  the  proud  Laurence  Reall  (the
Dutch  Generall  that  was)  hath  falsely  reported  that  he  hath
Letters  Patents  from  his  Majestie  of  England  to  surprize
us  in  those  parts  of  Banda,  and  the  Moluccas,  we  take
notice  thereof,  and  will  put  it  in  print  amongst  the  rest  of
their  lyes,  out  of  whose  mouth  there  commeth  not  a  true
word.  We  like  very  well  of  your  former  proceedings,  and
of  your  large  advise  concerning  those  parts,  praying  you
to  continue  therein,  and  with  a  stedfast  resolution,  not-
withstanding the  Hollanders  threatning,  to  defend  the
place  untill  we  send  further  ayde.  And  no  doubt,  but  the
Honorable  Company  will  highly  reward  you  and  all  those
that  faithfully  and  truly  doe  their  endevour  in  their
affaires.  Thus  leaving  farther  to  insert  at  present,  refer-
ring all  things  to  our  next,  in  which  God  willing,  we  will
write  you  more  at  large,  praying  God  to  prosper  your  pro-
ceedings to  his  glory  and  your  hearts  desire.
Bantam,  the  three  and  twentieth  of
December  161 8.

Your  loving  Friends,
John  Jordan,  Augustine  Spaldwin,  George  Ball.

118

NATHANIEL COURTHOP  a.d.

1618.

THe  James  and  the  Bantam  arrived  at  Bantam  from  Post-script  of
Jambe,  the  one  and  twentieth  dicto,  by  whom  we  Master
understand  of  the  death  of  Master  Richard  Westly,  mur-
thered  there  by  the  Dutch,  they  inviting  him  to  their
house,  to  give  him  his  foy,  he  being  bound  for  Bantam  in
these  ships,  and  there  ended  his  life.  The  three  and  twen-
tieth dicto,  I  set  saile  in  the  James,  Hound  and  Petty
France  from  Bantam,  towards  the  Fleet,  which  lay  about
the  Hands  of  Jacatra  neere  the  Holland  fleet,  hoping  to
have  beene  with  them  before  they  had  begunne  any  fight.
But  the  very  same  day  in  the  morning,  the  Fleets  had  a
very  hot  incounter  for  the  space  of  foure  houres,  our  men
valiantly  fighting,  and  they  no  lesse  defending  our  Fleet,  [I.  v.  677.]
having  shot  about  twelve  hundred  shot  to  the  Hollanders ;
so  that  they  have  had  such  a  breakfast  that  they  will  not
abide  a  second,  but  flye  before  us,  as  we  suppose,  only  to
draw  us  to  the  East-wards  from  their  Fort,  supposing
that  wee  shall  not  bee  able  to  come  up  this  Monson.  But
wee  have  not  followed  them  further  then  the  Easter  point
of  Jacatra,  whereas  wee  have  lost  sight  of  them,  and  know
not  as  yet  which  way  they  are  gone  either  to  the  East-
ward  or  to  the  Westward. Your  loving  Friendj

John  Jordane.

The  second  of  February,  we  by  councell  ordered  that
the  Francis  should  ride  under  the  Fort,  to  releeve  such
Junckes  as  should  come  thither  for  reliefe  :  divers  of  which
with  some  Praw  or  Curracorra  they  had  intercepted,  so  to
starve  the  Inhabitants. The  fift,  came  a  Praw  from  Poolo-
way  with  Letters  from  the  English  Prisoners,  deploring  Letter  from
that  lying  in  misery  and  irons  many  of  them  have  lost  the  Prisoners
their  lives,  who  if  they  had  beene  at  libertie  might  have  Z^lf^em
beene  alive,  and  have  done  their  King  and  Countrey  good  dead  by  misery
service,  and  praying  to  supply  their  wants  by  that  Praw  of  imprison- "
with  money  and  what  else  could  be  sent,  not  knowing  menU
whether  they  might  bee  suffered  hereafter  to  send  or  no :
which  I  answered  with  Certificate  of  the  newes  and  pro-
vision.

119

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1618.

The  thirteenth  of  February,  there  were  three  ships  in
Nero  Road,  one  whereof  had  her  beak-head  shot  off,  and
shot  thorow  in  fortie  places.  I  ghessed  it  one  of  the  ships
which  were  in  the  skirmish  at  Jacatra.

The  eighteenth,  I  received  a  Letter  by  a  Praw  from
Wayre,  from  Bartholomew  Churchman,  wherein  with
thankes  for  things  sent,  he  certifieth  that  the  Angell  came
from  Amboyna  that  night,  where  they  left  their  Generall
Dutch  pre-  to  get  all  their  forces  together,  which  will  bee  fourteene  or
paratton.  fifteene  ships  with  the  old  Generall  too,  that  commeth  from
Ternate :  and  shortly  they  looke  for  their  Fleet  from  the
Maneelos,  which  is  ten  ships.  And  they  say  they  will
goe  all  to  Java  together,  and  where  they  had  the  overthrow,
there  againe  they  will  set  upon  our  ships  to  recover  their
former  losse  and  disgrace  in  sight  of  all  the  Javas.  But
I  thinke  they  will  be  hanged  before  they  meet  upon  equall
tearmes.  Three  dayes  after  wee  had  received  your  Letter,
they  brought  us  all  to  Nero,  where  they  doe  allow  us  now
more  victuals  and  libertie,  then  they  did  before  (God  be
thanked  therefore)  and  within  two  or  three  dayes  we  are
to  goe  for  Amboyna  in  the  Angell,  &c.

The  two  and  twentieth  of  Aprill,  161 9.  I  did  write  to
Master  Staverton  at  Maccasser,  and  also  to  Master  Presi-
dent, certifying  that  at  that  time  there  was  neither  Hol-
land ship  nor  Gaily  in  Banda :  and  had  the  English  ships
comne  as  they  promised,  I  verily  thinke  there  would  not
at  the  end  of  this  Monson  beene  left  one  Hollander,
enemie  to  us  in  Banda,  by  reason,  I  know,  the  World  was
never  so  hard  with  them  :  their  wants  being  extreame,  both
for  men  and  victuals :  likely  that  few  of  their  Souldiers
but  would  have  fled  to  us :  wee  having  neither  stocke  nor
victuals,  but  bare  incouragement  of  words,  &c.

The  eight  of  June,  the  Pinnasse  set  saile  for  Seiran,  and
returned  the  fourteenth  of  July,  with  fiftie  thousand  Cakes
of  Sago.

The  three  and  twentieth  of  August,  I  sent  her  thither
againe.  Shee  returned  the  five  and  twentieth  of  Novem-
ber, so  full  of  leakes,  that  the  third  of  December  we  haled

120

NATHANIEL COURTHOP  a.d.

1619.

her  on  shoare,  and  found  her  so  rotten  that  we  saved  what
we  could,  and  set  fire  on  the  rest.

The  fift  of  December,  there  came  a  Lantore  Coracora,
which  brought  newes  that  foure  dayes  before  they  had
taken  a  Holland  Praw  rowing  from  Nero  to  Pooloway,
there  being  foure  Holland  Prawes  in  company,  bound  for
Pooloway,  who  came  by  Lantore  daring  the  Banda  men
to  come  forth :  who  manned  two  Prawes,  and  followed
them  almost  to  Pooloway,  and  tooke  one  of  them,  and
killed  all  the  men,  being  twentie  Blackes  and  nine  Hol-
landers. The  Lantore  men  are  now  in  heart :  and  now  I
have  gotten  the  Banda  men  to  repaire  the  Fort  at  the
Hand,  beeing  much  out  of  reparations.  The  foure  and
twentieth  of  December,  heere  arrived  a  Juncke  from  Mac-
casser,  which  brought  us  some  provision,  but  no  newes
from  the  West.  That  day  Master  Jackson  misse-behaving
himselfe  to  the  Captaine  was  censured.

The  twelfth  of  January,  an  Holland  Coracora  which
came  from  Amboyna  with  Letters  to  the  Captaine  of  Nero,
put  off  by  a  gust,  was  taken  by  the  Ilanders. The  Letters
contayned  their  losing  of  Bachan  to  the  Spaniards,  and
their  troubles  at  Amboyna  and  Luho,  but  no  newes  from
the  West. The  thirtieth,  I  sent  over  Robert  Hayes  with  s*™md$t  of
the  Priest  of  Pooloway  to  Lantore,  to  conferre  with  the  L«ntore  talked
Orancajas  there  about  the  surrender  of  their  Land  to  the
Kings  Majestie  of  England ; to  which  they  all  agreed,
that  the  Sabandar  of  Lantore  should  be  the  man  to  come
over  and  agree  with  me  about  that  businesse. And  that
whatsoever  he  should  agree  upon,  the  whole  Countrey
would  affirme  unto. Also  I  sent  to  them  concerning  their
making  Islams  of  all  such  Hollanders  as  came  running  Making
from  Nero,  which  caused  so  few  to  come. They  promised  q?0™?-  °^
it  should  be  no  more  so :  but  hereafter,  as  they  should  see
cause,  they  would  either  kill  them  or  send  them  to  mee.

The  eight  and  twentieth,  went  by  a  Holland  ship,  and
never  touched  at  Pooloway,  nor  Nero ; only  a  Boat  came  [I.  v.  678.]
aboord  her,  and  whither  she  went  I  know  not. I  ghessed,
they  brought  no  reliefe,  and  therefore  would  not  stay  for

121

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1619.

feare  of  Mutinies  amongst  the  Souldiers,  they  beeing  in

great want and distresse for victuals. Whiles Master

Hayes  was  over  at  Lantore,  the  Hollanders  brake  league

with  the  Solamon  men,  taking  three  Prawes  of  theirs.

Holland  Fleet The  thirteenth  of  February,  came  in  a  Java  Juncke,  and
reported  Mr- a  praw  of  thig  Iknd wkh  g  from  BurQ The f  ayas

tie  toure  oai/e  ««  •  /•  ..

could  tell  us  no  certaine  newes  of  our  shipping,  but  they

reported  that  thirtie  foure  Holland  ships  were  at  Bantam,
and  that  fifteene  English  ships  were  gone  thorow  the
Streights  of  Sunda :  and  thought  that  no  English  ship
would  be  here  this  yeare :  which  was  cold  comfort  to  me,
which  had  neither  direction  nor  stockes.  Many  Junckes
arrived  which  could  tell  no  other  newes,  one  a  Portugall
Frigat,  and  in  her  Mattheus  a  Blacke  whom  I  had  sent
the  last  Easterly  winds  to  Maccasser,  which  brought
Letters  from  thence,  but  Juncke  and  Letters  were  cast
away.  He  came  in  this  Frigat  which  was  bound  for  the
Moluccas,  but  having  stricken  on  a  Rocke  and  leake,  was
perswaded  to  come  to  Poolaroone.  I  tooke  up  all  his
lading,  God  make  mee  able  to  pay  him.

The  twentieth  of  March,  I  received  a  Letter  sent  from

Master  Staverton  at  Maccasser,  dated  the  seventh  of  Feb-

Seven  English  ruary,  wherein  is  mentioned  the  report  of  the  Hound  and

ship  taken  in  Samson,  taken  at  Patania  by  the  Dutch ; the  Beare,  Rose,

buhe  Hollan-  Hope,  and  Dragon  at  Tecoo ; and  at  Bantam,  a  ship

ders%  called  the  Starre,  new  come  out  of  England  :  complayning

also  of  wants  there,  by  neglect  at  Bantam. The  two  and

twentieth,  here  arrived  a  Praw  from  Maccasser,  with  one

Guilliam  Gualtier  a  French-mans  goods  sent  me  to  sell  for

him. The  losse  of  the  ships  aforesaid,  I  thought  good  to

adde  out  of  a  Letter  of  Master  Muschamp,  to  Master

Courthop.

Laus  Deo  in  Jacatra,  this  ninth  of  March,  16 19.

WOrthy  and  respected  friend  heartie  salutations :  my
hope  was  to  have  beene  my  owne  Messenger,  but
there  was  an  unfortunate  change,^  and  time  spent  to  little
purpose,  the  manner  I  referre  to  future  relation,  not  being

122

NATHANIEL COURTHOP  a.d.

1619.

desirous  to  censure  my  superiours,  only  to  cleere  my  selfe
of  the  trust  you  imposed  upon  me,  which  I  prosecuted
with  all  my  endevours,  and  to  performe  my  promise  in
returning,  freed  my  selfe  from  the  chiefe  Merchants  place
in  Bantam.  After  all  hope  was  past  of  comming  to  you
I  was  appointed  chiefe  for  Siam,  and  went  with  the  Presi-
dent for  Patania,  where  we  fell  in  the  hands  of  our
Enemies,  and  in  the  defence  of  our  ships  and  goods,  per-
formed what  we  were  able :  but  the  Elements  fought
against  us,  for  contrary  to  the  common  course,  we  had
neither  wind  nor  tyde  to  thwart  the  ship  to  bring  our
Ordnance  to  beare,  and  they  breathed  themselves  to  our
great  disadvantage,  which  wee  might  have  helped  over-
night, if  the  President  had  not  stood  too  much  upon  points
of  honour  in  the  sight  of  the  Countrey  people,  which  in
his  owne  person  he  endevoured  to  maintaine,  with  as
much  resolution  as  ever  did  any  Commander,  and  most
part  of  us  seconded,  with  our  best  endevours  as  long  as
we  were  able  untill  many  of  us  were  killed  and  hurt.
Then  the  President  sounded  a  parley,  and  in  talking  with
Henrike  Johnson,  received  his  death's  wound  with  a  Mus-
ket, and  they  presently  surprized  our  ships,  made  pillage
of  all  we  had,  but  gave  most  part  of  us  our  libertie,  by
reason  of  our  wounds,  where  I  continued  foure  monethes
in  miserable  torture  with  the  losse  of  my  right  legge,  (shot
off  with  a  Canon)  for  want  of  Medicines  to  apply  to  it.
Afterwards  we  came  to  seeke  our  Fleet  in  three  Prawes,
and  left  two  of  them  with  Master  Weldin,  and  fortie  men
for  the  defence  of  our  Factorie  at  Jambe :  the  residue
beeing  sixe  and  twentie  with  my  selfe,  came  for  Bantam,
thinking  to  have  found  our  Fleet,  where  wee  were  sur-
prized with  their  ships  and  boats,  and  now  remayne
Prisoners  with  them,  which  is  more  grievous  to  me  then
the  rest,  by  reason  of  the  want  of  my  legge,  and  urgeth
me  to  solicite  to  goe  home  in  their  ships,  which  will  be  an
unseasonable  and  discontented  passage  at  this  time,  but  in
the  case  I  am  in,  I  doe  not  much  value  my  life,  and  have
every  day  lesse  comfort  and  courage  to  remain  in  these

123

A.D.
1619.

His  name
Robert  Hold-
ings now  at
Japarra.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

parts  for  either  you  or  my  selfe,  howsoever  I  make  no
question,  our  honourable  Masters  will  truly  value  your
deserts.  God  send  you  well  home,  to  receive  the  guerdon
thereof,  and  the  comfort  of  your  friends,  who  as  I  heare
are  very  desirous  to  see  you,  and  your  elder  brother  wished
the  Pursers  Mate  of  the  Starre  to  tell  you,  that  you  should
come  home  with  the  first,  and  that  while  he  had  a  peny
you  should  not  want  to  receive  it.

The  newes  since  our  taking,  as  followeth.

The  Starre  comne  out  of  England,  taken  in  the  Straights
of  Sunda  :  the  Dragon,  Expedition,  Rose,  and  Beare  taken
at  Tecoo,  with  sixe  of  their  ships,  they  came  upon  them
unprovided,  and  the  Deckes  of  the  Dragon  was  so  pes-
tered with  Pepper  and  other  things,  that  they  could  not
use  one  quarter  of  their  Ordnance,  so  that  they  were  taken
without  any  great  resistance :  the  residue  of  our  Fleet
are  at  the  Coast :  viz.  ten  ships,  where  it  is  supposed  they
stay  to  joyne  with  seven  ships  that  are  at  Surat,  and  three
of  the  King  of  Denmarkes  ships,  which  will  be  of  force
sufficient  to  revenge  our  injuries,  if  God  be  of  our  side
and  that  they  have  no  new  force  out  of  Holland :  they
have  now  not  above  fourteen  ships  before  Bantam,  and
the  Pangram  continues  their  mortall  Enemie,  all  the  forces
they  have  (which  was  thirtie  sayle  at  one  time)  cannot
bring  him  to  any  composition,  but  wholly  relyeth  upon  our
Fleet,  and  his  owne  strength,  which  will  much  advantage
the  Companies  Trade,  if  they  be  of  force  to  make  their
owne  way,  and  assist  him  according  to  expectation.
[I.  v.  679.]  Excuse  my  unperfect  advise,  for  I  have  neither  time  nor
place  to  write  as  I  would,  when  occasion  shall  serve,  you
shall  find  me  alwayes  readie  to  deserve  your  love  and
friendship,  remember  my  love  to  Master  Hayes,  Master
Jones,  John  Elmor,  Thomas  Dobins  and  all  the  rest,  with
my  dearest  affection  to  your  selfe :  I  rest  now  and  ever

Your  faithfull  friend  to  his  power,

George  Muschampe.
124

NATHANIEL COURTHOP  ad.

1620.

The  eight  and  twentieth  of  March,  1620.  here  arrived
a  Juncke  from  Jortan,  laden  with  Rice.  The  third  of
Aprill,  three  Holland  ships  sayled  into  Nero  Road.

This  yeare  I  had  no  Letter  nor  any  advice  from  our
Commanders  at  Bantam,  nor  any  supply  :  and  am  enforced
to  take  up  all  my  mens  goods,  to  buy  victuals,  to  pay  fiftie
per  cento,  per  annum  interest.  The  thirtieth,  I  sent  a
Letter  to  the  President  and  Commanders  signifying  my
wants,  and  if  the  Portugall  Frigat  had  not  come  in,  I
must  have  given  over  the  place,  whom  yet  I  am  enforced
to  send  to  Bantam  for  his  payment  on  my  Bill.  God
grant  mee  good  getting  out  of  these  Countrie  peoples
hands  :  for  they  have  spent  their  Gold  and  estates,  begger-
ing  themselves :  and  divers  of  them  losing,  some  their
lives,  others  their  liberties  in  holding  out  in  expectation
of  the  English  forces.  Can  the  Heathens  saile  to  and
againe,  as  also  all  other  Nations,  French  and  Portugals,
and  only  the  English  feare  to  adventure  the  Companies
goods,  passing  over  the  matter  with  rub  out  another
yeare  ?  we  have  rubbed  off  the  skinne  alreadie,  and  if  we
rub  any  longer,  shall  rub  to  the  bone ;  I  pray  looke  to
it,  &c.

The  third  of  May,  the  long  expected  Jurotinge  arrived
with  his  Juncke,  Master  West  dyed  of  the  Fluxe.

The  twentieth  of  June,  I  sent  Letters  to  Maccasser,
with  a  Letter  inclosed  to  the  President  and  Commanders,
advising  to  send  a  ship  with  provisions,  and  of  the  Lan-
tore  men  holding  out  still  in  expectation,  and  that  except
some  such  course  be  taken,  they  should  see  mee  before
they  should  heare  any  further  from  me.

The  three  and  twentieth  of  September,  Jurotinge  set
saile  for  Maccasser,  whom  I  sent  to  fetch  Rice :  and  with
him  three  China  men,  which  ranne  from  Nero  to  the
Blackes  at  Lantore,  which  but  for  me  would  have  forced
them  to  turne  Slammes.

[Chap.  X,
125

A.D.
l620.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

This  Juro-
tinge,  M.
Staverton  in  a
Letter  of  his
which  I  havey
calleth  an
unluckie fellow
(as  heere  hee
proved)  seem-
ing a  blacke
Saint,  being  a
blacke  DevilL

Chap.  X.

The  continuation  of  the  former  Journall  by  Master
Robert  Hayes,  contayning  the  death  of  Cap-
taine  Courthop,  succession  of  Robert  Hayes,
surrender  of  Lantore  to  His  Majestie,  newes  of
the  peace,  and  after  the  peace  Lantore  and
Poolaroone  seized  by  the  Dutch,  with  abomin-
able wrongs  to  the  English.

He  eighteenth  of  October,  1620.  Our
Captaine  Nathaniel  Courthop  came  to
me  Robert  Hayes,  and  said  that  he  heard
say,  there  were  two  Prawes  gone  into
Lantore  yesterday,  which  were  Key
Prawes  as  hee  thought  (yet  were  not)  and
in  regard  of  former  abuses  to  Jurotingee,
hee  would  goe  and  revenge  the  same.  I  prayed  him  to
stay  till  he  heard  from  thence  whether  it  were  so  or  no :
But  hee  refused  saying,  if  they  were  not  of  Key,  it  were
but  so  much  labour  lost,  &  now  he  might  go  with  the
Priest.  Thus  went  he  over  that  night  with  his  Boy
William,  wel  fitted  with  Muskets  and  weapons ;  promis-
ing to  returne  in  five  dayes,  and  bidding  me  send  for
water  on  the  three  and  twentieth,  which  I  did,  but  he  came
not,  and  sent  me  word  hee  would  come  the  sixe  and  twen-
tieth at  night.  Hee  came  accordingly  part  of  the  way,
the  Priest  staying  at  Lantore,  because  it  was  a  great  Feast
with  the  Blacks  the  next  day.  There  were  one  and  twentie
persons  in  the  Boate  with  sixe  Muskets  and  Fowling
Peeces  of  the  Companies,  and  goods  of  the  Captaine  to
the  value  of  one  hundred  and  fiftie  Rials  of  eight  or  up-
wards. Comming  thwart  of  Pooloway,  about  two  or  three
a  clocke  in  the  morning,  they  met  with  the  Hollanders
Coracora  and  one  Praw  more  with  some  fortie  small  shot,
and  comming  up  with  them  fought  with  them :  where  the
Captaine  behaved  himselfe  couragiously  untill  divers  of

126

ROBERT HAYES  ad.

1620.

the  Banda  men  were  slaine. And  the  Captaine  also  re-
ceiving a  shot  on  the  brest  sate  downe,  and  with  all  his  CaptaineCort-
Peece  being  cloyed  threw  it  over-boord,  and  then  leapt  %™%%?\
over-boord  himselfe  in  his  clothes,  the  Praw  being  too  hot  /,oor^
to  stay  in. And  what  became  of  him  I  know  not : but
the  Blackes  say  surely  he  there  sunke,  by  reason  of  his
wounds  and  his  clothes  all  about  him. There  came  of
those  one  and  twentie  persons,  seven  ashoare,  who  had  not  [I.  v.  680.]
beene  wounded,  and  were  strong  to  swimme,  the  space
being  some  five  miles. The  same  night  Riall  a  Dutch-
man (formerly  turned  Moore)  ranne  away  to  the  Hol-
landers with  a  small  Praw.

The  seven  and  twentieth  of  October,  I  went  to  the  Master  Hayes
Fort  at  Neylackey,  and  calling  the  Company  together,  succeeas-
demanded  of  them  their  purpose :  and  they  all  promised
that  as  formerly  they  had  beene  ruled  by  the  Captaine,  so
now  they  would  be  ruled  by  me  Robert  Hayes,  as  know-
ing before  that  I  wTas  to  succeed  in  case  of  Mortalitie. I
tooke  order  concerning  better  watch,  having  but  twentie
three  men  on  Neylackey,  and  two  barrels  of  Powder  with
that  which  was  in  the  Gunnes. The  one  and  thirtieth,  I
sent  a  small  Praw  to  Lantore,  with  foure  men  to  certifie
Robert Randall of businesse. The same night the  New  agree-
Sabander  Rato,  came  with  a  Coracora  and  an  Orankay,  mtnt°etw*xt
well  provided  to  bring  over  the  Priest  and  Robert  Randall  ta-ine  ^dtke
with  them. So  all  the  chiefe  of  the  Countrey  came  to  the  people.
Fort  on  Saturday  in  the  Evening  the  fourth  of  November,
and  called  all  our  company,  demanded  whom  they  should
now  (our  Captaine  being  dead)  trust  to  take  charge :  they
all  answered  Master  Hayes : they  further  demanded,  if
they  would  stand  to  that  which  I  should  promise,  because
they  were  not  to  make  agreement  with  a  multitude  with-
out a  head. They  all  answered,  they  would  performe  all
my  agreements  and  promises  to  the  utmost  of  their  power.
I  then  being  settled  in  my  businesse,  demanded  thirtie
men  each  night  to  come  to  watch  with  us,  viz.  fifteene  at
the  Hand,  and  fifteene  betwixt  the  two  Forts ; for  that
I  feared  assault  in  the  night :  and  it  was  agreed.

127

Key-men
chastised.

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1620.

The  fift  of  November,  the  Sabander  Rato  came  with  the
Priest  to  me,  to  know  my  determination  about  foure
Peeces  of  Ordnance,  which  the  Captaine  had  promised  to
Lantore,  as  Master  Randall  knew  &  my  selfe ;  and  perus-
ing the  Presidents  Letter  to  go  thorow  with  them  of
Lantore,  as  we  had  done  with  them  of  Poolaroone  and
Pooloway ;  I  answered,  that  if  the  Chiefe  would  come
over  and  agree  with  me,  I  would  performe  their  request.
The  seventh,  Robert  Randall  went  backe  with  the  said  Sab.
Rato  in  the  Corocora,  which  Rato  said  hee  would  certifie
the  Sab.  of  Lantore  and  the  Orankayes  of  my  answere ;
and  that  writhin  three  dayes  I  should  expect  them  againe.
At  present  here  were  seven  Key  Prawes  in  the  Road,  and
the  seventeenth,  I  manned  our  Oranbay  with  a  Murtherer,
and  seven  Muskets,  and  went  with  other  five  Muskets  on
the  Flanker  at  Feriat,  and  sent  to  the  Key-men  that  two
of  their  Chiefe  should  come  and  conferre  with  me  about
the  cloth  stolne  from  Jurotinge :  But  they  all  swamme  on
shoare,  till  the  Countrey  people  tooke  up  the  matter,  and
gave  mee  two  Key-men  pledges,  whom  I  kept  at
Neylarkey.

The  foure  and  twentieth,  came  three  Corocoras  with
other  Prawes  from  Lantore,  for  the  Guns  promised :  and
upon  their  demand  of  ayde  of  us,  and  agreement  to  sur-
render their  Land  to  the  Kings  Majestie  of  England,  I
gave  them  two  Sakers  and  one  Demiculverin.  The  same
day  the  Key-case  was  ended.  And  the  same  day  they  of
Lantore  surrendred  the  Land  to  the  Kings  most  excellent
rendred  to  the Majestie.

The  sixe  and  twentieth  of  November,  we  saw  a  saile  to
the  West,  and  all  the  chiefe  of  Banda  being  here  put  off
with  thirteene  Corocoras,  and  came  up  with  her,  being  a
DutchAdvlsor  Holland  Advisor  from  Japan  and  Amboyna,  with  Letters
for  Banda.  They  killed  foure  and  kept  three  alive,
beeing  in  all  seven  Hollanders.  The  Letters  they  brought
me,  but  I  could  not  attayne  to  the  full  contents  by  want
of  the  Dutch  Language.  Only  thus  I  found  that  the
English  and  Hollander  were  agreed  at  home,  and  I  read

128

Lantore  sur-

taken.

ROBERT HAYES  a.d.

1620.

the  thirtieth  Article  of  agreement  betwixt  us  and  them :
so  that  I  thought  it  not  unfit  to  send  the  Letters  to  Poolo-
way.  I  would  have  kept  the  businesse  from  the  Banda
men ;  but  then  it  would  have  beene  worse  for  us.  I
therefore  disclosed  it  to  the  Priest  of  Pooloway,  so  to
frame  our  answere  to  the  whole  Countrey,  namely,  that
shippes  both  English  and  Dutch  were  to  come  thither  to
end  the  businesse,  and  that  it  were  good  those  Writings
should  be  sent  to  the  Hollanders  to  redeeme  their  three
men  with  sixe  Blackes.  Wee  were  glad  of  the  agreement,
but  knew  not  how  to  cleere  our  selves  of  the  Countrey
people,  in  case  of  peace.

The  eight  and  twentieth,  I  sent  Robert  Munday  with
sixe  Banda  slaves  to  Pooloway  with  a  flagge  of  Truce  and
that  Packet  of  Letters,  and  to  redeeme  their  men,  and  to
send  word  whether  they  would  persist  in  their  rigorous
courses,  or  be  still  till  ships  came :  which  if  they  refused,
that  they  take  notice  that  the  Banda  men  are  in  hand  with
a  stratageme  against  them  (for  they  purposed  to  make  use
of  their  Ordnance,  and  besides,  to  set  on  their  Frigat,  but
I  would  not  disclose  the  particulars.)  The  nine  and  twen-
tieth, my  Messenger  came  backe  with  a  Letter  written.

To  his  loving  Friend  Master  Robert  Hayes,
Factor  for  the  English upon Poolaroone.

WOrthy  Sir,  your  Letters  of  the  eight  and  twentieth
of  November,  we  have  received,  also  the  packet  of
Letters  which  were  by  it,  and  have  with  great  joy  and
gladnesse  understood  the  friendship  and  agreement  be-  [I.  v.  681.]
tweene  both  our  Masters : wherewithall  is  ended  warre  The  Letter  of
which  was  begunne  with  great  bloud  shedding,  not  fitting  the  Dutch  to
for  two  Nations  which  have  beene  so  good  Friends  as f  E/£
yours  and  ours  have  beene. We  have  further  understood  peace%
with  sadnesse  the  losse  of  the  Campas  and  the  killing  of
foure  men  at  the  taking  of  her :  likewise  of  three  which
are  the  Banda  mens  Prisoners,  for  the  redeeming  of  which
they  will  have  sixe  men  :  howsoever,  I  will  not  leave  them
un-redeemed. The  Captaine  Nathaniel  is  killed  in  the
v  129  1

A.D.

l620.

M.  Courthop
buried  by  the
Dutch.

Monsons.

Want  of
water.

Beynazvre.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Prow,  for  which  God  knoweth  I  was  heartily  sorie.  We
have  buried  him  so  stately  and  honestly  as  ever  we  could
fitting  for  such  a  man.

He  proceeds  with  desire  that  Master  Hayes  and  an
Orankaja  should  come  that  they  might  conferre  upon  some
truce  with  the  Bandanezes  till  the  ships  comming,  wherein
they  should  well  agree  if  they  would  let  them  have  Mace
and  Nuts  for  their  money :  with  promise  of  securitie,  a
present,  thankes  and  commendations.

Dated  Pooloway,  in  the  Castle  of  Revenge  this  ninth  of
Decemb.  Anno  1620.  stilo  novo.

Your  loving  Friend  William  van  Anthon.

The  second  of  December,  the  Priest  was  content  to
take  man  for  man,  but  freemen ;  and  if  they  had  not,  so
many  hundred  Rials  of  8.  for  the  third.  And  I  writ  so
by  Ed.  Twelves,  and  advised  them  of  going  betweene
Lantore  and  Guning  Apee,  and  of  an  action  in  hand,  &c.
The  third  my  Messenger  returned  with  a  Holland  Prow
rowed  by  Spaniards,  and  two  Hollanders,  the  Minister  and
an  Ancient-bearer  which  brought  Nocoda  Ismael,  Mirnie,
and  one  hundred  Rials  of  eight.  And  I  suffered  no  Banda
man  to  come  to  the  Hand  but  only  the  Priest,  and  ex-
changed the  Prisoners.  I  entertayned  the  Hollanders  in
the  best  manner  I  could,  but  would  not  suffer  them  as
they  desired  to  speake  with  a  Banda  Orancaja,  suspecting
it  was  for  trade.  In  the  Letter  of  van  Anthon,  he  writes,
Touching  the  truce  of  which  you  write,  is  not  only  be-
tweene Yours  and  Our  Masters  made  a  truce,  but  also  a
good  and  sure  peace.  Therefore  there  is  nothing  to  say
betweene  you  and  us.  When  it  please  you,  you  may  goe
where  soever  you  list,  &c.

The  fift  day,  the  Westerne  Monson  blew  with  raine,
God  be  thanked,  for  wee  had  no  water  fell  to  any  purpose,
since  the  beginning  of  June  last  being  sixe  monethes,  so
that  wee  went  to  Lantore  seven  times  for  water,  besides
that  I  hired  the  Key-men  once.  The  same  day  came  a
Praw  from  Beynawre,  and  told  of  twentie  Corocoras  gone

130

ROBERT HAYES  a.d.

1620.

from  Seyram  to  Amboyna  against  the  Hollander,  besides
many  small  Prowes.  There  came  over  the  Sabander  Rato,
and  Sab.  Lantore  with  a  Coracora  and  two  Oranbayas  for
their  other  Gunne :  and  told  that  the  Hollanders  sued  for
peace  and  Trade  with  the  Lantore  men  and  those  of
Salomon,  but  were  deferred  till  tenne  dayes  for  answere.
I  bade  them  remember  their  Surrender,  and  how  they  had
promised  in  writing  to  sell  no  Spice  but  to  the  English.
Thus  the  Hollander  sought  by  policie  what  he  could,  not-
withstanding the  newes  was  publike.

The  eighteenth,  I  had  word  that  the  Hollanders  came  to
seeke  for  Trade  with  the  Lantore  men,  which  would  not
agree  except  they  would  restore  them  one  of  the  Hands  of
Nero  or  Pooloway  :  whereupon  the  Hollanders  Messenger
returned  to  Nero,  and  pulled  downe  their  white  Flags
which  had  stood  some  ten  dayes,  and  set  red  in  place,  and
sent  the  Frigat  to  shoot  into  Lantore.  And  at  night  the
Lantore  men  sent  three  Blackes  in  a  small  Praw  to  Nero,
which  killed  a  Hollander  in  a  house  without  the  Castle.
And  the  Sab.  Rato  sent  me  word  that  they  would  keepe
their  Spice  for  the  English  only.

The  one  and  twentieth  of  December,  here  arrived  at
the  Lucon  a  China  Juncke  from  Maccasser,  with  a  little
Rice  and  Racke  from  the  Factor  and  Letters,  but  no
newes  from  the  West ;  so  that  we  knew  more  Newes  here
then  they  there.  He  also  protested  in  his  Letter,  that  hee
had  that  on  trust,  having  no  meanes  left  but  borrowing,
the  people  censuring  and  the  Portugals  laughing  hereat.
Dated  the  nine  and  twentieth  of  November,  to  Captaine
Courthop.

The  nineteenth  of  January,  I  sent  over  the  Sewes  to
fetch  Letters  from  Master  Staverton,  in  a  Portugall
Juncke.  I  heard  then  by  Master  Randals  Letter,  that  the
Hollanders  had  burned  the  great  China  Juncke  with  our
Flag  in  her,  and  tooke  our  Letters  and  all  the  China  men
Prisoners :  but  the  Lantore  men  will  redeeme  them  with  Dutch
two  Hollanders,  they  tooke  in  a  small  Prow,  having  killed  cunnini-
the  third. But  the  Hollanders  care  not  so  much  to  re-

13l

A.D.

l620.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

deeme  their  men,  as  to  have  Trade  with  the  Blackes.
They  doe  what  lyeth  in  their  power  to  set  the  Banda  men
and  us  at  difference.  For  any  Sailes  they  see  they  pursue,
under  the  reach  of  Ordnance :  and  being  pursued  by
Banda  Coracoras,  put  out  a  white  Flagge  to  us :  which  I
thinke  basely  done.  They  were  intreated  by  mee  to  bee
still  till  the  Fleetes  came  but  they  will  not,  though  them-
selves goe  by  the  worst.  They  professe  friendship  to  the
English,  and  skirmish  with  the  Bandanezes,  with  whom
we  live.

The  Letters  which  I  received  from  Hoja  Murad,  was
the  Copie  of  a  Letter  from  Master  Hayward  the  Factor
at  Succadania  to  Master  Staverton  of  the  place.  Dated
[I.  v.  682.]  the  seven  and  twentieth  of  October.  It  was  under- written
by  Master  Staverton,  with  promise  of  reliefe,  his  best
endevours,  the  Copie  of  the  Articles  sent  from  our  Com-
manders at  Jacatra,  under-written  by  Captaine  Furresland
President,  Master  Brokden,  Master  Spaldin,  &c.

The  five  and  twentieth  of  January,  Matthew  Richards
was  censured  for  misdemeanour,  in  pulling  downe  the
Orders  set  up  in  our  place  of  Common  Prayer  and  uncivill
speeches,  by  consent  of  Councell.

The  ninth  of  February,  the  Dragons  Claw  arrived  and
brought  us  Letters  and  a  Cargazon.  The  eleventh,  came
by  eleven  Holland  ships,  and  I  sent  my  Prow  aboord  to
heare  of  our  shipping.  I  received  a  Letter  from  Master
Bates  from  Amboyna,  wherein  I  was  certified  of  the  Hol-
landers pretence  to  take  Lantore  with  two  thousand  Soul-
diers,  besides  a  thousand  more  of  all  Nations ;  which  was
strange  newes  to  us,  expecting  nothing  lesse,  in  respect
that  Land  was  surrendred  unto  us,  and  we  had  a  Factory
there,  with  men.  Ordnance,  and  goods.  I  expected  direc-
tions from  Jacatra  concerning  this  affaire,  but  I  had  no
knowledge  concerning  it.  Three  dayes  after,  in  came
some  three  ships  more.

The  sixteenth  at  night,  I  wrote  a  Letter  to  the  Dutch
Generall,  to  give  him  notice  of  the  surrender  of  Lantore,
and  of  our  men,  goods  and  munition  there. The  eigh-

132

Hollanders
pretence  to
Lantore.

Notice  given
to  the  Dutch
General,
which  would
give  no
answere.

ROBERT HAYES

A.D

l620.

teenth,  my  Messenger  returned  certifying  me  that  the
Dutch  Generall  read  my  Letter,  but  would  not  answere  it,
but  bid  my  Messenger  be  gone.  Now  the  Dutch  sent  to
the  Lantore  men  to  yeeld  up  their  Countrey  to  them,  and
to  put  the  English  from  them ;  but  they  would  not.
Neither  would  I  send  for  them  to  come  off,  for  I  could
not  answere  it,  namely  to  forsake  the  Companies  goods
there,  or  to  leave  the  Land  so  surrendred  to  the  Kings
Majestie.  The  Lantore  men  sent  over  to  mee,  to  know
what  we  meant  to  deceive  them,  and  not  to  succour  them
as  we  had  promised.  I  sent  over  my  Prow  with  men  in
her  for  the  defending  of  the  Companies  Spice  there.  But
for  that  the  Countrey  saw  I  could  not  relieve  them,  denyed
that  we  should  put  out  our  Flagge,  in  regard  they  must
defend  themselves  for  all  us.  So  all  the  men  returned
except  Robert  Randall,  and  two  more  English.

The  first  of  March,  the  Hollanders  forces  went  on
shoare  at  a  place  betwixt  Loquee  and  Maude  Anginy,  and
so  marched  to  Lantore,  and  tooke  the  Towne  and  fired  it ;
there  being  small  bloud-shed  on  either  partie.  The  In-
habitants fled,  and  Master  Randall  &  the  other  two
English  standing  by  the  Companies  goods  were  taken  and
stript  to  their  skinnes,  bound,  beaten,  throwne  over  the
Towne- wall ;  and  carried  aboord  the  Generall,  and  put  in
Chaines.  They  tooke  all  the  Companies  spice,  goods  and
monies  by  accompt  of  Robert  Randall,  three  and  twentie
thousand  foure  hundred  pounds  English,  of  Maces,  and
one  hundred  and  twentie  thousand  pounds  English  of
Nuts,  Monies,  five  hundred  Rials,  Cloth  and  others  to  a
small  quantitie.

The  third  day  the  Starre  arrived  here  at  Poolaroone  :  so  Dutch  fights.
I  went  aboord  and  made  Master  Welden  and  Master
Bates  acquainted  with  these  Occurrents.  The  fift,  they
went  over  to  the  Generall  at  Nero,  to  know  his  pleasure
about  setling  of  Factories  in  Banda :  but  hee  pretended
businesse  for  three  or  foure  dayes,  and  then  we  should
heare  further.  At  Master  Weldens  being  there,  he  spake
with  Master  Randall  with  much  adoe,  who  told  of  his

133

Hollanders
invade  Lan-
tore',  and  burn e
the  Towne.

The  English
villanously
abused  by
Hollanders.

A.D.

l620.

Hollanders
arts  at  Poola-
roone.

The  Fiscals
threats.

The  people
pleade  subjec-
tion to  his
Majestie.
High-zuay-
lazv.

Note  well.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

usage.  But  release  could  not  be  gotten  for  our  men.
Further,  the  Generall  demanded,  if  we  had  Poolaroone
men  in  subjection,  as  he  had  the  Lantore  men ;  otherwise
he  would  come  and  doe  it.  His  pretence  (as  I  suppose)
is  to  picke  a  Quarrell  with  the  Poolaroone  men  to  get  us
out,  and  after  to  settle  us  under  them.

The  sixt  of  March,  the  Hart  came  and  anchored  at  the
Lucon,  and  twentie  five  Prowes  contayning  some  fifteene
hundred  men,  came  and  lay  off :  and  the  Fiscall  came
aboord  the  Starre.  Now  the  Countrey  people  came  flock-
ing to  know  what  these  Prowes  meant,  and  whether  they
came  in  peace  or  warre.  The  Fiscall  intreated  Master
Welden  to  goe  ashoare  with  him :  but  Master  Welden
said  he  had  businesse  aboord,  desiring  me  to  goe  on  shoare.
The  Fiscall  then  told  the  Countrey  people  they  had  no-
thing to  say  to  us :  but  as  for  them,  if  they  did  not  come
and  submit  themselves  presently  to  the  Generall,  that  they
should  fare  as  those  of  Lantore :  &  would  know  how  they
durst  surrender  Poolaroone  to  the  English.  The  Coun-
trey said  that  they  knowing  it  to  bee  peace  betwixt  them
and  the  English ;  and  they  themselves  subjects  to  the
Kings  Majestie  of  England,  doubted  not  that  the  Hol-
lander had  any  further  to  say  in  this  matter.  The  Advo-
cate replyed,  that  if  on  the  morrow  they  would  not  come
over  and  surrender  their  Land  to  the  Generall,  that  then
they  would  come  with  their  forces,  &c.  and  so  hee  departed.
And  the  seventh  day,  the  Countrey  being  afraid  that  we
could  not  withstand  the  Hollanders  (as  indeed  then  we
could  not)  they  went  to  the  Generall  and  told  him  they
had  brought  the  Land  unto  him,  but  it  was  not  theirs  to
give,  being  formerly  given  the  English :  therefore  let
them  and  the  English  try  for  that  as  we  would.  The
ninth,  came  the  Advocate  with  certaine  Souldiers  and
Amboynezes,  to  command  the  Blackes  to  pull  downe  their
wals,  and  deliver  up  their  weapons,  which  they  did :  and
afterwards  bid  the  Blackes  take  off  our  Gunnes  from  the
Land ;  but  the  Orankay  answered  they  could  not  doe  it
by  reason  of  former  agreement. Then  the  Fiscall  would

134

ROBERT HAYES  a.d.

1621.

have  mee  to  take  them  off,  but  I  would  not. The  Fiscall

said  that  if  the  Blackes  would  not  give  them  the  Land  ^ententias

cleare  without  bushes  on  it  (mening  by  us)  that  then  he  Jl*xUf

would  come  with  his  forces. So  by  their  policie  they  set

the  Blackes  against  us  to  cut  our  throats  as  much  as  lay

in  their  power.

The  thirteenth,  the  Fiscall  came  to  see  if  the  Blackes  [I-  v.  683.]
had  pulled  downe  their  wals,  and  was  at  them  to  pull  off
our  Gunnes,  and  left  their  flagge  standing  upon  one  of  the
carriages  of  our  Gunnes  which  were  at  the  Towne,  the
same  time  Master  Welden  went  to  Nero  to  the  publica-
tion. The  fourtenth,  came  in  the  Exchange,  and  I  re-
lated to  Captaine  Fitzherbert  of  the  Occurrents  here,  who  Captaine
wished  hee  had  beene  here  sooner,  and  that  night  sent  one
of  his  men  on  shore,  and  carried  away  the  flag  into  Nero
Road  the  next  day  :  and  sent  word  backe  to  send  the  Starre
presently  away  for  Nero,  which  I  did  as  soone  as  I  could
on  the  eighteenth.

The  twentieth,  the  Fiscall  and  the  Captaine  Solar  came  b^h  hostility
with  twentie  Souldiers,  and  threw  downe  all  our  Ordnance  '  ngl
of  the  mayne  Hand,  being  nine  Peeces,  and  broke  them,
and  carryed  away  the  Peeces  thereof.  Also  they  tooke
away  a  flagge  from  one  of  the  Forts,  and  carried  away  a
Coracora  of  the  English  for  Pooloway.  As  for  the  little
Hand  they  medled  not  with  it  at  all,  but  as  we  had  it,  so
we  might  keepe  it.  The  flagge  which  they  tooke,  the
Fiscall  said  was  in  revenge  that  Captaine  Fitzherbert  had
taken  away  their  flagge.

The  one  and  twentieth,  the  Claw  arrived  from  Am-  Imperious
boyna. The  sixe  and  twentieth, 1621.  the  Generall  of uc  '
the  Hollanders  sent  to  the  Orankajes  of  Poolaroone,  com-
manding them  to  sell  us  no  more  Spice.

The  second  of  Aprill,  Master  Bate  went  to  settle  at  DutchEmpire.
Poolaway. The  Pinnasse  was  sent  on  a  Voyage  to  Seyran,
to  buy  slaves  and  Sago. The  eight  and  twentieth,  we
heard  of  a  strange  Massacre,  that  the  Generall  cut  in  pieces
fortie  foure  Orankajes  of  Lantore  for  Treason.

The  second  of  May,  the  Generall  signed  Articles  of

J3S

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1621.

agreement  with  the  Poolaroone  men,  which  were  all  one
in  effect  with  our  Articles  formerly  signed  with  them ;
only,  that  they  must  pay  Tenths  to  the  Prince  of  the  Coun-
trey.  The  fourth,  hee  sent  to  take  the  Orancks  of  Poola-
roone their  Oathes  to  be  true  to  the  Prince  of  Orange.
Seran  The  two  and  twentieth,  I  heard  of  the  Clawes  misfortune

treachery. betrayed  by  Seran  men,  losing  twentie  two  slaves  and  halfe
their  Sago,  being  glad  to  get  aboord  themselves ;  lost  two
English  suffer  men  ancj  aH  whatsoever  on  shoare. The  cause  sprang

^faufts°llanderS  k°m  Lantore  men  t^at  ranne  thither,  saying,  that  the
English  and  Hollanders  were  all  one  and  had  massacred
their  Orencajas.

The  fift  of  June,  I  went  in  the  Claw  from  Poolaroone
to  Amboyna,  where  I  went  ashoare  on  the  ninth.

I  have  added  to  this  Journall  of  Master  Hayes  (by  him
kindly  communicated  to  me)  a  Letter  of  Master  Fitzher-
bert  to  him,  sorting  with  these  Dutch  Affaires.

I  have  added  Master  Fitzherberts  Letter  here
printed  out  of  the  originall,  because  the
Dutch  in  their  Answere  make  him  an
Approver  of  their  Dessignes.

M  Aster  Hayes,  these  are  to  require  you  to  discharge
these  three  Dutchmen  out  of  the  Companies  ser-
vice, and  to  dispatch  them  off  the  Hand,  for  so  much  I
have  promised  unto  the  Dutch  Generall,  who  is  much
offended  with  them,  that  he  saith,  he  will  have  them  how-
soever. It  doth  grieve  mee  to  turne  away  the  Companies
Servants  in  this  manner,  preferring  in  my  minde  the  time
of  our  infortunate  warre  before  a  troubled  peace.  Other
newes  I  could  write,  but  I  referre  it  to  better  occasion.
From  aboord  the  Royall  Exchange  in  Nero  Roade,  the
eighteenth  of  March, 1620.

Your  loving  Friend,

HtJMFREY  FlTZHERBERT.

136

LETTER  TO  THE  EAST  INDIA  COMPANY a.d.

1620.

FOr  the  Readers  more  full  satisfaction  in  these  Affaires
of  Banda  (the  originall  of  the  Warres  betwixt  the
English  and  Hollanders  in  the  Indies)  I  have  re-printed
three  Letters  before  published :  as  also  the  Declaration  of
the  Hollanders  in  answere  thereto ;  and  the  same  refuted
by  certaine  Mariners,  together  with  Depositions  touching
the  Premisses.  And  lastly,  the  state  of  the  Quarrels  be-
twixt the  Dutch  and  the  Bandanezes,  and  betwixt  ours
and  them,  is  more  fully  cleered  by  the  Authour.

Chap.  XL  P-  v-  684-]

A Letter  written  to  the  East  India  Company  in
England,  from  their  Factours.

Bout  the  moneth  of  December,  1620.  the
Dutch  Generall  having  prepared  a  force
of  sixteene  ships,  declared  to  our  Presi-
dent, that  hee  entended  an  exploit  for
the  good  of  both  Companies,  without
mentioning  any  particulars  of  his  De-
signes.

And  seeing  us  to  have  no  such  forces  readie  to  joyne
with  him,  hee  said  hee  would  attempt  it  alone.  And  the
third  of  January,  1620.  he  did  set  sayle  from  Jaquatra  with
his  said  forces,  and  arrived  at  Banda  about  the  third  of
February  following.

Presently  upon  his  arrivall,  he  made  great  preparation
against  the  Hand  of  Lantore,  which  Hand  was  formerly
by  the  Inhabitants  thereof  delivered  over  unto  our  people
for  the  use,  and  under  the  subjection  of  the  Kings  Majestie
of  England,  whereof  our  Captaine  of  the  He  of  Polaroone
had  taken  possession,  and  had  also  setled  a  Factory  there.

When  our  chiefe  Factor  *  in  our  said  He  of  Polaroone,  *ThiswasM.
heard  of  the  purpose  of  the  Dutch  Generall  against  the  Hayes>  CaP-
said  He  of  Lantore,  he  wrote  a  Letter  unto  the  said  Gene-  ^fj1"
rail,  advising  him  that  the  said  He  of  Lantore  did  belong ngu  '
unto  the  King  of  England,  and  that  therefore  hee  should
not  attempt  any  violence  against  it,  seeing  there  is  an

137

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1620.

accord  made  in  England  betweene  us.  Which  Letter,  the
said  Generall  threw  from  him  in  a  great  rage,  scarce
vouchsafing  to  reade  it  over,  and  caused  the  Messenger
to  bee  thrust  out  of  doores,  requiring  him  to  advise  our
Factor  of  Polaroone,  presently  to  send  to  Lantore,  and
fetch  away  all  such  of  our  people  and  goods  as  were  upon
that  Hand ;  for  whomsoever  hee  should  find  there,  hee
would  take  them  as  his  utter  Enemies,  and  they  should
fare  no  better  then  the  Inhabitants.

And  within  ten  or  twelve  dayes  after  he  landed  all  his
forces  there,  and  subdued  the  said  Hand.  So  long  as  the
fight  endured,  our  Factors  and  Servants  there  (being  three
English  and  eight  Chinees)  kept  themselves  within  doores,
and  afterwards  our  people  came  out  of  their  houses,  and
told  them,  the  house  wherein  they  were,  was  the  English
house,  and  that  therefore  they  should  not  meddle  there-
with.

Neverthelesse  they  sacked  our  house,  tooke  away  all  our
goods,  murthered  three  of  our  Chines  Servants,  bound
the  rest  (as  well  English  as  Chinezes)  hand  and  foote,  and
threatned  them  to  cut  their  throats,  binding  them  three
severall  times  to  severall  stakes,  with  their  weapons
readie  drawne  out,  and  did  put  a  halter  upon  our  princi-
Robert  pall  Factors  necke,  drawing  up  his  head,  and  stretching

Randall.  out  ^  ntc]^^  readie  to  put  them  to  death,  yet  did  not
execute  them,  but  as  they  were  bound  hand  and  foot  (as
afore-said)  tumbled  them  downe  over  the  Rockes  like
Dogges,  and  like  to  have  broken  their  neckes,  and  thus
bound,  carryed  them  aboord  their  shippes,  and  there  kept
them  Prisoners  in  Irons,  foureteene  or  sixteene  dayes.

After  the  conquest  of  the  Hand  of  Lantore,  the  Dutch
Generall  threatned  to  doe  the  like  unto  Polaroone,  where-
*TMs  was  fore  our  principall  *  Factor  of  Polaroone  being  there  but
M.  Welden.  newly  arrived,  went  unto  the  Dutch  Generall  unto  the
Castle  of  Nero,  and  told  him  that  hee  heard  that  hee  pur-
posed to  take  Polaroone  by  force,  which  he  could  not
beleeve,  although  his  owne  Messenger  sent  to  Polaroone,
to  speake  with  our  Factors,  had  given  it  out  also,  that  the

138

LETTER  TO  THE  EAST  INDIA  COMPANY a.d.

1620.

Generall  himselfe  should  say,  that  if  the  English  did  not
come  presently  unto  him,  and  yeeld  the  said  Fort  of  Pola-
roone  unto  him,  hee  would  send  his  forces,  and  over-runne
all  the  Countrey,  but  hoped  hee  would  enterprize  no  such
thing  against  that  place,  considering  the  Articles  of  agree-
ment, and  knowing  how  many  yeares  (to  the  great  losse
and  charge  of  the  Company)  wee  held  possession  and
maintayned  the  place  to  the  use  of  his  Majestie  of
England.

The  said  Generall  made  little  answere  to  it,  as  though
there  were  no  such  matter  intended,  whereupon  our  said
Factor  tooke  his  leave  and  came  away.

But  the  next  day  he  was  followed  to  Polaroone,  with  an
Armado  of  twentie  sixe  Prowes,  and  one  ship,  which  did
put  the  Inhabitants  of  Polaroone  in  such  a  feare,  as  they
knew  not  what  to  doe  ;  whereupon  our  chiefe  Factor  there
asked  the  Commander  of  those  forces,  what  his  purpose
was  with  such  a  Fleet  there,  and  that  if  he  attempted  any
thing  against  Poolaroone,  it  was  a  breach  of  the  Articles  it
being  in  our  possession.  This  could  not  prevaile  with
him,  but  said  the  Land  was  theirs,  and  they  would  have  it
by  faire  meanes  or  force,  and  as  for  our  profession,  they
would  not  acknowledge  it  (the  Inhabitants  and  not  we
being  Masters  of  the  place)  and  so  the  Dutch  Commander
went  ashoare  unto  the  Inhabitants.

Whereupon  the  said  Inhabitants  asked  us  if  we  could
and  would  defend  them,  but  perceiving  we  were  not  able
to  defend  our  selves,  much  lesse  to  secure  them :  they
were  forced  to  yeeld  themselves  and  the  Hand  into  his  hands.

The  Dutch  tooke  downe  the  English  colours,  and  set
up  their  owne,  and  caused  the  Inhabitants  presently  to
bring  in  all  their  weapons,  and  to  throw  downe  all  their
wals,  and  would  have  forced  them  to  have  taken  all  our  [I.  v.  685.]
Ordnance  out  of  our  Fort,  which  they  at  the  first  refused
to  doe,  alleaging  that  they  had  formerly  given  and  sur-
rendred  the  Land  to  the  King  of  England,  and  in  respect
they  had  lived  so  long  with  the  English,  they  would  not
now  offer  us  any  injurie  or  violence.

139

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1620.

And  when  our  chiefe  Factor  went  ashoare  to  expostulate
the  matter  with  the  Dutch  Commander,  he  could  obtayne
nothing  at  his  hands,  but  that  the  Land  was  theirs,  and
things  must  be  so,  and  should  be  so.

Whereupon  our  said  Factor  went  againe  unto  the  Dutch
Generall  to  the  Castle  of  Nero  to  conferre  with  him  there-
abouts, but  he  would  give  no  other  answere,  but  that  hee
had  referred  those  businesses  to  his  said  Lieutenant  sent
thither,  with  whom  he  might  conferre  :  who  in  the  absence
of  our  chiefe  Factor,  had  brought  some  of  his  Souldiers
ashoare  upon  Poolaroone,  and  forced  the  Danders  to  throw
all  our  Ordnance  over  the  Rocke  from  the  place  where
they  were  planted  (being  nine  peeces)  whereof  foure  broke
with  the  fall,  and  were  all  carryed  away  by  the  Dutch.
Nathaniel Moreover  our  Captaine  of  Poolarone  who  had  defended
Courthop.  ^  jiancj  foure  yeeres  together,  going  to  Lantore  (at  the
request of the Inhabitants) to receive the surrendry
thereof  for  our  Kings  Majesties  use  (as  aforesaid)  and
returning  backe  againe  about  the  beginning  of  November,
1620.  was  slaine  by  the  Dutch. And  it  is  very  probable,
they  did  it  after  the  time  they  had  intelligence  of  the
publication  of  the  accord  at  Bantam,  in  March  16 19. For
presently  upon  the  said  publication,  they  sent  secretly  to
the  Hands  in  those  parts,  where  they  had  trade,  to  pre-
vent us  of  our  part  of  the  Spices  due  unto  us  by  the
accord.

After  the  said  Dutch  Generall  had  subdued  the  fore
mentioned  Hand  of  Lantore,  hee  constrayned  them  to
deliver  unto  him,  the  principall  of  all  their  children  for
Hostages :  Then  hee  tooke  away  from  them  all  their
small  Vessels  and  Boates,  and  then  he  also  required  all  the
men  of  Lantore  to  be  brought  unto  him,  and  they  brought
him  all  the  principall  men,  but  this  did  not  satisfie  him,
but  he  would  have  all  the  Bandanezes,  which  had  ayded
them,  as  also  all  their  wives  and  children,  small  and  great
to  be  brought  as  Prisoners  aboord  his  ships.

Which  when  the  Bandanezes  perceived  (doubting  that
he  meant  to  make  them  all  slaves  and  to  carrie  them  to

140

LETTER FROM PATRICK COPLAND  a.d.

1619.

some  other  places)  they  agreed  together  to  retyre  them-
selves into  the  highest  and  strongest  places  of  the  Land,
and  there  did  fortifie  themselves,  whereupon  the  Dutch
slue  of  them  and  tooke  twelve  hundred  persons  Prisoners,
most  of  them  being  women  and  children,  which  they  have
since  carryed  to  Jacatra  and  other  places.

Reverendo  in  Christo  Fratri  D.  Domino  Adrian
Jacobson  Hulsebus  apud  Jacatranenses  Batavos
Praedicatori,  Salutem  &  pacem  ab  Authore
utriusque.

LOving  Brother :  I  have  received  your  Letters,  and
according  to  your  desire,  have  returned  these  few
lines  in  answere  thereunto.  If  I  have  not  so  fully  satis-
fied the  particulars  of  your  Letters,  as  I  wished  and  pur-
posed, I  pray  you  impute  it  not  to  any  want  of  will,  but
unto  my  disacquaintance  with  your  Dutch  Tongue  and
hand :  I  should  peradventure  have  given  you  better  satis-
faction then  now  I  doe,  if  you  had  written  to  me  in  the
Latine  Tongue.  But  to  leave  excuses  and  come  to  the
matter,  the  thing  you  touch  in  your  Letter  is  but  too  too
true,  to  wit,  that  the  hatred  and  dissention  among  Chris-
tians (if  it  continue,  as  God  defend  it  should)  is,  and  will
bee  the  cause  of  much  innocent  bloud-shedding  amongst
friends,  and  of  estranging  the  hearts  of  Heathens,  from
the  worship  of  the  true  God.  And  therefore  that  enmitie
amongst  friends  may  cease,  and  that  such  as  are  yet  with-
out, may  be  allured  to  submit  themselves  to  the  Scepter
of  Jesus  Christ :  it  standeth  us  upon  (who  are  Preachers
of  the  Gospel!  of  Peace)  to  be  instruments  of  peace,  which
for  my  owne  part  how  willing  I  am  to  doe,  is  not  un-
knowne  to  such  as  know  my  selfe,  and  among  whom  I  doe
daily  converse.  I  have  alwayes  both  in  publike  and  pri-
vate, by  Letters  to  our  Worshipfull  Company  in  England,
and  by  lively  voice  to  our  Commanders  here  in  the  Indies,
declared  how  good  a  thing  it  is  for  us  that  are  Christians,
professing  one  Faith,  one  Christ,  one  Baptisme,  to  live  in

141

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1619.

peace,  and  to  dwell  together  in  unitie.  And  of  this  my
earnest  desire  to  be  a  Peace-maker,  Master  Brancraft  your
Master  of  the  Blacke  Lion,  who  remayned  after  his  taking
some  weekes  aboord  of  the  Royall  James,  can  give  evident
testimonie  and  witnesse.  And  now  that  you  have  written
to  this  end,  I  will  stirre  up  my  selfe,  and  set  afresh  upon
the  worke  of  reconciliation.  It  is  pelfe  indeed  and  pride
that  is  the  Make-bate  breeding  strife  and  discord :  for,
had  not  the  riches  of  the  Moluccas,  and  the  robbing  of
the  Chinees  and  others  by  you,  under  the  English  Colours,
fathering  thereby  your  theft  upon  us,  cast  you  into  a
deepe  and  deadly  Lethargie,  you  would  not  as  you  have
[I.  v.  686.]  done,  have  abused  your  best  friends  abroad,  that  have
shed  so  much  of  their  deerest  blood  in  defence  of  you  and
your  countrey  at  home ;  but  now  you  are  freed  from  the
Spaniard  at  home,  you  fall  out  with  your  friends  abroad.
Is  this  the  recompence  of  our  love  and  blood  shewed  unto
you,  and  shed  for  you,  to  keepe  you  from  the  supposed
thraldome  of  Spaine?  Did  David  thus  reward  his  three
Worthies,  who  adventured  their  lives  to  satisfie  his  long-
ing, &  to  quench  his  thirst  ?  Did  he  not  say,  Lord,  be  it
farre  from  me  that  I  should  doe  this :  is  not  this  the  blood
of  the  men  that  went  in  jeopardy  of  their  lives?  2.  Sam.
23.  17.  Doe  you  thus  requite  us,  as  Lot  did  Abraham,
Who,  when  as  hee  with  the  three  hundred  and  eighteene
that  were  borne  and  brought  up  in  his  house,  did  recover
Lot  and  his  goods,  and  women  out  of  the  hands  of  the
Conquerors,  cared  not  for  him  but  to  serve  his  owne  turne,
and  being  delivered,  did  in  a  manner  scorne  Abrahams
company.  Well,  though  Abraham  being  the  elder  and
worthier  might  have  stood  upon  his  right,  yet  yeelded  of
his  interest,  that  he  and  Lot  might  live  as  brothers,
and  the  rather  because  both  of  them  at  this  time  sojourned
among  the  Canaanites  and  Pheresites,  who  were  ready  to
take  notice  of  their  discord,  and  so  to  curse  their  God  and
holy  Religion.  Yet  what  gained  Lot  by  separating  com-
pany, but  a  showre  of  fire  and  brimstone,  which  rained
upon  Sodome  wherein  he  lived,  and  would  have  consumed

142

LETTER  FROM  PATRICK  COPLAND a.d.

1619.

both  him  and  his,  if  God  had  not  beene  mercifull  unto
him  at  Abrahams  request.

It  is  not  long  of  the  English  that  we  expose  our  selves
to  the  mockery  of  Infidels :  our  Company  love  peace,  and
trade  peaceably :  they  have  put  up  for  peace  sake  more
wrongs  at  your  hands,  then  they  meane  to  doe  againe.
You  write  and  publish  to  the  world,  that  the  Sea  is  free,
and  yet  by  your  encroaching  upon  it,  are  not  you  both  the
Mothers  and  Nurses  of  discord?  One  of  our  Corn-
maunders,  wrote  (as  I  thinke,  or  at  least  sent  word  by  one
of  speciall  note  amongst  your  selves)  to  Coen  your  Com-
mander concerning  a  parley  before  the  shooting  downe  of
our  Turret  at  Jacatra :  but  the  first  and  last  newes  we
heard  of  him,  was  it  not  the  beating  downe  of  our  house
there,  and  the  defaming  of  our  Nation,  with  Penoran  at
Bantam  and  others  here?

And  thinke  you  that  this  is  the  way  to  make  peace  ?

The  present  Captaine  of  your  Fort  at  Jacatra  promised
to  the  Right  Worshipfull  Sir  Thomas  Dale  our  chiefe
Commander,  upon  the  faith  of  a  Christian,  that  M.  Peter
Wadden  (now  your  prisoner)  should  have  free  ingresse
and  egresse  in  and  out  of  your  house  to  parley  betweene
us,  to  returne  to  our  Shippes :  and  yet  is  either  promise
or  oath  kept  ?  hath  he  not,  and  doth  he  not  continue  your
prisoner  to  this  hower?  You  remember  Jehu  his  an-
swere  to  Jehoram,  What  peace  whiles  the  whoredomes  of
thy  Mother  Jezabel,  and  her  witchcrafts  are  yet  in  great
number?  2.  Kings  9.  23.  No  sound  league  of  friend-
ship or  reconciliation  can  be  made,  or  being  made  can
continue,  till  the  wrongs  which  men  have  done  one  to
another,  be  reproved,  and  removed  ;  and  satisfaction  given
by  word  and  deed,  where  it  may  possibly  be  performed ;
else  it  will  be  like  a  wound  or  sore,  that  being  cured  out-
wardly to  the  eye,  doth  bleed  and  fester  inwardly ;  many
hollow  reconciliations  are  daily  made  amongst  men,  which
afterwards  breake  out  to  the  hurt  of  both  parties,  and
scandall  of  others :  As  a  wound  that  is  ill  cured,  by  an
unskilfull  or  an  unconscionable  Chirurgion. As  for  mine

M3

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1619.

owne  part,  I  would  to  God  that  if  it  were  possible,  I
might  with  all  my  best  skill  and  cunning  be  the  Chirur-
gion  to  cure  this  wound,  that  our  reconciliation,  when
ever  it  shall  be  made,  may  not  be  hollow,  but  holy  and
firme :  yea  I  wish  from  my  heart,  that  my  very  blood
might  be  the  milke  to  put  out  this  wilde  fire  which  now  is
kindled,  and  (if  it  be  not  quenched  in  time)  is  like  to
devoure,  not  onely  the  ships  and  goods  (as  it  hath  done
some  already,  and  is  like  to  doe  more)  but  the  precious
lives  of  many  of  both  Nations,  and  of  those  also  that  are
as  yet  unborne,  who  (it  is  like)  will  curse  the  time  that
ever  the  English  and  Dutch  knew  the  Indies.  All
standeth  not  in  one  side,  there  must  be  a  yeelding  of  both
sides,  if  ever  there  be  a  sound  peace.  But  you  say,  both
sides  are  stout,  who  shall  begin  ?  I  answere,  what  availeth
anger  without  strength  to  beare  it  out?  What  is  fierce-
nesse  of  spirit  without  wisedome  of  heart?  but  even  a
fooles  bolt  against  himselfe.  And  to  such  a  one  may  not
the  saying  of  Archidamus  to  his  sonne,  being  too  foole-
hardie,  be  as  fitly  applyed  as  a  glove  to  a  mans  hand :
Sonne,  sonne,  either  put  too  more  strength,  or  take  away
some  of  this  courage  ?  You  cannot  be  ignorant  that  when
Herod  intended  to  make  warre  against  the  Tyrians  and
Sydonians,  how  they  came  all  with  one  accord,  and  per-
swaded  Blastus  the  Kings  Chamberlaine  that  they  might
live  in  peace,  or  else  they  should  all  of  them  be  starved,
Act.  12.  20.  Take  heede  you  come  not  to  this  when  it
is  too  late.  Are  you  so  well  able  to  live  of  your  selves  in
Holland,  that  you  have  no  need  of  your  neighbour  coun-
trey  England  ?  Are  you  so  high  above  the  waters,  that  the
sluces  of  heaven  cannot  drowne  you?  Or  are  the  Seas
so  low  beneath  your  Netherlands,  that  you  feare  no
deluge  ?  Shebna  the  Treasurer,  was  he  not  as  surely  seated
as  your  Grave  is  in  Holland?  or  the  greatest  amongst
you  here  in  the  Indies,  even  Coen  himselfe  ?  and  yet  was
he  not  tossed  up  and  downe  as  a  foote-ball  in  a  strange
countrey?  and  were  not  the  Chariots  of  his  glory  the
shame  of  his  Lords  house? Esay  22. 18. But  I  have

144

LETTER FROM PATRICK COPLAND  ad.

1620.

runne  my  selfe  a  little  beyond  that  I  intended,  and  now
to  recover  my  breath,  by  these  lines  I  promise,  and  by
word  and  deed  will,  God  willing,  with  saile  and  care  labour
to  bring  to  passe,  that  we  may  live  as  friends  and  neigh-
bours both  here  and  at  home.  Thus  I  have  returned  you
an  answere  to  that  you  desire,  and  looke  that  both  of  us
should  doe  our  best  endeavour  for  the  good  of  our  present
Fleets,  and  of  such  as  hereafter  may  live  to  blesse  us.
From  our  Royall  James  riding  neere  to  Bantam  Rode,
this  20.  of  Aprill  16 19.

Your  loving  brother  Patricke  Copland.

From  aboard  the  Bee  in the Rode of  Jacquatra  [I.  v.  687.]
on  the  Coast  of  Java,  the  five  and  twentieth
of  February. 1620.

AUgust  the  second 1619.  our  ship  and  goods  were  Ships  taken  by
taken  by  the  Flemings  in  the  strait  of  Sunda  neere  the  Hollanders
Bantam,  and  set  ashore  at  Jacquatra. September  the  eight ^  /**%!'
1 619.  the  Flemings  dispersed  us  into  their  ships,  and  on  they  had  taken
the  coast  of  Sumatra  the  first  of  October  1619.  they  tooke  the  Swan,  the
foure  other  English  ships,  viz.  the  Dragon,  the  Beare,  the  Salomon,  the
Expedition,  and  the  Rose. And  on  the  second  of  Octo- Att^ancey
ber  they  turned  us  all  ashore  at  Tecoo  amongst  the  Indians, Defencewhich
where  our  Merchants  had  no  trade,  but  for  eight  dayes.  fugitive
We  were  then  three  hundred  seventie  and  odde  men,  all  knaves
or  the  most  part  undone. About  fifteene  men  were  killed  ~j*W**
in  fight. They  left  us  the  little  Rose  to  shift  for  our  Jj™tfo  speed-
selves.  wellaPinnasse

The  three  and  twentieth  of  October,  161 9.  there  came  they  are
into the  Roade  out  of  England  three  other  ships, the  rePorted  t0
Palsgrave,  the  Elizabeth,  and  the  Merchants  hope. From  Platen  L
Tecoo  we  sayled  too  and  fro,  and  at  length  came  to  anchor  the  English,
at  an  Hand  called  Amyncan,  where  we  had  fresh  water  and  leaving  only
some  fish,  but  is  in  no  place  of  trade,  nor  is  there  any  man three  ^orant

Blacks  which
for  want  of  wit  or  skill,  suffered  her  to  be  lost:  the  cause,  for  that  she  would  not  strike  to  the
Dutch,  pleading  freedom  in  sea,  as  subject  to  a  free  King. The  Starre  was  taken  in  the  strait
of  Sunda. In  all,  these  infortunate  shippes,  are  twelve.

V  145  K

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1620.

that  knoweth  of  any  thing  that  growes  upon  it.  The  people
are  thought  to  bee  meneaters.  After  this  we  returned
backe  for  Tecoo,  &  neere  the  same  twenty  nine  of  Janu-
ary 1 61 9.  we  met  with  Generall  Pring  in  the  Royall  James,
and  his  whole  fleet  of  ships,  in  number  nine.  All  the
fleet  being  then  twelve  goodly  ships,  were  resolved  to  saile
for  Bantam :  and  in  sight  of  two  Flemish  ships,  (which
we  purposed  to  take)  Captaine  Adams  in  the  ship  called  the
Bull,  together  with  one  of  the  Flemish  ships  came  up  with
newes  of  peace.  We  then  sailed  for  Jacatra,  where  by  the
way  met  us  seventeen  saile  of  goodly  Flemmish  ships,
with  whom  (had  not  the  peace  then  come)  we  must  have
fought  it  out.  But  peace  being  then  concluded  betweene
the  Flemmings  and  us,  our  English  Factorie  was  againe
setled  at  Jacatra ;  and  the  ships  divided,  some  for  one
place,  some  for  another.

The  sixe  and  twentieth  of  Aprill  1620.  the  Royall
James,  and  a  ship  of  some  eight  hundred  Tunnes  called
the  Unicorne,  set  saile  for  Japan,  the  distance  neere  about
a  eleven  hundred  leagues.  The  second  of  June  1620.
The  Unicorne  was  cast  away  on  the  coast  of  China,  neere
a  certaine  Hand  called  the  Macojo  Hand.  In  the  ship  were
two  English  women ;  both  which,  and  all  the  men  were
saved :  for  they  ran  the  ship  neere  the  shore.  Most  part
of  all  their  goods  they  lost.  As  we  sailed  for  Japan  at  a
place  called  Patanie,  we  heard  of  Captaine  Jordayne,  who
being  there  with  two  ships,  called  the  Hound,  and  the
Samson,  there  came  into  the  Rode  and  fought  with  them
three  Flemish  ships :  Captaine  Jordayne  was  slaine  in  that
fight,  and  the  Flemmings  tooke  both  their  shippes.  The
seventeenth  of  December  1620.  The  great  James  being
well  trimmed  at  a  place  called  Firando  in  Japan,  came
away  from  thence:  and  the  fourteenth  of  Januarie  1620.
we  arrived  safely  at  Jacatra,  where  she  is  now  loaden  for
England.

The  ships  that  since  my  comming  from  England,  have
beene  taken  and  and  lost,  are  the  Sunne,  cast  away  neere
Bantam ; the  Starre,  taken  neere  Bantam ; the  Dragon,

146

LETTER FROM THOMAS KNOWLES  a.d.

1622,

the  Beare,  the  Expedition,  and  the  Rose,  taken  at  Tecoo ;
the  Hound  and  the  Samson  taken  at  Patany ;  the  Uni-
corne  cast  away  on  the  coast  of  China ;  two  or  three  other
ships  taken  and  lost  at  the  Moluccas.

Men  of  good  command,  dead,  are,  Captaine  Parker  of
Plymmouth,  Sir  Thomas  Dale,  Captaine  Jordayne  killed
at  Patany,  Captaine  Bonner  killed  at  Tecoo  while  we  were
at  Japan.  The  Flemmings  yeelded  up  againe  the  Starre
to  the  English,  and  she  is  gone  to  the  Moluccas.

Thomas  Knowles.

Chap. XII.

The  Hollanders  Declaration  of  the  affaires  of  the
East  Indies  :  faithfully  translated  according  to
the  Dutch  Copy,  Printed  at  Amsterdam,  1622.
Written  in  answere  to  the  former  reports,
touching  wrongs  done  to  the  English.  And
an  answere  written  by  certaine  Mariners  lately
published :  with  Depositions  further  opening
the  iniquity and  crueltie  of  the  Dutch.

§•  1.

A  true  Relation  of  that  which  passed  in  the
Hands  of  Banda,  in  the  East  Indies,  in  the
yeere  of  our  Lord  God  1621.  And  before
printed  at  Amsterdam 1622.

LI  the  Hands  of  Banda,  from  the  tenth  of
August  1609.  by  a  special!  treaty  and
agreement  made  with  the  Orankayes,  or
Magistrates  of  the  foresaid  Hands,  were
put  under  the  protection  of  the  high  and
mighty,  the  States  general!  of  the  united
Provinces,  on  condition  to  defend  them
from  the  Portugall,  and  other  their  Enemies,  provided
that  they  of  the  said  Hands,  are  bound  to  deliver  unto  the
Fort  called  Nassau,  or  unto  the  Committees  of  the  said

147

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1622.

[I.  v.  688.]  Company,  all  their  fruits  or  spices  at  a  certaine  price,  and
so  forth,  as  by  the  said  treaty  of  agreement  more  at  large
appeareth.  These  articles  of  agreement,  being  for  a  time
by  them  performed,  were  afterward  broken  and  violated,
as  well  in  keeping  backe,  and  with-holding  the  said  fruits
and  spices,  which  they  were  tyed  to  deliver  to  the  Nether-
lands Company ;  as  also  enforcing  and  robbing  their
Ware-houses,  and  contrary  to  solemne  treaty  and  promise ;
murthering  at  sundry  times  and  places,  divers  of  the  prin-
cipall  Officers,  Committees,  and  Servants  of  the  said
Netherlands  Company,  in  taking  away  divers  small  Shippe
provision,  their  open  invading  of  the  places  and  Coun-
tries, withstood  also  lately  under  the  subjection  of  the
High  and  Mightie  the  States  generall,  and  in  conquering
the  inhabitants  thereof,  whom  with  a  strong  hand  they
forced  from  being  Christians  to  become  Moores  againe,  or
those  which  withstood  or  gaine-said  them,  they  sold  as
Slaves,  and  in  committing  all  kind  of  perverse  wickednesse
and  trechery  :  during  which  passages  and  doings,  there  was
againe  certaine  contracts  on  the  aforesaid  conditions  agreed
upon,  with  the  said  Bandaneses,  as  in  May,  in  the  yeere
1 61 6.  by  one  of  the  Netherlands  Commanders  called  Lam,
and  by  their  Governour  Generall  Laurence  Reall,  in  the
yeere  161 7.  which  indeed  were  shortly  after  broken  and
violated  by  the  Bandaneses,  and  that  through  the  animat-
ing by  the  English,  who  did  openly  ayde  and  assist  the
foresaid  Hands,  and  maintained  them  in  warrage,  the
Netherlands  Company  with  victuals,  and  Munition,  great
Ordnance,  Men  and  Ships,  thereby  to  with-hold  from  us
the  fruits  and  spices,  which  the  Bandaneses  were  tyed  to
deliver.  In  this  wilfulnesse  the  Bandaneses  continued,  till
in  June  1620.  Till  that  at  Jacatra  was  published  both
amongst  the  English  and  the  Netherlands  Fleet,  then
riding  there  in  the  Road  :  the  treaty  concluded  and  agreed
upon,  betweene  his  most  excellent  Majestie,  the  King  of
great  Britaine,  and  the  High  and  Mightie  Lords  the  States
generall,  for  to  reconcile  upon  certaine  conditions,  the
English  and  Netherlands  East  India  Companies.

148

THE  HOLLANDERS  DECLARATION a.d.

1622.

The  which  Treaty,  and  by  conference  of  handling  con-
cerning the  Moluccaes,  Amboyna,  and  Banda,  all  disputes
and  differences  betweene  the  English  and  the  Netherlands
Company  concerning  the  same,  were  to  that  time  abolished,
and  a  generall  force  of  Shippes  of  Warre  was  ordained
betweene  them,  for  the  defence  of  both  Companies  in
their  rights,  and  the  commerce  which  they  had  obtained
in  the  Indies.

The  Reduction  of  the  wilfull  Bandaneses  unto  the
Netherlands  Campe,  was  hindred  a  yeere  or  two,  (through
the  actuall  proceedings  which  the  English  in  Banda  it  selfe,
since  the  yere  161 6.  and  afterwards  in  the  yeere  161 8.
about  the  coast  of  Java,  and  whole  India  through)  by  open
hostility  did  attempt :  whereby  the  aforesaid  Bandaneses
being  encouraged,  and  made  bolder,  did  withdraw  them-
selves wholly  from  under  the  subjection  of  the  Castle  of
Nassaw,  doing  unto  us  and  ours  all  wrong  and  hostility,
and  with-holding  from  us  their  fruits  (to  say)  Nutmegs
&  Mace,  which  they  did  not  onely  sell  unto  the  English,
and  to  the  Indians,  but  also  to  the  Portugals,  who  are  both
their  and  our  Enemies,  with  whom  they  seeke  to  make
neerer  alliance  of  friendship,  as  already  in  the  great  Hand
named  Banda,  were  come  fiftie  or  threescore  Portugals,
who  by  some  more  assistance,  considering  the  naturall
force  of  the  said  Hand,  would  have  beene  sufficient  to  have
deprived  both  the  English  and  the  Netherlands  Company
of  the  rights  therein,  and  the  fruits  thereof,  without  hope
hereafter  to  have  any  redresse.

In  regard  of  those  inconveniences,  after  the  publication
of  the  contract  that  was  made,  the  Generall  of  the  Nether-
land  Company,  in  the  common  Councell  for  defence,  (con-
sisting of  Englishmen,  and  Netherlanders)  propounded  the
necessity  of  the  taking  of  Banda,  as  also  the  redressing
and  assuring  of  those  Quarters,  and  of  the  trade  in  Am-
boyna  and  Moluccaes,  to  the  which  end,  both  the  Com-
panies according  to  the  contract  were  bound  together,  to
use  all  the  force  and  power  that  he  could,  for  the  preserva-
tion of  the  places,  as  much  as  concerned  the  trade,  for  both

149

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1622.

the  Companies.  And  it  appeareth  by  the  Act  made  by
those  of  the  said  Counsell  for  defence,  bearing  date  the
first  of  January  1621.  stilo  nova,  that  the  English  Com-
mittees there  declared,  that  the  necessities  of  the  businesse
was  well  knowne  unto  them ;  as  also  that  they  were  very
willing  together  with  us,  to  doe  some  common  exploit :
but  for  that  as  then,  they  wanted  both  power  and  meanes
of  men  and  ships,  that  they  could  not  for  that  time  furnish
any  thing  towards  the  same :  Whereupon,  the  Nether-
lands Governour  Generall  declared,  that  with  the  particular
power  of  the  Netherland  Company,  he  would  take  the
same  in  hand,  and  effect  it  in  such  manner,  as  God  should
be  pleased  to  prosper  his  proceedings.

And  to  that  end,  upon  the  thirtenth  of  January,  the
Governour  Generall  went  from  Jacatra  to  Amboyna,  where
he  arrived  upon  the  fourteenth  of  February,  and  from
thence  went  to  Banda,  to  the  Castle  of  Nassaw,  lying  in
the  Hand  Nero,  upon  the  seven  and  twentieth  of  February
1 62 1.  In  the  meane  time,  one  of  the  English  Counsell
for  defence,  that  had  beene  at  Jacatra  upon  the  first  of
January  1621.  and  was  privy  to  the  contract  made,  lying
then  in  Amboyna,  when  the  Governour  Generall  went
from  thence  to  Banda ;  sent  Letters  in  our  owne  Ships  to
the  Englishmen,  lying  in  the  small  Hand  Polaroon,  and
made  knowne  and  discovered  unto  those  of  Banda,  in
what  manner  the  Generall  of  the  Netherland  Company,
intended  to  assaile  the  great  Hand  of  Banda :  &  when  the
said  Governour  Generall  was  come  to  the  Fort  of  Nassaw
in  Banda,  he  understood  that  the  Englishmen  in  Pola-
roon, had  added  them  of  the  Towne  of  Lantore  in  the
great  Hand  of  Banda,  with  foure  Peeces  of  great  Ord-
nance ;  and  that  if  they  had  had  longer  time,  that  the
entrance  of  the  Generall  of  the  Netherlands  Army  into
Lantore  Haven,  should  have  beene  let  and  withstood  by
a  great  battery.  As  also  that  some  Englishmen,  in  Lan-
tore, assisted  these  of  Banda,  ours,  and  (according  to  the
contract)  their  enemies,  both  with  counsell  and  force,  en-
couraging them  with  their  presence,  &  notwithstanding

150

THE HOLLANDERS DECLARATION  a.d.

1622.

that  the  said  Generall  required  the  said  Englishmen  of
Lantore  to  leave  the  Towne,  for  the  causes  and  reasons  [I.  v.  689.]
aforesaid,  as  also  for  that  they  themselves,  according  to
the  Contract  and  Order  made  by  the  Counsell  of  Defence,
before  that  time  might  not  buy  any  Fruit  in  Moluccas,
Amboina,  and  Banda,  as  after  the  publication  of  the  Con-
tract they  may  doe,  and  that  onely  together,  and  in  common
places  with  the  Netherlanders,  yet  some  few  of  them  stayed
still  with  them  of  Banda  our  common  enemies.  Notwith-
standing also  that  the  Governour  generall  protested,  that
he  was  not  therein  to  be  blamed,  if  by  that  meanes  any
hurt  were  done  unto  them,  being  among  and  with  our
common  enemies,  from  whom  they  should  and  ought  to
have  separated  themselves.

First,  the  Governours  generall  determined  to  assayle
the  great  Hand  of  Banda  on  the  South  side,  (by  some
called  Lantore,  because  the  principall  Towne  is  so  called)
by  land  in  a  place  called  Luchny,  and  to  that  end  caused
the  ship  called  the  Hart  to  anchor  thereabouts,  which  lay
not  long  there  but  it  was  shot  at  by  an  English  Peece  of
Ordnance,  whereby  our  men  were  forced  to  tow  the  said
ship  with  a  Galley  from  the  shoare,  and  to  leave  two  An-
chors and  two  Cables  behind  them,  or  else  it  had  beene  in
great  danger  of  sinking  or  burning,  our  men  assuring  us,
that  an  English  Gunner  had  shot  at  them,  and  that  they
perfectly  descried  and  saw  him,  although  the  Englishmen
seeme  to  denie  it.

Whereby  altering  of  their  first  purpose,  the  Generall  of
the  Netherlanders  resolved  to  land  upon  the  inward  part  of
the  Hand  of  Banda,  there  to  encampe  themselves,  and  then
to  goe  up  upon  the  Hills,  and  there  to  plant  their  Ord-
nance, and  to  that  end  upon  the  eighth  of  March,  1621.
landed  with  seventeene  Companies  betweene  Comber  and
Ortatten,  they  marched  along  the  shoareside,  within  the
reach  of  three  Peeces  of  great  Ordnance  lent  then  by  the
Englishmen,  and  not  long  before  planted  there,  whereby
if  they  had  marched  forward  many  of  our  men  had  beene
slaine,  and  so  wee  should  have  found  no  place  there  to

151

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1622.

encamp  our  selves,  but  the  Enemie  from  the  Hills  would
have  domineered  over  us,  no  man  knowing  what  counsell
to  give,  whereby  wee  might  get  up  upon  the  Hills.  The
way  whereon  above  three  yeeres  before  wee  had  beene,
being  all  intrenched,  whereupon  the  Generall  determined
to  enter  againe  into  his  ship  with  the  whole  Armie,  to  take
another  course.  They  of  Banda  not  once  pursuing  after
us,  but  with  flouting  and  mocking  let  us  goe,  and  so  think-
ing thereby,  that  they  had  gotten  the  upper  hand  of  us,
most  part  of  them  brought  their  wives  and  children  againe
into  Lantore.  After  these  two  enterprizes,  partly  hindred
by  the  English  Ordnance,  were  in  that  manner  crost.
The  Generall,  for  a  third  resolution,  determined  to  assayle
the  great  Hand  of  Banda  on  both  sides,  that  is,  on  the
inner  side  of  the  Land  with  sixe  Companies,  and  on  the
South  side  with  ten  Companies.  That  they  on  the  inner
side  should  land  an  houre  before  the  others  should  land,
by  that  meanes  to  draw  the  Enemie  forth,  and  so  to  make
place  on  the  other  side,  while  a  Companie  of  chosen  men
should  land  on  the  North  side,  to  climbe  up  upon  the
Hills,  and  others  in  other  places  of  the  Land  should  also
bee  in  a  readinesse,  being  three  hundred  and  thirtie
persons,  whereof  one  hundred  and  fiftie  were  Musketiers,
appointed  for  the  manning  and  assuring  of  thirtie  boats,
which  the  said  Companie  would  bring  on  the  South  side
of  the  Hand.

This  was  effected  upon  the  eleventh  of  March,  and
accordingly  sixe  Companies  by  breake  of  day,  went  on
land  betweene  Comber  and  Ortatten.  Captaine  Voghel
with  certaine  chosen  Souldiers  marching  forward,  who
climbing  up  upon  the  Hills,  found  such  resistance,  that  all
their  powder  being  spent,  they  were  in  great  danger  to  be
spoyled,  but  being  well  followed  and  seconded  by  the  rest,
the  Enemie  was  forced  to  retire :  and  while  this  skirmish
continued,  the  other  ten  Companies  landing  out  of  the
said  thirtie  boats,  went  on  shoare  upon  the  South  side  of
Banda,  in  a  small  Bay,  some  with  Ladders,  and  others
without,  climbing  up  upon  the  Cliffes ; and  being  gotten

152

THE HOLLANDERS DECLARATION  a.d.

1622.

up,  they  marched  to  the  backeside  of  Lantore,  without  any
resistance,  but  onely  those  that  set  upon  the  first  Troopes,
being  some  ten  or  twentie  Musketiers,  by  whom  one  of
our  men  was  slaine,  and  foure  or  five  hurt,  whereby  Lan-
tore  was  taken  on  the  South  side  by  the  said  ten  Com-
panies, while  the  other  five  Companies  skirmished  with
those  of  Banda  upon  the  Hills,  and  as  soone  as  Lantore
was  taken,  those  of  Madiangi,  Luchny,  Ortatten,  and
Sammer,  presently  forsooke  their  Townes  in  the  said  Hand.
When  they  of  Banda  saw  the  aforesaid  thirtie  boats,  they
thought  wee  would  have  sayled  round  about  the  Land,
as  wee  had  done  three  times  before,  whereupon  making
no  reckoning  of  our  landing,  they  were  sodainly  surprized
by  breake  of  day.

As  soone  as  Lantore  with  the  rest  of  the  places  afore-
said were  won,  the  rest  of  them  of  Banda,  namely  Slamma,
Comber,  Owendender,  Wayer,  and  those  of  the  Hands  of
Rosinging,  and  Poolaroone,  made  composition  with  us,
which  we  granted  upon  condition,  that  they  should  breake
downe  their  Forts  and  Walls,  and  give  us  their  Shot,
Peeces  and  Muskets,  &c.  Which  by  them  being  done,
all  of  them  together,  according  to  their  Contract  and  pro-
mises, yeelded  to  hold  their  Countries  and  Lands,  of  the
Lords  the  generall  States  of  the  united  Netherland  Pro-
vinces, promising  to  doe  whatsoever  they  should  be
commanded,  and  acknowledge  the  said  Lords  the  generall
States  for  their  Soveraignes,  notwithstanding  their  former
Oathes  taken  unto  any  others.

Those  of  Lantore  and  others  being  first  overcome  and
vanquished,  and  that  saved  themselves  among  others  of
Banda,  also  asked  pardon  and  sought  for  Peace,  which  was
granted  unto  them  upon  the  condition  aforesaid,  though
they  hardly  held  the  same,  and  secretly  sought  to  begin  a
new  rebellion,  and  were  commanded  by  the  Generall  to
shew  themselves  all  together  upon  the  Strand,  that  they
might  be  appointed  in  some  other  convenient  place  to  live
as  fellow  Citizens  freely  together,  without  the  losse  of
their  goods  which  they  then  had. Whereunto  some  of

*53

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1622.

them  obeyed,  but  the  greatest  part  fled  upon  the  high
Mountaines  in  the  great  Hand  of  Banda,  to  whom  also
many  other  Townes  resorted,  and  slew  a  Netherland  Mer-
chant, one  other,  and  a  boy,  where  they  were  enclosed  and
[I.  v.  690.]  hindred  from  victuals  by  our  men.  By  this  meanes  all
the  Townes  and  Places  in  Banda  were  won,  and  made  sure,
onely  Poolaroone^  which  was  not  medled  withall,  because
they  of  Banda  therein  behaved  themselves  peaceably,  for
the  ayde,  or  rather  the  service  of  those  of  Poolaroone.
The  Englishmen  planted  nine  Peeces  of  Ordnance  upon  a
small  Hand  in  Poolaroone,  having  intrenched  the  same :
and  when  those  of  Poolaroone,  according  to  the  composi-
tion, were  to  yeeld  up  their  Armes,  and  disarme  them-
selves, as  they  willingly  did ;  yet  our  Generall  did  not
once  speake  of  those  nine  Peeces  of  Ordnance  standing  in
the  said  small  Hand,  because  the  Englishmen  should  have
no  cause  to  make  any  question,  that  our  men  had  done  any
thing  against  their  Fort  or  men.

The  English  Commander,  Humfrey  Fitz-Herbert,  with
his  ship  called  the  Exchange,  lying  before  the  Castle  of
Amboina,  and  having  intelligence  of  the  Generall  of  the
Netherlands  victorie  in  Banda,  shot  off  fourteene  Peeces
of  Ordnance  for  Joy  thereof.

This  that  is  formerly  declared,  is  the  true  state  and  pro-
ceedings of  that,  which  hath  beene  done  now  lately,  and
before  in  the  Hand  of  Banda,  wherein  nothing  hath  beene
done,  but  that  which  (according  to  the  Law  of  Nations,
and  the  aforesaid  Contract,  made,  and  promised  to  bee
holden,  and  without  any  wrong  done  to  the  Liberties  of
the  English  Companie,  agreed  upon  with  the  Companie
of  the  Netherland)  might  and  ought  to  have  beene  done.

iS4

AN  ANSWER TO THE HOLLANDERS  a.d.

1622.

§.  II.

An  Answere  to  the  Hollanders  Declaration  con-
cerning the  occurrents  of  the  East  India,
contracted  somewhat  briefer  then  in  the
former  Impression.

Here  was  of  late  two  Currents  published,  bearing
date :  the  one,  the  eight  of  Februarie :  the  other,
the  eight  and  twentieth.  In  these  two  Currents
sundrie,  both  incredible  and  intolerable  wrongs  and  griev-
ances were  made  knowne,  which  the  Hollanders  of  the
East  Indies  had  inflicted  and  enforced  upon  the  English
Companie  of  the  East  Indies.  Since  the  printing  of  these
two  Currents,  the  Hollanders  have  published  a  Pamphlet,
entituled,  A  declaration  of  the  Affaires  of  the  East  Indies.
This  declaration  was  published  (as  by  the  discourse  may
appeare)  in  answere  of  the  two  Currents  above  mentioned,
for  the  whole  scope  of  the  declaration  tendeth  to  no  other
end,  but  to  justifie  their  owne  right  in  the  East  Indies,  and
thereupon  to  charge  the  English  with  wrongs  done  to
them,  that  thereby  the  world  might  be  made  beleeve,  that
whatsoever  extremities  or  hard  measures  they  offered  to
the  English,  they  were  urged  and  provoked  thereunto  by
the  unjust  dealing  of  the  English,  and  the  wrongs  first
offered  by  them :  howsoever  the  English  provoked  the
Hollanders  in  India,  the  Hollanders  by  this  Declaration,
doe  urge  and  provoke  the  English  to  defend  themselves
against  so  false  and  fabulous  slanders  imposed  upon  them.
Is  it  not  too  much  that  the  Hollanders  most  unjustly
oppressed  us  in  India,  but  that  they  must  proceed  further
to  slander  us  in  England.  Majora  sunt  famae  &  fidei
damna,  quam  quae  sarciri  possunt :  The  losse  of  a  good
name,  the  losse  of  trust  and  credite  are  losses  irrecoverable.
But  thankes  be  to  Almightie  God,  who  doth  alwayes  pro-
tect the  innocent.  This  Declaration  of  the  Hollanders
intended  and  published  for  our  utter  undoing  and  disgrace,
offereth  unto  us,  in  two  respects,  both  hope  and  helpe,

i5S

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1622.

thankes  be  to  Almightie  God,  who  hath  converted  Hamon
his  Galhouse  intended  against  Mordocheus,  to  his  owne
confusion,  like  as  he  hath  suffered  you  to  publish  a
Declaration  to  cut  your  owne  throats.  What  could  you
devise  to  write  and  publish,  more  opposite  to  what  you
intended ;  more  to  disgrace  your  selves,  in  convincing
you  of  falshood ;  more  to  honour,  acquit,  and  cleere  the
English,  then  this  Declaration?  All  which  shall  mani-
festly appeare  in  the  examination  of  your  Declaration,
which  followeth.

To  begin  with  the  very  first  lines  and  page ;  you
affirme,  That  all  the  Hands  of  Banda,  from  the  tenth  of
August,  1609.  were  by  a  speciall  Treatie  and  agreement
made  with  the  Orankayas  the  Magistrates  of  the  Hands,
put  under  the  protection  of  the  States  of  the  Netherlands  :
how  untrue  this  is,  let  all  men  judge ;  when  as  you  con-
*Understand  fesse  in  the  latter  end  of  the  first  page,*  and  in  the  begin-
**Pa8esmas nine:  of  the  second,  were  afterward  broken  and  violated;

they  Lie  in  the  "  .

former  impres-  and  that  the  Ilanders  with-held  their  Fruits  and  Spices,
sion.  that  they  enforced  and  robbed  their  Ware-houses,  mur-

thered  at  sundrie  times  and  places,  divers  of  the  princi-
pall  Officers,  Committies,  and  Servants  of  the  Nether-
lands companie,  taking  away  their  ships  and  provision,
what  could  the  Hollanders  say  lesse  then  to  pretend  an
agreement  ?  and  what  or  how  could  alledge  and  prove  more
directly  to  convince  themselves  of  untruth  then  so  plainely
and  largely  confesse  the  recited  hostilities,  practised  by  the
Bandaneses  against  them :  what  an  agreement  could  this
be,  where  there  was  so  great  an  aversion  of  the  Ilanders
minds,  declared  by  the  hostile  deeds  which  they  practised
against  the  Hollanders ;  they  might  perhaps  say  there
was  a  Treatie,  but  such  hostile  practices  manifestly  prove
there  could  be  no  Agreement.

The  Hollanders  proceed  further,  from  the  yeere  1609.
[I.  v.  691.] to  the  yeere  161 6.  where  they  spake  of  another  Agree-
ment concluded  in May,  by  one  of  the  Netherlanders
Commanders  called  Lam. And  another  Agreement  made
by  their  Governour  generall  called  Reall, in the  yeere

156

AN ANSWER TO THE HOLLANDERS  a.d.

1622.

1 6 17.  which  they  confesse  were  both  shortly  after  broken
by  the  Bandaneses :  but  how  ?  Heere  commeth  in  the
maine  matter ;  The  Bandaneses  rebelled  through  the
animating  of  the  English,  who  did  openly  ayde  and  assist
them  with  Victuals,  Munition,  great  Ordnance,  Men,  and
Ships.  It  were  necessarie  that  the  Hollanders  should  set
down  the  causes  which  moved  the  English  to  joyne  so
farre  with  the  Bandaneses,  for  the  causes  doe  either  lessen
or  aggravate  the  charge  imposed  upon  the  English :  they
must  either  say,  the  English  ayded  the  Bandaneses  directly
against  the  Hollanders  without  further  respect,  which  they
cannot  prove ;  or  they  must  alledge,  which  themselves  in
their  Declaration  doe  prove,  that  the  English  did  endea-
vor to  defend  them  with  whom  they  had  free  trade  and
trafficke ;  who  lovingly  and  with  free  consent  sold  to  the
English  their  Spices,  &c.  who  put  themselves  under  the
protection  of  the  English ;  who  yeelded  the  Hands  of
Poolaway,  Poolaroone,  and  Lantore,  under  the  obeysance
of  the  King  of  England  :  which  if  they  would  they  cannot
denie,  for  they  confesse  that  the  English  had  mounted
Ordnance  upon  all  these  Hands :  why  should  the  English
plant  their  Ordnance  upon  these  Hands,  but  to  defend  their
Right ;  how  could  the  English  plant  their  Ordnance  upon
the  Hands,  but  with  free  consent  of  the  Bandaneses ;  at
what  time  did  the  English  plant  their  Ordnance  in  these
Hands  of  Banda?  The  Hollanders  confesse,  before  they
came  to  the  Hands ;  for  they  found  them  in  the  Hands :
now,  where  is  the  wrong  that  the  English  have  done  the
Hollanders  ?  and  in  what  ?  because  the  English  did  hinder
the  agreements  so  often  made  betwixt  the  Hollanders  and
the  Bandaneses,  why  for  eleven  yeeres  the  Hollanders  con-
fesse there  was  never  any,  as  in  the  third  page  they  say :
In  this  wilfulnesse  did  the  Bandaneses  continue  till  in  June,
1620.  Thus  hitherto  it  is  plainly  acknowledged,  the  Hol-
landers never  had  any  landing,  any  Castle  or  Fort,  any
trading  in  the  Hands  of  Banda,  but  what  was  gotten  by
force  and  absolute  constraint:  If  the  Hollanders  could
prove  so  much  for  themselves,  as  they  doe  for  the  English  ;

J57

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1622.

the  English  then  might  have  blushed  for  shame.  In  all
this  time  that  the  Hollanders  maintayned  hostilitie  with
the  Bandaneses,  there  is  no  mention  made,  that  the  Ban-
daneses  ever  offered  any  opposition  against  the  English,
or  once  denied  them  their  Spices,  but  that  they  had  trade
and  trafficke  with  them  freely  and  friendly :  now,  if  con-
sent and  prescription  of  time  be  the  best  claime  the  Hol-
landers would  have  for  the  Hands  of  Banda,  why  the
Englishmen  goe  farre  beyond  them ;  the  Bandaneses  did
never  violate  any  agreement  made  with  the  English ;  they
never  kept  any  pretended  agreement  made  with  the  Hol-
landers ;  the  Englishmen  in  eleven  yeeres  were  never  ex-
pelled ;  the  Hollanders  in  all  that  time  were  never  enter-
tayned,  but  in  all  hostile  manner ;  the  Englishmen  had
offer  at  all  times  of  Nutmegs  and  Mace ;  so  had  the
Hollanders  never  at  any  time,  but  what  they  got  by
violence  and  compulsion ;  all  which  is  acknowledged  in
the  third  page,  and  the  beginning  of  the  fourth.  We
passe  over  many  acknowledgements  and  confessions  of  the
Hollanders,  because  they  all  tend  but  to  two  ends ;  to
justifie  themselves,  and  condemne  the  English ;  and
because  there  is  sufficient  observation  given,  that  in  justi-
fying themselves,  they  disgrace  themselves ;  and  in
practising  to  disgrace  the  English,  they  doe  them  great
honour.  But  to  deale  plainely  and  truely,  not  to  abuse
the  world  with  untruths,  nor  to  wrong  the  Hollanders
without  cause,  we  doe  confesse ;  The  Bandaneses  made
one  famous  agreement  with  the  Hollanders,  which  we  well
remember,  even  in  that  yeere  in  which  they  report  they
had  made  agreement  with  the  Bandaneses.  In  June,
1609.  after  ^ey  had  by  force  taken  from  them  a  Towne
called  Neara,  and  making  them  flee  to  the  backside  or  the
Coast,  to  a  place  which  they  called  Nassaw :  Van  Hoofe
the  Generall  made  shew  of  love  and  friendship  with  the
Bandaneses ;  which  they  perceiving,  and  desirous  to
revenge  the  wrongs  and  cruelties  offered  unto  them  by
the  Hollanders,  did  dissemble  their  intents,  entertayning
Van  Hoofe  with  vaine  hopes,  promising  him  to  come  to

158

AN  ANSWER  TO THE HOLLANDERS  ad

1622.

some  agreement ;  by  which  meanes  they  drew  Van  Hoofe
with  threescore  or  more  of  his  Commanders  and  Soul-
diours,  unto  a  place  in  which  the  Bandaneses  had  advan-
tage. Now  instead  of  agreement,  in  warlike  manner  they
set  upon  Van  Hoofe,  and  slew  him  and  almost  his  Com-
panie.  This  is  the  best  agreement  that  wee  ever  knew
or  heard  the  Bandaneses  ever  made  with  the  Hollanders,
during  eleven  or  twelve  yeeres.  Presently  after  this,  in
July  after,  Captaine  Bitter  who  among  all  the  Commanders
escaped,  when  Van  Hoofe  was  slaine,  attempted  to  sur-
prize another  Towne  called  Slamma ;  he  was  fought
withall  by  the  Bandaneses,  and  wounded  in  the  thigh,  of
which  wound  he  shortly  died.

Where  is  now  any  wrong  which  the  English  hath  done
the  Hollanders,  except  it  bee  a  wrong  to  maintaine  them,
who  with  free  and  generall  consent  put  themselves  under
the  protection  of  the  King  of  England?  or  a  wrong  to
defend  them,  who  willingly  trafficke  and  trade  with  the
English ;  or  a  wrong  to  maintaine  that  right  which  the
Hollanders  acknowledge  the  English  had  in  the  Hand  of
Banda :  These  bee  all  the  wrongs  which  the  Hollanders
doe  or  can  charge  the  English  withall.

But  now  on  the  other  side,  what  extreme  wrongs  doe
the  English  charge  upon  the  Hollanders  ?  In  two  Cur-
rents printed  the  eight  of  Februarie,  and  the  twentie
eight,  1622.  the  Hollanders  are  charged  with  most  bar-
barous and  inhumane  wrongs  done  to  the  English,  all
which  they  passe  over  in  their  Declaration  without  any  [I.  v.  692.]
answere  at  all,  whereby  in  silence  they  cannot  but  pleade
guiltie :  to  confesse  them  they  are  ashamed,  and  to  denie
them  they  cannot,  but  in  their  accustomed  pollicie  they
seeke  to  avoyd  them  by  way  of  insinuation,  that  the  Eng-
lish deserved  them  in  ayding  and  assisting  the  Bandaneses
against  them.

There  were  two  Orators  of  Athens  very  great  and  in-
ward friends,  before  the  Judges ;  the  one  did  accuse,  the
other  defend  a  Magistrate  of  Athens ;  whereupon  the  one
Orator  did  challenge  the  other  that  he  had  dealt  very

iS9

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1622.

unkindly  with  him  to  defend  his  mortall  enemie ;  and
thou  as  unkindly  with  me,  quoth  the  other,  to  accuse  my
deerest  friend.

This  is  just  the  like  challenge  betwixt  the  Hollanders
and  the  English  :  Why  doe  you  say  the  Hollanders  defend
our  greatest  enemies?  And  why  doe  you  say  the  Eng-
lish oppose  against  our  deerest  friends?  Yet  in  this
challenge  there  is  a  difference :  for  the  English  have  more
cause  to  defend  their  friends,  then  the  Hollanders  have
cause  to  oppose  against  their  enemies ;  Englishmen  have
a  right  by  consent,  Hollanders  have  nothing  but  con-
straint. Just  defence  is  more  honest  and  honourable  then
unjust  opposition  is,  either  by  Lawes  of  God  or  man
warrantable.

To  proceed  on  with  the  cruell  and  inhumane  wrongs,
done  by  the  Hollanders  to  the  English,  by  so  much  more
barbarous  and  inhumane,  by  how  much  the  English  of  all
Nations  in  the  world,  did  least  deserve  it.  What,  deserve
any  hard  measures  from  the  Hollanders?  To  what
Nation  under  the  Coape  of  Heaven,  are  they  so  much
bound  as  to  the  English  ?  Who  hath  fostered  and  nursed
them  up  to  this  greatnesse,  but  the  English?  What
Nation  hath  shed  so  much  bloud,  lost  the  lives  of  so  many
gallant  Captaines,  Commanders,  and  Souldiers,  to  ayde
and  defend  them  as  the  English?

What  Nation  hath  lent  them,  and  spent  upon  them  so
much  money  and  treasure,  as  the  English  have  done,  when
they  were  in  their  extremest  weaknesse  and  povertie?
When,  and  where  did  the  English  ever  fayle  them?  If
for  these  causes,  the  English  have  deserved  at  the  Hol-
landers hands,  to  have  their  ships  taken,  and  made  prize,
their  goods  confiscate,  and  converted  to  their  owne  uses ;
their  Captaines,  Souldiers,  Factors,  and  Mariners,  taken
prisoners,  held  in  miserable  servitude,  clogged  with  yrons,
kept  in  stockes,  bound  hand  and  foot,  tied  to  stakes,  haling
and  pulling  them  with  ropes  about  their  neckes,  spurning
them  like  dogs,  throwing  them  headlong  downe  rockes
and  clifts,  killing,  murthering,  starving,  and  pining  them

160

AN  ANSWER  TO  THE  HOLLANDERS  ad.

1622.

to  death,  enforcing  them  to  carrie  lime  and  stone  for  their
buildings.  Landing  them  amongst  the  Pagan  people,
without  all  provision  whatsoever,  exposing  them  to  the
mercie  of  Miscreants,  of  whom  notwithstanding  they
found  better  usage  then  of  the  Hollanders.  When  as  the
Hollanders  robbed  and  spoyled  other  Nations  under  the
English  Colours,  pretending  (to  disgrace  the  English)
that  they  were  Englishmen,  counterfeiting  the  Coyne  of
other  Nations,  charging  the  English  with  the  same.  Lay-
ing the  English  whom  they  held  as  prisoners  above  hatches,
where  the  Sunne  scorched  them  in  the  day,  and  where  their
ordures  and  pisse  fell  upon  them  in  the  night,  till  they
grew  more  lothsome  and  filthie  then  Lepers,  barring  the
English,  as  much  as  in  them  lay,  from  all  commerce  and
trade  in  the  Indies.  As  all  these  particulars  are  directly
to  be  proved  by  men  yet  living,  who  either  indured,  or
their  eyes  saw  what  is  here  reported,  and  will  be  readie
upon  all  occasions,  either  with  their  lives  or  oathes  to
justifie  for  truth,  what  they  have  indured,  and  what  they
have  seene  with  their  eyes.

Let  all  the  world  judge,  whether  Englishmen  have  de-
served these  usages  at  the  Hollanders  hands :  Whereas
some  people  either  affected  to  the  Hollanders,  or  thinking
it  too  strange  and  monstrous,  that  Christians  should
domineere  over  Christians  with  such  inhumane  and  bar-
barous cruelty,  rather  tyrannie,  except  the  English  had
provoked  them  heavily  thereunto.

Let  all  such  who  harbour  any  such  conceits,  read  and
consider  what  is  before  answered  to  such  objections :  the
Hollanders  in  their  Declaration  being  charged  in  the  two
first  Currents,  with  many  of  these  extreme  wrongs  inflicted
upon  the  English,  they  make  no  deniall  of  them :  make  a
challenge  that  the  English  did  ayde  and  assist  the  Ban-
daneses  against  them;  it  hath  formerly  beene  alleaged,
and  sufficiently  proved,  by  their  owne  confession,  that  the
English  did  not  maintaine  the  Ilanders,  by  way  of  oppos-
ing the  Hollanders;  but  they  did  as  much  as  in  them
lay,  to  defend  the  right  of  the  King  of  England,  they  did
v  161  T

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1622.

defend  that  right  which  they  had  by  consent ;  they  did
defend  that  People,  who  did  so  freely  and  friendly  trade
and  trafficke  with  them  ;  other  causes  then  their  so  honest,
so  just,  agreeing  with  the  Lawes  of  God,  of  Nature,  and
Nations,  they  neither  doe  nor  can  alledge  any.

Some  other  inconsiderate  people,  who  envie  the  pros-
peritie  of  the  East  Indian  Merchants  will  further  say,  to
close  with  the  Hollanders,  that  these  extremities  were
offered  in  India  onely,  and  no  where  else  to  the  English ;
for  proofe  of  the  contrarie,  wee  of  the  East  Indian  Com-
panie  doe  challenge  all  the  Merchants  which  travaile  or
trafficke  East,  West,  North,  or  South,  to  deliver  their
knowledge,  what  indignities  they  have  indured  from  the
Hollanders,  in  Turkey,  in  the  Straights,  in  Muscovie,  in
Groynland,  at  New-found-land,  and  where  not ;  so  that
not  onely  the  East  Indian  Companie  hath  onely  cause  to
complaine :  yea,  they  wrong  Englishmen  in  their  owne
Seas  at  home,  as  is  generally  knowne.  Now,  because
Hollanders  may  say,  that  they  are  charged  with  generalities
without  particular  instances ;  generall  speeches  being  a
[I.  v.  693.]  common  cause  to  aggravate  causes,  and  be  avoyded  except
the  Generall  bee  proved  by  particulars,  because  they  shall
find  that  we  cannot  want  of  particulars  out  of  infinite,
there  shall  bee  here  following  delivered,  some  by  men  yet
living,  who  have  both  seene  them,  and  endured  them.

§.  in.

Relations  and  Depositions  touching  the  Hollanders
brutish  and  cruell  usage  of  the  English.

N  the  Roade  of  Patanyin  the  East  Indies,  the  seven-
teenth of  July,  1 61 9.  the  two  ships  called  the
Samson  and  the  Hound,  riding  there  at  Anchor,

three  ships  of  the  Netherlands  set  upon  them  with  might
and  mayne,  after  five  houres  fight,  eleven  of  the  men  in
the  Samson  were  slaine  out-right,  and  five  and  thirtie  men
of  the  same  ship  were  wounded,  maymed  and  dismem-
bred,  at  this  time  Captaine  Jordan  was  Captaine  of  the

162

AN  ANSWER  TO  THE HOLLANDERS  a.d,

1622.

Samson,  and  did  hang  up  a  flagge  of  Truce,  and  withall
sent  Thomas  Hackwell,  Master  of  the  Samson  to  the
Netherlanders  to  parlee  about  a  peace.

The  Examination  of  Thomas  Hackwell,  the  five
and  twentieth  of  January,  1621.

Thomas  Hackwell  being  sworne  and  examined  upon
certaine  Articles  ministred  on  the  behalfe  of  the
Right  Worshipfull,  the  English  Company  of
Merchants,  trading  to  the  East  India  aforesaid,
saith  and  deposeth  thereto,  as  followeth.

TO  the  first  of  the  said  Articles  he  saith,  &  deposeth  by  1 .
charge  of  his  oath,  that  in  the  road  of  Patany  in  the
East  India,  upon  the  seventeenth  day  of  July,  1619.  last
past,  the  Samson,  whereof  this  Examinant  was  Master,  and
the  Hound  belonging  to  the  English  Company,  were
forceably  assaulted  by  three  ships  of  the  Hollanders  (viz.)
The  Angell,  the  Morning  Starre,  and  the  Burgarboate,
whereof  Hendricke  Johnson  was  Commander,  and  after
five  Glasses  fight  two  houres  and  a  halfe,  eleven  of  the  said
ship  the  Samson,  her  men  beeing  slaine  out-right,  five  dis-
membred,  and  about  thirtie  otherwise  wounded,  Captaine
Jordane  being  then  in  the  said  ship,  the  Samson,  and  Com-
mander of  her,  caused  a  flagge  of  truce  to  be  hung  out ;
and  sent  this  Examinant  in  the  Samsons  Boate  aboord  the
Flemmings,  to  treate  with  them  for  a  peace,  and  at  the
hanging  out  of  the  said  flagge  of  truce,  and  when  this
Examinant  left  the  said  Captaine  Jordane  to  goe  aboord
the  Flemmings,  he  was  well;  but  above  halfe  an  houre
after  the  said  flagge  of  truce  was  so  hung  out,  and  this
Examinant  was  in  parlee  with  the  Flemmings  about  the
said  peace,  Captaine  Jordane  not  expecting  any  violence
from  the  Flemmings  during  the  said  parlee,  shewed  him-
selfe  aboord  the  Samson  before  the  maine  Mast  upon  the
gratings,  where  the  Flemmings  espying  him,  most  treach-
erously and  cruelly  shot  at  him  with  a  Musket,  and  shot

163

ad  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1622.

him  into  the  bodie  neere  the  heart,  of  which  wound  hee
dyed  within  halfe  an  houre  after.  And  this  he  saith  by
charge  of  his  Oath.

2.  To  the  second  he  saith,  That  after  the  said  ships,  the
Samson  and  the  Hound  were  surprised  by  the  Hollanders
in  the  said  fight  at  Patany,  as  aforesaid,  the  greatest  part  of
their  men,  by  the  command  of  the  Dutch,  were  brought
aboord  the  Angell  their  Admirall :  and  there  notwith-
standing, divers  of  them  in  the  said  fight  were  much  burnt
with  Gun-powder,  and  wounded  with  splinters,  and  there-
by suffered  miserable  torment,  yet  they  the  said  Dutch
most  unchristianly  and  inhumanely  caused  and  forced
them  to  put  their  legges  downe  through  the  gratings,  and
so  seized  them,  and  tyed  them  to  the  Capsten  Barres,
insomuch  that  still  as  any  man  had  occasion  to  goe  and
ease  himselfe,  his  legges  were  so  swelled  by  reason  of  the
extraordinary  hard  tying  of  them,  that  the  Carpenter  was
alwayes  fetched  to  make  bigger  the  holes,  at  which  they
were  put  downe  to  get  out  their  legges  againe.  And  this
hee  saith  by  charge  of  his  Oath  is  most  true.

3#  To  the  third  he  saith,  That  he  knoweth  that  the  Dutch
at  Jacatra,  doe  cause  all  China  men,  residing  and  bartering
there,  to  pay  monethly  sixe  shillings  upon  a  head,  or  else
you  shall  not  sell  any  commoditie  there  to  the  English
and  this  he  hath  seene  divers  of  China  men  pay  at  Jacatra.

4,  To  the  fourth  he  saith,  That  upon  the  third  day  of
March  last  was  twelve  moneth,  aboord  the  new  Zealand
then  riding  in  Bantam  Roade,  this  Examinant,  with  three
or  foure  others,  did  heare  one  Clase  Derickson,  then  upper
stearsman  of  the  Dutch  ship  called  the  Southern-Indraught
say,  that  the  States  in  Holland  had  beene  plotting  that
Warre  betweene  the  English  and  the  Dutch  in  the  Indie
seven  yeares  before.

[I.  v.  694.]  To  this  last  Article  is  witnesse,

Thomas  Hackwell. William  Shaples. Henry  Backtasell.
Bartholomew  Churchman. Anthony  Piccot.

164

AN  ANSWER  TO THE HOLLANDERS  a.d.

1622,

The  Deposition  of  Bartholomew  Churchman.

I  doe  affirme,  that  they  have  many  times  termed  us
slaves  to  the  King  of  Holland,  and  that  we  should  all  be
sent  to  the  Moluccas  to  rowe  in  their  Gallies,  and  so  bee
kept  bond-slaves  under  them  during  our  lives.

More  I  affirme,  that  they  have  kept  twelve  of  us  in  a
Dungeon  at  Pooloway,  and  foure  and  twentie  at  Amboyna,
by  the  command  of  Laurence  Riall  then  Generall,  but
now  returned  into  Holland,  where  they  pist  and  (  )

upon  our  heads,  and  in  this  manner  we  lay,  untill  such
time  as  we  were  broken  out  from  top  to  toe  like  Leapers,
having  nothing  to  eat  but  durtie  Rice,  and  stinking  raine-
water,  insomuch  as  if  it  had  not  beene  for  a  Dutch
woman,  named  Mistris  Cane,  and  some  poore  Blackes
that  brought  us  a  little  fruit,  we  had  all  starved  in  that
place,  as  many  of  our  Company  did,  besides  the  extremitie
which  they  used  to  many  others  which  they  had  in  Prison
at  other  Hands  wher  they  perished,  leaving  their  Wives
and  Children  heere  in  England  readie  to  starve  for  want
of  maintenance.

The  names  of  the  ten  men  which  lay  in  Poolo-
way, are  these :

Bartholomew Churchman. Jacob Lane.  Kellam

Throgmorton. Matthew Willis.  William  Burris.

Cassarian  David.  George  Jackson.  George  Pettice.
Walter  Stacy. Richard  Phillips.

At  Amboyna,  Richard  Swanley,  William  Brookes,  and
twelve  more,  whose  names  I  well  know  not,  nor  cannot
remember,  put  into  a  Dungeon,  with  fortie  Indians  all
in  a  hole,  having  no  place  to  ease  themselves.

Bartholomew  Churchman.

The  last  of  October,  161 7.  John  Tucker  affirmeth :
That  the  Dutchmen  tooke  the  Dragon,  the  Expedition,
the  Beare,  and  the  Rose,  and  delivered  onely  the  Rose,
and  that  there  being  in  the  Dragon  a  Present  from  the

165

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1622.

King  of  Achen  for  the  King  of  England,  called  by  them
a  Creeze,  (that  is  to  say)  a  Dagger,  which  they  doe  detayne
to  this  houre.

This  is  true,  I  under-written  doe  affirme,  and  testifie
that  it  was  not  done  by  base  Rogues  (as  they  terme  it)  but
some  of  the  principall  Commanders.  John  Tucker.

After  the  taking  of  these  ships,  there  were  above  three
hundred  and  fiftie  men  set  out  of  the  foure  ships  which
were  on  shoare,  exposed  unto  the  mercie  of  the  Indians,
where  they  found  more  courtesie  then  of  the  Hollanders,
otherwise  they  had  all  perished.

That  all  these  abuses,  and  many  more  which  wee  have
formerly  received  by  them,  are  true,  we  will  maintayne
upon  our  oathes,  and  with  our  lives  against  any  of  their
Nation,  or  others  that  shall  gain-say  this  truth.  Yet  not-
withstanding all  this  being  (by  the  goodnesse  of  Almightie
God)  returned  into  our  owne  Country,  we  have  no  satis-
faction for  these  intolerable  injuries,  nor  any  consideration
for  two  thirds  of  our  wages  most  barbarously  kept  from
us.

Articles  of  abuses  done  by  the  Hollanders  at  the
Hand  of  Moluccas,  and  other  places  of  the  East
Indies,  aswell  against  our  Soveraigne  Lord  the
Kings  Majestie ;  as  also  against  us,  and  other
Englishmen,  since  the  yeare  of  our  Lord,  1616.
not  only  before  the  Peace,  but  also  since,  untill
the  moneth  of  March  1620.  that  we  came  out
of  the  Indies,  in  the  good  Ship  called  the  James.

1  H~^He  second  day  of  the  moneth  of  February,  in  the
A  yeare  of  the  Lord,  161 6.  the  Swanne  was  surprized
and  taken  by  the  Hollanders,  at  the  Hands  of  Banda,  and
her  men  kept  Prisoners  till  the  eight  and  twentieth  of
Aprill  following.  At  which  time  the  Hollanders  carryed
five  and  twentie  of  the  English  to  the  Moluccas,  where
they  were  very  hardly  and  inhumanely  used,  being  fettered
and  shackelled  in  the  day  time,  and  close  locked  up  at

166

AN  ANSWER  TO  THE HOLLANDERS  a.d.

1622.

nights.  And  from  the  moneth  of  May,  untill  the  end  of
September,  they  were  compelled  to  carrie  stone  and  lime
for  the  building  of  Forts  there ;  which  if  any  refused  to
doe,  they  were  kept  in  Stockes  and  Irons  till  they  would
worke ;  and  were  notwithstanding  also  very  hardly  used
for  their  victuals,  insomuch  that  the  one  halfe  of  them
dyed  through  their  hard  usage.

When  we  were  first  taken,  we  were  possessed  of  divers  2.
goods,  provisions,  and  meanes,  wherewith  to  relieve  our
selves,  which  they  presently  tooke  from  us,  and  left  us  not
so  much  as  wherewith  to  cover  our  bodies.

Whereof  when  we  complayned  to  John  Ellias,  who  was
Lieutenant  to  one  Garret  Derickson  in  the  Trow,  hoping
that  he  would  have  had  some  commiseration  of  our
miseries,  and  long  lying  in  Irons,  bad  usage  for  want  of
meate,  drinke,  lodging,  and  other  things :  The  said  Ellias
and  the  rest  of  his  Company  did  thereupon,  and  many  [I.  v.  695.]
other  times  say  unto  us,  That  hee  cared  not  for  us,  nor  Here  divers
for  any  of  our  Countreymen ; and  that  if  they  should  words  *re

, J j  1  J  i 1  j  -rv . «  omitted  as  too

take  us  and  hang  us  up,  wee  had  our  deserts : 1  ea,  they  0^ous  aza'tnst

used  other  grosse  and  base  speeches,  not  fit  to  be  spoken  filthy  fumes  of

off.  Dutch  Drinke.

We  affirme,  that  the  said  John  Ellias  and  his  Com-  3-
panie  said,  that  they  had  little  need  of  Englishmen ;  for
they  in  Holland  were  able  of  a  sudden  to  make  and  fur-
nish twentie  foure  thousand  of  flat-bottomd  Boats,  such
as  Parma  would  have  landed  upon  the  English  shoare  in
eightie  eight.  And  also  said,  that  they  had  of  their  owne
Nation  and  Countreymen,  at  the  least  fortie  thousand
strong  in  England,  that  presently,  upon  the  least  occasion,
would  rise  in  Armes,  and  bend  their  forces  speedily  against
us  in  our  owne  Countrey.

We  affirme,  that  Laurence  Riall,  who  was  their  Gene-  4.
rail,  caused  Grates  and  Cages  to  bee  made  in  their  ship,
and  did  put  us  therein,  and  carryed  us  in  them  bound  in
Irons  from  Port  to  Port  amongst  the  Indians,  and  thus  in
scornfull  and  deriding  manner  and  sort  spake  unto  the
Indians,  as  followeth :  Behold  and  see,  heere  is  the  people

167

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1622.

of  that  Nation,  whose  King  you  care  so  much  for.  But
now  you  may  hereby  plainly  behold  how  kindly  wee  use
his  Subjects  ;  making  them  beleeve  that  Englishmen  were
their  Vassals  and  Slaves.

Besides  all  this,  they  kept  many  of  us  fast  bound  and
fettered  in  Irons,  in  most  loathsome  and  darke  stinking
Dungeons,  and  gave  us  no  sustenance,  but  a  little  durtie
Rice  to  eate,  and  a  little  stinking  raine-water  to  drinke.
So  that  many  of  our  English  fainting  in  their  sights,  for
want  of  competent  sustenance  or  other  lodging  at  their
hands :  for  want  whereof  many  dyed,  who  were  fetcht
out  of  the  Dungeons,  and  so  basely  buried,  more  like
Dogges  then  Christians.

5-  About  the  fift  of  May,  in  the  yeare  of  our  Lord  1619.
we  having  over-passed  many  hungrie  dayes,  and  cold
nights  Lodging,  in  cold  Irons  and  darke  Dungeons,  and
thinking  it  not  possibly  able  for  us  to  endure  those
miseries  any  longer,  made  meanes  that  some  of  us  came
to  John  Peter  Socoma,  their  Generall  that  now  is,  and
desired  his  Lordship  (which  Title  hee  duly  lookes  for  in
the  East  Indies)  that  he  would  consider  of  our  extreame
wants  and  miseries,  and  helpe  us  to  some  better  susten-
ance. And  further  we  desired  him,  that  he  would  be  so
much  our  friend,  as  to  ease  us  of  our  Irons  but  for  the
day  time :  Whereupon  the  said  Generall  most  wickedly
replyed  with  base  speeches,  and  bade  us  bee  gone,  and
trouble  him  no  more ;  for  if  wee  did,  hee  would  cause  us
all  to  be  hanged  speedily.  So  that  we  were  forced  to
returne  from  whence  wee  came  with  heavie  hearts,  having
no  hope  but  in  the  Almightie,  to  whom  wee  prayed  to
turne  their  hearts,  and  to  release  us  of  our  miseries.

6.  Upon  the  thirteenth  of  May,  in  the  yeare  of  our  Lord
Japara,  the  1619.  the  Dutch  went  ashoare  at  Japara ;  and  there  they
wickedly  and  maliciously  burnt  downe  the  Towne  and
the  English  House  there,  and  from  thence  forcibly  tooke
away  the  English  Flagge,  and  in  great  disdaine  of  our
Countrey  trayled  our  Flagge  after  them  in  the  dirt  through
the  Towne,  and  towed  it  aboord  their  ship  at  their  Boats

168

crueltie  there.

AN  ANSWER  TO  THE  HOLLANDERS  a.d.

1622.

sterne ; but  what  they  did  with  it  afterwards,  we  know

not.

Upon  the  eighteenth  day  of  the  moneth  of  November,  7.
and  in  the  yeare  of  our  Lord  God,  161 9.  they  tooke  one
Bartholomew  Churchman,  and  clapt  him  up  in  Irons,  and
set  him  where  he  sate  in  the  raine  and  cold  stormes  of  the
night,  and  in  the  day  time  where  the  hot  Sunne  shone
upon  him,  and  scorched  him,  without  any  shelter  at  all :
and  this  they  did  to  him,  only  because  hee  strucke  a  base
fellow  that  spake  such  words  against  our  late  Queene
Annes  Majestie,  as  are  not  fit  to  be  repeated  :  which  words,
as  also  divers  other  which  they  spake  against  our  dread
Soveraigne,  we  dare  not  relate,  as  being  too  odious  to  be
used  in  a  subjects  mouth  touching  his  Prince :  Howbeit,
might  licence  and  freedome  of  speech  bee  granted  us,  to
make  knowne  the  base  slanderous  and  detracting  speeches
of  that  Nation  against  our  King  and  Countrey,  that  wee
might  not  incurre  any  danger  of  his  Majesties  displeasure
by  the  repeating  them,  it  would  sufficiently  make  knowne
the  pride  and  crueltie  of  that  people,  who  did  not  then
let  to  say  that  they  made  no  account  of  our  King,  nor  any
of  his  subjects.

The  seventeenth  day  of  the  moneth  of  March,  and  in  8.
the  yeare  of  our  Lord  God  everlasting,  161 9.  their  Gover-
nour  of  the  Moluccas  gave  order  for  the  release  of  the
English  there,  and  appointed  thirtie  of  them  to  be  carried
to  Amboynas,  from  thence  to  be  sent  into  England  or  Amboynas
Holland.  But  the  Governour  of  Amboynas,  perceiving  crueltte-
them  to  bee  arrived,  hee  utterly  refused  to  discharge  them,
and  forced  them  to  serve  in  their  three  ships,  that  went
to  the  Manelees  as  men  of  warre,  which  if  any  refused  to
doe,  they  were  to  rowe  in  their  Gallies  chained  like  unto
slaves;  in  which  Voyage  to  the  Manelees,  fourteene  of
our  men  went  in  the  Saint  Michael,  which  were  lost,  and
never  since  heard  on,  whose  names  doe  follow :  George
Trigges,  John  Edwards,  James  Welch,  John  Crocket,
William  Nichols,  Robert  Gilbert,  Matthew  Gilbert,
Giles  Lipscombe,  Arthur  Tap,  Edward  Parker,  William

169

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1622.

Vese,  John  King,  John  Over,  and  William  Smith  Chir-
urgion.
9.  We  affirme,  that  they  having  Arrian  Ellis,  Edward
Reade,  and  William  Powell,  three  Englishmen  Prisoners,
in  their  ship  called  the  Bantam,  they  chained  them  in  Irons,
and  layed  them  in  the  Beake-head,  straitly  prohibiting  all
others  to  come  neere  them,  to  give  them  any  other  food
then  their  allowance,  which  was  so  small  that  meere  hunger
compelled  those  three  Prisoners  to  throw  the  Dice  who
should  cut  each  others  throat ;  and  so  they  did  throw  the
[I.  v.  696.]  Dice  to  that  end,  but  were  disclosed  before  any  of  them
were  slaine,  so  that  they  were  thereupon  sundred,  and  sent
into  other  ships.

10.  They  have  taken  our  men,  and  without  any  cause  have
stripped  and  whipped  them  openly  in  the  Market  place ;
they  have  also  beaten  up  their  Drumme,  and  called  the
Blackes  together  to  see  it  done.

1 1 .  They  will  not  suffer  us  to  weare  or  spread  in  our  Eng-
lish houses,  in  those  parts  where  they  have  any  command^
any  Colours  that  are  our  Kings  Colours.

The  Copie  of  a  Letter  sent  unto  the  Dutch  in  the
East  Indies,  from  their  English  Captives  at
the  Hand  of  Monoboca,  the  nineteenth  day  of
March,  161 8.  and  delivered  unto  Captaine
William  Johnson  Commander  of  the  Angell.

Consideration  in  things  of  difficultie  is  requisite :  and
therefore  much  requisite  in  these  our  unchristian-
like  miseries.  But  because  this  hath  beene  but  sleightly
respected,  wee  are  now  resolved  to  tell  you  of  all  your
perfidiousnesse.  First,  Grippe  got  advantage  to  surprize
our  ships,  and  made  a  vow,  not  to  touch  life  nor  goods  in
any  sort.  But  since  the  contrarie  hath  beene  so  much
proved,  that  Grippe  and  his  confederates  are  now  seene
to  be  forsworne,  as  shortly  after  their  actions  did  shew,  in
taking  away  even  those  things,  which  with  their  consent
we  did  save,  and  bring  aboord  your  ship  called  the  Trow.

170

AN  ANSWER  TO  THE  HOLLANDERS  a.d.

1622.

At  that  time  we  being  indungeoned  at  Pooloway,  (be-
sides all  the  Pagan-like  usage  of  that  cruell  man,  Laurence
Riall)  we  were  by  Van  Hoofe  kept  in  such  extreme  miserie
with  stinking  water,  and  Rice  halfe  full  of  stones  and  dirt
(scarce  able  to  keepe  life  and  soule  together)  that  had  not
Derrickson  van  Lam  granted  the  English  at  Poolaroone
free  accesse  to  Pooloway  to  bring  us  reliefe,  wee  had  beene
all  ere  this  time  starved  for  want.  But  we  passed  away
that  time  in  expectation  of  better  fortunes,  which  you
have  all  from  time  to  time  promised :  yet  now  againe  our
miseries  are  thrice  redoubled ;  for  since  we  came  to  this
place,  you  have  not  onely  used  us  most  basely  in  other
things,  but  also  have  taken  away  from  us  even  that  poore
sustenance,  which  we  bought  with  our  moneys :  and  this
hath  beene  done  by  that  envious  man  the  Master,  whom
your  Commanders  doe  suffer  to  be  their  Commander,
rather  then  their  Inferiour.  If  you  consider  all  his  actions,
the  refreshing  which  we  have  bought  hath  beene  but  small ;
that  is  to  say,  foure  small  Hennes  and  Cockes,  and  even
them  hath  the  Master  taken  away,  and  eaten  them  in  the
great  Cabbin,  which  dealing  of  his,  if  it  be  Christian-like,
we  referre  it  to  your  owne  discretion  :  and  now  at  last,  for
a  small  cause  or  nothing  at  all,  to  be  thus  handled,  is  a  ten
times  worse  affliction,  then  ever  was  inflicted  upon  us,
for  to  chaine  us  up  like  so  many  Dogs,  and  to  let  us  lie
in  the  raine  and  storms  of  the  night,  without  any  shelter,
which  is  also  brought  to  passe  by  the  Master.  For  (Com-
mander) *  we  considering  your  gentlenesse,  so  that  you  A  sop  fir
can  dispense  with  rigour :  Therefore  that  miserie  that  we  Cerberus-
indure  is  not  by  your  meanes,  but  by  the  Masters,  and
theirs  that  bee  of  his  mind :  and  this  is  of  a  truth,  that
even  your  Hogs  after  their  kind,  lye  a-nights  dryer  then
we  after  our  kind,  being  Christians :  and  our  griefe  is  the
more,  because  your  men  of  the  Blacke  Lion,  being  taken
by  our  English,  were  used  like  men,  and  we  like  abjects  of
the  world,  to  be  thus  used  like  dogs,  being  Subjects  to
the  Kings  Majestie  of  England,  and  in  good  respect  with
our  Employers. But  God  that  is  above  all,  knowes  all ;

171

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1622.

and  in  his  good  time  will  remedie  all.  Thus  much  we
have  thought  good  to  certifie  unto  you,  not  in  the  way  of
intreaty,  for  that  we  see  is  vaine,  but  only  that  you  may
know,  we  now  never  looke  to  come  alive  out  of  your
hands :  for  by  all  manifest  appearance,  you  seeke  to  take
even  our  lives  from  us  :  and  this  shall  be  a  true  argument
of  our  grieved  hearts,  witnessing  to  all  men,  how  un-
christian-like we  have  beene  and  are  used  by  you ;  for
in  all  this  we  have  not  expressed  the  tenth  part  of  your
cruelty ;  yet  we  hope,  that  for  this  time  it  shall  be  a
sufficient  light  unto  you,  for  that  which  hath  beene  from
time  to  time  practised  by  you  against  the  English.  Given
at  the  Hand  of  Monaboca,  the  nineteenth  of  March,
1618.

Subscribed  by  Cassarian  David, Bartholomew
Churchman,  and  George  Pettys.

Upon  the  receit  of  this  Letter,  wee  three  afore-named
were  layed  in  yrons  for  eighteene  moneths  following,  with
such  barbarous  usage  as  is  not  to  bee  imagined  to  bee
used  amongst  Christians.

Upon  the  newes  of  the  taking  of  our  two  ships  called
the  Samson  and  the  Hound  in  Patania  Road,  Hendricke
Janson  the  Commander  of  three  ships,  viz.  the  Angell,
the  Morning  Starre,  and  the  Burger-boat,  sent  a  Letter
by  the  upper  Steres-man  of  the  Starre,  (who  had  but  one
arme)  to  their  Generall  John  Peter  Sacone  then  at  Jacatra,
of  the  taking  of  our  two  ships ;  He,  the  said  Sacone  then
said,  you  have  now,  Hendricke  Janson,  given  me  good
satisfaction,  in  that  Captaine  Jordayne  is  dead  :  and  at  his
returne  thither  gratified  him  with  fourteene  hundred
Gilders  in  a  chaine  of  gold,  putting  it  himselfe  about  his
necke,  not  leaving  any  one  unrewarded,  that  had  beene  at
the  taking  of  our  two  ships,  and  one  hundred  Pieces  of
[I.  v.  697.]  eight  to  him  that  shot  him,  notwithstanding  our  Flag  of
truce  was  hung  out.  Wee  affirme  also  that  the  said  Gene-
rall John  Peter  Sacone  upon  the  newes  brought  him  by  a
ship  called  the  Hart,  from  the  Coast  of  Carmandele,  of

172

AN  ANSWER  TO  THE  HOLLANDERS  a.d

1622.

the  death  of  Sir  Thomas  Dale,  then  said ;  Dale  is  dead,
and  Jordaynes  blood  I  have,  if  I  had  George  Cockins  life
to,  I  were  then  satisfied.

An  Answere  to  objections  made  by  the  Hol-
landers, that  the  English  were  the  cause  of  the
first  breach  in  the  East  Indies.

WHereas  the  Hollanders  affirme  that  Sir  Thomas  l6l6«
Dale,  and  Captaine  Jordayne  were  the  prime  cause  e  u  '
of  all  the  differences  betwixt  the  two  Companies.  This
wee  affirme  and  can  proove,  that  both  Sir  Thomas  Dale,
and  Captaine  Jordayne  were  both  in  England  when  the
Defence  and  the  Swan  were  taken ;  and  also  that  very
inhumanly  they  tooke  the  Defence,*  when  for  reliefe  being  *See  the  story

put  from  their  Anchor  at  Poolaroone  in  a  storme,  they eJoje\sus'
l  ?  j pcctcd  some-

came  into  one  of  their  Harbours  for  succour. They  tooke  w^at  ot^er_
the  ship,  and  detayned  her  men  prisoners ; likewise  in  wise)  by
rescue,  we  following,  they  tooke  a  Pinnasse  of  ours  called  Spurzvay  and
the  Speed- well ; going  to  Jacatra,  one  of  our  men  they ^ourthoP'
slew,  and  the  rest  they  layed  in  Irons  as  prisoners,  amongst
which  one  Richard  Tayler  Carpenter  of  the  said  Pinnasse,
who  at  that  time  had  the  bloody  fluxe,  who  dying  in  their
hands  in  Irons,  they  tooke  the  dead  carkasse  of  the  said
deceased,  and  put  him  into  a  bush,  with  his  head  down- l6l7-
ward,  and  his  heeles  upward,  and  said  in  most  barbarous
manner,  that  there  was  a  Stert-man,  (that  is,  a  man  with  a
tayle) with  his  heeles  upward ; and there his  carkasse
rotted  in  the  bush.

I  would  demand  of  them  where  Sir  Thomas  Dale,  and  l6l9-
Captaine  Jordayne  were,  when  they  tooke  the  Salomon  25'  MarcL
and  the  Attendance,  it  is  to  be  proved,  they  were  then
comming  out  of  England,  hardly  cleere  of  the  Coast,  when
they  tooke  both  these  ships,  upon  faire  terms  of  Composi-
tion ;  namely,  with  promise  to  give  us  our  lives,  goods,
and  libertie.  They  robbed  us  of  all  our  goods,  and  kept
us  in  lamentable  manner  in  Irons,  some  of  us  three  yeers,
some  more,  some  lesse :  in  which  wofull  miserie  many  of

173

A.D.
l622.

Gonahpee  one
of  the  Banda
Hands  with  a
burning  top.

Earthquakes.

One  most
hideous  and
horrible.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

our  Companie  ended  their  dayes  lamentably ;  for  in  trueth,
they  never  kept  any  faith,  oath,  or  promise  with  us  at  all,
but  most  proudly,  disdainfully,  and  cruelly  demeaned
themselves  towards  us.

Bartholomew  Churchman.

Chap.  XIII.

A  pithie  Description  of  the  chiefe  Hands  of  Banda
and  Moluccas,  by  Captaine  Humphrey  Fitz-
Herbert  in  a  Letter  to  the  Companie.

Right  Worshipfull,

T  remaineth  that  before  I  leave  these
Easterne  parts,  I  note  unto  you  some
particulars  observed  this  Voyage  in  Banda,
Amboyna,  and  the  Moluccas :  which
although  I  easily  beleeve  are  well  knowne
unto  you  alreadie,  yet  as  of  the  letters  of
the  Alphabet  well  knowne  to  all  men,
many  unknowne  words  be  composed ;  so  these  noted
things,  either  in  respect  of  the  time,  the  matter,  or  the
manner  of  the  deliverie,  may  bring  some  thing  againe  to
your  necessarie  remembrance,  to  your  wise  fore-know-
ledge, or  to  your  further  consideration.  Leaving  Jap-
parra  and  Macassar,  I  will  betake  my  selfe  to  the  barrenest
place  of  the  lies  of  Banda,  that  is,  to  Gonahpee,  at  the
top  yeelding  nothing  but  cinders,  fire,  and  smoake ;  on  the
surface  below,  woods  without  water  or  fruit  for  the  sus-
tenance of  the  life  of  man :  neverthelesse  being  severed
from  the  Hand  Nero  but  by  a  very  small  channell,  they
together  with  Lantore  on  the  other  side  doe  make  a  very
fair  and  spacious  Harbour.  This  Hand  is  very  subject
to  Earthquakes,  which  doe  trouble  all  other  the  Hands
also,  and  make  the  ships  in  the  Road  to  totter  and  tremble
againe.  Since  the  surprizall  of  Nero  by  the  Dutch,  there
being  a  fearefull  Earthquake,  the  said  Hill  cast  forth  such
hideous  flames,  such  store  of  cinders,  and  huge  steames,
that  it  destroyed,  burnt,  and  brake  downe  all  the  thicke

i74

HUMPHREY FITZHERBERT  a.d.

1621.

woods  and  mightie  trees,  overwhelming  them  as  it  were  her
owne  vomiting,  so  that  a  greene  leafe  could  not  be  seene
in  all  that  part  of  the  Hand :  nor  did  Nero  escape  these
hellish  blasts,  which  blew  these  steames  and  cinders  into
the  Castle  and  Countrey  neere  adjoyning,  in  such  abund-
ance, that  it  invited  all  men  that  saw  it  to  her  funerall,
burnt  up  all  the  fruit  trees,  and  covered  all  the  Countrey
about  it,  and  had  like  to  have  sunke  the  ships  in  the  road.
It  is  credibly  reported  by  those  that  saw  it,  the  violence
was  so  great,  that  it  carried  stones  of  three  or  foure  tunnes
weight  from  the  one  Hand  into  the  other,  and  into  the
Road.

The  Castle  Nera  standeth  close  on  the  water-side  in  U--  v-  698.]
the plaine, it is faire, large, and strongly built ; but ra'
weakly  situate,  by  reason  of  the  rising  of  the  hill  to  the
landward : within  lesse  then  Musket  shot  it  hath  a  hil-
locke  higher  then  it  by  at  the  least  twentie  fathome,  which
doth  command  it  at  pleasure. To  prevent  which  mischiefe,
the  Dutch  have  built  thereon  a  small  Fort,  but  in  vain,
the  same  being  under  command  of  another,  aswell  as  the
former. The  Castle  is  a  matter  of  great  charge,  both  in  Castle  weakly
respect  of  it  selfe,  as  also  in  respect  of  the  Souldiers ;  and  ntuate-
altogether  unnecessarie,  but  for  dwelling  houses  and  Maga-
zines ; the  other  Fort  being  great  enough,  and  strong
enough  for  the  defence  of  this  place. Here  is  in  this
Castle  about  fortie  Peeces  of  Ordnance ; in  the  other,
some  eight  or  ten,  the  most  of  brasse. The  Dutch  have
not  received  the  fruit  of  this  Hand  since  their  comming
thither,  being  alwayes  over-mastered  by  the  Blackes,  both
by  sea  and  land :  but  the  gayning  of  Lantore  hath  made
all  things quiet now. I pray  God make it profitable
hereafter.

Lantore  is  the  greatest  and  richest  Hand  of  all  the  lies  Lantore.
of  Banda,  strong,  and  almost  inaccessible,  as  it  were  a
Castle :  there  is  scarce  a  tree  on  the  Hand  but  beareth
fruit.  TheBandaneses  left  it  forwantof  militarie  pollicie :
but  he  must  have  a  polliticke  pate  (I  beleeve)  that  gayneth
it  againe. The  Towne  is  situate  on  the  brow  of  a  sharpe

i75

A.D.
l62I.

Pooloway.

None  but  rain
water.
The  Castle.
Poolaroone.
*Coen  the
chief  Com-
mander of  the
Dutch  in  the
Indies,  whose
fastigious
Titles  may
seeme  fastidi-
ous to  an  eye
not  altogether
evill :  and
follow,  as  I
have  seene  a
copie  of  them,
I  know  not
whether  need-
ing a  Demo-
critus  or  Her a-
clitus;

whether  to  be
ranked  with
T.  Ccriat,  sup.
here  named,  at

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

hill,  the  ascent  as  difficult  as  by  a  ladder :  while  they
stood  peevishly  to  the  defence  thereof  to  the  Roadwards,
the  Dutch  landed  with  much  adoe  on  the  other  side  of  the
Hand,  and  surprised  them  at  unawares.  Right  over
the  Towne  the  Dutch  have  built  a  Fort  on  the  top  of  the
hill  to  prevent  the  like  inconveniences,  as  also  to  keepe
the  same  in  better  subjection.  It  is  but  small,  and  while
I  was  there,  the  foundation  scarcely  finished.  If  the
English  had  come  thither  a  moneth  or  sixe  weekes  before
the  Dutch  made  this  spitefull  expedition,  I  dare  avouch
it,  they  might  have  neere  laden  the  best  ship  your  Wor-
ships have  in  India  with  Nutmegs  and  Mace  from  these
Hands.

Pooloway  is  the  Paradice  of  all  the  rest,  entermitting
pleasure  with  profit.  There  is  not  a  tree  on  that  Hand
but  the  Nutmeg,  and  other  delicate  Fruits  of  superfluitie ;
and  withall,  full  of  pleasant  walkes,  so  that  the  whole
Countrey  seemes  a  contrived  Orchard  with  varieties.  They
have  none  but  raine-water,  which  they  keepe  in  Jarres
and  Cisternes,  or  fetch  it  from  the  above-named  Hands,
which  is  their  onely  defect.  The  sea  shoare  is  so  steepe,
that  it  seemeth,  Nature  meant  to  reserve  this  Hand  particu-
larly to  her  selfe.  There  is  but  one  place  about  the  whole
Hand  for  a  ship  to  anchor  in ;  and  that  so  dangerous,  that
he  that  letteth  fall  his  Anchor  seldome  seeth  the  weighing
of  it  againe :  besides  hee  incurreth  the  imminent  dangers
of  his  ship.  How  this  Hand  was  won  by  Derricke  Lam,
or  lost  by  Captaine  Castleton,  I  cannot  well  relate.  It
hath  on  the  Easterne  side  a  faire  and  strong  Castle,  a
regular  Pentagonon  well  fortified,  and  furnished  with  all
manner  of  provisions  and  Souldiers,  and  is  held  to  bee
the  strongest  Castle  the  Dutch  have  in  the  Indies,  and  the
most  pleasant  residence.

Poolaroone  (in  imitation  of  her  sisters  the  other  Hands)
is  turned  Dutch.  There  was  in  her  neither  pleasure  nor
profit,  yet  the  ambitious  King  Coen  *  hath  made  a  con-

/.  4.  c.  t  7.  or  with  some  of  the  longs tiled  Emperours. Besides  these  Hands  ofBanda
e  reckoned  Rosinging,  P.  Maon,  P.  Capal,  P.  Sangy,  Neilackey  &c.

176

HUMPHREY FITZHERBERT  a,d,

1621.

quest  of  her  chastitie.  The  Civill  Law  denieth  a  violent
rape  to  be  incontinencie,  because  although  the  bodie  be
forced,  the  minde  may  yet  bee  free.  Recall  her  againe,
and  right  this  uncivill  outrage  by  your  wise  and  civill
censure :  although  the  benefit  (which  is  not  to  be  con-
temned) bee  divided  into  shares,  yet  we  hope,  your  Wor-
ships will  keepe  and  enjoy  to  your  selves  the  disposing
and  distributing  alwayes  of  your  owne.

Amboyna  sitteth  as  Queene  between  the  lies  of  Banda  4mb°yna.
and  the  Moluccas ; shee  is  beautified  with  the  fruits  of  istjmuSm
severall  Factories,  and  dearely  beloved  of  the  Dutch  :  which
the  better  to  declare,  they  say  they  would  give  thirtie
millions  there  were  no  Cloves  but  on  that  Hand  onely.
Neptune is her darling, and entertayned in her very
bosome,  it  seemeth  that  the  Water  and  the  Earth  are  agreed
together  in  unitie : for  at  the  bottome  of  the  Bay,  with
one  hundred  Pioners  in  seven  dayes,  of  one  Hand  it  may
be  made  two. It  is  not  above  a  Flights  shot  from  full
sea  marke  on  the  one  side,  to  full  sea  marke  on  the  other
side :  nor  is  the  sandie  Plaine  raised  a  fathome  above  the
of  the  horizon ; insomuch  they  glide  their
Prawes  and  Coracorries  by  maine  force  from  one  sea  to
the  other. It  is  plentifully  stored  with  Fruit,  Fish,  and
fresh  water  :  nor  is  there  any  great  want  of  Flesh. Their
Vines  both  of  Banda,  Amboyna,  and  the  Moluccas,  are
pruned  thrice  a  yeere,  and  every  prunage  hath  his  vintage. Three
A  raritie  it  seemeth  to  me,  in  nature,  I  saw  in  the  Woods J^sS^L
of  this  Hand  a  Plant,  or  Tree,  or  neither,  or  whether  I  Nature.
shall  call  it,  I  know  not,  in  substance  much  like  to  the
bodie  of  our  Ivie,  in  forme  like  a  halser  of  five  or  sixe
inches,  in  length  five  or  six  fathoms,  bare  without  sprig
or  sprout,  the  one  end  fast  in  the  ground,  the  other  fixed
to  the  limbe  of  a  great  Tree,  a  fathome  and  better  dis-
tant from  the  bodie  thereof,  and  so  perpendicular,  that  it
is  very  disputable  whether  it  growes  up  from  the  ground,
or  from  the  limbe  of  the  Tree  to  the  ground :  this  rope  is
of  firm  solid  wood  without  any  concavitie,  and  yet  it  strange
yeeldeth  excellent  good, faire  and sweet  water,  and  as  spring.

V  177  M

A.D.
l62I.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

fresh  as  from  the  Fountaine ;  nor  doth  it  herein  admit
any  distinction  or  difference,  unlesse  it  be  the  more  deli-
cate, according  to  your  companies  cut  more  or  lesse  thereof,
distributing  every  one  the  quantitie  of  two  foot  or  there-
abouts, and  they  shall  have  sufficient ;  for  every  piece
will  runne  to  the  value  of  a  pinte  or  thereabouts,  and  that
in  an  instant ; a  strange  refreshing  to  those  that  travaile

[I.  v.  699.] those  high  and  drie  mountaines,  as  my  selfe  did  find  by

The  Castle,  good  experience,  the  Castle  of  Amboyna  is  quadrangular,
well  moted  and  fortified  with  men  and  munition,  and
hath  in  it  about  Peeces  of  Ordnance. The  Dutch

have  reduced  into  order  the  two  rebellious  Factories,  and
the  people  begin  to  plant  anew,  insomuch  that  they  expect
within  these  few  yeeres  the  fruit  will  be  to  that  it

is  at  present.  Your  Worships  shall  herewith  receive  the
Draught  of  this  Hand,  and  the  adjoyning  Factories  set
out  at  large  after  the  Dutch  fashion,  which  maketh  not
mole-hils  of  Mountaines.

GreatBachan.  Bachan  is  accounted  amongst  the  Hands  which  are  more
properly  called  the  Moluccas,  and  is  the  greatest  of  them
all ;  it  is  called  great  Bachan,  there  is  another  neere  adjoyn-

Old  Bachan.  ing  called  old  Bachan.  In  great  Bachan  the  Dutch  have
a  Factorie  and  Castle,  which  venting  some  Commodities
doth  yeeld  them  Boords,  Planks,  and  Masts  for  any  ship
whatsoever ;  it  is  the  fruitfullest  of  all  the  Hands  of  all
the  Moluccas,  and  the  cheapest.  The  King  keepeth  neere
the  Castle  without  about  three  hundred  persons,  the  rest
being  fled  to  the  mountains  &  other  Hands.  The  Dutch
Merchant  and  others  told  me  for  certain,  that  for  want  of
people  the  Cloves  lye  on  the  ground  three  or  foure  inches
thicke  in  some  places :  so  as  it  may  be  truly  said  of  this
place,  the  Harvest  is  great  and  the  gatherers  few ; nor

The  Castle,  doe  I  thinke  that  the  Dutch  doe  desire  many.  The  Castle
is  but  small  yet  strong  enough  for  this  place,  and  con-
tayneth  fourteene  Peeces  of  Iron  Ordnance,  small  and
great,  &c. This  is  a  very  good  Harbour.

Machan.  Machan  the  next  in  order,  mounteth  her  tops  above

the  Cloudes  in  manner  of  a  Cone,  and  admits  no  plaines

178

HUMPHREY FITZHERBERT  ad.

1621.

within  the  circut  of  her  Confines. It  is  a  very  fertile
Hand,  and  yeeldeth  to  the  Dutch  the  greatest  Revenue  of
all  the  rest  of  the  Moluccas  Hands. It  hath  three  Fac-
tories with  their  Forts  in  Triangle  position ; the  chiefest
is  Nossaquia  which  yeeldeth  most  Spice,  but  venteth  lesse  Nossaquia.
Merchandize. The  second  is  Taffasoho,  which  venteth Taffasoho.
more  Merchandize,  and  receiveth  lesse  Spice. The  third
is  Tabbalolo,  which  yeeldeth  lesse  Spice,  and  venteth  lesse Tabbahh.
Merchandize. The  Road  where  the  ships  take  in  their
goods  is  at  Nossaquia ; at  the  other  places  there  is  no
riding  :  this  Castle  also  is  the  strongest ;  they  are  all  seated
high  above  the  water,  and  the  way  unto  them  is  steepe  and
difficult,  and  therefore  to  the  Sea-wards  very  strong,,  but
to  the  Land-wards  are  commanded  every  way.

There  is  in  this  Hand  a  Clove  Tree  differing:  from  all  Strange  Clove
other  in  its  fruit,  which  is  called  The  Kings  Clove,  much  rees'
esteemed  by  the  Countrey  people  both  for  the  varietie,  as
also  for  the  goodnesse ;  nor  is  there  any  other  but  this
in  all  the  Moluccas ;  they  are  not  to  be  bought  for  any
money,  but  are  given  abroad  to  friends  by  handfuls  and
halfe  handfuls :  what  fell  to  my  lot  your  Worships  shall
receive  together  with  an  exact  draught  of  all  the  Dutch
Castles  in  the  Moluccas.

Motyr  makes  haste  to  follow  Machand,  in  forme,  height,  Motyr.
and  fruitfulnesse ;  but  not  in  her  Revenues :  nor  is  shee
equall  to  her  in  greatnesse.  The  Dutch  hath  one  onely
Factorie  upon  this  Hand,  which  is  called  by  the  same  name,
it  yeeldeth  but  little  fruit,  and  venteth  lesse  Merchandize  :
here  Venus  and  Voluptuousnesse  have  their  habitation  Otia  si  tollas
through  idlenesse. Thus  much  by  the  report  of  others,  PeJlfre  CuPl~

r T  A.-L  ir  r  aims  arcus.

tor  1  was  not  there  to  see  it  my  selre.

Tydore  doth  taxe  the  Dutch  for  leaving  her  wholy  to  Tydore.
the  Spaniards,  and  destroying  the  Fort  called  the  Marieca.
This  Hand  is  great  and  rich  in  Spice  as  any,  but  because
I  had  not  landed  here,  I  referre  you  to  the  Draught  there-
of, and  of  Ternate,  herewith  sent  to  your  Worships  for
further  notice.

Ternate, the  greatest  of  these  Hands  is  the  seat  of  Ternate.

179

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1621.

Dissention  betweene  the  Spaniard  and  the  Dutch.  The
chiefest  place  for  the  Dutch  is  Malaijo,  neere  unto  which
is  Tallooko,and  on  the  Northside  of  the  Hand  is  Tycoome,
which  should  have  beene  destroyed  with  the  rest.  Gamo-
lamo,  Dangile  and  Saint  Lucie  are  the  Spanish  Forts,  be-
tweene which  is  Calamasca  seated  as  a  Frontier  Fort  of
the  Dutch,  which  should  also  have  beene  destroyed ;  the
whole  both  concerning  the  Hand  and  those  Forts  will
better  appeare  by  the  Draught  thereof,  herewith  sent  your
Worships  inclosed  in  a  Bamboo,  &c.

Aboord  the  Royall  Exchange  in  the  Road  of
Jacatra,  the  18.  of  October,  1621.

Your  Worships  to  command,

HUMFREY  FlTZ-HERBERT.

Because  the  Authour  calleth  Coen  an  ambitious  King,
you  may  see  the  occasion  of  it  in  the  Titles  which  hee
assumeth,  and  are  imposed  on  him ;  as  I  have  seene  them
written,  intituled  by  himselfe  in  his  Proclamation  for
cessing  or  imposing  of  Customes  at  Jacatra,  in  this  manner,
viz.

[I.  v.  700.]  TOhn  Peeterson  Coen  Governour  General]  over  all  the
J  Lands,  Hands,  Townes,  Forts,  Places,  Factories,  Ships,
Pinnasses,  Shallops,  and  Men,  as  also  of  the  whole  Trade
and  Commerce  in  India,  on  the  behalfe  of  the  High  and
Mightie  Lords  the  States  generall,  his  Princely  Excel-
lencie,  and  others  the  priviledged  Committees  of  the  united
Netherlands  East  India  Company.

To  all  those  to  whom  this  present  Writing  shall  come,
greeting.  We  taking  into  our  consideration,  after  the
Conquest  of  the  Kingdome  of  Jacatra,  &c.

By  the  Queene  of  Patanie,  sending  her  Ambassadour
unto  Him : He  was  stiled,

The  great,  strong,  and  mightie  King  of  Jacatra,  and  of
twelve  Castles ;  Commander  of  all  the  Seas  under
the  Winds,  John  Peeterson  Coen.

180

SURRENDER OF  POOLOWAY

IF  I  had  beene  able  to  have  given  thee  also  those
Draughts,  Reader,  thou  shouldest  have  had  them.
But  such  as  I  have,  give  I  unto  thee ;  namely,  this  of
Hondius,  meane  and  obscure  enough,  but  somewhat  more
then  nothing.

Chap. XIIII.

Three  severall  Surrenders  of  certaine  of  the  Banda
Hands  made  to  the  Kings  Majestie  of  England,
faithfully  translated  out  of  Malahan  into  Eng-
lish ;  with  a  Voyage  also  annexed  of  Sir  Henry
Middleton.

The  Contents  of  the  Surrender  of  the  Hands  of  Poolo-
way,  and  Poolaroone,  in  Banda,  to  His  Majestie.

1  His  Writing  is  for  the  agreement  betweene
all  the  Orankayes  of  Pooloway,  and
Poolaroone  also,  and  the  English  in  man-
ner as  followeth,  That  whereas  in  the
time  that  Pooloway  was  not  yet  surprized
by  the  Hollanders,  the  people  of  Poolo-
way and  Poolaroone  had  surrendred  the
two  foresaid  Hands  unto  the  King  of  England,  and  had
given  ground  to  Richard  Hunt  Merchant  here,  withall
setting  up  the  King-  of  England  his  Flagge  upon  the
Castle  of  Pooloway,  and  shooting  off  three  Peeces  of
Ordnance  in  token  of  the  Covenant  of  the  men  of  Poolo-
way and  Poolaroone,  betweene  the  English  and  them,
when  they  did  surrender  the  two  foresaid  Hands  to  the
King  of  England,  and  had  given  ground  to  the  English,
being  done  before  the  surprize  of  Pooloway,  eight  dayes :
and  after  that,  it  was  taken  by  the  Hollanders.  And  where
as  at  that  time  there  were  but  two  Englishmen  upon  Poolo-
way, of  weake  defence,  who  beeing  not  able  to  doe  the
Countrey  any  good,  went  away  to  Poolaroone,  together
with  the  men  of  Pooloway  in  one  small  Praw,  who  had
brought away with them Earth and Writings for the

181

A.D.

c.  1620.

/  had  another
farre  better
sent  out  of  the
Indies,  but
partly  the  cost,
and  partly
doubt  to  dis-
please have
detained  the
publishing.
[I.  v.  701.]

This  was
translated  by
Robert  Hayes,
the  second  sent
out  the  Indies
so  translated:
the  third  by
Robert  Hayes.

a.d  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

c.  1620.

establishing  of  Covenants  betwixt  them  and  the  men  of
Poolaroone :  Therefore  now  the  two  foresaid  Hands  are  in
the  hands  of  the  King  of  England  only  according  to  our
Surrender.  But  whereas  at  this  time  through  the  Assaults
of  the  Hollanders,  Pooloway  is  fallen  into  their  hands  and
Possession,  if  it  shall  please  his  Majestie  to  recover  it
unto  himselfe  againe,  hee  shall  doe  therein  nought  but
Justice,  because  the  Inhabitants  thereof  have  absolutely
surrendred  it  unto  Him :  and  if  his  Majesties  pleasure
be  to  the  contrary,  let  it  be  as  shall  seeme  best  in  his
Highnesse  judgement.  But  this  is  sure  that  we  the  men
of  Pooloway  and  Poolaroone,  have  surrendred  the  two
foresaid  Hands  unto  his  Majesties  power  and  cannot  goe
from,  or  revolt  our  word  againe  even  to  the  last  day,  and
having  linked  our  selves  with  the  English  in  one  bond  to
live  and  dye  together.  Furthermore  all  the  men  of  Poolo-
way and  Poolaroone  doe  covenant  to  send  every  yeere  to
the  King  of  England  a  branch  of  Nutmegs,  in  token  of
their  designes,  desiring  that  this  offer  of  all  the  Oran-
kayas  of  Pooloway  and  Poolaroone,  being  once  offered
out  of  their  true  love  unto  the  King  of  England,  bee  not
had  in  oblivion  or  rejected.

And  whereas  King  James  by  the  grace  of  God  is  King
of  England,  Scotland,  France  and  Ireland,  is  also  now  by
the  mercy  of  God  King  of  Pooloway  and  Poolaroone.
Moreover,  wee  doe  all  of  us  make  an  agreement  that  the
Commodities  in  the  two  foresaid  Hands,  namely,  Mace  and
Nutmegs,  we  cannot  nor  will  sell  to  any  other  Nation,
but  only  to  the  King  of  England  his  subjects,  according
to  the  true  meaning  of  our  Covenants  and  surrendring  of
the  two  foresaid  Hands  to  his  Majestie,  with  all  that  is
(in)  them  to  be  solely  at  his  disposing,  which  is  and  shall
be  the  reason  that  we  cannot  trade  with  any  others.  And
whereas  all  the  Orankayas  of  the  two  foresaid  Hands  have
made  this  agreement,  let  it  be  credited  that  it  was  not
made  in  madnesse  or  loosely  as  the  breathing  of  the  wind,
but  because  it  was  concluded  upon  in  their  hearts,  they
cannot  revolt  or  swerve  from  the  same  againe. More-

182

SURRENDER OF  POOLOWAY  ad.

c.  1620.
over all  we  together  doe  desire  of  his  Majestie  that  such
thing  as  are  not  fitting  in  our  Religion,  as  unreverent
usage  of  women,  mayntayning  of  Swine  in  our  Countrey,
forceable  taking  away  of  mens  goods,  misse-using  of  our
men,  or  any  such  like  that  are  excepted  against  in  our
Lawes,  that  they  be  not  put  in  practice,  being  out  of  our
use  and  custome ; that  they  may  not  prove  a  blemish
unto  our  Religion,  and  that  we  may  receive  no  occasion
to deale unkindly with the English. Furthermore, if
any  Englishman  will  become  of  our  Religion,  wee  will
accept  of  him  upon  counsell :  or  if  any  of  our  people  will
become  a  Christian,  he  shall  be  so  likewise  upon  like  coun-
sell, desiring  this  promise  that  such  things  be  not  done  in
such  manner  as  may  breed  discontent  betwixt  us  and  the
English,  which  we  doe  very  earnestly  desire  of  his  Majes-
tie. Finally,  at  this  time  all  the  Orankayas  of  Pooloway
and  Poolaroone,  doe  againe  make  a  Covenant  with  Nath-
aniel Courthop,  Captaine  of  the  two  ships  riding  here,
Sophon  Cozocke,  and  Thomas Spurway  giving  ground
and  surrendring  the  two  foresaid  Hands  unto  the  King  of
England,  being  alreadie  partly  in  the  hands  of  Nathaniel
Courthop,  Sophon  Cozocke  and  Thomas  Spurway ; and
that  not  only  now,  but  as  being  done  long  since  when
Captaine  Castleton  went  from  Pooloway  with  foure  ships,
all  the  Orankayas  of  the  two  foresaid  Hands,  having  agreed
with  Richard  Hunt  Merchant  of  Pooloway,  with  all  hav-  [I.  v.  702.]
ing  set  the  King  of  England  his  Flagge  upon  the  Castle  of
Pooloway,  and  shot  off  two  peeces  of  Ordnance  in  token  of
the  Covenant  betweene  the  Orankayes  of  Pooloway,  and
Poolaroone,  and  the  English  : and  as  it  hath  beene  done
heeretofore,  so  at  this  time  we  doe  renew  it  with  Nathaniel
Courthop,  Sophon  Cozocke,  and  Thomas  Spurway.

Emmon  Poolowaye.  Hattib  Ittam.

Sabandar  Poolowaye.  Hattib  Pootee.

Sabandar  Wratt.  Sabandar  Treat.

Sabandar  Poolaroone.  Emmon  Lancecoe.

Sabandar  Lameco.  Sabandar  Locon.
Naboda  Coa.

>83

AVD  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

c.  1620.

The  Surrender  of  Rosinging  and  Wayre  to

his Majestie.

THis  writing  is  for  the  agreement  betweene  all  the
Orankayes  of  the  Countrey  of  Wayre,  and  of  the  Hand
of  Rosinging,  and  the  English  Nation  in  manner  as  fol-
loweth,  viz.  That  whereas,  in  the  time  that  the  Countrey
of  Banda  was  in  trouble,  by  reason  of  their  enemies,  so  that
they  were  no  longer  able  to  withstand  them,  they  there-
fore agreed  with  Nathaniel  Courthop,  Sophonie  Cozock,
and  Thomas  Spurway ;  thus  much  in  effect,  that  is,  that
they  doe  surrender  the  Countrey  of  Wayre  and  the  Hand
of  Rosinging,  unto  the  King  of  England  in  respect  that
they  are  not  able  any  more  to  stand  for  themselves  against
their  enemies  :  that  now  the  sayd  Countrey  of  Wayre,  and
the  Hand  of  Rosinging  is  onely  in  the  power  of  the  King
of  England.  And  whereas  the  agreements  is  once  made,
we  the  aforesaid  Orankeyes  cannot  in  our  Consciences
dissolve  it  againe,  but  that  it  shall  last  for  ever  untill  the
last  day  of  doome :  And  that  the  English  shall  be  as  the
men  of  the  Countrey  of  Wayre  in  all  Priviledges.  Fur-
thermore, the  men  of  the  aforesaid  Countrey  of  Wayre,
and  the  Hand  of  Rosinging,  doe  promise  and  agree  to
send  unto  the  King  of  England,  one  branch  of  Nutmegges
as  a  token  of  there  foresaid  agreement  of  all  us  the  afore-
said Orankayes :  on  condition  that  the  said  token  of  our
agreement  be  not  out  of  memory  nor  dissolved,  nor  we
dis-esteemed.  And  we  doe  wish  that  Almightie  God
would  vouchsafe  to  give  prosperitie  to  the  King  of  Eng-
land, Scotland,  France  and  Ireland :  and  now  by  the  grace
and  mercy  of  God,  the  King  of  the  Countrey  of  Wayre,
and  the  Hand  of  Rosinging,  and  that  more,  we  will  stoope
to  no  other  King  or  Potentate,  but  onely  unto  his  Majestie  :
and  after  him  to  all  his  posteritie.  Furthermore,  as  con-
cerning our  trade,  we  doe  all  truely  agree,  not  to  sell  any
of  the  Nuts  or  Mace,  which  the  aforesaid  Countreyes,  do
afford  to  any  other  but  onely  to  the  King  of  England  his
subjects,  because  we  have  wholly  unto  him  surrendred  the

184

HONDIUS HIS MAP OF  THE ISLANDS OF EAST INDIA

SURRENDER OF  ROSINGING  a.d.

c.  1620.
foresaid  two  Countreys  of  Wayre  and  Rosinging,  with  all
that  therein  is,  or  whatsoever  it  doth,  or  shall  yeeld,  it  is
the  King  of  England  his  owne ;  and  this  shall  stand  for  a
reason  that  we  cannot  trade  with  any  other  Nation.  More-
over, we  intreat  the  Kings  Majestie  of  England  in  earnest
manner,  that  such  things  as  are  not  befitting  to  our
Religion,  as  unmannerly  usage  of  our  women,  maintain-
ing of  Swine  in  our  Countrey,  beating  and  abusing  of  our
men,  or  taking  away  of  them  perforce  against  their  wils,
as  if  they  were  their  own  slaves,  or  any  other  such  like
attempts,  that  are  held  unbeseeming  in  our  lawes  (we  say)
that  we  doe  intreate  his  Highnesse  that  none  of  these  or
such  like  be  put  in  practise  by  his  subjects,  because  they
are  things  disallowable  in  our  lawes,  and  so  being  com-
mitted, will  redound  to  the  overthrow  thereof ;  and  we
thereby  might  be  forced  to  deale  unkindly  with  the  Eng-
lish therefore.  Moreover,  if  any  of  the  English  here-
after shall  have  an  affection  to  be  circumcised,  and  become
as  one  of  us,  it  shall  be  done  upon  sufficient  Counsell  be-
tweene  the  rest  of  the  English  and  us,  or  if  any  of  us  will
become  a  Christian  in  that  cause,  the  like  counsell  shall
be  held,  and  this  shall  not  be  done  for  any  misdemeanour
of  the  partie  willing  so  to  turne :  because  that  may  breed
a  discention  betwTeene  the  English  and  us.  And  whereas
this  agreement  was  made  in  the  presence,  and  by  the  con-
sent of  the  King  &  Sabander,  of  Wayre,  the  Sabander  of
Rosinging,  Emmon  Hattib,  and  all  the  rest  of  the  Oran-
kayes,  of  the  Countreyes  of  Wayre,  and  the  Hands  of
Rosinging  :  This  shall  be  for  a  testimony  that  it  is  not
done  in  madnesse,  or  in  the  manner  of  the  breathing  of
wind ;  but  that  it  was  also  aswell  thought  in  our  hearts,  ,
as  spoken  with  our  mouthes,  and  therefore  we  cannot,  nor
will  goe  from  it  againe,  but  that  it  shall  so  stand  untill  the
dissolution  of  the  world  ;  Neither  shall  there  any  doubts
rise  in  our  hearts  of  any  other,  but  that  we  the  men  of
Wayre  and  Rosinging,  are  onely  the  Kings  Majesties  of
England  his  subjects :  and  if  any  trouble  hereafter  doe
happen  in  the  foresaid  Countreys,  we  will  be  contented

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

c.  1620.

aswell  to  die,  as  to  live  together  with  the  English,  because
we  will  be  subject  to  one  King,  and  this  shall  stand  for  a
reason,  that  any  being  in  league  with  us,  shall  also  be  in
league  with  the  English,  &  per  contra,  he  that  is  neere  the
English,  shall  be  neere  us,  because  we  will  by  no  meanes
againe,  divorce  our  selves  one  from  the  other.  Finally,
at  the  time  this  agreement  was  made,  all  the  Orankayes  of
Pooloway  and  Poolaroone  were  witnesses  thereunto ;  all
the  Orankayes  of  Pooloway  and  Rosinging  have  unto  the
aforesaid  Premisses  set  their  hands.

The  King  of  Wayre.  The  Sabandar  of  Rosinging.

The  Sabandar  of  Wayre. Emmon  of  Rosinging.
Emmon  of  Wayre.  Hattib  of  Rosinging.

[I.  v.  703.] Translation  of  the  Surrender  of  Lantore,  Cont.  in

the  paper  N.D.

In  the  yeere  of  the  Prophet  Mahomed  1028.  in
the  tenth  day  of  the  Moone  Maharran  being
Saturday,  the  yeere  is  called  Aleph.  And  in
the  yeere  of  Jesus,  1620.  in  the  Moneth  of
November  the  24.  day.

THis  is  the  writing  of  the  agreement  of  the  Sabander
of  Lantore,  and  the  Cap.  of  Lantore,  &  all  the  Oran-
kayes within  the  Countrey  of  Lantore,  with  Robert  Hayes,
after  the  losse  of  Captaine  Courthop ;  That  we  of  Lan-
tore do  surrender  the  land  of  Lantore  unto  the  Kings
Majestie  of  England  with  all  that  is  therein  :  So  that  all
the  Nuts  and  Mace  within  the  Countrey  of  Lantore,  we
promise  to  sell  to  no  other  people,  other  then  to  the  sub-
jects of  the  Kings  Majestie  of  England  only.  Further-
more, we  the  Orankayes  of  Lantore,  doe  promise  every
yeere  to  send  to  the  Kings  Majestie  of  England  a  bough
of  a  Nutmeg  tree,  for  the  acknowledging  of  the  homage
of  us  the  men  of  Lantore,  to  the  Kings  Majestie  of  Eng-
land. To  the  intent  that  this  agreement  of  Surrender  be-
twixt us  be  not  forgotten,  to  the  end  of  the  world :  and

186

SURRENDER OF LANTORE  ad.

1620.

to  the  intent  their  be  no  difference  or  falling  out  betwixt
us.  Furthermore,  we  doe  crave  of  his  Majestie  of  Eng-
land, concerning  such  things  as  doe  not  agree  with  our
Religion,  that  they  may  not  be  done  in  the  Countrey  of
Bandan,  to  the  end  that  such  things  being  restrained,  there
be  no  offence  given  betweene  the  Bandanezes  and  the
Englishmen :  As  to  enforce  our  Women,  our  Wives  or
Daughters,  or  to  strike  any  of  us,  or  violently  to  take
any  thing  from  us,  or  to  let  Swine  loose  in  our  Countrey,
or  any  such  like  thing  as  doth  not  agree  with  our  Religion.
These  things  we  onely  except  (because  those  things  tend
to  the  destroying  of  our  Religion)  to  4ie  intent  there  be
no  falling  out  betwixt  the  Bandanezes  and  the  English,
unto  the  end  of  the  world.  And  whereas  it  pleaseth  God
that  James  is  King  of  England,  Scotland,  France  and  Ire-
land ;  so  now  also  he  is  King  of  the  Countrey  of  Banda :
so  then  the  Country  of  Banda  is  in  subjection  to  no  other
King  then  to  the  Kings  Majestie  of  England  onely  in  this
world,  excepting  our  Religion.  For  our  Religion  of  Islam
doth  not  agree  with  the  Christian  Religion,  neither  doth
the  Christian  Religion  agree  with  our  Religion  of  Islam ;
and  this  is  the  purport  of  our  agreement.  Further,  if  it
shall  happen  any  English  to  runne  to  us,  or  any  Banda
man  to  runne  to  the  English,  it  may  not  be  tolerated  with-
out the  consent  of  the  chiefe  of  the  English  and  us  of
Banda ;  because  such  things  are  contrary  to  our  Religion,
and  tend  onely  to  falling  out  and  brabbles  betwixt  the
Bandamen  and  the  Englishmen.  At  this  time  we  were
together  in  consultation,  all  the  Orankayes  of  Lantore,
and  the  Orankayes  of  Labetacke,  and  the  Orankayes  of
Nero  Pooloway  and  Poolaroone,  and  have  put  too  our
hands,  and  this  is  the  intent  of  this  writing.

Sabandar  Lantore.
Sabandar  Ratoo.

[The  Voyage
187

A.D.

1604.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

This  should
have  come  in
more  due  place
before,  being
the  second
Voyage  of  the
Compauy,  if
we  then  had
had  it:  but
better  late  then
never.  And
for  the  subject
it  well  agrees
with  this  place
also.

His  Majesties
letter.
King  of
Bantam.

[I.  v.  704.]
Varanula.

Castle  of
Amboyna
taken.

English  barred
of  trade  by  the
Hollanders.

The  Voyage  of  Master  Henry  Middleton  to  the
Moluccas  (having  sent  Captaine  Colthurst  in
the  Ascension  to  Banda)  with  letters  of  the
Kings  of  those  parts  to  his Majestic

HAving  taken  leave  of  the  Company,  being  furnished
with  all  things  necessary,  we  departed  from  Gravs-
end  the  five  and  twentieth  of  March,  1 604.  and  about  the
twentieth  of  December  following,  after  many  various
accidents,  we  arrived  (our  men  being  very  weake)  in  Ban-
tam Roade ;  where  after  many  complementall  salutations
betweene  us  and  the  Hollanders,  with  interchange  of  great
Ordnance  on  both  parts,  the  Generall  of  the  Hollanders
dining  the  last  of  December  aboard  our  Generall :  The
day  following,  our  Generall  went  on  shoare  with  a  letter
from  the  Kings  Majestie  of  England,  to  the  King  of  Ban-
tam, which  was  a  present  sent,  was  by  him  received  with
great  ceremonie,  he  being  but  of  thirteene  yeeres  of  age,
and  governed  by  a  Protector.  The  sixteenth  of  the  said
moneth,  our  Generall  came  aboard  from  Bantam  to  pro-
ceed on  his  voyage  for  the  Moluccaes,  appointing  Master
Surflet  to  goe  home  in  the  Hector.  The  seventh  of
January  following  1605.  we  anchored  under  the  Shore  of
Veranula,  a  people  that  deadly  hate  the  Portugals,  and
therefore  had  sent  to  the  Hollanders  for  ayde  against
them,  promising  to  become  subject  unto  them,  if  they
expeld  the  Portugals ;  in  summe,  the  Hollanders  pre-
pared to  assault  the  Castle  of  Amboyna,  and  the  Portugals
to  defend  it,  the  one  purposing  to  recover,  the  other  to
hold  it ;  The  Hollanders  summoning  them  in  the  Prince
of  Orange  his  name  to  deliver  it  that  day  by  two  of  the
clocke,  and  the  Portugals  denying  it.  Yet  in  the  end
after  many  attempts  and  defences,  it  was  yeelded  to  the
Hollanders  by  composition,  whereupon  the  Governour  of
the  Towne,  after  the  surrender  of  the  Castle,  bard  us  of
all  trade  by  the  command  of  the  Hollanders.

The warre continuing betweene the Tarnatans and

188

SIR HENRY MLDDLETON  a.d.

1605.

Tydorians,  the  first  assisted  by  the  Hollanders,  the  other
by  the  Portugals,  shortly  after  we  got  under  the  land  of
Tydore,  where  we  might  espie  betweene  Pulocanally  and
Tydore,  two  Gallies  of  Tarnata  making  great  speed
towards  us,  weaving  unto  us  with  a  white  flagge  to  strike
sayle  and  to  tarry  for  them.  At  the  same  time  came  seven
Gallies  of  Tydore,  rowing  betwixt  us  and  the  shore  to
assault  the  Tarnatans,  our  Generall  seeing  the  danger  they
were  in,  lay  by  the  lee  to  know  what  the  matter  was  ;  The
formost  of  these  Gallies  or  Coracoras,  wherein  the  King  of  &n&  °f
Tarnata  with  divers  of  his  Nobles,  and  three  Dutch  Mer-
chants were,  being  full  of  feare,  desired  our  Generall  for
Gods  sake  to  save  them  from  their  enemies  the  Tydorians,
from  whom  they  looked  for  no  mercy  if  he  did  not  help
them,  &  withall,  that  he  would  be  pleased  to  rescue  their
other  Coracora  that  came  after,  wherin  there  were  divers
Dutchmen  who  were  to  expect  nothing  but  death,  if  he
did  not  releeve  them.  Whereupon  our  Generall  com-
manded his  Gunner  to  shoote  at  the  Tydore  Gallies,  yet  Ty^e
they  desisted  not  but  boarded  them  within  shot  of  our  a  tes
Ordnance,  and  put  them  all  to  the  sword,  but  three  that
saved  themselves  by  swimming,  and  were  taken  up  by  our
men  into  their  boat.

Our  Generall  being  determined  to  goe  for  Tydore,  the  Eniltsh^en^
Dutch  desired  him  that  he  would  not  let  the  King  of  Tar-  t0  the  DutcL
nata  and  them  fall  into  their  enemies  hands,  from  whom  he
had  so  lately  delivered  them,  promising  mountaines  of
Cloves  and  other  Commodities  at  Tarnata  and  Makeu,
but  performing  Mole-hils,  (verifying  the  proverbe,  The
danger  escaped,  the  Saint  is  deceived.)  One  thing  I  may
not  forget,  the  King  of  Tarnata  comming  aboard  the
Generall,  trembled  for  feare,  which  the  Generall  supposing
to  be  for  cold,  put  a  blacke  Damaske  gowne  laid  with
gold  lace,  and  lined  with  unshorne  Velvet  on  his  backe,
which  at  his  departure,  he  had  not  the  manners  to  restore,
but  kept  it  as  his  owne :  But  see  how  this  kindnesse  was
shortly  after  recompensed  by  these  unthankefull  men.  Our
Generall  arriving  at  the  Portugals  towne  in  Tydore ; the

189

A.D.

1605.

Ternatas
fraud.

Dutch
unkindnesse.

This  Slander
passeth  in
print  in  their
authors  not-
withstanding.
Peevishnesseof
the  Dutch.

Their  bragges
and  lies.

^Understand
this  of  the
Merchants
which  traded
(or  warred
rather)  not  of
the  whole  land
or  best  men  of
Holland.
Loosers  will
have  leave  to
speak :  y
Merchants
envy  each
other.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Governour  of  the  Fort  sent  one  Thomas  de  Torres,  and
others  with  a  letter,  the  effect  whereof  was,  that  the  King
of  Tarnata  and  the  Hollanders  reported,  that  there  was
nothing  but  treason  and  villany  to  be  expected  at  our
hands,  but  that  he  conceived  better  of  us,  beleeving  their
reports  to  be  nothing  but  malice.  To  second  this,  not
long  after,  our  Generall  arriving  at  the  Kings  towne,  sent
Master  Grave  aboard  the  Dutch  Admirall,  who  found  but
could  entertainement  at  their  hands,  affirming  that  we  had
assisted  the  Portugals  in  the  last  warres  against  the  King
of  Tarnata  and  them,  with  Ordnance  and  other  Munition,
which  our  Generall  proved  to  the  contrary  by  some
Portugals  that  were  taken  prisoners  by  them  in  that  con-
flict ;  &  then  being  ashamed  of  the  slaunder,  the  Generall
affirmed  he  had  it  from  a  Renegado  Gussarat,  but  did  not
thinke  it  to  be  true.

To  fill  up  full  measure,  not  long  after  the  King  of  Tar-
nata seeming  to  affect  our  Nation,  they  threaned  him  that
they  would  forsake  him  and  joyne  with  the  deadly  enemie
the  King  of  Tydore,  if  he  suffered  the  English  either  to
have  a  Factory,  or  any  trade  with  them,  affirming  that  the
English  were  theeves  and  robbers,  and  no  other  he  should
find  them,  and  that  the  King  of  Holland  was  stronger  by
Sea,  then  all  Christendome  besides,  with  many  other  dis-
gracefull  speeches  of  our  Nation,  and  all  other  Christian
Princes  (a  just  consideration  for  all  Nations  to  thinke  what
this  insolent  frothy  *  Nation  will  doe,  if  they  attaine  to
the  possession  of  the  East  Indies).  To  which  insolent
speeches  our  General  replied  :  That  what  Hollander  soever
he  were  that  so  reported,  he  lyed  like  a  traitor,  and  that
he  would  make  it  good  against  any  one  that  should  so
report ;  affirming  that  if  the  Queenes  Majestie  of  England
had  not  taken  pitty  of  them,  they  had  beene  utterly  ruined
by  the  King  of  Spaine,  and  branded  for  slaves  and  traitors.
The  particular  wrongs  done  by  them  to  our  Nation,  if
they  were  laid  open,  would  fill  volumnes,  and  amaze  the
world  to  heare.  I  will  conclude,  to  shew  the  esteeme  had
of  our  Nation  in  the  East  India,  with  the  true  Copies  of

190

SIR HENRY MIDDLETON  ad

1605.

sundry  letters  sent  by  their  Kings  to  his  Majestie  of  Great
Brittaine,  and  first  of  the  King  of  Tarnata.

The  King  of  Tarnatas  Letter  to  the  King.

H  Earing  of  the  good  reports  of  your  Majestie  by  the
comming  of  the  great  Captaine  Sir  Francis  Drake,
in  the  time  of  my  father,  which  was  about  some  thirtie
yeeres  past : by  the  which  Captaine  my  predecessor  did  [I.  v.  705.]
send  a  Ring  unto  the  Queene  of  England,  as  a  token  of
remembrance  betweene  us:  which  if  the  aforesaid  Drake  Fam^ofSir
had  bin  living,  he  could  have  informed  your  Majestie  of  p™£S
the  great  love  and  friendship  of  either  side : he  in  the
behalfe  of  the  Queene,  my  Father  for  him  and  his  suc-
cessors :  since  which  time  of  the  departure  of  the  foresaid
Captaine,  we  have  dayly  expected  his  returne,  my  Father
living  many  yeeres  after,  and  dayly  expecting  his  returne.
And  I  after  the  death  of  my  Father,  have  lived  in  the
same  hope,  till  I  was  father  of  eleven  children :  In  which Quis  tulertt
time,  I  have  beene  informed  that  the  Englishmen  were ??CJ  os  e

r 1 1 i«  .  .  1 ,  ,  to  seditione  que-

men  or  a  bad  disposition,  and  that  they  came  not  as  peace-  rentes?

able  Merchants,  but  to  dispossesse  us  of  our  kingdomes ;
which  by  the  comming  of  the  bearer  hereof,  we  have  found
to  the  contrary :  which  we  greatly  re  Joyce  at.  And  after
many  yeeres  of  our  expectation  of  some  English  forces,
by  the  promise  of  Captaine  Drake,  here  arrived  certaine
ships,  which  we  well  hoped  had  bin  Englishmen,  but  find-
ing them  contrary,  and  being  out  of  all  hope  of  succour
of  the  English  Nation,  wee  were  enforced  to  write  to  the
Prince  of  Holland,  to  crave  aide  and  succour  against  our
ancient  enemies  the  Portugals ;  and  according  to  our
request,  he  hath  sent  hither  his  forces  which  have  expelled
the  Portugals  out  of  all  the  Forts  which  they  held  at
Amboyna  and  Tydore.  And  whereas  your  Majestie  hath
sent  to  me  a  most  kind  and  friendly  letter  by  your  servant
Captaine  Henry  Middleton  ;  that  doth  not  a  little  rejoyce
us :  and  whereas  Captaine  Henry  Middleton  was  desirous
to  leave  a  factorie  heere,  we  were  very  willing  thereunto ;
which  the  Captaine  of  the  Hollanders  understanding,  he

191

ad.  PURCHAS HIS P1LGRIMES

1605.

came  to  challenge  me  of  a  former  promise,  which  I  had
A  friend  at  a  written  to  the  Prince  of  Holland  :  That  if  he  would  send
*m  me  such  succours,  as  should  expell  the  Portugals  out  of

these  parts,  that  no  other  Nation  should  have  trade  there,
but  only  they :  so  that  we  were  enforc't  against  our  lik-
ings, to  yeeld  unto  the  Holland  Captaines  request  for  this
time,  whereof  we  crave  pardon  of  your  Highnesse :  and
if  any  of  your  Nation  come  hereafter,  they  shall  be  wel-
come. And  whereas  the  chiefe  Captaine  of  the  Hollanders
doth  solicite  us  not  to  hold  any  friendship  with  your
Nation,  nor  to  give  eare  to  your  Highnesse  Letters,  yet
for  all  their  suit,  if  you  please  to  send  hither  againe,  you
shall  be  welcome :  And  in  token  of  our  friendship  which
we  desire  of  your  Majestie,  we  have  sent  you  a  small
remembrance,  a  Bahar  of  Cloves,  our  Country  being
poore,  and  yeelding  no  better  commodity ;  which  we  pray
your  Highnesse  to  accept  in  good  part.

Tarnata.

The  King  of  Tydores  Letter  to  the  Kings
Majestie  of  England.

THis  writing  of  the  King  of  Tydore  to  the  King  of
England,  is  to  let  your  Highnesse  understand,  that
the  King  of  Holland  hath  sent  hither  into  these  parts,  a
Fleete  of  ships,  to  joyne  with  our  ancient  enemie  the  King
of  Tarnata,  and  they  jointly  together,  have  over-run  and
spoiled  part  of  our  Countrey,  and  determined  to  destroy
both  us  and  our  subjects.  Now  understanding  by  the
bearer  hereof,  Captaine  Henry  Middleton,  that  your
Highnesse  is  in  friendship  with  the  King  of  Spaine,  we
desire  your  Majestie  that  you  would  take  pitty  of  us,
that  we  may  not  be  destroyed  by  the  King  of  Holland
and  Tarnata,  to  whom  we  have  offered  no  wrong :  but
they  by  forcible  meanes,  seeke  to  bereave  us  of  our  King-
dome.  And  as  great  Kings  upon  the  earth  are  ordained
by  God,  to  succour  all  them  that  be  wrongfully  oppressed ;
So  I  appeale  unto  your  Majestie  for  succour  against  my
enemies ; not  doubting  but  to  find  reliefe  at  your  Majes-

192

SIR HENRY MIDDLETON

ties  hands :  And  if  your  Majestie  send  hither,  I  humbly
intreat  that  it  may  bee  Captaine  Henry  Middleton  or  his
brother,  with  whom  I  am  well  acquainted.  God  enlarge
your  Kingdomes,  blesse  you  and  all  your  Counsels.

Tydore.

The  King  of  Bantam  to  the  King  of  England.

A  Letter  given  by  your  friend  the  King  of  Bantam,  to  the
King  of  England,  Scotland,  France  and  Ireland :  de-
siring God  to  preserve  your  health,  and  to  exalt  you  more
and  more  and  all  your  Counsell.  And  whereas  your
Majestie  hath  sent  a  Generall  Henry  Middleton  he  came
to  me  in  health.  I  did  heare  that  your  Majestie  was
come  to  the  Crowne  of  England,  which  doth  greatly  re-
joyce  my  heart :  now  England  and  Bantam  are  both  as  one.
I  have  also  received  a  Present  from  your  Majestie :  the
which  I  give  you  many  thankes  for.  I  doe  send  your
Majestie  two  Bezar  stones,  the  one  weighing  fourteene
masses,  the  other  three :  and  so  God  have  you  in  his
keeping.

Bantam.

Chap. XV.

The  Dutch  Navigations  to  the  East  Indies,  out  of
their  owne  Journals  and  other  Histories.

Orasmuch  as  Banda  hath  beene  almost  the
bane,  and  as  it  were  the  Trojane  Horse
to  our  Indian  Ilium,  whence  an  Iliade  of
miseries  and  mischiefes  have  issued  to
that  Societie  whereby  their  wonted
gaines  have  beene  suspended  (with  a
Xanthe  retro  propera)  their  reputation
stayned,  their  shippes  and  goods  taken  and  stayed,  the
persons  of  many  Christians,  Brethren  in  Armes,  Arts,  and
Religion  :  exposed  to  the  basest  of  contumelies,  and  cruel-
lest of  deaths,  as  the  premisses  declare ;  and  that  amongst
the  Infidels,  whom  by  word  and  example  of  life  they

A.D.
1595.

[I.  v.  706.]

!93

N

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1595.

should  have  sought  to  convert ; whose  states  also  are

hereby  subverted,  and  their  faith  farther  perverted  (thorow
you,  the  wrong-doers  in  this  case,  is  my  Name  blasphemed
amongst  the  Gentiles)  I  have  thought  good  to  set  downe
the  true  case  briefly,  as  out  of  divers  Witnesses,  Christian
and  Heathen,  English  and  Dutch,  I  have  gathered  it ;  no
whit  seeking  the  dishonour  of  either  Nation  (for  what
Nation  hath  not  some  sicke,  some  rotten  members : )  but
as  an  Historian  ought  to  deliver  the  truth :  which  haply
the  industrious  out  of  the  formall  materials  can  see  to  doe
without  helpe,  but  the  vulgar  will  need  Spectacles.  And
herein  for  the  more  honor  of  the  Dutch  Nation,  we  wil
begin  with  the  beginnings  of  their  Indian  Navigations,
and  by  briefe  steps  descend  into  these  broyles :  wherein  if
the  Merchants  have  proved  Martiall,  if  some  of  their
Commanders  have  beene  insolent,  if  others  of  the  baser
Rascalitie  with  Pot-froth  or  Sea-froth,  transported  to
blaspheme  Kings  and  higher  Powers :  &  that  Dutch-
Indian  disease  hath  lately  grown  Epidemical  in  those
parts,  &  turned  into  a  general  Contagion  wherwith  their
greatest  numbers  there  have  beene  infected :  yet  the  head
and  heart  here  at  home  (I  doubt  not)  are  sound,  and  will
soone  (my  hope  tels  me)  purge  these  maligne  humours
from  those  remoter  members  :  will  soone  ?  nay !  my  faith
runnes  faster,  they  are  even  now  a  doing  it :  herein  also
my  charitie  checks  it,  as  too  short-breathed,  and  faith  (it
*Dabit,  Len-  is  others  fault  if  I  lye)  they  have  alreadie  *  done  it.  For
turn  est  dakt,  wjj0  can  SUppOSe  that  they  will  make  others  wrong  deeds
esiheniumU  ^eirs  by  convenience  or  countenance?  that  their  Justice
dedit.  Sen  Hel  will  not  doe  that  which  is  just  ?  that  their  wisdome  doth
fur.  not  reason  in  season  ? that  their  mature  forwardnesse  hath

not  done  alreadie  that  to,  and  for  the  English  there,  which
came  thither  and  about  the  World  by  English  helpe ;  by
their  examples  in  Drake  and  Candish  instigated ;  by  their
Pilots,  notes  and  instructions,  as  before  appeareth  in  Melis,
Adams,  Davis,  and  others  not  a  little  furthered ;  and  by
their  support  at  home  enabled  to  looke  abroad :  so  many
gallant  English  spirits  exhaled,  so  much  English  Trea-

194

THE DUTCH NAVIGATIONS  ad.

1595.
sure  exhaust,  in  defence  of  that  Belgian  libertie :  wherein
the  Hollander  of  all  men  will  not  take  it  to  see  their
vertue  imitated  by  the  Bandanezes,  who  likewise  there
affected  it  by  seeking  English  protection,  and  effected  by
surrendring themselves in subjection to the English

Crowne  ? And  as  for  their  freedome  then  when they  *5/. di

offered  it,  I  am  not  willing  to  make  a  comparative  quaere  5\m  hac  con-

betwixt  the  Dutch  and  them  *  whether  were  freer  States :  tumeSa

whether  more  obliged,  these  to  the  Dutch  themselves  by  m  *****  (*9

any  act  of  former  subjection,  or  to  the  pretended  title  of  ^ndBandlnese

Ternate, (in both which, the Dutch owne Historio-  alleage).Attu

graphers,  as  heere  will  appeare,  free  them)  or  the  other  to.  (Hollande)  in-

But  I  will  to  my  Historie,  or  rather  to  theirs,  both  in  <h&us  <2m

respect  of  the  subject  and  authors,  and  occasioned  by  the  \%?s  *mn'

evill  of  some,  will  honour  the  worthier  spirits  of  that  lod  Joh  j"

Nation,  out  of  their  owne  Journals  and  Relations,  deliver-  p0ntani.  I.  2.

ing  a  briefe  of  their  Marine  Exploits.  c  18  li  24.

Prefat.  in  8.

WHen  *  the  King  of  Spaine  had  made  many  yeeres q^m '
warres  upon the  Hollanders  with  exceeding  ex-  DiariumNau-
pense  and  force,  permitting  meane  whiles  the  Hollanders  ticum  in  Ind.
ships  neverthelesse  to  trade  on  his  Coasts,  he  was  at  last Orient  ap.  lo.
counselled  to  bring  them  to  subjection,  by  hindering-  their ans™- ™~

c>  u  j  . * , j  o  hentiens.  also

Navigation  and  intercepting  their  ships  by  arrest. Thus  you  jiave  t^s
were  they  prohibited  the  shoares  of  Spaine  and  Portugall,  whole  Voyage
some  put  into  their  Gallies,  their  goods  confiscate,  and  the  written  by  the
Hollanders  began  to  thinke  of  other  Trade,  and  to  make  ^2™™%?™-
tryall  of  the  Indies. And  first  began  those  of  Amsterdam  the  third  part
to  set  forth  eight  ships  by  consent  of  the  States  and  Prince  ind.  Or.
Maurice  :  foure  of  which  were  to  goe  the  wonted  way  (by  Of  these  things
the  Cape  of  Good  Hope)  to  seeke  and  settle  Trade  in  ^hetr sever-
those  parts  especially  of  the  Indies,  where  the  Spanish  ^i^d  L
Power  was  not  admitted ; The  other  foure  (of  which  two  'divers  Lan-
were  of  Amsterdam,  the  other  two  of  Zeland  and  Enck-  guages:  also
husen)  attempted  by  the  North  to  discover  a  passage  to  the  tomes  of  the
China,  Cathay  and  the  Moluccas,  as  by  a  farre  shorter  f nffZ'

m  .  J r  tt 11 1  t  1  hns^KyOtArtus

cut ; this  way  from  JHLolland  to  Japan  being  not  above  Metranus,

one thousand two hundred thirtie five Dutch miles,  fag.  594.  lie.

i95

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1595.

whereas  by  the  Portugall  way  it  was  two  thousand  nine

*In  the  eight hundred  thirtie  two. Of  their  Northerne  Expeditions  *

Booke  of  his elsewhere : the  other  foure  ships  by  a  safer  and  more

frequented  way  set  forth  in  the  same  yeare  1595.  and  laid

foundation of that which since is  reputed  by them a

miraculous  structure,  and  taking  occasion  from  being  for-

[I.  v.  707.] bidden  Spaine,  to  make  themselves  way  first  to  the  East,

and  since  enterprizing  also  the  West  Indies. The  ships

were  the  Maurice,  the  Holland,  the  Amsterdam,  and  a

Societias  long-  Pinnasse,  the  persons  two  hundred  fortie  nine :  the  Socie-

tnqua  soae- tje  called,  De  Compenie  van  verre  :  the  whole  charge  was

two  hundred  and  ninetie  thousand  Florens,  of  which  one

hundred  thousand  was  in  readie  money  and  Merchandize.

The  Maurice  and  the  Holland  were  of  two  hundred  and

eightie  lasts,  the  Amsterdam  one  hundred  and  eightie,  the

Pinnasse twentie. The Captaine  of  the  first  Bernard

Heynck ; Cape Merchant, Cornelius Houtman ; John

Miller  Master,  &c.

The  second  of  Aprill,  they  set  saile  from  the  Tessell.
The  second  of  August,  they  had  sight  of  the  Cape  of
Good  Hope.  The  two  and  twentieth  of  September,  they
set  two  men  on  shoare  for  mutinie.  On  the  five  and  twen-
tieth, they  came  to  Saint  Augustines  Bay  in  the  He  of
Saint  Laurence. The  tenth  of  February,  to  Anton  Gill.

In  May  they  came  to  Dampin  in  Sumatra,  in  June  to
the  Straits  of  Sunda,  where  certaine  Portugals  from  Ban-
tam visited  them.  On  the  three  and  twentieth  and  foure
and  twentieth,  divers  Chinois,  Malabars,  and  men  of  other
Nations  came  to  them,  some  of  which  had  beene  in  Con-
stantinople, Venice  and  Rome,  and  one  of  them  said,  hee
had  foure  monethes  past  seene  their  Lad  and  God  (meaning
the  Pope)  whom  they  answered  that  they  were  Christians,
and  cared  not  for  the  Pope.  On  the  sixe  and  twentieth
of  June,  Captaine  Heync  dyed  of  the  Fluxe.  On  the  nine
and  twentieth,  the  Pangram  or  Vice-King  came  aboord
the  Mauritius.  The  first  of  July,  the  Princes  Letters
(written  in  Arabecke  and  Portugall)  were  read,  and
Covenants  confirmed  by  Oath  on  both  sides.

196

THE DUTCH NAVIGATIONS  a.d.

,1596.

On  the  sixth  of  July,  they  were  warned  by  their  Inter-
preter, from  the  Vice-roy  or  Protector,  to  take  heed  of  the
Portugals, which (notwithstanding coloured friendship)  Portugals
sought  their  ruine,  and  had  agreed  with  Caesar  (whose  ^^]^the
father  had  ruled  all  Java,  but  he  himselfe  was  brought
into  straits,  and  enjoyed  little  but  a  name,  having  also  a
Portugall  Wife)  that  he  should  invite  all  the  principall
Hollanders  to  a  Feast,  and  the  Portugals,  meane-while,
with  fiftie  Souldiers  and  others  of  Caesars  Houshold  should
invade  their  ships,  Caesar  to  have  the  spoyle,  and  the
Portugals  to  give  him  three  thousand  Ducats  for  the  ships.
This  Caesar  was  so  called  by  the  Portugals,  of  the  people  RaJa  Dav'lna
Raya Davina : but the men of Bantam rejected his  a *sar
Dominion  because  he  had  lived  at  Malacca,  and  favoured
the  Portugals,  to  whom  they  feared  lest  he  should  bring
them  in  subjection. Yet  was  he  acknowledged  of  many,
even  Kings  themselves  speaking  to  him  with  their  hands
infolded  one  in  the  other  (the  gesture  of  Slaves)  hee  had
also  beene  aboord  with  his  children  on  the  second  of  July.
He  told  them  also  that  the  Portugals  sought  to  perswade
the  Vice-Roy  to  the  like,  and  besought  and  bribed  his
followers  thereunto,  affirming,  that  they  were  not  Mer-
chants but  Pirats,  and  if  they  had  accesse  now  in  ten  or
twelve  yeares  they  would  returne  and  subdue  their  Coun-
trey :  and  this  sparke,  if  now  unquenched  would  set  the
whole  East  on  fire. Moreover,  they  were  enemies  to  the
King  of  Spaine,  whose  enmitie  would  by  their  entertain-
ment be  procured  : and  that  they  were  but  Spies. The
Hollanders  sent  one  of  their  Captaines  into  the  Towne  to  Hereby
search  the  truth  by  conference  with  the  Protector  or  Vice-  "*?'*, fh  the
Roy, who further  counselled them to shoot into the  betwixt
Towne  when  Caesar  went  aboord  the  ships,  promising  to  Caesarandthe
reveale  all  things  to  them  :  He  found  also  in  the  Sabanders  Bantamiansas
house Gun-powder  and  other  hostile  provision. They  f"rre  as  the^
sent  Caesar  a  Costlet  and  other  Presents,  and  he  accord-
ingly sent  to  invite  all  their  chiefe  men  and  Musicians :
but  now  by  their  Present  seemed  to  bee  wonne  to  better
thoughts,  blaming  the  Portugals.

197

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1596.

After  this  Caesar  went  to  Jacatra,  and  the  Protector  and
Hollanders  agreed  about  taking  a  house  for  their  better
Traffique,  which  was  done,  and  Rainer  van  Hell  was  ap-
pointed chiefe,who  yet  found  nothing  but  fraudes  and  shifts
in  the  Protector  and  Bantameses.  As  for  the  Portugals
they  murthered  Peter  Tayda  a  Mestizo  of  Portugall  origi-
nal! and  dwelling  at  Bantam,  for  holding  familiaritie  with
the  Dutch,  by  the  solicitation  of  their  Priest.  The  In-
habitants were  by  Proclamation  inhibited  to  sell  Rice  to
the  Hollander,  and  presently  after  they  were  told  of  an
assault,  should  be  made  on  their  ships :  and  when  some  of
their  Companie  had  gotten  aboord,  the  rest  were  detayned  :
which  when  by  no  intercession  they  could  recover,  they
assayled  the  towne  with  their  ships,  and  tooke  three
Junckes ;  a  fourth  was  set  on  fire  by  the  Portugals  to  pre-
vent taking.

At night Houtman the chiefe on shoare writ to
them that they had halters about their neckes, and
were presently all of them adjudged to dye, if they
continued further battery and spoyle. A dayes
truce followed, and after that the Warre renewed,
which continued above a moneth, and peace was
concluded. As for Houtman and his fellowes, they
were  sentenced  to  dye,  but  the  various  opinions  of  the
meanes  protracted  their  lives. Perswaded  by  the  Portu-
*This  Mes- gals  who  had  sent  purposely  thither  from  Malacca,*  the
senger  is  said Bantamians  after  a  little  space  broke  off  Trade  againe,
to  ave  given ^j^jj  t}ie  Hollanders  supplyed  by  taking  their  Junckes.
to  deliver  him  After  this  they  were  assaulted  by  a  ship  of  Indians,  with
theHollanders,  poysoned  Arrowes,^  the  venom  whereof  could  not  be  cured
or  to  prohibit but  by  cutting  out  the  affected  part: this  ship  also  the
them  Trade. Hollanders  tooke. The  Portugals  expostulated  with  the
Protector  that  so  little  had  beene  done,  and  they  both  grew
[I.  v.  708.] to  hot  words,  the  fuell  of  a  great  fire ; the  Portugals
seizing on some China Junckes for their satisfac-
tion, which  the  Protector  a  while  dissembled  but  after-
wards revenged  with  the  destruction  of  the  Portugals ;
under  colour  of  a  great  Mariage  at  Jacatra,  setting  forth  a

198

THE DUTCH NAVIGATIONS  a.d.

1596.

Fleet,  wherewith  he  invaded  the  Portugal!  Gallies,  slue
the  men  and  divided  the  spoyle,  the  other  Portugals  slip-
ping their  Anchors  and  fleeing  to  Malacca.

The Hollanders came to Jacatra the thirteenth of  The  Portugals
November, and were received with much kindnesse,  reward-
whence  having  furnished  themselves  with  necessaries,  they
set  sayle,  the  Amsterdam  running  with  full  sayles  on  a
Rocke  before  they  had  sayled  a  Dutch  mile. On  the  third
of  December, they  came  to  Tuban  and  Cydaia,  where  Tuba*,
they  bought  Nutmegs  and  Cloves,  and  the  Sabandar  gave J °\ Jcran~

t.  /  fe-r^iiiiT-  1  r  r -i-i daonandSuru-

them  a  great  r  owle  called  lime,  above  roure  root  in  height,  £aya  are  neere
somewhat  like  an  Ostrich,  saving  that  the  feete  were  not  each  other,  on
cloven. Here  under  colour  of  friendship  the  Cydayans  Java-
(set  on,  as  they  learned  after,  by  the  Portugals  and  Ban-  a

tamians,)  with  sixe  great  Prawes  assailed  the  Amsterdam  jno'tfor  trea_
and  the  Pinnasse : where  they  slue  in  the  Amsterdam  cherie.
twelve  and  wounded  two,  but  the  other  ships  comming  in,
they  fled,  losing  an  hundred  and  fiftie  of  the  Javans. The
Hollanders  departed  thence  to  Madura. Here  the  King  Madura.
would  needs  have  leave  to  come  aboord,  which  he  was  per-
mitted if  he  came  with  sixe  followers,  and  to  one  of  the
greater  ships. But  hee  comming  with  one  hundred,  and  to
the  Amsterdam,  was  slaine,  with  the  Priest  and  most  of  his
Companie : his  yong  sonne  and  others  taken : by  whom
they  learned  the  ill  intent  that  the  Madurians  had  to  take
their  ship  Amsterdam,  which  themselves  soone  after  fired,
taking  out  of  her  what  they  found  useful. And  now
having  lost  many  of  their  Chiefes  they  consulted  about
returne,  and  by  force  of  winds  were  put  into  Ballabua,  and
the  ship  Holland  entring  the  River  of  Baly  an  He  nine
leagues  off,  was  put  back  with  the  violence  of  the  streame.
The  King  of  Passarvan  a  Mahumetan  had  marryed  and
slaine  the  daughter  of  the  King  of  Balabua  a  Gentile,  and  Ballabua,  or
now  held  him  besieged  to  inforce  him  to  exchange  his  Balamboan,
faithlesse  faith. The  King  of  Baly  assisted  the  Gentile,  ^d  beene  '
but  his  Captaine  being  slaine,  the  rest  returned. These
told  of  a  ship  there  ten  yeares  before,  which  was  thought
to  be  Master  Candishes,  the  old  King,  then  supposed  one

199

A.D.

1596.

Baly  called
Hollandiola  in
eight  degrees
of  South  lati-
tude.

^Another
saith  (which  is
more  credible)
that  it
nourisheth
600000.
people.

The  seventh
day  holy.

Drakes
Streight.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

hundred  and  fiftie  to  be  still  living. Baly  they  called
Hollandiola,  for  the  fertilitie ; there  they  watered.

They  sent  to  the  King,  who  accompanied  the  Messenger
to  the  shoare  in  a  Chariot  drawne  with  Buffals,  holding
the  Whip  in  his  owne  hands,  having  three  hundred  fol-
lowers, some  with  flame-formed  Crises  and  long  Speares,
Bowes  of  Canes  with  poysoned  Arrowes.  Hee  was  feasted
in  Dishes  of  solid  Gold.  The  Land  is  an  equall  and  fertile
plaine  to  the  West,  watered  with  many  little  Rivers  (some
made  by  hand)  and  so  peopled  that  the  King  is  able  to
bring  into  the  field  *  three  hundred  thousand  foot,  and  one
hundred  thousand  horsemen.  Their  horse  are  little  like
Islanders,  their  men  blacke  and  using  little  Merchandize,
but  with  Cotton  Cloth  in  Prawes.  The  Hand  is  in  com-
passe  about  twelve  Germane  miles.  Their  Religion  is
Ethnike,  ordered  by  the  Brachmanes  or  Bramenes,  in
whose  Disciplines  the  King  is  trayned  up.  They  have
also  Banianes,  which  weare  about  their  neckes  a  stone  as
bigge  as  an  Egge  with  a  hole  in  it,  whence  hang  forth  three
threds ;  they  call  it  Tambarene,  and  thinke  the  Deitie
thereby  represented :  they  abstaine  from  flesh  and  fish,
but  not  (as  the  Javan  Pythagoreans)  from  Marriage.
Once  they  may  marry,  and  when  they  dye  their  Wives  are
buried  quicke  with  them.  Every  seventh  day  they  keepe
holy,  and  many  other  Holidayes  in  the  yeare  besides  with
solemne  Ceremonies.  Their  Wives  burne  with  their  dead
Husbands.  Here  they  heard  of  Captaine  Drakes  being
there  eighteene  yeares  before,  and  called  one  Strait  by  his
name.  The  King  observeth  state,  is  spoken  to  with
hands  folded,  by  the  best.  The  Quillon  hath  power  there
as  the  Chancellor  in  Poland.  Two  of  their  companie  for-
sooke  them  and  stayed  on  the  Hand.  And  of  the  two
hundred  fortie  nine  there  were  now  left  but  ninetie.  In
February  they  began  their  returne.  The  foure  and  twen-
tieth of  Aprill,  1597.  they  came  in  sight  of  Terra  del
Natal,  and  the  five  and  twentieth  of  May,  of  Saint
Helena,  where  foure  Carracks  made  them  afraid  to  adven-
ture. The  eleventh  of  August  they  entered  the  Tessell  r

200

THE DUTCH NAVIGATIONS  a.d.

1598.

the  ship  Holland  having  not  men  left  to  weigh  their
Anchor,  and  forced  therefore  in  a  storme  to  cut  their  Mast
over-boord.

The  second  Voyage.
Lthough  the  gaine  of  this  Expedition  were  losse  of

A

men  and  perhaps  also  of  money  and  wealth,  yet  did  it
encourage  with  the  strange  Noveltie  and  hopefull  proba-
bilitie  many  Adventurers,  both  of  the  Hollanders  and  of
English  also  that  way  affected,  adventuring  with  them.
This  we  have  observed  in  the  Voyages  of  Master  Davis,
*  Pilot  with  Houtman,  with  two  ships;  and  of  Master  *Pag.  117.
Adams  with  Jaques  Mayhay,  in  a  Fleete  of  five  ships,
and  of  Melis*  with  Oliver  Noort,  in  a  Fleete  of  *PaS-  i*5-
foure ships, these two last sayling by the Magellan  a&  7l>

Streights  to  the  Indies,  following  the  Sunne  to  see  his
rising  and  seeking  the  East  Indies  by  the  West :  all  were
set  forth  in  the  yeare  after  the  others  returne.  Anno  1598.
The  same  yeare  was  by  the  Indian  Societie  of  Holland  set
forth  a  Fleet  of  eight  ships,  the  Holland,  the  Zealand,
the  Frisland,  the  Gelderland,  the  Utrick,  the  Over-Issel,  [I.  v.  709.]
or  the  Dove,  the  Maurice,  and  the  Amsterdam,  furnished
with  five  hundred  and  sixtie  men,  James  Neccius  Admirall
in  the  Maurice,  Wibrand  Warwicke  (whom  we  before  have
honoured  for  his  love  and  honour  to  the  English)  Vice-
Admirall  in  the  Amsterdam,  and  seven  Commissioners
adjoyned.  On  May-day  they  set  forth  from  the  Tessell,
and  kept  together  till  they  came  to  the  hopefull  Promon-
torie,  where  they  by  ignorance  and  foule  weather  parted,
the  Holland,  Maurice  and  Over-issell,  holding  their  way
to  the  He  of  Saint  Marie :  the  other  five  to  the  Hand  De
Cerne,  by  them  named  of  Prince  Mauritius,  about  twentie  ^Mauritius
degrees  South  latitude,  neere  to  Madagascar,  mountainous,  lland'
full  of  tall  trees  of  blacke,  red  and  yellow  Ebonie,  and
Palmites,  having  a  good  ayre,  Tortoises  able  to  goe  with
foure  men  on  their  backes,  and  to  hold  ten  men  sitting  on
the  inside  of  the  shell,  (unkind  Guests  eating  their  Host,
non  hospes  ab  hospite  tutus)  store  of  Fowles,  desolate  and

201

A.D.
1598.

Dec.  26.

1598.

Speedy  Voyage
to  and  fro  the
Indies,  In
15.  M.

Tub  an.

J  or  tarn.
Madura.

Treacherie.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

dis-habited,  by  man  or  beast :  they  left  there  Hennes,  and
sowed  a  certaine  Plaine  with  divers  seeds.  The  other
three  ships  having  watered  at  Saint  Maries,  (able  to  yeeld
little  else)  came  to  Bantam,  in  the  end  of  the  yeere,  who
suspected  them  to  be  the  same  which  formerly  had  beene
there,  and  refused  Trade,  till  they  sent  Abdol  a  Chinois
(carried  into  Holland  by  the  former  Fleet)  with  Presents
to  the  King  then  an  Infant,  and  Cephate  the  Protector,
and  procured  Trafficke.  Foure  weekes  after  came  in  the
other  five  ships,  many  of  them  sicke,  and  thirtie  five  dead.
The  Bantameses  having  ejected  the  Portugals,  now
brought  them  store  of  provision,  used  them  kindly,  ad-
mired their  Pewter,  and  for  one  Spoone  gave  as  much
food  as  would  serve  a  man  a  weeke.  But  Abdols  telling
of  the  other  ships  to  come  raised  the  price  of  Pepper.
Foure  ships  being  laden  were  sent  home,  and  arrived  at
the  Tessell,  the  nineteenth  of  July,  1599.  The  other
resolved  for  the  Moluccas  and  Neccius  being  returned,
Warwicke  was  their  Admirall.

These  set  sayle  from  Bantam  the  eight  of  Januarie.  On
the  one  and  twentieth  they  came  to  Tuban  a  Towne  of
Java,  the  King  thereof  potent  and  pompous,  the  People
delighted  in  riding,  their  silken  Saddles  pourtrayed  with
Devils ;  they  use  exercises  and  games  on  hors-backe.
Here  having  gotten  provision,  on  the  eight  and  twentieth
they  came  to  Madura  an  Hand  lying  Northward  from
Java,  fertile  of  Rice,  the  People  living  in  great  part  on
robberie.  Heere  they  divided  their  Fleet,  two  ships  the
Gelderland  and  Zeland  for  Jortam  in  Java,  the  Utricke
and  Amsterdam  to  Arosbay  a  Towne  on  the  West  of
Madura,  where  they  had  no  sooner  landed  their  men  to
seeke  provision,  but  they  were  taken,  spoyled,  and  captived
by  the  Inhabitants  ;  and  after  them  three  others  sent  to
see  what  was  become  of  their  fellowes.  They  demanded
for  their  libertie  two  great  Peeces,  one  thousand  Rials  and
other  commodities.  But  the  Admirall  having  called  the
rest  from  Jortam  put  on  land  one  hundred  and  fiftie  men
to  recover  them  by  force  on  the  fift  of  Februarie,  and  saw

202

THE DUTCH NAVIGATIONS  ad.

1599.

many  in  Armes,  two  Portugals  being  their  Captaines.
Whiles  they  were  in  fight  a  storme  arose,  which  made  the
Hollanders  mind  their  ships,  but  two  boats  in  their  re-
turne  were  overturned  with  fortie  nine  men,  of  which
twentie  five  drowned  and  slaine,  the  rest  were  kept
prisoners  with  their  fellowes,  in  all  one  and  fiftie ;  for
which  they  payed  in  money  and  wares,  two  thousand  Rials
of  eight.

On  the  seventeenth,  they  had  sight  of  Celebes :  on  the  Divers  Hands.
nineteenth  of  the  He  Camboyna : on  the  one  and  twen-
tieth, of  Cebesa,  betwixt  which  the  Botun  lie  shoalds,
which  they  happily  escaped : on  the  five  and  twentieth,
Bur :  on  the  sixe  and  twentieth,  Blau :  the  first  of  March,
they  saw  three  Hands  adjoyning  Atypoly,  Manyba,  and
Gyta,  before  Amboyna,  to  which  they  came  on  the  third.
In  Amboyna, are store of  Cloves, Oranges, Limonds,
Citrons,  Coquos,  Bonanas,  Sugar  canes : the  Inhabitants
simple and poore, their weapons long Pikes hooked,
which they  dart  very  sure. Their  Coracoras  or  Boats
have  some  representation  of  a  Dragon,  of  the  head  in  the
prow,  and  the  tayle  in  the  sterne,  adorned  with  Streamers.
Heere  they  agreed  for  trade  and  a  house. But  because The  Dut
here  was  not  sufficient  for  all  foure  ships,  therefore  the  j^anda.
Zeland  and Gelderland  were sent to Banda. On the 1599.
fourteenth,  they  passed  by  Polo  Setto,  an  Hand  not  in-  Polo  Setton.
habited,  five  leagues  North-west  from  Banda  :  whereof  also
they  conceit  I  know  not  what  devillish  possession,  inso-
much that  their  foolish  Indian  Pilot,  wTith  a  terrible  gastly
countenance  (when  they  came  against  it)  thrust  forth  the
boat-hooke  with  like  gesture  as  they  doe  in  boats,  as  if  he
would  thrust  the  ship  thence,  and  being  wearie  layd  it
by  him  with  the  hooke  forward,  seeming  to  triumph  of
his  Devill-conquest  when  he  was  past.

On  the  fifteenth,  they  came  to  Pooloway,  and  had  sight Poolaway.
of  Poolaroone,  and  anchored  that  night  at  Banda. The
Sabander  came  the  next  day  to  conferre  with  the  Admirall,
and  agreement  of  mutuall  trade  was  made  betwixt  them,
a  house  also  taken  for  that  purpose. On  the  three  and

?  203

ad.  PURCHAS HIS P1LGRIMES

J599-

twentieth,  came  the  first  Merchandise  from  Ortattan :  on

the  foure  and  twentieth,  they  began  to  buy  and  sell :  on
the  five  and  twentieth,  the  Vice-Admirall  went  to  the
other  side  of  Banda  which  is  most  frequented,  to  hire  a
house  there  :  on  the  seven  and  twentieth,  came  goods  from
Nera. On  the  fojurth  of  Aprill,  they  had  Letters  from  the
Admirall  at  Amboyna,  that  by  reason  of  the  Inhabitants
Warres  with  the  Portugals  he  had  yet  laded  few  wares.
All  May  they  were  busie  in  buying  and  selling.
Civi//  warres On  the  fift  of  June,  the  men  of  Labetacke  (about  an
aj?on&  t  e houres  journey  distant  from  Nera,  but  in  heart  unmeasur-
ably  different,)  made  a  sallie  or  skirmish,  in  which  some
were  slaine. On  the  seventeenth,  the  men  of  Nera  with
those  of  Lantore  and  Pooloway  went  over  to  Wayre  and
[I.  v.  710.] killed  many,  whose  heads  in  disgrace  of  Labetacke  they
fastned  on  their  boats,  and  at  their  returne,  with  their
swords  yet  bloudie,  made  glorious  muster  of  themselves
foure  or  five  dayes  together. They  brought  some  women
captives,  one  of  which  they  cut  asunder. Yet  did  they
after  burie  the  heads  in  cotton  clothes. The  Zeland  re-
ceived in  her  last  lading  on  the  nine  and  twentieth  of
June : and  the  Gelderland  on  the  first  of  July. On  the
second,  the  Vice-Admirall  intreated  good  usage  to  those
They  are  the he  should  leave  behind  him  in  a  house  built  by  them,  and
words  of having  given  gifts  to  the  Sabander  and  the  Orancayes,  he
Isacius  Pon- tooke  leave : (Regem  nullum  agnoscunt) for  the  Ban-
tanusyhb.z. daneses  acknowledge  no  King,  sed  suis  institutis  viventes,

c 2  C of  his  •  .

His  ton  of  a<^ Seniorum Coetus, ubi consultatione opus est, res

Amsterdam,  referunt : they  are  ruled  by  their  owne  States  or  Oran-

See  also  pars  kayes. The  Inhabitants  are  Mahumetans  and  very  de-

$.Ind.Orient.  vout that they begin nothing, neither Divine nor

which  words n  1_ r ..l il  j  • ^ •  T»i-

are  to  be  riumane,  before  they  have  prayed  in  their  manner. I  hey

marked  ar^  a  collectitious  Nation  of  many  Peoples  compounded.

against  what-  The  Hands  are  divers,  Banda  the  chiefe,  in  which  are  sixe

soever  pretext  or  seven  Townes  continually  disagreeing. The  chiefe  is

j- [rryte'r  Nera, to which Labetacke, Comber, and Wayre are

aisaoilitie  of  .  j  j  j

surrendring enemies  :  Lantore  (on  the  other  side  of  the  Hand)  and  the
themselves. two  Hands  of  Pooloway  and  Poolaroone  are  friends  to

204

THE DUTCH NAVIGATIONS  a.d.

1600.

Nera.  The  cause  of  these  Jarres  and  Warres  is;  the
casting  downe  of  certaine  trees  many  yeeres  since,  in  the
territorie  of  Nera,  by  the  men  of  Labetacke  :  whence  they
still  kill  one  another  like  Dogs.  Their  banquets  publicke,
Meskit  ceremonies,  and  foot-ball  tennise,  I  omit.  They
are  nimble,  and  some  very  aged  unto  one  hundred  and
thirtie  yeeres.  The  worke  in  dressing  their  Nutmegs,
Mace,  and  otherwise,  is  the  womens  burthen.

On  the  fourth  of  July,  they  set  sayle  from  Banda,  and
on  the  sixe  and  twentieth  came  to  Jacatra.  On  the  eight
of  August  to  Bantam,  from  whence  they  set  sayle  on  the
nineteenth;  and  the  twentieth  of  Aprill,  1600.  arrived
in  the  Tessell.  The  two  other  ships,  Amsterdam  and
Utricke,  after  two  moneths  stay  at  Amboyna,  set  sayle
thence  the  eighth  of  May  for  the  Moluccas;  and  on  the
two  and  twentieth,  cast  Anchor  neere  Ternate.  Here  they
held  trade  with  the  Kings  leave  and  love,  till  the  nine-
teenth of  August ;  and  then  leaving  some  in  Factorie
they  departed.  The  nineteenth  of  December,  they  came
to  Bantam,  whence  they  set  sayle  the  one  and  twentieth  of
Januarie.  The  sixteenth  of  February,  John  Peters  an  John  Peeters
Englishman  their  Treasurer  died.  The  thirtieth  of  May,  an  English-
they  had  sight  of  the  Ascension,  from  whence  the  next  man-
day  they  made  haste  homewards,  much  pressed  with  defect
of  victual,  and  safely  arrived  at  Amsterdam.

BUt  before  the  returne  of  any  of  these  ships,  in  the  Many  Fleets
yeere 1599. the  Dutch  Indian  Companie  set  forth  sent  to  the
another Fleet of three ships, under the command of  East ^tes
Stephen  van  Hagen,  the  fourth  of  May. Likewise  the  °and  Zeknd.
foure  ships  of  the  former  Fleet,  which  had  made  so  speedy
a  Voyage,  were  sent  againe  forthwith  under  the  command
of  James  Williams. And  besides  the  former  Companie,
a  new  Companie  of  Amsterdam  and  Brabant  sent  forth  a
Navie  of  foure  ships  under  Peter  Bot. These  set  sayle
from  the  Tessell  the  one  and  twentieth  of  December,
1599.  which  returned  two  yeeres  after  richly  laden. Also
this  last  Society  prepared  two  other  ships,  A. 1600.  to

205

A.D.
l600.

See  Davis  his
first  Voyage,
pag.  117.
This  slaughter
of  Houtman
some  ascribe  to
the  Portugal
wiles,  part,
oct.  Ind.  Or.

Companies
united.

See  Pont  an.
pag.  204.
*  Others  say
Wibrand
Warrick :  or
else  that  which
followeth  of
Herman  de
Bree  is
another  Fleet.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

which  the  former  Companie  added  sixe  other  of  five  hun-
dred tunnes  the  piece,  under  the  command  of  Neccius,
which  making  happie  returnes,  meane  whiles  the  Zelanders
entertayned  the  businesse.  And  in  the  yeere  1601.  thir-
teene  ships  departed  from  Amsterdam,  on  the  three  and
twentieth  of  Aprilly  under  the  command  of  James  Heems-
kirck,  foure ;  and  foure  under  John  Grenier,  and  foure
under  Wolphard  Harminius.  Against  these  the  Spaniard
set  forth  a  strong  Armada  of  thirteene  Sayle,  which  en-
countred  eight  ships  of  the  Dutch,  before  the  rest  were
come  to  them ;  a  fight  followed,  wherein  a  small  Hollander
Pinnasse  was  so  battered,  that  they  tooke  out  her  wares,
and  sent  her  backe.

How  Houtman  was  slaine  at  Achen,  is  elsewhere  de-
livered. This  King  being  by  Portugall  wiles  further
instigated,  did  give  good  entertainment  notwithstanding,
this  yeare  1601.  to  some  Zeland  ships  under  the  command
of  Laurence  Bicker,  as  also  to  George  Spilberg.  He  sent
his  Ambassador  also  to  Prince  Maurice,  with  Bicker,  one
of  which  died  at  Middleborough,  whose  Epitaph  in  great
letters  hath,  Hie  situs  est  Abdur  Zamat  Princeps  Lega-
tionis  a  Rege  Taprobanae  seu  Sumatrae  Soltan  Alciden
Raietra  Lillo  Lahe  Felalam  missae  :  ad  Illustriss.  Prin-
cipem  Mauritium  cum  duabus  Navibus  quae  in  dedit.
accepere  Liburnicam  Lusitanicam.  Vixit  71.  obiit  Anno
do. Id.  cii. Praefecti  Societatis  Indicae  H.M.P.C.

But  when  as  it  happened  by  the  diversitie  of  Stockes
and  Companies,  that  great  losse  ensued  to  the  Adven-
turers, it  was  by  common  consent  concluded,  that  all  these
severall  Companies  should  be  united,  and  by  Proclamation
forbidden  to  all  but  this  Society  to  adventure  to  the  Indies
for  one  and  twentie  yeeres  space :  and  that  Amsterdam
should  in  the  expeditions  of  new  Fleets,  beare  halfe  the
charge  ;  Middleborough  a  fourth  part ;  Delfe,  Rotterdam,
Home,  and  Enchusen  each  a  sixteenth,  &c.  Presently
after,  this  united  Companie  made  readie  a  Fleet  of  four-
teene  ships  according  to  these  proportions  under  the  com-
mand of  *  Stephen  van  Hagen. The  capitall  Summe  or

206

THE DUTCH NAVIGATIONS  a.d.

1601.

common  Stocke  brought  into  the  Treasurie,  exceeded  sixe
Millions  of  Florens.

The  Portugals  which  alone  before  enjoyed  the  Indian
Trade,  did  much  enrich  the  Dutch  by  their  opposition,
which  while  they  sought  to  make  prize  of  the  Hollanders,
were  often  surprized,  the  Portugall  decaying  in  those  [I.  v.  711.]
parts  unto  this  day.  Wolphard  Harminius  before  named
Admirall  of  five  ships  in  the  Straights  of  Sunda,a  was  told  a  Qner*
by  a  China  Junke  that  Bantam  was  besieged  of  a  Portu-  whether  th"

*  name  hunaa  be

gall  Armada, under  the  command  of  Andreas  Fortado  not  as  Sound  in
Mendoza,b consisting of eight great ships and neere  these  parts,
twentie Frigats, seeking to cause the Bantameses to  that  is  a
have  nothing  to  doe  with  the  Dutch. Wolphard  tooke  J*,
counsell  and  adventured  on  the  Portugals,  of  whom  hee  ^/42I
tooke  two  Frigats  and  three  Ships,  some  he  sunke,  others  Portugal
they  set  fire  on  themselves  ;  the  rest  departed  to  Amboyna,  Insolence.
and  there  slew  divers  of  the  Inhabitants,  for  holding  trade  ^orruPtl0
with  the  Dutch,  and  (as  having  an  evill  eye  at  Natures  ^fjf *\

.  .  & -i-ci  J  *  sima :  a

good  eye,  and  angrie  with  the  very  Elements)  cut  downe  naughtie
their  Clove  trees,  which  the  Moores  had  no  where  done  in Christian  is
their  most  despitefull  opposition  to the  Portugall  pro-  the  worst  man.
ceedings  in  the  East.

Wolphard  after  gratulations  of  the Bantameses, and  Hollanders
some  time  there  spent,  directed  his  course  for  Ternata  and  r'lchcmd  quiet
Banda, and hearing that the Portugals were gone to  ^anda
Tydore,  where  they  had  a  Fortresse ; they  divided  their
Fleet,  two  for  Banda,  three  for  Ternata,  where  they  found
Francis  Verdusius  (whom  the  Dutch  had  left  there)  in  the
great  favour  of  the  King. And  having  well  furnished
their  ships  at  Ternata,  they  set  sayle  for  Banda  to  the  rest
of  their  Fleet,  where  Venius  their  Factor  was  well,  and
had  provided  store  of  Mace  and  Nutmegs,  so  that  they
presently  sent  home  three ships  laden ; the  other  two
stayed  there  till  Cloves  were  ripe.

HEemskirk  with  two  ships  tooke  a  Portugall  Carricke
of  Macao  valued  at  divers  millions  of  Florens :  she
was  of  fourteene  hundred  tunnes,  had  eight  hundred  men

207

A.D.
l60I.

Spilbergs  going
to  Zeilan.

Columbo.

John  de
Austria  or
Fimala,  how
King  of
Candey  or
Candy.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

(one  hundred  whereof  were  women)  her  lading  Silke,
Sugar,  Cotton,  Muske,  Tintinago,  her  name  Saint  Kathe-
rine,  which  first  hung  forth  a  bloudie  Banner,  but  being
shot  betwixt  wind  and  water,  exchanged  it  into  a  white :
seventie  men  were  slayne,  the  rest  according  to  composi-
tion set  on  shoare. Hee  returned,  1604.

SPilberg  returned  the  same  yeere.  He  had  fought  with
three  Portugall  Caravels  at  Cape  Verde.  In  Zeilan
he  received  of  the  King  honourable  entertainment  with
libertie  of  trade,  first  with  the  King  of  Batecoli,  and  after
with  the  King  of  Candes,  invited  by  him  and  accommo-
dated with  an  Elephant  to  carrie  him  by  the  King  of
Batecoli,  met  by  the  King  of  Candes  his  Elephants  a  dayes
journey  on  the  way,  and  a  Litter  with  costly  furniture  of
Arras,  and  after  that  with  more  honourable  accoultrement
and  attendance  of  the  Captaine  (graced  with  Banners  and
Colours  taken  from  the  Portugals  their  professed  enemies)
to  the  Citie.  For  after  the  death  of  Darma  King  of
Zeilan,  this  Fimala  of  Candes  (educated  with  the  Portugals
in  the  Fortresse  Columbo,  and  baptised  by  the  name  of
John  de  Austria)  by  the  helpe  of  his  friends  made  himselfe
King,  and  expelled  the  Portugals.  There  remayned  a
daughter  of  the  deceased  King,  baptized  by  the  name
Catharina,  whom  the  Portugals  intended  to  make  Queene,
and  to  marrie  her  to  Peter  Lopes  de  Sofa  Governour  of
Malacca,  and  with  a  great  Armie  brought  her  to  Candes,
and  made  John  de  Austria  hide  himselfe  in  the  woods,
who  did  beleager  the  wayes  meane  while,  that  no  provision
might  come  to  the  Citie,  slaying  the  Portugals  which
came  in  his  reach.  Whereupon  Lopes  was  constrained
to  take  the  field,  and  trie  it  by  battell,  Anno  1590.
in  which  he  was  slaine,  and  Catharina  then  nine  or
ten  yeeres  old  was  married  to  Fimala,  who  subverted
the  Portugall  Forts,  and  every#  way  fortified  himselfe
against  them.

This  King,  the  next  day  after  Spilbergs  arrivall  sent  him
Horses  to  come  to  the  Court,  which  went  thither  with

208

C  EI  LAN

infula

/. . .  P  Ag  Batecatan

',  nfc ada  das  tncmt—^~==

'<§>

^'

•  -

^ -

MiilGcrnumhu.

f

u"^  f

^V^jJ^rt""  JcTrtqt/tlemale^^'

,  L>odo  Etniatos

'it , ; Rr/Vio  *fr  tiaiitalir

OK3m

^letmtvanc
fCyaacma  -gyalnc

.Li  qui coX\mrt'icmtna+0s  Aeficrtos, /f^tS\Jf*\t>

m»

ttt/ttvt

%Ztijar  tbihvatarrvs ■■  jtrtatw ^^  i  } ,  ■■^/tj^.  JCbfa&L  "qiu  a

»^ *

^ •*^'T *;-*/!%.  jLcvto  dafalaXcfcrtv

Jftvdie <*"  defcovado  ai  o  o  annas

5*X'  Keino  Je  jfijfiiri  f/ipatum

f  que  it

cven.cn

u /

■Uhaquespor*. - ■*&
L ''tfevcr  JEI  'rfnntct

.••.  «■

:^ e  - ' \  ViliC c""J£2Aeino  de  Candelg  f% '  "5<J|  ^  /»

mj^n*tyc\^>^menc

^i

s

rfw

V A  cine

dbcli

I  Car  diva  J/  [» i  .

a

Colombo

8

icctJc

:iu

7

HONDIUS HIS MAP OF CEYLON

THE DUTCH NAVIGATIONS  ad.

1602.

some  Presents,  Prince  Maurice  his  Letters  and  Picture,
and  the  Portraiture  of  the  Battell  at  Newport.

The  King  questioned  much  of  these  parts,  saying  hee
had  thought  that  there  had  beene  no  white  men  but  the
Portugals.  Hee  feasted  him  in  a  roome  furnished  with
Arras  Hangings,  Chaires,  a  long  Table,  and  other  furniture
like  the  Portugals.  And  as  for  league,  he  said  that  he  and
the  Queene  with  his  Nobles  were  readie  to  carrie  morter
on  their  shoulders,  and  stones  to  erect  a  Fortresse  in  his
Kingdome,  where  and  whensoever  the  States  and  Prince
Maurice  pleased.  Spilberg  also  to  gratifie  the  King,
tooke  three  Portugall  ships  not  farre  off,  burned  the  Vessels
and  gave  the  Captives  to  the  King.  Hee  gave  him  two
Musicians  also,  because  he  saw  him  therewith  delighted ;
wherewith  he  was  so  pleased,  that  he  made  one  of  them
his  Secretarie,  would  needs  learne  the  Dutch  Language,
and  have  his  Kingdome  called  New  Holland.  Spilberg  New  Holland.
brought  thence  first  Cynamon  and  Precious-stones,
amongst  which  a  Pyropus  (a  kind  of  Carbuncle)  so  great
as  had  not  beene  here  seene,  weighing  foure  hundred
Carats.  This  Hand  from  North  to  South  is  two  hundred  Of  Ms  Hand
and  fiftie  miles,  broad  one  hundred  and  fortie,  fertile  of  **? Uke **»*?-

r .  1 j ./•  ,  , ,  r r>  ation  of  their

fruits  and odoriferous  plants, abundance or Cynamon,  Elephants  by
gemmes,  both  by  sea  and  mynes,  and  Elephants. It  is  others  of  other
divided  into  seven  Kingdomes,  one  whereof  is  principall,  p*?**  &c- see
the  chiefe  Citie  Columbo,  now  wholly  possessed  by  Fimala, Ltnschoten-
except  the  Fortresses  of  the  Portugals. For  the  Readers
further  delight,  and  because  I  find  little  Trade  of  our
English  on  this  Hand,  I  have  borrowed  hither  Hondius
Map  of  Zeilan.

J  Ames  Neccius  before  mentioned,  setting  sayle  the  eight  ^eJc\u]\is

and  twentieth  of  June, 1601.  in  the  end  of  March  voyage  to

came  to  Bantam,  where  he  found  Paulus  a  Carden. He  China.

spake  with  the  Governour,  who  willed  him  to  beware  of  The  Dutch

the  Portugals,  telling  that  one  had  beene  with  him  from  JJEf-t*

the  ^  King of  Tuban, Ragielella a Portugall borne, to  he\e  $the  Por-

sollicite  for  leave  to  assault  the  Dutch  in  Harbor,  for  tugalsofthem.
v 209 o

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1602.

which  purpose  they  had  a  Fleet  of  fortie  sayle  at  Jacatra.

The  second  of  Aprill,  he  departed  from  Bantam  for  the

See  the  King Moluccas. Here  at  Ternata  he  found  Verdusius  afore-

LM^Tai said>  and  Peter  Lindius  the  Captaine  of  a  Fleet  which  had
Kins:,  and  Sir  passed  the  Magellane  Straights,  which  here  at  Ternata
H.  Middle  tons  had  bilged  his  ship  on  a  Rocke,  but  saved  her  goods. By
first  Voyage, these  Neccius  heard  of  a  ship  of  Mabus  Fleet  at  Tidore
taken  by  the  Portugals,  or  betrayed  rather,  and  their  Cap-
taine  treacherously  slaine  with  all  his  Company,  except
five. They had also belabored  the  King  of  Ternata
against  the  Hollanders,  saying,  they  were  impious,  per-
fidious, without  God  or  goodnesse,  Sodomites,  of  whom
for  their  love  to  the  King,  they  gave  him  faire  warning,
Note  that  the Promising  also  rewards. The  Hollanders  in  revenge  set
Hollanders  in  upon  the  Portugals  at  Tidore,  where  Neccius  was  wounded
reckoning  the on  his  right  hand,  eight  or  nine  of  his  Companie  lost,  and
King  o/Ter- ^t  Dutch  going  by  the  worst,  retired. Some  of  his  Com-
doms '  name  not  Pan*e  ^e  ^e^  at  Ternata,  and  after  festivall  entertainment
Banda:  which  for  want  of  merchandize,  he  was  forced  to  seeke  Trade  in
before  their China,  or  elsewhere.

Authors  tes-  This  King  of  Ternata  was  called  Scipidine,  Lord  of
ftlte^and  to  Ternate>  Machian,  Motir,  Amboni,  Gulolo,  &c.  he  stileth
entertaine  himselfe  also  King  of  Celebes,  although  he  possesseth
Chill  Warres,  nothing  there  but  some  forced  places :  and  in  Mindanao,
which  one Sokeni,  Menos,  and  other  Hands.

King  might  Neccius  came  to  Coyo  one  of  the  Philippine  in  eleven

pacified:  degrees,  tributarie  to  the  Spaniard,  where  they  had  kind

besides  the  entertainment.  After  that  they  came  to  Mendare  not
KingofTer-  farre  from  the  Bay  of  Manilla,  and  eight  dayes  together
T'^&n'dom  were  en^angered  among  the  Rockes.  The  twentieth  of
to  the  Queene  September,  they  came  to  a  Land  unknowne,  and  then  were
of  England,  encountred  with  a  terrible  tempest.  This  was  one  of  the
See  Sir  Fr.  Hands  before  Canton.  When  they  thought  themselves
Drtf&.  twelve  or  fifteene  leagues  from  Macao,  they  proceeded

Hollanders  lost  t^ree  or  f°ure  leagues,  and  saw  buildings  at  the  foot  of  a
there.  hill,  and  certaine  boats  with  one  man  and  one  woman,

[I.  v.  713.] besides  children,  in  each  of  them,  as  if  they  had  beene  so
many  Families  dwelling  therein. They  questioned  with

210

THE DUTCH NAVIGATIONS

them  (for  none  would  come  aboard)  of  Macao,  and  they
pointed  to  the  mountaine :  but  they  not  thinking  it  so
neere,  set  some  ashoare,  whom  when  they  could  not  see
returne  at  night,  they  misdoubted  and  found  too  late  that
it  was  Macao,  and  their  men  there  detayned.  Seeing
seven  and  thirty  little  Hands  before  them,  they  sent  the
Master  to  see  if  he  could  find  any  sure  harbour  by  sound-
ing, who  was  also  intercepted  with  boats  from  the  towne,
together  with  his  consorts.  Thus  were  twenty  men  lost,
amongst  whom  the  Treasurer  and  the  Captaine  of  the
Souldiers,  which  was  also  Master.  They  thought  to  write,
but  could  get  no  carrier,  and  staying  two  dayes  at  Sanchona
without  hope  of  effecting  any  thing,  the  third  of  October
they  departed,  and  the  next  day  were  carried  on  the  shelfe
of  Pulo  Cynon,  and  in  danger  to  be  carried  upon  Cauchin
China.

After  that  endangered  with  tempest  and  the  shelves,
and  the  swiftnesse  of  the  Current  to  the  South,  they  came
to  Quami,  where  finding  nothing  but  Woods,  Deserts,
and  Buffals  footings,  they  passed  to  Auarella  Talca  in
eleven  Degrees,  and  thirtie  Minutes.  Heere  the  Generall
with  twelve  others  going  on  shoare,  came  to  an  open  field,
encompassed  with  goodly  trees,  where  he  found  many
Buffals  feeding,  and  store  of  Birds,  but  they  could  get
none.  Finding  then  the  tract  of  a  cart,  they  followed  it
to  spacious  woods  and  fields,  footings  of  men  and  beasts,
but  no  habitation,  which  made  them  thinke  that  they  lived
like  the  Tartars.  They  called  the  place  Sotternym  of  a
destraction  which  they  got  by  eating  a  certaine  fruit,  every
man  distracted  for  a  time  with  a  madnesse  answering  his
proper  humour,  seeing  angels,  devils,  serpents,  all  things,
and  nothing.  The  one  and  twentieth  of  October  they
passed  by  Polo  Condor,  the  next  day  by  Sangora,  and  the
seventh  of  November  arrived  at  Batane,  where  they  had
excellent  entertainement ;  procured  trade  and  a  house,  and
by  the  Queenes  favour  left  there  eight  in  factory.  Thither
also  came  Heemskirke,  who  told  them  of  his  taking  the
Portugall  Caricke,  and  therein  of  a  letter  that  Don  Paulo

211

A.D.

1602.

Pulo  Cynon.

Cauchin

China.

Auarella
Talca.

Sotternim.

Polo  Condor.
Sangora.
Trade  at
Patania.

A.D.

l602.

Dutch  exe-
cuted.

Patania
diversitie  of
language  and
writing.

Balls  in  yards.
One  cut  out
one  out  of  his
yard  before
Cap.  Saris
and  gave  it
him.

Herman  de
Bree.  Werts
Voyage  to
Zeilan.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

had  hanged  fifteene  of  the  Hollanders  taken  at  Macao  ;  the
Quester  and  Master  were  sent  to  Goa ;  which  act  before
they  attributed  to  the  Chinois,  now  saw  it  to  be  the
Portugals,  although  (as  they  thought)  by  helpe  of  the
Chinois.

In  Patania  they  use  the  Malayan,  Syan  and  China  lan-
guage :  the  Malayan  writing  like  the  Arabecke,  the  Syan
like  the  Europian ;  and  all  most  in  Latine  characters,  the
Chinese  from  the  right  hand  but  downewards.  Adultery
is  punished  with  death  inflicted  by  their  parents  in  what
kind  themselves  chuse.  Common  women  are  commonly
offered  to  strangers  to  do  household  service  by  day,  and
other  offices  at  night.  Some  of  the  Syanites  weare  two
or  three  silver  balles  (or  of  other  metall)  in  their  yeards,
inserted  betwixt  the  skinne  and  flesh,  as  big  sometimes  as
a  Tennis  ball.  The  Countrey  is  fruitfull  and  wholesome.
Their  Geese  and  Duckes  lay  twice  a  day :  the  woods  are
stored  with  wild  beasts ;  there  are  Turtles  with  faire
feathers  like  Parrets.  They  take  wild  Elephants  in  fight
with  a  tame,  put  into  the  woods  of  purpose,  whiles  both
are  fastned  by  the  teeth,  some  men  behind  with  ropes
captiving  the  wild.  They  arrived  at  the  Ramekins  the
fifteenth  of  July,  1604.

IN  the  yeere  1602.  a  Fleet  of  fourteene  saile  were  sent
out  under  the  command  of  Wibrand  Warwicke  Ad-
mirall,  and  Sabalt  de  Wert  Vice-admirall :  the  Maurice  of
foure  hundreth  tunnes,  the  Holland  three  hundreth  and
fiftie,  the  Nassau  three  hundreth  and  fortie,  the  Sunne  two
hundreth  and  eightie,  the  Moone  two  hundreth  and  fiftie,
the  Starre  one  hundreth  and  eightie,  the  Parret  a  Pinnasse
of  five  and  twentie  ;  all  by  Amsterdam.  Three  Zelanders,
one  of  foure  hundreth,  the  Flushing  two  hundreth  and
fiftie,  the  Goose  one  hundreth  and  fourtie  :  by  the  Enchu-
seners  two,  the  Hedge  two  hundreth  and  twentie,  the
Virgin  one  hundreth  seventie  and  five :  by  the  Roter-
damians  two,  the  Erasmus  two  hundred  and  fiftie,  and
Roterdam eightie. It was determined that the three

212

THE DUTCH NAVIGATIONS  a.d.

1603.

Zelanders  should  goe  for  Zeilon  and  Achen,  the  Maurice
and  Moone  to  the  Moluccas,  the  Nassau  and  Erasmus  to
China,  the  Holland,  Hedge  and  Starre  to  Achen,  the  Sun,
Virgin,  &c.  to  Bantam.  In  the  Hedge,  Herman  de  Bree
was  Cape  Merchant.  These  all,  (but  the  three  Zelanders
which  went  three  moneths  before)  set  out  from  the  Tessell
the  seventeenth  of  June,  1602.  The  tenth  of  March  they
came  to  Achen.  There  they  found  the  three  Zelanders,
and  Spilbergs  two  ships.  Sebalt  de  Wert  the  Vice-
admirall,  the  eight  and  twentie  of  November,  1603.
came  to  Zeilon,  &  went  with  sixe  Elephants  fourtie
leagues  journey  to  Candes  or  Candy,  &  had  beene  honour-
ably entertained  with  his  fifteene  followers.  He  was
brought  into  the  City  as  if  he  had  beene  a  King,  the  Citi-
zens and  Souldiers  making  a  rancke  halfe  a  *  mile  long  *Dutch.
on  both  sides  the  way,  and  such  a  thundering  of  Ordnance,
and  sound  of  trumpets,  that  none  could  bee  heard  speake.
To  the  Court  he  was  had  with  like  pompe,  where  he  saw
the  Royall  Counsell,  &  Prince  Maurice  his  picture,  with
a  stately  Carpet  before  it  to  receive  his  Presents.  The
King  stood  in  a  place  by  himselfe  with  his  children,  before
whom  he  fell  on  his  knees,  and  was  taken  up  presently,
and  demaunded  what  Countriman  he  was,  and  wherefore
he  came :  who  answered,  of  Holland,  governed  by  that
Prince  there  pourtraied  ;  whereat  they  all  rejoyced,  having
placed  it  there  to  trie  whether  he  knew  it,  and  the  truth  of
Spilbergs  relation.  He  added  that  he  came  for  trade  of
Merchandize.  The  King  protested  much  his  hatred  to  the
Portugall :  and  after  asked  how  he  durst  without  pledge
or  any  assurance,  adventure  so  farre  into  that  Countrey  :
hee  answered,  because  the  Portugals  were  hated  alike  of  [I.  v.  714.]
both  their  Princes  ;  whereat  they  laughed.  In  more  pri-
vate conference,  he  promised  with  twenty  thousand  men  Promise  to  the
to  besiege  the  Portugall  Castle  Columbo,  if  the  Hollanders  Hollanders-
would  prevent  helpe  from  Goa :  and  would  give  the  Hol-
landers all  their  Castles  which  he  should  take,  and  would
reserve  his  Merchandizing  for  them.  The  next  day  he
feasted  him,  give  him  before  a  golden  tooth-picke,  now  a

213

A.D.

1603.

Two  French
ships.

*Sir  James
Lancaster.

Motecalo.

The  sacrilegi-
ous murtherof
Beeves.

Punto  de
Gallo.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

bowle  of  gold  wherein  he  made  his  little  daughter  to
drinke  to  him :  and  if  his  sonne  were  old  enough,  said,  he
would  send  him  to  Prince  Maurice  to  be  instructed  in
Martiall  discipline.  At  his  departure  he  gave  him  twenty
five  Quintals  of  Cynamon,  and  sixteene  of  Pepper,  and
honourable  convoy  to  his  ships.

He  notified  these  things  to  his  fellowes  at  Achen,  and
counselled  them  to  embrace  these  opportune  promises.
For  they  could  not  easily  be  provided  of  Merchandize.
They  had  heard  of  two  French  ships,  one  shipwracked  at
the  Maldavae,  the  other  returned  with  a  small  victory :  as
also  the  state  of  the  English  there,  which  had  taken  *  a
prize,  and  built  a  store-house  at  Achen.  Thus  sixe  ships
with  a  Pinnasse,  set  foorth  the  third  of  Aprill,  not  a  little
heartned  by  the  old  and  young  King  of  Achen,  who  sent
an  Embassadour  with  them  to  Zeilon.  They  lost  many
in  the  calmes  betwixt  the  sixteenth  and  one  and  twentieth
of  Aprill.  On  the  foure  and  twentieth  they  arrived,  and
marched  in  battell  array  on  the  sixe  and  twentieth  to
Motecalo.  The  king  there  entertained  them  well :  but
their  Religion  prohibiting  to  eat  Beeves  and  Buffals,
whereof  they  had  great  plenty ;  they  would  not  sell  any
to  the  Hollanders.  They  were  disquieted  with  Flies  also
and  Gnats  which  would  not  suffer  them  to  sleepe ;  against
which  the  Natives  make  fire  and  smoake  all  the  night  the
place  where  they  sleepe.  Some  unruely  persons  caused
great  disturbance  by  killing  of  certaine  Kine,  and  could
not  appease  them  with  offering  satisfaction  :  and  seeking  to
make  the  King  intercessor  for  them  to  the  owners,  he  also
tooke  it  to  heart,  and  said  the  Portugals  had  never  offered
such  indignitie,  neither  could  he  any  longer  tolerate  such
wrongs :  some  forsooth,  imagined  that  the  soules  of  the
oxen  (had  themselves  any?)  thus  slaine  were  precipitated
to  hell.  Yet  at  last  upon  promise  of  better  abearing,  he
was  intreated.

The  thirteenth  of  May,  they  had  answere  of  their  letter
to  the  King  of  Candy,  now  encamped  at  Manacrawari,  de-
siring the  Hollanders  to  come  with  their  ships  to  Punto  di

214

THE DUTCH NAVIGATIONS  ad.

1603.

Gallo,  promising  to  besiege  it  first,  and  to  give  the  Hol-
landers that  which  he  had  promised,  and  one  thousand
Quintals  of  Cynamon,  and  as  much  Pepper  for  tribute,
that  being  wonne. He  desired  also  the  Vice-admirall  to
meet  him  at  Vintane,  halfe  way  betwixt  Metacalo  and  Vintane.
Candy. Meane while the Hollanders tooke three
Portugall  ships,  two  of  two  hundreth  tunnes,  the  third  of
seventie,  and  after  that  a  fourth  of  eightie,  but  the  goods  Sep.  Wert  and
not  worth  the  while,  except  to  gratifie  the  King  of  Candy  : \^HoUa^ders
them  they  sent  away  with  the  Prisoners  according  write  that  Jthe
to  promise,  which  was  very  distastefull  to  the  King. The  King  suspected
first  of  June,  two  hundred  choise  men  were  set  on  shoare  him  oftrea-
to  meet  the  King  in  best  array :  but  he  desired  the  Vice-  s.on> as  tttfend\
admirall  to  stay  with  him  and  send  his  men  aboord,  to  JL#M . some
come  in  like  manner  the  next  day. Thus  they  which  impute  it  to
made  speed,  saved  their  lives  ; the  rest  doubting  no  evill,  the  delivery  of
were  most  of  them  slaine. The  next  day  they  understood  *  Pori
by  a  letter  from  the  King  of  the  death  of  the  Vice-admirall  Prmners-

J. , ,  .  .  &  , .  1  • •  1  1 rr •  some  t0°  Per~

with  his  retinue,  pretending  his  insolence,  and  offering  emt0ry  words
good  termes  or  warre,  as  they  pleased.  used  to  the

The  sixteenth,  they  had  letters  againe  by  a  Germane KinS-
of  Candy  from  the  King,  swearing  all  kindnesse  before
promised, if they would helpe him  take Gallo and
Columbo : to  which  they  answered,  they  were  ready  to
trade  at  shoare,  but  for  the  fortresses  their  ships  were,
some  gone,  and  they  unfit  at  present  for  that  which  might
in  fitter  time  be  done. Many  messages  passed  betwixt
them,  but  little  trust  or  trade. The  nine  and  twentieth
of  July  they  departed. These  Zeilonians  worship  Pagodes,
of  which  the  Hollanders  saw  some  in  Candy  of  five  or
sixe fathoms, representing Adam, as the inhabitants  Adam.
affirmed,  proportioned  by  artificiall  symmetry  to  the  foot-
print of  Adam  in  a  mountaine  neere. The  Kings  of
Panane, Matecalo and Poligamme, acknowledging the
King  of  Candy  their  superior,  who  is  thus  reported  to  have
attained *  the Scepter. A  certaine King  of Sitabague  *See  before
fifteene  leagues  from  Candy,  about  thirty  yeeres  before  had  ^Ptlber&
taken  Candy,  the  King  whereof  with  this  his  sonne  and

215

A.D.
1603.

Dam.

Macesser.
Ende.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

daughter  fled  to  the  Portugals,  who  at  Goa,  baptized  him
by  the  name  of  John  of  Austria,  (as  is  beforesaid)  and
brought  him  up  in  Columbo.  But  Candy  rebelling  against
the  other  King,  the  Portugals  sent  him  after  that  King's
death  to  Candy,  where  he  was  acknowledged  King,  and
then  followed  that  which  before  you  had  of  the
Kings  daughter  (of  Sitebague.)  To  returne  to  the
Dutch,  they  returned  to  Achen,  and  thence  againe
to  the  He  of  Daru  neere  Sumatra,  and  thence  after  divers
Portugall  prizes  taken  to  Maccasser.  They  learned  of  an
Hand  called  Ende,  famous  with  a  Volcano  or  burning  hill
called  Gunoapi.  At  last,  they  (not  knowing  whether  to
goe)  came  to  Jor,  where  they  helped  the  King  against  the
Portugall  Fleet.  Thence  they  went  to  Patane,  whether
they  came  the  first  of  November,  1603.  Here  they  heard
of  the  Erasmus  and  Nassau,  there  taking  a  rich  ship  sayl-
ing  to  Japan  neere  to  Macao :  after  they  had  pillaged  her,
they  burnt  her.  After  trade  here  they  returne  to  Bantam
and  home.

COrnelius  de  Vena  in  another  ship  of  that  Fleet,  saith,
they  came  the  twentie  one  of  June  to  Pulo  Timon,
on  the  three  and  twentieth  to  Pahan,  where  the  King  re-
PanorPahan. ceived  them  kindly,  on  the  first  of  July  to  Patani,  and
[I.  v.  715.] agreeing  with  a  Chinese  to  conduct  them  to  Canton,  they
Patent,  set  sajie  on  the  eleventh,  and  found  no  matter  of  great

Patanla  note  ^  ^e  thirtieth,  when  they  came  to  Macao,  and

tooke  a  Portugall  ship  bound  for  Japan ;  the  Portugals
fleeing  and  leaving  them  their  ship  with  the  goods  and
twentie  Blackes ;  these  they  set  on  shoare,  and  having
lighted  the  ship  on  the  tenth  of  August  fired  it,  and  set
saile  for  Bantam.  On  the  eighteenth  of  September,  they
encountred  a  great  Juncke  which  they  supposed  to  be
Portugals,  and  after  a  hot  fight  forced  her,  found  them
Chineses,  and  were  sorrie  that  they  had  ignorantly  hurt
their  friends ;  seventie  of  which  perished,  one  the  Cap-
taine,  whose  valour  lost  himselfe  and  them :  they  let  them
depart  with  their  goods  in  friendship. The  sixteenth  of

216

Great  China
Juncke.

THE DUTCH NAVIGATIONS  a.d.

1604.

December,  they  arrived  at  Bantam,  and  the  thirtieth  of
August,  1604.  at  ^e  Tessell.

IN  the  yeare,  1603.  twelve  ships  were  sent  under  the  Verhagens
command  of  Stephen  Verhagen. They  set  saile  the Voyage.
eighteenth  of  December. On  the  seven  and  twentieth  of
June,  they  came  to  Mosambique  and  anchored  without
the  Castle, in  sight  and spight  whereof  they  tooke  a
Portugall  ship  in  the  Harbour,  and  after  that  divers  other
Vessels. But  not  able  to  doe  any  thing  memorable  against
the  Hand; On  the  five  and  twentieth  of  August,  they
departed,  and  the  sixteenth  of  September,  came  before
Goa, but found the Portugals so provided that they Goa.
imagined  themselves  before  betrayed,  and  their  designe
bewrayed  in  Europe.

On  the  fourteenth  of  October,  they  therefore  departed
for  Cananor,  whither  they  came  on  the  sixe  and  twentieth, Cananor.
but  by  intercession  of  the  King  they  remooved  to  Calecut, Calecut.
where  they  tooke  a  Portugall  ship  with  Powder  and  Pro-
vision bound  for  Zeilan.

The  third  of  November,  they  had  fight  with  nine
Portugall  ships  in  which  many  were  slaine,  none  taken.
The  eighth  of  November,  they  entred  league  with
the  Samorine,  ratified  by  Oath  and  Instrument  in
writing.

It  was  ordered  that  the  Zeland  and  Enchusen  should
goe  for  Cambaya,  the  rest  to  Cochin,  before  which  they Cambaya.
came  on  the  fourteenth,  but  attempted  nothing. On  the Cockln.
two  and  twentieth,  they  sailed  before  Columbo,  and  shot
at  the  Castle.

The  second  of  January  they  came  to  Bantam,  the  Delffe
staying  at  Achen  to  returne  their  Embassador. On  the  jm^na
seventeenth,  they  departed  for  the  Moluccas. The  one Castle  taken.
and  twentieth  of  February,  they  came  to  Amboyna,  and  See  Sir  H.
assayled  the  Castle,  which  without  further  adoe  was  de-  Mid-  °fthis
livered  on  composition  of  free  passage  for  such  Portugals  wtZf2r
as  would,  and  such  as  would  to  stay,  the  Castle  and  Ord-  assisting  the
nance  left  to  the  Hollanders,  which  presently  received  the  Port.

217

A.D.
1605,

Castle  of
Tidore  wonne,
and  the  Por-
tugal driven
out  of  the
Moluccas:  see
the  later  state
in  Capt.  Saris,

L  4.  c  1.  y

Spilbergyp.%7.

Mateliffs
Expedition,

*Jor.

Malacca
besieged.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Dutch  Colours :  forty  sixe  marryed  Portugals  staying  and
swearing  allegiance  to  the  States,  sixe  hundred  others
departing.

Five  ships  were  thence  sent  to  Tidore,  the  Home  re-
mayning  here,  and  the  Admirall  going  to  Banda.  Those
five  arrived  at  Tidore,  on  the  second  of  May,  1605.  ^n
the  fift,  the  Vice- Admirall  summoned  the  Castle  to  yeeld,
which  the  Portugals  refused  and  manfully  defended  their
honour  against  the  Assailants,  till  an  unfortunate  fire,  (how
or  whence  uncertaine)  lighting  in  their  Powder  blew  up  a
great  part  of  their  Castle  with  sixtie  or  seventie  of  their
men.  This  forced  them  to  yeeld,  and  consequently,  they
were  dispossessed  of  all  the  Moluccas,  except  Solor.  The
King  of  Ternata  with  fourteene  Corocoras,  contayning
each  one  hundred  and  fortie  Souldiers,  aided  the  Hol-
landers, and  held  fast  the  King  of  Tydore,  both  prooving
Spectators  of  the  European  Prize.  They  razed  the
Castle.

This  yeare  1605.  ^e  King  of  Spaine  had  made  a  terrible
Edict  against  the  Hollanders,  forbidding  Trade  with  them
under  grievous  penalties.  But  prohibition  without  inhibi-
tion is  vaine :  and  the  Foxe  the  more  he  was  cursed,
thrived  the  better.  For  in  the  same  yeare,  they  sent
forth  Cornelius  Matelivius  with  twelve  ships,  foure  of
which  were  seven  hundred  tunnes  each.  The  next  yeare
Paulus  a  Caerden  was  set  forth  with  eight  other  in  May,
1606.  Anno  1607.  the  Peace  or  Truce  being  in  treatie,
they  set  forth  another  Fleet  of  thirteene  sayle  under  Peter
Williamson  Verhuef.  Anno  1608.  three  ships  returned
laden  with  Spices,  three  hundred  tunnes  of  Cloves,  one
hundred  of  Nutmegs,  fiftie  of  Mace,  &c.

MAtelivius  having  in  charge  to  enter  league  with  the
Indian  Kings  against  the  Portugals,  in  the  end  of
Aprill,  1 606.  sent  to  the  King  of  Jortan*  to  ayde  him,  who
came  with  two  thousand  Blackes,  and  on  the  tenth  of  May,
they  both  went  on  shoare  against  Malacca,  and  possessed
the  Suburbs. But  continuing  their  siege  to  little  pur-

218

THE  DUTCH NAVIGATIONS  a.d.

1606.

pose,  and  hearing  of  the  Portugall  Fleet  comming,  they
arose & on the seventeenth of August set sayle to
encounter  the  Armada  consisting  of  fourteene  great  ships,
and  as  many  smaller. A  terrible  Sea-fight  followed,  in  Sea  fight.
which  the  Hollanders  were  forced  to  forsake  the  Mauri-
tius one  of  their  best  ships,  and  Mateliff  himselfe  was  in
great  distresse  by  three  Portugall  shippes  (together  with
the Midleborough) till  others  comming  into his  helpe
with  firie  shot,  hee  freed  himselfe :  but  the  Midleborough  See  0f*M*
with  two  Portugall  ships  fastened  to  it  were  burnt  to- *&*>?*&
gether,  the  men  saving  themselves  in  the  boats  (as  well
as  they  could)  of  other  ships. The  Hollanders  diverted
to  their  confederate  Kings,  the  Portugals  going  to  Malacca,
where  having  left  seven  of  their  ships,  the  rest  returned.
The  Dutch  having  now  repayred  themselves  tooke  this  [I.  v.  716.]
oportunitie,  and  make  an  unexpected  returne,  took  one
of  the  Portugall  ships,  slue  the  men,  fired  the  Vessell ;  two
others  fighting  with  the  Dutch  Vice-Admirall,  fell  both
on  fire  and  were  consumed  in  both  Elements,  Anger : a
fourth  also  yeelded ; the  rest  were  fired  by  the  Portugals j)uk^  women
at  Malacca,  being  before  disfurnished,  lest  they  should  and  families
fall  into  the  Enemies  power.  sent.

I  omit  Admirall  Peter  Both,  sent  with  a  notable  Fleet,  JJtait
Anno  1609.  with  Garison  Souldiers,  with  women  also  and  aiso  enter_
families  sent  to  inhabit ; and  a  ship  that  returned  from  prised  a  new
Japan,  16 10.  where  she  had  the  Emperors  license  of  Trade  Trade  at  the
and  had  left  a  Factorie :  and  another  shippe  sent  thither, ^aPeofGood
1 6 1 1 .  and  the  fortie  tunnes  of  Gold  which  that  Japan  ship  tr°^nyJ°r\  /
and  another  are  said  to  have  brought  backe. I  have  done y  sea/es
sufficient  in  this  Treasurie  of  Navigations,  to  shew  the  skinnes,  and
beginnings  as  of  the  Spanish  and  Portugall  before, so Oxe  hides:  of
here  also  of  the  Dutch  Plantations  in  the  Indies,  and  in  ^J%"
the  course  of  our  English  Voyages  we  have  many  of  theirs  brought  home
interlarded,  thus  many  Rivers  bringing  us  into  an  im-  at  once
mense  Sea  of  their  present  Trade. But  because  Banda  45°00-  Seale
was  the  banefull  and  banned  occasion  of  this  digression,  sktnnes>  c,nd
you  may  see  in  divers  of  ours,  also  Relations  of  the  Dutch  lo^[  steads  of
doings  and  sufferings  there,  as  1606.  some  of  their  men  trayne,  ls?c/

219

A.D.

1607.
Sup.  p.  385.
See  Floris  321.
&  324.  CVz/>/.
Keeling,  Mid-
dleton,  l3c
Peter  Wil-
liamson Ver-
huesy  or
Verhoes,  or
Haus.

Mosambike
taken,  and  the
Castle
besieged.

Bon  Jesus
taken.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

slaine  whiles  they  sought  Trade,  and  of  the  quarrels  be-
twixt the  Ilanders  and  them  continuing  long  after :  and  I
have  thought  good  briefely  to  adde  the  Historie  of  their
forcible  possession  thereof  by  Verhuef,  out  of  their  owne
Relations.

VErhuef  with  a  Navie  of  nine  ships  and  foure  Pin-
nasses,  the  three  and  twentieth  of  December,  1607.
set  saile  from  the  Tessell.  The  thirteenth  of  July,  1608.
they  saw  the  Land  of  Sofala :  on  the  eight  and  twentieth,
they  came  to  Mozambique,  where  they  tooke  a  ship  under
the  Castle  most  of  the  Portugals  having  runne  away,  very
rich,  but  casually  or  by  the  Portugals  set  on  fire  the  next
night  whereby  great  part  of  the  goods  were  lost.  They
tooke  also  two  Pinnasses.  A  thousand  men  they  set  on
shoare  in  sixe  Bands,  commanded  by  Captaine  Bitter,  on
the  nine  and  twentieth,  but  found  none  in  the  Towne
but  five  or  sixe  Portugals,  and  a  few  olde  folkes,  children
and  Blacke  slaves,  three  hundred  with  fiftie  Turkes,  whom
they  set  at  libertie  and  set  on  shoare  in  safer  places.  The
Towne  they  found  great,  with  convenient  houses,  wals,
two  Churches  and  Monasteries.  The  Merchants  had  con-
veyed themselves  into  the  Castle,  but  left  much  goods
behind  to  the  Dutch  prey.

The  first  of  August,  they  began  to  batter  the  Castle.
On  the  tenth,  they  went  into  the  continent  and  destroyed
two  Villages.  But  the  Monson  being  neere,  they  raysed
their  siege  the  eighteenth,  fortie  of  them  being  slaine,  and
an  hundred  wounded ;  and  having  burned  a  Towne  and
Monasterie  in  an  adjoyning  Hand  they  departed.  They
tooke  a  PortugaJl  ship  called  the  Bon  Jesus,  on  the  one
and  twentieth  whereby  they  understood  that  nine  Gallions
and  five  other  great  ships  had  beene  sent  from  Lisbone,
towards  the  East  Indies,  of  which  Company  this  ship  was
separated  from  her  consorts  by  foule  weather.  They
fought  with  the  Dutch  nine  houres,  who  found  in  her
remayning,  one  hundred  and  fortie  Souldiers  of  one  hun-
dred and  ninetie.

220

THE DUTCH NAVIGATIONS  a.d

1608.

On  the  eighteenth  of  September,  they  anchored  before
Goa. On  the  sixe  and  twentieth,  they  sent  the  Arnold  to  Goa.
Coromandel  where  they  had  great  trading. The  fift  of  Coromandel.
October,  they  sayled  along  the  Malabar  Coast  to  refresh
themselves  neere  Cananor,  and  on  the  eight  towards  Cali-
cut. On  the  eleventh,  the  Admirall  with  two  hundred
men  visited the Samorine,  who  on  the  thirteenth  and
fourteenth  sent  out  Hunters  which  killed  above  fortie
great  Boares,  and  gave  to  the  Hollanders. He  delivered
to  the  Samorine  the  Captaine  and  Cape  Merchant  of  the  Samonne.
Bon  Jesus  ; the  ship  they  had  before  sunke. On  the  six-
teenth he  set  saile,  on  the  two  and  twentieth  came  before
Zeilon. The  two  and  twentieth  of  November,  they  came
before  Malacca,  where  they  tooke  a  Portugall  ship,  and  Ma^acco-
fired  it,  the  goods  beeing  by  the  Inhabitants  before  carryed
away.

On  the  foure  and  twentieth,  they  sent  to  the  King  of
Jor  to  acquaint  him  with  their  purpose  to  besiege  and  take
the  Towne  and  Castle  of  Malacca.  On  the  six  and  twen-
tieth, they  set  men  on  shoare  in  the  little  Hand  of  Saint  .
Peter,  where  the  next  day  the  Portugals  set  on  them  and
lost  their  Admirall  with  three  Captaines  and  sixe  prime
Officers,  besides  many  of  the  meaner.  Of  the  Hollanders
seven  were  slaine  and  three  taken.  On  the  eight  and
twentieth,  fifteene  Frigats  of  Blackes  Pirats  adjoyned
themselves  to  the  Hollanders.  But  the  King  of  Jor  could
afford  no  helpe,  his  Fleet  being  then  abroad.  Some
Vessels  being  taken  and  their  three  men  recovered  by
exchange  of  Prisoners,  they  departed  on  the  nine  and
twentieth.

The  tenth  of  January  they  went  to  Jor,  and  the  King
with  his  Sonne  and  Brother  with  twelve  Frigats  came  to
the  Fleet  on  the  fourteenth.  His  name  is  Ratispont :  he  RatisPontKing
had  on  a  white  Cotton  Wastcote  to  his  knees  with  a  jesc°^ea
fringe  hanging  to  the  feet,  silken  Sandals,  a  blacke  Shash
on  his  head,  three  Gold  Chaines  about  his  necke,  with
many  Jewels  annexed,  two  thicke  gold  Rings  on  his  left
arme  and  one  on  his  right,  sixe  on  his  fingers,  a  Crisse

221

ad.  PURCHAS HIS P1LGRIMES

1608.

very  artificiall  in  sheath  of  solid  Gold  set  with  many  Dia-
monds, Saphires, Carbuncles (valued at fiftie thousand
Florens)  of  meane  stature,  comely  shape,  moderate  speech,
whitish  complexion,  having  with  him  thirtie  Wives ; his
Frigat adorned gallantly with a Tent, borne up with
foure  golden  Pillars. His  seat  is  in  New  Jor.
[I.  v.  717.] The  fourteenth  of  February,  they  came  to  Bantam. On
the  second  of  April,  1609.  ^ey  came  to  Teraltas  twenty
foure  leagues,  from  which  is  a  Rocke  burning  in  the  Sea,
halfe  an  houres  journey  in  circuit,  with  a  huge  opening  in
the  top  alway  smoking. On  the  eight  arrived  at  Banda.
There  he  found  Captaine  Keeling  in  Trade  for  the  English
Company,  with  other  Dutch  ships  for  theirs  (the  English
having  begunne  and  continued  Trade  ever  since  the  be-
ginnings in  manner  of  that  Societie,  Captaine  Colthurst
who  went  with  Sir  Henry  Middleton,  in  the  second  Voy-
age, having  spent  one  and  twentie  weekes  in  trading  at
Banda.) The  Dutch  ships  belonged  to  the  Fleet  of  Paul
van  Caerden.
See  /.  2.  r.  5. These  Hands  of  Banda,  saith  Verkius,  the  Author  of
~  °-  this  Journall, and one of the chiefe Commanders, are

Orient  \ar seven *n number, about ten leagues in circuit, eightie
non.Pag.216.  leagues  from  the  burning  Rocke: the  best  Hands  in  all
the  East,  producing  Mace  and  Nutmegs  to  serve  the  whole
World.

The  people  in  them  are  supposed  ten  or  twelve  thou-
sand. Banda  libera  est  Respub,  saith  Pontanus,  in  his
Historie  of  Amsterdam  :  Banda  is  a  free  Common-wealth
(as  before,  Regem  nullum  agnoscunt,  they  acknowledge
no  King,  or  in  Dutch  English,  They  are  Free  States)  and
tor  the  King  of  Ternata,  Isacius  sleights  it  off  as  a  trifle,
quamvis.  Ternatensis  partem  aliquam  territorii  vindicare
sibi  videatur :  Some  seeming  of  some  challenge  of  some
part ;  that  is,  some  nothing.  Thus  the  Story  of  Amster-
dam written  and  printed  of,  and  at  Amsterdam,  purposely
handling  these  Indian  Affaires.  Neither  did  Verhuef  now
challenge  that  or  any  right,  or  have  any  of  their  Journals
which  I  have  seene  published,  so  much  as  mentioned  any

222

THE DUTCH NAVIGATIONS  ad.

1609.

such  challenge  or  broken  title,  on  that  Kings  part,  or  such
acknowledgement  on  theirs,  that  any  should  now  become
redemptor  litium,  or  incurre  a  Writ  of  Champertie  in  his
behalfe,  which  yet  the  English  might  best  doe,  as  appeares
in  Sir  Francis  Drakes  Voyage.  Their  cruel  warres  which
the  Hollanders  found  betwixt  them  at  their  first  comming
before  mentioned,  shew  that  no  Superiour  interposed  (as
was  just  cause)  to  command  better  abearing.

Verhuef  on  the  ninth  (as  Keeling  hath  it,  or  after  their
Story,  which  I  follow,  all  these  Relations  of  the  Dutch,
and  after  their  New  stile,  nineteene)  went  on  shoare  at
Ortattan,  where  the  Orankayas,  or  the  States  and  Gover-
nours  assembled : Here  he  caused  Prince Maurice  his
Letters  to  be  carryed  before  him  in  a  silver  Dish  covered,
and  was  met  by  an  Orankaya,  and  convayed  under  a  great
Tree, where  were  two  hundred  of  the  Chiefes  sitting
crosse-legged  like  Taylors (after  their manner) and he
conveniently  set,  and  his  Letters  read  in  Portugall  first,
and  after  in  Malayan. The  Contents  whereof  were,  that  See  °fthts  let~
Prince  Maurice  understanding  that  the  Ilanders  had  not  ulremarke
kept  promise  with  the  Hollanders  to  have  Trade  onely  no  right  of  the
with  them,  who  had  now  traded  there  sixe  yeares  and  Hollanders  or
beene  at  great  charges,  and  were  often  much  abused ; did TeT]aja  ^re'
therefore  desire  them  to  permit  the  Hollanders  to  build  See  afs0  the
some  Castle  in  some  of  those  Hands  in  place  most  fit  for  Dutch  allega-
them,  not  thereby  to  endammage  any  way  the  Inhabitants,  tions  to  Keel-
but  to  defend  themselves  and  the  whole  Countrey  from  tn&  202-  &
Portugals,  which  happily  might  come  thither: the  Hoi- ^he  Uollan-
landers  being  to  satisfie  them  for  the  place  and  for  stones  ders  what  they
and  all  appurtenances  to  the  structure,  and  no  way  to  be  cannot  get  by
troublesome to the Inhabitants. These Letters being intreatie,seeke
read,  the  people  were  in  an  uprore,  and  but  for  feare  of  %£jnn'  y
their  shipping  would  have  slaine  the  Hollanders,  as  after
appeared. But  consulting  amongst  themselves  in  present,
answered,  that  he  should  depart  aboord  his  ships,  and  they
would  communicate  the  businesse  with  the  rest  of  the
Hands,  and  in  three  dayes  give  him  an  answere ; which
was  given  on  the  two  and  twentieth,  and  proved  a  flat

223

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1609.

Negative.  Whereupon  the  Hollanders  provided  them-
selves for  fight,  and  some  went  on  shoare  and  fought  with
them  the  same  evening :  One  ship  also  and  two  Pinnasses
they  sent  to  Nera,  that  the  ship  Companies  might  forrage
that  Hand  at  pleasure.

On  the  foure  and  twentieth,  the  Ilanders  came  to  the
Admirall  and  desired  three  dayes  respite,  which  the  Hol-
landers denyed,  but  said,  they  would  next  day  try  by
force  their  fortunes  with  them :  which  answere  received,
they  soone  returned  with  answere,  that  the  Ilanders
thought  better  to  abstayne  from  battell  and  to  permit  them
to  build  a  Castle  on  Nera.  On  the  five  and  twentieth,
sixe  Companies  of  Hollanders  (each  one  hundred  and
fiftie)  went  to  Nera  and  found  the  Inhabitants  of  it  and
Rato,  fled  to  the  other  side  of  the  Hand :  wherefore  they
kept  good  watch.

The  third  of  May,  was  a  great  Earthquake  (not  un-
usuall  in  those  parts)  and  the  fourth  they  began  their
Castle  in  Nera,  or  Nero.  On  the  one  and  twentieth,  the
Ilanders  sent  to  the  Admirall  desiring  him  to  appoint  a
place  where  they  might  meet  and  conferre.  The  next  day
hee  went  with  one  hundred  and  fiftie  Souldiers  to  a  place
neere  Rato,  halfe  an  houres  way  distant  from  the  New
founded  Castle :  and  the  Fiscall  went  to  the  Ilanders  to
bid  them  send  some  with  full  power  to  treate.  They  sent
to  desire  the  Admirall  that  he  would  meete  their  Oran-
kayas  or  State-Governours  in  a  Grove ;  for  some  of  them
feared  his  forces  there  where  hee  was,  lest  the  Souldiers
should  offer  them  violence.
*The  Ban-  The  Admirall  hereupon  with  his  Militarie  Councell,

daneses  still two  Gunners  and  two  Boyes  went  amongst  them,  com-

ojec ir  uess  man(jjnpr  the  Souldiers  to  looke  to  their  Armes  and  expect

basenesse  in  o  1

crying  at  his  h*s returne. But they  within a quarter of  an houre

death,  which  hearing  a  great  cry  *  in  the  Wood,  and  two  Peeces  dis-

they  Mnke  charged,  sent  Vercius  to  see  what  was  the  matter,  with

more  childish  sjxe  Musketiers,  who  had  scarsly  gone  thirtie  paces  into

then  ffian/v  * o  1

and  brave. ^e  Wood,  before  they  were  incountred  by  a  great  com-
[I.  v.  718.] pany  of  Blackes,  at  whom  they  discharging  their  peeces,

224

THE DUTCH NAVIGATIONS  ad.

1609.

the  other  souldiers  came  in  and  rescued  them,  putting  the
Blackes  to  flight,  and  in  the  chase  found  the  Admirall  and  Verhues^  the
his  Company  slaine  whom  they  brought  on  their  shoulders  2g£tf«&|
to  their  new  rounded  Castle. Or the  Hollanders  were  many  ot^ers
that  day  slaine  in  all  forty  two  persons. On  the  three  treacherously
and  twentieth,  they  slew  the  Dutch  Fiscall  with  divers  slaine.
others. On  the  thirtieth,  the  Hollanders  with  two  Com-
panies  spoyled all they could in the Hand. On the
twelfth  of  June,  the  Dutch  killed  fiftie  Blackes  in  a  Junke.
On  the  thirteenth, the  Castle  being  well-nigh  finished,  Nassau  Castle
was  named  Nassau,  of  James  Bitter  the  Captaine  ;  ** e'a'

On  the  three  and  twentieth  of  July,  the  Hollanders  ^on^e  partis
attempted  Slanga,  a  towne  of  the  Blacks,  but  returned  Ind.  Orient.
with  the  losse  of  thirtie,  and  one  hundred  hurt : Bitter
himselfe  having  his  legge  broken,  whereof  he  after  died.
On  the  fourteenth  of  August,  the  Danders  sent  to  treat
of  a  peace,  saying,  that  though  they  had  offended  the  *Marke  the
Hollanders  in  killing  the  Admirall  and  chiefe  men,  yet  usages alledged
they  also  should  remember  what  harmes  they  had  done  to 9  °.ttr  men.
the  Ilanders,  in  subverting  their  Citties  *  and  Temples,  iepuicnres  y
firing  their  Villages  and  Forts,  with  great  slaughters  every Meskits.
where. The  Hollanders  answered,  that  they  would  grant  *Tkerewasno
peace,  on  condition  they  would  sweare  that  they  would  ^roPlan .
thereafter  have  trade  with  none  other  Nation  *  whatsoever  traj  w-lth
it  were,  but  sell  all  their  Nuts  and  Mace  to  the  Hollanders  them  but  the
onely; who  on  the  other  side  promised  to  defend  them  English:  that
from  their  enemies,  and  to  provide  them  of  Rice  and  lt  was  done
necessaries for food, with a reasonable price for their  ^inst\hem
wares. On  these  conditions,  peace  was  concluded,  and  But  see  Keel-
by  oath  on  the  Alcaron  confirmed,  the  fifteenth  of  August,  ings  story  then

How  brittle  this  forced  peace  was,  appeareth  before  by  here->  and  D-
the  Journalls  of  Captaine  Keeling  then  there,  and  David I ^n°nfyhe
Middleton  soone  after,  and  by  the  Dutch  owne  stories,  third  Booke
which  complaine  of  their  trade  with  Captaine  Middleton,  before,  with
their  conspiracie  also  against  the  Hollanders, the  Hoi-  Eloris,  and
landers sacking of Comber, the Blacks killing divers  °^s^fh^ce
Hollanders  in  a  wood,  of  a  kinde  of  Siege  of  their  Castle,  tj^s  'businesse
bloody  fight,  the  Castle  almost  famished,  all  in  the  same  appeares.
v  225  p

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1609.

yeere  that  this  peace  was  concluded.  So  little  force  is
made  of  Force,  when  any  evasion  appeareth,  especially
when  Mercury  is  turned  to  Mars,  and  men  begging  trade
will  force  Forts  upon  free  States  and  Governours.  No
marvaile  if  hereupon  they  found  the  Hollanders  perpetuall
worke,  as  you  have  before  read  in  Floris,  and  at  last  sent
and  obtained  trade  with  the  English,  ratifying  the  same
by  resignation  of  so  many  Hands  to  his  Majestie :  which
Soveraignety  the  Dutch  stories  (by  me  traced,  and  faith-
fully followed  in  the  former  relations)  doe  no  so  much  as
mention  by  them  sought  in  articles  of  treaty,  or  to  them
by  the  Danders  offered.  Hence  the  warres  betwixt  the
English  and  Dutch :  and  the  hatefull  disasters  before
recited :  the  Hollanders  making  a  bridge  of  English  ships
to  get  over  English  bodies  and  blood  to  these  Hands,  even
without  denutiation  of  warre,  fore  heard  of.

Having  now  gathered  this  out  of  the  Dutch  owne
Histories  and  Journalls,  I  presume  not  to  dispute  (for
even  they  themselves  and  these  their  Historians  being
judges)  who  seeth  not  the  state  of  the  case.  But  I  have
thought  good  to  adde  for  further  illustration ;  this  rela-
tion of  their  gaine  by  that  trade,  as  one  of  that  society
hath  lately  published :  after  which  I  will  give  you  the
testimony  of  the  Priest  of  Poolaroone  (a  man  there  of
great  esteeme)  touching  the  Banda  case,  a  Discourse  of
mine  owne  added  for  illustration :  and  that  men  may  not
misconstrue  these  things,  to  the  distaste  of  the  Hollanders
in  generall,  but  rather  of  some  of  their  Maiors  or  Com-
maunders  and  Committees  there  (which  you  may  under-
stand also  in  like  differences  with  the  Portugals)  I  have
added  (to  end  this  businesse)  an  extract  of  a  little  Booke
translated  out  of  Dutch,  which  as  he  speaks  meanely  of
their  gaines  by  this  trade ;  so  hee  imputeth  the  fault  to
the  ill  government  and  Governours.

226

DUTCH  GAINS  IN  THE  EASTERN  TRADE

The  gaines  which  the  Hollanders  had  gotten  by
the  East  India  trade,  taken  out  of  a  Booke
Translated  out  of  the  Dutch,  perswading  to  a
West  Indie  Trade.

NOw  to  let  you  see  how  much  we  should  be  hindered,
if  we  should  leave  off  the  East  Indian  Trade,  &  the
like  hinderance,we  should  consequently  also  faile  of  touch-
ing the  power  and  strength  of  these  Countreyes. In  the
Records  of  the  East  Indian  Company  it  appeareth,  that
from  Anno  1595.  to  Anno  1601.  included,  they  sent  out
fortie  and sixe ships, whereof  there  arrived three  and
fortie againe in these Countreyes richly laden. Ships
that  brought  for  returne,  (all  charges  deducted)  two  hun-
dred and  thirtie  Tunnes  of  gold,  cleare  gaines  for  the
Merchants  of  the  said  Company. Further,  by  the  records
and  Bookes  of  the  said  East  Indian  Company : it  is  also
shewed,  that  for  the  space  of  eleven  yeeres  we  had  still
about  thirtie  ships  continually  in  East  India,  with  five
thousand Sea-faring men, and that they expected to
receive  from  thence  at  least  three  hundred  Tuns  of  gold
in  capitall,  besides  that  which  they  had  in  the  land. Now
I  refer  it  to  your  judgement,  what  the  said  Company  in
the  last  ensuing  tenne  yeeres  untill  this  time  hath  gained  ?
who  within  the  time  of  sixe  moneths,  have  had  a  good
returne  of  fortie  Tuns  of  gold, I doubt  not  but  you
have  heard  of  the  rich  lading  that  the  two  ships  brought
hether,  within  the  space  of  a  moneth,  being  valued  to  be
worth  foure  and  twenty  Tuns  of  gold,  in  such  manner,
that  the  particular  partners  from  Anno  1605.  (every  mans  [i.  v.  719.]
full  adventure  being  delivered  in)  have  gained  upon  every
hundred Gilders, unto this day, in ready money, the
summe  of  two  hundred  Gilders,  and  whensoever  any  man
will  sell  his  stocke  (which  at  this  time  he  hath  in  the
Company)  which  he  may  doe  when  he  will,  he  may  for
every  hundred  have  two  hundred  and  thirtie  Gilders :
whereunto  adde  the  Interest,  which  the  partners  (from  the

227

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

first  money  received)  to  this  present  have  gained,  which
also  is  halfe  a  capitall,  there  resteth  to  the  partners  particu-
larly, upon  every  hundred,  if  they  have  ventured  and
traded  sixteene  yeeres  in  the  East  Indian  Company,  in
cleare  gaines  above  foure  hundred  Gilders.  I  speake  not
this  by  report,  but  as  a  witnesse  thereof,  being  one  of  the
partners,  that  have  received  my  part  of  the  gaine,  and
may  have  the  rest  within  eight  dayes,  if  I  will  sell  my
stocke,  which  I  may  at  all  times  doe.

Secondly,  we  may  by  the  Trade  used  by  the  said  Com-
pany, untill  the  yeere  1614.  included,  declare  and  prove,
that  the  custome  houses  of  the  Countrey,  by  meanes  of
convoyes,  licences,  tolls,  and  customes,  which  the  said
East  Indian  Company  have,  and  pay,  inward  and  out-
ward, have  profited  and  received  above  five  and  thirtie
Tunnes  of  gold,  for  the  which  the  States  of  the  land,  have
at  some  times  (as  neede  required)  ayded  the  said  Company
towards  their  warres  in  India,  with  money  and  ships :
partly  to  ease  the  said  Company  of  some  portion  of  their
charge.  Now,  what  they  have  received  in  the  custome-
houses  of  the  Countrey,  from  Anno  16 14.  to  Anno
1 62 1.  without  doubt  it  is  a  greater  summe,  and
much  more  then  the  former,  noting  what  a  rich
returne  they  have  made  within  these  seven  yeeres.
Now  to  shew  what  furtherance  and  benefit  the  com-
mon people  have  had  and  gotten  by  this  East  Indian
Trade,  we  must  note,  that  a  Fleet  of  twelve  ships,
doth  cost  in  money  and  all  other  things  thereunto  belong-
ing, about  eighteene  Tunnes  of  gold,  to  set  and  send  it
foorth ;  and  commonly  there  is  not  above  five  or  sixe
Tunnes  of  gold  in  ready  money  sent  out  with  it :  all  the
rest  is  bought  and  prepared  here  in  the  land,  to  the  great
benefit  and  welfare  of  the  Countrey,  and  gained  by  the
Inhabitants,  that  sell  and  deliver  the  same.  And  every
ship  that  comes  home  againe,  one  with  another,  payeth
above  a  Tunne  of  gold  for  monthly  wages,  whereby  the
Officers  and  Saylers  also  are  inriched,  which  also  is  gotten
and  spent  by  and  among  the  Inhabitants : whereby  it  is

228

DUTCH  GAINS  IN  THE  EASTERN  TRADE

manifest,  what  the  common  people  have  profited  ;  besides,
the  great  number  of  so  many  thousand  people,  that  by
meanes  of  this  Trade  aforesaid,  are  set  on  worke,  and  well
paid  for  it,  to  the  great  comfort  and  benefit  of  many  poore
people.

Thirdly,  to  shew  what  the  publike  Common-wealth
hath  yet  further  gotten  by  this  Trade,  you  must  under-
stand, that  the  greatest  profit  of  the  land  consisteth  in  the
most  great  hurt  and  damage  which  the  enemie  hath  first
and  last  endured,  and  yet  endureth  in  East  India :  for
since  that  we  were  prohibited  to  Trade  and  Trafficke  in
Spaine,and  other  of  the  Spanish  territories  (which  notwith-
standing against  his  will,  by  other  Nations  we  doe  con-
tinue with  good  profit)  from  Anno  1596.  we  have  over-
come and  spoyled  eleven  of  his  great  huge  Carrackes,  Gal-
lies,  and  other  great  ships,  and  have  made  about  fortie  of
his  ships  unserviceable ;  besides  those,  that  in  the  last  ten
yeeres  ensuing,  we  have  spoyled  and  taken :  whereby  our
enemies  trade  there,  hath  beene  greatly  impaired,  and  ours,
by  Gods  blessing  (who  onely  is  to  be  praysed  therefore)
to  the  admiration  of  the  whole  world,  is  greatly  encreased.
In  such  manner,  that  the  Staple  of  all  manner  of  Spices,
and  other  rich  and  costly  Wares,  which  for  the  space  of
two  hundred  yeeres  together  was  in  Venice,  (whereby  the
said  Towne  encreased  and  became  exceeding  rich)  and
after  that  by  meanes  of  their  Navigation,  was  in  Portugall,
for  the  space  of  one  hundred  yeeres :  and  lastly,  for  five
and  twenty  yeeres  hath  beene  in  Holland  and  Zeland,  and
since  that  by  a  good  agreement  made,  the  last  yeere  was
also  brought  into  England  :  in  such  sort,  that  the  King  He  reckoneth
of  Spaines  Merchants,  were  forced  in  the  yeeres  aforesaid  the  Ktn&  losse
(contrary  to  all  mens  expectations)  to  buy  Nutmegs,  ^  hundred
Cloves  and  Mace  of  us.  tunne  of  gold,

I  will  briefly  declare,  the  present  state  of  the  said  Com- besides  what
pany  in  East  India. You  must  understand,  that  matter tJ*e  PortugaUs
of  Trafficke  is  in  very  good  termes,  which  wee  hope  by
Gods  helpe  and  blessing,  shall  from  yeere  to  yeere  still  be
better  and  better,  now  the  Englishmen  (by  meanes  of  a

229

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

contract  made  with  them  a  yeere  since)  joyne  their  forces
with  ours :  and  we  for  our  parts  have  in  East  India,  that
are  comming  home  and  here  in  the  Countrey,  above  fiftie
ships,  double  furnished  with  lusty  Saylers,  as  also  all  other
things  fit  for  the  War,  and  for  so  long  a  Voyage,  and
about  ten  strong  Forts,  whereof  some  we  have  taken  from
the  Enemie ;  the  rest  have  beene  erected  at  the  great  cost
and  charges  of  the  Company,  and  made  defensible,  which
for  the  securitie  of  our  owne  people  and  goods,  as  also  for
the  defence  of  our  confederates  are  sufficiently  provided.
Lastly,  when  they  of  Bantam  began  to  lay  an  extraordinary
toll  upon  our  Nation,  and  caused  us  to  pay  fiftie  per
cento  custome,  and  yet  we  could  not  for  all  that  obtaine
licence  of  them,  to  build  a  Ware-house  of  stone  and
Morter,  for  the  securitie  of  our  Wares  and  Merchandizes,
for  that  being  of  wood,  it  was  twice  burnt :  we  were  con-
strained to  transport  our  Trade  in  Bantam  to  another  con-
venient place,  which  is  a  firme  Hand,  and  hath  many  good
and  convenient  Havens  in  it :  for  in  my  writings  I  finde,
that  five  yeeres  past,  Mataram  the  great  Emperour  of
Java,  who  is  able  to  bring  three  hundred  thousand  men
into  the  field,  dwelling  about  one  hundred  miles  distant
from  Bantam,  had  also  sought  to  make  some  contract  of
alliance  with  us,  offering  to  deliver  us  Pepper  toll  free,
and  licence  to  build  us  a  Castle  of  Morter  and  Stone,  with
all  things  convenient  in  Japara,  which  was  not  well  liked
off  by  the  King  of  Bantam  and  his  Lieutenant.  At  last
our  Nation  built  a  convenient  Towne  about  Jacatra,
reasonably  well  fortified,  and  called  it  Batavia,  where  there
are  about  one  thousand  houses  of  all  Nations,  there  to
Trafficke  and  deale  in  Merchandize,  which  is  defended
and  governed  by  a  Governour,  Scout,  and  other  Officers,
for  the  maintenance  of  good  governement  and  policy,  and
to  administer  Justice  unto  every  one :  and  to  the  end  that
[I.  v.  720.]  before  all  other  things,  Gods  service  and  honour  might  be
maintained,  whereby  the  blind  Heathens  might  be  brought
out  of  their  great  darkenesse,  and  young  children  taught
the  knowledge  of  the  truth  of  Jesus  Christ  our  Saviour :

230

DUTCH  GAINS  IN  THE  EASTERN  TRADE

the  Company  diligently  and  carefully  tooke  order,  to
erect  a  Church  and  a  Schoole  therein,  to  the  which  end
they  sent  thither  certaine  learned  men,  as  at  the  first  also
they  did,  which  with  great  benefit  and  encrease,  have
taught  the  Heathens  the  Gospell  of  Christ  in  their  owne
language,  as  well  as  unto  our  men  in  their  language :  In
such  manner,  that  a  King  and  a  Prince  of  Amboyna,
(where  the  Country  people  are  much  addicted  unto  devil-
lish  and  heathenish  superstitions)  sent  two  of  their  sonnes
into  these  Countreys,  with  a  Letter  unto  the  Prince  of
Orange,  to  have  them  brought  up  at  Schoole,  and  taught
our  language,  and  Christian  Religion,  that  they  might
at  their  returne  into  East  India,  be  a  meanes  of  planting
the  Church  of  Christ  there  in  India,  and  learne  how  to
defend  their  owne  native  Countrey.

The  Relation  of  the  Priest  of  Poolaroone,  touching
the  beginnings  and  occasions  of  quarrells  be-
twixt the  Dutch  and  Bandaneses,  written  in  the
Malayan  language  with  his  owne  hand,  in  a
very  faire  Arabecke  letter,  and  the  sense  rendred
to  me  in  English  by  M.  Rob.  Haies.

THis  is  the  beginning  of  contentions  betwixt  the  Hol-
landers and  the  Bandaneses.  Two  Hollanders  ranne
from  them  and  turned  Slammes  or  Mahumetans,  and  in
the  Priests  house  at  Nero  were  slaine  by  three  Hollanders,
which  in  revenge  were  slaine  by  the  Natives,  who  stayd
not  there,  but  in  the  fury  slew  other  three  Hollanders.
This  was  ill  done  of  them,  to  adde  a  double  revenge.
Soone  after  the  Generall  of  the  Hollanders,  came  thither
with  thirteene  ships,  and  demanded  satisfaction  for  the
slaughter  of  his  Countrimen.  The  Bandaneses  offered
Diet  (that  is,  the  wonted  satisfaction  there  used  for  man-
slaughter, in  money)  for  those  last  three.  But  the  Gene-
rall answered,  that  he  came  not  now  to  demand  satisfac-
tion, but  to  make  peace  and  league  with  them,  which  was
done. The  next  yeere  came  another  Holland  Generall,

231

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Peter  Williamson  Verhuef,  with  fifteene  ships  into  the
Haven  of  Nero,  and  asked  leave  to  set  up  a  Fort  at
Tanjung  Ratoo,  or  Ponit  Ratoo,  which  the  Bandaneses
granted ;  but  then  he  refused  it,  and  demanded  leave
to  erect  a  Fort  in  another  place  at  Tanjung  Minangis,
which  they  refused.  But  he  comming  before  the
Castle  of  Nero,  with  his  ship  and  Ordnance,  terri-
fied the  inhabitants,  which  fled  away,  and  he  possessed
the  Castle,  and  fortified  there.  Then  did  the  Ban-
daneses subtilly  dissemble  friendship,  and  slew  the
Generall,  and  fifteene  Captaines,  with  others  about  one
hundred  men,  in  all.

A  discourse  of  TTEnce  the  Warres  betwixt  the  Dutch  and  Bandaneses  :
those  warm,  XjL  and  hence  the  Warre  so  portentuous  in  the  midst  of
with  their  Peace  (not  betwixt  the  two  Nations  their  Princes  and
causes,  briefly  States,  which  hold  confederacie  and  amitie,  but)  betwixt
presented  in  a  our  Merchants  and  theirs,  our  Mariners  and  theirs,
short  Sum-  our  Sea-Commanders  and  theirs ;  the  two  Indian
Companies  in  those  parts  (the  guiltie  of  them)  as
it  were  growing  fierce  with  infection  of  those  fiercer
Nations,  changing  their  conditions  more  then  their
complexions,  travelling  from  themselves  in  so  farre  Navi-
gations, putting  off  with  their  warmer  clothes  in  that
hotter  Climate,  their  solid  vertues,  putting  on  Heathenish
qualities  with  their  commerce ;  putting  up  fierie  ferity
with  their  hot  Spices,  putting  out  in  great  part  humanitie,
civilitie,  Christianitie,  in  those  various  Currents  and
diversified  Seas,  Shoalds,  Hands.  And  who  can  but  be
amused  and  amazed  with  wonder  at  such  prodigious  trans-
formations, that  so  neere  Neighbours  in  Region,  (parted
with  a  narrow  Channell)  neerer  yet  in  long  societie  of
Armes,  (sealed  with  so  many  lives  and  deaths  against  one
enemie,)  and  neerer  then  all  names  of  neerenesse,  in  the
neerest,  deerest,  and  sweetest  of  names,  Religion  (both
professing  in  substance  one  Reformation,)  that  this  three-
fold Cord  hath  beene  so  easily  broken ;  their  reformation
in Religion become a deformation of Religion

232

marie.

A DISCOURSE ON THE DUTCH WARS

amongst  unbeleeving  Ethniks  and  misbeleeving
Papists :  their  following  the  same  Armes  by  sea  and
land  became  a  trayning  to  greater  harmes  to  each
other  by  sea  and  land :  that  propinquitie  of  dwelling
should  make  remotenesse  of  Neighbourhood ;  and  what
neither  Portugall  policies,  nor  Infidell  treacheries  could
doe,  themselves  might  doe,  to  their  owne  undoing  with
their  owne  hands ;  and  the  hearts  of  both  Nations  at  home
might  bee  in  danger  of  dis-joyning,  by  the  dis-joynted
parts  and  Factions  abroad ;  the  sparkes  of  that  fire  of  See  Fitz-her-
Hell  seeming  to  breake  out  at  Goun  Apee  with  that  bertsReIatt°n-
terrible  Earthquake  before  mentioned,  unto  a  more  terrible
heart-quake,  there  to  set  that  world  on  fire,  and  here
to  endanger  this.  Sphaeres  have  beene  hereby  turned  to
Speares ;  Wares  (with  addition  of  a  canine  letter)  to
Warres ;  Words  (with  a  new  hissing  sound  from  that  old
Serpent)  into  Swords ;  Ships  charge  of  so  many  Tunnes
in  freight  to  discharge  of  so  many  Gunnes  in  fight ;  Mer-
chants to  Martialists,  exchanging  their  gayn-good  (or
gayn-god)  Mercury,  for  those  payn-gods  or  devils  Mars
and  Mors,  or  that  wonted  function  which  Poeticall
Divinitie  ascribed  to  Mercury,  of  patronising  Merchan-
dise, for  that  other  of  conducting  Soules  to  Hell.  Her-
cules hath  brought  up  Cerberus  that  Hell-monster,  and
set  him  unchained  on  the  Indian  shoares,  with  the  three
Infernall  Furies  crowning  his  triple  head ;  and  hence  have
we  had  this  Hell  upon  Earth.  Such  is  Warre,  and  especi-
ally when  the  sonnes  of  Peace  make  Warres,  when  un-
christian Christians  warre  together :  when  the  sonnes  of  Gen.  6.
God  see  these  faire  daughters  of  men  (the  riches  of
Infidels)  and  take  them  Wives  where  they  lust  (will  not  [I.  v.  721.]
Woo  with  trafficke,  but  ravish  by  force,  nor  make  their  Gen-  *>•
Voyage  but  a  Conquest)  is  it  any  marvell  if  the  issue
proove  Giants,  and  the  Earth  be  filled  with  violence?
(Even  the  Poets  also  fabled  their  Giants  to  be  Neptunes
Sonnes.)  Hence  is  Commerce  Divine  and  humane  em-
payred,  Peace  blowne  up,  Charitie  blowne  out,  Rights  of
neighbourhood,  and  Rites  of  hospitalitie  exiled ; Mer-

233

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

chandise  in  unlawfull  copulation  with  Mars  procreating,
I  know  not  how,  many  Bastards;  such  are  Usurpations,
Oppressions,  Insultations,  Jealousies,  Treacheries,  Inva-
sions, Lies,  Force,  Fraud ;  and  the  rest  of  that  restlesse
blacke  Gard,  hatefull  to  God  and  man :  Which  here  I
have  historically  expressed,  not  delighting  in  Tragedies,
but  (forsan  &  hcec  olim  meminisse  juvabit)  it  will  be
delightfull  to  some  to  have  escaped  such  disasters  as  have
swallowed  so  many  others,  and  profitable  to  posteritie,  to
prevent  like  mischiefes  in  the  like  beginnings.

S&  Scot  sup.  The  beginning  of  this  quarrell  was  first  a  strangenesse  ;

pag.  180,  is  whereof  Syverson  a  Dutch  Captaine  is  charged  to  be  the
yy'  author,  whose  uncivill  conditions  infected  the  rest,  and

made  them  withdraw  their  familiaritie  with  our  Nation,
which  before  they  had  kindly  used.  When  this  Sunne  of
Charitie,  shining  in  loving  Society,  was  set  in  this  cloud
of  strangenesse,  stormie  weather  followed,  and  darknesse,

Psal.  104. 20.  and  it  was  night,  wherein  all  the  beasts  of  the  Forrest
crept  forth,  the  young  Lions  roared  after  their  prey  ;  the

Eph.  6.  12. ghastly  ghosts  walked  abroad  in  the  darke,  and  the  Rulers

1.  Th.  5.5.  Gf  j-hg  darknesse  of  this  world  amongst  the  children  of
Night  and  of  darknesse  domineered  at  pleasure.  This
Strangenesse,  as  the  darknesse  of  Hell,  opened  a  passage
to  those  Hellish  fires  following,  and  was  the  Wombe  of
those  Hell-bred  Monsters  (as  privation  is  a  preparation
to  habite,  and  corruption  to  generation)  which  were  indeed
many,  but  their  three  Captaines  were  Drunkennesse,
Covetousnesse,  and  Pride  (this  that  threefold  Head  of
Cerberus,  and  triple  Crowne  of  Furies,  before  mentioned.)
In  the  first,  Bacchus  made  a  new  expedition  into  the  Indies,
with  a  band  of  Racke,  Rackapee,  and  other  hot  drinkes,
displaying  the  Colours  of  the  Flesh,  oppugning  the  Spirit

Scott  ubi  sup. of  God,  and  expugning  the  Reason  of  Man  : whence  so

Wfc  many Frayes, Braules, and sometimes Blowes, and

Wounds ;  this  Wild-fire  or  Ignis  Graecus  burning  most
in  moisture  whiles  men  played  the  Greekes.  After  this
Vant-gard  of  Bacchus  and  the  Flesh,  followed  the  Maine
battell  lead  by  the  World,  arranged  under  the  Colours

234

A DISCOURSE ON THE DUTCH WARS

indeed  of  Covetousnesse,  which  finding  some  sweets  of
gayne,with  an  evill  eye  grudged  at  any  partners  ;  cohibited
them  by  undermyning  wiles,  lies,  pretences ;  prohibited
by  open  Proclamations ;  inhibited  by  confiscations
and  surprizals,  attended  with  Chains,  Fetters,  Prisons,
Tortures,  Famine,  and  manifold  Deaths.  God  helpe  the  Pbtrima
man  that  comes  under  the  power  of  Covetousnesse !  an  mrtu  ima&m
over-drie,  ever-thirstie  fire  of  Hell,  kindled  from  thence,
and  burning  thither,  still  flaming  on  the  Altar  and  before
the  Idol  of  the  golden  Calfe,  and  kindling  there  (that  is  Tie  Gordion
in  the  covetous  mans  heart)  such  zeale  of  that  devotion,  noL
that  he  knowes  not,  hates,  persecutes,  whatsoever  stands
in  his  way ;  and  if  he  be  able,  answeres  all  objections  with
Jus  in  armis,  like  another  Alexander,  chopping  that  knot
in  sunder  by  force,  which  neither  wit,  learning,  nor  Reli-
gion could  untye.  After  these  battalions  of  the  Flesh
and  the  World,  the  Devill  followes  in  the  Rere,  (though
as  Generall  of  the  Field,  he  generally  infuseth  himselfe,
totamque  infusa  per  artus  Mens  agitat  molem  &  magno
se  corpore  miscet)  His  Standard  is  advanced  by  Pride,
which  having  cast  Angels  out  of  Heaven,  and  Man  out
of  Paradise,  would  dispossesse  Mankind  of  Humanitie,
Christians  of  Societie,  the  just  Merchant  of  his  Trade,  and
the  World  of  Justice.  Hence  inordinate  confusions,  and
the  confused  confounding  orders  of  contentions,  (onely  Pro.  13.  10.
by  pride  doe  men  make  contention)  combustions,  sup-
plantings,  neglects,  contempts,  scornes,  indignations,
vexations,  persecutions,  exultations,  insultations,  insolen-
cies,  cruelties,  hells.  He  that  puts  off  himselfe  in  drunken-
nesse,  and  puts  on  the  world  in  covetousnesse,  shall  lose
both,  and  find  the  Devill,  readily  blowing  these  sparkes
of  Hell  with  the  Bellowes  of  Pride  (the  divisions  of  jud.  5.  15.
Ruben  are  great  thoughts  of  heart)  till  both  he  and  they
are  encompassed  with  the  unquenchable  flames  of  Hell.
Drunkennesse  began  with  Bantam  frayes,  (search  the
Authors  in  the  former  storie,)  Covetousnesse  proceeded
with  prohibition  of  profitable  Trade,  wheresoever  it  could
hinder ; and  with  the  helpe  of  Pride,  raped  Soveraigntie,

235

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

and  reaped  an  enforced  Jurisdiction)  violently  exercising

the  same  against  all  gain-sayers.
The  parcels  This,  as  in  other  places,  so  principally  in  Banda. There

summed,  and ^  g  Qf  thig  TraRedie and  out  Qf  that  burning  hill

a  true  account  ^  <•"  •

«w»  ef/fe this burning hell of  Diabolicall fires first (as is said)

Banda  case seemed  to  breake  forth  ; the  first  originall  beginning  with

and  cause  of Apostacie  (as  you  have  heard)  in  some  Dutch  Fugitives,

the  warresy which  perhaps  to  escape  deserved  punishment,  denied  that
ouvs  and  %  *

theirs.  which  they  never  had,  Faith. Secondly,  others  in  unjust

Justice  punishing  the  same  with  murther  (expressing
Piety  with  oppressing  Impiety,  blind  Zeale  being  a  hell
fire  indeed,  a  burning  fire  without  any  shining  light.)
Thirdly,  the  Bandaneses  in  their  supposed  sanctitie  of
Religion  profaned,  and  Sanctuarie  of  their  Priests  house
violated,  see  no  meane  in  revenge,  and  repent  at  leisure
what  was  done  in  hasty  furie.  Fourthly,  this  being  some-
what composed,  and  peace  made  (when  Revenge  is  asleepe)
Covetousnesse  awakes,  and  in  cold  bloud,  by  force  (which
intreatie  could  not  procure)  erects  a  Fort  (that  is,  a
Prison  to  the  Libertie,  a  Store-house  for  the  Wealth,  and
a  Gibbet  for  the  neckes  of  the  Inhabitants,)  that  I  omit
the  supposed  sacriledge  and  wrongs  to  their  Meskits  and
Sepulchres.  In  the  fift  place,  they  unable  to  revenge  by
force,  borrow  helpe  of  treacherous  fraud  (dolus  an  virtus
quis  in  hoste  requirit?)  and  kill  Verhuef  and  the  Dutch.
This  being  pursued  by  Warres,  is  sodered  a  little  while  by
Peace,  but  (for  ought  is  extant)  never  kept  on  either  side,
and  the  Dutch  continued  Masters  in  their  Holds,  the
Natives  elsewhere.  Which  yet  proving  burthensome  to
them  (as  the  Dutch  know,  other  Nations  have  done)  they
sought  protection  of  the  English,  and  upon  Composition

[I.  v.  722.]  surrendred  themselves  to  his  Majestic  The  English
name  before  distasted,  was  now  detested  and  contemned
of  the  Dutch,  (who  before  had  growne  strange,  and  with
whom  brails  and  factions  had  not  beene  strange,  towards
ours,  with  hindrance  of  Trade  and  the  like)  they  seize
our  ships,  goods,  men,  and  use  them  as  you  have  heard.
After  which  the  English  pretend  by  just  force  to  recover

236

A DISCOURSE ON THE DUTCH WARS

what  by  unjust  force  they  had  lost,  and  Sir  Thomas  Dale

long  after,*  with  Captaine  Pring  and  others  sought  by  *Tfoy  tooke

offence  to  defend  : wherein  their  prowesse  at  first  sue-  ^  defence

ceeded,  but  their  misfortunes  after  exceeded,  in  the  casuall  1616.  the

burning  of  the  Blacke  Lion,  and  in  the  death  soone  after  Salomon  and

of  a  more  heroike  Lion,  Sir  Thomas  Dale  (whose  valour  Attendance  in

having:  shined  in  the  Westerne,  was  set  in  the  Easterne *f* \  l ,:
o  {  the  speedwell,

India ; so  rarre  as  Death  can  be  a  solstice  to  Honour, yf  where  as
whose  losse  the  losse  of  the  Sunne,  at  Engano  seemed  to  Sir  Thomas
presage)  after  which  followed  the  surprizall  of  foure  ships  bales  first
at  Tecoo,  two  at  Patania,  another  in  the  Straits. Egregiam  ^ anti
vero  laudem !  may  some  say,  for  Men  of  Warre  so  pre-  Lion  \f  theirs
pared  to  take  their  opportunities  of  dispersed,  busied,  was  in  Decern.
unprovided  Merchants. I  would  I  could  not  adde,  spolia J6i8.
ampla  refertis,  except  in  another  sense. But  the  Com-
panies of  both  Nations,  and  their  wiser  Governours  at
home  came  to  a  composition,  and  agreed  on  Articles  of J. he. ^  ne
Peace,  which  was  on  both  sides  there  (alreadie  wearied)  5/r  Thomas
received  with  joy,  and  published  with  approbation. All  Dales  Fleet
this  notwithstanding,  in  the  midst  of  this  calme  and  faire  lost,pag.6^.
weather,  there  arose  a  new  storme  at  Banda,  which  as  a  a*  *  "e
beautifull  and  rich  Bride  was  envied  to  English  Armes, n^a>
and  seemeth  by  the  cryes  on  both  sides,  to  have  beene
lately  ravished  from  her  new  Husband,  unwarned,  un-
armed, I  know  not  whither  by  greater  force  or  fraud ; or
whither  might  cause  greater  indignation,  the  seizing  on
the  English  fellowes  and  friends  the  Bandaneses,  with
their  owne  goods  and  bodies  also,  casting  downe  their
Colours  and  Ordnance,  and  abusing  their  persons,  in  one
place ; or  the  letting  stand  in  another,  their  Fort,  as  a
Cage  to  be  showne  in  derision,  when  the  Bird  was  fled  or
stolne  away. This now  remaynes, that violent things
remayne  not  and  are  not  usually  permanent ; and  (we
doubt  not)  the  bright  beames  of  his  Majesties  prudence
and  justice,  with  the  mature  wisedome  of  Prince  Maurice
his  Excellencie,  and  the  Illustrious  Lords  Governours  of
the  united  Provinces,  shining  on  those  troubled  Indian
waters,  will  like  the  Great  God  out  of  darknesse  bring

237

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

light,  and  chastise  the  wrong-doers ;  nor  will  permit  per-
sonall  quarrels  to  become  Nationall,  or  Indian  brails  of
Merchants  to  become  Europaean  broyles  for  Souldiers,
but  cause  the  remotest  Members  to  communicate  in  the
Heads  amitie  and  soundnesse.  This  they  will  doe,  this
they  doe ;  how  soone  ?  and  it  is  done,  and  Amantium
irae  amoris  redintegratio.  Nulla  salus  bello,  pacem  te
poscimus  omnes. Amen.

THat  it  may  appeare  that  we  doe  not  impute  the  former
wrongs  to  the  Holland  Nation  in  generall,  nor  seeke
to  make  a  State-quarrell  with  the  States,  Lords,  Gover-
nours,  and  the  estate  of  that  Republike ;  but  attribute
the  same  to  private  spirits  and  mis-demeanure  of  some  in
authoritie  and  place  of  command  in  the  Indies}  I  have
added  a  piece  of  a  Booke  translated  out  of  the  Dutch.

*The  former QO  *  as  the  Adventurers  have  gained  nothing  neere  the

A^Tf  °S\fA O  simple  interest  of  sixe  and  a  quarter  per  cent,  per  ann.

proveth  this  I  anc^  ordinary  assurance. By  this  may  be  gathered  what

have  omitted, profits  the  Adventurers  have  injoyed,  and  how  thankefull

as  lesse  to  our they  ought  to  be  to  the  Maiors.

purpose.  Now  as  concerning  the  government,  it  is  a  thing  cer-

taine,  that  be  it  good  or  bad,  the  profits  arise  accordingly,
for  we  daily  see  and  find  that  by  negligence  and  ill  govern-
ment, a  great  estate  is  soone  brought  to  nought :  and  on
the  contrary  through  a  good  diligent  and  provident
governing,  great  gaines  arise  out  of  a  small  stocke  or
meanes :  whereas  during  all  this  Patent,  so  little  profit
ariseth,  though  great  gaine  is  ordinarily  to  be  made  in  the
East  Indies,  so  as  hereby  may  well  be  concluded  that  the
same  must  be  so,  by  reason  of  the  directing  or  governing
the  same.

Ill  govern-  Now  as  concerning  the  well  governing:  First  of  all,  is

mentofthe required  a  good  understanding  and  experience,  which  I
Dutch  Indian *  , & ir i .1 1 °  1 • •  c ^

Commanders. Perswade  my  selre hath  beene  and  is  in many  or the

Maiors  without  all  doubt,  but  that  is  not  enough,  except
there  be  care  &  diligence  withall. But  what  care  and  dili-

238

A DUTCH OPINION

gence  can  be  expected  from  them,  who  are  so  continually
imployed  in  their  publike  Office  and  functions,  besides
their  particular  affaires,  that  they  can  scarce  once  or  twice
in  a  weeke,  spend  a  few  houres  in  this  weightie  businesse,
which  indeed  hath  need  of  a  constant  and  continuing  sale
according  as  the  greatnesse  and  importancie  thereof  re-
quireth? &c. Further,  is  required  in  every  Maior  that
he  by  all  meanes  seeke  to  procure  the  common  good  of
that  which  is  committed  to  his  charge,  and  not  his  par-  Seeking  their
ticular: but  how  or  wherein  have  they  hitherto  sought  ^^^^
the  common  good  of  the  Companie,  so  long  as  they  take
a  libertie  to  sell  the  Companies  goods  unto  themselves,
in  which  sale  they  no  doubt  seeke  their  owne  particular
profit,  and  not  the  Companies. At  sometimes  one  Maior
buying  the  Companies  goods  of  another  Maior ; and  at
another  time  it  happeneth  quite  contrarie,  viz. that  he
which  was  at  first  the  buyer,  is  now  become  the  seller  to
him  that  formerly  was  the  seller  himselfe  : one  may  well
conjecture  how  these  things  are  thus  carried,  by  such,  who
it  may  be  are  not  so  honest  as  they  should  be ;  what  hind-
rance hereby  befalleth  the  Adventurers,  and  what  profits
to the Maiors, one may  well  conjecture by the small
profits  which  the  Adventurers  have  made,  and  the  great
wealth  which  the  Maiors  have  attained  unto. When  as
the  Maiors  have  bought  great  quantitie  of  the  Companies
goods  for  themselves,  is  to  be  imagined  what  kind  of
Advise  they  will  send  to  the  Indies  concerning  such  goods  [I.  v.  723.]
as  themselves  have  bought,  &  whether  their  advise  shal
not  tend  to  their  particular  profits,  &c. For  might  one
peruse  their  Bookes,  no  doubt  thereby  would  be  found,
that  many  amongst  them  have  little  or  no  adventure  at The  Mators
all  with  the  Company,  and  it  would  plainely  appeare,  that ^dventu^e
their  provision  or  factory  concernes  them  neerer  then  the  with  the  Com-
profit  of  the  stocke  they  have  there  to  respect,  and  there-  panie.
fore  doe  readily  resolve  to  the  setting  foorth  of  great
shipping  or  fleetes,  when  as  fewer  and  smaller  would  have
beene  sufficient  for  Conquest,  and  fewer  for  trade  from
Port  to  Port :  whereof  that  fleete  which  went  through  the

239

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Preferring
their  friends  to
Government.

Committies
sent  by  their
procurement.

Great  ships.

Their  employ-
ment.

straight  of  Magellane  was  one,  which  fleet  alone  did
charge  the  Company  with  more  then  a  Capitall.  It  is
likewise  the  practise  of  these  kind  of  Maiors,  (knowing
the  choice  to  be  in  their  owne  powers)  to  prefer  their
friends  and  kindred  to  the  government,  &  excluding  those
that  are  great  Adventurers,  take  ofttimes  such  as  are  none,
but  such  as  when  they  stand  in  nomination  to  be,  doe
then  begin  to  buy  conditionally  so  they  are  chosen,  then
their  buying  to  stand  :  but  if  not,  then  the  bargaine  to  be
voyd  :  what  good  service  the  Company  is  to  expect  by
such  nimbling  may  well  be  conjectured.  Besides,  they
ofttimes  preferre  their  friends,  to  be  sent  as  Committees
and  other  Officers  to  the  Indies,  although  very  unfit
thereto,  whereas  it  highly  concerneth  the  Company,  to
have  both  honest  and  fit  persons  there,  for  hardly  can  it
be  imagined  the  great  wrong  which  the  Company  have
sustained,  thorow  the  having  so  basely  vild,  and  proudly
insolent  Committees  in  the  Indies.  Further,  what  losse
the  Company  is  put  unto,  by  the  building  of  so  great  and
costly  ships  (each  Chamber  striving  which  shall  make  the
greatest  ship,  and  all  for  great  stowage,  to  cause  the  greater
returne  to  be  brought  into  their  chamber,  thereby  to  pro-
cure to  themselves  the  greater  factory  or  provision)  can-
not well  be  imagined :  for  as  well  might  it  be  done  with
lesser,  and  ships  not  so  costly,  and  so  the  more  stocke  to  be
imployed  in  Trade,  or  otherwise  to  free  themselves  of  their
interest  money  which  great  ships,  are  partly  used  to  carry
wood  and  stone  in  the  Indies,  for  the  building  of  the  Fort
Jacatra,  some  being  worne  and  spent  there,  so  as  indeed
one  might  have  done  as  well  betweene  this  and  the  Indies,
with  halfe  as  many  great  ships.  Also  many  summes  of
gold  have  beene  spent  in  the  making  of  divers  costly
Forts  &  Castles  in  the  Indies,  the  wals  being  all  of  stone,
being  King-like  works,  whereas  to  have  made  them  of
Earth,  as  they  are  here  in  our  Countrey  the  Nether-
lands, had  been  as  usefull  for  keeping  the  Trade  from
other  Committies  of  forraine  Lands  :  so  had  this  needlesse
charge  beene  employed  in  Trade,  might  have  advanced

240

A DUTCH OPINION

A.D.
l620.

the  Companie  more  then  a  Capitall. Also  the  Companie

hath  freely  indured  some  losse,  by  reason  of  the  com-  Male-contents

plaint  of  those  persons,  who  having  done  the  Companie  see.  tng*01~i  ,
r 1  •  111-1-1  & n  1 r 1  raine  employ-

good  service,  could  obtaine  little  or  no  balary  tor  the  same.  menL

Whereby  is  befallen  that  some  have  put  themselves  into

the  service  of  other  Companies  of  forraine  Lands,  &c.

Chap. XVI.

Extracts  of  a  Journall  of  a  Voyage  to  Surat  and  to
Jasques  in  the  Persian  Gulfe,  set  forth  by  the
East  India  Societie  of  Merchants :  wherein
were  imployed  foure  new  ships ;  the  London,
of  eight  hundred  Tunnes,  and  therein  Andrew
Shilling  Chiefe  Commander  of  the  whole  Fleet ;
William  Baffin  Master ;  the  Hart,  of  five  hun-
dred Tunnes,  Richard  Blithe  Master  ;  he
Roe  Bucke,  of  three  hundred,  Richard  Swan
Master ;  the  Eagle,  of  two  hundred  and
eightie,  Christopher  Browne  Master.  Written
by  Richard  Swan.

He  sixe  and  twentieth  of  Februarie,  161 9.
all  our  Fleet  set  saile  from  Tilbury  Hope.
The twentieth of Aprill, 1620. about
eight  degrees  North  latitude,  we  begin  to
have a taste of the Turnados. From
the  Downes  hither  we  might  alwayes  have
carried  a  top  gallant  saile. The  ninth  of
May,  we  crost  the  ^Equator. We  would  have  crossed  it
more  Easterly,  but  the  Current  and  Winds  would  not
permit. The  tenth  of  June,  wee  saw  great  store  of  Fowle.
And  on  the  three  and  twentieth,  wee  had  sight  of  Soldania
Road, and anchored there the next day. Here wee  Nic.  van
found  the  Lion  homeward  bound,  and  nine  Dutch  ships  ffc^9  an
bound  for  Bantam,  their  Commander  Nicholas  van  Bac-  Ge^  0ftj*e  '
cum  a  Gentleman,  which  by  report  lived  seven  yeeres  in  Dutch.
v  241  Q

A.D.
l620.

King  James
his  Title  to
Soldania  pub-
lished.

Note  for  such
as  goe  into
Soldania  Road.

[I.  v.  724.]

Note  for
troublesome
Sea  at  the
Cape.

Hand  Rasif

Batecala.

Goa.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Oxford.  After  kind  Sea-salutes,  the  next  morning  the
Lion  and  the  Dutch  departed,  each  their  way ;  and  the
same  evening  arrived  the  Schidam  of  Delph  outward
bound,  which  being  suspected,  by  both  Admiralls,  the
Master  was  sent  for,  his  Commission  examined,  and  good
satisfaction  given.  The  third  of  July  was  made  a  solemne
publication  of  his  Majesties  Title  to  Soldania :  and  on  the
seventh  King  James  his  Mount  erected.  The  three  and
twentieth,  I  had  a  Cable  of  eleven  inches  spoiled  with
other  hurt,  and  the  Hart  had  a  great  deliverance,  two  of
her  best  Anchors  breaking  at  once :  and  the  Eagle  broke
two  Cables. The  five  and  twentieth,  we  set  saile.

Note,  that  if  at  any  time  you  have  occasion  to  ride
under  Pengwin  Hand,  you  bring  the  Northerne  end
thereof  West  by  South,  or  within  halfe  a  Point  on  either
side  thereof :  and  anchor  about  a  mile  from  the  neerest
part  of  the  Hand,  in  ten,  eleven  or  twelve  fathoms,  white
and  gray  sand.  Having  a  little  passed  the  Cape  of  Good
Hope,  being  much  Wind  at  North-west  North  North-
west and  North,  the  Sea  was  exceedingly  troubled,  and
went  so  upon  heapes  by  the  meeting  of  the  North-west
and  South-east  Ocean,  that  it  laboured  our  ships  to  the
triall  of  all  their  joynts.

From  the  eight  and  twentieth  of  September,  to  the  first
of  October,  we  were  hindred  eleven  or  twelve  minutes
every  day  by  a  Current  to  the  South  latitude,  from  one  to
five  degrees  thirtie  two  minutes  North.  The  seventh  of
October,  latitude  nine  degrees  and  fiftie  minutes  North.
These  foure  and  twentie  houres,  I  have  come  over  the
Hand  Rasif  (one  of  the  Mamales)  as  it  is  placed  in  my
Card.  Note,  that  every  day  since  we  were  in  sixe  degrees
North  latitude,  we  have  seene  land  Fowles,  as  Castrells,
Quailes,  Martins,  Butter-flyes,  but  not  any  Sea  Fowle.
The  nineteenth,  we  were  due  West  from  Batecala  sixe
leagues  off,  depth  two  and  twentie  fathoms  ozie  sand.
The  twentie  two,  at  sixe  in  the  morning,  wee  were  thwart
of  Goa  foure  leagues  off,  the  latitude  is  fifteene  degrees
and  thirtie  minutes,  rather  lesse  then  more. The  sixe

242

ANDREW  SHILLING

A.D.
l620.

Dabul.

and  twentieth,  we  put  into  Dabul  Road  in  seventeene  de-
grees and  thirtie  foure  minutes,  and  stayed  till  the  second
of  November,  our  men  refreshed  and  recovered,  and  the
two  ships  for  Persia  well  provided.  The  sixt,  the  Hart
and  Eagle,  eight  leagues  from  the  high  Land  of  Saint
Johns,  tooke  their  leave  of  us.  The  seventh,  latitude
twentie  degrees  sixteene  minutes.  Now  are  we  truly
West  from  Damon  sixe  leagues  off,  depth  eighteene  Damon.
fathoms.  The  ninth  in  the  morning,  we  anchored  in  the
outter  road  of  Swally,  where  we  found  the  Wappen  van
Zeland,  a  ship  of  one  thousand  Tunnes.  At  our  com-
ming  shee  tooke  in  her  flagge  and  saluted  the  London
with  three  peeces,  and  the  Roe  Bucke  with  two.  I  was
sent  on  shore  and  found  Master  Thomas  Kerridge  Presi-
dent, Master  James  and  Master  Hopkinson,  whom  I
brought  aboard.  The  next  day,  a  consultation  was
holden  for  our  speedie  dispatch  after  the  Hart  and  Eagle ;
foure  Portugall  Gallions  attending  at  Ormus  or  Jasques
Road  for  their  surprisall.  The  nineteenth,  after  businesse
dispatched,  we  set  saile  towards  Jasques.  The  one  and
twentieth  we  descried  a  ship,  which  yeelded  without  resist-
ance ;  Her  name,  Nostra  Sennora  de  Morces,  neere  two
hundred  Tunne,  come  from  Muscatte,  bound  for  Chaul,
in  her  two  and  fortie  Arabian  Horses,  being  her  principall
lading  (as  built  for  that  purpose)  the  residue  Dates  and
Raisins :  the  Captaines  name  Francisco  Mirando.

The  fift  of  December,  latitude  foure  and  twentie  de-  [I.  v.  725.]
grees  fiftie  five  minutes,  we  met  the  Hart  and  Eagle  com-
ming  from  Jasques  towards  Surat,  not  being  sufficient  to
encounter  the  Portugall  forces  there  attending,  to  ruine
our  Masters  Persian  Trade.  Thus  happily  rejoyned  wee
made  haste  towards  Jasques  to  accomplish  our  designes.
The  eight,  at  their  owne  earnest  sollicitation,  we  set  all  the
Portugalls  and  Moores  on  land,  except  some  Sea-men
Moores  whom  we  detayned  for  our  service,  and  the  Pilot
wrhich  misdoubting  hard  measure,  intreated  to  stay.  The
tenth,  the  Lords  Supper  was  administred  aboard  the  Lon-
don. The  twelfth,  the  men  who  voluntarily  undertooke  to

243

A  Portugall
prize.

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1620.

burne  the  Prize  aboard  the  Portugalls  Admirall,  were  put
aboard  her  in  the  night.  The  thirteenth  and  fourteenth,
the  wind  against  us.  The  fifteenth,  we  had  sight  of  the
East  Point  of  Land  in  Jasques  Road,  which  hath  upon  it
a  Tombe  or  an  old  square  flat  House,  bearing  West  North-
west, by  Compasse  twelve  miles  off7.  So  then  from  Diu
Head  to  this  Point,  I  make  the  longitude  by  the  plaine
ordinarie  Sea  Chart,  nine  degrees  fiftie  five  minutes  and
three  fifth  parts,  and  by  Mercators  projection,  ten  degrees
and  one  and  fiftie  minutes.  From  this  place  we  might  dis-
cerne  the  Portugall  men  of  Warre  set  out  from  Lisbone  ;
whose  Fleet  consisted  of  two  Portugall  Gallions  one  bigger
then  the  London  ;  and  two  Flemmish  ships,  one  as  bigge
as  the  Hart ;  the  other  lesse  then  the  Eagle  :  Their  Gene-
rall  Ruy  Frere  de  Andrado,  John  Boralio  Vice-admirall,
the  Flemmings  were  commanded  by  Antonio  Musquet
and  Baltazar  de  Chaves.

The  sixteenth  in  the  morning,  our  Admirall  with  the
Masters  of  his  Fleet  went  aboard  the  Prize,  and  carried
two  Barrells  of  powder,  some  Tarre,  and  other  combustible
provisions,  intending  with  her  to  lay  the  Portugall  Ad-
mirall thwart  the  halse  to  burne  together.  Thus  fitted,
we  bore  up  with  the  men  of  Warre,  but  it  fell  calme,  and
the  Current  set  us  so  neere  them  that  they  reached  us
with  their  Ordnance.  All  night  we  kept  under  saile.
And  in  the  seventeenth,  being  by  reason  of  the  Land-
turne  to  leeward  of  them  ;  they  weighed  and  made  towards
our  Fleet,  which  attended  their  comming,  albeit  they  had
and  carefully  kept  the  benefit  of  the  wind.  About  nine
The  fight,  the  fight  began,  which  continued  nine  houres  without
intermission.  In  the  afternoone  (a  fine  gentle  Westerly
Sea-wind  blowing,  and  we  to  windward  of  them)  their
Admirall,  whether  of  necessitie  to  repaire  some  defect
about  his  Rudder,  or  of  policy  for  some  conceited  strata-
gem, anchored ;  and  to  the  Eastward  of  him,  his  Vice-
Admirall  and  the  greater  Flemming,  the  lesser  to  leeward
of  all  stopping  his  leakes.  Now  were  wee  in  great  hope
of  our  fire  designe,  which  yet  being  too  soone  fired  and

244

ANDREW SHILLING  a.d.

1620.

forsaken  of  those  which  had  it  in  charge,  prooved  frus-
trate, driving  cleere  of  all  their  ships  to  their  rejoycing,
our  disgrace  and  our  Imployers  losse.  We  seeing  them
abide  at  anchor,  and  keeping  the  wind  of  them,  turning  to
and  againe  close  ahead  of  them  raked  them,  especially
their  Admirall,  thorow  and  thorow,  fore  and  after,  with
all  our  broad  sides,  receiving  from  them  only  their  Praw
and  Bow  Peeces.  Out  of  whom  as  I  passed  to  the  North,
two  unfortunate  shots  cut  a-sunder  the  Robuckes  weather-
leech  ropes  of  her  foresaile  and  fore  top-saile  in  the
middle  depth  of  both  sailes,  which  renting  we  could  not
make  her  stay,  but  were  inforced  for  reparation  of  our
sailes  to  beare  up  to  leeward  betwixt  them  &  the  shoare.
In  which  time  their  three  greatest  ships  played  upon  us
with  their  whole  broad  sides,  yet,  God  be  praysed,  with
lesse  hurt  then  I  could  have  imagined.  Thus  having  com-
passed the  three  last  mentioned  ships,  and  luffing  to
re-joyne  with  our  owne  Fleet  (which  all  this  while  holding
the  benefit  of  the  wind  played  upon  the  Portugals  with
their  great  Ordnance,  as  fast  as  with  so  many  Muskets)  I
had  gotten  to  wind- ward  of  the  smaller  Flemming :  who
standing  off  as  I  did,  untill  he  had  brought  the  fired  ship
directly  betweene  him  and  me,  then  turned  taile  and
steered  with  all  the  sailes  he  could  make  right  afore  the
wind,  alongst  the  shoare  to  the  Eastward :  whom  to
rescue,  the  other  three  set  saile,  now  so  gentle,  that  the
Hart  passing  along  their  broad  sides  received  from  some
of  them  few,  from  others  none,  either  great  or  small  shot.
But  our  Fleet  at  present  reunited,  desisted  their  further
chase,  the  darknesse  of  the  night,  and  the  generall  weari-
nesse,  challenging  a  surcease  from  so  toylsome  a  worke  :
and  anchored  after  midnight  in  their  (before)  usuall
Road.

In  this  fight  the  London  and  Hart  received  very  little
hurt  in  their  huls  and  tackling ;  lesse  or  none  amongst
their  men.  The  Eagles  mayne  Mast  was  shot  in  five
places,  whereof  foure  quite  thorow  :  and  one  John  Banckes
lost  his  right  arme. I  in  the  Robucke,  had  one  Edward

245

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1620.

Browne  slaine  with  a  great  shot  thorow  his  head ;  a  piece
of  whose  skull  together  with  some  splinters  of  the  same
shot,  wounded  Master  Thomas  Waller  one  of  my  Mates
in  the  fore-head  to  the  losse  of  his  left  eye :  also  John
Phenix  and  Robert  Hopworth  lost  the  use  of  their  right
hands.  Never  (God  be  praysed)  did  I  heare  of  so  little
hurt  in  so  long  a  fight,  as  we  had  on  our  parts.  I  cannot
truly  particularise  their  hurts,  by  report  of  our  Merchants,
John  Boralio  their  Vice-Admirall  and  another  Captaine
were  slaine ;  with  thirtie  or  forty  Portugals  out  of  their
Admirall  (for  Moores  they  account  not  in  the  number  of
their  men)  the  rest  unknowne.

The  eighteenth  in  the  morning,  wee  had  sight  of  the
Portugals  at  anchor  ten  miles  to  the  East  of  us :  they  had
the  wind  faire  to  come  to  us,  but  did  not.  Whereupon
we  had  a  generall  conference,  whether  it  might  be  fitter
with  the  first  of  the  Sea-turne  (beginning  usually  about
noon)  to  stand  with  them  and  try  it  out  for  the  Mastery
(before  they  could  have  supply  from  Ormus  or  Muskat,
or  expected  ayde  from  Goa)  or  else  to  make  saile  for
[I.  v.  726.]  Jasques  Road,  there  to  land  our  monies  and  goods  (for
surprisall  whereof  they  fought  and  we  defended)  and  this
later  was  concluded.  Thither  the  London  attayned  that
night :  the  rest  rode  a  league  without.
Portugall  The  two  and  twentieth,  descrying  the  Port.  Galliones

supplies.  open  of  the  Road,  to  come  in  as  wee  supposed  with  the

Sea  turne,  we  hasted  and  stood  off  with  them.  They
steered  directly  towards  Ormus,  till  they  met  with  two  or
three  Frigats  from  thence  with  supply  of  men  and  muni-
tion, which  having  shipped,  they  made  towards  us  but
soone  repented,  and  clapt  upon  a  tacke,  and  till  the  eight
and  twentieth,  were  either  to  windward,  or  so  at  anchor  that
without  disadvantage  wee  could  not  attempt  them.  Wee
tryed  on  Christmasse  day,  but  were  inforced  backe  with
a  present  encounter  of  a  gust,  which  made  some  Blackes
aboord  us,  say,  that  the  Port,  had  brought  a  Witch  from
Ormus  to  serve  them  with  faire  winds.  On  Innocents
day  perceiving  the  drift  of  our  Fabius  Cunctator,  we  took

246

ANDREW  SHILLING  a.d.

1620.

the  oportunitie  of  an  Easterly  gale,  weighed  and  put
things  in  order  for  fight.  The  London  and  Hart  next  The  second
anchored  within  a  Cables  length  and  halfe  from  them  upon  *&  L
their  broad  sides,  and  so  indured  the  hottest  burthen  of
this  second  dayes  fight.  For  no  sooner  were  they  at
anchor,  but  it  fell  calme  and  so  continued  all  day,  inso-
much that  the  Robucke  and  Eagle  (who  had  steered  neerer
the  shoare  with  intent  to  anchor,  one  upon  the  Bow  of
the  Port-Admirall,  the  other  on  the  Bow  of  their  Vice-
Admirall)  beeing  Easterne,  could  not  with  any  diligence
come  to  doe  any  service  in  halfe  an  houres  space.  And
no  sooner  were  wee  within  the  levell  range  of  our  Ord-
nance from  them,  then  (there  beeing  not  a  breath  of  wind,
and  the  current  against  us)  we  were  driven  to  anchor  or
drive  further  off.  But  our  broad  sides  once  brought  up,
the  great  Ordnance  from  our  whole  Fleet  playd  so  fast
upon  them,  that  had  our  mens  knowledge  equalled  their
resolutions,  not  one  of  them  had  escaped  us.  How  ever,
loth  to  receive  a  Supper  as  hot  as  their  Dinner,  at  three  a
clocke  they  cut  their  Cables  and  drove  with  the  tyde  (then  The  fight  and
setting  Westerly)  untill  they  were  out  of  our  reach.  Then  ®sse  °fthe
came  their  Frigats  to  them  (which  the  day  before  had  oru£as-
domineered  with  their  Musicke,  pendants  and  flagges
alongst  the  shoare,  now  with  a  fitter  taske)  to  tow  them
away  all  mangled  and  torne.  For  their  Admirall  in  the
greatest  fury  of  the  fight,  was  inforced  to  heeld  his  ship
to  stop  his  leakes,  his  mayne-top-mast  over-boord,  and
the  head  of  his  mayne  Mast.  The  greater  Flemming  had
both  his  top-masts  and  part  of  his  bow-sprit  shot  away :
the  lesse  having  never  a  shrowd  standing,  never  a  top-
mast.

The  Vice-Admirall  (which  both  dayes  did  us  most  hurt)
escaped  best,  having  commonly  this  day  one  or  other  of
their  ships  twixt  him  and  us.  We  kept  them  company
all  night  in  hope  the  next  morning  to  have  given  them
their  pas-ports,  but  surveying  our  shot  and  finding  small
store  left  (notwithstanding  that  by  some  happy  mistake,
the  Eagle  had  a  double  proportion)  and  considering  the

247

ad.  JPURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1620.

Voyage  which  we  had  to  performe,  we  returned :  and  left
them  glad  men,  the  two  greater  ships  towing  the  two
smaller  at  their  sterne.  Their  slayne  I  heard  not :  Ours
lost  in  the  London  slaine,  Henry  Crane,  John  Gore ;  our
Admirall  and  Peter  Robinson  dyed  of  their  wounds  after-
wards. In  the  Hart,  Walter  Davie,  William  Hall,  John
Muskat,  and  Edmund  Okely  were  wounded  but  recovered.
The  great  shot  of  severall  sorts  spent,  in  the  London,  one
thousand  three  hundred  eightie  two.  Hart,  one  thousand
twentie  foure.  Robucke,  eight  hundred  and  fifteene.
Eagle,  eight  hundred,  in  all  foure  thousand  twentie  one.
Captaine  Richard  Blith  according  to  the  order  (opening
the  white  Boxe  N  1.)  succeeded  our  worthy  Admirall :  my
selfe  removed  into  the  Hart,  Christopher  Browne  to  the
Robucke,  and  Thomas  Taylor  was  made  Master  of  the
Eagle.

The  fourteenth  of  January,  having  had  for  eight  and
fortie  houres  precedent  continuall  extremitie  of  raine
(wind  or  raine  being  usuall  here  for  three  or  foure  dayes
at  the  change  and  full,  otherwhiles  faire  weather)  we  set
saile  from  Jasques,  where  we  had  dispatched  our  businesse,
to  Surat,  where  we  arrived  the  first  of  February  follow-
ing :  nothing  in  our  passage  occurring  worth  recitall,  sav-
ing that  the  seven  and  twentieth  of  January,  wee  surprized
betwixt  Diu  and  the  Sand  heads,  a  small  ship  of  warre
called  Nostra  Seniora  de  Remedio,  of  burthen  one  hun-
dred tunnes,  Francisco  de  Sylva  Captaine,  with  thirtie
five  Portugals,  and  twentie  five  Moores  for  Sailers  set
out  by  the  Captaine  of  Diu  to  gard  their  small  Merchants
ships  from  the  Malabars.  The  men  were  dismissed,  and
A  Port.  Prise,  the  shippe  kept  for  our  use,  and  called  the  Andrew.  Shee
had  in  her  neyther  meate,  money,  nor  commodities,  and
scarse  so  many  poore  sutes  as  backes.

The  seven  and  twentieth  of  February,  we  began  to  take
in  goods.  The  fift  of  March,  the  Eagle  was  sent  downe
to  guard  the  Princes  Juncke,  and  to  hinder  her  further
lading,  till  free  leave  and  libertie  should  be  granted  for
passage  of  Carts  with  goods,  and  other  our  provisions,

248

ANDREW SHILLING  a.d.

1621.

which  have  beene  restrayned  sixe  or  seven  dayes  by  the
grating  Governour  of  Ulpare :  by  which  meanes  no
Cotton  Wooll  could  come  downe  till  our  ship  was  full
laden  forward  on.  The  sixteenth,  upon  notice  that  the
Agra  Caffila  was  robbed  by  the  Decan  Armie,  resolution
was  taken  to  seeke  restitution  upon  the  ships  of  the  said
Decan  Prince  and  his  Confederates  in  the  action ;  and  the
Red  Sea  intended  for  our  ships  wintering.  The  nine-
teenth, the  Prince  his  Juncke  was  dismissed,  the  Gover-
nour of  Surat  having  granted  under  his  hand  to  supply
our  wants  of  Powder  and  shot  for  our  money,  with  re-
dresse  for  many  other  discourtesies.

Since  the  five  and  twentieth  of  March,  till  the  sixt  of  [I.  v,  727.]
Aprill,  1 62 1.  the  windes  have  beene  outwardly,  viz.
South  and  South  South-west  and  West,  and  from  noone
till  mid-night  blowne  so  hard  that  the  great  stuffe  by  the
shoare  permitted  no  businesse  to  bee  done,  except  on  the
last  quarter  ebbe  and  first  after  floud.  The  seventh,  we
set  sayle.  The  ninth,  the  Eagle  and  Dutch  Pinnasse
called  the  good  Fortune,  departed  our  Company,  con-
signed for  Achen  and  Bantam :  the  London,  Hart,
Robucke  and  Andrew  intended  for  the  Red  Sea,  if  not
too  late.

The  first  of  May,  the  Andrew  and  our  Boats  surprized  A  Prise.
the  Saint  Antonio  a  ship  of  two  hundred  tunnes,  which
we  called  the  May-flower  :  her  principall  lading  Rice  taken
in  at  Barcelor,  whence  she  went  to  Goa,  and  the  eight  of
Aprill,  had  set  saile  for  Muscat  and  Ormus. By  these
we  understood  that  Ruy  Frere  de  Andrado,  was  busie  in
repayring  his  foure  ships  at  Ormus :  C.  that  Don  Eman-  Eman.
uell  de  Asseredo,  is  departed  about  fiftie  dayes  past  from  Assaveda  sent
Goa  in  his  succour  with  two  Galliones ;  one  whereof  is  the  rL^
same  in  which  the  Vice-Roy  was  personally,  when  hee
fought  with  Captaine  Downtons  Fleet. The  seventh,  in
a  calme  we  surprized  the  Jacinth  a  small  ship  built  of  a
Frigat,  from  Mozambique  bound  for  Goa :  wee  called  her
the  Prim-rose. Thence  to  the  thirteenth,  winds  variable,
calmes,  raines. The  May-flowre  hindred  us  much : and

249

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1621.

the  Pilots  either  were  malicious  or  blind :  whereupon  we
resolved  to  trust  to  our  owne  endeavours  to  find  an  an-
choring place,  whence  we  might  discover  some  convenient
Road  for  our  safe  riding  till  the  strength  of  the  Monson
Macera.  were  past,  we  resolved  for  Macera.

The  second  of  June,  we  descryed  Land  and  anchored
in  seventeene  fathomes  three  miles  off  shoare  :  here  we
found  in  foure  or  five  Pits,  three  quarters  of  a  mile  from
the  waters  side,  water  in  abundance.  I  had  fortie  tunne
out  of  one  Well,  which  we  rolled  downe  in  Hogsheads :
the  people  tractable,  little  other  refreshing.  The  latitude
twentie  degrees  twentie  minutes,  variation  seventeene
North-westing.  The  Date  Trees  by  the  watering  place
bare  North-west  by  West,  the  other  end  of  the  Hand
North-east  halfe  East  five  leagues  off.

The  twelfth  wee  set  saile  for  the  North-east  end  of
Macera,  and  in  the  afternoone  anchored  in  seven  fathomes
in  a  faire  Bay,  cleane  ground,  a  fast  blacke  ozie  sand,  the
North-east  point  bearing  South  halfe  a  league  off :  the
landing  place  West  South-west  two  miles  off  :  the  Norther
part  of  the  Bay  North  by  West  foure  miles  off.  The
latitude  twentie  degrees  thirtie  minutes,  variation  seven-
teene North-west.  You  may  ride  in  this  Bay  from  five
to  twelve,  in  what  depth  you  will :  an  excellent,  hungry,
cold  and  healthfull  place :  but  a  tumbling,  rolling  Sea  for
ships :  fresh  water  enough  to  be  had  in  Pits  digged,  but
except  at  the  usuall  landing  place,  very  ill  to  boate  :  yeeld-
ing  no  better  refreshing  then  the  first,  a  few  Goats  and
Lambes  in  trucke  for  Cannekeens.

Whiles  the  Hart  and  Robucke  were  here  resolved  to

stay  till  the  Monsons  fury  were  past ; on  the  nineteenth,

we  sent  Abdelavie  an  inhabitant  of  Macera,  with  Letters

in  quest  for  the  Admirall  as  farre  as  Soar,  which  returned

the  sixt of  July,  with  Letters of  their  being there  at

Cape  Rosa/- Soar,  seven  leagues  within  Cape  Rosalgate  ; their  difficult

Adlt'T  &!*'  watel"ing  at  Teue, surprisall  of  Simons  the  Chirurgion,

Natives  call and  the  Preachers  Boy  on  Land  by  the  Portugals  and

it).  Moores,  &c.

250

ANDREW  SHILLING  a.d.

1622.

The  sixt  of  August,  the  Hart  and  Robucke  set  saile
from  Macera :  the  eight  in  the  evening  we  anchored  by
our  Admirall :  this  Road  differing  from  Macera,  in  beeing
calme,  usually  cleere,  and  by  heat  taking  away  the  stom-
acke.  The  fifteenth  set  saile.  The  first  of  September  a
Boate  of  Chaul  came  aboord  the  Robucke,  &c.

The  one  and  twentieth  of  November,  our  Fleet  set  saile
from  Swally,  and  anchored  before  the  Barre  of  Surat.  The
seven  and  twentieth  at  noone,  in  latitude  twentie,  and  by
judgement  twentie  eight  leagues  from  neerest  Land :  we
tooke  leave  of  the  Jasques  Fleet,  consisting  of  the  Lon-  The  Jasques
don,  Jonas,  Whale,  Dolphine,  Lion,  Rose,  Shilling,  Fk/tofmne
Richard  and  Robert.  s  ^s'

The  first  of  January  we  found  our  selves  betweene
Johanna  and  Mayotta.  The  nine  and  twentieth  we  an-
chored in  Soldania  Road :  having  beene  from  Surat  hither
nine  weekes  and  three  dayes,  blessed  be  God  for  our  safe
and  speedie  passage.  Heere  wee  watered,  washed,  fished
in  the  River,  buried  our  Letters,  bought  three  Cowes,  one
Calfe,  foure  sheepe,  all  unsavourie  meate.

The  third  of  February,  we  set  saile :  the  nineteenth,
anchored  at  Saint  Helena.  Heere  wee  found  the  Wap-
pen  and  the  Holland  Dutch  ships :  this  last  fell  on  fire
the  two  and  twentieth,  with  her  Cloves  taken  in  greene
at  Amboyna.  There  was  another  small  Dutch  ship.
They  arrived  eleven  dayes  before  us,  and  cannot  in  ten
dayes  more  discharge  and  relade  their  damnified  Cloves.
The  eight  and  twentieth,  we  set  sayle  from  Saint  Helena :
and  the  seventh  of  June,  1622.  anchored  in  the  Downes.

For  further  satisfaction  touching  the  fight,  I  have  added
this  Letter  or  Relation  sent  to  the  Company  from  the
Chiefe  of  the  Fleet.

[Relation  of
251

T

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1620.

[I.  v.  728.] Relation  of  the  fight  of  foure  English  ships  with

foure  Portugall  ships,  two  Galliats,  and  ten
Frigats  in  the  Gulfe  of  Persia,  in  the  Monethes
of  December  and  January,  1620.

He  London  and  the  Robucke  arriving  at  Surat  the
ninth  of  December,  there  understood  that  the  Por-
tugals  had  sent  into  the  gulfe  of  Persia  an  Armado,
purposely  to  attempt  the  English  shipping  at  their  com-
ming  thither,  whereupon  it  was  forth-with  resolved  by
the  English  Factors  at  Surat,  &  the  Commanders  of  the
above-named  two  ships,  that  they  should  apply  them-
selves to  the  gulfe  of  Persia,  to  re-joyne  themselves  with
two  other  English  ships,  namely,  the  Hart  and  the  Eagle
which  parted  from  the  London  and  Robucke,  before  their
comming  to  Surat,  and  were  gone  directly  toward  Jasques
in  the  said  gulfe  of  Persia,  and  so  the  said  London  and
Robucke  set  sayle  from  Surat  towards  Jasques,  the  nine-
teenth day  of  November,  and  the  first  day  of  December
following,  they  met  with  the  Hart  and  the  Eagle,  about
eightie  leagues  short  of  Jasques,  where  all  the  foure  ships
joyning  together,  they  received  most  certaine  intelligence
by  a  Portugall  Frigat  which  they  met,  that  the  Portugall
Armado  consisting  as  aforesaid  of  foure  Gallions,  two
Galliats  and  about  tenne  Frigats,  were  attending  them  at
the  Easter  end  of  Jasques  Road,  where  the  English  ships
must  come,  and  so  went  along  towards  the  same,  where
the  sixteenth  day  they  found  the  said  Portugall  Armado,
consisting  in  these  particulars  before  named  the  Generall
or  chiefe  Commander  whereof  is  named  Ruy  Frere  de
Andrado,  whom  themselves  call  the  Pride  of  Portugall,
the  Vice-Admirall  John  Boralio,  and  Inhabitant  of  Ormus,
and  late  Admirall  of  those  Seas,  of  the  other  two  ships  the
Commanders  were  Anthonio  Musquet  and  Balthazar  di
Chaves,  this  day  prooved  calme,  so  that  it  was  night  ere
they  came  in  shot  one  of  another.

The  seventeenth  of  December,  being  the  Lords  day,

252

THE FIGHT OFF JASQUES  ad.

1620.

wee  intended  to  have  sanctified  his  service  being  under
saile  a  league  to  Sea-boord  of  them,  but  about  eight  of  the
clocke  with  the  Land  turne,  they  weighed  anchor  and  bore
up  with  us,  for  whom  (albeit  they  had  the  winde)  we
shortned  saile  and  stayed  neere  about  nine  of  the  clocke,
we  joyned  fight  with  them,  which  continued  until  the
darknesse  of  the  night  justly  challenged  an  end  to
so  long  and  weary  a  work,  they  (like  a  kind  Host  to
Strangers)  leaving  us  their  anchoring  place  to  lodge  in,
and  retyred  some  ten  or  eleven  miles  to  the  Eastward,
there  to  amend  and  repaire  themselves ;  wee  cannot  truely
particulate  unto  you  their  hurts  and  losses  in  this  fight,
save  by  reports  of  our  Merchants,  that  John  Boralio  their
Vice-admirall,  and  the  Captaine  of  one  of  the  other  ships,
were  slaine,  with  some  thirtie  or  fortie  men  out  of  their
Admirall,  the  rest  yet  unknowne.  The  losse  or  hurt  of
our  men  in  your  own  ships,  the  inclosed  Note  of  this
seventeenth  present,  will  make'  manifest.  Thus  for  a
time  we  were  not  disturbed  by  our  enemies,  though  by
contrary  winds  we  could  not  get  into  the  usuall  Road
before  the  twentieth  current.  The  twentie  one  and
twentie  two,  the  most  part  of  your  goods  was  landed,  and
descrying  the  Portugall  Gallions  open  of  the  Road,  to
come  in,  as  we  supposed,  with  the  Sea-turne,  we  there-
fore set  saile  and  stood  off  with  them,  but  after  some
small  shew  of  bearing  up  with  the  Sea-wind,  they
clapt  upon  a  Lake,  and  were  so  fortunate  untill  the
eight  and  twentieth  day,  that  either  they  being  to  wind-
ward we  could  not  come  at  them,  or  else  at  anchor  wee
could  not,  without  our  great  disadvantage,  meddle  with
them.

The  eight  and  twentieth,  being  Innocents  day,  both
Fleets  riding  at  the  Easter  Points  of  the  Road,  not  a
mile  distant  one  from  the  other ;  we  omitted  no  oppor-
tunitie  to  give  battell  to  our  wary  protracting  enemies,
who,  as  by  his  working  appeared,  if  hee  could  have
avoyded  fight,  and  by  lingring  delayes,  and  the  benefit
of  his  Frigats,  have  hindred  us  from  the  prosecution  of  your

253

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1620.

Persian  designments,  he  attayned  unto  the  full  heighth
and  scope  of  his  imployments.

But  about  one  of  the  clocke,  the  Lord  sent  us  a  pretty
gale,  our  Fleet  weighed  and  put  all  things  in  order  for  to
fight,  the  London  and  Hart  next  anchored  within  a  Cables
length  from  them  upon  their  broad  sides,  and  so  indured
the  hottest  brunt  of  this  two  dayes  fight,  for  no  sooner
were  they  at  anchor  but  it  fell  calme  and  so  continued  all
day,  insomuch  that  the  Roe  Bucke  and  Eagle,  who  being
somewhat  a  sterne  and  steering  neerer  the  shoare,  with
intent  to  anchor  one  upon  the  Bowe  of  the  Portugall
Admirall,  and  the  other  upon  the  Bowe  of  the  Vice-
admirall,  could  not  notwithstanding  all  diligence  used,
come  to  doe  any  service  in  halfe  an  houres  space,  but  being
come  neere  anchored,  and  all  our  ships  so  fitted  to  keepe
our  broad  sides  full  upon  them.  The  great  Ordnance
out  of  our  whole  Fleet  played  so  fast  upon  them,  that
about  three  of  the  clocke  in  the  afternoone,  not  willing
to  indure  so  hot  entertainment,  they  cut  their  Cables
and  with  the  Tyde  drove  downe  from  us,  untill  being
without  reach  of  our  Ordnance,  their  Frigats  came  and
towed  them  away  wonderfully  mangled  and  torne,  for
their  Admirall  in  the  hottest  of  the  fight  was  inforced  to
heeld  their  ship  to  stop  his  leakes,  his  mayne  top-mast
over  board,  and  the  head  of  his  mayne  mast ;  the  third
ship  both  his  top-mast,  mizon  mast,  and  part  of  his  bow
sprit  were  shot  away,  the  lesser  ship  had  never  a  shroud
left  standing,  nor  never  a  top-mast ;  the  Vice-admirall
escaped  best,  for  most  commonly  hee  had  one  or  other
[I.  v.  729.]  of  their  ships  betweene  him  and  us.  All  this  night  we
kept  them  companie,  with  hope  the  next  morning  to  have
given  them  all,  or  some  of  them,  their  Passe-port,  but
surveying  our  shot  and  finding  no  great  store  left,  and
withall  considering  the  great  weight  and  import  of  the
voyage  we  had  to  performe,  we  resolved  our  returne  to
Jasques,  for  the  speedy  dispatching  of  our  businesse  in
hand,  thanking  God  for  putting  our  enemies  to  flight
before  us,  of  whom  unto  the  present  writing  hereof  we

254

not  true.

THE FIGHT OFF JASQUES  a.d.

1620.

have  heard  no  newes,  neither  are  any  of  them  arrived  at
Ormus  or  Muscat,  as  our  Merchants  report,  only  it  is
rumored  by  some  Caffaires,  who  by  swimming  escaped
ashoare,  that  Ruy  Frere  de  Andrado  *  was  slaine.  All  ™s  Proved
your  ships,  praysed  bee  God,  ramayne  serviceable,  and
not  above  five  men  slaine  on  our  part  in  these  two  long
and  great  battailes,  and  not  many  wounded,  as  by  the  List
of  their  names  here  inclosed  will  appeare.  Amongst
whom  our  worthy  Admirall  and  kind  Commander,  re-
ceived a  great  and  grievous  wound  through  his  left
shoulder  with  a  great  shot,  which  hurt  hee  with  such
courage  and  patience  under-went,  that  gave  great  hope  to
us  all  of  his  much  wished  recoverie,  but  having  besides
his  former  wound  two  of  his  uppermost  ribs  on  the  left
side  broken  ;  the  sixt  of  Januarie,  he  departed  this  life,
shewing  himselfe  (as  ever  before)  a  resolute  Commander,
so  in  his  passage  through  the  Gates  of  death,  a  most  will-
ing, humble,  constant,  and  assured  Christian,  his  body
we  intended  to  have  carried  to  Surat,  and  there  according
to  his  deserts  to  have  performed  his  last  funerall  rights,
the  Chyrurgians  confidently  promising  by  imbalming  and
waxe-cloth  to  preserve  him  without  annoyance  thither,
but  notwithstanding  this  cost  and  their  promise,  his  body,
in  regard  of  his  great  wound,  proving  noysome,  we  were
enforced  to  bury  him  at  Jasques,  which  was  effected  the
seventh  Current,  with  what  respect,  solemnitie,  and
decency  the  time  required.

The  thirteenth  of  January,  1620.  aboard  the
Ship  London  in  Jasques  Road.

Under-written  by  all  the  foure  Masters
of  the  foure  Ships,

Ri.  Blyth. Rob.  Swan.
Chr.  Browne.  Will  Baffin.

WHiles  we  are  publishing  these  things  there  are  late
newes  of  English  Persian  occurrents,  as  namely,
that  nine  English  ships  have  beene  in  those  Persian  Seas,

255

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1620.

and  together  with  the  Persian  have  paid  part  of  their
Portugall  debt :  Chisman  in  three  dayes  being  taken,  the
spoile  divided  betwixt  them.  Also  the  Bassa  of  Xeras
helped  by  the  English  both  in  setting  over  his  men,  and
in  beleagring  the  Towne,  hath  in  two  dayes  taken  the
Towne  of  Ormus,  the  Castle  holding  out ;  though  little
hope  remayned  of  it,  their  water  and  all  hope  of  helpe
being  taken  from  them.  The  English  have  won  much
honour  and  reputation  of  valour  :  and  if  they  take  it,
(besides  sharing  the  spoile)  are  to  have  the  Castle  com-
mitted to  their  keeping.  They  are  said  also  to  have  taken
a  rich  ship,  called  the  Mosambique.

Part  of  a  Letter  written  from  Mr.  Robert  Smith
to  his  brother  Henrie  Smith,  relating  of  a
rare  attempt  and  exploit  of  a  small  English
Pinnasse,  in  taking  a  Portugall  ship.

IN  our  passage  from  Joanna  to  this  place,  we  lost  sight
of  the  Rose  and  Richard,  but  within  sixe  dayes  after,
the  Richard  came  to  us  with  a  Portugall  prize  at  her
sterne,  which  shee  had  taken  that  night  we  lost  her  com-
pany. It  is  a  wonder  to  tell  it.  The  Richard  being  a
Pinnasse  of  about  twentie  Tunnes,  manned  with  fourteene
Men  and  Boyes,  and  having  but  two  small  Falconets  in
her,  and  the  Portugall  of  two  hundred  and  fiftie  Tunnes,
with  two  hundred  and  fiftie  in  her,  whereof  seventie  were
Portugalls,  the  rest  Mesticos  and  Slaves :  the  Richard
comming  up  with  them  plyed  her  demi-Dogs  so  well,  that
in  the  shooting  off  twentie  shot,  it  pleased  God  they
killed  their  Captayne,  which  the  rest  perceiving  stroke  all
their  sailes  amayne,  and  like  tall  men  came  aboard  the
Richard,  sixe  at  a  time,  where  the  Master  caused  them  to
be  bound  :  but  fearing  to  have  too  many  aboard,  though
bound,  he  sent  a  terrible  command  to  the  rest  aboard,  that
upon  their  lives  they  should  depart  their  ship  into  their
great  Boat,  which  they  very  valiantly  performed,  and  left
their  ship  to  the  utter  disgrace  of  themselves  and  all  their
Nation,  &c.

256

~yp7 Sfj  ?0[ , >/,'  t0o\SeptftTLOx I TT*\  %tf\  tJt,\  u/|  '

f  ,  7  /  ■  ■  >  ■  .  /  ■  ■  i  ■■  ^  <  ■  ■  /  i  i  I  i  i  t  t  i.l  »  ■  I  V  i  I  '  ■  l  '  i  \  i  i  1  i  i  \  i  i  i  i  i  I  i  i  v  i  i  t  i  i  v  ca

4*

~Marr  C*fp  turn  Jive 'Jfyrcanu
ChualmfhcJiiarf'K  uthehtsijifare  dr ,
"ha£hu-  Sunzgr-  atifos  naminibys •'::''■  r"'v;
\ ^ MH^ni a  ^| •;  Vacatur* ^^^ajfiimejl  J^^^/V^

4"

3°

HussiyE.  CoifatfiA.

JliJlTstljLlL  )Au -*sL  fas

[Car  tarns

Siugon*

rsamarchi

Cvtachs
^'Be4c-,ptat

AtvtjX<acus  -S!

An>tsJ<acus  JW
'ZKfnnanapatUf

Gilon

Taunt

\&

, r ^Cyia1aihfa~

MJibefatm Vk  'jr T^fcftS  f  *•  ^  . ,  \ Guuvtca* 1  -^Afarefh

\  **V I s3aravt}^J>tgul \ *  I —f *' Tr.iw.s^r

VJAK3£CH

-Tfoful

m»

#*>

Ataman

San\Jin
\C4--'rvtib

j«  Ckeindi-

rPardim

tfcaLand

foScrus

Cdda^ar\_

%j£a&  (ahak\

cjiiryan

Ca&v

%

Swxtni-  -

?*Hl

y

JSqgiaa

if

S

%^  f.J / *irU*r\ Cine**- %atm*h"' >\V

•-jK"S

PERSICUM

REGNUM

'faueti

m

Ga-M

rcbuh

'^CiJi.i  3&rp3WJ*C

'-^^

M

i  *  I |  "1

t<pp

i i I  .  r,  i | i i j i i

JWa*ij>i^«

^itiratuL
Jifaua,—  &

jiafCambata

*&arache

jiillidria.  Germxnka,
v\  J*\  *A  §  //•

tip

x

"/

t- r

T — T

tap

\ t \ I

40

HONDIUS HIS MAP OF PERSIA

GILES HOBBS  a.d.

1619.

Giles  Hobbs  his  travaile  from  Musco  to  Spahan,
written  in  a  Letter  by  himselfe  to  the  East
Indian  Companie.

Right  Honorable,  my  dutie  remembred,  &c.

THe  fourth  of  October  last  past,  a  yeere  since  my
arrivall  at  Spahan,  your  then  Agent  Master  Thomas  Tho.  Barker.
Barker  was  then  advising  for  England,  mentioning  of  my
arrivall,  and  also  of  his  appointment  to  resend  me  so  soone  [I.  v.  730.]
as  he  heard  of  the  safe  arrivall  of  your  shippes,  but  it
pleased  the  Lord  in  the  meane-time  to  take  him  from  us
by  a  sudden  death.  Whose  appointment  was  the  first
cause  I  omitted  to  write  to  your  Honors ;  the  second,  a
long  &  tedious  journey  by  lets  on  the  Volga,  and  also
in  this  Land.  The  third  cause,  my  Convoy  taken  from
me,  and  not  suffered  to  passe  but  with  the  Kings  Caravan
of  Boats,  for  that  the  report  was,  the  Cossackes  did  pur-
pose to  make  fight  with  the  Caravan,  which  proved  the
contrary.  It  would  be  too  long  to  trouble  your  patience
to  relate  at  large  the  accidents  in  this  my  journey,  wherein
little  happened  worthy  your  notice  or  expectation,  or  my
hopes  to  effect  your  desires.  I  will  therefore  briefly  make
relation  thereof.

The  eighth  of  May,  161 9.  I  set  off  from  Yeraslave,  and
arrived  at  Astracan  the  sixteenth  of  June,  from  whence  I
purposed  to  take  my  journey  and  passage  for  Turkie,  and
from  thence  by  the  Emperours  Post  to  passe  the  Cher-
kasses  Countrey,  and  so  for  Spahan  by  Land.  This
passage  I  could  not  proceed  of,  but  with  the  Emperours
Caravan  of  provisions  which  would  not  bee  in  twelve
dayes :  in  the  interim,  I  enquired  when  the  Guilan  Busses
would  goe.  The  Masters  and  Merchants  promised
fourteene  dayes  at  furthest ;  so  I  resolved  to  passe  in
them.

The  tenth  of  July,  I  set  off  from  Astracan,  and  by  occa-
sion of  the  Boats  stay,  to  be  cleered  by  the  Searchers,  it
was  the  fifteenth  dicto,  our  comming  aboord  the  Busse.
v  257  R

A.D.

1619.

No  Compasse
used  in  the
Caspian  Sea.

Tempest.

Callopsheray.

Shomakee.

Bocka.
Guilan.

Ardevil.

Spahan.

Threepassages
to  Persia  from
Musco.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

The  eighteenth  dicto,  the  Busse  set  sayle  steering  South
till  we  made  the  Persian  shoare,  they  use  no  Compasse  but
direct  their  course  by  the  Sunne,  Moone  and  Stars.

The  sixe  and  twentieth  dicto,  we  made  land,  having
great  tempest  of  wind  at  North-east ;  the  land  lying
South  and  West ;  at  evening  the  wind  came  of  the  land
still  increasing :  the  next  day  the  Busse  lost  her  sayle
from  the  yard,  and  for  to  succour  her  they  hung  up  figge
baskets,  coverlets  and  Cow  hides,  throwing  great  store  of
the  lading  over-boord ;  the  first  all  our  provision,  after
the  goods  :  this  night  we  had  small  rest,  the  next  morning
the  wind  was  out  of  the  Sea,  and  it  pleased  the  Lord  to
bring  us  in  betweene  a  small  Hand  and  the  mayne  land,
and  both  us  and  the  Vessell  saved.

The  eight  and  twentieth,  the  Master  and  most  of  us
went  on  land,  the  place  called  Callopsheray,  no  Inhabi-
tants :  the  wind  increased  still,  that  untill  the  first  of
August,  the  Boate  could  not  row  aboord  the  Busse.  This
day  the  Merchants  unladed  ther  goods,  and  the  fift  dicto,
wee  procured  Horses  for  Shomakee,  and  arrived  there  the
ninth  dicto.

The  Busse  bound  her  selfe  for  a  Port  called  Bocka,  to
lade  Neft  ere  she  proceeded  for  Guilan,  the  nineteenth  of
August,  I  departed  with  the  Cafala  from  Shomakee,  &
arrived  at  Ardevill,  the  nine  &  twentieth  of  the  same.
The  ninth  of  September,  with  the  Cafala  I  departed
Ardevill,  &  arrived  at  Spahan,  the  fourth  of  October,
1619.  thus  in  briefe  you  may  please  to  understand  of  my
long  journey  from  Yeraslave  to  Spahan  in  Persia,  no  lesse
then  five  monethes,  which,  no  doubt,  might  be  done  in
eleven  or  twelve  weekes,  if  no  lets  in  the  way,  as  in  these
subsequents  I  shall  declare.

The  first  passage  is  at  the  opening  the  River  Volga,
from  Yeraslave  to  Astracan,  and  so  to  Turkie  by  water,
which  may  bee  done  in  five  and  twentie  dayes,  and  from
Turkie  by  the  Emperors  Convoy  to  Derbent  or  Shomakee,
Cities  under  this  King,  and  from  those  Cities  to  Ardevill
and  Casbin  with  Cafala,  and  from  Casbin  as  they  please  to

258

GILES HOBBS  a.d.

1619.

Spahan,  the  way  cleere,  and  may  bee  effected,  as  above-
said.

The  second  passage  is  to  come  off  from  Yeraslave  the
first  of  June  untill  the  tenth  dicto,  and  if  no  let  may  be  at
Astracan,  in  eighteene  or  twentie  dayes,  in  good  time  to
take  the  first  passage  in  the  Guilan  Busses  for  Leygoints,
a  league  from  Laigon,  and  from  Resht,  from  whence  this
yeares  Silke  was  taken  seven  leagues,  and  from  thence  to
Spahan,  sixteene  dayes  journey.  This  may  prove  the
speedier  passage,  if  it  please  God  to  lend  favourable  wind
to  passe  the  Caspian  Sea ;  from  Astracan  Sea  passage  is
to  be  had  in  July,  August  and  September.

The  third  passage,  which  no  doubt,  may  bee  procured
by  your  Honours  Agent  there,  is  to  have  your  Letters
sent  from  Musco,  by  the  Emperours  Post  to  the  Gover-
nour  of  Astracan,  to  send  the  said  Letters,  if  over  land,  to
the  Chan  of  Shomakee,  to  be  sent  to  the  English  Nation
at  Spahan,  by  the  Chans  Post,  if  by  Sea  to  Guilan  to  the
Governour  of  Resht,  accordingly  to  bee  sent  to  the  Eng-
lish at  Spahan :  the  charge  to  bee  defrayed  by  your  Hon-
ours Agents,  and,  no  doubt,  so  long  as  you  have  here  Trade,
your  Letters  by  these  Governours  will  bee  safely  delivered  :
and  for  the  better  safetie  of  them,  the  Agent  may  at  his
next  going  to  the  King,  procure  two  Firmans  to  those
Governours  to  that  effect :  and  thus  much  for  the  needfull
transport  of  your  Letters  from  Musco  to  Spahan  in
Persia.

I  will  now  returne  and  speake  something  of  the  Trade
at  Astracan :  the  Mart  beginneth  at  the  arrivall  of  the
Boats  which  is  in  June ;  at  which  time  the  Persians  come
in,  and  bring  dyed  Silke,  Dorogoes,  Callicoes,  and  other
Persian  stuffes,  which  they  sell  by  retayle  and  in  barter.
The  Commodities  they  returne  are  cloth,  (but  no  great
quantitie)  Sables,  Martens,  redde  Hides,  Caviare,  Butter,
the  hinder-part  of  Horse  Skinnes,  for  Leather,  and  olde
Russe  Money  which  they  buy  at  fortie  foure  and  fortie
sixe  d  per  robles  for  exchange.  These  are  the  Commodi-
ties likewise  the  Russe  transports  whereon  he  makes  small

259

A.D.
1619.

[I.  v.  731.]
Making  of
Caviare.

1 sing/as.

A  rash.
Derbent.

Resht.

Peomin.

Shoft.

Leygon.

Monzen-

droan.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

profit  the  olde  money  failing,  and  your  Honours  Trade
here  will  prejudice  him  much,  if  not  quite  overthrow  his
Trade.

In  my  Passage  on  the  Volga,  I  held  nothing  worthy
notice  except  the  taking  the  Sturgeon,  and  the  making  the
Caviare  and  Isinglasse.  The  River  they  pale  in  from
banke  to  banke,  that  no  Sturgeon  passe  up  or  downe  the
River,  but  they  fall  in  the  weeres.  The  Roe  they  lay  in
salt  fourteene  or  fifteene  dayes,  then  take  and  wash  the
salt  of  them,  and  packe  them  in  the  Fat.  The  fat  Stur-
geon hath  a  yellow  Roe,  which  they  packe  up  as  it  com-
meth  to  hand,  which  Roe  spoyleth  all  that  lyeth  neere  it
and  much  hindreth  the  sale  of  the  Caviare  at  our  Markets.
The  Isinglas  is  made  of  the  string  taken  out  of  the
Sturgeons  backe.  This  yeare  the  But  of  Caviare  sold  at
five  robles  the  hundred,  and  sixe  robles.

Gentlemen,  I  am  bound  by  Commission  to  advize  how
many  dayes  from  Arash  to  the  Caspian  Sea  and  to  Astra-
can.  From  Arash  to  Derbent  a  Port  Towne  seven  dayes
journey.  This  Port  lyeth  opposite  to  the  River  Volga,
and  may  be  sayled  in  five  dayes.  All  other  places  where
the  Kings  Silke  is  made,  lye  neere  the  Sea,  as  Resht,
Peomin,  Shoft  and  Leygon,  in  the  Province  of  Guilan,  the
farthest  eight  leagues  from  the  Ports.  In  Monzendroan,
is  the  Plantation  for  the  making  of  Silke,  and  this  yeare
a  good  quantitie  made,  of  which  as  yet  hath  never  proofe
beene  made  for  his  goodnesse.  Thus  much  for  nerehesse
of  the  places  where  the  Silke  is  made  to  the  Caspian  Sea,
by  which  your  Honours  may  perceive  how  necessary  the
Silke  doth  lye  for  its  transport  by  the  way  of  the  Volga,  if
passage  might  be  procured  from  the  Emperours  of
Muscovia ;  whereas  now  they  are  carryed  three  moneths
journey  by  land  to  the  Port,  and  not  without  great
charges  and  trouble,  as  by  the  generall  advice  you  will
well  understand  ; to  which  I  humbly  referre  you.

Gentlemen,  this  your  Persian  Trade,  as  it  is  in  her
infancy  hath  many  Enemies,  the  Turke,  Arabian,  Ar-
menian,  and the proud  Portugall, whose  lying tongue

260

GILES HOBBS  ad.

1619.
ceaseth  not  to  dishonour  our  Kingdome  and  Nation,  but
the  Lord,  I  hope,  will  turne  the  dishonour  upon  his  owne
pate.

The  overthrow  of  the  three  first  Enemies  must  be  by
the  presence  of  an  Ambassadour  heere,  who,  no  doubt,
would  perswade  and  pull  downe  the  Kings  now  loftie
price  of  his  Silke  as  you  will  well  find  in  this  yeares  Silke
received,  and  no  abatement  to  bee  expected,  but  by
treatie  of  an  Ambassadour,  who  hath  beene  expected  and
demanded  for  by  this  King :  also  to  accord  an  agreement
with  the  King  for  the  Silke  that  is  most  in  esteeme,  and
profitable  for  you :  and  as  he  is  turned  Merchant  for  sale
of  his  Silke,  so  likewise  to  be  your  Merchant  for  the
goods  you  shall  yearely  send  into  his  Land,  at  such  prices
as  may  countervaile  the  price  he  sets  on  his  Silke.  But
I  doubt,  you  will  say  I  passe  the  bounds  of  my  Commis-
sion or  order  in  writing  this  briefe  Relation,  of  which
might  be  spoken  at  large.  But  doubtlesse,  not  more  then
your  grave  wisdomes  doe  foresee,  or  the  better  experienced
then  my  selfe  doe  advise,  to  which  I  humbly  referre  your
Honours,  praying  the  successe  may  prove  to  your  hearts
desires.

Gentlemen,  I  am  sorry,  you  thinke  me  not  worthy  to
nominate  me  your  servant  in  your  Letters,  and  more  sorry
you  write  me  severall  names  and  not  mine  owne  name,
for  which  cause  I  have  beene  a  daily  table  sport  by  some,
which  of  these  names  they  may  take  for  your  Honours
Servant,  others  wish  me  to  returne  and  make  my  wages
with  you :  and  had  I  good  occasion  in  your  Honours  em-
ployment I  should  bee  very  willing  thereunto ;  but  how-
soever I  referre  mee  to  God  and  your  Honours,  not
doubting,  but  you  will  deale  as  well  with  mee  as  others,
and  that  I  may  not  returne  as  promised  I  willingly  remayne
your  Honours  oblieged  servant  readie  to  undergoe  any
your  Affaires,  desiring  your  Honours  will  please  to
nominate  mee  a  certaine  yeerely  stipend  for  the  time  I
shall  so  spend  untill  my  returne  to  your  Honours,  for
which  I  shall  bee  bound  to  pray  for  your  Honours  helpe

261

A.D.
l620.

Jasques.

[I.  v. 732.]

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

and  happinesse  in  this  World,  and  in  the  World  to  come
eternal!  rest.

Your  Honours  may  please  that  yesterday  we  received
a  Letter  from  the  Agent  from  Port  Jasques.  A  second
Letter  directed  to  Master  William  Bell  and  the  rest  at
Spahan,  advizing  the  truth  as  neere  as  they  can  be
informed,  the  occasion  of  your  Honours  ships  not  arrivall
as  yet ;  to  which  I  humbly  referre  you.  Being  ordered
also  by  the  Agent  that  the  Copie  thereof  should  be  dis-
peeded  to  your  Honours,  I  have  fitted  those  former  lines,
long  by  you  expected,  of  a  briefe  Relation  of  my  Journey
from  Yeraslave  to  Spahan  in  Persia,  also  the  fittest  time
for  transport  of  your  Letters  to  have  speediest  passage.

Since  my  arrivall  here  at  Mina  with  the  last  Cafila  of
Silke,  nothing  hath  happened  worthy  your  Honours
notice.  We  expect  hourely  to  heare  the  happy  newes  of
the  safe  arrivall  of  the  ships  at  Port  Jasques,  that  wee  may
proceed  thither  with  your  goods,  which  God  of  his  mercie
grant,  to  whose  blessed  tuition  I  ever  commend  your
Honours ; and  rest,

Mina,  the  thirteenth  of  December,  1620.

Your  Honours  obliged  Servant,

Giles  Hobs.

Chap.  XVII.

A  Discourse  of  Trade  from  England  unto  the  East
Indies  ;  Answering  to  divers  Objections  which
are  usually  made  against  the  same.

Written  by  T.  Mun.

iiHe  trade  of  Merchandise,  is  not  onely  that  laud-
able practise  whereby  the  entercourse  of  Nations
is  so  worthily  performed,  but  also  (as  I  may  terme
it)  the  very  Touchstone  of  a  kingdomes  prosperitie,  when
therein  some  certaine  rules  shall  be  diligently  observed.
For,  as  in  the  estates  of  private  persons,  we  may
account that man to prosper and grow rich, who

262

THE TRADE TO THE  EAST INDIES  ad.

c.  1620.
being  possessed  of  revenues  more  or  lesse,  doth
accordingly  proportion  his  expences ;  whereby  he
may  yeerely  advance  some  maintenance  for  his  pos-
teritie.  So  doth  it  come  to  passe  in  those  kingdoms,
which  with  great  care  and  warinesse  do  ever  vent  out
more  of  their  home  commodities,  then  they  import  and
use  of  forraine  wares ;  for  so  undoubtedly  the  remainder
must  returne  to  them  in  treasure.  But  where  a  contrary
course  is  taken,  through  wantonnesse  and  riot ;  to  over-
waste  both  forraine  and  domesticke  wares ;  there  must
the  money  of  necessity  be  exported,  as  the  meanes  to
helpe  to  furnish  such  excesse,  and  so  by  the  corruption  of
mens  conditions  and  manners,  many  rich  countreyes  are
made  exceeding  poore,  whilst  the  people  thereof,  too  much
affecting  their  owne  inormities,  doe  lay  the  fault  in  some-
thing else.

Wherefore,  industry  to  encrease,  and  frugalitie  to
maintaine,  are  the  true  watchmen  of  a  kingdomes  trea-
sury ;  even  when  the  force  and  feare  of  Princes  prohibi-
tions cannot  possibly  retaine  the  same.

And  therefore,  as  it  is  most  plaine,  that  proportion  or
quantitie,  must  ever  be  regarded  in  the  importing  of
forraine  wares ;  so  must  there  also  be  a  great  respect  of
qualitie  and  use;  that  so,  the  things  most  necessary  to  be  [I.  v.  733.]
first  preferred ;  such  as  are  foode,  rayment,  and  munition
for  war  and  trade  ;  which  great  blessings,  when  any  Coun-
trey  doth  sufficiently  enjoy ;  the  next  to  be  procured  are
wares,  fitting  for  health,  and  arts ;  the  last,  are  those,
which  serve  for  our  pleasures  and  ornament.

Now,  forasmuch  as  by  the  providence  of  Almightie
God,  the  kingdome  of  England,  is  endowed  with  such
abundance  of  rich  commodities,  that  it  hath  long  enjoyed,
not  onely  great  plenty  of  the  things  before  named,  but
also,  through  a  superfluitie,  hath  beene  much  inriched
with  treasure  brought  in  from  forraine  parts ;  which
hath  given  life  unto  so  many  worthy  trades,  amongst
which  that  unto  the  East  India  by  name ;  the  report
whereof,  although  it  is  already  spread  so  famous  through

263

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

c.  1620.

the  world  :  yet  notwithstanding,  here  at  home,  the  clamor-
ous complaints  against  the  same,  are  growne  so  loud  and
generall ;  that  (my  selfe  being  one  of  the  Society,)  it  hath
much  troubled  my  private  meditations,  to  conceive  the
meanes  or  true  grounds  of  this  confusion.  But  at  the
last  I  resolved  my  selfe,  that  the  greatest  number  of  these
exclaimers  are  led  away  in  ignorance ;  not  having  as  yet
discerned  the  mysteries  of  such  weighty  affaires :  Some
have  beene  transported  with  envy,  as  not  participating  in
the  said  Society,  or  being  thereby  hindred  (as  they  con-
ceive) in  some  other  trade ;  and  others,  wholy  corrupted
in  their  aff ections,  who  whilst  they  willingly  runne  into
these  errors,  doe  also  labour  diligently  to  seduce  others ;
that  so,  this  good  and  glory  of  the  kingdome,  might  be
subverted  by  our  selves,  which  by  the  policie  and  strength
of  Strangers,  cannot  so  easily  be  abated ;  wherefore,  it  is
now  a  fit  time  to  meete  with  such  injurious  courses,  by  a
true  Narration  of  the  passages  in  the  said  East  India
Trade ;  answering  to  those  severall  objections,  which  are
so  commonly  made  against  the  same :  That  so  these  mis-
understandings and  errors,  may  be  made  knowne  unto  the
whole  body  of  this  Kingdome,  which  at  this  present  time
is  most  worthily  represented  to  those  noble  assemblies  of
the  high  Courts  of  Parliament ;  where  I  hope  the  worth
of  this  rich  Trade,  shall  bee  effectually  inquired,  and  so  in
the  end  obtaine  the  credite  of  an  honorable  approbation.

The  first  Objection.

It  were  a  happie  thing  for  Christendome  (say  many  men)
that  the  Navigation  to  the  East  Indies,  by  way  of  the
Cape  of  Good  Hope,  had  never  been  found  out ;  For
in  the  fleets  of  shippes,  which  are  sent  thither  yeerely
out  of  England,  Portugall,  and  the  Low-countreyes ;
The  Gold,  Silver,  and  Coyne  of  Christendome,  and
particularly  of  this  Kingdome,  is  exhausted,  to  buy
unnecessary  wares.

264

THE TRADE TO THE EAST INDIES  ad.

c.  1620.

The  Answere.

He  matter  of  this  Objection  is  very  weighty,  and
therefore it ought to be answered fully ; the
which  that  I  may  the  better  performe,  I  will  divide
the  same  into  three  parts. In  the  first,  I  will  consider  the 1 .
necessary  use  of  the  wares,  which  are  usually  brought  out
of  East  India  into  Europe; namely,  Drugges, Spices,
Raw-silke,  Indico,  and  Callicoes. In  the  second,  I  will  2.
imitate  the  manner  and  meanes  by  which  the  said  wares
have  beene  heretofore,  and  now  are  brought  into  Europe.
In  the  third  and  last,  I  will  proove,  that  the  treasure  of  3.
England  is  not  consumed,  but  rather  greatly  to  be  in-
creased, by  the  performance  of  the  said  Trade.

Touching  the  first,  Who  is  so  ignorant  in  any  famous  The  first  part
commonwealth,  which  will  not  consent  to  the  moderate  ^Iffndian
use of wholesome Drugges and comfortable Spices?  wareSm
Which  have  been  so  much  desired  in  all  times,  and  by  so
many Nations, not thereby to surfeit, or to please a
lickorish  taste  (as  it  often  happeneth,  with  many  other
fruites  and  wines)  but  rather  as  things  most  necessary  to
preserve  their  health,  and  to  cure  their  diseases ; even  as
it  is  most  notably  set  foorth  by  some  learned  men,  who  Sir  Thomas
have  undertaken  to  write  upon  this  subject : and  there-  ^tot  nts
fore  it  shall  be  altogether  needlesse  heere  to  discourse  ^ith
upon  their  severall  operations  and  vertues,  seeing  that  he  b.  embert
that  listeth,  may  be  well  instructed  therein ; if  hee  will  Dodoneus  his
peruse  the  Volumes  which  are  penned  by  the  learned,  for  history  °f
the  benefit  of  all  those  who  shall  make  use  thereof.  The  French

But  if  peradventure  it  be  yet  further  urged,  that  divers  Academie
Nations  live  without  the  use  of  Druggs  and  Spices : the  second  part,
answere  is,  That  either  such  people  know  not  their  vertue,  an<*  others.
and  therefore  suffer  much  by  the  want  of  wares  so  health-
full,  or  else  they  are  most  miserable,  being  without  meanes
to  obtaine  the  things  which they  so much  want : but
sithence  I  intend  to  be  briefe,  I  will  insist  no  further  upon
this  point : For  the  Objecters  might  aswell  denie  us  the
use  of  Sugers,  Wines,  Oyles,  Raysons,  Figges,  Prunes,

265

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

c.  1620.

and Currands ; and with farre more reason exclaime
against  Tobacco,  Cloth  of  Gold  and  Silver,  Lawnes,  Cam-
bricks,  Gold  and  Silver-lace,  Velvets,  Sattens,  Taffataes,
and  divers  other  manufactures,  yeerely  brought  into  this
Realme  for  an  infinite  value :  all  which  as  it  is  most  true,
that  whilest  we  consume  them,  they  likewise  devoure  our
wealth ; yet  nevertheles,  the  moderate  use  of  all  these
wares  hath  ever  suted  well  with  the  riches  and  Majestie  of
this  Kingdome.
[I.  v.  734.J But  I  will  come  to  the  raw  Silkes  and  Indico,  this  being
France  and so  excellent  for  the  dying  of  our  woollen  clothes,  thereby
1/ \ r  so  much  esteemed  in  so  many  places  of  the  world ; that

Countreyes  of  .  •  1 1 f  /►  t «

late  yeares  do  ornament,  together  with  the  great  reliere  and  maintenance

make  great  of  so  many  hundreds  of  poore  people,  who  are  continually

quantities  of  imployed,  in  the  winding,  twisting,  and  weaving  of  the

wrought  silkey  same .  insomuch,  that  by  the  cherishing  of  this  businesse

of  which  wares / 1  .-**-•• r 1  •  •  1 1  \

they  were  here-  (as  ^1S  Majestie  for  his  part  is  graciously  pleased  to  per-
tofore  served  forme,  in  remitting  the  impost  of  Silke)  it  may  well  be
from  Italy.  hoped,  that  in  short  time,  industrie  will  make  the  Art  to
^rd?Tn  h  flourish  with  no  lesse  happinesse  to  this  Kingdome,  then
and  other  **  kath  done  (through  many  ages)  to  divers  states  in  Italy,
Countreyes.  and  lately  also  to  the  Kingdome  of  France,  and  to  the
united  Provinces  of  the  Low-countreyes.

Now  as  touching  the  Trade  of  Callicoes,  of  many  sorts,
into  which  the  English  lately  made  an  entrance,  although
it  cannot  be  truely  said,  that  this  commoditie  is  profitable,
for  the  state  of  Christendome  in  generall  (in  respect  they
are  the  manufacture  of  Infidels,  and  in  great  part  the  weare
of  Christians)  yet  neverthelesse,  this  commoditie  likewise
is  of  singular  use,  for  this  common- wealth  in  particular ;
not  onely  therewith  to  increase  the  trade  into  forraine
parts,  but  also  thereby  greatly  to  abate  the  excessive  prices
of  Cambrickes,  Holland,  and  other  sorts  of  Linnen  cloth,
which  daily  are  brought  into  this  Kingdome  for  a  very
great  summe  of  money.  And  this  shall  suffice  concerning
the  necessary  use  of  the  Indian  wares :  In  the  next  place,
I  will  set  forth  the  manner  and  meanes  of  their  importing
into  Europe.

266

THE TRADE TO THE EAST INDIES  ad.

c.  1620.

It  is  an  errour  in  those  men  ;  who  thinke  that  the  trade  The  second

of  the  East  Indies  into  Europe  had  first  entrance,  by  the  g^iae^  the

discoverie  of  the  Navigation  by  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope.  manner  y  the

For  many  yeeres  before  that  time,  the  trafficke  of  those  meanes  by

parts  had  his  ordinary  course  by  shipping  from  divers  wh^ch  Indian

places  in  the  Indies,  yeerely  resorting  with  their  wares  to  ™ares  .afe

r  *  j  j  ©  beene  \D  tiozv

Mocha  in  the  Red-Sea,  and  Balsera  in  the  Persian  Gulfe  : are  iroug]lt
From  both  which  places, the Merchandise (with  great  into  Europe.
charges)  were  after  transported  over-land  by  the  Turkes
upon  Cammels,  fiftie  dayes  journey,  unto  Aleppo  in  Soria,
and to  Alexandria  in  Egypt, (which  are in the Mart
Townes,  from  whence  divers  Nations,  as  well  Turkes  as
Christians  doe  continually  disperse  the  said  Wares  by  Sea
into  the  parts  of  Europe : )  by  which  course,  the  common
enemie  of  Christendome  (the  Turke)  was  Master  of  the
Trade,  which  did  greatly  imploy,  and  inrich  his  Subjects,
and  also  fill  the  Coffers  of  his  owne  Customes,  which  he
exacted  at  very  high  rates ; But  by  the  providence  of  Rates  uP°n. a"
Almightie  God,  the  discoverie  of  that  Navigation  to  the  ^ *  °~er  **™'
East  Indies  by  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope  (now  so  much  raw  si/fos
frequented  by  the  English,  Portugals,  and  Dutch; and  esteemed  about
also  attempted  by  other  Christian  Kingdomes)  hath  not  *- per  cent.
onely  much  decayed  the  great  Commerce  betweene  the  J*  "°. a  out
Indians  and  the  Turkes  in  the  Red  Sea ; and  in  the  Per-
sian Gulfe  (to  their  infinite  hurt,  and  to  the  great  increase
of  Christian  Trade,)  but  it  hath  also  brought  a  further
happinesse unto Christendome in generall, and to the
Realme  of  England  in  particular,  for  the  venting  of  more
English  Commodities ; and  for  exporting  of  a  lesse  quan-
tise of  Silver  out  of  Europe  unto  the  Infidels,  by  many
thousand  pounds  yearely,  then  hath  beene  accustomed  in
former  times ; as  I  shall  proove  most  plainely  by  that
which  followeth.

And  first,  it  will  be  necessarie  to  set  downe  the  quan-
titie  of  Spices,  Indico,  and  Persian  raw  Silke  (which  is
yeerely  consumed  in  Europe)  and  in  them  all  to  consider
the  cost  with  the  charges  to  lade  the  same  Commodities
cleere  aboord  the  ships  from  Aleppo ; and  the  like  of  all

267

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

c.  1620.

the selfe same  wares, as they  have  beene  usually  dis-
patched from  the  Ports  of  the  East  Indies ; wherein  will
appeare  that  happinesse,  which  many  doe  so  much  oppose ;
Such  people  as  especially our owne Countrey-men, under the gilded
effect  not  tie termes 0f j^e Common- wealth  : whilest being: indeed

good  of  this  ...  •  1 1 /v  1 1  1  1

Kingdoms  either  ignorant,  or  ill  affected,  they  doe  not  onely  grosly
erre  themselves,  but  also  cause  others  to  hinder  as  much
as  in  them  lyeth,  the  glorie  and  wel-fare  of  this  King-
dome  ;  but  leaving  them,  I  will  set  downe  the  said  wares,
in  their  quantitie  and  prices  as  followeth ; and  first,

At  Aleppo,

The  quantity  Sixe  thousand  thousand  pounds  of  Pepper,  cost  with
°f$pce>  charges  at  two  shillings  the  pound,  six  hundred  thousand

Persian  raw  Pound.  Foure  hundred  fiftie  thousand  pounds  of  Cloves,
Silie,  yeere/y  at  foure  shillings  nine  pence  the  pound,  cost  one  hundred
consumed  in  sixe  thousand  eight  hundreth  seventie  five  pound  tenne
Europe.  shillings. One  hundreth  and  fiftie  thousand  pounds  of

Mace  at  foure  shillings  nine  pence  the  pound,  cost  there
thirtie  five  thousand  sixe  hundred  twentie  sixe  pound.
Foure  hundred  thousand  pounds  of  Nutmegs  at  two
shillings  foure  pence  the  pound,  cost  fortie  sixe  thousand
sixe  hundred  sixtie  sixe  pound  thirteene  shillings  foure
pence.  Three  hundred  fiftie  thousand  of  Indico,  at  foure
shillings  foure  pence  the  pound,  cost  seventie  five  thou-
sand eight  hundred  thirtie  three  pound,  sixe  shillings
eight  pence.  One  thousand  thousand  of  Persia  raw  Silke
at  twelve  shillings  the  pound,  come  to  sixe  hundreth
thousand  pound.  The  whole  summe  of  all  is  146  5001.
pounds,  ten  shillings.

Now  follow  the  same  wares  both  for  quantitie  and
qualitie  at  their  severall  prices,  as  they  are  to  be  bought
and  laden  cleere  of  charges,

In  the  East  Indies,

Sixe  thousand  thousand  pounds  of  Pepper,  cost  with
charges  at  two  pence  halfe  pennie  the  pound,  sixtie  two
thousand five hundred pound. Foure hundred fiftie

268

THE TRADE TO THE EAST INDIES  a.d.

c.  1620.
thousand  pounds  of  Cloves  at  nine  pence  the  pound,  cost  [I.  v.  735.]
sixteene  thousand  eight  hundred  seventie  five  pounds.
One  hundred  and  fiftie  thousand  pounds  of  Mace,  at  eight
pence  the  pound,  cost  five  thousand  pounds.  Foure  hun-
dred thousand  pounds  of  Nutmegs,  at  foure  pence  the
pound,  cost  sixe  thousand  sixe  hundred  sixtie  sixe  pounds
thirteene  shillings  foure  pence.  Three  hundred  and  fiftie
thousand  pounds  of  Indico,  at  fourteene  pence  the  pound,
cost  twentie  thousand  foure  hundred  and  sixteene  pounds
twelve  shillings  foure  pence.  Ten  hundred  thousand
pounds  Persia  raw  Silke,  at  eight  shillings  the  pound,
cost  foure  hundred  thousand  pounds.  The  whole  summe
of  all  is,  51 1458.  pounds,  5.  shillings,  8.  pence.

So  that  by  the  substance,  and  summes  of  these  accounts  T}e  ^xPort^-
it  doth  plainely  appeare,  that  the  buying  of  the  said  quan-  ttonl  °* *e
titie  of  raw  Silkes,  Indico,  and  Spices,  may  be  performed  9:53543.  /.
in the Indies, for neere one third part of the readie  sterling  out  of
moneys,  which  were  accustomed  to  be  sent  into  Turkey Christendome
to  provide  the  same: So  that  there  will  be  saved  every  tntoTurkey
yeere  the  value  of  nine  hundred  fiftie  three  thousand  five '
hundred  fortie  three  pounds  foure  shillings  foure  pence
sterling, of  readie  moneys, that  heretofore  hath beene
exported  out  of  Christendome  into  Turkey : which  is  a
matter  of  such  note  and  consequence,  that  it  may  seeme
incredible,  before  the  circumstance  be  duely  considered ;
and  therefore  lest  I  should  leave  the  matter  in  doubt,  it  is
requisite,  that  I  doe  make  an  explanation  of  some  par-
ticulars.

And  principally,  it  must  not  be  conceived,  that  this
great  advantage  which  hath  beene  spoken  of,  is  onely  the
Merchants  gayne ;  for  the  Common-wealth  of  Christen-
dome, hath  a  very  great  part  thereof  in  the  cheapnesse  of
the  Wares,  as  shall  be  (God  willing)  proved  hereafter  in
his  due  place.

Secondly,  the  time  of  the  Merchants  forbearance  and
interest  is  very  long ;  his  adventure  and  assurance  much
dearer ;  his  charges  of  Shipping,  Victuals,  Mariners,  and
Factors  their  wages,  farre  greater  then  by  the  voyage  into

269

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

c.  1620.

Turkey  for  the  same  Wares :  so  that  the  former  great
difference  must  be  understood  in  these  particulars :
whereby  we  may  perceive  to  our  comfort,  that  the
Instance  only,  materials  of  the  Kingdome,  and  the  employments  of  the
t  at  ten  si-  Subjects  (in  lieu  of  readie  moneys)  becomes  a  very  great
in  Pepper  in  Part  °f  the  price  which  is  payed  for  the  said  Indian  Wares  :
deEastlndies,  which  cannot  hurt  the  State  (as  some  erroniously  suppose)
will  require but  greatly  helpe  it,  as  I  shall  better  prove  in  that  which

fm^ifaii  followeth-

charges  what-  First  therefore,  I  shew  for  an  undoubted  truth,  That

soever  to  the  Persians,  Moores,  and  Indians,  who  trade  with  the

deliver  it  in  Turkes  at  Aleppo,  Mocha,  and  Alexandria,  for  raw  Silkes,

London,  Drugs,  Spices,  Indico,  and  Callicoes ; have  alwayes  made,

summes  of  anc^  st*^  doe  make  their  returnes  in  readie  money : for

money  which  other  Wares,  there  are  but  few  which  they  desire  from

the  Persians  forraine  parts ; some  Chamlets,  Corrall,  wrought  Silke,

and  the  woollen  Cloth,  with  some  trifles,  they  doe  yeerly  vent  in

yeerely  out  of  a^>  not  ^or  above  fortie  or  fiftie  thousand  pounds  sterling  ;

Turkey.  which  is  no  valuable  summe  in  respect  of  that  wealth
which  is  carried  from  Aleppo  and  Constantinople  into
Persia  for  raw  Silkes ; when  least,  five  hundred  thousand

The  East  pounds  sterling  per  annum :  and  from  Mocha  about  sixe

India  Com-  hundred  thousand  pounds  sterling  (likewise  yeerely  into

t>ame  doe  /*  *•

endeavour  to  India) for returne of Callicoes, Drugs, Sugar, Rice,

bring  the  raw  Tobacco,  and  divers  other  things. So  here  is  stil  a  very

Silkes  from  great  commerce  maintayned  betweene  those  Infidels ;  not

Persia  directly  Gnely  for  the  Callicoes  of  many  sorts,  and  other  Wares

Marcellis  sen-  (which  concerne  their  owne  use)  but  also  for  the  raw  Silkes

deth  yeerely  to  of  Persia,  which  are  altogether  transported  into  Christen-

Aleppo  and  dome.

Alexandria,  How  worthie  an  enterprise  is  it  therefore  in  the  Eng-

00000  /  ^s^  ^ast  Inc^a  Companie?  by  whose  endeavours  there  is

sterling,  and  now  good  hope  to  turne  a  great  part  of  this  wealthie

little  or  no  Trade into England, by shipping directly from the

wares.Venice  Persian  Gulfe,  whereby  the  employments,  trafficke,  and

sen  s  a  out Customes  of  the  Turkes,  may  be  still  more  and  more

the  value  of  5  '

1 00000  /.  and  a  great  value  in  wares. The Low  countries  sends  about  the  value  of
50000  /.  sterling  monies,  and  litle  wares. Messina  25000  /.  in  ready  money.

270

THE TRADE TO THE EAST INDIES  ad.

c.  1620.

impaired,  and  the  generall  Treasure  of  Christendome  much
lesse  consumed ;  as  is  already  performed  for  the  businesse
of  Spices  and  Indico.

And  who  shall  then  doubt  our  want  of  Silver  to  main-
taine  the  Trade  ?  if  by  this  way  we  doe  obtaine  the  Silke,
which  with  more  advantage  and  conveniencie  will  draw
the  money  to  this  Mart,  then  it  hath  beene  heretofore
conveyed  unto  those  remote  Dominions  of  the  Turke.

And  lest  peradventure  it  should  be  thought,  that  the
trafficke  in  those  parts  by  the  Christians  for  the  Persian
Silke,  is  performed  by  change  for  other  Wares,  or  by  the
money  which  proceedeth  of  the  sales  of  many  rich  Com-
modities, which  yeerely  they  sell  at  Aleppo,  Alexandria,
Constantinople,  and  these  parts.  The  answere  is,  that
neither  the  Venetians,  French,  nor  Dutch,  doe  vent  so
much  of  their  owne  Countrie  Commodities  in  those  parts,
as  doe  provide  their  necessarie  wants  of  the  proper  Wares
of  Turkes :  such  as  are  the  fine  raw  Silke  made  in  Soria,
Chamlets,  Grograns,  Cotten  Woolls,  Cotten  Yarne,  Galls,
Flax,  Hempe,  Fleece  Woolls,  Rice,  Hides,  Waxe,  and
divers  other  things ;  so  that  still  the  raw  Silkes  of  Persia,
must  be  bought  with  readie  money.  Onely  the  English
have  more  advantage  then  any  other  Nation  in  this  kind :
for  they  vent  so  great  a  quantitie  of  Broad-clothes,  Tinne,
and  other  English  Commodities,  that  the  proceed  thereof,
doth  not  onely  provide  a  sufficient  quantitie  of  part  of  the
said  Turkish  Wares  (which  fit  their  use)  but  also  a  pro-
portion of  about  three  hundred  great  Balls  of  Persia  raw
Silke  yeerely.

And  if  in  any  yeere  they  chance  to  buy  a  greater  quan-
titie of  Silke,  then  must  and  doe  they  furnish  the  same
in  readie  moneys  from  the  Ports  of  Marcellis,  Genovay,
Ligorne,  Venice,  or  the  Netherlands.  Neither  are  these  [I.  v.  736.]
the  onely  meanes,  whereby  the  Empire  of  the  Turke  is
so  abundantly  stored  with  Gold  and  Silver,  to  the  per-
formance of  the  Indian  Trade.  For,  many  are  the  Christian
ships  which  yeerely  lade  with  Corne  for  readie  moneys  in
the  Archipelago : great is the  commerce from  Poland,

271

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

c.  1620.

Hungarie, and Germanie,  with  Gold  and  Dollers, for

Chamlets,  Grograns,  and  other  things :  But  that  which  is

very  remarkable,  is  the  great  quantitie  of  Gold,  and  some

Silver coyned in Grand-Cairo, which by two severall

Caravans  (in  bullion)  is  yeerly  brought  thither  from  the

Abassem  a Abassens  Countrey  in  Ethiopia,  for  returne  of  many  rich

Ethiotiawhose  Commodities,  as  Velvets,  Sattins,  Cloth  of  Gold,  Taffatas,

influence  hath  wollen  Cloth,  pollished  Corrall,  and  other  things.

made  them  Thus  by  the  coherence  of  the  Turkish  Trade  with  the

dull,  lazy,  and  Christians,  Persians,  and  Indians,  I  have  shewed  both  the

without  arts; manner  ancj  the  meanes,  whereby  the  East  Indian  Wares

divers  Mines have  beene  heretofore,  and  yet  are  in  part,  procured  into

of  Gold,  and Christendome. But  lest  it  should  seeme  incredible,  that

one  of  Silver, the  Turke  would  let  so  great  a  masse  of  Treasure  yeerely

which  doe  pro-  to  passe  hjs  Dominions,  to  the  Indians,  and  to  the  Per-

wants  of  for- s^ans  his  professed  enemies ; I  will  make  the  matter  yet

raine  Wares, more  plaine.

And first concerning the raw Silkes, it is alreadie

shewed, that he hath the money from the Christians,

besides  the  benefit  he  reapeth  in  their  Customes,  with

great  employments  also  for  his  Subjects. And  for  Calli-

Turkey  hath coes  ^js  whole  Empire  having  little  or  no  other  meanes

it  e  meanes ^ Linnen)  he  cannot  possibly  be  without  them,  although
forLinnenbut ■ ,  /  r  /  >  &

onely  from it  hath,  and  doth  greatly  exhaust  his lreasure,  neither

India.  doth  he  gayne  any  manufacture  by  the  same,  as  the  Chris-

tians have  alwayes  done  by  the  raw  Silke,  to  the  great
reliefe  of  innumerable  poore  people,  so  much  provided  for,
The  proceed-  by  t^le  P°Uicie  of  all  well  governed  and  flourishing
ings  of  some  Common-wealths ;  As  by  this  occasion,  and  in  a  busi-
Statesinltalie  nesse  of  the  like  kind,  I  may  instance  the  States  of  Geno-
for  the  main-  va^  Florence,  and  Luca ;  who  for  the  maintenance  of
^rts*  ^rts  anc^  Trade,  doe  provide  raw  Silkes  out  of  Sicilia  for

The  readie  the  value  of  five  hundred  thousand  pounds  sterling  at
moneys  which  least  yeerly ;  and  for  the  payment  thereof  they  doe  vent
are  yeerely  at  Naples,  Palermo,  Messina,  and  those  parts,  a  certaine
C*™Sttt*f  (luanti^e  °f  Florence  Rashes,  and  some  other  Wares,  for
Italic  into  about  one  hundred  and  fiftie  thousand  pounds  sterling  per
Sicilia,  annum ; so  the  rest,  being  three  hundred  and  fiftie  thou-

272

HONDIUS HIS MAP OF THE EAST INDIES

THE TRADE TO THE EAST INDIES  ad.

c.  1620.
sand  pounds  sterling,  is  supplied  all  in  readie  moneys :
which  treasure  they  doe  willingly  forsake  to  procure  their
Trade :  for  experience  hath  taught  them  that  Trade  is
their  employment,  and  doth  returne  them  Treasure ;  for
by  those  Silkes  (being  wrought,  transported,  and  sold  at
Frankford  and  other  Marts,)  they  have  the  better  meanes
to  furnish  their  Contracts  with  the  King  of  Spaine  in
Flanders ;  and  so  from  Spaine  the  Silver  must  returne
againe  to  Italic  But  if  I  should  runne  out  in  this  and
other  particulars  (fitting  our  purpose)  it  would  make  me
too  tedious,  and  so  carrie  mee  beyond  my  ayme,  which  is
to  be  briefe.

Wherefore  I  will  proceed  to  cleere  some  doubts  in
those  men,  who  perhaps  not  having  the  knowledge  of
occurrents  in  forraine  parts,  might  thinke  that  neither
Venice,  nor  Marcellis  have  the  meanes  or  yet  the  minds,
to  export  such  great  summes  of  readie  moneys  yeerely
out  of  those  Dominions,  especially  Marcellis  being  a  part
of  France,  where  neighbourhood  doth  daily  tell  us,  that
Gold  and  Silver  may  not  bee  convayed  out  of  that  King-
dome,  for  any  valuable  summe,  more  then  is  permitted
for  the  necessarie  use  of  Travellers :  yet  neverthelesse,
experience  hath  likewise  taught  us,  that  for  the  effecting
of  those  Trades  (whereof  we  now  speake,  and  which  they
esteeme  so  much)  there  is  a  free  extraction  out  of  the  said
places,  of  moneyes  both  gold  and  silver ;  whereof  with
them  there  is  no  want ;  for,  the  said  Wares  doe  procure  it
abundantly.

First,  to  Marcellis,  it  commeth  not  onely  from  Genovay,  HowMarcellis
Ligorne, Cartagenia, Malliga, and many other Port  a*dv™lcea™

D  ~  * ' '  O  ■»  O-7  •  tUTtllSnCcl  Willi

Townes  of  Spaine  and  Italy,  but  also  from  Paris,  Roan,  rea^  moneyS.
Sainct-Malloes,  Tolouse,  Rochell,  Deepe,  and  other  Cities
of  France ; who  want  not  meanes  to  have  great  store  of
Rials  and  Dollers  from  Spaine  and  Germanie.

And  in  the  like  manner,  the  Venetians  dispersing  the

said  raw  Silkes,  and  other  Wares  into  the  severall  States

of  Italie,  Germanie,  and  Hungarie,  (who  have  but  few

Commodities  fitting  their  barter  or  exchange,  but  onely

v  273  s

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

c.  1620.

moneyes)  are  therewith  abundantly  served  :  for,  the  Mynes
of Hungarie and Germanie affoord good quantitie of
Gold  and  Silver ; and  likewise  the  States  of  Italie,  especi-
ally Genovay,  Florence,  and  Millane,  have  ever  store  of
Rials  out  of  Spaine  in  satisfaction  of  many  great  disburse-
The  Italian ments,  which  those  Merchants  make  for  that  King  in  his
f  ^ihth °e  occas^ons  °f  Italie  and  Flanders ; of  all  which  I  might
Kingof  Spaine  make  a  large  discourse,  but  I  conceive  I  have  said  suffi-
with  money  in  cient,  to  shew  how  the  Trade  of  the  East  Indies  hath
Italie  and beene,  and  now  is  brought  into  Christendome  generally ;
what  money  is  yeerely  sent  out,  by  whom,  and  the  possi-
bilitie  or  meanes  which  they  have  to  performe  it. I  will
The  third  part  therefore  in  the  next  place,  satisfie  the  Objectors,  that  it  is
the  East  India  not  ^e  ^ast  India  Trade,  which  wasteth  the  Gold,  and
Trade  doth Silver,  Coyne,  or  other  treasure  of  this  Kingdome  in  par-

enrich  this  ticular.

Kingdome.  por  £rst^  wh0  ktioweth  not  that  Gold  in  the  East  Indies

hath  no  ratable  price  with  Silver  ? Neither  hath  the  Silver

coyne  of  England  any  equall  value  with  the  Spanish  Rials

according  to  their  several  prices  here ; besides  that,  his

Majestie  hath  not  authorized  the  East  India  Company,  to

send  away  any  part  of  this  Kingdoms  Coyne,  either  Gold

or  Silver, but  only  a  certain  limited  summe  of  forren

silver  yeerly ; which  as  they  dare  not  exceed,  so  never

[I.  v.  737.] have  they  as  yet  accomplished  the  same. For  it  doth

plainly  appeare  in  their  bookes,  that  from  the  originall

How  much an(j  first  foundation  of  the  Trade  in  Anno 1601.  untill

wares  the  East  t'ie  moneth  °f  Juty>  Anno  1620.  they  have  shipped  away

India  Com- onely five hundred fortie eight thousand and ninety

panie  have pounds sterling in Spanish Rials, and some Dollers ;

sent  firth  ever  whereas  by  licence,  they  might  have  exported  in  that  time

sithencethe seven hundred and twentie thousand pounds sterling.

beginning  of  ,  ,  ,  r  r •

this  Trade.  Also  ^ey  have  laden  away  in  the  same  terme  or  ninteene
yeeres,  out  of  this  Kingdome  two  hundred  ninetie  two
thousand  two  hundred  eightie  sixe  pounds  sterling  in
Broad-clothes,  Kersies,  Lead,  Tinne,  with  some  other
English  and  forraine  Commodities ;  which  is  a  good
Addition, and vent of our Wares, into such remote

274

THE TRADE TO THE EAST INDIES  ad.

c.  1620.

places ; where heretofore they have had no utterance

at  all.

And  note,  I  pray  you,  how  time  and  Industrie  hath  The  vent  of

bettered  this  Trade,  when  in  the  last  three  yeeres  there  hath  EnghshWares

m  encreased  in

beene  sent  more  Wares  to  the  Indies,  then  in  the  sixteene  the  jncnes.

yeeres  before ; and  yet our  expectation is not  at the

highest ; for  those  new  borne  Trades  within  the  Red  Sea,

and  in  the  Persian  Gulfe,  doe  bid  us  hope  for  better  things,

as  lately  by  Letters  from  Spahan,  we  understand  of  great

quantitie  of  raw  Silke  prepared  by  the  English  Factors,

which  (by  Gods  assistance)  wee  may  expect  here  about

the  moneth  of  August  next,  with  encouragement  also  to

vent  our  English  Cloth,  and  Kersies  in  good  quantities ;  Our  stocke

the  like  of  Iron,  Tinne,  and  other  things,  whereof  experi-  may  he  much

ence  (of  those  already  sold)  hath  given  us  sufficient  appro-  *%rejSei  2
1 .•  e  ,\ •  \*  •%• .  •  J-  rade  from

bation  of  their  validitie.  #  ^  Port  to  For  tin

And now (omitting much matter which might be  the  Indies,
written touching  the  discoveries  of  other  Trades  from  For  this  see
one  Kingdome  or  Port  to  another  in  the  Indies,  with  the  Reformer  re-
Commodities  thereof; whereby  the  employment  of  our  Trade  from*
ships,  together  with  the  Stocke  of  money  and  goods  which  Surat  to
is  sent  out  of  England  in  them,  may  be  much  encreased)  Achen,andall
I  will  draw  to  a  conclusion  of  the  point  in  hand,  and  shew  the  Southerne
that  whatsoever  summes  of  forraine  readie  moneyes  are  1?  yf e1
yeerely  sent  from  hence  into  the  East  Indies,  his  Majestie  indies:  as
in  the  Letters  Patents  granted  to  that  Companie,  hath  thence  also  to
notwithstanding with singular care provided, that the  the  re* Sea
brethren  of  the  Companie,  shall  yeerely  bring  in  as  much -;•
Silver,  as  they  send  forth  ;  which  hath  beene  alwayes  truly  $ent  tQ  tj{e
performed,  with  an  overplus,  to  the  increase  of  this  King-  Indies  is  all
domes  treasure  :  Neither  is  it  likely  that  the  money  which  forrain  Coyne.
is  thus  contracted  for  by  the  Companie  at  certaine  prices,  t^eEast]:ndta
and  to  be  delivered  them  at  times  appointed,  would  be  ^/w^
otherwise  brought  into  England,  but  onely  by  vertue  and  bring  in  as
for  the  performance  of  the  said  Contracts  : for,  without  much  money  as

this  assurance  of  vent,  together  with  a  good  price  for  the  theJ  cajJteout

&  fe  r  oftheRealme.

Tobacco,  Raisons,  Oyles,  and  Wines,  whereof  there  is  no  want,  but  rather  too  much  Smoke. A

proportion  of  such  Trade  as  is  ho  fed yeerely  to  be  brought  into  this  Realme  from  East  India.

275

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

c.  1620.

said  moneyes,  the  Merchants  would  undoubtedly  make
their  returnes  in  other  Wares ;  the  use  and  extraordinarie
consume  whereof,  would  be  found  lesse  profitable  to
the  Common-wealth,  when  the  matter  should  be
duly  considered,  as  I  shall  yet  further  endeavour  to
demonstrate.

And  here  I  will  suppose,  That  the  East  India  Com-
panie  may  ship  out  yeerely  one  hundred  thousand  pounds
sterling :  yet  it  is  most  certaine,  that  the  Trade  being  thus
driven,  with  sums  of  readie  moneys,  it  will  not  decay,
but  rather  much  increase  the  treasure  of  the  Kingdome :
which  to  prove,  I  will  briefly  set  downe  the  substance  of
the  English  Trade  unto  the  East  Indies,  concerning  the
quantitie  of  the  severall  sorts  of  Wares,  to  be  yeerly
bought  there,  and  sold  here ;  with  the  usuall  prices  given
for  them  in  both  places.  And  first,  I  will  beginne  with
their  cost  and  charges  laden  cleere  aboord  the  ships  in  the
East  Indies.

In  the  East  Indies.

Two  thousand  five  hundred  thousand  pounds  of  Pepper,
at  two  pence  half-penie  the  pound,  cost  twentie  sixe  thou-
sand fortie  one  pounds  thirteene  shillings  foure  pence.
One  hundred  and  fiftie  thousand  pounds  of  Cloves,  at
nine  pence  the  pound,  cost  five  thousand  six  hundred
twentie  sixe  pounds.  One  hundred  and  fiftie  thousand
pounds  of  Nutmegs,  at  foure  pence  the  pound,  cost  two
thousand  five  hundred  pounds.  Fiftie  thousand  pounds
of  Mace,  at  eight  pence  the  pound,  cost  one  thousand
sixe  hundred  sixtie  sixe  pounds  thirteene  shillings  foure
pence.  Two  hundred  thousand  pounds  of  Indico,  at
fourteene  pence  the  pound,  cost  eleven  thousand  sixe
hundred  sixtie  sixe  pounds  thirteene  shillings  foure  pence.
One  hundred  and  seven  thousand  one  hundred  fortie
pounds  of  China  raw  Silkes,  at  seven  shillings  the  pound,
cost  thirtie  seven  thousand  foure  hundred  nintie  nine
pounds.  Fiftie  thousand  of  Callicoes  of  severall  sorts,
rated  at  seven  shillings  the  piece  one  with  another,  fifteene

276

THE TRADE TO THE EAST INDIES  ad.

c.  1620.
thousand  pounds. The  whole  summe  of  all  is,  one  hun-
dred thousand  pounds.

All  the  said  Merchandize  have  beene  often  experienced,
or  bought  at  or  about  the  prices  above  written ;  and  we
doe  hope  for  our  parts  (besides  the  Trade  of  raw  Silkes
from  Persia)  yeerely,  to  lade  from  the  Indies,  such  quan-
tise of  the  severall  sorts  of  Wares  as  are  here  set  downe
(if  it  shall  please  his  Majestie,  to  protect  and  defend  us
concerning  the  Articles  of  agreement  made  with  the
Dutch,  that  they  may  not  violate  any  of  them  to  our
hindrance  or  damage)  all  which  wares  in  England  will
yeeld  (as  I  doe  conceive)  the  prices  hereafter  following,
viz.

In  England.

Two  hundred  and  fiftie  thousand  pounds  of  Pepper,  at
twentie  pence  the  pound,  cost  two  hundred  and  eight
thousand  three  hundred  thirtie  three  pounds  sixe  shillings
eight  pence.  One  hundred  and  fiftie  thousand  of  Cloves,
at  six  shillings  the  pound,  cost  fortie  five  thousand
pounds.

One  hundred  and  fiftie  thousand  pounds  of  Nutmegs,  at  P«  v-  738-]
two  shillings  sixe  pence  the  pound,  cost  eighteene  thou-  H°w  much  the
sand  seven  hundred  and  fiftie  pounds. Fiftie  thousand  fw| .
pound  of  Mace,  at  sixe  shillings  the  pound,  cost  fifteene  crease  yeerely
thousand pounds. Two hundred thousand pounds of  by  trading  to
Indico,  at  five  shillings  the  pound,  cost  fiftie  thousand  theEastlndies.
pounds. One  hundred  and  seven  thousand  one  hundred  2^?'  **"**'
fortie  pounds  of  China  raw  Silkes,  at  twentie  shillings  the  ladelornT^all
pound,  cost  one  hundred  and  seven  thousand  one  hundred  the  wares
fortie pounds. Fiftie thousand pieces of Callicoes of  ^fire  written
severall  sorts,  rated  at  twentie  shillings  the  piece  one  with  f™™. the  faf
another,  cost  fiftie  thousand  pounds. The  whole  summe  the  materiais
of  all  is,  foure  hundred  ninetie  foure  thousand  two  hun-  of  the  said
dred  twentie  three  pounds  sixe  shillings  eight  pence.  shipping  (un-

So  that  here  would  be  our  owne  money  againe  and  wrou&ht) ts
more,  the  summe  of  three  hundred  ninetie  foure  thousand  7coooY*
two  hundred  twentie  three  pounds  sixe  shillings  eight  sterling.  '

277

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

c.  1620.
India  wares pence  advanced  towards  the  generall  Stocke  of  the  King-
wil  bring dome. For although the East India Companie shall
'into  tethemoneys disburse  the  greatest  part  of  the  said  summe  advanced
Realme.  unto  his  Majestie  for  Custome  and  Impost ;  and  also  unto

We  have  no  the  Factors,  Officers,  and  Mariners,  for  wages,  together
other  meanes  with  the  cost  of  shipping  Victuals,  Munitions,  Assurance
*o  procure  ancj  ^e  like  :  yet  all  these  (the  Materials  of  shipping  onely
by  Trade  and  excepted)  are  but  transmutations  and  no  consumption  of
Merchan-  the  Kingdomes  Stocke.
d'lze-  But  if  any  man  object  and  say,  that  the  said  Commodi-

d  hv  **es  being  brought  into  England  (as  is  before  written)  they
tians  send  the  are  either  consumed  in  the  Land,  or  being  transported  into
value  of  forraine  parts,  they  are  changed  into  other  Wares : So

600000  /.  that  still  we  want  our  hundred  thousand  pounds  in  readie
sterling  ^  money. The  answere  is,  First,  that  in  the  occasion  of  this

ready  money  dispute,  wee  must  conceive  the  said  Wares  to  be  of  no
into  Turkey,  use  for  this  Kingdome,  but  onely  for  so  much,  as  doe
Trade  maketh  concerne  the  Trade  thereof.  And  Secondly,  in  the  said
some  States  Trade  we  must  consider,  that  although  the  said  goods  be
wMck  have  sent  out>  anc^  returned  home  in  other  Wares  from  forraine
little  other  parts  ;  yet  still,  they  are  negotiated  to  the  increase  of  the
meanes.  said Stocke, and  for the imployment  of  the Subjects.

If  the  generall  Lastly5  if  there  be  a  resolution  to  determine  and  end  the
v- 6j ,Jli  businesse : who  doubteth,  that  the  whole  value  may  not

Kingaomeaotn  .  ' ,  5 J ,

export  a  bee  presently  returned  hither  in  readie  moneyes: Jhor  in

greater  value  Italie,  Turkey,  and  other  places,  where  they  are  most

in  wares  then  vendible  to  profit,  there  likewise  is  the  money  free  to  be

it  dot  impoit  eXp0rteci  at  ai|  times  and  by  whomsoever.

xeer/v  then  * s

doth  our  trea-  And  as  it  is  most  certaine,  that  some  other  Merchan-

sure  increase,  dize,  sent  out  of  this  Kingdome,  were  the  meanes  to
The  Trade  to  bring  in  the  hundred  thousand  pounds  in  readie  moneyes,
the  East  Indies  wy^i  is  here  supposed  to  be  sent  and  imployed  in  the
exlort  East  Indies  (as  aforesaid)  so  likewise,  there  is  the  same

480000  power  in  these  Indian  wares,  to  procure  other  summes  of

pounds  and  readie  moneyes,  to  bee  brought  into  this  Kingdome :  For
to  import |et  not  man  doubt,  but  that  money  doth  attend  Merchan-

120000  /•  «•  /•  ,  1  •  r  1  ^_i_

yeerely.  So  the  ^lzeJ  ^or  money  1S  the  prize  or  wares,  and  wares  are  the
overbalance proper  use  of  money  ; so  that  their  coherence  is  unsepar-

278

THE TRADE TO THE EAST INDIES

able.  And  if  the  French  and  the  Venetians,  made  any
doubt  of  this,  they  would  not  so  willingly  permit  the
value  of  sixe  hundred  thousand  pounds  sterling,  or  more
in  Spanish  Rialls  and  Dollers,  yeerly  to  be  carryed  out  of
their  Dominions  into  Turkey :  whereof  three  quarter
parts  at  least  are  imployed,  onely  for  the  buying  of  Persia
raw  Silkes,  which  commoditie  doth  presently  enable  them
with  readie  money  from  divers  other  States  to  performe
the  Trade ;  whereby  their  wealth  doth  much  increase,
and  their  people  are  greatly  imployed.  So  to  conclude
this  point,  I  will  onely  adde,  that  the  East  India  Trade
alone  (although  it  be  driven  in  no  amplyer  manner  then
is  afore  written)  is  a  meanes  to  bring  more  treasure  into
the  Realme  then  all  the  other  trades  of  this  Kingdome  (as
they  are  now  managed)  being  put  together.  For  if  the
rule  be  true,  that  when  the  value  of  our  commodities  ex-
ported doth  over-ballance  the  worth  of  all  those  forraigne
wares,  which  are  imported  and  consumed  in  this  King-
dome,  then  the  remaynder  of  our  stocke  which  is  sent
forth,  must  of  necessitie  returne  to  us  in  Treasure.  I  am
confident,  that  upon  a  diligent  and  true  inquirie  it  will
be  found,  that  the  over-ballance  of  all  our  other  Trades
together,  will  not  amount  unto  so  great  a  summe  of
money  as  the  East  India  Trade  alone  doth  over-ballance  in
this  kinde.

And  to  make  the  matter  yet  more  plaine,  whereas  it  is
already  said  that  one  hundred  thousand  pounds  in  money
exported,  may  import  about  the  value  of  five  hundred
thousand  pounds  sterling,  in  wares  from  the  East  Indies,
we  must  understand  that  part  thereof  to  be  properly
called  our  importation  that  this  Realme  doth  consume,
which  is  about  the  value  of  one  hundred  and  twenty  thou-
sand pounds  sterling  yeerly.  So  the  remaynder  being
three  hundred  and  eightie  thousand  pounds,  is  matter
exported  unto  forraine  parts  in  the  nature  of  our  Cloth,
Lead,  Tin,  or  any  other  native  commodities,  to  the  great
increase  of  this  Kingdomes  stocke,  and  that  also  in  so
much  treasure,  so  farre  as  the  East  India  Trade  can  be

279

A.D.

c.  1620.

is  360000  /.
sterling.
Every  action
ought  espe-
cially to  be
considered  in
his  end.
The  East
Indian  wares
which  were
sent  beyond  the
Seas,  are  sold
and  have  their
finall  end  in
money,  which
might  bee
brought  into
this  Realme  in
that  kind,  if
our  other
Trades  did  not
divert  the
same.

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

c.  1620.

rightly  understood  to  subsist  in  this  particular.  For  as
all  humane  actions  have  their  Termination  and  Ends,  so
likewise  there  must  bee  an  end  assigned  unto  the  affaires
of  the  East  Indies ;  which  are  then  truely  said  to  bee
finished,  when  this  Realme  is  served,  and  the  remainder
of  those  Wares  which  are  sent  from  hence  beyond  the
Seas,  sold  there  and  converted  into  money ;  which  like-
wise from  thence  may  bee  brought  away  freely  and  with-
out the  danger  of  Law,  or  prohibition.  Forasmuch  there-
fore as  it  is  well  knowne  to  many  men,  that  moneys  are
thus  procured  by  the  Sales  of  Indian  Wares  to  profit,  in
the  parts  of  Turkey,  and  at  Ligorne,  Genoway,  the
[I.  v.  739.]  Netherlands,  Marcellis,  and  other  places :  yet  notwith-
standing if  all  the  said  Coyne,  or  any  part  thereof  should
bee  diverted  from  this  Realme  by  some  other  new  imploy-
ments  or  affaires,  it  must  neverthelesse  bee  granted,  that
the  said  India  wares  had  their  finall  end  in  monies.  But
I  will  cease  to  heape  up  any  more  arguments,  to  prove  a
matter  which  is  alreadie  made  so  plaine ;  wherefore  leav-
ing this  Objection,  I  will  endevour  to  give  Answere  to
the  next.

The  second  Objection.

The  Timber,  Planke,  and  other  materials,  for  making  of
shipping,  is  exceedingly  wasted,  and  made  dearer,  by
the  building  of  so  many  great  Ships,  as  are  yeerely  sent
to  Trade  in  the  East  Indies ;  and  yet  the  State  hath  no
use  of  any  of  them  upon  occasion.  For  either  they  are
not  here ;  or  else  they  come  home  very  weake  and
unserviceable.

The  Answere.

THis East India Trade seemeth to be borne and
brought up an Unthrift, for it wasteth and  con-
sumeth  all ; Neither  doth  it  good  to  any.
The  first  Part Y gut  ^  Objection,  in  some  part  is  very  weake  :
concemeth  the  a 1 • 1  v •  1

folk  of  the  2  -^nd  in  t^e  rest  xt  1S  mistaken.

Objection,  For  first,  concerning  the  weaknesse  thereof,  would  men

280

THE TRADE TO THE EAST INDIES  ad.

c.  1620.
have  us  to  keepe  our  woods  and  goodly  trees  to  looke
upon?  they  might  aswell  forbid  the  working  of  our
wools,  and  sending  forth  our  cloth  to  forraigne  parts ;  for
both  are  meanes  alike  to  procure  the  necessary  wares,
which  this  Kingdome  wanteth.  Do  they  not  know  that
trees  doe  live  and  grow :  and  being  great,  they  have  a
time  to  dye  and  rot,  if  oportunitie  make  no  better  use  of
them  ?  and  what  more  noble  or  profitable  use  then  goodly
ships  for  Trade  and  Warre  ?  Are  they  not  our  Barnes  for
wealth,  and  plentie,  serving  as  wals  and  bulwarkes  for  our
peace  and  happinesse?  Doe  not  their  yeerely  buildings
maintayne  many  hundred  poore  people,  and  greatly  in-
crease the  number  of  those  Artesmen  which  are  so  need-
full  for  this  Common- wealth  ?  And  is  not  all  this  good  The  Profl~
r  ji / '  -l  -j  \ i_ u • • • dence  of  the

performed  also  (with  great  providence) by  bringing  in  ^ast  fn^a

yeerely  store  of  Timber,  and  other  provisions  from  Ire-  Company  for

land  ? Why  then,  where  is  the  great  waste  and  dearnesse  ?  Timber  and

I  am  sure,  the  East  India  Companie  finds  it  not; for  ^ncke-

whereas  they  doe  onely  buy  their  provisions  in  Hamp-  j, ..  ,  ^  la

shire,  Essex,  Kent,  and  Barkshire,  in  all  which  places  they  not  indeared

now  may  have  both  Timber,  Plankes,  Sheathing  boards,  the  materials

Trenals  and  the  like,  both  for  goodnesse  and  price,  as  wh*ch  serve  t0

\  • tnnhfi  t  hi  tit

cheape (yea  better cheape) then they have beene this  F

fifteene  yeeres ;  and  likewise  in  all  that  course  of  time
their  Bookes  doe  plainly  shew  that  those  wares  have  never
varied  much ;  for  if  they  have  risen  any  small  matter  in
one  yeare,  they  have  fallen  as  much  the  next.  And  yet  I
pray  you  observe  (besides  the  East  India  Companies
buildings)  the  many  goodly  ships  which  are  daily  made  for
other  private  Merchants  (such  as  England  never  had
before)  and  that  which  is  most  remarkable,  is  the  con-
tinuall  late  buildings  of  his  Majestie,  thereby  yearely
adding  more  strength  and  glory  of  great  ships,  to  his
Royall  and  matchlesse  Navy ;  so  that  here  we  see  this
supposed  waste  and  want  is  not  considerable.  ZTfe  second

Yea  but,  say  they,  the  East  India  ships  are  never  here ^rt  . ,
to  serve  the  Kingdome  upon  occasion : Or  if  they  beate  mistaking  in
home,  they  are  weake  and  unfit  for  service.  the  Objection.

281

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

c.  1620.

In  Trade  of  Merchandize  our  ships  must  goe  and  come,
they  are  not  made  to  stay  at  home ; Yet  neverlesse,  the
East  India  Company  are  well  prepared  at  all  times,  to
The  Warlike serve  his  Majestie  and  his  Kingdomes,  with  many  war-
provuion  ]^e  provisions,  which  they  alwayes  keepe  in  store ; such

India  Com-  as  Timber,  Planckes,  Ironworkes,  Masts,  Cordage,  An-
panie  keepe  in  chors,  Caske,  Ordnance,  Powder,  Shot,  Victuals  readie
store.  packed,  Wine,  Sider,  and  a  World  of  other  things,  fitting

the  present  building,  repairing  and  dispatch  of  ships  to
Sea ; as  may  be  plentifully  seene  in  their  yards  and  store-
houses at  Deptford,  and  more  especially  in  those  at  Blacke-
wall ; which  are  growne  so  famous,  that  they  are  daily
visited  and  viewed  by  strangers,  as  well  Embassadors  as
His  Majesties  others  ;  to  their  great  admiration  of  his  Majesties  strength
strength  in  the  anc[  glorie,  in  one  only  Company  of  his  Merchants,  able
Comtam at  s^ort  warning  to  set  forth  a  Fleet  of  ships  of  great  force
alone.  and  power.

For  it  is  well  knowne  to  all  men  who  please  truly  to
bee  informed, That the  East India  Companie (besides
their  Fleets  of  ships  going  and  comming,  and  also  abiding
in  the  Indies)  are  continually  building,  repayring,  rigging,
victualling,  and  furnishing  to  Sea,  with  all  provision  need-
full  for  such  a  long  Voyage,  some  seven  or  eight  great
ships  yearely ;  which  are  to  bee  seene  at  an  Anchor  in  the
River  of  Thames  in  a  great  forwardnesse  some  five  or
sixe  moneths  together,  before  they  commonly  depart  for
the  Indies,  which  is  about  the  moneth  of  March : and
they  are  no  sooner  got  off  from  the  Coast  of  England,
The  shippes but  shortly  after,  is  the  season  of  our  shippes  to  returne
which  returne  from  the  Indies ; who  come  not  home  so  weake  as  some
Id^hom** would  have  them; for  how  often  hath  experience  beene
may  be  re- ' made  of  our  ships  which  have  performed  two  or  three
payed  in  a severall  Voyages  to  the  East  Indies  ? Yet  at  their  returne,
very  short ^hey  have  beene  indocked,  new  trimmed  and  lanched  out
againe, fitted for the  like  Voyages, in  lesse then two
monethes. But  it  will  be  needlesse  to  spend  any  more  time
in  shewing  the  errors  of  this  second  Objection :  therefore
I  will  rather  come  to  the  handling  of  that  which  followeth.

282

THE TRADE TO THE EAST INDIES  ad.

c.  1620.

The  third  Objection.  [I.  v.  740.]

The  Voyages  to  the  East  Indies  doe  greatly  consume  our
victuals,  and  our  Mariners :  leaving  many  poore  Wid-
dowes  and  Children  unrelieved ;  Besides,  that  many
Shippes  are  yeerely  sent  forth  to  the  East  Indies,  and
few  we  see  as  yet  returned ;  Also,  this  Trade  hath
greatly  decayed  the  Traffique  and  shipping,  which  were
woont  to  be  imployed  into  the  Streights :  And  yet
the  said  Trade  to  the  East  Indies,  is  found  very  unpro-
fitable to  the  Adventurers  :  Neither  doth  the  Common-
wealth find  any  benefit  by  the  cheapenesse  of  Spice  and
Indico,  more  then  in  times  past.

The  Answere.

WHy,  what  a  World  of  Mischiefes  have  we  here?
First,  Dearth.  Secondly,  Mortalitie.  Thirdly,
Destruction.  Fourthly,  Beggerie.  Fiftly,  And  never  a
whit  the  neere.  A  very  Teame  of  Calamities,  drawing  on
to  miserie ;  is  it  not  then  high  time  to  seeke  a  remedie  ?
yes  verily,  and  it  will  be  easily  done,  because  these  evils
never  were  (as  yet  at  least)  procured  by  the  East  India
Trade,  as  I  shall  shew,  by  answering  all  the  parts  in  order
as  they  stand :  and  first  of  Dearth.

It  is  both  naturall  and  just,  that  every  Kingdome,  The  first  Part
State,  or  Common-wealth,  should  feede  and  cherish  up  concerneth
the  Native  people  of  all  degrees  and  conditions  whatso-
ever, to  their  preservation  of  life  and  health,  with  such
meanes  and  moderation,  as  their  plentie  shall  aff  oord ;  and
this  is  not  onely  due  to  them  in  the  time  of  their  aboad
at  home,  but  also  upon  all  occasions  of  Voyages  into  other
Countries  beyond  the  Seas,  wherein  they  shall  bee  imployed
for  their  owne  maintenance,  and  for  the  good  of  the
Common- wealth.  The  manner

Now therefore concerning the provision of victuals  how  the  East
(which  in  this  Kingdome  is  yeerely  prepared  for  the  setting  l a j0m~
forth  of  those  shippes  which  saile  to  the  East  Indies)  it  is  victuall  their
well  knowne  to  many  men,  that  it  is  alwayes  proportioned,  ships.

283

A.D.

c.  1620.

The  second
Part  con-
cerneth  Mor-
tality,

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

for  about  eighteene  monethes ;  whereas  commonly  the
Voyages  prove  a  yeare  longer,  so  that  this  over-plus  of
time,  is  furnished  with  the  victuals  of  forreine  parts.

And  likewise  for  the  Bread  and  Bisket  which  is  shipped
from  hence,  hath  it  not  alwayes  bin  made  of  French
Corne,  purposely  brought  over  hither  (and  that  at  a  deare
rate)  onely  to  preserve  the  plentie  of  our  owne  graine?
untill  now  of  late  dayes  that  the  Farmers  heere  beginne
to  cry  out  and  say,  That  the  cheapnesse  of  Corne  doth  dis-
inable  them  to  pay  their  deare  Rents :  Thus  doe  the  East
India  Company  every  way  accommodate  their  proceed-
ings for  the  good  of  the  Kingdome.

And  further  concerning  their  Drinke,  is  it  not  a  very
great  part  water?  Some  Wine  and  Sider  and  but  little
Beere.

Also  the  Flesh  they  eate,  is  Beefe  and  Porke,  and  that
onely  for  three  dayes  in  a  weeke  ;  the  rest  of  their  victuals
is  Fish,  some  Butter,  Cheese,  Pease,  Oat-meale,  and  other
things ;  all  which  is  proportioned  into  a  very  sparing
Dyet  to  every  man  by  allowance :  so  that  heere  is  no
Excesse  nor  Riot,  or  any  other  meanes  to  make  our  vic-
tuals scant  and  deare,  as  is  by  some  erroniously  supposed ;
but  rather  by  this  course  of  life,  our  plentie  is  much
advanced.  And  so  I  will  give  answere  to  the  next  part
which  is  mortalitie  and  great  decay  of  Mariners.

The  life  of  man  is  so  precious,  that  it  ought  not  lightly
to  be  exposed  to  danger ;  And  yet  we  know,  that  the
whole  course  of  our  life,  is  nothing  but  a  passage  unto
Death ;  wherein  one  can  neither  stay  not  slacke  his  pace,
but  all  men  runne  in  one  manner,  and  in  one  celeritie ;
The  shorter  liver  runnes  his  course  no  faster  then  the  long,
both  have  a  like  passeage  of  time ;  howbeit,  the  first  hath
not  so  farre  to  runne  as  the  later.

Now,  it  is  this  length  of  life  which  Nature  seekes,  and
States  likewise  endevour  to  preserve  in  worthy  men ;  but
none  are  accounted  so  worthy  in  this  nature,  save  onely
they,  who  labour  in  their  vocations  and  functions,  both
for  the  publike  good,  and  for  their  private  benefit.

284

THE TKADE TO THE EAST INDIES  ad.

c.  1620.
Thus  may  we  esteeme  our  good  Mariners,  to  be  of  no Good  Mari-
small  use  unto  this  Common- wealth  :  but  take  them  from  ners  are '

. . - - t  ,  n  1 • 1  r  c accounted

their  laudable  and  accustomed  imployments,  tor  want  or wor^y  men  \n
Voyages  to  Sea ; we  see  what  desperate  courses  they  doe  a  Common-
then  attempt,  by  joyning,  even  with  Turkes  and  Infidels, wealth.
to  rob  and  spoyle  all  Christian  Nations ; so  that  we  may
conclude,  we  must  not  onely  breed  up  Mariners,  but  also
seeke  by  Trade,  to  give  them  maintenance.

Well,  all  this  is  true,  but  (say  they)  the  East  India
Company  doth  neither  breed  nor  maintayne,  but  destroy
the  wonted  number  of  our  Mariners.  How  can  this  be,
when  it  is  most  certaine,  that  England  (besides  the  East
India  Fleets)  had  never  yet  more  shipping  then  at  this
present?  neither  doe  any  of  them  stay  at  home  for  want
of  Mariners,  no,  not  at  this  time,  when  many  hundred
Sailers  are  employed  in  extraordinarie  service,  for  his
Majestie  in  a  Royall  Fleet  of  ships,  now  at  Sea:  besides  [I.  v.  741.]
those  great  numbers  of  our  best  Mariners,  which  have
beene  and  daily  are  wasted  and  taken  Prisoners  by  the
Turkes ;  so  where  is  this  want,  or  what  is  our  miserie
more  then  the  want  of  true  information  in  them  that  are  The  breeding
so  ill  perswaded  of  our  Company?  0/400. Man-

Is  it  not  certaine  that  as  the  East  India  Voyages  are  ^^des^tlMt
long,  so  likewise  in  Natures  course  many  should  dye  by  thefeare  of  a
length  of  time  although  they  stayed  at  home  ? And  to  few  mens
recompence the losse of those that dye, doe not the  death  ou&ht
East  India  Company  with  great  providence,  yeerely  ship ,
out  at  least  foure  hundred  Land-men  in  their  Fleets,  which  hinder  the
in  one  Voyage  prove  good  Mariners  to  serve  the  King-  performance  of
dome  and  Common-wealth, unto  which  many  of  them  Honourable

were  a  burthen  before  they  obtayned  this  employment?  actwnf  f01' ^e
Aii  i_ xr- 1  1 r 1  1 service  of  the

And thus is the Kingdome purged or desperate and  %  an^  Qom_

unruly  people,  who  kept  in  awe  by  the  good  discipline  monwealth.

at  Sea,  doe  often  change  their  former  course  of  life,  and  OurMariners

so  advance  their  fortunes.  0W7]e  dl!~rf  .

Neither  indeed  are these  Voyages so  dangerous  and  that  wh^h

mortall, as is reported ; for how many of our ships  killeth  many

have  gone  and  come  from  the  East  Indies,  without  the  of  them.

285

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

c.  1620.

losse  of  five  men  in  a  hundreth?  Others  againe  have
had  worse  successe  in  the  first  beginning,  when  the
seasons,  the  places  and  their  contagions  were  not  so
well  knowne  unto  us ;  yet  time  hath  taught  us  many
things,  both  for  the  preservation  of  health,  and  speedier
performance  of  our  Voyage  then  heretofore.  But  the
Method  of  my  Discourse  bids  me  write  more  of  this  in
the  next  part,  which  is  destruction ;  and  this  I  must
divide  into  two  parts.

In  the  first,  I  will  consider  the  want  of  divers  ships
sent  to  the  East  Indies,  which  are  wasted  there.

And  in  the  second,  I  will  answere  the  supposed  over-
throw of  the  Turkie  Trade,  together  with  much  of  our
shipping  which  were  wont  to  be  employed  thither.

1  tie  ttiira  part  t™*  • , .]  r  •  11  r  1  •

concerns  the  * irst therefore, concerning  the  decay  or our  shippes

decay  of  ship-  in  the  Indies,  it  cannot  bee  denyed,  but  there  hath  beene

ping  which  great  spoyle  of  them  in  these  three  last  yeeres ; not  by

have  beene  tHe  dangers  of  the  Seas,  or  by  the  strength  of  Enemies ;

Indies %  ^ut  ^y  unkind  and  unexpected  quarrels  with  our  Neigh-

Of  the  Dutch  bours the Hollanders, who have taken and surprized

wrongs  y  the  twelve  of  our  ships  at  severall  times,  and  in  sundry  places,

ships  taken  by  \_0  our  unspeakeable  losse  and  hinderance  ; together  with

them,  see  the ^  death  of  many  of  our  worthyest  Mariners,  who  have

former  K.e/a-  *  ^

tions  of  Spur- beene  slaine  and  dyed  Prisoners  under  their  hands : and

way,  Hore,  this  hath  so  much  the  more  encreased  the  rumour  of  their
Know/es,  &c.  Mortalitie :  Neither  list  I  here  to  aggravate  the  fact,  more
with  the  tjien  tjlus  bnefly  to  give  answere  to  the  Objection  : for

divers  men  y  our  ^ate  un^on  w*th  the  Dutch,  doth  promise  a  double
in  manner  all  recompence  of  gaine  in  time  to  come.
these  Indian And  they  who  make  this  Trade  so  poore  and  unprofit-
Voy ages.  The  a^je^  are  much  mistaken  in  the  reckoning  ; for  the  present

^ff//c  losses  which  causeth  many  Adventurers  so  much  to
are  tne  dwan,  ..  .  J  r 1 *-n j 1 1 1

Defence,  Salo-  despaire,  is  not  in  the  substance  of  the  Trade,  but  by  the

mon,  Attend-  evill  accidents  which  have  befalne  the  same  :  and  to  make
ance  {all taken  ^jg  p0}nt  more  plaine,  I  must  yet  declare  some  other
. an  /' l particulars  :  in  which  I  will  endeavour  very  briefly  to  set

before  Sir  Tho. r  . J  J

Dale  began  the  downe  the  summe  or  the  whole  businesse,  which  the
war)  the English  hath  hitherto  performed  in  the  East  Indies.

286

THE TRADE TO THE EAST INDIES  a.d.

c.  1620.

First,  therefore  I  doe  observe  that  since  the  beginning  Speedwell,  the

of  this  Trade,  untill  the  moneth  of  July  last,  Anno  1620.  s*arre>  th\

,  .  « J  «  .  ,  • • i_- •  11  Dragon*  the

there  have  beene  sent  thither  seventie  nine  ships  in  severall  Be*re  Ex*e_

Voyages,  whereof  thirtie  foure  are  alreadie  come  home  dition,  Rose,

in  safetie  richly  laden,  foure  have  beene  worne  out  by  and  the

long  service,  from  Port  to  Port  in  the  Indies : two  were  Samm9  with

over-whelmed  in  the  trimming  there : sixe  have  beene  q troubles

cast  away  by  the  perils  of  the  Seas ; twelve  have  beene  w\tn  tne

taken  and  surprized  by  the  Dutch,  whereof  divers  will  Dutch.

be  wasted,  and  little  worth  before  they  bee  restored :  and  T&e  summe  of

one  and  twentie  good  shippes  doe  still  remayne  in  the  ^$17'^

Indies. So  this  is  a  true  account  of  our  shippes.  ever  s-tnce  tne

And  next  concerning  our  stocke,  it  is  a  certaine  truth,  Trade  began.

that  in  all  the  said  ships  there  hath  bin  sent  out  in  readie  Account  of  all

money  as  well  out  of  this  Realme,  as  from  all  other  places  theQJ°nel^d

wheresoever  beyond  the  Sea  (which  hath  not  beene  landed  hath  ieen  sent

in  this  Kingdome)  the  value  of  five  hundred  fortie  eight  to  the  East

thousand  and  ninetie  pounds  sterling  in  forraine  Coyne ;  Indies  ever

and  together  with  the  said  mony,  there  hath  been  shipped  st.nce. .

the value of two hundred ninety two thousand two  ^  Trade.

hundred eightie sixe pounds sterling, in sundry sorts  356288.  /.

of  English  and  forraine  Commodities ; all  which  monies  sterling,  hath

and  wares  amounting  unto  eight  hundred  fortie  thousand  beene  returned

three  hundred  seventie  sixe  pounds,  have  been  disposed  as  -\°™  f  *,.*!*

hereafter  followeth,  • •  ^  did  produce

First,  there  hath  beene  lost  thirtie  one  thousand  seventie  here  towards

nine  pounds  sterling  in  the  sixe  ships  which  are  cast  away  :  c**r&st

and  in  the  thirtie  foure  ships,  which  are  returned  in  safetie,  '9H  °°

■*•  ,  pounds  ster-

there  hath  beene  brought  home  three  hundred  fiftie  sixe  jL-
thousand  two  hundred  eightie  eight  pounds  sterling  in
divers  sorts  of  wares,  which  have  produced  here  in
England  towards  the  generall  stocke  thereof,  one  million
nine  hundred,  fourteene  thousand  sixe  hundred  pounds
sterling,  for  the  charges  arising  here  is  but  a  change  of
effects  from  one  to  another,  as  hath  beene  said  before  in
this  Discourse :  So  there  ought  to  remayne  in  the  Indies,
to  bee  speedily  returned  hither,  foure  hundred  eightie
foure  thousand  eightie  eight  pounds : neither  can  wee

287

A.D.

c.  1620.

[I. v. 742.]

There  remains
yet  in  the  East
Indies  to  bee
returned  home
from  thence
about\ooooo.
pounds  ster-
ling.

Concerning
the  decay  of
shipping  and
Trade  into
Turkey.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

conceive  that  our  charges  and  troubles  with  the  Dutch,
will  have  wasted  more  then  the  odde  eightie  foure
thousand  eightie  eight  pounds  sterling :  so  that  I  am
confident,  that  there  yet  remayneth  foure  hundred
thousand  pounds  sterling  of  good  estate,  for  both  the
joynt  Stockes.  And  what  a  great  value  of  Indian  goods
this  summe  of  money  may  (by  Gods  blessing)  shortly
returne  in  our  shippes,  which  are  there  readie  to  bring
them,  the  example  here  doth  teach  us  to  make  up  the
reckoning.  So  that  notwithstanding  our  great  charges  of
Discoveries,  our  losses  by  the  danger  of  the  Seas,  our
quarrels  and  infinite  hinderance  by  the  Dutch :  yet  here
the  kingdome  hath  and  shall  have  her  stocke  againe  with
a  very  great  increase,  although  the  Merchants  gaines
concerning  the  two  joynt  stockes  will  prove  but  poore,  in
respect  of  the  former  Voyages,  which  have  not  had  the
like  hinderance.

And  thus  in  a  few  lines  may  be  seene,  much  matter
truly  collected  with  some  paines,  out  of  the  divers
Volumes  of  the  East  Indian  Bookes.

Now  concerning  the  decay  of  Trade  and  shipping  which
were  woont  to  bee  imployed  into  Turkey,  I  doubt,  that
in  time  it  will  likewise  be  affirmed,  that  the  East  India
Company,  have  hindered  the  vent  of  our  white  Cloth
in  the  Netherlands,  which  to  report  were  a  very  strange
thing.  But  (praysed  be  God)  to  our  comfort,  we  see  the
great  increase  of  goodly  shippes,  daily  built  and  imployed
by  the  Turkey  Merchants,  with  vent  of  more  of  our
English  Cloth  (by  one  third  part  at  least)  then  in  times
before  the  East  India  Trade  began.

Yea,  but  (say  they)  wee  have  lost  the  Trade  of  Spices,
and  Indico  from  Aleppo  into  England.

Wei,  I  grant  they  have ;  yet  the  Kingdome  hath  found
it  with  more  profit  by  another  way,  and  they  likewise  are
recompenced  with  a  greater  Trade,  by  the  exporting  from
hence  of  the  selfe-same  Commodities  into  Italy,  Turkey,
and  other  places :  neither  can  it  be  lesse  profitable  for  this
Kingdome,  to  turne  the  Trade  of  raw  Silkes  from  Aleppo,

288

THE TRADE TO THE EAST INDIES  a.d.

c.  1620.
and  to  bring  them  from  the  Persian  Gulfe,  with  one  third
part  lesse  money,  then  it  doth  now  cost  in  Turkey ;
Besides,  that  by  this  meanes,  the  money  proceeding  of
our  English  Cloth,  Tinne,  and  other  wares  in  Turkey
(not  finding  Commodities  fitting  to  returne  for  England)
would  undoubtedly  bee  brought  home  in  Gold,  as  it  hath
beene  performed  heretofore,  when  by  superfluitie  of
stocke  sent  from  hence  in  Spice,  together  with  our
English  wares : the  Merchants  (beeing  thereby  furnished  \T  Turkey

.  V  rr •  ^'j.'  r t 1  •  1 r*  j-  r \ Merchants  can

with a sufficient quantitie or lurkish Commodities)  an^wmjusti-
brought  home  the  remaynder  of  their  stocke  of  those  jie  this  truth.
yeares  in  gold  for  a  great  value.

Thus  doth  it  plainly  appeare,  that  these  revolutions  of
Trades,  have  and  doe  turne  to  the  good  of  the  Common-
wealth ;  neither  hath  the  affaires  of  the  East  Indies
impayred  or  decayed  any  other  Trade,  Shipping  or
Mariners  of  this  Realme ;  but  hath  mightily  increased
them  all  in  it  selfe.  Wherefore  let  us  now  take  a  view
of  this  Noble  addition  of  the  Kingdomes  strength  and
glorie.

But  this  I  must  not  doe,  by  setting  downe  the  number
of  our  English  shipping  now  in  the  Indies,  or  lately  gone
that  way ;  for  they  have  beene  heaped  thither,  these  three
last  yeares  together  without  returne,  save  onely  five
shippes  in  all  that  time ;  the  rest  have  beene  kept  there
to  oppose  the  furie  of  the  Dutch ;  but  now  wee  are  at
union,  wee  shall  (by  Gods  assistance)  daily  expect  divers
great  ships  with  rich  returnes.

And  for  the  future  time,  this  Trade  I  doe  conceive,  will  The  strength
royally  maintayne  tenne  thousand  tunnes  of  shipping  J  *  f.s
continually :  (That  is  to  say)  going,  and  returning,  and
abiding  there  in  the  Indies ;  which  said  shipping  will
employ  two  thousand  and  five  hundred  Mariners  at  least ;
and  the  building  with  the  repayring  of  the  said  ships,
heere  at  home  will  set  to  worke  five  hundred  men,
Carpenters,  Cawkers,  Carvers,  Joyners,  Smiths,  and  other
Labourers,  besides  many  Officers ;  and  about  one  hundred
and  twentie  Factors,  in  severall  places  of  the  Indies. And

V  289  T

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

c.  1620.

so  from  these  matters  of  great  consequence,  I  must  begin
to  write  of  Beggerie.
The  fourth  ^he  povertie  of  Widdowes  and  Fatherlesse  is  matter

part  concernes r  •  1 1 <* 1  ^1 . .

the  povertie  great  compassion, and  doth  alwaies move  Christian

of  widdowes,  hearts to commiseration and charitie ; whereby many

&c.  receive  reliefe  and  helpe  of  those  whom  God  hath  blessed

TheEastlndia  w[th  better  meanes :  but  how  this  povertie  should  totally

emtio man  ^ee  Prevented,  it  seemeth  not  onely  difficult,  but  altogether

poore  men,  y  impossible : For  besides  the  evill  accidents  and  miseries,

deboist  people  which  ever  attend  on  our  humanitie  we  see  how  many

which  other  daily  (even  through  their  owne  folly  and  wilfulnesse)  doe

ra  es  repse,  as  jt  were  desperatelv  plunge  themselves  into  adversitie.

rr  apes  belore  r  ^ r o

hand  is  not  And  thus  the  number  of  those  is  great,  who  having  the
given  in  other  charge  of  wife  and  children,  are  notwithstanding  altogether
Merchants  without  meanes  and  Artes  to  procure  their  maintenance ;
Voyages,  whereby  some  of  them  wanting  grace,  doe  run  a  desperate

neither  yet  so  J «. t  , °1° ~Z  -  ,r .

great  wages  as  course>  and  have  untimely  ends. Others  againe  beeing

the  East  India  better  inspired,  seeke  for  imployment,  but  find  it  not,  or

Company  pay.  with  great  difficultie : for,  who  doth  willingly  entertaine

a  man  poore  and  miserable,  charged  with  a  family,  and

peradventure  debauched  in  conditions  ? Neither  doe  any

of  our  other  Merchants  voyages  to  forraine  parts  accept

of  those  novices,  who  never  have  been  used  to  the  Sea :

So  that  when  all  the  other  doores  of  charitie  are  shut,

the  East  India  gates  stand  wide  open  to  receive  the  needy

and  the  poore,  giving  them  good  entertainement  with  two

Moneths wages before hand, to make their needfull

provisions  for  the  Voyage. And  in  the  time  of  their

absence, there is likewise payd unto their wives for

[I.  v.  743.] maintenance,  two  other  moneths  wages  upon  account  of

every  yeares  service :  and  also  if  any  chance  to  dye  in  the

Voyage,  the  wife  receiveth  all  that  is  found  due  unto  her

When  did  any  husband  (if  he  doe  not  otherwise  dispose  it  by  will : )  and

of  these  Wid- this  often  happeneth  to  be  more  money,  then  ever  they

domes  beg  for ^acj  0f  their  owne  together  in  any  one  time. And  like-

CAurJes  °Z  w*se>  are  not  many  Poore  Widdowes,  Wives  and  Children
others  often  °f  Black-wall,  Lime-house,  Ratcliffe,  Shadwell,  and
doe  P  Wapping,  often  relieved  by  the  East  India  Company  with

290

THE TRADE TO THE EAST INDIES  ad.

c.  1620.
whole  Hogsheads  of  good  Biefe  and  Porke,  Bisket  and
Doales  of  ready  money  ? Are  not  divers  of  their  children
set  on  worke  to  picke  Okam,  and  other  labours  fitting
their age and capacitie? What might I not say of
repayring of Churches, maintenance of some young
Schollers, relieving of many poore Preachers of the
Gospell  yearely  with  good  summes  of  money ;  and  divers
other  acts  of  charitie,  which  are  by  them  religiously  per-  The  East
formed,  even  in  the  times  now  of  their  worst  fortunes?  l™ta  company
for  all  which  I  hope  there  shall  be  a  reward  unto  them
and  theirs. And  so  I  come  to  the  fift  part  of  this  third
Objection.

And  here  I  must  intimate  how  much  they  are  deceived,  The  Jifth  Part
who  thinke,  that  Spices  and  Indico  are  no  better  cheape  cfoapenes  0f
in  England  now,  then  in  times  past,  before  the  East  India  spice  and
trade  began. For,  it  is  an  undoubted  truth,  that  in  those  Indico  at  this
dayes  we  often  paid  sixe  shillings,  or  more  for  a  pound  of  pr****** **
Pepper,  and  seldome  or  never  lesse  then  three  shillings  ?f//^Lfjmes
and  sixe  pence  the  pound ; whereas  since  the  Trade  hath  *
come directly from the Indies, it hath been bought
commonly  at  severall  prices  betweene  sixteene  pence  and
two  shillings  the  pound :  but  I  will  make  the  difference
of  price appeare more plainely by setting downe the
quantities  of  Spices  and  Indico,  which  are  yearely  spent  in
the  Realme  of  England,  together  with  the  lowest  prices,
which  they  were  wont  to  sell  at,  when  we  brought  them
from  Turkey  and  Lisborne ;  and  the  like  concerning  their
usuall  prices  now  that  we  bring  them  from  the  East  Indies
directly : And first as from Turkey, foure hundred  Pr*ces  °fsP{ce

thousand  pounds  of  Pepper  at  three  shillings  six  pence  a~ J° in
*  r  x  c  r  tovmev  times.

the  pound,  is  threescore  &  ten  thousand  pounds :  Fortie
thousand  pounds  of  Cloves  at  eight  shillings  the  pound,
is  sixteene  thousand  pounds :  twenty  thousand  pounds  of
Maces  at  nine  shillings  the  pound,  is  nine  thousand
pounds :  One  hundred  and  sixty  thousand  pounds  of
Nutmegs,  at  foure  shillings  sixe  pence  the  pound,  is  six
and  thirtie  thousand  pounds :  One  hundred  and  fiftie
thousand  pounds  of  Indico  at  seven  shillings  the  pound,

291

A.D.

c.  1620.

Prices  of  spice
and  Indico  in
these  latter
times.

Lesse  then
eighteene
thousand
pounds  sterling
in  the  Indies,
will  buy  Spice
and  Indico  to
serve  this
Realme  for  a
yeare,  which  is
not  halfe  so
much  money  as
it  spendeth
beyond  the  seas
to  buy  Cur-
rands  only,  or
to  buy
Tobacco,
The  wares
only  which  are

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

is  fifty  two  thousand  five  hundred  pounds.  All  these
summes  being  put  together,  comes  to  one  hundred  eightie
three  thousand  five  hundred  pounds  Sterling.

And  the  selfe  same  quantity  and  sorts  of  wares  are
commonly  sold  at  the  prices  here  under  written  now  in
these  later  times :  Foure  hundred  thousand  pounds  of
Pepper  at  twenty  pence  the  pound,  is  thirtie  three
thousand  three  hundred  thirtie  three  pounds,  sixe  shillings,
eight  pence :  forty  thousand  pounds  of  Cloves  at  six
pence  the  pound,  is  twelve  thousand  pound :  twenty
thousand  pounds  of  Mace  at  six  shillings  the  pound,  is
six  thousand  pounds  :  one  hundred  sixty  thousand  pounds
of  Nutmegs  at  two  shillings  six  pence  the  pound,  is
twentie  thousand  pounds :  one  hundred  fiftie  thousand
pounds  of  Indico  at  five  shillings  the  pound,  is  seven  and
thirtie  thousand  pounds.  All  these  summes  beeing  put
together,  is  one  hundred  eight  thousand  three  hundred
thirtie  three  pounds  sixe  shillings  eight  pence  sterling.

So  that  this  Trade  in  Spice  and  Indico  only,  doth  save
the  kingdom  yerely  seventy  foure  thousand  nine  hundred
sixtie  sixe  pound  thirteene  shillings  foure  pence,  which  is
a  matter  worthy  to  be  observed ;  and  so  much  the  rather,
because  it  is  a  certaine  truth,  that  lesse  then  a  quarter
part  of  this  summe  of  mony  which  is  thus  saved  yearely,
shall  buy  in  the  Indies  the  full  quantitie  of  all  the  severall
sorts  of  wares  before  written,  which  doe  serve  for  a  yeares
provision  for  this  Realme  of  England ;  but  still  it  must
be  remembred,  that  the  custom,  impost,  wages,  victuals,
shipping,  and  other  charges  (which  are  to  be  added)  will
be  a  greater  summe,  then  the  mony  which  is  paid  for
these  wares  in  the  Indies :  but  as  I  have  noted  before,  the
said  charges  doe  not  consume  the  Kingdomes  stocke,
although  it  doth  greatly  abate  the  Merchants  gaine.

And  to  conclude  this  point,  I  will  adde  unto  that  which
hath  been  said ;  that  the  commodities  onely  which  we
now  send  yearely  into  the  East  Indies  and  Persia,  are  of
sufficient  value  there  to  returne  us  Indico,  Spices,  Drugs,
and  all  other  sorts  of  Indian  wares  (Raw-silkes  of  Persia

292

THE TRADE TO THE EAST INDIES  a.d.

c.  1620.
only  excepted)  for  one  yeares  consume,  or  more  in  this  sent  out  of  this

Kingdome :  so  that  now  all  the  money  which  is  sent  forth  KtnSdome  tnt0

o'l- ji J.-L  ir^u 'j  theEastlndies,

in  our  Ships  doth  procure  an  over-plus  or  the  said  wares,  areofsufiicient

to  the  furtherance  of  Trade  from  India  hither,  and  after  vaiue  t0

from  hence  to  forreine  parts  againe,  to  the  great  imploy-  famish  this

ment  of  the  Subjects,  and  inriching  of  this  Realme,  both  *«**  wlth  ,

in  Stocke  and  Treasure  ; all  which  is  matter  verie  worthy  ann  overP  us %

an  manner  or

to  be  diligently  observed. And  so  I  come  to  give  answere  Indian  wares
unto  the  fourth  and  last  Objection.  (Persian  Raw

Silkes  only

The  fourth  Objection.  excepted).

It  is  generally  observed,  that  his  Majesties  Mint  hath  had  -  '
but  little  imployment  ever  since  the  East  India  Trade
began ;  wherefore  it  is  manifest,  that  the  onely  remedy
for  this,  and  so  many  evils  besides,  is  to  put  downe  this
Trade :  For  what  other  remedie  can  there  be  for  the
good  of  the  Common-wealth?

The  Answere.  The  first  Part

THis  fourth  objection  may  be  devided  into  three  parts  :  Majesties

First,  An  evill  declared : Secondly,  A  remedie  pro-  Mint.

pounded:  Thirdly,  And  counsell  demanded.  Twenty  five

And  first  concerning  the  Evill  or  want  of  Silver, I  thousand

thinke it hath been, and is a generall disease of all  ^leasltf

Nations,  and  so  will  continue  untill  the  end  of  the  world ;  silver  yearely

for  poore  and  rich  complaine,  they  never  have  enough  :  melted  downe

but  it  seemeth  the  maladie  is  growne  mortall  here  with  us,  *ntom  p!ate>

and  therefore  it  cries  out  for  remedy. Well,  I  hope  it  is  pjt*  °

but  imagination  maketh  us  sicke,  when  all  our  parts  be  fashioned,  as

sound  and  strong :  For  who  knoweth  not  the  inestimable  by  credible

treasure of this Kingdome, in Plate possessed by the  report.

people  thereof  almost  of  all  degrees  ; in  such  measure,  as ,  ,

rr111  • r  e  * a 1 /• 1  • been  coyned

never hath been seene in former ages  r And tor his  great  store  0f

Majesties  Mint,  it  is  well  knowne,  that  there  hath  been  Gold  and

coyned  in  five  yeares  together  since  the  East  India  Com-  Silver  in  his

pany  began,  six  thousand  two  hundred  fourteene  pound  "™Jestt?s

waight  of  Gold,  and  three  hundred  eleven  thousand  three  gast  \n£a

hundred  fourescore  and  foure  pound  weight  of  sterling  Trade  began.

293

A.D.

c.  1620.

There  hath
been  little  or
no  Silver
coyned  in  some
yeares,  when
the  East  India
Company  sent
out  very  small
summes  of
money.

Some  causes
and  meanes
which  were
wont  to  bring
Silver  into  the
Realme,  are
ceased  at  this
present  time.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Money ;  all  which  Gold  and  Silver  doe  amount  unto  the
summe  of  twelve  hundred  thirteene  thousand  eight  hun-
dred fiftie  pounds  of  sterling  Money :  How  then  doth
this  Trade  turne  the  currant  and  imployment  of  the
Mint  ?

But  upon  the  sight  of  this  truth,  perhaps  it  will  be
said,  That  we  must  resort  unto  the  present  times  (the
Mint  being  idle  now.)  To  which  I  answere,  That  like-
wise the  Mint  had  little  or  no  imployment  for  coynage  of
Silver  in  former  times,  when  the  said  Company  did  not
export  above  fifteene  or  twentie  thousand  pounds  sterling
at  the  most  per  annum;  no,  nor  yet  in  the  yeares  1608,
and  1 6 1 2  ;  when  in  the  former  they  shipped  out  but  sixe
thousand  pound,  and  in  the  latter  but  one  thousand  two
hundred  and  fifty  pounds  sterling.  So  that  both  wayes
we  see,  that  the  Mint  hath  had  very  great  imployment
five  yeares  together,  sithence  the  East  India  Trade  began ;
and  also  it  hath  been  without  imployment  divers  yeares,
when  the  East  India  Company  have  sent  away  but  verie
small  summes  of  money ;  wherefore  of  necessitie  there
must  bee  some  other  causes  and  meanes  whereby  our  Silver
is  not  exported  onely,  but  also  it  is  not  imported  into  the
Realme  as  in  former  times.  For  wee  have  not  had  the
meanes  by  our  owne  plenty,  nor  by  the  scarsitie  of  our
Neighbours  (for  the  space  of  the  last  foureteene  yeares
together)  to  send  out  hundreds  of  Ships  laden  with  Corne,
as  in  times  past,  which  was  returned  home  in  Silver ;  but
rather  of  late  yeares  (as  is  much  to  be  feared)  a  great
quantitie  of  our  money  hath  been  carried  out  of  the
Kingdome  for  that  Corne,  which  hath  been  brought  us
from  the  East  Countries,  and  other  places,  to  supply  our
wants.  Thus  times  doth  change,  and  our  fortunes  change
with  them :  neither  list  I  to  make  this  matter  plainer,  by
setting  downe  those  meanes,  which  heretofore  brought  us
store  of  money,  even  out  of  France,  and  other  places,
which  now  are  ceased.  But  without  any  further  medling
in  the  Mint,  I  will  come  to  the  remedie  which  some  pro-
pound, by  putting  downe  the  East  India  Company.

294

THE TRADE TO THE EAST INDIES  ad.

c.  1620.

But  here  our  comfort  is,  that  the  Objectors  are  not  our The  second
Judges,  whose  wisdome  and  integritie  labouring  for  the  Part  con~
honour  of  his  Majestie,  and  the  good  of  his  Kingdome,  "%gng  'Jwne
will soone perceive the mischiefes of this supposed  ofthe  East
remedie. And  that  the  pretended  evill  which  many  with  India  Trade.
malice  chase,  is  that  great  good,  which  other  Nations  seeke  T^Eastlndia
by  policie  and  strength  to  keepe,  and  likewise  to  obtaine ; '*^  ^;w
in  which  proceedings,  it  concerneth  us  especially  to  observe  by  other
the  diligences  and  practises  of  the  Dutch,  who  with  more Christian
gladnesse  would  undertake  the  whole  Trade  to  the  East  Natiim.
Indies,  then  with  any  reason  wee  can  abandon  that  part
thereof,  which  we  now  enjoy ; neither  can  our  restraint
from  the  Indies  keepe  our  Silver  from  thence,  as  long  as
the  Dutch  goe  thither : for  we  know,  that  devices  want
not  to  furnish  such  designes ; and  when  their  Ships  re-
turne  from  India,  shall  not  our  Silver  out  againe  to  helpe
to  pay  a  double  price,  or  what  they  please,  for  all  those
wares  which  we  shall  want  for  our  necessities?

Thus  should  the  Dutch  increase  their  honour,  wealth The  Dutch
and  strength,  whilest  we  abate,  grow  poore  and  weake  at m& gro™^
Sea  for  want  of  Trade : And  call  you  this  a  Remedie  ? ^  our  jestruc.
no,  rather  tearme  it  Ruine,  Destruction,  or  what  you  list.  tion.
And  so  I  come  unto  the  conclusion  or  last  part.

And  here  I  must  confesse  my  self  aground,  for  this  The thrd Part
matter  is  much  too  high  for  my  handling- : besides,  my  conceinf e

. r-i-  11-1  1  11 councell  which

excuse  is  raire,  having  alreadie  done  my  taske  to  cleare  the  t^e  objecters

East  India  Trade  from  imputation  ; the  which  for  want  of  demand.

learning,  although  I  have  performed,  without  varietie  of

words  or  eloquence : yet  it  is  done  with  all  integritie  of

truth,  in  every  particular,  as  I  shall  be  ready  to  make

proofe  upon  all  occasions,  which  may  be  offered. And

yet  before  I  make  an  end,  although  I  cannot  satisfie  every

mans  desire,  in  such  measure  as  is  necessarie :  yet  I  thinke

it  not  amisse  to  performe  the  same  so  farre,  as  I  am  able

by  common  practice,  and  my  observations  in  the  Trade  of

Merchandize,  which  is  my  profession.

And  first  therefore,  all  men  doe  know,  that  the  riches
or  sufficiencie  of  every  Kingdome, State,  or  Common-

29s

ad.  PURCHAS HIS P1LGRIMES

c.  1620.

wealth,  consisteth  in  the  possession  of  those  things,  which

[I.  v.  745.] are  needfull  for  a  civill  life. This  sufficiency  is  of  two

/l-?^!a f- sorts; the  one  is  naturall,  and  proceedeth  of  the  Terri-

of  two  sorts. torie  it  selfe ; the  other  is  artificiall,  and  dependeth  on

the  industrie  of  the  Inhabitants.

The  Realme  of  England  (praised  be  God)  is  happily
possessed  of  them  both  :  as  first,  having  great  plentie  of
naturall  riches,  both  in  the  Sea  for  Fish,  and  on  the  Land
for  Wooll,  Cattell,  Corne,  Lead,  Tinne,  Iron,  and  many
other  things  for  Food,  Rayment,  and  Munition  ; inso-
much that  upon  strict  termes  of  need,  this  Land  may  live
without  the  helpe  of  any  other  Nation. But  to  live  well,
to  flourish,  and  grow  rich,  we  must  find  meanes  by  Trade
to  vent  our  superfluities ; therewith  to  furnish  and  adorne
us  with  the  treasure  and  those  necessarie  Wares  which
This  Kind  of forraine  Nations  doe  affoord  : and  here  Industrie  must
Industrie begin  to  play  his  part,  not  onely  to  increase  and  guide  the
"countries Trades  abroad,  but  also  to  maintaine  and  multiplie  the
which  are  poor  Arts  at  home  : for  when  either  of  these  faile,  or  are  not
of  themselves, effected  with  such  skill  as  their  mysterie  shall  require,  then
to  grow  rich doth  the  Common-wealth  abate  and  grow  poore  :  neither
ank  ^'f7?-  / is  it  easily  perceived  at  first,  untill  some  evill  accidents
who  have doe  stirre  up  our  diligence  to  search  out  the  true  causes ;
greater  that  so  they  being  remooved,  the  effects  may  cease. And

meanes,  and this  is  the  subject  of  our  Discourse  which  wee  now  pursue.

are  /esse  That  which  I  have  hitherto  delivered  hath  beene  alto-

industrious.  «  .  -n 1 r i*  1  1

Foure  princi-  getner  negative,  still  depending  and  proving  by  arguments,
pall  Causes  that  the  East  India  Trade  hath  not  hurt  this  Common-
which  carry  wealth  :  And  now  changing  my  stile,  I  must  affirme  as
away  our  Gold  fast  ^  tme  causes  Qf  those  evils  which  we  seeke  to  chase

and  Silver.

away.

These  causes  then  (as  I  conceive)  are  principally  foure.

The  first,  is  the  breach  of  Entercourse  by  forraine  Nations.

The  second,  is  the  abuse  of  the  exchanges  betwixt  us  and

other  Countries. The  third,  is  neglect  of  dutie  in  some

Subjects. The  fourth,  is  our  damage  in  commerce  with

Strangers. Now  concerning  all  these, I  might  make  a

very large discourse ; but my purpose is onely to

296

THE TRADE TO THE EAST INDIES

explane the meaning of every point in order, as
briefly  as  I  can.

And  first  for  the  breach  of  Entercourse ;  by  this  I
understand  those  Nations,  who  have  either  debased  their
Standard,  or  else  over  valued  the  price  of  their  Coynes
from  that  equivalence  which  formerly  they  had  wTith  the
Standard  and  Moneys  of  this  Realme :  and  also  doe
tolerate,  not  onely  their  owne  Moneys,  but  also  the  Coyne
of  other  Countries  (and  especially  of  this  Kingdome)  to
bee  current  with  them  at  higher  rates,  then  the  prices  of
the  exchange  ;  by  which  courses  (being  directly  against
the  Entercourse)  there  is  a  greater  cause  given  of  expor-
tation of  the  Moneys  of  this  Realme,  then  otherwise  there
would  be.  For  although  this  is  done  with  great  danger
to  the  Exporters  of  the  same,  (it  being  an  act  against  the
Law  of  the  Land)  yet  notwithstanding  covetousnesse
being  ever  conversant  in  wicked  actions,  thinketh  nothing
unlawfull  which  promiseth  a  certaine  gaine  ;  and  how  to
remedie  this  evill  practice  I  find  it  not  easie.  For  the
debasing  of  the  Coyne,  or  raysing  the  price  thereof  in
this  Realme,  would  much  impoverish  the  estates  of  par-
ticular men,  and  yet  in  the  conclusion,  would  prove  a
businesse  without  end  :  for  who  doth  not  conceive  that
which  would  follow  beyond  the  Seas  upon  any  such  altera-
tion heere  with  us?  so  that  still  the  evill  will  remaine,
untill  we  find  some  other  remedie.

And  for  the  exchanges  of  money  used  betwixt  Nations,
although  the  true  use  thereof  is  a  very  laudable  and  neces-
sarie  practice  for  the  accommodating  of  Merchants  affaires,
and  furnishing  of  Travellers  in  their  occasions,  without
the  transporting  of  Coyne  from  one  State  to  another,  with
danger  and  losse  both  to  the  publike  and  private  wealth  :
yet  is  the  abuse  thereof  very  prejudicial!  unto  this  King-
dome  in  particular  ;  whilest  in  the  interim  the  benefit  doth
arise  unto  other  Countries,  who  diligently  observing  the
prices  whereby  the  moneys  be  exchanged,  may  take  advan-
tage to  carrie  away  the  Gold  and  Silver  of  this  Realme
at  those  times,  when  the  rate  of  our  sterling  money  (in

297

A.D.

c.  162c.

The  first
Cause  con-
cerneth  the
Standard.
Proceeding-:
against  t
course.

The  Second
Cause  con-
cerneth  the
exchanges  of
moness  with
Terrain
Countries.
The  practice
of  tk

Strangers  here
in  this  Realme,
zcho  make  a
Trade  by
exchange  of
moneys.

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

c.  1620.

exchange)  is  under  the  value  of  that  Standard,  unto  which
Forrain  place  they  are  convayed :  For  in  respect  the  prices  of  the

Wares  brought  exchanges, doe  rise  or  fall  according  to  the  plentie  or

in  with  our  •  - r  1  •  1 •  1  P  11-  1

ready  moneys scarsitie  °*  money,  which  is  to  bee  taken  up,  or  delivered

carried  out  of  out,  the  exchange  is  hereby  become  rather  a  Trade  for
this  Realme.  some  great  moneyed  men,  then  a  furtherance  and  accom-
modation of  reall  Trade  to  Merchants,  as  it  ought  to  bee
in  the  true  use  thereof.  And  thus  many  times  money
may  be  made  over  hither  by  strangers  to  a  good  gaine,
and  presently  carried  beyond  the  Seas  to  a  second  profit ;
and  yet  the  mischiefe  ends  not  here :  for  by  this  meanes
the  takers  up  of  money  in  forraine  Countreys  must  neces-
sarily drive  a  Trade  to  those  places,  from  whence  they
draw  their  moneys ;  and  so  doe  fill  us  up  with  forraine
Commodities,  without  the  vent  of  our  owne  Wares  :  but
for  this  great  evill,  there  is  an  easie  remedie,  and  so  I
come  to  handle  the  next  cause  which  is  neglect  of  dutie.
The  Third  Neither  is  it  my  intent  to  write  of  duties  in  their  severall

Cause  con- kinds ; but  onely  of  that  kind  of  dutie  which  is  here
^dutieT^ ' thought  to  be  neglected  by  some  men  in  their  severall
vocations. As  it  might  peradventure  come  to  passe,  in
those  who have the  working of  his Majesties Coyne,
either  gold  or  silver ; if  diligent  care  be  not  had  in  the
size or every severall piece, to answere justly to his
weight : for  howsoever  upon  triall  of  many  pieces  alto-
gether, the  weight  may  be  sound  according  to  the  Cove-
nants, and  within  the  remedies  ordained  in  the  Indentures  :
yet  notwithstanding  many  of  those  pieces  may  be  sized
too  light,  and  others  as  much  too  heavie ; which  giveth
the  greater  advantage  to  some  people,  to  carrie  away  that
which  is  over-weight,  and  so  to  leave  us  them  which  are
Our  heavie too  light,  if  they  leave  us  any. And  this  mischiefe  is
monk  is  con- not  single  . for  thereby  also  some  Gold-smiths,  regarding
Vthe\ea?°and V™^  more  than  dutie,  may  bee  the  more  readily  drawne
melted  downe to  melt  downe  the  heavie  Coyne  into  Plate  and  other
into  Plate  here  ornaments  both  of  gold  and  silver. But  what  might  wee
in  the  Realme. thinke  of  those  men  who  are  placed  in  authoritie  and
office  for  his  Majestie,  if  they  should  not  withall  dutifull

298

Merchants

ow  our

THE TRADE TO THE EAST INDIES  ad.

c.  1620.

care  discharge  their  trust  concerning  that  excellent  Statute,

wherein  it  is  ordered,  that  all  the  moneys  received  by  [I.  v.  746.]

strangers  for  their  Merchandize,  shall  be  employed  upon

the  Commodities  of  this  Realme? the  due  performance  dnno  17.

whereof  would  not  onely  prevent  the  carrying  away  of  ^dward*  4-

much  Gold  and  Silver,  but  also  bee  a  meanes  of  greater

vent  of  our  owne  Wares : whereof  I  purpose  to  write

some  thing  more  in  the  next  part  which  concerneth  our

commerce  with  strangers.

And  now  I  come  to  the  last  point,  which  I  feare  is  not The  Fourth

the  least  amongst  the  causes  of  our  want  of  money  (so  Cause Tcon~
r  1  1 \ 1  1 •  cerneth  our

rarre  as  any  such  may  be,)  and  let  it  not  seeme  strange  to  cmmercewith

any  man,  that  Trades  should  hurt  and  impoverish  a  Com-  Strangers.

mon-wealth, since it hath beene alwayes  accounted an

excellent  meanes  to  helpe  and  enrich  the  same : for,  as

this  truth  cannot  be  denied  with  reason,  so  it  is  likewise

most  certaine,  that  the  unskilfull  managing:  thereof  hath Unskilful!

ever  proved  a  great  decay  unto  those  Nations  who  have  .

i  o  •  overtliix

beene entangled  with such errours. And are not the Trades.

examples  too  frequent  in  many  of  our  owne  Merchants,
who  not  onely  by  the  perils  of  the  Seas  and  such  like
misfortunes  lose  their  goods,  but  also  even  through  want
of  knowledge,  wisely  to  direct  their  affaires,  doe  over-
throw  their  whole estates? Neither may we properly
call  this  their  losse,  but  rather  the  Kingdomes  losse  in
them. Wherefore  it  were  to  be  wished,  that  this  mysterie  Merchants  by
of  Merchandize  might  be  left  onely  to  them  who  have  e^\aUTt^e
had  an  education  thereunto  ;  and  not  to  be  undertaken  by  traa>e  jnfor.
such,  who  leaving  their  proper  vocations,  doe  for  want  of  raine  parts.
skill  in  this,  both  overthrow  themselves,  and  others  who
are  better  practised.

But  there  is  yet  a  farre  greater  mischiefe  by  our  Trades
beyond  the  Seas,  when  peradventure,  there  might  be  im-
ported yeerely  a  greater  value  in  forraine  Wares,  then  by
any  way  or  meanes  wee  doe  export  of  our  owne  Com-
modities ;  which  cannot  otherwise  come  to  passe,  then
with  a  manifest  impoverishing  of  the  Common-wealth :
for  as  it  is  a  certaine  course  to  make  us  rich,  both  in

299

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

c.  1620.

Stocke  and  Treasure,  when  wee  shall  carrie  out  a  greater

value  of  our  owne  goods  then  wee  bring  in  of  forraine

How  rich Wares ; so  by  consequence,  a  course  contrarie  to  this,

Common- must  of  necessitie  worke  a  contrarie  effect. Neither  is

wealths  may 1  • •  •  1  •  1  •  1

become  poore.  ^1S  importation  meant  otherwise  then  concerning  those

ForrainWares  Wares, which are consumed in this Realme : for the

brought  in  for  Commodities  which  are  brought  in,  and  after  carried  out

Transito  can-  unto  forraine  parts  againe,  cannot  hurt,  but  doe  greatly

not  hurt  but  t  /•  • •

greatly  nelpe  helpe  the  Common-wealth,  by  encrease  of  his  Majesties
the  Common-  Customes  and  Trades,  with  other  imployments  of  the
wealth.  Subjects  : by  which  particulars  I  might  yet  set  forth  the

Hopes  to  glorie  of  the  East  India  Trade,  which  hath  brought  into

bv  exportation  ^is  Realme  in  fifteene  moneths  space,  not  onely  so  much
of  Indian Spice,  as  hath  served  the  same  for  the  said  time  ; but  also
Wares  to  fir-  by the superfluitie thereof, there hath beene exported
rain  parts. 'in^Q  forraine  parts  for  about two  hundred  and  fifteene
thousand  pounds  sterling. So  then  let  all  men  judge,  for
what a great value  we may hope hereafter to export
yeerely ; when unto these Spices wee may (by Gods
assistance)  adde  the  infinite  worth  of  raw  Silkes,  Indicoes,
Callicoes, and some other things : all which are to
be issued in the nature of Cloth, Lead, Tinne, or
any of our owne Merchandize to the enriching of
this Kingdome by encrease of the common Stocke.
So then to conclude this point, wee ought not to
avoid the importation of forraine Wares, but rather
willingly to bridle our owne affections to the mode-
rate consuming of the same : for otherwise, howso-
Thepartkular  ever  the  East  India  Trade  in  particular  is  an  excellent
Trade  to  the meanes  greatly  to  encrease  the  Stocke  of  money  which
will  bring wee  send  thither  yeerely,  by  returning  home  five  times
great  store  of the  value  thereof  in  rich  Commodities  ;  all  which  (in  short
treasure  into time) may be converted into Treasure, as is plainely
this  Realme,  if  shewecj  alreadie. Yet notwithstanding, if  these  Indian
TradTofthis Wares  thus  brought  home  cannot  be  spared,  to  serve  for
Kingdome  doe  that  purpose  of  Treasure ; but  must  bee  sent  forth  to-
not  hinder  and  gether  with  our  owne  native  Commodities; and  yet  all
consume  it. little  enough,  to  provide  our  excesse  and  extraordinarie

300

THE TRADE TO THE EAST INDIES  ad.

c.  1620.
consume  of  forraine  Wares  :  then  is  it  likewise  as  certaine,  The  Dutch  in
that  the  generall  Trade  of  this  Kingdome  doth  hinder  and  particular,  are
divert  the  comming  in  of  the  said  Treasure,  by  over-  sat '  ?  fJa£e
ballancing  the  value  of  our  Wares  exported  with  the  im-  wealth  yeerely
portation  and  immoderate  consume  of  forraine  Com-  by  this  fishing
modities.  Trade,  that

Therefore,  forasmuch  as  the  number  of  the  people  in  m*  otff  mLore
.  . -p. ,  .  .  .  .  1 r  i  certaine  know-

tnis  Kealme  are  thought  to  be  greatly  encreased  or  late  ie^e  thereof

time  (both  in  themselves  and  strangers,)  whereby  neces-  /  dare  not  set
sarily  the  Commodities  of  this  Kingdom,  and  also  forren  doume  the
Wares, are  the  more  consumed  and  wasted, (a  double  5umme^tt
meanes  to  abate  the  Common-wealth)  it  therefore  con-  incredible.  See
cerneth  us  all  in  generall,  and  every  man  in  his  particular,  hereof  D.
to  stirre  up  our  minds  and  diligence,  to  helpe  the  naturall  Dees  booke:
Commodities  of  this  Realme  by  industrie,  and  increase  of  as  ?y  CaP-
Arts ; seeing that the materials cannot be  wanting to
make  such  Stuffes,  and  other  things  as  are  daily  brought
unto  us  from  forraine  parts,  to  the  great  advantage  of
Strangers,  and  to  our  no  lesse  damage. Neither  should
wee  neglect  the  riches  which  our  Seas  affoord,  whilest
other  Nations  by  their  labour  doe procure themselves
great  Treasure  from  the  same. And  as  the  diligent  per-
formance of  these  things  would  plentifully  maintaine  the
Poore, and  much increase the  common Stocke of  this
Kingdome :  so  likewise  for  the  better  furtherance  thereof,
wee  ought  religiously  to  avoyd  our  common  excesses  of
food  and  rayment,  which  is  growne  to  such  a  height  in
most  degrees  of  people  (above  their  abilitie) that  it  is
now  beyond  all  example  of  former  Ages. Neither  is  it
needfull  for  mee  to  set  downe  the  particulars  of  these
abuses ; for  they  are  too  well  knowne : and  I  am  confi-
dent, that  the  wisedome  of  our  Government  doth  endea-
vour to  see  them  as  well  amended,  to  the  glorie  of  God,
the  honour  of  the  King,  and  the  good  of  the  Common-
wealth. Amen.

[Courteous  Reader
301

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

[I.  v.  747.] /^Ourteous  Reader,  I  could  have  added  others  indea-
\^J  vours  in  this  defensive  Argument  for  the  East  Indian
Trade ; and  especially that  of  that  learned Gentleman
Sir  Dud.  Diggs : But  because  himselfe  is  now  absent  in
weightier Employments, and I knew not whether he
would  be  willing  to  see  it  mustered  and  marshalled  in
my  Files,  I  was  loth  to  doe  it : For  his  ill-will  I  have
cause  to  bee  unwilling  to  purchase,  whose  good-will  hath
purchased  mine  and  mee  (a  worthlesse  Purchas)  in  effect-
ing my  present  good,  in  affecting  greater,  that  I  might
have  beene  enabled  to  have  bestowed  on  the  world  my
promised  perfected  World. Wherein  not  to  have  suc-
ceeded, is  yet  (as  that  vast  and  incompetible  designe  of
mine)  to  have  exceeded,  as  others  otherwise,  so  herein
himselfe. Besides,  later  occurrents  have  ministred  other
Strings  for  busie  Fingers  to  harpe  on,  (though  not  with
best  Harmonie)  since  the  edition  of  that  Booke. I  had
thought  also to have  added somewhat  out of  Master
Misseldens Free Trade, fitting the present businesse :
but  seeming  to  have  made  not  an  Indian  Voyage,  but  a
Plantation,  in  so  long  stay  there,  I  will  bring  you  home-
wards : and  because  the  wonted  way  of  returne  is  by
encompassing  Africa,  that  course  also  wee  will  here  take :
and  to  prevent  Sea-sicknesse,  and  the  lazie  Scorbute,  we
will  not  onely  touch  on  the  Shoare,  but  adventure  into
the  maine  Land,  and  follow  the  best  Guides,  both  English
and  others,  thorow  the  African  both  Desarts  and  Habita-
tions : of  whom  John  Leo  is  the  best  that  hath  written
in  that  Argument,  and  as  a  Lion  may  conduct  the
most  fearefull  thorow  the  most  perillous
passages. For what may not
Cowards  doe,  having  a  Lion
to their  Guide  and
Captaine  ?

The  end  of  the  Fifth  Booke.

302

A MAP OF AFRICA

FOr  the  Readers  greater  both  pleasure  and  profit,  I  [I.  v.  748.]
have  here  premised  to  the  following  Historie  of
Africa,  this  generall  Map  of  Africa  (published  by  Hondius)
that  hee  may  indeed  see,  even  with  both  Eyes  of  Geo-
graphic (the  Mappe  and  the  Relation)  to  travell  thorow
that  least  knowne  part  of  the  Elder-knowne  World.
Other  Maps  more  particular  we  shall  adde  in  their  places.

3°3

HONDIUS HIS MAP OF AFRICA

TO  THE  HIGH  AND  MIGHTIE  PRINCE,

GEORGE,

Duke,  Marquesse,  and  Earle  of  Buckingham,  Vis-
count Villiers,  Baron  of  Whaddon,  Lord  High
Admirall  of  England,  Justice  in  Eyre  of
all  his  Majesties  Forests,  Parkes,  and
Chaces  beyond  Trent ;

Master  of  His  Majesties  Horse,  Knight  of  the

most  Noble  Order  of  the  Garter,  and  One

of  His  Majesties  most  Honorable

Privie  Councell.

Aving  presented  to  the  Princes  Highnesse
a  World  of  Histories  composed  into  a
Historie  of  the  World,  I  durst  not  set
saile  with  so  great  a  Fleet  of  Sea-voyages
(a  principall  part  thereof)  before  I  be-
came humble  Sutor  to  Your  Grace  for
license  from  the  Admiraltie.  Pardon
this  presumption,  which  Your  Greatnesse  requireth,  Your
Goodnesse  inviteth,  and  the  nature  of  the  Worke  exacteth.
His  Majestie,  the  breath  of  our  nosthrils,  the  Life  and
Rule  of  our  actions,  hath  by  many  graces  otherwise,  and
by  exemplarie  dedication,  taught  Others  Bookes  there  to
seeke  delightsome  shaddow,  where  His  gave  so  glorious
light.

Neither  may  any  Name  stand  so  neere  That  of  His
Highnesse,  especially  in  a  Booke  of  Sea  and  Land  Travels,
as  His  who  hath  beene  so  late  and  faithfull  a  Traveller

305

u

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

with  Him  by  Sea  and  Land ; Nor  the  Kings  honor  (here

aymed  at)  bee  more  welcome  to  any  then  the  Kings  Friend,

whom  the  King  will  honour ; Nor  can  acts  of  Navigation

bee  any  where  more  sutable  then  to  a  Noble  mind,  now

fixing  his  best  and  blest  thoughts  on  discovering  a  neerer

passage  to  the  remoter  World,  and  under  whose  Charge

the  Navie  Royall  more  flourisheth  then  ever. By  some

of  Yours  also  the  Author  was  encouraged  to  undertake

this  great  worke,  which  now  therefore  returneth  to  your

Grace,  as  that  Sea  whence  the  Springs  first  flowed. May

it  please  your  Graces  taste  (more  from  such  employments

cannot  be  expected)  to  incite  inferior  appetites  :  and  I  hope

that  to  such  sweetnesse  of  Nature,  this  Historie  of

Nature  will  not  be  altogether  distastfull. God

Almightie  blesse  and  prosper  your  Grace,

and  all  your  Loyall  services  to  His

Majestie,  with  increase  of  Divine,

Royall,  and  Princely  favour.

Amen.

Your  Graces

lowly  Orator

Samuel  Purchas.

306

Navigations,  Voyages,

and  Land-Discoveries,  with  other  Historicall

Relations  of  Afrike

[II.  vi.  749.]

THE SIXTH  BOOKE

Chap. I.

Observations  of  Africa,  taken  out  of  John  Leo  his

nine  Bookes,  translated  by  Master  *  Pory,  and  "j***™
the  most  remarkable  things  hither  transcribed, translation  %

*In  divers

§.  1.

amended.

Collections  out  of  the  first  Booke  of  John  Leo,
touching  the  People,  Tribes,  Languages,
Seasons,  Vertues,  Vices,  and  other  more
generall  considerations  of  Africa.

Frica is called in the Arabian Tongue  0y^  World

Iphrichia, of the word Faraca, which  was  so  named

signifieth  in  the  said  Language,  to  divide  :  Africa.

but  why  it  should  be  so  called,  there  are  {°Q^e°>hbA'

two  opinions ; the  first  is  this : namely,  ^v^e  itfr

because  this  part  of  the  World  is  divided  Asia  by  the

from  Europa  by  the  Mediterran  Sea,  and  *** Sea-

from  Asia  *  by  the  River  of  Nilus. Others  are  of  opinion  As !here  was

J r  Asia  proprte

dicta,  so  likewise  Africa  was  the  name  of  the  whole  and  of  a  speciall  part ;  and  that  both

amongst  the  Ancients,  so  (but  in  larger  latent)  with  the  African  Authors  and  John  Leo.

307

rom

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

c.  1526.

that  this  name  of  Africa  was  derived  from  one  Ifricus  the
King  of  Arabia  Foelix,  who  is  said  to  have  beene  the  first
that  ever  inhabited  these  parts.  This  Ifricus  waging  war
against  the  King  of  Assyria,  &  being  at  length  by  him
driven  out  of  his  Kingdome,  passed  with  his  whole  Armie
over  Nilus,  and  so  conducting  his  troupes  westward,  made
no  delay  till  he  was  come  unto  the  Region  lying  about
Carthage.  Hence  it  is  that  the  Arabians  doe  imagine  the
Countrey  about  Carthage  onely,  and  the  Regions  lying
Westward  thereof,  to  comprehend  all  Africa.
The  borders  of  Africa  (if  we  may  give  credit  unto  the  Writers  of  that
jnca.  Nation,  being  men  of  Learning,  and  most  skilfull  Cosmo-

graphers)  beginneth  Southward  at  certaine  Rivers  issuing
forth  of  a  Lake  in  the  Desart  of  Gaoga.  East-ward  it
bordereth  upon  the  River  Nilus.  It  extendeth  North-
ward to  that  part  of  Egypt,  where  Nilus  at  seven  mouthes
dischargeth  his  streames  into  the  Mediterran  Sea :  from
whence  it  stretcheth  Westward  as  farre  as  the  Straights  of
Gibralter,  and  is  bounded  on  that  part  with  the  utmost
*Non.  Sea-towne of all Libya, called *  Nun. Likewise the

South  part  thereof  abutteth  upon  the  Ocean  Sea,  which
compasseth Africa almost as farre as the Desarts of
Gaoga.
[II.  vi.  750.] Our  Authours  affirme,  that  Africa  is  divided  into  foure
fAftic*** Parts3  ^at  *s  to  say>  Barbaria,  Numidia,  Libya,  and  the
We  usually  cal  Land  of  Negros. Barbaria  taketh  beginning  from  the
all  Africa Hill  called  Mejes,  which  is  the  extreme  part  of  all  the
which  lyeth Mountaines of Atlas, beeing distant from Alexandria
R*d'7nd'*' a^most  ^ree  hundred  miles. It  is  bounded  on  the  North-
Atlantike  and  s^e  w^^  t^e  Mediterran  Sea,  stretching  thence  to  Mount-
Mediterran Mejes aforesaid, and from Mount-Mejes extending it
Seas;joyned selfe to the Streights of Gibralter. West- ward it is
with  a  necke }imited  with  the  said  Streights,  from  whence  winding  it
Arabia  se^e  out  °^  ^e  Mediterran  Sea  into  the  mayn  Ocean,  it

is  inclosed  with  the  most  Westerly  point  of  Atlas:
namely,  at  that  Westerne  Cape  which  is  next  unto  the
Towne  called  Messa.  And  South-ward  it  is  bounded
with  that  side  of  Atlas  which  lyeth  towards  the  Medi-

308

JOHN LEO ON  AFRICA  ad.

c.  1526.
terran  Sea. This  is  the  most  noble  and  worthy  Region
of  all  Africa,  the  Inhabitants  whereof  are  of  a  browne  or
tawny  colour,  being  a  civill  people,  and  prescribe  whol-
some  Lawes  and  Constitutions  unto  themselves.

The  second  part  of  Africa  is  called  of  the  Latines
Numidia,  but  of  the  Arabians  Biledulgerid :  this  Region
bringeth  forth  Dates  in  great  abundance.  It  beginneth
East-ward  at  the  Citie  of  Eloacat,  which  is  an  hundred
miles  distant  from  Egypt,  and  extendeth  West  as  far  as
the  Towne  of  *  Nun,  standing  upon  the  Ocean  Sea.  *Non.
North-ward  it  is  inclosed  with  the  South-side  of  Atlas.
And  the  South  part  thereof  bordereth  upon  the  sandy
Desarts  of  Libya.  All  the  Arabians  doe  usually  call  it
the  Land  of  Dates :  because  this  onely  Region  of  Africa
beareth  Dates.

The  third  part  called  of  the  Latines  Libya,  and  of  the
Arabians  Sarra,  (which  word  signifieth  a  Desart)  begin-
neth Eastward  at  that  part  of  Nilus  which  is  next  unto
the  Citie  of  Eloacat,  and  from  thence  runneth  West-ward
as  farre  as  the  Ocean  Sea.  North-ward  it  is  bounded  with
Numidia,  South-ward  it  abutteth  upon  the  Land  of  Negros,
East-ward  it  taketh  beginning  at  the  Kingdome  of  Gaoga,
and  stretcheth  West-ward  even  to  the  Land  of  Gualata,
which  bordereth  upon  the  Ocean  Sea.

The  fourth  part  of  Africa  which  is  called  the  Land  of
Negros,  beginneth  East-ward  at  the  Kingdome  of  Gaoga,
from  whence  it  extendeth  West  as  farre  as  Gualata.  The
North  part  thereof  is  inclosed  with  the  Desart  of  Libya,
and  the  South  part,  which  is  unknowne  unto  us,  with  the
Ocean  Sea :  howbeit  the  Merchants  which  daily  come
from  thence  to  the  Kingdome  of  Tombuto,  have  suffi-
ciently described  the  situation  of  that  Countrey  unto  us.
This  Land  of  Negros  hath  a  mightie  River,  which  taking  The  River  of
his  name  of  the  Region,  is  called  Niger  :  this  River  taketh  Nt&r-
his  originall  from  the  East  out  of  a  certaine  Desart  called
by  the  fore-said  Negros,  Seu.  Others  will  have  this
River  to  spring  out  of  a  certaine  Lake,  and  so  to  runne
Westward  till  it  exonerateth  it  selfe  into  the  Ocean  Sea.

309

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

c.  1526.

Our  Cosmographers  affirme,  that  the  said  River  of  Niger
is  derived  out  of  Nilus,  which  they  imagine  for  some  cer-
taine  space  to  bee  swallowed  up  of  the  Earth,  and  yet  at
last  to  burst  forth  into  such  a  Lake  as  is  before  mentioned.
Some  others  are  of  opinion,  that  this  River  beginneth
West-ward  to  spring  out  of  a  certaine  Mountaine,  and  so
running  East,  to  make  at  length  a  huge  Lake  :  which
verily  is  not  like  to  be  true ;  for  they  usually  saile  West-
ward from  Tombuto  to  the  Kingdome  of  Ginea,  yea,  and
to  the  Land  of  Melli  also  ;  both  which  in  respect  of
Tombuto  are  situate  to  the  West :  neither  hath  the  said
Land  of  Negros  any  Kingdomes  comparable,  for  beauti-
full  and  pleasant  soyle,  unto  those  which  adjoyne  unto
the  bankes  of  Niger. And  here  it  is  to  be  noted,  that

* ^Ethiopia,  (according  to  the  opinion  of  our  Cosmographers)  *  that
Land  of  Negros  by  which  Nilus  is  said  to  runne  (namely,
that  part  of  the  World  which  stretcheth  East-ward  even
to  the  Indian  Sea,  some  Northerly  parcell  whereof  abut-
teth  upon  the  Red  Sea,  to  wit,  the  Countrey  which  lyeth
without  the  Gulfe  of  Arabia)  is  not  to  bee  called  any
member  or  portion  of  Africa,  and  that  for  many  reasons,
which  are  to  bee  found  in  the  processe  of  this  Historie
set  downe  more  at  large :  The  said  Countrey  is  called  by
the  Latines  ^Ethiopia.  From  thence  come  certaine  religi-
ous Friers  seared  or  branded  on  the  face  with  an  hot  Iron,
who  are  to  be  seene  almost  over  all  Europe,  and  specially
at  Rome.  These  people  have  an  Emperour,  which  they
call  Prete  Gianni,  the  greater  part  of  that  Land  being
inhabited  with  Christians.  Howbeit,  there  is  also  a  cer-
taine Mahumetane  among  them,  which  is  said  to  possesse
a  great  Dominion.

A  division  of Barbarie  is  distinguished  into  foure  Kingdomes  : the

the  foure  fore-  £rst  whereof  is  the  Kingdome  of  Maroco  ; which  is  like-
named  parts  of  ,. .  ,  (Jf .  -n •  t»  1

Africa  wlse  divided  into  seven  Regions  or  Provinces ; namely,

Hea,  Sus,  Guzula,  the  territorre  of  Maroco,  Ducoala,
Hazcora,  and  Tedles.  The  second  Kingdome  of  Bar-
barie called  Fez,  comprehendeth  in  like  sort  seven  Regions
within  the  bounds  thereof ; to  wit,  Temesne,  the  Terri-

310

JOHN LEO ON AFRICA  a.d.

c.  1526.
tory  of  Fez,  Azgara,  *  Elabat,  Errif,  Garet,  and  *  Elcauz.  *Habat.
The  third  Kingdome  is  called  *  Telensin,  and  hath  three  J^auz.m
Regions  under  it,  namely,  the  Mountaines,  Tenez,  and
Algezer.  The  fourth  Kingdom  of  Barbarie  is  named
Tunis ;  under  which  are  comprized  foure  Regions,  that
is  to  say,  Bugia,  Constantina,  Tripolis  in  Barbarie,  and
Ezzaba,  which  is  a  good  part  of  Numidia.  Burgia  hath
alwayes  beene  turmoyled  with  continuall  warres,  because
sometimes  it  was  subject  unto  the  King  of  Tunis,  and
sometimes  againe  unto  the  King  of  Tremizen.  Certaine
it  is  that  even  untill  these  our  dayes,  this  Bugia  was  a
Kingdome  of  it  selfe,  and  so  continued,  till  the  principall
Citie  of  that  Region  was  at  the  commandement  of  Fer-
dinando  the  King  of  Castile,  taken  by  one  Peter  of
Navarre.

This  is  the  basest  part  of  all  Africa;  neither  will  our  [II.  vi.  751.]
Cosmographers  vouchsafe  it  the  name  of  a  Kingdome,  by  The  division  of
reason  that  the  Inhabitants  thereof  are  so  farre  distant  a
sunder ;  which  you  may  easily  conjecture  by  that  which
followeth.  Tesset  a  City  of  Numidia,  containeth  about  Tesset,
foure  hundred  families,  and  is  in  regard  of  the  Libyan
Desart,  severed  from  all  places  of  habitation  almost  three
hundred  miles ;  wherefore  this  second  part  is  thought  by
divers  not  to  bee  worthy  the  name  of  a  Kingdome.  How-
beit  we  will  make  some  relation  of  the  habitable  parts  of
Numidia ;  some  whereof  may  not  unfitly  bee  compared
with  other  Regions  of  Africa,  as  for  example,  that  of
Segelmess,  which  territorie  of  Numidia  lyeth  over  against
Barbarie ;  likewise  Zeb,  which  is  situate  against  Bugia,
and  the  signiorie  of  Biledulgerid,  which  extendeth  unto
the  Kingdome  of  Tunis.  Reserving  therefore  many  par-
ticulars for  the  second  part  of  this  Historie,  we  will  make
our  entrie  and  beginning  at  those  places,  which  lie  upon
the  West  of  Numidia :  the  names  whereof  be  these ;
Tesset,  Guaden,  Ifren,  Hacca,  Dare,  Tabelbelt,  Todga,
Fercale,  Segelmess,  Benigumi,  Fighig,  Tegua,  Tsabit,
Tegorarin,  Mesab,  Tegort  and  Guarghela.  The  Region
of  Zeb  containeth  five  townes,  to  wit,  Pescara,  Elborh,

311

A.D.

c.  1526.

A  discription
of  the  Libyan
Desarts,zvhich
lie  betweene
Numidia  and
the  Land  of
Negros.

A  division  of
the  land  of
Negros  into
severall
Kingdoms,

*John  Leo
travelled  over
fifteene  King-
domes  of  the
land  of  Negros.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Nesta,  Taolac  and  Deusin  :  so  many  Cities  likewise  hath
the  territories  of  Biledulgerid ;  namely,  Teozar,  Caphesa,
Nefreoa,  Elchamid  and  Chalbis :  and  from  hence  East-
ward are  found  the  Isles  of  Gerbe,  Garion,  Mesellata,
Mestrata,  Teoirraga,  Gademis,  Fizza,  Augela,  Birdeoa
and  Eloacat.  These  are  the  names  of  the  most  famous
places  of  all  Numidia,  being  bounded  (as  is  said  before)
Westward  upon  the  Ocean  Sea,  and  Eastward  with  the
River  of  Nilus.

These  Desarts  have  not  as  yet  any  certaine  name
amongst  us,  albeit  they  be  divided  into  five  parts,  and
receive  all  their  denomination  from  the  inhabitants  which
dwell  upon  them,  that  is  to  say,  from  the  Numidians,  who
are  in  like  sort  themselves  divided  into  five  parts  also,
to  wit,  the  People  or  Tribes  called  Zanega,  Ganziga,  Terga,
Leuta  and  Berdeoa.  There  bee  likewise  certaine  places,
which  take  some  proper  and  particular  name  from  the
goodnesse  and  badnesse  of  the  soile ;  as  namely,  the
Desart  of  Azaohad,  so  called  for  the  drought  and  un-
fruitfulnesse  of  that  place :  likewise  Hair,  albeit  a  Desart,
yet  so  called  for  the  goodnesse  and  temperature  of  the
ay  re.

Moreover,  the  land  of  Negros  is  divided  into  many
Kingdomes :  whereof  albeit  a  great  part  be  unknowne
unto  us,  and  remooved  farre  out  of  our  trade ;  wee  will
notwithstanding  make  relation  of  those  places,  where  wee
our  selves  have  aboad,  and  which  by  long  experience  are
growne  very  familiar  unto  us  :  as  likewise  of  some  other
places,  from  whence  Merchants  used  to  travell  unto  the
same  Cities  wherein  my  selfe  was  then  resident ;  from
whom  I  learned  right  well  the  state  of  their  Countries.
I  *  my  selfe  saw  fifteene  Kingdomes  of  the  Negros :  how-
beit  there  are  many  more,  which  although  I  saw  not
with  mine  owne  eies,  yet  are  they  by  the  Negros  suffi-
ciently knowne  and  frequented.  Their  names  therefore
beginning  from  the  West,  and  so  proceeding  Eastward
and  Southward)  are  these  following :  Gualata,  Ghinea,
Melli,  Tombuto,  Gago,  Guber,  Agadez,  Cano,  Casena,

312

JOHN LEO ON AFRICA  a.d.

c.  1526.
Zegzeg,  Zanfara,  Guangara,  Burno,  Gaoga,  Nube.  These
fifteene  Kingdomes  are  for  the  most  part  situate  upon  the
River  Niger,  through  the  which  Merchants  usually  travell
from  Gualata  to  the  City  of  *  Alcair  in  iEgypt.  The  *Cain,
journey  indeede  is  very  long,  but  yet  secure  and  voyd  of
danger.  All  the  said  Kingdomes  adjoyne  one  upon  an-
other ;  ten  whereof  are  separated  either  by  the  River
Niger,  or  by  some  sandie  desart :  and  in  times  past  each
one  of  the  fifteene  had  a  severall  King,  but  now  *  at  this  A***  the
present,  they  are  all  in  a  manner  subject  unto  three  Kings  ^eere  lz>z
onely  :  namely,  to  the  King  of  Tombuto,  who  is  Lord  of
the  greatest  part ;  to  the  King  of  Borno,  who  governeth
the  least  part,  and  the  residue  is  in  subject  on  unto  the
King  of  Gaoga  :  howbeit,  he  that  possesseth  the  King-
dome  of  Ducala  hath  a  very  small  traine  attending  upon
him.  Likewise  these  Kingdomes  have  many  other  King-
domes  bordering  upon  the  South  frontiers  of  them  :  to
wit,  Bito,  Temiam,  Dauma,  Medra,  and  Gorhan ;  the
Governors  and  Inhabitants  whereof,  are  most  rich  and
industrious  people,  great  lovers  of  Justice  and  equitie,
albeit  some  leade  a  brutish  kind  of  life.

Our Cosmographers and Historiographers affirme, Ofthehabita-
that  in  times  past  Africa  was  altogether  disinhabited,  ex-  tton'°fAfrtca>
cept  that  part  which  is  now  called  the  Land  of  Negros : signification  of
and  most  certaine  it  is,  that  Barbarie  and  Numidia  were  this  word
for many ages destitute of Inhabitants. The tawnie Barbar.
people  of  the  said  Region  were  called  by  the  name  of
Barbar,  being  derived  of  the  Verbe  Barbara,  which  in  their
tongue  signifieth  to  murmure  :  because  the  African  tongue
soundeth  in  the  eares  of  the  Arabians,  no  otherwise  then
the  voyce  of  Beasts,  which  utter  their  sounds  without  any
accents. Others  will  have  Barbar  to  be  one  word  twice
repeated,  forsomuch  as  Bar  in  the  Arabian  tongue  signi-
fieth a  Desart. For  (say  they)  when  King  Iphricus  being
by  the  Assyrians  or  ^Ethiopians  driven  out  of  his  owne
Kingdome,  travelled  towards  iEgypt,  and  seeing  himselfe
so  oppressed  with  his  enemies, that  he  knew  not  what
should  become  of  him  and  his  followers,  he  asked  his

313

A.D.

c.  1526.

[II.vi.752.]

A  division  of
the  tawnie
Moores  into
sundrie  Tribes
or  Nations.
*Guadal-
babit.

Tremizen
called  by  the
ancient  Cosmo-
graphers
Casaria,  or
Mauritania
Ccesariensis.

PURCHAS HIS PILGR1MES

people  how  or  which  way  it  was  possible  to  escape,  who
answered  him  Bar-Bar,  that  is,  to  the  Desart,  to  the
Desart :  giving  him  to  understand  by  this  speech,  that  he
could  have  no  safer  refuge,  then  to  crosse  over  Nilus,  and
to  flee  unto  the  Desart  of  Africa.  And  this  reason
seemeth  to  agree  with  them,  which  affirme  the  Africans
to  bee  descended  from  the  people  of  Arabia  foelix.

The  tawnie  Moores  are  divided  into  five  severall
People  or  Tribes :  to  wit,  the  Tribes  called  Zanhagi,
Musmudi,  Zeneti,  Hacari  and  Gumeri.  The  Tribe  of
Musmudi  inhabit  the  Westerne  part  of  Mount  Atlas,
from  the  Province  of  Hea,  to  the  River  of  *  Servan.
Likewise  they  dwell  upon  the  South  part  of  the  said
Mountaine,  and  upon  all  the  inward  plaines  of  that
R.egion.  These  Musmudae  have  foure  Provinces  under
them :  namely,  Hea,  Sus,  Guzula,  and  the  Territorie  of
Morocco.  The  Tribe  of  Gumeri  possesse  certaine  Moun-
taines  of  Barbarie,  dwelling  on  the  sides  of  those  Moun-
taines  which  lie  over  against  the  Mediterran  Sea :  as
likewise  they  are  Lords  of  all  the  River  called  in  their
language  Rif .  This  River  hath  his  Fountaine  neere  unto
the  streights  of  Gibraltar,  and  thence  runneth  Eastwards
to  the  Kingdome  of  Tremizen,  called  by  the  Latines
Caesaria.  These  two  tribes  or  people  have  severall  habi-
tations by  themselves :  the  other  three  are  dispersed
confusively  over  all  Africa :  howbeit,  they  are  like
strangers,  discerned  one  from  another  by  certaine  proper-
ties or  tokens,  maintaining  continuall  warre  among  them-
selves, especially  they  of  Numidia.  Out  of  all  which  it
is  evident,  that  in  times  past  all  the  foresaid  people  had
their  habitations  and  tents  in  the  plaine  fields :  every  one
of  which  favoured  their  owne  faction,  and  exercised  all
labours  necessary  for  mans  life,  as  common  among  them.
The  Governours  of  the  Countrey  attended  their  droves
and  flocks ;  and  the  Citizens  applyed  themselves  unto
some  manuall  Art,  or  to  husbandry.  The  said  people  are
divided  into  five  hundred  severall  families,  as  appeareth
by  the  Genealogies  of  the  Africans,  Author  whereof  is

314

JOHN  LEO ON AFRICA  a.d.

c.  1526.
one  Ibnu  Rachu,  whom  I  have  oftentimes  read  and  per-  Wnu  Rachu

used. Some  writers  are  of  opinion, that the  King  of  a"  African
r^ 1  1 t^-  r ti  >r  ii-  1 1 tx-  r a 1 Historian.

Tombuto,  the  King  or  Melli,  and  the  King  of  Agadez

fetch  their  original!  from  the  people  of  Zanaga,  to  wit,

from  them  which  inhabite  the  Desart.

The foresaid five families or people, being divided  ^he  agreement

into  hundreds  of  progenies,  and  having  innumerable  habi-  ^j!Lcan

tations,  doe  notwithstanding  use  all  one  kind  of  language,  ianguage.

called  by  them  Aquel  Amarig,  that  is,  the  noble  tongue :  Aquel

the Arabians which inhabit Africa, call it a barbarous  Amarig.

tongue ; and  this  is  the  true  and  naturall  language  of  the  African
v  ^ "  language.

Africans. Howbeit  it  is  altogether  different  from  other

languages,  although  it  hath  divers  words  common  with
the  Arabian  tongue. Yea,  all  the  Gumeri  in  a  manner
and  most  of  the  Haoari  speake  Arabian,  though  corruptly  ;  Arabike.
which  (I  suppose)  came  first  hereupon  to  passe,  for  that
the  said  people  have  had  long  acquaintance  and  conversa-
tion with  the  Arabians. The  Negros  have  divers  lan-
guages among themselves, among  which they  call  one
Sungai,  and  the  same  is  current  in  many  Regions ; as  Sungai.
namely,  in  Gualata,  Tombuto,  Ghinea,  Melli  and  Gago.
Another  language  there  is  among  the  Negros,  which  they
call  Guber,  and  this  is  rife  among  the  people  of  Guber,  of  Guber.
Cano,  of  Casena,  of  Perzegreg,  and  of  Guangra. Like-
wise the  Kingdome  of  Borno  hath  a  peculiar  kind  of  yorno
speech,  altogether  like  unto  that,  which  is  used  in  Gaogo. an&ua£e-
And  the  Kingdome  of  Nube  hath  a  language  of  great  Nubian.
affinitie  with  the  Caldean,  Arabian  and  -/Egyptian  tongues.
But  all  the  Sea-townes  of  Africa,  from  the  Mediterran
Sea  to  the  Mountaines  of  Atlas,  speake  broken  Arabian. Arabike
Except  the  Kingdome  and  Towne  of  Maroco,  and  the
in-land Numidians bordering upon Maroco, Fez and
Tremizen  ; all  which,  use  the  Barbarian  tongue. How-  Barbarian.
beit,  they  which  dwell  over  against  Tunis  and  Tripoli, Of  the
speake  indeede  the  Arabian  language ; albeit  most  cor-  Arabians
ruptly.  inhabiting  the

Citie  of
Of  that  Army  which  was  sent  by  Califa  *  Otmen  the  Afr\ca\

third,  in  the  foure  hundred  yeere  of  the  Hegeira,  there  *Hutmen.

3i5

A.D.

c.  1526,

*  Hucha.

*  Cairaoan.
Tunis.

Cairaoan.

Corruption  of
Language.

*Tae  Moores
of  Granada.

Of  the
Arabians
which  dwel  in
Tents,  and
their  coming
into  Africa.
*A  Mahume-
tane  Patri-
arch.
Of  these
Chalififsy  see
my  Pilgrim,
lib.  3.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

came  into  Africa  fourescore  thousand  Gentlemen  and
others,  who  having  subdued  sundry  Provinces,  at  length
arrived  in  Africa :  and  there  the  Generall  of  the  whole
Army  called  *  Hucha  Hibnu  Nafich  remained.  This
man  built  that  great  City  which  is  called  of  us  *  Alcair.
For  he  stood  in  feare  of  the  people  of  Tunis,  lest  they
should  betray  him,  misdoubting  also  that  they  would
procure  aide  out  of  Sicily,  and  so  give  him  the  incounter.
Wherefore  with  all  his  treasure  which  he  had  got,  he
travelled  to  the  Desart  and  firme  ground,  distant  from
Carthage  about  one  hundred  and  twenty  miles,  and  there
is  he  said  to  have  built  the  City  of  *  Alcair.  The  rem-
nant of  his  Souldiers  he  commanded  to  keepe  those  places,
which  were  most  secure  and  fit  for  their  defence,  and
willed  them  to  build  where  no  rocke  nor  fortification  was.
Which  being  done,  the  Arabians  began  to  inhabit  Africa,
and  to  disperse  themselves  among  the  Africans,  who,  be-
cause they  had  beene  for  certaine  yeeres  subject  unto  the
Romans  or  Italians,  used  to  speake  their  language :  and
hence  it  is,  that  the  naturall  and  mother-tongue  of  the
Arabians,  which  hath  great  affinitie  with  the  African
tongue,  grew  by  little  and  little  to  be  corrupted :  and  so
they  report  that  these  two  Nations  at  length  conjoyned
themselves  in  one.  Howbeit  the  Arabians  usually  doe
blaze  their  Pedigree  in  daily  and  triviall  Songs,  which
custome  as  yet  is  common  both  to  *  us,  and  to  the  people
of  Barbarie  also.  For  no  man  there  is,  be  he  never  so
base,  which  will  not  to  his  owne  name,  adde  the  name  of
his  Nation ;  as  for  example,  Arabian,  Barbarian,  or  such
like.

The  Mahumetan  Priests  alwayes  forbad  the  Arabians
to  passe  over  Nilus  with  their  Armies  and  Tents.  How-
beit in  the  foure  hundred  yeere  of  the  Hegeira  we  reade,
that  they  were  permitted  so  to  doe  by  a  certaine  factious
and  schismaticall  *  Califa  :  because  one  of  his  Nobles  had
rebelled  against  him,  usurping  the  City  of  Cairaoan,  and
the  greatest  part  of  Barbarie.  After  the  death  of  which
Rebell,  that  Kingdome  remained  for  some  yeeres  unto  his

316

JOHN LEO ON AFRICA  a.d.

c.  1526.
posteritie  and  family ; whose  jurisdiction  (as  the  African
Chronicles  report)  grew  so  large  and  strong  in  the  time  of  [II.  vi.  753.]
Elcain  (the  Mahumetan  Califa  and  Patriarch  of  Arabia)
that  hee  sent  unto  them  one  Gehoar,  whom  of  a  slave  he
had  made  his  Counsellor, with  an  huge  Armie. This
Gehoar  conducting  me  his  Armie  Westward,  recovered  Gehoar  a  slave
all  Numidia  and  Barbarie. Insomuch  that  hee  pierced  conauere^all
unto  the  Region  of  Sus,  and  there  claymed  most  ample  Barbarie,
Tribute : all  which  being  done,  he  returned  backe  unto  Numidia,
his  Califa,  and  most  faithfully  surrendred  unto  him  what-  EgfP**  and
soever hee had gained from the Enemy. The Califa ^na%
seeing  his  prosperous  successe, beganne  to  aspire  unto
greater  Exploits. And  Gehoar  most  firmely  promised,
that  as  hee  had  recovered  the  Westerne  Dominion  unto  his
Lord,  so  would  he  likewise  by  force  of  Warre  most  cer-
tainly restore  unto  him  the  Countries  of  the  East,  to  wit,
Egypt, Syria,  and  all  Arabia ; and  protested  moreover
that  with  the  greatest  hazard  of  his  life,  he  would  bee
avenged of  all the injuries offered by the Family of
Labhus  unto  his  Lords  Predecessors,  and  would  revest
him  in  the  Royall  Seate  of  his  most  famous  Grand-fathers,
great-grand-fathers,  and  Progenitors. The  Califa  liking
well  his  audacious  promise,  caused  an  Armie  of  fourescore
thousand  Souldiers,  with  an  infinite  summe  of  money  and
other  things  necessary  for  the  Warres,  to  bee  delivered
unto  him. And  so  this  valiant  and  stout  Chieftaine  being
provided  for  warfare,  conducted  his  Troupes  through  the
Desarts  of  Egypt  and  Barbarie ; and  having  first  put  to
flight  the  Vice-Califa  of  Egypt  (who  fled  unto  Elvir  the
Califa  of  Bagdet)  in  short  time  he  subdued  very  easily  all
the  Provinces  of  Egypt  and  Syria. Howbeit  he  could
not  as  yet  hold  himselfe  secure ; fearing  least  the  Califa
of  Bagdet  would  assayle  him  with  an  Army  out  of  Asia,
and  least  the  Garrisons  which  he  had  left  to  keepe  Barbarie,
should  be  constrayned  to  forsake  those  conquered  Pro-
vinces. Wherefore  he  built  a  Citie,  and  caused  it  to  be
walled  round  about. In  which  Citie  he  left  one  of  his
most  trustie  Captaines,  with  a  great  part  of  the  Army :

317

A.D.

c.  1526.

Cayro  bunt,
called  Ale  hair.
Gehoar  the
first  founder  of
Cairo :  all  is
the  Arabeck
Article,  0  the
Exoticke  ter-
mination.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

and  this  Citie  hee  called  by  the  name  of  Alchair,  which
afterward  by  others  was  named  Cairo.  This  Alchair  is
said  daily  so  to  have  increased,  that  no  Citie  of  the
World  for  buildings  and  Inhabitants  was  any  way  com-
parable thereunto.

Moreover,  Califa  Elcain  arriving  at  Alchair,  and  beeing
most  honourably  entertayned  by  his  Servant  Gehoar,  (who
had  written  for  him  to  come)  began  to  thinke  upon  great
affaires,  and  having  gathered  an  huge  Armie,  resolved  to
wage  battell  against  the  Califa  of  Bagdet.  In  the  meane
season  he  that  was  appointed  Vice-Roy  of  Barbarie,  com-
pacting with  the  Califa  of  Bagdet,  yeelded  himselfe  and
all  Barbarie  into  his  hands.  Which  the  Califa  most  kindly
accepted,  and  ordayned  him  King  over  all  Africa.  But
Califa  Elcain  hearing  this  newes  at  Alchair  was  wonder-
fully afflicted  in  minde.  Howbeit  there  was  one  of  his
secret  Counsellors  a  very  learned  and  wittie  man,  who
seeing  his  Lord  so  sad  and  pensive ;  I  assure  you,  said
he,  if  you  please  to  take  mine  advise,  that  I  will  forth-with
procure  you  such  an  Armie,  as  shall  give  you  great  store
of  money,  and  yet  notwithstanding  shall  doe  you  good
service  also.  The  Califa  beeing  some-what  emboldened
at  these  speeches,  asked  his  Counsellour  how  this  might
possibly  bee  brought  to  effect :  My  Lord  (sayth  his
Counsellor)  certaine  it  is,  that  the  Arabians  are  now
growne  so  populous,  and  to  so  great  a  number,  that  all
Arabia  cannot  contayne  them,  scarcely  will  the  yeerely
increase  of  the  ground  suffice  to  feed  their  Droves,  and
you  see  with  what  great  famine  they  are  afflicted,  and
how  they  are  destitute  not  onely  of  habitations,  but  even
of  victuals  and  sustenance.  Wherefore  if  you  had  hereto-
fore given  them  leave,  they  would  long  ere  this  have
invaded  Africa.  And  if  you  will  now  licence  them  so  to
do,  doubt  you  not,  but  that  you  shall  receive  of  them  an
huge  Masse  of  Gold.  This  counsell  could  not  altogether
satisfie  the  Califa  his  minde :  for  he  knew  right  well  that
the  Arabians  would  so  waste  all  Africa,  as  it  should  neither
be  profitable  for  himselfe, nor  for  his  Enemies. Not-

318

JOHN LEO ON AFRICA  a.d.

c.  1526.
withstanding,  seeing  that  his  Kingdome  was  altogether
endangered,  he  thought  it  better  to  accept  those  summes
of  money  which  his  Counsellour  promised,  and  so  to  be
revenged  of  his  Enemie,  then  to  lose  both  his  Kingdome
and  Gold  all  at  once.  Wherefore  he  permitted  all
Arabians,  which  would  pay  him  Duckats  apiece,  freely  to
enter  Africa ;  conditionally  that  they  would  shew  them-
selves most  deadly  Enemies  unto  the  treacherous  King  of
Barbarie.  Which  libertie  being  granted  unto  them,  it
is  reported  that  ten  Tribes  or  Families  of  Arabians,  being
halfe  the  people  of  Arabia  Deserta,  came  immediately  into
Africa,  unto  whom  certaine  Inhabitants  of  Arabia  Foelix
joyned  themselves,  insomuch  that  there  were  found
amongst  them  about  fiftie  thousand  persons  able  to  beare
Armes :  their  women,  children,  and  cattell  were  almost
innumerable :  the  Storie  whereof  Ibnu  Rachu,  the  most
diligent  Chronicler  of  African  Affaires  (whom  wee  have
before  mentioned)  setteth  downe  at  large.

These  Arabians  having  traversed  the  Desart  betweene
TEgypt  and  Barbarie,  first  laid  siege  unto  Tripolis  a  Citie
of  Barbarie,  which  being  overcome,  they  slue  a  great  part
of  the  Citizens,  the  residue  escaping  by  flight.  Next  of
all  they  encountred  the  Towne  of  Capes,  which  was  by
them  taken  and  vanquished.  At  length  they  besieged  Ten  Tribes  of
Cairaoan also ; howbeit the Citizens  being sufficiently  Arablans  .

•  1 1 r •  *  .j  ,  .i&ii • y invade  Africa.

provided  of  victuals,  are  said  to  have  indured  the  siege  j$m  Rachu  a
for  eight  monethes :  which  being  expired,  they  were  con-  famous  Histo-
strayned  to  yeeld  : at  what  time  there  was  nothing  in  riographer.
Cairaoan but  wofull slaughters, hideous  out-cryes, and
present  death. This  Land  the  Arabians  divided  among
themselves,  and  began  to  people  and  inhabit  the  same ;
requiring  in  the  meane  space  large  Tributes  of  the  Townes
and  Provinces  subject  unto  them. And  so  they  possessed
all  Africa,  untill  such  time  as  one  Joseph  the  sonne  of  [II.  vi.  754.]
Jeffin  attayned  to  the  Kingdome  of  Marocco.  Kin&  JosePL

This  Joseph  was  the  first  King  of  Marocco,  who  endea-
voured by  all  meanes  to  advance  the  friends  and  kindred
of  the  late  deceased  King  of  Africa  unto  the  Kingdome ;

3J9

A.D.

c.  1526.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Mansor.

neither  did  hee  cease  untill  he  had  expelled  all  the  Arabians
out  of  Cairaoan.  Howbeit  the  Arabians  possessed  the
Regions  thereabout,  giving  themselves  wholy  to  spoiles
and  robberies :  and  the  friends  of  the  said  deceased  King
could  beare  rule  but  in  certaine  places  only.  Afterward
succeeded  in  the  Kingdome  of  Marocco  one  Mansor,  who
was  the  fourth  King  and  Prelate  of  that  Mahumetan  Sect
which  was  called  Muachedim.  This  man,  albeit  his
Grand-fathers  and  great  Grand-fathers  had  alwayes  fav-
oured the  Posteritie  and  friends  of  the  foresaid  deceased
African  King,  and  had  restored  them  to  their  ancient
dignitie ;  devised  altogether  how  to  oppose  himselfe
against  them,  and  to  usurpe  all  their  authoritie.  Where-
fore making  a  fayned  league  with  them,  wee  reade,  that
he  provoked  the  Arabians  against  them,  and  so  very  easily
overcame  them.  Afterward  Mansor  brought  the  greatest
part  of  the  Arabians  into  the  Westerne  Dominions  of
Africa  ;  unto  the  better  sort  of  whom  he  gave  the  Habita-
tion of  Duccala  and  Azgara,  and  unto  the  baser  remnant
he  bequeathed  the  possession  of  Numidia.  But  in  pro-
cesse  of  time  hee  commanded  the  Numidian  slaves  to  be
set  at  libertie,  and  so  in  despight  of  the  Arabians,  hee
caused  them  to  inhabit  that  part  of  Numidia  which  he  had
allotted  unto  them.  But  as  for  the  Arabians  of  Azgara
and  of  certaine  other  places  in  Barbarie,  hee  brought  them
A  Prwerbe.  all  under  his  subjection.  For  the  Arabians  out  of
Desarts  are  like  fishes  without  water :  they  had  indeed
often  attempted  to  get  into  the  Desarts ;  but  the  Moun-
taines  of  Atlas,  which  were  then  possessed  by  the  Bar-
barians, hindred  their  passage.  Neither  had  they  libertie
to  passe  over  the  Plaines,  for  the  residue  of  the  Barbarians
were  there  planted.  Wherefore  their  pride  being  abated,
they  applyed  themselves  unto  Husbandry,  having  no
where  to  repose  themselves,  but  onely  in  Villages,  Cot-
tages, and  Tents.  And  their  miserie  was  so  much  the
greater,  in  that  they  were  constrayned  yeerely  to  disburse
unto  the  King  of  Marocco  most  ample  Tribute.  Those
which inhabited Duccala, because they were an huge

320

JOHN LEO ON AFRICA  a.d.

c.  1526.
multitude,  easily  freed  themselves  from  all  Tribute  and
Imposition.

A  great  part  of  the  Arabians  remayned  still  at  Tunis,
for  that  Mansor  had  refused  to  carrie  them  along  with
him  :  who,  after  the  death  of  the  said  Mansor,  grew  to  bee
Lords  of  Tunis,  and  so  continued,  till  they  resigned  their
Government  unto  the  people  called  Abu-Haf ;  upon
condition  that  they  should  pay  them  halfe  the  Revenues
thereof :  and  this  condition  hath  remayned  firme  even
untill  our  dayes.  Howbeit,  because  the  Arabians  are  in-
creased to  such  innumerable  swarmes,  that  the  whole
Revenues  are  not  sufficient  for  them,  the  King  of  Tunis  1 526.
most  justly  alloweth  some  of  them  their  duties,  to  the
end  they  may  make  secure  passage  for  Merchants,  which
indeed  they  performe  without  molestation  or  hurt  of  any.
But  the  residue  which  are  deprived  of  their  pay,  betake
themselves  wholy  to  robberies,  thefts,  slaughters,  and  such
other  monstrous  outrages.  For  these,  lurking  alwayes
in  the  Woods,  no  sooner  see  any  Merchant  approching,
but  suddenly  they  breake  forth,  depriving  him  of  his
goods  and  life  also  :  insomuch  that  now  Merchants  dare
not  passe  that  way  but  with  a  Garrison  of  safe-conduct.
And  so  they  passe  sometimes  to  their  great  inconvenience.
For  they  are  notwithstanding  constrayned  to  give  unto  the
foresaid  Arabians,  which  are  in  pay  with  the  King  of
Tunis,  great  summes  of  money  :  and  are  likewise  often-
times so  in  danger  of  Robbers,  that  they  lose  both  their
goods  and  lives.

The  Arabians  which  inhabit  Africa,  are  divided  into
three  parts  :  one  part  whereof  are  called  Cachin,  the  second  The  Tribe
Hilel,  the  third  Machil.  The  Cachin  are  divided  into  Cachh'
three  Nations  or  Tribes ;  to  wit,  the  Tribes  of  Etheg,
Sumait,  and  Sahid.  Moreover,  Etheg  is  divided  into
three  Families ;  that  is  to  say,  the  Family  of  Delleg,
Elmuntefig,  and  Subair :  and  these  are  dispersed  into
many  Regions.  Hilel  are  derived  into  foure  Genera-
tions ;  to  wit,  the  people  of  Benihemir,  of  Rieh,  of  Sufien,
and  of  Chusain.  The  Family  of  Benihemir,  is  divided
v  321  x

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

c.  1526.

into  the  Linages  of  Huroam,  Hucben,  Habrum  and
Mussim.  The  Tribe  of  Rieh,  are  distributed  into  the
Kindreds  called  Deuead,  Suaid,  Asgeg,  Elchyrith,  Enedri,
and  Garfam ;  which  Kindreds  possesse  many  Dominions.
Machil  have  three  Tribes  under  them :  to  wit,  Mastar,
Hutmen,  and  Hassan.  Mastar  are  divided  into  Ruchen,
and  Selim  ;  Hutmen  into  Elhasi  and  Chinan  ;  and  Hassan
into  Deuihessen,  Deuimansor,  and  Deuihubaidulla.
Deuihessen  is  distinguished  into  the  Kindreds  called
Dulein,  Berbun,  Vodein,  Racmen  and  Hamram ;  Deui-
mansor into  Hemrun,  Menebbe,  Husein,  and  Albuhusein  ;
and  lastly,  Deuihubaidulla,  into  Garag,  Hedeg,  Teleb,
and  Geoan.  All  these  doe  in  a  manner  possesse  innumer-
able Regions ;  insomuch  that  to  reckon  them  up  at  large,
were  a  matter  not  onely  difficult,  but  almost  impossible.
The  most  noble  and  famous  Arabians  were  they  of  the

Etheg.  Family  of  Etheg,  unto  whom  Almansor  gave  the  Regions

of  Duccala  and  of  Tedles  to  inhabit.  These  Arabians
even  till  our  times  have  beene  put  to  great  distresse  and
hazard,  partly  by  the  Portugall  King,  and  partly  by  the
King  of  Fez.  They  have  at  all  oportunities,  if  need
should  require,  a  hundred  thousand  Souldiers  fit  to  beare
Armes,  a  great  part  whereof  are  Horsemen. The  Ara-

Sumait.  bians  called  Sumait,  enjoy  that  part  of  the  Libyan  Desart

which  lyeth  over  against  the  Desart  of  Tripoly.  These
make  often  invasions  into  Barbarie,  for  they  have  no  places
allotted  them  therein,  but  they  and  their  Camels  doe  per-

[II.  vi.  755.]  petually  remaine  in  the  Desarts. They  are  able  to  levie
fourescore thousand souldiers, the greatest part being

Sahid.  footmen. Likewise  the  Tribe  of  Sahid  doe  inhabite  the

Desart  of  Libya :  and  these  have  had  alwaies  great  league
and  familiaritie  with  the  King  of  Guargala.  They  have
such  abundance  of  cattell,  that  they  doe  plentifully  supply
all  the  Cities  of  that  region  with  flesh,  and  that  especially
in  Summer-time,  for  all  the  Winter  they  stir  not  out  of
the  Desarts.  Their  number  is  increased  to  about  a  hun-
dred and fiftie thousand having not many Horsmen

Delleg.  among them. The Tribe of Delleg possesse divers

322

JOHN LEO ON AFRICA  ad.

c.  1526.
habitations  ;  howbeit,  Caesaria  containeth  the  greatest  part
of  them.  Some  also  inhabit  upon  the  frontiers  of  the
Kingdom  of  Bugia,  who  are  said  to  receive  a  yearely  Tremizen.
stipend  from  their  next  neighbours.  But  the  least  part
of  them  dwell  upon  the  field-countrey  of  Acdes,  upon  the
borders  of  Mauritania,  and  upon  some  part  of  mount
Atlas,  bein'g  subject  unto  the  King  of  Fez.  The  people
of  Elmuntefig  are  seated  in  the  Province  of  Azgar,  and  Elmuntefig.
are  called  by  the  later  writers  Elcaluth.  These  also  pay
certaine  yearely  tribute  unto  the  King  of  Fez,  being  able
to  furnish  about  eight  thousand  Horsemen  to  the  warres.
The  Kindred  of  Sobair  doe  inhabit  not  farre  from  the  Sobair.
Kingdome  of  Gezeir,  being  many  of  them  under  the  pay
of  the  King  of  Tremizen,  and  are  said  to  enjoy  a  great
part  of  Numidia.  They  have  more  or  lesse,  three  thou-
sand most  warlike  Horsemen.  They  possesse  likewise
great  abundance  of  Camels ;  for  which  cause  they  abide
all  Winter  in  the  Desarts.  The  remnant  of  them
occupieth  the  Plaine  which  lieth  betweene  Sala  and
Mecnes.  These  have  huge  droves  of  Cattell,  and  exercise
themselves  in  Husbandrie,  being  constrained  to  pay  some
yearely  tribute  unto  the  King  of  Fez.  They  have  Horse-
men, who,  as  a  man  may  say,  are  naturally  framed  to  the
warres,  about  foure  thousand  in  number.

Hillel,  which  are  also  called  Benihamir,  dwel  upon  the  Of  the  people
frontiers  of  the  King-dome  of  Tremizen  and  Oran. These  &fHJ.,f.

11  ti -n  r  t*  1 •  of  their  habt-

range  up  and  downe  the  Desart  or  legorarin,  being  in  taftons
pay  under  the  King  of  Tremizen,  and  of  great  riches
and  power ;  insomuch  that  they  have  at  all  times  in  a
readinesse  for  the  warres  sixe  thousand  Horsemen.  The
Tribe  of  Hurua  possesse  onely  the  borders  of  Mustu-  Hurua,
ganim.  These  are  savage  people,  giving  themselves
wholly  to  spoyles  and  robberies,  and  alienating  their  minds
from  the  warres.  They  never  come  forth  of  the  Desarts ;
for  the  people  of  Barbarie  will  neither  allow  them  any
places  of  habitation,  nor  yet  any  stipend  at  all :  Horsemen
they  have  to  the  number  of  two  thousand.  The  Kin-
dred of  Hucban  are  next  neighbours  unto  the  region  of  Hucban.

323

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

c.  1526.

Melian,  who  receive  certaine  pay  from  the  King  of  Tunis.
They  are  rude  and  wild  people,  and  in  very  deed  estranged
from  all  humanitie : they  have  (as  it  is  reported)  about

Habru.  fifteene  hundred  Horsemen.  The  Tribe  of  Habru  inhabit
the  region  lying  betweene  Oran  and  Mustuganim  :  these
exercise  Husbandrie,  paying  yearely  tribute  unto  the  King
of  Tremizen,  and  being  scarce  able  to  make  one  hundred
Horsemen.

Mussim.  The  people  called  Mussim,  possesse  those  Desarts  of
Masila,  which  extend  unto  the  Kingdome  of  Bugia.
These  likewise  are  given  onely  to  theft  and  robberie ;
they  take  tribute  both  of  their  owne  people,  and  of  other

Rieeh.  regions  adjoyning  unto  them.  The  Tribe  of  Rieeh  in-
habit those  desarts  of  Libya,  which  border  upon  Con-
stantina.  These  have  most  ample  Dominions  in  Numidia,
being  now  divided  into  sixe  parts.  This  right  famous
and  warlike  Nation  receiveth  stipend  from  the  King  of
Tunis, having five thousand Horsemen at command.

Suaid.  The  people  of  Suaid  enjoy  that  Desart,  which  is  extended
unto  the  Signiorie  of  Tenez.  These  have  very  large  pos-
sessions, receiving  stipend  from  the  King  of  Tremizen,
being  men  of  notable  dexteritie,  as  well  in  the  warres,  as

A%geg.  in  all  other  conversation  of  life.  The  Kindred  of  Azgeg
dwell  not  altogether  in  one  place  :  for  part  of  them  inhabit
the  region  of  Garet,  among  the  people  called  Hemram ;
and  the  residue  possesse  that  part  of  Duccala,  which  lieth

Elcherit.  neere  unto  Azaphi.  The  Tribe  of  Elcherit  dwell  upon
that  portion  of  Helin  which  is  situate  in  the  Plaine  of
Sahidim,  having  the  people  of  Heah  tributarie  unto  them,
and  being  a  very  uncivill  and  barbarous  people. The

Enedru  people  called  Enedri  are  seated  in  the  Plaine  of  Heah  :
but  the  whole  region  of  Heah  maintaineth  almost  foure
thousand  Horsemen,  which  notwithstanding  are  unfit  for

Gar/a.  the  warres.  The  people  of  Garfa  have  sundry  Mansions  :
neither  have  they  any  King  or  Governour.  They  are
dispersed  among  other  Generations,  and  especially  among
the  Kindreds  of  Manebbi  and  Hemram.  These  convay
Dates from Segelmessa to the Kingdome of Fez, and

324

JOHN LEO ON AFRICA  a.d.

c.  1526.
carry  backe  againe  from  thence  such  things  as  are  neces-
sarie  for  Segelmess.

The  people  called  Ruche,  who  are  thought  to  be  de- °f the  Tribe
scended  from  Mastar,  doe  possesse  that  desart,  which  lieth  °t * €  l '
next  unto Dedes and Farcala. They have  very small
dominions,  for  which  cause  they  are  accounted  no  whit
rich  ;  howbeit,  they  are  most  valiant  souldiers,  and  exceed-
ing swift  of  foote  ; insomuch  that  they  esteeme  it  a  great
disgrace,  if  one  of  their  footemen  be  vanquished  by  two
horsemen. And  you  shall  find  scarce  any  one  man  among  Swift  people.
them,  which  will  not  outgoe  a  very  swift  horse,  be  the
journey  never  so  long. They  have  about  five  hundred
Horsemen,  but  most  warlike  Footemen,  to  the  number  of
eight  thousand. Selim  inhabite  upon  the  River  of  Dara, Selim.
from  whence  they  range  up  and  downe  the  Desarts. They
are  endowed  with  great  riches,  carrying  every  yeare  mer-
chandize unto  the  Kingdome  of  Tombuto,  and  are  thought Traffick  to
to  be  in  high  favour  with  the  King  himselfe. A  large om  ut0m
jurisdiction they have in Darha, and great plentie of
Camels  :  and  for  all  opportunities  of  warre  they  have  ever
in  a  readinesse  three  thousand  Horsemen. The  Tribe  of  [II.  vi.  756.]
Elhasis  dwelleth  upon  the  sea-coast,  neere  unto  Messa. Elhasis.
They  doe  arme  about  five  hundred  Horsemen,  and  are  a
Nation  altogether  rude,  and  unacquainted  in  the  warres.
Some part of them inhabiteth Azgara. Those which
dwell  about  Messa,  are  free  from  the  yoke  of  superioritie  ;
but  the  others  which  remaine  in  Azgar,  are  subject  to  the
King of Fez. The Kindred of Chinan are dispersed Chinan*
among  them,  which  before  were  called  Elcaluth,  and  these
also  are  subject  unto the  King  of  Fez. Very  warlike
people  they  are,  and  are  able  to  set  forth  two  thousand
Horsemen. The  people  of  Deuihessen  are  divided  into
the  Kindreds  of  Duleim,  Burbun,  Vode,  Denimansor,  and
Deuihubaidulla. Duleim  are  conversant  in  the  Desarts Deuihessen.
of  Libya  with  the  African  people,  called  Zanhaga. They  Duleim-
have  neither  dominion,  nor  yet  any  stipend  ; wherefore
they  are  very  poore,  and  given  to  robberie  : they  travell
unto  Dara,  and  exchange  Cattell  for  Dates  with  the  inhabi-

325

A.D.

c.  1526,

Burbun.

Fode.

Racmen.

H  antrum.

The  people
descended  of
Deuimansor.
Dehemrum.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

tants  there.  All  braverie  and  comlinesse  of  apparrell
they  utterly  neglect ;  and  their  number  of  fighting  men
is  ten  thousand,  foure  thousand  being  Horsemen,  and  the
residue  Footemen.  The  people  called  Burbun,  possesse
that  part  of  the  Libyan  Desart  which  adjoyneth  unto  Sus :
They  are  a  huge  multitude,  neither  have  they  any  riches
besides  Camels.  Unto  them  is  subject  the  Citie  of
Tesset,  which  scarce  sufficeth  them  for  the  maintenance
of  their  Horses,  being  but  a  few.  The  people  of  Vode
enjoyeth  that  Desart,  which  is  situate  betweene  Guaden
and  Gualata.  They  beare  rule  over  the  Guadenites,  and
of  the  Duke  of  Gualata  they  receive  yearely  tribute,  and
their  number  is  growne  almost  infinite :  for  by  report,
they  are  of  abilitie  to  bring  into  the  field  almost  threescore
thousand  most  skilfull  souldiers ;  notwithstanding,  they
have  great  want  of  Horses.  The  Tribe  of  Racmen
occupie  that  Desart  which  is  next  unto  Hacha :  they  have
verie  large  possessions,  and  doe  in  the  Spring-time  usually
travell  unto  Tesset ;  for  then  alwaies  they  have  somwhat
to  do  with  the  inhabitants  there.  Their  people  fit  for
Armes  are  to  the  number  of  twelve  thousand,  albeit  they
have  very  few  Horsemen.  The  Nation  of  Hamrum  in-
habit the  Desarts  of  Tagauost,  exacting  some  tribute  of
the  inhabitants  there,  and  with  daily  incursions  likewise
molesting  the  people  of  Nun.  Their  number  of  souldiers
is  almost  eight  thousand.

The  Generation  of  Dehemrum,  which  are  said  to  derive
their  pedigree  from  Deuimansor,  inhabit  the  Desart  over
against  Segelmess,  who  continually  wander  by  the  Libyan
Desarts  as  farre  as  Ighid.  They  have  tributarie  unto
them  the  people  of  Segelmesse,  of  Todgatan,  of  Tebelbelt,
and  of  Dara.  Their  soile  yeeldeth  such  abundance  of
Dates,  that  the  yearely  increase  thereof  is  sufficient  to
maintaine  them,  although  they  had  nothing  else  to  live  on.
They  are  of  great  fame  in  other  Nations,  being  able  to
furnish  for  the  warres  about  three  thousand  Horsemen.
There  dwell  likewise  among  these  certaine  other  Arabians
of  more  base  condition,  called  in  their  language  Garfa

326

JOHN LEO ON AFRICA  a.d.

c.  1526.
Esgeb  ;  which  notwithstanding  have  great  abundance  of
Horses,  and  of  all  other  Cattell.  The  people  of  Menebbe  Menebbe.
doe  almost  inhabite  the  very  same  Desart,  having  two
Provinces  of  Numidia  under  them ;  to  wit,  Matgara,
and  Retebbe.  These  also  are  a  most  valiant  Nation,
being  in  pay  under  the  Province  of  Segelmess,  and  being
able  to  make  about  two  thousand  Horsmen.  The  Kindred
of  Husein,  which  are  thought  to  be  descended  of  Deui-  Husein.
mansor,  are  seated  upon  the  Mountaines  of  Atlas.  They
have  in  the  said  Mountaines  a  large  jurisdiction,  namely,
divers  Castles  every  where,  and  many  most  rich  and
flourishing  Cities ;  all  which,  they  thinke,  were  given
them  in  old  time  by  the  Vice-royes  of  the  Marini :  for  as
soone  as  they  had  wonne  that  Kingdome,  the  Kindred  of
Husein  affoorded  them  great  aide  and  service.  Their
dominion  is  now  subject  unto  the  Kings  of  Fez  and  of
Segelmess.  They  have  a  Captaine,  which  for  the  most
part  resideth  at  the  Citie,  commonly  called  Garseluin.
Likewise  they  are  alwaies  in  a  manner,  traversing  of  that
Desart,  which  in  their  language  is  called  Eddara.  They
are  taken  to  be  a  most  rich  and  honest  people,  being  of
abilitie  to  furnish  for  the  warres  about  sixe  thousand
Horsemen.  Among  these,  you  shall  oftentimes  find
many  Arabians  of  another  sort,  whom  they  use  onely  to
be  their  servants.  The  Tribe  of  Abulhusein  doe  inhabit  Abulhmein.
part  of  the  foresaid  Desart  of  Eddara,  howbeit  a  very
small  part ;  the  greatest  number  of  whom  are  brought
unto  such  extreme  misery,  that  they  have  not  in  those
their  wild  tents  sufficient  sustenance  to  live  upon.

One  Generation  of  the  people  of  Deuihubaidulla  are The  of-spring
those  which  are  named  Gharrag :  these  enjoy  the  Desarts  °f  ®eulhuhat-
of  Benigomi  and  Fighig,  having  very  large  possessions  in Qjiarra<r
Numidia. They  are  stipendaries  unto  the  King  of  Tre-
mizen, who diligently endevoureth to bring them to
peace  and  tranquillitie  of  life  ;  for  they  are  wholly  given  to
theft  and  robberie. In  Summer-time  they  usually  repaire
unto  Tremizen,  where  they  are  thought  for  that  season  of
the  yeare  to  settle  their  abode :  their  Horsemen  are  to  the

327

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

c.  1526.

number of foure thousand, all which are most noble

Hedeg.  warriours. The  Kindred  of  Hedeg  possesse  a  certaine

Desart  neere  unto  Tremizen,  called  in  their  owne  language

Hangad. These  have  no  stipend  from  any  Prince,  nor

yet  any  jurisdiction  at  all,  rapine  and  stealth  is  onely  de-

lightfull  unto  them  ; they  provide  onely  for  their  family

and  themselves,  and  are  able  to  set  forth  about  five  hun-

Thekb.  dred Horsemen. The Tribe of Theleb inhabite the

*  Alger.  Plaine  of  *  Algezer  ; these  have  often  vagaries  over  the

Algere.the Desart s  unto  the  Province  of  Tedgear. Unto  them  were

nest  of  oea-  ,  . ..  ,  r°  ^.  .  r w

Hornets  a subject  in  times  past,  the  most  famous  Cities  or  Algezer

cage  of  unclean  and  Tedelles : howbeit  in  these  our  dayes  they  were  re-

Birdsy  and covered  againe  from  them  by  Barbarossa  the  Turke  ;  which

place  of  Pirats.  ]osse  COuld  not  but  greatly  grieve  and  molest  their  King.

It  is  reported  moreover,  that  at  the  same  time,  the  princi-

pall  of  the said  people of  Theleb  were  cut off. For

[II.  vi.  757.]  strength  and  cunning  in  chivalrie  they  were  inferiour  to

no  other  Nation ; their  Horsemen  were  about  three  thou-

Gehoan.  sand. The  Tribe  of  Gehoan  inhabite  not  all  in  one  place  :

for  part  of  them you may  find  among the people of

Guarag,  and  the  residue  amongst  the  people  of  Hedeg ;

and  they  are  unto  them  no  otherwise  then  their  servants,

which  condition  they  notwithstanding  most  patiently  and

willingly  submit  themselves  unto. And  here  one  thing

is  to  bee  noted  by  the  way ; to  wit,  that  the  two  fore-

The  Arabians  named  people  called Schachin  and Hilel, are  originally

Ca  dH'll Arabians of Arabia Desarta, and think themselves

descendedfrom  to be descended from Ismael, the sonne of Abra-

Ismaely  the ham. And those which we called Machil, came first

base  sonne  of forth  of  Arabia  Foelix,  and  derive their  pedigree  from

T,n lJm'?- Saba. Before  whom  the  Mahumetans  preferre  the  former,

called  Machil which  of  Ismael  are  called  Ismaelites. And  because  there

descended  of hath  alwaies  been  great  controversie  among  them,  which

Saba.  part  should  bee  of  greater  Nobilitie,  they  have  written  on

both  sides  many  Dialogues  and  Epigrams,  whereby  each

man  is  wont  to  blaze  the  Renowne,  the  Vertues,  Manners,

and  laudable  Customes  of  his  owne  Nation. The  ancient

Arabians,  which  were  before  the  times  of  the  Ismaelites,

328

JOHN LEO ON AFRICA  ad.

c.  1526.
were  called  by  the  African  Historiographers  Arabi-Araba ;
as  if  a  man  should  say,  Arabians  of  Arabia. But  those
which  came  of  Ismael,  they  call  Arabi  Mus-Araba  ; as  if
they should say, Arabians ingrafted into the land of
Arabia, or  Arabians accidently, because they were not
originally  bred  and  borne  in  Arabia. And  them  which
afterward  came  into  Africa,  they  name  in  their  language
Mustehgeme,  that  is,  Barbarous  Arabians ; and  that  be-
cause they  joyned  themselves  unto  strangers, insomuch
that  not  onely  their  speech,  but  their  manners  also  are
most  corrupt  and  barbarous. These  are  (friendly  Reader)
the  particulars,  which  for  these  ten  yeeres  my  memorie
could  reserve,  as  touching  the  originals,  and  diversities  of
the  Africans  and  Arabians ; in  all  which  time  I  remember
not,  that  ever  I  read,  or  saw  any  Historie  of  that  Nation.
He that  will  know more, let him have  recourse unto
Hibnu  Rachu  the  Historiographer  before  named.

Those  five  kinds  of  people  before  rehearsed, to  wit, The  manners
the  people  of  Zenega,  of  Ganfiga,  of  Terga,  of  Leuta,  and  anfttUS^$
of  Bardeoa,  are  called  of  the  Latins,  Numidae  : and  they  peopie%
live  all  after  one  manner,  that  is  to  say,  without  all  law The  people  of
and  civilitie. Their  garment  is  a  narrow  and  base  piece  Numidia.^
of  cloth, wherewith scarce halfe their  body is covered.  attire.

Some  of  them  wrap  their  heads  in  a  kind  of  black  cloth,
as  it  were  with  a  scarfe,  such  as  the  Turkes  use,  which  is
commonly  called  a  Turbant.  Such  as  will  be  discerned
from  the  common  sort,  for  Gentlemen  weare  a  Jacket
made  of  blew  Cotton  with  wide  sleeves.  And  Cotton-
cloth  is  brought  unto  them  by  certaine  Merchants  from
the  land  of  Negros.  They  have  no  beasts  fit  to  ride  upon,
except  their  Camels ;  unto  whom  Nature,  betweene  the  Camels.
bunch  standing  upon  the  hinder  part  of  their  backes  and
their  neckes,  hath  allotted  a  place,  which  may  fitly  serve
to  ride  upon,  in  stead  of  a  saddle.  Their  manner  of  rid-  Riding.
ing  is  most  ridiculous.  For  sometimes  they  lay  their
legges  across  upon  the  Camels  necke ;  and  sometimes
againe  (having  no  knowledge  nor  regard  of  stirrops)  they
rest their feete upon a rope, which is cast over his

329

A.D.

c.  1526.

Beds  and
tents.

Wooll  growing
upon  the
Palme-tree.
Miserable
diet.

Naturall  dish.

Slovens.

Occupation.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

shoulders.  In  stead  of  spurres,  they  use  a  truncheon  of
a  cubites  length,  having  at  the  one  end  thereof  a  Goade,
wherewith  they  pricke  onely  the  shoulders  of  their  Camels.
Those  Camels  which  they  use  to  ride  upon,  have  a  hole
bored  through  the  gristles  of  their  nose,  in  the  which  a
ring  of  leather  is  fastened,  whereby  as  with  a  bit,  they  are
more  easily  curbed  and  mastred ;  after  which  manner  I
have  seene  buffles  used  in  Italic  For  beds,  they  lie  upon
mats  made  of  sedge  and  bulrushes.  Their  tents  are
covered  for  the  most  part  with  coarse  chamlet,  or  with  a
harsh  kind  of  Wooll,  which  commonly  groweth  upon  the
boughes  of  their  Date-trees.

As  for  their  manner  of  living,  it  would  seeme  to  any
man  incredible  what  hunger  and  scarcitie  this  Nation  will
indure.  Bread  they  have  none  at  all,  neither  use  they  any
seething  or  rosting ;  their  foode  is  Camels  milke  onely,
and  they  desire  no  other  dainties.  For  their  break-fast
they  drinke  off  a  great  cup  of  Camels  milke :  for  supper
they  have  certaine  dried  flesh  steeped  in  butter  and  milke,
whereof  each  man  taking  his  share,  eateth  it  out  of  his
fist.  And  that  this  their  meate  may  not  stay  long  undi-
gested in  their  stomacks,  they  sup  off  the  foresaid  broth
wherein  their  flesh  was  steeped :  for  which  purpose  they
use  the  palmes  of  their  hands  as  a  most  fit  instrument
framed  by  nature  to  the  same  end.  After  that,  each  one
drinkes  his  cup  of  milke,  and  so  their  supper  hath  an
end.  These  Numidians,  while  they  have  any  store
of  milke,  regard  water  nothing  at  all,  which  for  the
most  part  hapneth  in  the  Spring  of  the  yeare,  all
which  time  you  shall  find  some  among  them  that  will
neither  wash  their  hands  nor  their  faces.  Which  seemeth
not  altogether  to  be  unlikely ;  for  (as  we  said  before)  while
their  milke  lasteth,  they  frequent  not  those  places  where
water  is  common  :  yea,  and  their  Camels,  so  long  as  they
may  feede  upon  grasse,  will  drinke  no  water  at  all.  They
spend  their  whole  dayes  in  hunting  and  theeving :  for  all
their  indeavour  and  exercise  is  to  drive  away  the  Camels
of  their  enemies ; neither  will  they  remaine  above  three

330

JOHN LEO ON AFRICA  a.d.

c.  1526.
dayes  in  one  place,  by  reason  that  they  have  not  pasture
any  longer  for  the  sustenance  of  their  Camels.  And  albeit  Pol/icy.
(as  is  aforesaid)  they  have  no  civilitie  at  all,  nor  any  Lawes
prescribed  unto  them ;  yet  have  they  a  certaine  Gover-
nour  or  Prince  placed  over  them,  unto  whom  they  render
obedience  and  due  honour,  as  unto  their  King.  They  are
not  only  ignorant  of  all  good  learning  and  liberall  Sciences  ;
but  are  likewise  altogether  carelesse  and  destitute  of
vertue :  insomuch  that  you  shall  find  scarce  one  amongst
them  all,  which  is  a  man  of  judgement  or  counsell.  And  [II.  vi.  758.]
if  any  injuried  partie  will  goe  to  the  Law  with  his  adver-  Judges.
sarie,  hee  must  ride  continually  five  or  sixe  daies  before
he  can  come  to  the  speech  of  any  judge.  This  Nation
hath  all  learning  and  good  disciplines  in  such  contempt,  Learning.
that  they  will  not  once  vouchsafe  to  goe  out  of  their
deserts  for  the  study  and  attaining  thereof :  neither,  if
any  learned  man  shall  chance  to  come  among  them,  can
they  love  his  company  and  conversation,  in  regard  of  their
most  rude  and  detestable  behaviour.  Howbeit,  if  they
can  find  any  judge,  which  can  frame  himselfe  to  live  and
continue  among  them,  to  him  they  give  most  large  yearely
allowance.  Some  allow  their  Judge  a  thousand  ducates
yearely,  some  more,  and  some  lesse,  according  as  them-
selves thinke  good.  They  that  will  seeme  to  be  accounted
of  the  better  sort,  cover  their  heads  (as  I  said  before)  with
a  piece  of  blacke  cloth,  part  whereof,  like  a  vizard  or
maske,  reacheth  downe  over  their  faces,  covering  all  their
countenance  except  their  eyes ;  and  this  is  their  daily  kind
of  attire.  And  so  often  as  they  put  meate  into  their  Manner  of
mouthes,  they  remove  the  said  maske  ;  which  being  done,  e  n&
they  forthwith  cover  their  mouthes  againe,  alleaging  this
fond  reason  :  for  (say  they)  as  it  is  unseemely  for  a  man,
after  he  hath  received  meate  into  his  stomacke,  to  vomit
it  out  of  his  mouth  againe,  and  to  cast  it  upon  the  earth ;
even  so  it  is  an  undecent  part  to  eate  meate  with  a  mans
mouth  uncovered.

The  women  of  this  Nation  be  grosse,  corpulent,  and  of  Their  women.
a  swart  complexion. They  are  fattest  upon  their  brest

33i

A.D.

c.  1526.

Jealousie.

Merchants.

The  Authours
travels.

Camels  and
Ostriches  used
for  victuals.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

and  paps,  but  slender  about  the  girdle-stead.  Very  civill
they  are,  after  their  manner,  both  in  speech  and  gestures :
sometimes  they  will  accept  of  a  kisse  ;  but  who  so  tempteth
them  farther,  putteth  his  owne  life  in  hazard.  For  by
reason  of  jealousie,  you  may  see  them  daily  one  to  be  the
death  and  destruction  of  another,  and  that  in  such  savage
and  brutish  manner,  that  in  this  case  they  will  shew  no
compassion  at  all.  And  they  seeme  to  bee  more  wise  in
this  behalfe  then  divers  of  our  people,  for  they  will  by  no
meanes  match  themselves  unto  an  harlot.  The  liberalise
of  this  people  hath  at  all  times  been  exceeding  great.  And
when  any  Travellers  may  passe  through  their  drie  and
desart  Territories,  they  will  never  repaire  unto  their  tents,
neither  will  they  themselves  travell  upon  the  common
high  way.  And  if  any  Caravan,  or  multitude  of  Mer-
chants will  passe  those  Desarts,  they  are  bound  to  pay
certaine  Custome  unto  the  Prince  of  the  said  people,
namely,  for  every  Camels  load,  a  piece  of  cloth  worth  a
Ducat.

Upon  a  time  I  remember,  that  travelling  in  the  com-
panie  of  certaine  Merchants  over  the  Desart,  called  by  them
Araoan,  it  was  our  chance  there  to  meete  with  the  Prince
of  Zanaga ;  who,  after  he  had  received  his  due  custome,
invited  the  said  companie  of  Merchants,  for  their  recrea-
tion, to  goe  and  abide  with  him  in  his  tents  foure  or  five
dayes.  Howbeit,  because  his  tents  were  too  farre  out  of
our  way,  and  for  that  wee  should  have  wandred  farther
then  we  thought  good,  esteeming  it  more  convenient  for
us  to  hold  on  our  direct  course,  we  refused  his  gentle
offer,  and  for  his  courtesie  gave  him  great  thankes.  But
not  being  satisfied  therewith,  he  commanded  that  our
Camels  should  proceede  on  forward,  but  the  Merchants
he  carried  along  with  him,  and  gave  them  very  sumptuous
entertainement  at  his  place  of  abode.  Where  we  were  no
sooner  arrived,  but  this  good  Prince  caused  Camels  of  all
kinds  and  Ostriches,  which  he  had  hunted  and  taken  by
the  way,  to  bee  killed  for  his  houshold  provision.  How-
beit, wee  requested  him  not  to  make  such  daily  slaughters

332

JOHN LEO ON AFRICA  a.d.

c.  1526.
of  his  Camels ; affirming,  moreover,  that  we  never  used
to  eate  the  flesh  of  a  gelt  Camell,  but  when  all  other
victuals failed us. Whereunto hee answered, that he  Princely  fare.
should  deale  uncivilly,  if  he  welcommed  so  worthy  and  so
seldome-seene ghests with the killing of smal Cattell
onely. Wherefore  hee  wished  us  to  fall  to  such  provision
as  was  set  before  us. Heere  might  you  have  seene  great
plenty  of  rosted  and  sodden  flesh  : their  rosted  Ostriches
were brought to the Table in wicker platters, being
seasoned  with  sundry  kinds  of  Herbes  and  Spices. Their
bread  made  of  Mill  and  Panicke  was  of  a  most  savorie  Bread  of
and  pleasant  taste : and  alwaies  at  the  end  of  dinner  or  Mtllet-
supper  we  had  plentie  of  Dates,  and  great  store  of  Milke
served  in. Yea,  this  bountifull  and  noble  Prince,  that  he
might  sufficiently  shew  how  welcome  wee  were  unto  him,
would  together  with  his  Nobilitie  alwaies  beare  us  com-
pany : howbeit,  we  ever  dined  and  supped  apart  by  our
selves. Moreover,  hee  caused  certaine  religious  and  most Religious  men.
learned  men  to  come  unto  our  banquet ; who,  all  the  time
wee  remained  with  the  said  Prince,  used  not  to  eate  any
bread  at  all,  but  fed  onely  upon  flesh  and  milke. Whereat
we  being  somewhat  amazed,  the  good  Prince  gently  told
us,  that  they  all  were  borne  in  such  places,  whereas  no  Places  without
kind  of  graine  would  grow : howbeit,  that  himselfe  for  8ratne-
the  entertainement  of  strangers,  had  great  plentie  of  Corne
laid  up  in  store. Wherefore  he  bade  us  to  be  of  good
cheere,  saying,  That  he  would  eate  onely  of  such  things
as  his  owne  native  soyle  affoorded : affirming  moreover,
that  bread  was  yet  in  use  among  them  at  their  feast  of
Passeover,  and  at  other  feasts  also,  whereupon  they  used
to  offer  sacrifice. And  thus  we  remained  with  him  for
the  space  of  two  dayes ; all  which  time,  what  wonderfull  Bountifull
and  magnificent  cheare  we  had  made  us,  would  seeme  in-  hospitaKtie.
credible  to  report. But  the  third  day,  being  desirous  to
take  our  leave,  the  Prince  accompanied  us  to  that  place
where  wee  overtooke  our  Camels  and  companie  sent  before.
And  this  I  dare  most  deepely  take  mine  oath  on,  that  we
spent  the  said  Prince  ten  times  more,  then  our  Custome

333

A.D.

c.  1526.

[II.  vi.  759.]

The  manners
andcustomesof
the  Arabians
which  inhabit
Africa.

Arabian
valour.

Where  the

Barbarie

Horses  are

bred.

Arabian

Poems  and

Verses.

Apparell.

Biledulgerid.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

which  he  received  came  to.  We  thought  it  not  amisse
here  to  set  downe  this  Historie,  to  declare  in  some  sort
the  courtesie  and  liberalise  of  the  said  Nation.  Neither
could  the  Prince  aforesaid  understand  our  language,  nor
we  his ;  but  all  our  speech  to  and  fro  was  made  by  an
interpreter.  And  this  which  we  have  here  recorded  as
touching  this  nation,  is  likewise  to  bee  understood  of  the
other  foure  Nations  above  mentioned,  which  are  dispersed
over  the  residue  of  the  Numidian  Desarts.

The  Arabians,  as  they  have  sundrie  mansions  and  places
of  abode,  so  doe  they  live  after  a  divers  and  sundry
manner.  Those  which  inhabite  betweene  Numidia  and
Libya  leade  a  most  miserable  and  distressed  life,  differing
much  in  this  regard  from  those  Africans,  whom  we
affirmed  to  dwell  in  Libya.  Howbeit,  they  are  farre  more
valiant  then  the  said  Africans,  and  use  commonly  to
exchange  Camels  in  the  land  of  Negros :  they  have  like-
wise great  store  of  Horses,  which  in  Europe  they  call
Horses  of  Barbarie.  They  take  wonderful!  delight  in
hunting  and  pursuing  of  Deare,  of  wild  Asses,  of
Ostriches,  and  such  like.  Neither  is  here  to  be  omitted,
that  the  greater  part  of  Arabians  which  inhabite  Numidia,
are  very  witty  and  conceited  in  penning  of  verses  ;  wherein
each  man  will  decypher  his  love,  his  hunting,  his  combates,
and  other  his  worthy  acts :  and  this  is  done  for  the  most
part  in  rime,  after  the  Italian  manner.  And  albeit  they
are  most  liberally  minded,  yet  dare  they  not  by  bountifull
giving  make  any  shew  of  wealth ;  for  they  are  daily
oppressed  with  manifold  inconveniences.  They  are
apparelled  after  the  Numidians  fashion,  saving  that  their
women  differ  somewhat  from  the  women  of  Numidia.
Those  Desarts  which  they  doe  now  enjoy,  were  wont  to  be
possessed  by  Africans :  but  the  Arabians  with  their  Armie
invading  that  part  of  Africa,  drave  out  the  naturall
Numidians,  and  reserved  the  Desarts  adjoyning  upon  the
Land  of  Dates,  unto  themselves  :  but  the  Numidians  began
to  inhabite  those  Desarts  which  border  upon  the  land  of
Negros. The Arabians which dwell betweene Mount

334

JOHN LEO ON AFRICA  a.d.

c.  1526.
Atlas  and  the  Mediterran  sea,  are  farre  wealthier  then  these
which  wee  now  speake  of,  both  for  costlinesse  of  apparrell,
for  good  horse-meate,  and  for  the  statelinesse  and  beautie  of
their  tents. Their  Horses  also  are  of  better  shape,  and
more  corpulent,  but  not  so  swift  as  the  Horses  of  the
Numidian  Desart. They  exercise  Husbandry,  and  have
great increase of corne. Their droves and flockes of
Cattell  be  innumerable,  insomuch  that  they  cannot  inhabit
one  by  another  for  want  of  pasture. They  are  somewhat
more  vile  and  barbarous  then those  which inhabit the
Desarts, and yet they are not altogether destitute of
liberalitie : part  of  them  which  dwel  in  the  territory  of
Fez,  are  subject  unto  the  King  of  Fez. Those  which
remaine  in  Marocco  and  Duccala,  have  continued  this  long
time  free  from  all  exaction  and  tribute :  but  so  soone  as
the  King  of  Portugall  began  to  beare  rule  over  Azafi  and .*?§*. acts
Azamor,  there  began  also  among  them  strife  and  civill  ow^lTyv'
warre. Wherefore  being  assailed  by  the  King  of  Portu-
gall on  the  one  side,  and  by  the  King  of  Fez  on  the  other,
and  being  oppressed  also  with  extreme  famine  and  scarcitie
of  that  yeere,  they  were  brought  unto  such  misery,  that
they  freely  offered  themselves  as  slaves  unto  the  Portugals, J?  ~* ****
submitting  themselves  to  any  man,  that  was  willing  to  feive$  s/aves  t0
relieve  their  intolerable  hunger  :  and  by  this  meanes  scarce  any  that  would
one  of  them  was  left  in  all  Duccala.  relieve  their

Moreover,  those  which  possesse  the  Desarts  bordering  extreme
upon  the  Kingdomes  of  Tremizen  and  Tunis,  may  all  of
them  (in  regard  of  the  rest)  be  called  Noblemen,  and
Gentlemen  :  For  their  Governours  receiving  every  yeare
great  revenues  from  the  King  of  Tunis,  divide  the  same
afterward  among  their  people,  to  the  end  they  may  avoide
all  discord :  and  by  this  meanes  all  dissention  is  eschewed,
and  peace  is  kept  firme  and  inviolable  among  them.  They
have  notable  dexteritie  and  cunning,  both  in  making  of
Tents,  and  in  bringing  up  and  keeping  of  Horses.  In
Summer-time  they  usually  come  neere  unto  Tunis,  to  the
end  that  each  man  may  provide  himself  of  bread,  armour,
and  other  necessaries ; all  which  they  carrie  with  them

335

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

c.  1526.

into  the  Desarts,  remaining  there  the  whole  Winter.  In
the Spring of the yeare they apply themselves unto

Their  hunting,  hunting,  insomuch  that  no  beast  can  escape  their  pursuite.
My  selfe  (I  remember)  was  once  at  their  tents,  to  my  no
little danger and inconvenience, where I saw greater

Riches.  quantitie  of  Cloth,  Brasse,  Yron,  and  Copper,  then  a  man

shall  oftentimes  find  in  the  most  rich  ware-houses  of  some
Cities.  Howbeit  no  trust  is  to  be  given  unto  them ;  for
if  occasion  serve,  they  will  play  the  thieves  most  slily  and

Honesty.  cunningly ; notwithstanding,  they  seeme  to  carrie  some

shew  of  civilitie. They  take  great  delight  in  Poetrie,  and

Poetry.  will  pen  most  excellent  verses,  their  language  being  very

pure  and  elegant.  If  any  worthy  Poet  be  found  among
them,  he  is  accepted  by  their  Governours  with  great  honor
and  liberalise  ;  neither  would  any  man  easily  believe  what
wit  and  decencie  is  in  their  verses.

Women.  Their  women  (according  to  the  guise  of  that  countrie)

goe  very  gorgeously  attired  :  they  weare  linnen  Gownes
died  blacke,  with  exceeding  wide  sleeves,  over  which  some-
times they  cast  a  Mantle  of  the  same  colour,  or  of  blew,
the  corners  of  which  Mantle  are  very  artificially  fastened
about  their  shoulders  with  a  fine  silver  claspe.  Likewise
they  have  rings  hanging  at  their  eares,  which  for  the  most
part  are  made  of  silver :  they  weare  many  rings  also  upon
their  fingers.  Moreover,  they  usually  wTeare  about  their
thighes  and  ankles  certaine  scarfes  and  rings,  after  the
fashion  of  the  Africans.  They  cover  their  faces  with
certaine  maskes,  having  onely  two  holes  for  their  eyes  to
peepe  out  at.  If  any  man  chance  to  meete  with  them,
they  presently  hide  their  faces,  passing  by  him  with  silence,
except  it  be  some  of  their  Allies  or  Kinsfolks ;  for  unto
them  they  alwaies  discover  their  faces,  neither  is  there
any  use  of  the  said  maske  so  long  as  they  be  in  presence.
These  Arabians  when  they  travell  any  journey  (as  they

[II.  vi.  760.]  oftentimes  doe)  they  set  their  women  upon  certaine  saddles
made  handsomely  of  wicker  for  the  same  purpose,  and
fastned  to  their  Camels  backes,  neither  be  they  any  thing
too  wide,  but  fit  onely  for  a  woman  to  sit  in. When  they

336

JOHN LEO ON AFRICA  a.d.

c.  1526.
goe  to  the  wars,  each  man  carries  his  wife  with  him,  to  the
end  that  she  may  cheare  up  her  good  man,  and  give  him
encouragement. Their  Damsels  which  are  unmarried,  do
usually  paint  their  faces,  brests,  armes,  hands,  and  fingers
with  a  kind  of  counterfeit  colour : which  is  accounted  a
most  decent  custome  amongst  them. But  this  fashion  was
first  brought  in  by  those  Arabians,  which  before  we  called
Africans,  what  time  they  began  first  of  all  to  inhabite  that
region ; for  before  then, they  never  used  any  false  or
glozing  colours. The  women  of  Barbarie  use  not  this
fond  kind  of  painting,  but  contenting  themselves  onely
with their naturall hiew, they regard not such fained
ornaments  :  howbeit  sometimes  they  will  temper  a  certaine
colour  with  hens-dung  and  safron,  wherewithall  they  paint
a  little  round  spot  on  the  bals  of  their  cheekes,  about  the
bredth of  a  French Crowne. Likewise  betweene their
eye-browes  they  make  a  triangle,  and  paint  upon  their
chinnes  a  patch  like  unto  an  olive  leafe. Some  of  them
also  doe  paint  their  eye-browes :  and  this  custome  is  very
highly  esteemed  of  by  the  Arabian  Poets,  and  by the
Gentlemen  of  that  countrie. Howbeit,  they  will  not  use
these fantasticall ornaments above two or three dayes
together :  all  which  time  they  will  not  bee  seene  to  any  of
their  friends,  except  it  be  to  their  husbands  and  children  :
for  these  paintings  seeme  to  be  great  allurements  unto
lust, whereby  the  said  women thinke themselves  more
trim  and  beautifull.

The  life  of  the  Arabians  in  the  Desarts  betweene  Bar- ?ke  Arabians
barie  and  Egypt  is  full  of  miserie  and  calamitie  : for  the  in e  E  s s
places  where they inhabite, are  barren and  unpleasant. Their  poverty.
They have some store of Camels and other Cattell :
howbeit,  their  fodder  is  so  scarce,  that  they  cannot  well
sustaine  them. Neither  shall  you  find  over  all  the  whole
region  any  place  fit  to  beare  corne. And  if  in  that  Desart
there  be  any  villages  at  all,  which  use  to  husband  and
manure  their  ground ; yet  reape  they  small  commoditie
thereby, except it  bee for  plentifull  increase  of  Dates.
Their  Camels  and  other  of  their  Cattell,  they  exchange  for

v  337  y

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

c.  1526.

Dates  and  Corne ; and  so  the  poore  Husbandmen  of  the

foresaid  villages  have  some small  recompence  for  their

labours : notwithstanding, how can all this satisfie the

hunger  of  such  a  multitude? For  you  shall  daily  see  in

The  Arabians  Sicilia great numbers of their sonnes laid to pawne ;

their* sonnes  to  because  when  they  have  not  wherewithall  to  pay  for  the

pawne  unto Corne  which  they  there  buy,  they  are  constrained  to  leave

the  Sicilians their  sonnes  behind  them,  as  pledges  of  future  payment.

fir  come. gut  the  Sicilians,  if  their  money  bee  not  paid  them  at  the

time  appointed,  will  chalenge  the  Arabians  sonnes  to  be

Crueli famine,  their  slaves. Which  day  being  once  past,  if  any  father

will  redeeme  his  child,  hee  must  disburse  thrice  or  foure

times  so  much  as  the  due  debt  amounteth  unto  :  for  which

cause  they  are  the  most  notable  thieves  in  the  whole  world.

If  any  stranger  fall  into  their  hands,  depriving  him  of  all

that  he  hath,  they  presently  carry  him  to  Sicily,  and  there

either  sell  or  exchange  him  for  Corne. And  I  think,  that

no Merchants  durst  at  any  time  within  these  hundred

yeares  arrive  for  trafficks  sake  upon  any  part  of  their  coast.

For  when  they  are  to  passe  by  with  merchandize,  or  about

any  other  weightie  affaires,  they  eschew  that  region  five

hundred  miles  at  the  least. Once  I  remember,  that  I  my

selfe,  for  my  better  securitie,  and  to  avoide  the  danger  of

those  mischievous  people,  went  in  companie  with  certaine

Merchants,  who  in  three  ships  sailed  along  their  coast.

Wee  were  no  sooner  espied  of  them,  but  forthwith  they

came  running  to  the  shore,  making  signes  that  they  would

traffique with us to our great advantage. Howbeit,

because  we  durst  not  repose  any  trust  in  them,  none  of

our companie  would depart the ship, before they had

delivered  certaine  pledges  unto  us. Which  being  done,

we  bought  certaine  Eunuchs,  or  gelded  men,  and  good

store  of  butter  of  them. And  so  immediately  weighing

our  ankers,  we  betooke  us  to  flight,  fearing  lest  wee  should

have  been  met  withall  by  the  Sicilian  and  Rhodian  Pirates,

and  been  spoiled  not  onely  of  our  goods,  but  of  our  liber-

Miserabk ties  also. To  be  short,  the  said  Arabians  are  very  rude,

people.  forlorne, beggerly, leane, and hunger-starved people,

338

JOHN LEO ON AFRICA  a.d.

c.  1526.
having  God  (no  doubt)  alwaies  displeased  against  them,
by  whose  vengeance they daily sustaine such  grievous
calamities.

You  shall  find  many  among  the  Africans  which  live
altogether  a  shepheards  or  drovers  life,  inhabiting  upon
the  beginning  of  mount  Atlas,  and  being  dispersed  here
and  there  over  the  same  Mountaine. They  are  constrained
alwaies  to  pay  tribute  either  to  the  King  of  the  same  region
where  they  dwell,  or  else  to  the  Arabians,  except  those
onely  which  inhabite  Temesna,  who  are  free  from  all  forren
superioritie,  and  are  of  great  power. They  speake  the
same  kind  of  language  that  other  Africans  doe,  except
some  few  of  them  which  converse  with  the  inhabitants  of
the  Citie  called  Urbs  (which  is  neere  unto  Tunis)  who
speake  the  Arabian  tongue. Moreover,  there  is  a  certaine
people  inhabiting  that  region,  which  divideth  Numidia
from  Tunis. These  oftentimes  wage  warre  against  the
King  of  Tunis  himselfe,  which  they  put  in  practice  not
many  yeares  since,  when  as  the  said  King  his  sonne  march-
ing towards  them  from  Constantina  with  an  Armie,  for  the
demanding  of  such  tribute  as  was  due  unto  him,  fought
a verie unfortunate battell. For no sooner were they  Theoverthrow
advertised  of  the  Kings  sonne  his  approach,  but  forthwith  a' *  J.at  °i
they  went  to  meete  him  with  two  thousand  Horsemen,  and  Tunis  his
at  length  vanquished  and  slew  him  at  unawares,  carrying  sonne.
home  with  them  all  the  furniture,  bag,  and  baggage,  which  [II.  vi.  761.]
he  had  brought  forth. And  this  was  done  in  the  yeere  of
Mahumets Hegeira 915. From that time their Fame
hath  beene  spred  abroad  in  all  places. Yea,  many  of  the
King  of  Tunis  his  Subjects  revolted  from  their  King  unto
them ; insomuch  that  the  Prince  of  this  People  is  growne
so  puissant,  that  scarcely  is  his  equall  to  be  found  in  all  ™,  F  .  , ,

Africa.  Religion  of  the

The  ancient  Africans  were  much  addicted  to  Idolatrie,  ancient
even  as  certaine  of  the  Persians  are  at  this  day ; some  of  Africans  or

J '  -mm

whom  worship  the  Sunne,  and  others  the  Fire,  for  their  ^oores%

.  ounne  and

gods. For  the  said  Africans  had  in  times  past  magnificent  Yire  wor-

and  most  stately  Temples  built,  and  dedicated  as  well  to  shipped.

339

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

c.  1526.

the  honour  of  the  Sunne  as  of  the  Fire.  In  these  Temples
day  and  night  they  kept  Fire  kindled,  giving  diligent  heed
that  it  might  not  at  any  time  be  extinguished,  even  as  we
reade  of  the  Roman  Vestall  Virgins :  all  which  you  may
reade  more  fully  and  at  large  in  the  Persian  and  African
Chronicles.  Those  Africans  which  inhabited  Libya  and
Numidia,  would  each  of  them  worship  some  certaine
Planet,  unto  whom  likewise  they  offered  Sacrifices  and
Prayers.  Some  others  of  the  Land  of  Negros  worship
No  Christians  Guighimo,  that  is  to  say,  The  Lord  of  Heaven.  And  this
among  t  e sound  point  of  Religion  was  not  delivered  unto  them  by

•V  cPTOeS. rr  CC  1  . O  J

may  hold  it  a  any  Prophet  or  Teacher,  but  was  inspired,  as  it  were,  from
punishment  of  God  himselfe.  After  that,  they  embraced  the  Jewish  Law,
God  for  their  wherein  they  are  said  to  have  continued  many  yeeres.
many  giddie Afterward they professed the Christian Religion, and

heresies  of  .  ...

which  Mon- continued  Christians,  untill  such  time  as  the  Mahumetan

sters  Africa  Superstition  prevailed  ;  which  came  to  passe  in  the  yeere
was  fertile  as  of  the  Hegeira  208.  About  which  time  certaine  of
//n  Mahumets  disciples  so  bewitched  them  with  eloquent  and
Hsts  Circum-  deceivable  speeches,  that  they  allured  their  weake  minds  to
cellians  and  consent  unto  their  opinion  ;  insomuch  that  all  the  King-
others  (which  domes  of  the  Negroes  adjoyning  unto  Libya  received  the
had  this  good  Mahumetan  Law.  Neither  is  there  any  Region  in  all  the
/  ^red  7al?  ■  Negros  Land,  which  hath  in  it  at  this  day  any  Christians
ofS.  Jug.)  at  all.  At  the  same  time  such  as  were  found  to  be  Jewes,
The  Arrians  Christians,  or  of  the  African  Religion,  were  slaine  every
after  pre-  man  0f  them.  Howbeit  those  which  dwell  neere  unto  the
Py  %l£  c  Ocean  Sea,  are  all  of  them  very  grosse  Idolaters.  How-
makingzuayto  beit  afterward,  civill  dissensions  arising  among  them,
Mahumet.  neglecting  the  Law  of  Mahumet,  they  slew  all  the  Priests
The  letters an^  Governours  of  that  Region. Which  tumult  when

"nheJfr?"  xt  came  to  the  eares  °^  the  Mahumetan  Califas,  they  sent
canSm  an  huge  Armie  against  the  said  Rebels  of  Barbarie,  to  wit,

The  Africans  those  which  were  revolted  from  the  Califa  of  Bagdet,  and
used  in  times severely  punished  their  misdemeanour.

Pk7nTo}Tttn  Th°Se  Writers  which  rec°rd  the  Histories  of  the
but  the  Roman  Arabians  doings  are  all  joyntly  of  opinion,  that  the  Africans
letters.  were  wont  to  use  onely  the  Latine  letters. The  Arabians

340

JOHN LEO ON AFRICA  ad.

c.  1526.
have  no  Historie*  of  African  matters,  which  was  not  first  *  Perhaps  he
written  in  Latine. They  have  certaine  ancient  Authors,  ™a™fh  f
who  writ  partly  in  the  times  of  the  Arrians,  and  partly  Sa/ust,  Titus
before  their  times,  the  names  of  all  which  are  cleane  for-  Livius,  and
gotten. But  when  as  those  which  rebelled  against  the  others.
Califa  of  Bagdet  (as  is  aforesaid)  got  the  upper  hand  in
Africa,  they  burnt  all  the  Africans  bookes. For  they  were
of  opinion,  that  the  Africans,  so  long  as  they  had  any
knowledge  of  Naturall  Philosophie,  or  of  other  good  Arts
and  Sciences,  would  every  day  more  and  more  arrogantly  Science  guide
contemne the Law of Mahumet. Contrariwise, some  t0  Conscience-
Historiographers  there  are  which  affirme,  that  the  Africans
had  a  kind  of  letters  peculiar  unto  themselves ; which
notwithstanding,  from  the  time  wherein  the  Italians  began
first  to  inhabite  Barbarie,  and  wherein  the  Christians  fleeing
out  of  Italie  from the  Gothes,  began to subdue those
Provinces  of  Africa,  were  utterly  abolished  and  taken  away.
For  it  is  likely  that  a  People  vanquished  should  follow  the
customes  and  the  letters  also  of  their  Conquerours. And
did  not  the  same  thing  happen  to  the  Persians,  while  the
Arabians  Empire stood? For  certaine  it  is, that the
Persians  at  the  same  time  lost  those  letters  which  were
peculiar  unto  their  Nation  ; and  that  all  their  bookes,  by  ThcMahume-
the commandement of the Mahumetan Prelates, were  tan  Cfl{/Sr
burnt ; least  their  knowledge  in  naturall  Philosophie,  or  fafa  0ftne
their  idolatrous  Religion  might  moove  them  to  contemne  Persians  to  be
the  precepts  of  Mahumet. The  like  also  (as  wee  shewed  burned.
before)  befell  the  Barbarians,  when  as  the  Italians  and  the
Gothes  usurped  their  Dominions  in  Barbarie  ; which  may
here  (I  hope)  suffice  the  gentle  Reader. Howbeit  this  is
out  of  doubt,  that  all  the  Sea-Cities  and  Inland-Cities  of
Barbarie  doe  use  Latine  letters  onely,  whensoever  they  will
commit  any  Epitaphs,  or  any  other  Verses  or  Prose  unto
posteritie. The  consideration  of  all  which  former  par-
ticulars hath  made  me  to  be  of  opinion,  that  the  Africans
in  times  past  had  their  owne  proper  and  peculiar  letters,
wherein  they  described  their  doings  and  exploits. For  it
is  likely  that  the  Romans,  when  they  first  subdued  those

34i

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

c.  1526.

Provinces  (as  Conquerours  usually  doe)  utterly  spoiled  and
tooke  away  all  their  letters  and  memorie,  and  established
their  owne  letters  in  the  stead  thereof ;  to  the  end  that  the
fame  and  honour  of  the  Roman  People  might  there  onely
be  continued.  And  who  knoweth  not  that  the  very  same
attempt  was  practised  by  the  Gothes  upon  the  stately
buildings  of  the  Romans,  and  by  the  Arabians  against  the
Monuments  of  the  Persians.  Concerning  those  nine
hundred  yeers,  wherein  the  Africans  used  the  letters  of  the
Arabians,  Ibnu  Rachich,  a  most  diligent  Writer  of  Africa,
doth  in  his  Chronicle  most  largely  dispute ;  whether  the
Africans  ever  had  any  peculiar  kind  of  writing  or  no.  And
at  last  he  concludeth  the  affirmative  part ;  that  they  had  :
for  (sayth  he)  whosoever  denyeth  this,  may  as  well  denye,
that  they  had  a  Language  peculiar  unto  themselves.  For
it  cannot  be  that  any  People  should  have  a  proper  kind  of

[II.  vi.  762.]  Speech,  and  yet  should  use  letters  borrowed  from  other
Nations,  and  being  altogether  unfit  for  their  Mother-
language.

The  un-  All  the  Region  of  Barbarie,  and  the  Mountaines  con-

pleasant  and tainec[  therein,  are  subject  more  to  cold  then  to  heat. For

snowy  places  .  «  ,  J . r • 1 1  •  1 1 • ~ 1

in  Africa. seldome  commeth  any  gale  or  wind  which  bringeth  not

some  Snow  therwith.  In  all  the  said  Mountaines  there
grow  abundance  of  Fruits,  but  not  so  great  plentie  of
Corne.  The  Inhabitants  of  these  Mountaines  live  for  the
greatest  part  of  the  yeere  upon  Barley  Bread.  The  Springs
and  Rivers  issuing  forth  of  the  said  Mountaines,  repre-
senting the  qualitie  and  taste  of  their  native  soyle,  are
somewhat  muddie  and  impure,  especially  upon  the  confines
of  Mauritania.  These  Mountaines  likewise  are  replen-
ished with  Woods  and  loftie  Trees,  and  are  greatly  stored
with  Beasts  of  all  kinds.  But  the  little  Hills  and  Valleys
lying  betweene  the  foresaid  Mountaines  and  Mount  Atlas
are  farre  more  commodious,  and  abounding  with  Corne.
For  they  are  moistened  with  Rivers  springing  out  of  Atlas,
and  from  thence  holding  on  their  course  to  the  Mediterran
Sea.  And  albeit  Woods  are  somewhat  more  scarce  upon
these  Plaines,  yet  are  they  much  more  fruitfull,  then  be  the

342

JOHN LEO ON  AFRICA  a.d.

c.  1526.
plaine  Countreys  situate  betweene  Atlas  and  the  Ocean
Sea,  as  namely,  the  Regions  of  Maroco,  of  Duccala,  of
Tedles,  of  Temesna,  of  Azgara,  and  the  Countrey  lying
towards  the  Straights  of  Gibraltar. The  Mountaines  of  TAe  Moun-

Atlas  are  exceeding  cold  and  barren,  and  bring:  forth  but  tatnes°J *fj

5  j  6  exceedingcold.

small  store  or  Lome,  being  woody  on  all  sides,  and
engendring  almost  all  the  Rivers  of  Africa.  The  Foun-
taines  of  Atlas  are  even  in  the  midst  of  Summer  extremely
cold ;  so  that  if  a  man  dippeth  his  hand  therein  for  any
long  space,  he  is  in  great  danger  of  losing  the  same.
Howbeit  the  said  Mountaines  are  not  so  cold  in  all  places  :
for  some  parts  thereof  are  of  such  milde  temperature,  that
they  may  be  right  commodiously  inhabited :  yea,  and
sundry  places  thereof  are  well  stored  with  inhabitants ;  as
in  the  second  part  of  this  present  discourse  we  will  declare
more  at  large.  Those  places  which  are  destitute  of
Inhabitants  be  either  extremely  cold,  as  namely,  the  same
which  lie  over  against  Mauritania :  or  very  rough  and
unpleasant,  to  wit,  those  which  are  directly  opposite  to
the  Region  of  Temesna.  Where  notwithstanding  in
Summer  time  they  may  feed  their  great  and  small  Cattell,
but  not  in  Winter  by  any  meanes.  For  then  the  North
wind  so  furiously  rageth,  bringing  with  it  such  abundance
of  Snow ;  that  all  the  Cattell  which  till  then  remaine  upon
the  said  Mountaines  and  a  great  part  of  the  People  also
are  forced  to  lose  their  lives  in  regard  thereof :  wherefore
whosoever  hath  any  occasion  to  travaile  that  way  in  Winter
time,  chuseth  rather  to  take  his  Journey  betweene  Mauri-
tania and  Numidia.  Those  Merchants  which  bring  Dates
out  of  Numidia  for  the  use  and  service  of  other  Nations,
set  forth  usually  upon  their  Journey  about  the  end  of
October :  and  yet  they  are  oftentimes  so  oppressed  and  Most  wonder-
overtaken  with  a  sodaine  fall  of  Snow,  that  scarcely  one  ful1^
man  among  them  all  escapeth  the  danger  of  the  tempest.  ^  t  Qctoj,er
For  when  it  beginneth  to  snow  over  night,  before  the  next  and  Novemb.
morning  not  onely  Carts  and  Men,  but  even  the  very
Trees  are  so  drowned  and  overwhelmed  therein,  that  it  is
not  possible  to  finde  any  mention  of  them. Howbeit  the

343

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PTLGRIMES

c.  1526.

dead  Carkasses  are  then  found,  when  the  Sunne  hath
melted  the  Snow.
The  extreme  \  my  selfe  alSO)  by  the  goodnesse  of  Almightie  God,
™Wr  °J  twice  escaped  the  most  dreadfull  danger  of  the  foresaid
John  Leo  him-  Snow ;  whereof,  if  it  may  not  be  tedious  to  the  Reader,
selfe  escaped,  I  will  here  in  few  words  make  relation.  Upon  a  certaine
day  of  the  foresaid  moneth  of  October,  travelling  with  a
great  companie  of  Merchants  towards  Atlas,  wee  were
there  about  the  Sunne  going  downe  weather-beaten  with
a  most  cold  and  snowy  kind  of  Hayle.  Here  we  found
eleven  or  twelve  Horse-men  (Arabians  to  our  thinking)
who  perswading  us  to  leave  our  Carts  and  to  goe  with
them,  promised  us  a  good  and  secure  place  to  lodge  in.
For  mine  owne  part,  that  I  might  not  seeme  altogether
uncivill,  I  thought  it  not  meet  to  refuse  their  good  offer ;
albeit  I  stood  in  doubt  lest  they  went  about  to  practise
some  mischiefe.  Wherefore  I  bethought  my  selfe  to  hide
up  a  certaine  summe  of  gold  which  I  had  as  then  about  me.
But  all  being  readie  to  ride,  I  had  no  leasure  to  hide  away
my  Coyne  from  them ;  whereupon  I  fained  that  I  would
goe  ease  my  selfe.  And  so  departing  a  while  their  com-
panie, and  getting  me  under  a  certaine  Tree,  whereof  I
tooke  diligent  notice,  I  buried  my  money  betweene  cer-
taine stones  and  the  roote  of  the  said  Tree.  And  then  we
rode  on  quietly  till  about  mid-night.  What  time  one  of
them  thinking  that  he  had  stayed  long  enough  for  his
Prey,  began  to  utter  that  in  words  which  secretly  he  had
conceived  in  his  mind.  For  he  asked  whether  I
had  any  money  about  me  or  no?  To  whom  I
answered,  that  I  had  left  my  money  behind  with
one  of  them  which  attended  the  carts,  and  that  I  had
then  none  at  all  about  me.  Howbeit  they  being  no  whit
satisfied  with  this  answer,  commanded  me,  for  all  the  cold
weather,  to  strip  my  selfe  out  of  mine  apparell.  At  length
when  they  could  find  no  money  at  all,  they  said  in  jesting
and  scoffing  wise,  that  they  did  this  for  no  other  purpose,
but  onely  to  see  how  strong  and  hardy  I  was,  and  how  I
could  endure  the  cold  and  tempestuous  season. Well,  on

344

JOHN LEO ON AFRICA

C.

A.D.
1526.

we  rode,  seeking  our  way  as  well  as  wee  could  that  darke
and  dismall  night ;  and  anone  we  heard  the  bleating  of
Sheepe,  conjecturing  thereby,  that  wee  were  not  farre
distant  from  some  habitation  of  people.  Wherefore  out
of  hand  we  directed  our  course  thitherwards :  being  con-
strained to  leade  our  Horses  thorow  thicke  Woods,  and
over  steepe  and  craggie  Rockes,  to  the  great  hazard  and
perill  of  our  lives.  And  at  length  after  many  labours,  [II.  vi.  763.]
wee  found  Shepheards  in  a  certaine  Cave :  who,  having
with  much  paines  brought  their  Cattell  in  there,  had
kindled  a  lustie  fire  for  themselves,  which  they  were  con-
strained, by  reason  of  the  extreme  cold,  daily  to  sit  by.
Who  understanding  our  companie  to  be  Arabians,  feared  at
the  first  that  we  would  doe  them  some  mischiefe  :  but
afterward  being  perswaded  that  we  were  driven  thither
by  extremitie  of  cold,  and  being  more  secure  of  us,  they
gave  us  most  friendly  entertainment.  For  they  set  bread,
flesh,  and  cheese  before  us,  wherewith  having  ended  our
Suppers,  we  laid  us  along  each  man  to  sleep  before  the  fire.
All  of  us  were  as  yet  exceeding  cold,  but  especially  my
selfe,  who  before  with  great  horrour  and  trembling  was
stripped  starke  naked.  And  so  we  continued  with  the  said
shepheards  for  the  space  of  two  dayes :  all  which  time  we
could  not  set  forth,  by  reason  of  continuall  Snow.  But
the  third  day,  so  soone  as  they  saw  it  leave  snowing,  with
great  labour  they  began  to  remoove  that  Snow  which  lay
before  the  doore  of  their  Cave.  Which  done,  they  brought
us  to  our  Horses,  which  wee  found  well  provided  of  Hay
in  another  Cave.  Being  all  mounted,  the  shepheards
accompanied  us  some  part  of  our  way,  shewing  us  where
the  Snow  was  of  least  depth,  and  yet  even  there  it  touched
our  Horse  bellies.  This  day  was  so  cleere,  that  the  Sunne
tooke  away  all  the  cold  of  the  two  dayes  going  before.

At  length  entring  into  a  certaine  Village  neere  unto  Fez,
wee  understood,  that  our  Carts  which  passed  by,  were  over-
whelmed with  the  Snow.  Then  the  Arabians  seeing  no
hope  of  recompence  for  all  the  paines  they  had  taken  (for
they  had defended  our  Carts  from  Theeves) carryed  a

345

Continuall
Snow.

Unkind  kind*

nesse.

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

c.  1526.

certaine  Jew  of  our  Companie  with  them  as  their  Captive,
(who  had  lost  a  great  quantitie  of  Dates,  by  reason  of  the
Snow  aforesaid)  to  the  end  that  he  might  remayne  as  their
Prisoner,  till  he  had  satisfied  for  all  the  residue.  From
my  selfe  they  tooke  my  Horse,  and  committed  me  unto
the  wide  World  and  to  Fortune.  From  whence,  riding
upon  a  Mule,  within  three  daies  I  arrived  at  Fez,  where  I
heard  dolefull  newes  of  our  Merchants  and  Wares,  that
they  were  cast  awTay  in  the  Snow.  Yea,  they  thought  that
I  had  beene  destroyed  with  the  rest ;  but  it  seemed  that
God  would  have  it  otherwise.

Now,  having  finished  the  Historie  of  mine  owne  mis-
fortunes, let  us  returne  unto  that  Discourse  wThere  we  left.
Beyond  Atlas  there  are  certaine  hot  and  dry  places
moystened  with  very  few  Rivers,  but  those  which  flow
Rivers  dryed  out  of  Atlas  it  selfe  :  some  of  which  Rivers  running  into
up  by  sands.  ^  Libyan  Desarts  are  dryed  up  with  the  Sands,  but  others
do  ingender  Lakes.  Neither  shall  you  find  in  these
Countreyes  any  places  apt  to  bring  forth  Corne,  notwith-
standing they  have  Dates  in  abundance.

There  are  also  certaine  other  Trees  bearing  fruit,  but  in
so  small  quantitie,  that  no  increase  nor  gaine  is  to  be  reaped
by  them.  You  may  see  likewise  in  those  parts  of  Numidia
which  border  upon  Libya,  certaine  barren  hils  destitute  of
Trees,  upon  the  lower  parts  whereof  grow  nothing  but
unprofitable  thornes  and  shrubs.  Amongst  these  Moun-
taines  you  shall  find  no  Rivers  nor  Springs,  nor  yet  any
waters  at  all,  except  it  be  in  certaine  Pits  and  Wels  almost
unknowne  unto  the  Inhabitants  of  that  Region.  More-
over,  in  sixe  or  seven  dayes  journey  they  have  not  one  drop
of  water,  but  such  as  is  brought  unto  them  by  certaine
Merchants  upon  Camels  backs.  And  that  especially  in
those  places  which  lye  upon  the  mayne  Road  from  Fez  to
*Jgacfez.  Tombuto  or  from  Tremizen  to  *Agad.  That  journey
likewise  is  very  dangerous  which  is  of  late  found  out  by
the  Merchants  of  our  dayes  from  Fez  to  Alcair  over  the
Desarts  of  Libya,  were  it  not  for  an  huge  Lake  in  the  way,
upon  the  bankes  whereof  the  Sinites  and  the  Goranites

346

JOHN LEO ON AFRICA  a.d.

c.  1526.
doe  inhabit. But  in  the  way  which  leadeth  from  Fez  to
Tombuto  are  certaine  Pits  environed  either  with  the  hides
or bones of Camels. Neither doe the Merchants in  DaWr  h
Sommer  time  passe  that  way  without  great  danger  of  their
lives  : for  oftentimes  it  falleth  out,  when  the  South-wind
bloweth,  that  all  those  Pits  are  stopped  up  with  sand. And
so  the  Merchants  when  they  can  find  neither  those  Pits,  nor
any mention thereof, must needs perish for extreame
thirst :  whose  carkasses  are  afterward  found  lying  scattered
here  and  there,  and  scorched  with  the  heat  of  the  Sunne.
One  remedie  they  have  in  this  case,  which  is  very  strange  : ^  strange
for  wThen  they  are  so  grievously  oppressed  with  thirst,  they  rf**,  iefJe.
kill  forth-with  some  one  of  their  Camels,  out  of  whose  Merchants  to
bowels  they  wring  and  expresse  some  quantitie  of  water,  quench  their
which  water  they  drinke  and  carrie  about  with  them,  till  thirst.
they  have  either  found  some  Pit  of  water,  or  till  they  pine
away  for  thirst. In  the  Desart  which  they  call  Azaoad,
there  are  as  yet  extant  two  Monuments  built  of  Marble,
upon  which  Marble  is  an  Epitaph  engraven,  signifying
that  one  of  the  said  Monuments  represented  a  most  rich
Merchant,  and  the  other  a  Carrier  or  transporter  of  Wares.
Which  wealthfull  Merchant  bought  of  the  Carrier  a  cup  of  A  Merchant
water  for  ten  thousand  Ducats,  and  yet  this  precious  water  constrayne«  ty

j  j  l  pxtvpftip  thirst

could  suffice  neither  of  them  ; for  both  were  consumed ~ave  ten  thou[

with thirst. This Desart likewise contayneth sundry  sand  Ducates

kinds  of  beasts,  which  in  the  fourth  part  of  this  Discourse  fir  a  cup  of

concerning  Libya,  and  in  our  Treatise  of  the  beasts  of  water-

Africa,  we  will  discourse  of  more  at  large.

The  Land  of  Negros  is  extreame  hot,  having  some  store

of  moysture  also,  by  reason  of  the  River  of  Niger  running

through the  midst  thereof. All  places  adjoyning  upon

Niger  doe  mightily  abound  both  with  Cattell  and  Corne.

No  Trees  I  saw  there  but  only  certaine  great  ones,  bearing

a  kind  of  bitter  fruit  like  unto  a  Chestnut,  which  in  their

Language  is  called  Goron. Likewise  in  the  same  Regions  [H«  vi-  764.]

grow  Cocos,  Cucumbers,  Onions,  and  such  kinde  of  herbs „-y]?
0 ■%  r • .  , ,  called  Goron.

and  fruits  in  great  abundance.  _  CocoSy  Cucum_

There  are  no  Mountaines  at  all  either  in  Libya  or  in  the  bers,  Onions,

347

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

c.  1526.

Land  of  Negros :  howbeit  divers  Fennes  and  Lakes  there

are ; which  (as  men  report)  the  inundation  of  Niger  hath

left  behind  it. Neither  are  the  woods  of  the  said  Regions

altogether  destitute  of  Elephants  and  other  strange  beasts ;

whereof  we  will  make  relation  in  their  due  place.

Whatnaturall Throughout  the  greatest  part  of  Barbarie  stormie  and

impressions  \s  CQ\^  weather  begin  commonly  about  the  midst  of  October.

Aire  of  Africa  ^ut  *n  December  and  January  the  cold  groweth  some- what

is  subject  unto;  more  sharpe  in  all  places: howbeit  this  happeneth  in  the

and  what morning  onely,  but  so  gently  and  remissely,  that  no  man

effects  ensue Careth  greatly  to  warme  himselfe  by  the  fire. February

The  seasons  of  some_what  mitigateth the  cold  of  Winter, but  that  so

the  y are, inconstantly,  that  the  weather  changeth  sometime  five  and

sometime  sixe  times  in  one  day. In  March  the  North

and  West  winds  usually  blow,  which  cause  the  Trees  to  be

Cheries  ripe adorned  with  blossomes. In  April  all  fruits  attaine to

in  Aprill. their  proper  forme  and  shape,  insomuch  that  Cherries  are

commonly  ripe  about  the  end  of  Aprill  and  the  beginning

of  May. In  the  midst  of  May  they  gather  their  figs :

and  in  mid- June  their  Grapes  are  ripe  in  many  places.

Likewise their  Peares, their  sweete  Quinces, and their

Damascens attayne unto sufficient ripenesse in the

monethes  of  June  and  July. Their  Figs  of  Autumne

may  be  gathered  in  August ; howbeit  they  never  have  so

great  plentie  of  Figs  and  Peaches,  as  in  September. By

the  midst  of  August  they  usually  begin  to  dry  their  Grapes

in  the  Sunne,  whereof  they  make  Rasins. Which  if  they

cannot finish  in September, by  reason of  unseasonable

weather,  of  their  Grapes  as  then  ungathered  they  use  to

make  Wine  and  Must,  especially  in  the  Province  of  Rifa,  as

wee  will  in  due  place  signifie  more  at  large. In  the  midst

of  October  they  take  in  their  Honey,  and  gather  their

The  Olives  of  Pomgranates  and  Quinces. In  November  they  gather  their

Africa.  Olives,  not  climing  up  with  Ladders  nor  plucking  them

with  their  hands,  according  to  the  custome  of  Europe ;

for  the  Trees  of  Mauritania  and  Caesarea  are  so  tall,  that

no  Ladder  is  long  enough  to  reach  unto  the  fruit. And

therefore their Olives  being full  ripe, they  climbe the

348

JOHN LEO ON AFRICA  a.d.

c.  1526.
Trees,  beating  them  off  the  boughes  with  certaine  long
Poles,  albeit  they  know  this  kind  of  beating  to  be  most
hurtfull  unto  the  said  Trees.  Sometimes  they  have  great
plentie  of  Olives  in  Africa,  and  sometimes  as  great  scarcitie.
Certaine  great  Olive-trees  there  are,  the  Olives  whereof  are
eaten  ripe  by  the  Inhabitants  because  they  are  not  so  fit  for
Oyle.  No  yeare  fals  out  to  be  so  unseasonable,  but  that
they  have  three  monethes  in  the  spring  alwayes  temperate.  Pleasant

They begin their spring upon the fifteenth day of  &**&•
February,  accounting  the  eighteenth  of  May,  for  the  end
thereof :  all  which  time  they  have  most  pleasant  weather.
But  if  from  the  five  and  twentieth  of  Aprill,  to  the  fifth
of  May  they  have  no  raine  fill,  they  take  it  as  a  signe  of  Raine  skni/y-
ill  lucke. And  the  raine-water  which  falleth  all  the  time  Jjjjj*  °r
aforesaid  they  call  Naisan,  that  is,  water  blessed  of  God.
Some  store  it  up  in  Vessels,  most  religiously  keeping  it,  as
an  holy  thing. Their  Summer  lasteth  till  the  sixteenth  of
August ; all  which  time  they  have  most  hot  and  cleere
weather. Except  perhaps  some  showres  of  raine  fall  in
July  and  August,  which  doe  so  infect  the  Aire,  that  great
plague  and  most  pestilent  Fevers  ensue  thereupon ; with
which  plague  whosoever  is  infected,  most  hardly  escapeth
death. Their  Autumne  they  reckon  from  the  seventeenth
of  August  to  the  sixteenth  of  November ; having  com-
monly in  the  monethes  of  iVugust  and  September  not  such
extreme  heate  as  before. Howbeit  all  the  time  betweene
the  fifteenth  of  August  and  the  fifteenth  of  September  is
called  by  them  the  furnace  of  the  whole  yeare,  for  that  it
bringeth  Figs,  Quinces,  and  such  kind  of  fruits  to  their  full
maturitie. From  the  fifteenth  of  November  they  beginne
their  winter-season,  continuing  the  same  till  the  fourteenth
day  of  February. So  soone  as  Winter  commeth, they
begin  to  till  their  ground  which  lyeth  in  the  Plaines  :  but
upon the Mountaines  they  goe to  plough in October.
The  Africans  are  most  certainly  perswaded  that  every  yeare  Forty  days  of
contayneth  fortie  extreme  hot  dayes,  beginning  upon  the  extreTlie  heate
twelfth  of  June  ; and  againe  so  many  dayes  extreme  cold,  cokm '
beginning  from  the  twelfth  of  December. Their  iEqui-

349

ajx  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

c.  1526.

noctia  are  upon  the  sixteenth  ot  March,  and  the  sixteenth

of September. For their Solstitia they account the

sixteenth  ot  June  and  the  sixteenth  of  December. These

rules  thev  doe  most  strictly  observe,  as  well  Husbandrie

and  Navigation,  as  in  searching  out  the  houses  and  true

places  of the  Planets  : and  these  instructions,  with  other

such  like  thev  teach  their  young  children  first  ot  all.

Tr.e  Pease  Many  Countrev-people  and  Husbandmen  there  be  in

, f Africa,  who  knowing  (as  thev  say)  never  a  Letter  of  the

Jfiicsam- Booke, will notwithstanding most learnedly dispute of

wmgm  Astrologie,  and  alleage  most  profound  reasons  and  argu-

Astrwhff*. incuts  for  themselves. But  whatsoever  skill  they  have  in

*  cU'  the  Art  ot  Astrologie,  thev  first  learned  the  same  of  the

Latines : vea, thev give those very names unto their

Moneths  which  the  Latines  doe.

Moreover,  they  have  extant  among  them  a  certaine
great  Booke  divided  into  three  Volumes,  which  thev  call,
The  Treasurie  or  Store-house  ot  Husbandry.  This  Booke
was  then  translated  out  of  Latine  into  their  Tongue,  when
Mansor  was  Lord  ot  Granada.  In  the  said  Treasurie  are
all  things  contavned  which  may  seeme  in  any  wise  to  con-
[II.  vi.  765.]  cerne  Husbandry;  as  namely,  the  changes  and  varietie  of
times,  the  manner  ot  sowing,  with  a  number  ot  such  like
particulars,  which  (I  thinke)  at  this  day  the  Latine  Tongue
it  selfe,  whereout  these  things  were  first  translated,  doth
not  contavne.  Whatsoever  either  the  Africans  or  the
Mahumetans  have,  which  seemeth  to  appertaine  in  any
wise  to  their  Law  or  Religion,  they  make  their  computation
thereof  altogether  according  to  the  course  of  the  Moone.
Tki  yeare  of Their  yeare  is  divided  into  three  hundred  fiftie  foure

fjjfrit'**'  ^a}'es :  t'or  unro  s^xe  Monethes  they  allot  thirtie  dayes,
and  unto  the  other  sixe  but  nine  and  twentie  ;  all  which
beeing  added  into  one  summe  doe  produce  the  number
aforesaid  :  wherefore  their  yeare  differeth  eleven  daies  from
the  veare  ot  the  Latines.  Thev  have  a:  divers  times
Festival!  Daves  and  Fasts,

//';>.-.  About  the  end  of  Autumne,  for  all  Winter,  and  a  great

part ot the Spring they are troubled with boysterous

55°

JOHN LEO ON AFRICA  a.d.

c.  1526.
winds,  with  Haile,  with  terrible  Thunder  and  Lightening  :
yea  then  it  snoweth  much  in  some  places  of  Barbarie. The
Easterne,  Southerne,  and  South-easterne  winds  blowing  in
May  and  June,  doe  very  much  hurt  there  :  for  they  spoyle
the  Corne,  and  hinder  the  fruit  from  comming  to  ripenesse.
Their Corne likewise is greatly appayred by Snow,
especially  such  as  falleth  in  the  day  time,  when  it  beginneth
to  flowre. Upon  the  Mountaynes  of  Atlas  they  divide  the Tiejemy*
veare  into  two  parts  onelv  : for  their  Winter  continueth  dl*'ldcd  uUo

•  /•  •  tZVO  SCCSC71S

from  October  to  Aprill ; and  from  Aprill  to  October  they 'CKejs  wpm  the
account  it  Summer: neither  is  there  any  day  throughout Mountains  of
the  whole  veare,  wherein  the  tops  of  those  Mountaines  ^tlu.
are not covered with Snow. In Numidia, the veare
runneth  away  very  swiftly  : for  they  reape  their  Corne  in
May,  and  in  October  they  gather  their  Dates  : but  from
the  midst  of  September,  they  have  Winter  till  the  begin-
ning of  Januarie. But if  September falleth out to be
raynie,  they  are  like  to  lose  most  part  of  their  Dates.

All  the  fields  of  Numidia  require  watering  from  the
Rivers  :  but  if  the  Mountavnes  of  Atlas  have  no  raine  fall
upon  them,  the  Numidian  Rivers  waxe  dry,  and  so  the
fields  are  destitute  of  watering.  October  being  destitute
of  raine,  the  Husbandman  hath  no  hope  to  cast  his  seed
into  the  ground  ;  and  he  despayreth  likewise,  if  it  raine  not
in  Aprill.  But  their  Dates  prosper  more  without  raine,
whereof  the  Numidians  have  greater  plentie  then  of  Corne.
For  albeit  they  have  some  store  of  Corne,  yet  can  it
scarcely  suffice  them  for  halfe  the  veere.  Howbeit,  if
they  have  good  increase  of  Dates,  they  cannot  want
abundance  of  Corne,  which  is  sold  unto  them  by  the
Arabians  for  Dates.  If  in  the  Libyan  Desarts  there  fall
out  change  of  weather  about  the  midst  of  October  ;  and
if  it  continue  rayning  there  all  December,  January,  and
some  part  of  February,  it  is  wonderfull  what  abundance
of  grasse  and  milke  it  bringeth  forth.  Then  may  you  find
divers  Lakes  in  all  places,  and  many  Fennes  throughout
Libya  ;  wherefore  this  is  the  meetest  time  for  the  Barbarie
Merchants  to  travell  to  the  Land  of  Negros. Heere  all

351

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

c.  1526.

kind  of  fruits  grow  sooner  ripe,  if  they  have  moderate
showers  about  the  end  of  July.  Moreover,  the  Land  of
Negros  receiveth  by  raine  neither  any  benefit,  nor  yet  any
dammage  at  all.  For  the  River  Niger  together  with  the
water  which  falleth  from  certaine  Mountaynes  doth  so
moysten  their  grounds,  that  no  places  can  be  devised  to  be
more  fruitfull :  for  that  which  Nilus  is  to  Egypt,  the  same
The  increase Js  Niger  to  the  Land  of  Negros  : for  it  increaseth  like

of  the  River ]STiluis  from  the  fifteenth  of  Tune  the  space  of  fortie  dayes
of  Niger  ana r  1  r  • . 1  r  1  a 1  1

NUUSt  arter,  and  tor  so  many  againe  it  decreaseth. And  so  at  the

increase  of  Niger  when  all  places  are  over-flowne  with

water,  a  man  may  in  a  Barke  passe  over  all  the  Land  of

Negros,  albeit  not  without  great  perill  of  drowning,  as  in

the fift part of this Treatise we  will declare more at

large.

Thelengthand  All  the  people  of  Barbarie  by  us  before  mentioned  live
°rtnJis?  °f unto  sixtie  five  or  seventie  yeares  of  age,  and  few  or  none

lives  i  exceed  that  number.  Howbeit  in  the  foresaid  Moun-
taynes I  saw  some  which  had  lived  an  hundred  yeares,
and  others  which  affirmed  themselves  to  bee  older ;  whose
age  was  most  healthfull  and  lustie.  Yea,  some  you  shall
find  heere  of  fourescore  yeares  of  age,  who  are  sufficiently
strong  and  able  to  exercise  Husbandy,  to  dresse  Vines,  and
to  serve  in  the  Warres ;  insomuch  that  yong  men  are
oftentimes  inferiour  unto  them.  In  Numidia,  that  is  to
say,  in  the  Land  of  Dates,  they  live  a  long  time :  howbeit

Teeth  soone they  lose  their  Teeth  very  soone,  and  their  Eyes  waxe

lost  and  Eyes  Wonderfull  dimme.  Which  infirmities  are  likely  to  be
ecaye  .  incident  unto them, first  because they  continually  feed

upon  Dates,  the  sweetnesse  and  naturall  qualitie  whereof
doth  by  little  and  little  pull  out  their  Teeth  :  and  secondly,
the  dust  and  sand,  which  is  tossed  up  and  downe  the  Ayre
with  Easterne  windes  entring  into  their  Eyes,  doth  at  last
miserably  weaken  and  spoile  their  eye-sight.  The  Inhabi-
tants of  Libya  are  of  a  shorter  life ;  but  those  which  are
most  strong  and  healthfull  among  them  live  oftentimes  till
they  come  to  threescore  yeares  ;  albeit  they  are  slender  and
leane  of  bodie.

352

JOHN LEO ON AFRICA  a.d.

c.  1526.

The  Negros  commonly  live  the  shortest  time  of  all  the  What  kinds  of
rest : howbeit  they  are  alwayes  strong  and  lustie,  having  J??*^ *re
their  Teeth  sound  even  till  their  dying  day :  yet  is  there  subject  unt0t
no  Nation  under  Heaven  more  prone  to  Venery ; unto
which  vice  also  the  Libyans  and  Numidians  are  too  too
much addicted. To be short, the Barbarians are the
weakest  people  of  them  all.

The  children,  and  sometimes  the  ancient  women  of  this
Region  are  subject  unto  baldnesse  or  unnaturall  shedding
of  haire  ;  which  disease  they  can  hardly  be  cured  of.  They
are  likewise  oftentimes  troubled  with  the  head-ache,  which
usually  afflicteth  them  without  any  ague  joyned  therewith.  [II.  vi.  766.]
Many  of  them  are  tormented  with  the  tooth-ache,  which
(as  some  thinke)  they  are  the  more  subject  unto,  because
immediately  after  hot  pottage  they  drinke  cold  water.
They  are  oftentimes  vexed  with  extreame  paine  of  the
stomacke,  which  ignorantly  they  call,  the  paine  of  the
heart.  They  are  likewise  daily  molested  with  inward
gripings  and  infirmities  over  their  whole  bodie,  which  is
thought  to  proceed  of  continuall  drinking  of  water.  Yea,
they  are  much  subject  unto  bone-aches  and  gowts,  by
reason  that  they  sit  commonly  upon  the  bare  ground,  and
never  weare  any  shooes  upon  their  feet.  Their  chiefe
Gentlemen  and  Noblemen  prove  gowtie  oftentimes  with
immoderate  drinking  of  Wine  and  eating  of  daintie
meates.  Some  with  eating  of  Olives,  Nuts,  and  such
course  fare,  are  for  the  most  part  infected  with  the  Scurvies.

Those  which  are  of  a  sanguine  complexion  are  greatly
troubled  with  the  cough,  because  that  in  the  Spring-season
they  sit  too  much  upon  the  ground.  And  upon  Fridayes
I  had  no  small  sport  and  recreation  to  goe  and  see  them.
For  upon  this  day  the  people  flocke  to  Church  in  great
numbers  to  heare  their  Mahumetan  Sermons.  Now  if
any  one  in  the  Sermon-time  fals  a  neezing,  all  the  whole  Neesingat
multitude  will  neeze  with  him  for  company,  and  so  they  Sermons-
make  such  a  noise,  that  they  never  leave,  till  the  Sermon
be  quite  done  ;  so  that  a  man  shall  reape  but  little  know-
ledge by  any  of  their  Sermons.

v  353  z

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

c.  1526.
The  French  jf  any  0f  Barbarie  be  infected  with  the  Disease  com-

monly called  the  French  Poxe,  they  dye  thereof  for  the
most  part,  and  are  seldome  cured.  This  Disease  beginneth
with  a  kinde  of  anguish  and  swelling,  and  at  length
breaketh  out  into  Sores.  Over  the  Mountaines  of  Atlas,
and  throughout  all  Numidia  and  Libya  they  scarcely  know
this  Disease.  Insomuch  that  oftentimes  the  parties
infected  travell  forth-with  into  Numidia  or  the  land  of
Negros,  in  which  places  the  Aire  is  so  temperate,  that  onely
by  remayning  there  they  recover  their  perfect  health,  and
returne  home  sound  into  their  owne  Countrey :  which  I
saw  many  doe  with  mine  owne  eyes ;  who  without  the
helpe  of  any  Physician  or  Medicine,  except  the  foresaid
holsome  aire,  were  restored  to  their  former  health.  Not
so  much  as  the  name  of  this  malady  was  ever  known  unto
the  Africans,  before  Ferdinand  the  King  of  Castile  expelled
When  and  by  aj[  Jewes  out  of  Spaine ;  after  the  returne  of  which  Jewes
w  a  meanes  .^Q  Africa,  certaine  unhappie  and  lewd  people  lay  with
was  brought  their  Wives  ;  and  so  at  length  the  Disease  spread  from  one
into  Africa.  to  another,  over  the  whole  Region  :  insomuch  that  scarce
any  one  Family  was  free  from  the  same.  Howbeit,  this
they  were  most  certainly  perswaded  of,  that  the  same
Disease  came  first  from  Spaine ;  wherefore  they  (for  want
of  a  better  name)  doe  call  it,  The  Spanish  Poxe.  Notwith-
standing at  Tunis  and  over  all  Italy,  it  is  called  the  French
Disease.  It  is  so  called  likewise  in  iEgypt  and  Syria  :  for
there  it  is  used  as  a  common  Proverbe  of  Cursing ;  The
French  Poxe  take  you.  Amongst  the  Barbarians  the
Hernia,  or  the  Disease  called  in  Latine  Hernia  is  not  so  common  ;  but  in
Disease  called  j£gyp^  the  people  are  much  troubled  therewith.  For
ruZure°r  *  some  °f  the  ^Egyptians  have  their  Cods  oftentimes  so
swollen,  as  it  is  incredible  to  report.  Which  infirmitie
is  thought  to  be  so  common  among  them,  because  they
eate  so  much  Gumme,  and  Salt  Cheese.  Some  of  their
children  are  subject  unto  the  falling  sicknesse ;  but  when
they  grow  to  any  stature,  they  are  free  from  that  Disease.
This  falling  sicknesse  likewise  possesseth  the  women  of
Barbarie,  and  of  the  Land  of  Negros ; who,  to  excuse  it,

354

JOHN LEO ON AFRICA  a.d.

c.  1526.
say  that  they  are  taken  with  a  Spirit.  In  Barbarie  the
Plague  is  rife  every  tenth,  fifteenth,  or  twentieth  yeare,
whereby  great  numbers  of  people  are  consumed ;  for
they  have  no  cure  for  the  same,  but  onely  to  rub  the
Plague-sore  with  certaine  Ointments  made  of  Armenian  Earth  °f
Earth.  Armnia-

In  Numidia  they  are  infected  with  the  Plague  scarce  Pk&fraretn
once  in  an  hundred  yeares. And  in  the  Land  of  Negros
they  know  not  the  name  of  this  Disease : because  they
never  were  subject  thereunto.

Those  Arabians  which  inhabit  in  Barbarie  or  upon  the Tkiemmmd-
Coast  of  the  Mediterran  Sea,  are  greatly  addicted  unto  and  vertues  0f
the  studie  of  good  Arts  and  Sciences : and  those  things  the  Africans.
which  concerne  their  Law  and  Religion  are  esteemed  by
them  in  the  first  place. Moreover,  they  have  beene  here-
tofore most  studious  of  the  Mathematikes,  of  Philosophic,  Mathematikes
and  of  Astrologie  :  but  these  Arts  (as  it  is  aforesaid)  were  s  u  te  '
foure  hundred  yeares  agoe,  utterly  destroyed  and  taken
away  by  the  chiefe  Professors  of  their  Law. The  Inhabi-
tants of  Cities  doe  most  religiously  observe  and  reverence
those  things  which  appertaine  unto  their  Religion  : yea,
they  honour  those  Doctors  and  Priests, of  whom  they  Prtests
learne their  Law, as if  they  were pettie  gods. Their
Churches  they  frequent  very  diligently,  to  the  end  they
may  repeat  certaine  prescript  and  formall  Praiers ; most
superstitiously  perswading  themselves  that  the  same  day  Superstitions.
wherein  they  make  their  praiers,  it  is  not  lawfull  for  them
to  wash  certaine  of  their  members,  when  as  at  other  times
they  will  wash  their  whole  bodies.

Moreover  those  which  inhabit  Barbarie,  are  of  great
cunning  and  dexteritie  for  building  and  for  Mathematicall
Inventions,  which  a  man  may  easily  conjecture  by  their
artificiall  Workes.  Most  honest  people  they  are,  and
destitute  of  all  fraud  and  guile ;  not  onely  imbracing  all
simplicitie  and  truth,  but  also  practising  the  same  through-
out the  whole  course  of  their  lives :  albeit  certaine  Latine
Authors,  which  have  written  of  the  same  Regions,  are
farre  otherwise  of  opinion. Likewise  they  are  most  strong

355

A.D.

c.  1526.

[II.  vi.  767.]
The  Moores
are  a  people  of
great  fdelitie.
Jealousie.

Merchandise.

Gravitie.
Modes  tie.

The  Arabians
and  their
Vertues.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

and  valiant  people,  especially  those  which  dwell  upon  the
Mountaines.  They  keepe  their  covenant  most  faith-
fully ;  insomuch  that  they  had  rather  dye  then  breake
promise.

No  Nation  in  the  World  is  so  subject  unto  Jealousie ;
for  they  will  rather  lose  their  lives,  then  put  up  any
disgrace  in  the  behalfe  of  their  women.  So  desirous  they
are  of  Riches  and  Honour,  that  therein  no  other  people
can  go  beyond  them.  They  travel  in  a  manner  over  the
whole  World  to  exercise  Traffike.  For  they  are  continu-
ally to  be  seene  in  iEgypt,  in  ^Ethiopia,  in  Arabia,  Persia,
India,  and  Turkie :  and  whithersoever  they  goe,  they  are
most  honourably  esteemed  of :  for  none  of  them  will
professe  any  Art,  unlesse  hee  hath  attained  unto  great
exactnesse  and  perfection  therein.  They  have  alwayes
beene  much  delighted  with  all  kind  of  civilitie  and  modest
behaviour  :  and  it  is  accounted  hainous  among  them  for
any  man  to  utter  in  companie,  any  Bawdie  or  unseemely
word.  They  have  alwayes  in  mind  this  sentence  of  a
grave  Author  ;  Give  place  to  thy  Superiour.  If  any  youth
in  presence  of  his  Father,  his  Uncle,  or  any  other  of  his
Kindred,  doth  sing  or  talke  ought  of  love  matters,  he  is
deemed  to  be  worthy  of  grievous  punishment.  Whatso-
ever Lad  or  Youth  there  lighteth  by  chance  into  any
companie  which  discourseth  of  Love,  no  sooner  heareth
nor  understandeth  what  their  talke  tendeth  unto,  but
immediately  he  withdraweth  himselfe  from  among  them.

Those  Arabians  which  dwell  in  Tents,  that  is  to  say,
which  bring  up  Cattell,  are  of  a  more  liberall  and  civill
disposition :  to  wit,  they  are  in  their  kind  as  devout,
valiant,  patient,  courteous,  hospitall,  and  as  honest  in  life
and  conversation  as  any  other  people.  They  be  most
faithfull  observers  of  their  word  and  promise  :  insomuch
that  the  people,  which  before  we  said  to  dwell  in  the
Mountaines,  are  greatly  stirred  up  with  emulation  of  their
Vertues.  Howbeit  the  said  Mountainers,  both  for  Learn-
ing, for  Vertue,  and  for  Religion,  are  thought  much
inferiour  to  the  Numidians ; albeit  they  have  little  or  no

356

JOHN LEO ON AFRICA  a.d.

c.  1526.

knowledge  at  all  in  naturall  Philosophic.  They  are
reported  likewise  to  be  most  skilfull  Warriours,  to  be
valiant,  and  exceeding  lovers  and  practisers  of  all
humanitie.  Also,  the  Moores  and  Arabians  inhabiting
Libya  are  somewhat  civill  of  behaviour,  being  plaine
dealers,  void  of  dissimulation,  favourable  to  Strangers,  and
lovers  of  Simplicitie.

Those  which  we  before  named  white,  or  tawnie  Moores,
are  most  stedfast  in  friendship  :  as  likewise  they  indiffer-
ently and  favourably  esteeme  of  other  Nations  :  and  wholy
indeavour  themselves  in  this  one  thing,  namely,  that  they
may  leade  a  most  pleasant  and  jocund  life.  Moreover,
they  maintaine  most  learned  Professors  of  liberall  Arts,
and  such  men  as  are  most  devout  in  their  Religion.  Neither
is  there  any  people  in  all  Africa  that  lead  a  more  happie
and  honourable  life.

Never was there any people or Nation so perfectly  what  *****
endued  with  vertue,  but  that  they  had  their  contrary  faults  fj^^
and  blemishes  :  now  therefore  let  us  consider,  whether  the  subUct  unto.
vices  of  the  Africans  doe  surpasse  their  vertues  and  good
parts. Those  which  we named the Inhabitants  of the
Cities of Barbarie, are somewhat needie  and covetous,
being  also  very  proud  and  high-minded,  and  wonderfully
addicted  unto  wrath ; insomuch  that (according  to the
Proverbe)  they  will  deeply  engrave  in  Marble  any  injurie
be  it  never  so  small,  and  will  in  no  wise  blot  it  out  of  their Vindicative,
membrance. So rusticall they are and void of good  Rude.
manners, that scarcely can any stranger obtaine their  Credulous.
familiaritie  and  friendship. Their  wits  are  but  meane,  and
they are so credulous, that they will beleeve matters
impossible,  which  are  told  them. So  ignorant  are  they  of
naturall  Philosophic,  that  they  imagine  all  the  effects  and
operations  of  nature  to  be  extraordinarie  and  divine.

They  observe  no  certaine  order  of  living  nor  of  Lawes. Chokricke  W
Abounding  exceedingly  with  choler,  they  speake  alwayes  quar™Isome-
with  an  angry  and  lowd  voice. Neither  shall  you  walke
in  the  daytime  in  any  of  their  streets,  but  you  shall  see
commonly  two  or  three  of  them  together  by  the  eares.

357

A.D.

c.  1526.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

By  nature  they  are  a  vile  and  base  people,  being  no  better
accounted  of  by  their  Governours  then  if  they  were  Dogges.
They  have  neither  Judges  nor  Lawyers,  by  whose  wisdome
and  counsell  they  ought  to  be  directed.  They  are  utterly
unskilfull  in  Trades  of  Merchandize,  being  destitute  of
Bankers  Money-changers :  wherefore  a  Merchant  can  doe
nothing  among  them  in  his  absence,  but  is  himselfe  con-
strayned  to  goe  in  person,  whithersoever  his  Wares  are
carryed. No  people  under  Heaven  are  more  addicted  unto

Covetous.  covetise  then  this  Nation  :  neither  is  there  (I  thinke)  to  be
found  among  them  one  of  an  hundred,  who  for  courtesie,
humanitie,  or  devotions  sake,  will  vouchsafe  any  enter-
tainment upon  a  stranger. Mindfull  they  have  alwayes

Ingratefull.  beene  of  injuries,  but  most  forgetfull  of  benefits.  Their
mindes  are  perpetually  possessed  with  vexation  and  strife,
so  that  they  will  seldome  or  never  shew  themselves  tract-
able to  any  man ;  the  cause  whereof  is  supposed  to  be ;
for  that  they  are  so  greedily  addicted  unto  their  filthy
lucre,  that  they  never  could  attayne  unto  any  kind  of
civilitie  or  good  behaviour.

Shepheards.  The  Shepheards  of  that  Region  live  a  miserable,  toyl-

some,  wretched  and  beggerly  life  :  they  are  a  rude  people,
and  (as  a  man  may  say)  borne  and  bred  to  theft,  deceit,
and  brutish  manners.  Their  young  men  may  goe  a
wooing  to  divers  Maides,  till  such  time  as  they  have  sped

Manages.  of  a  wife.  Yea,  the  father  of  the  Maide  most  friendly
welcommeth  her  Suiter ;  so  that  I  thinke  scarce  any  Noble
or  Gentleman  among  them  can  chuse  a  Virgine  for  his

[II.  vi.  768.]  Spouse :  albeit,  so  soone  as  any  woman  is  married,  she  is
quite  forsaken  of  all  her  Suiters  ;  who  then  seeke  out  other
new Paramours for their liking. Concerning their

Irreligion.  Religion,  the  greater  part  of  these  people  are  neither
Mahumetans,  Jewes,  nor  Christians ;  and  hardly  shall  you
find  so  much  as  a  sparke  of  Pietie  in  any  of  them.  They
have  no  Churches  at  all,  nor  any  kind  of  Prayers,  but  being
utterly  estranged  from  all  godly  devotion,  they  leade  a
savage  and  beastly  life  :  and  if  any  man  chanceth  to  bee  of
a  better  disposition  (because  they  have  no  Law-givers  nor

358

JOHN LEO ON AFRICA  a.d.

c.  1526.
Teachers  among  them)  hee  is  constrained  to  follow  the
example  of  other  mens  lives  and  manners.

All  the  Numidians  being  most  ignorant  of  Naturall,  Robberie.
Domesticall,  and  Common-wealth  matters,  are  principally
addicted  unto  Treason,  Trecherie,  Murther,  Theft  and
Robberie.  This  Nation,  because  it  is  most  slavish,  will
right  gladly  accept  of  any  service  among  the  Barbarians,
be  it  never  so  vile  or  contemptible.  For  some  will  take
upon  them  to  be  Dung-farmers,  others  to  be  Scullions,
some  others  to  be  Ostlers,  and  such  like  servile  Occupa-
tions. Likewise  the  Inhabitants  of  Libya  live  a  brutish
kind  of  life ;  who  neglecting  all  kinds  of  good  Arts  and
Sciences,  doe  wholy  apply  their  minds  unto  theft  and
violence.  Never  as  yet  had  they  any  Religion,  any  Lawes,
or  any  good  forme  of  living ;  but  alwaies  had,  and  ever
will  have  a  most  miserable  and  distressed  life.  There
cannot  any  trechery  or  villanie  be  invented  so  damnable,
which  for  lucres  sake  they  dare  not  attempt.  They  spend
all  their  dayes  either  in  most  lewd  practices,  or  in  hunting,
or  else  in  warfare ;  neither  weare  they  any  shooes  nor
garments.  The  Negros  likewise  leade  a  beastly  kind  of
life,  being  utterly  destitute  of  the  use  of  reason,  of
dexteritie  of  wit,  and  of  all  Arts.  Yea,  they  so  behave
themselves,  as  if  they  had  continually  lived  in  a  Forrest
among  wild  beasts.  They  have  great  swarmes  of  Harlots
among  them ;  whereupon  a  man  may  easily  conjecture
their  manner  of  living ;  except  their  conversation  perhaps
bee  somewhat  more  tolerable,  who  dwell  in  the  principall
Townes  and  Cities :  for  it  is  like  that  they  are  somewhat
more  addicted  to  Civilitie.

§. II.  [II.  vi.  769.]

Collections  of  things  most  remarkable  in  John  Leo
his  second  Booke  of  the  Historie  of  Africa.

Eginning  at  the  West  part  of  Africa,  we  will  in
this  our  Geographical  Historie  proceed  Eastward,  j~  ^ePon  °f
till  we  come  to  the  borders  of  ^gypt.  _  u^n  J^lVest

Hea  being  one  of  the  Provinces  of  Maroco  is  bounded  partof  Africa.

359

A.D.

c.  1526.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

are

Their  Food.

Westward  and  Northward  with  the  maine  Ocean,  South-
ward with  the  Mountaines  of  Atlas,  and  Eastward  with
the  River  which  they  call  Esfivalo.  This  River  springeth
out  of  the  foresaid  Mountaine,  discharging  it  selfe  at
length  into  the  River  of  Tensift,  and  dividing  Hea  from
the  Province  next  adjacent.

The  Region  of  Hea  is  an  uneven  and  rough  soile,  full
of  rockie  Mountaines,  shadie  Woods,  and  Christall
Streames  in  all  places ;  being  wonderfully  rich,  and  well
stored  with  Inhabitants.  They  have  in  the  said  Region
great  abundance  of  Goats  and  Asses,  but  not  such  plentie
of  Sheep,  Oxen,  and  Horses.  All  kind  of  Fruits
very  scarce  among  them.

This  People  for  the  most  part  eateth  Barly-bread
unleavened,  which  is  like  rather  unto  a  Cake,  then  to  a
Loafe  :  this  Bread  is  baked  in  a  kind  of  earthen  Baking-
pan.
Their  Attire.  The  greatest  part  of  them  are  clad  in  a  kind  of  cloth
Garment  made  of  Wooll  after  the  manner  of  a  Coverlet,
called  in  their  Language,  Elchise,  and  not  unlike  unto
those  Coverlets  or  Blankets  which  the  Italians  lay  upon
their  Beds.  In  these  kind  of  Mantles  they  wrap  them-
selves ;  and  then  are  they  girt  with  a  woollen  girdle,  not
about  their  waste,  but  about  their  hips.  You  may  easily
discerne  which  of  them  is  married,  and  who  is  not :  for
an  unmarried  man  must  alwayes  keepe  his  Beard  shaven,
which,  after  hee  bee  once  married,  hee  suffereth  to  grow
at  length.  The  said  Region  bringeth  forth  no  great
plentie  of  Horses,  but  those  that  it  doth  bring  forth,  are
so  nimble  and  full  of  mettall,  that  they  will  climbe  like
Cats  over  the  steep  and  craggie  Mountaines.  These
Horses  are  alwayes  unshod :  and  the  People  of  this
Region  use  to  till  their  ground  with  no  other  Cattell,
but  onely  with  Horses  and  Asses.  You  shall  here  find
great  store  of  Deere,  of  wild  Goats,  and  of  Hares.  No
good  learning  nor  liberall  Arts  are  here  to  be  found ;
except  it  be  a  little  skill  in  the  Lawes,  which  some  few
challenge  unto  themselves  : otherwise  you  shall  find  not

360

Horses  and
other  Beasts.

JOHN LEO ON AFRICA  ad.

c.  1526.
so  much  as  any  shadow  of  vertue  among  them.  They
have  neither  Physician  nor  Surgeon  of  any  learning  or  Cauterizing.
account.  But  if  a  disease  or  infirmitie  befall  any  of  them,
they  presently  seare  or  cauterize  the  sicke  partie  with  red
hot  Irons,  even  as  the  Italians  use  their  Horses.  How-
beit  some  Chyrurgians  there  are  among  them,  whose  dutie
and  occupation  consisteth  onely  in  circumcising  of  their
male  Children.  Whosoever  will  travell  into  a  forraine
Countrey  must  take  either  a  Harlot,  or  a  Wife,  or  a
religious  man  of  the  contrary  part,  to  beare  him  companie.
They  have  no  regard  at  all  of  Justice.

The  ancient  Citie  of  Tednest  was  built  by  the  Africans Tednest  one  of
upon a most beautifull and large Plaine, which they  * Ctties  &
invironed  with  a  loftie  Wall  built  of  Bricke  and  Lime.
In  this  Citie  there  are  no  Innes,  Stoves,  nor  Wine-taverns  :
so  that  whatsoever  Merchant  goes  thither,  must  seeke  out
some  of  his  acquaintance  to  remaine  withall : but  if  hee
hath  no  friends  nor  acquaintance  in  the  Towne,  then  the
principall  Inhabitants  there  cast  lots  who  should  entertaine
the  strange  Merchant : insomuch  that  no  Stranger,  be  he Their  manner
never  so  meane,  shall  want  friendly  entertainment,  but  is  °fentertatmnS
alwaies sumptuously  and  honourably  accepted  of. But fe^nfst
whosoever  is  received  as  a  Guest,  must  at  his  departure
bestow  some  gift  upon  his  Host  in  token  of  thankfulnesse,
to  the  end  hee  may  be  more  welcome  at  his  next  returne.
Howbeit  if  the  said  Stranger  be  no  Merchant,  hee  may
chuse  what  great  mans  house  he  will  to  lodge  in,  being
bound  at  his  departure  to  no  recompence  nor  gift. To  be
short,  if  any  Beggar  or  poore  Pilgrim  passe  the  same  way,
he  hath  some  sustenance  provided  for  him  in  a  certaine
Hospitall, which was founded onely for the  reliefe of
poore  people,  and  is  maintained  at  the  common  charge  of
the  Citie. In  the  middest  of  the  Citie  stands  an  ancient  Their  Temple.
Temple,  being  most  sumptuously  built,  and  of  an  huge
bignesse,  which  was  thought  to  be  founded  at  the  very
same  time  when  as  the  King  of  Maroco  bare  rule  in  those
places. This  Temple  hath  a  great  Cisterne  standing  in
the  midst  thereof,  and  it  hath  many  Priests  and  such  kind

361

A.D.

c.  1526.

Tednest  for-
sakenforfeare
of  the
Portugals.

Teculeth  a
Towne  of  Hea.

Hadecchls  a
Towne  of  Hea.

[II.  vi.  770.]

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

of  People  which  give  attendance  thereunto,  and  store  it
with  things  necessarie.  In  this  Citie  likewise  are  divers
other  Temples,  which,  albeit  they  are  but  little,  yet  be
they  most  cleanly  and  decently  kept.  There  are  in  this
Citie  about  an  hundred  Families  of  Jewes.  My  selfe  saw
this  Citie  utterly  ruined  and  defaced,  the  Walls  thereof
being  laid  even  with  the  ground,  the  Houses  being
destitute  of  Inhabitants,  and  nothing  at  that  time  to  be
there  seene,  but  onely  the  nests  of  Ravens  and  of  other
Birds. All  this  I  saw  in  the  920.  yeere  of  the  Hegeira.

Upon  the  foot  of  an  hill  eighteene  miles  Eastward
from  Tednest,  stands  a  Towne  called  by  the  Africans
Teculeth,  and  containing  about  one  thousand  Housholds.
Here  also  is  to  be  seene  a  most  stately  and  beautifull
Temple ;  as  likewise  foure  Hospitals,  and  a  Monasterie
of  Religious  persons.  The  Inhabitants  of  this  Towne
are  farre  wealthier  then  they  of  Tednest :  for  they  have
a  most  famous  Port  upon  the  Ocean  Sea,  commonly  called
by  Merchants,  Goz.  They  have  likewise  great  abundance
of  Corne  and  Pulse,  which  grow  in  the  fruitfull  fields
adjacent. It  was  destroyed  by  the  Portugals, 15 14.

The  Citie  of  Hadecchis  being  situate  upon  a  Plaine,
standeth  eight  miles  Southward  of  Teculeth  :  it  containeth
seven  hundred  Families :  and  the  Walls,  Churches,  and
Houses  throughout  this  whole  Citie  are  all  built  of  Free-
stone. They  have  certaine  yeerely  Faires  or  Marts,
wherunto  the  Nations  adjoyning  doe  usually  resort.
Here  is  to  bee  sold  great  store  of  Cattell,  of  Butter,  Oyle,
Iron,  and  Cloth ;  and  their  said  Mart  lasteth  fifteene  dayes.
Their  Women  are  very  beautifull,  white  of  colour,  fat,
comely,  and  trim.  But  the  Men  beare  a  most  savage
mind,  being  so  extremely  possessed  with  jealousie,  that
whomsoever  they  find  but  talking  with  their  Wives,  they
presently  goe  about  to  murther  them.  They  have  no
Judges  nor  learned  men  among  them,  nor  any  which  can
assigne  unto  the  Citizens  any  Functions  and  Magistracies
according  to  their  worthinesse :  so  that  he  rules  like  a
King  that  excelleth  the  residue  in  wealth. For  matters  of

362

JOHN LEO ON AFRICA  a.d.

c.  1526.
Religion,  they  have  certaine  Mahumetan  Priests. Who
neither  pay  Tribute  nor  yeerely  Custome,  even  as  they
whom  we  last  before  mentioned. Here  I  was  entertained
by  a  certaine  courteous  and  liberall  minded  Priest,  who  was
exceedingly  delighted  with  Arabian  Poetrie. From  hence
I travelled  unto Maroco. And  afterward I heard that  Hadecckh
this  Towne  also,  in  the  yeere  of  the  Hegeira  922.  was  Sp^b]the
sacked  by  the  Portugals ; and  that  the  Inhabitants  were \t\\. '
all  fled  into  the  next  Mountaines.

This  Towne  is  situate  upon  the  top  of  a  certaine  high  Ilemugaghena
Mountaine which is distant eight miles to the South  TowneofHea.
of Hadecchis : it consisteth of about two hundred
Families. They  are  at  continuall  war  with  their  neigh-
bours, which  is  performed  with  such  monstrous  bloud-shed
and  manslaughter,  that  they  deserve  rather  the  name  of
Beasts  then  of  Men. They  have  neither  Judges,  Priests,  Barbarisme.
nor  Lawyers, to  prescribe  any forme of  living  among
them, or  to  governe  their  Common-wealth : wherefore
justice  and  honestie  is  quite  banished  out  of  their  habita-
tions. Those Mountaines are altogether destitute of
Fruits : howbeit  they  abound  greatly  with  Honie,  which
serveth  the  Inhabitants  both  for  Food,  and  for  Merchan-
dize  to sell  in the  neighbour-Countries. And because Wax  cast
they  know  not  what  service  to  put  their  Waxe  unto,  they  *way  h  dul1
cast  it  forth,  together  with  the  other  excrements  of  Honie. '
No  People  under  Heaven  can  be  more  wicked,  treacherous,
or  lewdly  addicted,  then  this  People  is.

The  Towne  Tesegdelt  being  situate  upon  the  top  of  a  Tesegdelt  a
certaine  high Mountaine,  and  naturally  environed  with TozvneofHea'
an  high  Rocke  in  stead  of  a  Wall,  containeth  more  then
eight  hundred  Families. It  is  distant  from  Teijeut  South-  Teijeut
ward  about  twelve  miles,  and  it  hath  a  River  running  by  *estro*ed  h
it,  the  name  whereof  I  have  forgotten. About  this  Towne I5I*  ^ '
of  Tesegdelt  are  most  pleasant  Gardens  and  Orchards, miles  West  off
replenished  with  all  kind  of  Trees,  and  especially  with  Ileusugagen.
Walnut-trees. The  Inhabitants  are  wealthie,  having  great
abundance  of  Horses,  neither  are  they  constrained  to  pay
any Tribute unto the  Arabians. There are continuall

363

A.D.

c.  1526.

The  cur  teste  of
the  Citizens
of  Tesegdelt
towards
Strangers.

A  Description
of  the  Ci  tie  of
Tagtess.

Water  far  re
fetched.

Locusts.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Warres  betweene  the  Arabians  and  them,  and  that  with
great  bloud-shed  and  man-slaughter  on  both  parts.  The
Villages  lying  neere  unto  Tesegdelt  doe  usually  carrie  all
their  Graine  thither,  lest  they  should  be  deprived  thereof
by  the  Enemie,  who  maketh  daily  inrodes  and  invasions
upon  them.  The  Inhabitants  of  the  foresaid  Towne  are
much  addicted  unto  curtesie  and  civilitie ;  and  for  liber-
alitie  and  bountie  unto  Strangers,  they  will  suffer  them-
selves to  be  inferiour  to  none  other.  At  every  Gate  of
Tesegdelt  stand  certaine  Watch-men  or  Warders,  which
doe  most  lovingly  receive  all  In-commers,  enquiring  of
them,  whether  they  have  any  friends  and  acquaintance  in
the  Towne,  or  no?  If  they  have  none,  then  are  they
conducted  to  one  of  the  best  Innes  of  the  Towne,  and
having  had  entertainment  there,  according  to  their  degree
and  place,  they  are  friendly  dismissed :  and  whatsoever
his  expences  come  to,  the  Stranger  payes  nought  at  all,
but  his  charges  are  defrayed  out  of  the  common  Purse.
This  People  of  Tesegdelt  are  subject  also  unto  jealousie :
howbeit  they  are  most  faithfull  keepers  of  their  promise.
In  the  very  midst  of  the  Towne  stands  a  most  beautifull
and  stately  Temple,  whereunto  belong  a  certaine  number
of  Mahumetan  Priests.

The  most  ancient  Citie  of  Tagtess  is  built  round,  and
standeth  upon  the  top  of  an  Hill :  on  the  sides  whereof
are  certaine  winding  steps  hewen  out  of  the  hard  Rocke.
It  is  about  fourteene  miles  distant  from  Tesegdelt.  By
the  foot  of  the  said  Hill  runnes  a  River,  whereout  the
Women  of  Tagtess  draw  their  water,  neither  have  the
Citizens  any  other  drinke  :  and  although  this  River  be
almost  sixe  miles  from  Tagtess,  yet  a  man  would  thinke,
looking  downe  from  the  Citie  upon  it,  that  it  were  but  halfe
a  mile  distant.  The  way  leading  unto  the  said  River
being  cut  out  of  the  Rocke,  in  forme  of  a  paire  of  Staires,
is  very  narrow.  While  I  was  in  that  Countrey,  there
came  such  a  swarme  of  Locusts,  that  they  devoured  the
greatest  part  of  their  Cornes  which  were  as  then  ripe :
insomuch  that  all  the  upper  part  of  the  ground  was  covered

364

JOHN LEO ON AFRICA  a.d.

c.  1526.
with  Locusts. Which  was  in  the  yeere  of  the  Hegeira
919.  that  is,  in  the  yeere  of  our  Lord  15 10.

Fifteene  miles  Southward  from  Tagtess  stands  another  Tfo  Towne  of
Towne  called  Eitdeuet. In  the  said  Towne  are  Jewes  of
all  Occupations : and  some  there  are  which  affirme,  that
the first Inhabitants of this Towne came by naturall
descent  from  King  David  :  but  so  soone  as  the  Mahumetan  Jewes.
Religion had infected that place, their  owne  Law and
Religion  ceased. Here  are  great  store  of  most  cunning
Lawyers,  which  are  perfectly  well  seene  in  the  Lawes  and  Lawyers.
constitutions  of  that  Nation : for,  I  my  selfe  saw  a  very
aged  man,  who  could  most  readily  repeat  a  whole  Volume  Learned  Men.
written  in  their  Language,  called  by  them  Elmudevuana,  Law-bookes.
that  is  to  say,  the  Bodie  of  the  whole  Law. The  said
Volume  is  divided  into  three  Tomes,  wherein  all  difficult
questions  are  dissolved : together  with  certaine  Counsels
or  Commentaries  of  a  famous  Author,  which  they  call
Melic.

This  Culeihat  Elmuridin  is  a  Castle  built  upon  the  top  ^I)v^'  771*-!
of  a certaine high Mountaine, having round about it wimuridin
divers  other Mountaines of  a  like heighth, which  are  that  is  to  say,
environed  with  craggie  Rocks  and  huge  Woods. There  The  Rock  of
is  no  passage  unto  this  Castle,  but  onely  a  certaine  narrow  disciples,  a
path  upon  one  side  of  the  Mountaine. By  the  one  side asteoJ ea-
thereof  stands  a  Rocke,  and  upon  the  other-side  the  Moun-
taine of  Tesegdelt  is  within  halfe  a  mile,  and  it  is  distant
from  Eitdeuet  almost  eighteene  miles. This  Castle  was
built  even  in  our  time  by  a  certaine  Apostata,  or  renouncer  A  pestiferous
of the Mahumetan religion, called by them Homar  Manumetan
Seijef ; who  being  first  a  Mahumetan  Preacher  unto  the
people,  propounded  unto  a  great  number  of  Disciples  and
Sectaries, whom hee had drawn to be of  his opinion,
certain  new  points  of  religion. This  fellow  seeing  that
he  prevailed  so  with  his  Disciples,  that  they  esteemed  him
for  some  petty-god,  became  of  a  false  Preacher  a  most
cruell  tyrant,  and  his  government  lasted  for  twelve  yeares.
Hee  was  the  chiefe  cause  of  the  destruction  and  ruine  of
the  whole  Province. At  length  he  was  slaine  by  his  owne

365

A.D.

c.  1526.

Igdingil  and
Tefethne  are
here  omitted
for  brevitie.

The  Inhabi-
tants of  the
Mountaines  in
Hea.

Need/es  not
used.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

wife,  because  he  had  unlawfully  lien  with  her  daughter
which  she  had  by  her  former  husband.  And  then  was
his  perverse  and  lewd  dealing  laid  open  unto  all  men  :  for
hee  is  reported  to  have  been  utterly  ignorant  of  the  lawes,
and  of  all  good  knowledge.  Wherefore  not  long  after  his
decease,  all  the  inhabitants  of  the  region  gathering  their
forces  together,  slew  every  one  of  his  Disciples  and  false
Sectaries.  Howbeit,  the  Nephew  of  the  said  Apostata
was  left  alive  ;  who  afterward  in  the  same  Castle  endured
a  whole  yeares  siege  of  his  adversaries,  and  repelled  them,
insomuch  that  they  were  constrained  to  depart.  Yea,
even  untill  this  day  he  molesteth  the  people  of  Hea,  and
those  which  inhabite  neere  unto  him,  with  continuall
warre,  living  upon  robberie  and  spoile  ;  for  which  purpose
he  hath  certaine  Horsemen,  which  are  appointed  to  watch
and  to  pursue  travellers,  sometimes  taking  Cattell,  and
sometimes  men  captives.  He  hath  likewise  certaine
Gunners,  who,  although  travellers  be  a  good  distance  off
(for  the  common  high-way  standeth  almost  a  mile  from
the  Castle)  will  put  them  in  great  feare.  Howbeit,  all
people  doe  so  deadly  hate  him,  that  they  will  not  suffer
him  to  till  one  foote  of  ground,  or  to  beare  any  dominion
without  the  said  Mountaine.  This  man  hath  caused  his
Grandfathers  body  to  be  honourably  buried  in  his  Castle,
suffering  him  to  be  adored  of  his  people,  as  if  he  were  a
God.  Passing  by  that  way  upon  a  certaine  time,  I
escaped  their  very  bullets  narrowly.

The  greatest  part  of  the  people  of  Hea  dwelleth  upon
mountaines,  some  whereof  being  called  Ideuacal  (for  so
are  they  named)  inhabite  upon  that  part  of  Atlas,  which
stretcheth  it  selfe  from  the  Ocean  Sea  Eastward,  as  farre  as
Igilingigil ;  and  this  ridge  of  mountaines  divideth  Hea
from  Sus.  The  breadth  of  this  mountaine  is  three  dayes
journey.  It  is  replenished  with  inhabitants  and  country
Villages.  Their  ordinarie  food  is  Barly,  Goates-flesh,  and
Hony.  Shirts  they  weare  none  at  all,  nor  yet  any  other
garments  which  are  sowne  together ;  for  there  is  no  man
among  them  which  knoweth  how  to  use  the  needle  :  but

366

JOHN LEO ON AFRICA  a.d,

c.  1526.
such  apparell  as  they  have,  hangeth  by  a  knot  upon  their
shoulders.  Their  women  weare  silver  rings  upon  their  ^n&  and
eares,  some  three,  and  some  more.  They  have  silver
buttons  of  so  great  a  scantling,  that  each  one  weigheth
an  ounce,  wherewith  they  fasten  their  apparell  upon  their
shoulders,  to  the  end  it  may  not  fall  off.  The  nobler  and
richer  sort  of  people  among  them  weare  silver  rings  upon
their  fingers  and  leggs :  but  such  as  are  poore,  weare  rings
only  of  iron  or  ot  copper.  There  are  likewise  certaine
Horses  in  this  Region,  being  so  smal  of  stature  and  so
swift,  as  it  is  wonderfull.  Here  may  you  find  great  plentie
of  wild  Goats,  Hares,  &  Deere,  and  yet  none  of  the  people
are  delighted  in  hunting.  Many  fountaines  are  here  to
be  found,  and  great  abundance  of  trees,  but  especially
of  Walnut-trees.  The  greater  part  of  this  people  liveth
after  the  Arabians  manner,  often  changing  their  places  of
habitation.  A  kind  of  Daggers  they  use,  which  are  broad
and  crooked  like  a  wood-knife ;  and  their  Swords  are  as
thicke  as  Sithes,  wherewith  they  mow  Hay.  When  they
goe  to  the  warres,  they  carrie  three  or  foure  hunting
Toyles  with  them.  In  all  the  said  mountaine  are  neither
Judges,  Priests,  or  Temples  to  be  found.  So  ignorant
they  are  of  learning,  that  not  one  among  them  either
loveth,  or  embraceth  the  same.  They  are  all  most  lewd
and  wicked  people,  and  apply  their  minds  unto  all
kind  of  villanie.  It  was  told  the  Seriffb  in  my  presence,
that  the  foresaid  mountaine  was  able  to  affoord  twentie
thousand  souldiers  for  a  neede.

This  mountaine  also  is  a  part  of  Atlas,  beginning  from  The  Moun-
the  mountaine  last  before  mentioned,  and  extending  it  t(^ie  ca^ed
selfe  Eastward  for  the  space  of  about  fiftie  miles,  as  farre
as  the  mountaine  of  Nifif,  in  the  Territorie  of  Maroco  ;
and  it  divideth  a  good  part  of  Hea  from  the  Region  of
Sus  before  named.  It  aboundeth  with  inhabitants,  which
are  of  a  most  barbarous  and  savage  disposition.  Horses
they  have  great  plentie  :  they  goe  to  warre  oftentimes  with
the  Arabians  which  border  upon  them ;  neither  will  they
permit  any  of  the said  Arabians  to  come  within their

367

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

c.  1526.

Dominions. There  are  no  Townes  nor  Castles  upon  all

this  mountaine  :  howbeit,  they  have  certaine  Villages  and

Cottages,  wherein  the  better  sort  doe  hide  their  heads.

Great  store  of  Noblemen  or  Governours  they  have  in  all

places,  unto  whom  the  residue  are  very  obedient. Their

ground yeeldeth Barly  and Mill in abundance. They

have  everie  where  many  fountaines,  which  being  dispersed

over  the  whole  Province,  doe  at  length  issue  into  that

River,  which  is  called  in  their  language  Siffaia. Their

apparell is somewhat decent : also they possesse great

Plenty  of  Iron,  quantitie  of  Iron,  which  is  from  thence  transported  into

[II.  vi.  772.]  other  places ; and  these  people  are  well  given  to  thrift

Store  of  J  ewes,  and  good  husbandrie. Great  numbers  of  Jewes  remaine

in  this  Region,  which  live  as  stipendarie  souldiers  under

divers  Princes,  and  are  continually  in  Armes ; and  they

Carraum,  that  are  reputed  and  called  by  other  Jewes  in  Africa,  Carraum ;

is, cnpture- tkat  jg  tQ  Heretikes. They  have  store  of  Boxe,  of

men  *  for  t/iex  *  ,  »

admitted  not Mastick,  and  of  high  Walnut-trees. Unto  their  Argans

the  traditions,  (for  so  they  call  a  kind  of  Olives  which  they  have)  they
put  nuts ; out  of  which  two  simples  they  expresse  very
bitter  Oyle,  using  it  for  a  sauce  to  some  of  their  meates,
and  powring  it  into  their  lampes. I  heard  divers  of  their
principall  men  avouch,  that  they  were  able  to  bring  into
the  field  five  and  twenty  thousand  most  expert  souldiers.
Of  the  Moun- This  mountaine  is not to be  accounted  any  part of
tame  of  Iron, Atlas . for  }t  beginneth  Northward  from  the  Ocean,  and
^alledGebel- Southward it extendeth to the River of Tensift, and
elhadith.  divideth  Hea  from  Duccala  and  Maroco. The  inhabi-

tants are  called  Regraga.  Upon  this  hill  are  waste  Desarts,
cleare  Fountaines,  and  abundance  of  hony,  and  of  Oyle
Arganick,  but  of  Corne  and  Pulse  great  scarcitie,  unlesse
they  make  provision  thereof  out  of  Duccala.  Few  rich
men  are  here  to  bee  found,  but  they  are  all  most  devout
and  religious  after  their  manner.  Upon  the  top  of  this
mountaine  are  many  Hermites,  which  live  onely  upon  the
fruites  of  certaine  trees,  and  drinke  water.  They  are  a
most  faithfull  and  peaceable  Nation.  Whosoever  among
them  is  apprehended  for  theft  or  any  other  crime,  is  forth-

368

to

^^  *-~  .^^

fSeptmirinj

i  [J  i  i  id

*s :^r>

I I II EZE

£  TVVt J  J  5  v  4

Tiff - s^ (V^iKS^

:i  I i i i

fJ"

i i i l

Feis^/l

j  i  i  -t --Ln

FAILS

u

;J5^ £decfenaj>Jrtni'rtr<

*te+£

.SerraCarnacara

C-faCani

-&-.A  uamjv

j1:'

AfavXn  et Cafun

-/T*

clearer
m'flSiechi  \T^^

"%

w

Serra  Verde

pofuVJi

rMARRVCCO^

Aak

WtfrtJ

tittfc

^Michis

s  _r

}°.

Xiclgaumhx

ideuacal A4L
jfvbi  Jdc va;  ^  % -%#

Xalip«?p

^>

44-

vi

*Js

%<£

h^Gos^ueflcm r  \ JCUX ^<J^

^^  Serra  de  Hah  a. .,

. .  j?ru« V!gij^wrd4antt  empty
tycehwf \^±riim

.liejhtduon  *i7^L

Anin  'TewxejX  ^

.  Uclouotn  eictium. <>\^<^^*.
ACtt'Cfahitixntur

Utla.

•rdza.

kMuftnvidar'

t

MAROCCHI
RE  G'NUM  J

"^Mlfc.

Hi

\ I L.J.

'ZXfflluirui  Gcrnumisa j~j

HONDIUS HIS MAP OF THE KINGDOM OF MOROCCO

JOHN LEO ON AFRICA  a.d.

c.  1526.
with  banished  the  countrey  for  certaine  yeares.  So  great
is  their  simplicitie,  that  whatsoever  they  see  the  Hermites
doe,  they  esteeme  it  as  a  miracle.  They  are  much
oppressed  with  the  often  invasions  of  their  neighbours
the  Arabians ;  wherefore  this  quiet  Nation  choose  rather
to  pay  yearely  tribute,  then  to  maintaine  warre.

Now  comes  the  Region  of  Sus  to  be  considered  of,  ***  Region  of
being  situate  beyond  Atlas,  over  against  the  Territorie  of
Hea,  that  is  to  say,  in  the  extreme  part  of  Africa.  West-
ward it  beginneth  from  the  Ocean  Sea,  and  Southward
from  the  Sandie  Desarts  :  on  the  North  it  is  bounded  with
the  utmost  Towne  of  Hea ;  and  on  the  East  with  that
mightie  River  whereof  the  whole  Region  is  named.
Wherefore  beginning  from  the  West,  we  will  describe  all
those  Cities  and  places  which  shall  seeme  to  be  worthy  of
memorie.

Three  small  Townes  were  built  by  the  ancient  Africans  Of  the  Towne
upon  the  Sea  shoare  (each  being  a  mile  distant  from  other)  °*  essa'
in  that  very  place  where  Atlas  takes  his  beginning :  all
which  three  are  called  by  one  onely  name,  to  wit,  Messa ;
and  are  invironed  with  a  wall  built  of  white  stones.
Through  these  three  runneth  a  certaine  great  River,  called
Sus,  in  their  language :  this  River  in  Summer  is  so
destitute  of  water,  that  a  man  may  easily  without  perill
passe  over  it  on  foote  ;  but  it  is  not  so  in  the  Winter-time.
They  have  then  certaine  small  barkes,  which  are  not  meete
to  saile  upon  this  River.  The  place  where  the  foresaid
three  Townes  are  situate,  aboundeth  greatly  with  Palme
trees,  neither  have  they  in  a  manner  any  other  wealth  ;
and  yet  their  Dates  are  but  of  small  worth,  because  they  &****  which
will  not  last  above  one  yeare.  All  the  inhabitants  exercise
husbandry,  especially  in  the  moneths  of  September  and  '

Aprill,  what  time  their  River  encreaseth.  And  in  May
their  Corne  groweth  to  ripenesse.  But  if  in  the  two
foresaid  moneths  the  River  encreaseth  not  according  to  the
wonted  manner,  their  harvest  is  then  nothing  worth.
Cattell  are  very  scarce  among  them.  Not  farre  from  the
sea-side  they  have  a  Temple,  which  they  greatly  esteeme  Holy  Temple.
v  369  2  A

A.D.

c.  1526.

Great  store  of
Whales.

Superstitious
conceit.

A  Whales  Rib
of  incredible
greatnesse.

Amber.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

and  honour.  Out  of  which,  Historiographers  say,  that
the  same  Prophet,  of  whom  their  great  Mahumet  foretold,
should  proceed.  Yea,  some  there  are  which  sticke  not  to
affirme,  that  the  Prophet  Jonas  was  cast  forth  by  the  Whale
upon  the  shoare  of  Messa,  when  he  was  sent  to  preach  unto
the  Ninivites.  The  rafters  and  beames  of  the  said
Temple  are  of  Whales  bone.  And  it  is  a  usuall  thing
amongst  them,  to  see  Whales  of  an  huge  and  monstrous
bignesse  cast  up  dead  upon  their  shoare,  which  by  reason
of  their  hugenesse  and  strange  deformitie,  may  terrifie  and
astonish  the  beholders.  The  common  people  imagine,
that,  by  reason  of  a  certaine  secret  power  and  vertue
infused  from  heaven  by  God  upon  the  said  temple,  each
Whale  which  would  swim  past  it,  can  by  no  meanes  escape
death.  Which  opinion  had  almost  perswaded  me,
especially  when  at  my  being  there,  I  my  selfe  saw  a  mighty
Whale  cast  up,  unlesse  a  certaine  Jew  had  told  me,  that
it  was  no  such  strange  matter :  for  (quoth  he)  there  lie
certaine  rockes  two  miles  into  the  Sea  on  either  side,  and
as  the  Sea  moves,  so  the  Whales  move  also ;  and  if  they
chance  to  light  upon  a  rocke,  they  are  easily  wounded  to
death,  and  so  are  cast  upon  the  next  shoare.  This  reason
more  prevailed  with  me,  then  the  opinion  of  the  people.
My  selfe  (I  remember  being  in  this  Region  at  the  same  time
when  my  Lord  the  Seriffo  bare  rule  over  it,)  was  invited
by  a  certaine  Gentleman,  and  was  by  him  conducted  into
a  Garden,  where  he  shewed  me  a  Whales  rib  of  so  great
a  size,  that  lying  upon  the  ground  with  the  convexe  or
bowing  side  upward,  in  manner  of  an  arch,  it  resembled
a  gate,  the  hollow  or  inward  part  whereof  aloft  we  could
not  touch  with  our  heads,  as  we  rode  upon  our  Camels
backs :  this  rib  (he  said)  had  laine  there  above  an  hundred
yeares,  and  was  kept  as  a  miracle.  Here  may  you  find
upon  the  sea-shore  great  store  of  Amber,  which  the
Portugal  and  Fessan  Merchants  fetch  from  thence  for  a
verie  meane  price  :  for  they  scarcely  pay  a  Duckat  for  a
whole  ounce  of  most  choice  and  excellent  Amber.  Amber
(as  some  thinke)  is  made  of  Whales  dung,  and  (as  others

370

JOHN LEO ON AFRICA  ad.

c.  1526.
suppose)  of  their  Sperma  or  Seede,  which  being  consolidate
and  hardned  by  the  Sea,  is  cast  upon  the  next  shoare.

Teijeut containeth foure thousand families, and
standeth not farre  from the  River  of Sus. The soyle  [II.  vi.  773.]
adjacent  is  most  fruitfull  for  graine,  for  Barly,  and  for  all
kind  of  Pulse. They  have  here  likewise  a  good  quantitie
of  Sugar  growing ; howbeit,  because  they  know  not  how  Store  of  Sugar.
to  presse,  boyle,  and  trim  it,  they  cannot  have  it  but  blacke
and  unsavorie  :  wherefore  so  much  as  they  can  spare,  they
sell  unto  the  Merchants  of  Maroco,  of  Fez,  and  of  the
land  of  Negros. Of  Dates  likewise  they  have  plentie ;
neither  use they  any  mony  besides the  Gold  which  is
digged  out  of  their  own  native  soile. The  women  weare
upon  their  heads  a  piece  of  cloth  worth  a  duckat. Silver
they  have  none,  but  such  as  their  women  adorne  themselves
with. The  least  Iron-coine  used  amongst  them,  weigheth  Iron  Coyne.
almost  an  ounce. No  fruites  take  plentifully  upon  their
soile  but  onely  Figgs,  Grapes,  Peaches,  and  Dates. Here
is  that  excellent  Leather  dressed,  which  is  called  Leather  Cordovan
of  Maroco ; twelve  hides  whereof  are  here  sold  for  sixe *S
Duckats,  and  at  Fez  for  eight. That  part  of  this  Region
which  lieth  toward  Atlas  hath  many  Villages,  Townes,  and
Hamlets  :  but  the  South  part  thereof  is  utterly  destitute  of
inhabitants, and  subject  to the  Arabians, which  border
upon  it. In  the  midst  of  this  Citie  standeth  a  faire  and
stately  Temple,  which  they  call  The  greatest,  and  The  A  Temple
chiefest,  through  the  verie  midst  whereof  they  have  caused  f  10^  w  u
a  part  of  the  foresaid  River  to  runne. The  inhabitants  runneth.
are  sterne  and  uncivill,  being  so  continually  exercised  in
warres,  that  they  have  not  one  day  of  quiet. Each  part
of  the  Citie  hath  a  severall  Captaine  and  Governour,  who
all  of  them  together  doe  rule  the  Common-wealth  : but
their  authoritie continueth never  above three moneths,
which  being  expired,  three  other  are  chosen  in  their  roome.

The  Towne  of  Tarodant  built  by  the  ancient  Africans, Tarodant,  a
containeth  about three thousand housholds. For  when  Towne  of  Sus.
the  Family  of  Marin  governed  at  Fez,  part  of  them  also
inhabited  Sus,  and  in  those  dayes  Sus  was  the  seate  of  the

37i

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

c.  1526.

King  of  Fez  his  Vice-roy.  All  authoritie  is  committed
unto  their  Noble,  or  principall  men,  who  governe  foure  by
foure,  sixe  moneths  onely.

Tedsi,  a  Tedsi  being  a  very  great  Towne,  and  built  many  yeares

owne  of  us.  agQe  jn  a  most  pleasant  and  fertile  place  by  the  Africans,

containeth  moe  then  foure  thousand  families  :  it  is  distant

from  Tarodant  Eastward  thirtie  miles,  from  the  Ocean  sea

sixtie  miles,  and  from  Atlas  twentie. Here  growTeth  great

Store  of  Sugar  abundance  of  Corne,  of  Sugar,  and  of  wild  Woad.  You
oj  'oa  .  gjjaj]  £ncj  jn  thjg  Ckje  many  Merchants,  which  come  out  of
the  land  of  Negros  for  trafficks  sake.  The  Citizens  are
great  lovers  of  peace,  and  of  all  civilitie  :  and  they  have  a
flourishing  Common-wealth.  The  whole  Citie  is  governed
by  sixe  Magistrates  which  are  chosen  by  lots  :  howbeit,
their  government  lasteth  for  sixteene  moneths  onely.  The
River  of  Sus  is  distant  three  miles  from  hence.  Here
dwell  many  Jewes,  which  are  most  cunning  Gold-smiths,
Carpenters,  and  such  like  Artificers.  They  have  a  very
stately  Temple,  and  many  Priests  and  Doctors  of  the  Law,
which  are  maintained  at  the  publike  charge.  Every
Mundy  great  numbers  of  Arabians  both  of  the  Plaines,
and  of  the  Mountaines  come  hither  to  Market.

The  Citie  of  Jn  aU  Sus  there  is  no  Citie  comparable  unto  that  which
agauost.  jg  commonly  called  Tagauost,  for  it  containeth  above  eight
thousand  housholds  ;  the  wall  thereof  is  built  of  rough
stones.  From  the  Ocean  it  is  distant  about  threescore
miles,  and  about  fiftie  miles  Southward  of  Atlas  :  and  the
report  is,  that  the  Africans  built  this  Citie.  About  ten
miles  from  this  place  lieth  the  River  of  Sus  :  here  are  great
store  of  Artificers  and  of  shops,  and  the  people  of  Tagauost
are  divided  into  three  parts.  They  have  continuall  civill
warres  among  themselves,  and  one  part  have  the  Arabians
alwaies  on  their  side  ;  who  for  better  pay  will  take  part
sometime  with  one  side,  and  sometime  with  the  contrarie.
Of  Corne  and  Cattell  here  is  great  abundance  ;  but  their
Wooll  is  exceeding  course.  In  this  Citie  are  made  cer-
taine  kinds  of  apparell,  which  are  usually  carried  for
merchandize  once  a  yeere  to  Tombuto,  to  Gualata,  and

372

JOHN LEO ON AFRICA  a.d.

c.  1526.
to  other  places  in  the  land  of  Negros.  Their  Market  is
twice  every  weeke :  their  attire  is  somewhat  decent  and
comely  :  their  women  are  beautifull :  but  their  men  are  of
a  tawnie  and  swart  colour,  by  reason  they  are  descended  of
blacke  fathers,  and  white  mothers.

The  Mountaine  Hanchisa  beginneth  Westward  from  The  Moun-
Atlas,  and  from  thence  stretcheth  almost  fortie  mile  as  *%?*  °£
Eastward.  The  inhabitants  of  this  Mountaine  are  such
valiant  foot-men,  that  one  of  them  will  encounter  two
Horsemen.  The  soile  will  yeeld  no  Corne  at  all  but
Barly  ;  howbeit  hony  there  is  in  great  abundance.  With
snow  they  are  almost  at  all  times  troubled :  but  how
patiently  and  strongly  they  can  endure  the  cold,  a  man
may  easily  ghesse,  for  that  the  whole  yeare  throughout
they  weare  one  single  garment  onely.

The Mountaine llalem beginneth Westward from  Ths  Moun-
the  Mountaine  aforesaid ; on  the  East  it  abutteth  upon  *?jnf  °*
the  region  of  Guzula,  and  Southward  upon  the  Plaines  of
Sus. The  inhabitants  are  valiant,  having  great  store  of
Horses. They  are  at  continuall  warre  among  themselves
for  certaine  Silver  mines ; so  that  those  wThich  have  the  Mines  of
better  hand,  digge  as  much  Silver  as  they  can,  and  dis-
tribute to  every  man  his  portion,  untill  such  time  as  they
bee  restrained  from  digging  by  others.

The  region  of  Maroco  beginneth  Westward  from  the  "*  situation
Mountaine  of  Nefisa,  stretching  Eastward  to  the  Moun-  ^  Retiln  of
taine  of  Hadimei,  and  Northward  even  to  that  place  where  Maroco.
the  most  famous  Rivers  of  Tensift  and  Asfinual  meete
together,  that  is  to  say,  upon  the  East-border  of  Hea.
This  region  is  in  a  manner  three  square,  being  a  most
pleasant  Country,  and  abounding  with  many  droves  and  [II.  vi.  774.]
flocks  of  Cattell : it  is  greene every  where, and most
fertile of all things, which serve for foode, or which
delight  the  sences  of  smelling  or  seeing. It  is  altogether
a  plaine  country.

Upon  a  certaine  hill  of  Atlas  named  Ghedmin  standeth
a  towne,  which  was  built  (as  some  report)  by  the  ancient
Africans,  and  called  by  the  name  of  Tenessa,  being  a  most Tenessa.

373

A.D.

c.  1526.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

strong  and  defensible  place,  and  being  distant  about  eight
miles  Eastward  from  the  river  of  Asifinuall.  At  the  foot
of  the  said  hill  lieth  a  most  excellent  plaine,  which,  were
it  not  for  the  lewd  theevish  Arabians,  would  yeeld  an
incomparable  crop.  And  because  the  inhabitants  of
Tenessa  are  deprived  of  this  notable  commodity,  they  till
onely  that  ground  which  is  upon  the  side  of  the  mountaine,
and  which  lieth  betweene  the  towne  and  the  river.
Neither  doe  they  enjoy  that  gratis ;  for  they  yeerely
pay  unto  the  Arabians  for  tribute  the  third  part  of  their
corne.
Tkewemmmm  Upon  the  top  of  a  certaine  high  mountaine  was  built
of  Delgumuha.  -n  our  tjme  a  mcst  large  and  impregnable  Fort,  being
invironed  on  all  sides  with  divers  other  mountaines,  and
called  by  the  inhabitants  New  Delgumuha.  Beneath  the
said  mountaine  springeth  Asifinuall,  which  word  signifieth
in  the  African  tongue,  the  River  of  Rumor,  because  that
breaking  foorth  by  the  side  of  the  hill  with  a  monstrous
noise,  it  maketh  a  most  deepe  gulfe,  much  like  unto  that,
which  the  Italians  call  Inferno  di  Tivoli.  The  said  Fort
containeth  almost  a  thousand  families.  They  have  alwayes
beene  great  lovers  of  civility,  and  have  worne  neat  and
decent  apparell ;  neither  shall  you  find  any  corner  in  the
whole  towne  which  is  not  well  peopled.  In  this  towne
are  plentie  of  Artificers,  for  it  is  but  fiftie  miles  from  the
Citv  of  Maroco.

Upon  a  certaine  part  of  Atlas  standeth  a  Citie  called
Imizmizi.  Westward  it  is  distant  from  new  Delgumuha
about  fourteene  miles  :  and  this  citie  the  Arabians  are
reported  to  have  built.  Xeere  unto  this  Citie  lieth  the
common  high  Wav  to  Guzula  over  the  mountaines  of
Atlas,  being  commonly  called  Burris,  that  is,  A  way
strewed  with  feathers  :  because  snow  falls  often  thereupon,
which  a  man  would  thinke  rather  to  be  feathers  then  snow.
Not  farre  from  this  towne  likewise  there  is  a  verv  faire
and  large  plaine,  which  extendeth  for  the  space  of  thirtie
miles,  even  to  the  territory  of  Maroco.  This  most  fertile
plaine  yeeldeth  such  excellent  corne,  as  (to  my  remem-

374

The  Citie  of

Imizmizi.

JOHN LEO OX AFRICA  a.d.

c.  1526.
brance)  I  never  saw  the  like. Saving  that  the  Arabians
and  souldiers  of  Maroco  doe  so  much  molest  the said
plaine  countrey,  that  the  greater  part  thereof  is  destitute
of  the  inhabitants :

This  noble  City  of  Maroco  in  Africa  is  accounted  to  be  A  most  exact

one  of  the  greatest  cities  in  the  world. It  is  built  upon  a  descriPtt0»  °f
1  n  11 1 «  1  r  -ii-  ..  r  the  great  and

most  large  field,  being  about  rourteene  miles  distant  rrom  famus  city  of

Atlas. One  Joseph  the  sonne  of  Tesfin,  and  king  of  the Maroco,  as  it

tribe  or  people  called  Luntuna,  is  reported  to  have  beene  ««  100.

the  founder  of  this  Citie,  at  that  very  time  when  he  con-  Veres  agoe'

ducted  his  troupes  into  the  region  of  Maroco,  and  setled  fouvjer  0f

himselfe not farre from the common high-way, which  Maroco.

stretcheth  from  Agmeg  over  the  mountaines  of  Atlas,  to

those  desarts  where  the  foresaid  tribe  or  people  doe  usually

inhabite. Heere may you behold most stately and

wonderfull  workmanship  : for  all  their  buildings  are so

cunningly  and artificially contrived, that a man cannot

easily  describe  the  same. This  huge  &  mighty  City,  at  Maroco  tn

such  time  as  it  was  governed  by  Hali  the  son  of  King  /^J/*LT*~

Joseph, contained more then one hundred thousand 1 00000,

families. It had foure and twenty gates belonging  families. In

therto,  and  a  wall  of  great  strength  and  thicknes,  which  later  times

was  built  of  white  stone  and  lime. From  this  City  the  before  the  late

c t- -r v 1 1  -  -1  i-  tt  cwill  tropes,

river  or I  ensitt  lietn  about  sixe  miles  distant, hleere -lt  -ls  /^et  t0
may  you  behold  great  abundance  of  Temples,  of  Colledges,  have  beene
of  Bath-stoves,  and  of  Innes,  all  framed  after  the  fashion  much  greater:
and  custome  of  that  region. Some  were  built  by  the  King  onePlaS^  ls
of  the  tribe  of  Luntuna,  and  others  by  Elmuachidin  his  consume^
successor : but  the  most  curious  and  magnificent  Temple 700000.  per-
of  all,  is  that  in  the  midst  of  the  City  which  was  built  by  sons.
Hali  the  first  King  of  Maroco,  and  the  sonne  of  Joseph
aforesaid,  being  commonly  called  the  Temple  of  Hali  ben
Joseph. Howbeit one  Abdul-Mumen which succeeded  Foolish  emula-
him,  to  the  end  he  might  utterly  abolish  the  name  of  Hali,  tl0n-
and might  make himselfe  onely  famous  with posterity,
caused  this  stately  Temple  of  Maroco  to  be  razed,  and
to  be  reedified  somwhat  more  sumptuously  then  before.
Howbeit  he  lost  not  onely  his  expences,  but  failed  of  his

375

A.D.

c.  1526.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Glansor  the
king  of
Maroco.

A  stately
Temple.

*Obscurum.

purpose  also  : for  the  common  people  even  till  this  day
doe  call  the  said  Temple  by  the  first  and  ancientest  name.

Likewise  in  this  City  not  farre  from  a  certaine  rocke  was
built  a  Temple  by  him  that  was  the  second  usurper  over
the  kingdome  of  Maroco  :  after  whose  death  his  nephew
Mansor  enlarged  the  said  Temple  fittie  cubits  on  all  sides,
and  adorned  the  same  with  many  pillars,  which  he  com-
manded to  be  brought  out  of  Spaine  for  that  purpose.
Under  this  Temple  he  made  a  Cisterne  or  vault  as  bigge
as  the  Temple  it  selfe  :  the  roofe  of  the  said  Temple  he
covered  with  lead  :  and  at  every  corner  he  made  leaden
pipes  to  convay  raine  water  into  the  Cisterne  underneath
the  Temple.  The  turret  or  steeple  is  built  of  most  hard
and  well  framed  stone,  like  unto  Vespasian  his  Amphi-
theatrum  at  Rome,  containing  in  compasse  more  then  an
hundreth  elles,  and  in  height  exceeding  the  steeple  of
Bononia.  The  staires  of  the  said  turret  or  steeple  are
each  of  them  nine  handfuls  in  breadth,  the  utmost  side  of
the  wall  is  ten,  and*  the  thicknes  of  the  turret  is  five.
The  said  turret  hath  seven  lofts,  unto  which  the  staires
ascending  are  very  lightsome  :  for  there  are  great  store  of
windowes,  which  to  the  end  they  may  give  more  light,
are  made  broader  within  then  without.  Upon  the  top  of
[II.  vi.  775.]  this  turret  is  built  a  certaine  spire  or  pinnacle  rising  sharpe
in  forme  of  a  sugar-loafe,  and  containing  five  and  twenty
elles  in  compasse,  but  in  height  being  not  much  more  then
two  speares  length  :  the  said  spire  hath  three  lofts  one
above  another,  unto  every  of  which  they  ascend  with
wooden  ladders.  Likewise  on  the  top  of  this  spire
standeth  a  golden  halfe  moone,  upon  a  barre  of  Iron,  with
three  spheares  of  gold  under  it ;  which  golden  spheares  are
so  fastened  unto  the  said  iron  bar  that  the  greatest  is  lowest,
and  the  least  highest.  It  would  make  a  man  giddie  to
looke  downe  from  the  top  of  the  turret ;  for  men  walking
on  the  ground,  be  they  never  so  tall,  seeme  no  bigger
then  a  child  of  one  yeere  old.  From  hence  likewise  may
you  plainely  escrie  the  promontory  of  Azaphi,  which  not-
withstanding  is an hundreth and thirtie miles distant.

376

JOHN LEO ON AFRICA  a.d.

c.  1526.
But  mountaines  (you  will  say)  by  reason  of  their  huge
bignesse  may  easily  be  seene  a  farre  off  :  howbeit  from  this
turret  a  man  may  in  cleere  weather  most  easily  see  fiftie
miles  into  the  plaine  countreys.  The  inner  part  of  the
said  Temple  is  not  very  beautifull.  But  the  roofe  is  most
cunningly  and  artificially  vaulted,  the  timbers  being  framed
and  set  together  with  singular  workmanship,  so  that  I
have  not  seene  many  fairer  Temples  in  all  Italy.  And
albeit  you  shall  hardly  find  any  Temple  in  the  whole  world
greater  then  this,  yet  it  is  very  meanly  frequented  ;  for  the
people  doe  never  assemble  there  but  onely  upon  fridayes.
Yea  a  great  part  of  this  City,  especially  about  the  aforesaid
Temple  lieth  so  desolate  &  void  of  inhabitants,  that  a  man
cannot  without  great  difficulty  passe,  by  reason  of  the
ruines  of  many  houses  lying  in  the  way.  Under  the  Great  store  of
porch  of  this  Temple  it  is  reported  that  in  old  time  there  ^ookes  tn  old
were  almost  an  hundreth  shops  of  sale-bookes,  and  as  many  .  Maroco
on  the  other  side  over  against  them  :  but  at  this  time  I
thinke  there  is  not  one  Book-seller  in  all  the  whole  City
to  be  found.  And  scarcely  is  the  third  part  of  this  City
inhabited.

Within the wals of Maroco are Vines, Palme-trees,  State  of  it
great  Gardens,  and  most  fruitfull  Corne-fields  :  for  without lS2^-
their wals they can till no ground, by reason of the
Arabians  often inrodes. Know  ye  this for  a  certainty,
that  the  said  City  is  growen  to  untimely  decay  and  old
age  : for  scarcely  five  hundreth  and  sixe  yeeres  are  past,
since  the  first  building  thereof,  forasmuch  as  the  founda-
tions  thereof  wrere  laid  in  the  time  of  Joseph  the  sonne
of  Tesfin,  that  is  to  say,  in  the  foure  hundreth  twentie  and
fourth  yeere  of  the  Hegeiria. Which  decay  I  can  impute Causes  of  the
to  none  other  cause,  but  to  the  injurie  of  continuall  warres,  ***)  °f
and  to  the  often  alterations  of  Magistrates  and  of  the af0C0'
common-wealth. After  King  Joseph  succeeded  his  sonne
Hali,  and  the  sonne  of  Hali  was  ordained  governour  after

his  fathers  decease. In  whose  time  sprung  up  a  factious _. .  r
11  r  iv  /  1  -r» 1 Elmaheh  a

crue,  by  the  meanes  or  a  certaine  Mahumetan  Preacher  fact\ous
named  Elmaheli,  being  a  man  both  borne  and  brought  up  preacher.

377

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

c.  1526.

in  the  mountaines.  The  said  Elmaheli  having  levied  a
great  army,  waged  warre  against  Abraham  his  soveraigne
Lord.  Whereupon  King  Abraham  conducting  another
armie  against  him,  had  marveilous  ill  successe :  and  after
the  battell  ended,  his  passage  into  the  City  of  Maroco  was
so  stopped  and  restrained,  that  he  was  forced  with  a  few
souldiers,  which  remained  yet  alive,  to  flee  Eastward  to
the  mountaines  of  Atlas.  But  Elmaheli  not  being  satisfied
with  expelling  his  true  Soveraigne  out  of  his  owne  King-
dome,  commanded  one  of  the  Captaines  called  Abdul
Mumen,  with  the  one  halfe  of  his  armie  to  pursue  the
distressed  King,  while  himself  with  the  other  halfe  laide
siege  to  Maroco.  The  king  with  his  followers  came  at
length  unto  Oran,  hoping  there  to  have  renewed  his  forces.
But  Abdul  Mumen  and  his  great  armie  pursued  the  said
King  so  narrowly,  that  the  Citizens  of  Oran  told  him  in
plaine  termes,  that  they  would  not  hazard  themselves  for
him.  Wherefore  this  unhappie  King  being  utterly  driven
to  dispaire,  set  his  Queene  on  horse-backe  behind  him,
and  so  in  the  night  time  road  foorth  of  the  Citie.  But
The  miserable  perceiving  that  hee  was  discried  and  knowen  by  his
death  of  a  bra-  enemies,  he  fled  foorthwith  unto  a  certaine  rocke  standing
Maroco  and  of  uPon  ^e  sea-shoare :  where,  setting  spurs  to  his  horse-
his  Queene.  *  side,  he  cast  himselfe,  his  most  deare  spouse,  and  his  horse
downe  headlong,  and  was  within  a  while  after  found  slaine
among  the  rockes  and  stones,  by  certaine  which  dwelt
neere  unto  the  place.  Wherefore  Abdul  Mumen  having
gotten  the  victorie,  returned  in  triumphant  manner  toward
Maroco,  where  the  foresaid  Elmaheli  was  deceased  before
his  comming,  in  whose  place  Abdal  was  chosen  King  and
Mahumetan  Prelate  over  the  fortie  disciples,  and  tooke
New  Sect.  ten  persons  to  be  of  his  privy  councell,  which  was  a  new
invention  in  the  law  of  Mahumet.  This  Abdul  Mumen
having  besieged  the  Citie  of  Maroco  for  the  space  of  an
whole  yeere,  at  last  overcame  it :  and  killed  Isaac,  the
onely  sonne  of  King  Abraham  with  his  owne  hand,  he
commanded  all  the  souldiers  and  a  good  part  of  the
Citizens  to  be  slaine. This  mans  posteritie  raigned  from

378

JOHN LEO ON AFRICA  a.d.

c.  1526.
the  five  hundred  sixteenth, to  the  sixe  hundred  sixtie
eight  yeere  of  the  Hegeira,  and  at  length  they  were  dis-
possessed of  the  Kingdome  by  a  certaine  King  of  the  Tribe
called  Marin. The  family  of  Marin  after  the  said  Kings
decease  bare  rule  till  the  yeere  of  the  Hegeira, seven
hundreth  eightie  and  five. The  principall  court  of  this
family  was  holden  for  the  most  part  at  Fez ; but  over
Maroco  were  appointed  Vice-royes  and  Deputies : inso-  In  later  yeeres
much  that  Fez  was  continually  the  head  and  Metropolitan  €(£™j  ™j~
Citie  of  all  Mauritania,  and  of  all  the  Westerne  dominion,  supremacy.
In  the  said  City  of  Maroco  is  a  most  impregnable  Castle,  A  stronge
which,  if  you  consider  the  bignes,  the  walls,  the  towres, Castle.
and  the  gates  built  all  of  perfect  marble,  you  may  well
thinke  it  to  be  a  City  rather  then  a  Castle. Within  this
Castle  there  is  a  stately  Temple,  having  a  most  loftie  and  ^  stateh
high  steeple,  on  the  top  whereof  standeth  an  halfe  moone,  temP
and  under  the  halfe  moone  are  three  golden  spheares  one  P*- V1-  776.]
bigger  then  another,  which  all  of  them  together  weigh  one *ee8>  en
hundreth  and  thirty  thousand  ducates. Some  Kings  there
were,  who  being  allured  with  the  value,  went  about  to
take  downe  the  said  golden  spheares  :  but  they  had  alwayes
some great misfortune or other, which hindred their
attempt : Likewise the said Castle containeth a noble  A  &'eat
Colledge,  which  hath  thirtie  Hals  belonging  thereunto: °  e  ge'
In  the  midst  whereof  is  one  Hall  of  a  marvellous  great-
nesse,  wherein  publike  Lectures  were  most  solemnely  read,
while the studie of  Learning flourished among them.
Such  as  were  admitted  into  this  Colledge  had  their  victuals
and apparell freely  given them. Of their  Professours
some  were  yearely  allowed  an  hundred,  and  some  two
hundred  Duckats,  according  to  the  qualitie  of  their  pro-
fession : neither  would  they  admit  any  to  heare  them
read,  but  such  as  perfectly  understood  what  belonged  to
those Arts which they professed. The wals of this
beautifull  Hall  are  most  stately  adorned  with  painting  and
carving,  especially  of  that  Hall  where  Lectures  were  woont
publikely to be read. All their Porches and vaulted
Roofes  are  made  of  painted  and  glittering  stones,  called

379

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

c.  1526.

in  their  Language  Ezzulleia,  such  as  are  yet  used  in
Spaine.  In  the  midst  of  the  said  building  is  a  most
pleasant  and  cleare  Fountaine,  the  wall  whereof  is  of  white
and  polished  Marble,  albeit  low  built,  as  in  Africa  for  the
most  part  such  wals  are.  I  have  heard  that  in  old  time
here  was  great  abundance  of  Students,  but  at  my  being
there  I  found  but  five  in  all :  and  they  have  now  a  most
senselesse  Professour,  and  one  that  is  quite  void  of  all
humanitie.

Moreover,  the  foresaid  Castle  (as  I  remember)  hath
twelve  Courts  most  curiously  and  artificially  built  by  one
Mansor.  In  the  first  lodged  about  five  hundred  Chris-
tians, which  carryed  Crosse-bowes  before  the  King  whither
soever  he  went.  Not  farre  from  thence  is  the  lodging  of
the  Lord  Chancellour  and  of  the  Kings  Privie  Counsell,
which  House  is  called  by  them,  The  House  of  Affaires.
The  third  is  called,  The  Court  of  Victorie ;  wherein  all
the  Armour  and  Munition  of  the  Citie  is  layed  up.  The
fourth,  belongeth  to  the  great  Master  of  the  Kings  Horse.
Upon  this  Court  three  Stables  adjoyne,  each  one  of  which
Stables  will  containe  two  hundred  Horses.  Likewise
there  are  two  other  Ostleries,  whereof  one  is  for  Mules,
and  the  other  for  an  hundred  of  the  Kings  Horses  onely.
Next  unto  the  Stables  were  two  Barnes  or  Garners  adjoyn-
ing  in  two  severall  places,  in  the  lower  of  which  Barnes
was  layed  Straw,  and  Barley  in  the  other.  There  is  also
another  most  large  place  to  lay  up  Corne  in,  every  Roome
whereof  will  containe  more  then  three  hundred  Bushels.
The  cover  of  the  said  Roome  hath  a  certaine  hole  where-
unto  they  ascend  by  staires  made  of  stone.  Whither  the
beasts  laden  with  Corne  being  come,  they  powre  the  said
Corne  into  the  hole.  And  so  when  they  would  take  any
Corne  from  thence,  they  doe  but  open  certaine  holes  below,
suffering  so  much  Corne  to  come  forth  as  may  serve  their
turnes,  and  that  without  any  labour  at  all.  There  is  like-
wise a  certaine  other  Hall,  where  the  Kings  Sonne,  and
the  Sonnes  of  Noblemen  are  instructed  in  Learning.
Then  may  you  behold  a  certaine  foure-square  building,

380

JOHN LEO ON AFRICA  a.d.

c.  1526.
containing  divers  Galleries  with  faire  Glasse  Windowes,  in
which  Galleries  are  many  Histories  most  curiously  painted  :
heere  likewise  the  glittering  and  gilt  Armour  is  to  be  seene.
Next  unto  this  building  is  another,  wherein  certaine  of
the  Kings  Guard  are  lodged :  then  followes  that  wherein
State-matters  are  discussed :  whereunto  adjoyneth  also
another,  which  is  appointed  for  Ambassadors  to  conferre
with  the  Kings  Privie  Counsell  in.  Likewise  the  Kings
Concubines  and  other  Ladies  of  Honour  have  a  most
convenient  place  assigned  them  :  next  unto  which  standeth
the  Lodging  of  the  Kings  Sonnes.  Not  farre  from  the
Castle  wall,  on  that  side  which  is  next  unto  the  fields,  may
you  behold  a  most  pleasant  and  large  Garden,  contayning
almost  all  kind  of  Trees  that  can  bee  named.

Moreover,  there  is  a  sumptuous  and  stately  Porch  built
of  most  excellent  square  Marble : in  the  midst  whereof
standeth  a  Piller  with  a  Lion  very  artificially  made  of
Marble,  out  of  the  mouth  of  which  Lion  issueth  most  **r/«*r
cleere  and  Christall  water,  falling  into  a  Cisterne  within  y  e>,
the  Porch  :  at  each  corner  of  the  said  Porch  standeth  the
Image  of  a  Leopard  framed  of  white  Marble,  which  is
naturally  adorned  with  certaine  blacke  spots : this  kind
of  parti-coloured  Marble  is  no  where  to  be  found  but  onely
in  a  certaine  place  of  Atlas,  which  is  about  an  hundred
and  fiftie  miles  distant  from  Maroco. Not  farre  from  the
Garden  stands  a  certaine  Wood  or  Parke  walled  round
about : And  here  I  thinke  no  kind  of  wild  beasts  are
wanting : for  heere  you  may  behold  Elephants, Lions,
Stagges, Roes, and such like : howbeit the Lions are
separated  in  a  certaine  place  from  other  beasts,  which  place
even  to  this  day  is  called  The  Lions  Den. Wherefore
such Monuments of Antiquitie as are yet extant in  7,,.  K>
Maroco, albeit they are but few, doe notwithstanding  calledMansor
sufficiently  argue,  what  a  Noble  Citie  it  was  in  the  time  of  was  he  unto
Mansor.  whom  Rasis

At  this  present  all  the  Courts  and  Lodgings  before  ^'{7™

described  lye  utterly  voyd  and  desolate  : except  perhaps  dedicated  his

some  of  the  Kings  Ostlery  which  tend  his  Mules  and  Booh.

381

A.D.

c.  1526.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

The  huge
Dominions  of
King  Mansor.

Horses  do  lye  in  that  Court,  which  we  said  even  now  was
to  lodge  Archers  and  Crosse-bow-men  :  all  the  residue
are  left  for  the  Fowles  of  the  Aire  to  nestle  in.  That
Garden  which  you  might  have  named  a  Paradise  in  old
time,  is  now  become  a  place  where  the  filth  and  dung  of
the  whole  Citie  is  cast  forth.  Where  the  faire  and  stately
Librarie  was  of  old,  at  this  present  there  is  nothing  else  to
be  found,  but  Hens,  Doves,  and  other  such  like  Fowles,
[II.  vi.  777.]  which  build  their  Nests  there.  Certaine  it  is,  that  the
foresaid  Mansor,  whom  we  have  so  often  mentioned,  was
a  most  puissant  and  mighty  Prince  :  for  it  is  well  knowne
that  his  Dominion  stretched  from  the  Towne  of  Messa  to
the  Kingdome  of  Tripolis  in  Barbarie,  which  is  the  most
excellent  Region  of  Africa,  and  so  large,  that  a  man  can
hardly  travell  the  length  thereof  in  fourescore  and  ten
dayes,  or  the  breadth  in  fifteene.  This  Mansor  likewise
was  in  times  past  Lord  of  all  the  Kingdome  of  Granada
in  Spaine.  Yea,  his  Dominion  in  Spaine  extended  from
TarifFa  to  Aragon,  and  over  a  great  part  of  Castilia  and
of  Portugall.  Neither  did  this  Jacob,  surnamed  Mansor,
only  possesse  the  foresaid  Dominions,  but  also  his  Grand-
father Abdul  Mumen,  his  father  Joseph,  and  his  Sonne
Mahumet  Enasir,  who  beeing  vanquished  in  the  King-
dome  of  Valentia,  lost  threescore  thousand  Souldiers,
Horsemen  and  Footmen :  howbeit  himselfe  escaped  and
returned  to  Maroco.  The  Christians  being  encouraged
with  this  victorie,  refrayned  not  from  Warre,  till,  within
thirtie  yeares  space,  they  had  wonne  all  the  Townes  follow-
ing, to  wit,  Valentia,  Denia,  Alcauro,  Murcia,  Cartagena,
Cordova,  Sivillia,  Iaen,  and  Ubeda.  After  which  unhappie
warre  succeeded  the  decay  of  Maroco.  The  said  Mahumet
deceasing,  left  behind  him  ten  Sonnes  of  a  full  and  perfect
age,  who  contended  much  about  the  Kingdome.  Here-
upon it  came  to  passe,  while  the  Brethren  were  at  discord,
and  assayled  each  other  with  mutuall  warres,  that  the
people  of  Fez  called  Marini,  and  the  Inhabitants  of  other
Regions  adjacent,  began  to  usurpe  the  Government.  The
people  called  Habduluad  enjoyed  Tremizen,  expelling  the

382

The  Chris-
tians happie
successe
against  the
Moores.

JOHN LEO ON AFRICA  a.d.

c.  1526.
King  of  Tunis,  and  ordayning  some  other,  whom  they
pleased,  in  his  stead.  Now  have  you  heard  the  end  of
Mansor  his  Progenie  and  Successors.  The  Kingdome
therefore  was  translated  unto  one  Jacob  the  Sonne  of
Habdulach,  who  was  the  first  King  of  the  Family  called
Marin.  And  at  length  the  famous  Citie  of  Maroco  it
selfe,  by  reason  of  the  Arabians  continuall  out-rages,  fell
into  most  extreme  calamitie  :  so  great  is  the  inconstancie
of  all  earthly  things.  That  which  we  have  here  reported
as  touching  Maroco,  partly  we  saw  with  our  owne  eyes,
partly  we  reade  in  the  Historie  of  one  Ibnu  Abdul  Malich,  H**  Abdul
a  most  exact  Chronicler  of  the  Affaires  of  Maroco.  "fJfria™

The  Towne  of  Agmet  built  of  old  by  the  Africans  upon  The  Towne  of
the  top  of  a  certaine  hill  which  beginneth  almost  from  Agmet.
Atlas,  is  distant  from  Maroco  about  foure  and  twentie
miles.  In  times  past,  when  Muachidin  was  Prince  thereof,
it  contayned  more  then  sixe  thousand  Families :  at  what
time  the  people  were  very  civill,  and  had  such  plentie  and
magnificence  of  all  things,  that  many  would  not  sticke
to  compare  this  Towne  with  the  Citie  of  Maroco.  It  had
on  all  sides  most  pleasant  Gardens,  and  great  store  of
Vines,  whereof  some  grew  upon  the  Mountaine  it  selfe,
and  others  on  the  Valley.  By  the  foot  of  this  Hill  runneth
a  faire  River,  which  springing  forth  of  Atlas  falleth  at
length  into  Tensift.  The  field  which  lyeth  neere  unto
this  River  is  said  to  be  so  fruitfiill,  that  it  yeeldeth  every
yeere  fiftie  fold  increase.  The  water  of  this  River  looketh
alwaies  white.

Howbeit the Citie of Agmet, which I have now  The  desolation
described  unto,  hath  at  this  day  no  other  Inhabitants  but  '* gmitm
Woolves, Foxes, Deere, and such other wilde beasts.
Except  onely  at  my  being  there  I  found  a  certaine  Her-  Hermite.
mite,  who  was  attended  upon  by  an  hundred  persons  of
his  owne  Sect :  all  of  them  were  well-horsed,  and  did  their
best  endevour  to  become  Governours  and  Commanders,
but  their  forces  were  insufficient. With  this  Hermite  I
staied  (as  I  remember)  for  the  space  of  ten  dayes,  and
found  one  amongst  his  followers,  with  whom  I  had  old

383

A.D.

c.  1526.

John  Leo
student  at
Fez.

The  Moun  -
taine  of
Nififa.

Learned  men
clothed  in
white.

Semede.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

acquaintance,  and  familiaritie  :  for  we  were  certaine  fellow-
students  together  at  Fez,  where  beeing  of  one  standing
and  senioritie,  we  heard  that  Booke  of  the  Mahumetan
Religion  expounded  which  is  commonly  called  the  Epistle
of  Nensesi.

Having  before  described  all  the  Cities  and  Townes  of
Maroco,  it  now  remayneth  that  wee  briefly  declare  the
situation  and  qualitie  of  the  Mountaines  there.  Where-
fore wee  will  beginne  with  the  Mountaine  of  Nififa,  from
whence  the  Region  of  Maroco  it  selfe  beginneth  West-
ward, and  is  thereby  divided  from  the  Province  of  Hea.
The  said  Mountaine  hath  great  store  of  Inhabitants :  and
albeit  the  tops  thereof  are  continually  covered  with  Snow ;
yet  doth  it  yearely  affoord  marvellous  increase  and
abundance  of  Barley.  The  rude  people  there  are  so
destitute  of  all  humanitie  and  civill  behaviour,  that  they
doe  admire  not  onely  all  Strangers,  but  also  doe  even  gaze
and  wonder  at  their  apparell.  I  my  selfe  remayned  two
dayes  among  them,  in  which  space  all  the  people  of  the
Towne  came  flocking  about  mee,  greatly  wondring  at  the
white  Garment  which  I  wore  (being  such  as  the  learned
men  of  our  Countrey  are  usually  clad  in)  so  that  every
one  being  desirous  to  handle  and  view  this  Garment  of
mine,  in  two  dayes  it  was  turned  from  white  to  blacke,  and
became  all  greasie  and  filthy.

At  the  bounds  of  Nififa,  a  certaine  other  Mountaine
called  by  the  Inhabitants  Semede,  taketh  his  originall :  and
these  two  Mountaines  are  separated  by  the  River  of
Sefsaua.  Semede  extendeth  East-ward  almost  twentie
miles,  the  Inhabitants  whereof  are  most  base  and  witlesse
people.  Great  store  of  Springs  and  Fountaines  are  here  to
be  found ;  the  Snow  is  perpetuall ;  all  good  Lawes,
Civilitie  and  honestie  are  quite  banished  from  hence,
except  perhaps  the  people  be  mooved  thereunto  by  the
advice  of  some  stranger,  whom  they  find  to  be  of  a  modest
and  sober  disposition.  Here  being  entertayned  by  a  cer-
taine religious  man  of  the  same  place  (who  was  had  in
great  reputation  by  the  people)  I  was  constrayned  to  eate

384

JOHN LEO ON AFRICA  a.d.

c.  1526.
of  such  grosse  meats  as  the  said  people  are  accustomed  [II.  vi.  778.]
unto,  to  wit,  of  Barley  meale  mingled  with  water,  and  of
Goats-flesh,  which  was  extremely  tough  and  hard  by  reason
of  the  stalenesse  and  long  continuance. After  Supper  we
had  no  other  Bed  but  the  bare  ground  to  lye  upon.

The  next morning  being  readie  to take  Horse, and  $*r**P  t1lals
desirous  to  depart,  fiftie  or the  people  came  about  me,  tn aw'
laying  open  each  man  their  Causes  and  Suites  unto  me,  as
our  people  use  to  do  before  a  Judge. Unto  whom I
answered,  that  I  had  never  in  all  my  life  either  knowne
or  heard  of  the  manners  and  customes  of  that  Region.
Forth-with  comes  one  of  the  chiefe  men  amongst  them,
affirming  that  it  was  their  custome  never  to  dismisse  any
Stranger,  till  hee  had  both  heard  and  throughly  decided
all the Quarrels and Controversies of the Inhabitants.
Which  words  he  had  no  sooner  uttered,  but  immediately
my  Horse  was  taken  from  me. Wherefore  I  was  con-  John  Leo  con'
strayned  for  nine  dayes,  and  so  many  nights,  longer  to  Tj^l  j  j
abide  the  penurie  and  miserie  of  that  Region. Moreover,
my  trouble  was  the  greater,  for  that,  in  such  abundance  of
Suites  and  Affaires,  there  was  not  one  man  present,  which
could  set  downe  so  much  as  a  word  in  writing :  wherefore
I  my  selfe  was  fayne to  play  both  the  Judge  and the
Notarie.

Upon  the  eight  day  they  all  of  them  promised  to  bestow
some  great  Reward  upon  mee.  Wherefore  the  night
following  seemed  unto  me  a  yeare  long :  for  I  was  in
good  hope,  the  next  morrow  to  have  received  a  masse  of
Gold  from  my  Clients.  So  soone  as  the  next  day  began
to  dawne,  they  placed  me  in  a  certaine  Church-porch  :
whither,  after  an  usuall  and  short  Prayer  ended,  each  man
full  reverently  presented  his  gift  unto  me.  Here  some
offered  me  a  Cocke,  others  brought  me  Nuts  and  Onions,
and  some  others  bestowed  a  handfull  of  Garlicke  upon  me.
The  principall  and  head-men  amongst  them  presented  mee
with  a  Goat ;  and  so  by  reason  that  there  was  no  money  in
all  the  said  Mountayne,  they  proffered  mee  not  one
farthing  for  my  paines :  wherefore  all  the  said  gifts  1
v  385  2  B

A.D.

c.  1526.

The  Mountain

called

Seusaua.

The  Moun-
tains Sefiua,
Teumella,  and
Gedmena  are
omitted.

Hanteta.

Carrain
Jewes.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

bequeathed  unto  mine  Hoast  for  his  worthy  entertayning
of  me.  And  this  was  all  the  notable  reward  which  I
reaped  in  regard  of  so  great  and  intolerable  paines.  All
things  being  thus  dispatched,  they  sent  fiftie  Horsemen
to  accompany  and  guard  me  from  Theeves  in  that  danger-
ous way.

This  Mountaine  of  Seusaua  taketh  his  beginning  where
Semede  endeth,  out  of  which  springeth  a  certaine  River,
having  one  name  with  the  said  Mountaine  from  whence  it
proceedeth.  Never  were  the  tops  of  this  Mountaine  seene
destitute  of  Snow.  The  Inhabitants  leade  a  brutish  and
savage  life,  waging  continuall  warre  with  their  next  Neigh-
bours :  for  which  purpose  they  use  neither  Swords,  Javelins,
nor  any  other  Warlike  Instruments,  but  onely  certaine
Slings,  out  of  which  they  discharge  stones  after  a  strange
and  wonderfull  manner.  Their  victuals  consist  of  Barley,
Honey,  and  Goates  flesh.  In  the  same  Mountaine  great
multitudes  of  Jewes  exercising  Handie-crafts,  doe  inhabit :
likewise  they  make  Sope,  Iron-hookes,  and  Horse-shooes.
Divers  Masons  are  here  to  be  found  also.  They  build
their  wals  of  no  other  matter  but  onely  of  rough  stone
and  lime,  and  the  roofes  of  their  houses  they  use  to  cover
with  thatch :  neither  have  they  any  other  kind  of  lime  or
brickes.  They  have  among  them  also  abundance  of
learned  men  and  of  skilfull  Lawyers,  whose  counsell  they
use  at  all  times.  Among  whom  I  found  some,  who  had
heretofore  beene  my  fellow-students  at  Fez,  and  for  our
old  acquaintance  sake,  gave  me  most  courteous  entertayn-
ment :  and,  to  the  end  I  might  escape  the  danger  of
Theeves,  they  conducted  me  a  good  part  of  my  way.

Never  did  I  see  (to  my  remembrance)  an  higher  Moun-
tayne,  then  that  which  the  Africans  call  Hanteta.

Many  Jewes  exercising  divers  Handie-crafts  doe  here
inhabit,  and  doe  yearely  pay  unto  the  Governour  of  this
Mountayne  great  summes  of  money.  As  concerning
Religion,  they  follow  them  especially  which  are  called
Carrain.  The  top  of  this  Mountayne  is  continually
covered  with  Snow. When  I  first  beheld  this  Mountayne,

386

JOHN LEO ON AFRICA  a.d.

c.  1526.
I  thought  it  had  beene  Cloudes,  so  great  is  the  height
thereof.  The  sides  of  this  Mountayne  being  altogether
destitute  of  Herbs  and  Trees,  are  in  many  places  stored
with  excellent  white  Marble,  which  the  people  might
digge,  and  make  a  good  commoditie  thereof,  were  they
not  so  sluggish  and  so  ignorant  in  hewing  and  polishing  of
the  same.  In  this  place  are  many  Pillars  and  Arches  which
were  most  artificially  and  sumptuously  built  by  those
mightie  Princes  whom  wee  have  often  before  made  mention
of :  which  Pillars  they  would  have  used  for  the  building  of
Water-conduits,  had  they  not  beene  hindered  by  the
violence  of  warres.

This Region is exceeding populous : Westward it  Guzzu/a.
abutteth  upon  Ilda  a  Mountayne  of  Sus ; Northward  it
joyneth  unto  Atlas,  and  Eastward  it  stretcheth  unto  the
Region  of  Hea. It  is  inhabited  with  savage  and  fierce
people,  being  most  needie  of  money,  and  yet  abounding
greatly  in  Cattell. Great  store  of  Copper  and  Iron  is  here  Iron  and
digged  out  of  Mines. Great  Villages  they  have,  which vjf?er
containe  many  of  them,  more  then  a  thousand  Families  a
piece. They  have  neyther  King  nor  Governour  to  pre-
scribe any  Lawes  unto  them :  but  every  one  is  his  owne
Captaine  and  Commander ; whereupon  they  are  at  con-  Contmuall
tinuall  warres  among  themselves,  neither  have  they  any  wJ?rs  tn.
truce  at  all,  but  three  dayes  onely  every  weeke ; during  #^/y
which  time  every  man  may  safely  and  freely  bargaine  with  Truces.
his  Enemie,  and may  travell  whither  hee  listeth. But
these  dayes  of  Truce  being  past,  the  wretched  people  of
this Region doe continually commit most horrible  [H.  vi.  779.]
slaughters. The  foresaid  dayes  of  truce  a  certaine  Her-
mite appointed unto them, whom they honoured and
reverenced  like  a  god. This  Hermite  with  one  eye,  I Venerable

my selfe saw, and found him to be  a trusty, sincere, ermte-

J  \  vi 11  s\  Free  enter-

courteous,  and  most  liberall  person. Once  every  yeere  talnmentfor

they  have  a  Faire  of  two  months  long : all  which  time  Merchants.

(though  the  number  of  Merchants  be  never  so  great)  they

give  free  entertainment  unto  all  such  as  either  bring  wares

with  them,  or  come  thither  to  fetch  away  their  wares.

387

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

c.  1526.

When  the  time  of  their  Faire  approcheth,  they  foorthwith
make  truce,  and  each  faction  appointeth  a  Captaine  over
an  hundred  souldiers,  to  the  end  they  may  keepe  them-
selves in  safety,  and  may  defend  their  said  Faire  from  the
invasion  and  injury  of  all  lewd  persons.  If  any  offence
be  committed,  the  Captaines  immediately  give  sentence
Cruell  upon  the  guilty  person  : and  whosoever  be  convicted  of

executions. theft,  is  foorthwith  slaine  like  a  brute  beast,  and  his  theeves
carkasse  is  throwne  out  to  bee  devoured  of  dogges,  wilde
beasts,  and  ravenous  fowles.
Of  the  Region Azapi  was  built  by  the  Africans,  and  standeth  upon  the
i--f?*/,l5  shore of the Ocean sea, containing foure thousand

which  is  Azafi r .-,  . - ,  .  5  °  ,

and  the  rest  families  :  inhabitants  there  are  great  store,  being  tor  the
following:  it  most  part  very  uncivill  and  barbarous.  In  times  past
was  won  by  there  dwelt  many  Jewes  in  this  Towne,  which  exercised
*~P§r*HtP~>  divers  Handi-crafts.  Their  soyle  is  exceeding  fertile  :  but
reason  of  chill  so  gr°sse  is  their  owne  unskilrulnesse  and  negligence,  that
broiles,  one  they  know  neither  how  to  till  their  ground,  to  sow  their
Halt  having Corne,  or  to  plant  Vineyards.

slaine  the  King '-pj^ Towne Centumputei is built upon a rocke of

man  in  the excellent  marble  : in  the  Suburbes  whereof  are  certaine

Church. The  caves,  wherein  the  inhabitants  use  to  lay  up  their  Corne :

Portugals which  is  there  so  wonderfully  preserved,  that  it  will  con-

about  this  time  tinue an hundreth yeares without any ill favour or

face^on  the* corruption. Of  the  number  of  which  caves,  resembling

Townes  of pits  or  wels,  the  Towne  it  self  is  called  Centum  putei.

these  parts,  as  The  inhabitants  are  of  small  reckoning  or  account,  having

ye  may  see  in no  artificers  dwelling  among  them  but  certaine  Jewes.

C° t mttei Azamur,  a  Towne  of  Duccala,  was  built  by  the  Africans

Come  pre- upon  that  part  of  the  Ocean  seashore,  where  the  River  of

served  one Ommirabih  disemboqueth,  being  distant  from  Elmadina

hundred  Southward,  about  thirtie  miles. Very  large  it  is,  and  well

yeares.  inhabited,  and  containeth  to  the  number  of  five  thousand

families. Here  doe  the  Portugall  Merchants  continually

reside. The inhabitants are very civill, and decently

apparelled. And  albeit  they  are  divided  into  two  parts,

yet  have  they  continuall  peace  among  themselves. Pulse

and  Corne  they  have  great  plentie,  though  their  Gardens

388

JOHN LEO ON AFRICA  a.d.

c.  1526.
and  Orchards  bring  forth  nought  else  but  figs. They  have
such  plentie  of  fishes,  that  they  receive  yearely  for  them
sometime  sixe  thousand, and  sometime  seven  thousand
duckats. And  their  time  of  fishing  dureth  from  October  *Or  Marbea.
to  the  end  of  Aprill. They  use  to  frie  fishes  in  a  certaine Traine  Oyle.
pan  with  oyle,  whereby  they  gather  an  incredible  quantitie
of  trane :  neither  use  they  any  other  oyle  to  put  into  their
lampes. The Jewes compounded with the King of
Portugall,  to  yeeld  the  Citie  to  him,  on  condition,  that
they  should  sustaine  no  injurie,  with  a  generall  consent
opened the Gates unto them : and so the Christians  Azamur
obtained  the  Citie,  and  the  people  went  to  dwell  part  of  %0™*JS  *
them  to  Sala,  and  part  to  Fez. Neither  doe  I  thinke  that
God  for  any  other  cause  brought  this  calamitie  upon  them,
but  onely  for  the  horrible  vice  of  Sodomie,  whereunto  the  Sodomie.
greatest  part  of  the  Citizens  were  so  notoriously  addicted,
that  they  could  scarce  see  any  young  stripling,  who  escaped
their  lust.

The Greene Mountaine is of an exceeding: height, Greene  Moun-
beginning  Eastward  from  the  River  of  Ommirabih,  and
extending  Westward  to  the  Hills,  called  in  their  language
Hasara  ;  and  it  divideth  Duccala  from  some  part  of  Tedles.
Likewise  this  Mountaine  is  very  rough  and  full  of  Woods,
affoording  great  store  of  Acornes  and  Pine-apples,  and  a
certaine  kind  of  red  fruit  which  the  Italians  commonly *~ fr*%t
call  Africano. Many  Hermites  also  doe  inhabite  upon  /L//^/
this  Mountaine,  living  with  no  other  kind  of  victuals,  but  Frutto
such  as  the  Woods  yeeld  unto  them : for  they  are  above  Africano.
five  and  twenty  miles  distant  from  all  Townes  and  Cities. &*&&**"
Here  are  great  store  of  fountaines  and  of  Altars  built  after ejmts-
the Mahumetan  fashion,  and  many  ancient  houses  also
erected  by  the  Africans.

Tagodast  is  built  upon  the  top  of  a  certaine  high  Moun-  Tagodast.
taine,  having  foure  other  high  Mountaines  round  about  it.
Betweene  which  foure  Mountaines  and  the  said  Towne,
are  divers  most  large  and  beautiful  Gardens  replenished
with  all  kind  of  fruits :  Quinces  here  are  of  an  incredible
bignesse. Their  Vines  dispersing themselves  upon the

389

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

c.  1526.

boughes  of  trees,  doe  make  most  pleasant  Bowers  and
Grapes  of  Walkes  ;  the  Grapes  whereof  being  red,  are  for  their  bignesse
marve  ous  called  in  the  language  of  that  people,  Hennes  egs.  They
have  here  great  abundance  of  Oyle,  and  most  excellent
White  honey.  Hony  ;  some  of  their  Hony  being  white,  and  some  yellow.
This  Towne  hath  many  fountaines  about  it,  which  joyning
into  one  streame,  doe  serve  for  many  Water-mils  there-
abouts. Here  are  likewise  great  store  of  Artizans,  who
exercise  themselves  onely  about  things  necessary.  The
inhabitants  are  somewhat  civill,  their  women  are  most
beautifull,  being  most  gorgeously  decked  with  silver
Jewels.  Their  Oyle  they  carry  unto  the  next  Cities  South-
ward of  them  on  this  side  Atlas :  but  they  send  their
Leather  unto  Fez  and  Mecnasa.  Their  Plaine  is  almost
sixe  miles  long,  the  soyle  being  most  fruitful  for  Corne :
in  regard  whereof,  the  Townesmen  pay  certaine  yearely
tribute  unto  the  Arabians.  This  Towne  hath  Judges,
Priests,  and  a  great  number  of  Gentlemen.
[II.  vi.  780.]  Neere  unto  the  foresaid  Towne,  within  five  miles,
Elgiumuba.  standeth  Elgiumuha.  It  was  in  our  time  built  upon  the
top  of  an  high  Mountaine,  and  containeth  to  the  number
of  five  hundred  families,  besides  so  many  families  com-
prised in  the  Villages  of  that  Mountaine.  Here  are
innumerable  Springs  and  Fountaines,  and  most  pleasant
and  fruitfull  Gardens  in  all  places.  Here  are  likewise
Walnut-trees  huge  and  tall.  The  little  Hills  environing
this  Mountaine,  doe  yeeld  Barly  and  Olives  in  great
abundance.  In  the  said  Towne  are  great  numbers  of
Artizans,  as  Smiths,  Leather-dressers,  and  such  like.  And
because  they  have  here  notable  Yron-mines,  they  make
plentie  of  Horse-shooes.

In  the  Mountaine  of  Tenueues,  being  but  sixteene
yeares  old,  I  travelled  with  mine  Uncle,  Ambassadour  from
the  King  of  Fez  to  the  King  of  Tombuto  ;  and  the  Prince
here  gave  mee  in  recompence  of  Arabia  Verses  wherewith
I  presented  him,  fiftie  duckats,  and  a  good  Horse.
Tefza.  Tefza,  the  chiefe  Towne  of  all  Tedles,  was  built  by  the

Africans  upon  the  side  of  Mount  Atlas,  some  five  miles

390

JOHN LEO ON AFRICA  a.d.

c.  1526.
from  the  Plaine. The  Towne-walls  are  built  of  most  Marble  wals.
excellent  Marble,  which  is  called  in  their  language  Tefza,
and  hereupon  the  Towne  was  so  called  likewise. Heere
doe  reside  most  rich  Merchants  of  all  sorts  :  of  Jewes  here
are  two  hundred  families,  who  exercise  Merchandise  and
divers other trades. And heere  you shall finde many
Outlandish Merchants which buy from hence certaine
blacke  Mantles  with  hoods,  commonly  called  Ilbernus :  of  Ubcmus.
these  there  are  great  numbers  both  in  Italy  and  Spaine. u aptaine
They  have  Golden  Coine  without  any  Image  or  super- g,0oo.
scription  : their  apparell  is  decent : and  their  women  are  Ducats  of  the
beautifull and of good behaviour. In this towne are Citizens  iff
divers  Mahumetan  Temples,  and  many  Priests  and  Judges.  more  frm  one
The  King  receiveth  from  that  City,  even  at  this  present
twenty  thousand  Ducats  for  yeerely  tribute.

Somewhat  beyond  the  foresaid  Mountaine  of  Seggheme
standeth  Mount  Magran. Southward  it  bordereth  upon The  Moun-
the  Region of  Farcali, neere unto the  Lybian desart : t^incae{-

o  ?  J  Mazrati,

Westward  it  beginneth  at  Seggheme,  and  extendeth  East-
ward to  the  foot  of  Mount  Dedes.  It  is  continually
covered  with  snow.  The  inhabitants  have  such  abundance
of  small  &  great  cattell  that  they  cannot  long  remaine  in
one  place  together.  They  build  their  houses  of  the  Barke  These  people
of  certaine  trees,  the  rooffe  whereof  dependeth  on  slender  r^e.et
sparres,  fashioned  like  unto  the  hoopes  invironing  the  lids
of  such  Chests  or  Trunks,  as  the  women  of  Italy,  when
they  travell,  carry  upon  their  Mules.  So  likewise  these
people  transport  their  whole  houses  up  and  downe  by  the
strength  of  Mules,  till  they  have  found  a  fit  place  of
aboad ;  where,  so  soone  as  they  arrive,  they  plant  their
sayd  houses,  remaining  there  with  their  whole  families,  so
long  as  they  have  grasse  sufficient  to  feede  their  cattell.
Howbeit  all  the  spring  time  they  settle  themselves  in  one
place,  making  certaine  low  Stables  or  Cottages,  and  cover-
ing them  with  the  boughs  of  trees,  which  serve  for  their
cattell  to  lie  in  a  nights :  and  to  the  end  that  the  cold  may
not  pinch  them  overmuch,  they  kindle  certaine  huge  fires
neere  unto  their  said  Stables,  whereupon  sometimes  the

39i

ad.  PURCHAS HIS P1LGRIMES

c.  1526.

wind  so  violently  driveth  the  fire,  that  unlesse  the  cattell
escape  by  flight,  they  are  in  great  danger  to  be  consumed :
and  as  their  houses  are  destitute  of  walls,  so  are  their
Stables.  They  are  continually  molested  and  haunted  with
Lions  and  Woolves.  In  their  apparell  and  customes  they
wholly  agree  with  the  foresaid  people  of  Seggheme,  saving
that  these  have  houses  of  Barke  and  Wood,  and  the  other
of  Stone.  I  my  selfe,  in  the  nine  hundreth  and  seven-
teenth yeere  of  the  Hegeira,  was  in  this  Mountaine,  as  I
travelled  from  Dara  to  Fez.
A  description  The  high  and  cold  Mountaine  of  Dedes  greatly
of  Mount  aboundeth  with  Fountaines  and  Woods.  Westward  it
beginneth  at  Mount  Magran,  extending  thence  almost  as
far  as  the  Mountaine  of  Adesan ;  and  Southward  it
bordereth  upon  the  plaines  of  Todga.  The  length  thereof
is  almost  fourescore  miles.  Upon  the  very  top  of  this
Mountaine  there  was  a  City  built  in  ancient  time,  whereof
a  few  ruinous  Monuments  are  to  be  seene  at  this  present ;
namely,  certaine  walles  of  white  Stone,  wherein  are  divers
letters  and  words  graven,  which  the  inhabitants  themselves
doe  not  understand.  Many  are  of  opinion,  that  this  City
was  built  long  agoe  by  the  Romanes :  howbeit  I  my  selfe
could  never  finde  so  much  affirmed  by  an  African  writer,
Seriffo  Essa-  nor  yet  the  City  it  selfe  mentioned.  Saving  that  Seriffo
calli  an  His-  j?ssacaUj  [n  a  certaine  Story  of  his  maketh  mention  of
Tedsi,  which  he  saith  is  neere  unto  Segelmesse  and  Dara :
but  he  declareth  not  whether  it  bee  built  upon  Mount
Dedes  or  no.  Howbeit  for  mine  owne  part  I  thinke  it
to  be  the  very  same :  for  there  is  no  other  City  in  the
whole  Region.  The  inhabitants  of  Dedes  are  in  very  deed
most  base  people  ;  of  whom  the  greater  part  dwell  in  Caves
under  the  ground :  their  food  is  Barly  and  Elhasid,  that
is  to  say,  Barly  meale  sodden  with  water  and  salt,  which
we  mentioned  before  in  our  description  of  Hea  :  For  heere
is  nothing  but  Barly  to  be  had.  Goates  and  Asses  they
have  in  great  abundance.  The  Caves  wherein  their  cattell
* Or  Salt-  lodge  are  exceedingly  full  of  *  Nitre:  so  that  I  verily
peter.  thinke  if  this  Mountaine  were  neere  unto  Italy,  the  said

392

JOHN LEO ON AFRICA  a.d.

c.  1526.
Nitre  would  yeerely  be  worth  five  and  twenty  thousand
Ducats. But  such  is  their  negligence  and  unskilfulnesse,
that they are truely ignorant to what purposes Nitre
serveth. Their  garments  are  so  rude, that they  scarce
cover  halfe  their  nakednesse. Their  houses  are  so  loath-
some, being  annoyed  with  the  stinking  smell  of  their  Goats.
In  all  this  Mountaine  you  shall  finde  neither  Castle  nor
walled  Towne :  when  they  build  an  house,  they  pile  one
stone  upon  another  without  any  morter  at  all,  the  roofe
whereof  they  make  of  certaine  rubbish,  like  as  they  doe
in  some  places  of  Sisa  and  Fabbriano  : the  residue  (as  we [II.  vi.  781.]
have  said)  doe  inhabite  in  Caves,  neither  saw  I  ever,  to
my  remembrance,  greater  swarmes  of  fleas  then  among
those  people. Moreover,  they  are  trecherous  and  strong
theeves,  so  given  to  stealing  and  quarrelling,  that  for  one
unkind  word  they  will  not  only  contend,  but  seeke  also
the  destruction  one  of  another. They  have  neither  Judge,
Priest,  nor  any  honest  Governour  among  them. No  Mer-
chants resort  unto  them : for  being  given  to  continuall
idlenesse,  and  not  exercising  any  trades  or  handie-crafts,
they  have  nothing  meete  for  Merchants  to  buy. If  any
Merchant  bring  any  wares  into  their  Region,  unlesse  he
be  safe  conducted  by  their  Captaine,  he  is  in  danger  to  be
robbed  of  altogether. And  if  the  wares  serve  not  for
their  owne  necessary  uses,  they  will  exact  one  fourth  part
of  them  for  custome. Their  women  are  most  forlorne
and  sluttish,  going  more  beggerly  apparelled  then  the  men.
So  continuall  and  slavish  are  the  toiles  of  these  women,
that  for  misery,  the  life  of  Asses  is  not  comparable  to  theirs.
And,  to  be  briefe,  never  was  I  so  weary  of  any  place  in  all
Africa  as I was  of this : howbeit in the  yeere  of  the
Hegeira,  nine  hundred  and  eighteene,  being  commanded
by  one,  to  whom  I  was  in  duety  bound,  to  travell  unto
Segelmesse,  I  could  not  choose  but  come  this  way.

[§.  in.

393

A.D.

c.  1526.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

§•  HI.

Collections  of  things  most  remarkable  in  John  Leo
his  third  Booke  of  the  Historie  of  Africa.

A  most  exact
description  of
the  Kingdome
of  Fez.

*Habat.

*Chauzor.

Cheuz.

He  kingdome  of  Fez  beginneth  Westward  at  the

famous  river  Ommirabih,  and  extendeth  eastward

to  the  river Muluia ; Northward  it  is  enclosed

partly  with  the  Ocean,  and  partly  with  the  Mediterran

sea. The  said  Kingdome  of  Fez  is  divided  into  seven

Provinces  ; to  wit,  Temesna,  the  Territory  of  Fez,  Azgar,

*Elhabet,  Erna,  Garet,  and  *Elchauz: every  of  which

Provinces  had  in  old  time  a  severall  Governour : neither

indeed  hath  the  City  of  Fez  alwayes  beene  the  Kings

Royall  Seate,  but  being  built  by  a  certaine  Mahumetan

Apostata,  was  governed  by  his  posteritie  almost  an  hundred

[II.  vi.  782.]  and  fiftie  yeeres. After  which  time  the  familie  of  Marin

got  the  upper  hand,  who  here  setling  their  aboad,  were  the

first  that  ever  called  Fez  by  the  name  of  a  Kingdome.

Westward  it  beginneth  at  the  River  Ommirabih,  and
stretcheth  to  the  River  Buragrag  Eastward ;  the  South
Frontire  thereof  bordereth  upon  Atlas,  and  the  North  upon
the  Ocean  Sea.  It  is  all  over  a  plaine  Countrey,  contayn-
ing  in  length  from  the  West  to  East  almost  fourescore
miles,  and  in  breadth  from  Atlas  to  the  Ocean  Sea  about
threescore.  This  Province  hath  ever  almost  beene  the
principall  of  the  seven  before  named :  for  it  contained  to
the  number  of  forty  great  Townes,  besides  three  hundred
Castles,  all  which  were  inhabited  by  Barbarian  Africans.
In  the  three  hundred  three  &  twentieth  yeer  of  the
Hegeira,  this  Province  was  by  a  certaine  heretike  against
the  Mahumetan  Religion,  called  Chemim  the  sonne  of
Mennall,  freed  from  paying  of  tribute.  This  bad  fellow
perswaded  the  people  of  Fez  to  yeeld  no  tribute  nor
honour  unto  their  Prince,  and  himselfe  he  professed  to
be  a  Prophet :  but  a  while  after  he  dealt  not  onely  in
matters  of  Religion,  but  in  common-wealth  affaires  also.
At  length  waging  warre  against  the  King  of  Fez  (who

394

Of  Temesne
one  of  the
Provinces  of
Fez.

A  dangerous
seducer.

JOHN LEO ON AFRICA  a.d.

c.  1526.
was  himselfe  then  warring  with  the  people  of  Zenete)  it
so  befell,  that  a  league  was  concluded  betweene  them,
conditionally  that  Chemin  should  enjoy  Temesne,  and
that  the  King  should  containe  himselfe  within  his  Signiorie
of  Fez,  so  that  from  thencefoorth  neither  should  molest
other.  The  said  Chemim  governed  the  Province  of
Temesne  about  five  and  thirtie  yeeres  :  and  his  successours
enjoyed  it  almost  an  hundred  yeeres  after  his  decease.
But  King  Joseph  having  built  Maroco,  went  about  to
bring  this  Province  under  his  subjection.  Wherupon  he  Differences  in
sent  sundry  Mahumetan  Doctors,  and  Priests  to  reclaime  Rff^
the  governour  thereof  from  his  heresie,  and  to  perswade
him,  if  it  were  possible,  to  yeeld  unto  the  King  by  faire
meanes.  Whereof  the  inhabitants  being  advertised,  they
consulted  with  a  certaine  kinsman  of  the  foresaid  Gover-
nour, in  the  Citie  called  Anfa,  to  murther  the  King  of
Maroco  his  Ambassadours  :  and  so  they  did.  Soone  after
levying  an  army  of  fifty  thousand  men,  he  marched  towards
Maroco,  intending  to  expell  thence  the  family  of  Luntuna,
and  Joseph  their  King.  King  Joseph  hearing  of  this
newes,  was  driven  into  wonderfull  perplexity  of  mind.
Wherefore  preparing  an  huge  and  mighty  army,  he  stayed
not  the  comming  of  his  enemies :  but  on  the  sudden
within  three  dayes,  having  conducted  his  forces  over  the
River  of  Ommirabih,  he  entred  Temesne,  when  as  the
foresaid  fifty  thousand  men  wTere  so  dismayed  at  the  Kings
army,  that  they  all  passed  the  River  Buragrag,  and  so  fled
into  Fez.  But  the  King  so  dispeopled  and  wasted
Temesne,  that  without  all  remorse  he  put  both  man,
woman,  and  child  to  the  sword.  This  army  remayned  in  The  horrible
the  Region  eight  dayes,  in  which  space  they  so  razed  and  <^olatlon  °f
demolished  all  the  Townes  and  Cities  thereof,  that  there
scarce  remaine  any  fragments  of  them  at  this  time.  But
the  King  of  Fez  on  the  other  side  hearing  that  the  people
of  Temesne  were  come  into  his  Dominions,  made  a  truce
with  the  Tribe  of  Zenete,  and  bent  his  great  army  against
the  said  Temesnites.  And  at  length  having  found  them
halfe  famished  neere  unto  the  River  of  Buragrag,  he  so

395

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

c.  1526.

stopped  their  passages  on  all  sides,  that  they  were  con-
strained to  run  up  the  craggie  mountaines  and  thickets.
At  last  being  environed  with  the  Kings  forces,  some  of
them  were  drowned  in  the  River,  others  were  throwne
downe  headlong  from  the  rockes,  and  the  residue  were
miserably  slaine  by  their  enemies.  And  for  the  space  of
ten  moneths  there  was  such  havocke  made  among  the
Temesnites,  that  a  silly  remnant  of  them  was  left  alive.
But  King  Joseph  Prince  of  the  Luntunes  returned  foorth-
with  to  Maroco  for  the  repayring  of  his  forces,  to  the  end
he  might  bid  the  King  of  Fez  a  battell.  Howbeit
Temesne  being  bereft  of  her  people,  was  left  to  be  inhabited
of  wilde  beasts.  Neither  had  that  Province  any  new
Colony,  or  supply  of  inhabitants,  till  that  about  one
hundreth  and  fifty  yeeres  after,  King  Mansor  returning
from  Tunis,  brought  thence  certaine  Arabians  with  him,
unto  whom  he  gave  the  possession  of  Temesne.  And
these  Arabians  enjoyed  the  said  Province  for  fifty  yeeres,
till  such  time  as  King  Mansor  himselfe  was  expelled  out
of  his  Kingdom  :  &  then  were  they  also  expelled  by  the
Luntunes,  &  were  brought  into  extreme  miserie.  After-
ward the  Kings  of  the  family  of  Marin  bestowed  the  said
Province  upon  the  people  of  Zenete  and  Haoara.  Hence
it  came  to  passe  that  the  said  people  of  Zentete  &  Haoara,
were  alwayes  great  friends  unto  the  Marin  family,  and
were  thought  to  have  defended  them  from  the  fury  of  the
King  of  Maroco.  From  which  time  they  have  peaceably
enjoyed  Maroco,  and  now  they  are  grown  in  lesse  then  an
hundred  yeers  so  mighty,  that  they  stand  not  in  feare  of
the  King  of  Fez.  For  they  are  able  to  bring  threescore
thousand  horsemen  into  the  field,  &  have  two  hundred
Castles  at  their  commaund.  My  selfe  had  great  familiarity
and  acquaintance  with  them,  and  therefore  I  will  not  sticke
to  record  all  memorable  things  which  I  saw  among  them.
AnsaaTowne  This  famous  Towne  was  built  by  the  Romanes  upon
in  Temesne.  the  Ocean  Sea  shoare,  Northward  of  Atlas  sixtie,  Eastward
of  Azamur  sixty,  and  Westward  Rebat  forty  miles.  The
Citizens  thereof  were  most  civill  and  wealthy  people :  the

396

JOHN LEO ON AFRICA  a.d.

c.  1526.

fields  thereto  adjoyning  are  exceeding  fruitfull  for  all  kind

of  graine  : neither  doe  I  thinke,  that  any  Towne  in  all

Africa  is  for  pleasant  situation  comparable  thereto. The

plaine  round  about  it  (except  it  be  to  the  Sea  Northward)

is  almost  fourescore  miles  over. In  old  time  it  was  fraught

with stately  Temples,  rich  ware-houses  and  shops,  and

beautifull  palaces  :  which  the  monuments  as  yet  remayning

doe  sufficiently  testifie. They  had  also  most  large  and

faire  gardens,  out  of  which  they  gather  great  abundance  of

fruit,  especially  of  Melons,  &  Pome-citrons  even  at  this  [II.  vi.  783.]

day :  all  which  are  perfectly  ripe  by  mid-Aprill. So  that

the inhabitants  usually  carry their  fruits  unto Fez, by

reason  that  the  fruits  of  Fez  are  not  so  soone  ripe. Their

attire  is  trim  and  decent,  and  they  have  alwayes  had  great

traffique  with  the  Portugals  and  the  English. Likewise  ^ffW

they  have  many  learned  men  among  them. But  is  now JM '

desolate  and  destroyed  by  Portugals.  destroyed  by

This  great and famous Towne was built not many  the  Portugals.

yeers  ago  by  Mansor  the  King  &  Mahumetan  Patriark  of  A  description

Maroco,  upon  the  Ocean  Sea  shoare. By  the  East  part  °fRebaL

therof  runneth the River Buragrag before-named, and

there  dischargeth  it  selfe  into  the  maine  Sea. The  rocke

whereon  this  Towne  is  founded,  standeth  neere  the  mouth

of the said River, having the River on the one side

thereof,  and  the  Sea  on  the  other. In  building  it  much

resembleth  Maroco,  which  Mansor  willed  to  be  a  patterne

thereof :  saving  that  it  is  a  great  deale  lesse  then  Maroco.

Some  say  that  the  reason  why  it  was  built  in  this  place whJ  Kin& .

was,  for  that  King  Mansor  possessing  the  Kingdome  of ..  a%ot m  r
5  5  V  5  to  the  Towne  of

Granada,  and  a  great  part  or  bpaine  besides,  and  con-  Rebat  upon  the
sidering  that  Maroco  was  so  farre  distant,  that  if  any  Sea  shoare.
warres  should  happen,  he  could  not  in  due  time  send  new
forces  against  the  Christians,  determined  to  build  some
Towne  upon  the  Sea  shoare,  where  he  and  his  army  might
remaine  all  summer  time.  Some  perswaded  him  to  lie
with  his  army  at  Ceuta  a  Towne  upon  the  streights  of
Gibraltar :  but  Mansor  seeing  that  by  reason  of  the
barrennes  of  the soile  he  could  not  maintain  an  army

397

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

c.  1526.

Royall  for  three  or  foure  moneths  in  the  Town  of  Ceuta,
he  caused  this  Town  of  Rebat  in  short  space  to  be  erected,
&  to  be  exceedingly  beautified  with  Temples,  Colledges,
Palaces,  Shops,  Stoves,  Hospitals,  and  other  such  build-
ings. Moreover,  on  the  South  side  without  the  wals  he
caused  a  certaine  high  Tower  like  the  Tower  of  Maroco
to  be  built,  saving  that  the  winding  staires  were  somewhat
larger,  insomuch  that  three  horses  a-breast  might  well
ascend  up  :  from  the  top  whereof  they  might  escry  ships
an  huge  way  into  the  Sea.  So  exceeding  is  the  height
thereof,  that  I  thinke  there  is  no  where  the  like  building
to  be  found.  And  to  the  end  that  greater  store  of  Arti-
ficers and  Merchants  might  hither  from  all  places  make
resort,  he  appointed,  that  every  man  according  to  his  trade
and  occupation  should  be  allowed  a  yeerely  stipend,
whereupon  it  came  to  passe  that  within  few  moneths,  this
Towne  was  better  stored  with  all  kind  of  Artificers  and
Merchants,  then  in  any  Towne  in  all  Africa  besides,  and
that  because  they  reaped  a  double  gaine.  Heere  used
Mansor  with  his  Troupes  to  remaine  from  the  beginning
of  Aprill,  till  the  month  of  September.  And  whereas
there  was  no  water  about  the  Town  meet  to  be  drunke
(for  the  Sea  runneth  ten  miles  up  into  the  River,  and  the
Conduits  of  wels  likewise  yeeld  salt-water)  Mansor  caused  fresh  water
fresh  water  to  ke  COnveied  to  the  Towne  by  certaine  Pipes  and  Chan-
nels,  from  a  fountaine  twelve  miles  distant.  And  the
Conduits  hee  made  arch-wise,  like  unto  the  Conduits  of
Italy  in  many  places,  and  specially  at  Rome.  So  soone
as  the  said  water-conduit  was  derived  unto  the  Towne,  he
caused  it  to  be  divided  and  sent  into  sundry  places,  as
namely,  some  pipes  thereof  to  the  Temples,  some  to  the
Colledges,  others  to  the  Kings  Palace,  and  the  rest  into
the  common  Cisternes,  throughout  all  the  City.  How-
beit  after  King  Mansors  death  this  Towne  grew  into  such
decay,  that  scarce  the  tenth  part  thereof  now  remaineth.
The  said  notable  water-conduit  was  utterly  fordone  in
the  warre  betweene  the  Marin  familie  and  the  successors
of  Mansor.

398

12.  miles.

JOHN LEO ON AFRICA  a.d.

c.  1526.

Also  King  Mansor  caused  Sella  to  be  walled  round  Sella.
about,  and  built  therein  a  faire  Hospitall,  &  a  stately
Palace,  into  which  his  souldiers  might  at  their  pleasure
retire  themselves.  Here  likewise  he  erected  a  most
beautifull  Temple,  wherein  he  caused  a  goodly  Hall  or
Chappell  to  be  set  up,  which  was  curiously  carved,  and
had  many  faire  windows  about  it :  and  in  this  Hall  Where  King
(when  he  perceived  death  to  seaze  upon  him)  he  com-  ,  a7!S0!  was
manded  his  subjects  to  burie  his  corps.  Which  being
done,  they  laid  one  Marble-stone  over  his  head,  and
another  over  his  feete,  whereon  sundry  Epitaphes  were
engraven.  After  him  likewise  all  the  honourable  per-
sonages of  his  family  and  blood,  choose  to  be  interred  in
the  same  Hall.  And  so  did  the  Kings  of  the  Marin
family,  so  long  as  their  Common-wealth  prospered.  My
selfe  on  a  time  entring  the  same  Hall,  beheld  there  thirty
Monuments  of  noble  and  great  personages,  and  diligently
wrote  out  all  their  Epitaphes  :  this  I  did  in  the  yeere  of  the
Hegeira  nine  hundred  and  fifteene.

In  Thagia  is  visited  the  Sepulchre  of  one  accounted  for  Sepulchre

a  most  holy  man,  who  is  reported  in  the  time  of  Habdul-  ™ -yf.

J  ,  , r  . ,  •  1 r • feare  of  Lions.

mumen,  to  nave  wrought  many  miracles  against  the  rune

of  Lions :  whereupon  he  was  reputed  by  many  as  a  great

Prophet. I  remember  that  I  read  in  a  certaine  writer  of

that  Nation  commonly  called  Etdedle,  a  whole  Catalogue

of  the  said  holy  mans  miracles  :  which  whether  he  wrought

by  Arte-magicke,  or  by  some  wonderfull  secret  of  nature,

it  is  altogether  uncertaine. Howbeit  his  great  fame  and

honourable  reputation  is  the  cause  why  this  Towne  is  so

well  fraught  with  inhabitants. The  people  of  Fez  having  Pilgrimage

solemnized  their  Easter,  do  yeerely  frequent  this  Towne  ^116

*  j  j  1  treouent.

to  visite  the  said  Sepulchre,  and  that  in  such  huge  num-
bers, that  you  would  esteeme  them  to  be  an  whole  armie ;
for  every  principall  man  carries  his  Tent  and  other  neces-
saries with  him  :  and  so  you  shall  see  sometime  an  hun-
dred Tents,  and  sometimes  more  in  that  company.
Fifteene  dayes  they  are  in  performing  of  that  Pilgrimage ;
for  Thagia standeth from  Fez  almost  an hundred  and

399

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

c.  1526.

twenty  miles. My  selfe  being  a  child,  went  thither  on
Pilgrimage  oftentimes  with  my  Father ; as  likewise  being

[II.  vi.  784.]  growen  up  to  mans  estate,  I  repaired  thither  as  often,
making  supplication  to  bee  delivered  from  the  danger  of
Lions.

The  Territory Westward  it  beginneth  at  the  River  of  Buragrag,  and

of  tez.  stretcheth Eastward to the  river  called Inaven  : which

two  Rivers  are  almost  a  hundred  miles  distant  asunder.

*Or  Cebu.  Northward  it  bordereth  upon  the  River  *  Subu,  and
Southward  upon  the  foote  of  Atlas.  The  soile  both  for
abundance  of  Corne,  Fruits,  and  Cattell  seemeth  to  be
inferiour  to  none  other.

Sella.  The  buildings  of  Sella  carry  a  shew  of  Antiquity  on

them,  being  Artificially  carved  and  stately  supported  with
Marble  pillars.  Their  Temples  are  most  beautifull,  and
their  shops  are  built  under  large  Porches.  And  at  the
end  of  every  row  of  shops  is  an  Arch,  which  (as  they  say)
is  to  divide  one  occupation  from  another.  And  (to  say
all  in  a  word)  here  is  nothing  wanting,  which  may  be  re-
quired either  in  a  most  honourable  City,  or  a  flourishing
Common-wealth.  Moreover  hither  resort  all  kind  of
Merchants,  both  Christians  and  others. Heere  the  Geno-

English  wayes, Venetians, English and low Dutch used to

traffique.  traffique. The  grounds  adjoyning  upon  this  Towne  are

sandy :  neither  are  they  fit  for  Corne,  but  for  Cotten-
wooll  in  divers  places  very  profitable.  The  inhabitants,
divers  of  them  doe  weave  most  excellent  Gotten.  Heere
likewise  are  made  very  fine  Combes,  which  are  sold  in  all
the  Kingdome  of  Fez,  for  the  Region  thereabout  yeeldeth
great  plenty  of  Boxe,  &  of  other  wood  fit  for  the  same
purpose. Their  government  is  very  orderly  and  discreet

1526,  even  untill  this  day: for  they  have  most  learned  Judges,

Umpires,  and  deciders  of  doubtfull  cases  in  Law.  This
Towne  is  frequented  by  many  rich  Merchants  of  Genoa,
whom  the  King  hath  alwayes  had  in  great  regard ;  because

T£bh^m°f  he  gaineth  much  merely  by  their  traffique.

warm  moved ^n  the  time  of  Abusaid  the  last  King  of  the  Marin

by  Sahid. family,  his  Cousin,  called  Sahid,  was  taken  by  Habdilla

400

MtranvV QViridis.Ums
naicora  f^.

HONDIUS HIS MAP OF THE KINGDOM OF FEZ

JOHN LEO ON AFRICA  ad.

c.  1526.
the  King  of  Granada ; whereupon  by  letters  he  requested
his  Cousin  the  King  of  Fez  to  send  him  a  certaine  summe
of  money,  required  by  the  King  of  Granada  for  his  ran-
some. Which  when  the  Fessan  King  refused  to  yeeld
unto,  Habdilla  restored  his  prisoner  to  libertie,  and  sent
him  towards  Fez  to  destroy  both  the  City  and  the  King.
Afterward  Sahid,  with  the  helpe  of  certaine  wilde  Arabians  The  City  of
besieged  Fez  for  seven  yeeres  together ; in  which  space  fwSJwfeers
most  of  the  Townes,  Villages,  and  Hamlets  throughout  together.
the whole Kingdome were destroyed. But at length
such  a  Pestilence  invaded Sahids  forces, that himselfe,
with  a  great  part  of  his  army,  in  the  *  nine  hundred  and TMs  number
eighteenth  yeere  of  the  Hegeira,  died  thereof. Howbeit  ^kould^ather
those desolate Towns never received from thenceforth  ^  819.
any  new  inhabitants,  especially  Fanzara,  which  was  given
to  certaine  Arabian  Captaines,  that  came  to  assist  Sahid.
Whatsoever  commoditv  ariseth  out  of  Banibasil  redoun-
deth  to  the  Priests  of  the  principall  Mahumetan  Temple
in  Fez,  and  it  amounteth  almost  yeerely  to  twenty  thou-
sand Dukats. Heere  also  in  times  past  were  most  large,
pleasant,  and  fruitfull  Gardens,  as  appeareth  by  the  Monu-
ments and  reliques  thereof,  howbeit,  they  were  like  other
places,  laid  waste  by  the  warre  of  Sahid. The  Towne
it  selfe  remaineth  destitute  of  inhabitants  an  hundred  and
ten  yeeres ; but  as  the  King  of  Fez  returned  home  from
Duccala,  he  commanded  part  of  his  people  to  inhabite
the same : albeit their incivilitie made them loth so
to  doe.

Fez  was  built  in  the  time  of  one  Aron  a  Mahumetan  Ffz  the  Prin~
Patriarke,  in  the  yeere  of  the  Hegeira  one  hundreth  eighty  C^flB^j{e
and  five,  and  in  the  yeere  of  our  Lord  seven  hundred  andofthe
eightie  sixe,  by  a  certaine  hereticke  against  the  Religion  of  founders
Mahumet. But  why  it  should  so  be  called,  some  are  of  thereof.
opinion,  because  when  the  first  foundations  thereof  were
digged,  there  was  found  some  quantity  of  Gold,  which
mettall  in  the  Arabian  language  is  called  Fez.  ldrls  the  r$t

The  Founder  of  this  City  was  one  Idris,  being  the  fore-  founder  of
said  Aron  his  neere  kinsman. This  Idris  ought  rather Fez.
v  401  2C

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

c.  1526.

to  have  beene  an  Mahumetan  Patriarke,  because  he  was
nephew  unto  Hali  the  Cousin-german  of  Mahumet,  who
married  Falerna,  Mahumets  owne  daughter,  so  that  Idris
both  by  Father  and  Mother  was  of  Mahumets  Linage :
but  Aron  being  nephew  unto  one  Habbus  the  Uncle  of
Mahumet,  was  of  kinred  onely  by  the  Fathers  side.
Howbeit  both  of  them  were  excluded  from  the  said  Pat-
riarkship  for  certaine  causes  mentioned  in  the  African
Chronicles,  although  Aron  usurped  the  same  by  deceit.
For  Arons  Uncle  being  a  most  cunning  and  crafty  man,
and  faining  himselfe  to  beare  greatest  favour  unto  the
family  of  Hali,  and  to  be  most  desirous,  that  the  Patriark-
ship  should  light  thereon,  sent  his  Ambassadours  almost
throughout  the  whole  world.  Whereupon  the  dignity
was  translated  from  Umeve  to  Habdulla  Seffec  the  first
Patriarke.  Which,  Umeve  being  informed  of,  waged
warre  against  the  family  of  Hali,  and  so  prevailed,  that
some  of  them  he  chased  into  Asia,  and  some  into  India.
Howbeit,  an  ancient  Religious  man  of  the  same  family
remained  still  alive  at  Elmadina,  who  being  very  old,  no
whit  regarded  the  dignity.  But  this  ancient  sire  left
behind  him  two  sonnes,  who  when  they  were  come  to
mans  estate,  grew  into  so  great  favour  with  the  people  of
Elmadin,  that  they  were  chased  thence  by  their  enemies ;
the  one  being  taken  and  hanged ;  and  the  other  (whose
name  was  Idris)  escaping  into  Mauritania.  This  Idris
dwelling  upon  Mount  Zaron,  about  thirtie  miles  from
Fez,  governed  not  onely  the  Common-wealth,  but  matters
of  Religion  also :  and  all  the  Region  adjacent  paid  him
tribute.  At  length  Idris  deceasing  without  lawfull  issue,
left  one  of  his  maydes  big  with  child,  which  had  beene
turned  from  the  Gothes  Religion  to  the  Moores.  Being
delivered  of  her  sonne,  they  called  him  after  his  Fathers
name,  Idris.  This  child  the  inhabitants  chusing  for  their
Prince,  caused  him  to  be  most  carefully  brought  up :  and
[II.  vi.  785.]  as  he  grew  in  yeeres,  to  the  end  they  might  trayne  him  up
in  feates  of  Chivalrie,  they  appointed  one  Rasid  a  most
valiant  and  skilfull  Captaine  to  instruct  him. Insomuch,

402

JOHN LEO ON AFRICA  a.d.

c.  1526.
that  while  hee  was  but  fifteene  yeeres  of  age,  he  grew  Idris  his  great
famous  for  his  valiant  Acts  and  Stratagems,  and  beganne  VgI0U™*
wonderfully to inlarge his Dominions. Wherefore his  0fage.
Troupes  and  Family  increasing  every  day  more  and  more,
he  set  his  minde  upon  building  of  a  Citie,  and  changing  of
his  habitation. And  so  hee  sent  for  cunning  builders  into
all  Nations,  who  having  diligently  perused  all  places  in
the  Region,  at  last  made  choise  of  that  where  the  Citie  of
Fez  now  standeth. For  heere  they  found  great  store  of
Fountaines,  and  a  faire  River,  which  springing  forth  of  a
plaine  not  farre  off,  runneth  pleasantly  almost  eight  miles
amidst  the  little  Hils,  till  at  length  it  casteth  it  selfe  upon
another  plaine. Southward  of  the  place they  found  a
wood,  which  they  knew  would  be  right  commodious  for
the  Towne. Here  therefore  upon  the  East  banke  of  the
said  River,  they  built  a  Towne  contayning  three  thousand
Families : neither  omitted  they  ought  at  all  which  might
bee  required  in  a  flourishing  Common-wealth. After  the
decease  of  Idris,  his  Sonne  erected  another  Towne  directly
over  against  the  foresaid,  on  the  other  side  of  the  River.
But  in  processe  of  time  either  Towne  so  increased,  that
there  was  but  a  small  distance  betweene  them : for  the
Governours  of  each  laboured  might  and  mayne  to  aug-
ment their  owne  Jurisdictions. An  hundred  and  foure-
score  yeeres  after,  there  fell  out  great  dissention  and  Civill
warre  betweene  these  two  Cities,  which  by  report  con-
tinued an  hundred  yeeres  together.

At  length  Joseph  King  of  Maroco  of  the  Luntune
Family,  conducting  an  huge  Armie  against  both  these
Princes,  tooke  them  Prisoners,  carryed  them  home  unto
his  Dominions,  and  put  them  to  a  most  cruell  death.  And
he  so  vanquished  the  Citizens,  that  there  were  slaine  of
them  thirtie  thousand.  Then  determined  King  Joseph
to  reduce  those  two  Townes  into  firme  unitie  and  con-
cord :  for  which  cause,  making  a  bridge  over  the  River,
and  beating  downe  the  wals  of  either  Towne  right  against
it,  he  united  both  into  one,  which  afterward  he  divided
into  twelve  Regions  or  Wards. Now  let  us  make  report

403

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

c.  1526.
*i 526.  of  all  such  memorable  things  as  are  there  to  bee  seene  *  at

this  day.
A  most  exact \  \Vorld  it  is  to  see,  how  large,  how  populous,  how
description  of ^jj fortified and walled this CJtic is. The most part

the  Litte  of .  -  . .  1 t i t  t  •  i  •  1  ■

frz>  thereof stanaeth upon  great  and  little  riils  : neither  is

there  any  plaine  ground  but  onely  in  the  midst  of  the
Citie. The  River  entreth  the  Towne  in  two  places,  for
it  is  divided  into  a  double  branch,  one  wThereof  runneth
bv  new  Fez,  that  is,  by  the  South-side  of  the  Towne,  and
another  commeth in  at the  West-side. And so  almost
infinitely  dispersing  it  selfe  into  the  Citie,  it  is  derived  by
certaine  conduits  and  chanels  unto  everv  Temple,  Colledge,
Inne,  Hospitall,  and  almost  to  everv  private  house. Unto
the  Temples  are  certaine  square  conduits  adjoyned,  having
Cels  and  Receptacles  round  about  them  ;  each  ont  of  which
hath  a  Cock,  wherebv  water  is  conveved  through  the  wall
into  a Trough of Marble. From  whence  flowing  into
the  Sinkes  and  Gutters,  it  carrveth  awav  all  the  filth  of
the  Citie  into the  River. In  the  midst  of  each  square
conduit  standeth  a  low  Cisterne,  beeing  three  Cubits  in
depth,  toure  in  breadth,  and  twelve  in  length  : and  the
water is conveved bv certaine Pipes into the foresaid
square  conduits,  which  are  almost  an  hundred  and  fiftie  in
number. The  most  part  oX the  houses  are  built  oX  fine
brickes  and  stones  curiouslv  painted. Likewise  their  bav-
windowes  and  portals  are  made  of  partie-coloured  bricke,
like  unto  the  stones  oX Maiorica. The  Roofes  oX their
Houses  thev  adorne  with  Gold,  Azure,  and  other  excellent
Colours,  which  Roofes  are  made  oX  wood,  and  plaine  on
the  top,  to  the  end  that  in  Summer-time  Carpets  may  be
spred  upon  them,  for  here  thev  use  to  lodge  bv  reason  of
the  exceeding  heate  oX  that  Countrev. Some  houses  are
oX two  and  some  oX  three  Stories  high,  whereunto  thev
make  fine  staires,  bv  which  thev  passe  from  one  roome  to
another  under  the  same  roofe  : for  the  middle  part  of  the
house  is  alwaves  open  or  uncovered,  having  some  Cham-
bers built  on  the  one  side,  and  some  on  the  other. The
Chamber  doores  are  verv  high  and  wide  : which  in  rich

404

JOHN LEO ON AFRICA  a.d.

c.  1526.
mens  houses  are  framed  of  excellent  and  carved  wood.
Each  Chamber  hath  a  Presse  curiously  painted  and  var-
nished belonging  thereunto,  being  as  long  as  the  Chamber
it  selfe  is  broad  :  some  will  have  it  very  high,  and  others
but  sixe  handfuls  in  height,  that  they  may  set  it  on  the
Tester  of  a  Bed.  All  the  portals  of  their  houses  are  sup-
ported with  bricke  Pillars  finely  playstered  over,  except
some  which  stand  upon  Pillars  of  Marble.  The  Beames
and  Transomes  upholding  their  Chambers  are  most  curi-
ously painted  and  carved.  To  some  houses  likewise
belong  certaine  square  Cisternes,  contayning  in  breadth
sixe  or  seven  Cubits,  in  length  ten  or  twelve,  and  in  height
but  sixe  or  seven  handfuls,  being  all  uncovered,  and  built
of  brickes  trimly  playstered  over.  Along  the  sides  of  these
Cisternes  are  certaine  Cockes,  which  convav  the  water  into
Marble  Troughs,  as  I  have  seene  in  many  places  of
Europe.  When  the  foresaid  Conduits  are  full  of  water,
that  which  floweth  over,  runneth  by  certaine  secret  pipes
and  conveyances  into  the  Cisternes  :  and  that  which  over-
flowed the  Cisternes,  is  carryed  likewise  by  other  passages
into  the  common  Sinkes  and  Gutters,  and  so  into  the
River.  The  said  Cisternes  are  alwayes  kept  sweete  and
cleane,  neyther  are  they  covered  but  onely  in  Summer-
time, when  Men,  Women,  and  Children  bathe  themselves
therein.

Moreover, on the tops  of  their  houses they  usually
build  a  Turret  wTith  many  pleasant  roomes  therein,  whither  [II.  vi.  786.]
the  women  tor  recreations  sake,  when  they  are  wearie  of
working,  retyre  themselves  ; from  whence  they  may  see
wel-nigh  all  the  Citie  over.

Of Mahumetan Temples and Oratories there are Wta  number
almost  seven  hundred  in  this  Towne,  fiftie  whereof  are  and  state^-
most  stately  and  sumptuously  built,  having  their  Conducts Makmutm
made  of  Marble  and  other  excellent  stones  unknowne  to Temples  in
the  Italians  ; and  the  Chapiters  of  their  Pillars  be  arti-  Fez.
ficially  adorned  with  painting  and  carving. The  tops  of
these  Temples,  after  the  fashion  of  Christian  Churches  in
Europe,  are  made  of  Joyses  and  Plankes : but  the  pave-

405

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

c.  1526.

ment  is  covered  with  Mats  which  are  so  cunningly  sowed
together  that  a  man  cannot  see  the  breadth  of  a  finger
uncovered.  The  wals  likewise  on  the  inner  side  are
lined  a  mans  height  with  such  Mats.  Moreover,  each
Temple  hath  a  Turret  or  Steeple,  from  whence  certaine
are  appointed  with  a  lowd  voice  to  call  the  people  at  their
set-time  of  Prayer.  Every  Temple  hath  one  onely  Priest
to  say  Service  therein ;  who  hath  the  bestowing  of  all
Revenues  belonging  to  his  owne  Temple,  as  occasion
requireth :  for  thereby  are  maintayned  Lampes  to  burne
in  the  night,  and  Porters  to  keepe  the  doores  are  paid
their  wages  out  of  it,  and  so  likewise  are  they  that  call
the  people  to  ordinarie  Prayers  in  the  night  season :  for
those  which  cry  from  the  said  Towres  in  the  day  time
have  no  wages,  but  are  onely  released  from  all  Tributes
and  Exactions.
The  principal!  The  chiefe  Mahumetan  Temple  in  this  Towne  is  called
Temple  of  Fez  Caruven,  beeing  of  so  incredible  a  bignesse,  that  the  cir-
Caruven  cul*  thereof  and  of  the  buildings  longing  unto  it,  is  a
good  mile  and  a  halfe  about.  This  Temple  hath  one  and
thirtie  gates  or  portals  of  a  wonderfull  greatnesse  and
height.  The  Roofe  of  this  Temple  is  in  length  one
hundred  and  fiftie,  and  in  breadth  about  fourescore  Floren-
tine Cubits.  The  Turret  or  Steeple,  from  whence  they
cry  amayne  to  assemble  the  people  together,  is  exceedingly
high  ;  the  breadth  whereof  is  supported  with  twentie,  and
the  length  with  thirtie  Pillars.  On  the  East,  West,  and
North-sides,  it  hath  certaine  Walkes  or  Galleries,  fortie
Cubits  in  length,  and  thirtie  in  breadth.  Under  which
Galleries  there  is  a  Cell  or  Storehouse,  wherein  Oyle,
Candles,  Mats,  and  other  such  necessaries  for  the  Temple
are  layd  up.  Every  night  in  this  Temple  are  burnt  nine
hundred  Lights ;  for  every  arch  hath  a  severall  Lampe,
especially  those  which  extend  through  the  mid-quire.
Some  Arches  there  are  that  have  one  hundred  and  twentie
Candles  a  piece  :  there  are  likewise  certaine  Brasse  Candle-
stickes  so  great  and  with  so  many  Sockets,  as  they  will
hold  each  one  fifteene  hundred  Candles  :  and  these  Candle-

406

JOHN LEO ON AFRICA  ad.

c.  1526.
stickes  are  reported  to  have  beene  made  of  Bels,  which
the  King  of  Fez  in  times  past  tooke  from  Christians.

About  the  wals  of  the  said  Temple  are  divers  Pulpits,  Pulpits  and
out  of  which  those  that  are  learned  in  the  Mahumetan  Preac*tn&
Law  instruct  the  people.  Their  Winter  Lectures  beginne
presently  after  Sunrise,  and  continue  the  space  of  an
houre.  But  their  Summer  Lectures  hold  on  from  the
Sunne  going  downe,  till  an  houre  and  a  halfe  within  night.
And  here  they  teach  as  well  Morall  Philosophie  as  the
Law  of  Mahumet.  The  Summer  Lectures  are  performed
by  certaine  private  and  obscure  persons ;  but  in  Winter
such  onely  are  admitted  to  read,  as  bee  reputed  their
greatest  Clerkes.  All  which  Readers  and  Professours  are
yearely  allowed  most  liberall  Stipends.  The  Priest  of  this
great  Temple  is  enjoyned  onely  to  read  Prayers,  and  faith-
fully to  distribute  almes  among  the  poore.  Every  Festi-
vall  day  he  bestoweth  all  such  Corne  and  Money  as  he
hath  in  his  custodie,  to  all  poore  people  according  to  their
need.

The  Treasuror  or  Collector  of  the  Revenues  of  this
Church  hath  every  day  a  Duckat  for  his  pay.  Likewise
he  hath  eight  Notaries  or  Clerkes  under  him ;  every  one
of  which  gayneth  sixe  Duckats  a  moneth :  and  other  sixe
Clerkes  who  receive  the  rent  of  houses,  shops,  and  other
such  places  as  belong  to  the  Temple,  having  for  their
wages  the  twentieth  part  of  all  such  Rents  and  Duties  as
they  gather.

Moreover,  there  belong  to  this  Temple  twentie  Factors
or  Baylies  of  Husbandry,  that  without  the  Citie  wals  have
an  eye  to  the  Labourers,  Ploughmen,  Vine-planters,  and
Gardeners,  and  that  provide  them  things  necessarie :  their
gaine  is  three  Duckats  a  moneth.  Not  farre  from  the
Citie  are  about  twentie  Lime-kils,  and  as  many  Bricke-
kils,  serving  for  the  reparation  of  their  Temple,  and  of  all
houses  thereto  belonging:.  The  Revenues

The  Revenues  of  the  said  Temple  daily  received,  are  %  fj*  A
two  hundred  Duckats  a  day ;  the  better  halfe  whereof  is  ^thlyZre
layd  out  upon  the  particulars  aforesaid. Also  if  there  bee  bestowed.

407

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

c.  1526.

any  Temples  in  the  Citie  destitute  of  living,  they  must
all  be  mayntayned  at  the  charges  of  this  great  Temple :
and  then  that  which  remayneth  after  all  expenses,  is  be-
stowed for  the  behoofe  of  the  Common-wealth :  for  the
people  receive  no  Revenues  at  all.  In  our  time  the  King
commanded  the  Priest  of  the  said  Temple  to  lend  him  an
huge  summe  of  money,  which  he  never  repayed  againe.
Colkdges  of  Moreover,  in  the  Citie  of  Fez  are  two  most  stately
Fez-  Colledges, of which divers roomes are adorned with

curious  painting ;  all  their  beames  are  carved,  their  wals
consisting  both  of  Marble  and  Freestone.  Some  Colledges
heere  are  which  contayne  an  hundred  studies,  some  more,
and  some  fewer,  all  which  were  built  by  divers  Kings  of
the  Marin  Family.  One  there  is  among  the  rest  most
beautifull  and  admirable  to  behold,  which  was  erected  by
a  certaine  King  called  Habu  Henon.  Here  is  to  be  seene
an  excellent  Fountaine  of  Marble,  the  Cisterne  whereof
contayneth  two  Pipes.  Through  this  Colledge  runneth
[II.  vi.  787.]  a  little  streame  in  a  most  cleere  and  pleasant  chanell,  the
brimmes  and  edges  whereof  are  workmanly  framed  of
Marble,  and  stones  of  Majorica.  Likewise  heere  are
three  Cloysters  to  walke  in,  most  curiously  and  artificially
made,  with  certaine  eight  square  Pillars  of  divers  colours
to  support  them.  And  betweene  Pillar  and  Pillar  the
arches  are  beautifully  over-cast  with  Gold,  Azure,  and
divers  other  Colours ;  and  the  Roofe  is  very  artificially
built  of  wood.  The  sides  of  these  Cloysters  are  so  close,
that  they  which  are  without  cannot  see  such  as  walke
within.  The  wals  round  about  as  high  as  a  man  can
reach,  are  adorned  with  Playster-worke  of  Majorica.  In
many  places  you  may  find  certaine  Verses,  which  declare
what  yeare  the  Colledge  was  built  in,  together  with  many
Epigrams  in  the  Founders  commendation.  The  Letters
of  which  Verses  are  very  great  and  black,  so  that  they  may
be  read  a  farre  off.  This  Colledge  gates  are  of  Brasse
most  curiously  carved,  and  so  are  the  doores  artificially
made  of  wood.  In  the  Chappell  of  this  Colledge  standeth
a  certaine  Pulpit  mounted  nine  stayres  high,  which  staires

408

JOHN  LEO ON AFRICA  a.d.

c.  1526.
are  of  Ivorie  and  Ebonie. Some  affirme,  that  the  King
having  built  this  Colledge,  was  desirous  to  know  how
much  money  hee  had  spent  in  building  it ; but  after  he
had  perused  a  leafe  or  two  of  his  Account-booke,  finding
the  summe  of  fortie  thousand  Duckats,  he  rent  it  asunder,
and  threw  it  into  the  foresaid  little  River,  adding  this
Sentence  out  of  a  certaine  Arabian  Writer  :  Each  precious
and  amiable  thing,  though  it  costeth  deare,  yet  if  it  be
beautifull,  it  cannot  choose  but  bee  good  cheape :  neither
is  any  thing  of  too  high  a  price,  which  pleaseth  a  mans
affection. Howbeit  a  certaine  Treasurer  of  the  Kings, A  Colkdge
making  a  particular  account  of  all  the  said  expenses,  found  ™*  48oo°°-
that this excellent  building stood his Master in foure  ^y^w  '
hundred  and  eightie  thousand  Duckats. The  other  Col-
ledges  of  Fez  are  somewhat  like  unto  this,  having  every
one  Readers  and  Professors,  some  of  which  read  in  the
forenoone,  and  some  in  the  afternoone.

In  times  past  the  Students  of  those  Colledges  had
their  apparell  and  victuals  allowed  them  for  seven
yeares,  but  now  they  have  nothing  gratis  but  their
Chamber.

For  the  warre  of  Sahid  destroyed  many  possessions, The  suppres-
whereby Learning was maintayned ; so that now the  sionofLearn-

greatest  Colledge  of  all  hath  yeerely  but  two  hundred,  and  *!*&  an

o  o  j  j  *  lecirned  men  a

the  second  but  an  hundred  Duckats  for  the  maintenance  principalcause
of  their  Professors. And  this  perhaps  may  bee  one  rea-  of  disorderly
son,  among  many,  why  the  government  not  onely  of  Fez,  an*  base
but  of  all  the  Cities  in  Africa,  is  so  base.  government.

Now  these  Colledges  are  furnished  with  no  Schollers
but  such  as  are  strangers,  and  live  of  the  Citie  Almes :
and  if  any  Citizens  dwell  there,  they  are  not  above  two
or  three  at  the  most.  The  Professor  being  readie  for  his
Lecture,  some  of  his  Auditors  readeth  a  Text,  whereupon
the  said  Professor  dilateth,  and  explayneth  obscure  and
difficult  places.  Sometimes  also  the  Schollers  dispute  be-  A  description
fore  their  Professor.  SS^«

Many  Hospitals  there  are  in  Fez,  no  whit  inferiour, in  the  Citie  of
either  for  building  or  beautie,  unto  the  foresaid  Colledges. Fez.

409

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

c.  1526.

For  in  them  whatsoever  strangers  came  to  the  Citie  were
entertayned  at  the  common  charge  for  three  dayes  together.
There  are  likewise  as  faire  and  as  stately  Hospitals  in
the  Suburbes.  In  times  past  their  wealth  was  marvellous
great ;  but  in  the  time  of  Sahids  warre,  the  King  standing
in  need  of  a  great  summe  of  money,  was  counselled  by
Livings  some  of  his  greedie  Courtiers  to  sell  the  Livings  of  the
belonging  to  s^  Hospitals.  Which  when  the  people  would  in  no
0SP  a  s'  case  yeeld  unto,  the  Kings  Oratour  or  Speaker,  perswaded
them  that  all  those  Livings  were  given  by  his  Majesties
Predecessours,  and  therefore  (because  when  the  warres
were  ended,  they  should  soone  recover  all  againe)  that  it
were  farre  better  for  them  by  that  meanes  to  pleasure
their  Soveraigne,  then  to  let  his  Kingly  Estate  fall  into  so
great  danger.  Whereupon  all  the  said  Livings  being
sold,  the  King  was  prevented  by  untimely  and  sudden
death  before  he  could  bring  his  purpose  to  effect :  and  so
these  famous  Hospitals  were  deprived  of  all  their  main-
tenance.

The  poore  indeed  and  impotent  people  of  the  Citie  are
at  this  day  relieved ;  but  no  strangers  are  entertayned,
save  only  learned  men  or  Gentlemen.  Howbeit  there  is
another  Hospitall  for  the  reliefe  of  sicke  and  diseased
strangers,  who  have  their  dyet  onely  allowed  them,  but
no  Physician  or  Medicine :  certaine  women  there  are
which  attend  upon  them,  till  they  recover  their  former
health,  or  dye.  In  this  Hospitall  likewise  there  is  a  place
for  frantike  or  distracted  persons,  where  they  are  bound
in  strong  Iron  Chaines ;  whereof  the  part  next  unto  their
walkes  is  strengthened  with  mightie  beames  of  Wood  and
Iron.  The  Governour  of  these  distracted  persons,  when
he  bringeth  them  any  sustenance,  hath  a  Whip  of  purpose
to  chastise  those  that  offer  to  bite,  strike,  or  play  any  mad
part.

Likewise  this  Hospitall  hath  many  Roomes  for  the
Purveyors,  Notaries,  Cookes,  and  other  Officers  belonging
to  the  sicke  persons ;  who  each  of  them  have  some  small
yeerely  stipend. Being  a  young  man, I  my  selfe  was

410

JOHN LEO ON AFRICA  ad.

c.  1526.
Notarie  heere  for  two  yeeres,  which  Office  is  worth  three  JohnLeoinhis
Duckats  a  moneth.  5Sf  J«B

In  this  Citie  are  moe  then  an  hundred  Bath-stoves  very  j^twoTeem
artificially  and  stately  built ;  which  though  they  bee  not  together.
of  equall  bignesse,  yet  are  they  all  of  one  fashion.  Each  Their  Bathes
Stove  hath  foure  Halls,  without  which  are  certaine  Gal-  and  bathing.
leries  in  an  higher  place,  with  five  or  sixe  staires  to  ascend
unto  them :  here  men  put  off  their  apparell,  and  hence
they  goe  naked  into  the  Bath.  In  the  midst  they  alwaies  [II.  vi.  788.]
keepe  a  Cisterne  full  of  water.  First  therefore,  they  that
meane  to  bathe  themselves,  must  passe  through  a  cold
Hall,  where  they  use  to  temper  hot  water  and  cold  to-
gether, then  they  goe  into  a  roome  somewhat  hotter,
where  the  servants  dense  and  wash  them ;  and  last  of  all,
they  proceede  into  a  third  Hot-house,  where  they  sweate
as  much  as  they  thinke  good.  The  fire  that  heateth  their
water  is  made  of  nought  else  but  beasts  dung :  for  which
purpose  many  boyes  are  set  on  worke  to  run  up  and  downe
to  Stables,  and  thence  to  carrie  all  the  dung,  and  to  lay  it
on  heapes  without  the  Towne-walles ;  which  being  parched
in  the  Sunne  for  two  or  three  moneths  together,  they  use
for  fuell.  Likewise,  the  women  have  their  Stoves  apart  Womens
from  the  men.  And  yet  some  Hot-houses  serve  both  for  Bat"es-
men  and  women,  but  at  sundrie  times,  namely,  for  men
from  the  third  to  the  fourteenth  houre  of  the  day,  and  the
residue  for  women.  While  women  are  bathing  them-
selves, they  hang  out  a  rope  at  the  first  entrance  of  the
house,  which  is  a  signe  for  men,  that  they  may  then  pro-
ceede no  farther.  Neither  may  husbands  here  be  per-
mitted to  speake  with  their  owne  wives  ;  so  great  a  regard
they  have  of  their  honestie.  Here  men  and  women  both,
after  they  have  done  bathing,  use  to  banquet  and  make
merrie  with  pleasant  Musicke  and  singing.  Young
Striplings  enter  the  Bath  starke  naked  without  any  shame,
but  men  cover  their  privities  with  a  linnen  cloth.  The
richer  sort  will  not  enter  the  common  Bath,  but  that  which
is  adorned  and  finely  set  forth,  and  which  serveth  for
Noble-men  and  Gentle-men. When  any  one  is  to  be

411

a.i>.  tURCttAS HIS PILGRlMES

c.  1526.

bathed,  they  lay  him  along  upon  the  ground,  anointing
him  with  a  certaine  oyntment,  and  with  certaine  instru-
ments doing  away  his  filth.  The  richer  sort  have  a  Car-
pet to  lie  on,  their  head  lying  on  a  woodden  Cushion,
covered  with  the  same  Carpet.  Likewise,  here  are  many
Barbers  and  Chyrurgions  which  attend  to  doe  their  office.
Revenues  to  The  most  part  of  these  Baths  pertaine  to  the  Temples  and
the  Temple,  Colledges,  yeelding  unto  them  a  great  summe  of  money
for  yearely  rent :  for  some  give  an  hundred,  some  an  hun-
dred and  fiftie  Duckats  a  yeare.  Neither  must  I  here
omit  the  Festivall-day  which  the  Servants  and  Officers  of
the  Bathes  celebrate ;  who  with  Trumpets  and  Pipes  call-
ing their  friends  together,  goe  forth  of  the  Towne,  and
there  gather  a  wild  Onion,  putting  it  in  a  certaine  brazen
vessell,  and  covering  the  same  with  a  linnen  cloth  wet  in
Lee  :  afterward  with  a  great  noise  of  Trumpets  and  Pipes,
they  solemnely  bring  the  said  Onion  unto  the  Hot-house
doore,  and  there  they  hang  it  up  in  the  little  brazen  vessell
or  Laver,  saying,  That  this  is  a  most  happy  boading,  or
signe  of  good  luck  unto  their  Stove.  Howbeit,  I  suppose
it  to  be  some  such  Sacrifice,  as  the  ancient  Moores  were
wont  in  times  past,  when  they  were  destitute  of  Lawes
and  civilitie,  to  offer,  and  that  the  same  custom  hath
remained  till  this  very  day.  The  like  is  to  be  seene  even
among  Christians,  who  celebrate  many  Feasts,  whereof
they  can  yeeld  no  reason.  Likewise,  every  African  towne
had  their  peculiar  Feast,  which,  when  the  Christians
once  enjoyed  Africa,  were  utterly  abolished  and  done
away.
The  Innes  of  In  this  Citie  are  almost  two  hundred  Innes,  the  greatest
Fez.  whereof are in the principall part of the Citie neere

unto  the  chiefe  Temple.  Every  of  these  Innes  are  three
stories  high,  and  containe  an  hundred  and  twenty,  or
moe  Chambers  apiece.  Likewise,  each  one  hath  a  Foun-
taine,  together  with  Sinks  and  Water-pipes,  which  make
avoidance  of  all  the  filth.  Never,  to  my  remembrance,
did  I  see  greater  building,  except  it  were  the  Spanish
Colledge  at  Bologna,  or  the  Pallace  of  the  Cardinall  di

412

JOHN LEO ON AFRICA  a.d.

c.  1526.
San  Giorgio  at  Rome ;  of  which  Innes  all  the  Chamber-
doores  have  Walkes  or  Galleries  before  them.  And  albeit
the  Innes  of  this  Citie  are  very  faire  and  large,  yet  they
affoord  most  beggerly  entertainement  to  strangers ;  for
there  are  neither  Beds  nor  Couches  for  a  man  to  lie  upon,
unlesse  it  be  a  course  Blanket  and  a  Mat.  And  if  you
will  have  any  victuals,  you  must  goe  to  the  Shambles
your  selfe,  and  buy  such  meate  for  your  Host  to  dresse,
as  your  stomack  stands-to.  In  these  Innes  certaine  poore
Widdowes  of  Fez,  which  have  neither  wealth  nor  friends
to  succour  them,  are  relieved :  sometimes  one,  and  some-
times two  of  them  together  are  allowed  a  Chamber ;  for
which  courtesie  they  play  both  the  Chamberlaines  and
Cookes  of  the  Inne.  The  Inne-keepers  of  Fez  being  all
of  one  Family,  called  Elcheua,goe  apparelled  like  Women,
and  shave  their  Beards,  and  are  so  delighted  to  immitate
Women,  that  they  will  not  onely  counterfeite  their  speech,
but  will  sometimes  also  sit  downe  and  spin.  Each  one  of
these  hath  his  Concubine,  whom  hee  accompanieth  as  if
she  were  his  owne  lawfull  Wife ;  albeit  the  said  Concu-
bines are  not  onely  ill-favoured  in  countenance,  but
notorious  for  their  bad  life  and  behavior.  They  buy  and
sell  wine  so  freely,  that  no  man  controles  them  for  it.
None  resort  hither  but  most  lewd  and  wicked  people,  to
the  end  they  may  more  boldly  commit  vilany.  The  very
company  of  these  Inne-keepers  is  so  odious,  and  detest-
able in  the  sight  of  all  honest  men,  learned  men,  and
Merchants,  that  they  will  in  no  wise  vouchsafe  to  speake
unto  them.  And  they  are  firmely  enjoyned  not  to
enter  into  the  Temple,  into  the  Burse,  nor  into  any  Bath.
Neither  yet  are  they  permitted  to  resort  unto  those  Innes
which  are  next  unto  the  great  Temple,  and  wherein
Merchants  are  usually  entertained.

In  this  Citie  are  Mills  in  foure  hundred  places  at  least.
And  every  of  these  places  containeth  five  or  sixe  Mills :
so  that  there  are  some  thousands  of  Mills  in  the  whole  F  J

City. Every  Mill  standeth  in  a  large  roome  upon  some  Like  unto  our
strong pillar or post, whereunto many Country-people  Hone-mills.

413

A.D.

c.  1526.

A  discription
of  the  Occu-
pations, the
Shops,  and  the
Market,
[II.  vi.  789.]
Scriveners,

Booksellers,

Shoo-mer-

chants.

Brasiers.
Fruiterers.

Herb-women.

Taverns.
Milk-sellers.

Cotton-sellers.
Rope-sellers.

Girdlers.

Salters.
Potters.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

use  to  resort. All  the  said  Mills  pertaine  either  to  the
Temples  or  Colledges.

Each  trade  or  occupation  hath  a  peculiar  place  allotted
thereto,  the  principal!  whereof  are  next  unto  the  great
Temple :  for  there  first  you  may  behold  to  the  number  of
fourescore  Notaries  or  Scriveners  shops,  whereof  some
joyne  upon  the  Temple,  and  the  residue  stand  over  against
them :  every  of  which  Shops  hath  alwaies  two  Notaries.
Then  Westward  there  are  about  thirtie  Stationers  or
Booke-sellers.  The  Shoo-merchants  which  buy  Shooes
and  Buskins  of  the  Shoo-makers,  and  sell  them  againe  to
the  Citizens,  inhabite  on  the  Southside  of  the  Temple :
and  next  unto  them,  such  as  make  Shooes  for  children
onely,  their  Shops  being  about  fiftie.  On  the  East-side
dwell  those  that  sell  vessels,  and  other  commodities  made
of  brasse.  Over  against  the  great  Gate  of  the  said
Temple  stands  the  Fruit-market,  containing  fiftie  Shops,
where  no  kind  of  fruit  is  wanting.  Next  unto  them
stand  the  Waxe-merchants,  very  ingenious  and  cunning
workmen,  and  much  to  be  admired.  Here  are  Merchants
factors  likewise,  though  they  bee  but  few.  Then  followes
the  Herbe-market,  wherein  the  Pome-citrons,  and  divers
kinds  of  greene  Boughes  and  Herbes  doe  represent  the
sweete  and  flourishing  Spring,  and  in  this  Market  are
about  twenty  Tavernes :  for  they  which  drinke  Wine,  will
shrowd  themselves  under  the  shadie  and  pleasant  Boughes.
Next  unto  them  stand  the  Milke-sellers :  I  thinke  there
passeth  scarce  one  day  over  their  heads,  wherein  they
utter  not  five  and  twentie  tunnes  of  Milke.  Next  unto
these  are  such  as  sell  Cotton,  and  they  have  about  thirtie
shops  :  then  follow  those  that  sell  Hempe,  Ropes,  Halters,
and  such  other  hempen  commodities.  Then  come  you  to
the  Girdlers,  and  such  as  make  Pantofles,  and  Leather-
bridles  embrodered  with  silke :  next  their  shops  adjoyne
that  make  Sword-scabberds,  and  Caparisons  for  Horses.
Immediately  after  dwell  those  that  sell  Salt  and  Lime ;
and  upon  them  border  an  hundred  Shops  of  Potters,  who
frame al kind of  earthen vessels  adorned with divers

414

JOHN LEO ON AFRICA  a.d.

c.  1526.
colours. Then  come  you  to  the  Sadlers  Shops :  and  next  Sadlers.
of  all  to  the  streete  of  Porters,  who  (as  I  suppose)  are The  Porters  of
above  three  hundred : these  Porters  have  a  Consull  or
Governour,  who  every  weeke  allotteth  unto  part  of  them
some  set  businesse. The  gaine  which  redoundeth  thereof,
they  put  into  a  Coffer,  dividing  it  at  the  weekes  end
among them, which have wrought the same weeke.
Strange  it  is  to  consider  how  exceedingly  these  Porters
love  one  another : for  when  any  of  them  deceaseth,  the
whole company maintaineth his widow and fatherlesse
children  at  their  common  charge,  till  either  she  die,  or
marrieth  a  new  Husband. The  children  they  carefully
bring  up,  till  they  have  attained  to  some  good  Art  or
occupation. Next  unto  the  Porters  companie  dwell  the
chiefe  Cookes  and  Victuallers. Here  also  stands  a  cer-  Cookes.
taine  square  house  covered  with  Reed,  wherein  Pease  and
Turnep-rootes are to bee sold, which are so greatly
esteemed  of  in  Fez,  that  none  may  buy  them  of  the  coun-
try people  at  the  first  hand,  but  such  as  are  appointed,  who
are  bound  to  pay  tole  &  tribute  unto  the  Customers :  and
scarcely  one  day  passeth,  wherein  more  then  five  hundred
sacks  of  Pease  and  Turneps  are  not  sold. On  the  North-  Ptatt  and
side  of  the  Temple  is  a  place  whither  all  kind  of  Hearbs  *urntp$.
are  brought  to  make  Sallets  withall : for  which  purpose  Sallet-Shops.
there  is  fortie  Shops  appointed. Next  whereunto  is  the
place  of  Smoke,  so  called,  by  reason  of  continuall  smoke :
here  are  certaine  Fritters  or  Cakes  fried  in  Oyle,  like  unto Fritttrtrs.
such  as  are  called  at  Rome,  Pan  Melato. They  roste  their
flesh  not  upon  a  spit,  but  in  an  Oven  : for  making  two  Costing  in
Ovens  one  over  another  for  the  same  purpose,  in  the  lower 0z/ens.
they  kindle  a  fire,  putting  the  flesh  into  the  upper  Oven
when  it  is  well  het ; you  would  not  beleeve  how  finely
their  meat  is  thus  rosted ; for  it  cannot  be  spoiled  either
by  smoke  or  too  much  heate  :  for  they  are  all  night  rosting
it  by  a  gentle  fire,  and  in  the  morning  they  set  it  to  sale.
The foresaid Steakes and Fritters they sell unto the
Citizens  in  so  great  abundance,  that  they  daily  take  for
them  moe  then  two  hundred  Ducats ;  for  there  are  fifteene
I  4X5

A.D.

c.  1526.

Tripe-wives.

Victualers.

Shambles.

The  Governor
of  the

Shambles  in
Fez.

Course  cloth.

Armorers.
Fishmongers.

C  as ge- maker.

[II.  vi.  790.]
Sopers.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Shops  which  sell  nothing  else. Likewise,  here  are  sold
certaine  Fishes  and  flesh  fried,  and  a  kind  of  excellent
savorie  bread, tasting somewhat  like  a Fritter ; which
being  baked  with  Butter,  they  never  eate  but  with  Butter
and  Honie. Here  also  are  the  feete  of  certaine  beasts
sodden,  wherewith  the  Husbandmen  betimes  in  the  morn-
ing breake  their  fast,  and  then  hie  them  to  their  labour.
Next unto these are such as sell Oyle, Salt, Butter,
Cheese, Olives, Pome-citrons and Capers : their shops
are  full  of  fine  earthen  vessels,  which  are  of  much  greater
value  then  the  things  contained  in  them. Then  follow
the  Shambles,  consisting  of  about  forty  Shops,  wherein
the  Butchers  cut  their  flesh  a  pieces,  and  sell  it  by  weight.
They  kill  no  beasts  within  the  Shambles,  for  there  is  a
place  allotted  for  this  purpose  neere  unto  the  River,  where
having  once  dressed  their  flesh,  they  send  it  to  the  Sham-
bles by  certaine  servants  appointed  for  that  end. But
before  any  Butcher  dare  sell  his  flesh  unto  the  Citizens,  he
must  carrie  it  to  the  Governour  of  the  Shambles,  who  so
soone  as  he  seeth  the  flesh,  he  sets  downe  in  a  piece  of
paper  the  price  thereof,  which  they  shew  together  with
their  meate  unto  the  people ; neither  may  they  in  any
case exceed the said price. Next unto the Shambles
standeth  the  Market  where  course  cloathes  are  sold,  which
containeth  at  least  an  hundred  Shops : the  said  cloth  is
delivered  unto  certaine  Criers  (which  are  about  threescore
in  number)  who  carrying  the  cloth  from  Shop  to  Shop,
tell the price thereof. Then follow their Shops that
scowre  and  sell  Armour,  Swords,  Javelings,  and  such  like
warlike  instruments. Next  unto them  stand  the  Fish-
mongers, who  sell  most  excellent  and  great  Fish. Next
unto  the  Fishmongers  dwel  such  as  make  of  a  certaine
hard  Reed,  Coopes  and  Cages  for  Fowles ; their  Shops
being  about  fortie  in  number : for  each  of  the  Citizens
useth  to  bring  up  great  store  of  Hennes  and  Capons.
And  that  their  houses  may  not  be  defiled  with  Hennes-
dung,  they  keepe  them  continually  in  Coopes  and  Cages.
Then  follow  their  Shops  that  sell  liquide  Sope. Next  of

416

JOHN LEO ON AFRICA  a.d.

c.  1526.
all  are  certaine  of  their  Shops  that  sell  Meale,  albeit  they  Mealemen.
are  diversly  dispersed  throughout  the  whole  Citie.  Next
unto  them  are  such  as  sell  Seede-graine  and  Seede-pulse.
Then  are  there  tenne  Shops  of  them  that  sell  Straw.  Next
them  is  the  Market  where  Thread  and  Hempe  is  to  be
sold,  and  where  Hempe  useth  to  bee  kempt :  which  place
is  built  after  the  fashion  of  great  Houses,  with  foure  Gal-
leries, or  spare-roomes  round  about  it :  in  the  first  whereof
they  sell  Linnen-cloth,  and  weigh  Hempe :  in  two  other
sit  a  great  many  women,  having  abundance  of  sale-thread,
which  is  there  sold  by  the  Criers.

Let  us  now  come  to  the  West  part,  which  stretcheth
from  the  Temple  to  that  Gate  that  leadeth  to  Mecnase.
Next  unto  the  Smokie  place  before  mentioned,  their  habi- Tankarters.
tations  directly  stand,  that  make  Leather-tankards  to  draw
water  out  of  Wells,  of  whom  there  are  some  foureteene
Shops. Unto  these  adjoyne  such  as  make  Wicker-vessels,
and  other,  to  lay  up  Meale  and  Corne  in :  and  these  enjoy
about thirty Shops. Next them  are  one  hundred  and
fifty  Shops  of  Taylors. And  next  the  Taylors  are  those  Taylors.
that make  Leather-shields, such  as I have  often seene
brought into Europe. Then follow twenty Shops of
Landresses  or  Washers,  being  people  of  a  base  condition  ;  Landerers.
to  whom  the  Citizens  that  have  not  Maids  of  their  owne,
carry  their  Shirts  and  other  foule  linnen,  which  after  few
dayes  are  restored  unto  them  so  cleane  and  white,  as  it  is
wonderfull. These  Landresses  have  divers  Shops  adjoyn-
ing together in the same place : but here and there
throughout  the  Citie  are  above  two  hundred  Families  of
such  persons. Next  unto  the  Landresses  are  those  that
make  Trees  for Saddles ; who dwell  likewise in  great
numbers Eastward right in the way to the Colledge
founded  by  King  Abuhinan. Upon  these  adjoyne  about
fortie  shops  of  such  as  worke  Stirrops,  Spurres,and  Bridles, Spurres,  &c
so  artificially,  as  I  thinke  the  like  are  not  to  be  seene  in
Europe. Next standeth their streete, that  first rudely
make  the  said  Stirrops,  Bridles  and  Spurres. From  thence
you  may  goe  into  the  streete  of  Sadlers,  which  cover  the .
v  417  2D

A.D.

c.  1526.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Of  the  Station
or  Burse  of
Merchants  in
Fez.

Saddles  before  mentioned  threefold  with  most  excellent
Leather :  the  best  Leather  they  lay  uppermost,  and  the
worst  beneath,  and  that  with  notable  Workmanship,  as
may  bee  seene  in  most  places  of  Italy :  and  of  them  there
are  moe  then  an  hundred  Shops.  Then  follow  their  long
Shops  that  make  Pikes  and  Launces.  Next  standeth  a
Rocke  or  Mount,  having  two  Walkes  thereupon ;  the
one  whereof  leadeth  to  the  East-gate,  and  the  other  to  one
of  the  Kings  Palaces,  where  the  Kings  Sisters,  or  some
other  of  his  Kindred  are  usually  kept.  But  this  is  by  the
way  to  be  noted,  that  all  the  foresaid  Shops,  or  Market,
begin  at  the  great  Temple.

The  Burse  you  may  well  call  a  Citie,  which  being  walled
round  about,  hath  twelve  Gates,  and  before  every  gate  an
Iron-chaine,  to  keepe  Horses  and  Carts  from  comming  in.
The  said  Burse  is  divided  into  twelve  severall  Wards  or
parts :  two  whereof  are  allotted  unto  such  Shoo-makers
as  make  Shooes  onely  for  Noblemen  and  Gentlemen,  and
two  also  to  Silke-merchants,  or  Haberdashers,  that  sell
Ribands,  Garters,  Scarfes,  and  such  other  like  ornaments ;
and  of  these  there  are  about  fiftie  Shops.  Others  there
are  that  sell  Silke  onely  for  the  embrodering  of  Shirts,
Cushions,  and  other  such  furniture  made  of  Cloth,  pos-
sessing almost  as  many  Shops  as  the  former.  Then  follow
those  that  make  Womens  Girdles  of  course  Wooll  (which
some  make  of  Silke)  but  very  grossely,  for  I  thinke  they
are  moe  then  two  fingers  thicke,  so  that  they  may  serve
almost  for  Cables  to  a  Ship.  Next  unto  these  Girdlers
are  such  as  sell  Woollen  and  Linnen-cloth  brought  out  of
Europe :  which  have  also  Silke-stuffes,  Caps,  and  other
like  commodities  to  sell.  Having  passed  these,  you  come
to  them  that  sell  Mats,  Mattrasses,  Cushions,  and  other
things  made  of  Leather.  Next  adjoyneth  the  Customers
Office ;  for  their  Cloth  is  sent  about  by  certaine  Criers  to
be  sold,  who  before  they  can  passe,  must  goe  to  the  Cus-
tomers to  have  the  said  Cloth  sealed,  and  to  pay  Toll  unto
the  Customers.  Criers  here  are  to  the  number  of  sixtie,
*Or  Baiocc. which  for  the  crying  of  every  Cloth  have  one  *  Liardo

418

JOHN LEO ON AFRICA  a.d.

c.  1526.
allowed  them.  Next  of  all  dwell  the  Taylors,  and  that
in  three  severall  streetes.  Then  come  you  to  the  Linnen-
drapers,  which  sell  Smocks  and  other  apparell  for  women :
and  these  are  accounted  the  richest  Merchants  in  all  Fez,
for  their  wares  are  the  most  gainefull  of  all  others.  Next
unto  these  are  certaine  Woollen  garments  to  be  sold,  made
of  such  Cloth  as  is  brought  thither  out  of  Europe.
Every  after-noone  Cloth  is  sold  in  this  place  by  the  Criers,
which  is  lawfull  for  any  man  to  doe,  when  necessary  occa-
sion urgeth  him.  Last  of  all  is  that  place  where  they  use
to  sell  wrought  Shirts,  Towels,  and  other  embrodered
works ;  as  also  where  Carpets,  Beds,  and  Blankets  are  to
be  sold.

Next unto the said Burse, on the Northside, in a  Of  the
streight  lane, stand  an hundred  and  fifty  Grocers  and  Grce?' .
Apothecaries  Shops,  which  are  fortified  on  both  sides  with  J£  other '
two  strong  Gates. These  Shops  are  garded  in  the  night-  Tradesmen
season  by  certaine  hired  and  armed  Watchmen,  which  and  Artizans
keep  their  station  with  Lanthornes  and  Mastives. The  °fFez-
said  Apothecaries  can  make  neither  Sirrups,  Oyntments,
nor  Electuaries : but  such  things  are  made  at  home  by
the  Physicians,  and  are  of  them  to  be  bought. The  Phy-
sitians  houses  adjoyne  for  the  most  part  unto  the  Apothe-
caries :  howbeit,  very  few  of  the  people  know  either  the
Physician,  or  the  use  of  his  Physick. The  Shops  here  are
so  artificially  built  and  adorned,  that  the  like  (I  thinke)
are  no  where  else  to  be  found. Being  in  Tauris,  a  Citie  John  Leo  was
of  Persia,  I  remember  that  I  saw  divers  stately  Shops  aJ  Tauris  in
curiously  built  under  certaine  Galleries,  but  very  darke,
so  that  (in  my  judgement)  they  be  far  inferiour  unto  the
Shops  of  Fez. Next  the  Apothecaries  are  certaine  Arti-  [II.  vi.  791.]
ficers  that  makes  Combes  of  Boxe  and  other  wood. East-  Comb  makers.
ward of the Apothecaries dwell the Needle-makers,
possessing  to  the  number  of  fifty  shops. Then  follow
those  that  turne  Ivory,  and  such  other  matter,  who  (be- Turners.
cause  their  craft  is  practised  by  some  other  Artizans)  are
but  few  in  number. Unto  the  Turners  adjoyne  certaine
that  sell  Meale,  Sope,  and  Broomes :  who  dwelling  next

419

A.D.

c.  1526.

Upholsters.
Poulters.

Corkslippers.

Crosse-bozves.
Broome-men.

Smithes.
Coopers.

Woolmen,

PURCHAS HIS FILGRIMES

unto  the  Thread-market  before  mentioned,  are  scarce
twenty  shops  in  all :  for  the  residue  are  dispersed  in  other
places  of  the  City,  as  we  will  hereafter  declare.  Amongst
the  Cotten-merchants  are  certaine  that  sell  ornaments  for
Tents  and  Beds.  Next  of  all  stand  the  Fowlers,  who,
though  they  be  but  few,  yet  are  they  stored  with  all  kind
of  choice  and  dainty  Fowles  :  whereupon  the  place  is  called
the  Fowlers  market.  Then  come  you  to  their  shops  that
sell  Cords  and  Ropes  of  Hempe :  and  then  to  such  as
make  high  Coorke-slippers  for  Noblemen  and  Gentlemen
to  walk  the  streets  in,  when  it  is  foule  weather :  these
Corke-slippers  are  finely  trimmed  with  much  silke,  and
most  excellent  upper  leathers,  so  that  the  cheapest  will
cost  a  Ducat,  yea  some  there  are  of  ten  Ducats,  &  some
of  five  and  twenty  Ducats  price.  Such  slippers  as  are
accounted  most  fine  and  costly  are  made  of  blacke  and
white  Mulberie-tree,  of  blacke  Walnut-tree,  and  of  the
Jujuba  tree,  albeit  the  Corke-slippers  are  the  most  durable
and  strong.  Unto  these  adjoyne  ten  shops  of  Spanish
Moores,  which  make  Crosse-bowes :  as  also  those  that
make  Broomes  of  a  certaine  wilde  Palme-tree,  such  as  are
dayly  brought  out  of  Sicilie  to  Rome.  These  Broomes
they  carry  about  the  City  in  a  great  basket,  either  selling
them,  or  exchanging  them  for  Bran,  Ashes,  or  old  Shooes :
the  Bran  they  sell  againe  to  Shepheards,  the  Ashes  to  such
as  white  Thread,  and  old  Shooes  to  Coblers.  Next  unto
them  are  Smithes  that  make  Nailes ;  &  Coopers  which
make  certain  great  vessels  in  forme  of  a  bucket,  having
Corne-measures  to  sell  also  :  which  measures,  when  the
Officer,  appointed  for  the  same  purpose,  hath  made  triall  of,
he  is  to  receive  a  farthing  a-peece  for  his  fee.  Then  follow
the  Wooll-chapmen,  who  having  bought  wooll  of  the
Butchers,  put  it  foorth  unto  others  to  be  scowred  and
washed :  the  Sheepe-skinnes  they  themselves  dresse :  but
as  for  Oxe-hides  they  belong  to  another  occupation,  and
are  tanned  in  another  place.  Unto  these  adjoyne  such  as
make  certaine  Langols  or  Withs,  which  the  Africans  put
upon  their  horses  feet. Next  of  all  are  the  Brasiers  :  then

420

JOHN LEO ON AFRICA  a.d.

c.  1526.
such  as  make  Weights  and  Measures ; and  those  likewise  Weights  and
that make instruments to carde Wooll or Flaxe. At Measures-
length  you  descend  into  a  long  street,  where  men  of  divers
occupations  dwell  together,  some  of  which  doe  polish  and
enamell  Stirops,  Spurres,  and  other  such  commodities,  as  Enamellers.
they  receive  from  the  Smithes  roughly  and  rudely  ham-
mered. Next  whom  dwell  certaine  Cart-wrights,  Plow- Fabri.
wrights, Mill-wrights, and of other like occupations.
Diers  have  their  aboad  by  the  Rivers  side,  and  have  each  Diers.
of  them  a  most  cleere  Fountaine  or  Cisterne  to  wash  their
Silke-stuffes  in. Over  against  the  Diers  dwell  makers  of
Bulwarkes  or  Trenches,  in  a  very  large  place,  which  being
planted  with  shady  Mulberrie-trees  is  exceeding  pleasant
in  the  Summer  time. Next  them  are  a  company  of  Far-  Farriers.
riers,  that  shooe  Mules  and  Horses :  and  then  those  that
make the Iron-worke of Crosse-bowes. Then follow
Smithes  that  make  Horse-shooes ; and  last  of  all,  those
that  white  Linnen-cloth  : and  here  the  west  part  of  the Whitsters.
City  endeth,  which  in  times  past  (as  is  aforesaid)  was  a
City  by  it  selfe,  and  was  built  after  the  City  on  the  East
side  of  the  River.

The  second  part  of  Fez  situate  Eastward,  is  beautified  A  Description
with  most stately  Palaces, Temples, Houses, and Col-  °f  the  second
ledges ;  albeit  there  are  not  so  many  trades  and  occupations  *at  ***
as  in  the  part  before  described. For  here  are  neither  Mer-
chants, Taylors,  Shoo  makers,  &c.  but  of  the  meaner  sort.
Heere are notwithstanding thirty shops of Grocers. Grocers.
Neere  unto  the  walles  dwell  certaine  Bricke-burners  and
Potters  : and  not  farre  from  thence  is  a  great  Market  of
white  Earthen  Vessels,  Platters,  Cups  and  Dishes. Next  Earthen
of  all  stands  the  Corne-market,  wherein  are  divers  Gran-  ********
aries  to  lay  up  Corne. Over  against  the  great  Temple ^orn'mar  e  ■
there  is  a  broad street  paved  with  Brick,  round  about
which  divers  handi-crafts  and  occupations  are  exercised.
There  are  likewise  many  other  trades  diversly  dispersed
over this East part of the City. The Drapers and Drapers.
Grocers  have  certaine  peculiar  places  allotted  unto  them.
In  the  East  part  of  Fez  likewise  there  are  five  hundred

421

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS P1LGRIMES

c.  1526.

and  twenty  Weavers  houses,  very  stately  and  sumptu-
ously built :  having  in  each  of  them  many  worke-houses
and  Loomes,  which  yeeld  great  rent  unto the  owners.
Weavers. Weavers  there  are  (by  report)  in  this  City  twenty  thou-
Millers.  sand,  and  as  many  Millers. Moreover,  in  this  part  of

Fez  are  an  hundred  shops  for  the  whiting  of  thread ; the
principall  whereof  being  situate  upon  the  River,  are  ex-
ceedingly  well furnished with Kettles, Cauldrons, and
other  such  vessels : here  are  likewise  many  great  houses
Sawyers. to  sawe  wood  in,  which  worke  is  performed  by  Christian
captives,  and  whatsoever  wages  they  earne,  redoundeth
Christian  cap-  unto  their  Lords  and  Masters. These  Christian  captives
tives  slavery. are  not  suffered  to  rest  from  their  labours,  but  onely  upon
Fridayes, and upon eight severall dayes of the yeere
besides, whereon the Moores feasts are solemnized.
Stezves.  Heere  also  are  the  common  stewes  for  Harlots,  which  are

favoured by great men, and sometime by the chiefe
Governours of the City. Likewise there are certaine
Vintners. Vintners,  who  are  freely  permitted  to  keepe  Harlots,  and
to  take  filthie  hire  for  them. Heere  are  also  moe  then
Fountaines sixe hundred cleere Fountaines walled round about
6°°-  and  most  charily  kept,  every  one  of  which  is  severally

conveyed  by  certaine  pipes  unto  each  House,  Temple,
Colledge,  and  Hospitall :  and  this  Fountaine  water  is
[II.  vi.  792.]  accounted  the  best :  for  that  which  commeth  out  of  the
Rivers  dried  River  is  in  Summer  oftentimes  dried  up :  as  likewise
up  in  Summer.  when  the  Conduits  are  to  be  clensed,  the  course  of  the
River  must  of  necessitie  bee  turned  out  of  the  City.
Wherefore  every  family  useth  to  fetch  water  out  of  the
said  Fountaines,  and  albeit  in  Summer-time  the  chiefe
Gentlemen  use  River-water,  yet  they  will  often  call  for
Fountaine-water,  because  it  is  more  coole  and  pleasant
in  taste.  But  in  the  Spring-time  it  is  nothing  so.  These
Fountaines  have  their  Originall  for  the  most  part  from  the
West  and  South,  for  the  North  part  is  all  full  of  Mountaines
and  Marble  Rockes,  containing  certaine  Caves  or  Cels,
wherein  Corne  may  be  kept  for  many  yeeres ;  of  which
Caves  some  are  so  large,  that  they  will  hold  two  hundred

422

JOHN LEO ON AFRICA  ad.

c.:i526.
bushels  of  Corne.  The  Citizens  dwelling  neere  those
Caves,  and  such  as  possesse  them  do  sufficiently  main-
taine  themselves  in  taking  yeerely  every  hundred  bushell
for  rent.  The  South  part  of  East  Fez  is  almost  halfe
destitute  of  Inhabitants ;  howbeit  the  gardens  abound
with  Fruits  and  Flowres  of  all  sorts.  Every  Garden  hath  Gardens.
an  house  belonging  thereunto,  and  a  Christall-fountaine
environed  with  Roses,  and  other  odoriferous  Flowres  and
Herbes ;  so  that  in  the  Spring-time  a  man  may  both
satisfie  his  eyes,  and  solace  his  mind  in  visiting  this  part
of  the  City :  and  well  it  may  be  called  a  Paradise,  sithence
the  Noblemen  doe  here  reside  from  the  moneth  of  Aprill
till  the  end  of  September.  Westward,  that  is,  toward
the  Kings  Palace,  standeth  a  Castle  built  by  a  King  of  Kings  Palaces.
the  Luntune  Familie,  resembling  in  bignesse  an  whole
towne :  wherein  the  Kings  of  Fez,  before  the  said  Palace
was  built,  kept  their  Royall  residence.  But  after  new
Fez  began  to  be  built  by  the  Marin  Kings,  the  said  Castle
was  left  onely  to  the  Governor  of  the  City.  Within  this
Castle  stands  a  stately  Temple  built  (as  aforesaid)  what
time  it  was  inhabited  by  Princes  and  Nobles,  many  places
being  afterward  defaced  and  turned  into  Gardens :  how-
beit certaine  houses  were  left  unto  the  Governour,  partly
to  dwell  in,  and  partly  for  the  deciding  of  controversies.
Heere  is  likewise  a  certaine  Prison  for  captives  supported  Prison.
with  many  pillars,  and  being  so  large,  that  it  will  hold  (as
divers  are  of  opinion)  three  thousand  men.  Neither  are
there  any  severall  roomes  in  this  prison :  for  at  Fez  one
prison  serveth  for  all.  By  this  Castle  runneth  a  certaine
River  very  commodious  for  the  Governour.

In  the  City  of  Fez  are  certaine  particular  Judges  and OftheMagis-

Magistrates : and there is a Governour that defineth  trate*\the  .

. .y?  .  i • i  n.  >r  i administration

civill controversies, and giveth sentence against Male-  0f  Justice,  and

factors. Likewise  there  is  a  Judge  of  the  Canon  Law,'  of  the  apparell

who  hath  to  doe  with  all  matters  concerning  the  Mahume-  used  ™  Fez-

tan  Religion. A  third  Judge  there  is  also,  that  dealeth

about  marriages  and  divorcements,  whose  authoritie  is  to

heare all witnesses, and to give sentence accordingly.

423

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

c.  1526.

Next  unto  them  is  the  high  Advocate,  unto  whom  they
appeale  from  the  sentence  of  the  said  Judges,  when  as
they  doe  either  mistake  themselves,  or  doe  ground  their
sentence  upon  the  authoritie  of  some  inferiour  Doctor.
The  Governour  gaineth  a  great  summe  of  money  by  con-
The  punish- demning  of  parties  at  severall  times. Their  manner  of

ment  of  male- proceeding:  against  a Malefactor  is this : having  given
factors  in  Fez •  00  c5 o

him  an  hundred  or  two  hundred  stripes  before  the  Gover-
nour, the  Executioner  putteth  an  Iron-chaine  about  his
necke,  and  so  leadeth  him  starke-naked  (his  privities  onely
excepted)  through  all  parts  of  the  City :  after  the  Execu-
tioner followes  a  Serjeant,  declaring  unto  all  the  people
what  fact  the  guilty  person  hath  committed,  till  at  length
having  put  on  his  apparell  againe,  they  carry  him  backe  to
prison.  Sometimes  it  falleth  out  that  many  offenders
chained  together  are  led  about  the  Citie :  and  the  Gover-
nour for  each  Malefactor  thus  punished,  receiveth  one
Ducat  and  one  fourth  part ;  and  likewise  at  their  first
entrance  into  the  Gaole,  he  demands  of  each  one  a
certaine  duety,  which  is  paid  particularly  unto  him  by
divers  Merchants  and  Artificers  appointed  of  purpose.
And  amongst  his  other  livings,  he  gathered  out  of  a
certaine  Mountaine  seven  thousand  Ducats  of  yeerely
Revenue :  so  that  when  occasion  serveth,  he  is  at  his
proper  costes  to  finde  the  King  of  Fez  three  hundred
horses,  and  to  give  them  their  pay.

Those  which  follow  the  Canon  law  have  neither  stipend

nor  reward  allowed  them :  for  it  is  forbidden  by  the  Law

No  Officer  by  of Mahumet, that the Judges of his Religion should

Mahumets reape  any  commoditie  or  Fees  by  their  Office ; but  that

F  they  should  live  onely  by  reading  of  Lectures,  and  by

Unlearned their  Priesthood. In  this  faculty  are  many  Advocates  and

Lawyers. Proctors,  which  are  extreme  idiots,  and  utterly  voyd  of  all

good  learning. There  is  a  place  also  in  Fez  whereinto

the  Judges  use  to  cast  the  Citizens  for  debt,  or  for  some

ButfoureSer-  iight  offence. In  all  this  City  are  foure  Officers  or  Ser-

^and\hose  * jeants  onely; who  from  midnight  till  two  a  clocke  in  the

baudy  Knaves,  morning  doe  walke  about  all  parts  of  the  Citie; neither

424

JOHN LEO ON  AFRICA  a.d.

c.  1526.
have  they  any  stipend,  but  a  certaine  Fee  of  such  Male-
factors as  they  lead  about  in  chaines,  according  to  the
qualitie  of  every  mans  crime ;  moreover,  they  are  freely
permitted  to  sell  Wine,  and  to  keepe  Harlots.  The  said
Governour  hath  neither  Scribes  nor  Notaries,  but  pro-  No  Notaries.
nounceth  all  sentences  by  word  of  mouth.  One  onely
there  is  that  gathereth  Customes  and  Tributes  over  all  the  Tribute,
City,  who  daily  payeth  to  the  Kings  use  thirty  Ducats.

Searchers  y

excise.

This  man  appointeth  certaine  substitutes  to  watch  at  every

Gate,  where  nothing,  be  it  of  never  so  small  value,  can

passe  before  some  Tribute  be  paid. Yea,  sometime  they

goe foorth of the City to meet with the Carriers &

Muliters  upon  the  high  wayes,  to  the  end  they  may  not

conceale  nor  closely  convey  any  merchandize  into  the  City.

And  if  they  be  taken  in  any  deceit, they  pay  double.

The  set  order  or  proportion  of  their  Custome  is this. Two  per  cento

namely,  to  pay  two  Ducats  for  the  worth  of  an  hundred : tt\ ^%  x  -1

for  Onix-stones,  which  are  brought  hither  in  great  plentie,

they  pay  one  fourth  part : but  for  Wood,  Corne,  Oxen,

&  Hens,  they  give  nothing  at  all. The  said  Governor  of

the  Shambles  hath  alwaies  twelve  men  wayting  upon  him,

and  oftentimes  hee  rideth  about  the  Citie  to  examine  the

weight  of  bread,  and  finding  any  bread  to  faile  of  the

duewaight,  he  causeth  the  Baker  to  be  beaten  with  cudgels,

and  to  bee  led  in  contempt  up  and  downe  the  Citie.

The  Citizens  of  Fez  goe  very  civilly  and  decently  Their  apparel.
attyred,  in  the  Spring  time  wearing  Garments  made  of
out-landish  cloth :  over  their  Shirts  they  weare  a  Jacket  or
Cassock  beeing  narrow  and  halfe- sleeved,  whereupon  they
weare  a  certayne  wide  Garment,  close  before  on  the  brest.
Their  Caps  are  thinne  and  single,  like  unto  the  Night-
caps used  in  Italie,  saving  that  they  cover  not  their  eares :
these  Caps  are  covered  with  a  certaine  Skarfe,  which  beeing
twice  wreathed  about  their  head  and  beard,  hangeth  by  a
knot.  They  weare  neither  Hose  nor  Breeches,  but  in  the
Spring  time  when  they  ride  a  Journey,  they  put  on  Boots  :
many  of  the  poorer  sort  have  onely  their  Cassocke,  and  a
Mantle  over  that  called,  *  Barnussi,  and  a  most  course  *OrIlbernus.

425

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

c.  1526.

Cap.  The  Doctors  and  ancient  Gentlemen  weare  a  cer-
tayne  Garment  with  wide  sleeves,  somewhat  like  to  the
Gentlemen  of  Venice.  The  common  sort  of  people  are
for  the  most  part  clad  in  a  kind  of  course  white  cloth.
The  women  are  not  altogether  unseemely  apparelled,  but
in  Summer  time  they  weare  nothing  save  their  Smockes
onely.  In  Winter  they  weare  such  a  wide  sleeved  Gar-
ment, being  close  at  the  brest,  as  that  of  the  men  before
mentioned.  When  they  goe  abroad,  they  put  on  certaine
long  Breeches,  wherewith  their  legges  are  all  covered,
having  also,  after  the  fashion  of  Syria,  a  Veile  hanging
downe  from  their  heads,  which  covereth  their  whole  bodies.
On  their  faces  likewise  they  weare  a  Maske  with  two  little
holes,  onely  for  their  eyes  to  peepe  out  at.  Their  eares
they  adorne  with  golden  Eare-rings,  and  with  most  pre-
cious Jewels :  the  meaner  sort  weare  Eare-rings  of  Silver
and  gilt  only.  Upon  their  armes  the  Ladies  and  Gentle-
women weare  golden  Braclets,  and  the  residue  Silver,  as
likewise  Gold  or  Silver-rings  upon  their  legs,  according  to
each  ones  estate  and  abilitie.
Their  manner  Let  us  now  speake  somewhat  of  their  victuals  and
of  eating  and  manner  Qf  eating.  The  common  sort  set  on  the  pot  with
rtn  wg.  fresh  meate  twice  every  weeke :  but  the  Gentlemen  and
richer  sort  every  day,  and  as  often  as  they  list.  They
take  three  meales  a  day :  their  Break-fast  consisteth  of
certaine  Fruits  and  Bread,  or  else  of  a  kind  of  liquid  Pap
made  like  unto  Frumentie :  in  Winter  they  sup  off  the
Broth  of  salt  flesh  thickned  with  course  meale.  To  dinner
they  have  Flesh,  Sallets,  Cheese,  and  Olives :  but  in
Summer  they  have  greater  cheere.  Their  Supper  is  easie
of  digestion,  consisting  of  Bread,  Melons,  Grapes,  or
Milke :  but  in  Winter  they  have  sodden  flesh,  together
J  kind  of  meat  with  a  kind  of  meate  called  Cuscusu,  which  being  made
c*lled  of  a  lumpe  of  Dow  is  set  first  upon  the  fire  in  certaine

Vessels  full  of  holes,  and  afterward  is  tempered  with
Butter  and  Pottage.  Some  also  use  often  to  have  Roste-
meat.  And  thus  you  see  after  what  sort  both  the  Gentle-
men  and common people lead their lives : albeit the

426

JOHN LEO ON AFRICA  a.d.

c.  1526.
Noblemen  fare  somewhat  more  daintily :  but  if  you  com-
pare them  with  the  Noblemen  and  Gentlemen  of  Europe,
they  may  seeme  to  be  miserable  and  base  fellowes ;  not
for  any  want  or  scarcitie  of  victuals,  but  for  want  of  good
manners  and  cleanlinesse.  The  Table  whereat  they  sit  is
low,  uncovered,  and  filthy :  seates  they  have  none  but  the
bare  ground,  neyther  Knives  or  Spoones  but  only  their
ten  Talons.  The  said  Cuscusu  is  set  before  them  all  in
one  only  Platter,  whereout  as  well  Gentlemen  as  others
take  it  not  with  Spoones,  but  with  their  Ckwes  five.
The  meate  and  pottage  is  put  all  in  one  Dish ;  out  of
which  every  one  raketh  with  his  greasie  fists  what  hee
thinkes  good :  you  shall  never  see  Knife  upon  the  Table,
but  they  teare  and  greedily  devoure  their  meate  like
hungry  Dogges.  Neyther  doth  any  of  them  desire  to
drinke  before  he  hath  well  stuffed  his  panch  ;  and  then
will  he  sup  off  a  cup  of  cold  water  as  bigge  as  a  Milke-
bowle.  The  Doctors  indeed  are  somewhat  more  orderly
at  meales  :  but,  to  tell  you  the  very  truth,  in  all  Italie  there
is  no  Gentleman  so  meane,  which  for  fine  Dyet  and  stately
Furniture  excelleth  not  the  greatest  Potentates  and  Lords
of  all  Africa.

As  touching  their  Marriages,  they  observe  these  courses  The  manner  of
following. So  soone  as  the  Maydes  Father  hath  espoused  solemnizing
her  unto  her  Lover,  they  goe  forth-with  like  Bride  and  MarrtaSes-
Bridegroome  to  Church,  accompanyed  with  their  Parents
and  Kinsfolkes,  and  call  likewise  two  Notaries  with  them,
to  make  record  before  all  that  are  present  of  the  Cove-
nants and  Dowrie. The  meaner  sort  of  people  usually
give  for  their  Daughters  Dowrie  thirtie  Duckats  and  a
woman-slave  of  fifteen  Duckats  price ; as  likewise  a  parti-
coloured Garment  embroydered  with Silke  and  certaine  Portion  and
other  Silke  Skarfes,  or  Jags,  to  weare  upon  her  head  in  househo^
stead  of  a  Hood  or  Veile ; then  a  paire  of  fine  Shooes,  stu^e'
and  two  excellent  paire  of  Startups; and  lastly, many
prettie  Knackes  curiously  made  of  Silver  and  other  Metals,
as  namely,  Combes,  Perfuming-pans,  Bellowes,  and  such
other  Trinkets  as  Women  have  in  estimation. Which

427

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIM ES

c.  1526.

beeing  done,  all  the  Ghests  present  are  invited  to  a  Ban-
quet, whereunto  for  great  Dainties  is  brought  a  kind  of
Bread  fryed  and  tempered  with  Honey,  which  we  have
before  described  ; then  they  bring  Rost-meat  to  the  boord,
all  this  being  at  the  Bridegroomes  cost : afterward  the
Brides  Father  maketh  a  Banquet  in  like  sort. Who  if  he
bestow  on  his  Daughter  some  apparell  besides  her  Dowrie,
it is accounted a point of liberalise. And albeit the
Father  promiseth  but  thirtie  Duckats  onely  for  a  Dowrie,
yet  will  he  sometimes  bestow,  in  apparell  and  other  Orna-
[II.  vi.  794.]  ments  belonging  to  Women,  two  hundred,  yea  sometimes
three  hundred  Duckats  besides. But  they  seldome  give
an  House,  a  Vineyard,  or  a  field  for  a  Dowrie. Moreover
upon  the  Bride  they  bestow  three  Gownes  made  of  costly
cloth  ;  and  three  others  of  Silke  Chamlet,  or  of  some  other
excellent  Stuffe. They  give  her  Smockes  likewise  curi-
ously wrought,  with  fine  Veiles,  and  other  embroydered
Vestures ; as  also  Pillowes  and  Cushions  of  the  best  sort.
And  besides  all  the  former  gifts,  they  bestow  eight  Carpets
or  Coverlets  on  the  Bride,  foure  whereof  are  onely  for
seemelinesse  to  spread  upon  their  Presses  and  Cupboords :
two  of  the  courser  they  use  for  their  Beds ; and  the  other
two of Leather to lay upon the floore of their Bed-
chambers. Also  they  have  certaine  Rugs  of  about  twentie
els  compasse  or  length ; as  likewise  three  Quilts  beeing
made  of  Linnen  and  Woollen  on  the  one  side,  and  stuffed
with  flocks  on  the  other  side,  which  they  use  in  the  night
in manner following. With the one halfe they cover
themselves, and the  other  halfe they  lay  under them :
which  they  may  easily  doe,  when  as  they  are  both  waies
about  ten  ells  long. Unto  the  former  they  adde  as  many
Coverlets of Silke very  curiously embroydered on the
upper-side,  and  beneath  lined  double  with  Linnen  and
Cotton. They  bestow  likewise  white  Coverlets  to  use
in  Summer-time  onely  :  and  lastly,  they  bestow  a  Woollen
hanging  divided  into  many  parts,  and  finely  wrought,  as
namely,  with  certaine  pieces  of  gilt  Leather ; whereupon
they  sowe  Jags  of  partie-coloured  Silke,  and  upon  every

428

JOHN LEO ON AFRICA  a.d.

c.  1526.
Jagge  a  little  Ball  or  Button  of  Silke,  whereby  the  said
hanging  may  for  Ornaments sake  bee  fastened  unto  a
wall.

Here  you  see  what  be  the  Appurtenances  of  their
Dowries ;  wherein  some  doe  strive  so  much  to  excell
others,  that  oftentimes  many  Gentlemen  have  brought
themselves  unto  Poverty  thereby.  Some  Italians  thinke  !**«***
that  the  Husband  bestowes  a  Dowrie  upon  his  Wife ;  but
they  altogether  mistake  the  matter.

The  Bridegroome  being  readie  to  carry  home  his  Bride,  fetching  home
causeth  her  to  be  placed  in  a  woodden  Cage  or  Cabinet
eight  square  covered  with  Silke,  in  which  shee  is  carryed
by  Porters,  her  Parents  and  Kinsfolkes  following,  with  a
great  noyse  of  Trumpets,  Pipes,  and  Drummes,  and  with
a  number  of  Torches ;  the  Bridegroomes  Kinsmen  goe
before  with  Torches,  and  the  Brides  Kinsfolkes  follow
after :  and  so  they  goe  unto  the  great  Market  place,  and
having  passed  by  the  Temple,  the  Bridegroome  takes  his
leave  of  his  Father-in-law  and  the  rest,  hying  him  home
with  all  speed,  and  in  his  Chamber  expecting  the  presence
of  his  Spouse.  The  Father,  Brother,  and  Uncle  of  the
Bride  leade  her  unto  the  Chamber-doore,  and  there  deliver
her  with  one  consent  unto  the  Mother  of  the  Bridegroome  :
who,  as  soone  as  she  is  entred,  toucheth  her  foot  with  his,
and  forth-with  they  depart  into  a  severall  roome  by  them-
selves. In  the  meane  season  the  Banquet  is  comming
forth  :  and  a  certaine  woman  standeth  before  the  Bride-
chamber  doore,  expecting  till  the  Bridegroome  having
defloured  his  Bride,  reacheth  her  a  Napkin  stayned  with
bloud,  which  Napkin  she  carryeth  incontinent  and  sheweth
to  the  Ghests,  proclayming  with  a  lowd  voyce,  that  the
Bride  was  ever  til  that  time  an  unspotted  &  pure  Virgine.
This  woman,  together  with  other  women  her  Companions,
first  the  Parents  of  the  Bridegroom,  and  then  of  the  Bride,
doe  honourably  entertayne.  But  if  the  Bride  be  found  not
to  be  a  Virgine,  the  Marriage  is  made  frustrate,  and  shee
with  great  disgrace  is  turned  home  to  her  Parents.

But  so  soone  as  the  new  marryed  man  goeth  forth  of

429

A.D.

c.  1526.

Custome  of
fishes.

Minstrelsie
and  dancing.

The  Marriage
of  Widdowes.

The  Circum-
cision of  their
Children.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

the  house  (which  is  for  the  most  part  on  the  seventh  day
after  the  Marriage)  hee  buyeth  great  plenty  of  fishes,  which
hee  causeth  his  Mother  or  some  other  woman  to  cast  upon
his  Wives  feet ;  and  this  they,  from  an  ancient  Supersti-
tious custome  take  for  a  good  boding.

The  morrow  after  a  company  of  women  goe  to  dresse
the  Bride,  to  combe  her  Lockes,  and  to  paint  her  Cheekes
with  Vermillion ;  her  hands  and  her  feet  they  dye  blacke,
but  all  this  Painting  presently  loseth  the  fresh  hue ;  and
this  day  they  have  another  Banquet.  The  Bride  they
place  in  the  highest  Roome  that  she  may  be  seene  of  all.
The  same  night,  which  was  spent  in  dancing,  there  are
present  at  the  Bridal-house  certayne  Minstrels  and  Singers,
which  by  turnes  sometimes  use  their  Instruments  and
sometimes  Voyce-musick :  they  dance  alwayes  one  by
one,  and  at  the  end  of  each  Galliard  they  bestow  a  Largesse
upon  the  Musicians.  If  any  one  will  honour  the  Dancer,
he  bids  him  kneele  downe  before  him,  and  having  fastened
pieces  of  money  all  over  his  face,  the  Musicians  presently
take  it  off  for  their  fee.  The  women  dance  alone  without
any  men,  at  the  noyse  of  their  owne  Musicians.  All  these
things  use  to  bee  performed  when  the  Bride  is  a  Mayde.
But  the  Marriages  of  Widowes  are  concluded  with  lesse
adoe.  Their  cheere  is  boyled  Beefe  and  Mutton,  and
stewed  Hens,  with  divers  juncating  Dishes  among.  In
stead  of  Trenchers,  the  Ghests  being  ten  or  twelve  in
number,  have  so  many  great  round  Platters  of  wood  set
before  them.  And  this  is  the  common  custom  of  Gentle-
men and  Merchants.  The  meaner  sort  present  their
Ghests  with  certaine  sops  or  bruesle  of  Bread  like  unto  a
Pancake,  which  being  dipped  in  flesh-pottage,  they  eat
out  of  a  great  Platter  not  with  Spoones  but  with  their
fingers  onely :  and  round  about  each  great  Platter  stand
to  the  number  of  ten  or  twelve  persons.

Likewise  they  make  a  solemne  Feast  at  the  Circum-
cision of  their  male  children,  which  is  upon  the  seventh
day  after  their  birth ;  and  at  this  Feast  the  Circumcisor,
together  with  all  their  Friends  and  Kinsfolkes  is  present :

43°

JOHN LEO ON AFRICA  a.d.

c.  1526.

which  being  done,  each  one,  according  to  his  abilitie,
bestoweth  a  Gift  upon  the  Circumcisor  in  manner  follow-
ing. Every  man  layes  his  money  upon  a  Lads  face  which
the  Circumcisor  brought  with  him.  Whereupon  the  Lad
calling  every  one  by  his  name,  giveth  them  thankes  in  [II.  vi.  795.]
particular :  and  then  the  Infant  beeing  circumcised,  they
spend  that  day  with  as  great  jollity  as  a  day  of  Marriage.
But  at  the  birth  of  a  Daughter  they  shew  not  so  much
alacritie.

Among  the  people  of  Fez  there  have  remayned  certaine  QftmrRttes
Relikes  of  Festivall  Dayes  instituted  of  old  by  the  Chris-  festivall
tians, whereupon they use certaine ceremonies which  dates,  and
themselves  understand  not. Upon  Christmas  even  they  their  manner
eate  a  Sallet  made  of  divers  Hearbs : they  seeth  likewise  °fmo^rnJnS
that  night  all  kind  of  Pulse,  which  they  feede  upon  for  Refifuefa0f
great  dainties. Upon  New-yeeres  day  the  children  goe  christians
with  Maskes  and  Vizards  on  their  faces  to  the  houses  of  Ceremonies
Gentlemen  and  Merchants,  and  have  Fruites  given  them  ^served
for  singing  certaine  Carols  or  Songs. When  as  the  Feast  a™on&  f
of  Saint  John  Baptist  is  hallowed  among  Christians,  you  of  which  seeme
shall  here  see  all  about  great  store  of  fires  made  with  Straw,  also  to  have
And  when  their  childrens  teeth  begin  to  grow,  they  make  remained  from
another  feast  called,  according  to  the  La  tines,  Dentilla.  fe^effen'
They  have  also  many  other  Rites  and  Customes  of  Divin-  Bon-fires.
ing,  or  Southsaying,  the  like  whereof  I  have  seene  at
Rome,  and  in  other  Cities  of  Italy. As  touching  their
Feasts  prescribed  by  the  Mahumetan  Law,  they  are  at  A  ^ooke  lost.
large  set  downe  in  that  briefe  Treatise  which  we  have
written  concerning  the  same  Law.

The  women  having  by  death  lost  their  husbands,  fathers,  Their
or  any  other  of  their  deare  friends,  assemble  forth-with  a  *unera-  ■  •
great  multitude  of  their  owne  Sexe  together,  who  stripping
themselves  out  of  their  owne  attire,  put  on  most  vile
sack-cloth,  and  defile  their  faces  with  much  durt :  then  call
they  certaine  men  clad  in  womens  attire,  bringing  great
foure-square  Drums  with  them,  at  the  noyse  of  which
Drums  the  women-mourners  sing  a  Funerall-song,  tending
as  much  as  may  be,  to  the  commendation  of  the  partie

431

A.D.

c.  1526.

Their  manner
of  gaming  at
Fez.

Chesse-play.
Of  the  African
Poets.

Mahumets
Birth-day.
Rewards  for
poets  in  Fez.
Honor  alit
artes  omnesque
in  cenduntur
ad  studio
gloria.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

deceased ;  and  at  the  end  of  every  Verse,  the  said  women
utter  most  hideous  shrikes  and  out-cries,  tearing  their
haire,  and  with  much  lamentation  beating  their  cheekes  and
brests,  till  they  be  all-imbrued  with  bloud :  and  so  these
Heathenish  superstitions  continue  for  seven  whole  dayes
together.  At  which  seven  daies  end  they  surcease  their
mourning  for  the  space  of  forty  daies,  and  then  they  begin
anew  to  torment  themselves  for  three  daies  together  in
manner  aforesaid :  howbeit,  these  kinds  of  Obsequies  are
observed  only  by  the  baser  people,  but  the  Gentlemen  and
better  sort  behave  themselves  more  modestly.  At  this
time  all  the  widowes  friends  come  about  her  to  comfort
her,  and  send  divers  kinds  of  meats  unto  her :  for  in  the
mourning-house  they  may  dresse  no  meate  at  all,  till  the
dead  corps  bee  carried  forth.  The  woman  her  selfe  that
looseth  her  husband,  father,  or  brother,  never  goeth  forth
with  the  funerall.  But  how  they  wash  and  burie  the  dead
corps,  and  what  superstitions  they  use  thereabout,  you  shall
find  recorded  in  my  little  Treatise  above  mentioned.

The  Citizens  use  most  of  all  to  play  at  Chesse,  and  that
from  ancient  times.  Other  Games  there  are  also,  but  very
rude,  and  used  onely  by  the  common  people.

In  Fez  there  are  divers  most  excellent  Poets,  which  make
Verses  in  their  owne  Mother-tongue  :  most  of  their  Poems
and  Songs  intreate  of  Love.  Every  yeare  they  pen  cer-
taine  Verses  in  the  commendation  of  Mahumet,  especially
upon  his  Birth-day :  for  then  betimes  in  the  morning  they
resort  unto  the  Palace  of  the  chiefe  Judge  or  Governour,
ascending  his  Tribunall  seate,  and  from  thence  reading
their  Verses  to  a  great  audience  of  people :  and  he  whose
Verses  are  most  elegant  and  pithy,  is  that  yeare  proclaimed
Prince  of  the  Poets.  But  when  as  the  Kings  of  the  Marin
Family  prospered,  they  used  to  invite  all  the  learned  men
of  the  Citie  unto  their  Palace ;  and  honourably  enter-
taining them,  they  commanded  each  man  in  their  hearing
to  recite  their  Verses  to  the  commendation  of  Mahumet :
and  hee  that  was  in  all  mens  opinions  esteemed  the  best
Poet,  was  rewarded  by  the  King  with  an  hundred  Duckats,

432 .

JOHN LEO ON  AFRICA  ad.

c.  1526.
with  an  excellent  Horse,  with  a  Woman-slave,  and  with
the  Kings  owne  Robes  wherewith  hee  was  then  apparelled  :
all  the  rest  had  fifty  Duckats  apiece  given  them,  so  that
none  departed  without  the  Kings  liberalise :  but  an
hundred  and  thirtie  yeares  are  expired  since  this  custome,
together  with  the  Majestie  of  the  Fezzan  Kingdome
decayed.

Of  Schooles  in  Fez  for  the  instructing  of  Children,  there  d  description
are  almost  two  hundred,  every  one  of  which  is  in  fashion  °fthe  ^ram"
like a great Hall. The Schoole-masters teach their  F
Children  to  write,  and  reade  not  out  of  a  Booke,  but  out  Two  hundred
of  a  certaine  great  Table. Every  day  they  expound  one  Schooles.
sentence  of  the  Alcoran  :  and  having  read  quite  through, Tk  4/coran
they  begin  it  againe,  repeating  it  so  often,  till  they  have ™™.et ^
most  firmely  committed  the  same  to  memorie :  which  they
doe  right  well  in  the  space  of  seven  yeeres. Then  reade
they  unto  their  Scholers  some  part  of  Orthography :  how-
beit,  both  this  and  the  other  parts  of  Grammar  are  farre
more  exactly  taught  in  the  Colledges,  then  in  these  triviall
Schooles. The  said  Schoole-masters  are  allowed  a  very
small  stipend ; but  when  their  Boyes  have  learned  some
part  of  the  Alcoran,  they  present  certaine  gifts  unto  their
Master, according to each ones  abilitie. Afterward so
soone  as  any  Boy  hath  perfectly  learned  the  whole  Alcoran,
his  Father  inviteth  all  his  sonnes  Schoole-fellowes  unto  a
great Banquet : and his sonne in costly apparell rides
through  the  streete  upon  a  gallant  Horse,  which  Horse
and  apparell  the  Governour  of  the  Royall  Citadell  is  bound
to lend him. The  rest  of  his Schoole-fellowes  beeing
mounted  likewise  on  Horse-backe  accompany  him  to  the
Banqueting-house,  singing  divers  Songs  to  the  praise  of
God,  and  of  Mahumet. Then  are  they  brought  to  a  most
sumptuous  Banquet,  whereat  all  the  Kinsfolks  of  the  fore-  [II.  vi.  796.]
said  Boyes  Father  are  usually  present :  every  one  of  whom
bestoweth  on  the  Schoole-master  some  small  gift,  and  the
Boyes  Father  gives  him  a  new  suite  of  apparell. The  said
Scholers  likewise  use  to  celebrate  a  Feast  upon  the  birth-
day of  Mahumet,  and  then  their  Fathers  are  bound  to  send

v  433  2E

A.D.

c.  1526.

Torches  on
Mahumets
birth-day.

The  Fortune
tellers.
Three  sorts
of  Diviners
in  Fez.

Witches.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

each  man  a  Torch  unto  the  Schoole  :  whereupon  every  Boy
carrieth  a  Torch  in  his  hand,  some  of  which  weigh  thirtie
pound.  These  Torches  are  most  curiously  made,  being
adorned  round  about  with  divers  fruits  of  Waxe,  which
being  lighted  betimes  in  the  morning,  doe  burne  till  Sun-
rise ;  in  the  meane  while  certaine  Singers  resound  the
prayses  of  Mahumet ;  and  so  soone  as  the  Sunne  is  up,  all
their  solemnitie  ceaseth :  this  day  useth  to  be  very
gainefull  unto  the  Schoole-masters,  for  they  sell  the
remnant  of  the  Waxe  upon  the  Torches  for  an  hundred
Duckats,  and  sometimes  for  more.  None  of  them  payes
any  rent  for  his  Schoole :  for  all  their  Schooles  were  built
many  yeeres  agoe,  and  were  freely  bestowed  for  the  training
up  of  youth.  Both  in  these  common  Schooles,  and  also
in  the  Colledges  they  have  two  dayes  of  recreation  every
weeke,  wherein  they  neither  teach  nor  studie.

Now  let  us  speake  of  the  Fortune-tellers  and  Diviners,
of  whom  there  is  a  great  number,  and  three  kinds.  For
one  sort  useth  certaine  Geomanticall  figures.  Others
powring  a  drop  of  Oyle  into  a  viall  or  glasse  of  water,
make  the  said  water  to  be  transparent  and  bright,  wherein,
as  it  were  in  a  mirror,  they  affirme  that  they  see  huge
swarmes  of  Devils  that  resemble  an  whole  Armie,  some
whereof  are  travelling,  some  are  passing  over  a  River,  and
others  fighting  a  Land-battell,  whom  when  the  Diviner
seeth  in  quiet,  he  demandeth  such  questions  of  them  as
he  is  desirous  to  be  resolved  of ;  and  the  Devils  give  them
answere  with  beckning,  or  with  some  gesture  of  their
hands  or  eyes ;  so  inconsiderate  and  damnable  is  their
credulitie  in  this  behalfe.  The  foresaid  Glasse-viall  they
will  deliver  into  childrens  hands  scarce  of  eight  yeeres  old,
of  whom  they  will  aske  whether  they  see  this  or  that
Devill.  Many  of  the  Citie  are  so  besotted  with  these
vanities,  that  they  spend  great  sums  upon  them.  The
third  kind  of  Diviners  are  Women-witches,  which  are
affirmed  to  have  familiaritie  with  Devils :  some  Devils
they  call  red,  some  white,  and  some  blacke  Devils :  and
when  they  will  tell  any  mans  fortune,  they  perfume  them-

434

JOHN LEO ON AFRICA  a.d.

c.  1526.
selves  with  certaine  Odours,  saying,  That  then  they
possesse  themselves  with  that  Devill  which  they  called  for  :
afterward  changing  their  voyce,  they  faine  the  Devill  to
speake  within  them :  then  they  which  come  to  enquire,
ought  with  great  feare  and  trembling  aske  these  vile  and
abominable  Witches  such  questions  as  they  meane  to
propound ;  and  lastly,  offering  some  fee  unto  the  Devill,
they  depart.  But  the  wiser  and  honester  sort  of  people
call  these  women  Sahacat,  which  in  Latin  signifieth
Fricatrices,  because  they  have  a  damnable  custome  to  Frkatrkts.
commit  unlawfull  Venerie  among  themselves,  which  I
cannot  expresse  in  any  modester  termes.  If  faire  women
come  unto  them  at  any  time,  these  abominable  Witches
will  burne  in  lust  towards  them,  no  otherwise  then  lustie
Younkers  doe  towards  young  Maides,  and  will  in  the
Devils  behalfe  demand  for  a  reward,  that  they  may  lie
with  them :  and  so  by  this  meanes  it  often  falleth  out,  that
thinking  thereby  to  fulfill  the  Devils  command  they  lie
with  the  Witches.  Yea,  some  there  are,  which  being
allured  with  the  delight  of  this  abominable  vice,  will  desire
the  company  of  these  Witches,  and  faining  themselves  to
be  sicke,  will  either  call  one  of  the  Witches  home  to  them,
or  wil  send  their  husbands  for  the  same  purpose :  and  so
the  Witches  perceiving  how  the  matter  stands,  will  say,
That  the  Woman  is  possessed  with  a  Devil,  and  that  she
can  no  way  be  cured,  unles  she  be  admitted  into  their
society.  With  these  words  her  silly  husband  being  per-
swaded,  doth  not  only  permit  her  so  to  do,  but  makes  also
a  sumptuous  banquet  unto  the  damned  crew  of  Witches :
which  being  done,  they  use  to  dance  very  strangely  at  the
noyse  of  Drums :  and  so  the  poore  man  commits  his  false

wife  to  their  filthy  disposition. Howbeit,  some  there  are ,
1  -n  ;  • r  1 -r^ -ii •  1  1 1 11  Among  mam

that  will  soone  conjure  the  Devill  with  a  good  cudgell  out  bad,  some  good

of  their  wives :  others  faining  themselves  to  be  possessed  Conjurers.

with  a  Devill,  will  deceive  the  said  Witches,  as  their  wives  Of  the

have  been  deceived  by  them.  Conjurers,

In  Fez  likewise  there  are  a  kind  of  Juglers,  or  Conjurers  and  Jugglers

called  Muhazzimin,  who  of  all  others  are  reported  to  be  in  Fez.

435

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

c.  1526.

most  speedie  casters  out  of  Divels.  And  because  their
Negromancie  sometimes  taketh  effect,  it  is  a  wonder  to  see
into  what  reputation  they  grow  thereby  :  but  when  they
cannot  cast  forth  a  Devill,  they  say,  It  is  an  Airie  Spirit.
Their  manner  of  adjuring  Devils,  is  this  :  First,  they  draw
certaine  Characters  and  Circles  upon  an  ash-heape,  or  some
other  place ;  then  describe  they  certaine  signes  upon  the
hands  and  fore-head  of  the  partie  possessed,  and  perfume
him  after  a  strange  kind  of  manner.  Afterward  they  make
their  Inchantment  of  Conjuration,  enquiring  of  the  Devill,
which  way,  or  by  what  meanes  he  entred  the  party,  as
likewise  what  he  is,  and  by  what  name  he  is  called ;  and
lastly,  charging  him  to  come  forth. Others  there  are  that

Cabalists.  worke  by  a  certaine  Cabalisticall  rule,  called  Zairagia  :  this
rule  is  contained  in  many  Writings,  for  it  is  thought  to  be
Naturall  Magique :  neither  are  there  any  other  Negro-
mancers  in  all  Fez,  that  will  more  certainely  and  truly
resolve  a  doubtfull  question  :  howbeit,  their  Art  is  exceed-
ing difficult,  for  the  Students  thereof  must  have  as  great
skill  in  Astrologie,  as  in  Cabala.  My  selfe  in  times  past
having  attained  to  some  knowledge  in  this  facultie,
continued  (I  remember)  an  whole  day  in  describing  one
figure  onely  :  which  kind  of  figures  are  described  in  manner
following.  First,  they  draw  many  circles  within  the
compasse  of  a  great  circle :  in  the  first  circle  they  make  a
crosse,  at  the  foure  extremities  whereof,  they  set  downe  the

[II.  vi.  797.]  foure  quarters  of  the  World,  to  wit,  East,  West,  North
and  South  :  at  each  end  of  one  of  the  said  crosse  lines  they
note  either  Pole  :  likewise  about  the  circumference  of  the
first  circle,  they  paint  the  foure  Elements :  then  divide
they  the  same  circle  and  the  circle  following  into  foure
parts,  and  every  fourth  part  they  divide  into  other  seven,
each  one  being  distinguished  with  certaine  great  Arabian
Characters,  so  that  every  Element  containeth  eight  and
twenty  Characters.  In  the  third  circle  they  set  downe  the
seven  Planets :  in  the  fourth,  the  twelve  Signes  of  the
Zodiack  :  in  the  fifth,  the  twelve  Latine  names  of  the
moneths : in  the  sixth,  the  eight  and  twentie  Houses  of

436

JOHN LEO ON AFRICA  ad.

c.  1526.
the  Moone :  in  the  seventh,  the  three  hundred  sixty  five
dayes  of  the  yeare ;  and  about  the  convexitie  thereof,  the
foure  Cardinall  or  principall  Windes.  Then  take  they  one
onely  letter  of  the  question  propounded,  multiplying  the
same  by  all  the  particulars  aforenamed,  and  the  product  or
summe  totall  they  divide  after  a  certaine  manner,  placing
it  in  some  roome,  according  to  the  quality  of  the  character,
and  as  the  Element  requireth  wherein  the  said  Character
is  found  without  a  figure.  All  which  being  done,  they
marke  that  figure  which  seemeth  to  agree  with  the  foresaid
number,  or  summe  produced,  wherewith  they  proceed  as
they  did  with  the  former,  til  they  have  found  eight  and
twenty  Characters,  whereof  they  make  one  wrord,  and  of
this  word  the  speech  is  made  that  resolveth  the  question
demanded :  this  speech  is  alwaies  turned  into  a  verse  of
the  first  kind,  which  the  Arabians  call  Ethauil,  consisting
of  eight  Stipites,  and  twelve  Chordi,  according  to  the
Meeter  of  the  Arabian  Tongue,  whereof  we  have  intreated
in  the  last  part  of  our  Arabian  Grammer.  And  the  Verse  An  Arabian
consisting  of  those  Characters,  comprehendeth  alwaies  a  Grammer
true  and  infallible  answer  unto  the  question  propounded,  J5T  rj
resolving  first  that  which  is  demanded,  and  then  expound-
ing the  sense  of  the  question  it  selfe.  These  Practitioners
are  never  found  to  erre,  which  causeth  their  Art  of  Cabala
to  bee  had  in  great  admiration  :  which  although  it  bee
accounted  Naturall,  yet  never  saw  I  any  thing  that  hath
more  affinitie  with  supernaturall  and  Divine  knowledge.
I  remember  that  I  saw  in  a  certaine  open  place  of  King
Abulunan  his  Colledge  in  Fez,  upon  a  floore  paved  with
excellent  smoothe  Marble,  the  description  of  a  figure.
Each  side  of  this  floore  or  court  was  fifty  ells  long,  and
yet  two  third  parts  thereof  were  occupied  about  the  figure,
and  about  the  things  pertaining  thereto  :  three  there  were
that  made  the  description,  every  one  attending  his
appointed  place,  and  they  were  an  whole  day  in  setting  it
downe.  Another  such  figure  I  saw  at  Tunis,  drawne  by
one  that  was  marvelous  cunning  in  the  Art,  whose  father
had  written  two  volumes  of  Commentaries  or  expositions

437

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

c.  1526.

upon  the  precepts  of  the  same  Art,  wherin  whosoever  hath
exact  skill,  is  most  highly  esteemed  of  by  all  men. I  my
selfe  never  saw  but  three  of  this  Profession,  namely,  one
Bookes  of  that  at  Tunis,  and  two  other  at  Fez  :  likewise  I  have  seene  two
ArL  Expositions  upon  the  precepts  of  the  said  Arte,  together

with  a  Commentarie  of  one  Margian,  father  unto  the  fore-
said Cabalist  which  I  saw  at  Tunis  :  and  another  written  by
Ibnu Caldim the Historiographer. And if any were
desirous  to  see  the  Precepts  and  Commentaries  of  that
Art,  he  might  doe  it  with  the  expence  of  fiftie  Duckats :
for  sayling  to  Tunis,  a  Towne  neere  unto  Italy,  hee  might
have  a  sight  of  all  the  particulars  aforesaid. I  my  selfe
had  fit  oportunitie  of  time,  and  a  Teacher  that  offered  to
Divination instruct  me  gratis  in  the  same  Art : howbeit,  I  thought
and  Southsay-  good  not  to  accept  his  offer,  because  the  said  Art  is  for-
%fo  the  Law* of  bidden  and  accounted  hereticall  by  the  Law  of  Mahumet :
Mahomet. f°r  Mahumets  Law  affirmeth  all  kind  of  Divinations  to  be
vaine,  and  that  God  onely  knoweth  secrets,  and  things  to
come : wherefore sometimes the said Cabalists are
imprisoned by the Mahumetan Inquisitors, who cease
not  to  persecute  the  Proffessors  of  that  Art.
Ofcertaine  Here  also  you  may  find  certaine  learned  men,  which

Rules  and w\\\  have  themselves  called  Wizards,  and  Morall  Philo-

supet stitions SOphers. They  observe  certaine  Rules  which  Mahumet
observed  in  the r  m 1 n  1  1  ^ 1 i-

Mahumetan never  prescribed. By  some  they  are  accounted  Latholique,

Law.  or  true  Mahumetans,  and  by  others  they  are  holden  for

heretiks  :  howbeit,  the  greatest  part  of  the  common  people

reverence  them  as  if  they  were  Gods,  notwithstanding  they

commit many things unlawfull and forbidden by the

Mahumetan Law ; as namely, whereas the said Law

forbiddeth  any  love-matters  to  be  expressed  in  any  musicall

Ditties,  or  Songs,  these  Moralists  affirme  the  contrary. In

Divers  Mahu-  the  foresaid  Mahumetan  Religion  are  a  great  number  of

metan  Sects. Rules  or  Sects,  every  of  which  hath  most  learned  Patrons

and  Protectors. The  foresaid  Sect  sprang  up  fourescore

yeares  after  Mahumet,  the  first  Author  thereof  being  called

Elhesen  Ibnu  Abilhasen,  and  being  borne  in  the  Towne  of

Basora : this man taught his Disciples and followers

438

JOHN LEO ON AFRICA  ad.

c.  1526.
certaine  Precepts,  but  Writings  hee  left  none  behind  him.
About  an  hundred  yeares  after  there  came  another  notable
Doctor  of  that  Sect  from  Bagaded,  called  Elharit  Ibnu
Esed,  who  left  volumes  of  Writings  unto  his  Disciples.
Afterward  those  that  were  found  to  be  his  followers,  were
all  condemned  by  the  Mahumetan  Patriarkes  and  Lawyers.
Howbeit,  fourescore  yeares  after,  that  Sect  began  to  revive
againe  under  a  certaine  famous  Professor,  who  drew  after
him  many  Disciples,  unto  whom  he  published  his  Doctrine.
This  man  at  length,  and  all  his  followers,  were  by  the
Patriarke  and  Lawyers  condemned  to  die.  Which  he
understanding,  wrote  forthwith  unto  the  Patriarke,
requesting  that  he  might  be  licenced  to  dispute  with  the
Lawyers,  as  touching  his  Doctrine,  of  whom  if  he  were
convinced,  he  would  most  willingly  suffer  death ;  other-
wise that  it  would  be  against  al  equity,  that  so  many
innocents  should  perish  upon  an  unjust  accusation.  The
Patriarke  thinking  his  demand  to  be  reasonable,  con-
descended wholly  thereunto.  But  when  the  matter  came  [II.  vi.  798.]
to  disputation,  the  partie  condemned,  soone  put  all  the
Lawyers  to  silence.  Which  when  the  Patriarke  perceived,
he  revoked  the  sentence  as  unjust,  and  caused  many
Colledges  and  Monasteries  to  be  erected  for  the  said  partie
and  his  followers.  After  which  time  this  Sect  continued
about  an  hundred  yeeres,  till  the  Emperour  Malicsach  of
the  Turkish  race  came  thither  out  of  Asia  the  greater,  and
destroyed  all  the  maintainers  thereof.  Whereupon  some
of  them  fled  unto  Cairo,  and  the  rest  into  Arabia,  being
dispersed  here  and  there  for  the  space  of  twenty  yeares,
till  the  reigne  of  Caselsah,  Nephew  unto  Malicsach,  Nidam
Elmule,  one  of  his  Counsellers,  and  a  man  of  an  high
spirit,  being  addicted  unto  the  said  Sect,  so  restored,
erected,  and  confirmed  the  same,  that  by  the  helpe  of  one
Elgazzuli,  a  most  learned  man  (who  had  written  of  the
same  argument  a  notable  Worke,  divided  into  seven  parts)
he  reconciled  the  Lawyers  with  the  Disciples  of  this  Sect,
conditionally,  that  the  Lawyers  should  be  called  Conservers
of  the  Prophet  Mahumet  his  Lawes,  and  the  Sectaries

439

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

c.  1526.

Reformers  of  the  same. This  concord  lasted  betweene
Bagdet  sacked  them,  till  Bagaded  was  sacked  by  the  Tartars  ;  which  befell
y e c  in the  yeare  of  the Hegeira 756. at  what time  those

Sectaries  so  increased,  that  they  swarmed  almost  over  all
Africa  and  Asia.  Neither  would  they  admit  any  into  their
societie,  but  such  as  were  very  learned,  and  trained  up  in
all  kind  of  liberall  Sciences ;  to  the  end  they  might  the
better  defend  their  owne  opinions,  and  confute  their  adver-
saries :  but  now  adayes  they  admit  all  kind  of  rude  and
ignorant  persons,  affirming  all  sorts  of  learning  to  be
needlesse ;  for  the  holy  spirit  (say  they)  revealeth  the
knowledge  of  the  truth  unto  such  as  are  of  a  cleane  heart ;
and  they  alleage  many  reasons  for  the  confirmation  of  this
their  opinion,  though  not  very  forcible.  Wherefore
despising  their  ancestors  Rites,  and  the  strict  observations
of  the  Law,  they  addict  themselves  to  nought  else  but
delights  and  pleasures,  feasting  often,  and  singing  lascivious
Songs.  Sometimes  they  will  rend  their  garments,  either
alluding  thereby  to  the  Verses  that  they  sing,  or  being
mooved  thereunto  by  their  corrupt  and  vile  disposition,
saying  falsely,  That  they  are  then  ravished  with  a  fit  of
divine  love :  but  rather  impute  it  to  their  abundance  of
meat,  and  gluttony.  For  each  one  of  them  will  devoure
as  much  meate,  as  may  well  suffice  three.  Or  (which  is
more  likely)  they  utter  those  passionate  clamours  and
out-cries,  because  they  are  inflamed  with  unlawfull  and
filthy  lust.  For  sometimes  it  happeneth  that  some  one  of
the  principal  of  them,  with  all  his  Scholers  and  Disciples,
is  invited  to  the  marriage  of  some  Gentleman,  and  at  the
beginning  of  the  banket  they  will  rehearse  their  devout
Orizons  and  Songs,  but  so  soone  as  they  are  risen
from  the  Table,  the  elder  of  the  companie  being  about
to  dance,  teare  their  garments :  and  if  any  one  in  the
middest  of  their  dancing,  that  hath  drunke  immoderately,
chanceth  to  fall  downe,  he  is  taken  up  forthwith  by
one  of  the  Scholers,  and  too  too  lasciviously  kissed.
Whereupon  this  Proverbe  grew  among  the  people  of
Fez, The Hermits banquet. Which they use in

440

JOHN LEO ON AFRICA  ad.

c.  1526.
reproch of those Masters, that make their Scholers
their  Minions.

Amongst  these  Sects  there  are  some,  that  have  not  Of  divers
onely  a  divers  Law,  but  also  a  different  beliefe  from  the  °anJ^tse5an^
residue ;  whereupon  by  some  others  they  are  called  0ftfo  supersti-
Heretikes.  Some  there  are  also  which  hold,  that  a  man  Horn  credulity
by  good  Works,  by  Fasting,  and  Abstinence,  may  attaine  °fm<wy-
unto  the  nature  of  an  Angell,  which  good  Works,  Fastings,
&c.  doe  (say  they)  so  purge  and  free  the  mind  from  all
contagion  of  evill,  that  by  no  meanes  it  can  sinne  any
more,  though  it  would  never  so  faine.  Howbeit,  they
thinke  themselves  not  capable  of  this  felicitie,  before  they
ascended  thereunto  by  the  degrees  of  fiftie  Disciplines  or
Sciences  :  and  although  they  fall  into  sinne  before  they  be
come  to  the  fiftieth  degree,  yet  they  say  that  God  wil  not
impute  that  sinne  unto  them.  These  fellowes  indeed  in
the  beginning  led  a  most  strict  life,  and  do  even  macerate
and  consume  themselves  with  fasting :  but  afterward  they
give  themselves  to  all  licentiousnesse  and  pleasure.  They
have  also  a  most  severe  forme  of  living  set  downe  in  foure
Bookes,  by  a  certaine  learned  man  of  their  faction,  called
Essehrauar  de  Sehrauard,  and  borne  in  the  Citie  of  Corasan.
Likewise  there  was  another  Authour  called  Ibnul  Farid,
that  described  all  their  Religion  in  witty  Verses,  which
being  fraught  with  Allegories,  seemed  to  intreate  of
nought  but  Love  :  wherefore  one  Elfargani  expounded  the
said  Verses  with  a  Commentarie,  and  thereout  gathered
the  Canons  and  Orders  of  the  Sect,  and  shewed  the  degrees
to  the  attainement  of  felicitie.  Moreover,  the  said  Verses
are  so  sweet  and  elegant,  that  the  maintainers  of  this  Sect
will  sing  and  repeate  none  other  in  their  Banquets :  for
these  three  hundred  yeeres  no  Author  hath  so  adorned  their
language  as  the  said  Ibnul.  These  Sectaries  take  the
Heavens,  the  Elements,  the  Planets,  and  the  fixed  Starres
to  be  one  God,  and  that  no  Law  nor  Religion  is  erronious  :
for  every  man  (say  they)  may  lawfully  worship  that  which
his  mind  is  most  addicted  to  worship.  They  thinke  that
all  the  knowledge  of  God  was  infused  into  one  man,  whom

441

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

c.  1526.

they  call  in  the  language  Elcorb  ;  this  man,  they  say,  was
elect  by  God,  and  was  made  equall  in  knowledge  to  him.
Forty  there  are  among  them  called  all  by  the  name  of
Elauted,  which  signifieth  in  our  language,  a  block,  or  stock
of  a  tree  :  out  of  this  number,  when  their  Elcoth  deceaseth,
they  create  another  in  his  roome,  namely,  seventy  persons
that  have  the  authority  of  election  committed  unto  them.
There  are  likewise  seven  hundred  sixty  five  others  (whose
names  I  doe  not  well  remember)  who  are  chosen  into  the
said  electors  roomes,  when  any  of  them  decease.  These
seven  hundred  sixtie  five  being  bound  thereunto  by  a
certaine  Canon  or  Rule  of  their  Order,  are  constrained
[II.  vi.  799.]  alwaies  to  goe  unknowne,  and  they  range  almost  all  the
world  over  in  a  most  vile  and  beggerly  habite,  so  that  a
man  would  take  them  for  mad  men,  and  estranged  from  all
sense  of  humanitie :  for  these  lewde  miscreants  under
pretence  of  their  religion,  run  like  rogues  naked  and  savage
throughout  all  Africa,  having  so  little  regard  of  honestie
or  shame,  that  they  will  like  brute  beasts  ravish  women  in
publike  places ;  and  yet  forsooth  the  grosse  common
people  reverence  them  as  men  of  wonderfull  holinesse.
Horrible  vll-  Great  swarmes  of  these  filthie  Vagabonds  you  may  see  in
h™*'M  w'd-  Tunis,  but  many  more  in  Egypt,  and  especially  at  Alcair,
nesse.  where  as  in  the  Market  called  Bain  Elcasrain,  I  saw  one  of

these  Villaines  with  mine  owne  eyes,  in  the  presence  of
much  people,  defloure  a  most  beautifull  woman  as  she  was
comming  forth  of  the  Bath :  which  being  done,  the  fond
people  came  flocking  about  the  said  woman,  striving  to
touch  her  garment  as  a  most  holy  thing,  saying,  That  the
Adulterer  was  a  man  of  great  sanctitie,  and  that  he  did  not
commit  the  sin,  but  onely  seemed  to  commit  it :  which
when  the  silly  cuckold  her  husband  understood,  he  shewed
himselfe  thankefull  to  his  false  God  with  a  solemne
Banquet,  and  with  liberall  giving  of  Almes.  The
Magistrates  of  the  Citie  would  have  punished  the
Adulterer,  but  they  were  in  hazard  to  be  slaine  of  the
people  for  their  labours,  who  (as  is  before  said)  adore  these
Varlets  for  Saints,  and  men  of  singular  holinesse. Other

442

JOHN LEO ON AFRICA  a.d.

c.  1526.
more  vilanous  acts  I  saw  committed  by  them,  which  I  am
ashamed  to  report.

Likewise  there  is  another  sort  of  men,  which  wee  may  Of  the  Cabal-
fitly  call  Cabalists. These  fast  most  strictly,  neither  doe  ~?'  anfh  cer"

1  1 n 1 r  1  • •  11  •  tatne  otfier

they  eate  the  flesh  or  any  living  creature,  but  have  certaine  Sects.
meates  and  garments  allotted  unto  them :  they  rehearse  Pythagoreans,
likewise  certaine  set-prayers  appointed  for  every  houre  of  or  Banians.
the  day  and  for  the  night,  according  to  the  varietie  of
dayes  and  moneths,  and  they  use  to  carrie  about  certaine
square  Tables  with  characters  and  numbers  engraven
therein.  They  faine  themselves  to  have  daily  conference
with  the  Angels,  of  whom  they  learne  (they  say)  the  know-
ledge of  all  things.  They  had  once  a  famous  Doctor  of
their  Sect,  called  Boni,  who  was  Author  of  their  Canons,  Boni.
Prayers,  and  square  Tables.  Which  when  I  saw,  mee
thought  their  Profession  had  more  affinitie  with  Magique
then  with  Cabala.  Their  Art  was  divided  into  eight  parts,
whereof  the  first  was  called  Elumha  Enormita,  that  is,
the  demonstration  of  light,  the  which  contained  Prayers
and  Fastings.  The  second  called  Semsul  Meharif,  that  is,
the  Sunne  of  Sciences,  contained  the  foresaid  square  Tables,
together  with  their  use  and  profit.  The  third  part  they
call  Sirru  Lasmei  Elchusne ;  this  part  contained  a  catalogue
of  those  ninetie  nine  Vertues,  which  (they  say)  are  con-
tained in  the  names  of  God,  which  I  remember  I  saw  at
Rome  in  the  custodie  of  a  certaine  Venetian  Jew.  They
have  also  a  certaine  other  Rule,  called  Suvach,  that  is,  the
Rule  of  Hermites :  the  Professors  and  followers  whereof
inhabite  Woods,  and  solitarie  places ;  neither  have  they
any  other  food,  but  such  as  those  wild  Desarts  will  affoord  :
the  conversation  of  these  Heremites  no  man  is  able  exactly
to  describe,  because  they  are  estranged  from  all  humane
societie.  But  if  I  should  take  upon  me  to  describe  the
varietie  of  Mahumetan  Sects,  I  should  digresse  too  farre
from  my  present  purpose. He  that  desireth  to  know  more

of  this  matter,  let  him  reade  over  the  booke  of  Elefacni,  **v,en9  *%°

, ,.  1  t  r 1 o  1. 1 •  1 prtncipallSects

who  discourseth  at  large  of  the  beets  belonging  to  the  \n  tj£  reiigton

Mahumetan  Religion,  the  principall  whereof  are  seventie  ofMahumet.

443

A*  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

c.  1526.

two,  every  one  of  which  defend  their  opinions  to  be  true
and  good,  and  such  as  a  man  may  attaine  salvation  by.
At  this  day  you  shall  find  but  two  principall  Sects  onely,
the  one  of  Leshari  being  dispersed  over  all  Africa,  Egypt,
Syria,  Arabia,  and  Turkie  :  the  other  of  Imamia,  which  is
authorized  throughout  the  whole  Kingdome  of  Persia,  and
in  certaine  Townes  of  Corasan ;  and  this  Sect  the  great
Sophi  of  Persia  maintaineth,  insomuch  that  all  Asia  had
like  to  have  been  destroyed  thereabout.  For  whereas  before
they  followed  the  sect  of  Leshari,  the  great  Sophi  by  force
of  Armes  established  his  owne  of  Imamia :  and  yet  one
onely  Sect  stretcheth  over  all  the  Mahumetans  Dominions.
Of  such  as  Moreover,  in  the  Citie  of  Fez  there  are  certaine  men
searcijot  cajjecj  Elcanesin,  who  supposing  to  finde  treasure  under
in  Fez.  ^e  foundations  of  old  houses,  doe  perpetually  search  and
delve.  These  grosse  fellowes  use  to  resort  unto  certaine
dennes  and  caves  without  the  Citie-walles,  certainely  per-
swading  themselves,  that  when  the  Romans  were  chased
out  of  Africa,  and  driven  into  Baetica  or  Granada
in  Spaine,  they  hid  great  abundance  of  treasure  in
the  bowels  of  the  earth,  which  they  could  not  carry
with  them,  and  so  enchanted  the  same  by  Art-
Magique,  that  it  can  by  no  meanes  be  attained  unto
but  by  the  same  Art ;  wherefore  they  seeke  unto
Inchanters  to  teach  them  the  Art  of  digging  up  the  said
treasures.  Some  of  them  there  are  that  will  stedfastly
affirme,  that  they  saw  Gold  in  this  or  that  Cave :  others,
that  they  saw  Silver,  but  could  not  digge  it  out,  by  reason
that  they  were  destitute  of  Perfumes  and  Enchantments
fit  for  the  purpose ;  so  that  being  seduced  with  this  vaine
opinion,  and  deeply  delving  into  the  earth,  they  turne
upside-downe  the  foundations  of  Houses  and  Sepulchers,
and  sometimes  they  proceede  in  this  manner  tenne  or
twelve  dayes  journey  from  Fez  :  yea,  so  fond  they  are,  and
so  besotted,  that  they  esteeme  those  Bookes  that  professe
the  Art  of  digging  of  Gold,  as  divine  Oracles.  Before
my  departure  from  Fez,  these  fantasticall  people  had
chosen  them  a  Consull,  and  getting  licence  of  certaine

444

JOHN LEO ON AFRICA  ad.

c.  1526.
owners  to  digge  their  grounds,  when  they  had  digged  as
much  as  they  thought  good,  they  paid  the  said  owners  for
all  dammages  committed.

In  this  Citie  likewise  there  are  great  store  of  Alchymists, Of  the  Alchy-
which  are  mightily  addicted  to  that  vaine  practice : they  msts  °* eZm
are  most  base  fellowes,  and  contaminate  themselves  with
the  steame  of  Sulphur,  &  other  stinking  smels. In  the  [II.  vi.  800.]
evening they use to assemble themselves  at the great
Temple,  where  they  dispute  of  their  false  opinions. They
have  of  their  Arte  of  Alchymie  many  Bookes  written  by
learned  men,  amongst  which  one  Geber  is  of  principal!  Geier  an  Al-
account,  who  lived  an hundred  yeeres  after Mahumet,  €MJ w
and  being  a  Greeke  borne,  is  said  to  have  renounced  his
owne  Religion. This  Geber  his  workes  and  all  his  pre-
cepts are  full  of  Allegories  or  darke  borrowed  speeches.
Likewise  they  have  another  Author,  that  wrote  an  huge
Volume  of  the  same  Arte,  intituled  by  the  name  of  Atto-
grehi :  this  man  was  secretary  unto  the  Soldan  of  Bagaded,  A  Bookewrit-
of  whom  we  have  written  in  the  lives  of  the  Arabian . />//
Philosophers. Also the Songs or Articles of the said  0f  the  Arabian
Science  were  written  by  one  Mugairibi  of  Granada,  where-  Philosophers.
upon  a  most  learned  Mamuluch  of  Damasco  wrote  a  Com-
mentary : yet so, that a man may much more easily
understand the  Text then the  exposition thereof. Of
Alchymists  here  are  two  sorts ; whereof  the  one  seeke  for
the  Elissir,  that  is,  the  matter  which  coloureth  brasse  and
other  Metals ; and  the  other  are  conversant  about  multi-
plication of  the  quantities  of  Metals,  whereby  they  may
conveniently  temper  the  same. But  their  chiefest  drift  is
to  coine  counterfeit  money :  for  which  cause  you  shall  see
most  of  them  in  Fez  with  their  hands  cut  off.

In  this  City  likewise  there  is  a  great  swarme  of  base  Charmers  and
people,  such  as  there  Italians  commonly  call  Ciurmatori :  ™c"**Ur$  °f
these  sing  foolish  Songs  &  Rimes  in  all  the  streets  of  the
City,  &  broching  meere  trifles  with  the  Musicke  of  Drums,
Harpes,  and  Citterns,  they  sell  unto  the  rude  people
certaine  scrowles  or  briefe  Charmes  in  stead  of  preserva-
tives. Unto  these  you  may  adde  another  kinde  of  reffuse

445

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

c.  1526.

people  of  one  Family  and  disposition  with  the  former,  who
carry  dauncing  Apes  up  and  downe,  and  have  their  Neckes
and  Armes  all  entwined  with  crawling  Snakes.  These
also  professe  Geomancy,  and  perswade  women  that  they
can  foretell  them  their  fortune.  Likewise  they  carry  stone-
horses  about  with  them,  which  for  a  certaine  Fee,  they
will  let  others  have  to  cover  their  Mares.  Their  Gentle-
men are  very  stately  and  high  minded,  and  will  have  little
or  no  familiarity  at  all  with  the  Citizens :  so  likewise  the
Doctors  and  Judges  of  principall  account  will  admit  but
few  unto  their  acquaintance.  This  City  it  selfe  is  most
beautiful  and  right  commodiously  situate ;  where  albeit
in  winter  time  the  streets  are  so  mirie,  that  you  cannot
walke  in  them  without  startups,  yet  they  let  passe  such
abundance  of  water  out  of  their  Conduits,  that  all  the  filth
is  washed  cleane  away.  Where  Conduits  are  wanting,
they  carry  all  the  durt  in  Carts  unto  the  next  part  of  the
River.
J  Description  Without  the  wals  of  this  City  Westward  standeth  a
of  the  Suburbs  Suburbe  containing  almost  five  hundreth  Families,  the
foresaid  City  h°uses  whereof  are  but  meane,  and  the  Inhabitants  base,
of  Fez.  as  namely,  divers  of  Camels,  Water-bearers,  and  Cleavers

of  Wood  for  the  Kings  Palace.  Yet  heere  you  may  finde
divers  shops,  and  all  kinds  of  Artificers.  Heere  likewise
dwell  all  the  Charmers  and  Roguish  Minstrels  before
named ;  as  also  great  swarmes  of  sluttish  and  filthie
harlots.  In  the  principall  street  of  this  Suburbe,  you  shall
find  certaine  Caves  most  Artificially  hewen  out  of  excellent
Marble,  wherein  the  Noble  men  of  Fez  were  wont  to  lay
up  their  Corne :  for  the  least  of  them  will  containe  more
then  a  thousand  Measures  of  Corne,  there  being  above  an
hundreth  and  fifty  of  them  in  all,  but  now  they  lie  waste
and  open,  insomuch  that  divers  fall  into  them  at  unawares,
for  which  cause  their  brims  are  invironed  with  wals.
Heere  every  one  may  play  the  Vintner  and  the  Bawd ;  so
that  this  Suburbe  may  justly  be  called  the  sinke  of  Fez.
From  the  twentieth  houre  you  shall  see  none  at  all  in  their
shops :  for  then  every  man  runs  to  the  Taverne  to  disport,

446

JOHN LEO ON AFRICA  a.d.

c.  1526.
to  spend  riotously,  and  to  be  drunken. Another  Suburbe
there  is  allotted  unto  the  Lepers,  of  whom  there  are  two  The  habitation
hundreth  Families : these  leprous  persons  have  a  Gover-  f^z^™^-r
nour,  which  gathereth  certaine  yeerely  Revenues  from  the  Governour.
Noble  men,  and  taketh  such  care  of  the  said  Lepers,  that
they  want  no  necessary  thing. He  is  bound  by  his  Office
to  discharge  the  City  of  all  leprous  persons,  and  to  com-
pell  all  such  as  hee  understands  to  be  infected  with  that
disease,  to  depart  into  the  foresaid  Suburbs. If  any  Leper
chanceth to die without issue, part of his goods are
imployed  to  the  common  benefite  of  the  Lepers,  and  part
fall  to  the  Governours  share  :  but  if  he  hath  children,  they
injoy  his  goods.

Many  fields  there  are  without  the  City,  which  have  4  Description
beene  given  by  certaine  Noblemen  for  the  buriall  of  the  °f the  com-
dead. Upon  their  Sepulchers  for  the  most  part  they  lay  a  bur{au  W-J^
long  three-square  stone. When  any  Noble  man  or  any  out  the  City.
principall  Citizen  deceaseth,  they  lay  one  stone  over  his
head, and another over his feet, whereon used to be
engraven some  Epitaph,  with the  day  and  yeere  when
the  party  deceased. I  my  selfe  bestowed  much  labour  in
gathering  of  Epitaphs,  which  I  saw  both  about  Fez  and
in  other  places  of  Barbary ; all  which  being  set  downe  in
a  Booke,  I  gave  unto  the  Kings  Brother. The  manner  of
their  Epitaphs  is  divers,  some  tending  to  consolation,  and
others  to  sorrow.

Northward  of  the  City  upon  a  certaine  high  Hill  stands  a  TheSepulchers
Palace, wherein are the Monuments of divers Marin  °fthe Ktn&  °f
Kings,  being  most  Artificially  hewen  out  of  Marble  with
Epitaphs  upon  them,  so  that  I  cannot  condignely  expresse
the  Majestie  and  Beauty  thereof.

King  Jacob  the  Founder  divided  New  Fez  into  three  New  Fez.
parts,  whereof  the  first  contained  his  Royall  Palace,  and
divers  Noblemens  houses,  unto  every  one  of  which  he
allotted  a  most  pleasant  Garden.  Not  farre  from  his
Palace  he  built  a  most  stately  and  sumptuous  Temple.  In
another  part  of  this  Citie  hee  built  a  large  and  faire  Stable  [II.  vi.  801.]
for  the  Kings  Horses  to  stand  in. Then  also  he  caused

447

A.D.

c.  1526.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

other  Palaces  to  be  erected  for  his  Captaines  and  principal!
Courtiers.  From  the  West  gate  to  the  East  he  appointed
the  Market  place,  the  distance  betweene  which  Gates  is  a
mile  and  an  halfe,  and  on  both  sides  he  placed  Artificers
and  Merchants  shops.

Gold-smiths.  In  Fez,  neither  Ring  nor  any  other  Jewell  or  Com-

moditie  can  bee  made  of  Silver  or  Gold,  before  the  Metall
be  sealed,  for  the  Offenders  are  most  severely  punished.
And  the  Mettall  being  sealed,  whatsoever  is  made  thereof
is  weighed  as  if  it  were  money.  The  greatest  part  of
Gold-smiths  dwelling  in  new  Fez  are  Jewes,  who  carry
their  Vessels  of  Gold  and  Silver  unto  a  certaine  place  of
old  Fez,  neere  unto  the  Grocers  shops,  and  there  sell  them.
For  in  olde  Fez  neither  Gold  nor  Silver  is  coyned,  nor  any
Mahumetans  are  suffered  to  bee  Gold-smiths,  because  they
have  Usurers  among  them,  which  will  sell  any  piece  of
wrought  Silver  or  Gold  dearer  then  the  waight  requireth ;
albeit  the  same  priviledge  is  by  the  Governours  of  the  Citie

Jewes.  granted  unto  the  Jewes. Some  there  are  also  that  onely

make  Plate  for  the  Citizens,  who  are  payed  hire  onely  for
their  worke.  That  part  of  the  Citie  which  the  Kings
Attendants  or  Guard  once  possessed,  is  now  inhabited  by
Jewes :  for  now  a  dayes  the  Kings  use  no  such  Guard.

The  Jewes  indeed  first  dwelt  in  old  Fez,  but  upon  the
death  of  a  certaine  King  they  were  all  robbed  by  the
Moores :  whereupon  King  Abusabid  caused  them  to
remoove  into  new  Fez,  and  by  that  meanes  doubled  their
yearely  Tribute.  They  therefore  even  till  this  day  doe
occupie  a  long  street  in  the  said  new  Citie,  wherein  they
have  their  Shoppes  and  Synagogues,  and  their  number  is
marvellously  increased  ever  since  they  were  driven  out  of

Their  con- Spaine. These  Jewes  are  had  in  great  contempt  by  all

tempt.  men,  neyther  are  any  of  them  permitted  to  weare  shooes,

but  they  make  them  certaine  Sockes  of  Sea-rushes. On

*OrTurbant.  their  heads  they  weare  a  blacke  *Dulipan,  and  if  any  will
goe  in  a  Cap,  he  must  fasten  a  Red  cloth  thereunto.  They
pay  unto  the  King  of  Fez  monethly  foure  hundred
Duckats.

448

JOHN LEO ON AFRICA  ad.

c.  1526.
At  length,  within  the  space  of  an  hundred  and  forty
yeares  this  new  Citie  was  environed  with  most  impregnable
wals,  and  adorned  with  Temples,  Colledges,  Palaces,  and
other  such  building  as  serve  to  beautifie  a  Citie,  so  that  I
thinke  there  was  more  bestowed  in  garnishing  of  the
Citie,  then  in  building  of  the  wals.  Without  the  Citie-
wals  are  built  many  huge  Wheeles  or  Engins,  for  the  Engmsforthe
convayinp-  of  River-water  over  the  said  wals  into  Cisternes,  conva^ance  °J

• O  J WUT6V.

from  whence  it  is  convayed  in  certayne  Channels  and  Pipes
unto  the  Temples,  Gardens,  and  Palaces.  The  said
Wheeles  were  built  not  fully  an  hundred  yeares  past,  before
which  time  water  was  brought  unto  the  Citie  by  a  certayne
Conduit,  from  a  Fountayne  ten  miles  distant.  Of  which
artificiall  Conduit  a  certaine  Genouese,  being  then  in  great
favour  with  the  King,  is  reported  to  have  beene  the
Author :  but  the  Wheeles  (they  say)  were  invented  by  a
Spaniard  :  and  in  them  there  is  marvellous  cunning  Work-
manship :  for  to  the  convayance  of  so  huge  a  quantitie
of  water,  each  Wheele  is  turned  about  but  foure  and
twentie  times  onely  in  a  day  and  a  night.  To  conclude,
here  are  but  few  Gentlemen  in  this  Citie,  except  such  as
attend  upon  the  Court,  for  the  residue  are  base  and
Mechanicall  people :  but  such  as  carry  any  shew  of
honestie,  doe  so  hate  and  disdayne  the  Kings  Courtiers
and  Gentlemen,  that  they  will  by  no  meanes  vouchsafe
to  marrie  their  Daughters  unto  them.

Amongst  all  the  Princes  of  Africa,  I  never  read  of  any  The  fashions

that  was  created  by  the  common  suffrages  and  consent  of  andcifstofes

. .  used  in  the

the  people  unto  his  Kingdome  or  Princedome,  or  that  was  gjn~s  Court.

called  from  any  strange  Province  or  Citie  to  beare  rule.  No  Elective

Also  by  the  Law  of  Mahumet  no  man  may  beare  any  Princes  in

Secular  Authoritie,  which  may  be  called  lawfull,  save  onely £*\

the  Mahumetan  Patriarkes  and  Prelates :  howbeit  the  said  Cp^lJe  y

Patriarkes  Authoritie  decreasing  daily  more  and  more,  the  No  Rulers

Ringleaders  of  such  people  as  ranged  up  and  downe  the  Mahumetan

Desarts,  began  to  invade  places  inhabited  and  civilized,  but  Pre?ates-

and by force of Armes, against Mahumets Law, and

maugre  his  Prelates,  to  ordayne  sundry  Princes : As  for

v  449  2  F

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

c.  1526.

example  in  the  East,  whereas  the  Turkes,  Cordians,  and
Tartars,  have  usurped  dominion  over  such  as  were  not
able  to  repell  them.  So  likewise  in  West  parts  first  the
Families  of  Zeneta  and  Luntuna,  then  the  seditious
Mahumetan  Preachers,  and  afterward  the  Family  of  Marin
got  the  upper  hand.  Howbeit,  the  Family  of  Luntuna  is
reported  to  have  ayded  the  Westerne  Regions,  and  to  have
released  them  from  the  furie  of  the  seditious  Heretikes,
wherein  they  shewed  themselves  Friends  and  not  Enemies  :
but  afterward  their  tyranny  began  to  shew  it  selfe.  And
this  is  the  reason  why  they  doe  not  now  a  dayes  attayne
unto  Government  by  Hereditarie  Succession  or  by  Election
of  the  people,  or  of  the  Nobilitie.

But  the  Prince  himselfe  when  he  feeles  death  seazing
upon  him,  calleth  about  him  all  his  Peeres  and  Nobles,
and  bindeth  them  by  Oath,  to  establish  his  Sonne,  Brother,
or  any  other  whom  he  most  favoureth,  in  his  Kingdome.
But  they  after  the  Princes  decease  neglecting  their  Oath,
This  was wiH  chose  any  other  whom  they  list. And  this  is  ordinarily

before  the fae  Election  of  the  King  of  Fez,  who,  so  soone  as  he  is
XeriffeFamuy  ,  , yr.  1 ° 1 r 1 •  1  r 1  •

prevailed. proclaymed  King,  chooseth  forth-witn  some  one  or his

The  manner  of  Nobles to be his Chiefe Counsellour, and on him he

choosing  ^ bestoweth  the  third  part  of  all  his  Kingly  Revenues. Then

Officers  in  the  chooseth  another  to  be  his  Secretarie,  Treasuror,  and  High

Steward  of  his  Houshold. Then  is  created  the  Captaine

of  the  Horsemen  appointed  for  the  Kings  Guard,  and  these

Horsemen  with  their  Horses  live  most  commonly  in  the

[II.  vi.  802.]  fields.

Lastly,  he  appointeth  a  new  Governour  over  every
Citie,  unto  whom  all  the  Tributes  and  Revenues  of  the
same  place  redound,  with  condition  that  as  often  as  any
warres  betyde,  hee  shall  maintayne  a  certayne  company
of  Horses  to  the  Kings  service.  After  a  while  also  hee
placeth  certayne  Deputies  and  Commissioners  over  his
people  inhabiting  the  Mountaynes,  and  over  the  Arabians
subject  unto  him.  The  Governours  of  Cities  diversly
administer  Justice,  according  to  the  custome  of  the  place.
Some  there  are  also  appointed  by  the  King  to  collect  all

45°

JOHN LEO ON AFRICA  a.d

c.  1526.

the  Tributes  and  Revenues  of  his  Kingdome,  and  duly  to
pay  the  same  unto  him.  Likewise  there  are  others  chosen,
whom  they  call  in  their  Language,  Keepers  or  Guardians,
and  unto  every  one  of  these  the  King  giveth  some  Castle  or
Village,  whereby  hee  may  procure  his  owne  mayntenance,
and  bee  able  to  serve  the  King  in  time  of  warre.

Moreover,  the  King  of  Fez  mayntayneth  a  Troupe  of
Light  Horsemen,  who  so  long  as  they  serve  the  King  in
his  Campe,  have  their  Dyet  allowed  them  out  of  the  Kings
Provision :  but  in  time  of  peace,  he  findeth  them  Corne,
Butter,  and  pouldered  flesh  for  the  whole  yeare,  but  money
they  have  very  seldome.  Once  a  yeare  they  are  apparelled
at  the  Kings  cost ;  neither  doe  they  provide  for  their
Horses  either  within  the  Citie  or  without,  for  the  King
furnisheth  them  with  all  necessaries.  Those  that  give
attendance  to  their  Horses  are  Christian  Captives,  which
go  shackled  in  great  Chaines  and  Fetters.  But  when  the
Armie  remooveth  any  whither,  the  said  Christians  are
carryed  upon  Camels  backes.  Another  Officer  there  is
that  giveth  attendance  onely  to  the  Camels,  assigning
certaine  Pastures  unto  the  Heardsmen,  and  dividing  fields
among  them,  and  making  such  provision  for  the  Kings
Camels,  as  himselfe  shall  thinke  expedient.  Each  Camel-
driver  hath  two  Camels,  which  are  laden  with  the  Kings
Furniture,  according  to  the  appointment  of  the  Governour.
Likewise  the  King  hath  a  certaine  Purveyor  or  Steward,
whose  office  is  to  provide,  keepe,  and  distribute  Corne
both  to  the  Kings  Houshold  and  to  his  Army.  This  man
in  time  of  warre  hath  ten  or  twelve  Tents  to  lay  up  Corne
in,  and  every  day  with  change  of  Camels  he  sendeth  for
new  Corne,  least  the  Army  should  be  unprovided  of
victuals :  he  hath  also  Cookes  at  his  command.

Moreover,  there  is  a  Governour,  or  Master  Groome  of
the  Stables,  who  provideth  for  the  Kings  Horses,  Mules,
and  Camels,  and  is  furnished  with  all  necessaries  by  the
Steward.  There  is  another  also  appointed,  Over-seer  of
the  Corne,  whose  dutie  it  is  to  provide  Barley  and  other
Provender  for  the  beasts:  and  this  man  hath  his  Scribes

45*

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

c.  1526.

and  Notaries  about  him,  who  diligently  set  downe  all
particular  expenses,  for  they  must  give  up  a  perfect  account
unto  the  chiefe  Steward.  They  have  also  a  certaine
Captaine  over  fiftie  Horsemen,  which  Horsemen  may  well
bee  called  Pursuivants,  for  they  are  sent  by  the  Secretarie
in  the  Kings  name  to  doe  his  businesse.  Likewise  the
Fezzan  King  hath  another  Captaine  of  great  name,  being
as  it  were,  Governour  of  his  Guard,  who  in  the  Kings
name,  may  compell  the  Judges  to  doe  Justice,  and  to  put
their  sentences  in  execution.  This  mans  authoritie  is  so
great,  that  sometimes  he  may  commit  principall  Noblemen
to  Ward,  and  may  severely  punish  them,  according  to  the
Kings  commandement.

Moreover,  the  said  King  hath  a  most  trusty  Chancelor,
who  keepeth  the  great  Seale,  and  writeth  and  signeth  the
Kings  Letters.  He  hath  also  a  great  number  of  Footmen,
the  Governour  of  whom  accepteth  and  dismisseth  whom
hee  thinkes  good,  and  giveth  to  every  one  wages  according
to  his  agilitie  and  desert.  And  whensoever  the  King
commeth  in  place  of  Judgement,  the  said  Governour
alwayes  attendeth  upon  him,  and  is  in  a  manner  his  High
Chamberlaine.  Also  there  is  another  that  taketh  charge  of
the  Carriages  and  Baggage  of  the  Armie,  and  causeth  the
Tents  of  the  Light  Horsemen  to  be  carryed  up  and  downe
on  Mules,  and  the  Tents  of  the  other  Souldiers  on  Camels.
There  are  likewise  a  Company  of  Ensigne-bearers,  who
in  marching  on  a  Journey  carry  their  Colours  wrapped  up  :
but  he  that  goeth  before  the  Armie  hath  his  Banner  dis-
played, and  of  a  great  height.  And  every  one  of  the  said
Standard-bearers  knoweth  most  exactly  alwayes,  fords  of
Rivers,  and  passages  thorow  Woods,  wherefore  they  are
for  the  most  part  appointed  to  guide  the  Army.

The  Drummers  (of  whom  there  are  great  store  in  the
Kings  Host)  play  upon  certayne  Drums  of  Brasse  as  bigge
as  a  great  Kettle,  the  lower  part  whereof  is  narrow,  and
the  upper  broad,  being  covered  with  a  skinne.  These
Drummers  ride  on  Horseback,  having  alwayes  on  the  one
side  of  their  Horses  a  great  waight  hanging  downe,  to

452

JOHN LEO ON AFRICA  a.d.

c.  1526.
counterpoize  the  heavinesse  of  their  Drums  on  the  other
side.  They  are  allowed  most  swift  Horses,  because  the
Moores  account  it  a  great  disgrace  to  loose  a  Drumme.
The  said  Drummes  make  such  a  loude  and  horrible  noyse,
that  they  are  not  onely  heard  a  farre  off,  but  also  strike
exceeding  terrour  both  upon  men  and  Horses,  and  they
are  beaten  onely  with  a  Buls-pizzle.  The  Musicians  are
not  maintayned  at  the  Kings  charge,  for  the  Cities  are
bound  at  their  costs  to  send  a  certaine  number  of  them  to
thewarres,  who,  according  to  their  demeanour  in  the  warres,
are  admitted  or  not  admitted  unto  the  Kings  Table.  This
King  hath  also  a  certaine  Master  of  Ceremonies,  who
sitteth  at  his  feet  in  the  Senate  House,  and  commandeth
each  man  to  sit  downe,  and  to  speake  according  to  his
dignitie.

All  the  Mayde  servants  in  the  Kings  Family  are  Negro-
slaves,  which  are  partly  Chamberlaines,  and  partly  Wayting
Maydes.  And  yet  his  Queene  is  alwayes  of  a  white
skinne.  Likewise  in  the  King  of  Fez  his  Court  are  [II.  vi.  803.]
certaine  Christian  Captives,  being  partly  Spanish,  and
partly  Portugall  women,  who  are  most  circumspectly  kept
by  certaine  Eunuches,  that  are  Negro  slaves.

The  King  of  Fez  hath  very  large  Dominions,  but  his  The  King  of
Revenues  are  small,  to  wit,  scarce  three  hundreth  thousand  Fez * Reve"
Duckats, the fift part whereof  redoundeth not to the
King :  for  the  remainder  is  divided  into  sundry  portions,
as  wee  have  before  signified. Yea,  the  greater  part  of  the
said  Revenues  is  payd  in  Corne,  Cattle,  Oyle  and  Butter,
all  which  yeeld  but  small  store  of  money. In  some  place
they  pay  a  Duckat  and  one  fourth  part,  Tribute  for  every
Acre,  but  in  other  places  a  whole  Family  payeth  but  so
much. In  some  other  Regions  each  man  above  fifteene
yeares  of  age  payeth  as  much  Tribute  also. Neither  are
the  people  of  this  great  Citie  more  vexed  with  any  thing
then with paying of their Tributes and Impositions.
Heere  also  is  to  be  noted,  that  the  Mahumetan  Governours  Tribute  how
(the Priests onely excepted) may not exact greater  muc^
Revenues  then  those  that  Mahumet  hath  allotted  unto

453

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

c.  1526.

them,  namely,  of  every  of  their  subjects  which  possesseth

an  hundred  Duckats  in  ready  money,  they  are  to  have  two

Duckats  and  an  halfe  for  yeerely  Tribute.

Tithes  paid  to Every  husbandman  likewise  is  bound  to  pay  for  Tribute

&..;„„, an the  tenth  part  of  all  his  Corne. And  all  the  said  Tributes
t twees  .  r  , .  1111

because  they he  appointed  to  be  paid  unto  the  Patnarke,  who  should

were  Priests, bestow  that  which  was  superfluous  for  the  Prince  to  have,

and  by  his  law  UpQn  common  uses ; namely,  for  the  releeving  of  poore

impotent people  and  widowes, and for maintaining of

warres  against  the  enemie. But  since  the  Patriarkes  began

to  decay,  the  Princes  (as  we  have  before-said)  exercised

tyranny. For  it  was  not  sufficient  for  them  to  exact  all

the forenamed  Tributes, and  riotously to  consume the

same,  but  also  to  urge  people  unto  greater  contributions ;

so  that  all  the  Inhabitants  of  Africa  are  so  oppressed  with

daily  exactions, that  they  have  scarcely  wherewithall  to

Note.  feed  and  apparell  themselves : for  which  cause  there  is

almost  no  man  of  learning  or  honesty, that  will  seeke

any  acquaintance  with  Courtiers,  or  will  invite  them  to

his  Table,  or  accept  any  gifts  (bee  they  never  so  pretious)

at  their  hands  :  thinking  that  whatsoever  goods  they  have,

are  gotten  by  theft  and  bribery.

The  King  of The  King  of  Fez  continually  maintaineth  sixe  thousand

Fez  his  Horsemen, five hundreth Crosse-bowes, and as many

Harqubusiers,  being  at  all  assayes  prepared  for  the  warres,

who  in  time  of  peace,  when  the  King  goeth  on  Progresse,

lie  within  a  mile  of  his  person :  for  being  at  home  in  Fez,

How  the  King  he  needeth  not  so strong  a  Guard. When  he  wageth

oj ez  naet warre  against  the  Arabians  that  bee  his  enemies,  because
on  rrovresse*  /•  •  .  •  .

the  fore-named  Garison  is  not  sufficient,  he  requireth  ayde

of  the  Arabians  his  Subjects,  who  at  their  owne  costs  find

him  a  great  army  of  men  better  trained  to  the  wars,  then

his  owne  Souldiers  before-mentioned. The  pompe  and

Ceremonies  of  this  King  are  but  meane,  neither  doth  he

willingly  use  them,  but  onely  upon  Festivall  dayes,  and

when  meere  necessitie  requireth. When  the  King  is  to

ride  foorth,  the  master  of  Ceremonies  signifieth  so  much

unto  certaine  Herbengers  or  Postes,  whereupon  the  Her-

454

JOHN LEO ON AFRICA  a.d.

c.  1526.
bengers  give  notice  thereof  unto  the  Kings  *  Parents,  unto  *Or  kins-
his Nobilitie, his Senators, Captaines, Guardians, and  fi '
Gentlemen,  who  presently  arrange  themselves  before  the
Palace  gate. At  the  Kings  comming  foorth  of  the  Palace,
the  Herbengers  appoint  unto  each  man  his  place  and  order
of  riding. First  and  fore-most  go  the  Standard-bearers,
next  the  Drummers,  then  followeth  the  chiefe  Groome  of
the  Stable  with  his  servants  and  family ; after  him  comes
the  Kings  pensioners,  his  Guard,  his  master  of  Ceremonies,
his  Secretaries,  his  Treasurer,  and  last  of  all  his  chiefe
Judge  and  his  Captaine  General!,  at  length  comes  the
King  accompanied  with  his  principall  Counseller,  or  with
some  other  great  Peere. Before  the  King  also  ride  certaine
Officers  belonging  to  his  person,  whereof  one  carries  his
Sword-royall,  another  his  Shield,  and  the  third  his  Crosse-
bow. On  each  side  of  him  march  his  Foot-men, one
carrying  a  payre  of  Stirups,  another  the  Kings  Partizan,
the  third  a  covering  for  his  Saddle,  and  the  fourth  a  halter
for  his  horse. And  so  soone  as  the  King  is  dismounted,
they  foorthwith  cover  the  Saddle,  and  put  the  foresaid
halter  upon  his  Horse-head. Likewise  there  is  another
footman  that  carrieth  the  Kings  Pantofles  most  Artificially
wrought. After  the  King  followeth  the  Captaine  of  the
footmen,  then  the  Eunuches,  the  Kings  Family,  the  light
Horsemen,  and  last  of  all  the  Crosse-bowes  and  Harque-
busiers. The  apparell  of  the  King  is  then  very  moderate
and  plaine  :  insomuch  that  if  a  man  knew  him  not,  he  would
thinke  him  to  be  absent :  for  the  attendants  be  farre  more
sumptuously  attired. Moreover  no  Mahumetan  King  or  No  Mahume-
Prince  may  weare  a  Crowne,  Diademne,  or  any  such  like  tan  crowned'
ornament  upon  his  head,  for  that  is  forbidden  by  the  law
of  Mahumet. When  the  King  lyeth  with  his  army  in  the The  Kjng  °f
fields,  first  his  owne  great  tent  is  pitched  in  a  foure-square  Fez  *?  man"
forme  like  unto  a  Castle,  each  side  of  the  said  square  being  ^ WM
fifty elles in length. At every of the foure corners
standeth  a  little  sharpe  Turret  made  of  Cloth,  and  a  gallant
Spheare  on  the  top  which  glistereth  like  gold. This  Royall
Pavilion  hath  foure  gates,  every  one  of  which  is  kept  by

455

a».  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

c.  1526.

Eunuches.  Within  the  said  Pavilion  are  contained  divers
other  tents,  among  which  is  the  Kings  lodging,  being
framed  in  such  wise,  that  it  may  easily  bee  remooved  from
place  to  place.  Next  unto  it  stand  the  Tents  of  the
Noblemen,  and  of  such  as  are  most  in  the  Kings  favour ;
then  the  lodgings  of  the  principall  Guard  being  made  of
Goats-skinnes,  after  the  Arabian  fashion ;  and  in  the
midst  of  all  stands  the  Kings  Kitchin  and  his  Pantry.
[II.  vi.  804.]  Not  farre  from  hence  the  light  Horsemen  have  their  abode,
who  all  of  them  are  victualled  out  of  the  Kings  Store-
house, notwithstanding  their  attire  be  very  base.  Next
of  all  are  the  Stables,  wherein  their  Horses  are  marvelous
well  tended.  Without  this  circuit  keepe  such  as  carry
the  Tents  and  the  Kings  Furniture  from  place  to  place.
Here  are  also  Butchers,  Victualers,  and  such  like.  All
Merchants  and  Artificers  that  resort  hither,  take  up  their
abode  next  unto  the  Tent-carriers :  so  that  the  Kings
Pavillion  is  pitched  like  a  strong  City,  for  it  is  so  environed
with  the  lodgings  of  the  Guard,  and  with  other  Tents
adjoyning,  that  there  is  very  difficult  passage  to  the  King.
Round  about  the  said  Royall  Pavillion,  there  are  certaine
appointed  to  watch  and  ward  all  night  long,  howbeit,  they
are  base  and  unarmed  people.  In  like  sort  there  is  a  watch
kept  about  the  Stables,  but  sometime  so  negligently,  that
not  onely  some  Horses  have  beene  stolne,  but  there  have
beene  found  enemies  in  the  Kings  owne  Pavillion,  that
came  to  murther  him.  The  King  liveth  the  greatest  part
of  the  yeere  in  the  fields,  both  for  the  safegard  of  his
Kingdome,  and  also  that  he  may  keepe  his  Arabian  sub-
Then  began  jects  in  obedience,  and  sometimes  he  recreateth  himselfe
Xerlffetopeep  with  hunting,  and  sometime  with  playing  at  Chesse.  I
forth,  whu know  right  well  how  tedious  I  have  beene  in  the  descrip-

(liter  obtained  *^  .

Fez  and  ^on °f ^is Citie  : but  because it  is the Metropolitan

Maroco,  fcfc. not onely of Barbarie, but of  Africa, I thought good

and  Maroco  most  particularly  to  decypher  every  parcell  and  member

the  principall  thereof.

(  1  ti  p

Mount  This  Mountaine  beginneth  from  the  Plaine  of  Esais

Zarhon.  ly*ng  ten  miles  distant  from  the  Citie  of  Fez ; Westward

456

JOHN LEO ON AFRICA  a.d.

c.  1526.
it  extendeth  thirty  miles,  and  is  almost  ten  miles  broad.
This  Mountaine  is  all  covered  with  waste  and  Desart
woods,  being  otherwise  still  stored  with  Olives.  In  this
Mountaine  there  are  of  Sheepe-folds  and  Castles,  to  the
number  of  fiftie,  and  the  Inhabitants  are  very  wealthy,  for
it  standeth  betweene  two  flourishing  Cities,  that  is  to  say,
Fez  on  the  East,  and  Mecnase  on  the  West.  The  women
weave  Woollen  cloth,  according  to  the  custome  of  that
place,  and  are  adorned  with  many  silver  Rings  and
Bracelets.  The  men  of  this  Mountaine  are  most  valiant,
and  are  much  given  to  pursue  and  take  Lyons,  whereof
they  send  great  store  unto  the  King  of  Fez.  And  the
King  hunteth  the  said  Lyons  in  manner  following :  In  a  K**&ng  of
large  field,  there  are  certaine  little  Cels  made,  being  so  J°ng-use  f  *
high,  that  a  man  may  stand  upright  in  them :  each  one  peZt
of  these  Cells  is  shut  fast  with  a  little  doore  ;  and  containe
within  every  of  them  an  armed  man,  who  opening  the
doore  presents  himselfe  to  the  view  of  the  Lyon :  then
the  Lyon  seeing  the  doores  open,  comes  running  toward
them  with  great  furie,  but  the  doores  being  shut  againe,
he  waxeth  more  furious  then  before ;  then  bring  they
foorth  a  Bull  to  combate  with  the  Lyon,  who  enter  a  fierce  F*g&*  betwixt
and  bloody  conflict,  wherein  if  the  Bull  kill  the  Lyon,  a/j[n  and  a
that  dayes  sport  is  at  an  end ;  but  if  the  Lyon  get  the
victory,  then  all  the  armed  men,  being  ordinarily  twelve,
leape  foorth  of  their  Cels,  and  invade  the  Lyon :  each
one  of  them  having  a  Javelin  with  a  pike  of  a  cubite  and
a  halfe  long.  And  if  these  armed  men  seeme  to  be  too
hard  for  the  Lyon,  the  King  causeth  their  number  to  be
diminished :  but  perceiving  them  too  weake,  the  King
with  his  company  from  a  certaine  high  place,  where  he
standeth  to  behold  the  sport,  kill  the  Lyon  with  their
Crosse-bowes.  And  oftentimes  it  falleth  out,  that  before
the  Lyon  be  slaine,  some  one  of  the  men  dies  for  it,  the
residue  being  sore  wounded.  The  reward  of  those  that
encounter  the  Lyon  is  ten  Ducats  apeece,  and  a  new  gar-
ment :  neither  are  any  admitted  unto  this  combat  but  men
of redoubted valour, and such as come from Mount

457

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

c.  1526.

Zelagi :  but  those  that  take  the  Lyons  first  are  inhabitants

of  Mount  Zarhon.

Guam  a  This  Towne  when  the  Scismatike  Idris  came  into  this

Mount  Region,  he  began  to  repaire  Gualili,  and  to  replant  it  so

Zarhon.  with Inhabitants, that  within short time it grew  very

populous : howbeit  after  his  decease  it  was  neglected  by

his  sonne,  being  wholy  addicted  (as  is  before  said)  unto

the  building  of  Fez. And  yet  Idris  lieth  buried  in  this

Towne,  whose  Sepulchre  is  visited  with  great  reverence

almost  by  all  the  people  of  Barbary,  for  he  is  as  highly

esteemed  as  if  he  had  been  some  Patriarke,  because  he

was  of  the  linage  of  Mahumet.

The  Towne  Pietra  Rossa,  is  a  small  Towne  built  by  the  Romanes

€Rossa  or^th uPon  t^le  s^e  °^  t^le  foresaid  Mountaine,  beeing  so  neere

Red  Sea. the  Forrest,  that  the  Lyons  will  come  daily  into  the  Towne

Tame  Lyons, and  gather  up  bones  in  the  streets,  yea,  they  are  so  tame

and  familiar,  that  neither  women  nor  children  are  afraid  of

them.

The  Castle  of Shame  is  an  ancient  Castle  built  at  the  foot  of  the  said

Mountaine  neere  unto  the  high  way  from  Fez  to  Mecnase  :

and  it  was  called  by  this  name,  because  the  Inhabitants

are  most  shamefully  addicted  to  covetise,  like  unto  all  the

people thereabouts. In old time  it is  reported that  a

certaine  King  passed  by,  whom  the  Inhabitants  of  the

Castle  invited  to  dinner,  requesting  him  to  change  the

ignominious  name  of  the  place : which  when  the  King

had  condescended  unto,  they  caused,  according  to  their

custome,  a  company  of  Rams  to  be  slaine,  and  certaine

bladders  and  vessels  to  be  filled  with  milke,  to  serve  for

the  Kings  breakfast  the  morrow  after. But  because  the

said  vessels  were  very  large,  they  consulted  together  to

put  in  halfe  milke  and  halfe  water,  hoping  that  the  King

should  never  perceive  it. The  day  following,  albeit  the

King  was  not  very  hasty  of  his  breakfast,  yet,  his  servants

urging  him  thereunto,  he  perceived  the  milke  to  be  halfe

Naturam water ; whereat smiling, he said : Friends, that  which

expelas  furca nature  hath  given,  no  man  can  take  away.

About  Agla  keepe  great  store  of  Lyons,  but  they  are

458

JOHN LEO ON AFRICA  a.d.

c.  1526.
by  nature  so  fearefiill,  that  they  will  flee  at  the  voyce  of  a
child  :  hence  commeth  the  Proverbe  so  rife  in  Fez,  A  Lyon  The  occasion  of
of  Agla,  which  they  apply  unto  such  a  one  as  maketh  great  *Pm. f1* •  ..
bragges,  and  is  but  a  meere  Dastard.

The  great  Citie  of  Arzilla  called  by  the  Africans  Azella,  A  descr&}m
was  built  by  the  Romanes  upon  the  Ocean  Sea  shoare,  jrs^gu %  %e
about  seventie  miles  from  the  Streights  of  Gibraltar,  and
an  hundred  and  fortie  miles  from  Fez. It  was  in  times
past  subject  unto  the  Prince  of  Septa  or  Ceuta,  who  was
tributary  to  the  Romanes,  and  was  afterward  taken  by  the
Gothes,  who  established  the  said  Prince  in  his  former
Government :  but  the  Mahumetans  wanne  it  in  the  yeere
of  the  Hegeira  94.  and  held  the  same  for  two  hundred
and  twenty  yeeres,  till  such  time  as  the  English  at  the
perswasion  of  the  Gothes  besieged  it  with  an  huge  Armie ;
and albeit the Gothes were Enemies to the English,
because  themselves  were  Christians,  and  the  English  wor-
shippers of  Idols,  yet  the  Gothes  perswaded  them  to  this
attempt,  hoping  by  that  meanes  to  draw  the  Mahumetans
out  of  Europe. The  English  having:  good  successe  tooke  The  taking  of
the  Citie,  and  so  wasted  it  with  fire  and  sword,  that  scarce v r  l
one  Citizen  escaped,  so  that  it  remayned  almost  thirtie These  seeme
yeeres  void  of  Inhabitants.  Danes  which

But afterward when the Mahumetan Patriarkes of  infested

Cordova  were  Lords  of  Mauritania,  it  was  againe  re-edified,  £ng™na,Ger-

.  -  ~  flianie  t  ranee

and  by  all  meanes  augmented,  enriched  and  fortified. The  an^  ftane  \n

Inhabitants  were  rich, learned,  and  valiant. The  fields  those  times:

adjacent yeeld Graine  and Pulse of  all sorts in great  and  comming

abundance,  but  because  the  Towne  standeth  almost  ten  fr°m  E^and

miles  from  the  Mountaynes,  it  sustayneth  great  want  of  foaten  &y

wood ; howbeit, they have coles brought them from  Alfred,  \3c

Harais,  as  is  aforesaid. In  the  yeere  of  Hegeira  882.  were  called

this Citie was suddenly surprized and taken by the  5**v?"

Portugals,  and  all  the  Inhabitants  carried  prisoners  into  /^  »

Portugall,  amongst  whom  was  Mahumet  the  King  of  Fez  tugals.
that now  is, who together  with his Sister being  both
children  of  seven  yeeres  old,  were  taken  and  led  captive.
For  the  Father  of  this  Mahumet  seeing  the  Province  of

459

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

c.  1526.

Habat  revolt  from  him,  went  and  dwelt  at  Arzilla,  the
very  same  time,  when  Esserif  a  great  Citizen  of  Fez,
^utKin  *ofth havinS  slaine  Habdulac  the  last  King  of  the  Marin  Family,
Marin  was  ^y  t^le  favour  °f  ^e  people  advanced  unto  the  Fezzan

Fami/y.  Kingdom. Afterward,  one  Saic  Abra  being  pricked  for-

ward with  ambition,  went  about  to  conquer  the  Citie  of
Fez,  and  to  make  himselfe  King ;  howbeit  Esserif  by  the
advise  of  a  certaine  Counsellor  of  his,  being  Cousin  unto
Saic,  vanquished  and  put  to  flight  the  said  Saic  to  his
great  disgrace.

Moreover,  while  Esserif  had  sent  his  said  Counsellor
to  Temesna,  to  pacifie  the  people  of  that  Province  being
about  to  rebell,  Saic  returned,  and  having  for  one  whole
yeere  besieged  new  Fez  with  eight  thousand  men,  at  length
by  Treason  of  the  Townesmen  hee  easily  wanne  it,  and
compelled  Esserif  with  all  his  Family,  to  flye  unto  the
Kingdome  of  Tunis.  The  same  time  therefore  that  Saic
besieged  Fez,  the  King  of  Portugall  (as  is  aforesaid)
sending  a  Fleet  into  Africa,  took  Arzilla,  and  then  was  the
King  of  Fez  that  now  is  with  his  yong  Sister,  carryed
captive  into  Portugall,  where  he  remayned  seven  yeeres,
in  which  space  hee  learned  the  Portugall  Language  most
exactly.  At  length,  with  a  great  summe  of  money  his
Father  ransomed  him  out  or  Portugall,  who  afterward
being  advanced  to  the  Kingdome,  was  by  reason  of  his
long  continuance  in  Portugall,  called  King  Mahumet  the
Portugall.  This  King  afterward  attempted  very  often  to
be  avenged  of  the  Portugals,  and  to  recover  Arzilla.
Wherefore  suddenly  encountring  the  said  Citie,  he  beate
downe  a  great  part  of  the  wall,  and  entring  the  breach,  set
Reade  Osorius  all  the  captive  Moores  at  libertie.  The  Christians  retyred
lib.  ^de rebus  jnto  ^  Castle,  promising  within  two  dayes  to  yeeld  unto
gestts,  man  ^  King.  But  Pedro  de  Navarro  comming  in  the  mean
season  with  a  great  Fleet,  they  compelled  the  King  with
continuall  discharging  of  their  Ordnance,  not  onely  to
relinquish  the  Citie,  but  also  to  depart  quite  away  with
his  whole  Armie :  afterward  it  was  so  fortified  on  all  sides
by  the  Portugals,  that  the  said  King  attempting  often  the

460

JOHN LEO ON AFRICA  a.d.

c.  1526.
recoverie  thereof,  had  alwayes  the  repulse. I  my  selfe
serving-  the  King  in  the  foresaid  expedition  could  find  but  John  Leo

OO  x  tprvifi/l  the

five hundred of our company slaine. But the warre ~ 0fFezjn
against  Arzilla  continued  from  the  yeere  of  the  Hegeira  ^s  warres
914.  to  the  yeere  921.  against

The  great  and  ancient  Citie  of  Tangia,  called  by  the  Arzilla.
Portugals,  Tangiara,  according  to  the  fond  opinion  of  T  e  . ttte  §*
some  Historiographers,  was  founded  by  one  Sedded  the
sonne  of  Had,  who  (as  they  say)  was  Emperour  over  the
whole  World.  This  man  (say  they)  determined  to  build
a  Citie,  which  for  beautie  might  match  the  Earthly
Paradise.  Wherefore,  hee  compassed  the  same  with  wals
of  Brasse,  and  the  Roofe  of  the  Houses  hee  covered  with
Gold  and  Silver,  for  the  bulding  whereof  he  exacted  great
Tributes  of  all  the  Cities  in  the  World.  But  the  Classical
and  approved  Authours  affirme,  that  it  was  built  by  the
Romanes  upon  the  Ocean  Sea  shoare,  at  the  same  time
when  they  subdued  the  Kingdome  of  *  Granada.  *Or  Bcetka.

Septa, called by the Latines, Civitas, and by the  The  great
Portugals  Seupta,  was  (according  to  our  most  approoved  CtiutfSefta.
Authors)  built  by  the  Romanes  upon the Streights  of
Gibraltar,  beeing  in  olde  time  the  head  Citie  of  all  Mauri-
tania, wherefore  the  Romanes  made  great  account  thereof,
insomuch  that  it  became  very  civill,  and  was  throughly
inhabited. Afterward  it  was  wonne  by  the  Gothes,  who
appointed  a  Governour  there,  and  it  continued  in  their
possession,  till  the  Mahumetans  invading  Mauritania  sur-
prized it  also. The  occasion  whereof  was  one  Julian  Earle  The  entrance
of  Septa ; who  being  greatly  iniuried  by  Roderigo  King  oftheMoores

/•  r  .  •  •  into  Granada

of  the  Gothes  and  of  Spaine,  joyned  with  the  Infidels,
conducted  them  into  Granada,  and  caused  Roderigo  to
lose  both  his  life  and  his  Kingdome.

The  Mahumetans  therefore  having  taken  Septa,  kept  [II.  vi.  806.]
possession  thereof  on  the  behalfe  of  one  Elgualid,  Sonne
of  Habdulmalic  their  Patriarke,  who  then  was  resident  at
Damasco,  in  the  yeere  of  the  Hegeira  92.  From  thence-
forth till  within  these  few  yeeres,  this  Citie  grew  so  civill
and  so  well  stored  with  Inhabitants,  that  it  proved  the

461

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

c.  1526.

most  worthy  and  famous  Citie  of  all  Mauritania.  It
contayned  many  Temples  &  Colledges  of  Students,  with
great  numbers  of  Artizans,  and  men  of  Learning  and  of
high  spirit.  Their  Artizans  excelled  especially  in  Workes
of  Brasse,  as  namely,  in  making  of  Candlestickes,  Basons,
Standishes,  and  such  like  Commodities,  which  were  as
pleasant  to  the  eye,  as  if  they  had  beene  made  of  Silver
or  Gold.  The  Italians  have  great  cunning  in  making
of  the  like,  but  their  Workemanship  is  nothing  comparable

*0r  Ceuta. to  theirs  of  *  Septa.

Without  the  Citie  are  divers  faire  Villages  and  Granges,
especially  in  that  place  which  for  the  abundance  of  Vines
is  called,  The  Vineyards :  howbeit,  the  fields  are  very
barren  and  fruitles,  for  which  cause  their  Corne  is  exceeding
deere.  Both  without  and  within  the  Citie  there  is  a
pleasant  and  beautifull  prospect  to  the  shoare  of  Granada

The  Streights Up0n  the  Streights  of  Gibraltar,  from  whence  you  may

3L  V!L  **  *  discerne  living  creatures,  the  distance  being  but  twelve
pombepta^but #1  &  .  . >  .  &

twelve  miles miles. Howbeit,  this  famous  Citie  not  many  yeeres  since

broad.  was greatly afflicted by Habdulmumen the King and

Patriarke :  who  having  surprized  it,  razed  the  buildings,

and  banished  the  principall  Inhabitants  thereof. And  not

long  after  it  sustayned  as  great  damage  by  the  King  of

Granada, who (besides the  foresaid  harms) carryed the

Nobles  &  chiefe  Citizens  Captives  into  Granada. And

Septa  taken  by  lastly,  in  the  yeere  of  Mahumet  his  Hegeira  818.  being

the  Portugals.  taken  by  a  Portugall  Armada,  all  the  Citizens  did  abandon

Abu  Sahid it. Abu  Sahid  being  then  King  of  Fez,  and  a  man  of  no

Kwg  of  Fez vaiour neglected  the  recoverie  thereof :  but  in  the  midst

ana  his  sixe r 1  • 1 •  1 1  •  1 •  1  1 1

Sonnes  slaine °* ^1S  dancing  and  disport  being  advertised  that  it  was

all  in  one lost,  he  would  not  so  much  as  interrupt  his  vaine  pastime  :

night.  wherefore  by  Gods  just  judgement,  both  himselfe  and  his

sixe  Sonnes  were  all  slaine  in  one  night  by  his  Secretarie,

in  whom  hee  reposed  singular  trust,  because  he  would  have

defloured  the  said  Secretaries  wife. These  things  came  to

passe  in  the  yeere  of  the  Hegeira  824.

Afterward,  the  Kingdome  of  Fez  being  eight  yeeres

destitute  of  a  King,  a  Sonne  of  the  murthered  King  whom

462

JOHN LEO ON AFRICA  a.d.

c.  1526.

he  begot  of  a  Christian  woman,  and  who  the  same  night

that  his  Father  was  slaine  fled  unto  Tunis,  succeeded  in

the  Government :  this  was  Habdulac,  the  last  King  of  the

Marin  Family,  who  likewise  (as  is  aforesaid)  was  slaine

by  the  people. -

Upon  the  Mountaine  Quadres,  was  borne  one  called  Quadres.

by them Hellul : this Hellul atchieved many worthy

exploits  against  the  Spaniards ; the  History  whereof  is

set  downe  partly  in  verse  and  partly  in  prose,  and  is  as

rife  in  Africa  and  Granada,  as  is  the  Storie  of  Orlando  in

Italic But  at  length  in  the  Spanish  warre  (wherein  Joseph

Enesir  King  and  Patriarke  of  Maroco  was  vanquished)

this  Hellul  was  slaine  in  a  Castle  of  Catalonia,  called  by

the  Moores,  The  Castle  of  the  Eagle. In  the  same  battell  Threescore

were  slaine  threescore  thousand  Moores,  so  that  none  of  \°.us ,  .
,  ,  ,  1 /*  r 1  • xt  1  1 Moores  slaine.

them  escaped  save  the  King  and  a  few  or  his  JNobles.

This  was  done  in  the  yeere  of  the  Hegeira  609.  which
was  in  the  yeere  of  our  Lord  11 60.  From  thenceforth
the  Spaniards  had  alwayes  good  successe  in  their  warres,
so  that  they  recovered  all  those  Cities  which  the  Moores
had  before  taken  from  them.

This  ancient  Towne  built  upon  the  Mediterran  Sea  Bedis9  other-
shoare,  and  called  by  the  Spaniards,  Velles  de  Gumera,  Wy5eu  {
contayneth  about  sixe  hundred  Families.  Heere  is  also  Gumera.
a  very  stately  Temple  to  bee  seene.  Water  for  drinke
is  exceeding  scarce  among  them,  for  they  are  all  constrayned
to  resort  unto  one  Pit  or  Well,  being  in  the  Suburbes,
neere  unto  the  Sepulchre  of  a  certayne  man,  that  was  in
times  past  very  famous  among  them.  Howbeit  in  the
night  it  is  dangerous  to  fetch  water  from  thence,  because  it
is  so  full  of  Bloud-suckers  or  Horse-leeches.  They  have
such  abundance  of  fish,  that  one  man  alone  is  not  able  to
draw  up  a  Net ;  wherefore  whosoever  will  assist  the
Fishermen  in  that  businesse,  are  rewarded  with  good  store
of  fishes  for  their  labour :  yea,  sometimes  they  will  freely
bestow  fishes  upon  such  as  passe  by.  They  salt  the  fore-
said Sardelli,  and  send  them  to  the  Mountaines  to  be  sold.
In  this  Towne  there  is  a  long  street  inhabited  with  Jewes,

463

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

c.  1526.

wherein  dwell  sundry  Vintners  that  sell  excellent  Wines.
So  that  in  calme  evenings  the  Citizens  use  to  carry  Wine
aboord  their  Barkes  in  the  Sea,  and  to  spend  their  time  in
drinking  and  singing.

Ferdinando  King  of  Spaine  taking  a  certaine  Hand
within  a  mile  of  the  Towne,  built  a  Fort  thereon,  and  so
planted  it  with  Ordnance  and  Souldiers,  that  neyther  their
Temples  nor  themselves  walking  in  the  streets  were  free
there  from,  ,but  were  daily  slaine.  Wherefore  the  Gover-
nour  of  the  Towne  was  constrayned  to  crave  aide  from  the
King  of  Fez,  who  sent  out  a  great  Armie  against  the
Christians ;  but  they  were  partly  taken,  and  partly  slaine,
so  that  very  few  escaped  backe  unto  Fez.  The  Christians
kept  this  He  almost  two  yeeres  and  then  it  was  betrayed
by  a  false  trecherous  Spaniard  (who  slue  the  Governour  of
the  He,  because  hee  had  taken  his  Wife  from  him)  into  the
Moores  possession,  and  all  the  Christians  were  slaine :  not
a  man  of  them  escaped,  save  onely  the  Spanish  Tray  tor,
who  in  regard  of  his  Treason  was  greatly  rewarded,  both
by  the  Governour  of  Bedis,  and  also  by  the  King  of  Fez.
Being  at  Naples  I  heard  the  whole  relation  of  this  matter
from  a  certaine  man  that  was  present  at  all  the  former
[II.  vi.  807.]  Exploits,  who  said,  that  they  were  done  about  the  yeere
of  our  Lord  1520.

In Mount Beniguazeual, there is a certaine Towne

indifferently  well  peopled,  and  furnished  with  all  kind  of

Artificers ; whereunto  the  fields  belonging  marvellously

abound  with  Grapes,  Quinces,  and  Pome-citrons,  all  which

are  sold  at  Fez :  heere  are  likewise  great  store  of  Linnen

Weavers,  and  many  Judges  and  Lawyers. They  have  also

a  good  Market,  whereunto  the  Inhabitants  of  the  Neigh-

A  cave  or  hole  bour  Mountaynes  resort. Upon  the  top  of  this  Moun-

*  ll^^th' tayne  ^ere  is  a  certaine  Cave  or  hole  that  perpetually

up  fire.  casteth  up  fire. Some  wondring  greatly  at  the  matter,

have  cast  in  wood,  which  was  suddenly  consumed  to  ashes  :

I  my  selfe  never  saw  the  like  Miracle  in  any  other  place,

so  that  a  great  many  thinke  it  to  be  hel-mouth.

In Mount Beni Mesgalda  are  many  Doctors  of  the

464

JOHN LEO ON AFRICA  ad.

c.  1526.
Mahumetan  Law,  and  divers  inferiour  Students :  who  put
the  Inhabitants  to  great  damage.  Themselves  forsooth,
will  drinke  wine,  and  yet  they  perswade  the  people  that
it  is  unlawfull  for  them  to  drinke  it,  albeit  some  doe  give
them  little  credit.  The  Inhabitants  of  this  Mountayne
pay  in  respect  of  others  no  great  Tribute,  and  that  perhaps,
because  they  maintayne  the  foresaid  Doctors  and  Students.

In  my  time  the  King  of  Spaine  sent  a  great  Armie
against  Melela  in  Garet :  before  the  arrivall  whereof,  the
Townesmen  sent  unto  the  King  of  Fez  for  ayde,  who
making  warre  as  then  against  the  people  of  Temesna,
could  send  but  small  forces  to  succour  them.  Which  the
Townesmen  being  advertised  of,  and  fearing  least  their
small  forces  would  prove  too  weake  for  the  Spaniards  great
Armada,  they  tooke  all  the  bagge  and  baggage  that  they
could  carrie,  and  fled  unto  the  Mountaynes  of  Buthoia.
Howbeit,  the  Captaine  of  the  Fessan  Souldiers,  both  to
bee  revenged  upon  the  Townesmens  cowardize,  and  also
to  leave  nothing  for  the  Spaniards  to  enjoy,  burnt  downe
all  the  Houses,  Temples,  and  Buildings.  This  was  done
in  the  yeere  of  the  Hegeira  896.  which  was  in  the  yeere
of  our  Lord  1487.  But  the  Spaniards,  for  all  they  found  Me/^
the  Citie  so  wasted,  would  not  depart  thereupon,  but  first  ^^Lfojii
built  a  strong  Castle,  and  afterward  by  little  and  little  the  Spaniards.
repayred  the  Towne  wals,  and  by  that  meanes  have  kept
possession  thereof  even  till  this  day.  They  tooke  also
Chasasa.

The  Province  of  Garet  is  divided  into  three  parts :  the  The  e*treme
first whereof contayneth the Cities and Townes, the  ^rt°Lf
second  the  foresaid  Mountaynes,  (the  Inhabitants  whereof  Garet.
are called Bottoia) and the third comprehendeth the
Desarts,  which  beginning  Northward  at  the  Mediterran
Sea,  and  extending  South  to  the  Desart  of  Chauz,  are
bounded  Westward  with  the  foresaid  Mountaynes,  and
Eastward  with  the  River  of  Muluia. The  length  of  these
Desarts  is  sixtie  miles,  and  the  breadth  thirtie. They  are
unpleasant  and  dry,  having  no  water  but  that  of  the  River
Muluia. There  are  many  kinds  of  beasts  in  this  Desart,
v  465  2  g

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

c.  1526.

such  as  are  in  the  Lybian  Desart  next  unto  Numidia.  In
Summer  time  many  Arabians  take  up  their  abode  neere
unto  the  River  Muluia ;  and  so  doe  another  kind  of  fierce
people  called  Batalisa,  who  possesse  great  abundance  of
Horses,  Camels,  and  other  Cattell,  and  maintayne  con-
tinuall  warre  against  the  Arabians  that  border  upon
them.

The  Towne  of  Dubdu  was  in  possession  of  one
Mahumet  who  beautified  it  exceedingly  with  store  of  faire
houses  and  buildings  :  likewise,  he  greatly  altered  and
reformed  the  government  of  this  Towne ; and  shewed

The  great such  extraordinary  courtesie  unto  all  Strangers,  that  hee

cour teste  of  ^  y famous.

ivLdhuTnet

toward  Moreover, the said Mahumet  consulted  how  to get

strangers.  Tezza  from  the  King  of  Fez,  and  offered  great  matters
to  the  performance  of  his  intent :  and  that  he  might  the
easilier  attayne  his  purpose,  he  determined  to  goe  to  the
Market  of  Tezza  in  a  simple  habite,  and  so  to  make  an
assault  upon  the  Captaine  of  the  Towne  :  for  he  hoped
that  a  great  part  of  the  Townesmen,  whom  hee  knew  to
bee  his  friends,  would  assist  him  in  that  enterprize.  How-
beit  this  practice  was  at  length  discovered  unto  the  King
of  Fez  (which  King  was  called  Saich,  and  was  the  first  of
the  Family  of  Quattas,  and  Father  unto  the  King  that
*i 526.  *now  reigneth)  who  presently  assembled  an  huge  Armie,
and  marched  of  purpose  against  Dubdu,  utterly  to  destroy
it :  and  so  comming  unto  the  foot  of  the  Mountayne  hee
there  encamped.  The  people  of  the  Mountayne  having
gathered  an  Armie  of  sixe  thousand  men,  hid  themselves
craftily  behind  the  Rockes,  suffering  their  Enemies  to
ascend  by  certayne  difficult  and  strait  passages,  from
whence  they  were  sure  they  could  hardly  escape,  and  so  at
length  they  brake  forth  on  the  sodaine  and  encountred
their  said  Enemies  being  weary  of  ascending ;  and
because  the  way  was  very  troublesome  and  narrow,  the
King  of  Fez  his  Souldiers  could  not  endure  their  assaults,
but  beeing  constrayned  to  give  backe,  were  moe  then  a
thousand  of  them  throwne  downe  head-long  and  slaine.

466

JOHN LEO ON AFRICA  a.d.

c.  1526.
In  this  skirmish  were  slaine  in  all  to  the  number  of  three
thousand  Fessan  Souldiers :  and  yet  the  King  not  being
dismayed  with  so  great  an  overthrow,  prepared  forth-with
a  band  of  five  hundred  Crosse-bowes,  and  three  hundred
Harquebuziers,  and  determined  to  make  a  new  assault
upon  the  Towne.  But  Mahumet  seeing  that  he  could  no
longer  withstand  the  King,  resolved  to  go  himselfe  unto
him,  that  he  might,  if  it  were  possible,  obtaine  peace,  &
to  release  his  Country  from  the  fury  of  the  Enemy.
Wherefore  putting  on  the  habit  of  an  Ambassador,  he
went  &  delivered  a  Letter  with  his  own  hand  unto  the
King.  Which  the  King  having  perused,  asked  him  what
he  thought  concerning  the  Governor  of  Dubdu?  Mary
I  think  (quoth  Mahumet)  he  is  not  well  in  his  wits,  in  that  [II.  vi.  808.]
he  goeth  about  to  resist  your  Majestic  Then  said  the
King,  if  I  had  conquered  him,  (as  I  hope  to  do  within
these  few  daies)  I  would  cause  him  to  be  dismembred  and
torne  in  peeces.  But  what  if  he  shoold  come  hither  (saith
Mahumet)  to  submit  himselfe,  and  to  acknowledge  his
offence ;  might  it  then  please  the  King  to  admit  him  into
favour  ?  Then  the  King  answered  :  I  sweare  unto  thee  by
this  my  head,  that  if  he  will  come  and  acknowledge  his
fault  in  manner  as  thou  hast  said,  I  will  not  onely  receive
him  into  favour,  but  will  espouse  my  daughters  unto  his
sonnes,  and  will  bestow  most  ample  and  Princely  dowries
upon  them.  But  I  am  sure,  being  distracted  of  his  wits
(as  thou  hast  said)  that  he  will  by  no  meanes  come  and
submit  himselfe.  Then  said  Mahumet :  he  would  soone
come  (I  assure  you)  if  it  pleased  the  King  to  protest  this
for  a  certaintie  unto  the  Nobles.  I  thinke  (said  the  King)
it  hath  beene  sufficiently  protested  and  affirmed,  sithence
I  have  bound  it  with  a  solemne  oath  in  the  presence  of
these  foure ;  for  here  stand  my  chiefe  Secretary,  the
Generall  of  my  Forces,  my  Father  in  law,  and  the  chiefe
Judge  and  Patriarke  of  Fez ;  the  testimony  of  which
foure  may  well  satisfie  you.  Whereupon  Mahumet
humbly  falling  at  the  Kings  feete :  loe,  heere  the  man
(quoth  he)  that  submissely  acknowledgeth  his  fault,  and

467

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

c.  1526.

craveth  the  King  gracious  pardon.  With  that  the  King
himselfe  lifted  him  from  the  ground,  embraced  him,  and
saluted  him  with  friendly  speeches.  Then  caused  he  both
his  daughters  to  be  called,  which  he  bestowed  upon
Mahumets  sonnes :  all  which  being  done,  he  remooved
his  armie  from  that  Mountaine,  and  returned  conquerour
unto  Fez.  This  was  done  in  the  yeere  of  the  Hegeira
904.  which  was  in  the  yeere  of  our  Lord  1495.  And  in
the  yeere  of  the  Hegeira  921.  I  my  selfe  was  at  the  City
of  Dubdu,  where  I  was  most  curteously  entertained  by  the
foresaid  Mahumet.
The  Citie  of  Tezza  was  built  by  the  Africans,  five  miles  from  Mount
Te%%a  Atlas,  being  distant  from  Fez  fiftie,  from  the  Ocean  an

hundred  and  thirty,  and  from  the  Mediterran  Sea  seven
miles,  and  standing  in  the  way  from  Garet  to  Chasasan.  It
contained  in  times  past  about  five  thousand  families :  the
buildings  of  this  Towne  are  not  very  stately,  except
Noblemens  Palaces,  Colledges,  and  Temples,  which  are
somewhat  beautifull.  Out  of  Atlas  springeth  a  little
River  which  runneth  through  the  chiefe  Temple  of  this
Citie :  and  sometimes  it  falleth  out,  that  certaine  people
bordering  upon  the  Citie :  upon  some  quarrel  with  the
Citizens  will  cut  off  this  River  from  the  Citie,  and  turne
the  course  thereof  some  other  way,  which  breedeth  great
inconveniences  unto  the  Citizens :  for  then  they  can
neither  build  houses,  nor  get  any  water  to  drinke,  but
onely  corrupt  water  which  they  take  out  of  certaine
Cisternes,  for  which  cause  they  are  often  constrained  to
make  a  league  with  those  borderers.  This  Citie  both  for
wealth,  civilitie,  and  abundance  of  people,  is  the  third
Huge  Temple,  Citie  of  all  the  Kingdome,  and  hath  a  greater  Temple
then  that  of  Fez :  heere  are  likewise  three  Colledges,  with
divers  Bath-stoves,  and  a  great  number  of  Hospitals.
Each  trade  and  occupation  hath  a  severall  place  in  this
Citie,  like  as  they  have  in  Fez :  the  Inhabitants  are  of  a
more  valiant  and  liberall  disposition,  then  they  of  Fez :
here  are  also  great  store  of  learned  and  rich  men  :  and  the
fields  adjacent  are  exceeding  fruitfulL Without  the  Citie

468

JOHN LEO ON AFRICA

A.D.

c.  1526.

Mount  Beni
Jesseten.

walls  are  very  large  Plaines,  and  many  pleasant  streames,
that  serve  to  water  their  Gardens  which  are  replenished
with  all  kind  of  fruits :  here  are  abundance  of  Vines  also
yeelding  very  sweet  Grapes,  whereof  the  Jewes  (being  five
hundreth  Families)  make  excellent  wine,  such  as  I  thinke
all  Africa  scarce  affoordeth  better.  I  my  selfe  was
acquainted  in  this  Citie  with  a  certaine  aged  sire,  whom  feneration  of
the  Townesmen  adored  as  if  he  had  beene  a  god :  he  was  an  old  man-
merveilous  rich  both  in  Fruits,  Grounds,  and  other  Com-
modities, which  the  people  bestowed  upon  him  in  great
abundance.  The  Citizens  of  Fez  used  to  come  fiftie  miles
(for  so  farre  is  Fez  distant)  onely  to  visite  the  said  old
man.  My  selfe  conceived  some  great  opinion  of  this  aged
sire  :  but  after  I  had  seene  him,  I  could  find  no  such  super-
excellency  in  him,  save  onely  that  he  deluded  the  fond
people  with  strange  devises.

The  Mountaine  of  Beni  Jessenten  is  subject  unto  the
Governour  of  Dubdu,  being  inhabited  with  most  base
and  beggerly  people.  Their  houses  are  made  of  Sea-
rushes,  and  so  likewise  are  their  shooes  made  of  such  rushes
when  they  travell  any  Journey,  where  by  a  man  may
conjecture  the  miserable  estate  of  this  people.  The
Mountaine  yeeldeth  nought  but  panicke,  whereof  they
make  bread  and  other  victuals :  but  at  the  foot  thereof
are  certaine  Gardens  replenished  with  Grapes,  Dates,  and
Peaches.  Their  Peaches  they  cut  into  foure  quarters,  and
casting  away  the  Nuts  or  Stones,  they  dry  them  in  the
Sunne,  and  keepe  them  an  whole  yeere,  which  they
esteeme  for  great  dainties.  Upon  this  Mountaine  are
Iron-mines  :  and  they  frame  their  Iron  in  manner  of  horse-  Iron-mines.
shooes,  which  serveth  them  sometimes  in  stead  of  money,
whereof  they  have  great  want  in  this  Mountaine,  unlesse
the  Smithes  by  their  Arte  keepe  this  money  in  store  :  who,
besides  horse-shooes,  make  certaine  daggers  with  blunt
points.  Their  women  weare  Iron-rings  upon  their  fingers
and  eares  for  a  great  bravery,  but  they  are  more  basely
apparelled  then  the  men,  and  remaine  continually  in  the
woods,  both  to  keepe  Goats,  and  to  gather  fewell. They

469

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

c.  1526.

have  neither  civilitie  nor  learning,  but  live  after  a  brutish
manner  without  all  discretion  and  humanitie.
MountSeklgo.  This  woodie  Mountaine  is  full  of  Pine-trees  and
Fountaines.  Their  houses  are  not  made  of  stone,  but  of
Sea-rushes,  so  that  they  may  easily  be  remooved  from
[II.  vi.  809.]  place  to  place,  which  is  very  commodious  to  the  Inhabi-
tants, for  every  spring  they  leave  the  Mountaine  and
descend  into  the  Vallies,  from  whence  about  the  end  of
May  they  are  expelled  by  the  Arabians,  which  inhabite  the
Desarts :  who  by  reason  of  their  abundance  of  Goats  and
other  Cattell,  forsaking  the  said  Desarts,  seeke  unto  the
Fountaines  and  moist  places :  but  in  winter,  because  their
Camels  are  so  impatient  of  cold,  they  resort  unto  the
woods,  and  warme  Regions.  In  this  Mountaine  are  great
Lyons,  store  of  Lyons,  Leopards,  and  Apes. And  from  the  said

Leopards,  and  Mountaine  runneth  a  certaine  streame  of  water  with  such
^e,m  violence,  that  I  have  seene  a  stone  of  an  hundred  pound

weight  carried  with  the  force  thereof : and  here  Subu
taketh  his  beginning,  which  is  the  greatest  River  of  all
Mauritania.
Monnt  Beni The  Inhabitants  of  Mount  Beni Iasga  are  rich,  and
Iasga.  civill  people :  it  standeth  so  neere  the  Mountaine  Selelgo,

that  they  are  onely  separated  with  the  foresaid  River :  and
to  the  end  they  may  easilier  passe  from  one  Mountaine  to
A  wonderfu// another,  they  have  made  a  certaine  strange  bridge  in  the
bridge.  midst,  and  that  in  manner  following :  on  either  side  stand

certaine  Posts,  through  the  which  runneth  a  rope  upon  a
truckle  or  pulley,  unto  which  rope  is  fastened  a  great
basket,  that  will  containe  ten  persons,  and  that  in  such
sort,  that  so  often  as  they  will  passe  over  to  the  opposite
Mountaine,  they  enter  into  the  basket,  and  drawing  the
rope  whereon  it  hangeth,  they  are  easily  carried  aloft  in
the  aire  over  the  River  by  the  helpe  of  the  foresaid
pulleyes,  but  sometimes  with  great  hazard  of  their  lives,
especially  if  the  basket  or  the  rope  be  worne  in  any  place :
yea,  and  the  distance  of  place  is  often  an  occasion  of  great
terrour.  In  this  Mountaine  there  is  great  store  of  cattell,
but  little  wood. It  aboundeth  likewise  with  most  excellent

470

Sacerrima

sacra.

JOHN LEO ON AFRICA  a.d

c.  1526.

fine  wooll,  whereof  their  women  make  cloth  comparable
unto  silke,  which  is  sold  at  Fez  for  a  great  price.  Here
also  is  great  plenty  of  oyle.

There  is  no  memorable  thing  in  all  Sofroi  Towne,  save
onely  a  certaine  Temple,  through  the  midst  whereof
runneth  a  large  River ;  and  at  the  doores  standeth  a
Fountaine  of  most  pure  water.

In  the  Forrests  about  this  Towne,  as  also  about  Mez-  Tame  Lyons.
daga,  are  marveilous  store  of  Lyons,  being  not  very  hurt-
full,  for  any  man  may  drive  them  away  with  a  little  sticke.

At  the  same  time  while  the  Africans  were  as  yet
Idolaters,  they  had  a  Temple  standing  neere  unto  Ham  fij°une
Lisnan,  whither  at  certaine  times  of  the  yeere,  resorted  nsnan  J
in  the  night  great  multitudes  of  people  both  men  and
women  :  where  having  ended  their  sacrifices,  they  used  to
put  out  their  lights,  and  every  man  to  commit  adultery
with  that  woman  which  he  first  touched.  But  the  women
which  were  present  at  this  abominable  sport,  were  for-
bidden to  lie  with  any  man  for  a  yeere  after :  and  the
children  begotten  in  the  said  adultery,  were  kept  and
brought  up  by  the  Priest  of  the  Temple,  as  being  dedicated
to  sacred  uses.

Upon  Mount  Centopozzi  are  great  store  of  most  ;  ount  ent0~
ancient  buildings,  neere  unto  the  which  there  is  a  hole  or
drie  pit  of  so  great  a  depth,  that  the  bottome  thereof  can
in  no  wise  be  seene.  Into  this  pit  some  mad  fellowes  will
have  themselves  let  downe  by  ropes,  carrying  a  Candle  or
Torch  in  their  hands :  and  beneath,  they  say,  it  is  divided
into  many  roomes,  and  as  it  were,  chambers ;  and  last  of
all,  they  come  to  a  most  large  place  hewen  out  of  the
Rocke  with  Instruments,  and  compassed  about  as  it  were
with  a  wall,  in  which  wall  are  foure  doores,  which  lead  to
other  more  narrow  places,  where,  they  say,  that  Fountaines
of  Springing  water  are.  And  sometimes  it  falleth  out  that
some  miserably  end  their  lives  here :  for  if  their  lights
chance  to  be  blowen  out  with  any  sudden  blast  of  wind,
they  can  by  no  meanes  find  the  place  where  the  rope
hangeth,  but  are  there  constrained  to  die  for  extreame

47i

A.a  PURCHAS HIS PILGR1MES

c.  1526.

famine.  It  was  told  me  by  a  certaine  Nobleman  of  Fez,
that  there  were  ten  persons,  who  being  desirous  to  see  the
wonders  of  this  pit,  and  being  prepared  for  the  same
purpose,  went  first  three  of  them  downe,  who  when  they
were  come  to  the  foresaid  foure  doors,  two  of  them  went
one  way,  &  the  third  went  alone  another  way.  And  being
thus  divided,  after  they  had  proceeded  almost  a  quarter  of
a  mile,  there  came  great  swarmes  of  Bats  flying  about
their  lights,  insomuch  that  one  light  was  put  out ;  at
length  being  come  to  the  springing  fountaines,  they  found
there  certaine  white  bones  of  men,  and  five  or  sixe  Candles,
whereof  some  were  new,  and  others  were  old  and  worne
with  long  lying  there :  but  having  found  nothing  but
water  in  the  said  Fountaines,  they  returned  backe  againe  the
same  way  that  they  came :  and  they  had  scarce  gone  halfe
way,  but  their  owne  light  also  was  blowen  out  with  a
sudden  blast.  Afterward  seeking  earnestly  up  and  downe,
and  being  weary  of  many  falles  that  they  caught  among
the  Rockes,  they  found  that  there  was  no  hope  of  returne  :
wherefore  in  this  desperate  case  committing  themselves
with  teares  into  the  hands  of  God,  they  vowed,  if  they
once  escaped  this  danger,  never  to  adventure  any  more.
They  that  stood  at  the  Caves  mouth  being  ignorant  of
their  companions  mishap,  expected  their  returne,  and
having  staid  over  long,  at  length  they  let  downe  themselves
by  the  rope,  and  began  with  lights  to  seeke  their  fellowes,
making  a  great  noise,  and  at  length  found  them  heavy
and  sad.  But  the  third,  who  was  wandring  up  and  downe
those  dark  places,  they  could  by  no  meanes  finde,  where-
fore leaving  him,  they  returned  foorth  of  the  Cave.  And
he  that  was  left  behind  heard  at  length  a  noyse  like  the
barking  of  little  dogges,  and  shaping  his  course  toward
them,  he  found  immediately  foure  strange,  and  (as  it  should
seeme)  new-borne  beasts,  after  which  followed  the
[II.  vi.  810.]  *  Damme,  being  not  much  unlike  to  a  shee-wolfe,  saving
*^H  ^as!  /  t^lat  s^e  was  digger :  wherefore  hee  began  exceedingly  to
feare ;  howbeit,  there  was  no  danger,  for  being  about  to
flee,  the  beast  came  towards  him,  fawning  gently  upon

472

called  Dabah,

JOHN LEO ON AFRICA  a.d.

c.  1526.
him  with  her  taile.  And  so  at  length,  after  long  seeking,
he  found  the  holes  mouth  with  great  joy,  and  escaped  the
danger :  for  within  a  while  he  said,  that  he  began  to  see
some  glimmering  of  light,  as  they  doe  which  have  long
been  in  the  darke.  But  after  a  certaine  time  this  Cave
was  filled  with  water  up  to  the  top.

Cunaigel  Gherben,  standeth  very  neere  the  former,  and  The  Moun-
is  full  of  Woods  and  Lions. Here  is  no  Citie,  nor  any  **tne  °f
other  place  of  habitation,  perhaps  by  reason  of  the  extreme  Quna-mii
coldnesse  of  the  place. From  this  Mountaine  runneth  a  Gherben.
certaine  little  River :  and  here  is  a  Rocke  of  an  exceeding
height,  whereupon  keepe  infinite  swarmes  of  Crowes  and
Ravens,  which  some  thinke  to  have  been  the  occasion  of
the name of this Mountaine. Sometime the terrible
Northerly  winds  bring  such  abundance  of  Snow  upon  this
Mountaine,  that  such  as  travell  from  Numidia  towards
Fez  loose  their  lives  thereby,  as  hath  been  signified  in
the first Booke. Every Summer, the Arabians next
inhabiting,  being  called  Beni  Essen,  usually  resort  unto
this  Mountaine,  in  regard  of  the  coole  water  and  pleasant
shadowes,  notwithstanding  they  know  it  to  bee  haunted
with  great  store  of  Lions  and  Leopards.

There  lyeth  a  way  neere  the  Towne  of  Umen  Giunaibe, Dancing  way.
which  a  man  may  not  passe  without  dancing  and  leaping,
unlesse  he  will  fall  into  an  Ague :  the  certainty  whereof  I
have  heard  many  avouch.

The  Inhabitants  are  a  most  lewde  and  villanous  genera-  Of  Mount
tion,  being  wholly  addicted  to  theft  and  robberie. They  Z/z-
are  at  continuall  dissension  with  the  Arabians,  and  practise
daily  mischiefes  and  inconveniences  against  them,  and  to
the  end  they  may  provoke  them  to  greater  furie,  they
will  sometimes  throw  their  Camels  downe  headlong  from
the  top  of  some  high  Mountaine. In  these  Mountaines  Domestical/
there  happeneth  a  certain  strange  and  incredible  matter,  andtame
for  there  are  Serpents  so  familiar  with  men,  that  at  dinner-  Thelike  is
time  they  wil  come  like  Dogs  and  Cats,  and  gather  up  the  reported  of
crums  under  the  Table,  neither  will  they  hurt  any  body,  Lapland.
unlesse  they  bee  offered  some  injurie.  r* jjjj

473

A.D.

c.  1526.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

A  description
of  the  King-
dome  of
Telensin,  or
Tremizen.
Ctesaria.

§.  mi.

The  most  remarkable  things  of  John  Leo,  in  his
fourth  Booke  of  the  Historie  of  Africa.

His  Kingdome  beginneth  Westward  from  the  Rivers
of  Zha  and  Muluia :  Eastward  it  bordereth  upon
the  great  River,  Southward  upon  the  Desart  of
Numidia,  and  Northward  upon  the  Mediterran  Sea.  This
Region  was  called  by  the  Romans,  Caesaria,  and  was  by
them  inhabited  :  howbeit,  after  the  Romans  were  expelled,
it  was  fully  possessed  by  the  ancient  Governours  thereof,
called  Beni  Habdulguad,  and  being  a  generation  of  the
Family  of  Magraua.  And  it  remained  unto  them  and
their  successors  three  hundred  yeeres,  untill  such  time  as
a  certaine  mighty  man,  called  Ghamrazen,  the  sonne  of
Zeijen,  tooke  possession  thereof.  His  posteritie  changing
at  length  their  ancient  name,  were  called  Beni  Zeijen,  that
is,  the  Sons  of  Zeijen  :  and  they  enjoyed  this  Kingdome
for  the  space  almost  of  three  hundred  and  eighty  yeares.
At  length  the  Kings  of  Fez  of  the  Marin  Family  greatly
molested  them,  so  that  those  ten  Kings  which  succeeded
Zeijen  were  some  of  them  unfortunate  in  battell,  some
slaine,  some  taken  Captive,  and  others  expelled  their  King-
dome,  and  chased  to  the  next  Mountaines.  Neither  were
they  free  from  vexation  of  the  Kings  of  Tunis :  howbeit,
the  Kingdome  of  Telensin  remained  still  to  this  Familie,
and  they  continued  in  peace  for  almost  an  hundred  and
twenty  yeares,  being  endamaged  by  no  forren  power ;
saving  that  one  Abu  Feris  King  of  Tunis,  and  his  sonne
Hutmen,  made  them  to  pay  tribute  for  certaine  yeares
unto  Tunis,  till  the  decease  of  the  said  Hutmen.  This
Kingdome  stretcheth  in  length  from  East  to  West  three
hundred  and  eighty  miles ;  but  in  breadth  from  North  to
South,  that  is,  from  the  Mediterran  sea,  to  the  Desarts  of
Numidia  not  above  five  and  twenty  miles :  which  is  the
occasion  that  it  is  so  often  oppressed  by  the  Arabians
inhabiting  the  Numidian  Desarts. The  Kings  of  Telensin

474

JOHN LEO ON AFRICA  a.d.

c.  1526.
have  alwaies  endevoured  by  great  gifts  to  gaine  the  good
will  and  friendship  of  the  Numidians, but they  could  Numidians
never satisfie their insatiable covetice. A man shall  covettse-
seldome  travell  safely  through  this  Kingdome : howbeit,
here  are  great  store  of  Merchants,  perhaps  either  because
it  adjoyneth  to  Numidia,  or  else  for  that  the  way  to  the
land of Negros lieth through it. It hath two most
famous and frequented Haven-townes, the one called
*Horam,  and  the  other  *Marsa  Elcabir,  whither  use  to  %Or  Oran.
resort great store of Genoueses, and Venetians. But /. er
afterward  both  these  Townes  were  taken  by  Don  Ferdi-
nando  the  Catholike  King,  to  the  great  inconvenience  of
all this Kingdome : for which cause the King then
reigning,  called  Abuchemmeu,  was  expelled  his  Kingdome,
and put to flight by his owne subjects : afterward
Abuzeijen  was  restored  to  the  Kingdome,  who  had  for
certaine  yeares  been  imprisoned  by  his  Nephew  Abuchem-
meu :  howbeit,  he  enjoyed  the  Kingdome  but  a  very  short
space :  for  he  was  at  length  miserably  slaine  by  Barbarossa  [II.  vi.  811.]
the  Turke,  who  conquered  the  Kingdome  of  Tremizen  by
force  of  warre. Whereof  Abuchemmeu,  that  was  expelled  Abuchemmeu
by  his  owne  subjects,  having  intelligence,  sent  to  crave  aide ?*  ^ re~

j  j *  o  _  o  *  mizen

of  the  Emperour  Charles  the  fifth,  whereby  he  hoped  to  restorld  to  his

recover  his  Kingdome. Which  request  being  granted,  he  Kingdome  by

levied  a  puissant  Armie,  and  made  warre  against  Bar-  the  Emperor

barossa, and  having  driven him  out, he  recovered  his  tL,

Kingdome,  and  severely  punished  them  that  had  conspired J

his  banishment. And  then  he  gave  the  Spanish  souldiers

their  pay,  sent  the  Captaines  home  with  great  rewards,

and  allowed  Charles  the  Emperour  a  large  yearely  revenue

so long  as  he  lived. After his decease succeeded his

brother  Habdulla,  who  neglecting  the  league  made  before

betweene  the  Emperor  and  his  brother,  and  relying  upon

Solyman  the  great  Turke,  refused  to  pay  any  more  tribute

unto  the  Emperour  Charles,  and  hath  kept  possession  of

the  Kingdome,  till  *this  present. The  greater  part  of  this  *i$z6.

Region  is  untilled,  drie,  and  barren,  especially  towards  the

South. Howbeit,  the  sea  coast  is  somewhat  more  fertill.

475

A.D.

c.  1526.

The  Desart  of
Angad.

Great  store  of
Ostriches.

The  Citie
called  Ned
Roma.

The  great

Citie  of

Telensin,

otherwise

called

Tremizen.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

The  territorie  adjacent  to  the  Citie  of  Telensin  is  full  of
woods,  saving  that  the  Westerne  part  towards  the  Sea  is
mountainous.  Likewise,  the  Regions  of  Tenez  and  Alger
containe  Mountaines  abounding  with  all  kind  of  com-
modities. In  this  part  are  but  few  Cities  and  Castles ;
howbeit,  it  is  a  most  fruitfull  and  blessed  place,  as  we  will
hereafter  declare  in  particular.

This  barren,  dry,  and  untilled  Desart,  being  utterly
destitute  of  Water  and  Wood,  is  situate  upon  the
Westerne  frontier  of  the  Kingdome  of  Telensin,  and
extendeth  in  length  fourescore,  and  in  breadth  almost
fiftie  miles.  Here  are  great  store  of  Roes,  Deere,  and
Ostriches.

This  ancient  Towne  built  by  the  Romans,  while  they
were  Lords  of  Africa,  standeth  upon  a  large  Plaine,  almost
two  miles  from  a  certaine  Mountaine,  and  about  twelve
miles  from  the  Mediterran  Sea,  and  neere  unto  it  runneth
a  little  River.  The  Historiographers  of  those  times
report,  that  this  Towne  was  in  all  respects  built  after  the
fashion  of  Rome,  whereupon  they  say,  it  borrowed  the
name :  for  Ned  in  the  Arabian  tongue  signifieth,  like.
The  Wall  of  this  Towne  is  as  yet  to  be  seene :  but  all  the
ancient  buildings  of  the  Romans  are  so  destroyed,  that
now  there  scarcely  remaine  any  ruines  thereof.  It  began
in  some  places  to  be  repaired  and  reedified  anew,  but
nothing  comparable  to  the  former  buildings.  The  fields
adjacent  are  exceeding  fruitfull,  and  containe  many  Gardens
replenished  with  such  trees  as  beare  Carobs  (being  a  fruite
like  unto  Cassia  Fistula)  which  in  the  Suburbs  they  use  for
food.  This  Towne  is  indifferently  well  inhabited,
especially  with  Weavers,  who  make  great  store  of  Cotton-
cloth,  and  are  free  from  all  tribute.

Telensin,  is  a  great  Citie,  and  the  Royall  seate  of  the
King ;  and  then  it  was  an  honourable  and  well-governed
Citie :  howbeit,  Joseph  King  of  Fez  continually  molested
it,  and  with  an  huge  Armie  besieged  it  for  seven  yeares
together.  This  Joseph  having  built  a  Fort  upon  the  East
side  of  the  Towne,  put  the  besieged  Citizens  to  such

476

JOHN LEO ON AFRICA  a.d.

c.  1526.
distresse,  that  they  could  no  longer  endure  the  extreme
famine  : wherefore  with  one  accord  they  all  went  unto
their  King,  beseeching  him  to  have  compassion  upon  their
want. The King, to make them acquainted with his
daintie  fare,  which  he  had  to  supper,  shewed  them  a  dish
of  sodden  Horse-flesh  and  Barly. And  then  they  well
perceived,  how  little  the  Kings  estate  was  better  then  the
estate  of  the  meanest  Citizen  of  them  all. Soone  after
the  King  having  procured  an  assembly, perswaded  his
people  that  it  was  much  more  honourable  to  die  in  battell
for  the  defence  of  their  Countrie,  then  to  live  so  miserable
a  life. Which  words  of  the  King  so  inflamed  all  their
minds  to  the  battell,  that  the  day  following  they  resolved
to  encounter  the  enemie,  and  valiantly  to  fight  it  out.
But  it  fell  out  farre  better  for  them  then  they  expected ;
for  the  same  night  King  Joseph  was  slaine  by  one  of  his
owne people : which newes being brought unto the
Citizens,  with  greater  courage  they  marched  all  out  of  the
Towne,  easily  vanquishing  and  killing  the  confused  multi-
tude of  their  enemies ; after  which  unexpected  victorie,
they  found  victuals  sufficient  in  the  enemies  Campe  to
relieve  their  long  and  tedious  famine. About  fortie  yeares
after,  the  fourth  King  of  Fez  of  the  Marin  Familie,  called
Abulhesen,  built  a  Towne  within  two  miles  Westward  of
the  Citie  of  Telensin. Then  hee  besieged  Telensin  for
thirty  moneths  together,  making  daily  and  fierce  assaults
against  it,  and  every  night  erecting  some  new  Fort,  so
that  at  length  the  Fezzan  forces  next  unto  Telensin  easily
entred  the  Citie,  and  having  conquered  it,  carried  home
the  King  thereof  Captive  unto  Fez,  where  he  was  by  the  ™e  Kt.n&  °f
King  of  Fez  beheaded,  and  his  carkase  was  cast  forth  Jr-^^r  aan™
among  the  filth  of  the  Citie :  and  this  was  the  second  and  beheaded.
the  greater  damage  that  Telensin  sustained. After  the
decay  of  the  Marin  Familie  Telensin  began  in  many  places
to  bee  repaired, and  replenished  with new  inhabitants,
insomuch  that  it  increased  to  twelve  thousand  Families.
Here  each  Trade  and  Occupation  hath  a  peculiar  place,
after  the  manner  of  Fez,  saving  that  the  buildings  of  Fez

477

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRTMES

c.  1526.

are  somewhat  more  stately. Here  are  also  many,  and

Temples  and  beautifiill  Temples,  having  their  Mahumetan  Priests  and
0  e  ies  Preachers.  Likewise  here  are  five  Colledges  most  sumptu-
ously built,  some  by  the  King  of  Telensin,  and  some  by
the  King  of  Fez.  Here  also  are  store  of  goodly  Bathes
and  Hot-houses,  albeit  they  have  not  such  plentie  of
water  as  is  at  Fez.  Also  here  are  very  many  Innes  built
after  the  manner  of  Africa :  unto  two  of  which  Innes  the
Merchants  of  Genoa  and  Venice  doe  usually  resort.

A  great  part  of  this  Citie  is  inhabited  with  Jewes,  who

[II.  vi.  812.]  were  in  times  past  all  of  them  exceeding  rich  :  upon  their

*OrTurbant.  heads  they  weare  a  *Dulipan,  to  distinguish  them  from
other  Citizens  :  but  in  the  yeare  of  the  Hegeira  923.  upon
the  death  of  King  Abuhabdilla,  they  were  all  so  robbed
and  spoyled,  that  they  are  now  brought  almost  unto
beggerie.  Moreover,  in  this  Citie  there  are  many  Con-
duits, the  Fountaines  whereof  are  not  farre  from  the  Citie
walles,  so  that  they  may  easily  be  stopped  by  any  forren
Enemie.  The  Citie  wall  is  very  high  and  impregnable,
having  five  great  Gates  upon  it,  at  everie  one  of  which
there  is  placed  a  guard  of  Souldiers,  and  certaine  Receivers
of  the  Kings  Custome.  On  the  South-side  of  the  Citie
standeth  the  Kings  Palace,  environed  with  most  high
Walls,  and  containing  many  other  Palaces  within  it,  which
are  none  of  them  destitute  of  their  Fountaines  and
pleasant  Gardens :  This  Royall  Palace  hath  two  Gates,
one  leading  into  the  Fields,  and  the  other  into  the  Citie,
and  at  this  Gate  standeth  the  Captaine  of  the  Guard.
The  Territorie  of  Telensin  containeth  most  pleasant
habitations,  whither  the  Citizens  in  Summer-time  use  to
retire  themselves :  for  besides  the  beautifull  Pastures  and
cleare  Fountaines,  there  is  such  abundance  of  all  kind  of
fruits to delight  both the eyes and taste, that to my

Pleasantplace.  remembrance  I  never  saw  a  more  pleasant  place :  their
Figges  they  use  to  drie  in  the  Sunne,  and  to  keepe  untill
Winter  :  and  as  for  Almonds,  Peaches,  Melons,  and  Pome-
citrons,  they  grow  here  in  great  plentie.  Three  miles
Eastward  of  this  Citie  are  divers  Mills  upon  the  River  of

478

JOHN LEO ON AFRICA  a.d.

c.  1526.
Sefsif ;  and  some  other  there  are  also  not  far  from  the
Citie  upon  the  Mountaine  of  Elcalha.  The  South  part
of  the  Citie  is  inhabited  by  Jewes,  Lawyers,  and  Notaries :
here  are  also  very  many  Students,  and  Professors  of  divers
Arts,  which  have  maintenance  allowed  them  out  of  the  five
forenamed  Colledges.  The  Citizens  are  of  foure  sorts,
to  wit,  some  Artificers,  some  Merchants,  other  Schollers
and  Doctors,  and  all  the  residue  Souldiers.  The  Mer-
chants are  men  most  just,  trustie,  liberall,  and  most  zealous
of  the  common  good,  who  for  the  most  part  exercise
traffique  with  the  Negros.  The  Artificers  live  a  secure,
quiet,  and  merrie  life.  The  Kings  Souldiers  being  all  of
a  comely  personage,  and  of  great  valour,  receive  verie
large  and  liberall  pay,  for  they  are  monthly  allowed  three
pieces  of  the  Gold-coyne  of  Telensin,  which  are  worth
three  Italian  Duckats,  and  one  second  part.  All  Students  Schollers.
before  they  attaine  to  the  degree  of  a  Doctor,  live  a  bare
and  miserable  life :  but  having  attained  thereunto,  they
are  made  either  Professors,  or  Notaries,  or  Priests.  The
Citizens  and  Merchants  of  this  Citie  are  so  neate  &  curious
in  their  apparel,  that  somtimes  they  excel  the  Citizens  of
Fez  in  braverie.

A  Wonder  it  is  to  see  how  stately  and  magnificently  the  The  customes

King-  of  Telensin  behaveth  himselfe :  for  no  man  may  see  andntes

o  j  observed-  tti  the

him,  nor  be  admitted  to  parle  with  him,  but  onely  the  KingofTelen-

principall  Nobles  of  his  Court,  each  one  of  whom  are  sin  his  Court.
assigned  to  beare  Offices  according  to  their  place  and
dignitie.  In  this  Court  are  sundry  Offices  and  dignities,
and  the  Kings  Lieutenant  being  principall  Officer,  allotteth
unto  each  one  such  places  of  dignitie,  as  may  bee  cor-
respondent to  their  honour :  and  this  Lieutenant  levieth
the  Kings  Armies,  and  sometime  conducteth  them  against
the  Enemie.  The  second  Officer  is  the  Kings  chiefe
Secretarie,  who  writeth  and  recordeth  all  things  pertaining
to  the  King.  The  third  is  the  High  Treasurer,  who  is
bound  by  his  Office  to  receive  Tributes  and  Customes.
The  fourth  is  the  Kings  Dispensator  or  Almoner,  who
bestoweth  such  liberalise  as  the  King  vouchsafeth. The

479

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

c.  1526.

fifth,  is  the  Captaine  of  the  Kings  Guard,  who  so  often  as
any  Nobles  are  admitted  to  the  Kings  presence,  conducteth
the  guarde  unto  the  Palace  Gate.  Then  are  there  other
meaner  Officers,  as  namely,  the  Master  of  the  Kings
Stable,  the  Over-seer  of  his  Saddles  and  Stirrops,  and  his
Chiefe  Chamberlaine,  who  giveth  attendance  onely  at  such
times  as  any  Courtiers  are  admitted  unto  the  Kings
audience.  For  at  other  times  the  Kings  Wives,  with
certaine  Christian  Captives,  and  Eunuches  doe  performe
that  dutie.  The  King  sometimes  in  sumptuous  and
costly  apparell  rideth  upon  a  stately  Steed  richly  trapped
and  furnished.  In  riding  hee  observeth  not  much  pompe,
nor  many  ceremonies ;  neither  indeed  doth  hee  carrie  so
great  a  traine ;  for  you  shall  scarcely  see  a  thousand
Horsemen  in  his  company,  except  perhaps  in  time  of
Warre,  when  as  the  Arabians  and  other  people  give
attendance.  His  dominions  are  but  slenderly  inhabited :
4  passage  from  howbeit,  because  the  way  from  Europe  to  Ethiopia  lieth
jb  C.  .  through  his  Kingdome,  he  reapeth  much  benefit  by  the
through  the  wares  that  passe  by,  especially  since  the  time  that  Oran  was
Kingdome  of surprised  by  the  Christians.

Tremizen.  Hubbed  containeth  store  of  Inhabitants,  who  are  for

Rubbed,  ^e  most  part  Dyers  of  Cloath. In  this  Towne  was  buried

one  Sidi  Bu  Median,  being  reputed  a  man  of  singular
holinesse,  whom  they  adore  like  a  God,  ascending  up  to
his  Monument  by  certaine  steps.  Here  is  likewise  a
stately  Colledge,  and  a  faire  Hospitall  to  entertaine
strangers  in ;  both  which  were  built  by  a  King  of  Fez  of
the  Marin  Family,  as  I  find  recorded  upon  a  certaine
Marble  stone.
Batha,  f  ^e  pia;ne  0f  Batha  was  utterly  destitute  of  Inhabitants,

Ti{aH!°?S till  a  certaine Hermite  with  his  followers, whom they
Hermite.  r. f  v.  • 1 1  •  1

reverenced  as  a  man  or  singular  holinesse,  repaired  thither.

This  Hermite  in  short  time  grew  so  rich  in  Oxen,  Horses,

and  other  Cattell, that  no man  almost  throughout the

whole  Region  was  comparable  unto  him. Neither  he  nor

his  followers  pay  any  tribute  at  all,  when  as  notwithstanding

(as I heard of  his  Disciples) he  reapeth  yearely  eight

480

JOHN LEO ON AFRICA  a.d.

c.  1526.
thousand  bushels  of  Corne,  and  at  this  time  possesseth
five  hundred  Horses,  tenne  thousand  small  Cattell,  and
two  thousand  Oxen ;  and  besides  all  the  former  hath
yearely  sent  unto  him  from  divers  parts  of  the  world  foure
or  five  thousand  Duckats :  so  greatly  hath  the  fame  of
his  false  holines  spread  over  all  Africa  and  Asia.  Disciples  [II.  vi.  813.]
he  hath  to  the  number  of  five  hundred,  whom  hee  main-
taineth  at  his  owne  cost :  neither  imployeth  he  them  to
ought  else,  but  daily  to  read  a  few  prayers  :  for  which
cause  many  resort  unto  him,  desiring  to  be  of  the  number
of  his  Disciples,  whom  after  he  hath  instructed  in  certaine
Ceremonies,  he  sendeth  them  thither  from  whence  they
first  came.  He  hath  about  an  hundred  Tents  pitched,
whereof  some  are  for  strangers,  others  for  Shepheards,  and
the  residue  for  his  owne  Family.  This  holy  Heremite
hath  foure  wives,  and  a  great  many  women-slaves,  wearing
most  sumptuous  apparell.  His  sonnes  likewise  have  their
wives  and  Families :  insomuch  that  the  whole  Familie  of
this  Heremite  and  of  his  sonnes  containeth  five  hundred
persons.  He  is  greatly  honoured  by  all  the  Arabians,  and
by  the  King  of  Telensin  himselfe.  My  selfe  was  once
desirous  to  trie  what  manner  of  man  this  Heremite  was :
and  for  three  dayes  I  was  entertained  by  him  in  the  most
secret  places  of  his  habitation,  where  amongst  other  things,
he  shewed  me  certaine  Bookes  intreating  of  Art-Magique,
and  of  Alchymie :  and  hee  endevoured  by  all  meanes  to
perswade  me,  that  Magique  was  a  most  true  and  undoubted
Arte,  whereby  I  perceived  that  himselfe  was  a  Magician,
albeit  he  never  used  nor  regarded  the  Arte,  except  it  were
in  invocating  of  God  by  certaine  names.

Oran  containing  about  sixe  thousand  Families,  and  The  Towne  of
built  many  yeeres  agoe  by  the  Africans  upon  the  Medi-  Oran.
terran  Sea  shoare,  is  distant  from  Telensin  an  hundreth
and  fortie  miles.  Heere  may  you  see  great  store  of
stately  buildings,  as  namely  of  Temples,  Colledges,
Hospitals,  Bath-stoves,  and  Innes.  The  Towne  is  com-
passed with  most  high  and  impregnable  walles,  having  on
the  one  side  a  faire  plaine,  and  on  the  other  side  divers

V  481  2H

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

c.  1526.

Mountaines.  The  greatest  part  of  the  Inhabitants  were
Weavers,  and  the  residue  lived  of  their  yeerely  Revenues.
The  Territorie  of  this  Towne  yeeldeth  but  small  store  of
Corne,  so  that  the  Townesmen  make  all  their  bread  of
Barley :  howbeit,  they  are  most  courteous  and  friendly  to
all  strangers.  This  Towne  was  greatly  frequented  with
Merchants  of  Catalonia,  and  of  Genoa :  and  one  street
thereof  is  at  this  present  called,  the  streete  of  the
Genoueses.  They  were  at  perpetuall  enmitie  with  the
King  of  Telensin,  neither  would  they  ever  accept  of  any
Governour,  but  one  which  received  the  Kings  Tribute.
But  the  Townsmen  chose  one  of  their  chiefe  Burgo-
masters to  judge  of  Cases  Civil  and  Criminall.  The
Merchants  of  the  Towne,  maintained  at  their  owne  costs,
certaine  Foists  and  Brigandines  of  warre,  which  committed
many  Piracies  upon  the  coast  of  Catalonia,  Gevisa,
Majorica,  and  Minorica,  insomuch,  that  Oran  was  full  of
Christian  Captives.  Afterward,  Don  Ferdinando  King
of  Spaine  encountring  Oran  with  a  great  Armada,  deter-
mined to  release  the  said  Christians  out  of  Captivitie  :  but
he  had  very  hard  successe.  Howbeit,  within  a  few
moneths  after  being  ayded  by  the  Biscaines  and  the
Oran  taken  by  Cardinall  of  Spaine,  he  tooke  Oran.  For  the  Moores
the  Spaniards,  issiaing-  foorth  with  great  furie  upon  the  Christians  armie,
left  the  Towne  utterly  destitute  of  Souldiers,  which  the
Spaniards  perceiving,  began  to  assayle  the  Towne  on  the
other  side ;  where  being  resisted  by  none  but  by  women,
they  had  easie  entrance.  Whereupon  the  Moores  seeing
the  Christians  Banners  advanced  upon  their  wals,  they
returned  backe  into  the  Towne,  and  were  there  put  to
so  great  a  slaughter,  that  few  of  them  escaped.  Thus  was
Oran  taken  by  the  Spaniards  in  the  yeere  of  Mahumet  his
Hegeira  916.
The  Towne  of  Mersalcabir  in  the  Moores  language  signifieth,  a  great
Mersakabir.  or  jarge  Haven  ;  for  I  thinke  there  is  not  the  like  Haven
to  be  found  in  the  whole  world  besides :  so  that  here
infinite  numbers  of  Ships  and  Gallies  may  finde  most
safe  harbour  in  any tempestuous  weather. Hither  the

482

JOHN LEO ON AFRICA

Venetians  ships  made  often  resort,  when  they  perceived
any  tempest  to  approach  :  and  from  hence  they  would  cause
all  their  wares  to  be  transported  to  Oran  in  other  vessels.
This  Towne  also  was  at  length  taken  by  the  Spaniards  as
well  as  Oran.

Bresch  standeth  many  miles  distant  from  Mustuganin.
It  containeth  great  store  of  Inhabitants,  which  are  many
of  them  Weavers.  The  people  of  this  Towne  use  to
paint  a  blacke  crosse  upon  their  cheeke,  and  two  other
blacke  crosses  upon  the  Palmes  of  their  hands :  and  the
like  custome  is  observed  by  all  the  Inhabitants  of  the
Mountaines  of  Alger,  and  Bugia :  the  occasion  whereof  is
thought  to  be  this,  namely,  that  the  Gothes  when  they
first  began  to  invade  these  Regions,  released  all  those  from
paying  of  Tribute  (as  our  African  Historiographers
affirme)  that  would  imbrace  the  Christian  Religion.  But
so  often  as  any  Tribute  was  demaunded,  every  man  to
eschew  the  payment  thereof,  would  not  sticke  to  professe
himselfe  a  Christian :  wherefore  it  was  then  determined,
that  such  as  were  Christians  indeed,  should  be  distinguished
from  others  by  the  foresaid  crosses.  At  length  the  Gothes
being  expelled,  they  all  revolted  unto  the  Mahumetan
Religion ;  howbeit,  this  custome  of  painting  crosses
remained  still  among  them  neither  doe  they  know  the
reason  thereof.  Likewise  the  meaner  sort  of  people  in
Mauritania  use  to  make  such  crosses  upon  their  faces,  as
we  see  used  by  some  people  of  Europe.

Sersell,  built  by  the  Romanes  upon  the  Mediterran  Sea,
was  afterward  taken  by  the  Gothes ;  and  lastly  by  the
Mahumetans.  The  wall  of  this  Towne  is  exceeding  high,
strong,  and  stately  built,  and  containeth  about  eight  miles
in  circuit.  In  that  part  of  the  Towne  next  unto  the
Mediterran  Sea,  standeth  a  most  beautifull  and  magnificent
Temple  built  by  the  Romanes,  the  inward  part  whereof
consisteth  of  Marble.

Gezeir,  in  the  Moores  language  signifieth  an  Hand,
which  name  is  thought  to  have  beene  given  unto  this
Cjtie,  because  it  lyeth  neere  unto  the  lies  of  Majorica,

483

A.D.

c.  1526.

Mersalcabir
surprised  by
the  Spaniards.
Bresch,

Blacke  crosses.

The  Towne  of
Sersell.

Stately
Temple.

Geizer,  other-
wise called
Algar.
[II.  vi.  814.]

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

c.  1526.

Minorica,  and  Jeviza  :  howbeit,  the  Spaniards  call  it  Alger.
It  was  founded  by  the  Africans  of  the  Family  of  Mesgana,
wherefore  in  old  time  it  was  called  by  the  name  of  Mes-
gana.  It  is  a  large  Towne,  containing  Families  to  the
number  of  foure  thousand,  and  is  environed  with  most
stately  and  impregnable  walles.  The  buildings  thereof
are  very  Artificiall  and  sumptuous  :  and  every  trade  and
occupation  hath  heere  a  severall  place.  Innes,  Bath-stoves,
and  Temples  heere  are  very  beautifull ;  but  the  stateliest
Temple  of  all  standeth  upon  the  Sea-shoare.  Next  unto
the  Sea  there  is  a  most  pleasant  walke  upon  that  part  of
the  Towne  wall,  which  the  waves  of  the  Sea  beat  upon.
In  the  Suburbs  are  many  Gardens  replenished  with  all  kind
of  Fruits.  On  the  East  side  of  the  Towne  runneth  a
certaine  River  having  many  mills  thereupon  :  and  out  of
this  River  they  draw  water  fit  for  drinke,  and  for  the
services  of  the  Kitchin.  It  hath  most  beautifull  Plaines
adjoyning  upon  it,  and  especially  one  called  Metteggia,
which  extendeth  forty  five  miles  in  length,  and  almost
thirty  miles  in  breadth,  and  aboundeth  mightily  with  all
kinds  of  Graine.  This  Towne  for  many  yeeres  was  subject
unto  the  Kingdome  of  Telensin  :  but  hearing  that  Bugia
was  also  governed  by  a  King,  and  being  neerer  thereunto,
they  submitted  themselves  unto  the  King  of  Bugia.  For
they  saw  that  the  King  of  Telensin  could  not  sufficiently
defend  them  against  their  enemies,  and  also  that  the  King
of  Bugia  might  doe  them  great  damage,  wherefore  they
offerd  unto  him  a  yeerely  Tribute  of  their  own  accord,  and
yet  remained  almost  free  from  all  exaction.  But  certaine
yeeres  after,  the  inhabitants  of  this  Citie  building  for
themselves  Gallies,  began  to  play  the  Pirats,  and  greatly
to  molest  the  foresaid  Hands.  Whereupon  King  Ferdi-
Alger  become  nando  provided  a  mighty  Armada,  hoping  thereby  to
th  l K^P \f  become  Lord  of  the  Citie.  Likewise  upon  a  certaine  high
Spaine.  Rocke  standing  opposite  against  the  Towne,  he  caused  a

strong  Fort  to  be  built,  and  that  within  Gun-shot  of  the
Citie,  albeit  the  Citie  walles  could  not  bee  endamaged
thereby. Wherefore  the  Citizens  immediately  sent  Am-

484

JOHN LEO ON AFRICA  a.d.

c.  1526.
bassadours  into  Spaine,  to  crave  a  league  for  ten  yeeres,
upon  condition  that  they  should  pay  certaine  yeerely
Tribute  ;  which  request  was  granted  by  King  Ferdinando.
And  so  they  remained  for  certaine  Moneths  free  from  the
danger  of  warre  :  but  at  length  Barbarossa  hastning  to  the
siege  of  Bugia,  and  having  wonne  one  Fort  built  by  the
Spaniards,  determined  to  encounter  another,  hoping  if  he
could  obtaine  that  also,  that  he  should  soone  conquer  the
whole  Kingdome  of  Bugia.  Howbeit,  all  matters  fell  not
out  according  to  his  expectation :  for  a  great  part  of  his
Souldiers  being  husbandmen,  when  they  perceived  the
time  of  sowing  corne  to  approach,  without  any  leave  or
licence  they  forsooke  their  Generall,  and  returned  home  to
the  Plough-taile.  And  many  Turkes  also  did  the  like,  so
that  Barbarossa  failing  of  his  purpose,  was  constrained  to
breake  up  the  siege.  Howbeit,  before  his  departure,  he
set  on  fire  with  his  owne  hands  twelve  Gallies,  which  lay  in
a  River  but  three  miles  from  Bugia.  And  then  with
forty  of  his  Souldiers,  he  retired  himselfe  to  the  Castle
of  Gegel,  being  from  Bugia  above  sixtie  miles  distant,
where  hee  remained  for  certaine  dayes.  In  the  meane
while,  King  Ferdinando  deceasing,  the  people  of  Alger
released  themselves  from  paying  any  more  Tribute :  for
seeing  Barbarossa  to  be  a  most  valiant  warriour,  and  a
deadly  enemy  unto  Christians,  they  sent  for  him,  and  chose
him  Captaine  over  all  their  Forces ;  who  presently
encountred  the  Fort,  but  to  little  effect.  Afterward,  this
Barbarossa  secretly  murthered  the  Governour  of  the  Citie
in  a  certaine  Bath.  The  said  Governour  was  a  Prince  of
the  Arabians  dwelling  on  the  Plaines  of  Mettegia,  his  name
was  Selim  Etteumi,  descended  of  the  Familie  of  Telaliba,
and  created  Governour  of  Alger,  at  the  same  time  when
Bugia  was  taken  by  the  Spaniards :  this  man  was  slaine
by  Barbarossa,  after  he  had  governed  many  yeeres.  And
then  Barbarossa  usurped  the  whole  government  of  the
Citie  unto  himselfe,  and  coined  money,  and  this  was  the
first  entrance  into  his  great  and  princely  estate.  At  all
the  foresaid  accidents  I  my  selfe  was  present,  as  I  travelled

4*5

A.D.

c.  1526.

3OOO.

Arabian
bookes.
A  Voyage
performed  by
John  Leo.

This  Alger  is
now  the  cage
of  uncle  an  e
birds,  the  next
of  Turkish
unchristian
Pyrats.

Medua.

The  Tozvne  of
Temendfust.
His  discourse
of  the  Moun-
tains is
omitted.

[II.  vi.  815.]

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

from  Fez  to  Tunis,  and  was  entertained  by  one  that  was
sent  Ambassadour  from  the  people  of  Alger  into  Spaine,
from  whence  he  brought  three  thousand  bookes  written  in
the  Arabian  tongue.  Then  I  passed  on  to  Bugia,  where  I
found  Barbarossa  besieging  the  foresaid  Fort :  afterward
I  proceeded  to  Constantina,  and  next  to  Tunis.  In  the
meane  while  I  heard  that  Barbarossa  was  slaine  at  Tremi-
zen,  and  that  his  brother  called  Cairadin  succeeded  in  the
government  of  Alger.  Then  we  heard  also  that  the
Emperour  Charles  the  fift  had  sent  two  armies  to  surprize
Alger  ;  the  first  whereof  was  destroyed  upon  the  plaine  of
Alger,  and  the  second  having  assailed  the  Towne  three
dayes  together,  was  partly  slaine,  and  partly  taken  by
Barbarossa,  insomuch,  that  very  few  escaped  backe  into
Spaine. This  was  done  in  the  yeere  of  the  Hegeira  922.

The  Inhabitants  of  Medua  being  themselves  unlearned,
so  often  as  any  learned  man  comes  amongst  them,  they
entertaine  him  with  great  honour,  and  cause  him  to  decide
all  their  controversies.  For  the  space  of  two  moneths,
while  I  remained  with  them,  I  gained  above  two  hundred
Ducats,  and  was  so  allured  with  the  pleasantnesse  of  the
place,  that  had  not  my  dutie  enforced  me  to  depart,  I  had
remained  there  all  the  residue  of  my  life.

Unto  Temendfust  belongeth  a  faire  Haven,  where  the
Ships  of  Alger  are  safely  harboured,  for  they  have  no  other
Haven  so  commodious.  This  Towne  was  at  length
destroyed  by  the  Goths,  and  the  greatest  part  of  the  wall
of  Alger  was  built  with  the  stones  which  came  from  the
wall  of  this  Towne.

§•  v.

The  most  remarkable  things  in  John  Leo  his  fifth
Booke  of  the  Historie  of  Africa,  and  a  descrip-
tion of  the  Kingdomes  of  Bugia  and  Tunis.

lUgia  was  subject  to  the  King  of  Tunis,  and  albeit,
for  certaine  yeares  the  King  of  Telensin  was  Lord
thereof,  yet  was  it  at  length  recovered  againe  by
the  King  of  Tunis,  who  committed  the  Government  of  the

486

JOHN LEO ON AFRICA  a.d.

c.  1526.
Citie  unto  one  of  his  Sonnes,  both  for  the  tranquillitie  of
Bugia,  and  also  that  no  discord  might  happen  among  his
Sonnes  after  his  decease.  Hee  left  behind  him  three
Sonnes,  the  eldest  whereof  was  called  Habdulhaziz,  and
unto  him  he  bequeathed  the  Kingdome  of  Bugia,  as  is
aforesaid :  unto  the  second,  whose  name  was  Hutmen,  hee
left  the  Kingdome  of  Tunis :  and  the  third  called  Ham-
mare,  he  made  Governour  of  the  Region  of  Dates.  This
Hammare  began  forth-with  to  wage  warre  against  his
Brother  Hutmen,  by  whom  beeing  at  length  taken  in  the
Towne  of  Asfacos,  and  deprived  of  both  his  eyes,  hee
was  carryed  Captive  unto  Tunis,  where  he  lived  many
yeares  blind :  but  his  Brother  Hutmen  governed  the
Kingdome  of  Tunis  full  forty  yeares.  The  Prince  of
Bugia  beeing  most  loving  and  dutifull  to  his  Brother,
raigned  for  many  yeares  with  great  tranquillitie,  till  at
length  hee  was  by  King  Ferdinand  of  Spaine,  and  by  the
meanes  of  one  Pedro  de  Navarra,  cast  out  of  his  Kingdome.

This  ancient  Citie  of  Bugia  was  built  (as  some  think)  A  description
by  the  Romans,  upon  the  side  of  an  high  Mountayne,  of  the  great
neere  unto  the  Mediterran  Sea,  is  environed  with  wals  of  CtfteofBuSia-
great  height,  and  most  stately  in  regard  of  their  Antiquitie.
The  part  thereof  now  peopled  contayneth  above  eight
thousand  Families : but  if  it  were  all  replenished  with
buildings,  it  were  capeable  of  more  then  foure  and  twentie
thousand  Housholds,  for  it  is  of  a  great  length. The
Houses,  Temples,  and  Colledges  of  this  Citie  are  most
sumptuously  built. Professors  of  liberall  Sciences  heere  Sch/ers.
are  great  store,  whereof  some  teach  matters  pertayning  to  Lawyers.
the  Law,  and  others  professe  naturall  Philosophic Neyther  PhtlosoPhers-
Monasteries, Innes, nor Hospitals erected after their
manner  are  heere  wanting :  and  their  Market  place  is  very
large  and  fayre : their  streetes  either  descend  or  ascend,
which  is  very  troublesome  to  them  that  have  any  businesse
in  the  Towne. In  that  part  of  the  Citie  next  unto  the
top  of  the Mountayne  standeth  a  strong  Castle, most
sumptuously  and  beautifully  walled : and  there  are  such
notable  Letters  and  Pictures  most  artificially  carved  upon

487

A.D.

c.  1526.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

by  Pedro  de
Navarra

Necaus.

the  Playster-worke  and  Timber,  that  they  are  thought  to
have  cost  much  more  then  the  building  of  the  wall  it
selfe.

The  Citizens  were  exceeding  rich,  and  used  with  their
Warlike  Gallies  continually  to  molest  the  Coasts  of  Spaine  ;
which  was  the  occasion  of  the  utter  overthrow  of  their
Citie.  For  Pedro  de  Navarra  was  sent  against  them  with
a  Fleet  of  fourteene  Sayles  onely.  The  Citizens  being
addicted  wholy  to  pleasure  and  ease,  and  being  terrified
with  the  rumour  of  Warre,  because  they  were  never
The  Citie  of  exercised  therein,  were  no  sooner  advertised  of  Pedro  de
Navarra  his  approch,  but  all  of  them  together  with  their
King  betooke  themselves  to  flight,  and  left  their  Citie
abounding  with  all  kind  of  riches  and  wealth,  to  be  spoyled
by  the  Spaniards,  so  that  it  was  easily  taken,  in  the  yeere
of  Mahumet  his  Hegeira  917.  Soone  after  Pedro  de
Navarra  having  sacked  the  Citie,  built  a  strong  Fort  upon
the  Sea  shoare,  and  repayred  another  which  had  lien  a
long  time  waste  furnishing  them  both  with  Souldiers  and
Munition.

The  Inhabitants  of  Gegel,  have  in  despight  of  the  Kings
of  Bugia  and  Tunis  continued  alwayes  free  from  Tribute :
for  that  impregnable  Mountayne  can  be  surprized  by  no
siege  nor  encounter  of  the  Enemy.  At  length  they
yeelded  themselves  unto  Barbarossa,  who  demanded  none
other  Tribute  of  them,  but  onely  the  tenths  of  certaine
Fruits  and  Corne.

The  Inhabitants  of  Necaus  are  very  rich,  liberall,  and
curious  in  their  apparell.  Heere  is  an  Hospitall  main-
tayned  at  the  common  charges  of  the  Towne,  to  entertayne
Strangers  that  passe  by.  Here  is  a  Colledge  also,  the
Students  whereof  are  allowed  their  Dyet  and  apparell.
Neither  is  this  Towne  destitute  of  a  most  stately  and
wel-furnished  Temple.  Their  women  are  white,  having
blacke  haires  and  a  most  delicate  skinne,  because  they
frequent  the  Bath-stoves  so  often.  Most  of  their  houses
are  but  of  one  story  high,  yet  are  they  very  decent,  and
have  each  one  a  Garden  thereto  belonging,  replenished

488

JOHN LEO ON AFRICA  ad.

c.  1526.
with  Uamaske  Roses,  Myrtles,  Cammomill,  and  other
herbs  and  flowers,  and  beeing  watred  with  most  pleasant
Fountaines.  In  these  Gardens  likewise  there  are  most
stately  Arbours  and  Bowres,  the  coole  shaddow  whereof  in
Summer  time  is  most  acceptable.

No  man  can  deny  the  Romanes  to  have  beene  Founders  The  Citie  of
of  this  Citie,  that  shall  consider  the  great  strength,  height  Constantina.
and  antiquitie  of  the  wals,  and  how  curiously  they  are
beset  and  adorned  with  blacke  stones.  This  Citie  standeth
upon  the  South  side  of  an  exceeding  high  Mountayne,
and  is  environed  with  steepe  Rockes,  under  which  Rockes
and  within  the  compasse  whereof  runneth  the  River  called
Sufegmare,  so  that  the  said  deepe  River  with  the  Rockes
on  either  side,  serveth  in  stead  of  a  Towne-ditch  to  [II.  vi.  816.]
Constantina.  The  North  part  is  compassed  with  a  wall
of  great  thicknesse :  and  there  are  two  extreme  narrow
passages  onely  to  enter  into  the  Citie,  one  on  the  East
part,  and  another  on  the  West.  The  Citie  gates  are  very
large  and  stately.  The  Citie  it  selfe  contayneth  above
eight  thousand  Families.  Buildings  it  hath  very
sumptuous,  as  namely,  the  Chiefe  Temple,  two  Colledges,
three  or  foure  Monasteries,  and  other  such  like.  Here
every  Trade  and  Occupation  hath  a  severall  place  assigned  :
and  the  Inhabitants  are  right  honest  and  valiant  people.
Here  is  likewise  a  great  Company  of  Merchants,  whereof
some  sell  Cloth  and  Wooll,  others  send  Oyle  and  Silke
into  Numidia,  and  the  residue  exchange  Linnen-cloth  and
other  Wares  for  Slaves  and  Dates.  Neyther  are  Dates  so
cheape  in  any  Region  of  all  Barbarie  besides.  The  Kings
of  Tunis  usually  commit  the  Government  of  Constantina
unto  their  eldest  Sonnes.

Also  without  the  Citie  stand  many  fayre  and  ancient
buildings.  About  a  mile  and  a  halfe  from  the  Citie
standeth  a  certaine  triumphall  Arch,  like  unto  the  Triumphall
triumphall  Arches  at  Rome,  which  the  grosse  common  ^rch.
people  thinke  to  have  beene  a  Castle,  where  innumerable
Devils  remayned,  which  (they  say)  were  expelled  by  the
Mahumetans,  when  they  came  first  to  inhabit  Constantina.

489

A.D.

c.  1526.

Hot  Baths.
Snai/e  Devils.

J  fond  and

senselesse

Superstition.

The  ancient
Towne  of
Bona.

Saint  Augus-
tine in  times
past  Bishop  of
Hippo.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

From  the  Citie  to  the  River  they  descend  by  certaine
staires  hewen  out  of  the  Rocke :  and  neere  unto  the
River  standeth  a  little  house  so  artificially  cut  out  of  the
mayne  Rock,  that  the  Roofe,  Pillars  and  Wals  are  all  of
one  continued  substance,  and  here  the  women  of  Constan-
tina  wash  their  Linnen.  Neere  unto  the  Citie  likewise
there  is  a  certaine  Bath  of  hot  water  dispersing  it  selfe
among  the  Rockes :  in  this  Bath  are  great  store  of  Snailes,
which  the  fond  women  of  the  Citie  call  Devils  :  and  when
any  one  falleth  into  a  Fever  or  any  other  Disease,  they
suppose  the  Snailes  to  be  the  Authours  thereof.  And
the  onely  remedie  that  they  can  apply  upon  such  an
occasion,  is  this :  first,  they  kill  a  white  Hen,  putting  her
into  a  Platter  with  her  feathers  on,  and  then  very  solemnely
with  Wax-candles  they  carry  her  to  the  Bath,  and  there
leave  her :  and  many  good  fellowes  there  are,  which  so
soone  as  the  silly  women  have  set  downe  their  Hens  at  the
Bath,  will  come  secretly  thither,  and  convay  away  the
Hens  to  their  owne  Kitchins.  Somewhat  farther  from
the  Citie  Eastward,  there  is  a  Fountayne  of  extreme  cold
water,  and  neere  unto  it  standeth  a  certaine  building  of
Marble  adorned  with  sundry  Hieroglyphicall  Pictures  or
Emblemes,  such  as  I  have  seene  at  Rome,  and  at  many
other  places  of  Europe.  But  the  common  people  imagine
that  it  was  in  times  past  a  Grammar  Schoole,  and  because
both  the  Masters  and  Schollers  thereof  were  most  vicious,
they  were  transformed  (say  they)  into  Marble.

Bona  was  in  ancient  times  called  Hippo,  where  the
Reverend  Father  Saint  Augustine  was  once  Bishop.  It
was  in  processe  of  time  subdued  by  the  Gothes,  and  was
afterward  surprized  and  burnt  to  ashes  by  Hutmen  the
third  Patriarke  after  Mahumet.  And  many  yeeres  after
they  built  a  new  Towne  within  two  miles,  of  the  stones
that  were  brought  from  the  ruines  of  Bona :  which  new
Towne  they  called  Beld  Elhuneb,  that  is,  the  Citie  of  the
fruit  called  Ziziphus  or  Jujuba,  by  reason  of  the  great
abundance  of  that  fruit :  the  which  they  use  to  dry  in  the
Sunne,  and  to  keepe  till  Winter. It  contayneth  almost

490

JOHN LEO ON AFRICA  a.d.

c.  1526.
three  hundred  Families,  and  all  the  houses  and  buildings
thereof  are  very  base,  save  one  onely  Temple  which
standeth  next  the  Sea.  The  Inhabitants  are  all  of  an
ingenuous  disposition,  some  of  them  being  Merchants,  and
the  residue  Artizans.  Here  is  great  store  of  Linnen-cloth
woven,  the  greatest  part  whereof  is  carryed  to  Numidia.

Every  Friday  they  have  neere  unto  the  Towne  wals  a
Market,  which  is  well  frequented  even  till  night.  Not
farre  from  hence  there  is  a  certaine  place  in  the  Sea,
abounding  with  great  store  of  Corall :  and  because  the  Great  store  of
Townesmen  know  not  how  to  fish  for  the  same,  the  King  Coral/.
of  Tunis  licensed  certaine  Merchants  of  Genoa  to  fish  for
it :  who  in  regard  of  the  continuall  assaults  of  Pirates,
because  they  could  not  speed  of  their  purpose,  they
obtayned  leave  also  of  the  King  to  build  a  Castle  neere
unto  the  place :  but  that  the  Townesmen  would  in  no
case  permit,  saying,  that  the  Genoueses  in  times  past  tooke
their  Towne  by  such  a  wile,  and  that  it  was  afterward
recovered  againe  by  the  King  of  Tunis.

Tebessa,  compassed  with  an  high  wall  made  of  such  The  Citie  of
stones,  as  are  to  be  seene  upon  the  Colosso  at  Rome :  Tebessa.
neither  saw  I,  to  my  remembrance,  any  such  wals  in  all
Africa  or  Europe ;  and  yet  the  houses  and  other  buildings
are  very  base.  Through  part  of  this  Citie  runneth  a  great
River :  and  in  the  Market,  and  divers  other  places  stand
certaine  Marble  Pillars,  having  Epigrams  and  Sentences
with  Latine  Letters  engraven  upon  them ;  there  are  also
other  square  Pillars  of  Marble  covered  with  Roofes.  The
Plaines  adjacent,  albeit,  very  dry,  yet  are  they  most  fruitfull
for  Corne.  Five  miles  from  hence,  grow  such  abundance
of  Wall-nut-trees,  as  you  would  take  them  to  be  some
thicke  Forrest.  Neere  unto  this  Towne  standeth  a  certaine
hill  full  of  mighty  Caves,  wherein  the  common  people  say,
that  Giants  inhabited  of  old :  but  it  is  most  evident,  that
those  Caves  were  digged  by  the  Romanes  at  the  same
time,  when  they  built  the  Citie :  for  certaine  it  is  that  the
stones  whereof  the  Citie  wals  consist,  were  taken  out  of
those  Rockes. The  Inhabitants  are  people  of  a  covetous,

491

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

c.  1526.

inhumane,  and  beastly  disposition ;  neither  will  they
vouchsafe  to  looke  upon  a  stranger :  insomuch,  that
[II.  vi.  817.]  Eldabag  a  famous  Poet  of  the  Citie  of  Malaga  in  Granada,
E  dabag.  having  in  his  travell  this  way  received  some  discourtesie,
wrote  in  disgrace  of  Tebessa  certaine  Satyricall  Verses,
which  my  selfe  likewise  have  thought  good  here  to  set
downe  in  the  dispraise  thereof.

Within  this  place  here's  nought  of  any  worth,
Save  worthlesse  Nuts,  which  Tebessa  affoords.

Soft,  I  mistake,  the  Marble  walles  are  worth
Your  earnest  view,  so  are  the  Christall  Foords  :

But  hence  are  banisht  vertues  all  divine,

The  place  is  Hell,  the  People  worse  then  Swine.

This  Eldabag  was  a  most  learned  and  elegant  Poet  in  the
Arabian  Tongue,  and  out  of  measure  Satyricall,  and  bitter
in  his  invectives.  But  to  returne  to  our  former  purpose,
these  Tebessians  have  alwaies  rebelled  against  the  King
of  Tunis,  and  have  slaine  all  the  Governours  that  he  hath
sent.  Wherefore  the  King  that  now  is,  travelling  upon  a
time  towards  Numidia,  sent  certaine  Ambassadours  into
the  Citie,  to  know  how  the  Citizens  stood  affected  towards
him :  unto  whom  they  (in  stead  of  God  save  the  King)
made  answere  ;  God  save  our  Citie  walles.  Whereat  the
King  waxing  wroth,  sacked  the  Citie  forthwith,  beheaded
and  hanged  divers  of  the  inhabitants,  and  made  such
havock,  that  ever  since  it  hath  remained  desolate.  This
was  done  in  the  yeare  of  the  Hegeira  915.

In  the  Towne  of  Urbs,  are  to  be  seene  sundry  Monu-
ments of  the  Romans,  as  namely,  Images  of  Marble,  and
every  where  upon  the  Walles  are  sentences  in  Latin  letters
engraven :  the  Towne  Walles  are  most  artificially  and
sumptuously  built.  This  Towne  the  Gothes,  being  assisted
by  the  Moores,  surprised,  when  as  it  contained  the  chiefe
treasure  and  wealth  that  the  Romans  enjoyed  in  all  Africa.
Afterward,  it  remained  for  certaine  yeares  desolate,  being
at  length  notwithstanding  inhabited  anew ;  yet  so,  that  it
deserveth  rather  the  name  of  a  Village,  then  of  a  Towne.

492

The  Towne
called  Urbs.
Urbs  full  of
Roman
antiquities.

JOHN LEO ON AFRICA  a.d.

c.  1526.

We  have  here  given  the  Reader,  with  a  small  generall
Map  of  Barbary  and  Egypt,  a  description  of  the  Ruines
of  Carthage,  with  the  Goletta  and  Bay  of  Tunis.

The  famous  and  ancient City  Carthage  was  built  at  [II.  vi.  818.]

the  first  by  a  certaine  people  that  came  out  of  Syria. But  /w*^

others  say  that  it  was  founded  by  a  *Queene. The  African  Carthage.

Chronicler  Ibnu  Rachich  is  of  opinion,  that  it  was  built  *Both  may  be

by  a  certaine  people  that  came  from  Barca. Tripolis  of  truf  °f  Queen

Barbaria  and  Capis  being  taken  by  the  Mahumetans,  the  Dldo>™htch

r  o  /  »  1  1 came  from

Inhabitants  of  them  both  went  unto  Carthage,  whither  the  p^nic-ta  \n

principall  Romans  and  Gothes  had  retired  themselves,  who  Syria.

endeavored  by  all  meanes  to  withstand  the  Mahumetans :

and  after  many  skirmishes  the  Romans  fled  to  Bona,  and

the  Goths  left  Carthage  for  a  pray  unto  the  Mahumetans ;

so  that  it  remained  desolate  many  yeares  after,  till  a  certaine  Ruines  °f

Mahumetan Patriarke, called  Elmahdi brought  in new ar &'

Colonies : howbeit,  he  could  scarce  furnish  the  twentith

part  with  Inhabitants. There  are  to  be  seene  at  this  day

certaine  ruines  of  the  Citie  walls,  till  you  come  to  a  deepe

and  large  Cisterne. And  there  remaineth  as  yet  also  a

certaine  Conduit,  which  conveyeth  water  to  the  Citie  from

a  Mountaine  thirtie  miles  distant,  being  like  unto the

Conduit of the great Palace at Rome. Neere unto

Carthage  likewise  are  certaine  great  and  ancient  buildings,

the  description  whereof  is  out  of  my  remembrance. On

the  West  and  South  part  of  this  Citie,  are  divers  Gardens

replenished  with  all  kind  of  fruits,  which  are  carried  from

thence to Tunis in great abundance. The plaines

adjoyning  to  this  Citie  are  exceeding  fruitfull,  though  not

very large : for upon the North part thereof lieth a

Mountaine,  the  Sea,  and  the  Gulfe  of  Tunis  :  on  the  East

and  South  parts  it  joyneth  to  the  Plaines  of  Bensart. But

*now  this  Citie  is  fallen  into  extreme  decay  and  misery: *i$26.

Merchants  shops  there  are  not  above  twenty  or  five  and

twenty  at  the  most :  and  all  the  houses  of  the  Towne  being

scarce  five  hundred,  are  most  base  and  beggerly. In  my

time  here  was  a  stately  Temple,  and  a  faire  Colledge  also,

but  no  Students  were  therein. The  Townesmen,  though

493

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

c.  1526.

verie  miserable,  yet  are  they  exceeding  proud  withall,  and

seeme  to  pretend  a  great  shew  of  Religion. And  the

greater  part  of  them  are  either  Gardiners  or  Husbandmen,

and are grievously oppressed with the Kings daily

exactions.

A  description This  Citie  is  called  by  the  Latines,  Tunetum,  and  by  the

oj  the  mighty Arabians  Tunus,  which  name  they  thinke  to  be  corrupt,

Tunis,  because  it  signifieth  nought  in  their  language :  but  in  old

time  it  was  called  Tansis,  after  the  name  of  a  Citie  in  Asia.

At  the  first  it  was  a  small  Towne  built  by  the  Africans

upon  a  certaine  Lake,  about  twelve  miles  distant  from  the

Mediterran  Sea. And  upon  the  decay  of  Carthage,  Tunis

began  to  increase  both  in  buildings  and  inhabitants : for

the  inhabitants  of  Carthage  were  loth to  remaine  any

longer  in  their  owne  Towne,  fearing  least  some  Armie

would  have  been  sent  out  of  Europe : wherefore  they

repaired  unto  Tunis,  and  greatly  enlarged  the  buildings

thereof. Afterward  came  thither  one  Hucba  Utmen,  the

fourth  Mahumetan  Patriarke,  who  perswaded  the  Citizens,

that  no  Armie  or  Garrison  ought  to  remaine  in  any  Sea

The  building Townes  ;  wherefore  he  built  another  Citie,  called  Cairaoan,

dfCairaoan. being  distant  from  the  Mediterran  Sea  thirtie,  and  from

Tunis  almost  an  hundred  miles : unto  which  Citie  the

Armie  marched  from  Tunis,  and  in  the  roome  thereof  other

people  were  sent  to  inhabite. About  an  hundred  and  fiftie

yeares  after,  Cairaoan  being  sacked  by  the  Arabians,  the

Prince  thereof  was  expelled,  and  became  Governour  of  the

Kingdome  of  Bugia  :  howbeit,  he  left  certaine  Kinsmen  of

his  at  Tunis,  who  governed  that  Citie. And  ten  yeares

after,  Bugia  was  taken  by  Joseph,  the  sonne  of  Tesfin,  who

seeing  the  humanitie  of  the  foresaid  Prince,  would  not

expell  him  out  of  his  Kingdome  :  but  so  long  as  it  remained

to  the  said  Prince  and  his  posteritie,  Joseph  caused  it  to  be

free from  all molestation. Afterward, Abdul Mumen,

Tunis  subject King of Maroco, having recovered Mahdia from the

Mumen  and Christians, marched toward Tunis, and got possession

other  Kings  of  thereof  also. And  so  Tunis  remained  peaceably  under  the

Maroco,  Dominion  of  the  Kings  of  Maroco,  so  long  as  the  King-

494

JOHN LEO ON AFRICA  a.d.

c.  1526.

dome  was  governed  by  the  said  Abdul,  and  his  sonne
Joseph,  and  their  successors  Jacob  and  Mansor. But  after
the  decease  of  Mansor,  his  sonne  Mahumet  Ennasir  made
warre  against  the  King  of  Spaine,  by  whom  being  van-
quished, he  fled  to  Maroco,  and  there  within  few  yeares
ended  his  life. After  him  succeeded  his  brother  Joseph,
who was slaine by certaine souldiers of the King of
Telensin. And  so  upon  the  death  of  Mahumet,  and  of  his
brother  Joseph,  the  Arabians  began  to  inhabite  the  Terri-
torie  of  Tunis,  and  to  make  often  siedges  and  assaults
against  the  Citie  it  selfe : whereupon  the  Governour  of
Tunis  advertised  the  King  of  Maroco,  that  unlesse  present
aide  were  sent,  he  must  be  constrained  to  yeeld  Tunis  unto
the  Arabians. The  King  therefore  sent  a  certaine  valiant
Captaine,  called  Habduluahidi,  and  borne  in  Sivill,  a  Citie
of  Granada,*  with  a  Fleete  of  twentie  Sayles  unto  Tunis,  *  Or  perhaps
which  he  found  halfe  destroyed  by  the  Arabians : but  so  Andalu%ta-
great  was  his  eloquence  and  wisdome,  that  he  restored  all
things  to  their  former  estate,  and  received  the  yearely
tribute. After  Habduluahidi  succeeded  his  sonne  Abu
Zachheria,  who  in  learning  and  dexteritie  of  wit,  excelled
his  father. This  Abu  built  a  Castle  upon  a  certaine  high
place  of  the  West  part  of  Tunis,  which  he  adorned  with
faire  buildings,  and  with  a  most  beautifull  Temple. After-
ward, taking  his  journey  unto  the  Kingdome  of  Tripolis,
and  returning  home  by  the  Southerne  regions,  he  gathered
tribute  in  all  those  places : so  that  after  his  decease,  he
left great treasure unto his sonne. And after Abu
succeeded  his  sonne,  who  grew  so  insolent,  that  hee  would
not  be  subject  to  the  King  of  Maroco,  because  hee  per-
ceived his  Kingdome  to  decay :  at  the  same  time  also  had
the  Marin  Family  gotten  possession  of  the  Kingdome  of
Fez,  and  so  was  the  Familie  of  Beni  Zeijen  possessed  of
the  Kingdomes  of  Telensin  and  Granada. And  so  while
all those Regions were at mutual! dissention, the  [II.  vi.  819.]
Dominions  of  Tunis  began  mightily  to  encrease ; inso-
much, that  the  King  of  Tunis  marched  unto  Telensin,
and  demanded  tribute  of  the  inhabitants. Wherefore  the

495

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

c.  1526.

King  of  Fez,  who  as  then  laid  siege  against  Maroco,
craved  by  his  Ambassadors  the  King  of  Tunis  his  friend-
ship, and  with  great  gifts  obtained  the  same.  Then  the
King  of  Tunis  returning  home  Conquerour  from  Telensin,
was  received  with  great  triumph,  and  was  saluted  King
of  all  Africa,  because  indeed  there  was  no  Prince  of  Africa
at  the  same  time  comparable  unto  him.  Wherefore  he
began  to  ordaine  a  Royall  Court,  and  to  choose  Secretaries,
Counsellors,  Captaines,  and  other  Officers  appertaining  to
a  King ;  after  the  very  same  manner  that  was  used  in  the
Court  of  Maroco.  And  from  the  time  of  this  King  even
1526.  till  our  times,  the  Kingdome  of  Tunis  hath  so  prospered,

that  now  it  is  accounted  the  richest  Kingdome  in  all  Africa.
The  said  Kings  sonne  reigning  after  his  fathers  death,
enlarged  the  Suburbs  of  Tunis  with  most  stately  buildings.
Without  the  Gate  called  Bed  Suvaica  he  built  a  streete,
containing  to  the  number  of  three  hundred  Families :  and
he  built  another  street  at  the  Gate,  called  Bed  el  Manera,
consisting  of  more  then  a  thousand  Families.  In  both  of
these  streetes  dwell  great  store  of  Artificers,  and  in  the
street  last  mentioned,  all  the  Christians  of  Tunis,  which
are  of  the  Kings  Guard,  have  their  abode.  Likewise,
there  is  a  third  streete  built  at  the  Gate  next  unto  the  Sea,
called  Beb  el  Bahar,  and  being  but  halfe  a  mile  distant
from  the  Gulfe  of  Tunis.  Hither  doe  the  Genoueses,
Venetians,  and  all  other  Christian  Merchants  resort,  and
here  they  repose  themselves  out  of  the  tumult  and  con-
course of  the  Moores :  and  this  street  is  of  so  great
bignesse,  that  it  containeth  three  hundred  Families  of
Christians  and  Moores ;  but  the  houses  are  very  low,  and
of  small  receit.  The  Families  of  the  Citie,  together  with
them  of  the  Suburbs,  amount  almost  to  the  number  of
ten  thousand.  This  stately  and  populous  Citie  hath  a
peculiar  place  assigned  for  each  Trade  and  Occupation.
Here  dwell  great  store  of  Linnen-weavers,  and  the  Linnen
A  stranze  t^lat  ^ey  weave  is  exceeding  fine,  and  sold  at  a  great  price
kind  of  over  all  Africa.  The  women  of  this  Towne  use  a  strange
spinning. kind  of  spinning  :  for  standing  upon  an  high  place,  or  on

496

i/l  20 1 ™ ,  ' 20\ ^epttrtirio  +o\  <c\  6o\  t  •

^»*»/

fas  ^jz  ^Ti

&

Atah

\sm

Trapan

■J»

Xtvis^—Pohyoti '

tlexaJh

Je^ctmcfe  1renlufte

^

-#*'

.«£:

v  «:

■  Liirho

cy\

Wv.'!'&i

w£2*  ""iMtba

Jlr\

^>.

R

;*«#.  6-emuntea..

-M

;«-.

?4». ^Jj^*

iTV°^

i£

•S\

>!tr

ChsJFhrTtrd.
ifus

*Ot

GffOjan

j3^

Et>-

<fcn

^jr

="=?

t — r

v  > y

"P""7"^^
-H

,/Jfc^  ^<3lk.

^

jBorno

*£

a/pea

Ir>^

' ' ' ' ' ' ' ' .l"'V  '  ■  '  ^  1 ' '— » — E

5°

1IM IJ ' ' ^

■ZJ

.1,.  ..!■■»  ...

— jJT,^ J  .  '■

v%\

L  ^  RT^.  GINJENS  *^^I$ SIN  US

*MeriAits

Jitrcatts

j^GRiy^Mmxr

A3}fineriocuri

'Jena  feU

£itvcath -

^kPalmtA  -*  u

yictc^.  -$\

HONDIUS HIS MAP OF BARBARY AND EGYPT

JOHN LEO ON AFRICA  a.d.

c.  1526.
the  upper  part  of  the  house,  they  let  downe  their  Spindles
at  a  window,  or  through  a  hole  of  the  plancher  into  a
lower  roome,  so  that  the  weight  of  the  Spindle  makes  the
thread  very  equall  and  even.  The  apparell  of  their
Merchants,  Priests,  and  Doctors  is  very  decent.  Upon
their  heads  they  were  a  Dulipan,  which  is  covered  with  a
great  Linnen-cloath :  the  Courtiers  likewise  and  the
Souldiers  weare  all  of  them  Dulipans,  but  not  covered  with
Linnen.  Rich  men  here  are  but  few,  by  reason  of  the
exceeding  scarcitie  of  all  kind  of  graine :  for  a  man  cannot
till  a  piece  of  ground,  be  it  never  so  neere  the  Citie,  in
regard  of  the  manifold  invasions  of  the  Arabians.  Corne
is  brought  unto  them  from  other  Regions  and  Cities,  as
namely,  from  Urbs,  from  Beggi,  and  from  Bona.  Some
of  the  Citizens  of  Tunis  have  certaine  Fields  in  the
Suburbs  walled  round  about,  where  they  sow  some
quantitie  of  Barley,  and  of  other  Corne :  howbeit,  the
soyle  is  marveilous  dry,  and  standeth  in  need  of  much
watring  :  for  which  purpose  every  man  hath  a  pit,  whereout
with  a  certaine  wheele  turned  about  by  a  Mule  or  a
Camell,  and  through  certaine  conveyances  and  passages
made  for  the  nonce,  they  water  all  the  upper  part  of  their
ground.  Now  consider  (I  pray  you)  what  great  crop  of
Corne  can  be  reaped  out  of  so  little  a  Field,  walled  round
about,  and  watred  by  such  cunning  and  industrie.  Bread
they  make  very  excellent,  albeit  they  leave  the  Bran  still
among  the  Flower,  and  they  bake  their  Loaves  in  certaine
Mortars,  such  as  the  Egyptians  use  to  beate  Flaxe  in.  In
this  Citie  they  have  no  Fountaines,  Rivers,  nor  Wells  of
fresh  water :  but  they  all  use  raine  water  taken  out  of
Cisterns,  saving  that  there  is  a  Fountaine  in  the  Suburbs,
from  whence  certaine  Porters  bring  salt  water  into  the
Citie  to  sell,  which  they  thinke  to  bee  more  wholesome
and  fit  for  drinke  then  raine  water.  Other  Wells  there
are  that  affoord  most  excellent  water,  which  is  reserved
only  for  the  King  and  his  Courtiers.  In  this  Citie  there
is  one  most  stately  Temple,  furnished  with  sufficient
number  of  Priests,  and  with  rich  revenues.  Other
v  497  2 1

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

c.  1526.

Temples  there  be  also,  but  not  endowed  with  so  ample

revenues  : here  are  Colledges  likewise  and  Monasteries

built  after  their  manner,  all  which  are  maintained  upon  the

Madmen, common benevolence of  the  Citie. There  are  certaine

inference  1  \a pCOpje jn ^1S  Q[^{c^  whom a man would take to bee

distracted,  which  goe  bare-headed  and  bare-footed,  carrying
stones  about  with  them,  and  these  are  reverenced  by  the
common  people  for  men  of  singular  holinesse.  Moreover,
on  the  behalfe  of  one  of  these  mad  fellowes,  called  Sidi  el
Dahi,  and  for  the  residue  of  his  fond  Societie,  the  King
of  Tunis  built  one  of  the  foresaid  Monasteries,  and
endowed  the  same  with  most  ample  revenues.  All  the
houses  of  this  Citie  are  indifferently  beautifull,  being  built
of  excellent  stones,  and  adorned  with  much  painting  and
carving.  They  have  very  artificiall  pargettings  or  plaister-
works,  wThich  they  beautifie  with  Orient  colours ;  for
Wood  to  carve  upon  is  very  scarce  at  Tunis.  The  floores
of  their  Chambers  are  paved  with  certaine  shining  and
faire  stones  :  and  most  of  their  houses  are  but  of  one  storie
high  :  and  almost  every  house  hath  two  Gates  or  entrances  ;
one  towards  the  street,  and  another  towards  the  Kitchin  and
other  back-roomes,  betweene  which  Gates  they  have  a  faire
Court,  where  they  may  walke  and  conferre  with  their
friends.  Povertie  constraineth  some  of  their  women  to
leade  an  unchast  life :  they  are  decently  apparelled,  and
going  foorth  of  the  house,  they  weare  vailes  or  maskes
before  their  faces,  like  unto  the  women  of  Fez :  for  with
one  Linnen-cloth  they  cover  their  fore-heads,  and  joyne
[II.  vi.  820.]  thereto  another  which  they  call  Setfari :  but  about  their
heads  they  lap  such  fardels  of  Linnen,  as  they  seeme
comparable  to  the  heads  of  Giants.  Most  part  of  their
substance  and  labour  they  bestow  upon  Perfumes  and
other  such  vanities.  They  have  here  a  Compound,  called
Lhasis,  whereof  whosoever  eateth  but  one  Ounce,  falleth
a  laughing,  disporting,  and  dallying,  as  if  he  were  halfe
drunken,  and  is  by  the  said  Confection  marvellously
provoked  unto  lust.

So  soone  as  the  King  of  Tunis  hath  by  inheritance

498

JOHN LEO ON AFRICA  a.d.

c.  1526.
attained  to  his  Kingdome,  all  his  Nobles,  Doctors,  Priests,  Of  the  King  of
and  Judges,  bind  themselves  by  solemne  Oath  unto  him. JJwwitf
Immediatly  after  any  Kings  death,  his  sonne  and  heire  foRi™  and
apparent succeedeth  in  the  Kingdome : then  the  chiefe Ceremonies
Officer  of  the  Court  (called  the  Munafid,  because  he  is  the  there  used.
Kings  Vice-Roy  or  High  Deputie)  presenteth  himselfe
forthwith  unto  the  new  King,  and  giveth  up  an  account
of  all  things  which  hee  did  while  the  old  King  lived :  and
then  at  the  Kings  appointment,  everie  of  the  Nobles  re-
ceive Offices  from  the  Munafid  according  to  their  severall
places  of  dignitie. Another  principall  Officer  there  is,
called  the  Mesuare,  that  is,  the  Great  Commander  and
Governour  of  the  warlike  forces :  who  hath  authority  to
increase  or  diminish the  number  of  Souldiers, to  give
them  their  pay,  to  levie  Armies,  and  to  conduct  the  same
whither  he  thinketh  good. The  third  Officer  in  dignitie,
is  the  Castellan,  who  with  his  Souldiers  taketh  charge  of
the  Castle,  and  looketh  to  the  safeguard  of  the  Kings
owne  person : and  he  allotteth  punishments  unto such
prisoners,  as  are  brought  into  the  said  Castle,  as  if  he  were
the  King  himselfe. The  fourth  Officer,  is  the  Governour
of  the  Citie,  whose  dutie  is  to  administer  Justice  in  the
Common- wealth,  and  to  punish  Malefactors. The  fifth
Officer,  is  the  Kings  Secretarie,  who  hath  authoritie  to
write,  and  to  give  answere  in  the  Kings  name : he  may
open  also,  and  reade  any  Letters  whatsoever,  except  such
as  are  sent  unto  the  Castellan  and  Governour  of  the  Citie.
The  sixth,  is  the  Kings  Chiefe  Chamberlaine,  who  is  to
furnish  the  Walles  with  Hangings,  to  appoint  unto  every
man  his  place,  and  by  a  Messenger  to  assemble  the  Kings
Counsellors ; and  this  man  hath  great  familiaritie  with
the  King,  and  hath  accesse  to  speake  with  him,  as  often
as  he  pleaseth. The  seventh  in  dignitie, is  the  Kings
Treasurer, who receiveth all Customes, Tributes, and
yearely  revenues,  and  payeth  them,  with  the  Kings  con-
sent, unto  the  Munafid. These  are  the  chiefe  Officers
under  the  King  ;  of  the  residue  (lest  I  should  seeme  tedious
to  the  Reader)  I  have  of  purpose  omitted  to  intreate  of.

499

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

c.  1526.

I  could  here  make  a  large  discourse  of  the  Kings  vices
that  now  reigneth  (at  whose  hands  I  confesse  my  selfe  to
have  received  great  benefits)  but  that  is  not  my  purpose
at  this  present :  this  one  thing  I  can  affirme,  that  he  is
marvellous  cunning  to  procure  money  out  of  his  subjects
purses.  But  he  himselfe  liveth  sometimes  in  his  Palace,
and  sometimes  in  Gardens,  in  the  company  of  his  Concu-
bines, Musicians,  Stage-plaiers,  and  such  like. When  he

Musician calleth  for  any  Musician,  he  is  brought  in  blindfold  or

blindfold. hoodwinked  in  manner  of  a  Hawke.

The  Towne  of £J  Mahdia,  founded  in  our  time  by  Mahdi  the  first

.  ' Patriarke  of  Cairaoan  upon  the  Mediterran  sea,  and  forti-

otherwise  .

called  Africa.  fied  with  strong  Walls,  Towers,  and  Gates,  hath  a  most
noble  Haven  belonging  thereto.  Mahdi  when  he  first
entred  into  this  Region,  fained  himselfe  in  an  unknowne
habite  to  be  descended  of  the  linage  of  Mahumet,  whereby
growing  into  great  favour  of  the  people,  hee  was  by  their
assistance  made  Prince  of  Cairaon,  and  was  called  El
Mahdi  Califa :  afterward  travelling  fortie  dayes  journey
Westward  into  Numidia  to  receive  tribute  due  unto  him,
he  was  taken  by  the  Prince  of  Segelmesse,  and  put  in
prison ;  howbeit,  the  said  Prince  of  Segelmesse  being
presently  moved  with  compassion  toward  him,  restored
him  to  his  former  libertie,  and  was  for  his  good  will  not
long  after  slaine  by  him :  afterward  tyrannizing  over  the
people,  and  perceiving  some  to  conspire  against  him,  he
erected  this  Towne  of  Mahdia,  to  the  end  hee  might  there
find  safe  refuge  when  need  required.  At  length  one
Beiezid,  a  Mahumetan  Prelate  (whom  they  called  the
Cavalleir,  or  Knight  of  the  Asse,  because  that  riding  con-
tinually upon  an  Asse,  hee  conducted  an  Armie  of  fortie
thousand  men)  came  unto  Cairaoan :  but  Mahdi  fled  unto
his  new  Towne,  where  with  thirtie  Sayle  of  ships,  sent
him  by  a  Mahumetan  Prince  of  Cordova,  he  so  valiantly
encountred  the  Enemie,  that  Beiezid  and  his  sonne  were
both  slaine  in  that  battell :  afterward  returning  to  Cairaoan,
hee  grew  in  league  and  amitie  with  the  Citizens,  and  so  the
government  remained  unto  his  posteritie  for  many  yeares.

500

JOHN LEO ON AFRICA  ad.

c.  1526.
The  famous  Citie  of  Cairaoan,  otherwise  called  Caroen,  Of  the  great
was  founded  by  Hucba,  who  was  sent  generall  of  an  Armie  &&  °f
out  of  Arabia  Desarta  by  Hutmen,  the  third  Mahumetan  Catraoan-
Califa.  From  the  Mediterran  Sea,  this  Citie  is  distant
sixe  and  thirtie,  and  from  Tunis  almost  an  hundred  miles :
neither  was  it  built  (they  say)  for  any  other  purpose,  but
onely  that  the  Arabian  Armie  might  securely  rest  therein
with  all  such  spoiles,  as  they  wonne  from  the  Barbarians,
and  the  Numidians.  He  environed  it  with  most  impreg-
nable Walls,  and  built  therein  a  sumptuous  Temple,  sup-
ported with  stately  Pillars.  The  said  Hucba  after  the
death  of  Hutmen  was  ordained  Prince  of  Muchavia,  and
governed  the  same  till  the  time  of  Qualid  Califa,  the  sonne
of  Habdul  Malic,  who  as  then  reigned  in  Damasco.  This
Qualid  sent  a  certaine  Captaine,  called  Muse,  the  sonne
of  Nosair,  with  an  huge  Armie  unto  Cairaoan  ;  who  having
staied  a  few  dayes  with  his  Armie  not  farre  from  Cairaoan,
marched  Westward,  sacking  and  spoyling  Townes  and
Cities,  till  hee  came  to  the  Ocean  Sea  shore,  and  then  hee
returned  towards  Cairaoan  againe.  From  whence  hee
sent  as  his  Deputie  a  certaine  Captaine  into  Mauritania,
who  there  also  conquered  many  Regions  and  Cities:  [II. vi.  821.]
insomuch  that  Muse  being  mooved  with  a  jealous  emula-
tion, commanded  him  to  stay  till  himselfe  came.  His
said  Deputie  therefore,  called  Tarich,  encamped  himselfe
not  farre  from  Andaluzia,  whither  Muse,  within  foure
moneths  came  unto  him  with  an  huge  Armie ;  from
whence  both  of  them  with  their  Armies  crossing  the  Seas,
arrived  in  Granada,  and  so  marched  by  land  against  the
Gothes.  Against  whom  Theodoricus,  the  King  of  Goths,
opposing  himselfe  in  battaile,  was  miserably  vanquished.
Then  the  foresaid  two  Captaines  with  all  good  successe
proceeded  even  to  Castilia,  and  sacked  the  Citie  of  Toledo,
where  amongst  much  other  treasure,  they  found  many
Reliques  of  the  Saints,  and  the  very  same  Table  whereat  Reliques.
Christ  sate  with  his  blessed  Apostles ;  which  being
covered  with  pure  Gold,  and  adorned  with  great  store  of
precious  stones,  was  esteemed  to  bee  worth  halfe  a  million

501

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

c.  1526.

of  Ducats,  and  this  Table,  Muse  carrying  with  him,
as  if  it  had  been  all  the  Treasure  in  Spaine,  returned  with
his  Armie  over  the  Sea,  and  bent  his  course  toward  Cair-
aoan.  And  being  in  the  meane  space  sent  for  by  the
Letters  of  Qualid  Califa,  hee  sayled  into  Egypt :  but
arriving  at  Alexandria,  it  was  told  him  by  one  Hescian,
brother  unto  the  said  Califa,  that  the  Califa  his  brother
was  fallen  into  a  most  dangerous  disease :  wherefore  hee
wished  him  not  to  goe  presently  unto  Damasco,  for  feare
least  if  the  Califa  died  in  the  meane  season,  those  rich  and
sumptuous  Spoyles  should  be  wasted  and  dispersed  to  no
end.  But  Muse  little  regarding  this  counsell,  proceeded
on  to  Damasco,  and  presented  all  his  Spoyles  to  the  Califa,
who  within  five  dayes  after  deceased.  After  whom  his
brother  succeeding  Califa,  deprived  Muse  of  his  dignitie,
and  substituted  one  Jezul  into  his  roome,  whose  sonne,
brother,  and  nephewes  succeeding,  governed  the  Citie  of
Cairaoan,  till  such  time  as  the  Familie  of  Qualid  was  de-
prived of  that  dignitie,  and  one  Elagleb  was  appointed
Lieutenant,  who  governed  not  the  Towne  as  a  Califa :
from  that  time  the  Mahumetan  Califas  leaving  Damasco,
removed  unto  Bagaded,  as  wee  find  recorded  in  a  certaine
Chronicle.  After  the  decease  of  Elagleb,  succeeded  his
sonne,  and  the  government  remained  unto  his  posteritie
for  an  hundred  threescore  and  tenne  yeares,  till  such  time
as  they  were  deprived  thereof  by  one  Mahdi  Califa.  But
at  the  same  time  when  Elagleb  was  Governour,  the  Citie
of  Cairaoan  was  so  increased,  both  with  inhabitants  and
buildings,  that  a  Towne,  called  Recheda,  was  built  next
unto  it,  where  the  Prince  with  his  Nobles  used  to  remaine.
The  lie  of jn  his  time  a}so  the  He  of  Sicilia  was  wonne  :  for  Elagleb

SfaltLSUidUed  sent  th^tiler  a  certaine  Captaine,  called  Halcama,  who  built
Governour  of  uPon  the  said  Hand  a  Towne  in  stead  of  a  Fort,  calling  it
Cairaoan.  according  to  his  owne  name,  Halcama ;  which  name  is
used  by  the  Sicilians  even  till  this  present.  Afterward
this  new  Towne  was  besieged  by  certaine  people  that  came
to  aide  the  Sicilians.  Whereupon  one  Ased  was  sent  with
an  Armie,  and  so  the  Moores  Forces  being  augmented,

502

JOHN LEO ON AFRICA  a.d.

c.  1526.
they  conquered  the  residue  of  Sicilia  by  which  meanes  the
Dominions  of  Cairaoan  began  wonderfully  to  increase.
The  Citie  of  Cairaoan  standeth  upon  a  Sandie  and  Desart
Plaine,  which  beareth  no  Trees,  nor  yet  any  Corne  at  all.
In  this  Citie  for  certaine  yeares  the  studie  of  the  Mahu-
metan  Law  mightily  flourished,  so  that  here  were  the  most
famous  Lawyers  in  all  Africa.  It  was  at  length  destroyed,
and  replanted  againe  with  new  inhabitants,  but  it  could
never  attaine  unto  the  former  estate.  At  this  present  it
is  inhabited  by  none  but  Leather-dressers,  who  send  their
Leather  unto  the  Cities  of  Numidia,  and  exchange  it  also
for  Cloath  of  Europe.

A  mile  and  a  half  to  the  South  of  El  Hamma  beginneth  A  River  of  hot
a certain River of hot water to Spring, which being  water.
brought through the midst of the Citie by certaine
Chanels,  is  so  deepe  that  it  will  reach  up  to  a  mans  navell :
howbeit,  by  reason  of  the  extreme  heate  of  the  water,
there  are  but  few  that  wil  enter  thereinto. And  yet  the
inhabitants  use  it  for  drinke,  having  set  it  a  cooling  almost
an  whole  day. At  length  this  River  not  far  from  the
Towne  maketh  a  certain  Lake,  which  is  called  the  Lake The  Lake  of
of  Leapers :  for  it  is  of  wonderfull  force  to  heale  the  dis-  Lepers.
ease  of  leprosie,  and  to  cure  leprous  sores : wherefore
neere  unto  it  are  divers  Cottages  of  Leapers,  some  of
whom  are  restored  to  their  health. The  said  water  tasteth
in  a  manner  like  Brimstone,  so  that  it  will  nothing  at  all
clench  a  mans  thirst,  whereof  I  my  selfe  have  had  often

triail.  C\f  the ///>  nf

Gerbi  being  neere  unto  the  firme  land  of  Africa,  and  Gerbi  or

consisting  of  a  Plaine  and  Sandy  ground,  aboundeth  ex-  Zerbi9  where

ceedingly  with  Dates,  Vines,  Olives,  and  other  fruits,  and  John  Leo  the,

containeth  about  eighteene  miles  in  compasse.  //*/  >

Old  Tripolis  built  also  by  the  Romans,  was  after  wonne  tajten  u

by  the  Goths,  and  lastly  by  the  Mahumetans,  in  the  time  Italian

of  Califa  Homar  the  second. Which  Mahumetans  hav-  PiraUs9  and

ing besieged the Governour of Tripoli sixe moneths  c^Q^henU

together,  compelled  him  at  length  to  flee  unto  Carthage.  7^  old  Citie

The  Citizens  were  partly  slaine,  and  partly  carried  captive  of  Tripolis.

S°3

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

c.  1526.

into  Egypt  and  Arabia,  as  the  most  famous  African
Historiographer,  Ibnu  Rachich  reporteth.
The  new  Citie  After  the  destruction  of  old  Tripolis,  there  was  built
of  Tripolis  in  another  Citie  of  that  name:  which  Citie  being  invironed
with  most  high  and  beautifull  walls,  but  not  very  strong,
Plenty  of  is  situate  upon  a  Sandy  Plaine,  which  yeeldeth  great  store
Dates,  Qf  Dates. The  houses  of  this  City  are  most  stately,  in

respect  of  the  Houses  of  Tunis ;  and  here  also  every
trade  and  occupation  hath  a  severall  place.  Weavers  here
are  many.  They  have  no  Wells  nor  Fountaines  ;  but  all
their  water  is  taken  out  of  Cisterns.  Corne  in  this  Citie
[II.  vi.  822.]  is  at  an  exceeding  rate  ;  for  all  the  Fields  of  Tripoli  are  as
sandy  and  barren  as  the  fields  of  Numidia.  In  this  Citie
were  many  faire  Temples  and  Colledges  built,  and  an
Hospitall  also  for  the  maintenance  of  their  owne  poore
people,  and  for  the  entertainment  of  strangers.  Their
fare  is  very  base  and  homely,  being  onely  Besis  or  Dump-
lings made  of  Barley  meale :  for  that  Region  affoordeth
so  small  quantitie  even  of  Barley,  that  he  is  accounted  a
wealthy  man  that  hath  a  bushell  or  two  of  corne  in  store.
The  Citizens  are  most  of  them  Merchants ;  for  Tripolis
standeth  neere  unto  Numidia  and  Tunis,  neither  is  there
any  Citie  or  Towne  of  account  betweene  it  and  Alexan-
dria :  neither  is  it  farre  distant  from  the  lies  of  Sicilia  and
Malta :  and  unto  the  Port  of  Tripolis  Venetian  Ships
yeerely  resort,  and  bring  thither  great  store  of  Merchan-
dize. This  Citie  hath  alwayes  beene  subject  unto  the
King  of  Tunis :  but  when  Abulhasen  the  King  of  Fez
besieged  Tunis,  the  King  of  Tunis  was  constrained  with
his  Arabians  to  flee  into  the  Desarts.  Howbeit,  when
Abulhasen  was  conquered,  the  King  of  Tunis  returned  to
his  Kingdome :  but  his  subjects  began  to  oppose  them-
selves against  him :  and  so  that  Common-wealth  was
afterward  grievously  turmoyled  with  civill  dissensions  and
warres.  Whereof  the  King  of  Fez  having  intelligence,
marched  the  fifth  yeere  of  the  said  civill  warre  with  an
armie  against  the  Citie  of  Tunis,  and  having  vanquished
the  King  thereof,  and  constrained  him  to  flee  unto  Con-

504

JOHN LEO ON AFRICA  ad.

c.  1526.
stantina,  he  so  straitly  besieged  him,  that  the  Citizens
of  Constantina  seeing  themselves  not  able  to  withstand
the  King  of  Fez,  opened  their  Citie  gates  to  him  and  to
all  his  armie.  Whereupon  the  King  of  Tunis  was  carried
captive  unto  Fez,  and  was  afterward  kept  a  while  prisoner
in  the  Castle  of  Septa. In  the  meane  season  Tripolis  was  Tripoli*  taken

by a Genouese Fleet of twenty sailes surprised and £ tl . °*

7  iiTii-  -i  •  ttti  r Genozvaies.

sacked,  and  the  Inhabitants  carried  away  captive. W hereof

the  King  of  Fez  being  advertised,  gave  the  Genoueses
fiftie  thousand  Ducats,  upon  condition,  that  he  might
enjoy  the  Towne  in  peace.  But  the  Genoueses  having
surrendred  the  Towne,  perceived  after  their  departure,
that  most  part  of  their  Ducats  were  counterfeit.  After-
ward, the  King  of  Tunis  beeing  restored  unto  his  former
libertie  by  Abuselim  King  of  Fez,  returned  home  unto  his
Kingdome,  and  so  the  governement  thereof  remained  unto
him  and  his  posteritie,  till  Abubar  the  sonne  of  Hutmen
together  with  his  young  sonne  was  slaine  in  the  Castle  of
Tripolis  by  a  nephew  of  his,  who  afterward  usurped  the
Kingdome  :  but  he  was  slaine  in  a  battell  which  he  fought
against  Habdul  Mumen,  who  presently  thereupon  became
Lord  of  Tripolis.  After  him  succeeded  his  sonne  Zacha-
rias,  who  within  a  few  moneths  dyed  of  the  pestilence.
After  Zacharias,  Mucamen  the  sonne  of  Hesen,  and  cousin
to  Zacharias  was  chosen  King  ;  who  beginning  to  tyran-
nize over  the  Citizens  was  by  them  expelled  out  of  his
Kingdome  :  and  afterward  a  certaine  Citizen  was  advanced
unto  the  Royall  Throne,  who  governed  very  modestly.
But  the  King  which  was  before  expelled,  sent  an  army  of
Souldiers  against  Tripolis,  who  loosing  the  field,  were  all
of  them  put  to  flight.  Afterward,  the  King  that  began
to  Raigne  so  modestly,  prooved  a  very  tyrant,  and  being
murthered  by  his  kinsmen,  the  people  made  choise  of  a
certaine  Nobleman,  leading  as  then  a  Heremits  life,  and
in  a  manner  against  his  will  appointed  him  their  Gover-
nour :  and  so  the  government  of  the  Citie  of  Tripolis
remained  unto  him  and  his  posteritie,  till  such  time  as
King  Ferdinando  sent  Don  Pedro  de  Navarra  against  it :

SOS

The  Moun-
taines  are
omitted.

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGMMES

c.  1526.

Tripolis  sur-  who  on  the  sudden  encountring  this  City,  carried  away

pnsed  by  many  captives  with him. The  Governour  of  Tripolis

J  ro  e  and  his  sonne  in-law  were  sent  prisoners  unto  Messina.

Navarra.  .  r  .  K

Where,  alter  certaine  yeeres  imprisonment,  they  were  re-
stored by  the  Emperour  Charles  the  fift,  unto  their  former
liberty,  and  returned  unto  Tripolis,  which  Towne  was
afterward  destroyed  by  the  Christians.  The  Castle  of
Tripolis  being  environed  with  most  strong  walles,  begin
(as  I  understand)  to  be  replanted  with  new  Inhabitants.

§.  vi.  I

Collections  taken  out  of  John  Leo  his  sixt  Booke
of  the  Historie  of  Africa.

N  Barca  they  have  not  any  Corne  growing  at  all.

But  Corne  and  other  necessaries  are  brought  unto

1  them  by Sea from Sicilia, which that every of

them may purchase, they are constrained to lay their

sonnes  to  gage,  and  then  goe  rob  and  rifle  travellers  to

The  Arabians  redeeme them againe. Never did  you  heare of more

of  Barca  most  cvut\\  ancj  bloody  theeves : for  after  they  have  robbed

cruetl  atiu

bloody  theeves.  Merchants  of  all  their  goods  and  apparell, they  powre

warme  milke  downe  their  throats,  hanging  them  up  by

the  heeles  upon  some  tree,  and  forcing  them  to  cast  their

gorge,  wherein  the  lewd  varlets  search  diligently  for  gold,

suspecting  that  the  Merchants  swallowed  up  their  Crownes

before  they  entred  that  dangerous  Desart.

Being  about  to  describe  all  the  Cities  and  Townes  of

Tesset.  Numidia,  I  will  first  begin  with  Tesset : which  ancient

Towne  built  by  the  Numidians,  neere  unto  the  Libyan
Desarts,  and  environed  with  walles  of  Sun-dried  Bricke,
deserveth  scarcely  the  name  of  a  Towne ;  and  yet  con-
taineth  foure  hundred  Families.  It  is  compassed  round
about  with  sandy  Plaines,  saving  that  neere  unto  the
Towne  grow  some  store  of  Dates,  of  Mill-seed,  and  of

[II.  vi.  823.]  Barley,  which  the  miserable  Townesmen  use  for  food.
They  are  constrained  also  to  pay  large  Tribute  unto  the
Arabians Inhabiting the next Desarts. They exercise

506

JOHN LEO ON AFRICA  ad.

c.  1526.
traffique  in  the  land  of  Negroes  and  in  Guzula,  insomuch,
that  they  spend  most  of  their  time  in  forren  Regions.
They  are  of  a  blacke  colour,  and  destitute  of  all  learning.
The  women  indeed  teach  their  young  children  the  first
rudiments  of  learning,  but  before  they  can  attaine  to  any
perfection,  they  are  put  to  labour,  and  to  the  Plough-tayle.
The  said  women  are  somewhat  whiter  then  other  women :
some  of  them  get  their  living  by  spinning  and  carding  of
wooll, and the residue spend their time in idlenesse.
Such  as  are  accounted  richest  in  this  Region,  possesse  but
very  few  Cattell. They  Till  their  ground  with  an  Horse  plowing  with
and  a  Camell,  which  kind  of  Plowing  is  observed  through-  a  Horse  and  a
out  all  Numidia.  CamelL

Guaden  situate  upon  the  Numidian  Desart,  neere  unto  The  village  of
Libia,  is  Inhabited  by  most  miserable  and  grosse  people. Guaden,
Heere  groweth  nothing  but  Dates : and  the  Inhabitants
are  at  such  enmitie  with  their  neighbours,  that  it  is  danger-
ous for  them  to  goe  abroad. Howbeit,  they  give  them-
selves to  hunting,  and  take  certaine  wilde  Beasts  called  The  beast
Elamth,  and  Ostriches,  neither  doe  they  eate  any  other  called  Elamth.
flesh. All  their  Goats  they  reserve  for  milke. And  these
people  also  are  blacke  of  colour.

The  Province  of  Dara  beginneth  at  Mount  Atlas,  ex- The  Province
tendeth  it  selfe  Southward  by  the  Desarts  of  Libia,  almost  °fDara.
two  hundred  and  fiftie  miles,  and  the  breadth  thereof  is
very  narrow. All  the  Inhabitants  dwell  upon  a  certaine
River  which  is  called  by  the  name  of  the  Province. This  Dara  River.
River  sometime  so  overfloweth,  that  a  man  would  thinke
it  to  be  a  Sea,  but  in  Summer  it  so  diminisheth,  that  any
one  may  passe  over  it  on  foot. If  so  be  it  overfloweth Tke  quality
about  the  beginning  of  Aprill,  it  bringeth  great  plenty  thereof-
unto the  whole  Region : if  not, there  followeth great
scarcitie  of  Corne. Upon  the  banke  of  this  River  there
are  sundry  Villages  and  Hamlets,  and  divers  Castles  also,
which  are  environed  with  walles  made of  Sunne-dried
Bricke  and  Mortar. All  their  Beames  and  Planchers  con-
sist of  Date-trees, being  notwithstanding  unfit for the
purpose; for  the  wood  of  Date-trees  is  not  solid,  but

507

A.D.
c.  1526.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

The  strange
propertieofu
Palme  or  Date
tree.

flexible  and  spungie.  On  either  side  of  the  said  River  for
the  space  of  five  or  sixe  miles,  the  fields  abound  exceed-
ingly with  Dates,  which  with  good  keeping  will  last  many
yeeres :  and  as  heere  are  divers  kinds  of  Dates,  so  they
are  sold  at  sundry  prices :  for  a  bushell  of  some  is  woorth
a  Ducat,  but  others  wherewith  they  feede  their  Horses
and  Camels,  are  scarce  of  a  quarter  so  much  value.  Of
Date-trees some  are  male  and  female : the  male  bring

^fi^ln.L  f°orth  flowers  onely,  and  the  female  fruit :  but  the  flowers
of  the  female  will  not  open,  unlesse  the  boughes  and
flowers  of  the  male  be  joyned  unto  them :  And  if  they
bee  not  joyned,  the  Dates  will  proove  starke  naught,  and
containe  great  stones.  The  Inhabitants  of  Dara  live  upon
Barley  and  other  grosse  meate :  neither  may  they  eate  no

Bread daintie.  bread  but  onely  upon  Festivall  dayes.  Their  Castles  are
Inhabited  by  Gold-smithes  and  other  Artificers,  and  so
are  all  the  Regions  lying  in  the  way  from  Tombuto  to
Fez :  in  this  Province  also  there  are  three  or  foure  proper
Townes,  frequented  Merchants  and  strangers,  and  con-
taining many  Shops  and  Temples.  But  the  principall
Towne  called  Beni  Sabih,  and  Inhabited  with  most  valiant
and  liberall  people,  is  divided  into  two  parts,  either  part
having  a  severall  Captaine  or  Governour :  which  Gover-
nours  are  oftentimes  at  great  dissension,  and  especially
when  they  moisten  their  arable  Grounds,  by  reason  that
they  are  so  skanted  of  water.  A  Merchant  they  will  most
courteously  entertaine  a  whole  yeere  together,  and  then
friendly  dismissing  him,  they  require  nought  at  his  hands,
but  will  accept  such  liberality  as  he  thinkes  good  to  bestow
upon  them.  The  said  Governours  so  often  as  they  fall  a
skirmishing,  hire  the  next  Arabians  to  aide  them,  allow-
ing them  daily  halfe  a  Ducat  for  their  pay,  and  sometimes
more,  and  giving  them  their  allowance  every  day.  In
time  of  peace  they  trim  their  Harquebuzes,  Hand-guns,
and  other  weapons :  neither  saw  I  ever  (to  my  remem-
brance) more  cunning  Harquebuziers  then  at  this  place.
In  this  Province  groweth  great  store  of  Indico,  being  an
herbe  like  unto  the  wilde  woad,  and  this  herbe  they  ex-

508

Indico.

JOHN LEO ON AFRICA  a.d.

c.  1526.

change  with  the  Merchants  of  Fez  and  Tremisen  for  other

•  11*11

wares. Corne  is  very  scarce  among  them,  and  is  brought

thither  from  Fez  and  other  Regions,  neither  have  they
any  great  store  of  Goats  or  Horses,  unto  whom  in  stead
of  Provender  they  give  Dates,  and  a  kind  of  herbe  also
which  groweth  in  the  Kingdome  of  Naples,  and  is  called
by  the  Neapolitans  Farfa. They  feed  their  Goats  with  Goats  fed  with
the  Nuts or Stones  of  their  Dates beaten to powder,  Dates.
whereby  they  grow  exceeding  fat,  and  yeeld  great  quan-
tity of  milke. Their  owne  food  is  the  flesh  of  Camels
and Goats, being unsavory and displeasant in taste.
Likewise  they  kill  and  eate  Ostriches,  the  flesh  whereof  The  flesh  of
tasteth  not  much  unlike  to  the  flesh  of  a  dunghill-cocke,  the  Ostrich.
saving  that  it  is  more  tough  and  made  of  a  stronger  smell, A 10vtnces
especially  the  Ostriches  legge  : which  consisteth  of  slime  cheneg,
flesh. Their  women  are  faire,  fat,  and  courteous : and  Matgara,  lie.
they  keepe  divers  slaves  which  are  brought  out  of  the  are  omitted.
land  of  Negroes.

This  Territory  extending  it  selfe  along  the  River  of  The  Territory
TJyl  from  North  to  South  almost  twentie  miles,  contayneth  ofSegelmesse.
about  three  hundred  and  fiftie  Castles,  besides  Villages
and  Hamlets :  three  of  which  Castles  are  more  principall
then  the  rest. The  first  called  Tenegent,  and  consisting
of  a  thousand  and  moe  Families,  standeth  neere  unto  the
Citie  of  Segelmesse,  and  is  inhabited  with  great  store  of
Artificers. The  second  called  Tebuhasan,  standeth  about
eight  miles  to  the  South  of  Tenegent,  being  furnished  also
with  great  numbers  of  Inhabitants,  and  so  frequented  with
Merchants,  that  there  is  not  in  that  respect  the  like  place  [II.  vi.  824.]
to  bee  found  in  all  the  whole  Region  besides. The  third
called Mamun, is  resorted  unto  by  sundry Merchants,
both  Jewes  and  Moores.

These  three  Castles  have  three  severall  Governours,
who  are  at  great  dissention  among  themselves.  They
will  oftentimes  destroy  one  anothers  Chanels,  whereby
their  fields  are  watered,  which  cannot  without  great  cost
be  repayred  againe.  They  will  stow  the  Palme-trees  also
to  the  very  stockes :  and  unto  them  a  company  of  lewd

S°9

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

c.  1526.

Arabians  associate  themselves.  They  Coyne  both  Silver
and  Gold  money :  but  their  Gold  is  not  very  speciall.
Their  Silver  Coyne  weigheth  foure  graines  a  piece,  eightie
of  which  pieces  are  esteemed  to  bee  worth  one  piece  of
their  Gold  Coyne.  The  Jewes  and  Arabians  pay  excessive
Tribute  here.  Some  of  their  principall  men  are  exceeding
rich,  and  use  great  Traffique  unto  the  Land  of  Negros :
whither  they  transport  Wares  of  Barbarie,  exchanging  the
same  for  Gold  and  Slaves.  The  Territory  of  Segelmesse
live  upon  Dates,  except  it  be  in  certaine  places  where  some
Infinite  Corne  grew. Here  are  infinite numbers  of  Scorpions,

mm  ets  of kut  nQ pjyes  at  a}i[ jn Summer  time this  Region is

extremely  hot,  and  then  are  the  Rivers  so  destitute  of
water,  that  the  people  are  constrayned  to  draw  salt  water
out  of  certaine  Pits.  The  said  Territory  contayneth  in
circuit  about  eighty  miles,  all  which,  after  the  destruction
of  Segelmesse,  the  Inhabitants  with  small  cost  walled  round
about,  to  the  end  they  might  not  be  molested  by  continuall
inrodes  of  Horsemen.  While  they  lived  all  at  unitie  and
concord,  they  retayned  their  libertie :  but  since  they  fell
to  mutuall  debate,  their  wall  was  razed,  and  each  faction
invited  the  Arabians  to  helpe  them,  under  whom  by  little
and  little  they  were  brought  in  subjection.
The  Towne  or  ^j^  common  people  together  with  one  of  our  African
Segelmesse  Cosmographers,  called  Bicri,  suppose  that  the  Towne  of
Segelmesse  was  built  by  Alexander  the  Great,  for  the
reliefe  of  his  sicke  and  wounded  Souldiers.  Which
opinion  seemeth  not  probable  to  me :  for  I  could  never
reade  that  Alexander  the  Great  came  into  any  part  of  these
Regions.  This  Towne  was  situate  upon  a  Plaine  neere
unto  the  River  of  Ziz,  and  was  environed  with  most
stately  and  high  wals,  even  as  in  many  places  it  is  to  be
seene  at  this  present.  When  the  Mahumetans  came  first
into  Africa,  the  Inhabitants  of  this  Towne  were  subject
unto  the  Family  of  Zeneta ;  which  Family  was  at  length
dispossessed  of  that  authority  by  King  Joseph  the  Sonne
of  Tesfin,  of  the  Family  of  Luntuna.  The  Towne  it  selfe
was  very  gallantly  built,  and  the  Inhabitants  were  rich,

510

JOHN LEO ON AFRICA  a.d.

c.  1526.
and  had  great  traffique  unto  the  Land  of  Negros.  Here
stood  stately  Temples  and  Colledges  also,  and  great  store
of  Conduits,  the  water  whereof  was  drawne  out  of  the
River  by  Wheeles.  The  Ayre  in  this  place  is  most  tem-
perate and  holesome,  saving  that  in  Winter  it  aboundeth
with  overmuch  moysture.

Ummelhesen  is  a  forlorne  and  base  Castle,  founded  by  The  Castle  of
the  Arabians  also,  five  and  twentie  miles  from  Segelmesse  Ummelhesen.
upon  a  Desart,  directly  in  the  way  from  Segelmesse  to
Dara.  It  is  environed  with  blacke  wals,  and  continually
garded  by  the  Arabians.  All  Merchants  that  passe  by,
pay  one  fourth  part  of  a  Duckat  for  every  Camels  lode.
My  selfe  travelling  this  way  upon  a  time  in  the  company
of  fourteene  Jewes,  and  being  demanded  how  many  there
were  of  us,  wee  said  thirteene,  but  after  I  began  particu-
larly to  reckon,  I  found  the  fourteenth  and  the  fifteenth
man  amongst  us,  whom  the  Arabians  would  have  kept
Prisoners,  had  wee  not  affirmed  them  to  bee  Mahumetans  :
howbeit  not  crediting  our  words,  they  examined  them  in
the  Law  of  Mahumet,  which  when  they  perceived  them
indeed  to  understand,  they  permitted  them  to  depart.

The  three  Castles  of  Fighig  stand  upon  a  certaine  The  Castles  of
Desart,  marvellously  abounding  with  Dates.  The  women  ^£%-
of  this  place  weave  a  kind  of  cloth  in  forme  of  a  Carpet,
which  is  so  fine,  that  a  man  would  take  it  to  be  Silke,  and
this  Cloth  they  sell  at  an  excessive  rate  at  Fez,  Telensin,
and  other  places  of  Barbarie.  The  Inhabitants  being  men
of  an  excellent  wit,  doe  part  of  them  use  Traffique  to  the
Land  of  Negros,  and  the  residue  become  Students  at  Fez  :
and  so  soone  as  they  have  attayned  to  the  degree  of  a
Doctor,  they  returne  to  Numidia,  where  they  are  made
either  Priests  or  Senators,  and  prove  most  of  them  men  of
great  wealth  and  reputation.  From  Segelmesse,  the  said
Castles  are  distant  almost  an  hundred  and  fiftie  miles
Eastward.

This  great  and  large  Region  of  Tegorarin  in  the  Numi- The  Region  of
dian  Desart,  standing  about  an  hundred  and  twentie  miles  Tegorarin.
Eastward  of  Tesebit,  contayneth  fiftie  Castles,  and  above

511

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

c.  1526.

an  hundred  Villages,  and  yeeldeth  great  plentie  of  Dates.
The  Inhabitants  are  rich,  and  have  ordinarie  Traffique  to
the  Land  of  Negros.  Their  fields  are  very  apt  for  Corne,
and  yet  by  reason  of  their  extreme  drought,  they  stand  in
need  of  continuall  watering  and  dunging.  They  allow
unto  strangers  houses  to  dwell  in,  requiring  no  money  for
rent  but  onely  their  dung,  which  they  keepe  most  charily :
yea,  they  take  it  in  ill  part  if  any  stranger  easeth  himselfe
without  the  doores.  Flesh  is  very  scarce  among  them :
for  their  soyle  is  so  dry,  that  it  will  scarce  nourish  any
Cattell  at  all :  they  keepe  a  few  Goats  indeed  for  their
Milkes  sake :  but  the  flesh  that  they  eate  is  of  Camels,
which  the  Arabians  bring  unto  their  Markets  to  sell :  they
mingle  their  meate  with  salt  Tallow,  which  is  brought  into
this  Region  from  Fez  and  Tremizen.  There  were  in
Jewes  times  past  many  rich  Jewes  in  this  Region,  who  by  the

expe  e  .  meanes  of  a  certaine  Mahumetan  Preacher,  were  at  length

expelled,  and  a  great  part  of  them  slaine  by  the  seditious
people ;  and  that  in  the  very  same  yeare  when  the  Jewes
were  expelled  out  of  Spaine  and  Sicily.
[II.  vi.  825.]  The  ancient  Towne  of  Techort  was  built  by  the  Numi-
ozvne  or  ^ians  Up0n  a  certaine  Hill,  by  the  foot  whereof  runneth
a  River,  upon  which  River  standeth  a  draw-bridge.  The
wall  of  this  Towne  was  made  of  free  stone  and  lime,  but
that  part  which  is  next  unto  the  Mountayne  hath  instead
of  a  wall  an  impregnable  Rocke  opposite  against  it :  this
Towne  is  distant  five  hundred  miles  Southward  from  the
Mediterran  Sea,  and  about  three  hundred  miles  from
Tegorarim.  Families  it  contayneth  to  the  number  of  five
and  twenty  hundred :  all  the  houses  are  built  of  Sunne
dryed  Brickes,  except  their  Temple  which  is  somewhat
more  stately.  Heere  dwell  great  store  both  of  Gentle-
men and  Artificers :  and  because  they  have  great  abund-
ance of  Dates,  and  are  destitute  of  Corne,  the  Merchants
of  Constantina  exchange  Corne  with  them  for  their  Dates.
Hospitalitie  All  strangers  they  favour  exceedingly,  and  friendly  dis-
a"?*l™l?°  misse  them  without  paying  of  ought.  They  had  rather
match  their  Daughters  unto  strangers,  then  to  their  owne

S12

strangers.

JOHN LEO ON AFRICA  a.d.

c.  1526.
Citizens  :  and  for  a  Dowry  they  give  some  certaine  portion
of  Land,  as  it  is  accustomed  in  some  places  of  Europe.
So  great  and  surpassing  is  their  liberalitie,  that  they  will
heape  many  gifts  upon  strangers,  albeit  they  are  sure
never  to  see  them  againe.

The  Governour  at  this  present  called  Habdulla,  is  a
valiant  and  liberall  yong  Prince,  and  most  courteous  unto
strangers,  whereof  I  my  selfe  conversing  with  him  for
certayne  dayes,  had  good  experience.

This  Region  is  extremely  hot,  sandie  and  destitute  both
of  Water  and  Corne :  which  wants  are  partly  supplyed
by  their  abundance  of  Dates.  It  contayneth  to  the  num-
ber of  five  Townes  and  many  Villages,  all  which  we  pur-
pose in  order  to  describe.

Their soyle in Pescara, yeeldeth nought but Dates. The  Towne  of
They  have  beene  governed  by  divers  Princes ; for  they
were  a  while  subject  unto  the  Kings  of  Tunis,  and  that  to
the death of  King Hutmen, after whom succeeded a
Mahumetan  Priest : neyther  could  the  Kings  of  Tunis
ever  since  that  time  recover  the  Dominion  of  Pescara.
Here  are  great  abundance  of  Scorpions,  and  it  is  present  P***?
death  to  bee  stung  by  them : wherefore  all  the  Townes- corPlons-
men  in  a  manner  depart  into  the  Countrey  in  Summer
time,  where  they  remayne  till  the  moneth  of  November.

Not  farre  from  Deusen  are  divers  Monuments  of  An-  Deusen.
tiquitie  like  unto  Sepulchres,  wherein  are  found  sundry
pieces  of  Silver  Coyne,  adorned  with  certayne  Letters  and
Hieroglyphicall Figures, the interpretation whereof I
could  never  find  out.

The  ancient  Towne  of  Caphsa  built  also  by  the  The  Towne  of
Romanes,  had  for  certayne  yeeres  a  Governour  of  their  CaPhsa-
owne :  but  afterward  being  sacked  by  one  Hucba  a  Cap-
taine  of  Hutmen  Califa,  the  wals  thereof  were  razed  to
the  ground ;  but  the  Castle  as  yet  remayneth,  and  is  of
great  force ;  for  the  wall  thereof  being  five  and  twentie
Cubits  high,  and  five  Cubits  thicke,  is  made  of  excellent
stones,  like  unto  the  stones  of  Vespasians  Amphitheatre
at  Rome. Afterward  the  Towne  wals  were  re-edified,

V  SI3  2K

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

c.  1526.

and  were  destroyed  againe  by  Mansor,  who  having  slaine
the  Governour  of  the  Towne  and  all  the  Inhabitants,
appointed  a  new  Governour  over  the  same  place.  Now
this  Towne  is  very  populous,  all  the  houses  thereof,  ex-
cept the  Temple  and  a  few  other  buildings,  being  very
deformed  and  base,  and  the  streets  are  paved  with  blacke
stones,  like  unto  the  streets  of  Naples  and  Florence.  The
poore  Inhabitants  are  continually  oppressed  with  the  exac-
tions of  the  King  of  Tunis.  In  the  middest  of  the  Towne
are  certaine  square,  large,  and  deepe  Fountaines  walled
round  about,  the  water  whereof  is  hot  and  unfit  to  be
drunke,  unlesse  it  be  set  an  houre  or  two  a  cooling.  The
Ayre  of  this  place  is  very  unholesome,  insomuch  that  the
greatest  part  of  the  Inhabitants  are  continually  sicke  of
Fevers.  People  they  are  of  a  rude  and  illiberall  disposi-
tion, and  unkind  unto  strangers :  wherefore  they  are  had
in  great  contempt  by  all  other  Africans.  Not  farre  from
this  Towne  are  fields  abounding  with  Dates,  Olives,  and
Pome-citrons  :  and  the  Dates  and  Olives  there  are  the  best
in  all  the  whole  Province :  heere  is  likewise  most  excel-
lent Oyle.  The  Inhabitants  make  themselves  Shooes  of
Buckes  Leather.

Having  hitherto  described  all  the  Regions  of  Numidia,
let  us  now  proceed  unto  the  description  of  Libya ;  which
is  divided  into  five  parts,  as  we  signified  in  the  beginning
of  this  our  Discourse.  We  will  therefore  beginne  at  the
dry  and  forlorne  Desart  of  Zanhaga,  which  bordereth
Westward  upon  the  Ocean  Sea,  and  extendeth  Eastward
to  the  Salt-pits  of  Tegaza,  Northward  it  abutteth  upon
Sus,  Haccha,  and  Dara,  Regions  of  Numidia  ;  and  South-
ward it  stretcheth  to  the  Land  of  Negros,  adjoyning  it
selfe  unto  the  Kingdomes  of  Gualata  and  Tombuto.
Water  scarce.  Water  is  here  to  be  found  scarce  in  an  hundred  miles
travell,  beeing  salt  and  unsavourie,  and  drawne  out  of
deepe  Wels,  especially  in  the  way  from  Segelmesse  to
Tombuto.  Heere  are  great  store  of  wilde  beasts  and
creeping  things,  whereof  wee  will  make  mention  in  place
convenient. In this Region there is a barren Desart

5*4

JOHN LEO ON AFRICA  a.d.

c.  1526.
called  Azaoad,  wherein  neyther  water  nor  any  Habitations
are  to  be  found  in  the  space  of  an  hundred  miles ;  begin-
ning from  the  Well  of  Azaoad,  to  the  Well  of  Araoan,
which  is  distant  from  Tombuto  about  one  hundred  and
fiftie  miles.  Here  both  for  lacke  of  water  and  extremitie  Heate  an^
of  heate,  great  numbers  of  men  and  beast  daily  perish. roug  tm

Not  farre  from  Agadez,  there  is  found  great  store  of  ^eat  store  °f
Manna,  which  the  Inhabitants  gather  in  certaine  little
Vessels,  carrying  it  while  it  is  new  unto  the  Market  of
Agadez :  and  this  Manna  beeing  mingled  with  water  they  [II.  vi.  826.]
esteeme  very  daintie  and  precious  Drinke.  They  put  it
also  into  their  Pottage,  and  beeing  so  taken,  it  hath  a  mar-
vellous force  of  refrigerating  or  cooling,  which  is  the
cause  that  here  are  so  few  Diseases ;  albeit,  the  Ayre  of
Tombuto  and  Agadez  be  most  unholsome  and  corrupt.
This  Desart  stretcheth  from  North  to  South  almost  three
hundred  miles.

The  residue  of  the  Libyan  Desart,  that  is  to  say,  from  Levata,
Augela  to  the  River  of  Nilus  is  inhabited  by  certayne  Be^oay  ***
Arabians  and  Africans,  commonly  called  Levata :  and  this  Qm-ttte^
is  the  extreme  Easterly  part  of  the  Desarts  of  Libya.

This  Region  bordering  upon  the  Ocean  Sea,  contayneth  The  Region  of
many  Villages  and  Hamlets,  and  is  inhabited  with  most  Nun-
beggerly  people.  It  standeth  betweene  Numidia  and
Libya,  but  somewhat  neerer  unto  Libya.  Here  groweth
neyther  Barley  nor  any  other  Corne.  Some  Dates  heere
are,  but  very  unsavourie.  The  Inhabitants  are  continu-
ally molested  by  the  Arabians  invasions  :  and  some  of  them
traffique  in  the  Kingdome  of  Gualata.

In  the  Region  of  Tegaza,  is  great  store  of  Salt  digged, The  Region  of
being  whiter  then  any  Marble. This  Salt  is  taken  out  of e£aza-
certaine  Caves  or  Pits,  at  the  entrance  whereof  stand  their
Cottages  that  worke  in  the  Salt  Mines. And  these  Work-  Salt  Mines.
men  are  all  strangers,  who  sell  the  Salt  which  they  digge
unto  certaine  Merchants,  that  carrie  the  same  upon  Camels
to  the  Kingdome  of  Tombuto,  where  there  would  other-  Tombuto.
wise  be  extreme  scarcitie  of  Salt. Neyther  have  the  said
Diggers  of  Salt  any  victuals  but  such  as  the  Merchants

5J5

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

c.  1526.

bring  unto  them :  for  they  are  distant  from  all  inhabited
places,  almost  twentie  dayes  Journey,  insomuch,  that
oftentimes  they  perish  for  lacke  of  food,  when  as  the  Mer-
chants come  not  in  due  time  unto  them :  Moreover,  the
South-east  wind  doth  so  often  blind  them,  that  they  cannot
live  here  without  great  perill.  I  my  selfe  continued  three
dayes  amongst  them,  all  which  time  I  was  constrayned  to
drinke  Salt  water  drawne  out  of  certaine  Wels  not  farre
from  the  Salt  Pits.
The  Region  Berdoa,  a  Region  situate  in  the  midst  of  the  Libyan

Berdoa.  Desart, and standing almost five hundred miles from

Nilus,  contayneth  three  Castles  and  five  or  sixe  Villages,
abounding  with  most  excellent  Dates. And  the  said  three
Castles  were discovered  eighteene  yeeres  agoe, by  one
A  whole  Hamar,  in  manner  following :  the  Caravan  of  Merchants

j  m?Vfh  C°n~  wandring  out  of  the  direct  way,  had  a  certaine  blind  man
ducted  fry  a  o  j  ?

blind  Guide  *n  their  company  which  was  acquainted  with  all  those
who  lead  them  Regions :  this  blind  Guide  riding  foremost  upon  his
by  scent  onely ;  Camell,  commanded  some  Sand  to  be  given  him  at  every
as  at  this  rniles  end,  by  the  smell  whereof  hee  declared  the  situation
Caravans  of  °^  t^le  place  :  but  when  they  were  come  within  fortie  miles
Maroco  are  of  this  Region,  the  blind  man  smelling  of  the  Sand,
conducted  over  affirmed,  that  they  were  not  farre  from  some  places  in-
the  Libyan  habited ;  which  some  beleeved  not,  for  they  knew  that
Tombuto  ^ey  were  distant  from  Egypt  foure  hundred  and  eightie

miles,  so  that  they  tooke  themselves  to  bee  neerer  unto
Augela.  Howbeit,  within  three  dayes  they  found  the
said  three  Castles,  the  Inhabitants  whereof  wondering  at
the  approach  of  strangers,  and  being  greatly  astonied,  pre-
sently shut  all  their  Gates,  and  would  give  the  Merchants
no  water  to  quench  their  extreme  thirst.  But  the  Mer-
chants by  mayne  force  entred,  and  having  gotten  water
sufficient,  betooke  themselves  againe  to  their  Journey.
The  Region  of  Alguechet  also  being  a  Region  of  the  Lybian  Desart,
guec  et.  -s  from  Egypt  an  hundred  and  twentie  miles  distant.
Here  are  three  Castles  and  many  Villages  abounding  with
Dates.  The  Inhabitants  are  blacke,  vile,  and  covetous
people,  and  yet  exceeding  rich : for  they  dwell  in  the

JOHN LEO ON AFRICA  a.d.

c.  1526.
midway  betweene  Egypt  and  Gaoga. They  have  a  Gover-
nour  of  their  owne, notwithstanding  they  pay  Tribute
unto  the  next  Arabians.

§.  VII.

Extracts  taken  out  of  John  Leo  his  seventh  Booke
of  the  Historie  of  Africa,  wherein  he  intreateth
of  the  Land  of  Negros,  and  of  the  Confines  of
Egypt.

Ur  ancient  Chroniclers  of  Africa,  to  wit,  Bichri  and  Btchri  **4
Meshudi,  knew  nothing  in  the  Land  of  Negros,  Meshudu
but  onely  the  Regions  of  Guechet  and  Cano :  for
in  their  time  all  other  places  of  the  Land  of  Negros  were
undiscovered. But  in the  yeere  of  the Hegeira three
hundred  and  eightie,  by  the  meanes  of  a  certaine  Mahu-
metan  which  came  into  Barbarie,  the  residue  of  the  said
Land  was  found  out,  beeing  as  then  inhabited  by  great
numbers  of  people,  which  lived  a  brutish  and  savage  life,
without  any  King,  Governour,  Common-wealth,  or  know-
ledge  of Husbandry. Clad they were in skinnes of  Nfgro9Bar6a-
beasts,  neither  had  they  any  peculiar  wives : in  the  day  rJ?9i  ,am£es-
time  they  kept  their  Cattell ; and  when  night  came  they
resorted  ten  or  twelve,  both  men  and  women  into  one
Cottage  together,  using  hayrie  skinnes  in  stead  of  beds,
and  each  man  choosing  his  Leman  which  hee  had  most
fancie  unto. Warre  they  wTage  against  no  other  Nation,
nor  yet  are  desirous  to  travell  out  of  their  owne  Countrey. [II.  vi.  827.]
Some  of  them  performe  great  adoration  unto  the  Sunne-
rising :  others,  namely  the  people  of  Gualata,  worship  the
fire :  and  some  others,  to  wit,  the  Inhabitants  of  Gaoga,
approach  (after  the  Egyptians  manner)  neerer  unto  the
Christian  Faith. These  Negros  were  first  subject  unto ^flfc  Negros
King  Joseph  the  Founder  of  Maroco,  and  afterward  unto  SfJ^h^  of
the  five  Nations  of  Libya ; of  whom  they  learned  the Maroco.
Mahumetan  Law,  and  divers  needfull  handi-crafts  :  a  while
after  when the Merchants  of  Barbarie  began  to  resort
unto  them  with  Merchandize,  they  learned  the  Barbarian

Si7

A.D.

c.  1526.

Abuacre
Izchia.

Mecca.

Niger.

A  description
of  the

Kingdotne  of
Gualata.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

language  also.  But  the  foresaid  five  people  or  Nations  of
Libya  divided  this  land  so  among  themselves,  that  every
third  part  of  each  Nation  possessed  one  Region.  How-
beit,  the  King  of  Tombuto  that  now  raigneth,  called
Abuacre  Izchia,  is  a  Negro  by  birth :  this  Abuacre  after
the  decease  of  the  former  King,  who  was  a  Lybyan  borne,
slue  all  his  sonnes,  and  so  usurped  the  Kingdome.  And
having  by  warres  for  the  space  of  fifteene  yeere  conquered
many  large  Dominions>hee  then  concluded  a  league  with
all  Nations,  and  went  on  Pilgrimage  to  Mecca,  in  which
Journey  hee  so  consumed  his  Treasure,  that  he  was  con-
strained to  borrow  great  summes  of  money  of  other
Princes.  Moreover,  the  fifteene  Kingdomes  of  the  land
of  Negros  knowen  to  us,  are  all  situate  upon  the  River  of
Niger,  and  upon  other  Rivers  which  fall  therinto.  And
all  the  land  of  Negros  standeth  betweene  two  vast  De-
sarts,  for  on  the  one  side  lyeth  the  maine  Desart  betweene
Numidia  and  it,  which  extendeth  it  selfe  unto  this  very
land :  and  the  South  side  thereof  adjoyneth  upon  another
Desart,  which  stretcheth  from  thence  to  the  maine  Ocean :
in  which  Desart  are  infinite  Nations  unknowen  to  us,
both  by  reason  of  the  huge  distance  of  place,  and  also  in
regard  of  the  diversitie  of  Languages  and  Religions.
They  have  no  traffique  at  all  with  our  people,  but  we  have
heard  oftentimes  of  their  traffique  with  the  Inhabitants
of  the  Ocean  Sea  shoare.

The  Region  of  Gualata  in  regard  of  others  is  very
small :  for  it  containeth  onely  three  great  Villages,  with
certaine  Granges  and  fields  of  Dates.  From  Nun  it  is
distant  Southward  about  three  hundred,  from  Tombuto
Northward  five  hundred,  and  from  the  Ocean  Sea  about
two  hundred  miles.  In  this  Region  the  people  of  Libya,
while  they  were  Lords  of  the  land  of  Negros,  ordained
their  chiefe  Princely  seate :  and  then  great  store  of  Bar-
barie  Merchants  frequented  Gualata :  but  afterward  in  the
Raigne  of  the  Mightie  and  rich  Prince  Heli,  the  said
Merchants  leaving  Gualata,  began  to  resort  unto  Tombuto
and  Gago,  which  was  the  occasion  that  the  Region  of

5*8

JOHN LEO ON AFRICA  a.d.

c.  1526.
Gualata  grew  extreme  beggerly.  The  language  of  this
Region  is  called  Sungai,  and  the  Inhabitants  are  blacke
people,  and  most  friendly  unto  strangers.  In  my  time
this  Region  was  conquered  by  the  King  of  Tombuto,  and
the  Prince  thereof  fled  into  the  Desarts,  whereof  the  King
of  Tombuto  having  intelligence,  and  fearing  least  the
Prince  would  returne  with  all  the  people  of  the  Desarts,
graunted  him  peace,  conditionally  that  he  should  pay  a
great  yeerely  Tribute  unto  him,  and  so  the  said  Prince
hath  remained  Tributarie  to  the  King  of  Tombuto  untill
this  present.  The  people  agree  in  manners  and  fashions
with  the  Inhabitants  of  the  next  Desart. Heere  groweth Th"  rounf  &

o  ZVulte t>lilS6 IS

some  quantity  of  Mil-seed,  and  great  store  of  a  round  ca//ej  Maiz

and  white  kinde  of  pulse,  the  like  whereof  I  never  saw  in  in  the  West

Europe ; but  flesh  is  extreme  scarce  among  them. Both  Indies.
the  men  and  the  women  doe  so  cover  their  heads,  that  all
their  countenance  is  almost  hidden. Heere  is  no  forme
of  a  Common-wealth,  nor  yet  any  Governours  or  Judges,
but  the  people  lead  a  most  miserable  life.

The  Kingdome  called  by  the  Merchants  of  our  Nation  A  description

Gheneoa,  by  the  naturall  Inhabitants  thereof  Genni,  and  jm*  \Jn^'

by  the  Portugals  and  other  people  of  Europe  Ghinea,  GMnea.

standeth  in  the  midst  betweene  Gualata  on  the  North,  We  extend  the

Tombuto  on  the  East,  and  the  Kingdome  of  Melli  on  the  Countrey  °f

South. In  length  it  containeth  almost  five  hundred  miles,  f™!***  l„

and  extended  two  hundred  and  fifty  miles  along  the  River  applying  the

of  Niger,  and  bordereth  upon  the  Ocean  Sea  in  the  same  name  knowen

place,  where  Niger  falleth  into  the  said  Sea. This  place  t0  th*  remote

exceedingly  aboundeth  with  Barley,  Rice,  Cattell,  Fishes,  Refons

<->  j  j  j  j  ?  } unknowen,

and  Cotten  :  and  their  Cotten  they  sell  unto  the  Merchants  7^  naturall
of  Barbarie,  for  cloth  of  Europe,  for  Brazen  vessels,  for  commodities  of
Armour,  and  other  such  commodities. Their  Coine  is  of  Ghinea.
Gold  without  any  stampe  or  inscription  at  all :  they  have
certaine  Iron-money  also,  which  they  use  about  matters  of
small  value,  some  peeces  whereof  weigh  a  pound,  some
halfe  a  pound,  and  some  one  quarter  of  a  pound. In  all
this  Kingdome  there  is  no  fruit  to  be  found  but  only
Dates,  which  are  brought  hither  either  out  of  Gualata  or

5J9

a.d.  PURCRAS HIS PILGRIMES

c.  1526.

Numidia. Heere is neither  Towne nor Castle, but a

certaine  great  Village  onely,  wherein  the  Prince  of  Ghinea,

together  with  his  Priests,  Doctors,  Merchants,  and  all  the

principall  men  of  the  Region  inhabite. The  walles  of  their

houses  are  built  of  Chalke,  and  the  roofes  are  covered  with

Strawe :  the  Inhabitants  are  clad  in  blacke  or  blew  Cotten,

Priests,  y wherewith  they  cover  their  heads  also : but  the  Priests

Doctors  clothed  anc[  Doctors  of  their  Law  goe  apparelled  in  white  Cotten.

This  Region  during  the  three  moneths  of  July,  August,

and  September,  is  yeerely  environed  with  the  overflowings

of  Niger  in manner  of  an Hand ; all  which time  the

Merchants of Tombuto conveigh their Merchandize

hither  in  certaine  Canoas  or  narrow  Boats  made  of  one

tree,  which  they  rowe  all  the  day  long,  but  at  night  they

binde  them  to  the  shoare,  and  lodge  themselves  upon  the

land. This  Kingdome  was  subject  in  times  past  unto  a

certaine  people  or  Libya,  and  became  afterward  Tributarie

unto  King  Soni  Heli,  after  whom  succeeded  Soni  Heli

[II.  vi.  828.]  Izchia,  who  kept  the  Prince  of  this  Region  prisoner  at

The  Prince  of  Gago, where together with a certaine Nobleman, he
Guinea  kept  • 1  1 j- j

aWm..**  ti miserably  died.

prisoner  by  /  r  f%,  .  ** %

Izchia.  The  Region  of  Mem  extending  it  selfe  almost  three

The  Kingdom  hundred  miles  along  the  side  of  a  River  which  falleth
ofMellu  into  Niger,  bordereth  Northward  upon  the  Region  last
described,  Southward  upon  certaine  Desarts  and  drie
Mountaines,  Westward,  upon  huge  Woods  and  Forrests,
stretching  to  the  Ocean  Sea  shoare,  And  Eastward  upon
the  Territorie  of  Gago.  In  this  Kingdome  there  is  a
large  and  ample  Village  containing  to  the  number  of  sixe
thousand  or  moe  Families,  and  called  MelH,  whereof  the
whole  Kingdome  is  so  named.  And  heere  the  King  hath
his  place  of  Residence.  The  Region  it  selfe  yeeldeth  great
abundance  of  Corne,  Flesh,  and  Cotton.  Heere  are  many
Artificers  and  Merchants  in  all  places  :  and  yet  the  King
honorably  entertaineth  all  strangers.  The  Inhabitants  are
rich,  and  have  plenty  of  wares.  Heere  are  great  store  of
Professors.  Temples,  Priests,  and  Professors,  which  Professors  read
their  Lectures  onely  in  the  Temples,  because  they  have  no

520

JOHN LEO ON AFRICA  ad.

c.  1526.
Colledges  at  all. The  people  of  this  Region  excell  all
other  Negros  in  wit,  civility,  and  industry ; and  were  the
first  that  embraced  the  Law  of  Mahumet,  at  the  same  time
when  the  Uncle  of  Joseph  the  King  of  Maroco  was  their
Prince,  and  the  Government  remained  for  a  while  unto
his  posteritie  :  at  length  Izchia  subdued  the  Prince  of  this  Tie  Prince  of
Region,  and  made  him  his  Tributarie,  and  so  oppressed  Melh  subdued
him  with  grievous  exactions,  that  he  was  scarce  able  to
maintaine  his  Family.

Tombuto  is  so  called  of  a  certaine  Towne  so  called, Tie  Kingdom
which  (they  say)  King  Mense  Suleiman  founded  in  the  °£ om  uto.
yeere  of  the  Hegeira  610.  and  it  is  situate  within  twelve  conquered  by
miles  of  a  certaine  branch  of  Niger,  all  the  houses  whereof  the  King  of
are now changed into Cottages built of Chalke, and  Mmc$  1589.
covered  with  Thatch. Howbeit,  there  is  a  most  stately  ^™J%*Z*C*
Temple  to  be  seene,  the  walles  whereof  are  made  of  stone  yeere/y
and  lime  ;  and  a  Princely  Palace  also  built  by  a  most  excel-  Tribute
lent  workeman  of  Granada. Heere  are  many  shops  of  mighty  sums  of
Artificers,  and  Merchants,  and  especially  of  such  as  weave  mf**J\fut

t  1  the  civil  zvars

Linnen  or  Cotten  cloth. And  hither  doe  the  Barbarie  have  aitere^

Merchants  bring  cloth  of  Europe. All  the  women  of  this  that  state  since.
Region  except  Maid-servants  goe  with  their  faces  covered,
and sell all necessary victuals. The Inhabitants, and
especially strangers there residing, are exceeding rich,

insomuch,  that  the  King  that  *  now  is,  married  both  his  ^1526.

daughters  unto two  rich Merchants. Heere  are  many  The  King  of

welles,  containing  most  sweet  water ; and  so  often  as  the  Tombuto  his

River  Niger  overfloweth,  they  conveigh  the  water  thereof  au£  ,e™

o  * j  o  married  unto

by  certaine  sluces  into  the  Towne. Corne,  Cattell,  Milke,  two  rich

and  Butter,  this  Region  yeeldeth  in  great  abundance  :  but  merchants.

salt  is  very  scarce  heere; for  it  is  brought  hither  by  land  Great  scarcity

from  Tegaza,  which  is  five  hundred  miles  distant. When  °L f tn

I  my  selfe  was  heere,  I  saw  one  Camels  load  of  Salt  sold  w^c^  co'm_

for  eightie  Duckats. The  rich  King  of  Tombuto  hath  modify  might

many  Plates  and  Scepters  of  Gold,  some  whereof  weigh  &  supplied  by

one  thousand  and  three  hundred  pounds :  and  he  keepes  a  °™'  En&luh

magnificent  and  well  furnished  Court. When  he  travel-  the-tr  mspea^

leth  any  whither  he  rideth  upon  a  Camell,  which  is  lead  by  able  gaine.

521

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

c.  1526.

some  of  his  Noblemen  ;  and  so  he  doth  likewise  when  hee

goeth  to  warfare,  and  all  his  Souldiers  ride  upon  Horses.

Reverence Whosoever  will  speake  unto  this  King  must  first  fall  downe

used  before  the  before  his  feet,  and  then  taking  up  earth,  must  sprinkle

Tombuto. **  uPon  his  owne  head  and  shoulders : which  custome  is

ordinarily  observed  by  them  that  never  saluted  the  King

before,  or  come  as  Ambassadours  from  other  Princes. He

hath alwayes three thousand Horsemen, and a great

Poysoned number  of  footmen  that  shoot  poysoned  arrowes,  attending

arrowes.  upon  him. He  so  deadly  hateth  all  Jewes,  that  he  will

not  admit  any  into  his  Citie  : and  whatsoever  Barbarie

Merchants  he  understandeth  to  have  any  dealings  with  the

Jewes,  he  presently  causeth  their  goods  to  be  confiscate.

Heere  are  great  store  of  Doctors,  Judges,  Priests,  and

other  learned  men,  that  are  bountifully  maintained  at  the

Kings  cost  and  charges. And  hither  are  brought  divers

Bookes.  Manuscripts  or  written  Bookes  out  of  Barbarie,  which  are

sold  for  more  money  then  any  other  Merchandize. The

Coine  of  Tombuto  is  of  Gold  without  any  stampe  or

superscription  : but  in  matters  of  small  value  they  use

Shels  used  for certaine  shels  brought  hither  out  of  the  Kingdome  of

Lowe  tike  as persja5  foure  hundred  of  which  shels  are  woorth  a  Duckat :

ldome  of  Congo  an<^  s*xe  Peeces  °f  their  Golden  Coine  with  two  third  parts
weigh  an  ounce.  The  Inhabitants  are  people  of  a  gentle
and  cheerefull  disposition,  and  spend  a  great  part  of  the
night  in  singing  and  dancing  through  all  the  streets  of  the
Citie :  they  keepe  great  store  of  men  and  women-slaves,
and  their  Towne  is  much  in  danger  of  fire :  at  my  second
being  there  halfe  the  Towne  almost  was  burnt  in  five
houres  space.  Without  the  Suburbs  there  are  no  Gardens
nor  Orchards  at  all.
The  Towne  of  Cabra  a  large  Towne  built  without  walles  in  manner  of
Cabra.  a  Village, standeth  about twelve  miles from  Tombuto

upon  the  River  Niger :  and  heere  such  Merchants  as
travell  unto  the  Kingdomes  of  Ghinea  and  Melli  embarke
themselves.  Neither  are  the  people  or  buildings  of  this
Towne  any  whit  inferiour  to  the  people  and  buildings  of
Tombuto  :  and  hither  the  Negros  resort  in  great  numbers

522

JOHN LEO ON AFRICA  a.d.

c.  1526.
by  water.  In  this  Towne  the  King  of  Tombuto  appoin-
teth  a  Judge  to  decide  all  controversies :  for  it  was  tedious
to  goe  thither  so  oft  as  need  should  require.  I  my  selfe
am  acquainted  with  Abu  Bacr,  sirnamed  Pargama,  the
Kings  Brother,  who  is  blacke  in  colour,  but  most  beautifull
in  mind  and  conditions.  Heere  breed  many  diseases
which  exceedingly  diminish  the  people ;  that  by  reason  of
the  fond  and  loathsome  mixture  of  their  meates ;  for  they
mingle  Fish,  Milke,  Butter,  and  Flesh  altogether.  And
this  is  the  ordinary  food  also  in  Tombuto.

The  great  Towne  of  Gago  being  unwalled  also,  is  dis-  [H.  yi.  829.]
tant  Southward  of  Tombuto  almost  foure  hundred  miles,  The  lr*L
and  enclineth  somewhat  to  the  South-East.  The  houses  0fQan0a,
thereof  are  but  meane,  except  those  wherein  the  King  and
his  Courtiers  remaine.  Here  are  exceeding  rich  Mer-
chants :  and  hither  continually  resort  great  store  of  Negros,
which  buy  Cloath  here  brought  out  of  Barbarie  and
Europe.  This  Towne  aboundeth  with  Corne  and  Flesh,
but  is  much  destitute  of  Wine,  Trees,  and  Fruites.  How-
beit,  here  is  plenty  of  Melons,  Citrons,  and  Rice :  here
are  many  Wells  also  containing  most  sweet  and  wholsome
water.  Here  is  likewise  a  certaine  place  where  slaves  are
to  be  sold,  especially  upon  such  dayes  as  the  Merchants
use  to  assemble ;  and  a  young  slave  of  fifteene  yeares  age
is  sold  for  sixe  Duckats,  and  so  are  children  sold  also.
The  King  of  this  Region  hath  a  certaine  private  Palace,
wherein  hee  maintaineth  a  great  number  of  Concubines
and  Slaves,  which  are  kept  by  Eunuches :  and  for  the
guard  of  his  owne  person,  he  keepeth  a  sufficient  troope  of
Horsemen  and  Footmen.  Betweene  the  first  Gate  of  the
Palace  and  the  inner  part  thereof,  there  is  a  place  walled
round  about,  wherein  the  King  himselfe  decideth  all  his
subjects  controversies :  and  albeit,  the  King  be  in  this
function  most  diligent,  and  performeth  all  things  thereto
appertaining,  yet  hath  he  about  him  his  Counsellors,  and
other  Officers ;  as  namely,  his  Secretaries,  Treasurers,
Factors,  and  Auditors.  It  is  a  wonder  to  see  what  plenty
of  Merchandize  is  daily  brought  hither,  and  how  costly

523

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

c.  1526.

and  sumptuous  all  things  be.  Horses  bought  in  Europe
for  ten  Duckats,  are  here  sold  againe  for  forty,  and  some-
Rich  sale  for  times  for  fifty  Duckats  a  piece.  There  is  not  any  Cloath
of  Europe  so  course,  which  will  not  here  be  sold  for  foure
Ducats  an  ell ;  and  if  it  be  any  thing  fine,  they  will  give
fifteene  Duckats  for  an  ell :  and  an  ell  of  the  Scarlet  of
Venice,  or  of  Turkie  Cloath  is  here  worth  thirty  Duckats.
Swords,  A  Sword  is  here  valued  at  three  or  foure  Crownes,  and  so

likewise  are  Spurs,  Bridles,  with  other  like  commodities ;
and  Spices  also  are  sold  at  an  high  rate  :  but  of  all  other
Salt  dear e. commodities,  Salt  is  most  extremely  deare. The  residue
of this Kingdome  containeth nought but  Villages and
Hamlets  inhabited  by  Husbandmen  and  Shepheards,  who
in  Winter  cover  their  bodies  with  beasts  skins ; but  in
Summer  they  goe  all  naked  save  their  privie  members :
and  sometimes  they  weare  upon  their  feete  certaine  shooes
made  of  Camels  Leather. They  are  ignorant  and  rude
people,  and  you  shall  scarce  find  one  learned  man  in  the
space  of  an  hundred  miles. They  are  continually  bur-
thened  with  grievous  exactions,  so  that  they  have  scarce
any  thing  remaining  to  live  upon.
Of  the  King- Guber standeth  Eastward of  the Kingdom  of  Gago
domeofGuber.  a]most  three  hundred  miles  ; between  which  two  King-
domes  lieth  a  vast  Desart,  being  much  destitute  of  water,
for  it  is  about  forty  miles  distant  from  Niger. The  King-
dome  of  Guber  is  environed  with  high  Mountaines,  and
containeth  many  Villages  inhabited  by  Shepheards,  and
other  Heardsmen. Abundance  of  Cattell  here  are  both
great  and  small :  but  of  a  lower  stature  then  the  Cattell  in
Their  manner  other  places. At  the  inundation  of  Niger  all  the  fields  of
of  sowing £j^s  Reprion  are  overflowed,  and  then  the  inhabitants  cast
Lome  at  the * . °,  .  ,  ,  T 1  • t-» •  1

Inundation  of  their  seed  into  the  water  onely. In  this  Region  there  is  a

Niger.  certaine great Village containing almost sixe thousand

Families, being  inhabited  with  all  kind  of  Merchants ;

The  King  of and  here  was  in  times  past  the  Court  of  a  certaine  King,

Guber  slaine W^Q  jn  my  time  was  slaine  by  Izchia  the  King  of  Tombuto,

™  and  his  sonnes  were  gelt,  and  accounted  among  the  number

of  the  Kings  Eunuchs.

524

JOHN LEO ON AFRICA  a.d.

c.  1526.

He  which  pleaseth  the  inhabitants  of  the  Desart  best,
is  sure  to  be  King  of  Agadez.  The  residue  of  this  King-
dome  lying  Southward  is  inhabited  by  Shepheards  and
Heardsmen,  wTho  dwel  in  certaine  Cottages  made  of  Cottages
boughes,  which  cottages  they  carrie  about  upon  Oxen  from
place  to  place.  They  erect  their  Cottages  alwaies  in  the
same  field  where  they  determine  to  feede  their  cattell ;
like  as  the  Arabians  also  doe.

The  great  Province  of  Cano  standeth  Eastward  of  the  The  Province
River  Niger  almost  five  hundred  miles.  The  greatest  ^
part  of  the  inhabitants  dwelling  in  Villages  are  some  of
them  Heardsmen,  and  others  Husbandmen.  Here  grow-
eth  abundance  of  Corne,  of  Rice,  and  of  Cotton.  Also
here  are  many  Desarts  and  wild  woodie  Mountaines  con-
taining many  Springs  of  water.  In  these  Woods  grow
plenty  of  wild  Citrons  and  Lemons,  which  differ  not  much
in  taste  from  the  best  of  all.  In  the  midst  of  this  Pro-
vince standeth  a  Towne  called  by  the  same  name,  the
walles  and  houses  whereof  are  built  for  the  most  part  of  a
kind  of  Chalke.  The  inhabitants  are  rich  Merchants,  and
most  civill  people.  Their  King  was  in  times  past  of  great
puissance,  and  had  mighty  troopes  of  Horsemen  at  his
command ;  but  he  hath  since  been  constrained  to  pay
tribute  unto  the  Kings  of  Zegzeg  and  Casena.  After-  The  Kings  of
ward,  Ischia  the  King  of  Tombuto  faining  friendship  unto c  j

the two foresaid Kings treacherously slew them both. of  Cano  sub-
And  then  hee  waged  warre  against  the  King  of  Cano,  duedbylzchia
whom  after  a  long  siedge  he  took,  and  compelled  him  to  the  Kin£  °f
marrie  one  of  his  daughters,  restoring  him  againe  to  his Tombuto-
Kingdome,  conditionally  that  he  should  pay  unto  him  the
third  part  of  all  his  tribute :  and  the  said  King  of  Tom-
buto hath  some  of  his  Courtiers  perpetually  residing  at
Cano  for  the  receit  thereof.

Casena  bordering  Eastward  upon the  Kingdome  last  The  Kingdome
described,  is  full  of  Mountaines,  and  drie  fields,  which  °J  Casena.
yeeld  notwithstanding  great  store  of  Barlie  and  Mill-seed.
The  inhabitants  are  all extremely  blacke, having  great
noses  and  blabber  lips. They  dwell  in  most  forlorne  and

525

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

c.  1526.

base  Cottages  :  neither  shall  you  find  any  of  their  Villages

containing  above  three  hundred  Families. And  besides,

their  base  estate  they  are  mightily  oppressed  with  famine :

[II.  yi.  830.]  a  King  they  had  in  times  past  whom  the  foresaid  Ischia

Izchia.  slew, since  whose  death they  have  all  beene  tributarie

unto  Ischia.
The  Kingdom  The  South-east  part  of  Zegzeg  bordereth  upon  Cano,
of  Zegzeg.  an(j  jt  -s  distal-  frQm  Casena  almost  an  hundred  and  fiftie
miles.  The  inhabitants  are  rich,  and  have  great  traffique
unto  other  Nations.  Some  part  of  this  Kingdome  is
plaine,  and  the  residue  Mountainous,  but  the  Mountaines
are  extremely  colde,  and  the  Plaines  intollerably  hot.  And
because  they  can  hardly  indure  the  sharpenesse  of  Winter,
they  kindle  great  fires  in  the  midst  of  their  houses,  laying
the  coles  thereof  under  their  high  bedsteads,  and  so  betak-
ing themselves  to  sleepe.  Their  fields  abounding  with
water,  are  exceeding  fruitfull,  and  their  houses  are  built
like  the  houses  of  the  Kingdome  of  Casena.  They  had  a
King  of  their  owne  in  times  past,  who  being  slaine  by
Ischia  (as  is  aforesaid)  they  have  ever  since  beene  subject
Izchia.  unto  the  said  Ischia.

The  Region  of  The  Region  of  Zanfara  bordering  Eastward  upon
Zanfara. Zegzeg,  is  inhabited  by  most  base  and  Rusticall  people.

^zlnfyraskine  Their  6dds  abound  with  Rice>  Mill>  and  Cotton-  The
bTlzchL^and  Inhabitants  are  tall  in  stature  and  extremely  blacke,  their
the  people  visages  are  broade,  and  their  dispositions  most  salvage  and
made  tribu-  brutish.  Their  King  also  was  slaine  by  Ischia,  and  them-
tary-  selves  made  tributarie.

The  Tozvne  These Kingdomes of Guangara adjoyneth South-

7fGuandlZe  easterly  uPon  Zanfara.  Southward  thereof  lyeth  a
Q0Mt  Region  greatly  abounding  with  gold. But  now  they  can

have  no  traffique  with  forren  Nations,  for  they  are  molested
on  both  sides  with  most  cruell  enemies. For  Westward
Izchia.  they  are  opposed  by  Ischia,  and  Eastward,  by  the  King  of

Borno.  When  I  my  selfe  was  in  Borno,  King  Abraham
having  levied  an  huge  Armie,  determined  to  expell  the
Prince  of  Guangara  out  of  his  Kingdome,  had  hee  not
been hindred by Homar the Prince of  Gaoga, which

526

JOHN LEO ON AFRICA  a.d.

c.  1526.
beganne  to  assaile  the  Kingdome  of  Borno.  Wherefore
the  King  of  Borno  being  drawne  home  into  his  owne
Countrey,  was  enforced  to  give  over  the  conquest  of
Guangara.  So  often  as  the  Merchants  of  Guangara
travell  into  the  foresaid  Region  abounding  with  gold,
because  the  wayes  are  so  rough  and  difficult  that  their
Camels  cannot  goe  upon  them,  they  carry  their  wares  upon
slaves  backes ;  who  being  laden  with  great  burthens,  doe
usually  travell  ten  or  twelve  miles  a  day.  Yea,  some  I
saw  that  made  two  of  those  journies  in  one  day :  a  wonder
it  is  to  see  what  heavy  burthens  these  poore  slaves  are
charged  withall ;  for  besides  the  Merchandize,  they  carry
victuals  also  for  their  Masters,  and  for  the  Souldiers  that
goe  to  guard  them.

The  large  Province  of  Borno,  bordering  Westward  upon  The  Kingdom
the  Province  of  Guangara, and  from thence  extending  °C„°rno%
Eastward  five  hundred  miles,  is  distant  from  the  Fountaine  refigious  set
of  Niger  almost  an  hundred  and  fiftie  miles,  the  South  Ceremonies
part  whereof  adjoyning  unto  the  Desart  of  Set,  and  the  are,  men  are
North  part  unto  that  Desart  which  lyeth  towards  Barca.  ^U  to  have  no
The Inhabitants, in Summer  goe all naked save their  ttp0n  better
privie  members  which  they  cover  with  a  peece  of  leather  : notice  of  such
but  all  Winter  they  are  clad  in  skinnes,  and  have  beds  of  parts,alway  an
skinnes  also. They  embrace  no  Religion  at  all,  being  observation  of,

neither  Christians,  Mahumetans,  nor  Tewes,  nor  of  any  „  ,.  m .,,,,"
.  \  > i-i  \ cation  with  the

other  rroression,  but  living  arter  a  brutish  manner,  and  Devilisfound,

having  wives  and  children  in  common :  and  (as  I  under-  where  men

stood  of  a  certaine  Merchant  that  abode  a  long  time  among  acknowledge  ^

them)  they  have  no  proper  names  at  all,  but  every  one  is  ^ ?, '/%  tn

nicknamed  according  to  his  length,  his  fatnesse,  or  some  j/so  Savages

other  qualitie. They  have  a  most  puissant  Prince,  being  are  said  to

lineally  descended  from  the  Libyan  people  called  Bardoa.  have  no

He  is  at  perpetuall  enmitie  with  a  certaine  people  inhabit-  ™li&on>

i_jit^  ro  1 .rr.  having  no

ing beyond the Desart of Seu ; who in times past, Temples,  &c.
marching  with  an  huge  army  of  footemen  over  the  said  The  Desart  of
Desart,  wasted  a  great  part  of  the  Kingdome  of  Borno. Sen.
Whereupon  the  King  of  Borno  sent  for  the  Merchants  of
Barbarie,  and  willed  them  to  bring  him  great  store  of

527

A.D.

c.  1526.

Fifteene  or
twentie  slaves
exchanged  for
one  Horse,

Vessels,  \3c.

Gold.  '

The  Kingdom
of  Gaoga.

[II.  vi.  831.]

The  Kingdome
of  Nubia.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Horses  :  for  in  this  Countrey  they  use  to  exchange  Horses
for  slaves,  and  to  give  fifteene,  and  sometimes  twenty
slaves  for  one  horse.  And  by  this  meanes  there  were
abundance  of  horses  brought :  howbeit,  the  Merchants
were  constrained  to  stay  for  their  slaves  till  the  King
returned  home  conquerour  with  a  great  number  of  Cap-
tives, and  satisfied  his  creditors  for  their  Horses.  The
King  seemeth  to  be  marvellous  rich ;  for  his  Spurres,  his
bridles,  platters,  dishes,  pots,  and  other  vessels  wherein
his  meate  and  drinke  are  brought  to  the  table,  are  all  of
pure  gold  :  yea,  and  the  chaines  of  his  Dogs  and  Houndes
are  of  gold  also.  Howbeit,  this  King  is  extremely  covet-
ous, for  he  had  much  rather  pay  his  debts  in  slaves  then
in  gold.

Gaoga  bordering  Westward  upon  the  Kingdome  of
Borno,  and  extending  Eastward  to  the  Confines  of  Nubia,
adjoyneth  Southward  unto  a  certaine  Desart,  situate  upon
a  crooked  and  winding  part  of  Nilus,and  is  enclosed  North-
ward with  the  frontiers  of  iEgypt.  It  stretcheth  from
East  to  West,  in  length  five  hundred  miles,  and  as  much
in  breadth.  They  have  neither  humanitie  nor  learning
among  them,  but  are  most  rusticall  and  savage  people,
and  especially  those  that  inhabite  the  Mountaines,  who
goe  all  naked  saving  their  privities :  Their  houses  are
made  of  boughes  and  rafts,  and  are  much  subject  to  burn-
ing, and  they  have  great  abundance  of  Cattell,  whereunto
they  give  diligent  attendance.  This  Prince  greatly  hon-
oreth  all  learned  men,  and  especially  such  as  are  of  the
linage  of  Mahumet.  I  my  selfe  being  in  his  Court,  a
certaine  Noble-man  of  Damiata  brought  him  very  rich
and  royall  gifts ;  as  namely,  a  gallant  Horse,  a  Turkish
Sword,  and  a  Kingly  robe,  with  certaine  other  particulars,
that  cost  about  an  hundred  and  fiftie  Duckats  at  Cairo :  in
recompence  whereof,  the  King  gave  him  five  slaves,  five
Camels,  five  hundred  Ducats  of  that  Region,  and  an  hun-
dred Elephants  teeth  of  wonderfull  bignesse.

Nubia  bordering  Westward  upon  the  Kingdome  last
described,  and  stretching  from  thence  unto  Nilus,  is  en-

528

JOHN LEO ON AFRICA  a.d.

c.  1526.
closed  on  the  South-side  with  the  Desart  of  Goran,  and  on
the  North-side  with  the  Confines  of  Egypt. Howbeit
they cannot passe by water from this Kingdome into ^f Rwer  °f
Egypt :  for  the  River  of  Nilus  is  in  some  places  no  deeper  N\l\™lle  be_
then  a  man  may  wade  over  on  foot. The  principall  Towne  tweene  Nufca
of  this  Kingdome  called  Dangala,  is  exceeding  populous, and  Egypt.
and  contayneth  to  the  number  of  ten  thousand  Families.
The  Kingdome  of  Nubia  is  most  rich  in  Corne  and  Sugar, The  rich  Com-
which  notwithstanding  they  know  not  how  to  use. Also  ™  £"  °*
in  the  Citie  of  Dangala  there  is  great  plentie  of  Civet  and
Sandal-wood. This  Region  aboundeth  with  Ivory  like-
wise, because  heere  are  so  many  Elephants  taken. Heere
is also a most strong and deadly poyson, one graine Most  strong
whereof  being  divided  amongst  ten  persons,  will  kill  them °^Si
all  within  lesse  then  a  quarter  of  an  houre  : but  if  one
man  taketh  a  grain,  he  dyeth  thereof  out  of  hand. An
ounce  of  this  Poyson  is  sold  for  an  hundred  Duckats ;
neyther  may  it  be  sold  to  any  but  to  forraine  Merchants,
and  whosoever  buyeth  it  is  bound  by  an  Oath  not  to  use
it  in  the  Kingdome  of  Nubia. All  such  as  buy  of  this
Poyson  are  constrayned  to  pay  as  much  unto  the  King,  as
to  the  Merchant :  but  if  any  man  selleth  Poyson  without
the  Princes  knowledge,  he  is  presently  put  to  death. The
people  themselves  are  called  Bugiha,  and  are  most  base  Bugiaa;.
and  miserable,  and  live  onely  upon  Milke,  Camels  flesh,
and  the  flesh  of  such  beasts  as  are  taken  in  those  Desarts.
Some  times  they  receive  Tribute  of  the  Governour  of
Suachen,  and  sometimes  of  the  Governours  of  Dangala.
They  had  once  a  rich  Towne  situate  upon  the  Red  Sea
called  Zibid,  whereunto  belonged  a  commodious  Haven,
being  opposite  unto  the  Haven  of  Zidem,  which  is  fortie
miles  distant  from  Mecca. But  an  hundred  yeares  since
it  was  destroyed  by  the  Soldan,  because  the  Inhabitants
received  certaine  Wares  which  should  have  beene  carried
to  Mecca,  and  at  the  same  time  the  famous  Port  of  Zibid
was  destroyed,  from  whence  notwithstanding  was  gathered
a  great  yeerely  Tribute.

END OF VOLUME V.

2  L

l9  ft°5

BOSTON  PUBLIC  LIBRARY

3  9999  06663  969  9
