Hakluytus Posthumus, or Purchas His Pilgrimes, Vol. 8 (Samuel Purchas, 1625)
==========================================================
Purchas His Pilgrimes (1625) - the 17th century's great sequel to Hakluyt; the largest voyage collection of its age, preserving dozens of narratives otherwise lost. The 20-volume MacLehose reprint (Glasgow, 1905-07), the standard complete edition. Vol. 8 of 20.

Hakluytus  Posthumus

or

Purchas His Pilgrimes

In  Twenty  Volumes

Volume  VIII

GLASGOW

PRINTED AT THE UNIVERSITY PRESS BY

ROBERT  MACLEHOSE  <&-  COMPANY  LTD. FOR

JAMES MACLEHOSE AND SONS, PUBLISHERS

TO THE UNIVERSITY OF GLASGOW

MACMILLAN AND CO. LTD.  LONDON

THE MACMILLAN CO.  NEW YORK

SIMPKIN, HAMILTON AND CO.  LONDON

MACMILLAN AND BOWES  CAMBRIDGE

DOUGLAS AND FOULIS  EDINBURGH

MCMV

Hakluytus Posthumus

or

Purchas His Pilgrimes

Contayning a History of  the World

in Sea Voyages and Lande Travells

by Englishmen and others

By

SAMUEL PURCHAS, B.D.

VOLUME VIII

> ♦ O •> J  i .

*  t  • I

»«*  „ I  .  ft • n«

Glasp-ow

James MacLehose and Sons

Publishers  to  the  University

MCMV

/W- •. i£>,  I  *}  »  i"

v^aiife

i44 ,  ij  r

.•  »  •  ••  •

•  •  • , ,

•  ••

•  •  •

•  •• • • *  •  ♦

THE TABLE

The  Contents  of  the  Chapters  and  Paragraphs  in
the  eight  Booke  of  the  First  part  of
Purchas  his  Pilgrims.

CHAP. VI.

The  Churches  Peregrination  by  this  H.  Land  way,  and
warre  into  mysticall  Babylon ;  or  a  Mysterie  of  Papall
iniquitie  revealed,  how  the  Papall  Monarchie  in  and
over  Christendome,  was  advanced  in  that  Age  and  the
following,  and  principally  by  this  Expedition  into  the
H.  Land. ........

§.  i .  The  Historie  of  the  Normans,  and  their  proceedings.
Of  Urban  and  Boamunds  policie,  abusing  the  zeale  of
Christendome  in  these  warres :  and  of  Satans  loosing
after  one  thousand  yeeres.  .....

A  Mysterie.  Englishmen  in  threefold  respect  Normans.
The  Normans  Dominion  in  Italy.  Rob.  puissance
and  Boa.  policy.  Pope  Urban,  Boa.  the  Norman
abuse  the  zeale  of  Christendome.  Mysterie  of  the
Starre,  Key,  Locusts  of  the  bottomlesse  pit.  Applying
of  Apoc.  9.  to  the  Romish  Clergie.  Foure  Angels
what.  Foure  Angels  applied  to  many  Mahumetan
Foures.  The  thousandth  yeere  of  Satans  loosing
discussed.  Pilgrimages.  Pilgrimage  to  Jerusalem,
whether  of  God  or  of  Satan.  Satans  loosing  and
Deluge  of  Poperie 1000. yeeres  after  Christ.

v

PAGE

THE TABLE

The  Contents  of  the  Chapters — Continued.  page

§.  2.  Of  the  foure  meanes  which  Popes  have  to  get  monies :
Of  the  two  first,  their  Temporalties  and  Collations  of
Benefices.  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  25

The  Pope  when  and  how  first  a  temporall  Prince.  Rome
lately  subject  to  the  Pope.  Reall  Presence.  Investi-
tures. The  Pope  and  his  great  by  the  Churches
spoiles. Zeale. Just  Use.

§.  3.  Of  Dispensations. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  32

Popish  abuse  of  Dispensations  furthered  by  Holy  Land
Warre.  The  Popes  abuse  of  Non  obstante,  Com-
mendams,  Unions,  Provisions.  Courses  of  the  Popes
Consistorie,  and  Paenitentiarie.  Papa  turpilucricupidus.
Taxa  Camerae. Lesban  Rules.

§.  4.  Of  Indulgences. .......  45

Leo's  Indulgences  occasion  of  Luthers  preaching.  Indul-
gences disputed,  incurable,  gainfull  :  their  beginning.
Popish  Indulgence  Daughter  of  Purgatorie.  The  use
and  abuse.  Faith  and  Manners  endamaged  by  these
Expeditions.  Interdicts.  King  John  subjected  by
Papall  Indulgences  and  Interdict.  Waldenses.  Crosse-
preaching.  Guildes.  Inquisition  erected.  Friers
numbers  and  cumbers.  Long  and  bloudy  warres  by
Crusados.  Indulgences  how  many  wayes  the  Popes
Mint  and  Mine  for  Monies.

§.  5.  Superstition  advanced  in  and  by  the  Holy  Land
Expeditions,  and  the  Christians  Christianitie  in  those
parts  worse  then  in  other.  Divers  Sects  of  Christians
in  the  East. ........  67

English  founders  at  Aeon.  Three  orders  of  Regular  Knights.
Damnable  impietie  of  Pastors,  Regulars,  people  of  the
H.  Land.  Surians.  Jacobites.  Nestorians.  Maron-
ites.  Armenians.  The  name  Antichrist  applyed  to
the  head  and  his  mysticall  bodie,  Angell-Devill.
Christ  crucified  twixt  two  Theeves.

VI

THE TABLE

The  Contents  of  the  Chapters — Continued.  page

CHAP. VII.

Monuments  of  Antiquitie,  taken  out  of  ancient  Records,  to
testifie  the  quondam  commerce  betwixt  our  Kings  and
their  Subjects,  and  those  Easterne  Princes.  ...  80

Records.  Old  Records  of  Henrie  the  third,  and  Edward
the  second.  Letters  of  Edward  the  second,  to  the
farthest  Easterne  Kings.  Letters  to  the  Persian  Sultan,
and  to  the  Emperour  of  Cathay.

CHAP. VIII.

A  Relation  of  a  Journey  begun,  Anno  Dom,  1610.  written

by  Master  George  Sandys,  and  here  contracted.  .  .  88

§.  1.  His  journey  from  Venice  to  Constantinople,  and  obser-
vations by  the  way.  .  .  .  .  .  .  88

Venetian  Signiories  inhabited  by  Grecians.  Fruitfull  Val-
leyes.  Receiving  of  Tribute.  Cowards,  but  Murtherers
upon  advantages.  Cicero's  Sepulchre.  An  English
woman  turned  Jew.  Fruitfull  Orchards.  A  strange
figge.  Turkish  Rebels.  English  service.  Cunning
water  Divers.  Weather  Charmers.  Ancient  Ilium
called  Troy.  Lemnos  famous  by  Vulcans  fall.  Rivers
drunke  drie.  Sea  beaten,  and  fetters  throwne  therein.
Merrie  Greekes.  A  drunken  frey.  The  Authors
entertaynment.

§.  2.  Constantinople  described,  the  Turkes  Seraglio,  Pera  ;
the  Turkish  Empire  and  Government :  Some  obser-
vations of  the  Turkish  Religion.  .  .  .  . no

S.  Sophies  Temple.  The  Turkes  Seraglio  in  Constantinople.
Ottoman  Monuments.  Great  mens  Serraglios.  Janicula.
Buildings  consisting  of  shops.  Women  prohibited
to  buy  or  sell.  Holy  Sepulchre.  Crueltie.  Terrible
fires.  Tempests.  Plague.  The  Ottomans  presumed
Title.  His  Letter  to  his  Majestic  Turkish  warlike
discipline.  Places  of  preferment.  Generals,  Viziers,
Vice-royes,  Governors,  and  other  Officers.  Janizaries,
revolted Christians. Turkes chiefe Guard. Sea

vii

THE TABLE

The  Contents  of  the  Chapters — Continued.  PAGE

force. Brothers crueltie. Turkish Sabbath.  Their

Prayers. Antique dancing. Circumcision.  Lent.

The  feast  Byram. Turkish  Charitie  and  Pitie.  Their
love. Fearefull  to  offend.

§.  3.  The  Muftie,  Cadileschiers,  Divans :  Manners  and  attire
of  the  Turkes.  The  Sultan  described,  and  his  Customes
and  Court.  The  Customes  of  the  Greekes.  Sir  Tho.
Glover.  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  137

Witnesses  and  Oathes.  Briberie,  a  Corrupter.  Ouirks  in
Law.  Turkish  attyre.  Their  cutting  of  haire.  Offices
of  Nature.  Parents,  Age,  and  Superiors  reverenced.
Hospitalitie,  Feasts.  Marriage.  Adulterie  punished.
Multiplicitie  of  Wives.  Women  kept  close.  Baths
and  manner  of  bathing.  Abominable  fllthinesse.
Markets  of  Men  and  Women.  Horrible  torment.
Mourning.  Liberall  Arts.  Trades.  The  Sultans
cruell  policie.  His  Acts,  Attire,  Court,  &c.  Sultans
entertainment  of  Embassadors.  His  going  to  the
Mosque.  The  Sultans  Hawkes  and  hawking.  His
Huntsmen.  Amorous  women.  Their  Language.
Foure  Patriarkes.  Bigamie  forbidden.  Trigamie
detested.  Funerall  lamentations.  Christian  Embas-
sadors.

§.  4.  The  Holy  Land  described,  the  Countrie,  Cities,
Inhabitants,  holy  Places,  and  memorable  rarities  of
Jerusalem. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .171

The  Holy  Land  described.  Jewish  Doctors  of  their  Law.
Their  attire.  Diet.  Poore  houses.  Poorer  Inhabi-
tants. Saturdayes  sorrow.  Fruitfull  and  pleasant
Champaines.  Charges  of  Pilgrims.  Knights  of  the
Sepulcher.  Their  Originall.  How  and  when.  Knights
of  the  holy  Sepulcher.  Mount  Calvarie.  Places  of
reverence  and  devotion.  Holy  Observations.  Temple
of  the  Sepulcher.  Chappels  of  severall  Sects.  Holy
places  described.  Chappell  of  Angels.  Chappell  of
S.  Helena.  Invention  of  the  Crosse.  Good-friday
Ceremonies.  Fire  from  Heaven.  Nestorians  hated.
Easter  Solemnitie.

§.  5.  Visiting  of  Emaus  and  Bethlehem,  and  other  places :

Also  other  observations  of  the  Jerosolymitan  Holies. . 201

viii

THE TABLE

The  Contents  of  the  Chapters — Continued.  page

Hierosolymitan  Holies  observed.  Ancient  Monuments.
Bershebas  Bath.  Simeons  House.  Davids  Cisternes.
Innocents  Infants  Sepulcher.  Place  of  the  Nativitie.
Jacobs  field.  Our  Ladies  Well.  John  Baptists
Wildernesse.  Rose  valleyes.  Davids  Sepulchre.
Caiphas  his  Palace.  Flesh  devouring  Earth.  Esay
sawne.  Absolons  Pillar.  Turkish  womens  devotions.
Salomons  Temple.  Golden  Gate.  Judgement  place.
Dolorous  way.  Simon  of  Cyrene.  Peters  penance.
Judas  his  hanging.  River  Jordan.  Mount  Olivet.
Pelagia's  Cell. Pilgrims  marked.

§.  6.  His  returne.  Observations  of  memorable  places  by
the  way.  Of  Mount  Carmel,  Aeon,  Sidon,  Tyrus  ;
of  Facardin,  Emer  of  Sidon  his  Greatnesse.  .  . 229

Terebynth  famous  for  the  death  of  Golias.  Silent  riding.
Shining  Flies.  Mount  Carmel.  Elias  his  house.
Glasse  Sand.  Memnons  Sepulcher.  Blessed  Virgins
house.  Lauretta,  Sidon,  Zebulons  Sepulcher.  Emers
of  Sidon.  Faccardine,  his  Courage.  His  Wisedome  &
Subtiltie.  Customes.  Justice.  Injustice.  Rare  and
charitable  Hospitalitie.  Salomons  Cisternes.  Desper-
ate Swimmer.

CHAP. IX.

Part of a Letter of Master William Biddulph from

Aleppo.  ......... 248

Q.  Elizabeths  death.  Prayer,  Preaching,  and  Thankesgiving.
Wel-comming.  Good  entertainment.  Feast  and
feasting.  Formes  of  set  Prayers.  Good  Husbandry
and  Huswiferie.  Silke-wormes,  how  bred.  Foure
Patriarchs.  Bartons  Hand.  English  Ambassadors,
their  succession.  Jeremias  Sepulchre.  Church-men
held  in  great  reverence.  Mad-Bedlam  Saints.  No
printing.  A  charitable  Whore.  Turkish  Diet.
Jelousie.  Salutations  for  all  degrees.  Distinction  of
names.  Jewes  stoned.  Nice  superstition.  No
Beggers.  Two  Universities.  Man-children  in  great
esteeme.  Women  of  light  behaviour.  Presumptuous
braving  termes. Mercilesse  punishments.

ix

THE TABLE

The  Contents  of  the  Chapters — Continued.  page

Part  of  another  Letter  of  Master  William Biddulph,  from

Jerusalem. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .278

Plague  how  it  ceaseth  in  Syria.  Canes  for  Travellers.
Jobs  Citie,  and  need  of  Jobs  patience.  Turkish  Canes
and  Lamps.  Theevish  waves.  Damascus  described.
Holy  places  there.  Mechan  Pilgrims  much  honored.
Walking  wondred  at.  Long  haire  contemptible.  Long
beards  honorable.  Base  thraldome.  Saphetta  a  Jewish
Universitie.  Mourning  with  Timbrels.  Wearisome
ascent.  Pleasant  fields.  Dangerous  wood.  Jacobs
well.  Pleasant  water.  Singing  of  Psalmes.  Letters
of  commendations. Good  entertaynment. Admonition.

CHAP. X.

The  journey  of  Edward  Barton  Esquire,  her  Majesties
Ambassadour  with  the  Grand  Signior,  otherwise  called
the  Great  Turke,  in  Constantinople,  Sultan  Mahumet
Chan.  Written  by  Sir  Thomas  Glover,  then  Secretarie
to  the  Ambassadour,  and  since  employed  in  that  Hon-
ourable Function  by  his  Majestie,  to  Sultan  Achmet.
Two  Letters  are  also  inserted,  written  from  Agria,  by
the  said  Ambassador  Barton. ..... 304.

The  English  Ambassadors  Attendance  and  Commission.
Terrible  Turkish  Executions.  G.  Sors  Campe.  Maner
of  the  G.  Signiors  March.  Martiall  Law,  huge  Armie.
Siege  and  taking  of  Agria  by  the  Turkes.

A  Letter  written  by  Master  Edward  Barton  Ambassadour,
to  Master  Sanderson  ;  inscribed  Al  Molto  Mag.  Sig.
Gio.  Sanderson,  &c.  .  .  .  .  .  313

L. Ambassador  Bartons  Letters  from  Agria.

Part  of  another  Letter  written  likewise  by  the  said  Ambas-
sadour from  Agria,  to  Master  Sandy,  the  English
Consull  at  Aleppo.  .  .  .  .  .  3 1 5

Dangerous  battell  to  the  Turke,  dismall  to  the  Christians.
Christians  lose  opportunitie.  Returne  of  the  Grand
Signior.

x

THE TABLE

The  Contents  of  the  Chapters — Continued.  page

CHAP. XL

The  Travels  and  Adventures  of  Captaine  John  Smith,  in

divers  parts  of  the  World,  begun  about  the  yeere  1596. 321

§.  1.  His  travels  thorow  France,  Italie,  and  on  the  Sea  coasts
of  Europe,  Africa,  and  Asia  :  His  entertainment  and
exploits  in  the  Emperours  warres  against  the  Turke  :
his  subtile  stratagems,  valerous  combats,  applause,
advancement,  honour. .  .  .  .  .  .321

French  Cheaters,  and  Noble  French-men.  Smith  throwne
over  boord,  entertayned  by  a  Britton.  Sea-fight.
Smiths  travels  in  Italie  and  Stiria.

Extracts of  Captaine Smiths Transylvanian Acts, out of

Fr. Fer.  his  storie.  .  . .  .  .  .326

Smiths  Stratagems,  and  Advancement  in  the  Emp.  his
Warres.  Smith  in  three  combats  winneth  three  Turkes
heads.  Triple  reward  to  Smiths  triple  victorie,  gifts,
command,  honor.

§.  2.  Divers  valiant  English  men  in  this  battell.  Captaine
Smith  taken,  sold,  sent  into  Turkie,  and  over  the
Black  Sea  to  Tartaria.  His  admirable  escape  and
other  travels  in  divers  parts  of  Christendome.  . 334.

English-men  slaine.  Smith  taken,  sold,  sent  to  Tartaria.
Taurike  and  Nagay  Tartars  Food,  Attire,  Gods,  Tents.
Smiths  flight,  and  state  of  the  places  twixt  Tartaria
and  Transilvania.  Smiths  returne  by  Germanie,
France  and  Spaine.

CHAP. XII.

The  death  of  Sultan  Osman,  and  the  setting  up  of  Mustafa
his  Uncle,  according  to  the  Relation  presented  to  His
Majestic 343,

Spahies  and  Janizaries  rebellion.  Vizier  slaine  in  May,
1622.  Mustafa  made  King.  New  mutinie.  Osman
slaine. Turks  losse  in  Poland, unseasonable  remedy.

xi

THE TABLE

The  Contents  of  the  Chapters — Continued.  page

Degenerate  Janizaries.  Rebellion.  Treacherie.  Un  -
advised  threats.  Lazie  Slaves.  Osmans  dreame.
Mustafa's  interpretation.  Ottomans  extinguished.
Turkes new Vizier severe.

CHAP XIII.

Mount  Sinai,  Oreb,  and  the  adjoyning  parts  of  Arabia,
described  out  of  the  foure  Journals  of  Breidenbach,
Baumgarten,  Bellonius,  and  Christopher  Furer  of
Haimendorf. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  -359

Red  Sea.  Darius  Dike.  Monasterie  of  S.  Katharine.
Mount  Sinai.  Holy  places  of  the  Desart.  Provision
to  keepe  Food  fresh.  Plants  and  habitations  of  Sinai
Desart.  Sinai  prospect  and  holies.  Sinai  Holies,
Sin-whole-lyes.  Pardons.  Monkes.  Manna.  Mama-
iukes  tyrannic  Egyptian  slaverie.  Beastly  Saint.
Mamalukes  activities. Strange  flourishing  and  shooting.

The  Contents  of  the  Chapters  and  Paragraphs  in
the  ninth  Booke  of  the  First  part  of
Purchas  his  Pilgrims.

CHAP. I.

A  Briefe  Compendium  of  the  Historie  of  Sir  Anthonie
Sherleys  travels  into  Persia  :  And  employed  thence
Ambassadour  to  the  Christian  Princes ;  penned  by
himselfe,  and  recommended  to  his  brother  Sir  Robert
Sherley,  since  that  sent  on  like  Ambassage  by  the
King  of  Persia. .  .  .  .  .  .  • 375

§.  i.  The Causes of his going to Persia, and strange

accidents  in  the  way. .  .  .  .  .  -375

Variance  about  the  Dutchy  of  Ferrara.  Duke  of  Candies
magnificence.  Portugals  wickednesse.  Insolence  of
Janizaries.  Merchants  bountie.  Happy  deliverance.
Manner  of  Justice.  Great  distresse.  Strange  provi-
dence. Persian  Pilgrims.  Accidentall  and  extra-
ordinarie kindnesse.

xii

THE TABLE

The  Contents  of  the  Chapters — Continued.  page

§,  2. Of  Abas King  of  Persia,  his Person,  vertues,  perils,

escapes,  advancement,  government,  and  conquests. . 389

King  of  Persia  described.  His  government,  warres  and
justice.  Sultan  Hamzire  Mirza  murthered.  Abas
his  strange  succession.  Alteration  of  government.
Preparation  of  Warre.  Slie  stratagem.  Seventie  Cans
heads  ;  a  terrifying  spectacle.  Usurping  Kings.  Dis-
placing of  Governours.  Rebels  flee.  Reformation  of
disorders.  Establishing  Princely  government.  Ferrats
haughtinesse.  Kings  speech  to  Ferrat.  Persian
Queene.  Corasan  invaded.  Ferrat-Cans  treason.
Ferrats  treason. Usurper  slaine. The  Kings  victorie.

§.  3.  The  Kings  triumphant  entrie  into  Casbin,  enter-
tainment of  the  Authour  and  his  companie.  Other
remarkable  observations  of  the  Kings  justice,  bountie,
treatie  of  warre,  and  Mustaphas  embassage.  .  . 413

Sir  Anthonie  Sherleis  speech  to  the  King  of  Persia.
Extortion  punished.  Kings  love  to  Sir  Antonie
Sherley.  Majesties,  Triumphs,  Fire-workes.  Hawking
and  Hunting.  Proposition  of  the  Persians  warre
against  the  Turke  discussed.  Kings  confidence  of  Sir
Anthonie.  Ambassadour  from  the  Turke.  Turkes
proud  Ambassage. King  of  Persias  resolute  Answere.

§.  4.  The  Kings  condescending  to  Sir  Anthonies  motion,
employing  and  furnishing  him  in  Ambassage  to
Christian  Princes. Two  Friers. .  ,  .  . 432

Motion  for  Ambassage  to  Christian  Princes.  Preparation
of  Warre.  Sir  Ant.  Sherleys  constant  perswasion  :
Kings  resolution.  Persian  magnificence.  Tartars
submission.  Great  Mogors  alliance.  Sir  Robert
Sherley detayned. Sir Anthonies departure.

CHAP. II.

Sir  Anthonie  Sherley  his  Voyage  over  the  Caspian  Sea  and
thorow  Russia  :  taken  out  of  W.  Parry  his  discourse
of  the  whole  voyage  of  Sir  Anthonie,  in  which  he
accompanied  him; published 1601.  .  .  . 442

xiii

THE TABLE

The  Contents  of  the  Chapters — Continued.  PAge

S.  A.  Sherleys  bad  usage  in  Russia,  by  a  Frier  and  the
Persian.  Offering  of  a  Bell  and  an  Image.  Cere-
monious  triumph.

CHAP. III.

Two  voyages  of  Master  John  Newberie,  One,  into  the
Holy  Land,  The  other  to  Balsara,  Ormus,  Persia,
and  backe  thorow  Turkie. ..... 449

Master  John  Newberies  Voyages  and  Observations.  Travels
by  Sea  and  Land.  Cities,  Townes,  and  Castles
described.  Pitchie  Fountaine.  Babylon  and  Bagdet.
Balsara  Customes.  Newberies  sailing  the  Persian
Gulfe  from  Balsara  to  Ormuz.  Salt,  cause  of  exces-
sive heat.  Long  clawed  Swine.  Hispahan  chiefe
Citie  of  Persia.  Toll  and  tollage.  Carriage  of
Merchandizes,  the  Prices  and  Customes.  Noahs
Arke.  Saint  Christophers  Church.  Salt  growing.
Womens  attire.  River  Ponnats  fall.  Womens  faces
covered.  Bride  carried  about  the  towne  on  horseback.
Women  like  Maskers.  Tempestuous  and  stormie
weather.  Making  of  Caviare.  Attyre  of  Women
and Maides. Faire  Women.

CHAP. IIII.

Observations  of  Master  John  Cartwright  in  his  voyage  from
Aleppo  to  Hispaan,  and  backe  againe  :  published  by
himselfe,  and  here  contracted. .  .  .  .  .482

§.  1.  Of  Euphrates,  Orpha,  Caraemit,  the  Curdi,  Armen-
ians, Bithlis,  Van,  and  Arraret. .  .  .  .482

M.  Cartwrights  Travels.  His  Relation  and  Description.
Aladeules  his  Paradise.  Euphrates  and  Tygris.
Curdies  described  :  worshippers  of  the  Divell.  Women
Archers.  Armenian  Religion.  Lambe  sacrifice.  A
great  battell.  Hand-made  passage.  Seige  of  Van.
Famous Rivers. Mountaines.

§.  2.  Of  Araxis, Chiulfal, Sumachia, Derbent, Sechieres,

Aras,  Tauris,  Soltania,  Casbin,  Argovil,  and  Gilan.  . 496

xiv

THE TABLE

The  Contents  of  the  Chapters — Continued.  page

Araxis.  Chiulfal  described.  Chiulfalines,  great  drinkers.
Barbarous  spectacle.  Ameleke  Carina.  Sumachians
punished.  Description  of  Tauris.  Tauris  yeelded
to  Selymus.  Description  of  Sultania.  Horrible
Tempest.  Casbin  described.  Bassars,  streets  of
trafrique. Oyle  springeth  out  of  the  ground.

§.  3. Of  Cassan  and  Hispaan. Of  the  Persian  King  and

governement. Of  Sir  Anthonie  Sherley.  .  .  .509

Law  against  idlenesse.  Description  of  Hispaan.  Kings
Garden.  Persian  dignities.  Nature  of  Persians.
Persians  inconstant.  Marshall  weapons.  Warlike
exercises. Triumphs. Fire-works.

§.  4.  The  returne  of  the  Authour  by  the  way  of  Persia,

Susiana,  Chaldaea, Assyria,  and  Arabia. .  .  . 516

Old  Mountaines.  Description  of  Ninive.  The  Hand  of
Eden.  Cleere  Skie.  Caliph  reverenced.  Tower  of
Babel.  Old  Babylon  described.  A  Valley  of  Pitch.
Euphrates.

CHAP. V.

The  Peregrination  of  Benjamin,  the  sonne  of  Jonas,  a  Jew,
written  in  Hebrew,  translated  into  Latin  by  B.  Arias
Montanus,  discovering  both  the  state  of  the  Jewes,
and  of  the  World,  about  foure  hundred  and  sixtie
yeeres  since. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .523

§.  1.  Of the Jewes and their Synagogues, Schooles, or

Universities,  and  other  his  observations  in  Europe.  . 524

Jewish  Rabbins  Students  in  Traditions.  Synagogues  and
Schooles.  Jewish  Synagogues  Affaires.  Their  per-
mitted government.  Jewish  tales,  their  superstition.
Mountayne  Paros.  Balachia  inhumane.  Constantina
magnificent.  Jewish,  Greeke  Emperors  Palace,
wealth, and revenue. Jewish slaverie.

§.  2.  The  estate  of  the  Jewes,  and  relations  of  the  World
in  the  higher  parts  of  Asia,  Syria,  Palaestina,  Damascus,
and  the  parts  adjoyning. .  .  .  .  .  -537

xv

THE TABLE

The  Contents  of  the  Chapters — Continued.  page

Scripture  Jewes.  Land  of  Edom.  Mountayne  Hermon.
Aharonites,  Priests  of  the  Samaritane  Law.  Burnt
Offerings.  Mount  Ebal  and  Garizim.  Jerusalem.
Hospitalers.  Abraham  Pius  his  pia  fraus.  Patriarkes
Sepulchre  at  Hebron.  Holy  Land  survayed  by
Benjamin  Tudelensis  a  Jew.  Damascus  the  Mesquit
there. Giants bone. Earthquake.

§.  3.  Of  Mesopotamia,  Mosul,  Bagdat,  the  Calipha  ;  the
numbers,  Synagogues,  and  Priviledges  of  the  Jewes  in
it,  and  the  places  adjoyning. .  .  .  .  • 5  5  5

Noahs  Arke.  King  Davids  Posteritie.  Ancient  Ninive.
A  studious  and  laborious  King.  A  lover  of  the
Ismaelites.  Caliphas  feast,  sermon,  retirednesse,
hospitals.  Bagdat-Jewes.  Head  of  the  Captivitie  his
power  and  revenue.  Old  Babel.  Pilgrimage  to
Ezechiels  Tombe. Sacred librarie.

§.  4.  Strange  reports,  if  true,  of  the  Aliman  Jewes.  Of
Persia,  and  David  Elroi.  Of  the  Nisbor  Jewes,  and
some  places  of  India. ...... 568

Pharisie,  an  order  of  Mourners.  Jew  and  Jesuite  suspected.
Temple.  Daniels  Tombe.  Persian  greatnesse.
Numbers  of  Jewes.  David  Elroi  Jew-Witch-Messias
his  storie.  Mordecais  Sepulchre.  Reports  of  separated
free  Jewes  and  of  Cophar  Althorech. Moses  his  tale.

§.  5. Of  India,  Ethiopia,  Egypt,  his  returne  into  Europe:

Sicilia,  Germanie,  Prussia,  Russia,  France.  .  .  . 580

Nekrokis.  Pearle-oysters.  Great  heate.  Pepper.  Strange
funerals.  Blacke  Jewes.  Fire  and  Sun-superstition.
Dangerous  sands.  Sects  of  Jewes  and  Saracens.
Calipha.  Nilus.  Old  and  new  Mitzraim.  Antiqui-
ties at  Alexandria.  Sinai.  Jewes  in  Sicilia,  Germanie,
Bohemia, Prussia  : desperate hopes.

xvi

ILLUSTRATIONS

The  Historical  Column  in  Aurat  Basar,  .
Hondius  his  Map  of  the  Turkish  Empire,
A  Turkish  Woman,

Hondius  his  Map  of  Hungary,
Hondius  his  Map  of  France,
Hondius  his  Map  of  Transylvania,
Hondius  his  Map  of  Europe,

Hondius  his  Map  of  Candia,
Hondius  his  Map  of  Paradise,

PAGE

1 20

128

152

320

328

344

Hondius his Map of  the Peregrinations of the

Israelites  in  the  Desert,  .  .  .  .368

376

520

XVll

THE EIGHTH  VOLUME

OF

Purchas His Pilgrimes

Contayning  Peregrinations  and  Travels  by  Land
into  Palestina,  Natolia  and  Syria ; Peregrina-
tions and  Discoveries  by  Land  of  Assyria,
Armenia,  Persia,  India,  Arabia,  and
other  Inland  Countries  of  Asia
by  Englishmen  and  others,
Moderne  and  Ancient

Chap.  VI.

The  Churches  Peregrination  by  this  Holy  Land
way,  and  warre  into  mysticall  Babylon  :  or  a
Mysterie  of  Papall  Iniquity  revealed,  how  the
Papall  Monarchic  in  and  over  Christendome,
was  advanced  in  that  Age  and  the  following,
and  principally  by  this  Expedition  into  the
Holy  Land.

§.  i.

The  Historie  of  the  Normans,  and  their  proceed-
ings. Of  Urban  and  Boamunds  policie,  abusing
the  zeale  of  Christendome  in  these  Warres  :  and
of  Satans  loosing  after  one  thousand  yeares.

Itherto  you  have  heard  the  Monke  and
the  Priest  Eye-witnesses  of  this  Expedi-
tion :  the  one  called  Robertus  Anglus,  the
other  a  follower  of  Robert  the  Norman  :
and  after  them  the  Tyrian  Archbishop,
and  an  English  Monke.  Neither  let  any
marvell  that  in  these  Peregrinations,  dedi-
cated to  the  English  name  principally,  I  omit  not  the
Norman,  whose  Father  and  Brethren  reigned  here,  who
for  the  hope  of  the  English  Crowne  forsooke  that  of
Jerusalem  being  offered,  who  dyed  in  England  :  and  what
shall  I  more  say?  What  are  Englishmen  but  in  triple
respect,  Normans  or  Northmen  ?  From  the  North  parts  jrfa  Camb.
adjoyning  came  the  first  Angles,  or  Saxons : from  thence  Brit.

VIII  I  A

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

c.  1625.

also the Danes, which made  the next Conquest : and

w.  Gemetk.  fr0m  these  North  parts,  the  scourge  of  the  World,  Omne
malum  ab  Aquilone  (ex  Scanza  insula  quae  erat  quasi
officina  gentium,  aut  velut  vagina  Nationem,  the  parts  for
most  part  still  subject  to  the  Crowne  of  Denmarke)  the
same  Danish  people  setling  themselves  in  France,  and
called  Normans,  that  is,  men  of  the  North,  after  a  French
civillizing  and  Christianitie,  made  their  third  Conquest
under  Earle  William.  This  three-fold  Cord  cannot  be
easily  broken,  nor  can  any  Englishman  at  this  day  separate
his  Norman  bloud  from  the  English,  an  indissoluble
mixture  even  from  the  last  conquest  remayning  in  the

[U.viii.  tongue and people, the Conquerors utmost indevours

1246.]  being  herein  conquered. A  great  part  of  Earle  Roberts

Armie was English, and as Eadmerus and all the

Historians  of  that  time  testifie,  the  monie  which  defrayed

his  Armie  was  English,  Normandie  remayning  therefore

History  of engaged  to  King  William  his  Brother. Yea,  Boamund

Normans,  ajso  an(j  Tancred  were  Normans :  fortie  of  which  Nation
returning  from  a  Jerosolymitan  pilgrimage,  behaved  them-
selves so  valiantly  at  the  siege  of  Salerne,  against  the
Saracens,  that  Guaimar  the  Prince  sent  Legats  with  them
into  Normandie,  to  draw  some  adventurers  into  his  part,

Cir.  Sigon.  de  where  Giselbert  a  Nobleman,  having  slaine  William,  and

Rg.ltahel.%.  fearing  the  anger  of  Robert  then  Earle  or  Duke  of
Normandie,  embraced  the  occasion,  and  with  his  Brethren
Rainulph,  Aisclitin,  Osmund  and  Rodulph,  and  their
followers  went  into  Italie  to  Prince  Pandulph  at  Capua,
Anno  Dom.  1017.

Norm  ms  In  Apulia  and  Calabria  were  then  subject  to  the  Greeke

tttia%  Empire, which rather tyrannizing then ruling, by the

Catapan  or  Deputie,  Melus  a  principall  man  perswaded
the  Normans  to  invade  his  Countrey,  so  to  shake  of  the
Greekish  yoke,  and  fought  foure  times  with  Bubagan  the
Catapan,  in  the  three  first  battels  winning  much,  which
in  the  fourth  at  that  fatall  place  of  Canna  hee  lost  againe  :
the  remayning  Normans  betaking  themselves  to  Pandulfe
and  Guaimar. After  this  Maniacus  the  Catapan  sent  to

ADVANCE  OF  THE  PAPAL  MONARCHY a.d.

c.  1625.
Guaimar  to  send  him  his  Normans,  to  fight  against  the
Saracens  in  Sicilia. Lately  before  (this  was,  Anno  1039)
the  sonnes  of  Tancred  (invited  by  their  Countrimen)  had  Somes  °f
comne thither  with three hundred men at Armes, by ancre  '
whose  helpe  he  recovered  Syracuse,  and  the  most  part  of
Sicilia,  which  after  their  departure  the  Saracens  next  yeare
repossessed. Anno  1041.  Ardoinus  a  Lumbard  offended
with  Maniacus,  for  taking  from  him  a  Horse  which  he
had taken from a Saracen, incited Earle Ranulph a
Norman,  to  assist  him  in  the  warre  against  the  Catapan,
where  in  many  fights  overthrowing  the  Greekes,  matters
succeeded  so  prosperously,  that  William  one  of  the  sonnes
of Tancred was made Earle of Asculum, Drogo his
Brother  obtayned  Venusia,  and  the  rest  of  Apulia  was  Apulia  shared
shared  amongst  the  rest  of  the  Normans. In  this  Expedi-  a™ongst
tion, William, Drogo, Humfrie, Richard, Roger, and
Robert  the  Sonnes  of  Tancred  were  renowmed,  of  whom
many  Dukes  and  Kings  in  Italy  after  descended. Henry
the  Emperour  confirmed  to  Drogo  Earle  of  Apulia,  and
to  Ranulph  of  Aversa,  all  which  they  had  gotten. To
Drogo succeeded his Brother, Humfrie, 105 1. who
invading  the  possessions  of  the  Church,  which  Pope  Leo  '  warlike
seeking  to  recover  by  battell,  was  beaten  out  of  the  field °**e'
with  exceeding  slaughter  on  both  sides,  and  besieged  in
a  Castle  whither  he  fled,  was  taken  and  forced  to  receive
the  Norman  into  communion.

Baielard  the  Sonne  of  Humfrie,  by  Robert  called  Ro^r^!s~  f
Wiscard  (brother  to  the  said  Humfrie)  was  expelled  from  Cfl)'ta  U
his  Countrie  of  Apulia.  He  added  also  Rhegium  in
Calabria,  and  Troia  in  Apulia  to  his  conquests,  stiling
himselfe  Duke  of  Apulia  and  Calabria.  His  brother
Richard  winning  Capua,  vexed  the  confines  of  Campania,
and  both  molesting  the  Papall  Possessions  were  cursed  by
Pope  Nicholas,  who  yet  upon  their  Oath  of  vassalage  to
the  Church,  received  them  and  confirmed  the  one  Prince
of  Capua,  the  other  Duke  of  Apulia  and  Calabria,  paying
twelve  pence  a  yeare  on  every  yoke  of  Oxen.  Anno
1062.  Robert  with  his  brother  Roger,  warred  against  the

3

A.D.

c.  1625.

Occasion  of
the  'Normans
entring
Greece.

*Car.  Sigon.
de  reg.  ItaL

/.9.

*Boamund
was  sonne  to
Rob.  by  a
former  wife  :
Roger  by  the
daughter  of
of  Guaimar
Prince  of
Salem.
W.  Gemetic.
how  this
Dutc hie  added
to  Sicilia
became  a
Kingdome,  is
here  omitted.
*G.  Malm.
I.  4.  initio.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Saracens  in  Sicilia.  Richard  invaded  a  great  part  of
Campania  neere  to  Rome  it  selfe,  and  sought  to  become
Patricius ;  whereupon  Henry  the  Emperour  entred  Italy,
and  Richard  forsooke  Campania.

Anno  1078.  Nicephorus  put  downe  Michael  from  the
Empire  of  the  East,  who  came  and  sought  to  Robert
for  ayde,  who  being  compounded  with  Jordan  which  had
succeeded  his  Father  Richard,  went  into  Greece,  and
prosperously  succeded.  Hence  he  was  called  backe  by
Hildebrand,  or  Gregorie  the  Seventh,  which  before  had
excommunicated  him,  to  helpe  him  against  Henrie  the
Emperour,  then  having  taken  Rome  by  force  ;  who  hearing
of  Roberts  comming  with  a  strong  Armie  (leaving
Boamund  to  pursue  his  Grecian  affaires)  went  with
Clement  or  Guibert,  his  new  made  Pope  into  Etruria.
Thus  was  hee  dreadfull  to  the  Easterne  and  Westerne
Emperours  at  once.  He  dyed,  Anno  1085.  Roger  his
sonne  succeeded.  This  Historie  both  as  of  Normans,
and  as  a  preamble  to  the  Expedition  of  the  Frankes,  is
not  unworthy  recitall.

Roger  the  younger  brother  succeeding  in  the  Duke-
dome  of  Apulia  and  Calabria,  as  also  in  the  quarrell  of
Urban  successor  of  Gregory  against  Guibert  (who  also
confirmed  his  Dutchie  to  him  as  Vassall  of  the  Church,
the  possessions  whereof  such  good  fishing  made  he  in
troubled  waters,  he  had  even  to  Tibur  and  Velitre  *  gotten
into  his  possession)  his  brother  Boamund*  began  to  thinke
of  another  succession,  that  as  Roger  had  gotten  the
inheritance  of  Calabria  and  Apulia,  from  the  Easterne
Empire,  he  might  also  obtayne  the  like  in  Greece.  This
was  not  unknowne  to  the  wiser  in  those  times,  as  William
Malmesbury  *  our  Countriman  testifieth,  whose  words  are
these.

Anno  ab  incarnatione  1095.  Papa  Urbanus  secundus,
qui  praesidebat  Apostolico  culmini,  evasis  Alpibus  venit
in  Gallias.  Adventus  causa  ferebatur  perspicua,  quod
violentia  Guiberti  Roma  extrusus,  citra  montanas  ad  sui
reverentiam sollicitaret Ecclesias. Illud repositius pro-

ADVANCE  OF  THE  PAPAL  MONARCHY ad.

c.  1625.
positum  non  ita  vulgabatur,  quod  Boamundi  con-
silio  pene  totam  Europam  in  Asiaticam  Expeditionem
moveret,  ut  in  tanto  tumultu  omnium  provinciarum  facile
obaeratis  auxiliaribus,  &  Urbanus  Romam,  &  Boamundus
Illyricum  &  Macedoniam  pervaderent.  Nam  eas  terras
&  quicquid  praeterea  a  Dyrrhachio  usque  in  Thessalonicam  [H.viii.
protenditur,  Guiscardus  pater  super  Alexium  acquisierat :  I247-J

idcirco  illas  Boamundus  suo  juri  competere  clamitabat,
inops  haereditatis  Apulae,  quam  genitor  Rogero  filio  minori
delegaverat.  Thus  Urbanes  intent  was  to  get  Rome  from
the  Antipope  Guibert  or  Clement,  whom  the  Imperials
and  some  Italians  followed ;  neither  had  hee  any  great
partaker  in  Italie  but  Roger,  who  sought  his  owne
advantage.

Anselme  Archbishop  of  Canterburie  was  by  King  Rufus
dispossessed  of  his  revenues,  and  lived  in  Exile  for
acknowledging  him,  as  Eadmerus  his  companion  in  his
Italian  peregrinations  to  and  with  Pope  Urban  testifieth  :
no  Bishop  in  England  then  daring  to  acknowledge  either
of  the  Popes  without  the  Kings  leave,  who  also  admitted
no  Papall  power,  but  by  his  leave  in  this  Kingdome  (for
his  and  his  fathers  power  in  cases  and  over  persons
Ecclesiasticall,  See  Eadmerus  and  the  Annotations  of  that
learned  and  industrious  Gentleman,  Master  Selden  Eadmerus
thereon,  and  therewith  now  published.)  And  Boamund  published  by
enjoying  some  Castles  by  his  brothers  indulgence,  wanne  '  e
many  other,  the  men  of  warre  following  him.  Nam  ad
fratrem  specie  tenus  Ducatus  pervenerat  (Malmesbury
addeth  toward  the  end  of  that  Booke)  alterum  bello
meliorem  secuti.  Jam  vero  parui  momenti  fuit  quod
paterni  propositi  sequax,  Guibertum  repellens  Urbano
validissime  astitit,  &  cunctantem  impulit  ut  Gallias  ad
Concilium  Clari  Montis  accederet,  quo  eum  Raimundi
Provincialis  Comitis  &  Episcopi  Caturicensis  Epistolae  in-
vitabant.  Concilioque  celebrato  libens  occasionem  accepit
&  in  Graeciam  copias  trajecit,  subindeque  promovens  exer-
citum  modeste  Raimundum  &  Godfridum  operiebatur.
Quibus venientibus sociatus magnum incitamentum

5

A.D.

c.  1625.

See  how  this
agreeth  with
his  cunning
dissimulation
before
mentioned.

Hen.  Hunt.

lib.  7.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

caeteris  erat,  discipline  militaris  scientia  &  virtute  nulli
secundus.

This  Mysterie  hath  beene  little  observed  of  most
Authors,  and  was  lesse  observed  in  those  times  by  the
zealous  Princes  of  Christendome,  whose  valour,  wealth,
devotion,  glory  and  lives  were  engaged  so  deeply  in  this
quarrell,  most  of  all  other  devices  availed  the  Papacie,  in
abasing  the  power  of  Princes  Christian.

And  well  might  Urban  use  the  helpe  of  Boamund  and
the  Normans  in  that  designe,  which  not  only  sorted  to  that
expected  effect  to  settle  him  in  Rome,  then  held  by
Clement  his  Corrivall,  but  to  a  further  advancement  of  the
Papacie  in  after  times,  then  either  hee  or  Boamund  could
then  divine  or  dreame  of.  For  of  the  Normans  disposi-
tion, Henry  Huntingdon  hath  long  since  given  testimonie
that  God  had  chosen  them  to  exterminate  the  English,
because  he  saw  them  eminent  above  all  people  in  the
prerogative  of  singular  cruelty.  For  their  nature  is
when  they  have  dejected  their  enemies  to  the  utmost,  that
they  then  depresse  themselves,  and  bring  themselves  and
their  Lands  into  povertie  and  waste :  and  alwayes  the
Lords  of  the  Normans,  when  they  have  trodden  downe
their  enemies,  seeing  they  cannot  but  be  doing  cruelty,
they  hostily  trample  under  foot  their  own.  Which  plainly
appeares  in  Normandie,  England,  Apulia,  Calabria,  Sicilia,
and  Antiochia,  very  good  Countries  which  God  hath
subjected  to  them.  Thus  our  Historian,  and  thus  our
Mysterians  Urbanus  (then  for  this  disposition  called
Turbanus)  and  Boamundus  uncharitably  seeking  their
owne,  abused  the  charitie  and  devotion  of  those
degenerated  times.

So  it  was  necessary  that  Mysteries  should  be  carryed  in
mystie  cloudes :  which  make  mee  not  a  little  minde  that
Revelation  not  fully  revealed,  yet  in  some  imperfect
glimpses  offering  it  selfe  to  view,  this  Historie  unmasking
that  Mysterie ;  or  if  it  bee  not  the  just  interpretation  of
the  Prophecie  (a  taske  too  great  for  me  to  determine)  yet
not  unfit  to  be  waied  in  the  ballance  of  the  Sanctuary

6

ADVANCE  OF  THE  PAPAL  MONARCHY ad.

c.  1625.
together,  and  to  be  propounded  to  wiser  considerations,
at  lest  by  way  of  Allegoricall  application,  if  not
of  Propheticall  explication.  Saint  Johns  mysteriall
Revelation  is  delivered  in  these  words.  Apos  9.
1.  And  the  fift  Angell  sounded,  and  I  saw  a  starre
fall  from  Heaven  unto  the  Earth,  and  to  him  was
given  the  Key  of  the  bottomlesse  pit.  2.  And  hee  opened
the  bottomlesse  pit,  and  there  arose  a  smoke  out  of  the
pit,  as  the  smoke  of  a  Furnace,  and  the  Sunne  and  the
ayre  were  darkened  by  reason  of  the  smoke  of  the  pit.
3.  And  there  came  out  of  the  smoke  Locusts  upon  the
Earth,  and  unto  them  was  given  power  as  the  Scorpions
of  the  Earth  have  power,  &c.  7.  And  the  shapes  of  the
Locusts  were  like  unto  Horses  prepared  unto  battell,  and
on  their  heads  were  as  it  were  Crownes  like  Gold,  and
their  faces  were  as  the  faces  of  men.  8.  And  they  had
haire  as  the  haire  of  women,  and  their  teeth  were  as  the
teeth  of  a  Lion.  9.  And  they  had  brest-plates  as  it  were
brest-plates  of  Iron,  and  the  sound  of  their  wings  was  as
the  sound  of  Chariots  of  many  Horses  running  to  battell.
10.  And  they  had  tayles  like  unto  Scorpions,  and  there
were  stings  in  their  tayles,  and  their  power  was  to  hurt  men
five  monethes.  1 1 .  And  they  had  a  King  over  them  which
is  the  Angell  of  the  bottomlesse  pit,  whose  name  is  in
the  Hebrew  Tongue,  Abaddon,  but  in  the  Greeke
Tongue,  hath  his  name  Apollyon.  After  the  sixt  Angel
sounding,  followeth  the  loosing  of  the  foure  Angels  bound
in  the  great  River  Euphrates,  for  to  slay  the  third  part  of
men.  And  the  number  of  the  armie  of  the  Horsemen
were  two  hundred  thousand  thousand.  And  thus  I  saw
the  Horses  in  the  Vision,  and  them  that  sate  on  them,
having  brest-plates  of  Fire  and  of  Jacint,  and  of  Brim-
stone ;  and  the  heads  of  the  Horses  were  as  the  heads  of
Lions,  and  out  of  their  mouthes  issued  Fire  and  Smoke,
and  Brimstone.  By  these  three  was  the  third  part  of  men
killed,  by  the  Fire,  and  by  the  Smoke,  and  by  the  Brim-
stone which  issued  out  of  their  mouthes.  For  their  power
is  in  their  mouth,  and  in  their  tayles  :  for  their  tayles  were

7

A.D.

c.  1625.

[Il.viii.

1248.]

*J/>.  1  ult.

aCof.  3.  1.
b Ephe.  3.  20.

cHeb.  12. 12.

Ph.  3.  19.

e  Sansovine
/.  1 1.

*Sac.  Cer.
R.E.  I.  1.  8.

Matk  16.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

like  unto  Serpents,  and  had  heads,  and  with  them  they
doe  hurt.

Divers  Interpreters  will  direct  in  the  former  of  these
Visions,  to  behold  the  Popish  Clergie,  in  the  other  the
Saracenicall  Souldiory  :  both  which  agree  to  our  present
businesse,  where  Papall  superstition,  and  Saracenicall
crueltie  begot  in  strange  copulation  such  numerous
innumerable  deaths.  As  for  the  Starre  it  noteth  an
Ecclesiasticke  Angell,  or  Bishop,  as  the  Revelation  it  selfe
revealeth.*  This  Starre  is  not  fixed,  but  falleth  from
heaven,  the  care  of  Heavenly a  affection,  heavenly b  con-
versation, and  bringing  soules  by  Pastorall  vigilancie  to
the  heavenly0  Jerusalem,  and  Church  of  the  first  borne,
whose  names  are  written  in  heaven ;  and  falleth  to  the
earth,  that  is,  to  minde  earthly  pompe,  and  secular  glorie,
Whose  Godd  is  their  belly,  whose  glorie  is  in  their  shame,
who  minde  earthly  things.  That  the  Pope  hath  evidently
done  this,  their  owne  Histories  make  mention  ;  first  by
Phocas,  obtaining  a  Monarchic  over  the  Church,  and  since
Hildebrand  exalting  it  over  Kingdomes,  States  and
Empires,  and  now  at  this  day  exercising  nothing  of  a
Bishop,  but  the  Title,  leaving  the  Cure  to  his  Vicario  di
Roma,6  whiles  his  Cardinall  Consistorie  are  not  Vigiles
Ecclesiae,  but  Conjudices  Orbis  terrarum,  &  Principes
mundi,  regum*  similes,  veri  mundi  Cardines,  and  himselfe
hath  turned  Pasce  oves  into  Rege,  and  playes  the  King,
and  playes  with  Kings,  making  and  marring  Kings  and
Emperours,  and  wearing  himselfe  a  triple  Crowne :  either
detaining  (as  King  Johns)  or  deposing  and  disposing
(as  Henries  to  Rodulph)  or  with  the  foote  striking  off,  (as
Celestine  to  Henrie  the  sixt  Emperour)  or  treading  also
on  the  Emperours  necke,  (as  Alexander  to  Fredericke.)
All  this  power  is  challenged  to  the  Keyes  of  the  Kingdome
of  heaven,  promised  to  Peter,  Math.  16.  in  the  name  of
the  rest  of  the  Apostles,  of  whom  the  question  had  beene
asked,  which  he  in  their  name  answered ;  and  that  to
shut  out  impenitents,  and  to  admit  those  which  beleeve
and  repent,  by  Evangelicall  ministry  into  the  house  of

8

ADVANCE  OF  THE  PAPAL  MONARCHY a.d.

c.  1625.
Gods Church and Family. But neither  by word nor
Sacraments,  publikely,  nor  privatly,  by  teaching,  improv-
ing, exhorting,  rebuking,  doth  he  either  open  or  shut,  or
exercise  any  proper  Episcopall  Function  :  so  that  the  key  of
power  which  he  hath,  must  needs  bee  this  Key  of  the  KeJ  °fthe
bottomlesse pit, whereby Hell is opened, (as here in  Jj^JJI?
vision)  and  Heaven  is  hidden ; both  that  supercelestiall  0fffej/m
Heaven  of  glorie,  wherein  is  the  Sunne  of  righteousnesse  ;
and  this  inferiour  Ecclesiasticke  heaven  of  Grace,  and  of
the  Church,  which  as  the  Aire  borroweth  her  light  from
that Sunne, or else must needs abide in night and
darknesse.

And  indeed  what  are  Papall  Dispensations  and  Indul-
gences,  (as  we shall  anone  see) but  opening  of  Hell?
What  his  Crusados  to  kill  and  destroy, Interdicting  of
kingdomes, excommunicating and deposing of Kings,
raising warres, seditions, treasons, prohibiting vulgar
reading of Scriptures, and the like, but shutting of
heaven? These, these are the  Papall keyes so much
gloried  of,  keyes  of  the  bottomlesse  pit ; yea,  the  key
singular  to  open,  and  not  plurally  keyes,  as  having  no
power to shut that Hell  which once he hath opened.
Hence  arose  (by  this  opening  of  the  bottomlesse  pit)  that
Smoake  of  Ignorance,  which  bemisted  the  world  (so  that
in  King  Alfreds  daies  not  one  Priest  in  England  could  AtfreAi  Epist.
understand  his  Latine  Service,  or  translate  an  Epistle  out  published
of  Latine  into  English ; and  if  any  in  the  next  Ages  had  before^  Tho.
his  Grammer,  he  was  a  wonder  to  the  rest  of  the  Clergie) */*/"§  am'
caused  by  Barbarians,  which  filled  Italy,  France,  and  other  ^  lt  ckrki
Countries of Christendome before, with a Smoake of  adeoliteratura
Confusion  and  combustion,  whereby  the  Latine  Language  webant,  ut
was  lost  in  vulgar  use,  which  continued  in  their  Holies : catert*  essft
men  in  that  smoake  not  able  to  see  what  God  said  to  them  Grammatkam
in  his  Word,  or  they  to  him  in  their  Prayers. Hence  a  dedicisset.
Smoake  of  blind  zeale  ascending  as  from  a  furnace : but
as  the  fire  of  Hell  is  fire  without  light,  burning  and  not
shining,  such  is  eager  impetuous  zeale  without  discretion,
which  crucified  Christ,  and  persecuted  Christianitie,  &  in

9

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

c.  1625.

Papists  hath  much  changed  them  for  Antichrist,  and
Antichristianitie.  A  smoake  from  the  bottomlesse  pit,  is
all  unbrideled  Concupiscence,  alway  fuming  from  and  to
Hell ;  Bottomlesse  in  the  originall,  without  just  cause  of
beginning ;  Bootlesse  in  fine,  without  causing  Justice  in
the  ending.  Pride,  Covetousnesse,  Envy,  and  other
Hellish  passions,  are  a  smoake  which  ascend,  but  by
ascending  vanish ;  which  as  in  the  Builders  of  Babel,  seeke
a  Name,  and  make  as  they  would  build  to  Heaven,  but  get
Gen.  11.  no  other  name  but  Babel,  and  after  confused  cloudie
Chymaeras  (like  pillars  of  smoake  in  the  Aire)  vanish  to
nothing.

Out  of  this  smoakie  ignorance,  and  ignorant  zeale,  and

zealous perturbations (the travels and throwes of the

bottomlesse  pit)  came  Locusts  upon  the  Earth,  the  carnall

and  earthy  minded  Bishops,  Priests,  Cardinals,  Abbots,

Monkes,  and  innumerable  religious  Orders  of  inordinate

Religion  :  these  being  wholly  superstititious,  degenerating

into  superstition,  and  turning  their  heavenly  calling  into

earthly  ease  and  pompe,  and  the  spirituall  service  of  God,

into  beggerly,  worldly,  carnall  rites  and  bodily  exercises.

Thus  have  you  the  Locusts  worse  then  Egyptian,  such  to

the  soule  as  those  in  Alvares,  and  other  the  former  Stories

of  this  Booke  mentioned  to  the  bodie,  save  that  they  are

limited,  and  may  not  (as  those)  hurt  the  Grasse  and  Trees,

and  greene  things,  that  is,  such  as  have  a  lively  Faith  in

*Prie$ts  had Christ. Neither may they  kill  bodily,*  but spiritually

nyJ°™fjr  1° torment  the  Conscience  with  their  Canons,  Confessions,

Ld  subjected Penances>  Purgatories,  Miracles,  Visions,  and  (which  most

the  secular concernes  our  present  purpose)  Pilgrimages,  and  the  like.

power  to  them. Their shape is like to Horses, for their courage and

See  Eadmerus  wilfulnesse,  Kings  and  Kingdomes  being  forced  to  stoop,

andNubrt- ^ ^  their y Mumpsimus, and to their new

gensis  Writers  .  r  -

of  those  times. Sumpsimus ; even  the  most  rerractone  or  couragious,  as

William  Rufus,  and  the  two  first  Henries,  conquered  in

Clergie  immunities  by  Anselme  and  Becket,  men  of  great

[Il.viii.  worth  in  other  kinds,  but  for  this  accounted  Worthies,

1249.]  eminent  in  the  sanctitie  of  those  times,  for  this  honored

10

ADVANCE  OF  THE  PAPAL  MONARCHY a.d.

c.  1625.
and  Canonized  Saints.  These  the  Crownes  on  their  heads,
or  as  Dunstan,  Eadmund,  and  if  there  were  any  more
Canterburie  Canonizations :  and  such  Crownes  had  the
heads  of  Religious  Orders,  and  first  Founders  and
Inventors  of  Holies,  as  Dominicke,  Francis,  and  others,
(and  now  at  last  Ignatius  Loyola)  and  all  the  Clergie  were
crowned  with  dignitie,  in  their  head  over-topping  Kings,
in  the  meanest  Priest  exempted  from  Kings,  yea  creating
his  Creator  the  King  of  Kings,  (that  I  mention  not  their
shaven  crownes  nor  the  Martyrs  crownes  which  befell
Priests  or  Laitie,  dying  in  this  Jerosolymitan  Peregrination,
or  in  fight  against  Christians,  against  whom  the  Pope  had
published  his  Crusado.)

But  these  Crownes  were  like  Gold,  not  of  it,  the  Pope
herein  the  best  Alchymist,  extracting  true  Gold  out  of
Leaden  Bulls,  but  distracting  and  contracting  shewes  of
Gold,  seeming  Canonizations,  and  sanctitie  in  shew  and
sound  of  holy  Church,  rather  then  true  holinesse :  yea,
the  holy  name  of  Church  appropriated  to  these  shaven
crownes,  by  Popish  Monopoly.  Yet  were  the  shewes
made  faire,  and  in  all  their  actions  they  had  the  faces  of
men,  in  resemblance  of  just  reason  and  resolution ;
insomuch,  that  as  when  I  looke  on  the  Scripture  onely,  I
wonder  how  there  could  bee  any  Papist,  so  when  in
Histories  and  the  courses  of  times,  I  looke  upon  the
Church,  especially  after  Hildebrand,  I  as  much  wonder
that  all  were  not  Papists,  the  smoake  had  so  taken  away
the  light  of  the  Sunne,  and  the  Pope  set  up  so  many
Night-lights  of  humane  reasons,  and  Treasons  or  Tradi-
tions in  Canon  Law  and  Schoole  Divinitie.  Yea  they
had  also  the  haire  of  Women,  in  insinuating  impressions,
and  melting  ravishments  of  flattering  perswasions,  pro-
mised pleasures  of  Paradise,  dazeling  pomps  in  the  present,
and  for  the  future,  Merits,  Supererogations,  deliveries
from  Purgatorie,  Relikes  of  Saints,  Revelations,  Miracles,
&  a  world  of  the  like ;  which  this  Historie  of  the  Holy
Land  sheweth  sufficiently,  and  a  Map  of  which  you  may
see  in  Urbans  elegant  Oration,  and  Boamunds  cunning

11

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

c.  1625.

dissimulation.  Their  teeth  were  as  teeth  of  Lions,  in
preying  upon  Temporal  Lands,  Liberties,  Jurisdictions,
and  Spirituall  devouring  of  soules.  Their  Iron  Breast-
plates, were  their  defensive  immunities  and  exemptions,
whereby  they  were  hardned  and  heartned  against  all
contrary  powers.

The  sound  of  their  Wings,  was  their  preaching  of
Indulgences,  thundering  Interdictments,  and  Excommuni-
cations, Penances  in  Confessions,  and  the  like.  Their
Tailes,  were  the  consequences  of  their  Doctrine  and
Actions,  which  promising  satisfactions  to  God  and  Man,
yea  Merit  and  Supererogation,  the  honoring  of  Saints  and
Angels,  in  the  fore-part :  in  the  end  stung  like  a  Scorpion,
filled  the  soule  of  their  most  devoted  with  disconsolation,
the  body  with  grievous  bodily  exercises  in  Fastings,
Pilgrimages,  (as  here)  selfe-whippings ;  Ever  learning,
never  comming  to  the  knowledge  of  the  truth ;  giving
reall  possessions,  and  bequeathing  true  beggerie  to  their
heires,  for  deliverance  from  a  Poeticall  Purgatorie ;
crucifying  themselves  indeed  before  a  painted  Crucifixe,
buying  repentance  at  a  deare  rate,  and  making  more
irksome  way  to  Hell  (if  Gods  infinite  mercy  prevented
not)  then  that  by  which  many  have  attained  Heaven.
Their  King  is  the  Angell  of  the  bottomlesse  pit,  (you  see
whose  Vicar  he  is  indeed)  and  is  named  in  Hebrew  and
Greeke,  as  hardning  the  Jewes,  and  corrupting  Christians ;
or  as  restoring  both  Jewish  rites  and  Gentile  superstitions,
in  both  a  Destroyer.  The  five  moneths  some  interpret
of  this  life,  some  alluding  to  the  Grass-hoppers  Summer
season ;  some  to  Noahs  floud,  so  long  prevailing  over  the
Earth ;  some  to  one  hundred  and  fiftie  yeares,  taking  a
day  prophetically  for  a  yeare,  and  reckoning  from  Hilde-
brand,  to  Gregorie  the  Decretalist ;  some  for  an  indefinite
Acts  1.  7.  time,  some  for  a  short  time:  as  if  they  should  say,  It  is
not  for  you  to  know  the  times  or  the  seasons  which  the
Father  hath  put  in  his  owne  power.  I  have  rather  sought
to  lay  open  their  qualities  then  their  durance :  as  for  the
time,  Time  will  deliver  it.

12

ADVANCE  OF  THE  PAPAL  MONARCHY ad.

c.  1625.
Now  for  the  other  Vision  of  foure  Angels,  bound  in
the  great  River  Euphrates ; some  understand  Euphrates
mystically,  for  the  meanes  of  upholding  and  advancing
the  Merchandize  of  mysticall  Babylon,  that  is  of  Rome  and
her  Poperie : Indeed  foure  hath  beene  a  famous  number,
for the foure Gospels, for those foure first generall
Councels,  for  the  Ecclesiasticke  Aristocracie  by  the  foure
Patriarchs,  (the  fift  was  in  manner  titular)  for  the  foure
Doctors  of  the  Latine  Church  : also  foure  hath  beene
notable  in  this  Papall  mysterie  and  Supremacy ; first  in
the  ages  thereof,  the  Child-hood  from  Boniface  to  Hilde-
brand,  in  a  spirituall  Monarchy,  long  growing  up ; the
Youth  from  Hildebrand  to  Boniface  the  eight,  in  addition
of  power, over  all powers  Royall  and Imperiall, with
youthfull vigour trampling under foote the strongest
Adversaries  ;  the  Mans  age  from  thence  till  Luther,  losing
somewhat of that King-awing strength, by schismes
amongst  themselves,  and  by  Councels,*  Kings  and  King-  *As  those  °f
domes  better  opportunitie  and  vigilance ; but  holding  up .w^'
to  the  upmost  their  spirituall,  till  Luther  gave  beginning  -tn  thye  statute
to  their  old  declining  age,  and  this  their  almost  precarian  of  Praemunire
and  obnoxious  power,  which  by  leave  of  Kings  and  States  in  Rich.  2.
they hold, howsoever in seeming above them. Foure &Cm
Courses  have  advanced  and  upheld  them,  Excommuni-
cations, (to which interdictments of Kingdomes, and
deprivations  of  Kings  are  annexed)  Decretall  Lawes  and
Constitutions  to  governe  the  Church  ;  Warres  by  Crusados
and  Treasons,  and  Inquisitions  against  contrary  opinions.
Foure sorts of men have beene their Creatures and
Creators ; degenerated Monkery of later ages, which
undermined  the  ancient  sanctitie  and  discipline,  Canonists
which  wholly  corrupted  it; Schoole-men  which  admitted  [n.vin.
the  Philosophers  to  bee  Masters  in  Divinitie,  and  Friers  1250.J

which  occupied  both  Churches  and  Palaces  in  new  and
meerely  Papall  hypocrisies  and  priviledges.  And  since,
the  revenues  of  Poperie,  as  we  shall  by  and  by  see,  are
foure,  Temporalties,  Collations  of  Benefices,  Indulgences,
and  Dispensations.

*3

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

c.  1625.

But  I  rather  like  their  Interpretation,  which  apply  these
foure  to  the  Angels  of  destruction,  which  literally  have
beene  loosed  from  Euphrates  upon  the  Christian  world,
and  indeed  destroyed  the  third  part  of  Christian  men  with
bodily  death.  For  presently  after  Boniface  the  Pope  had
obtained  his  Supremacy  of  Phocas,  Mahomet  arose  with
his  new  Sect  in  the  East ;  the  one  with  Locusts,  (whereof
you  have  heard)  to  corrupt  the  soules ;  the  other  with
Horses  in  his  Successors,  to  destroy  the  bodies  of  men.
And  these  Angels  of  destruction  have  beene  many  waies
foure.  First,  in  the  foure  Doctors,  Authours  of  the  foure
SeemyPUg.l. Sects  of  that  irreligious  Religion. For  Mahumet  having

2 C 2 § 2  /•  ®  «

*'  taken  Mecca,  created  foure  Generals,  Ebubezer,  Omar,

Osmen,  and  Ali ;  whom  he  called,  the  foure  sharpe  Swords
of  God,  and  commanded  them  to  goe  into  the  foure  parts
of  the  world,  to  kill  such  as  resisted.  After  Mahumets
oee  my  Pi/g.  death,  these  foure  successively  succeeded.  These  may  be
called  foure  Angels,  as  the  foure  Doctors  of  the
Mahumetan  Law,  (so  they  are  usually  stiled  by  the
Mahumetans)  and  reckoned  Saints  in  their  Kalender ;
whom  they  say  Mahomet  had  prophecied  should  succeed
him,  who  also  fained  his  Law  received  from  the  Angell
Gabriel.  These  were  Authors  of  foure  Sects  also,  Ali  or
Hali,  of  the  Sect  Imemia ;  Osmen  of  the  Sect  Baanesia,
Homar  of  the  Anesia,  Ebubezer  of  the  Melchia.  These
foure  in  their  succeeding  Generations,  have  bin  sent  out
from  neere  the  parts  of  Euphrates  :  where  before  they  may
be  said  to  be  bound,  because  that  howsoever  Chosroes
or  some  others  at  some  start,  or  advantage  passed  over,
and  did  hurt  to  the  Romane  Empire,  (then  the  most
flourishing  part  of  the  Church)  yet  did  they  not  continue
any  long  space,  or  much  prevaile  on  this  side  Euphrates,
that  being  the  boundary,  as  it  were  appointed  of  God,
betwixt  the  Roman  and  the  Parthian,  and  after,  betwixt
the  Roman  and  Persian  Empires.  But  after  the
Mahumetans  had  once  appeared  from  Arabia,  which
Euphrates  washeth,  they  in  one  Age  over-ranne  Egypt,
Syria,  Palestina, Persia, yea  overwhelmed Africa, quite

14

ADVANCE OF THE PAPAL MONARCHY ad.

c.  1625.
thorow  to  the  Streights,  and  all  Spaine,  with  many  other
Countries,*  never  after  recovered  to  the  Empire. And  *See  uhl  SUP-
as they began  with foure  Angels in foure Sects, and '  3* c'
conquering  to  the  foure  Winds : so  there  have  beene  of
them  foure  principall  Deluges,  each  from  Euphrates,  over-
whelming the  world. That  we  reckon  the  first,  in  that
Saracenicall  Age : the  second,  that  of  the  Turkes,  which
under Belpheth tooke Diogenes the Greeke Emperor
prisoner,  and  conquered  in  manner  all  the  Countrey  to
Constantinople,  the  occasion  of  this  Jerosolymitan  expedi-
tion, and  consequently,  of  killing  the  third  part  of  men,
dwelling  in  remote  Countries  which  they  had  not  seene,
but  came  to  the  Holy  Land  as  the  publike  slaughter  place
and Shambles of the Christian world : in which it is
remarkable,  that  the  two  Calyphas  of  Bagdet  and  Cairo,
one  on  the  one  side,  the  other  on  the  other  of  Euphrates,
otherwise  dissenting,  consented  yet  like  Herod  and  Pilate,
to  kill  Christ  again  in  his  members,  and  to  perpetrate  those
butcheries, yee  have  read of  in the  former  Relations.
And  let  the  understanding  Reader  examine  the  Roman
Stories,  and  see  if  in  above  sixe  hundred  yeares  from
Romulus forward, there was so much Ethnicke  bloud
spilt  on  both  sides,  to  purchase  the  Roman  Monarchic,  as
here  in  much  lesse  then  the  third  part  of  that  time,  was
occasioned  to  be  spilt  by  the  Romish  Hierarchie :  on  both
sides  shall  I  say? Or  may  I  make  the  question,  even  of
that  which  was  meerely  Christian  of  the  Easterne  and
Westerne  beleevers? And  the  third  overflowing,  was  of
the  Tartars,  at  first  not  Mahumetan,  yea  destroying  Bagdet  See  of  the
and  the  Calypha,  and  enemies  to  mankind  in  generall,  but  Jart  mJ  Pl&
after proving, and still continuing in greatest part 'anjl2  a'na*
Mohumetan. These did almost roote out the Chris- after  fol  In
tianitie of the greater Asia, and erected the greatest  this  Worke  in
Empire  (not  with  best  bloudshed)  that  ever  was  :  yea,  they  Haiton^M.
not  onely  over-ranne  the  Christians,  as  farre  as  Poland °'0'
and  Russia,  Hungaria  and  Germany  by  themselves,  but
forced  the  Chorosmines  out  of  Persia,  (which  as  you  have
heard  gave  the  fatallest  blow  to  the  Christians  in  the  Holy

15

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGBIMES

c.  1625.

Land)  and  rooted  out  the  Turkish  Kingdome  there,  and
forced  them  also  to  invade  the  Christians,  founding  in  the
See  T.  H.  pa.  Christian  ruines  the  Aladine  Turkish  Kingdome  in
Natolia,  and  enforcing  over  Euphrates  the  Progenitors  of
Ottoman,  from  whom  beginneth  our  fourth  Epocha,  and
that  fourth  Deluge  of  the  Turkish  Nation,  which  hath
devoured  such  worlds  of  Christian  flesh.  The  Warres
also  of  these  peoples,  have  beene  principally  by  Horses,
neither  doe  I  thinke  the  number  expressed  of  two
hundred  Millions  is  any  whit  hyperbolicall,  if  we
consider  the  innumerable  Armies  of  innumerable  Horse-
men, which  they  have  in  divers  times  burthened
the  World  withall.  That  of  the  Tartars  alone,  if
Authors  report  truly,  easily  makes  credible  that  incred-
ible number.  The  later  expedition  of  the  Tartars  under
Tamerlane,  how  monstrous  doth  it  seeme  ?

Also,  Their  Horses  having  power  in  their  mouthes  and
tailes,  agrees  to  the  manner  of  Warre  used  by  those
Nations,  which  used  a  conjoyned  flight  and  fight,  as  before
yee  have  read,  that  even  then  when  they  seemed  to  flye,
they  had  Serpent  headed  tailes,  and  did  flee  but  in  cunning
sleight,  to  returne  to  greater  mischiefe,  shooting  also  as  they
fled,  and  wounding  their  pursuers.

And  as  the  number  of  foure, so  sitteth  their  foure
[Il.vin.  Doctors,  foure  Sects,  foure  Deluges; so  also  have  they

lz5lm\  had  foure  principall  places  of  residence, neere  to  Euphrates,
Mecca  still  hallowed  in  their  profane  Rites,  the  seate  of
Mahomet  and  his  first  Successors.  After  that  Damascus
(for  Jerusalem  continued  not  their  Imperiall  residence)
and  after  that  Bagdet,  to  which  by  a  contrary  faction  was
opposed  Cairo,  succeeding  herein  to  Cairaoan,  as  that  to
Tunis.

Likewise,  foure  great  Nations  doe  still  observe  these
Eufratean  Angels,  the  Turkish  (to  whom  the  huge  African
tracts  have  some  reference),  the  Persian,  the  Tartars  (the
chiefe  of  which  is  now  seated  in  India,  the  Mogol
successor  of  Tamerlan)  and  the  Indian  (in  many  smaller
and  specially  maritime  Kingdomes)  depending  for  their

16

ADVANCE  OF  THE  PAPAL  MONARCHY ad.

c.  1625.

Faith  and  Scepter  of  the  Arabians,  which  beginning  with

Trade  proceeded  to  Conquest. But  more  then  enough  of

these  things. Wherein  we  see  all  plainly  agreeing  to  this

warring  Religion,  as  in  the  former  to  the  Romish  Locusts  ;

in  both  perhaps  rather  intimating  the  danger  to  Christians

by both Angels (the one corporall, the other chiefly

spirituall) then their time : both which wee see have

continued  so  long  a  time,  and  spread  so  farre,  that  they

thereby,  the  Moore  aswell  as  Papist,  plead  Catholike  from  See  hefore
tT • ' iv  Finches

U  niversalitie.  journal/

Yet  if  we  will  weigh  the  time,  when  both  were  likely  to
doe  Christendome  most  harme,  and  like  Samsons  Foxes  Apoc.  20.  1.
looking  contrarie,  held  a  fierie  conjunction  in  their  tailes,
to  set  the  World  on  fire ;  this  Angell  of  the  bottomlesse
pit,  puts  us  in  minde  of  another  Angell  which  came  downe
from  heaven,  having  the  key  of  the  bottomlesse  pit,  and
a  great  chaine  in  his  hand,  And  hee  laid  hold  on  the
Dragon  that  old  Serpent,  and  bound  him  one  thousand
yeeres.  And  cast  him  into  the  bottomlesse  pit,  and  shut
him  up  and  set  a  seale  upon  him,  that  he  should  deceive
the  Nations  no  more  till  the  thousand  yeeres  should  be
fulfilled,  and  after  that  he  must  be  loosed  a  little  season.
This  is  not  a  falling  starre,  but  an  Angell  which  descends  ;  Mai.  3.
even  Christ  himselfe  (which  is  called  the  Angell  of  the  Apoc  1.
Covenant)  and  hath  the  keyes  of  Hell  and  Death,  which
entreth  into  the  strong  mans  house  and  binds  him  (as
Primasius,  Andreas  Caesariensis,  and  other  interpreters  doe
agree)  that  hee  should  not  seduce  the  Nations  or  Church
of  the  Gentiles,  as  before  in  a  generall  defection  and
idolatrie.  But  after  that  thousand  yeeres  expired,  he
should  be  loosed,  not  so  long  as  in  the  Gentile  super-
stitions, nor  all  so  farre,  but  exchanging  those  prophane
Idoll  names  (with  greater  wrong  to  Gods  holy  Angels
and  Saints)  should  in  holier  Names  and  shewes  restore
those  Heathen  Rites,  Lights,  Images,  and  other  will-
worships  of  Angels  and  dead  men.  Now,  for  a  thousand
yeeres  after  Christ,  the  state  of  Christs  Church,  though  it
were  still  after  the  primitive  golden  Age  somewhat
viii  17  B

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

c.  1625.

declining,  as  the  Fathers  and  Ecclesiasticall  Histories
shew :  Yet  in  substantiall  and  fundamentall  points  it
continued  sound,  as  Bishop  Jewel  in  the  mayne  points  of
Controversie  hath  shewed  for  sixe  hundred  yeeres,  and
**feJ?'F  UJher  Bishop  Usher  for  the  foure  Ages  following,  although  these
y  g't  were much more corrupt then those former. Nemo

repente  fuit  turpissimus :  and  it  is  true  of  mysticall  Rome
also>  that  it  was  not  built  in  one  day.  But  I  had  rather
the  Reader  should  examine  this  point  in  Bishop  Usher  his
learned  worke,  de  Christ.  Eccles.  Success.  &  Statu.  I  am
more  then  enough  busied  in  our  Holy  Land  pilgrimage.

Cedrenus  mentions  divers  starres  fallen,  one  An.  1033.
which  made  a  noise  in  the  fall  (cum  sonitu  &  fragore)  and
another  the  next  yeere,  which  in  the  night  made  so  great
a  light,  that  people  thought  the  Sunne  had  risen.  He
mentions  also  terrible  Armies  of  Locusts,  which  brought
miserable  famine  over  those  parts :  as  if  God  by  visible
signes  would  then  warne  men  to  observe  these  mysticall
predictions,  when  they  were  to  worke  their  most  complete
effects.  The  like  is  mentioned  in  the  West  by  Floria-
censis  and  others.  An  earthquake  at  Jerusalem  destroyed
many  buildings,  and  men,  continuing  fortie  dayes.  The
Glab.Rodulph.  Temple  of  the  Sepulchre  had  a  little  before  beene  razed  by
4- c-  6- hi5t-  Azius,  whose  sonne  permitted  the  reedif ying  thereof,  and
presently  there  resorted  innumerable  numbers ;  first,  of
the  meanest ;  after  of  the  meane  sort,  after  of  Kings,
Prelates,  Earles ;  and  lastly,  of  women  both  noble  and
base.  And  when  some  questioned  what  this  might
signifie,  it  was  answered,  the  comming  of  Antichrist.
Once ;  from  the  thousandth  yeere  after  Christ,  till  Hilde-
brands  time,  Anno  1073.  hapned  more  frequent  and
prodigious  signes  in  Heaven,  Locusts,  Famines,  &c.  on
earth,  then  ever  we  read  of,  as  Glaber  and  other  Historians
have  recorded.

And  for  those  Hierosolymitan  Pilgrimages  in  such
numbers,  what  did  they  else  but  make  way  to  these
bloudie  expeditions,  after  that  Peter  the  Eremite  had
received  a  revelation  thereof. Neither  is  it  likely,  that

18

ADVANCE  OF  THE  PAPAL  MONARCHY ad.

c.  1625.
this  revelation  was  from  any  but  the  Devill  (so  many
superstitious  revelations,  then  more  plainly  arguing  this
loosing  of  Satan)  which  is  a  lyar  and  murtherer  from  the
beginning,  and  can  turne  himselfe  into  an  Angel  of  light,
as  appeareth  by  his  fore-mentioned  vanitie,  by  the
monstrous  impietie  of  his  followers,  in  sacrileges  and  all
abuses  to  God  and  Men,  in  almost  idolatrie  to  himselfe.
Whose  attempts  at  Jerusalem,  whatsoever  lustre  they
sparkle  forth,  yet  wanted  not  some  sparke  of  Hell,  in  that
they  were  so  died  in  bloud,  corrupted  with  spoiles,
corrupting  with  superstition,  and  with  neglect  of  their
aeconomicall  and  politicall  calling.  Christ  himselfe  had
said,  the  true  worshippers  should  worship  the  Father,  not
at  Jerusalem,  nor  in  that  Mountayne,  but  in  spirit  and
truth :  for  God  seekes  such  to  worship  him.  And
although  I  denie  not  that  a  place  dignified  with  holy
actions  or  passions,  may  bee  a  Place  to  the  memorie  and
affection  exciting  holinesse,  yet  for  Religion  of  place  to
leave  or  neglect  our  place  and  calling  in  Religion,  is  [H.viii.
superstitious;  and  to  ascribe  sanctitie  to  the  place,  is  G  lf^Zj
Jewish.  Gregorie  Nyssene  hath  written  a  whole  Epistle  %  "•  adeunt
against  such  Hierosolymitan  Pilgrims,  alledging,  that  it  Hierosol.
is  neither  commanded,  nor  is  God  present,  or  the  holy
Ghost  any  more  there  then  in  other  places  of  Christen-
dome ;  yea  lesse,  because  more  iniquitie  is  there
committed,  in  no  place  more  nor  more  abominable  :  that
himselfe  had  beene  there,  but  in  the  Churches  affaires,
and  made  this  benefit  thereby  to  know  that  their  owne
were  more  holy ;  with  other  like  passages  against  that
superstitious  passage.  Which  might  better  be  spoken  of
these  Worlds  of  men,  which  travelled  nothing  from  them-
selves and  their  vices  in  this  Pilgrimage,  as  the  stories
testifier  yea  Vitriacus  Bishop  of  Achon,  tells  of  the
Christians  which  lived  at  Jerusalem,  as  if  they  were  the
worst  in  all  the  world.  And  what  else  were  the  Templers,
and  other  their  chiefe  Warriours,  but  such  as  were,  The  «mU  « ,  m

1 *t«  1  1/-1  r  s>  • /• •  1  oUlp.  oetl.  1.2.

neerer  the  Temple,  the  further  from  God,  verifying  that  BedainMar.
proverbe,  Caelum  non  animum  mutant,  qui trans  mare  13,  lie

19

a.d.  PUECHAS HIS PILGRIMES

c.  1625.

currant?  The  ancients  thought  that  God  suffered
Jerusalem  before  to  bee  destroyed,  for  the  further  propa-
gating of  the  Catholike  Church,  which  liveth  and  walketh
by  Faith  and  not  by  sight :  id  Domino  ordinante
dispositum,  ut  legis  servitus  a  libertate  fidei  atque  Ecclesiae
tolleretur.  And  sure,  just  one  thousand  yeeres  after  this
ruine  of  the  Temple  lived  Hildebrand,  who  began  the
Monarchic  of  the  Church,  in  the  deposing  of  Kings,  which
nothing  ever  so  much  effected  as  this  disposing  them  first
to  serve  the  Crosse,  and  after  the  Crosse  to  serve  to  depose
them.  It  savours  somewhat  of  the  Devills  loosing,  that
they  which  are  called  Gods,  hereby  were  so  loosed  from
their  charges,  and  their  charges  or  subjects  by  Crusados
loosed  from  them,  loosed  against  them.  Mirabilis
Dod;chinusy spiritus, (saith Dodechinus Abbas in his Appendix to

ui tus, Marianus  Scotus)  illius  temporis  homines  impulit  ad  illud

Albertus  Aq. .  j-j  a  -i  • • /  1 1  1

yf  iter aggrediendum. A mervailous spirit (the loosed

Dragon,  it  seemeth)  moved  the  men  of  that  time.  For
women  used  mans  habit  and  went  armed.  And  he  saith,
that  Peter  the  Eremite  carried  about  a  Scroll,  which  he
said,  was  fallen  from  Heaven,  commanding  men  hereto.
Men,  Women,  and  Children  followed  him,  so  as
Kingdomes  were  void  of  Governours,  Cities  of  Pastors,
Streets  of  Inhabitants.  They  began  their  bloudie  and
disordered  out-rages  upon  the  Jewes,  and  after  that  used
like  hostilitie  against  the  Christians  in  Hungarie  (which
had  shewed  them  kindnesse)  and  other  places  as  they
passed,  besides  their  uncleannesse,  fornications,  and
abominations  amongst  themselves.  Albertus  Aquensis
addeth  ;  Bishops,  Abbots,  Monkes,  Clergie-men,  Nobles,
Princes,  and  all  the  vulgar,  aswell  chaste  as  incestuous,
Adulterers,  Homicides,  Theeves,  Perjured,  Robbers,  and
all  the  kind  of  Christian  profession,  and  the  Womankind
led  with  penance  (the  fruits  of  which  their  Expedition
declared)  runne  together  at  Peters  preaching  this  way.
He  tells  that  Christ  appeared  in  vision  to  Peter,  bidding
him  carrie  from  the  Patriarke,  Letters  of  our  Embassage,
and  thou  shalt  rayse  the  hearts  of  the  faithfull  to  purge

20

ADVANCE OF THE PAPAL MONARCHY ad.

c.  1625.
the  holy  Places  of  Jerusalem,  and  to  restore  the  services  of
the  Saints  (officia  Sanctorum.)  For  now  by  perils  and
many  tentations,  the  gates  of  Paradise  shall  be  opened  to
the  Elect  and  Called.  Leonem  ex  ungue.  You  may
know  by  his  Offices  of  Saints  what  Christ  this  was,  and
what  Paradise  was  now  set  open,  as  also  by  Peters  peoples
proper  successe,  which  being  fortie  thousand,  and  the  first
that  went,  after  much  villanie,  perished  by  Christian  and
Turkish  swords  before  the  rest  could  come,  not  above
three  thousand  being  left.  Godscalke  Priest,  led  fifteene
thousand  with  like  successe.

But  above  all,  they  were  so  superstitiously  devoted  to Quicquid
Peter,  that  whatsoever  hee  said  or  did,  was  held  subdivine,  a&°at  seu .
and  they  plucked  off  his  Mules  haires  for  Relikes  (his  J^^'J
hypocriticall  abstinence,  Robert  the  Monke  hath  before  subdivinum
told you.) These are the words of Guibert an eye-  videbatur,
witnesse,  which  never  saw  man  so  frequented  with  multi-  prffertimcum
tudes,  so  enriched  with  gifts  (which  he  bestowed  on  his  \\^ J11  p™
followers)  so  applauded  for  sanctitie. And  which  more  reUqum  rape-
encreased  the  wonder  (he  calls  it  a  miracle)  victuals  being  rentur,  Guib.
that  yeere  very  deare,  yet  men  sold  their  goods  cheape  to  hlsL  Hter-
buy  provisions  deare  for  that  way  of  God,  as  it  was  called.
Yea, the men which to day laughed at men for this
distracted  devotion,  to  morrow  were  suddenly  possessed
with like instinct, and imitated those whom they had
derided. Children,  saith  he,  old  Wives,  tender  Virgins,
trembling  old  Men, devoted  themselves  to  warres  and
Martyrdome : poore  men  carrying  their  small  substance
in  Carts  with  their  little  ones,  which  asked  at  every  Towne
if  it  were  Jerusalem. These  and  much  more  shall  you
read of the generall confused raptures of that Age.
Fulcherius hath told you of sixtie hundred thousand,
which  under-tooke  the  way,  most  of  which  repented,  or
dyed,  or  were  forced  to  stay. God  is  not  a  God  of  con- 1.  Cor.  14.
fusion: & quae a Deo sunt, ordinata sunt. These  Rom-  !3-
confusions preach Babylon, and these raptures, strange
instincts,  strong,  impetuous,  mad  zeale,  revelations,  and  all
abominations  in  all  places,  plainly  proclaime  that  Hell  was

21

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

c.  1625.

broken  loose  indeed  :  and  the  crie  of  bloud,  and  exaltation
of  superstition  in  Reliques,  and  the  like  crie  out,  that
Satan  was  loosed.

When  I  read  that  Anselme  esteemed  the  Alpha  of  his

times  for  learning  and  sanctitie,  gave  so  light  credit  to

receive  two  haires,  brought  by  a  Souldier  of  Boamunds

companie  from  those  parts,  with  great  joy  and  reverence,

So  Eadmerus and  to  keepe  them  with  great  veneration,  as  two  of  the

which  was  his  haires  which  the  blessed  Virgin  plucked  from  her  head  at

keeper  of  them, ^  Q.osse  m  ^ t'me  Qf  the  passion  . (two  others  the

Bishop of Roan received with a long Procession of
Monkes,  Canons,  Priests,  People,  with  the  greatest  honor.)
What  may  we  thinke  of  the  unlearned  vulgar? Yea,  his
[Il.viii.  judgement  of  Relikes  Eadmerus  describeth,  upon  occasion

12 S3*]  of  a  Bone,  said  to  be  of  Prisca  the  Martyr,  given  him,
whom  desiring  more,  Anselme  restrayned,  saying,  that  her
body  cannot  bee  entire  so  long  as  this  Bone  shall  be
wanting.  Wherefore  if  thou  shalt  keepe  it  worthily,  and
.  shalt  serve  the  Lady  whose  it  is  with  what  devotion  thou
canst,  shee  will  accept  the  gift  of  thy  service  as  thankefully
as  if  thou  shouldest  serve  her  whole  bodie.  Of  the
Crosse  you  have  alreadie  read,  upon  what  ground  it  was
received  (a  superstitious  Surians  report,  as  the  former  on
a  Souldiers)  how  observed  and  served,  and  consequently
how  multiplyed.  Once,  Revelations  caused  adoration  at
Reliques,  Crosses,  Images,  Pilgrimages,  and  the  like  ;  that
is,  the  Devill  was  loosed  a  thousand  yeeres  after  Christ,  to
seduce  the  Nations  as  before,  to  Ethnike  idolatrie  and
superstition,  all  things  fitted  to  Heathenish  splendor,  and
himselfe  with  signes  and  lying  wonders,  working  effec-
tually in  the  children  of  disobedience ;  Ethnicisme  in
*Ofth  Rites and worships being  restored, but Palliated with

to  Papa//  Christian  names  and  shewes.  A  thousand  yeeres*  had
power  in  that  passed  after  Christ,  before  the  Reall  Presence  was  decreed
dge  by  (more before Transubstantiation, Elevation, Adoration,

nuae crams Communion  in  one  kind)  before  the  Cardinals  grew  Kings

dec7'ees C3 c /»

See  d!  Ush.  fellowes,  the  Election  of  the  Pope  being  devolved  to
uhi  suf>.  them ; before  Canonists,  and  Schoolemen,  the  issues  cf

22

ADVANCE  OF  THE  PAPAL  MONARCHY ad.

c.  1625.
Lumbard  and  Gratian,  before  exemptions  of  the  Clergie
from  Kings,  before  Kings  became  Subjects  to  the  Pope,
before  there  were  any  Friars,  before  religious  Orders  were
so  divided,  subdivided,  multiplyed ;  before  Indulgences,
Jubilees,  Canonizations,  legall  power  of  Decretals,
Generall  Councels  of  all  Christendome  called  and  ordered
by  the  Pope,  before  marriages  wholly  prohibited  the
Clergie,  before  Saturday  made  our  Ladies  day,  before
Crusado's,  Interdictments,  Inquisitions,  and  other  carnall
and  spirituall  Monsters  of  crueltie.  A  thousand  yeeres
had  passed  before  this  present  face  of  Poperie  had  once
seene  the  World,  or  the  World  it ;  which  after  that  time
of  the  Devils  loosing  by  degrees  crept  in,  even  the
moderne  Councell  of  Trent  adding  many  things,  and  many
things  still  added  occasionally  by  Papall  Constitutions  to
Popish  faith.  The  smoke  from  the  bottomlesse  pit
darkned  the  light  of  the  Sunne  to  humane  eyes :  and  this
Papall  Moone  is  ever  in  change,  the  Scriptures,  as
Cardinall  Cusanus  writes,  altering  their  sense  also  with  Card.  Cus.
the  practice  &  interpretation  of  the  Church.  Now  indeed  E?tsL  ad  BoL
was  the  time  when  Antichrist  was  ascended  his  Throne,
which  had  beene  closely  conceived  in  former  and  better
times ;  for  even  in  Pauls  time  the  mysterie  of  iniquitie
did  alreadie  worke,  when  some  preached  Christ  of  envie  Phil.  1.  Esf  2.
and  strife,  when  the  Pastors  did  not  naturally  care  for  the
state  of  the  Flocke,  with  a  genuine,  Fatherly  and  Pastorly
regard ;  but  all  sought  their  owne  and  not  the  things  of
Christ;  and  that  in  Rome:  so  that  whereas  charitie  *•  Cor.  13.
seeketh  not  her  owne,  and  God  is  charitie,  and  he  that  l*Job-\-
dwelleth  in  charitie  dwelleth  in  God  and  God  in  him,  the
Devill  had  no  fitter  meane  to  under-mine  the  Faith,  then
by  diverting  charitie,  perverting  and  subverting  it  with
selfe-love  and  ambition.  Which  seedes  lay  hidden  (onely
now  and  then  some  motions  and  springings,  as  it  were,  in
the  wombe  of  the  Roman  Church,  by  some  proud  and
wicked  Popes  testified  both  conception  and  quicknesse)  till
by  Phocas  his  Mid-wiferie  Antichrist  was  borne,  above
sixe  hundred  yeeres  after  Christ,  and  grew  up  by  degrees

23

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

c.  1625.

to  further  maturitie,  till  a  thousand  yeeres  were  expired,
and  the  Devill  was  againe  loosed  in  the  Sea  of  Rome.
Of  this  loosing These  thousand  yeeres,  after  some  were  expired  in  the
of  Satan,  see thousandth  yeere,  when  Sylvester  the  second  was  Pope,
book  de Christ.  w^°  ^ac^  attayned  the  Seate  by  compact  with  the  Devill,
Eccks.  success,  according  to  whose  ^equivocating  Oracle  he  lost  it  and  his
W  statu. life,  saying  Masse  in  Jerusalem,  a  Chappell  so  called,  which
he  understood  of  the  Holy  Citie. The  common  expecta-
tion of  those  times  was  of  the  Devils  loosing  and  the
Worlds  end,  but  seeing  no  such  matter  (for  this  was  a
mysterie,  in  which  men  could  not  see  Wood  for  Trees)
they  fell  every  where  on  worke  with  building  of  glorious
Hi/,  com. fabrikes  of  Monasteries  and  Churches. Of  which  Hilaries
Aur.  Aman. worc[s deserve memorie : Cavete Antichristum. Male
enim  vos  parietum  amor  cepit, male  Ecclesiam  Dei  in
tectis  aedificiisque  veneramini :  male  sub  his,  pacis  nomen
ingeritis. Anne  ambiguum  est  in  his  Antichristum  esse
sessurum? Wickliffe,  White  and  Luther,  with  others  of
later  times  have  applyed  the  loosing  of  Satan  to  that  time.
Otho  the  Emperour  gave  eight  Cities  to  this  Sylvester  in
Marca  Ancona,  for  his  more  Papall  Port.

Others  begin  these  thousand  yeeres  from  Christs
Passion,  at  which  time  another  Conjurer  Theophylact,
called  Benedict  the  ninth,  was  Pope,  made  at  ten  or  twelve
yeeres  of  age :  at  which  time  Authors  tell  strange  reports
of  devouring  Locusts  in  the  East  and  West,  and  of  a
portentuous  Dragon,  appearing  of  a  mile  in  length,  huge
bignesse,  dreadfull  with  horrible  scales,  hissing,  coldnesse,
colours,  without  legs  and  feet,  as  Arnolphus  an  eye-
witnesse  testifieth,  ending  in  terrible  thunders  all  that  day
(the  Friday  seven-night  after  Whitsontide)  and  the  next.

Others  referre  this  loosing  of  Satan  to  Hildebrands
time,  another  famous  Sorcerer,  so  stiled  (and  therefore
deposed)  not  by  Benno  alone,  but  by  a  whole  Synode  of
Bishops,  Anno  1080.  He  brought  in  the  doctrines  of
Devills,  forbidding  the  Clergie  marriage  (which  caused
great  tragedies)  and  appointing  Saturday  fasts.  Once ;
hee  exalted  the  Papacie  and  Romish  Church  to  freedome,

24

ADVANCE OF THE PAPAL MONARCHY a.d.

c.  1625.
wealth,  temporall  Revenue,  to  rule  over  all  secular  Rulers,
to  be  Lady  of  all  Christians,  from  whom  the  right  of  this
great, ever-dreadfull  and  venerable, and  almost  infinite
power  (they  are  the  words  of  Onuphrius)  hath  proceeded.  next  Pope
He  first  deposed  the  Emperour,  and  he  tooke  order  for  nved  hut  a
exalting  this  Urban  *  the  second  (the  second  Turban  or  Tittle  while.
Hildebrand)  to  the  Seate. As  for  the  manners  of  those  [ILvin.
times  how  degenerate  they  were,  all  the  Authors  which  I254-J

then  writ,  yea  Tyrius  the  most  famous  Writer  of  these
Holy  Land  warres,  have  delivered  them  beyond  all
parallel  of  all  Ages  for  crueltie,  oppression,  ignorance,
treason,  and  all  abhominations  of  desolation ;  and  like
Priests  like  People.  Let  the  Reader  see  these  things  more
fully  handled  in  Doctor  Ushers  learned  worke.  As  for
those  which  begin  the  Devils  binding  at  Constantines
time,  and  loosing  with  Boniface,  one  thousand  and  three
hundred  yeeres  after  Christ,  they  doe  not  well  consider
that  from  Gregorie  to  Boniface  there  was  more  effusion
of  Christian  bloud,  then  had  beene  all  the  times  of  the
ten  Primitive  Persecutions  ;  not  onely  by  Turkes,  Tartars,
and  civill  warres  amongst  the  Christians ;  but  also  by
occasion  of  the  Warres  called  Holy,  both  in  the  millions
which  perished  in  them,  and  other  millions  by  them
through  Indulgences  against  Emperours,  Kings,  Princes,
States,  Albigenses  and  all  the  Opponents  whatsoever.
And  what  are  seventie  to  a  thousand,  whethersoever  of
these  three  opinions  be  followed  ?

§•  n.

Of  the  foure  meanes  which  Popes  have  to  get
monies :  Of  the  two  first,  their  Temporalties
and  Collations  of  Benefices.

Hist,  concil.

Ranciscus  Soderinus  Cardinall  of  Volterra,  a  man  Trid.L  1.
versed  in  the  troublesome  affaires  of  the  Papacies  published  in
of Alexander, Julius and Leo, could counsell  {****  anf

A  1 .  .  r  •  r  1  Latin,  and

Adrian  that  reformation  or  manners  was  not  the  way  to  Englished  by

extinguish  Heresies,  raysed  against  the  authoritie  of  the  Master  Brent.

25

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

c.  1625.

Church  of  Rome ; but  Crusado's,  by  exciting  Princes  and
People  to  roote  them  out ; that  thus  Innocent  the  third
oppressed  the  Albigenses,  and  the  succeeding  Popes  the
Waldenses,  Picards,  Lionists,  Arnoldists,  Speronists  and
Patavines : that  likewise  many  German  Princes  if  they
might have leave to seise on the States of Luthers
favourers, would  greedily embrace the condition ; and
many  might  bee  caused  to  follow  them  by  Indulgences.
Neither  could  any  reformation  be  made  without  diminish-
ing the Rents of the Church, which having foure
Fountaynes, the one Temporall (the Rents of the
Ecclesiasticall state) the other three Spiritual^ Indul-
gences, Dispensations,  and  Collations  of  Benefices ; none
of  them  could  be  stopped,  but  that  one  quarter  of  the
Revenues  would  be  cut off. You  see  here the  foure
Rivers  of  the  Popes  Paradise,  the  foure  feete  of  the  Beast,
all  which  had  either  their  beginning  of  being,  or  strength
at  least  to  support  it  about  these  times. For  as  for  the
Temporall  Revenues,  their  originall  is  derived  from  the
rebellion raysed against Leo Iconomachus, whom for
abolishing  Images,  Pope  Gregorie  the  second  excommuni-
cated,  ac mox Italia populos Sacramenti (they are the
Car.Sigon.de  words of Sigonius the Popes Historian) quo se illi
reg.  ltd.  1. 3. obligaverant  religione  exoluit,  &  ne  ei  aut  tributum  darent,
aut  alia  ratione  obedirent, in  dixit. Thus  the  People
rebelled, killed the Emperours Lieutenants and sware
subjection  to  the  Pope. Ita  Roma,  Romanusque  Ducatus
ad Rom. Pontificem pervenit. So did Rome and the
Roman  Dukedome  accrue  to  the  Pope  by  treason  (or  by
leasing,  for  Onuphrius  a  Papall  Antiquarie  esteemes  it  a
tale)  and  having  thrived  so  well  by  treason  at  home,  he
fared  much  better  by  like  arts  elsewhere  :  the  French,  by  the
Popes  counsaile  enthronizing  Pipine,  and  deposing  Chil-
perike :  who  with  Charles  his  sonne  were  not  unthankfull.
For  to  omit  Pipines  devotion,  his  sonne  Charles  having
subdued  the  Lumbards  (which  still  were  troublesome  to
the  Popes,  not  permitting  them  well  to  hold  what  they
Sig.  I.  4. had  so  ill  gotten)  left  Apulia  and  Calabria  to  the  Emperour

26

ADVANCE  OF  THE  PAPAL  MONARCHY ad.

c.  1625.
(which  the  Normans  after  turned  into  another  Kingdome)
to others other parts, to the Pope he permitted the
Exarchate  of  Ravenna,  Pentapolis,  the  Perusine  Duke-
dome,  the  Roman>  Tuscane  and  Campan,  jure,  principatu  Onuph.invita
&  ditione  sibi  retenta ; reliqua  ipse  sibi nomine  regni  Gre&  7* co*-
retinuit. The Right, Sovereigntie and Jurisdiction  ^22
reserved,  made  the  Pope  no  absolute  Prince : and  the  divers
acknowledging  him  Patricius  Romanus,  the  making  and  Authors,  cited
Investiture  by  Ring  and  StafFe  of  Archbishops  and  Bishops  h  &-  Usher,
in  every  Province,  yea  his  choosing  the  Pope  and  ordering  u  1 5U^
the  Apostolike  Sea,  made  him  an  absolute  subject. And
subjects they were till Hildebrands time, and their
authoritie, saith Onuphrius, extended not further then
matters of  Faith, Caeterum Imperatoribus suberant, ad
eorum  nutum  omnia  fiebant,  de  eis  judicare  vel  quidquam
decernere  non  audebat  Papa  Romanus. Primus  omnium  *Sigeb.Chron.
R.  Pont. Greg. 7.  armis  Nortmannorum  fretus,  opibus  hac  sola
Comitissae Mathildis mulieris  per Italiam Potentissimae  nomta^ne

r  i-  j*  r>  L t~»  • •  i_ 11 • -r  dicam  heresis

connsus,  discordiaque  Germanorum  Principum  bello  civili  ^c Qtho

laborantium inflammatus, praeter majorum morem con-  fris,  kgo  y

tempta  Imperatoris  authoritate  &  potestate,  cum  summum  re/ego  Rom.

Pontificatum  obtinuisset,  Caesarem  ipsum  (a  quo  si  non  re&um  &

electus,  saltern  confirmatus  fuerat)  non  dico  excommuni-  m^'  ges  a

j  '  ^  nusquam

care,  sed  etiam  regno  Impenoque  pnvare  ausus  est. Res  invenio  ante

ante  ea  saecula  inaudita. Nam  fabulas  quae  de  Arcadio,  &c.

Anastasio, & Leone Iconomacho circumferuntur nihil  ®tho  Fru-

moror. And thus whereas the Popes and the whole  ?h™'  ^ 6#

Clergie  had  beene  exalted  by  Princes,  they  became  Princes  proj  7

of their  Princes ; and  in  this  Gregorie first  * imitated  Fid.  lib.  de

David,  which  cut  off  Goliahs  head  with  his  owne  sword,  vlta  Henr-

as  Otho  Frisingensis  hath  observed. Henrie  the  fourth  wptien  h one

King,  the  third  Emperor  of  that  name,  was  the  subject  of  Maimsb^x

Gregories  furie,  a  man  for  humilitie,  patience,  and  many  de  Reg.  Ang.

vertues  much  commended ;  yea,  for  bountie  to  the  Church,  [H.viii.
as  at  Spire,  Mentz,  &c.  and  for  valour  tried  in  sixtie  two  I255-J

battels,  but  so  haunted  with  the  evill  Genius  of  the
Papacie,  ut  rem  religionis  tractare  sibi  videretur  quisquis
in  ilium  (you  read  our  Malmesburie)  arma  produceret.

27

A.D.

c.  1625.

Theod.  de.
Schif.  I.  2.  c.

13-

Plat,  de  vit  P.
in  Bon.  9.

*See  Bot.  and
Booke  of
Estates  by
E.  G.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

The  temporall  power  of  the  Pope,  was  much  increased  by
the  great  Legacie  of  Countesse  Mathildis,  (as  a  little  before
by  the  gift  of  Otho  to  Sylvester)  and  by  taking  advantages
in  the  Norman  and  other  occasions :  which  they  held  with
uneven  fortunes,  and  not  so  quiet  that  Rome  it  selfe  could
well  brooke  it  (which  caused  divers  of  them  to  live  at
Avinion  for  about  seventie  yeeres)  and  was  not  secure  to
them  till  the  time  of  Boniface  the  ninth,  a  man  composed
of  the  worst  vices  and  best  fortunes,  as  Theodorike  a
Niem,  one  of  his  Courtiers  observeth ;  who  first,  in  alto
&  basso  (saith  he)  temporale  dominium  habuit,  quod
contigit  ex  dissensione  civium  Romanorum.  So  Platina,
Primus  populi  Romani  vim  omnem  in  Pontificem  trans-
tulerit,  creatis  suo  nutu  Magistratibus  omnibus,  munitaque
Sancti  Angeli  arce,  &c.  Once,  how  ever  they  got  this
Papall  Duchie  or  temporall  Kingdome,  they  had  never
kept  it  but  by  their  Spirituall  Empire  and  Monarchie,  and
that  branch  especially  which  lookes  to  Jerusalem.  For  the
generation  of  the  Popes  Temporalties  in  Italie,  (now
valued  by  some  above  divers  Kingdomes)  arose  out  of  the
corruption  and  ruine  of  the  Empire,  the  Emperours  being
Kings  aswell  of  Italie  as  Germany,  crowned*  not  only  at
Aquisgrave  or  Germanie,  but  at  Milan  for  Italie,  and  at
Rome  for  the  Empire.  But  the  Empire  decaying  by  the
Popes  stratagems,  by  bandying  factions  against  the
Emperours,  by  inciting  them  to  Holy  Land  Expeditions
(to  their  great  weakning)  by  exciting  the  World  against
them  for  neglect,  by  taking  opportunities  in  their  absence
at  home,  by  seeking  to  betray  them  there,  by  applying
and  employing  the  Crusados  and  Indulgences,  (yea,  some-
times as  before  yee  have  read  of  Conrade)  greater
indulgence  against  them,  or  theirs  then  against  Saracens,
(most  of  which  Matthew  Paris  hath  delivered  of  Fredericke
the  Second)  besides,  Monies  raised,  by  Tenths,  Lones,
Impositions,  and  specially  by  releasing  Vowes  for  Holy
Land  Expeditions,  to  maintayne  Armies  against  them ;
hence  the  Imperiall  Rent,  Guelph  and  Gibelline  long  and
bloudie  division,  and  the  Emperour  quite  deprived  of

28

ADVANCE  OF  THE  PAPAL  MONARCHY a.d.

c.  1625.
Italie,  and  so  little  left  him  of  Germanie,  in  Germanie
also.  Thus  hath  the  Pope  turned  his  Keyes  into  Pick-
lockes,  into  Swords,  into  Scepters,  exercising  his  Spirituall
unlimited  power,  Extra  anni  solisque  vias  (saith*  one)  to  *Botero  2.
all  parts  of  the  World  :  yea,  and  if  there  should  be  found  ?aft'  '  4'
out  more  Worlds,  as  Democritus  dreamed,  this  Dreamer
addes  that  they  should  all  be  under  Papall  Jurisdiction.
This  hath  no  Hils,  Seas,  or  Rivers  for  boundaries,  but  is
without  Horizon  or  limitation.  And  this  power  hath  two
Functions  to  rule ;  and  to  provide  against  dangers  of
Wolves,  both  vicious  and  hereticall  persons,  as  also  Princes
either  malignant  or  negligent.  For  seeing  that  Princes
have  original  from  Elections  of  the  people,  and  this  power
is  confirmed  by  mutuall  Oathes  of  Prince  and  people,  and
God  hath  given  all  power  of  binding  and  loosing  of
Oathes  to  the  Pope :  therefore  Botero  concludes  all
Temporall  Princes  subject  to  the  Popes  censure,  which
Ordine  ad  Deum,  in  pretence  of  defence  the  Church  hath
raised  such  Tragedies  in  the  Christian  World.

Now  for  Collations  of  Benefices,  these  partly  depend
of  his  Temporall  Sovereigntie,  and  partly  are  wrung  and
extorted  from  Temporall  Sovereignes  and  Patrones,  under
pretence  of  their  Simoniacall  bestowing  them.  This  the
pretended  quarrell  of  Gregorie  to  Henrie,  and  of  his
Successors  to  the  next  Henrie,  and  all  other  Christian
Princes.  Eadmerus  was  present  at  the  Roman  Councell
of  Pope  Urbane,  and  heard  his  words  excommunicating
all  Lay-men  giving,  and  all  Ecclesiasticals  taking  Investi-
tures at  their  hands,  and  all  which  consecrated  such  so
invested  (a  custome  which  had  continued  many  Ages)  and
all  which  for  preferments  of  the  Church  did  homage  to
Lay-men,  Dicens  nimis  execrabile  videri,  manus  quae  in  Ead.Novorum

tantam  eminentiam  excreverint,  ut  quod  nulli  Ang-elorum  ^-  2-

^ -p.  *  • *  • •  * * Fid.  Selden

concessum est, Deum cuncta creantem suo ministeno * . ,

o  1  •  1  • Annot.  ad

creent,  &  eundem  ipsum  pro  redemptione  &  salute  totius  eund.Malmes-
Mundi Summi Dei Patris obtutibus offerant, in hanc  bur.  &c
ignominiam  detrudi,  ut  ancillae  fiant  earum  manuum  quae
die ac nocte obscoenis contagiis inquinantur, rapinis &

29

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

c.  1625.

injustae  sanguinum  effusioni  addictae  commaculantur.  He
addes ;  His  praesentes  fuimus,  haec  conspeximus,  his  ab
universis  fiat,  fiat,  acclamari  audivimus.  Thus  you  see
the  Reall  and  Corporeall  Presence  (that  men  may  know
what  benefit  accrueth  to  the  Pope  by  that  Doctrine)  is
made  an  argument  of  devesting  Princes  of  Investitures,
and  making  of  Prelates :  both  first  confirmed  in  that  Age,
the  one  by  Pope  Nicholas  against  Berengarius,  the  other

2.  The*.  2. 4.  by  Gregorie  and  Urban:  thus  opposing  and  exalting
himselfe  above  all  that  is  called  God,  or  that  is  worshipped,
that  is  over  all  powers  Civill  and  Ecclesiasticall  (called
Gods)  and  over  God  himselfe,  whom  here  he  professeth  to
be  created  by  his  creature :  a  three-fold  cord  of  power,
all  broken  by  one  blast  of  the  Pope.

How  stifly  King  Henry  stood  for  his  Investitures,  and
how  Henry  the  Emperour  warred  and  captived  the  next
Pope  Paschall  for  them,  Eadmerus,  Malmesbury,  and
others  then  living  testifie,  the  Pope  swearing  and  starting
from  his  Oath  in  that  case.  Neither  is  it  likely  that  the
Popes  had  thus  made  all  Bishops  and  Abbots  depend  upon
themselves,  without  acknowledging  homage  to  their
Princes,  usurping  so  evidently  al  Ecclesiastical  Supremacy,
had  not  the  civil  combustions  on  one  side  (as  here  under
King  Stephen  the  first  King  which  discontinued  them)  and
exhaustions  into  the  Holy  Land  on  the  other  side,  made
the  Pope  dreadfull,  whose  breath  could  thus  lead  the
Westerne  World  into  the  East.  Thus  did  the  Pope
usurpe  a  Monopoly  of  the  Keyes  by  Elections,  Postula-
tions,  Translations,  Reservations,  Provisions,  Unions,
Permutations,  Accesses,  Regresses,  Coadjutories ;  by
Compositions  for  Palls,  Crosier  Staves, Miters,  Rings ;

[Il.viii.  personall Visitations by Bishops and Abbots of the

I2S^-]  Apostles  staires ; by  making  his  Cardinals,a  (which  in  this

a  The  Pope Age  first  grew  to  be  Giants  and  men  of  renowme,  and  as  I

can  make  his sai^  Kings  fellows,  being  before  but  Bishops,  Priests,  &
'aji*as%c Deacons,)  able  to  carrie  it  out  in  pomp  and  Maiestie  as

and  himselfe  '  * *■  ^

by  their  crea-  befits  the  Apostles  of  Christs  Vicar ; and  by  inriching  his

Hon9  both  by Kindred,  Countrymen, Officers,  and  Favorites  with  the

30

ADVANCE  OF  THE  PAPAL  MONARCHY a.d.

c.  1625.
best  Benefices  and  Prelacies  in  every  Countrey,  (whereof  money  for  that
let  the  Reader  informe  himselfe  in  Matthew  Paris,  of  that  dWnjfh  and
^Egyptian  Babylonian  servitude  in  his  time,  as  also  of  his  lramer  e^ene_
imposing  summes  of  money  to  bee  given  out  of  these,  foes  falling  to
and  if  they  had  it  not,  to  be  taken  up  of  the  Caursines  him.
(Out-landish  Papall  Usurers,  at  abominable  rates)  Tenths,
First-fruits, Thirds, Fifthes, and I know not what
Annuities  and  Pensions,  yea,  the  open  and  shamelesse  sale
of  these  at  Rome  (read  Theod.  a  Niem  a  Courtier  to  many
Popes,  of  Arts  beyond  what  Simon,  or  Magus,  or  the
Devill  himselfe  had  ever  heard  of,  if  it  could  be  Simonie
which  the  Popes  did,  who  forsooth  could  not  sinne  as  their
flatterers  said)  and  lastly,  by  making  Lawes  in  all  these  and
other  Ecclesiasticall  affaires  to  remayne  to  all  Generations,
whereby  the  Clergie  was  exempt  from  Kings,  not  Kings
from  their  Clergie ; yea,  forced  out  of  their  means  and  Theod.  a  N.
Lands,  to  maintayne  the  subjects  of  another  Soveraigne ; 2* c'  J'  j
every Monasterie being a Castle, every Cathedral a
spirituall  exempt  Citie,  every  Prelate  the  Popes  Captaine,
and  to  whom  also  they  were  particularly  sworne. Consider
this  legge  of  the  beast,  and  consider  Monstrum  horren-
dum, informe, conceived long before, in receiving
Appeales  from  all  parts,  but  borne  in  that  Smoke  from
the  bottomlesse  pit,  when  Satan  was  loosed ; nor  ever
could  have  growne  to  full  age,  if  Indulgences  had  not
strengthned  the  Popes,  to  tread  under  foote  allb  Aspes  b  The  words  of
and  Basiliskes  (so  they  esteemed  gaine-saying  Kings  and Alexander,

f~»  \  T11  r  C  11 •  H  tUUlllV Url

Jkmperours)  nor  were  Indulgences  or  any  force  at  all  in  the  Emperors
this  kinde  before  this  Expedition,  when  and  whence  spring  necke.
their  unexpected  puissance,  and  thence  the  Popes,  as  shall  Super  Aspidem
anone  appeare.  "  Basthscum

Besides,  the  Easterne  Patriarkes  which  before  these  ^c  a  '
warres,  held  of  long  time  in  many  Ages  no  communion
with  the  Popes  of  Rome,  by  this  meanes  became  subject
to  him,  Antiochia  first,  then  Jerusalem,  and  after  that
Constantinople  it  selfe  (Romes  Corrivall)  being  subjected
and  subdued  by  these  Expeditions  from  the  West ;  and  I
know  not  what  Genius,  both  in  the  East  and  West,  making

31

A.D.

c.  1625.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

the  Bishops  in  seeming  most  religious,  make  this  a  part
of  their  Religion  to  quarrell  with  their  Kings,  (and  one
with  another  for  superioritie  of  their  Seas)  and  goe  to  the
Pope  for  refuge,  as  is  seene  in  Anselme  of  Canterburie,
Thurstan  of  Yorke,  and  others,  and  especially  Thomas
Becket,  whose  murder  in  that  quarrell,  construed  to  a
Martyrdome,  and  rewarded  with  a  Canonization,  did
super-exceedingly  advance  and  advantage  the  Popes  power
over  Kings  ;  furthered  by  the  emulation  of  the  French
King  against  the  English,  which  instigated  the  Bishop
first,  after  the  Pope  ;  lastly,  his  owne  sonnes  against  him,
honouring  the  new  Saint  also  with  personall  Visitation,
Offering  and  Pilgrimage.  Also  Daibert  the  first  Westerne
Patriarch  of  Jerusalem,  taught  his  Successors  this  Lesson,
See  the  stories  who  went  to  Rome  to  complaine  of  his  King ;  William
before  related.  an  Englishman,  first  Latine  Archbishop  of  Tyre,  and
William,  the  Authour  of  the  Holy  Land  History,  with
others  must  needs  fetch  their  power  from  Rome  :  and  the
Easterne  Empire  beeing  before  weakened  by  the  Saracens
and  Turkes,  now  engirt  on  both  sides  by  the  Westerne
Frankes,  the  heart  and  bowels  being  also  by  civill  dissen-
tions  embroyled,  it  must  needs  follow  that  by  the  fall  of
her  Competitor,  Rome  must  arise,  sit  alone  and  reigne  as
a  Queene ;  Whose  ambitious  neglects,  hath  since  betrayed
that  whole  Empire  to  the  Turke.

§•  in.

Of  Dispensations.

Ut  Temporalties  and  Benefices  were  but  the  hinder
legges,  of  this  Babylonicall  Beast,  for  stabilitie ;
Dispensations  and  Indulgences  were  the  two  fore-
legs, more  active  for  pray  and  puissance.  And  these  also
now  began  to  bee  of  vigour  and  strength  in  the  Church  to
Papall  Monarchicall  intents  and  purposes.  As  for  Dispen-
sations it  is  true,  that  there  was  some  use  of  them  in  the
ancient  Church :  it  beeing  necessary  that  as  in  the
Temporall, so in the Ecclesiasticall Republique, there

32

Ground  and
reason  of
Dispensations.

ADVANCE  OF  THE  PAPAL  MONARCHY a.d.

c.  T625.
should  be  according  to  conducent  circumstances,  a  quali-
fication of  rigid  (which  differing  times  may  esteeme
rigorous)  Canons.  Even  the  Ceremonies  of  Divine  Law
yeelded  to  the  necessitie  of  Charitie,  as  in  Davids  eating
the  Shewbread,  justified  by  Christ  himselfe,  who  preferres
Mercie  to  Sacrifice.  How  much  more  in  the  milder  times
of  the  Gospell,  and  in  the  Canons  and  Constitutions
Ecclesiasticall,  not  given  immediately  by  ministerie  of
Angels ;  nor  to  a  Jewish  Pinfold,  or  one  compendious
people,  and  that  for  a  set  time  till  Shilo  came;  but  to  a
Sea  of  peoples,  by  ministery  of  men,  without  limitation  of
time ;  may  the  difference  of  times,  manners,  and  men
require  a  dispensing  by  change  or  suspension  by  con-
nivence, making  the  best  harmonie  of  Mercie  and
Judgement :  No  man  puts  new  wine  into  old  vessels  :  nor
were  later,  weaker  times  fitted  to  the  severitie  of  the
Ancients,  which  were  both  more  holy,  and  by  necessitie
were  forced  for  want  of  the  Temporall  Sword,  to  whet
the  Spirituall  sharper.  Neither  can  men  see  all  circum-
stances which  may  arise,  nor  are  all  men  or  times  of  one  [H.viii.
constant tenor. Summum jus, summa injuria: The  I257-J

wringing  of  the  Nose  bringeth  forth  bloud,  the  forcing  y  \^
of wrath bringeth forth strife. Charitie covereth a  1.  Cor.  9.
multitude  of  offences,  is  weake  with  them  that  are  weake,  Acts  27.
and  burneth  when  others  are  offended, maketh  us  all
things  to  all :  yea,  casts  forth  the  wheate  into  the  Sea  to
prevent  shipwracke,  notwithstanding  a  promise  of  deliver-
ance. Hence  new  Parliaments,  Statutes,  Edicts ; hence
later  Councels,  Synods,  Canons.

But  what  is  this  to  the  Popes  Non  obstante  ?  a  plenitude
of  power  to  dispense  with  Oathes,  Vowes,  and  whatsoever
Divine  or  Humane,  standing  in  the  way  of  his  Monarchic  ?  Eva„  ^  5  Ct
True  it  is,  that  above  foure  hundred  yeares  before  this  12.
time,  Gregorie  Bishop  of  Antioch  did  dispense  with  the  In  ma/is
Oath of the Armie, which said, they had sworne  Promtssts  t
not  to  admit  Philippicus  their  Commander,  alledging  the  L'?,L/i'li  '

t- •  11  Vi. j.  ii-  1  1- 6  in  turpi  veto

rLpiscopall  power  or  binding  and  loosing :  but  this  was  to  muta

prevent,  not  to  invent  Treason ; to  reduce  to,  and  not  decretum.

vm  33  c

A.D.

c.  1625.

Jud.  9.

Nummus  ait
pro  me,  nubit
Cornubia
Romee,

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

seduce  from  loyaltie  &  subjection  to  their  Emperor.  In
these  times  first  were  the  Keyes  of  the  kingdom  of  heaven,
pretended  by  Peters  pretended  Successor,  to  exclude  the
Kings  of  the  earth,  with  Petra  dedit  Petro,  Petrus  Diadema
Rodulpho,  setting  up  one  &  putting  down  another
Emperor  at  Papall  pleasure.  Little  did  Dispensations
before  availe  the  Papacie  (except  in  enlarging  the
Phylacteries  of  his  spirituall  power,  in  admitting  Appeales,
and  making  himselfe  a  Busie-bodie,  and  Interloper,
Magnus  Ecclesiae  ardelio)  but  now  the  Cedars  of  Libanus
quaked  with  feare  of  fire  from  the  bramble,  when
Dispensations  with  the  Oathes  of  Subjects,  had  deposed
Henry  the  victorious  Emperour,  by  the  Ministerie  of  his
owne  Sonne.  In  vaine  did  that  Sonne  seeke  afterwards  to
stop  the  current  in  taking  the  Pope  Prisoner :  Sero  medi-
cina  paratur ;  his  Fathers  Example  might  teach  him  to
feare  some  Absolom,  to  imitate  himselfe.

And  especially  Dispensations  were  brought  into  request,
by  the  quest  of  the  Holy  Land :  when  large  Merit  and
larger  Indulgences,  Priviledges,  Praviledges  attend  the
Vow,  and  taking  the  Crosse  on  the  one  side ;  and  larger
summes  fill  the  Popes  Coffers  on  the  other  side  by  the
Popes  dispensing :  when  some  Friars  goe  before  to  preach
the  Crusado  and  holy  Warre,  other  Friars  are  sent  after
with  Faculties  to  dispense  for  so  much  money,  as  the
Expedition  would  cost  you,  leaving  you  no  lesse  merit
with  a  great  deale  more  safetie,  ease  and  pleasure  at  home  :
when  the  Pope  can  thus  prostitute  the  zeale  of  Christians,
to  let  and  set  it  to  Farmers  and  Undertakers,  as  to  Richard
Earle  of  Cornwall,  (whose  summes  this  way  gotten  were
incredible,  able  to  make  way  to  his  Imperiall  Election)
when  the  like  Dispensations  are  bestowed  as  Papall  favours
to  repaire  the  broken  state  of  others :  when  Dispensations
raise  up  new  Locusts  from  the  bottomlesse  pit ;  not  only
exempting  some  principall  Monasteries  from  Episcopall
Jurisdiction,  as  the  Popes  peculiars  under  Saint  Peters
immediate  protection  (and  hee  thus  obliged  the  chiefe
Colledges  of  the  chiefe  learned  men  of  those  times,  to

34

ADVANCE  OF  THE  PAPAL  MONARCHY ad.

c.  1625.
maintayne that power which priviledged them) but
Chapters of Cathedrall Churches, whole Orders of
Religion,  as  the  Cluniacensian  and  Cistercian  Congrega-
tions ;  and  after  that  the  Orders  of  Friars  in  their  severall
swarmes,  dispensing  to  them,  not  only  Exemptions  from  See  hist.  Cone
Bishops,  but  power  to  build  Churches,  to  receive  Confes-  Trtd-Page-
sions, to preach in all places, to be Bishops in every
Diocesse,  and  Curates  in  every  Parish ; at  once  Papall
Lords  by  Dispensations, and Mendicants  by  Vow  and
Profession. Yea,  every  pettie  Priest  might  obtayne  by  his
Purse  an  exemption  from  Episcopall  power. And  lastly,
new  Dispensations,  and  new  Priviledges  have  hatched  a
new  Ignatian  Societie  of  parti-coloured  Leopards,  Regular-
Secular-Clergie-Lay-Fathers-Friars-all-things-nothing.

Thus  Dispensations  made  way  to  get  monies  by  Sales ;
Friends  by  Gifts,  Patrons  by  patronizing  (Forts  and
Armies  of  Learned  men  in  Abbies,  Covents,  Colledges,
Congregations,  Orders)  yea,  they  robbed  the  Church  of
her  Officers  and  Labourers ;  it  being  now  a  glorious
vertue  for  Bishops  and  Priests  to  forsake  their  flockes,
and  in  stead  of  Spirituall  warfare  against  the  Devill,  (by
preaching  to  cast  downe,  with  weapons  not  carnall,  2.  Cor.  10. 4.
imaginations  and  every  high thing exalted  against the  ConciL  Sur.

/O  o  O  trim 1 -fi/jtr

knowledge  of  God) to  imbrace  this  carnall  against  the *5'pg'
Turks,  walking  in  and  warring  after  the  flesh  :  yea,  they  j^a'tu  pari$.
were  dispensed  with  for  non  residence  mean-while,  and  Hen.  i.pag.
to  receive  or  lay  to  pawne  the  fruits  of  their  Benefices  for  9ll-*n
that  three  yeares,  no  lesse  then  if  they  were  resident. So Qfnjf-
Baldwin  Archbishop  of  Canterbury,  made  a  Pilgrimage  it\nerarie
thorow  England  and  Wales,  to  winne  Pilgrimes  for  this  Giraldus  hath
warre. Pope  Gregorie  had  excommunicated  Fredericke  written  a  book.
the  Emperour,  for  not  going  to  the  holy  warres,  as  he  had
vowed : hee  went  and  did  gloriously,  as  you  have  read
alreadie :  but  the  Hospitulars  and  Templars  pursuing  the
Popes  quarrell  sought  to  betray  him  to  the  Soldan,  (a
perfidie  odious  to  that  Infidell)  and  in  his  absence  the
Pope  sets  John  de  Brunes,  to  conquer  and  subject  his
Sicilian  Dominions. For  quarrels  of  those  Templars,  and

35

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

c.  1625.

others,  he  is  againe  excommunicated ;  and  the  third  time
by  Innocent  in  the  Councell  of  Lions :  Omnesque  (saith
the  Pope  therein)  qui  ei  juramento  fidelitatis  aliquo  modo
astricti  vel  obligati,  a  juramento  hujusmodi  perpetuo
absolvimus  &  liberamus,  authoritate  Apostolica  firmiter  &
strictim  inhibendo  ne  quisquam  de  cetero  sibi  tanquam
Imperatori  vel  Regi  pareat,  vel  quomodo  libet  parere
intendat.  Decernendo  quoslibet  qui  deinceps  ei,  velut
Imperatori  vel  Regi,  consilium  vel  auxilium  praestiterint
(could  the  Devill  have  roared  lowder  against  Charitie?)
seu  fautorem,  ipso  facto  excommunicationis  vinculo
subjacere,  &c.

To  palliate  this  Dispensation  of  Oathes,  and  electing

[II.V111.  a  new  Emperour,  the  Holy  Land  businesse  was  also  a

I25  'J  goodly  covert,  where  besides  the  Dispensations  to  beneficed
Priests  (after  this  Expedition,  given  to  all  such  as  could
pay  the  price,  insomuch,  that  John  Mansell  had  foure
thousand  Markes  of  Ecclesiasticall  Revenue  in  those  dayes
of  Henry  the  Third,  and  others  incredible  purchases  in
that  kind  of  pluralities)  he  authorizeth  Bishops  to  excom-
municate and  interdict  the  Lands  of  such  as  having
received  the  Crosse  did  not  performe  their  vow.  All  Arch-
bishops, Bishops,  Abbots,  and  such  as  have  cure  of  soules,are
enjoyned  to  preach  this  word  of  the  Crosse  to  their  Cures,
to  goe  or  send  Souldiers  thither  for  remission  of  their
sinnes.  Crossed  Detters  are  freed  from  paying  Usuries,
although  bound  thereto  by  Oath,  &c.
Non  obstante  ^nc^  ^us  treasonakle  Dispensations  beganne  by  Hilde-
a  clause, brand,  grew  up  to  strength  and  maturitie  by  this  Holy

signifying  not-  Land  businesse,  and  both  Laitie  and  Clergie  at  once  were

withstanding, exempt  from  oaths,  vowes,  and  bonds  to  God  and  Men.

f  -?i*l  n°j~ Hence  grew  that  Non  obstante,*  so  often  mentioned  by

zvit/istandinp  o  .  ^

any  Canon,  Matthew  Paris, for the grievances whereof the whole

Law, Promise,  Parliament  sent  Anno 1246. Messengers  or  Legats,  to

Prwiledge,  Lions  to  treate  with  the  Pope,  and  for  which  that  Lincolne

lie.  he  would  Bii Robert Grosted (whom the Westerne Church

uist>ense  ana

they  might  do admired  for  Learning  and  Sanctitie)  both  writ  to  the  Pope,
the  contrarie. and  on  his  death-bed  proved  him  to  be  Antichrist. He

36

was

ADVANCE OF THE PAPAL MONARCHY a.d.

c.  1625.
affirmeth  also  that  the  King  undertooke  to  sweare  with
most  solemne  Ceremonies  or  Candle  curse,  that  which  hee
observed  not,  in  confidence  of  the  Popes  Dispensation :
yea,  falsified  his  owne,  and  frustrated  his  Progenitors
Acts  and  Grants  in  professed  imitation  of  the  Popes  Non
obstante :  vowed  this  Holy  Land  Expedition,  and  sware
where  hee  had  no  meaning  to  doe  any  thing,  but  get  money
of  his  people  ;  part  whereof  might  procure  Papall  Dispen-
sation. Yea,  hereby  the  Popes  have  obliged  Kings,  States,
and  Kingdomes  to  them,  by  dispensing  with  oathes,  with
Marriages  in  degrees  forbidden,  or  having  other  wives
living,  so  that  their  Posterities  stand  obnoxious  to  the
Pope  for  feare  of  illegitimation.

In  the  first  of  these  the  Pope  by  Temporalties  became
a  temporall  Prince  by  Treason  to  his  Prince ;  in  the
second  by  Collation  of  Benefices,  hee  became  universall
Bishop,  swallowing  the  power  of  all  Bishops  and  Church-
men, and  of  Princes  over  them,  into  a  Papall  Whirle-poole,
which  he  confirmed  by  Lawes,  sitting  in  Ecclesiam  (as  it
was  prophesied  of  the  Man  of  Sinne)  as  representing  the
whole  Church,  invested  in  her  whole  power,  which  under
him  as  under  covert  Barnes  was  no  person  in  Law,  but  hee  See  abundant
answeres  all  in  Law,  and  is  himselfe  in  his  written  testm™tes
Decretals,  and  in  his  present  Consistorie,  the  speaking  iat  sub  Jul*
Law  of  the  Church:  In  this  third,  he  is  more  then  Law,  z.&Lttm.io.
cutting  asunder  the  Gordian  knot,  by  Dispensations,  if
he  cannot  by  Glosses,  and  qualifying  Interpretations  untye
it,  above  Law,  above  the  Church,  above  God,  above
himselfe  by  his  Non  Obstante,  in  fulnesse  of  power
disanulling  all  their  acts  hindering  his  acts  and  present
purposes.  And  whatsoever  hath  beene  by  former  Popes,
by  Councels,  by  themselves  ordained  for  reformation,  una
falsa  lachrymala  quam  vix  vi  extorserit,  one  goodly
pretence  forced  to  some  shew  of  equitie,  shall  with  a
Dispensing  Non  Obstante,  turne  to  serve  his  turne,  and
bring  money  to  his  Coffers,  though  purposely  devised
against  it.

Thus  dealt  he  with  Commenda's  (devised  for  the  good

37

A.D.

c.  1625,

Hist.  Cone.

Trid.  pag.
251.

Guicciard.
hist.  lib.  6.

See  Rain,  and
Hart.  y.  6.

T.  Walsing-
ham  in  Ed.  3.
Sac.  Cer.  Ec.
Rom.  lib.  1.
/  8.  c.  3.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

of  the  Church,  which  was  commended  for  a  time  to  some
other  fit  Rector,  till  a  proper  Rector  and  worthy  might  be
procured)  to  a  longer  time,  yea,  to  terme  of  life,  for  the
goods,  not  the  good  of  the  Church.  Even  after  Luthers
preaching  Pope  Clement  commended  to  Hyppolitus  all  the
Benefices  of  the  World,  Secular  and  Regular,  Dignities
and  Parsonages,  Simple  and  with  Cure,  being  vacant  for
sixe  monethes,  to  beginne  from  the  first  day  of  his  posses-
sion, with  power  to  dispose  of,  and  to  convert  to  his  use
all  the  fruits.  Yea,  this  Cardinall  de  Medicis  (which
plucked  out  the  eyes  of  his  brother  Julius  whom  his
Mistris  loved  more  then  him  for  his  eyes  sake)  continued
to  hold  the  Archbishopricks  of  Milan  in  Lumbardie,  Capua
in  the  Kingdome  of  Naples,  Strigonium  in  Hungarie,
besides  the  Bishoprickes  of  Agra  in  Hungarie,  Mutina,
and  Ferrara  in  Italie,  places  so  far  distant.  Unions
devised  for  the  Churches  provision  in  the  insufficience  of
one  living,  by  adding  some  neere  one,  were  stretched  to
thirtie  or  fortie  whersoever  lying,  as  if  the  good  not  of  the
Church,  but  of  the  person  had  beene  intended.

Matthew  Paris  in  his  time  tels  that  the  Pope  sent  to
the  Bishops  of  Canterbury,  Lincolne,  and  Salisbury,  to
provide  three  hundred  Romanes  in  the  Benefices  next
vacant,  giving  none  other  till  these  were  provided,  which
never  meant  to  come  at  any  cure  but  of  the  money.  Yea,
when  they  dyed  other  Italians  succeeded,  so  that  their
receits  in  this  kind,  far  surmounted  the  Crowne  Lands :
and  after  complaints  to  the  Pope,  and  the  fore-mentioned
Councell  so  zealous  of  the  Holy  Land,  the  case  was
worse,  as  it  hapned  to  the  Israelites  by  Pharoes  Taxe-
masters,  swelling  from  sixtie  to  seventie  thousand  Markes.
Clement  the  sixt  reserved  for  two  Cardinals,  which  hee
had  lately  made,  the  Benefices  void  and  to  be  next  void,
besides  Bishoprickes,  and  Abbeyes,  to  the  summe  of  two
thousand  Markes,  which  in  the  valuations  of  those  times,
might  one  with  another  be  two  hundred,  forsooth,  for
these  Princepes  mundi,  consiliarii  nostri  (so  saith  Pope
Pius of his Cardinals) & conjudices orbis terrarum,

38

ADVANCE OF THE PAPAL MONARCHY *,a

c.  1625.
successores  Apostolorum  circa  thronum  sedentes,  Senatores
urbis  &  Regum  similes,  veri  mundi  Cardines,  super  quos
militantis  ostium  Ecclesiae  voluendum  ac  regendum  est.
Thus Cardinall* Wolsey is said to have had more  *Herooh&a
Revenues,  then  all  the  Bishops  and  Deanes  in  England  j4n^ltca-
now.

In  the  Councell  of  Trent  (which  pretended  to  reforme,  [II. vm.
intended  to  palliate,  if  not  further  to  pollute  with  abuses, . I2^'J
at  least  in  the  greater  and  Papall  part)  the  Pope  could  not  /  - '
indure  the  question  of  Residence  due  jure  divino,  which
the  Spanish  Bishops  urged,  and  in  the  question  of  Dis-
pensations had  Adrian  a  Dominican  Friar,  to  defend  his
absolute  and  unlimited  power ; and  though  he  dispensed
without  cause,  the  dispensation  was  to  be  held  for  good,
alledging  that  of  Saint  Paul,  that  Ministers  are  Dispensers 1.  Cor.  4.
of  the  mysteries  of  God,  and  to  them  is  the  dispensation  *  *A  ^osse  cori~
committed  (his  paterne  was  the  Dispenser  or  Steward,  Luc. *~rt* t0  *.i
16.  which  is  said  to  deale  wisely,  as  the  Pope  did  in  the  Dispensing  the
Master  piece  of  their  skill,  this  whole  Councell)  and  though Wordy  were
the  Popes  dispensation  in  divine  Law  be  not  of  force,  yet  concealing  or
every one ought to captivate his understanding, and  cance"tngtL
beleeve  that  he  hath  granted  it  for  a  lawfull  cause,  and
that  it  is  temeritie  to  call  it  in  question. Laynez,  the
Generall  of  the  last  Locust-brood (the  * Jesuites) said,  *Hts{- conc-
that  to  say  the  Pope  cannot  by  dispensation  disoblige  him
who  is  obliged  before  God,  is  to  teach  men  to  preferre
their  owne  conscience  before  the  authoritie  of  the  Church,
that  it  cannot  be  denyed  that  Christ  had  power  to  dispense
in  every  Law,  nor  that  the  Pope  is  his  Vicar,  nor  that
there is the same Tribunall and Consistorie of the
Principall  and  the  Vicegerent ; so  it  must  be  confessed
that  the  Pope  hath  the  same  authoritie : that  this  is  the
priviledge  of  the  Church  of  Rome,  which  it  is  heresie  to
take  away,  &c.  that  it  belonged  not  to  the  Councell  to
reforme  the  Court,  because  the  Scholar  is  not  above  his
Master,  nor  the  Servant  above  his  Lord. And  thus  must  Th ,  N.
all  men  dispense  with  Romish  Dispensations :  and  thus  it  ^em%  m%  tr. '
comes  to  passe  that  the  Popes  Exchequor  is  like  unto  the  6.  c.  37.

39

ad.  PURCIIAS HIS 1MLGR1MES

c.  1625.

Sea,  into  which  all  Rivers  runne,  and  yet  it  runnes  not
over,  as  one  observed  which  served  long,  and  well  observed
the  reserved  courses  in  the  Popes  Court.
F.  Sansovmo  Neither  is  it  amisse  to  heare  Sansovino  tell  the  manner

e  gov. e ^ cjiSpensinpr Dispensations at Rome, in his eleventh
diver  si  regnt.  * . °  r  >

Booke,  written  wholly  del  Governo  della  Corte  Komana.

The authoritie of the Pope (saith he) as the Head,

disperseth  it  selfe  into  so  many  members,  that  the  Courtiers

use  to  grow  old  before  they  understand  that  government.

There is first, the Colledge of Cardinalls, the Head

whereof  is  the  Pope  (therefore  called  Maximus)  and  the

Cardinals  members  ; of  which  the  number  is  not  certayne

in  our  times,  howsoever  it  is  found  that  in  former  times

there  were  but  twelve. These  Illustrious  Fathers  assemble

once  a  weeke,  which  Assembly  is  called  the  Consistorie ;

in which Senate are appointed Bishops, Archbishops,

Metropolitans  and  Patriarks  when  the  Seas  are  void,  whose

*Even  in election  doth  not  belong*  to  a  Chapiter,  Citie,  Province,

these  the  Pope  King,  or  other  person  : in  which  case  they  are  chosen  by

provisions  at ^e  P°Pe  and  this  Senate. Here  they  treat  of  all  things

his  pleasure, which  belong  to  Worship,  to  Faith,  to  Religion,  to  the

as  in  many peace of  Christendome, to the  temporall estate of  the

Archbishops  of  Church  of  Rome. In  this  sacred  Senate  (as  the  greatest

in  the  World)  all  Provinces,  all  Regulars,  and  all  Kings,

have  their  Fathers  Defenders,  which  they  call  Protectors,

who  propound  the  causes  of  their  Provinces,  &c.

For  the  Penitentiarie,  he  addes,  that  all  the  World
seekes  to  the  Pope  for  many  graces  in  that  matter,  which
our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  left  unto  Peter,  to  wit,  of  loosing
and  binding  in  earth  whatsoever  he  will.  Now  this  part
being  by  the  Pope  reserved  to  himselfe  ;  that  other  is
accustomed  to  be  granted  of  him,  that  is,  that  of  loosing,
to  one  of  the  Cardinals,  who  is  called  the  chiefe  Penitenti-
arie, who  for  so  much  as  appertaynes  to  that  which  is
Note  how common in the divine Law, and to his Absolution,

meane  Gods exerciseth  the  Jurisdiction  committed  to  him  by  the  Pope
L*awes  are  to  .  •  •

humane  in ^y  many  Vicars  and  Substitutes,  called  Penitentiaries  (or
Rome.  Penitentiers)  divided  thorowout  all  the  greatest  Churches

40

ADVANCE OF THE PAPAL MONARCHY ad.

c.  1625.
of  Rome,  as  Saint  Peters  in  the  Vatican,  Saint  John  de
Lateran, Saint Marie Major. But the Dispensations
which  are  made  touching  observation  of  humane  Lawes,
he  granteth  not  but  in  some  cases,  and  by  himselfe. And
by  a  generall  commission  from  the  Pope  he  heares  Sutors
in  such  affaires,  and  having  seene  their  Demands,  if  there
be  any  cause*  for  which  the  Sutor  meriteth  to  be  heard, Qu^ ^
and  that  which  he  requireth  hath  beene  accustomed  to  be J\  S*V
granted  by  the  Pope ; he  writes  by  authontie  Apostolicall  nummi
and  of  his  Office,  and  not  by  the  Popes  mouth  but  by  that
generall  commission  in  his  Letters  of  commission  from  the
Popes  mouth,  hee  affirmes,  and  his  Assertion  is  beleeved
as  in  a  thing  belonging  to  his  Office,  and  rescribes  alway
to  the  Supplication  on  that  side  directed  to  the  Pope  in
one  of  these  formes,  fiat  in  forma,  fiat  de  speciali,  fiat  de
espresso,  with  which  varietie  of  wordes  he  lets  the  Taxers
understand  the  importance  of  the  Suit :  and  as  the  Rescript
of  the  Penitentiarie  differs  in  forme,  so  the  taxes  of  the
payments  are  altered  by  the  Officers. And  in  these  times  Thefrmt  of
the  multitude  of  humane  Lawes  is  so  increased,  both  by  man?L  amns
the  Pope,  and  by  Councells,  and  by  Monasteries,  that  men  Ecclesiastical!
being  in  some  sort  bound,  desiring  their  ancient  libertie,  publike  and
have  recourse  by  way  of  Supplication  to  the  Penitentiarie,  private.
who  having  signed  the  Suppliants  Bill  with  his  hand,  they
dispatch  the  Bulls  under  his  Name  and  Seale. And  for
that many times hee doth not write backe precisely,
requiring  some  attestation  of  the  Suppliant,  hee  appoints
Judges  by  his  writing,  which  taking  knowledge  of  the
Cause,  perfect  the  Act ; and  herein  he  appoints  others  in
his  place. And  this  holy  Office  of  the  Penitentiarie,  for
the  greater  commoditie  of  them  which  come  for  Expedi-
tions  hath foure and twentie Defenders  of Suppliants,
which  are  called  the  Proctors  of  the  holy  Penitentiarie.
These  as  Advocates  declare  the  Contents  of  his  Suite,  and
as  it  were  plead  the  Cause  before  the  Penitentiarie,  of
whom  they  procure  to  obtayne  their  Suite,  and  to  get
their  Bulls  dispatched. He  useth  also  to  rescribe  in  many
Causes  appertayning  to  Justice,  and  as  it  were  alway  to

41

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

c.  1625.

*This  the  grant  in  the  one  kinde  and  in  the  other,  here  under  noted,

reason  of  their  Dispensations  matrimoniall  in  degrees  forbidden  by  the

for  the  Law  of  ^aw  *  of  Man,  legitimations  of  Children  ; Dispensations

God,  as  in  in  respect  of  them,  or  for  want  of  members  due  to  such  as

Henry  the  are  to  receive  Orders  or  Benefices  ;  also  for  incompatabilitie

eight  l£c.  the  Qf  mQre  Benefices. Absolutions  from  homicide  in  Foro

,eet!Ji\L Conscientiae  : for  Clerkes  in  both  Courts,  with  retention
great  tor  the  .  ■%• r

Penitentiarie. of  Benefices  and  Dispensations  for  more. The  like  for
[Il.viii.  Simonie,  for  Exile,  moreover  from  an  Oath  for  the  effect

1260.]  of  the  operation,  from  false  Oathes,  commutation  of
Vowes,  and  Licences  from  observation  of  any  humane
Law,  and  especially  of  Regulars  from  any  Chapiter  (or
Article)  of  the  Lawes  of  their  Rules.  He  gives  Indul-
gences to  places  and  persons ;  and  moreover,  infinite
Commissions  in  forme  of  Law,  as  namely,  the  Declaration
of  the  Nullitie  or  Invaliditie  of  Marriage,  which  are
called  Declaratorie :  and  in  many  other  things  which
are  knowne  to  them  that  practise  in  the  Ecclesiasticke
Courts.

They  doe  every  day  demand  the  Subscriptions  from  the
Pope  of  such  things  as  come  from  his  voluntarie  and
proper  liberalise,  as  the  grants  of  Benefices  and  other
things,  which  are  also  generally  committed  to  the  Great
Penitentiarie,  and  all  matters  which  pertayne  to  Justice  in
things  Ecclesiasticall  thorow  all  parts  of  the  World,  as  also
in  things  profane  of  the  temporall  patrimonie  of  the  holy
Church  of  Rome,  and  of  any  other  place  of  the  World
which  have  recourse  to  the  Court  of  Rome,  by  reason  of
the  person  being  Ecclesiasticall,  or  by  Princes  sending  it,
or  by  consent  of  the  parties.  The  Pope  for  the  more
easie  dispatch  of  Sutors  in  all  these  things,  hath  ordayned
two  Audiences,  in  one  of  which  they  demand  matters  of
Grace,  in  the  other  those  of  Justice.
Officers  and  But  for  these  and  the  like  Officers,  the  Vice-chancellor,
Counsellors  of  ^  Audience  of  the  Chamber  (as  it  were  his  privie
the  Popes  state.  QQun$e^  the  private  dispatches  by  the  Secretarie,  the
Chamberlan  (which  hath  power  in  the  Temporall  State)
Treasurer,  Advocate,  Proctor,  Commissaries,  Marshalls  (to

42

ADVANCE  OF  THE  PAPAL  MONARCHY a.d.

c.  1625.
one of which the Whores of the Citie pay a yeerly
Taxation,  which  they  call  Tribute)  I  omit  and  referre  the
Reader  to  the  Author. The  last  he  mentions  is  the  Vicar  Vkario  dl
of  Rome,  who  hath  the  same  authoritie  which  the  Pope  Roma-
hath  over  the  Priests  in  all  things,  in  Rome  and  in  the
Diocese,  hearing  all  Clergie  cases  as  Ordinarie ; imposeth
Penance, conferreth Sacraments, calleth Congregations,
visits Churches and Monasteries, makes Inquisition,
correcteth,  punisheth,  remooveth  and  giveth  Benefices :
his  authoritie  extends  fortie  miles  out  of  Rome,  in  some
cases. The  Pope  hath  also  given  him  all  those  Pontificalia,
which  every Ordinarie  exerciseth  in  his  Diocese,  as  to
consecrate  places  profane,  to  reconcile  such  as  are  profaned,
to  promote  to  holy  Orders,  to  punish  Blasphemies,  Usuries,
Perjuries,  Incests : and  in  case  of  corporall  punishments
to send them to the Secular Judges. He hath foure
Notaries  or  publike  Scribes,  and  two  Vicars  substitute.
So  farre  is  the  Pope  degenerated  from  a  Bishop  in  any
thing but Title, and using that onely, that through  2.  Pet.  2.  3.
covetousnesse  with  fayned  words  he  might  make  merchan-
dise of  men,  as  turpilucricupidus,  a  lover  of  filthy  gayne
(even  that  of  Curtezans  filthinesse)  yea,  of  the  soules  of
men,  which  are  reckoned  among  the  Babylonian  wares  of
these  Merchants  of  the  earth. And  what  else  are  these  -^/w.  18. 13.
dispensations  thus  abused,  but  soule-sale,  which  is  made ,.,s  ,  '  .

•  .  WhllCS  tuClV  5171

more  evident  (is  any  thing  more  impudent  then  a  Whore  ?)  rema«nes

by their Taxa Camerae, a Booke published in print,  though  their
whereby  men  may  know  the  prices  of  their  Absolutions  mony  be  gone;
for  Simonie,  Sodomie,  Incest,  Homicide,  and  other  the  y™i"ncreasecl

Master  and  Monster  sinnes  and  degenerations  of  mankind.  and  frequenc«

In  which  marke  also,  that  being  breaches  of  the  Law  of  inhopeofDis-

God,  an  inferior  Penitentiarie  by  his  Booke  of  Taxation  pensations:

can absolve, but those crimes against humane Lawes  stnnes  ™n&

require  the  chiefe  Penitentiarie  to  turne  the  Law  into  a  ^  ™*nLll

Net,  and  become  a  good  Sponge-man  to  exenterate  his  andvenalL

purse  more  thorowly.  Bud.  de  Asse.

And  as  Rome  by  Dispensations  is  made  a  Merchants  '*•  5-
shop,  Litium  officina  capturarumque  improbarum,  where

43

A.D.

c.  1625.

Nov  us  homo,  in
a  Supplication
by  a  Romish
Catholike  to
his  Majestie,
Englished  by
M.  Cr.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

are  kept  perpetuall  Marts  of  Sacriledge,  which  make
sinnes  not  onely  Veniall  but  Venall ;  and  Golden  Canons
become  Lesbian  Rules  by  Papall  Leaden  Bulls,  flexible
and  pliant  according  to  the  price  and  banke  of  the  Romish
money  changers :  so  by  Indulgences  hath  she  beene
indulgent  to  all  her  Chapmen  (except  they  wanted  money)
and  hath  made  them  the  foundation  of  the  Tower  or
Babylon ;  in  this,  Indulgences  and  Dispensations  agreeing
that  nothing  hath  more  raysed,  nothing  more  razed  her
gorgeous  and  glorious  Fabriques  ;  Henrie  the  eight,  upon
the  one  occasion  forsaking  wonted  commerce  with  Rome,
and  Luther  by  the  other  provoked  to  open  his  mouth  so
wide  and  loud,  that  he  awakned  all  Europe  to  behold  her
filthy  whoredomes.  And  if  any  thinke  the  later  times
either  more  Casta,  or  more  Cauta,  let  him  observe  what
Novus  Homo,  an  unknowne  Supplicant  of  Rome,  hath
revealed  touching  the  mysteries  of  the  Datarie  (the  Office
where  matters  of  Benefices  are  dispatched)  where  the
bestowing  of  Benefices  is  deferred,  that  inquirie  may  be
made  of  the  richest  Competitors  ;  each  Living  is  charged
with  a  pension  of  halfe,  or  a  third,  or  two  thirds  of  the
worth,  and  then  by  another  Ordination  by  present  payment
of  five  yeeres  purchase  extinguished.  As  if  the  Benefice
bee  worth  three  hundred  crownes  a  yeere,  a  pension  is
imposed  of  two  hundred,  leaving  one  hundred  for  the
Incumbent ;  who  paying  one  thousand  crownes  and  a
hundred  more  for  Seales  and  Expedition,  buyes  repentance
at  a  deare  rate.  The  Regressus  and  Expectativae  forbidden
by  the  Councell  of  Trent,  are  deluded  with  Coadjutorships,
sold  for  a  yeeres  profit  in  colour  of  expediting  Bulls,  with
assurance  of  future  succession  :  by  which  and  like  meanes
(you  may  not  call  that  Simonie  which  the  Pope  doth  ;  and
it  is  disputable  amongst  them,  whether  the  Pope  can
commit  that  sinne,  although  the  very  name  come  from
Simon  Magus  his  seeking  to  contract  with  Simon  Peter)
Paul  the  fifth  is  reported  to  have  extracted  out  of  his  Lead
twentie  hundred  thousand  Scutes,  to  buy  Lands  for  his
Nephew  (or  sonne)  Borghesius. The  truth  of  which,  by

44

ADVANCE  OF  THE  PAPAL  MONARCHY ad.

c.  1625.
the  Registers  (saith  the  Author)  in  the  Office  of  Bettus,  a  [II. mi.
publike  Notarie,  in  a  particular  kept  secret,  appeareth.  1261.]

§.  IIII.

Of  Indulgences.

|Hus  have  we  seene  the  Popes  Temporalties,  arising
from  Conspiracies  against  Emperours,  his  Colla-
tions from  the  spoile  of  all  Kings  and  Princes  of
their  Investitures,  in  pretence  of  Simonie,  to  further
intensions  and  extensions  of  Simonie ;  his  Dispensations,
Factors  and  Bawds  for  Compensations,  by  this  Man  of
Sinne,  which  thus  sinned  and  kept  a  Trade,  Shop,  Mart,
Sale,  and  gaine  of  Sinne  :  but  that  which  had  least  shew  of
reason,  and  yet  was  the  right  fore-legge  of  the  beast,
whereon  he  had  surest  standing,  whereby  he  had  securest
holding  his  prey,  wherewith  he  made  strongest  fights
against  his  Adversaries,  was  Indulgences.  And  whereas
the  River  of  the  Popes  Eden,  is  parted  into  foure  heads,  Gen. 2. 10. n.
this  first  compasseth  the  whole  Land  of  Havila,  where  Hist.C.TJ.i.
there  is  Gold,  and  the  Gold  of  that  Land  is  good.  Of
which  the  Author  of  the  Historie  of  the  Councell  of
Trent,  relateth  that  this  manner  of  gaining  Money  was
put  in  practise,  after  Pope  Urban  the  second  had  given  a
plenarie  Indulgence  to  all  that  should  make  war  in  the
Holy  Land ;  imitated  by  his  Successors,  some  of  which
granted  it  to  those  that  maintained  a  Souldiour,  if  they
went  not  in  person.  And  after,  the  same  Indulgences  or
Pardons  were  given,  for  taking  Armes  against  those  that
obeyed  not  the  Church  of  Rome,  although  they  were
Christians :  and  for  the  most  part,  infinite  exactions  were
made  under  those  pretences,  all  which,  or  the  greater  part
were  applied  to  other  uses.  Thus  Pope  Leo  the  tenth,  Original/  of
1 517.  sent  an  Indulgence  thorow  all  Christendome,  lndukences-
granting  it  to  any  which  would  give  Money  and  extending
it  to  the  dead ;  for  whom  his  will  was,  that  when  the
disbursement  was  made,  they  should  be  delivered  from  the
paines  of  Purgatorie : giving  also  power  to  eate  Egges

45

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

c.  1625.

and  Whitmeats  on  fasting  daies,  to  chuse  themselves  a
Confessor,  and  other  such  like  abilities. And  although
the  execution  of  this  enterprise  of  Leo  had  some  particular
neither  pious  nor  honest, notwithstanding  many  of  the
Grants  made  by  the  preceding  Popes,  had  causes  more
unjust,  and  were  exercised  with  more  i^varice  and  Extor-
tion. He  distributed  part  of  the  Harvest  before  it  was
reaped or well sowne, giving to divers persons the
Revenues  of  divers  Provinces,  and  reserving  some  also  for
his  owne  Exchequer. The  Indulgences  of  Saxonie,  and
from  thence  to  the  Sea,  he  gave  to  Magdalene  his  Sister,
Wife  unto  Francescheto  Cibo,  Bastard  Sonne  of  Innocent
the  eight ; by  reason  of  which  marriage,  this  Leo  was
created  Cardinall  at  the  age  of  foureteene  yeares. She  to
make  the  best  of  it,  committed  the  care  of  preaching  the
Indulgences,  and  exacting  the  Money  unto  Aremboldus,
a  Genoa  Merchant,  (now  a  Bishop  and  Merchant  too)  who
found  Ministers  like  unto  himselfe,  who  aymed  at  nothing
but  game  : which  would  not  use  the  Hermite  Friers  (as
had beene the custome of Saxonie in this case) but
Dominicans, which to amplifie the value, spake many
strange  things  5 and  in  Tavernes,  games,  and  other  things
not  fit  to  bee  named,  spent  that  which  the  people  spared
from  their  necessarie  expences,  to  purchase  the  Indulgences.

Occasion  of  gy  fa{s  meanes  Martin  Luther  an  Hermite  Frier,  first
**  J  began  to  speake,  first  against  these  new  abuses:  and  aftei
being  provoked  by  the  Pardoners,  he  set  himselfe  to  studie
this  matter,  being  desirous  to  see  the  rootes  and  founda-
tions of  the  Doctrine  of  Indulgences.  He  published
ninetie  five  Conclusions  herein,  to  be  disputed  on  in
Wittenberg,  which  none  accepted :  but  John  Thecel
proposed  others  contrarie  in  Frankfort  of  Brandeberg.
Luther  proceeded  to  write  in  defence  of  his,  and  John
Ecchius  to  oppose ;  and  these  Writings  being  gone  to
Rome,  Sylvester  Prierias,  a  Dominican  Frier,  wrote  against
Luther  :  which  contestation  inforced  both  the  one  and  the
other  partie  to  passe  to  other  things  of  greater  importance.
For  the  Doctrine  of  Indulgences  having  not  beene  well

46

merit  and
supereroga-

ADVANCE  OF  THE  PAPAL  MONARCHY a.d.

c.  1625.
examined  in  former  Ages,  the  essence  and  causes  of  them  Doctrine  of
were not well understood. Some thought they were  lnd"l&nces
nothing  but  an absolution made by  Authoritie of the jywm
Prelate  from  Penance,  wThich  the  Church  in  most  ancient  opinions  of
times  imposed  by  way  of  Discipline  upon  the  penitent,  them.
(which  Imposition  was  assumed  in  succeeding  Ages  by  the
Bishop  onely,  after  delegated  to  the  Penitentiarie  Priest,
and  in  conclusion  left  wholly  to  the  will  of  the  Confessor)
and  that  they  delivered  us  not  from  paying  the  debt  due
to  the  Justice  of  God. Others  thought,  that  they  freed
from  both. But  these  were  divided  : some  thinking  that  Ejects  of  the
they  freed  us,  though  nothing  were  given  in  recompence,  °Pinlon  °f
others said, that  by  reason of  mutuall participation in
charitie  of  the  members  of  holy  Church,  the  Penance  of  J2*
one  might  bee  communicated  to  another,  and  free  him  by
this  Compensation. But  because  it  seemed  that  this  was
more  proper  to  men  of  holy  and  austere  life  then  to  the
authoritie  of  Prelates,  there  arose  a  third  opinion,  which
made  them  in  part  an  absolution,  (because  authoritie  was
necessary  for  them) and  in part  a  Compensation. But
because  the  Prelats  lived  not  in  such  sort  as  they  could
spare  much  of  their  Merits  to  others,  there  was  made  a
treasurie  in  the  Church,  full  of  the  Merits  of  all  those  who
had  more  then  would  serve  their  owne  turne  : the  dis-
pensation whereof  is  committed  to  the  Pope,  who  when  he
giveth  Indulgences,  recompenseth  the  debt  of  the  Sinner,
by  assigning  so  much  in  value  out  of  the  Treasure. It
being  opposed  that  the  Merits  of  Saints  being  finite,  this
treasure  might  be  diminished ; they  added  the  Merits  of
Christ  which  are  infinite: which  caused  another  doubt,  [Il.viii.
what  needed  those  drops  to  this  Ocean  ; which  gave  cause  izoz.j

to  some  to  make  the  Treasure  to  be  onely  of  the  Merits
of  Christ.

These  things  then  so  uncertaine,  and  had  no  other
foundation  then  the  Bull  of  Clement  the  sixt,  made  for
the  Jubilee,  1350.  Wherefore  Thecel,  Echius,  and
Prierius,  laid  for  their  ground-worke  the  Popes  Authoritie,
and  Consent  of  the  Schoolemen,  concluding  that  the  Pope

47

A.D.

c.  1625.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Pope  Adrian
the  Sixt.

Mysterie.

not  being  able  to  erre  in  matters  of  Faith,  and  himselfe
publishing  the  Indulgence,  it  was  necessarie  to  beleeve
them  as  an  Article  of  Faith.  This  made  Martin  to  passe
from  Indulgences  to  the  Popes  Authoritie,  &c.

After Leos death, Adrian succeeded, who being a
Devine, had written in that matter, and thought to
establish  his  Doctrine  by  Apostolicall  Decree,  that  is,  that
an  Indulgence  being  granted  to  one  which  shall  doe  such
a  Worke,  the  Worker  obtaineth  so  much  of  it  as  is  propor-
tionable to  his  Worke ; thinking  Luthers  objection  thus
answered,  (How  a  peny  could  gaine  so  great  Treasure)
and  yet  Indulgences  remaining  in  request,  seeing  he  that
hath  not  all,  hath  his  proportionable  part. But  Cardinall
Cajetan  told  him  it  was  better  to  keepe  this  secret,  lest
the Popes grant might seeme to profit nothing, that
Indulgences  are  but  absolutions  from  Penance  imposed  in
confession  onely : and  if  he  would  restore  the  disused
penitentiarie  Canons,  men  would  gladly  seeke  Indulgences.
This  being  proposed  in  the  Penitentiary  Court,  Cardinall
Puccio,  Datarie  to  Pope  Leo,  a  diligent  Minister  to  finde
out  Money,  (which  had  counsailed  Leo  to  those  Indulg-
ences, and  was  now  cheefe  Penitentiarie)  related  to  the
Pope  with  a  generall  assent  the  impossibilitie ; that  those
Canonicall  Penances  were  gone  into  disuse,  because  they
could  be  no  longer  supported  for  want  of  the  ancient  zeale,
whereas  now  every  one  would  be  a  Judge  and  examine  the
reasons ; and  in  stead  of  curing  they  would  kill. At
length the  Cardinall  of  Volterra  proposed the  way to
extinguish  Heresies,  to  bee  not  by  Reformations,  but  by
Hist.C.T.l.%.  Crusados,  (as  is  said  before.) And  in  the  Councell  of
Trent, when Indulgences came to bee examined, the
Bishop  of  Modena  told  them  they  would  finde  it  difficult,
and  to  require  a  long  time,  it  being  impossible  to  make
that  matter  plaine,  but  by  determining  first  whether  they
be  Absolutions,  or  compensations  onely  and  suffrages ; or
whether  they  remit  the  penalties  imposed  by  the  Confessors
onely,  or  all  that  are  due ; whether  the  treasure  be  of  the
Merits  of  Christ  onely,  or  of  the  Saints  also ; whether

48

ADVANCE  OF  THE  PAPAL  MONARCHY ad.

c.  1625.
they  extend  to  the  dead,  or  though  the  receiver  performe
nothing ;  with  other  difficulties.  But  to  determine  that
the  Church  may  grant  them,  and  that  they  are  profitable
to  those  which  worthily  receive  them,  needed  no  great
disputation,  and  a  Decree  might  be  composed  without
difficultie :  and  hee  with  other  Frier  Bishops  was  deputed
to  make  a  Decree  in  this  sense,  adding  a  provision  against
the  abuses.

Thus  farre  have  we  gleaned  out  of  that  fertile  Corne-  Tract.de  J  ub.
field. As  for  that  of  Clements  Jubilee  Indulgence,  it  is  ^orn  s t  ?'
not  amisse  to  recite  some  part,  in  which  every  Pilgrime  to  iniq,  pag.
Rome hath power granted, to chuse his Confessor or  1036.
Confessors,  to  whom  hee  gives  full  power  to  absolve  all
Papall cases, as if the Pope himselfe were personally
present :  and  if  he  dies  in  the  way  being  truly  confessed,
that  he  be  quite  free,  and  absolved  from  all  his  sinnes  :  and
moreover,  wee  command  the  Angels  of  Paradise  that  they
carrie  the  soule  into  the  glory  of  Paradise,  being  fully
absolved  from  Purgatorie. Theodorike  a  Niem  speaking  Theod.  I.  1.

of Boniface the ninth his Indulgences, saith that his  «/  /•  » ^

.  -r» •  1  1 r 1  Plat.tnBon.t).

pardoners  got  in  some  one  Province  by  sale  or  them,  one  Krantz.

hundred  thousand  Florens,  releasing  all  sinnes  to  such  as  Metrop.  /.  1 1 .

were  confessed, even  without  Penance, Dispensing for  c-  IO-

Money with irrigularities, &c. Yea, some Pardoners

descended  sometime  (saith  Gascoigne)  to  take  for  them  a  T\  Gasc-  tn

supper,  a  nights-lodging,  a  draught  of  Wine  or  Beere,  a  Dtctton-TheoL

game  at  Tennis,  and  sometime  a  venereall  Act. Pope

Alexander  the  sixt  gave  thirtie  thousand  yeares  Indulgence,

for  the  saying  of  a  certaine  Prayer  to  Saint  Anne. And

Julius  his  warring  Successor  gave  large  Indulgences  to

every  man  which  should  kill  a  French-man,  with  whom

he  had  Warres. Others  to  Stations,  Rosaries, Crosses,

Churches,  Images,  Graines,  Pilgrimages,  Prayers,  throwing

Wood  into  the  Fire  to  burne  Heretickes,  and  other  like

parts  of  Faith  and  Charitie. But  let  us  come  to the

Originall  of  this  sinke.

Some  ascribe  their  beginning  to  Pope  John,  about  the  Jo.Eput.\\\.

yeare  880.  which  yet  is  but  giving  his  opinion  of  them

viii  49  d

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

c.  1625.

that  die  in  Warre  against  Infidels,  not  an  Indulgence  to

P.  Dam.  ep. any# Petrus Damianus tels of Monks, redeeming

"cereb  *13  ap Penances  w^^  Psalmodies,  and  selfe-whippings,  redeeming

Sur.  Oct.  14. a  yeares  penance  with  a  thousand  stripes,  and  five  thousand

vid.  Spa/at. stripes  with  once  singing  the  whole  Psalter,  with  other

rep.  Ecdes.  I.  voluntarily imposed taskes. Sigonius tels of Pope

l*  c\  'R Alexander,  about  the  same  time,  Anno  107 1.  consecrating

Itol  the  Church  of  Cassinum,  and  giving  great  Indulgences  to

all  present ; which  brought  thither  most  Italian  Princes

P. Virg.de In.  an(j Bishops, and Agnes the Empresse. Some tell of

Gregorie the first, in the time of publike Pestilence,

enjoyning  a  publike  kind  of  Penance,  the  Letanies,  and

Stations  or  visiting  on  set  daies  certaine  Churches,  with

prayers  for  deliverance,  and  remission  to  be  given  by  the

Priests,  to  such  as  penitently  confessed  their  sinnes. These

Ludi  Stations  gave  occasion  to  Boniface  the  eight,  of  proclaim-

saw  ares. jng  ^  jubiiee  every  secular  yeare  in  imitation  of  the

Secular  games,  which  Clement  reduced  to  fiftie,  and  Sixtus

Quartus  to  five  and  twentie. These  Jubilees  begunne  in

Anno 1300. have Indulgence generation, Jewish and

Ethnicke  imitation,  which  the  other  have  little  Commerce

with, as  being void of Commerce. Bishop Fisher of

Roff.  art.  18. Rochester  writing  against  Luther,  doth  more  fitly  make

Indulgence,  a  Daughter  of  Purgatorie  Family :  Quamdiu

enim  (saith  he) nulla  fuerat  de  Purgatorio  cura, nemo

quaesivit  Indulgentias. Nam  ex  illo  pendet  omnis  Indul-

gentiam existimatio. Si tollas Purgatorium, quorsum

Indulgentiis opus erit? Caeperunt igitur Indulgentiae

[Il.viii.  postquam  ad  Purgatorii  cruciatus  aliquandiu  trepidatum

1263.J est ^n(j  in(jeeci  Purgatorie  hath  beene  the  gainefullest

fire  to  the  Pope,  and  as  a  painefull-gaine-foole  Mother,

might  well  procreate  this  Daughter : both  issuing  from

conceit, that temporall punishment remaineth to be

satisfied, after the fault of sinne remitted. Therefore

have  they  invented  that  Treasurie  of  the  Merits  of  Christ

and  the  Saints  to  bee  this  way  employed,  a  name  fitting

the nature, being the best Treasurie, (for externall

Treasures)  which  ever  the  Pope  had ; in  warre  to  pay

50

ADVANCE  OF  THE  PAPAL  MONARCHY a.d.

c.  1625.
Souldiers,  warring  in  his  cause,  at  their  owne  costs,  in
peace  to  fill  his  Coffers. But  let  us  looke  to  a  purer
generation,  whereof  this  is  the  corruption  and  degeneration.

When  as  in  the  first  times  of  the  Church,  onely  feare  of
God  and  Ecclesiasticall  Discipline  held  men  in  awe,  the
Magistrates  being  Ethnicke ;  severe  Canons,  and  sincere
Zeale  held  things  in  order.  And  if  men  transgressed,
yet  either  for  intension  of  their  superabundant  sorrow,  or
for  encouragement  and  provocation  to  Martyrdome,  or  in
danger  of  death  relaxation  was  made  and  Indulgence ;
the  Church  receiving  some  satisfaction  for  the  externall
scandall,  and  beleeving  that  God  for  the  merit  of  his
Sonne,  and  propense  mercy  was  satisfied  also  in  that
sacrifice  of  a  contrite  heart  and  broken  spirit ;  God
graciously  accepting  that  Care,  feare,  clearing  of  ones  selfe,  2.  Cor.  7.
zeale,  indignation,  desire,  and  revenge,  (the  affects  and
effects  of  true  repentance)  and  the  Church  imitating  the
mercy  of  the  heavenly  Father ;  as  wee  see  in  the
incestuous  Corinthian.  This  satisfaction  did  not  by  merit
redeeme,  but  in  Faith  and  Penance  appease  him,  being
reconciled  in  his  Sonne ;  for  he  sheweth  Mercy  (not  Adulterous
Merit)  to  thousands  in  them  that  love  him  and  keepe  his  'j^}*''™/^
Commandements :  he  turning  to  them  when  they  turne  oispt
to  him.  Indulgences  and  Dispensations  were  adulterously
commixed  to  destruction  of  this  both  publike  and  private
Penance,  when  men  were  taught  in  stead  of  a  Contrite
heart,  to  give  a  contrite  purse ;  and  in  stead  of  satisfying
God,  (to  use  that  word)  that  is,  appeasing  and  meeting
him  by  repentance,  doing  what  he  exacts  and  expects ;
or  satisfying  the  Church  in  her  Sanctions,  by  externall
humiliation,  testifying  internall  humilitie  and  conversa-
tion ;  to  put  over  all  to  a  Jubilee  and  Plenarie  Indulgence.
Which  if  they  bee  good,  why  doth  not  the  Popes  Charitie
freely  give  what  he  freely  received?  What  greater
Simonie  then  sale  of  Merits,  the  chiefe  graces  of  the  holy
Ghost;  yea,  of  Christs  owne  Merits?  And  what  shall
become  of  this  Treasurie  after  the  last  day?

Let  Bellarmine  and  Valentianus  alledge  the  communion

51

^ens.

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

c.  1625.

of  Saints,  and  other  Scriptures  of  seeming  supererogation,
Greg,  de as  qq\ lt  24.  and  the  power  of  the  Keyes,  yet  dothValentia
7  afn> ' e-j confesse their novitie, whence followes their invalencie
St>a/./.$.c.$. ar,d vanitie. Once; their Money-valencie and Man-
valency,  was  not  begun  before  by  Gregorie  the  seventh
against the  Emperour,  as  is  said,  and  by  Urban  heere
applied  to  the  Holy  Land  Warre. Yea,  these  of  Urban
did  but  give  occasion  to  the  after  Popes,  to  make  them
so  strong  pillars  of  the  Babylonicall  Tower,  the  Indulg-
ences  being then but Calves, which after grew to be
Bulls, as appeareth by the various reports of this his
Speach,  and  Act  in  the  Councell  of  Claremont. I  have
read  seven  or  eight severall Orations,  written most  of
them  by  men  of  that  time,  and  some  professing  themselves
present,  which  yet  have  made  it  the  triall  of  their  wits,
what  they  could,  or  else  have  added  what  Urban  at  divers
times,  did  say  or  write,  or  other  Popes  after  him  : the
later composing themselves to their own times, when
Indulgences  were  common  and  current. You  have  heard
Vid.GestaDei  Robertus and Fulcherius  already. Baldricus the  Arch-
er Francos, bishop  being  present, delivers that  part of  his speech,
which  looks  this  way  in  these  words  : Confessis  pecca-
torum  suorum  ignorantiam, securi  de  Christo  coelestem
pasciscimini veniam. Guibertus, peroraverat vero
excellentiss. omnes  qui  se  ituros  voverant,  (in  his  long
Oration I find nothing to this purpose) Beati Petri
potestate absoluit, eadem ipsa authoritate Apostolica
G.Malm.l.^. firmavit,  &c. Malmesbury  had  it  of  those  which  heard

aromus  hath jt  jn  t^js  sense Itriri  habentes  per  Dei  concessum  &  beati
the  same.  .

Jacob,  de Petri  privilegium  omnium  absolutionem  criminum,  &  hac

Vitriac  hist, interim laetitia laborem itineris alleviant, habituri post
Jer.  obitum  foelicis  martyrii  commercium. Vitriacus  Bishop

W.  Tyr.  Mst.  Qf  Aeon,  Omnibus  in  remissionem  omnium  peccatorum
peregrinationem  injungens.  William  Archbishop  of
Tyre  thus,  Nos  autem  de  misericordia  Domini  &  Beatorum
Petri  &  Pauli  authoritate  confisi  fidelibus  Christianis  qui
contra  eos  arma  susceperint,  &  onus  sibi  hujus  peregrina-
tionis assumserint, injunctas sibi pro suis delictis

52

ADVANCE  OF  THE  PAPAL  MONARCHY ad.

c.  1625.
poenitentias  relaxamus. Qui  autem  ibi  in  vera  poenitentia
decesserint, & peccatorum indulgentiam & fructum
aeternae  mercedis  se  non  dubitent  habituros. M. Paris
after  them,  &  more  fitted  to  Indulgences,  Nos  autem  de
Omnipotentis  Dei  maxime  &  BB.  App.  ejus  Petri  &  Pauli
authoritate  confisi,  ex  ilia  quam  nobis  (licet  indignis)  Deus
ligandi  atque  solvendi  contulit  potestatem,  omnibus  qui
laborem  istum  in  propriis  personis  subjerint  &  expensis,
plenam suorum peccatorum, si veraciter fuerint corde
contriti  &  ore  confessi,  veniam  indulgemus,  &  in  retri-
butione  justorum  salutis  aeternae  pollicemur  augmentum.
Thus  the  later,  perhaps  from  some  later  Popes,*  which  *Matth.Pans
after  Urban  had  broken  the  Ice,  gave  further  Indulgence  ^^Pope
to  the  spirit  of  Indulgences,  til  (like  the  Frog  in  the  fable) Gregprus
they  cracked  themselves  in  sunder  with  swelling. Some  Indulgence
you  see  mention  only  the  merit  of  the  worke,  some  adde  B'antetiy Anno
the  power  of  the  Keyes  in  loosing,  or  absolving  from l2)*"  fl' t  •
sinne  in  the  Conscience,  others  absolution  from  enjoyned Ccelestineand
penances  (by  the  Confessor)  the  last  to  a  plenary  Indulg-  Innocent.
ence,  yet  at  most  but  an  absolution  and  that  from  penall
Canons,  as  it  were  by  commutation  of  penance,  in  stead
of  that imposed  by the  Ghostly  Father, or  Canonicall
sentence of  the Prelate, undertaking in person, or  by
purse in maintenance of another this peregrination.
Upon  this  timber  they  soone  after  built  hay  and  stubble,
which  hath  by  Luthers  kindling  set  Rome  on  fire.

In  following  times, this  Expedition  and  Indulgences  [Il.viii.
thereof,  were  followed  by  the  opinions  of  satisfying  God  1264.]

for  former  sinnes  or  imputations  (as  in  Henry  the  Second Mat  Paris'*
for Beckets murther) to be expiated by this Warre.  and'the  Rela-
Secondly,  of  freeing  of  others  soules  hereby  out  of  Purga-  tions  before
tory. Thirdly, of  freedome  from Oathes, as is  before  ndted.
mentioned  out  of  the  Councell  of  Lions. Fourthly,  of
Immunity  of  persons  and  goods,  as  of  Priests  to  be  absent,
and  yet  taking  the  profits  of  their  Livings  for  three  yeares
present,  and  to  be  free  from  payments ; Laymen  freed
from  Collections,  Taxations  and  other  publike  grievances.
Fiftly, against private Sutes, their persons and goods

53

A.D.

c.  1625.

Hurts  in  Faith
and  Manners
by  these  Expe-
ditions, and
Pilgrimages  to
the  Holy  Land.

Pope  grew
great  by  Holy
Land  warres.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

after  the  Crosse  received,  to  be  under  Saint  Peters  and  the

Popes protection, and the defence of the Church, by

speciall  Protectors appointed, that till their  returne  or

death  certainly  knowne,  none  might  meddle  with  them

under  paine  of  Excommunication (a  good proviso for

Bank-rupts.) Sixtly,  the  proportion  of  this  Indulgence

to the proportion of ayde or counsell (concilium vel

auxilium)  or  money  that  way  employed. Seventhly,  the

Suffrage  and  Prayers  of  the Synod, that this  Journey

might  profit  worthily  to  their  salvation. Eightly,  power

for  all  whomsoever  but  Regulars  to  goe,  though  unfit ;

redeeming,  changing,  or  deferring  it  by  the  Popes  grant.

Likewise,  they  increased  sinne  by  this  meanes,  Murtherers,

Theeves,  Adulterers,  Bank-rupts,  and  others  having  the

Holy  Land  for  refuge  against  Law,  and  for  safety  of  them

and  theirs,  yea,  for  Merit  and  Indulgence  ;  that  becomming

hereby  the  very  sinke  of  sinne,  confluence  of  all  villanie,

the heart and centre of abomination : as appeares in

Vitriacus  and  others.

And  as  morally,  so  also  doctrinally,  Purgatorie,  Merit,
Supererogation,  Superstitious  Pilgrimages,  and  the  like,
tooke  further  rooting  by  these  Holy  Land  Expeditions ;
but  especially  the  Popes  power  hereby  increased  in  and
over  Kings  and  Kingdomes,  thus  intermedling,  perverting
and  preventing  courses  of  Justice  by  his  Indulgence-Buls
horned  with  Excommunication  :  by  imposing  this  Expedi-
tion on  Kings  as  Penance  :  by  exhausting  their  Treasures,
Souldiers  and  Forces ;  by  busying  them  farre  off,  whiles
he  and  his  might  take  and  make  oportunitie  to  adulterate
all  at  home :  by  pushing  with  these  homes  of  Indulgences
against  Kings  themselves ;  without  other  force,  employing
the  forces  of  one  Prince  against  another,  and  of  their
owne  subjects  against  their  Sovereignes.  So  was  King
John  forced  to  surrender  his  Crowne,  and  take  it  of  the
Pope  in  farme,  the  French  and  his  owne  being  armed
against  him :  so  Conrade,  Memfred,  Ladislaus,  and  other
Kings  of  Sicil ;  George,  King  of  Bohemia,  &c.  By  this
was the Imperiall  Eagle plucked  and stripped, greater

54

ADVANCE  OF  THE  PAPAL  MONARCHY ad.

c.  1625.
Indulgences  being  given, that  more  money  might  bee
gathered  to  maintayne  with  Holy  Land  money,  his  warre
against Fredericke the Emperour ; sending simple M.  Paris,  p.
Messengers  with  Legatine  power,  which  by  Commanding, 535-
Minacing,  Excommunicating,  Preaching,  Praying,  besides,
his  white  white  Bull,  which  might  moove  stony  hearts
(melting  out  their  metall)  as  to  succour  the  Holy  Land,
indeed,  to  ruinate  the  Emperour. For  which  cause  he  had
procured  a  Tenth,  of  Clergy  and  Laity  in  many  King-
domes  ;*  and  that  with  strict  Inquisition  of  the  value  to  *P*&-6S3-0f
the  Popes  best  commodite,  even  of  the  fruits  before  the  aJl  Ckrtsten-
Harvest,  present  pay  to  bee  made  under  paine  of  Inter-  /w\.8r.
diting  and  Excommunicating : which  made  the  Prelates
sell  their  Chalices  and  Church  goods,  that  I  mention  not
the  usurers  his  Chaplen,  and  Agent  Stephen  had  to  byte,
slay  and  devoure  the  flocke  with  further  exactions. This
was Gregorie the Compiler of the Decretals. These
moneyes  the  Pope  gave  to  John  de  Bresnes, to  warre
against  the  Emperour  then  in  the  Holy  Land,  and  forced
thither  by  the  Popes  Excommunication. He  extorted  also
a  fifth  of  beneficed  Forreiners  for  that  purpose,  &  absolved
his Subjects from their Allegeance. And when some
expostulated  with  the  King  of  England,  for  suffering  his
Kingdome  to  be  made  a  prey,  He  answered,  I  neyther  will  Pag.  703.
nor  dare  contradict  the  Lord  Pope  in  any  thing : so  that
hee  obtayned  a  fifth  in  England  :  and  after  that,  sent  Peter
Rubeus  to  new  un-heard  of  execrable  exactions  by  lyes
and  cavilations. What  shall  I  tell  *  of  Rustandus,  which  *Pag.  12 19.
was  sent  to  gather  new  Tenths,  and  to  exchange  the  Kings
Vow  for  the  Holy  Land,  into  a  Sicilian  Expedition  against
Memfrede, with equall Indulgences? Yea, greater
Indulgences  are  granted  to  such  as  would  warre  against
Christians,  if  the  Popes  Enemies,  as  before  you  have  read,
then  in  the  Holy  Land  against  the  Turkes.

Contrary  to  Indulgences  are  Interdictments,  as  Samsons  *Spa/at.  de
Foxes  having  a  fierie  conjunction  in  their  tayles  :  of  which  rePm  E- l-  5-
Hildebrand  is  noted  first  Author ; by  which,  if  a  Prince  Cm  9'
offended, his Subjects and whole Dominions were

55

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

c.  1625.

Interdicted,  that  is  in  Papall  Interpretation,  a  publike
Excommunication  was  denounced  against  him  and  his,
and  all  externall  publike  Holies  suspended.  You  shall
have  it  in  Mat.  Paris  his  words  of  King  John,  who  being
offended  that  the  Pope  had  rejected  from  the  Archbishop-
ricke  of  Canterburie,  the  Bishop  of  Norwich,  whom  the
greater  and  sounder  part  of  the  Monkes  in  due  solemnity,
by  the  Kings  consent  had  chosen,  obtruding  one  of  his
Cardinals  Stephen  Langton  upon  him,  whom  he  refused :
the  Pope  caused  the  Bishop  of  Ely  and  Worcester,  to
denounce  his  Interdict,  which  was  also  contrary  to  Papall
M.Paris,pag.  Priviledges  observed.  There  ceased  therefore  in  England
302.  c5  seq.  ajj  Ecclesiasticall  Sacraments  (except  confession,  and
housell  in  danger  of  death,  and  Baptisme  of  children.)
The  bodies  of  the  dead  were  carried  out  of  Cities  and
Villages,  and  buried  like  Dogges  in  by-wayes,  and  Ditches
without  Prayers  and  Ministerie  of  the  Priests  :  whereupon
divers  Bishops  forsooke  his  Land  and  such  combustions
[Il.vin.  followed,  that  the  Pope  excommunicated  him  (which  was

1205.J  denounced  by  the  former  Bishops)  after  which  hee  absolved
his  Subjects  from  their  Alleageance  and  prohibited  them
in  paine  of  Excommunication  to  avoyd  his  table,  counsell,
conference.  All  which  yet  were  of  no  great  force  till  the
dismall  sentence  of  deposition,  nor  that  but  by  Indulg-
ences and  Crusados.

For  the  Pope  writ  to  the  French  King  Philip  to  under-
take the  execution,  for  the  remission  of  all  his  sinnes ;
and  expelling  the  King  of  England,  to  hold  the  Kingdome
of  England  to  him  and  his  Successors  for  ever.  He  wrote
also  to  all  great  men,  Knights  and  Warriours  in  divers
Nations,  that  they  should  signe  themselves  with  the  Crosse
for  the  dejection  of  the  King  of  England,  following  the
French  King  in  this  Expedition,  labouring  to  revenge  the
quarrell  of  the  universall  Church.  Hee  ordained  also
that  whosoever  should  bestow  his  goods,  or  helpe  to
expugnate  that  obstinate  King,  they  should  remayne
secure  in  the  peace  of  the  Church  (even  as  they  which
visit  the  Sepulchre  of  our  Lord)  in  their  goods  and  persons

56

ADVANCE  OF  THE  PAPAL  MONARCHY ad.

c.  1625.
and  suffrages  of  soules,  (or  deliverance  of  soules  out  of
Purgatory!)

The  issue  whereof  was,  that  great  provisions  were  made
on  both  sides,  King  John  having  at  Barhamdowne,  three-
score thousand  armed  men,  besides  a  strong  Navy  at  Sea :
the  French  on  the  otherside  was  come  to  the  Sea  with  his
owne and the English, an innumerable Army, when
Pandulfus  the  Popes  Legate  craftily  sent  to  him  to  satisfie
the  Pope,  which  he  could  no  way  doe  but  by  resigning
his  Crowne  and  Kingdome,  to  receive  it  againe  in  fee
farme  of  the  Pope,  doing  him  homage,  and  paying  him
rent : which when the King had granted, Pandulfus
sought  to  perswade  the  French  party  to  peace,  and  the
English to returne. The French hereupon stormed,
invaded  the  Earle  of  Flanders,  King  Johns  Confederate,
who  now  with  his  forces  succored  him  with  five  hundred
ships,  which  tooke  three  hundred  French  shippes  richly  Miserable
provided,  and  burned  one  hundred  others : the  French  ^^^  0f
being  crossed  in  a  double  sense,  not  without  great  effusion  christians  by
of  Christian  bloud  :  the  Pope  ayming  at  his  owne  designed  Papall
greatnesse,  to  use  the  French  against  the  English,  and  the  procurement.
Subjects  against  their  Prince ; as  afterward  taking  the
Kings  part  against  his  Subjects,  and  excommunicating  the
French,  that  as  in  the  Fable,  he  might  play  with  both,  and
pray  on  both ;  spending  themselves  in  mutuall  emulations.

Yet  would  not  his  Subjects  obey  him,  providing  great
forces  to  invade  France,  till  the  Sentence  were  released :
whereupon  he  entertayned  Stephen,  and  the  other  Bishops
falling  at  their  feet  with  teares,  desiring  them  to  have  mercy
on  him,  and  the  Kingdome  of  England,  who  thereupon  King  abased  to
absolved  him, swearing  to  the  conditions  propounded : h"  sufyects-
his  Designes  against  France,  through  that  delay  prooved
frustrate  notwithstanding. In  the  Pope  and  his  Bishops,
he  found  so  little  certainty  that  he  sent  Embassadors  to
the  King  of  Morocco,  offering  vassallage  to  him,  if  he
would  protect  him ; which  being  refused,  knowing  (saith
the  Author) that  the  Pope  was  above  all  mortall  men
ambitious and proud, and an insatiable thirster after

57

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

c.  1625.

money,  and  waxen,  and  prone  to  all  villanies,  for  bribes  or

promises,  he  sent  him  Treasure,  and  promises  of  more,

and  alway  to  bee  his  Subject,  if  hee  would  confound  the

Archbishop,  and  excommunicate  the  Barons  whose  parts

he  had  before  taken ; that  he  might  so  imprison,  disherit

and  slay  them. Innocent  was  contented  to  be  thus  nocent,

Interdictofsix  and  released  the  Interdict,  which  had  continued  sixe  yeares,

yeares  and three  monethes  and  fourteene  dayes, to  the  irreparable
three  moneths. ,  r , P1 . . ^  1  1 o • •,_ 1  t-i

losse  or the  Lhurch  in lemporals  and  spirituals. I  he

Pope  taking  part  now  with  the  King,  hee  had  opportunitie
to  revenge  himselfe  of  his  Peeres,  who  hereupon  raysed
Civill  Warres,  and  sware  themselves  to  the  French  Kings
Sonne,  England  remayning  thus  on  fire,  till  the  death  of
King  John,  (which  hapned  amidst  these  flames)  to  the
terrour  of  his  Successors  in  so  daring  attempts  against
the  Pope.

And thus you see  what Crusadoes  and Indulgences
could  doe  in  those  dayes,  in  and  over  this  Kingdome :
Interdicts; Interdicts  can  intend  and  pretend  nothing,  but  raysing
how  unjust. Discontents  and  Rebellions,  as  if  God  should  impiously
be  deprived  of  his  worship,  and  men  uncharitably  of  the
meanes  of  their  salvation,  for  one  mans  fault,  if  a  fault,
if  not  the  Popes  only  fault  as  well  as  tyrannicall  punish-
Ez.  18.  ment. For  Gods  Law  forbids  the  fathers  eating  sower

Grapes  to  set  the  childrens  teeth  on  edge,  and  the  sonne
to  beare  the  fathers  fault,  but  the  soule  that  sinneth  shall
dye :  which  the  Venetian  lately  understood,  and  nobly
vindicated  against  the  Pope,  as  King  John  would  have
done,  if  the  times  had  beene  answerable.  But  Indulg-
ences you  see  heere,  were  the  Executors  and  Executioners
of  the  Popes  fury,  even  to  the  subjection  of  the  most
unwilling  Kings  and  Kingdomes,  which  is  the  Master-
piece of  Popery  in  the  getting.  And  for  the  keeping  and
mayntayning  this  Monarchie,  Crusadoes  and  Indulgences
stayd  not  heere,  but  by  the  same  Innocent  (the  first
Decreer  also  of  Transubstantiation)  was  extended  against
Alblgenses,  or  the  Albigenses,  or  Waldenses,  then  reputed  Heretikes,
Waldenses. ^as  wee  now  are  j^  fae  Papists)  and  condemned  for  those

58

ADVANCE  OF  THE  PAPAL  MONARCHY ad.

c.  1625.
Doctrines,  which  they  had  learned  out  of  the  Scriptures
against  the  Papall  Pride  and  Superstition. Other  things
are  ascribed  to  them,  as  now  to  us  by  the  Jesuits,  with
like  Truth  and  Charity,  as  out  of  their  owne  Authors
which best knew, is evident. As Urbans intent had
beene  against  the  Antipope,  which  his Successors  after
followed,  so  Innocent  and  other  Popes  disposed  the  Crosse
and  Indulgence  against  those  which  mayntayned  the  Truth
of  the  Gospell, and  in  all  likelihood  had  but for this
opposition,  ruined  the  Papacie. He  sent  Preachers  (sayth  P*g-  322-
Matthew  Paris  in  whose  steps  we  still  insist)  unto  all  the I2I3-
Regions  of  the  West,  and  enjoyned  Princes,  and  other
Christian  people  for  remission  of  their  sinnes,  that  they
should  signe  themselves  with  the  Crosse  to  root  out  this  [II. vm.
pestilence,  and  opposing  themselves  to  such  mischiefes,  1200.J

by  force  and  armes  should  defend  the  Christian  people.
He  added  also  by  authoritie  of  the  Sea  Apostolike,  that
whosoever  to  expugnate  them,  shall  undertake  the
enjoyned  labour,  should  remayne  secure  aswell  in  their
goods  as  persons  from  all  incursions  of  enemies.  At  this
preaching,  so  great  a  multitude  of  men  which  tooke  the
Crosse  assembled,  as  is  not  beleeved  at  any  time  to  have
met  together  in  our  Climate.  But  wee  will  learne  this
businesse  of  others  which  better  knew  it.

Poplinerius  saith, the  Waldenses  against  the  will  of  Pop.hist.Fran.
all  Christian  Princes  (so  did  the  Apostles  against  the  will  llb*  l,f°1'  7-
of  Ethnike  Princes,  (and  Princes  called  Christians,  were
now made drunke  with the Whores cup) sowed their
Doctrine,  little  differing  from  that  which  the  Protestants
now  embrace,  not  only  thorow  all  France,  but  almost  all
the Coasts of Europe. For the French, Spaniards,
English, Scots, Italians, Germanes, Bohemians, Saxons,
Polonians, Lithunians,  and  other  Nations, have  stiffely
defended  it  to  this  day. One  of  Innocents  Decrees  in  Tom.  4.
the  Councell  of  Lateran,  which  also  decreed  Transubstan-  Conal.  Edit.
tion, is, that  if  a  Temporall  Lord  being  required  and
warned  by  the  Church,  shall  neglect  to  purge  his  Countrey
from  hereticall  filthinesse,  the  Bishops  shall  excommuni-

59

A.D.

c.  1625.

Umber t.  serm.
p.  2.  Ser.  64.
See  D.  Usher
de  C.  Ec.  Stat,
c.  8.  9.  10.
SabeL  En.  9.
/.  6.

Military
Orders,  lay
Fraternities
and  Friers.
See  Usher,
pag.  261.
Inquisition
begun.

Jun.  Ep.  dec.
I.  1.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

cate  him :  if  he  continue  so  a  yeare,  let  it  be  signified  to
the  Pope,  that  he  may  free  his  vassals  from  their  alleag-
eance,  and  expose  his  Land  to  bee  occupyed  of  Catholikes,
which  may  possesse  it  without  contradiction,  the  Heretikes
being  rooted  out,  &c.

Indulgences  were  preached  in  this  sort,  the  Text,  Psal.
94.  16.  Who  will  rise  up  for  mee  against  the  evill  doers,
&c.  or  the  like  applyed  to  the  people :  You  see  beloved,
how  great  the  malice  of  Heretikes  is,  &c.  Therefore  the
holy  Mother  Church,  though  unwilling,  calleth  against
them  a  Christian  Armie.  Whosoever  therefore  hath  the
zeale  of  the  faith,  whosoever  is  touched  with  the  honour
of  God ;  whosoever  will  have  this  great  Indulgence,  let
him  come  and  take  the  signe  of  the  Crosse,  and  joyne
himselfe  to  the  Christian  Souldierie.  Some  thinke  that
the  Crouched  Order  of  Crucigeri,  was  then  comfirmed  by
this  Innocent ;  many  Crossed,  and  going  to  or  returning
from  Syria,  winning  the  Popes  favour  by  their  Exploits
against  the  Albigenses.  I  might  adde  the  Orders  of
Militarie  Knights,  as  Templars,  Hospitulars,  and  others
which  hence  had  their  originall,  and  were  so  potent  in
wealth  and  numbers,  that  they  could  beard  Kings,  and
had  their  dependance  and  priviledges  of  the  Pope.

Dominicke  Author  of  the  Dominicans,  preached  to
convert  with  the  word,  and  had  helpers  with  the  Sword,
to  expugnate  those  which  his  word  could  not.  These
were  called,  Fratres  de  militia  B.  Dominici,  and  they  and
their  wives  were  a  certaine  guilde,  called  the  Brethren  and
Sisters  of  Penance  of  Saint  Dominicke.  Likewise,  the
Office  of  the  Inquisition  was  instituted  by  this  Innocent,
charging  the  Bishops  in  remission  of  their  sinnes,  to
receive  his  Commissaries,  and  to  assist  them  against  Here-
tikes, drawing  forth  the  Spirituall  Sword  against  those
which  were  by  the  Inquisitors  named  ;  and  let  the  Laymen
confiscate  their  goods,  and  cast  them  out  of  their  posses-
sions. And  whosoever  should  devoutly  assist  them,  we
grant  that  Indulgence  of  their  sinnes  which  we  grant  to
those  which  visit  the  staires  of  Saint  Peter,  or  Saint  James.

60

ADVANCE  OF  THE  PAPAL  MONARCHY ad.

c.  1625.

This  he  wrote  in  behalfe  of  Rainer  and  Guido. But  after

this Inquisition was delegated to Dominicke, for the

Countries  of  Provence,  who  raysed  this  Dominican  Order,

(ordure)  whose  chiefe  care  should  be  against  Heretikes :

he  somewhat  verified  the  Popes  Dreame,  seeming  to  stay

the  Church  of  Laterane,  beeing  readie  to  fall,  which  the

Franciscans  apply  to  Saint  Francis. And  indeed,  had  not

these  in  this  Age  upheld  the  Lateran  Babylon,  together

with  the  Schoolemen,a  the  best  of  which  were  Friers,  and  *Mostofthe

the  Canonists : it  is  likely  the  Albigenses,  Waldenses,  c  te*e

y  o  j  » men  were

Pooremen  of  Lions,  Inzabbatati,  (other  names  they  give  Dominicans  or
them)  had  then  ruined  it,  they  then  with  like  Arts,  Dispen-  Franciscans.
sations,  and  Reputation  doing  that,  which  since  Luther
and  Calvine  the  Jesuites  have  laboured.

The  new  Locusts  *  supplanted  the  former  Clergie,  *?**•  &  v'tn>
exercised  Penances,  Unctions,  Baptismes,  and  began  two  m1'
Fraternities,  wherein  they  received  men  and  women  so
generally,  that  scarsly  any  were  free :  the  people  being
unwilling  to  heare  others  preach ;  that  the  Priests  were
defrauded  of  their  Tithes,  and  had  not  to  live :  the
Churches  now  retayning  nothing  but  a  Bell,  and  old  dustie
Image.  The  Friers  began  at  Cottages,  and  now  have
Kings  Houses  and  Palaces  erected,  and  having  no  riches
are  richer  then  all  rich  men,  whiles  we  begge,  &c.  These
became  acute  Schoolemen,  Sententraries,  Questionists,
Summists,  Quodlibetists,  and  I  know  not  what  irrefrag-
able, subtle,  Angelical  Doctors  and  Disputants,  bringing
in  Oppositions  of  Science  falsly  called,  languishing  about
Questions  and  strifes  of  words:  these  made  Divinitie  a  1.  Tim.  6.
Linsey  wolsey  garment ;  not  as  their  Master  of  Sentences,
of  Fathers  and  Scriptures ;  but  admitted  Aristotle  free  of
the  Divinitie  Schooles,  and  ploughed  with  an  Oxe  and  an
Asse,  their  Miscelan  fields.

These  Dominicans  and  Franciscans  were  appointed  also,
Inquisitores  hereticae  pravitatis,  and  made  many  bloudy
Sacrifices,  for  their  unbloudy  Sacrifice,  and  other  Popish
Heresies  in  pretence  of  Heretical  pravitie :  growing  into  Sabel.  En.  9.
such  numbers,  that  Sabellicus  numbred  of  Dominicans,  /.  6.

61

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

c.  1625.

one  and  twenty  Provinces ;  twentie  foure  thousand,  one
hundred  forty  three  Covents,  and  in  them  Fryars  entred,
fifteene  hundred  Masters  or  Doctors  of  Divinitie,  in  all
twenty  sixe  thousand,  foure  hundred  and  sixtie.  Of
Franciscans,  forty  Provinces  devided  into  Warden-ships,
Covents,  and  Places  ;  the  persons  innumerable,  conjectured
threescore  thousand.  Yea,  the  Generall  promised  to
Pope  Pius  of  bodies  able  to  serve  in  his  intended  war

r  t  I  *  *  *  -J-

u"  ,  n  against  the  Turke,  thirty  thousand  Franciscans,  thirtie
J  thousand  Augustine  Friars,  the  Carmelites  more,  and
other  Orders  I  mention  not,  nor  can  I  number  these
Locusts.

Pag.  561.  Matth.  Paris  inveigheth  often  against  the  insolencie  of

these  Friars  and  their  Papall  priviledges,  odious  to  the
Monkes  and  Secular  Clergie.  They  were  (saith  he)  Coun-
sellors and  Messengers  of  great  men,  Secretaries  of  our

Pdg-  823-  Lord  the  Pope,  getting  hereby  Secular  favour  :  quarrelling
about  prioritie  of  Order,  that  in  three  or  foure  hundred
yeeres  the  Monkes  had  not  so  degenerated,  as  these  within
foure  and  twentie  yeeres  after  their  first  Mansions  in
England,  whose  buildings  now  grow  Royall  Palaces.
They  wait  on  rich  men  dying,  extort  Confessions  and
secret  Testaments,  commending  themselves  and  their
owne  Order  alone,  sollicitous  to  get  Priviledges ;  in  the
Courts  of  Kings  and  great  men,  Counsellors,  Chamberlans,
Treasurers,  makers  of  Marriages,  Executors  of  Papall
exactions  ;  in  their  Preachings  bitter  or  flattering,  Revealers
of  Confessions,  Contemners  of  other  Orders,  accounting

Pag.  921.  the  Cistercians  Semi-laikes  and  Rustikes,  the  blacke
Monkes  proud  and  Epicures,  seeking  to  be  entertayned  as
Legats  or  Angels  of  God  in  their  preaching.  And  if  a
man  were  confessed  of  his  owne  Priest,  what  say  they,  of
that  Idiot,  ignorant  of  Theologie,  the  Decrees,  Questions  ?
they  are  blind  Leaders  of  the  blind  :  come  to  Us,  we  know
to  distinguish  leprie  from  leprie,  know  hard,  difficult  things
and  the  secrets  of  God  :  whereupon  Noble-men  and  Ladies
entertayned  them,  contemning  their  owne  Priests  and  Pre-

Pag.  1017. lates.  And  to  returne  to  Indulgences,  These  were  the  Popes

62

Christ.  Eccles.
Stat.  c.  10.

ADVANCE  OF  THE  PAPAL  MONARCHY ad.

c.  1625.
Publicans,  preaching  the  receiving  of  the  Crosse  (giving
notice  of  such  preaching  before-hand,  and  entertayned  by
the  Clergie  in  Vestments  with  Banners  and  Procession)  to
all  Ages,  Sexes,  Conditions,  to  the  Sicke  and  Aged,  the
next  day  for  money  absolving  them  from  their  vowed
Pilgrimage.  But  I  am  wearie  of  this  stinking  sinke  of
hypocrisie,  which  for  the  World  denyed  the  World,  the
Flesh  for  the  Flesh,  and  obeyed  to  such  enormous
rebellions.

Yet  let  us  examine  the  Indulgences  against  the
Waldenses,  in  the  yeere  1208.  innumerable  multitudes
received  the  Crosse  in  their  brests ;  the  Pope  writ  to
King  Philip  and  all  his  Princes,  to  invade  Narbone,
Tholouse,  and  other  parts.  The  next  yeere,  from  all  $"  Vsh'^e7
parts  of  France,  Flanders,  Normandie,  Aquitane,  Bur-
gundie,  the  Bishops,  Earles,  and  Barons,  with  an  infinite
number,  met  at  Lions  and  came  to  Byterrae,  where  they
slue  sixtie  thousand,  promiscuously  Papists  and  Waldenses,
by  advise  of  the  Popes  Legat,  who  said,  The  Lord  knoweth
who  are  his :  some  say  an  hundred  thousand,  not  sparing
Sex  or  Age,  burning  the  dead  bodies.  Thence  they  went
to  Carcasson,  where  they  spared  onely  the  mens  lives,  not
leaving  them  their  apparell.  Simon  Montfort,  Earle  of
Leicester,  was  made  Generall,  who  tooke  Roger  the  Lord
of  the  Countrey,  and  all  the  Countrey  with  an  hundred
Castles,  and  many  others  rendred  themselves.  In  the
yeer  12 10.  was  a  new  Expedition  of  these  crossed  Votaries
out  of  France,  England,  and  Loraine,  which  tooke
Minerbia,  where  an  hundred  and  fourescore  chose  rather
to  burne  then  turne  :  entred  Tolouse,  wasting  all,  taking
Cities  and  Castles,  burning  such  as  would  not  turne.
They  tooke  Raimund  and  his  Castle  of  Thermae,  his  Wife
and  Daughter ;  he  dyed  in  prison,  they  with  other  Ladies
in  the  fire.  Leopold  Duke  of  Austria,  Adolph  Earle  de
Monte,  William  Earle  of  Juliers  went  thither  out  of
Almaine.  An.  121 1.  a  new  Armie  from  many  parts,
tooke  many  Cities  and  Castles,  burning  and  hanging
many, committing the conquered Countrey to Simon

63

A.D.

c.  1625.

*R.  Earle  of
Tolouse  had
the  Countrey
of  Saint  Giles,
Provence,
Dauphine,
Venasme,
Ruthen,
Cadure,
Albig.  fcsfc.

Bertrand.
Gest.  Tolos.

Thu.  Prafat.
hist.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Montfort.  Lavallis  was  taken,  and  choise  given  to  turne
or  burne,  three  hundred  and  fiftie  choosing  this.  The
Ladie  was  cast  in  a  Well  and  stones  throwne  on  her.

Raimund  *  Earle  of  Tholouse  had  aide  of  the  King  of
Arragon,  and  was  an  hundred  thousand  strong  (Armori-
canus  hath  two  hundred  thousand)  but  was  over-throwne
by  the  Crosses  and  Montfort,  and  the  King  of  Arragon
slaine,  and  the  certayne  number,  saith  Paris,  of  the  slaine,
could  not  be  certainly  numbred :  some  say  two  and  thirtie
thousand.  Hence  new  crossed  Knights  which  served  for
Indulgence  and  spoile,  in  the  yeeres  12 14.  and  12 15.
Simon  possessing  himselfe  of  the  great  Countries  of  Earle
Raimund,  by  the  Popes  procurement,  and  King  Philips
grant.  The  Warres  continued  121 6.  121 7.  1218.  in
which  Simon  was  slaine.  The  Warres  were  prosecuted
by  Amalricus  his  sonne,  and  Lewis  sonne  to  King  Philip.
These  tooke  Miramonda  and  slue  Man,  Woman  and
Child.

Anno  12 19.  Tolouse  was  besieged  in  vaine,  Famine
and  Mortalitie  plaguing  the  Armie.  The  Warre  con-
tinued 1220.  1 22 1.  In  the  yeere^i223.  the  Pope  sent  his
Legat,  a  Cardinall,  with  twentie  Bishops.  King  Philip
died  and  appointed  twentie  thousand  pounds  to  helpe
Amalricus  against  the  Albigenses,  which  grew  now  strong
in  Dalmatia,  Bulgaria,  Croatia.  Anno  1225.  King  Lewis
made  an  Expedition  to  besiege  Avinion,  seven  yeeres
excommunicate  by  the  Pope,  with  an  Armie  of  Crusado's.
But  Earle  Raimund  had  plowed  the  grounds  and  prevented
all  provision,  that  Sword,  Famine  and  Pestilence  dismayed
that  huge  Armie,  wherein  the  King  himselfe  died,  and
above  two  and  twentie  thousand  of  the  Assailants.  Loth
to  wearie  you  with  such  bloudie  spectacles,  effects  of
Antiphrasticall  Indulgences,  this  Warre  is  said  to  continue
about  seventie  yeeres.  The  Waldenses  encreased  not-
withstanding daily,  and  the  Warre,  saith  Thuanus,  was
of  no  lesse  weight  then  that  against  the  Saracens  (which
occasioned  this  whole  discourse)  and  they  were  rather  in
the  end  spoiled  then  converted  or  convicted,  some  remayn-

64

ADVANCE  OF  THE  PAPAL  MONARCHY a.d.

c.  1625.
ingf  close  in  Provence,  some  in  the  Alpes,  some  in  Calabria  ^n.SyLhtst.

&  1  • -d  • •  Bo.  Dubr.  ul.

to  our  times,  and  some  in  Jonsaine.  „ „  „ . r^

•  1  1 • •  •  1  1  3* 24.. O

The  Bohemians  also  were  their  issue,  against  whom  the  H-~
Pope  used  like  courses  of  Indulgences,  one  hundred  and  [Il.viii.
fiftie  thousand  at  one  time  crossed  under  Sigismund  to  1268.]

the  war,  being  out  of  divers  Kingdomes,  not  to  mention
the  Crusado's  by  the  Cardinals  of  Winchester  and  Julian,
with  innumerable  bloudshed. But  I  am  loth  to  lothe  and
wearie  you  with  such  cruell  Indulgentiall  morsells, the
Popes  feast  of  mans  flesh  to  the  blinded  World. Those
Bohemian  warres  had  first  originall  from  Hus  his  preach-
ing, and  that  also  against  Indulgences  preached  against
the  King  of  Naples  :  they  were  long  and  bloudie,  but  more
long  and  bloudie  have  those  of  this  last  and  worst  Age
beene  from  like  originall,  which  I  leave  to  other  Authors,
to  reckon  the  many  many  hundreths  of  thousands  of  Chris-
tians, which  one  neighbour  Countrey,  yea  one  little  piece
of  her  neighbour  Countrey  (not  to  mention  others  still
bleeding,  crying,  dying)  have  lost  in  quarrels,  died  in  the
bloud  of  Religion. Money  is  the  life  of  merchandise,
Sinowes  of  warre,  and  upholder  of  Greatnesse,  without
which,  Peters  succession,  pasce  Oves,  I  have  prayed  for
thy  Faith,  Constantines  supposed  donation,  and  the  keyes
of  the  Kingdome  of  Heaven, had not  prevailed to  a
Papall  earthly  Monarchic And  Indulgences  andCrusado's
have  beene  his  best  both  Mine  and  Mint  for  Money :
first,  in  sharing  with  Kings  which  tooke  the  Crosse,  and
by  Papall  power  imposed  Tenths  that  he  might  have  a  Matt.  Par.
Twentieth,  as  he  did  to  Saint  Lewis  of  France. Secondly,  in
letting  out  his  Indulgences  to  Kings  at  a  Rent,  whereby  at
this  day  some  get  more  then  by  some  Kingdomes. Thirdly,
by  redeeming  the  Vowes  by  such  meanes  as  you  have  now
heard  of  the  Friars,  one  binding  to  the  Vow,  another  for
money  loosing,  like  a  blacke  and  white  Devill  witching
and unwitching the superstitious vulgar. Fourthly,
Kings  taking  the  Crosse  to  oppresse  their  Subjects  for  the
charge, with part of  the purchase purchasing  a  Papall
Absolution. Fiftly, agreeing  with Kings to fleece the
viii  65  E

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

c.  1625.

Church  for  the  Holy  Land,  that  he  might  doe  as  much
against  the  Emperour.  Sixtly,  letting  out  these  Crusado's
Page.  977.  to  ferme,  by  which  Richard  Earle  or  Cornwall,  in  Matt.
Paris,  daily  so  enriched  himselfe,  how  much  more  the
Pope?  the  Popes  preacher  (playing  the  harvest  man,  to
bring  into  his  Barnes  or  Treasurie)  that  the  fame  of  his
money  made  him  to  be  chosen  Emperour.  He  of  one
Archdeaconrie  reaped  six  hundred  pounds.  William
Longspat  got  by  the  late  gift  of  the  Pope,  above  a  thou-
sand marks.  Seventhly,  giving  Indulgences,  that  is,  the
money  which  might  be  made  of  them  in  recompense  of
friendship,  labours,  expenses.  Eightly,  selling  Indulg-
ences to  Churches,  Images,  Altars,  Graines,  Prayers,  &c.
SMfCt'fTh  thorow  t'le  Christian  world.  Ninthly,  by  Jubilees,
Cromwell.  whereof  Crusado's  were  Fore-runners  and  Apparitors.
Tenthly,  by  dispensations  the  Juno,  sister  and  wife  of  this
Indulgent  Jove,  or  Pluto  rather.  Eleventhly,  by  insti-
tuting Offices ;  Penitentiaries,  Notaries,  and  I  know  not
what  rabble  for  these  purposes  and  his  Exchequer  Receits,
and  then  selling  those  multiplyed  Offices  for  the  greatest
summe.  But  who  can  summe  up  these  Accounts?
especially  being  workes  of  Darknesse,  mystie  mysteries,
which  yet  are  thus  farre  revealed,  enough  to  prove  the
Author  the  Man  of  sinne,  which  by  his  owne  verie  sinne,
and  supposed  pardon  of  others,  hath  let  the  raines  of  the
World  loose  to  Sinne ;  and  hereby  ruled  the  World
holding  the  raines  in  his  owne  hand.  Once ;  his
temporall  Monarchic,  Collations  of  Benefices,  Dispensa-
tions had  never  under-propped  this  mysticall  Monarchic,
had  not  Crusado's  and  Indulgences  awed  Kings,  excited
and  incited  furious  Armies,  armed  furies ;  depopulated
and  ruined  Kingdomes,  and  by  mayne  force  bett  downe  all
Opponents  abroad,  and  filled  his  Coffers  at  home.

But  for  this  of  money,  Sixtus  or  Xistus  the  fourth,  was
wont  to  say,  that  hee  should  never  want  money  so  long
as  he  wanted  not  a  Hand  and  a  Pen.  And  Xistus  the
fifth,  in  five  yeeres  and  a  halfe  had  gathered  five  millions
of  treasure,  notwithstanding  his  magnificent  and  admir-

66

ADVANCE OF THE PAPAL MONARCHY a.d.

c.  1625.
able  expenses,  in  Palaces,  Churches,  Obeliskes,  Conduits,
and  the  like.  So  much  could  Friars  Minors  skill  of
getting  both  Papacie  and  Money.  And  that  you  may
know  of  what  use  prohibited  marriages  to  Priests  and
religious  Orders  are,  you  may  consider  how  the  Pope  may
make  Armies  of  their  numbers  in  extremitie ;  and  of
their  purses  at  pleasure  make  sponges.  Pius  the  fourth
levied  at  one  time  of  the  Religions  foure  hundred  thou-
sand Ducats  ;  and  if  he  would  have  admitted  Resignations
of  Benefices  with  Regresses,  as  he  was  advised,  he  might
that  way  have  made  a  million.  Paul  the  third  maintayned
twelve  thousand  foot  and  five  hundred  horse  at  his  pay,
under  Charles  the  fift  against  the  Lutherans,  and  yet
raysed  his  house  as  you  see :  Clement  the  seventh
hath  notwithstanding  his  captivitie  done  more  for
his  House.  Pius  the  fift  sent  foure  thousand  foot
and  one  thousand  horse,  to  aide  Charles  the  ninth
against  the  Protestants.  But  I  have  wearied  the
Reader  in  observing  the  effects  of  this  Pope  holy
Expedition  to  Jerusalem,  and  the  Papall  advancement
thereby.  I  will  adde  the  vertues  of  those  Holy  Land
Inhabitants,  and  then  you  shall  see  it  the  Holy  Land
indeed,  so  termed  by  Antiphrasis,  Dignum  patella  oper-
culum, Lettice  sutable  to  the  lips  of  His  Holinesse,  who
may  also  have  that  Title  for  the  selfe  same  cause.

§. V.  [Il.viii.

/CI

Superstition  advanced  in  and  by  the  Holy  Land
Expeditions,  and  the  Christians  Christianitie  in
those  parts  worse  then  in  other.  Divers  Sects
of  Christians  in  the  East.

Irst  for  superstition,  this  voyage  proved  a  Mart  for
Reliques,  as  is  before  in  part  observed  of  the
multiplyed  Crosse,  of  the  Speare,  of  the  Bloud  of
Christ,  solemnely  carried  by  King  Henrie  to  Westminster,
of  our  Ladies  haires,  &c.  Of  the  Crowne  of  Thornes,  Pag,  731.
Matth.  Paris  tells,  that  Baldwin,  Emperour  of  Constanti-

67

A.D.

c.  1625.

*By  English-
men.
Pag.  634.

Peeres  of  the
Kingdome  of
Jerusalem.

Quarantena.

Jerusalem
described.

Templars ,  so
called  of  a
Temple
built  by
Mahumetans.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

nople  before  mentioned,  sold  it  to  the  French  King  for
money,  to  pay  his  Armie.  Peter  the  pilgrime  Bishop  of
Winchester,  bequeathed  inestimable  summes  of  money
to  Religious  Houses  by  him  founded  at  Hales,  Tikeford,
Seleburne,  Portsmouth  :  and  whereas  two  Churches  had
beene  dedicated  *  to  Saint  Th.  Becket  at  Aeon,  he  removed
one  of  them  to  a  more  convenient  place,  and  changed  their
Order  into  a  more  competent,  subject  to  the  Templars,
and  gave  besides  by  Will  five  hundred  marks  to  it.  But
Vitriacus,  the  Bishop  of  Aeon,  will  best  acquaint  us  with
their  conditions,  who  having  reckoned  the  Peeres  of  that
Kingdome,  the  Earle  of  Tripolis,  Lords  of  Berith,  Sidon,
Caiphas  or  Porphyria,  Caesarea,  Mount  Royall,  of  Assur,
of  Ibelim,  with  some  others  ;  the  Prince  of  Galilee,  Lord
of  Tiberias  ;  Earle  of  Joppe  and  Ascalon,  &c.  tells  us  of
the  flourishing  state  of  Religion  by  the  odor  of  holy  and
venerable  places  there,  sorted  and  fitting  to  mens  devouter
humours ;  some  choosing  to  live  in  the  Desart  called
Quarantena,  where  our  Lord  was  tempted,  living  Here-
miticall  lives  in  petie  Cells ;  others,  in  imitation  of  Elias
in  Mount  Carmell  neere  Caiphas,  in  Hives  of  small  Cells,
foure  miles  from  Aeon  :  others,  in  the  Desarts  of  Jordan  ;
others  living  solitarie  in  the  Desart  of  Galilee,  where
Christ  preached.  In  Thabor  was  a  Monasterie  builded,
and  in  divers  other  places.  Others  chose  rather  to  live  in
Cities,  especially  Jerusalem,  Nazareth,  and  Bethleem.

Jerusalem  was  the  Mother  of  the  Faith,  as  Rome  is  of
the  faithfull ;  it  stands  on  a  high  Hill,  is  on  both  sides
Mountaynous,  abounding  with  Wheat,  Wine,  and  Oile,
and  all  temporall  good  things  :  yet  hath  but  one  Foun-
tayne,  called  Siloe,  flowing  out  of  Sion,  sometimes  having
little  or  no  Waters.  And  as  it  is  more  holy  then  any
place,  so  it  hath  drawne  to  it  more  religious  Persons.  In
it  is  a  Temple  of  huge  quantitie,  whence  the  Templars
have  their  name,  called  Salomons  Temple.  Whatsoever
places  (in  all  that  Countrey)  our  Lord  trod  on,  are  esteemed
holy  and  consecrated,  and  for  precious  Reliques  by  the
faithfull ; whence Religious both Clerks and Laymen,

68

ADVANCE  OF  THE  PAPAL  MONARCHY ad.

c.  1625.
aswell  militarie  as  of  other  condition,  have  beene  drawne
thither :  namely,  the  Brethren  of  the  Hospitall  of  Saint
John,  the  Templars,  and  the  Brethren  of  the  Hospitall
of  Saint  Marie  of  the  Dutch.  The  Hospitalars  were  Hospitalars.
from  the  time  of  the  Surians,  having  a  Latine  Church  of
Saint  Marie,  the  Abbot  whereof  built  an  Hospitall  in
honor  of  Saint  John  Eleemon.  After  the  Franks  Expedi-
tion, Gerard  the  Master,  adjoyning  some  others  to  him
tooke  a  religious  habit  and  white  Crosse,  whom  Agnes
the  Abbesse  followed.  These  buried  their  dead  in  Achel-  Acheldama.
dama,  and  whiles  they  were  poore  obeyed  the  Abbot,  and
payed  their  Tithes,  and  called  the  poore  to  whom  they
ministred,  their  Masters  and  Lords,  but  after  became  as
Princes  of  the  Earth.  The  Templars  also  were  at  first  Templars.
Lions  in  battell,  Lambs  at  home,  Eremites  and  Monkes
in  the  Church,  having  Banners  blacke  and  white  (as  mild
to  Christians,  terrible  to  the  Infidels)  severe  in  their  owne
societie,  obsequious  to  the  Patriarke,  beloved  for  their
Religion  and  humilitie,  as  the  former,  insomuch  that
Dukes  and  Princes  denyed  the  World  and  followed  them.

And  because  a  threefold  Cord  is  not  easily  broken,  that  Dutch  Knights
of  the  Dutch  Knights  was  added,  from  a  small  beginning  ongma"-
increasing  into  a  swelling  streame.  For  one  Dutch  man
with  his  family  dwelling  at  Jerusalem,  many  of  his  Coun-
trey  Pilgrimes,  which  knew  not  the  language,  were  glad
of  his  entertainment  in  a  small  Hospitall  by  him  therefore
builded,  to  which  also  he  added  a  Chappel  in  honour  of
our  Lady,  and  partly  procured  of  his  owne  goods,  partly
by  almes,  to  the  poore  and  sicke  Pilgrimes.  Some  Dutch-
men liking  the  intent,  gave  all  they  had  thereto,  binding
themselves  by  vow  ;  and  when  some  of  Gentle  and  Noble
bloud  had  adjoyned  themselves,  they  became  both  followers
of  the  Hospitulars  in  their  care  of  the  poore,  and  of  the
Templars  in  Military  Devotion.

The  Holy  Land  also  flourished  with  Regulars,  Religious,  Holy  Land
Anchorites, Monkes, Canons, Nuns, Inclosed persons,  Inhabitants-
Virgins,  Widowes. It  was  also  full  of  peoples,  Genuois,
Pisans,  Venetians,  men  fit  for  the  Sea,  and  sage  Counsels ;

69

A.D.

c.  1625.

Colts,

Chickens  or
young  things.

[Il.viii.

1270.]

The  Authour
doth  heape
more  sentences
of  Scripture  to
discover  their
abominations,
then  here  are
mentioned,  to
shew  them
deplorate  and
desperate :
especially  con-
sidering their
sins  out  of
measure
sinfully  and
their  Holies  so
leavened  with
manifold
superstitions.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Frankes,  Almans,  Britons,  Englishmen,  lesse  ordered  or
circumspect,  more  impetuous,  more  superfluous  in  Dyet,
prodigall  in  Expenses,  devout  in  the  Church,  fervent  in
Charity,  more  couragious  in  Battell,  and  formidable  to
the  Saracens :  which  yet  for  the  vanitie  of  some,  are  by
the  Pollans,  called  the  Sonnes  of  Hemaudius.  They
which  descended  of  the  Conquerors  are  called  Pollans,
eyther  because  they  were  Pulli,  in  respect  of  the  Surians,
or  because  their  Mothers  were  most  of  them  Apulians ;
the  Army  wanting  women  enough,  and  procuring  from
Apulia,  the  neerest  place  of  the  Westerne  Church.  There
are  besides  in  the  Holy  Land,  Greekes,  Jacobites,  Maro-
nites,  Nestorians,  Armenians  and  Georgians,  of  much
service  for  husbanding  the  Earth  and  other  commodities.

But  when  the  Devill  (I  still  follow  our  Author)  had
found  no  rest  in  the  first  poore  Pilgrims ;  hee  found  the
house  emptie,  swept  and  garnished  (men  idle  and  dwelling
securely,  abounding  with  temporall  goods)  and  taking
seven  spirits  worse  then  himselfe  (the  seven  deadly  sinnes,
for  their  ingratitude  worse)  hee  entred  againe,  and  the
last  state  was  worse  then  the  former.  They  were  proud,
high-minded,  contumelious,  seditious,  malicious,  sorcerers,
sacrilegious,  covetous,  slouthfull,  drunkards,  gluttons,
adulterous,  theeves,  robbers,  homicides,  traitors,  men  of
bloud,  disobedient  to  Parents  and  Elders,  without  affec-
tion, truce  breakers,  mercilesse  :  Reproach  and  lying,  man-
slaughter, and  theft,  and  adulterie  over-flowed,  and  bloud
touched  bloud.  So  was  the  imagination  of  wicked  mens
intent  to  evill  at  all  times,  so  farre  was  all  vertue  and
religious  honestie  decayed,  that  there  was  scarsly  any  found
which  made  difference  betwixt  the  holy  and  profane,  or
separated  the  precious  from  the  vile.  All  were  gone
head-long  to  confusion ;  from  the  sole  of  the  foot  to  the
crowne  of  the  head  there  was  no  soundnesse :  and  as  was
the  People,  such  was  the  Priest.

For  when  all  the  World  in  manner  had  made  it  selfe
tributarie  in  Almes,  Gifts,  Oblations,  the  Pastors  fed
themselves,  minding  the  Wooll  and  Milke,  not  the  Soules

70

ADVANCE  OF  THE  PAPAL  MONARCHY ad.

c.  1625.
of  the  Flocke ;  yea,  became  examples  of  Treason,  rich  by
Christs  povertie,  proud  by  his  humilitie,  glorious  by  his
ignominie,  fattened  and  grosse  by  the  patrimonie  of  him
Crucified ;  howsoever  Christ  had  said,  Feede  my  Sheepe,
not,  Sheare  my  Sheepe.  They  sought  their  owne,  not
the  things  of  Christ,  became  blinde  guides  of  the  blinde,
dumbe  Dogs  not  able  to  barke ;  entring  the  Lords  House
pompously,  wanting  the  Key  of  knowledge,  polluted  with
Gehezis  leprosie,  erecting  the  Chayres  of  Dove-sellers  and
Money-changers,  which  our  Lord  over-threw,  in  the
Churches  every-where,  saying  with  Judas,  What  will  you
give  mee?  and  I  will  betray  him  to  you.  All  of  them
loved  Gifts  and  followed  Rewards,  taking  the  Keyes  from
Simon  Peter,  and  delivering  them  to  Simon  Magus :
manifold  wayes  luxurious,  idle ;  feeding  not  with  crummes
from  the  Lords  Table,  but  with  whole  Loaves  and  delicate
Meates,  their  Whelps  which  of  filthy  Concubines  they
themselves  more  filthy  had  procreated.

The  Regulars  also  infected  with  the  poyson  of  Riches,  f*gfar
and  increased  with  possessions  beyond  measure,  contemned  mJ^s  of
their  Superiours,  and  not  onely  became  irksome  to  the  mi5Se-rule  and
Ecclesiastikes,  but  envied  and  detracted  each  other  to  the  disorder.
grievous  scandall  of  Christendome,  to  contumelies,  open
hatreds,  conflicts,  violences,  battells. For  having  begunne
to  build  the  Tower  of  Babel,  with  divided  Tongues,  they
not  onely  disagreed  amongst  themselves,  but  bandying
factions  procured  discords  amongst  others. And  howso-
ever many  of  them  as  graines  of  Corne  amongst  Chaffe,
and  Lillies  amongst  Thornes,  as  the  times  gave  leave,
observed  their  rules,  and  sate  not  downe  in  the  Chayre  of
pestilence ; yet  the  impietie  of  the  worse  prevailed,  and
their iniquitie superabounded, that in contempt of
Ecclesiastical!  Discipline, they  received to their Holies
those  which  by  name  had  beene  excommunicated  :  Abbots,
Priors,  Monkes,  their  miserable  and  mercenarie  Chaplens,
thrust  their  Sickles  into  others  Harvests,  made  unlawfull
marriages,  visited  and  houselled  the  sicke  for  gayne,  not
for  godlinesse  ;  binding  and  loosing  against  God  and  holy

71

A.D.

c.  1625.

Pullani,
wicked  and
abominable.

*Per  miseros
Capelly  y
itnperitos  pres-
byterunculos.

[Il.viii.

1269.]

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Canons,  the  Soules  which  belonged  not  to  their  charge ;
admitted  the  dead  to  burialls  (their  Pastors  contradicting,)
and  usurped  Parochiall  right.  Nunnes  also  leaped  out
of  their  Cloysters,  frequenting  publike  Baths  with  secular
persons.  And  as  any  were  greater  amongst  the  Lay-
men, so  much  more  perniciously  corrupted  they  their
wayes  :  a  corrupt  Generation,  as  Lees  of  the  Wine,  Cockle
of  Wheat,  and  Rust  of  Silver.

These  Pullani,  delicate,  wanton,  effeminate,  more  accus-
tomed to  Baths  then  Battells,  given  to  uncleannesse  and
leacherie, curiously dressed after womens wont, were
contemned  of  the  Saracens,  and  (if  they  had  none  of  the
Westerne people with them) more vilipended then
Women. They made league with the Saracens, and
quarrelled  with  themselves,  for  light  matters  raysing  civill
warres,  and  often  borrowing  aide  of  the  Infidells,  spending
the  Treasure  and  Stocke  of  Christians  against  Christians.
They  were  deepe  Dissemblers,  not  easie  to  bee  perceived
in  their  fallacies  till  they  had  deceived ; jealous  mewers
up  of  their  wives,  that  their  owne  Brethren  and  neerest
Kindred  might  scarsly  have  accesse ; and  keeping  them
from  the  Churches,  and  Sermons,  and  other  things  neces-
sarie  to  their  soules,  hardly  once  in  the  yeere  admitting
them  the  Church. The  richer  sort  erected  Altars  neere
their  wives  beds,  and  by  some  *  wretched  Chaplens  and
unlearned  Sir  Johns,  procured  Masses  to  bee  said,  that
they  might  seeme  Christians. And  how  much  closer  their
wives  are  kept,  so  much  more  they  whet  their  wits  with
a thousand devises  and infinite plots to finde starting
holes ; furnished  by  the  Surians  and  Saracen  women,  with
sorceries, mischiefes, and innumerable abominations.
They  are  ingratefull,  and  many  wayes  irksome  to  those
Pilgrims,  which  come  from  remote  parts  to  their  aide,  with
great  labours  and  intolerable  expenses,  liking  better  their
ease  and  carnall  pleasures,  then  warres  with  the  Saracens.
These  Pilgrims they  entertayne  at immoderate charge,
defrauding  and  impoverishing  them  in  buying,  and  barter-
ing to  their  owne  exceeding  enriching ; afflicting  them

72

ADVANCE  OF  THE  PAPAL  MONARCHY a.d.

c.  1625.
with  reproaches  and  wrongs,  and  calling  them  a  Sonnes  of  a Before  filios
Hernaud,  as  it  were  Fooles  and  Ideots.  _  frE*'  ""

There  are  others,  continuing  from  ancient  times  under  p^nte^
divers  Lords,  Romanes,  Greekes,  Saracens  and  Christians,
called  Surians,  unfit  for  Warre,  men  for  the  most  part  Surians.
Unfaithfull,  Double-dealing,  Lyers,  Inconstant,  Fortune-
fawners, Traytors, Gift-takers, esteeming Theft and
Robbery  for  nothing, Spyes  to the Saracens, imitating
their  Language  and  Condition. These  shave  not,  but  ^  Westeme
nourish  their  beards,  as  doe  the  Greekes  with  great  care, *™ j0f
attributing  thereto  much  virilitie,  gravitie,  authoritie  and  used  much
glorie. Whereupon, when Baldwin Earle of Edessa,  shaving,  as  in
having  marryed  the  Daughter  of  a  rich  Armenian,  suffered  old  pictures  is
his  Beard  to  grow; to  extort  money  from  his  Father-  se™  Beards  °f
in-law,  he  said,  he  had  impawned  his  Beard  for  a  great
summe to certaine Creditors ; who gave him thirtie
thousand Bizantines, to prevent that disgrace to his
Family,  and  on  condition  never  to  engage  his  Beard  againe.
These  Syrians  use  the  Tongue  and  manner  of  writing  of
the  Saracens  in  contracts,  and  all  saving  their  Divinitie
and  Holies,  for  which  they  have  the  Greeke  Letter ; so
that their Laity understand not their service, as the
Greekes  doe,  whose  Rites  they  wholly  observe. They
obey  the  Latine  Prelates,  for  feare  of  the  Princes,  other-
wise not  having  Greeke  Bishops  of  their  owne,  nor  would
regard  their  censures,  but  that  our  Lay-men  in  contracts  Force  °f

and  other  businesse,  would  not  have  to  doe  with  them  Ex™mmunt-
1 •  .  w  * j t,  <t  ,  cation  against

being excommunicated. J^or they say amongst them-  contra€£

selves, that the Latines are all excommunicated, and

therefore cannot excommunicate. The Surians and

Greekes  admit  not  fourth  Marriages. Their  Priests  marry

not  after  their  Orders,  but  use  their  wives  which  before

they  marryed. They  account  not  Sub-deaconship  in  holy

Orders. Their simple Priests confirme with Chrisme,

which  with  the  Latines  is  not  lawfull  but  to Bishops.

They  keepe Saturday  holy, nor  esteeme Saturday  Fast

lawfull  but  on  Easter  Eeven. They  have  solemne  Service

on  Saturdayes,  eate  flesh,  and  feast  it  bravely  like  the  Jewes.

73

A.D.

c.  1625.

Jacobites.

See  of  this  our
former  Abas-
sine  Relations.

Nestorians.
bNot  the
A  b  as  sine )  but
in  Asian
India,  where
the  Portugalls
found  Bishops
and  other
Christians,
called  S.
Thomas
Christians.
The  Tartars
caused  much
alteration  in
these  parts.
Maronites.

Armenians.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

There  are  also  in  the  Holy  Land  and  the  East  parts
Jacobites,  so  called  of  one  James  a  Disciple  of  the  Pat-
riarke  of  Alexandria.  These  of  long  time  have  inhabited
the  greater  part  of  Asia,  some  amongst  the  Saracens,  and
some,  as  in  Nubia,  and  great  part  of  ^Ethiopia,  possessing
whole  Countries.  They  Baptise  and  circumcise  their
children,  and  observe  not  Auricular  Confession :  some
make  Crosses  with  fire  in  their  cheekes  or  temples ;  and
they  maintaine  but  one  nature  in  Christ.  Some  of  them
use  the  Chaldee  Letter,  others  the  Arabike,  that  is,  the
Saracenicall.  There  are  in  the  Holy  Land,  and  by  them-
selves in  India,  Nestorians,  especially,  in  the  Countrey
of  Presbyter  b  John.  These,  with  the  Jacobines,  are  said
to  be  more  then  the  Latines  and  Greekes  :  and  besides
those  which  dwell  by  themselves  entyre,  there  are  said  to
be  more  of  these  Christians  subject  to  the  Infidels,  then  are
of  Saracens  themselves.  They  divide  the  person  of
Christ,  making  the  Virgin  Mary  Mother  of  the  humane
Person,  &  the  Son  of  God  another  divine  Person.
Nestorius  and  this  his  Heresie  were  condemned  in  the
Ephesine  Councell.  They  use  the  Chaldee  Letter,  and
leavened  Hosts  as  the  Greekes  doe.

About  Libanus  are  some  called  Maronites,  many  in
number  which  acknowledged  (Maro  was  their  Master)
but  one  nature  in  Christ.  These  Monothelites  were  con-
demned in  the  sixth  generall  Councel  at  Constantinople.
They  used  Sacraments  by  themselves  five  hundred  yeares,
and  after  by  Aimerike,  Patriark  of  Antiochio,  were
reduced  to  the  Roman  Faith,  whose  Traditions  they  follow  ;
insomuch,  that  when  all  the  Easterne  Prelates  except  the
Latines,  use  no  Rings,  Miters,  nor  Pastorall  Staves,  nor
Bels,  (but  Boords  on  which  they  knocke  with  a  Sticke  or
Hammer  to  call  the  Assembly)  the  Maronites  use  all ;
and  their  Patriarke  was  present  at  the  Councell  of
Laterane,  under  Innocent  the  Third.  They  use  the
Chaldee  Letter  and  Saracen  Language.

The  Armenians  are  divided  from  all  other  Christians
in  Rites ; having  a  Primate  of  their  owne,  whom  they  call

74

ADVANCE  OF  THE  PAPAL  MONARCHY ad.

c.  1625.
Catholicon,  observed  by  all  of  them  as  another  Pope.
They  have  Letters  and  Language  proper,  and  Lyturgies
in  the  vulgar.  At  Christmasse  they  fast,  and  at  Twelf-
day  they  solemnize  our  Lords  Baptisme,  and  his  Spirituall
Nativitie,  as  they  improperly  speake.

Lent  they  fast  so  strictly,  that  they  not  only  abstayne
from'Flesh,  Egges,  Whit-meates,  but  also  from  Fish,  Oyle,
and  Wine,  yet  rast  not  but  eate  fruites,  and  as  often  as  they
please.  On  some  Fridayes  they  eate  flesh.  They  mixe
no  water  with  Wine  in  the  Sacrament.  The  Armenians
promised  obedience  to  the  Pope,  when  their  King  received
of  Henry  the  Emperor  his  Land,  and  the  Crown  of  the
Archbishop  of  Mentz :  but  retayne  their  old  Rites  not-
withstanding. There  is  also  a  warlike  people  dreadfull
to  the  Saracens,  called  Georgians,  of  Saint  George ;  whom  Georgians.
they  have  for  their  Patrone,  and  worship  as  their  Ensigne
bearer  above  other  Saints,  using  the  Greeke  Holies.
Their  Priests  have  round  crownes,  the  Lay-men  square :
and  when  they  come  to  Jerusalem  on  Pilgrimage,  they
enter  with  Banners  displayed  and  without  Tribute :  the
Saracens  forbearing  them,  lest  they  should  after  their
returne  bee  revenged  on  other  Saracens.  Their  noble
women  use  Armes  in  Battels,  as  Amazons.

The  Mosarabes  are  Latine  Christians,  and  observe  the  Mosarabes,  or
Romish  Rites,  dwelling  amongst  the  African  and  Spanish  Moxara^es-
Saracens.  Yet  some  of  them  divide  the  Sacrament  into
seven  parts,  others  into  nine,  whereas  the  Romane  Church
doth  it  into  three.  There  are  other  miserable  Easterne
people,  as  Essees  of  Jewish  descent,  and  Assasines,  and
Saducees,  and  Samaritans.

They  which  have  best  knowne  the  Holy  Land  Affaires  t11-™1-

and  Changes,  aflirme,  that  no  greater  plague  hath  hapned  ^  f/o/^°

then  flagitious  and  pestiferous  men,  Sacrilegious  Theeves,  ian^  the

Robbers,  Murderers,  Parricides,  Perjured,  Adulterers,  Tray_  receptacle  of

tors,  Pirates,  Drunkards,  Jesters,  Dicers,  Players,  Runnagate  aU  ImfieHe

Monkes,  and  Nunnes  becomne  common  Whores,  and  such  ^ mpuntte

•  '  troTTi  other

women  as  leaving  their  Husbands  have  followed  Bawdes,  parts  0f

or  such  as  have  forsaken  their  Wives  and  marryed  others. Christendome.

75

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

c.  1625.

These  Monsters  have  runne  away,  and  flying  to  the  Holy
Land,  have  so  much  more  boldly  perpetrated  there  their
former  evils  without  shame,  as  they  have  beene  further
from  those  which  knew  them ;  neither  fearing  God  nor
respecting  men.  The  easinesse  of  escaping,  and  impunitie
of  sinning  have  loosed  the  reines  to  their  Impietie  :  because
that  after  villanies  committed,  they  runne  to  the  Saracens,
and  deny  Christ,  or  else  by  ship  flye  to  some  Hands,  or
*T6e  getting  to  the  houses  of  Regulars,*  which  every  where

Tempkrs,l3c  fo^y  founc[5  by  their  pernicious  libertie  of  Priviledges,
defending  the  wicked,  they  escaped  without  punishment.
Some  Murderers  also  condemned  to  mutilation  or  death
in  their  owne  Countries,  by  praying  or  paying  obtayned
often  to  bee  condemned  to  perpetuall  Exile  in  the  Holy
Land ;  and  never  altering  their  manners,  have  there
preyed  on  Pilgrimes  and  Strangers,  kept  Bawdie-houses
and  Gaming-houses,  and  Receptacles  for  Theeves  and
Murthers,  paying  a  yeerely  Pension  to  the  potent  and
rich,  to  patronize  them  in  these  exorbitancies ;  extorting
the  same  with  greater  summes  from  Whores  and  Gamesters.
Many  also  came  to  the  Holy  Land,  not  for  Devotion,  but
Curiositie  and  Noveltie.

Thus  you  have  had  a  view  of  the  Inhabitants,  both
Clergie  and  Laitie,  Native  and  accessorie :  all  flesh  cor-
rupting their  way,  and  making  it  the  most  unholy  Sinke
in  the  World,  not  the  navill  of  the  Earth,  as  some  call  it,
but  the  Knave-ill,  Slave-vile,  and  base  confluence  of
villanie ;  not  the  foundation  of  Religion,  but  the  funda-
ment of  the  Devill  and  of  Irreligion,  as  formerly  in  other
Ages,  so  worse  then  all  worsts  in  this,  that  it  was  inhabited
by  these  Pullans  and  Pilgrimes.  Neither  have  I  in  this
Relation  augmented  or  exagerated,  but  for  brevitie  have
fallen  farre  short  of  the  Authors  blacke  pitchie  colours,
wherein  hee  describeth  their  Hellish  darknesse.  And
howsoever  he  much  commends  the  first  Pilgrimes  (as
comparatively  they  deserved)  yet  even  that  their  righteous-
nesse  was  but  pannus  menstruatae,  dyed  in  a  deepe  graine
of  Superstition,  besides  their  other  pollutions  which  the

76

ADVANCE  OF  THE  PAPAL  MONARCHY a.d.

c.  1625.
former  Storie  hath  related.  The  best  was  a  Popish  pietie,
the  worst  was  farre  farre  worse  then  Heathenish  Impietie
(Corruptio  optimi  pessima)  so  little  good  did  Religion  &
Christianity  hereby  receive  even  here.  And  as  for  the
hurt  it  received  in  the  West,  we  have  declared  and  proved
at  large ;  Religion  comming  to  the  West  and  worst,  and
that  bright  Sunne  almost  set  in  a  darke  misty  mysticall
Cloud,  and  darknesse  from  the  bottomlesse  Pit,  princi-
pally by  this  meane  and  occasion.

Let  none  traduce  me,  as  if  I  held  it  wholly  unlawfull  to
visit  holy  places,  or  to  warre  against  Infidels,  or  that  I
envy  the  Pope  himselfe,  his  Temporalties :  (howsoever
gotten  at  first,  as  you  have  heard)  or  absolutely  deny
Absolutions,  Dispensations,  Indulgences :  the  abuses  I
taxe,  and  historically  have  shewed  how  by  corruptions,
confusions,  combustions,  the  face  and  body  of  the  Church
hath  beene  empayred,  weakned,  and  sicke  (so  neere  to
death  in  so  many  many  members  and  limmes)  of  the  Anti-
christian  or  Romish  Disease. As  Christ  is  the  name  not JvT'-1?'12

/T till \f  tlVl  f /

of  the  Head  alone,  but  of  the  whole  mysticall  body,  which  s'tgnifieth  in
is  one  Seed,  one  City,  one  Temple,  one  Vine,  one  New  the  stead  of
man, one Christ :  * So is Antichrist both the head &  Christ.against

mystical  body ; the  name  howsoever  it  be  most  properly  Chnst> or

etuutous  of
due  to  the  Popes  in  their  successions,  as  the  head,  yet  Qyut%

competible  also  to  the  whole  body  of  the  Popish  Church,  The  Pope  is

which  together  makes  up  that  mysticall  Babylon,  which  ally  *»  profos-

thus  by  the  carnall  Jerusalem,  and  Jewish  Opinion  and  5}on  h%$  Vtcar*

Rites, hath so impoverished the new, spirituall and  emu/ous  ^

heavenly  Jerusalem,  and  her  Celestiall  Priviledges,  whereof  %ealey  indeed

we  are  children  by  Regeneration,  and  enfranchised  citizens  an  emulous

in  manifold  Priviledges. Neyther  perhaps,  did  any  one  Cornvall,

stratageme  so  farre  reduce  Judaisme,  or  induce  Poperie,  ™nJm°ie$e0f

or  seduce  the  Christian  world,  as  this  Holy  Land  unholy  Christ.

degeneration. Christianity,  is  to  live  by  faith  and  not  by VU.  B.  Dow-

sight,  and  to  have  a  conversation  heavenly,  and  the  exercise  nam,  de  Antl~

of  a  spirituall  warfare  against  the  World,  the  flesh,  the  ^3w  V

Devill,  by  the  panoply  of  God,  hope  of  Salvation  for  a  iphes.  6.

Helmet, Brest-plate  of  Righteousnesse,  Girdle  of  Sin-  Heb.  11.

77

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

c.  1625.

cerity,  Greaves  of  the  Gospell,  Sword  of  the  Spirit,  which
is  the  Word  of  God,  and  Shield  of  Faith  (the  evidence  of
things  not  seene,  the  ground  of  things  hoped  for)  with
perseverant  Watching  and  Prayer.  But  these  Expedi-
tions first  hapned  in  a  tumultuary  warring  and  spoyling
Age ;  were  begun  for  temporall  respects  in  the  first
moovers ;  in  many  if  not  most  of  the  followers  appre-
hended to  like  purpose  of  spoyle  (all  being  as  you  have
seene,  the  Souldiers  owne,  hee  could  get)  which  blanched
over  with  Honour,  Religion,  Merit ;  Once ;  being  the
service  of  two  Masters  at  once,  God  and  Mammon,
(which  in  true  Religion  is  incompetible)  easily  wonne
entertaynment.  And  if  men  now  will  adventure  volun-
tarily to  fight  any  quarrels  of  any  Region  or  Religion,  for
foure  shillings  a  week,  (eight  dayes  to  the  weeke)  in  an
Age  more  composed  generally  to  words  then  workes :  is
it  any  marvell,  if  so  many  inducements,  in  such  a  mist
and  smoke  could  whet  so  many  Swords  and  courages  in
those  Martiall  times,  where  earthly  purchases  were  the
guerdon  of  the  living,  with  Fame,  Novelties,  and  many
many  sensuall  Holies ;  and  Martyrdome  was  the  Crowne
of  the  dead  with  God,  Heaven  and  Eternitie.

To  conclude,  Hypocrisie  was  the  beginning,  Bloud  was

[Il.viii.  the  proceeding, Superstitious  Pietie  that  is  impietie  or

l27I-l  impious  pietie,  with  impuritie  and  desolation  were  the
end.  This  whole  businesse  was  (as  the  Serpents  seducing
Eve,  and  was  prophesied  of  Antichrist)  not  an  open
professed  enmitie  against  Christ,  but  in  coloured  love  of
Christ  and  his  patrimonie,a  more  subtle  deceitfull  working,
the  Devill  transformed  into  an  Angell,  that  hee  might

2.  Thes.  2.  prove  the  worse  Devill :  this  Expedition  being  after  the
working  of  Satan  with  all  power,  and  signes,  and  lying
wonders,  and  with  all  deceivablenesse  of  unrighteousnesse,
as  was  foretold  of  that  Sonne  of  perdition  (which
hereby  and  herein  he  hath  proved,  if  ever  by  any
one  course,  as  is  shewed,  to  the  perdition  of  thousands
and  thousands  of  thousands,  both  bodies  and  soules)
a strange Chymera, headed like a Lion, and in shew

78

ADVANCE OF THE PAPAL MONARCHY a.d.

c.  1625,
presenting  a  Lionlike  fortitude,  for  the  honor  of
that  Lion  of  the  Tribe  of  Juda ;  yet  after  the
Goats  belly  of  various  lusts,  tayled  like  a  Dragon,  and
envenoming  to  manifold  deaths  with  the  poyson  of  the
old  Serpent :  in  shew  kissing,  indeed  betraying,  with
Judas ;  in  shew  lifting  Christ  higher,  indeed  crucifying
him ;  the  Pope  in  shew  crowning  these  Pilgrims,  but
with  a  crowne  of  Thornes,with  manifold  externall  miseries,
void  of  all  internall  consolation,  his  Indulgences  notwith-
standing ;  in  shew  presenting  the  faces  of  men,  and  haire
of  women,  indeed  the  tayles  of  Scorpions,  which  those
Locusts  had  in  their  tayles.  Once ;  herein  was  Christ
many  wayes  crucified  betwixt  two  theeves,  in  Urban  and
Boamund  the  first  Founders ;  in  superstition  and  hypo-
crisie,  the  principall  Movers ;  in  Revelations  of  Peter  the
Heremite  and  others,  and  Papall  Indulgences,  the  chiefe
Confirmers :  in  the  Greekes  and  Infidels,  the  one  by
Treacherie,  the  other  by  open  Violence,  the  mayne  Con-
founders,  (like  two  Mill-stones,  grinding  the  Westerne
Christians  and  this  whole  exploit,  to  poulder)  in  exposing
Christian  bodies  to  bloudie  crueltie,  and  their  soules  to
crueller  impietie ;  in  confusions  and  manifold  disorders  in
Families  and  Commonwealths,  by  absence  of  Over-seers
at  home,  and  buying  vanitie,  nothing,  and  lesse  then
nothing  (for  that  was  the  end)  with  Seas  of  bloud  and
heapes  of  carkasses  abroad ;  in  abasing  the  lawfull  power
of  Kings,  and  exalting  (in  manner  as  yee  have  heard)  the
usurped  Papall  Monarchic ;  that  is,  by  Excommunica-
tions, Interdicts,  Treasons,  Crusado's,  Votifrages,  Per-
juries, abolishing  them  which  are  called  Gods ;  and  Him
by  whom  Kings  reigne,  both  in  this  his  Ordinance,  and  in
the  whole  face  of  his  Religion ;  that  the  Man  of  sinne
might  exalt  himselfe  above  all  that  is  called  God,
or  that  is  worshipped  ;  so  that  now,  and  principally  hereby,
He  as  God  sitteth  in  the  Temple  of  God,  shewing  himselfe
that  he  is  God.  This  was  then  a  mysterie  hidden  from
the  wise  and  prudent :  but  now,  and  hereby,  that  Wicked
is  revealed.

79

A.D.

c.  1625.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Chap.  VII.

Monuments  of  Antiquitie,  taken  out  of  ancient
Records,  to  testifie  the  quondam  commerce  be-
twixt our  Kings  and  their  Subjects,  and  those
Easterne  Princes.

Liter ce  Hen-
rici tertii
Regis  Anglice
Coradino  Sol-
dano  Damasci,
de  captivis
redimendis.
Dorso  Claus.
Anno  12.
Regni  sui.  &
An.  Dom.
1228.
Patentesy
Anno  17.
Henrici  tertii.

Pro  Philippo
de  Albiniaco.

Ex  Coradino  Illustri  Soldano  Damasci,
salutem.  De  transmissis  nobis  a  Nobili-
tate  vestra  muneribus  per  Anselmum  de
Jenua  mallonum  Soldani,  gratiarum  vobis
rependimus  actiones ;  prompti  as  parati
in  hiis  quae  licet,  vestrae  placere  voluntati.
Hoc quidem a Serenitate vestra pro

Patenter,
Anno  19.
Henrici  tertii.

ampliori  petimus  munere,  ut,  si  quos  terrae  nostrae  Chris-
tianos  captivatos  tenetis,  eos  liberos  &  expeditos  reddere,
&  intuitu  nostri  nobis  mittere  velitis :  certis  datis  indiciis,
quod  ad  eorum  liberationem  noster  eis  profuit  interventus.
Quo  intellecto  ad  condignam  vicissitudinem  Serenitati
vestrae  merito  teneamur.  Teste  meipso  apud  West-
monasterium,  Anno  Regni  nostri  duodecimo.

Henricus  Rex,  &c.  Sciatis  nos  concessisse,  dilecto  &
fideli  nostro  Philippo  de  Albiniaco,  quod  si  de  eo
humanitus  contigerit,  antequam  iter  peregrinationis  suae
arripuerit  versus  terram  Jerusalem,  quicquid  ante  obitum
suum  assignaverit,  vel  legaverit  de  terra  de  Periton,  quam
habet  de  dono  nostro,  &  de  terris  de  Clyneton,  Bamton,  &
Wytton,  quas  habet  de  Ballivo  nostro  ad  debita  sua  acquie-
tanda,  vel  eleemosynas  faciendas,  vel  ad  mercedem
militibus  &  servientibus  suis  pro  servicio  suo  retribuen-
dam,  nisi  prius  terras  illas  haeredibus  eorum,  per
voluntatem  nostram,  vel  per  pacem  reddiderimus,  ratum
habemus  &  stabile  usque  in  tres  annos  a  die  obitus  sui
completos.  In  cujus  &c.  Teste  Rege  apud  Westmonas-
terium  14.  Julii,  Anno  Regni  sui  decimo  septimo.

Rex  concessit  &  licenciavit  Simonem  de  Wistlegray,
quod  peregrini  de  partibus  istis  euntes  peregre  versus
terram  Jerusalem, Sanctum  Jacobum,  &  alibi  ad  partes

80

ADVANCE OF THE PAPAL MONARCHY a.d.

c.  1625.
transmarinas,  in  Nave  ipsius  Simonis,  quae  vocatur  Gladyg-
hyne  salvo  &  secure  transfretare  possint.  Et  mandatum
est  omnibus  Ballivis  &  fidelibus  Regis,  &c.  Quod  eidem
Simoni  &  hominibus  suis  in  ducendo  Peregrinos  in  Nave
praedicta,  sicut  praedictum  est,  nullum  faciant,  nee  fieri
permittant  damnum  vel  gravamen.  Et  durant  literae
usque  ad  festum  Sancti  Michaelis.  Teste  Rege  apud
Rading,  quinto  die  Aprilis,  Anno  Regni  sui  decimo  nono.

Rex omnibus, ad quos praesentes literae pervenerint,  Pr°0/iverode
salutem. Sciatis,  quod  concessimus  dilecto  &  fideli  nostro  Qeor~0
Olivero  de  Sancto  Georgio,  quod  in  auxilium  peregrina-
tionis  suae,  quam  facturus  est  in  Terram  Sanctam,  invadiare  [Il.viii.
possit  terram  suam  de  Brocton  usque  ad  terminum  trium  1272.]

annorum,  a  festo  Sancti  Michaelis,  Anno  Regni  nostri
decimo  nono.  Ita  quod  ipse  cui  terram  illam  invadiaverit,
illam  teneat  usque  ad  terminum  praedictum  trium  annorum,
quicquid  de  ipso  Olivero  interim  contingat.  In  cujus  rei
testimonium  &c.  Teste  Rege  apud  Windesoram  vicesimo
octavo  die  Aprilis,  Anno  Regni  sui  decimo  nono.

The  Kings  Letters  to  the  Prelates,  to  excite  their
charitable  devotions,  for  reliefe  of  the  Hospitall  of  Saint
Samson  in  Constantinople,  and  the  Licence  granted  to
Friar  Thomas  their  Messenger  for  one  yeere,  granted  at
Windsor,  A.  Reg.  22.  is  here  omitted.

Rex  Saladino,  socio  Thath  Nuncii  *  Veteris  de  Mussa,  *Sennor  vel
salutem. Significavimus  praedicto  Thath,  quod  bene  placet  Domnu
nobis,  quod  ad  nos  in  Angliam  veniat,  expositurus  nobis
Nuncium  suum,  pro  quo  ad  nos  venistis  in  Angliam,  sicut
per  literas  nostras  Patentes,  quas  ei  mittimus,  plenius  ei
significamus. Et ideo vos scire volumus, quod bene
placet  nobis,  quod  si  cum  Uteris  nostris  praedictis  ad  ipsum
personaliter  accedere  volueritis,  id  libenter  faciatis  :  vel  eas
per  quern  volueritis  praedicto  socio  vestro  transmittatis.  pro  Magistro
Teste  Rege  apud  Kenynton  20.  die  Julii,  Anno  Regni  Militum
sui 22.  TempR  de

Rex  omnibus  ad  quos  &c.  salutem. Sciatis,  quod  con- enart\s

A>r •  iv/ff  rr*  i- t  1  ~ •  COtlCeSSlSad

cessimus  Magistro  Militum  lempli  Jerusalem  quingentas  redempthnem
Marcas  ad  opus  suum,  reddendas  in  Anglia  vel  Hibernia  Fratrum.

VIII  8 1  F

A.D.

c.  1625.

Patentes,
Anno  32.
Henrici  tertii.
Pro  Gerardo
de  Rodes.

DeProtectione.

Pro  Galfredo
de  Lezignan.

The  Kings
letters  to
Dolgiet  the
King  of
Ta?'taria.
Rotula  Rome,
Anno  1 .  Edw.
2.  Anno
Domini  \  307.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Magistro  Militiae  Templi  Anglicanae,  ad  redemptionem
Militum  &  Fratrum  ejusdem  Templi  Jerusalem,  qui  a
Saracenis  capti  fuerunt  in  bello  inter  Castra  de  Gastun  &
Trepeshac  in  terra  Antiochiae.  Teste  Rege  apud  Gelde-
ford  primo  die  Januarii,  Anno  Regni  sui  vicessimo
secundo.

Gerardus  de  Rodes,  qui  profecturus  est  ad  Terram
Jerusalem  de  licentia  Domini  Regis,  habet  literas  Domini
Regis  de  protectione,  cum  hac  clausula,  quod  quietus  sit
de  secta  Comitatuum  &  Hundredorum,  &  de  omnibus
placitis  &  querelis,  exceptis  placitis  de  dote,  unde  in  his
habet,  assisa  novae  disseisinae,  &  ultimae  praesentationis
Ecclesiarum,  duraturas  quamdiu  idem  Gerardus  fuerit  in
peregrinatione  praedicta.  Teste  Rege  apud  Winton,  sexto
die  Junii,  Anno  Regni  sui  tricessimo  secundo.

Robertus  de  Ver,  qui  de  licentia  Regis  peregre  profec-
turus est  in  Terram  Jerusalem,  habet  literas  Regis  de
protectione  Patentes  sine  clausula,  duraturas  per  triennium.
Teste  Rege  apud  Westmonasterium  27.  Junii,  Anno
Regni  sui  tricessimo  tertio.

Rex  Ademaro  de  Lezignan,  salutem.  Sciatis,  quod
dedimus  Gulfredo  de  Lezignan  fratri  nostro,  in  auxilium
ad  faciendam  peregrinationem  in  Terram  Sanctam,  ducentas
Marcas,  quas  nobis  debetis  pro  custodia  terrae,  quae  fuit
Thurstani  Dispenser  &c.  Et  ideo  vobis  mandamus,
quatenus  praedictas  ducentas  Marcas  praefato  Galfredo,  vel
ejus  certo  Nuncio  sine  difficultate  solvatis.  In  cujus  &c.
Teste  Rege  apud  Westmonasterium  10.  Januarii,  Anno
Regni  sui  34.

Excellentissimo  Principi,  Domino  Dolgieto,  Regi  Tar-
tarorum  Illustri,  Edwardus  Dei  gratia  Rex  Angliae,
Dominus  Hiberniae,  &  Dux  Aquitaniae  salutem,  &  foelices
ad  vota  successus.  Celsitudinis  vestrae  Nuncios  ad  Cele-
bris memoriae  Dominum  Edwardum  imper  Regem  Angliae,
Patrem  nostrum,  qui  antequam  ad  ipsum  venissent,  extre-
mum  clauserit  fati  diem,  cum  literis  vestris  missos  post
dicti  Patris  nostri  decessum  admisimus :  &  literas  vestras
praedictas,  &  ea  quae  iidem  Nuncii  vestri  nobis  ex  parte

82

ADVANCE  OF  THE  PAPAL  MONARCHY a.d.

c.  1625.
vestra  per  commissam  a  vobis  credentiam  retulerunt,
audivimus  &  intelleximus  diligenter :  de  benevolentia  &
amore  quos  vos  &  progenitores  vestri  erga  dictum  pro-
genitorem  nostrum  &  nobis  hactenus  gessistis,  &  adhuc
geritis,  necnon  de  missione  Nunciorum  vestrorum,  &  dilec-
tione  &  unitate,  quas  inter  vos  &  nos  hinc  inde  crescere
cupitis,  &  augeri :  Et  de  eo  praecipue,  quod  amicitiam  inter
nobiles  Antecessores  vestros  &  genitorem  nostrum  praedic-
tum  habitam  memoriter  retinetis,  prout  literarum
vestrarum  series  patefecit :  ac  aliis  rumoribus  contentis  in
eisdem  vestris  literis  &  expressis,  grates  referentes  vestrae
magnificentiae  Regiae  speciales.  De  pace  siquidem  ab  ortu
solis  usque  ad  confinia  ultra  mare  Deo  propicio  per  vos
facta  gaudemus  in  Domino,  &  efficimur  valde  laeti.
Caeterum  super  eo,  quod  intelligi  vobis  datur,  quod  inter
nos,  qui  discordes  fuimus  citra  mare  pax  &  concordia
reformatur :  Excellentiae  vestrae  Regiae  volumus  esse
notum,  quod  inter  nos  firmiter  credimus  &  speramus,  super
quibuscunque,  dicordiis  &  controversiis  hinc  inde  susci-
tatis,  in  brevi,  mediante  Dei  praesidio,  finalem  fieri  &
concordiam  atque  pacem.  Datum  apud  Northampton
decimo  sexto  die  Octobris,  Anno  Regni  nostri  primo.

Serenissimo  Principi  ac  Domino,  Tartarorum  Impera-  Mother
tori Potentissimo, Edwardus Dei gratia Rex Angliae,  L^terti^,e
Dominus  Hiberniae,  &  Dux  Aquitaniae,  f oelicem  regnandi  tarif  against
gloriam cum salute. Reges & Principes terreni tanto  the  superstition
magis dinoscuntur Regi Coelestis glorise complacere,  of  Mahomet.
quanto simplices Christi fideles ardentius defendere, &
nocivos  &  perfidos  nituntur  viribus  debellare. Quibus  ex
collato  sibi  divinitus  incumbit  officio  aequa  justitiae  libra
rempublicam  gubernare,  &  Christi  infideles  Christianaeque,
fidei  contrarios  &  rebelles  impugnare  &  destruere  juxta
posse. Hinc  est  quod  cum  in  partibus  Asiae  &  Affricae  a
longissimis  retroactis  temporibus  multum  invaluerit  pro-
phana  secta  &  sordida  Machometi,  circumquaque,  pullu-

lans  &  diffundens  sua  infecta  germina  nimis  late  pestem

1  •  1 • • • 1 ^Tr

saeculo  suae  contagionis  nephanae  immittendo  : Nos  qui,

Deo  permittente,  sumus  sceptro  Regio  insigniti  ad  tarn

$3

A.D.

c.  1625.

[Il.viii.

1273.]

Anno.  1.
Edwardi.  2.
The  Kings
Letters  to  the
king  of
Armenia.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

nefandae  sectae  eradicationem  libenter  intenderemus,  si  loci
distantia,  &  alia  ardua  negocia  nobis  incumbentia  hoc  fieri
permitterent  quovis  modo.  Nam  tempus  ad  hoc  adest
acceptabile,  ut  accepimus  his  diebus,  maxime  cum  in  libris
ipsorum  contineri  dicatur,  infra  breve  tempus  terminari  &
adnullari  debere  sectam  nephariam  Machometi.  Vos
igitur  vestrum  laudabile  propositum  in  hac  parte  continu-
antes  inchoata  per  vos  ad  hujusmodi  sectam  sordidam  a
seculo  penitus  abolendam  velitis  perducere  ad  effectum.
Ad  haec  ad  vestram  accedunt  praesentiam  Religiosi,  honesti,
&  literati  viri,  ut  populum  vestrum  ad  fidem  Catholicam,
sine  qua  salvus  fieri  nemo  potest,  divina  operante  virtute,
reducant,  &  instruant  in  eadam :  Ac  ad  sumendum  bellum
contra  detestabilem  Machometi  sectam  habilitent  &
informent :  venerabilis  scilicet  frater  Willielmus  Dei  Gratia
Lidden  Episcopus,  vir  utique  discretus,  moribus  &  scientia
praeditus,  cum  sua  venerabili  comitiva :  quern  ob  honorem
omnipotentis  Dei,  &  favorem  fidei  Christianae  vobis  quanto
affectuosius  possumus,  commendamus.  Rogantes  ex  corde
quatenus  eundem  Episcopum  &  ejus  Comitivam  Dei
intuitu,  sub  cujus  imperio  cuncta  consistunt,  gratiose  &
curialiter  admittentes,  eisdem  in  prosecutione  negocii
praedicti  exhibere  vos  velitis  favorabiles  &  benignos  praefato
Episcopo,  in  his  quae  vestrae  magnificentiae  pro  augmenta-
tion fidei  Catholicae  eduxerit  exponenda,  fidem  credulam
exponendo.  Datum  apud  Langley  ultimo  die  mensis
Novembris,  Anno  Regni  nostri  primo.

Like  Letters  of  commendation  of  the  said  Bishop
William,  to  the  King  of  Armenia,  and  others  to  the  Prince
Gentis  Matalorum  in  partib.  orient,  are  upon  Record,  but
here  for  brevitie  omitted.  Another  to  the  said  King  here
folio  we  th.

Serenissimo  Principi,  &  amico  suo  charissimo,  Leoni
Dei  Gratia  Armenorum  Regi  illustri,  Edwardus  Rex
Angliae,  &c.  Salutem  &  foelices  ad  vota  successus.  Literas
vestras  de  credentia  per  discretos  viros  Theodorum,  Can-
torem  Abbatiae  de  Tresarco,  Dominum  Baudinium  filium
Domini  de  Negrino,  consobrinum  vestrum,  &  Dominum

84

ADVANCE  OF  THE  PAPAL  MONARCHY ad.

c.  1625.
Leonem,  Milites,  familiares  vestros  &  Nuncios  speciales,
super  novis  periculis  vobis  &  Regno  vestro,  cunctisque
ejusdem  Regni  Christicolis  emergentibus  nobis  missos
recepimus.  Et  ea  quae  iidem  Nuncii  vestri  vobis  ex  parte
vestra  per  credentiam  eis  commissam  exponere  voluerunt,
audivimus  &  intelleximus  diligenter.  Super  quibus
dolemus  in  intimis,  &  turbamur.  Verum  quia  clarae
memoriae  Dominus  Edwardus  Rex  Anglise,  pater  noster,
viam  universae  carnis  est  ingressus ;  quamobrem  ejusdem
Regni  regimen  suscepimus,  &  Coronacionis  nostrae
solennia  celebrari  fecimus,  non  est  diu ;  diversaque  &
ardua  ex  hiis  causis  nobis  incumbunt  negocia  hiis  diebus :
dictorum  negociorum  requisitionibus  ex  parte  vestra  nobis
factis  annuere  non  possumus  in  praesenti.  Sed  cum  tem-
pora  nobis  ad  hoc  advenerint  oportuna,  libenter  adhibebi-
mus  cum  Dei  praesidio  super  requisitionibus  praedictis
consilium  quod  poterimus  bono  modo.  De  xenio  siquidem
quod  vestra  munificentia  nobis  misit,  vestrae  serenitati
grates  referimus  speciales :  parati  semper  ad  ea  facienda
quae  vestris  utilitatibus  noverimus  convenire.  Datum
apud  Westmonasterium  tertio  die  Martii,  Anno  Regni
nostri  primo.

Edwardus  Dei  Gratia  Rex  Angliae,  &c.  Religioso  viro,
&  sibi  in  Christo  charissimo,  fratri  Johanni  de  ordine
Minorum,  Leonis  quondam  Regis  Armenorum  illustris
filio  primogenito,  salutem  cum  delectione  sincera.  Literas
vestras  de  credentia,  &c.  ut  supra.

Magnifico  Principi  ac  potenti,  David  Dei  gratia  Regi  Anno  sexto
Jurgianorum,  Edwardus  eadem  Dei  gratia  Rex  Angliae,  Edwa^
Dominus  Hiberniae,  &  Dux  Aquitaniae  prosperorum  incre-  ^[^ductu
menta successuum, cum augmento fidei Orthodoxae.  pro  Episcopis
Creator  &  Redemptor  humani  generis  Jesus  Christus,  qui  Samaritanis
omnes  vult  salvos  fieri,  &  neminem  vult  perire,  hominem  pr^dtcare
ad  suam  factum  imaginem,  proto  parentis  Adae  lapsu  a  ™lentt  ™\
supernis  exclusum  sedibus,  tanto  dilexit  caritatis  affectu,  Davidi  Regi
ut pro ipsius redemptione perpetua, de intemerato  Jurgianoru
Virginis nascens utero, nostraeque humanitatis indutus  or  of  the
velamine,  tanquam  Pastor  optimus  pro  suis  ovibus  mortem  Ge9r&ans'

85

lorum

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

c.  1625.

pati,  &  suam  dare  animam  non  horreret,  qui  post  passionem
suam,  secundum  Scripturas,  tertia  die  resurgens  a  mortuis,
discipulis  suis  se  vivum  praebuit  in  multis  argumentis,  per
dies  quadraginta  apparens  eis,  &  loquens  de  Regno  Dei,
&  eos  spiritus  Sancti  virtute  perlustrans  &  sapientia,  misit
in  omnem  Judaeam,  &  Samariam,  &  usque  ad  ultimum
terrae,  suae  resurrectionis  gloriam  &  doctrinam  Evangelicam
praedicare,  ut  in  omnem  terram  sonus  eorum  exiret,  &  in
fines  orbis  terrae  verba  eorum  credentibus  panderent.
Euntes,  inquiens,  in  mundum  universum  praedicate  Evan-
gelium  omni  creaturae :  Quid  credit  &  baptizatus  fuerit
salvus  erit :  Qui  vero  non  crediderit  condemnabitur.  Cum
igitur  vir  religiosus  &  providus  frater  Guillermus  de  Villa
Nova,  ordinis  Minorum  Episcopus,  praesentium  lator,
sanctae  fidei  Orthodoxae  Professor  &  Zelator  fervidus,  de
mandato  Sanctae  sedes  Apostolicae  ad  partes  Tartarorum,
&  aliorum,  qui  fidem  non  norunt  Catholicam,  una  cum
nonnullis  Co-episcopis  &  fratribus  ejusdem  ordinis,  ut
vobis,  &  ipsis  Evangelium  Christi,  verbumque  salutis
annunciet,  &  transferre  proponat :  vos  rogamus  &  horta-
mur  in  Domino  Jesu  Christo,  per  vestrae  salutem  animae
requirentes,  quatenus  praefatos  Episcopos  caeterosque
Religiosos  &  Catholicos,  eisque  adhaerentes,  &  adhaerere
volentes  per  loca  vestrae  ditioni  subjecta  libere,  salvo,  &
secure  transire.  Verbumque  Dei,  &  sanctum  Domini  Jesu
Christi  Evangelium  praedicare  audire  volentibus  per  mit-
tentes,  ipsis  faciatis  ob  Divinae  Majestatis  reverentiam,
nostrorumque  contemplatione  rogaminum  securum  praes-
tari  conductum,  ipsosque  malignantium  incursu  defendi.
Datum  apud  Dovarram  vicissimo  secundo  die  Maii,  Anno
Regni  nostri  sexto. Teste  Regi.

Eodem  modo  mandatum  est  Imperatori  Trapezan-
darium. Teste  Rege,  ut  supra.

Rex  potenti  viro  Imperatori  Aquilonari,  deposito  Gen-
tilitatis  errore,  lumen  verum  agnoscere  quod  est  Christus
Creator  &  Redemptor  humani  generis  Jesus  Christus,  qui
omnes  vult  salvos  fieri,  &  neminem  vult  perire,  &c.  ut
supra. Teste  ut  supra.

86

ADVANCE  OF  THE  PAPAL  MONARCHY ad.

c.  1625.
Eodem  modo  mandatum  est  subscriptis : videlicet;  [n.vm.

Carpentae  Persarum  &  Medorum  Imp.  I274-J

Imperatori  de  Cathay.
Divers  others  of  Richard  the  Second,  Henry  the  Eight,
&c.  collected  to  this  purpose. I  have  omitted.

To  the  Reader.

Like  that  Scribe  which  brings  out  of  his  Treasurie  new
and  old ;  so  have  I  here  done,  and  so  our  Author
following.  To  those  elder  Stories  and  Records  I  have
added  this  later  Voyage  to  Jerusalem  and  Constantinople :
and  He,  besides  his  Travels,  hath  added  his  Studies,  the
Voyage  of  his  Minds  Industrie,  aswell  as  of  his  bodies
Peregrination ;  as  a  Learned  Argus,  seeing  with  the  Eyes
of  many  Authors,  and  comparing  things  old  and  new.
Pardon  me,  that  I  have  here  much  pruned  his  sweet
Poetrie,  his  farre-set  Antiquitie,  and  other  fruits  of  his
Learning :  I  would  not  have  his  owne  Worke  out  of
request.  I  present  men  rather  as  Travellers,  then  as
Scholers ;  and  in  this  Historicall  Stage  produce  them,
telling  what  they  have  seene ;  not  what  they  can  say,  or
what  other  Authors  have  written :  not  that  I  disprove  this
(for  what  else  is  my  whole  Pilgrimage  ?)  but  that  I  hold  on
here  another  course ;  where  if  every  man  should  say  all,
no  man  could  have  his  part ;  and  where  even  brevitie  it
selfe  is  almost  tedious  (as  you  see)  by  Multitudes.  The
other  parts  of  Master  Sandys  are  not  simply  superfluous,
yet  are  these  to  our  present  purpose  sufficient.

[Chap.  VIII.
87

A.D.

l6lO.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Marriage  of
the  Sea.

Chap.  VIII.

A  Relation  of  a  Journey  begunne,  Anno  Dom.
1 610.  written  by  Master  George  Sandys,  and
heere  contracted.

§.  1.

His  journey  from  Venice  to  Constantinople,  and
Observations  by  the  way.

Rom  Venice  wee  departed  on  the  twentieth
of  August,  1 610.  in  the  Little  Defence  of
London.  The  Venetians  are  Lords  of  this
Sea,  but  not  without  contention  with  the
Papacie.  On  Ascention  day,  the  Duke
accompanyed  with  the  Clarissimoes  of  that
Signiory,  is  rowed  thither  in  the  Bucen-
toro,  a  triumphall  Galley,  richly,  and  exquisitely  gilded :
above  a  roome  (beneath  which  they  row)  comprehending
the  whole  length  and  breadth  of  the  Galley ;  neere  the
poope  a  throne,  the  rest  accomodated  with  seates,  where
he  solemnely  espouseth  the  Sea :  confirmed  by  a  Ring
throwne  therein,  the  Nuptiall  Pledge  and  Symboll  of
subjection.  This  Ceremonie  received  a  beginning  from
that  Sea-battell  fought  and  wonne  by  the  Venetians,  under
the  conduct  of  Sebastiano  Zani,  against  the  forces  of
Fredericke  Barbarossa,  in  the  quarrell  of  Pope  Alexander
the  Third.  Who  flying  his  furie  in  the  habit  of  a  Cooke
repayred  to  Venice,  and  there  long  lived  disguised  in  the
Monastery  of  Charitie.  Zani  returning  in  triumph  with
the  Emperours  Sonne,  was  met  by  the  Pope,  and  saluted
in  this  manner :  Here  take,  O  Zani,  this  Ring  of  Gold,
and  by  giving  it  to  the  Sea,  oblige  it  unto  thee.  A
ceremonie  that  shall  on  this  day  bee  yearely  observed,
both  by  thee  and  thy  Successors,  that  Posteritie  may  know
how  you  have  purchast  the  Dominion  thereof  by  your
valours,  and  made  it  subject  unto  you,  as  a  Wife  to  her
Husband.

%2>

GEORGE SANDYS  a.d.

1610.

We  sayled  all  along  in  the  sight  of  Dalmatia,  at  this
day  Sclavonia,  of  the  Sclavi,  a  people  of  Sarmatia.  They  Sclavonia.
dissent  not  from  the  Greeke  Church  in  their  Religion.
Throughout  the  North  part  of  the  World  their  Language
is  understood  and  spoken,  even  from  thence  almost  to  the
Confines  of  Tartaric  The  men  weare  halfe-sleeved
Gownes  of  Violet  cloth,  with  Bonnets  of  the  same.  They
nourish  onely  a  locke  of  haire  on  the  crowne  of  their
heads :  the  rest  all  shaven.  The  women  weare  theirs  not
long ;  and  dye  them  blacke  for  the  most  part.  Their
chiefe  Citie  is  Ragusa  (heretofore  Epidaurus)  a  Common-
wealth of  it  selfe,  famous  for  Merchandize,  and  plentie  of
shipping.  Many  small  Hands  belong  thereunto,  but  little
of  the  Continent.  They  pay  Tribute  to  the  Turke,
fourteene  thousand  Zecchins  yearely :  and  spend  as  much
more  upon  them  in  gifts  and  entertainment,  sending  the
Grand  Signior  every  yeare  a  ship  loden  with  Pitch  for  [H.viii.
the use of his Gallies. Whereby they purchase their  I275-J

peace ; and  a  discharge  of  duties  throughout  the  Ottoman
Empire.

Corfu,  the  first  Hand  of  note  that  we  past  by,  lyeth  in  the
Ionian  Sea  ;  stretching  East  and  West  in  forme  of  a  Bow  :
foure  and  fiftie  miles  long,  foure  and  twentie  broad,
distant  about  twelve  from  the  mayne  of  Epirus,  called
formerly  Corcyra,  adorned  with  Groves  of  Oranges,
Limons,  Pomegranates,  Fig-trees,  Olives  and  the  like :
enriched  with  excellent  Wines  and  abundance  of  Honey.
Upon  the  North-side  stands  a  Citie  that  takes  the  name
of  the  Hand,  with  a  Castle  strongly  seated  on  a  high
Rocke,  which  joyneth  by  an  Isthmos  to  the  Land,  and
impregnably  fortified.  The  Turkes  have  testified  as  much
in  their  many  repulses.  It  is  the  Chaire  of  an  Arch-
bishop, inhabited  for  the  most  by  Grecians,  as  is  the  whole
Hand,  and  subject  to  the  Venetians.

Saint  Maura  lyeth  next  unto  this,  once  adjoyning  to  the
Continent,  and  separated  by  the  labour  of  the  Inhabitants  :
yet  no  further  removed  then  by  a  bridge  to  bee  past  into.
Called  it  was  formerly  Leucadia,  of  a  white  Rocke  which

89

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1610.

lyeth  before  it,  toward  Cephalonia.  On  which  stood  the
Temple  of  Apollo.  In  this  Hand  they  have  a  Citie
inhabited  for  the  most  part  by  Jewes  :  received  by  Bajazet
the  Second ;  at  such  time  as  they  were  expulsed  Spaine  by
King  Ferdinand.

Val  de  Compare,  a  little  beyond  presenteth  her  rockie
Mountaines,  contayning  in  circuit  about  fiftie  miles,  now
inhabited  by  Exiles  and  Pirates.  Once  called  Ithaca,  so
celebrated  for  the  birth  of  Ulysses :  Betweene  this  and  the
mouth  of  the  Gulph  of  Lepanto,  (once  named  the  Gulph
of  Corinth)  lye  certaine  little  Hands,  or  rather  great  Rockes,
CurzolatL  now  called  Curzolari,  heretofore  Echinades,  made  famous
by  that  memorable  Sea-battell  there  obtayned  against  the
Turke  by  Don  John  of  Austria,  in  the  yeare  1 57 1 .  and
sung  by  a  crowned  Muse.

We  sayled  close  by  Cephalenia,  triangular  in  forme,  one
hundred  and  sixtie  miles  in  circumference :  the  Moun-
taynes  intermixed  with  profitable  Valleyes,  and  the  Woods
with  Champian.  Unwatered  with  Rivers,  and  poore  in
Fountaines,  but  abounding  with  Wheate,  Honey,  Corents,
Manna,  Cheese,  Wooll,  Turkeyes,  excellent  Oyle,  incom-
parable (though  not  long  lasting)  Muscadines,  and  Powder
for  the  dying  of  Scarlet :  This  growes  like  a  blister  on  the
leafe  of  the  holy  Oke,  a  little  shrub,  yet  producing
Acornes :  being  gathered,  they  rub  out  of  it  a  certaine  red
dust,  that  converteth  after  a  while  into  wormes,  which  they
kill  with  Wine  when  they  begin  to  quicken.  Amongst
her  many  harbours,  Argostoli  is  the  principall,  capacious
enough  for  a  Navie.  The  Inhabitants  of  this  Hand  are
Grecians,  the  Venetians  their  Sovereignes.  Having  past
through  the  Streights,  that  divide  this  Hand  from  the  next,
(vulgarly  called  Canale  del  Zant,)  on  the  second  of
September  we  entred  the  Haven  of  Zacynthus,  and
saluted  the  Castle  with  our  Ordnance.

This  Hand  (nine  hundred  miles  distant  from  Venice)

Zacynthus,  or  so  called  of  Zacynthus  the  Sonne  of  Dardanus,  and  at  this

Zant.  ^ay  Zant ; contayneth  in  circuit  not  past  threescore  miles.

On  the  South  and  South-east  sides  rockie  and  mountayn-

90

GEORGE SANDYS  ad.

1610.
ous,  but  plaine  in  the  midst,  and  unspeakably  fruitfull,
producing  the  best  Oyle  of  the  World,  and  excellent
strong  Wines,  both  white  and  red,  which  they  call  Ribolla.
But  the  chiefe  riches  thereof  consisteth  in  Corents,  which  Store  of
draweth  hither  much  trafficke  (especially  from  England  Corants-
and  Holland,  for  here  they  know  not  what  to  doe  with
them : )  insomuch  that  wheras  before  they  were  scarce  able
to  free  themselves  from  importunate  famine,  they  now
(besides  these  private  gettings,  amounting  to  one  hundred
and  fiftie  thousand  Zecchins)  doe  yearely  pay  unto  Saint
Marke  fortie  eight  thousand  Dollars  for  Customes  and  other
Duties.  It  is  impossible  that  so  little  a  portion  of  Earth,
so  employed,  should  be  more  beneficiall,  the  mountaynous
part  being  barren,  and  the  rest  comprized  within  two  or
three  not  very  ample  Valleyes,  but  those  all  over  husbanded
like  an  entyre  Garden.  They  sow  little  Corne,  as
employing  their  grounds  to  better  advantage :  for  which
they  sometimes  suffer,  beeing  ready  to  starve,  when  the
weather  continueth  for  any  season  tempestuous :  and  they
cannot  fetch  their  provision,  which  they  have  as  well  of
Flesh  as  of  Corne,  from  Morea,  being  ten  leagues  distant.
They  have  Salt-pits  of  their  owne,  and  store  of  fresh
water,  but  little  or  no  wood,  though  celebrated  for  the
abundance  thereof,  by  Homer  and  Virgil.

It  is  here  a  custome  strictly  observed  (as  also  else-where
within  the  Streights  belonging  to  the  Christians)  not  to
suffer  any  to  trafficke  or  come  ashoare  before  they  have  a
Pratticke  from  the  Signiors  of  Health,  which  will  not  be  Pratticke  of
granted  untill  fortie  dayes  after  their  arrivall,  especially  **»*•
if  the  ship  come  from  Turkie,  and  bring  not  a  Certificate,
that  the  place  from  whence  they  came  is  free  from  the
infection  :  if  so,  perchance  their  restraint  may  be  shortned,
during  which  time  they  have  a  Guardian  set  over  them.
They  will  not  suffer  a  Letter  to  be  delivered,  if  sealed  with
thred,  before  it  be  opened  and  ayred.  If  such  as  come
to  speake  with  them  doe  but  touch  one  of  the  ship,  or
sometimes  but  a  rope,  they  shall  be  forced  to  ascend,  and,
remayne  there  for  the  time  limited ; it  being  death  to

91

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1610.

him  that  shall  come  ashoare  without  licence.  Notwith-
standing, they  upon  request  will  carrie  you  to  the  Lazaretto
(which  is  the  nature  of  a  Pest-house)  there  to  abide  untill
the  date  be  expired.  But  if  any  fall  sicke  amongst  them
in  the  meane-season,  their  Pratticke  is  accordingly  pro-
longed. A  great  inconvenience  to  the  Merchants,  but  at
Venice  intolerable,  where  when  they  have  Pratticke,  they
[Il.viii.  are  enforced  to  unlade  at  the  Lazaretto. So  under  pretence

I276-J  of  ayring  their  goods  are  opened ;  their  quantitie,  qualitie
and  condition  known ;  redounding  much  to  their  detri-
ments. But  for  that  we  came  from  Venice,  wee  were
freed  from  this  mischiefe,  and  presently  suffered  to  land.

The  Towne,  taking  or  giving  a  name  to  the  Hand,
stretcheth  along  betweene  the  West  side  of  the  Haven  and
the  foote  of  the  Mountayne :  perhaps  a  mile  in  length,  in
breadth  but  narrow.  The  streets  unpaved,  the  building
low,  by  reason  of  the  often  Earth-quakes  whereunto  this
Hand  is  miserably  subject.  Two  hapned  during  my  short
abode  heere,  though  of  small  importance.  Although  the
seate  of  the  Towne  be  excessive  hot,  yet  is  it  happily
qualified  by  a  North-east  gale  that  bloweth  from  Sea  most
constantly  about  the  midst  of  the  day.

The  Great  Turke  hath  yearely  a  present  of  Falcons  from
the  Governor  (accompanyed,  as  some  say,  with  twelve
hundred  Zecchins)  which  he  calleth  a  Tribute :  it  beeing
in  his  power  to  distresse  them  at  his  pleasure,  by  restrayn-
ing  the  reliefe  of  victuals  which  they  have  from  Morea,
and  his  adjoyning  Dominions.  Whilest  wee  were  here,
the  Captaine  Bassa  past  by  with  sixtie  Gallies  :  who  yearely
about  this  time  sayleth  in  circuit,  to  receive  Tribute,
suppresse  Pirates,  and  to  doe  some  exploit  upon  the
Malteses,  Spaniards,  and  Florentines,  with  whom  they  are
onely  in  hostilitie.  Divers  of  their  Gallies  putting  into
the  Haven,  were  courteously  entertaynd  for  the  Venetians
endeavour,  as  much  as  in  them  lyes  to  keepe  good  quarters
with  the  Turke  ;  not  onely  for  the  reason  aforesaid,  (which
perhaps  might  extend  as  farre  as  their  Citie :  their  Terri-
tories though  large  and  fruitfull,  too  narrow  to  sustayne

92

GEORGE SANDYS  ad.

1610.

so  populous  a  State,  if  unrelieved  from  Turkie,  and  that
their  passage  into  the  mid-land  Sea  were  interrupted)  not  for
the  losse  they  should  sustayne  by  the  cessation  of  Trafficke
with  the  Mahometans :  but  knowing  him  by  deare  experi-
ence too  powerfull  an  Adversary  for  them  by  Land,  and
though  they  are  perhaps  strong  enough  by  Sea,  yet  should
they  lose  a  Navie,  their  losse  were  unrecoverable,  whereas
the  Turke  within  the  space  of  a  yeare  is  able  to  set  forth
another.

The  Inhabitants  of  this  Hand  are  in  generall  Grecians
(of  whom  wee  will  speake  no  more  then  concernes  the
particular  customes  of  the  place,  reserving  the  rest  to  our
relation  of  that  people) :  in  habit  they  imitate  the  Italians,
but  transcend  them  in  their  revenges,  and  infinitely  lesse
civill.  They  will  threaten  to  kill  a  Merchant  that  will  not  Murtheren.
buy  their  Commodities,  and  make  more  conscience  to
breake  a  Fast,  then  to  commit  a  Murther.  One  of  them
at  our  beeing  heere,  pursued  a  poore  Sailer  (an  English-
man) for  offering  but  to  carrie  a  little  bagge  of  Corents
aboord  uncustomed,  and  killed  him,  running  up  a  paire  of
staires  for  succour.  He  is  weary  of  his  life  that  hath  a
difference  with  any  of  them,  and  will  walke  abroad  after
day-light.  But  cowardize  is  joyned  with  their  crueltie,
who  dare  doe  nothing  but  sodainly,  upon  advantages  ;  and
are  ever  privately  armed.  Encouraged  to  Villanies  by  the  danger  of
remisnesse  of  their  Lawes :  for  none  will  lay  hands  upon  remsseLawes-
an  offender,  untill  fourteene  dayes  after  that  hee  bee
called  to  the  Scale,  (an  eminent  place  where  one  doth  stand
and  publikely  cite  the  offenders : )  who  in  the  meane-time
hath  leisure  to  make  his  owne  peace,  or  else  to  absent
himselfe :  if  then  he  appeare  not,  they  banish  him ;  and
propound  a  reward  according  to  the  greatnesse  of  the
offence,  to  him  that  shall  either  kill  or  take  him  alive  :  and
if  it  be  done  by  one  that  is  banished,  his  owne  banishment
(the  least  reward)  is  released.  The  Labourers  doe  goe  into
the  fields  with  Swords  and  Partizans,  as  if  in  an  Enemies
Country,  bringing  home  their  Wines  and  Oyles  in  Hogs-
skins, the in-sides turned outward. It is a custome

93

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1610.

amongst  them  to  invite  certaine  men  unto  their  Marriages,
whom  they  call  Compeeres.  Every  one  of  these  doe
bestow  a  Ring,  which  the  Priest  doth  put  upon  the  Bride
and  Bridegroomes  fingers,  interchangeably  shifting  them ;
and  so  hee  doth  the  Garlands  on  their  heads.  Of  these
they  are  never  jealous  (an  abuse  in  that  kind  reputed  as
detestable  a  crime,  as  if  committed  by  a  naturall  Brother,)
so  that  they  lightly  chuse  those  for  their  Compeeres  that
have  beene  formerly  suspected  too  familiar.  The  Bride-
groome  entring  the  Church,  stickes  his  Dagger  in  the
doore ;  held  available  against  Inchantments.  For  heere
it  is  a  common  practice  to  bewitch  them :  made  thereby
impotent  with  their  Wives,  untill  the  Charme  be  burnt,  or
otherwise  consumed :  insomuch  that  sometimes  (as  they
say)  the  Mothers  of  the  betrothed,  by  way  of  prevention
doe  bewitch  them  themselves,  and  againe  unloose  them  as
soone  as  the  Marriage  is  consummated.  The  Nuptiall
sheets  (as  in  some  cases  commanded  by  the  Mosaicall  Law)
are  publikely  showne :  and  preserved  by  their  Parents  as
a  Testimonie  of  their  uncorrupted  Virginities.

There  be  here  two  Bishops,  one  of  the  Greekes,  and
another  of  the  Latines.  The  Greekes  have  divers
Churches,  the  principall  that  of  S.  Nicolas,  (which  giveth
to  the  Haven  a  name,  and  not  far  removed)  with  a
Monastery  of  Caloieros ;  for  so  are  their  Monkes  called.
On  the  other  side  of  the  Harbor,  upon  the  top  of  the
Promontory,  they  have  another  far  lesse ;  with  a  Chappell
dedicated  to  the  Virgin  Mary,  called  Madonna  del  Scopo,
reputed  effectresse  of  Miracles,  and  much  invocated  by
Sea- faring  men.  As  the  Duke  of  Venice  doth  marrie  the
Sea,  so  yearely  doth  this  Bishop  upon  the  Twelfe  day
baptize  it :  although  with  lesse  state,  yet  with  no  lesse
Ceremonie.  The  Venetians  heere  (as  in  Candy)  doe
joyntly  celebrate  the  Grecian  Festivals :  either  to  gratifie,
or  else  to  avoid  occasions  of  tumult.  As  for  the  Romane
Catholike  Bishop,  hee  hath  his  Cathedrall  Church  and
[Il.viii.  residence  within  the  Castle: where  there  is  a  Covent  of

1277'] Franciscans. A  mile  and  halfe  off,  in  the  sight  of  the

94

GEORGE SANDYS  a.d.

1610.

Towne,  on  the  side  of  a  Mountaine,  they  have  another

Monasterie,  called  the  Annuntiata,  where  the  Latins  have

their  burials,  built  in  the  yeere 1550.  when  under  the

ground  there  were  found  two  Urnes ; one  full  of  ashes,

and  the  other  of  water,  in  an  ancient  Sepulchre. Upon  a  Sepulchre  of

square  stone  that  covered  the  Tombe,  was  engraven  M. tmo'

Tul.  Cicero  lave  et  tu  Jeptia  Antonia,  and  under  the  Urnc

which  contayneth the  ashes,  Ave Mar. Tul. It  being  Johannes

supposed that Cicero was there buried : peremptorily ,*?  aLus "

affirmed  by  a  Traveller  then  present ; reporting  withall,

that  he  saw  this  Epitaph :

Of  Orators  the  Prince,  of  Speech  the  Pride,
Tullie,  with  his  Wife  in  this  Urne  abide  :
Tullie,  that  of  himselfe  thus  writ ; O  Rome
Blest,  in  that  I  thy  Consul,  am  become.

Ille  oratorum  princeps,  &  gloria  linguae
Romanae,  jacet  hac,  cum  conjuge  Tullius  urna.
Tullius  ille,  inquam,  de  se  qui  scripserat  olim,
O  fortunatam  natam,  me  consule,  Romam.
Adamus  Tefellenius  in  suo  Itin.

The  Jewes  have  here  a  Synagogue,  (of  whom  there  are  not
many)  one  having  married  an  English  woman,  and  con-
verted her  to  his  Religion.  They  weare  a  blue  riband
about  their  hats  for  a  distinction.  The  forraine  Merchants
here  resident,  are  for  the  most  part  English,  who  by  their
frequent  deaths  doe  disprove  the  aire  to  be  so  salubrious
as  is  reported  :  who  have  their  purchased  interments  in
gardens :  neither  suffered  by  Greekes  nor  Latines  to  be
buried  in  Churches.  If  a  Stranger  here  take  a  fraught  of  a
Venetian,  and  a  Venetian  ship  be  in  Port,  the  Master
thereof  upon  a  protestation,  will  enforce  the  Stranger  to
unlode,  and  serve  his  owne  turne  therewith,  if  it  be  for
his  benefit. In  this  Hand  there  are  fortie  Villages.

On  the  fourteenth  of  September  I  embarqued  in  another
English  ship,  called  the  Great  Exchange ;  first  bound  for
Chios,  and  then  for  Tripolis.  With  a  prosperous  wind
wee  compassed  a  part  of  Morea  :  more  famous  by  the  name  Morea.

95

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1610.

of  Peloponnesus :  shaped  like  a  Plantan  leafe,  and
embraced  almost  by  the  Corinthian  and  Saronian  armes  of
the  Mediterraneum :  on  the  North  adjoyning  by  a  narrow
Isthmos  to  the  rest  of  Greece ;  where  stood  that  renowmed

Corinth.  Citie  of  Corinth.  But  I  rather  thinke,  for  their  wholsome
advice,  and  expedite  execution,  in  freeing  the  State  of
those  monsters,  called  the  Dogs  of  Jupiter,  that  is,  infernall
Furies,  and  ministers  of  his  vengeance.  Alphonsus  King
of  Naples,  was  wont  to  say  merrily,  that  the  Harpyes  had

Strophades.  left  the  Strophades  to  inhabite  at  Rome :  intimating
thereby  the  avarice  of  that  Clergie.  Wee  left  on  the  left
hand  two  Rockes,  at  this  day  called  the  Strivaly :  where
onely  live  a  few  Greeke  Coloieros,  that  receive  their
sustenance  of  almes  from  the  neighbouring  Hands.  There
is  in  one  a  Spring  of  fresh  water,  supposed  to  have  his
originall  in  Peloponnesus,  and  so  to  passe  under  the  Sea,
in  regard  of  a  certaine  tree  over-shadowing  a  little  Lake,
the  leaves  thereof  (or  like  unto  those)  being  often  found
in  this  Fountaine,  there  growing  none  of  that  kind  in  the
Hand.  Wee  thrust  betweene  Cape  Malio  and  Cerigo,
about  five  miles  distant ;  once  Porphyris,  of  his  excellent
Porphyr ;  but  better  knowne  by  the  name  of  Cythera.
An  Hand  consecrated  unto  Venus.  In  the  Towne  rising
two  furlongs  up  from  the  Haven,  stood  her  celebrated
Temple  (the  most  ancient  that  the  Grecians  had  of  that
Goddesse,)  and  therein  her  Statue  in  complete  armour.
Out  of  this  it  is  said,  that  Paris  made  a  rape  of  Helena,
or  rather  here  first  enjoyed  her  in  his  returne  from  Sparta.
The  ruines  are  now  to  be  seene,  together  with  that  of
Uranias.  The  Hand  is  sixtie  miles  in  compasse ;  it  hath
divers  Harbours,  but  those  small  and  unsafe.  A  delight-
full  soyle,  inhabited  by  Grecians,  and  subject  to  the
Venetians.

Mare  This  is  the  first  of  the  iEgean  Sea  :  the  largest  arme  of

jiLgeum.  ^  MecHt;erraneum,  extending  to  the  Hellespont,  and
dividing  Greece  from  the  lesser  Asia.  A  Sea  dangerous
and  troublesome  to  sayle  through,  in  regard  of  the  multi-
tude of Rockes, and Hands, every where dispersed.

96

GEORGE SANDYS  a.d.

1610.

Insomuch,  that  a  man  is  proverbially  said  to  sayle  in  the

iEgean Sea, that is, encumbred with difficulties. The

Hands  of  this  Sea  were  anciently  divided  into  the  Sporades,

and  Cyclades. The  Sporades  are  those  that  lie  scattered

before  Crete,  and  along  the  coast  of  Asia :  The  Cyclades,

so  called  in  that  they  lie  in  a  circle.

Amongst  the  rest  of  the  last  named  wTee  sayled  by  Delos,  Debs.
(now  Diles)  hemd  with  sharpe  Rockes.  The  ruines  of
A  polios  Temple  are  here  yet  to  be  seene,  affoording  faire
Pillars  of  marble  to  such  as  will  fetch  them,  and  other
stones  of  price,  both  in  their  nature,  and  for  their  work-
manship ; the  whole  Hand  being  now  uninhabited.

Three  dayes  after  our  embarkment  (as  quicke  a  passage
as  ever  was  heard  of)  we  arrived  at  Sio,  a  famous  Hand,
called  formerly  Chios.  Sixscore  and  five  miles  it  Chios.
contayneth  in  circuit,  extending  from  South  unto  North :
the  North  and  West  quarters  extraordinarie  hilly.  In  the
middest  of  the  Hand  is  the  Mountaine  Arvis  (now  Amista)
producing  the  best  Greeke  Wines.  But  the  Lenticke  tree,
which  is  well-nigh  onely  proper  to  Sio,  doth  give  it  the
greatest  renowne  and  endowment.  These  grow  at  the
South  end  of  the  Hand,  and  on  the  leasurely  ascending
hills  that  neighbour  the  shoare.  In  heighth  not  much
exceeding  a  man,  leaved  like  a  Service,  and  bearing  a  red
berrie,  but  changing  into  blacke  as  it  ripeneth.

In  the  beginning  of  August  lanch  they  the  rine,  from
whence  the  Masticke  distilleth  untill  the  end  of  September,  Masticke.
at  which  time  they  gather  it.  None  suffered  to  come  L"-V111'
amongst  them  during  the  interim,  it  being  death  to  have
but  a  pound  of  new  Masticke  found  in  their  houses.
The  wood  thereof  is  excellent  for  tooth-picks.  By  reason
of  these  trees  they  have  the  best  Honie  of  the  world,  which
intermingled  with  water,  is  not  much  inferiour  in  relish
to  the  costly  Shurbets  of  Constantenople.  The  Hand
produceth  Corne  and  Oyle  indifferent  plentie.  Some  Silke
they  make,  and  some  Cottons  here  grow,  but  short  in
worth  unto  those  of  Smyrna.  It  hath  also  quarries  of
excellent  Marble,  and  a  certaine  green  earth,  like  the  rust

VIII  97  g

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1610.

of  Brasse,  which  the  Turkes  call,  Terra  Chia  :  but  not  that
so  reputed  of  by  the  ancient  Physicians.  The  coast,
especially  towards  the  South,  is  set  with  small  Watch-
towers,  which  with  smoake  by  day,  and  fire  by  night,  doe
give  knowledge  unto  one  another  (and  so  to  the  up-land)
of  suspected  enemies.  The  environing  Sea  being  free
from  concealed  Rockes,  and  consequently  from  perill.  On
the  East  side  of  the  Hand,  foure  leagues  distant  from  the
Maine  of  Asia,  from  that  part  which  was  formerly  called
Ionia,  stands  the  Citie  of  Sio,  having  a  secure  Haven
(though  daily  decaying,  yet  with  a  something  dangerous
entrance,  streightned  on  the  North  side  by  the  sea-ruined
wTall  of  the  Mould,  incroching  neerer  the  Diamond,  which
stands  on  the  other  side  of  the  Mouth,  so  called  of  the
shape,  rising  out  of  the  Sea,  and  supporting  a  Lanterne,
erected  by  the  Genoeses,)  insomuch  that  ships  of  the
greatest  size  doe  anchor  in  the  channell :  but  ours  thrust
in,  when  going  ashoare,  I  was  friendly  entertayned  of  the
English  English  Consull.  The  Towne  stretcheth  along  the
bottome  of  the  Haven,  backt  on  the  West  with  a  rockie
Mountaine,  the  building  meane,  the  Streets  no  larger  then
Allies.  Upon  the  Castle  hill  there  is  a  Bannia,  which
little  declines  from  the  state  of  a  Temple ;  paved  with
faire  tables  of  marble,  and  supported  with  Columnes,
contayning  severall  roomes,  one  hotter  then  another,  with
Conduits  of  hot  water,  and  naturall  Fountaines.  On  the
North  side  of  the  Citie  stands  the  Castle,  ample,  double
walled,  and  environed  with  a  deepe  ditch :  manned  and
inhabited  by  Turkes,  and  well  stored  with  munition.  This
not  many  yeeres  since  was  sodainely  scaled  in  a  night  by
the  Florentines,  who  choaking  the  Artillerie,  and  driving
the  Turkes  into  a  corner,  were  now  almost  masters
thereof :  when  a  violent  storme  of  wind,  or  rather  of
feare,  enforced  their  companions  to  Sea,  and  them  to  a
composition  ;  which  was,  to  depart  with  ensignes  displayed.
But  the  Governour  having  gotten  them  into  his  power,
caused  their  heads  to  be  strucke  off,  and  to  be  piled  in
morter  on  the  Castle  wall ; where  as  they  yet  remayne,

98

GEORGE SANDYS  a.d.

1610.

but  not  unrevenged.  For  the  Captaine  Bassa  upon  his
comming,  strangled  the  perfidious  Governour,  either  for
dishonouring  the  Turke  in  his  breach  of  promise,  or  for  his
negligence  in  being  so  surprised.  Since  when,  a  watch-
word every  minute  of  the  night  goeth  about  the  walls,  to
testifie  their  vigilance.  Their  Orchards  are  here  enriched
with  excellent  fruits ;  amongst  the  rest,  with  Oranges,
Limons,  Citrons,  Pomgranats,  and  Figs.  Upon  these
Fig-trees  they  hang  a  kind  of  unsavoury  Figge :  out  of
whose  corruption  certaine  small  wormes  are  ingendred,
which  by  biting  the  other  (as  they  say)  procure  them  to
ripen.  Partridges  here  are  an  ordinarie  food ;  whereof
they  have  an  incredible  number,  greater  then  ours,  and
differing  in  hue,  the  beake  and  feete  red,  the  plume
ash-colour.  Many  of  them  are  kept  tame  ;  these  feeding
abroad  all  day,  at  night  upon  a  call  returne  to  their
severall  owners.

Solyman  the  Magnificent,  picking  a  quarrell  with  the
Governour  for  the  Genoas,  for  a  suspected  correspondencie
with  the  great  Master  of  Malta,  during  those  warres,  and
discovery  of  his  designes ;  having  besides  neglected
accustomed  presents,  with  the  payment  of  two  yeeres
tribute,  sent  Pial  the  Captaine  Bassa  to  seize  on  the  Iland ;
who  on  Easter  day  in  the  yeere  1566.  presenting  himselfe
before  Sio,  with  fourescore  Gallies,  so  terrified  the
Inhabitants,  that  before  they  were  summoned,  they  quietly
surrendred  both  it  and  themselves  to  his  disposure.  The
Governour,  together  with  the  principall  families,  intending
to  depart  for  Italie,  hee  sent  unto  Constantinople ;  and
suffered  the  common  people  to  stay  or  remove  at  their
liking :  So  that  the  whole  Iland  is  now  governed  by
Turkes,  and  defiled  with  their  superstitions :  yet  have  the
Christians  their  Churches,  and  unreproved  exercise  of
Religion.  Besides  impositions  upon  the  land,  and  upon
commodities  arising  from  thence,  the  Great  Turke  receives
yeerely  for  every  Christian  above  the  age  of  sixteene,  two  *

hundred  Aspers  :  but  the  husbandmen  are  exempted  untill  amount  to  a
marriage. The  Inhabitants  for  the  most  part,  are  Turkes  Sultanie.

99

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1610.

and  Grecians  ;  those  living  in  command,  and  loosely  :  the
other  husbanding  the  earth,  and  exceeding  them  infinitely
in  number.  They  are  in  a  manner  releast  of  their  thral-
dome,  in  that  unsensible  of  it :  well  meriting  the  name  of
Merrie  Greekes,  when  their  leasure  will  tolerate.  Never
Sunday  or  holiday  passes  over  without  some  publike
meeting  or  other :  where  intermixed  with  women,  they
dance  out  the  day,  and  with  full  crownd  Cups  enlengthen
their  jollitie.  Frequented  by  forraine  Merchants,  Natolia
affoording  great  store  of  Chamolets  and  Grogerams,  made
about  Angra ;  and  a  part  brought  hither,  before  such  time
as  the  Goats  (whose  haire  they  pull,  white,  long,  and  soft)

Turkish  were  destroyed  by  the  late  Rebels,  consisting  for  the  most

part  of  the  expulsed  Inhabitants  of  burned  Townes ;  who
having  lost  all  that  they  had,  knew  not  better  how  to
recover  their  losses,  then  by  preying  upon  others ;  and  so
joyned  with  their  undoers,  led  by  Calender  Ogly  and  Zid
Arab  :  and  growne  to  so  fearefull  a  head,  that  the  Great
Turke  (some  say)  had  once  a  thought  to  have  forsaken  the
Imperiall  Citie,  they  being  fiftie  thousand,  but  destitute  of

[II.  vin.  Artillerie. After  foyled  by  Morat  Bassa  the  great  Vizer,

I279-J  ^q  for  that  service  (but  chiefly  for  the  over-throw  of

Janballat  the  Bassa  of  Aleppo,  and  naturall  Lord  of  the

rich  Valley  of  Achillis)  was  called  by  him  his  Father  and

Deliverer. They  besieged  this  Citie,  and  were  by  certayne

English  English  ships  that  lay  in  the  Roade,  unfriendly  saluted.

In  the  end,  burnt  a  part  thereof,  and  tooke  a  ransome  for

Cotton.  sparing  the  rest. But  their  principall  commoditie  is  Cotton

wooll,  which  here  groweth  in  great  quantitie.  With  the
seeds  thereof  they  doe  sow  their  Fields,  as  wee  ours  with
Corne.  The  stalke  no  bigger  than  that  of  Wheate,  but
tough  as  a  Beanes :  the  head  round  and  bearded,  in  size
and  shape  of  a  Medler :  hard  as  a  stone ;  which  ripen-
ing breaks,  and  is  delivered  of  a  white  soft  Bombast
intermixed  with  seeds,  which  they  separate  with  an
instrument.  You  would  thinke  it  strange,  that  so
small  a  shell  should  contayne  such  a  quantitie,  but
admire if you saw them stive it in their ships :

100

GEORGE SANDYS  aj>.

1610.

enforcing  a  Sacke  as  bigge  as  a  Wooll-packe  into  a  roome,
at  the  first  too  narrow  for  your  arme,  when  extended  by
their  instruments  :  so  that  oft  they  make  the  very  decks  to
stretch  therewith.

Taking  with  me  a  Greeke  that  could  speake  a  little
broken  English,  for  my  Interpreter :  on  the  twentieth  of
November,  I  did  put  my  selfe  into  a  Barke,  Armado  of
Simo,  a  little  Hand  hard  by  the  Rhodes  (the  Patron  a
Greeke,  as  the  rest)  being  laden  with  Spunges.  That
night  we  came  to  an  anchor,  under  the  South-west  side  of
Mitylen.  This  Hand,  not  past  seven  miles  distant  from  Mttykn  or
the  Continent  of  Phrygia,  contayneth  eight  score  and  eight  £s  os'
miles  in  circuit.  The  South  and  West  parts  Mountaynous
and  barren,  the  rest  levell  and  fruitfull,  producing  excellent
Corne.

On  the  one  and  twentieth  of  September,  the  Windes
grew  contrarie  :  and  the  Seas  (though  not  rough)  too  rough
to  be  brooked  by  so  small  a  vessell,  no  bigger,  and  like  in
proportion  to  a  Graves-end  Tilt-boate,  yet  rowing  under
the  shelter  of  the  Land,  we  entred  the  Gulfe  of  Calonus,
they  hoping  to  have  found  some  purchase  about  a  ship
cast  there  away  but  a  little  before ;  divers  of  them  leapt  Cunning
into  the  Sea,  and  diving  unto  the  bottome,  stayed  there  so  Dwers-
long  as  if  it  had  beene  their  habitable  element.  And
without  question,  they  exceed  all  others  in  that  facultie,
trayned  thereunto  from  their  child-hood,  and  hee  the
excellentest  amongst  them  that  can  best  performe  it.
Insomuch,  that  although  worth  nothing,  he  shall  be
proffered  in  marriage  the  best  endowed,  and  most  beautifull
Virgin  of  their  Hand.  For  they  generally  get  their  living
by  these  Spunges,  gathered  from  the  sides  of  Rocks  about  Spunges.
the  bottome  of  the  Streights :  sometimes  fifteene  fathome
under  water.  A  happie  people,  that  live  according  to
nature ;  and  want  not  much,  in  that  they  covet  but  little.
Their  apparell  no  other  then  linnen  breeches,  over  that  a
smocke  close  girt  unto  them  with  a  Towell ;  puting  on
sometimes  when  they  goe  ashoare,  long  sleevelesse  Coates
of  home-spun  Cotton. Yet  their  Backs  need  not  envie

IOI

A.D.

1 6  io.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Charmes.

their  Bellies :  Biscot,  Olives,  Garlicke  and  Onions  being
their  principall  sustenance.

Upon  the  two  and  twentieth  of  September,  the  winds
continuing  contrarie,  we  but  a  little  shortned  our  journey.
Descrying  a  small  Saile  that  made  towards  us,  and  thinking
them  to  bee  Pirats,  we  rowed  backe  by  the  shoare  with  all
possible  speed.  In  the  evening  we  returned  to  the  place
that  we  fled  from.  When  going  ashoare,  one  attyred  like
a  woman,  lay  groveling  on  the  Sand,  whilest  the  rest  skipt
about  him  in  a  ring,  muttering  certayne  words,  which  they
would  make  me  beleeve  were  prevalent  Charmes  to  alter
the  weather  to  their  purpose.  On  the  three  and  twentieth
wee  continued  weather-bound,  remooving  after  it  grew
darke  unto  another  anchorage ;  a  custome  they  held,  lest
observed  by  day  from  Sea  or  Shoare,  they  might  by  night
be  surprised.  We  lay  in  a  little  Bay,  and  under  a  Cliffe,
where  not  one  of  us  but  had  his  sleepe  interrupted  by
fearfull  dreames,  he  that  watched  affirming,  that  he  had
seene  the  Devill,  so  that  in  a  great  dismay  we  put  from
shoare  about  mid-night.  But  whether  it  proceeded  from
the  nature  of  the  vaporous  place,  or  that  infested  by  some
spirit,  I  leave  to  decide.  It  is  reported  of  a  little  Rockie
Iland  hard  by,  named  formerly  iEx,  and  sacred  unto
Neptune  (whereof  we  have  spoken  something  alreadie)
that  none  could  sleepe  upon  it  for  being  disturbed  with
apparitions.

On  the  foure  and  twentieth  the  Sea  grew  calme,  and  wee
proceeded  on  our  voyage.  Towards  evening  we  went
ashoare  on  the  firme  of  Asia  for  fresh  water,  and  came  that
night  unto  Tenedos.  With  the  morning  they  renewed
their  labour,  rowing  along  the  chalkie  shoare  of  the  lesser
C.  Janizari.  Phrygia.  Now  against  Cape  Janizari  (desirous  to  see
those  celebrated  fields,  where  once  stood  Ilium  the  glorie
of  Asia,  that  hath  affoorded  to  rarest  wits  so  plentifull  an
argument)  with  much  importunitie  and  promise  of  reward
(it  being  a  matter  of  danger)  I  got  them  to  set  mee
ashoare.  When  accompanied  with  two  or  three  of  them,
we  ascended  the  not  high  Promontorie,  levell  above,  and

Tenedos.

102

GEORGE SANDYS  a.d.

1610.

crowned  with  a  ruined  Citie,  whose  imperfect  walls  doe
shew  to  the  Sea  their  antiquitie.  Wherein  are  many
spacious  Vaults  and  ample  Cisternes  for  the  receit  of  water.
The  foundation  hereof  should  seeme  to  have  beene  laid  by
Constantine  the  Great,  who  intending  to  remove  the  seate
of  his  Empire,  began  here  to  build ;  which  upon  a  new
resolution  he  erected  at  Byzantium.  This  is  that  famous
Promontorie  of  Sigeum,  honoured  with  the  Sepulchre  of  Sigaum.
Achilles,  which  Alexander  (visiting  it  in  his  Asian  expedi-
tion) covered  with  flowers,  and  ranne  naked  about  it,  as
then  the  custome  was  in  Funerals  :  sacrificing  to  the  ghost
of  his  Kinsman,  whom  he  reputed  most  happy,  that  had
such  a  Trumpet  as  Homer,  to  resound  his  vertues.  In  the  [H.viii.
Playne  beyond  us  (for  wee  durst  not  straggle  farther  from  1280.J

the  shoare)  wee  beheld  where  once  stood  Ilium  by  him
founded,  called  Troy  promiscuously  of  Tros.  Afterward
feigned  to  have  beene  walled  about  by  Neptune  and
Phoebus,  in  the  dayes  of  Laomedon.  Who  hath  not  heard
of  this  glorious  Citie,  the  former  taking,  the  ten  yeeres
warre  ;  and  later,  finall  subversion  ?  which  befell  according
to  Eusebius,  in  the  yeere  of  the  World  2784.  and  second
of  Abdons  government  of  Israel.  The  ruines  at  this  day
not  more  then  conjecturally  extant.

These  Rivers,  though  now  poore  in  Streames,  are  not  yet
so  contemptible,  as  made  by  Bellonius,  who  perhaps
mistaketh  others  for  them,  (there  being  sundrie  Rivolets
that  descend  from  the  Mountaynes)  as  by  all  likelihood  he
hath  done  the  site  of  the  ancient  Troy.  For  the  ruines  Troy.
that  are  now  so  perspicuous,  and  by  him  related,  doe  stand
foure  miles  South-west  from  the  aforesaid  place,  described
by  the  Poets,  and  determined  of  by  Geographers :  seated
on  a  hanging  Hill,  and  too  neere  the  navall  station  to
affoord  a  Field  for  such  dispersed  Encounters,  such  long
Pursuites,  interception  of  Scouts,  (then  when  the  Trojans
had  pitched  neerer  the  Navie)  and  executed  stratagems,  as
is  declared  to  have  hapned  betweene  the  Sea  and  the  Citie.
These  reliques  doe  sufficiently  declare  the  greatnesse  of  the
later, and not a little the excellencie. The walls (as

103

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1610.

Bellonius,  but  more  largely,  describeth  it)  consisting  of
great  square  stone,  hard,  blacke,  and  spongie,  in  divers
places  yet  standing  supported  on  the  inside  with  Pillars,
about  two  yards  distant  one  from  another,  and  garnished
once  with  many  now  ruined  Turrets,  contayning  a  confusion
of  throwne-downe  buildings,  with  ample  Cisternes  for  the
receit  of  Raine,  it  being  seated  on  a  sandie  soile,  and
altogether  destitute  of  Fountaynes. Foundations  here  are
of  a  Christian  Temple,  and  two  Towers  of  Marble,  that
have  better  resisted  the  furie  of  Time ; the  one  on  the
top  of  the  Hill,  and  the  other  neerer  the  Sea  in  the  Valley.
From  the  wall  of  the  Citie,  another  extendeth  (supported
with  Buttresses,  partly  standing,  and  partly  throwne  downe)
well-nigh  unto  Ida,  and  then  turning,  is  said  to  reach  to  the
Gulfes  of  Satelia,  about  twentie  miles  distant. Halfe  a
mile  off,  and  West  off  these  Ruines,  opposing  Tenedos,
are  the  hot  water  Baths,  heretofore  adorned,  and  neigh-
boured with magnificent buildings ; the way thither
inclosed,  as  it  were,  with  Sepulchres  of  Marble  (many  of
the  like  being  about  the  Citie,)  both  of  Greeks  and  Latins,
as  appeareth  by  the  severall  Characters. Two  Baths  there
be ; the  one  choked  with  rubbidge,  the  other  yet  in  use,
though  under  a  simple  coverture. But  now  the  ruines
beare not  altogether that forme, lessened daily  by the
Turkes,  who  carried  the  Pillars  and  stones  unto  Constanti-
nople, to  adorne  the  buildings  of  the  great  Bassas,  as  they
now  doe  from  Cyzicus. This  notable  remainder  of  so
noble  a  Citie  was  once  a  small  Village  of  the  Ilians. For
the  Ilians,  after  the  destruction  of  that  famous  Ilium,  often
shifting  the  seate  of  the  new,  here  fixt  it  at  last,  as  is  said,  by
the  advice  of  an  Oracle,  contayning  one  onely  contemptible
Temple,  dedicated  to  Minerva,  at  such  time  as  Alexander
came  thither,  who  then  offered  up  his  shield,  and  tooke
downe  another  (that  which  he  after  used  in  his  fights)
enriching  the  Temple  with  gifts,  and  honouring  the  Towne
with  his  Name,  exempting  it  from  tribute,  and  determining
upon  his  returne  to  erect  in  it  a  sumptuous  Temple,  to
institute  sacred  Games,  and  to  make  it  a  great  Citie. But

104

GEORGE SANDYS  a.d.

1610.

Alexander  dying,  Lysimachus  tooke  upon  him  that  care,
who  immured  it  with  a  wall,  contayning  fortie  furlongs  in
circuit,  yet  suffered  it  to  retayne  the  name  of  Alexandria.
After  it  became  a  Colonie,  and  an  Universitie  of  the
Romanes,  of  no  meane  reputation.  Fimbria  the  Questor,
having  in  a  sedition  slaine  the  Consul  Valerius  Flaccus  in
Bithynia,  and  making  himselfe  Captaine  of  the  Roman
Armie,  the  Citizens  refusing  to  receive  him,  as  a  Robber
and  a  Rebell,  besieged  this  Citie,  and  in  eleven  dayes  tooke
it ;  who  boasted,  that  he  in  eleven  dayes  had  done  that,
which  Agamemnon  with  five  hundred  saile  of  ships  and
the  whole  Greeke  Nation,  could  hardly  accomplish  in  ten
yeeres.  To  whom  an  Ilian  answered,  That  they  wanted  a
Hector  to  defend  them.  Pieces  of  ruines,  throughout
these  Playnes,  lye  every  where  scattered.

Returning  againe  to  our  Barke,  hard  by  on  the  left  hand
left we Imbrius, now called Lembro, once sacred to
Mercurie ; and  not  farre  beyond  Lemnos,  famous  for  the  Lemnos.
fabulous  fall  of  Vulcan. Whereupon,  and  no  marvell,  he
ever  after  halted. The  Grecians  there  now  inhabiting,
doe  relate,  that  he  brake  his  Thigh  with  a  fall  from  a  Horse
on  the  side  of  a  Hill,  which  at  this  day  beareth  his  name :
the  Earth  in  that  place  thereupon  receiving  those  excellent
vertues  of  curing  of  wounds,  stopping  of  fluxes,  expulsing
poysons,  &c. now  called  Terra  Sigillata,  in  that  sealed, Terra
I and  there  onely  gathered. This  Hill  lyeth  South  of  the  ^lllata-
ruines  of  that  ancient  Hephaestia,  which  gave  a  name  unto
Vulcan,  and  about  three  flight-shots  removed. Betweene
which  standeth  Sotira,  a  little  Chappell,  frequented  by  the
Greeke  Coloieros  upon  the  sixt  of  August ; where  they
begin  their  Orisons,  and  from  thence  ascend  the  Moun-
tayne  to  open  the  veine  from  whence  they  produce  it  -
which  they  doe  with  great  preparations  and  solemnities,
accompanied  with  the  principall  Turkes  of  the  Hand. That
which  covereth  it,  being  remooved  by  the  labour  of  well-
nigh  fiftie  Pioners,  the  Priests  take  out  as  much  as  the
Cadee  doth  thinke  for  that  yeere  sufficient  (lest  the  price
should  abate  by  reason  of  the  abundance)  to  whom  they

T°5

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1610.

deliver  it ;  and  then  close  it  up  in  such  sort,  as  the  place
where  they  digged  it,  is  not  to  bee  discerned ;  the  veine
discovered,  this  precious  Earth,  as  they  say,  doth  arise  like
the  casting  up  of  Wormes,  and  that  only  during  a  part  of
that  day :  so  that  it  is  to  be  supposed,  that  they  gather  as

[Il.viii.  much as the same will affoord them. Certayne bags

128 i.J  thereof  are  sent  to  the  Great  Turke,  the  rest  they  sell  (of
which  I  have  seene  many  Cups  at  Constantinople : )  but
that  which  is  sold  to  the  Merchants,  is  made  into  little
Pellets,  and  sealed  with  the  Turkish  Character :  the
ceremonies  in  the  gathering  hereof  were  first  inducted  by
the  Venetians.

And  now  we  entred  the  Hellespont,  so  called  of  Helle,
the  Daughter  of  Athamas  King  of  Thebes,  and  Sister  of
Phryxus ;  who,  flying  the  stratagems  of  their  step-
mother Ino,  was  drowned  therein.  Bounded  on  the  left
hand  with  the  Thracian  Chersonesus  (vulgarly  called
Saint  Georges  Arme)  a  Peninsula  pointing  to  the  South-
west, whereon  stood  the  Sepulchre  of  Hecuba,  called
Cynossema,  slaine  by  them,  and  buried  in  the  aforesaid

Hellespont.  Promontorie.  On  the  right  hand,  the  Hellespont  is
confined  with  the  lesser  Phrygia,  dividing  Europe  from
Asia,  in  sundrie  places  not  above  a  mile  broad,  and  in
length  about  fortie,  (now  called  the  Channell  of  Constanti-
nople) and  having  a  Current  that  setteth  into  the  iEgeum  :
a  trade-wind  blowing  either  up  or  downe,  which  when
contrarie  to  the  streame,  doth  exceedingly  incense  it.
The  Mountaynes  on  each  side  are  clothed  with  Pines,
from  whence  much  Pitch  is  extracted.  Three  leagues
above  the  entrance,  and  at  the  narrowest  of  this  Streight,

Sestos  and stand  Sestos  and  Abydos  ;  opposite  to  each  other,  formerly

Abydos.  famous  for  the  unfortunate  loves  of  Hero  and  Leander,

drowned  in  the  uncompassionate  Surges,  and  sung  by
Musaeus.  Here  Xerxes,  whose  populous  Armie  drunke
Rivers  drie,  and  made  Mountaynes  circumnavigable,  is
said  to  have  past  over  into  Greece,  upon  a  Bridge  of
Boats ;  which  when  broken  by  Tempests,  he  caused  the
Sea  to  be  beaten  (as  if  sensible)  with  three  hundred  stripes,

106

GEORGE SANDYS  a.d.

1610.

and  Fetters  to  be  throwne  therein ; forbidding  any  to

sacrifice  unto  Neptune.

Abydos  stands  in  Asia,  which  the  Milesians  first
founded,  by  the  permission  of  Gyges  King  of  Lydia,
unto  whom  all  the  Countrey  was  subject.  Taken  by  the
Turke  in  the  reigne  of  Orchanes.  Sestos  stands  in
Europe,  though  never  great,  yet  strongly  built,  and  once
the  principall  Citie  of  Chersonesus :  afterward  defaced,  a
Castle  was  built  in  the  roome  thereof.  Abydos  is  seated
upon  a  low  levell ;  and  Sestos  on  the  side  of  a  Mountayne,
yet  descending  to  the  Sea :  both  bordering  the  same  with
their  Castles ;  whereof  the  former  is  foure  square,  the
other  triangular.  These  at  this  day  are  vulgarly  called
the  Castles.  All  ships  are  suffered  to  enter,  that  by  their
multitude  and  appointment  doe  threaten  no  invasion  ;  but
not  to  returne  without  search  and  permission,  of  which  we
shall  speake  in  the  processe  of  our  Journall.  A  little
beyond  wee  past  by  the  ruines  of  a  Castle,  which  the
Turkish  Carmasals  and  Gallies  still  sayling  by,  salute  with
their  Ordnance,  it  being  the  first  Fort  by  them  taken  in
Europe,  who  call  it  Zembenic.  That  night  wee  came  to
Callipoly,  some  twentie  miles  distant,  and  thrust  into  a
little  Haven  North  of  the  Towne,  but  only  capable  of
small  Vessels.

Callipoly  is  a  Citie  df  Chersonesus,  seated  at  the  CaUlopoli.
bottome  of  a  Bay  ;  so  shallow,  that  ships  doe  there  usually
anchor,  as  throughout  the  whole  Hellespont.  Callipolis
maketh  a  faire  shew  a-farre  off ;  but  entred,  is  nothing
lesse  then  it  promised :  a  part  thereof  possessing  the
shoare,  and  the  rest  the  rising  of  the  Mountayne :
unwalled,  and  without  either  Citadell  or  Fortresse.  Along
the  shoare,  there  are  divers  drie  stations  for  Gallies.  On
the  South  side  of  the  Citie  in  a  little  Playne,  are  sundrie
round  Hills ;  the  Sepulchres,  as  they  say,  of  certayne
Thracian  Kings :  for  such  was  the  ancient  custome  of
buriall.  The  Countrey  above  is  Champan,  and  not  barren,
but  rarely  inhabited.  Here  is  a  Ferrie  for  transportation
into  Asia. Greekes  and  Jewes,  together  with  the  Turkes,

107

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1610.

doe  inhabit  the  Towne,  and  are  admitted  their  Churches
and  Synagogues.  Here  also  is  a  Monasterie  of  Romish
Friars,  of  the  Order  of  Saint  Augustine ;  one  of  them
being  at  this  time  (but  not  dwelling  in  the  Covent)  the
Franke  Consul ;  whose  office  is  to  dispatch,  and  discharge
the  dues  of  all  Christian  ships,  not  subject  to  the  Grand
Signior,  and  admitted  free  trading  below  at  the  Castles.
To  this  house  I  repayred,  with  hope  of  some  refreshment
after  my  wearisome  voyage  :  but  hee  then  from  home,  I
was  forced  to  returne  to  my  water-bed ; there  being  no

No  Innes.  Innes  for  entertainment  throughout  inhospitall  Turkie  :
yet  is  this  Towne  well  furnished  with  all  sorts  of  pro-
vision. What  is  here  sold  by  the  Greekes,  you  may
agree  for  on  a  price :  but  the  Turks  will  receive  your
money,  and  give  you  a  quantitie  for  it,  according  to  their
owne  arbitrement ;  but  truly  enough,  and  rather  exceed-
ing, then  short  of  your  expectation.  For  two  or  three
Aspers  (whereof  twentie  are  neere  upon  a  shilling)  a
Butcher  will  cut  off  as  much  Mutton  (for  they  divide  it
not  into  joynts)  as  will  well  satisfie  three,  though  hungrie  ;
which  they  carrie  to  the  Cookes,  who  make  no  more  adoe,
but  slicing  it  into  little  Gobbets,  pricke  it  on  a  Prog  of
Iron,  and  hang  it  in  a  Fornace.  Derided  and  flurted  at
by  divers  of  the  baser  people,  at  night  we  returned  to  our
Barke.  And  departing  the  next  morning,  were  forthwith
met  with  a  contrarie  winde,  which  drove  us  to  the  shelter
of  a  Rocke  not  farre  from  the  Towne  :  where  we  abode
all  that  day,  and  the  night  ensuing  :  they  opening  and
washing  part  of  their  Sponges,  which  laid  on  the  shoare,
by  the  bulke  you  would  have  thought  to  have  beene  a
fraught  for  a  Pinnace ;  which  stived  into  Sackes,  when
wet,  were  bestowed  under  the  side  Benches  and  crosse
Bankes  of  this  little  Vessell.

On  the  seven  and  twentieth  of  September,  before  day
wee  left  the  shoare,  and  after  a  while  entred  the  Propon-
ticke  Sea  :  confined  with  Thrace  on  the  one  side,  and  with
Bithynia  on  the  other.  Having  climbed  the  Mountayne
steepe towards the Sea, wee got to the Towne, and

108

GEORGE SANDYS  a.d.

1610.

bought  us  some  victuals,  at  night  we  returned  to  our  [II.viii.
Boate,  which  lay  in  an  obscure  Bay,  where  they  spent  the  *'J

next  day  in  washing  the  residue  of  their  Sponges,  whilest
I  and  my  Interpreter  spent  our  times  on  the  top  of  the
Mountayne  in  the  Vineyards,  not  well  pleased  with  this
their  delay,  now  more  affecting  their  ease  then  when
without  the  Hellespont :  being  rid  of  that  feare  (for  no
Pirat  dare  venter  to  come  within  the  Castles)  which  had
quickned  their  expedition.  In  the  evening  we  descended,
where  we  found  the  Patron  lying  on  his  backe  upon  a
Rocke,  all  dropping  wet :  speechlesse,  and  strugling  with
death  to  our  seeming.  The  Greekes  together  by  the  eares,  Merne
every  one  with  his  fellow ;  some  in  the  Boate,  and  some
upon  the  Shoare.  Amongst  the  rest  there  was  a  blinde
man,  who  had  married  a  yong  wife,  that  would  not  let
him  lie  with  her ;  and  thereupon  had  under-taken  this
journey  to  complaine  unto  the  Patriarch :  hee  hearing  his
brother  crie  out  at  the  receit  of  a  blow ;  guided  to  the
place  by  the  noise,  and  thinking  with  his  staffe  to  have
strucke  the  striker ;  laid  it  on  with  such  a  force,  that
meeting  with  nothing  but  Ayre,  and  not  able  to  recover
himselfe,  he  fell  into  the  Sea :  and  with  much  difficultie
was  preserved  from  drowning.  The  clamour  increased
with  their  contentions,  and  anon  the  Patrone  starting  up,
as  if  of  a  sodaine  restored  to  life ;  like  a  mad  man  skips
into  the  Boate,  and  drawing  a  Turkish  Cymiter,  beginneth
to  lay  about  him  (thinking  that  his  Vessell  had  beene
surprized  by  Pirats,)  when  they  all  leapt  into  the  Sea ;
and  diving  under  water  like  so  many  Dive-dappers,
ascended  without  the  reach  of  his  furie.  Leaping  ashoare,
hee  pursues  my  Greeke,  whom  feare  had  made  too  nimble
for  him ;  mounting  a  steepe  Cliffe,  which  at  another  time
hee  could  have  hardly  ascended.  Then  turning  upon  me
onely  armed  with  stones,  as  God  would  have  it,  hee
stumbled  by  the  way,  and  there  laid  like  a  stone  for  two
houres  together ;  that  which  had  made  them  so  quarrel-
some being  now  the  Peace-maker,  having  cast  the  fetters
of  sleepe  upon  their  distemperatures. For  it  beeing  pro-

109

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1610.

claimed  death  to  bring  Wine  unto  Constantinople,  and
they  loth  to  powre  such  good  Liquor  into  the  Sea,  had
made  their  bellies  the  over-charged  Vessels.  When  the
Patron  awaked,  and  was  informed  by  my  Greeke  how  he
had  used  me,  and  withall  of  my  resolution  (which  was
rather  to  retyre  unto  the  Towne,  and  there  expect  a
passage,  than  to  commit  my  safetie  unto  such  people)  he
came  unto  me,  and  kissed  me,  as  did  the  rest  of  his
companions,  (a  testimonie  amongst  them  of  good-will  and
fidelitie)  and  so  enforced  mee  aboord.  The  winds  the
next  day  blew  fresh  and  favourable.  That  night  wee
came  to  anchor  a  little  below  the  seven  Towers :  and
betimes  in  the  morning-  arrived  at  the  Custome-house.
Galata.  Then crossing the Haven I landed at Galata, and so

SirT.  Glover,  ascended  the  Vines  of  Pena  ;  where  by  Sir  Thomas  Glover,
Lord  Embassador  for  the  King,  I  was  freely  entertayned  :
abiding  in  his  house  almost  for  the  space  of  foure
monethes.  Of  whom  without  Ingratitude  and  Detrac-
tion I  cannot  but  make  an  honourable  mention.

§.  11.

Constantinople  described,  the  Turkes  Seraglio,  Pera;
the  Turkish  Empire  and  Government :  Some
Observations  of  the  Turkish  Religion.

His  Citie  by  destinie  appointed,  and  by  nature
seated  for  Soveraigntie,  was  first  the  seat  of  the
Romane  Emperors,  then  of  the  Greeke,  as  now

it  is  of  the  Turkish  :  built  by  Constantine  the  Sonne  of
Helena,  and  lost  by  Constantine  the  Sonne  of  another
Helena  (a  Gregorie  then  Bishop,  whose  first  Bishop  was  a
Gregorie)  to  Mahomet  the  second,  in  the  yeare  1453.  with
the  slaughter  of  her  people,  and  destruction  of  her  magni-
ficent structures.  The  like  may  bee  observed  of  the
Romane  Emperours,  whose  first  was  Augustus,  and  whose
last  was  Augustulus.

It  stands  on  a  Cape  of  Land  neere  the  entrance  of  the
Bosphorus. In  forme  triangular,  on  the  East-side  washed

no

GEORGE SANDYS  a.d.

1610.

with  the  same,  and  on  the  North-side  with  the  Haven,
adjoyning  on  the  West  to  the  Continent.  Walled  with
bricke  and  stone,  intermixed  orderly,  having  foure  and
twentie  gates  and  posternes ;  whereof  five  doe  regard  the
Land,  and  nineteene  the  water,  being  about  thirteene  miles
in  circumference.  Than  this  there  is  hardly  in  nature  a
more  delicate  Object,  if  beheld  from  the  Sea  or  adjoyning
Mountaines ;  the  loftie  and  beautifull  Cypresse  Trees
so  intermixed  with  the  buildings,  that  it  seemeth  to  present
a  Citie  in  a  Wood  to  the  pleased  beholders.  Whose  seven
aspiring  heads  (for  on  so  many  hils  and  no  more,  they  say
it  is  seated)  are  most  of  them  crowned  with  magnificent
Mosques,  all  of  white  Marble,  round  in  forme,  and
coupled  above ;  being  finished  on  the  top  with  gilded
Spires,  that  reflect  the  beames  they  receive  with  «a  mar-
vellous splendor ;  some  having  two,  some  foure,  some
sixe  adjoyning  Turrets,  exceeding  high,  and  exceeding
slender ;  Tarrast  aloft  on  the  out-side  like  the  mayne  top
of  a  ship,  and  that  in  severall  places  equally  distant,  from
whence  the  Tasilmanni  with  elated  voices  (for  they  use  no
Bels)  doe  congregate  the  people,  pronouncing  this  Arabicke
Sentence,  La  Illah  Illella  Muhemet  re  sul  Allah :  viz.  t11- viii-  n  _
There  is  but  one  God,  and  Mahomet  his  Prophet. No  J

Mosque  can  have  more  then  one  of  these  Turrets,  if  not
built  by  an  Emperor.  But  that  of  Sancta  Sophia,  once  5-  Sophia.
a  Christian  Temple,  (twise  burnt,  and  happily,  in  that  so
sumptuously  re-edified  by  the  Emperour  Justinian)
exceedeth  not  onely  the  rest,  by  whose  patterne  they  were
framed,  but  all  other  Fabrickes  whatsoever  throughout
the  whole  Universe.  A  long  labour  it  were  to  describe  it
exactly,  and  having  done,  my  eies  have  seene  it,  would
but  condemne  my  defective  Relation.  The  principall
part  thereof  riseth  in  an  Ovall,  surrounded  with  Pillars,  .
admirable  for  their  proportion,  matter  and  workmanship.
Over  those  others,  through  which  ample  Galleries,
curiously  paved  and  arched  above,  have  their  prospect
into  the  Temple,  dignified  with  the  presence  of  Christian
Emperours  at  the  time  of  Divine  Service,  ascended  by

in

A.D.

l6lO.

Mosaike
painting.

Sweating
Pillar.

Suntque  in  eo
Templo  (si
licet  dicere  tot
porta  quot  in
anno  dies.
Obser.  lib.  2.
cap.  j6.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

them  on  Horse-backe. The  roofe  compact,  and  adorned
with Mosaike Painting : an Antique kind of worke,
composed  of  little  square  pieces  of  Marble ; gilded  and
coloured  according  to  the  place  that  they  are  to  assume
in  the  figure  or  ground,  which  set  together,  as  if  embossed,
present  an  unexpressable  statelinesse,  and  are  of  a  mar-
vellous durance  :  numbred  by  Pancirollus  amongst  things
that  are  lost,  but  divers  in  Italie  at  this  day  excell  in  that
kind,  yet  make  the  particles  of  Clay,  gilt,  and  coloured
before  they  be  neiled  by  the  fire. The  rest  of  the  Church,
though  of  another  proportion,  doth  joyne  to  this  with  a
certaine  harmonie. The  sides  and  floore  all  flagged  with
excellent Marble, vaulted underneath, and contayning
large  Cisternes,  replenished  with  water  from  an  Aquaeduct.
Before  the  entrance,  there  is  a  goodly  Portico ; where  the
Christians that  visit it upon curiositie, as  well  as the
Turkes, doe  leave their shooes  before  they  doe  enter.
Within  on  the  left  hand,  there  is  a  Pillar  covered  with
Copper,  ever  sweating,  (I  know  not  why,  unlesse  in  beeing
past  through  by  some  Conduit)  which  the  Turkes  wipe  off
with  their  Handkerchers, through  a  vaine  Superstition
perswaded,  that  it  is  of  sacred  and  soveraigne  vertue. The
doores  are  curiously  cut  through,  and  plated ; the  wood
of  one  of  them  fained  to  be  of  the  Arke  of  Noe,  and
therefore  left  bare  in  some  places  to  be  kissed  by  the
devouter  people. Evagrius  that  lived  a  thousand  yeares
since,  affirmeth  this  Temple  to  have  beene  from  East  unto
West,  two  hundred  and  threescore  feet  long,  and  in  height
one  hundred  and  fourescore : and  Antonius  Menavinus,
that  in  the  dayes  of  Bajazet,  it  contayned  at  once  sixe  and
thirtie  thousand  Turkes. Perhaps  the  ancient  Fabricke
then  standing  entire,  whereof  this  now  remayning,  was
little  more  then  the  Chancell. Better  to  be  beleeved  then
Bellonius  a  moderne  eye-witnesse,  who  reports  that  the
dores  thereof  are  in  number  equall  to  the  dayes  of  the
yeare :  whereas  if  it  hath  five,  it  hath  more  by  one,  then
by  me  was  discerned. Mahomet  the  Great,  upon  the
taking  of  the  Citie,  threw  downe  the  Altars,  defaced  the

112

GEORGE SANDYS  a.d.

1610.

Images,  (of  admirable  workemanship,  and  infinite  in
number)  converting  it  into  a  Mosque.  To  every  one  of
these  principal  Mosques  belong  publike  Bagnios,
Hospitals,  with  lodgings  for  Santons,  and  Ecclesiasticall
persons,  beeing  endowed  with  competent  Revenues.
The  inferiour  are  built  for  the  most  part  square,  many
penthousd  with  open  Galleries  where  they  accustome  to
pray  at  times  extraordinarie  :  there  being  in  all  (compre-
hending Pera,  Scutari,  and  the  Buildings  that  border  the
Bosphorus)  about  the  number  of  eight  thousand.

But  of  this  Sophia,  is  almost  every  other  Friday
frequented  by  the  Sultan,  beeing  neere  unto  the  fore-
front of  his  Serraglio,  which  possesseth  the  extremest
point  of  the  North-east  Angle,  where  formerly  stood  the
ancient  Byzantium ;  divided  from  the  rest  of  the  Citie
by  a  loftie  wall,  contayning  three  miles  in  circuit ;  and
comprehending  goodly  Groves  of  Cypresses  intermixed
with  Plaines,  delicate  Gardens,  artificiall  Fountaines,  all
varietie  of  fruit-trees,  and  what  not  rare  ?  Luxurie  being
the  Steward,  and  the  Treasure  unexhaustable.  The  proud
Palace  of  the  Tyrant  doth  open  to  the  South,  having  a  TurkesPaiace,
loftie  Gate-house  without  lights  on  the  out-side,  and  or  Sera8lt0-
ingraven  with  Arabicke  Characters,  set  forth  with  Gold
and  Azure  all  of  white  Marble.  This  leadeth  into  a
spacious  Court  three  hundred  yards  long,  and  about  halfe
as  wide,  on  the  left  side  whereof  stands  the  round  of  an
ancient  Chappell,  contayning  the  Armes  that  were  taken
from  the  Grecians,  in  the  subversion  of  this  Citie ;  and  at
the  far  end  of  this  Court  a  second  Gate,  hung  with  Shields
and  Cymiters,  doth  leade  into  another  full  of  tall  Cypresse
Trees,  lesse  large  yet  not  by  much  then  the  former.  The
Cloysters  about  it,  leaded  above,  and  paved  with  stone,
the  Roofe  supported  with  Columnes  of  Marble  having
Copper  Chapters,  and  Bases.  On  the  left  hand  the  Divano
is  kept ;  where  the  Bassas  of  the  Port  doe  administer
Justice,  on  that  side  confined  with  humble  buildings,
beyond  which  Court  on  the  right  hand  there  is  a  street
of  Kitchens  :  and  on  the  left  is  the  Stable,  large  enough
vni  113  h

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1610.

for  five  hundred  Horse ; where  there  is  now  to  be  seene
StreaktMuky  a  MuJe  so  admirably  streakt,  and  dapled  with  white  and
Zebra  of blacke,  and  in  such  due  proportion,  as  if  a  Painter  had
which  see  the done  it,  not  to  imitate  Nature,  but  to  please  the  Eye,  and
former  Booke expresse  his  Curiositie. Out  of  this  second  Court  there
in  Andrew [s  a  passage  into  a  third,  not  by  Christians  ordinarily  to
be  entred,  surrounded  with  the  Royall  Buildings,  which
though perhaps they come short of the Italian, for
contrivement  and  finenesse  of  workmanship ; yet  not  in
costly  curiousnesse,  matter,  and  amplitude. Betweene  the
East  wall  (which  also  serveth  for  a  Wall  to  the  Citie)  and
the  water,  a  sort  of  terrible  Ordnance  was  planted,  which
threat  destruction  to  such  as  by  Sea  shall  attempt  a  violent
entrie  or  prohibited  passage  :  and  without  on  the  North-
side  stands  the  Sultans  Cabinet,  in  forme  of  a  sumptuous
Sommer  House,  having  a  private  passage  made  for  the
[Il.vin.  time,  of  waxed  Linnen,  from  his  Serraglio  :  where  he  often

12  4-J  solaceth  himselfe,  with  the  various  objects  of  the  Haven,
and  from  thence  takes  Barge  to  passe  unto  the  delightfull
places  of  the  adjoyning  Asia.  This  Palace  howsoever
enlarged  by  the  Ottomans,  was  first  erected  by  Justinus,
who  named  it  Sophia  of  the  Empresse.
Ottoman  Now  next  to  these  the  Ottoman  Mausoleas  doe  require

Monuments,  their  regarcj3  built  all  of  white  Marble  round  in  forme,
and  coupled  on  the  top ;  having  stately  Porches,  within
each  is  the  Tombe  of  a  severall  Sultan,  with  the  Tombes
of  his  Children,  that  either  have  dyed  before  him.  or  have
after  beene  strangled  by  their  tyrannicall  Brethren,  accord-
ing to  the  Turkish  pietie.  The  Tombes  nor  longer,  nor
larger  then  fitting  the  included  bodies,  each  of  one  stone  ;
higher  at  the  head  then  feet,  and  compast  above  :  without
other  ornament  then  covers  of  Greene,  and  Turbants  laid
upon  the  upper  ends,  at  the  foure  corners  of  those  of  the
Sultans,  there  stand  foure  Tapers  of  Waxe  as  bigge  as  a
thigh,  but  not  lighted.  The  floores  of  the  Monuments
are  spread  with  Carpets  :  and  some  there  are  that  doe
continually  live  therein,  performing  such  duties  of  Prayers
and Lamentations, as agreeth to their customes ; at

114

GEORGE SANDYS  a.d.

1610.

certaine  times  besprinkled  also  with  the  teares  of  their
Offspring.

The  South-east  Angle  of  this  Citie  is  taken  up  by  the
seven  Towers,  called  anciently  Janicula :  employed,  as  the
Tower  of  London,  for  a  Store-house  of  the  Sultans  The  Tower.
Treasure,  and  Munition,  being  also  a  Prison  for  capitall
Offenders.  We  omit  to  speake  of  the  great  mens
Serraglios ;  that  of  the  women  belonging  to  the  deceased  ®therr
Emperours ;  and  that  of  the  Virgins :  the  Alberges  of
Janizaries ;  the  severall  Seminaries  of  Spachies  and
Giamoglans :  the  Besestans  (where  finer  sorts  of  Com-
modities are  sold,)  Hospitals ;  Markets  of  men  and
women,  &c.  since  hereafter  we  are  to  treate  of  most  of
their  Orders ;  the  buildings  themselves  not  meriting  a
particular  description :  converting  our  Discourse  to  those
few  remainders  of  many  Antiquities,  whereof  the  Aquae-
duct  made  by  the  Emperour  Valentinian,  and  retayning
his  name,  doth  principally  challenge  remembrance.  This
hath  his  heads  neere  to  the  Blacke  Sea,  not  farre  from  a
Village  called  Domuz-dere,  of  the  abundance  of  wilde
Hogges  thereabout,  the  place  being  woodie  and  moun-
taynous,  where  many  Springs  are  gathered  together,  and
at  sundry  places  doe  joyntly  fall  into  great  round
Cisternes,  from  thence  conveyed  to  conjoyne  with  others
(amongst  which,  as  supposed,  is  the  Brooke  Cydarius)  led
sometimes  under  the  Earth,  now  along  the  levell,  then
upon  mightie  Arches  over  profound  Valleyes,  from  Hill
to  Hill,  for  the  space  wel-nigh  of  thirtie  miles,  untill
arriving  at  the  Citie,  and  surmounting  the  same,  it  falleth
at  length  as  from  a  head-long  Cataract  into  an  ample
Cisterne,  supported  with  neere  two  hundred  Pillars  of
Marble ;  and  is  from  thence  by  Conduits  conducted  unto
their  publike  uses.  This  was  repayred  by  Solyman  the
Great,  great-grand-father  of  this  now  reigning  Achmet :
whose  wishes  and  endeavours  are  said  to  have  aymed  at
three  things  ;  which  were,  the  re-edifying  of  Ponte  Picollo,
and  Ponte  Grande,  (which  crosse  two  armes  of  the  Sea,
and  the  restoring  of  this  Aquaeduct ; these  he  accom-

iJ5

A.D.
l6lO.

A  Brazen
Columne  and
an  Obelisk  are
omitted.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

plished  :  but  the  third,  which  was  the  expugnation  of
Vienna,  he  could  never  accomplish.  Not  farre  from  the
Temple  of  Sancta  Sophia,  there  is  a  spacious  place  sur-
rounded with  buildings,  like  to  that  of  Smith-field  ;  and
anciently  called  the  Hippodrom,  for  that  there  they
exhibited  their  Horse-races,  as  now  Atmidan  by  the
Turkes,  a  word  of  like  significance,  where  the  Spachies
of  the  Court  play  every  Friday  at  Giocho  di  Canni ;  which
is  no  other  then  Prison  Bace  upon  Horse-backe,  hitting
one  another  with  Darts,  as  the  other  doe  with  their  hands ;
which  they  never  throw  Counter  but  at  the  backe  of  the
Flyer.  Nor  is  it  the  least  contentment  to  the  Christian
to  behold  the  terrible  falls  that  they  often  get  (not  rarely
costing  them  their  lives)  whilst  by  the  wreathing  of  their
bodies,  or  a  too  hastie  turne,  they  seeke  to  avoid  the
Pursuer ;  and  sometimes  the  Darts  not  lighting  in  jest
on  their  naked  neckes,  and  reversed  faces.  In  this  place
there  standeth  a  stately  Hieroglyphicall  Obeliske  of
Theban  Marble.

And  in  Auratbasar  (that  is,  the  Market  of  Women)
there  is  an  Historicall  Columne  to  bee  ascended  within,
farre  surpassing  both  Trajans,  and  that  of  Antoninus,
which  I  have  seene  in  Rome,  the  Workman  having  so
proportioned  the  Figures,  that  the  highest  and  lowest
appeare  of  owne  bignesse.

And  right  against  the  Mansion  of  the  Germane
Emperours  Embassador  (who  onely  is  suffered  to  lodge
within  the  Citie)  stands  the  Columne  of  Constantine,
about  the  top  whereof,  you  may  reade  this  Distichon,
TO  0EION  EPrON  EN0AAE  *©APEN  XPONfi  NEOI
MANOi/HA  Ei/2EBH2  AvTOKPATQP.  These  are  all  the
Remaines  that  are  left  (or  all  that  are  by  the  Chris-
tians to  be  seene,  besides  the  Relikes  of  the  Palace
of  Constantine,  now  made  a  Stable  for  wilde  beasts)
of  so  many  goodly  buildings,  and  from  all  parts  con-
gested Antiquities,  wherewith  this  Sovereigne  Citie  was
in  times  past  so  adorned  :  and  with  them  are  their
memories  perished. For  not  a  Greeke  can  satisfie the

116

GEORGE SANDYS  a.d.

1610,

Inquirer  in  the  History  of  their  owne  Calamities. So
supine  negligent  are  they,  or  perhaps  so  wise  as  of  passed
evils  to  endeavour  a  forgetfulnesse. But  to  say  some-
thing of  Constantinople  in  generall : I thinke  there  is
not  in  the  World  an  Object  that  promiseth  so  much  afarre
off  to  the  beholders,  and  entred,  so  deceiveth  the  expecta-
tion. The  best  of  their  private  buildings,  inferiour  to  the  Base
more contemptible sort of ours. For the  Turkes are  bmldmis-
nothing  curious  of  their  houses,  not  onely  for  that  their
Possessions are not hereditary; but esteeming it an  pl.viii.
egregious  folly  to  erect  such  sumptuous  Habitations,  as  I2  5-J

if  hee  were  to  live  for  ever.  None  being  above  two  stories
high,  some  of  rough  stone,  some  of  timber,  some  of
Sunne-dryed  bricke :  their  Roofes  but  rising  a  little,
covered  with  such  Tiles  as  are  layd  on  the  Ridges  of  ours,
one  contrary  to  another ;  yet  some  part  of  some  of  them
flat,  (those  belonging  to  men  of  principall  degree)  planted
with  flowers  and  trees  of  the  rarest  colours,  and  produc-
tions. Many  vacant  places  there  are  in  the  Citie,  and
many  rowes  of  buildings,  consisting  of  shops  onely,  all
belonging  to  the  Grand  Signior,  who  lets  them  out  unto
Tradesmen  ;  into  which  their  wives  come  not :  prohibited
by  Mahomet  that  women  should  buy  or  sell  (though  now
not  seldome  they  doe)  or  shew  themselves  publikely.
The  streets  for  the  most  part  are  exceeding  narrow  ;  some  "■  'VmI"2g6  1
raised  on  the  sides  for  more  cleanlinesse :  many  having
steep  ascents,  in  many  places  bounded  with  long  dead
walls,  belonging  to  great  mens  Serraglios ;  so  negligent
are  they  of  exterior  garnishings.  All  the  suburbs  that  The  ^uhurhs-
this  Citie  hath,  lie  without  the  gate  of  Adrinople,  adjoyn-
ing  to  the  North-west  angle  thereof,  and  stretching  along
the  uppermost  of  the  Haven ;  where  within  a  stately
Monument,  there  standeth  a  Tombe  of  principall  repute
in  the  Mahometan  devotion :  the  Sepulchre  of  Jupe  Sepulchre
Sultan  a  Santon  of  theirs,  called  vulgarly  and  ridiculously,
the  Sepulchre  of  Job.  To  which  the  Captaine  Bassa  doth
repaire  before  he  set  forth,  and  at  his  returne,  there  per-
forming appointed  orations  and  ceremonies : and  upon  a

117

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1610.

victorie  obtayned,  is  obliged  to  visite  the  same  every
morning  and  evening  for  the  space  of  three  weekes.
Before  this,  in  a  Cypresse  grove,  there  standeth  a  Scaffold,
where  the  new  Sultans  are  girt  with  a  sword,  by  the  hands
of  the  Mufti  their  principall  Prelate,  with  divers
solemnities.

The  Haven.  Now  speake  wee  of  the  Haven,  rather  devouring  then
encreased  by  a  little  River,  called  formerly  Barbyses,  now
by  the  Greekes,  Chartaricon,  and  Chay  by  the  Turkes :
much  frequented  by  fowle,  and  rigorously  preserved  for
the  Grand  Signiors  pleasure,  who  ordinarily  hawkes
thereon ; insomuch  that  a  servant  of  my  Lord  Embassa-

Cruelty.  dors  was  so  beaten,  for  presuming  to  shoote  there,  that
shortly  after  he  died  (as  it  is  thought)  of  the  blowes.  This
falleth  into  the  West  extent  of  the  Haven ;  throughout
the  world  the  fairest,  the  safest,  the  most  profitable.  So
conveniently  profound,  that  the  greatest  ships  may  lay
their  sides  to  the  sides  thereof,  for  the  more  easie  receit,
or  discharge  of  their  burthen.  The  mouth  of  it  is  land-
lockt  by  the  opposite  Asia,  opening  Eastward  into  the
Thracian  Bosphorus,  which  by  a  long  narrow  channell
stretching  North  and  South,  joynes  the  blacke  and  white
Seas :  so  call  they  the  Seas  North  and  South  of  the
Bosphorus.  So  that  no  wind  bloweth,  which  brings  not
in  some  shipping  or  other,  to  the  furnishing  of  this  Citie ;
having  (as  hath  beene  said  before)  on  the  left  hand  the
Euxine  Sea,  with  the  Lake  of  Meotis,  inhabited  about  by
multitudes  of  Nations,  and  entred  into  by  many  navigable
Rivers ;  whereby  whatsoever  groweth,  or  is  nourished  in
those  farre  distant  Countries,  is  easily  transported  unto
it :  on  the  right  hand  Propontis,  and  the  Mid-land  Sea,
(bordered  with  Natolia,  Syria,  iEgypt,  Africa,  Spaine,
France,  Italie,  Greece,  and  Dalmatia,  with  their  fruitfull
Hands)  and  without,  the  great  Ocean.  Insomuch  as  it
seemeth  by  the  opportunitie  of  navigation  to  participate
with  their  several!  commodities,  daily  brought  hither  by
forrainers ;  seated  of  it  selfe  in  a  Countrey,  though  not
altogether  barren,  yet  not  sufficient  to  sustaine  the  Inhabi-

118

GEORGE SANDYS

A.D.

l6lO.

Janizaries
insolence.

tants.  Moldavia  and  Valachia  doe  serve  them  with
Beeves  and  Muttons ;  and  as  for  Fish,  the  adjoyning  Seas
yeeld  store  and  variety,  as  the  concaves  of  the  Rockes
doe  salt,  white,  pure,  and  solid,  made  onely  by  the  labour
of  the  surges.  Subject  it  hath  beene  to  sundrie  horrible  Terrible  fires.
combustions :  unto  that  which  befell  in  the  dayes  of  Lea,
and  not  long  after  in  the  reigne  of  Basilicus,  (when  amongst
other  infinite  losses  that  famous  Librarie  perished,  con-
tayning  an  hundred  and  twentie  thousand  volumes ;
wherein  the  inward  skin  of  a  Dragon  the  Odysses  and
Iliads  of  Homer  were  written  : )  and  to  divers  others,  this
last,  though  lesse,  may  be  added,  which  hapned  on  the
fourteenth  of  October,  in  the  yeere  1607.  ln  which  three
thousand  houses  were  burnt  to  their  foundations.  Nor
is  it  to  be  marvelled  at :  the  Citizens  themselves  not
daring  to  quench  the  fire  that  burneth  their  owne  houses,  •
or  by  pulling  some  downe  to  preserve  the  remaynder :
an  office  that  belongeth  to  the  Aga,  and  his  Janizaries ;
who  nothing  quicke  in  their  assistance,  doe  often  for
spite  or  pillage,  beate  downe  such  buildings  as  are  farthest
remooved  from  danger.  So  that  the  mischiefe  is  not  onely
wished  for  the  bootie,  but  prolonged  ;  and  not  seldome
they  themselves  set  the  J  ewes  houses  on  fire;  who  made
warie  by  the  example,  are  now  furnished  of  arched  vaults,
for  the  safeguard  of  their  goods,  which  are  not  to  bee
violated  by  the  flame.  The  fall  of  houses  heretofore  by
terrible  and  long-lasting  earthquakes,  now  by  negligence
in  repayring,  tempests,  and  the  matter  that  they  consist  Tempests.
of,  is  heere  also  most  frequent,  many  (as  hath  beene  said)
being  built  of  Sun-dried  bricke.  And  although  it  enjoyes
a  delicate  aire,  and  serene  skies,  even  during  the  Winter,
when  the  East,  the  West,  or  South  wind  bloweth ;  yet
the  boysterous  Tramontana,  that  from  the  blacke  Sea  doth
sweepe  his  blacke  substance,  heere  most  violently  rages,
bringing  often  with  it  such  stormes  of  snow,  that  in
September  I  have  seene  the  then  flourishing  trees  so
overcharged  therewith,  that  their  branches  have  broken,
accompanied  with  bitter  frosts,  which  dissolving,  resolve

119

A.D.

l6lO.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Galata  or
Pera.

therewith the unfirme matter that sustaynes them.

Plague.  Lastly,  the  plague  (either  hapning  through  the  vice  of

the  Clime,  or  of  those  misbeleevers,  or  hither  brought  by
the  many  frequenting  Nations)  for  the  most  part  miserably
infesteth  this  Citie,  encreased  by  the  superstition  of  the
Mahometans.

On  the  other  side  of  the  Haven  (continually  crossed  by
multitudes  of  little  Boats,  called  Permagies,  and  rowed
for  the  most  part  by  ^Egyptians)  stands  the  Citie  of
Galata,  so  called,  as  some  write  of  the  Gaules,  once  the
masters  thereof,  or  as  others  will  have  it,  of  Galac,  which
signifieth  Milke,  for  that  there  the  Greekes  kept  their
cattell ;  as  Pera  (another  name  thereof,)  which  signifieth
Beyond,  in  that  on  the  other  side  of  the  Haven  ;  but
more  anciently  Cornu  Byzantium.  Infirmely  walled,  yet
great,  if  you  comprehend  the  suburbs  therewith,  extend-
ing from  along  the  shoare  to  the  upper  tops  of  the  Moun-
taines,  surpassing  Constantinople  in  her  loftie  buildings
built by the Genoas ; who bought it of the Greeke

[Il.viii.  Emperours  (in  their  declining  estate,  possest  of  little  more

1287.]  tjlen  t}le  regall  Citie,  and  title;  for  the  most  part
sustayned  by  forraine  contributions)  and  by  them
surrendred  unto  Mahomet  the  Great,  the  day  after  the
sacking  of  Constantinople.  At  the  West  end  thereof  the
Grand  Signiors  Gallies  have  a  drie  station  :  and  at  the
East  end  right  against  the  point  of  his  Serraglio,  called
Tophana  and  Fundacle,  lies  a  number  of  great  Ordnance
unplanted ;  most  of  them  the  spoyle  of  Christian
Cities  and  Fortresses,  as  may  appeare  by  their  inscrip-
tions, and  Impreses ;  and  many  of  them  of  an
incredible  greatnesse.

Now,  right  against  the  mouth  of  the  Haven,  on  the

Scutari.  other  side  of  the  Bosphorus,  stands  Scutari,  a  Towne  of

Chakedon.  Bythinia.  Scutari  sometimes  belonged  to  Chalcedon,
once  a  free  Citie,  and  seated  a  little  below  it :  so  called  of
a  Brooke,  now  without  a  name,  that  runs  into  Propontis  ;
called  also,  The  Citie  of  the  Blind ;  because  of  the  foolish
Megarians  that  built  it. Famous  for  the  fourth  generall

120

m

GEORGE SANDYS  ad.

1610.

Councell  there  holden  ; and  now  onely  shewing  a  part  of
her  ruines.

The blacke Sea is distant some fifteene miles from  Blade  Sea.
Constantinople,  so  named  of  his  blacke  effects,  or  for  the
thicke  mists  that  usually  hang  over  it.

Here  the  Turke  prohibiteth  forrainers  to  trafficke,
there  being  no  other  passage  there  into  but  by  Rivers :
neither  this  passage  of  Bosphorus,  as  some  conjecture,
hath  beene  alwayes  :  but  forced  by  the  violence  of  streames
that  fell  into  the  over-charged  Euxine.  Where  it  rusheth
into  the  Bosphorus  there  are  two  Rockes,  that  formerly
bare  the  names  of  Cyaneae  and  Sympligades :  which  for
that  so  neere,  as  many  times  appearing  but  as  one,  they
were  fayned  by  the  Poets  unstable,  and  at  sundry  times
to  justle  each  other.  Here  upon  the  top  of  a  Rocke,
supposed  by  some  to  be  one  of  these,  yet  too  farre  removed
from  a  fellow  to  be  so,  stands  a  Pillar  of  white  marble,
called  vulgarly,  The  Pillar  of  Pompey.  Upon  the  shoare
there  is  an  high  Lanterne,  large  enough  at  the  top,  to
contayne  above  threescore  persons,  which  by  night  direc-
teth  the  Sayler  into  the  entrance  of  the  Bosphorus.

The  Bosphorus  setteth  with  a  strong  current  into  Pro-  Bosporus.
pontis,  and  is  in  length,  about  twentie  miles ;  where
broadest,  a  mile ;  and  in  two  places,  but  halfe  a  mile
over.  So  called,  for  that  Oxen  accustomed  to  swim
from  the  one  side  to  the  other.  One  of  those  two  fore-
mentioned  Streights  lies  before  Constantinople ;  the  other,
five  miles  above  and  a  halfe,  where  on  Europe  side  there
standeth  a  Castle,  called  formerly  Damalis,  and  now,  The
Blacke  Tower.

The  Turkish  Empire  is  the  greatest  that  is,  or  perhaps
that  ever  was  from  the  beginning.  For  first  the  European
part  thereof  extendeth  westward  unto  the  Archdukes  of
Austrias  Dominions,  stretching  to  the  Adriatick  Sea  by
the  confines  of  Ragusa,  bounded  on  the  South  with  the
Mediterraneum  ;  on  the  East,  with  iEgeum,  Propontis,  and
Pontus,  even  to  Theodosia,  a  Citie  of  the  Scythian  Cher-
sonesus  ;  and  on  the  North  almost  to  Russia  and  Polonia ;

121

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1610.

contayning Romania, Bulgaria, Servia, Rascia, the
tributarie  principalities of  Valachia  and Moldavia ; the
greater part of Hungary,  Bosnia, Albania, Macedon,
Epirus, all Grecia and Peleponnesus ; all the fruitfull
Hands  of  the  iEgean  Sea :  Ragusa  payes  for  her  libertie ;
nor  is  Candie,  Zant,  or  Cephalania  held  without  Presents.
But what is this, compared to her  Asian  Territories?
within  which,  all  Natolia  is  comprised ; on  three  sides
embraced  with  the  iEgean,  Euxine,  and  Cilician Seas ;
contayning  the  Provinces  of  Pontus,  Galatia,  Bythinia,
Phrygia, Lycia,  Pamphilia, Cicilia  Cappadocia,  and the
lesser  Armenia ; beyond  which,  Colchis  stretching  North-
ward to  Cataie,and  bounded  on  the  East  with  the  Countrey
of the Georgians, whereof the Turkes possesse not a
little. A  great  part it also contayneth of the  greater
Armenia : all  Syria  (in  which  Coelosyria,  Phoenicia,  and
Palestine ;) Babylonia and Mesopotamia : Arabia felix,
which  stretcheth  out  into  the  South  Sea,  interposing  the
Persian  and  Arabian  Gulfes,  doe  bow  to  that  Soveraigntie  :
so  doe  the  Inhabitants  of  Petrea,  and  Deserta ; such  I
meane, as have knowne habitations. In Africa it
extendeth  all  along  the  coasts  of  the  Mediterraneum,  even
from  the  red  Sea  to  Acrath,  a  Citie  of  Mauritania  (except
some  few  places  possest  by  the  Spaniard)  wherein  is  the
Countrey of the Troglodites, the miraculously fertile
Kingdome  of  iEgypt,  Tripoly  in  Barbarie,  the  Kingdome
of  Tunis,  and  Citie  of  the  Argers  with  her  Territories,
with the  tributarie  Kingdomes  of  Fesse  and Morocco.
To  this  adde  Cyprus,  Rhodes,  and  all  the  fertile  Hands
of  the  mid-land  Sea,  that  lie  East  of  Candie. Thus  great
at  this  day  is  the  Ottoman  Empire  : but  too  great  for  it
are  their  assumed  Titles : as  God  on  earth,  Shadow  of
God,  Sole  Monarch  of  the  World,  King  of  Kings,  Com-
mander of  all  that  can  be  commanded,  Soveraigne  of  the
most  noble  Families  of  Persia  and  Armenia,  Possessor  of
the  holy  Cities  of  Mecha  and  Jerusalem,  Lord  of  the
blacke  and  white  Seas,  Sultan  of  Babylon,  and  so  pro-
ceeding with  a  repetition  of  their  severall  Kingdomes.

122

GEORGE SANDYS  a.d.

1610.

Like  swelling  attributes  gave  this  now  reigning  Sultan  to
our  Soveraigne,  in  a  Letter  writ  lately,  which  I  will  insert
for  the  strangenesse :  Unto  the  most  glorious  and  most
mightie  King  James,  one  of  the  great  Lords  of  the
creation  of  Jesus,  and  most  laudable  amongst  all  the
Princes  of  the  Nation  of  Messia,  a  Judge  of  all  debates
and  differences  of  the  people  of  Nazarets,  Possessor  of
great  Majestie,  riches,  and  of  glorie,  a  Judge  of  the  most
great  Kings  of  England,  &c.  farcing  his  Letter  with  like
Fustian,  calling  his  owne  Court,  Our  most  happie  and
shining  Port,  a  Port  of  refuge  for  the  World :  and  sub-
scribing, From  our  Imperiall  residence  of  Constantinople,
most  strongly  and  mightily  guarded  :  Yet  in  his  owne
stile  more  modest,  contayning  no  more  then  Sultan
Achmet  Chan,  Sonne  to  Mahomet  Chan  most  invincible.

But  the  barbarous  policie  whereby  this  tyrannie  is  [H-viii.
sustayned,  doth  differ  from  all  other :  guided  by  the
heads,  and  strengthned  by  the  hands  of  his  slaves,  who
thinke  it  as  great  an  honour  to  be  so,  as  they  doe  with  us
that  serve  in  the  Courts  of  Princes  :  the  Naturall  Turke  (to
be  so  called  a  reproach)  being  rarely  employed  in  com-
mand of  service :  amongst  whom  there  is  no  Nobilitie  of
bloud,  no  knowne  parentage,  kindred,  nor  hereditary
possessions,  but  as  it  were  of  the  Sultans  creation,  depend-
ing upon  him  onely  for  their  sustenance  and  preferments.
Who  disposeth,  as  well  of  their  lives  as  their  fortunes,  by
no  other  rule  then  that  of  his  will ;  although  sometime
for  forme  he  useth  the  assent  of  the  never  gain-saying
Mufti.  These  are  the  sonnes  of  Christians  (and  those  Janizaries.
the  most  compleatly  furnished  by  nature)  taken  in  their
childhood  from  their  miserable  Parents,  by  a  levie  made
every  five  yeeres  (or  oftner,  or  seldomer,  as  occasion
requireth)  throughout  the  whole  Empire,  (excepting
certaine  priviledged  places,  amongst  which  are  Sio  and
Constantinople,)  who  are  bestowed  in  severall  Seminaries,
instructed  in  the  Mahometan  Religion  (changing  their
names  upon  their  circumcision)  taught  the  use  of  their
severall  weapons,  and  made  patient  of  hunger  and  labour,

123

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1610.

with  inured  abstinence,  and  continuall  exercise.  These
they  call  Jemoglans,  who  have  their  faces  shaven  (the  token
of  servitude,)  wearing  long  Coats  and  copped  Caps,  not
unlike  to  our  Idiots.  The  choicest  of  them  for  spirit
and  feature,  are  after  a  while  received  into  the  Grand
Signiors  Serraglio,  distinguished  by  chambers  like  to
those  in  Hospitals,  according  to  their  seniorities ;  where
all  are  brought  up  in  the  discipline  of  warre ;  and  not  a
few,  acquainted  with  the  secrets  of  State :  such  as  by  the
excellency  of  their  gifts  doe  assure  the  expectation  of  a
future  eminency.  Those  of  the  first  chamber,  are  the
first  preferred :  yet  not  in  order,  but  according  to  the
worth  of  the  place,  and  worthinesse  of  the  person.  Of
these  come  the  Beglerbegs,  (the  name  signifying,  a  Lord
of  Lords)  of  whom  there  be  onely  two,  the  one  of  Greece,
and  the  other  of  Natolia  :  who  command  all  the  horse-men
in  those  Countries  under  the  Generall)  the  Great  Bassas,
(whereof  some  are  Generals  of  Armies,  some  Vizers  of
the  Port,  the  rest  Vice-royes  of  Provinces)  the  Sanziaks

[Il.viii.  Governours  of  Cities,  for  so  the  name  signifieth,  with  their

1 289.]  Territories  and  Forces,  and  other  Officers  both  of  Warre
and  Peace ;  with  those  of  the  Court,  of  principall  place
and  attendance.  Of  the  other  Jemoglans  some  come  to
bee  Chauses,  who  goe  to  Embassies,  execute  Commande-
ments,  and  are  Pursivants,  and  under-Sheriff  s ;  attending
the  imployment  of  the  Emperour,  who  mounted  on  horse-
backe,  carrie  Dabuzes  (a  weapon  like  a  Mace)  before  him,
and  on  the  Courts  of  Justice :  soliciting  all  the  causes  of

Spachies.  their  Clients.  But  the  Spachies  and  Janizaries  which
are  made  of  these  Jemoglans  (the  principall  cause  of
their  institution)  are  the  nerves  and  supporters  of  the
Turkish  Monarchy.  The  Spachies  are  Horse-men,
weaponed  for  the  most  part  at  once,  with  Bow,  Mase,
Lance,  Harquebusse,  &  Cymiter :  whereof  they  have  the
severall  uses,  agreeing  with  their  fights,  their  flights  or
pursuments.  For  defence,  some  weare  Bucklers,  and
shirts  of  Male.  The  skirts  of  their  coats,  when  they
ride, are gathered within long Stammell broges that

124

GEORGE SANDYS  a.d.

1610.

reach  to  their  anckles,  and  they  doe  joyne  to  their  Buskins  ;
shod  with  Iron,  and  supplying  the  want  of  Spurres,  with
their  large  and  sharpe  Stirrops.  Their  Saddles  are  plated
behind  &  before,  the  seate  deep  and  hard :  and  for
Caparison,  use  for  the  most  part  the  skins  of  Leopards,
Lions,  Tygres,  Panthers,  and  the  like.  In  Cities  when
on  foot,  they  weare  Gownes  of  Stammell  with  long  hang-
ing sleeves,  and  are  distinguished  from  others  by  the
folding  up  of  their  Shashes.  Of  these  there  be  two  sorts  ;
the  Uleffigi,  which  is  to  say,  stipendarie,  who  are  almost
altogether  made  of  these  Jemoglans ;  and  the  Timariots,  Timariots.
who  consist  of  all  sorts  of  people.  The  first  as  yet
unpreferred,  under  the  command  of  severall  Captaines,
do  attend  upon  the  immediate  imployment  of  the
Emperor  :  who  alloweth  unto  each  the  daily  pension  of
ten  Aspers,  paid  them  every  quarter.  Of  these  there  be
32000.  the  one  halfe  of  them  are  called  Spaheioglans,  who  Some  say
weare  red  Pendants  on  their  speares,  &  when  in  the  field,  f£.
march  on  the  right  hand  the  Sultan  :  as  the  other  on  the
left,  who  are  called  Silihtarspaheis,  bearing  yellow  &
white  Pendants.  The  other  dispersed  throughout  the
whole  Empire,  do  live  upon  their  particular  Tenements
for  terme  of  life  assigned  them,  and  thereupon  so  called.
It  being  the  policy  of  this  State,  to  erect  in  the  conquered
Countries  a  number  of  Timariots,  answerable  to  the
greatnesse  thereof :  whereby  the  principall  part  of  the
souldiery  is  provided  for,  and  the  Empire  strengthned,
both  against  forraine  invasions,  and  revolts  of  the  sub-
dued. Of  these,  as  they  say,  there  are  upward  of  seaven
hundred  thousand :  every  one  being  to  find  as  many
Horse,  as  his  Farme  doth  double  the  yearely  value  of
sixtie  Sultanies,  ready  to  be  commanded  by  their  severall
Sanziacks,  as  they  by  their  Bassas :  these  beare  on  their
Lances  white  and  red  Pendants.  But  the  Janizaries  (a
name  that  signifieth  New  Souldiery)  are  those  that  beare
such  great  sway  in  Constantinople  :  insomuch,  that  the
Sultans  themselves  have  beene  sometimes  subject  to  their
insolencies. They  are  divided  into severall  Companies

I25

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGMMES

1610.

under  severall  Captaines,  but  all  commanded  by  their  Aga,
a  place  of  high  trust ;  and  the  third  in  repute  through  the
Empire  :  howbeit,  their  too  much  love  is  to  him  an  assured
destruction.  These  are  the  Flower  of  the  Turkish
Infantry,  by  whom  such  wonderfull  victories  have  beene
atchieved.  They  call  the  Emperour  Father,  (for  none
other  is  there  for  them  to  depend  on)  to  whose  valour
and  faith  in  the  time  of  warre  hee  committeth  his  person,
they  having  their  stations  about  the  Royall  Pavillion.
They  serve  with  Harquebusses,  armed  besides  with
Cymiter,  and  Hatchets.  They  weare  on  their  heads  a
Bonnet  of  white  Felt,  with  a  flap  hanging  downe  behind
to  their  shoulders ;  adorned  about  the  browes  with  a
wreathe  of  Metall  gilt,  and  set  with  stones  of  small  value,
having  a  kind  of  sheathe  or  socket  of  the  same  erected
before,  wherein  such  are  suffered  to  sticke  Plumes  of
Feathers  as  have  behaved  themselves  extraordinary
bravely.  They  tucke  up  the  skirts  of  their  coats  when
they  fight  or  march,  and  carry  certaine  daies  provision  of
victuals  about  with  them,  nor  is  it  a  cumber,  it  being  no
more  then  a  small  portion  of  Rice,  and  a  little  Sugar  and
Hony.  When  the  Emperour  is  not  in  the  field,  the
most  of  them  reside  with  him  in  the  Citie :  ever  at  hand
upon  any  occasion  to  secure  his  person,  and  are  as  it  were
the  Pretorian  cohorts  with  the  Romanes.  They  are  in
number  about  fortie  thousand,  whereof  the  greater  part
(I  meane  of  those  that  attend  on  the  Court)  have  their
being  in  three  large  Serraglios,  where  the  Juniors  do  rever-
ence their  Seniors,  and  all  obey  their  severall  Commanders
(as  they  their  Aga)  with  much  silence  and  humilitie.
Many  of  them  that  are  married  (a  breach  of  their  first
institution)  have  their  private  dwellings  :  and  those  that
are  busied  in  forraine  imployments,  are  for  the  most  part
placed  in  such  Garrison  Townes  as  doe  greately  concerne
the  safetie  of  the  Empire ;  some  are  appointed  to  attend
on  Embassadours ;  others,  to  guard  such  particular  Chris-
tians as  will  be  at  the  charge,  both  about  the  Citie,  and  in
their  Travels, from  incivilities  and  violences, to  whom

]  26

GEORGE SANDYS  a.d.

1610.

they  are  in  themselves  most  faithfull :  wary  and  cruell,  in
preventing  and  revenging  their  dangers  and  injuries,  and
so  patient  in  bearing  abuses,  that  one  of  them  of  late
being  strucken  by  an  English-man,  (whose  humorous
swaggering  would  permit  him  never  to  review  his  Coun-
trey)  as  they  travelled  along  through  Morea,  did  not  onely
not  revenge  it,  nor  abandon  him  to  the  pillage  and  out-
rages of  others,  in  so  unknowne  and  savage  a  Countrey ;
but  conducting  him  unto  Zant  in  safetie,  saying,  God
forbid  that  the  villany  of  another  should  make  him  betray
the  charge  that  was  committed  to  his  trust.  They  are  of
one  Trade  or  other :  The  pay  that  they  have  from  the
Grand  Signior,  is  but  five  Aspers  a  day ;  yet  their  eldest
Sons  as  soone  as  borne,  are  inrolled,  and  received  into
pension,  but  his  bountie  extendeth  no  further  unto  his  L11-1^1^-
Progeny,  (the  rest  reputed  as  naturall  Turkes)  nor  is  a  I29°-J

Janizarie  capable  of  other  preferments  then  the  command,
of  ten,  of  twentie,  or  of  an  hundred.  They  have  yearely
given  them  two  Gownes  apeece  ;  the  one  of  Violet  cloath,
and  the  other  of  Stammell,  which  they  weare  in  the  Citie,
carrying  in  their  hands  a  great  tough  Reede,  some  seven
foote  long,  tipped  with  Silver,  the  weight  whereof  is  not
seldome  felt  by  such  as  displease  them.  Who  are  indeed
so  awfull,  that  Justice  dare  not  proceed  publikely  against
them  (they  being  onely  to  be  judged  by  their  Aga)  but
being  privatly  attached,  are  as  privatly  throwne  into  the
Sea  in  the  night  time.  But  then  are  they  most  tumul-
tuous (whereto  they  doe  give  the  name  of  affection)  upon
the  dangerous  sicknesses  of  their  Emperours,  and  upon
their  deaths  commit  many  out-rages.  Which  is  the  cause
that  the  great  Bassas  as  well  as  they  can,  do  conceale  it
from  them,  untill  all  things  be  provided  for  the  present-
ment of  the  next  for  them  to  salute.  Whereupon  (besides
the  present  larges)  they  have  an  Asper  a  day  increase  of
pension:  so  that  the  longer  they  live,  and  the  more
Emperours  they  out-live,  the  greater  is  their  allowance.

But  it  is  to  be  considered,  that  all  these  before  named,
are  not  onely  of  that  tribute  of  children. For  not  a  few

127

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1610.

of  them  are  captives  taken  in  their  child-hood,  with  divers
Renegados,  that  have  most  wickedly  quitted  their  Religion
and  Countrey,  to  fight  against  both,  who  are  to  the
Christians  the  most  terrible  Adversaries.  And  withall
they  have  of  late  infringed  their  ancient  customes,  by  the
admitting  of  those  into  these  orders  that  are  neither  the
Sonnes  nor  Grandsonnes  of  Christians ;  a  naturall  Turke
borne  in  Constantinople,  before  never  knowne,  being  now
a  Bassa  of  the  Port.

Tartars.  Over  and  above  these,  and  besides  the  auxiliary  Tartars,
whereof  there  are  lightly  threescore  thousand  (who  live  on
spoile,  and  serve  without  pay)  that  are  ever  assistant ; the

Aching.  Grand  Signior  hath  other  Forces,  whom  they  call  Achingi,
who  have  nothing  but  what  they  can  get  by  foraging,  being
Hindes  of  the  Countrey,  and  tyed  to  serve  on  Horse-
backe,  for  certaine  priviledges  that  they  hold,  in  number
about  thirtie  or  fortie  thousand : but  small  in  value,  as

Azapi.  are  the  Azapi,  who  serve  on  foote  (yet  properly  belonging
to  the  Gallies)  better  acquainted  with  the  Spade  then
Sword  ;  thrust  forward  with  purpose  rather  to  weary,  then
to  vanquish  the  enemy,  whose  dead  bodies  doe  serve  the
Janizaries  to  fill  up  ditches,  and  to  mount  the  walls  of
assaulted  Fortresses ;  besides  many  voluntaries,  who
follow  the  Army  in  hope  to  succeede  the  slaine  Spaheis  and
Janizaries,  now  nothing  curious  at  such  a  time  to  receive
those  that  bee  not  the  Sonnes  of  Christians  into  the  Order.
Such  are  the  Turkish  Forces,  both  in  qualitie  and  propor-
tion, and  hee  that  shall  see  three  hundred  thousand  of  these
in  an  Armie  (as  he  might  have  done  this  last  Sommer  in
Bithynia)  so  disciplined,  so  appointed,  and  so  daringly
resolute  :  whose  onely  repute  consists  in  their  valours ;
and  whose  defeats  are  punished  in  their  Commanders  as
offences,  furnished  with  such  abundance  of  great  Ordnance
(much  whereof  they  cast  according  to  their  occasions,
carrying  with  them  the  Metall  upon  the  backes  of  Camels)
will  not  onely  not  wonder  at  their  victories,  but  rather  how
the  rest  of  the  yet  unvanquished  world  hath  withstood
them. I  have  heard  a  Prince  (and  he  of  no  small  experi-

128

4*

M

3"

vaaia  Covfekia  ^XTAlCf  AR1AL I W^  .PA*,.*

1

HONDIUS HIS MAP OF  THE TURKISH EMPIRE

GEORGE SANDYS  a.d.

1610.

ence)  impute  the  sundry  overthrowes  given  them,  by  a
small  number  of  Christians,  to  the  paucitie  of  Com-
manders, and  their  want  of  experience,  some  one  Sanziack
having  under  his  conduct  five  thousand  Timariots ;  and
he  perhaps  but  newly  crept  out  of  the  Sultans  Serraglio,
exercised  onely  in  speculative  conflicts.  So  that  their
numbers  prove  often  but  cumbers,  and  the  advantage  losse,
encountred  by  the  many  expert  Directors  of  few,  who  are
also  farre  better  defensively  armed.  But  he  that  hath
bounded  the  Sea,  hath  also  limited  their  furies.  And
surely  it  is  to  bee  hoped,  that  their  greatnesse  is  not  onely
at  the  height,  but  neere  an  extreame  precipitation  :  the
body  being  growne  too  monstrous  for  the  head,  the  Sultans
unwarlike,  and  never  accompanying  their  Armies  in
person ;  the  Souldier  corrupted  with  ease  and  libertie,
drowned  in  prohibited  Wine,  enfeebled  with  the  continuall
converse  of  Women,  and  generally  lapsed  from  their
former  austeritie  of  life,  and  simplicitie  of  manners.  Their
valours  now  meeting  on  all  sides  with  opposition,  having
of  late  given  no  increase  to  their  Dominions,  and  Empire
so  got,  when  it  ceasseth  to  increase,  doth  begin  to  diminish.
Lastly,  in  that  it  hath  exceeded  the  observed  period  of  a
Tyrannie,  for  such  is  their  Empire.  Now  when  they
march,  the  Tartars  doe  scoure  the  Countrey  two  daies
journey  before,  then  follow  the  Achingi,  after  them  the
Timariots,  next  those  few  Jemoglans  that  be,  next  them
the  Janizaries,  the  Chauses  follow  on  horse-backe,  (who
carrie  Bowes  and  Arrowes,  besides  their  Mases  and
Cymiters)  then  comes  the  Sultan  with  the  Officers  of  his
Court,  and  Archers  of  his  Guard,  who  are  foot-men :  the
stipendarie  Spaheis  marching  on  either  side  of  him.  An
hundred  Coaches  covered  with  red,  with  foure  Horses
apeece,  are  drawne  after,  which  carrie  the  Hichoglans  (his
Pages)  and  Eunuchs ;  about  these  the  Jemoglans,  called
Baltagies,  are  placed.  The  carriages  of  the  Army  ensue,
followed  by  voluntaries,  who  goe  in  hope  (as  before  said)
to  bee  entertained  in  the  roomes  of  the  slaine,  with  the
Servants  of  the  Spaheis  of  the  Court,  and  certaine
viii  129  1

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1610.

Janizaries  Att-oglans  Lepzlers  and  Devigilers.  The
Janizaries  have  the  models  of  Elephants,  Boots,  Swords
of Wood, and the like, borne before them for their

Colours.  Ensignes ; and  the  Royall  Standard  is  no  other  then  a

J**** . Horse  taile  tied  to  the  end  of  a  staffe.

[Il.viii.  As  for  their  forces  at  Sea,  they  are  but  small  in  com-

129 1.] parison  of  what  they  have  beene,  and  compared  to  those  of

Sea  force.  particular  Christian  Princes,  but  contemptible.  Approved
by  the  Florentine,  who  with  sixe  ships  onely  hath  kept  the
bottome  of  the  Streights  for  these  three  yeeres  past  in
despite  of  them ;  insomuch  as  they  have  not  dared  to
hazard  the  revenue  of  JEgypt  by  Sea,  but  have  sent  it  over
Land  with  a  Guard  of  Souldiers,  to  their  no  small  trouble
and  expences :  the  whole  Armado  comming  often  in  view,
yet  not  so  hardie  as  to  adventure  the  onset.  The  Admirall
having  thought  it  a  safer  course  to  employ  the  Pirats  of
Tunis  and  Algers  in  that  service,  who  have  many  tall
ships  (the  spoile  of  Christian  Merchants)  and  warlikely
appointed  :  now  growne  expert  in  Navigation,  and  all  kind
of  Sea-fights,  by  the  wicked  instruction  of  our  fugitive
Pirats,  and  other  Renegados.  But  those  Pirats  have  no
heart  to  such  an  enterprise,  where  the  victorie  would  prove
so  bloudie,  and  the  bootie  so  worthlesse.  The  Navie  that
is  yeerly  set  forth  in  the  beginning  of  May,  to  annoy  the
Enemie,  suppresse  Pirats,  collect  Tribute,  and  reforme
disorders  in  the  Maritime  Townes  that  belong  to  the
Admiraltie,  consists  of  not  above  threescore  Gallies,  which
are  all  that  can  be  spared  from  their  other  places  of  imploy-
ment.  During  the  Winter  the  Armado  is  dispersed,  and
the  Gallies  are  drawne  into  their  drie  stations.  In  which
time  the  Pirats,  both  Christian  and  Mahometan,  doe  rob
on  the  iEgean  and  Mediterranean  Seas  uncontrolled,  but
by  the  defensive  strength  of  the  Assailed.  So  much  the
continuance  of  honors  in  Families  are  avoided,  that  when
a  Bassa  is  given  (for  so  I  may  terme  it)  to  the  Sister  or
Daughter  of  a  Sultan  for  an  husband,  the  children  begotten
on  them,  doe  most  rarely  rise  above  the  degree  of  a  private
Captaine. But  more  severe  are  these  Tyrants  to  their

130

GEORGE SANDYS  ad.

1610.

owne,  who  lop  all  the  Branches  from  the  Bole ;  the
unnaturall  Brother  solemnizing  his  Fathers  funerals,  with
the  slaughter  of  his  Brothers.  So  fearfull  are  they  of
rivalitie,  and  so  damnably  politike ;  making  all  things
lawfull  that  may  secure  the  perpetuitie  of  their  Empire.
Yet  they  mourne  for  those  being  dead,  whom  they
murdered ;  honoring  them  with  all  dues  of  buriall,  and
customarie  lamentations.  Now  if  the  Ottoman  Line
should  faile,  the  Crim  Tartar  is  to  succeed  (both  being  of
one  Familie,  and  of  one  Religion)  as  the  Turke  the  Tartar  ;
who  hath  at  this  day  the  election  of  the  Tartarian
Emperours :  but  with  this  limitation,  that  hee  is  to  bee
one  of  the  sonnes  of  the  deceassed.

They  are  commanded  seven  times  a  day  to  resort  unto
publike  Prayers :  the  first  assembling  is  called  Timgil-
namas,  which  is  two  houres  before  day :  the  second
Sabah-namas,  at  day  breake :  the  third  Vyle-namas,  at
noone  :  the  fourth  Kyndy-namas,  at  three  of  the  clocke :
the  fift  Aksham-namas,  after  Sunne-set :  the  sixth  Ghogic-
namas,  two  houres  within  night :  and  the  seventh
Giuma-namas,  at  ten  of  the  clocke  in  the  morning :  the
last  also  on  Fridayes  observed  by  all,  at  other  times  but
by  the  more  religious.  Congregated  (as  aforesaid)  by  the
chanting  of  the  Priests  from  the  tops  of  steeples  :  at  which
times  lightly,  though  they  be  in  the  fields,  they  will  spread
their  upper  garments  on  the  earth,  and  fall  to  their
devotions.  Moreover,  I  have  seene  them  conjoyntly  pray
in  the  corners  of  the  streets,  before  the  opening  of  their
shops  in  the  morning.  Friday  is  their  Sabbath ;  and  yet  TheirSabbath.
they  spend  but  a  part  thereof  in  devotion,  and  the  rest  in
recreations  :  but  for  that  time  they  observe  it  so  rigorously,
that  a  Turke  here  lately  had  his  eares  nayled  to  his  shop-
boord  for  opening  it  too  timely.  Before  they  pray,  they
wash  all  the  Organs  of  their  senses ;  their  legs  to  their
knees,  and  their  armes  to  their  elbowes :  their  privities
after  the  purgings  of  nature ;  and  sometimes  all  over  from
top  to  toe :  for  which  there  are  houses  of  office  with
conduits  belonging  to  every  principall  Mosque. Where

131

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1610.

water  is  wanting,  they  doe  it  with  dust.  At  the  doore  of
the  Mosque  they  put  off  their  shooes ;  and  entring,  sit
crosse  legged  upon  rewes  of  Mats,  one  behind  another,  the
poore  and  the  rich  promiscuously.  The  Priest  in  a  Pulpit
before  them,  not  otherwise  distinguished  in  habite  but  by

TheirPrayers.  the  folding  up  of  his  Turbant.  When  they  pray,  they
turne  their  faces  towards  Mecha :  first  standing  upright,
without  any  motion  of  their  bodies,  holding  the  palmes  of
their  hands  upward ;  sometimes  they  stop  their  eyes  and
eares,  and  oft  pull  the  haire  on  the  sides  of  their  faces :
then  thrice  they  bow,  as  in  their  salutations ;  and  as  often
prostrating  themselves  on  the  earth,  doe  kisse  it.  Doing
this  sundrie  times,  they  will  looke  backe  upon  no  occasion,
untill  they  come  unto  the  salutation  of  Mahomet :  at  which
time  they  reverse  their  faces,  first  over  the  right  shoulder,
and  then  over  the  left ;  beleeving  that  his  comming  will
be  behind  them  when  they  are  at  their  devotions.  The
Priest  doth  somtimes  reade  unto  them  some  part  of  the
Alcoran  (holding  it,  in  reverence  to  the  booke,  as  high  as
his  chin)  sometimes  some  of  their  fabulous  Legend,  inter-
mixing Expositions  and  Instructions,  which  they  hearken
unto  with  heedie  attention,  and  such  steadie  positures  of

Lyturgie.  body,  as  if  they  were  intranced.  Their  Service  is  mixed
with  Songs  and  Responses :  and  when  all  is  done,  they
stroke  downe  their  faces  and  beards  with  lookes  of  devout
gravitie.  If  they  finde  a  Paper  in  the  streets,  they  will
thrust  it  in  some  Crevice  of  the  adjoyning  wall ;  imagining
that  the  name  of  God  may  be  contayned  therein,  and  then
prophane  to  be  trod  under  foot,  or  otherwise  defiled.  They
number  their  often  repetition  of  the  Names  of  God  and  his
Attributes  (with  other  short  ejaculations  of  Prayer  and
Praise)  upon  Beades  :  some  shaking  their  heads  incessantly,
untill  they  turne  giddie :  perhaps  in  imitation  of  the
supposed  trances  (but  naturally  infirmitie)  of  their  Prophet.

Monkes.  And they have an Order of Monkes, who are called

[Il.viii.  Dervises, whom I have often seene to dance in their

1 292.]  Mosques,  on  Tuesdayes  and  Fridayes,  many  together,  to

the  sound  of  barbarous  musicke ; dances  that  consist  of

132

GEORGE SANDYS  a.d.

1610.

continuall  turnings,  untill  at  a  certayne  stroke  they  fall

upon  the  earth,  and  lying  along  like  beasts,  are  thought  to

be  rapt  in  spirit  unto  celestiall  conversations. Now  the

Women  are  not  permitted  to  come  into  their  Temples  (yet

have  they  secret  places  to  looke  in  through  Grates)  partly

for  troubling  their  devotions,  but  especially  for  that  they

are not circumcised, as are the women of Persia and

^Ethiopia. Nor  circumcise  they  the  Males  untill  they  be

able  to  answere  the  Priest,  and  promise  for  themselves,

which  is  for  the  most  part  at  the  age  of  eight. They  are

circumcised  in  the  houses  of  their  Parents,  at  a  festivall

meeting,  and  in  the  midst  of  the  Assembly,  the  Child

holding up his fore-finger, in token that he is a

Mahometan. As  soone  as  cut, the  Priest  washeth  the

wound  in  water  and  salt,  and  bindeth  it  in  linnen. Who

changeth  not  his  name,  but  is  from  thenceforth  called  a

Musselman,  which  is,  a  true  Beleever. This  done,  he  is

carryed  unto  the  Bannia,  where  his  haire  (before  that  time

worne  at  full  length)  is  shaven,  and  so  kept  ever  after,  all

saving  a  locke  on  the  top  of  his  crowne ; by  which  they

dreame that they shall be assumed by Mahomet into

Paradise : then  put  they  on  him  a  white  Turbant ; and

so returning with Drums and Hoboys, is with great

solemnitie  conducted  to  the  Mosque,  and  presented  with

gifts  according  to  his  qualitie.

The  Turkes  doe  fast  one  moneth  in  the  yeere,  which  Lent.

they  call  Ramazan : which  changeth  yeerly  (so that  in

thirteene  yeeres  they  fast  one)  wherein,  they  say,  that  the

Alcoran was delivered unto Mahomet by the Angell.

Observed by all but the Infirme and Travellers :

who are to fast for as long a time, when so they

recover, or come to the end of their  journey. But

they fast but during the day, in the night they

feast,  and  then  are  all  their  steeples  stucke  round  with

Lamps,  which  burne  till  the  morning,  affording  an  object

of  great  solemnitie. Such  as  in  stead  of  abstayning  from

meates,  doe  abstayne  at  that  time  from  their  Mosques,

they  carrie  about  in  scorne,  and  severely  chastise  ;  but  such

133

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1610.

as  then  drinke  wine,  they  punish  with  death.  Upon  the
discoverie  of  the  new  Moone  (which  they  superstitiously
gratulate,  esteeming  him  happy  that  discovereth  it  first,
and  by  the  course  thereof  doe  reckon  their  yeere)  falling
out  this  yeere  on  the  seventh  of  December,  the  feast  of
the  great  Byram  did  begin,  which  doth  continue  for  three
dayes  together,  observed  by  them  as  Easter  is  with  us.
On  the  first  day  the  Grand  Signior  riding  to  Sancta  Sophia,
in  all  the  pompe  and  glorie  of  Empire  (of  which  we  shall
Desperate  speake  hereafter)  upon  his  returne  we  saw  a  sort  of
impietie.  Christians,  some  of  them  halfe  earth  alreadie,  crooked  with
age,  and  trembling  with  palsies ;  who  by  the  throwing
away  of  their  Bonnets,  and  lifting  up  of  their  fore-fingers,
did  proffer  themselves  to  become  Mahometans.  A  sight
full  of  horror  and  trouble,  to  see  those  desperate  wretches
that  had  professed  Christ  all  their  life,  and  had  suffered
no  doubt  for  his  sake  much  contumely  and  oppression ;
now  almost  dying,  to  forsake  their  Redeemer,  even  then
when  they  were  to  receive  the  reward  of  their  patience.
To  these  the  Tyrant  a  little  inclined  his  body,  who  before
not  so  much  as  cast  his  eye  aside,  but  sate  like  the  adored
statue  of  an  Idoll.  For  they  hold  it  a  great  grace,  and  an
act  of  singular  pietie,  to  draw  many  to  their  Religion,
presenting  them  with  money,  change  of  rayments,  and
Gravitie.  freeing  them  from  all  Tribute  and  Taxes.  Insomuch,
that  if  a  Christian  have  deserved  death  by  their  Law,  if
hee  will  convert,  they  will  many  times  remit  his  punish-
ment. But  they  compell  no  man.  During  this  festivall
they  exercise  themselves  with  various  pastimes,  but  none
more  in  use,  and  more  barbarous,  then  their  swinging  up
and  downe,  as  Boyes  doe  in  Bell-ropes :  for  which  there
bee  Gallowses  (for  they  beare  that  forme)  of  an  exceeding
height,  erected  in  sundrie  places  of  the  Citie ;  when  by
two  joyning  Ropes  that  are  fastned  above,  they  will  swing
themselves  as  high  as  the  transome :  perhaps  affected  in
that  it  stupifies  the  senses  for  a  season :  the  cause  that
Opium  is  so  much  in  request,  and  of  their  foresaid  shaking
of their heads, and continued turnings. In regard

i34

GEORGE SANDYS  a.d.

1610.

whereof,  they  have  such  as  have  lost  their  wits,  and  Whether  are
naturall  Idiots,  in  high  veneration,  as  men  ravished  in  the?°J!F^
spirit,  and  taken  from  themselves,  as  it  were  to  the  fellow-
ship of  Angels.  These  they  honour  with  the  Title  of
Saints,  lodge  them  in  their  Temples,  some  of  them  going
almost  starke  naked ;  others  clothed  in  shreds  of  severall
colours,  whose  necessities  are  supplyed  by  the  peoples
devotions,  who  kisse  their  Garments  as  they  passe  through
the  streets,  and  bow  to  their  benedictions ;  yea,  many  by
counterfeiting  the  Idiot  have  avoided  punishment  for
offences  which  they  have  unwittingly  fallen  into.  Whilst
the  Byram  lasteth,  you  cannot  stirre  abroad  but  you  shall
be  presented  by  the  Dervises  and  Janizaries,  with  tulips
and  trifles,  besprinkling  you  with  sweet  water ;  nor  ceasse
so  to  doe,  till  they  have  drawne  Rewards  from  you.

The  Turkes  are  incouraged  to  almes  by  their  Alcoran,  as
acceptable  to  God,  and  meritorious  in  it  selfe,  if  given
without  vaine-glorie,  and  of  goods  well  gotten,  alledging
it  to  be  a  temptation  of  the  Devils,  to  abstayne  from
Almes,  for  feare  of  impoverishment.  Their  more  publike
Almes  consist  in  sacrifices  (if  not  so  wrongfully  termed)
upon  their  festivals,  or  performance  of  vowes :  when
Sheepe  and  Oxen  are  slaine  by  the  Priest,  and  divided
amongst  the  Poore,  the  Owner  not  so  much  as  retayning
a  part  thereof.  They  say,  they  give  much  in  private  :  and
in  truth,  I  have  seene  but  few  Beggers  amongst  them.
Yet  sometimes  shall  you  meet  in  the  streets  with  couples
chained  together  by  the  necke,  who  beg  to  satisfie  their
Creditors  in  part,  and  are  at  the  yeeres  end  released  of  [H.viii.
their  Bonds,  provided  that  they  make  satisfaction  if  they  I293-J

prove  afterward  able.  At  their  deaths  they  usually  give
Legacies  for  the  release  of  Prisoners,  the  freeing  of  Bond-
slaves, repayring  of  Bridges,  building  of  Canes  for  the
reliefe  of  Passengers :  and  the  great  men,  to  the  erecting
of  Mosques  and  Hospitals,  which  they  build  not  seldome
in  their  life  time.  But  Mahomet  the  Great,  and  Solyman
the  Magnificent,  have  in  that  kind  exceeded  all  others :
whose stately and sumptuous structures doe give a

J35

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1610.

principall  ornament  to  the  Citie ;  where  the  sicke  and
impotent  are  provided  for,  and  the  stranger  entertayned
(for  here  bee  no  Innes)  the  revenue  of  that  of  Mahomets,
amounting  to  an  hundred  and  fiftie  thousand  Sultanies.
To  these  there  belong  Physicians,  Chyrurgions,  Apothe-
caries, the  charge  thereof  committed  unto  their  Priests,
who  bring  up  a  certayne  number  of  youths  in  the
Mahometan  Law,  and  frequently  pray  for  the  departed
soules  of  the  Founders  in  the  Chappels  of  their  Sepulchres.
They  extend  their  charitie  to  Christians  and  Jewes,  as  well
as  to  them  of  their  owne  Religion ;  nay,  Birds  and  Beasts
have  a  taste  thereof.  For  many  onely  to  let  them  loose,
will  buy  Birds  in  Cages,  and  bread  to  give  unto  Dogges ;
for  most  have  in  this  Citie  no  particular  owners,  being
reputed  an  uncleane  Creature,  and  therefore  not  suffered
to  come  into  their  houses,  thinking  it  neverthelesse  a  deed
of  pietie,  to  feede  and  provide  them  kennels  to  litter  in,
most  of  them  repairing  to  the  Sea  side  nightly,  where  they
keep  such  a  howling,  that  if  the  wind  sit  South-ward,
they  may  be  easily  heard  to  the  upper  side  of  the  Citie
of  Pera.

With  the  Stoicks  they  attribute  all  accidents  to  destinie,
and  constellations  at  birth.  Since  death  can  be  neither
hastned  nor  avoided,  being  withall  perswaded,  that  they
die  bravely  that  die  fighting :  and  that  they  shall  be
rewarded  with  Paradise  that  doe  spend  their  bloud  upon
the  enemies  of  their  Religion,  called  Shahids,  which  is
Martyrs,  by  them.  For  although  they  repute  murder  to
be  an  execrable  crime,  that  cries  to  Heaven  for  vengeance,
and  is  never  forgiven  :  yet  are  they  commanded  by  their
law,  to  extend  their  profession  by  violence,  and  without
compassion  to  slaughter  their  Opposers.  But  they  live
with  themselves  in  such  exemplary  concord,  that  during
the  time  that  I  remained  amongst  them  (it  being  above
Mahometans three  quarters  of  a  yeare)  I  never  saw  Mahometan  offer

may  in  t  is  e  v}0ience  to  a  Mahometan,  nor  breake  into  ill  language :
examples  to  .  ~  .  ^ v

Christians. but  if  they  so  chance  to  do,  a  third  will  reprove  him,  with,

Fie,  Mussel-men,  fall  out! and  all  is  appeased. He  that

136

GEORGE SANDYS  ad.

1610.

gives  a  blow  hath  many  gashes  made  in  his  flesh,  and  is
led  about  for  a  terror,  but  the  man-slayer  is  delivered  to
the  kindred  or  friends  of  the  slaine,  to  bee  by  them  put  to
death  with  all  exquisite  torture.

§.  in.

The  Muftie,  Cadileschiers,  Divans:  Manners  and
attire  of  the  Turkes.  The  Sultan  described,
and  his  Customes  and  Court.  The  Customes
of  the  Greekes. Sir  Tho:  Glover.

He  dignitie  of  the  Chaliph  amongst  the  Turkes,
with  much  abatement,  doth  now  remaine  in  the
Mufties  (which  name  doth  signifie  An  Oracle,  or  The  Mufti.
Answerer  of  doubts)  as  Successors  to  Ebbubecher,  Omar
and  Ozman ;  the  other  being  both  High-Priests  and
Princes ;  these  Patriarchs,  as  it  were,  and  Soveraignes  of
their  Religion.  Throughout  the  whole  Turkish  Territories,
there  is  but  one,  who  ever  resideth  in  the  Royall  Citie,  or
followes  the  person  of  the  Emperour.  He  is  equall  to
the  ancient  Popes,  or  rather  greater  both  in  repute  and
authoritie.  The  Grand  Signior  doth  rise  at  his  approach
to  salute  him,  and  sets  him  by  him,  and  gives  him  much
reverence.  His  life  is  onely  free  from  the  Sword,  and  his
fortunes  most  rarely  subject  to  subversion.  The  Emperour
undertaketh  no  high  designe  without  his  approvement.
He  hath  power  to  reverse  both  his  sentence,  and  the
sentence  of  the  Divan,  if  they  be  not  adjudged  by  him
conformable  to  the  Alcoran,  but  his  owne  is  irrevocable.
In  matters  of  difficultie  they  repaire  to  him,  and  his
exposition  standeth  for  a  Law.  To  conclude,  he  is  the
supreme  Judge,  and  rectifier  of  all  actions,  as  well  Civill
as  Ecclesiasticall,  and  an  approver  of  the  Justice  of  the
Militarie.  The  place  is  given  by  the  Grand  Signiors,  to
men  profoundly  learned  in  their  Law,  and  of  knowne
integritie.  He  seldome  stirres  abroad,  and  never  admits
of  impertinent  conversation.  Grave  is  his  looke,  grave  is
his  behaviour ; Highly  affecting  silence,  and  most  spare

x37

A.D.
l6lO.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

[II.

Vlll,

of  speech.  For  when  any  come  to  him  for  judgement,
they  deliver  him  in  writing  the  state  of  the  question,  who
in  writing  briefly  returnes  his  oraculous  answer.  He
commonly  weareth  a  vest  of  greene,  and  the  greatest
Turbant  in  the  Empire :  I  should  not  speake  much  out  of
compasse,  should  I  say  as  large  in  compasse  as  a  bushell.
I  oft  have  beene  in  this  mans  Serraglio,  which  is  neither
great  in  receit  nor  beautie,  yet  answerable  to  his  small
dependancie,  and  infrequencie  of  Sutors.  He  keepeth  in
his  house  a  Seminarie  of  Boyes,  who  are  instructed  in  the
mysteries  of  their  Law.  He  is  not  restrained,  nor
restraineth  himselfe  from  pluralitie  of  Women.  His
incomes  are  great,  his  disbursings  little,  and  consequently
his  wealth  infinite ;  yet  he  is  a  bad  paymaster  of  his  debts,
I294-J  though  they  be  but  trifles.  He  much  delighteth  in
Clockes  and  Watches,  whereof,  as  some  say,  he  hath  not
so  few  as  a  thousand.

Cadikschiers.  Next  in  place  to  the  Muftie,  are  the  Cadileschiers,  that
are  Judges  of  the  Armies,  (but  not  to  meddle  with  the
Janisarie)  and  accompany  the  Beglerbegs  when  they  goe
into  the  field.  Of  these  there  are  onely  two  ;  one  of  the
European  part  of  the  Empire,  and  another  of  the  Asian.
These  are  also  elected  by  the  Grand  Signior,  as  the  Cadies
by  them,  (yet  to  bee  allowed  by  the  other,  and  to  kisse  his
Vest : )  of  whom  there  is  one  in  every  Towne,  who  besides
their  spirituall  Functions,  doe  administer  Justice  betweene
partie  and  partie,  and  punish  offenders.  Of  inferior
Priests,  there  be  some  particularly  appointed  to  sing  at  the
tops  of  their  steeples,  and  to  congregate  the  people ;  some
to  looke  to  the  Ceremonies,  and  some  to  reade  and  interpret
the  Alcoran.  There  are  also  other  religious  Orders,  which
I  omit  to  speak  of,  being  of  their  owne  taking  up,  neither
commanded  nor  commended,  and  rather  to  be  esteemed
Vagabonds  then  religious  persons,  consider  we  either  their
life  or  their  habits.

Testimonie.  Among the Turkish Commandements, one is that

drawne  originally  from  our  Saviours,  Thou  shalt  not  doe
what  thou  wouldst  not  have  done  to  thee :  whereupon  for

«8

iv  an.

GEORGE SANDYS  a.d.

1610.

the  most  part  their  Civill  Justice  is  grounded,  not  dis-
agreeing greatly  from  the  Lawes  of  Moses.  All  evictions
there,  as  elsewhere  depend  upon  Witnesses :  yet  will  not
the  oath  of  a  Christian  or  a  Jew  be  received  against  a
Turke,  as  will  a  Turkes  against  them,  and  theirs  one
against  another.  But  the  kindred  of  Mahomet  have  their
single  testimonies  in  equall  value  with  the  testimonies  of
two  others :  notwithstanding  the  oath  of  a  Mahometan
will  not  be  taken,  if  impeached  for  a  drinker  of  Wine,  or
eater  of  Swines  flesh.  Every  Bassa  keepes  a  Divan  (so  The  D
they  call  the  Court  of  Justice)  within  his  Province :  but
the  highest  of  all,  and  to  which  they  may  appeale  from  all
other,  is  that,  which  is  kept  foure  daies  of  the  weeke  in  the
Grand  Signiors  Serraglio,  from  whence  no  appeale  is
admitted  but  to  the  person  of  the  Muftie.  Here  the
Vizier  Bassas  of  the  Port,  who  are  nine  in  number  (or  as  They  were
many  as  then  are  not  otherwise  employed) doe  sit  in  Mmerb  but

T • / 1  1t  \ r  r  c-  1  joure,  to  whom

Justice  (where  also  they  consult  or  matters  or  btate,  and  Mahomet  the
that publikely, not excepting against Embassadours  third  added
Drogermen,  lightly  alwaies  present : so  presume  they  of  five.
strong  hand)  assisted  by  the  *Admirall,  and  *  Chancellor,  *Ca/>utain
(the  *  Treasurer  in  the  same  roome  keeping  his  Court)  +  pS.a',.
where  all  causes  whatsoever  that  are  heard,  within  the  space  *Testedar
of  three  daies  are  determined,  the  Great  Viziers  Bassa  being
President  of  the  rest. But  Briberie,  not  knowne  untill
lately  amongst  them,  hath  so  corrupted  their  integritie,
that  whose  causes  (if  they  beare  but  a  colour  of  right)  doe
seldome  miscarrie  where  gifts  are  the  Advocates :  yet  this
is  the  best  of  the  worst,  that  they  quickly  know  their  suc-
cesses. But  many  times  when  the  oppressed  subjects  can
have  no  Justice,  they  will  in  troupes  attend  the  comming
forth  of  the  Emperor,  and  by  burning  Straw  on  their
heads,  or  holding  up  Torches,  provoke  his  regard : who
brought  unto  him  by  his  Mutes,  doth  receive  his  petition,
which  oftentimes  turnes  to  the  ruine  of  some  of  those  great
ones. For  assurances  of  Purchases,  they  have  no  Inden-  Assurances
tures,  no  fines  and  recoveries. The  omitting  of  a  word writings.
cannot  frustrate  their  estates  ; nor  Quirks  of  Law  prevaile

139

A.D.

l6lO.

Punishments.

Their  persons
and  Manners.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

against  Conscience.  All  that  they  have  to  shew,  is  a  little
Scedule,  called  a  Hodget  or  Sigil,  onely  manifesting  the
possession  of  the  Seller,  as  his  of  whom  he  bought  it,  or
from  whom  it  descended  unto  him,  which  under-written
by  the  Cadie  of  the  place,  doth  frustrate  all  after-claimes
whatsoever.

Now  the  punishments  for  offenders,  be  either  Pecuniarie
or  Corporal!.  To  impose  the  former,  they  will  forge  all
the  slanders  that  they  can,  to  eate  upon  the  lesse  circum-
spect Christians,  but  the  other  are  seldome  unjustly
inflicted.  Their  formes  of  putting  to  death,  (besides  such
as  are  common  else-where)  are  impaling  upon  stakes,
ganching  (which  is  to  be  let  fall  from  on  high  upon  hookes,
and  there  to  hang  untill  they  die  by  the  anguish  of  their
wounds,  or  more  miserable  famine,)  and  another  invented
(but  now  not  here  used)  to  the  terror  of  mankind,  by  some
devillish  Perillus,  who  deserved  to  have  first  tasted  of  his
owne  invention,  viz :  they  twitch  the  offender  about  the
waste  with  a  Towell,  enforcing  him  to  draw  up  his  breath
by  often  pricking  him  in  the  body,  untill  they  have  drawne
him  within  the  compasse  of  a  spanne ;  then  tying  it  hard,
they  cut  him  off  in  the  middle,  and  setting  the  body  on
a  hot  plate  of  Copper,  which  seareth  the  veines,  they  so
up-propping  him  during  their  cruell  pleasure :  who  not
onely  retaineth  his  sense,  but  the  faculties  of  Discourse,
untill  hee  be  taken  downe,  and  then  departeth  in  an  instant.
But  little  faults  are  chastised  by  blowes,  received  on  the
soles  of  the  feet  with  a  bastinado,  by  hundred  at  a  time,
according  to  the  qualitie  of  the  misdemeanor.  A  terrible
paine  that  extendeth  to  all  the  part  of  the  body,  yet  have  I
seene  them  taken  for  money.  The  Master  also  in  this
sort  doth  correct  his  Slave ;  but  Parents  their  Children
with  stripes  on  the  belly.  The  Subashie  is  as  the
Constable  of  a  Citie,  both  to  search  out,  and  punish
offences.

It  remayneth  now  that  we  speake  of  the  persons  of  the
Turkes,  their  dispositions,  manners  and  fashions.  They
be  generally  well  complexioned,  of  good  statures,  and  full

140

GEORGE SANDYS

A.D.

l6lO.

bodies,  proportionably  compacted.  They  nourish  no  haire
about  them,  but  a  Locke  on  the  crowne,  and  on  their
faces  onely ;  esteeming  it  more  cleanly,  and  to  bee  the
better  prepared  for  their  superstitious  washings.  But
their  Beards  they  weare  at  full  length,  the  marke  of  their
affected  gravitie,  and  token  of  freedome,  (for  slaves  have  [II.  mi.

Turbants.

theirs  shaven)  insomuch  that  they  will  scoffe  at  such
Christians  as  cut,  or  naturally  want  them,  as  if  suffering
themselves  to  be  abused  against  nature.  All  of  them
weare  on  their  heads  white  Shashes  and  Turbants,  the  £?^7r
badge  of  their  Religion,  as  is  the  folding  of  the  one,  and
size  of  the  other,  of  their  vocations  and  qualitie.  Shashes  Shashes.
are  long  Towels  of  Callico  woond  about  their  heads :
Turbants  are  made  like  great  Globes  of  Callico  too,  and
thwarted  with  Rols  of  the  same ;  having  little  copped
Caps  on  the  top,  of  Greene  or  Red  Velvet,  being  onely
worne  by  persons  of  ranke,  and  he  the  greatest  that  weareth
the  greatest,  the  Mufties  excepted,  which  over-sizes  the
Emperours.  And  though  many  Orders  have  particular
Ornaments  appointed  for  their  heads,  yet  weare  they  these
promiscuously.  It  is  an  especiall  favour  in  the  Turke  to
suffer  the  Christian  Tributarie  Princes  and  their  chiefest
Nobles  to  weare  white  heads  in  the  Citie :  but  in  them,
what  better  then  an  Apostaticall  Insinuation?  But  to
beginne  from  the  skinne,  the  next  that  they  weare  is  a
Smock  of  Callico,  with  ample  sleeves,  much  longer  then  Ca^°
their  Armes :  under  this  a  paire  of  Calsouns  of  the  same,
which  reach  to  their  ancles,  the  rest  naked ;  and  going  in
Yellow  or  Red  Slip-shooes,  picked  at  the  toe,  and  plated  on
the  sole :  over  all  they  weare  a  halfe-sleeved  Coate  girt
unto  them  with  a  Towell :  their  necke  all  bare,  and  this
within  doores  is  their  Sommer  accoutrement.  Over  all
when  they  goe  abroad  they  weare  Gownes,  some  with  wide  Gownes,
halfe  sleeves,  (which  more  particularly  belong  to  the
Grecians,)  others  with  long  hanging  sleeves,  and  the
Gownes  buttened  before,  and  a  third  sort  worne  by  the
meaner  sort,  reaching  but  a  little  below  the  knee,  with
hanging  sleeves  not  much  longer  then  the  arme,  and  open

141

1295.]

A.D.

l6lO.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

before  ;  but  all  of  them  ungathered  in  the  shoulders.  In
the  Winter  they  adde  to  the  former,  Calsouns  of  Cloth,
which  about  the  small  of  the  legge  are  sewed  to  short
smooth  Buskins  of  Leather  without  soles,  fit  for  the  foote
as  a  Glove  for  the  hand,  lining  their  Gownes  with  Furre,
as  they  doe  their  Coats  ;  having  then  the  sleeves  (or  quilted
Waist-coats  under  them)  reaching  close  to  their  wrists.
They  weare  no  Gloves.  At  their  Girdles  they  weare  long
Handkerchers,  some  of  them  admirable  for  value  and
workmanship.  They  never  alter  their  fashions,  not  greatly
differing  in  the  great  and  vulgar,  more  then  in  the  rich-
nesse.  Cloth  or  Tissue,  of  Gold  and  Silver,  Velvet,
Scarlet,  Sattin,  Damaske,  Chamolets,  lined  with  Sables,  and
other  costly  Furres,  and  with  Martins,  Squerrils,  Foxes
and  Cony-skins  ;  worne  according  to  their  severall  qualities.
But  the  common  weare  is  Violet  Cloth.  They  retayne  the
old  Worlds  custome  in  giving  change  of  Garments,  which
they  may  aptly  doe,  when  one  Vest  fitteth  all  men,  and  is  of
every  mans  fashion.

Gierke  attire.  The  Clergie  goe  much  in  Greene,  it  being  Mahomets
colour  ;  and  his  Kinsmen  in  greene  Shashes,  who  are  called
Emers,  which  is  Lords :  the  women  also  weare  something
of  Greene  on  their  heads,  to  be  knowne.  There  lives  not
a  Race  of  ill-favoureder  people ;  branded  perhaps  by  God
for  the  sinne  of  their  seducing  Ancestor,  and  their  owne
wicked  assuming  of  hereditary  holinesse.  But  if  a
Christian  out  of  ignorance  weare  Greene,  hee  shall  have
his  clothes  torne  off  from  his  backe,  and  perhaps  be  well
beaten. They  carrie  no  Weapons  about  them  in  the  Citie  ;

Their  Knives,  onely  they  thrust  under  their  Girdles  great  crooked  Knives
of  a  Dagger-like  size,  in  sheathes  or  Metall ;  the  Hafts
and  Sheathes  of  many  beeing  set  with  stones,  and  some
of  them  worth  five  hundred  Sultanies.  They  beare  their
bodies  upright,  of  a  stately  gate,  and  elated  countenance.
In  their  familiar  salutations  they  lay  their  hands  on  their
bosomes,  and  a  little  decline  their  bodies :  but  when  they
salute  a  person  of  great  ranke,  they  bow  almost  to  the
ground, and kisse the hemme of his Garment. The

142

Emers
deformed.

Gate.

GEORGE SANDYS  a.d.

1610.

ornaments  of  their  heads  they  never  put  off  upon  any
occasion.  Some  of  them  perfume  their  Beards  with
Amber,  and  the  in-sides  of  their  Turbants  :  and  all  of  them
affect  cleanlinesse  so  religiously,  that  besides  their  custom-
arie  Lotions,  and  daily  frequenting  of  the  Bannias,  they
never  so  much  as  make  water,  but  they  wash  both  their  Cleannesse.
hands  and  privities :  at  which  businesse  they  sequester
themselves,  and  couch  to  the  Earth  ;  reviling  the  Christian
whom  they  see  pissing  against  a  wall,  and  sometimes
striking  him.  This  they  doe  to  prevent  that  any  part  of
either  excrement  should  touch  their  Garments,  esteeming  °Jfices  °f
it  a  pollution,  and  hindering  the  acceptation  of  Prayer,
who  then  are  to  bee  most  pure  in  heart  and  habite.

So  slouthfull  they  be,  that  they  never  walke  up  and  Sloth.
downe for recreation, nor use any other exercise but
shooting,  wherein  they  take  as  little  paines  as  may  bee,
sitting  on  Carpets  in  the  shadow,  and  sending  their  Slaves
for  their  Arrowes. They  also  shoote  against  Earthen  wals  ;  Shooting.
ever  kept moyst  in shops  and  private  houses  for that
purpose,  standing  not  above  sixe  paces  from  the  marke,
and  that  with  such  violence,  that  the  Arrow  passes  not
seldome  through : nay,  I  have  seene  their  Arrowes  shot
by  our  Embassadour  through  Targets  of  Steele,  pieces  of
Brasse  two  inches  thicke ; and  through  wood,  with  an
Arrow  headed  with  wood,  of  eight  inches. Their  Bowes  Bowes.
are  for  forme  and  length,  not  unlike  the  Lath  of  a  large
Crosse-bow,  made  of  the  homes  of  Buffoloes,  intermixed
with  sinewes,  of  admirable  workmanship,  and some  of
them  exquisitely  gilded. Although  there  bee  Wrastlers  Wrestlers.
amongst  them,  yet  they  bee  such  as  doe  it  to  delight  the
people,  and  do  make  it  their  profession ; as  do  those  that
walke  upon  Ropes,  wherein  the  Turkes  are  most  expert ;
going  about  when  they  have  done, to  every  particular
Spectator  for  his  voluntary  benevolence. Of  Cards  and  Games.
Dice  they  are  happily  ignorant ; but  at  Chesse  they  will
play  all  the  day  long :  a  sport  that  agreeth  well  with  their  [H.viii.
sedentarie  vacancie  ;  wherein  notwithstanding  they  avoyde  1296.]

the  dishonest  hazard  of  money.

*43

A.D.

l6lO.
Horses.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Reverence  to
Superiors.

Left  hand
before  right.

The  better  sort  take  great  delight  in  their  Horses,  which
are  beautifull  to  the  eye,  and  well  ridden  for  service,  but
quickly  jaded  if  held  to  a  good  round  trot  (for  amble  they
doe  not)  in  an  indifferent  Journey.  But  theTurkes  doe  not
lightly  ride  so  fast  as  to  put  them  unto  eyther.  Their
Saddles  be  hard  and  deepe,  though  not  great,  plated
behind  and  before ;  and  some  of  them  with  Silver,  as  are
their  massie  Stirrops,  and  the  Reines  of  their  Bridles,  suted
unto  their  costly  Caparisons.  When  they  stand  in  the
Stable  they  feed  them  for  the  most  part,  if  not  altogether,
with  Barley  ;  being  heere  of  small  value,  and  onely  serving
for  that  purpose.  They  litter  them  in  their  owne  dung,
first  dryed  in  the  Sunne  and  pulverated,  which  keepes  their
skinnes  cleane,  smoth,  and  shining.

The  Turkes  doe  greatly  reverence  their  Parents,  (so
commanded  to  doe  by  their  Law)  as  the  Inferiour  his
Superiour,  and  the  young  aged,  readily  giving  the  prioritie
to  whom  it  belongeth,  (the  left  hand  as  they  goe  in  the
streets  preferd  before  the  right,  in  that  made  Masters
thereby  of  the  Sword  of  the  other,  and  the  chiefest  place
the  farthest  from  the  wall)  living  together  as  if  all  of  a
Hospitalitie.  Brother-hood.  Yet  give  they  no  entertaynment  unto  one
another,  nor  come  there  any  into  their  houses  but  upon
speciall  occasion,  and  those  but  into  the  publike  parts
thereof ;  their  women  being  never  seene  but  by  the  Nurses
and  Eunuches  which  attend  on  them.  Yea,  so  jealous
they  are,  that  their  Sonnes  when  they  come  to  growth  are
separated  from  them.  As  their  houses  are  meane,  so  are
their  furnitures :  having  nothing  on  the  in-side  but  bare
white  walls,  unlesse  it  be  some  especiall  roome,  in  the
house  of  some  of  high  qualitie.  But  the  Roofes  of  many
of  them  are  curiously  seeled  with  in-laid  wood,  adorned
with  Gold  and  Azure  of  an  excessive  costlinesse ;  the
greater  part  of  the  floore,  and  that  a  little  advanced,  beeing
covered  with  Turkie  Carpets,  whereon  when  they  tread
they  doe  put  off  their  slip-shooes.  Many  of  their  roomes
have  great  out  windowes,  where  they  sit  on  Cushions  in
the  heate  of  the  day. They  lye  upon  Mattresses,  some  of

144

Household.

GEORGE SANDYS  a.d.

1610.

Silke,  some  of  stayned  Linnen,  with  Bolsters  of  the  same,
and  Quilts  that  are  sutable,  but  much  in  their  clothes,  the
cause  perhaps  that  they  are  so  lousie.  Nor  shame  they
thereat,  many  shall  you  see  sit  publikely  a  lousing  them-
selves in  the  Sunne ; and  those  no  meane  persons.

They  have  neither  Tables  nor  stooles  in  their  houses,
but  sit  crosse-leg'd  on  the  floore  at  their  victuals,  all  in  a  Sit  crosse-
Ring.  In  stead  of  a  cloth,  they  have  a  Skinne  spread  e^e  '
before  them ;  but  the  better  sort  sit  about  a  round  boord,
standing  on  a  foot  not  past  halfe  a  foot  high,  and  brimd
like  a  Charger.  Their  Dishes  have  feet  like  standing
Bolls,  and  are  so  set  one  upon  another,  that  you  may  eat
of  each  without  the  remooving  of  any.  Their  most  Dyet.
ordinarie  food  is  Pillaw,  that  is,  Rice  which  hath  beene
sod  with  the  fat  of  Mutton.  Pottage  they  use  of  sundry
kinds,  Egges  fryed  in  Honey,  Tansies,  (or  something  like
them)  Pasties  of  sundry  Ingredients  :  the  little  flesh  which
they  eate  is  cut  into  gobbets,  and  either  sod,  or  tosted  in
a  Furnace.  But  I  thinke  there  is  more  in  London  spent  in
one  day  then  is  in  this  Citie  in  twentie.  Fish  they  have  in
indifferent  quantitie.  But  the  Commons  doe  commonly
feed  on  Herbes,  Fruits,  Rootes,  Onions,  Garlicke,  a  beastly
kind  of  unpressed  Cheese  that  lyeth  in  a  lumpe ;  hodge-
podges  made  of  Flower,  Milke,  and  Honey,  &c.  so  that
they  live  for  little  or  nothing,  considering  their  fare,  and
the  plentie  of  all  things.  They  are  wayted  upon  by  their
slaves  given  them,  or  purchased  with  their  Swords,  or
Money :  of  these  to  have  many  it  is  accounted  for  great
Riches.  When  one  hath  fed  sufficiently  he  riseth,  and  Meaks  and
another  taketh  his  roome,  and  so  continue  to  doe  untill  all  Feasts-
be  satisfied.  They  eate  three  times  a  day,  but  when  they
feast  they  sit  all  the  day  long,  unlesse  they  rise  to  exonerate
Nature,  and  forth-with  returne  againe.  Theyabstaine  from
Hogs-flesh,  from  bloud,  and  from  what  hath  dyed  of  it
selfe,  unlesse  in  cases  of  necessitie.  Their  usuall  drinke  Drinke.
is  pure  water,  yet  have  they  sundry  Sherbets,  (so  call  they
the  Confections  which  they  infuse  into  it)  some  made  of
Sugar  and  Limons,  some  of  Violets,  and  the  like,  (whereof
viii  145  k

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1610.

some  are  mixed  with  Amber)  which  the  Richer  sort
dissolve  thereinto.  The  Honey  of  Sio  is  excellent  for
that  purpose,  and  they  make  another  of  the  juyce  of
Raisins,  of  little  cost,  and  most  usually  drunke  of.  Wine
is  prohibited  them  by  their  Alcoran,  they  plant  none,  they
buy  none :  but  now  to  that  libertie  they  are  growne  (the
naturall  Turke  excepted)  that  they  will  quaffe  freely  when
they  come  to  the  house  of  a  Christian  :  insomuch,  as  I
have  seene  but  few  goe  away  unled  from  the  Embassadors
Table.  Yet  the  feared  disorders  that  might  ensue  thereof,
have  beene  an  occasion  that  divers  times  all  the  Wine  in
the  Citie  hath  beene  staved  (except  in  Embassadors  houses)
and  death  hath  beene  made  the  penaltie  unto  such  as
presumed  to  bring  any  in.  They  preferre  our  Beere  above
all  other  drinkes.  And  considering  that  Wine  is  for-
bidden, that  water  is  with  the  rawest  (especially  in  this
Clime)  the  dearenesse  of  Sherbets,  and  plentie  of  Barley
(being  here  sold  not  for  above  nine  pence  a  bushell)  no
doubt  but  it  would  prove  infinitely  profitable  to  such  as
should  bring  in  the  use  thereof  amongst  them.

Although  they  be  destitute  of  Tavernes,  yet  have  they

Coffa-houses.  their  Coffa-houses,  which  something  resemble  them.
There  sit  they  chatting  most  of  the  day,  and  sippe  of  a
drinke  called  Coffa  (of  the  Berrie  that  it  is  made  of)  in
little  China  dishes,  as  hot  as  they  can  suffer  it :  blacke  as

[Il.vm.  soote,  and  tasting  not  much  unlike  it  (why  not  that  blacke

I297J  broth  which  was  in  use  amongst the  Lacedemonians?)

which  helpeth,as  they  say,  digestion,  and  procureth  alacritie  :

many  of  the  Coffamen  keeping  beautifull  boyes,  who  serve

as stales  to  procure  them  customers. The  Turkes  are

Opium.  also  incredible  takers  of  Opium,  whereof  the  lesser  Asia

affoordeth  them  plentie :  carrying  it  about  them  both  in
peace  and  in  warre ;  which  they  say  expelleth  all  feare,
and  makes  them  couragious :  but  I  rather  thinke  giddy
headed,  and  turbulent  dreamers ;  by  them,  as  should  seeme
by what hath beene said, religiously affected. And

Tobacco  taking  perhaps for the selfe-same cause they also delight in

punished. Tobacco  ;  they  take  it  through  reeds  that  have  joyned  unto

146

GEORGE SANDYS  a.d.

1610.

them  great  heads  of  wood  to  contayne  it,  I  doubt  not  but
lately  taught  them,  as  brought  them  by  the  English :  and
were  it  not  sometimes  lookt  into  (for  Morat  Bassa  not
long  since  commanded  a  Pipe  to  bee  thrust  through  the
nose  of  a  Turke,  and  so  to  be  led  in  derision  through  the
Citie,)  no  question  but  it  would  prove  a  principall  com-
moditie.  Neverthelesse,  they  will  take  it  in  corners,  and
are  so  ignorant  therein,  that  that  which  in  England  is  not
saleable,  doth  passe  here  amongst  them  for  most  excellent.

They  are  by  their  law  in  generall  exhorted  to  marrie,  Marriage.
for  the  propagation  of  their  Religion :  and  hee  ill  reputed
of,  that  forbeareth  so  to  doe  untill  the  age  of  five  and
twentie.  Every  man  is  allowed  foure  wives,  who  are  to
be  of  his  owne  Religion,  and  as  many  Concubine  slaves
as  hee  is  able  to  keepe,  of  what  Religion  soever.  For
God  (sayth  the  Alcoran)  that  is  good  and  gracious,  exacteth
not  of  us  what  is  harsh  and  burdensome ;  but  permits  us
the  nightly  companie  of  women,  well  knowing  that
abstinency  in  that  kind  is  both  grievous,  and  impossible.
Yet  are  they  to  meddle  with  none  but  their  owne  peculiars  :
the  offending  woman  they  drowne,  and  the  man  they  Punishment  of
gansh.  They  buy  their  wives  of  their  parents,  and  record  Adulteru-
the  contract  before  the  Cadi,  which  they  after  solemnize
in  this  manner.  Many  women  are  invited  by  the  mother
of  the  Bride,  to  accompanie  her  the  night  before  the
marriage  day,  whereof  they  spend  a  great  part  in  feasting ;
then  leade  they  her  into  a  Bath,  where  they  anoint  and
bathe  her :  so  breaking  companie  they  depart  unto  their
severall  rests,  and  in  the  morning  returne  to  her  chamber,
where  they  tricke  her  in  her  richest  ornaments,  tying  on
her  silken  Buskins  with  knots  easily  not  unknit.  The
Bridegroom  having  feasted  a  number  in  like  manner,  in
the  morning  they  also  repaire  to  his  house,  in  their  best
apparell,  and  gallantly  mounted,  from  whence  they  set
forward  by  two  and  by  two,  to  fetch  home  the  Bride,
accompanied  with  Musike,  and  conducted  by  Sagdich,  who
is  the  neerest  of  his  kindred ;  unto  whom  the  Bride  is
delivered,  with  her  face  close  covered. Who  set  astride  on

i47

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1610.

horse-backe,  hath  a  Canopie  carried  over  her,  in  such  sort

as no  part  of  her  is to  bee  discerned. So the troope

returning  in  order  as  they  came,  after  them  are  carried  in

Serpets  (a  kind  of  baskets)  their  presents  and  apparell ;

then  followeth  she,  and  lastly  her  slaves,  if  any  have  beene

given  her. The  Bride-groome  standeth  at  his  doore  to

receive  her,  who  is  honoured  by  his  guests  (yet  goe  they

not  in)  with  sundrie  presents  before  their  departure. If

shee  be  of  qualitie,  shee  is  led  to  the  Bride  chamber  by  an

Eunuch,  where  women  stand  prepared  to  undresse  her.

But  the  Bride-groome  himselfe  must  untye  her  Buskins  (as

amongst  the  Romanes  they  did  their  Girdles)  to  which  hee

is  fayne  to  applie  his  teeth. Now,  he  is  to  entertaine  his

wives  with  an  equall  respect,  alike  is  their  diet,  alike  is

their  apparell,  alike  his  benevolence  (for  such  sweet  stuffe

is  contayned  in  the  precepts  of  their  Doctors)  unlesse  they

consent to give or change turnes ; or else they may

complaine  to  the  Cadi,  and  procure  a  divorcement. But

After  the  first,  fat  husband  may  put  away  his  wife  at  his  pleasure:  who

say aomo. m marrie unto another within foure moneths after,
Chaloocon.Li. J .  .  t  J

P 2j^ provided  shee  prove  not  with  child,  and  then  not  untill

so  long  after  her  delivery. But  if  he  will  have  her  againe,

hee  must  buy  her :  and  if  after  the  third  divorce,  another

is  first  to  lie  with  her,  as  a  punishment  inflicted  for  his

levitie :  They  give  him  the  reverence  of  a  master ; they

are  at  no  time  to  denie  him  their  embracements,  whom  he

toucheth  not  againe  untill  they  have  beene  at  the  Bannias.

They  receive  chastisement  from  him,  and  that  they  hold

to  be  an  argument  of  his  affection. They  feed  apart,  and

intermeddle not with houshold affaires. All that is

required  at  their  hands,  is,  to  content  their  husbands,  to

nurse  their  owne  children,  and  to  live  peaceably  together :

which they doe (and which is strange) with no great

Jealousie. jealousie, or  envie. No  male  accompanies  them  above

twelve  yeeres  old,  except  they  be  Eunuchs  :  and  so  strictly

are  they  guarded,  as  seldome  seene  to  looke  out  at  their

doores. They  be  women  of  elegant  beauties,  for  the  most

part  ruddie,  cleere,  and  smooth  as  the  polished  Ivorie ;

148

GEORGE SANDYS  ad.

1610.

being  never  ruffled  by  the  weather,  and  daily  frequenting

the  Bannias,  but  withall  by  the  selfe-same  meanes  they

sodainly wither. Great eyes they have in principall

repute :  affected  both  by  the  Turks  and  the  Grecians,  as

it  should  seeme,  from  the  beginning. For  Mahomet  doth

promise  women  with  such,  (nay  as  big  as  Egges)  in  his

imaginarie  Paradise. And  of  those  the  blacker  they  be,

the  more  amiable : insomuch  that  they  put  betweene  the

eye-lids  and  the  eye  a  certaine  blacke  powder  with  a  fine

long pensill, made of a minerall brought from the

Kingdome  of  Fez,  and  called  Alcohole ; which  by  the

not  disgracefully  stayning  of  the  lids  doth  better  set  forth

the  whitenesse  of  the  eye ; and  though  it  trouble  for  a

time,  yet  it  comforteth  the  sight,  and  repelleth  ill  humours.

Into  the  same  hue  (but  likely  they  naturally  are  so)  doe

they  die  their  eye-breies,  and  eye-browes  (the  later  by  Arte

made  high,  halfe  circular,  and  to  meet,  if  naturally  they  doe  [n.viii.

not)  so  doe  they  the  haire  of  their  heads,  as  a  foyle  that  1298.J

maketh  the  white  seeme  whiter,  and  more  becomming  their

other  perfections. They  part  it  before the  midst, and

plaite it behind, yet sometimes wearing it disheveled.

They  paint  their  nayles  with  a  yellowish  red. They  weare

on  the  top  of  their  heads  a  Cap  not  unlike  a  Sugar-loafe,

yet  a  little  flat,  of  paist-boord,  and  covered  with  Cloth  of

silver  or  Tissue. Their  under-garments (which  within

doores  are  their  uppermost)  doe  little  differ  from  those

that  bee  worne  by  the  men,  which  wee  will  present  to  the

eye  to  avoide  repetition.

The  better  sort  about  the  upper  part  of  their  armes,
and  smalls  of  their  legs  weare  bracelets,  and  are  elsewhere
adorned  with  Jewels.  When  they  goe  abroad  they  weare
over  all  long  Gowns  of  violet  cloth,  or  scarlet,  tyed  close
before,  the  large  sleeves  hanging  over  their  hands ;  having
Buskins  on  their  legs,  and  their  heads  and  faces  so  mabbled
in  fine  linnen,  that  no  more  is  to  be  seene  of  them  then
their  eyes :  nor  that  of  some,  who  looke  as  through  the
sight  of  a  Bever.  For  they  are  forbidden  by  the  Alcoran  Women  kept
to  disclose  their  beauties  unto  any,  but  unto  their  fathers  close-

149

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1610.

and  husbands. They  never  stirre  forth,  but  (and  then
alwayes  in troupes) to  pray  at  the  graves,  and  to the
Baths  and publike  Bannias : which  for  excellency  of  buildings  are
Catkin  next to *keir Mosques. But having in part alreadie

described  some  of  their  formes,  I  will  a  little  treate  of
their  use ;  which  have  beene  in  times  past,  and  are  at  this
present,  in  such  request  with  these  Nations  (as  once  with
the  Romanes,  as  mayappeare  by  their  regardable  ruines)  that
few  but  frequent  them  twice  in  the  weeke,  as  well  for  their
health,  as  for  delight  and  cleanlinesse.  For  the  stomackes
crudities,  proceeding  from  their  usuall  eating  of  fruits,
and  drinking  of  water,  is  thereby  concocted :  which  also
after  exercise  and  travell  restoreth  to  the  wearied  bodie  a
wonderfull  alacritie.  The  men  take  them  up  in  the
morning,  and  in  the  afternoone  the  women.  But  both
amongst  the  Romanes  did  ordinarily  frequent  them
together :  a  custome,  as  they  say,  continued  in  Switserland
at  this  day,  and  that  amongst  the  most  modest.  The  men
are  attended  upon  by  men,  and  the  women  by  women ;
in  the  outermost  roome  they  put  off  their  clothes,  and
having  Aprons  of  stayned  linnen  tyed  about  their  wastes,
then  entring  the  Baths  to  what  degree  of  heate  that  they
please,  (for  severall  roomes,  and  severall  parts  of  them  are
of  severall  temperatures,  as  is  the  water  let  in  by  cocks  to
wash  the  sweat  and  filth  of  the  bodie)  the  servitors  wash
[ILviii.  them,  rub  them,  stretch  out  their  joynts,  and  cleanse  their

I299-]  skins  with  a  piece  of  rough  Grogeram ;  which  done,  they
shave  the  heads  and  bodies  of  men,  or  take  away  the  haire
with  a  composition  of  Rusma  (a  minerall  of  Cyprus)  and
unsleakt  Lime ;  who  returning  to  the  place  where  they
left  their  clothes,  are  dryed  with  fresh  linnen ;  and  for
all  this  they  pay  not  above  three  or  foure  Aspers  :  so  little,
in  that  endued  with  revenues  by  their  Founders.  But  the
women,  doe  anoint  their  bodies  with  an  oyntment  made
of  the  earth  of  Chios,  which  maketh  the  skin  soft,  white,
and  shining ;  extending  that  on  the  face,  and  freeing  it
Unnatural  from  wrinkles.  Much  unnaturall  and  filthie  lust  is  said
tusL  to  bee  committed  daily  in  the  remote  closets  of  the  darke-

15°

GEORGE SANDYS  a.d.

1610.

some  Bannias :  yea,  women  with  women ;  a  thing
uncredible,  if  former  times  had  not  given  thereunto  both
detection  and  punishment.  They  have  generally  the
sweetest  children  that  ever  I  saw ;  partly  proceeding  from  Children,
their  frequent  bathings,  and  affected  cleanlinesse.  As  wee
beare  ours  in  our  armes,  so  they  doe  theirs  astride  on
their  shoulders.

Now,  next  to  their  wives  wee  may  speake  of  their  slaves  :  Slaves.
for  little  difference  is  there  made  betweene  them :  who  are
Christians  taken  in  the  Warres,  or  purchased  with  their
Money.  Of  these  there  are  weekly  Markets  in  the  Citie,  Sak  of  them
where  they  are  to  be  sold  as  Horses  in  Faires :  the  men  /;/  Markets-
being  rated  according  to  their  faculties,  or  personall
abilities,  as  the  Women  for  their  youths  and  beauties,  who
are  set  out  in  best  becomming  attires,  and  with  their
aspects  of  pitie  and  affection,  endevour  to  allure  the
Christians  to  buy  them,  as  expecting  from  them  a  more
easie  servitude,  and  continuance  of  Religion  :  when  being
thrall  to  the  Turke,  they  are  often  inforced  to  renounce  it
for  their  better  entertainment.  Of  them  there  bee  many
of  excellent  outward  perfection  ;  and  when  the  buyer  hath
agreed  of  the  price  (but  yet  conditionally)  they  are  carried
aside  into  a  roome,  even  to  the  search  or  her  mouth,  and
assurance  (if  so  she  be  said  to  be)  of  her  virginitie.  Their  Their  ^
Masters  may  lye  with  them,  chastise  them,  exchange,  con^on-
and  sell  them  at  their  pleasure.  But  a  Christian
will  not  lightly  sell  her  whom  he  hath  layne  with,
but  give  her  her  libertie.  If  any  of  their  Slaves  will
become  Mahometans,  they  are  discharged  of  their  bond-
age :  but  if  a  Slave  to  a  Turke,  he  onely  is  the  better
intreated.  The  Turkes  do  use  their  Bond-women  with
little  lesse  respect  then  their  Wives,  and  make  no  difference
betweene  the  Children  begotten  both  of  the  one  and  the
other  :  who  live  together  without  jelousie,  it  being  allowed
by  their  irreligious  Religion.  Notwithstanding,  their
Wives  doe  onely  receive,  as  proper  unto  them,  their
Sabbaths  benevolence.  The  old  and  most  deformed,  are
put  to  most  drudgerie.

151

A.D.

l6lO.

Gelded
Eunuch,

Funerals.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

The  Men-slaves  may  compell  their  Masters  before  the
Cadie,  to  limit  the  time  of  their  bondage,  or  set  a  price
of  their  redemption,  or  else  to  sell  them  unto  another :
but  whether  of  the  two,  they  lightly  referre  to  the  Slaves
election.  If  they  bee  onely  fit  for  labour,  they  will  accept
of  the  time ;  but  if  skilfull  in  any  craft,  of  the  price :
which  expired  or  payed,  they  may  returne  into  their
Countries.  But  Gally-slaves  are  seldome  released,  in
regard  of  their  small  number,  and  much  employment
which  they  have  for  them ;  nor  those  that  are  Slaves  unto
great  ones,  to  whom  the  Cadies  authoritie  extends  not.
Many  of  the  Children  that  the  Turkes  doe  buy  (for  these
Markets  doe  affoord  of  all  Ages)  they  castrate,  making  all
smooth  as  the  backe  of  the  hand,  (whereof  divers  doe  dye
in  the  cutting)  who  supply  the  uses  of  Nature  with  a
Silver  Quill,  which  they  weare  in  their  Turbants.  In
times  past,  they  did  but  onely  geld  them,  but  being
admitted  to  the  free  converse  of  their  women,  it  was
observed  by  some,  that  they  more  then  befittingly  delighted
in  their  societies.

But  others  say,  that  Selymus  the  second,  having  seene  a
Gelding  cover  a  Mare,  brought  in  amongst  them  that
inhumane  custome.  The  first  that  ever  made  Eunuch,
was  Semiramis.  They  are  heere  in  great  repute  with  their
Masters,  trusted  with  their  States,  the  Government  of
their  Women  and  Houses  in  their  absence ;  having  for
the  most  part  beene  approoved  faithfull,  wise,  and
couragious ;  insomuch  as  not  a  few  of  them  have  come  to
sit  at  the  sterne  of  State,  (the  second  Vizer  of  the  Port
being  now  an  Eunuch,)  and  others  to  the  Government
of  Armies.

But  now  speake  we  of  their  Funerals.  After  their
death,  the  Men  by  the  Men,  and  the  Women  by  the
Women,  are  laid  out  in  the  midst  of  the  roome.  When
divers  of  their  Priests  do  assemble^  and  having  performed
certaine  idle  ceremonies,  as  in  wrapping  their  beades  about
it,  and  in  the  often  turning  it,  invoking  God  to  have  mercy
on  the  departed :  which  done,  they  wash  it,  shave  it,  and

152

A TURKISH WOMAN

GEORGE SANDYS  a.d.

1610.

shroud  it  in  Linnen,  which  they  leave  untied  both  at  the
head  and  feet.  Then  lay  they  the  Corse  on  a  Beere,
placing  a  Turbant  at  the  upper  end,  and  carrying  it  to  the
Grave  with  the  head  forward  :  some  of  the  Dervises  going
before  with  Tapers,  the  Priests  after  singing,  and  lastly,
his  friends  and  acquaintance.  But  persons  of  principall
qualitie  have  their  Horses  led  before  them,  with  Ensignes
trailed  on  the  Earth,  and  other  rites  of  that  nature ;  divers
of  the  Santons  going  before,  naming  of  God,  and  shaking
of  their  heads,  and  turning  about  untill  they  fall  downe
giddy.  The  sides  and  bottome  of  the  grave  are  boorded,
and  a  boord  laid  over  the  Corse,  to  keepe  the  earth  from
it,  leaving  a  sufficient  compasse  to  kneele  in.  For  they
are  of  opinion,  that  two  terrible  Angels,  called  Mongir
and  Guavequir  doe  presently  repaire  unto  the  grave,  and
put  the  soule  againe  into  the  body,  as  if  (saith  the  Alcoran)  pl.viii.
a  man  should  put  on  a  shirt,  and  raising  him  on  his  knees,  i3°°\l

with  his  head  uncovered,  (the  winding-sheete  being  left
unknit  for  that  purpose)  demand  of  him  in  particular,  how
he  hath  behaved  himselfe  in  this  life :  which  if  not  well,
the  one  strikes  him  on  the  head  with  a  hammer  nine
fathoms  into  the  earth,  the  other  tearing  him  with  an
Iron  hooke ;  and  so  continue  to  torment  him  untill  the
day  of  Judgement.  A  Purgatory  so  feared,  that  in  their
Mattins  they  petition  God  to  deliver  them  from  the
examinations  of  the  blacke  Angels,  the  tortures  of  the
Grave,  and  their  evill  journey.  But  if  he  have  satisfied
them  in  his  reply,  they  vanish  away,  and  two  white  Angels
come  in  their  places ;  the  one  laying  his  arme  under  his
head ;  the  other  sitting  at  his  feet,  and  so  protect  him
untill  doomes  day.  The  Emperors,  and  some  of  the  great
Bassas  (whereof  we  have  spoken  sufficiently  before)  have
their  particular  Mausoleums.  Those  of  a  second  condi-
tion are  buried  in  their  Gardens,  in  Sepulchers  without
covers,  filled  within  with  earth,  and  set  with  varietie  of
Flowers  :  But  the  common  sort  are  buried  by  the  high- way
sides,  and  fields  of  most  frequency,  adjoyning  to  the  Citie,
having  a  stone  of  white  Marble  more  then  a  foote  broad,

i53

A.D.

l6lO.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

White  and
Blacke.

Physicke.

and  foure  foote  high,  ingraven  with  Turkish  Characters,
erected  at  the  head,  and  another  at  the  feete,  the  grave
betweene  lying  low  like  a  trough.  To  these  the  women
flocke  every  Thursday  in  multitudes,  weeping  over  their
Children,  Husbands,  Kinsfolkes,  and  dead  Progenitors,
often  kissing  the  stones,  and  praying  for  their  delivery
from  the  aforesaid  blacke  Torturers :  many  times  leaving
bread  and  meate  on  their  graves,  (a  custome  also  of  the
Pagans)  for  Dogges  and  Birds  to  devoure,  as  well  as  to
relieve  the  poore,  being  held  an  available  almes  for  the
deceassed.  The  better  sort  doe  mourne  in  white  (as  for
blacke,  I  never  saw  it  worne  by  a  Turke)  and  but  for  a
little  season.  And  the  Women  are  not  to  marry  by  their
law,  untill  foure  moneths  and  ten  daies  after  the  death  of
their  Husbands.

To  speake  a  word  or  two  of  their  Sciences  and  Trades :
some  of  them  have  some  little  knowledge  in  Philosophic
Necessitie  hath  taught  them  Physicke,  rather  had  from
experience  then  the  grounds  of  Art.  In  Astronomy  they
have  some  in-sight ;  and  many  there  are  that  undertake
to  tell  fortunes.  These  frequently  sit  in  the  streetes  of
the  Citie,  resorted  unto  by  such  as  are  to  take  a  journey,
or  goe  about  any  businesse  of  importance.  They  have  a
good  gift  in  Poetry,  wherein  they  chant  their  Armours  in
the  Persian  tongue  to  vile  Musicke  ;  yet  are  they  forbidden
so  to  doe  by  their  Law :  Citternes,  Harpes  and  Recorders,
being  their  principall  Instruments.  But  their  lowd  Instru-
ments doe  rather  affright,  then  delight  the  hearing.  On  a
time  the  Grand  Signior  was  perswaded  to  heare  some  choise
Italian  Musicke :  but  the  foolish  Musicians  (whose  wit  lay
onely  in  the  ends  of  their  fingers)  spent  so  much  time  in
unseasonable  tuning,  that  he  commanded  them  to  avoid,
belike  esteeming  the  the  rest  to  be  answerable.  They
Liberal!  Arts,  studie  not  Rhetorick,  as  sufficiently  therein  instructed  by
Nature ;  nor  Logick,  since  it  serves  as  well  to  delude  as
informe,  and  that  wisedome  (according  to  the  opinion  of
the  Epicures)  may  be  comprehended  in  plaine  and  direct
expressions. Some there  be  amongst them that  write

154

Poetry.

Musicke.

GEORGE SANDYS  ad.

1610.
Histories,  but  few  reade  them,  thinking  that  none  can
write  of  times  past  truly,  since  none  dare  write  the  truth
of  the  present. Printing  they  reject,  perhaps  for  feare  lest  Printing
the  universalitie  of  learning, should  subvert  their  false  reJected-
grounded  religion  and  policie,  which  is  better  perserved
by  an  ignorant  obedience :  Moreover,  a  number  that  live
by  writing  would  bee  undone,  who  are  for  the  most  part  of
the  Priest-hood. The  Turkish  tongue  is  loftie  in  sound,  Language.
but  poore  of  it  selfe  in  substance. For  being  originally
the  Tartarian,  who  were  needie  ignorant  Pastors,  they  were
constrayned  to  borrow  their  Termes  of  State  and  Office
from  the  Persians,  (upon  whose  ruines  they  erected  their
Greatnesse)  of  Religion  (being  formerly  Pagans)  from  the
Arabians ;  as  they  did  of  Maritime  Names  (together  with
the  skill)  from  the  Greekes  and  Italians. In  Natolia  it  is
most  generally  spoken. They  use  (as  the  Persians)  the
Arabique  Character. In  writing  they  leave  out  the  vowels,
unlesse it  be in the  end of  a  word, so that much is
contrived  in  a  little  roome. They  curiously  sleeke  their
Paper,  which  is  thicke,  much  of  it  being  coloured  and  Paper.
dapled  like  Chamolets,  done  by  a  tricke  they  have  in
dipping  it  in  the  water. They  have  Painters  amongst  Painters.
them,  exquisite  in  their  kind,  (for  they  are  not  to  draw  by
their  Law,  nor  to  have  the  figure  of  any  thing  living)  yet
now  many  privatly  begin  to  infringe  that  precept,  and  the
Grand  Signior  himselre  hath  a  fanne,  whereon  the  battels
of  Hungarie  are  painted. Colours  also  they  have,  nor
lesse  faire  then  durable.

Every  one  hath  some  Trade  or  other,  not  so  much  as  the  Ever5  man
Grand  Signior  excepted.  Their  Trades  are  lightly  such  as  ****  a  Traa*e-
serve  for  their  owne  uses,  neither  much  supplying  forraine
Marts,  nor  frequenting  them.  A  lazy  people,  that  worke
but  by  fits,  and  more  esteeme  of  their  ease  then  their
profit,  yet  are  they  excessive  covetous.  And  although
they  have  not  the  wit  to  deceive  (for  they  be  grosse-
headed)  yet  have  they  the  will,  breaking  all  compacts  with
the  Christians  that  they  find  discommodious,  so  that  they
seldome  will  deale  with  them. But  with  one  another  they

i55

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1610.

buy  and  sell  onely  for  ready  Money,  wherein  the  most
of  their  substance  consisteth :  the  occasion  that  few  suites
doe  happen  amongst  them.  I  have  spoken  sufficiently,  at
least  what  I  can  of  this  Nation  in  generally  now  convert  we
to  the  Person  and  Court  of  this  Sultan.

[Il.viii.  He  is,  in  this  yeare  16 10.  about  the  age  of  three  and

!301-]  twentie,  strongly  limmed,  and  of  a  just  stature,  yet  greatly

dec^b  d  inclining  to  be  fat :  insomuch  as  sometimes  he  is  ready  to
choake  as  he  feeds,  and  some  doe  purposely  attend  to  free
him  from  that  danger.  His  face  is  full  and  duly  propor-
tioned, onely  his  eyes  are  extraordinary  great,  by  them
esteemed  (as  is  said  before)  an  excellency  in  beauty.
Fleame  hath  the  predominancy  in  his  complexion.  He
hath  a  little  haire  on  his  upper  lip,  but  lesse  on  his  chin,
of  a  darksome  colour.  His  aspect  is  as  haughty  as  his
Empire  is  large,  he  beginneth  already  to  abstaine  from
exercise ;  yet  are  there  pillars  with  inscriptions  in  his
Serraglio,  betweene  which  he  threw  a  great  Iron  Mace,
that  memorize  both  his  strength  and  activitie. Being  on

Cruell policy.  a,  time  rebuked  by  his  Father  Mahomet,  that  he  neglected
so  much  his  exercises  and  studies,  he  made  his  reply  :  That
now  he  was  too  old  to  beginne  to  learne,  intimating
thereby,  that  his  life  was  to  determine  with  his  Fathers,
whereat  the  Sultan  wept  biterly.  For  he  then  had
two  elder  Brothers,  of  whom  the  eldest  was  strangled  in
the  presence  of  his  Father  upon  a  false  suspition  of  treason,
and  the  other  by  a  naturall  death  did  open  his  way  to  the
Empire.  Perhaps  the  consideration  thereof  hath  made
him  keepe  his  younger  Brother  alive,  contrary  to  their
cruell  custome ;  yet  strongly  guarded,  and  kept  within  his
Serraglio.  For  hee  is  of  no  bloudy  disposition,  nor  other-
wise notoriously  vicious,  considering  the  austeritie  of  that
government,  and  immunities  of  their  Religion. Yet  is

His  Acts,  he  an  unrelenting  punisher  of  offences,  even  in  his  owne
Houshold  :  having  caused  eight  of  his  Pages,  at  my  being
there,  to  be  throwne  into  the  Sea  for  Sodomy  (an  ordinary
crime,  if  esteemed  a  crime  in  that  Nation)  in  the  night
time,  being  let  to  know  by  the  report  of  a  Canon,  that  his

156

GEORGE SANDYS  a.d.

1610.

will  was  fulfilled. Amongst  whom,  it  was  given  out  that

the  Vice-royes  naturall  Sonne  of  Sicilia  was  one,  (a  youth

lately  taken  Prisoner,  and  presented  unto  him)  yet  but  so

said  to  be,  to  dishearten  such  as  should  practise  his  escape.

His  valour  rests  yet  untried,  having  made  no  war  but  by

disputation,  nor  is  it  thought  that  he  greatly  affects  it,

despairing of long life in regard of his corpulency.

Whereupon  he  is  now  building  a  magnificent  Mosque,  for

the  health  of  his  soule,  all  of  white  Marble ; at  the  East

end,  and  South-side  of  the  Hippodrom,  where  he  first

broke  the  Earth,  and  wrought  three  houres  in  person.

The  like  did  the  Bassas,  bringing  with  them  presents  of

Money,  and  Slaves  to  further  the  building. His  occupa- u  0CCUPa~

tion  (for  they  are  all  tyed  to  have  one)  is  the  making  of

Ivory  Rings,  which  they  weare  on  their  Thumbs  when

they  shoote,  whereupon  he  workes  daily. His  Turbant  is  His  atttre-

like  in  shape  to  a  Pumpion,  but  thrice  as  great. His  under

and  upper  garments,  are  lightly  of  white  Sattin,  or  cloath

of  Silver  Tissued  with  an  eye  of  Greene,  and  wrought  in

great  branches. Hee  hath  not  so  few  as  foure  thousand  H*s  C°urt-

persons  that  feede  and  live  within  his  Serraglio,  besides

Capagies,  of  whom  there  are  five  hundred  attired  like

Janizaries,  but  onely  that  they  want  the  socket  in  the

front  of  their  Bonnets,  who  waite  by  fifties  at  every  gate.

The  chiefe  Officers  of  his  Court  are  the  Master  (as  we  may

terme  him)  of  the  Requests,  the  Treasurer,  and  Steward

of  his  Houshold,  his  Cup-bearer,  the  Aga  of  the  Women,

the  Controller  of  the  Jemoglans : who  also  steereth  his

Barge,  and  is  the  principall  Gardiner. Divers  of  these

Jemoglans  marching  before  the  Grand  Signior  at  solemne

shewes, in a vaine ostentation of what they would

undergoe  for  their  Lord,  gathering  up  the  skinne  of  their

Temples to thrust Quils through, and sticke therein

Feathers  for  a  greater  bravery,  so  wearing  them  to  their  no

small  trouble,  untill  the  place  putrifie ; some  when  the

old  breakes  out,  cutting  new  holes  close  to  the  broken.

Yea  the  Standard-bearers  of  this  Crue,  thrust  the  staves

sometimes  of  their  Standards  through  the  skinne  and  fat

i57

A.D.

l6lO.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

His  Women
and  Virgins.

Sultans.

R  oxo /anas
story.

[Il.viii.

of  their  bellies,  resting  the  lower  end  on  a  stirrop  of
Leather,  and  so  beare  them  through  the  Citie.  Fiftly,
Mutes  he  hath  borne  deafe  and  dumbe,  whereof  some  few
be  his  daily  companions  ;  the  rest  are  his  Pages.  It  is  a
wonderfull  thing  to  see  how  readily  they  can  apprehend,
and  relate  by  signes,  even  matters  of  great  difficultie.
Not  to  speake  of  the  multitude  of  Eunuchs,  the  Foot-
men of  his  Guard,  Cookes,  Sherbet-men,  (who  make  the
foresaid  bevrage)  Gardiners  and  Horse-keepers.  Relate
we  now  of  his  Women,  wherein  we  will  include  those  as
well  without  as  within  his  Serraglio.

And  first  begin  we  with  his  Virgins,  of  whom  there
seldome  are  so  few  as  five  hundred,  kept  in  a  Serraglio  by
themselves,  and  attended  on  onely  by  Women,  and
Eunuches.  They  all  of  them  are  his  Slaves,  either  taken
in  the  warres,  or  from  their  Christian  Parents,  and  are
indeed  the  choisest  beauties  of  the  Empire.  They  are
not  to  be  presented  to  the  Emperour,  untill  certaine
moneths  be  expired  after  their  entrance,  in  which  time  they
are  purged  and  dieted,  according  to  the  custome  of  the
ancient  Persians.  When  it  is  his  pleasure  to  have  one,
they  stand  ranckt  in  a  Gallery,  and  she  prepareth  for  his
bed  to  whom  he  giveth  hisHandkerchiefe,who  is  delivered
to  the  aforesaid  Aga  of  the  Women,  (a  Negro  Eunuch)
and  conducted  by  him  into  the  Sultans  Serraglio.  She
that  beareth  him  the  first  Sonne,  is  honoured  with  the
Title  of  Sultana.  But  for  all  his  multitude  of  Women,
he  hath  yet  begotten  but  two  Sonnes  and  three  Daughters,
though  he  be  that  way  unsatiably  given,  (perhaps  the
cause  that  he  hath  so  few)  and  useth  all  sorts  of  foods  that
may  inable  performance.  He  cannot  make  a  free  Woman
his  Concubine,  nor  have  to  doe  with  her  whom  he  hath
freed,  unlesse  hee  doe  marry  her,  it  being  well  knowne  to
the  wickedly  witty  Roxolana :  who  pretending  devotion,
and  desirous  for  the  health,  forsooth,  of  her  soule  to  erect
a  Temple,  with  an  Hospitall,  imparting  her  mind  to  the
Mufti,  was  told  by  him  that  it  would  not  be  acceptable  to
lm*  God,  if  built  by  a  Bond-woman. Whereupon  she  put  on

158

GEORGE SANDYS  ad.

1610.

a  habite  of  a  counterfeit  sorrow,  which  possessest  the
doting  Solyman  with  such  a  compassion,  that  he  forth-with
gave  her  her  freedome,  that  she  might  pursue  her  inten-
tion. But  having  after  a  while  sent  for  her  by  an  Eunuch,
shee  cunningly  excused  her  not  comming,  as  touched  in
Conscience  with  the  unlawfulnesse  of  the  fact ;  now  being
free,  and  therefore  not  to  consent  unto  his  pleasure.  So
he  whose  soule  did  abide  in  her,  and  not  able  to  live
without  her,  was  constrained  to  marrie  her.  The  onely
marke  that  shee  aymed  at,  and  wThereon  she  grounded
her  succeeding  Tragedies.  This  also  hath  married  his
Concubine,  the  mother  of  his  younger  Sonne,  (she  being
dead  by  whom  hee  had  the  eldest)  who  with  all  the  practices
of  a  politicke  Stepdame,  endevours  to  settle  the  succes-
sion on  her  owne,  adding,  as  it  is  thought,  the  power  of
Witch-craft  to  that  of  her  beautie,  she  being  passionately
beloved  of  the  Sultan.  Yet  is  she  called  Casek  Cadoun,
which  is  the  Lady  without  haire :  by  Nature  her  selfe,
both  graced  and  shamed.  Now  when  one  Sultan  dieth,
all  his  women  are  carried  into  another  Serraglio,  where
those  remaine  that  were  his  predecessors,  being  there  both
strictly  lookt  unto,  and  liberally  provided  for.  The  Grand
Signior  not  seldome  bestowing  some  of  them  (as  of  his
Virgins,  and  the  women  of  his  owne  Serraglio)  upon  his
great  Bassas  and  others,  which  is  accounted  a  principall
honour.  But  for  his  Daughters,  Sisters,  and  Aunts,  they
have  the  Bassas  given  them  for  their  Husbands :  the
Sultan  saying  thus,  Here,  Sister,  I  give  thee  this  man  to
thy  Slave,  together  with  this  dagger,  that  if  he  please  thee
not,  thou  maist  kill  him.  Their  husbands  come  not  unto  Husbands  of
them  untill  they  be  called :  if  but  for  speech  onely,  their  h±*  listers  and
shooes  which  they  put  off  at  the  doore,  are  there  suffered  aug
to  remaine :  but  if  to  lye  with  them,  they  are  laid  over
the  bed  by  an  Eunuch,  a  signe  for  them  to  approach,  who
creep  in  unto  them  at  the  beds  feete.  Mustapha  and
Hadir,  (two  of  the  Vizers  of  the  Port)  have  married  this
Sultans  Sister,  and  Neece ;  and  Mahomet  Bassa  of  Cairo,
his  daughter,  a  child  of  sixe  yeares  old,  and  he  about  fiftie,

T59

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1610.

having  had  presents  sent  according  to  the  Turkish
solemnities,  who  giveth  two  hundred  thousand  Sultanies
in  dowry.  Not  much  in  habite  doe  the  Women  of  the
Serraglio  differ  from  other,  but  that  the  Favourite  weares
the  ornament  of  her  head  more  high,  and  of  a  particular
fashion,  of  beaten  Gold,  and  inchaced  with  Gems ;  from
the  top  whereof  there  hangeth  a  veile  that  reacheth  to  her
anckles,  the  rest  have  their  Bonets  more  depressed,  yet
rich  ;  with  their  haire  disheveled.
Entertainment  When  the  Sultan  entertayneth  Embassadours,  hee
°^ n  sitteth  in  a  roome  of  white  Marble,  glistring  with  Gold

and  Stones,  upon  a  low  Throne,  spred  with  curious
Carpets,  and  accommodated  with  Cushions  of  admirable
workmanship ;  the  Bassas  of  the  Bench  being  by,  who
stand  like  so  many  Statues  without  speech  or  motion.  It
is  now  a  custome  that  none  doe  come  into  his  presence
without  presents,  first  fastned  upon  his  Bassas,  as  they  say,
by  a  Persian  Embassadour ;  who  thereupon  sent  word  to
the  Sophy  his  master  that  hee  had  conquered  Turkie.
The  stranger  that  approacheth  him  is  led  betweene  two  :  a
custome  observed  ever  since  the  first  Amurath  was  slaine
by  the  Servian  Cobelitz,  a  common  Souldier,  who  in  the
overthrow  of  Cossova,  rising  from  among  the  dead  bodies,
and  reeling  with  his  wounds,  made  towards  the  Sultan
then  taking  a  view  of  the  slaine,  as  if  hee  had  something
to  say ;  by  whom  admitted  to  speech,  hee  forthwith  stabd
him  with  a  Dagger,  hid  under  his  Cassocke  for  that  pur-
pose. They  goe  backward  from  him,  and  never  put  off
their  Hats ;  the  shewing  of  the  head  being  held  by  the
Turke  to  bee  an  opprobrious  indecency.  Now,  when  hee
Going  to  the  goeth  abroad,  which  is  lightly  every  other  Friday  (besides
osque.  at  other  times  upon  other  occasions)  unto  the  Mosque:

and  when  in  state,  there  is  not  in  the  world  to  be  seene  a
greater  spectacle  of  humane  glorie,  and  (if  so  I  may  speake)
of  sublimated  manhood.  For  although  (as  hath  beene
said)  the  Temple  of  Sancta  Sophia,  which  he  most  usually
frequenteth,  is  not  above  a  stones  cast  from  the  out-most
gate  of  the  Seraglio,  yet  hath  he  not  so  few  as  a  thousand

160

GEORGE SANDYS  a.d.

1610.

Horse  (besides  the  Archers  of  his  Guard,  and  other  Foot-
men) in  that  short  procession ;  the  way  on  each  side
inclosed,  as  well  within  as  without,  Capagies  and  Janiz-
aries, in  their  scarlet  Gownes,  and  particular  head-orna-
ments. The  Chauses  ride  formost  with  their  gilded
Maces ;  then  the  Captaines  of  the  Janizaries  with  their
Aga,  next  the  Chieftaines  of  the  Spachies,  after  them  their
Sanziaks ;  those  of  the  soulderie  wearing  in  the  fronts  of
their  Bonnets  the  Feathers  of  the  Birds  of  Paradise,
brought  out  of  Arabia,  and  by  some  esteemed  the  Phoenix.
Then  follow  the  Bassas  and  Beglerbegs :  after  them  the
Pretorian  foot-men,  called  the  Solacchi,  whereof  there  be
in  number  three  hundred ;  these  are  attired  in  Calsouns
and  Smockes  of  Callico,  wearing  no  more  over  them  then
halfe-sleeved  Coates  of  Crimson  Damaske,  the  skirts
tuckt  under  their  girdles :  having  Plumes  of  Feathers  in
the  top  of  their  copped  Bonnets  ;  bearing  Quivers  at  their
backes,  with  Bowes  ready  bent  in  their  left  hands,  and
Arrowes  in  their  right,  gliding  along  with  a  marvellous
celeritie.  After  them  seven  or  nine  goodly  Horses  are
led,  having  Caparisons  and  Trappings  of  inestimable
value,  followed  by  the  idolized  Sultan  gallantly  mounted.
About  whom  there  runne  fortie  Peichi  (so  called  in  that
they  are  naturally  Persians)  in  high-crowned  brimlesse
Caps  of  beaten  Gold,  with  Coats  of  Cloath  of  Gold  girt
to  them,  with  a  girdle  called  Chochiach  :  the  Pages  follow-
ing in  the  reare,  and  other  Officers  of  the  Houshold.
But  what  most  deserveth  admiration  amongst  so  great  a
concourse  of  people,  is  their  generall  silence :  insomuch,  General/
as  had  you  but  onely  eares,  you  might  suppose  (except  jj-'j  *:.
when  they  salute  him  with  a  soft  and  short  murmur)  that  1303.1

men  were  then  folded  in  sleepe,  and  the  World  in  mid-
night. He  that  brings  him  good  newes  (as  unto  others
of  inferiour  condition)  receiveth  his  reward,  which  they
call  Mustolooke.  But  this  Sultan  to  avoid  abuses  in  that
kind,  doth  forth-with  commit  them  to  Prison,  untill  their
reports  bee  found  true  or  false ;  and  then  rewards  or
punisheth  accordingly.  Although  he  spends  most  of  his
viii  161  L

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1610.

time  with  his  women,  yet  sometimes  he  recreates  himselfe
Hawking  and  -m  hawking,  who  for  that  purpose  hath  (I  dare  not  name)
how  many  thousand  Faulkners  in  pension,  dispersed
throughout  his  Dominions :  and  many  of  them  ever
attendant.  Their  long-winged  Hawkes  they  whistle  not
off  as  wee  doe,  but  putting  a  bridle  about  their  neckes,
they  make  them  couch  to  their  fists,  and  so  galloping  to  the
Brooke,  fling  them  off  at  the  fowle,  being  reared  sodainly
by  the  noyse  of  a  Drumme  that  hangs  at  their  Pummels,
by  use  made  cunning  in  that  kind  of  preying.  They
carrie  them  on  the  right  hand.  A  hardie  Hawke  is  highly
esteemed ;  and  they  have  a  kind  of  them  called  Shahans,
much  lesse  then  a  Falcon  :  yet  so  strangely  couragious,
that  nothing  flyeth  in  the  Ayre  that  they  will  not  bind
with.  They  also  hawke  at  the  field,  for  I  have  seene  them
carrie  Spaniels  with  them :  yet  those  in  beautie  not  like
unto  ours,  but  of  a  bastard  Generation.  They  feed  their
Hawkes  with  hard  Egges  when  flesh  is  wanting,  and
seldome  bestow  of  them  the  mewing.  Although  he
Huntsmen.  affects  not  hunting,  yet  entertaynes  he  a  number  of  Hunts-
men. Their  Dogs  they  let  goe  out  of  slips  in  pursuit  of
the  Wolfe,  the  Stagge,  the  Bore,  the  Leopard,  &c.  Those
that  serve  for  that  purpose  are  stickle  haired,  and  not
unlike  to  the  Irish  Grey-hounds.

Now  the  yearely  Revenue  which  he  hath  to  defray  his
excessive  disbursements,  such  a  World  of  people  depend-
ing upon  him,  amounts  not  above  fifteene  Millions  of
Sultanies,  (besides  the  entertaynment  for  his  Timariots)
which  is  no  great  matter,  considering  the  amplitude  of  his
Dominions :  being  possessed  of  two  Empires,  above
twentie  Kingdomes,  beside  divers  rich  and  populous
Cities ;  together  with  the  Red,  most  of  the  Mid-land,  the
iEgean  Euxine,  and  Proponticke  Seas.  But  it  may  be
imputed  to  the  barbarous  wastes  of  the  Turkish  Con-
quests, who  depopulate  whole  Countries,  and  never
re-edifie  what  they  ruine.  So  that  a  great  part  of  his
Empire  is  but  thinly  inhabited,  (I  except  the  Cities)  and
that  for  the  most  part  by  Christians,  whose  povertie  is

162

GEORGE SANDYS  a.d.

1610.

their  onely  safetie  and  protectresse.  But  his  casuall  in-
comes doe  give  a  mayne  accession  to  his  Treasurie :  as
Taxes,  Customes,  Spoiles,  and  Extortions.  For  as  in  the
Sea  the  greater  fishes  doe  feed  on  the  lesse,  so  doe  the
Great  ones  here  on  their  Inferiours,  and  hee  on  them  all :
being,  as  afore-said,  the  Commander  of  their  lives,  and
generall  Heire  of  their  substances.  He  hath  divers  Mines
of  Gold  and  Silver  within  his  Dominion,  that  of  Sidero-
capsa  in  Macedon,  having  beene  as  beneficiall  unto  him  as
the  largest  Citie  of  his  Empire,  called  anciently  Chrysites  :
and  not  unknowne  to  Philip  the  Father  of  Alexander,
who  had  the  Gold  from  thence  wherewith  he  coyned  his
Philips,  as  also  from  those  of  Cranider,  from  whence  he
yearely  extracted  a  thousand  Talents.  He  hath  onely  two
sorts  of  Coine,  the  Sultanie  and  the  Asper.  The  Sultanie
is  equall  in  value  to  the  Venice  Zecceene,  and  sixe  score
Aspers  amount  to  a  Sultanie,  called  rather  Aspro,  of  the
whitenesse  thereof,  in  that  consisting  of  silver.

Constantinople  is  said  to  contayne  seven  hundred  thou-
sand persons :  halfe  of  them  Turkes,  and  the  other  halfe
Jewes  and  Christians,  and  those  for  the  generall  Grecians.  Greekes.
But  Pera  hath  three  Christians  for  one  Mahometan  :  for
no  Jew  dwels  in  Pera,  though  they  have  their  shops  there.
We  omit  to  speake  of  the  Jewes  untill  we  come  into
Jewrie  ;  and  now  will  bend  our  discourse  to  the  Grecians  :
a  Nation  no  lesse  scattered  then  they,  but  infinitely  more
populous.  For  not  onely  three  parts  of  the  Inhabitants
of  all  Greece  and  Romania  are  Grecians,  but  almost  all
that  dwell  in  the  Hands  of  the  Mid-land  Sea,  Propontis
and  iEgeum.  Infinite  numbers  there  are  of  them  both
in  the  Lesse,  and  the  Greater  Asia,  and  in  Africa  not  a
few.  For  (besides  divers  Colonies  by  them  formerly
planted)  when  Antipater,  Perdiccas,  Seleucus,  Lysimacus,
Antigonus,  Ptolomie,  and  the  rest  of  the  Successors  of
Alexander  had  shared  his  Empire  among  them,  they
endeavoured  as  much  as  they  could  to  plant  their  new-got
Kingdomes  with  their  Countrey  men :  whose  Posteritie
in  part  remayneth  to  this  day,  though  vassalled  to  the

163

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1610.

often  changes  of  forraine  Governours :  supplyed  by  the
extension  of  the  latter  Greeke  Empire,  who  yet  retayne
wheresoever  they  live,  their  Name,  their  Religion,  and
particular  Language.  A  Nation  once  so  excellent,  that
their  Precepts  and  Examples  doe  still  remayne  as  approved
Canons  to  direct  the  mind  that  endeavoureth  vertue.
Admirable  in  Arts,  and  glorious  in  Armes,  famous  for
government,  affectors  of  freedome,  every  way  noble  :  and
to  whom  the  rest  of  the  World  were  reputed  Barbarians.
But  now  their  knowledge  is  converted,  as  I  may  say,  into
affected  ignorance,  (for  they  have  no  Schooles  of  Learning
amongst  them)  their  libertie  into  contented  slavery,  having
lost  their  minds  with  their  Empire.  Now  they  delight
in  ease,  in  shades,  in  dancing  and  drinking :  and  no
further  for  the  most  part  endeavour  their  profit,  then  their
bellies  compell  them.  They  are  generally  taxed  by  the
stranger  Christians  of  perfidiousnesse,  insomuch,  as  it  is
growne  into  a  Proverbe,  Chi  side  in  Grego,  sara  intrigo,
in  them  more  anciently  noted.  There  be  divers  rich  men
of  them  in  Pera,  but  those  I  thinke  were  descended  of  the
Genoes  ;  who  were  as  hath  beene  said,  the  owners  of  that
Citie.  Many  of  them  exercise  Merchandize  in  Vessels
called  Carmasals,  and  have  of  late  gotten  the  use  of  the
Compasse,  yet  dare  they  not  adventure  into  the  Ocean.

[Il.viii.  They  are  of  divers  Trades  in  Cities,  and  in  the  Countrey

I3°4'J  doe  till  the  Earth  (for  the  European  Turkes  doe  little
meddle  with  Husbandry)  and  dresse  their  Vines,  by  them
onely  planted.  They  have  a  Ceremonie  of  baptizing  of
their  Wines,  which  is  the  reason  that  the  Jewes  will  not
drinke  thereof :  performed  in  the  memorie,  and  on  that
day  wherein  Christ  converted  water  into  wine :  the  Priest
in  the  midst  of  his  Oraisons  powring  thereinto  a  small
quantitie  of  water.

Drinkings.  And  although  the  Greekes  doe  now  for  the  most  part

imitate  the  Turkes,  (I  meane  heere  in  Turkie)  in  sitting
at  their  meate,  yet  retaine  they  still  that  vice  of  immoderate
drinking.  They  pledge  one  another  in  order ;  and  he
that  cals  for  wine  out  of  his  turne,  is  reputed  uncivill.

164

GEORGE SANDYS  a.d.

1610.

Their  Glasses  are  little,  but  at  every  draught  emptied;
and  when  they  have  once  drunke  hard,  they  observe  no
Rule  but  provoke  one  another  to  excesse.  Never  silent ;
and  ever  and  anon  kissing  those  that  sit  next  them  on
the  cheeke  and  fore-head :  and  so  likewise  they  doe  in
their  salutations  after  a  long  absence,  and  to  those  to  whom
they  would  give  an  assurance  of  their  good  will.  Used  of
long,  as  appeareth  by  the  Scriptures,  amongst  these
Easterne  Nations.  But  to  kisse  their  women  is  an
unsufferable  wrong ;  unlesse  it  be  betweene  the  Resurrec-
tion and  Ascention ;  using  also  this  greeting,  that,  Our
Saviour  is  risen.  The  women  for  the  most  part  are  browne  Women.
of  complexion,  but  exceedingly  wel-favoured,  and  exces-
sively amorous.  Their  Garments  differ  little  from  theirs
amongst  whom  they  live.  They  cover  not  their  faces
(the  Virgins  excepted)  unlesse  it  bee  with  Painting ;
using  all  the  suppliment  of  a  sophisticate  beautie.  And
not  without  cause,  for  when  they  grow  old,  they  most
grow  contemptible,  beeing  put  to  doe  the  drudgeries  of
the  house,  and  many  times  to  waite  on  their  children.
They  are  costly  in  their  attyre,  and  will  complaine  to  the
Patriarke,  if  their  Husbands  maintayne  them  not  according
to  their  substances.  The  Greekes,  as  the  Turkes  doe  use
little  houshold  stuffe  ; and  lye  upon  Mattresses.

Now  the  Grecians  themselves,  (except  some  few)  are  Their
ignorant  in  the  ancient  Greeke,  it  being  called  the  Latine  *"•
Greeke,  and  is  a  Language  peculiar  to  the  Learned.  Yet
the  vulgar  Greeke  doth  not  differ  so  farre  from  the  same,
as  the  Italian  from  the  Latine,  corrupted  not  so  much  by
the  mixture  of  other  Tongues,  as  through  a  supine
wretchlesnesse.  In  some  places  they  speake  it  more  purely
than  in  others.  For  the  Boyes  of  Pera  will  laugh,  when
they  heare  the  more  barbarous  Dialect  of  other  maritime
Grecians.  And  there  be  yet  of  the  Laconians  that  speake
so  good  Greeke,  (though  not  Grammatically)  that  they
understand  the  Learned ;  and  understand  not  the  vulgar.
Their  Liturgie  is  read  in  the  ancient  Greeke,  with  not
much  more  profit  perhaps  to  the  rude  people,  then  the

165

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1610.

Latine  Service  of  the  Romish  Church  to  the  illiterate
Papists.
Thefoure  They  have  foure  Patriarchs :  One  of  Constantinople,
Patriarkes.  another  of  Alexandria,  the  third  of  Jerusalem,  and  the
fourth  of  Antioch.  He  of  Constantinople  hath  under
his  Jurisdiction  all  Peloponnesus,  Grecia,  Thracia,  Dacia,
Moesia,  Macedonia,  Epirus,  Albania,  Dalmatia,  Illyria,  a
great  part  of  Polonia,  Russia,  the  Hands  of  the  Adriaticke
Sea,  and  of  the  Archipelagus,  with  Candie,  Rhodes,  Coos,
almost  all  the  lesser  Asia,  Colchis,  not  a  few  that  inhabit
about  the  Fennes  of  Moetis,  and  Northerne  shoare  of
Euxinus  :  as  Sicilia,  and  Calabria  were,  untill  they  returned
unto  the  Sea  of  Rome.  Under  the  Patriarch  of  Alex-
andria, are  those  of  Egypt  and  Arabia.  The  Greekes  of
Palestine,  and  of  the  Countries  thereabout,  doe  obey  the
Patriarch  of  Jerusalem.  And  he  of  Antioch,  who  hath
his  seate  in  Damascus,  (for  Antiochia  is  now  desolate)  hath
subject  unto  him  the  Grecians  of  the  lesser  Armenia,
Celicia,  Beritus,  Tripoly,  Aleppo,  and  other  places  of  the
greater  Asia.  In  all  these  parts  they  have  the  free  exer-
cise of  their  Religion :  with  publike  Temples,  and
numbers  of  strong  Monasteries.  If  a  Patriarch  dye,
another  is  elected  by  a  Synod  of  Bishops.  But  the  Pat-
riarch of  Constantinople  hath  the  Supremacie  of  the  rest
assigned  him  by  the  Councell  of  Chalcedon,  as  Metro-
politan of  the  Imperiall  Citie :  whose  Diocesse  exceedeth
the  other  so  much,  in  that  most  of  those  Northerne  Nations
were  wonne  to  Christianitie  by  the  Industry  of  his
Predecessors,  and  reduced  to  their  Government.  So  if
we  doe  consider  it,  the  Grecian  Religion  both  in  extent
and  number  exceedeth  the  Romane.  And  as  the  Papists
attribute  an  extraordinarie  holinesse  to  Rome,  so  doe  the
Greekes  unto  Athos,  a  Mountaine  of  Macedona ;  so
named  of  Athon  the  Sonne  of  Neptune,  deckt  with  still-
flourishing  Trees,  and  abounding  with  Fountaines  :  called
also  the  Holy  Mountayne  by  the  Christians.  A  place
from  the  beginning  dedicated  to  Religion ;  lying  directly
West  from  Lemnos :  and  so  high,  that  though  it  be  seven

166

GEORGE SANDYS  a.d.

1610.

hundred  furlongs  distant ; yet  it  is  said  a  little  before  the

setting  of  the  Sunne,  to  cast  a  shadow  on  that  Hand.

This  stretcheth  out  into  the  Sea,  and  joynes  unto  the

Continent  by  an  Isthmos,  about  a  mile  and  halfe  broad :

which was cut through by Xerxes, (as hath beene

intimated  before)  and  made  circumnavigable. But  time

hath  left  now  no  impressions  of  his  barbarous  labour. It

is  well  nigh  three  dayes  journey  in  length,  considering  the

difficultie  of  the  way ; and  halfe  a  dayes  over. The  top

thereof  resembleth  the  forme  of  a  man,  stretched  on  his

backe  from  West  unto  East ; and  formed  (according  to

Strabo)  to  the  similitude  of  Alexander. This  Mountayne

is  onely  inhabited  by  Grecian  Monkes,  whom  they  call

Caloieros,  un-intermixed  with  the  Laitie :  of  whom  there  Caloieros.

are  there  residing  not  so  few  as  sixe  thousand,  that  live

in  Monasteries  strongly  munited  against  the  Incursions

of  Robbers  and  Pirats. Of  these  there  be  in  number

twentie  foure. The  Caloieros  weare  Gownes  of  blacke,  of  [H.viii.

a  homely  stuff e,  with  Hoods  of  the  same  ; and  their  haire  '  3°5-J

at  full  length. They  never  marrie,  abstaine  from  flesh,

and  often  (especially  during  their  Lents)  from  fish  that

hath  bloud  in  it. They  live  hardly,  feeding  on  Biscot,

Onions,  Olives,  Herbs,  and  such  fish  as  they  take  in  the

adjoyning  Seas. For  they  all  of  them  labour  for  their

sustenance, leaving their Monasteries betimes in the

mornings ; and  imploying  the  day,  some  in  tillage,  some

in the  Vineyards, some in making of  Boats, some in

fishing,  others  at  home  spinne,  weave,  sew^,  and  doe  all

the  Offices  that  belong  unto  women  :  so  that  none  but  are

busied  about  one  thing  or  another,  to  the  behoofe  of  their

particular Covents : and men they  bee that are onely

meete  for  such  Drudgeries. For  amongst  so  many,  not

past  three  or  foure  can  write  or  reade,  throughout  a  whole

Monasterie : insomuch, that at their Lyturgies, that

is read to them first, which they are to sing after.

In these Monasteries many excellent Manu-scripts

have  beene  preserved,  but  those  that  now  are,  be  onely  of

Divinitie,  all  other  Learning  (as  amongst  the  Turkes)  at

167

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1610.

this  day  detested  by  the  Religious.  The  Coloieros  of
this  place  have  a  repute  above  all  others :  and  for  their
strictnesse  of  life,  and  observance  of  Ceremonies,  are  in
their  severall  Monasteries  relieved  from  severall  Nations.
The  Patriarch  of  Constantinople  is  said  to  pay  yearely  for
the  Priests  and  Coloieros,  that  are  under  his  Jurisdiction
within  the  Turkish  Dominions,  twelve  thousand  Sultanies.
The  Patriarchs  of  Constantinople  were  heretofore  men
of  singular  gravitie  and  learning  ;  but  now  nothing  lesse  :
rather  chosen  for  temporall  respects,  then  either  for  their
knowledge  or  devotion ;  admitted  not  seldome  to  the
place  at  the  age  of  fortie,  though  prohibited,  if  under
threescore,  by  an  ancient  Canon.  Although  elected  by
their  owne  Bishops  ;  yet  often  appointed,  and  ever  to  be
allowed  by  the  Grand  Signior :  frequently  displanted,
and  banished  unto  the  Rhodes,  by  the  briberie  of  their
Successors.  Some  few  of  their  Priests  are  learned.  For
them  it  is  lawful  to  marrie,  but  Bigamie  is  forbidden
them,  and  Trigamie  detested  in  the  Laitie.  There  are  no
other  Orders  amongst  them  besides  the  foresaid  Coloieros,
and  certaine  Nunnes  whom  they  call  Coloieras.  Yet  of
the  last  but  a  few,  who  are  for  the  most  part  poore  old
Widdowes,  that  exercise  themselves  in  sweeping  of  the
Churches,  attending  on  the  sicke,  and  actions  of  like
nature.  Their  Churches  are  many  of  them  well  set  forth
and  painted  with  the  represents  of  Saints,  but  they  have
no  carved  nor  imbossed  Images.  Lampes  they  have
continually  burning.  Their  ordinarie  Lyturgie  is  Saint
Chrysostomes ;  but  on  Festivall  Dayes  they  doe  reade
Saint  Basils,  and  then  attired  in  their  Pontificals.  Their
behaviour  therein  expresseth  there,  to  my  understanding,
no  great  either  decencie  or  devotion.  They  administer
the  Eucharist  in  both  kinds  :  if  the  bread  bee  not  leavened,
they  thinke  it  not  availeable ;  and  they  drinke  of  the  cup
very  liberally.  One  Article  they  hold  against  the  Catho-
licke  Creed ;  which  is,  that  the  Holy  Ghost  proceedeth
onely  from  the  Father.

Foure  Lents  they  have  in  the  yeare,  and  then  a  damn-

168

GEORGE SANDYS  a.d.

1610.

able  sinne  it  is  to  eate  flesh,  or  fish  that  hath  bloud  in  it
(except  in  the  Lent  before  Easter,  when  all  sorts  of  fish
may  bee  eaten  by  the  Laitie : )  but  shel-fish  they  eate,  and
the  Cuttle:  whose  bloud,  if  I  may  so  tearme  it,  is  like
Inke;  a  delicate  food,  and  in  great  request.  They  fast
on  Wednesdayes,  Fridayes,  and  on  holy  Eeves :  but  on
Saturdayes  they  feast,  in  regard  that  it  was  the  old
Sabbath.  They  compute  the  yeare  as  we  doe.  They
yeeld  no  Supremacie  to  the  Romane  Papacie,  but  hold  that
Church  for  Schismaticall.  And  although  many  times  out
of  the  necessitie  of  their  Affaires,  and  to  purchase  reliefe,
they  have  treated  of  a  Conciliation ;  and  sometimes  it
hath  beene  by  their  Agents  concluded :  yet  what  they
have  done  hath  beene  generally  rejected  upon  their
returne,  both  by  the  Greekes  and  those  other  Nations  that
professe  their  Religion.  Of  their  Marriages  I  have  else-
where spoken,  and  now  conclude  wee  will  with  their
Funerals :  wherein  they  retayne  not  a  few  of  their  ancient
and  Heathen  Ceremonies.  Their  lamentations  are  the
same  that  they  were,  and  beyond  all  civilitie.

The  women  betimes  in  the  morning  doe  meete  at
appointed  places,  and  then  cry  out  mainely ;  beating  of
their  breasts,  tearing  their  haire,  their  faces  and  garments.
And  that  the  clamour  may  be  the  greater,  they  hire  certaine
Jewish  women,  .that  have  lowdest  voyces,  joyning  there-
with the  prayses  of  the  dead,  from  the  houre  of  his
Nativitie  unto  the  houre  of  his  dissolution  :  and  keeping
time  with  the  melancholicke  Musicke.  Nor  want  they
store  of  Spectators,  partly  drawne  thither  to  delight  their
eyes,  and  partly  by  jealousie.  For  then  the  choice,  and
prime  women  of  the  Citie  (if  the  deceased  were  of  note)
doe  assist  their  Obsequies ;  with  bosomes  displaid,  and
their  haire  dis-sheveled :  glad  that  they  have  the  occasion
to  manifest  their  beauties,  which  at  other  times  is  secluded
from  Admirers.

The  reason  why  the  Grecians  did  burne  their  dead,  was,
because  that  part  which  was  divine  in  them,  should  as  it
were  in  a  fierie  Chariot  againe  re-ascend  to  the  Celestiall

169

A.D.

l6lO.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

[Il.viii.

English
Embassador.

Habitations,  as  unto  Earth  the  Earthly  returned.  They
used  to  quench  the  fire  with  Red  Wine,  and  gathering
the  bones  together  to  include  them  in  Urnes  as  the  Urnes
in  Sepulchres,  (which  had  no  title,  unlesse  they  were  slaine
in  fighting  for  their  Countrey)  exhibiting  games,  and
prizes  for  the  Victors  in  honour  of  the  deceased.  Not-
withstanding all  were  not  burnt,  but  some  buried  in  their
apparell,  as  now  being  Christians  they  are :  who  use
Extreme-unction,  as  inducted  by  S.  James ;  yet  not  onely
I3°o.J  denie  the  Romane  opinion  of  Purgatorie,  but  furthermore
erroniously  maintayne,  that  neither  the  soules  of  the
blessed  nor  damned  doe  suffer  either  joy  or  torment,  or
shall  till  the  generall  Judgement.  But  enough  of  the
Grecians.

The  Germane  Emperour,  the  Kings  of  England  and  of
France,  have  heere  their  Liedger  Embassadours :  as  the
Venetians  their  Baily,  and  divers  tributarie  Princes  their
Agents.  Some  meerly  employed  about  State  Affaires ;
others  together  therewith,  about  the  trafficke  of  their
Nations.  But  the  English  onely  negotiates  for  the  Mer-
chants, having  two  in  the  hundred  upon  everie  ship,
besides  a  large  Pension  :  with  the  name  of  a  great  propor-
tion of  provision  from  the  Grand  Signior.  The  English
Consulship  of  Chios  is  in  his  disposing,  and  accountable
to  him ;  and  out  of  that  of  Alexandria  hee  hath  no  small
share,  though  served  by  a  French  man.  There  hath  bin
some  contention  between  him  and  the  French,  about  the
protection  of  the  Dutch  Merchants  :  but  now  they  doe
divide  the  profits.  The  English  Consul  of  Aleppo  is
absolute  of  himselfe,  yet  hath  from  hence  his  redresses  of
injuries :  whose  chiefe  employment  is  to  protect  the
persons  and  goods  of  our  Nation,  to  labour  a  revenge  of
*$ir  Thomas  wrongs,  and  a  restitution  of  losses.  And  to  give  *  this
Glover.  no  more  then  his  due,  for  this  place  none  can  be  more

sufficient ;  expert  in  their  Language,  and  by  a  long
experience  in  their  natures  and  practises :  being  moreover
of  such  a  spirit,  as  not  to  be  danted.  And  surely,  his
chiefest  fault  hath  beene  his  misfortune  ;  in  the  too  violent

170

GEORGE SANDYS  a*.

1610.

chargeable,  and  successelesse  sollicking  of  the  restitution  of
the  Prince  of  Moldavia,  (whom  adversitie  hath  rather
made  crafty  then  honest : )  whose  house  doth  harbour
both  him  and  his  dependents ;  beeing  open  also  to  all  of
our  Nation  :  a  Sanctuary  for  poore  Christian  slaves  that
secretly  flye  hither,  whom  hee  causeth  to  bee  conveyed
into  their  Countries,  and  redeemeth  not  a  few  with  his
money.

§.  mi.

The  Holy  Land  described,  the  Countrie,  Cities,
Inhabitants,  holy  Places,  and  memorable
Rarities  of  Jerusalem.

Ow  are  we  in  the  Holy  *  Land,  confined  on  the  *His  Journey

North  with  the  Mountaynes  of  Lybanus,  and  a  0U*°fRg!pt
r  t^i • •  it- • 1 1 /-> 1  • thither,  you

part  or  Phoenicia : on  the  JtLast  it  hath  Coelosyria  jiave  ^i

tore

and  Arabia  Petrea :  on  the  South  the  same  together  with  /.  6  c  8.  For
Idumea,  the  West  is  bounded,  a  part  with  Phoenicia,  and  leaving  Con-
the  rest  with  the  Mid-land  Sea. Distant  from  the  Line  ***»**¥*}«
one  and  thirtie  degrees,  extending  unto  thirtie  three,  and  the  Trinitie  of
something  upward. So  that  in  length  from  Dan  (the  same  London,  he
with  Caesarea  Philippi,)  unto  Bersheba,  (now  Gebelin)  it  sailed  by
contayneth  not  more  then  an  hundred  and  fortie  miles ;  Samos9Patmos>
where  broadest  not  fifty. A  Land  that  flowed  with  Milke Aos* J  es
and  Honey : in  the  middest  as  it  were  of  the  habitable
World,  and  under  a  temperate  Clime. Adorned  with
beautifull  Mountaynes,  and  luxurious  Valleys  ;  the  Rockes
producing  excellent  Waters  :  and  no  part  emptie  of  delight
or  profit.

It  is  for  the  most  part  now  inhabited  by  Moores  and  The
Arabians : those  possessing  the  Valleyes,  and  these  the  Jnna^tants-
Mountaynes. Turkes  there  be  few,  but  many  Greekes,
with  other  Christians,  of  all  Sects  and  Nations,  such  as
impute  to  the  place  an  adherent  holinesse. Here  be  also
some  Jewes,  yet  inherit  they  no  part  of  the  Land,  but  in  Jewes.
their  owne  Countrey  doe  live  as  Aliens  ;  a  people  scattered
throughout  the  whole  World,  and  hated  by  those  amongst

171

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1610.

whom  they  live ;  yet  suffered  as  a  necessary  mischiefe :
subject  to  all  wrongs  and  contumelies,  which  they  support
with  an  invincible  patience. Many  of  them  have  I  seene

Their  abused  ; some  of  them  beaten  :  yet  never  saw  I  Jew  with

patience,  an  angry  countenance. They  can  subject  themselves  unto

times,  and  to  whatsoever  may  advance  their  profit. In

Thriftinesse.  generall  they  are  worldly  wise,  and  thrive  wheresoever
they  set  footing.  The  Turke  employes  them  in  Receit  of
Customes,  which  they  by  their  policies  have  inhaunced,
and  in  buying  and  selling  with  the  Christian :  beeing
himselfe  in  that  kind  a  Foole  and  easily  coozened. They

Of  the  Jewish  are  men  of  indifferent  statures,  and  the  best  complexions.

people  and Throughout the Turkes Dominions, they are allowed
their  Sects  and  ^ • c  ^1  /  t*  j 1

Rites  you  may  their Synagogues: so are they at Rome, and else-

reade  this where in Italie ; whose Receit they justifie as a

Author,  y retayned  testimonie  of  the  verity  of  Scriptures ; and  as

more  fully  my  being  a  meanes  of  their  more  speedie  conversions  :  whereas

1  gi image, ^  Qfftnct  ^^  faty  receive  from  Images,  and  the  losse

of  goods  upon  their  conversions,  oppugne  all  perswasions
whatsoever.  Their  Synagogues  (for  as  many  as  I  have
seene)  are  neither  faire  without,  nor  adorned  within  more
then  with  a  Curtayne  at  the  upper  end,  and  certaine
Lampes  (so  farre  as  I  could  perceive)  not  lightned  by
daylight.  In  the  midst  stands  a  Scaffold,  like  those
belonging  to  Queresters,  in  some  of  our  Cathedrall
Churches :  wherein  he  stands  that  reades  their  Law  and
sings  their  Lyturgie :  an  Office  not  belonging  unto  any
in  particular,  but  unto  him  (so  hee  bee  free  from  deformi-
ties) that  shall  at  that  time  purchase  it  with  most  money ;
which  redounds  to  their  publike  Treasurie.  They  reade
in  savage  Tones,  and  sing  in  Tunes  that  have  no  affinitie
with  Musicke :  joyning  voyces  at  the  severall  closes.
[Il.viii.  But  their  fantasticall  gestures  exceed  all  Barbarisme,  con-

l3°7-i  tinually  weaving  with  their  bodies,  and  often  jumping
up-right  (as  is  the  manner  in  Dances)  by  them  esteemed  an
action  of  zeale,  and  figure  of  spirituall  elevation.  They
pray  silently,  with  ridiculous  and  continuall  noddings  of
their  heads,  not  to  bee  seene  and  not  laught  at. During

172

GEORGE SANDYS  a.d.

1610.

the  time  of  Service  their  heads  are  veyled  in  linnen,
fringed  with  knots ;  in  number  answerable  to  the  number
of  their  Lawes :  which  they  carrie  about  with  them  in
procession  ;  and  rather  boast  of  then  observe.  They  have
it  stucke  in  the  jambs  of  their  doores,  and  covered  with
glasse :  written  by  their  Cacams,  and  signed  with  the  doctors  of
names  of  God,  which  they  kisse  next  their  hearts  in  their  aw%
goings  forth,  and  in  their  returnes.  They  may  not  print
it,  but  it  is  to  bee  written  on  Parchment,  prepared  of
purpose  (the  Inke  of  a  prescribed  composition)  not  with  a
Quill,  but  a  Cane.  They  doe  great  reverence  to  all  the
names  of  God,  but  especially  to  Jehova;  insomuch  that
they  never  use  it  in  their  speech.  And  whereas  they
handle  with  great  respect  the  other  Bookes  of  the  old
Testament,  the  Booke  of  Hester  (that  part  that  is  Canoni-
call,  for  the  other  they  allow  not  of)  writ  in  a  long  Scroll
they  let  fall  on  the  ground  as  they  reade  it,  because  the
name  of  God  is  not  once  mentioned  therein ;  which  they  .
attribute  to  the  wisdome  of  the  Writer,  in  that  to  be
perused  by  the  Heathen.  Their  other  books  are  in  the
Spanish  Tongue  and  Hebrew  Character.  Although  they
agree  with  the  Turke  in  Circumcision,  detestation  of
Images,  abstinency  from  Swines-flesh,  and  divers  other
Ceremonies :  neverthelesse,  the  Turkes  will  not  suffer  a
Jew  to  turne  Mahometan,  unlesse  hee  first  turne  a  kind
of  Christian.  As  in  Religion  they  differ  from  others,  so
doe  they  in  Habite,  in  Christendome  enforcedly,  here  in  Their  attire.
Turkie  voluntarily.  Their  under-garments  differing  little
from  the  Turkes  in  fashion,  are  of  purple  cloth  ;  over  that
they  weare  Gownes  of  the  same  colour,  with  large  wide
sleeves,  and  clasped  beneath  the  chin,  without  band  or
collar :  on  their  heads  high  brimlesse  Caps  of  purple,
which  they  move  at  no  time  in  their  salutations.  They
shave  their  heads  all  over  ;  not  in  imitation  of  the  Turke  :
it  being  their  ancient  fashion.  Their  familiar  Speech  is
Spanish:  yet  few  of  them  are  ignorant  in  the  Hebrew,
Turkish,  Morisco,  vulgar  Greeke,  and  Italian  Languages.
Their  onely  studies  are  Divinitie  and Physicke : their

173

A.D.
l6lO.

Salonica.

The  J  ewes

justice.

Diet.

Burials.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

occupations  Brocage  and  Usurie  ;  yet  take  they  no  interest
of  one  another,  nor  lend  but  upon  pawnes ;  which  once
forfeited,  are  unredeemable.

They  marrie  their  daughters  at  the  age  of  twelve,  not
affecting  the  single  life,  as  repugnant  to  societie,  and  the
law  of  creation.  The  Sabbath  (their  devotions  ended)
they  chiefly  employ  in  nuptiall  benevolencies,  as  an  act  of
charitie,  befitting  well  the  sanctitie  of  that  day.  Although
no  Citie  is  without  them  throughout  the  Grand  Signiors
Dominions,  yet  live  they  with  the  greatest  libertie  in
Salonica,  which  is  almost  altogether  inhabited  by  them.
Every  male  above  a  certaine  age,  doth  pay  for  his  head  an
annuall  tribute.  Although  they  be  governed  by  the
Turkish  Justice  ;  neverthelesse,  if  a  Jew  deserve  to  die  by
their  law,  they  will  either  privately  make  away,  or  falsly
accuse  him  of  a  crime  that  is  answerable  to  the  other  in
qualitie,  and  deserving  like  punishment.  It  is  no  ill  turne
for  the  Franks  that  they  will  not  feed  at  their  Tables.  For
they  eate  no  flesh,  but  of  their  owne  killing ;  in  regard  of
the  intrals,  which  being  dislocated  or  corrupted,  is  an  abomi-
nation unto  them.  When  so  it  falls  out,  though  exceeding
good  (for  they  kill  of  the  best)  they  will  sell  it  for  a  trifle.
And  as  for  their  Wines,  being  for  the  most  part  planted
and  gathered  by  Grecians,  they  dare  not  drinke  of  them,
for  feare  they  be  baptized :  a  ceremonie  whereof  we  have
spoken  alreadie.  They  sit  at  their  meate,  as  the  Turks
doe.  They  burie  in  the  fields  by  themselves,  having  onely
a  stone  set  upright  on  their  Graves,  which  once  a  yeere
they  frequent,  burning  of  incense,  and  tearing  of  their
garments.  For  certaine  dayes  they  fast  and  mourne  for
the  dead,  yea  even  for  such  as  have  beene  executed  for
offences.  As  did  the  whole  Nation  at  our  being  at  Con-
stantinople for  two  of  good  account  that  were  impaled  upon
stakes ;  being  taken  with  a  Turkish  woman,  and  that  on
their  Sabbath.  It  was  credibly  reported,  that  a  Jew,  not
long  before,  did  poyson  his  sonne,  whom  he  knew  to  be
unrestrainably  lascivious,  to  prevent  the  ignominie  of  a
publike  punishment,  or  losse  by  a  chargeable  redemption.

i74

GEORGE SANDYS  a.d.

1610.

The  flesh  consumed,  they  dig  up  the  bones  of  those  that
are  of  their  families;  whereof  whole  bark-fuls  not
seldome  doe  arrive  at  Joppa,  to  be  conveyed,  and  againe
interred  at  Jerusalem  :  imagining  that  it  doth  adde  delight
unto  the  soules  that  did  owe  them,  and  that  they  shall
have  a  quicker  dispatch  in  the  generall  judgement.  To
speake  a  word  or  two  of  their  women.  The  elder  mabble  Women.
their  heads  in  linnen,  with  the  knots  hanging  downe
behind.  Others  doe  weare  high  Caps  of  plate,  whereof
some  I  have  seene  of  beaten  Gold.  They  weare  long
quilted  Waistcoats,  with  Breeches  underneath  ;  in  Winter
of  cloth,  in  Summer  of  linnen ;  and  over  all  when  they
stirre  abroad,  loose  Gownes  of  purple  flowing  from  the
shoulders.  They  are  generally  fat,  and  ranke  of  the
savours  which  attend  upon  sluttish  corpulency.  For  the
most  part,  they  are  goggle-eyed.  They  neither  shun
conversation,  nor  are  too  watchfully  guarded  by  their
husbands.  They  are  good  work-women,  and  can  and  will
doe  any  thing  for  profit,  that  is  to  be  done  by  the  Art  of
a  woman,  and  which  sutes  with  the  fashion  of  these  Coun-
tries. Upon  injuries  received,  or  violence  done  to  any
of  their  Nation,  they  will  crie  out  mainly  at  their  windowes,
beating  their  cheekes,  and  tearing  of  their  garments.  Of
late  they  have  beene  blest  with  another  Hester,  who  by
her  favour  with  the  Sultan,  prevented  their  intended
massacre,  and  turned  his  furie  upon  their  accusers.  They  L11-7111-
are  so  well  skilled  in  lamentations,  that  the  Greekes  doe  '*

hire  them  to  crie  at  their  funerals.

But  now  returne  we  unto  Gaza.  It  stands  upon  a  hill  Gaza.
surrounded  with  valleyes ;  and  those  againe  wel-nigh
environed  with  hills,  most  of  them  planted  with  all  sorts
of  delicate  fruits.  The  building  meane,  both  for  forme
and  matter :  the  best  but  low,  of  rough  stone,  arched
within,  and  flat  on  the  top  including  a  quadrangle :  the
walls  surmounting  their  roofes,  wrought  through  with
pot-sheards  to  catch  and  strike  downe  the  refreshing
winds,  having  spouts  of  the  same,  in  colour,  shape  and
sight,  resembling  great  Ordnance. Others  covered  with

i75

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1610.

mats  and  hurdles  ;  some  built  of  mud ;  amongst  all,  not
any  comely  or  convenient.  Yet  there  are  some  reliques
left,  and  some  impressions,  that  testifie  a  better  condition  :
for  divers  simple  roofes  are  supported  with  goodly  Pillars
of  Parian  marble,  some  plaine,  some  curiously  carved.  A
number  broken  in  pieces  doe  serve  for  thresholds,  jambs
of  doores,  and  sides  of  windowes,  almost  unto  every
beggarly  Cottage.  On  the  North-east  corner,  and  sum-
mitie  of  the  hill,  are  the  ruines  of  huge  arches  sunke  low
in  the  earth,  and  other  foundations  of  a  stately  building.
From  whence  the  last  Sanziack  conveyed  marble  Pillars
of  an  incredible  bignesse ;  enforced  to  saw  them  asunder
ere  they  could  be  removed  :  which  hee  employed  in  adorn-
ing a  certaine  Mosque  below  in  the  valley.  The  Castle
now  being,  not  worthie  that  name,  is  of  no  importance :
wherein  lieth  the  Sanziack  (by  some  termed,  a  Bassa)  a
sickly  young  man,  and  of  no  experience,  who  governes
his  Province  by  the  advice  of  a  Moore.  His  Territories
begin  at  Arissa.  On  the  West  side  of  the  Citie,  out  of
sight,  and  yet  within  hearing,  is  the  Sea,  seven  furlongs
off ;  where  they  have  a  decayed  and  unsafe  Port,  of  small
availe  at  this  day  to  the  inhabitants.  In  the  valley  on
the  East  side  of  the  Citie,  are  many  stragling  buildings ;
beyond  which,  a  hill  more  eminent  then  the  rest,  on  the
North  side  of  the  way  that  leadeth  to  Babylon ;  said  to
be  that  (and  no  question  the  same  described  in  Scriptures)
to  which  Samson  carried  the  gates  of  the  Citie ;  upon
whose  top  there  standeth  a  Mosque,  environed  with  the
Graves  and  Sepulchres  of  Mahometans.  In  the  Plaine
betweene  that  and  the  Towne,  there  stand  two  high  Pillars
of  marble,  their  tops  much  worne  by  the  weather :  the
cause  of  their  erecting  unknowne,  but  of  great  antiquitie.
South  of  this,  and  by  the  way  of  iEgypt,  there  is  a  mightie
Cisterne,  filled  onely  by  the  fall  of  raine,  and  descended
into  by  large  staires  of  stone :  where  they  wash  their
clothes,  and  water  their  Cattell.

The  same  day  that  wee  came,  wee  left  the  Caravan,  and
lodged in the  Citie, under  an  Arch in  a  little Court,

176

GEORGE SANDYS  a.d.

1610.

together  with  our  Asses. The  doore  exceeding  low,  as  Reason  °flow
are all that belong unto Christians, to withstand the
sodaine  entrance  of  the  insolent  Turkes. For  they  heere
doe  live  in  a  subjection  to  be  pitied; not  so  much  as  Slavery  of  the
daring to have handsome houses, or to employ their
grounds  to  the  most  benefit : so  dangerous  is  it  to  be
esteemed  wealthy. During  our  abode  here,  there  came
a  Captaine  with two hundred Spaheis, sent by Morat
Bassa  to  raise  thirtie  thousand  Dollars  of  the  poore  and
few  Inhabitants  of  this  Citie. The  Grecians  have  certaine
small  Vineyards :  but  that  they  have  Wine,  they  dare  not
be  acknowne,  which  they  secretly  presse  in  their  houses.
They  burie  their  Corne  under  ground,  and  keepe  what
they  are  to  spend  in  long  vessels  of  clay ; in  that  it  is
subject  to  bee  eaten  with  wormes  (as  throughout  JEgypt)
and  will  not  last  if  not  so  preserved. In  the  principall
part  of  the  Citie  they  have  an  ancient  Church,  frequented
also  by  the  Copties. The  Greekish  women  (a  thing  else-
where unseene)  here  cover  their  faces,  dying  their  hands
blacke ; and  are  apparelled  like  the Moores  of  Cairo.
Every  Saturday  in  this  Church-yard  upon  the  Graves  of  Saturday
the dead, they  keepe a miserable howling ; crying of  sorim%
custome,  without  teares  or  sorrow. The  Subassee  would
have  extorted  from  us  wel-nigh  as  much  money  as  wee
were  masters  of :  which  wee  had  hardly  avoyded,  had  not
the sicke Sanziack (in that administered unto by our
Physician)  quitted  us  of  all  payments. So  that  there  is
no travelling this way for a Franke, without speciall
favour.

Thrust  out  of  our  lodging  (as  we  were  about  to  leave
it)  by  the  uncivill  Spaheis,  who  seized  on  divers  of  our
necessaries :  on  the  eighteenth  of  March  wee  returned  to
the  Caravan.  Wee  payed  halfe  a  Dollar  apiece  to  the  place
for  our  Camels :  and  for  their  hire  from  Cairo,  for  those
of  burthen,  sixe  Sultanies ;  for  such  as  carried  passengers,
eight.  Wee  gave  them  more,  two  Sultanies  apiece  to
proceed  unto  Jerusalem.  Here  the  Caravan  divided  :  not
a  small  part  thereof  taking  the  way  that  leadeth  unto
vin  177  m

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1610.

Babylon.  The  next  day  wee  also  dislodged  :  leaving  the
Jewes  behind  us,  who  were  there  to  celebrate  their  festi-
vall.  The  Captaine  of  the  Caravan  departed  the  night
before,  taking  his  way  through  the  mountainous  Countrey

Hebron.  by  Hebron  : out  of  his  devotion  to  visite  the  graves  of

the  Patriarchs ;  a  place  of  high  esteeme  amongst  them,
and  much  frequented  in  their  pilgrimages.  The  ancient
Citie  (the  seat  of  David  before  he  tooke  Sion  from  the
Jebusites)  is  utterly  ruinated.  Hard  by  there  is  a  little
Village,  seated  in  the  field  of  Mechpelah,  where  standeth
a  goodly  Temple,  erected  over  the  Cave  of  their  buriall,
by  Helena  the  mother  of  Constantine ;  converted  now
into  a  Mosque.  Wee  past  this  day  through  the  most
pregnant  and  pleasant  valley  that  ever  eye  beheld.  On
the  right  hand  a  ridge  of  high  Mountaines,  (whereon
stands  Hebron  : )  on  the  left  hand  the  Mediterranean  Sea,
bordered  with  continued  hills,  beset  with  varietie  of  fruits  :
as  they  are  for  the  most  part  of  this  dayes  journey. The

[Il.viii.  Champaine betweene about twentie miles over full of

I3°9-J  flowry  hils  ascending  leasurely,  and  not  much  surmounting

champaine  their  ranker  valleys,  with  groves  of  Olives,  and  other
fruits  dispersedly  adorned.  Yet  is  this  wealthy  bottome
(as  are  all  the  rest)  for  the  most  part  uninhabited,  but  only
for  a  few  small  and  contemptible  Villages,  possessed  by
barbarous  Moores ;  who  till  no  more  then  will  serve  to
feed  them  :  the  Grasse  waste-high,  unmowed,  uneaten,
and  uselessly  withering.  Perhaps  so  desolate  in  that
infested  by  the  often  recourse  of  Armies,  or  masterfull
Spaheis :  who  before  they  goe  into  the  field  (which  is
seldome  untill  the  latter  end  of  harvest,  lest  they  should
starve  themselves  by  destroying  of  the  Corne)  are  billited
in  these  rich  pastures,  for  the  benefit  of  their  Horses,
lying  in  Tents  besides  them ;  committing  many  outrages
on  the  adjoyning  Townes  and  distressed  passengers.

Ten  miles  from  Gaza,  and  neere  unto  the  Sea,  stands

Ascalon.  Ascalon,  now  a  place  of  no  note ; more  then  that  the

Turke  doth  keepe  there  a  Garrison.  Ten  miles  North
of  Ascalon  along  the  shoare  stands  Azotus  : and  eight

178

GEORGE SANDYS  a.d.

1610.

miles  beyond  that  Acharon,  now  places  of  no  reckoning.

About  two  of  the  Clocke  wee  pitched  by  Cane  Sedoe ; a  Cane  Sedoe.

ruinous  thing,  hard  by  a  small  Village,  and  not  a  quarter

of  a  mile from the Sea : the Caravan lying in deepe

pastures  without  controlment  of  the  Villagers. The  next

day  we  departed  two  houres  before  Sun-rise :  descending

into  an  ample  valley,  and  from  that  into  another ; having

divers  Orchards  towards  the Sea. The  Countrey such

(but  that  without  trees)  as  wee  past  through  before. No

part  so  barren,  but  would  prove  most  profitable,  if  planted

with  Vines,  and  fruits ; made  more  then  probable, by

those  that  grow  about  Gaza. Passing  through  a  spacious

field  of  Olives,  about  noone  wee  pitched  on  a  little  hill,

lying  East,  and  within  a  furlong  of  Rama,  called  Ramula  Ramu/a.

by  the  Moores ; which  signifieth  sandy. It  is  seated  in

a  plaine,  on  a  little  rising  of  the  earth,  stretching  North

and South,  built  of  free-stone, the  streets  narrow, the

houses  contemptible. Yet  are  there  many  goodly  ruines,

which  testifie  farre  better  building,  especially  those  of  the

Christian  Churches. Here  is  a  Monasterie,  much  of  it

standing ; founded  by  Philip  the  good  Duke  of  Bur-

gundie,  in  that  place  where  sometimes  stood  the  house

of  Nicodemus  ;  built  for  the  reliefe  and  safety  of  Pilgrims

in  their  passage  to  Jerusalem  :  and  although  quitted  by  the

Friers,  yet  at  this  day  serving  to  that  purpose,  called  Sion-  Sion  house.

house,  and  belonging  to  the  Monasterie  of  Mount  Sion.

Joppe  was  called  the  Port  of  Jury ;  the  only  one  that  it  Joppe.
had.  Then  more  convenient  then  now :  much  of  it
choked  with  sand,  and  much  of  it  worne  with  the  continual
assaults  of  the  waters.  Of  the  City  there  is  no  part
standing,  more  then  two  litle  Towers,  wherein  are  certain
harquebuses  acrosse,  for  the  safe-guard  of  the  harbour.
Under  the  cliffe,  and  opening  to  the  Haven  are  certaine
spacious  Caves,  hewen  into  the  rock  :  some  used  for  Ware-
houses, and  others  for  shelter.  The  merchandizes  here
embarqued  for  Christendome  are  only  Cottens,  gathered
by  certaine  Frenchmen,  who  reside  at  Rama  in  the  house  charges  of
of  Sion. The  Westerne  Pilgrims  doe  for  the  most  part  Pilgrims.

179

A.D.

l6lO.

So  call  they
their  Leaders
for  the  most
part  Santons.
A  kind  of
riding  Gowne.

^Perhaps
because  most
of  them  are
Nestorians.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

arrive  at  this  place,  and  are  from  hence  conducted  to
Jerusalem  by  Attala,  a  Greeke  of  Rama ;  and  Drugaman
to  the  Pater-guardian,  paying  seven  Sultanies  a  piece  for
his  Mules,  his  labour,  and  discharge  of  Caphar.  The  like
rate  he  hath  for  bringing  them  backe  againe :  a  great
expence  to  poore  Pilgrims  for  so  small  a  journey ;  which
must  be  payed  although  they  accept  not  of  his  conduct.
Yet  by  this  meanes  they  doe  passe  securely :  hee  being  in
fee  with  the  Arabians  that  possesse  the  Mountaines.  Now
the  Caravan  did  againe  divide,  the  Moores  keeping  on
the  way  that  leadeth  to  Damascus.  Here  wee  should
have  payed  two  Dollars  a  piece  for  our  heads  to  a  Sheck
of  the  Arabs.  But  the  Sanziack  of  Gaza  had  sent  unto
him  that  it  should  be  remitted.  He  came  unto  our  Tent,
and  greedily  fed  on  such  viands  as  we  had  set  before  him.
A  man  of  a  tall  stature,  clothed  he  was  in  a  Gambalocke
of  scarlet,  buttoned  under  the  chin  with  a  bosse  of  gold.
He  had  not  the  patience  to  expect  a  present,  but  demanded
one ;  wee  gave  him  a  piece  of  Sugar,  and  a  paire  of
Shooes,  which  he  earnestly  enquired  for,  and  cheerfully
accepted.  On  the  twentieth  of  March  with  the  rising
Sunne  wee  departed.  A  small  remainder  of  that  great
Caravan  ;  the  Nostraines  (so  name  they  the  Christians  of
the  East  *)  that  rode  upon  Mules  and  Asses,  being  gone
before.  Amongst  whom  were  two  Armenian  Bishops :
who  footed  it  most  of  the  way,  but  when  (alighting  them-
selves) they  were  mounted  by  some  of  their  Nation.
Before  wee  had  gone  farre  we  were  stayed  by  the  Arabs,
untill  they  had  taken  Caphar  of  the  rest.  The  Subassee
of  Rama  besides  had  two  Medines  upon  every  Camell.
The  day  thus  wasted  did  make  us  misdoubt  that  we  should
not  get  that  night  unto  Jerusalem :  but  the  missing  of
our  way  (for  the  Arabs  had  left  us  contrarie  to  their
custome)  turned  our  feare  to  despaire.  Some  sixe  miles
beyond  Rama  the  hills  grew  bigger  and  bigger,  mixed
with  fruitfull  valleyes.  About  two  miles  further  wee
ascended  the  higher  Mountaines ;  paying  by  the  way  two
Medines  a  head ; but  at  severall  places. The  passage

180

GEORGE SANDYS  a.d.

1611.

exceeding difficult ; streightned with wood, and as it

were  paved  with  broken  rockes :  which  by  reason  of  the

raine then falling, became no lesse dangerous to our

Camels. At  length  wee  came  to  a  small  Village,  where

we  first  discovered  our  erring. Some  counselled  to  stay,

others to proceed ; both dangerous alike, the way

unknowne,  unsafe,  the  inhabitants  theeves,  as  are  all  the

Arabians. Whilest  we  thus  debated,  the  night  stole  upon

us,  and  bereft  us  of  the  election. The  much  raine  enforced

us to flee  for shelter  unto a  ruinous Chappell, where

distrust  set  the  watch,  which  we  carefully  kept  till  the

morning. Betimes  wee  forsooke  the  Village,  descending  [n.viii.

the  way  wee  had  ascended,  guided  by  the  chiefe  of  the  f3IO\l

Towne,  who  for  a  summe  of  money  had  undertaken  our

conduct  to  the  top  of  the  Mountaines,  having  hired  Asses

for  our  more  expedition  : yet  others  crossing  us  as  wee

returned  along  the  Valley,  with  shewes  of  violence,  would

have  extorted  more  money. Our  passage  for  five  houres

together  lay  through  a  narrow  streight  of  the  Mountaines  ;

much  of  our  way  no  other  then  such  as  seemed  to  have

beene worne by the winters torrent. We past by a

ruinous  Fort,  seated  neere  a  Fountaine,  sufficient  when  it

stood,  to  have  made  good  that  passage. In  the  way  wee

sprang  a  number  of  Partridges ; others  on  each  side  run-  Partridges.

ning  on  the  Rockes ; like  in  colour  unto  those  of  Chios.

Ascending  by  little  and  little,  at  length  wee  attained  to

the  top,  which  overtopt  and  surveyed  all  the  Mountaynes

that  wee  had  left  behinde  us. From  hence  to  Jerusalem  Jerusalem.

the  way  is  indifferent  even. On  each  side  round  Hils,

with  ruines  on  their  tops,  and  Valleyes,  such  as  are  figured

in  the  most  beautiful!  Land-skips. The  soyle, though

stonie,  not  altogether  barren,  producing  both  Corne  and

Olives  about  inhabited  places. Approaching  the  North

Gate  of  the  Citie,  called  in  times  past  the  Gate  of  Ephraim,

and  now  of  Damascus ; we  onely  of  all  the  rest  were  not

permitted to enter. When compassing the wall unto

that  of  the  West,  commanded  by  the  Castle,  we  were  met

by  two  Franciscan  Friers,  who  saluted  and  conveyed  us  to

181

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1611.

their  Coven t.  Wee  entred,  as  afore- said,  at  the  west
Gate,  called  the  Gate  of  Joppa.  On  the  right  hand,  and
adjoyning  to  the  Wall,  there  standeth  a  small  ill- fortified
Castle :  yet  the  onely  Fort  that  belongeth  to  the  Citie ;
weakely  guarded,  and  not  over-well  stored  with  Munition  ;
built  by  the  Pisans  at  such  time  as  the  Christians  inhabited
this  Citie.  Turning  on  the  left  hand,  and  ascending  a
Monasterie  of  part  of  Mount  Gihon,  we  came  to  the  Monasterie  of  the
Franciscans,  Franciscans  (being  now  in  number  betweene  thirtie  and
fortie)  who  in  the  yeere  1561,  thrust  out  of  that  which
they  had  on  Mount  Sion,  had  this  place  assigned  them.
But  of  the  Founders  name  I  am  ignorant :  nor  is  hee  much
wronged  by  being  forgotten :  since  so  meane  a  building
can  give  no  fame  to  the  builder.

The  Pater-guardian  with  due  complement  entertained
us  :  a  reverent  old  man,  of  a  voluble  tongue,  and  winning
behaviour.  His  name  Gaudentius :  his  Nation,  Italy.
Every  third  yeere  they  are  removed ;  and  a  Successor
elected  by  the  Pope,  from  whom  they  have  a  part  of  their
exhibition :  the  rest  from  the  Spaniard  and  Florentine.
Nor  is  it  a  little  that  they  get  by  the  resort  of  the  Pilgrims
of  Christendome.  For  all  that  come  must  repaire  to  their
Coven t ;  otherwise  they  shall  be  accused  for  Spies,  and
suffer  much  trouble :  the  Romane  Catholikes  rewarding
them  out  of  devotion,  and  the  rest  out  of  curtesie  :  which
if  short  of  their  expectations,  they  will  repine  it  as  losers.
Wee  foure,  for  eight  dayes  entertainment  bestowed  little
lesse  amongst  them  then  an  hundred  Dollers ;  and  yet
they  told  us  wee  had  hardly  payed  for  what  wee  had  eaten.
A  costly  rate  for  a  monasticall  diet.  But  the  Turke  is
much  more  fierce  upon  them :  awayting  all  advantages
that  may  give  a  colour  to  extortion.  A  little  before  our
comming,  a  Turke  being  denyed  by  a  Friar  of  some  trifle
that  hee  requested,  gave  himselfe  such  a  blow  upon  the
Nose  that  the  bloud  gushed  forth  :  and  presently  exclaym-
ing  as  if  beaten  by  the  other,  complayned  to  the  Sanziacke  ;
Turks  for  which  Avania  they  were  compelled  to  part  with  eight

knavery  hundred  Dollers. Brought  much  behind  hand,  as  they

182

GEORGE SANDYS  a.d.

1611.

alledge,  with  such  losses,  they  use  oft  to  rehearse  them  as
motives  unto  charitie.

The  Co  vent  hath  also  another  in-come  by  the  Knights  Knights  of  the

of  the  Sepulchre; who  pay thirtie Sultanies  apiece to  jffj^™'

the  Pater-guardian : who  by  vertue  of  his  Patent  doth  Qotovicus

give them that dignitie. The Kings of  France  were  Doctor  of  both

Soveraignes  of  that  Order,  by  whom  it  was  instituted  in  Lawes,  was

the  yeere 1099.  who  granted  them  divers  Immunities.  mf*de  ™e.°f

They  bare  five  Crosses  Gules,  in  forme  of  that  which  is  tJ°*n  J^\

at this day called the Jerusalem Crosse ; representing  know  not  any

thereby  the  five  wounds  that  violated  the  Bodie  of  our  more  exact  and

Saviour.  None  were  to  bee  admitted  if  of  a  defamed  life,  C0P*0U?  tTl

or  not  of  the  Catholike  Religion. They  are  to  bee  Gentle-  .eLsm*  *?  ^

r -m 1  ^ r rr •  J  -  these  parts y

men  or  Bloud,  and  or  sufficient  meanes  to  maintayne  a  ^  -tn
port  agreeable to that  calling, without the  exercise  of  discourse  and
Mechanicall  Sciences. But  now  they  will  except  against  pictures:  his
none  that  bring  money,  insomuch  that  at  our  being  there f~  Prmted
they  admitted  of  a  Rorhane,  by  Trade  an  Apothecarie,  j,i6iq.Our
late  dwelling  in  Aleppo. They  take  the  Sacrament  to  Authors
heare  every  day  a  Masse,  if  they  may  conveniently. If  pictures  also
warres  bee  commenced  against  the  Jnfidels,  to  serve  here  W0UMfnuch
in  person,  or  to  send  other  in  their  steads  no  lesse  service-  trated t^~se
able : To  oppugne  the  Persecutors  of  the Church, to  Relations:  but
shunne unjust Warres, dishonest Gaine, and private  /  remit  the
Duells : Lastly, to bee Reconcilers of dissentions, to mo™ curtous
advance  the  common  good,  to  defend  the  Widdow  and  ^  £  m**
Orphane,  to  refrayne  from  Swearing,  Perjurie,  Blasphemie,  hug  for  our
Rapine,  Usurie,  Sacriledge,  Murder,  and  Drunkennesse : purpose,  who
to avoide suspected Places, the company of infamous intend  longer
Persons ; to  live  chastly,  irreproveably,  and  in  Word  and  Jmrne3es*
Deed to shew themselves worthy of such a Dignitie.
This  Oath  taken,  the  Pater-guardian  layeth  his  hand  upon
his  head,  as  hee  kneeleth  before  the  entrance  of  theTombe  :
bidding  him  to  bee  Loyall, Valiant,  Vertuous,  and  an
undaunted  Souldier  of  Christ  and  that  holy  Sepulchre.
Then  gives  hee  him  the  Spurs,  which  hee  puts  on  his
heeles ; and  after  that  a  Sword  (the  same,  as  they  say,
which  was  Godfreyes  of  Bullein)  and  bids  him  use  it  in

i«3

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1611.

defence  of  the  Church,  and  himselfe  ;  and  to  the  confusion
[Il.vhi.  0f  Infidels: sheathing  it  againe,  he  girts  himselfe  there-

in-J  with.  Who  then  arising,  and  forth- with  kneeling  close  to
the  Sepulcher,  enclining  his  head  upon  the  same ;  he  is
created  by  receiving  three  strokes  on  the  shoulder,  and  by
saying  thrice,  I  ordaine  thee  a  Knight  of  the  holy  Sepul-
cher  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  in  the  Name  of  the  Father,
the  Sonne,  and  the  Holy  Ghost ;  then  kisses  he  him,  and
puts  about  his  necke  a  chaine  of  Gold,  whereat  hangeth  a
Jerusalem  Crosse :  who  arising,  kisses  the  Sepulcher,  and
restoring  the  aforesaid  Ornaments,  departeth.

From  the  top  of  this  Monasterie,  survey  you  may  the
most  part  of  this  Citie :  whereof  much  lies  waste ;  the
old  buildings  (except  some  few)  all  ruined,  the  new  con-
temptible. None  exceed  two  stories  :  the  under  no  better
then  Vaults ;  the  upper  arched  above,  and  standing  upon
Arches,  being  well  confirmed  against  fire,  as  having
through  out  no  combustible  matter :  the  Roofes  flat,  and
covered  with  Plaister.  Inhabited  it  is  by  Christians  out
of  their  devotion  ;  and  by  Turks,  for  the  benefite  received
by  Christians,  otherwise  perhaps  it  would  be  generally
abandoned.

After  a  little  refreshment,  the  same  day  we  came  (which
was  upon  Maundie-Thursday)  we  went  unto  the  Temple
of  the  Sepulcher,  every  one  carrying  with  him  his  Pillow
and  Carpet.  The  way  from  the  Monasterie  continues  in
a  long  descent  (the  East  side  of  Gihon)  and  then  a  little
Mount  ascendeth  to  Mount  Calvary. Mount  Calvarie  a  rocky

Calvary.  hj^  neither  high  nor  ample,  was  once  a  place  of  publicke

execution  :  then  without,  but  now  wel-nigh  within  the
heart  of  the  Citie,  whereupon  the  Emperour  Adrian
erected  a  Fane  unto  Venus ;  but  the  vertuous  Helena  (of
whom  our  Countrey  may  justly  glorie)  overthrew  that
receptacle  of  Paganisme,  and  built  in  the  roome  thereof
this  magnificent  Temple,  which  not  onely  possesseth  the
Mount,  but  the  Garden  below,  together  with  a  part  of
the  Valley  of  Carcasses,  (so  called,  in  that  they  threw  there-
into the  bodies  of  the  executed)  which  lay  betweene  Mount

184

GEORGE SANDYS  a.d.

i6it

Calvary  and  the  Wall  of  the  old  Citie. The  Frontispice
opposing  the  South,  of  an  excellent  structure  ;  having  two
joyning  doores ; the  one  now  walled  up,  supported  with
Columnes  of  Marble,  over  which  a  transome  ingraven
with  Historicall  figures ; the  Walls  and  Arches  crested,
and  garnished  with Floritry. On the left  hand there
standeth  a  Tower,  now  something  ruined,  (once,  as  some
say,  a  Steeple,  and  deprived  by  Saladine,  of  Bels  unsuffer-
able  to  the  Mahometans  : )  on  the  right  hand,  by  certaine
steps  a  little  Chappell  is  ascended,  coupled  above,  and
sustained  at  the  corners  with  pillars  of  Marble  : below
through  a  Wall,  which  bounds  the  East  side  of  the  Court,
a  paire  of  staires  doe  mount  to  the  top  of  the  Rocke,  (yet
no  Rocke  evident)  where  is  a  little  Chappell  built  (as  they
say)  in  the  place  where  Abraham  would  have  sacrificed
Isaac ; of  much  devotion,  and  kept  by  the  Priest  of  the
Abissines. This  joyneth  to  the  top  of  the  Temple,  levell,
and  (if  I  forgot  not)  floored  with  plaister. Out  of  the
Temple  there  arise  two  ample  coupulos  :  that  next  the  East
(covering  the  East  end  and  lies  of  the  Chancell)  to  bee
ascended  by  steps  on  the  out-side : the  other,  over  the
Church  of  the  Sepulcher,  being  open  in  the  middle. O  *
who  can  without  sorrow,  without  indignation  behold  the
enemies of Christ to be the Lords of his Sepulcher!

*  Let  his  friends  enjoy  him,  and  Heaven  where  is  his  glory :  as  for
his  Sepulcher,  He  is  risen,  he  is  not  there.  And  what  then  have  his
enemies,  but  what  himselfe  would  not  hold,  and  which  could  not  hold
him  ?  Which  it  hath  pleased  him  to  permit  to  them,  that  his  followers
might  follow  him  to  heaven  in  their  affections  and  conversation,  Col.  3.
Phil.  3.  their  hearts  being  both  the  place  of  his  Sepulcher,  where  by
vertue  of  his  death,  our  Old  man  mortified  &  of  his  Resurrection,
whereby  we  live  not,  but  he  lives  in  us.  Yet  is  this  complaint  just,  be-
cause In-justice  and  superstitions  of  Christians  have  made  Infidels,  Lords
of  that  holy  place.  Pilgrimages  are  good,  when  we  are  thereby  made
Pilgrimes  from  the  world  and  our  selves.  Thy  selfe  is  the  holyest  place
thou  canst  visit,  if  with  faith  and  repentance  made  the  Lords  Temple,
which  the  Jewish  signified ;  and  to  which  the  Fathers  did,  and  wise
men  still  doe  visite  these  places,  by  folly  perverted  to  superstition  (as  in
the  former  Discourse  is  observed)  when  Place  hath  more  place  then
Grace,  or  religious  immitation  of  those  whose  holinesse  had  made  the
places  esteemed  holy.

185

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1611.

Who  at  feastivall  times  sit  mounted  under  a  Canopie,  to
gather  money  of  such  as  doe  enter  :  the  profits  arising
thereof,  being  farmed  at  eight  thousand  Sultanies.  Each
Franke  payes  foureteene,  (except  he  be  of  some  religious
Order,  who  then  of  what  Sect  soever,  is  exempted  from
payments)  wherein  is  included  the  Impost  due  at  the  gate
of  the  Citie ;  but  the  Christians  that  be  subject  to  the
Turke,  doe  pay  but  a  trifle  in  respect  thereof.  At  other
times  the  doore  is  sealed  with  the  Seale  of  the  Sanziacke,
and  not  opened  without  his  direction  :  whereat  there  hangs
seven  Cords,  which  by  the  Bels  that  they  ring,  give  notice
to  the  seven  severall  Sects  of  Christians  (who  live  within
the  Temple  continually)  of  such  as  would  speake  with
them,  which  they  doe  through  a  little  Wicket,  and  thereat
receive  the  provision  that  is  brought  them.  Now  to
make  the  foundation  even  in  a  place  so  uneven,  much  of
the  Rocke  hath  beene  hewne  away,  and  parts  too  low,
supplyed  with  mightie  Arches :  so  that  those  naturall
formes  are  utterly  deformed,  which  would  have  better
satisfied  the  beholder,  and  too  much  regard  hath  made
them  lesse  regardable.

The  roofe  of  the  Temple  is  of  a  high  pitch,  curiously
arched,  and  supported  with  great  pillars  of  Marble :  the
out  lies  galleried  above ;  the  universall  Fabricke  stately
and  sumptuous.  After  we  had  disposed  of  our  luggage
in  a  part  of  the  North-gallery,  belonging  to  the  Latines,
the  Confessor  offered  to  shew  us  the  holy  and  observable
places  of  the  Temple :  which  wee  gladly  accepted  of ;  he
demaunding  first  if  devotion  or  curiositie  had  possest  us
with  that  desire.  So  that  for  omitting  Pater  Nosters,
and  Ave  Maries,  wee  lost  many  yeeres  Indulgences,
which  every  place  doth  plentifully  afFoord  to  such  as
affect  them,  and  contented  our  selves  with  an  Historicall
Relation.  Which  I  will  not  declare  in  order  as  shewne,
but  take  them  as  they  lye  from  the  first  entrance  of  the
Temple.  Right  against  the  doore,  in  the  midst  of  the
[II.  viii.  South  He,  and  levell  with  the  pavement,  there  lyeth  a

X3I20  white  Marble  in  forme  of  a  Graves-stone,  environed  with

186

GEORGE SANDYS  a.d.

1611.

a  raile  of  Brasse,  about  a  foote  high:  the  place  (as  they  Place  of  anoint-
say)  where  Joseph  of  Aramathia,  and  Nicodemus,  anointed  *?&  rt5ts
the  body  of  our  Saviour  with  sweete  ointments.  This  they
kisse,  and  kneele  to,  rubbing  thereupon  their  Crucifixes,
Beades,  and  Handkerchiefes  ;  yea,  whole  webs  of  Linnen,
which  they  carrie  into  farre  Countries,  and  preserve  the
same  for  their  shrouding  sheetes.  Over  this  there  hang
seven  Lamps,  which  burne  continually.  Against  the  East
end  of  the  stone,  there  is  a  little  Chappell.  Neere  the
entrance  on  the  right  hand,  stands  the  Sepulcher  of  God-
frey of  Bullein  :  with  a  Latine  Epitaph,  thus  Englished.

Hie  jacet  inclitus  Godefridus  de  Buglion  qui  totum
istam  terram  acquisivit  cultui  Christiano,  cujus
anima  requiescat  in  pace,  Amen.

Here  lieth  the  renowned  Godfrey  of  Bullein,  who  won
all  this  Land  to  the  worship  of  Christ.  Rest  may
his  soule  in  peace,  Amen.

On  the  left  hand  stands  his  Brother  Baldwins,  with  this
inscription.

Rex  Baldwinus,  Judas  altar  Machabeus,
Spes  Patriae,  vigor  Ecclesiae,  virtus  utriusque  :
Quern  formidabant,  cui  dona  tributa  ferebant,
Cedar,  iEgypti  Dan,  ac  homicida  Damascus :
Proh  dolor ! in  modico  clauditur  hoc  tumulo.

Baldwine  the  King,  another  Macabie,

The  Churches,  Countries,  strength,  hope,  both  their

glory ;
Whom  Cedar,  iEgypts  Dan,  Damascus  fraught
With  Homicides,  both  fear'd,  and  tribute  brought ;
O  griefe ! Within  this  little  Tombe  doth  lie.

The  first  and  second  Kings  of  Jerusalem.  The  farre
end  of  this  Chappell,  called  the  Chappell  of  Saint  John,
(and  of  the  Anointing,  by  reason  of  the  stone  which  it
neighboureth)  is  confined  with  the  foote  of  Calvarie,
where  on  the  left  side  of  the  Altar  there  is  a  cleft  in  the

187

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

ibn.

Legend  of Rocke : in  which,  they  say,  that  the  head  of  Adam  was

Adam.  found,  as  they  will  have  it,  there  buried,  (others  say  in

Hebron)  that  his  bones  might  bee  sprinkled  with  the  reall
and  precious  bloud  of  our  Saviour  Jesus  Christ ;  which
he  knew  should  bee  shed  in  that  holy  place,  by  a  propheti-

Chappels  of C3\\ fore-knowledge. Over this are the Chappels of

Mount  CaU  Mount  Calvarie  :  Ascended  on  the  North  side  thereof  by
twentie  steppes ;  the  highest  hewne  out  of  the  Rocke,  as
is  a  part  of  the  passage,  obscure,  and  extraordinarily
narrow.  The  floore  of  the  first  Chappell,  is  checkered
with  divers  coloured  Marbles,  not  to  bee  trod  upon  by
feete  that  are  shod. At  the  East  end  under  a  large  arched

Place  of  the concave  of  the  Wall,  is  the  place  whereon  our  Saviour

assion. ^  suffer,  and  may  assuredly  be  thought  the  same :  and

if  one  place  bee  more  holy  then  another  reputed  of,  in  the

world  the  most  venerable. Hee  is  void  of  sence  that  sees,

beleeves,  and  is  not  then  confounded  with  his  Passions.

Rocke  rent.  The  Rocke  there  ariseth  halfe  a  yard  higher  then  the  pave-
ment, levell  above  in  forme  of  an  Altar,  ten  foote  long,
and  sixe  foote  broad,  flagged  with  white  Marble,  as  is  the
Arch  and  Wall  that  adjoyneth.  In  the  midst  is  the  place
wherein  the  Crosse  did  stand,  lined  with  Silver,  Gilt,  and
Imbossed.  This  they  creepe  to,  prostrate  themselves
thereon,  kisse,  salute,  and  such  as  use  them,  sanctifie
therein  their  Beades  and  Crucifixes.  On  either  side  there
standeth  a  Crosse ;  that  on  the  right  side,  in  the  place
where  the  good  Theefe  was  crucified ;  and  that  on  the
left,  where  the  bad,  divided  from  Christ  by  the  rent  of
the  Rocke,  (a  figure  of  his  spirituall  separation)  which
clove  asunder  in  the  houre  of  the  Passion.  The  in-sides
doe  testifie  that  Art  had  no  hand  therein  :  each  side  to
other  being  answerably  rugged,  and  there  where  unacces-
sable  to  the  Worke-man.  That  before  spoken  of,  in  the
Chappell  below  is  a  part  of  this,  which  reacheth  (as  they

Georgians,  say)  to  the  Centre.  This  place  belongeth  to  the  Georgians,
whose  Priests  are  poore,  and  accept  of  Almes.  No  other
Nation  say  Masse  on  that  Altar :  over  which  there  hang
fortie  sixe  Lamps,  which  burne  continually. On  the  selfe-

188

GEORGE SANDYS  a.d.

161  i.

same  floore,  of  the  selfe-same  forme  is  that  other  Chappell,
belonging  to  the  Latines,  divided  onely  by  a  Curtaine,
and  entred  through  the  former.  In  the  midst  of  the  pave-
ment is  a  square,  inchaced  with  stones  of  different  colours,
where  Christ,  as  they  say,  was  nailed  upon  the  Crosse.  *****  °f
This  place  is  too  holy  to  be  trod  upon.  They  weare  the  nay  n&'
hard  stones  with  their  soft  knees,  and  heate  them  with
their  fervent  kisses  :  prostrating  themselves,  and  tumbling
up  and  downe  with  such  an  over-active  zeale,  that  a  faire
Greeke  Virgine,  ere  aware,  one  morning  shewed  more
then  intended,  whom  the  Frier  that  helpt  the  Priest  to  say
Masse  so  tooke  at  the  bound,  that  it  ecchoed  againe,  and
disturbed  the  mournefull  sacrifice  with  a  mirthfull  clamor ;
the  poore  Maid  departed  with  great  indignation.  Over
the  Altar  which  is  finely  set  forth,  three  and  thirtie  Lampes
are  maintained.  These  two  Chappels  looking  into  the
Temple,  are  all  that  possesse  the  summit  of  the  Rocke,
excepting  that  of  the  Immolation  of  Isaac  without,  and
spoken  of  before,  and  where  they  keepe  the  Altar  of
Melchisedech.  Opposite  to  the  doore  of  the  Temple,
adjoyning  to  the  side  of  the  Channell,  are  certaine  Marble
Sepulchers,  without  Titles  or  Epitaphs.  Some  twentie
paces  directly  West  from  Mount  Calvarie,  and  on  that
side  that  adjoyneth  to  the  Tower,  a  round  white  Marble,
levell  with  the  pavement,  retaineth  the  memorie  (as  they
say)  of  that  place,  where  the  blessed  Virgine  stood,  and
the  Disciple  whom  Christ  loved,  when  from  the  Crosse  hee
commended  each  to  other,  over  which  there  burneth  a
Lampe.  A  little  on  the  right  hand  of  this,  and  towards
the  West,  you  passe  betweene  certaine  pillars  into  that  part
of  the  Church,  which  is  called,  the  Temple  of  the  Resurrec-  [H.viii.
tion,  and  of  the  holy  Sepulcher.  A  stately  round,  r  .I3J3^
cloystered  below,  and  above :  and  supported  with  great  sepMer
square  pillars,  flagged  heretofore  with  white  Marble ;  but
now  in  many  places  deprived  thereof  by  the  sacrilegious
Infidels.  Much  of  the  neather  Cloyster  is  divided  into
sundry  Chappels  belonging  unto  severall  Nations  and  Chappels  of
Sects, where they exercise the rites of their severall  severa"  Secfs'

i8q

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1611.

Religions.  The  first,  on  the  left  hand  to  the  Abissines ;
the  next  to  the  Jacobites ;  the  third,  to  the  Copties,  (close
to  which,  on  the  left  side  of  another,  there  is  a  Cave  hewne
out  of  the  Rocke,  with  a  narrow  entrance,  the  Sepulcher
of  Joseph  of  Aramathia ;)  the  fourth,  to  the  Georgians  ;
and  the  fifth,  to  the  Maronites.  The  Chappell  of  the
Armenians  possesseth  a  great  part  of  the  Gallery  above,
and  the  rest  lying  towards  the  North,  belongeth  to  the
Latines,  though  not  employed  to  religious  uses.  Now
betweene  the  top  of  the  upper  Gallerie,  and  extreme  of
the  upright  Wall,  in  severall  concaves,  are  Pictures  of
divers  of  the  Saints  in  Mosaique  work,  full  faced,  and
unheightned  with  shaddowes  according  to  the  Grecian
painting,  but  much  defaced  by  malice,  or  continuance.  In
the  midst  on  the  South  side,  is  the  Emperour  Constantines,
opposite  to  his  Mothers,  the  memorable  Foundresse.  This
Round  is  covered  with  a  Cupolo,  sustained  with  Rafters
of  Cedar,  all  of  one  piece,  open  in  the  midst  like  the
Pantheon  at  Rome,  whereat  it  receiveth  the  light  that  it
hath,  and  that  as  much  as  sufliceth.  Just  in  the  midst,
and  in  the  view  of  heaven,  stands  the  glorified  Sepulcher,
a  hundred  and  eight  feet  distant  from  Mount  Calvarie ;
the  naturall  Rocke  surmounting  the  sole  of  the  Temple,
abated  by  Art,  and  hewne  into  the  forme  of  a  Chappell,
more  long  then  broad,  and  ending  in  a  Semi-circle,  all
flagged  over  with  white  Marble.  The  hinder  part  being
something  more  eminent  then  the  other,  is  surrounded
with  ten  small  pillars  adjoyning  to  the  Wall, and  sustaining
the  Cornish.  On  the  top  (which  is  flat)  and  in  the  midst
thereof  a  little  Cupolo  covered  with  Lead,  is  erected  upon
sixe  double,  but  small  Corinthian  Columnes  of  polished
Porphyre.  The  other  part  being  lower  then  this  by  the
height  of  the  Cornish,  smooth  above,  and  not  so  garnished
on  the  sides,  serving  as  a  Lobby  or  Portico  to  the  former,
is  entred  at  the  East  end,  (having  before  the  doore  a  long
pavement,  erected  something  above  the  floore  of  the
Church  included  betweene  two  white  Marble  walls,  not
past  two  foot  high)  consisting  of  the  selfe-same  Rocke,

190

GEORGE SANDYS  a.ix

1611.

doth  containe  within  a  Concave  about  three  yards  square,
the  roofe  hewne  compasse,  all  flagged  throughout  with
white  Marble.  In  the  midst  of  the  floore  there  is  a  stone
about  a  foot  high,  and  a  foot  and  a  halfe  square ;  whereon,
they  say,  that  the  Angell  sate,  who  told  the  two  Maries
that  our  Savior  was  risen.  But  Saint  Matthew  saith,  he
sate  upon  the  great  stone,  which  he  had  rolled  from  the
mouth  of  the  Sepulcher ;  and  which,  it  is  said,  the
Empresse  caused  to  bee  conveyed  to  the  Church  of  Saint
Saviour,  standing  where  once  stood  the  Palace  of  Caiphas.
.  Out  of  this  a  passage  through  the  midst  of  the  Rocke,
exceeding  not  three  feet  in  height,  and  two  in  breadth,
having  a  doore  of  gray  stone,  with  hinges  of  the  same,
undivided  from  the  naturall,  affoordeth  a  way  to  creepe
through  into  a  second  Concave,  about  eight  foote  square,
and  as  much  in  height,  with  a  compast  roofe  of  the  solid
Rocke,  but  lined  for  the  most  part  with  white  Marble.
On  the  North-side  a  Tombe  of  the  same,  which  possesseth
one  halfe  of  the  roome,  a  yard  in  height,  and  made  in  the
forme  of  an  Altar  :  insomuch,  as  not  above  three  can  abide
there  at  once ;  the  place  no  larger  then  affoordeth  a
libertie  for  kneeling.  It  is  said,  that  long  after  the
Resurrection,  the  Tombe  remained  in  that  forme,  wherein
it  was  when  our  Saviour  lay  there ;  when  at  length,  by
reason  of  the  devouter  Pilgrimes,  who  continually  bore
away  little  peeces  thereof,  (Relikes  whereunto  they  attri-
buted miraculous  effects)  it  was  inclosed  within  a  Grate
of  Iron.  But  a  second  inconveniency  which  proceeded
from  the  tapers,  haire,  &  other  offerings  throwne  in  by
Votaries,  which  defiled  the  Monument,  procured  the  pious
Helena  to  inclose  the  same  within  this  Marble  Altar,  The  Altar.
which  now  belongeth  to  the  Latines :  whereon  they  onely
say  Masse,  yet  free  for  other  Christians  to  exercise  their
private  devotions ;  being  well  set  forth,  and  having  on
the  farre  side  an  Anticke  and  excellent  Picture,  demon-
strating the  Resurrection.  Over  it,  perpetually  burneth  a
number  of  Lamps,  which  have  fulled  the  roofe  like  the
in-side of  a Chimney, and  yeelds unto the roome an

191

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1611.

immoderate  fervour.  Thousands  of  Christians  performe
their  vowes,  and  offer  their  teares  here  yearly,  with  all
the  expressions  of  sorrow,  humilitie,  affection,  and  penit-
ence. It  is  a  frozen  zeale  that  will  not  bee  warmed  with
the  sight  thereof.  And,  6  that  I  could  retaine  the  effects
that  it  wrought  with  an  unfainting  perseverance!  who
then  did  dictate  this  Hymne  to  my  Redeemer :

Saviour  of  Mankind,  Man,  Emmanuel :
Who  sin-lesse  dyed  for  sinne,  who  vanquisht  Hell.
The  first  fruits  of  the  grave. Whose  life  did  give
Light  to  our  darknesse :  in  whose  death  we  live.

0  strengthen  thou  my  Faith  ; correct  my  will,
That  mine  may  thine  obey :  protect  me  still.

So  that  the  latter  Death  may  not  devoure
My  Soule  seaPd  with  thy  Seale. So  in  the  houre
When  thou  whose  Bodie  sanctifide  this  Tombe,
Unjustly  judg'd,  a  glorious  Judge  shalt  come
To  judge  the  World  with  Justice  ; by  that  signe

1  may  be  knowne,  and  entertaind  for  thine.

Without,  and  to  the  West  end  of  this  Chappell,  another

very small one adjoyneth, used in common by the

^Egyptians  and  ^Ethiopians. Now  on  the  left  hand  as

Chappellofthe  you  passe  unto  the  Chappell  of  the  Apparition,  there  are

Apparition. two  round  stones  of  white  Marble  in  the  floore  :  that  next

the  Sepulcher  covering  the  place  where  our  Saviour,  and

[Il.viii.  the  other  where  Mary  Magdalen  stood  (as  they  say)  when

^H-J he  appeared  unto  her. On  the  North-side,  and  without

the  limits  of  the Temple, stands the Chappell of  the

Apparition  :  so  called  (as  they  say)  for  that  Christ  in  that

place  did  shew  himselfe  to  his  sorrowfull  Mother,  and

comforted  her,  pierced  with  anguish  for  his  cruell  death,

and ignominious sufferings. This belongeth to the

Latines,  which  serveth  them  also  for  a  Vesterie  ; from

whence they proceed unto their pompous Processions.

On  the  East-side  there  stands  three  Altars,  that  in  the

midst  in  a  Closet  by  it  selfe,  dedicated  to  God  and  our

Lady. That  on  the  right  hand  is  called  the  Altar  of  the

192

GEORGE SANDYS  a.d.

1611.

holy  Crosse,  whereof  a  great  part  was  there  (as  they  say)
reserved.

But  when  Sultan  Solyman  imprisoned  the  Friers  of
Mount  Sion,  (whom  hee  kept  in  durance  for  the  space  of
foure  yeares)  the  Armenians  stole  it  from  thence,  and
carryed  it  to  Sabastia,  their  principall  Citie.  That  on  the
left  hand  in  the  corner,  and  neere  unto  the  entrance,  is
called  the  Altar  of  the  Scourging ;  behind  which  there  is
a  piece  of  a  Pillar,  of  that  (as  they  say)  whereunto  our  ^f™ 'wheret0

c •  i_  j 1  j_i_  ii*  t*i  "  j L4  ht'ist  was

saviour  was  bound  when  they  scourged  him.  1  his  stood  ^  *
on  Mount  Sion,  and  there  supported  the  Portico  to  a
Church  in  the  dayes  of  Saint  Jerome ;  when  broken  by
the  Saracens,  the  pieces  were  recollected,  and  this  part  here
placed  by  the  Christians.  The  rest  was  distributed  by
Paul  the  Fourth,  unto  the  Emperour  Ferdinand,  Philip
King  of  Spaine,  and  the  SignOrie  of  Venice ;  in  honour
whereof  they  celebrate  the  sixt  of  Aprill.  It  is  (as  I
remember)  about  three  foot  high,  of  a  duskie  black-veind
Marble,  spotted  here  and  there  with  Red ;  which  they
affirme  to  be  the  markes  of  his  bloud  wherewith  it  was
besprinkled.  Before  it  there  is  a  grate  of  Iron,  insomuch
as  not  to  be  toucht  but  by  the  mediation  of  a  sticke
prepared  for  the  purpose  ;  being  buttened  at  the  end  with
Leather,  in  manner  of  a  Foyle,  by  which  they  convey  their
kisses,  and  blesse  their  lips  with  the  touch  of  that  which
hath  touched  the  Relike.  Through  the  aforesaid  Vestery,
a  passage  leades  into  certaine  Roomes,  heretofore  a  part  of
the  Colledge  of  the  Knight-Templers :  by  a  generall  Tempters.
Councell  held  in  Vienna,  in  the  year  13 12.  this  Order  was
extinguisht,  and  their  Lands  for  the  most  part  conferred
upon  the  Knight-Hospitallers  of  Saint  Johns  of  Jerusalem,
of  whom  wee  shall  speake  when  wee  come  unto  Malta.
The  Temples  in  London  belonged  unto  them,  wherein  the
Church  (built  round  in  imitation  of  this)  divers  of  their
Statues  are  to  be  seene,  and  the  positure  used  in  their
Burials.  Here  the  Franciscans  entertayned  us  during  our
abode  in  the  Temple.  Returning  againe  through  the
Chappel  of  the  Apparition,  a  little  on  the  left  hand  there
viii  193  N

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1611.

is  a  concave  in  the  wall,  no  bigger  then  to  contayne  two
Chappell  of  persons  besides  the  Altar  ;  which  is  called  the  Chappell  of
'  '  n& s%  the  Angels  :  belonging  also  to  the  Latines,  but  lent  by
them  to  the  despised  Nestorians,  during  the  celebration
of  Easter.  Winding  with  the  wall  along  the  outward
North-alley  of  the  Chancell,  at  the  farre  end  thereof  there
is  a  Grot  hewne  out  of  the  Rocke,  where  they  say,  that  the
Jewes  imprisoned  our  Saviour,  during  the  time  that  they
were  a  providing  things  necessary  for  his  crucifying.  This
is  kept  by  the  Georgians  ;  without  other  ornament  then  an
ungarnished  Altar  :  over  which  hangeth  one  onely  Lampe,
which  rendreth  a  dimme  light  to  the  Prison.  Untreading
a  good  part  of  the  fore-said  Alley,  we  entred  the  He  (there
but  distinguished  by  Pillars)  which  bordes  on  the  North
of  the  Chancell :  and  turning  on  the  left  hand,  where  it
beginnes  to  compasse  with  the  East  end  thereof,  wee
passed  by  a  Chappell  contayning  an  Altar,  but  of  no
regard :  wherein  they  say,  the  Title  was  preserved,  which
was  hung  over  the  head  of  our  Saviour :  now  shewne  at
Rome  in  the  Church  of  the  holy  Crosse  of  Jerusalem.
Next  to  this  in  the  same  wall,  and  midst  of  the  Semi-circle,
there  is  another,  the  place  where  they  say,  the  Souldiers
cast  lots  for  his  garments,  of  which  the  Armenians  have
the  custodie.  A  little  beyond  you  are  to  descend  a  paire
of  large  staires  of  thirtie  steps,  part  of  the  passage  hewne
out  of  the  Rocke  of  Calvary,  which  leadeth  into  a  Lobby,
the  roofe  supported  with  foure  massie  pillars  of  white
Marble,  which  are  ever  moist  through  the  darknesse  of
the  place  (being  under  ground)  and  sometimes  dropping,
are  said  to  weepe  for  the  sorrowfull  passion  and  death  of
Christ.  At  the  farre  end,  containing  more  then  halfe  of
Chappell oj S.  the  roome,  is  the  Chappell  of  Saint  Helena:  having  two
Helena.  great  Altars  erected  by  Christian  Princes  in  her  honour.

On  the  South  thereof  standeth  a  seate  of  stone,  over-
looking a  paire  of  staires  which  descend  into  the  place  of
the  Invention  of  the  Crosse :  where,  they  say,  that  she
sate  whilst  the  Souldiers  removed  the  rubbidge  that  had
covered  it. These  staires  (eleven  in  number)  conduct  into

194

GEORGE SANDYS  a.d.

1611.

an  obscure  vault,  a  part  of  the  Valley  of  Carcasses.  There
threw  they  our  Saviours  Crosse,  and  covered  it  with  the
filth  of  the  Citie,  when  after  three  hundred  yeares,  the
Empresse  Helena  travelling  unto  Jerusalem,  in  the
extremitie  of  her  age,  to  behold  those  places  which  Christ
had  sanctified  with  his  corporall  presence,  threatned  torture
and  death  to  certaine  of  the  principall  Jewes,  if  they  would
not  reveale  where  their  Ancestours  had  hid  it.  At  last,
forsooth,  they  wrested  the  truth  from  an  old  old  Jew,  one
Judas,  first  almost  famished,  who  brought  them  to  this
place.  Where  after  he  had  petitioned  Heaven  for  the
discovery ;  the  earth  trembled,  and  breathed  from  her
Cranies  Aromaticke  odours.  By  which  miracle  confirmed,
the  Empresse  caused  the  rubbidge  to  be  removed,  where
they  found  three  crosses,  and  hard  by,  the  superscription.
But  when  not  able  to  distinguish  the  right  from  the  other,
they  say  that  Macarius,  then  Bishop  of  Jerusalem,  repairing
together  with  the  Empresse  unto  the  house  of  a  noble
woman  of  this  Citie,  uncurably  diseased,  did  with  the
touch  of  the  true  Crosse  restore  her  to  health.  At  sight  L11-*111-
whereof  the  Jew  became  a  Christian,  and  was  called  there-
upon Quiriacus.  Being  after  Bishop  of  Jerusalem,  in  the
Reigne  of  Julian  the  Apostata,  hee  was  crowned  with
Martyrdome.  At  which  times  it  was  decreed,  that  no
Malefactor  should  thenceforth  suffer  on  the  Crosse ;  and
that  the  third  of  May,  should  be  for  ever  celebrated  in
memoriall  of  that  Invention.  In  this  Vault  are  two  Altars,
the  one  where  the  Crosse  of  Christ  was  found,  and  the  lnveptonof
other  where  the  other.  Ascending  againe  by  the  aforesaid
staire  into  the  Temple,  on  the  left  hand  betweene  the
entrance,  and  Mount  Calvarie,  there  is  a  little  Roome
which  is  called  the  Chappell  of  the  Derision.  Where
under  the  Altar  is  reserved  a  part  (as  they  say)  of  that
Pillar  to  which  Christ  was  bound,  when  Pilates  Servants
crowned  him  with  Thornes,  clothed  in  an  old  Purple  Robe,
placing  a  Reed  in  his  hand,  in  stead  of  a  Scepter,  and
crying,  Haile  King  of  the  Jewes  :  with  other  opprobrious
Taunts,  and  Revilings. This  is  kept  by  Abissens. Now

i95

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1611.

nothing  remayneth  to  speak  of  but  the  Quire,  not  differing
from  those  in  our  Cathedrall  Churches.  The  West  end
openeth  upon  the  Sepulcher :  the  East  ending  in  a  semi-
circle, together  with  the  lies,  is  covered  with  a  high
Cupolo  :  on  each  side  stand  opposite  doores  which  open
into  the  North  &  South  Alleyes ;  all  joyntly  called  the
Temple  of  Golgotha.  A  partition  at  the  upper  end
excludeth  the  halfe  round  (behind  which  their  high  Altar)
which  riseth  in  the  manner  of  a  loftie  Screene,  all  richly
gilded  (as  most  of  the  sides  of  the  Chancel)  and  adorned
with  the  Pictures  of  the  Saints  in  Antike  habits :  flat  and
full  faced,  according  to  the  manner  of  the  Grecians,  to
whom  this  place  is  assigned.  Towards  the  West  end  from
each  side  equally  distant  there  is  a  little  Pit  in  the  Pave-

Nwl1d°{fhe0  ment'  which  (they  say)  is  the  Nave11  of  the  World>  and
list  to  beleeve  endeavour  to  confirme  it  with  that  saying  of  the  Scripture,
God  wrought  his  Salvation  in  the  midst  of  the  Earth :
which  they  fill  with  holy  Water.  The  universall  Fabricke,
maintayned  by  the  Greeke  Emperors  during  their  Sove-
raigntie,  and  then  by  the  Christian  Kings  of  Jerusalem,
hath  since  beene  repayred  in  the  several!  parts  by  their
particular  Owners.  The  whole  of  so  strong  a  constitution,
as  rather  decayed  in  beautie  then  substance.

Having  visited  these  places  (which  bestow  their  severall

Indulgences,  and  are  honoured  with  particular  Oraisons)

after Eeven-song, and Procession, the Pater-guardian

putting  off  his  Pontificall  Habit,  clothed  in  a  long  Vest

Washing  of 0f  Linnen  girt  close  unto  him,  first  washed  the  feet  of  his

*ee '  fellow  Friers,  and  then  of  the  Pilgrimes  :  which  dryed  by

others  hee  kissed,  with  all  outward shew  of  humilitie,

Good-friday n^fe  next  j^  being  Good-friday,  amongst  other  Solemni-

withanlmav **es?  *key  carried  the  Image  of  Christ  on  a  sheete  supported

by  the  foure  corners,  in  Procession,  with  Banners  of  the

Passion  :  first,  to  the  place  where  he  was  imprisoned,  then

in  order  to  the  other,  performing  at  each,  their  appointed

Devotions. Laying  it  where  they  say  he  was  fixed  on  the

Crosse, the Frier Preacher made over it a short and

passionate  Oration  : who  acted  his  part  so  well,  that  hee

196

GEORGE SANDYS  a.d.

1611.

begot  teares  in  others  with  his  owne ;  and  taught  them  how
to  be  sorrowfull.  At  length  they  brought  it  to  the
place  where  they  say,  he  was  imbalmed :  where  the  Pater-
guardian  anointed  the  Image  with  sweet  Oyles,  and  strewed
it  with  Aromaticke  Powders,  and  from  thence  conveyed  it
to  the  Sepulcher.  At  night  the  Lights  put  out,  and
company  removed,  they  whipped  themselves  in  their
Chappell  of  Mount  Calvarie.  On  Saturday  their  other
Solemnities  performed,  they  carryed  the  Crosse  in  Proces-
sion, with  the  Banners  of  the  Buriall,  to  the  afore-said
Chappell :  creeping  to  it,  kissing,  and  lying  groveling  over
it.  On  Easter  day  they  said  solemne  service  before  the
doore  of  the  Sepulcher.  The  whole  Chappel  covered  on
the  out  side  with  cloth  of  Tissue,  the  gift  (as  appeareth  by
the  Armes  embroydered  thereon)  of  the  Florentine.  In
this  they  shewed  the  varietie  of  their  Wardrobe,  and
concluded  with  a  Triumphant  Procession,  bearing  about
the  Banners  of  the  Resurrection.  Those  Ceremonies  that
are  not  locall,  I  willingly  omit.  At  noone  wee  departed
to  the  Monasterie,  having  laine  on  the  hard  stones  for
three  nights  together,  and  fared  as  hardly.

The  other  Christians  (excepting  such  as  inhabit  within, Of  these  reade
of  each  sort  a  few,  and  that  of  the  Clergie)  entred  not  ^r™
untill  Good-friday. Viz.  Grecians,  Armenians,  Copties,  c  54/
Abissines,  Jacobites,  Georgians,  Maronites,  and  Nestorians.

The  Abissens  on  the  Passion  Weeke  forbeare  to  say
Masse,  putting  on  mournfull  Garments,  and  countenances
sutable.  They  use  no  Extreme  unction,  but  carrie  the
dead  to  the  Grave,  with  the  Crosse,  the  Censer,  and  holy
Water,  and  say  Service  over  them.  To  conclude,  they
joyne  with  the  Copties  for  the  most  part  in  substance  of
Religion,  and  in  Ceremony  ;  one  Priest  here  serving  both  :
an  ^Ethiopian,  poore,  and  accompanyed  with  few  of  his
Nation ;  who  fantastically  clad,  doth  dance  in  their
Processions  with  a  skipping  motion,  and  distortion  of
his  bodie,  not  unlike  to  our  Antickes.  To  which
their  Musicke  is  answerable ;  the  Instruments  no  other
then Snappers,  Gingles,  and  round-bottomd  Drummes,

197

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1611.

borne upon the backe of one, and beaten upon by
the  followers.

The  Jacobites  had  two  Patriarkes ;  one  resident  in  the
Mountaine  Tur,  the  other  in  the  Monasterie  of  Gifran,
neere  unto  the  Citie  of  Mordin,  seated  (they  say)  on  so
high  a  Mountayne  that  no  Bird  flyeth  over  it.  But  now
they  have  but  one  Patriarke,  and  that  hee  of  Gifran ;
alwayes  a  Monke  of  the  Order  of  Saint  Anthonie,  and
named  Ignatius  ;  stiling  himselfe  the  Patriarke  of  Antioch  ;
who  for  the  more  conveniencie  is  remooved  to  Carmit.
They  have  a  Bishop  still  residing  in  Jerusalem,  of  which
the  Patriarke  is  also  a  Jacobite.
[Il.vni.  The  Georgians  differ  not  much  from  the  Grecians  in

l3l°'l  their  opinions :  not  called  (as  some  write)  of  Saint  George
their  selected  Patrone,  but  of  their  Countrey,  so  named
long  before  the  time  wherein  hee  is  supposed  to  have
lived  ;  lying  betweene  Colchos,  Caucasus,  the  Caspian  Sea,
and  Armedia ;  heretofore  Iberia,  and  Albania.  A  warlike
people,  infested  on  both  sides  with  the  Turkish  and
Persian  Insolencies.  They  have  a  Metropolitan  of  their
owne ;  some  say,  the  same  that  is  resident  in  Mount  Sina.
They  say,  that  they  marrie  within  prohibited  degrees,  they
are  divided  into  eighteene  Bishoprickes ;  and  are  not  here
to  be  distinguished  from  the  Sorians,  nor  they  from  them,
being  almost  of  one  Religion :  and  called  Melchites,
heretofore  of  their  Adversaries,  which  signifieth  a  King  in
the  Syrian  Tongue ;  for  that  they  would  not  embrace  the
Heresies  of  Eutyches  and  Dioscorus,  but  obeyed  the  Edict
of  the  Emperour,  and  Councell  of  Chalcedon.  Their
Patriarke  is  the  true  Patriarke  of  Antioch,  who  abides  in
Damasco,  for  that  Antioch  lyes  now  wel-nigh  desolate.
Their  Bishop  is  here  poore,  so  are  his  ornaments ;  in  their
Processions,  for  State,  or  in  regard  of  his  age,  supported
on  both  sides.  Their  Musicklesse  Instruments  are  Fannes
of  Brasse,  hung  about  with  Rings,  which  they  gingle  in
stops  according  to  their  marchings.

The Maronites are Christians inhabiting Mount
Lybanus,  so  called  of  Marona,  a  Village  adjoyning,  or

198

GEORGE SANDYS  a.d.

1611.

of  Maro  their  Abbot. They  use  the  Chaldean  Tongue,

and Syrian  Character  in  holy  matters. A  limme they

weare  of  the  Jacobites,  and  once  subject  to  the  Patriarke

of  Antioch :  but  wonne  to  the  Papacie*  by  Joh.  Baptista  *Seeofthem,

a  Jesuite,  in  the  dayes  of  Gregorie  the  Thirteenth,  who  «#•  ^6-5-5-

sent  them  a  Catechisme  printed  at  Rome  in  the  Arabian  wJ*ne  b

Language :  so  that  now  they  doe  joyne  with  the  Latines.  Aimerike.

An  ignorant  people,  easily  drawne  to  any  Religion,  that

could  not  give  a  reason  for  their  owne  :  poore  in  substance,

and  few  in  number.

But the Greekes doe here surpasse all the rest in

multitude ; and  the  Armenians  in  braverie,  who  in  stead

of  Musicall  Instruments,  have  Sawcers  of  Brasse  (which

they  strike  against  one  another)  set  about  with  gingles.

All  differ  in  habit,  and  most  in  Rites ; yet  all  conjoyne

(the  Latines  excepted)  in  celebration  of  that  Impostury  of

fetching  fire  from  the  Sepulcher  upon  Easter  Eeve. The  Fire  from

Turkes  deride,  yet  throng  to  behold  it: the  Galleries  of  ^efven.' See

dp  fore  itt

the  round  Temple  beeing  pestered  with  Spectators.  All  pu/cforius
the  Lampes  within  the  Church  are  at  that  time  ex-  sup.  c  2.
tinguished ;  when  they  often  compassing  the  Sepulcher  in
a  joynt  Procession,  are  fore-runne  and  followed  by  the
people  with  Savage  clamours  (the  women  whistling)  and
franticke  behaviours,  befitting  better  the  solemnities  of
Bacchus ;  extending  their  bare  armes  with  unlighted
Tapers.  At  length  the  chiefe  Bishops  approach  the  doore
of  the  Sepulcher ;  but  the  ^Ethiopian  Priest  first  enters
(without  whom,  they  say,  the  Miracle  will  not  fadge)  who
after  a  long  stay  (meane-while  the  people  hurrying  about
like  mad-men)  returnes  with  the  sacred  flame,  supposed
at  his  Prayers  to  burst  out  of  the  Sepulcher ;  whereat
confusedly  they  fire  their  Lights :  and  snatching  them  one
from  another,  strive  who  should  first  convey  it  to  their
particular  Chappels ;  thrusting  the  flame  amongst  their
clothes,  and  into  their  bosomes,  (but  swiftly  with-drawing
it)  perswading  strangers  that  it  will  not  burne  them :
kindling  therewith  all  their  Lampes,  unlighted  with  other
fire  untill  that  day  twelve-moneth.

199

A.D.
l6ll.

Nestorians.

Easter
Solemnitie.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

But  I  had  almost  forgot  the  Nestorians,  so  called  of
Nestorius,  by  birth  a  Germane,  who  lived  in  the  dayes  of
Theodosius,  and  by  him  made  Bishop  of  Constantinople.
These  hated  of  the  rest,  in  an  obscure  corner,  without
Ceremonies  or  Pontificall  habit,  full  of  seeming  Zeale  and
Humility,  doe  reade  the  Scriptures,  and  in  both  kinds
administer  the  Sacrament,  denying  the  Reall  Presence  :  the
Priest  (not  distinguished  from  the  rest  in  habit)  breaking
the  bread,  and  laying  it  in  the  palme  of  the  Communicants
hand ;  they  sipping  of  the  Cup,  which  is  held  betweene
his.  They  kisse  the  Crosse,  but  pray  not  before  it,  nor
reverence  they  Images.  They  will  not  have  Marie  to  be
called  the  Mother  of  God.  Their  chiefest  Heresie  is,  that
they  divide  the  Divinitie  of  Christ  from  his  Humanitie.
Their  Doctrine  dispersed  throughout  all  the  East,  by
meanes  of  Cosro  the  Persian  King,  who  enforced  all  the
Christians  within  his  Dominion  (out  of  a  mortall  hatred
that  he  bare  to  the  Emperour  Heraclius)  eyther  to  forsake
his  Empire,  or  to  become  Nestorians ;  as  through  a  great
part  of  Cataia.  It  is  now  embraced,  but  by  few  ;  most  of
that  Sect  inhabiting  about  Babylon.  Their  Patriarkall
seate  is  Muzal  in  Mesopotamia,  seated  on  the  bankes  of
Tygris :  their  Patriarke  not  elected,  but  the  dignitie
descending  from  the  Father  to  the  Sonne.  For  Marriage
is  generally  allowed  in  their  Clergie;  and  whenWiddowers,
to  marry  againe  at  their  pleasure.  They  have  the  Scrip-
tures, and  execute  the  Ministrie  in  the  Chaldean  Tongue.
They  allow  not  of  the  Councell  of  Ephesus,  nor  any  that
succeeded  it.  All  this  while  there  were  no  lesse  then  a
thousand  Christians,  men,  women  and  children,  who  fed
and  lodged  upon  the  pavement  of  the  Temple.  On
Easter  day  about  one  of  the  clocke  in  the  morning,  the
Nations  and  Sects  above  mentioned,  with  joyfull  clamours,
according  to  their  severall  customes,  circled  the  Church,
and  visited  the  holy  places  in  a  solemne  Procession ;  and
so  for  that  time  concluding  their  Ceremonies,  departed.

200

GEORGE SANDYS  ad.

1611.

§.  V.  [n.viii.

1317-]

Visiting of Emaus and Bethlehem, and other
places  : Also other observations of the
erosolymitan  Holies.

Pon  Easter  Munday  wee  hired  certaine  Asses  to
ride  to  Emaus,  accompanied  with  a  Guard,  and
certaine  of  the  Friers. About  the  mid-way,  at  the

foot  of  a  hill,  there  are  the  mines  of  a  Monasterie,  built
by  Saint  Helena :  they  say,  in  that  place  where  Jesus
appeared  to  the  two  Disciples.  Here  the  Latines  per-
formed certaine  devotions,  and  tooke  of  the  stones  (as
generally  they  did  from  all  such  like  places)  preserved  as
precious.  Emaus  stands  seven  miles  off,  and  West  of  Emaus.
Jerusalem.  The  way  thither  mountainous,  and  in  many
places  as  if  paved  with  a  continuall  rocke  ;  yet  where  there
is  earth,  sufficiently  fruitful!.  It  was  seated  (for  now  it  is
not)  upon  the  South  side  of  a  hill,  over-looking  a  little
valley,  fruitfull  in  Fountaines.  Honoured  with  the
presence  of  our  Saviour,  who  there  was  knowne  by  the
breaking  of  bread  in  the  house  of  Cleophas  his  Coosin-
german,  and  afterward  the  second  Bishop  of  Jerusalem.
In  the  selfe-same  place  a  Temple  was  erected  by  Paula  (a
Roman  Ladie,  of  whom  we  shall  speake  hereafter)  whose
ruines  are  yet  extant,  neere  the  top  of  the  Mountaine ;
unto  which  the  Arabians  would  not  suffer  us  to  ascend,
who  inhabite  below  in  a  few  poore  Cottages,  untill  we  had
payed  Caphar  they  demanded.  This  Citie  was  burnt  in
the  Jewish  warres,  by  the  commandement  of  Varus ;  and
upon  the  destruction  of  Jerusalem,  re-edified  by  the
Romanes ;  who  in  regard  of  their  victorie,  called  it
Nicopolis.  In  the  yeere  131.  throwne  downe  by  an  Nkopolis.
earth-quake,  it  was  fourescore  and  twelve  yeeres  after
restored  by  the  Emperour  Marcus  Aurelius  ;  and  afterward
dignified  during  the  government  of  the  Christians  with
an  Episcopall  Sea,  being  under  the  Metropolitan  of
Caesarea. Nicephorus,  and  the  Tripartite  historie  report

201

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1611.

of  a  miraculous  Fountaine  by  the  high-way  side,  where

Christ  would  have  departed  from  the  two  Disciples :  who

when  he  was  conversant  upon  earth,  and  wearied  with  a

longer  journey,  there  washed  his  feet ; from  thenceforth

retayning a curable vertue against all diseases. But

relations  of  that  kind,  have  credite  onely  in  places  farre

distant. In  our  returne,  wee  inclined  a  little  to  the  left

hand,  and  after  a  while  ascended  the  top  of  a  Mountaine,

(whose  Westerne  valley  was  the  field,  they  say,  of  that

battell, when  the Sunne  and Moone stood  still  at  the

commandement  of  Josua.) Out  of  the  ruines  of  an  ancient

building,  a  small  Mosque  is  advanced ; where  they  hold

that  the  Prophet  Samuel  was  buried,  who  had  his  Sepulchre

in  Rama  on  Mount  Ephraim  ;  though  divers  other  Townes

so  seated,  are  so  called,  which  signifieth  High  in  their

Language. But  our  guides  were  well  practised  in  that

precept :

Of  Streames,  Kings,  Fashions,  Kingdomes  askt,  there

showne ;
Answer  to  all :  th'unknowne  relate  as  knowne.

Atque  aliqua  ex  illis  dum  regum  nomina  quaerunt
Quae  loca,  qui  mores,  quaeve  feruntur  aquae  :
Omnia  responde  ; nee  tantum  si  qua  rogabit,
Et  quae  nesciris,  ut  bene  nota  refer. — Ovid.

who  endeavour  to  bring  all  remarkable  places  within  the
compasse  of  their  processions.  The  Mahometans  either
deceived  with  this  tradition,  or  maintayning  the  report  of
their  profite,  would  not  suffer  us  to  enter  but  at  an
excessive  rate ;  which  wee  refused  to  part  with.  The
next  Mountaine  unto  this,  doth  weare  on  his  Crowne,  the
ruines  of  a  Castle  that  belonged  to  the  Machabees.
Another  more  humble,  and  neerer  the  Citie,  presenteth  a
pile  of  stones,  square,  flat,  and  solid :  the  Sepulchre,  they
say,  of  the  seven  brethren  who  were  tortured  to  death  by
Antiochus,  whom  I  rather  judge  to  have  beene  buried  at
Moden,  the  ancient  seat  of  that  Familie ;  which  stands  on
the  uttermost  confines  of  the  Mountaines  of  Judea,  where

202

GEORGE SANDYS  ad.

161 1.
were  to  be  seene  seven  Sepulchres  of  white  marble,  each  Sepulchres,
bearing  a  Pyramis  on  his  square ;  said  by  Josephus  to
have  served  in  his  time  for  Sea-markes.  From  hence  we
approached  the  North-west  side  of  the  Citie,  where  in  the
Vineyards  are  sundry  places  of  burial  hewen  out  of  the
maine  rocke ;  amongst  the  rest,  one  called  the  Sepulchre
of  the  Prophets.  The  first  entrance  large,  and  like  the
mantle-tree  of  a  chimney,  cut  curiously  on  the  out-side :
through  which  we  crept  into  a  little  square  roome,  (every
one  carrying  a  light  in  his  hand)  the  sides  cut  full  of  holes
(in  manner  of  a  Dove-house : )  two  yards  deepe,  and  three
quarters  square.  Out  of  that  roome  wee  descended  by
two  streight  passages  into  two  other  roomes,  likewise  under
ground :  yet  more  spacious,  and  of  better  workmanship,
but  so  rounded  with  the  Sepulchres  as  the  former ;  neigh-
boured with  a  Vault,  which  serves  for  a  Cisterne,  and  filled
with  a  living  Fountaine.  A  little  beyond,  upon  the  West
side  of  a  large  square  Court,  hewen  into  the  rocke  some
three  fathoms  deepe,  and  entred  under  an  arch  of  the
same,  there  is  another  mansion  for  the  dead,  having  a
porch  like  to  that  of  the  Prophets :  and  garnisht  without
(amongst  other  figures)  with  two  great  clusters  of  Grapes,
in  memoriall  of  those,  as  they  say,  which  were  brought
by  the  spies  into  the  host  of  the  Hebrewes.  On  the  left
hand  you  creepe  through  a  difficult  descent,  which  leadeth
into  faire  roomes  under  the  ground,  and  one  within
another,  benched  about  with  coffins  of  stone  bereaft  of  their
covers,  there  being  some  bones  yet  remayning  in  some  of
them.  This  is  famed  to  bee  the  houshold  Monument  of  [Il.viii.
certaine  of  the  Kings  of  Juda. In  which  there  is  nothing  I3l8-]

more  admirable,  then  is  the  artificiall  contriving  of  the
doores,  the  hinges  and  all,  of  the  selfe-same  stone,
unseperated  from  the  rocke  without  other  suppliment.
Hitherto  (if  not  further)  by  all  likelihood  the  old  Citie
extended. From  hence  we  returned  to  the  Covent.

The  day  following  wee  rode  towards  Bethlehem,  which
stands  about  sixe  miles  South  from  Jerusalem.  Going
out  from  the  gate  of  Joppa,  and  turning  on  the  left  hand

203

A.D.
l6ll

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Bershebas
Bath.

Turpentine
tree.

by  the  foot  of  Mount  Sion.  Aloft  on  whose  uttermost
angle  stood  the  Tower  of  David,  (whose  ruines  are  yet
extant)  of  a  wonderfull  strength,  and  admirable  beautie,
adorned  with  shields,  and  the  armes  of  the  mightie.  Below
on  the  right  hand  of  the  way  in  our  passage,  they  shewed
us  a  Fountaine  at  the  Southside  of  a  square  Serraglio ;
delivered  to  be  that  wherein  Bersheba  bathed.  North  of
which,  the  valley  is  crossed  with  a  ruinous  Aquaduct,
which  conveyed  water  unto  the  Temple  of  Salomon.
Ascending  the  opposite  Mountaine,  we  passed  through  a
Countrey,  hilly  and  stony  :  yet  not  utterly  forsaken  of  the
Vine,  though  onely  planted  by  Christians,  in  many  places
producing  Corne,  here  shadowed  with  the  fig-tree,  and
there  with  the  Olive.  Sundry  small  Turrets  dispersed
about,  which  serve  for  solace  as  well  as  for  safe-guard.
Some  two  miles  from  the  Citie,  on  the  left  hand,  and  by
the  high-way  side,  there  groweth  a  Turpentine-tree  yet
flourishing,  which  is  said  to  have  affoorded  a  shelter  to
the  Virgin  Marie,  as  shee  passed  betweene  Bethlehem  and
Jerusalem.  This  tradition  how  ever  absurd,  is  generally
beleeved  by  those  Christians :  a  place  of  high  repute  in
their  devotions.  Towards  the  West  about  two  miles  off,
on  a  little  hill  stands  an  ancient  Tower :  which  is  said,  to

Simeons  house,  have  beene  the  habitation  of  Simeon.  A  mile  beyond  the
foresaid  Tree,  in  the  midst  of  the  way  there  is  a  Cisterne,
vast  within,  and  square  at  the  mouth ;  which  is  called  the
Cisterne  of  the  Starre.  For  that  (as  they  say)  the  wise-men
of  the  East,  there  first  againe  did  see  that  conducting
Starre,  which  went  before  them  to  the  place  of  our
Saviours  nativitie.  A  little  on  the  right  hand  there  are
the  small  remaynes  of  an  ancient  Monasterie,  built,  they
affirme,  in  that  place  where  the  Angell  tooke  up  Abacuck
by  the  haire  of  the  head,  and  conveyed  him  to  Babylon.
Halfe  a  mile  further,  on  the  left  side  of  the  way,  there  is
another  Religious  house,  but  in  good  repaire,  in  forme  of
a  Fortresse,  and  environed  with  high  walls,  to  withstand
the  insolencies  of  the  Infidels ; possessed  by  the  Greeke

EUas.  Coloieros,  and  dedicated  to  Elias. Hard  by  there  is  a  flat

204

Starre  of  the
wise-men.

Abacuck.

GEORGE SANDYS

rocke,  whereon  they  told  us  that  the  Prophet  accustomed
to  sleepe ;  and  that  it  beares  as  yet  the  impression  of  his
bodie.  Indeed  there  are  certaine  hollowes  in  the  same,
but  not  by  my  eyes  apprehended  to  retayne  any  manly
proportion.  As  farre  beyond  are  the  decayes  of  a  Church,
which  stood  (as  they  say)  in  the  place  where  the  Patriarch
Jacob  inhabited.  About  a  mile  further  West  of  the  way,
and  a  little  off,  stands  the  Sepulchre  of  Rachel,  (by  the
Scripture  affirmed  to  have  beene  buried  here  about)  if  the
entirenesse  thereof  doe  not  cunfute  the  imputed  antiquitie  :
yet  kept  perhaps  in  repaire  by  her  offspring,  as  a  Monu-
ment of  venerable  memorie.  The  Tombe  it  selfe
resembleth  a  great  Trunke,  covered  with  a  Cupolo  mounted
on  a  square,  which  hath  on  each  side  an  ample  arch
sustayned  onely  by  the  corners.  This  is  environed  with  a
foure-square  wall ;  within  which  stand  two  other,  little,
but  of  the  same  proportion  ;  kept,  and  used  for  a  place  of
prayer  by  the  Mahometans.  Below  it  on  the  side  of  a
Mountaine  stands  the  ruines  of  that  Rama,  whereof  the
Prophet :  A  voyce  was  heard  in  Rama,  Rachel  weeping  for
her  children,  &c.  From  this  ridge  of  the  hills,  the  Dead
Sea  doth  appeare  as  if  neere  at  hand :  but  not  so  found  by
the  traveller,  for  that  those  high  declining  Mountaines  are
not  to  be  directly  descended.  Within  halfe  a  mile  of
Bethlehem,  separated  from  the  same  by  a  valley,  and  a
little  on  the  left  hand  of  the  way,  are  the  Cisternes  of
David,  whereof  he  so  much  desired  to  drinke,  and  when
they  brought  him  of  the  water,  refused  it :  a  large  deepe
Vault,  now  out  of  use,  having  onely  two  small  tunnels  at
the  top,  by  which  they  draw  up  the  water.

And  now  wee  are  come  to  Bethlehem,  where  in  a  Grot  at
the  East  side  of  the  Citie,  employed  for  a  Stable  (the  Inne
being  pestred  with  strangers)  the  Virgin  fell  in  travell,
and  produced  unto  the  world  a  Saviour.  In  this  Cave
from  the  time  of  Adrian,  unto  the  raigne  of  Constantine,
they  celebrated  the  impious  lamentation  of  Adonis  (much
honoured  by  the  Syrians)  who  above  had  his  Statue
shadowed  with  a  grove  of  Myrtles : which  the  vertuous

205

A.D.
l6ll.

Jacob.

Rachels

Sepulchre.

Dead  Sea.

Davids
Cisternes.

Bethlehem,

Adonis.

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1611.

Helena  subverted,  and  erected  thereupon  this  goodly
Temple  yet  entire,  and  possesst  by  the  Franciscans  of
Jerusalem, of whom some few are here continually

Saint  Maries,  resident ;  called  Saint  Maries  of  Bethlehem :  in  forme
representing  a  Crosse,  the  stalke  whereof  compriseth  the
bodie  ;  entred  at  the  lower  end  through  a  Portico  sustayned
with  sixteene  Pillars.  The  roofe,  in  the  midst,  is  lofty,
fiat,  and  (if  I  forget  not)  of  Cedar :  the  Sides,  of  the  same
fabricke,  but  much  more  humble,  are  upheld  with  foure
rankes  of  Pillars  (ten  in  a  row)  each  of  one  entire  marble,
white,  and  in  many  places  beautifully  speckled  ;  the  largest,
and  fairest  that  ever  I  saw,  whose  upper  ends  doe  declare
that  they  have  in  part  beene  exquisitely  gilded.  The
walls  are  flagged  with  large  tables  of  white  marble,  wel-
nigh  to  the  top  ;  the  rest  adorned  with  Mosaique  painting,
although  now  greatly  defaced.  It  is  both  here  reported,
and  recorded  by  historie,  that  a  Sultan  of  Egypt  allured
with  their  beautie,  set  certaine  Masons  aworke,  to  take
downe  those  Tables,  with  intent  to  have  transported  them
unto  his  Castle  of  Cairo  ; when  a  dreadfull  serpent  issued

[Il.viii.  out  of  the  wall,  and  brake  in  pieces  such  as  were  removed  :

^^•J  so  that  terrified  therewith,  he  desisted  from  his  enterprise.
The  three  upper  ends  of  the  Crosse,  doe  end  in  three
Semi-circles,  having  in  each  an  Altar.  In  the  midst  the
Chancell,  roofed  with  a  stately  Cupolo,  covered  without
with  Lead,  and  garnished  within  with  Mosaique  figures.

This  Church  is  left  for  the  most  part  desolate,  the  Altars
naked,  no  Lamps  maintained,  no  Service  celebrated,
except  at  times  extraordinary :  yet  are  there  a  few  poore
Greekes  and  Armenians,  who  inhabite  within  on  the  right
hand of the entrance, and in the opposite corners,

Monasterie  of  Adjoyning  on  the  left  hand,  stands  the  Monastery  of  the

Franciscans,  Franciscans,  entred  through  the  Church,  sufficiently
spacious,  but  of  no  commendable  building  ;  accommodated
with  divers  Gardens,  and  environed  with  defencible  walls ;
at  whose  North-west  corner  a  tottered  Tower  doth
challenge  regard  for  the  waste  received  in  that  places
protection. They  brought us into their  Chappell, not

206

GEORGE SANDYS  a.d.

161-1.

slightly  set  forth,  and  dedicated  to  Saint  Katherine,  having
Indulgences  conferred  thereupon  from  Mount  Sina. From
which  wee  descended  with  Lights  in  our  hands,  and  then
were  led  by  a  narrow  long  entry  into  a  little  square  Cave,
supported  in  the  midst  with  a  Pillar  of  the  Rocke. On
the  left  hand,  an  Altar,  and  under  that  a  passage  into  a
Vault ; wherein,  they  say,  that  the  Infants  slaine,  by  the  /******
bloudy  Edict  of  Herod,  were  buried. Out  of  this  Cave e*tt  c  er'
or  Chappell,  there  are  two  other  entries : in  that  on  the
right  hand,  stands  the  Sepulcher  of  Eusebius  the  Con-
fessor, and  Disciple  unto  Saint  Jerome :  this  directeth  into
another  Grot, wherein  are two  Tombes, in forme not
unlike  unto  Altars : the  farther  contained  the  body  of
Paula  a  Romane  Ladie,  descended  of  the  ancient  families  Paulas
of  the  Gracchi  and  Cornelii. She  built  foure  Monasteries  ^  ^J-}
neare  adjoyning  to  this  Temple,  (whose  ruines  do  yet  give  ference  ^as
testimony  of  her  pietie,)  one  she  planted  with  men ; the  betwixt  the
three  other  with  Virgins,  who  never  past  the  bounds  of  ancient  and
their  Covents  but  on  Sundayes  onely,  (and  then  attending  later  Monas-
on  their  severall  Governesses)  to  performe  the  Orasons  in %Mmiitis
the  Church, and  Cave  of  the  Nativitie : her selfe the  Those  Hker our
Abbesse  of  one  of  them,  and  so  for  the  space  of  twentie Universities,
yeares did continue. She likewise built an adjoyning  free  from  vow,

Hospitall  for  Pilgrims,  whose  ruines  declare  it  to  have  an*J*tte

1  o #  *  with  arts  and

beene  no  meane  Fabricke. The  other  Tombe  did  cover  sanctitie  as
the  body  of  Saint  Jerome,  who  lived  in  her  time,  and  in  Seminaries  of
the Monasterie which shee had founded: his bones,  the  Church:
together  with  the  bones  of  Eusebius,  were  translated  to  Theb/unsand
Rome,  and  shrined  in  the  Church  of  Santa  Maria  Mag-  m\fh^iffered
giore ; over  which,  Pope  Sixtus  Quintus  hath  erected  a  from  the  later
sumptuous  Chappell. Out  of  this  we  past  into  another  more  degene-
Grot,  which  they  call  his  Cell ; wherein  hee  lay  (as  they  rate-  $jerome
say)  full  fiftie  yeares  and  sixe  moneths,  and  there  twice  MblePaJa
translated the Bible. Returning into the aforeseid  and  her
Chappell  of  the  Innocents,  by  the  other  entry  we  passed  daughter
into  a  Vault  or  Chappell,  twelve  foote  wide,  fortie  long,  Eustochium
and  fifteene  in  height :  the  sides  and  floore  all  lined  with  J^*"'"
faire  white  Marble  : the  compassed  roofe  adorned  with

207

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1611.

Mosse-worke,  and  Mosaique  Gilding,  though  now  much
perished. At  the  upper  end,  in  an  arched  Concave,  stands
Place  of  the an  Altar  garnished  with  a  Table  of  the  Nativitie. Under
this  a  Semi-circle  ;  the  sole  set  forth  with  stones  of  severall
colours,  in  the  forme  of  a  Starre : and  in  the  midst  a
Serpentine,  there  set  to  uphold  the  memory  of  that  place
where  our  Saviour  was  borne :  the  credite  whereof  I  will
neither  impeach,  nor  inforce. In  this  Citie  it  was,  and  in
a  stable ; nor  is  the  report  by  the  site  refuted,  though
under  ground,  hewne  out  of  the  living  Rocke,  as  is  the
rest  before  spoken  of. For  he  that  travels  through  these
Countries,  will  not  wonder  to  see  such  Caves  imployed  to
like  uses. Neither  is  it  likely,  that  they  that  succeeded
those  times  so  neerely,  should  erre  in  the  place  so  celebrated
in their  devotions, and  beautified  with such  cost. On
either  side  of  this  Altar  in  the  Corners,  there  are  two
equall  ascents,  which  Land  on  the  opposite  out-sides  of
the  Chancell,  closed  with  doores  of  Brasse  cut  through,
through  which  they  passe  in their solemne  Procession.
Now  on  the  South  side,  and  neere  unto  the  foote  of  the
staires,  you  descend  by  three  steps  into  a  lesser  Grot :
separated  onely  from  the  former,  by  three  fine  Columnes
of  discoloured  Marble,  which  seeme  to  support  the  over-
hanging Rocke. On  the  West  side  there  is  a  Manger
hewne  out  in  a  Concave,  about  two  foote  high  from  the
floore,  and  a  little  way  hallowed  within  :  wherein,  they  say,
that  our  New-borne  Saviour  was  laid  by  the  Virgine  ; now
flagged  about  with  white  Marble,  as  the  Rocke  that  roofes
it ; at  the  left  end  sustained  with  a  short  Serpentine. In
the  bottome  of  this  Manger,  and  just  in  the  middle,  a
round  Serpentine  is  set,  to  denote  the  place  where  he  lay,
which retaineth, as they would make us beleeve, the
Saint  Jeromes  effigies  of  Saint  Jerome,  miraculous  framed  by  the  naturall
naturallmage.  veines  Qf  the  stone,  in  reward  of  his  often  and  affectionate
kisses. But  surely,  they  bee  the  eyes  of  Faith  that  must
apprehend  it : yet  present  they  it  in  Picture. On  the
opposite  side  of  this  Grot,  there  is  a  Bench  in  the  Rocke,
Magi.  not  unlike  to  an  Altar :  where  the  Magi  of  the  East,  that

208

GEORGE SANDYS  ad.

1611.

were  conducted  hither  by  the  Starre,  disposed,  (as  they  say)
of  their  Presents.

These  places  be  in  the  keeping  of  the  Franciscans,  and
not  lesse  reverenced  then  Calvarie,  or  the  Sepulcher,  visited
also  by  the  Mahometan  Pilgrimes.  Where  Lamps  still
burning  do  expell  the  naturall  darknesse ;  and  give  a
greater  State  thereunto,  then  the  light  of  the  day  could
affoord  it.  Baldwine  the  second  did  honor  this  place  with
an  Episcopal  Sea  (being  before  but  a  Priorie)  adjoyning
thereunto,  together  with  the  Church  of  Ascalon,  many
Townes  and  Villages.  In  the  place  where  this  Citie  stood,
there  are  now  but  a  few  poore  Cottages  standing.  Most
of  the  few  Inhabitants  Greekes  and  Armenians,  who  get  pl-yiii.
a  beggerly  living  by  selling  unto  strangers  the  Models  of  I32°-l

the  Sepulcher,  and  of  the  Grot  of  the  Nativitie ;  cut  in
wood,  or  cast  in  stone,  with  Crosses,  and  such  like
Merchandizes,  and  in  being  serviceable  unto  Pilgrims.

After  dinner  we  descended  a  foote  into  the  Valley  which  Jacobs  fielde.
lyeth  East  of  the  Citie,  fruitfull  in  pasturage,  where  Jacob
fed  his  flocke  (at  this  day  called  his  field)  neere  the  Tower
of  Adar ; but  more  famous for  the  Apparition  of  the  Angelsappari-
Angels,  who  there  brought  to  the  Shepheards  the  glad-  f$T  %***>
tidings  of  our  Salvation. In  the  midst  of  the  field,  on  the
selfe-same  place,  as  is  supposed,  and  two  miles  distant
from Bethlehem, Saint Helena erected a Church, and
dedicated it to the Angels ; now nothing but ruines.
Returning  from  thence,  and  turning  a  little  on  the  left
hand, we  came to the  Village  where those Shepheards
dwelt,  as  yet  so  called  :  in  the  midst  whereof  there  standeth
a  Well ; the  same,  as  the  rumor  goeth,  that  the  blessed  0ur  ladies
Virgine  desired  to  drinke  of,  when  the  churlish  Villagers el*
refusing  to  draw  her  up  water,  it  forth-with  miraculously
flowed  to  the  brim ; greedy  to  passe  through  her  blessed
lips,  and  satisfie  her  longing. Of  this  the  Arabs  would
not  suffer  us  to  drinke  before  we  had  given  them  Money.
Neerer  to  Bethlehem,  and  at  the  foote  of  the  hill  are  the
ruines  of  a  Chappell,  where  Joseph  (as  they  say)  had  his
dwelling,  at  such  time  as  the  Angell  commanded  him  to
viii  209  o

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1611.

flie  into  JEgypt.  Neere  the  top,  and  not  farre  from  the
backe  of  the  Monasterie,  there  is  a  Cave  containing  two
roomes,  one  within,  another  descended  into  by  a  narrow
entrance,  and  in  some  places  supported  by  Pillars.  In
this  it  is  said,  that  Joseph  hid  our  Saviour  and  his  Mother,
whilst  he  prepared  things  necessarie  for  his  journey.  The
stone  thereof  pulverated,  and  often  washed,  of  much  a
little  will  remaine,  and  not  unlike  to  refined  Chalke  ;  which
taken  in  drinke,  is  said  to  have  a  Soveraigne  vertue,  in
restoring  Milke  both  to  Women  and  Cattell,  much  used
by  the  Moores  themselves  for  that  purpose.  Over  which
stood  one  of  the  Nunneries  built  by  Paula,  now  onely
shewing  the  foundation,  and  wherein  she  dyed.  These
places  seene,  we  re-entred  the  Monasterie,  and  there
reposed  our  selves  the  night  following.

Each  of  us  bestowing  a  piece  of  Gold  on  the  Vicar,
betimes  in  the  morning  we  departed,  bending  our  course
to  the  Mountaines  of  Judaea,  lying  West  from  Bethlehem  :
neere  to  which,  on  the  side  of  the  opposite  hill,  we  past  by

Bez.ec  a  little  Village,  called  (as  I  take  it)  Bezec  ;  inhabited  onely
by  Christians :  mortall  (as  they  say)  to  the  Mahometans,
that  attempted  to  dwell  therein. About  two  miles  further

Bethsur.  we  passed  by  Bethsur,  seated  in  a  bottome  betweene  two
rocky  Mountaines,  once  a  strong  Fort :  first  built  by
Rhoboam,  and  after  repaired  by  the  Machabies  :  famous  for
sundry  sieges  ;  being  in  the  upper  way  betweene  Jerusalem
and  Gaza,  where  wee  saw  the  ruines  of  an  ample  Church ;
below,  that,  a  Fountaine  not  unbeholding  by  Art,  whose
pleasant  Waters  are  forth-with  drunke  up  by  the  earth
that produced them. Heere, they say, that Philip

Eunuchs  baptized  the  Eunuch ;  whereupon  it  retaineth  the  name
aptwne.  Qf  ^  Ethiopian  Fountaine.  And  no  question,  but  the
adjoyning  Temple  was  erected  out  of  devotion  to  the
honour  of  the  place,  and  memorie  of  the  fact.  Yet
seemeth  it  strange  unto  me,  that  a  Chariot  should  be  able
to  passe  those  rocky  and  declining  Mountaines,  where
almost  a  Horse  can  hardly  keepe  footing.  Having
travelled  about  a  mile  and  a  halfe  further,  we  came  to  the

210

GEORGE SANDYS  a.d.

1611.

Cave  where  John  the  Baptist  is  said  to  have  lived  from  the  John  Baptists
age  of  seven,  untill  such  time  as  hee  went  unto  the
Wilderness  by  Jordan,  sequestred  from  the  abode  of  men,
and  feeding  on  suchwilde  nourishment  as  these  uninhabited
places  affoorded.  This  Cave  is  seated  on  the  Northerne
side  of  a  desart  Mountaine  (onely  beholding  to  the  Locust
tree)  hewne  out  of  the  precipitating  Rocke,  so  as  difficultie
to  be  ascended  or  descended  to  :  entred  at  the  East  corner,
and  receiving  light  from  a  window  in  the  side.  At  the
upper  end  there  is  a  Bench  of  the  selfe-same  Rocke,
whereon  (as  they  say)  he  accustomed  to  sleepe ;  of  which,
who  so  breakes  a  piece  off,  stands  forth-with  excom-
municate. Over  this,  on  a  little  flat,  stands  the  ruines  of
a  Monasterie,  on  the  South  side  naturally  walled  with  the
steepe  of  the  Mountaine :  from  whence  there  gusheth  a
living  Spring,  which  entreth  the  Rocke,  and  againe  bursteth
forth  beneath  the  mouth  of  the  Cave ;  A  place  that  would
make  solitarinesse  delightfull,  and  stand  in  comparison
with  the  turbulent  pompe  of  Cities.  This  over-looketh  a
profound  Valley,  on  the  far  side  hem'd  with  aspiring
Mountaines ;  whereof  some  are  cut  (or  naturally  so)  in
degrees  like  Allies,  which  would  bee  else  unaccessably
fruitlesse,  whose  levels  yet  beare  the  stumps  of  decayed
Vines,  shadowed  not  rarely  with  Olives  and  Locusts.  And
surely  I  thinke,  that  all,  or  most  of  those  Mountaines  have
beene  so  husbanded,  else  could  this  little  Countrey  have
never  sustained  such  a  multitude  of  people.  After  wee
had  fed  of  such  provision  as  was  brought  us  from  the
Citie,  by  other  of  the  Fraternitie  that  there  met  us,  wee
returned  towards  Jerusalem,  leaving  the  way  of  Bethlehem
on  the  right  hand,  and  that  of  Emaus  on  the  left.  The
first  place  of  note  that  we  met  with,  was  there  where  once
stood  the  dwelling  of  Zacharie,  seated  on  the  side  of  a  Zacharies
fruitfull  hill,  well  stored  with  Olives  and  Vineyards.  house%
Hither  came  the  blessed  Virgine  to  visite  her  Cousin
Elizabeth.  Here  died  Elizabeth,  and  here  in  a  Grot  on  Elizabethan*
the  side  of  a  Vault  or  Chappell,  lies  buried  :  over  which  a  ane'
goodly  Church  was  erected,  together  with  a  Monasterie ;

211

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

l6ll.

whereof  now  little  standeth  but  a  part  of  the  Wals,  which
offer  to  the  view  some  fragments  of  painting,  which  shew
that  the  rest  have  beene  exquisite.  Beyond,  and  lower  is
our  Ladies  Fountaine,  (so  called  of  the  Inhabitants)  which
[Il.vni.  maintaineth a little current through the neighbouring

1321 -J  valley.  Neere  this,  in  the  bottome,  and  uttermost  extent
thereof,  there  standeth  a  Temple,  once  sumptuous,  now
desolate ;  built  by  Helena,  and  dedicated  to  Saint  John
Baptist,  in  the  place  where  Zacharie  had  another  house
where  the  Prophet  was  borne,  in  a  roome  hewen  out  of  the
rocke ;  of  principall  devotion  with  those  Christians :
possest,  as  the  rest,  by  the  beastly  Arabians,  who  defile  it
with  their  Cattell,  and  employ  it  to  the  basest  of  uses.
Transcending  the  Iesse  steepe  hills,  and  passing  through
Rose  valleys,  valleys  of  their  Roses  voluntarily  plentifull ;  after  a  while
wee  came  to  a  Monasterie  seated  in  a  streight  betweene
two  rockie  Mountaines,  environed  with  high  walls,  and
entred  by  a  doore  of  Iron ;  where  a  Bishop  of  the
Georgians  hath  his  residence,  who  curteously  entertayned
us.  Within  they  have  a  handsome  Chappell,  at  the  upper
end  an  Altar,  and  under  that  a  pit,  in  which  they  say  that
the  Palme  did  grow  (but  rather,  if  any,  the  Olive,  whereof
that  place  hath  store)  of  which  a  part  of  the  Crosse  was
made :  for  it  was  framed  (as  they  report)  of  foure  severall
woods ;  the  foot  of  Cedar,  the  bole  of  Cypresse,  the
transome  of  Palme,  and  the  title  of  Olive.  This  is  called
Monasterie  of  thereupon  the  Monasterie  of  the  holy  Crosse.  Where  in
the  holy  stead of Bells they strike on a hollow beame (as the

Grecians  doe  in  the  Temple  of  Golgotha)  to  summon
their  assemblies.  Betweene  this  and  Jerusalem,  we  saw
nothing  worth  noting,  that  hath  not  beene  spoken  of
already.

The  day  following,  we  went  to  review  the  remarkable

places  about the Citie. Passing  by  the  Castle  of  the

Pisans,  on  the  left  hand  entring  at  a  little  square  passage,

Chappell wee  were  shewed  a  small  Chappell,  the  doore  and  windowes

unlucky  to rammed  up  :  for  that  (as  they  say)  the  Mahometans  became

mortally  sicke,  that,  though  but  by  chance  did  come  into

212

Mahometans.

GEORGE SANDYS  ad.

161 1.
it,  standing  where  stood  the  Temple  of  Saint  Thomas.
From  hence  wee  were  brought  to  the  Palace  of  Annas,
destroyed  by  the  Seditious  in  the  time  of  the  siege,  where
now  standeth  a  Church  dedicated  to  the  blessed  Angels,
and  belonging  to  the  Armenians,  who  have  their  dwellings
about  it.  Within  the  Court  there  is  an  old  Olive  tree,
environed  with  a  low  wall ;  unto  which,  it  is  said,  that  they
bound  our  Saviour.  Turning  on  the  right  hand,  wee
went  out  at  a  Port  of  Sion.  South  and  not  farre  from
thence,  on  the  midst  of  the  mount  is  the  place,  as  they  say,
where  Christ  did  eate  his  last  Supper ;  where  also  after  Last  Supper
his  resurrection,  the  doores  being  shut,  hee  appeared  to
his  Apostles  ;  where  they  received  the  holy  Ghost ;  where
Peter  converted  three  thousand ;  and  where,  as  they  say
also,  they  held  the  first  Councel,  in  which  the  Apostles
Creed  was  decreed.  Here  Helena  built  a  most  sumptuous
Temple  including  therein  a  Coenaculum,  where  that  marble
Pillar  was  preserved  that  stood  before  in  the  Palace  of
Pilate  ;  to  which  they  tyed  our  Saviour  when  they  whipped
him.  This  Church  subverted  by  the  Saracens,  in  the  selfe-
same  place  the  Franciscans  had  a  Monasterie  erected,  who
in  the  yeere  1561.  were  removed  by  the  Turkes :  they
building  here  a  Mosque  of  their  owne,  into  which  no
Christian  is  permitted  to  enter.  Yet  not  in  the  respects
aforesaid,  so  reverenced  by  the  Infidels,  but  in  that  it  is
delivered  by  tradition  (and  not  unlikely)  that  David  had  David's
there  his  Sepulchre.  Betweene  this,  and  the  walls  of  the  S^uftir*.
Citie,  the  Franckes  have  their  buriall,  where  lie  sixe
English-men,  sent  (as  may  bee  suspected)  unto  their  long-  Englishmen
homes  not  many  yeeres  since,  though  coloured  by  the  murthered
Franciscans,  in  whose  Monasterie  they  lay,  with  pretence  '  nen'
of  Divine  vengeance  for  the  supposed  murder  of  their
Drogaman.  Seven  they  were  in  all,  all  alive  and  well  in
one  day,  sixe  dead  in  the  other ;  the  out-liver  becomming
a  convert  to  their  Religion.  Turning  a  little  on  the  left
hand,  we  came  to  a  small  Church,  inclosed  within  a  square
wall,  arched  within,  with  a  walke  on  the  top  in  manner  of
a  Cave  ;  the  habitation  of  the  Armenians,  who  have  of  this

213

A.D.
l6ll.

Palace  of
Caiphas.

Peters

Denial!.

Grave-stone.
Gehinnon.

Aceldama.

[Il.viii.

1322.]
Flesh  devour-
ing Earth.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Church  the  custodie.  Heere  flourished  the  proud  Palace
of  Caiphas,  in  which  our  Saviour  was  buffetted,  spit  upon,
and  so  spitefully  reviled.  Here  Helena  built  a  taire
Church  to  Saint  Peter ;  but  that  destroyed,  in  the  roome
thereof  this  lesse  was  erected,  and  dedicated  to  Saint
Saviour.  On  the  right  hand  in  the  Court,  they  undertake
to  shew  where  the  fire  was  made,  by  which  Peter  stood
when  he  denied  his  Master :  and  at  the  side  of  the  Church
doore,  the  chapter  of  a  Pillar,  whereon  the  Cocke  crowing
did  move  him  to  contrition.  At  the  upper  end  of  the
Church,  upon  a  large  Altar  lieth  a  Stone,  that  (as  they
say)  which  was  rolled  against  the  mouth  of  the  Sepulchre.

From  hence  we  descended  into  the  valley  of  Gehinnon,
which  divideth  Mount  Sion  from  the  Mountaine  of
Offence,  so  called  for  that  Salomon  by  the  perswasion  of
his  wives  there  sacrificed  to  Chamoch  and  Molech ;  but
now  by  these  Christians  called  the  Mountaine  of  111
counsell,  where  they  say,  the  Pharises  tooke  counsell
against  Jesus ;  whose  heighth  yet  shewes  the  reliques  of
no  meane  buildings.  This  valley  is  but  streight,  now
serving  for  little  use,  heretofore  most  delightfull,  planted
with  Groves  and  watered  with  Fountaines ;  wherein  the
Hebrews  sacrificed  their  children  to  Molech.  On  the
South  side  of  this  valley,  neere  where  it  meeteth  with  the
valley  of  Jehosaphat,  mounted  a  good  heighth,  on  the  side
of  the  Mountaine  is  Aceldama,  or  the  field  of  bloud ;
purchased  with  the  restored  reward  of  Treason,  for  a  buriall
place  for  strangers.  In  the  midst  whereof  a  large  square
roome  was  made  by  the  mother  of  Constantine :  the  South
side  walled  with  the  naturall  rocke ;  flat  at  the  top,  and
equall  with  the  upper  levell.  Out  of  which  ariseth
certaine  small  Cupolos  open  in  the  midst  to  let  downe  the
dead  bodies.  Through  which  we  might  see  the  bottome
all  covered  with  bones ;  and  certaine  Corses  but  newly  let
downe  :  it  being  now  the  Sepulchre  of  the  Armenians.  A
greedy  Grave  ;  and  great  enough  to  devoure  the  dead  of  a
whole  Nation.  For  they  say,  (and  I  beleeve  it)  that  the
Earth  thereof  within  the  space  of  eight  and  fortie  houres,

214

GEORGE SANDYS  a.d.

1611.

will  consume  the  flesh  that  is  laid  thereon. The  like  is
said  of  Saint  Innocents  Church-yard  in  Paris :  and  he  that
sees  the  multitude  of  bones,  that  are  there  piled  about  it,
the daily burials (it being a generall Receptacle for
strangers) and smalnesse of the  circuit, may be easily
induced  to  credit. And  why  might  not the  Earth  be
transported  from  hence,  as  well  as  that  at  Rome  in  Campo
Sancto,  brought  thither  in  two  hundred  and  seventie  ships
by  the  commandement  of  the  aforesaid  Empresse  ? which
though  changing  soyles  retayneth  her  vertue : it  being
also  a  place  of  buriall  for  Forreiners. In  the  Rocke  about
there  are  divers  Sepulchers,  and  some  in  use  at  this  day :
having  great  stones  rolled  against  their  mouthes  according
to  the  ancient  custome. Beyond  on  the  point  of  the  Hill,
a  Cave  hewne  out  of  the  Rocke,  consisting  of  severall  Cave.
Roomes,  is  said  to  have  hidden  sixe  of  the  Apostles  in  the
time  of  Christs  Passion  : first  made  without  doubt  for  a
Sepulcher  ;  and  after  serving  for  an  Hermitage  :  the  Roofe
of  the  larger  Roome  retayning  some  shew  of  gilding.
Below,  where  the  Valley  of  Gehinnon  and  Jehosaphat,  like  Valley  of
two  conjoyning  streames  doe  trent  to  the  South,  there  is  a  Jehosaphat.
dry  Pit ; where  the  Priests  are  said  to  have  hid  the  sacred
fire  when  the  Jewes  were  carried  captive  into  Babylon  :  and
seeking  it  after  their  returne  did  find  it  converted  into
water. But  Nehemiah  caused  it  to  be  sprinkled  on  the
Altar :  when  forth-with  with  the  beames  of  the  Sunne  it
miraculously  flamed. This  Valley  of  Jehosaphat  (so  called
of  that  good  King)  from  hence  extendeth  full  North,  and
then  enclineth  a  little  to  the  West,  first  presenting  (though
naturall)  no  other  then  a  large  dry  Ditch  to  the  East  of
the Citie  contracted  betweene  it, and the  over-pearing
Hils  of  the  opposite  Olivet. It  is  said  to  be  about  two
miles  long,  and  if  it  be  so,  but  short  ones  :  where  broadest
fruitfull ; watered  by  the  Torrent  Cedron,  which  runneth  Cedron.
no  longer  then  fedde  with  showres :  losing  his  intermitted
streames  in  the  Lake  of  Asphaltis. It  was  also  called  the
Valley  of  Cedron,  and  of  the  King : where  the  generall
Judgement shall be, if the Jewes or Latines may be

2I5

A.D.
l6l  I.

Esay  sazvne.

Siloe.

Zacharies
Sepulcher.

PURCHAS HIS PILGR1MES

beleeved ;  who  ground  their  opinions  upon  the  Prophesie
of  Joel :  which  I  will  not  gain-say,  since  some  of  our
Divines  have  of  late  so  laboured  to  approve  it.  Of  the
same  opinion  are  the  Mahometans.  In  the  wall  above  it,
there  is  a  window  not  farre  from  the  Golden  Gate :  where
they  say,  that  Mahomet  shal  sit  whilst  Christ  doth  execute
Justice.  Passing  to  the  Citie  side  of  the  Valley,  at  the
foot  of  the  Hill,  and  East  of  the  South-east  corner,  is  the
place  where  the  Prophet  Esay  was  sawne  in  sunder  by  the
Commandement  of  Manasses  his  Grand-father  by  the
Mother  :  and  there  buried,  where  there  is  a  little  Pavement
used  for  a  place  of  Prayer  by  the  Mahometans.  Close
below  this  stood  the  Oke  Roguel,  where  now  a  white
Mulbery  is  cherished.  North  of  it,  in  a  gut  of  the  Hill
(above  which  in  the  wall  stood  the  Tower)  was  the  fish-
poole  of  Siloe :  contayning  not  above  halfe  an  Acre  of
ground,  now  dry  in  the  bottome :  and  beyond  the  Foun-
tayne  that  fed  it :  now  no  other  then  a  little  Trench  walled
in  on  the  sides,  full  of  filthy  water :  whose  upper  part  is
obscured  by  a  Building  (as  I  take  it  a  Mosque)  where
once  flourished  a  Christian  Church  built  by  Saint  Helena.
Deprived  of  those  her  salubrious  streames ;  yet  held  in
honour  for  their  former  vertues.  Passing  along  wee  came
to  our  Ladies  Fountayne  (upon  what  occasion  they  so  call
it,  is  not  worth  the  relating)  in  a  deepe  Cave  of  the  Rocke,
descended  into  by  a  large  paire  of  staires,  and  replenisht
with  pleasant  waters.  Here  the  Valley  streightning,  and
a  little  beyond  no  broader  then  serves  for  a  Channell  to  the
Torrent,  on  the  other  side  stands  the  Sepulcher  of
Zacharie,  who  was  slaine  betweene  the  Temple  and  the
Altar :  all  of  the  naturall  Rocke,  eighteene  foot  high,
foure  square,  and  beautified  with  Doricke  Columnes  of  the
same  unseparated  stone,  sustayning  the  Cornish,  and  topt
like  a  pointed  Diamond.  Close  to  this  there  is  another  in
the  upright  Rocke  ;  the  Front  like  the  side  of  an  open
Gallerie,  supported  with  Marble  Pillars,  now  betweene
rammed  up  with  stones.  Within  a  Grot,  whither  James
retyred  (as  they  say)  after  the  Passion  of  our  Saviour,  with

216

GEORGE SANDYS  a.d.

1611.
purpose  never  to  have  received  sustenance  untill  he  had
seene  him :  who  in  that  place  appeared  unto  him  after  his
Resurrection.  In  memoriall  whereof  the  Christians  erected
a  Church  hard  by :  whose  Ruines  are  now  ruined.  A
little  farther  there  is  a  stone  Bridge  of  one  Arch,  which
passes  the  Torrent.  In  a  Rocke  at  the  foot  thereof,  there
are  certayne  Impressions :  made  (as  they  say)  by  our
Saviours  feet  when  they  led  him  through  the  water.  At
the  East  end  of  this  Bridge,  and  a  little  on  the  North,
stands  the  Pillar  of  Absolon  ;  which  he  here  erected  in  his  dbsohns
life  time,  to  retayne  the  memorie  of  his  name,  in  that  his  Ptllar-
Issue  Male  fayled,  (but  he  was  not  buried  therein)  being
yet  entyre  and  of  a  goodly  Fabricke :  rising  in  a  loftie
square  ;  below  adorned  with  halfe  Columnes,  wrought  out
of  the  sides  and  corners  of  the  Doricke  forme :  and  then
changing  into  a  round,  a  good  height  higher  doth  grow
to  a  point  in  fashion  of  a  Bell :  all  framed  of  the  growing
stone.  Against  this  there  lyeth  a  great  heape  of  stones
which  increaseth  daily.  For  both  Jewes  and  Mahometans
passing  by,  doe  throw  stones  against  it :  yet  execrating  Siom
Absolon  for  his  Rebellion  against  David.  Adjoyning  throwm^'
there  is  a  large  square,  but  lower  by  far,  which  hath  an
entrance  like  the  Frontispice  of  a  Porch  cut  curiously
without ;  the  earth  almost  reaching  to  the  top  of  the
entrance :  having  a  Grot  within  hewne  out  of  the  Rocke  :
some  say,  a  Kingly  Sepulcher ;  perhaps  appertayning  to
the  former.  A  little  more  North  and  up  the  Torrent,  at
the  foot  of  Olivet,  once  stood  the  Village  Gethsemani ;  the  Gethsemani.
place  yet  fruitfull  in  Olives :  and  hard  by  the  delightfull
Garden  wherein  our  Saviour  was  betrayed.

They point  out the  place  where he left two of  his  [ILviii.
Disciples,  and  a  little  higher  the  third  when  he  went  to  1323-]

pray,  and  with  all  the  place  where  he  was  taken.  In  this
Garden  there  is  also  a  stone,  whereon  they  say  that  our
Lady  sate,  and  beheld  the  Martyrdome  of  Saint  Steven,
who  suffered  on  the  side  of  the  opposite  Hill.  Without
the  said  Garden,  in  the  joyning  of  two  wayes,  they  shewed
us  the  place,  as  they  will  have  it,  where  Saint  Thomas

217

A.D.
l6ll.

Sepulchers  of
the  blessed
Virgin  and  her
Parents.

Turkish
womens  devo-
tion to  the
blessed
Virgin.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRTMES

stood,  when  incredulous  forsooth  of  our  Ladies  Assump-
tion, she  let  fall  her  Girdle  to  informe  his  beliefe.

And  now  we  are  come  to  the  Sepulcher  of  the  blessed
Virgin,  made  thus,  as  it  is,  by  the  Mother  of  Constantine.
Before  it  a  Court ; the  building  above  ground,  a  square
pile  onely,  flat  at  the  top,  and  neatly  wrought,  like  the
largest  Portico  to  a  Temple. You  enter  at  the  South-side,
and  forth-with  descend  by  a  goodly  paire  of  staires  of
fiftie  steps :  about  the  midst  of  the  descent,  are  two  small
opposite  Chappels ; in  that  on  the  right  hand  are the
Sepulchers  of  Joachim  and  Anna ; in  that  on  the  left  of
Joseph :  the  Parents  and  Spouse  of  the  Mother  of  Jesus.
These staires doe leade you into a spacious Church,
stretching  East  and  West,  walled  on  each  side,  and  arched
above  with  the  naturall  Rocke. Upon  the  right  hand  in
the  midst  there  is  a  little  square  Chappell,  framed  of  the
eminent  Rocke,  but  flagged  both  within  and  without  with
white  Marble,  entred  at  two  doores. At  the  far  side  her
Tombe,  which  taketh  up  more  then  the  third  part  of  the
Room,  now  in  forme  of  an  Altar :  under  which,  they  say,
that  she  was  decently  buryed  by  the  Apostles ; and  the
third  day  after  assumed  into  Heaven  by  the  Angels. In
this there  burneth  eighteen  Lamps  continually ; partly
maintained  by  the  Christians,  &  partly  by  the  Mahometans,
who  have  this  place  in  an  especiall  veneration. Neere  the
East  Semicircle  of  the  Church,  there  standeth  a  great  Altar
(over  which  the  little  light  that  this  darke  place  hath,  doth
descend  by  a  Cupolo,)  neere  the  West  another,  but  both
unfurnished ; and by the former a Well of excellent
Water. In  a  Canton  of  the  Wall,  right  against  the  North
end  of  the  Sepulcher,  there  is  a  Clift  in  the  Rock,  where
the  Turkes  do  affirme,  that  our  Lady  did  hide  her  selfe,
when  persecuted  by  the  Jewes ; into  which  I  have  seene
their  women  to  creepe,  and  give  the  cold  Rocke  affec-
tionate kisses. The  opposite  Canton  is  also  used  for  an
Oratory  by  the  Mahometans,  who  have  the  keeping  of  the
whole, and will not suffer us to enter of free cost.
Remounting  the  same  staires,  not  farre  off  on  the  left

218

GEORGE SANDYS  a.d.

1611.

hand,  towards  the  East,  and  not  above  a  stone  cast  from
the  Garden  of  Gethsamani,  a  straite  passage  descendeth
into  a  vast  round  Cave,  all  of  the  naturall  Rocke,  the
Roofe  confirmed  with  Arches  of  the  same,  receiving  a
dimme  light  from  a  little  hole  in  the  top,  in  times  past  all
over  curiously  painted.  The  place,  they  say,  where  Christ
did  pray,  when  in  that  bloudie  agonie  he  was  comforted  by
the  Angels.  From  hence  wee  bent  our  course  to  the  Citie.
High  on  the  Hill,  where  three  wayes  meete,  and  upon
the  flat  of  a  Rocke,  is  the  place  where  Saint  Steven  (who
bore  the  first  Palme  of  Martyrdome)  was  stoned  to  death.
The  stones  thereabout  have  a  red  rust  on  them ;  which,
they  say,  give  testimonie  of  his  bloud-shed.  A  little
above,  we  entred  the  Citie  at  the  gate  of  Saint  Steven,
(where  on  each  side  a  Lion  Retrograde  doth  stand)  called
in  times  past  the  Port  of  the  Valley,  and  of  the  flocke ;
for  that  the  Cattell  came  in  at  this  gate,  which  were  to  be
sacrificed  in  the  Temple,  and  were  sold  in  the  Market
place  adjoyning.  On  the  left  hand  there  is  a  stone  bridge,
which  passeth  at  the  East  end  of  the  North  wall  into  the
Court  of  the  Temple  of  Salomon :  the  head  to  the  Poole
Bethesda,  underneath  which  it  hath  a  conveyance,  called  Bethesda.
also  Probaticum,  for  that  the  Sacrifices  were  therein
washed  ere  delivered  to  the  Priests.  It  had  five  Ports
built  thereto  by  Salomon  ;  in  which  continually  lay  number
of  diseased  persons.  For  an  Angell  at  certaine  seasons
troubled  the  water ;  and  he  that  could  next  descend  there-
into was  perfectly  cured.  Now  a  great  square  profunditie,
Greene,  and  uneven  at  the  bottome,  into  which  a  barren
Spring  doth  drill  from  betweene  the  stones  of  the  North-
ward Wall,  and  stealeth  away  almost  undiscerned.  The
place  is  for  a  good  depth  hewne  out  of  the  Rocke,  confined
above  on  the  North-side  with  a  steepe  Wall,  on  the  West
with  high  Buildings  (perhaps  a  part  of  the  Castle  of
Antonia)  where  are  two  doores  to  descend  by,  now  all  that
are,  halfe  choked  with  Rubbidge ;  and  on  the  South  with
the  Wall  of  the  Court  of  the  Temple :  whereof  it  is  fit
that  something  bee  spoken ; although  not suffered to

219

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1611.

enter  without  the  forfeiture  of  our  lives,  or  renouncing  of
our  Religion.

I  will  not  speake  of  the  former  forme,  and  magnificencie
thereof,  by  sacred  Pens  so  exactly  described. First  built
Salomons by  Salomon,  destroyed  by  Nebuchadnezzar,  re-edified  by
Temple.  Zerubabel,  (yet  so  far  short  of  the  first  in  glory,  that  those

wept  to  behold  it,  who  had  beheld  the  former)  new  built  or
rather  sumptuously  repayred  by  Herod  the  Great ;  and
lastly,  utterly  subverted  by  Titus.  The  Jewes  assayed  to
re-edifie  it  in  the  Reigne  of  Adrian,  of  whom  he  slue  an
infinite  number,  levelled  it  with  the  floore,  and  threw  the
Rubbidge  into  the  Valley  of  Jehosaphat,  to  make  it  lesse
steepe,  and  the  place  lesse  defenceable,  planting  in  the
Roome  thereof  a  Grove,  which  hee  consecrated  unto
Jupiter.  Afterward  Julian  the  Apostata,  to  disproove  the
Prophesie  of  our  Saviour,  did  licence  the  Jewes  to  re-build
it,  furnishing  them  with  mony  out  of  his  Treasurie  :  when
loe,  a  terrible  Earth-quake  shooke  downe  what  they  had
begun ;  and  a  flame  bursting  forth,  devoured  the  Work-
men, reported  by  Amianus  Marcellinus  a  Pagan,  and
living  in  those  times.  But  who  built  this  that  now
standeth,  is  doubtfull.  Some  doe  attribute  it  to  the
Christians ;  others  to  a  Prince  of  the  Arabians,  (which  is
confirmed  by  the  Christians  of  these  Countries)  and  hee
[Il.viii.  the  Saracen  Omer,  next  Successor  unto  Mahomet. Seated

I324-J  it  is  upon  Mount  Moria,  in  the  South-east  corner  of  the
Citie ;  without  doubt  in  the  very  place  where  Salomons
stood :  the  more  eminent  building  consisting  of  an  eight
square  round  of  a  blewish  stone,  adorned  with  adjoyning
Pillars,  and  Tarrast  above.  In  the  midst  of  the  shelving
Roofe,  another  upright  aspireth,  though  lesse  by  far,  yet
the  same  in  forme  and  substance  with  the  former,  being
covered  over  with  a  Cupolo  of  Lead.  To  the  West  of
this  a  long  building  adjoyneth,  like  the  bodie  of  a  Church,
compast  above,  and  no  higher  then  the  under  Tarras  of
the  other,  but  like  it  in  colour.  Now  the  Court  (the  same
with  that  of  the  old  Temple)  is  just  foure  square  every
way,  about  a  flights  shoot  over. In  the  East  Wall,  which

220

GEORGE SANDYS  a.d.

1611.

is  also  a  Wall  to  the  Citie,  stands  the  Golden  Gate,  (so  Golden  Gate,
called  in  that  it  was  gilded)  which  belonged  onely  to
the  Temple,  through  which  Christ  passed  twice;  first  in
triumph,  and  after  a  Captive.  It  is  said  that  the  Emperour
Heraclius  returning  from  his  Persian  Victory,  attempted
to  have  entred  thereat  in  all  his  glory ;  but  was  miracu-  Turkish
lously  prohibited,  untill  he  had  put  off  all  his  Princely  t0*  me'
Ornaments ;  in  a  simple  habite  bearing  that  part  of  the
Crosse  of  Christ  on  his  shoulders,  which  he  had  recovered
from  the  Persians.  This  Gate  is  now  rammed  up  by  the
Turkes,  to  prevent  as  some  say,  a  Prophesie  :  which  is,  that
the  Citie  should  there  be  entred  by  the  Christians.  A
part  of  the  South-side,  is  also  inclosed  with  the  wall  of
the  Citie.  The  rest  not  inferiour  in  strength,  surrounded
with  a  deepe  Trench  hewne  into  the  Rocke :  though  now
much  choaked,  heretofore  inhabited  in  the  bottome  like  a
street.  In  the  midst  of  this  out-court,  there  is  another ;
wherein  the  aforesaid  Mosque  doth  stand,  raised  some  two
yards  above  it,  and  garnished  on  the  sides  with  little
Turrets,  through  which  ascended ;  all  paved  with  white
Marble  (the  spoile  of  Christian  Churches)  where  the
Mahometans,  as  well  as  within,  doe  performe  their
particular  Oraysons.  Sundry  low  buildings  there  are
adjoyning  to  the  wall :  as  I  suppose,  the  Habitation  of
their  Santons.  In  the  midst  of  that,  on  the  South-side,
there  is  a  handsome  Temple  covered  with  Lead ;  by  the
Christians  called  the  Church  of  the  Purification  of  the
Virgine :  now  also  a  Mosque.  Godfrey  of  Bullein,  with
the  rest  of  the  Citie  tooke  this  place  by  assault,  and  slue
within  the  circuit  thereof  tenne  thousand  Saracens.  By
him  then  made  a  Cathedrall  Church :  erecting  Lodgings
about  it  for  the  Patriarch  and  his  Canons.  Into  which
there  are  now  but  two  entrances :  that  on  the  West ;  and
this  Gate  over  the  head  of  the  Poole  Bethesda  (called  of
old  the  Horse-gate,  for  that  here  they  left  their  Horses,
it  beeing  not  lawfull  to  ride  any  further)  resembling  the
Gate  of  a  Citie.  One  thing  by  the  way  may  bee  noted :
that whereas our Churches turne to the East, the

221

A.D.
l6ll.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Jaachims
house.

Temple  of  Salomon  regarded  the  West,  perhaps  in  respect
of  Mount  Calvarie.

Repassing  the  aforesaid  Bridge,  (seeing  we  might
proceed  no  farther)  on  the  North-side  of  the  street  that
stretcheth  to  the  West,  now  in  a  remote  corner,  stood
the  House  of  Jaachim,  where  a  goodly  Church  was  built
to  the  honour  of  Saint  Anna,  with  a  Monasterie  adjoyning
of  which  some  part  yet  remayneth,  but  polluted  with  the
Mahometan  Superstition.  Turning  backe,  we  tooke  up
the  said  street  to  the  West :  not  far  onward,  at  the  left
Piiates Palace,  hand  stood  the  Palace  of  Pilate,  without  all  question  the
Castle  of  Antonia,  neere  adjoyning  to  the  wall  of  the
Temple,  where  now  the  Sanziacke  hath  his  Residence ;
deprived  of  those  lofty  Towers,  and  scarce  appearing  above
the  wals  that  confine  it.  On  the  right  hand,  at  the  far  end
of  a  street  that  pointeth  to  the  North,  stood  the  stately
Mansion  of  Herod  :  of  which  some  signes  there  are  left,
that  witnesse  a  perished  excellency.  Now  at  the  West
corner  of  that  of  Piiates,  where  the  wall  for  a  space  doth
turne  to  the  East,  there  are  a  paire  of  high  staires  which
leade  to  the  place  of  Justice,  and  Throne  of  the  Romane
President,  where  the  Saviour  of  the  World,  was  by  the
World  condemned.  The  staires  that  they  say  then,  were
called  Scala  Sancta,  I  have  seene  at  Rome  neere  Saint
Johns  in  the  Lateran ;  translated  thither  by  Constantine.
Three  paire  there  are  in  one  Front,  divided  but  by  wals :
the  middlemost  those :  being  of  white  Marble,  and
eighteene  in  number ;  ascended  and  worne  by  the  knees
of  the  Suppliants,  who  descend  by  the  other.  At  the  top
there  is  a  little  Chappell  called  Sanctum  Sanctorum,  where
they  never  say  Masse  :  and  upon  this  occasion.  A  holy
Father  in  the  Roome  adjoyning,  having  consumed  most
part  of  the  night  in  his  Devotions,  is  said,  an  houre  before
the  dawning,  to  have  seene  a  procession  of  Angels  passe
by  him,  some  singing,  and  others  perhaps  that  had  worse
voyces,  bearing  Torches  :  amongst  whom  Saint  Peter  with
the  Eucharist ;  who  executed  there  his  Pontificall
Function  :  and  that  done  returned. This  rumored  the  day

Judgment
place.

Sanctum
Sanctorum.

222

GEORGE SANDYS  ad.

1611.

following about the Citie, numbers of people flockt
thither ; who found the Roome all to be dropt with
Torches  in  confirmation  of  this  Relation. Whereupon
decreed  it  was,  that  not  any  (as  not  worthy)  should  say
Masse  on  that  Altar. Now  the  way  betweene  the  place
of  those  staires  and  Mount  Calvarie,  is  called  the  Dolorous  Dolorous  way.
way :  alongst  which  our  Saviour  was  led  to  his  Passion  :
in  which  they  say,  (and  shew  where)  that  hee  thrice  fell
under  the  weight  of  his  Crosse. And  a  little  beyond
there is  an ancient Arch that crosseth the street, and
supporteth  a  ruined  Gallerie  :  in  the  East-side  a  two  arched
window,  where  Pilate  presented  Christ  to  the  people. An
hundred  paces  farther,  and  on  the  left  hand  there  are  the
Relikes  of  a  Church,  where  they  say  that the  blessed
Virgin  stood  when  her  Sonne  passed  by,  and  fell  into  a
trance  at  the  sight  of  that  killing  Spectacle. Sixtie  sixe
paces  beyond  (where  this  street  doth  meete  with  that  other
which  leadeth  to  Port  Ephraim,  now  called  the  Gate  of
Damascus)  they  say,  that  they  met  with  Simon  of  Cyrene,  pi.viii.
and  compelled  him  to  assist  our  Saviour  in  the  bearing  of  «. V?25-J
his burthen. Turning a little on the left hand, they  Cyrene.
shewed  us  where  the  women  wept,  and  he  replyed,  Weepe
not for me you Daughters of Jerusalem, &c. Then
turning  againe  on  the  right,  we  passed  under  a  little  arch,
neere  which  a  house  ascended  by  certain  steps ; the  place
where  Veronica  dwelt,  who  gave  our  Saviour,  as  they  say,  Veronica.
a  Napkin  as  he  passed  by  the  doore,  to  cleanse  his  face
from the bloud which trickled from his Thorne-pierst
browes ;  and  spittle  wherewith  they  had  despitefully  defiled
him : who returned it againe enriched  with his  lively
counterfeit,  now  to  be  seene  at  Rome  upon  Festivall  dayes,
in  Saint  Peters  Church  in  the  Vatican. Fronting  the  far
end  of  this  street,  an  ancient  Gate  which  stood  in  the  West
wall  of  the  old  Citie,  yet  resists  the  subversions  of  time,
called  by  Nehemia,  the  old  Gate  ;  by  the  Jebusites  the  Port
of  Jebus,  and  the  Gate  of  Judgement ; for  that  the  Elders
there  sate  in  Justice  :  through  which  the  condemned  were
led  to  execution  unto  Mount  Calvarie :  then  two  hundred

223

A.D.
l6ll.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Zebedees
houses.

twentie  paces  without,  and  a  little  on  the  left  hand  ;  though
now  almost  in  the  heart  of  the  Citie.  From  hence  we
ascended  the  East-side  of  Mount  Calvarie  (eight  hundred
paces  from  the  Palace  of  Pilate)  and  so  descended  into  the
Court  of  the  Temple  of  the  Sepulcher.  Right  against  it
are  the  ruines  of  loftie  buildings,  heretofore  the  Alberges
of  the  Knight  Hospitallers  of  Saint  Johns.  Turning  to
the  South  we  were  shewed,  where  once  stood  the  dwelling
of  Zebedus,  in  which  James  and  John  were  borne,  hereto-
fore a  Collegiat  Church,  but  now  a  Mosque.  A  little
higher  wee  came  to  the  Iron  Gate,  a  passage  in  times  past
betweene  the  upper  Citie,  and  the  neather  (which  gave
way  unto  Peter  conducted  by  the  Angell)  built  by
Alexander  the  Great :  who  having  taken  Tyrus,  and  the
Sea-bordering  Cities  of  Phoenicia  and  Palestine,  begirt
Jerusalem  with  his  Armie  :  when  on  a  sudden  the  Gates
were  set  open,  Jaddus  the  High  Priest  issuing  forth,
clothed  in  his  Pontificall  Habit,  and  followed  with  a  long
trayne  in  white  Rayments :  whom  Alexander  espying,
advanced  before  the  rest  of  the  company ;  and  when  he
drew  neere  fell  prostrate  before  him.  For  it  came  unto
his  remembrance,  how  once  in  Dio  a  Citie  of  Macedon,
consulting  with  himselfe  about  his  Asian  Enterprize,  he
had  seene  in  a  Vision  one  so  apparelled,  who  bid  him
boldly  proceed,  and  told  him  that  the  God  whom  he
served  would  protect  his  Armie,  and  make  him  Lord  of  the
Persian  Monarchic.  Then  hand  in  hand  they  entred  the
Citie,  the  High  Priest  conducting  him  unto  the  Temple,
where  hee  sacrificed  unto  God  according  to  the  manner  of
the  Hebrewes :  Jaddus  expounding  unto  him  the  Pro-
phesies of  Daniel,  which  foretold  of  his  victories.  From
thence  we  proceeded  unto  the  House  of  Saint  Marke,  of
which  an  obscure  Church  in  the  custodie  of  the  Sorians
doth  retayne  the  memory.  And  beyond,  we  came  to  the
Saint  James.  Church  of  Saint  James,  standing  in  the  place  where  he  was
beheaded ;  erected  by  the  Spaniards,  together  with  an
Hospitall,  and  now  possest  by  the  Armenians.  This
seene,  we  returned  to  the  Covent.

224

GEORGE SANDYS  a.d.

1611.

The  day  following,  wee  went  out  (as  before)  at  the  Port  Sm  Port.
of  Sion. Turning  on  the  left  hand  along  the  wall,  wee
were  shewed  the  place  where  Peter  wept,  when  hee  had  Peters
denyed  our  Saviour ; dignified  once  with  a  Church,  and  *
whereof  there  now  remayneth  some  part  of  the  foundation.
Right  against  it  there  is  a  Posterne  in  the  wall,  formerly
called  Port  Esqueline ; at  which  they  bore  forth  the  filth
of  the  Citie. The  foundation  of  this  part  of  the  wall  is
much  more  ancient,  and  much  more  strong  then  the  rest,
consisting  of  blacke  stones  of  a  mightie  size. Not  farre
beyond,  we  crossed  the  Valley  of  Jehosaphat,  and  mounted
the  South  end  of  Mount  Olivet,  by  the  way  of  Bethania.
Having  ascended  a  good  height,  on  the  right  hand  they
shewed  us  where  Judas  hanged  himselfe  (the  stumpe  of  Judas.
the  Sycamore,  as  they  say,  not  long  since  extant)  being
buried  in  a  Grot  that  adjoyneth. Neerer  the  top  where
Christ  cursed  the  fig-tree, many  there  growing  at this
present. Descending  the  East-side  of  the  Mountaine,  a
little  on  the  left  hand,  we  came  to  a  desolate  Chappell,
about which divers  ruines ; the Houses heretofore of
Simon  the  Leper. From  thence  we  descended  unto  the
Castle  of  Lazarus,  (whereof  yet  there  is  something  extant)
the  Brother  to  Marie  and  Martha :  close  under  which  lyes
Bethania, (two miles from Jerusalem) now a tottered  Bethania.
Village,  inhabited  by  Arabians. In  it  the  Vault  where
Christ  raysed  Lazarus from death ; square  and deepe,  Lazarus.
descended  into  by  certaine  steps. Above  are  two  little
Chappels,  which  have  in  either  of  them  an  Altar :  where
stood  a  stately  Church  erected  by  Saint  Helena :  and  after
that  an  Abbey,  Queene  Milisend  the  Foundresse. A  little
North  of  Bethania,  we  came  to  the  ruines  of  a  Monasterie,
now  levell  with  the  floore,  seated  in  the  place  unto  which
the  penitent  Marie  retyred  from  the  corrupting  vanities  of
the  Citie. South-ward  of  this,  and  not  far  off,  stood  the
House  of  Martha,  honoured  likewise  with  a  Temple,  and  Marthas
ruinated  alike. Equally  distant  from  both,  there  is  a  stone, e'
whereon,  they  say,  that  our  Saviour  sate,  when  the  two
Sisters  intreated  him  to  restore  life  to  their  Brother  now
viii  225  p

A.D.
l6ll.

Bethfage.

[Il.viii.

1326,
Quarantena.
Dead  Sea.

]

Jordan.

Jerico.
Balme.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

foure  dayes  buryed :  the  Pilgrime  that  breakes  off  a  piece
thereof,  stands  excommunicated.  A  little  above,  there  is
a  Fountayne  of  excellent  water,  deepe  sunke  into  the
Rocke,  (by  which  we  refreshed  our  selves  with  provision
brought  with  us)  called  the  Fountayne  of  the  Apostles.
Now  we  ascended  Mount  Olivet  againe,  by  another  way
more  inclining  to  the  North.  Upon  the  right  hand,  and  not
far  from  the  top,  stood  Bethfage,  whose  very  foundations
are  now  confounded ;  from  whence  Christ  past  unto
Jerusalem  in  triumph  upon  an  Asses  Colt :  every  Palme-
sunday  by  the  Pater-guardian  superstitiously  imitated.

Here  looke  we  backe,  and  for  a  while  survey  the  high
mountaine  Quarantania,  the  low  Plains  of  Jericho,  Jordan,
and  the  Dead  Sea ;  which  we  could  not  goe  to,  by  reason
of  our  tardy  arrivall,  the  Pilgrims  returning  on  the  selfe-
same  day  that  wee  came  unto  Jerusalem.  Undertaken
but  once  a  yeere  in  regard  of  the  charges,  then  guarded
by  a  Sheck  of  the  Arabians,  to  resist  the  wild  Arabs,  who
almost  famished  on  those  barren  Mountaines  (which  they
dare  not  husband  for  feare  of  surprisall)  rob  all  that  passe,
if  inferiour  in  strength :  yet  payed  wee  towards  that
conduct  two  Dollars  apiece  to  the  Sanziack.  Jordan
runneth  wel-nigh  thirtie  miles  from  Jerusalem ;  the  way
thither  by  Bethania ;  made  long  and  troublesome  by  the
steepe  descents  and  labyrinthian  windings ;  being  to  the
judgement  of  the  eye,  not  the  fourth  of  that  distance.
In  this  the  Pilgrims  wash  themselves,  and  bring  from
thence  of  the  water,  soveraigne  (as  they  say)  for  sundry
diseases.  A  great  way  on  this  side  the  River,  there  stands
a  ruined  Temple,  upon  the  winding  of  a  crooked  channell,
forsaken  by  the  streame,  (or  then  not  filled  but  by  inunda-
tions) where  Christ  (as  they  say)  was  baptized  by  John.
On  the  right  hand  stood  Jerico,  a  Citie  of  fame  (and  in  the
time  of  the  Christians  an  Episcopall  Sea)  beautifull  in  her
Palmes,  but  chiefly  proud  of  her  Balsamum,  a  Plant  then
onely  thought  particular  unto  Jurie,  which  grew  most
plentifully  in  this  valley,  and  on  the  sides  of  the  Westerne
Mountaines  which  confine  it,  being  about  two  cubits  high,

226

GEORGE SANDYS  a.d.

1611.

growing  upright,  and  yeerely  pruned  of  her  superfluous
branches.  In  the  Summer  they  lanced  the  rine  with  a
stone,  (not  to  be  touched  with  Steele)  but  not  deeper  then
the  inward  filme ;  for  otherwise  it  forthwith  perished :
from  whence  those  fragrant  and  precious  teares  did  distill,
which  now  are  onely  brought  us  from  India ;  but  they
farre  worse,  and  generally  sophisticated.  The  bole  of  this
shrub  is  of  least  esteeme,  the  rine  of  greater,  the  seed
exceeding  that,  but  the  liquor  of  greatest,  knowne  to  be
right  in  the  curdling  of  Milke,  and  not  stayning  of
garments.  Here  remayned  two  Orchards  thereof  in  the
dayes  of  Vespasian ;  in  defence  of  which,  a  battell  was
fought  with  the  Jewes  that  endeavoured  to  destroy  them.
Of  such  repute  with  the  Romanes,  that  Pompey  first,  and
afterwards  Titus  did  present  it  in  their  triumphs  as  an
especiall  glorie :  now  utterly  lost  through  the  barbarous
waste  and  neglect  of  the  Mahometans.  Where  Jerico
stood,  there  standeth  a  few  poore  Cottages  inhabited  by
the  Arabians.  The  valley  about  ten  miles  over,  now
producing  but  a  spiny  grass ;  bordered  on  the  East  with
the  high  Arabian  Mountaines,  on  the  West  with  those  of
Jurie ;  amongst  which,  Quarantania  the  most  eminent,  in
that  wildernesse  where  Christ  for  fortie  dayes  was  tempted
by  the  Devill,  so  high,  that  few  dare  attempt  to  ascend
to  the  top ;  from  whence  the  Tempter  shewed  him  the
Kingdomes  of  the  earth ;  now  crowned  with  a  Chappell,
which  is  yet  unruined.  There  is  besides  in  the  side  an
Hermitage,  with  a  Cisterne  to  receive  raine- water ;  and
another  Grot,  wherein  the  Hermites  were  buried.  Here
Saint  Jerome  (as  they  say)  fulfilled  his  foure  yeeres
penance.

But  now  returne  wee  to  the  summit  of  Mount  Olivet,  Mount  Olivet.
which  over-toppeth  the  neighbouring  Mountaines,  whose
West  side  doth  give  you  a  full  survey  of  each  particular
part  of  the  Citie,  bedect  with  Olives,  Almonds,  and
Fi£-trees ;  heretofore  with  Palmes  :  pleasantly  rich  when
husbanded,  and  now  upbraiding  the  barbarous  with  his
neglected  pregnancy. So  famous  in  sacred  histories,  and

227

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1611.

so  often  blest  with  the  presence  of  Christ,  and  apparition
of  Angels.  It  is  not  much  lesse  then  a  mile  in  heighth,
stretching  from  North  to  South,  and  having  three  heads.
On  the  middlemost  (and  that  the  highest)  there  standeth

Chappell  of  a  \[^\e  Chappell,  of  an  eight  square  round,  at  every  corner
a  Pillar,  mounted  on  three  degrees,  being  all  of  white
marble, and of  an elegant structure : within it is not

Foot-print.  above  twelve  foot  over,  paved  with  the  naturall  rocke,
which  beareth  the  impression  of  a  foot-step,  they  say,  of
our  Saviours ;  the  last  that  he  set  upon  earth,  when  from
thence  he  ascended  into  Heaven :  A  place  in  honour
inferiour  unto  none,  frequented  by  Christians,  possest  by
Mahometans,  yet  free  to  both  their  devotions.  Built  it
was  by  the  mother  of  Constantine,  and  covered  like  the
Sepulchre,  with  a  sumptuous  Temple  (whose  ruines  yet
looke  aloft)  together  with  a  Monasterie. On  the  South-

pi/  side  of  which,  they  shewed  us  the  Cell  of  Palagia; a

**"  famous,  rich, and  beautifull  Curtizan of  Antioch,  who

converted  by  the  Bishop  of  Dimiata,  retired  hither
unknowne,  and  here  long  lived  in  the  habite  and  penurie
of  an  Hermite,  being  not  till  dead,  discovered  for  a
woman.  Descending,  wee  were  shewed  by  the  way,  where
our  Saviour  taught  them  the  Pater  noster,  where  hee
fore-told  of  the  destruction  of  Jerusalem,  where  the
Apostles  made  the  Creede,  where  hee  wept  over  the  Citie,
(a  paved  square,  now  a  Mahometan  Oratorie)  and  such
like  traditions,  not  much  worthy  the  mentioning.  So
crossing  the  valley  by  the  Sepulchre  of  the  blessed  Virgin,
we  entred  the  Citie  at  the  gate  of  Saint  Steven ;  returning
the  same  way  (as  the  day  before)  to  the  Monasterie.

Much  of  the  day,  and  all  the  night  following  we  spent
in  the  Church  of  the  Sepulchre :  they  then  concluding  the
ceremonies  and  solemnities  of  that  Festivall.  The  next
day  wee  prepared  for  our  departure.  Wee  agreed  with
certaine  Muccermen  (so  call  they  their  Muliters)  of
Aleppo  (who  had  brought  a  Portugall  hither  with  his
Janizarie,  and  interpreter  then  newly  come  from  India)  to
carrie  us  unto  Tripoly,  and  to  defray  all  charges  (our  diet

228

GEORGE SANDYS  ad.

1611.

excepted)  for  sixe  and  twentie  Dollars  a  man,  and  for  halfe
so  much  as  if  we  went  but  to  Acre,  greatly  to  the  dis-
pleasure of  Atala  the  Drogaman  ;  that  would  not  undertake
our  convey  under  a  greater  summe :  who  found  a  time  to  [II.  vm.
effect  his  malice; yet  his  little  paines  wee  rewarded  with  I327-J

foure  Dollars.  Caphar  and  Asse  hire  about  the  Countrey
had  cost  us  sixe  Sultanies.  We  gave  money  to  the  Frier-
servants,  and  that  not  niggardly,  considering  our  light
purses  and  long  journey ;  whereof  the  Pater-guardian
particularly  enquired,  lest  their  vow  of  povertie  they
should  covetously  infringe  (or  rather  perhaps  defraud  his
desire)  by  retayning  what  was  given,  to  their  private  uses  :
A  crime  with  excommunication  punished :  yet  that  lesse
feared,  I  suppose,  then  detection.  They  use  to  marke  the
armes  of  Pilgrims  with  the  names  of  Jesus,  Maria,
Jerusalem,  Bethlehem,  the  Jerusalem  Crosse,  and  sundry
other  Characters,  done  in  such  manner  as  hath  beene
declared  before.  The  Pater-guardian  would  needs  thrust
upon  us  severall  Certificates,  which  returned  him  as  many
Zecchines :  he  desired  that  we  would  make  their  povertie
knowne,  with  the  dignitie  of  those  sanctified  places :  as  a
motive  to  reliefe,  and  more  frequent  Pilgrimages.

§.  VI.

His  returne.  Observations  of  memorable  places
by  the  way.  Of  Mount  Carmel,  Aeon,  Sidon,
Tyrus ;  of  Facardin,  Emer  of  Sidon  his
Greatnesse.

Eaving  behind  those  friendly  Italians  that  accom-
panied us  from  Cairo  (being  now  also  upon  their
returne)  on  the  first  of  Aprill  we  departed  from
Jerusalem,  in  the  companie  of  that  Apothecarie  (now
Knight  of  the  Sepulchre)  and  the  Portugall  before  men-
tioned ;  together  with  an  Alman  and  a  French-man ;  all
bound  for  Tripoly.  Wee  returned  by  the  way  which  we
strayed  from  in  our  comming ;  lesse  difficult  to  passe  ;  the
Mountaines  more  pleasant  and  fruitfull,  neere  the  Citie

229

A.D.
l6ll.

Shilo.

Vale  of
Terebinth.

Mo  den.

Jeremie.

Good  thiefes
house.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

there  are  many  Sepulchres  and  places  of  mines,  here  and
there  dispersed.  On  the  right  hand,  and  in  sight,  is  Silo,
of  a  long  time  a  station  for  the  Arke  of  the  Covenant,
the  highest  Mountaine  of  Jury,  bearing  on  the  top  some
fragments  of  a  Citie.  North  of  it  on  another,  the  remaynes
of  that  Rama  Sophim  (with  more  likelihood  of  the  truth
then  the  other)  which  was  the  habitation  of  Samuel :  whose
bones  are  said  to  have  beene  translated  unto  Constanti-
nople, by  the  Emperour  Arcadius.  After  foure  miles
riding  wee  descended  into  the  valley  of  Terebinth,  famous,
though  little,  for  the  slaughter  of  Golias.  A  Bridge  here
crosseth  the  Torrent,  neere  which  the  ruines  of  an  ancient
Monasterie,  more  worthie  the  observing  for  the  greatnesse
of  the  stones,  then  finenesse  of  the  workmanship.  Having
rid  foure  miles  further,  they  shewed  us  Moden,  the  ancient
seate  of  the  Macchabees,  toward  the  North,  and  seated  on
the  top  of  an  aspiring  hill,  which  yet  supporteth  the
reliques  of  a  Citie :  whereof  there  something  hath  beene
spoken  already.  Beyond,  by  the  high-way  side  there  is
another  Monasterie,  not  altogether  subverted :  of  late
inhabited  by  some  of  the  Franciscans,  who  beset  one  night
by  the  Arabs,  and  not  able  to  master  their  terrour,  quitted
it  the  day  following.  About  a  stones  cast  off,  there
standeth  a  Church,  now  desolate,  yet  retayning  the  name
of  the  Prophet  Jeremie.  But  whether  here  stood  that
Anathoth  or  no  that  challengeth  his  birth,  I  am  ignorant.
About  three  miles  further,  wee  passed  by  a  place,  called
Sereth,  where  by  certaine  ruines  there  standeth  a  pile  like
a  broken  Tower,  engraven  with  Turkish  Characters,  upon
that  side  which  regardeth  the  way ;  erected  as  they  say,
by  an  Ottoman  Emperour.  Now  having  for  a  while
descended  those  Mountaines  that  neighbour  the  Cham-
paine,  we  came  to  the  ruines  of  an  ancient  building,  over-
looking the  levell :  yet  no  lesse  excelling  in  commodious
situation,  then  delicacie  of  prospect.  They  call  it,  The
house  of  the  Good  Thiefe.  Perhaps  some  Abbey  erected
in  that  place ;  or  Castle  here  built  to  defend  this  passage.
Upon  the  right  hand  there  standeth  a  handsome  Mosque,

230

GEORGE SANDYS  a.d.

1611.

every  way  open,  and  supported  with  Pillars,  the  roofe  flat,
and  charged  on  the  East  end  with  a  Cupolo,  heretofore  a
Christian  Chappell.  This  is  ten  miles  from  Rama,  whither
we  came  that  night ;  and  wet  as  we  were,  tooke  up  our
lodgings  on  the  ground  in  the  House  of  Sion :  nothing
that  day  befalling,  save  the  violence  done  us  by  certaine
Spaheis,  who  tooke  our  Wine  from  us ;  and  payments  of
head-money  in  sundry  places,  unto  which  we  were  neither
chargeable  nor  troublesome.

Not  untill  noone  next  day  departed  we  from  Rama : Rama.
travelling through a most fruitfull Valley. The first
place  we  passed  by  was  Lydda,  made  famous  by  Saint  Lydda.
Peter,  called  after  Diospolis,  that  is,  the  Citie  of  Jupiter,
destroyed by Cestius ; here yet standeth a Christian
Temple,  built,  as  they  say,  by  a  King  of  England  to  the  Satn*  GeorSes
honour  of  Saint  George,  a  Cappadocian  by  birth,  advanced ,  em^L  m  f
in  the  Warres  to  the  dignitie  of  a  Tribune,  who  after  England.
became  a  Souldier  of  Christ ; and  here  is  said  to  have
suffered  Martyrdome  under  Diocletian. Others  say,  that
there  never  was  such  a  man,  and  that  the  storie  is  no  other
then  an  allegoric The  Greekes  have  the  custodie  of  this
Church,  who  shew  a  Scull,  which  they  affirme  to  be  Saint
Georges. In  the  time  of  the  Christians  it  was  the  seate
of  a  Suffragan,  now  hardly  a  Village. Eight  miles  from
Rama  stands  the  Castle  of  Augia,  built  like  a  Caine,  and
kept  by  a  small  Garrison. A  little  beyond,  the  Muccer-
men  would  have  staid  (which  wee  would  not  suffer,  being
then  the  best  time  of  the  day  for  travell)  that  they  might  [H.viii.
by  night  have  avoided  the  next  Village,  with  the  payments  *328-]

there  due : which  wee  were  hardly  intreated  by  the  pro-
curement of  Attala,  who  hold  correspondencie  with  the
Moores  of  those  quarters. They  would  not  take  lesse  Turkish
then  foure  Dollars  a  man  (when  perhaps  as  many  Medeins  b*averte9
were  but  due)  and  that  with  much  jangling. They  sought  siaver\e*
occasion  how  to  trouble  us,  beating  us  off  our  Mules,
because  forsooth,  wee  did  not  light  to  doe  homage  to  a
sort  of  halfe-clad  Rascals ; pulling  the  white  Shash  from
the  head  of  the  Portugal  (whereby  he  wel  hoped  to  have

231

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1611.

past  for  a  Turke)  his  Janizarie  looking  on.  Here  detayned
they  us  untill  two  of  the  clocke  the  next  morning,  without
meate,  without  sleepe,  couched  on  the  wet  earth,  and
washed  with  raine ;  yet  expecting  worse,  and  then  suffered

Goodly  Us  to  depart. After  a  while  wee  entred  a  goodly  Forrest,

Forrest.  fuji  of  tall  and  delightfull  Trees,  intermixed  with  fruitfull

and  flowrie  Launes.  Perhaps  the  earth  affoordeth  not
the  like  ;  it  cannot  a  more  pleasant.  Having  passed  this
part  of  the  Wood  (the  rest  inclining  to  the  West,  and  then
againe  extending  to  the  North)  we  might  discover  a
number  of  stragling  Tents,  some  just  in  our  way,  and
neere  to  the  skirts  of  the  Forrest.  These  were  Spaheis
belonging  to  the  Host  of  Morat  Bassa,  then  in  the
Confines  of  Persia.  They  will  take  (especially  from  a
Christian)  whatsoever  they  like ;  and  kindly  they  use  him
if  he  passe  without  blowes :  nor  are  their  Commanders  at
all  times  free  from  their  insolencies.  To  avoid  them,  we
strucke  out  of  the  way,  and  crossed  the  pregnant  cham-
paine  to  the  foote  of  the  Mountaynes,  where  for  that  day
we  reposed  our  selves :  when  it  grew  darke,  wee  arose,
inclining  on  the  left  hand,  mingling  after  a  while  with  a

Silent  riding,  small  Caravan  of  Moores ;  enjoyned  to  silence,  and  to  ride
without  our  Hats,  lest  discovered  for  Christians.  The
clouds  fell  downe  in  streames,  and  the  pitchie  night  had
bereft  us  of  the  conduct  of  our  eyes,  had  not  the  Light-
ning affoorded  a  terrible  light.  And  when  the  raine
intermitted,  the  Aire  appeared  as  if  full  of  sparkles  of
fire,  borne  too  and  fro  with  the  wind,  by  reason  of  the

Shining  Flies,  infinite  swarms  of  Flies  that  doe  shine  like  Glow-wormes,
to  a  stranger  a  strange  spectacle.  In  the  next  Wood  we
out-strip t  that  Caravan,  where  the  theevish  Arabs  had
made  sundrie  fires ;  to  which  our  foot-men  drew  neere  to
listen,  that  we  might  passe  more  securely.  An  houre
after  mid-night  the  skie  began  to  cleere,  when  on  the  other
side  of  the  Wood  we  fell  amongst  certaine  Tents  of
Spaheis ;  by  whom  we  past  with  as  little  noise  as  we
could,  secured  by  their  sounder  sleepings.  Not  farre
beyond,  through  a  large  Glade  betweene  two  Hils,  we

232

Carmel.

GEORGE SANDYS  ad.

1611.

leisurely  descended  for  the  space  of  two  houres  (a  Torrent
rushing  downe  on  the  left  hand  of  us)  when  not  able  longer
to  keepe  the  backes  of  our  Mules,  we  laid  us  downe  in
the  bottome  under  a  plump  of  Trees  on  the  farre  side  of
a  Torrent.  With  the  Sunne  we  arose,  and  found  our
selves  at  the  East  end,  and  North  side  of  Mount  Carmel.

Mount  Carmel  stretcheth  from  East  to  West,  and  hath  Mount
his  uttermost  Basis  washt  with  the  Sea,  steepest  towards  the
North,  and  of  an  indifferent  altitude :  rich  in  Olives  and
Vines when husbanded ; and abounding with severall
sorts  of  Fruits  and  Herbs,  both  medicinable  and  fragrant :
now  much  over-growne  with  Woods  and  Shrubs  of  sweet
savour  :  celebrated  for  the  habitation  of  Elias,  whose  house  E&m  his
was  after  his  death  converted  into  a  Synagogue ; where  house'
Oracles,  it  is  said,  were  given  by  God ;  called  by  Suetonius
the  God  Carmelus,  whose  words  are  these,  intreating  of
Vespasian  : In  Judea  consulting  with  the  Oracle  of  the
God  Carmelus,  the  Oracle  assured  him,  that  whatsoever
he  under-tooke  should  be  successfull. Where  then  was
nothing  more  to  be  seene  then  an  Altar. From  hence
proceeded  the  Order  of  the  Friar  Carmelites,  as  successors  Frian
to  the  children  of  the  Prophets  there  left  by  Elias ; who  Carmelites-
had  their  beginning  in  the  Desarts  of  Syria,  in  the  yeere
1 1 80. instituted  by  Almericus  Bishop  of  Antioch, and
said  to  have  received  their  white  habite  from  our  Ladie,
whom  Albertus  the  Patriarke  of  Jerusalem  transported
first  into  Europe. There  is  yet  to  be  seene  the  remaynes
of their Monasterie, with a Temple dedicated to the
blessed  Virgin; under  which  a  little  Chappell  or  Cave,
the  ancient  dwelling  of  Elias. This  is  inherited  by  an
Emer  of  the  Arabians,  who  after  the  ancient  custome  of
that  Nation  doth  live  in  Tents,  even  during  the  Winter,
although  possest  of  sundrie  convenient  houses ; whose
Signiorie  stretcheth  to  the  South,  and  along  the  Shoare.
Within  his  Precinct  stands  the  Castle  of  the  Perigrines,
upon  a  cape,  almost  surrounded  with  the  Sea,  now  called
Tortora,  built  by  Raimond  Earle  of  Tolosa  for  their  better  Tortora.
securitie,  and  after  fortified  by  the  Templers. Ten  miles

233

A.D.
l6ll.

Casarea.

Chison,

Tabor,

Hertnon.

Be/us.

[Il.viii.

1329.]

Glasse-sand.

Memnons
Sepulcher.

Ship  of
London.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

South  of  this,  stood  that  famous  Caesarea  (more  anciently
called  the  Tower  of  Strato,  of  a  King  of  Aradus,  the
Builder  so  named,  who  lived  in  the  dayes  of  Alexander)
in  such  sort  re-edified  by  Herod,  that  it  little  declined  in
magnificencie  from  the  principall  Cities  of  Asia ;  now
levell  with  the  Floore,  the  Haven  lost,  and  situation
abandoned.

We  passed  the  Torrent  Chison,  which  floweth  from  the
Mountaynes  of  Tabor  and  Hermon ;  and  gliding  by  the
North  skirts  of  Carmel,  dischargeth  it  selfe  into  the  Sea.
Carmel  is  the  South  bound  to  the  ample  valley  of  Acre ;
bounded  on  the  North  by  those  of  Saron,  on  the  West  it
hath  the  Sea,  and  it  is  inclosed  on  the  East  with  the  Moun-
taines  of  Galile.  In  length  about  fourteene  miles,  in  bredth
about  halfe  as  much ;  the  neerer  the  Sea  the  more  barren.
In  it  there  arise  two  rivolets  of  living,  but  pestilent  waters,
drilling  from  severall  marishes ;  the  first  is  the  River  of
Belus,  called  by  Plinie  Pagida  and  Palus,  and  Badas  by
Simonides ;  whose  sand  affoordeth  matter  for  Glasse,
becomming  fusable  with  the  heate  of  the  Fornace.  Strabo
reports  the  like  of  divers  places  thereabout.  And  Josephus
speaking  of  this,  declareth,  that  adjoyning  thereunto,  there
is  a  pit  an  hundred  cubits  in  circuite,  covered  with  Sand
like  Grasse ;  and  when  borne  away  (for  there-with  they
accustomed  to  Ballace  their  ships)  it  forth-with  filled
againe,  borne  thither  by  winds  from  places  adjacent :  And
moreover,  whatsoever  Minerall  was  contained  therein,  con-
verted into  Glasse  ;  and  Glasse  there  laid,  againe  into  Sand.
Neere  to  this  pit  stood  the  Sepulcher  or  Memnon,  the
Sonne  of  Tythonus.

Having  rid  seven  or  eight  miles  along  the  skirts  of  the
hils,  we  crossed  the  Valley,  and  anon  that  other  Rivolet  a
little  above,  where  it  falleth  into  the  Road  of  Acre ;  where
to  our  comfort,  we  espyed  the  Ship  that  brought  us  to
Alexandria,  with  another  of  London,  called  the  Elizabeth
Consort :  when  entring  the  Towne,  we  were  kindly  enter-
tained by  our  Country-men.  Here  stayed  we,  the  rest
of  our  company  proceeded  unto  Tripoly ; this  being  the

234

GEORGE SANDYS  a.d.

1611.

mid-way  betweene  it  and  Jerusalem.  But  our  Muccer-  Turkish
man  would  not  rest  satisfied  with  halfe  of  his  hire,  Mussulman.
according  to  our  compact,  whom  we  were  glad  to  be  rid
of  for  twentie  Dollers  a  man :  our  Oaths  being  bootlesse
against  a  True  Beleever,  for  so  do  they  tearme  themselves.
This  Citie  was  called  Ace  at  the  first,  a  refuge  for  the
Persians  in  their  ^Egyptian  warres :  Then  Ptolomais  of
Ptolomy  King  of  iEgypt :  Colonia  Claudii,  of  Claudius
Caesar,  who  heere  planted  a  Colony  :  Afterward  Aeon,  and  Acon-  See  of  it
now  Acre.  Seated  on  a  levell,  in  forme  of  a  Triangular  ™n&*tcnara
Shield :  on  two  sides  washt  with  the  Sea ;  the  third  ^ephew  £ar/e
regarding  the  Champaine.  The  carkasse  shewes  that  the  Richards  Acts,
body  hath  beene  strong,  double  immured,  fortified  with  sup.  c  4.
Bulwarkes  and  Towers ;  to  each  wall  a  ditch,  lined  with
stone,  and  under  those  divers  secret  Posternes.  You
would  thinke  by  the  ruines,  that  the  Citie  rather  consisted
wholly  of  divers  conjoyning  Castles,  then  any  way  mixed
with  private  dwellings ;  which  witnesse  a  notable  defence,
and  an  unequall  assault,  or  that  the  rage  of  the  Conquerors
extended  beyond  Conquest :  the  huge  Wals  and  Arches
turned  topsie-turvey,  and  lying  like  Rockes  upon  the
foundation.  On  the  South  side  lyes  the  Haven,  no
better  then  a  Bay ;  open  to  the  West,  North-west,  and
South-west  winds,  the  bottome  stony,  and  ill  for  their
Cables.  There  are  the  ruines  of  a  Palace,  which  yet  doth
acknowledge  King  Richard  for  the  founder,  confirmed
likewise  by  the  Passant  Lion.  An  hundred  yeares  after,
it  remained  with  the  Christians,  and  was  the  last  receptacle
in  the  Holy  Land,  for  the  Knights  Hospitalers  of  Saint
Johns  of  Jerusalem,  called  thereupon  Saint  John  de  Acre ;
to  whom  a  goodly  Temple  neere  the  South  side  of  the
Citie  was  consecrated,  which  now  over-toppeth  the  rest
of  the  ruines.  In  a  Vault  thereof  a  great  masse  of  Trea-
sure was  hid  by  the  Knights  of  the  Order,  which  made
knowne  from  time  to  time  unto  their  Successors,  was
fetcht  from  hence  about  forty  yeares  since  by  the  Gallies
of  Malta,  the  Inhabitants  abandoning  the  Towne  upon
their  landing. In  the  yeare  1291.  besieged  by  an  hundred

235

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1611.

and  fiftie  thousand  Mahometans,  Acre  received  an  utter
subversion,  which  the  Mamalucks  after  in  some  sort
repaired,  and  lost  it  at  last  with  their  name  and  Empire,
unto  the  Turkish  Selimus.  It  is  now  under  the  Sanziack
of  Saphet,  and  usurped  with  the  rest  of  that  Province,  by
the  Emer  of  Sidon.  In  the  Towne  there  are  not  above
two  or  three  hundred  Inhabitants,  who  dwell  heere  and
there  in  the  patcht-up  ruines ;  onely  a  new  Mosque  they
have,  and  a  strong  square  Cane  (built,  where  once  was
the  Arsenall  for  Gallies)  in  which  the  Francke  Merchants
securely  dispose  of  themselves  and  their  Commodities :
who  for  the  most  part  bring  hither  ready  Monies,  (Dutch
Dollers  being,  as  generally  throughout  Jury  and  Phoenicia,
equivalent  with  Royals  of  eight,  else-where  lesse  by  ten
Aspers)  fraughting  their  ships  with  Cottons  that  grow
abundantly  in  the  Countrey  adjoyning. Here  have  they

Respects  of  a  Cadee,  the  principall  Officer. The  English  are  much

English.  respected  by  the  principall  Moores :  insomuch,  as  I  have
seene  the  striker  stricken  by  his  fellow,  a  rare  example
amongst  the  Mahometans,  which  I  rather  attribut  to  their
policie  then  humanitie,  lest  by  their  quitting  of  the  place
they  should  be  deprived  of  their  profit,  they  being  the

Wrestling,  onely  men  that  doe  maintaine  that  trading.  Here  wrastle
they  in  Breeches  of  oyled  Leather,  close  to  their  thighs,
their  bodies  naked  and  anointed  according  to  the  ancient
use,  who  rather  fall  by  consent,  then  by  slight  or  violence.
The  Inhabitants  doe  nightly  house  their  Goats  and  Sheepe

Jaccals.  for  feare  of  Jaccals  (in  my  opinion  no  other  then  Foxes)
whereof  an  infinite  number  doe  lurke  in  the  obscure
Vaults,  and  reedy  Marishes  adjoyning  to  the  Brooke ;  the
Brooke  it  selfe  abounding  with  Tortesses.

Foure  daies  we  stayed  at  Acre ;  in  which  time  we
vainely  expected  the  leisure  of  the  Merchants  to  have
accompanied  us  to  Nazareth,  distant  from  hence  about
fifteene  miles :  who  goe  by  one  way  and  returne  by
another,  for  feare  of  the  Arabs.  Now  a  small  Village  of
Galily,  seated  in  a  little  Vale  betweene  two  hils,  where  are
the  remaines  of  a  goodly  Temple  (once  the  Chaire  of  an

236

GEORGE SANDYS  a.d.

1611.

Arch-bishop) erected over the house of the blessed  Blessed
Virgine: whereof  there  is  yet  one  roome  to  be  seene, v%r&m  house-
partly  hewne  out  of  the  living  Rocke ; amongst  those
Christians  of  great  veneration. But  the  Romanists  relate,
that  the  roome  wherein  she  was  borne,  was  borne  by  the
Angels  (at such time  as the Countrey  was  universally
possessed  by  the  Infidels)  over  Seas  and  shores  to  a  Citie
of  Illyria. But  when those people grew niggardly in
their  Offerings,  it  was  rapt  from  thence,  and  set  in  the
Woods  of  Picenum ; within  the  possessions  of  a  Noble
Lady,  named  Lauretta,  frequented  by  infinite  numbers  of  LadJ  °f
Pilgrimes. When  many  miscarrying  by  the  ambushment
of  Theeves,  who  lurking  in  the  Woods  adjoyning,  the
blessed  Virgine  commanded  the  Angels  to  remoove  it  unto  L11^111-
a  certaine  Mountaine  belonging  unto  two  Brethren,  where  'J

shee  got  much  riches,  and  sumptuous  apparell,  by  the
benevolence  of  her  Votaries,  and  her  charitable  miracles.
By  which  meanes  the  two  Brethren  grew  also  rich,  and
withall,  dissentions  about  the  devision  of  their  purchases.
Whereupon  it  was  once  more  transported  by  those  winged
Porters,  and  set  in  the  place  where  as  now  it  standeth,
neere  to  the  Adriaticke  Sea,  and  not  farre  from  Ancona,
yet  retaining the name of  Lauretta. In which is her
Image  (made  as  they  say, by Saint  Luke) of  the  hue
(though  a  Jew)  of  a  Blackamore.* This  Conclave  hath  a  *****  ****
cover  of  Marble,  yet  not  touched  by  the  same,  included  j%essJe  $°f0^
within  a  magnificent  Temple,  adorned  with  Armors  and  they  picture
Trophies  ;  and  beset  with  Statues  and  Tables,  representing  Christ  blacke,
her  miraculous  cures  and  protections :  And  well  hath  she  ltke  them~
beene paid for her labour : her Territories large, her  se  ves'
Jewels  inestimable ;  her  apparell  much  more  then  Princely,
both  in  cost  and  varietie  ; her  Coffers  full : of  whom,
though the  Pope  be a  yearely  borrower, yet are they
doubly  replenished  by  the  first,  and  latter  Spring-tides  of
devotion. Now  at  Nazareth,  no  Christian  is  suffered  to
dwell  by  the  Moores  that  inhabit  it. Most  of  the  old
Citie  seemeth  to  have  stood  upon  the  hill  that  adjoyneth,
which beares the decayes of divers other Churches.

237

Spouts  of
water.

St  don.

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1611.

Nazareth  gave  the  name  of  Nazaretans  unto  Christians,
called  here  corruptly  Nostranes  at  this  present.

Upon  the  eight  of  Aprill  we  went  aboord  the  Trinitie,
and  hoised  Sailes  for  Sidon :  the  winds  favourable,  and
the  Seas  composed ;  but  anon  they  began  to  wrangle,  and
wee  to  suffer.  Spouts  of  water  were  seene  to  fall  against
the  Promontorie  of  Carmel,  the  tempest  increased  with
the  night ;  and  did  what  it  could  to  make  a  night  of  the
day  that  ensued.  But  the  distemperature  and  horror  is
more  then  the  danger,  where  Mariners  be  English,  who
are  the  absolutest  under  heaven  in  their  profession ;  and
are  by  forreiners  compared  unto  Fishes.  About  foure  of
the  clocke  we  came  before  Sidon,  the  Ship  not  able  to
attaine  to  the  Harborage  of  the  Rocke,  which  is  environed
by  the  Sea,  and  the  onely  protection  of  that  rode  for  ships
of  good  burthen  :  but  some  of  us  were  so  sicke,  that  we
desired  to  be  set  ashoare  in  the  Skiffe,  (a  long  mile
distant)  which  was  performed,  but  not  without  perill.

Phoenicia  is  a  Province  of  Syria,  interposing  the  Sea  and
Galily  stretching  North  and  South  from  the  River  of
Valanus,  to  the  Castle  of  the  Peregrines,  which  is  on  the
farre  side  of  Mount  Carmel.  The  chiefe  Sea-bordering
Cities  of  Phoenicia,  are  Tripolis,  Biblis,  Beritus,  Sidon,
Tyrus,  and  Ptolomais,  now  called  Acre.  Tripolis  is  so
called,  because  it  was  joyntly  built  by  Tyras,  Sidon  and
Aradus.  It  is  seated  under  Libanus,  and  commanded  by
a  well-furnished  Cittadell,  manned  with  two  hundred
Janizaries.  Before  it,  there  is  an  ill-neighbouring  banke
of  Sand,  which  groweth  daily  both  in  greatnesse  and  neere-
nesse ;  by  which  they  have  a  Prophesie,  that  it  shall  in
processe  of  time  be  devoured.  The  Towne  and  Terri-
tories are  governed  by  a  Bassa.  Two  miles  off,  and  West
from  it,  is  the  haven,  made  by  a  round  piece  of  Land
adjoyning  to  the  maine  by  an  Isthmos  ;  the  mouth  thereof
regarding  the  North.  On  each  side  a  Bulwarke  kept  by
Alexandretta  an  hundred  Janizaries,  and  planted  with  Ordnance  to
or  Scande-  defend  the  entrance.  Hither  of  late  the  Grand  Signior
hath  removed  the  Scale,  which  was  before  at  Alexandretta,

238

Tripolis.

room.

GEORGE SANDYS  a-d.

IOII.

a  Towne  in  the  furthest  extents  of  the  Streights,  beyond
the  River  Orontes,  most  contagiously  seated  by  reason  of
the  Marishes  and  loftie  bordering  Mountaines  (towards
the  North,  being  part  of  Taurus)  which  deprive  it  of  the
rarifying  Sunne,  for  no  small  part  of  the  day ;  insomuch,
that  not  many  forreiners  escape  that  there  linger  any
season,  who  goe  not  a  shoare  before  the  Sunne  bee  high
mounted,  and  returne  againe  ere  too  low  declining :  Not-
withstanding, the  Merchants  doe  offer  great  summes  of
Money  to  have  it  restored  unto  that  place,  as  more
convenient  for  their  Traffick  with  Aleppo,  (the  principall
Mart  of  that  part  of  Asia  for  Silkes,  and  sundry  other
Commodities)  from  thence  but  three  daies  journey,  being
eight  from  Tripoly :  which  the  Turke  will  not  as  yet
assent  to,  for  that  divers  ships  have  beene  taken  out  of  that
Rode  by  Pirats,  there  being  no  Forts  for  protection,  nor
no  fit  place  to  erect  them  on.  A  thing  usuall  it  is  betweene
Tripoly  and  Aleppo,  as  betweene  Aleppo  and  Babylon,  to
make  tame  Doves  the  speedy  transporters  of  their  Letters ;
which  they  wrap  about  their  Legges  like  Jesses,  trained
thereunto  at  such  time  as  they  have  young  ones,  by  bearing
them  from  them  in  open  Cages.  A  Fowle  of  a  notable
memory.  Sidon  is  at  this  day  contracted  within  narrow
limits,  and  onely  shewes  the  foundations  of  her  greatnesse  ;
lying  Eastward  of  this  that  standeth,  and  over-shadowed
with  Olives.  There  is  nothing  left  of  Antiquitie,  but  the
supposed  Sepulcher  of  the  Patriarke  Zebulon,  included  f'*vj?
within  a  little  Chappell  amongst  these  ruines,  and  held
(especially  by  the  Jewes)  in  great  veneration.  The  Towne
now  being,  is  not  worth  our  Description ;  the  Walls
neither  faire  nor  of  force ;  the  Haven  decayed,  when  at
best  but  serving  for  Gallies.  At  the  end  of  the  Peir,
stands  a  paltry  Blocke-house,  furnished  with  sutable
Artillery.  The  Mosque,  the  Bannia,  and  Cane  for
Merchants,  the  onely  buildings  of  note.

The  Inhabitants  are  of  sundry  Nations  and  Religions,
governed by a succession of Princes, whom they call  Emers  of
Emers : descended, as  they say, from the  Druses, the  Sidon.

239

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1611.

remainder  of  those  French  men  which  were  brought  into
these  parts  by  Godfrey  of  Bullen,  who  driven  into  the
Mountaines  above,  and  defending  themselves  by  the
advantage  of  the  place,  could  never  be  utterly  destroyed
by  the  Saracens.  At  length  the  affoorded  them  peace,  and
[Il.viii.  Hbertie  of  Religion; conditionally that they  wore the

1331  'J  white  Turban t,  and  paid  such  duties  as  the  naturall  sub-
ject. But  in  tract  of  time  they  fell  from  the  knowledge
of  Christ :  nor  throughly  embracing  the  other,  are  indeede
of  neither. As  for  this  Emer,  he  was  never  knowne  to
pray,  nor  ever  seene  in  a  Mosque. His  name  is  Faccar-
dine,  small  of  stature,  but  great  in  courage  and  achieve-
ments :  about  the  age  of  forty,  subtile  as  a  Foxe,  and  not
a  little  inclining  to  the  Tyrant. He  never  commenceth
battell,  nor  executeth  any  notable  designe,  without  the
She  h  sup- consent  of  his  *  mother. To  his  Towne  hee  hath  added
^inbld \A t a  Singly  Segnioury,  what  by  his  sword,  and  what  by  his
Stratagems. When  Morat  Bassa  (now  principall  Vizier)
came  first  to  his  governement  of  Damasco,  he  made  him
his,  by  his  free  entertainment  and  bounty : which  hath
converted  to  his  no  small  advantage,  of  whom  he  made
use  in  his  contention  with  Frecke  the  Emer  of  Balbec ;
by  his  authority  strangled. After  that  he  pickt  a  quarrel
with Joseph Emer of  Tripoly, and dispossest him of
*Olim  *Barut,  with  the  territories  belonging  thereunto,  together

erytus.  with  Gazer,  about  twelve  miles  beyond  it ; a  place  by

situation  invincible.  This  Joseph  hated  of  his  people
for  his  excessive  tyranny,  got  to  bee  made  Seidar  of
Damasco  (which  is  Generall  of  the  Souldiery)  and  by  that
power  intended  a  revenge.  But  in  the  meane  season
Faccardine  sackt  Tripoly  it  selfe,  and  forced  the  Emer  to
flie  in  a  Venecian  shippe  unto  Cyprus  :  where  againe  he
imbarqued  in  a  French-man,  and  landed  at  the  Castle  of
the  Paregrines  ;  and  there  by  Achmet  the  Arabian  (for-
merly mentioned)  entertained,  hee  repayred  to  Damasco,
entred  on  his  charge,  converting  his  whole  strength  upon
the  Sidonian,  now  in  the  field,  and  joyned  with  AH  Bassa
his  confederate. In  a  plaine  some  eight  miles  short  of

240

GEORGE SANDYS  AD

IDII.

Damasco,  the  armies  met ;  the  Damascens  are  foiled,  and
pursued  to  the  gates  of  the  Citie :  The  Conquerors  lodge
in  the  suburbs,  who  are  removed  by  the  force  of  an
hundred  and  fiftie  thousand  Sultanie.  This  battel  was
fought  about  the  midst  of  November  in  the  yere  of  our
Lord  1606.  Three  months  after  a  Peace  is  concluded
amongst  them.  But  the  sommer  following,  Morat  the
Great  Vizier  having  overthrowne  Ali  Bassa  of  Aleppo,
that  valiant  rebell  (who  in  three  maine  battels  withstood
his  whole  forces ;  having  set  up  an  order  of  Sedgmen  in
opposition  of  the  Janizaries)  they  sought  by  manifold
complaints  to  incense  him  against  the  Emer  of  Sidon,
as  confederate  with  the  traytor ;  which  they  urged  with
gifts,  received  and  lost :  for  the  old  Bassa  mindfull  of  the
friendly  offices  done  him  by  the  Emer  (corrupted  also,  as
is  thought,  with  great  summes  of  money)  not  only  not
molesteth,  but  declareth  him  a  good  subject.  Having  till
of  late  held  good  correspondency  with  the  City  and
Garrison  of  Damasco,  they  had  made  him  Sanziacke  of
Saphet.  Now,  when  according  to  the  governement  of
Turkie,  which  once  in  2  or  3  yeeres  doth  use  to  remove
the  Governours  of  Cities  and  Provinces  ;  and  that  another
was  sent  by  the  Damascens  to  succeede  him,  he  refused
to  resigne  it ;  notwithstanding  tendring  to  the  Teftadar
or  Treasurer  the  revenue  of  that  Sanziackry ;  this  was
the  first  occasion  of  their  quarrell.  Hee  got  from  the
improvident  Peasants  the  Castle  of  Elkiffe,  which  he  hath
strongly  fortified,  and  made  the  receptacle  of  Treasure :
And  the  Castle  of  Banies  from  the  Shecke  that  ought  it,  by
a  wile  (which  standeth  on  a  hill  by  it  selfe,  and  is  indeede
by  nature  invincible.)  For  the  Emer  in  peaceable  manner,
pitching  his  Tents  not  farre  from  the  wall,  was  kindely
visited  and  entertained  by  the  Sheck  :  when  desirous  to
see  it,  he  conducted  him  up,  having  not  above  twenty  or
thirty  in  his  company,  but  those  privately  armed ;  leaving
order  that  the  rest  should  ascend  by  twoes  and  by  threes,
and  so  surprised  it  without  bloud-shed,  planting  the
inhabitants  in  other  places  within  his  Dominions,  and
viii  241  Q

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1611.

strengthning  this  with  a  Garrison.  Out  of  the  Rock
whereon  it  is  mounted  ariseth  one  of  the  two  heads  of
Jordan.  His  Signiory  stretcheth  from  the  River  of
Canis  (which  they  call  Celp)  to  the  foote  of  mount  Carmel.
In  which  the  places  of  principall  note,  are  Gazir,  Barut,
Sidon,  Tyrus,  Acre,  Saffet  (which  was  Tyberias)  Diar,
Camer,  Elkiffe,  Banias,  the  two  heads  of  Jordan,  the  lake
Semochonthis  (now  called  Houle)  and  sea  of  Tyberias,
with  the  hot  bath  adjoyning ;  Nazareth,  Cana,  and
mount  Tabor.  Saffet  is  his  principall  City,  in  which  there
abide  a  number  of  Jewes,  who  affect  the  place,  in  that
Jacob  had  his  being  thereabout  before  his  going  downe
into  iEgypt.
His  intelli-  ^e  Qran(j  Signior  doth  often  threaten  his  subversion,

^Florentine  *  w^ich  he  puts  off  with  a  jest,  that  hee  knowes  he  will  not
this  yeare  trouble  him,  whose  displeasure  is  not  so  much
provoked  by  his  incroching,  as  by  the  revealed  intelligence
which  he  holds  with  the  Florentine ;  whom  he  suffers  to
harbour  within  his  Haven  of  Tyrus,  (yet  excusing  it  as  a
place  lying  waste,  and  not  to  be  defended)  to  come  ashoare
for  fresh-water,  buyes  of  him  underhand  his  prizes,  and
furnisheth  him  with  necessaries.  But  designes  of  a  higher
nature  have  been  treated  of  betweene  them,  as  is  well
knowne  to  certaine  Merchants  imployed  in  that  businesse.
And  I  am  verily  perswaded,  that  if  the  occasion  were  laid
hold  of,  and  freely  pursued  by  the  Christians,  it  would
terribly  shake,  if  not  utterly  confound  the  Ottoman
Empire.  It  is  said  for  a  certainty  that  the  Turke  will
turne  his  whole  forces  upon  him  the  next  Sommer :  And
therefore  more  willingly  condescends  to  a  Peace  with  the
Persian.  But  the  Emer  is  not  much  terrified  with  the
rumor  (although  he  seekes  to  divert  the  tempest  by  con-
tinuance of  gifts,  the  favour  of  his  friends,  and  professed
His  strength,  integritie : )  for  he  not  a  little  presumeth  of  invincible
forts,  well  stored  for  a  long  warre ;  and  advantage  of  the
mountaines :  having  besides  forty  thousand  expert  soul-
diers  in  continuall  pay ;  part  of  them  Moores,  and  part
of  them  Christians :  and  if  the  worst  should  fall  out,  hath

242

GEORGE SANDYS  a.d.

1611.

the  sea  to  friend,  and  the  Florentine. And  in  such  an  [n.vih.

exigent  intendeth,  as  is  thought,  to  make  for  Christen-  lS3**l

dome, and there to purchase some Signorie ; for the

opinion  is  that  he  hath  a  masse  of  Treasure,  gathered  by

wiles  and  extortions,  as  well  from  the  Subject,  as  from

the  Forreiner. Hee  hath  coyned  of  late  a  number  of

counterfeit  Dutch  Dollers,  which  he  thrusteth  away  in

payments,  and  offers  in  exchange  to  the  Merchant : so

that  no  new  Dutch  Dollers,  though  never  so  good,  will

now  goe  currant  in  Sidon. He  hath  the  fifth  part  of  the  Custome.

increase  of  all things. The Christians  and Jewes  doe

pay  for  their  heads  two  Dollers  apiece  yearely,  and  head

money  he  hath  for  all  the  Cattell  within  his  Dominions.

A  severe  Justicer,  re-edifies  ruinous,  and  replants  depopu-  Justice.

lated  places ; too  strong  for  his  Neighbours,  and  able  to

maintayne  a  defensive  warre  with  the  Turke :  but  that  it

is  to  be  suspected  that  his  people  would  fall  from  him  in

regard  of  his  tyrannie. Now  as  for  the  Merchants,  (who

are  for  the  most  part  English)  they  are  entertayned  with

all  courtesie  and freedome ; they  may travell  without

danger with their Purses in their hands, paying for

custome  by  three  in  the  hundred. Yet  these  are  but

Traines  to  allure  them,  and  disguise  his  voracitie ; for  if  Injustice.

a  Factor  dye,  as  if  the  Owner,  and  hee  his  Heire,  hee  will

seize  on  the  goods  belonging  to  his  Principals,  and  seeme

to  doe  them  a  favour  in  admitting  of  a  Redemption  under

the  value,  so  that  they  doe  but  labour  for  his  Harvest,

and reape for his Garners. For such, and such-like

eatings  they  generally  intend to forsake  his  Countrey.

The  Merchandizes  appropriate  to  this  place  are  Cottons,

and  Silkes,  which  here  are  made  in  the  Mulbery  Groves,

in  indifferent  quantitie. Other  Commodities  (which  are

many,  and  not  course)  they  fetch  from  Damasco  : two

dayes  iourney  from  hence ; interposed  with  the  Snow-

topt  Mountaynes  of  Antilibanus,  so  exceeding  cold,  that  dntilibanus

a  Moore  at  our  being  here,  returning  from  thence  in  the  very

company  of  an  English  Merchant,  perished  by  the  way :

the  heate  then  excessive  great  in  the  Valleys  on  both  sides.

243

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1611.

Damascus.  Damascus  is  seated  in  a  Plaine  environed  with  Hils,  and

M  B'A  watered  Wlt^  the  River  Chrysoras :  descending  with  a
dulph  in  the  great  murmure  from  the  Mountaynes  ;  but  after  awhile
next  Chapter,  having  entred  the  plaine  becommeth  more  gentle  ;  serving
the  Citie  so  abundantly,  that  few  houses  are  without  their
Fountaines,  and  by  little  Rivolets  let  into  their  Orchards :
then  which  the  habitable  earth  affoordeth  not  more  deli-
cate for  excellencie  of  fruits,  and  their  varieties :  yet
subject  to  both  the  extreames  of  weather ;  rich  in  Trades,
and  celebrated  for  excellent  Artizans.  We  were  desirous
to  have  seene  it,  but  were  advised  not  adventure,  because
of  the  lawlesse  Spaheis  there  then  residing  in  great
numbers.  The  people  about  Sidon  are  greatly  given  to
the  nourishing  of  Cattel,  (having  notwithstanding  not
many)  insomuch  as  Beefe  and  Veale  are  seldome  here  to
be  had,  but  when  by  chance  they  doe  breake  their  legges
or  otherwise  miscarrie.  They  fother  them  in  the  Winter
(for  they  cut  no  grasse)  with  straw,  and  the  leaves  of
Trees,  whereof  many  doe  flourish  continually.

Our  ship  returning  to  Alexandria,  and  carrying  with
her  two  of  our  fellow  Pilgrimes ;  on  the  five  and  twentieth
of  Aprill  we  returned  also  towards  Acre  by  Land  in  the
company  of  divers  English  Merchants :  the  Champaine
betweene  the  Sea  and  the  Mountaynes  fruitfull  though
narrow ;  and  crossed  with  many  little  Rivolets.  After
five  miles  riding  wee  came  to  a  small  solitarie  Mosque
not  far  from  the  Sea ;  erected,  as  they  say,  over  the
Widdowes  house  that  entertayned  Elias ;  close  by  it  are
Sarepta.  the  foundations  of  Sarepta. It  was  the  Seate  of  a  Bishop,

and  subject  unto  Tyrus.  Right  against  it,  and  high
mounted  on  the  Mountayne,  there  is  a  handsome  new
Sarapanta.  Towne  now  called  Sarapanta.  Beyond  on  the  left  hand
of  the  way  are  a  number  of  Caves  cut  out  of  the  Rocke,
the  Habitations,  as  I  suppose,  of  men  in  the  Golden  Age,
and  before  the  foundation  of  Cities.  These  are  mentioned
in  the  Booke  of  Josua,  and  called  Mearah,  (which  is  the
Caves  of  the  Sidonians,  and  afterward  called  the  Caves  of
Tyrus,)  a  place  then  inexpugnable,  and  maintayned  by  the

244

GEORGE SANDYS  a.d.

1611.

Christians,  untill  in  the  yeare  1 167.  it  was  by  the  corrupted

Souldiers  delivered  to  the  Saracens.

Wee  crossed  a  little  Valley  devided  by  the  River
Elutherus  (now  called  Casmeir)  which  derives  his  originall
from  Lybanus,  and  glideth  along  with  a  speedie  course
through  a  strangely  intricate  Channell :  guiltie  of  the
death  of  the  Emperour  Fredericke  Barbarossa,  who  falling
from  his  Horse  as  hee  pursued  the  Infidels,  and  oppressed
with  the  weight  of  his  Armour  was  drowned  therein,  and
buried  at  Tyrus.  On  the  other-side  of  the  Valley  stands
an  ancient  Cane,  whose  Port  doth  beare  the  pourtrayture
of  a  Chalice.  Five  miles  beyond  wee  came  to  a  Village
seated  on  a  little  Hill  in  the  midst  of  a  Plaine,  the  same
by  all  likelihood  that  was  formerly  called  Palatyrus,  or  old  Palatyrus.
Tyrus.  Forget  I  must  not  the  custome  observed  by  the
Inhabitants  hereabout,  who  retayne  the  old  Worlds  Hos-  Rare
pitalitie.  Be  the  Passenger  Christian  or  whatsoever,  they  HosPltalttte-
will  house  him,  prepare  him  extraordinary  fare,  and  looke
to  his  Mule,  without  taking  of  one  Asper.  But  the
precise  Mahometans  will  neither  eate  nor  drinke  with  a
Christian  :  onely  minister  to  his  wants  ;  and  when  he  hath
done,  breake  the  earthen  Dishes  wherein  he  hath  fed,  as
defiled.  Now  through  this  Towne  there  passes  a  ruinous
Aquaduct,  extending  a  great  way  towards  the  South,  and
through  the  Champaine,  seeming  often  to  climbe  above  his
beginning,  and  from  hence  proceedeth  directly  West  unto
Tyrus,  which  standeth  about  two  miles  and  a  halfe
below  it.

Tyrus  was  said  to  be  built  by  Tyras,  the  seventh  Sonne  Tyrus.
of  Japhet ; re-edified  by  Phoenix,  made  a  Colony  of  the
Sidonians,  and  after  the  Metropolis  of  Phoenicia. The
Citie was consecrated to Hercules, whose Priest was  [H.viii.
Sicheus. The  Citizens  famous  for  sundry  excellencies,  x333-]

and  forreine  Plantations.

But  in  the  yeare  1289.  it  was  subdued  by  the  ^Egyptian
Mahometans,  and  from  them  by  the  Ottoman  Selymus.
But  this  once  famous  Tyrus,  is  now  no  other  then  a  heape
of  Ruines ; yet  have  they  a  reverent  respect,  and  doe

24s

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1611.

instruct  the  pensive  beholder  with  their  exemplarie  frailtie.
It  hath  two  Harbours,  that  on  the  North-side  the  fairest,
and  best  throughout  all  the  Levant,  (which  the  Cursours
enter  at  their  pleasure)  the  other  choaked  with  the  decayes
of  the  Citie.  The  Emer  of  Sidon  hath  given  it  with  the
adjacent  Territories,  to  his  Brother  for  a  possession,  com-
prehending sixe  miles  of  the  Continent  in  length ;  two
in  breadth,  and  in  some  places  three.  A  levell  naturally
fertile,  but  now  neglected  :  watered  with  pleasant  Springs  ;
heretofore  abounding  with  Sugar-canes,  and  all  varietie  of
fruit  Trees.
Salomons  We  passed  by  certaine  Cisternes.  some  mile  and  better

^  merries,  distant  from  the  Citie :  which  are  called  Salomons  by  the
Christians  of  this  Countrey.  I  know  not  why,  unlesse
these  were  they  which  he  mentions  in  the  Canticles.
Square  they  are  and  large  ;  replenished  with  living  waters,
in  times  past  conveyed  by  the  Aquaduct  into  the  aforesaid
Orchards :  but  now  uselesse  and  ruined,  they  shed  their
waters  into  the  Valley  below,  making  it  plashie  in  sundry
places :  where  the  Ayre  doth  suffer  with  the  continuall
croking  of  Frogs.  Within  night,  wee  came  unto  certayne
Tents  that  were  pitched  in  those  Marishes,  belonging  to  the
Emers  Brothers  Servants,  who  there  pastured  their  Horses.
Where  by  a  Moletto  the  Master  of  his  Horse  (whose
Sister  he  had  marryed)  we  were  courteously  entertayned.
The  next  morning  after  two  or  three  houres  riding,  we
Saron.  ascended  the  Mountaynes  of  Saron,  high  and  woodie ;
which  stretch  with  intermitted  Vallies,  unto  the  Sea  of
Galilie,  and  here  have  their  white  Cliffes  washt  with  the
surges ;  called  Capo  Bianco  by  the  Mariner :  frequented
(though  forsaken  by  men)  with  Leopards,  Bores,  Jaccals,
and  such  like  savage  Inhabitants.  This  passage  is  both
dangerous  and  difficult,  neighboured  by  the  precipitating
Cliffe,  and  made  by  the  labour  of  man  :  yet  recompensing
the  trouble  with  fragrant  Savours,  Bayes,  Rosemary,
Marjoram,  Hysope,  and  the  like  there  growing  in  abund-
ance. They  say,  that  of  late  a  Thiefe  pursued  on  all  sides,
and  desperate  of  his  safetie,  (for  rarely  are  offences  here

246

GEORGE SANDYS

A.D.
l6ll.

pardoned)  leapt  from  the  top  into  the  Sea,  and  swum  unto
Tyrus,  which  is  seven  miles  distant ;  who  for  the  strange-
nesse  of  the  fact  was  forgiven  by  the  Emer. A  little
beyond  we  passed  by  a  ruinous  Fort,  called  Scandarone,  of  Scandarone.
Alexander  the  builder ;  heere  built  to  defend  this  passage :
much  of  the  foundation  over-growne  with Oziers  and
Weeds, being  nourished  by  a  Spring  that  falleth  from
thence  into  the  Sea. A  Moore  not  long  since  was  heere
assailed  by  a  Leopard,  that  sculkt  in  the  aforesaid  Thicket ; A  Leopard.
and  jumping  upon  him,  overthrew  him  from  his  Asse :
but  the  beast  having  wet  his  feet,  and  mist  of  his  hold,
retyred  as  ashamed  without  further  violence : within  a
day  or  two  after  he  drew  company  together  to  have  hunted
him,  but  found  him  dead  of  a  wound  received  of  a  Bore.
The  higher  Mountaines  now  comming  short  of  the  Sea,
doe  leave  a  narrow  levell  betweene. Upon  the  left  hand
on  a  high  round  Hill,  wee  saw  two  solitarie  Pillars,  to
which  some  of  us  rid,  in  hope  to  have  seene  something  of
Antiquitie  ;  where  we  found  divers  others  laid  along,  with
the  halfe  buried  foundation  of  an  ample  building. A  mile
beyond  we  came  to  a  Fort  maintayned  by  a  small  Garrison
of  Moores,  to  prohibit  that  passage  if  need  should  require,
and  to  secure  the  Traveller  from  Theeves ; a  place  here-
tofore  unpassable by  reason of  their  out-rages. The
Souldiers  acquainted  with  our  Merchants,  freely  enter-
tayned  us,  and  made  us  good  cheere  according  to  their
manner of Diet : requited with a Present of a little
Tobacco,  by  them  greedily  affected. They  also  remitted Tobacco.
our  Caphar,  using  to  take  foure  Dollers  apiece  of  the
stranger Christians. From hence ascending the more
eminent  part  of  the  Rockie  and  naked  Mountaynes,  which
heere  againe  thrust  into  the  Sea,  (called  in  times  past,  the
Tyrian  Ladder)  by  a  long  and  steepe  descent  we  descended
into  the  Valley  of  Acre. Divers  little  hils  being  here
and  there  dispersed,  crowned  with  Ruines  (the  Coverts
for Theeves) and many Villages on the skirts of the
bordering Mountaynes. Ere yet night, we re-entred
Acre.

247

A.D.
l6ll.

[Il.viii.

1334]

*  The  former
part  of  this
Letter  is
omitted:  the
later  also
pruned  in  some
things  to
prevent
tedious  repeti-
tions, of  those
things  which
you  have  had
in  others.
Fame  pfQ.
Elizabeth.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Now  is  our  Author  shaping  his  course  for  England ;
and  we  have  a  further  Asian  Discoverie  to  make.  Thank-
full  to  him  for  his  paines  (which  have  eased  us  of  further
search  in  the  many  many  Holy  Land  Pilgrimes,  which  I
have  in  divers  Languages)  wee  will  seeke  a  new  Pilgrime
to  be  our  Guide,  both  in  Syria,  and  in  the  parts  adjoyning.
And  loe,  Jerusalem  so  pleaseth  us,  that  once  againe  we
will  travell  thither  with  Master  Biddulph,  following  him
from  Constantinople  to  Aleppo,  and  thence  by  Land  to
Jerusalem,  the  Navill  and  Centre  of  many  our  Pilgrimes
and  Pilgrimages.

Chap.  IX.

Part  of  a  Letter  of  Master  William  Biddulph

from  Aleppo.

He  *dolefull  and  lamentable  beginning  of
your  last  Letter  made  mee  exceeding
sorrowfull ;  for  therein  you  acquainted  me
with  the  death  of  blessed  Queene  Eliza-
beth, of  late  and  famous  memory ;  at  the
hearing  whereof,  not  onely  I  and  our
English  Nation  mourned,  but  many  other
Christians  who  were  never  in  Christendome,  but  borne
and  brought  up  in  Heathen  Countries,  wept  to  heare  of
her  death,  and  said,  she  was  the  most  famous  Queene  that
ever  they  heard  or  read  of  since  the  World  beganne.  But
the  ending  of  your  Letter  comforted  us  againe,  and  miti-
gated our  mourning.  And  (as  my  dutie  was)  I  appointed
one  day  to  bee  kept  holy,  which  wee  spent  in  Prayer,  and
Preaching,  and  Thanksgiving  unto  God  for  the  happie
advancement  of  so  Noble,  Wise,  Learned,  and  Religious  a
King  over  us.  And  in  signe  of  joy,  we  feasted  and
triumphed  in  such  sort,  that  the  very  Heathen  people  were
partakers  with  us  of  our  joy.  After  my  departure  from
Constantinople,  the  first  place  wee  touched  at,  was  the  two
Castles  at  the  Hellespont,  about  two  hundred  and  twentie
miles  distant  from  Constantinople,  where  the  order  is,  for

248

WILLIAM BIDDULPH  a.d.

1600.

all  ships  to  stay  three  dayes,  to  the  end  that  if  any  slaves
be  run  away  from  their  Masters,  or  Theeves  have  stolne
away  any  thing,  they  may  thither  be  pursued  in  three
dayes,  before  the  ships  passe  :  And  then  at  three  dayes  end,
the  ship  must  be  searched  for  goods,  contra  bando,  and  the  That  is,  goods
Grand  Signiors  Passe  shewed  for  all  the  Passengers  in  the  forhtdden-
ship ; and  then  (their  usuall  duties  payed)  they  may  set
saile  and  away. Yet  if  the  Master  of  the  ship  pay  extra-
ordinarily, they  may  more  speedily  bee  dispatched : and
many  give  very  liberally  (when  they  have  a  good  winde)
rather  than  they  will  be  stayed  many  houres. From  thence
we  came  to  Chios,  where  we  stayed  a  few  dayes. From
Chios  wee  set  sayle  with  a  very  good  wind,  which  brought
us amongst the  fiftie three lies in the Arches, called
Cyclades,  or  Sporades  :  And  then,  by  a  contrary  wind,  wee
were  driven  to  Samos,  which  is  an  He  before  Ionia,  over
against  Ephesus,  where  we  anchored  untill  wee  had  a  good
wind, and then sayled  by  Andros, an He, one  of  the
Cyclades, and had a very good wind untill we
came to Rhodos, commonly called Rhodes, which is
an He in the Carpathian Sea, neere Caria,  where we
were becalmed. It is called the Carpathian Sea of
Carpathus, an He  in the  middest  betwixt  Rhodes  and  Rhode.
Greet. From  Rhodes  we  came  to  Cyprus,  a  famous  and
fruitfull  Hand  in  the  Sea  Carpathium,  betweene  Cilicia  and
Syria,  which  was  once  conquered  by  Richard  the  First,
King of England. In this He Venus was greatly
honoured. There  is  still  a  Citie  therein  called  Paphia,
built  by  Paphus,  who  dedicated  it  to  Venus. But  the
chiefest Cities in Cyprus are Famogusta and Nicosia. Cyprus.
There is great store  of Cotton-wooll growing in this
Hand,  and  exceeding  good  Wine  made  here,  and  the  best
Dimetey,  with  other  good  Commodities. From  hence  a
French  Gentleman  (who  came  in  our  ship  from  Constanti-
nople,) imbarked  himselfe  for  Joppa,  with  a  purpose  to
goe  to  Jerusalem. Joppa  is  not  two  dayes  sayling  from
Cyprus  with  a  good  wind :  and  Joppa  is  but  thirtie  miles  Joppa.
from  Jerusalem  by  Land. Cyprus  was  under  the  govern-

249

A.D.

1600,

Tripoly  in
Syria.

Lybanus.

Eden  not  the
Garden.

[Il.viii.

1335-]

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

ment  of  the  Signiorie  of  Venice ;  but  now  it  is  inhabited
by  Greekes,  and  governed  by  Turkes.

But  our  ship  from  Cyprus  went  to  Tripoly  in  Syria,  a
Citie  on  the  manye  Land  of  Syria,  neere  unto  Mount
Lybanus,  which  is  a  Mountayne  of  three  dayes  journey  in
length,  reaching  from  Tripoly  neere  to  Damascus.
Whilest  our  ship  stayed  in  the  Roade  at  Tripoly,  I  and
some  others  road  up  to  Mount  Lybanus,  to  see  the  Cedar
Trees  there,  and  lodged  the  first  night  at  the  Bishops
house  of  Eden,  who  used  us  very  kindly.  It  is  but  a
little  Village,  and  called  by  the  Turkes,  Anchora,  but
most  usually  by  the  Christians  there  dwelling,  it  is  called
Eden,  not  the  Garden  of  Eden,  (which  place  is  unknowne
unto  this  day)  but  because  it  is  a  pleasant  place,  resembling
in  some  sort  the  Garden  of  Eden,  (as  the  simple  Inhabi-
tants thereof  suppose)  therefore  it  is  called  Eden.  This
Bishop  was  borne  in  the  same  Parish,  but  brought  up  at
Rome :  his  name  was  Franciscus  Amyra,  by  whom  I
understood,  that  the  Pope  of  Rome  many  yeeres  since,
sent  unto  the  Christians  inhabiting  Mount  Lybanus,  to
perswade  them  to  embrace  the  Romish  Religion,  and
yeeld  themselves  to  the  Church  of  Rome,  making  large
promises  unto  them  if  they  would  so  doe :  whereof  they
deliberated  long,  but  in  the  end  yeelded,  upon  condition
they  might  have  libertie  to  use  their  owne  Lyturgie,  and
Ceremonies,  and  Lents  (for  they  strictly  observe  foure
Lents  in  the  yeere)  and  other  Customes.  Ever  since
which  time,  the  Pope  hath  and  doth  maintayne  some  of
their  Children  at  Rome.  These  Christians  which  dwell
upon  Mount  Lybanus,  are  called  Maronites,  they  are  very
simple  and  ignorant  people,  yet  civill,  kinde,  and  courteous
to  Strangers.  There  are  also  many  Turkes  dwelling  on
the  same  Mountayne,  and  an  Emeer  or  great  Lord,  called
Emeer  Useph,  who  governeth  all  the  rest,  both  Christians
and  Turkes,  beeing  himselfe  a  Mahometan,  yet  one  who
holdeth  the  government  of  Mount  Lybanus,  in  despight
of  the  Great  Turke,  and  hath  done  a  long  time.

From  Eden  we  rode  ten  miles  further  up  the  Moun-

250

WILLIAM BIDDULPH  ad.

1600.

tayne,  to  see  certayne  Cedar  Trees,  where  we  saw  foure  Cedars  were
and  twentie  tall  Cedar  Trees  growing  together,  as  bigge  P^ent'lfultn.
as  the  greatest  Oakes,  with  divers  rowes  of  branches  one  but  now '
over  another,  stretching  straight  out,  as  though  they  were  rare,
kept  by  Art. iUthough  we  read  of  great  store  of  Cedars
which  have  growne  on  Mount  Lybanus,  yet  now  there  are
very  few,  for  we  saw  none  but  these  foure  and  twentie,
neither  heard  of  any  other  but  in  one  place  more. At
these  Cedars  many  Nostranes  met  us,  and  led  us  to  their
Villages. From these Cedars wee returned toward
Tripoly, another way, descending by the side of the
Mount  towards  a  Village  of  the  Maroniticall  Christians,
called  Hatcheeth,  where  (as  we  were  descending  downe  the
side  of  the  Mountaine)  all  the  men,  women  and  children,
came  out  of  their  Houses  to  behold  us : And  when  we
were  yet  farre  off  riding  towards  them,  they  gave  a  joyful]
shout  altogether  joyntly, to  expresse  their  joy  for  our
comming. And  when  we  came  neere,  their  women  with
Chaffing-dishes  of  coles  burnt  Incense  in  our  way,  and
their Casseeses, that is, their Church-men (with blue
Shashes  about  their  heads)  made  crosses  with  their  fingers
towards  us  (as  their  manner  is  in  signe  of  welcome)  and
blessed us, giving God thankes that he had brought
Christian  Frankes,*  of  such  far  Countries  as  they  under-  *The
stood  we  were  of,  to  come  to  visit  them.  Westerne

So  soone  as  we  were  dismounted  from  our  Horses,  the wiled****
chiefe  Sheh,  with  all  the  rest  of  their  ancientest  men,  came  thorow  all  the
and  brought  us  to  the  chiefe  house  of  the  Parish,  called  East,  ever
the Towne-house or Church-house, and there spread  since  theHiero-

Carpets  and  Table-clothes  on  the  ground  fas  their  manner  s°y™lt™
.  o  \  &xi)  editions

is)  and  made  us  all  sit  downe ; and  every  one  that  was  fa  Godfrey
able,  brought  Flaskets  of  such  good  cheere  as  they  had,  to  Button.
welcome us, which was many Bottles or Ingesters of  Shehysignifieth
exceeding  good  Wine,  with  Olives,  Sallets,  Egges,  and
such  like  things,  as  on  the  sudden  they  had  readie,  and
set  them  before  us  ;  and  both  by  the  cheerefulnesse  of  their
countenances,  gestures  of  their  bodies,  and  presents  of
such  present  things  as  they  had,  expressed  their  gladnesse

2Si

man.

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1600.

for  our  comming ;  and  would  also  have  prepared  Hens,
Kids,  and  other  good  cheere,  but  we  would  not  suffer
them.  This  was  about  eleven  or  twelve  of  the  clocke.
They  would  have  had  us  continue  with  them  all  night,
and  with  great  importunitie  craved  it ;  but  we  under-
standing that  the  Patriarch  was  but  three  miles  off,  at  a
Village  called  Sharry,  we  went  to  salute  him,  who  hearing
of  our  comming  (albeit  he  were  at  a  Feast  amongst  all  his
Neighbours)  came  to  meete  us,  and  saluted  us,  and  brought
us  all  in  amongst  his  Neighbours  into  a  Roome  foure
square,  and  round  about  beset  with  Carpets  and  Table-
clothes  on  the  ground,  and  such  cheere  as  the  season  of
the  yeere  did  affoord,  set  thereon,  and  made  us  all  sit
down,  and  conferred  with  us  of  our  Country,  and  many
other  matters,  saving  matters  of  Religion,  for  the  poore
man  had  no  Latine,  and  little  Learning  in  any  other
Language ;  only  he  had  the  Syracke,  (which  was  his
naturall  Language)  with  the  Turkish  and  Arabian  Tongue.
After  wee  had  spent  one  houre  with  him,  we  left  him  with
his  Neighbours  at  Sharry,  where  we  found  him,  for  he
could  not  conveniently  come  from  them :  for  their  manner
is,  when  they  feast,  to  sit  from  mid-day  untill  mid-night,
and  sometimes  all  night,  never  altogether  rising  from
their  good  cheere,  but  now  and  then  one  by  Inter-
courses, as  occasion  requireth,  returning  againe  speedily.
Yet  hee  sent  with  us  three  men  to  bring  us  to
his  owne  house,  neere  unto  a  Village  (foure  miles
distant  from  Sharry)  called  Boloza,  but  vulgarly  Blouza,
from  whence  we  descended  downe  the  side  of  another
part  of  the  Mountayne,  and  in  the  middle  of  the
descending  of  this  Mountayne  was  the  Patriarkes  house,
called  Kanobeen  Kadischa  Mir-iam,  in  the  Syriacke
Tongue,  but  in  Latine,  Coenobium  Sanctae  Marise  ;  that
is,  The  Monasterie  of  Saint  Marie.  Over  against  the
Patriarkes  house  is  an  high  steepie  Mountayne,  from
whence  the  water  runneth  downe  into  a  deepe  Valley
betwixt  the  Patriarkes  House  and  the  Hill,  and  in  the
fall,  the  water  maketh  an  exceeding  great  noyse,  like  unto

252

WILLIAM BIDDULPH  a.d.

1600.

that  Catadupa  in  ^Ethiopia,  where  the  fall  of  Nilus  maketh
such  a  noyse,  that  the  people  are  made  deafe  therewith  that
dwell  neere  it.  This  place  is  some-what  like  unto  it  in
fall,  but  not  in  effect :  for  this  water  beeing  not  so  great
as  Nilus,  maketh  not  the  like  noyse,  neither  worketh  the
like  effect.  There  is  also  an  extraordinarie  Eccho  there-
about.

One  side  of  the  Patriarkes  house  is  a  naturall  Rocke,
the  other  of  hewen  stones  and  squared  Timber :  a  very
strong  House,  but  not  very  large,  nor  specious  to  behold.
So  are  also  many  of  their  Houses,  in  most  of  their  Villages,
built  against  a  Rocke,  as  a,  Wall  unto  one  side  of  it,
especially  Emeer  Useph  his  House,  the  greatest  part  ***r  lx> Lorc^
thereof  being  hewed  out  of  the  lively  Rocke,  and  the  m*i
passage  or  descending  unto  it  so  narrow  and  dangerous,
that  it  is  counted  invincible,  which  maketh  him  to  hold
out  against  the  Turke,  and  to  domineere  in  this  Moun-
tayne,  will  he,  nill  he.

It  is  a  most  intricate  Mountayne  with  Hils  and  Valleyes,
Woods  and  Rivers,  and  fruitfull  Pastures,  Olives,  Vines,
and  Fig-trees,  Goates,  Sheepe,  and  other  Cattle.  It  is  also
exceeding  high  having  Snow  on  the  top  all  the  yeere  long.

At  this  Monastery  of  Saint  Marie  (which  is  the
Patriarkes  House)  wee  lodged  all  night,  and  both  on
Saturday  at  Evening  Prayer,  and  on  Sunday  at  Morning
Prayer,  we  both  heard  and  saw  the  manner  of  their
Service  in  the  Syriacke  Tongue,  both  read  and  sung  very
reverently,  With  Confessions,  Prayers,  Thankesgivings,
the  Psalmes  of  David  sung,  and  Chapters  both  out  of  the
Old  Testament,  and  the  new  distinctly  read.  It  rejoyced
me  greatly  to  see  their  Order :  and  I  observed  in  these  t11- vlil-
ancient Christians called Nazarites, the Antiquitie of  J  33^-1

using  set  formes  of  Prayers  in  Churches,  and  also  the Setjbrmes  of
necessitie  thereof,  that  the  people  might  have  something ra3ers-
to  say  Amen  unto,  beeing  read  in  their  Mother  Tongue,
that  they  may  learne  to  pray  privately,  by  those  Prayers
which  they  daily  heare  read  publikely. This  is  too  much
neglected  in  England,  God  grant  reformation  thereof.

253

A.D.

l600.

But  four e
Parishes  in  all
the  World
which  speake
Syriack.

Mount
Lybanus.

Drusies.

Turcomany,

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

There  is  no  place  in  all  the  World,  but  foure  Parishes
or  Villages  on  this  Mountaine,  where  they  speake  the
Syriacke  Tongue  naturally  at  this  day.  And  these  are
these  foure  Villages,  which  I  named  before ;  at  all  which
places  wee  had  kind  entertainment,  viz.  First,  Eden,
called  by  the  Turkes,  Anchora.  Secondly,  Hatcheeth.
Thirdly,  Sharry.  Fourthly,  Boloza,  called  vulgarly
Blouza.  And  these  people  are  called  Nostranes,  quasi
Nazaritans,  as  it  were  Nazarites,  and  none  but  they.  But
more  generally  they  are  called  Maronites,  but  this  name
is  common  to  them  with  others.

There  are  dwelling  on  one  side  of  Mount  Lybanus,
towards  the  foot  of  the  Mountayne  (and  in  some  other
places  in  that  Countrey)  a  kind  of  Christians,  called
Drusies,  who  came  into  the  Countrey  with  King  Baldwine,
and  Godfrey  of  Bullen,  when  they  conquered  that
Countrey,  whose  Predecessors  or  Ancestors  are  thought  to
have  beene  Frenchmen)  and  afterwards  when  the  Saracens
recovred  it  againe,  these  men  (whom  they  now  call
Drusies)  fled  into  the  Mountaynes  to  save  themselves ;
and  there  dwelling  long,  in  the  end  their  Posteritie  forgat
all  Christianitie,  yet  used  still  Baptisme,  &  retained  still
the  names  of  Christians,  whom  the  Turcomen  call  Rafties,
that  is,  Infidels,  because  they  eate  Swines  flesh,  which  is
forbidden  by  the  Turkes  Law.

These  Turcomanny  are  kind,  and  simple  people,
dwelling  alwayes  in  the  fields,  following  their  flockes,
borne  and  brought  up,  living  and  dying  in  Tents,  and
when  their  flockes  and  heards  remoove,  then  all  their  men,
women  and  children  remove  with  their  houshold-stuffe,
and  houses  too,  which  are  but  Tents  made  to  remoove,
after  the  manner  of  the  ancient  Israelites :  &  where  they
find  good  pasture,  there  they  pitch  their  Tents ;  the  men
following  their  flocks  of  sheepe  and  heards  of  Cattle,  the
women  keepe  their  Tents,  and  spend  their  time  in
spinning,  or  carding,  or  knitting,  or  some  houshold
huswiferie,  not  spending  their  time  in  gossipping  and
gadding  abroad  from  place  to  place,  and  from  house  to

254

WILLIAM BIDDULPH  a.d.

1600.

house, from  Ale-house to Wine-taverne, as many idle

Huswives  in  England doe. Yet sometimes are these

simple  soules  abused  by  Janizaries,  who  in  travelling  by  Janizaries9

them,  take  from  them  perforce  victuals  for  themselves  and  are  ou

for  their  horses,  and  give  them  nothing  but  sore  stripes,

if  they  but  murmure  against  them. But  when  Christian

Merchants  passe  by  them,  they  will  (of  their  owne  accord)

kindly  present  them.

We  returned  from  Mount  Lybanus  to  Tripoly,  by  such
an  intricate  way,  that  if  we  had  not  had  a  Guide  with  us,
wee  should  have  lost  our  selves.  Neere  unto  Tripoly
there  is  a  Plaine  at  least  one  mile  in  length,  full  of  Olive-
trees  and  Fig-trees.  At  the  foot  of  this  Mountayne,  neere
unto  Tripoly,  there  is  a  sandie  Mount  which  hath  arisen  A  Mountayne
(in  the  memorie  of  some  olde  men  there  yet  living)  where  °*  an  '
there  was  none  before ;  and  it  groweth  still  bigger  and
bigger,  and  there  is  a  Prophesie  of  it,  that  in  time  it  shall
over-whelme  the  Towne.  Tripoly  hath  the  Etimologie
(as  some  say)  of  two  Greeke  words,  viz.  rpi$  and  7roA*9,
because  the  Citie  hath  bin  thrice  built.  First,  on  a
Rockie  Hand,  where  it  was  over-whelmed  with  water.
Secondly,  on  the  Marine  neere  unto  the  Sea,  where  it  was
often  sacked  by  Cursares.  And  now  thirdly,  a  mile  from
the  Sea,  where  it  is  annoyed  with  sand.  Our  ship  being
not  readie  to  set  saile  at  our  return  from  the  Mount,  but
staying  partly  to  dispatch  their  businesse,  and  partly  for  a
good  wind ;  we  travelled  by  Land  two  dayes  journey,  to
see  Tyrus  and  Sidon,  hard  by  the  Sea.  And  at  Sidon  we  Tyrus  \3
saw  the  Tombe  of  Zabulon,  the  Sonne  of  Jacob,  held  in
great  estimation  and  reverent  account  at  this  present  day.

Tyrus  is  now  called  (by  the  Turkes)  Sur,  because  there  Sur,  or  Syria.
beginneth  the  Land  of  Syria,  which  they  call  Sur ;  Tyrus
is  destroyed,  and  no  such  Citie  now  standing,  onely  the
name  of  the  place  remayneth,  and  the  place  is  still  knowne
where  it  stood.  Eight  miles  from  Tyrus  towards  the
East,  is  the  Citie  Sarepta,  of  the  Sidonians,  where  the
Prophet  Elias  raised  the  Widdowes  Sonne  from  death  to
life. We  saw  also  Baruta,  where  sometimes  was  a  great

255

A.D.

l600.

Scanderone.

Bottome  and
border  of  all
the  St?-eights.

[Il.viii.

I337-]

Tarsus  in
Cilicia.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Trade  for  Merchants,  but  from  thence  they  removed  it  to
Damascus,  and  from  Damascus  to  Tripoly,  and  of  late,
from  Tripoly  to  Sidon.  Joppa  is  not  far  from  these
parts,  oftentimes  Barkes  come  from  the  one  to  the
other.  At  our  returne  we  went  abroad,  and  pre-
sently set  saile  for  Scanderone,  (as  it  is  now  called
by  Turkes : )  otherwise  called  Alexandretta  by  the
Christians,  which  is  the  very  bottome  and  utmost
border  of  all  the  Streights.  The  Aire  is  very  corrupt,
and  infecteth  the  bodies,  and  corrupteth  the  bloud  of
such  as  continue  there  many  dayes,  partly  by  reason  of
the  dregs  of  the  Sea,  which  are  driven  thither :  and  partly
by  reason  of  two  high  Mountaynes  which  keepe  away  the
Sunne  from  it  a  great  part  of  the  day.  And  it  is  very
dangerous  for  strangers  to  come  on  shoare,  before  the
sunne  be  two  houres  high,  and  have  dryed  up  the
vapours  of  the  ground,  or  to  stay  on  shoare  after  Sun-
setting.  The  water  also  neere  unto  the  Towne  are  very
unholsome,  comming  from  a  Moorish  ground ;  but  at  the
Fountayne,  a  mile  off,  there  is  exceeding  good  water  to
drink.  It  is  far  more  healthfull  to  sleepe  aboard  then  on
the  shoare.  Scanderone  is  in  Cilicia,  and  Cilicia  is  the
Countrey  Caramonia,  (as  it  is  now  called)  in  the  lesser
Asia,  and  is  divided  into  two  parts,  viz.  Torcher  and
Campestris.  It  hath  on  the  East,  the  Hill  Amanus :  on
the  North,  Taurus :  on  the  West,  Pamphilia :  on  the
South,  the  Cicilian  Sea.

Scanderone  is  the  Port  for  Aleppo,  where  all  our
Merchants  land  their  goods,  and  send  them  up  to  Aleppo
upon  Camels.  The  Caravans  usually  make  three  dayes
journey  betwixt  Scanderone  and  Aleppo.  Whiles  our
Camels  were  preparing,  wee  tooke  boat  and  went  to  an
ancient  Towne  by  the  Sea  side,  called  at  this  day  Byas,
but  of  old,  Tarsus,  a  Citie  in  Cilicia,  where  Saint  Paul
was  borne,  mentioned  Act.  22.  3.  which  Towne  is  arched
about  (as  many  of  their  Cities  are)  to  keepe  away  the  heat
of  the  Sunne,  which  Arches  they  call  Bazars.  At  the
Gardens neere Tarsus (and likewise at other Gardens

256

WILLIAM BIDDULPH  a.d.

1600.

within  three  miles  of  Scanderone)  wee  saw  great  store  of
Silke-wormes,  which  at  the  first  bee  but  little  graines  like  Silkewormes.
unto  Mustard  seed :  but  by  the  bearing  of  them  in
womens  bosomes,  they  doe  gather  an  heat,  whereby  they
come  unto  life,  and  so  prove  wormes ;  they  keepe  them
in  Tents  made  of  reeds  with  one  loft  over  another  full  of
them,  and  feed  them  with  leaves  of  Mulberie  trees ;  these
wormes  (by  naturall  instinct)  doe  fast  often,  (as  some
report)  every  third  day.

Here  we  stayed  certaine  dayes  to  avoyd  the  infection  of
Scanderone.  The  Mountaines  which  obscure  Scanderone,
and  make  it  more  unhealthfull,  I  take  to  be  a  part  of
Taurus,  which  is  a  great  and  famous  Mountaine,  beginning
at  the  Indian  Sea,  and  rising  into  the  North,  passeth  by
Asia  unto  Moeotis,  bordering  upon  many  Countries,  and
is  called  by  many  names.  Sometimes  it  is  called  Caucasus,
which  is  the  highest  Hill  in  all  Asia,  which  parteth  India
from  Scythia,  and  is  part  of  the  Hill  Taurus.  Sometimes
it  is  called  Amanus,  which  Hill  parteth  Syria  from  Cilicia.
And  sometimes  it  is  called  by  other  names,  according  unto
the  Sea  coasts  along  which  it  extendeth.  About
Scanderone  there  are  many  ravenous  beasts,  about  the
bignesse  of  a  Foxe,  commonly  called  there  Jackalles,
engendred  (as  they  say)  of  a  Fox  and  a  Wolfe,  which  in
the  night  make  a  great  crying,  and  come  to  the  graves,
and  if  there  have  beene  any  Corse  buried  the  day
before,  (if  the  grave  be  not  well  filled,  with  many
great  stones  upon  it)  many  of  them  together,  with  their
feet,  doe  scrape  up  the  earth,  and  pull  up  the  corps
and  eate  it.

At  our  returne  from  Tharsus,  Edward  Rose  our  Factor  Edward  Rose,
marine,  provided  us  horses  to  ride  to  Aleppo,  and  a
Janizarie,  called  Paravan  Bashaw  with  two  Jimmoglans  to
guard  us,  with  necessarie  victuals  for  our  selves  to  spend
by  the  way,  for  there  are  no  Innes  nor  Victualing-houses
in  that  Countrey,  but  travellers  take  victuals  for  them-
selves, and  provender  for  their  Horses  with  them.  Our
Merchants  and  Passengers  making  haste  to  be  gone  from
viii  257  R

A.D.

l600.

Malims  are
chiefe
Carriers.
Muckremen
set  Horses  to
hire.
By  Ian.

Master  Mori-
sons  travels  a?  e
since  printed
in  a  large
volume  by
themselves,
where  the
Reader  may
feast  himselfe
with  the
rarities  and
varieties  of
many

Kingdomes.
Orontes.
Antiochia  in
Pisidia.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

this  contagious  and  pestiferous  place  Scanderone  (which
one  very  well  called,  The  bane  of  Francks)  left  their  goods
with  the  Factor  marine  to  be  sent  after  them,  because  the
Malims  and  Muckremen  (as  they  call  the  Carriers)  were
not  yet  come  downe  with  their  Camels  to  carrie  them  up :
but  we  met  them  at  the  Fountaine  of  fishes  neere  unto
Scanderone.  About  eight  miles  from  Scanderone,  we
came  to  a  Towne  called  Bylan,  where  there  lieth  buried  an
English  Gentleman,  named  Henrie  Morison,  who  died
there  comming  downe  from  Aleppo,  in  companie  with  his
brother  Master  Phines  Morison,  who  left  his  Armes  in
that  Countrey  with  these  Verses  under  written.

To  thee  deere  Henry  Morison
Thy  Brother  Phines  here  left  alone :
Hath  left  this  fading  memorie,
For  Monuments,  and  all  must  die.

From  Bylan  wee  came  to  the  Plaine  of  Antioch,  and
went  over  the  River  Orontes  by  Boate,  which  River
parteth  Antiochia  and  Syria.  Antioch  Plaine  is  very  long
and  large,  at  least  ten  miles  in  length.  We  lodged  the
first  night  at  Antiochia  in  Pisidia,  an  ancient  Towne  about
five  and  twentie  miles  from  Scanderone,  mentioned  Act.
11.  26.  where  the  Disciples  were  first  called  Christians.
Here  we  lodged  in  an  house,  but  on  the  bare  ground,
having  nothing  to  sleepe  on,  or  to  cover  us,  but  what  wee
brought  with  us,  viz.  a  Pillow,  and  a  Quilt  at  the  most,
and  that  was  lodging  for  a  Lord.

This  Antioch  hath  beene,  as  a  famous,  so  an  exceeding
strong  Towne,  situated  by  the  Sea,  and  almost  compassed
(at  the  least  on  both  sides)  with  exceeding  high  and
strong  Rockes.  The  Inhabitants  at  this  day  are  Greekes,
but  under  the  governement  of  the  Turke,  but  for
matters  of  Religion,  ordered  and  ruled  by  their  Patriarchs,
for  the  Greekes  have  foure  Patriarchs  to  this  present  day,
viz.  The  Patriarch  of  Antioch,  the  Patriarch  of  Jerusalem,
the  Patriarch  of  Alexandria,  the  Patriarch  of  Constanti-
nople, who  ruleth  all  the  rest. Yet  as  the  Jewes,  so  also

258

WILLIAM BIDDULPH  a.d.

1600.

the  Greeks  to  this  day  are  without  a  King,  and  both  they,
and  their  Patriarchs  are  but  slaves  to  the  great  Turke.

And although their Patriarch of Constantinople be
counted  their  chiefe  Patriarch : yet  I  have  knowen  one
Milesius  (a  learned  man  indeed)  who  was  first  Patriarch
of Constantinople, preferred to the place by Master  Bartm
Edward  Barton,  an  English  Gentleman,  and  Lord  Ambas-  Before  him
sadour  for  Queene  Elizabeth  of  famous  memorie,  who  Master
for  his  wisedome,  good  governement,  policie,and  Christian  Harebom  was
carriage,  hath  left  an  immortall  fame  behind  him  in  those m  assa  or%
Countries, to  this  present  day,  and  lieth  buried  at  an
Hand  of  the  Greekes,  within  twelve  miles  of  Constanti-
nople,  called Bartons Hand to this day. After  whose  Bartons  I  land.
death, this good man Milesius was by the Greekes
displaced  from  being  Patriarch  of  Constantinople :  (which
they durst not doe  whiles Master Barton was  living)
because,  being  a  man  of  knowledge,  he  laboured  to  reforme
the  Greekes  from  many  of  their  superstitious  customes.
Whereupon  (presently  after  the  death  of  Master  Barton)
they  said,  their  Patriarch  was  an  English-man,  and  no
Greeke,  and  therefore  manzulled  him,  that  is,  displaced  I-11-™1-
him. Yet  bearing  some  reverence  towards  him  for  his
learning,  they  made  him  Patriarch  of  Alexandria. And
being  there  Patriarch,  hee  excommunicated  the  Patriarch
of  Antiochia,  because  he  accepted  of  reliefe  at  the  Popes
hand, and made him come to Alexandria, to humble
himselfe  unto  him,  and  acknowledge  his  fault  before  he
would  suffer  him  to  execute  his  Patriarchs  office.

Master  Henry  Lello (a learned, wise, and religious  Henry  hello.
English  Gentleman, sometime Student  in Oxford, and
afterwards  at  the  Innes  of  the  Court)  succeeded  Master
Barton  in  his  place,  and  in  many  things  exceeded  him, The  English
especially in his  religious carriage and unspotted life : Ambassadors
and  had  not  the  times  beene  more  troublesome  in  his  with  the  Great
Regiment,  then  in  the  time  of  his  Predecessor  Master  Turie  have
Barton ; he  would  every  way  have  gone  beyond  him. Ma$ter

Hareborn. 2.  Master  Barton. 3.  Sir  Henr.  Lello. 4.  Sir.  T.  Glover. 5-  Sir  Paul
Finder. 6.  Sir  J  oh.  Aires. 7.  Sir  Thomas  Roe,  now  Lieger  there  for  his  Majestic*

259

A.D.

l600.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Hee  first  of  all  reformed  his  familie,  and  afterwards  so
ordered  himselfe  in  his  whole  carriage,  that  he  credited
our  Countrey :  and  after  ten  yeeres  governement  of  the
English  Nation  there,  hee  returned  into  his  Countrey
with  the  teares  of  many,  and  with  generall  good  report  of
all  Nations  there  dwelling  or  sojourning ;  and  is  worthily
by  his  excellent  Majestie  rewarded  with  Knighthood  for
his  good  service.  If  Milesius  had  lived,  this  good
Gentleman  would  have  restored  him  to  Constantinople,
as  he  placed  many  other  Arch-bishops  both  at  Salonica,
(of  old  called  Thessalonica)  and  elsewhere.

In  the  Mountaines  betwixt  Scanderone  and  Aleppo,
there  are  dwelling  a  certaine  kind  of  people,  called  at  this
day  Coords,  comming  of  the  race  of  the  ancient  Parthians,
who  worship  the  Devill,  and  alledge  for  their  reason  in  so
doing,  that  God  is  a  good  man,  and  will  doe  no  man
harme,  but  that  the  Devill  is  bad,  and  must  bee  pleased,
lest  hee  hurt  them.  There  was  one  of  our  Carriers  a
Muccreman  and  Malim,  named  Abdel  Phat,  who  was  said
to  be  of  that  Race  and  Religion.  There  is  also,  although
not  in  the  direct  way,  (yet  for  safety  and  pleasantnesse  of
the  way,  it  is  sometimes  taken  in  the  way  to  Aleppo)  an

Achilles.  ancient  Citie  called  Achilles,  where  one  Asan  Bashaw
ruleth  like  a  King  (paying  duties  to  the  Turkes)
successively  from  his  Predecessors,  comming  of  the  house

Sanballat.  Qf  Sanballat,  who  hindred  the  building  of  the  Temple  of
e  e'  +•  I#  Jerusalem,  who  is  called  to  this  day,  Eben  Sumbolac,  that
is,  The  sonne  of  Sanballat :  and  all  his  kinred  call  one
another,  Ammiogli,  that  is,  Brother  Ammonite ;  for  they
account  themselves  of  the  race  of  the  Ammonites.  This
Ashan  Bashaw  is  now  old,  and  (for  the  most  part)  referreth
all  matters  of  governement  to  his  Kinsman  Useph  Bege,
that  is,  Lord  Joseph.

The  second  night,  in  our  travell  from  Scanderone,  we
lodged  at  a  place  called,  The  Gardens,  in  the  open  fields,
having  the  ground  to  our  Bed,  a  stone  to  our  Pillow  (as
Jacob  in  his  travell  had)  and  the  Skie  to  our  covering.
And many  poore  Travellers in these  parts (who  come

260

WILLIAM BIDDULPH  a.d.

1600.

unprovided)  have  nothing  but  the  aire  for  their  supper,
except  they  can  meet  with  the  fruits  of  Trees,  or  Herbs  of
the  fields.  Wee  met  in  some  places  with  Villages  of
Tents,  where  our  Janizarie  Paravan  Bashaw  (being  partly
feared  and  partly  loved  amongst  them,)  brought  unto  us
from  them,  Bread  and  Water  often  times.  Their  Bread
is  made  all  in  Cakes,  after  the  ancient  manner,  as
Abraham  entertayned  Angels  with  hearth  Cakes.  At  one  Cakes.
place  we  had  also  presented  to  us  very  good  sweet  Goats
milke,  and  also  good  sowre  milke,  turned  by  Art,  which
is  the  most  common  dish  in  those  hot  Countries.

The  day  following,  we  came  about  noone  to  a  Village,
called  Hanadan,  eight  miles  on  this  side  Aleppo,  over  Hanadan.
against  which  Village,  on  the  right  hand,  on  the  top  of
the  hill,  there  is  (as  the  Jewes  report)  the  Sepulchre  of  the
Prophet Jeremie. At this  Village Hanadan there  are  Premie  his
many Pigeon houses, whereof the poore people make  Sepulchre.
much  profit,  bringing  them  to  Aleppo  to  sell. At  this
Village we dined with Musmelons, Sambouses, and a  Sambouses  are
Mucclebite. And  after  dinner,  we  slept  an  houre  or  two  ^  ff?
(as  the  custome  of  the  Countrey  is)  and  then  rode  forwards  ^  ma^e\f
towards  Aleppo,  whither  we  came  by  five  of  the  Clocke,  Egges  and
and were kindly entertayned at Cane Burgol by the  Herbs.
worshipfull  Richard  Colthurst  Esquire,  Consull  for  the
English  Nation  there.

Aram Sobah, some  thinke  to have  beene that  Citie
which  is  now  called  Aleppo. And  of  this  Aram  Sobah  I  Aleppo.
find  mention  made,  2.  Sam.  8.  3,  4,  5. And  also  in  the
title  of  the  sixtie  Psalme,  where  mention  is  made  of  the  In  the  &&  °f
salt  Valley  which  is  but  halfe  a  dayes  journey  from  Aleppo,  Psa*m  6o*
which  is  a  very  great  Plaine,  without  grasse  growing  on
it,  the  very  sand  whereof  is  good  Salt  naturally : after
raine,  being  dried  againe  by  the  Sunne,  they  gather  it.
There  is  also  a  little  Hand  or  Mountaine  in  the  midst
thereof,  plaine  on  the  top,  which  yeeldeth  the  best  Salt.
Some  Jewes  there  dwelling,  doe  also  say,  that  Aleppo  was
the  Citie  Sephervaim :  but  I  thinke  it  to  be  a  better  Citie,
which  some  say,  was  called  Apollonius : but  I  know  no

261

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1600.

reason  for  it,  except  it  were  built  by  one  of  that  name.
Howsoever,  it  should  seeme  this  Citie  Aleppo  hath  often
changed  her  name,  and  that,  if  it  were  not  Aram  Sobah,
yet  to  be  built  not  farre  from  the  place  where  Aram  Sobah
stood.  But  the  Turkes  (changing  the  names  of  all  places
where  they  come)  call  Aleppo  at  this  day,  Halep,  which
signifieth  Milke,  because  it  yeeldeth  great  store  of  Milke.
Aleppo  is  inhabited  by  Turkes,  Moores,  Arabians,
Jewes,  Greekes,  Armenians,  Chelfalines,  Nostranes,  and
people  of  sundry  other  Nations.  The  Turkes  come  of
Magog  the  sonne  of  Japheth.

The  Moores  are  more  ancient  dwellers  in  Aleppo  then
Turkes,  and  more  forward  and  zealous  in  Mahometisme
then  Turkes  :  yea  all  the  Church-men  amongst  the  Turkes
are  Moores  (whom  the  Turkes  count  a  base  people  in
regard  of  themselves,  and  call  them  Tots.)  Yet  their
[Il.viii.  Churchmen  they  have  in  great  reverence; and  not  onely

J 339-J  theirs,  but  they  reverence  Church-men  of  all  Nations,  and
reverence  ca^  ^em  holy  Men,  Saints,  and  men  of  God.  I  my  selfe
Churchmen  of  have  had  great  experience  hereof,  both  in  the  place  of  my
all  sorts.  abode  at  Aleppo,  and  in  my  journey  towards  Jerusalem,
and  in  other  places.  In  Aleppo,  as  I  have  walked  in  the
streetes,  both  Turkes  and  Moores,  and  other  Nations,
would  very  reverently  salute  me  after  the  manner  of  their
Countrey :  yea,  their  very  Souldiers,  as  I  have  walked  in
the  Fields,  with  many  other  of  our  Nation,  without  a
Janesarie  to  guard  us,  though  they  have  beene  many
hundreds  together,  yet  have  they  not  offered  either  me  or
any  of  my  companie  wrong,  for  my  sake,  but  have  said
one  to  another,  Hadah  Cassies ;  that  is,  This  is  a  Church-
man, and  therefore  take  heede  what  you  doe  unto  him,
for  he  is  a  good  man,  &c.  At  Jerusalem  many  strangers
of  sundry  Nations  understanding  that  I  was  an  English
Preacher,  came  and  kissed  my  hand,  and  called  me  the
English  Patriarke.  Yea,  in  all  my  ten  yeeres  Travels,  I
never  received,  neither  was  offered  wrong  by  any  Nation
but  mine  owne  Countrey-men,  and  by  them  chiefly  whom
it  chiefly  concerned  to  protect  me  from  wrongs  :  yet  have  I

262

WILLIAM BIDDULPH  a.d.

1600.

found  them  most  forward  to  offer  me  wrong,  onely  for
doing  my  dutie,  and  following  the  order  of  our  Church
of  England :  knowing  that  I  had  none  of  the  Reverend
Fathers  of  our  Church  to  defend  me.  So  would  it  be
in  England,  if  we  had  not  the  Reverend  Fathers  in  God
the  Lord  Bishops  of  our  Church  to  protect  us.  All  other
Nations,  both  Heathen  and  Christian,  goe  before  us
herein,  in  reverencing  and  providing  for  their  Church-men.
The  Turkes  honour  their  Muftie  (which  is  their  chiefe
Ruler  in  Ecclesiasticall  matters,  next  under  the  Grand
Signior)  as  an  Angell :  The  Nostranes,  Greekes,
Armenians,  Chelfalines,  and  Christians  of  all  other
Nations,  performe  double  honour  unto  them :  onely  in
England,  where  there  is  a  more  learned  Ministerie  (I
speake  by  experience)  then  in  any  Nation  in  the  world,
they  are  least  of  all  regarded :  Which  maketh  our  Adver-
saries, the  Papists,  say,  (as  I  have  heard  some  of  them
speake  in  my  hearing,  many  thousand  miles  from  England)
that  if  wee  our  selves  were  perswaded  of  the  truth  of  our
Religion,  wee  would  reverence  our  Church-men  as  they
doe,  and  not  scorne  them  and  contemne  them  as  we  doe.

They  also  account  fooles,  dumbe  men,  and  mad  men,  Mad  and
Santones,  that  is,  Saints.  And  whatsoever  such  mad  men  foolu\  t
say  or  doe,  though  they  take  any  thing  out  of  their  house,
or  strike  them,  and  wound  them,  yet  they  take  it  in  good
part,  and  say,  that  they  shall  have  good  lucke  after  it.
And  when  such  mad  men  die,  they  Canonize  them  for
Saints,  and  erect  stately  Monuments  over  their  graves,
as  wee  have  here  many  examples,  especially  of  one  (who
being  mad)  went  alwayes  naked,  whose  name  was  Sheh  Skeh  Boubac
Boubac,  at  whose  death  they  bestowed  great  cost  on  his
funerall,  and  erected  an  house  over  his  grave,  where  (to
this  day)  there  are  Lampes  burning  night  and  day,  and
many  idle  fellowes  (whom  they  call  Darvises)  there  main-
tained to  looke  unto  his  Sepulchre,  and  to  receive  the
offerings  of  such  as  come  to  offer  to  Sheh  Boubac,  which
they  take  to  themselves,  and  there  is  no  weeke  but  many
come  out  of  the  Citie  of  Aleppo  and  other  places, to

263

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1600.

offer. For  this  Sepulchre  is  built  on  an  Hill,  three  miles

from  Aleppo,  betweene  the  Kings  Garden  and  the  Foun-

taine  of  Fishes. If  any  be  sicke,  or  in  danger,  they  vow

that  if  they  recover  or  escape,  they  will  offer  so  much

money,  or  this  or  that  good  thing  to  Sheh  Boubac. There

is  also  such  another  Bedlam  Saint  in  Aleppo  yet  living,

Sheh  Maham-  whom  they  call  Sheh  Mahammet  a  Santone,  who  goeth

met  a  naked a}waies  naked,  with  a  Spit  on  his  shoulders ; and  as  hee

goeth  thorow  the  streetes,  the  Shop-keepers  will  offer  him

.  their  Rings  ;  and  if  hee  thrust  his  Spit  thorow  their  Rings,

pajTAcc  itin ^ey  take  it  for  a  favour  and  signe  of  good  successe :  The

Hieros.  y like  account  they  make,  if  hee  take  any  thing  from  their

Syr.  men- Shop-boards,  or  box  them  or  any  of  their  house : yea,

tioneth  this fa^y  are  yej.  more  mac[  Upon  this  mad  man  then  so,  for

m j  \?e?,  .  both  men  and  women  will  come  unto  him,  and  kisse  his

and  saith,  that  •  1  • 1  • 1  11

each  other  day  hand, or  any  other  part,  sometimes  his  thighs,  and  aske

hee  washeth him  counsell,  for  they  hold  that  mad  mens  soules  are  in

Ms  naked  body  Heaven  talking  with  God,  and  that  hee  revealeth  secrets

at  the  Foun- un^Q  them. In  regard  whereof,  the  Bashawes  themselves
tame  of  the  r  , ,  P  r ^ •  •«  1  •  •  1

great  Can oftentimes,  and  chiere  Captaines  will  come  unto  him  with

and  presently  some  present,  and  kisse  some  part  of  his  naked  body,

the  water  is  and  aske  him  whether  they  shall  goe  to  battell  or  not,

reputed  holy;  an(j  what  successe  they  shall  have  in  warre: And  looke

carried  to  sicke  whatsoever  he  saith, they  hold  it  for  an  Oracle. Not

folkes  by  the  l°ng since, the Turkes had a victorie against the

Moores.  His  Christians ; and  at  their  returne,  they  reported  that  this

Cell  is  like  naked  Santone,  Sheh  Mahammet  of  Aleppo,  was  seene

he^kel  th  naked  *n  the  field,  fighting  against  their  enemies,  and  that

on  the  ground,  by  his  helpe  they  over-came  them,  although  hee  were  not

is  attended  neere  them  by  many  thousand  miles. Whereby  you  may

withDarvises,  see  how  the  Devill  doth  delude  them  still,  as  hee  did  their

which  beg Fore-fathers at the first by Mahomets Machiavellian

almes,  and _. .  J

gather  Beasts devlces;

bones  to  make Their  Darvises  also  they  have  in  such  reputation,  that

fire;  some- oftentimes  great  Bashawes, when they  are  in  disfavour
times  he,  some-
times they  singing. Some  women  desiring  issue,  kisse  his  genetall  member  {which  is  alway
naked)  and  depart  joy  full. Hee  ate  Flies,  Dogs  eyes  raw,  and  with  his  Spit  used  to  pursue  any
Dog  hee  saw,  for  that  purpose,  &c. A  fit  glasse  to  looke  upon  superstition.

264

WILLIAM BIDDULPH  a.d.

1600.

with  the  King,  and  feare  either  losse  of  life,  or  goods,  or
both,  to  avoide  danger,  will  turne  Darvises,  and  then  they  Darvises.
account  themselves  priviledged  persons  from  the  rigour  of
their  Law.  The  witnesse  of  a  Darvise  or  of  a  Church-
man, will  passe  better  then  any  mans  witnesse  besides,
yea,  better  then  SherefFes  whom  they  account  of  Mahomets
kindred,  and  they  are  knowne  from  others  by  their  greene
Shashes,  which  no  man  else  may  weare :  for  greene  they
account  Mahomets  colour,  and  if  they  see  any  Christian
wearing  a  garment  of  that  colour,  they  will  cut  it  From
his  backe,  and  beate  him,  and  aske  him  how  he  dare
presume  to  weare  Mahomets  colour,  and  whether  hee  bee  [ILviii.
Kin  to  God  or  not? This  I  have  knowne  put  in  practise  ll\0-\

upon  Christians  (not  acquainted  with  the  customes  of  the
Countrey)  since  my  comming :  one  for  having  but  greene
Shooe-strings,  had  his  Shooes  taken  away.  Another
wearing  greene  Breeches  under  his  Gowne  (being  espied)
had  his  Breeches  cut  off,  and  he  reviled  and  beaten.

The  Turkes  have  no  Printing  amongst  them,  but  all
their  Law  and  their  Religion  is  written  in  the  Morisco
tongue,  that  is,  the  Arabicke  tongue.  And  he  is  accounted
a  learned  man  amongst  them,  that  can  write  and  reade.
And  as  for  the  Latine  tongue,  hee  is  a  rare  man  amongst
them  that  can  speake  it.  Some  few  amongst  them  have
the  Italian  tongue :  and  many  (especially  in  and  about
Constantinople)  speake  the  vulgar  Greeke,  that  is,
Romeica  tongue.  For  in  Constantinople  there  are  as
many  Grecians  and  Hebrues  as  Turkes.  The  poore,
amongst  the  Moores  and  Turkes  at  Aleppo,  beg  oftentimes
in  the  streetes,  in  the  name  and  for  the  sake  of  Syntana  Syntana  Fissa.
Fissa,  who  was  (as  they  say)  a  Whore  of  Charitie,  and
would  prostitute  her  selfe  to  any  man  Bacsheese  (as  they
say  in  the  Arabicke  tongue)  that  is  gratis  freely.

The  Diet  of  the  Turkes  is  not  sumptuous,  for  the  most  Diet  of  the
common  dish  is  Pilaw,  which  is  good  savory  meate  made  of  Turkes*
Rice,  and  small  morsels  of  Mutton  boyled  therein,  and  Ptlawe'
sometimes  rosted  Buckones,  (that  is,  small  bits  or  morsels
of flesh.) Their more costly fare is Sambouses and

265

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1600.

Muclebites.  Sambouses  are  made  of  Paste,  like  a  great
round  Pastie,  with  varietie  of  Herbes  and  meates  therein,
not  minced,  but  in  Buckones.  A  Muclebite  is  a  dish
made  of  Egs  and  Herbes.  Their  smaller  Sambouses  are
more  common,  not  so  big  as  a  mans  hand,  like  a  square
Pastie,  with  minced  meate  therein.  They  have  also
varietie  of  Helloway,  that  is,  sweet  meates  compounded
in  such  sort,  as  are  not  to  be  seene  elsewhere.  The
poorer  sort  feede  on  Herbes  and  Fruits  of  the  Trees.

Coffa.  Their  most  common  drinke  is  Coffa,  which  is  a  blacke

kinde  of  drinke,  made  of  a  kind  of  Pulse  like  Pease,
called  Coava,  which  being  grownd  in  the  Mill,  and  boiled
in  water,  they  drinke  it  as  hot  as  they  can  suffer  it ;  which
they  finde  to  agree  very  well  with  them  against  their
crudities,  and  feeding  on  Herbes  and  raw  meates.  Other
compounded  drinkes  they  have,  called  Sherbet,  made  of
Water  and  Sugar,  or  Hony,  with  Snow  therein  to  make
it  coole ;  for  although  the  Countrey  bee  hot,  yet  they
keepe  Snow  all  the  yeere  long  to  coole  their  drinke.  It
is  accounted  a  great  curtesie  amongst  them  to  give  unto
their  friends  when  they  come  to  visit  them,  a  Fin-ion  or
Scudella  of  Coffa,  which  is  more  holesome  then  toothsome,
for  it  causeth  good  concoction,  and  driveth  away  drowsi-
nesse.  Some  of  them  will  also  drinke  Bersh  or  Opium,
which  maketh  them  forget  themselves,  and  talke  idlely  of
Castles  in  the  Ayre,  as  though  they  saw  Visions,  and

Coffa  houses,  heard  Revelations.  Their  Coffa  houses  are  more  common
then  Ale-houses  in  England ;  but  they  use  not  so  much
to  sit  in  the  houses,  as  on  Benches  on  both  sides  the
streets,  neere  unto  a  Coffa  house,  every  man  with  his
Fin-ion  full ;  which  being  smoaking  hot,  they  use  to  put
it  to  their  Noses  and  Eares,  and  then  sup  it  off  by  leasure,
being  full  of  idle  and  Ale-house  talke,  whiles  they  are
amongst  themselves  drinking  of  it ;  if  there  be  any
newes,it  is  talked  off  there.  They  have  also  excellent  good
fountaine  waters  in  most  places  of  that  Countrey,  which
is  a  common  drinke  amongst  them,  especially  in  Summer
time,  and  in  their  travels  at  all  times  of  the  yeere.

266

WILLIAM BIDDULPH  ad.

1600.

Some  of  our  Merchants  have  weighed  their  water  and  Water  lighter
ours  in  England,  when  they  have  come  home,  and  have  *j*re  then
found  their  water  lighter  then  ours  by  foure  ounces  in
the  pound ;  and  the  lighter  the  water  is,  the  more  pleasant
it  is  to  drinke,  and  goeth  downe  more  delectably,  as  if
it  were  Milke  rather  then  water.  In  great  Cities  where
the  Fountaines  are  either  farre  off,  or  not  so  plentifull,
there  are  certaine  poore  men,  which  goe  about  the  streetes
from  morning  to  night,  with  a  Beares  skinne  full  of  water,
sewed  up  and  fastned  about  his  shoulders  like  a  Tinkers
Budget,  with  a  Bole  of  Brasse  in  his  hand,  and  offereth
water  freely  to  them  that  passe  by,  except  they  give  them
any  thing  in  curtesie,  (some  seldome  times.)  The  greatest  Salutations  of
part  of  them  are  very  curteous  people  amongst  themselves,  the  Tur^es-
saluting  one  another  at  their  meetings,  with  their  hand
on  their  brest  (for  they  never  uncover  their  head)  with
these  words :  Salam  Alike  Sultanum :  that  is,  Peace  bee
unto  you  Sir.  Whereunto  the  other  replyeth,  Alekem
Salam :  that  is,  Peace  be  to  you  also.  And  sometimes
thus :  Elph  Marhabba  ianum.  Or  in  Turkish,  thus :
Hosh  Geldanos,  Sophi  Geldanos :  that  is,  Welcome  my
deare  friend.  And  in  the  Morning,  Subalkier  Sultanum,
that  is,  Good  morrow  Sir :  and  in  the  Evening,  thus,
Misalker  Sultanum,  that  is,  Good  even  Sir.  And  when
friends  and  acquaintance  meete,  who  have  not  seene  one
another  many  dayes  before,  they  salute  one  another  in
Turkish,  thus  :  Neder  halen  ?  that  is,  how  doe  you  ?  In
Arabicke,  thus,  Ish  halac  Seedi?  that  is,  How  doe  you
Sir?  And  Ish  babtac?  that  is,  how  doth  thy  Gate?
(meaning  all  within  his  Gate)  and  so  proceed  by  particulars,
to  aske  how  doth  thy  Childe,  Slave,  Horse,  Cat,  Dog,
Asse,  &c.  and  every  thing  in  the  house,  except  his  Wife ;
for  that  is  held  a  very  unkinde  question,  and  not  usuall
amongst  them,  And  if  a  man  come  to  their  houses,  and
at  the  doore  enquire  of  the  Children  for  their  Father,  they
will  answer  him :  but  if  he  enquire  for  the  Mother,  they
will  throw  stones  at  him  and  revile  him.

Their  women  (as  hath  beene  shewed  before)  have  little

267

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1600.

libertie  to  come  abroade,  except  it  be  on  the  Eeve  before
their  Sabbath  (which  is  Thursday)  to  weepe  at  the  graves
of  the  dead,  or  to  the  Bannios  or  hot  Baths  to  wash  them-

[Il.viii.  selves  (as  the  use  of  the  Countrey  is.) And  when  they

I3+I'J  come  abroad,  they  are  alwayes  masked ;  for  it  is  accounted
a  shame  for  a  Woman  to  bee  seene  bare-faced :  yea,  they
are  so  jealous  and  suspicious  over  them,  that  Fathers  will
not  suffer  their  owne  Sonnes,  after  they  come  to  fourteene
yeeres  of  age,  to  see  their  Mothers.

These  bee  their  common  salutations  one  to  another.
Their  more  speciall  salutations  to  great  Personages  are
these.  When  a  man  commeth  to  salute  the  great  Turke,
or  Grand  Signior  himselfe  (into  whose  presence  few  are
admitted  except  Ambassadours  and  great  Personages)
they  are  led  betweene  two  by  the  armes,  for  feare  of  a
stab,  by  which  meanes  one  of  their  Grand  Signiors  was
once  killed,  and  when  they  returne,  they  goe  backwards ;
for  it  is  accounted  a  disgrace  to  turne  their  backe  parts  to
a  great  Man.  In  like  manner  they  salute  their  Bashawes,
and  other  great  Men  (but  not  led  by  the  armes)  but  with
their  hands  on  the  brest,  bowing  downe  their  heads  to
kisse  the  skirt  of  his  Garment,  pronouncing  these  words,
Ollah  towal  omrac  Seedi,  that  is,  God  prolong  your  dayes
Sir.  And  so  long  as  they  talke  with  a  Bashaw,  they  stand
with  their  hands  on  their  brest  Maiden-like,  and  bow  low
at  their  departure,  and  goe  backward.  They  never
uncover  their  heads  unto  any  man,  no  not  to  the  King
himselfe ;  yea,  it  is  a  word  of  reproach  amongst  them,  to
say,  when  they  mislike  a  matter,  I  had  as  lieve  thou
shewedst  me  thy  bare  head.

Names.  They  call  one  another  diversly,  and  not  alwayes  by

their  names,  but  sometimes  by  their  fathers  Calling,
Trade,  or  Degree :  as  Eben  Sultan,  that  is,  The  sonne  of
a  King  :  Eben  Terzi,  the  sonne  of  a  Taylor.  And  some-
times by  their  fathers  qualities,  as  Eben  Sacran,  that  is,
The  sonne  of  a  Drunkard.  And  sometimes  by  their
Marks,  as  Colac  cis,  that  is,  A  man  without  eares :  Cowsi
Sepher,  that  is,  Sepher  with  the  thin  beard. And  some-

268

WILLIAM BIDDULPH  ad.

1600.

times  by  their  Stature,  as  Tow-ill,  that  is,  A  tall  man :
Sgire  rugiall,  that  is,  A  little  man.  And  sometimes  by
their  Offices,  as  I-asgee,  that  is,  A  Secretarie :  Nibe,  that
is,  A  Clerke,  &c.  And  sometimes  by  their  humours,  as
Chiplac,  that  is,  A  naked  man :  or,  One  who  was  of  a
humour  to  weare  no  cloathes  but  breeches.  But  their
common  word  of  curtesie  either  to  strangers,  or  such
whose  names  they  know  not,  or  whom  they  purpose  to
reverence,  is  Chillabee,  that  is,  Gentleman.  And  there
is  no  man  amongst  them  of  any  degree,  will  refuse  to
answere  to  any  of  these  names.  But  if  Nature  have
marked  them  either  with  goggle  eyes,  bunch  backs,  lame
legs,  or  any  other  infirmitie  or  deformitie,  as  they  are
knowne  by  it,  so  they  are  content  to  bee  called  by  it.  But
they  have  gone  on  pilgrimage  to  their  holy  Citie  Mecha,
where  their  Prophet  Mahomet  was  buried,  at  their
returne  are  called  Hogies,  that  is,  Pilgrims,  as  Hogie
Tahar,  Hogie  Mahammet,  &c.  which  is  counted  a  word
of  great  grace  and  credit  amongst  them.  And  the  witnesse
of  an  Hogie,  will  bee  taken  before  any  other.

There  are  also  many  Arabians  in  Aleppo,  called  vulgarly,
Arabs  or  Bedweens.  They  have  two  Kings  at  this  day,
viz.  Dandan  and  Aborisha ;  the  one  their  lawfull  King,
the  other  an  Usurper ;  and  some  follow  the  one,  and
some  the  other,  and  are  bitter  enemies  one  to  another ;  yet
have  I  seldome  heard  of  any  great  warres  betwixt  them,
for  they  seldome  meet.  They  never  come  into  any
walled  Townes  or  Cities,  for  feare  of  treason :  but  live  in
Tents,  and  are  here  to  day,  and  many  hundred  miles  off
within  a  few  dayes  after.  They  are  a  base,  beggarly,
and  roguish  people,  wandering  up  and  downe,  and  living
by  spoile,  which  they  account  no  sinne,  because  they  are
Mahomets  countrimen,  and  hee  allowed  them  libertie  to
live  by  theft.  Yet  their  Kings  doe  no  great  harme,  but
take  Toll  or  Tribute  of  the  Caravans  as  they  passe  by,
which  if  they  pay  willingly,  they  passe  quietly,  and  are
not  robbed,  but  a  little  exacted  upon.  One  of  their
Kings  hath  often  times  pitched  his  Tents  neere  unto  the

269

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1600.

Citie  of  Aleppo,  and  many  Merchants  being  desirous  to
see  them  and  their  order,  tooke  occasion  to  present  him
with  some  small  Present  or  other,  which  he  tooke  very
kindly,  and  admitted  them  to  his  Table,  and  gave  them  a
Tent  to  lodge  in  all  night :  on  the  morrow  for  breake-fast
one  of  them  made  him  a  minsed  Pie,  and  set  it  before
him  hot  as  it  came  out  of  the  Oven :  And  when  he  saw  it
cut  up  and  opened,  and  perceived  smoke  to  come  out  of
it,  he  shrunke  backe,  fearing  it  had  beene  some  engine
to  destroy  him,  and  that  the  fire  would  follow  after  the
smoake.  But  when  hee  perceived  no  fire  followed  the
smoake,  he  was  content  to  taste  of  it,  and  highly  com-
mended it,  as  the  daintiest  dish  that  ever  he  tasted  of  in
his  life.

These  Arabian  Kings  never  keepe  any  money  in  their
purses,  but  spend  it  as  fast  as  they  finde  it,  and  when  they
want,  with  their  Sword  they  seeke  a  new  purchase.  Some
are  Souldiers,  fighting  faithfully  on  any  side  that  will  give
them  pay.  Some  of  this  roguish  Arabian  Race  follow
neither  of  their  Kings,  but  wander  from  place  to  place  in
Caves  and  Rocks,  and  live  by  their  Sword,  not  onely
robbing,  but  killing  such  as  they  can  over-come.  Others
of  them  (of  a  better  minde)  sojourne  in  Cities  of  Trade
and  Traffique,  and  make  themselves  servants  to  any
Nation  that  will  set  them  on  worke,  and  well  reward  them.
Some  of  them  are  Horse-keepers,  some  Bastages,  that  is,
Porters,  and  some  under-Cookes  in  Kitchins,  and  are  very
serviceable.  But  for  the  most  part  their  Lodgings  are
on  some  Dunghill  or  other,  or  odde  corner  of  the  Citie,
with  some  silly  Tent  over  their  heads.  Their  wives  weare
Rings  in  their  Noses,  either  of  silver  or  brasse,  fastned  to
the  middle  gristle  of  their  Nose,  and  colour  their  Lips
blue  with  Indico,  and  goe  alwayes  bare-legged  and  bare-
footed, with  Plates  or  Rings  of  brasse  above  their  ankles,
and  bracelets  of  brasse  about  their  hands.  They  are
people  which  can  and  doe  endure  great  hardnesse  and
[Il.viii.  miserie,  both  for  Diet  and  Lodging. Their  Women  are

1342.]  skilfull  in  mourning  and  crying  by  Art,  and  therefore

270

WILLIAM BIDDULPH  a.d.

1600.

they  are  hired  to  crie  at  the  Funerals  of  Turks  and  Moores
oftentimes,  tearing  their  haire,  and  making  all  their  face
blue  with  Indico.  There  are  here  spoken  so  many  severall
Languages  as  there  are  several  Nations  here  dwelling  or
sojourning,  every  Nation  (amongst  themselves)  speaking
their  owne  language.  And  here  are  of  most  Nations  in
the  World  some,  who  either  come  with  their  Merchandise
to  sell  or  buy  commodities,  or  sojourne  here  as  strangers,
or  else  have  accesse  and  recesse  to  this  Citie  as  Travellers.
But  of  all  Christian  languages,  the  Italian  tongue  is  most
used,  and  therewithall  a  man  may  travell  furthest.  But
of  all  the  Orientall  Tongues,  these  foure  are  most  spoken
in  these  parts,  Arabicke,  Turkish,  Armenian,  and  Persian,
or  Agimesco.  Besides  all  these  Mahometans  (which  I
have  alreadie  named)  there  are  many  Jewes  in  Constanti-
nople, Aleppo,  Damascus,  Babylon,  Grand  Cairo,  and
every  great  Citie  and  Place  of  Merchandise,  throughout
all  the  Turkes  Dominions,  who  are  knowne  by  their  Hats  :
for  they  were  accustomed  to  weare  red  Hats  without
brimmes  at  my  first  comming  :  But  lately  (the  head  Vizier
being  their  enemie)  they  are  constrayned  to  weare  Hats  of
blue  cloth,  because  red  was  accounted  too  stately,  and
Princelike  a  colour  for  them  to  weare.  They  are  of  more
vile  account  in  the  sight  of  Turkes  then  Christians ;
insomuch  that  if  a  Jew  would  turne  Turke,  he  must  first
turne  Christian  before  they  will  admit  him  to  bee  a  Turke.
Yea,  it  is  a  word  of  reproach  amongst  the  Turkes,  and  a
usuall  protestation  amongst  them,  when  they  are  falsly
accused  of  any  crime,  to  cleare  themselves  they  use  to
protest  in  this  manner,  If  this  bee  true,  then  God  grant  I
may  die  a  Jew.  And  the  Jewes  in  like  cases  use  to  say,
If  this  be  not  a  false  accusation,  then  God  grant  I  may
die  a  Christian,  praying  better  for  themselves  then  they
beleeve,  and  as  all  of  them  must  be  that  shall  bee  saved.
And  the  poore  Christians  sojourning  and  dwelling  in  these
parts,  doe  hate  them  very  uncharitably  and  irreligiously :
(in  that  we  reade  Rom.  11.  many  Arguments  proving  that
they  shall  be  converted  againe)  for  on  Good  Friday  in

271

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1600.
Jewes  stoned  many  places  (especially  at  Zante) they  throw  stones  at
™&ood  them, insomuch that they  dare  not  come  out  of  their

houses  all  that  day,  and  yet  are  scarse  in  safetie  in  their
houses,  for  they  use  to  throw  stones  at  their  windowes  and
doores,  and  on  the  roofe  of  their  houses.  On  Thursday
about  noone,  the  Jewes  begin  to  keepe  within  doores,  and
continue  there  with  their  doores  shut  untill  Saturday
about  noone,  for  if  they  come  forth  before  that  time  they
are  sure  to  be  stoned,  but  after  noone  on  Easter  Eeve  if
they  come  abroad,  they  may  passe  as  quietly  as  ever  they
Superstition,  did.  And  some  ignorant  Christians  refuse  to  eate  of  their
meat  or  breade :  their  reason  is,  because  the  Jewes  refuse
to  eate  or  drinke  with  Christians  to  this  day,  or  to  eate  any
meate  that  Christians  kill.  But  it  is  not  unusuall  amongst
Christians  of  better  knowledge,  to  eate  of  the  Jewes  meat,
which  ordinarily  they  buy  of  them :  for  the  Jewes  to  this
day  eate  not  of  the  hinder  part  of  any  beast,  but  onely  of
the  former  parts,  and  sell  the  hinder  quarters  of  their
Beefe,  Mutton,  Kids,  Goats,  &c.  to  Christians.

They  observe  still  all  their  old  Ceremonies  and  Feasts,
Sacrifices  onely  excepted.  Yet  some  of  them  have  con-
fessed, that  their  Physicians  kill  some  Christian  Patient
or  other,  whom  they  have  under  their  hands  at  that  time,
in  stead  of  a  Sacrifice.  If  a  man  die  without  Children,
the  next  Brother  taketh  his  Wife,  and  raiseth  up  seed
unto  his  Brother :  and  they  still  marrie  in  their  owne
Kindred.  Many  of  them  are  rich  Merchants :  some  of
them  Drogomen,  and  some  Brokers.  Most  of  them  are
very  craftie  and  deceitfull  people.  They  have  no  Beggers
amongst  them,  but  many  Theeves,  and  some  who  steale
for  necessitie,  because  they  dare  not  begge.  All  matters
of  controversie  betwixt  themselves,  are  brought  before
their  Cakam  to  decide,  who  is  their  chiefe  Churchman.
Most  of  the  Jewes  can  reade  Hebrew,  but  few  of  them
speake  it,  except  it  be  in  two  places  in  Turkie,  and  that  is
at  Salonica,  formerly  called  Thessalonica,  a  Citie  in  Mace-
donia, by  the  Gulfe  Thermaicus ;  and  at  Safetta  in  the
Holy  Land,  neere  unto  the  Sea  of  Galile : Which  two

272

WILLIAM BIDDULPH  a.d.

1600.

places  are  as  it  were  Universities,  or  Schooles  of  learning  *«"f

r  -t  Universities.

amongst  them.

Amongst  all  the  sorts  of  Christians,  there  is  amongst
the  Maronites  an  ancient  companie  of  Christians,  called
vulgarly  Nostranes,  quasi  Nazaritans,  of  the  Sect  of  the
Nazarites,  more  civill  and  harmelesse  people  then  any  of
the  rest.  Their  Countrey  is  Mount  Lybanus  (as  I  wrote
unto  you  heretofore)  but  many  of  them  dwell  at  Aleppo,
whereof  some  of  them  are  Cassises,  that  is,  Church-men ;
some  of  them  are  Cookes,  and  servants  unto  English
Merchants  and  others  ;  some  Artificers  :  All  of  them  live
somewhat  poorely,  but  they  are  more  honest  and  true  in
their  conversation  then  any  of  the  rest,  especially  at  their
first  comming  from  Mount  Lybanus  to  dwell  in  Aleppo ;
and  many,  during  their  continuance  there,  if  they  bee  not
corrupted  by  other  wicked  Nations  there  dwelling :  in
whom  I  observed  more  by  experience  then  I  heard  of
them,  or  noted  in  them  when  I  was  amongst  them  at
Mount  Lybanus.  And  especially  for  the  manner  of  their
marriage,  and  how  they  honour  the  same.

They  buy  their  wives  of  their  Fathers  (as  others  there
dwelling,  doe)  but  never  see  them  untill  they  come  to  be
married,  nor  then  neither  untill  the  marriage  be  solemnized
betwixt  them :  for  there  is  a  partition  in  the  place  where
they  meet  to  be  married,  and  the  Man  and  his  Friends
stand  on  the  one  side,  and  the  yong  Woman  and  her
Friends  on  the  other  side,  where  they  may  heare,  but  not
see  one  another,  untill  the  Cassies  bid  the  yong  man  put
his  hand  thorow  an  hole  in  the  wall,  and  take  his  Wife
by  the  hand.  And  whiles  they  have  hand  in  hand,  the
Mother  of  the  Maid  commeth  with  some  sharpe  instru-
ment made  for  the  purpose,  and  all  to  bepricketh  the  new  [n.viii.
married  mans  hand,  and  maketh  it  bleed. And  if  hee  let  J343-]

her  hand  goe  when  hee  feeleth  his  hand  smart,  they  hold
it  for  a  signe  that  hee  will  not  love  her :  But  if  hee  hold
fast  (notwithstanding  the  smart)  and  wring  her  hard  by
the  hand  untill  shee  crie,  rather  then  hee  will  once  shrinke,
then  he  is  counted  a  loving  man,  and  her  friends  are  glad
viii  273  s

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1600.

that  they  have  bestowed  her  on  him.  And  how  they
honour  Marriage  above  others,  I  observed  by  the  naming
of  their  first  man-child.  For  as  amongst  us  the  women,
when  they  are  married,  lose  their  Surnames,  and  are
surnamed  by  the  husbands  surname,  and  children  like-
wise ;  so  amongst  them  the  father  loseth  his  name,  and  is
called  by  the  name  of  his  eldest  sonne,  in  this  manner.
I  have  knowne  a  Nostrane,  whose  name  was  Mou-se,  that
is,  Moses,  who  having  a  man-child,  named  him  Useph,
that  is,  Joseph,  and  then  was  the  father  no  more  called
Mouse,  Moses,  but  Abou  Useph,  that  is,  The  father  of
Joseph.  Another  whose  name  was  Useph,  named  his
eldest  sonne  Pher-iolla,  after  which  he  was  no  more  called
Useph,  but  Abou  Pher-iolla,  The  father  of  Pher-iolla.
Another  man  called  Jubrael,  that  is,  Gabriel,  his  sonne  at
the  time  of  Baptisme  being  named  Mouse,  hee  alwaies
after  was  called  Abou  Mouse,  that  is,  The  father  of  Moses  :
such  an  honour  doe  they  account  it  to  be  the  father  of  a
man-child.

These  Nostranes  reverence  their  Cassises  greatly,  and
kisse  their  hand  wheresoever  they  meet  them  :  yet  are  most
of  them  altogether  unlearned,  having  onely  the  knowledge
Lyturgieread.  of  the  Syriac  Tongue,  wherein  their  Lyturgie  is  read.
They  keepe  their  Feasts  at  the  same  time  as  wee  doe,  viz.
Christmasse,  Easter,  and  Whitsuntide :  and  at  Christ-
masse  on  the  Twelfth  day  in  the  morning,  called  Epiphanie,
their  young  men  have  a  custome  (betimes  in  the  morning)
to  leape  naked  into  the  water :  I  could  never  heare  any
reason  of  their  so  doing,  but  Uzansa  de  prease,  The
custome  of  their  Countrey.  And  though  it  bee  then  very
cold,  yet  they  perswade  themselves  and  others,  that  then
it  is  hotter  then  at  any  other  time,  and  that  the  water
then  hath  an  extraordinarie  vertue  to  wash  away  their
sinnes.  On  Munday  in  Easter  weeke  and  Whitsun
weeke,  these  Nostranes  goe  with  their  Cassises  to  the
graves  of  the  dead,  and  there  kneele  downe,  and  burne
incense,  and  pray  at  every  grave.
The  Chelfalines  are  Christians,  dwelling  upon  the  borders

274

WILLIAM BIDDULPH  a.d.

1600.

of  Persia,  betweene  Mesopotamia  and  Persia,  at  a  place
called  Chelfa.  These  bring  Silke  to  Aleppo  to  sell.  They
are  plaine  dealing  people.  If  a  man  pay  them  money,
and  (by  over-reckoning  himselfe)  give  them  more  then
their  due,  though  there  be  but  one  piece  over,  so  soone
as  they  perceive  it,  though  it  bee  many  dayes  after,  they
will  bring  it  backe  againe,  and  restore  it,  and  thinke  they
shall  never  returne  safely  into  their  Countrey,  if  they
should  not  make  restitution  thereof.  These  people  per-
swade  themselves,  and  report  unto  others,  that  they  dwell
in  that  place  which  was  called  Eden,  whereinto  Adam  was  Eden.
put  to  keepe  and  dresse  it.

The  Greekes  in  Aleppo  are  very  poore,  for  they  are
there  (for  the  most  part)  but  Brokers  or  Bastages,  that  is,
Porters ; and  many  of  their  women  as  light  as  water,
maintayning  their  husbands,  themselves,  and  their  families,
by  prostituting  their  bodies  to  others. And  their  owne
husbands  are  oftentimes  their  Pandars  or  procurers to
bring  them  Customers. But  the  Greekes that  live  at
Constantinople  are  many  of  them  great  Merchants,  and
very rich ; but exceeding proud, and sumptuous in
apparell,  even  the  basest  of  them,  and  especially  their
women,  who  though  they  be  but  Coblers  wives,  or  poore  Cobkrs  wives
Artificers  wives,  yet  they  goe  in  Gownes  of  Sattin,  and  fl in
Taffata,  yea,  of  Cloth  of  silver  and  gold,  adorned  with
Precious  stones,  and  many  Gemmes,  and  Jewels  about
their  neckes  and  hands. They  care  not  how  they  pinch
their  bellies,  so  that  they  may  have  fine  apparell  on  their
backes. And  at  the  time  of  their  Marriage,  the  women
condition  with  their  husbands  to  find  them  decent  apparell,
and  convenient  diet,  and  bring  them  before  their  Patriarch,
of  Constantinople  to  confirme  it ; which, if  it  be  not  He  instanceth
performed  accordingly,  if  they  complaine  to  their  Patri-  °f°.ni ?  S°tfta>
arch,  they  are  divorced  presently,  and  shee  taketh  an  other  Jr^i/^]s
man  to  her  husband,  better  able  to  maintayne  her : and  omitted.
hee  may  marrie  another  woman  if  hee  please.

And  both  at  Constantinople,  Aleppo,  and  other  places
of  Turkey,  where  there  is  trafficking  and  trading  of  Mer-

275

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1600.

chants,  it  is  no  rare  matter  for  Popish  Christians  of  sundry
other  Countries,  to  Cut  Cabine,  (as  they  call  it)  that  is,
to  take  any  woman  of  that  Countrey  where  they  sojourne,
(Turkish  women  onely  excepted,  for  it  is  death  for  a
Christian  to  meddle  with  them)  and  when  they  have
bought  them,  and  enrolled  them  in  the  Cadies  Booke,  to
use  them  as  wives  so  long  as  they  sojourne  in  that  Coun-
trey, and  maintayne  them  gallantly,  to  the  consuming  of
their  wealth,  diminishing  of  their  health,  and  endangering
of  their  owne  soules.  And  when  they  depart  out  of  that
Countrey  they  shake  off  these  their  sweet-hearts,  and
leave  them  to  shift  for  themselves  and  their  children.
And  this  they  account  no  sinne,  or  at  leastwise  such  a
sinne  as  may  be  washed  away  with  a  little  holy  water.
And  these  are  the  vertues  which  many  Christians  learne
by  sojourning  long  in  Heathen  Countries.

Every  Bashaw  who  hath  governement  over  others  in  a
Citie  or  Countrey,  tyranniseth  over  those  which  are  under
their  regiment ;  and  sometimes  strangleth,  sometimes
beheadeth,  and  sometimes  puts  unto  terrible  tortures  those
who  offend.  Yea,  oftentimes  without  offence ;  onely
because  they  are  rich  and  have  faire  houses,  the  Bashaw
[Il.viii.  will  lay  to  their  charge  such  things  as  he  himselfe  knoweth

1 344-1  to  be  untrue,  and  put  them  to  death  that  hee  may  seize
upon  his  goods.  There  was  a  Sheriffe  or  a  Green-head
in  Aleppo,  whom  they  account  Mahomets  kindred,  who
offending  the  Bashaw,  and  braving  him  in  termes,  as
though  he  durst  not  punish  him,  hee  caused  one  of  his
Officers  to  goe  with  him  home,  and  when  he  came  before
his  owne  doore,  openly  in  the  street  to  breake  both  his
legs  and  armes,  and  there  let  him  lie,  and  no  man  durst
find  fault,  or  give  him  food ;  or  Physician,  or  Chirurgion
come  to  him ;  or  wife  or  servants  take  him  into  house,
but  there  he  lay  all  day,  and  should  so  have  continued
untill  hee  had  died  for  hunger,  or  Dogs  eaten  him,  had
not  his  friends  given  money  to  the  Bashaw  to  have  his
throat  cut,  to  rid  him  out  of  his  paine.  And  this  is  a
common  punishment  amongst  them. And  sometimes  for

276

WILLIAM BIDDULPH  ad.

1600.

small  offences,  they  will  lay  a  man  downe  on  his  backe,
and  hoyse  up  his  feet,  and  with  a  cudgell  give  them  three
hundred  or  foure  hundred  blowes  on  the  soles  of  their
feet,  whereby  many  are  lamed.  And  some  they  set  on  a
sharpe  stake  naked,  which  commeth  from  his  fundament
up  to  his  mouth,  if  he  find  not  favour  to  have  his  throat
cut  sooner.  And  some  are  ganched  in  this  manner  ;  they
are  drawne  up  by  a  rope  fastned  about  their  armes,  to  the
top  of  a  Gazouke  or  Gibbet  full  of  hookes,  and  let  down-
wards againe,  and  on  what  part  soever  any  hooke  taketh
hold,  by  that  they  hang,  untill  they  die  for  hunger.  And
some  in  like  sort  are  drawne  over  a  Gibbet,  and  they  being
compassed  about  the  naked  waste  with  a  small  cord,  the
cord  is  drawne  by  two  men  to  make  them  draw  up  their
breath,  and  still  pulled  straighter  and  straighter,  untill
they  be  so  narrow  in  the  waste,  that  they  may  easily  be
cut  off  by  the  middle  at  one  blow,  and  then  the  upper
part  is  let  downe  on  a  hot  grid-iron,  and  there  seared  up,  to
keepe  them  in  sense  and  feeling  of  paine  so  long  as  is
possible,  and  the  neather  part  is  throwne  to  the  Dogs,  &c.
They,  whom  they  call  Franckes  or  Free-men,  live  in
greater  securitie  amongst  them  then  their  owne  People,
by  reason  that  they  are  governed  by  Consuls,  of  their
owne  Nation,  and  those  Consuls  also  are  backed  by
Ambassadours,  for  the  same  Nations  which  are  alwaies
Liegers  at  Constantinople  :  and  when  their  Consuls  abroad
are  offered  wrong,  they  write  unto  the  Ambassadours,
how,  and  by  whom  they  are  wronged :  and  then  the
Ambassadour  procureth  from  the  Great  Turke,  commande-
ments  to  the  Bashaw  of  Aleppo  to  redresse  their  wrongs,
and  punish  such  as  offend  them.  Otherwise  there  were
no  dwelling  for  Francks  amongst  them,  but  they  should  be
used  like  slaves  by  every  slave.  And  notwithstanding
their  Consuls  and  Ambassadours  too,  yet  they  are  often-
times abused  by  Turkes,  both  in  words  and  deeds.  In
words  they  revile  them,  as  theiEgyptians  did  the  Israelites,
and  call  them  Gours,  that  is,  Infidels ;  and  Cupec,  that  is,
Dog; and  Canzier,  that  is,  Hog; and  by  many  other

277

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1600.

odious  and  reproachflill  names.  And  though  they  strike
them,  yet  dare  they  not  strike  againe,  lest  they  lose  their
hand,  or  be  worse  used.  They  also  oftentimes  make
Avenies  of  them,  that  is,  false  accusations ;  and  suborne
false  witnesses  to  confirme  it  to  be  true :  and  no  Christians
word  will  be  taken  against  a  Turke,  for  they  account  us
Infidels,  and  call  themselves  Musselmen,  that  is,  True
beleevers.

This  miserie  abroad  will  make  us  love  our  owne
Countrie  the  better  when  we  come  thither.  And  that  is  the
best  lesson  which  I  have  learned  in  my  travels,  Mundi
contemptum,  that  is,  The  contempt  of  the  world.  And
Saint  Paul's  lesson,  Phil.  4.  11.  In  whatsoever  state
I  am,  therewith  to  be  content.  Oh  how  happie  are
you  in  England,  if  you  knew  your  owne  happinesse?
But  as  the  prodigall  sonne,  untill  he  was  pinched
with  penurie  abroad,  never  considered  the  plentie  of
his  fathers  house :  So  many  in  England  know  not  their
owne  felicitie,  because  they  doe  not  know  the  miseries  of
others.  But  if  they  were  here  in  this  Heathen  Countrie,
they  would  know  what  it  is  to  live  in  a  Christian  Common-
wealth, under  the  government  of  a  godly  King,  who  ruleth
by  Law  and  not  by  lust ;  where  there  is  plentie  and  peace,
and  preaching  of  the  Gospel,  and  many  other  godly
blessings,  which  others  want.  And  God  long  continue
his  mercies  to  our  noble  King  James,  and  his  whole
Realmes,  and  give  us  grace  as  farre  to  excell  other  Nations
in  thankfulnesse  as  we  doe  in  happinesse.  And  thus  for
present  I  commend  you  to  the  most  gracious  protection  of
the  Almightie  Jehovah,  beseeching  him,  (if  it  be  his  will)
to  send  us  a  joyfull  meeting,  both  in  this  world,  and  in
the  world  to  come. Amen.

Part  of  another  Letter  of  Master  William  Biddulph,

from  Jerusalem.

WOrshipfull  and  my  singular  good  friend,  I  being
now  (by  the  providence  of  God)  at  Jerusalem,
Captus  amore  tui,  raptus  honore  loci,  for  the  love  I  beare

278

WILLIAM BIDDULPH  a.d.

1600.

to  you,  and  delight  I  conceive  in  this  famous  place,  where
our  sweet  Saviour  Christ  vouchsafed  once  his  blessed
bodily  presence  ;  I  could  not  but  remember  you  with  some
salutation  from  hence,  having  such  choice  of  Messengers
(by  reason  of  the  great  concourse  of  people  unto  this
place  at  this  present,  from  sundry  places  of  Christendome)
to  transport  my  Letters  unto  you :  Nothing  doubting  but
that  as  my  former  Letters  (which  I  have  heretofore  written
unto  you  both  from  Aleppo,  and  other  places)  concerning
my  former  voyages,  and  such  things  as  (by  diligent  obser-
vation) I  noted  in  my  travels,  were  acceptable  unto  you;  [H.vm.
so  that  this  shall  be  much  more  acceptable,  both  in  regard  I345-J

of  the  Place  from  whence  it  came,  as  also  of  the  matter  ,
subject  herein  contayned  ;  beeing  my  Voyage  from  Aleppo
in  Syria  Comagena,  to  Jerusalem,  undertaken  this  present
yeere  1 600.  not  moved  as  Pilgrims  with  any  superstitious
devotion  to  see  Relikes,  or  worship  such  places  as  they
account  holy ;  but  as  Travellers  and  Merchants,  occasioned
by  Dearth  and  Sicknes,  Pestilence,  and  Famine  in  the
Citie  where  we  sojourne :  which  two  are  such  fellow-like
companions,  that  the  Graecians  distinguish  them  but  by
one  Letter,  calling  the  Pestilence  Xot/mos,  and  the  Famine
A*/xo9  :  By  reason  whereof  all  Trafficke  was  hindred,  and
those  Merchants  whom  they  call  Frankes,  or  Freemen,
either  removed  to  other  places ;  or  such  as  stayed  in  the
Citie,  caused  their  gates  to  bee  shut  up,  and  came  not
abroad  untill  Sol  entred  into  Leo,  which  is  usually  the
twelfth  or  thirteenth  day  of  July,  at  which  time  the  Plague  The  Plague
still  ceaseth  in  this  place,  though  it  bee  never  so  great,  c?aj*th  h
and  all  that  are  then  sicke,  amend ;  and  such  as  then  ^^
come  abroad,  need  not  feare  any  danger.  The  Turkes,
Moores,  Arabians,  and  other  Mahometans,  never  remoove
for  feare  of  any  sicknesse,  nor  refuse  any  mans  company
infected  therewith;  for  they  say,  every  mans  fortune  is
written  in  his  fore-head,  and  that  they  shall  not  dye  before
their  time ;  not  knowing  what  it  is  to  tempt  God,  and  to
refuse  ordinary  meanes.  But  in  this  interim,  from  the
beginning  of  this  sicknesse  (which  was  in  March)  untill

279

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1600.

the  expected  and  undoubted  end,  when  the  Sunne  entreth
into  Leo,  we  whose  names  are  subscribed  (for  causes  above
mentioned)  tooke  our  Voyage  from  Aleppo  towards
Jerusalem,  having  Letters  of  commendation,  from
Clarissimo  Imo  the  Venice  Consul,  and  sundry  others  of
the  chiefe  Italian  Merchants,  to  their  Padres  at  Jerusalem,
for  our  kind  usage  there,  with  libertie  of  conscience.

Anno  Dom.  1600.  The  ninth  of  March,  after  Dinner
we  set  forth,  garded  with  Janizaries,  and  accompanied
with  sundry  English,  Italian,  and  French  Merchants,  who
in  kindnesse  rode  with  us  seven  or  eight  miles,  to  bring
us  on  the  way,  and  then  returned  to  Aleppo. But  most

Cane  Toman,  of  our  English  Merchants  brought  us  to  Cane  Toman,
ten  miles  from  Aleppo,  where  we  made  merry  with  such
good  cheere  as  we  brought  with  us.  For  there  was
nothing  to  be  had  for  money  but  Goates  Milke,  whereof
we  had  as  much  as  we  would.  Here  we  purposed  to  have
slept  all  night,  but  having  no  other  Beds  but  the  hard
ground,  with  Jacobs  Pillow  (a  good  hard  stone)  under  our
heads,  unaccustomed  to  such  Downe  Beds,  we  could  not
sleepe,  but  spent  the  time  in  honest  mirth  untill  it  was
past  mid-night,  and  then  our  friends  tooke  their  leave  of
us,  and  returned  towards  Aleppo,  and  we  proceeded  in
our  journey  towards  Jerusalem.  The  night  beeing  darke,
and  the  way  dangerous  and  theevish,  our  Janizarie,  Byram
Bashaw,  willed  us  every  one  to  take  a  match  lighted  in
our  hands,  and  to  whirle  it  about,  that  the  fire  might  be
seene  the  further,  to  terrifie  the  Theeves,  lest  they  should
surprize  us  on  the  sudden.  And  when  wee  came  to
suspitious  places  (as  Caves,  Rockes,  Barnes,  or  odde  Cot-
tages in  the  way)  our  Janizarie  used  to  ride  before ;  and
as  Fowlers  beate  upon  Bushes  for  Birds,  so  hee  (with
his  Launce)  would  strike  and  beate  upon  such  places,  lest
wild  Arabs  (which  lye  lurking  in  such  places)  should  steale
upon  us  on  the  sudden.  When  the  day  appeared,  our  way
was  pleasant  and  comfortable  unto  us,  untill  we  came  to

Saracoope. a  Village  called  Saracoope,  whither  we  came  about  noone,
the tenth of March. And because our Seisenars or

280

WILLIAM BIDDULPH

A.D.

l600.

Sumptor  Horses  (which  carryed  provision  for  Man  and
Horse,  as  the  custome  of  the  Countrey  is)  were  tyred,
and  we  our  selves  also  (for  want  of  sleepe  the  night  past)
wearied  and  hungry,  wee  were  constrayned  to  lodge  there
all  night  on  the  hard  ground  by  our  Horse  heeles,  in  an
old  Cane  distant  from  Cane  Toman  eight  and  twentie
miles.

The  eleventh  of  March,  betimes  in  the  morning  wee
departed  from  Saracoope,  and  came  betimes  in  the  after-
noone  to  a  fine  Village  called  Marrah,  where  there  is  a  Marrah.
very  faire  new  Cane  builded  by  Amrath  (commonly  called
Morat)  Chillabee,  sometimes  Defterdare,  that  is,  Trea-
surer of  Aleppo,  and  afterwards  of  Damascus,  who  for  the
refuge  of  Travellers,  and  their  protection  against  Theeves,
built  a  stately  strong  Cane  like  unto  Leaden  Hall  in  Maner  of  their
London,  or  rather  the  Exchange  in  London,  where  there  Lanes-
are  faire  upper  Roomes  for  great  men  in  their  Travels,
and  the  neather  Roomes  are  for  ordinary  Travellers  and
their  Horses,  but  in  hot  weather  the  best  make  choise  to
sleepe  on  the  ground  in  low  Roomes,  rather  then  in  their
Chambers.  The  Founder  hereof  also  ordayned,  that  all
Travellers  that  way  should  have  their  entertaynment  there
of  his  cost.  Hee  alloweth  them  Bread,  Pillaw,  and
Mutton,  which  our  Janizaries  accepted  off;  but  we
scorning  reliefe  from  the  Turkes  without  money,  sent  unto
the  Village,  where  (besides  our  owne  provision  which  wee
brought  with  us)  wee  had  also  other  good  things  for
money.  Marrah  is  distant  from  Saracoope,  foure  and
twentie  miles.

The  twelfth  of  March  was  a  very  raynie  day,  yet  we
travelled  all  the  forenoone,  untill  wee  came  to  a  Village,
called  Lacmine,  which  a  farre  off  made  shew  of  a  very  Lacmine.
faire  Village ;  but  when  we  came  thither,  wee  found  it  so
ruinous,  that  there  was  not  one  house  able  to  shroude  us
from  the  extremitie  of  the  showre  :  the  Inhabitants  thereof
having  forsaken  it,  and  fled  into  the  Mountaynes  to  dwell,
for  feare  of  the  Janizaries  of  Damascus,  who  travelling
that  way  used  to  take  from  them,  not  onely  victuals  for

281

A.D.

i6oo.

Wretched
slaverie.

[Il.viii.

1346

Miserable
Povertie.

Tyaba.
J  man.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

themselves,  &  Provender  for  their  Horses  without  mony,
but  whatsoever  things  else  they  found  in  their  houses.
Onely  there  was  a  little  Church  or  Chappel  in  good  pre-
paration, whereinto  (for  a  little  mony)  we  obtayned  leave
to  enter,  our  selves  with  our  horses  &  carriage,  &  there
we  brought  out  our  victuals,  &  refreshed  our  selves,  and
baited  our  horses,  and  rested  untill  it  left  rayning. After
J  the  showre,  while  our  Horses  were  preparing,  we  walked
into  the  fields  neere  unto  the  Church,  &  saw  many  poore
people  gathering  Mallows  and  three  leafed  grasse,  and
asked  them  what  they  did  with  it : and  they  answered,
that  it  was  all  their  food ; and  that  they  boyled  it,  and  did
eate  it : then  wee  tooke  pitie  on  them,  and  gave  them
bread,  which  they  received  very  joyfully,  and  blessed  God
that  there  was  bread  in  the  World,  and  said,  they  had  not
seene  any  bread  the  space  of  many  moneths. The  showre
ceasing,  wee  rode  from  this  Chappell,  and  Village  of  Lacke
money  (I  should  have  said  Lacmin,  but  might  say,  lacke
men  and  money  too)  and  rode  forward  untill  wee  came
unto  a  Village  or  Towne  called  Tyaba,  where  (because  it
was  neere  night)  we  desired  to  lodge,  but  could  not  bee
admitted  into  any  house  for  any  money,  whereupon  our
chiefe  Janizarie,  Byram  Bashaw  went  into  an  house,  and
offered  to  pull  man,  woman,  and  child  out  of  the  house,
that  wee  might  bring  in  our  Horses,  and  lodge  there  our
selves. But  when  we  saw  what  pittifull  lamentation  they
made,  we  intreated  our  Janizarie  either  to  perswade  them
for  money,  or  to  let  them  alone. And  understanding
that  there  was  a  faire  Citie  in  our  way,  ten  miles  off,  wee
five,  with  our  Janizarie,  beeing  well  horsed,  rode  thither,
and  left  our  carriage  with  the  rest  of  our  company  at
Tyaba,  to  come  to  us  betimes  in  the  morning.

This  Citie  is  now  commonly  called  Aman,  but  of  olde
it  was  called  Hamath,  2.  Kings  17.  Here  we  lodged  in
a  faire  Cane,  but  on  the  cold  ground,  and  upon  the  hard
stones,  and  thought  our  selves  well  provided  for,  that  wee
had  an  house  over  our  heads  to  keepe  us  dry.  Hamath  is
from  Marrah,  about  five  and  thirtie  miles. On  the  four-

282

WILLIAM BIDDULPH

A.D.

l600.

teenth of March wee travelled from Hamath, a

pleasant way, & a short dayes journey, to a fine

Towne called vulgarly Hemse, but formerly Hus,  Hemse.

distant  from  Hamath,  but  twentie  miles. This  is  said

to  have  beene  the  City  where  Job  dwelt,  and  is  to  this

day  called  by  the  Christians  inhabiting  in  those  borders,

Jobs  Citie. And  there  is  a  fruitfull  Valley  neere  unto  it,  Jobs  Citie.

called  the  Valley  of  Hus,  and  a  Castle  not  farre  off,  in  Hus.

the  way  to  Tripoly,  called  Hus  Castle  to  this  day. But

I  make  some  doubt  whether  Job  were  ever  at  this  place,  for

Job  is  said  to  have  dwelt  amongst  the  Edomites,  or  wicked

Idumaeans  :  and  Idumaea  bordered  upon  Arabia  Foelix,  and

not  neere  Syria,  where  this  Citie  called  Hus  standeth.

On  the  fifteenth  day  of  March,  we  went  from  Hus
towards  Damascus,  which  is  foure  dayes  Journey  off,  and
all  the  way  (untill  we  came  within  ten  miles  of  Damascus)
is  a  Desart,  un-inhabited,  and  a  Theevish  way ;  onely
there  are  erected  in  the  way  certayne  Canes  to  lodge  in.
But  if  they  bring  not  provision  with  them  both  for  man
and  horse,  and  some  Quilt  or  Pillow  to  sleepe  on,  the
hard  stones  must  be  their  Bed,  and  the  Aire  their  Supper :
for  some  of  their  Canes  are  nothing  but  stone  wals  to
keepe  out  Theeves.  In  Cities  they  have  very  stately
Canes,  but  not  for  Travellers,  but  for  themselves  to
dwell  in ;  for  every  rich  man  calleth  his  house  a  Cane.
But  the  Canes  that  stand  in  high  wayes,  are  in  Charitie
erected  by  great  men,  for  the  protection  of  Travellers ;
but  most  of  them  are  very  badly  kept,  and  are  worse  than
Stables.  Our  first  dayes  Journey  from  Hus  was  a  very
uncomfortable  and  dangerous  Desart :  wee  saw  no  House
all  the  way  until  we  came  unto  a  Village  called  Hassia,  Hassia.
where  we  lodged  in  an  old  Castle  distant  from  Hus  two
and  twentie  miles.

The  sixteenth  of  March,  from  Hassia,  we  rode  to  an
ancient  Christian  Towne  called  Charrah,  where  our  pro-  Charrah.
vision  being  spent,  we  made  supply  thereof,  and  bought
Bread  and  Wine  of  the  Christians  there  dwelling. It  is
inhabited  by  Greekes  and  Turkes,  but  governed  by  Turkes

283

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1600.

only.  There  is  but  one  Church  in  the  Towne,  which  is
dedicated  to  Saint  Nicholas,  by  the  Christians  who  first
builded  it.  But  both  Christians  and  Turkes  pray  therein  :
the  Christians  on  the  one  side  or  He  of  the  Church,  and
the  Turkes  on  the  other.  But  the  Christians  are  over-
ruled by  the  Turkes,  and  constrained  to  find  them  Oyle
to  their  Lampes  in  the  Church.  For  the  Turkes  not
only  burne  Lampes  in  their  Churches  every  night,  but
during  the  whole  time  of  their  Lent  they  beset  the  battle-
ments of  their  Steeples  round  about  with  Lampes.  But
when  their  Lent  is  ended,  they  burne  Lampes  in  their
Steeples  onely  once  a  week,  and  that  is  on  Thursday  at
night,  which  is  the  Eeve  before  their  Sabbath.  After  wee
had  refreshed  our  selves  heere,  halfe  the  day  being  not
yet  spent,  we  roade  from  hence  to  a  poore  Village  called

Nebetke.  Nebecke,  or  (as  they  pronounce  it)  Nebhkeh,  where  we
lodged  in  an  old  Cane,  distant  from  Hassia  seven  and
twentie  miles.  And  understanding  at  this  place,  that  the
way  that  wee  were  to  passe  on  the  morrow,  was  full  of
Arabs,  and  that  two  dayes  before,  many  men  were  found
in  the  way  killed  by  them,  we  feared  to  goe  any  further.
Yet  meeting  with  company  contrarie  to  expectation,  March
the  seventeenth  we  went  forwards,  and  saw  no  house  nor
company  all  the  day  long  besides  our  selves,  untill  we

Cotifey.  came  to  a  Village  called  Cotifey,  where  wee  lodged  in  a
very  stately  new  Cane,  built  by  Synan  Bashaw ; and  not

Excellent  altogether  finished.  This  Cane  doth  farre  exceed  that  at
e'  Marrah,  (before  mentioned)  for  hereunto  is  adjoyned  a
faire  new  Church  and  a  Bazar,  that  is  a  Market  place  where
Travellers  may  buy  many  good  things.  Heere  is  also
meate  for  Travellers,  and  Provender  for  their  Horses  to
be  had  of  the  Founders  cost.  And  in  the  middle  of  this
Cane,  there  is  a  faire  large  Fountayne  of  water,  of  hewed
stones  foure  square,  wherein  there  is  exceeding  good  water
for  Travellers  to  drinke,  and  Chambers  for  their  Lodging  :
but  if  they  will  have  any  Beds,  they  must  bring  them  with
them,  or  sleepe  on  the  hard  ground,  as  most  men  that
travell  that  way  are  wont  to  doe.

284

Dangerous

way,

WILLIAM BIDDULPH  a.d.

1600.

The  eighteenth  of  March,  from  Cotifey,  wee  had  not  [n*vm.

much  more  then  twentie  miles  to  Damascus. The  first n 12„°

ten  miles  was  a  Desart,  and  dangerous  way,  and  we  hardly
escaped  danger ;  for  an  Arabian  Horseman  seeing  us
come,  stood  as  a  Spie  in  our  way^  to  view  our  strength,
and  marked  every  one  of  us  very  narrowly,  and  what
weapons  we  had ;  and  then  rode  up  an  high  Mountayne,
as  fast  as  if  it  had  beene  plaine  ground,  to  acquaint  his
companions  what  a  prey  hee  had  found  for  them.
Whereupon  our  Janizarie  cast  aside  his  upper  garment,
being  a  Gamberlooke,  and  bad  us  all  make  readie  our
Weapons,  and  hee  himselfe  rode  before  us  with  his  Launce
on  his  shoulders,  expecting  their  comming  upon  us  sud-
denly :  but  they  having  espyed  (from  the  top  of  the
Mountayne)  fiftie  Janizaries  of  Damascus  at  the  least,
with  their  Jimmoglans  comming  after  us,  came  not,  and
so  by  the  providence  of  God  wee  escaped  their  hands.
The  other  part  of  our  way  to  Damascus,  was  a  pleasant
Plaine  of  tenne  miles  in  length,  having  many  fruitfull
Villages,  fine  Rivers,  and  pleasant  Gardens  thereon.  At
our  entrance  into  this  Plaine  or  Valley,  riding  downe  an
Hill,  we  beheld  the  prospect  of  Damascus  ten  miles  off,
whither  we  came  about  two  of  the  clocke  in  the  afternoone,
and  tooke  up  our  Lodging  in  the  middle  of  the  Citie,  at
a  Cane  called  in  Morisco,  Cane  Nebbe,  that  is,  The  Cane
of  the  Prophet :  but  by  the  Turkes ;  Cane  Haramin,
where  we  hired  three  Chambers  for  our  money,  and  our
Servants  bought  our  meate,  and  dressed  it  themselves,  as
they  did  also  all  the  rest  of  the  way  where  wee  could  get
any  thing.  To  this  end  we  tooke  a  Cooke  with  us,  and
other  Servants  from  Aleppo,  to  dresse  our  meate,  and  to
looke  to  our  Horses.  Heere  we  met  with  Frenchmen,
and  other  Christians,  staying  for  company  to  goe  to
Jerusalem.

At  Damascus  many  Jewish  Merchants,  and  Greekes,
and  others,  knew  some  of  us,  and  came  to  salute  us,  and
present  us  with  such  good  things  as  they  had,  both  Wine,
and  Bread,  and  Kiddes,  and  Fruit,  &c.  and  lent  us  very

285

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1600

good  Beds  with  sheets  and  other  furniture,  which  refreshed
well  our  wearied  bodies.

The  nineteenth  and  twentieth  of  March,  wee  stayed  at
Damascus  to  rest  our  selves,  and  see  the  Citie.

Damascus  is  a  most  ancient  Citie,  and  as  Esay  spake  of

Damascus.  it  in  his  time,  The  head  of  Aram  is  Damascus,  Isa.  7.  8.
so  Damascus  is  the  chiefest  Citie  of  Syria  to  this  day.
The  situation  thereof  is  most  pleasant,  being  built  on  a
plaine  ground,  strongly  walled  about,  and  a  strong  Castle
therein,  with  many  fine  Rivers  running  on  every  side  of
it,  especially  Abanah,  and  Pharpar,  mentioned,  2.  Kings
5.  which  now  are  divided  into  many  heads.  The  Turkes
say,  that  their  Prophet  Mahomet  was  once  at  Damascus,

The  pleasant  ancj  fa^  when  he  saw  the  pleasant  situation  of  it,  and
beheld  the  stately  prospect  of  it,  excelling  all  others  that
ever  hee  saw  before ;  refused  to  enter  into  the  Citie,  lest
the  pleasantnesse  thereof  should  ravish  him,  and  move
him  there  to  settle  an  Earthly  Paradise,  and  hinder  his
desire  of  the  heavenly  Paradise.  It  hath  also  many
pleasant  Orchards,  and  Gardens  round  about  the  Citie,
and  some  wayes  for  the  space  of  a  mile,  and  more  about
the  Citie  there  are  many  Orchards,  and  great  varietie  of
fruits :  some  called  Adams  Apples,  and  Adams  Figs,
and  sundrie  other  strange  Fruits.  Damascus  is  called
by  the  Turkes,  Sham,  and  they  call  it,  the  Garden
of  Turkie,  because  there  is  no  place  in  all  the  Turkes
Dominions (especially in Syria,) that yeeldeth such

Store  of  fruits,  abundance  of  Fruit.  Here  we  stayed  two  dayes  and
three  nights  to  rest  our  selves,  and  see  the  Citie.
And  having  a  Greeke  to  our  Guide,  he  shewed  us
first  a  stately  Muskia,  or  Turkish  Church  erected  in  the
place  where  the  Temple  of  Rymmon  stood,  mentioned,  2.
Kings  5.  And  two  other  memorable  matters,  mentioned,
Acts  9.  25.  viz.  the  place  where  the  Disciples  let  downe
Paul  in  the  night  through  the  wall  in  a  Basket,  whereof
the  Christians  there  dwelling  keepe  an  exact  memoriall ;
taking  upon  them  to  demonstrate  the  very  place  of  the
wall ;  which  we  not  beleeving,  they  confirmed  it  with  this

286

WILLIAM BIDDULPH  a.d.

i  600.

reason,  that  Damascus  was  *  never  overcome ; and  that  ^Damascus

there  have  beene  Christians  dwelling  there  ever  since  the  J*/m™™e

time  of  Paul,  and  therefore  might  keepe  a  memoriall  of  the  christians  by

very  place : But  to  let  the  place  passe,  the  thing  it  selfe  the  Saracens.

we  know  to  be  true. He  shewed  us  also  the  house  of

Ananias,  which  is  under  the  ground,  whereinto  we  were

led,  downe  a  paire  of  staires  from  the  street,  as  it  were

into  a  Celler ; and  the  doore  being  unlocked,  we  entred

with  Candels  into  the  place,  where  we  saw  two  darke

Chambers,  where  a  man  cannot  see  to  reade  in  the  day

time  without  Candels,  here  they  say,  he  lived  in  secret  for

feare  of  the  Jewes. Many  Christians  comming  thither  to

see  that  place,  with  a  coale  write  their  names  on  the  wall,

and  there  are  so  many  names  there  alreadie,  that  there  is

scarce  roome  for  any  other  to  set  his  name. Some  of

them  report  Damascus  to  bee  built  in  the  place  where

Kain  killed  his  Brother  Abel. And  some  say  it  is  neere

it,  and  offered  to  bring  us  to  the  place  ;  but  we  refused.

They  take  upon  them  also  at  Damascus  to  demonstrate
the  place  where  Saint  George  was  buried,  so  they  doe  Saint  George.
likewise  at  Aleppo,  but  I  thinke  the  one  to  bee  as  true  as
the  other.  There  is  a  fine  Towne  neere  unto  Damascus,
about  two  or  three  miles  distant  on  the  side  of  an  hill,
called  Salhia,  from  whence  a  man  may  behold  the  prospect  Sa/hia.
of  the  Citie  of  Damascus  most  pleasantly,  with  the  Gardens
and  pleasant  places  about  it.

At  Damascus  we  met  many  thousand  Turkes,  going  on  Pilgrimage  to
Pilgrimage  towards  Mecha  in  Arabia,  to  visit  Mahomets  Mecha-
Sepulchre,  as  they  usually  doe  every  yeere  about  their
Byram  time; for  they  hold,  that  whosoever  once  in  his  [n-viii-
life  time  shall  not  goe  on  Pilgrimage  to  Mecha,  to  see  the  I34  '-'

Sepulchre  of  their  Prophet,  shall  never  enter  into  Para-
dise. And  therefore  some  of  them  goe  thither  often  in
their  life  time,  partly  for  devotion,  and  partly  to  buy
Merchandise.  For  there  are  brought  thither  at  that  time
of  the  yeere,  great  store  of  Commodities  from  India,
Persia,  and  other  places ;  and  none  may  buy  or  sell  there
but  Mahometans. And  it  is  forbidden  to  all  Christians

287

a-d  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1 600.

upon  paine  of  death,  to  come  neere  Mecha  within  five
miles :  partly,  lest  they  should  marre  their  Markets ;  but
chiefly,  lest  they  should  see  their  folly  or  rather  madnesse
in  worshipping  an  Iron  Sepulchre ;  after  the  sight  whereof,
many  of  their  old  men  (which  thinke  never  to  come
thither  againe)  use  to  pull  out  both  their  eyes,  after  they
have  seene  so  holy  a  sight.  And  whosoever  (say  they)
dyeth  in  his  Pilgrimage  thither,  or  returning  from  thence,
is  sure  to  goe  to  Heaven  presently. And  they  that  have

Hogies.  beene  there  but  once,  are  alwaies  after  called  Hogies,
that  is,  Pilgrims :  and  are  called  by  that  name  in  this
manner.  If  his  name  before  were  Mahomet,  he  is  at
his  returne  called  Hogie  Mahomet.  If  before  Mustapha,
hee  is  alwaies  after  called  Hogie  Mustapha,  &c.  And  they
that  have  beene  often  at  Mecha  and  returne  againe,  are
called  Great  Hogies.  And  every  yeere  when  the  Caravan
of  Pilgrims  returne  from  Mecha,  hee  that  hath  beene  there
oftnest,  is  called,  The  Great  Hogie :  and  is  greatly
honored  of  them  all,  for  hee  rideth  before  them  all  in  more
stately  apparell  then  they,  with  Flowers  and  Garlands
about  his  Horse,  and  when  they  come  neere  any  great
Citie,  the  chiefest  men  in  the  Citie  ride  forth  to  meet  him,
and bring him into the Citie with great solemnitie.

An  Angell-  They  falsely  affirme,  that  this  their  Temple  at  Mecha  in
Arabia,  was  built  by  Abraham,  and  they  prepare  them-
selves with  greater  care  to  goe  to  worship  there,  then  many
Christians  doe  when  they  come  to  the  Lords  Supper,  for
they  disburden  their  hearts  of  all  hatred  and  malice,  and
reconcile  themselves  one  to  another,  &c.  Otherwise  they
hold  that  all  their  labour  is  lost,  and  that  they  shall  bee
never  awhit  the  better  for  their  Pilgrimage.  But  if  they
forgive  one  another,  and  repent  them  for  their  former
sinnes,  they  thinke  there  to  obtaine  full  remission  of  all
their  sinnes,  and  that  at  their  returne  they  are  pure  and
without  spot.

March twentie  one,  we  departed from the Citie  of
Damascus,  and  about  five  or  sixe  miles  from  the  Citie,

Darla. passed  by  a  Village  called  Daria ; neere  unto  which,  we

288

WILLIAM BIDDULPH  a.d.

1600.

saw  a  great  multitude  of  men,  women,  and  children  on

their  knees,  in  the  high  way :  and  by  that  time  they  had

ended  their  devotion,  we  drew  so  neere  as  to  salute  them ;

and  asking  what  they  were,  it  was  told  us,  that  they  were

all  Christians  of  sundry  Nations,  viz.  Armenians,  Greekes,

Chelfalines,  Nostranes,  and  sundry  others,  who  went  to

Jerusalem, to  visit  and  worship the  holy  places there.

We  asked  further,  what  they  meant  to  fall  on  their  knees

in  that  place : they  answered  us,  that  it  was  the  place  M**  of  Pauls

where  *  Paul  was  converted,  and  that  it  was  their  custome  €^mm'f

when  they  travelled  that  way,  to  fall  on  their  knees,  and  Saug  ^er  est

pray  unto  God  to  convert  them. They  were  in  number  convenio

at  the  least  foure  or  five  hundred  people,  there  was  a  PauR.

Greeke  Patriarke,  and  an  Armenian  Bishop  in  their  com-

panie. Many  of  them knew  us, (having seene us in

Aleppo)  and  saluted  us  by  our  names. Wee  rode  a  while

in  companie  together,  and  lodged  all  together  that  night

at  a  Cane,  called  Sassa,  distant  from  Damascus  six  and  Sassa.

twentie  miles.

March  twentie  two,  we  rode  before  the  rest  of  the
companie. Our  way  that  we  travelled  all  this  day,  was
exceeding  bad,  rockie,  waterish,  and  barren,  called  Arabia -Arabia
Petrea,  where  our  Horses  oftentimes  stucke  fast  in  the  Petraa-
puddles  and  myrie  places,  and  somtimes  ready  to  breake
their  owne  legs,  and  their  Riders  necks,  among  Rocks  and
Stones,  it  was  neither  pleasant  going  on  foot,  nor  riding
this  way,  for  there  was  no  path  nor  even  ground,  but  huge  ///  way.
stones  and  Rocks  so  neere  together,  that  our  Horses  could
goe but a foot-pace, and oftentimes met with such
Marishes  and  Quagmires,  that  wee  were  constrained  to
goe  farre  about  before  wee  could  find  better  waies  to  passe
over. It  is  also  exceeding  cold  in  this  place  alwaies  (in Great  cold.
respect  of  other  places  in  that  Countrey)  for  there  are
neither  Trees  nor  Houses,  nor  high  Hils  to  keep  away  the
violence  and  force  of  the  Windes. The  Caravans  that
travell  usually  that  way  betwixt  Damascus  and  Egypt,  say,
that  this  dayes  journey  troubleth  them  more  then  all  the
rest,  and  that  they  never  passe  by  that  way,  but  they  leave
vtii  289  T

A.D.

l600.

Conetra.

Walking
wondred  at.

Cut  doublet.

[Il.viii.

1 349-1
Long  haire.

Long  beards.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

two  or  three  of  their  Camels  behind  them,  some  misfortune
or  other  befalling  unto  them.  Wee  saw  also  in  sundry
places  this  way,  the  carkasses  of  many  dead  Camels,  which
have  miscarried  amongst  the  Rocks.  It  is  also  a  very
theevish  way,  full  of  wilde  Arabs :  yet  (by  the  providence
of  God)  we  came  safely  that  day  to  Conetra,  where  we
lodged  in  a  good  Cane,  distant  from  Sassa  eight  and
twentie  miles.

In  a  Bazar  (like  unto  a  Cloister)  adjoyning  to  the  Cane,
wee  tooke  pleasure  towalke  up  and  downe  some  few  turnes,
which  the  Turkes  beholding,  wondred  at  us :  (for  it  is
not  their  custome  in  those  hot  Countries,  to  walke  up  and
downe  as  wee  doe  in  cold  Countries,  but  to  sit  still  on
the  ground  like  bruite  Beasts)  and  one  of  them  came  unto
us,  and  asked  us  what  wee  meant  to  walke  up  and  downe
in  such  sort,  and  whether  wee  were  out  of  our  way,  or
out  of  our  wits.  If  your  way  (said  hee)  lyeth  toward  the
upper  end  of  the  Cloister,  why  come  you  downewards?
And  if  at  the  nether  end,  why  goe  you  backe  againe  ?  It
seemed  no  lesse  strange  unto  them,  to  see  a  Christian  with
a  cut  Doublet :  and  they  called  him  foole,  and  asked  him
what  he  meant  to  make  holes  in  his  Coate :  for  they
neither  cut  nor  pinke  any  of  their  Garments,  but  wearing
them  all  plaine,  sparing  for  no  cost,  to  guard  them  with  lace
of  silver  and  gold,  if  they  be  able.  And  such  as  weare  long
haire  on  their  heads,  the  Turkes  call  Slovens,  and  account
them  savage  Beasts ;  for  they  themselves  weare  no  haire
on  their  heads  at  all,  but  shave  them  every  weeke  once,
and  keepe  them  warme  with  a  Turbant  of  white  Shash,
made  of  cotton  Wooll,  which  they  never  uncover  in  their
salutations  to  any  man,  but  bow  their  heads,  with  their
hands  on  their  breasts.  But  if  a  man  have  a  faire  long
beard,  they  reverence  him,  and  say  hee  is  a  wise  man,  and
an  honorable  personage.  But  if  they  have  no  beards  at
all,  they  call  them  (if  they  be  yong)  Bardasses,  that  is,
Sodomiticall  Boyes.  But  if  they  be  men  growne,  and
have  no  beards,  they  call  them  fooles,  and  men  of  no
credit ; and  some  of  them  refuse  to  buy  or  sell  with  such,

290

WILLIAM BIDDULPH  a.d.

1600.

and  say,  they  have  no  wit,  and  that  they  will  not  beleeve
them,  &c.

The  three  and  twentieth  of  March,  we  had  a  more
pleasant  way ; for  the  first  ten  miles  wee  rode  thorow
the  fields,  and  a  very  pleasant  Parke. But  when  we  came  PleasantPark.
out  of  this  Parke  of  Forrest,  we  were  somewhat  troubled,
partly  by  reason  of  the  bad  way,  and  partly  by  bad  people
in  the  way. The  people  did  more  trouble  us  then  the  way  ;
for  there  sate  amongst  the  Rocks,  in  our  way,  many  Turkes
and  Arabs,  with  Maces  of  Iron,  and  other  weapons,  who
stayed  us,  and  demanded  Caphar  or  toll  money ; we  were  Caphar
glad  to  give  them  content,  that  we  might  passe  safely  by  customers-
them. But  the  Caravan  of  Christians,  who  came  after  us,
though  they  were  many  hundreds,  yet  some  of  them  being
not  able,  some  not  willing  to  pay  so  much  money  as  they
demanded,  were  shrewdly  beaten  with  their  Iron  Maces.
There  was  a  Jesuit  in  their  company,  who  escaped  not
without  stripes,  whereat  (as  I  have  heard)  he  rejoyced,  and
counted  it  meritorious,  in  that  he  suffered  such  misery  in  Much  good  do
so  holy  a  voyage. And  in  my  hearing  at  Jerusalem,  one  him  ™*&  such
of  his  companions  told  him, that  he  merited  much to ertts'
sustaine  such  travell  and  labour,  and  be  at  so  great  cost
and  charges,  and  suffer  so  many  stripes  for  Christs  sake :
but  I  know,  had  it  not  beene  more  for  love  of  his  purse
then  for  love  of  Christ,  he  might  have  escaped  without
stripes,  yea,  with  these  kind  speeches,  Marhabbah  Janum,
that  is,  Welcome  my  friend  or  sweet-heart. At  another
place  in  my  Travels,  I  heard  a  Frier  bragging  of  his  good  Friart
workes,  and  saying, that  hee  had  done  so  many  good  MerUmonSer-
workes,  that  if  he  should  kill  three  men,  his  good  workes
would  make  satisfaction,  and  merit  remission  for  them  all.
Here  I  may  fitly  take  occasion  to  teach  those  that  purpose
to  travell  into  Turkey,  how  to  behave  themselves. If
they  bee  set  upon  by  Theeves,  they  may  defend  themselves  4n  admonition
in  their  travels,  if  they  be  strong  enough ; but  if  they  be  forTravellers-
polling  officers  (as  these  were)  they  must  not  be  contra-
dicted. But  neither  in  their  Cities,  nor  in  their  travels
may  they  strike  againe,  though  they  be  abused  and  beaten

291

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1600.

by  any  man  (except  they  bee  Theeves  and  Robbers)  for  if
they  doe,  they  shall  either  bee  put  to  death,  or  have  their
hand  cut  off.  Neither  if  a  man  receive  a  box  on  the  eare
at  any  of  their  hands,  must  he  give  one  bad  word,  or  looke
Base  frowningly  upon  him  that  smote  him : for  then  hee  will

thraldome.  strike  him  againe,  and  say,  What,  Goure?  Dost  thou
curse  me,  and  wish  that  the  Devil  had  me  ?  but  hee  must
kisse  his  beard,  or  the  skirt  of  his  Garment,  and  smile  upon
him,  and  then  he  will  let  him  passe.

At  the  foot  of  this  Mountayne  there  is  an  old  Cane,
where  usually  Travellers  lodge :  but  it  being  not  yet
noone,  we  resolved  to  travell  eighteene  miles  further,  to
the  Sea  of  Galile.  At  the  foot  of  this  stony  Hill,  hard  by
this  Cane,  there  runneth  a  pleasant  River,  which  divideth
Syria  from  Galile.  And  over  this  River  there  is  a  faire
Bridge,  the  one  end  whereof  is  out  of  the  Holy  Land,  the
other  in  it.  This  River  is  called  Jordan,  the  head  whereof
commeth  from  Mount  Lybanus,  and  maketh  three  Seas.
The  first,  is  the  waters  of  Maron,  which  we  left  on  our
right  hand,  about  ten  miles  off.  The  other,  on  the  left
hand,  which  lay  in  our  way  as  wee  should  travell.  The
second,  is  the  Sea  of  Galile  or  Tiberias,  or  Lake  of  Gene-
zereth.  The  third,  is  the  Sea  of  Sodome,  called  Mare
mortuum,  where  the  River  Jordan  endeth.  The  Bridge
that  crosseth  this  River  Jordan  at  the  entrance  into  the
JacobsBridge.  Holy  Land,  is  called  Jacobs  Bridge ;  for  two  causes.
First,  it  is  said,  that  there  Jacob  met  his  brother  Esau.
Secondly,  that  there  Jacob  wrestled  with  an  Angell.

The  first  part  of  Canaan  called  Galile,  beginneth  at  this
Bridge,  and  to  this  day  it  is  a  very  pleasant  and  fruitfull
Countrey.  After  wee  were  entred  into  Galile,  about  two
miles  from  the  Bridge,  our  Janisaries  asked  us  whither
wee  would  goe  up  to  a  Mountayne,  and  so  to  Saphetta
neere  unto  Mount  Carmel,  which  is  a  place  of  leaning  for
Jewes ;  or  keepe  the  lower  way,  and  goe  by  the  Sea  of
Galile,  which  is  the  pleasanter  way :  and  thereof  we  made
choise ; and  tooke  Saphetta  in  our  way  afterwards.

About seven miles from Jacobs Bridge, our Guide

292

WILLIAM BIDDULPH  a.d.

1600.

brought  us  to  a  Well,  adorned  with  marble  Pillars,  and
covered  with  stone,  which  hee  said  to  have  beene  the  Pit  Josephs  Pit.
whereinto  Joseph  was  put,  when  his  Brethren  sold  him
to  the  Ishmalites.  But  it  seemed  to  us  incredible :  first,
because  that  was  a  drie  Pit,  and  this  is  full  of  sweet  water.
Againe,  Jacob  dwelt  at  Hebron  twelve  miles  beyond
Jerusalem,  and  his  Sonnes  kept  Sheepe  in  Shechem.  And
that  drie  Pit  whereinto  they  put  Joseph  was  at  Dothan
(which  we  saw  afterwards)  and  this  Pit  which  they  shewed
us  with  marble  Pillars,  was  in  Galile  ;  not  neere  Dothan
nor  Shechem  where  Josephs  Brethren  kept  their  Fathers
Sheepe.  But  by  others  of  better  judgement,  we  under-
stood that  this  also  was  called  Josephs  Pit,  or  Well,  because
it  was  built  by  one  Joseph,  not  Joseph  the  sonne  of  Jacob,
but  some  other.  But  the  ignorant  people  which  travell  [H.vin.
that  way,  are  apt  to  beleeve  any  thing  that  is  told  them.  13S°-]

About  ten  miles  from  this  Well,  we  came  to  a  Cane,  called
by  the  Moores  Minium,  but  by  the  Turkes  Missia,  hard  Minium.
by  the  Sea  of  Galile,  where  we  lodged  all  night,  having
travelled  that  day  by  computation  sixe  and  thirtie  miles.

The  foure  and  twentieth  of  March  we  rode  along  by
the  Sea  of  Galile,  which  Joh.  6.  1.  is  called  by  two  names,
viz.  the  Sea  of  Galile  or  Tiberias. Galile,  because  it  is  Sea  of  Galile.
in  Galile  : and  Tiberias,  because  the  Citie  Tiberias  was
built  by  it,  and  Bethsaida  an  other  ancient  Citie  ; of  both
which  we  saw  some  ruinous  walls. And  it  is  said  in  that
chapter  (Joh.  6.  1.)  that  Jesus  went  over  the  Sea  of  Galile  :
and  in  an  other  place, that  he  went  beyond  the  Lake.
And,  Luke  9.  10.  it  is  said,  that  he  went  into  a  solitarie
place,  neere  unto  a  Citie,  called  Bethsaida,  which  place  of
John,  I  learned  to  understand  better  by  seeing  it,  then  ever
I  could  before  by  reading  of  it. For,  seeing  that  Tiberias  Tiberias  and
and  Bethsaida  were  both  Cities  on  the  same  side  of  the  Bethsatda-
Sea, and Christ  went from  Tiberias to, or  neere unto
Bethsaida ; I gather thereby, that our Saviour Christ
went  not  over  the  length  or  breadth  of  that  Sea ;  but  over
some  Arme,  Bosome,  or  Reach  thereof,  viz.  so  farre  as
Tiberias  was  distant  from  Bethsaida ; which  is  also  con-

293

A.D.

l600.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Carta.

firmed  in  that  it  is  said  elsewhere,  A  great  multitude
followed  him  on  foot  thither ;  which  they  could  not  have
done,  if  hee  had  gone  quite  over  the  Sea,  to  the  other  side
among  the  Gergesens,  which  is  out  of  the  Holy  Land.
And  therefore  this  Sea  of  Galile,  is  also  called  the  Lake
Genesareth.  of  Genesereth,  because  of  the  Countrey  of  the  Gergesens
is  on  the  other  side  the  Lake,  from  whence  the  Swine
ran  head-long  into  the  Sea  and  were  choaked  therein  :  and
as  that  place  was  out  of  the  Holy  Land,  so  the  people
which  then  inhabited  it,  were  as  farre  from  holinesse,  when
they  requested  our  Saviour  Christ  to  depart  out  of  their
Coasts.  And  such  like  holy  people  inhabit  there  still,
viz.  wild  Arabs  and  Turks,  &c.  Wee  saw  also  (neere
unto  this  Sea)  the  place  where  that  Towne  (mentioned,
Joh.  2.  1.)  called  Cana  of  Galile  stood,  where  our  Saviour
Christ  at  a  marriage  turned  Water  into  Wine ;  in  place
whereof  there  standeth  now  a  poore  Village,  inhabited  by
Turks.  This  Sea  of  Galile  is  (by  computation)  in  length
eight  leagues,  and  in  breadth  five  leagues,  and  every  league
is  three  miles,  and  then  it  encloseth  it  selfe  into  a  narrower
compasse,  carrying  but  the  breadth  of  an  ordinarie  River
untill  it  came  to  Sodome,  where  it  endeth,  which  is  called
Mare  Mortuum,  that  is,  The  dead  Sea.

After  we  had  rode  about  seven  miles  by  the  Sea  of
Galile,  we  left  it  on  our  left  hand,  and  ascended  up  a
Mountayne  on  the  right  hand.  This  Mountayne  was  not
very  steepie,  but  exceeding  pleasant  and  fertile,  for  (being
the  Spring-time)  it  was  so  beset  with  such  varietie  of
flowers  among  the  greene  grasse,  that  they  seemed  to
fleere  in  our  faces,  and  to  laugh  and  sing  (as  the  Psalmist
speaketh)  as  wee  went,  Psal.  6$.  13.  This  is  said  to  bee
that  Mountayne,  mentioned  Joh.  6.  9.  where  our  Saviour
Christ  wrought  a  miracle,  in  feeding  five  thousand  men
with  five  Barley  loaves,  and  two  Fishes.

When  we  came  to  the  top  of  the  Mountayne,  we  saw
Saphetta  on  the  right  hand,  a  Universitie  of  the  Jewes,
where  they  speake  Hebrew,  and  have  their  Synagogues
there. The  Citie  Saphetta  is  situated  on  a  very  high  Hill

294

Saphetta  a

Jewish

Universitie.

WILLIAM BIDDULPH  ad.

1600.

with  three  tops,  and  so  the  Citie  hath  three  parts ;  one
part  is  inhabited  by  Jewes,  the  other  two  by  Turks.  We
asked  some  Jewes,  whom  we  knew  formerly  to  have  beene
Merchants  of  Aleppo,  what  they  meant  to  leave  their
Trade  and  to  live  there  :  They  answered,  they  were  now  old
and  came  thither  to  die,  that  they  might  be  neerer  to
Heaven.  The  Jewes  have  here  more  libertie  then  in  any
part  of  the  Holy  Land.  They  dare  not  come  to  Jerusalem,
for  feare  lest  the  Christians  there  dwelling,  stone  them.
Whiles  we  were  at  Saphetta,  many  Turkes  departed  from
thence  towards  Mecha  in  Arabia.  And  the  same  morning
they  went,  we  saw  many  women  playing  with  Timbrels,  Mourning
as  they  went  along  the  street,  and  made  a  yelling  or  2!  ,  .
shriking  noise  as  though  they  cryed.  We  asked  what  they
meant  in  so  doing?  It  was  answered  us,  that  they
mourned  for  the  departure  of  their  Husbands,  who  were
gone  that  morning  on  Pilgrimage  to  Mecha,  and  they
feared  that  they  should  never  see  them  againe,  because  it
was  a  long  way  and  dangerous,  and  many  died  there  every
yeere.

All  the  way  which  we  travelled  this  day,  was  very
pleasant ;  and  all  the  Ground  both  Hils  and  Dales  very
fruitfull,  according  as  it  is  described  by  Moses,  Deut.  8.
7,  8.  and  Deut.  11.  10,  11.  And  we  came  that  day,  about
two  of  the  clocke  in  the  afternoone  to  a  Village,  called  in
the  Arabick  tongue  I-nel  Tyger,  that  is  (by  interpretation)  1-nel  Tyger.
The  Merchants  Eye,  wherein  there  are  two  very  faire
Castles  for  Travellers  to  lodge  in  from  danger  of  wild
Arabs,  which  abound  in  those  parts :  we  tooke  up  our
lodging  in  the  neerest  Castle,  which  is  the  fairest.

After  we  had  refreshed  our  selves,  and  slept  a  while :
being  hard  by  Mount  Tabor,  wee  desired  to  ascend  to  the  Tabor.
top  of  it,  and  tooke  Ally  (one  of  our  Janisaries)  and  rode
towards  the  Mountaine.  But  understanding  that  it  was  Mount  Tabor.
very  dangerous,  by  reason  of  wild  Arabs,  which  lodged  in
Caves,  and  Rocks,  and  Bushes,  about  the  Mountaine,  wee
hired  some  of  the  principall  Arabs  to  goe  with  us,  and
guard  us  from  the  rest. And  as  wee  went,  wee  beheld

295

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1600.

the  prospect  of  the  Mountaine  to  be  very  pleasant,  some-
what steepie,  but  not  very  high  (in  respect  of  some  other
Mountaines  thereabout)  not  very  large,  but  a  comely  round
Mountaine,  beset  with  Trees  and  thicke  Bushes,  which  at
that  time  of  the  yeere  flourished  greene :  wee  rode  so
farre  as  wee  could  for  steepinesse,  and  then  left  some  of  our
[Il.viii.  Servants  at  the  foot  of  the  Mountaine  to  keepe  our  Horses,

I3S1-]  and  tooke  upon  us  to  clamber  up  on  foot,  which  wee
should  never  have  beene  able  to  have  done,  had  there  not
beene  very  high  Grasse,  Sprigs,  and  Bushes  to  hold  by.
One  of  our  Arabs  went  up  before  us,  as  fast  as  if  it  had
beene  even  ground,  but  we  came  very  slowly  after,  which
he  perceiving,  would  looke  backe,  and  often  use  these
words  to  cheere  us,  Gel,  gel,  gel,  that  is,  Come,  come,
come  ;  and  sometimes  these,  Ish  halac  Seeadi,  How  doe  you
Masters.  Wee  were  almost  all  out  of  breath,  and  one  of
our  companie  cried,  For  the  love  of  God  let  us  returne,  for
I  can  goe  no  further ;  Oh,  I  shall  die,  I  shall  die.  Where-
upon, one  of  us  being  neerer  the  top  then  he  himselfe
supposed  (to  cheere  the  rest)  said,  Come  cheerefully,  I  am
on  the  top  ;  which  somewhat  heartned  the  rest :  otherwise
Top  of  Tabor,  they  had  all  gone  downe  againe.  Being  on  the  top,  we
rested  a  while  to  take  breath ;  and  then  we  walked  up
and  downe  the  top  of  the  Mount,  and  saw  onely  one
house,  or  rather  low  Cottage  uninhabited,  having  onely
two  darke  roomes  in  it,  meete  for  Foxes  or  Jaccals  to  lodge
in,  and  saw  no  signe  of  any  other  Taverne  or  Tabernacle.
Onely  we  understood,  that  (many  yeeres  since)  there  was
a  Monasterie  there  inhabited  by  Popish  Friers,  but  being
molested  by  the  Arabs,  tooke  away  the  holinesse  with
them,  and  left  the  Mountaine  behind  them ;  yet  still  they
call  this  Mount  Tabor,  in  Italian,  Monte  Santo,  that  is,
the  Holy  Mountaine :  as  if  there  were  some  inherent
holinesse  in  the  Mountaine.  And  two  dayes  after  we  had
Conference  beene  there,  came  a  Jesuit  and  two  Friers  with  a  yong
betwixt  a  Gentleman  of  Paris  in  France,  who  was  a  Protestant,  and
Protestant  some  other  companie  with  them,  who  had  a  desire  to
ascend  to  the  top  of  this  holy  Mountaine,  and  went  all

296

WILLIAM BIDDULPH  a.d.

1601.

together  untill  they  were  wearie,  which  was  at  the  foot  of

the  Mountaine,  and  in  the  heate  of  the  day : wherefore

the  French  Gentleman  said,  he  would  stay  for  them  there

untill  they  returned,  but  was  himselfe  already  wearie,  and

would  goe  no  higher ; the  Jesuit  and  Friers  reproved

him,  and  called  him  foole,  and  told  him  he  did  not  know

what  hee  might  merit  by  going  to  the  top  of  that  holy  Merit-

Mountaine. Merit (said the Gentleman) what may I  mongers-

merit? Thou maiest merit (said they) fiftie yeeres

pardon. The  Gentleman, to  breake  a  jest  with  them,

asked  them  whether  hee  might  merit  fiftie  yeeres  pardon

for  the  time  past,  or  for  the  time  to  come :  If  (said  he)  for

the  time  past,  I  am  not  so  old  (for  he  was  but  twentie  two

yeeres  of  age)  if  for  the  time  to  come,  he  did  not  thinke

hee  should  live  so  long. They  answered  him,  if  he  did

not  live  so  long,  he  might  give  the  yeeres  which  remained,

to  his  friends. Yet  could  they  not  perswade  him  to  goe

up  any  higher. When  we  had  seene  enough  this  Mount,

returned  againe  to  the  Castle,  with  good  stomacks  to  our

Supper, and wearied bodies, desiring rest. Tabor is

distant  from  Galile  not  much  above  twentie  miles.

The  five  and  twentieth  of  March,  being  the  feast  of

the  Annunciation  of  the  Virgin  Mary,  and  (according  to

the  computation  of  our  Church  of  England)  the  first  day

of  the  yeere  1601.  we  travelled  over  very  pleasant  fields  all

the  way,  the  fields  of  Basan,  not  farre  from  the  Mount  Mount  Basan.

Basan,  where  there  was  exceeding  good  Pasture,  and  fat

Cattell :  onely  wee  wanted  good  water  to  drinke,  and  our

Wine  was  spent,  and  the  day  exceeding  hot. Wee  saw

in  our  way  some  remnants  of  that  old  Tower  or  Fortresse,  Gehazis

mentioned  2.  Kings  5.  24.  where  Gehazi  the  Servant  of  Tower.

Elisha,  over-tooke  Naaman,  and  tooke  of  him  two  Talents

of  silver,  and  two  change  of  Garments. We  saw  also

many  other  places  worthy  observation,  but  (for  want  of

a  good  Guide)  we  knew  not  the  names  thereof,  for  the

Turkes inhabiting those Countries, have given new

names  to most  places. This  was the pleasantest daies

journey  we  had  in  our  whole  travell. I  never  saw  more

297

A.D.
l6oi.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Turkish
Byram.

fertill  ground  and  pleasant  fields,  and  so  much  together,
all  the  whole  day,  from  Mount  Tabor,  to  a  Village  called
En-gannim.  vulgarly  Jenine,  but  of  old  En-gannim,  whereof  wee
reade,  Josh.  15.  34.  Neere  unto  this  Village  is  the  place
where  Jahel  beheaded  Sisera,  mentioned  Judg.  4.  21.
Engannim  is  distant  from  Mount  Tabor  twentie  two  miles.
It  is  a  very  pleasant  place,  having  fine  Gardens,  and
Orchards,  and  Waters  about  it.  We  stayed  here  all  the
day  (the  six  and  twentieth  of  March)  because  (the  Turkes
Romadan,  which  is  their  Lent,  being  ended)  on  this  day
beganne  their  Feast  called  Byram ;  and  our  Janisarie  was
loth  to  travell  on  that  day,  being  their  Feast  day,  and  so
much  the  rather,  because  his  name  also  was  Byram.

The  seven  and  twentieth  of  March,  riding  from  En-
gannim,  wee  were  endangered  twice :  First,  by  certaine
Theeves  dwelling  neere  unto  En-gannim,  who  made  us
pay  Caphar,  or  pole  money  twice,  once  at  En-gannim.
And  when  we  departed  from  thence,  they  pursued  us  with
Bowes  and  Arrowes,  and  other  weapons :  we  withstood
them  long  in  parley ;  at  length  every  man  prepared  his
instruments  of  death  ready  for  battell.  Our  Janisaries
Kinsman,  Fatolla,  had  his  Musket  ready,  and  being  about
to  give  fire,  was  stayed  by  our  Janisarie,  who  saw  not  onely
these  Arabs  present  very  desperate,  with  their  Bowes  and
Arrowes  ready  drawne,  but  messengers  also  sent  to  raise  up
all  the  whole  rabblement  thereabout  upon  us ;  hee  told
us,  wee  were  best  give  them  content,  or  else  we  were  all
but  dead  men :  wherefore,  to  avoide  further  danger,  we
gave  them  their  owne  desire,  upon  condition,  they  would
pursue  us  no  further  nor  suffer  any  of  their  companie  to
molest  us :  the  chiefest  of  them  answered,  Stopherlo,
Stopherlo,  that  is,  God  forbid,  God  forbid,  we  should  doe
you  any  harme,  if  you  pay  us  what  we  demand  ;  which  we
did  with  all  speede,  and  rode  away  from  them,  being  glad
we  were  rid  of  them.

About  ten  miles  from  them,  wee  rode  through  a  Wood
(a  very  fit  place  to  harbour  Theeves,  who  had  killed
certaine  men  travelling  that  way  the  day  before,  and  tooke

298

Double
Knaverie.

Dangerous
Wood.

WILLIAM BIDDULPH  a.d.

1601.

away  both  a  man  and  Horse  from  the  Caravan  which  [H.viii.
followed  after; and  a  woman  also  riding  on  an  Asse  with  !352-J

their  carriage)  and  (as  our  Guide  told  us)  he  never
travelled  that  way  but  he  saw  some  men  killed :  and
therefore  bade  us  all  charge  our  Peeces,  and  shoot  off
when  he  bade  us,  though  we  saw  no  bodie,  lest  the  wilde
Arabs  should  set  upon  us  on  the  sodaine,  lying  in  ambush,
which  wee  also  did  in  a  place  most  dangerous,  to  daunt
the  enemies  before  we  saw  each  other.  But  before  wee
came  unto  the  most  dangerous  place,  there  overtooke  us
many  Turkes  well  armed,  who  dwelt  in  Jerusalem,  and
were  glad  of  our  companie  thither.  And  shortly  after  wee
had  discharged  every  man  his  piece,  we  saw  a  great  com-
panie of  Arabs  on  an  high  Mountaine  neere  unto  our
way,  yet  out  of  the  reach  of  our  shot,  who  perceiving  us
to  be  too  strong  for  them,  durst  not  set  upon  us.  And  so
(by  the  providence  of  God)  wee  came  that  night  to  an
ancient  and  famous  Citie,  (situated  in  a  fruitfull  valley
betwixt  two  Mountaines  called  Sychar,)  a  Citie  in  Sychar.
Samaria,  mentioned,  John  4.  Neere  whereunto  wee  saw
Jacobs  Well,  where  our  Saviour  Christ  asked  water  of  the  Jacobs  Well.
woman  of  Samaria.  Wee  came  thither  in  good  time,  for
wee  were  exceeding  thirstie,  and  dranke  thereof  liberally
and  freely.  The  water  thereof  goeth  downe  very  Pleasant
pleasantly,  like  unto  Milke.  From  Jacobs  Well  we  water-
went  into  the  Citie,  and  lodged  in  a  very  ancient  and
stately  Cane,  but  very  badly  kept.  It  had  beene  better
for  us  to  have  slept  by  Jacobs  Well,  as  others  did ;  for
here  we  slept  on  the  hard  stones  neere  unto  a  Chappell  in
the  middle  of  the  Cane,  under  two  or  three  great  Fig-trees
and  Mulberrie-trees,  where  we  were  scarce  safe  from
theeves,  for  we  had  some  things  stollen  from  us  in  the
night,  whiles  wee  slept  under  the  Trees  on  faire  broad
stones,  whereunto  we  ascended  by  a  faire  stone  paire  of
staires,  sixe  or  seven  steps  from  the  ground.  Sychar  is
distant  from  En-gannim,  seven  and  twentie  miles.

The  nine  and  twentieth  of  March,  wee  departed  from
Samaria  to  Jerusalem,  and  met  many  Souldiers  in  severall

299

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1601.

companies  by  the  way,  who  knowing  our  Janizarie,  and
other  Turkes  in  our  Companie,  let  us  passe  by  them
quietly,  and  gave  us  the  salam  aliek,  that  is,  peace  be  unto
you.  The  first  part  of  this  dayes  journey  was  somewhat
pleasant ;  but,  the  neerer  we  came  to  Jerusalem,  the  more
barren  and  tedious  our  way  was.  About  ten  of  the  Clocke
we  came  to  a  great  Forrest  or  Wildernesse  full  of  Trees  and
Mountaines.  When  wee  were  on  the  top  of  this  Moun-
taine,  we  saw  the  maine  Sea  on  our  right  hand,  and  small
Ships  sayling  towards  Joppa. About  three  or  foure  of

Been.  the  clocke,  we  came  to  a  ruinous  Village  called  Beere,  but
of  old  (as  it  is  reported)  Beersheba,  which  in  former  times
was  a  great  Citie : And  it  is  said  to  be  the  place  where

Jerusalem.  Joseph  and  Mary  comming  from  Jerusalem  (the  feast
being  ended)  missed  the  Child  Jesus,  and  sought  him
sorrowing ;  and  returning  to  Jerusalem,  found  him  in  the
Temple  amidst  the  Doctors,  hearing  them  and  posing  them.
Our  purpose  was  to  lodge  here  all  night,  being  all  of  us
wearie  and  hungrie,  and  all  our  provision  spent.  But
finding  nothing  here  to  be  had  for  money,  either  for  Man
or  Horse ;  and  understanding  that  Jerusalem  was  but  ten
miles  off,  wee  went  on  in  our  way  somewhat  faintly,  five
or  sixe  miles,  and  then  beholding  the  prospect  of  the  Citie,
wee  were  somewhat  cheered  and  revived,  and  solaced  our
selves  with  singing  of  Psalmes,  untill  wee  came  neere  unto
the  Citie.  Many  Greekes  dwelling  in  Jerusalem,  seeing
us  afarre  off,  came  to  meet  us,  supposing  their  Patriarch
had  beene  in  our  companie,  who  came  two  or  three  dayes
after  us.

We  dismounted  from  our  Horses  at  the  West  gate  of

Joppa  gate,  the  Citie,  called  Joppa  gate,  or  the  Castle  gate ;  which  is
a  very  strong  gate  of  Iron,  with  thirteene  Peeces  of  Brasse-
ordnance  planted  on  the  wall  about  the  gate.  Wee  stayed  in
the  porch  of  the  gate,  and  might  not  be  admitted  into  the
Citie,  untill  wee  were  searched  by  an  Officer  (as  the  manner
is.)  In  the  meane  time  there  came  to  us  two  Italian
Friers,  viz.  Padre  Angelo,  and  Padre  Aurelio,  and  kissed
our  hands,  and  bade  us  welcome,  and  told  us,  that  two

300

WILLIAM BIDDULPH  ad.

1601.

other Englishmen were at their house, viz. Master  Master
Timberley,  and  Master  Borell.  Ff/'l?  ,  j

TTT1 J  J  11-1  1  1  *-rk t  -_i hath  published

When  we  were  searched  without  the  gate  by  a  1  urkish  a  ho'oke  0fhis
Officer,  and  delivered  up  our  weapons  to  the  Porter  to  Voyage.
keepe  for  us  in  the  gate-house  untill  our  returne  (because
no  Christian  may  enter  into  Jerusalem  with  weapons)  these
two  Padres  led  us  to  their  Monasterie ;  at  the  gate
whereof  wee  were  searched  againe  by  another  Turkish
Officer  before  wee  might  enter  into  the  house.  For  the
office  of  the  former  Searcher  at  the  gate  of  the  Citie  was
onely  to  receive  the  weapons  of  all  Christians,  and  deliver
them  safe  to  them  againe  at  their  departure.  But  this
Searcher  went  further  and  searched  all  our  carriage,  which
he  caused  to  be  opened,  to  see  whether  we  had  any  Gun-
powder, or  any  other  engins  there.  For  they  are  very
suspicious  of  all  Christians,  fearing,  lest  for  devotion  to
the  place,  they  should  worke  treason ;  therefore  they  suffer
not  Christians  to  enter  into  the  Citie  weaponed,  lest  they
make  insurrection  against  them  when  they  are  many
together,  and  conquer  the  Citie,  as  heretofore  they  have
done.  To  this  end  also  is  the  Citie  walled  about  with
strong  walls,  and  fortified  with  foure  strong  gates,  and  a
Castle,  (but  by  Sultan  Solyman)  and  every  gate  well
planted  with  Ordnance  for  feare  of  Christians.  And  partly
for  hope  have  they  environed  this  Citie  with  such  strong
walls,  that  Christians  for  devotion  to  the  place,  might
come  and  build  within  the  walls,  and  bee  subject  to  the
Turke.  For  though  their  walls  be  large  and  strong,  yet
there  is  great  roome  within  the  walls  to  build  more  houses
then  are  there,  for  there  are  fields  of  Corne  within  the
walls  of  the  Citie;  and  the  houses  stand  very  thin,  [H.viii.
scattered,  and  dispersed,  here  one,  and  there  two  or  three  I353-D

together ; there  is  not  one  faire  street  in  all  Jerusalem  as
it  now  is.

After  they  had  thus  narrowly  searched  all  our  carriage,  Entertayn-
even  to  our  cases  of  Bottles,  we  were  admitted  into  the  men.t wtth  the
Monastery ; at the entrance wherinto, met us Master nen'
Timberley,  and  Master  Boreel,  and  then  Signior  Franciscus

301

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1601.

Mannerba,  the  Padre  Guardian  of  the  Monasterie,  and  all
the  rest  in  order,  and  bade  us  welcome,  and  led  us  into  a
faire  Parlour,  and  set  good  cheere  before  us,  and  served  us
themselves.  After  Supper  we  delivered  them  our  Letters
which  wee  had  brought  from  the  Venice  Consull  of  Aleppo,
and  other  Italian  Merchants  there,  in  our  behalfe.  Which
when  they  had  read,  the  Guardian  said,  our  custome  is,
when  strangers  come  to  us,  to  call  them  the  first  night  to
Masse,  and  to  Confession,  and  to  give  every  man  a  Candle
to  hold  in  his  hand  at  Masse  time ;  and  at  night  to  wash
their  feet  and  to  bring  them  to  bed,  and  to  many  other
ceremonies,  during  the  whole  time  of  their  continuance
there.  But  as  for  us,  they  understood  by  Letters  what
we  were ;  and  told  us  that  we  were  so  highly  commended
by  their  Patrons  and  Benefactors,  the  Venice  Consull,  and
Merchants  of  Aleppo,  that  if  they  should  shew  us  halfe  the
favour  which  was  required  at  their  hands,  they  should
themselves  lie  without  doores  and  suffer  us  to  rule  and
dominiere  at  our  pleasures.  And  that  therefore  they
would  not  urge  us  to  any  thing  against  our  consciences,
but  give  free  libertie  both  of  persons  and  consciences,  as  if
wee  were  in  England,  or  in  our  owne  houses  elsewhere ;
and  so  much  the  rather,  because  they  understood  our
Merchants  were  rich,  and  hoped  to  gaine  by  us.  In
regard  whereof,  although  it  were  Lent,  wherein  they
eate  no  flesh,  yet  offered  us  Hens,  Egges,  Milke :
any  thing  that  was  there  to  be  had  for  money,  they
requested  us  to  command  it.  And  during  the  time
of  our  continuance  there,  he  commanded  one  Padre
Aurelio  to  attend  upon  us,  and  see  that  wee  wanted
nothing ;  and  another  of  his  brethren,  one  Padre
Angelo,  to  be  our  guide  abroad,  and  to  shew  us  all
ancient  Monuments  and  places  worth  seeing,  either  in  the
Citie  or  out  of  the  Citie.

These  kind  speeches  being  used,  they  brought  us  to  our
chambers  where  wee  should  lodge  all  night,  and  provided
for  every  man  severally  a  good  neat  Bed  with  faire  sheets,
and  all  things  very  wholsome  and  handsome,  where  wee

302

WILLIAM BIDDULPH  a.d.

1601.

slept  sweetly,  and  refreshed  our  wearied  bodies  all  that
night  very  comfortably.

But  although  they  dealt  thus  kindly  with  us  (at  the
instance  of  their  Benefactors)  in  giving  us  libertie  of
conscience,  yet  they  deale  not  so  with  others.  For  some
I  doe  know  who  have  beene  there,  and  made  no  conscience
to  doe  as  they  have  done.  Wherefore,  I  admonish  those  4n  admonition
who  have  a  desire  to  travell  to  Jerusalem  hereafter,  to  * m .. as
take  heed  to  themselves,  that  they  make  not  shipwracke  jerusa/em,
of  conscience ;  for  if  they  come  not  well  commended,  or
well  moneyed,  or  both,  there  is  no  being  for  them,  except
they  partake  with  them  in  their  idolatrous  services.  True
it  is,  that  the  Turkes  give  libertie  of  conscience  unto  all
that  come  thither ;  but  they  give  not  entertaynment  unto
any  Christians  in  their  houses.  And  the  Greeke  Patriarchs
are  poore,  and  not  able  to  protect  such  as  come  unto  them
for  refuge.  These  Padres,  though  they  bee  Papists,  yet
have  they  rich  Benefactors,  and  want  nothing,  and  (for  the
most  part)  very  kind  and  curteous  to  strangers  in  all
things,  libertie  of  conscience  onely  excepted,  wherein  they
seeke  to  make  others  like  unto  themselves,  and  to  seduce
them  from  their  Faith,  and  to  winne  them  to  the  Church
of  Rome :  and  offer  unto  them  who  have  money  in  their
purses,  to  make  them  Knights  of  the  Sepulcher ;  but  no
good  English  Subject  will  accept  of  that  order  of  Knight-
hood ;  for  at  the  receiving  thereof,  they  sweare  to  bee  true
to  the  Pope,  and  to  the  King  of  Spaine,  and  to  other
things,  which  no  man  can  doe  with  a  good  conscience.
And  this  kindnesse  and  libertie  of  conscience,  which  wee
found  amongst  them,  wee  imputed  not  so  much  to  the
men,  as  to  our  owne  money :  for  it  cost  us  charo,  viz.
one  hundred  Duckets  for  our  entertaynment.

After  wee  had  rested  one  night  in  Jerusalem,  the  first
day  wee  walked  about  the  Citie  our  selves  without  our
guide,  onely  to  view  the  Citie,  wee  found  it  exceeding  hot,
and  hotter  then  it  is  usually  at  Midsummer  in  England :
It  seemed  strange  unto  mee,  how  it  should  once  bee  so
cold,  that  Peter  should  creepe  to  the  fire,  and  now  (at

303

A.D.
l60I.

[Il.viii.

1354]

*lf  any  think
it  ill  that  a
Christian
Ambassador
should  accom-
pany the
Turke  in  this
wan'e  against
Christendom:
they  may  please
to  understand,
that  his  intents
were  to  doe
service  to  the
Christians,  if
occasions  were
offered  for
peace:  as  also
he  did  in
deliverie  of  the
Emperors  Ser-
vants here
mentioned,
lie.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

the  same  season)  so  hot  that  wee  could  not  indure  the
heate  of  the  Sunne.  But  after  I  had  beene  there  a  few
dayes,  the  very  place  resolved  that  doubt :  for  there  fall
great  deawes,  and  before  the  Sunne  have  dried  it  up,  it  is
cold,  and  in  the  night  season  (about  that  time  of  the  yeere)
somewhat  cold,  as  I  felt  by  experience  when  I  slept  in  the
fields  all  night.  And  Peter  having  watched  with  Christ
in  the  night,  might  well  be  cold  in  the  morning,  before  the
heat  of  the  Sunne  had  expelled  cold.

But  here  wee  will  breake  off,  having  with  Master
Sandys  his  eyes  curiously  viewed  Jerusalems  Holies  in  the
former  Chapter.

Chap. X.

The  Journey  of  Edward  Barton  Esquire,  her
Majesties  Ambassador  with  the  Grand  Signior,
otherwise  called  the  Great  Turke,  in  Constanti-
nople, Sultan  *  Mahumet  Chan.  Written  by
Sir  Thomas  Glover  then  Secretarie  to  the
Ambassador,  and  since  employed  in  that  Hon-
ourable Function  by  his  Majestie,  to  Sultan
Achmet.  Two  Letters  are  also  inserted,
written  from  Agria,  by  the  said  Ambassador
Barton.

Irst,  the  Ambassador  well  mounted,  and
his  two  spare  Horses,  with  a  Coach  with
foure  Horses ;  next  before  him  his
Chauses,  and  an  Enterpreter,  with  three
Janizaries :  and  before  the  Chauses,  and
Janizaries,  his  men,  (beeing  twelve  in
number)  in  Liveries  rode  before  him,
and  foure  Gentlemen  next  after  him :  and  foure
Coaches  with  the  Christian  Captives  (being  three  and
twentie  in  number)  the  Family  of  Signior  Crotskii,
the  Emperour  his  late  Ambassador  in  Constantinople,
which  hee  redeemed  from  the  Great  Turke,  and  had  licence

3°4

SIR THOMAS GLOVER  ad.

1596.

to  carrie  them  a  long  with  him,  and  to  send  them  into  their
owne  Countrey,  allowing  and  giving  him  the  foure
Coaches,  with  two  Horses  in  each  Coach,  and  a  man  to
tend  on  every  Coach.  Lastly,  thirtie  sixe  Camels  for
carriage  of  provision,  and  to  every  sixe  Camels,  two  men
to  attend  on  them,  to  lade  and  unlade  as  occasion  served
(which  in  Turkish,  are  called  Deuedzilers)  of  them  there
were  twelve  in  all  wayting  on  the  Camels :  More  the
Chauses  man  and  another  Turke,  called  Mahomet,  who
was  recommended  to  the  Ambassadour  to  be  his  Lackey,  to
runne  by  his  Horse  untill  wee  came  to  Agria.

Now  on  Friday  being  the  second  day  of  July,  1596.  the
said  Ambassador  parted  his  house  (which  is  in  the  Vines
of  Pera,)  and  tooke  his  Journey,  having  to  accompany  him
that  first  day,  Master  John  Sanderson  Merchant  (who  was
by  him  left  an  Agent  or  Logotenent  until  his  returne)
Jonas  Aldrich  Merchant,  and  John  Field  a  Physician  :  who
brought  him  that  day  unto  a  place,  called  Aquadulce,  and
there  pitched  their  Tents,  remayning  there  that  night,  and
the  next  day  ensuing.  On  Sunday  morning  at  Sunne
rising,  we  departed  from  Aquadulce,  and  came  to  Ponte
Piccolo,  about  mid-day,  which  is  some  fifteene  miles  distant
from  Aquadulce,  and  there  wee  pitched  our  Tents.  On
Munday,  before  the  breake  of  the  day,  parted  thence
about  ten  of  the  clocke  in  the  morning,  and  arrived  at
Ponte  Grande,  which  is  about  twelve  miles  distant ;  where
having  pitched  our  Pavillions  the  Ambassadour  sent  his
Chaus,  and  the  Drogue-men,  with  the  Grand  Signior,  his
Commission  to  the  Cady  of  the  said  Towne,  for  his  allow-
ance of  provision,  who  sent  him  five  Sheepe,  two  hundred
Loaves  of  Bread,  five  Meatres  of  Wine,  one  loade  of
Hay,  with  twentie  Kylowes  of  Barley.

On  Tuesday,  before  day,  we  parted  Ponte  Grande,  and
by  Sun-rising  wee  came  to  a  small  Village,  called  Comber-
gasi,  where  the  Ambassador  his  people  broke  their  fast,
and  after  an  houres  stay  parted  thence,  and  came  to  a
Towne,  called  Celebria,  about  eleven  a  clocke,  which  is  OY  Selimbria.
some  ten  miles  distant  from  our  last  Lodging.  There  also
viii  305  u

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1596.

the  Ambassadour  sent  his  Commission  to  the  Cady  of  the
said  Towne,  who  sent  him  three  Sheepe,  two  hundred
Loaves  of  Bread,  ten  Meaters  of  Wine,  one  loade  of  Hay,
and  twentie  Kyllowes  of  Barley,  wee  pitched  our  Tents  a
quarter  of  a  mile  distant  from  the  Towne ;  and  an  houre
within  the  night,  the  Moone  being  up,  parted  thence.

The  twentieth,  wee  were  to  passe  through  a  great  Wood,
betwixt  two  Mountaynes  that  day,  and  in  the  night  to
keepe  watch.  These  men  are  Bulghars,  beeing  appointed
by  the  Grand  Signior,  to  guard  all  Travellers  (I  meane  of
the  Campe)  that  come  that  way,  for  which  service  the  said

Bulgaria.  Bulgharians  pay  no  Tribute  to  the  Turke.  Then  wee
came  to  a  Village,  called  Servia,  which  is  at  the  entrance
betweene  those  two  Mountaynes,  and  no  other  passage
but  one  that  goeth  to  Wallachia,  all  the  Countrey  else
within  these  Mountaynes,  beeing  as  it  were  environed
with  mightie  steepe,  woodie  hils,  as  though  they  were  wals
of  strong  Cities ;  this  was  the  passage  that  Julius  Caesar
passing  out  of  Servia,  lost  so  many  thousand  men  before
he  could  gaine  it ;  for  this  passage  is  as  though  it  were
hewen  or  cut  out  betwixt  these  two  Mountaynes.  At  the
mouth  or  rather  the  entrance  on  the  North-side,  it  is
fortified  with  a  mightie  great  wall  from  Mountayne  to
Mountayne,  and  a  strong  Castle  in  the  midst,  with  a  great
Gate  to  passe  thorow,  there  is  yet  to  be  seene  part  of  the
wals,  or  rather  fragments :  the  wals  adjoyning  to  the  Gate
are  marvellous  loose,  and  shake,  readie  to  fall :  some  two
houres  before  night,  we  came  to  the  foot  of  the  Mountayne,
and  there  pitched  our  Tents  a  mile  from  a  Towne,  called
Erchpnia ;  being  from  Tartarb-sardgi  eight  and  twentie
miles,  this  day  and  nights  travell  was  all  betwixt  these  two
Mountaynes.

The  five  and  twentieth,  we  came  to  the  mouth  or
entrance  of  a  strong  passage  beeing  tenne  miles  long
betwixt  two  Mountaynes,  the  way  winding  in  and  out,  as  it

[Il.viii.  were,  hewen,  or  cut  out  of  the  Mountaynes,  on  both  sides

1 3 5S-J  verie  loftie : this  place  is  of  a  wonderfull  strength  for

resisting  of  the  Enemies : Now  little  after  mid-day,  we

306]

SIR THOMAS GLOVER  ad.

1596.

came  to  pitch  our  Tents  towards  the  end  of  the  said
passage,  by  a  faire  River  side.

The  sixe  and  twentieth,  passing  along  the  River  side,
on  the  high  way,  wee  found  two  men  most  miserably  put
to  death,  having  each  of  them  a  stake  thrust  in  at  his
Fundament,  through  his  bodie,  and  so  out  by  his  necke ;
the  stake  being  set  up  right  on  end :  the  cause  was  for
killing  of  a  Janizarie,  they  being  Christians.  The  Grand
Signior  passing  by,  caused  them  so  to  suffer.

The  eight  and  twentieth,  we  came  to  a  Towne,  called
Neesa,  and  a  little  before  our  comming  to  the  same,  we  Neesa.
saw  two  men  staked  as  afore-said,  who  were  Transilvanians,
came  purposely  to  spie  and  view  the  Campe :  also  at  this
Townes  end,  there  were  of  Christians  heads  flead,  and
stopt  full  of  Hay  hanged  on  posts  by  strings,  to  the
number  of  three  hundred  which  foure  moneths  before  were
slaine  by  Turkes,  under  Mahomet  Bassa,  at  Bosna :  From
the  entrance  of  the  straight  passage  to  this  place  are  ten
miles,  and  from  Sofpa  to  this  place  all  high  Mountaynes,
rockie  and  troublesome  to  travell :  these  Mountaynes  part
Servia  and  Sclavqnia,  this  Citie  is  situated  in  a  verie
delectable  Valley,  having  towards  the  West  side  a  faire
Plaine,  that  stretcheth  it  selfe  towards  Albania  and
Macedonia,  here  we  rested  all  that  day  and  night.

The  third  of  August,  wee  came  to  spread  our  Tents
close  by  the  mayne  Campe,  halfe  a  mile  distant  from
Belgrado,  which  is  a  marvellous  great  Plaine  adjoyning
to  the  Citie,  and  about  the  midst  or  the  Campe,  the  Grand
Signior  his  Pavillion  is  alwayes  placed ;  and  now  hard  by
his  Pavillion  by  force  of  hands  was  raised  a  small  Hill,
upon  which  was  growne  a  Haw-thorne,  cut  artificially
spreading,  which  made  a  marvellous  good  shadow :  every
Evening  the  Great  Turke  would  ascend  into  it  to  view  his
Campe,  and  to  be  seene  of  his  people,  being  a  custome
amongst  the  Turkes,  his  Souldiers  in  the  Wars  to  see  their  [Ikviii.
King,  once  in  foure  and  twentie  houres.  „ h

The  seventh,  the  Ambassador  went  to  the  chiefe  Vizier,  Bassa  Chiefe
Abraham  Bassa,  about  the  Captives  he  had  in  his  charge,  Fizier,

3°7

A.D.

1596.

Christians
delivered.

Bridge  of
Boates.

Armie  eight
dayes  in
passing.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

and  in  conference  with  him  presently,  the  said  slaves  were
sent  for,  and  beeing  brought  before  the  Bassa,  in  the
presence  of  the  Ambassador  and  other  Viziers,  and  great
personages,  their  deliverance  being  pronounced,  to  be  sent
by  the  Ambassador  into  their  Countrey,  it  was  granted
by  them  all ;  whereupon  the  said  slaves  kissing  the  Bassa
his  feet,  as  the  manner  of  the  Turkes  is  for  such  a  grace ;
and  the  Ambassador  also  giving  them  thankes,  tooke  his
leave  and  so  departed,  carrying  his  Captives  along  with
him  to  his  Pavillion.

The  thirteenth,  about  Quindi,  the  Ambassador  with  his
company  departed  from  Belgrado,  riding  by  the  South-
west end  of  the  Castle,  came  to  the  River  Lava,  neere
where  it  entreth  into  the  Danubium,  to  passe  the  bridge
purposely  made  for  the  Grand  Signior,  his  Armie  to  passe
the  same,  which  bridge  is  artificially  builded  upon  fortie
five  great  Boats  made  for  that  purpose  like  Lighters,  but
much  broader,  deeper  and  flat  bottomed,  the  length  of  the
same  bridge  is  some  one  hundred  paces,  the  breadth
betwixt  the  Rayles  fortie  foot :  for  space  of  eight  dayes  the
Armie  was  going  over,  in  such  sort  as  a  man  could  not
passe  for  the  continuall  presse  of  the  people.

Next  morning  the  Grand  Signior  parted  thence,  and
some  two  houres  after,  the  Ambassador  followed  :  now  the
ordinarie  riding  of  the  Great  Turke,  was  in  this  manner
(not  speaking  of  the  whole  Armie,  which  went  before  and
followed  him,  but  only  of  those  that  attended  on  his  owne
person)  before  him  rides  one  thousand  of  the  bravest  and
best  armed  Horsemen,  every  one  with  his  Lance.  Next
them  some  three  hundred  Chauses ;  then  one  hundred
Foot-men  next  before  him,  with  Bowes  &  Arrowes ;  then
followes  his  Youths,  all  for  the  most  part  at  mans  state
(called  Jehoglans)  about  some  three  hundred  clothed  in
Gownes  of  Brocado,  of  Gold  and  Silver,  all  of  one  fashion,
and  a  Cap  on  their  heads,  made  in  manner  of  a  French-
hood,  of  course  red  cloath  :  in  the  midst  amongst  them,
are  fortie  or  fiftie  men  riding  on  Camels,  Horses  and
Mules,  who  play  on  Drummes,  Fifes,  and  many  other  sorts

308

SIR THOMAS GLOVER  ad.

1596.

of  Instruments,  continually  all  the  way  along :  after  these
follow  some  fortie  Coaches  ;  then  his  ordinary  Servants,  as
Stable-men,  Kitcheners,  and  such  like :  this  day  travelling
till  about  eleven  of  the  clock,  we  came  and  spread  our
Tents,  as  neere  the  Grand  Signiors  Pavillion  as  we  could,
and  close  by  the  Danubium :  whence  we  came,  to  this
place,  is  about  some  nine  miles.

The  next  morning,  the  Grand  Signior  departed  from
Slanconie,  and  about  ten  of  the  clocke  came  to  spread  his  Slanconie,
Pavillion  under  the  side  of  an  hill,  close  on  the  other  side
of  the  Danubium,  some  seven  miles  from  the  Towne
aforesaid ;  all  alongst  this  Hill  full  of  Vineyards,  where
the  Souldiers  gathering  and  spilling  Grapes,  were  com-
playned  of ;  whereupon,  sixe  of  them  beeing  taken,  were
hanged  on  Trees  in  the  Vineyards,  and  after,  a  strict
commandement  given  not  to  take  any  thing  perforce  from
any  man,  upon  paine  of  death :  here  the  Ambassador  was
sent  for  to  the  Bassa,  and  readie  to  depart,  the  Bassa  willed
the  Ambassador,  that  the  next  morning,  as  the  Grand
Signior  should  passe  along  on  his  way,  hee  should  bee
ready  to  salute  him,  for  hee  said,  that  he  asked  for  him,
and  marvelled  hee  could  not  see  him.  Upon  this,  taking
his  leave,  departed ;  and  so  went  to  the  great  Hodgia  his
Tent,  and  after  awhile  to  his  owne  Tents.  The  next
morning,  perceiving  the  Great  Turkes  departure,  the
Ambassador  with  his  men  about  him,  all  on  Horse-backe
salute  his  Highnesse  according  to  their  manner,  bowing,
at  severall  times,  and  the  Grand  Signior  beholding  the
Ambassador  with  his  retinue,  also  did  bow  himselfe  unto
them  very  kindly,  and  so  past  on  his  way,  for  that  the
Grand  Signior,  upon  the  newes  aforesaid,  was  desirous  to
see  the  Ambasadour,  which  was  cause  that  the  Bassa  willed
the  Ambassadour  to  doe  as  aforesaid.

The  five  and  twentieth,  the  Grand  Signior  parted  this
place  (in  the  morning  early)  the  rather  to  hasten  towards
Hatuan,  not  that  hee  himselfe  in  person  would  goe,  but
being  neere  the  way  to  Agria,  whereto  he  went  to  lay  his
siedge,  might  upon  any  occasion  send  more  succour ; the

309

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

i596-

Ambassador  also  followed  him  with  his  retinue,  finding

(as  before)  all  plaine  Champion  grounds,  full  of  Grasse,
and  Hay : The  Grand  Signior  willing  to  see  his  whole
Huge  Armle. Armie,  gave  order  that  they  should  all  troope  together
that  day,  that  hee  might  have  full  view  of  them,  which
was  done  accordingly,  and  a  sight  almost  uncredible,  over-
spreading a  Plaine,  further  then  any  man  could  discerne.
The  Ambassador,  to  have  a  full  view  of  them,  mounted  a
small  Hill, about the midst  of  that  Plaine, somewhat
higher  then  the  rest ; from  whence  beholding  them  with
great  wonder,  round  about  so  farre  as  could  not  be  dis-
cerned,  the  Plaine  was  over-spread (as  aforesaid) with
Quindi,  is people  and  carriages. And  about  Quindi^  we  came  to
their  Vespers spread  our  Pavilions  neere  unto  a  ruinated  Towne ; for
or  Even-song,  ^^  there  was  no  body  dwelling:  in  the  same,  we  did  not

about  three  or  .  *

foure  in  the demand  the  name,  being  from  the  place  wee  came,  some

aftemoone,  at twelve  miles :  All  along  this  way  wee  saw  many  reliques

which  time of  Castles  and  Townes,  which  by  these  warres,  afore-time,

they  call  to anj  noW5  have  beene,  and  are  destroyed  and  pulled  downe.

their  steeples ^he  twe^h  °f  September,  the  Grand  Signior  removed

neere  Agria,  within  full  sight  thereof,  and  there  hath  laid

his  siege,  commanding  a  Turret  of  wood  to  bee  made  very

high,  to  the  end  hee  might  view  the  whole  Campe,  to  see

all  what  past  at  his  pleasure. All  the  way  from  Belgrado,

hitherto  newes  were  bruited,  that  Maximillian  was  under

Vatiae,  where  hee  kept  long  Councell,  yet  hitherto  (though

he  had  full  power  of  the  Emperor)  makes  no  show  nor

[Il.viii.  signe  to  meete  the  great  Turke,  or  succour  Agria. The

*357-]  same  night  the  Janisaries  built  and  entred  their  Trenches,

placing  good  store  of  Artillarie  therein  ; having  Abraham

Bassa  the  Visere,  and  Assan  Bassa  the  Beglerbie  of  Grecia,

to  their  guard,  and  began  to  beate  the  East  part  of  the

Castle ; also  Giafar  Bassa  and  Mahomet  Bassa,  the  North

part,  the  Bassa  of  Natolia  and  Caramania,  the  West  part.

The  thirteenth,  the  Hungarians  set  their  Suburbs  on  fire,

which  were  very  well  fenced  with  a  high  Wall,  yet  dis-

tructing  their  forces,  fearing  that  the  Turkes  once  entring

the  same,  should  make  a  Fortresse  of  offence,  fired  the

310

SIR THOMAS GLOVER  a.d.

1596.

same,  and  fled  unto  the  Castle  :  Now  the  Turkes  perceiving
them  to  be  gone  up  into  the  Castle,  scaled  the  out  wals  of
this  Towne,  and  tooke  such  pilledges  as  the  fire  had  left
there :  The  chiefest  of  the  Inhabitants  of  this  Citie,  fled
into  the  Countries  thereabouts,  before  the  Grand  Signior
his  aproaching  to  the  said  siege,  and  the  rest  retyred  them-
selves into  the  Castle,  as  aforesaid,  with  as  much  goods  as
they  could.  The  fourteenth,  the  Turkes  entred,  and
burned  and  spoyled  the  rest  of  the  Suburbs,  with  a  great
Church,  but  were  soone  repelled,  and  the  Church,  with
the  rest,  for  that  time  was  well  defended.  The  same  day
Cigalla  was  appointed  out  Skire,  with  a  troope  of  light
Horse-men,  to  see  that  no  succour  should  come  to  the
Castle.

The  twentieth,  Turkes  giving  fire  to  a  Mine,  it  proved
contrarie  to  their  minds,  the  force  comming  forth,  and  not
into  the  Castle :  After  which,  the  defendants  perceiving
it  tooke  courage,  and  assaulted  the  Trenches  of  the  ven-
turers, whom  they  found  unprovided  of  defence ;  slew
many,  and  taking  some  of  them  and  their  Banners,  retired
into  the  Castle  with  their  prey,  and  there  set  the  Banners
upon  the  wals,  to  terrifie  the  Turkes.  The  two  and
twentieth  at  night,  the  Turkes  filled  the  Castle  Ditches
with  Wood  and  Hay,  but  because  they  were  not  ready,  or
devised  to  cover  the  same  with  earth,  as  it  ought  to  be;
the  defendents  seeing  it,  presently  with  Wild-fire  con-
sumed it ;  so  for  that  time  frustrated  their  desire,  yet
continuing  their  batterie,  made  foure  severall  places  of  the
Castle  wals  assaultable.  The  three  and  twentieth,  by
night  had  they  provided  sufficient  wood,  and  other  matter
to  fill  the  Ditches ;  in  the  meane  time,  the  Beglerbie  of
Janik  being  sent  hither  to  the  siege,  without  order  from
the  Grand  Signior  or  the  chiefest  Bassa,  and  word  being
brought,  the  Emperour  was  strong  in  those  parts,  if  pardon
had  not  beene  gotten  for  him,  he  had  lost  his  head ;  yet
presently  was  sent  backe  againe  from  whence  he  came,
upon  his  owne  proper  cost  and  charges,  and  that  was  his
penaltie  for  the  offence.

311

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1596.

The  foure  and  twentieth,  the  Turkes  giving  fire  to  a
Mine,  had  made  a  great  breach,  and  thereupon  gave  a
generall  assault,  which  indured  most  fearefully  on  both
sides,  for  the  space  of  an  houre :  yet  at  last  the  Turkes
were  beaten  backe.  After  a  little  rest  made,  began  a  new
assault,  which  continued  two  houres ;  in  the  which,  the
Turkes  got  the  better,  gayning  the  wals  and  the  Artillery
on  the  same,  which  presently  they  turned  upon  the  Castle.
The  twentie  five,  the  Turks  gave  an  assault  upon  the  inner
part  of  the  Castle,  but  repulsed  with  a  great  slaughter.
The  twentie  sixe,  the  Turkes  attempting  to  undermine
the  Castle,  and  presently  thereupon,  to  give  a  generall
assault :  but  the  Christians  having  by  some  meanes  know-
ledge thereof,  to  hinder  the  Turkes  they  should  not  give
fire  thereunto,  and  to  have  more  time  themselves  to  counter-
mine theirs,  went  and  cast  great  quantitie  of  unbeaten
corne  on  that  side  the  wall,  so  that  the  Turkes  could  not
wel  stand  to  come  nigh  to  dig  or  bring  powder,  so  for  that
day  the  assault  was  deferred.  The  eight  &  twentieth,  in
the  morning,  first  fired  a  Mine  which  cast  up  the  Castle
wall,  the  breadth  of  two  Carts,  and  presently  upon  the
same,  gave  a  new  assault ;  but  because  the  Janisaries  was
not  backed,  the  assault  tooke  no  effect,  but  about  two
houres  after,  refreshing  themselves,  and  gathering  more
strength,  about  mid-day  began  the  assault  afresh,  which
indured  till  night ;  but  because  of  the  great  raine  that  at
the  instant  fell,  they  prevailed  not,  though  on  both  sides
many  slaine,  and  the  Castle  put  in  great  jeopardie.  On
Wednesday  the  nine  and  twentieth,  and  Thursday  the
thirtieth,  still  skirmishing  for  all  it  rained.

The  first  of  October,  as  before  said,  continually  skir-
mishing, it  chanced  that  an  English-man  a  Trumpeter,
fled  out  of  the  Castle,  and  being  taken  by  the  Turkes,  was
brought  to  the  Grand  Signior,  and  being  examined,
advised  him  of  the  weake  state  thereof :  according  to
whose  report,  in  the  morning  being  Saturday  the  second
of  October,  it  was  rendred  upon  condition  they  might
depart  with  Bag  and  Baggage :  which  was  granted. The

312

49

P

47

3^

4*

hk.  ©

7/OTV

U

•^

&

_,  ere  r&eretzaz

f(W

4?

tn1

5tftf

m™

Pa

W

rTAtba'RraaItsSfu1'

3rJ*ccg

uMuvech

.&**-*&

^BanhaJjm.

4^

-'X*v^  V  Kcrezhanya,

.Ph/lkien^  co^fa*

iHlo  ran  talie  lui

sydcdhas

erf«>J

TCoh'ant?

i

(jlvdt/ktA

^y.

Jurrtajni*

cm

3iiU.  Germanxa .,_

£i$imk^'*S&k£%$  ■

anuPutJ  flu.  - Crah'haih^
Jiubenbenj

4*

4  A  JlerUies 4 J

^~^4\ '-^

4f

47

4*

^  I

HONDIUS HIS MAP OF HUNGARY

SIR THOMAS GLOVER  a.d.

1596.

third,  being  licenced  to  depart  according  to  the  Grand
Signior  his  promise,  under  the  charge  of  the  Beglerbie  of
Natolia.  At  their  departure  forth  of  the  Castle,  they
were  spoyled  of  their  goods  carried  with  them,  and  most
of  them  slaine  by  the  Spahies,  Janisaries  of  Hatuan,  and
other  Turks,  not  without  suspition  of  the  Grand  Signior
his  knowledge,  because  he  used  no  severe  punishment  for
the  breaking  of  his  commandement,  and  his  owne  promise.
There  were  in  number  about  one  thousand  Souldiers,  and
as  many  more  men,  women,  and  children  Inhabitants,
which  were  saved  and  kept  to  remaine  Subjects  there  :
the  chiefe  Captaines  were  kept  and  promised  their  libertie.
The  chiefe  was  Honnger,  Signior  Paulo  :  The  Coronell
Gulielmo  Trozka,  Johannes  Jacobus,  Comes  Atarne
Bohemo,  Johannes  Kinskye  de  Tetan  ;  and  Count  Rugero
Italiano.

A  Letter  written  by  Master  Edward  Barton  Am-  [il.viii.
bassador,  to Master Sanderson; inscribed Al  x358.]

Molto  Mag.  Sig.  Gio.  Sanderson,  &c.

LOving  friend,  I  have  written  twice  unto  you,  as  well  These  two
from  Bellograd  as  also  Solnok,  of  what  in  my  voyage  Otters  written
hitherto  had  passed,  but  my  Letters  were  intercepted  and  sador  his^wne
torne,  brought  unto  my  hands  againe,  and  being  of  no  hands,  I  have
great  importance,  I  will  no  more  reply  them,  but  advise  fir  his  sake
you  of  the  Grand  Signior,  and  our  arrivall  at  Agria,  which  and  the'm
happened  the  twelfth  of  September,  and  the  selfe  same  ^jf Muter
night  he  made  his  trenches  and  batteries  in  six  severall  Sanderson.
places  ; the  Vice-Roy  in  one  place,  the  Beglerbie  of  Grecia
in  another, the  Beglerbie  of  Natolia  in the third, the
Janisaries  in  the  fourth,  Jeffer  Bassa  Eunuch  in  the  fifth,
Mahemed  Bassa  Gera  in  the  sixt ;  Cigal  Ogli  was  Captaine
over  the  light  Horse-men,  to  scoure  the  coasts  on  all  sides,
that  no  succour  should  come,  and  to  learne  advice  of  the
Emperours  proceedings  and  designes.

The  thirteenth,  the  Inhabitants  set  all  their  Suburbs  on
fire,  which  might  be  little  lesse  then  Gallata,  which  though
they were well defenced with a strong wall, yet the

313

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

i596-

defendants  being  few  in  number,  and  distrusting  to  their

owne  strength,  left  the  defence  of  them,  and  retired  them-
selves within  the  Castle. The  sixteenth,  the  Janisaries
offered  a  generall  skirmish,  even  under  the  Gate  of  the
Castle,  where  on  both  sides  many  were  slaine,  but  the
Hungars  keeping  themselves  close  within  the  wals,  and
the Janisaries tyred, soone retired. The seventeenth,
eighteenth,  and  nineteenth,  they  intended  to  undermine
the  Castle,  and  the  twentieth,  put  fire  thereto,  but  not
succeeding  to  their  mindes  (though  they  valiantly  attempted
to  enter  the  breach)  they  gave  courage  to  the  defendants
to  make  issue  to  mutuall  damage. The  foure  and  twen-
tieth, the  assailants  having  made  another  breach,  valiantly
entred  the  same,  but  not  being  seconded  with  fresh  forces,
were  repelled,  yet  two  houres  after,  in  the  same  day,  taking
on  them  better  courage,  and  more  valiantly  seconded,  gave
a  new  assault,  when  by  chance,  a  woman  in  the  Castle
setting,  by  chance,  fire  on  a  Barrell  of  Powder,  and  the
Souldiers  of  the  Castle  thinking  it  was  a  Mine  fired  in  the
Castle, for feare thereof  retiring themselves, gave the
Turkes  courage  to  enter  a  small  but  strong  Bastion,  builded
for  defence  of  a  weake  part  of  the  Castle,  which  they
valiantly  even  to  the  last  defended,  and  ever  after,  with
myning  and  counter-myning,  continuall  assaults  and  skir-
mishes on  both  parts  fighting,  to  the  extreame  losse  of  the
defendants. The  first  of  October,  an  English  Trumpetter
escaped  out  and  fled  to  the  Vice-Roy,  requiring  life  and
libertie,  and  declaring  the  weakenesse  of  the  Castle,  was
brought  before  the  Grand  Signior,  to  whom  likewise  he
made  like  relation ; according  to  whose  reports,  the  next
day  being  Saturday  the  second  of  October,  the  Castle  was
rendered,  with  compact  that  all  the  Souldiers  should  safely
retire  whither  best  they  list,  and  the  Inhabitants  to  remaine
continuall  Inhabitants,  and  owners  of  their  former  posses-
sions ; the  latter  of  which  promises  was  observed,  but  the
first  was  broken,  because  the  Inhabitants  of  Hatuan,  a
Castle  belonging  to  the  Grand  Signior,  two  dayes  journey
thence, together with the Tartars, assaulted the said

3i4

EDWARD BARTON

Souldiers  a  mile  from  Agria  in  their  departure,  and  cut
them  all  in  pieces,  because  Maximillian  with  the  Emper-
ours  forces,  having  a  moneth  since  taken  Hatuan,  did  most
cruelly,  without  compassion,  put  all  the  Inhabitants  to  the
sword.  Hence  the  Grand  Signior  doth  within  five  daies
determine  to  goe  towards  Buda  uncertaine  upon  what
designe.  From  Solnok  I  sent  my  Drogueman  to  Buda
with  the  Emperours  Ambassador  his  familie,  and  in  Buda
I  released  five  other,  with  all  which  companie,  consisting
of  seven  and  twentie,  I  received  Letters  from  my  Drogue-
man,  and  the  Gentleman  in  Buda  released ;  that  they
departed  from  Pest  the  thirteenth  of  December  toward
the  Emperours  Court,  God  send  mee  a  good  answer
speedily.  And  I  pray  you  send  this  advise  for  England ;
Commending  me  to  Ju.  Field,  and  Doctor  Sette  Cotte,
and  Master  Peter  Gallant,  with  Sign.  Ant.  Peron,  and  the
French  Secretarie :  this  fift  of  October,  1596.

Yours  assured, E.  Barton.

Part  of  another  Letter  written  likewise  by  the  said
Ambassadour  from  Agria,  to  Master  Sandy  the
English  Consull  at  Aleppo.

IThinke  that  at  your  residence  with  me,  you  remember
how  that  the  Grand  Signior  had  made  me  grant  of  the
libertie  of  all  the  Emperours  Ambassadors  his  family,
which  now  he  hath  performed,  and  I  have  sent  them  by
my  Drogueman  unto  the  Emperour,  even  twentie  eight
persons  of  which  number  divers  were  Gentlemen  of
account,  so  that  I  hope  my  service  therein  shall  be  grace-
full  to  his  highnesse,  and  acceptable  to  his  Majestie,  and  of
delight  to  you  and  the  rest  my  good  friends,  whom  I  could
not  leave  unadvised  thereof,  as  alike  of  the  Mansulling  of
the  Bassa,  and  successe  of  Abraham  Bassa,  late  high  Trea-
surer, now  Bassa  of  that  place,  to  whom,  as  to  my  very
good  friends,  I  will  earnestly  commend  you,  and  the  rest
of  my  Countriemen  and  friends,  &c.

The  Polish  Ambassadour  departed  from  Agria,  having

31S

A.D.
I596.

Sette  Cotte  had
beene  Jew,
Christian,
Turke,  of  all,
and  therefore
no  Religion:
now  a  rich
Turke.

Gallant  a  rich
Merchant,
Peron  a  rich
Grecian.

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

i596-

with him three Janisaries, and two Girles, which the

Janisaries  tooke  at  Agria  the  same  day,  the  Ambassadour
having  occasion  to  goe  to  the  Bassa,  at  his  returne  his
Chauses  carried  him  through  the  Citie  of  Agria,  which  was
[Il.viii.  burned  and  spoyled  to  the  ground,  and  lying  a  mile  beyond

1 359-J  the  Towne  upon  a  great  Plaine,  the  poore  Christians  that
were  licenced  to  depart  out  of  the  Castle,  lay  all  slaine
there  scattered.  Returning  back,  we  saw  under  the  Castle
wals  of  Christians  that  were  slaine  at  the  siege  a  great
number  heaped  up  together  close  to  the  wall,  about  two
fathome  high,  all  naked  frying  in  the  Sunne,  besides  in
divers  other  places  many  more.  Comming  along  to  our
Pavilion,  wee  saw  with  certaine  Janisaries  five  women  and
children,  the  one  of  five  yeeres,  and  the  other  sucking  the
mothers  brest ;  those  women  and  children  the  Janisaries
made  purchase  of,  at  rendring  up  of  the  Citie,  and  the
Castle  of  Agria.  The  Girle  of  five  yeeres  of  age,  the
Ambassadour  bought  for  ten  Chekines ;  Here  the  Grand
Signior  stayed  till  the  Castle  was  againe  repaired.

The  tenth,  came  newes  that  Christians  were  within  three
daies  journey  of  the  Campe,  wherupon  Gieffer  Bassa,
and  the  Beglerbie  of  Grecia,  were  sent  to  view  the  Chris-
tians Campe ;  who  more  ventrous  then  wise,  entring  the
clawes  of  the  Christians,  were  wholly  discomfited,  &  most
of  their  retinue  slaine,  and  pursued  to  the  Turks  campe ;
for  which  cause  they  were  both  deposed.  Yet  Assan  Bassa
was  preferred  to  the  Beglerbie  of  Grecia,  which  five  daies
before  was  taken  from  him.  Now  Cigalla  was  made
General  together  with  Assan  Bassa,  and  appointed  to  go
on  the  Christians  :  but  Agria  wals  being  already  repaired,
the  Grand  Signior  resolved  himselfe  to  go  in  person,  and
departed  from  Agria  on  the  fourteenth,  travelling  all  that
day,  till  about  Quindie,  then  came  to  spread  his  Tents  or
Pavilions.  Next  morning  proceeding  on  his  journey,
about  ten  of  the  clocke  hee  came  in  sight  of  the  Christians,
and  within  halfe  an  houre  after,  began  to  skirmish  with
them,  they  being  intrenched  neere  to  their  Campe,  by  two
old  Churches  or  Chappels  upon  a  great  Plaine,  neere  to

316

EDWARD BARTON  ad.

1596.

a  long  puddle  or  moorish  ground,  of  some  foure  miles
long,  all  alongst  a  small  banke  or  hill,  in  breadth  some
seven  or  eight  Rods ;  and  beyond  this,  upon  this  hill  or
banke  aforesaid,  had  the  Christians  incamped  themselves.
About  mid-day,  at  the  aproaching  of  the  Grand  Signior,
they  skirmished  freshly,  and  some  Turkes  intrenched
themselves  neere  unto  one  of  these  Churches  aforesaid,
these  continuing  all  day  skirmishing,  as  aforesaid,  where
both  sides  shewed  great  valour,  but  small  bloud  shed,  in
respect  of  such  infinite  forces  as  were  there,  especially  of
Turkes.  The  Janisaries  in  particular,  bravely  entred  the
Christians  Trenches,  but  not  being  seconded,  were  most  of
them  put  to  the  Sword ;  and  the  Christians  perceiving  no
seconds,  valiantly  marched  forwards,  and  gained  the
Turkes  Trenches,  put  them  to  flight  with  some  slaughter.
Now  the  night  approaching,  and  raine  withall,  the  Grand
Signior  retired  with  his  Pavilions,  some  mile  off :  the
Ambassadour  also  with  his  companie,  seeking  to  plant
themselves  for  that  night,  not  finding  his  carriages,  was
constrained  to  rest  in  the  open  field  without  any  Tent,  or
ought  else  over  his  head,  and  neither  meat  nor  drinke.
The  Ambassador  was  faine  to  send  two  of  his  Janisaries
to  seeke  for  somewhat  for  him  and  his  Companie,  as  also
for  their  Horses ;  at  length  they  brought  some  twelve
Okes  of  Bisket,  whereof  some  part  wee  eate,  and  the  rest
gave  our  Horses :  also  Benjamin  Bushop  having  formerly
under  Agria  bought  a  Dutchman,  Slave  to  the  Turks,  who
riding  all  day  with  us,  and  being  ill  at  ease,  the  same  night
he  dyed  with  his  Horse  in  his  hand.

The  sixteenth,  when  after  a  troublesome  night,
approached  the  day,  that  bloudy  day,  that  dreadfull  day
to  the  Turkes,  but  most  unfortunate  to  the  Christians :  In
the  morning  newes  being  brought,  that  the  Christians  had
forsaken  the  Turkes  Trenches,  and  retired  to  their  owne ;
the  Turkish  Horse-men  that  seeing,  assaulted  them  vali-
antly, and  though  they  found  good  incounter,  yet  repulsed
the  Christians.  Now  againe,  when  the  Christians  had  set
their forces in good order, they brought their maine

3*7

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1596.

campe  forth,  and  soone  repelled  the  Turks,  where  the
poore  Janisaries,  being  Foot-men,  were  all  put  to  the
Sword,  some  two  thousand  persons,  the  Christians  seeing

Turkes  flee,  the  Turkes  flie,  followed  in  brave  Martiall  manner :  The
Foot-men  Harquebuses,  before  them  the  light  Artillerie,
and  after  them  the  Horse-men  in  warlike  manner,  whose
approaching  so  terrified  the  Turkes,  that  without  respect
of  their  Emperour,  and  their  livings  depending  on  him,
they  fled  in  most  shamefull  wise,  so  that  the  Christians
without  resistance,  approached  even  nigh  the  Pavilions  of
the  Grand  Signior.  At  which  time  I  leave  to  the  world,
to  consider  what  fright  the  Grand  Signior  was  in,  seeing
all  his  Armie  flie ;  yet  incouraged  by  some  about  him  of
his  chiefe  Officers,  caused  his  Banners  Imperiall,  to  march
forwards  upon  the  Christians ;  and  he  with  his  Bow  and
Arrowes  shot  thrice,  and  as  some  say,  slue  three  Christians.
Now  the  Tartars,  for  feare  of  the  Harquebuses,  gathered
themselves  about  the  Grand  Signior  his  Pavillion,  and
hovering  a  little  off,  and  Hassan  Bassa  who  had  the  charge
of  the  rereward  (lest  the  Christians  Horse  should  assault
the  Grand  Signior  on  the  backe  side)  approaching  with  all
the  Grecian  light  horsemen,  who  taking  the  right  side  of
the  Christians,  were  al  ready  on  the  face  encountred  with
those  who  invironed  the  Grand  Signior,  and  on  the  other
side,  by  the  Tartars,  were  on  the  sudden  so  frighted,  that
the  Horse-men  forsaking  the  Artillerie  and  guard  of  the
Foot-men,  fled  without  order,  and  being  pursued,  many  of
them  were  slaine ;  but  the  poore  footmen  soone  incom-
passed  by  the  troopes  of  Turkes  Horse-men,  were  all  most
cruelly  without  blow  offering  or  shew  of  resistance,  put
to  the  Sword ;  many  of  the  Horse-men  by  benefit  of  the
night,  escaped  to  the  Mountaynes  of  Agria.

The  seventeenth  in  the  morning,  there  came  to  the

[Il.viii.  Ambassadors  Pavillion,  two  great  Chauses  from  the  Bassa,

I36o-J  who  willed  him  to  goewith  them  to  view  the  place  where  the

Christians  had  encamped  themselves  :  which  he  did,  taking

foure  Janizaries,  his  owne  two  Chauses,  two  Spaheis,  and

his  owne  men. Now  missing  one  of  his  Janizaries,  his

318

EDWARD BARTON  ad.

1596.

fellow  not  having  seene  him  all  that  day,  riding  along  at
the  entrance  of  the  Christians  Campe,  found  the  said
Janizarie  slaine,  whom  the  Ambassador  shewed  the
Chauses,  and  so  past  along ;  the  foresaid  Chauses
shewed  the  Ambassadour  what  place  they  had  chosen
for  their  Armie ;  which,  if  they  had  kept  them-
selves within  that  compasse,  and  let  the  Turkes  assault
them  still  as  they  began,  and  they  but  to  defend  them-
selves, in  small  time  would  have  wearied  the  Turkes,  and
done  them  great  damage ;  and  little  hurt  to  themselves :
for  onely  but  at  two  muddy  watery  places  (by  the  foresaid
old  Chappels)  could  the  Turkes  come  neere  them  to  doe
any  great  harme :  for  hardly  could  a  Horse  passe,  for
being  layed  in,  so  that  no  possibilitie  was  for  the  Christians
to  have  any  great  repulse.  But  passing  those  places,
assaulting  and  skirmishing  with  the  Turkes  was  their  over-
throw. Thus  these  Chauses  led  the  Ambassador  from  the
one  end  to  the  other,  which  is  about  two  miles  long,  and  a
very  great  Plaine,  and  Woods  at  the  end  thereof.  There
was  all  their  Ordnance  left  behind  them,  and  much  Armour
which  the  Christians  that  fled  cast  away,  to  goe  with  more
speed  when  the  Turkes  pursued  them  so  neere.  When
they  came  to  the  end  thereof,  some  which  fled,  being  over-
taken, lay  slayne,  both  Horse-men  and  Foot-men.  There
was  left  great  store  of  Wheat,  Meale,  Bread,  Butter,
Cheese,  Bacon,  Sausages,  Beefe,  and  other  provision.
Now,  the  Ambassador  returned  to  his  Pavillion,  bringing
these  two  Chauses  with  him  to  dinner ;  which  done,  they
tooke  their  leave  and  departed.  After  this  conquest,  the
Grand  Signior  rested  in  his  Pavillions  there  three  dayes.

The  nineteenth,  the  Grand  Signior  raysed  his  whole
Armie,  bending  his  course  homewards,  arriving  at  Con-
stantinople on  Sunday,  being  the  twelfth  of  Decemb.
1596.  at  which  time  he  was  received  with  great  pompe,
and  before  his  entrance,  the  Ambassadour,  being  placed  by
the  chiefe  Vizere,  that  when  the  Grand  Signior  came,  hee
went  and  saluted  him,  as  the  manner  amongst  them  is,  and
kissed  his  hand ; which  done,  he  returned  to  his  Horse.

319

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1596.

The  Agent  aforesaid,  with  a  fresh  Horse,  and  a  troope  of
more  then  twelve  met ;  having  met  him  foure  miles  off
from  Constantinople,  and  about  midday  came  to  his  owne
house  in  the  Vines  of  Pera,  God  be  thanked,  and  his  holy
and  blessed  Name,  for  this,  and  our  preservation  in  so
dangerous  a  Voyage,  and  for  all  other  his  infinite  good-
nesse  towards  us,  be  praised  for  evermore. Amen.

The  Ambassador  reported  to  Master  John  Sanderson,

that  the  Hodjee  or  Schoole-master  of  the  Great  Turke,

encouraged  him  in  this  extremitie  to  get  upon  his  Horse,

wrapping  himselfe  in  Mahomets  Flag,  and  to  take  these

* This  holy three  *  Arrowes,  and  shoot  them  towards  the  Christians

Arrowesseeme  Campe,  using  these  words  following,  Bismilla  Rohmane

to  be  reliques,  Roheim ; which hee did. Cigallogli encouraged the

and  of  holy Turkes  to  turne  upon  the  Christians  then  busied  in  pillag-

esteeme  as \n^  ancJ  pUt  them  to  flight. After  which  service  Cigal-

those  three j jj  n^fo,. Mansul'd  or  put  out  of  his  place  of  High

words  also.  o \  1  r  r*>

Admirall)  came  to  the  Turke,  who  embraced  and  kissed
him,  saying,  he  deserved  not  onely  his  place  againe  but
the  Kingdome.

The  Reader  may  informe  himselfe  more  fully  of  this
Battel,  and  the  Christians  spoile  through  greedinesse  of
spoile,  in  Knolles,  or  other  Writers  of  the  Turkish  Storie.
This  our  Author  hath  so  written  his  Voyage,  from  thence
sent  by  the  Ambassador  into  Poland,  also  from  Constanti-
nople to  Tripolis  in  Syria,  1601.  from  Constantinople  to
Aleppo,  1602.  into  England,  1603.  and  againe  from  Con-
stantinople to  England,  1604.  But  I  feare  my  Reader  will
bee  wearie  of  Turkie :  from  whence  yet  yee  may  not,
shall  not  depart,  till  yee  have  beene  made  spectators  of  a
Tragicall  Comedie,  and  a  Comicall  Tragedie  (Comicall,  I
hope  to  us,  if  the  sinnes  of  Christendome  prevent  not,  to
the  Turkes  a  Tragedie)  the  most  dismall  that  ever  yet
befell  the  Ottomans.  In  the  first,  the  same  man  is  both
Author  and  Actor ;  in  the  next,  you  have  a  Choragus,  to
whom  wee  owe  much  for  this,  for  former  his  learned  and
honourable  services,  both  full  of  Raritie  and  Varietie,  the
parents  of  Wonder  and  Delight.

320

T&

~Hambn

Jt^.==r^.

hvtrpen

Lyardpoint

S3 Ot0"

orpjant "H  •ilhi  v$*la

Cal.juctP'
\^»  Goj-iuUyCP'&triuuitk

y"^<

naif - 'IWiWy--; '■

D/^

!Wl

Ri<;l;r<crc,

jfi  Limburfl

t-^Sp

tfe

ci

:*->

»fc>

.fl^TK«E "^tri^

^js^  it*

Bi  V *

«">.>»'«««

Ou

••m/i.

Lsmhtty.  oS^,'•!''"''/,''|ll

, ~Miyjfan

3  -  1

rden  %*

Cm\c  «fwr BAA %/j^ "^ ^
Kw/ Sc •  nernuUlt

/^ „/fvr?(V HP- *

«4^

Rhmzabtr'i

L  litem  t  r* n

,wZ^  ""few  /ta> -*»!.•»■ f , ,-.ci, 1)  4  0

M'

W

H

J.?

3|bA

n

e

Chaipnznr  ^--v Matfinunih' £  «?'

PAru y— '  ^ w ifl lj/;lfl;^

^

g^^jgto

% 3Un

^HlSPANIAE

julhjo

V-

i>Jjr<

CarJo
f.lhijticrrc' C

t  /• A-  'YAW  JI^w*

^Z^s^^^a

"  M t»«?//  .:.

Incrauruu V ^*/»Wv

VS.Harhtrt
IlAli

"H ~*"¥'v  1  \rwMin

i4t/c  Fmiiebc  L  A  UiG  V  £  \aJubt

HONDIUS HIS MAP OF FRANCE

CAPTAIN JOHN SMITH

A.D.

c.  1596.

Chap.  XL

The  Travels  and  Adventures  of  Captaine  John
Smith  in  divers  parts  of  the  world,  begun
about  the  yeere  1596.

§•  1.

His  Travels  thorow  France,  Italie,  and  on  the  Sea
coasts  of  Europe,  Africa,  and  Asia :  His  enter-
taynment  and  exploits  in  the  Emperours  warres
against  the  Turke :  his  subtile  Stratagems,
valorous  Combats,  Applause,  advancement,
Honour.

[ILviii.

1361.]

N  his  youth,  when  France  and  Netherlands
had  taught  him  to  ride  a  Horse,  and  use
.  his  Armes ;  with  such  rudiments  of
Warre  as  his  tender  yeeres  in  this  Martiall
Schoole  could  attayne  unto ;  he  was
desirous  to  see  the  World,  and  trie  his
fortune  against  the  Turke.  Opportunitie
casting  him  into  the  companie  of  foure  French  Gallants
well  attended,  fayning  to  him  they  were  devoted  that  way ;
overperswaded  him  in  the  Low  Countries,  to  goe  with
them  into  France :  with  such  ill  weather  as  winter
affoordeth,  in  the  darke  night  they  arrived  in  the  broad
shallow  inlet  of  S.  Valereys  in  Piccardie.  A  worse  winter,
and  darker  night  accompanied  him,  namely  his  French
Gallants ;  which,  liking  well  his  apparell,  and  thinking
him  better  furnished  with  money  then  themselves,  plotted
with  the  Master  of  the  ship,  who  conveyed  them  and  his
Trunks  ashoare ;  and  left  him  aboord  till  the  Boat  could
returne,  which  was  not  till  next  day  towards  evening.
The  reason  he  alleaged  was,  the  Sea  was  so  high  he  could
come  no  sooner :  And  that  his  pretended  French  Lord
was  gone  to  Amiens,  where  they  would  stay  his  comming.
viii  321  x

A  French
cheater  pre-
tending  to  be
the  Lord
Deprean  and
his  company ,
coozen  him  of
his  Clothes^
Trunkes,  and
Money.

A.D.

c.  1596.

Currianuer,  a
kind  French-

man,

Diep.

Caudebecq,

Honfleu,

Caen,

He  meets
Cursell,  y
wounds  him  in
fight.

The  eves  fall
out  without
satisfaction  to
the  true  man.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Which  treacherous  villanie,  when  divers  other  Souldiers
Passengers  had  understood,  they  had  like  to  have
slaine  the  Master :  and  had  they  knowne  how,  would  have
runne  away  with  the  ship.

One  of  the  Souldiers,  called  Currianuer,  compassionating
his  injurie,  assured  him  this  great  Lord  Deprean,  was
onely  the  sonne  of  a  poore  Lawyer  of  Mortaine  in  Bas
Brittagine,  and  his  attendants  Cursel,  La  Nelie,  and
Monferat,  three  younger  Brothers,  as  arrant  cheaters  as
himselfe ;  and  if  he  would  accompanie  him,  he  would
bring  him  to  their  friends,  and  in  the  interim  supplie  his
wants.  Thus  travelling  by  Diep,  Codobeck,  Honfleu,
Pount  Rodemer  in  Normandie,  they  came  to  Caen  in  Bas
Normandie.  Where  both  the  Noble  Currianuer,  and  many
of  his  friends  kindly  welcommed  him,  and  brought  them
to  Mortaine,  where  hee  found  their  friends,  as  hee  had
promised  him,  but  to  small  purpose.  Yet  the  bruit
occasioned  the  Ladie  Columber,  the  Baron  Larshan,  the
Lord  Shasge,  and  divers  other  honourable  persons  to
supplie  his  wants,  and  to  give  him  kind  entertainment  with
them,  to  recreate  himselfe  as  long  as  he  would.  But  such
pleasures  little  suted  with  his  poore  estate :  and  his  rest-
lesse  spirit  could  never  find  content  to  receive  such  noble
favours  as  he  could  neither  deserve,  nor  requite.  Where-
upon, wandring  from  Port  to  Port,  to  find  some  Man  of
Warre,  he  spent  that  he  had,  and  in  a  Forrest,  neere  dead
with  griefe,  a  rich  Farmer  found  him  by  a  faire  fountaine
under  a  tree.  This  kind  Pesant  relieved  him  againe  to
his  content,  to  follow  his  intent.  Not  long  after,  as  he
passed  through  a  great  Grove  of  trees  betwixt  Pounterson
and  Dinan  in  Brittaigne,  it  was  his  chance  to  meet  Cursell,
more  miserable  then  himselfe.  Without  any  word  they
both  drew,  and  in  a  short  time  Cursell  fell  to  the  ground :
where,  from  an  old  ruinated  Towne  the  Inhabitants  seeing
them,  were  satisfied,  when  they  heard  Cursell  confesse
what  formerly  had  passed ;  and  that  in  the  dividing  what
they  had  stolne  from  him,  they  fell  by  the  eares  among
themselves :  but  for  his  part  hee  excused  himselfe  to  be

322

CAPTAIN JOHN SMITH  a.d.

c.  1596.
innocent,  as  well  of  the  one  as  of  the  other. In  regard
of  his  hurt,  Smith  was  glad  to  bee  so  rid,  directing  his
course  to  an  honourable  Lord,  the  Earle  of  Ployer :  who  Earle  of
(during  the  Warres  in  France)  with  his  two  brethren  had  Pl°yer-
beene  brought  up  in  England ; by  whom  he  was  better
refurnished  then  ever. When  they  had  shewed  him  Saint  Sain*  Ma^
Malo, Mount Saint Michael, Lambal, Saint Brieux,  £^f^
Lanion,  and  their  owne  faire  Castle  of  Tunkadeck  Guigan,  $aint  Brieux,
and  divers  other  places  in  Brittaigne,  and  their  Cornwall ;  Lanion,  places
taking  his  leave  he  tooke  his  way  to  Renes,  the  Brettons  of  note  in
chiefe  Citie ; and  so  to  Nantes,  Poytiers,  Rochell,  and  B^stgne'
Bordeaux. The  rumour  of  the strength of Bayon in  ^ante'St
Biskay  caused  him  to  see  it :  And  from  thence  tooke  his  Rochell.
way  from  Leskar  in  Beam,  and  Pow  in  the  Kingdome  of  Bordeaux.
Navarre  to  Tolouse,  Vizers,  and  Carcasson  in  Gascoigne ;  Baione\
Narbonne, Montpellier, Nysmes, and Poundegale, in  B
Langedock, and  through the  Countrey  of  Avinion  by  Carcasson.
Aries,  to  Marselles  in  Provence.  Narbonne.

There embarking himselfe for Italie, the ship was  [n.vm.
inforced to Toulon; and putting againe to Sea, ill  N l^  2'*
weather  so  grew  upon  them,  they  anchored  close  aboord  Marceille  in
the  shoare,  under  the  little  He  of  Saint  Marie  against  Provence.
Nice  in  Savoy. Here  the  inhumane  Provincials  with  a  Toulon.
rabble  of  Pilgrims  of  divers  Nations  going  to  Rome,  j£j?]K
hourely  cursed  him  not  onely  for  a  Hugonot,  but  said,  cnaritie.
his  Nation  were  all  Pirats  ;  rayling  on  his  dread  Soveraigne
Queene  Elizabeth,  and  that  they  never  should  have  faire
weather  so  long  as  he  was  aboord  them. There  disputa-
tions grew  to  that  passion,  that  they  threw  him  overboord  :
yet  God  brought  him  into  that  little  He,  where  were  no
Inhabitants. The next morning hee espied two ships
more  ride  by  them,  put  in  by  the  storme ; which  fetched
him  aboord,  well  refreshed  him,  and  so  kindly  used  him,  Entertained
that  hee  was  well  contented  to  trie  the  rest  of  his  fortunes  haBnttai^ne
with  them. After  he  had  related  unto  them  this  former
discourse :  what  for  pitie  and  for  love  of  the  Honourable
Earle of Ployer, this Noble Britton his neighbour,
Captaine  La  Roshe  of  Saint  Malo,  regarded  and  enter-

323

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

c.  1596.

tayned  him. With  the  next  faire  wind  they  sayled  along

by  the  coast  of  Corsica,  and  Sardinia,  and  crossing  the

Gulfe of  Tunis, passed by Cape Bona, to the lie  of

Lampedosa. Lampadosa ; leaving  the  coast  of  Barbarie  till  they  came

at  Cape  Rosato,  and  so  along  by  the  African  shoare  for

Alexandria. Alexandria in Egypt. There having delivered their

Scanderone. fraught,  they  went  to  Scanderone  ; and  after  keeping  their

Cyprus.  course  by Cyprus, and the  coast  of  Asia ; sayling  by

Rhodes.  Rhodes,  the  Archipelagus,  Candia,  and  the  coast  of  Graecia,

Criaknfa'' an<^  t^le  ^e  Cephalonia  ;  they  lay  to  and  againe  a  few  dayes,

betwixt  the  He  of  Corfu,  and  the  Cape  of  Otranto  in  the

Kingdome  of  Naples,  in  the  entrance  of  the  Adriaticke

Sea,  till  they  mette  with  an  Argosie  of  Venice,  which  it

seemes, the Captaine desired to speak with : whose

untoward  answer  was  such  as  slue  them  a  man. Where-

A  desperate upon  presently  the  Britton  gave  them  his  broad  side,  then

bea-jight. kjs  stearne)  ancj  his  other  broad  side  also ; and  continued

his  chase  Peeces  till  hee  gave  so  many  broad  sides  one

after  another,  that  the  Argosies  Sayles  and  tackling  were

so  torne  that  shee  stood  to  her  defence,  and  made  shot  for

shot. Twice  in  one  houre  and  halfe  the  Brittons  boorded

her, yet they cleered them selves. But clapping her

aboord  againe,  the  Argosies  fired  him,  with  much  danger

to  them  both,  but  was  presently  quenched. This  rather

[Il.viii.  augmented  the  Brettons  rage,  then  abated  his  courage;

!3  3'J  and  having  re-accommodated  himselfe  againe,  he  shot  her

so  betweene  wind  and  water,  that  shee  was  ready  to  sinke :

then  they  yeelded. The  Brettons  lost  fifteene  men,  shee

twentie,  besides  divers  hurt : the  rest  went  to  worke  on

all  hands ; some  to  stop  the  leakes,  others  to  guard  the

Argosie  taken  prisoners,  which  were  chayned  ; the  rest  to  rifle  her. The

^rifledby silkeS) Velvets, Cloth of  gold, and Tissue; Peasters,

^rittaine Chickines, and Sultanies, they unloaded in foure and

twentie houres in wonderful! store : whereof having

sufficient ; and  tyred  with  toyle,  rhey  cast  her  off  with  all

her  companie,  with  as  much  good  Merchandize  as  would

have  fraughted  such  another  Britton.

To  repaire  his  defects  he  stood  for  the  Coast  of  Calabria :

324

CAPTAIN JOHN SMITH  ad.

c.  1596.
but  hearing  there  were  sixe  or  seven  Galleys  at  Mesina,
he  departed  thence  for  Malta : but  the  winde  comming
faire,  hee  kept  his  course  along  the  coast  of  the  Kingdome
of  Sicilia,  by  Sardinia  and  Corsica,  till  hee  came  to  the
Road  of  Antibo  in  Piemont,  where  he  set  Smith  on  shoare,  Smti  set  on
with  five  hundred  Chickenes,  and  a  little  Box  which  he ?ar?h  at.
had,  worth  neere  as  much  more. Here  he  embarqued  p'temon\
himselfe  for  Legorne,  being  glad  to  have  such  an  opor-  Legorne,  or
tunitie  and  meanes  to  better  his  experience,  by  the  view  Livorno.
of  Italie :  and  having  passed  Tuscanie,  Veterbo  and  many
other  Cities,  as  Rome,  and  Saint  Peters  Patrimonie,  he
went  downe  the  River  Tyber,  to  Civita  Vecha :  where  hee
embarqued  himselfe  to  satisfie  his  eye  with  the  faire  Citie
of  Naples,  and  her  Kingdomes  Nobilitie,  returning  by
Capua,  Rome,  and  Siena,  he  passed  by  that  admired  Citie  Rome.
of  Florence,  the  Cities  and  Countries  of  Bolonia,  Ferrara,  Sienna.
Mantua,  Padua,  and  Venice  :  whose  Gulfe  he  passed  from  Florence>  &c-
Malamaco,  and  the  Adriaticke  Sea  for  Ragouza,  spending
sometime  to  see  the  barren  broken  Coast  of  Albania  and
Dalmatia,  to  Capo  de  Istria,  travelling  the  Mayne  of  poore
Sclavonia,  by  Tubliano,  till  hee  came  to  Gratz  in  Stiria,  the  Sclavonia.
Seat of Ferdinando an Arch-duke of Austria, (now  Gratz  in
Emperour  of  Almaine)  where  hee  met  an  English  and  an  Stma-
Irish Jesuite : who acquainted him with many brave
Gentlemen  of  good  qualitie : especially  with the  Lord
Ebersbaught, to whom hee  gave experiments of such
conclusions,  as  he  projected  to  undertake : hee  preferred
him  to  Baron  Kizell,  Generall  of  the  Artillery :  and  he  to
a  worthy  Colonell,  the  Earle  of  Meldritch,  with  whom
going  to  Vienna  in  Austria,  hee  made  him  Captaine  of  two  Vienna.
hundred  and  fiftie  Souldiers,  under  whose  Regiments  how
he  spent  his  time,  this  insuing  Discourse  will  declare,  as
it is written in a Booke intituled, The Warres of
Transilvania,  Wallachi,  and  Moldavia,  written  by  Fran-
cisco Ferneza  a  Learned  Italian,  Secretarie  to  Sigismundus
Bathor  the  Prince.

[Extracts  of
325

A.D.

c.  1596.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1364.J

Olimpach
relieved.

^lLvu\\^A  1  Extracts °f  Captaine  Smiths  Transylvanian  Acts,

out  of  Fr.  Fer.  his  Storie.

AFter  the  losse  of  Caniza,  the  Turkes  with  twentie
thousand  besieged  the  strong  Towne  of  Olimpach,
so  straitly,  as  they  were  cut  off  from  all  intelligence  and
hope  of  succour,  till  John  Smith  an  English  Gentleman,
acquainted  Baron  Kizell,  Generall  of  the  Arch-Dukes
Artillerie,  that  he  had  taught  the  Generall  his  worthy
Friend,  such  a  Rule,  that  hee  would  undertake  to  make
him  know  any  thing  he  intended,  and  have  his  Answere ;
would  they  bring  him  but  to  some  place,  where  he  might
make  the  flame  of  a  Torch  seene  to  the  Towne.  Kizell
inflamed  with  this  strange  invention ;  Smith  made  it  so
plaine,  that  forth-with  he  gave  him  Guides,  who  in  the
darke  night  brought  him  to  a  Mountaine,  where  he  shewed
three  Torches  equi-distant  from  each  other,  which  plainly
appearing  to  the  Towne,  the  Governour  presently  appre-
hended :  and  answered  againe  with  three  other  fires  in  like
manner,  each  thus  knowing  the  others  being  and  intent.
Smith,  though  distant  seven  miles,  signified  to  him  these
words.  On  Thursday  at  night  I  will  charge  on  the  East,
at  the  Alarme  sally  you  :  Eberspaught  answered  he  would.
And  thus  it  was  done,  First,  he  writ  his  Message,  as  briefe
you  see,  as  could  be ;  then  divided  the  Alphabet  in  two
parts  thus  :  ABCDEFGHIKL  with  one  Light,  the
other  Letters  following  with  two,  MNOPQRSTV
W  X  Y  Z.  The  first  part  from  A  to  L  is  signified  by
shewing  and  hiding  one  Linke  so  oft  as  there  is  Letters
from  A  to  that  Letter,  you  meane ;  the  other  part  from
M  to  Z,  is  mentioned  by  two  Lights  in  like  manner ;  the
end  of  a  word  is  signified  by  shewing  of  three  Lights,  ever
staying  your  Light  at  that  Letter,  you  meane,  till  the  other
may  write  it  in  a  Paper,  and  answere  by  his  signall,  which
is  one  Light.  It  is  done,  beginning  to  account  the  Letters,
by  the  Lights  every  time  from  A  or  M  :  by  this  meanes,
also  the  other  returned  his  Answere,  thereby  each  under-
standing other. The  Guides  all  this  time,  having  well

326

Speech  by
Torches,

A  good
stratagem,

CAPTAIN JOHN SMITH  a.d.

c.  1596.
viewed  the  Campe,  returned  to  Kizell,  who  doubting  of
his  power,  being  but  twentie  thousand,  was  animated  by
the  Guides  which  related  that  the  Turkes  were  so  divided
by  the  River  in  two  parts,  that  they  could  not  easily
second  each  other.  To  which  Smith  added  this  conclusion,  Another
that  two  or  three  thousand  pieces  of  Match,  fastened  to  stratagem.
divers  small  Lines  of  two  hundred  fathome  in  length,
beeing  armed  with  Powder,  might  all  bee  fired  and
stretched  at  one  instant,  before  the  Alarme,  upon  the
Plaine  of  Eysnaburge,  supported  betweene  two  staves,  at
each  Lines  end :  in  that  manner,  would  seeme  as  if  they
were  so  many  Musketiers :  which  was  so  put  in  practice,
as  being  discovered  by  the  Turkes,  they  prepared  to
encounter  these  false  fires,  thinking  there  had  bin  some
great  Armie,  whilst  Kizell  with  his  Forces  entred  the
Turkes  quarter.  They  now  ranne  up  and  downe  as  men
amazed,  and  it  was  not  long  ere  Eberspaught  was  pell
mell  with  them  in  their  Trenches :  in  which  distracted
confusion,  a  third  part  of  the  Turkes  that  besieged  that
side  towards  Konbrucke  were  slaine,  many  of  the  rest
drowned,  and  fled :  the  other  part  of  the  Armie  was  so
busied  to  resist  the  false  fires,  that  Kizell  before  the
morning  had  put  in  two  thousand  good  Souldiers  into
the  Towne,  and  with  small  losse  was  retyred  :  the  Garrison
was  also  well  relieved  with  that  which  they  found  in  the
Turkes  Quarter :  Which  caused  the  Turkes  to  rayse  their
Siege,  and  returne  to  Caniza,  and  Kizell  with  much  honour
was  received  at  Kerment :  and  occasioned  the  Author  a
good  reward  and  preferment,  to  bee  Captaine  of  two  Smith  made
hundred  and  fiftie  Souldiers,  under  the  conduct  of  Colonell  Captaine  of
Meldrich.  2  5  o.Sou/diers.

A  generall  Rumour  of  a  generall  Peace,  now  spread  it
selfe  all  over  the  face  of  those  tormented  Countries :  but
the  Turke  intended  no  such  matter,  but  levied  Souldiers
from  all  parts  he  could,  and  the  Emperour  also  by  the
assistance  of  the  Christian  Princes,  provided  three  Armies  :  Three  Armies.
the  one  led  by  the  Arch-duke  Matthias,  the  Emperours
Brother,  and  his  Lieftenant  Duke  Mercurie  to  defend  low

327

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

c.  1596.

Hungarie ;  the  second  by  Ferdinando  the  Arch-duke  of
Stiria,  and  the  Duke  of  Mantua  his  Leiftenant  to  regaine
Caniza :  the  third  by  Don  Gonsago  Governour  of  high
Hungarie  to  joyne  with  Basta,  to  make  an  absolute
Conquest  of  Transilvania.
The  siege  of  Duke  Mercurie  with  an  Armie  of  thirtie  thousand
Alba  Regain.  (whereof  neere  ten  thousand  were  French)  besieged
Stolewisenburg,  otherwise  called  Alba  Regalis,  a  place  so
strong  by  art  and  nature  that  it  was  thought  impregnable.
There  hapened  many  a  bloudie  sally,  strange  stratagems
and  valiant  Exploits  on  both  sides  by  severall  Nations :
but  in  briefe,  Earle  Meldritch  by  the  information  of  three
or  foure  Christians  escaped  out  of  the  Towne.  Captaine
Smith  tooke  occasion  upon  the  great  Assemblies,  thronging
together  at  every  Alarme,  to  put  in  practice  the  fierie
Dragons,  which  hee  had  demonstrated  him  and  the  Earle
Von  Suits  at  Comora,  which  he  thus  performed.  After
hee  had  prepared  fortie  or  fiftie  Earthen  round  bellied  Pots
Fierie  prepared,  with  mixtures,  Powder  and  Bullets,  as  experi-

Dragons.  ences  had  taught  him  (though  with  exceeding  danger)  he
so  fitly  placed  them  in  slings,  graduated  so  neere  as  they
could  to  these  Assemblies,  and  other  places  of  advantage,
that  at  mid-night  upon  the  Alarme,  it  was  a  fearefull  sight
to  see  the  short  flaming  course  of  their  flight  in  the  Ayre :
but  presently  after  the  fall,  the  lamentable  noyse  of  the
miserable  slaughtered  Turkes  was  most  terrible ;  besides,
they  fired  that  strong  Suburbe,  at  the  Port  of  Buda,  in  two
or  three  places,  which  so  troubled  the  Turkes  to  quench,
that  had  there  beene  any  meanes  to  have  assaulted  them,
they  could  hardly  have  resisted  the  fire  and  their  Enemies.
This  Citie  being  taken  by  the  incredible  Adventures  of
the  Duke,  the  Earle  Roseworme  with  the  other  Colonell
and  Captaines,  which  had  beene  in  possession  of  the  Turkes,
[Il.viii.  more  then  fiftie  yeares : the  Turke  sent  presently  Asan

I365-]  Bassa  with  threescore  thousand,  if  it  were  possible  to
A  Battel!,  and  re-gaine  it:  the  Duke  understanding  this,  with  twentie
the  Bassa^  of  thousand  met  him :  where  five  or  sixe  thousand  were
Buda  slame. ^xn^  ^^  ^  gassa  Qf  Buda,  and  foure  or  five  Zanzackes.

328

17\  xScptcn.y\

I ■■ i I t I I -t I, I I i  =t==i

T9

Ak!3^x

Zsttttfr
batua

IP&&&

fet^

te/h-i

^y*<

/&**

cue

T£t£-

ft*

IPS

Ircoi

S.UKOU

Guozdz

tea

JSTvv

^

"Sb*

■^

(BOXUM

$m

yb/'ltaf

ntr  Jan

*^  Mi '

ttn

.  Cobmrh
my

fcuttiarcK
'Waficrhcly

feytn

JahuL

^  J1!

^X  "Jnaiin  ;a/v AA ^*t

Jeek

&-=

*TaeJ

^Jderhel/%^

reuti  .  ■

Jedx

ls>

Trek

tetyfL

\Sc

ft

\£*.

Jcel

WttMd

M°Q

>ar<

*Jy*

*e.

ftc

wj

^S«

^&

kdem

yM

pchattnaeurqJbwft

®Dt

'Berp  0and

-A

'armbeh  m

**fye*

,jfi>

«*£«/

p^vJ

>>

dit

fttetu*

Jchenek
f&Uynfthec^

SbBS

'V*

.4

'^&^

.acute*  •

-^M*>

tyfi

g^^^j^b*

aw

S**K ^

fyl/l/S  /^

yw

*a

whdfhm

Jehad

A*

hurn  /5r^

^>

y*

*****jv

i^

'Bw*

&&0>

&/>-

Jrrfit.  .

%

v<»

5U'

y

v>-

s%

^%-\^

-^A,

■ ' ' i [ ■  a < ■

la-teaJgVal

-Ok,

>Iii

^J

5

^S.

/%Ay^^

ff

EBBSZmimmSm  '■

TRAN
»XVA]

irtfliamQermameu  eSmmut^

4^

HONDIUS HIS MAP OF TRANSYLVANIA

CAPTAIN JOHN SMITH  a.d.

c.  1596.

Duke  Mercurie  dividing  his  Armie,  sent  the  Earle
Meldrich  (of  whose  Company  was  Captaine  Smith  in  this
encounter)  to  assist  the  Lord  Basta,  Generall  for  the
Emperor  Rodulph,  against  Sigismundus  Bathur,  the
Prince  of  Transilvania :  who  was  beyond  all  mens  beliefe,
newly  returned  from  Polonia :  and  established  in  his
Estate ;  the  Earle  neither  finding  pay,  nor  such  regard  as
he  expected,  perswaded  his  Troupes  rather  to  serve  the
Prince  against  the  Turkes,  then  Basta  against  the  Prince.
The  Souldiers  worne  out  with  these  paylesse  Travels,  upon
hope  to  make  Bootie  of  what  they  could  get  from  the
Turke,  were  easily  perswaded  to  follow  him  wheresoever :
especially  to  helpe  to  re-gaine  or  ransacke  his  Fathers
Country  then  possessed  by  the  Turkes,  which  (they  heard)
notwithstanding  those  Warres,  were  rich  and  unspoyled.
The  Prince  glad  of  so  a  brave  a  Commander,  and  so  many
expert  and  ancient  Souldiers,  made  him  Campe-master  of
his  Armie,  gave  him  all  necessaries  else  hee  could,  and
what  freedome  they  desired  to  ransacke  the  Turkes.

The  Earle  having  made  many  incursions  into  the  Land
of  Zarkain,  amongst  the  rockie  Mountaines,  where  the
people  were  some  Turkes,  some  Tartars,  some  Jewes,  but
most  Banditos,  Renegadoes,  and  such  like,  which  some-
times he  forced  into  the  Plaines  of  Regall :  where  is  a  Regal
Citie,  not  only  of  men  and  Fortifications,  strong  of  it  besieged.
selfe  ;  but  so  environed  with  Mountaines,  and  the  passage
so  difficult,  that  in  all  those  warres,  no  attempt  had  beene
made  upon  it  to  any  purpose.  Having  satisfied  himselfe
with  the  situation  and  those  passages,  amongst  which  he
had  many  a  sharpe  encounter :  at  last,  with  eight  thousand
he  pitched  his  Campe  before  it.  The  Inhabitants  scorning
so  small  a  number,  sallied  in  such  abundance,  that  about
one  hundred  and  fiftie  were  slaine  on  both  sides,  and  the
Turkes  chased  so  neere  the  Ports,  that  the  Towers  small
shot  and  Ordnance  caused  the  Earle  to  retyre.

The  next  day  Zachell  Moyzes,  Liuetenant  Generall  to
the  Prince,  came  with  foure  thousand  Foote  and  Horse,
and  foure  and  twentie  Peeces  of  Ordnance,  but  in  regard

329

A.D.

c.  1596.

Three  single
eombats.

The  first  onely
with  Lances.

Manner  of

Turbashas

entrance.

C.  Smith
enters.

Turbasha
slaine.

The  second
combat  twixt
Smith  and
Grualgo  with
Pistols.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

of  the  situation  of  the  place,  they  did  more  feare  then
hurt  them :  till  they  had  spent  neere  a  moneth  in  raising
their  Mounts  and  Batteries ;  which  slow  proceeding  the
Turkes  daily  derided,  and  as  fearing  least  they  should
depart  ere  they  assaulted  the  Citie,  sent  this  challenge  to
any  Captaine  in  their  Armie :  That  to  delight  the  Ladies
who  did  long  to  see  some  Courtlike  pastime,  the  Lord
Turbashaw  did  defie  any  Captaine  that  had  the  command
of  a  Companie,  which  durst  cumbat  with  him  for  his  head.
The  matter  being  discussed,  was  accepted.  But  so  many
questions  grew  for  the  undertaking,  that  it  was  devided
by  lots,  and  the  lot  fell  upon  Captaine  Smith,  before  spoken
of.  Truce  being  taken  for  that  time,  the  Rampiers  all  beset
with  faire  Dames,  and  men  in  Armes,  the  Christians  in
Batalia ;  Turbashaw,  with  a  voice  of  Hoboyes  entred  the
field,  well  mounted  and  armed  :  on  his  shoulders  were  fixed
two  paire  of  great  wings,  richly  garnished  with  gold,
silver,  and  precious  stones,  a  Janisarie  before  him,  bearing
his  Launce ;  on  each  side,  another  leading  his  Horse ;
where  long  he  stayed  not  before  Smith  with  a  noise  of
Trumpets  (onely  a  Page  bearing  his  Lance)  passing  by
him,  with  a  curteous  salute,  tooke  his  ground  with  such
good  successe,  that  at  the  sound  of  the  charge  he  passed
the  Turke  thorow  the  sight  of  his  beaver,  face,  head,  and
all,  that  hee  fell  dead  to  the  ground ;  where  alighting,
unbracing  his  Helmet,  he  tooke  off  his  head,  leaving  the
Turkes  his  body,  and  so  returned  without  any  hurt  at  all.
The  head  he  presented  to  the  Lord  Moyzes  the  Generall,
who  kindly  accepted  it,  and  with  joy  to  the  whole  Armie,
he  was  generally  welcome.

The  death  of  this  Captaine,  so  swelled  in  the  heart  of
one  Grualgo  his  vowed  friend,  as  rather  inraged  with
madnesse  then  choller,  he  directed  a  particular  Challenge
to  the  Conquerour,  to  regaine  his  friends  head,  or  lose  his
owne,  with  his  Horse  and  Armour  for  advantage  :  which,
according  to  his  desire,  was  the  next  day  undertaken,  as
before.  Upon  the  sound  of  the  Trumpets  their  Launces
flew  in  pieces,  upon  a  cleere  passage,  but  that  the  Turke

330

CAPTAIN JOHN SMITH  ad.

c.  1596.
was  neere  unhorsed : their  Pistols  were  the  next,  which
marked  Smith  upon  the  Placket ; but  the  next  shot,  the
Turke  was  so  wounded  in  the  left  arme,  that  not  able  to Grualgo
rule  his  Horse,  and  defend  himselfe,  he  was  throwne  to  the atne*
ground,  and  so  bruised  with  the  fall,  that  he  lost  his  head,
as  his  friend  before  him,  with  his  Horse  and  Armour  ;  but
his  bodie  and  his  rich  apparell,  was  sent  backe  to  the
Towne.

Every  day  the  Turkes  made  some  sallies,  but  few
skirmishes  would  they  indure  to  any  purpose,  our  workes
and  approaches  being  not  yet  advanced  to  that  height,  and
effect  as  necessitie  required.  To  delude  time,  Smith  with
many  incontradictable  perswading  reasons,  obtained  leave,
that  the  Ladies  might  know  he  was  not  so  much  enamored
with  their  Servants  heads,  but  if  any  Turke  of  their  ranke
would  come  to  the  place  of  Combat  to  redeeme  them,  hee
should  have  his  also  upon  the  like  conditions,  if  they  could
winne  it.  The  Challenge  presently  was  accepted  by  Bony
Molgro.  The  next  day  both  the  Champions  entring  the
field,  as  before,  each  discharging  their  Pistols,  having  no
Launces,  but  such  martiall  weapons  as  the  Defendant  had
appointed,  no  hurt  was  done.  Their  Battle-axes  were  the  Third  combat
next,  whose  piercing  bils  made  sometimes  the  one,  some-  w!  Battle
times  the  other,  to  have  scarce  sence  to  keepe  their
Saddles :  especially  the  Christian  received  such  a  wound,
that  he  lost  his  Battle-axe,  and  failed  not  much  to  have
fallen  after  it :  whereat  the  supposing  conquering  Turke
had  a  great  shout  from  the  Rampiers.  The  Turke
prosecuted  his  advantage  to  the  uttermost  of  his  power :  C.  Smith
yet  the  other,  what  by  the  readinesse  of  his  Horse,  and  his  e™m&re«-

•  ...  LJV&ZV6S  his

judgement  and  dextentie  in  such  a  businesse  beyond  all  Fau/c^on  ana>
mens  expectation,  by  Gods  assistance,  not  onely  avoyded  kills  Bonny
the Turkes violent blowes, but having drawne his  Molgro.
Faulchion,  pierced  the  Turke  so  under  the  Cullets  through  [Il.viii.
backe  and  body,  that  although  he  alighted  from  his  Horse,  13°°']

hee  stood  not  long  ere  hee  lost  his  head,  as  the  rest  had
done.

This  good  successe  gave  such  incouragement  to the

33i

A.D.

c.  1596.
His  honorable
retuj'ne.

Made  Ser-
geant Major.

Re  gall  taken.

Faratzo,

SolmoSy

Cuprouka.

Prince  of
Transilvania
honoreth  Cap-
taine  Smith.

Bloudie  battell
of  Christians.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Armie,  that  with  a  guard  of  sixe  thousand,  three  spare
Horses,  before  each,  a  Turkes  head  upon  Launces,  hee  was
conducted  to  the  Generals  Pavilions  with  his  presents.
Moyses  received  both  him  and  them  with  as  much  respect
as  the  occasion  deserved,  imbracing  him  in  his  armes,  gave
him  a  faire  Horse  richly  furnished,  a  Cymiter  and  Belt
worth  three  hundred  Ducats,  and  Meldrich  made  him
Sergeant  Major  of  his  Regiment.  The  Towne  with  an
incredible  trouble  and  danger  was  assaulted,  and  at  last
taken  perforce,  where  the  Earle  remembring  his  Fathers
death,  caused  all  he  could  find  beare  Armes  to  be  put  to
the  Sword,  and  their  heads  to  bee  set  upon  stakes,  round
about  the  walls,  in  the  same  manner  as  they  had  served
the  Christians  when  they  tooke  it.  Then  he  sacked
Varatzo,  Solmos,  and  Kuprouka,  whereto  had  retired  the
remnant  of  this  Den  of  Theeves,  leaving  five  thousand
dead  (though  he  lost  neere  as  many,  yet)  with  all  the
spoyle  and  two  thousand  prisoners  (most  women  and
children)  he  returned  to  Esenberge,  not  farre  from  the
Princes  Pallace,  where  hee  incamped.  The  Prince
comming  to  view  the  Armie,  presented  with  the  Prisoners,
and  sixe  and  thirtie  Ensignes  (after  his  accustomed  manner,
having  given  thankes  to  God)  he  was  acquainted  what
service  Smith  had  done  at  Olimpach,  Stolewisenberge,  and
Regall ;  for  which,  with  great  honor  and  solemnitie,  he
gave  him  three  Turkes  heads  in  a  Shield  for  Armes,  with
an  oath  ever  to  weare  them  in  his  Colours,  his  picture  in
gold,  and  three  hundred  Duckats  yeerely  for  a  pension.

During  all  this  time,  Basta  and  the  Prince  being
capitulating  of  a  peace,  the  Emperour  had  raised  new
forces  for  Basta  to  invade  Transilvania ;  which  caused  the
Prince  to  condescend  to  the  Articles  propounded  him :
which  when  Moyses  understood,  then  in  field  with  the
whole  Armie  (that  hated  the  Germans  as  ill  as  Turkes)  he
gave  battell  to  Basta.  Betwixt  them  in  sixe  or  seven
houres,  more  then  sixe  or  seven  thousand  on  both  sides
were  slaine.  Moyses  thus  overthrowne  fled  to  the  Turkes,
and  his  scattered  Troopes,  some  one  way,  some  another.

332

CAPTAIN JOHN SMITH  a.d.

c.  1596.
The  Prince  excused  himselfe  of  this  unexpected  accident,
made composition for his dispersed Troopes, yeelded
himselfe  to  Basta ; and  all  his  Countrey  and  Subjects  to
the  Emperours  obedience.

Basta thus possessed of Transilvania, drew all the
Christians  of  those  old  Regiments  of  Sigismundus, of
whose greatnesse and true affections, he was most
suspitious, under the conduct of Rodoll Voyuad of
Walachia,  forced  out  by  Jeremy,  put  in  by  the  Turke. In
this  Armie  of  thirtie  thousand,  Captaine  Smith  was  one,
who  (under  his  noble  Colonell  holding  the  same  places  he
had before) had many severall imployments in every
dangerous incounter, which would be too voluminous  Smiths  tmpby-
particularly to relate, before they could draw Prince  tAePayuodof
Jeremy  to  battaile,  where  (as  it  is  recorded)  two  thousand  Walachy.
on  both  sides,  lay  dead  in  the  fields ; but  Jeremy  fled,  Bhudie  battell

and Rodol had the victorie, and thereby againe his  twtxt  7* two
c  . . °  Fayuoas.

ooveraigntie.  J

Meldrich  not  long  after  with  thirteene  thousand,  was

sent  against the stragling  escaped  Troopes  of  Jeremy,

which  joyning  with  some  Tartars,  forraged  the  frontiers

towards Moldavia ; but when they heard it was the

Crimme  Tartar  and  his  two  sonnes,  with  thirtie  thousand, Thirtie  thou-

and that Jeremy which had escaped, lay with fifteene  san*  Tartars.

thousand  in  Ambuscado  for  him,  about  Langanow,  hee

retired  towards  Rotenton,  a  strong  Garison  for  Rodoll :

But  they  were  so  invironed  with  these  hellish  numbers,

that  they  could  make  no  great  haste  for  skirmishing  with

their  Scoutes  and  Forragers : Yet  by  getting  through  a

wood  in  a  thick  Fog,  meeting  two  thousand  loaden  with

pillage,  and  two  or  three  hundred  Horse  and  Cattell,  the

most  of  them  were  slaine  or  taken  prisoners,  who  told

Meldrich  where  Jeremy  lay,  expecting  the  Crimme  Tartar.

Meldrich  intending  to  make  by  him  his  passage  by  force,

was  advised  of  a  pretie stratagem  by Captaine Smith,  A  memorable

which  presently  so  accommodated  two  or  three  hundred  st^at^em ^

Trunkes, with wild-fire upon the heads of Launces,  ^ott^nteQn

charging  the  enemie  in  the  night,  gave  fire  to  the  Trunkes,

^333

A.D.

c.  1596.

[Il.viii.

t  1367.]

Englishmen
slaine.

Ensigne
Carlton  and
Sergeant
Robinson
escape.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

which  blasted  forth  such  flames  and  sparkles,  amazing  not
onely  the  Horse  but  also  the  Foot,  that  by  the  meanes  of
this  flaming  incounter,  their  owne  Horses  turned  tailes
with  such  furie,  as  by  their  violence  overthrew  Jeremy  and
his  Armie,  without  any  losse  at  all  to  Meldrich.  But  of
this  victorie  they  not  long  triumphed ;  for,  being  within
three  leagues  of  Rotenton,  in  the  Valley  of  Verest  Home  ;
the  Tartar  with  fortie  thousand  had  so  beset  him,  that  they
were  forced  to  fight  with  this  matchless  number,  where
neere  thirtie  thousand  were  slaine.  The  Earle,  with  some
fifteene  hundred  escaped,but  the  rest  were  all  slaine  or  taken
prisoners :  as  the  Historie  at  large  will  plainly  shew,  the
times,  place,  chiefe  Commanders,  with  the  manner  and
order  of  their  battels,  and  fights,  to  which  I  referre  you.

§.  11.

Divers  valiant  English-men  in  this  battell.  Captaine
Smith  taken,  sold,  sent  into  Turkie,  and  over
the  Black  Sea  to  Tartaria.  His  admirable
escape  and  other  travels  in  divers  parts  of
Christendome.

N  this  dismall  battell,  Nederspol,  Veltus,  Zarnava,
Mavazo,  Bavell,  and  many  other  Earles,  Barons,
Colonels,  Captaines,  brave  Gentlemen  and
Souldiers  were  slaine.  Give  me  leave  to  remember  the
names,  and  honor  the  memories  of  our  owne  Country-men
in  those  exploits,  which  as  resolutely  as  the  best,  in  the
defence  of  Christ  and  his  Gospell  ended  their  daies,
Batchelor,  Hardwicke,  Thomas  Milemay,  Robert  Mully-
nax,  Thomas  Bishop,  Roger  Compton,  George  Davyson,
Nicholas  Williams,  and  one  John  the  Scot.  These  all  did
what  men  could  doe,  and  when  they  could  doe  no  more,
left  there  their  martyred  bodies,  in  testimonie  of  their
Martiall  minds,  onely  Ensigne  Carlton,  and  Sergeant
Robinson  escaped.  But  Smith  amongst  the  slaughtered
dead  bodies,  with  toyle  and  wounds  lay  groning,  till  being

334

CAPTAIN JOHN SMITH  ad.

c.  1596.
found by the Pillagers that he was able to live, and
perceiving  by  his  Armour  and  habit, that  his  ransome
might  be  better  to  them  then  his  death, they  led  him  Captaine
Prisoner  with  divers  other. Well  they  used  him  till  his  Smth  taken*
wounds  were  cured,  and  at  Axopolis  they  were  all  brought
into  the  market  place  and  stripped,  that  the  Merchants
might  see  their  limbs  and  wounds,  (who  had  Servants  upon
purpose  to  try  their  strengths)  and  there  sold  like  beasts.
Smith  fell  to  the  share  of  Basha  Bogall,  who  sent  him  Captaine
forth-with  to  Andrinopolis,  and  so  for  Constantinople  to mt  50
his  faire  Mistris  for  a  Slave. By  twentie  and  twentie
chained  by  the  necke,  they  marched  in  Fyle  to  this  great
Citie,  where  they  were  delivered  to  their  severall  Masters,
and  he  to  his  young  Charatza  Tragabigzanda.

This  Noble  Gentlewoman  tooke  sometimes  occasion  to
shew  him  to  some  friends,  or  rather  to  speake  with  him,
and  because  she  could  speake  Italian,  would  faine  her  selfe
sicke  when  shee  should  goe  to  the  Banias,  or  weepe  over
the  graves,  to  know  how  Bogall  tooke  him  Prisoner,  and
if  he  were,  as  Bogall  writ  to  her,  a  Bohemian  Lord  con-
quered by  his  hand,  with  many  more  which  he  had  with
him,  whom  hee  would  present  her  ere  long,  whose  ransomes
should  adorne  her  with  the  glory  of  his  Conquests.  But
when  shee  heard  him  protest  he  knew  no  such  matter,  nor
had  ever  seene  Bogall  till  hee  bought  him  at  Axopolis,  and
that  hee  was  an  English-man,  onely  by  his  adventures
made  a  Captaine  in  those  Countries :  to  try  the  truth,  shee
found  meanes  to  find  out  many  which  could  speak  English,
French,  Dutch,  and  Italian  ;  to  whom  he  relating  the  most
part  of  those  former  passages,  (which  they  honestly
reported  to  her)  shee  tooke  as  it  seemed,  much  compassion
on  him.  But  having  no  use  for  him,  least  her  mother
should  sell  him,  she  sent  him  to  her  Brother  the  Tymor
Bashaw  of  Nalbrits,  in  the  Country  of  Cambrya  in
Tartaria.

But  let  us  remember  his  passing  notes  in  the  speculative  How  he  was
course  from  Constantinople,  by  Sander,  Pelus,  Pannasa-  sent  int°
musa,  Lastilla,  to  Varna,  an  ancient  Citie  upon  the  blacke  Tartana'

335

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

c.  1596.

Sea,  where  having  little  more  libertie  then  his  eies  judge-
ment, he  might  see  the  Townes  with  their  short  Towers,
in  a  most  excellent  plaine,  pleasant,  and  fertile  Countrey,
full  of  Villages,  and  dispersed  faire  buildings,  as  well  in
Varna.  Sagovia  as  Romania. But  from  Varna,  nothing  but  the

blacke  Sea,  till  he  came  to  the  two  Capes  of  Taur  and
Pergillo,  which  are  two  muddy  Promontories,  at  the
entrance  of  the  Straight  Niger,  which  hath  a  very  deepe
Channell,  and  as  he  conjectured,  ten  leagues  long,  and
Afdehscr*Pfton  three  broad.  At  the  entrance  of  the  Disabachi  Sea,  are  a
bachi  or  '  ~  great  many  of  high  blacke  Rocks  on  each  side  the  Channell
blacke  Sea.  to  ones  thinking,  which  they  said  were  onely  Trees,
Weedes,  and  Muds,  throwne  from  the  in-land  Countries
by  the  inundations,  and  by  the  violence  of  the  Currant
cast  there  by  the  Eddy :  of  which  as  they  sayled,  they  saw
many  without  sight  of  Land,  seeming  like  high  Rockes
on  low  Hands,  which  are  onely  great  flats  of  Osie  Quag-
mires, where  infinite  heapes  of  Trees  doe  sticke ;  and  by
their  waight,  time,  and  multitudes,  though  the  boughes
rot,  the  bodies  they  say,  have  made  many  of  those  Osie
Flats  firme  Land  in  many  places :  Thus  sayling  this
Dissabachi  Sea,  till  hee  came  betwixt  Susack  and  Curaske,
onely  two  visible  Townes  appeared  at  the  entrance  of  the
River  Bruago.  In  sixe  or  seven  daies  sayle,  hee  saw  foure
or  five,  seeming  strong  Castles  of  stone,  with  flat  tops
Cambria.  ancj  Battlements  about  them  ;  but  ariving  at  Cambria,  he
was  according  to  their  custome,  well  used.  The  Castle
was  of  a  large  circomference,  ten  or  twelve  foote  thicke  in
the  foundation.  Some  sixe  foote  from  it  a  Palizado,  and
then  a  ditch  round  about,  fortie  foot  broad,  full  of  water :
on  the  one  side  of  it  a  Towne  all  of  low  flat  houses,  but  no
great  matter  as  it  seemed ;  yet  it  keeps  all  that  Country
in  admirable  awe  and  subjection.  Three  daies  he  rested
there,  then  it  was  two  daies  journey  to  Nalbrits,  the
Timors  habitation,  a  place  not  of  much  lesse  strength  then
Cambria,  where  sometimes  resideth  this  Tymor  Nalbrits,
Brother  to  the  Ladie  Tragabigzando.  To  her  unkind
Brother  this  kind  Ladie  writ  so  much  for  his  good  usage,

336

CAPTAIN JOHN SMITH  ad.

c.  1596.
that  hee  halfe  suspected  as  much  as  she  intended. For
shee  told  him,  he  should  there  but  sojourne  to  learne  the
language :  and  what  it  was  to  be  a  Turke,  till  time  made
her  Master  of  her  selfe. But  the  Tymor  her  Brother
diverted,  and  perverted  all  this  to  the  worst  of  crueltie  :
for  within  an  houre  after  his  arrivall,  hee  caused  his  Drug-
man  to  strip  him  naked,  and  shave  his  head  and  beard  as  Shaving  of
bare  as  his  hand,  a  great  Ring  of  Iron  with  a  long  stalke ,  a™Sj  an
bowing  like  a  Sickle  about  his  neck,  and  a  coate  made  of
Ulgrayes haire, much like Hairecloath, guarded about
with  a  piece  of  an  undressed  skinne. There  were  many
other Christian Slaves, but more then two hundred
Forsados,  and  he  being  the  last,  was  Slave  of  Slaves  to
them  all. Among  those  slavish  fortunes,  there  was  no
great  choise,  for  the  best  was  so  bad,  a  Dog  could  hardly
have  lived  to  indure  : and  yet  for  all  their  paines  and
labour,  no  more  regarded  then  a  Beast. The  Tymor  and
his  friends  fed  upon  Pillow,  which  is  boyled  Rice  and
Garnancis,  with  little  bits  of  Mutton  or  Buckones,  which
is  rost  pieces  of  Horse,  Ulgry,  or  any  Beast. Samboses
and  Muselbits  are  great  dainties,  and  yet  but  round  pies
full  of  all  sorts  of  flesh  chopped,  with  varietie  of  Hearbs. [H.viii.
Their  best  drinke  is  Coffa,  made  of  a  Graine,  called  Coava,  I3^*l

boyled  with  water  and  Sherberke,  which  is  onely  Hony
and  Water.  Mares  Milke,  or  the  Milke  of  any  Beast,
they  hold  restorative ;  but  all  the  Comminaltie  drinke  pure
Water.  Their  Bread  is  made  of  this  Coava,  which  is  a
kind  of  blacke  Wheate,  and  Cuscus  a  small  white  Seed
like  Millet  in  Biskany.  Our  common  victuall,  was  the  Millet.
Intrals  and  Offal  of  Horses  and  Ulgryes ;  of  this  cut  in
small  pieces,  they  will  fill  a  great  Cauldron ;  which  being
boyled,  and  with  Cuscus  put  in  great  bowles  in  the  manner
of  Chafing-dishes,  they  sit  about  it  on  the  ground ;  after
they  have  raked  it  through  as  oft  as  they  please  with  their
fowle  fists,  the  remainder  was  for  the  Christian  Slaves.
Some  of  this  broth  they  would  temper  with  Cuscus,  like
Butter  for  Fritters,  and  putting  the  fire  off  from  the  hearth,
powre  there  a  bowle  full,  then  cover  it  with  coales  till  it
viii  337  y

A.D.

c.  1596.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Houses.

No  houses  but

moveable

Tents.

The  Tartars
o/Nagi.

be  baked,  which  stued  with  the  remainder  of  the  broath,
and  small  pieces  of  flesh,  was  an  extraordinary  dainty.
Their  Attire.  The  better  sort  are  attired  like  Turkes,  but  the  plaine
Tartar  weareth  halfe  a  blacke  Sheepes  skinne  over  his
backe,  two  of  the  legges  tyed  about  his  necke,  the  other
two  about  his  middle  ;  with  another  over  his  belly,  and  his
legges  tyed  in  like  manner  behind  him :  then  two  skinnes
more  made  like  a  paire  of  Bases,  serve  him  for  Breeches,
with  a  little  Cap  close  to  his  skull  of  course  blacke  Felt,
and  they  use  exceeding  much  of  this  Felt  for  Carpets,  for
Bedding,  for  Coates,  and  Idols.  Their  houses  are  much
worse  then  your  Irish  :  but  the  In-land  Countrey  hath
none  but  Carts  and  Tents,  which  they  ever  remove  from
Countrey  to  Countrey,  as  they  see  occasion,  driving  with
them  infinite  troups  of  blacke  Sheepe,  Cattle,  and  Ulgryes,
eating  up  all  before  them  as  they  goe.

For  the  Tartars  of  Nagi,  they  have  neither  Towne  nor
House,  Corne  nor  Drinke,  but  Flesh  and  Milke  ;  and  live
all  in  Hordias,  three  or  foure  thousand  of  them  in  a  com-
pany, all  living  in  great  Carts,  fifteene  or  sixteene  foot
broad,  which  is  covered  over  with  small  Rods,  wratled
together  in  the  forme  of  a  Birds-nest  turned  upwards,  and
with  the  Ashes  of  bones  ;  tempered  with  Oyle,  and  a  Clay
they  have,  &  Camels  haire,  they  loome  them  so  wel,  that
no  weather  wil  pierce  them,  and  yet  they  are  very  light.
Each  Hordia  hath  a  Murse,  which  they  obey  as  King.
Their  gods  are  infinite,  but  the  Crimme  Tartar  and  the
Tauricks,  obey  Murtissalla  Mahomets  chiefe  Prophet.
One  thousand  or  two  thousand  of  those  glittering  white
Carts  drawne  with  Camels,  Deere,  Bulls,  and  Ulgryes,
they  bring  round  in  a  Ring,  where  they  pitch  their  Campe,
and  the  Murse  with  his  chiefe  Alliances  are  placed  in  the
midst :  They  doe  much  hurt  when  they  get  any  Strogs,
which  are  great  Boats,  used  upon  the  Edle  a  River  we
call  Volga,  to  them  that  dwell  in  the  Countrey  of  Poronlog,
and  would  doe  much  more,  were  it  not  for  the  Muscovits
Garisons  that  there  inhabite.

All  the  hope  he  had  ever  to  be  delivered  from  this

338

CAPTAIN JOHN SMITH  a.d.

c.  1596.
thraldome,  was  onely  the  love  of  Tragabigzanda,  who
surely  was  ignorant  of  his  bad  usage  :  for  although  he  had
oft  debated  the  matter  with  some  Christians,  which  had
beene  there  long  Slaves,  they  could  not  find  how  to  make
any  escape,  by  any  reason  or  possibilitie.  But  God  beyond  How  ^mttmh
Mans  expectation  or  imagination,  helpeth  his  Servants  esc?£e-t:  *
when  they  least  thinke  of  helpe,  as  it  hapned  to  him.  In
this  miserable  estate,  he  became  a  Thrasher  at  a  Grange  in  a
great  field,  more  then  a  league  from  the  Tymors  house.
The  Bassa  as  he  oft  used  to  visite  his  grounds,  visited  him,
and  tooke  occasion  so  to  beate,  spurne  and  revile  him,  that
Smith  forgetting  all  reason,  beate  out  his  braines  with  his
bat :  and  seeing  his  estate  could  not  be  worse  then  it  was,
he  cloathed  himselfe  in  his  cloathes,  hid  his  body  under
the  Straw,  filled  his  Knapsacke  with  Corne,  shut  the  doores,
mounted  his  Horse,  and  ranne  into  the  Desart  at  all  adven-
ture :  Two  or  three  daies  thus  fearefully  wandring  he  knew
not  whither,  and  well  it  was  hee  met  not  any  to  aske  the
way.  Thus  being  even  as  one  taking  leave  of  this  miser-
able world,  God  did  direct  him  to  their  great  way  or
Custragan,  as  they  call  it,  which  doth  crosse  those  large
Territories,  and  is  generally  knowne  among  them  by  these
markes.

In  every  crossing  of  this  great  way,  is  planted  a  Poste,
and  in  it  so  many  bolts  with  broad  ends,  as  there  werewaies,
and  every  bolt  hath  the  figure  painted  over  it,  that  demon-
strateth  to  what  part  that  way  leadeth,  as  that  which
pointeth  towards  the  Crimmes  Countrey,  is  marked  with  a
halfe  Moone :  if  towards  the  China,  the  picture  of  the
Sunne ;  if  towards  the  Georgians  and  Persia,  a  blacke
man  full  of  white  spots ;  if  towards  Muscovy,  the  signe
of  a  Crosse  ;  if  towards  the  habitation  of  any  other  Prince,
the  figure  whereby  his  Standard  is  knowne.  To  his  dying
spirits  thus  God  added  some  comfort  in  this  melancholy
journey,  wherein  if  he  had  met  any  of  that  vild  generation,
they  had  made  him  their  Slave,  or  sent  him  backe  agalne
to  his  Master.  Sixteene  daies  he  travelled  in  this  feare
and  torment  after  that  crosse,  till  hee  arrived  at  Axopolis,  Exopolis.

339

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

c.  1596.

upon  the  River  Don,  a  Garrison  of  the  Muscovits. The

Governor  after  due  examination  of  those  hard  events,

tooke off  his Irons, and so kindly  used him, that he

thought  himselfe  newly  risen  from  death.

The  descrip- The  most  he  could  learne  of  these  wild  Countries  was

*™n  °f .  this,  that  the  Countrey  of  Cambria  is  two  dayes  Journey

his  passage  to fr°m  ^e  head  of  the  great  River  Bruapo,  which  springeth

Russia.  from  many  places  of  the  Mountaynes  of  Inagachi,  that

Bruapo.  joyne  themselves  together  in  the  Poole  Kerkas,  which  they

account  for  the  head,  and  falleth  into  the  Sea  Dissabach  :

Don,  or  which  receiveth  also  the  River  Don,  and  all  the  Rivers

Tanais.  fa^  fa||  fr0m  the  great Countrey  of  the Circassi, the

[Il.viii.  Caitaches,  the  Tauricaces,  Pricopes,  Cumania,  Cossunka,

X369-J and  the  Crymme,  through  which  Sea  hee  say  led,  and  up

the  River  Bruapo  to  Nalbrits,  and  thence  through  the

Deserts  of  Circassi  to  Exopolis,  as  is  related,  where  he

stayed with the Governour, till the Convoy went to

Coragnaw,  then  with  his  Certificate  how  he  found  him,

and  had  examined  him,  with  his  friendly  Letters  he  sent

him  by  Zumalacke  to  Coragnaw,  whose  Governor  in  like

manner  so  kindly  used  him,  that  by  this  means,  he  went

with  the  safe  conduct  to  Letch  &  Donka,  in  Cologosk,  and

thence  to  Birniske,  &  Newgrade,  in  Seberya,  by  Kezachica

upon the River Niger, in the Confines of Littuania.

A  faire  sun- From  whence  with  as  much  kindnesse  he  was  conveyed  in

shine  after  a jjke  manner  by  Coroskie,  Duberosko,  Duzihell,  Drohobus,

and  Ostroge  in  Volonia. Shaslaw  and  Laxco  in  Podolia,

Halico  and  Collonia  in  Polonia,  and  so  to  Hermonstat  in

Transilvania. In  all  his  life  he  seldome  met  with  more

respect,  mirth,  content  and  entertaynment,  and  not  any

Governour  where  he  came,  but  gave  him  somewhat  as  a

Present  besides  his  charges,  seeing  themselves  subject  to

the  like  calamitie. And  because  our  Authour  hath so

His  Observa-  thorowly  travelled  Europe,  I  have  here  presented  Hondius

"jTrn kito hiS  Map  °f  Eur°Pe  :

Tr^ansUvania Through those poore continually forraged Countries

and  the  midst  there  is  no  passage,  but  with  the  Caravans  or  Convoyes ;

of  Europe. for  they  are  Countries  rather  to  bee  pittied  then  envyed,

34o

CAPTAIN JOHN SMITH  a.d.

c.  1596.
and  it  is  a  wonder  any  should  make  Warres  for  them.
The  Villages  are  here  and  there  a  few  Houses  of  streight
Firre-trees,  laid  heads  and  points  above  one  another  made
fast  by  notches  at  the  ends,  more  then  a  mans  height,  and
with  broad  split  boards  pinned  together  with  woodden
pinnes  thatched  for  coverture  in  ten  Villages  you  shall
scarce  find  ten  Iron  Nayles,  except  it  bee  in  some  extra-
ordinarie  mans  House.  For  their  Townes,  Exopolis,
Lech,  and  Donka  have  Rampiers  made  of  that  woodden
walled-fashion,  double,  and  betwixt  them  Earth  and  Stones,
but  so  latched  with  crosse  Timber,  they  are  very  strong
against  any  thing  but  fire,  and  about  them  a  deepe  Ditch,
and  a  Pallizado  of  young  Firre-trees,  but  most  of  the  rest
have  only  a  great  Ditch  cast  about  them,  and  the  Ditches  [H.viii.
Earth  is  all  their  Rampier,  and  the  toppe  on  it  round,  well  I37°-\

environed  with  Palizadoes ;  Some  have  some  few  small
Peeces  of  small  Ordnance  and  Slings,  Curriours  and
Muskets ;  but  their  generallest  Weapons  are  the  Russe
Bow  and  Arrowes.  In  their  wayes  you  shall  find  pave-
ments over  Bogges,  only  of  young  Firre-trees  laid  crosse
over  one  another  for  two  or  three  houres  Journey,  or  as
the  passage  requires,  and  yet  in  two  dayes  travell,  you
shall  scarce  see  sixe  Habitations.  Notwithstanding,  to  see
how  their  Lords,  Governours,  and  Captaines  are  civilized,
well  attyred  and  accoultred  with  Jewels,  Sables,  Horses,
and  after  their  manner  with  curious  Furniture,  it  is
wonderfull ;  but  they  are  all  Lords  or  Slaves,  which  makes  -All  Lords,  or
them  so  subject  to  every  Invasion.  Slaves,

In  Transilvania  he  found  so  many  good  friends,  that  but
to  see  and  rejoyce  himselfe  after  all  those  Encounters  to
see  his  Native  Countrey,  he  would  ever  hardly  have  left
them,  though  the  Miracle  of  Vertue,  their  Prince  was
absent.  Being  thus  glutted  with  content,  and  neere
drowned  with  joy ;  he  passed  high  Hungaria,  By-fylecke,
Tocka,  Cassovia,  and  Unaderawa,  by  Ulmitch  in  Moravia,
to  Prague  in  Bohemia :  at  last  he  found  the  most  generous
Prince  Sigismundus  with  his  Colonell  at  Lipswicke  in  Sighmunds
Misenland,  who  gave  him  his  passe,  intimating  the  service  ^est'monial1'

34i

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

c.  1596.

hee  had  done,  and  the  honours  he  had  received  with  fifteene
hundred  Duckets  of  Gold  to  repaire  his  losses.  With  this
he  spent  sometime,  to  visit  the  faire  Cities  and  Countries
of  Dresden  in  Saxonie,  Mandabourge,  and  Brunswicke
Castle  in  Hessen,  Wittenberge,  Ulme  and  Minikin  in
Bavaria,  Ausburge  and  her  Universitie,  Hanna,  Franck-
ford,  Mets,  the  Palatinate,  Wormes,  Spire,  and  Straws-
burge.  Passing  the  Cardinalship  to  Nancey  in  Loraine,
and  the  Kingdome  of  France,  by  Paris  to  Orleance,  he
went  downe  the  River  of  Leyer,  to  Angers,  and  imbarked
himselfe  at  Nants  in  Britania  for  Bilbow  in  Biskanie,  to
see  Burgos,  Valiodolid,  Squeriall,  Madrill,  Toledo,  Cordua,
Cuede  Ryall,  Sivill,  Cherges,  Cales,  and  Saint  Lucars  in
Spaine.

Then  understanding  that  the  Warres  of  Mully  Shash
and  Mully  Sedan,  the  two  Brothers  in  Barbarie  of  Fez
and  Moroco  (to  which  hee  was  animated  by  some  friends)
His  retume  were  concluded  in  peace,  he  imbarked  himselfe  for  England
for  England.  ^\\h  one  thousand  Duckets  in  his  Purse,  which  after  with
a  great  deale  more  hee  employed,  in  searching  more  dangers
in  the  West  Indies,  and  the  unknowne  parts  of  uncivilized
America,  where  how  he  discovered  and  inhabited  Virginia,
how  hee  was  taken  Prisoner  by  Powhatan,  their  Emperor
1607.  and  delivered,  how  hee  tooke  the  King  of  Paspa-
hegh,  Prisoner  in  single  Combate,  and  the  King  of
Pamavuke  Prisoner  in  the  middest  of  his  Armie,  and
brought  thirtie  of  their  pettie  Kings,  and  all  their  people
in  subjection  to  the  English  :  How  since  hee  hath  searched,
and  caused  a  new  England,  and  was  taken  Prisoner  by
French  Pirats,  and  escaped :  You  shall  after  heare  in  fitter
place.

342

THE  DEATH  OF  SULTAN  OSMAN

A.D.
l622.

Chap.  XII.

The  death  of  Sultan  Osman,  and  the  setting  up  of
Mustafa  his  Uncle,  according  to  the  Relation
presented  to  His  Majestic

He  Grand  Signior  Sultan  Osman  discon-
tented since  his  disgrace  in  Poland,  as
soone  as  he  came  to  Constantinople,  pre-
tended a  journey  upon  the  Emir  de  Saida,
who  was  reported  to  be  in  Rebellion,
having  taken  Armes  to  other  ends.  But
being  diverted  from  this  purpose  by  the
great  instance  of  the  Viziers,  and  that  it  would  not  so  well
serve  his  secret  Designes,  because  hee  must  then  keepe  an
Armie  on  foote ;  hee  gave  out  that  hee  would  visite  Pretence  of
Mecha,  the  Tombe  of  his  false  Prophet.  visiting

To  make  this  Voyage  the  more  secure,  in  appearance,  ec  a'
hee  seemed  content  to  accept  of  any  Treatie  with  the
Polacks,  even  to  conditions  both  of  disadvantage  and
dishonour  ;  for  his  estates  in  Hungarie,  he  re-enforced  the
frontiers  with  divers  troupes,  and  though  hee  were  much
troubled  at  the  league  betweene  the  Emperour  of  Ger-
manie  and  Bethlem  Gabor,  yet  he  dissembled  it  so,  as  that
he  would  not  displease  the  Transilvanian,  but  rather
offered  new  succours,  and  forbearance  of  his  Tribute.
From  the  Incursions  of  the  Cossacks,  hee  hoped  to  assure
himselfe,  by  the  treatie  of  the  Poles,  and  in  occasion  of
breach,  he  had  the  Tartars  readie  to  requite  them  (it  being
both  their  trades  to  live  upon  spoile  and  robberie)  and  for
more  securitie  hee  appointed  twentie  Gallies  to  keepe  the
Blacke  Sea.  The  common  people  and  Viziers  that  loved
rest,  and  knew  not  the  Designe,  were  much  troubled  and
discontent  at  this  Journey,  who  made  many  Remonstrances
to  him  of  the  inconvenience  and  danger  to  leave  the  seat
of  his  Empire  to  the  trust  of  a  Deputie,  in  a  time  when
Bethlem  Gabor  was  newly  reconciled  to  the  Germane
Emperour, and therefore not to be trusted; and the

343

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1622.

Polacks  newly  reconciled  to  him,  and  therefore  to  bee
mistrusted. Divers other reasons were made to
[Il.vin.  him, many Petitions delivered from the Churchmen,

I37i-J  Lawyers,  and  from  all  Estates.  But  melancholike
Revenge  had  wholly  possessed  him,  so  that  by  no
meanes  he  could  be  perswaded  to  desist.  The
Souldierie  passed  so  farre,  as  to  threatten  publikely,  and
to  protest,  they  would  not  follow,  but  rather  set  up  another
King  in  his  absence  that  should  stay  among  them.  In
conclusion,  carried  by  his  owne  fate  to  destruction :  the
1622.  seventh  of  May,  having  first  commanded  away  all  his

Gallies  to  the  Levant,  and  thereby  disposed  away  many
of  his  Souldiers,  he  began  to  passe  over  his  Tents  and
Pavilions  to  Asia  side,  with  great  quantities  of  Treasure :
Janizaries The  Janizaries  and  Spahees,  who  had  also  secret  Intellig-
mutime.  ence  Up0n  ^€  King,  his  owne  words  and  actions  betraying

some  further  Designe  then  a  Pilgrimage  (for  he  made
preparations  to  carrie  away  all  his  Jewels  and  Treasure,
even  defacing  his  Palace,  and  taking  from  Churches,  and
his  Wardrobes,  whatsoever  could  be  converted  to  Bullion)
suddenly  met  at  the  Hippodrome  in  the  Citie  upon  a  word
given ;  and  from  thence  ranne  to  the  Seraglio  in  tumult,
but  without  Armes,  and  there  according  to  their  barbarous
mutinies  cryed  out  for  the  King  (having  first  taken  order
to  stop  the  passage  of  any  thing  upon  the  water)  who
appearing  to  them,  asked  what  this  insolencie  meant,  and
what  they  pretended.  They  then  by  the  mouth  of  a
multitude  (for  they  had  no  head  but  that  of  the  Monster)
demanded  first  that  hee  should  not  proceed  in  his  purpose
to  goe  to  Mecha,  nor  into  Asia,  but  that  he  must  abide
in  the  Citie.  Secondly,  they  would  have  delivered  to  their
furie  the  Great  Vizier  De-lavir  Bassa,  the  Hoja,  or  Con-
fessor of  the  King,  the  Cashariaga  Governour  of  the
women,  the  Tefterdar,  or  Treasurer,  the  Cadde  Leskar,
or  Chiefe  Justice,  and  some  others,  as  Enemies  to  the
State,  and  consenting  to  this  Voyage,  which  they  pretended
would  be  the  ruine  of  the  Empire.  The  first,  after  a  little
dispute,  the  King  granted  unto  them ; promising  to  give

344

HONDIUS HIS MAP OF EUROPE

THE  DEATH  OF  SULTAN  OSMAN a.d.

1622.
over  his  Journey,  but  they  not  content,  exacted  it  in
writing.  To  the  second,  he  replyed,  that  it  was  dis-
honour to  him  to  have  his  Servants  so  used  without  order
of  Justice :  but  perswaded  them  to  have  patience  to  stay
untill  Saturday,  the  next  Divan,  or  publike  Councell,  where
they  should  all  appeare,  and  if  they  were  found  culpable,
they  should  receive  punishment ;  not  meaning  to  performe
any  of  this,  but  to  get  time  and  allay  their  present  furie.
These  fellowes  not  content  with  this  moderate  answere,
undertooke  to  know  that  they  were  guiltie,  and  therefore
that  they  needed  no  other  witnesse,  tryals,  nor  Judge,  but
themselves,  and  with  extreme  clamour,  called  to  have  them
delivered.  But  the  King  refusing  to  give  them  any  other
satisfaction,  and  they  unprepared  for  force,  returned  into
the  Citie,  which  now  was  all  in  feare,  every  house  and  shop
shut  up  expecting  a  generall  sacke.  But  they  followed
the  way  of  their  owne  hatred,  and  first  went  unto  the
house  of  the  Hoja,  which  they  brake  and  pillaged :  but
not  finding  him,  they  proceeded  to  the  Great  Viziers,  who
made  some  defence,  and  (they  being  unarmed)  beate  him
off ;  and  so  they  separated  being  now  Evening,  but  yet
kept  a  Guard  in  some  parts  of  the  Towne.

This  night  the  King  made  an  attempt  to  send  over  to
Asia  side,  but  was  prevented ;  and  to  fortifie  and  defend
his  Seraglio,  which  is  walled  strongly  about,  and  hath
alway  in  it  of  household  Servants  about  three  thousand,
but  it  seemes  no  man  would  arme  in  his  cause.  For  the
next  morning,  the  Mutiners  assembled  againe,  and  taking
their  Armes,  went  first  to  the  Mufti,  or  Arch-priest  among
them,  and  forced  him  and  divers  others  to  accompany  them
to  the  Court,  where  they  anew  demanded  these  men,  but
with  more  instance  and  furie.  In  the  meane  time  the  Hoja,
Caddee  Leskar,  and  Tefterdar  fled,  and  were  yet  never
heard  of.  The  Vizier  retyred  to  the  King,  and  perswaded
him  earnestly  to  goe  over  in  person  in  his  owne  Boates
(which  from  his  Garden  he  might  easily  doe)  to  Asia,  and
there  to  take  Horse,  and  he  would  secure  him  from  all
perill ; but  the  King  would  not  moove,  bidding  him  stay

345

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1622.

confident and assured that hee would punish these
Rebels.

The  wise  old  man  seeing  this  constancie  or  obstinacie,
desired  leave  to  shift  for  himselfe,  which  he  either  tooke
Saint  Knave,  or  obtayned,  and  so  got  away  to  the  Hermitage  of  a  Saint
renowmed  amongst  them,  who  (like  himselfe)  betrayed  him
to  a  Captaine  of  the  Janizaries ;  yet  did  him  the  favour
as  not  to  deliver  him  to  the  multitude,  but  carried  him
backe  to  the  Kings  House.  At  this  time  it  was  disputed
in  the  Seraglio,  about  the  deliverie  of  these  Officers,  the
Emperour  refusing,  the  Rebels  clamouring  and  threatning  ;
insomuch,  as  he  began  to  feare  they  would  breake  in,  and
in  their  rage  doe  worse  then  was  yet  pretended.  Where-
upon, whether  by  the  Kings  order,  or  by  his  owne  consent
(willing  to  bee  the  Peace-offering)  the  Vizier  went  out  to
them,  and  with  a  good  assurednesse  demanded  what  they
sought  of  him,  and  wherein  he  had  offended :  But  they
answered  him  with  their  Swords,  and  suddenly  cut  him
in  pieces.

The  Emperour  seeing  their  furie  so  out-ragious,  had
now  more  cause  to  doubt,  and  retyred  himselfe  then  too
late,  when  hee  had  lost  his  brave  Counsellor ;  would  have

GrandSigniors  fled  into  Asia,  and  could  not,  but  conveyed  himselfe  into

figfrt*  a  private  place,  prepared  by  his  Bustengi  Bassa,  or  chiefe

Gardiner.  The  Rebels  continue  without  in  their  mad-
nesse,  asking  for  the  King,  and  for  more  Sacrifices.  But
the  Servants  protesting  they  knew  not  where  he  was,  they
said,  they  must  have  a  King,  and  if  he  would  not  appeare,
they  would  make  another ;  and  having  awhile  attended,
they  resolved  to  enter  the  Palace  (but  first  tooke  a  generall
Oath  not  to  sacke  the  Imperiall  Throne,  which  they  called
their  house  and  their  honour)  and  there  seeking  for  the
King,  not  able  to  find  him,  they  extorted  by  confession  the

[Il.viii.  Caslariaga,  and  slue  him,  and  then  they  demanded  for

x372-]  Mustafa,  Uncle  to  Osman,  by  him  formerly  deposed,  a

Mustafa  made  man  estemecj  rather  holy  (that  is  franticke)  then  wise,  and
indeed  fitter  for  a  Cell,  then  a  Septer.  The  King  the  first
day  of  this  tumult  had  put  Mustafa  into  a  Vault  with  two

346

THE DEATH OF SULTAN OSMAN  a.d.

1622.

Negro  women,  without  bread  or  drinke,  in  which  estate
these  new  Electors  found  him  almost  naked,  and  halfe
pined.  At  first  sight,  hee  thought  they  had  beene  the
Messengers  of  death :  but  that  feare  passed  over,  he
begged  of  them  a  Cup  of  water.  Whom  they  tooke,  and
instantly  proclaimed  their  Emperour,  which  hee  was  loth
to  accept  uti  pudebat  aucti  nominis ;  How  unstable  are
the  Estates  of  the  greatest  Princes!  Quern  dies  videt
veniens  jacentem,  hunc  vidit  dies  fugiens  regnantem.  He
that  was  now  in  the  Jawes  of  death,  naked,  starved,  and
dying  for  thirst,  is  become  the  Emperour,  and  may  drinke
Gold,  or  the  bloud  of  men.

They  as  yet  not  knowing  what  was  become  of  Osman,
and  loth  to  trust  Mustapha  in  the  Palace,  carried  him  in
triumph  to  the  old  Seraglio,  and  there  left  him,  departing
to  the  sacke  of  the  Viziers  house,  and  so  in  the  Evening
to  their  Rendevous,  where  they  kept  both  good  gard,  and
good  order  in  the  Citie,  from  fires  and  other  Insolencies.
Sultan  Osman  amazed  with  these  newes,  so  soone  as  they
had  left  the  Court,  came  out  and  called  to  Councell  in  the
night,  Huzein  Bassa,  late  Vizier  in  the  Polish  Warre,  and
the  Aga  of  the  Janizaries,  both  faithfull  to  him,  and
demanded  their  advice,  first,  having  sent  to  the  old
Seraglio,  to  practise  the  women  there,  to  strangle  Mustafa  ;
but  some  taking  his  part,  a  new  uproare  beganne  in  the
house  betweene  that  Sexe :  and  the  Souldiers  that  kept
watch,  taking  the  Alarum,  entred  in,  and  rescued  him,  and
from  thence  remooved  him  to  the  Chambers  of  the  Jani-
zaries, where  they  garded  him  for  that  night,  in  an  ill
Lodging.  All  this  while  Osman  consults  what  course  to
take.  These  two  his  friends,  and  some  others,  tell  him,
that  the  case  was  desperate,  and  could  not  bee  cured  but  by
a  desperate  remedie.  And  they  agreed  that  the  Aga  should
goe  and  perswade  with  the  Mofti,  and  that  the  King  in  the
morning  should  suddenly  present  himselfe  to  the  Souldiers
at  their  owne  doore,  and  make  experience,  what  his  Pres-
ence, his  submission,  and  his  benevolence  promised  could
worke,  to  move  them  to  Loyaltie,  or  compassion ; which

347

A.D.

l622.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

counsell  early  in  the  morning  they  put  in  practice.  The
King  accompanied  with  the  Mofti,  (who  never  consented
to  his  deposing,  though  he  favoured  the  Souldiers  against
the  Vizier)  with  Huzein  Bassa,  and  about  twelve  Horse-
men, went  directly  to  the  Janizaries  Colledge  where
Mustafa  was  kept,  and  there  in  teares  made  them  an
Oration,  offering  great  recompence  repenting  of  his
errour ;  and  finally,  invoked  them  by  the  merits  of  his
Father  and  all  his  Ancestors  to  have  some  pitie  upon  their
true  Master.  The  multitude  (tarn  prona  in  misericor-
diam,  quam  immodica  saevitia  fuerat)  now  knew  not  what
to  doe ;  a  silent  murmure  ranne  among  them,  and  they
were  halfe  converted :  But  the  Aga  of  the  Janizaries,
thinking  to  merit  of  the  King,  and  beginning  to  plead
unseasonably  for  him,  with  some  harsh  words  of
upbraidure,  Ut  natura  Maris  omni  flatu  venti  turbida,
New  mutinle.  anew  moved  their  furie,  so  that  they  cryed  out  Treason,
and  fell  upon  him  and  Huzein  Bassa,  and  cut  them  into
pieces,  every  man  taking  a  part  of  their  flesh  to  satisfie
their  revenge.  The  Mofti  would  speake,  but  is  with-
drawne  by  some,  for  respect  to  his  place,  and  with  diffi-
cultie  is  conveyed  away.  Now  the  poore  Osman  sees  his
friends  slaine,  and  knowes  not  which  way  to  convert  him-
selfe,  but  binding  up  his  eyes  with  a  Napkin,  expects  death
as  the  last  of  their  furie ;  But  they  carrie  him  first  before
Mustafa,  and  accuse  him  as  the  disturber  of  the  Peace  of
the  Empire,  and  demand  sentence  against  him,  more  vulgi
suum  quisque  flagitium  aliis  objectantes.  The  forsaken
Prince  pleades  for  life,  and  the  new  King  knowes  not  how
to  condemne,  but  nods  and  agrees  to  all  that  is  propounded.
At  last,  they  consult  with  themselves,  and  put  him  upon  an
Horse  (an  insolent  Spahee  changing  Turbants  with  him)
and  sent  him  away  Prisoner  to  the  seven  Towers  under
good  gard,  and  then  returned  to  their  new  Master,  and
placed  him  in  the  Seraglio  and  Imperiall  Throne,  where
he  hath  need  to  have  good  Broths  and  nourishment  to
restore  his  decayed  bodie.

The  Souldiers  thinke  all  is  done,  and  (onely  sacking  the

348

Mustafa
enthronized.

THE DEATH OF SULTAN OSMAN  a.d.

1622.

houses  of  Huzein  Bassa,  and  some  others  their  conceived
Enemies)  returne  in  quiet  to  their  severall  Lodgings,  and
have  no  further  malice.  But  the  new  Vizier  Daout  Bassa,
made  by  Mustafa,  knew  well,  if  Osman  lived,  that  this
storme  might  passe  over,  and  hee  would  as  easily  and  by
the  same  meanes  returne  to  his  Estate,  as  hee  fell  from  it,
Vulgus  ut  mos  est,  cujusque  novi  motus  cupidum.
Therefore  hee  consulted  with  some  few  interessed  in  Mus-
tafaes  preferment,  and  thereby  obnoxious  to  Osman,  to
search  how  many  of  the  Royall  bloud  were  left  alive,  and
resolved  if  there  remayned  two,  to  make  an  end  of  Osman.
Two  of  his  Brothers  were  found,  the  one  about  twelve,  the  9mfns
other  about  seven  yeares  of  age  :  and  thereupon  the  Vizier
went  himselfe  to  the  Prison  with  a  packe  of  Hangmen,
and  gave  order  to  strangle  the  unfortunate  Prince :  who
now  having  had  no  rest  in  two  nights,  and  thinking  him-
selfe secure  for  a  season,  was  newly  falne  asleepe :  but
awaked  by  the  comming  of  these  Messengers,  asked  what
newes,  saying,  hee  did  not  like  their  sudden  intrusion.
They  at  first  stood  amazed,  and  the  King  made  shew  to
defend  himselfe ;  but  a  strong  Knave  strooke  him  on  the  Osman  slake.
head  with  a  Battle-axe,  and  the  rest  leaping  upon  him,
strangled  him  with  much  adoe.  Thus  one  of  the  greatest
Monarkes  in  the  World  is  first  affronted  by  mutined
troupes,  his  owne  slaves,  almost  unarmed,  and  few  in
number,  no  man  taking  up  a  Sword  to  defend  him:  and  [H-viii.
they  who  began  this  madnesse,  not  meaning  to  hurt  him,  I373-J

by  the  increase  of  their  owne  furie,  which  hath  no  bounds,
depose  him  against  their  owne  purpose,  and  at  last  expose
his  life  against  their  will,  to  the  counsels  of  other  men,
whom  they  equally  hate.  And  now  they  mourne  for  their
dead  King,  as  freshly  as  they  raged  unreasonably,  knowing
they  have  stayned  their  honour,  being  the  first  of  their
Emperours  they  ever  betrayed,  and  that  they  have  set  up
another  that  in  all  likelihood  they  must  change  for  disa-
bilitie :  Nonnunquam  tulit  documenta  sors  majora,  quam
fragili  loco  starent  superbi.

This  is  the  last  act  of  the  life  of  Sultan  Osman  :  but  his

349

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1622.

intents  and  great  designes,  which  drew  upon  him  this
fatall  blow,  I  suppose  will  not  bee  unworthy  the  communi-
cation, the  Practices,  Reasons,  Secrets,  and  Counsels  of  all
Actions  being  the  soule  of  Historie,  and  res  gestae  but  the
bare  carkasse  :  and  I  am  perswaded,  as  many  Ages  have  not
produced  so  strange  an  Example  of  the  incertaintie  of
humane  greatnesse ;  so  in  the  disposition  thereof,  and  in
the  wayes  leading  thereunto,  there  is  seene  evidently  the
wonderfull  providence  of  God,  in  confounding  of  the
counsels  of  the  worldly  wise,  who  had  laid  a  foundation  of
new  greatnesse,  whereby  he  aspired  the  universall  Mon-
archic, ambitious  of  the  honour  of  Trajan,  in  whose  time
the  decayed  Empire  was  said,  Primum  movere  lacertos,  &
senectutem  Imperii,  quasi  reddita  juventute  reviviscere.
And  lastly,  the  world  may  see  upon  how  weake  founda-
tions this  Monarchic  was  at  first  builded,  but  it  is  now
shaken  and  corrupted ;  how  their  Kings  are  subject  to
the  rage  of  a  few  Slaves,  how  Anarchie  hath  prepared  it  an
easie  prey  to  any  able  hand,  that  would  attempt  it.  From
the  Invasion  of  Poland,  all  these  changes  took  their
beginning.  Sultan  Osman  advanced  to  the  Throne  in  his
youth,  full  of  heate  and  bloud,  being  of  a  great  and
haughtie  spirit,  very  couragious,  strong  of  bodie,  and  a
mortall  hater  of  Christians,  envious  of  the  glory  of  his
Osmans  Ancestors,  and  ambitious  to  rayse  his  name  above  any  of
ambition.  theirs,  had  projected  in  himselfe  the  Conquest  of  the
Remaynes  of  the  bordering  Europe.  But  to  so  great
designes  he  had  one  vice  that  resisted  all  hope  of  pros-
His  avarice  peritie,  which  was  extreme  Avarice,  and  he  fell  into  the
£5  unseason-  latter  times  and  decrepit  age,  Ubi  vires  luxu  corrumpe-
a  e  attempts  kantur contraveterem  disciplinam  &  instituta  maiorum,

against  *  ,  * ,  ...  ••.*'.

Poland.  apud  quos  virtute  quam  pecunia  res  militaris  melius  stetit.
His  first  enterprize  was  that  of  Poland,  mooved  by  the
Incursions  of  the  Cossacks,  which  yet  he  undertooke  of
his  owne  head,  without  the  counsell  of  any  his  Viziers
(who  in  a  Monarchic  growne  to  the  height  by  ease  and
wealth,  and  perhaps,  longa  dominatione  inertes,  are  ever
corrupt  and  lazie)  and  against  the  liking  of  all  the  Soul-

35°

THE DEATH OF SULTAN OSMAN  ad.

1622.

diers,  who  now  contrarie  to  their  Institution  being  marryed,
and  Fathers  of  a  Family,  entred  into  Trades,  receiving
nothing  in  Warre  more  then  in  Peace,  praeter  pericula  &
labores,  are  not  easily  drawne  from  their  owne  Chimneies.
This  action  he  thought  so  easie,  as  he  had  disposed  of  his
Conquest,  and  devided  the  live  Lions  skinne.  But  being
met  upon  the  Borders  with  a  poore  Armie  in  comparison,
he  was  first  arrested  at  Chotyn  a  little  Fortresse,  which  he
was  faine  to  leave  behind  him  untaken.  And  then  seeking
to  advance  into  the  plaine  Countrey,  by  forcing  the
Trenches  of  the  Chancellor  of  Poland,  opposed  against
him,  he  could  never  procure  his  Janizaries  to  fight,  though  Janizaries
engaging  his  person  once  or  twice  beyond  the  regard  of  Pewerse-
his  qualitie,  and  his  owne  Troupes  readie  to  mutinie
against  him,  or  to  forsake  him,  he  was  at  last  enforced  to
rayse  shamefully  his  Campe,  and  to  accept  of  any  Treatie
to  save  his  outward  honour.  In  this  attempt  he  lost
above  one  hundred  thousand  Horses  for  want  of  Fodder,
and  fourescore  thousand  men  for  want  of  fighting :  for
they  would  rather  dye,  running,  or  pillaging,  or  eating,
then  in  the  face  of  the  Enemie.  For  this  disgrace  he
conceived  so  inward  and  rooted  an  indignation  against  the
Janizaries,  and  so  justly,  that  he  often  lamented  himselfe,
and  complayned  hee  was  no  King,  that  was  subject  to  his
owne  slaves,  upon  whom  he  spent  great  Treasures,  and  yet
they  would  neither  fight  in  Warre,  nor  obey  in  Peace,
without  exacting  new  bounties  and  Priviledges.  Delavir  Delavir
Bassa  a  man  of  great  wit  and  courage,  lately  called  from  Bassa-
the  Easterne  parts,  where  hee  had  long  governed  with
honour,  who  came  in,  though  late,  yet  in  a  very  brave  and
Warlike  Equipage,  above  all  other  his  Captaines,  was
suddenly  made  Great  Vizier,  the  former  Huzein  Bassa
being  in  the  same  disgrace,  common  with  the  Souldier,
though  not  in  the  same  fault.  This  man  was  never  bred
at  Court,  but  had  lived  many  yeares  in  Action,  and  so  had
neither  Faction  nor  Dependance  heere,  but  stood  upon
himselfe  and  his  owne  merit :  And  being  nowunlookedfor,
and  advanced  to  this  high  dignitie,  he  wrought  upon  the

35i

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1622.

Kings  discontent,  and  nourished  it :  and  in  conclusion,
brake  with  him,  that  it  was  true,  he  was  no  Emperour,
nor  could  be  safely  alive,  while  the  Janizaries  had  the
power  which  they  lately  usurped.  Informing  him,  that
they  were  corrupted  from  their  ancient  Institution,  and
were  lazie  Cowards,  given  over  to  Ease  and  Lust,  Et
animo  per  libidines  corrupto,  nihil  honestum  inerat.
But  if  his  Majestie  would  pull  up  his  spirits,  and  follow  his
advice,  hee  would  provide  him  a  new  Souldioury  about

The  Coords.  Damascus,  and  from  the  Coords,  of  men  ever  bred  in  the
Frontier,  Hardnesse,  and  Warre,  of  great  Courage  and
Experience,  and  that  of  them  hee  should  erect  a  new
Militia,  that  should  wholy  depend  of  him,  entertayning
onely  fortie  thousand  in  pay,  which  should  alway  be  his
Guard,  and  that  in  the  distribution  of  every  Province,  he
should  constitute  that  the  Beghler-begh  in  his  Govern-
ment should  trayne  some  of  the  Inhabitants,  who  in  all
occasions  of  making  a  great  Armie,  should  be  in  readinesse,

[II.  vni.  ancj  hereby  hee  should  spare  Infinite  Treasures  spent  upon

I374-J  these  Drones  that  eate  up  his  Estate;  And  with  men  of
new  spirits  and  hopes,  hee  should  be  enabled  to  doe  greater
matters,  then  any  of  his  Ancestors :  but  withall  he  desired
the  King  to  communicate  this  counsell  to  no  man,  nor  to
trust  his  life  upon  anothers  secrecie.  Delavir  Bassa  never
revealing  himselfe  to  any  but  the  King,  who  extremely
pleased  with  this  advice,  that  flattered  his  owne  humour,
consented,  and  remitted  all  to  the  Viziers  direction,  who
was  a  true  Souldier,  and  a  very  wise  man,  able  by  his
credit  in  Asia,  to  performe  all  hee  had  undertaken  :  for  he
was  exceedingly  beloved  in  those  parts,  very  rich,  and  had
kept  Damascus,  whereof  he  was  Governour,  for  himselfe
in  the  last  Rebellion.  Upon  this  conclusion  betweene
them,  it  was  first  agreed,  that  the  King  should  pretend  to
goe  in  person  against  the  Emir  de  Zaida,  who  was  moved
to  take  Armes  really  to  assist  in  the  designe :  but  they
used  it,  to  colour  the  departure  of  the  Emperour ;  which
when  it  was  well  weighed,  it  was  found,  that  then  the
Army  of  the  Janizaries  must  be  kept  together,  which  could

352

THE DEATH OF SULTAN OSMAN  a.d.

1622.

not  agree  with  their  ends.  Hereupon  the  journey  of
Mecha  was  divulged,  that  the  King  might,  under  the
shadow  of  an  holy  pilgrimage,  goe  out  with  a  smal  trayne,
and  disperse  those  who  were  suspected  to  him.  And  for
this  preparation  was  made,  but  somwhat  too  grosly  by
melting  of  all  the  Plate,  Saddles,  furniture  of  house,
Lamps  of  Churches,  and  whatsoever  could  more  easily  be
conveyed  away  in  metal,  with  all  the  Jewels  and  treasurie.
This  gave  the  first  suspicion,  which  was  confirmed  by
divers  unadvised  words  let  fall  from  the  King,  of  disdayne  Unadvised
against  the  cowardize  of  the  Janizaries,  and  that  he  would
shortly  find  himselfe  soldiers  that  should  whip  them ;  &
lastly,  dismissing  all  his  houshold,  except  some  few  elect,
the  discontented  observed  and  betrayed  him.  Delavir
Bassa  kept  his  owne  secret,  and  in  the  meane  time  pre-
pared by  his  friends  in  Asia  10000.  about  Damascus,
1 0000.  from  the  Coords,  besides  those  in  readinesse  of  the
Emir  de  Zaida,  and  all  upon  pretence  of  defending  the
borders  of  Persia,  who  having  intelligence  of  some  change
in  those  parts ;  And  gave  order  that  all  these  should  meet
the  King  at  Damascus,  where  he  would  presently  cut  off
his  Guard,  and  stay  there,  untill  he  had  regulated  his  new
Armie,  and  discipline,  and  then  to  returne  triumphant  to
Constantinople,  and  utterly  root  out  the  order  of  Jani-
zaries, Spaheis,  and  Timariots,  and  to  exauctorate  all  their
Captaines  and  Officers  to  settle  a  new  government,  and  to
change  the  name  of  the  Citie.  And  these  things  suc-
ceeding, he  then  resolved  with  his  new  Souldiers  to  attempt
the  recoverie  of  his  honour  in  Christendome  :  in  the  meane
time  to  hold  a  dissembled  friendship  there  in  all  parts.
Certainely,  this  was  a  brave  and  well-grounded  designe,and
of  great  consequence  for  renewing  of  this  decayed  Empire,
languishing  under  the  insolencies  of  lazie  slaves,  if  God  Lazie  Slaves.
had  not  destroyed  it :  It  being  very  true,  that  the  Turkish
Emperour  stands  at  the  devotion  of  his  owne  troops  for
peace  or  warre,  life  or  death,  and  is  in  effect  nothing  but
the  Steward  or  Treasurer  of  his  Janizaries.  If  this  project
had  taken  effect,  what  events  it  might  have  produced  by  a

vin  353  z

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1622.

Civill  Warre,  is  not  easie  to  judge.  For  doubtlesse,  the
Souldiouriehere  would  have  set  up  another  King,  and  main-
tayned  him  as  well  as  they  could,  and  this  European  part
had  beene  in  danger  to  have  beene  torne  away  by  the
division.  Besides,  Delavir  Bassa  having  the  King  and
the  Treasurie  in  his  possession,  and  his  owne  credit  so
great,  and  his  inclination,  velle  imperare,  once  discovered,
it  may  well  be  thought  that  he  had  some  ends  of  his  owne
to  share  a  part  of  this  mightie  estate  :  If  on  the  other  side,
the  Vizier  had  proved  true  and  faithfull,  the  reformation  and
new  erection  of  the  Discipline  of  Warre,  and  the  encrease
of  Treasure  consequent  to  the  dismission  of  the  old
Militia,  would  have  beene  fearefull  to  all  Christendoms :
But,  Ubi  est  sapiens?  Ubi  disquisitor  saeculi  hujus?
Nonne  infatuavit  Deus  sapientiam  mundi  hujus  ?  Perdam
sapientiam  sapientum,  &  vanam  reddam  intelligentiam
intelligentium.  It  is  a  great  question  whether  is  the  wiser
wish,  that  these  Counsels  had  succeeded  or  not :  for  either
division  and  subversion,  or  a  new  prosperitie  and  enlarge-
ment of  their  Dominion  had  necessarily  followed.
Observations,  Some  observations  upon  this  occasion,  will  not  be  very
impertinent  to  those  that  desire  to  know  as  well  the  dis-
position and  use,  as  the  things  themselves.  First,  in  the
purpose  of  the  Souldier,  not  at  all  to  violate  or  hurt  the
King,  much  lesse  to  depose  and  murther  him ;  but  onely
to  take  away  those  about  him,  whom  they  thought  assis-
tants in  this  project :  yet  the  furie  once  on  foot,  they
proceeded  by  missensible  steps,  to  the  uttermost  of  out-
rage, against  many  innocents  in  that  businesse,  though
otherwise  obnoxious,  and  against  the  Throne  and  life  of
their  owne  Emperour,  ubi  furor  ingraut  innocentes  ac
noxios  juxta  cadere.  Secondly,  in  the  degrees,  that  yet
the  King  had  not  falne  thus  low,  if  first  hee  had  not  lost
that  awe  and  reverence  which  alway  attendeth  upon
Majestie,  by  unseemely  offices,  done  by  him  in  the  streets
and  Tavernes,  apprehending  many  Souldiers  for  pettie
faults,  like  a  Constable,  making  his  person  common,
cheape,  and  despised  among  them  which  were  wont  onely

354

THE DEATH OF SULTAN OSMAN  ad.

1622.

to  be  seene  and  feared,  as  somewhat  supra  humanitatem.
And  this  he  did  also  in  hatred  and  disdayne  of  those  that
had  in  the  Warre  forsaken  him.  And  now  in  this  last  act,
if  his  owne  obstinacie  had  not  plunged  him  into  destruc-
tion, but  that  he  had  softned  them  by  a  seasonable  yeelding
to  time,  he  had  prevayled  onely  by  time.  Thirdly,  in  the
order,  That  these  Mutiners  having  no  head,  or  direction,
kept  that  reglement,  that  they  tooke  oath  in  their  furie,  in
hot  bloud,  in  the  Kings  yard,  not  to  dishonour,  spoyle,
nor  sacke  the  Imperiall  Throne,  neither  committed  nor
suffered  any  insolence  nor  violence  in  the  Citie  to  the
Neutrals,  but  rather  proclaymed  peace  and  justice.
Fourthly,  in  the  consequents,  that  at  the  third  dayes  end,
all  was  at  quiet,  and  all  men  in  their  trade,  as  if  no  such
thing  had  hapned  ;  Onely  the  Janizaries  suffered  no  Divan
nor  Councell,  untill  they  had  received  a  Donative,  as  [H-Vlii-
Guerdon  of  their  iniquitie,  in  which  also  the  infinite  waste  l37S'\

of  Treasure  is  worthie  of  consideration,  which  must  of
necessitie  be  exceedingly  exhausted  by  three  changes  in
foure  yeeres,  and  by  the  late  Warres  in  Persia  and  Poland  :
For  every  Janizarie  in  the  Citie,  absent  or  present,  whose
roll  is  about  fortie  thousand,  receive  five  and  twentie
Chequins  gold,  besides  Spaheis,  Jamoglans,  and  other
orders  at  every  alteration,  which  amounts  in  all  neere  to
two  millions.  And  now  these  fellowes  all  living,  that
have  tasted  the  sweet  of  prosperous  mutinies,  haud  ignari
summa  scelera  incipi  cum  periculo,  peragi  cum  praemio,
they  have  taken  such  a  head  as  cannot  safely  be  suffered
on,  nor  securely  be  taken  off.  Fiftly,  of  certaine  presages
that  fore-ran,  it  being  related  to  mee  from  the  mouth  of  a
Cadee,  inward  with  the  King  a  moneth  before  the  tumult :
That  Osman  dreamed  in  the  night,  that  he  thought  to  ride  Osmans
a  Camell,  and  being  mounted,  he  could  not  force  him  to  dream%
got  by  faire  meanes  nor  stripes,  and  that  then  he
descending  in  a  rage,  the  bodie  of  the  beast  vanished,  and
left  the  head  in  the  Kings  hand.  Who  next  day  troubled
at  this  fancy,  sent  to  a  learned  Man,  familiar  with  him,
for  the  interpretation. Hee  excused  himselfe  as  unfit  to

355

A.D.
l622.

Conference
betwixt  the
Emperors
Ambassador
and  the
Vizier,

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

give  opinion  in  a  matter  of  that  consequence,  but  per-
swaded  Osman  to  send  to  the  Mufti.  Hee  also  craved
pardon,  but  withall  said,  there  was  none  so  fit  to  interprete
it,  as  Mustafa  the  Kings  Uncle,  and  now  Emperour,  who
is  esteemed  a  holy  man,  that  hath  Visions,  and  Angel-like
speculations,  in  playne  termes,  betweene  a  mad  man  and  a
foole.  The  King  repayres  to  Mustafa,  who  briefly  tells
him,  The  Camell  signifies  his  Empire  :  his  riding,  abuse
in  governement :  his  descension,  his  disposition :  the
vanishing  of  the  bodie,  the  revolt  of  his  subjects :  the
head  remayning  in  his  hand,  onely  a  bare  Title ;  and  that
hee  should  shortly  die  within  few  moneths,  and  lose  his
Kingdome,  but  the  emptie  name  of  Emperour  should
accompanie  him  to  his  Grave.

A  second  of  lesse  consequence  in  the  Vizier  Delavir
Bassa,  from  whom  the  Lord  Ambassador  having  received
particular  friendship  about  sixe  dayes  before  this  uprore,
he  went  to  visit,  and  having  no  other  businesse  but  to
perswade  him  to  stay  the  King  from  his  intended  Pilgrim-
age, the  Ambassador  gave  him  many  reasons  in  the  present
estate  of  their  owne  affaires,  especially  the  Treaty  of
Poland  yet  depending.  To  which  the  Bassa  replyed  very
gravely.  Then  the  Ambassador  urging  the  feare  of  some
tumult,  collected  from  the  licentious  speeches  rumoured
in  the  Towne,  and  he  was  bold  to  deale  plainely,  sincerely,
and  friendly,  That  if  any  such  thing  should  happen,  the
fault  would  bee  imputed  to  the  Bassa,  as  being  of
authoritie  to  perswade  the  King,  whom  his  qualitie  and
youth  would  excuse,  but  all  the  furie  would  be  discharged
upon  the  greatest  Minister ;  desiring  him  to  consider  the
event,  at  least,  to  take  his  affection  in  the  best  part.  The
old  Renard  stayed  a  while  from  replie  :  at  last,  smiling  to
himselfe  at  the  Ambassadour,  who  perswaded  him  against
that  which  was  his  owne  counsell,  he  gave  him  a  finall
answere,  that  there  was  no  remedie,  he  durst  not  hazard
himselfe  to  oppose  the  Kings  resolution  :  but  assured  him,
hee  would  so  order  the  matter,  as  this  journey  should  not
proceed  so  farre  as  was  expected. The  Ambassador  con-

356

THE  DEATH  OF  SULTAN  OSMAN ad.

1622.
eluded  for  himselfe,  desiring  then  that  he  would  leave  him
a  particular  recommendation  to  the  Chimacham  or  Deputie
as  his  friend.  To  which  hee  sodainly  replied,  Trouble  not
your  selfe,  nor  feare ;  I  will  never  remove  so  farre,  but
that  I  will  leave  one  of  my  legs  in  this  Citie  to  serve  you :
which  the  poore  man  fulfilled ;  for  being  murthered  in  few
dayes  after,  one  of  his  legs  whole  and  entire,  was  hanged
in  the  Hippodrome,  the  most  publike  place  of  the  Citie.
Lastly,  in  things  yet  to  come,  and  so  probably  to  be  sus-
pected, That  the  Souldiours  in  Asia,  who  have  now  lost  their
hopes,  will  not  sit  downe  by  this  affront,  but  rather  will
attempt  some  revenge,  for  the  death  of  that  King  who  was
their  Martyr ;  or  that  some  great  Bassaes  farre  removed
from  Court,  will  apprehend  this  occasion,  not  to  obey  an
Usurper,  set  up  by  treason  ;  And  upon  this  colour  ground
their  owne  ambitions,  or  that  all  every  where  will  fall  into
combustion  and  intestine  Warre ;  For  I  dare  not  hope,
that  God  will  open  the  eyes  of  Christian  Princes  to  see  the
littlenesse  of  their  owne  uncivill  quarrels,  while  this
mightie  Monarchie  inviteth  them  to  concord,  and  to  divide
it  as  a  prostituted  spoyle.

On  Saturday  evening,  the  first  of  June  following,  the  The  continua-
Capiaga  or  Major  Domo  of  the  Seraglio,  having  received  a  tton  °f the

secret  order  to  remove  the  brethren  of  Osman  from  their °™e]f^l
, 1 .  1 • 1  • 1  11  sented  to  the

lodgings,  and  in  the  night  to  strangle  them  : as  he  was  Kings

performing  his  command,  ayded  with  a  few  of  his  Carni-  Majestie  from

fices  to  carrie  away  the  Princes,  they  cried  out :  the  Pages  * same

running  to  the  noise,  and  encouraged  by  the  Casliaraga,  tfh^C '

who  had  some  suspicion,  without  further  examination  kill

the  Capiaga,  now  almost  every  order  having  risen  against

their  owne  head. That  night  they  sent  secretly  to  the

Janizaries  and  Spaheis,  to  informe  them  what  they  had

done,  and  in  the  morning  early  hanged  his  bodie  in  the

Hippodrome for a publike spectacle. The Souldiers

returned  in  furie  to  Court,  in  favour  of  the  Pages,  and

demanded  justice  against  those  that  had  consented  to  this

wicked  order ;  which  had  made  an  end  of  all  the  Ottoman

race,  onely  this  Mustafa,  being  left  alive,  who  is  so  holy  a

357

A.D.

l622.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

[ILviii.

Daout  Bassa
degraded.

New  Vizier
severe.

Saint,  that  he  will  not  people  the  world  with  sinners,  nor
indure  any  women  about  him.  The  innocent  King  pro-
tests he  knowes  nothing  of  this  purpose :  and  if  his  com-
mand were  procured,  it  was  gotten  by  subreption,  and  he  is
easily  beleeved.  But  his  mother  another  Livia,  and  the
new  Vizier,  Daout  Bassa,  who  had  her  daughter  to  wife,
were  vehemently  suspected.  It  was  a  day  of  Divan  or
Councell :  But  these  Souldiers  would  suffer  none,  untill
they  had  an  account  of  this  Treason.  The  Vizier  denies
all ;  the  mother  is  a  woman,  and  hidden  in  the  house  :  yet
it  is  very  likely,  they  both  were  guilty  to  uphold  and  secure
their  owne  authoritie.  It  being  rumoured,  that  the  Vizier
determined  to  place  subdititiously,  in  the  roome  of  the
elder  Prince,  his  owne  Sonne,  and  very  like  him,  and  so
to  governe  Mustafa  for  a  time,  and  by  his  remove,  to
[37°-J  establish  himselfe  and  his  Race  for  ever.  But  now
somewhat  must  be  done  to  appease  the  people ;  Therefore
Daout  Bassa  is  degraded  from  his  Office,  and  one  Huzein
Bassa  newly  arrived  from  the  Government  of  Cairo,
advanced  to  his  place,  with  promise  of  further  examination.
Since,  the  furie  once  over,  there  hath  beene  no  great  search
nor  discovery  made.  I  thinke  the  Sultans  Chequines  have
quieted  the  matter.  This  new  Vizier,  a  man  here  without
friends,  yet  very  rich,  of  a  stubborne  and  obstinate  nature,
reported  just  in  his  wayes,  but  peremptorie  and  inflexible ;
Audax,  ferox,  &  prout  animum  intendit  pravus  aut  indus-
trius  eadem  vi :  one  from  whom  all  men  may  expect  much
good,  or  much  ill ;  Begins  his  government  roughly,  under-
takes to  punish  insolencies  early,  and  professeth  a  reforma-
tion, or  to  bee  a  Sacrifice.  A  man  fit  for  these  times  that
are  desperate :  For  the  worst  will  be,  that  hee  must  at  last
endure  their  furie.  In  the  meane  time  he  procures  a  little
awe,  and  hath  restored  the  face  of  Justice :  yet  I  am  per-
swaded  it  cannot  last  long,  the  Ghost  of  Osman  will  not
bee  at  rest,  untill  there  are  some  Parentalia  made  unto
him.  The  nature  of  this  Vizier  is  unsupportable  ;  But  if
he  prevaile,  and  once  settle,  he  will  anew  change  the  King,
and  lay  an  Obligation  upon  the  Brethren  of  Osman ; For

358

THE  DEATH  OF  SULTAN  OSMAN

he  will  never  thinke  himselfe  secure  under  a  man  governed
by  an  insolent  woman,  Dominandi  avida  :  And  what  assur-
ance can  he  have  in  that  Prince,  Cui  non  judicium,  non
odium  est  nisi  indita  &  jussa  ?  And  though  I  cannot  fore-
see the  particulars,  and  where  the  Sore  will  breake  out,
yet  I  am  sure  the  whole  body  is  sicke ;  and  Princes  of
Christendome  shall  have  breath  three  yeares,  before  they
shall  have  cause  to  feare  this  State,  whose  present  King  is
Mentis  inops,  and  the  next  in  expectation,  a  Child,  unfit
for  action,  and  all  the  great  men  and  Souldiers  decayed,
mutined  and  corrupted.

And  now  tyred  with  this  Tragicall  sight  and  contempla-
tion, we  will  commend  you  to  other  Pilgrims,  who  shall
guide  you  thorow  the  Desarts,  to  the  tops  of  the  holy
Mountains,  Oreb  and  Sinai,  and  after  those  Holies,
recreate  your  eyes  with  an  admirable  Spectacle  of  the
Mamalukes,  fine  feates  of  Activitie,  that  profit  and
pleasure  may  conclude  this  Booke.

A.D.

1565.

Chap. XIII.

Mount  Sinai,  Oreb,  and  the  adjoyning  parts  of
Arabia,  described  out  of  the  foure  Journals  of
Breidenbach,  Baumgarten,  Bellonius,  and  Chris-
topher Furer  of  Haimendors.

He  nine  and  twentieth  of  October,  1565.

we  *  joyned  our  selves  to  the  Caravan,  *Christop.

having  before  obtained  Letters  commenda-  Furer- .
• x  ^ t> • 1 r  ^1 ^ 1  Alexandrian

tone  from  the  Patriarch  or  the  Greekes,  patriarch  of
which  dwelleth  at  Cairo  to  the  Friers  of  the  Greekes,
Mount  Sinai.  They  tell  of  this  Patri-
arch, that  he  for  proofe  of  his  Religion  in
contention  with  a  Jew,  before  the  Bassa  five  and  thirtie
yeares  before,  drunke  a  draught  of  poyson  without  harme,
which  the  Jew  doing,  dyed.  At  this  time,  he  was  one
hundred  and  three  yeares  old.  I  had  with  me  three
Pilgrims. November  the  third,  we  departed  from  Cairo,

359

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1565.

and  on  the  fift,  came  to  the  shoare  of  the  Red  Sea,  two

Sues,  miles  from  which  in  times  past  Sues  flourished. The  next

day,  we  saw  at  the  right  hand  of  the  Red  Sea,  that  ditch

Darius  Dike,  which  lyeth  betwixt  it  and  Nilus,  which  Darius,  and  after
Ptolomaeus  made  thirtie  foote  deepe,  one  hundred  foote
broad,  seven  and  thirtie  miles  in  length,  and  there  ceased,

Red  Sea.  finding  the  Red  Sea  higher  three  cubits,  then  the  Land  of

y£gypt.  The  Region  is  desart,  and  not  inhabited,  wherein
they  use  Camels  dung  for  want  of  Wood.  The  Water  of
the  Red  Sea,  is  of  the  colour  that  other  Seas  are  of.  But
the  Land  adjoyning,  is  Red  and  Mountainous,  whence  it
is  called  the  Red  Sea,  or  from  the  Sunbeames  reflected  on
that  Sea  from  those  Mountaines,  Curtius  saith,  from  a

*This  Red King  called  Erythrus,*  (which  signifieth  Red.) Here  first

king  was we  saw  tta  place  where  the  Israelites  had  passed  thorow

Edom,orEsau, h gea  Qn 1 L j Aft that we  saw  jy[ara where

whose  Li  and.  ^

that  Sea  Moses  by  casting  in  a  piece  of  wood,  made  the  water

washeth  (and  sweete,  which  still  so  continueth,  saving  that  from  the

from  which  neighbour  Sea, it  is  somewhat  brackish  : and  here  our

Sal.  set  forth  Camels  dranke,  which  in  five  daies  they  here  first  did,

his  Ophyrian ,  . , . ,  7  «  1 • 1 r 1 •  1 1

Voyage)  He  is  which  is  the  more  to  be  admired  tor  their  great  burthens,

most  likely  some  bearing  sixe  hundred  pounds  ;  others,  foure  hundred

Author  of  that  or  five  hundred  pounds  weight. Here  washing  in  the

name  of  Red  Rec[  gea^  j  jlurt  my  f00^.  on  a  sharp  Corall,  whereof  here  is

Camels  great  store,  both  Red  and  White. On  the  seaventh  of

Corall.  November,  after  midnight,  was  an  Eclipse  of  the  Sunne,

and  our  Ethiopian  Companions  continued  (as  long  as  it
continued)  beating  Basons.  The  next  day,  we  went  fortie
Italian  miles :  and  the  day  after  forsooke  the  Red  Sea,
declining  on  the  left  hand  towards  the  Mountaines.  The
tenth,  we  left  the  Caravan,  which  went  the  right-hand  way

Toro.  toward  Thoro. Wee  went  towards  the  left  hand,  and  in  a

Valley  saw  that  Tree  which  is  called  Spina  Christi,  or  Gum
Arabike,  whereof  they  say  Christs  Crowne  of  Thornes  was
made. The  eleventh,  we  saw  the  tops  of  Mount  Sinai,

[Il.viii.  and  admired  the  height  thereof. The  twelfth,  we  saw  a

1 377-J  Viper  or  Aspe,  whitish  and  skaly  on  the  belly,  on  the  backe

white  and  spotted,  with  two  little  homes  on  the  fore-head.

360

DESCRIPTION OF MOUNT SINAI  a.d.

1565.

The  thirteenth,  we  came  to  the  Monasterie  of  Saint  S.  Katharines.
Katharine  in  a  narrow  Valley,  at  the  foot  of  Mount  Sinai,
built  of  square  stones,  founded  (as  they  say)  by  the
Emperour  Justinian,  strong,  high,  and  compassed  with
pleasant  Gardens.  The  length  of  it,  is  one  hundred
twentie  five  paces.  In  it  we  saw  the  Sepulchre  of  Saint
Katharine,  after  that  wee  saw  a  Chappell  built  on  that
place,  where  they  say  was  the  Bush  in  which  first  God
appeared  to  Moses.  It  hath  fifteene  Temples,  twenty  five
Chappels,  and  divers  little  Cels,  in  which  Greeke  Calogeri
doe  keepe.  In  the  adjoyning  Valley  is  a  Hill  of  marvel-
lous aspect,  as  if  it  were  all  burnt  and  covered  with  Ashes,
where  (they  say)  Moses  kept  Jethros  sheepe.  Neere  the
Monastery,  before  Mount  Sinai,  is  the  place  in  Mount
Horeb,  in  which  God  commanded  Moses  to  goe  into
Egypt  to  deliver  the  Israelites.

The  foureteenth  of  November,  by  a  waylesse  and  broken
way,  (which  the  Monkes  by  steps  or  staires,  such  as  they
are,  have  indevoured  to  make  better)  wee  ascended  Mount  Mount  Sinai.

Sinai. And  when  we  had  passed  the  two  gates,  which  in  &elontus

,  .  ,  r  , o ^  calleth  this

old times were shut, we came to three lemples or  MountHoreb.

Chappels ; one of Saint Barbara, the second of Saint  So  Baum-

Marina,  the  third  of  Elias  the  Prophet. Round  about  garten,  and

are some houses, whilome the Monkes dwellings. In  ^feedallthese

Elias  his  Temple,  behind  the  Altar,  is  a  Cave,  in  which  ofSinai  which

(they  say)  the  Prophet  lay  hid,  when  hee  fled  from  Jesabel.  *#  kclt^x^

On  the  left  hand,  beneath  the  top  of  the  Mountaine,  is  the  is  given  to  the

place  where  Moses  desired  to  see  God. On  the  top  of  foghest  t0P->

Mount  Sinai,  towards  the  East  is  a  little  Temple  ; and  on  wJ£^™/r

the  left  hand  a  Chappell. Heere  entred,  our  Monke-  that  Saint,

guide  said  prayers  in  Greeke,  and  we  sung  the  Decalogue,  now  call  Saint

Lords  Prayer  and  Creed  in  German  Rithmes. And  this  Katharines

is  the  place  where  God  gave  to  Moses  the  Tables  of  the  Mount
Law,  written  with  the  finger  of  God.  There  is  a  Chappell
in  which  the  Mahumetans  doe  their  devotions.  Eight
paces  thence  is  a  Cave,  in  which  Moses  after  his  second
fortie  daies  Fast,  received  the  Tables  of  the  Law.  After
these  sights,  wee  descended  the  Hill,  where  comming  to  a

361

A.D.
I565.

Roche  of  John
the  Her  mite.

Ba(3o\6iro\is.

Sinai.

Monastery  of
Saint  Katha-
rine higher
then  Sinai  and
Horeb:  by
Sinai  under-
stand some
other  rising  of
that  hilly
besides  the
highest  of  all:
for  all  is  Sinai,
as  the  follow-
ing Authors
shew:  and
this  ofS.
Katharine  the
highest  top  of
them  all.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

certaine  Cisterne,  we  refreshed  our  selves  with  meat.  And
going  a  little  lower,  we  saw  a  broken  and  hollow  Rocke
on  the  left  hand,  wherein  John  the  ^Egyptian  Hermite
lived  with  great  austeritie,  and  writ  the  Booke,  called  Scala
Paradisi.  It  cannot  bee  entred  but  creeping :  within  on
the  right  hand,  is  a  stone  as  it  were  a  bed,  and  another
against  it  like  a  seat :  above,  a  hole  whereby  light
descendeth,  sufficient  to  reade  by.  Descending  hence  on
the  left  hand,  in  a  certaine  Valley  is  the  Temple  of  Saint
John  Baptist,  with  a  Garden,  Vineyard,  and  little  house.
Against  it  is  another  Temple  of  Saint  Anne ;  and  on  the
left  hand,  on  the  top  of  the  Rocke,  is  a  Cave  covered  with
stone,  in  which  two  Brethren  of  a  King  comming  to  see
the  place,  setled  their  abode  till  death.

After  this  we  ascended  another  Hill,  whence  besides
many  Regions  the  Red  Sea  may  be  seene.  In  the  Valley
thereof  is  Pantaleons  Temple,  &  an  Hermitage.  Hence
with  great  labour  we  descended  into  a  Valley,  by  a  broken
and  dangerous  way,  over  against  Saint  Katharines  Mount,
wherein  is  the  Monasterie  of  fortie  Fathers  and  divers
houses,  sometimes  the  habitations  of  Hermits.  There  is
a  Church  of  Saint  Onophrius,  and  a  pleasant  Garden,  with
various  and  excellent  fruits.  Having  lien  all  night  in  this
Monasterie,  the  next  morning,  with  farre  greater  labour
and  danger  then  before,  we  climbed  the  high  and  inacces-
sible hill  of  Saint  Katharine :  on  the  top  whereof  is  a
sharpe  Rocke,  whereon  toward  the  East  is  built  a  low
Chappell,  fifteene  foote  long,  and  ten  broad,  in  the  midst
whereof  is  a  Monument,  in  which  sometime  the  body  of
Saint  Katharine  was  kept.  Heere  our  Monke  said  his
prayers,  and  we  sung  Veni  Sancti  Spiritus  in  our  vulgar
tongue.  This  Mountaine  of  Saint  Katharine  is  farre
higher  then  the  other,  two,  Horeb  and  Sinai,  which  both
seeme  hillocks,  not  hils  to  this.  In  the  top  we  looked  to
the  Red  Sea,  and  Thora.  Descending  neere  the  Nets  of
Horeb,  we  saw  the  Rocke  which  being  stricken  with  Moses
his  Rod,  powred  forth  water  like  a  Fountaine.  In  the
former  part  are  yet  seene  twelve  rifts  or  clefts,  and  as  many

362

DESCRIPTION OF MOUNT SINAI  ad.

1565.

behind,  but  lesse  perspicuous :  but  the  former  part  doth
still  so  lively  represent  the  tokens  of  the  miracle,  as  if
water  had  but  lately  gushed  thence.  That  former  part  is
twelve  cubits,  the  whole  thicknesse  fiftie  two  foot.  On
the  left  hand  of  the  Valley,  is  the  Temple  of  the  Holy
Apostle,  with  a  notable  Garden,  and  against  it  another  of
Saint  George,  with  a  flourishing  Garden.  Betwixt  this
Temple  and  the  Monastery  of  Saint  Katharines,  is  a
round  Cave  cut  into  the  Rocke,  five  and  thirtie  foote  large,
in  which  they  say  Aaron  made  the  golden  Calfe.  The
last  night  we  abode  in  Saint  Katharines  Monasterie :  and
the  sixteenth  of  November  departing,  passed  by  Raphi-
dim,  the  eleventh  Mansion  of  the  Israelites,  and  thence
by  divers  places  of  their  two  yeares  Peregrination,  where
the  Tabernacle  and  Arke  were  made.

The  eighteenth  we  came  to  Thora,  which  Citie  is  on Tori.
the  shoare  of  the  Red  Sea  of  no  lustre ; the  Haven  small,
in  which  ships  laden  with  Spices  out  of  Arabia,  Abassia,
and India,  resort. In this  Citie  wee  saw  a Mermaids Mermaid.
skinne  taken  there  many  yeares  before,  which  in  the  lower
part ends Fish-fashion : of the upper part, onely the
Navill  and  Breasts  remaine,  the  armes  and  head  being  lost.
The  Inhabitants  are  most  Christians,  live  like  the  Greekes,
and  performe  their  Holies  in  the  Arabicke  tongue. No
Jew  may  enter  this  Citie,  nor  goe  to  Mount  Sinai,  the
Christians  having  priviledge  (as  we  were  told)  to  kill  them.
I  saw  there  one  Jew  which  farmed  the  Customes  of  the
Christians. The twentieth of November, having the
wonted  testimonie  of  the  chiefe  of  the  Monasterie,  and  [H-vm-
given  him  certaine  Duckets  of  Gold,  we  departed  from  3/  >,J

Thora,  and  in  our  departure  to  Cairo,  not  farre  thence  saw
the  twelve  Fountaines,  and  seventie  Palme-trees  where
the  Israelites  encamped  :  But  the  trees  are  now  much  more.
The  foure  and  twentieth  we  found  the  Caravan  new
arrived  where  we  had  left  them.  The  nine  and  twentieth,
wee  passed  the  Valley  against  Pihahiroth,  betwixt  Magdalo  Exod.  14.
and  the  Sea  against  Baalsephon.  The  thirtieth,  we  came  Egyptian
safe  to  Cairo. At  this  time  was  no  frost  there,  nor  wet  as  seasons.

363

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1565.

with  us,  but  all  fresh  and  flourishing,  the  Corne  and  Fruits
ripe,  as  with  us  in  Summer.  The  Grasse  groweth  not  as
with  us,  but  is  sowne  by  hand,  &c.

For  the  better  understanding  of  these  Relations,  and  for
addition  of  things  heere  omitted,  I  have  thought  good  to
give  you  Bellonius,  which  almost  twentie  yeares  before  had
made  the  same  Voyage,  and  Breidenbachius,  then  Cham-
berlaine,  and  after  Deane  of  Mentz,  which  Anno  1483.
had  travelled  out  of  the  Holy  Land  to  Sinai,  and  thence
to  iEgypt ;  and  lastly,  Martin  Baumgarten,  a  German
Knight,  whose  peregrination  hapned  Anno  1507.  I  have
also  here  added  for  further  Illustration,  the  Map  of
the  Israelites  peregrination  in  the  Desart,  here  after
mentioned.
Bellonius.  Bellonius  in  company  of  the  Lord  of  Fumet,  attended

with  twentie  Janizaries  for  his  Guard,  went  from  Cairo
*So  it  seemeth  1547.*  Their  provisions  were  water  of  Nilus,  a  Camels
by  his  Preface.  }oad  0f  Bisket,  and  many  Muttons  killed,  and  the  flesh
f°T't0ntL°1  shred  (the  bones  being  taken  out)  into  small  gobbits,  and
Desart.  boyled  with  Onions  and  Suet  till  all  the  liquor  was  con-

sumed, then  seasoned  with  Salt  and  Spices,  and  put  up  in
Vessels  :  which  continued  so  fresh,  that  fifteene  daies  after
being  heated  with  Onions,  they  seemed  as  fresh  as  if  they
[Il.viii.  had  beene  first  dressed. It  was  in  September  when  the

1 379-]  nights  were  very  cold,  and  the  day  exceeding  hot,  for
which  cause  they  travelled  much  by  night,  and  in  three
journeys  came  to  the  Well  of  Suez,  in  a  Castle  a  mile  and
halfe  from  the  Towne,  the  water  of  which  is  brackish.
They  have  there  a  huge  Cisterne  for  rayne-water,  which
seldome  happeneth,  but  then  with  great  vehemence,  so
Deep  Well  of  that  once  or  twice  a  yeere  it  is  filled.  The  Well  is  deep,
Suez.  and  the  water  is  drawne  by  a  wheele  turned  with  Oxen  ;

upon  the  wheele  are  two  ropes  with  many  Pitchers  fastned,
which  emptie  themselves  into  a  Cisterne  underneath  ; a
thing  usuall  in  Egyptian  Gardens. By  the  way  as  we
#„  .  travelled  grew  Ambrosia,  Sena,  Rose  of  Jerico,  Colocyn-

Christi  or this,  Acacia,*  a  peculiar  kind  of  Genista,  and  many  other
GummiArab.  unknowne  plants. Beyond  Suez  we  entred  a  wide  Plaine

364

DESCRIPTION OF MOUNT SINAI

A.D.

1547

Pharagou.
Tree-cave-
dwellers.

all  greene  with  Sena,  growing  of  it  selfe.  Wee  found
Vipers,  and  Cameleons  differing  from  the  Egyptian,  white
and  red :  Capars  as  high  as  dwarfe  Fig-trees,  the  Capars  Capars.
as  big  as  Egges  and  the  seed  biting  like  Pepper ;  the
leaves  continue  greene  perpetually,  the  Wooll  is  finer  then
Silke,  and  whiter  then  Cotton.  The  first  Village  which
after  Suez  we  encountred  in  our  way  towards  Sinai  was
called  Pharagou,  not  having  above  three  or  foure  houses
builded,  the  people  dwelling  under  Palme-trees,  (for  it
seldome  raineth)  or  under  Rockes  in  Caves.  Here  were
Pomgranats,  Olives,  Figs,  Peares,  and  other  Trees  pro-
fitable by  fruit  and  shade.  The  Cattell  and  Fowles  are
there  much  lesse  then  in  Egypt.

The  ascent  of  the  Mountaine  is  by  hand-made  steps  for  Sinai.
Camels ;  for  Horses  can  very  hardly  passe  :  which  when
we  had  ascended,  we  had  two  miles  to  passe  betwixt  round
hills,  here  and  there  dispersed,  of  differing  quantitie,  before
wee  came  at  the  Monasterie  of  Saint  Katharine ;  and
although  we  began  to  ascend  the  Hill  at  breake  of  day,
it  was  after-noone  before  wee  came  thither.  The  Monkes
are  Christian  Maronites,  which  observe  the  Greeke  Rites,
of  divers  Nations,  Syrians,  Greekes,  and  Arabians.  Pil-
grims have  no  place  of  entertaynment  but  the  Monasterie,
which  is  situate  at  the  foot  of  Mount  Horeb,  watered  by
a  Spring  thence  flowing,  cleere,  sweet,  coole,  and  excel-
lent. It  is  walled  with  high  walls  against  enemies,  and
hath  also  a  Mosqued  for  Arabs  and  Turkes.  In  the  vallies
are  pleasant  Gardens,  where  Vines,  Pulse,  Herbs,  and
fruitfull  Trees  grow,  especially  Almonds.  Mount  Sinai
when  the  Sunne  riseth,  over-shadoweth  Horeb,  which  is
from  it  a  mile  and  halfe  ;  and  on  the  top  of  Sinai  yee  may
view  over  Horeb  the  Region  beyond  full  of  Rockes  and
Hills,  unto  the  Easterne  Plaine  where  Jerusalem  standeth  :
to  the  West,  nothing  but  Arabia  Desarta  ;  and  North-west,
the  Region  washed  by  the  Mediterranean  Sea  (but  not  the
Sea  it  selfe)  five  dayes  journey  thence.  Southward  are
easily  discerned  both  the  shoares  of  the  Red  Sea  extended
like  an  English Bow, and the Ethiopian Desarts  and

365

Monies  or
Caloieri.

Height  of
Sinai.

A.D.

1547-

Plants.

*The  Author
doubted  of  the
truth.

Breidenbachs
Journey.
Anno  1483.

Gaza.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRTMES

Mountaines,  where  stands  the  Monasterie  of  Saint  Maca-
rius,  and  Saint  Antonie.  When  wee  came  to  the  top  wee
found  it  hard  stone  of  Iron  colour,  yet  not  without  plants :
for  Absinthium  seriphium,  which  beareth  the  Worme-seed,
Panax  asclepium,  Conyza,  and  Eupatorium  Arabum
groweth  about  the  Mountaine.  In  height  it  excells  Oeta
and  Ida,  but  seemes  lower  then  Olympus.  The  Plaine  on
the  top  is  not  much  greater  then  that  of  the  greatest
Pyramis,  that  is,  foure  paces,  but  a  little  lower  much
larger,  and  is  ascended  with  great  difficultie.  It  is  not  so
cold  as  the  Alpes,  nor  so  hot  as  the  low  Plaines  of  Europe.
We  lay  all  night  in  S.  Katharines  Monasterie,  and  the  next
day  were  shewed  the  pensile  receptacle  of  S.  Katharines
bones,*  hanging  in  the  Church,  which  is  adorned  with
goodly  Pictures  and  Relicks.  The  Rock  which  Moses
strucke  with  his  Rod  is  a  solid  stone,  right  up,  of  colour
and  qualitie  like  Thebaick  Stone,  of  which  Obelisks  and
Pompey's  Pillar  in  Alexandria  were  made,  then  which  no
Stone  resists  Iron.

But  the  Legend  of  Saint  Katharine  is  better  knowne  by
Deane  Breidenbach,  a  man  seeming  more  devout  then
Bellonius,  who  with  the  Earle  of  Solms,  and  Philip  de
Bichen  a  German  Knight,  first  visited  Jerusalem,  and  the
holy  places  of  Palaestina ;  and  thence  passed  together  to
Sinai,  above  sixtie  yeeres  before.  Their  journey  was  by
Gazera,  where  they  saw  a  huge  Fig-tree  which  bare  figs
seven  times  in  the  yeere.  Thence  wee  departed  (sayth  he)
on  the  ninth  of  September.  On  the  eleventh,  wee  passed
a  sandy  Plaine,  so  large  that  we  could  see  no  end,  but  the
Sea  on  the  West.  At  last,  wee  came  into  Cawath  or
Cades,  where  wee  had  raine,  which  there  is  seldome.  Now
were  wee  come  into  a  true  Desart,  utterly  without  all  signe
of  habitation.  We  saw  smokes  sometimes,  but  they  arose
of  sands  moved  with  the  wind.  On  the  twelfth,  we  came
to  Gayon :  on  the  thirteenth  to  the  Brook  Wadalar,  where
was  store  of  Coloquintida.  On  the  fourteenth,  to  Magare
and  Gebelhelel,  where  we  saw  nor  man,  nor  beast,  nor
bird, but Ostriches. The fifteenth, into a very cold

366

DESCRIPTION OF MOUNT SINAI  a.d.

1483.

Desart,  the  earth  white  like  Chalke,  and  the  sand  like

burnt  Lime,  called  Mynschene. The  sixteenth,  wee  could

see  no  end  toward  the  East,  and  it  is  said  to  reach  without

habitation  two  moneths  journey,  yea  as  some  thinke,  to  Dreams  of  a

the  torrid  Zone  which  continueth  to  the  terrestriall  Para-  JjJJjS^'

dise :  that  day  we  came  to  Alherok. The  seventeenth  to  parajiset

Mesmar,  to  the  foot  of  the  Hill  Caleb  which  seemeth

made by hand. The eighteenth, we travelled the

Salt Land, where the deaw, hills, vallies, stones, and

sand, are like Salt. The nineteenth, we came to

mountaynous  places,  and  saw  Mount  Sinai  and  Horeb

on  the  left  hand,  and  the  Red  Sea  on  the  right,  foure  dayes

journey  distant. The  way  was  rockie  and  praecipitious.

The  twentieth,  the  Spinae  Christi  with  their  sent  refreshed

us,  but  the  Mountaines  were  rockie  and  barren,  of  colour

betwixt  blacke  and  red,  and  the  stones  in  the  Sun-shine

seemed  as  if  anoynted  with  Oyle. There  we  saw  a  great

beast  bigger  then  a  Camell,  and  our  Guide  said  it  was  an  [n.viii.

Unicorne  :  and  there  we  saw  a  Shepheard  with  his  flocke,  N 3 "1

which  seemed  to  us  a  marvellous  sight. At  even,  wee

stayed  at  a  place  called  Scholie. This  comfort  wee  had

from  our  Ladie  and  S.  Katharine,  that  after  mid-night  we  Q^aman^Pst

saw  a  Star  brighter  then  the  rest,  to  arise  from  the  South,  £nmnt

which  we  called  S.  Katharines  Star,  and  directed  us  before

day  standing  over  Mount  Sinai. On  the  one  and  twentieth,

we  saw  Mount  Sinai,  higher  then  the  other  Mountayns,

and  came  to  Abalharoch,  a  Plain  every  way  environed  with

hils,  where Moses  kept  Jethroes  sheep. The  two  and

twentieth,  wee  came  to  another  Plaine  of  the  Red  Sand,

and  the  Hils  were  red,  reaching  to  the  Roots  of  Sinai.

Wee  had  a  very  bad  way,  and  entred  the  Monasterie  of

Saint  Katharine,  at  the  Root  of  Mount  Sinai.

The  foure  and  twentieth  of  September,  taking  victuals
with  us  for  two  dayes,  wee  ascended  Horeb,  and  there  saw
the  Fountayne,  which  when  the  Monkes  were  once  leaving
the place for Todes, Serpents and noysome Creatures  Miracletfour
molesting  them,  they  were  by  the  blessed  Virgin  com-  rat^  a
manded  to  stay,  and  doubting  whether  it  might  be  an  Monkes  Tale.

367

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1483.

illusion,  as  they  were  praying,  this  Fountayne  sprang  up
amongst  them,  and  still  continueth :  and  here  is  our
Ladies  Chappell.  We  passed  higher  to  an  Arch  of  stone,
which  they  say,  no  Jew  can  passe.  Then  comming  to  the
toppe  of  that  Hill  wee  came  to  the  Plaine  whence  Horeb
riseth  without  conjunction  of  any  other  Hill,  where  are
three  Chappels  within  one  wall,  of  Marina,  Elizeus  and

Indulgences.  Elias  :  in  each  of  which  is  seven  yeares  Indulgence,  and  as
many  Lents.  On  the  top  of  Horeb  is  a  little  faire  Chap-
pell shut  with  an  Iron  doore,  where  the  Decalogue  in  two
Tables  was  given  ; wee  put  off  our  shooes  to  enter,  and

The  specialties  prostrating  our  selves,  kissed  the  place  where  Moses
received  the  Law.  Fifteene  paces  off  is  the  Cave  where  he
fasted  fortie  dayes.  Over  it  a  Moschee,  where  the  Moores
daily  resort  in  honour  of  Moses.  There  is  a  great
Cisterne,  called  Moses  Well.  This  Mountayne  riseth
round,  and  is  not  coherent  to  other  Mountaynes,  and  from
the  Monasterie  to  the  top  thereof  are  about  seven  thou-
sand steps  ascending,  besides  those  which  are  gone  on
plaine  ground.  In  the  former  Chappell  is  plenarie
Remission  of  all  sinnes.

Having  refreshed  our  selves  with  food  we  descended
towards  the  West,  a  dangerous  way,  and  came  to  the
Monastery  of  fortie  Saints,  and  after  a  little  rest  ascended
Sinai  by  a  harder  way,  by  Breaches,  Rockes,  Over-hanging
Stones,  Precipices,  Steepes  and  exceeding  heate  of  the
Sun ;  refreshed  in  the  way  by  two  Springs.  After  much
sweat  wee  came  to  the  toppe  on  the  five  and  twentieth  of
September,  even  to  the  holy  place  where  the  Angels  had
brought  from  Alexandria,  the  bodie  of  the  glorious  Virgin
S.  Katharines  and  Martyr  Katharine,  in  which  place  it  lay  three  hundred

tgtna.  See yeares  guarded  by  Angels,  till  it  was  revealed  to  a  certaine
hereof  in  J  di
Castro  sup Abbot,  that  it  should  be  thence  translated  to  the  Monas-

pag.  1 141. terie  where  now  it  is. We  with  much  joy  kissed  the  place,

and  measured  our  bodies  in  the  place,  which  is  a  stonie

Plaine,  still  having  the  Impression  of  a  humane  bodie,

not  made  by  Arte,  but  formed  by  the  touch  of  that  sacred

bodie. The  Red  Sea  seemed  but  three  leagues  distant,

368

i  s

■£DIT£

SM-4JIE  MZ

A&jjftiu  marc.

t^SU

3-erlcho  m

&

k4»:

::.;. -.;;4p  Jiabarim  mtiu

yL GJSTUM 1»'

&JM t&Vfibtvn  Xw  ^k

■Af]>hd-

Otitis  I

fqutd
fiimctr'

](V,

Sd\

mm rS

IVtoabi ;  '?»■
j:arum

T%]

'/am

JLG

p

'fttfcm

T)hutrvM

-*3H'  id  run  ^  ^,vi»v

'A'fwi  (rdi  £f

■;■«  JUkchchth
10,'JLaraln

■i$S*.

»y

3fc

37

Montes  Sehir

,v--m  —a

K

PARS

>---.v.;...,l  Erham  i'frrtum-  ;*•*  ->_ :  ''.*-  '  ■"-  'V;"v»c/V->  _ ^

Uanih ■■sfcatfA.v

■**  TzrfmcnA  uA

'jPwi/w  i%'/r/  Amahihitis

HONDIUS HIS MAP OF THE PEREGRINATIONS OF THE ISRAELITES

IN THE DESERT

DESCRIPTION OF MOUNT SINAI  a.d.

1483.
being  two  dayes  Journey.  We  might  thence  see  the
Deserts  of  Thebaida,  where  Anthonie  and  the  old  Here-  T?e  f°f  °f
mites  lived,  and  divers  barren  Hands  in  the  Red  Sea,  and  /J*//*)^0™
the  Deserts  of  Elim  and  Sin.  Also  a  place  in  which  they  Katharines
said  was  a  Monastery,  the  Bels  whereof  might  be  heard  Mountayne
at  all  Canonicall  houres,  but  the  house  no  man  could  find.  Monastery
In  the  descent  we  came  to  Saint  Katharines  Well,  and  cut  ™P°s*ihle  t0

bee  found

twigs  of  that  kind  (they  said)  whereof  Moses  burning-  Friers, L^ers
not-burned-Bush  was,  good  for  the  falling  sicknesse :  this  is  true.
After  much  labour  wee  came  to  the  Monasterie  of  fortie
Saints  which  the  Pagans  had  martyred,  and  now  there  are
but  two  Monkes  of  Saint  Katharines  which  keepe  there.
The  Edifices  are  of  Mudde  and  Reeds,  except  the  Church
and  the  Wall  encompassing.  In  their  Garden  is  a  Chap-
pell  in  the  Cave  where  Onophrius  lived  an  Anchorite.
Here  we  did  eate,  and  then  compassed  Oreb,  to  returne
to  Saint  Katharines  Monasterie.  Wee  found  at  the  foot
of  the  Mount,  the  Rocke  of  Oreb,  where  Moses  smote
twice  and  water  flowed.  On  the  sixteenth  of  September,
we  confessed  our  selves,  and  prepared  to  see  the  Relikes
of  Saint  Katharine,  and  the  Tombe  being  opened,  kissed
the  same,  and  rubbed  our  Jewels.  The  Tombe  was  in
the  right  side  of  the  Quire,  and  therein  the  head,  two
hands  and  some  other  members,  the  rest  dispersed  thorow
the  World.  Neare  to  it  is  the  Chappell  where  the  burning
Bush  grew.  In  both  these  places  is  plenary  pardon,  as  Plenary
also  many  Chappels  thereabouts  have  great  Indulgence.  Pardon-
In  the  twelve  Pillars  of  the  Church  are  many  Relikes,  and
their  Pictures  hanging  by. There  is  also  a  Moskee.

The  Monkes  of  Saint  Katharines,  are  of  Saint  Basils
Order :  they  use  Brazen  Rings  in  stead  of  Bels :  they  are
Proprietaries,  buy,  sell,  worke  with  their  hands,  conten-
tions continually,  abstinent  in  dyet,  use  rough  Garments :
in  their  Garden  is  the  place  where  the  Golden  Calfe  was
made,  the  Stone  against  which  Moses  brake  the  Tables,
the  Water  of  Cursing  which  Moses  made  the  people
drinke,  and  we  saw  a  Calfe  of  Stone  standing  on  the
toppe  of  a  Hill  therein,  which  they  said  (and  what  can  bee
viii  369  2  A

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1483.

said  which  some  Fooles  will  not  beleeve  ?)  that  if  any  went
up,  hee  could  not  find  it,  whereupon  some  say,  that  the
Devill  carryed  the  Molten  Calfe  thither. In  this  Valley

Manna.  and  the  others  adjoyning  to  Sinai,  is  found  Manna  only

in  August  and  September,  which  the  Monkes  gather  and
sell  to  Strangers.  It  fals  toward  day  like  Dew  or  Frost  on
the  grasse  and  leaves,  and  beeing  gathered  runnes  together
like  Pitch,  and  at  the  heate  of  the  Sunne  or  Fire  is  melted,
tasteth  like  Honey,  and  cleaves  to  the  Teeth. The  Abbot

[Il.viii.  of  that  Monasterie  is  constrained  to  give  food  to  one

l3°1-]  hundred  Arabs  daily.  All  Nations  may  be  received  into
their  Order,  but  Jacobites  and  Armenians ;  but  beeing
received  must  observe  the  Greeke  Rites.  The  seven  and
twentieth  of  September  wee  departed.  The  first  of
October,  wee  came  to  the  common  way  which  leades  from
Gazeia  to  Cairo,  and  by  another  way  to  Thor,  where  the
Indian ships arrive without Iron-workes, because they

Tale  of  Load passe  by  Mountaynes  and  Rockes  of  Load-stone  which

stones.  would  attract  them. Wee  came  to  the  place  in  the  Red  Sea,

where  the  Israelites  passed  on  dry  Land.  Next  day  going
along  by  the  shoare,  we  came  to  the  imperfect  workes,
whereby  the  Red  Sea  should  have  beene  conveyed  to  Nilus.
Martinus  a  Baumgarten,  the  fift  of  October,  1507.
departed  from  Cairo,  and  came  on  the  tenth  to  the  Ditch,

*M?  late an(j  the  other  passage. There  are  seene  still  to  this  day  j*

nter  at ag  Qrosius  also  testifieth  the  foot-prints  of  Chariots  and
mentioned  this y T  T  . .  1  •  1 1  1

and  I  doubt riorsemen  on  the  shoare,  which  howsoever  by  any  con-

outofOrosius,  fused,  soone  recover  the  like  forme. On  the  seventeenth,
ithathgrowne  we  came  to  Saint  Katharines. Thence  in  the  night  by
%T  h T Moone  light,  we  ascended  Horeb  by  almost  seven  thou-
sand staires  of  stone,  besides  the  greater  part  naturall.
Neere  to  the  Church  where  Moses  received  the  Tables
(the  Mountayne  and  others  adjoyning  still  shine  like  to
molten  Copper)  is  a  Moschee  of  Saracens  over  the  place
where  he  fasted  fortie  dayes  in  a  Cave,  which  Cave  the
Prophane Saracens  still  use  to  get  Prophets,  and  account  the  issue
holies.  there  generated,  holy. Descending  from  Horeb,  by  the

West  we  came  to  a  Valley  twixt  it  and  Sinai,  in  which  was

37o

DESCRIPTION OF MOUNT SINAI  a.d.

1483.
the  Monastery  of  the  forty  Saints,  where  having  fed  we  Sacra  ^
ascended  Sinai  with  great  danger,  with  wounded  hands,  sacerrma>
sliding  feete  by the  loosenesse  of  the  stones, creeping
knees,  breathlesse  brests ; the  Monkes  our  Guides  scarsly
able  to  discerne  the  true  Mountayne  amongst  so  many
Hill-tops,*  of  like  semblance. The  way  beeing  marked  *Thusheweth
out  by  certaine  stones  set  by  Pilgrimes,  brought  us  at  last  Yurr^rT
to  the  top,  where  a  fresh  Spring  refreshed  us. Thence  affirming
returned  to  the  Monasterie  of  the  fortie  Monkes,  and  Saint
compassing  Horeb  we  came  to  the  Rocke  in  the  Root  of  Katharines  to
Horeb,  which  Moses  smote  twice: a  square  stone,  with ff„a, f. .

.  /it II then uiti 'at

one sharp point fast to the earth, with twelve marks  w^c^  ;s  ^ut '

according  to  the  number  of  the  twelve  Tribes. A  little  the  highest  top

off  is  the  place  where  Dathan  and  Abiron  were  swallowed  : of  Sinai,

by  night  we  got  to  S.  Katharines,  so  wearie,  that  the  next  whereofare

day  we  could  scarsly  stand  on  our  feet. In  our  returne, * '  "

we  were  often  set  on  by  Arabs,  which  live  in  subjection  to

no  man,  wearied  with  the  Camels  hard  pace,  and  more  with

Famine (which made us sometime halfe asleepe, and

dreaming  of  victuals,  reaching  to  receive  them,  fall  off

our  beasts)  we  got  at  last  to  Cairo. There  wee  saw  a

Ziraph,  speckled  white  and  higher  then  any  beast  I  had Camelopar-

ever  seene,  the  necke  so  long,  that  it  exceeds  a  mans  armes  *a™'

twice  stretched  out,  the  head  of  a  Cubit,  the  brest  high,

the  backe  low,  eyes  pleasing,  eating  any  thing  which  was

given  it. We  saw  also  an  Indian  Oxe  of  a  shorter  bodie

and greater head then ours, with great blunt knottie

Homes. The Mamalukes  are  of  such  authoritie, that  Mamalukes

they  doe  what  they  list  to  any  Saracen,  turne  him  out  of  QranVe'

his  house,  and  dwell  in  it  as  long  as  they  please. No  jfaZrie.

Saracen  may  ride  or  beare  Armes  in  the  Citie,  but  are

slaves  to  these  slaves,  give  way,  rise,  kisse  their  knees  and

feet,  (their  hands  are  a  great  great  bountie.) Their  mad

Men  and  Penitents  are  esteemed  Saints,  and  may  goe  into

any  house  and  eate,  drinke,  yea,  lye  with  the  women  freely,

and that Issue forgotten is esteemed holy : they are

honoured  whiles  they  live,  and  when  they  are  dead  have

Monuments  and  Temples,  and  to  touch  or  bury  them  is  a

37i

A.D.
I483.

Beastly  Saint.

Tongobar-
dinus  his
Wives.

Socienus  the
Calipha.

Mamalukes
activitie.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

matter  of  esteeme.  One  wee  saw  sitting  as  naked  as  hee
was  borne  on  the  Sands,  and  heard  him  commended  for
that  he  medled  not  carnally  with  Women  or  Boyes,  but
Female  Asses  or  Mules.

Of  the  Mamalukes  hee  reporteth,  that  Tongobardinus
the  Soldan  entertayned  him  in  his  Palace,  shewed  him  his
house  of  women,  whereof  thirtie  five  were  there  present,
dallying  and  talking,  exceeding  fragrant.  The  next  day
shewed  him  a  great  sight,  where  almost  sixtie  thousand
Mamalukes  were  assembled,  standing  with  great  reverence
and  silence  all  in  white  and  like  habit.  The  Soldan  also
with  a  large  blacke  beard  horned  or  mitred  Diademe  in  a
Summer  open  Roome  and  white  Raiment :  not  farre  from
him  his  Pope  (whom  they  call  Calipha)  Socienus  sate,  a
browne  man,  and  beneath  him  the  Turkish  Embassador.
Beneath  the  Castle  was  a  large  Plaine  prepared  before  to
that  purpose,  in  the  middest  whereof  were  three  heapes  of
Sand,  fiftie  paces  distant,  and  in  each  a  Speare  erected  with
a  marke  to  shoote  at,  and  the  like  over  against  them,  with
space  betweene  for  sixe  Horses  to  runne  abreast.  Heere
did  the  yonger  Mamalukes  gallantly  adorned,  upon  their
Horses  running  a  full  careere,  yeeld  strange  experiments
of  their  skill,  not  one  missing  the  marke,  first,  with  casting
Darts,  and  after  with  their  Arrowes,  as  they  ran  :  and
lastly,  trying  their  staves.  Others  after  this,  in  the  like
Race  of  their  running  Horses,  shot  with  like  dexteritie
divers  Arrowes  backwards  and  forward.  Others  in  the
midst  of  their  Race  alighted  three  times,  and  (their  Horses
still  running)  mounted  againe,  and  hit  the  Marke  never-
thelesse.  Others  did  hit  the  same,  standing  on  their
Horses  thus  swiftly  running.  Others  three  times  unbent
their  Bowes,  and  thrice  againe  bent  them  whiles  their
Horses  ran,  and  missed  not  the  Marke  :  neither  did  others,
which  amidst  their  Race,  lighted  downe  on  either  side,  and
againe  mounted  themselves :  no,  nor  they  which  in  their
swiftest  course  leaped  and  turned  themselves  backwards  on
their  Horses,  and  then  (their  Horses  still  running)  turned
themselves forwards. There were which, whiles their

372

DESCRIPTION OF MOUNT SINAI  a.d.

1483.

Horse  ranne,  ungirt  their  Saddles  thrice,  at  each time
shooting,  and  then  againe  girding  their  Saddles,  and  never
missing  the  Marke. Some  sitting  in  their  Saddles,  leaped  [H.viii.
backwards  out  of  them,  and  turning  over  their  heads,  I3^2-}

setled  themselves  againe  in  their  Saddles  and  shot,  as  the
former,  three  times.  Others  laid  themselves  backwards  on
their  running  Horses,  and  taking  their  tayles,  put  them
into  their  mouthes,  and  yet  forgot  not  their  ayme  in
shooting.  Some  after  every  shot  drew  out  their  Swords,
and  flourished  them  about  their  heads,  and  againe  sheathed
them.  Others  sitting  betwixt  three  Swords  on  the  right
side,  and  as  many  on  the  left,  thinly  clothed,  that  without
great  care  every  motion  would  make  way  for  death,  yet
before  and  behind  them  touched  the  Marke.  One  stood
upon  two  Horses  running  very  swiftly,  his  feet  loose,  and
shot  also  at  once  three  Arrowes  before,  and  againe  three
behind  him.  Another  siting  on  a  Horse  neither  bridled
nor  sadled,  as  hee  came  at  every  Marke  arose  and  stood
upon  his  feete,  and  on  both  hands  hitting  the  Marke,  sate
downe  againe  three  times.  A  third  sitting  on  the  bare
Horse,  when  hee  came  to  the  Marke  lay  upon  his  backe
and  lifted  up  his  legges,  and  yet  missed  not  his  shoot.
After  all  this  they  ranne  with  like  swiftnesse  (for  all  these
things,  which,  where  is  the  Vaulter  that  can  doe  on  his
Imaginarie  Horse  standing  still?  these  did  running)  and
with  their  staves  carryed  away  those  Markes,  as  triumph-
ing over  their  innocent  Enemie.  One  of  them  was  killed
with  a  fall,  and  two  sore  wounded  in  these  their  Feats  of
Activitie.  They  had  an  old  grave  man  which  was  their
Teacher.  If  I  have  long  detayned  thee  in  this  Spectacle,
remember  that  the  Race  of  Mamalukes  should  not  bee  for-
gotten, the  rather,  because  their  name  is  now  razed  out  of
the  World ;  and  this  may  seeme  an  Epitaph  on  their
Sepulchre,  after  whom  none  perhaps  are  left  able
to  doe  the  like,  nor  in  all  Franciscus  Modius
his  Triumphall  Pandects  to  be  paralelled.

The  end  of  the  eighth  Booke.
373

Peregrinations,

[ii.ix.1383.]

and  Discoveries  by  Land  of  Assyria,  Armenia,  Per-
sia, India,  Arabia,  and  other  In-land  Countries
of  Asia,  by  Englishmen  and  Others  ;
Moderne  and  Ancient.

THE NINTH BOOKE.

Chap. I.

A  briefe  Compendium  of  the  Historie  of  Sir  Anthony
Sherleys  Travels  into  Persia  :  And  employed
thence  Ambassadour  to  the  Christian  Princes  ;
*  penned  by  himselfe,  and  recommended  to  his
Brother  Sir  Robert  Sherley,  since  that  sent  on
like  Ambassage  by  the  King  of  Persia.

§.  i.

The  Causes of  his going to Persia,  and strange

Accidents  in  the  way.

N  my  first  yeares,  my  friends  bestowed  on
me  those  Learnings  which  were  fit  for  a
Gentlemans  ornament,  without  directing
them  to  an  Occupation ;  and  when  they
were  fit  for  agible  things,  they  bestowed
them  and  me  on  my  Princes  Service,  in
which  I  ran  many  courses,  of  divers  For-
tunes, according  to  the  conditions  of  the  Warres,  in  which,

375

*This  Sum-
marie  is  also  in
his  own  words,
but  many
things  which
pertayne
rather  to  his
minde  then
bodies  travels,
in  discourses  of
causes,  iff  care
left  out  not  for
want  of  worth,
but  of  roome  :
this  worke
looking
another  way.
The  studious
may  reade  the
Author
himselfe,  the
Historie  we
have
extracted.

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

I599-

as  I  was  most  exercised,  so  was  I  most  subject  to  accidents  :

With  what  opinion  I  carryed  myselfe  (since  the  causes
of  good  or  ill  must  be  in  my  selfe,  and  that  a  thing  without
my  selfe)  I  leave  it  to  them  to  speake ;  my  places  yet  in
authoritie,  in  those  occasions  were  ever  of  the  best ;  in
which,  if  I  committed  errour  it  was  contrarie  to  my  will,
and  a  weaknesse  in  my  judgement ;  which,  notwithstand-
ing, I  ever  industriated  my  selfe  to  make  perfect,  correcting
my  owne  over-sights  by  the  most  vertuous  Examples  I
could  make  choice  of :  Amongst  which,  as  there  was  not  a
Subject  of  more  worthinesse  and  vertue,for  such  Examples
to  grow  from,  then  the  ever-living  in  honour  and  condigne
Eark  of  estimation,  the  Earle  of  Essex :  as  my  reverence  and
Essex.  regard  to  his  rare  Qualities  was  exceeding ; so  I  desired

(as  much  as  my  humilitie  might  answere,  with  such  an
eminencie)  to  make  him  the  patterne  of  my  civill  life,  and
from  him  to  draw  a  worthy  modell  of  all  my  actions.
And  as  my  true  love  to  him,  did  transforme  mee
from  my  many  imperfections,  to  be,  as  it  were,  an
imitator  of  his  vertues ;  so  his  affection  was  such
to  mee,  that  hee  was  not  onely  contented,  I  should  doe
so ;  but  in  the  true  Noblenesse  of  his  minde  gave  mee
[II. ix. 1 3 84.]  liberally  the  best  Treasure  of  his  mind  in  counselling  me;
his  fortune  to  helpe  me  forward,  and  his  verie  care  to
beare  me  up  in  all  those  courses,  which  might  give  honour
to  my  selfe,  and  inworthy  the  name  of  his  friend :  in  so
much,  that  after  many  actions,  into  which  (peradventure)
he  provoked  my  owne  slacknesse.  The  Duke  of  Ferrara
Likelihood  of  dying,  and  leaving  Don  Caesare  d'Este  Inheritor  of  that
wars  betwixt Principalitie, who by his birth could indeed challenge

t  e ope  an nothin£  justly  being  a  Bastard ; notwithstanding,  in  the

Ka  c6 save  tor  o  j  t t  j  d  *  o;

the  Dutch  of  worlds  opinion,  hee  was  most  likely  to  have  beene  estab-

Ferrara. "  lished  in  that  succession,  through  the  long  continuance  of
the  government  in  that  name.  The  Earle  holding
opinion,  that  the  Dukes  greatest  necessitie  at  the  first
must  be  of  incouragement,  and  Captaines  sent  me  pre-
sently (though  the  least  amongst  many)  accompanied  with
divers Souldiers  of  approved  valour,  and  procured  the

376

55

A \ l'~T

5  £  r  TE53

jlTX__J L

NTKIO

~  \  '"  i i  "  r

JL,  I 1 I

54

i — r~i — r.

(iii:

I I I JL

^=; CSj>aJa

\yll^l'RE 2>  E

H

cccruji* J\

^■Etlccmra >  i

C  -4  JS'DIA  c*£d.

titniia.

Garutr

tirn

^^^jrJ-^zr  S ^|g g^ ^Pf"

*i.  intcnici®

tormm

^  ^  -Hh.^k^/k  ©6  1.

^  LcfinMmc  f^fe  -^, ©

55

S/ith

cfr<%  j ©

(y  MtfaxvpeU  CPdki.  -

'Girpeaia \  {  Corconcfi

t& Xacn>  ©

^C

£^

<i

MERl  JJ\  I>IES

Ma  ri s  Med  i terranei  P^a  r  s  ^  r

l*m^i,au«_i m  - #  J  CANDIA

-111 <g| *<>i yJ  I e  f^""  s~* 1

t"i i 'i j 'i r 1" i 1 i -r-

/4

HONDIUS HIS MAP OF CANDIA

SIR ANTHONY SHERLEY  a.d.

1599.
Count  Maurice,  Generall  of  the  States  Army,  to  write  him
Letters  of  as  much  comfort,  as  could  be  given  from  so
brave  a  Prince,  and  so  famous  an  Estate :  and  though  my
journey  was  under-taken  in  the  dead  of  Winter,  and  I
left  no  paines  untaken  to  accelerate  it ;  yet  before  I  could
arrive  in  Italy,  I  found  the  Duke  given  over  to  quieter
resolutions,  and  Ferrara  yeelded  to  the  Pope ;  him  selfe
satisfying  himselfe  with  Modena  &  Rhegium,  of  which  he
now  beareth  the  Title.  Which  when  I  had  advertised  the
Earle  of,  as  he  who  never  had  his  own  thoughts  limited,
within  any  bounds  of  honorable  and  just  ambition.  So
he  also  desired,  that  those  whom  he  had  chosen  into  a
neerenesse  of  affection,  should  also  answere  both  his  owne
conceit  of  them,  and  satisfie  the  world  in  his  election  of
them :  wherefore,  not  willing  I  should  returne,  and  turne
such  a  voyce  as  was  raised  of  my  going  to  nothing ;  as
unwilling  that  I  should  by  a  vaine  expence  of  Time,
Money  and  Hope,  be  made  a  scorne  to  his,  and  (through
him)  to  my  enemies :  He  proposed  unto  me  (after  a  small
relation,  which  I  made  unto  him  from  Venice)  the  Voyage
of  Persia.  Having  with  these  Advertisements  received
strength  to  my  owne  mind,  large  meanes,  and  Letters  of
favour  and  credit  to  the  Company  of  Merchants  at
Aleppo.

I  imbarked  my  selfe  at  Venice  for  Aleppo,  in  a  Vene-  [ii.ix.1385.]
tian  ship,  called  the  Morizell,  the  foure  and  twentieth  of
May,  1599.  Five  and  twentie  daies  the  ship  was  sayling
betweene  Malmocko  the  Port  of  Venice,  and  Zant ;  in
which  space  one  of  the  worst  in  the  Ship,  a  Passenger  to
Cyprus,  used  most  scandalous  speeches  of  her  Majestie,
which  being  brought  unto  me,  not  onely  moved  with  the
dutifull  zeale  which  a  Subject  oweth  to  his  Prince ;  but
even  with  that  respect  which  every  Gentleman  oweth  to  a
Lady,  I  commanded  one  of  my  people  to  give  him  a  fit
reward  for  so  vile  an  abuse :  which  was  no  sooner  done,
but  the  Ship  was  all  in  an  uprore.  And  though  the  cause
of  the  act  was  just,  and  so  understood  by  divers  principall
Merchants,  which  went  to  Zant,  and  that  the  punishment

377

A.D.

I599<

Duke  of
Candy  under
the  state  of
Venice.

Cyprus.

A  strange
deliverance.
Wickednesse
of  a  Portugal!.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

was  nothing  proportionable  to  the  sceleratnesse  of  the
fact ;  yet  through  the  instigation  of  one  Hugo  de  Potso,
a  Portugall  Factor,  which  was  going  to  Ormus,  (though
they  shewed  all  to  be  satisfied,  because  they  durst  doe  no
other,  yet)  when  we  were  to  have  departed  in  the  Ship
from  Zant,  they  would  no  more  receive  us,  so  that  we
were  forced  to  hire  a  Carramosall  to  carrie  us  to  Candy,
where  we  received  most  honorable  entertainment,  (the
comming  of  Strangers  thither  being  a  thing  so  unusuall,
that  the  Duke  desired  to  shew  the  Magnificence  of  the
great  Signiorie  to  us  that  came  first,  and  peradventure
should  bee  the  last  for  a  long  time.)

From  thence  in  the  same  Carramosall  we  departed  to
Cyprus  and  Paphos,  where  wee  found  nothing  to  answere
the  famous  Relations  given  by  ancient  Histories  of  the
excellency  of  that  Hand,  but  the  name  onely,  (the  barbar-
ousnesse  of  the  Turke,  and  Time,  having  defaced  all  the
Monuments  of  Antiquitie)  no  shew  of  splendor,  no  habita-
tion of  men  in  a  fashion,  nor  possessors  of  the  ground  in  a
Principalitie ;  but  rather  Slaves  to  cruell  Masters,  or
Prisoners  shut  up  in  divers  prisons :  so  grievous  is  the
burthen  of  that  miserable  people,  and  so  deformed  is  the
state  of  that  Noble  Realme.  Notwithstanding,  the
Redemption  of  that  place  and  people  were  most  facile
(being  but  foure  thousand  Turkes  in  the  whole  Hand.)

From  Paphos  we  went  to  the  Salines  in  a  little  hired
Barke,  where  we  found  the  Morizell,  in  which  wee  came
to  Zant.  The  Portugall  and  his  Complices  presently
went  on  shoare  to  the  Subbassa  of  the  place  (for  so  is
called  the  Governor  there)  and  told  him  divers  Pirats  who
had  lost  their  ships,  were  come  into  the  Harbour  in  a  small
Boat,  amongst  whom  were  some  Boyes  and  Youths,  worth
much  Money ;  besides,  I  know  not  what  Jewels  and
Treasure  we  had  amongst  us,  with  the  which  he  would
give  him  a  good  present  also,  if  he  would  send  some  of
his  Souldiers  and  take  us.  At  this  Oration  of  his,  were
present  certaine  Armenian  Passengers,  who  had  knowne
us  in  the  ship,  which  moved  with  the  enormitie  of  so  vile

^78

SIR ANTHONY SHERLEY  a.d.

I599-
an  act  (that  Christians  should  sell  and  betray  Christians  to

Turkes,  and  that  upon  no  cause  of  offence,  which  they
were  witnesses  of,  we  should  be  persecuted  with  such  a
kind  of  inhumane  crueltie)  with  all  speed  possible  hired  a
Boat  themselves  for  Alexandretta,  came  with  it  unto  us,
provided  in  it  victuals  for  us,  and  the  Masters  themselves
to  lose  no  time ;  and  beseeching  us,  with  teares  in  their
eyes,  to  flie  from  thence  with  all  speed  possible,  relating
unto  us  the  scelerat  Treason  conspired  against  us,  and  our
imminent  perill.  Wherefore  we  instantly  changed  into
that  Boat,  and  perceiving  a  Frigat  a  farre  off,  rowing
towards  us  for  haste,  left  most  of  our  things  behind  us,
and  yet  could  not  make  so  much  speed,  but  that  the  Jani-
zaries which  were  in  the  Frigat,  and  chased  us,  bestowed
some  shot  upon  us,  and  had  peradventure  overtaken  us,
if  the  night  had  not  ended  their  chasing  us,  and  our
dangers.

This  Boat  in  which  we  were,  was  an  ordinary  Passenger  Another
betweene  Cyprus  and  Alexandretta,  a  small  way  off,  onely  ^elwerance-
a  night  and  a  halfe  sayling,  and  halfe  a  daies  sayling :  So
that  by  reason  the  Master  was  unlike  to  mistake  his  way,
much  lesse  so  just  contrary  as  hee  did,  towards  two  houres
in  the  night,  we  met  another  passage-Boate,  put  off  from
Famagusta,  holding  the  course  which  we  intended.  The
night  was  faire,  with  the  shining  of  the  Moone  and  Star-
light ;  yet,  by  reason  of  the  differences  in  sayling,  wee
first  lost  sight  of  that  Boate,  then  by  our  different  course,
the  Master  of  ours,  in  stead  of  Alexandretta,  going  for
Tripoly,  which  certainely  was  a  great  worke  of  God  to
preserve  us.  The  other  Boat,  at  breake  of  the  day,  being
taken  at  the  entrance  of  the  Port  of  Alexandretta,  by
certaine  Turkish  Pirats,  who  put  all  to  the  sword  that  were
in  it,  and  hearing  of  us,  we  had  rowed  so  farre  into  the
River  Orontes,  before  they  could  recover  us,  that  they
durst  no  further  prosecute  that  prey.  There  we  found  a
goodly  Countrey,  repleat  even  naturally  with  all  the
blessings  the  earth  can  give  to  man,  for  the  most  part
uncultivated  here  and  there  (as  it  were)  sprinkled  with

379

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

*599-

miserable  Inhabitors,  which  in  their  fashion  shewed  the

necessitie  they  had  to  live,  rather  then  any  pleasure  in
their  living.

From  thence  we  sent  our  Interpreter  to  Antiochia,  to
provide  us  Horses  to  bring  us  thither,  which  he  returned
within  two  daies  after,  and  with  them  wee  proceeded
thither,  full  of  great  care  how  we  should  escape  from
thence.  The  Turke  having  given  certaine  scales  to  trade
in,  out  of  which,  as  it  was  unlawfull  for  any  to  converse ;
so  it  must  needs  be  an  unevitable  peril  for  so  great  a
company,  when  the  same  great  Providence,  which  at  first
defended  us  from  the  former  hazards,  gave  us  the  good
hap  to  meete  with  two  Janizaries,  Hungarish-runnagates,
who  understanding  that  we  were  Christians,  compelled
against  our  dispositions  into  that  place,  our  intention  to
be  a  visitation  of  Jerusalem,  and  withall,  our  feare  of  some
[II.ix.1386.]  great  prejudice  by  our  being  arrived  out  of  the  distin-
guished places  for  all  Christians :  having  told  us  first,  that
they  themselves  had  beene  Christians,  and  though  they
had,  for  reasons  best  knowne  to  themselves,  altered  that
condition ;  yet  they  wished  well  to  those  which  still  were
so,  and  especially,  to  all  of  those  parts :  and  afterwards
cheerefully  comforting  us,  invited  us  to  lodge  in  their
house,  securing  us,  by  a  number  of  protestations,  from  al
dangers ;  which  as  they  courteously  offered,  so  (if  I  may
give  so  faire  a  terme,  to  such  a  people)  they  honorably
performed :  For  being  by  the  Cady  of  Antiochia  required
to  present  us  unto  him,  they  did  not  onely  deny  us,  as
bound  unto  it  by  the  lawes  of  hospitalitie,  in  respect  of
their  promise,  as  they  themselves  said ;  but  called  fiftie
other  Janizaries  of  Damasco,  their  friends  to  defend  us,  if
the  Cady  should  have  offered  violence.

Those  Janizaries  of  Damasco,  amongst  other  Garrisons,
were  appointed  as  those  of  Cairo  against  the  invasions  of
the  Arabs,  who  are  through  all  those  Provinces,  a  people
dispersed,  living  in  Tents,  without  a  certaine  place  of
abode,  removing  their  habitations  according  to  the  seasons,
and  their  owne  Commodities : part  of  which,  who  are

380

SIR ANTHONY SHERLEY  a.d.

1599.

remooved  on  that  side  of  Euphrates,  which  is  of  Meso-
potamia, now  called  Diarbech,  are  peaceable  to  the  Turke,
and  not  much  infestious  to  Travellers.  Their  King  being
a  Saniacke  of  the  Turkes,  and  by  that  Title  holding  Ana
and  Der,  two  Townes  upon  the  River,  which  pay  him  his
stipend.  The  other,  upon  the  other  side  towards  iEgypt,
through  all  Arabia  Petra,  and  Deserta,  and  spreading  as
farre  as  the  limits  of  Arabia  Felix  ;  being  in  multitudes,
and  not  possible  bee  brought  to  a  quiet  and  well-formed
manner  of  living,  are  dangerous  to  Strangers,  and  con-
tinuall  spoylers  of  those  parts  of  the  Turkes  Dominions,
which  every  way  border  upon  them  :  for  the  safetie  of
which  (as  I  said)  those  two  Garrisons  of  Cairo  and
Damasco  were  instituted ; the  first,  of  twelve  thousand,

the other of fifteene hundred Janizaries. Those  ^so[enceoft

Jz 1  •  1  • , j c ,i  r  :• r j Janizaries  in

anizanes  (which  were  appointed  tor  the  safetie  or the  those  tims  0f

Provinces,  and  had  their  first  priviledges,  not  onely  for  a  Mahomet,
reward  to  their  vertues ;  but  to  binde  them  by  such  Father  to  the
rewards,  to  answere  the  Princes  confidence  in  them)  now  Mustapka.
obey  no  authoritie  which  calleth  them  to  other  Warres :
but  by  combining  themselves  in  a  strength  together,
tyrannize  the  Countries  committed  to  their  charges :  in
such  a  sort,  that  they  are  not  onely  Princes  (as  it  were)
over  the  people,  but  doe  also  terrifie  the  greater  Ministers,
(a  great  weaknesse  in  the  very  Basis  of  so  huge  an  estate)
want  of  necessary  provision  for  the  warres  in  all  those
parts ;  not  speaking  of  those  for  peace,  sithence  the  ruine
of  the  Provinces,  for  the  most  part,  and  the  misery  of
those  poore  flocke  of  people,  which  doe  live  in  the  parts
inhabited,  are  onely  the  meanes  to  give  him  peace.  Yet
the  negligence  of  the  Princes  Christian,  will  not  make
use  of  these  extreame  defects  of  his  to  amplifie  their
Dominions,  to  eternize  their  Honours ;  and  (that  which
is  the  greatest)  to  glorifie  God,  which  hath  made  them
Princes,  onely  to  execute  his  judgements.  I  will  leave
them,  and  speake  of  my  Janizaries  rare  disposition  unto
me,  who  did  not  onely  performe  their  promise  in  defending
me  in  Antiochia,  but  delivered  me  safely  from  them  into

381

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1599.
English  Con- our  English  Consuls  hands  in  Aleppo  : from  whom,  and

*™at  Aleppo.  from  a|i  thc  Merchants  there  abiding,  I  received  such  an
Merchants  .  .  ,  c  n  1  • 1  1  1

bounty.  entertainment,  with  so  carerull,  so  kind,  and  so  honour-

able a  respect,  as  I  must  needs  say,  they  were  the  onely
Gentlemen,  or  the  most  benigne  Gentlemen  that  ever  I
met  withall.  For  my  company  being  so  great,  that  it  was
no  light  burthen  unto  them ;  besides,  gave  an  occasion  to
the  Turkes  condition  of  getting  to  make  quarrels  for  that
end :  so  that  they  were  not  onely  at  expence  by  defraying
me  and  mine,  but  at  more  by  preserving  us  from  oppres-
sion amongst  them.  I  had  not  beene  fully  one  moneth
expecting  a  commoditie  of  passage  by  Caravan  into  Persia  :
but  that  the  Morizell  arrived,  who  presently  had  the
advice  of  my  being  at  Aleppo  :  And  though  that  Hugo
de  Potso  threatned  us  much  as  an  ill  mind,  and  great  purse
could  make  him  hope  to  prevaile  against  me  by ;  and
questionlesse  had  raised  some  great  trouble  against  me,  if
A  happy  he  had  come  safe  to  Aleppo. Yet  ever  the  first  providence

deliverance which  saved  me  before,  determined  so  well  also  for  me
from anger tjlen^  t}lat  foure  miles  from  Aleppo  he  dyed : by  which
meanes I  was  preserved from perill, and those honest
Merchants  (my  friends)  from  great  trouble.

After  sixe  weekes  staying  in  Aleppo  (a  wearisome  time
to  my  selfe,  being  drawne  from  thence  continually  by  the
instigation  of  my  desire,  which  longed  for  the  accomplish-
ment of  the  end,  that  I  proposed  to  my  selfe,  and  as
chargeable  a  time  for  my  friends,  which  would  needs  make
me  a  burthensome  guest  unto  them)  the  Tafterdall,  which
is  the  Treasurer,  and  the  great  Cady,  which  is  (as  it  were)
the  Lord  Chiefe  Justice  of  Babylon,  arrived  at  Aleppo,
from  thence  to  goe  by  the  River  of  Euphrates  to  the
place  of  their  Regiment.  With  those,  as  divers  others
went,  so  did  I  also,  for  the  more  securitie  of  my  Voyage
(their  company  being  ever  defended,  besides  with  the
respect  of  their  persons,  with  a  good  company  of  Janizaries)
to  Birr,  which  is  the  place  of  imbarkment.  Divers  of  our
Merchants  brought  me,  and  left  me  not  untill  I  was
boated. Thirtie  daies  we  were  going  upon  the  River  to

382

SIR ANTHONY SHERLEY  ad.

*599-

Babylon,  resting  every  night  by  the  shoare  side : In  all

which  way  we  found  few  Townes ; onely  Racha,  Ana,

Derrit,  and  otherwise  as  little  habitation,  except  heere  and

there  a  small  Village  :  and  one  of  better  reputation,  which

is  the  landing  place,  thirtie  miles  from  Babylon,  called

Phalugium. To  tell  wonders  of  things  I  saw,  strange  to

us,  that  are  borne  in  these  parts,  is  for  a  Traveller  of

another  profession  then  I  am,  who  had  my  end  to  see,  and

make  use  of  the  best  things ; not  to  feed  my  selfe  and  the

world  with  such trifles,  as  either  by  their  strangenesse

might  have  a  suspition  of  untruth  :  or  by  their  lightnesse  [Il.ix.i 387.]

adde  to  the  rest  of  my  imperfections,  the  vanitie  or  smal-

nesse  of  my  judgement. But  because  I  was  desirous  to

certifie  my  selfe  truly  of  the  estate  of  the  Turke,  in  those

parts  through  which  I  passed,  understanding  where  we

lodged  one  night,  that  the  Campe  of  Aborisci,  King  of  dforisct  King

those  Arabs,  which  inhabite  the  Desart  of  Messopotamia,  °A  .e,

was  a  mile  off ; I  hazarded  my  selfe  in  that  curiositie  to

goe  into  it,  and  saw  a  poore  King  with  tenne  or  twelve

thousand  beggerly Subjects, living  in  Tents  of  blacke

Haire-cloath : yet so well governed, that though our

cloathes  were  much  better  then  theirs,  &  their  want  might

have  made  them  apt  enough  to  have  borrowed  them  of  us  ;

we  passed  notwithstanding  through  them  all  in  such  peace,

as  we  could  not have  done, being Strangers, amongst

civiller  bred  people. That  day,  as  it  hapned,  was  the  day  Manner  of

of  Justice  amongst  them,  which  was  pretty  and  warlike.

Certaine  chiefe  Officers  of  the  Kings,  mounting  on  horse-

backe,  armed  after  their  manner,  with  their  Staves,  Targets,

Bowes  and  Arrowes ; and so  giving  judgement  of  all

Cases,  which  the  people  brought  before  them. The  King

gave us good words, without any kind of barbarous

wondring, or other distastfull fashion. But when we

returned  to  our  Boat,  we  found  the  Master  of  his  house,

Master  of  our  Boat,  with  a  sort  of  his  Arabs : and  in

conclusion,  we  were  forced  to  send  his  Master  three  Vestes

of  cloath of  Gold, for  beholding his  person. This  is

that King of the Arabs, which I said before, was a

3*3

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1599.

Saniacke  of  the  Turkes ; and  for  that  place  held  of  the
Turke,  Ana  and  Dirr,  two  Townes  upon  the  River.

As  soone  as  we  came  to  Babylon,  having  put  the  stocke
which  I  had  all  into  Jewels  and  Merchandize,  to  carry  the
fashion of  a Merchant ; at the  Dogana, which is the
Custome-house,  all  (whatsoever)  was  stayed  for  the  Bassa :
and  (as  I  perceived)  not  so  much  for  any  great  use  which
he  meant  to  speake  of  those  things ; as  for  the  suspition
which  hee  had  of  me,  and  mine  extraordinary  company
bearing  much  cause  thereof  with  it ; and  because  I  gave
out I had  more  goods  comming  with the  Caravan  by
Land,  to  binde  me  not  to  start  from  thence. In  the  meane
time,  by  very  necessitie,  having  left  me  nothing  in  the
world ; what  extreame  affliction  I  was  in,  by  that  meanes,
for  the  present : and  in  what  just  cause  of  feare  for  the
Sir  Robert future,  every  man  may  easily  judge. I  had  my  Brother
«  r,V'  slnce with  me,  a  young  Gentleman,  whose  affection  to  me,  had
from  the  King  onely  led  him  to  that  disaster,  and  the  working  of  his
of  Persia  to  * owne  vertue  :  desiring  in  the  beginning  of  his  best  yeares,
His  Majestie. to  inable  himselfe  to  those  things,  which  his  good  mind
raised  his  thoughts  unto. I  had  also  five  and  twentie
other  Gentlemen,  for  the  most  part :  the  rest,  such  as  had
served  me  long,  onely  carried  with  their  loves  to  mee,  into
the  course  of  my  fortune. I  had  no  meanes  to  give  them
A  hard  dis- sustenance  to  live,  and  lesse  hope  to  unwrap  them  from
the  horrible  snare,  into  which  I  had  brought  them,  being
farre  from  all  friends,  and  further  from  counsell,  not  under-
standing the  language  of  the  people,  into  whose  hands  I
was  falne,  much  lesse  their  proceedings :  onely  thus  much
I  knew,  they  were  Turkes,  inhumane  in  their  natures,  and
addicted  to  get  by  all  meanes  just  and  unjust.
The  rumes  of gut  j  w[\\  leave  my  se}fe  a  little  in  that  great  straight,

a  y  on'  and  speake  of  Babylon  ; not  to  the  intent  to  tell  stories,

either  of  the  huge  ruines  of  the  first  Towne,  of  the
splendor  of  this  second :  but  because  nothing  doth
impresse  any  thing  in  mans  nature  more,  then  example,
to  shew  the  truth  of  Gods  Word,  whose  vengeance,
threatned  by  his  Prophets,  are  truely  succeeded  in  all  those

384

SIR ANTHONY SHERLEY  a.d.

1599.

parts.  Ninive  (that  which  God  himselfe  calleth,  That  Ninhe.
great  Citie)  hath  not  one  stone  standing,  which  may  give
memorie  of  the  being  of  a  Towne  :  one  English  mile  from
it,  is  a  place  called  Mosul,  a  small  thing ;  rather  to  bee  a
witnesse  of  the  others  mightinesse,  and  Gods  judgement,
then  of  any  fashion  of  Magnificencie  in  it  selfe.  All  the
ground  on  which  Babylon  was  spred,  is  left  now  desolate,
nothing  standing  in  that  Peninsula,  betweene  the  Euphrates
and  the  Tigris,  but  onely  part,  and  that  a  small  part  of  the
great  Tower.  The  Towne,  which  is  now  called  Bagdat,  Bagdat,
and  is  on  the  other  side  of  Tigris,  towards  Persia  (onely  a
small  Suburbe  in  the  Peninsula)  but  removed  from  any
stirpe  of  the  first ;  to  which  men  passe  ordinarily  by  a
Bridge  of  Boats,  which  every  night  is  dissolved,  for  feare
either  of  the  Arabs,  or  some  storme  upon  the  River,  which
might  carrie  away  the  Boats,  when  there  were  no  helpe
readie.  The  buildings  are  after  the  Morisco  fashion,  low,
without  stories  ;  and  the  Castle,  where  the  Bassa  is  resident,
is  a  great  vast  place,  without  beautie  or  strength,  either  by
Art,  or  Nature  ;  the  people  somewhat  more  abstinent  from
offending  Christians,  then  in  other  parts,  through  the
necessitie  of  the  Trade  of  Ormus :  upon  which  standeth
both  the  particular  and  publike  wealth  of  the  State.
Victuals  are  most  abundant,  and  excellent  good  of  all  sorts,
and  very  cheape ;  which  was  a  mightie  blessing  for  mee,
which  had  nothing  but  a  generall  Wardrobe  of  clothes,
not  in  our  Coffers,  but  upon  our  backes ;  which  we  were  A  hard
forced  to  make  money  of  by  piece-meale,  according  to  the  distresse-
falling  of  the  Lot,  and  our  necessitie  ;  and  with  that  lived  :
and  if  feeding-well  had  beene  all,  which  we  had  cause  to
care  for,  we  also  lived  well.

But  after  one  moneth  was  past,  and  time  fastned  every  A  strange
mans  eyes  more  firmely  upon  us :  One  day  a  Florentine  Provldence-
Merchant  (whom  I  had  onely  knowne  in  the  way  betweene
Aleppo  and  Babylon,  by  a  riding  acquaintance)  came  unto
mee,  and  after  a  little  other  discourse,  told  mee,  that  there
was  a  great  muttering  amongst  divers  great  men  there,
what  I  was,  and  what  my  designes  might  bee;  that  he
viii  385  2  B

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1599.

found  me  to  be  dangerously  spied  after :  and  wished  mee

[II.ix.1388.] to  have  regard,  (if  not  to  my  selfe)  yet  to  so  many,  which

he  did  imagine  were  impawned  in  that  misfortune  by  my

meanes. And  though  it  were  true,  that  hee  came  upon

the  motion  of  an  honest,  pious,  and  charitable  heart ; yet

I  was  so  fearefull  of  an  Italian  Merchant,  that  I  did  rather

imagine  him  to  be  the  spie,  then  lightly  to  have  beene  an

instrument  of  his  prevention. Therefore  agreeing  with

him  in  the  complement  onely,  I  answered  determinately

in  the  rest ; that  I  knew  no  just  cause  of  perill,  therefore

I  feared  none ; and  if  there  were  any  curious  eyes  upon

me,  because  of  the  number  of  my  companie,  the  Caravan

comming,  they  should  see  good  use  made  of  them  all :

and  untill  that  time I  would  have  patience  with their

looking  and  speaking. Him  I  thanked  for  his  kindnesse,

and  offered  my  selfe  largely  unto  him,  as  though  I  had

least  suspected  him ; though  in  truth  I  did  most : and

most  unjustly. For,  two  dayes  after  he  returned  to  me

againe,  and  as  a  man  moved  in  his  very  soule  with  anguish,

told  me,  that  within  ten  dayes  the  Caravan  of  Aleppo

would  arrive ; in  the  meane  time,  beseeched  me  not  to

cover  my  selfe  longer  from  him,  who  did  so  truely  wish

me  well,  not  so  much  for  my  person  (which  he  could  know

little)  but  because  his  conceit  was,  that  I  would  not  have

hazarded  my  selfe  in  such  a  journey,  but  for  some  great

end,  which  he  did  beleeve  well  of ;  and  besides,  in  charitie

to  a  Christian,  and  so  many  Christians  with  me : saying,

A  Caravan  of  that  there  was  a  Caravan  of  Persian  Pilgrims,  arrived  two

Persian  dayes  since  from  Mecca  without  the  Towne,  who  were

forced  to  take  that  way  (though  the  longest)  by  reason  of

the Plague, which raigned very exceedingly in those

A  strange  and  places,  by  which  they  should  have  passed. Hee  was  not

extraordinary ignorant  of  my  wants,  for  which  hee  also  had  provided ;

kindnesse  ot  a  •

Florentine an<^  taking  me  by  the  hand,  beseeched  me  againe  to  beleeve

Merchant,  him,  and  to  goe  presently  with  him  to  the  Caravan  :  which
called  V'utorio  I  did,  not  being  able  to  answere,  through  admiration  of  so
Spectero.  generous  a  part  in  him,  and  an  amazement,  with  a  thou-

sand divers  thoughts  spred  upon  mee. When  I  came

386

SIR ANTHONY SHERLEY  a.d.

1599,

there,  hee  brought  me  to  a  Vittorin,  of  whom  hee  had
alreadie  hired  Horses,  Camels,  and  Mules  for  mee ;  and  I
found  a  Tent  pitched  by  his  servants :  and  then  opening
his  Gowne,  hee  delivered  mee  a  bag  of  Chequins,  with
these  very  words :  The  God  of  Heaven  blesse  you,  and
your  whole  companie,  and  your  enterprise,  which  I  will  no
further  desire  to  know,  then  in  my  hope,  which  perswadeth
me  that  it  is  good ;  My  selfe  am  going  to  China,  whence
if  I  returne,  I  shall  little  need  the  repayment  of  this  cour-
tesie,  which  I  have  done  you  with  a  most  free  heart ;  if  I
die  by  the  way,  I  shall  lesse  need  it :  but  if  it  please  God
so  to  direct  both  our  safeties  with  good  providence,  that
we  may  meet  againe,  I  assure  my  selfe,  that  you  will
remember  mee  to  be  your  friend  ;  which  is  enough,  for  all
that  I  can  say  to  a  man  of  your  sort.  And  almost,  without
giving  me  leasure  to  yeeld  him  condigne  thankes  (if  any
thankes  could  bee  condigne)  for  so  great  and  so  noble  a
benefit,  he  departed  from  mee.  And  as  I  heard  afterward
from  him  by  Letters  from  Ormus,  he  received  much
trouble  after  my  departure,  through  his  honourable  desire
to  perfect  the  kindnesse  which  he  had  begun.  For,
imagining  that  by  the  continuall  spies,  which  clave  to  my
house,  that  my  flight  could  not  be  secret :  hee  had  no
sooner  left  mee  in  the  Caravan,  but  that  he  changed  his
lodging  to  mine,  saying  that  I  had  done  the  like  to  his ;
and  went  to  the  Cady,  telling  him  that  I  was  sicke,  desiring
his  Physician  to  visite  mee,  knowing  well  enough  that  the
Cady  had  none,  but  onely  to  give  colour  to  my  not  appear-
ing in  the  Towne.  The  Cady  answered,  he  was  sorrie  for
my  sicknesse,  and  would  send  to  the  Bassa  for  his
Physician,  which  Signior  Victorio  Speciera  (for  so  was
this  honourable  Florentine  called)  would  by  no  meanes ;
hoping,  as  hee  said,  that  my  sicknesse  would  not  bee  so
great,  as  would  require  the  trouble  of  his  Highnesse.  By
this  meanes  five  dayes  passed  before  I  was  missed ;  and
when  I  was  once  discovered  to  be  gone,  fiftie  Janizaries
were  sent  after  me,  to  bring  mee  backe  againe :  the  Cara-
van having  divided  it  selfe  by  the  way,  whereof  one  part

387

A.D.
1599.

Santon
Pilgrimage.

Courdines.

[II.ix.1389.]

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

went  a  visitation  of  a  Santon  in  the  Desarts  of  Samarone ;
and  the  other  passed  the  right  way  for  Persia  by  the  Moun-
taines,  governed  by  a  Prince  of  the  Courdines,  called
Cobatbeague.  The  Janizaries  hearing  of  them  to  be  past,
and  thinking  that  all  had  beene  so,  they  returned  :  and
that  noble-minded  Florentine  was  forced  to  pay  five
hundred  Crownes,  to  make  his  peace  with  the  Bassa.

My  frailtie  gave  mee  a  continuall  terrour,  during  those
thirtie  dayes,  in  which  wee  wandred  with  that  companie
of  blinde  Pilgrims  through  the  Desarts ;  not  knowing
what  God  had  wrought  for  my  securitie,  and  those  which
were  with  mee,  by  that  good  man,  Signior  Victorio.  At
the  end  of  which  wee  arrived  in  the  King  of  Persia's
Dominions,  having  first  passed  a  great  tract  of  good  and
ill  Countries,  the  Desart  places  of  which  being  onely  sand,
gave  no  meanes  for  Inhabitants  to  live  :  the  fruitfuller
parts  were  used  by  certaine  people,  called  Courdines,  living
in  Tents,  knowing  no  other  fruit  of  the  earth,  but  what
belonged  to  the  sustenance  of  their  Cattell,  upon  the
Milke,  Butter,  and  Flesh,  of  which  they  live,  ruled  by
certaine  particular  Princes  of  their  owne,  which  give  partly
an  obedience  to  the  Turke,  and  part  to  the  Persian,  as
they  are  neerest  the  Confines  of  the  one  or  the  other.
Yet  in  that  simplicitie  of  living  (not  being  without  that
contagion  of  all  Mankind,  of  all  Provinces,  and  of  all
States,  ambition  of  getting  superioritie,  and
Dominion)  some  Warres  daily  grow  in  amongst
even  to  the  extirpation  of  a  whole  Nation  :  as  we
freshly,  when  we  passed  by  one  of  those  Princes,  called
Hiderbeague,  all  whose  people  were  devoured  by  the
sword,  or  carried  away  captive  by  Cobatbeague  ;  and  him-
selfe  remayned  onely  with  some  twentie  soules,  in  certaine
poore  Holds  in  a  Rocke.

The  precise  summe,  which  I  received  of  the  Florentine,
I  set  not  downe,  to  prevent  the  scandales  of  divers,  who
measuring  every  mans  mind  by  the  straightnesse  of  theirs,
will  beleeve  no  act,  which  doth  not  symbolize  with  them-
selves :  but  so  much  it  was,  that  being  thirtie  dayes  upon

388

larger
them,
found

SIR ANTHONY SHERLEY  ad.

1599.

the  way  to  the  Confines ;  then  fifteene  from  the  Confines
to  Casbine,  where  wee  attended  one  moneth  the  Kings
arrivall ;  it  was  not  onely  sufficient  to  give  us  aboundant
meanes  for  that  time,  but  to  clothe  us  all  in  rich  apparell,
fit  to  present  our  selves  before  the  presence  of  any  Prince,
and  to  send  extraordinarily  in  gifts,  by  which  wee  insinu-
ated fqjrre  into  the  favour  of  those,  which  had  the  authoritie
of  that  Province,  during  our  abode,  and  expectation  of
the  Kings  comming :  in  which  time  we  were  well  used,
more  by  the  opinion,  which  they  had,  that  the  King  would
take  satisfaction  by  us,  then  by  their  owne  humours ;
being  an  ill  people  in  themselves :  and  onely  good  by  the
example  of  their  King,  and  their  exceeding  obedience
unto  him.  The  Governour  visited  mee  once  ;  Margana-
beague,  Master  of  the  Kings  house,  (whom  I  had  won
unto  me  by  Presents)  came  oftentimes  to  see  mee  :  besides
(as  it  seemed)  being  more  inwardly  acquainted  with  the
Kings  inclination,  fitted  himselfe  more  to  that,  then  others
did,  which  knew  it  lesse.

Of  Abas  King  of  Persia,  his  Person,  Vertues,  Perils,
Escapes,  Advancement,  Government,  and  Con-
quests.

Nd  now  that  I  am  in  Persia,  and  speake  of  the  Kings
absence  ;  since  hee  is  both  one  of  the  mightiest
Princes  that  are,  and  one  of  the  excellentest,  for
the  true  vertues  of  a  Prince,  that  is,  or  hath  beene ;  and
having  come  to  this  greatnesse,  though  by  right ;  yet
through  the  circumstances  of  the  time,  and  the  occasions,
which  then  were,  solely  his  owne  worthinesse,  and  vertue,
made  way  to  his  right :  besides,  the  fashion  of  his  govern-
ment differing  so  much  from  that  which  wee  call  barbar-
ousnesse,  that  it  may  justly  serve  for  as  great  an  Idea  for  a
Principalitie,  as  Platoes  Commonwealth  did  for  a  Govern-
ment, of  that  sort. I  hold  it  not  amisse,  to  speake  amply

389

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1599.

first  of  his  Person,  the  nature  of  his  People,  the  distribution
of  his  Government,  the  administration  of  his  Justice,  the
condition  of  the  bordering  Princes,  and  the  causes  of  those
Warres,  in  which  hee  was  then  occupied ;  that  by  the  true
expression  of  those,  this  discourse  may  passe  with  a  more
lively,  and  a  more  sensible  feeling.

His  Person  then  is  such,  as  well-understanding  Nature
would  fit  for  thfc  end  proposed  for  his  being,  excellently
well  shaped,  of  a  most  well  proportioned  stature,  strong,
and  active ;  his  colour  somewhat  inclined  to  a  man-like
blacknesse,  is  also  more  blacke  by  the  Sunnes  burning :
his  furniture  of  his  mind  infinitely  royall,  wise,  valiant,
liberall,  temperate,  mercifull,  and  an  exceeding  lover  of
Justice,  embracing  royally  others  vertues,  as  farre  from
pride  and  vanitie,  as  from  all  unprincely  signes,  or  acts ;
knowing  his  power  justly  what  it  is  ;  and  the  like  acknow-
ledgement will  also  have  from  others,  without  any
gentilitious  adoration ;  but  with  those  respects,  which  are
fit  for  the  majestie  of  a  Prince ;  which  foundeth  it  selfe
upon  the  power  of  his  State,  generall  love,  and  awfull
terrour.  His  fortunes  determining  to  make  proofe  of  his
vertue,  drave  him  (in  his  first  yeeres)  into  many  dangerous
extremities ;  which  hee  overcomming  by  his  vertue,
hath  made  great  use  of,  both  in  the  excellent
encrease  of  his  particular  understanding,  and  generall
tranquillitie,  strength  of  his  Countrey,  and  propagation  of
his  Empire.  For  the  Lawes,  and  Customes,  or  both,  of
that  Kingdome,  being  such,  that  though  the  King  have  a
large  encrease  of  Issue,  the  first-borne  onely  ruleth  ;  and
to  avoide  all  kind  of  cause  of  civill  dissention,  the  rest  are
not  inhumanely  murthered,  according  to  the  use  of  the
Turkish  government,  but  made  blind  with  burning
Basons :  and  have  otherwise  all  sort  of  contentment  and
regard  fit  for  Princes  children.  Xa-Tamas  King  of  Persia
dying  without  Issue,  Xa-Codabent,  his  brother  was  called
blind  to  the  Kingdome ;  who  had  Issue,  Sultan  Hamzire
Mirza  the  eldest,  who  succeeded  him,  and  this  present
King  called  Abas.

390

SIR ANTHONY SHERLEY  a.d.

1599.

The  eldest  Sonne  of  the  King  remayned  at  the  Court  of
his  Father,  administring  all  that,  which  his  Fathers  defect
of  light  unabled  him  to  doe.  Abas  the  second  Sonne,
twelve  yeares  of  age  under  the  government  of  Tutors,
held  the  Province  of  Yasde ;  and  (as  Courts  are  full  of
Rumours,  and  suspition  never  wanteth  in  Princes,  especi-
ally which  have  such  imperfections,  as  they  are  compelled
to  take  knowledge  of)  the  vertues  of  Abas,  by  which  hee
bound  to  him  the  hearts  of  his  Provincials,  spred  them-
selves further,  and  so  to  the  Court ;  where  they  were
increased  to  such  a  condition,  as  altered  the  Father,  and
Brothers  rejoycing  in  them,  to  an  opinion  that  his  winning
of  the  affections  of  the  people,  proceeded  not  from  any
other  worthinesse,  but  artifice ;  which  had  the  intent  of  it
stretching  to  the  Crowne :  which  tooke  such  hold  in  the
Fathers  minde,  worne  with  age  and  griefe,  and  sore  with
his  late  misfortunes,  that  hee  resolved  secretly  his  death :
The  newes  of  which  being  brought  to  Abas,  speedily  by
the  meanes  of  secret  friends,  not  onely  to  himselfe,  but  to  [II.ix.1390.]
his  Governours  (which  as  they  were  the  greatest  of  the  state,
so  they  were  not  unfriended  in  the  Court)  being  so  farre
from  any  such  designe,  that  he  had  no  sort  of  provision  Abas  his
at  hand  to  defend  himselfe ;  hee  fled  to  the  King  of  Jpht  t0  the
Corasan,  a  Countrey  of  the  Tartars,  limiting  upon  the  Q0fafan
East  of  Persia,  ever  infestuous  to  that  State,  not  more  in
their  owne  disposition  (being  a  people  given  to  spoyle,
unquiet,  and  which  cannot  live  in  rest)  then  through  their
dependance  upon  the  Turke,  whose  Religion  they  pro-
fesse  (which  the  Persians  do  not,  but  much  altered)  and
whose  Pensionaries  they  were,  by  which  they  were  bound
in  all  seasons,  when  the  Turke  was  tyed  to  the  Christians
wars,  to  divert  the  Persian  from  looking  to  the  commoditie
of  such  a  time ;  besides,  on  occasions,  the  Turke  used  to
transport  great  forces  of  them  over  the  Caspian  Sea  into
Sirvana ;  and  from  thence  passed  them  into  Hungarie ;
eyther  the  longer  way  by  Land,  or  the  shorter  by  Sea,  over
Negropont.  To  this  King  Abas  was  exceeding  welcome,
and  cherished,  and  honoured  like  his  owne  Sonne. Shortly

39i

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1599.

after  the  flight,  the  Father  dyed,  and  Sultan  Hamzire
Mirza,  his  Sonne,  succeeded  him,  who  renewed  the  Truce
with  the  Turke,  through  the  necessitie  which  hee
had  to  use  the  most,  which  his  strength  and  power
could  yeeld  him,  to  suppresse  a  great  Rebellion  of
the  Turcomans :  whom,  at  the  last,  he  so  brake  with
divers  Battels,  and  all  other  sort  of  afflictions,  that
they  delivered  him  up  their  Princes,  and  then  them-
selves. Their  Princes  he  beheaded,  and  of  them,
slue  twentie  thousand  of  the  ablest  for  the  warres,
assuring  his  peace  with  them  by  their  extremest  ruine ;
and  as  he  was,  by  all  reports,  a  most  brave,  and  warlike
Prince,  having  pacified  his  owne  State,  and  desirous  to
recover,  not  onely  what  was  freshly  lost ;  but  all  which
was  formerly  taken  from  the  Sophies  Kingdome,  by  the
power  of  the  Ottomans  ;  united  all  his  thoughts,  and  all
his  Councels  to  that  one  great  end ;  which  all  finished
with  his  life,  ending  it  selfe  by  Treason  of  his  Princes  (not
without  perswasion  of  the  Turke)  when  hee  had  fit  yeares,
minde,  and  courage ;  and  meanes  joyned  with  occasion,
to  have  made  himselfe  the  greatest  Prince  of  many  Ages :
all  which  though  they  made  his  death  miserable,  yet  the
The  King  manner  was  more  miserable  ;  beeing  vilely  slaine  by  his
murthered.  Barber  retyring  halfe  drunke  from  a  Banquet,  to  which
hee  was  provoked  by  the  Conspirators,  which  presently
parted  the  State  betweene  them  ;  every  man  making  him-
selfe absolute  Prince  of  those  Provinces,  which  they  had
in  government ;  and  parting  the  Royall  Treasure  amongst
them  for  their  reciprocall  mayntenance,  disposed  them-
selves unitely  to  resist  the  comming  in  of  Abas  ;  whom
notwithstanding  they  did  not  much  feare,  having  promise
of  the  Turke,  that  hee  should  be  detayned  in  Corassan
where  he  was  refuged  :  and  knowing  that  he  had  neither
Men  nor  Money,  nor  yeares  to  give  him  any  incourage-
ment  to  attempt  against  them,  who  had  soone  confirmed
themselves,  both  with  giving  good  satisfaction  to  the
people,  and  with  liberalitie  to  the  Souldioury ;  and  their
entrance  into  the  State  being  without  opposition,  and  so,

392

SIR ANTHONY SHERLEY  a.d.

1599.

without  offence,  made  the  foundation  both  more  sure  and
more  facile.

Abas  in  the  meane  time,  whose  just  Title  made  him
King,  assured  himselfe  that  both  the  murder  of  his  Brother,
and  this  parting  of  the  State,  had  the  Turkes  counsell
concurring  with  those  Princes  Impietie  :  and  not  doubting
but  the  King  of  Corassan  was  also  perswaded  to  detayne
him  resolved  notwithstanding  by  his  necessitie,  began  to
deale  boldly  with  him  for  his  assistance  against  his  Rebels,
the  King  of  Corassan,  though  pre-occupyed  by  the  Turke,
yet  desirous  to  bee  his  Friend  afarre  off,  and  also  doubting
the  successe  of  Abas,  neither  having  yeares,  nor  experi-
ence, nor  Friends  ;  In  fine,  being  destitute  of  all  reasonable
hope,  not  to  moove  the  Turkes  displeasure  upon  such  a
disadvantagious  condition,  was  notwithstanding  contented
to  see  whether  some  thing  might  be  mooved  by  such  a
helpe  as  should  not  appeare  to  be  given  by  him,  but  rather
voluntarie  followers  of  Abas  his  fortune :  he  gave  him
three  thousand  Horse  onely  to  put  him  in  possession  of
that  State,  which  by  his  vertue,  and  fortune,  is  growne  now
so  great,  that  it  hath  devoured  all  the  States  of  the  Tartars,
extended  it  selfe  so  farre  as  Cabull  to  the  East ;  the
Arabian  gulfe  downe  to  Balsaraeke  on  the  South  ;  within  Mr  Persian
three  dayes  Journey  of  Babylon  on  the  West ;  and  to
Tauris  on  the  North  ;  embracing  the  whole  Circumference
of  the  Caspian  Sea  unto  Astracan,  which  is  the  uttermost
of  the  Moscovites  Dominion,  and  Servane  of  the  Turkes,
which  lyeth  upon  that  Sea :  an  Empire  so  great,  so
populous,  and  so  abundant ;  that  as  it  may  compare  with
most  of  the  greatest  that  ever  were,  so  is  it  terrible  to  the
Turkes  which  is  the  greatest  that  now  is ;  though  I  doe
thinke  verily,  That  in  Asia  the  Persian  hath  as  great  an
extent  of  Territories,  as  the  Turke,  and  better  inhabited,
better  governed,  and  in  better  obedience  and  affection,  I
am  sure  he  hath.  With  this  small  troupe,  the  King  of
Persia,  guided  by  his  infinite  Royall  courage,  entred
Persia.  But  as  those  which  are  wicked,  are  ever  so  well
instructed  in  the  Art  of  their  possession,  that  they  never

393

Greatnesse.

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1599.

want  Instruments  in  themselves  to  devise,  and  in  others
to  act  those  counsels  which  must  ever  be  waking,  to  main-
tayne  what  they  have  gotten  by  their  sceleratenesse.  So
their  Spyes  hastened,  with  such  diligence,  to  give  those
Rebels  notice,  of  their  Kings  being  on  foot,  that  the  next
of them to him, had time to arme great forces, and

Sistane.  encountred  him  in  a  Province,  called  Sistane  :  and  though

his  invincible  spirit,  without  any  sparke  of  feare,  made  him
adventure  to  fight  upon  so  unequall  termes,  as  was  three
thousand  against  twentie  thousand ;  he  found  by  his
experience,  that  Majestie  and  right,  is  nothing  without
power  to  beare  them  up  :  and  that  no  exquisite  vigour
of  the  minde,  can  resist  the  violence  of  sinister  fortune,
nor  oppression  of  many  hands.  Yet  did  Fortune  so  much
care  (for  so  great  vertue)  that  she  gave  him  way  to  escape

[II. ix.  1 391.]  to  the  Mountaynes,  all  the  rest  of  the  small  troupe  beeing
cut  in  pieces.  This  victory  assured  the  Rebels  (as  they
thought)  from  all  further  danger ;  the  King  of  Persia,
whose  owne  minde  ever  comforted  him,  with  a  stedfast
assurance  of  his  greatnesse,  to  which  hee  is  now  growne,
having  recovered  the  Mountaynes,  lived  amongst  the
Heardes-men  for  three  monethes  unknowne,  changing
continually  from  place  to  place,  without  any  certaine  abode,
accompanied  onely  with  ten  or  twelve  followers,  which
were  of  his  first  Governours,  and  other  young  Gentlemen
brought  up  with  him  from  his  child-hood.  But  being  now
no  longer  able  to  temporize  with  his  great  desire,  resolving
to  prove  the  last,  and  the  uttermost  of  his  fortune,  and
remembring  how  much  love  and  affection  those  of  Ysad
had  shewed  towards  him  in  the  time  of  his  governing
them,  and  how  much  he  had  truly  deserved  of  them,
determined  to  shew  himselfe  in  that  Province  ;  and  proove
what  effect  the  Majestie  of  his  person,  the  justice  of  his
cause,  and  former  obligation  would  worke  in  them  :  which,
though  it  were  a  foundation  prooved  ever  false,  almost  by
all  experiences,  The  peoples  affections  ever  raising  mens
hopes,  and  ruining  their  persons :  Yet  it  prooved  other-
wise with  this  King ;  who  was  no  sooner  certainly  knowne

394

SIR ANTHONY SHERLEY  a.d.

1599.

in  those  parts,  but  numbers  of  people  came  flocking  to

him,  armed  and  appointed  for  the  warres : in  such  sort,

that  before  any  provision  could  be  made  against  him  (this

being  an  accident  so  farre  removed  from  all  sort  of  suspi-

tion)  he  had  a  power  together,  too  strong  to  bee  easily

suppressed ; which  was  no  sooner  heard  by  Ferrat  Can,  a Ferrat  Can.

great  Prince,  and  discontented  with  the  alteration  of  the

government  (to  whose  share  none  of  that  partition  had

falne,  his  fortune  being  such,  that  at  the  time  of  the  other

Kings  death,  he  had  none  of  the  Provinces  to  administer,

and  they  were  parted  onely  betweene  them,  which  held

them)  hee  I  say,  with  his  Brother,  and  a  company  of  some

ten  thousand,  came  and  joyned  themselves  to  the  forces  of

the  King. Neither  were  the  men  so  welcome,  as  that

Ferrat  Can  (being  a  wise  Prince,  and  a  great  Souldier)

grew  a  partie,  and  such  as  the  King  also  stood  in  need  of

Neither  did  the  King  lose  any  sort  of  opportunitie,  but

hearing  of  the  Assembly  which  certaine  of  the  Princes

were  making  in  the  neerest  Provinces  unto  him,  with  all

speed  fell  upon  them,  and  overthrowing  them  followed

them  as  farre  as  Casbin.

In  the  meane  time,  those  of  Shyras,  Asphaan,  Cassan

assisted  by  the  Kings  of  Gheylan,  and  Mazandran,  gather

mightie forces ; the  Turkes  armed  at Tauris, and the

Prince  of  Hamadan,  having  called  in  a  strength  of  the

Courdines,  to  his  assistance,  was  marching  also  towards

Casbin  : So  that  the  King  was  likely  to  bee  so  inclosed

with  all  these  Armies,  that  his  first  victory  would  rather

have  proved  a  snare  to  his  intrapment ; then  important,

as  he  hoped,  to  the  summe  of  his  affaires : Whence  he

resolved  to  helpe,  with  Art,  that  which  hee  was  much  too

weake  to  accomplish  by  strength. Wherefore  he  leaveth

Ferrat Can in Casbin with some five thousand men,

accompanied  with  Zulpher  his  Brother ;  and  himselfe,  with

the  rest  of  his  power  marched  towards  the  Can  of  Hama-

dane. Ferrat Can, according to the deliberation taken  SRe stratagem.

betweene  the  King  and  him,  shewed  himselfe  altered  from

the  Kings  part,  writeth  to  the  Rebels,  which  were  all,  in  a

395

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1599.

grosse,  advanced  as  farre  as  the  mid-way  betweene  Cassan
and  Casbin,  and  offereth  not  onely  to  joyne  that  strength
which  he  had  with  them,  but  to  mutinie  the  Kings  Armie,
which  was  lodged  in  the  Mountaynes  towards  Hamadane,
in  a  shew  to  keepe  those  straights,  to  give  impeachment
to  the  passage  of  that  other  Army ;  but  indeed  to  protract
time  onely,  and  to  expect  the  event  of  his  other  counsels.
The  other  Cans  rebelled  easily,  and  desirously  imbraced
Ferrat  Cans  proposition,  hasted  the  Army  towards  Casbin,
which  they  entred  without  difficultie,  both  by  the  nature
of  the  place,  which  is  not  of  any  strength,  and  conveyance
of  Ferrat.  There  were  many  dayes  spent  in  Counsel!,  and
at  last  it  was  concluded,  since  the  suppression  of  the
King  was  certaine,  being  abandoned  by  him  which  was
his  onely  Captaine  and  Counsellour ;  by  so  great  a  part  of
his  strength ;  and  upon  the  confidence  which  Ferrat  gave
them  to  mutine  the  rest ;  that  it  would  proove  too
dangerous  to  call  in  those  forces  of  the  Turkes,  which
were  in  readinesse  for  their  succour.  Not  knowing
whether  they  should  so  easily  free  themselves  of  them
againe,  if  they  were  once  entred :  They  feared  the  Turkes
purposes,  and  as  much  feared  to  know  them ;  therefore  to
avoid  the  danger  of  being  compelled  to  experience  them,
they  determined  to  write  to  the  Bassa  of  Tauris,  that  the
warre  was  so  certaine  to  bee  finished  by  themselves,  that
they  would  reserve  favour  till  a  more  urgent  opportunitie  :
and  with  that  deliberation  a  principall  man  was  dispatched
with  a  Present  for  the  Bassa.  Of  this,  the  King  had
present  advice,  by  a  confident  Messenger,  and  also  that
few  nights  after,  the  principals  of  the  Army  were  to  meete
together  at  Ferrats  house,  invited  to  a  great  Banquet ;
which  being  understood  by  him,  electing  five  thousand
of  his  best  men,  and  best  horsing,  with  great  and  close
Journeyes,  hee  came  to  Casbin ;  where  having  secretly
disposed  his  people  in  the  Mountayne,  covered  with  the
quarter  of  Ferrats  Troupe,  he  expected  the  signe  which
was  to  be  given  him.  The  Prince  (as  it  was  appointed)
failed  not  of  comming,  nor  he  of  his  signe  to  the  King,

396

SIR ANTHONY SHERLEY  a.d.

1599.

nor  the  King  to  accomplish  his  resolution. For  Ferrat

having  protracted  the  Banquet  the  most  part  of  the  night,

when the  whole  companie was heavie with Wine and

sleepe,  the  King  was  received  into  the  house  with  three

hundred  men,  where  without  any  uproare,  hee  slue  all

those  which  were  invited, to  the  number  of  threescore

and  ten ; the  Servants  and  Pages  being  so  suddenly  taken

hold  of,  and  with  such  dexteritie,  that  without  any  moving

of  other  Rumours,  the  same  fashion  of  Feast  of  Singing

and  of  Dancing,  continued  all  the  night ;  and  in  that  space  [II.ix.1392.]

all  the  rest  of  those  people,  which  the  King  had  with  him,

were  appointed,  in  the  breaking  of  the  day,  to  make  the

greatest  shew,  and  the  greatest  noyse  that  they  could  under

the  foote,  of  the  Mountayne,  as  though  all  the  Army  had

beene  there,  marching  to  the  Towne. When  the  Alarme

beganne  to  bee  hot  in  the  Towne,  and  every  man  fell  to

his  Armes,  and  repaired  to  Ferrats  Lodging,  where  they

supposed  their  Princes  to  have  beene ; the  King  having

disposed  his  three  hundred  men  which  were  shut  fitly  in

the  house,  and  Zulpher  having  his  five  thousand  all  in  a

troope,  in  the  great  place,  the  threescore  and  ten  Cans

heads  were shewed,  all  laced  upon  a  string,  and  hung

out  of  a  Tarras ; upon  which  the  King  presently  shewed

himselfe, accompanied with Ferrat Can ; whereas the

Majestie  of  the  King,  the  terrour  of  the  sight  represented

before  them,  the  feare  of  the  Armie,  which  they  saw  (as

they  thought)  at  hand,  Zulpher  and  Ferrat  Cans  power

amongst  them,  which  they  perceived  turned  against  them  ;

their  being  destitute  of  Commanders,  and  the  guiltinesse

of  their  owne  consciences,  for  their  rebellion,  strooke  them

into  so  dead  an  amazement,  that  they  stood  readie,  rather  to

receive  all  mischiefe,  then  that  they  had  either  courage,

or  'minds,  or  counsell  to  avoide  it.

But  upon  offer  of  pardon,  they  cryed  out,  Let
the  King  live,  let  the  King  live;  we  are  all  King
Abas  his  slaves,  and  will  not  suffer  to  live  any
of  his  Enemies :  and  there  was  more  trouble  to
defend the poore people of Casbin from sacking by

397

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1599.

them  (their  Towne  ever  having  beene  a  well  disposed
Harbour  for  the  Rebels)  then  to  turne  their  hearts  and
armes  to  the  Kings  part. Besides,  the  succours  which  the
Gheylan  and  Mazandran  had  sent  the  Rebels,  were  with
great  difficultie  saved, and  returned  to their  Countries
by  the  King  of  Persia,  with  commandement  to  tell  their
Masters,  that  as  the  poore  men  were  not  culpable,  which
obeyed  their  Princes  authoritie,  by  whom  they  were  sent
against  him,  and  for  that  innocencie,  hee  had  given  them
their  lives ; so  that  he  would  not  be  long  from  seeking
his  revenge  upon  their  Masters,  which  had  more  justly
deserved  it,  by  his  never  provoking  them  to  any  offence.
And  when  hee  came  with  his  Armie  thither,  he  would
prove, by those mens acknowledgement unto him,
whether they could  discerne by the  benefits they had
already  received  of  him  in  the  gift  of  their  lives,  which
they  had  forfeited  unto  him,  by  bearing  Armes  with  Rebels
against  him,  what  better  hopes  they  might  conceive  of
him,  if  they  would  dispose  themselves  to  deserve  good
of him. In this meane time, the fame of this  great
successe,  flew  to  both  the  Armies  about  the  Mountaynes
of Hamadan : wThich, as it comforted the Kings with
exceeding  joyfulnesse ; so  it  entred  into  the  others  with
such  a  terrour,  that  they  presently  vanished,  every  man
retyring  to  his  best  knowne  safe-guard,  that  part  of  the
Warre  ending  with  the  blast  onely  of  the  fortune  of  the
other, with little expence of time, labour and bloud :
which  beeing  understood  by  the  King,  hee  raised  Oliver-
Dibeague  to  the  title  of  a  Can,  and  sent  him,  with  those
forces  which  he  had  to  Hamadan,  to  settle  the  Countrey
in  a  good  forme  of  government,  and  to  ease  it  from  the
oppression  of  the  other  dispersed  Troupes. Zulpher  he
also called Can, and sent him to Ardovile, which
frontireth  upon  Tauris,  with  an  Army  consisting  of  foure
and  twentie  thousand  men,  in  shew  to  quiet  the  Countrey,
but  indeed,  to  prevent  any  moving  of  the  Turkes. And
because  hee  knew,  that  as  his  State  stood  then  weake,
raysed  (as  it  were)  freshly  from  a  deadly  sicknesse,  it  was

398

SIR ANTHONY SHERLEY  a.d.

1599-
not  fit  for  him  (at  that  time)  to  bind  himselfe  to  wrastle
with  such  an  Enemie,  by  taking  knowledge  of  his  ill
disposition  towards  him ;  he  dispatched  Embassadors  to
Constantinople,  to  Tauris,  and  to  the  Bassa  of  Babylon,
to  congratulate  with  them,  as  with  his  friends,  for  the
felicitie  of  his  fortune;  and  to  strengthen  himselfe,  by
Alliance,  also  the  more  firmely,  against  the  proceeding  of
any  thing  which  the  Turk  might  designe  against  him,
either  then  or  in  future  time ;  he  required  the  Daughter
of  Simon  Can,  one  of  the  Princes  of  the  Georgians,  to
wife,  which  was,  with  as  readie  an  affection  performed,
as  demanded.

Whiles  that  Lady  was  comming  from  her  Father,  the
King  understanding  that  the  Cans  Son  of  Hisphaan  held
yet  strong  the  Castle,  and  whether  he  gave  it  out  to  amaze
his  Armie,  which  now  began  to  looke  for  satisfaction,  for
the  great  travels  and  dangers  which  they  had  passed,  or
whether  he  had  heard  so  indeed ;  true  it  is,  that  he  gave
out,  that  the  most  part  of  the  Treasure  of  the  former
Kings  of  Persia,  was  by  the  consent  of  the  Rebels,  for
securitie,  kept  together  in  that  Castle :  to  receive  the
which,  and  to  chastise  that  Rebell,  the  King  marched
thither  with  a  part  onely  of  his  Armie,  leaving  the  rest  at
Casbin,  which  was  Frontier  to  Gheylan  against  which  his
purpose  carryed  him.  Without  much  trouble  heeexpugned
the  Fort  at  Hisphaan,  beeing  a  large  Circumference  onely
of  Mud-wals,  somewhat  thicke,  with  Towers,  and  certaine
ill  Battlements,  and  suppressed  that  Rebell ;  but  Treasure
he  found  none,  for  the  indignation  whereof,  he  made  the
World  beleeve,  dismantled  the  Castle.  His  owne
necessitie  to  content  the  Army,  and  his  Armies  necessitie
to  aske  contentment,  drew  him  suddenly  backe  from
thence  to  Casbin,  where  hee  had  not  stayed  many  dayes
(for  daily  satisfaction  with  hope  having  no  reall  meanes)
but  that  the  Queene  arrived,  honourably  accompanied
with  two  thousand  Horse,  and  Byraicke  Myrza  her
Brother.  The  Marriage  was  soone  dispatched,  those
Countries  using  few  Ceremonies  in  such  cases : and  God

399

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1599.

blessed  them  both  so  happily,  that  within  the  tearme  of
lesse  then  one  yeare,  she  brought  him  a  gallant  yong
Prince  who  is  now  living,  called  Sophir  Mirza.
[II. ix.  1 393.]  The  King  unwilling  to  oppresse  his  Countrey,  and
Cheylan  and  desiring  to  revenge  himselfe  upon  the  Kings  of  Gheylan,
and  Mazamdran,  to  enlarge  his  Empire,  and  to  content
his  Souldiers ;  having  a  flourishing  Armie,  both  in  men,
and  the  reputation  of  his  present  victory ;  resolved  all
under  one,  to  increase  his  State,  honour  himselfe,  ease
his  Countrey,  and  satisfie  his  Souldiers  with  the  Enemies
spoyles.  Gheylan  is  a  Countrey  cut  off  from  Persia,  with
great  Mountaynes  hard  to  passe,  full  of  Woods  (which
Persia  wanteth,  being  here  and  there  onely  sprinkled  with
Hils,  and  very  penurious  of  fuell,  onely  their  Gardens
give  them  Wood  to  burne,  and  those  Hils,  which  are
some  Faggots  of  Pistachios,  of  which  they  are  well
replenished)  betweene  those  Hils  there  are  certaine
breaches,  rather  then  Valleyes ;  which  in  the  Spring,  when
the  Snow  dissolveth,  and  the  great  abundance  of  Raine
falleth,  are  full  of  Torrents ;  the  Caspian  Sea  includeth
this  Countrey  on  the  East :  betweene  which  and  the  Hils,
Populous  and  is  a  continuing  Valley,  so  abounding  in  Silke,  in  Rice,  and
fertile.  jn  Corne,  and  so  infinitely  peopled,  that  Nature  seemeth

to  contend  with  the  peoples  industry ;  the  one  in  sowing
of  men,  the  other  in  cultivating  the  Land ;  in  which  you
shall  see  no  piece  of  ground  which  is  not  fitted  to  one
use  or  other :  their  Hils  also  (which  are  Rockes  towards
Casbin)  are  so  fruitfull  of  Herbage,  shadowed  by  the
Trees,  as  they  shew,  turned  towards  the  Sea,  that  they  are
ever  full  of  Cattell,  which  yeeldeth  Commoditie  to  the
Countrey,  by  furnishing  divers  other  parts.  In  this  then
lay  the  difficultie  most  of  the  Kings  Enterprize,  how  to
enter  the  Countrey.
The  meanes  Yet  before  the  King  would  enter  into  this  Action,  hee

by  which  King  caue(j  unto  ^im  to  Casbin,  all  Governours,  and  all
the^auletof  Administratours  of  Justice,  whosoever  had  occupy ed  those
Persia.  Functions,  during  the  usurped  Rule  of  the  Cans,  through

all his Provinces ; with the Kinsmen, Friends and

400

SIR ANTHONY SHERLEY  a.d.

1599.

Children  of  the  said  Cans  :  besides,  that  all  men  of  power,
as  Mirzaes,  Cans,  Sultans,  and  Beagues,  which  are  prin-
cipall  Titles  of  Dukes,  Princes,  and  Lords,  should  repayre
thither,  without  excuse  of  Age,  Sicknesse,  or  any  other
pretence  whatsoever :  which  beeing  done,  hee  appointed
new  Governours  and  Officers  of  all  sorts ;  hee  cleered  all
his  Provinces  for  three  yeares,  for  paying  any  Tribute-
Custome,  or  any  other  ordinary  or  extraordinary  Exaction
whatsoever.  His  Chiefe  Vizier  he  made  one  Halden-
beague  a  Wise  man,  excellently  seene  in  all  Affaires,  of
great  Experience ;  but  such  a  one  as  was  onely  his
Creature,  without  Friends  or  Power  :  him  hee  commanded
to  passe  through  all  his  Provinces,  accompanied  with  the
Xa-Hammadaga,  who  is,  as  it  were,  Knight  Marshall,  to
cleere  them  from  Vagabonds,  Robbers,  and  seditious
Persons.  Ologonlie,  which  had  followed  him  in  all  his
Adversitie  (a  man  of  great  Worthinesse)  hee  made  Bearer
of  his  Great  Seale,  which  is  an  Office  there,  liker  the  Lord
Privie  Seale,  then  Chancellour.  (The  place  of  the  Vizier
comprehending  in  it,  the  Office  of  Chancellour,  and  High
Treasurer)  him  hee  also  advanced  to  the  dignitie  of  a  Can.
Bastana,  an  Ancient  approoved  man,  both  for  Fidelitie  and
other  Worthinesse,  hee  made  principall  Aga  of  his  House  ;
which  is  as  great  Chamberlaine.  Curtchibasschie  Captaine
of  his  Guard,  which  is  a  General-ship  of  twelve  thousand
shot,  who  attend  at  the  Port  by  turnes,  two  hundred  and
fiftie  every  quarter,  except  when  the  King  goeth  to  the
Warres,  that  they  are  all  bound  to  be  present.  Ferrat  Can
he  made  his  Generall.

Thus  having  wisely  and  providently  placed  through  all
his  Estates,  those  who  must  be  most  assured  to  him,  their
Fortunes  depending  onely  upon  him,  having  no  more
strength,  nor  authoritie  in  themselves,  then  they  received
from  him  :  and  having  all  the  great  ones  in  his  Armie
with  him,  or  such  of  them  as  could  not  bee  able  to  follow
him,  eyther  by  their  few,  or  many  yeares,  or  sicknesse,  so
securely  left  at  Casbin,  that  they  could  not  by  themselves,
or  any  other,  move  any  Innovation.  And  moreover,
viii  401  2C

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1599.

having  dispatched  all  those,  and  keeping  their  persons  with
him  which  had  any  Obligation  to  the  former  Cans,  secured
by  that  meanes  (as  much  as  the  counsell  of  any  man  could
secure  him)  from  perill  at  home :  having  called  Oliver  di
Can  from  Hamadan,  and  appointed  him  a  Successor  for
that  Government  with  ten  thousand  new  men ;  he  set
himselfe  forward  to  his  Enterprize,  with  his  old  Troupes,
and  great  part  of  his  rebelled  Army,  with  no  greater
courage  and  counsell  then  Fortune :  for  those  men  which
were  remitted  by  him  to  Gheylan,  and  Mazandran,  (as
those  which  had  bin  some-what  exercised  in  the  wars)
having,  with  some  more,  adjoyned  unto  them  the  guard
of  the  Streights,  from  which  the  mayne  Armie  of  the  Kings
was  some  foure  leagues  removed  (remembring  the  benefit
of  the  King,  better  then  their  faith  to  their  Princes)  at  the
very  sight  of  the  first  Troupes,  retyred  themselves  from
the  places  left  to  their  confidence  in  charge ;  which
advantage  beeing  followed  by  Ferrat,  with  the  Alarme
given,  fell  so  justly  upon  that  Army,  that  what  with  the
unexpected  terrour  of  the  Streights  abandoning,  and  their
being  surprized  in  disorder,  the  Army  was  facily  broken,
with  the  death  of  two  of  the  Kings,  and  an  infinite
slaughter  of  people,  which  had  beene  much  greater  if  the
Woods  had  not  covered  them  from  the  furie  of  their
Enemies.  The  greatest  of  those  Kings  having  escaped
with  much  difficultie  (accompanied  ever  with  the  terrour
of  the  perill  from  which  hee  had  escaped)  never  ended  his
flight,  untill  hee  came  into  Servane ;  and  from  thence
went  to  Constantinople,  to  desire  succour  from  the  Turke,
where  hee  yet  liveth.  The  other  which  remayned,  beeing
but  one,  without  any  great  difficultie  or  alteration  of
Fortune,  was  suppressed.
[II. ix.  1 394.]  The  Countrey  beeing  first  spoyled,  and  ransomed  at  a
great  rate,  which  they  might  well  beare,  by  reason  of  their
great  Riches,  which  they  had  gathered  together  through
a  long  peace,  and  the  Kings  Armie  excellently  well
satisfied ;  hee  dispatched  instantly  Embassadors  to  the
Turke,  the  Georgians,  and  his  old  Friend,  the  King  of

402

SIR ANTHONY SHERLEY  a.d.

1599-
Corassan,  to  give  them  an  account  of  this  new  victorie :
not  doubting,  but  as  it  would  bee  exceeding  pleasant  to
some ;  so  it  would  be  as  bitter  to  others  :  and  leaving
Ferrat  Can  to  governe  the  Countrey,  and  Oliver  Dibeague,
as  his  assistant,  but  to  be  commanded  by  him,  hee  returned
himselfe  full  of  glorie,  and  great  victorie  into  Persia,
disposing  himselfe  to  reduce  his  State  to  that  excellent
forme  of  government  which  now  it  hath.

First  then,  after  his  arrivall  in  Casbin,  having  heard  by
his  Vizier,  and  the  Relation  of  Xa-Hammadaga,  who  had
not  onely  spoyled  the  Subjects  in  their  substances ;  but
also  of  all  Orders,  and  just  forme  of  government,  which  it
now  hath ;  and  given  them,  by  that  meanes,  more  matter
of  dis-union,  then  union ;  insomuch,  that  they  were  full
of  Theeves,  of  Vagabonds,  of  Factions,  and  such  like
Insolencies :  hee  judged  it  fit,  to  reduce  it  to  the  more
peaceable  and  obedient,  to  give  it  in  those  cases,  a  good
condition  of  government :  Whereupon,  hee  presently
dispatched  that  Xa-Hammadaga,  a  terrible,  and  resolute
person,  with  full  power  and  authoritie,  for  the  Reformation
of  those  Disorders ;  who  in  short  time,  though  with  more
terrible  Examples,  reduced  all  the  Provinces  to  a  unite
Tranquilitie,  with  mightie  reputation.

Whilest  hee  was  busied  in  that  Administration ;  the
King,  to  shew  that  it  was  necessitie,  that  counselled  to
give  him  that  excessive  authoritie,  and  to  preserve  it  from
beeing  odious  to  himselfe,  appointed  in  the  chiefe  Citie  of
everie  Province,  a  Governour  elected  of  those  of  most
valour :  to  him  he  joyned  two  Judges  of  Criminall  and
Civill  Causes,  a  Treasurer,  two  Secretaries,  with  an
excellent  President,  and  two  Advocates  generall,  for  the
causes  both  particular  and  generall  of  the  whole  Province ;
Besides  the  particular  Advocate  of  every  Citie,  which
should  bee  resident  in  that  Metropolis.  These  deter-
mined all  Causes  within  themselves  of  those  Provinces  in
which  they  had  the  Administration ;  and  because  they
should  neither  bee  burthensome  to  the  Provinces,  nor
corrupted in partializing ; the King paid them their

403

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS FILGRIMES

1599.

stipend,  enjoyning  them  upon  paine  of  life  to  take  no
other  sort  of  reward.  And  because  such  things,  and
Causes  might  fall  out,  as  by  reason  of  the  importance  of
them,  or  appellations  of  the  parties  might  bee  brought
before  himselfe,  because  hee  would  ever  know  what  hee
did,  and  bee  continually  informed,  not  onely  of  the  generall
State  of  the  Provinces,  but  of  their  particular  Administra-
tion ;  he  ordayned  Posts  once  every  Weeke  from  all  parts,
to  bring  all  sort  of  Relations  to  the  Court ;  for  which
cause  also  he  willed  that  one  of  the  two  generall  Advocates
should  ever  bee  Resident  there,  who  receiving  those
Relations  presenteth  them  to  the  Vizier,  and  hee  to  the
King.  The  Vizier,  sitteth  every  morning  in  counsell
about  the  generall  State  of  all  the  Kings  Provinces,  accom-
panied with  the  Kings  Councell,  Advocates  Resident,  and
the  Secretaries  of  State ;  there  are  all  Matters  heard,  and
the  Opinions  of  the  Councell  written  by  the  Secretaries  of
State ;  then  after  Dinner,  the  Councell,  or  such  a  part  of
them  as  the  King  will  admit,  present  those  Papers,  of
which  the  King  pricketh  those  hee  will  have  proceed ;  the
rest  are  cancelled  ;  which  being  done  :  the  Councell  retyre
them  againe  to  the  Viziers,  and  then  determine  of  the
particular  businesse  of  the  Kings  House.  The  King
himselfe  every  Wednesday,  sitteth  in  the  Councell
publikely,  accompanied  with  all  those  of  his  Councell,
and  the  foresaid  Advocates :  thither  come  a  floud  of  all
sorts  of  people,  rich  and  poore,  and  of  all  Nations  without
distinction,  and  speake  freely  to  the  King  in  their  owne
Cases,  and  deliver  every  one  his  owne  severall  Bill,  which
the  King  receiveth ;  pricketh  some,  and  rejecteth  other,
to  bee  better  informed  of.  The  Secretaries  of  State
presently  record  in  the  Kings  Booke  those  which  hee  hath
pricked,  with  all  other  Acts,  then  by  him  enacted ;  the
which  Booke  is  carryed  by  a  Gentleman  of  the  Chamber,
into  his  Chamber,  where  it  ever  remayneth :  and  woe  be
to  his  Vizier,  if  after  the  fKing  hath  pricked  Bill  or
Supplication,  it  be  againe  brought  the  second  time.

When  hee  goeth  abroad  to  take  the  Ayre,  or  to  passe

404

SIR ANTHONY SHERLEY  ad.

1599.

the  time  in  any  exercise,  the  poorest  creature  in  the
World  may  give  him  his  Supplication :  which  hee
receiveth,  readeth,  and  causeth  to  bee  registred ;  and  one
request,  or  complaint,  is  not  ordinarily  brought  him  twice  :
and  though  these  bee  great  wayes,  wise  wayes,  and  just
wayes,  to  tye  unto  him  the  hearts  of  any  people ;  yet  the
nature  of  those  is  so  vile  in  themselves,  that  they  are  no
more,  nor  longer  good,  then  they  are  by  a  strong  and
wisely  tempered  hand  made  so :  The  Countrey  not  beeing
inhabited  by  those  nobly  disposed  Persians,  of  which  there  The  people.
are  but  a  few,  and  those  few  are  as  they  ever  were :  But
being  mightily  wasted  by  the  Inundation  of  Tamberlaine,
and  Ismael  afterward  making  himselfe  the  head  of  a
Faction,  against  the  Ottomans,  and  by  that  reason,  forced
to  re-people  his  Countrey  to  give  himselfe  strength  of
men  against  so  potent  an  Adversary,  calling  in  Tartars,
Turcomans,  Courdines,  and  of  all  scumme  of  Nations ;
which  though  they  now  live  in  a  better  Countrey,  yet  have
not  changed  their  bad  natures  :  though  as  I  said,  so  carefull
and  true  Princely  a  regard  of  the  King  for  the  establish-
ment of  good  and  just  Orders,  for  the  government  of  this
Countrey,  in  equitie,  generall  securitie,  and  tranquilitie ;
had  beene  of  sufficient  abilitie  to  have  bound  the  hearts  [II.ix.1395.]
of  people  unto  him :  Yet  knowing  what  his  were,  and  to
leave  no  meanes  unacted  which  might  both  assure  them
more,  and  himselfe  with  them  ;  because  he  knew,  that  their
owne  dispositions,  which  were  evill,  would  never  rightly
judge  of  the  Cause  of  many  rigorous  Examples  that  had
passed :  which  by  that  fault  in  them,  had  ingendred  him
hatred  amongst  them ;  to  purge  their  mindes  from  that
sicknesse,  and  gaine  them  the  more  confidently,  hee  deter-
mined to  shew,  that  if  there  were  any  cruell  Act  brought
forth,  it  did  not  grow  from  himselfe,  but  from  necessitie,
wherefore  he  displaced,  by  little,  finding  particular
occasions  daily  against  some  or  other,  all  the  whole
Tymarri  of  his  Estate ;  as  though  from  them  had  growne
all  such  Disorders,  as  had  corrupted  the  whole  government,
sending  new  ones,  and  a  great  part  of  them  Gheylaners  to

405

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

!599-
Colonies,  their  Possessions,  with  more  limited  authoritie,  and  more

favourable  to  the  people ; the  old  ones  part  he  cashiered,

part  he  distributed  in  Gheylan  and  Mazandran,  which  hee

had new conquered, so that by that Arte, the people

beganne  to  rest  exceeding  well  satisfied,  and  himselfe  the

more  secured ; those  which  succeeded  them  beeing  bound

to  his  Fortune ; and  those  which  were  remooved  also,

beeing  disposed  in  the  new  conquered  Provinces,  which

they  were  bound  to  maintayne  in  securitie,  for  their  owne

Fortunes, which  depended  onely  upon  their  preserving

them  for  the  King.

When  all  these  things  were  done,  and  the  King  beganne
to  thinke  himselfe  throughly  established,  for  a  long  time,
both  from  intrinsicke  and  extrinsicke  dangers.  The
Turkes  forces  being  so  occupyed  in  the  Warres  of
Hungarie,  that  hee  had  no  leisure  to  looke  to  his  increasing
the  Tartars  of  Corrasan  his  Friends,  by  the  old  Hospitality
which  he  had  received  from  their  King :  and  if  not  his
Friends,  yet  cold  Enemies,  such  as  would  be  long
resolving,  before  they  would  attempt  any  thing  to  his
prejudice.  There  fell  out  a  new  occasion  to  trouble  both
the  peace  of  his  minde  and  Countrey,  if  it  had  not  beene
prevented  with  great  dexteritie,  celeritie,  and  fortune.
For  Ferrat  Can,  not  regarding  his  benefits  downe  to  the
King,  knowing  too  well  his  owne  worthinesse,  and  attri-
buting unto  that,  the  successes  of  all  the  Kings  Fortunes,
and  for  so  great  causes,  not  being  able  to  limit  his  mind
within  any  compasse  of  satisfaction,  not  resting  contented
with  the  place  of  Generall,  nor  government  of  Gheylan,
nor  with  the  honour  to  be  called  the  Kings  Father,  but
despising  that  Haldenbeague  should  be  Vizier,  and  not
himselfe  all,  which  had  given  the  King  all ;  began  to  take
counsell  to  innovate,  and  alter  the  things  with  the  Bassa  of
Servan,  and  Tauris.  So  dangerous  are  too  great  benefits
from  a  Subject  to  a  Prince,  both  for  themselves  and  the
Prince,  when  they  have  their  minds  only  capable  of  merit,
and  nothing  of  dutie.

These  practises  of  his  were  most  dangerous,  for  which

406

SIR ANTHONY SHERLEY  a.d.

1599,

hee  did  more  assure  himselfe,  to  have  laid  a  strong  founda-
tion for  the  discontentment  of  those  Timari,  which  the
King  had  sent  into  his  government,  and  so  had  they  beene,
questionlesse,  if  Oliver  di-Can,  through  his  true  zeale  to
his  Masters  service ;  and,  perhaps,  a  little  envy  at  the
others  greatnesse,  had  not  made  him  so  watchfully  diligent,
that  having  gathered  his  intentions  by  very  momentall
circumstances,  hee  gave  the  King  from  time  to  time  notice
of  them,  which  at  the  first  were  negligently  received,  and
rather  taken  as  matter  of  emulation,  then  truth.  But
when  those  very  same  advertisements  ever  continued,  and
Oliver  di-Can,  was  not  at  all  terrified  from  sending  of
them ;  neither  by  the  Kings  neglecting  them,  nor  rebuke,
and  that  Mahomet  Shefia  was  also  secretly  arrived  in  the
Court,  with  more  particular  and  certaine  advice,  that  the
Bassa  of  Servan  had  sent  a  great  summe  of  money  to
Ferrat,  which  was  received  on  a  certayne  day,  and  in  a
certaine  place.  The  King  hereupon  presently  sent  Xa-
Tamascoolibeague,  his  chiefe  Favourite,  to  will  Ferrat  Can,
for  very  important  affaires,  for  the  determining  of  which
his  presence  was  requisite,  to  repaire  to  the  Court ;  which
he  excused,  through  his  indisposition,  which  he  said  to  be
such,  that  he  could  not  possibly  travell :  so  that  persisting
in  that  denial,  when  Xa-Tamas  Coolibeague  perceived  that
he  would  not  be  perswaded,  he  returned  with  all  expedition
to  the  King ;  who  assuring  himselfe  the  more  by  the
deniall,  of  the  former  related  accusations,  instantly  com-
manded his  guard  of  twelve  thousand  Courtchies  to  be  in
a  readinesse ;  with  which,  and  a  thousand  of  the  Xa-
Hammagaes  he  used  such  celeritie,  that  he  prevented  the
newes  or  his  comming,  and  was  sooner  arrived  at  Ferrats
house  then  he  had  almost  opinion  that  his  Messenger  had
beene  returned :  yet,  although  amazed  with  his  owne
guiltinesse,  and  the  Kings  sudden  comming,  he  made  shift
to  make  great  shew  of  the  indisposition  which  he  had  so
long  counterfeited.

The  King,  as  soone  as  he  came  unto  him,  said  :  That  he
had  taken  a  great  journey  to  visite  him  in  his  sicknesse,

407

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1599.

and  to  bring  him  the  Cure  thereof ; and  having  com-
manded all  out  of  the  Chamber,  but themselves  onely
alone  (as  the  King  himselfe  told  me)  he  used  such  like
The  Kings speeches  unto  him :  Father,  I  doe  acknowledge,  that  first
gracious  from  God,  then  from  you,  these  Fortunes  which  now  I

Ferrat.  have,  have  received  their  being. And  I  know,  that  as  a

man,  I  may  both  erre  in  my  merit  to  God,  and  in  my  well
deserving  of  your  service.  But  my  intention  (I  can  assure
you)  is  most  perfect  in  both  :  the  time  of  my  establishment
in  my  estate,  hath  beene  so  small,  that  I  could  scarce  use  it
sufficiently  to  performe  my  generall  dutie  towards  my
people,  over  whom  (by  Gods  permission)  I  am  appointed :
much  lesse  to  provide  for  every  particular  satisfaction,  as  I
mind  and  will  doe ;  which  you  principally,  as  a  Father  to
[II. ix.  1 396.]  me,  both  in  your  yeares,  and  my  election  should  have
borne  withall.  But  since  some  ill  spirit  hath  had  power
to  misleade  your  wisedome  so  farre,  as  to  make  you  forget
your  great  vertue ;  you  shall  once  receive  wholesome
counsell  from  me,  as  I  have  done  often  from  you,  &c.
Ferrat  neither  excused  nor  confessed,  but  indifferently
answered  the  King,  as  sory  to  have  given  cause  of  offence,
and  infinitely  rejoycing  (as  he  seemed)  that  the  King  had
so  royally  pacified  himselfe  with  him :  and  not  daring  to
refuse  to  goe  with  the  King,  desiring  him  to  use  some  few
daies  in  the  visiting  of  the  Country :  in  which  time  he
hoped  that  God,  and  the  comfort  of  his  presence,  would
raise  him  from  his  infirmitie.  The  King  having  staid
some  eight  or  ten  daies  in  the  Countrey,  was  sooner
hastned  thence  then  he  thought,  by  the  newes  of  the
Queenes  death,  who  was  deceased  by  a  sudden  and  violent
sicknesse  after  his  departure :  so  that  with  great  speed
taking  Ferrat  with  him,  and  leaving  Lieutenant  in  the
Countrey,  for  Ferrat,  Mahomet  Shefia,  he  returned  to
Hisphaan,  where  after  some  dayes  spent  in  sorrow,  (for
his  great  losse)  he  sent  to  Alexander,  the  other  Can  of  the
Georgians,  to  demand  his  Daughter,  by  that  meanes  to
binde  againe  that  league,  which  might  have  beene  dis-
solved by the death of the other Queen : In that

408

SIR ANTHONY SHERLEY  a.d.

1599,

Embassage  went  Xa-Tamas  Coolibeague,  who  returned
with  the  Lady  within  few  moneths.

In  the  meane  time,  the  Brother  to  that  King  of  Corasan,
who  had  so  royally  and  carefully  brought  up  the  King  of
Persia,  when  he  fled  from  the  wrath  of  his  Father,  rebelled
against  his  Brother,  slue  him,  and  all  his  Children,  but
onely  one ;  whose  Tutors  fled  with  him  into  the  Moun-
taines,  and  so  escaped  the  present  danger,  and  persecution
of  that  Tyrant.  Divers  other  also,  as  they  had  beene  in
estimation  or  favour  with  the  old  King,  fearing  for  that
the  violence  of  the  present  authoritie,  and  others  onely
discontented  with  the  alteration,  and  the  wicked  meanes
of  it,  fled  into  Persia,  by  whom  the  King  having  largely
and  perfectly  understood  the  state  of  things,  having  so
faire  a  way  both  to  shew  an  infinite  royall  point  of  grati-
tude, to  that  one  poore  posteritie  of  the  murdered  King,
for  great  obligations  to  the  Father,  and  withall,  to  assure
himselfe  in  future  times  and  occasions,  from  that  certaine
enemy,  which  had  ever  hung  like  a  dangerous  Cloud  over
his  State,  usually  breaking  into  terrible  Tempests,  as  it
was,  or  should  be  carried  against  him  by  the  breath  of  the
Turke :  though  he  knew  those  Tartars  so  obstinate
enemies  to  his  Government  and  Religion,  that  if  they  had
the  most  odious  reasons  of  disunion  amongst  themselves,
yet  that  they  would  combine  against  him,  without  reposing
himselfe  upon  any  hope  to  bee  holpen  by  those  partialities,
which  the  refuged  unto  him  seemed  to  promise :  but
confident  onely  in  the  Justice  of  the  Cause  which  he
intended,  in  his  owne  force,  vertue,  wisedome  and  fortune ;
he  resolved  to  gather  his  Armie,  and  to  goe  for  those
parts,  to  which  he  was,  besides  his  owne  disposition
mightily  instigated  by  Ferrat  Can,  whose  feare  and
ambition  being  without  meanes  of  end,  gave  him  assurance
by  place  of  Generall  which  he  held,  to  have  some  faire
opportunitie  given  him  to  end  them,  with  the  Kings  ruine,
and  without  his  owne  danger.

Thirtie  thousand  men  the  King  tooke  with  him  for  that
warre,  twelve  thousand  Harquebusiers  which  bare  long

409

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1599.

pieces,  halfe  a  foote  longer  then  our  Muskets,  sleightly
made :  the  Bullet  of  the  height  of  Caliver,  which  they  use
well  and  certainely :  and  eighteene  thousand  Horse,  which
may  seeme  a  small  troope  in  these  places,  where  the  warres
are  carried  with  innumerable  multitudes.  But  the  King
of  Persiaes  judgement  agreeth  with  that  of  the  best
experienced  Captaines,  that  multitudes  are  confusers  of
Orders,  and  devourers  of  Time,  and  of  those  meanes
which  nourish  the  Warres  ;  and  are  good  for  no  other  use,
but  to  make  a  warre  soone  breake  off,  and  to  consume  the
world.  This  Army  being  chosen  out  from  all  his  Forces,
of  elected  good  men,  hee  carried  into  Corasan  with  wonder-
full  expedition,  and  had  taken  it  utterly  unprovided,  if
Ferrat  Cans  advertisement  had  not  prevented  his  celeritie,
who  had  not  onely  given  notice  to  them,  but  to  the  Bassa
of  Tauris  of  the  Kings  purpose,  and  his  owne  resolution,
promising  them  a  certaine  victorie,  and  the  delivery  of
the  Kings  owne  person.  A  daies  journey  the  King  passed
peaceably  into  the  Countrey,  without  the  sight  onely  of  an
enemy :  himselfe  with  five  thousand  of  the  best  men,
accompanied  with  divers  of  the  principallest,  was  a  kind  of
Vaunt-guard  to  the  rest,  which  followed  with  Ferrat  Can,
Zulphir  Can,  and  Oliver  di  Can,  which  marched  softly.
The  King  by  that  meanes  was  farre  advanced ;  and  being
almost  assured  in  himselfe,  that  through  the  celeritie  of
his  comming,  he  should  find  yet  no  enemy  sufficiently  able
to  resist  him,  and  more  confidently  by  the  perswasion  of
Ferrat  Can :  some  sixe  hundred  Horse  under  the  leading
of  Useph-Aga  (which  were  sent  to  discover  before  the
Kings  troope)  fell  upon  fiftie  thousand  of  the  enemy ;
upon  which  sight  he  would  faine  have  retired :  but  being
so  farre  ingaged  that  hee  could  not,  and  unable  to  resist
so  great  a  force,  with  the  losse  of  almost  all  his  company,
hee  was  beaten  backe  to  the  Kings  Grosse :  who  by  the
dust  arising  a  farre  off,  and  the  great  noyse  following,
imagining  what  it  was  indeed,  with  a  great  and  ready
courage  provided  himselfe  ready  to  fight,  and  dispatched
Messenger  upon  Messenger,  to  command  Ferrat  Can  to

410

SIR ANTHONY SHERLEY  a.d.

1599.

advance  unto  him.  To  the  first  Ferrat  answered,  that  it  Ferrets
was  but  a  troope  of  some  few  Rascals,  and  desired  the  treason-
King  to  march  on,  and  not  trouble  himselfe  nor  his  Army,
and  to  divers  the  like.  At  the  last,  when  young  Hassan-
Can  came  from  the  King,  and  told  him  the  Kings  danger,
and  that  certainely  the  whole  Force  of  the  enemy  had
charged  him ;  hee  began  to  shew  feare,  and  to  call  a
Councell  of  the  Commanders,  then  to  know  what  they  [II.ix.1397.]
were  best  to  resolve  of  for  the  saving  of  the  Army,  since
the  King  had  so  rashly  lost  himselfe.  Which  when  Oliver
di-Can  heard,  upbraiding  him  of  Treason,  called  upon  all
those  which  loved  the  King  to  follow  him ;  and  putting
Spurs  to  his  Horse,  being  followed  by  Courtchibassa,  and
most  of  the  Kings  Guard,  and  many  other,  with  all  possible
haste  speeded  to  the  King,  who  by  this  time  was  forced
to  sustaine  and  retire  as  well  as  he  could,  without  disorder
or  shew  of  feare.  But  when  this  Troope  of  Oliver  di-Can
was  seene,  his  men  received  new  courage ;  and  the  enemy
which  dependeth  more  upon  Ferrats  treason,  then  their
owne  valour,  beganne  to  be  exceeding  amazed,  doubting
that  it  had  beene  the  whole  Army,  and  that  Ferrat  had
exchanged  his  Treason  from  his  Master  to  them :  Where-
fore slacking  their  first  fury,  and  rather  standing  at  a  gaze
then  fighting,  the  King  commanded  Useph-Aga  to
charge  them  throughly  afresh,  and  not  to  give  them  time
to  take  new  courage :  which  he  did  with  so  good  fortune,
that  lighting  upon  the  Usurper  of  Corazan  and  his  Sonne,  Thf  Usurper
he  slue  them  both  with  owne  hands ;  from  which  grew  the  slatne-
first  maine  flight  of  the  enemy,  and  the  beginning  of  the
victorie  for  the  King.  The  chase  was  desperatly  followed,
so  that  in  that  battell  and  the  chase,  were  slaine  thirtie
thousand  men,  with  the  Usurper  King  and  his  Sonne ;
and  divers  of  the  principall  of  the  Countrey  taken.  That
night  the  King  pitched  his  Tents  in  the  place  of  the
battell,  and  being  informed  by  Oliver  di-Can  and  the
whole  Army,  which  cryed  out  with  open  mouth  of  Ferrats
Treason,  tempered  the  outward  shew  of  his  indignation
with  a  compassionate  feeling  of  mans  errors  and  frailtie ;

411

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1599.

excused  the  constraint  and  necessitie,  of  the  Justice  which
he  was  forced  to  doe :  protesting,  that  though  for  his
States  and  owne  preservation,  he  was  at  last  compelled  to
give  his  Justice  place,  above  the  power  of  his  love  and
Obligation :  yet  what  the  Father  had  rent  from  himselfe
by  the  violence  of  his  owne  misdeeds,  his  Sonne  should
find  ripened  for  him,  who  should  be  heire  of  what  his
Father  had  well  merited  by  his  former  services,  as  he  hoped
he  would  be  of  his  vertue ;  praying  God,  that  his  Fathers
vices  onely  might  dye  with  himselfe.  Which  when  he
had  said,  he  gave  Oliver  di-Can  the  Generalship  of  his
Army,  and  appointed  him  to  doe  execution  upon  Ferrat,
who  being  resolved  of  that  judgement  which  his  double
offence  had  brought  upon  him,  attended  ready  in  his  Tent
without  feare  to  dye,  or  desire  to  live,  and  there  received
that  punishment,  which  was  unworthy  of  his  excellent
parts,  if  he  had  made  that  true  use  of  them  which  he
should.

Zulpher  Can  his  Brother  fled  to  the  Port  of  the  Kings
Tent,  and  there  prostrated  himselfe  on  the  ground,  and
obtained  pardon.  Next  day,  the  King  marched  farther
into  the  Countrey,  and  so  daily  advanced  on  without
obstacle,  the  Keyes  of  all  their  Townes  meeting  him  by
the  way ;  and  at  the  last,  an  Embassage  from  the  whole
State,  with  a  generall  submission :  which  when  he  had
received,  having  spent  some  time  in  the  setling  of  such  a
Government  as  was  securest  for  himselfe,  and  having
received  the  young  Prince,  Sonne  to  the  first  King,  and
divers  others  of  the  principall  of  the  Countrey  having  left
order  with  Xa-Endibeague,  whom  hee  left  there  with  the
best  part  of  his  Army,  which  he  increased  afterwards  to
thirtie  thousand  men,  to  extirpate  all  those  which  were
likeliest,  either  through  their  Obligation  to  the  Usurper,  or
through  their  owne  particular  interest,  to  make  innovation,
hee  returned  with  that  young  Prince,  and  those  Prisoners
into  Persia.

412

SIR ANTHONY SHERLEY  a.d.

!599-

§• HI-

The  Kings  triumphant  entry  into  Casbin,  entertain-
ment of  the  Authour  and  his  Company.  Other
remarkable  observations  of  the  Kings  Justice,
Bountie,  treatie  of  Warre,  and  Mustaphas
Embassage.

He  most  part  of  this  time  I  was  at  Casbin,  The  ***<P
courteously  used  by  Marganobeague,  the  Master  uumi
of  the  Kings  house,  and  not  amisse  by  any.  Casbin  after
When  the  King  was  come  within  sixe  miles  of  Casbin,  his  victory.
hee  stayed  there  some  three  daies,  to  the  intent  to  make  his
entry  with  such  an  estimation  of  his  victorie,  as  was  fit
for  so  great  and  happy  a  successe  of  Fortune :  and  in
truth,  I  thinke  that  hee  did  it  most  to  declare  the  great-
nesse  of  it  to  us  that  were  Strangers,  by  such  a  strange
demonstration.  The  night  before  hee  entred,  there  were
thirtie  thousand  men  sent  out  of  the  Towne  on  foote
with  Horse-mens  staves,  upon  which  were  fastned  Vizards
of  so  many  heads :  All  those  in  the  morning,  when  we
were  commanded  to  meete  him,  (the  Governour  having
provided  us  Horses)  wee  found  marching  in  battell  array
towards  the  Towne  ;  and  before  the  two  heads  of  the  King
and  his  Sonne,  foure  Officers  of  Armes,  such  as  they  use,
bearing  in  their  hands  great  Axes  of  shining  Steele,  with
long  helves ;  after  those  Battalions,  followed  the  Xa-
Hammadagaes  Horse-men ;  after  those,  a  number  of
Gentlemen  of  the  Kings  Court ;  after  those,  one  hundred
Spare-horses,  with  as  many  of  the  Kings  Pages ;  after
those  the  Prisoners,  accompanied  with  Bastan-Aga,  then
a  great  ranke  of  his  chiefe  Princes ;  amongst  whom  were
all  the  Embassadors,  which  used  to  be  resident  in  his
Court ;  then  followed  the  young  Prince  of  Corazan,
accompanied  with  Xa-Tamas-Coolibeague,  the  Kings  [II.ix.1398.]
principall  Favorite,  and  then  the  King  himselfe  alone ;
and  after  him,  some  five  hundred  Courtiers  of  his  Guard.

413

answere.

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1599.

Marganobeague  was  with  us,  and  making  us  large  passage
through  all  those  Troops.
Sir  Anthony  When  we  came  to  the  King  wee  alighted,  and  kissed

saZtZon,and hi* StilTOP  : mY SPeech WaS short unt° him> the time

speech  to  the being  fit  for  no  other  :  That  the  fame  of  his  Royall  vertues
King.  had  brought  me  from  a  far  Countrey, to  be  a  present

spectator  of  them,  as  I  had  beene  a  wonderer  at  the  report
of  them  a  farre  off :  if  there  were  any  thing  of  worth  in
me,  I  presented  it  with  my  selfe  to  his  Majesties  service.
Of  what  I  was,  I  submitted  the  consideration  to  his
Majesties  judgement,  which  he  should  make  upon  the
length,  the  danger,  and  the  expence  of  my  Voyage  onely
to  see  him,  of  whom  I  had  received  such  magnificent  and
glorious  Relations.
^LvJ^S  The  Kings  answere  unto  me  was  infinite  affable :  That

his  Countrey  whilst  I  should  stay  there,  should  be  freely
commanded  by  me,  as  a  Gentleman,  that  I  had  done  him
infinite  honour,  to  make  such  a  journey  for  his  sake,  onely
bid  me  beware  that  I  were  not  deceived  by  rumours,
which  had  peradventure,  made  him  other  then  I  should
finde  him :  It  was  true,  that  God  had  given  him  both
power  and  mind  to  answere  to  the  largest  reports  which
might  be  made  good  of  him ;  which  if  he  erred  in  the
use  of,  hee  would  aske  counsell  of  me,  who  must  needs
have  much  vertue  in  my  selfe  that  could  move  me  to
undergoe  so  much,  and  so  many  perils  to  know  that  of
another.  And  that  he  spake  smiling,  willing  me  to  get
on  horse-backe  :  which  when  I  had  done,  he  called  Halden-
beague,  his  Viseire,  and  Oliver  di-Can  his  Generall,  and
commanded  them  to  take  my  Brother  and  me  betwixt
them,  and  my  company  was  disposed  by  Marganobeague,
amongst  the  rest  of  the  Kings  Gentlemen  of  his  Court :
and  in  that  order,  the  King  entred  Casbin,  and  passing
to  the  great  place,  he  alighted  with  the  chiefest  of  his
Princes  and  Officers,  whom  he  caused  to  bring  us  with
them,  and  went  into  a  kind  of  banquetting  house,  in  which
there  were  staires  to  ascend  by  into  a  Tarras,  where  the
King  sate  downe,  and  the  greatest  of  those  Princes,  and

414

SIR ANTHONY SHERLEY  a.d.

1599.

wee  among  them.  This  Tarras  looked  upon  the  place,
where  after  we  had  beene  a  little,  and  beheld  some  of  the
Court  exercising  themselves  at  Givoco-di-canna,  that
great  troope  was  suddenly  vanished,  so  without  all  sort
of  rumour,  that  it  bred  infinite  wonder  in  me,  considering
how  much  tumult  we  made  in  these  parts,  in  the  disposing
of  a  farre  lesse  company.  Whilst  wee  sate  there,  the
King  called  me  againe  unto  him,  and  when  I  had  con-
firmed in  more  words  the  very  same  I  had  before  said
unto  him :  Then  said  hee,  You  must  have  the  proofe  of
time  to  shew  you,  either  the  errors  or  the  truth  of  these
rumours,  since  you  can  make  no  judgement  of  what  you
have  yet  seene,  which  is  but  the  person  of  a  man,  and
this  eminence  which  God  hath  given  me,  for  any  thing
you  know,  may  be  more  through  my  fortune  then  my
vertue.  But  since  your  paines  and  travell  hath  had  no
other  aspect  but  to  know  me,  we  must  have  a  more
intrinsicke  acquaintance  to  perfect  that  knowledge ;  and
how  you  will  indure  the  fashions  of  my  Countrey,  you
can  judge  best  your  selfe  which  are  Master  of  your  owne
humor  :  This  I  will  assure  you  of,  you  shall  want  no
respect  from  my  people,  nor  honour  from  my  selfe ;  and
therewith  bid  mee  fare-well  for  that  present,  committing
me  and  my  company  to  Bastan-Aga,  to  be  conducted  to
my  lodging.

Next  morning  I  sent  the  King  a  Present,  of  sixe  paire  Sir  Anthony
of  Pendants  of  exceeding  faire  Emeralds,  and  marvellous  ^herleis pre-
artificially  cut ; and  two  other  Jewels  of  Topasses,  excel-  $£imof
lent  well  cut  also ; one  Cup  of  three  pieces  set  together  Persia.
with  gold  inameled ; the  other  a  Salt,  and  a  very  faire
Ewer  of  Crystall,  covered  with  a  kind  of  cut-worke  of
silver  and  gilt,  the  shape  of  a  Dragon ; (all  which,  I  had
of  that  Noble  Florentine) which his Majestie  accepted
very  graciously,  and  that  night  I  was  with  my  brother
invited by him to a Banquet, where there was onely
Byraicke Myrza, and Sultan Alye, with Xa-Tamas-
Coolibeague, his  chiefe Minion ; there hee had divers
discourses  with  mee,  not  of  our  apparell,  building,  beautie

415

A.D.
1599.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Models  of
fortification.

The  Bazar.

of  our  women,  or  such  vanities ;  but  of  our  proceeding
in  our  Warres,  of  our  usuall  Armes,  of  the  commoditie
and  discommoditie  of  Fortresses,  of  the  use  of  Artillerie,
and  of  the  orders  of  our  government :  in  which,  though
my  unskilfulnesse  were  such,  that  I  knew  my  errours  were
greater  then  my  judgement,  yet  I  had  that  felicitie  of  a
good  time,  that  I  gave  him  good  satisfaction,  as  it  seemed.
For  in  my  discourse,  having  mentioned  the  having  of
certaine  Models  of  Fortification  in  some  Bookes  at  my
Lodging,  which  were  onely  left  mee  in  the  spoyle  which
was  made  of  mee  at  Babylon :  Next  day  after  dinner  he
came  thither  with  all  the  principallest  of  the  Court,  where
he  spent,  at  least,  three  houres  in  perusing  them,  and
not  unproperly  speaking  of  the  reasons  of  those  things
himselfe.  Next  night  he  sent  for  me  againe,  into  a  place
which  they  call  Bazar,  like  our  Burse ;  the  shops  and  the
roofe  of  which  were  so  full  of  lights,  that  it  seemed  all
of  a  fire.  There  was  a  little  Scaffold  made  where  hee  sate,
and  as  every  man  presented  him  with  divers  sorts  of  fruits,
so  hee  parted  them  some  to  one,  some  to  another,  and
there  hee  continued  some  foure  houres ;  in  which  time  he
tooke  mee  aside,  with  my  Interpreter,  and  asked  me  very
sadly,  Whether  I  would  content  my  selfe  to  stay  with
him ;  not  for  ever,  for  that  were  too  a  great  wrong  to  my
friends,  who  should  lose  me  from  their  comfort,  being
divided  so  farre  from  them ;  for  my  owne  fortune  he
would  not  speake  of,  but  onely  thus  much ;  since  I  had
told  him  I  was  a  Subject  to  a  Prince,  he  knew,  that  then
my  fortune  also  must  depend  upon  the  will  and  favour  of
that  Prince ;  and  he  assured  himselfe,  that  he  was  as  able,
and  more  desirous  to  doe  mee  good  then  any :  therefore
if  I  would  resolve  to  give  him  that  little  satisfaction ;  he
should  perswade  himselfe  the  more  confidently,  that  the
[II.ix.1399.]  cause  of  my  comming  was  such  as  I  told  him,  the  love  of
his  person  and  nothing  else.  I  answered  him,  I  could
say  no  more  to  his  Majestie  then  I  had  alreadie  done;  that
a  report  onely  of  his  excellent  vertues  had  brought  me
thither,  that  a  better  experience  had  bound  me  so  fast  to

416

SIR ANTHONY SHERLEY  a.d.

1599.

him  and  them,  that  as  he  was  Master  of  my  mind,  so

he  should  be  of  my  person  and  time,  which  were  both

subject  to  his  command. For  those  things  of  fortune,

they  were  the  least  things  that  I  regarded,  as  His  Majestie

well  saw  by  my  great  expence  thither,  onely  to  satisfie

my  sight:  but  as  I  knew  my  selfe  infinitely  honoured  by

His  Majestie,  vouchsafing  to  serve  himselfe  of  me ; so

that  was  to  mee  above  all  other  fortunes  and  satisfactions.

His  Majestie  seemed  wonderfully  well  content  with  my

answere,  and  that  night  began  to  shew  mee  extraordinarie

publicke  favour,  and  so  continued  all  the  time  of  his  being

in Casbin, daily encreasing by some or other great

demonstration.

Sixe  weekes  he  stayed there, giving  his  accustomed

audience  to  the  people :  In  which  time  I  saw  the  notablest

example  of  true  unpartiall  royall  Justice,  that  I  thinke  any

Prince  in  the  world  could  produce. The  Governour  of  A  memorable

Casbin  was  appointed  to  that  administration,  in  the  maine  Pumshment  °f

1  L  *  Extortion

service  of  the  Kings  State  when  the  Rebels  were  first

suppressed ; a  man  exceedingly  and  particularly  favoured

of  the  King :  he  taking  the  advantage  of  the  time,  which

being  troubled,  gave  him  lively  colour, to make  great

profit  upon  the  people,  and  confident  in  the  Kings  favour,

abused  both  the  one  and  the  other  by  extreme  extortions ;

his  judgement  was,  That  all  his  goods,  and  lands,  should  The  King  of

be  sold,  for  the  satisfaction  of  those  men  whom  he  had ,erstaes

spoyled : and  if  any  thing  wanted, since  the  King,  by  u^n  an  '

giving  him  that  authoritie,  was  partly  the  cause  of  those  Extortioner.

excesses,  hee  condemned  himselfe  to  pay  the  residue  out

of  his  Treasurie. That  if  any  thing  advanced,  it  should

be  given  to  his  Children,  with  a  grievous  Edict,  that  no

succour  should  bee  ministred  unto  himselfe. For  that,

since  death  was  a  concluder  of  his  offence,  shame,  and  the

memorie  of  it,  hee  should  not  die ; but  goe,  during  his

life,  with  a  great  yoke,  like  a  Hogs-yoke,  about  his  necke,

have  his  nose  and  eares  cut  off,  and  have  no  charitable

reliefe  from  any,  but  what  he  gayned  with  his  hands :  that

he  might  feele  in  himselfe  the  miserie  which  poore  men

VIII  417  2D

made  a
Mirza.

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1599.

have  to  get,  and  what  a  sinne  it  is  to  rent  from  them  by
violent  extortion,  the  birth  of  their  sweat  and  labour.

This  Judgement  strooke  a  mightie  amazement  into  all
the  Great  men  present,  and  gave  an  infinite  joy  and
comfort  to  the  people.  The  Turkes  Embassador,  which
was  there,  after  he  had  stood  silent  a  great  while,  as  a
man  halfe  distracted,  sware  publikely,  that  he  saw  before
his  eyes,  his  Masters  ruine :  being  impossible  that  such
fortune  and  vertue,  as  the  King  was  accompanied  with,
could  receive  any  obstacle.  That  night  he  made  Mar-
ganobeague  Governour  of  Casbin,  being  well  admonished
by  that  great  example  of  his  dutie.  Constantino,  a  brave
young  Gentleman,  being  a  Christian  of  Georgia,  he  called
Mirza,  and  gave  him  the  governement  of  Hisphaan ;  and
Sir  Anthonle  me  also  he  called  Mirza ;  telling  me,  that  he  would
provide  condignely  for  mee.  And  because  he  had  an
urgent  occasion  to  goe  post  to  Cassan,  I  should  receive  his
The  rich  Pre-  pleasure  by  Marganobeague ;  who  brought  me,  the  next
^th^K' m  rnorningy  a  thousand  Tomanas,  which  is  sixteene  thousand
Duckets  of  our  money :  fortie  Horses  all  furnished ;  two
with  exceeding  rich  Saddles,  plated  with  Gold,  and  set
with  Rubies  and  Turkesses,  the  rest  either  plated  with
Silver,  or  Velvet  embroidered,  and  gilt ;  sixteene  Mules  ;
twelve  Camels  laden  with  Tents,  and  all  furniture,  both
for  my  House  and  Voyage ;  telling  me  withall,  that  this
was  but  a  small  demonstration  of  the  Kings  favour,  by
which  I  might  (notwithstanding)  conceive  what  better
hopes  I  might  gather :  and  that  it  was  his  Majesties
pleasure  I  should  follow  him  to  Cassan :  in  the  house
where  I  was,  I  should  leave  a  keeper,  being  his  Majesties
pleasure  to  bestow  it  on  mee :  and  that  there  were  ten
Courtchies  which  should  attend  mee  the  next  morning,
to  serve  me  in  my  Journey.

All  this  while  I  moved  nothing  to  the  King  of  that
which  was  the  mayne  purpose  of  my  comming :  I  tooke
time  to  deeme  by  the  proceeding  of  other  deliberations,
of  the  way  which  I  should  take ;  and  to  make  my  selfe
learned  in  the  purpose  of  his  actions,  by  his  nature,  and

418

SIR ANTHONY SHEKLEY  a.d.

1599.

inclination ;  besides,  not  onely  to  get,  first  a  kind  of
possession  in  his  owne  affection,  but  of  all  his  Great  men ;
especially  of  those  whom  I  did  imagine  would  be  best  and
strongest  assisters  of  my  purpose  :  the  King  knowing  how  K*n& \ care  °f
potent  a  uniter  of  mens  minds  the  selfe-same  Religion  is  pj^
for  tranquillitie  of  an  Estate;  and  the  like  dis-uniter
severall  Religions  are  for  the  disturbance  of  the  peace  of
an  Estate,  hee  is  exceeding  curious  and  vigilant  to  sup-
presse,  through  all  his  Dominions,  that  Religion  of
Mahomet,  which  followeth  the  interpretation  of  Ussen
and  Omar,  and  to  make  his  people  cleave  to  that  of  Aly :
not  (as  I  Judge)  through  any  conscience  which  carrieth  him
more  to  the  one  then  the  other ;  but  first  to  extirpate
intrinsicke  factions,  then  to  secure  himselfe  the  more
firmely  against  the  Turke,  who  being  head  of  that  part
which  followeth  Omar  and  Ussen,  should  have  too  power-
full  sway  in  his  Countrey,  if  his  peoples  hearts  were
inclined  unto  him  by  the  force  of  Religion.  Therefore  he
doth  not  onely  strive  to  roote  it  out,  but  to  defile  it,  and
make  it  odious ;  having  in  use,  once  a  yeere,  with  great
solemnitie,  to  burne  publickly,  as  maine  Heretiques,  the
Images  of  Ussen  and  Omar :  then  doth  hee  cause  his
Great  men  publikely  (in  scorne  of  their  institution)  to
goe  with  a  Flagon  of  Wine,  carried  by  a  Footman,  and  at
every  Village,  or  where  they  see  any  assemblie  of  people,
to  drinke ;  which  himselfe  also  useth,  not  for  the  love
of  the  Wine,  but  to  scandalize  so  much  more  the  contrarie
Religion:  that  by  such  a  kind  of  profaning  of  it,  they  [ll.ix.1400.]
may  weare  the  respect  of  it  out  of  the  peoples  hearts :
which  when  it  fayleth  with  reverence  in  Religion,  the
Pillars  thereof  are  utterly  broken.  Yet  there  are  of  the
very  greatest,  exceeding  precise  Turkes,  if  they  durst  doe
other  for  their  owne  fortunes  sake,  then  cover,  with  all
artifice,  that  infection.

Ten  dayes  I  was  betweene  Casbin  and  Cassan,  where
arrived,  I  received  more  gracious  demonstrations  from
the  King,  then  I  could  hope  for,  or  wish  :  being  farre
beyond my  present merit, and my  Judgement how to

419

A.D.
1599.

The  particu-
lars of  his
generall
answer ',  yee
may  see  in  his
ozvne  booke :
as  also  the
Kings  answer.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

deserve  it  at  all.  Foure  dayes  his  Majestie  stayed  there,
after  my  comming ;  in  which  time  there  passed  many
Triumphs  at  Givoco-di-canna  in  the  day,  and  good  Fire-
workes  in  the  night :  at  which  I  was  ever  present  with
himselfe,  with  no  lesse  respect,  then  if  I  had  been  his
brother,  as  he  also  called  me,  and  continued  that  name
afterward  all  the  time  of  my  being  in  Persia.  The  second
day  of  his  Journey,  from  thence,  towards  Hisphaan,  hee
called  me  unto  him,  my  brother  and  my  Interpreter ;
and  (after  some  few  discourses)  hee  began  to  tell  us  the
whole  historie  of  those  his  fortunes  which  I  have  dis-
coursed :  and  joyned  that  hee  understood,  the  Turke  had
sent  him  a  faire  sword  (hee  did  beleeve)  to  cut  off  his  head
withall,  if  Ferrat  Cans  treason  had  well  succeeded :  for
after  the  Messenger  arrived  at  Tauris,  understanding  how
God  his  great  providence,  had  not  onely  mightily  pre-
served, but  given  him  that  famous  victorie  over  his
enemies,  hee  had  sent  for  new  order  to  Constantinople,
which  came  to  no  other  end,  but  to  call  him  backe  againe.
But  the  best  was,  the  more  the  Prince  hated  him,  the
more  his  Subjects  loved  him,  having  received  newes  at
Cassan,  of  ten  thousand  soules  of  Courdines  which  had
abandoned  their  possessions  under  the  Turke,  and  required
some  waste  land  of  him  to  inhabite  in ;  which  he  had
given  them.

And  though  this  discourse  opened  somewhat  largely  the
Kings  heart  unto  mee,  I  durst  bee  no  bolder,  at  that  time,
then  to  say,  It  was  ever,  almost  impossible  to  preserve  a
quiet  amitie  betweene  two  so  great  Potentates,  as  himselfe,
and  the  Turke,  &c.  At  Hisphaan,  said  the  King,  we  shall
have  leasure  enough  both  to  deliberate  and  resolve  of
some  good  things ;  and  with  that  called  some  other,  who
entertayned  him  with  discourses  of  Hunting,  and
Hawking,  in  which  he  is  much  delighted,  and  useth  them
with  great  magnificence :  never  going  to  any  of  those
sports,  but  that  he  carrieth  forth  above  five  hundred  Dogs,
and  as  many  Hawkes,  nothing  rising  before  him  but  it  is
game. For  Flies,  he  hath  Sparrows ; for  Birds,  Hobbies

420

SIR ANTHONY SHERLEY  a.i>.

*599-
and  Marlins  ;  for  the  greatest  sort,  some  Hawke  or  other ;  The  King  of

and  for  Roe-deare  Eagles ; he  hath  particular  Agaes  for  y™?.  ht$

his  Hawkes  and  Dogs,  and  other  Officers  to  them  a  great  himtin^  **

number.

The  next  day,  I  singled  out  Oliver  Di-Can,  with  whom,

(after a few complements) I communicated the Kings

discourse  with  me,  of  his  first  troubles,  and  latter  fortunes  ;

extolling  His  Majestie  as  it  was  fit ; and  besides,  giving

the  greatest  honour  to  himselfe,  without  flatterie,  that  I

could  devise ; then  I told  him  of  my  answere  to  the

King,  and  on  purpose  I  said,  I  feared,  that  it  might  turne

to  my  harme,  being  newly  planted  in  the  Kings  favour,

subject  to  the  envie  of  the  Court,  and  wanting  a  tongue

to  speake  for  my  selfe  : and  that  to  intermeddle  in  so

great  and  perillous  matters,  it  could  not  chuse  but  awake

some  covered  malice,  to  take  occasion  to  worke  me  some

damage. But my confidence was such, first in the

Heroicke  mind  of  the  King  himselfe,  then  in  the  generous

disposition  of  his  Excellencie,  that  I  should  be  protected

from  perill  for  this  fault,  as  I  would  preserve  my  selfe

with  more  cautell  hereafter. Hee  answered  mee,  that  the

Kings  affection  unto  me  was  such,  that  no  man  durst  lift

up  a  thought  against  mee : which  the  Court  knew  well.

For  himselfe,  as  he  knew  not  the  conditions  of  our  Courts,

so  I  might  mistake  those  of  theirs :  if  envie  bare  so  great

a  sway  with  us,  we  had  lighter  Princes,  and  men  of  more

presumption. In  this  Court  there  was  not  a  Gentleman

but  the  King :  the  rest  were  shadowes  which  moved  with

his  bodie. But  in  this  which  I  had  said  to  the  King,  if  I

had  intended  it,  to  move  him  to  warre  in  so  fit  a  time

against  the  Turke,  I  had  done  well :  and  assured  me,  that

both  hee,  and  Xa-Tamas-Coolibeague,  would  with  all  their

powers concurre with me to bring it to an essential

deliberation ; though, said hee, there bee three Dogs,

Haldenbeague,  Bastan-Aga,  and  Courtchy  Bassa,  that  will

mainly  oppose  themselves  against  it :  yet  in  the  conscience

of  my  dutie,  which  I  owe  to  his  Majestie,  I  assure  my

selfe,  that  there  is  no  secure  way,  either  for  the  preservation

421

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1599.

of  his  person,  or  estate,  but  that. Therefore,  since  you

have  begunne  in  so  happie  an  houre  to  breake  the  Ice  of
so  great  and  so  good  an  enterprise,  follow  it  without  feare,
since  God  will  prosper  your  good  intention  in  it,  and  wee
will  second  you,  with  all  the  strength  and  industrie  which
wee  have. This  was  all  which  I  desired,  to  bee  assured
of  some  friend ; especially  such  a  one,  as  might  have  both
opinion and credit of wisedome and favour with the
King.
Kings  entrance The  Kings  entrance  into  Hisphaan  was  there  of  the
tntoHtsphaan.  same  fashion  that  it  was  at  Cassan  ; differing  onely  in  this,
that  for  some  two  English  miles,  the  wayes  were  covered
all with Velvet, Sattin, and  cloth of  Gold, where his
Horse  should  passe. After  he  had  beene  setled  there
fourteene  dayes,  remembring  what  Oliver  Di-Can  had  said
unto  mee,  I  determined  to  lose  no  more  time. Therefore
taking  the  opportunitie  of  the  Kings  being  alone  with
mee,  and  my  brother  in  a  Garden,  with  my  Interpreter
onely  and  Xa-Tamas-Coolibeague,  I  spake  unto  him  to
Sir  Anthonie this  effect : That  my  affection,  growne  onely  upon  the
Sherleys per- fame  0f  his  Majestie,  had  guided  me  from  a  farre  Countrey
Persian  to *nto  ^s  Presence  5 by  which  I  found  his  Royall  vertues,
make  warre so  farre  exceeding  the  relation  which  I  had  heard,  that  as
against  the I  did  admire  them,  so  I  had  a  kind  of  forceable  moving  in
Turke.  my nature to desire condigne fortunes to accompanie

them :  Besides,  my  particular  obligation  to  his  Majestie
[II.  ix.  1 40 1.]  was  so  great,  that  I  was  bound,  not  onely  to  say  what  I
thought  fit  for  his  service,  but  to  doe  as  much  as  my  life
might  accomplish  for  the  same.  There  could  no  delibera-
tion be  grounded  upon  a  greater  foundation  of  equitie,
then  that  which  had  his  end  onely  directed  to  the  recovery
of  that,  which  was  by  force  and  violence  usurped  from
his  State :  nor  nothing  more  honourable  for  a  Prince  then
to  bee  able  without  hazard,  not  onely  to  revenge  private
and  publike  wrongs,  but  to  recover  their  members  againe
to  his  seate,  by  his  wisedome  and  vertue,  which  have
beene  separate  either  by  the  defect  or  fortune  of  his
Predecessors ; All  this,  both  publike  and  private  profit,

422

SIR ANTHONY SHERLEY  a.d.

J599<
followed  so  great  an  increase  of  State,  (increasing  in  all
points  the  force  of  his  State)  and  his  poore  Subjects,  which
were  throwne  out  of  their  possessions,  either  through  their
true  devotion  to  his  Majestie,  which  could  give  them  no
peace  under  another  government,  or  through  the  extreame
tyranny  of  the  Turke,  should  be  recovered  againe  to  their
owne,  with  his  infinite  glorie  and  utility.  The  facilitie
shewed  it  selfe  divers  waies,  principally  in  his  owne
fortune,  wisedome,  and  vertue ;  against  which,  there  was
no  likely  resistance,  especially  when  there  was  no  equall
obstacle,  then  the  reputation  of  his  late  victories  joyned
with  the  other,  would  finde  or  make  a  way  through  all
difficulties ;  then  his  Militia  which  was  fresh  and  uncor-
rupted,  then  the  incapacitie  of  the  Turke,  his  corruptions
of  government,  want  of  obedience,  sundry  rebellions,  and
distractions  from  any  possibilitie,  of  being  able  to  make
any  potent  resistance  against  his  Majesties  proceedings,
by  his  warres  in  Hungarie,  which  his  Majestie  might
assure  the  continuance  of,  if  it  pleased  him  to  invite  the
Princes  Christian  to  his  amitie,  which  he  should  offer  upon
that  condition :  by  which  also,  he  should  receive  one  other
worthy  benefite  fit  for  such  excellent  parts,  as  hee  most
richly  aboundant  in,  not  to  conclude  the  true  knowledge
of  them  in  that  one  corner  of  the  world  :  but  with  making
these  great  Princes  knowne  unto  himselfe,  he  should  make
his  owne  worthinesse  likewise  knowne  unto  them.
Neither  (as  I  said  at  the  first  to  his  Majestie)  though
these  were  great  points  to  move  so  great  a  spirit,  intending
to  glory  and  great  things,  as  his  was,  that  they  were  so
important  as  other  were.  For  these  might  either  be
deferred,  or  not  at  all  acted,  being  bound  unto  them  by
no  greater  necessitie  then  his  owne  will,  counselled  by
good  reason.  But  his  case  was  such,  that  hee  must
resolve,  both  for  the  securitie  of  his  estate  and  person,
to  make  or  endure  a  warre.

As  I  was  proceeding,  Haldenbeague  the  Vizeire,
Bastan-Aga,  and  Oliver  di-Can  came  in :  the  King
presently  called  them,  and  told  them  what I  was  pro-

423

A.D.

1599.

The  Vizeirs
disswaswe
opposition,  is
long,  and  here
omitted.

The  Persian
Generall  his
answere  to  the
Vizeirs  dis-
swasive,  is  for
like  cause
omitted.

The  Kings
censure  and
conclusion  of
the  consulta-
tion.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

pounding  unto  him ;  upon  which  the  Vizier  swelling
against  me,  answered  instantly.  Your  Majestie  may  now
perceive  that  true,  which  some  of  your  Servants  have
beene  bold  to  tell  you,  at  the  first  comming  of  these
Christians,  and  many  times  since,  that  they  were  sent  to
disquiet  your  Majesties  tranquilitie  of  your  State,  and
to  embarke  you  in  dangerous  enterprizes  for  other
interresses,  &c.

Oliver  di-Can  answered,  that  there  was  difference
betweene  a  proposition,  which  was  onely  mooved  to  be
counsailed  of,  and  a  perswasion.  That  hee  thought  I
counsailed  nothing,  (much  lesse  perswaded)  but  onely
propounded  that  to  the  King,  which  if  it  were  not  then  fit
to  be  executed,  for  reasons  that  I  knew  not  in  the  present
condition  of  the  Kings  affaires ;  yet  I  deserved  not  so
bitter  a  censure,  since  Princes  ought  to  heare  all,  and  elect
the  best,  &c.  The  King  then  commanded  Bastan-Aga  to
speake  freely  also  what  he  thought,  who  after  a  reverence
unto  him,  having  repeated  the  Arguments  past,  com-
mended them  all  (as  it  is  his  fashion  apparantly  to  offend
no  body :  but  what  he  doth  in  that  qualitie  is  secretly)
and  then  as  though  hee  meant  no  such  matter,  dividing
what  he  would  speake  into  two  points,  the  warre,  and  my
person,  he  proceeded,  &c.  When  he  had  ended,  I
beseeched  his  Majestie  to  vouchsafe  to  heare  me  once
more,  which  he  said  was  needlesse,  and  the  day  farre
spent ;  therefore  since  every  man  had  already  spoken
their  opinion,  he  would  also  say  somewhat  of  his  owne,
and  referre  the  farther  deliberation  of  things  untill  another
time.  The  proposition  which  Mirza  Antonio  (saith  he)
made  unto  me,  is  questionlesse  in  it  selfe  such  an  one,  as  I
must  not  onely  thanke  him  for  propounding  it,  by  which
it  hath  received  life,  but  I  must  also  provide  for  the
execution  of  it,  that  the  life  which  it  hath  may  bee  used  to
good  purpose.  (His  long  answeres  to  their  reasons  are
omitted)  For  the  Tartars  which  I  have  as  subjected,  if  I
were  Oliver  di-Chan,  Haldenbeague,  or  Bastan-Aga,  I
could  thinke  of  few  better  meanes  to  assure  my  selfe  of

424

SIR ANTHONY SHERLEY  ad.

1599.

their  rebellions,  then  those  which  they  have  propounded :
except  one  addition  of  suffering  them  to  enjoy  then-
ancient  Order,  Lawes,  and  their  particular  course  of
Justice.  But  as  I  am  borne  with  a  mind  of  another
constitution,  I  can  secure  them  better  by  giving  them  to
their  owne  naturall  Prince,  and  him  to  them.  For  to
whose  Father  I  was  so  much  bound,  that  through  the
royaltie  of  his  disposition,  I  hold  my  life,  and  had  the
beginning  of  what  I  am,  I  can  doe  little  for  the  Sonne,
and  no  gratefull  act  at  all  for  the  memory  of  the  Father,
if  I  cannot  give  him  a  Kingdome  which  is  the  least  part
of  what  I  am.  To  conclude  as  good  deliberations  in  their  The  Kings
many  points,  must  be  grounded  upon  the  example  of  the  conclus'ton  °f
past,  the  experience  of  the  present,  and  the  judgement  of  JnC°nsu  a~
the  future :  and  the  Turke  hath  beene  ever  heavy  to
my  State  in  long  passed,  and  late  passed  times,  and  is  now
by  some  accidents  partly  proceeding  from  himselfe,  partly
from  others  (in  all  likelihood)  easie  to  be  perpetually
assured :  which  point  of  time  that  giveth  so  good  an
occasion  if  it  be  let  passe,  may  give  him  power  (for  a
mind  he  can  nor  will  never  want)  to  be  untollerable  againe
hereafter ;  or  if  not  untolerable,  at  the  least  dangerous.
We  have  two  great  powers  of  our  minds,  the  one  a  wise
power  of  understanding,  by  which  we  penetrate  into  the
knowledge  of  things ;  the  other  a  strong  power  of
resolving ;  by  which  we  execute  things  well  understood  :
and  now  that  we  have  judged  of  all,  we  must  resolve  of
somewhat ;  and  of  that  which  is  probabliest  best.  There-
fore our  necessitie,  our  honour,  and  our  justice  calling  us  [ii.ix.1402.]
against  the  Turke,  and  since  with  all  these  concurreth  so
good  an  opportunitie  :  he  must  be  the  maine  end  of  which
wee  will  determine :  and  because  to  prepare  us  to  that  end
amongst  many  other  circumstances,  the  sending  to  the
Princes  Christian  hath  beene  intimated  as  one  of  the  most
necessarie  :  wee  shall  doe  well  in  the  generall  good  use
which  wee  must  make  of  this  interposition  of  time,  to  doe
also  that.  For  though  it  bee  true,  that  their  interesses
will  ever  make  such  a  proposition  acceptable : yet  where

425

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1599.

there  is  a  proffer  of  such  a  condition,  as  beareth  with  it
a  kind  of  Obligation,  as  it  is  of  more  honourable  fashion
for  us,  so  it  addeth  grace  and  reputation  and  more  strength
to  it,  or  any  such  like  purpose.  For  neither  will  I  relie
so  much  upon  my  owne  power,  or  fortune,  or  the  present
benefit  which  I  meane  to  bestow  upon  these  of  Corasan,
that  I  will  forget  I  have  offended  them,  and  to  arme  my
selfe  with  all  the  best  advice  I  can,  against  the  sinister
working  of  any  fortune.  Neither  will  I  so  much  pre-
judicate  the  opinion,  which  I  desire  the  world  (without
vaine  ostentation)  should  hold  me,  and  my  Ministers,  as
that  my  enterprises  should  not  have  a  way  given  them  by
the  wisest  and  best  weighed  counsell,  and  perfect  concur-
rence made  betweene  my  fortune  well  judging  of  my
counsell,  and  all  proper  occasions.  As  for  Mirza  Antonio
(for  so  hee  ever  called  mee)  what  hee  is  to  me  you  all  must
know,  and  my  estimation  of  him :  which  I  assure  my  selfe
to  be  grounded  upon  a  good  and  true  judgement,  since
he  hath  beene  the  first  and  onely  propounder  of  the
manifest  point  of  all  other,  which  doth  or  may  concerne  me
most.  So  for  that  matter  of  sending,  in  which  there  is
more  diversitie  of  opinions  about  the  forme  of  circum-
stance, then  essentiall  matter  of  substance,  I  will  remit  it
to  his  fidelitie  and  true  affection  to  me,  to  dispose  as  he
shall  in  those  two  great  workes  in  a  noble  minde,  find
meetest  for  my  honour,  and  convenient,  and  certainest
for  the  effecting.  Yet  this  must  I  tell  you  and  him,
which  hath  not  yet  been  thought  of,  that  a  great  Prince,
as  I  am,  must  receive  a  deniall  for  an  injurie :  and  I  had
rather  not  know  them  at  all,  then  with  knowing  them  to
be  also  offended  by  them,  though  (this  I  say  also)  that  he
cannot  be  judged  to  have  authoritie  to  command  their
wills,  therefore  must  be  blamelesse  in  all,  except  in  the
lightnesse  of  his  imagination,  upon  which  slender  occasion
hee  ought  not,  for  the  credite  of  his  owne  judgement,
to  have  formed  a  Counsell.  Before  I  could  frame  one
word  of  replie,  he  rose,  and  having  talked  a  little  while
alone  with  Xa-Thamas  Colibeague,  he  called  my  Inter-

426

SIR ANTHONY SHERLEY  a.d.

1599.

preter,  and  held  him  some  quarter  of  an  houre  in  a  very
earnest  speech :  which  was,  to  command  him  (as  he  after-
wards told  mee)  not  to  let  mee  know  what  his  Vizier  had
said  against  mee,  but  charged  him  to  animate  mee  to  love
his  People,  and  also  to  confirme  (in  all  hee  could)  my
affection  and  well-hearted  intention  to  his  owne  service.
And  wee  parted  with  a  mutuall  shew  of  great  satisfaction.
Many  dayes  after,  when  I  would  begin  to  enter  into  a
new  discourse  of  those  deliberations,  he  would  presently
turne  himselfe  to  speake  of  other  matters.  In  this
fashion  more  then  one  moneth  passed,  in  which  I  had  no
comfort  of  my  desire,  but  onely  that  which  Xa-Thamas
Colibeague  and  Oliver  Di-Chan  gave  me,  and  the  Kings
exceeding  favour  which  rather  encreased  then  decreased
towards  me.

In  this  time  (as  though  all  the  strength  of  that  ill
spirit,  who  ever  rayseth  the  uttermost  of  his  skill  and
power  to  prevent  all  good  purposes  had  conspired  to
overthrow  the  well  proceeding  of  this  good  businesse)
there  came  newes  to  the  Court,  that  Mahomet-Aga
Generall  of  the  Janizaries  of  Bagdat  was  entred  into  the
Kings  Confines,  as  Ambassadour  from  the  Turke,  with  a
rich  Present,  and  marvellous  honourable  traine :  And  that
those  of  Ormus  had  stayed  by  force  sixteene  slaves  which
were  sent  by  the  Great  Mogore  to  the  King ;  with  nine
other  which  Oliver  Di-Chan  had  bought  in  those  parts,
and  the  Merchants  for  their  more  securitie  had  sent  them
with  those  of  the  kings.  This  raised  the  courages  of
those  which  opposed  themselves  to  the  mayne  businesse,
alienated  mightily  the  hearts  of  Oliver-Chan,  &  Xa-
Thamas  Colibeague  from  all,  and  exasperated  the  King
himselfe  so  much  against  them,  that  his  ordinarie  speech
was  no  other,  but  that  he  would  shortly  learne  to  have  a
respect  unto  him,  which  did  so  exceedingly  fill  my  very
soule  with  perplexitie  and  anxietie,  that  I  fell  into  a  Sir  Anthonies
very  dangerous  sicknesse,  in  which  the  King  never  fayled  s*cknesse-
daily  to  visite  mee  himselfe  ;  and  finding  that  the  recorda-
tion of  those  things  did  aggravate  both  the  griefe  of  my

427

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1599.

mind,  and  unquiet  of  my  bodie,  he  forbad  that  any  in  my
presence  should  speake  more  of  it,  but  onely  comfort  me
with  all  sort  of  discourse  of  recreation,  with  so  royall  and
so  gracious  a  regard,  that  hee  shewed  apparantly  enough,
that  few  accidents  could  dispose  his  mind  from  any  reason-
able contentment  which  hee  might  give  mee.  In  the
meane  time  Mahomet- Aga  arrived  at  the  Court,  whom  the
King  sent  his  Vizier  and  Courtchibassa  to  meet,  accom-
panied with  a  thousand  Horse  of  the  principall  of  the
Court,  and  of  the  Citie.  These  (no  question)  gave  him
large  instructions,  and  as  large  hopes ;  which  if  he  had
guided  also  rightly,  he  might  have  done  his  Master  great
service,  and  himselfe  infinit  honour  :  but  through  his  owne
too  hastie  greedinesse,  assurance,  and  desire,  he  prevented
himselfe  whilest  he  strived  first  beyond  that  which  was
indifferently  good,  then  beyond  that  which  was  better,  and
at  the  last  beyond  all  reasonable  (and  I  thinke  his  owne)
hopes.  For  first  being  proudly  confident  upon  the  great-
nesse  of  his  Master ;  then  upon  the  difficultie  of  the
King  of  Persians  present  estate,  to  be  moved  to  offend  so
potent  a  Neighbour ;  then  upon  so  great  and  strong  a
faction  in  the  Court ;  besides,  having  heard  by  them  that
the  Kings  minde  was  altered  from  those  of  Ormus,  and
that  Oliver-Chan  also  was  then  likewise  alienated  from
his  first  censure  through  the  particular  wrong  done  unto
himselfe.  Hee  left  the  right  way  of  moving  by  degrees
[II.ix.1403.]  so  great  a  businesse  to  carrie  it  even  without  agitation  or
danger :  And  as  though  with  knowing  the  circumstances
he  had  attayned  the  end,  he  overthrew  his  Masters  inten-
tion, his  owne  honour,  and  almost  lost  his  life,  if  the
Kings  infinite  clemencie  had  not  either  despised  or  pittied
his  errour.

The  day  of  his  audience  was  honoured  with  all  the
Princes  of  the  Kings  Court,  and  my  selfe  being  too
weake  through  my  long  sicknesse,  the  King  commanded
that  my  brother  should  be  present  also  ;  where  after  a
magnificent  oration  of  his  Masters  potencie  in  all  condi-
tions of  force,  he  told  the  King,  That  he  was  sent  to

428

SIR ANTHONY SHERLEY  ad.

1599.

admonish  him  to  remayne  constant  in  the  truce  with  his  The  proud
Master ;  to  require  restitution  of  those  Courdines  which  me"a&
without  licence  had  abandoned  their  possessions  in  his  the  burkes
Masters  Provinces,  and  contrarie  to  the  termes  of  amitie  Ambaisadour
were  entertayned  by  him.  That  his  Master  also  demanded  *  the  Kingoj
the  restitution  of  Corassan  to  the  former  government,  in  Persta-
the  alteration  of  which,  though  he  knew  his  Greatnesse
and  Majestie  violated,  yet  he  could  yeeld  so  much  from
what  hee  ought  to  doe  to  the  King  of  Persias  yeeres  and
heat  of  valour ;  that  he  would  content  himselfe  with  that
satisfaction.  Then  he  advised  him  to  force  his  nature,
and  cover  this  vaine  glimmering  of  fortune  with  judge-
ment and  good  counsell ;  which  ever  would  advise  him  to
maintayne  and  preserve  his  estate,  rather  with  warie  then
violent  counsels.  This  his  Master  demanded  of  him  to
obliterate  (by  the  facile  granting  of  it)  all  greater  injuries ;
wished  his  Majestie  to  consider  well  of  the  Demand,  the
condition  of  the  Demander  and  his  owne :  Denials  ever
to  such  Potentates  being  received  for  mayne  offences  ;  that
it  was  ever  a  wise  determination  to  yeeld  to  the  authoritie
of  Time,  and  necessitie,  and  to  avoide  by  that  good
judgement,  urgent  perils,  and  sinister  conditions :  nothing
being  a  more  secure  repaire,  then  to  strike  sayle  against
insupportable  tempests,  it  many  times  hapning,  that  the
too  great  valour  of  men  used  with  too  great  confidence  is
bitterly  persecuted,  and  sometimes  oppressed  with  an
unhappie  course  of  fortune :  against  the  current  of  which,
when  once  through  errour  it  breaketh  forth,  no  humane
force  or  wit  can  make  any  resistance.  And  because  all
men  for  the  most  part  are  blind  in  discerning  the
judgement  of  good  or  ill  counsels,  from  their  end,
celebrating  them  when  they  prosper  with  a  false  argument
from  the  successe :  His  Majestie  should  give  a  great
example  of  true  wisedome,  not  to  be  so  much  overborne
with  the  present  delight,  or  future  hopes,  extracted  from
those  first  prosperous  successes,  as  not  to  bee  able  to  lift
up  his  eyes  to  see  the  clouds  which  hee  had  raised  by
some  of  them  :  which  if  they  were  not  prevented,  would

429

A.D.
1599.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

breake  forth  into  extreame  Tempests.  To  conclude,  he
said  that  his  Majestie  must  bee  so  farre  from  thinking  to
weaken  his  Master  by  cunning  and  by  artifice,  and  so  to
keepe  his  Armes  farre  from  him ;  that  hee  must  resolve
such  courses  to  be  servile :  and  to  execute  apparantly  and
presently  onely,  Princely,  and  like  himselfe  ;  so  that  eyther
hee  must  proove  himselfe  a  Friend,  or  declare  himselfe  an
Enemy.  The  first  would  merit  any  private  grace,  which
should  be  no  sooner  deserved  then  attayned ;  the  other
would  give  glorie  and  honour  to  the  Victor,  ever  deare
and  honest  to  the  winner,  precipitious  and  shamefull  to
the  loser.  And  not  speaking  of  the  invinciblenesse  of  his
Master,  God  himselfe  would  judge  the  first  unjust
Infringer  of  an  Amitie  sworne  to  his  great  Name.

The  King  without  any  thing  moving  from  his
accustomed  gravitie,  tempering  the  Justice  of  his
indignation  with  the  true  magnanimitie  of  his  minde,
The  King  of  answered  him  to  this  effect.  That  as  the  greatnesse  of
riches  and  Treasure  were  often  pernicious  to  Princes ;  so
were  abundance  of  men,  and  largenesse  of  Dominions,  to
such  as  were  too  weake  to  governe  them :  therefore  that
extolling  the  Magnificencie  of  his  Master  (which  might
breed  wonder  and  terrour  in  those  who  were  not  capable
of  greatnesse,  was  no  moover  of  him  to  decline  from  any
part  of  that  which  belonged  to  his  owne  greatnesse.  He
had  received  the  Courdines  (oppressed  by  the  tyrannie  of
cruell  Ministers)  into  his  protection ;  and  as  their
comming  to  him  proceeded  of  their  owne  will,  so  their
returne  from  him  should  bee  voluntarie,  and  not  through
his  constraint.  Corassan  he  had  justly  taken  from  an
Usurper,  and  would  restore  the  lawfull  Prince,  who  should
receive  the  benefit  from  his  munificence  :  and  not  from
any  point  of  the  Turkes  instance.  But  wherefore  should
hee  bee  bound  to  give  a  stricter  account  of  his  actions  to
the  Turke,  then  became  equall  Princes  to  aske  the  one  of
the  other ;  as  though  the  Lawes  of  ruling  had  but  one
Moderator,  before  whose  Tribunall  they  should  be  all
presented  ? Tauris  belonged  to  his  Predecessors  ; so  did

43°

Persias  his
Answere  to  the
Turkes
Ambassadour,

SIR ANTHONY SHERLEY  a.d.

1599.

Siervan,  so  did  Dierbech ;  and  what  Justice  had  his  King
to  detayne  them?  If  none  other  but  by  the  potencie  of
his  Armes ;  the  same  point  of  Justice  he  had  also  to
preserve  what  hee  had  alreadie  gotten  :  and  to  vindicate
also  those  unjustly  detayned  from  him.  If  hee  will
breake  the  Truce  made  betweene  my  Father  and  him,  and
continued  by  my  Brother  and  mee,  upon  so  manifest
unjust  Causes ;  as  the  Warre  was  never  prosperously
provoked  against  our  State  by  his  Predecessors  nor  him-
selfe, but  through  some  strange  accident,  errour,  or  our
disunion :  so  beleeve  that  it  will  now  breake  forth  to  his
owne  destruction.  Yet  I  doe  not  denie  but  that  I  had
rather,  both  to  preserve  what  I  have,  and  to  recover  what
my  Ancestors  have  lost,  by  equitie  then  bloud ;  and  by
force  of  Reason,  rather  then  of  Armes :  which  if  I  cannot,
I  will  certainly  amend  by  vertue  what  I  have  erred  in  by
cunctation.  My  power  and  glory  is  yet  soundly  whole,
and  more  increased  through  the  merit  of  Modestie,  which
was  never  yet  despised  by  the  greatest  which  have  beene
among  men  :  and  is  esteemed  by  God  himselfe.  Wresting
of  Acts  could  not  deceive  Oaths ;  which  as  they  were
made  to  God ;  so  the  judgement  of  their  breaking  or
abusing  would  ever  be  in  God,  and  his  memory,  care  and
power.  For  Mahomet- Aga  himselfe ;  though  hee  had
forfeited  the  Privileges  of  an  Ambassadour,  by  executing
under  that  Title  a  contrarie  Office ;  if  I  should  (said  hee)
presently  and  condignely  punish  you,  both  the  memory  of
your  present  Fortune  (into  which  pride  and  folly  hath  [II.ix.1404.]
throwne  you)  and  my  glorie  would  be  darkned ;  and  the
punishment  would  bee  followed  with  a  sudden  forget-
fulnesse ;  but  if  I  free  you  (as  I  will)  from  your
punishment,  though  I  cannot  from  the  fault,  I  shall  be  an
eternall  memory  to  the  World  of  Clemencie,  and  leave
you  a  great  precept  either  of  more  judgement,  or  lesse
employment :  untill  you  can  make  your  selfe  fitter  for
such  a  one  as  this,  to  which  you  have  beene  unworthily
elected.

[§•  nn.

43i

A.D.
1599.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Sir  Anthony
Sherley  con-
Jirmeth  the
King  in  his
purpose  of
sending  to  the
Princes  of
Christen  dome.

§.  IIII.

The  Kings  condescending  to  Sir  Anthonies  Motion,
employing  and  furnishing  him  in  Ambassage
to  Christian  Princes. Two  Friers.

He  next  morning  the  King  came  unto  me,  and
after  some  other  Discourses,  hee  told  me  he  had
well  considered  of  my  Proposition,  which  though
otherwise  hee  had  no  great  inclination  unto,  both,  because
of  the  great  separation  by  distance,  and  difficult  meanes
of  correspondencie,  which  could  bee  made  betweene  the
Princes  Christian  and  himselfe,  besides  the  small  necessitie
he  had  of  them  (God  having  given  him  so  ample,  so  rich,
and  so  warlike  a  Dominion)  and  if  he  had,  their  owne
dis-union  amongst  themselves  gave  him  small  hope  of
any  great  good  effect  in  what  he  should  propound  unto
them  :  Besides  the  derogation  from  his  owne  greatnesse
to  a  demander  of  their  Amitie,  whose  Predecessors  had
sought  it  of  his  by  divers  meanes,  and  upon  great  condi-
tions. Yet  to  shew  me  how  deare  an  estimation  hee  held
of  me,  hee  was  contented  not  to  see  what  belonged  to
himselfe,  but  onely  to  regard  my  satisfaction :  which  he
willed  me  to  determine  of,  and  assured  me  of  the  effecting
of  it  whatsoever  it  was.

And  after  I  had  given  his  Majestie  thankes  which  were
convenient  for  so  high  a  favour,  I  told  him  that  I  had
propounded  nothing  but  that  which  the  future  experience,
and  present  reason  of  things  would  prove  not  onely
infinitely  availeable,  but  also  necessary  for  his  honour,
profit  and  securitie :  to  which  counsell  I  was  readie  and
desirous  to  adde  my  owne  perill,  which  could  by  no  other
meanes  bring  an  answerable  benefit  to  the  greatnesse  of  it
selfe,  but  onely  in  the  true  estimation  which  I  made  of  the
merit  of  his  Majesties  vertue,  and  my  infinite  affection  to
his  service.  The  necessitie  of  his  State,  I  knew  either
counselled  him  to  provide  for  a  Warre ;  or  to  make  a
Warre :  Private  cogitations  having  their  progresse  of  such

432

SIR ANTHONY SHERLEY  a.d.

1599-
a  condition,  that  they  may  take  (as  themselves  will)  either
more  or  lesse  of  fortune ;  but  those  which  had  raised  their
thoughts  to  the  sublimitie  of  Dominion  are  no  more  in
their  owne  power  :  having  no  meane  to  step  upon  betweene
the  highest  of  all,  and  precipitation.  For  his  Majestie  to
sleepe  longer,  called  upon  by  so  mayne  Reasons  which  did
evidently  demonstrate  unto  him  the  inevitable  danger  (if
not  ruine)  of  his  State,  and  contrariwise,  the  certaine
addition  which  his  Majestie  might  make  to  his  Glorie  and
State,  would  seeme  to  those  that  did  not  rightly  under-
stand the  excellencie  of  his  Majesties  heart,  such  a
weaknesse  in  him,,  as  is  incident  to  those  which  have  not
power  to  temper  felicitie,  from  glutting  themselves  with
the  abundant  fruits  of  present  prosperitie ;  though  they
have  a  patient  forced  vigour  to  withstand  adversitie.  That
the  Turke  was  to  be  vanquished,  his  owne  Rebels  had
shewed,  which  have  overcome  with  small  forces  his  great
power  in  sundry  Encounters.  If  his  Militia  hath  had
heretofore  more  vigour  and  valour,  it  is  now  changed
through  pleasure,  ease,  and  surfeitings  (by  their  Princes
Example)  with  great  corruptions ;  which  a  more  vertuous
Prince  may  reduce  to  their  soundnesse :  his  Majesties
wisdome  should  worke  immediately  upon  the  present
generall  defect  and  errour.  Neither  should  hee  make  a
proportionable  concurrence  betweene  his  facts  and  wise-
dome,  if  hee  did  lose  time  in  doubtfull  deliberations,  in
such  a  case  which  did  evidently  shew  him  that  if  he  might
securely  continue  in  peace,  yet  that  peace  was  more
pernicious  unto  him  then  Warre :  leesing  so  many  faire
occasions  of  propagating  his  Empire,  and  making  his
Estate  eternally  invincible,  &  too  dangerous  to  be
attempted  againe  by  the  Turke :  when  there  should  be
so  equall  a  ballance  of  potencie,  as  would  bee  betweene
them,  but  by  the  recoverie  of  his  owne,  if  his  desire  and
fortune,  and  vertue  disposed  no  more  unto  him  then  that
which  was  justly  his  owne,  and  was  unjustly  detayned
from  him.  For  those  Rebellions  of  the  Turkes  they  were
likely  rather  to  increase  then  diminish :  such  manner  of
viii  433  2  e

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGBIMES

J599-

people  evermore  easily  consenting  in  unitie  in  Warre,  then

in  peace  to  be  commanded,  or  yeeld  obedience :  And  the
greatest  powers  which  are,  have  beene,  or  may  be,  which
united  beare  all  before  them,  the  violence  of  their  strength,
once  divided  either  by  time,  by  patience,  or  by  diversitie
of  Fortune  (which  cannot  be  at  all  times,  and  in  all  places
alike)  may  be  and  are  subverted.  The  Warre  it  selfe
will  open  and  disclose  many  hidden  and  swelling  wounds,
which  are  now  onely  covered  by  ignorance,  and  others
detracting  of  their  determination.  And  though  it  be  true
that  the  Princes  Christian  bee  farre  devided ;  and  some
of  them  incumbred  with  particular  Designes  amongst
themselves,  through  the  passions  of  their  private  interests ;
[II. ix. 1 405.]  yet  the  Emperour  (who  is  the  greatest  in  Title,  and  by
his  Alliance  of  the  most  power)  is  already  ingaged  against
the  Turke :  which  Warre  hee  wil  more  or  lesse  prosecute
according  as  he  shal  have  more  or  lesse  hopes.  And  what
greater  (almost  assurance  of  prosperous  successe)  can  he
have  then  the  conjunction  with  your  Majestie,  whose
power  and  vertues  he  shall  know?  And  the  moving  of
both  your  ends  being  the  same,  can  lose  no  propertie  in
their  working,  by  the  large  separation  or  distinction  of
places.  The  Pope  also  (who  carryeth  a  Supreme  Authoritie
among  Princes,  to  moove  them  to  those  things  which
shall  best  preserve,  or  augment  the  limits  of  his  Church)
animated  by  your  Majesties  great  name  and  offer ;  will
assuredly  use  the  uttermost  of  the  strength,  of  his
authoritie  and  industrie,  to  reconcile  all  particular  enmities,
and  to  combine  all  hearts  to  that  Generall  Warre,  in  which
every  particular  is  truly  much  interessed ;  if  they  consider
their  conscience  to  their  profession,  and  the  danger  where-
with they  all  have  beene  threatned,  by  that  great  Enemies
potencie  :  divers  Princes  having  alreadie  by  it  suffered  the
uttermost  of  ruine.

Neither  shall  your  Majesty  despaire,  but  that  all  may
bee  perswaded  to  so  honourable  and  pious  an  action,  being
a  propertie  in  mans  nature  to  follow,  that  which  hath
beene  contrarie  to  their  disposition  to  begin  :  And  if  they

434

SIR ANTHONY SHERLEY  a.d.

x599-
all  should  not ;  yet  the  Emperour,  Pope,  and  King  of
Spaine,  absolutely  will  imbrace  the  Amitie,  honour  the
name  of  your  Majestie,  and  unite  themselves  in  any
termes  of  Princely  Alliance  :  and  your  Majestie  shall  have
an  eternall  glory  amongst  all ;  for  inviting  them  all  to
so  Noble,  Generous,  and  Royall  an  Action :  and  at  the
least,  draw  great  Intercourse  of  Merchants  of  all  those
parts  ;  which  will  give  an  entrance  to  a  kind  of  sociablenesse,
and  that  will  proceed  to  a  common  respect,  And  so  to  a
mutuall  friendship,  which  will  give  the  communication
and  knowledge  of  many  things  hidden  (both  in  the
knowledge,  use  and  profit  of  them)  for  want  of  such  an
Intercourse.  Your  Majestie  also  wisely  desireth  to  take
away  all  reputation  from  the  Turkish  Religion,  through
your  Dominions,  both  by  scandalizing  it  publikly,  and
punishing  it  in  particular  persons :  Sithence,  Heresie  in
all  Religion  causeth  Division,  and  the  corrupted  part
becommeth  a  pernicious  Enemy  to  the  Prince  who  sup-
porteth  the  contrarie ;  From  it  arise  as  from  a  mayne
turbulent  Spring,  Treasons,  Conspiracies,  secret  Con-
venticles, and  Seditions.

Besides,  the  greatest  and  largest  way,  which  the  Turke
hath  into  your  Dominions,  is  the  faction  of  his  Sect ;  as
Ismael  your  Predecessor  had,  of  that  which  your  Majestie
professeth,  to  devide  your  State  from  him :  Hee  is  an
absolute  and  Tyrannous  Enemy  to  the  Christians ;  Your
Majesties  Religion,  hath  a  charitable  opinion  of  them :
and  if  drinking  of  Wine,  burning  of  their  Prophets
Images,  and  such  lesse  apparances  be  in  your  Majesties
opinion  effectuall  things  to  estrange  the  people's  hearts
from  that  Religion,  by  a  contrary  use,  with  those
Opprobries,  to  the  other ;  a  greater  meanes  your  Majestie
may  worke  by :  in  giving  libertie  of  Christian  Religion,
so  much  abhorred  of  their  part  and  securitie  of  Trade,
goods  and  person  to  Christians,  by  which  you  shall  bind
their  Princes,  expresse  the  charitie  of  your  Law,  serve
your  selfe  in  divers  things  of  them  which  have  beene
hidden unto you, both for your utilitie, strength and

435

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1599.

pleasure :  and  more  inure  your  people  to  despise
the  other  Religion,  by  so  contrary,  so  apparant  and
so  great  effect.  Neither  can  they  ever  be  danger-
ous to  your  Majesty,  their  increase  being  alwayes
to  be  limited  by  your  will.  This  also  will  give
your  Majestie  great  fame,  since  by  their  meanes  you
shall  recover  availeable  Instruments  both  to  preserve  and
augment  your  Estate  by :  as  Founders  of  Ordnance,
Makers  of  all  sorts  of  Armes,  and  Munition.  So  that
though  it  may  seeme  a  strange  Act  in  your  Majestie  to  bee
contented  to  inlarge  Christians,  so  new  and  so  great  a
favour,  yet  since  all  great  Examples  ever  have  in  them
some  thing  of  an  extraordinarie  qualitie,  those  are  to  bee
made  use  of  that  repaire  by  publike  profit,  those  particular
disgusts  which  private  men  may  receive  of  them :  I  know
that  it  is  for  the  most  part  a  fallacious  ambition  which
imbraceth  greedily  new  and  dangerous  things,  but  to
determine  and  execute  fit  and  convenient  things,  is  the
proper  effect  of  wisdome  and  courage.  Your  Majestie
knoweth  your  present  Estate,  remembreth  the  courses  of
times  past ;  and  the  excellencie  of  your  judgement
weigheth,  that  which  may  succeed  hereafter.  No  man
receiveth  harme  but  from  himselfe,  nor  your  Majestie  can
suffer  none  but  from  that  which  your  selfe  will  determine
of  your  selfe :  you  are  invited  to  no  act  depending  upon
fortune,  but  such  a  one  as  shall  have  his  foundation  upon
Counsell,  Reason,  and  Judgement.  My  satisfaction  shall
be  above  all  other  greatest  if  your  Majestie  resolve  of
that  which  wil  be  most  secure,  honourable  and  commodious
for  your  Person,  State,  and  particular  Subjects.
The  King  of  Well  said  the  King,  you  would  then  have  mee  to  write
Persiaes  reso- to  as  matly  0f  the  Christian  Princes  as  are  greatest  amongst

SirA  Sforkv  ^em5  w^°  ^  ^CY  w*^  aPpty  themselves  to  our  purpose

as  his  Ambas-  may  draw  all  other  lesser  unto  it,  by  the  example  of  their

sadour.  authoritie  ; or  at  the  least  (if  they  will  not  consent  in  that

point)  will  command  their  Merchants  to  repaire  to  our

Dominions : so  that  wee  and  they  may  have  some  good

friendly  use  the  one  of  the  other. The  Letters  you  shall

436

-'

SIR ANTHONY SHERLEY  a.d.

1599.

appoint  to  be  written  to  as  many,  and  to  whom  you  will,

with  priviledge  for  Merchants,  and  the  secure  profession  of

their  Religion  and  peaceable  possession  of  their  goods,

and  persons,  in  as  ample  sort  as  your  selfe  will  devise ;

and  not  onely  for  them  but  for  all  Christians  whatsoever,

which  for  curiositie  to  see,  or  love  to  mee,  will  take  paines

to come hither ; or for any purpose soever : beeing

impossible  their  purpose  can  at  any  time  be  ill  towards  us,

which  wish  them  in  all  things  so  wel. And  because  you

have  bin  the  Mover  and  Perswader  of  this  businesse,  you

also  shall  be  the  Actor  of  it,  assuring  my  selfe  that  my  [II.  ix.  1406.]

Honour  cannot  be  more  securely  reposed  in  any  mans

hands,  then  your  owne : both  in  that  I  judge  of  your

owne  disposition ; and  more,  in  that  which  I  know  of

your  Obligation  to  me ; besides,  There  is  none  so  proper

an  Executor  of  any  Enterprize,  as  hee  which  is  the  first

deviser  of  it : I humbly thanked  his Majestie  for  his  Sir  Anthonie

confidence ; and excused my inabilitie to performe so  Cheney  hu

great  a  charge ;  Many  men  being  more  fitter  to  propound  the  emp/oy/

then  to  execute : That  requiring  a  particular  valour  and  menu

experience,  which  I  had  not. Notwithstanding,  since  I

would  not  give  his  Majestie  cause  to  suspect,  that  I  had

intimated such a thing unto him ; as eyther was so

dangerous  to  carrie,  or  impossible  to  effect,  that  I  durst

not  for  those  causes  undertake  it :  I  would  onely  beseech

of  his Majestie  one  of  his  Princes, eyther to be my

Superiour  or  Equall  in  the  Ambassage,  or  such  a  one  as

might  be  absolutely  my  Inferiour,  for  a  Testimonie,  onely

of  my  assured  comming  from  his  Majestie. All  which

hee  promised :  commended  my  Reason  and  Providence  in

that  point ; and  offering  also  Presents  of  great  value,  and

worth  to  accompany  his  Letters,  which  should  bee  goodly

Carpets, Swords and Daggers covered with Gold, and

Jewels,  Plumes  according  to  their  Countrey  fashion,  and

other  things  worthy  to  bee  esteemed,  both  for  the  price

and  rarenesse. Then  he  told  me  I  must  recover  my  selfe,

strengthen  my  minde  and  come  abroad, that  he  might

feast  me  before  my  departure.

437

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1599.

The  Persian For  thirtie  dayes  continually,  the  King  made  that  Feast

magnificence jn  a  great  Garden  of  more  then  two  miles  compasse  under

solemneFeasts Tents,  pitched  by  certaine  small  courses  of  running  water,

like  divers  Rivers,  where  every  man  that  would  come,

was  placed  according  to  his  degree,  eyther  under  one  or

other  Tent,  provided  for  abundantly  with  Meate,  Fruit,

and  Wine,  drinking  as  they  would,  some  largely,  some

moderately  without  compulsion. A  Royaltie  and  Splendor

which  I  have  not  seene,  nor  shall  see  againe  but  by  the

same  King  :  ever  to  bee  praysed  for  the  constant  Antiquite,

if  not  for  the  reason  of  the  expence. The  joy  of  the

Two  great Feast  was  much  augmented  by  two  great  Fortunes,  which

firt™es  wh\ch  gave  themselves  at  that  time  to  the  King ; which  were

durin  I*  **'  these  :  The  Tartars  of  Buckehawrd  (which  have  ever  beene

Feast.  of  greatest  reputation  amongst  all  those  of  the  Orient,

First,Tkesub-  both  for  their  valour  in  Armes  and  Wealth)  moved  unto

mission  of  the ^ fa  through  their  own  divisions ; the  Captaines  of  which

artars  to is  kejng  Qf  validitie  and  proper  industry, to  enflame the
Lirowne.  . r« .  r r  j  >  t

Civill  dissentions,  and  unfit  to  temper  their  alternate  good

successes,  by  the  fame  of  the  King  of  Persiaes  Justice  in
Government,  and  the  felicitie  which  followed  all  his  Enter-
prizes,  were  brought  to  consent  unitely  in  one  to  send,  and
deliver  themselves  and  their  Countrey  under  his  subjection.
Secondly,  The And  the  Great  Mogor  King  of  Lahor  mooved  by  the  like
../**** fame> sent a great Ambassador to desire a Marriage
Alliance  of  the  betweene  his  eldest  Sonnes  Daughter,  and  Cephir  Micza
great  Mogor eldest  Sonne  to  the  King  of  Persia,  with  a  mightie  Present,
offered  to  the and  as  mightie  offers  both  of  readie  money,  and  to  pay
Persian.  thirtie  thousand  men  in  any  Warre,  which  the  King  of

Persia  should  undertake  for  seven  yeares.

The  comming In  this  time  came  unto  me  a  Portugall  Frier,  named

of  two  Friers Alphonso  Cordero,  of  the  Order  of  the  Franciscans  Secular,

t0  ™ll\"ate and  an  other  Armenian  Frier  of  Jerusalem,  with  a  Message

Anthonie from  an  other  Frier  of  better  estimation,  called  Nichola

Sherley.  Di-Meto  :  the  effect  of  which  was  this,  that  hee  had  beene

Inquisitor generall of the Indies, and his time being

finished,  as  also  having  received  commandement  from  the

Pope  and  King  of  Spaine  to  returne,  and  for  some  other

438

SIR ANTHONY SHERLEY  a.d.

1599.

important  causes  to  the  Christianitie  of  these  parts,  not

beeing willing to attend the tedious Voyage of the

Portugall  Fleet  by  Sea,  chose  rather  the  hazard  to  goe

over  Land.

But  when  hee  came,  though  this  insinuation  of  his  were
like  a  good  meane ;  and  shewed  to  proceed  from  the  best
condition  of  spirits ;  Yet  he  did  much  degenerate  from
the  name  of  a  Christian,  much  more  of  a  Religious  man,
of  a  true  Subject  to  his  Prince,  and  of  a  Pious  wisher  to
those  things  which  tended  to  the  generall  good  of  the
whole  Common-wealth  of  Christendome.

For  I  used  him  with  all  those  duties  and  reverences

which I could  possibly devise, or  any  ambitious heart

could  desire  :  which  gave  (as  it  fell  out)  but  a  freer  passage

to  the  iniquitie  of  his  soule ; to  my  great  griefe,  prejudice

of  the  estimation  in  those  parts  of  Religious  men,  and  to

the  most  infinite  affliction  of  the  other  Franciscan,  that  can

bee expressed ; hee  beeing  certainly  a  good man, and

as  farre  as  his  understanding  guided  him,  zealous  to  per-

swade  others  to  bee  so,  helping  to  expresse  by  a  sincere

and  holy  Example  of  life  what  he  wanted  in  Discourse.

But  ubi  Dei  numen  praetenditur  sceleribus,  subit  animum

timor, ne fraudibus humanis vindicandis, divini juris

aliquid  immixtum  violemus. For  which  reason  I  will  say

only  this  :  that  to  free  my  selfe  from  the  unexpected  crosses

which  daily  rose  against  my  businesse,  I  pressed  the  King

as  hotly  (as  civilly  I  could)  for  my  dispatch  : which  hee

granted  mee  at  the  thirtie  dayes  end : having  appointed

Assan  Chan  a  gallant  young  Prince  to  goe  with  mee :

when  it  was  concluded  that  Assan  Chan  should  goe,  and

his  provisions  were  all  ready,  my  Commission  and  Patent

(for  the  principall  points  of  my  businesse)  sealed ; the

King  marryed  him  to  an  Aunt  of  his,  much  against  his  Sir  Anthonies

Princes  will  and  more  to  my  griefe ; none  other  of  the  ^terPrtfe  u
^  1  .  .  * °  1 j 1  1  kindred  by  his

great Ones having a spirit to apprehend only such a  owne  'tn^ru_

Voyage,  much  lesse  a  heart  to  performe  it.  ment.

So that  beeing  instantly sued  to  by  Cuchin-Allibi  a

Courtchie  of  sixe  Thomans  Stipend  by  the  Yeare,  and  in

439

A.t>.

1599.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

disgrace  also,  for  some  ill  part  that  hee  had  played,  I
(pressed  thereunto  by  the  Vizier  and  Bastan  Aga)  spake
[II. ix.  1 407.]  unto  the  King  that  hee  might  goe  with  mee,  in  the  forme
onely  of  a  Testimonie,  though  honoured  with  some  good
words  in  the  Letters,  for  the  better  reputation  of  the
Businesse :  which  the  King  was  exceeding  backward  in
consenting  unto,  desiring  mee  eyther  to  goe  alone,  or
better  accompanied.

At  the  last,  I  was  urged  to  take  that  fellow,  and  the
King  content  to  let  him  goe :  But  would  bestow  on  him
no  more  then  fiftie  Tomans  for  the  whole  expence :  which
hee  called  also  cast  away.  Him  I  left  to  bring  the
appointed  Present  after  mee ;  and  the  Letters  to  the
particular  Princes  ;  which  were  then  readie  at  my  departure
not  sealed,  and  the  Present  not  throughly  provided :  my
selfe  desiring  to  free  my  selfe  from  the  Court,  where  every
occasion  was  received  by  those,  which  were  contrary  to  the
Enterprize,  to  hinder  it.

After  I  had  taken  my  leave  of  the  King,  the  morning
before  my  departure  he  came  to  find  me  againe  at  my
House :  and  after  a  little  other  speech  he  said  unto  mee.
That  my  absence  from  him  would  exceedingly  grieve  him,
his  affection  to  me  being  true,  and  his  hopes  or  me  many.
If  hee  had  bin  furnished  of  any  fit  to  have  undergone  the
management  of  this  Affaire,  hee  would  never  have
enjoy ned  me  to  so  much  travaile,  and  so  many  perils,  but
that  I  knew  his  Court  to  bee  ignorant  of  the  Language
and  properties  of  our  parts,  and  since  he  was  provoked  by
mee  to  send  thither,  hee  knew  that  I  would  bee  contented
with  my  labour  to  keepe  him  and  his,  from  all  sorts  of
scorne.  That  my  Brother  was  young,  and  therefore  the
more  to  be  tendered,  and  not  every  day  to  be  exposed  to
new  labours ;  his  love  to  us  both  made  him  carefull  in  that
point,  but  more  particularly  his  infinite  desire  of  my
returne ;  which  he  thought  would  be  more  assured  by  so
deare  a  pawne :  And  by  daily  Relation  which  I  should
receive  of  his  Royall  usage,  I  should  also  be  daily  invited
to  returne  howsoever. If  I  met  with  such  Fortunes  as

The  causes  for
which  the
King  of  Persia
detained  Sir
Robert
S  her  ley.

440

SIR  ANTHONY SHERLEY  ad.

1599.
would  bee  worthy  to  make  me  stay  from  him ;  or  such
accidents  as  had  power  to  hinder  me  by  their  necessitie ;
the  company  of  my  Brother  should  give  him  great  satis-
faction in  my  absence.  And  if  the  worst  should  happen
unto  me,  he  did  desire  ever  to  have  a  Subject  so  neere
unto  me,  upon  whom  he  might  make  a  declaration  unto
the  World,  both  of  what  qualitie  his  owne  minde  was ;
and  of  what  condition  his  true  and  Royall  affection
towards  me  was.

Before I could answere this infinite favourable and
gracious  speech  of  his :  my  Brother,  whose  minde,  appre-
hending that  this  staying  with  the  King,  might  bee  of
wonderfull effect, to keepe his minde constant in the
resolution  which  he  had  taken  : and  ghessing  at  many
occasions  which  might  happen  in  my  absence,  answered
the  King  presently  thus. That  our  two  soules  were  so  Sir  Robert
unitely  conjoyned,  that  our  wils  were  divided  in  nothing,  S&erkys
our  affections  to  his  Majesty,  and  our  desires  to  serve  him  thnsZe-n  tof
were  the  same,  and  such  as  they  could  not  bee  separated  pers'ta
from  his  Commandements. But  because  hee  did  desire  to
have  one  of  us,  which  was  himselfe,  to  remaine  with  him,
he  would  doe  it,  &c.

These  words  of  his  were  graciously  and  tenderly
received  of  the  King,  and  after  some  teares  on  all  parts,  the
King  and  himselfe  having  brought  mee  some  sixe  miles,
wee  all  parted,  they  for  the  Court,  my  selfe  for  my  Journey,
having  first  left  with  my  Brother,  my  heart  certainly,  not
onely  for  the  conjunction  which  Nature  had  made  betweene
us,  but  also  for  those  worthy  sparkes,  which  I  found  in
him  likely  to  bee  brought  to  great  perfection  by  his
Vertue,  which  cannot  leave  working  in  any,  which  will
give  them  way,  much  more  in  him,  who  will  make  way
for  them.

[Chap. II.
441

A.D.

l60I.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Chap. II.

Sir  Anthonie  Sherley  his  Voyage  over  the  Caspian
Sea  and  thorow  Russia  :  taken  out  of  W.  Parry
his  Discourse  of  the  whole  Voyage  of  Sir
Anthonie,  in  which  he  accompanied  him  ;
published  1601.

Pon  the  Caspian  Sea  (which  wee  were  to
Crosse)  wee  were  two  monethes  before  we
landed :  which  time  we  endured  with
much  paine,  and  no  lesse  feare,  having
(besides  the  naturall  roughnesse  of  the
Sea)  very  much  foule  and  stormy  weather  :
by  reason  whereof  we  had  beene  like  to
have  suffered  shipwracke,  which  twice  strooke  on  ground,
so  that  we  were  constrayned  to  disburden  the  same  of  a
great  part  of  our  substance.  Howbeit  in  the  end  God
so  blessed  us,  that  in  two  moneths  wee  came  to  our  wished
Harbour.  Where  beeing  arrived,  the  Governour  having
Intelligence  of  our  Landing,  sent  a  Captaine  with  a  Guard
to  receive  us,  and  to  conduct  us  to  the  Castle  of  Haster-
*Astracan.  caune,*  where  was  landed  but  the  day  before,  an
Ambassadour  that  the  King  of  Persia  had  sent  a  moneth
before,  onely  to  make  our  passage  through  the  Emperour
of  Russia  his  Countrey.  From  which  Castle  to  Musco
Towne,  we  were  by  River  and  by  Land,  ten  weekes
passing.  All  which  time  Sir  Anthonie  and  his  Company,
[II.  ix.  1 408.]  with  the  other  Ambassadours  and  their  Attendants,  were
all  at  the  charge  of  the  Russian  Emperour  (for  so  is  the
custome  of  that  Countrey,  to  all  Travellers  of  that  nature,
as  long  as  they  are  passing  through  his  Dominions)  who
eats  such  meate  as  is  brought  before  them  gratis,  having
withall,  a  Guard  set  over  them,  so  that  they  are  little  better
then  Prisoners,  as  long  as  they  are  within  the  limits  of  his
Territories.

From Haster-caune wee past by Boate along the
Volga.  mightie  River  of  Volgo,  untill  wee  came  to  a  Towne

442

SIR ANTHONY SHERLEY  ad.

1601.

named  Negson,  which  was seven  weekes  passage. In
which  time,  we  saw  nothing  worthy  the  noting,  but  three
or  foure  woodden  Castles  or  Block-houses  to  guard  that
River,  which  River  doth  bring  marvellous  great  Com-
modities to  the  Emperour,  and  to  the  whole  Countrey.
Divers  Tartars  passing  from place to place about that
River,  living  in  little  Houses  made  upon  Wheeles,  and
are  carryed  too  and  fro,  having  abundance  of  Cattell,  live
so  in  subjection  to  the  Emperour,  paying  him  Tribute,
&c. One  onely  faire  Citie  wee  saw  all  that  while  called
Cassane,  wherein  we  were : from  whence  we  passed  to  Cassan.
Negson aforesaid, where by the way fell out a Jarre
betweene Sir Anthonie and the other Ambassadour,
because Sir Anthonie presumed to reprehend him for
divers  misdemeanors  which  he  committed,  to  the  dishonour
of  his  King  and  Countrey : Insomuch,  that  had  we  not
had  guard  in  our  Company,  one  of  us  had  killed  another.
Leaving  here  a  while,  I  will  turne  againe  to  the  Frier,"*  *He  hath  told
who  was  by  this  time  growne  into  mortall  hatred  with  his  tn  tkef07^er
fellow  Frier,  of  whom  before  I  spake,  whose  name  was  s^[n  0/^e
Alfonso,  a  Frier  of  the  Order  of  Saint  Francis. Which  Friers
Frier  had  acquainted  Sir  Anthonie,  that  Frier  Nicolao  had  Whoredomesy
spent  his  life  most  lewdly  in  the  Indies,  the  particularities  Adulteries,

whereof  he  at  large  related. Moreover, hee  told  him, Sof™tes>^c-

.  to  tothsotne  to

that  by  reason  of  his  licentious  life,  the  King  of  Spaine  blot  our  paper.

had  sent  for  him,  because  hee  did  much  more  hurt  then

good  in  those  parts,  but  never  would  come  untill  now

that he was going thither-ward. He also told Sir

Anthonie,  that  that  Present  which  he  delivered  the  King

of  Persia  in  his  owne  name,  was  sent  by  a  Friend  of  the

Kings  from  Ormus,  by  another,  who  had  withall,  a  Letter

to  the  King. Which  Bearer,  (being  of  his  Acquaintance)

hee  inveigled  and  inticed  by  the  gift  of  fiftie  Crownes,

and  faire  words,  to  deliver  him  the  Present,  together  with

the  Letter  to  carry  to  the  King,  who  finally  prevailed  with

him. And  when  he  came  to  Persia,  hee  suppressed  the

Letter,  but  delivered  the  Present  in  his  owne  name,  as

before  is  declared.

443

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1601.

Upon  discovery  of  which  villanies,  Sir  Anthonie  tooke
him  Prisoner,  and  carryed  him  along  with  him,  as  one
deprived  of  former  libertie.  And  being  come  to  Negson,
we  stayed  there  neere  hand  a  moneth.  Towards  the  end
whereof  the  Emperour  sent  a  great  man  of  his  Court
thither,  for  to  accompany  and  conduct  us  to  Musco,  who
gave  the  preheminence  to  the  Persian  Ambassador,  in  that
hewasAmbassadour  to  the  Emperour  from  the  Persian,  and
Sir  Anthonie  but  a  Passenger  through  his  Countrey,  as  he
esteemed  him,  and  so  did  use  him  at  his  pleasure,  to  Sir
Anthonies  small  contentment,  until  we  came  to  Musco,
where  we  were  entertayned  in  the  best  sort  they  could,
with  a  crue  of  Aquavitae-bellyed  Fellowes,  clad  in  Coates
of  Cloth  of  Gold :  which  shew  being  ended,  for  the  first
encounter,  those  Coates  were  put  up  againe  into  the
Treasurie  or  Wardrobe,  and  we  shut  up  in  Prison  for
ten  dayes,  yea  all  accesse  of  others  to  us,  or  we  to  them
was  thereby  utterly  barred.  In  which  time  wee  sent  to
entreate,  that  either  our  English  Merchants  might  bee
permitted  to  come  to  us,  or  that  wee  might  goe  or  send
to  them  for  necessaries,  because  we  were  not  fitted  with
Clothes  (as  we  thought)  convenient  for  the  Emperours
presence.  Whereupon  the  Lord  Chancellor  sent  for  the
Merchants,  enquiring  of  them  what  Sir  Anthonie  was,  and
whether  they  durst  give  him  any  credit.  To  whom  they
replyed,  that  hee  was  nobly  descended,  and  allyed  even  to
the  best  men  of  England :  yea,  and  that  they  would  give
him  credit  for  as  much  as  they  were  worth.  Hereupon
they  had  libertie  to  send  us  such  necessaries  as  we  sent  for,
but  no  libertie  to  come  to  us,  much  lesse  we  to  them.
The  tenth  day  we  were  sent  for  to  come  before  the
Emperour  after  their  order,  which  was,  to  lay  downe  in
a  note,  how  every  man  should  be  marshalled  in  comming
(being  all  on  Horsebacke)  wherein  the  Persian  Ambas-
sadour  was  appointed  by  the  Emperour  to  have  the  first
and  chiefe  place,  the  next,  that  Persian  that  was  sent  but
to  accompany  Sir  Anthonie,  and  the  last  of  the  three  should
be  Sir  Anthonie  himselfe. Which  when Sir  Anthonie

444

SIR ANTHONY SHERLEY  a.d.

1601.
perceived,  he  utterly  refused  to  goe  in  that  Order,  because  &r.  Anthonies
that  he,  to  whose  trust  and  charge  the  whole  businesse  refusaH t0  g°e-
had  beene  committed,  and  by  whom  the  same  was  solely
procured : by  which  Persia  likewise  should  be  infinitely
benefited (specially hee beeing a Christian, and they
Pagans)  should  bee  put  hindermost  in  the  march,  that  was
the  foremost  in  the  matter.

By  the  meanes  of  which  refusall,  he  purchased  the
Emperors  displeasure  :  and  to  manifest  the  same,  first,  he
took  the  Frier  from  Sir  Antonie,  and  gave  him  his  libertie
to  go  whither  he  thought  good.  Next,  he  daily  sent  his
great  Dukes  to  examine  Sir  Anthonie  upon  divers
frivolous  particularities,  to  prove,  if  they  thereby  might
grope  out  some  matter  of  advantage  against  him.  Thus
daily  he  was  extremely  vexed  and  molested  by  the
Emperour,  the  Persian  Embassadour  withall  setting  on
the  Frier  under-hand,  to  devise  all  the  villanie  hee  could
against  him,  as  to  say,  he  knew  Sir  Anthonie  to  be  but  a  Frier  a  Lyer
man  of  meane  parentage,  and  also,  that  he  was  come  but
as  a  Spie  through  the  Countrey  for  purposes  tending  to
his  owne  good,  and  not  of  Persia  and  Christendome,  as
he  pretended.  Whereupon  they  tooke  all  the  Kings
Letters  from  him,  and  opened  them,  to  know  the  purport
thereof.

Soone  after,  Sir  Anthonie  and  the  Frier  were  brought  [II.ix.1409.]
before  the  Commissioners  to  be  further  examined  :  where
Sir  Anthonie  (being  inflamed  with  Choler,  by  reason  of
his  exceeding  ill  usage,  notwithstanding  the  goodnesse  of
the  cause  of  his  comming)  demanded  whether  the  Emper-
our did  ever  purpose  to  send  any  Embassadours  to  any
other  Countries  ;  Protesting,  that  if  ever  he  met  with  them
in  any  parts  of  the  world,  besides  their  owne,  he  would
indevour  to  let  them  know  he  was  not  halfe  so  well
intreated  in  Russia,  as  the  cause  of  his  comming  of  right
deserved,  and  the  Emperour,  by  the  lawes  Divine  and
Civill  ought  to  have  performed,  and  the  rather,  because  he
was  a  Christian,  such  as  he  pretends  himselfe  to  bee,  and
came  (as  became  a  Christian)  for  the  generall  good  of  all

445

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1601.

Christendome,  the  Persian  being  stirred  up  thereunto  by
his  onely  meanes.  Whereupon  the  Frier  in  termes
thwarted  Sir  Anthonie,  whose  bloud  already  boyled,  with
the  excesse  of  his  cholers  heat,  which  as  then  abounded.
And  being  by  that  gracelesse  and  ungratefull  Frier  further
provoked,  he  (not  able,  though  instantly  hee  should  have
S.  J.  striketh  died  for  it)  to  suppresse  his  heat,  gave  the  fat  Frier  such
the  Frier. a sounc[ \yOX on fat face (hjs double cause of choler

redoubling  his  might,  desire  of  revenge  withall  augment-
ing the  same)  that  downe  falls  the  Frier,  as  if  he  had  beene
strucke  with  a  Thunder-bolt.  Which  being  done,  (with
that  courage  and  high  resolution  which  well  appeared  in
his  lookes,  words,  and  deeds)  they  forthwith  gave  over
examination,  because  they  had  too  farre  examined  Sir
Anthonies  patience,  which  well  they  with  feare  (as  I  thinke)
saw,  and  the  Frier  (almost  past  feare)  did  farre  better  feele.
Whereupon  they  went  instantly  to  the  Emperour,  and
informed  him  of  all  that  had  hapned,  and  how  Sir  Anthonie
was  resolved.  For  which  (as  by  the  event  it  appeared)  he
was  used  the  better.  For  from  thence  forward  we  had
libertie  to  goe  to  the  Englishmen,  of  whom  wee  were  very
honourably  entertayned,  and  royally  feasted.  Howbeit
wee  were  constrayned  to  remayne  there  sixe  monethes,
expecting  every  day  (for  all  this)  some  mischiefe  to  be  done
unto  us,  or  to  be  sent  into  some  part  of  his  Countrey  to
bee  kept,  where  wee  should  not  have  heard  from  our
friends  in  haste,  which  we  feared  worse  then  death.  Yet,
in  the  end,  wee  were  eftsoones  sent  for  before  the  Privie
Councell,  where  Sir  Anthonie  had  his  charge  to  bee  gone,
which  was  no  small  joy  to  us  all.
Offering  of  a  But  the  day  before  we  left  Muscovia,  it  was  my  fortune
Bell  and  an  to  see  ^e  King,  and  his  Queene,  in  ceremonious  and
Frien  triumphant  manner  passing  out  of  the  Citie,  with  a  great

Image,  and  a  huge  Bell,  to  offer  to  a  certaine  Friery  some
thirtie  miles  off,  which  was  performed  in  this  sort.  First,
all  the  morning  divers  troops  of  Horse  passed  out  of  the
Citie,  to  stand  readie  to  receive  him  at  his  comming  out
of  the  gate. About  midday  the  King  setting  forwards,

446

SIR ANTHONY SHERLEY  a.d.

1601.

his  Guard  formost,  all  on  horse-backe,  to  the  number  of
five  hundred,  all  clad  in  stammell  Coats,  riding  in  ranke,
three  and  three,  with  Bowes  and  Arrowes,  and  Swords  girt
to  them,  as  also  Hatchets  under  the  one  thigh.  After  the
Guard,  were  led  by  twentie  men,  twentie  goodly  Horses,
with  very  rich  and  curious  Saddles,  and  ten  more  for  his
Sonne  and  Heire  apparent,  being  a  child  of  twelve  yeeres
of  age.  After  which  was  led  in  like  sort,  twentie  beauti-  Procession.
full  white  Horses,  for  the  Queenes  Chariots,  having  onely
upon  them  a  fine  sheet,  and  on  their  heads  a  crimson  velvet
Bridle.  After  them  came  a  great  number  of  Friers  in  their
rich  Coapes,  singing,  carrying  many  Pictures,  and  Lights.
After  them  followed  the  greatest  part  of  the  Merchants  of
the  Citie.  Next  them  was  led  the  Kings  Horse,  for  that
day,  together  with  his  sonnes :  the  Kings  Saddle  and
furniture  most  richly  beset  with  Stones  of  great  price  and
beautie.  Then  followed  the  Patriarch,  with  all  the  Arch-
bishops, Bishops,  and  great  Prelates  singing  in  their
Coapes,  very  rich  and  glorious,  having  huge  Images  borne
before  them,  being  very  richly  inlayed  with  precious
Gemmes  of  divers  colours,  and  Lights  about  them.  Then
followed  the  King  himselfe,  who  had  in  his  left  hand  his
Sonne  above  mentioned,  and  in  his  right  hand  his  Cap.
Next  him  came  the  Queene,  supported  on  either  side  by
two  old  Ladies,  her  face  even  thickely  plaistered  with
painting,  as  were  the  other  Ladies  (according  to  the  cus-
tome  of  the  Countrey)  her  bodie  very  grosse,  her  eyes
hollow  and  farre  into  her  head,  attended  with  some
threescore  very  faire  women  (if  painting  (which  they  hold  a  Painting.
matter  religious)  deceived  not  the  judgement  of  mine
eye.)  All  whose  apparell  was  very  rich,  beset  with  Pearle
curiously  wrought,  having  white  Hats  on  their  heads,  with
great  round  Bands  laden  with  Pearle.  Wee  never  saw
Hats  worne  by  any  woman  in  the  Countrey,  but  by  them
onely.  Next  unto  them  were  drawne  three  huge  Chariots  ;
the  first,  with  ten  faire  white  Horses,  two  and  two  ;  the
second,  with  eight ;  and  the  third,  with  sixe  in  like  order  :
which  Chariots  were  all  very  rich  and  gorgeous  within  and

447

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1601.

without. After  which  all  the  Noblemen  passed  in  Coaches.

Image.  Then  was  carried,  in  a  great  Chist,  the  forenamed  Image,

guarded  by  a  Great  man  and  State  of  the  Countrey,  with
some  five  hundred  under  his  command,  for  the  guard  and

Huge  Bell convoy  of  that  Image. And  last  of  all  came  that  huge

drawne  by j^ejj bejnpr  Qf twentie tunne  weight, drawne  by three
\  coo.  tneti.  w  o  o ■>  •

thousand  and  five  hundred  men  (not  being  possible  to  be

drawne  by  Oxen  or  Horses)  in  manner  following.  They
fastned  sixe  exceding  long  hawsers,  or  mightie  great  Cable-
ropes  in  sixe  lengths  to  the  frame  whereon  the  Bell  was
placed.  In  this  ranke  of  ropes  were  placed  those  three
thousand  five  hundred  men,  with  little  cords  over  their
shoulders,  fastned  to  the  great  hawsers,  drawing  after  the
manner  of  our  Westerne  Barge-men  here  in  England.
[II.ix.1410.]  The  poise  of  the  Bell  was  so  great,  that  passing  along
the  streets  of  Musco  (being  paved  with  great  square  pieces
of  Timber  set  close  one  by  another)  the  wood  of  the  frame
or  carriage  whereon  the  Bell  was  drawne,  set  the  timber
of  the  streets  on  fire,  through  both  the  woods  chafing
together,  so  that  some  were  raine  to  follow  hard  after,  to
throw  on  water,  as  the  timber  began  to  smoke.  And  thus
was  this  Bell  and  the  Image  conveyed  to  the  Friery,  as
hath  afore  beene  said.

The  next  day  following  wee  tooke  our  journey  (that  is
to  say  in  mid  May)  towards  Saint  Nicolas,  to  take
shipping,  which  was  some  sixe  weekes  passage  by  land  and
river.  During  all  which  time,  we  saw  nothing  in  a
manner,  but  Woods  and  water.  But  being  come  to  the
Sea  side,  being  the  place  where  we  were  to  take  ship,  we
stayed  there  one  moneth  for  provision  for  our  journey.
In  which  time  we  were  divers  times  invited  aboord
English  ships,  where  wee  were  royally  banquetted  at  the
Agents  charges  and  the  Merchants.  To  the  solemniza-
tion of  which  Banquets  wee  had  three  hundred  great  shot.
And  as  wee  stayed  there,  one  Master  Megricke  a  Merchant
came  from  Musco,  and  brought  the  Friers  two  Letters
with  him,  reporting  that  the  Lord  Chancellour,  in  satisfac-
tion  of the wrong and ill usage hee extended to Sir

448

SIR ANTHONY SHERLEY  ad.

1579
Anthonie,  sent  after  the  Frier  to  the  borders,  who  tooke  Fri*r
both  his  Letters  and  all  his  substance  that  he  had  deceit-  Pumshed-
fully and lewdly gotten in many yeeres before in the
Indiaes  from  him,  leaving  him  not  so  much  as  his  Friers
Weede  :  and  whether  hee  caused  his  throat  to  bee  cut,  it
was  uncertaine,  but  not  unlike.

From  hence  we  tooke  ship  for  Stode,  being  sixe  weekes  8tode.
upon  the  Sea  ere  wee  could  recover  it.  In  which  time
wee  were  continually  tossed  and  tumbled  with  contrarie
Winds  :  and  once  had  beene  like  to  have  beene  utterly  cast
away,  so  that  wee  all  were  overwhelmed  in  despaire,  as  we
were  at  point  to  be  in  the  Sea,  but  that  (by  Gods  protection
and  direction)  we  (past  all  expectation)  fell  upon  the  Flie.
Where,  (having  divers  Letters  of  Sir  Anthonies  to  his
friends  in  England)  I  parted  from  him  (he  holding  his
course  toward  the  Emperour  of  Germanie:)  from  thence
I  came  to  the  Tessell,  then  to  the  Firme :  so  to  the  Hage  :
from  the  Hage  to  Ulissing  :  and  finally,  from  thence  to
Dover,  where  I  landed  in  the  midst  of  the  moneth  of
September,  in  the  three  and  fortieth  yeere  of  the  Queenes
Majesties  Raigne,  and  in  the  yeere  of  our  Lord  God
1601.

Chap. III.

Two  Voyages  of  Master  John  Newberie,  One,  into
the  Holy  Land ;  The  other  to  Balsara,  Ormus,
Persia,  and  backe  thorow  Turkic

John  Newberie  Citizen  and  Merchant  of
London,  desirous  to  see  the  World,  the
eighth  of  March,  1578.  according  to  the
computation  of  the  Church  of  England,
began  a  Voyage  from  the  Citie  of  London
to  Tripolie  in  Syria,  and  thence  to  Joppe
and  Hierusalem,  and  the  Countrey  round

about  adjoyning,  which  I  performed  in  passing  through

France  to  Marceils,  where  I  embarqued  my  selfe, and  passing

through  the  Levant  or  Mediterrane  Sea, arrived  in  Tripolie

viii  449  2  v

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1579-

the  thirteenth  day  of  May ; and  within  few  dayes  after  at

Joppe,  and  thence  at  Hierusalem,  and  the  chiefe  places
thereabout :  And  spending  a  moneth  in  visiting  the  Monu-
ments of  those  Countries,  I  returned  to  Joppe  the  tenth  of
June,  1579. And  the  fifteenth  of  the  said  moneth  arrived
againe  in  Tripolie ; from  whence  shortly  after  I  visited
Mount  Libanus,  and  returning  speedily  to  the  said  Port
of  Tripolie,  I  embarqued  my  selre  in  a  ship  of  Marceils,
the  first  of  Julie,  and  the  three  and  twentieth  of  the  said
moneth, I  put  in  at  Candia ; and  the  seventh  day  of
September,  arrived  safely  in  Marceils,  and  passing  through
France,  by  Lions,  Paris,  Roan,  and  Diepe. The  tenth  of
November  of  the  aforesaid  yeere 1579.  by  Gods  helpe
arrived  safely  in  London.
*This  Voyage \  the  said  John  Newbery  *  being  incouraged  by  the
(as  the  former)  prosperous successe  of  my former  Voyage to Tripoly,
before  that  of Hierusalem,  and  Mount  Lybanus,undertooke  a  farre  more
Sir  Anthonle long  and  dangerous  voyage,  by  the  Straights  of  Gibraltar,
Sher/ey;  but the  Mediterranean  Sea,  the  aforesaid  Tripoly,  and  downe
that  in  honour  fat  River  of  Euphrates,  as  farre  as  the  Citie  of  Ormus  in
and  lmflfol°- ^e  Gulfe  °f  Persia,  and  from  thence  through  the  Countrey
ment  hath  and  °f  Lar,  and  the  most  Easterne  parts  of  Persia,  to  Media,
deserveth Armenia, Georgia, Carmania, Natolia, and so to Con-
precedence. stantinople,  and  from  thence  by  the  Blacke  Sea,  called  in
old  time  Pontus  Euxinus,  into  the  Mouth  of  the  River
Danubius  by  shipping,  and  so  a  great  way  up  the  said
River,  passing  by  the  parts  of  Bugdania  and  Valachia,  at
length  landing, I  came  to  Caminetz, the  first  Frontier
Towne  of  Poland ; and  passing  through  that  Kingdome,
arrived  in  Prussia,  and  came  to  Elbing,  and  Dantzk,  and
Quinsborow,  where  imbarquing  my  selfe,  I  passed  through
the  Sound  of  Denmark,  and  arrived  at  Hull  in  England,
and  so  over  land  travelled  to  London,  whither  I  came  the
last  day  of  August,  1582.  making  my  voyage  in  the  space
of  two  yeeres,  lacking  nineteene  dayes. This  voyage  at
large  I  performed  in  this  manner.
[II.iz.1411.] The  nineteenth  day  of  September,  1580.  accompanied
with Master William Barret an English Merchant, I

45°

JOHN NEWBERY

departed  from  London  in  a  good  ship,  called  the  White
Hinde,  and  the  fifteenth  of  November  came  to  Southie  in
Candie.  The  one  and  twentieth  we  arrived  at  the  Citie
of  Candia.  The  sixt  day  of  December  wee  set  sayle  with
our  ship  from  Fraschia  on  our  voyage :  and  the  eight  at
night,  we  had  like  to  have  runne  upon  the  He  of  the
Rhodes,  setting  our  course  East  from  the  He  of  Scarpanto.
The  eighteenth  day  we  had  sight  of  Cyprus.

The  first  day  of  Januarie  we  arrived  in  Tripoli.  And
the  third  and  fourth  dayes,  our  ship  called  the  White
Hinde,  discharged  all  her  goods.  The  French-men
brought  fortie  Barrels  of  Tinne  on  Shoare  in  their  Boat.
The  fifth  day  of  Januarie  at  night,  there  was  such  a  storme,
that  in  the  Roade  of  Tripoli  there  were  two  ships  cast
away,  and  the  French-mans  Boat.

The  fourteenth  of  Januarie,  1580.  after  the  account  of
the  Church  of  England,  Master  William  Barret  and  I
departed  from  Tripoli,  and  lodged  the  same  day  at  an
house  called  a  Cane ;  and  the  next  day  after,  we  passed  by
a  Castle  to  the  Sea-ward,  called  Draa.  The  sixteenth  day,
we  passed  by  a  strong  Castle,  called  Ewsen.  The  seven-
tenth,  wee  lay  at  Mowaa.  The  eighteenth  day  in  the
morning  about  nine  of  the  clocke,  wee  came  to  Metteni :
and  within  halfe  an  houre  after,  Master  William  Barret
rode  with  our  Janizarie  to  Aman,  which  is  within  three
leagues  of  Metteni.  The  nineteenth  day  in  the  morning,
wee  came  to  Sihi  a  Casal :  and  the  same  day  about  noone
I  came  to  Aman ;  and  stayed  there  some  sixe  dayes.
The  five  and  twentieth,  wee  came  from  Aman,  and  the
same  night  slept  at  a  Village,  called  Det.  The  six  and
twentieth,  at  Marra.  The  seven  and  twentieth  from
thence,  and  the  same  day  we  came  to  Ledeghe,  where  great
store  of  Soape  is  made :  that  night  we  lay  at  a  Village,
called  Sarraket,  neere  to  Syrmin  :  and  the  eight  and  twen-
tieth day  came  to  the  Citie  of  Aleppo.  The  Castle
standeth  to  the  Southward  off  the  Towne.  The  one  and
thirtieth  of  Januarie,  wee  had  a  great  banquet  made  us
in  the  house  of  the  French  Consul. The  one  and  twen-

45*

A.D.

1580.

The  Citie  of
Candia.

The  lie  of
Scarpanto.

They  arrive
at  Tripoli  in
Syria  the  first
of  Januarie.

Draa.
Ewsen.

Mowaa.
Metteni.

Sihi.
Aman.

Det.

Marra.

Sarraket.
Aleppo.

A.D.

I580.

This  Master

William

Barrel,  was

the  first

EnglishConsul

in  Aleppo,  as

appeareth  by

Master

Eldreds

Relation.

Boab.

Halse.

Bir.

Raick.

Ballesse.
Gabbar.

Racca.

Balladac.
Dier.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

tieth  of  Februarie  about  nine  of  the  clocke  in  the  morning,
was  seene  in  Aleppo  an  extraordinarie  Starre  or  Comet,
which  ascended  from  the  North,  and  descended  toward
the  North-west.

The  nineteenth  of  March  in  the  morning,  I  departed
from  Aleppo  with  a  hyred  servant  of  mine,  called  Jacomo
de  Francisco,  to  proceed  on  mine  intended  voyage  to
Ormuz,  lying  in  the  Mouth  of  the  Persian  Gulfe.  And
about  two  of  the  clocke  in  the  afternoone  I  passed  by  Boab,
where  is  an*  high  Tower  upon  an  Hill :  and  the  same  night
I  came  to  a  Village,  called  Halse.  And  the  twentieth  day
we  departed  from  thence,  and  the  same  day  came  to  Bir.
The  Towne  of  Bir  standeth  upon  the  East  side  of  the
River  Frat  or  Euphrates :  and  the  water  commeth  directly
from  the  North,  and  descendeth  to  the  South.  Here  is
great  store  of  Linnen  cloth  made,  and  great  store  of
Waxe :  here  is  also  great  store  of  Corne  and  Fish,  and
Cordovan  skins,  and  Hony.  At  Bir  the  Merchants  doe
pay  for  every  summe  or  packe  of  all  commodities,  one
Sehid  or  Madin,  for  Toll.  After  we  had  hyred  us  a
Barke  and  furniture  for  our  voyage,  wee  set  forward ;  and
the  six  and  twentieth  day,  wee  passed  by  a  Village  to  the
East  of  the  River,  called  Raick ;  and  the  same  day  in  the
evening  by  a  Mountaine  to  the  West  of  the  Water,  where
is  one  house  with  one  Tower  on  the  top  of  it.  And  there
the  Arabians  offered  to  shoote  at  us.  The  next  day  in
the  morning,  we  passed  by  a  Castle,  called  Ballesse,  which
is  ruinated,  and  standeth  on  the  West  side  of  the  River.
And  about  noone  the  same  day  by  a  Towne,  called  Gabbar,
which  standeth  upon  a  Mountaine  to  the  East  of  the
River.  The  eight  and  twentieth  day,  we  passed  by  an
old  Towne  where  is  a  Castle  all  ruinated,  and  lyeth  close
upon  the  Water  to  the  Eastward,  which  is  called  Racca :
and  it  standeth  North  North-east  of  the  Water.  The
thirtieth  day  in  the  morning,  we  passed  by  a  Towne  and  a
Castle  all  ruinate,  which  lyeth  to  the  West  of  the  Water,
and  is  called  Balladac  ;  which  in  times  past  was  the  Chris-
tians. The  same  night  wee  came  to  a  Towne,  called  Dier,

452

JOHN NEWBERY

which  lyeth  also  to  the  West  of  the  River,  and  is  invironed
with  the  Water  round  about.  Here  the  Patron  of  our
Barke  sold  his  Hony,  for  nine  Aspers  the  Rotila :  and  one
Rotila  of  Bir  maketh  two  Rotilas  there.

The  first  day  of  April,  1 58 1.  from  Dier,  and  the  same
night  we  lay  neere  unto  a  Castle,  called  Rab,  which  lyeth  to
the  West  of  the  Water.  The  second  day  in  the  morning,
wee  passed  byAshar  a  small  To  wne,  which  lyeth  to  the  West
of  the  Water.  The  third  day  in  the  morning,  we  passed
by  Subercan,  which  lyeth  to  the  East  of  the  Water,  and
is  all  ruinate,  and  in  times  past  was  the  Christians.  The
fourth  day  we  passed  by  a  Village,  called  Manalle,  to  the
West  of  the  River.  And  the  same  night  to  Anna,  which
lyeth  upon  both  sides  of  the  Water,  but  to  the  West  is
the  greatest  part :  But  the  East  side  reacheth  farther  then
the  other,  as  may  bee  perceived  by  the  Date  Trees  and
Houses.  This  Towne  of  Anna  is  very  long,  and  there  is
about  the  middle  of  it  a  Castle,  which  is  invironed  with
Water,  as  also  divers  Hands  to  the  number  of  fourteene  or
fifteene,  which  lye  all  to  the  Northward  of  the  Castle,
except  two  or  three.  Here  are  great  store  of  Dates,
Oranges,  Pomgranats,  Figs,  Limons,  Corne,  and  Muttons.
The  eight  day  we  departed  from  thence,  and  went  but
very  little  way,  by  reason  of  very  great  winde  and  stormie
weather :  which  began  the  fifth,  and  continued  untill  the
eleventh  day :  and  the  winde  was  most  commonly  at
North-east.  The  tenth  day,  wee  came  to  Addetta,  and
the  same  night  to  Gebbar,  which  lyeth  to  the  East  of  the
Water ;  and  there  we  were  at  a  wedding.  The  eleventh
day  we  departed  from  Gebbar,  and  the  same  day  came  to
Heit,  where  is  a  Castle  to  the  West  of  the  River :  and  a
little  from  the  Castle  to  the  South-west,  is  a  place,  where
Pitch  boyleth  out  of  the  Ground  continually ;  so  that  all
the  sandie  ground  toward  the  Rivers  side  is  over-flowed
therewith.  Divers  Camels  have  fallen  into  these  Springs,
but  none  of  them  could  be  saved.  All  the  way  betweene
Anna  and  Heit  are  continually  on  both  sides  the  River
Houses,  and  Date  Trees,  with  Corne  and  divers  Fruits.

453

A.D.
I58l.

Aprill,  1 58 1
Rab.

Ashar.

Subercan.

Manalle.
Anna.

Addetta.
Gebbar.

[ll.ix.1412.]
Heit.

Pitch  boyling
out  of  the
ground
continually.

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1581.

The  twelfth  day  wee  departed  from  Heit.  The  thirteenth
Ambar.  day  we  came  to  Ambar,  which  is  a  village,  and  lyeth  on

the  East  side  of  the  River.  The  fourteenth  we  went  from
Feluge.  thence,  and  the  same  morning  arrived  at  Feluge ; where

the  goods  are  landed  that  come  from  Bir.  There  I  was
Searching  for  searched  for  money,  and  the  Searcher  found  all  that  I  had :
money.  jDUt  jn  consideration  that  he  should  keepe  it  secret,  I  gave

him  two  Sehids,  and  to  him  that  writeth  up  the  goods  two
Sehids  more ;  which  they  received,  and  yet  wrote  unto
Bagdet,  that  I  had  foure  bags  of  money.  So  that  about
three  or  foure  miles  from  Bagdet  met  with  us  an  Officer  to
accompanie  us  to  the  Towne,  because  they  would  be  sure
of  the  money.  Notwithstanding,  by  the  meanes  of  one
Mustafa  a  Turke,  I  gave  this  Officer  three  and  thirtie
Madins,  wherewithall  he  was  content,  and  kept  it  secret.
So,  shortly  after  we  came  to  the  Market-place,  where  I  was
searched,  but  no  money  could  bee  found.  There  wee
remayned  about  two  houres,  and  then  went  into  a  Can.
The  next  day  in  the  morning  wee  went  over  the  Water,
and  were  no  sooner  out  of  the  Boat,  but  we  were  searched,
but  nothing  found.  From  thence  we  went  into  the
Hamman,  and  so  returned  to  our  lodging.  The  four-
teenth day  about  eight  of  the  clocke  at  night,  we  went
from  Feluge  by  land,  in  the  companie  of  an  hundred
Asses.  The  fifteenth  day  about  one  of  the  clocke  in  the
Bagdet.  afternoone,  we  came  to  Bagdet. The  sixteenth  day  of

Aprill,  I  did  see  Barley  that  was  ripe  and  cut  downe,  neere
* Babylon.  to  Bagdet.  Old  *  Bagdet  standeth  to  the  North  of  Bagdet,
about  twentie  or  five  and  twentie  miles.  The  seventeenth
day,  we  passed  through  Bagdet.  One  Castle  standeth  to
the  South-east  of  the  Towne,  upon  the  South  side  of  the
Water,  and  another  to  the  North-west  of  the  Water  upon
the  North  side,  where  the  Bassa  doth  keepe  his  Court,
whose  name  is  Hassan  Bassa.  The  twentieth  day,  there
was  a  Christian  which  came  into  the  Can  to  call  us  forth  :
but  because  wee  did  not  understand  him,  wee  remayned  still
in  the  Magasin.  So,  presently  came  foure  for  to  search  us,
and  they  found  our  money. The  two  and  twentieth  day,

454

JOHN NEWBERY  a.d.

1581.

I  wrote  Letters  to  Master  William  Hareborne,  and  Master  Master

William  Barret,  by  a  Merchant  of  Aleppo,  and  directed  my  ^Uiam

Letters  to Master  John  Blanch, Consul  of  the  French  an^-^astlr

Merchants  in  Aleppo. The  foure  and  twentieth  day  in  William

the  evening,  I  went  from  Bagdet. The  six  and  twentieth  Barret,

day  at  night,  we  passed  by  a  Towne,  called  Bourac,  which  Bourac

lyeth  to  the  West  of  the  Water,  and  is  all  ruinated. And

a  little  below  that  standeth  a  Tower  in  the  middle  of  the

River. The  seven  and  twentieth,  we  passed  by  a  Towne,

called  Menil,  which  lyeth  to  the  East  of  the  Water :  and  MeniL

there  is  but  one  Tower  standing. The  same  day,  by  a

place  called  Amor,  which  lyeth  close  upon  the  Water  to  Amor.

the  Eastward,  and  is  a  small  Casal. The  thirtieth  day  in

the  morning,  wee  passed  by  a  Towne,  called  Sekia,  which  Seiia.

lyeth  to  the  East  of  the  Water : and  the  same  day  by  a

very  long  Village,  named  Kendege,  to  the  East  of  the  Kendege.

Water,  and  it  is  all  ruinated. Also  the  same  day  in  the

evening,  we  came  to  Gurna,  which  is  a  Castle,  and  standeth  Gurna

upon  the  Point  where  the  River  of  Furro  and  the  River  st*ndeth™tht

1  ni tit 'wh.pvp

of  Bagdet  doe  meet. And  upon  the  South  side  of  Furro,  the  ^ven  0f
right  over  against  this  Castle  is  another  Castle,  about  the Furro  and
greatnesse  of  this. And  about  three  miles  farther  in  the  Bagdet  doe
River, toward  Balsara, to the South  of  the  Water, is  meeL
another.

The  first  day  of  May,  1581.  I  arrived  at  Balsara. At  May  1581.
the  Waters  side  at  Balsara,  the  merchandise  that  enter  Ba^sara-
within  the  Can,  pay  upon  every  Summe  or  Camels  burden  Custome.
three  Madins  and  three  quarters ; sixteene  Vessennes  of
Balsara  make  one  Kin  tall  of  Aleppo. The  carriage  of
every  summe  of  goods  from  Bagdet  to  Balsara,  costeth  by
water  sixe  Shehides. And  for  the  carriage  from  Balsara
to  Bagdet,  upon  every  Vessene  two  Madins. And  the
carriage  of  one  hundred  Vessenes  from  Balsara  to  Ormuz,
costeth  twentie  Larins,  and  from  Ormuz  to  Balsara  twentie
Larins. The  Custome  in  Balsara  is  upon  every  fourteene
Shehides  one. And  for  Glasse,  and  such  like  commodities,
accordingly. Clothes,  Kersies,  and  all  kinde  of  Silkes,  pay
upon  every  twentie  one. And  upon  every  ten  Vessenes

455

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1581.

or  ten  Rotilas,  there  are  three  to  be  allowed  for  Tarr  or
Waste :  and  upon  all  Spicerie  accordingly.  The  Towne
of  Balsara  standeth  to  the  East  South-east  of  the  River :
and  without  the  Towne  are  divers  Basars  or  Market  places,
and  their  Houses  are  made  of  Canes  or  great  Reedes.  And
their  Corne  lyeth  all  on  heapes  without  the  Towne  upon  the
ground  covered  with  Mats,  and  is  sold  by  the  weight.
There  are  about  Balsara  foure  Gates ;  and  a  little  from  the
North  Gate  lye  ten  peeces  of  Ordnance  great  and  small,
besides  two  Basiliscoes,  that  lye  under  the  wall  at  the
entring  of  the  Gate.  Their  building  is  of  Brick,  which
is  made  of  a  certaine  kind  of  stufFe,  that  may  be  cut  with
a  knife.  There  is  without  the  Towne  a  very  high  Pole
set  up,  which  is  of  three  pieces ;  and  upon  the  top  of  it  a
Cup  of  Tinne  or  Lead ;  and  there  they  runne  with  their
Horses,  and  shoote  at  the  Cup ;  and  he  that  hitteth  the
Cup  gayneth  a  Shasse.  At  Balsara  the  Water  doth  ebbe
and  flow,  as  it  doth  in  England,  and  in  no  other  places
adjoyning  upon  the  Ocean  Sea.  The  Turke  won  Balsara
about  the  yeere  1550.  The  Vessene  of  Maces  is  worth
in  Balsara  thirteene  Duckats,  and  Nut-megs  five  or  sixe
Duckats  :  Soape  is  worth  fifteene  Shehids  the  Vessene,  and
Almonds  foure  and  twentie  Shehids  the  Vessene :  Galles
are  worth  ten  Larins  the  Vessene.
[II.ix.1413.]  The  thirteenth  day  of  May,  158 1.  I  embarked  my  selfe
at  Balsara :  and  the  sixteenth  wee  valed  downe  about  three
flight  shot.  Halfe  a  dayes  journey  from  the  Towne,  to
the  East  of  the  River  lye  eight  or  ten  Bulwarks,  and  beyond
them  all  is  a  Castle  upon  the  Point  of  a  Land.  The  two
and  twentieth  day  in  the  afternoone,  wee  came  to  an
Anchor,  because  it  was  too  much  winde.  The  three  and
twentieth  in  the  morning,  we  sayled  untill  ten  of  the
clocke,  and  then  came  to  an  Anchor,  because  they  were
afraid  to  put  to  Sea  toward  night.  The  Mariners  are  all
beasts.  The  foure  and  twentieth  day  in  the  morning,  we
They  enter  put  to  Sea  with  a  faire  winde  :  and  the  same  day  by  noone,
into  the  Per-  we  were  a|-  tfat  Sea.  And  all  that  morning,  wee  kept  our
course  South,  and  when  wee  were  at  the  Sea,  South  or

456

JOHN NEWBERY  a.d.

1581.

South South-east. The  five  and twentieth  day  in the

morning,  we  had  sight  of  a  Mountaine  of  Aggemy,  a

day  short  of  Abosha :  and  then  we  kept  our  course  East

South-east. And  the  same  day,  we  arrived  at  an  Hand, The  Isle  of

called  Carreghe,  which  belongeth  to  the  Countrey  of  Hag-  Carreghe,  or

gemy,  and  left  it  to  the  South  of  us. The  sixe  and

twentieth  day,  we  landed  in  the  Hand  of  Carege : and

there  is  great  store  of  Onions,  and  Wells  of  fresh  water ;

and  in  the  middle  of  the  Hand  is  a  Casal. The  Hand  is

about  two  miles  broad  and  two  miles  long. And  to  the

North-west  of  it  lyeth  a  small  Hand  very  low  in  the  water.

The  seven  and  twentieth  day  in  the  morning,  wee  set  sayle

from  Careghe ; and  the  same  day  passed  by  the  low  Land

of  Persia,  which  lyeth  under  the  high  Mountaines. And

in  divers  places  are  certaine  Gulfs  like  Rivers. The  same

day  in  the  evening,  wee  were  at  Abousher,  which  is  a  Abomhcr  a

Castle. And from thence  wee kept our course South Castle.

South-east  to  goe  cleere  of  the  Land  :  it  is  very  high  Land.

The  nine  and  twentieth  day  in  the  morning,  the  Boat  went

on  shoare  for  water ;  and  I  went  also  on  shoare  with  the

Boat :  and  the  water  which  we  tooke  did  stinke,and  was  full

of  mud  and  vermine. And  in  this  order  is  all  their  water

in  the  Countrey  of  Cassel-Bash. The  last  day  of  May,

we  passed  by  a  very  high  Cliffe,  and  upon  it  is  a  Rocke  A  very  high

like  unto  a  Barne,  which  lyeth  East  and  West,  and  to  the  Cliffe.

West  end  of  it  lyeth  a  round  Rocke,  which  is  like  an

Hay-cocke, about two  yards  high. And  this  Cliffe  is

within  three  dayes  sailing  of  Ormuz. And  there  the  ships

put  off  from  the  Land  that  goe  for  the  He  of  Baharem  : The  He  of

and  there  we  kept  our  course  North-east. The  West  end Baharemi

of  this  Cliffe  is  white  like  Chalke  or  Snow. This  day,  exceiient

one  of  our  Mariners  being  sick,  another  of  his  fellowes  pearles  are

came  with  an  hot  Iron  and  burnt  him  in  the  sole  of  the  gotten.

foote. Another  they  would  have  left  in  an  Hand  because

he  was  sicke,  who  answered,  That  hee  trusted  they  did  not

take  him  for  a  Hen.

The  second  day  of  June  came  a  Boat  aboard  of  us,  June.
which  came  from  Ormuz,  and  was  bound  for  the  He  of

457

A.D.
I58l.

Shie  or  Seche,
an  I  land  under
the  Portugals.

A  small  Hand
to  the  South  of
Shie  or  Seche.

Necchel.
They  land
here.

Melgor,  a
great  Casal.

Gesser,  a

Casal.

Bender.

Left,  an  Hand.
Bassedor,  an
Hand.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Baharem.  The  same  day,  wee  passed  by  a  Mountaine
which  is  like  a  Castle,  and  upon  the  top  of  it  is  a  Rocke
like  unto  a  little  watch  house.  The  fourth  day  of  June
we  tooke  in  fresh  water.  The  seventh  day,  we  departed
from  the  place  where  wee  tooke  in  water ;  and  the  same
day  we  arrived  at  an  Hand,  called  Shie,  which  is  under  the
Portugals  :  and  upon  the  West  end  of  it  are  two  companies
of  Date  Trees,  and  two  round  Knobs  like  two  Hay-cocks,
and  it  is  a  plaine  Hand.  The  aforesaid  seventh  day  at
night,  wee  came  to  an  Anchor  at  Shie :  and  to  the  South
of  it  lyeth  a  small  Hand,  where  they  fish  for  Pearles.  The
eight  day  wee  went  on  shoare  there.  The  ninth  day,  we
departed  from  Shiche,  and  the  same  day  we  landed  at
Necchel,  which  is  about  foure  leagues  distant.  I  paid  for
carrying  of  my  things  on  shoare  at  Necchel  two  Larins,
and  for  landing  of  them  five  Larins.  The  women  here
weare  long  Mantles,  which  they  draw  after  them  like  a
traine :  and  farther  in  the  Countrey  they  weare  their  Gar-
ments with  three  slits,  one  before,  and  one  on  either  side ;
and  their  sleeves  are  like  the  sleeves  of  Morris-dancers.
And  they  have  round  about  their  eares  pack-threed  sewed.
Also  they  weare  great  Rings  in  their  Noses ;  and  about
their  Legs,  Armes,  and  Necks,  Iron  hoopes.

The  eleventh  day,  we  departed  from  Necchel.  The
twelfth  day  in  the  morning,  we  came  to  a  great  Casal,
called  Melgor,  where  lyeth  a  Captaine  called  Shiagh  :  and
here  we  remayned  three  dayes,  and  were  in  great  danger  of
being  taken  slaves,  but  God  kept  us.  This  Casal  lyeth
betweene  the  Mountaines.  The  fourteenth  day  in  the
evening,  wee  left  this  wicked  place,  where  I  paid  ten  Larins
for  my  part.  The  women  here  may  throw  their  Dugs
over  their  shoulders.  The  eighteenth  day,  we  came  to  a
Casal,  called  Gesser,  and  the  same  day  from  thence.  The
nineteenth  day,  wee  lodged  at  Bender.  The  twentieth,
wee  departed  from  Bender,  and  the  same  evening  came  at
an  Hand,  called  Left.  And  right  over  against  Bender,
lyeth  an  Hand,  called  Bassedor ;  and  these  two  Hands  are
under the  Portugals. And Gesser  and Bender, which

458

JOHN NEWBERY  ad.

1581.

are on the mayne Land, are under Abrehem Can,

and sometimes were under the King of Ormuz.

The one and twentieth day, I went on Land on

the He of Left : and here the women weare Iron

hoopes,  and  a  number  of  other  things  about  their  Necks,

Legs,  and  Armes. The  two  and  twentieth  day  of  June,  He  came  to

1  c8 1.  I  arrived  at  Ormuz,  and  presently  was  carried  before  0rmuz  the

\.  -  tzuo  dtlu,  tzvpti—

the  Captaine,  whose  name  was  Don  Gonsalvo. The  same  tieth  0fjune

day  I  hyred  an  house  for  sixe  Larins. The  Castle  of 1581.

Ormuz  standeth  to  the  North  of  the  Towne,  and  some

thing  to  the  Eastward. Divers  both  men  and  women

here  used  to  slit  the  lower  part  of  their  eares  more  then  two

inches,  which  hangeth  downe  to  their  chin. There  were

in  my  companie  from  Necchel  to  Ormuz  one  Turke,  and

one  Moore  of  Lahor,  and  one  Moore  of  Fez  in  Barbarie,

and  five  Persians,  and  twelve  Moores  of  Aleppo,  Aman,

and  other  places,  and  one  Nostrane,  a  Christian,  and  my

man,  who  was  a  Greeke : and  all  these  at  Melgor  sware  [II.ix.1414.]

upon  a  Booke  that  I  was  a  Christian  of  Aleppo,  and  had  ImPro^us
•  c  1 1  m  1  1  1  .1  extremos

wire  and  children,  and  an  house  there.  curritMerca-

It  was  a  great  miracle  to  see  the  Mountaines  of  Ormus,  tor  ad  Indos.

all  of  Salt,  and  as  hard  as  a  Flint  stone :  and  this  Salt  is

very  good  for  divers  diseases. All  the  Hand  is  salt,  and

the  very  ground  where  the  Towne  doth  stand  is  salt :

which  is  the  cause  of  the  excessive  heat  that  is  there. The  cause  of

From  eight  of  the  clocke  in  the  morning  untill  the  Sunne , excessive

1  . •  Mir  1 J 1 .1  j heatin  Ormus,

goe  downe,  it  is  not  possible  tor  any  body,  that  is  not  used

to  the  Countrey,  to  passe  either  with  shooes  or  bare- foot, Jn&€  we

where  the  Sunne  doth  lie,  it  is  so  extreme  hot. The  j  Castle

Swine  in  Ormus  have  clawes  of  a  quarter  of  an  ell  long,  called,  The

and  some  longer. The  Portugals  doe  hold  a  Castle  over  irea*

against  Ormus,  in  the  Countrey  of  the  King  of  Lar,  where *stan&-

they  keepe  ten  or  twelve  Souldiers  : the  name  of  which  Michael

Castle  is  called,  The  great  Mastango. The  seventh  day  Stropene.

of  Julie,  my  man  Jacomo,  which  was  a  Greeke,  went  from  Of  his  and

mee to  one Michael Stropene  a  Venetian, being, as I . fs

1 ,  11.  1  1 &  imprisonment

suspect,  entised  thereunto  by  him,  to  understand  my  secret  at  Goa,  see

purposes :  and  in  very  deed,  in  my  last  Voyage  into  these  Linschoten.

459

A.D.
I58l.

He  departeth
from  Ormus,
the  first  of
August,  1 5  8 1 .
Bender
gomrozu.

Cowrstan  a
CasaL
Our  mangel.

Lar.

Dehaccow  a

CasaL

BerreaCasaL

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

parts,  in  the  yeere  1583.  this  Michael  Stropene  betrayed
me  and  my  companie  to  the  Governour  of  Ormus.

After  I  had  spent  sixe  weekes  in  this  Citie,  and  informed
my  selfe  the  best  I  could,  of  the  Trade  and  Customes  of
the  place,  I  departed  from  Ormus  the  first  day  of  August
at  night,  and  left  Signior  Victorio,  a  friend  of  mine,  with
his  goods  behind.  The  second  of  August  about  mid-
night, I  arrived  at  Bender  gomrow,  where  the  Portugals
keepe  a  Castle  with  seven  or  eight  Souldiers,  within  it.
And  this  Bender  gomrow,  which  is  on  the  mayne  land,  was
sometimes  the  Kings  of  Lar,  and  after  that  Abreham  Cans,
and  so  it  came  to  the  King  of  Ormus.  The  fift  day  at
night  we  departed  from  Bender  gomrow :  and  the  eighth
day  we  lodged  at  a  Casal,  called  Cowrstan.  The  tenth  day
at  Ourmangel :  there  is  a  Spring  of  fresh  water,  which
runneth  through  the  middle  of  it.  The  fourteenth  day
in  the  morning  we  came  to  the  Citie  of  Lar.  Two  Mauns
of  Ormus,  make  three  Mauns  of  Lar :  two  hundred
seventie  and  two  Mauns  of  Ormus  merchandise,  which  are
eight  hundred  and  sixteene  Lerra  of  Bountaki,  cost  the
carriage  from  Bender  gomrow  to  Lar,  twentie  Larins  and
an  halfe.  And  one  Asnillo  will  carrie  one  hundred  Maun
of  Lar,  which  are  two  hundred  Lerra  of  Bountaki.  The
fifteenth  day,  I  hired  one  Mousa  a  Jew,  for  sixe  moneths  to
be  my  servant,  for  thirtie  Larins  the  moneth.  At  Bender
gomrow  all  goods  that  goe  for  Persia  pay  unto  the
Portugals  upon  every  summe  or  load  one  Sadan.

The  foure  and  twentieth  day  of  August,  1581.  about
noone  I  departed  from  Lar.  And  at  Lar  every  summe  of
merchandise  payeth  at  the  passing  out  of  the  gate  one
Tanger,  which  is  twelve  Pull.  And  the  five  and  twentieth
day  wee  passed  downe  a  very  high  Mountaine ;  and  the
same  day  passed  by  a  Casal,  called  Dehaccow.  And  this
five  and  twentieth  day  at  night  lodged  at  a  Casal,  called
Berre.  And  to  the  South  of  the  Towne  is  an  old  Castle
upon  an  high  Mountaine.  The  sixe  and  twentieth  day
we  came  to  a  place,  where  I  bought  three  Hendomies  for
one  Tanger,  and  they  are  as  sweet  as  Sugar. The  seven

460

JOHN NEWBERY

and  twentieth  day  we  lodged  at  Olous.  The  nine  and
twentieth,  we  departed  from  Olous :  and  neere  unto  it
is  a  very  great  Casal,  called  Goven,  which  hath  Angour
and  Corma  plentie.  And  this  night  we  payed  at  our
Baite  upon  every  summe  Pull :  And  at  Goven  endeth
the  Countrey  of  Lar.  The  last  day  of  August,  I  passed
over  the  greatest  Mountaine  that  ever  I  saw,  and  left  it
to  the  Southward  of  us.

The  first  of  September  in  the  morning,  wee  came  to  a
Citie,  called  Gaarrom :  and  the  same  day,  to  a  Casal,
called  Demonder,  where  standeth  an  high  Columne  alone.
About  Gaarrom  is  great  store  of  Rice  and  Cotton  wooll
growing.  And  here  the  Sheepe  have  Lambs  twice  every
yeere.  The  second  day  of  September,  we  came  to
Mecocal,  where  we  had  stinking  water :  and  the  same  day
payed  a  dutie  of  two  Tanger  upon  every  Bar.  The  third
day  we  came  to  Cawger,  and  the  same  day  at  night  we
payed  a  Best  upon  every  Bar.  The  fourth  day  we  came
to  a  faire  Can,  called  Chesimon  moddafar :  and  the  same
day  wee  had  raine.  The  fift  day  wee  came  to  Cowel,
which  is  a  Casal  neere  to  Shiras :  this  night  we  payed  a
dutie  upon  our  goods.  The  sixth  day  in  the  morning,  we
came  to  the  Citie  of  Shiras.  Betweene  Lar  and  Shiras  is
great  store  of  Wolves,  Partridges,  and  Pheasants.  There
are  in  Shiras  five  high  Towers,  and  the  highest  is  in  the
middle  of  the  Towne.  To  the  North  of  the  Towne  is  a
Gate  of  very  faire  coloured  stone,  which  is  a  little  beyond
the  Horse-mart :  and  without  this  Gate  are  all  the  Sheepe
and  Goats  sold,  that  serve  for  the  Towne.  The  highest
and  furthest  Tower  in  Shiras  is  neere  to  the  Can  that  I  lay
in,  and  is  builded  with  yellow,  greene,  white,  and  purple
stone.  The  women  ride  here  upon  Horses  like  men.  It  is
a  Towne  that  hath  great  store  of  victuals  and  fruits.  Iron,
Lead,  Casder,  Cochonillio,  Brasill,  Linnen  cloth,  Foutas,
and  all  wares  that  come  out  of  India,  are  very  well  sold
here.  Brasill  is  worth  sixe  Mamodies  the  Maun,  and
Cochonillio  one  hundred  and  fiftie  Mamodies.  Certaine
small  Laton  that  commeth  from  Sindi  are  sold  in  Shiras  for

461

A.D.

1581

Olous.

Goven.

September,
Gaarrom.
Demonder

Mecocal.

Cawger.

Chesimon.
Cowel  a
Casal.
Shiras.

A.D.

I58l.

S argon.
[II.ix.1415.]

Auglamor.
Augalm.

Moysse.

Sesmon
Dermal.

Augow.

Hausapaus.
Cuskesar.

Gerdoun.

PURCHAS HIS PILGR1MES

twelve  Shehides  the  piece. In  this  Towne  is  made  great

store  of  Mauward  and  Gebib,  which  are  carried  for  India.

The  Maun  of  Cloves  is  worth  in  Shiras  fiftie  Shehides,

Nutmegs,  thirtie,  Pepper,  seven  and  twentie. From  Lar

to  Shiras  we  went  the  most  part  North-west  and  to  the

North,  we  stayed  in  this  Towne  from  the  sixth  day  till  the

two  and  twentieth. The  two  and  twentieth  of  September,

we departed from Shiras, and the same day came to

Sargon,  a  Towne  under  a  Mountaine  in  a  pleasant  Valley.

The  three  and  twentieth  in  the  morning,  wee  passed  under

a  great  Mountaine,  and  neere  unto  the  East  of  it  is  a

small  River :  and  the  same  day  in  the  forenoone,  we  came

to  a  Village,  called  Auglamor : and  neere  unto  that  is

another,  called  Augalm. The  foure  and  twentieth  in  the

morning,  wee  passed  over  a  narrow  Bridge,  and  the  water

runneth  to  the  South :  and  the  same  day  we  lodged  at  a

Village  called  Moysse  ;  where  we  payed  upon  every  summe

of  goods,  one  Gasbi. And  while  wee  lay  here  there  passed

through the Towne a number of Sheepe, Goats, and

Camels, with poore people, and their houshold-stuffe.

The  five  and  twentieth  day  from  Moysse,  and  the  same

day  came  to  a  Village,  called  Sesmon  Dermal. The  sixe

and  twentieth  in  the  morning,  wee  passed  over  a  very  high

Mountaine,  upon  the  top  whereof  are  two  Springs  of  very

good  water,  and  the  same  day  we  came  to  Augow : and

to  the  North-east  of  the  Village  is  a  stony  Bridge,  and

very  good  water  passeth  under  it :  And  here  we  found  a

man  hurt  with  Theeves. The  seven  and  twentieth  we

went from Augow, and the same day we rested at

Hausapaus,  which  standeth  under  a  Mountaine,  and  hath

to  the  West  of  it  upon  a  little  Hill,  a  small  round  white

Castle  : And  here  is  Bread,  Cheese,  Hens,  Raisins,  and

Milke. The eight and twentieth day we went from

Hausapaus,  and  the  same  day  we  rested  at  Cuskesar,  where

is  nothing  but  a  round  house  upon  a  Hill :  but  there  is  a

new  Can  a  building. The  nine  and  twentieth  day  we  went

from  Cuskesar,  and  the  same  day  rested  at  Gerdoun. And

this  day  we  saw  many  Theeves  upon  the  Mountaines.

462

JOHN NEWBERY  a.d.

1581.

The  thirtieth  day  we  departed  from  Gerdoun,  and  the  same
day  came  to  Yestacas,  which  standeth  upon  a  Rocke  in  a  Testacas.
deepe  Valley : and  here  wee  found  Bread,  Ennap,  and
Battegh. Here  I  payed  twice  as  much  Toll  as  in  any
other  paid.

The  first  day  of  October  we  departed  from  Yestacas :  October.
and  the  second  day  in  the  morning  wee  came  to  Boial,  BoiaL
which  is  a  Village  of  great  store  of  fruit.  And  here  wee
met  with  the  Bassa  of  Shiras,  which  had  in  his  companie
about  a  thousand  Camels,  besides  Horses,  and  Asnillios.
And  here  are  many  Villages  and  Houses  together.  The
second  of  October  at  night  wee  left  Boial,  and  the  third
day  lodged  at  Moydar.  The  fourth  day  we  departed  Moydar.
from  Moydar,  and  the  same  day  I  came  to  the  Citie  of
Hispahan,  where  the  King  of  Persia  sometimes  keepeth  Hupahapnow
his  Court.  At  the  entring  in  of  the  gate  of  Hispahan,  citieof
groweth  on  either  side  of  the  gate  a  Chest-nut  tree,  one  Persia.
to  the  East,  and  another  to  the  West,  then  we  passed  over
many  waters  :  and  at  the  entring  into  the  principall  Towne
is  a  Castle  to  the  South-west  of  the  gate.  And  here  they
have  in  their  Hamam  a  certaine  Ointment  to  anoint  their
bodies  withall,  which  is  called  Dowa,  which  taketh  away
all  the  haire  of  a  mans  bodie.  To  the  East  of  Hispahan
is  a  very  long  and  great  Valley,  where  are  many  Villages
and  Houses.  The  carriage  of  one  hundred  Mauns  of
Merchandise  from  Shiras  to  Hispahan,  costeth  seventie
Shehides,  and  from  Hispahan  to  Cassan  sixtie  Shehides.
Hispahan  is  a  Citie  that  useth  great  store  of  Anil,  maketh
the  greatest  store  of  Muskaille,  and  hath  the  best  Cotton
that  ever  I  saw.  The  Maun  of  Cotton  wooll  is  worth
here  twelve  Shehides ;  and  the  Maun  of  Rice,  seven
Beste  ;  the  Maun  of  Dracken,  two  Beste  ;  and  the  Maun
of  Ennap,  two  Beste ;  the  Maun  of  Non,  three  Beste ;
and  Laghem,  foure  Beste.  The  Cattal  of  Sugar  is  worth
here  foure  hundred  Tomaun,  and  Anil  fortie  Mamodies
the  Maun.  The  Maun  of  Hispahan  is  one  and  an  halfe
of  Shiras.  Also  at  the  entring  in  and  going  out  of  the
gates of Hispahan, every Hemmel payeth one Gasbi.

463

A.D.
I58l.

Sen.

Shesers  Can.
Calenda.

Shen.

Garratcoy.
Cassan.

Tesd.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

The  seventh  day  of  October,  I  came  out  of  the  Can  at
Hispahan.

The  ninth  day  of  the  said  moneth  I  departed  from  His-
pahan, and  the  same  day  lodged  at  Sen.  The  tenth  day
from  Sen,  and  the  same  day  at  Shesers  Can :  and  also  this
day  at  night,  at  a  great  Village  called  Calenda,  which  hath
great  plentie  of  all  sorts  of  fruits.  The  eleventh  day
from  thence,  and  the  same  day  at  Shen,  also  a  Towne  of
great  store  of  fruit.  And  this  day  in  the  morning,  we
descended  downe  a  very  high  Mountaine.  At  Calenda
every  summe  of  goods  payeth  one  Gasbi.  The  twelfth
day  we  went  from  Shen,  and  the  same  day  we  came  to
Garratcoy,  and  the  same  day  departed  from  thence,  and  in
the  afternoone  reached  unto  the  Citie  of  Cassan.  And
presently  upon  the  comming  of  any  Caff  ell  to  Cassan,  there
is  one  that  doth  take  a  note  of  all  the  goods,  what  it  is,
and  how  much  of  every  sort :  which  note  he  delivereth  to
the  Vizier,  which  is  the  name  of  the  Governour  of  Cassan,
which  is  greater  then  a  Basha.  To  the  South-west  or
West  of  this  Towne,  is  all  Mountaynous,  and  to  the  North
of  it  are  divers  Villages  and  Valleys,  and  to  the  South-east
is  a  low  Mountaine,  and  white,  as  if  it  were  by  the  Sea
side.  The  foureteenth  day  at  the  comming  of  the  Caffell
to  Cassan,  they  brought  newes  that  seven  ships  of  the
Portugals  were  arrived  in  Ormus  from  Goa.  The  Caravan
Basha  had  for  guarding  of  the  Caffel  from  Lar  to  Cassan,
twentie  Tomaun,  which  were  in  number  five  hundred
Camels.  The  summe  of  an  Asse,  which  is  two  Mauns  of
Lar,  costeth  the  carriage  from  Lar  to  Cassan,  sixtie
Mamodies.  The  seventeenth  day  of  October,  went  a
Caffel  from  Cassan  to  Casbin.  From  Yesd,  which  is  ten
daies  journey  to  the  South  from  Cassan,  commeth  great
store  of  Cotton-wooll,  and  cloath  made  of  Cotton ;  and
the  Maun  of  Cotton-wooll  is  worth  in  Cassan,  eight
Mamodies,  Crems  is  worth  sixe  Tomaun  the  Maun.  The
use  is  in  this  Citie,  when  they  burie  their  dead,  that  three
carrie  the  Corps  to  the  grave,  two  before  and  one  behind.
Wood  is  sold  in  Cassan  for  one  Beste  the  Maun. He  that

464

JOHN NEWBERY  ad.

1581.

writeth  up  the  goods  that  come  to  Cassan,  taketh  upon

every  Tomaun  that  is  sold  in  the  Towne,  one  Mamodie :

and  the  like  order  is  in  Tauris. There  was  a  Caffel  of  one

hundred  and  fiftie  Camels  comming  from  Ormus  to  Cassan,  [II.ix.1416.]

all  carried  away  by  two  hundred  Theeves ; therefore  men

must  goe  strong  in  those  theevish  parts. The  Batman

of  Cassan  maketh  two  and  an  halfe  of  Aleppo. Pepper  is

worth the Maun  in this  Citie,  fortie  Shehides, Meck-

hickan and Bespessa seventie Mamodies, Drachen one

hundred  Shehides,  and  Angarra  sixe  Mamodies  the  piece.

And  eightie  make  fiftie  Mauns  of  Tauris,  which  is  foure

hundred and  fiftie Lerras of  Venice. Gingebel fortie

Shehides : Silke  eightie  Shehides. And  sixe  Mauns  of

Silke  make  one  Maun  of  all  other  things.

The  fourth  day  of  November  we  departed  from  Cassan,  November.
and  the  same  day  lodged  at  a  Casal,  called  Sensen  : the  Semen.
Can  is  old,  and  standeth  to  the  Eastward  of  the  Village.
And  this  Casal  standeth  upon  a  round  rotten  hill  like  a
Castle  :  and  to  the  West  of  it,  is  a  rew  of  small  Trees,  and
two  great  Trees  in  the  rew. And  neere  to  Sensen  is  a
Village,  called  Bedra,  which  hath  a  small  Castle. The  fifth
day  from  Sensen,  and  the  same  day  we  rested  at  Casmova ;  Casmova.
which is a small Village in a great Plaine, and hath
an old Castle standing to the South of the Towne.
And here we paid upon Barr one Gasbeke. The
sixt day from Casmova, and the same day at Coum, Caum,agt-eat
which  is  a  very  great  Citie. And  to  the  East  South-east  Cttte'
of  the  Towne,  are  divers  greene  Towers,  whereof  three
stand  together,  besides  sixe  others  very  high. And  to
the  North  of  the  Towne  is  a  bridge  of  stone. The  seventh
day  we  departed  from  Coum,  and  the  same  day  we  came
at  Gaffarawau,  which  is  a  new  Can  to  the  Eastward  of  the  Gassarawau.
high-way. And  here  wee  paid  upon every  summe  of
goods  one  Gasbeke. The eight day  we  departed  from
Gaffarawau,  and  the  same  day  we  came  to  a  Citie,  called
Sowwa  :  and  we  lay  all  night  in  a  great  field,  inclosed  with
a  wall  round  about. The  ninth  day,  we  went  from  Sowwa, Sowwa.
and  the  same  day  wee  came  to  Daung,  which  standeth  to  Daung.
viii  465  2  g

A.D.
I58l.

Sang.
Arrassan.

A  good  note.

Kirra.

Pas  sen.

Aussar.
Dessa.

Sultanas.

Cavesseras  of
the  Shangh.

Frost,  cold
winds,  y
snow,  from  the
eleventh  to  the
fourteenth  of
'November.
Sangas.

Necpaw.
Sar chant.
Meyannau.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

the  West  of  the  high-way.  And  here  we  paid  upon  every
Barr  one  Gasbeke.  The  tenth  day  we  departed  from
Daung,  and  the  same  morning  passed  by  another  Mangel,
called  Sang :  and  the  same  day  we  came  to  Arrassan,
which  is  a  Village  that  hath  divers  houses  built  like  Hay-
cocks. And  heere  a  Theefe  would  know  of  me  of  what
place  I  was.  And  at  Arrassan  we  paid  upon  every  summe
of  goods  one  Gasbeke.  It  is  alwaies  very  good  for  a  man
that  will  travaile,  to  apparell  himselfe  according  to  the
order  of  every  Country,  wherein  he  shall  travaile.  The
eleventh  day  we  departed  from  Arrassan,  and  the  same  day
we  came  to  Kirra,  which  standeth  upon  a  little  round  hill.
The  twelfth  day  from  Kirra,  and  the  same  day  at  Passen,
where  is  great  store  of  Wall-nut-trees  and  Wine :  and
heere  two  draughts  cost  me  one  Mamodie.  The  thirteenth
from  Passen,  and  the  same  morning  passed  by  a
Village,  called  Aussar ;  and  to  the  South  of  way  are  two
old  Towers.  Also  the  same  day  we  came  to  Dessa,  which
is  nothing  but  a  Can :  And  heere  comming  somewhat  late
in  the  evening,  wee  CQuld  get  neither  Bread  nor  Water.
The  foureteenth  we  departed  from  Dessa,  and  the  same
morning  passed  by  a  towne,  called  Sultanas ;  which  we
left  to  the  South-west  of  the  way.  Also  the  same  day
we  came  to  Cavesseras  of  the  Shangh,  which  is  a  Can,  and
new  built,  and  the  Water  is  farre  from  the  Can.  The
eleventh  day  of  November  it  began  with  frost,  and  very
cold  and  great  winds ;  and  the  foureteenth  day  in  the
evening,  being  at  the  Kings  house,  it  began  to  snow,  The
sixteenth  day,  we  departed  from  Cavesseras  of  the  Shangh,
and  the  same  day  we  came  to  a  Towne,  called  Sangas.
The  seventeenth  day  we  went  from  Sangas,  and  the  same
day  we  came  at  a  Can,  called  Necpaw.  The  eighteenth
day  we  departed  from  Necpaw,  and  the  same  day  we  came
to  Sarcham,  where  we  found  a  Sultan,  and  therefore  lay
without  the  Can.  The  nineteenth  wee  departed  from
Sarcham,  and  the  same  day  we  came  to  a  Towne,  called
Meyannau,  where  is  great  plentie  of  victuals.  And  here
the  Batman  of  Bread  is  sold  for  sixe  Gasbekes,  and  seven

466

JOHN NEWBERY  a.d.

1581.

Gasbekes  is  one  Beste.  And  this  morning  we  met  at  the
entring  into  the  Mountaines  twentie  Theeves,  and  pre-
sently after  passed  over  a  bridge,  and  then  over  a  very  high
Mountaine,  where  the  high-way  is  paved  with  stone.
And  neere  unto  this  Meyannau  is  a  very  long  bridge  of
Bricke :  and  heere  their  Bricke  is  much  like  unto  ours ;
and  heere  are  Musicians  like  unto  ours.  The  twentieth
wee  departed  from  Meyannau,  and  the  same  day  we  came
to  a  Village,  called  Turkeman  :  and  at  Meyannau  wee  met  Turkeman.
with  the  rest  of  our  Caffel.  The  one  and  twentieth  wee
went  from  Turkeman,  and  the  same  morning  passed  by
two  Cans,  the  one  called  David  Derhaver,  and  the  other
Abas.  Also  the  same  day,  we  came  to  a  Village  called
Haggegaw,  whither  we  came  late  in  the  night.  The  two  Haggegaw.
and  twentieth  day  we  departed  from  Haggegaw,  and  the
same  day  we  came  to  a  Village,  called  Avaspeng,  where  are  Avaspeng.
many  small  trees.  The  three  and  twentieth  wee  departed
from  Avaspeng,  and  the  same  day  we  came  to  the  great
Citie  of  Teuris  or  Tauris.  Teuris  or

rrt •

Neere unto Teuris is much Medow ground. This  laurts-
weeke  all  the  Armenians  keepe  fast. They  follow  the -Armenians,
orders  of  the  Greekes :  for  every  Wednesday  and  Friday  a~, ?7R.
they fast, and every Saturday eate flesh, except it be
Easter  Eeve. The  sixe  and  twentieth  day  of  November,
I  was  at  their  Church  in  Teuris : where  first  they  sung
Psalmes,  and  then  went  to  Masse : And  the  Priest  went
round  about  the  Altar  three  times. The  first  time  he
censored,  the  second  time  hee  carried  the  Booke  about,
and the  third time the  Chalice. At the  beginning  of
Masse,  every  man  doth  kisse  one  another ;  and  after  Masse
kisse  the  Booke,  and  take  holy  Bread  :  and  the  poore  have
pottage  and  bread  given  them. An  hundred  Mauns  of
Merchandize  of  Teuris  cost  the  carriage  from  Cassan  to
Teuris  by  Menel,  one  hundred  and  twentie  Shehides. I
paid  for  my  selfe  and  eightie  two  Mauns  of  Merchandize,  [II.ix.1417.]
eightie  seven Mamodies,  and  I  was  accounted  for  five
and  thirtie  Batmans. The  Batman  of  Teuris  maketh  nine
Lerra  of  Venice,  Darchen  is  worth  the  Maun  in  Teuris,

467

A.D.
I58l.

This  seemed  to
be  Master
Thomas  Hud-
son mentioned
in  the  sixth
voyage  to
Persia,  in
Master  Hac.
voyages.

He  departed
from  Teuris  or
Tauris.
Souffion.

Merent.

Jo/fa.

The  River
Aras  or
A  r  axis.

Or  Nassivan.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

fiftie  Shehides,  full  of  eight  and  twentie,  gold  and  silver
of  Bountaki  thirtie  Ducats  the  Lerra,  every  dram  one
Best,  Silke  one  hundred  Shehides.  The  seven  and  twen-
tieth of  November,  I  paide  in  Teuris  for  my  tribute  twelve
Shehides  and  two  Bestes.  Also  I  paid  for  safe  conduct
betweene  Cassan  and  Teuris,  ten  Shehides.  In  Teuris  I
understood,  that  a  yeere  before  my  comming  thither,  there
was  one  Thomas  here  with  divers  English-men,  who  sold
Cremes  for  one  Tomaun  and  an  halfe,  and  Kersies  for  one
hundred  Shehides  the  piece.  In  Teuris  is  a  kind  of  silke
Sattin,  called  Atlas,  of  nine  or  ten  Gasse  long  every  piece,
and  it  is  sold  for  three  Merchel  and  an  halfe  the  piece,
and  the  best  for  foure  Croysh,  which  are  good  wares  for
Arsingam,  and  Arserom  in  Armenia.  In  Teuris  I  sold
one  and  twentie  Mauns  of  Mechic,  at  three  Mamodies
the  Maun,  which  amount  to  sixe  hundred  ninetie  three
Mamodies.  The  Batman  of  Wan  or  Van  is  two  and  an
halfe  of  Teuris.  Neere  unto  Teuris  to  the  Northward,  is
a  very  high  Mountaine,  where  Snow  doth  lie  continually.
The  first  day  of  December,  1581.  in  the  Evening,  wee
departed  from  the  Citie  of  Teuris,  and  the  same  night
lodged  at  a  Village  called  Souffion,  and  here  is  Wine  that
is  very  strong,  but  not  pleasant.  The  third  day  from
Souffion,  and  the  same  day  at  a  Towne  called  Merent,
where  are  two  high  old  Towers,  and  two  blunt,
standing  neere  together.  And  hereupon  newes  of
the  passing  by  the  Towne  of  a  Bassa,  there  went  out
five  hundred  Horse-men.  The  fourth  day  from  Merent,
and  the  same  day  at  Jolfa :  and  there  is  a  Bridge  of  wood
upon  Boates,  there  was  a  stone  Bridge,  but  it  is  broken.
And  Aras  is  the  name  of  the  River  which  runneth  before
the  Towne,  and  the  Towne  standeth  under  a  Mountayne.
There  are  in  this  Towne  three  thousand  Houses,  and  they
have  seven  Churches,  and  the  richest  pay  every  house
twentie  Merchel  a  yeere,  and  the  rest  according  to  their
abilitie.  The  fifth  day  from  Jolfa,  and  the  same  day  we
lodged  at  a  good  Towne  called  Naxnan,  which  hath  great
plentie  of  victuals,  and  especially  Angour,  and  also  hath

468

JOHN NEWBERY

A.D.
I58l.

Potta.
Noahs  Arke.

Silke.  And  in  the  middle  way  betweene  Jolfa  and  this
Citie,  is  a  very  high  round  Rocke,  much  like  unto  a
Castle.  The  seventh  day  from  Naxnan,  and  the  same  day
at  a  Village  called  Potta.  And  about  ten  miles  to  the
North-west  of  this  Village,  is  Noahs  Arke  upon  a  Moun-
tayne,  which  is  somewhat  high,  and  hath  alwayes  Snow
lying  upon  it,  and  no  man  may  goe  up  it :  But  they  say
that  Saint  Jokemo  went  up  to  the  top,  and  in  the  Armenian
tongue  it  is  called  Asse  Masis.  And  at  the  foot  of  this
Mountayne,  is  a  Church  of  the  Armenians.  The  eighth
day  from  Potta,  and  the  same  day  we  came  to  a  Village
called  Cambellelea.  This  eighth  day  I  was  under  the  Cambellelea
Arke,  and  there  are  two  high  Mountaynes  together,  which
I  left  to  the  West,  and  they  are  about  three  miles  asunder,
but  the  highest  and  that  to  the  Northward  of  the  West,
is  that  whereupon  the  Arke  did  rest.  The  ninth  day  from
Cambellelea,  and  the  same  day  at  Errewan  ;  here  every  Or  Re'wan.
Hemel  of  Silke  payeth  five  Chekins.  At  the  time  of  the
last  warres  in  Persia,  there  were  many  Christians  taken
slaves  in  Errewan,  and  other  places.  And  those  of  Arsin-
gam  ransomed  seven  thousand.  Fourteene  Batman  of
Teuris  are  twelve  of  Errewan.  In  Errewan  are  very  many
Christians,  and  yet  there  is  a  Church  standing  of  the
Christians.  To  the  Northward  of  this  Towne,  about  a
mile,  is  a  stone  Bridge,  and  under  it,  passeth  a  River  called
Sanguina,  which  commeth  out  of  the  River  Aras,  or
Araxis :  and  about  foure  dayes  from  Errewan  or  Reivan,
it  meeteth  with  the  River  of  Aras  or  Arash  againe.  The
twelfth  day  wee  departed  from  Errewan,  and  lodged  the
same  day  at  a  Casal  of  Christians,  called  Echimassen,  and  Echimassen
here  are  five  old  Churches,  and  one  of  them  is  over-
throwne,  because  a  brother  and  a  sister  married  themselves
together  in  the  said  Church.  The  thirteenth  day  from
Echimassen,  and  the  same  morning  we  passed  by  certaine
old  Towers,  where  in  times  past,  was  a  Citie  called  Sow-  Sowmatin.
marin.  And  in  Echimassen  wee  paide  two  and  twentie
Shehides  for  a  bribe.  And  here  are  many  Lyons,  for
within  sixe  moneths  they  have  carried  away  out  of  this

469

Sauguin  a
River.

A.D.
I58l.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Sa It  growing
in  the  ground,

Dagswan.

Casal  seven  and  thirtie  persons ;  and  the  day  before  we
came  thither,  was  a  child  carried  away  out  of  his  mothers
armes.  Betweene  Naxnan  and  Errewan  is  a  place  where
they  dig  salt  out  of  the  ground.  The  said  thirteene  day
at  night  we  lay  by  the  Rivers  side,  where  hath  beene  in
times  past  a  Casal.  The  fourteenth  day  at  a  Castle  called
Dagswan,  and  without  the  Towne  is  an  old  Church  of  the
Christians.  At  this  place  every  summe  of  goods  that
commeth  out  of  Persia,  payeth  two  Aspers,  and  if  it
goeth  not  to  Arserom,  then  it  payeth  five  pro  cento.  A
Hen  is  worth  here  eight  Auctshas.  The  fifteenth  day
from  Dagswan,  and  the  same  day  at  a  Casal  called  Seraffa,
and  here  wee  lay  in  a  great  house,  and  neere  to  the  Casal
passed  over  a  Bridge.  The  sixteenth  day  from  Seraffa,
and  the  same  day  at  a  Casal  called  Cappannac,  and  neere
unto  Seraffa  is  a  Church  of  Saint  Christopher.  The
seventeenth  day  from  Cappannac,  and  the  same  day  at  a
Casal  called  Comatseur.  The  eighteenth  day  from  Comat-
seur, and  the  same  day  at  a  Casal  called  Shew  banc  cupres :
and  neere  unto  this  Casal  is  a  stone  Bridge,  which  a  Sheep-
heard  did  build.  And  here  all  our  Merchandizes  were
searched,  and  written  up  by  one  that  came  from  Dagswan,
and  another  of  this  Casal  that  did  write  all  things.  The
ninteenth  day  from  Shew  banc  cupres,  and  the  same  morn-
ing passed  by  a  Towne  called  Hassen  gallawth,  where  is  a
very  strong  Castle,  with  three  wals.  And  here  the  houses
are  built  of  Fir  trees  like  unto  the  houses  in  the  Alpes.
Also  the  same  day  at  a  Casal  called  Bollomash.  The
twentie  one  day  from  Bollomash,  &  the  same  day  at
Arserom.  And  he  that  setteth  prices  upon  all  commodities
[II.ix.141 8.]  hath  upon  every  hundreth  that  is  sold  two  Anil,  is  worth
heere  twentie  Chekins  the  Batman.

Arzerum  is  a  plentifull  Towne  for  all  kind  of  victuals,
and  hath  three  gates.  In  Arzerum  one  Batman  of  Mel
or  Deps,  is  worth  two  Auctshas.  And  in  this  Towne  one
robbed  three  shops,  and  the  next  morning  was  hanged.
After  eight  daies  abode  in  this  place,  the  nine  and  twentieth
of  December  I  departed  from  Arzerum,  and  the  same  day

470

Seraffa.

Cappannac.

Comatseur.
Shew  banc
cupres.

Hassen
gallawth.

Bollomash.

JOHN NEWBERY  a.d.

1581.

lodged  at  a  great  Casall,  named  Pre t ton. The  thirtieth  Pretton.
day  from  Pretton,  and  the  same  day  at  a  Casall,  named
Shennar. From  Dagswan  to  Arzerum,  the  women  goe  Shennar.
in  Gaskins  like  men  :  and  upon  their  heads  they  weare  a  foment
high  round  trunke  hanged  with  pieces  of  Silver  Money ;
and  about  that  and  their  chin,  they  have  a  large  white
cloath,  which  is  all  set  round  about  with  Buttons  of  Silver  :
&  also  upon  their  heads,  they  weare  a  piece  of  red  Silke,
which  hangeth  downe  behind  them,  two  or  three  yards
upon  the  ground  with  a  fringe : and  about  their  neckes
they  weare  a  Coller  of  Silver,  and  thereunto  are  fastned
five  or  sixe  pieces  of  Silver  made  very  broad,  and  to  some
more. They  are  the  most  part  blacke,  and  have  full  faces,
small  feet,  great  legs,  great  hands  and  armes,  and  their  lips
not  small.

The  first  day  of  January,  we  departed  from  Shennar,  and  January.
the  same  morning  passed  by  a  Casall,  called  Gotter. Also Gotter.
the  same  day  wee  came  to  a  Cravansall,  called  Gebesse,  and  Gebesse.
the  next  morning  passed  by  another  of  the  same  name.
The  second  day  from  Gebesse,  and  the  same  day  at  a  great ,
Casal,  called  Backerreg,  where  is  great  plentie  of  Wine : Backerreg.
and  here  the  Batman  is  sold  for  sixe  Parra. The  third  of
January  from  Backerreg,  and  the  same  day  at  a  Casall,
called  Bettarreg,  which  is  neere  unto  Arsingam. Also  Bettarreg.
the  same  day  I  went  unto  Arsingam,  which  is  within  foure  ^rmiam'
daies  journey  of  Trebesonda. The  weight  and  measure
of  Arsingam, do  both  agree  with  Arzerum : and  here
Merchel  is  worth  fiftie  foure  Auctshas. The  cariage  of  a
Mule  from  Arzerum  to  Arsingam,  costeth  twelve  She-
hides  ;  and  from  thence  to  Tockat  three  Duckats. To  the
East-ward  of  Arsingam,  is  a  very  strong  Castle,  and  to
the  South  of  the  Towne  a  stone  bridge,  which  passeth  over
the River of  Ponnats. And in this Valley are three  The  River  of
hundred  and  sixty  Casals  of  Christians. The  thirteenth  f^*{^*
day  of  January  we  departed  from  Arsingam,  and  the  same  m  ° ra  **
day  lodged at a  Cravanserras, named Serperron. The  Serperron.
fourteenth  day  being  Sunday,  from  Serperron  : and  the
same  day  at  a  Casal,  called  Ardansegh  :  and  this  day  wee  Ardansegh.

47*

a.i>.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1581.

passed  over  the  Mountaines  of  Chardalor,with  the  greatest
snow,  frost  and  wind,  that  ever  I  was  in,  and  were  in
danger  to  have  remained  in  the  Mountaines  all  night.
The  16.  from  Ardansegh,  the  same  day  at  a  Casal,  called

Shewbanning.  Shewbaning,  which  hath  a  small  Church  standing  upon  a
small  round  Rock. The  17.  from  Shewbaning,  the  same

Andre.  day  at  a  great  Casal,  called  Andre ; which  is  out  of  the

way,  and  standeth  under  an  hill,  in  a  very  pleasant  Valley.
The  eighteenth  day  from  Andre,  and  the  same  day  at

Yeoltedder.  Yeoltedder,  a  Casal  by  the  Rivers  side  :  and  this  day  wee
passed  by  a  very  great  Castle  to  the  North  of  the  water,
upon  a  very  high  Mountaine.  The  nineteenth  from
Yeoltedder,  and  the  same  day  passed  over  a  very  high
Mountaine  :  also  the  same  day  we  lodged  at  a  Casal,  called

Longo.  Longo  ;  and  here  we  met  with  the  Caravan  of  Tocat :  and

at  the  foot  of  this  Mountaine,  we  met  with  another  River.
The  twentieth  day  from  Longo,  and  the  same  day  at  a

Prassa.  Casal,  called  Prassa. The  one  and  twentieth  day  from

Prassa, and the same day being Sunday wee  came to

Tocat y  Tocato%  Tocat,  and  by  the  way  are  two  Casals,  the  one  called
Namnous,  and  the  other  Manec :  and  Namnous  is  a  very
great  Casal,  and  hath  many  Christians.  And  here  they
goe  to  plough  with  Oxen,  one  three  yards  from  another.
Neere  to  Tocat  to  the  North-East  of  the  towne,  runneth
the  River  of  Ponnats,  and  over  it  is  made  a  great  stone
bridge  :  and  to  the  North  of  the  towne  upon  a  high  Rock,
is  a  very  strong  Castle,  and  to  the  South  of  the  town  is
a  very  high  Mountaine,  that  is  sufficient  to  beate  both  the
Towne  and  the  Castle :  and  here  all  their  houses  that  are
new  built,  are  made  like  the  building  of  Lions :  and  their
Ploughs  here  have  no  Coultors,  but  very  long  Shares.
Tin  is  worth  the  Batman  in  Tocato,  three  hundred  Auct-
shas,  Pambas,  sixtie  two  Auctshas ;  and  five  and  twentie
graines  of  Silke,  eighty  Aspers.  The  twentie  foure  and
twentie  five  daies,  arrived  the  Caravan  with  the  Waftshe :
three  Batmans  of  Tocat  make  ten  Rotils  of  Aleppo.
The  Jewes  wives  in  Tocat  weare  upon  their  heads  very  high
tires,  much  like  unto  Miters. There  is  to  the  Castle  of

472

JOHN NEWBERY  ad.

1581.
Tocat  but  one  gate,  and  that  is  to  the  North  ; and  all  that
part  of  the  Towne  are  Christians. The  twenty  nine,  we
departed  from  Tocat,  and  the  same  day  passed  over  a
stone  bridge,  where  is  a  great  Casal :  also  the  same  day  we
came  to  another  Casal,  called  Ackelcon. The  thirtieth  day  Ackekon.
from  Ackelcon,  and  the  same  day  we  passed  by  a  little
Casal,  called  Burghcarre. Also  the  same  day  at  a  Village,  Burgkarre.
called  Tackia. The  last  day  of  January,  from  Tackia,  and
the  same  day  at  a  Casal,  called  Dadow. And  neere  to  Dadow.
this  Dadow  to  the  North-east,  is  a  Towne,  called  Amasia :
and  from  thence  is  carried  much  Ennebet,  and  Yeussen  to
other  places.

The  first  day  of  Februarie  we  departed  from  Dadow,  and  February.
the  same  day  came  to  a  Casal,  called  Searradella,  which  is  Searradella.
parted  into  two  parts. The  second  day  of  Februarie,  from
Searradella,  and  the  same  day  at  a  Casal,  called  Chagan- Chagannadel.
nadel,  and  over  it  upon  a  Mountaine  is  a  great  stone.
The  third  day,  from  Chagannadel,  and  the  same  day  at  a
Towne,  called  Garom  :  and  to  the  South-east  of  the  Towne  Garom.
is  a  Castle. And  here,  and  in  Tocat,  and  in  Arsingam,
every  Hemmel  of  goods  payeth  two  Auctshas :  arid  here
are  in  the  Towne,  three  Towers. And  here  the  women
goe  with  their  visages  covered,  and  a  white  cloath  about
their  middles,  and  another  about  their  heads  and  shoulders,
and  their  long  pendant  of  frindge  Silke  hangeth  downe
behind  them :  and  here  the  Batman  of  Pambacke  is  sold
for  sixtie  two  Auctshas. The  fourth  day  from  Garom,
and  the  same  day  at  a  Casal,  called  Lout: and  here  is  [II.ix.1419.]
great  plenty  of  Ennap ; and  this  day  wee  passed  over  a  Lout*
very  high  Mountaine. And  in  Lout  the  Women  weare
a  very  high  attire  upon  their  heads  like  an  hat,  and  down
before  them  to  their  eies,  hangeth  a  broad  cloath  much
like  unto  a  French-hood. The  fifth  day  from  Lout,  and
the  same  day  we  came  to  a  Casal,  called  Mourt  Larsarraie. Mourt  Lar-
And  this  day  about  five  of  the  clocke  in  the  afternoone,  sarrau
was  an  Earth-quake. Also  this  day  the  Armenians  began  Cmal™cS  a
their  fast  for  baint  George, lhis  day  we  passed  over  a  running  into
great River, called Casalmach, which runneth into the  the  Black  Sea.

473

A.D.
I58l.

Allagour.

Ennebea,

Sarracust.

Saddar.
Erandrerra.

Aash.

Garacham.

Gaye.

Carralla.
Sowdegan.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Blacke  Sea3or  Pontus  Euxinus.  The  sixth  day  from  Mourt-
Larsarrai,  and  the  same  day  at  a  Casal,  called  Allagour,
which  standeth  upon  an  hill :  and  heere  we  found  many
Theeves  neere  unto  the  Rivers  side  under  the  ground.
The  seventh  day  from  Allagour,  and  the  same  day  at  a
Casal,  called  Ennebea.  And  this  day  the  Caravan  was
greatly  afraid  of  Theeves.  And  for  these  three  daies  all
the  way  is  no  wood :  but  neere  unto  the  Waters  side,  is
Hay  and  wilde-geese  plentie :  and  this  day  we  left  the
great  River  Casalmach.  The  eighth  day  from  Ennebea,
and  the  same  day  at  a  great  Casal,  called  Sarracust :  and
heere  was  a  Bride  carried  about  the  Towne  on  horse-backe,
and  divers  Women  like  Maskers.  The  tenth  day  from
Sarracust,  and  the  same  day  at  a  little  Casal,  called  Saddar.
The  eleventh  day  from  Saddar,  and  the  same  day  at  a
Casal,  called  Erandrerra :  and  it  standeth  neere  unto  a
pleasant  Valley ;  and  to  the  South  of  this  place  halfe  a
day  is  a  Citie,  called  Angria,  where  most  of  the  Grograms
and  Chamblets  are  made.  The  twelfth  day  from  Erand-
rerra, and  the  same  day  at  a  Towne,  called  Aash,  which
standeth  in  a  Valley,  and  hath  but  one  Maddenna :  and
from  this  Towne  wee  descended  downe  a  very  great  Moun-
tains The  thirteenth  day  from  Aash,  and  the  same  day  at
a  Casal,  named  Ahemet  Shalla,  whither  we  came  late  in
the  night.  And  from  Aash  commeth  a  River,  which
runneth  to  the  West.  The  foureteenth  day,  from  Ahemet
Sheila,  and  the  same  day  at  a  Village,  called  Garacham,
which  standeth  among  the  Mountaines :  and  the  Cra-
vanseras  standeth  alone.  The  15.  day  from  Garacham,
and  the  same  day  at  a  Casal,  called  Gaye.  And  this  day
we  passed  over  the  Mountaine  Chambelle :  and  upon  this
Mountaine  we  met  with  a  Caravan  going  for  Tocat,  which
carried  great  store  of  Backam.  The  sixteenth  day  from
Gaye,  and  the  same  day  at  a  Casal,  called  Carralla :  and
this  day  we  lost  our  way.  The  seventeenth  day  from
Carralla,  and  the  same  day  at  a  Casal,  cald  Sowdegan :
and  here  is  a  very  great  Cravanserras ;  and  in  this
Country  the  women  wash  with  their  feet : and  this  day

474

JOHN NEWBERY

we  passed  by  a  River  that  runneth  to  the  East.  The
eighteenth  day  from  Sowdegan,  and  the  same  day  at  a
Casal,  called  Couscherderrom.  And  at  Couscherderrom
is  a  very  faire  Crovanserras  new  built :  and  for  the  building
thereof,  a  Merchant  of  Agam  gave  a  Hemmel  of  Silke.
The  twentieth  day  from  Couscherderrom,  and  the  same
day  we  passed  through  a  Towne  called  Bouseiuc :  also  the
same  day  at  a  Towne,  called  Basarich.  And  this  day  we
were  cold  and  wet  with  Snow.  The  one  and  twentieth
day  from  Basarich,  and  the  same  day  we  passed  downe  a
very  great  Mountaine :  also  the  same  day  we  lodged  at  a
Casal,  called  Korshonnov.  The  two  and  twentieth  day
from  Korshonnov,  and  the  same  day  at  a  Casal  called
Actsau.  The  three  and  twentieth  day  from  Actsau,  and
the  same  day  we  came  to  Borsa,  The  foure  and  twen-
tieth day,  three  Theeves  were  executed  in  Borsa,  which
had  robbed  seven  or  eight  yeres  between  Borsa  and
Stambol.  In  Borsa  all  Strangers  pay  for  custome  of  their
Merchandize  three  per  cento.  The  Kintall  of  Borsa  is
fortie  Hockies :  and  the  Kintall  of  Cremes,  is  here  worth
eight  thousand  Auctshas.  The  sixe  and  twentieth  day,  I
went  to  the  Hammam,  that  is  a  mile  without  Borsa  to  the
West- ward ;  and  the  same  day  passed  through  foure
woodden  gates.  And  the  Spout  of  this  water  commeth
in  from  the  South.  There  are  in  all  foure  of  these
Hammams.

The  first  day  of  March  at  night,  untill  twelve  of  the
clocke,  was  to  the  West  of  the  Towne,  a  great  light  like
fire.  The  fifth  day  of  March  in  the  evening,  wee  departed
from  Borsa  :  and  this  day  passed  over  a  small  River,  where
is  a  stone  Bridge.  Also  this  day  wee  lodged  at  a  Casal
of  Christians,  called  Peage.  The  sixth  day  from  Peage,
and  the  same  day  passed  by  a  Gulfe  of  the  Sea,  where  is  a
Towne,  called  Gamlech,  and  also  passed  by  a  Lake  of  fresh
water,  which  is  called  Bouchi.  Also  this  day  we  passed  by
two  Cravanserras :  and  by  the  way  is  great  store  of
Bay-trees  growing :  Also  this  day  we  came  to  Samal-
lech,  which  is  the  Skel. The  eight  day  from  Samallech,

475

A.D.
I58l.

Couscherder
rom.

Basarich.

Korshonnov,

Actsau.
Borsa.

Peage.

Gamlech.
Bourchi.

Samallech.

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1581.

The  Tower  and  the  same  day  we  landed  at  the  Tower,  where  they

where  they  make  light  for  the  Ships  that  passe  in  and  out  of  the  Blacke

Ihe  *hhs  ^ea  :  anc^  ^e  same  night  wee  came  to  Skell. The  ninth

She//.  day  of  March  in  the  morning,  we  departed  from  Skell,  and

Constant™- the  same  day  came  to  Galata  and  Constantinople,  by  the
ople,  corrupt/y  Turkes corruptly called Stambol. The tenth day, we
ca/tedStamboL  arrived  in  Stambol,  the  Caravan  of  Nest :  And  the  eleventh
day  it  was  all  burned, with one  hundred and twentie
Cargas  more,  and  eightie  thousand  crownes  in  Pepper ;
besides  great  store  of  other  Merchandize. And  the  order
is  to  hang  him,  that  was  the  first  cause  of  the  fire. The
fourteenth  day,  was  a  passage  Boate  with  sixtie  or  seventie
persons  lost  going  over  to  Samallech ; some  Christians,
some  Jewes,  and  some  Turkes. The  Mufti  in  Constanti-
nople, is  counted  like  the  Pope  of  Rome  :  and  he  was  the
cause  that  all  Christians  and  Jewes  were  forced  to  leave  off
their  turbants. Torra  is  a  great  Citie  in  Natolia,  three
daies  from  the  Sea :  from  whence  come  Grograms,  Gaules,
Silkes,  and  Cotton  Wooll.
April/,  1582. The  fourth  day  of  Aprill,  1582.  we  tooke  our  Voyage
He  departeth from  Galata  neere  Constantinople,  and  the  same  day  lay
tinople  °  S  an~  at  a  Casall,  called  Tarrapea :  and  from  Galata  hither  came
Tarrapea. one  Anthonie  a  Merchant  of  Sio,  in  company  with  me.
And  the  same  day  I  came  from  Constantinople,  the  Grand
[II.ix.1420.]  Signiors  Sonne  went  out  of  the  Towne  with  three  or  foure
thousand  Horses. Also  the  Grand  Signior  had  another
young  Sonne  borne  of  two  monethes  old. The  sixth  day
He taketh ship  of  Aprill,  1 582.  wee  departed  from  the  Gulfe  neere  unto
tonfoeh  I  Tarrapea,  being  imbarked  in  a  Barke  laden  with  Wines  of

the  River ' Candie, which  was  to  goe  up  the  River  of  Danubius.
Danubius. The  seventh  day  in  the  morning,  the  wind  came  up  to  the
East  North-east  with  very  stormie  weather :  and  the  same
Sissopo/i.  day  wee  returned  to  a  Towne  called  Sissopoli,  which  is  a

good  Harbour.  And  heere  are  many  Wind-mils,  and
great  store  of  Wine.  And  to  the  East  of  the  Harbour
are  three  Hands :  and  heere  they  are  all  Greekes.  Also
the  Turke  doth  make  here  many  Gallies.  And  in  this
foule  weather  some  of  our  company  wept, and  others

476

JOHN NEWBERY  a.d.

1582.

cryed  out :  &  our  foresaile  split  with  the  great  wind ; and
we  were  in  greatest  danger ; because  they  could  not  of  a
long  time  get  down  their  main  saile. This  great  tempest
that we had in the Blacke Sea, began upon Saturday
morning  about  one  of  the  clocke,  being  the  seventh  day
of  Aprill,  as  I  said  before,  and  continued  untill  Tuesday  in
the  morning  beeing  the  tenth  day,  with  very  great  Snow
and  Cold,  as  if  it  had  bin  at  Christmas. The  twelfth  day
we  set  saile  from  Sissopoli,  and  the  same  night  came  to  an
anchor  under  a  Cape  of  Land,  where  is  a  Casal  called
Emonna. The thirteenth day  from  Emonna, and this  Emonna.
night  we  passed  by  a  great  Citie  called  Varna,  which  lyeth  Varna.
within  a  very  great  Gulfe,  which  is  a  very  good  Harbor.
The  fourteenth  day  in  the  morning  we  passed  by  a  Castle
called  Caliacca,  which  standeth  upon  the  Cape  of  a  Land, Caliacca.
and  hath  to  the  Eastward  two  small  Pillars,  and  neere  unto
them  a  great  stone  much  like  a  man. The  fifteenth  day
in  the  morning,  wee  returned  to  the  Castle  of  Caliacca :
and  the  seventeenth  day  toward  night,  set  saile  from  this
Castle. The  nineteenth  day  in  the  morning,  we  entred
into  a  mouth  of  the  River  Danubius,  called  Licostoma.
And  at  the  entring  in  of  the  River  to  the  Southward  is  a
Beacon  :  and  the  depth  is  on  the  North-side,  but  there  is
never  above  eight  foot  water. And  the  Countrey  on  the
South  side  of  the  River  is  called  Dobis :  and  the  North-
side  is  called  Bugdania. The  two  and  twentieth  day  about  Bugdania.
noone, we  entred into the  River, where commeth the
mouth  of  Saint  George  ; and that mouth  runneth  to  the The  mouth  of
East  South-east. And  Licostomo,  which  we  came  forth Satnt  Geor£e-
off  runneth  to  the  West,  and  then  presently  againe  to  the
North. Also  this  day  we  arrived  at  a  Casal,  called  Dolcha, Dolcha.
which  lyeth  on  the  South-side  of  the  River. And  here
lye  out  from  the  Towne  certaine  small  Rocks  into  the
water :  And  here  our  ship  and  the  Merchant  paid  a  cer-
taine small  dutie  of  two  or  three  Crownes. And  here
Fish, Hens, and Egges are plenty. The three and
twentieth  day  we  departed  from  Dolcha  the  same  day  about  The  River  of
noone,  we  passed  by  the  River  of  Kelle,  which  is  very Kelle.

477

A.D.
1582.

A  small  Hand.
Saxe.

Tomourra,  is
also  called
Ren,  by  the
Vallachians.

ApparelL

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

broad,  and  runneth  to  the  North-east.  Also  this  day  wee
passed  by  a  small  Hand,  which  lyeth  very  neere  Saxe.  The
foure  and  twentieth  day  about  noone,  wee  came  to  a
Towne  called  Saxe,  which  lyeth  upon  the  South-side  of
the  River.  And  over  against  this  Towne  is  an  Hand :
and  here  the  River  is  very  broad.  And  here  we  were  to
have  paid  a  Custome,  but  paid  nothing  untill  our  comming
to  Tomourra.  The  foure  and  twentieth  day  in  the  after-
noone  from  Saxe :  and  the  five  and  twentieth  day  we
arrived  at  Tomourra.  And  this  Tomourra  lyeth  upon
the  North-side  of  the  River,  and  is  in  Bugdania.  In
Tomourra  the  children  go  much  after  the  order  of  India,
with  small  Rings  of  Wiar  through  their  eares.  And  the
women  goe  with  great  knobs  of  silver  hanging  upon  the
upper  part  of  their  eares ;  and  with  a  great  Roll  of  Linen
Cloth  about  their  heads,  much  like  a  Turkes  Turbant,  and
upon  that  a  small  cloth :  and  the  upper  bodies  of  their
garments  are  set  round  about  with  great  knobs  of  silver
like  buttons.  And  the  yong  Maids  weare  their  haire
pleyted,  and  thereupon  divers  pieces  of  silver  hanging :
and  upon  the  Crowne  of  the  head  a  round  broad  Brooch
of  silver  set  with  stones  ;  and  their  sleeves  great  and  short ;
and  about  their  armes  two  great  hoopes  of  silver,  and  at
their  Girdle  five  or  six  paire  of  Knives :  and  about  their
neckes  they  weare  nothing.  The  common  sort  goe  for
the  most  part  bare-footed.  The  five  and  twentieth  day,
we  came  to  Tomourra,  a  Bark  from  Constantinople,  which
came  from  thence  in  eight  dayes.  The  ship  that  I  came
in  from  Constantinople,  was  twentie  seven  foot  broad  of
my  feet :  and  the  poope  more  then  thirtie  foot  high  from
the  water,  and  could  stow  in  hold  but  two  Buts  of  heighth
one  upon  another,  except  it  were  in  the  middle.  In  this
Town  of  Tomourra  are  sold  twentie  Egges  for  an  Asper,
and  a  good  Hen  for  two  Aspers,  and  Beefe,  Bacon,  Bread,
Wine,  Beere,  and  Mede  plentie,  and  very  good  fresh
fish  more  then  of  any  thing  else.  Here  are  sold  for  one
Asper  two  Pikes,  either  of  them  better  then  three  spans
long,  &  three  Carpes  either  of  them  a  span  &  an  halfe

478

JOHN NEWBERY  ad.

1582.

long. Also  here  is  great  store  of  Sturgeons  &  Herings  in
this  River.

The  order  of  their  making  of  Caviare  of  their  Sturgeons,  The  order  af
is  this.  The  Caviare  or  Roe  must  be  taken  whole  out  of  **  ™&
the  Fish ;  and  then  slash  it  a  little  with  a  Knife,  and  so
salt  it  wel,  for  three  dayes  and  three  nights,  and  put  it  in
a  Barrell  or  Fat,  and  make  an  hole  underneath,  that  the
water  or  Salt  that  commeth  from  the  Caviare  may  void
forth :  and  after  these  three  dayes  are  past,  take  it  and
wash  it  very  well  with  fresh  water,  untill  the  Salt  bee
cleane  gone  from  it :  and  after  this  put  it  in  Barrels  for  the
space  of  other  three  dayes,  &  one  must  tread  it  downe  with
his  clean  feet :  also  you  must  make  an  hole  under  the
Barrell  for  the  water  to  void  away ;  and  then  lay  some
great  stones  upon  it  to  presse  it,  and  to  make  it  hard :  and
after  these  three  dayes  bee  past,  take  out  the  bottome  and
set  in  a  new ;  and  so  it  may  be  carried  through  out  the
World.  And  the  names  of  the  three  fishes,  of  the  Roes  They  make
whereof  they  make  it,  are  these : Sturgeon,  and  Mour- „*v*are  °f  r

.  Three  sorts  of

rounna,  and  Merssenne. And  the  best  times  of  the  yeare  ^

to  make  it  in,  are  June  and  July. In  this  Towne  of  [li.ix.1421.]

Tomourra  are  certaine  Merchants  of  Sio,  that  are  Lords

of  the  same ; and  in  times  past  it  hath  beene  a  faire

Towne :  But  the  Tartars  have  two  or  three  times  spoyled

it,  and  once  they  carried  away  fiftie  persons  out  of  it,  and

the  Countries  neere  adjoyning. And  about  the  yeare  of

our  Lord  1530.  the  Turke  subdued  this  Countrey  and  a

great  part  of  Hungarie,  and  all,  as  they  say,  by  the  Treason

of  the  Prince  of  Transilvania.

The  first  day  of  May, 1582.  wee  landed  our  goods: May.
And  Signior  Jocamo  Alberti  paid  for  fraught  of  every TJV  latl(*
Butte of his Wine sixtie Aspers from Constantinople etr  s°°  s'
to  this  place. This  day  in  the  Evening,  we  departed  They  take
by Land from  Tomourra, which is  called  Ren, in the  f%Jf™^d
Language of Wallachia. The fourth day of May, ToZuml
wee passed by a Casal, where the Master of the  called  Ren  by
Casall would have taken away our fore-mans Horse : the  WaUa-
and the same day in the afternoone we passed over  chtans-

479

A.D.
1582.

The  River  of
Prut.

Hus.

Padwellia.

Sutsourre.

Yas.

This  is  like  the
West  Indian
fortification.

ApparelL

Steffennet.
Leues.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

a long Bridge, and presently after a small River
called  Prut.

The  sixth  day  we  departed  from  Falchen.  The  eighth
day  in  the  morning,  we  came  to  a  little  Towne  calld  Hus,
which  standeth  under  the  Woods  side.  The  same  day  at
night  wee  passed  againe  over  the  River  of  Prut ;  and  the
next  morning  came  to  a  Casall,  called  Padwellia  :  and  here
one  of  our  Muckeres  Horses  were  againe  taken.  The
tenth  day  we  came  to  a  Casall  called  Sutsourre,  where  we
passed  againe  over  the  Prut.  The  eleventh  day  in  the
morning,  wee  came  to  Yas,  and  here  the  Toll-master  is  a
Greeke,  and  is  called  Nicolla  Neverredde.  To  the  South
of  Yas  is  the  Castle  with  a  paire  of  Gallowes  before  it,  and
round  about  it  is  a  wall  of  great  trees  of  wood  :  and  to  the
South-west  of  the  Towne  is  a  great  Lake :  and  upon  the
farther  side  of  the  Lake  is  a  great  Monasterie.  The
women  here  goe  in  Turkish  Gownes,  and  great  Turbants,
with  two  or  three  great  bosses  set  with  stones  on  either
side  of  their  Turbants,  and  their  Gownes  downe  before
with  the  like,  and  in  their  eares  great  bosses  with  a  Chaine
of  small  Pearle  made  fast  to  both  their  eares.  And  the
Maides  goe  with  an  Attyre  upon  their  heads  like  unto  a
Mitre,  and  upon  that  their  haire  bound  a  crosse  :  and  some
of  the  Children  goe  sewed  through  their  Eares  with  a  pack-
thred  like  the  Indian  fashion.  The  custome  of  a  Cloth
in  Yas  is  one  Ducke  of  Gold,  and  of  a  Kersie  a  Doller,
and  of  every  Carpet  that  costeth  one  hundred  Aspers,
twelve  Aspers ;  and  of  every  Oxe  and  Cow  foure  and
twentie  Aspers,  except  they  belong  to  the  Merchants  of
Poland,  and  then  they  pay  but  twentie  Aspers.  And  every
Butte  of  Wine  payeth  five  Dollers  and  tenne  Aspers  :  And
every  Butte  of  Muskadell,  payeth  in  Constantinople  sixe
Chechins,  and  in  Eluova  foure.  The  sixteenth  day  in  the
afternoone  wee  departed  from  Yas :  And  the  seventeenth
day  we  lodged  at  Steffennes.  The  eighteenth  day  wee
passed  over  the  River  of  Prut,  which  is  three  leagues
from  Chotym,  and  the  same  day  at  a  Casall  called  Leues,
which  standeth  in  a  Vale  and  hath  a  Lake  of  water  stand-

480

JOHN NEWBERY  a.d.

1582.

ing  in  the  middle  of  it. The  nineteenth  day  in  the  morning

at  Chotym,  and  to  the  North  of  the  Towne  is  the  Castle  Chotym.

which  lyeth  neere  to  the  River  of  Nyester,  and  this  River

parteth  Bugdania  and  Polonia. The  twentieth  day  about

noone,  we  departed  from  Chotym,  and  the  same  day  beeing

Sunday,  wee  came  to  the  strong  Frontier  Towne  of  Poland,

called  Camienitz,  which  standeth  in  a  Valley : and  the  Camienitz  the

Castle  standeth  to  the  West  of  the  Towne.  ^ftoZnZZ

In  this  Towne  all  Merchants  Strangers  pay  custome  for  the  xUrke
their  goods  two  and  an  halfe  per  cento.  The  women  in  Apparell
Camienitz  goe  with  their  Coates  close  bodied,  and  the
neather  bodies  gathered  like  a  Frocke  :  and  upon  their
heads  a  fine  Cloth  like  a  Call ;  and  upon  that  a  long  piece
of  white  Lawne,  that  hangeth  downe  to  the  ground,  and
upon  that  a  blacke  Velvet  Hat.  Their  Girdles  are  set  with
great  studs  of  Silver  and  Gold  :  and  they  are  very  faire
women,  but  not  very  commendable  for  their  Chastitie,  for
most  of  them  will  be  drunke.  They  use  in  the  morning
to  drinke  much  burnt  Wine,  and  afterward  Mede.  And
there  are  very  few  houses  in  the  Towne,  but  they  sell
Beere  and  Mede  ;  and  the  Borrow-masters  sell  Wine.  And
if  a  Gentlewoman  goe  abroad,  all  her  men  goe  before  her,
and  the  Gentlemen  ride  before,  and  their  men  behind.
The  womens  Garments  are  very  long :  and  in  the  Villages
by  the  way,  the  Maides  goe  with  their  haire  hanging  downe
behind  them,  and  a  Garland  upon  their  heads :  and  they
use  to  dance  much  like  the  Moores.  The  young  Maides  His  Journey
of  Camienitz  weare  their  haire  pleyted,  and  bound  up  thorow  Poland
about  their  heads,  and  with  a  blacke  band  of  Velvet. The  t0  ®ant%ih

1  1  \ - -  r  and  comming

three and twentieth day we tooke our Journey from  toHullbySea,
Camienitz,  &c.  is  omitted.

[Chap.  IIII.

VIII  481  2  H

A.D.
1603.

[II.  ix.  1422.]

*A  Caravan
is  a  great  many
of  Camels
laden,  not
much  unlike
our  Carriers
here  in
England.

Tedith  a  Vil-
lage of  note.

The  Valley  of

Salt.

2.  Sam,  8. 13.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Chap. IIII.

Observations  of  Master  John  Cartwright  in  his
Voyage  from  Aleppo  to  Hispaan,  and  backe
againe  :  published  by  himselfe,  and  here
contracted.

§• I.

Of  Euphrates,  Orpha, Caraemit,  the Curdi,  Ar-
menians, Bithlis,  Van,  and  Arraret.

Aving  rested  in  Aleppo  two  monethes  and
better,  Master  John  Mildenall  and  my
selfe  tooke  our  leave  of  the  Consull  and
Merchants,  with  a  full  intent  and  purpose
to  travell  unto  the  great  Citie  Lahor,  in
the  Great  Mogors  Countrey  in  the  East
Indies :  lodging  all  that  night  on  a  thinne
Turkish  Carpet  in  Woods-caine,  where  the  *  Caravan  was
assembled,  to  the  end  that  wee  might  bee  with  the  fore-
most :  for  delay  in  such  travell  doth  produce  great  and
inevitable  danger.  From  Aleppo  wee  spent  three  dayes
Journey  unto  the  bankes  of  Euphrates,  passing  by  many
Villages  not  worth  the  naming,  and  fertile  Plaines,
abounding  with  all  sort  of  provision  necessary  for  mans
life.  One  of  those  Villages  is  a  Village  of  note  unto  this
day,  called  by  the  Countrey  people  Tedith,  where  the
Jewes  keepe  a  Monument  in  remembrance  of  the  great
Synagogue,  holden  there  in  the  yeare  from  the  Creation
3498.  Neere  unto  this  Towne  is  the  Valley  of  Salt
memorable  for  that  great  overthrow  which  David  gave
the  Aramits,  when  hee  slue  of  them  in  one  battell  eighteene
thousand  men.  Here  also  Campson  Gaurus  the  Great
Sultan  of  Egypt  fought  that  deadly  and  mortall  Battell
with  Selymus  the  first,  the  Great  Turke ;  where  hee  lost
his  life  being  trodden,  without  regard,  to  death,  both  by
his  owne  Souldiers  and  pursuing  Enemies.

482

JOHN CARTWRIGHT  a.d.

1603.

Being  arrived  on  the  bankes  of  Euphrates,  we  found  it  Euphrates.

as  broad  as  the  Thames  at  Lambith ; but  in  some  places

it  is  narrower,  in  some  broader,  running  with  a  very  swift

streame  and  current,  almost  as  fast  as  the  River  of  Trent.

At  this  place  doth  this  River  beginne  to  take  his  name,

being  heere  all  gathered  into  one  Channell,  whereas  before

it commeth downe from the Lake Chieldor-Giol in

Armenia,  in  manifold  armes  and  branches,  and  therefore  is

called  by  the  Countrey  people,  by  a  name  which  signifieth

a  thousand  heads. Here  it  is  that  Merchants  use  to  passe

downe  by Barke unto Babylon, thereby to  avoid and

shunne the  great charge and wearisomnesse of travell

through  the  Desart  of  Arabia. Which  passage  they  make  Tme  and

sometimes  in  fifteene  dayes,  sometimes  in  twentie  dayes,  maJinerof

.  .  ,  . .  J «  «  ,  , . J. gome  downe

and  sometimes  in  tnirtie  dayes,  answerable  to  the  rising  the  River.

and  falling  of  the  River :  and  the  best  time  to  passe
thither  is  either  in  Aprill  or  October,  when  the  River
doth  swell  with  abundance  of  Raine.  The  Boates  are
flat-bottomed,  because  the  River  is  shallow  in  many
places ;  so  that  when  they  travell  in  the  Moneths  of  July,
August,  and  September,  they  find  the  River  at  so  low  an
ebbe,  that  they  are  faine  to  carry  with  them  a  spare  Boat
or  two,  to  lighten  their  owne,  if  they  should  chance  to
fall  on  the  shoales.  Every  night  after  Sun-set,  they  fasten
these  Boates  to  a  stake,  the  Merchants  lying  aboord,  and
the  Mariners  upon  the  shoare,  as  neere  as  they  can  unto
the  same.  In  this  passage  downe  the  River,  you  shall
meet  with  divers  troupes  of  Arabians,  who  will  barter  their
provision  of  Dyet  (for  they  care  not  for  money)  as  Hennes,
Kids,  Lambe,  Butter,  and  sowre  Milke,  for  Glasses,
Combes,  Corall,  Amber,  Knives,  Bread  and  Pomegranates,
Pils,  wherewith  they  use  to  tanne  their  Goats  skinnes,  in  ■
which  they  Churne  with  all.  All  of  them,  as  well  Women,
Children,  and  Men  are  very  good  Swimmers,  who  often-
times will  swimme  to  the  Barke  side  with  Vessels  full  of
Milke  upon  their  heads.  These  people  are  very  theevish,
and  therefore  in  your  passage  downe  good  watch  must  bee
kept. But  to  returne  where  we  left,  wee  were  constrained

4*3

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1603.

by  the  deepnesse  of  the  River  to  ferrie  over  our  whole

Caravan,  which  consisted  of  a  thousand  persons,  besides

Camels,  Horses,  Mules,  and  Asses,  by  reason  of  which

multitude  we  spent  a  whole  day  in  transporting  over  the

said  Caravan. The  gaines  of  which  transportation  yeelded

the  Ferriman  a  Shaughee,  which  is  five  pence  English  upon

a  Beast.

Bit.  Being  over  the  aforesaid  River,  wee  arrived  at  Bir  and

Mesopotamia, entred  into  the  famous  Province  of  Mesopotamia ; The

Turkes  doe  call  it  Diarbech. This  Province  of  it  selfe  is

most  fruitfull,  but  by  the  Turkish  Warres  much  ruinated

and  wasted :  neverthelesse,  there  are  some  Cities  of  great

importance. About two dayes journey from Bir, wee

Orpha.  came  to  Orpha,  a  Citie  of  great  account  and  estimation,

which many suppose to have beene the famous Citie

Edessa. As  yet  there  remayned  certaine  Monuments  of

*Seesup.c  2.  Baldwin*  in  Latine  letters. The  aire  of  this  Citie  is  very

healthfull, the  Countrey  fruitfull,  onely  wood  excepted,

and  therefore  in  stead  thereof,  they  burne  the  dung  of

Camels  and  other  beasts,  dried  in  the  Sunne. This  Citie

[II. ix. 1423.]  is  built  foure-square ; the  West  part  standing  on  the  side

of  a  rockie  Mountaine,  and  the  East  part  trendeth  into  a

spacious Valley, replenished with Vineyards, Orchards,

and  Gardens : the  walls  are  very  strong,  furnished  with

great store  of  Artillerie, and contayne in circuit three

English  miles :  and  for  the  gallantnesse  of  the  site,  it  was

once  reckoned  the  Metropoliticall  seat  of  Mesopotamia,

howsoever  it  is  now  translated  to  Caramida  or  Caraemit.

There  is  in  this  Citie  a  Fountaine  full  of  fishes,  so  used  to

hand,  that  they  will  receive  any  substance  that  shall  bee

offered  unto  them : both  Jewes,  Armenians,  and  Turkes

Gen.  29.  13.  reported  unto  us,  that  this  Fountaine  was  Jacobs  Well,

2  7-  and  that  here  hee  served  his  Uncle  Laban  twice  seven

yeeres,  for  faire  and  beautifull  Rachel. The  gates  of  this

Citie  were  much  battered,  a  little  before  our  comming  by

The  $c?ivano Eliazgee  the  Scrivano,  and  the  Rebels  his  followers ; hee

n  thl f! drew the Citizens to a composition of  fiftie thousand

rp  a.  1 3.  Qkekins,  ancj  so  departed. Memorable  also  is  this  Citie,

484

JOHN CARTWRIGHT  ad.

1603.
then  called  Carras,  for  the  great  battell  which  was  fought  Let  the  Geo-
before  it  betweene  the  Romans  and  the  Parthians,  when  &'apheruseht^
Marcus  Crassus  was  Generall  on  the  one  side,  and  Surena  j > ^
on  the  other  side.  Author.

At  this  Citie  having  paid  our  Custome,  which  is  a
Doller  on  a  summe  of  goods,  our  Caravan  was  licenced  to
depart :  and  at  our  ordinary  houre,  which  was  three  of
the  clocke  in  the  afternoone,  we  set  forward  towards  the
ancient  Citie  Amida,  now  called  Caramida  or  Caraemit,  Caraemit.
five  dayes  journey  from  Orpha,  travelling  sometimes  over
rough  and  craggie  Mountaines,  and  sometimes  through
most  delightfull  Playnes  and  Valleys :  amongst  which
there  is  one  of  note,  environed  about  with  a  Pale  of
Mountaines,  in  such  wise  that  there  is  but  one  entrie  and
passage :  where  *Aladeules  is  said  to  have  had  his  *See  hereof  in
Paradise.  M-  Pol°  lon&

At  the  end  of  five  dayes  travell,  wee  arrived  at  Caraemit,  ^e0f  §enex

which  is  to  say,  The  blacke  Citie,  either  for  the  stone  je  Monte

wherewith  it  is  built,  being  like  unto  Jet  in  colour,  or  which  this

for  the  fertilitie  of  the  soyle  round  about  it,  which  is  of  a  dladeules

dusky  colour. This  Citie  is  seated  upon  a  marvellous  tmtated^fthe
,  . ,  J  -^ .  ,  .....r  . report  be  true.

high Kocke, and containetn in circuit very neere sixe

miles ; and  though  it  be  sufficently  fortified  by  nature,

yet  is  it  environed  with  a  double  wall : the  outmost  is

somewhat  decayed,  but  the  inmost  is  well  repaired,  being

fenced  with  great  store  of  Artillerie. It  is  governed  by

a Bassa, who commandeth over twelve Sanzacks, and

thirtie thousand Tymariots : and is now become the

Metropoliticall' Citie of Mesopotamia. There were

mustred  from  this  Citie,  when  Amurat  the  third  invaded

Persia,  in  the  yeere  1578.  twelve  thousand  Souldiers,  the

Captaine  being  well  checked  by  Generall  Mustapha  for

bringing so few. The Souldiers of this Citie for the

most part are Archers, not of  any courage, but very

effeminate,  and  accustomed  to  the  use  of  the  Scimatarre.

During  our  abode  at  this  place  (which  was  fourteene  dayes)

we  lodged  in  a  very  faire  Caine  built  of  free-stone ; for

which  lodging  we  payed  to  the  Master  of  the  Caine  five

485

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1603.

Shaughes  a  piece :  all  which  time  nothing  fell  out  worthie
A  most  cruel/  observation,  but  the  cruell  execution  of  a  petie  malefactor,
who  having  but  pilfered  away  certaine  small  wares,  was
mounted  on  a  Camell,  with  his  armes  spread  abroad,  having
two  sockets-holes  bored  in  his  shoulders  blades,  into  which
were  set  two  flaring  torches,  dropping  continually  on  his
skin  to  his  greater  torment,  and  in  the  end,  having  carried
him  in  this  pitifull  manner  through  the  principall  streets
of  the  Citie,  they  brought  him  to  the  place  of  execution,
and  there  ganched  him  on  a  great  Iron  hooke,  suffering
him  so  to  hang  till  he  died.  Passing  through  the  South-
gate  of  this  Citie,  wee  payed  to  the  Porter  of  the  gate  a
Shaughee  upon  a  beast,  descending  from  the  Citie  into  a
most  fertile  and  fruitfull  Plaine,  where  are  many  Gardens
and  Orchards,  and  places  of  great  refreshment.
Euphrates.  Through  this  Plaine  runneth  the  great  River  Euphrates,

with  a  very  swift  current ;  and  is  as  broad  here  sometimes
of  the  yeere  as  the  Thames  at  London  Bridge,  but  now
was  much  dried  up,  by  reason  of  the  heate  in  Summer,
making  thereby  many  Hands  and  demi-Ilands,  where  the
Citizens  of  Caraemit  during  the  Summer  season  doe  use
to  pitch  their  Tents,  to  enjoy  the  freshment  of  the  Aire
and  River :  but  in  the  Winter  it  swelleth  so  aboundantly
over  the  said  Hands  and  bankes,  that  neither  man  nor  beast
is  able  to  passe  over  :  to  avoide  which  inconvenience,  there
is,  a  mile  distant  from  the  Citie,  a  stone-bridge  of  twentie
arches,  made  over  the  said  River.  This  evening  we
pitched  two  miles  from  the  Citie,  and  stayed  all  that  night
of  purpose  for  some  Merchants  that  were  behind.  Here
wee  exchanged  our  Camels,  and  in  stead  of  them  tooke
Mules,  a  creature  farre  more  fit  to  travell  over  craggie
Rockes  and  Mountaines  then  Camels :  for  now  we  were
within  a  few  dayes  journey,  to  passe  over  the  high  Moun-
taines of  Armenia,  called  in  Scripture  the  Mountaines  of
Ararat :  which  travell  with  Camels  is  not  onely  laborious,
but  very  dangerous,  if  the  ground  should  prove  moist  or
flabby ;  for  then  being  laden  with  great  burdens,  they
cannot  goe  onwards,  neither  are  they  able  to  passe  with

486

JOHN CARTWRIGHT  a.d.

1603.

their  huge  burdens,  through  the  streight  passages  which

are  in  those  Mountaines.

Two  dayes  journey  from  Caraemit,  we  rested  at  the  foot
of  a  great  rockie  Mountaine,  being  one  of  the  Heads  out  0ne  °fthe
of  which  Tygris  floweth,  and  runneth  downe  with  a  swift  *P*tm •
current  to  Balsara,  and  so  dischargeth  it  selfe  in  the  Persian  £owet^
Gulfe. Strangely doth it issue out of three Rockes J
admirably  hanging,  that  a  man  as  he  passeth  under  them,
would  imagine  them  to  bee  readie  to  fall  on  his  head.
And  for  the  strangenesse  of  the  site, the  Turkes  have
builded  three  Bridges  in  the  midst  of  those  Rockes,  to  Three
passe  from  one  unto  another,  thereby  to  behold  Natures  Brtd&u  •
wisedome  in  framing  them  so  wonderfull. Wee  went  to  [II.  ix.  1424.]
view  the  same,  but  through  the  huge  over-falls,  which
came  farre  off  within  those  Mountaines,  and  the  steepnesse
of  the  same,  together  with  the  hideous  noise,  and  whistling
murmuring,  wee  found  not  so  great  contentment  above,
as  wee  did  beneath.

The  next  day  we  spent  over  many  high  Mountaines,
on  the  top  whereof  grew  great  quantitie  of  Gall-trees,  Gall  trees.
which  are  somewhat  like  our  Oakes,  but  lesser  and  more
crooked :  on  the  best  tree  in  this  place  a  man  shall  not
gather  a  pound  of  Galls :  at  evening  we  pitched  againe
on  the  bankes  of  Euphrates ;  and  in  the  morning  passed  Euphrates.
the  said  River,  but  not  by  Barge  as  before,  which  was
likely  to  have  bred  no  small  annoyance  to  our  whole
Caravan ;  for  through  the  swiftnesse  of  the  streame,  and
deepnesse  of  the  Channell,  many  Beasts  with  their  ladings
had  beene  carried  away  and  drowned,  if  there  had  not
beene  in  time  a  shallow  Foord  discovered,  which  had  in
such  sort  raised  the  depth  of  the  Channell,  making  as  it
were  a  shelfe  for  our  Commodious  passage :  by  helpe
whereof  there  was  not  so  much  as  one  man  or  beast  that
perished.

We were no sooner over, but forth-with we were  The  descrip-
encountred  with  a  certaine  troope  of  people,  called  the  *%*!%  * e
Curdies,  which  some  thinke  to  be  a  remnant  of  the  ancient  m05t  thievish
Parthians. This  rude  people  are  of  a  goodly  stature,  and  people.

487

A.D.
1603.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

The  Curdles

well  proportioned,  and  doe  never  goe  abroad  without  their
Armes,  as  Bowes  and  Arrowes,  Scimatarre  and  Buckler,
yea  and  at  such  time,  when  a  man  for  age  is  ready  to  goe
downe  to  his  grave. They  doe  adore  and  worship  the

Tetwiii. of  Devill> to  the  end  hee  ™y not  hurt  them or  their  Cattell>

and  very  cruell  are  they  to  all  sorts  of  Christians ;  in  which
regard,  the  Countrey  which  they  inhabite,  is  at  this  day
termed  Terra  Diaboli,  the  Land  of  the  Divell.  They
participate  much  of  the  nature  of  the  Arabians,  and  are
as  infamous  in  their  Latrocinies  and  robberies,  as  the
Arabians  themselves.  They  live  under  the  commande-
ment  of  the  great  Turke,  but  with  much  freedome  and
libertie.  This  theevish  company  did  sundry  times  arrest
our  Caravan,  affirming  that  their  Prince  had  sent  for  a
Dollar  on  a  summe  of  goods,  without  the  payment  whereof
(being  five  severall  times  demanded)  wee  should  not  passe
through  their  Countrey.  One  Village  of  note  is  there  in
this  Countrey,  wholly  inhabited  by  the  Curdies,  being  five
daies  journey  from  Caraemit,  and  three  daies  journey  from

Manuscute.  Bitclish,  called  by  the  Countrey  people  Manuscute.  This
Towne  is  seated  in  a  most  fertile  and  fruitfull  Valley,
betweene  two  Mountaines,  abounding  with  Pasture  and
Cattell :  and  about  a  mile  from  it,  is  an  Hospitall  dedicated
to  Saint  John  the  Baptist,  which  is  much  visited  as  well

Indulgence.  by  Turkes  as  Christians,  who  superstitiously  affirme,  that
whosoever  will  bestow  either  a  Sheepe,  Kid,  or  some
piece  of  Money  to  releeve  the  poore  of  that  place,  shall
not  onely  prosper  in  his  journey,  but  obtaine  forgivenesse
of  all  his  sinnes.  To  the  Governour  of  this  Village,  wee
paied  for  our  custome  a  Shaughee  on  a  summe  of  goods,
and  so  were  dismissed.  The  next  day  following,  we
passed  over  many  craggy  and  steepe  Mountaines,  and  at
the  last  rested  our  selves  and  wearied  beasts  on  the  banke

Euphrates.  of  Euphrates,  being  the  out-most  bounds  on  this  side
of  Mesopotamia,  and  so  entred  the  day  following  on
the  Borders  of  Armenia  the  great,  which  is  by  some
distinctly  divided  into  three  parts ;  the  North  part
whereof  being  but  little,  is  called  Georgia : the  middle

488

JOHN CART  WRIGHT  ad.

1603.
part Turcomania : and the third part by the proper
name  of  Armenia.

It  is  now  called  Turcomania,  and  was  the  first  seate  of
the  Turkes,  after  their  first  comming  out  of  Scythia,  who
left  their  naturall  seates,  and  by  the  Caspian  Ports  passing
through  the  Georgian  Countrey,  then  called  Iberia,  neere
unto  the  Caspian  Sea ;  first  ceased  upon  this  part  of
Armenia,  and  that  with  so  strong  an  hand,  that  it  is  by
their  posteritie  yet  holden  at  this  day,  and  of  them  called
Turcomania.

At  our  first  entrance  into  this  Countrey,  we  travelled  Armenian
through  a  goodly,  large,  and  spacious  Plaine,  compassed  manners-
about  with  a  rew  of  high  Mountaines,  where  were  many
Villages,  wholly  inhabited  by  Armenians ; a  people  very
industrious in all kind  of  labour : their  Women very  Women
skilful  and  active  in  shooting,  &  managing  any  sort  of  Archers-
weapon,  like  the  fierce  Amazones  in  antick  time ;  and  the
women  at  this  day,  which  inhabit  the  Mountaine  Xatach-
in  Persia. Their  families  are  very  great ; for,  both  Sons,
Nephewes,  and  Neeces,  doe  dwell  under  one  roofe,  having
all their substance in common : and when the Father
dyeth,  the  eldest  Sonne  doth  governe  the  rest,  all  sub-
mitting themselves  under  his  Regiment. But  when  the
eldest  Sonne  dyeth,  the  government  doth  not  passe  to  his
Sonnes,  but  to  the  eldest  Brother. And  if  it  chance  to
fall  out,  that  all  the  Brethren  doe  dye,  then  the  government
doth  belong  to  the  eldest  Sonne  of  the  eldest  Brother,
and  so  from  one  to  another. In  their  dyet  and  cloathing,
they  are  all  fed  and  clad  alike,  living  in  all  peace  and
tranquilitie,  grounded  on  true  love  and  honest  simplicitie.

To  discourse  how  populous  this  Nation  is  at  this  day,  The  Armeni-
is needlesse, since they inhabit both in Armenia the  ans  are  a
greater,  and  Armenia  the  lesse ;  as  also  in  Cilicia,  Bithynia,  ^tion
Syria, Mesopotamia  and  Persia. Besides  the  principall
Cities  of  the  Turkish  Empire,  be  much  appopulated  with
them,  as  Brusia,  Angori,  Trabisonda,  Alexandria,  Grand-
Caire,  Constantinople,  Caffa,  Aleppo,  Orpha,  Cara-emit,
Van,  and  Julpha :  for  that  they  are  very  laborious  in  trans-

489

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1603.

porting  Merchandize  from  one  Citie  to  another,  by  which

meanes,  through  the  customes  which  are  paid  in  every  Citie,

the  Coffers  of  the  Grand  Signior  are  wonderfully  inriched.

The  Armeni- This  people  have  two  Patriarchs,  to  whom  they  give  the

ans  governed name  0f  Universall : the  one  keepeth  his  seate  in  the

Patriarchs, Citie  of  Sis  in  Caramania,  not  farre  from  Tharsus : the

[II. ix.  1 42 5.]  other  in  the  Monastery  of  Ecmeazin,  neere  unto  the  Citie

Ervan  in  this  Countrey. Under  these  two  Patriarchs  are

eighteene  Monasteries,  full  straight  with  Friers  of  their

Religion ; and foure and twentie Bishopricks. The

maintenance  allowed  in  times  past  unto  each  of  these  two

Patriarchs,  was  a  Maidin  on  an  house ; each  Patriarch

having  under  him  twentie  thousand  housholds  : but  now

that  large  benevolence  the  great  Turke  hath  seased  into

his  owne  hands ; and  therefore  now  they  are  constrained

to  live  on  the  Almes  of  the  people,  going  continually  in

Visitation  from  one  Citie  to  another,  carrying  their  Wives

and  whole  family  with  them.

The people of  this Nation have  amongst them the
*The Religion  Christian*  Faith,  but  at  this  day  it  is  spotted  with  many
°f  the  . . absurdities. They  hold  with  the  Church  of  Rome  in  the
ttlt^'th use  °^  ^e  Crosse,  affirming  it  to  be  meritorious,  if  they
many  make  the  same  with  two  fingers,  as  the  Papists  use ; but

absurdities. idle  and  vaine  if  with  one  finger,  as  the  Jacobites. They
adorne  their  Churches  in  every  place  with  the  signe  of  the
Crossings  and  Crosse,  but  for  other  Images  they  have  none,  being  pro-
Crosses.  fessed enemies against the use of them. In keeping

ancient  Reliques  they  are  very  superstitious,  and  much
devoted  to  the  blessed  Virgin  Mary,  to  whom  they  direct
their  prayers.  They  imitate  the  Dioscorians  in  eating
Whit-meats  on  Saturday,  which  to  doe  on  Wednesday
and  Friday  were  a  deadly  sin  :  neverthelesse,  they  will  not
refraine  from  the  eating  of  flesh  on  every  Friday,  betweene
the  Feast  of  the  Passover  &  the  Ascention.  They  abstain
five  Sabboths  in  the  yeare  from  eating  flesh,  in  a  remem-
brance of  that  time  which  the  Gentiles  did  sacrifice  their
Children  unto  Idols.  They  celebrate  the  Annunciation  of
the  Virgin  Marie  on  the  sixt  of  Aprill,  the  Nativitie  of

490

JOHN CARTWRIGHT  a.d.

1603.

our  blessed  Savior  on  the  sixt  of  January,  the  Purification
the  fourth  of  February,  and  the  Transfiguration  the  14.
of  August.  The  ministration  of  their  Liturgie  or  Service,
is  performed  in  their  native  language,  that  all  may
understand :  but  in  their  Service  of  the  Masse  for  the
dead,  they  are  most  idolatrous,  using  at  the  solemnizing
thereof,  to  sacrifice  a  Lambe,  which  they  first  lead  round  Lamb-
about  the  Church,  and  after  they  had  killed  it  and  rosted  sacrifce-
it,  they  spread  it  on  a  faire  white  Linnen  cloath,  the  Priest
giving  to  each  of  the  Congregation  a  part  and  portion
thereof.  They  are  (unlesse  some  few  families)  so  farre
from  yeelding  obedience  unto  the  Sea  of  Rome,  that  they
assume  all  Antiquitie  unto  themselves,  as  having  retained
the  Christian  Faith  from  the  time  of  the  Apostles.  Many
Jesuites  and  Priests  have  beene  sent  from  Rome,  to  bring
this  oppressed  Nation  under  her  government,  but  they
have  little  prevailed  ;  for  neither  will  they  yeeld  obedience,
nor  be  brought  by  any  perswasion  to  forsake  their  ancient
and  inveterate  errours,  to  become  more  erronious  with
her.

Having  well  refreshed  our  selves  amongst  these  Villages,
wee  proceeded  in  our  ordinary  travell,  but  ere  we  had
passed  two  miles,  certaine  troopes  of  Curdies  incountred
our  Caravan,  with  a  purpose  and  intent  to  have  robbed
the  same,  but  finding  themselves  too  weak  to  contend
with  so  great  company,  they  departed  untill  the  next  day
following,  when  againe  they  met  with  us  in  a  very  narrow
passage  betweene  two  Mountaines,  where  they  made  a
stay  of  our  whole  Caravan,  exacting  a  Shaughee  on  every
person,  which  to  purchase  our  peace  we  willingly  paied ;
and  so  arrived  that  evening  at  Bithlis  an  ancient  Citie,
but  a  Citie  of  much  crueltie  and  oppression,  where  little
Justice  and  right  is  to  be  found  to  releeve  distressed
passengers.

This Citie standeth in a pleasant Valley, by which  Bithlis.
runneth a little River, falling out of the Mountaines
Anti-Tauris,  it  was  once  a  Towne  in  the  Confines  of  the
Persian Kingdome, bordering upon Mesopotamia, and

491

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGMMES

1603.

had  a  Castle  kept  with  a  Garrison  of  Persian  Souldiers,

before  such  time  as  Solyman  the  Magnificent  did  conquer

these  Countries,  which  was  in  the  yeare  1535. In  which

The  great yeare  there  was  a  memorable  battell  fought  betweene  the

am  l fought tWQ  great  Bassaes  of  Caire  and  Syria,  conducted  by  Ulemas
betweene  two  j >  j

great  Bassaes  ^e  Persian  Traitor ; and  Delymenthes  a  right  Nobleman

y  Dely- of  Persia. The  two  Bassaes  and  Ulemas  were  commanded

menthes,  a by  Solyman  (in  his  returne  from  the  spoile  of  Tauris)  to

valiant  Nobk-  foUow  him  wkh  eighteene  thousand  Rood Souldiers  in
man  of  1 ersia, 1  r •  .

the  rereward  of  his  Army, to  receive  and  represse  the

sudden  assaults  of  the  Persians,  if  need  should  require.
But  Delymenthes  with  five  thousand  Persian  Souldiers
pursued  the  Turkes,  and  overtooke  them  in  the  aforesaid
Valley ;  and  being  furthered  in  this  venterous  designe-
ment,  both  by  the  darknesse  of  the  night,  and  the
abundance  of  raine  which  fell  at  the  same  instant,  as  if  it
had  beene  wished  for,  on  a  sudden  got  within  the  Turkes
Campe :  where  the  Persian  Souldiers,  as  Wolves  amongst
Sheepe,  did  such  speedy  execution  amongst  the  sleepy
Turkes,  that  the  two  great  Bassaes  and  Ulemas  had
much  adoe  to  get  to  horse,  and  save  themselves  by  flight.
Few  of  all  that  great  Army  escaped  the  sword  of  the
Persians.  There  was  three  great  Sanzacks  slaine,  one
taken,  and  the  other  fled,  eight  hundred  Janizaries  seeing
themselves  forsaken  of  their  Captaines,  laid  downe  their
Harquebusses,  and  other  Weapons,  and  yeelded  them-
selves upon  Delymenthes  his  word.  In  memoriall  thereof
they  still  keepe  that  day  (which  was  the  thirteenth  of
October)  as  one  of  their  solemne  Holy-daies.  In  Bithlis
we  stayed  two  daies ;  and  at  our  departure  paied  unto
the  Governor  of  the  said  Citie,  a  Dollar  on  a  summe  of
goods,  and  so  set  forwards  towards  the  great  Citie  Van,
three  daies  journey  farther.  In  which  travell  we  had  a
very  wearisome  and  painefull  journey,  over  high  Moun-
taines  and  craggy  Rockes,  the  way  being  exceeding  narrow,
that  a  beast  could  hardly  passe  with  his  burthen,  without
much  heaving  and  tumultuous  shouldering.  The  which
[II. ix.  1426.]  narrow  passages  the  Turkes  told  us,  was  by  the  commande-

492

JOHN CARTWRIGHT  ad.

1603.

ment  of  Amurat  the  third,  the  Great  Turke,  cut  through  Hand  made

by the  maine  industrie  of  labourers, for  his  Armie to  Passa&e-

passe,  like that  incredible  worke, which Haniball  with

Vinegar wrought upon the Alpes. In this place our

travell  was  very  dangerous,  by  reason  of  a  brackish  Lake

or  little  Sea,  called,  The  Lake  Arctamar,  which  was  under  Arctamar

the  Rocke,  over  which  wee  passed,  and  wee  enforced  to a  e'

ride  shoaling  on  the  side  of  the  said  Rocke,  that  had  not

our  Mules  beene  sure  of  footing,  both  they  and  we  had

perished,  with  an  insupportable  downe-fall  in that Sea.

Two  miles  from  this  shoare  in  the  aforesaid  Lake  are  two

Hands,  called,  the  Ecmenicke  Hands,  inhabited  onely  by  The  Ecmenick

Armenians,  and  some  Georgians,  which  two  Hands  doe

bring  forth  and  yeeld  such  store  of  Cattell,  and  plentie  of

Rice,  Wheat,  and  Barley,  the  Garners  and  Store-houses

for  all  the  Countrey  round  about.

Being  arrived  at  Van,  our  Caravan  rested  in  the  Suburbs

of  the  said  Citie,  not  daring  to  presume  to  enter  the  Citie,

by  reason  that  the  Bassa  was  gone  to  fetch  in  a  rebel,

that  was  risen  up  in  those  parts ; in  whose  absence  the

Citie,  under  the  sub-Bassa,  was  no  better  governed  then  it

should bee. On the West side of this Citie lieth a

pleasant and delightfull Plaine, wherein the Janizaries

twice  a  weeke  doe  exercise  themselves  after  their  manner

in  the  feats  of  Warre. On  the  North  side  runneth  the

Lake Arctamar, called in antique time the Moore or  The  Lake

Marish,  Martiana,  or  Margiana,  or  Mantiana. Out  of  Arctamar-
1  . T ,  ,  1  •  11  •  • r  called  in

this  .Lake  is  caught  yeerely  an  innumerable  quantitie  or  anc-ient  t-me

Fish  like  our  Herring,  which  being  dried  in  the  Sunne,  Martiana.

they disperse and sell them over all the Countrey

thereabout.

This  Citie  is  double  walled  with  hard  quarrie  stone,  The  descrip-

and  is  the  strongest  Towne  in  all  these  parts,  being  fortified  tton  °fVan-

with  great  store  of  brasse  Ordnance,  and  a  strong  Castle

mounted  on  an  high  Rocke,  to  command  and  defend  the

Citie. It  was  once  under  the  governement  of  the  Persian,

but  Solyman  the  Magnificent  in  the  yeere  1549.  with  a

puissant  Armie did besiege the same, which after ten

493

A.D.

1603.

Solyman  after
ten  dayes  siege
tooke  the
Citie  Van.

Gnusher.

Ararat,

The  River
Araxis
springeth  out
of  the  Hill
Taurus.

Nassiuan.
Reivan.

The  River
Cirus.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

dayes  siege  was  yeelded  unto  him  by  the  Persian
Governour,  upon  condition,  that  the  Persian  Souldiers
there  in  Garrison,  might  with  life  and  libertie  depart  with
their  weapons,  as  Souldiers :  which  was  by  Solyman
granted,  and  so  the  Citie  was  surrendred  up  into  his  hands
From  the  Persian  King,  who  never  since  could  get  the
same  into  his  possessions.  It  is  governed  now  by  a  Bassa,
who  hath  under  him  twelve  thousand  Timariots.

At  this  Citie  we  stayed  five  dayes,  paying  a  Doller  on  a
Summe  of  goods,  and  passed  from  thence  to  a  Turkish
Village,  called  Gnusher,  the  houses  standing  in  two
severall  places,  the  one  rew  fit  for  the  Winter,  and  the  other
for  the  Summer  season.  Here  wee  began  the  ascent  of
the  high  Mountaines  of  Ararat,  and  about  noone-tide  we
beheld  Bruz ;  the  very  crest  of  the  Periardi  Mountaines,
now  called  Cheilder  Monte,  the  hills  of  Periardo.  These
Mountaines  so  called,  are  very  famous  by  the  rising  of
many  notable  great  Rivers,  which  doe  so  fructiferate  the
Countrey  thereabouts,  that  the  barbarous  people  call  it
Leprus  (which  is  to  say,  Fruitfull)  viz.  First,  the  River
Araxis,  which  running  out  of  a  certaine  Marish,  with
many  armes  doth  wonderfully  enrich  that  Champaine  and
drie  Countrey.  This  River  springeth  out  of  the  hill
Taurus  in  this  part,  where  Periardo  is  situate,  on  the  side
of  the  Hill  Ado,  and  so  runneth  by  East  even  to  the
confines  of  Servan,  and  windeth  it  selfe  towards  the  West,
and  by  North,  where  it  is  joyned  with  the  River  Cirus,
and  then  passeth  to  Artaxata,  now  called  Nassivan,  a  Citie
of  the  Armenians,  right  against  Reivan  another  Citie,
and  so  watereth  Armenia,  and  coursing  along  the  Plaine
of  Araxis,  dischargeth  it  selfe  into  the  Caspian  Sea,  on
the  one  side  by  South  leaving  Armenia,  and  on  the  other
side  by  North  leaving  the  Countrey  Servania ;  whose
chiefe  Citie  is  Eris.  The  River  Cirus  likewise  springeth
out  of  Tauras,  and  so  descending  into  the  Champaines  and
Plaines  of  Georgie,  charging  it  selfe,  and  being  greatly
encreased  with  other  Rivers,  it  is  joyned  with  Araxis,  and
so  maketh  his  issue  also  into  the  Caspian  Sea. This  River

494

JOHN CARTWRIGHT  ad.

1603.

the  Inhabitants  of  the  Countrey  at  this  day  call  by  the

name  of  Ser,  in  their  owne  Language,  but  the  Turkes

call  it  Chiur. Out  of  these  Mountaines  also  springeth

the  River  Canac,  which  maketh  (as  it  were  almost)  an  The  River

Hand,  a  little  on  this  side  the  Citie  Eris,  and  afterwards  Canac-

unite  it  selfe  in  the  Channell  with  Araxis,  and  so  runneth

into  the  Caspian  Sea.

Two  other  Mountaines  are  of  great  note  in  this  place ;
the  one  is  Anti-Taurus, now  called  Mons  Niger,  The  The  Moun-
blacke  Mountaine,  which  runneth  up  into  Media ; and  *£** ntt~
the  other  Gordaeus,  the  tops  of  which Mountaines  are
covered  continually  with  white  and  hoary  Snowes. The
Mountaine  Gordaeus  is  environed  with  many  other  petie  The  Moun-
Mountaines,  called  the  Gordaean  Mountaines ;  on  the  tops  tatneGordaus-
whereof  (as  wee  passed)  wee  found  many  ruines  and  huge
foundations,  of  which  no  reason  can  be  rendred.

The  Turkes  call  the  Mountaine  Gordiaeus  Augri-daugh,  Gordiaus
the  Armenians  Messis-Saur  :  it  is  so  high,  that  it  over-tops  N S *,
all  the  Mountaines  thereabout. There  issueth  out  of  the  rested.
foot  of  this  Hill  a  thousand  little  Springs,  whereof  some
doe  feed  the  River  Tygris,  and  some  other  Rivers,  and  it
hath about it three hundred Villages inhabited by
Armenians  and  Georgians ; as  also  an  ancient  Monastery
dedicated  to  Saint  Gregorie,  very  large  and  spacious,  able
to  receive  Shaugh  Tamas  the  great  King  of  Persia,  and
most  of  his  Armie,  who  for  the  austere  and  strict  life  that
he  saw  in  those  Religious  men,  made  him  to  spare  it,
and  to  change  his  determination,  having  a  full  purpose  [II. ix.  1427.]
before to have destroyed it. About this Monasterie
groweth  great  plentie  of  Graine,  the  Graine  being  twice  as
big  as  ours,  as  also  Roses  and  Rheubarb,  which  because  Rheubarb.
they  have  not  the  skill  to  drie  it,  that  Simple  is  of  no
esteeme  or  value. On  the  top  of  this  Mountaine  did
the Arke of Noah rest, as both Jewes, Turkes and
Armenians affirmed. Some Friers of Saint Gregories
Monasterie  told  us,  that  even  at  this  day  some  part  of
the  Arke  is  yet  to  be  seene  on  the  top  of  this  Mountaine,
if  any  could  ascend  thither,  but  the  way  (as  they  say)  is

495

A.D.

1603.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

The  River
Ataxis.

Monkish  tale,  kept  by  Angels,  so  that  whosoever  shall  presume  to  goe
up  (as  once  a  Brother  of  that  Monasterie  did)  shall  be
brought  downe  in  the  night  season,  from  the  place  which
hee  had  gayned  by  his  travaile  in  the  day  time  before.

§.  11.

Of  Araxis,  Chiulfal,  Sumachia,  Derbent,  Sechieres,
Aras,  Tauris,  Soltania,  Casbin,  Argouil,  and
Gilan.

Rom  the  foot  of  this  Mountaine,  we  spent  a  dayes
journey  further  towards  Chiulfall,  which  day  wee
travelled  through  very  many  narrow  Lanes  in  those
Mountaines,  and  very  deepe  Valleys,  wherein  the  River
Araxis  with  most  outragious  turnings  and  windings,  and
his  many  rushing  down-falls  amongst  the  Rockes,  doth
even  bedeafe  a  mans  eares,  and  with  his  most  violent
roaming  in  and  out,  doth  drowne  and  overwhelm,  whoso-
ever by  miserable  chance  falleth  downe  head-long  from  the
top  of  those  narrow  passages,  which  are  upon  the
Mountaines.  And  upon  the  crests  of  the  said  Mountaines,
on  the  side  of  the  said  narrow  passages,  there  grow  most
hideous  Woods  and  antique  Forrests,  full  of  Beeches :
Trees  like  Poplers  carrying  Mast  fit  for  Hogs,  and  Pine-
trees  ;  where  the  horrour  of  darknesse,  and  silence  which
is  oftentimes  interrupted,  onely  by  the  whistling  winds,  or
by  the  crie  of  some  wild  beasts,  doe  make  the  poore
passengers  most  terribly  afraid.

At  length  our  Caravan  ferried  over  the  foresaid  River,
and  so  we  arrived  at  Chiulfal,  a  Towne  situated  on  the
frontiers  betweene  the  Armenians  and  the  Atropatians,  and
yet  within  Armenia,  inhabited  by  Christians,  partly
Armenians,  partly  Georgians :  a  People  rather  given  to
the  trafficke  of  Silkes,  and  other  sorts  of  wares,  whereby
it  waxeth  rich  and  full  of  money,  then  instructed  in
weapons  and  matters  of  warre.  This  Towne  consisteth
of  two  thousand  houses,  and  ten  thousand  soules,  being
built  at  the  foot  of  a  great  rockie  Mountayne  in  so  barren

496

The  descrip-
tion of
Chiulfal,

JOHN CARTWRIGHT  a.d.

1603.

a  soyle,  that  they  are  constrained  to  fetch  most  of  their
provision,  onely  Wine  excepted,  from  the  Citie  Nassivan,
halfe a dayes journey off, which some thinke to be
Artaxata,  in  the  confines  of  Media,  and  Armenia. The
buildings  of  Chiulfal  are  very  faire,  all  of  hard  quarrie
stone : and  the  Inhabitants  very  courteous  and  affable,  J}e  Chiulfal-
great  drinkers  of  Wine,  but  no  brawlers  in  that  drunken  j^j^fsagr
humour,  and  when  they  are  most  in  drinke,  they  powre  f^ne,  but  no
out  their  prayers,  especially  to  the  Virgin  Mary,  as  the  quarrellers  in
absolute  commander  of  her  Sonne  Jesus  Christ,  and  to  ^inke.
other  Saints  as  Intercessors. It  is  subject  and  tributarie tt?'  evotlon
to  the  Scepter  of  Persia,  and  contrariwise,  both  by  nature
and  affection  great  enemies  to  the  Turke. This  Towne  Chiulfal  much
was  much  indangered  in  the  warres  betwixt  Amurat  the  ^"totwarm
great  Turke,  and  Mahomet  Codibanda  the  Persian  King,  betweene  the
ready  to  bee  swallowed  up  of  both. One  while  the  Bassa  Turke  and  the
of  Reivan,  on  the  great  Turkes  behalfe,  made  an  inrode  Pers^an*
upon  them  with  a  thousand  and  five  hundred  Harque-
busiers, whom they were faine to pacifie with a very
bountifull  present,  excusing  themselves,  that  if  they  had
beene  backward  in  bringing  unto him their  voluntarie
tributes,  it  was  done  for  reare,  lest  they  should  have  fallen
into  the  displeasure  of  Mahomet  Codibanda  their  King :
who  no  doubt,  if  he  should  have  understood  any  such
matter,  would  have  beene  ready  to  destroy  their  Countrey,
and  deprive  them  of  their  libertie  and  lives. The  Bassa
was  no  sooner  departed  with  this  answer  and  their  present,
but  forthwith  Aliculi-Cham  was  sent  by  the  Persian  King
with  three  thousand  Souldiers,  and  with  this  direction,  that
if  the  Countrie  were  subdued  by  the  Turkes,  he  should
fight  against  it :  and  if  it  had  voluntarily  yeelded  it  selfe
unto  them,  he  should  not  onely  recover  it,  but  also  burne
it,  and  bring  away  all  the  chiefe  men  of  the  Countrey  for
prisoners and slaves. To avoide which danger, these
poore  Chiulfalini  were  glad  to  present  the  Persian  Prince
with  great  and  more  liberall  gifts, then they  did  their
enemie  Bassa. Thus  these  miserable  people,  in  the  midst
of  Armes  and  Squadrons  of  the  enemie,  were  constrained,
viii  497  2 1

A.D.

1603.

The  mortal!
battell  fought
betweene  Sely-
mus the  fir sty
Emperour  of
theTurkes,and
Hismael  the
Sophie  of
Persia.

[II.ix.1428.]

Atropatia
exceeding
fruitful!.

Sumachia.

A  most  bar-
barous spec-
tacle in
Sumachia.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

what  with  presents,  and  what  with  lies,  notably  to  preserve
their  liberties,  and  their  lives  in  safetie.

Within  a  dayes  journey  and  a  halfe  of  this  Towne,  is
the  Chalderan  Plaines ;  memorable  for  the  battell  fought
there,  on  the  seventh  day  of  August,  in  the  yeere  15 14.
betweene  the  two  great  Emperours  Ismael  King  of  Persia,
and  Selymus  the  first,  Emperour  of  the  Turkes.  In  which
battell,  Selymus  lost  above  thirtie  thousand  men.  At
Chiulfal  we  stayed  eight  dayes,  and  passed  againe  the
River  Araxis,  leaving  the  noble  Kingdome  of  Armenia,
called  now  Turcomania,  because  of  the  Turcomanes  a
people  that  came  out  of  Scythia  (as  before  wee  noted)  who
live  as  Sheepheards  in  their  Tents,  but  the  native  people
give  themselves  to  husbandry,  and  other  manuall  sciences,
as  working  of  Carpets  and  fine  Chamlets,  we  were  no
sooner  over,  but  wee  entred  into  Media ;  which  by  some
is  divided  into  Media  Atropatia,  and  Media  the  Great.

The  whole  Countrey  is  very  fruitfull,  and  watred  with
the  River  Araxis,  and  Cyrus,  and  other  Rivers  that  are
famous,  even  in  antique  Writers.  Divers  Cities  are  there
in  this  Kingdome,  but  my  purpose  is  to  speake  onely  of
those  which  we  saw  in  these  parts,  viz.  Sumachia,  Derbent,
Sechi,  Eres,  and  Aras.  Sumachia  is  the  Metropoliticall
City  of  Sirvan ;  and  lyeth  betweene  Derbent  and  Eres ;
where  the  Kings  of  Sirvan  used  to  keepe  their  great
and  sumptuous  Courts,  chiefly  inhabited  by  Armenians
and  Georgians.  In  this  City  our  English  Merchants  did
trafficke  much,  and  had  an  house  given  them  by  Obdow-
locan,  in  the  yeere  1566.  (as  reverend  Master  Hackluit
doth  relate)  who  then  raigned  there  under  the  Persian
King.  In  this  Citie  wee  saw  the  ruines  of  a  most  cruell
and  barbarous  spectacle,  that  is  to  say,  a  Turret  erected
with  free  stone  and  Flints,  in  the  midst  of  which  Flints,
were  placed  the  heads  of  all  the  Nobilitie  and  Gentrie  of
that  Countrey :  which  fell  out  on  this  occasion.  This
Countrey  of  Sirvan,  in  time  past  was  of  great  renowne,
having  many  Cities,  Townes,  and  Castles  in  it ;  the  Kings
thereof  being  of  great  power,  able  to  wage  warre  with  the

498

JOHN CART  WRIGHT  a.d.

1603.

Kings  of  Persia,  but  through  their  diversitie  in  Religion,
the  Persian  made  a  conquest  of  them,  razing  downe  to
the  ground  their  Cities,  Townes,  and  Castles,  that  they
should  not  rebell,  and  also  putting  to  death  their  Nobilitie
and  Gentrie,  and  for  the  greater  terrour  of  the  people,
placed  their  heads  in  the  foresaid  Turret.

About  a  mile  distant  from  this  Towne,  is  the  ruines  of
an  old  Castle,  once  esteemed  to  be  one  of  the  strongest
Castles  in  the  world,  and  was  besieged  by  Alexander  the
Great,  a  long  time  before  hee  could  winne  it.  And  a  little
further  off,  was  a  Nunnery  most  sumptuously  builded,
wherein  was  buried  (as  they  told  us)  the  body  of  Ameleke
Canna,  the  Kings  Daughter,  who  slew  her  selfe  with  a
Knife,  for  that  her  Father  would  have  forced  her  (shee
professing  chastitie)  to  have  married  with  a  Prince  of
Tartary  :  upon  which  occasion  the  Virgins  of  this  Countrey
doe  resort  thither  once  a  yeere  to  lament  her  death.  This
Citie  is  distant  from  the  Caspian  Sea,  with  Camels  seven
dayes  journey,  and  from  Derbent  sixe  dayes  journey ;  it
was  in  the  yeere  1578.  yeelded  up  unto  Mustaffa,  the
Generall  of  the  Turkish  Armie,  without  resistance,  who
presently  did  surprize  the  Citie,  intreating  all  the  Inhabi-
tants in  friendly  manner,  without  doing  or  suffering  any
outrage  to  bee  done  upon  them ;  but  for  this  their
Infidelitie  in  voluntarie  yeelding  themselves  to  follow  the
Religion  of  the  Turkes,  when  as  they  were  not  induced
thereunto  by  any  necessitie ;  Emirhamze  eldest  Sonne  to  ™f  Pe™an
Mahomet  Codibanda  King  of  Persia,  comming  with  his  .  wM  th
Armie  into  Servan,  did  with  great  crueltie  punish  the  inhabitants  of
miserable  and  infortunate  Commons  of  this  Citie,  making  Sumachia,
their  houses  even  with  the  ground,  destroying  both  the  w\th  diver$
old  and  new  walls  thereof,  and  bringing  the  whole  land  !  J  °f ,

11  .  1 • 1  r 1 tortures  and

to  nought,  that  sometimes  was  so  desired,  a  receit  or  the  deaths.
Turkes.  Derbent

Sixe  dayes  journey  from  this  Citie,  lyeth  Derbent ;  This  bui^d  h
Citie hath sundrie names given unto it by Writers: Q**™derthe
Sometimes  it  is  called  Derbent,  because  it  is  in  figure  Caucasia?
narrow  and  long : and sometimes  Demir-Capi, because  Porta'.

499

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1603.

there were the Iron Gates, that were sometimes the
entrance  into  Scythia  :  and  sometimes  Alessandria  ;  because
it was first erected by Alexander the Great, when he
warred  against  the  Medes  and  Persians ; at  which  time
The  great aiso  he  mac[e  a  Wall  of  a  wonderfull  height  and  thicknesse,
Al Wnder which extended it selfe from this Citie, to a Citie in
built  betweene  Armenia,  called  Teflis,  belonging  to  the  Georgians. And
Derbent  and though  it  bee  now  razed  and  decayed,  yet  the  foundation
Teflis.  remaineth  : and  it  was  made  to  this  purpose, that  the

Inhabitants  of  that  Countrey,  newly  conquered  by
Alexander,  should  not  lightly  flie,  nor  their  enemies  easily
invade  them.  This  Citie  is  seated  upon  an  high  Hill,  and
builded  all  of  Free-stone  much  after  our  buildings,  being
very  high  and  thicke :  neverthelesse,  it  never  grew  great
nor  famous,  and  even  in  these  dayes,  there  is  no  reckoning
made  of  it :  and  the  reason  is,  because  of  the  situation,
serving  for  passage  onely  out  of  Tartaria  into  Persia,  and
out  or  Persia  into  Tartaria,  receiving  those  that  travell
too  and  fro,  not  as  Merchants  and  men  of  Commerce,
but  as  passengers  and  travellers ;  and  to  speake  in  a  word,
it  is  seated  in  a  very  necessary  place,  as  the  case  standeth,
by  reason  that  it  is  Ports  of  the  Caspian  Sea,  but  not
profitable  unto  it  selfe :  much  like  as  it  is  in  the  passages
of  the  Alpes,  where  though  the  French-men,  Switzers,
Dutch-men,  and  Italians,  continually  doe  passe  by  them ;
yet  was  there  never  found  a  meane  Citie,  much  lesse  any
Citie  of  state  and  importance.
Sethi.  About  foure  dayes  journey  from  Sumachia,  in  Sechi,

which  also  at  the  same  time  as  Sumachia  offered  them-
selves to  Mustapha,  as  vassals  and  subjects  to  the  Turkes,
who  all  were  gladly  entertained  of  him,  and  some  of  the
chiefe  of  them  apparelled  in  silke  and  gold,  and  honored
with  great  magnificence,  and  in  the  end  had  all  protection
Eres  made  promised  unto  them.  Here  also  standeth  the  Citie  Eres,
Mamodcean  most  fruitfully  watered  with  the  River  Araxis  and  Cyrus,
and  hath  yeelded  in  times  past  great  store  of  those  fine
white  Silkes,  commonly  termed  by  the  Merchants  Mamo-
daean  Silkes,  whereof  at  this  day,  there  is  not  to  be  found,

500

JOHN CARTWRIGHT  ad.

1603.
no,  not  a  very  small  quantitie,  by  reason  of  the  monstrous
ruines  and  overthrowes,  that  hath  happened  in  these
Countries,  partly  by  the  Armies  of  the  great  Turke,  and
partly  by  the  Armie  of  the  Persians,  which  still  had
succeeded  one  another  in  their  cruell  incursions,  and
bloudie  invasions.  For  after  the  people  of  Sechi  and
Eres  had  yeelded  themselves  voluntarily  without  any
resistance  unto  Mustapha  great  Amurats  Generall ;  [II. ix.  1429.]
Emirhamze  the  Persian  Prince,  came  upon  them  with  his
Armie,  as  upon  rebels,  to  inflict  deserved  punishment.
In  effecting  of  which  his  purpose,  hee  spared  neither  sexe,
nor  age,  nor  any  condition,  but  though  the  persons  were
unequall,  yet  was  the  punishment  equall  to  all,  carrying
away  with  him  the  two  hundred  peeces  of  Artillerie,  that
were  left  in  the  Fort  by  Mustapha,  and  presently  sent
them  to  Casbin  to  his  father.

There is also in this Kingdome another Citie, that  Arasse  the
bordereth  upon  the  Georgians,  called  Arasse,  being  the  mostcniefia^
most  chiefe  and  opulent  Citie  in  the  trade  of  Merchandise,  °fnt^e  trade  of
partly  by  the  aboundant  growth  of  Silke  there  nourished,  Merchandize
partly  by  other  good  and  necessary  commodities, there  that  is  in  all
growing  and  there  brought,  as  rough  and  smooth  Galles,  Servania.
Gotten  wooll,  Allome ; besides  all  kinds  of  Spices,  and
Drugs, and Diamonds, and Rubies, and other Stones
brought  out  of  the  East  Indies. But  the  principall  com-
moditie  is  raw  Silke  of  all  sorts ; so  that  from  hence  hath
beene  and  is  carried  yeerely  five  hundred,  and  sometimes
a  thousand  mules  laden  of  Silke  to  Aleppo  in  Syria. From
this  towne  we  spent  six  daies  travell  to  Tauris,  passing
over the River Araxis, leaving Media Atropatia, and
entring  into  Media  the  great. The  chiefe  of  this  Country
is  Tauris,  memorable  for  the  resiance  once  of  the  Prophet
Daniel, who neere unto the same, builded a most  The  Castle
magnificent  Castle,  which  many  yeeres  remained  a  mar-  wh*ch  Danie{
vellous  Monument ; the  beautie  whereof  was  so  lively . ,  ™^JJ  ts
and  perfect,  that  continuance  of  time  did  little  deface  it,  builded.
being  very  fresh  and  flourishing  in  the  time  of  Josephus.  JosephusAnti.
In  this  Castle  were  all  the  Kings  of  Media,  Persia,  and  lib-  I0-  "•

5°i

A.D.

1603.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

The  descrip-

Parthia  for  many  yeeres  together  intombed.  But  now
time  hath  worne  it  out,  it  faring  with  buildings  as  with
mens  bodies,  they  wax  old,  and  are  infeebled  by  yeeres,
and  loose  their  beautie  :  neverthelesse,  Ecbatana  now  called
Tauris  remaines  in  great  glory  unto  this  day.  It  is  seated
tionofTauru.  at  ^  foot  Qf  ^  pj-jj  Orontes,  eight  dayes  journey  or

there  about s from the  Caspian Sea, and is subject to
Windes,  and  full  of  Snow  ;  yet  of  a  very  wholesome  ayre,
abounding  with  all  things  necessary  for  the  sustentation
of  man :  wonderfull  rich,  as  well  by  the  perpetuall  con-
course of  Merchandises ; that  are  brought  thither  from
the  Countries  of  the  East,  to  bee  conveyed  into  Syria,  and
into  the  Countries  of  Europe ; as  also  of  those  that  come
thither  out  of  the  Westerne  parts,  to  be  distributed  over
all  the  East. It  is  very  populous,  so  that  it  feedeth  almost
two  hundred  thousand  persons : but  now  open to the
fury  of  every  Armie  without  strength  of  wals,  and  without
Bulwarkes,  saving  a  Castle  built  of  late  by  the  Turkes.
The  buildings  are  of  burnt  Clay,  and  rather  low  then
high. On  the  South  side  of  this  Citie,  is  a  most  beautifull
and  nourishing  Garden,  large  and  spacious,  replenished
with  sundry  kinds  of  Trees,  and  sweete  smelling  Plants,
and  a  thousand  Fountaines  and  Brookes,  derived  from  a
pretie  River,  which  with  his  pleasant  streame  divides  the
Garden  from  the  Citie : and  is  of  so  great  beautie,  that
for  the  delicacy  thereof,  it  is  by  the  Countrey  Inhabitants,
called  Sechis-Genet,  that  is  to  say,  The  eight  Paradises :
and  was  in  times  past,  the  standing  house  of  the  Persian
Kings,  whilest  they  kept  their  residence  in  this  Citie,  and
after  they  with-drew  their  seate  from  thence,  by  reason  of
the  Turkish  warres  to  Casbin,  became  the  habitation  and
place  of  aboad  for  the  Persian  Governors. Sundry  muta-
tions even  of  late  yeares  hath  this  Citie  indured  both  by
the  great  Turke  and  the  Persian. For  in  the  yeare  15 14.
it was yeelded to Selymus the Turkish Tyrant, who
contrary  to  his  promise,  exacted  a  great  masse  of  Money
from the Citizens, and carried away with him three
thousand  families,  the  best  Artificers  in  that  Citie,  especially

502

Tauris
yeeldeth  to

Selymus  the
firsts  1 5 14.

JOHN CARTWR1GHT  a.d.

1603.

such  as  were  skilfull  in  making  of  Armour  and  weapons,
onely  to  inrich  and  appopulate  the  great  Citie  Constan-
tinople. Afterwards,  in  the  yeare  1535.  it  was  againe  Sacked  by
spoyled  by  Solyman  the  Turkish  Emperour,  who  gave  So/yman>
the  whole  Citie  for  a  prey  unto  his  Souldiers,  who  left
neither  house  nor  corner  thereof  unransacked,  abusing  the
miserable  Citizens  with  all  manner  of  insolency  :  every
common  Souldier  without  controlement,  fitting  himselfe
with  whatsoever  best  pleased  his  greedy  desire  or  filthy
lust :  beside  the  most  stately  and  royall  Palace  of  King
Tamas,  together  with  the  most  sumptuous  and  rich  houses
of  the  Nobilitie,  were  by  the  great  Turkes  commandement
all  rased  downe  to  the  ground,  and  the  greatest  part  of
the  best  Citizens,  and  beautifull  personages  of  all  sort  and
condition  were  carried  away  captives.  And  in  the  yeare
1585.  it  was  miserably  spoyled  by  Osmun  Vizier,  unto  Miserably
Amurat  the  third,  who  commanded  his  Souldiers  to  doe  5Plledh  t
the  worst  that  possibly  they  could  or  might  doe  to  it.  j-g.
Abas  now  King  of  Persia,  reposing  no  lesse  confidence  in
his  owne  good  fortune,  then  the  valour  of  his  Souldiers
marched  in  the  yeare  1603.  w^h  ^1S  Army  directly  to  the
Citie  of  Tauris,  and  that  with  such  expedition,  that  he  was
come  before  it,  before  any  such  thing  was  feared,  much
lesse  provided  for.  In  which  siege  he  for  battery  used
the  helpe  of  the  Canon,  an  engine  of  long  time  by  the
Persian  scorned,  as  not  beseeming  valiant  men,  untill  that
by  their  owne  harmes  taught ;  they  are  content  to  use  it,
being  with  the  same,  as  also  with  skilfull  Canoniers,
furnished  by  the  Portugals  from  Ormuz.  So  that  after
sixe  weekes  siege,  this  Citie  was  surrendred  into  the
Persians  hands,  to  the  great  rejoycing  of  all  Persia,
together  with  the  whole  Country  of  Servan,  except  a  Fort
or  two  which  still  stands  out.

At  this  Citie  we  paid  a  Doller  on  a  summe  of  goods,
and  five  Shaughes  to  the  keeper  of  the  Caine  wherein
we  lodged,  and  set  forward  to  the  wealthy  Citie  of  Casbin,
distant  from  Tauris  ten  daies  journey ;  passing  the  three
first  daies  over  many  rough  and  craggy  Mountaines,  full

5°3

a.».  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1603.

[II.ix.1430.]  of  a  thousand  difficulties,  which  were  the  more  increased
by  wonderfull  great  snowes  that  were  fallen,  by  meanes
whereof  many  Passengers,  Horses  and  Mules  (if  our  guide
had  not  beene  good)  had  perished  in  one  common  destruc-
tion. Every  night  we  had  great  flashes  of  lightning,
and  huge  Thunder-claps,  with  great  store  of  raine  and
snowes,  which  did  much  annoy  our  whole  Caravan.  We
had  no  sooner  left  those  hard  passages,  but  we  were  forth-
with encountred  by  a  gallant  troop  of  Persian  horse-men,
who  lay  up  and  downe  the  Borders  by  the  Kings  Com-
mandement,  to  murther  all  Turkish  Merchants  that  should
passe  that  way :  upon  revenge  of  the  death  of  a  Persian
Merchant,  who  being  richly  arrived  at  Van,  (a  little  before
our  comming)  was  injuriously  deprived  both  of  his  goods
and  life.  Hereupon  the  Governour  of  this  troope,
demanded  of  our  Caravan-Bassa  (who  was  a  Chiulphalin)
to  deliver  up  into  his  hands,  all  the  Turkie  Merchants
that  were  in  our  company ;  to  which  request  he  durst  not
condescend  affirming,  that  there  was  none  but  Jewes  and
Christians  under  his  conduct ;  and  withall  bestowed  on
him  a  bountifull  present,  of  two  hundred  and  fiftie  Dollers,
which  was  levied  amongst  us.
Our -first entry  By  this  time  we  came  to  the  full  Borders,  and  out-most
into  the  Per-  bounds  then  of  the  great  Turkes  Dominion,  so  farre  as  the
sian  ing  ome.  Qthoman  Empire  on  this  side  doth  extend ;  and  so  entred
into  the  Territories  of  the  Persian  King :  both  which  are
Duzim.  divided  by  the  high  Mountaine  Duzim,  and  by  a  pretie

River  that  runneth  at  the  foote  thereof. This  night  we
Darnah. rested  at  a  Persian  Village,  called  Darnah,  much  ruinated,
but  seated  in  a  very  delightfull  place,  both  for  Springs  of
Water,  and  plentie  of  all  things. For  heere  we  bought
foure  Hens  for  five  pence,  a  Kid  for  ten  pence,  and  thirtie
Egges  for  two  pence. From  Darnah  we  spent  three  daies
further  to Soltania, a  very  ancient Citie, travelling  by
Great  quiet  in  many  Persian  Villages,  and  finding  every  man  at  his  labour,
Persia.  an(j  neighbour  with  neighbour  going  from  one  Towne  to

another, which bred much contentment, and made us
wonder  at the  great  peace  and tranquilitie, which the

504

JOHN CARTWRIGHT  ad.

1603.

Commons  of  Persia  live  in  above  the  Commons  of  Turkic
The  ruines  of  many  faire  Christian  Churches  we  beheld,
but  not  without  pitie,  built  all  with  great  Arches  and  high
Towers,  elaborate  with  Gold,  and  other  rich  paintings  to
the  beautifying  of  the  same.

At  Soltania  wee  safely  arrived.  This  desolate  Towne  is  The  desaip-
on  every  side  environed  with  huge  Mountaines,  whose  tton  °f.
tops  are  to  be  seene  a  farre  off,  alwaies  covered  with  deepe
Snowes,  called  in  ancient  time  Nyphates,  Caspius,  Coathras
and  Zagras,  taking  their  beginning  no  doubt  of  Caucasus,
the  Father  of  Mountaines ;  which  joyning  one  to  another,
some  one  way,  some  another,  doe  divide  most  large  and
wide  Countries.  Before  this  Towne  lyeth  a  very  great
and  spacious  plaine,  memorable  for  that  dreadfull  and  A  most
horrible  Tempest,  which  fell  on  Solyman  the  Turkish  horr\ble  and
Emperour,  and  his  whole  Armie,  in  the  yeare  1534.  For  t}mpJt
whilest  hee  lay  incamped  in  these  plaine  fields  with  his
Army,  there  fell  downe  such  an  horrible  and  cruell  Tempest
from  the  Mountaines,  as  the  like  whereof  the  Persians
had  never  seene  before  at  that  time  of  the  yeare,  being  in
the  beginning  of  September ;  and  that  with  abundance  of
Raine,  which  froze  so  eagerly  as  it  fell,  that  it  seemed  the
depth  of  Winter,  had  even  then  of  a  sodaine  beene  come
in :  for  such  was  the  rage  of  the  blustering  Winds,
striving  with  themselves,  as  if  it  had  beene  for  victorie,
that  they  swept  the  Snow  from  the  top  of  those  high
Mountaines,  and  cast  it  downe  into  the  plaines  in  such
abundance,  that  the  Turkes  lay  as  men  buried  alive  in
the  deepe  Snow,  most  part  of  their  Tents  being  over-
throwne,  and  beaten  downe  to  the  ground,  with  the
violence  of  the  Tempest  and  weight  of  the  Snow,  wherein
a  wonderfull  number  of  sicke  Souldiers  and  others  of  the
baser  sort  which  followed  the  Campe  perished,  and  many
other  were  so  benummed,  some  their  hands,  some  their
feete,  that  they  lost  the  use  of  them  for  ever :  most  part
of  their  beasts  which  they  used  for  carriage,  but  specially
their  Camels  were  frozen  to  death.  Neither  was  there
any  remedy  to  be  found  for  so  great  mischiefes,  by  reason

S°5

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1603.

of  the  hellish  darknesse  of  that  tempestuous  night,  most
of  their  fires  being  put  out,  by  the  extreamitie  of  the
storme : which  did  not  a  little  terrifie  the  superstitious
Turkes,  as  a  thing  accounted  of  them  ominous.
The  desaip- From  Soltania  we  spent  foure  daies  travell  to  Casbin,
tion  of  Gasbin.  passing  by  many  Villages,  where  we  paid  a  Shaughee  a
piece  to  the  Beg  or  Governor  of  the  Village,  not  as  a
custome,  but  as  a  free  gratuitie,  and  so  entred  into  the
Territories  of  Casbin,  a  Citie  very  wealthy,  by  reason  of
the  Kings  Palace,  and  the  great  concourse  of  Merchants
which resort thither. It was in ancient time, called
Arsacia,  as  in  Strabo ; but  now  tearmed  Casbin,  which  in
the  Persian  language,  signifieth  chastisement,  or  a  place
of  punishment,  because  the  Kings  were  wont  to  banish  or
confine  such  persons,  as  for  their  offences  and  misdemean-
ours, had deserved such chastisement. This Citie is
seated  in  a  goodly  fertile  plaine  of  three  or  foure  daies
journey  in  length,  furnished  with  two  thousand  Villages,
to  serve  the  necessary  uses  thereof :  but  evill  builded,  and
for  the  most  part  all  of  Brickes,  not  hardned  with  fire,  but
onely  dried  in  the  Sunne  ;  as  are  most  parts  of  the  buildings
of  all  Persia. It  is  now  one  of  the  seats  of  the  Persian
Kings  Empire,  which  was  translated  by  King  Tamas,  (this
Kings  Grand-father)  from  Tauris,  who  built  one  goodly
Seraglio  for  himselfe,  and  another  for  his  Women,  and
hath  beene  ever  since  continued  by  his  Successors,  though
the  King  that  now  raigneth  makes  most  ot  his  abode  in
Hispaan,  fourteen  daies  journy  farther  towards  the  East,
There  are  three  places  in  the  Citie  most  of  note :  viz.  the
[II.  ix.  1 43 1.]  Kings  Palace,  the  Bassars,  and  the  At-Maidan. The  gate
of  the  Kings  Palace,  is  built  with  stone  of  divers  colours,
and  very  curiously  enamuled  with  Gold : on  the  seeling
within,  is  carved  the  warres  of  the  Persian  Kings,  and  the
sundry  battels  fought by them against the Turks  and
Tartars ; the pavements of the roomes beneath, and
Chambers  above  are  spread  with  most  fine  Carpets,  woven
and  tessued  with  Silke  and  Gold,  all  Ensignes  and  Monu-
ments of  the  Persian  greatnesse. There  is  likewise  in

506

JOHN CARTWRIGHT  a.d.

1603.

this  Citie  sundry  Bassars,  where  in  some  you  may  buy  Bassars  are
Shasses  and  Tulipants,  and  Indian  cloath,  of  wonderfull  c^^is
finenesse :  in  others  Silkes  of  all  sorts,  as  Velvets,
Damaskes,  Cloath  of  Gold  and  Silver :  in  others  infinite
Furres,  as  Sables  and  Martine  out  of  Muscovia,  and
Agiam  Furres  brought  from  Corassan.  In  a  word,  every
street  hath  a  severall  Science  or  Trade,  wherein  is  sold
whatsoever  is  fit  and  necessary  for  the  use  of  man.

The  At-Maidan,  is  the  high  speech  or  chiefe  Market
place  in  this  Citie ;  and  is  foure-square,  containing  in
circuit  very  neere  a  mile ;  and  serves  as  a  Bursse  for  all
sorts  of  Merchants  to  meete  on,  and  also  for  all  others
to  sell  whatsoever  Commodities  they  possesse,  so  that  in
one  place  is  selling  of  Horses,  Mules  and  Camels ;  in
another  place  Carpets,  Garments,  and  Felts  of  all  sorts ;
and  in  another,  all  kind  of  Fruits,  as  Muske-mellons,
Anguries,  Pomegranats,  Pistaches,  Adams  Apples,  Dates,
Grapes,  and  Raisins  dryed  in  the  Sunne.  In  this  place
do  sit  daily  twelve  Sheriffes,  that  is,  men  to  buy  and  sell
Pearle,  Diamonds,  and  other  pretious  stones,  and  to
exchange  Gold  and  Silver,  to  turne  Spanish  Dollers  to
great  advantage  into  Persian  Coyne ;  and  to  change  the
great  pieces  of  the  Persian  Coyne,  as  Abbasses,  Larines,
and  such  like  into  certaine  Brasse  Monies  for  the  poore.
They  will  also  lend  upon  any  pawne,  and  that  with  as
great  interest  as  our  divellish  Brokers  and  Scriveners  take
in  London.  Finally,  the  strength  of  this  Citie  consisteth
not  in  walls  and  bulwarkes,  but  in  the  Souldiers  that  are
continually  maintained  in  and  about  this  Citie ;  for  out  of
Casbin,  and  in  the  Villages  belonging  unto  the  same,
are  maintained  twenty  thousand  Souldiers  on  horsebacke,
howsoever  in  this  Kings  Fathers  time  were  livied  but
twelve  thousand.

Two  places  neere  to  this  Citie,  are  very  remarkable ;  Ardouil  the
the  one  is  the  Citie  Ardouil ; the  other  Giland. Ardouil  first  place  that
is  a  Citie  foure  daies  journey  from  Casbin,  and  two  from  received  the
Soltania. A  Citie  of  great  importance,  where  Alexander  superstition,
the  great  did  keepe  his  Court,  when  he  invaded  Persia. It

5°7

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1603.

is  a  towne  much  esteemed  and  regarded,  by  reason  of  the
Sepulchers  of  the  Kings  of  Persia,  which  for  the  most
part  lye  there  intombed :  and  so  is  growne  a  place  of  their
superstitious  devotion ;  as  also  because  it  was  the  first  place
which  received  the  Persian  Sect,  wherein  Giuni  the  first
Author  thereof  did  reside  and  raigne.

The  other  place  neere  to  Casbin,  remarkable  in  the
Country  of  Gilan,  in  the  Province  of  Hircania.  The
North  part  of  this  Kingdome  is  full  of  thicke  Woods  and
shadowy  Groves,  wherein  grow  divers  sorts  of  Trees,  but
specially  Cedars,  Beeches  and  Oakes,  a  fit  harbour  and
shelter  for  Tygres,  Panthers,  and  Pardies,  which  wilde
beasts  make  the  passage  in  those  places  very  dangerous :
but  neere  to  the  Sea  side  it  is  full  of  pasture,  and  very
delightfull,  by  reason  of  the  manifold  sweete  Springs  which
issue  out  of  the  Mountaine  neere  adjoyning.  Many
principall  Cities  are  there  in  this  Countrey,  as  Bestan,
Massandran,  Pangiazer,  Bachu  and  Gheilan,  Cities  of  such
state  and  condition,  as  deserve  to  have  a  Governour  of
the  same  dignitie,  that  the  Bassa  is  with  the  Turkes.
Bachu,  Concerning Bachu, it is a very ancient Haven-towne,

very  commodious  for  Ships  to  harbour  in,  as  also  profitable
to  vent  Commodities,  by  reason that  Ardouill,  Tauris,
Eres,  Sumachia,  and  Derbent,  lye  not  many  daies  from
thence. Neere  unto  this  Towne,  is  a  very  strange  and
wonderfull  Fountaine  under  ground,  out  of  which  there
Oylespringeth  springeth  and issueth  a marvellous  quantitie  of  blacke
out  of  the Oyle,  which  serveth  all  the  parts  of  Persia  to  burne  in
gioun  .  their houses ; and they usually carrie it all over the

Countrey,  upon  Kine  and  Asses,  whereof  you  shall  often-
Gheilan.  times  meete  three  or  foure  hundred  in  company. Gheilan

and  the  rest  stand  likewise  altogether  in  Trafficke :
Gheilan  being  but  foure  easie  daies  travell  from  Casbin,
and  very  neere  unto  the  Caspian  Sea.

From  Casbin  we  set  forwards  to  the  great  and  populous
Citie  of  Hispaan,  lodging  every  night  either  in  a  Persian
Village,  or  in  a  faire  Caine  built  of  stone,  where  we
found  all  kind  of  provision  necessary  for  our  selves  and

508

JOHN CARTWRIGHT  a.d.

1603.

beasts,  travelling  sixe  or  seven  in  a  company :  company-
sufficient,  by  reason  of  the  great  peace  and  tranquilitie,
which  the  Persians  live  in  above  the  Turkes ;  and  so
having  spent  sixe  daies,  we  arrived  at  Com,  a  very  ancient  TheCitieCom,
Citie.  This  Citie  is  called  by  Ptolomie,  Guriana,  and  was  ^^on-
so  great  in  times  past,  that  the  Inhabitants  affirmed  unto  5tantinople.
us,  that  when  it  was  in  his  flourishing  estate,  it  was  twice
as  big  as  Constantinople ;  but  it  was  much  ruinated  by
Tamerlane,  and  ever  since  hath  lien  in  the  dust  without
repaire,  Cassan  carrying  away  the  Trade  of  Merchandize
from  her,  which  was  once  the  Mistresse  and  Lady  thereof.
It  is  well  seated  for  water,  and  all  other  necessaries,  having
a  spacious  River  running  by  it,  with  a  stone  bridge  over
the  same :  the  which  we  no  sooner  passed,  but  we  entred
into  the  bounds  of  Parthia ;  a  Kingdome  once  famous,
but  now  so  mingled  with  Persia,  that  the  very  name  of
Parthia,  is  quite  extinguished  among  them.

§. III.  [II.ix.1432.]

Of  Cassan  and  Hispaan. Of  the  Persian  King  and
Government. Of  Sir  Anthony  Sherley.

Fter  two  daies  travell  from  Com,  wee  arrived  at  TJie  desaip-

Cassan,  a  principall  Citie  in  Parthia,  very  famous  ttonof^assan-
and  rich,  howsoever  Ortelius  and  others  make  no
mention  of  it.  This  Citie  is  seated  in  a  goodly  Plaine,
and  because  it  hath  no  Mountaines  neere  it,  but  within  a
daies  journey,  the  heate  is  very  fastidious,  as  great  almost
as  it  is  in  Ormuz :  the  Spring  and  Harvest  is  sooner  in
this  Climate,  then  in  any  other  parts  of  the  Persian
Dominions.  It  wanteth  neither  Fountaines,  Springs,  nor
Gardens,  but  aboundeth  with  all  necessaries  whatsoever :
consisting  altogether  in  Merchandize,  and  the  best  Trade
of  all  the  Land  is  there,  being  greatly  frequented  with
all  sorts  of  Merchants,  especially  out  of  India.  The
people  are  very  industrious  and  curious  in  all  sciences,
but  especially  in  weaving  Girdles  and  Shashes,  in  making
Velvets,  Sattins,  Damaskes,  very  good  Ormuzenes,  and

5°9

A.D.

1603.

Civill  and
good  govern-
ment.

The  Persian
lazv  against
idlenesse.

Scorpions.

0/M.  Mild-
nail,  ye  have
sup.  I.  3.  c.  1

The  descrip-
tion of
Hispaan.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES  |

Persian  Carpets  of  a  wonderfull  finenesse ;  in  a  word,  it
is  the  very  Magazeen  and  Ware-house  of  all  the  Persian
Cities  for  these  stuffes.  Here  may  you  buy  all  manner
of  Drugs  and  Spices,  and  Turkasses,  with  store  of  Pearle,
Diamonds,  and  Rubies ;  as  also  all  sorts  of  Silkes,  as  well
wrought  as  raw.  I  am  perswaded,  that  in  one  yeare  there
is  more  Silke  brought  into  Cassan,  then  is  of  Broad-cloath
brought  into  the  Citie  of  London.  This  Citie  is  much
to  be  commended  for  the  civill  and  good  government,
which  is  there  used.  An  idle  person  is  not  permitted  to
live  among  them :  the  childe  that  is  but  sixe  yeare  old  is
set  to  labour :  no  ill  rule,  disorder,  or  riot,  is  there
suffered.  For  they  have  a  Law  among  them,  (resembling
the  ^Egyptian  Law  which  Diodorus  mentioneth)  whereby
every  person  is  compelled  to  give  his  name  to  the
Magistrates,  therewith  declaring  what  kind  of  life  hee
liketh,  how  he  liveth,  and  what  art  hee  exerciseth.  And  if
any  doe  tell  untruly,  is  either  well  beaten  on  the  feete,  or
imployed  in  publike  slavery.  The  greatest  annoyance
that  this  Citie  is  infested  withall,  is  the  aboundance  and
multitude  of  blacke  Scorpions,  of  an  exceeding  greatnesse,
which  many  times  doe  much  harm,  if  a  speciall  care  be
not  had  of  them.  At  this  citie  Master  John  Mildenall
and  my  selfe  parted  company ;  he  travelling  to  Lahor  in
the  East  Indies ;  and  my  selfe  setting  forwards  to  the
great  Citie  of  Hispaan,  three  daies  travell  distant  from
Cassan.

This  Citie  in  times  past,  was  called  Ecatompolis,  the
Citie  of  a  hundred  gates :  and  well  it  may  keepe  that
name  still,  since  the  huge  wals  of  the  same  containe  in
circuit  an  easie  daies  journey  on  horsebacke,  and  is
become  the  greatest  Citie  in  all  the  Persian  Dominions :
which  is  so  much  the  more  magnified  and  made  populous,
by  reason  of  the  Kings  resiance  therein.  Very  strong  is
this  Citie  by  situation,  compassed  about  with  a  very  great
wall,  and  watered  with  deep  Channels  of  running  Springs,
conveighed  into  it,  from  a  part  of  the  Coronian  Moun-
taines,  which  are  as  a  wall  inaccessible  about  it. On  the

510

JOHN CARTWRIGHT  a.d.

1603.

North side is erected a strong Fort or Castle, being  The  fort  of
compassed  about  with  a  wall  of  a  thousand  and  seven  HtsPaan-
hundred  yards,  and  in  the  midst  thereof  is  built  a  Tower,
or  rather  a  strong  keepe,  sundry  Chambers  and  lodgings
therein,  but  stored  with  little  Ordnance. On  the  West
side  of  this  Citie  standeth  two  Seraglios,  the  one  for  the  ^}e  K*n&
King,  the  other  for  his  Women; Palaces  of  great  state efa&1
and  magnificence,  far  exceeding  all  other  proud  buildings
of this Citie : the wals glister with red Marble, and
pargeting  of  divers  colours,  yea  all  the  Palace  is  paved
with  Checker  and  Tesseled  worke,  and  on  the  same  is
spread Carpets wrought with Silke and Gold : the
windowes  of  Alabaster,  white  Marble,  and  much  other
spotted  Marble ; the  Poasts  and  Wickets  of  massie  Ivory,
chekered with glistering blacke Ebony, so curiously
wrought in winding knots, as many easier stay, then
satisfie  the  eyes  of  the  wondring  beholder. Neere  unto
this Palace, is a Garden very spacious and large, all Tie  Kings
flourishing  and  beautifull,  replenished  with  a  thousand ar  en'
sundry  kinds  of  grafts,  trees,  and  sweet  smelling  Plants,
among  which  the  Lilly,  the  Hyacinth,  the  Gilly-flower,  the
Rose,  the  Violet,  the  Flower-gentle,  and  a  thousand  other
odoriferous  flowers,  doe  yeeld  a  most  pleasant  and  delight-
full sight to all beholders. There are a thousand
Fountaines,  and  a  thousand  Brookes ; among  them  all,  as
the  father  of  them  all,  a  pretie  River,  which  with  his
milde course and delightsome noyse, doth divide the
Garden  from  the  Kings  Palace ; neither  is  this  Garden
so  straitly  lookt  unto,  but  that  both  the  Kings  Souldiers
and  Citizens,  may  and  doe  at  their  pleasures  oftentimes
on  horse-backe,  repaire  thither  to  recreate  themselves  in
the  shadowes  and  walkes  of  those  greenes.

And  as  a  Guard  for  the  gate  of  this  sumptuous  Palace, The  Guard  of
the  King  keepeth  certine  orders  of  Souldiers : whereof  * ,Ktngs
the  most  Noble  and  the  greatest  in  number,  are  called
Churchi,  which  are  as  it  were,  the  Kings  Pensioners,  being
eight  thousand  in  number, all  of  them  divided  under
severall  Captaines  : which  Captaines  do  yeeld  obedience

51*

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1603.

to the generall Captaine, called Churchi-Bassa, a man
alwaies of great authoritie. Next unto this order is
another, called Esahul, to the number of  a thousand,
distinguished also under particular Captaines, and the
chiefe Captaine is called Esahul-Bassa. All these are
maintained  by  certaine  Townes  and  Villages,  which  are
Feudataries  to  the  Crowne  of  Persia ; and  they  receive  at
certaine  times  of  the  King,  armor,  horses,  apparell,  and
[II.ix.1433.]  Tents,  every  one  as  hee  is  in place  and  degree  : with
this  strong  Garrison  is  the  King  daily  attended  upon,  and
maintayneth  the  Majestie  of  his  Court,  especially  when
hee  rideth  in  progresse.
The  order  of ^nd  for  the  government  of  this  Citie,  there  is  besides
dignities  in ^e  King  and  the  Prince  twelve  Sultanes,  but  three  especi-
Hispaan. ally  are  appointed  by  the  King,  for  the  generall  govern-
The  Sultanes. ment  of  the  whole  Empire,  having  their  severall  distinct
charges. One hath the care of all Martiall Affaires
throughout  the  Kingdome :  and  the  other  two  receive  all
the  Revenues,  keeping  a  just  account  thereof,  which  two
The  Trea- we  may  call  Treasurers. Next  unto  these  are  the  Mordari,
5™frs'  two  great  Chancellours,  whose  Office  is  to  write  all  Orders,

Chancellours Commandements,  and  Letters  concerning  the  government
of  the  Kingdome  : one  of  them  keepeth  the  Seale,  and
TheCaddi9or  the  other  the  Pen. Besides,  these  there  are  two  Caddi,
Judges.  that  is,  two  Judges,  who  make  Answere  and  give  Sentence

onely  in  matters  of  Controversie  and  civill  Quarrels ;  but
as  touching  criminall  Causes,  they  have  no  further  autho-
ritie, then  to  frame  Examinations  of  Witnesses,  and  to
make  declaration  thereof,  which  they  call  the  Sygill,  and
this  Sygill  they  deliver  up  into  the  hands  of  the  Sultan,
that  is  eyther  Governour  of  the  Citie,  or  else  of  the
Empire,  and  he  causeth  execution  to  bee  done  according
to  custome.  And  looke  as  Hispaan  is  governed,  so  other
Cities  have  the  selfe-same  Magistrates,  all  being  at  the
Kings  disposition  and  appointment.

Concerning  the  Church  government,  there  is  in  this
The  Mus-  Citie,  first  the  chiefe  of  the  Law  whom  they  call  the
taedini.  Mustaedini,  a  wicked  and  prophane  Priest : and  in  the

512

JOHN CARTWRIGHT  a.d.

1603.

other  subject  Cities  are  certaine  peculiar  heads,  obedient  to

this  chiefe  Priest,  who  are  not  chosen  and  displaced  at  his

pleasure,  as  the  Popish  Bishops  are  by  the  Pope,  but  by  the

King  himselfe,  who  is  not  onely  a  King,  but  a  Priest,  as

Mahomet  and  Aly  were. But  to  avoid  trouble,  the  King

granteth  that  favour,  and  putteth  over  that  burden  from

himselfe  unto  others,  to  whose  judgement,  he  also  refer-

reth  himselfe,  whensoever  any  consultation  is  touching

their  Law  or  prophane  Superstition. Under  this  great

Priest  are  Califes,  and  these  doe  daily  execute  service  in The  Califes.

the  Moschees  or  Temples. The  chiefe  of  these  Califes

is  hee  that  putteth  the  Home  upon  the  Kings  head,  when

he  is  first  inthronized. A  Ceremonie  once  performed  in

Cafe neere Babylon, but since Solyman the Turkish

Emperour  wonne  Assyria  from  the  Persian,  it  hath  beene

sometimes performed in Casbin, and sometimes in

Hispaan.

Finally,  the  Inhabitants  of  this  Citie  doe  much  resemble The  natuJ'e  °f
the  ancient  Parthians  in  divers  things,  but  specially  in  * e e7Stans-
their  continuall  riding. They  ride  on  horse-backe  for  the
most  part,  on  horse-backe  they  fight  with  the  Enemie,  they
execute  all  Affaires  as  well  publike  as  private  on  horse-
backe,  they  goe  from  place  to  place  on  horse-backe,  they
buy  and  sell,  and  on  horse-backe  they  conferre  and  talke
with  one  another  ;  and  the  difference  betweene  the  Gentle-
man and  the  slave  is,  that  the  slave  never  rideth,  nor  the
Gentleman  never  goeth  on  foote. Besides,  the  nature  of
people  is  arrogant  seditious,  deceitfull,  and  very  unquiet,
but  that  the  fiercenesse  of  their  nature  is  much  restrayned
by  the  Kings  severe  government. To  sensualitie  they  are  The  Persians
much  inclined,  having  three  sorts  of  women,  as  they  terme  gwen  J.  .
them,  viz.  honest  women,  halfe  honest  women  and  Cour-
tezans ; and yet they chastise no offence with like
extremitie as  Adulterie, and that as well in the halfe
honest  woman,  as  in  the  honest. Last  of  all  they  are  full  The  Persians
of  craftie  stratagems,  and  are  breakers  of  their  promise  ver9  tncon~
(a  vice  that  is  very  inbred  in  all  Barbarians.) Not  content
with  any  mans  government  long  :  and  lovers  of  Novelties.

VIII  513  2K

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1603.

*As  some  Abas,  howsoever  by  the  shedding  of  much  bloud,*  he

affirm  by  was  sajuted  King,  upon  the  death  of  his  Father,  yet  hath
hi* elder  ^e so cariTed the matter, that now he is exceedingly

brother  y  of  beloved  and  honoured  of  his  Subjects,  in  so  much  that
his  father:  so  when  they  will  confirme  any  thing  by  solemne  Oathes,
this  Author:  faey  w\\\  sweare  by  the  head  of  Abas  the  King,  and  when
Sh  h  f  ^ey  wisk  we^  to  any  man3  they  usually  say,  King  Abas
otherZseZsh  grant  thee  thy  desire.

the  next  This  Prince  is  very  absolute  both  in  perfection  of  his

Chapter  you  bodie,  and  his  minde  (but  that  he  is  in  Religion  a  pro-
tZ  SJe'  '  fessed  Mohumetan)  excellently  composed  in  the  one,  and
Hon  of  the  honourably  disposed  in  the  other.  Of  an  indifferent
Persian  King,  stature,  neither  to  high  nor  to  low.  His  countenance  very
sterne,  his  eyes  fierce  and  piercing,  his  colour  swarffie,  his
Mustachees  on  his  upper  lip  long,  with  his  beard  cut  close
to  his  chinne,  expressing  his  martiall  disposition,  and
inexorable  nature,  that  at  the  first  a  man  would  thinke  to
have  nothing  in  him,  but  mischiefe  and  crueltie.  And  yet
he  is  of  nature  courteous,  and  affable,  easie  to  bee  seene
and  spoken  withall :  his  manner  is  to  dine  openly  in  the
company  of  his  greatest  Courtiers,  delighting  much  in
hawking  and  hunting  accompanied  with  his  Nobilitie,  and
the  Ambassadours  of  forraine  Princes.  Hee  will  often-
times runne,  leape,  and  prove  masteries  with  his  chiefe
Courtiers,  beeing  himselfe  a  most  excellent  Horseman  and
cunning  Archer.

Usually  every  morning  he  visiteth  his  Stables  of  great

Horses,  and  according  to  an  old  custome  of  the  Persian

Kings,  the  Souldiers  of  his  Court  (before  mentioned)  doe

receive  Horses  at  his  hands,  as  he  is  in  place  and  degree.

The  Persian And  these  their  Horses  are  of  singular  vertue,  equall  with

o/ses  very those  of  the  old  time,  which (as  Strabo  writeth)  were

accustomed  to  bee  fed  and  brought  up  in  Armenia  for

the  Kings  use. They  are  wonderfull  swift  in  course,  fierce

in  battell,  long  breathed  and  very  docible  :  when  they  are

unsadled,  they  are  gentle  and  milde,  but  when  they  are

[II.ix.1434.]  armed,  they  are  warlike,  hardie,  and  manageable  even  at

the  pleasure  of  the  Rider. And  I  have  seene  of  them  sold

5*4

JOHN CARTWRIGHT  a.d.

1603.

for  a  thousand,  and  sometimes  a  thousand  and  sixe  hundred
Duckets  a  piece.

After  hee  hath  viewed  his  Horses,  hee  passeth  into  his  The  weapons
Armoury,  certaine  buildings  neere  unto  his  Palace,  where  %QU^i^mn
are  made  very  strong  Curiasses,  or  Corselets,  Head-peeces,
and  Targets,  most  of  them  able  to  keepe  out  the  shotte  of
an  Harquebusier,  and  much  more  to  daunt  the  force  of  a
Dart.  Heere  also  the  King  furnisheth  his  Souldiers,  not
only  with  Curiasses,  Head-peeces,  and  Targets ;  but  with
Bowes  and  Arrowes,  Pouldrones,  and  Gauntlets,  and  with
Launces  made  of  good  Ash,  armed  at  both  ends ;  with
Simatars,  and  shirts  of  Maile,  most  finely  and  soundly
tempered,  wherewith  both  themselves  and  their  Horses  are
defended  in  time  of  Warre.

By  this  time  having  spent  most  of  the  fore-noone,  he
returneth  again  into  his  Palace,  and  there  remaynes  till
three  of  the  clocke  in  the  afternoone,  at  which  time
he  makes  his  entry  into  the  At-Maidan,  which  is  the  The  King
great  Market  place  or  high  Street  of  Hispaan :  round  ej^Maidan
about  this  place  are  erected  certaine  high  Scaffolds,  where
the  multitude  do  sit  to  behold  the  warlike  exercises  per-
formed by  the  King  and  his  Courtiers,  as  their  running
and  leaping,  their  shooting  with  Bowes  and  Arrowes,  at
a  marke  both  above  and  beneath,  their  playing  at  Tennis,
all  which  they  performe  on  Horse-backe  with  divers  moe
too  long  to  write  of.  In  this  place  also  is  to  bee  seene
severall  times  in  the  yeare,  the  pleasant  sight  of  Fire-
workes,  of  Banquets,  of  Musickes,  of  Wrastlings,  and  of
whatsoever  Triumphs  else  is  there  to  bee  shewed,  for  the
declaration  of  the  joy  of  this  people.

Besides,  the  King  very  often  in  this  place,  in  the  His  justice.
presence  of  the  Princes  and  Peeres  of  the  Realme,  will
give  judgement  in  divers  causes :  in  the  execution  of
Justice  hee  is  very  severe,  as  well  to  the  greatest  as  to  the
meanest,  not  sparing  (as  might  bee  shewed)  to  hang  up
his  chiefe  Caddi  or  Judges,  when  he  shall  perceive  how
that  upon  bribes  and  favour  they  delay  the  Suits  of  his
Subjects,  against  the  cleare  and  manifest  truth  : And  I

515

A.D.
1603.

Sir  Anthoney
Sherleys
arrival  in
Persia.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

have  seene  him  many  times  alight  from  his  Horse,  onely
to  doe  Justice  to  a  poore  bodie.  Besides,  hee  punisheth
Theft  and  Man-slaughter  so  severely,  that  in  an  Age  a
man  shall  not  heare  either  of  the  one  or  of  the  other.  So
that  since  King  Abas  came  unto  the  Crowne,  full  twentie
yeares  and  upwards,  the  Persian  Empire  hath  flourished
in  sacred  and  redoubted  Lawes,  the  People  demeaning
themselves  after  the  best  manner  they  can,  abundance  of
Collections  comming  plentifully  in,  the  Rents  of  his
Chamber  were  increased  more  then  ever  they  were  in  his
Grandfather  Tamas  his  time,  Armes,  Artes  and  Sciences,
doe  wonderfully  prosper,  and  are  very  highly  esteemed.

To  this  great  Monarch,  came  Sir  Anthonie  Sherley,
Knight,  with  sixe  and  twentie  Followers,  all  gallantly
mounted  and  richly  furnished ;  whose  entertaynment  was
so  great,  that  the  Persians  did  admire,  that  the  King  should
vouchsafe  such  high  favour  to  a  meere  stranger  without
desert  or  tryall  of  his  worth.  Of  whose  bountie  the
World  may  judge,  since  within  three  dayes  after  his  first
arrivall  the  King  sent  him  fortie  Horses  furnished  with
Saddles,  and  very  rich  trappings  :  foure  of  them  fit  for  the
proper  use  of  any  Prince,  twelve  Camels  for  cariage,
together  with  sixe  Mules,  foure  and  twentie  Carpets,  most
of  them  rich  and  faire,  three  Tents  or  Pavilions,  with  all
other  necessaries  of  house ;  and  lastly,  sixe  men  laden
with  silver. (But  of  this  yee  have  heard  himselfe.)

§•  nil.  1

The  returne  of  the  Author  by  the  way  of  Persia,
Susiana,  Chaldaea,  Assyria,  and  Arabia.

Aving  tooke  my  leave  of  Master  Robert  Sherley,
and  the  rest  of  my  Countreymen,  I  left  them  to
the  mercy  of  the  King  (whose  bountie  and  good-
nesse  by  their  returne  hath  plentifully  shewed  it  selfe)  and
betooke  my  selfe  to  the  protection  of  the  Almightie,  to
bring  me  in  safetie  againe  into  my  owne  Countrey :  being
in my  returne,  accompanied  with  one Signior Belchior

516

JOHN CARTWRIGHT  a.d.

1603.

Dios  d'Croce,  an  Armenian  Portugall,  or  Portugall
Armenian,  and  one  Christophero  a  Greeke,  who  were  sent
with  Letters  from  the  Governour  of  Goa,  to  the  King  of
Spaine,  but  lost  afterwards  their  lives  and  Letters  by  ship-
wracke  in  the  Venetian  Gulfe.  From  Hispaan  we  spent
ten  dayes  travell  to  Siras,  by  perswasion  of  some  Persian
Merchants  that  were  bound  for  Aleppo  with  us,  travelling
through  the  very  heart  of  Persia  it  selfe,  paying  now  and
then  a  Shaughee  a  piece  to  certaine  Villages  in  the  way,  no
matter  of  importance  worth  the  relating  till  we  come  to
the  Citie  it  selfe.

Siras  is  situated  on  the  Bankes  of  Bindamir,  a  great  and  Tti  descrip-
famous  River,  which  courseth  through  Persia,  and  the lT  °J  ,tras
Kingdome  of  Lar,  and  so  emptieth  it  selfe  into  the  Persian  persepolis.
Gulre,  and  was  once  the  Metropoliticall  seat  of  all  the  The  River
Kingdome, untill of  late yeares, Hispaan hath gained Bindamir,
that  priviledge  from  her. Notwithstanding  it  is  large  and
spacious  contayning  very  neere  ten  miles  in  circuit,  and
lyeth  just  in  the  Road  way  which  leades  from  Hispaan  to
Ormuz.

In  and  about  this  Towne  are  to  be  seene  the  ruines  of  \S  lx-l4-35-]
many  ancient  Monuments  :  as  two  great  gates,  that  are
distant  one  from  the  other  the  space  of  twelve  miles,  which
shewes  the  circuit  of  this  Citie,  as  it  was  in  the  time  of  the
Monarchic,  to  be  both  large  and  spacious.  On  the  South-
side  we  viewed  the  ruines  of  a  goodly  Palace,  builded,  as
they  say,  by  King  Cyrus ;  a  Palace  much  magnified  by
iElianus  in  his  first  Booke  de  animalibus,  cap.  59.  And
on  the  North-side  the  ruines  of  an  old  Castle,  which
seemes  was  girt  about  with  a  three-fold  wall :  the  first
wall  being  foure  and  twentie  foot  high,  adorned  and
beautified  with  many  Turrets  and  Spires :  the  second  was
like  unto  the  first,  but  twice  as  high,  and  the  third  was
foure  square,  being  foure  score  and  ten  foot  high.  All
fabricated  of  free  stone.  On  each  side  were  twelve  Gates
of  Brasse,with  Brazen  Pales  set  before  them  very  curiously
wrought :  all  which  did  shew  the  magnificence  of  the
Founder. On  the  East-side  of  this  ruinous  Castle,  some

Si7

Old  Monu-
ments.

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1603.

foure  Acres  of  ground  distant,  is  a  Mountayne,  on  which
was  erected  a  goodly  Chappell,in  which  most  of  the  Persian
Kings  in  anticke  times  were  intombed.  And  though  this
Citie  hath  endured  sundry  mutations  and  changes,  yet  is
it  not  to  bee  esteemed  one  of  the  least  Cities  in  Persia :
for  out  of  it  in  short  time  is  levied  twenty  thousand  Horse-
men well  armed.  Besides  it  is  one  of  the  greatest  and
most  famous  Cities  of  the  East,  both  for  traffique  of
Excellent  Merchandize ;  as  also  for  most  excellent  Armour  and
Armour  made  Furniture,  which  the  Armourers  with  wonderfull  cunning
yras.  ^oe  make  of  Iron  and  Steele,  and  the  Juice  of  certayne
Herbs,  of  much  more  notable  temper  and  beautie  then
are  those  which  are  made  with  us  in  Europe ;  not  onely
Head-pieces,  Curiasses,  and  compleate  Armours,  but  whole
Caparisons  for  Horses,  curiously  made  of  thinne  plates  of
Iron  and  Steele.

From  Siras,  having  spent  eight  days  travell  and  better,
we entred into the Province of Susiana, now called
Cusestan,  but  in  old  time  Assyria. The  bounds  of  this
Countrey,  North-wards  is  on  the  South  part  of  Armenia.
East-ward  on  a  part  of  Persia : West-ward  on  Mesopo-
tamia : and  South-ward  on  a  part  of  the  Persian  Gulfe,
which  part  is  full  of  Fennes  and  marish  Bogges,  without
either Port or Haven. The Climate in that part is
exceeding  hot,  and  very  much  infested  with  bituminous
matter, which both spoiles the growth of Trees, and
corrupt  the  waters,  whereby  it  comes  to  passe,  that  the
people  are  not  long  lived.
The  descrip- Travelling  two  dayes  further  from  the  entrance  into
Hon  o/Susa. this  Kingdome,  we  rested  at  Valdac,  once  the  great  Citie
Susa, but now very ruinous. Close by this ruinous
The  River Towne  swimmeth  the  famous  River  Choaspes,  which  after
Choaspes. many  turnings  and  windings  through  the  Countrey  of
Susiana,  dischargeth  it  selfe  in  the  Persian  Gulfe. The
water  of  this  River  is  very  delicate  to  the  taste.

Having  passed  over  this  River,  we  set  forward  towards
Mosul,  a  very  ancient  Towne  in  this  Countrey,  sixe  dayes
journey  from  Valdac ; and  so  pitched  on  the  Bankes  of

518

JOHN CARTWMGHT  a.d.

1603.

the  River  Tygris. Here  in  these  Plaines  of  Assyria,  and
on  the  bankes  of  Tygris,  and  in  the  Region  of  Eden,  was
Ninive,  built  by  Nimrod,  but  finished  by  Ninus. It  is  The  descrip-
agreed by all profane Writers, and confirmed by the  ^hfZ'n^
Scriptures, that this Citie exceeded all other Cities in  fcient  building
circuit,  and  answerable  magnificence. For  it  seemes  by  of  Ninive  by
the  ruinous  foundation  (which  I  throughly  viewed)  that  Ntnus.
it  was  built  with  foure  sides,  but  not  equall  or  square ;  for
the  two  longer  sides  had  each  of  them  (as  we  ghesse)  an
hundred  and  fiftie  furlongs ; the  two  shorter  sides,  ninetie
furlongs,  which  amounteth  to  foure  hundred  and  eightie
furlongs of ground, which makes three score miles,
accounting  eight  furlongs  to  an  Italian  mile. The  walls
whereof  were  an  hundred  foot  upright,  and  had  such  a
breadth  as  three  Chariots  might  passe  on  the  rampire  in
Front : these  walls  were  garnished  with  a  thousand  and
five  hundred  Towers,  which  gave  exceeding  beautie  to  the
rest,  and  a  Strength  no  lesse  admirable  for  the  nature  of
those times. Now  it is  destroyed  (as  God  foretold  it
should  be  by  the  Chaldaeans)  being  nothing  else,  then  a
sepulture  of  her  selfe,  a  little  Towne  of  small  trade,  where
the  Patriarch  of  the  Nestorians  keepes  his  seat,  at  the
devotion  of  the  Turkes. Sundry  times  had  wee  confer-
ence with  this  Patriarch  :  and  among  many  other  speeches
which  past  from  him,  he  wished  us,  before  we  departed,  to
see  the  Hand  of  Eden,  but  twelve  miles  up  the  River,
which  hee  affirmed,  was  undoubtedly  a  part  of  Paradise. . "*SC™P~
This  Hand  lies  in  the  heart  of  the  River  Tygris,  and  is  uandofEden
(as  we  could  ghesse)  in  circuit  ten  English  miles,  and  was  of  Paradise
sometimes walled round about with a wall of strong  seemyPilg.i.
defence,  as  appeares  by  the  ruinous  foundation  of  Bricke  '•*•  3«
which  there  remayneth. And  howsoever  the  beautifull . . ,  .r,
.Land  or  Jkden  is  now  forgotten  in  these  parts,  with  those  inserted  a  dis-
flourishing  Countries  of  Mesopotamia,  Assyria,  Babylonia,  course  thereof
and  Chaldoea, being  all swallowed  up into meere Bar-  here  om^d.
barisme,  yet  this  Hand  still  retaynes  the  name  of  the  He  of ,  * ,. ,

-*-1  ^en  •  presented  you

From  the  Hand  of  Eden  wee  returned  to  Mosul,  and  with  the  Map.

519

ave

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1603.

stayed  there  eight  dayes,  and  so  went  downe  the  River

The  descrip- Tygris  to  Bagdat,  or  New  Babylon,  being  carried  not  on

*£*lj ew Boat,  as  downe  the  River  Euphrates,  but  upon  certaine

called  Bagdad  Zatarres  or  Rafts,  borne  upon  Goats  skins  blowne  full  of

wind  like  Bladders. Which  Rafts  they  sell  at  Bagdat  for

fire,  and  carrie  their  skins  againe  home  upon  Asses  by

Land,  to  make  other  Voyages  downe  the  said  River.

By  this  River  the  Citie  Bagdat  is  very  aboundantly
furnished  with  all  kind  of  provision,  both  of  Corne,  Flesh,
Fowle,  Fish,  and  Venison  of  all  sorts ;  besides  great  store
of  Fruit,  but  especially  of  Dates,  and  that  very  cheape.
This  Citie  by  some  is  called  New  Babylon,  and  may  well
be,  because  it  did  rise  out  of  the  ruines  of  old  Babylon,
[II.  ix.  1 43 6.]  not  farre  distant,  being  nothing  so  great,  nor  so  faire :  for
it  contaynes  in  circuit  but  three  English  miles ;  and  is
built  but  of  Bricke  dried  in  the  Sunne :  their  houses  also
being  flat  roofed  and  low.  They  have  no  raine  for  eight
Cleere  Skie.  moneths  together,  nor  almost  any  cloud  in  the  Skie  night
nor  day.  Their  Winter  is  in  November,  December,
Januarie  and  Februarie,  which  moneths  are  neverthelesse
as  warme  as  our  Summer  in  England.  In  a  word,  this
Towne  was  once  a  place  of  great  trade  and  profit  by  reason
of  the  huge  Caravans,  which  were  wont  to  come  from
Persia,  and  Balsara :  but  since  the  Portugals,  Englishmen,
and  Hollanders  have  by  their  traffique  into  the  East  Indies,
Bagdat  cut  off  almost  all  the  trade  of  Marchandize  into  the  Gulfs

\tdTurh°  of  Arabia>  and  Persia>  both  Grand  Cairo  in  Egypt  and
A  Caliph  is  a  Bagdat  in  Assyria,  are  not  now  of  that  benefit  as  they
man  7 ever-  have  beene,  either  to  the  Merchant,  or  Great  Turke  ;  his
encedofall  Tributes  both  in  Egypt,  and  his  Customes  in  this  place
Mahometan  being  much  hindred  thereby.  After  it  continued  under
hath  an  old  tbe  Tartar  and  Persian  governement,  untill  it  was  taken  by
prwiledge  in  Solyman  the  Turkish  Emperour,  for  Tamas  the  Persian
the  choice  &  King,  who  (after  it  was  yeelded  unto  him)  according  to
confirmation  of  an  0\c\  superstitious  manner,  received  at  the  hands  of  a
e  ssyiian  p00re  Caliph,  the  Ensignes  and  Ornaments  of  the  Kings  of
Sultans  of  Assyria :  so  this  Citie,  with  the  great  Countries  of
Egypt.  Assyria,  and  Mesopotamia,  sometimes  famous  Kingdomes

520

7<>.

69  ^v^i.^"--*"-

PARADI5US

a.  Sekath/i

Syria

Hebrjei^

AraIm

TSztahtiiifcha.

Lebana / -, ,  Hechooota.

£  PAKS]

37!

^Talmiria  ^

ttsi

Chamn  ubi  Abra: \  /, S^ha%^tlIZ  Eft  A J

l  V  t<  ^^ s4&\  at  ft  ^V^ Hvf  \

-A CME5  0P0TAAMIA  f I *

:a|mp

JLCtc/imhcn  i

$h J  iff •-,«

Si

/*w

^^^

.  />  >»^ tfsTDtitnafi'us
"SiAon  V *  ^x^  ^

yrus YLV'irca

>  \Pbi\ippi
'ana  is  Is* z
'  3

^> /^P

vL'Bcrrabba

\chal'

:  4-

Cat  a  mi

yH^s

tl

iaScppc ^  II" ^Jrachonita

lerumcm
Afcahn

F&

Arabcs
Scdoma

i  Gomorra

\Zcboim

\Aihvna.

*>  t'

StkucWt'a.  'jri

%JL^ jNLtJar H  JjEiR,*  "^^^A  hiliaua  >/^

hydJitULfii  V X^L jl  , , Orchoe'Pti. Hveana  \ tree

^C_  5^>  J^taLSarehainbc Vr,Abrahhmi patria ^ ^

i  r

•>.

3a ^  ^

Arabia

PETRA.A

20

^r

mina—\

68.  7* *i>

patria

^^Ratracbarta <^

&/?Ji  i)M  ^i^  fjDACIA  fl

)  \  -%» ^-\ReJtha

Lltht

'H/IrrJasu. '

Tfflfiij,

32

5

'nnamca,

5 ' 10 * 1$ l Zi

73*

70 r7  * z7^

7^

78t

So

HONDIUS HIS MAP OF PARADISE

JOHN CARTWRIGHT  a.d.

1603.

of  themselves,  and  lately  part  of  the  Persian  Kingdome,

fell  into  the  hands  of  the  Great  Turke,  in  the  yeere  1534,

and  so  have  continued  ever  since,  Provinces  of  the  Turkish

Empire.

Having  stayed  twentie  dayes  at  Bagdat,  we  put  our
selves  into  the  Companie  of  a  Chiaus  who  was  bound  from
the  Bassa  of  Bagdat,  for  Constantinople  being  in  number
sixteene  persons  and  no  more,  to  travell  through  a  great
part  of  Chaldaea,  and  the  Desart  of  Arabia.  So  soone  as
we  were  out  of  this  Citie,  we  passed  over  the  swift  River
Tygris,  on  a  great  Bridge  made  with  Boats,  chayned
together  with  two  mightie  Chaynes  of  Iron  :  and  so  entred
into  a  part  of  Bagdat,  on  this  side  of  the  River,  like
London  and  Southwarke,  where  we  stayed  foure  dayes.

Two  places  of  great  antiquitie  did  wee  throughly  The  Tower  of
view  in  the  Countrey :  the  one  was,  the  ruines  of  a  e '
the  old  Tower  of  Babel  (as  the  Inhabitants  hold
unto  this  day)  built  by  Nimrod,  the  Nephew  of  [II.ix.1437.]
Cham,  Noahs  sonne.  And  now  at  this  day,  that
which  remayneth  is  called,  the  remnant  of  the  Tower
of  Babel :  there  standing  as  much,  as  is  a  quarter  of  a
mile  in  compasse,  and  as  high  as  the  stone-worke  of  Pauls
Steeple  in  London.  It  was  built  of  burnt  Bricke  cimented
and  joyned  with  bituminous  Mortar,  to  the  end,  that  it
should  not  receive  any  cleft  in  the  same.  The  Brickes
are  three  quarters  of  a  yard  in  length,  and  a  quarter  in
thicknesse,  and  betweene  every  course  of  Brickes,  there
lieth  a  course  of  Mats  made  of  Canes  and  Palme-tree
leaves,  so  fresh,  as  if  they  had  beene  layd  within  one
yeere.

The other place remarkable is, the ruines of old  The  descrip-
Babylon,  because  it  was  the  first  Citie,  which  was  built  tl°n  0f°ld
after  the  Floud. Some  doe  thinke, that  the  ruines  of a ' on'
Nimrods  Tower,  is  but  the  foundation  of  this  Temple  of
Bell, and that therefore many Travellers have beene
deceived,  who  suppose  that  they  have  seene  a  part  of  that
Tower  which  Nimrod  builded. But  who  can  tell  whether
it  be  the  one  or  the  other? It  may  be,  that  confused

521

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1603.

Chaos  which  wee  saw,  was  the  ruines  of  both,  the  Temple
of  Bel  being  founded  on  that  of  Nimrod.

From  the  ruines  of  old  Babylon  wee  set  forwards  to

Aleppo ; travelling,  for  the  most  part,  through  the  Desart

Arabia. Having  spent  three  dayes  and  better,  from  the

ruines  of  old  Babylon,  we  came  to  a  Towne,  called  Ait,

inhabited  onely  with  Arabians,  but  very  ruinous. Neere

The  mouth  of  unto  which  Towne  is  a  Valley  of  Pitch  very  marvellous

Hell.  t0  behold,  and  a  thing  almost  incredible,  wherein  are  many

Springs, throwing out aboundantly a kind of blacke

substance  like  unto  Tarre  and  Pitch,  which  serveth  all

the  Countries  thereabouts  to  make  staunch  their  Barkes

and  Boats ; every  one  of  which  Springs  maketh  a  noise

like  a  Smiths  Forge,  in  puffing  and  blowing  out  the  matter,

which  never  ceaseth  night  nor  day,  and  the  noyse  is  heard

a  mile  off,  swallowing  up  all  weighty  things  that  come

upon  it. The  Moores  call  it,  The  mouth  of  Hell.

Three  daies  spent  we  on  this  Desart,  and  so  arrived  at

AnnaaTowne  Anna,  a  towne  of  three  miles  in  length,  but  very  narrow,

in  Arabia. inhabited  altogether  with  Curdies,  a  most  theevish  people.

Here  we  stayed  two  daies,  and  could  not  be  suffered  to

passe  without  a  present  to  the  Governor  of  this  towne,

which  came  to  a  Ducket  a  piece. Close  by  this  Towne

runneth  the  River  Euphrates,  with  a  very  swift  current,

which  doth  marvellously  fructiferate  the  Countrey  round

about,  whereby  wee  provided  our  selves  of  all  necessaries

fit  for  travell  through  the  rest  of  the  Desart.

From  this  Towne  we  proceeded,  and  every  second  night,
through  the  good  discretion  of  our  Guide,  we  pitched  on
the  banke  of  the  River  Euphrates,  which  much  refreshed
our  selves  and  wearied  beasts,  beholding  every  day,  great
Droves  of  wild  beasts,  as  wild  Asses  all  white,  Gasels,
Wolves,  Leopards,  Foxes,  and  Hares.  And  now  to  winde
up  all,  in  passing  from  Babylon  to  Aleppo,  they  ordinarily
with  Camels  spend  fortie  dayes,  travelling  through  this
sorry  and  barren  Desart,  lying  unmanured,  because  of  the
scarcitie  of  moysture.  Howbeit,  we  used  not  their
service,  by  reason  of  the  speed  which  the  Chiaus  made

522

JOHN CARTWRIGHT  ad.

c.  1 1 60.
for  Constantinople,  so  that  the  travell  which  the  Caravan
is  fortie  dayes  about,  we  passed  in  eighteene  dayes  in  much
securitie,  and  so  in  great  safety,  by  the  mercy  of  God,  I
arrived  againe  in  Aleppo.

Chap. V.

The  Peregrination  of  Benjamin  the  sonne  of  Jonas,
a  Jew,  written  in  Hebrew,  translated  into  Latin
by  B.  Arias  Montanus.  Discovering  both  the
state  of  the  Jewes,  and  of  the  world,  about
foure  hundred  and  sixtie  yeeres  since.

N  Epitome  of  the  Relations  of  Benjamin
the  sonne  of  Jonas  of  Tudela,  of  the
Province  of  Navarra,  or  Cantabria,  who
earnestly  undertaking  a  Journey,  and
travelling  very  many  and  the  most  remote
Countries,  hath  described  all  those  things,
which  either  he  himselfe  saw,  or  received
*from  men  of  approved  credit,  and  reported  the  same  in
Spaine :  nor  hath  hee  onely  mentioned  such  things,  but
the  greatest  part  also  of  the  renowmed  and  principall  men
(Israelites)  who  abode  in  every  particular  place  by  him
diligently  viewed.  At  length  returning  into  the  Countrey
of  Castella,  hee  declared  all  these  things  to  his  people,  in
the  yeere  933.  (after  the  Jewish  account,  from  the
Creation.)

*That  is  of  Jews  whose  Faith  is  displeasing  to  God,  and  contrarie  to
all  men  ;  the  faithfulnesse  also  of  their  relations  is  not  without  suspicion
in  some  Relations  received  from  them,  in  some  but  Jewish  Fables.  A
good  Author  in  the  things  hee  hath  seene,  and  few  ever  have  seene  more.
His  Universities  here  often  mentioned,  understand  Synagogues  or  Schooles
of  Jewes :  and  the  Governours  of  Jewes  to  be  but  in  those  Schooles,  or
some  petie  rule  over  their  owne,  bought  by  money,  &c.  Let  the  Reader
also  observe  that  some  things  may  be  true  which  seeme  strange,  and  that
the  Turkes  in  Europe,  they  and  the  Tartars  in  Asia  have  much  altered
the  face  of  the  World  since  Benjamins  Travels,  which  happened  about
A.D.  1 1 60.

523

A.D.

c.  1 1 60.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

[ii.ix.1438.]

Ccesar
Augusta.

Tortosa.
Tarracona.

Barchinonia,
aThe  J  ewes
call  their
Rabbins  and
Students  in
Traditions  by
this  arrogant
name  and  the
stile  of  their
tradition
Lecture  was>
OLaocpoi  devre-
povai.

Gerunda.
Narbona.

b  If  the  Jewish
braggarts  may
be  beleeved.  I
cannot  learney
and  learned
men  denie
that  the  J  ewes
in  their  pre-
sent confusion

§'.  1.

Of  the  Jewes  and  their  Synagogues,  Schooles,  or
Universities,  and  other  his  Observations  in
Europe.

Enjamin  the  sonne  of  Jonas,  of  approved  memorie
hath  said :  First,  departing  from  the  Citie  Caesar
Augusta,  according  to  the  direction  of  the  River
Iberus,  I  came  to  Tortosa,  and  from  thence  I  went  to
Tarracona,  an  ancient  Citie  built  by  the  sonnes  of  Enac,
and  the  Grecians,  the  like  excellencie  of  which  building  is
found  in  no  other  Countries  of  Spaine ;  and  the  Citie  it
selfe  bordereth  upon  the  Sea.  But  two  dayes  journey
from  thence  I  entred  into  Barchinonia,  in  the  which  there
is  a  sacred  Synagogue  frequented  by  awise  and  prudent
men,  and  also  adorned  with  noble  men,  among  whom  are,
Master  Seseth,  and  Sealthiel,  and  Selomoth  the  sonne  of
Abraham,  the  sonne  of  Hhazzidai  of  happie  memorie.
And  it  is  little,  but  a  fine  Citie,  seated  upon  the  very  Sea
shoare,  divers  Merchants  from  all  Countries  resorting
thither,  being  a  famous  Mart-towne  for  the  Grecians,
Pisanes,  Genueses,  Sicilians,  Egyptians,  Alexandrians,  and
out  of  the  Land  of  Israel,  and  all  the  borders  thereof.
But  departing  from  thence  one  dayes  journey  and  an  halfe,
I  came  to  Gerunda,  where  there  is  a  little  Synagogue  of
the  Jewes.  Three  dayes  journey  from  thence,  I  went  to
Narbona,  which  Citie  giveth  Lawes  to  the  rest :  for  out
of  it,  the  Law  goeth  forth  into  all  Countries ;  where,
there  are  wise  men,  both  great,  and  honourable,  especially
Kalonymos  the  sonne  of  the  great  and  honourable
Theodorus  of  good  memorie,  of  the  seed  of  David b  by
true  descent  and  genealogie,  who  hath  Inheritances  and
Lands  from  the  Princes  of  the  Countries,  fearing  the
force  or  violence  of  no  man.  Abraham  also,  principally,
is  Head  of  the  assemblie,  and  Machir,  and  Jehuda,  and
others  like  unto  these,  the  Disciples  of  Wise-men :  and,
there  are  almost  three  hundred  Jewes  therein  at  this  day.

524

BENJAMIN, SON OF JONAS, A JEW  ad.

C.  1 1 60.

Foure  leagues  from  thence,  I  came  unto  the  Citie  Bidrasch,  have  any
in  the  which  there  is  an  Universitie c  adorned  with  the  certaine
Disciples of Wise-men ; whose Heads are, Selomoh .*j£a  °£es ^
Hhalpetha,  and  Joseph  the  sonne  of  Nathanael  of  good  or  priest/y,
memorie. But,  travelling  two  dayes  journey  from  thence,  though  here
I  went  to  Mons  Tremulus,  in  times  past,  Pessulanus,  now  Sou  snal1  meet
called  by  the  Inhabitants,  Mompelier ; a  Citie  convenient «'/? ot^m
for  trafficke  and  merchandizing,  two  leagues  distant  from  peradventure
the  Sea,  frequented  by  divers  Nations  for  the  entercourse  Bosiers.
of  merchandise, Idumaeans, and Ismaelites of  Algarba,  c  Synagogue  or
Longobardes,  and  from  the  Kingdome  of  great  Rome,  ^oole,  and
and  out  of  all  the  Land  of  Egypt  and  Israel,  from  all  the  the  Ra&fons  '
Countrey  of  France,  Spaine,  and  England,  and  of  all  the  Mompelier.
languages  of  the  Nations  are  there  found,  by  meanes  of  The  famous-
the  Genueses  and  Pisani. The  Schollers  also  of  the  Wise-  nesse  °fM°ns
men  are  there  very  famous  in  this  Age,  especially  Reuben assu us'
the sonne of Theodorus and Nathan the sonne of
Zacharias,  and  the  chiefe  of  all,  Semuel,  and  Selamias,  and
Mardochaeus,  who  is  now  dead. Some  among  them  are
very  rich,  and  liberall  unto  the  poore ; who  helpe  all  that
come  unto  them.

Foure  leagues  from  thence  standeth  Lunel,  a  famous  Lunel.
Universitie  of  such  as  applie  themselves  to  the  studie  of
the  Law  of  the  Israelites  day  and  night ; where  that  great
Master  Messulam  of  happie  memorie  was  then,  with  five
wise  and  rich  sonnes,  Joseph,  Isaac,  Jacob,  and  Aharon,
and  Asser  the  Pharisie, who  being separated from the  dsserthe
eyes of the world, studieth day and night, fasting,  Phartsie-
and perpetually abstayning from the eating of  Flesh,
and hee is greatly conversant in the opinions and
traditions of the ancient, and great Moses, Nisus,
and old Samuel, and Salomo the Priest, and Master  Salojno  the
Judas  the  Physician,  the  sonne  of  Thebon  a  Spaniard  :  and  PrtesL
there is a Synagogue, there, of three hundred Jewes,
almost :  but  it  is  two  miles  distant  from  the  Sea. Foure
leagues  from  thence  standeth  Pothiaquiers,  a  great  Castle,  Pothiaquiers.
in  the  which  are  fortie  Jewes  almost,  and  a  great  Con-  Consistorie.
sistorie  with  Abraham  the  sonne  of  David  of  happie  fame,

525

A.D.
C.  I  1 60.

Nogheres.
Jewish  Uni-
versitie  or
Synagogue  -
schoole.

Rhodano.
Provence.

Arelatum.

Mas  si  Ha.
[II.ix.1439.]

*For  their
Synagogue
affaires  and
permitted
government
among  them-
selves.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

a  friendly  man,  and  very  learned,  both  in  disciplinary,  and
also  in  the  sacred  bookes,  unto  whom  very  many  resort
from  remote  places  for  the  learning  of  the  Law,  and  being
most  curteously  entertayned  in  his  house,  are  taught :
and  if  any  want  abilitie  to  defray  their  charges,  hee  liberally
bestowed  his  owne  money  for  all  uses ;  for  he  is  very
rich.  There  are  also  other  learned  men  there,  as  Joseph
the  sonne  of  Menabhem,  and  Benbeneseth,  and  Benjamin,
and  Abraham,  and  Isaac  the  sonne  of  Moses  of  commend-
able memorie.  About  foure  leagues  from  thence  is
Nogheres  the  Towne,  called,  The  Burrough  of  Saint
jEgidius,  where  there  is  an  Universitie  of  Jewes,  con-
sisting almost  of  an  hundred  Wise-men,  the  chiefe
whereof  are,  Isaac  the  sonne  of  Jacob,  and  Abraham
the  sonne  of  Judas,  and  Eliezer,  and  Isaac,  and
Moses,  and  Jacob  the  sonne  of  the  great  Master
Levi  of  excellent  memorie :  this  Towne  is  three  miles
distant  from  the  Sea,  and  is  situated  neere  unto  a
great  River,  called  Rhodano,  which  runneth  through  all
that  Countrey,  which  is  called,  Provincia :  but  there,  is
the  most  noble  and  honourable  Abba  the  sonne  of  Isaac
of  approved  memorie,  made  Governor  by  the  principall
Lord.  From  thence,  after  I  had  travelled  foure  leagues,
I  came  to  the  Citie  Arelatum,  where  there  are  almost  two
hundred  Israelties,  among  whom  the  chiefe  are,  Moses,
Tobias,  and  Isaias,  and  Selomoh,  and  honourable  Nathan,
and  Master  Abba  Meri  a  famous  man.  But  three  dayes
journey  from  thence  I  was  brought  to  Massilia,  a  Citie
renowmed  for  excellent  and  wise  men,  famous  for  two
Colledges  of  three  hundred  Jewes  almost.  One  of  the
Colledges  lyeth  neer  unto  the  Sea  shore  below,  above
which  the  other  standeth,  as  it  were  a  certaine  Tower,
seated  in  an  higher  place  :  and  there  is  a  great  Consistorie*
among  them  adorned  with  the  Disciples  of  Wisemen,
with  Simon  the  Sonne  of  Antolius,  and  his  Brother  Jacob
and  Lebaarus,  who  are  accounted  the  chiefe  in  the  higher
Colledge :  but  in  the  lower,  rich  Jacob  Pirpsienus,  and
Abraham,  and  Mair,  and  his  Son-in-law  Isaac,  and  another

526

BENJAMIN, SON OF JONAS, A  JEW  a.d.

C.  1 1 60.

Mair.  And  this  Citie,  for  Trade  of  Merchandize,  is  very
famous  on  the  Sea  shoare,  from  whence  taking  ship,  in
foure  dayes  sayling  you  come  to  Genua,  a  Citie  standing  Genua.
on  the  Sea-side,  where  there  were  two  Jewes  who  were
Brethren,  Samuel  the  Sonne  of  Calaam,  and  his  Brother
of  Sephta  a  Citie  of  Africa,  good  men.  But  the  Citie
is  compassed  with  walls,  subject  to  no  King ;  but  governed
by  a  Magistrate,  who  is  ordayned  by  the  will  and  consent
of  the  Citizen.

At  Pisa  were  Moses,  and  Hhaiim,  and  Joseph  with
almost  twentie  Jewes.  The  Citie  it  selfe  is  not  fortified
with  walls ;  and  is  foure  miles  distant  from  the  Sea,
whereunto  they  goe  in  Vessels  by  the  River  which  runneth
through  the  middest  of  the  Countrey  it  selfe,  and  entreth
into  the  Citie.  Foure  leagues  from  thence  standeth  Luca,  Luca.
a  great  Citie,  where  I  found  almost  fortie  Jewes ;  and  the
principall  Masters  amongst  them,  David,  Samuel,  and
Jacob,  learned  men.  It  is  sixe  dayes  Journey  from  thence
to  Rome,  sometimes  a  very  great  Citie,  and  head  of  the  Rome.
Empire  of  the  Nations.  And  there  were  almost  two
hundred  Jewes  there,  honest  men,  paying  Tribute  to  no
mortall  man ;  among  which,  some  are  the  Servants  of
Alexander the Pope, the Supreme Prelate of all the  Pope  Alex.  $.

Christian  Religion. And  there  were  very  learned  men  w  u,  J*?". .

o  t  j  ceeded  Adrian

there,  and  especially  David  Magnus,  and  Jehiel  the  Popes  t^e  fourt^  an
Servant,  an  excellent  yong  man,  and  wise,  often  frequent-  Englishman,
ing  his  house,  as  governour  of  the  house,  and  all  the  ^-  ir59-
Domesticall  Affaires. And  he  is  the  Nephew  of  Nathan,  **  ** J*  °f
the  Author  of  the Booke  and Commentaries  Aaruch : Barbarossa
Joab  also  the  Sonne  of  Great  Selomon,  and  Menahem  are  Henry  the
heads  of  the  Assembly,  and  Jehiel  dwelling  beyond  Tiber,  Second,  then
and Benjamen the Sonne  of  Sabthi, of  good memory.  K.of England.
But  the  Citie  of  Rome  it  selfe  is  divided  into  two  parts,  JJ '' ^ohof
betweene  which  the  River  Tiber  runneth. And  in  the  Aaruch.
former part standeth a very great Temple, called the
Romane  Capitoll,  at  the  which  the  house  of  Great  Julius  The  Capitoll.
Caesar  stood. Moreover,  there  are  huge  Buildings,  and
admirable  workes,  beyond  other  which  may  bee  found  in

527

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

c.  1 1 60.

Very  many  of  the  whole  World. But  the  Citie  it  selfe,  if  you  joyne

these  mines  ^  inhabited  part  with  that  which  is  razed,  and  without

altogether  Inhabitant, contayneth the space of foure and twentie

wasted  for  the  miles. And  in  it  are  eightie  Palaces  of  eightie  Kings,

use  of  other  from  the  Reigne  of  Tarquinius  untill  the  Reigne  of  Pipin

buildings.  tjle  pother  of  that  Charles  who  first  vanquished  Spaine,

That  which  he  possessed  by  the  Ismaelites. But  the  Palace  of  Titus  is

aaaes  oj  urns,  wJthout  Rome  ;  who  was  not  received  by  the  three  hundred

aspersion  he  Senators,  because  that  in  the  siege  of  Hierusalem  hee  had

being  called  spent  three  yeares,  that  is  to  say,  one  yeere  beyond  his

Orbis  delkice.  determined  time :  and  there  is  also  part  of  a  Church,  to
wit,  of  the  Palace  of  Vespasian,  of  a  very  great  and  most

Peradventure  firme building. Besides, there is the Palace of King

the  author  Malgalbinus,  contayning  three  hundred  and  sixtie  small

7r  Gafienus™'  Pa^aces  according  to  the  number  of  the  dayes  of  the
yeare,  and  the  compasse  thereof,  as  farre  as  we  might
gather  by  the  ruines,  contayneth  three  miles.  But  in
times  past  a  battaile  was  fought  in  that  Palace,  wherein
above  an  hundred  thousand  men  in  number  were  slaine ;
whose  bones  gathered  together  on  a  heape,  are  to  be  seene
even  untill  this  day.  And  the  Emperour  hath  ingraven
the  resemblance  of  that  fight  on  all  the  sides  of  the  houses
in  Marble  stone,  with  innumerable  opposite  factions  of
men,  and  the  representations  of  Horses,  Armes,  and  war-
like furniture,  that  he  might  leave  a  wonderfull  Monument
of  the  ancient  Warres  unto  Posteritie. In  the  same  place

Sepulchres.  a  rew  of  building  is  found  lower  then  the  ground  of  the
Earth,  where  the  Emperour  and  his  Wife  Augusta  are
found,  orderly  seated  in  Chaires  of  Estate,  and  almost  an
hundred  other  men  Servants  of  the  Empire,  all  embalmed
by  the  arte  of  the  Apothecarie,  even  untill  this  day.

Salomons  And  in  a  Church,  two  Brazen  Pillars  are  found,  the

worke  of  King  Salomon,  with  that  Inscription  ingraven
in  Hebrew  on  either  side,  Salomon  the  Sonne  of  David.
And  it  was  told  mee  by  the  Jewes  living  at  Rome,  that
every  yeare  the  ninth  day  of  the  moneth  Ab,  those  Pillars
distill  sweate  like  water.  There  is  also  a  Vault,  wherein
Titus is reported to have hidden the Vessels of the

528

BENJAMIN, SON OF  JONAS, A  JEW  a.d.

C.  I  1 60.

Sanctuary  brought  from  Hierusalem.  There  is  the
representation  of  an  Horse  made  of  Brasse,  gilded.
Besides,  there  are  buildings  and  other  workes,  and
Monuments  at  Rome,  which  no  man  is  able  to  reckon.

Departing  from  Rome,  in  two  dayes  Journey  I  came
to  Capua,  sometimes  great,  built,  as  they  say,  by  King  Capua.
Capis,  a  goodly  Citie,  yet  to  be  disliked  for  the  waters,
and  therefore  very  unwholsome  for  children  especially :
wherein there were almost three hundred Jewes, and
some  among  them  very  wise,  and  of  great  renowme  :  but,
the chiefe  were  Lampassus  and Samuel, Brethren, and
famous  Zaken,  and  David  a  renowned  man,  whom  some
call  our  Prince. From  thence  I  went  to  Puteoli,  some-  Puteoli.
times called Surrentum, a great Citie, which Sinan  Jewish  ^
Hadar-Ghezer  built,  being  put  to  flight  through  feare  of  ^™f^°"m
King  David,  and  brought  into  that  place : but  by  reason
of  the  inundation  of  the  Sea,  his  people  with  two  parts  of
the  Citie  were  over-whelmed  and  drowned : and  at  this  *NaturaM
day, the Towers, and seats of Judgement are seene  chmmi  Ikind
drowned  in the  waters, which sometimes, were  in  the  0f  clay  like
middest  of  the  Citie. And  in  the  same  place  a  Fountaine  Pitch.
springeth, in  the  which  *  Bitumen  is  found,  commonly  [II.ix.1440.]
called  Petroleum,  which  beeing  gathered  out  of  the  waters . ts  not

•  /»  /•  •  amisse  to

whereon  it  floateth,  is  preserved  for  the  use  of  Medicine.  reiate  these

There are also naturall bathes with most medicinable  Jewish  Tales

waters,  which  are  frequented  by  divers  sicke  persons  with  hatched  by

profitable  use,  especially  by  the  Longobardes,  who  in  the  arro£an?,

.  ^  Superstition

Summer  time  come  thither  to  seeke  remedie. Departing  and  nursed* by

from  thence,  a  way  of  fifteene  miles  in  length  is  made  Superstitious

under the Mountaynes ; and it is a worke made by  credulitie.

Romulus  the  first  King  of  the  Romanes,  through  feare  *  of  0//r  Author

David  the  King  of  Israel,  and  Joab  the  chiefe  Captaine  cotmtremen

of  Davids  Armie. Hee  made  the  like  worke  also  in  the  told  him.  One

Mountaynes,  and  under  the  Mountaynes,  where  Naples  truth  we  may

now  standeth,  a  famous  and  most  strongly  fortified  Citie,  IwneofLyes.

situated  on  the  Sea,  built  by  the  Grecians. Five  hundred  J**  buiU

T  «  ill  1  1  Faith  on

Jewes almost dwelt there, among whom, the most  Tradition.
renowmed,  are  Ezechias,  and  Salum,  and  Elias  the  Priest,  Naples.

VIII  529  2L

A.D.

C.  I  1 60.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Sale  mum.

Malfi.

and  Isaac  of  the  Mountayne  Hor.  One  dayes  Journey
from  thence  I  was  brought  to  Salernum,  a  Citie  famous
for  the  Schooles  of  the  Physicians,  in  the  which,  there
were  almost  sixe  hundred  Jewes,  but  among  these,  Judas
the  Sonne  of  Isaac,  and  Melchisedecke  a  great  man  of  the
Citie  Sipontum,  and  Salom  the  Priest,  and  Elias  the
Greeke,  and  Abraham  Narbonensis,  and  Thimon,  were
famous  for  their  Learning.  The  Citie  it  selfe  on  the  side
of  the  Continent,  is  fortified  with  wals,  on  the  other  side
it  lyeth  upon  the  Sea-shoare,  and  hath  an  exceeding  strong
Tower  upon  the  top  of  an  Hill.

Halfe  a  dayes  Journey  from  thence  is  Malfi,  in  the
which  were  twentie  Jewes  almost,  and  the  chiefe  among
these  were  Hhananeel  the  Phisician,  and  Elizeus,  and
honourable  Abuel.  All  the  Inhabitants  of  this  Countrey
apply  themselves  to  negotiation  and  Merchandize,  and
neglecting  the  care  of  sowing  the  ground,  live  upon
bought  Corne,  because  they  dwell  in  exceeding  high
Mountaynes  on  the  very  tops  of  the  Rockes :  yet  they
abound  with  other  Fruits,  Vineyards,  places  where  Olives
grow,  Gardens,  and  Orchards,  invincible  of  all  other  men

Beneventum.  by  reason  of  the  situation  of  the  place.  But  Beneventum
is  one  dayes  Journey  distant  from  thence,  a  great  Citie,
partly seated upon the Sea-shore, and partly upon a

* A 'Synagogue,  Mountayne  :  and  there  is  an  Universitie*  there,  consisting
almost  of  two  hundred  Jewes,  and  the  chiefe  of  these,  are
Colony mus,  and  Zerah,  and  Abraham,  famous  men.  Two
dayes  Journey  from  thence  is  Malchi,  in  the  Countrey  of
Apulia,  so  called  of  Pul,  that  is  to  say,  Beanes ;  there
were  almost  two  hundred  Jewes ;  the  chiefe  whereof  were
Abbimaghats,  and  Nathan,  and  Saddoq.  But,  from  thence
in  one  dayes  Journey  only  I  came  to  Asculum,  where  1
found  about  fortie  Jewes,  and  among  them,  the  principall,
Contilus,  and  Tsemahh  his  Sonne-in-law,  and  Joseph.
From  thence  two  dayes  Journey  to  Tarnaa,  situated  upon
the  Sea-shoare,  in  which  place,  they  who  go  to  Hierusalem
for  the  cause  of  Religion,  use  to  assemble  together,  as
into a Haven most commodious for that Navigation

53o

Malchi.
Apulia.

Asculum.

Tarnaa.

BENJAMIN, SON OF JONAS, A JEW  a.d.

C.  I  1 60.

And  there  was  an  Universitie  there,  consisting  of  two
hundred  Israelites  or  thereabouts,  and  the  most  renowmed
among  them,  were  Elias,  and  Nathan  the  Preacher,  and
Jacob  : the  Citie  it  selfe  is  great  and  fine. One  dayes
Journey from thence standeth Miquoles deuar, which  Miquoles
great  Citie  was  destroyed  by  Gulielmus  King  of  Sicilia : euai '
and  it  is  not  only  without  Israelites,  but  also  destitute  of
the  people  of  their owne  Nation, and  utterly  wasted.
From  thence  in  halfe  a  dayes  Journey  I  came  to  Tarentum,  Tarentum.
which  is  the  beginning  of  the  Jurisdiction  of  Calabria,
inhabited  by  the  Graecians ; a  great  Citie,  where  are  three
hundred  Jewes  almost,  and  some  of  them  learned,  especially
Maali,  and  Nathan,  and  Israel. From  hence,  in  one  dayes
Journey  I  went  to  Baruedis,  built  upon  the  Sea  shoare,  Baruedis.
where  are ten Jewes Dyers of  Wooll. From whence
Ornedo  is  two  dayes  Journey  distant,  seated  upon  the  Sea,  Ornedo.
appertayning  to  the  Countrey  of  the  Graecians,  and  there
are  about  five  hundred  Jewes  there,  the  chiefe  whereof
were  Menahem,  Caleb,  Mair,  and  Maali. Taking  ship
from  thence,  in  two  dayes  I  was  brought  to  Ocropos,  Ocropos.
where there  was  one Jew onely, named Joseph ; and
hitherto  extendeth  the  Kingdome  of  Sicilia.

From  thence,  in  two  daies  sayling  I  came  to  the  Towne  Lebta-
Lebta, which is the beginning of the Kingdome of  V/j£f"g
Emanuel  Grecian ; and  there,  I  found  about  an  hundred  jme  0fEm-
Jewes, whose heads are Seluhhias  and Ercules. From  manuel,  then
thence  in  two  daies  journey  I  came  to  Achilon,  where  Emperourof
there  were  almost  ten  Jewes,  the  chiefe  whereof  is  Sabthi.  c™stanttn-
Halfe  a  daies  journey  from  hence standeth Natolicon,  jchilon
seated  in  the  entrance  of  the  Sea. From  hence,  in  one  Natolicon.
dayes  journey  by  Sea,  I  came  to  Patra  the  Citie  of  Anti-  Patra.
pater,  one  of  the  foure  Kings  of  the  Graecians,  among
whom  the  Kingdome  of  deceased  Alexander  was  divided :
and  there,  ancient  great  buildings  are  to  bee  seene,  in  the
which  there  were  almost  fiftie  Jewes,  and  among  them,  the
chiefe  were  Isaac,  Jacob,  and  Samuel. From  thence,  halfe
a  dayes  journey  by  Sea, I  came to  Lepantum,  where,  Lepantum.
about  an  hundred  Jewes  dwell  neere  unto  the  Sea,  the

53i

A.D.
C.  I  I  60.

Cores.
The  Moun-
tayne  Paros.

Corinthus.

Theba  in

Bocetia  two

thousand

J  ewes  workers

of  Purple  and

Scarlet.

[II.ix.1441.]

*This  Jewish
honor  in  latter
times  hath
happened  to
Thessalonica9
now  Salonichi,
to  have  the
most  and  most
learned  of  that
Nation.
Argyropum.
Jabusterisa.
Robnica.

SinonPotamon.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

principall  whereof  are  Gasarias,  and  Salum,  and  Abraham.
From  thence,  in  one  dayes  journey  and  an  halfe,  I  went
to  Cores,  where,  almost  two  hundred  Jewes  dwell,  having
in  the  Mountayne  Paros  possessions  of  their  owne,  which
they  inhabit :  and  among  them  the  chiefe  are  Selomoh,
Hhaiim,  and  Jedaia.  From  thence  in  three  dayes  journey,
I  came  to  Corinth,  and  found  three  hundred  Jewes,  the
principall  whereof  are  Leo,  Jacob,  and  Ezekias.  Three
dayes  journey  from  thence,  I  came  to  Thebes  that  great
Citie,  where  there  are  two  thousand  Jewes,  the  most
excellent  workemen  of  Purple  and  Scarlet,  in  the  Countries
of  Graecia,  among  whom  there  are  most  learned  men,  and
very  skilfull  in  the  repetitions,  and  disciplines,  the  chiefe
of  this  age ;  among  whom,  were  that  great  Master  Aaron
Cutaeus,  and  his  brother  Moses,  and  Hhaiah,  and  Elias
Thurthinus,  and  Jectan,  with  whom,  none  in  all  Graecia
are  comparable,*  but  onely  at  Constantinople.  From
thence  in  one  dayes  journey  to  Argiropum,  seated  upon
the  Sea,  a  great  Citie,  and  frequented  by  a  great  number
of  Merchants  from  all  Countries,  and  there  are  about  an
hundred  Jewes  there,  and  the  chiefe  among  them  are  Elias,
Passeterius,  and  Emanuel,  and  Caleb.  From  hence  to
Jabusterisa,  is  one  dayes  journey,  and  this  Citie  standeth
upon  the  Sea  coast,  in  the  which  there  are  almost  an
hundred  Jewes,  Joseph,  Samuel,  and  Nethania,  being  the
Principall.  Robinca  is  one  dayes  journey  onely  distant
from  thence,  where  were  an  hundred  Jewes  almost,  over
whom  Joseph,  Eliezer,  and  Isaac  had  the  command.

From  thence,  in  one  dayes  journey  to  Sinon  Patamon,
where  are  almost  fiftie  Jewes,  the  chiefe  whereof  are
Salomo,  and  Jacob.  And  it  is  the  beginning  of  Balachia,
whose  Inhabitants  dwell  in  the  Mountaynes  called  Balachi,
comparable  with  Deare  in  swiftnesse,  who  descending
from  the  Mountaynes,  drive  away  booties,  and  carrie
away  spoyles  from  the  Graecians,  hitherto  vanquished
by  none,  by  reason  of  the  inaccessible  rooghnesse
of  the  places  and  Mountaynes  in  which  they  inhabit,
easie to bee passed, and knowne onely unto them-

532

BENJAMIN, SON OF JONAS, A JEW  ad.

C.  I  1 60.

selves. Nor  are  they  Christians  nor  Jewes,  although  many
among  them  are  called  by  Jewish  names ; and  boast  that
they were sometimes Jewes, and call the Jewes their
Brethren,  whom  when  they  finde,  they  use  surely  to  spoyle
them, but kill them not, as they doe the Graecians :
Lastly,  I  observed  no  forme  of  Religion  among  them.
From  thence,  in  two  dayes  journey  I  went  to  Gardeghi  a  GardeghL
defaced and  wasted Citie, retayning a few Inhabitants
Graecians  and  Jewes. From  hence  to  Armilon  is  two  dayes  Armilon.
journey,  a  great  Citie  seated  upon  the  Sea,  a  common .
Mart  Towne  for  the  Venetians,  Pisanes,  Genueses,  and  *^2s)nthat
other  Nations,  with  large  and  spacious  Fields ; where  I  t-me  usett  t0
found  about  foure  hundred  Jewes,  and  the  chiefe  of  them  sell  dignities  to
Siloh,  and  Joseph  the  Governour,  and  Salomon  the  princi-  the  Jewes  for
pall. From this Citie to Bissina, is one whole dayes  m^s^rd
journey,  where  are  an  hundred  Jewes  almost,  and  great  g0vernement
Sabthi,  and  Selomoh,  and  Jaacob  have  the  chiefe  authoritie  amongst  them-
among  them. From  hence  in  two  dayes  by  Sea,  I  arrived  selvis,whereby
at  Seleuca,  built  by  Seleucus,  one  of  those  foure  Kings  '*  ff^i  °f
who  arose  after  Alexander :  the  Citie  it  selfe  is  very  great,  anj  merK
in  the  which  there  are  about  five  hundred  Jewes,  and  the  Jewish,  they
chiefe of these is Semuel made Governour  * over his  were  exempt
Nation,  by  the  King  of  the  Citie,  together  with  his  sonnes  -^  ordinary
the  Disciples  of  wise  men,  and  Sabthai  his  sonne  in  Law,  Seein  my  Pil-
and  Elias,  and  Michael :  and  those  Jewes  apply  themselves  grimage  I.  2.
to  Handy-crafts  whereon  they  live. From  thence,  in  two  c  10.  §.  7.
dayes  I  came  to  Mitrici,  where  were  almost  twentie  Tewes,  %*n£  Johns

among  whom,  the  principall  were  Isaias,  Machir,and  Eliab. , ,  \

£>  5  1  1  •  t-a  • whereby  J  antes

brom  thence,  wee  made  two  dayes  journey  to  Darma,  in  ajewe

the  which  there  are  about  an  hundred  and  fortie  Jewes,  obtayneth

and  the  chiefe  of  them  Michael  and  Joseph. Canisthol  Presbyteratum

is  one  dayes  journey  onely  distant  from  this  Citie,  where  °™mum

J  iLcLtEorum

are  almost  twentie  Jewes.  tQtius  Anglia:

From  thence  we  travelled  three  dayes  journey  to  Aabi-  and  another  of

don,  seated  upon  the  sea  shoare  :  and  travelling  five  dayes  Rich.  \. secun-
dum legem  iff
consuet.  Judalsmly  and  In  most  Townes  two  Notaries  Jewes,  and  two  Christians,  iffc.  I  adde
this  long  Note,  lest  any  should  thlnke  the  Jewes  had  simple  freedome  or  power  In  this  time  of  their
malediction  In  any  place. MlthricL Darma. Canisthol. Aabldon  alias  Hablron.

533

A.D.

c.  1 1 60.

Constantina.

*That  is
betwixt  the
Mediterran-
ean and
Euxine  Seas.

dTo  all  sorts
of  men  or
Religions.

Saint  Sophies.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

journey  among  the  Mountaines,  I  came  to  Constantina,
an  exceeding  great  Citie,  and  the  head  of  the  Kingdome
of  Javan,  whom  they  call  Greekes,  the  principall  seate  of
the  Emperour  Emanuel,  whose  command  twelve  Kings
obey :  for  every  one  whereof  there  are  severall  Palaces  at
Constantinople,  and  Towers,  and  Countries;  and  unto
these  the  whole  land  is  subject.  The  principall  and
chiefest  is  called  the  great  Aphrippos ;  the  second,  Miga
Demastocos  ;  the  third,  Rominos  ;  the  fourth,  Makdacos  ;
the  fifth,  Alchasom  Magli :  the  rest  have  names  like  unto
these.  The  compasse  of  the  Citie  of  Constantinople  con-
taineth  eighteene  miles,  the  halfe  part  whereof  standeth
upon  the  Sea,  but  the  other  halfe  on  the  Continent :
and  it  is  seated  upon  two  armes  of  the  Sea,  or
exceeding  great  mouthes  of  Rivers,*  into  one  of
the  which,  the  waters  flow  from  out  of  Russia,  but
into  the  other  from  Spaine.  And  it  is  frequented  by
many  Factors,  from  the  Provinces  and  Countries  of  Baby-
lon, Senaar,  Media,  Persia,  and  all  the  Kingdomes  of  the
Land  of  iEgypt,  and  Canaan,  and  the  Kingdomes  of
Russia,  Ungaria,  and  Psianki,  Buria,  Longobardia,  and
Spaine.  The  Citie  it  selfe  is  common  d  and  without  differ-
ence, unto  the  which  Merchants  resort  out  of  all  Coun-
tries, travelling  both  by  Sea  and  Land :  it  hath  none
equall  with  it  in  the  World,  except  Bagdat,  that  mightie
Citie  of  the  Ismaelites.  Heere  is  the  most  famous  Temple
of  Saint  Sophia :  and  the  Patriarch  of  the  Graecians
dwelleth  heere :  nor  doe  they  agree  with  the  Doctrine  of
the  Pope  of  Rome.  There  are  other  Temples  also,  as
many  in  number,  as  the  dayes  of  the  yeare.  But  it  hath
that  exceeding  great  Treasure,  almost  beyond  all  estima-
tion, by  the  Offerings  and  Riches  yeerely  brought  from
divers  Countries,  Hands,  Castles,  Forts,  and  places,  so  that
no  Temple  of  the  whole  World  may  bee  compared  with  the
Riches  thereof.  And  in  the  middest  of  the  Temple  there
are  Pillars  of  Gold,  and  Silver ;  huge  Candlestickes,
Lanthornes,  Lampes,  and  other  Ornaments  of  Gold  and
Silver,  more  then  any  man  is  able  to  reckon.

534

BENJAMIN, SON OF JONAS, A JEW  ad,

C.  I  1 60.

Next  adjoyning  to  the  walls  of  the  Temple,  there  is  a
place  built  for  Princely  Pastimes,  called  Hippodromus,  Hippodromus.
where,  yeerely  upon  the  birth  day  of  Jesus  of  Nazareth,
great  Spectacles  are  publikely  presented ; and  there,  all
sorts  of  men  with  all  manner  of  Habits  of  the  whole
World,  are  shewed  before  the  King  and  Queene. Lions
also,  and  Beares,  Leopards,  and  wild  Asses  are  brought
forth  into  the  place  where  these  Spectacles  are  to  bee  seene,
that  they  might  fight  together : and  Birds  also  after  the
same  manner :  and  I  suppose  that  in  no  Countrey  of  the
World  such  Princely  Sports  are  to  be  seene. But  surely  [il.ix.1442.]
King  Emanuel,  besides  that  Palace  left  him  by  his  Ances-
tors, hath  built  him  another  upon  the  Sea  shoare,  which
they  call  Bilbernae  :  the  Pillars,  and  walls  whereof,  he  hath  Bittern*  the
over-layed  with  beaten  Gold  and  Silver ; whereon  hee  Pa^ace  °ftne
hath  ingraven  all  the  Warres  made  by  him  and  his  Ances- pm^°u[
tors. And  hee  hath  prepared  a  throne  there  for  himselfe,  Emperors
of  Gold  and  Precious  Stones :  and  hath  adorned  it  with  a  Palace,
Golden  Crowne  hanging  on  high  by  Golden  Chaines ;  the  Throne,
compasse  whereof  is  equall  with  the  Throne  it  selfe,  beset  health,  and
with  Precious  Stones  and  Pearles,  the  price  whereof  no
man  is  able  to  value,  of  so  great  a  lustre,  that  putting  no
Torch  unto  them,  they  shine  and  may  be  seene  in  the
night. Moreover,  there  are  other  innumerable  things  in
the  same  place,  and  incredible  to  bee  told ; and  Tributes
are  yeerely  brought  into  that  Palace,  wherewith  the  Towers
are  filled  with  Scarlet  and  Purple  Garments  and  Gold ;
so  that  the  like  example  of  building  and  riches,  can  no
where  else  bee  found  in  the  World. And  it  is  affirmed
that  the  Revenue  only  of  the  Citie  it  selfe,  gathered  of
the  Markets,  Haven,  and  Tribute  of  Merchants,  amoun-
teth  to  twentie  thousand  Crownes  a  day. Furthermore,
the  Grecians  themselves,  Inhabitants  of  the  Countrey,  are  Grecian
exceeding rich in Gold and Precious Stones, and are  PmPe-
attyred  with  most  sumptuous  Apparell,  their  Garments
beeing made of Crimson, intermingled with Gold, or
embroydered  with  Needle-worke,  and  are  all  carryed  upon
Horses  much  like  unto  the  Children  of  Kings. The  Coun-

535

A.D.

C.  1 1 60.

Merry
Greekes.

The  Soldan.

Thogarma.

Turkes.

Pera,  where
now  the  Chris-
tians dwell.

J  ewes  hated.

Jewish
Tanners.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES  1

trey  it  selfe  being  very  large,  aboundeth  with  all  sorts  of
Fruits,  and  hath  also  great  plentie  of  Corne,  Flesh,  and
Wine :  nor  the  like  Riches  in  the  whole  World  are  to  be
found.  They  are  also  learned,  and  skilfull  in  the  Discipline
of  the  Graecians,  and  giving  themselves  wholly  to  pleasure,
they  eate  and  drinke  every  one  under  their  Vine,  and
under  their  Figge-tree  :  and  of  all  Tongues  of  the  Nations,
which  they  call  Barbarians,  they  hyre  Souldiers  to  fight
with  the  Soldan  King  of  the  Children  of  Thogarma,  who
are  commonly  called  Turkes,  because  they  themselves
through  idlenesse,  and  delights  are  made  unapt  and
unmanly  for  the  Warres,  and  seemed  unto  mee  very  like
unto  women  through  a  certaine  impotencie  of  delights.

But  no  Jewes  dwell  within  the  Citie,  for  they  are
excluded  from  them  by  an  arme  of  waters,  and  being
inclosed  betweene  that  and  another  arme  of  the  Sea  of
Sophia,  they  are  not  so  much  as  permitted  to  come  into
the  Citie  but  by  Boate,  and  that  for  the  cause  of  Traffique
and  Commerce.  And  there  are  about  two  thousand
Jewes,  who  are  assembled  with  the  Masters,  that  is,  the
Disciples  of  Wisemen,  among  whom,  Abtalion  the  Great,
and  Abdias,  and  Aaron  Cuspus,  and  Joseph  Sarginus,  and
Eliakim  the  Governour,  have  the  chiefe  authoritie :  cer-
taine of  them  are  Artificers  of  Silken  Garments,  but  very
many  are  Merchants,  and  they  very  rich.  No  Jew  is  there
permitted  to  bee  carryed  on  Horse-backe,  except  Selomon
the  Egyptian,  the  Kings  Physician,  through  whose  service
the  Jewes  are  comforted,  and  ease  their  captivitie,  which
they  feele  to  be  grievous.

For  all  the  Jewes  are  very  much  hated  of  the  Graecians,
without  any  difference  of  the  good  and  evill ;  by  reason
of  the  Tanners,  who  while  they  dresse  skinnes,  powre  out
the  filthy  water  into  the  Streets  before  their  owne  doores :
and  therefore  they  are  all  oppressed  together  with  a
grievous  yoke,  and  are  beaten  in  the  Streets,  and  violently
compelled  to  serve.  But  the  Jewes  themselves  are  rich,
as  I  have  said,  and  good  men,  and  mercifull,  and  observers
of  the  Commandements,  who  patiently  endure  the  misery

S36

BENJAMIN, SON OF  JONAS, A  JEW  a.d.

c.  1 1 60.
of  Captivitie. The  place  wherein  they  dwell  is  called
Perse.  P*ra.

§.  11.

The  Estate  of  the  Jewes,  and  Relations  of  the
World  in  the  higher  parts  of  Asia,  Syria,
Palasstina,  Damascus,  and  the  parts  adjoyning.

IWo  dayes  sailing  from  thence,  I  came  to  Doroston,  Doroston.
where  there  is  an  University  of  about  foure  hun-
dred Israelites,  the  chiefe  whereof  are  Moses,  Abias,
and  Jacob. From  thence  in  two  dayes  journey  to  Gali- Galipolis.
polis, where are almost two hundred Jewes, and the
principall  of  these,  are  Elias  Caphid,  and  Sabthai-Zutra,
and  Isaac  Migas : But  Migas  signifieth  a  Tower  in  that
Language,  which  is  now  the  Graecians  Mother  Tongue.
Calas  is  two  dayes  journey  distant  from  hence,  where  were Calas.
almost  fiftie  Jewes,  and  the  chiefe  Masters  among  them
were  Judas,  and  Jacob,  and  Semaias. Two  dayes  journey
from  thence  being  brought  to  Mityle,  one  of  the  Hands  of Mityle.
the  Sea,  I  found  Universities  of  Israelites  in  tenne  places.
Travelling  three  dayes  journey  from  thence  I  came  to
Hicha,  where  were  almost  foure  hundred  Jewes,  whose  Hkha.
heads  are  Elias,  and  Thiman,  and  Sabthai :  and  there  are
the  Plants  from  which  Masticke  is  gathered. But,  from Mastick.
hence,  after  two  dayes  journey standeth Ismos, in the  Ismos.
which  almost,  three  hundred  Jewes  dwell :  among  whome
Semarias, Ghobadias, and Joel, have the  preeminence :
and  very  many  Assemblies  of  the  Israelites  meete  together
there. From  thence  in  three  dayes  sayling  I  arrived  at
Rhodus,  where  I  found  almost  foure  hundred  Jewes :  and  Rhodus.
the  principall  of  these  Aba,  Hananeel  and  Eliam  Masters. ^I-"c-I443-]
Foure daies journey from thence is Dophros distant, *perhaps
where  there  is  an  assembly  of  Jewes,  together  with  Masters, these  were
Moreover, there are certaine hereticall Jewes there, Carraim,  or
*  Cyprians, and Epicurians, whom the Israelites every  ^ripture
where  abhorre. But  these,  profane  the  evening  of  the  ^hating
Sabbath,  and  observe  the  evening  of  the  first  day.  Traditions.

537

A.D.
C.  I  1 60.

Corkos,  the
beginning  of
the  Land  of
Edom.

The  Dominion
of  Armenia.

Malmistrasyin
times  past
calledTharsis.

Antiochia  in
the  Valley
Jaboq.

Liga,  some-
timesLaodicea.

GebaL
Baghalgad.

Old  man  of
the  Assisines.
See  sup,  L  8.
c.  3.  4.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Corkos  is  two  dayes  journey  distant  from  thence,  which
is  the  beginning  of  the  Land  of  Edom,  of  that  which  is
called  Armenia.  And  it  is  the  beginning  of  the  Dominion
of  Tunis,  Lord  of  the  Mountaines  of  the  King  of
Armenia,  whose  jurisdiction  appertaineth  to  the  Metro-
politan Citie  Hhadochia;  and  extendeth  even  unto  the
Countrey  of  the  Children  of  Thogarma,  whom  they  call
Turkes.  Malmistras  is  two  daies  journey  distant  from
thence,  which  was  sometimes  called  Tharsis,  seated  upon
the  Sea.  And  hitherto  reacheth  the  Kingdome  of  the
children  of  Javan,  who  are  called  Grecians.  Two  daies
journey  from  thence,  standeth  great  Antiochia,  nigh  unto
the  River  Pir,  seated  in  the  Valley  Jaboq,  which  River
runneth  downe  from  the  Mountaine  Libanus,  in  the  Coun-
trey of  Emath.  King  Antiochus  built  this  Citie,  nigh
unto  the  which  standeth  a  very  high  Mountaine,  inclosed
also  with  the  wall  of  the  Citie.  And  in  the  top  of  the
Mountaine  there  is  a  Fountaine,  whereof  a  certain  man
hath  the  charge,  who  through  hollow  Trunkes  of  Timber,
distributeth  the  water  by  pipes  under  ground,  conveighed
into  the  Citie  houses  of  the  Nobilitie.  But  on  the  other
side,  right  over  against  the  Mountaine,  the  Citie  is  com-
passed with  the  Channell  of  the  River.  And  it  is  a  most
strong  and  well  fortified  Citie,  pertaining  to  the  Dominion
of  them  that  differ  from  our  Faith.

But  there  are  certaine  Israelites  there  Artificers  in  Glasse,
the  chiefe  whereof  are  Mardochaeus  and  Hhaim,  and
Ismael,  Masters.  Two  daies  journey  from  hence,  I  went
to  Liga,  in  times  past  called  Laodicea,  where  are  almost  two
hundred  Jewes,  and  the  chiefe  of  all  are  Hhaja  and  Joseph.
Two  daies  journey  from  thence  to  Gebal,  the  same  is  Bag-
halgad, under  the  Mountaine  Libanus :  and  it  lyeth  next
unto  that  Nation  which  they  cal  Hhassissin,  who  follow
not  the  doctrine  of  the  Ismaelites,  but  of  a  certaine  man
whom  they  suppose  to  be  a  Prophet :  whose  word  they
all  obey,  whether  unto  death,  or  unto  life.  And  they  call
him  Hheich  al  Hhassissin  :  and  he  is  their  Senator,  at
whose  command  all  the  men  of  the  Mountaines  come  in

538

BENJAMIN, SON OF JONAS, A  JEW

and  goe  forth.  His  seat  is  in  the  Citie,  called  Karmos,
which  was  the  beginning  of  the  Countrey,  called  in  former
times  Sehon:  and  they  have  a  Religion  among  them,
according  to  the  doctrine  of  their  old  man.  And  in  every
place  they  are  a  terrour  unto  all ;  because  they  kill  even
Kings  themselves,  by  putting  them  under  the  sawe :  and
their  Dominion  extendeth  eight  dayes  journey.  They
make  warre  with  the  Christians,  those  that  are  commonly
called  Frankes,  and  with  the  King  of  Tripolis,  which  selfe-
same  is  Trabelos  of  the  Countrey  of  Saam.  But,  it
happened  not  long  time  since,  that  the  Countrey  of
Tripolis  being  shaken  with  an  Earth-quake,  many,  both  of
the  Gentiles,  and  also  of  the  Jewes  were  over-whelmed,
and  buried  in  the  ruines  of  walls  and  houses :  and  at  the
same  time  also,  above  twentie  thousand  men  perished  in
all  the  Land  of  Israel.  From  hence  Gebal  is  one  dayes
journey  distant,  that  other,  which  was  the  bound  of  the
children  of  Amon  ;  where  there  are  almost  an  hundred  and
twentie  Jewes.  And  it  is  belonging  to  the  Jurisdiction  of
the  Ginotines,  whose  Prince  is  called  Gilianus  Enbirena :
and  the  place  of  the  ancient  Temple  of  the  children  of
Amon  is  found  there,  and  in  it  the  Idoll  of  the  children  of
Amon,  sitting  upon  a  seate,  called  a  Throne,  and  the  Image
is  of  stone,  over-layed  with  Gold ;  but  on  either  side  two
Images  of  women,  also  sitting  and  before  it  standeth  an
Altar,  on  the  which,  Sacrifices  and  Perfumes  were  made.
But  the  chiefe  and  principall  men  of  the  Jewes,  who  dwell
here,  are  Mair,  Jaacob,  and  Sencha.  And  the  Citie
standeth  nigh  unto  the  Sea  shoare,  which  is  in  the  Coun-
trey of  the  Israelites.  From  thence,  in  two  dayes  journey
I  came  to  Beritus,  sometimes  called  Beeroth,  where  were
almost  fiftie  Jewes,  Salomon,  and  Ghobadia,  and  Joseph
beeing  the  chiefe.  Travelling  one  dayes  journey  from
hence  to  Siiada,  called  Sidon  in  former  times,  a  great  Citie,
where  were  twentie  Jewes :  distant  from  whence  there  is  a
certaine  Nation  which  maketh  warre  with  the  Sidonians,
the  name  of  that  Nation,  in  their  owne  Language,  is
Dogziin,  called  Pagans  by  others,  being  of  no  Religion  or

539

A.D.
C.  I  1 60.
Karmos.

Fraud.

Tripolis.

Gebal.

Ginotin.

Beritus.
Beeroth.

Sidon.

Dogziin,  for
Drusians.

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

C.  I  1 60.

Sect :  they  dwell  in  the  Mountaynes,  in  the  Caves  and
Holes  of  the  Rockes,  being  subject  to  no  King  or  Prince ;
but  lead  their  lives  wildly,  living  among  the  highest
Mountaynes  and  steepest  Rockes  ;  their  Countrey  extend-
ing the  length  of  three  dayes  journey,  even  unto  the
The  Moun-  Mountayne  Hermon.  And  they  are  infamous  through
tayneHermon.  thtir  incests . for  the  Fathers  marry  with  the  Daughters.

But  at  a  yearely  Festivall  day  which  they  solemnely  hold,
aswell  the  men  as  the  women,  all  meete  together  at  the
common Banquet, and there change Wives each with
other  :  and  they  say,  that  the  soule,  as  soone  as  it  happeneth
to  depart  out  of  the  bodie  of  a  good  man,  goeth  into  the
Pdingenesia. bodie  of  an  Infant  borne  the  very  selfe-same  houre :  but
departing  out  of  the  bodie  of  an  evill  man,  that  it  goeth
into  the  bodie  of  a  Dogge,  or  into  another  beast. And
so  they  understand,  to  wit,  as  they  live. But  there  are  no
Jewes  among  them,  yet  sometimes  Artificers  and  Dyers
of  clothes  come  unto them, to exercise their  Art  and
Merchandize,  and  depart  againe :  and  the  Jewes  are  cour-
teously and  lovingly  entertayned  by  them. Moreover,
this  Nation  is  very  swift,  and  most  apt  to  runne  thorow
the  Mountaynes  and  hils,  invincible  of  other  mortall  men.
New  Tyrus. But  one  dayes  journey  distant  from  Sidon,  is  new  Tyrus,
[II.ix.1444.]  a very fine Citie, furnished with a most commodious
Haven,  which  it  contayneth  within  it  selfe,  and  receiveth
in  ships,  betweene  two  Towers  built  on  both  sides : so
that  a  Brazen  Chaine  beeing  extended  from  one  Tower
^Farmers  of unto  the  other  by  the  Publicans,*  serving  for  the  gathering
the  customes. Qf  tjie  Custome,  all  entrance  and  going  out  of  ships  by
night,  may  be  entred,  and  no  man  can  possibly  convay  any
thing  taken  out  of  the  ships. Nor  doe  I thinke,  any
Haven  in  the  World  to  bee  found  like  unto  this. The
Citie  it  selfe,  as  I  have  said,  is  goodly,  and  in  it  there  are
about  foure  hundred  Jewes,  among  whom  some  are  very
*The  Talmud  skilfull  in  Disciplinary  *  Readings,  and  especially  Ephraim
or  Traditions. ^e Egyptian Judge, and Mair, and Carchasona ; and
Abraham  the  head  of  the  Universitie. Some  of  the  Jewes
living  there  have  ships  at Sea  for  the  cause  of  gaine.

S4o

BENJAMIN, SON OF JONAS, A JEW  a.d.

C.  I  1 60.

There  are  artificiall  Workemen  in  Glasse  there,  who  make

Glasse,  called  Tyrian  Glasse,  the  most  excellent,  and  of  the  TyiianGlasse.

greatest  estimation  in  all  Countries. The  best  and  most

approoved  Sugar  also  is  found  there. Ascending  the  walls  Sugar.

of  new  Tyrus,  old  Tyrus  is  seene  over-whelmed,  in  time  The  ruines  °f

past  and  covered  with  the  Sea,  distant  a  stones  cast  out  of  ° yrus'

a  Sling,  from  the  new :  but  if  any  please  to  take  Sea  in  a

Skiffe  or  Boate, hee seeth the  Tower, Market  places,

Streetes,  and  Palaces  in  the  bottome. But  new  Tyrus  is

famous  for  publike  Traffique,  whereto  they  resort  from

all  places.

In  one  dayes  journey  from  thence  I  came  to  Akadi,  Akadu
which  was  sometimes  Ghaco,  the  bound  of  the  Tribe  of  Ghaco.
Asser,  and  the  beginning  of  the  Land  of  Israel,  seated  ^fser'
upon  the  great Sea, famous  for the  Haven, where  all  j*/"
Christians  going  by  ship  to  Hierusalem  are  received,  into
the  which,  the  River  runneth  through  the  Cite  it  selfe,
floweth  a  River  called  Cadumin. And  there  are  almost  ^e  R™er
two  hundred  Jewes  there,  and  the  Chiefe  among  them,  are
Sadok,  and  Japheth,  and  Jona. From  thence  three  leagues
to  Niphas,  which  selfe-same  Citie  is  hidden  Gad,  bordering  ^pPy5-
upon  the  Sea  shoare,  nigh  unto  which  on  the  one  side
standeth  Carmel  the  Mountayne,  and  at  the  foot  of  the
Mountayne  are  the  Sepulchers  of  very  many  Israelites,
and  in  the  Mountayne  it  selfe  the  Cave  of  the  Prophet
Elias  is  to  be  seene,  neere  unto  which  the  Christians  have
built  a  Chappell,  called  Saint  Elias. But  on  the  top  of  EB**<
the  ridge  of  the  Mountayne  there  remayneth  the  signe  of
the  Altar  broken  downe  and  burned  in  the  dayes  of  Achab,  Achab.
whereof  notable  mention  is  made  in  the  Historie  of  Elias.
And  the  place  of  that  Altar  is  Circular,  beeing  almost  foure
Cubits  over,  in  the  Diameter ; under  the  Mountayne  it
selfe,  on  the  side  thereof,  the  River  Chison  descendeth. TJ?*  Rwer
Caphar-Nahhum is foure leagues distant from thence, chaphar-
retayning the ancient name, a very high place which  Nahun.
exceedeth  Carmel  in  prospect.

But  having  passed  sixe  leagues  from  thence,  I  came  to Ctesarea.
Caesarea,  which  the  Inhabitants  call Siseria, the  ancient Siseria.

54i

A.D.

C.  1 1 60.

Gad.

Cuthai.

Samaritanes,

Ccesar.

Cacos.
Cei/a.
Keghila.

Sargoreg.
Luz.

Sebaste.
Samaria.

Nebi/us.
Sic  hem.
Ephraim.

Gerizim.
EbaL

Aharonites.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

name  whereof  was  Gad  of  the  Palaestines,  in  the  which  there
were  tenne  Jewes,  and  two  hundred  Cuthaei,  that  is  to
say,  Samarite  Jewes,  whome  they  commonly  call  Samari-
tanes. And  it  is  a  very  faire  and  goodly  Citie  seated  on
the  Sea,  re-edified  and  amplified  by  the  Emperour  Caesar,
and  called  by  his  name,  Caesarea.  From  whence,  departing
in  halfe  a  dayes  journey  I  came  to  Cacos,  which  sometimes
was  Ceila,  or  Keghila,  in  the  which  there  are  no  Jewes.

Againe  from  hence,  in  halfe  a  dayes  journey  I  went  to
Sargoreg,  which  by  the  Ancient  was  called  Luz,  where
there  is  one  Jew  onely,  and  he  a  Dyer  of  Woolles.  Travel-
ling one  dayes  journey  from  thence,  I  came  to  Sebaste,
which  selfe-same  Citie  is  Samaria,  wherein  the  Palace  of
Achab  the  King  of  Israel  is  yet  discerned.  But  it  hath
beene  a  very  strong  and  well  fortified  Citie,  seated  on  a
Mountayne,  delightfull  through  the  Fountaynes,  and
Rivers  of  Water,  Gardens,  Orchards,  Vineyards,  and  places
where  Olives  grow :  and  hath  no  Jew  inhabiting.  Two
leagues  distant  from  hence  is  Nebilas,  in  time  past  called
Sichem,  in  the  Mountayne  of  Ephraim ;  where  no  Jewes
are :  and  the  Citie  lyeth  in  a  deepe  Valley  betweene  the
Mountaynes  Gerezim  and  Ebal,  or  Hebal,  in  which  there
are  about  an  hundred  Cuthaei,  Observers  only  of  the  Law
of  Moses  alone  (these,  as  I  said,  they  call  Samaritanes.)
But  they  have  Priests,  of  the  Posteritie  of  Aaron,  the
Priest  resting  in  peace,  who  intermarry  with  none  other,
but  with  the  women  or  men  of  their  owne  Family,  that
they  may  preserve  their  Race  and  Kindred  without  mix-
ture :  and  there  they  are  commonly  called  Aharonites :
notwithstanding  they  are  Ministers  and  Priests  of  the
Law  of  those  Samaritanes.  But  they  offer  Sacrifices,  and
burne  burnt  Offerings  in  the  Synagogue  which  they  have
in  the  Mountayne  Garizim,  alleaging  that  which  is  written
in  the  Law.  And  thou  shalt  give  a  blessing  upon  Mount
Garizim.  But  they  say,  that  it  is  the  very  house  of  the
Sanctuary :  and  they  lay  the  burnt  Offering  in  the  Feast
of  Easter,  and  other  Festivall  dayes  upon  the  Altar,  built
in  the  Mountayne  Garizim,  of  the  stones  taken  out  of

542

BENJAMIN, SON OF JONAS, A  JEW  a.d.

C.  I  1 60.

Jordan  by  the  Children  of  Israel,  and  they  vaunt  that  they

are  of  the  Tribe  of  Ephraim. Among  them  is  the  Sepul-  The  Sepulchre

cher  of  Joseph  the  Just,  the  Sonne  of  Jacob  our  Father,  °f  osep  '

resting  in  peace,  as  hath  beene  said. And  the  bones  of

Joseph  carryed  out  of  Egypt  by  the  Children  of  Israel,

are  buried  in  Sichem. But  they  want  three  Letters  5*  r%  R#

HE,  of  the  name  of  Abraham,  Hheth,  of  the  name  of

Iishhac,  and  Ghain,  of  the  name  of  Jaghacob,  in  stead

whereof  they  put  Aleph,  that  is,  spiritus  tenuis. By  this

manifest  token  they  are  convicted  not  to  be  of  the  Pos-

teritie  and  Seed  of  Israel,  seeing  they  acknowledge  the

Law  of  Moses,  excepting  these  three  Letters,  which  they

know  not. But  they  keepe  themselves  from  the  defiling

of  the  dead,  and  of  bones,  and  also  of  the  slaine,  and  of

the  Grave.

They  have  also  this  custome,  to  put  off  the  garments  [II.ix.1445.]
which  they  daily  weare,  when  they  are  to  goe  into  the
Synagogue,  and  to  wash  their  bodies  with  water,  and  put
on  other  garments  provided  onely  for  this  use. And  this
is  their  daily  custome. But,  the  Mountaine  Garizim  is  The  Mountain
pleasant  with  Fountaines,  and  Gardens : and  contrarily,  J?*™ \  •
Ghebal  is  drie,  full  of  Rockes  and  Stones,  and  betweene  QhebaL
both,  as  wee  have  said,  the  Citie  Sichem  it  selfe  is  seated.
Foure  leagues  from  thence  is  Mount  Gilboagh,  which  the  Gilboagh,
Christians  call  Mount  Gilboe,  consisting  of  a  most  barren  Kjmoe-
and  dry  soyle. From  whence,  after  foure  leagues,  you  The  Valley  of
come  to  the  Valley  of  Ajalon,  which  the  Christian  Inhabi-  TheFall of
tants  of  the  Countrey  call,  Val  de  Luna ; from  whence,  tne  Moone.
having  travelled  the  length  of  one  league,  I  came  unto  the  Garaan
Mountaine  Moria,  to  Garaan,  called  the  Towne  of  David,  David.
a  Citie  in  time  past  called,  Gibghon  or  Gabaon,  where  no  q  f™'
Jewes  are. Having  passed  three  leagues  from  thence,  I  jjierusalem.
entred  into  Hierusalem,  a  little  Citie,  fortified  with  three  Jacobites,
walls,  wherein  there  are  many  sorts  of  men,  Jacobites,  Armenians,
Armenians,  Grecians,  and  Gorgeri,  or  Georgii,  and  Franks,  Greaans>
of  all  the  Languages  of  the  Gentiles. And  there  is  an  a^rf inches
house  prepared  there,  for  the  dying  of  Woolls  and  Cloaths,  inhabiting
which  the  Jewes  hyre  every  yeere,  of  the  Kings,  upon  that  Hierusalem.

543

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

C.  I  I  60.

condition,  that  they  onely  might  exercise  that  Art. And
there  are  Jewes  dwelling  in  an  angle  of  the  Citie,  under
the  Tower  of  David,  in  which  Tower,  the  walls  of  the  old
building  are  yet  remayning,  built  by  our  Ancestors,  to
the  heighth  of  ten  cubits,  almost,  from  the  very  foundation.
But  that  which  remayneth  beside  these,  is  the  building  of
the  Ismaelites. And  there  is  no  building  in  the  whole
Citie  comparable  with  that  Tower  of  David  in  strength.
There  are  also two  houses  there, called  Hospitals, the
Hospitalers  of  Inhabitants  whereof  being  Christians  are,  called  Hospi-
the  military talers : and they are Horse-men ; out of whose two
Johns  and  of Colledges,  foure  hundred  men,  almost,  goe  forth  furnished
the  Dutch to the Battell : and in those houses, all sicke persons
Order  of  Saint  comming  thither,  are  received,  and  cured,  all  plentie  of
s ^k  *T necessarie  things  for  the  maintenance  of  life,  as  well  to
the  sicke,  that  are  living,  and  recovering,  as  to  the  dead,
for their funerall, being abundantly and sufficiently
Salomons  Hos-  ministred. But  that  second  house  is  called,  The  Hospitall
pita  ,  or  t  e Qf  Salomon : for,  it  standeth  in  the  place  of  the  Palace,
sometimes  built  by  Salomon. Foure  hundred  of  them
therefore  doe  daily  goe  forth  to  the  battell :  and  all  these
associates  are  sworne,  and  bound  by  an  Oath,  besides  many
other  more,  who  assemble  thither,  out  of  the  Land  of  the
Franckes  and  Italians :  voluntarily  making  a  Vow,  which,
remayning  there  a  yeere  or  two,  they  performe. More-
over, there  is  a  very  great  Temple  there,  which  they  call,

Tof^TlChre  The  SePulchre>  the  Sepulchre  of  Jesus  of  Nazareth,  for  the
visiting  whereof  the  Pilgrims  assemble.  Hierusalem
hath  foure  gates,  the  one  is  named,  The  Sleepe  of  Abra-

%rahagme  °f  ham  ;  the  °ther>  The  S*te  °f  David  ;  the  third>  The  Sate
of  Sion  ;  and  the  fourth,  the  gate  of  Jehosaphat. But  this

is  before  the  holy  House,  which  sometimes  stood,  in  the

TtheeLZPh0f  which  now>  there  is  a  Church  called>  The  Temple  of  the
Lord,  situated  in  the  very  place  of  the  ancient  Sanctuarie  :

but  the  very  Temple  of  the  Lord,  now  so  called  is  a  cer-

Alchetab taine  huge  and  goodly  Arch,  built  by  Ghemar  BenAlchetab

No  Image  in now  frequented  by  the  Christians,  who  have  no  Image  or

the  Temple. Picture  in  that  place,  but  onely  resort  thither  to  pray.

544

BENJAMIN, SON OF JONAS, A JEW  a.d.

C.  I  1 60.

Right  over  against  this  place  there  is  a  wall  built,  of  the
walls  which  were  in  the  Sanctuarie,  which  they  now  call,
The  gate  of  Mercy  :  and  unto  this  gate,  the  Jewes  come  The  Gate  of
to  pray,  before  the  wall, in  the  Court. There  also, I  Mm>
meane,  at  Hierusalem,  in  the  house  which  was  Salomons,
are  the  Stalls  of  Horses  seene,  built  by  Salomon,  a  very
strong  building,  and  consisting  of  very  great  stones  : of
which  manner  of  building  the  like  example  is  not  to  be
seene in all the Land. The Fish-poole also is yet
remayning,  wherein  the  ancient  killed  their  Sacrifices :  and
every  one  of  the  Jewes  write  their  name  there  in  the  wall.
Going  out  at  the  gate  of  Jehosaphat,  they  goe  into  the
Desart,  called  the  Wildernesse  of  the  people,  in  the  which
there  is  the  Monument  of  the  Hand  (or  Pillar  of  Absalon,)  The  pillar  °f
and  the  Sepulchre  of  Uzia  the  King,  and  a  great  Fountaine,  h*?*'  ,,
of  the  waters  of  Siloahh  running  into  the  Brooke  Kedron  : of  King  Uzia.
and  nigh  unto  the  Fountaine,  a  great  building  from  the  TheFountaine
dayes  of  our  Ancestors. But  little  store  of  water  is  found  of  Siloahh.
in  the  Fountaine,  and  the  greatest  part  of  men  living  at
Hierusalem,  drinke  raine-water,  gathered  in  private  Cis-
ternes. But, from the  Valley  of  Jehosaphat, unto the
Mountaine  of  Olives,  they  continually  ascend  :  for  nothing  The  Mountain
lieth  betweene  the  Citie  and that Mountaine, but this  °folwes-
Valley. And  from  the  Mountaine  it  selfe  the  Sodomiticall  The  Sodomiti-
Sea  is  seene  : but  from  that  Sea  unto  the  heape  of  Salt,  ™ f,a:,  ^  f
into  the  which  Lots  wife  was  turned,  are  two  leagues.  $afy  'tnt0  the
For  that  heape  continueth  still,  which,  being  diminished  which  the  wife
by  the  flockes,  sometimes  by  licking,  encreaseth  againe  to  of  Lot  was
the  accustomed  greatnesse  :  from  the  Mountaine  of  Olives  %7*et'-
also,  all  that  plaine  Countrey  is  seene,  through  which  the  s-^m
River  Sitim  runneth  even  unto  the  Mountaine  Nebo.  The  Mountain

Right  over  against  this  new  Hierusalem  standeth  the  Nebo.
Mount  Sion,  on  the  which  no  entire  and  whole  building  ^he  Mount
is  seene,  except  one  Temple  of  the  Christians. Before ton'
Hierusalem  also,  three  houses,  as  it  were,  of  buriall  are
seene,  wherein  the  Israelites  were  sometimes  buried,  and
the  forme  of  the  Graves  is  yet  decent  and  conspicuous,  but
it  is  daily  diminished  by  the  Christians,  who  digge  up  the
viii  545  2  M

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

C.  I  1 60.

stones  for  the  building  of  their  private  houses.  That  space
and  length  of  Jerusalem  is  compassed  with  great  Moun-
taines.  But,  in  the  Mountaine  Sion,  are  the  Sepulchres
of  the  Familie  of  David,  and  of  those  Kings  who  arose
after  David  ;  but  the  place  it  selfe  is  commonly  unknowne.
For,  it  hapned  fifteene  yeeres  since,  that  one  wall  of  the
[II.ix.1446.]  Temple,  which  I  said  to  be  in  the  Mount  Sion,  fell  downe,
which  when,  at  the  commandement  of  the  Patriarch,  the
Priest  of  the  Temple  determined  to  repaire  ;  he  appointed
about  twentie  stones  in  number  to  be  digged  out  of  the
ancient  foundations  of  the  walls  of  Mount  Sion,  for  the
repayring  of  the  worke  of  the  Temple.  And  among  them,
there  were  two  men  confederates,  and  friends ;  whereof
the  one,  on  a  certaine  day  early  in  the  morning  brought
the  other  home  with  him  unto  a  private  Banquet,  and  after
they  had  taken  their  breakfast  together,  when  they  came
to  their  worke,  being  demanded  by  the  Over-seer  of  the
worke,  why  they  came  so  late,  they  answered,  that  they
would  make  amends  for  that  houre  with  continued  labour.
In  the  meane  space,  while  all  the  rest  went  to  dinner,
and  while  they  performed  that  which  they  had  promised,
having  taken  away  a  certaine  stone,  and  finding  the  mouth
of  a  Cave,  they  said  one  unto  the  other :  Let  us  enter  in,
to  see  whether  any  Treasure  lye  hidden  heere.  Going
therefore  in,  they  proceeded  so  long,  untill  they  came  unto
a  certaine  Palace  supported  with  Marble  Pillars,  over-layed
with  Gold  and  Silver,  before  which,  there  was  a  Table,
and  thereupon  a  Scepter,  and  a  golden  Crowne :  and  this
TheSepukher  was  the  Sepulchre  of  David  the  King  of  Israel,  on  whose
of  David  and  left  hand  was  the  Sepulchre  of  Salomon,  with  the  like

oalomon.  «  ,  «  e %  % it*  r

gorgeous  adorning,  and  many  other,  or  the  other  Kings  or
Juda  of  the  Family  of  David,  who  had  beene  buried  there  :
and  there  were  Chests  locked  up,  but  what  they  contayned,
is  yet  to  men  unknowne.  But,  when  those  men  deter-
mined to  enter  into  the  Palace,  being  strucken  with  the
blast  of  a  whirle-wind,  they  fell  downe  dead  upon  the
Earth  out  of  the  mouth  of  the  Cave.  And  they  lay  in  the
same  place  untill  the  evening :  when  being  raised  againe

546

BENJAMIN, SON OF JONAS, A JEW  a.d.

c.  1 1 60.
with  another  blast,  they  heard  a  voice  like  unto  the  voice
of  a  man,  saying  unto  them :  Arise,  and  goe  forth  of  this
place. Whereupon  being  much  moved,  and  stricken  with
an  exceeding  great  feare,  they  went  forth  trembling,  and
reported  the  whole  matter  to  the  Patriarch,  which,  calling  Jewish  Fable,
unto  Abraham  sirnamed  Pius,  a  Constantinopolitan  Phari-  °j^^us
say  living  at  Hierusalem,  he  caused  to  be  declared  by  the  ptus
same  two  men,  who  being  demanded  what  he  thought,  he
said,  that  it  was  the  place  of  the  Sepulchres  of  the  house  of
David,  appointed  for  the  Kings  of  Juda. But,  the  next
day  after,  both  those  men  lying  in  their  beds,  were  found
grievously  sicke  at  home  through  feare,  who  said,  that
they  would  never,  upon  any  conditions,  enter  in  thither
againe,  affirming,  that  it  was  utterly  unlawfull  for  any  man
to  desire  to  goe  thither,  where  God  forbade  him. Where-
fore, by  the  commandement  of  the  Patriarch,  the  place  was
shut  up,  and  concealed  from  the  eyes  of  men  untill  this
day,  by  the  labour  of  men  :  but  Abraham  Pius,  of  whom  I
have  spoken,  declared  the  whole  matter  unto  mee.

Bethlehem  Juda  is two leagues  distant from thence,  Bethlehem,
next  unto  which,  within  halfe  a  mile,  almost,  there  is  the
Sepulchre  of  Rachel,  in  a  place  where  two  wayes  meete  : The  Sepulcher
and  the  Grave  is  made  with  twelve  stones,  according  to  °fRachel-
the  number  of  the  Sonnes  of  Jacob  :  and  over  the  Tombe
there  is  an  Arch  supported  by  foure  Pillars. Moreover,
the  stones  of  the  Tombe  are  ingraven  with  many  divers
names  of  the  Jewes  passing  by  that  way. But,  in  Bethle-
hem there  are  twelve  Jewes,  Dyers  of  Wools. The  Fields
of  the  Towne  have  Rivers  of  waters,  Wells  and  Foun-
taynes.

Travelling  sixe  leagues  from  hence,  I  came  to  Hebron,  Hebron.
seated  in  a  Plaine :  for  Hebron  the  ancient  Metropolitan
Citie  stood  upon  an  hill,  but  is  now  desolate. But  in  the
Valley  there  is  a  field,  wherein  there  is  a  duplicitie,  that  is,
as  it  were  two  little  Valleys,  and  there  the  Citie  is  placed,
and  there  is  an  huge  Temple  there,  called  Saint  Abraham  : The  Temple  of
and  that  place  was  the  Synagogue  of  the  Jewes,  at  what  s*inf
time  the  Countrey  was  possessed  by  the  Ismaelites. But,  Abraham'

547

A.D.

C.  1 1 60.

Abrahams
house.

Beth-Gebarin.

Maressa.

Torondolos

GabraleriSy

Sunam.

Silo.

[II.ix.1447.]

Ramath.
Rama.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

the  Gentiles,  who  afterward  obtayned,  and  held  the  same,
built  sixe  Sepulchres  in  the  Temple  by  the  names  of
Abraham,  Sara,  Isaac,  Rebecca,  Jacob,  &  Lia.  And  the
Inhabitants  now  tel  the  Pilgrims,  that  they  are  the  Monu-
ments of  the  Patriarkes  :  and  great  summes  of  money  are
offered  there.  But  surely  to  any  Jew  commino-  thither,  and
offering  the  Porters  a  reward,  the  Cave  is  shewed  with  the
Iron  Gate  opened,  which  from  Antiquitie,  remayneth  yet
there.  And  a  man  goeth  downe  with  a  Lampe  light  into
the  first  Cave,  where  nothing  is  found,  nor  also  in  the
second,  untill  he  enter  into  the  third,  in  the  which  there  are
the  sixe  Monuments  of  Abraham,  Isaac,  and  Jacob,  Sara,
Rebecca,  and  Lia ;  the  one  right  over  against  the  other :
and  each  of  them  are  ingraven  with  Characters,  and  dis-
tinguished by  the  names  of  every  one  of  them,  after  this
manner,  Sepulchrum  Abraham  patris  nostri,  super  quern
pax  sit  and  so  the  rest,  after  the  same  example.  And  a
Lampe  perpetually  burneth  in  the  Cave,  day  and  night,  the
Officers  of  the  Temple  continually  ministring  Oyle  for
the  maintenance  thereof.  Also  in  the  selfe-same  Cave,
there  are  tuns  full  of  the  bones  of  the  ancient  Israelites,
brought  thither  by  the  Families  of  Israel,  which  even
untill  this  day,  remayne  in  that  selfe-same  place.  But  in
the  very  field  of  Duplicitie,  the  Monuments  of  the  ancient
house  of  our  Father  Abraham,  are  yet  extant  and  to  be
seene,  and  a  Fountayn  springeth  out  before  it,  and  no  man
may  build  an  house  there,  for  the  reverence  of  Abraham.
Beth-Gebarin  is  two  leagues  distant  from  thence,  which
was  sometimes  called  Maressa,  where  there  were  only
three  Jewes.  Five  leagues  Journey  from  hence  I  came  to
Torondolos  Gabraleris,  which  was  sometimes  called
Sunam,  where  are  three  hundred  Jewes.  Three  leagues
from  thence,  is  Saint  Samuel  of  Silo,  to  wit,  a  Towne  in
time  past  called  Siloh,  two  leagues  distant  from
Hierusalem,  where  there  is  a  great  Temple,  and
therein  the  Sepulchre  of  the  Prophet  Samuel,  trans-
lated by  the  Christians  from  Ramath,  which  is  Rama,
after  that  the Ismaelites  were  expelled thence,  and  the

548

BENJAMIN, SON OF JONAS, A JEW  a.d.

C.  I  1 60.

Towne  taken,  where  before  the  bodie  of  Samuel  was
preserved,  buried  in  the  Synagogue  of  the  Jewes.  And
now,  as  I  have  said,  there  is  a  goodly  and  great  Temple  in
Silo,  named  by  them  S.  Samuel  of  Silo  :  and  it  remayneth  Sib.

even  untill  this  day.  Samuel

Departing from thence, and having travelled three
leagues  towards  the  Mountayne  Moria,  I  came  to  Pesipua,  ^ma*
which  is  Gibgha,  the  Countrey  of  Saul,  otherwise  called  Q^^'0f
Gibgha  of  Benjamin,  where  are  no  Jewes. Beth-Nobi  is  Sau/y  or
three  leagues  distant  from  hence,  the  same  beeing  also  Benjamin.
called  Nob,  a  Citie  belonging  to  the  Priests,  where  were  Beth-Nobi.
two  Jewes,  Dyers,  and  in  the  middle  of  that  way,  are  those °  *
two  Rockes,  famous  through  the  memory  of  Jonathan,  Jonathan.
whereof  the  one  is  named  Bolsen,  and  the  other  Sina.  Basien.
Departing from thence, after three leagues I came to  *tna-
Ramas,  which,  in  time  past,  was  Harama  ; part  of  the  Ramas.
walls  and  buildings  whereof  remayneth,  even  from  ancient  Harama.
times,  and  it  is  confirmed  by  the  Inscriptions  of  stones  yet
continuing, and the markes, ruines, and situation are
shewed,  of  a  very  great  Citie,  sometimes,  where  now  there
are  only  three  Jewes. And  there  is  yet  seene  a  field  of
the  Israelites,  two  miles  long,  furnished  with  many  Sepul-
chres of  the  Israelites. Five  leagues  from  hence  standeth
Gapha,  in  time  past  Japho,  called  Jope  by  others,  seated  Gapha.
on  the  Sea ; where  there  is  only  one  Jew,  and  he,  a  Dyer  yM°-
of  Wooll. From  hence,  I  travelled  three  leagues  to  Ebalin,  ^rm
it  is  the  same  Citie  which  was  sometimes  called  Jebna,  jebna.
wherein  the  site  of  an  ancient  Schoole  is  yet  seene,  and
there  is  no  Jew  there. And  this  is  the  furthest  bound  of
the  Tribe  of  Ephraim. From  whence,  having  passed  three
leagues, I  went to  Palmis, sometimes  called  Asdod  or  Pa/mis.
Asotus,  in  time  past,  the  most  famous  Citie  of  the  Palaes-  dsdod.
tines, but now  destroyed : and  in it  there is  no Jew. Asotus-
From  whence  Ascalon  is two  leagues  distant. This  is
Ascalon  surnamed the  new,  built  by  Esdra  the  Priest,
upon  the  Sea  shoare,  which  in  the  beginning,  was  called
Benibera. This  is  foure  leagues  distant  from  the  ancient  Benibera.
Ascalon  of  the  Palaestines,  long  since  wasted. But,  this

549

A.D.

c.  1 160.

KaraimJezveSy
admitting  the
Scripture,  not
Traditions.

Seguras.
Lud.
Zsarezin.
Jesreghel.

Sipuria.

Tsipori.

Hakados.
Hhaijah.
Jonas.

Tiberia.

Jordan.

The  Sea  of

Kinerethj  or

Genezareth.

Asdoth-

hapisgah.

Bathes.

John.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

new  one  is  a  very  great  and  goodly  Citie  frequented  by
many  men  resorting  thither  from  all  places  for  the  cause
of  their  Affaires,  for  that  it  is  seated  in  part  of  the  bounds
of  Egypt.  And  in  it  there  are  almost  two  hundred
learned  Jewes,  among  whom  Tsamahh,  and  Aharon,  and
Salomo,  have  the  preeminence.  There  are  also  about
fortie  of  those  Students,  who  are  called  Literall,  that  is,
conversant  in  the  simple  meaning  of  the  sacred  Books,
and  about  three  hundred  Cuthaei,  or  followers  of  the
Doctrine  of  the  Samaritanes.  And  in  the  middle  of  the
Citie  there  is  a  Well,  which  in  the  Language  of  the
Ismaelites,  the  Inhabitants  call  Bir  Abraham  Alchelil,  that
is  to  say,  the  Well  of  Great  Abraham,  opened  by  Abraham
in  the  dayes  of  the  Palaestines.  From  hence  I  passed  to
Seguras,  the  ancient  name  whereof  was  Lud,  from  whence
in  one  dayes  Journey  and  an  halfe,  I  came  to  Zarezin,
which  is  Jesreghel,  where  there  is  a  certayne  great  Church  :
and  there  is  only  one  Jew  there,  a  Dyer  of  Woolles.
Foure  leagues  from  hence  is  Sipuria,  sometimes  called
Tsipori,  where  are  the  Sepulchres  of  that  great  Master
called  Hakados,  and  Hhaijah,  who  came  up  out  of
Babylon,  and  of  Jonas,  the  Sonne  of  Amithay  the  Prophet,
who  are  buried  in  the  Mountayne :  and  beside  these,  there
are  also  many  other  ancient  Sepulchers.  Three  leagues
from  hence  is  Tiberia,  neere  unto  Jordan  at  the  Lake,
called  the  Sea  of  Kinereth,  or  Genezareth,  into  the  which
Jordan  floweth,  and  runneth  out  towards  the  Salt  Sea  into
the  Land  of  the  Plaine :  and  this  place  is  called  Asdoth-
hapisga,  and  going  forth  from  thence,  it  falleth  into  the
Sea  of  Sodom,  which  is  called  the  Sea  of  Salt.  But,  at
Tiberia,  there  are  almost  fiftie  Jewes  :  and  the  chiefe  among
these,  are  Abraham  the  Seer,  and  Muchthar,  and  Isaac.
And  in  that  place  there  are  hot  waters  springing  out  of
the  ground,  which  they  call  the  Bathes  of  Tiberia ;  and
the  Synagogue  of  Caleb  the  Sonne  of  Jephune  is  there,
not  farre  from  the  Bathes.  There  are  also  very  many
Sepulchres  of  the  Israelites  there,  and  the  most  famous,
those  especially  of  John  the  Sonne  of  Zachai,  and  of

55°

BENJAMIN, SON OF  JONAS, A JEW  ad.

c.  1 1 60.
Jonathan  the  Sonne  of  Levi : all  these  are  in  the  lower  Jonathan.
Galiley. From  hence,  in  two  dayes  Journey  I  came  to
Timin,  which  in  time  past  was  called  Tamnatha,  famous  Timin.
for  the  Sepulchre  of  Samuel  the  Just,  which  is  yet  to  be  Tamnatha.
seene,  furnished  also  with  other  Sepulchers  of  the  Israelites.
From  thence,  after  one  whole  dayes  Journey, standeth
Ghasth,  sometimes  called  Gus  Hhaleb,  where  there  are  Ghasth.
about  twentie  Jewes. Travelling  sixe  leagues  from  hence,  Gus  H^a^-
I  went  to  Maran,  the  ancient  name  whereof  was  Maron.  Maran.
In  it  are  the  Sepulchers  of  Hilel  and  Samai  in  a  Cave,  \JfTJ**
with  twentie  Sepulchers  of  both  their  Disciples,  and  other  §ama\
Monuments  also,  as  of  Benjamin  the  Sonne  of  Jephat,  and
Jehuda  the  Sonne  of  Bathira. Sixe  leagues  from  thence
is  Galmah  famous  for  the  great  buildings  of  the  Sepul-  Galmah.
chers  of  the  Israelites,  where  there  are  fiftie  Jewes. Kadis  Kadis.
is  halfe  a  days  Journey  distant  from  hence,  called  also
Kades  Nephthalim,  upon  the  banke  of  Jordan,  where  are  Kades
the  Sepulchers  of  the  Ancient,  of  Eliezer  the  Sonne  of  NephthaBm*
Gharoch,  and  Eliezer  the  Sonne  of  Azarias,  and  Hunas
surnamed  Rotundus,  and  Rasbac,  and  Jose  of  Galiley.
And  the  Monument  of  Barak  the  Sonne  of  Abinogham,  Barak.
is  yet  remayning  there. Departing  from  this  place  one
whole  dayes  Journey,  I  came  to  Balijuus  in  time  past  called  Balijuus.
Dan,  nigh  unto  which  there  is  a  Cave  whence  Jordan  Dan.
issueth,  which  having  run  three  miles,  receiveth  the  waters  The  head  of
of  Arnon,  comming  out  of  the  borders  of  Moab. Before  jrnon'
the  Cave  it  selfe,  the  markes  of  the  Altar  or  Statue  appeared,
which  one  Micheas  dedicated,  adored  by  the  children  of
Dan  in  those  dayes  ; not  farre  also  from  thence,  the  place
of  the  Altar  is  seene,  erected  by  Jeroboam  the  Sonne  of  [It.ix.1448.]
Nabat,  whereon  that  Golden  Calfe  was  dedicated. And
hitherto  the  bound  of  Israel  extendeth  on  the  side  of  the
furthest  Sea. From  whence  I  made  two  dayes  journey
to  the  Citie  of  Damascus,  the  beginning  of  the  Kingdom  Damascus.
of  Noraldinus,  King  of  the  children  of  Thogarma,  who  Noradinus.Of
are  commonly  called  Turkes. The  Citie  it  selfe  is  exceed-  him  see  before>

1  r  •  I 8 C X

ing  great  and  very  faire,  compassed  with  walls,  but  the * '  '  y
whole  Countrey  is  wonderfully  beautified  with  Gardens

S5i

A.D.
C. I  I  60.

Amna.

Pharphar.

Hermon.

*Makumetan
Church  of
Damascus.

Bone  of  a
Giant.

Enak.

m  Head  of  the
Synagogues,  as
that  James
which  was  by
King  Johns

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

and  Paradises,  contayning  fifteene  miles  on  every  side.
There  is  no  Citie,  elsewhere,  in  all  the  fruitfull  Countrey
seene  like  unto  this :  which  the  two  Rivers,  Amna  and
Pharphar,  falling  downe  from  the  Mountayne  Hermon
doe  inrich.  For  the  Citie  standeth  under  the  Mountayne
Hermon.  The  River  Amna  runneth  into  the  Citie  it
selfe  the  waters  whereof  are  conveyed  through  Pipes,  into
all  the  houses  of  the  Nobilitie,  and  also  into  the  Market
places  and  streets.  And  the  Countrey  it  selfe  is  much
frequented  through  the  Affaires  of  all  Countries.  But
Pharphar  running  by  the  Citie  it  selfe,  doth  water  all  the
Gardens  and  pleasant  places.  And  there  is  a  Synagogue
of  the  Ismaelites  in  the  Citie,  which  they  call  Gumagh
Dumesq,  that  is,  the  *  Mosche  of  Damascus,  the  like
building  whereof  is  no  where  seene  in  the  World  :  and  the
Inhabitants  say,  that  it  was  the  Princely  Palace  of  Ben-
Hadad.  And  there  is  a  wall  of  Glasse  built  by  the  work-
manship of  the  Magicians,  distinguished  with  holes  equall
in  number  with  the  dayes  of  the  Sun,  so  that  every  day
the  Sun  entring  in  at  every  hole  goeth  thorow  the  twelve
degrees  fitted  to  the  houres  of  the  day,  and  so  sheweth  the
time  of  the  yeare  and  day.  But  within  the  Palace  it  selfe
there  are  houses  or  little  Bathes  made  of  Gold  and  Silver,
wherein  there  is  a  Throne  of  the  same  matter,  like  unto  a
great  Vessell,  so  that  it  may  receive  three  men  bathing
together.  Within  the  Palace  I  saw  the  rib  of  a  man
hanging,  of  one  of  the  Enakims,  which  was  nine  Spanish
handfuls  long,  and  two  handfuls  broad  :  and  it  is  reported,
that  he  descended  from  the  most  ancient  Kings  of  Enak,
named  Abchamaz,  as  by  the  ingraven  stone  of  his  Sepul-
chre is  declared  ;  whereon  it  is  also  written  that  he  raigned
over  the  whole  World.  But  at  Damascus  there  are  about
three  thousand  Israelites,  among  whom  there  are  the
Disciples  of  wisemen,  and  such  as  are  rich.  And  the
Head  m  of  the  Assembly  of  the  Land  of  Israel  dwelleth
there,  whose  name  is  Esdra,  and  his  Brother  Sar  Salom  the
chiefe  Judge,  and  Joseph  the  fift  of  the  Assembly,  and
Matsliahh  the  head  of  the  order  of  the  Readers,  and  Mair

552

BENJAMIN, SON OF  JONAS, A JEW  ad.

c.  1 1 60.
the  Crowne  and  glory  of  the  wise  men,  and  Sadik  the Charter Pres-
Physician. There  are  also,  almost,  two  hundred  of  the  hterofallthe
Literall  Expositors,  but  of  the  Cuthaei,  almost  foure  hun-  %™l™d
dred  :  among  all  whom  there  is  great  concord  and  peace,  Karaim.
yet  notwithstanding,  these  divers  Factions  inter-marrie  not
each  with  other.

Departing  from  Damascus,  in  one  whole  dayes  journey
I  went  to  Galgad,  which  was  sometimes  called,  Gilead,  a  Galgad.
large  Countrey,  flowing  with  Rivers  and  Fountaines  of  Gllead-
water, replenished with Gardens and Orchards, in the
which  there  are  about  threescore  Israelites. Halfe  a  dayes
journey  from  hence  standeth  Salcatha,  which  Citie  was  Mentha,
sometime  called,  Saleca. From  whence  the  other  Baghal-  Sakca.
Beik  is  halfe  a  dayes  journey  distant,  the  ancient  name  Baghal-Beik.
whereof  was  Baghala,  seated  in  the  Valley  under  Libanus,
built by Salomon, for the sake and use of Pharaos
Daughter. And  part  of  the  building  of  the  Palace  yet
remayneth,  the  stones  whereof  are  just  twentie  Spanish
handfuls  in  length,  and  twelve  in  bredth,  among  which
there  is  not  one  at  all,  that  is  not  worne :  and  it  is  com-
monly reported,  that  that  building  was  not  made  by  the
hand  of  man,  but  of  *  Asmodey. And  in  the  very  entrance  *That  is,  of  a
of  the  Citie,  a  great  Fountaine  bursteth  forth,  and  runneth  €erta**  &****>
through  the  middest  of  the  Citie. There  is  also  Thadmur  ^m^Mms
seated  in  the  Desart,  built  likewise  by  the  commandement  areaseribedby
of  Salomon,  after  the  same  manner  of  building  and  great-  Superstition.
nesse  of  the  stones  : and  it  is  compassed  with  a  wall, Thadmur.
solitary,  as  I  said,  and  removed  from  other  Habitation,  and
some  dayes  journey  distant  from  Baghala. But,  in  this
Citie,  Thadmur,  there  are  foure  thousand  Jewes,  valiant,
and  ready  and  prepared  for  the  battel : who  make  warre
with  the  Children  of  Edom,  and  with  the  Children  of
Garab,  or  the  Arabians,  commonly  called,  subject  unto  the
Kingdome  of  Noraldinus  : and  they  helpe  the  bordering
Ismaelites. Among  these,  Isaac,  surnamed  Graecus,  and
Nathan,  and  Uziel,  have  the  pre-eminence. Halfe  a  dayes
journey  from  thence  I  came  to  Kirjathin,  called  Kirjathaim  Kirjathin.
in  time  past,  in  the  which  there  are  no  Jewes,  except  one  Kirjathaim.

553

A.D.
C.  I  1 60.

Hamath.

The  River
Jabok.

Great  Earth-
quakes, of
which  see  /.  8,
c.  2.  y  3.
Siha.
Hhatsor.
Lamdin.

Hhaleby  hap-
pily Aleppo.
Aram  Tsoba.

Algub.

Baalit.

[II.ix.1449.]

Balaam.

Kelagh  Gebar.
Selagh
Midbera.
Petra  Deserti.
TheArabians.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES  1

Dyer  of  woolls.  From  whence  departing  one  whole  dayes
journey,  I  entred  into  Hamath,  retayning  the  ancient
name,  seated  under  the  Mountaine  Libanus,  nigh  unto
the  River  Jabok.  But,  in  those  dayes  it  hapned,  that  the
Citie  being  shaken  with  a  great  Earthquake,  about  fifteene
thousand  men  perished  in  one  day :  and  no  more  then
seventie  men  were  remayning  alive,  the  chiefe  is,  Ghola
the  Priest,  and  old  Father  Galeb,  and  Muchtar.  Siha  is
halfe  a  dayes  journey  distant  from  hence,  sometimes  called,
Hhatsor :  from  the  which,  Lamdin  is  no  further  removed
then  three  leagues.  In  two  dayes  journey  from  thence  I
went  to  Hhaleb,  the  ancient  name  of  which  Citie  and
Countrey  was  Aram  Tsoba :  and  it  is  the  Princely  seat  of
King  Noraldinus,  within  the  which  there  is  a  very  great
Palace,  compassed  with  a  wall,  and  there  is  no  Fountaine,
Well,  or  River  in  the  whole  Citie :  but  they  drinke  raine-
water  gathered  in  Cisternes,  which  in  the  Ismaelitish
Language  they  call,  Algub.  There  are  about  one  thou-
sand five  hundred  Israelites  here,  whose  Heads  are,  Moses
the  Constantinopolitan,  and  Israel,  and  Seth.  By  travelling
two  dayes  journey  from  hence,  I  came  to  Baalits,  in  time
past  Pethoran,  and  nigh  unto  the  River  Euphrates,  where
even  untill  this  day,  the  Tower  of  Balaam  the  sonne  of
Beghor,  remayneth  (let  the  name  of  the  wicked  be
abolished)  built  according  to  the  number  of  the  houres  of
the  day :  and  in  that  Citie  there  are  few  Jewes.  From
thence,  it  is  halfe  a  dayes  journey  to  Kelagh  Geber,  which
the  Ancients  called,  Selagh  Midbera,  the  Latines,  Petra
Deserti.  The  Arabians  onely  retayned  this,  after  they
fled  into  the  Desarts,  being  violently  expulsed  by  the
Turkes,  from  their  habitations  and  Cities.  But  here  there
are  almost  two  thousand  Jewes,  and  the  chiefe  of  these,
Sedekias,  Hhaiia,  and  Salomo.

554

BENJAMIN, SON OF  JONAS, A JEW  a.d.

c.  1 1 60.

§.  III.

Of  Mesopotamia,  Mosul,  Bagdat  ;  the  Calipha  ;
the  numbers,  Synagogues,  and  Priviledges  of
the  Jews  in  it,  and  the  places  adjoyning.

Ne  dayes  journey  distant  from  hence  is  Dakia,  which  Daiia.

was  sometime  called  Chalne,  the  beginning  of  the  Chalne.

Land  of  Senaar  (which  is  Mesopotamia)  it  lieth  Senaar.
out  in  length  betweene  the  Kingdome  of  the  Turkes,  and  The  Turkes.
the  Countrey  Sangasar. And  there  are  almost  seventie  Sangasar.
Jewes  there,  over  whom,  Zachai,  and  Nedib,  otherwise
called  c  Sagi  Nehor,  and  Joseph,  have  the  pre-eminence.  Sag*  Nehor.
And  in  this  place  standeth  the  Synagogue  built  by  Esdra,  zThattSyVery

a  /  # o o  •  > honourable

returning from Babylon to Hierusalem. Two dayes
journey  from  thence  is  ancient  Hharan,  in  the  which  there  Hharan.
is  also  a  Synagogue  of  the  like  building,  made  by  the
commandement  of  the  same  Esdra :  but  that  place,  where
the  house  of  our  Father  Abraham  was,  contayneth no
building ; yet  is  it  religiously  respected  by  the  Ismaelites,
and frequented by them for the offering up of their
supplications. Departing  from  thence,  we  travelled  two
dayes  journey  to  the  place  where  a  River  issueth  forth,
called  by  the  Inhabitants  Alchabor,  the  same  also  in  time  Alchabor.
past  being  called,  Hhabor,  which  runneth  forth  into  the  Hhabor.
Province  Madai  or  Media,  and  falleth  into  the  Mountaine  Madai.
Gozen. And  there  are  about  two  thousand  Jewes  there.  ™eata.

y-rOT '  Ptl

From hence, after two dayes journey, is Netsibin or  #*//*#».
Nisibis,  a  great  Citie,  abounding  with  Rivers  of  water,  Nisibis.
where  are, almost, a thousand Jewes. From whence,
travelling two dayes  journey, we came to Gezir Ben-  Gezir  Ben-
Ghamar,  which  Citie  is  contayned  within  the  bankes  of  Gnamar-
the  River  Hidekel,  which  the  people  of  the  West  call  HidekeL
Tygris,  at  the  foot  of  the  Mountaines  Ararat  or  Taurus,  Tygris.
foure  miles,  almost,  distant  from  the  place  where  the  Arke  Ararat.
of  Noe  rested : but  Ghamar-Ben-Alehetab  having  taken  j,he  jr^e  Qr
that Arke from the ridge of the Mountaine, being  a^.
removed,  fitted  it  for  the  use  of  the  Ismaelites  Mosche,

555

A.D.

c.  1 1 60.

Ghamar-Ben-
Alchetab.

Al-Mutsal
Assur.

d  That  is,  a
Prince.
e  Skilfull  in
Astrologie,  in
the  Arabian
Language.
Mutsal  the
beginning  of
Persia.
Ninive.

Adbael.

The  Syna-
gogues of
Abdia,  Jonas,
and  Nahhum.
Rahaba.
Rehhoboth.
Euphrates.

Karkesia.
Charchamis.

A I  Jobar.
Pumbeditha.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES  1

neere  unto  which,  standeth  the  Synagogue  of  Esdra,  even
unto  this  day,  whereunto,  the  Jewes  going  out  of  the
Citie,  assemble  on  festivall  dayes,  to  pray.  And  in  that
Metropolitan  Citie  of  Gezira  Gamar  Ben-Alchetab,  there
are,  almost,  foure  thousand  Jewes,  Mubhhar,  and  Joseph,
and  Hhaiia,  being  the  chiefe.

Two  dayes  journey  distant  from  thence  is  Al-Mutsal,
the  name  whereof  was  sometime,  Great  Assur,  where  are
seven  thousand  Jewes :  the  principall  whereof  are,  Zachai
had  Nassi,  of  the  posteritie  of  King  David;  and  Joseph,
surnamed  eBarhan  al  pelech,  Counsellor  of  King  Zinaldin,
Brother  of  Noraldinus  the  King  of  Damascus.  And  this
Citie  is  the  beginning  of  the  Kingdome  of  Persia,  and
retayneth  that  ancient  largenesse  and  greatnesse,  seated
upon  the  River  Hhidekel,  betweene  which  and  the  ancient
Ninive,  there  is  onely  a  Bridge :  but  Ninive  is  utterly
destroyed :  yet  there  are  Streets,  and  many  Castles  within
the  space  of  the  ancient  circuit,  from  which  unto  the  Citie
Adbael,  is  one  leagues  distance.  But  Ninive  was  built
upon  the  banke  of  Hhidekel.  And  in  the  Citie  Assur
there  are  now  three  Synagogues  of  three  Prophets,  of
Abdia,  of  Jonas  the  sonne  of  Amithai,  and  Nahhum  the
Sonne  of  Elcusseus.  Departing  from  thence,  and  travel-
ling three  dayes  journey,  I  came  to  Rahaba,  by  the  Antient,
called  Rehhoboth,  seated  nigh  unto  the  River  Euphrates,
in  the  which,  there  are  almost  two  thousand  Jewes,  whereof
Ezechias,  Ahud,  and  Isaac,  are  accounted  the  chiefe.  And
it  is  a  very  great  and  goodly  Citie,  compassed  about  with
walls,  and  very  well  fortified,  and  furnished  with  goodly
Suburbs  of  Gardens,  and  places  of  delight.  Upon  the
banke  of  the  same  River  standeth  Karkesia,  sometime
called  Charchamis,  one  dayes  journey  onely,  distant  from
Rahaba ;  in  the  which,  there  dwell  about  five  hundred
Jewes,  Isaac,  and  Elhana  being  the  chiefe.  Two  dayes
journey  from  hence,  we  went  to  Al- Jobar,  the  ancient
name  whereof,  was  Pumbeditha,  seated  in  Nahardugha :
in  the  which,  there  are  about  two  thousand  Jewes,  among
whom  there  are many  Disciples  of  the  Wisemen,  and

556

BENJAMIN, SON OF JONAS, A JEW  ad.

c.  1 1 60.

the chiefe of these are, Great Hen, and Moses, and

Eliakim. The Sepulchres of the Masters, Juda and  Sepulchres.

Samuel, are there accounted memorable. Before each

Sepulchre  stand  two Synagogues,  built  by them  before

their death. There also remayneth the Sepulchre of  Captameof

Bestenai  Hanassi,  who  was  Head  of  the  Transmigration,  \mffrLV€*

and  Nathan,  and  Neheman  the  sonne  of  Papha. Departing  thither.

from  hence,  I  travelled  five  dayes  journey  to  Hharda,  in  Hharda.

the  which,  there  are  about  fifteene  thousand  Jewes,  among

whom  Zachen,  and  Joseph,  and  Nathanael,  are  the  chiefe.

From  this  Citie,  it  is  two  dayes  journey  to  Ghukbera,  the  Ghukbera.

chiefe  Citie,  built  by  Jechonias  the  King  of  Juda,  in  the  Jechonias.

which  there  are  almost  ten  thousand  Jewes,  Jehosuah  and  L AX-l45°-l

Nathan  being  the  principall.

Two  dayes  journey  distant  from  hence  standeth  Bagdad,  Bagdad.

a  great  Citie,  the  beginning  of  the  Kingdome  of  Calipha, Calipha.

named  *Amir  Almumanin  Alghabassi,  of  the  Progenie  of  *That  is,

him,  whom  the  Ismaelites  call  their  Prophet,  who  hath  EmPerorofth^

the  chiefe  authoritie  over  the  whole  Doctrine  and  Sect  of  ieade  thJr  '

the Ismaelites : and for this cause he is accounted  Uves  sorrow-

reverent  and  honorable,  to  all  the  rest  of  the  Kings  of  fully  or

the  Ismaelites :  for  hee  ruleth  over  them  all,  as  a  certaine  p**te**t*

high  Priest  of  them  all. And  within  the  Citie  of  Bagdad  ^£^Jt

it  selfe  he  hath  a  Palace,  built  in  a  plat  of  ground  of  three

miles,  and  within  the  Palace,  there  is  a  Wood  furnished

with  all  kinds  of  Trees  of  the  whole  world,  not  onely

with fruitfull  Trees, but also barren ; replenished also

with  all  sorts  of  Beasts,  and  in  the  middest  of  the  Wood,

an  huge  standing  Poole  of  water,  conveyed  from  the  River

Tigris. But the Calipha walking or supping in that

Wood  for  recreation,  his  servants  exercise  Hawking  and

Fishing,  and  hee  goeth  unto  this  place  accompanied  with

the  traine  of  his  Counsellers  and  Princes. And  the  proper

name  of  this  great  King  is  *A1-Ghabassi  Hhaphtsi,  who  *Thatis,

loveth the Israelites very well, being skilfull in the  huLmble

J  o  observers*

tongues, studious in reading the Law of Moses, who

being  expert  in  the  Hebrew  Language,  both  readeth,  and

also  writeth  learnedly. But  hee  hath  made  this  Religious

557

A.D.

c.  1 1 60.

This  is
observed  by
the  greatest
Mahumetans :
the  Great
Turke  him-
selfe  still
professing  the
exercise  of
some  trade,
though  perhaps
more  for  shew
then  in  such
serious  respect
as  this.
Meka.
JEliman  or
the  South
Countrey  ;  so
they  call
Arabia.

Treason
prevented.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

vow  unto  himselfe,  that  he  would  receive  the  use  neither
of  meate,  drinke,  nor  apparell,  but  through  the  labour  of
his  owne  hands :  for  he  is  an  artificiall  maker  of  the  most
excellent  fine  Mats  and  Coverlets,  which,  being  marked
with  his  owne  Seale,  he  delivereth  to  his  principall  servants,
to  be  sold  in  the  Market,  but  the  Noble-men  of  the
Countrey  buy  them,  and  with  the  money  of  that  trade,  he
procureth  maintenance  for  himselfe :  and  hee  is  a  man  of
an  honest  behaviour,  and  faithfull,  and  religious  after  his
manner,  and  most  curteously  saluteth,  and  speaketh  unto
all  men.  But  the  Ismaelites  may  not  lawfully  behold
him.  But  the  Pilgrims  who  goe  unto  that  famous  house,
called  Meka,  seated  in  the  Countrey  of  iEliman,  from  the
most  remote  Countries,  travell  this  way  through  an
earnest  desire  they  have  to  salute  Calipha ;  and  having
entred  into  the  Palace,  they  crie  out,  O  our  Lord,  the
light  of  the  Ismaelites,  and  the  Sunne-beame  of  our  Law,
shew  us  the  brightnesse  of  thy  face :  to  whose  words  hee
inclineth  not  his  minde.  But  then,  the  Princes  his
familiar  friends  and  servants  speake  unto  him  with  these
words :  Our  Lord,  spread  abroade  thy  peace  upon  these
men  comming  from  remote  Countries,  whom  an  admirable
desire  hath  inforced  to  flye  unto  the  shadow  of  thy  glory.
In  the  selfe  same  houre  therefore,  taking  up  the  wing  of  his
garment,  hee  letteth  it  downe  out  of  the  Window,  which,
the  Pilgrims  comming  unto  it,  religiously  kisse.  And
having  heard  this  answer  from  one  of  those  familiar
Princes,  Goe  in  peace,  for  now  our  Lord,  the  light  of  the
Ismaelites  hath  received,  and  given  you  peace :  for  he  is
supposed  by  them  to  be,  as  it  were,  he  whom  they  call
their  Prophet.  They  therefore  most  joyfully  returne
every  one  into  their  Countrey,  after  they  have  beene
dismissed  in  this  manner  with  such  speech  of  the  Prince,
and  returning  home,  are  received  by  their  brethren,  kins-
folke,  and  familiar  and  inward  friends,  with  the  kissing  of
their  garments.  And  every  one  of  those  Princes  who
serve  the  Calipha,  have  their  severall  Palaces  within  that
huge  Palace,  yet  they  goe  all  bound  with  Iron  Chaines,

558

BENJAMIN, SON OF JONAS, A  JEW  a.d

C. 1 1  DO.

and  over  all  their  houses  there  are  watchfull  keepers  set,

lest  any  one  should  attempt  any  sudden  innovation  against

that mightie King. For it happened once, that his

brethren  conspiring  against  him,  made  a  certaine  other,

one of  their number, ruler over them ; wherefore he

established  it  by  decree,  that  all  the  children  of  his  whole

stocke  and  familie,  should  be  bound  with  Iron  Chaines,

lest  they  should  againe  enterprize  the  like  attempt  against

the  mightie King. But every one  liveth in a  private

Court, reverenced with  great honour, and hath Cities,

Townes, and Countries, from the which he yeerely

receiveth  tributes  and  revenues,  brought  unto  him  by  the

Tresurers :  and  they  feast,  and  give  themselves  to  pleasure

all  their  whole  life. But  in  that  Palace  of  the  mightie  J^ff^f

King,  there  are  buildings  of  an  admirable  greatnesse,  the J

Pillars  whereof  are  of  silver  and  gold,  and  the  inner  parts

of the houses are over-laide with these metals, and

beautified  with  all  kind  of  Precious  stones  and  Pearles  :

out  of  the  which  Palace  he  goeth  forth  once  only  in  the

yeere, on that festival day or Easter, which they cal

Ramadan. And  on  that  day,  great  multitudes  of  men  Rama^any  the

from  divers  and  remote  Countries,  flocke  together  to  see i .

his face. And he is carried upon a Mule, attired in

princely garments, intermingled with gold and silver,

having  his  head  adorned  with  a  Myter,  shining  with  stones

of  incomparable  price : but  he  weareth  a  blacke  Hand-

kerchiefe  upon  the  Myter,  by  carrying  whereof,  he  openly

confesseth  and  shamefacednesse  of  this  world ; as  if  he

should  have  said :  This  great  Majestie  which  yee  behold,

darkenesse  will  obscure  in  the  day  of  death. Moreover,

all  the  Nobilitie  of  the  Ismaelites  accompanie  him,  attired

with  very  goodly  and  costly  garments,  and  sitting  upon

Horses,  the  Princes  of  Arabia,  the  Princes  of  Media,  and  Arabia.

Persia,  and  the  Princes  of  the  Countrey  of  Tuboth,  which  Persia.

is  three  moneths  journey  distant  from  Arabia. But  he  Tuboth.

commeth  forth  of  his  Palace  to  the  great  house  (as  they

call  it)  of  Prayer,  built  in  the  gate  Bosra : for  that  is  Bosra.

accounted  their  greatest  house  of  Prayer. Moreover,  as

559

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

c.  1 1 60.

well  the  men  as  women,  all  who  celebrate  that  day  are

cloathed with Purple and silken garments. You may

also  finde  through  all  the  wayes  and  streets,  all  kindes  of

Instruments,  Songs,  and  Dances,  playing  when  he  passeth

by :  and  Calipha  himselfe  the  mightie  King  is  saluted  by

[II. ix.  1 45 1.]  all,  in  these  words: Peace  bee  upon  thee  our  Lord  the

King, He, I say,  kisseth  his  owne  garment,  wherewith

His  blessing sometimes,  but  sometimes  only  with  his  hand  stretched

peop  e. forth,  he  signifieth  peace  and  salutation  unto  them. And

thus  hee  goeth  unto  the  Court  of  prayer,  where  ascending

into a woodden Turret, he interpreteth his  Law  in a

Learned  men Sermon,  from  an  higher  place. But  then  the  wise  men

°Mah  Tt °^  t^le Ismaelites  arising, having  wished  all  happinesse

Law.  unto  him,  congratulate  his  greatnesse  and  excellent  pietie,

evidently  knowne  by  many  examples,  which  they  desire

to  be  perpetuall. And  surely,  all  enlarge  this  gratulation,

answering,  Amen. And  afterward  he  blesseth  them  all.

Came/1  killed.  Then  presently  a  Camell  being  brought,  is  killed  by  him,

for this is accounted their Paschal!  feast, of the flesh

whereof  he  commandeth  small  pieces  to  be  distributed  to

those  Princes  his  servants,  who  are  to  taste  of  the  beast

slaine  by  their  sacred  King,  at  which  present  they  greatly

rejoyce. And  these things  being  performed  after  their

manner,  they  depart  from  that  house  of  Prayer. But  the

King  returneth  another  way  then  hee  came,  by  the  banke

of  the  River  Tigris,  himselfe  alone. For  the  rest  of  the

Princes  and  servants  returne  by  the  River,  being  carried

in  Boates  before  him,  untill  hee  enter  into  the  Palace.

And  that  way  is  diligently  kept  all  the  yeere  by  Watch-

Caliphas  keep-  men,  lest  peradventure  any  one  enter  into  that  place,  which

ing  home. }s  sacrecj5  through  the  steps  of  his  feete. All  that  whole

Letf0:xt  yeere  after  he  is  conteyned  within  the  Palace,  never  to

Tigris  and goe forth to any other place. But he is of a faire

Euphrates. behaviour, and  according to that sect of  his, just  and

All  these godly. And  hee  hath  built  a  Palace  beyond  the  River,

ui  ings  [ft on t^e v banke of a certaine Arme of the River
seemes)  were  *

destroyed  by Euphrates,  which  floweth  from  the  other  side  of  the  Citie,

the  Tartars, in  the  which  he  hath  built  great  houses  and  Market-places,

560

BENJAMIN, SON OF JONAS, A  JEW  a.d.

C.  1 1 60.

and  also  Hospitals,  fit  for  the  curing  of  poore  sicke  men,  Hospitals.

and  almost  threescore  Physicians  Store-houses  are  reckoned

there,  being  all  abundantly  furnished  with  all  necessary

kindes  of  Spices,  Medicines,  and  other  fit  things  brought

from  the  Kings  house : whatsoever  therefore  is  thought

commodious  for  Medicine,  and  food,  and  for  the  whole

cure,  is  given  to  all  the  sicke  brought  thither,  at  the  Kings

cost,  untill  they  happen  to  bee  recovered. Besides,  there

is  another  Palace  in  the  same  place,  which  is  called  Dar  Dar  dlma-

Almarapthan, that is, the house of Mercie, for the  Bethlehem

including  of  all mad persons found in the Countrey ;  Hospital/ for

every  one  whereof  are  bound  with  Iron  Chaines,  untill  the  Mad.

they  returne  to  their  wits : for  then  they  are  every  one

permitted  to  depart  unto  their  houses,  the  men  to  whom

that  charge  is  committed,  looking  unto  it,  and  examining

the  same  every  moneth. All  these  things  are  ordained

by  that  King, for  the  bestowing  of  almes  and benefit

commonly,  to  all  comming  thither,  who  are  either  mad,

or  troubled  with  any  other  disease. For,  as  we  have  said,

he  is  of  a  mercifull  and  kind  disposition,  and  of  a  good

minde.

And  in  the  same  Citie,  called  Bagdad,  there  are  about  Jewes  at
a  thousand  Jewes,  living  in  great  quietnesse  and  peace, a&daU
and  very  honestly  used  under  the  dominion  of  that  King,
surnamed,  the  Great,  among  whom  there  are  some  very
learned  men,  the  chiefe  of  the  Assemblies,  greatly  con-
versant in  the  studie  of  the  Law  of  Moses. But  there
are  ten  Assemblies  there,  the  head  of  the  greatest  whereof,
is  Samuel  the  sonne  of  Heli :  next,  the  heads  of  the  other
Assemblies  are,  Gaon  Sagan  the  Levite,  of  the  second :
but  of  the  third, Daniel Sod : of  the  fourth, Eliezer
Hahhaber :  and  Eliezer  Ben  Tsamahh,  head  of  the  Order,  The  head  of
who  is  descended  from  the  Prophet  Samuel,  and  with  his  theCapttvtue^
Brethren  playeth cunningly  upon musicall Instruments,  Zhat^uattie.
that  is,  upon  the  Psalteries,  with  the  same  skill  which  was
then used when the house of the Sanctuarie was yet
standing ; hee  is  head  of  the  fift  Assembly : and  of  the
sixt  Hhasadias,  the  flower  of  his  Companions ; Haggaeus

VIII  561  2N

A.D.

C.  1 1  60.

*  The  power
which  the
J  ewes  had,
was  both
limited  to
Jewish  cases
and  persons,
and  under  the
Saracen
Magistrates
inspection,  as
the  Greeke
Patriarke  and
BB.  under  the
Turke,  a
slavish  power
dearely
bought,  and
executed  at
will  of  the
seller,  where
Jewish  affec-
tion hath  not
enlarged.
The  Countrey
of  Senaar.
Persia.
Charsan.
Seba,  which  is
also  Aliman,
andDiarbeich.

PURCHAS HIS PILGMMES

Hanassi  ruleth  the  seventh  Assembly :  Esdras  the  eight :
Abraham,  surnamed  Abutahar  the  ninth :  the  tenth  and
last  Zachaeus  Ben  Basathnai.  All  these  are  called  Vacant,
because  they  doe  no  other  thing  but  governe  the  Societie.
But  they  exercise  judgements,  and  execute  justice  to  all
the  Jewes  of  that  Countrey  all  the  dayes  or  the  weeke,
except  the  second  day  wherein  they  all  assemble  before
Great  Samuel,  the  head  of  the  Assembly,  and  honor  of
the  Jacobides,  who,  together  with  those  ten  Vacants,  the
heads  of  the  Assemblies,  doe  justice  to  every  one  requiring
the  same.  Notwithstanding  the  greatest  of  all  these,  is
Daniel  the  sonne  of  Hhasdai,  called  the  head  of  the
Captivitie,  who  hath  a  booke  of  his  Genealogie,  derived
even  from  David.  The  Jewes  call  him  our  Lord,  and  the
head  of  the  Captivitie.  And  the  Ismaelites  call  him  Sidna
Ben  David,  that  is,  our  Lord,  the  sonne  of  David.  And
he  hath  great  authoritie  over  all  the  Congregations  of  the
Israelites,  under  the  hand*  of  Amir  Almonin,  Lord  of
the  Ismaelites :  whose  decree  was  this,  appertaining  even
unto  his  Posteritie,  adding  and  delivering  also  a  Seale  of
authoritie  over  all  the  Colledges  of  the  Israelites,  what-
soever contayned  within  the  jurisdiction  of  his  Law,  to
whom  for  the  cause  of  honor,  he  hath  commanded  all  men,
as  well  Ismaelites  as  Jewes,  to  arise  up  and  salute,  and
Nations  also  of  whatsoever  faction ;  he  that  shall  doe
otherwise,  let  him  be  punished  with  an  hundred  stripes.
But  when  he  commeth  forth  to  visit  the  Great  King,  he  is
guarded  with  a  great  number  of  Horse-men,  Jewes  and
Gentiles  accompanying  him,  a  Cryer  going  before  him,
proclayming  these  words :  Prepare  yee  the  way  for  the
Lord  the  sonne  of  David,  as  it  is  meete ;  and  they
proclaime  it  in  their  Language.  But  he  is  carried  upon
an  Horse,  cloathed  with  silken  and  embroydered  garments,
he  adorneth  his  head  with  a  Miter,  upon  the  Miter  he
weareth  a  white  Shash,  and  upon  the  Shash  a  Chaine.
And  all  the  Colledges  of  the  Israelites  of  the  Countrey
of  Senaar,  Persia,  Gharsan,  and  Seba,  which  is  now  called
Aliman,  and  Diarbeich,  and  of  all  the  Countrey  of  Meso-

562

BENJAMIN, SON OF JONAS, A JEW  a.d.

C.  I  1 60.

potamia,  and  the  Province  Rut,  whose  Inhabitants  dwell  in
the  Mountaynes  of  Ararat,  and  of  the  Countrey  Alania,  [II.nc.1452.]
which  is  inclosed  round  about  with  very  high  Mountaines,  D^nt
and  have  no  entrance  or  way  to  goe  forth  except  the  Iron
Gates  placed  there  by  Alexander,  where  that  Nation  called
Alan  dwelleth : besides,  of  the  Countries  of  Sicria,  and  Sicria.
all  the  Land  of  Thogarmin,  even  unto  the  Mountaines  Thf  Moun~
Asna,  and  of  the  Province  of  the  Gerganaei,  even  unto  Q*'*J!fa
the  River  Ghihon. But  the  Gerganaei  are  the  same  People  wj^  a/so  a\e
that  are  called  Gergasaei,  now  Christians,  and  unto  the  the  Gergasau
Gates  of  the  best  Countries  and  Lands,  even  unto  India,  I
say,  the  Colledges  of  all  these  Countries, through  the
authoritie  and  power  of  this  man,  Prince  of  the  Captivitie,
chuse  every  one  their  Head  and Minister,  who  being
chosen,  come  unto  him  to  receive  authoritie,  and  imposi-
tion of  hands : and  unto  him, Gifts  and  Presents  are
brought  from  all  the  borders  of  the  Land. And  he  hath
publike  houses,  let  for  advantage,  which  they  call  Fondaci,
and  hath  also  Orchards  and  Gardens  in  Babylon,  and  very
many  possessions  received  from  his  Ancestors  by  the  right
of  Inheritance,  but  no  man  dare  violently  take  or  carrie
away  any  thing  from  him. He  hath  also  houses  to  be
let,  and  of  Merchandizing,  for  the  use  of  the  Jewes. He
receiveth  also  a  certaine  tribute  yeerely  out  of  the  Markets,
and  from  the  Merchants  of  the  Land,  besides  that  which  ^  So  is  the  Con-
he  receiveth,  brought  unto  him  from  remote  Countries,  stantinopolitan
Therefore  he  is  exceeding  rich,  and  diligently  conversant  Patrt^r^now
and  learned,  as  well  in  the  sacred  as  in  other  bookes  of  t0  the  Turjtes
humane  knowledge  :  and  he  feedeth  many  of  the  Israelites  tpooDuckets
by  his  daily  hospitalitie. But,  at  what  time  any  man  of  tribute  y  and
this  Familie  is  made  Head  of  the  Captivitie,a  hee  bringeth  a/most  as  mueA
forth  great  summes  of  money,  and  giveth  first  unto  the °t  a ^m%$
King  himselfe,  and  next  unto  the  Princes  and  Magistrates,  not  admitted  to
And  the  same  day  wherein  the  King  layeth  his  hand  upon  sit  with  them,
him,  to  grant  him  authoritie  and  principalitie,  the  second  £f[ e^%  f
Chariot  of  the  King  is  prepared  and  covered  for  him  to  crJa^naTtfe
ascend  into  it,  and  to  be  brought  from  the  Palace  unto  Head  of  the
his  owne  house  with  great  pompe  and  singing,  and  with  Captivitie.

S63

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

C.  1 1 60.

the  striking  up  of  Drums,  and  sound  of  the  Fluits. But

he  himselfe  exerciseth  the  imposition  of  hands  towards  the

men  of  the  Assemblie. And  the  Jewes  Inhabitants  of  that

That  is, Metropolitan  Citie  are  the  Disciples  of  b  Wise-men,  and

Rabbins  and ver7  T1C^  :  anc^  e^ght  and  twentie  Synagogues  are  numbred

Students  of  the  in  the  Citie  of  Bagdat  it  selfe,  and  in  Parech,or  the  Suburbs

Talmud.  which  are  beyond  Tigris. For  the  River  runneth  through

28.  Synagogs the  Metropolitan  Citie  it  selfe. But  that  great  Synagogue,

*g  & which  appertayneth  to  that  man  who  is  the  Head  of  the

Captivitie,  is  built  with  marble  stones,  divers  and  most

excellent,  of  all  colours,  garnished  with  Gold  and  Silver :

and  in  the  very  Pillars,  Verses  of  the  Psalmes  are  read,

ingraven  in  golden  letters. Moreover,  before  the  Arke,

the  ranks  of  ten  seats  are  there  distinguished  with  marble

steps ; in  the  highest  whereof,  the  Head  of  the  Captivitie

sitteth  with  the  chiefest  of  the  Familie  of  David. But

the  Metropolitan  Citie  it  selfe  is  great,  in  the  which  also  a

Citie,  like  a  Castle  is  contayned,  fortified  with  a  wall  of

three  miles  circuit  about. The  Countrey  aboundeth  with

the  most  excellent  Palme-trees,  Gardens  and  Orchards,  of

all  the  Land  of  Senaar,  and  is  frequented  by  the  most

gallant  Merchants  and  Factors  of  all  Countries,  and  main-

tayneth  learned  men  and  Philosophers,  and  Students  of

all the Mathematicall  Artes,  Divinations, and Inchant-

ments.

Departing  two  dayes  journey  from  thence  I  came  to

Gekaga. Gehiaga,  the  ancient  name  whereof  was  Resen,  sometimes  a

great  and  very  famous  Citie,  in  the  which  there  are  almost

five  thousand  Israelites ;  and  they  have  a  great  Synagogue,

with  a  place  of  buriall  next  unto  the  Synagogue :  and  in

the  burying  place  a  Cave,  famous  for  the  Sepulchres  of

certaine  ancient  learned  men. One  dayes  journey  distant

Babel  from  hence,  standeth  that  ancient  Babel,  contayning  thirtie

miles  in  compasse,  but  now  utterly  destroyed,  where  the

The  mines  of  ruines  of  Nabuchodonosors  Palace  are  yet seene, inac-

Nebuchodo- cessible  to  men,  by  reason  of  the  divers  and  noysome  kinds
nosors  Palace. r  n  I  ^i  ,. .  ,  XT /

or  berpents  and  Dragons  living  there. Not  above  twentie

miles  distant  from  these  ruines,  twentie  thousand  Israelites

564

BENJAMIN, SON OF JONAS A  JEW  ad.

C.  1 1 60.

dwell,  who  powre  forth  their  prayers  in  the  Synagogues ;
the  chiefe  whereof  is  that  uppermost  ancient  Floore  of
Daniel, built  with square stones  and Brickes, and  the
Temple and Palace of Nabuchodonosor of the same
matter,  and  the  Fornace  of  burning  fire,  into  the  which,  The  Fornace
Hananias,  Misael,  and  Azarias  were  cast. And  all  these  of  burning
things  are  seene  in  the  Valley  well  knowne  to  all. From  which  nana_
thence  we  passed  five  miles  to  Hhilan,  where  are  almost  nmtaSj  Misael,
ten  thousand  Israelites,  divided  into  foure  Synagogues,  and  Azarias
whereof  one  was  the  Synagogue  of  M  Aar,  who  lieth  we™ ca$L
buried  there  :  next  unto  whom  also,  are  the  Sepulchres  of %  an'
Great  Zeghirus  the  sonne  of  Hama,  and  of  Great  M  Aar  : The  Tower  of
and  the lewes  daily  assemble thither  to pray. From  Ba^e^

'  •  T  starr sir itt  thfi

thence,  are  foure  miles  unto  the  Tower  which  the  Children  ~  *>  .  ,'

r 1 1  • • • 1  i-ii i_  •  1  1 r 1 Spanish  tongue

or  the  division  began  to  build,  which  was  made  or  that  called,
kinde  of  Bricke,  which  in  the  Arabian  Language  is  called,  Mazari.
Lagzar. The  length  of  the  Foundation  conteyneth  almost  The  Brickes
two  miles,  but  the  bredth  of  the  walls  is  two  hundred  and  fe  S;Jn^fsL

r  ,  .  n ,  . !  ,  .  ,  broad,o.  thick,

rortie  cubits: and  where  it  is  broadest,  it  contayneth  an  I2)/ w-lth

hundred  Canes. Betweene  the  space  of  ten  Canes,  there  Canes

are wayes made out at length throughout the whole  betwixt,  the

building  in  the  forme  of  a  wreathed  rundle ; ascending  °ttiM*n&  \s  not

which  from  the  highest  place,  the  fields  are  beheld  twentie  na™out  some

miles  off : for  the  Countrey  it  selfe  is  very  broad  and  say,  but  a

plaine. But  this  building  was  sometimes  stricken  with  quarter;  per-

lightning from Heaven, and destroyed even unto the  haPs  a  &°°d ,
1  °  part  carried

lowest  part.  * w . ,

Halfe  a  dayes  journey  from  hence  is  Naphahh,  where  time  of

are  almost  two  hundred  Jewes : and  the  Synagogue  of  Benjamin.

that  Great  Isaac,  surnamed  Naphhaeus,  is  there,  who  lieth  Napkahh.

buried  right  over  against  it. Three  leagues  from  thence  TJ**Synagi>gie

o  /?.t  .  of  JhjZephiel

is  the  Synagogue  of  Ezechiel  the  Prophet,  nigh  unto  the  t^e  pr%heL

River  Euphrates  ;  and  in  the  same  place  right  over  against  [II.ix.1453.]

the Synagogue, are threescore Towers in number, and

betweene  every  Tower  also,  there  are  severall  Synagogues,

and  in  the  Court  of  the  Synagogue  there  is  an  Arke ; and

behind  the  Synagogue,  the  Monument  of  Ezechiel  the

sonne  of  Buz  the  Priest,  under  a  great  and  very  goodly

565

A.D.

c.  1 1 60.

The  River
Cobar.

Jewish

Pilgrimage

yeere/y.

Continual/
light  and
continued
darknesse.

GreatTemple.

The  house  of
refuge.

TheSepulchres
ofHananiaSy
Misael,  and
Azarias.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Vault,  built  by  Jechonias  King  of  Juda,  together  with  five
and  thirtie  thousand  Jewes,  who  followed  him  by  Evil-
merodak  delivered  out  of  Prison.  And  this  place  is
betweene  the  River  Cobar,  and  the  River  Euphrates.
And  Jechonias,  and  they  who  came  with  him,  are  engraven
in  the  very  walls  ;  Jechonias  first,  but  Ezechiel  last.  And
this  place  is  holy,  even  unto  this  day.  And  unto  that
place  at  a  certaine  time,  many  assemble  for  the  cause  of
prayer,  from  the  beginning  of  the  yeere  unto  the  feast  of
Expiations :  and  there  they  live  most  pleasant  dayes.  And
that  principall  man,  whom  they  call  the  Head  of  the
Captivitie,  with  the  other  Heads  of  the  Assemblies,  come
hither  also  from  Bagdat,  and  abide  all  in  that  field  for  two
and  twentie  miles  together,  pitching  their  Tents  in  divers
places.  Moreover,  the  Arabian  Merchants  come  thither,
and  the  greatest  and  most  frequented  Faires  are  kept  there.
But  at  this  time,  a  great  Booke,  renowmed  for  authoritie
and  antiquitie,  written  by  Ezechiel  the  Prophet,  is  brought
forth,  wherein  they  reade  on  the  day  of  Expiation.  And
upon  the  Sepulchre  of  Ezechiel,  a  Lampe  continually
burneth  day  and  night,  since  it  was  first  lighted  by  the
same  Prophet,  for  the  which,  Oyle  and  Thread  are
ordinarily  distributed  and  tempered.  There  is  also  a
certaine  great  sacred  Temple  there,  full  of  bookes  kept  as
well  from  the  time  of  the  first  house,  as  of  the  second :
and  it  is  and  was  the  custome,  that  they  who  had  no
children,  should  consecrate  their  Bookes  in  that  place.
Moreover,  Vowes  are  made  in  that  place,  to  be  performed
by  the  Jewes  dwelling  in  Media,  and  Persia.  The
principall  men  also  of  the  Ismaelites  resort  hither  to  pray,
among  whom  the  authoritie  and  reverence  of  the  Prophet
Ezechiel  is  great,  the  name  of  which  place  in  their
Language  is  Dar  melihha,  that  is,  The  house  of  the
Congregation ;  and  thither  all  the  Arabians  come  for  cause
of  prayer.  About  halfe  a  mile  distant  from  this  place,  the
Sepulchres  of  Hananias,  Misael,  and  Azarias,  are  seene,
with  each  of  their  great  and  goodly  Arches.  And
although  warre  happen  in  those  Countries, there  is  no

566

BENJAMIN, SON OF JONAS, A  JEW  a.d.

c.  1 1 60.
mortall man that dare violate or touch these places ;
neither  of  the  Jewes  nor  Ismaelites,  for  the  reverence  of
the  Prophet  Ezechiel. From  thence  you  travell  three
I  miles  to  the  Citie  Alkotsonath,  in  the  which  there  are  The  Citie
almost three hundred Jewes, and there also are the  Alkotsonath.
Sepulchres  of  Great  Papha,  and  Huna,  and  Master  Joseph
Sivaeus,  and  of  Joseph  the  sonne  of  Hhama. And  right
over against every one of them, there are severall
Synagogues,  in  the  which  the  Jewes  daily  assemble  for  the
cause  of  prayer. From  hence  to  Ghein  Saphta  are  three  GheinSaphta.
leagues,  where  is  the  Sepulchre  of  Nahum  the  sonne  of
Elcusaeus the  Prophet. It  is one dayes  journey  from
thence  to  Caphar  le  Paras,  a  famous  place  for  the  Sepulchres  Caphar  le
of  Hhassidai,  and  Ghakiba,  and  Dusa. Capharmehamid-  %"'*?'
bar  is  halfe  a  dayes  journey  distant  from  thence,  where  my^m "
Master  David,  and  Jehuda,  and  Kuberia,  and  Sehora,  and
i  Abba  lie  buried. One  dayes  journey  from  thence  is  the
River  Liga,  where  the  Sepulchre  of  King  Sedechia  is,  The  River
beautified  with  a  great  Arch. One  dayes  journey  from  ~|*'„
hence  standeth  the  Citie  Kupha,  famous  for  the  monument  0f$eJfcfiiasre
of  King Jechonias, of  great workmanship, right over  Kupha.
against  which,  a  Synagogue  is  built ; and  in  this  place The  Sepulchre
there are almost seven thousand Jewes. One dayes  of  Jechonias.
journey  and  an  halfe  from  thence  standeth  Suria,  which  Suria.
the  Ancient  called, Matha  Mahhasia,  in  the  which  the  Matha
Heads  of  the  Captivitie,  and  the  chiefe  of  the  Assemblies, Mahhasta-
were  in  the  beginning :  and  great  men  are  buried  there,
Sarica,  and  his  sonne  Haai, and Saadias  the  sonne  of
Piiumus,  and  Semuel  the  sonne  of  Hhophin  the  Priest,
and  Sephanias  the  sonne  of  Chussi  the  sonne  of  Gedolia  The  Sepulchre
the  Prophet,  and  very  many  other  of  the  Heads  of  the  °f$ePhamus-
Captivitie,  Princes  of  the  Familie  of  David,  and  principall
men  of  the  Assemblies,  who  abode  there  in  the  beginning,
before  the  destruction thereof. You travell  two  dayes
journey  from  hence  to  Sephiththib,  situated  in  Nahardagha.  Sephithib.
But  from  thence  to  Elnachar,  is  one  dayes  journey  and  an  Nabardagha.
halfe,  called  also  Pebeditha, seated  upon  the  banke  of  Elnachar.
Euphrates,  where  his  Synagogue  is  seene,  who  by  the  Peheditha-

567

Seba.
Aliman.

Rechab.
Theima.

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGR1MES

c.  1 1 60.

figure  Antonomasia,  is  called  Rab,  and  of  Samuel,  nigh
unto  the  which  also  are  their  Monuments.

§.  IIII.

Strange  reports,  if  true,  of  the  Aliman  Jewes.  Oj
Persia,  and  David  Elroi.  Of  the  Nisbor  Jewes.
and  some  places  of  India.

Rom  thence  travelling  through  the  Desart,  you  go<
unto  the  Countrey  Seba,  which  is  now  called,  th<
Land  of  Aliman,  bordering  upon  the  Countre]
Senaar  on  the  North,  the  length  whereof  contayneth  on<
and  twentie  dayes  journeys  to  be  made  through  the  Desarts  :
and  in  this  Countrey  those  Jewes  dwell,  who  are  called,

Thesonnes  of  the  Sonnes  of  Recab,  otherwise,  the  men  of  Theima.  F01
Theima  is  the  beginning  of  their  Dominion,  whom  no1
Hanan  Hanassi  governeth.  And  the  Citie  of  Theima  il
selfe  is  great,  and  populous.  Their  Countrey  is  extende(
sixteene  dayes  journey,  betweene  the  Mountaines  whicl

[II. ix.  1454.]  are  called,  Northerly,  beautified  with  great  and  well  forti-
fied Cities,  and  not  subject  to  the  yoke  of  any  forrain*
Nation  :  from  whence  the  Inhabitants  going  forth,  spoyL
all  the  bordering  and  also  the  remote  Nations,  how  man;
soever  they  be,  even  unto  the  Arabians,  who  are  in  leagu<
with  them.  But  the  Arabians  are  they  who  dwell  ii
Tents,  and  have  moveable  Habitations  in  the  Desarts  ol
their  Countrey,  and  invade  strange  Countries  for  prey,  ii
all  that  Countrey  of  Aliman  :  and  those  Jewes,*  whom  w<
now  mentioned,  manure  grounds  and  pastures ;  possess<
Heards  and  Cattell,  having  a  very  large  and  vast  Countrey,
who  give  the  Tenths  of  all  their  revenues  to  the  use  ol

*  Vertomannus  mentioneth  Arabian  Jewes  potent  and  cruell,  securec
more  by  Desarts  and  Hills,  then  any  greatnesse  of  their  owne  :  as  alsc
in  Abassia  some  Jewes  live  in  manner  free,  on  steepe  Hills.  But  this
freedome  is  a  continual  slavery,  and  siege  ;  the  Arabians  alwaies  endan-
gering the  one,  and  as  it  were,  besieging  them,  as  the  Abassines  the  other.
Neither  yet  doe  I  thinke  but  their  Countrey  is  here  enlarged  far,  by  the
Jewish  relations  to  our  Author.  For,  Cities  and  Townes  in  Arabia
seeme  not  to  be  so  frequent  and  populous.

568

BENJAMIN, SON OF JONAS, A  JEW  ad.

C. I  I  60.

the Disciples  of Wise-men, perpetually applying their

studie  to  Doctrine  and  Sermons,  and  of  the  Pharisies,  who  Jewes  called

lament Sion, and bewayle Hierusalem, continually  ^^7 '\ "

abstayning  from  Flesh,  and  Wine,  and  alwaies  cloathed  with  ^1Q%  §/2/

mourning  and  poore  apparell,  dwelling  in  holes  or  little

Cottages,  and  fasting  every  day  except  the  Sabbath,  with

continuall  prayers  also  beseeching  the  sacred  Majestie,  and

begging  the  mercy  of  God  towards  the  deliverance  of  the

Captivitie  of  Israel. All  the  Jewes  also  desire  the  same ;

to  wit,  the  men  of  the  Countrey  of  Theima,  and  Telimaas, Theima.

in  the  which  there  are  almost  an  hundred  thousand  Jewes  : rJh*ma*s',

1  itt  1 • 1  • r  . lnis  seemetn

among  whom  Selomoh  Hanasst,  that  is  the  chiete,  and  a  genealogicall

his  Brother  Hhanan  Hanassi,  are  of  the  Progenie  of  David  Fable,  as  some

the  King:  which  the  Booke  of  the  Familie  from  age  to  other  Relations

age  derived,  plainly  declareth. And  all  these  goe  with  whkh^ehad

p.  ?r  J  1 r r • 1 •  r  hit  Jrom  "ts  coun-

tneir  garments  rent,  and  fast  fortie  daies,  for  all  the  Jewes  trimen% My
sakes  living  in  Captivitie. But  that  Province  hath  about  rule  is  Cassia-
fortie Cities, two hundred Townes, and an hundred  num  l^ud> cui
Castles. But  the  Metropolis  and  Head  is  Thenai,  and  ^/{f/6™
the  summe  of  the  Jewes  inhabiting  in  all  those  Cities,  con-  jewi$h
tayneth  almost  three  hundred  thousand  men. Moreover, Temple,  or  a
that chiefe  Citie is largely compassed with very wide  Jesuite  his
and ample walls, so that it hath fields within it, Romsh-
and affoordeth the abilitie and commoditie of sow- Qhurch  Hook
ing and reaping Corne. For, it contayneth fifteene  w\th  both  eies,
miles in length, and as many also in bredth. And  a?idscarcelybe-
the Palace of Salomon Hanassi is there : and the  keve Relation,
Citie it selfe is very faire, and furnished with most  \*™fj^ned
pleasant  Gardens  and  Orchards. Tilmaas  also  is  no  lesse  and  Miracle.
goodly  and  great  a  Citie,  which  about  an  hundred  thousand  Thenai  the
Jewes  inhabit,  seated  betweene  two  very  high  Mountaines,  Metropolitan
and  very  strongly  fenced,  full  of  learned  and  wise  men,  of  Crttte  °fthe
the  which,  many  are  rich. Chibar  is  three  dayes  journey TMma.
distant from Tilmaas: and they report, that they are Tilmaas.
Reuben,  and  Gad,  and  the  Tribe  of  Manasse,  taken  by Chibar.

Salmanasar  the  King  of  the  Assyrians  and  sent  hither,  and  Sic.  Perhibent,

qui  de  magnis

maiora  loquuntur. Credat  Judaus  appella. Here  and  else  where  make  difference  of  what  he

saw,  and  what  he  received  of  his  fabulous  countrimen.

5^9

A.D.
C.  1 1 60.

Chibar.

Hodu.  India.

The  river
Vira.

Neasat.

Bosra.

Samura.

Esdras.
Artaxerses.

Chuzsethan.
Elam.

Susan  Habira.
The  Palace  of
Assuerus  the
King.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

that  they  built  these  great  and  well  fortified  Cities,  and
going  forth  of  these  places  they  made  warres,  and  yet
warre  with  all  the  bordering  Kingdomes ;  and  that  no
man  is  able  to  come  unto  them,  by  reason  of  the  vast  and
huge  Desarts,  voyd  of  all  succour  for  eighteene  dayes
journey  together.  And  Chibar  is  also  a  great  Citie,  where
fiftie  thousand  Israelites  dwell,  whereof  many  are  learned
men,  and  very  many  most  valiant,  who  make  warre  with
the  children  of  Senaar,  and  with  the  Northerne  Countries
and  the  bordering  Inhabitants  of  Eliman.  But  this  is
Hodu,  that  is  pertayning  to  India,  from  which  you  are  to
travell  five  and  twentie  dayes  journey  unto  the  River  Vira,
which  runneth  through  the  Countrey  of  Eliman,  where
three  thousand  Israelites  dwell.  Travelling  seven  dayes
journey  from  hence,  you  come  to  Neasat,  where  are  seven
thousand  Israelites,  among  whom,  Nedaian  is  accounted
a  great  man.  But,  from  thence  you  travell  five  dayes
journey  to  Bosra,  seated  on  the  River  Tigris,  in  which,
there  are  a  thousand  Israelites,  of  the  which  very  many
are  the  Disciples  of  the  Wise-men,  and  many  are  accounted
rich.

Two  dayes  journey  distant  from  hence,  is  the  River
Samura,  the  beginning  of  the  Countrey  of  Persia,  with  a
Citie  of  the  same  name,  wherein  a  thousand  and  five
hundred  Jewes  dwell.  And  that  place  is  famous  for  the
Sepulchre  of  Esdras,  the  Scribe  &  Priest,  who  comming
Embassador  from  Hierusalem  to  Artaxerses  the  King,
dyed  there.  But  before  his  Sepulchre  a  great  Synagogue
is  built  by  the  ancient  Fathers,  and  on  the  other  side,  the
Ismaelites  have  built  an  House  of  Prayer,  for  the  great
affection  they  bare  towards  that  man :  which  also  is  the
cause,  that  the  Ismaelites  love  the  Jewes  resorting  unto
that  place  to  pray.  Foure  miles  distant  from  thence
standeth  Chuzsethan,  called  Elam  in  former  time,  the
Countrey  of  the  Elamites,  a  very  great  Citie,  but  for  the
most  part,  now  destroyed,  wasted,  and  without  Inhabi-
tants :  among  the  ruins  whereof,  Susan  Habira  is  yet  to
be  seene,  the  huge  Palace  of  K.  Assuerus,  built  with  very

57o

BENJAMIN, SON OF JONAS, A JEW  a.d.

C.  1 1 60.

goodly  workemanship,  many  parts  and  examples  of  Art
yet  remayning  of  that  Princely  and  admirable  building.
In  this  Citie  there  are  seven  thousand  Jewes,  who  are
assembled  in  fourteene  Synagogues ; and  before  one  of
them  standeth  the  Sepulchre  of  Daniel: and  the  River  The  Sepulchre
Tigris  runneth  through  the  Citie  it  selfe,  and  also  divideth  °fDameL
the  habitation  of  the  Jewes :  and  on  the  one  side  of  the
River,  they  are  all  very  rich  whosoever  dwell  there,  and
they  have  Market  places  very  well  furnished  with  Mer-
chandizes and  Trading : but  on  the  other  dwell  all  the
meaner  and  poorer  sort,  who  have  no  Markets,  no  Trading,
nor  Gardens  or  Orchards,  so  that  upon  a  certaine  time  they
conceived  envie  against  the  other,  and  supposed  that  the
riches and fertilitie happened unto them, through the
Neighbour-hood of  Daniel the  Prophet buried there :
wherefore  they  required  of  them,  that  the  Sepulchre  of
Daniel  might  bee  permitted  to  bee  translated  unto  their
Quarter. Which  when  it  was  constantly  denyed,  they  [II.ix.1455.]
first  fell  to  brawling,  and  afterward  to  battell  and  fight,
with  great  slaughter  on  both  sides  for  manydayes  together,
untill  at length being both weary, they agreed upon
Covenants  and  conditions, that every  other  yeere, the
Tombe  stone  of  Daniel  should  be  carried  over  unto  the
other  side : and  that  for  some  little  while  was  done  and
renued,  but  in  the  meane  space  it  happened,  that  Senigar  Senigar  Saa,
Saa  the  Sonne  of  Saa  the  mightie  Emperour  of  all  the  tfoE™pe™ur
Kings  of  the  Persians  came  thither,  whose  command  five  q^LJuT^
and  forty  Kingdomes  obay.  five  Kings.

He  is  called  in  the  Arabian  Language  Sultan  alporas
alkabir, that is, the Great King of Persia : and his
Dominion is extended from the mouth of the River The  Rtver
Samura,  even  unto  the  Citie  Semarchoth,  and  unto  the  ^marchoth
River  Gozen,  and  unto  the  Countrey  Ghisbor,  and  the  Gozen.
Cities  of  Media,  and  the  Montaynes  Hhaphton,  and  unto  Ghisbor.
those  excellent  Countries,  where  beasts  are  maintayned,  The  Moun~
from which dissolved Myrrhe commeth. And all the  ^s ,
.Dominion  of  this  Lmperour  contayneth  foure  monethes  Myrrhe  or
and  foure  dayes  journey. When  therefore  having  some-  Muske.

57i

A.D.

c.  1 1 60.

Rob  ad-Bar,

The  River
Vaanath.

Molkhaath.

J  Ichesi  sin.
a  Synagogues.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES  1

time  stayed  in  this  City,  he  had  seene  the  Tombe  stone  of
Daniel  to  bee  carryed  over  from  one  quarter  of  the  Citie
unto  the  other,  and  that  very  many  of  the  Jewes  and
Ismaelites  went  with  it,  demanding  and  understanding
the  cause,  he  thought  it  a  shamefull  thing,  that  such
irreverance  towards  Daniel  should  bee  tolerated :  but
having  diligently  measured  the  space  betweene  both  parts,
hee  hung  up  the  Tombe  stone  of  Daniel  put  into  an  Arke
of  Glasse,  in  that  middle  place,  fastned  to  an  huge  Beame
with  Brazen  Chaines,  and  commanded  a  great  Temple  to
be  built,  dedicated  to  the  use  of  a  Synagogue,  and  open
for  all  men  of  the  whole  World,  and  denyed  to  no  mortall
man,  whether  Jew  or  Aramite  purposing  to  enter  into  the
same  to  pray.  And  that  Arke  hangeth  upon  the  Beame
even  untill  this  day.  Moreover,  that  Emperour  forbade
by  an  expresse  Edict,  that  no  man  should  take  fishes  out  of
the  River  for  one  mile  downe  the  River,  and  for  another
mile  up  the  River,  for  the  reverence  and  honour  of
Daniel.

From  hence  to  Robad-Bar  are  three  dayes  journeyes,
where  also,  almost  twentie  thousand  Israelites  dwell :
among  whom  there  are  very  many  Disciples  of  the  Wise-
men,  and  also  rich ;  but  these  live  as  Captives  under  the
power  and  authoritie  of  a  strange  Prince.  In  two  dayes
journey  from  thence  you  come  to  the  River  Vaanath,  where
are  foure  thousand  Jewes,  almost.  But  foure  dayes  jour-
ney from  that  River,  lyeth  the  Countrey  Molhhaath,  the
Inhabitants  whereof  beleeve  not  the  Doctrine  of  the
Ismaelites.  But  they  dwell  in  very  great  Mountaynes
and  they  obey  an  Elder,  whose  seate  is  in  the  Countrey
Alchesisin  :  and  among  these,  there  are  two  Colledges  a
of  the  Israelites,  and  they  goe  forth  to  the  warres  together
with  them.  Nor  are  they  subject  to  the  Dominion  of  the
King  of  Persia,  who  live  in  very  high  Mountaynes,  from
whence  descending  they  invade  the  bordering  Countries,
and  drive  away  booties ;  and  returne  againe  into  their
Mountaynes.  They  feare  the  force  and  violence  of  no
man. But  the  Jewes  who  dwell  among  them,  are  the

572

BENJAMIN, SON OF JONAS, A JEW  a.d.

C. I  1 60.

Disciples  of  the  Wise-men,  and  obay  the  Head  of  the
Captivitie  of  Babylon. You  travell  five  dayes  journey
from  hence  to  Ghaaria,  where  are  five  and  twentie  thousand  Ghaaria.
Israelites. And  it  is  the  beginning  of  the  Universities  b  hSynagogues.
of  the  Inhabitants  of  the  Mountaynes  Hhaphthon,  which  Hhaphthon.
it  is  certainly  knowne,  to  be  more  then  an  hundred  in
number. And  in  these  places,  the  Countrey  of  Media  Media.
beginneth. And  these  are  of  the  first  Captivitie  carryed
away  by  King  Salmanasar. But  they  speake  the  Chaldy
Language,  and  among  them  are  the  Disciples  of  Wise-
men. And  the  chiefe  Citie  Ghamaria  pertayning  to  the
Kingdome  of  Persia  is  neere  unto  them  within  one  dayes
journey. But  they  are  under  the  power  and  dominion  of
the  King  of  Persia,  to  whom  they  pay  Tribute. And  the
Tribute  appointed  in  all  the  Kingdomes  of  the  Ismaelites,
is,  that  all  the  Males  above  fifteene  yeares  old,  should  pay
yeerely,  one  Golden  Amircus  apiece. And  the  Golden  ^  Golden
piece of Money called Amircus, valueth one Spanish  Ptece°Jmoney
Morabetine  piece  of  Gold  and  an  halfe.  Amircus.

It  is  now  twelve  yeeres  since  a  certayne  man,  named  The  Spanish
David  Elroi,  arose  out  of  the  Citie  Ghamaria,  who  was  Morabetine
the  Disciple  of  Hhasdai,  the  Head  of  that  Captivitie,  and  G°UenPtece
of  Jacob  the  honourable,  Head  of  the  Assembly  of  Levi,  ^fie  History
in  the  Metropolitan  Citie  of  Baghdad,  and  became  very  of  David
learned in the Law of Moses, and in the Bookes of  Elroi.
Doctrine,  and  also  in  all  externall  wisedome,  and  in  the
Language and Writing of the Ismaelites, and in the
Bookes  of  the  Magicians  and  Inchanters. He  therefore
put  on  his  minde,  that  he  would  rayse  Armes  against  the
King  of  Persia,  and  gathering  together  those  Jewes,  who
dwelt  in  the  Mountaynes  Hhaphthon,  making  warre  with
all  Nations,  hee  would  goe  unto  Hierusalem  to  winne  it
by assault. And that hee might perswade the Jewes
thereunto,  he  used  lying  and  deceitfull  signes,  affirming,
that  hee  was  sent  from  God  to  vanquish  Hierusalem,  and
to  free  them  from  the  yoke  of  the  Nations ; so  that  with
many  of  the  Jewes,  he  procured  credit  unto  himselfe,  and
obtayned  the  name  of  their  Messias. The  King  of  the

573

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

C.  1 1 60.

Persians  hearing  the  same  of  this  matter,  sent  for  him  to
talke  with  him,  unto  whom  hee  went  without  any  feare
at  all ;  and  being  demanded  whether  he  were  the  King  of
the  Jewes,  hee  boldly  answered,  that  it  was  so  ;  and  forth-
with he  was  commanded  to  be  apprehended,  and  cast  in
Prison :  in  the  which  who  so  are  included  by  the  Kings
sentence,  are  kept  there  all  their  life. But  that  Prison  is

Dabasthan.  in  the  Citie  Dabasthan,  nigh  adjoyning  to  the  great  River
Gozen :  Now  after  three  dayes,  a  Councell  of  the  Princes
and  Ministers  being  gathered  together  by  the  King,  in  the

[II.ix.1456.]  which  they  determined  to  consult  and  treate  concerning
this  attempt  of  Innovation  begunne  by  the  Jewes,  suddenly
that  David  was  present  there,  loosed  out  of  Prison  of  his
owne  accord,  no  man  knowing  thereof;  whom  when  the
King  saw,  wondring  he  demanded :  who  hath  brought
thee  hither,  or  delivered  thee  out  of  Prison?  to  whom
hee  answering :  Mine  owne  wisdome,  saith  he,  and  my
industry.  For  I  am  nothing  afraid  of  thee,  or  of  thy
servants.  Then  the  King  crying  out,  Apprehend  him,
saith  he.  To  whom  the  Princes  and  servants  answered,
that  surely,  his  voice  was  heard  of  all,  but  that  his  shape
was  seene  of  no  man.  Wherefore  the  King  vehemently
wondering  at  his  wisedome,  was  astonished.  But,  hee
saith  against  the  King :  Behold,  I  make  my  way,  and  he
beganne  to  goe  before,  the  King  following  him :  but  all
the  Nobilitie  and  Servants  followed  the  King.  And  when
they  came  to  the  banke  of  the  River ;  David  spreading
abroad  the  Napkin  which  he  carried  upon  the  waters,
leaping  in,  passed  over ;  and  at  that  time  he  was  seene  of
all,  wondring  at  the  Spectacle  of  his  passing  over,  whom
to  pursue  and  take  with  little  Boates,  they  attempted
in  vaine,  and  all  proclaimed,  that  no  Inchanter  in
the  World  might  be  compared  unto  him :  but  having
travelled the same ten dayes journey, comming to

Elghamaraia.  Elghamaraia,  through  the  vertue  of  an  uninter-
pretable  name,  hee  declared  unto  the  Jewes  what  had
hapned  unto  him,  they  wondring  at  the  wisdome  of  the
man. But  the  King  of  the  Persians  sending  Messengers

574

BENJAMIN, SON OF JONAS, A  JEW  ad

C. I  I  DO.

unto  Bagdad,  certified  Almirus  Almunadinus  the  great
Calipha  of  the  Ismaelites,  of  this  matter,  &  requested  that
he  would  cause  David  Elroi  to  be  with-held  from  such  *£uthat  is,
Enterprizes  by  the  principal  head  of  the  captivitie,  and  '
the  chief  Rulers  of  the  Assemblies,  otherwise  unlesse  they
took  order  for  this  matter,  he  threatned  publike  destruc-
tion to  al  the  Jews  living  in  the  Kingdome  of  Persia.
All  the  Universities  of  the  Countrey  of  Persia  stricken
with  exceeding  great  feare  of  the  matter,  sent  letters  unto
that  principal  man,  who  was  accounted  the  head  of  the
captivitie  &  to  the  heads  of  all  the  Assemblies,  whatsoever
they  were  remayning  in  Bagdad,  to  this  purpose :  Why
shall  we  dye  in  your  eyes,  aswell  we  as  all  the  Universities
subject  unto  this  Kingdom?  restrayne  this  man,  we
beseech  you,  least  innocent  bloud  be  shead.  Therefore
the  Head  of  the  Captivitie,  and  the  Chiefe  Rulers  of  the
Assemblies  wrote  these  or  the  like  Letters  unto  David :
We  will  give  you  to  understand,  that  the  time  of  our
delivery  is  not  yet  come,  and  that  our  signes  have  not  yet
beene  seene ;  for  a  man  is  not  made  strong  through  the
wind.  Wherefore,  foretelling,  wee  enjoyne  you  altogether
to  abstayne  from  such  determinations,  enterprizes,  and
attempts ;  if  otherwise,  be  rejected  of  all  Israel.  They
also  by  Messengers  advertized  Zachai  Hanassi,  who  was
in  the  Countrey  Assur,  and  Joseph  surnamed  the  Seer,
Burhan  Alpelech,  living  there,  that  David  Elroi  mio-ht
bee  repressed  by  Letters  written  from  them ;  which  was
diligently  regarded  by  them,  but  all  in  vaine  :  for  he  would
not  forsake  that  wicked  way,  wherein  he  persisted,  untill
a  certaine  King  of  the  Togarmim  arose  called  Zinaldin,  Zinaldin
who  is  subject  unto  the  King  of  Persia,  and  hee  sending  ^nS°fthe
ten  thousand  pieces  of  Gold  unto  the  Father  in  Law  of
David  Elroi,  perswaded  him  to  end  these  troubles,  by
killing  his  Sonne  in  Law  privily :  which  when  hee  had
undertaken  to  performe,  he  thrust  David  thorow  with  a
Sword,  lying  in  bed  at  his  house ;  and  this  was  the  end
of  his  determinations,  and  vaine  subtiltie.  Nor  yet,  he
being  dead,  was  the  anger  of  the  King  of  the  Persians

575

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

C.  I  1 60.

appeased  towards  those  people  of  the  Mountaynes,  and
other  Jewes  subject  to  his  Dominion  :  wherefore  the  Jewes,
by  Messengers,  required  helpe  of  the  Head  of  the  Cap-
tivitie.  He  therefore  going  unto  the  King  himselfe,
appeased  him  with  mild  and  wise  speeches,  and  having
presented  and  given  many  Talents  of  Gold,  he  so  con-
firmed him,  that  afterward  great  quietnesse  happened  to
the  whole  Countrey.

But  from  this  Mountayne,  which  wee  have  described,
Hhamdan.  you  travell  ten  dayes  journey  to  great  Hhamdan,  and  the
Media.  principall  Citie  of  the  Countrey  of  Media,  in  the  which

there  are  about  fiftie  thousand  Jewes :  and  in  that  Citie,
The  Sepul-  right  over  against  one  of  the  Synagogues,  are  the  Sepul-
chen  of  Mar ckres  0f  Mardochaeus,  and  Esther. Debarzethaan  is  foure

dochceus  and .  i»  r  1  ^  r  1  1

Esther.  dayes  journey  distant  from  hence,  where  roure  thousand

Debarze-  Jewes dwell nigh unto the River Gozen : But from

thaan.  thence  you  travell  seven  dayes  journey  to  Asbahan  a  very

Asbahan,  or  crTe^  Metropolitan  Citie,  contayning  twelve  miles  space,

r±ist>ahan  now *  .  i*  •

the  Seat  Roxa//  in  ^e  which  there  are  about  fifteene  thousand  Israelites,
of  Persia. over  whom  Great  Salom  ruleth,  made  Governour,  by  the
Head  of  the  Captivitie,  over  this  Universitie,  and  all  the
rest  of  the  Israelites,  who  dwell  in  the  Castles  of  Persia.

Departing  from  hence,  I  travelled  foure  dayes  journey

to  Siaphaz,  the  Metropolitan  Citie  of  Persia,  and  also  the

most  ancient,  called  Persidis,  from  whence  the  name  was

given  to  the  whole  Countrey,  in  the  which  there  are  almost

Siaphaz. ten  thousand  Jewes. From  Siaphaz  in  seven  dayes  journey

Ginah.  you  come  to  the  Citie  Ginah,  seated  in  a  very  large  place

nigh  unto  the  banke  of  the  River  Gozen,  frequented  with

the  most  famous  Trading  of  all  Nations  and  Languages,  in

a  Plaine  and  very  ample  soyle,  where  are  about  eight

thousand  Jewes. The  furthest  Citie  of  this  Kingdome,

Samarcheneth.  great and famous Samarcheneth, standeth five dayes

Samarcan. journey  from  Ginah,  where  are  fiftie  thousand  Israelites,

over  whom  Master  Abdias  Hanassi  ruleth,  and  among

Y  7  them,  there  are  many  wise  and  rich  men. In  foure  dayes

Mosse,  or journey  from  hence  you  come  to  Tubot  a  Metropolitan

Muske.  Citie,  in  the  Woods  whereof  sweet  smelling  Mosse  *  is

576

BENJAMIN, SON OF JONAS, A  JEW  a.d.

C. 1 100.

found. Travelling  continually  eight  and  twentie  dayes
journey  from  thence,  I  came  unto  the  Mountaynes  Nisbon,  The^  ^^
which  hang  over  the  River  Gozen  flowing  from  them,  and  jf#£&r!  '*'
are  ascribed  unto  the  Kingdome  of  Persia,  where  are  many
Israelites. And  they  say,*  that  in  those  Cities  of  the  ^^^
Mountaynes  Nisbor,  foure  Tribes  of  the  Israelites  inhabit,  th say^  a  ta)e
carried  away  in  the  first  Captivitie  by  Salmanasar  the  King  devised  by
of  the  Assyrians,  to  wit,  Dan,  Zabulon,  Asser,  and  Neph-  Jewish
thali : as  it  is  written. And  he  carryed  them  away  into ~ r™  .,
Lahhlahh  and  Habor,  the  Mountaynes  Gozen. Moun-  lahUahh.  "'
taynes  of  Media. Their  Countrey  is  extended  twentie
dayes  journey  in  length,  with  many  Cities  and  Castles
inhabited,  all  Mountaynous ; almost  by  which  the  River
Gozen  runneth on the  one side. But the Inhabitants
themselves  are  under  the  subjection  of  no  Nation,  but  are
ruled  by  a  certaine Governour ; whose name is now,
Joseph  Amarcala  a  Levite :  and  among  them  are  the  Dis-
ciples of  Wise-men. They  till  grounds  and  make  warre
with  the  Borderers,  the  Children  of  Chus,  and  travell  on
warfare  through the  Desarts. They  have  amitie  with
Copher  Althorech,  worshippers  of  the  winds,  a  people  who  cJffer  ,
leade  their  lives  in  the  Desarts. These  neither  eat  bread,
nor  drinke  wine :  but  eat  the  raw  flesh  of  beasts,  as  well
cleane  as  uncleane,  and  those  either  new  killed,  and  yet
trembling  through  the  life  bloud,  or  also  dry,  but  unboyled,
and  also  devoure  the  members  taken  from  living  beasts.
They  want  a  Nose,  but  in  stead  thereof  they  have  two  holes  ®r  rather
in  their  faces,  wherewith  they  breathe:  They  are  friends  ^f^firso
to  the  Israelites. But,  it  happened  fifteene  yeares  since,  are  both
that  invading  the  Countrey  of  Persia  with  a  great  Armie, Tartars  and
they  vanquished  the  Metropolitan  Citie  Rai,  and  having  Ch™ots>
made  a  mightie  slaughter  utterly  wasted  it,  and  spoyling
the  houses  and  fields,  carried  away  a  great  bootie,  returning
through  the  Desarts,  the  like  example  whereof,  for  many
Ages,  was  never  seene  or  heard  in  Persia. Wherefore
the  King  of  the  Persians  being  vehemently  inraged,  deter-
mined utterly  to  abolish  from  the  Earth,  the  name  of  that
Nation,  first,  hatefull  to  him  alone,  not  daring  to  attempt
viii  577  20

Rai.

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

C  I  1 60.

any  such  matter  in  the  times  of  his  Ancestors.  Levying
therefore  an  Armie  for  warfare,  and  seeking  some  Guide,
to  whom  the  places  of  that  Nation  were  knowne,  a  certaine
man  voluntarily  offered  himselfe,  who  affirmed,  that  hee
was  of  the  same  Nation,  and  knew  their  dwellings.  But
being  demanded  what  was  needfull  for  the  performing  of
the  Voyage,  he  answered,  that  they  had  need  of  provision
of  bread  and  water  for  fifteene  dayes  journey :  which  of
necessitie  should  be  spent  in  a  very  great  Wildernesse :
following  whose  counsell,  when  they  had  ended  fifteene
dayes  journey,  beeing  destitute  of  necessarie  food  and
drinke  for  men  and  beasts,  yet  notwithstanding,  they
neither  saw  the  place  whether  they  intended  to  goe,  nor
any  tokens  of  habitation.  The  Guide  therefore  being
called  for  by  the  King,  when  he  was  demanded,  where  is
your  word,  whereby  you  undertooke  to  shew  us  the
Enemies ;  answered,  that  he  had  gone  out  of  the  way,
wherefore,  at  the  commandement  of  the  angry  King  he
was  put  to  death.

And  now,  part  of  the  men  and  beasts  began  to  perish
through  famine.  But  by  the  Kings  Decree  it  was  publikely
commanded,  that  whatsoever  provision  of  victuall  was
found  with  any  man,  should  be  imparted  to  the  company,
and  that  the  beasts  should  also  bee  divided.  After  this
manner,  therefore  they  wandered  thirteene  dayes  more
through  the  Wildernesse,  and  at  length  came  unto  the
The  Monn-  Mountaynes  Nisbor,  in  which  the  Jewes  inhabit.  The
taynes  Nisbor.  Armies  therefore  of  the  Persians  rested  themselves  in  the
Gardens  and  Orchards,  whereof  there  were  very  many  in
that  place,  and  nigh  unto  the  Fountaynes :  for  it  was  the
season  of  the  yeare  when  fruits  are  ripe.  They  therefore
eate  and  spoyled,  and  saw  no  man  comming  forth  unto
them :  but  beheld  very  many  Cities  and  Towers  in  the
Mountaynes  afarre  off.

Therefore  the  King  sent  two  of  his  Servants  to  demand,
what  Nation  dwelled  in  those  Mountaynes,  and  that  they
should  passe  over  unto  them,  going  over  the  River  either
by  Boat  or  swimming. But  they  found  a  great  Bridge,

578

BENJAMIN, SON OF  JONAS, A  JEW  ad.

c.  1 1 60.
fortified  with  Towers  furnished,  and  with  a  doore  shut ;
but  beyond  the  Bridge  there  was  a  great  Citie.  The
Spyes  therefore  crying  out  before  the  Bridge,  a  certaine
man  came  forth,  by  whom  being  demanded,  what  doe  you
seeke,  or  of  what  Country  are  you,  they  understood  them
not,  until  a  certaine  Interpreter  came,  who  understood  the
Persian  Language :  to  whom  demanding,  they  answered,
we  are  the  Servants  of  the  King  of  the  Persians,  sent  to
demand  who  you  are,  and  whom  you  serve.  To  whom  he
answered,  we  are  Jewes,  and  serve  no  King  or  Prince  of
the  Gentiles,  but  a  certaine  principall  man  of  the  Jewes.
And  being  demanded  concerning  the  worshippers  of  the
winds,  the  Children  of  Chus  of  Cophar  Althorech,  they
answered ;  they  are  a  Nation  joyned  in  league  with  us :
and  whosoever  goeth  about  to  hurt  them,  wee  suppose  hee
would  harme  us.  The  Spyes  therefore  returning  unto
the  King,  reported  the  whole  matter  unto  him ;  who  was
vehemently  afraid.  But  the  next  day  after,  the  Jewes
denounced  warre  against  the  King  of  Persia,  who  said,
that  hee  came  not  to  make  warre  against  them,  but  against
his  Enemies  of  Cophar  Althorech.  And  if  they  would
fight  with  him,  he  would  revenge  that  injurie,  by  killing
all  the  Jewes  who  dwelt  in  the  Kingdome  of  Persia :  for
he  was  very  well  assured,  that  they  were  stronger  then  hee
in  that  place ;  besides,  hee  intreated  that  they  would  not
assayle  him  with  battell,  but  would  suffer  him  to  fight  it
out  by  dint  of  Sword  against  Cophar  Althorech,  and  that
they  would  sell  him  provision  of  victuall  and  food  con-
venient for  his  Armie.  Consulting  therefore  together,  it
pleased  the  Jewes  to  consent  unto  the  King  of  Persia,  for
all  the  Israelites  sakes  dwelling  in  his  Kingdome.  The
King  therefore  being  admitted  with  all  his  Armie,  spent
fifteene  dayes  there,  beeing  most  honourably  entertayned
among  them :  but  in  the  meane  space,  the  Jewes  declared
the  whole  matter  by  Messengers  and  Letters,  unto  their  [II.ix.1458.]
Confederates  Cophar  Althorech:  which  being  knowne,
gathering  their  forces  together,  they  expected  the  enemie
at  the  passage  of  the  Mountaynes ; and  in  a  convenient

579

A.D.

c.  1 1 60.

Moses  the
Minister.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

place  for  their  purpose,  they  gave  the  Persians  so  mightie
an  overthrow,  comming  unto  them,  that  being  vanquished
and  put  to  flight,  they  compelled  him  to  return  into  his
own  Countrey  with  a  very  small  number.  But  it  hap-
pened, that  one  Jew  of  this  Province  named  Moses,
deceitfully  seduced  by  a  certaine  Persian  Horseman,  fol-
lowed the  King  of  Persia,  and  when  they  came  into  Persia,
being  brought  into  servitude,  hee  was  possessed  by  the
same  Horse-man.  But,  when  at  a  certaine  time,  they  who
exercised  their  Bowes,  sported  in  presence  of  the  King,
one  Moses  was  shewed  unto  him,  who  was  most  excellent
in  the  dexteritie  of  shooting  :  who  being  demanded  of  the
King  by  an  Interpreter,  openly  declared  the  manner  of  his
condition  :  and  was  presently  infranchised,  clothed  with
Purple  and  Silken  Garments,  and  inriched  with  Kingly
Gifts :  and  was  required,  that  he  should  receive  their
Religion,  the  hope  and  condition  of  great  Riches  being
propounded,  and  also  the  government  of  the  Kings  House
promised  :  which  when  he  courteously  denyed  to  doe,  yet
was  he  placed  by  the  King,  with  great  Salom  the  Prince
of  the  Universitie  of  Achphahan ;  whose  Daughter  also
he  married  by  consent  of  the  Father,  and  the  selfe-same
Moses  told  me  all  this  Historie.

Chevazthaan.
Tigris.
Haidu,  the
Indian  Sea.
Nekrokis,  per-
haps Ormus.

§.  v.  !

Of  India,  Ethiopia,  Egypt,  his  returne  into  Europe  :
Sicilia,  Germanie,  Prussia,  Russia,  France.

Nd  when  I  departed  out  of  these  Countries,  I  went
into  the  Countrey  Chevazthaan,  nigh  unto  which
the  River  Tigris  runneth,  which  falling  from  thence
runneth  downe  into  Hodu,  that  is,  the  Indian  Sea,  and
compasseth  the  Hand  Nekrokis  about  the  mouth  thereof,
contayning  the  space  of  sixe  dayes  journey,  in  the  which
there  is  only  one  Fountaine,  and  they  drinke  no  other
water  then  what  is  gathered  from  the  showres ;  for  it
wanteth  Rivers,  and  that  Land  is  neither  sowed,  nor  tilled  :
yet  is  it  very  famous  through  the  Trading  of  the  Indians,

580

BENJAMIN, SON OF  JONAS, A  JEW  a.d.

C.  1 1 60.

and  Hands  seated  in  the  Indian  Sea,  and  Merchants  of  the
Countrey  of  Senaar,  and  JEliman,  and  Persia,  bringing
thither  all  sorts  of  Silken  and  Purple  Garments,  Hempe
and  Cotton,  Flaxe,  and  Indian  Cloth,  which  they  call
Moch,  Wheate,  Barley,  Millet,  and  Oats  great  plentie,
also  all  sorts  of  Meates  and  Pulse,  which  they  barter  and
sell  among  themselves.  But  the  Indian  Merchants  bring
exceeding  great  plentie  of  Spices  thither.  And  the
Ilanders  execute  the  office  of  Factors  and  Interpreters
among  the  rest,  and  by  this  art  only  they  live.  But  in
that  place  there  are  about  five  hundred  Jewes.

Taking Ship from hence, sayling  with a  prosperous
winde,  in  ten  dayes  I  was  brought  to  Kathipha,  where  are  Kathipha.
five thousand Jewes : in these places the stone called
Bdellius  is  found,  made  by  the  wonderfull  workemanship  The  Stone
of  Nature. For  on  the  foure  and  twentieth  day  of  the  ,Le Ltu!' .

tv  /r  1 xt-  •  1  r  11 1 1  •  1 think  the  stone

Moneth JNisan, a  certaine dew ralletn downe into the  qfPearlesh
waters,  which  being  gathered, the  Inhabitants  wrap  up  some  Fabler,
together,  and  being  fast  closed,  they  cast  it  into  the  Sea,  was  thus  c°r-
that  it  may  sinke  of  it  owne  accord  into  the  bottome  of  *JP  *! t0  our
the  Sea,  and  in  the  middle  of  the  moneth  Tisri,  two  men 7^  moneth  of
being  let  downe  into  the  Sea  by  ropes,  unto  the  bottome, March.
bring  up  certaine  creeping  *  Wormes  which they  have  The  moneth  of
gathered,  into  the  open  Ayre,  out  of  the  which  (being  ^^usL
broken  and  cleft)  those  stones  are  taken. In  seven  dayes  q
journey  from  thence  I  came  to  Haaulam,  which  is  the  Our  people
beginning  of  their  Kingdome  who  worship  the  Sunne  in  call  Haaulam
stead  of  God ; to  wit,  a  Starre-gazing  Nation  descended  Z«/*».
from  the  Children  of  Chus. They  are  men  of  a  blacke  w™hlPPm
colour,  sincere,  and  or  very  great  ndelitie  both  in  promises  The  Chussites
and  receits,  and  also  in  gifts. They  have  this  custome,  starre  gazers.
that  such  as  come  unto  them  from  other  remote  Countries,
having  received  them  into  the  Haven,  they  cause  their
names  to  be  set  downe  in  writing,  by  three  Scribes,  and  so
carry  their  names  unto  the  King  ;  and  afterward  bring  the
parties themselves  also unto him, whose Merchandises
being  received  into  his  protection,  the  King  commandeth
to  be  left  landed  in  the  fields,  without  setting  any  watch-

581

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

c.  1160.

man  to  keepe  them.  Moreover,  one  Governer  sitteth  in
a  publike  house,  unto  whom,  whatsoever  any  man  in  the
whole  Countrey  hapneth  to  leese,  is  brought,  and  is  easily
received  by  the  owner  thereof,  being  there  required,  so
that  the  certaine  tokens  be  shewed,  wherby  the  lost  thing
may  be  knowne.  And  this  fidelitie  and  honest  dealing
is  common  and  publike  in  all  that  Kingdome.  All  this
country  from  Easter  unto  the  beginning  of  the  yeere,
through  all  the  Spring  time  and  Summer  burneth  with
outragious  heate :  wherefore,  from  the  third  houre  of  the
day  untill  the  Evening,  all  men  lye  close  shut  up  in  their
houses.  But  afterward,  Candles  and  Lampes  being
lighted,  and  orderly  set  throughout  all  the  streetes  and
markets,  they  worke  and  exercise  their  Arts  and  Profes-
sions all  the  night ;  for  they  cannot  at  all  doe  it  in  the
day  time  by  reason  of  the  exceeding  heate. And  in  this

Pepper.  Countrey Pepper groweth upon Trees planted  by the

Inhabitants  in  the  fields  of  every  particular  Citie.  And
every  one  of  them  have  their  proper  Gardens,  are  assigned
and  knowne. The  shrub  it  selfe  is  very  little,  and  bringeth

[II. ix.  1 459.]  forth  a  white  seede,  which  being  gathered  by  them,  is  put
into  Basons,  and  being  steeped  in  hot  water  is  set  forth  in
the  Sunne,  that  it  might  bee  dryed,  and  being  hardned,  may
be  preserved  ;  and  so  it  getteth  a  blacke  colour.  Cinamon
and  Ginger  are  found  there,  and  very  many  other  kindes  of

How  they Spices. The  Inhabitants  of  this  Countrey  burie  not  their

embalme  their  dead,  \^ut  being  enbalmed  with  divers  Drugs  and  Spices,
they  place  them  in  seates,  and  cloathe  them  with  Nets,  set
in  a  certaine  order  according  to  their  severall  families,  but
their  flesh  dryeth  with  the  bones,  and  becommeth  so  stiffe
that  they  seeme  even  like  unto  the  living.  And  every
one  of  the  living  know  their  Ancestors  from  many  yeeres

*They  are descents. But  they  worship  the  *  Sunne,  with  many  and

since  become m-eat  Altars  every  where  built,  about  halfe  a  mile  without

Mahumetans. S ^.  .  ^ y , , c  1 • 1

as  In  all  the the  Citie. Commonly therefore, early  in the morning

Indian  Ports they  run  forth  and  goe  unto  the  Sunne,  unto  which  upon

usually  they all  the  Altars  there  are  Images  consecrated,  made  by  the

are-  Magicke  Arts,  according  to  the  similitude  of  the  circle  of

582

BENJAMIN, SON OF  JONAS, A  JEW  a.d.

C.  I  1 60.

the  Sunne ;  and  when  the  Sunne  ariseth,  those  Orbes
seeme  to  be  inflamed,  and  sound  with  a  great  crackling  or
rustling  noyse.  And  they  have  every  one  their  severall
Box  in  their  hands,  as  well  the  women  as  the  men,  and  all
together  offer  Incense  to  the  Sunne.  This  way  of  theirs
is  folly  unto  them.  But  among  this  Nation,  in  all  places,
the  Jewes  whose  summe  at  the  most  amounteth  to  a  thou-
sand houses  in  all,  are  of  no  lesse  blacke  a  colour  then  the
Inhabitants  themselves,  yet  are  they  good  and  honest  men,
and  embracers  of  the  Commandements,  who  observe  the
Law  of  Moses,  and  are  not  accounted  altogether  unskilfull
in  the  bookes  of  Doctrine  and  Customes.

Departing  out  of  their  Countrey,  in  two  and  twentie
dayes  I  sayled  unto  the  Hands  Cheverag,  the  Inhabitants Cheverag.
whereof  worship  the  Fire,  and  are  called  Dugbijn ; but  Dugbijn.
among them thirtie thousand Jewes dwell. And the
Dugbijn  have  their  Priests  in  every  place,  consecrated  to
the  superstition  of  their  Temples : but  these  Priests  are
the  most  skilfull  Sorcerers  and  Inchanters  of  the  whole
world,  in  every  kinde  of  this  vanitie. And  before  every
Temple  there  is  a  great  and  large  field,  in  the  which  a
mightie  fire  burneth  every  day,  which  they  call  Elhotha,  Fire  wor"
and  they  use  to  make  their  Children  passe  through  this  Lf/t '

r  J  ,  , ,  1 . 1 1 .  & 1 Elhotha.

fire  to  purge  them ; and  also  cast  their  dead  into  the

middest  of  the  fire  to  be  burned. Moreover,  there  are

some of the Nobilitie of the Land, who solemnely

bequeathe  or  vow  themselves  to  the  fire  alive. But  when

any  man  of  these  declareth  such  his  intended  devotion  to

his  familiars,  acquaintance,  and  kindred,  presently  with

the  great  rejoycing  of  all,  and  with  the  common  voyce,

hee  heareth  these  words :  Blessed  art  thou,  and  it  shall  be The  error  of

well  with  thee. On  what  day  therefore  the  vow  is  to  bee  the  w0/fifr

performed,  being  first  entertained  with  a  great  Banquet,  re%

if  he  be  rich,  he  is  carried  on  Horse-backe,  but  if  hee  be

poore, hee is brought on foote, accompanied with a

multitude  of  his  friends  and  others,  unto  the  entrance  of

the  field,  from  whence  beginning  his  race,  he  leapeth  into

the  fire ; but  then  all  his  familiars,  cousins  and  kindred,

583

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

C.  I  1 60.

rejoyce  with  exceeding  great  joy,  striking  up  the  Drum,,
and  dancing  untill  he  be  wholly  burned.  But  three  dayes
after,  two  of  the  chiefe  Priests  going  unto  his  house,
command  the  whole  Family  to  prepare  the  house  of  their
Father,  who  would  be  present  with  them  the  same  day,
and  declare  unto  them  what  they  were  to  doe.  Calling
Devillish  therefore  unto  them  certaine  witnesses  of  the  Citie,  behold,
acmsion.  Satan  taking  upon  him  his  shape,  is  present,  of  whom  the

wife  and  children  demand  how  it  fareth  with  him  in  that
other  world  :  to  whom  he  answering,  I  came,  saith  he,
unto  my  companions,  by  whom  I  am  not  received,  untill  I
pay  those  things  which  I  owe  to  my  familiar  friends  and
kindred  :  so  presently,  hee  distributeth  his  goods  to  the
children,  and  commandeth  all  the  debts  to  be  paid  to  the
Creditors,  and  whatsoever  is  owing  by  the  debtors,  to  be
demanded,  the  witnesses  receiving  and  setting  downe  in
writing  all  his  words  and  commandes,  of  whom  notwith-
standing he  is  not  seene :  but  then  saying  that  he  will  goe
his  way  againe,  he  vanisheth.

From  these  Hands  it  is  fortie  dayes  sayling  to  the  Coun-
*Here  the  trey  of  *  Sin,  which  is  in  the  East,  they  sayle  three  dayes
author relateth  journey  to  Gingala,  which  is  performed  in  fifteene  daies

a  tale  related

to  him  of  men  ^y Sea, where  are  almost  a  thousand Israelites. From

carried  by hence  in  seven  dayes  sayling  I  came  to  Cholan,  where

Griffons,  l5c none  of  the  Israelites  are. But  from  thence  in  twelve  dayes

which  I  have j  went  to  Zebid,  in  which  Countrey  there  are  few  Jewes.

Zebid '  From  hence  in  eight  dayes  I  came  to  the  Midland  Hodu^

The  mid-land that  is,  ^Ethiopian  India,  which  by  the  name  of  their  owne

Hodu.  Nation  is  called  Baghdaan,  the  same  is  Gheden,  which

Baghdaan. Countrey  is  ascribed  to  the  Countrey  of  Thelassar, in

Thl*'  ■ which  Countrey  there  are  huge  Mountaines  and  very  well

knowne ; and in these, many of the Israelites dwell,

subject  to  the  yoke  of  none  of  the  Gentiles  : and  they

have  Cities  and  Towers  built  on  the  ridges  of  the  Moun-

taynes,  from  whence  descending  with  armed  forces,  they

Lubia  invade  the  Countrey  Hamaghtam,  with  warre,  which  selfe-

Lubii.  same  Countrey  is  Lubia,  belonging  to  the  dominion  of

Lybies.  Edom,  the  Inhabitants  whereof  are  called  Lubii,  or  Lybies  :

584

BENJAMIN, SON OF JONAS, A  JEW  a.d

C. 1 100.

which being often robbed and spoyled, the Israelites

returne  backe  againe  unto  their  Mountaynes,  where  they

are  not  afraide,  that  any  mortall  man  would  make  warre

against  them. But  of  those  Israelites  who  dwell  in  this

Countrey  of  Ghadan,  very  many  travell  into  Persia,  and

iEgypt  for  the  cause  of  trafficke. From  thence  unto  the

Countrey  called  Azzuan,  you  travell  twentie  dayes  journey  The  Countrey

through  the  Wildernesse  of  Seba,  nigh  unto  the  River  Jzzua/l-

Pisson,  which  descendeth  from  the  Mountaynes  of  Chus,  p"s°n>

that  is,  ^Ethiopia. And  these  Azzuanei  have  a  King,  who

in  the Ismaelitish  Language  is  called Sultan  Alhhabas.

Some  part  of  these  men  live  after  the  manner  of  bruit  [II.ix.1460.]

Beasts,  and  feede  upon  Herbes  found  nigh  unto  the  bankes

of  the  River  Pisson, they wander naked through the

fields,  so  that  they  seeme  to  be  voyde  of  the  sense  and

minde  of  other  men. They  use  the  Act  of  Generation

without difference, and with whomsoever they meete,

having  no  regard  of  kindred,  acquaintance  or  familiaritie,

age  or  qualitie  of  degree : they  inhabit  an  exceeding  hot

Countrey. When  the  rest  of  the  Azzuanei  assaile  these

to  make  a  prey  of  them,  setting  wheaten  Bread,  Raysins,

and  dry  Figs  in  the  field,  they  take  them  running  to  the

meate ;  and  carrying  them  away,  they  sell  them  in  iEgypt,

and  other  bordering  Kingdomes. And  these  bee  those

blacke  Slaves  very  well  knowne  to  all,  of  the  Posteritie  of

Cham. From  Azzuuan  you  travell  twelve  dayes  journey  Cham.

unto  Hhalavan,  where  are  three  hundred  Jewes. But  Hhalavan.

from  thence  travelling  in  troopes, you  goe  fiftie  dayes

journey through the Wildernesse, called Al Tsahhara, TheWildemes

into  the  Countrey  Zevilan,  which  selfe  same  is  Hhavila, Ja  .7ara'

to  wit,  that  which  is  upon  the  Coast  of  Geena,  or  Ginea.  Hhavila.

But  in  that  Wildernesse  there  are  many  Mountaynes  of  Geena,  or

Sand, which being sometimes mooved and scattered  Ginea.

through  the  violence  of  the  Windes,  overwhelmeth  and

killeth  the  whole  troopes  of  travelling  men :  but  such  as

could  avoide  or  escape  such  danger,  returne  laden  with

many  things,  as  Iron,  Brasse,  and  divers  kindes  of  Fruites,

and  Pulse,  and  also  Salt : besides,  they  carrie  Gold,  and

585

A.D.
C. I  1 60.

Chus.
Alhhabas,

Kits,

^Egypt.
Pi  urn.
Pithon.

Misraim,  or
Cayro.

*  Of  these  two
sorts,  see  my
Pilgr.  I.  2.  c.
8.  §  1.  the
Israelites  were
those  of  Pale s-
tina  of  later
dispersion,  the
other  of  the
former  Baby-
lonian disper-
sion, to  whom
Saint  Peter
wrote  his  for-
mer Epistle,
Ghirhhakiim.
The  divisions
of  the  sacred
Lessons,

* Rulers  and
Over-seers  of
their  Syna-
gogues.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

most  precious  Pearles.  And  this  Countrey  is  in  the  Land
of  Chus,  named  Alhhabas,  lying  towards  the  West.
From  Hhalvan  in  thirteene  dayes  journey,  you  come  to
the  Metropolitan  Citie  Kits,  which  is  the  head  of  the
beginning  of  iEgypt ;  in  it  there  are  about  thirtie  thou-
sand Jewes.  From  thence  to  Pium,  is  five  dayes  journey  :
this  in  time  past  was  called  Pithon,  where  there  are  twentie
Jewes,  and  yet  at  this  day  no  small  Monuments  are  seene,
of  the  workes  made  by  our  Fathers,  in  the  building  of
that  Citie.  From  thence  you  travell  foure  dayes  journey
to  Misraim,  a  great  Citie,  seated  nigh  unto  the  bankes  of
Nilus,  from  which  the  name  is  given  to  all  the  Countrey,
where  are  two  thousand  Jewes,  divided  into  two  *  Syna-
gogues ;  the  one  of  the  Israelites,  called  the  Synagogue
Saamiin ;  and  the  other  of  the  Babylonians,  called  the
Synagogue  Ghirhhakiim.  The  one  and  the  other  observe
divers  rites  and  customes  in  the  distribution  of  the  annuall
readings.  For  the  Babylonians  use  every  weeke  to  reade
one  Parassa,  after  the  same  manner  which  is  common
throughout  all  Spaine ;  and  therefore  every  yeere  they
finish  the  Law.  But  the  Israelites  divide  every  Parassa
into  three  orders  or  degrees,  and  so  they  reade  over  the
Law  in  three  yeeres.  And  both  these  after  a  solemne
manner,  twice  in  the  yeere  powre  forth  their  prayers
together,  to  wit,  upon  the  day  of  the  rejoycing  of  the
Law,  and  on  the  Festivall  day  of  the  Law  given.  Among
all  these  Nathaniel  hath  the  chiefe  authoritie,  being  the
greatest  of  the  Nobilitie,  and  head  of  the  Assembly ;  who
ruleth  all  the  Universities  of  iEgypt,  and  appointeth
Masters  and  Church-wardens.*  And  he  is  among  the
chiefe  and  most  familiar  servants  of  the  great  King,  in  the
Palace  and  throne  of  the  Princely  seate  Soan,  setled  in
the  Citie  Mitsraim,  which  Citie  is  the  Metropolitan  Citie
to  the  children  of  Ghereb,  that  is,  to  all  the  Arabians :  but
the  Kings  name  is  Amir  Almumanin  Eli  the  sonne  of
Abitaaleb :  all  the  Inhabitants  of  which  Countrey  are
called  Moredim,  that  is,  Rebels,  who  have  estranged  them-
selves from  Amir  Almumanin  Alghabazzi,  remayning  in

586

BENJAMIN, SON OF JONAS, A  JEW  a.d.

C.  I  1 60.

Bagdad  :  wherefore  there  is  great  and  perpetuall  dissension
betweene  both  the  Kings. But  he  hath  a  Throne  in  the  Soan  or  TsQ_
Palace  Soan,  dedicated  unto  him. And  he  commeth  forth  g^an[
twice  in  the  yeere,  once  at  the  time  of  their  feast  of  Mitsraim.
Easter,  and  againe  in  those  dayes  when  the  River  Nilus  They  were
overfloweth. And  Soan  it  selfe  is  compassed,  and  fortified  Cf0Jethate  es
with  walls,  but  Mitsraim  hath  no  walls,  but  is  environed  schismey  of
with  Nilus  on  the  one  side. And  this  is  a  very  great  citie,  which  see  sup.
furnished  with  many  market  places  &  publike  houses,  and  *'•  8-  caP-  3-
hath  many  rich  Jewes. The  Country  it  selfe  never  saw ^
either  Raine,  Ice,  or  Snow,  but  burneth  with  outragious  The  monetjl  0f
heate. It  is  watered  with  Nilus,  which  once  every  yeere  August  and J
vehemently  swelling  in  the  Moneth  Elul,  covereth  and  September.
over-floweth  all  the  Land  for  fifteene  dayes  journey ; the  The  Ntlosc°-
Waters  continuing  all  Elul  and  Tisri,  and  making  the  fitted  aT
earth fruitfull. And the policie and diligence of the  being  before
ancient  was  such,  that  in  an  Iland  which  the  River  maketh,  expressed  in
a  Pillar  should  be  erected,  &c. And  the  Fishes  of  that  £7- c-  8-  j~fc
River  are  very  fat,  the  Trane  wherof  being  molten,  is  , e  use,°i ,

1 r 1  r  ^ 11  -n  i  i •  trane  of  fishes.

preserved  for  the  use  or  Candles. Hut  whosoever  being  The  water  of

abundantly  glutted  with  those  Fishes,  drinketh  the  water  Ni/us median-

of  the  same  River,  feeleth  or  suffereth  no  harme  at  all.  a^e-

For  that  water  is  both  drinke  and  also  medicine  against  r  a  as[

1  1 •  a 1 1  1 1 1  11  Jrom  whence

such  repletions. And  there  hath  beene  a  perpetuall  ques-  the  people  are

tion,  and  a  divers  opinion  among  men,  concerning  the  calledHhabas-

overflowing  of  Nilus,  but  the  ^Egyptians  suppose,  that  at  s'tn'h  wfiom  the

the  same  time  when  this  River  over-floweth,  it  vehemently  Grmans>

• *• 1 1*1 /^»  •  1 ••iti/~ amisse*  can

raineth  in  the  higher  Countries,  that  is,  in  the  Land  or  jytssini  t^e

Hhabas,  which  we  said  to  be  named  Hhavila. At  what Countrey  of

time  the  River  doth  not  over-flow,  nothing  is  sowed  in  Prete  Janni.

iEgypt ; and  hereupon  sterilitie  and  famine  follow. The ^bout

fields  are  sowed  in  the  Moneth  *  Marhhesuan,  Nilus  being  ^^end  of

now  received  into  his  Channell : but  Barley  is  reaped  in  Februarie.

the  Moneth  a  Adar,  and  Wheate  the  next  Moneth  after,  h In  the  moneth

that  is,  b  Nisan,  and  in  the  same  Moneth  Cherries  are  ripe,  °f  March.

X  * C /I Z.  * '  J.

and  Almonds,  and  Cucumbers,  Gourdes,  Peasecods,  and  ^^tT
Beanes,  Lentiles,  Ruches  and  c  Spelt,  and  divers  kindes  of  grow'ing  in
Pot-hearbs,  as  Purslane,  Asparagus,  and  Lettice,  Corian-  India.

587

A.D.

c.  1 1 60.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Nilus.
Damiata.

Rasir.

Asmon.

[II.ix.1461.]  ders,  Succorie,  Coleworts,  and  Grapes.  Lastly,  the  earth
is  most  fruitfull,  and  replenished  with  every  good  thing.
But  the  Gardens  and  Orchards  are  watered  from  the  Lakes
and  Trenches,  and  that  with  the  Waters  of  the  River.

Thedivisionof  por  the  River  which  is  brought  unto  the  Citie  Mitsraim,

*"  r  r  11  r

is  divided  from  thence  into  foure  heads,  one  whereof
runneth  by  Damiata,  sometime  called  Caphtor,  nigh  unto
which  it  falleth  into  the  Sea.  The  second  runneth  downe
unto  the  Citie  Rasir,  next  unto  Alexandria,  and  there
mingleth  it  selfe  with  the  Sea.  The  third  floweth  downe
by  the  way  of  Asmon,  a  very  great  Citie  in  the  boundes
of  iEgypt ;  nigh  unto  all  those  heads  of  the  River,  many
Cities,  and  Castles,  and  many  Townes  are  seated  upon
either  side,  and  men  may  travell  unto  them  all,  either  by
Boate  or  Land.  No  Countrey  in  the  whole  world  may  be
compared  with  this,  for  the  multitudes  of  habitations ;
and  all  the  Countrey  is  plaine,  and  all  most  fruitfull,  and
well  stored  with  good  things.  Ancient  Mitsraim  is  two
leagues  distant  from  the  new  Mitsraim,  but  it  is  all
wasted,  and  desolate ;  yet  it  retayneth  many  tokens  of
the  walls  and  houses,  and  sheweth  not  a  few  Monuments
Ttorl-Luses  of  °^  t^le  Tresuries  and  Store-houses  of  Joseph,  yet  to  be
Joseph.  seene. In  the  same  place  also  there  is  a  most  artificiall

Pillar,  built  by  the  Art  Magicke,  like  unto  which  there  is
none  seene  in  all  the  Land.  But  those  Store-houses  con-
sist of  Lime  and  Stones,  of  exceeding  strong  Workman-
ship. Without  the  compasse  of  the  Citie  standeth  a
TheSynagogue  Synagogue,  called  by  the  name  of  Moses  our  Teacher
living  in  peace,  of  ancient  building,  which  being  yet
remayning,  a  certaine  old  Minister  maintaineth,  a  Disciple
of  Wise-men,  whom  they  call  Alsich  Abunetzer,  that  is,
the  old  father  of  the  Watch.  And  the  Diameter  of  that
defaced  Mitsraim,  containeth  almost  three  miles,  from
whence  to  the  Countrey  of  Gossen  are  eight  leagues  ;  it  is
called  Bulzzir  zzalbizz,  a  great  Citie,  in  the  which  there
are  about  a  thousand  Jewes.

From  hence  you  travell  halfe  a  dayes  journey  to  Ghiz-
kaal  le  Ghein  al  zzemezz,  which  was  sometimes  Ragh-

588

Ancient
Mitsraim.

The  monu-
ments of  the

of  Moses.

Gossen.

Bulzzir

zzalbizze.

Ghizkaal  le
Ghein  al
zzemezz.

Al  Bugiig.
Manziphtha.

Ramira.

Lamhhala.
Alexandria.

Aristotles
Schoole.

BENJAMIN, SON OF JONAS, A  JEW  a.d.

C.  I  1 60.

messes,  now  the  ruines  of  a  destroyed  Citie,  in  the  which  Raghmesses.
many  works  are  seene,  sometimes  built  by  our  fathers,
and  among  these  certaine  huge  buildings  like  unto  Towers,
made  of  Bricke.  From  thence  you  make  one  whole  dayes
journey  to  Al  Bubiig,  where  are  two  hundred  Jewes.  And
from  hence  in  halfe  a  dayes  journey  you  come  to  Man-
ziphtha,  where  are  two  hundred  Jewes.  From  which
'Citie,  Ramira  is  foure  leagues  distant,  and  in  it  there  are
seven  hundred  Jewes  ;  from  whence  it  is  five  dayes  journey
to  Lamhhala,  where  are  five  hundred  Israelites.  Two
dayes  journey  afterward,  you  come  to  Alexandria,  a  Citie
so  called,  after  the  name  of  Alexander  the  Macedonian,  at
whose  commandement  wee  reade  that  it  was  built,  and
strongly  fortifyed,  with  great  beautie  of  the  Walls,
Houses,  and  Palaces.  Without  the  Citie,  a  great  and
goodly  building  is  to  be  seene,  which  is  reported  to  have
beene  the  Colledge  of  Aristotle,  the  Master  of  Alexander,
wherein  there  are  almost  twentie  Schooles,  frequented  in
former  times  by  men  of  the  whole  world,  who  assembled
thither  to  learne  the  Philosophic  of  Aristotle ;  and
betweene  every  one  of  them,  were  Marble  Pillars.  But
the  Citie  it  selfe  is  excellently  built,  as  we  have  saide,
upon  the  Pavement  of  the  ground,  and  with  Vaults  and
Arches  under  ground,  through  the  hidden  passages
whereof,  men  may  come  into  the  Market  places  and  not
t>ee  seene :  of  the  which  some  are  a  whole  mile  in  length,
as  from  the  Gate  Resid,  unto  the  Gate  leading  unto  the
Sea,  in  which  Gate  a  way  was  made  and  paved,  unto  the
very  Haven  of  the  Citie  of  Alexandria,  which  is  extended
one  mile  within  the  Sea,  in  which  place  a  very  high  Tower
was  built,  which  the  Inhabitants  call  Magraah,  but  the
Arabians,  Magar  Alecsandria,  that  is,  the  Pharos  of  Alex-
andria: on  the  top  of  which  Tower,  it  is  reported,  that
Alexander  sometimes  set  a  glittering  Looking-glasse,  in
the  which  all  the  warlike  Ships  which  sayled  either  out  of
Graecia,  or  from  all  the  West  unto  ^Egypt,  to  harme  them,
might  bee  seene  fiftie  dayes  journey  by  land,  that  is,
above  the  space  of  five  hundred  leagues  off.

589

A.D.
C.  I  1 60.

Hierogly-
phikes.

Damiata.
Caphtor.
Sonbat.
Flaxe.

A  Ham.
Elim.

Raphidim.

Sinai.

Suriani.
Monks  of
Saint
Katharines.

The  red  Sea.
[II.ix.1462.]

The  Hand
Tunis,  other-
wise called
Hhanas.

Messana.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Nigh  unto  the  Sea-shoare  at  Alexandria,  there  is  a  very-
ancient  Sepulchre  to  be  seene,  adorned  with  the  shapes  of
all  Beasts  and  Birds  cut  thereon,  and  engraven  with
ancient  letters,  which  no  man  now  is  able  to  reade,  or
know.  But  there  are  some,  who  supposing,  say,  that  a
certaine  very  ancient  King  was  buried  there  before  the
time  of  the  Floud.  And  the  length  of  the  Sepulchre  is
fifteene  Spanish  spans,  to  wit,  of  the  hand  extended  from
the  thumbe  unto  the  little  finger :  and  the  bredth  con-
tayneth  sixe  such  spans.  About  three  thousand  Israelites
live  at  Alexandria.  From  Alexandria,  you  make  two
whole  dayes  journey es  to  Damiata,  which  selfe-same  Citie
was  called,  Caphtor,  where  are  two  hundred  Israelites.
From  thence  to  Sonbat,  is  halfe  a  dayes  journey,  the
Inhabitants  whereof  sowe  the  best  Flaxe,  and  make  Nets
or  Canopies :  and  this  merchandise  is  sold  throughout  the
whole  World.  From  thence,  in  foure  dayes  journey  I
came  to  Ailam,  otherwise  called  Elim,  now  possessed  and
inhabited  by  the  Arabians  dwelling  in  the  desert.  From
whence  to  Raphidim,  is  two  dayes  journey,  where  the
Arabians  dwell ;  and  none  of  the  Israelites.  But  from
hence,  in  one  day  you  goe  to  the  Mountaine  Sinai,  on  the
top  whereof  there  is  a  Temple  of  Monkes,  called  Suriani.
And  at  the  foot  of  the  Mountaine  standeth  a  great  Castle,
which  they  call  Tor  Sinai,  the  Inhabitants  hereof  speake
the  Chalday  Tongue,  that  is,  the  Language  of  Thargum.
This  Mountaine  is  little,  five  dayes  journey  distant  from
Sinai :  and  the  Inhabitants  of  this  place  are  subject  to  the
yoke  of  the  ^Egyptians.  But  the  Erythraean,  or  the  Red
Sea,  in  time  past  called  Suph,  is  one  dayes  journey  distant
from  the  Mountaine  Sinai,  and  is  a  Bay  of  the  Indian
Ocean  bending  towards  Damiata ;  in  the  which  Bay  sayling
one  dayes  journey  by  Sea,  you  come  to  the  Hand  called
Tunis,  and  the  same  is  otherwise  called  Hhanas,  where
are  almost  fortie  Israelites.  And  hitherto  extendeth  the
Kingdome  of  iEgypt.  Departing  from  thence,  in  twentie
dayes  journey  by  Sea,  I  was  brought  to  Messana,  which  is
the  beginning  of  the  Hand  of  Sicilia. But  Messana,  or

590

BENJAMIN, SON OF JONAS, A JEW

Messina,  as  it  is  now  called,  standeth  upon  a  Straight  of
the  Sea,  named  Lunid,  lying  betweene  Calabria  and  the
Hand  of  Cicilia  it  selfe :  and  two  hundred  Jewes  are  there.
The  soyle  of  the  Hand  is  most  fruitfull,  and  replenished
with  all  good  things,  and  beautified  with  Gardens,  and
Orchards.  In  this  place  the  Pilgrims  assemble  who
determine  to  goe  to  Hierusalem ;  for,  from  hence  is  the
best  and  most  commodious  passage  into  Syria.  From
hence  I  travelled  two  dayes  journey  to  Panormus,  a  great
Citie,  contayning  two  miles  in  bredth,  and  as  many  in
length.  In  this  Citie  a  princely  house  is  excellently  built
by  King  Guilielmus.  One  thousand  five  hundred  Jewes,
or  thereabouts,  remayne  in  that  place :  and  very  many
besides  of  the  Idumaeans,*  and  Ismaelites.

All  the  Colledges  of  the  Jewes  of  Germanie  are  seated
nigh  unto  the  great  River  Rohenus,  from  the  Citie  Colonia,
which  is  the  beginning  of  the  Kingdome,  unto  the  Citie
called,  Kesamburk,  in  the  borders  of  Germanie :  which
space  is  fifteene  dayes  journey  long.  This  Countrey,  in
time  past,  was  called,  Aschenaz.  These  are  the  Countries
in  Germanie,  in  the  which  the  Colledges  of  the  Israelites
are,  who  are  all  accounted  worthie  men,  by  the  River
Mosella,  and  Konphelinas,  and  Odranchah,  and  Kuna,  and
Kotania,  and  Binga,  and  Garmezza,  and  Mastheran.
Therefore  all  the  Israelites  remayne  dispersed  throughout
all  Countries.  But  whosoever  shall  hinder  Israel  that  it
may  not  be  gathered  together,  shall  never  see  the  good
signe,  nor  live  with  Israel.  But  at  what  time  God  shall
visite  our  Captivitie,  and  exalt  the  Home  of  his  Christ,
then  every  one  shall  say  :  I  will  bring  forth  the  Jewes,  and
gather  them  together.  And  in  these  Cities  are  the  Col-
ledges and  Schollers  of  Wise-men,  and  they  love  their
brethren,  and  speake  peace  unto  all  that  are  neere  and
farre  removed,  and  joyfully  and  with  rejoycing  receive
Guests  comming  unto  them,  and  celebrating  a  feast  for
their  entertaynment,  say :  O  our  Brethren  re  Joyce,  for  the
Divine  salvation  shall  come  very  speedily,a  as  it  were,  in
the  twinkling  of  an  eye. And  except,  fearing,  we  doubted

59*

A.D.

c.  1 1 60.

Lunid.
Calabria.

Panormus.

*The  Jewes

call  Romans

Idumteans,

and  Mahu-

metans

Ismaelites.

Kesamburk.

Aschenax.

Konphilinas.
Mosella.

*Speedie  lye!
and  how  long
lie  they  in  it
for  denying  the
truth?

A.D.
C.  1 1 60.

We  can  scarce
conjecture  the
new  names  of
these  Cities,
Bo  hem.

Praga,
Pin.

The  beasts
Veergaresy
otherwise
called  Sables.

Prussia.
Sarphat.

Sanad,  or
Zaanady  or
Zzod.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES  j

that  the  end  was  not  yet  come,  surely,  we  had  been  alreadie
gathered  together :  but  notwithstanding  we  cannot  yet,
untill  the  time  of  the  song,  and  the  voyce  of  the  Turtle
be  heard,  and  the  Embassadors  come,  and  say :  Let  God
alwaies  be  magnified.  They  use  to  write  Letters  one
unto  another,  whereby  they  confirme  each  other  in  the
Doctrine  of  Moses.  And  bewayling  Sion,  and  lamenting
Hierusalem,  they  aske  mercy  at  the  hands  of  God,  and  give
themselves  to  prayer,  cloathed  in  mourning  attire,  and
earnestly  bent  to  abstinence.  These  Metropolitan  Cities
therefore  which  wee  have  mentioned,  are  in  Germanie,
furnished  with  Colledges  of  the  Israelites.  Besides,  there
are  Astranburk,  and  Davirasburk,  Mandatrach,  Pessinghes,
Bamburk,  Sar,  and  Rasenburk,  which  is  also  the  end  of
the  Kingdome ;  in  which  Metropolitan  Cities,  many  of
the  Israelites  are,  Disciples  of  the  Wise-men,  and  rich.
From  thence  and  beyond,  is  the  Kingdome  of  Bohemia,
now  called  Praga,  and  it  is  the  beginning  of  the  Land  of
Sclavonia,  the  Inhabitants  whereof  are  called  Cananites,
by  the  Jewes  dwelling  there.  These  people  sell  their
sonnes  and  daughters  to  all  those  Nations  :  and  the  Russes
doe  the  like.  But  that  Countrey  is  farre  extended,  from
the  gate  of  Praga  unto  the  gate  of  the  great  Citie  Pin,
which  standeth  in  the  furthest  end  of  the  Kingdome.
The  whole  Countrey  is  mountaynous,  and  very  full  of
Woods,  in  the  which  those  Beasts  are  found,  named
Veergares,  and  the  same  are  called  Sables.  The  weather
is  so  cold  in  the  Winter,  that  for  that  season,  no  man  may
safely  come  forth  out  of  the  house.  And  hitherto  exten-
deth  the  Kingdome  of  Prussia.  Returning  from  hence,
I  came  into  the  Kingdome  of  France,  which  Countrey  was
called,  Sarphat,  by  the  Ancient.  Travelling  sixe  dayes
journey  from  the  Citie  Al-Sanad,  I  came  to  Paris,  the
greatest  Citie  of  the  whole  Kingdome  of  King  Lodovicus,
seated  nigh  unto  the  River  Saban  :  in  which  there  are
Disciples  of  Wise-men,  the  most  learned  of  all  those  who
at  this  day  remayne  in  all  the  Countrey,  who  applie  them-
selves day  and  night  unto  the  studie  of  the  Law,  hospitall

592

BENJAMIN, SON OF JONAS, A JEW  ad.

c.  1 1 60,
men,  and  curteous  towards  all  the  Brethren  that  passe
that  way,  and  companions  of  all  their  Brethren  the  Jewes.
The  mercifull  God  bee  mercifull  unto  them  and  us,  and
confirme  upon  us  and  them,  that  which  is  written  :  And  he
shall  bring  backe,  and  gather  thee  together  from  all  the
Nations,  among  whom  the  Lord  thy  God  hath  dispersed
thee. Amen,  Amen.

END OF VOLUME VIII.

viii  593  2  p

i9  m  05

BOSTON  PUBLIC  LIBRARY

3  9999  06663  967  3
