Hakluytus Posthumus, or Purchas His Pilgrimes, Vol. 3 (Samuel Purchas, 1625)
==========================================================
Purchas His Pilgrimes (1625) - the 17th century's great sequel to Hakluyt; the largest voyage collection of its age, preserving dozens of narratives otherwise lost. The 20-volume MacLehose reprint (Glasgow, 1905-07), the standard complete edition. Vol. 3 of 20.

Hakluytus  Posthumus

or

Purchas His  Pilgrimes

In  Twenty  Volumes

Volume III

GLASGOW

PRINTED AT THE UNIVERSITY PRESS BY

ROBERT MACLEHOSE 6» COMPANY LTD. FOR

JAMES MACLEHOSE AND SONS, PUBLISHERS

TO THE UNIVERSITY OF GLASGOW

MACMILLAN AND CO. LTD.  LONDON

THE MACMILLAN CO.  NEW YORK

SIMPKIN, HAMILTON AND CO.  LONDON

MACMILLAN AND BOWES  CAMBRIDGE

DOUGLAS AND FOULIS  EDINBURGH

MCMV

Hakluytus Posthumus

or

Purchas His Pilgrimes

Contayning a History of the World

in Sea Voyages and Lande Travells

by Englishmen and others

By
SAMUEL PURCHAS, B.D.

•VOLUME III

o

Glasgow

James MacLehose and Sons

Publishers  to  the  University

S

Digitized  by  the  Internet  Archive

in  2012  with  fundfng'fromJ  °*

Boston  Public-Utaary
•*:*:*::  if-  • :...

. . . '.. . .  mli  I ■

»  A/  •

http://archive.org/details/hakluytusposthum03purc

THE TABLE

The  Contents  of  the  Chapters  and  Paragraphs  in
the  third  Booke  of  the  First  part  of  Purchas
his  Pilgrimes.

CHAP. VII.

Captaine  William  Hawkins  his  Relations  of  the  occurrents
which  happened  in  the  time  of  his  residence  in  India,
in  the  Countie  of  the  Great  Mogoll,  and  of  his  de-
parture from  thence  ;  written  to  the  Companie. H.P.  I

§.  I.  His  barbarous  usage  at  Surat  by  Mocrebchan  : The

Portugals  and  Jesuites  treacheries  against  him.  .  .  I

Proud  injurious  Portugalls.  Barbarous  perfidie,  Portugall
treachery,  Jesuites  Sanctity.

§.  2.  His  journey  to  the  Mogoll  at  Agra,  and  entertain-
ment at  Court. .......  9

Jesuites  Plots.  Captaine  Hawkins  his  entertainment  with
the  Mogoll.  Captaine  Hawkins  at  the  Mogols  Court
in  Agra. Mocrebchan  the  spoyler  spoyled.

§.  3.  The  Mogols  inconstancy,  and  Captaine  Hawkins  de-
parture with  Sir  Henrie  Middleton  to  the  Red  Sea  :
Thence  to  Bantam,  and  after  for  England. .  .  1 S

The  Mogols  inconstancie.  Captaine  Hawkins  his  troubles
with  the  Mogoll.  Captaine  Hawkins  his  returne  for
England.

THE TABLE

The  Contents  of  the  Chapters — Continued.  page

§.  4.  A  briefc  Discourse  of  the  strength,  wealth  and  govern-
ment, with  some  Customes  of  the  Great  Mogoll :
which  I  have  both  seene,  and  gathered  by  his  chiefe
Officers,  and  Overseers  of  all  his  estate. ...  29

Offices,  Customes,  and  Revenewes  of  the  Mogoll.  The
Mogols  Treasure  and  Jewels.  Mogols  Greatnesse.
The  Mogols  Elephants  and  Dromedaries.  Delicacy
cruell,  Reason  brutish.  The  Mogols  wealth,  and
meanes  thereof.  The  Great  Mogols  devotions,  and
spending  his  time. Feasts  and  Funerals.

CHAP. VIII.

The  Voyage  of  Master  David  Middleton  in  the  Consent,
a  ship  of  an  hundred  and  fifteene  tunnes,  which  set
forth  from  Tilburie  Hope,  on  the  twelfth  of  March,
1606. H. ........ 51

Captaine  David  Middletons  Voyage  to  the  Molucca's.
Buttone.  Captaine  David  Midleton  his  ship  laden
with  Cloves.

CHAP. IX.

I.  A  briefe  Narration  of  the  fourth  Voyage  to  the  East
Indies,  with  the  two  good  ships,  the  Ascention  being
Admirall,  and  the  Union  Vice-Admirall,  under  the
command  of  Alexander  Sharpey  Generall,  and  Richard
Rowles  Lieutenant  Generall,  with  the  Discoverie  of
the  Red  Sea  in  the  Ascension. H.  .  .  .  61

§.  1. Relations of  the said Voyage, written by Thomas

Jones. .....  ....  61

The  treacherie  of  the  Moores.  Ascention  wracked.  Jones
his  Adventures  after  the  Ascentions  losse.  The  As-
cension lost,  the  Union  distressed.

§.  2.  The  report  of  William  Nicols  a  Mariner  of  the  Ascen-
sion which  travelled  from  Bramport  by  land  to
Masulipatan,  written from his  mouth  at Bantam by

VI

THE TABLE

The  Contents  of  the  Chapters — Continued.  pace

Henry  Moris,  the  twelfth  of  September,  1612.  The
former  and  greater  part  is  the  same  in  substance  with
that  of  Thomas  Jones,  and therefore  omitted.  .  72

§.  3.  The  unhappie  Voyage  of  the  Vice-admirall,  the  Union
outward  bound,  till  shce  arrived  at  Priaman,  reported
by  a  Letter  which  Master  Samuel  Bradshaw  sent  from
Priaman,  by  Humfrey  Bidulphe,  the  eleventh  day  of
March,  1609.  written  by  the  said  Henrie  Moris  at
Bantam,  the  fourteenth  of  September, 16 10. . .  74

Treachery  at  Zanzibar  and  Canquomorra.  Capt.  Rowles.
Unions  disaster. The  miserable  distresse  of  the  Union.

§.  4..  The  Voyage  of  Master  Joseph  Salbanke  through  India,
Persia,  part  of  Turkie,  the  Persian  Gulfe,  and  Arabia,
1609. Written  unto  Sir  Thomas  Smith.  .  .  82

Salbanks  Persian  travels  by  Land  and  Sea. Ormus,  Diu,  Goa.

CHAP. X.

The  Voyage  of  Master  David  Midleton  to  Java,  and  Banda,
extracted  out  of  a  Letter  written  by  himselfe  to  the
Companie,  this  being  the  fifth  Voyage  set  forth  by
them. H. ........  90

§.  1.  Their  affaires  at  Bantam,  Botun,  Bengaia. .  .  90

D.  Mid.  at  Botun. Hollander  in  Bengaia  his  life.

§.  2.  Occurrents  at  Banda  ; Contesting  with the Dutch  :

Trade  at  Puloway,  and  many  perils.  ...  94

The  Hollanders  usage  of  the  English. Uncharitable  pur-
poses of  the  Dutch. Dutch  scrupulositie,  and  English
resolution. Captaine David Middletons Trade in
. Banda. Sea and Land Perills. Captaine David
Midletons  trade  at Banda.

§.  3.  His  departure  for  Bantam,  escape  from  the  Hollanders,

and  returne  home.  .  . .  .  . .  .109

The  Dutch  Admirall  is  slaine.

vii

THE TABLE

The  Contents  of  the  Chapters — Continued.

CHAP. XI.

The  sixth  Voyage,  set  forth  by  the  East  Indian  Companie
in  three  ships  ;  the  Trades  Increase,  of  one  thousand
Tunnes,  and  in  her  the  Generall  Sir  Henrie  Middle-
ton,  Admirall  ;  the  Pepper-come  of  two  hundred  and
fiftie,  Vice-admirall,  the  Captaine  Nicholas  Dounton  :
and  the  Darling  of  ninetie.  The  Barke  Samuel  fol-
lowed as  a  Victualler,  of  burthen  one  hundred  and
eightie : written  by  Sir  H.  Middleton. H.  . 115

§.  I.  The  proceeding  of  his  Voyage  till  hee  came  to  Moha

in  the  Red  Sea .  .115

S.  H. Midleton  at  Zacotora  and  Aden.

§.  2.  Turkish treacherie at Moha and Aden with the

English.  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .126

Turkish  treacherie  towards  the  English.  John  Chambers
his  desperate  Adventure.

§.  3.  Sir  Henrie  Middleton,  and  foure  and  thirtie  others,
sent  to  the  Basha  at  Zenan.  Description  of  the
Countrie,  and  occurrents  till  their  returne. .  . 135

Their  passage  and  arrivall  at  Zenan.  The  English  be-
friended by  a  Moore.  The  English  imprisoned  by
the  Turkes.  The  Travailes  and  usage  of  Sir  H.
Midleton,  and  other  English.  Kindnesse  pretended
to  the  English.

§.  4..  Indian shipping at Moha  ; Sir Henrie Middletons

escape  from  the  Turkes,  and  enforcing  satisfaction. . 154.

S.  H.  Midleton  purposeth  an  escape.  The  escape  of  divers
of  the  English.  Sir  H.  Middletons  demands  of  the
Aga.  Restitution  made  by  the  Turkes  to  the  English.
The  English  feare  poysoning  by  the  Turkes.  The
Turkes  practice  to  poyson  Wells  at  Assab.
viii

THE TABLE

The  Contents  of  the  Chapters — Continued.  pace

§.  5.  Their  departure  from  Surat,  and  what  happened  there

with  the  Cambayans  and  Portugals.  .  .  . 1 70

Passages betweene the English and  Portugals. Hard

measure  offered by  the Portugals.  S. H. Midletons

entertainment at Cambaya. The  Indians  rude cus-
tome  in  buying.

§.  6. His  going  to  Dabul,  &  thence  to  the  Red  Sea,  and

enforced  trade  with  the  Guzerates.  .  .  . 185

Sir  Henry  Middleton  goeth  to  the  Red  Sea.  The  English
have  Trade  at  Dabull.  Divers  passages  betweene  the
Indians  and  English.  The  Jesuites  practise  among
the  Saracens.

CHAP. XII.

Nicholas  Dounton  Captaine  of  the  Pepper-corne,  a  ship  of
two  hundred  and  fifty  tunnes,  and  Lieutenant  in  the
sixth  Voyage  to  the  East  Indies,  set  forth  by  the  said
Companie,  his  Journall,  or  certaine  Extracts  thereof. H. 1 94

:§.  1.  Their  comming  to  Saldania,  and  thence  to  Socatora. 194

The  people,  and  commodities  of  Saldania.  The  descrip-
tion and  commodities  of  Saldania.  Madagascar.
Their  treachery.  Strange  Trees.  Long  drought  in
Socatora. The  Kings  entertainment.

:§.  2.  Of  Abba  del  Curia,  Arabia  Felix,  Aden  and  Moha,

and  the  trecherous  dealing  of  both  places. .  . 209

The  description  of  Abba  del  Curia.  Aden,  and  Moha.
The  cunning  treachery  of  the  Turkes  to  the  English
in  many  particulars.  English  betrayed  by  the  Turkes.
Turkish  policies  against  our  English.  Turkish  treachery
on  Land  and  Sea.  Chambers  Adventure.  Pembertons
escape. Sir  Henry  Middletons  happy  escape  aboord.

§.  3.  Their  departure  from  Moha  to  Assab,  and  after  that,
higher  into  the  Red  Sea,  thence  to  the  Socatora,  and
after  to  Surat.  ....... 243

The  English  kindly  used  at  Assab.  The  English  travelling
towards  Surat.

THE TABLE

The  Contents  of  the  Chapters — Continued.  PAGE

§.  4. Many  proud  affronts  of  the  Portugals. Disgusts  from

the  Indians. ........ 250

The  Portugals  dissimulation  with  the  English.  The  Por-
tugals enemies  to  the  English.  Sir  Henry  Middleton
kindly  entertained.  Another  assault  of  the  Portugals
on  the  English.  The  base  vanitie  of  Macrib  Chan.
The  base  dealing  of  the  Indians  with  our  English.

§.  5.  Their  departure  to  Dabul,  Socatora,  the  Red  Sea,  and

Acts  there. .  .  . .  . .  . .270

Unrulinesse  of  men  when  prey  is  to  be  had.  The  Eng-
lish recover  something  of  the  Portugals.  The  English
meete  with  a  ship  of  Callicut.  Dissembling  of  the
Turkes  with  the  English.

§.  6.  Their  barter  with  the  Indian  ships,  and  departure  to

Sumatra.  ........ 287

Sir  Henry  Middletons  composition  with  the  Indians  for
former  losses  by  the  Turkes.  The  Indian  Coast  dis-
cerned by  swimming  of  Snakes.  Civill  warres  a
hinderance  to  English  trade.  Worst  Friends  neer-
est  home.

CHAP. XIII.

The  seventh  Voyage ;  made  in  the  Globe  into  East  India,
set  out  under  the  command  of  Captain  Anthonie
Hippon,  observed  and  written  by  Nathaniel  Marten,
Masters  Mate  in the  said  ship. .... 304

English  Indian  Voyages.  Negapatan.  Paleacate.  Captaine
Hippon  at  Paleacate  and  Petepoly.  Patane,  Siam.
Indian Ports  traversed. S.  Helena  ill  graduated.

CHAP. XIIII.

Extracts  of  Peter  Williamson  Floris  his  Journall,  for  the
seventh  Voyage,  (in  which  he  went  Cape  Merchant)
translated  out  of  Dutch.  Hee  arrived  in  England,
161  5,  and  died  two  moneths  after  in  London.  . 319

x

THE TABLE

The  Contents  of  the  Chapters — Continued.  pace

§.  I.  The Voyage to Paleacatte, Petapoli, Masulipatan,

Bantam, Patania,  and  Siam. .  .  .  .  .319

The  Hollanders  triumph  over  the  English.  His  Majesties
Letters  delivered  at Patane  and  Syam. Tempest.

§.  2. Relations  of  strange  occurents  in Pegu, Siam, Joor,

Patane,  and  the  Kingdomes  adjacent. .  . .326

Tyranny,  Famine,  Warre,  Slave-tyrants.  Various  Affaires
at  Patanie,  Pahan  and  Siam.  Losse  of  the  Trade.
State  of  Banda. Slaves  domineering.

§.  3..  Their  Voyage  to  Masulipatan  ;  accidents  during  their

long  stay  there,  and  their  returne.  .  .  .  .334.

Great  and  extraordinarie  flouds  of  water.  Strange  attempt
of  English  among  the  Moores.

CHAP. XV.

A  Journall  of  a  Voyage  made  by  the  Pearle  to  the  East
India,  wherein  went  as  Captaine,  Master  Samuel
Castelton  of  London,  and  Captaine  George  Bathurst
as  Lieutenant  :  written  by  John  Tatton,  Master. . 343

The  ship  called  the  Pearle,  goeth  for  India.  The  Por-
tugal treachery  against  the  English.  The  English
take  a  ship,  and  dismisse  her.  Fight  betweene  the
Hollanders  and  Portugals.

The  Contents  of  the  Chapters  and  Paragraphs  in
the  fourth  Booke  of  the  First  part  of
Purchas  his  Pilgrimes.

CHAP. I.

The  eighth  Voyage  set  forth  by  the  East  Indian  Societie,
wherein  were  employed  three  ships,  the  Clove,  the
Hector,  and  the  Thomas,  under  the  command  of
Captaine  John  Saris :  His  Course  and  Acts  to  and  in
the  Red  Sea,  Java,  Moluccas,  and  Japan  (by  the
xi

THE TABLE

The  Contents  of  the  Chapters — Continued.  PAGe

Inhabitants  called  NefFoon,  where  also  he  first  began
and  setled  an  English  Trade  and  Factorie)  with  other
remarkable  Rarities,  collected  out  of  his  own  Journall. . 357

§.  1 Their sayling about Africa, visiting divers Hands

thereof,  and  comming  to  Socatora. .  .  .  . 357

A  Mahometane  King  entertained  by  the  English.  The
English  mens  usage  by  the  King  of  Moyela.

§.  2.  Occurrents  at  Socatora,  and  in  the  Red  Sea,  with
divers  Easterne  Letters,  and  the  Great  Turkes  Patent
and  Seale. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  370

The  entertainement  of  the  English  at  Socatora.  The
Voyage  of  Captaine  John  Saris.  Dangerous  sayling
neere  the  Arabian  Coast.  Entertainment  of  the
English  at  Moha  by  Ider  Aga.  Manner  of  sealing
at  Moha,  and  forme  of  Indian  writing.  The  forme
of  the  Grand  Signiors  Seale,  with  part  of  his  Passe.
The  Great  Turks  Patent  to  the  English  for  the  Red
Sea.  Entertainement  of  the  English  at  Moha.  The
great  and  rich  Customes  in  the  Port  of  Moha.

§.  3.  Their  Adventures  with  Sir  Henry  Middleton,  with
other  observations  of  those  parts,  and  arrivall  at
Bantam.  ........ 393

The  King  of  Rehita  commeth  to  visit  the  English.  Com-
modities priced  betweene  the  Turkes  and  English.
Trade  betweene  the  English  and  the  Turkes.  Trad-
ing of  the  English  with  the  Turkes.  Capt.  Saris  his
Voyage  to Bantam. Plentie  cause  of  dearth.

§.  4.  The  Voyage  of  Captaine  Saris  in  the  Clove,  to  the
He  of  Japan,  what  befell  in  the  way,  Observations
of  the  Dutch  and  Spaniards  in the  Moluccas.  .  . 408

Captaine  Saris  his  Voyage  to  Japan.  Welden  at  Botun.
The  Hollanders  hinder  English  Trade  at  Bachian.
The  Hollanders  Fort  in  the  Roade  of  Amasane.
The  Hollanders  spightfulnesse  to  the  English.  The
Hollanders  labour  to  hinder  the  English  trade.
Passages  betweene  the  English  and  the  Spanish.
xii

THE TABLE

The  Contents  of  the  Chapters — Continued.  pace

§.  5. Further observations touching the Molucca Hands,

and  their  proceeding  on their  Voyage  to  Japan. . 429

Divers  instructions  touching  the  Molucca  Hands.  The
Flemmings  severall  Forts  in the  Moluccaes.

§.  6.  Their arrivall at Firando  : the Habitc, Rites, and

Customes  of  the  Japonians. ..... 442

The  habite  and  behaviour  of  the  Japonians.  The  King
of  Japons  kindnesse  to  the  English.  Divers  customes
and  manners  of  the  Japonians.  The  manner  of  execut-
ing Offenders  in  Japan.  English  Presents  given  to
the  Emperour  of  Japan.

§.  7.  Captaine  Saris  his  Journey  to  the  Court  of  the
Japonian  Emperour,  and  observations  there,  and  by
the  way.  His  Letter  to  the  King,  and  Japonian
Priviledges  to  the  English  Companie. .  .  .453

The  true  heire  of  Japan  defeated  of  his  Inheritance.  Soul-
diers,  Dyet,  Temples  of  the  Japonians.  The  English
entertayned  by  the  Emperour  of  Japon.  The  King
of  Edoo  his  Letter  to  the  King  of  Great  Britaine.
Priviledges  granted  to  the  English  at  Japan.  The
Emperour  of  Japans  grants  to  the  English.  The
Jesuits  have  a  Colledge  in  Miaco.

§.  8.  Accidents  after  his  returne  to  Firando,  the  setling  of  a
Factorie  there,  departure  for  Bantam,  and  thence  for
England. King  of  Firandos  Letter  to  His  Majestic 472

Private  quarrels  among  the  English  abroad.  The  English
settle  a  Factorie  in  Japan.  The  English  passe  from
Japan  for  England.  The  price  of  Commodities  in-
creaseth  at  Bantam,  and  why.  The  King  of  Firando
his  Letter  to  our  King.

§.  9.  Intelligence  concerning  Yedzo,  delivered  in  the  Citie
of  Edoo  in  Japan,  by  a  Japanner  who  had  beene  there
twice. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  48  S

The  Description  of  the  Hand  of  Yedzo.

THE TABLE

The  Contents  of  the  Chapters — Continued.  page

CHAP. II.

Observations  of  the  said  Captaine  John  Saris,  of  occurrents
which  happened  in  the  East  Indies  during  his  abode
at  Bantam  from  October  1605.  till  October  1609.
As  likewise  touching  the  Marts  and  Merchandises  of
those  parts  ;  observed  by  his  owne  experience,  or
relation  of  others,  extracted  out  of  his  larger  Booke,
and  here  added  as  an  Appendix  to  his  former  greater
Voyage  ;  and  may  serve  as  a  continuation  of  Master
Scots  premised  Relations.  To  which  are  added  cer-
taine  Observations  of  the  said  Authour,  touching  the
Townes  and  Merchandise  of  principall  Trade  in  those
parts  of  the  World.  ...... 490

Certaine  Flemmings  put  to  death  at  Bemermassen.  A
great  Carracke  taken  by  the  Hollanders.  Javan  up-
roares.  Dutch  and  English  Indian  affaires.  Dutch
Admirall  taken  at  Ternate.

Certaine Rules for the choice of  sundry Drugs, as also

from  whence  they  may  bee  had,  as  followeth.  . 504

Muske,  Bezar  and  Amber.

Of  all  the  chiefe  and  principall  Towns  for  Trade  in  these
parts,  with  their  severall  names  and  situations,  and
also  what  commodities  they  doe  affoord,  and  what
is  there  desired. ....... 506

Bantam  weights  and  Cashes.  Best  wares  to  be  bought
or  sold.  And  Customes  at  Bantam.  Places  of  prin-
cipall Trade  in  the  East-Indies.  Diamonds  and  other
merchandise  of  Soccodanna  and  China.

A  note  of  requestable  Commodities  vendible  in  Japan,
together  with  their  prices  there  current,  being
Masses,  and  Canderines,  each  Canderine  contayning
the  Yo-  of  a  Masse  :  viz.  . .  . . .516

Commodities  vendible  in  Japan,  and  their  prices.

xiv

THE TABLE

The  Contents  of  the  Chapters — Continued.  **£■

A memoriall of  such merchandize as are to bee  bought

in  Japan,  and  the  prices  as  they  arc  there  worth. . 5 1 8

Commodities  to  be  bought  in  Japan.

CHAP.  III.

Relation  of  Master  Richard  Cockes  Cape  Merchant,  Of
what  past  in  the  Generals  absence  going  to  the  Em-
perours  Court.  Whereunto  are  added  divers  Letters
of  his  and  others,  for  the  better  knowledge  of  Japonian
affaires,  and  later  Occurrents  in those  parts. .  . 519

§.  1.  The  Kings  care,  unreadinesse  of  ours,  Japonian  super-
stitions, strange  tempest.  .  .  .  .  .519

The  English  kindly  entertained  at  Japan.  An  extraordinary
Tempest  in  Firando.  Superstitious  zeale  ;  Conjuring
Cousenage  ;  Fugitive  knaves.  Divers  Englishmen  run
away  from  the  ships  at  Firando,

§.  2.  Lies  of  or  on  the  Devil,  and  uproares  about  fire.
Deceit  of  Nangasack.  Suspicions,  Feasts,  Spanish
occurrents. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  530

The  entertaynment  of  the  English  at  Japan.  The  English
and  Dutch  feast  together.  A  great  and  dangerous
fire  in  Firando.

§.  3.  A  strange  Comedie  acted  by  Kings  and  Nobles  :  Pre-
ventions for  Night-cries  and  fires  ;  Returne  of  the
Generall  from  Court. . .  .  .  .  .54.2

The  English  are  invited  to  a  great  Feast.  The  jealousie
of  the  English  over  the  Spaniards.  The  Merchants
of  Miaco  deale  badly  with  the  English.

The  Copie  of  a Letter  sent by  the  Emperour of  Japan,
unto the King  of  Holland, by  the ship called the
Red  Lion,  with  Arrowes,  which  arrived  in  the  Texel,
the  two  and  twentieth of  July, 1610. And divers
Letters  written  from  the English in  Japan  to their
friends  in  England.  .  .  .  .  .  .548

xv

THE TABLE

The  Contents  of  the  Chapters — Continued.  page

Firando  in  Japan,  the  tenth  of  December, 1614. .  . 550

Disgust  of  Dutch.  Corean  stratagems  and  sayling  waggons.
Holland  acts  in  the  East  distasted.  Tempest  at  Edoo.
Divers  Intelligences  from  Japan  to  England.  The
fight  of  Hollanders  and  Spaniards.

Abuses  offered  by  the  Hollanders  to  the  English.  Dutch
Daggers,  Japon  Swords  :  Brutish  Boores,  Salvage
Tygres. Christ  crucified  betwixt  two  Theeves.

A  piece  of  another  letter  of  M.  Cockes.  . . . 563

ILLUSTRATIONS

PACK

Sharefoo Boobackar, King of Moyela, his note,

under  his  hand, of  friendship, .  .  . 364

Seals  of  Mamy, Captain  of  Moha, .  .  . 380

A Letter in the Banian hand written from the

Sabandar  in Moha  to  Captain  Saris, .  .380

The  Form  of  the  Grand Signiors Seal,  with  part

of  his  Pass,  ...... 382

The  Hand  and  Seal  of  Mahomed  Hashen  Comall
Adeene  Ashen,  Captain  of  the  Hassavy  of
Surat,  ........ 402

The Hand and Seal of Nohada Hassan Captain

of  the  Cawdrie  of  Diu,  .  .  .  .403

The  Japonian  Charter,  ..... 466

Hondius  his Map  of  Japan, . .  .  .  .570

THE  THIRD  VOLUME

OF

Purchas His Pilgrimes

Contayning  the  Navigations  and  Voyages  of  Eng-
lishmen to  the  Red  Sea,  the  Abassine,  Arabian,
Persian  and  Indian  Shoares,  Continents  and
Hands ;  with  English  Voyages  beyond
the  East-Indies,  to  the  Hands  of
Japan,  China,  Cauchin-China,
the  Philipinae  with  others,
and  the  Indian  Navi-
gations further
prosecuted

Chap. VII.  [i.  iii.  206.]

Captaine  William  Hawkins,  his  Relations  of  the
Occurrents  which  happened  in  the  time  of
his  residence  in  India,  in  the  Country  of  the
Great  Mogoll,  and  of  his  departure  from
thence  ;  written  to  the  Company.

§•  1.

His  barbarous  usage  at  Surat  by  Mocrebchan :  The
Portugals  and  Jesuits  treacheries  against  him.

T  my  arrivall  *unto  the  Bar  of  Surat,  being
the  foure  and  twentieth  of  August,  1608.
I  presently  sent  unto  Surat  Francis  Buck,
Merchant,  with  two  others,  to  make
knowne unto the Governour, that the

King of England had sent me as his  ^  not  need~

Embassadour unto his King, with his  ^epeate^\  t0

Letter  and  Present : I  received  the  Governours  answere,  the  Roade  of

both  by  them,  and  three  of  his  Servants  sent  me  from  Delisa  in  Soca-

Surat,  that  he,  and  what  the  Country  affoorded,  was  at  tora>  u'hence

my  command : and  that  I  should  be  very  welcome,  if  I  °" cL/J/ie

would  vouchsafe  to  come  on  shore. I  went  accompanied  Keeling  de-

with  my  Merchants,  and  others,  in  the  best  manner  I  could,  parted  in  the

befitting  for  the  honour  of  my  King  and  Country. At  Dragon,asyou

my  comming  on  shore,  after  their  barbarous  manner  I  was  tTC t^-tn'

kindly  received,  and  multitudes  of  people  following  me,  all  the  Hector  for

Surat  {the  meane  while  built  a  Pinnasse)  on  the  fourth  of  August,  having  received
from  the  Generall  a  duplicate  of  the  Commission  under  the  Great  Seale.  He  commeth  on
shoare  the  28.  of  August,  1608.

Ill  I  A

*  Captain
Keeling  and  he
had  kept  com-
pany together
al  the  voyage
before  related

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1608.

desirous  to  see  a  new  come  people,  much  nominated,  but
never  came  in  their  parts.  As  I  was  neere  the  Governors
house,  word  was  brought  me  that  he  was  not  well,  but  I
thinke  rather,  drunke  with  Affion  or  Opion,  being  an  aged
man.  So  I  went  unto  the  chiefe  Customer,  which  was  the
onely  man  that  Sea-faring  causes  belonged  unto  (for  the
government  of  Surat,  belonged  unto  two  great  Noblemen  ;
Chanchana.  the  one  being  Vice-Roy  of  Decan,  named  Chanchana  ;  the
Mocrebchan.  other,  Vice-Roy  of  Cambaya  and  Surat,  named  Mocreb-
chan,  but  in  Surat  hee  had  no  command,  save  onely  over
the  Kings  Customes)  who  was  the  onely  man  I  was  to  deale
withall.  After  many  complements  done  with  this  chiefe
Customer,  I  told  him  that  my  comming  was  to  establish
and  settle  a  Factory  in  Surat,  and  that  I  had  a  Letter  for
his  King  from  His  Majesty  of  England,  tending  to  the
same  purpose,  who  is  desirous  to  have  league  and  amitie
with  his  King,  in  that  kind,  that  his  Subjects  might  freely
goe  and  come,  sell  and  buy,  as  the  custome  of  all  Nations
is  :  and  that  my  ship  was  laden  with  the  commodities  of
our  land,  which  by  intelligence  of  former  travellers,  were
vendible  for  these  parts.  His  answere  was,  that  he  would
dispatch  a  Foot-man  for  Cambaya,  unto  the  Nobleman  his
Master :  for  of  himselfe  he  could  doe  nothing  without  his
order.  So  taking  my  leave,  I  departed  to  my  lodging
appointed  for  mee,  which  was  at  the  Custome-house  :  In
the  morning,  I  went  to  visit  the  Governour,  and  after  a
Present  given  him,  with  great  gravity  and  outward  shew
of  kindnesse,  he  entertained  me,  bidding  me  most  heartily
welcome,  and  that  the  Countrey  was  at  my  command.
After  complements  done,  and  entring  into  the  maine
affaires  of  my  businesse,  acquainting  him  wherefore  my
comming  was  for  these  parts :  he  answered  me,  that  these
my  affaires  did  not  concerne  him,  because  they  were  Sea-
faring causes,  which  did  belong  unto  Mocrebchan,  unto
whom  hee  promised  me  to  dispatch  a  Foot-man  unto  Cam-
baya, and  would  write  in  my  behalfe,  both  for  the  unlading
of  my  shippe,  as  also  concerning  a  Factorie.  In  the  meane
while,  he  appointed  me  to  lodge  in  a  Merchants  house,  that

2

WILLIAM HAWKINS

A.D.
l608.

The  Captaine
of  the  ship  that
Sir  Edward
Michelborne
tooke.
Excessive

understood  the  Turkish,  being  at  that  time  my  Trouch-
man,  the  Captaine  of  that  shippe  which  Sr  Edward
Michelborne  tooke.

It  was  twentie  daies  ere  the  answer  came,  by  reason  of
the  great  waters  and  raines  that  men  could  not  passe.  In
this  time,  the  Merchants,  many  of  them  very  friendly
feasted  me,  when  it  was  faire  weather  that  I  could  get  out  T
of  doores :  for  there  fell  a  great  raine,  continuing  almost
the  time  the  Messengers  were  absent,  who  at  the  end  of
twenty  daies  brought  answer  from  Mocrebchan,  with
Licence  to  land  my  goods,  and  buy  and  sell  for  this  present
Voyage  :  but  for  a  future  Trade,  and  setling  of  a  Factorie,
he  could  not  doe  it  without  the  Kings  commaundement,
which  he  thought  would  be  effected,  if  I  would  take  the
paines  of  two  moneths  travell,  to  deliver  my  Kings  Letter.
And  further,  he  wrote  unto  his  chiefe  Customer,  that  all,
whatsoever  I  brought,  should  be  kept  in  the  Custome-house,
till  his  Brother  Sheck  Abder  Rachim  came,  who  should
make  all  the  hast  that  possibly  could  bee,  for  to  chuse
such  goods  as  were  fitting  for  the  King :  (these  excuses  of
taking  goods  of  all  men  for  the  King,  are  for  their  owne
private  gaine.)  Upon  this  answere,  I  made  all  the  hast  I
could,  in  easing  our  shippe  of  her  heavy  burthen  of  Lead,
and  Iron,  which  of  necessitie  must  be  landed.  The  goods
being  landed,  and  kept  in  the  Customers  power,  till  the  [I.  iii.  207.]
comming  of  this  great  man,  perceiving  the  time  precious,
and  my  ship  not  able  long  to  stay,  I  thought  it  convenient
to  send  for  three  Chests  of  Money,  and  with  that  to  buy
Commodities  of  the  same  sorts,  that  were  vendible  at
Priaman  and  Bantam,  which  the  Guzerats  carry  yearely
thither,  making  great  benefit  thereof.  I  began  to  buy
against  the  will  of  all  the  Merchants  in  the  Towne,  whose
grumbling  was  very  much,  and  complaining  unto  the
Governour  and  Customer,  of  the  leave  that  was  granted
me,  in  buying  those  Commodities,  which  would  cut  their
owne  throates  at  Priaman  and  Bantam,  they  not  suspecting
that  I  would  buy  Commodities  for  those  parts,  but  onely
for  England.

A.D.
l608.

Our  two
Barks  taken  by
the  Portugal;,
and  thirtie
men  in  them.
This  not  fight-
ing, was
upbraided  to
our  men  by  the
Indians  with
much  disgrace,
since  recovered
with  interest
by  our  Sea-
fights  with  the
Portuga/s.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

At  the  end  of  this  businesse,  this  great  man  came,  who
gave  me  licence  to  ship  it :  before  the  shipping  of  which
I  called  a  Councell,  which  were  the  Merchants  I  had,  and
those  that  I  thought  fitting  for  the  businesse  I  pretended,
demanding  every  ones  opinion  according  to  his  place,  what
should  be  thought  convenient  for  the  delivery  of  his
Majesties  Letter,  and  the  establishing  of  a  Trade.  So
generally  it  was  agreed  and  concluded,  that  for  the  effecting
of  these  waighty  affaires,  it  neither  would,  nor  could  be
accomplished  by  any,  but  by  my  selfe,  by  reason  of  my
experience  in  my  former  travels  and  language :  as  also  I
was  knowne  to  all,  to  be  the  man  that  was  sent  as  Embassa-
dour  about  these  affaires.  After  it  was  concluded,  and  I
contented  to  stay,  I  made  what  hast  I  could  in  dispatching
away  the  ship,  and  to  ship  the  goods.  This  done,  I  called
Master  Marlow,  and  all  the  company  that  was  on  shore
before  mee,  acquainting  them  with  my  pretence,  and  how
they  should  receive  for  their  Commander  Master  Marlow :
willing  them  that  they  obey  and  reverence  him,  in  that  kind
as  they  did  me.  This  done,  I  brought  them  to  the  water
side,  and  seeing  them  imbarke  themselves,  I  bad  them
farewell.

The  next  day,  going  about  my  affaires  to  the  great  mans
brother,  I  met  with  some  tenne  or  twelve  of  our  men,  of
the  better  sort  of  them,  very  much  frighted,  telling  me  the
heaviest  newes,  as  I  thought,  that  ever  came  unto  me,  of
the  taking  of  the  Barkes  by  a  Portugal  Frigat  or  two  and
all  goods  and  men  taken,  onely  they  escaped.  I  demand-
ing in  what  manner  they  were  taken,  and  whether  they  did
not  fight ;  their  answer  was  no  :  M.  Marlow  would  not
suffer  them,  for  that  the  Portugals  were  our  friends  :  and
Bucke,  on  the  other  side,  went  to  the  Portugall  without  a
pawne,  and  there  he  betrayed  us,  for  he  never  came  unto
us  after.  Indeed,  Bucke  went  upon  the  oath  and  faithfull
promise  of  the  Captaine,  but  was  never  suffered  to  returne.
I  presently  sent  a  letter  unto  the  Captaine  Major,  that  he
release  my  men  and  goods,  for  that  we  were  Englishmen
and  that  our  Kings  had  peace  and  amity  together. And

4

WILLIAM HAWKINS  ad.

1608.

that  we  were  sent  unto  the  Mogols  countrey  by  our  King,

and  with  his  letter  unto  the  Mogol,  for  his  subjects  to  trade

in  his  Countrey  :  and  with  his  Majesties  Commission  for

the  government  of  his  subjects. And  I  made  no  question,

but  in  delivering  backe  his  Majesties  subjects  and  goods,

that  it  would  be  well  taken  at  his  Kings  hands  : if  the

contrary,  it  would  be  a  meanes  of  breach. At  the  receit  of

my letter, the proud Rascall braved so much, as the  The  intoller-

Messenger told me, most vilely abusing his Majestie, ?nde  °f

tearming  him  King  of  Fishermen,  and  of  an  Hand  of  no Captaine

import,  and  a  fart  for  his  Commission,  scorning  to  send  me

any  answer.

It  was  my  chance  the  next  day,  to  meete  with  a  Captaine
of  one  of  the  Portugal  Frigats,  who  came  about  businesse
sent  by  the  Captaine  Major.  The  businesse,  as  I  under-
stood, was  that  the  Governour  should  send  me  as  prisoner
unto  him,  for  that  we  were  Hollanders.  I  understanding
what  he  was,  tooke  occasion  to  speake  with  him  of  the
abuses  offered  the  King  of  England,  and  his  subjects  :  his
answer  was,  that  these  Seas  belonged  unto  the  King  of
Portugall,  and  none  ought  to  come  here  without  his  license.
I  told  him,  that  the  King  of  Englands  license  was  as  good
as  the  King  of  Spaines,  and  as  free  for  his  Subjects,  as  for
the  King  of  Spaines,  &  he  that  saith  the  contrary,  is  a
traytor,  and  a  villaine,  &  so  tel  your  great  Captaine,  that  in
abusing  the  King  of  England,  he  is  a  base  villaine,  and  a
traytor  to  his  King,  and  that  I  will  maintaine  it  with  my
sword,  if  he  dare  come  on  shore.  I  sending  him  a
challenge,  the  Mores  perceiving  I  was  much  mooved,
caused  the  Portugal  to  depart.  This  Portugal  some  two
houres  after,  came  to  my  house,  promising  me,  that  he
would  procure  the  libertie  of  my  men  and  goods,  so  that
I  would  be  liberall  unto  him :  I  entertained  him  kindly,
and  promised  him  much,  but  before  he  departed  the
Towne,  my  men  and  goods  were  sent  for  Goa.  . E"S'uh

I  had  my  goods  readie,  some  five  dayes  before  I  could  be  fQ1.  Goa
cleare,  and  have  leave,  for  they  would  not  let  them  be The  third  of
shipped,  untill  this  great  man  came,  which  was  the  third  October.

5

A.D.

l6o8.

The  ship

dcparteth
leaving  M.
William
Hawkins  and
his  servants  in
the  Conn  trey.

The  perfidy
y  treason  of
Mocreb-chan
and  the  Jesuit
Peonier.

[I.

208.]

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

of  October :  and  two  dayes  after,  the  ship  set  sayle,  I
remaining  with  one  Merchant  William  Finch,  who  was
sicke  the  greater  part  of  his  time,  and  not  able  to  stirre
abroad  to  doe  any  businesse :  the  rest  were  two  servants,
a  Cooke,  and  my  Boy.  These  were  the  companie  I  had,
to  defend  our  selves  from  so  many  enemies,  which  lay
daily  lurking  to  destroy  us :  aiming  at  me  for  the  stopping
of  my  passage  to  the  great  Mogol.  But  God  preserved
me,  and  in  spight  of  them  all,  I  tooke  heart  and  resolution
to  goe  forwards  on  my  travels.  After  the  departure  of  the
ship,  I  understood  that  my  goods  and  men  were  betrayed
unto  the  Portugal,  by  Mocreb-chan,  and  his  followers  :  for
it  was  a  plot  laid  by  the  Jesuite  and  Mocreb-chan,  to
protract  time  till  the  Frigats  came  to  the  Bar,  and  then  to
dispatch  me :  for  till  then,  this  dogge  Mocreb-chan  his
brother  came  not :  and  the  comming  of  these  Frigats  was
in  such  secrecy,  that  till  they  had  taken  us,  we  heard  no
newes  of  them.

After  the  departure  of  my  ship,  I  was  so  misused,  that  it
was  unsufferable,  but  so  long  as  my  ship  was  at  the  Bar,
I  was  flattered  withall.  But  howsoever,  well  used  or  ill,
it  was  not  for  mee  to  take  thought  for  any  thing,  although
remaining  in  an  heathen  Countrey,  invironed  with  so  many
enemies,  who  daily  did  nothing  else  but  plot  to  murther
me,  and  cosen  me  of  my  goods,  as  hereafter  you  shall
understand.  First,  misused  by  Mocreb-chan,  as  to  have
possession  of  my  goods,  taking  what  he  pleased,  and
leaving  what  he  pleased,  giving  me  such  a  price  as  his  owne
barbarous  conscience  afforded  :  that  from  thirtie  five  would
give  but  eighteene,  not  regarding  his  brothers  bil,  who  had
full  authoritie  from  him  :  and  how  difficult  it  was  to  get
money  from  his  chiefe  servant,  after  the  time  expired,  as  it
is  best  knowne  to  us,  who  tooke  the  paines  in  receiving  a
small  part  thereof,  before  his  comming  to  Surat :  and  after
his  comming,  I  was  barred  of  all :  although  he  outwardly
dissembled,  &  flattered  with  me  almost  for  three  moneths,
feeding  me  with  faire  promises  of  payment,  and  other  kind-
nesses. In  the  meane  time,  he  came  to  my  house  three

6

WILLIAM HAWKINS  A4>.

1608.

times,  sweeping  me  cleane  of  all  things  that  were  good,  so
that  when  he  saw,  that  I  had  no  more  good  things  left,  he
likewise  by  little  and  little  degraded  me  of  his  good  lookes.
Almost  all  this  time,  William  Finch  was  extreame  sicke  of
the  Fluxe,  but  thankes  be  to  God  recovered  past  all  hope,
I,  on  the  other  side,  could  not  peepe  out  of  doores  for  feare
of  the  Portugals,  who  in  troops  lay  lurking  in  by-wayes,
to  give  me  assault  to  murther  me,  this  beeing  at  the  time
that  the  Armada  was  there.

The  first  plot  laid  against  me,  was :  I  was  invited  by  The  first  plot
Hogio  Nazam  to  the  fraughting  of  his  ship  for  Mocha,  as  °L//f0  ^//"^
the  custome  is,  they  make  at  the  fraughting  of  their  ships
great  feasts,  for  all  the  principallest  of  the  Towne.  It
was  my  good  hap  at  that  time  a  great  Captaine  belonging  to
the  Vice-Roy  of  Guzerat  resident  in  Amadavar,  being
sent  about  affaires  unto  Surat,  was  likewise  invited  to  this
feast,  which  was  kept  at  the  water  side  :  and  neere  unto  it,
the  Portugals  had  two  Frigats  of  their  Armada,  which
came  to  receive  their  tribute  of  the  shippes  that  were  to
depart,  as  also  refreshment.  Out  of  these  Frigats,  there
came  three  gallant  fellowes  to  the  Tent  where  I  was,  and
some  fortie  followers  Portugals,  scattering  themselves
along  the  Sea  side,  ready  to  give  an  assault  when  the  word
should  be  given.  These  three  Gallants  that  came  to  the
tents,  armed  with  coats  of  Buffe  downe  to  the  knees,  their
Rapiers  and  Pistols  by  their  sides,  demaunded  for  the
English  Captaine  :  upon  the  hearing  of  which,  I  arose
presently,  and  told  them  that  I  was  the  man,  and  perceiving
an  alteration  in  them,  I  laid  hand  on  my  weapon.  The
Captaine  Mogol,  perceiving  treason  towards  me,  both  he
and  his  followers  drew  their  weapons  :  and  if  the  Portugals
had  not  been  the  swifter,  both  they  and  their  scattered
crew  (in  retiring  to  their  Frigats)  had  come  short  home.

Another  time,  they  came  to  assault  me  in  my  house  with  The  second
a  Friar,  some  thirty  or  fortie  of  them  :  the  Friars  comming  P"*'
was  to  animate  the  souldiers,  and  to  give  them  absolution.
But  I  was  alwaies  wary,  having  a  strong  house  with  good
doores. Many  troopes  at  other  times,  lay  lurking  for  me

7

A.D.

i6o8.

Padre  Pcneiro
a  Jesuiie,  a

paterne  of
Jcsuiticall
sanctitie.
How  franke
would  the
Jesuites  have
bin  to  Judas,
beyond  those
Priests  which
gave  but  thirty
pieces  for  the
price  of  b loud,
and  those  but
of  two  shillings
sixe  pence  the
piece?  whereas
this  Jesuite
offers  forty
thousand
Royals  {who
can  deny  them
Roy  all  Mer-
chants?) at
foure  shillings
sixe  pence  the
piece.

Jesuites  policy.
J  ust  Jesuit-

PURCHAS HIS PILGR1MES

and  mine  in  the  streetes,  in  that  kind,  that  I  was  forced  to
goe  to  the  Governour  to  complaine,  that  I  was  not  able  to
goe  about  my  businesse,  for  the  Portugals  comming  armed
into  the  Citie  to  murther  me  :  which  was  not  a  custome  at
other  times,  for  any  Portugals  to  come  armed  as  now  they
did.  He  presently  sent  word  to  the  Portugals,  that  if  they
came  into  the  City  armed  againe,  at  their  owne  perils  be
it.  At  Mocreb-chan  his  comming,  with  a  Jesuite  named
Padre  Pineiro  in  his  company  (who  profered  Mocreb-chan
fortie  thousand  Rials  of  eight,  to  send  me  to  Daman,  as
I  understood  by  certaine  advise  given  me  by  Hassun  Ally,
and  Ally  Pommory)  I  went  to  visit  him,  giving  him  a
Present,  besides  the  Present  his  brother  had :  and  for  a
time,  as  I  have  above  written,  I  had  many  kind  outward
shewes  of  him,  till  the  time  that  I  demanded  my  money.
After  that,  his  dissembling  was  past,  and  he  told  me
plainely,  that  he  would  not  give  mee  twentie  Manadies  per
Vare,  but  would  deliver  me  backe  my  cloath.  Upon  which
dealings,  I  dissembled  as  wel  as  I  could  with  him,  intreating
leave  for  Agra,  to  the  King,  telling  him  that  William  Finch
was  the  man  that  I  left  as  my  chiefe  in  this  place :  and  in
what  kind  soever  his  pleasure  was  to  deale  with  me,  he  was
the  man  to  receive  either  money  or  ware.  Upon  which
answer,  he  gave  me  his  license  and  letter  to  the  King,
promising  me  fortie  horsemen  to  goe  with  me,  which  hee
did  not  accomplish.  After  license  received,  the  Father  put
into  Mocreb-chan  his  head,  that  it  was  not  good  to  let  me
passe  :  for  that  I  would  complaine  of  him  unto  the  King.
This  he  plotted  with  Mocreb-chan  to  overthrow  my
journey,  which  he  could  not  doe,  because  I  came  from  a
King :  but  he  said,  that  he  would  not  let  me  have  any
force  to  goe  with  me.  And  what  else  hee  would  have
him  to  doe,  either  with  my  Treuchman  and  Coachman,  to
poyson  or  murther  me,  if  one  should  faile,  the  other  to  doe
it :  this  invention  was  put  into  Mocreb-chans  head  by  the
Father.  But  God  for  his  mercie  sake,  afterward  discovered
these  plots,  and  the  Counsell  of  this  Jesuite  tooke  not
place. Before  the  plotting  of  this,  the  Jesuite  and  I  fell

WILLIAM HAWKINS

out  in  the  presence  of  Mocreb-chan,  for  vile  speaches  made
by  him  of  our  King  and  Nation,  to  bee  vassals  unto  the
King  of  Portugall :  which  words  I  could  not  brooke,  in  w
much,  that  if  I  could  have  had  my  will,  the  Father  had
never  spoken  more,  but  I  was  prevented.

§. II.  [I.  iii.

His  Journey  to  the Mogoll at  Agra,  and  enter-
taynment  at Court.

A.  I ).
l608.

IO9.]

Ow  finding  William  Finch  in  good  health,  newly
recovered,  I  left  all  things  touching  the  Trade  of
Merchandizing  in  his  power :  giving  him  my
remembrance  and  order,  what  he  should  doe  in  my
absence.  So  I  began  to  take  up  Souldiers  to  conduct
mee,  being  denyed  of  Mocrebchan,  besides  Shot  and  Bow-
men that  I  hired.  For  my  better  safety,  I  went  to  one
of  Chanchanna  his  Captaines,  to  let  mee  have  fortie  or
fiftie  Horsemen  to  conduct  me  to  Chanchanna,  being  then
Vice-Roy  of  Decan,  Resident  in  Bramport,  who  did  to
his  power  all  that  I  demanded,  giving  me  valiant  Horse-
men Pattans,  a  people  very  much  feared  in  these  parts  :
for  if  I  had  not  done  it,  I  had  beene  over-throwne.  For
the  Portugals  of  Daman  had  wrought  with  an  ancient
friend  of  theirs  a  Raga,  who  was  absolute  Lord  of  a
Province,  (betweene  Daman,  Guzerat  and  Decan)  called
Cruly,  to  be  readie  with  two  hundred  Horsemen  to  stay
my  passage :  but  I  went  so  strong  and  well  provided,  that
they  durst  not  incounter  with  us :  so  likewise  that  time
I  escaped.

Then  at  Dayta,  another  Province  or  Princedome,  my
Coachman  being  drunke  with  certaine  of  his  Kindred,
discovered  the  Treason  that  hee  was  to  worke  against
mee,  which  was,  that  hee  was  hiered  to  murther  me :  he
being  over-heard  by  some  of  my  Souldiers,  who  at  that
present  came  and  told  me,  and  how  it  should  be  done  in
the  morning  following,  when  we  begin  our  travell :  (for
wee  use  to  travell  two  houres  before  day)  upon  which

9

He  setteth  for-
ward on  his
Journey  from
Suratt  toward
Agra.

Another  dan-
gerous Plot  of
the  Portuga/s.

Cruly
Province.

Dayta
another  Pro-

They  use  to
travell  two
houres  before
day.

A.D.

1608.

The  J  estates
bloudie  plot
discovered.
Virtus  an
virus,  quis  in
Jesuita
requirat?

M.  Hawkins

departethfrom
Suratt. The
first  of  Febru-
ary 1608.

His  arrivall
at  Bramport.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

notice,  I  called  the  Coachman  unto  me,  examining  him,
and  his  friends  before  the  Captaine  of  the  Horsemen  I
had  with  mee :  who  could  not  deny ;  but  hee  would
never  confesse  who  hired  him,  although  hee  was  very
much  beaten,  cursing  his  fortune  that  he  could  not  effect
it :  for  he  was  to  doe  it  the  next  morning,  so  I  sent  him
Prisoner  unto  the  Governour  of  Suratt.

But  afterward  by  my  Broker  or  Truchman,  I  understood
that  both  hee  and  the  Coachman  were  hired  by  Mocreb-
chan,  but  by  the  Fathers  perswasion,  the  one  to  poyson
me,  and  the  other  to  murther  me  :  but  the  Truchman
received  nothing  till  he  had  done  the  deed,  which  hee
never  meant  to  doe,  for  in  that  kind  hee  was  alwayes  true
unto  mee  :  thus  God  preserved  me.  This  was  five  dayes
after  my  departure  from  Suratt,  and  my  departure  from
Suratt  was  the  first  of  February  1608.  So  following  on
my  travels  for  Bramport,  some  two  dayes  beyond  Dayta,
the  Pattans  left  me,  but  to  be  conducted  by  another
Pattan  Captaine,  Governour  of  that  Lordship,  by  whom  I
was  most  kindly  entertained.  His  name  was  Sherchan,
beeing  sometime  a  Prisoner  unto  the  Portugall,  and  hav-
ing the  Portugall  Language  perfect,  was  glad  to  doe  mee
any  service  :  for  that  I  was  of  the  Nation,  that  was  enemie
unto  the  Portugall.  Himselfe  in  person,  with  fortie
Horsemen,  went  two  dayes  joureney  with  mee,  till  hee  had
freed  mee  from  the  dangerous  places :  at  which  time  he
met  with  a  troupe  of  Out-lawes,  and  tooke  some  foure
alive,  and  slew  and  hurt  eight,  the  rest  escaped.  This
man  very  kindly  writ  his  Letter  for  me,  to  have  his  house
at  Bramport,  which  was  a  great  curtesie,  otherwise  I  could
not  tell  where  to  lodge  my  selfe,  the  Towne  being  so  full
of  Souldiers :  for  then  began  the  Warres  with  the  Decans.

The  eighteenth  of  the  said  Moneth,  thankes  be  to
God,  I  came  in  safetie  to  Bramport,  and  the  next  day  I
went  to  the  Court  to  visit  Chanchanna,  being  then  Lord
Generall  and  Vice-Roy  of  Decan,  giving  him  a  Present ;
who  kindly  tooke  it :  and  after  three  houres  conference
with  him,  he  made  me  a  ^reat  Feast,  and  being  risen  from

WILLIAM HAWKINS

1609.

the  Table,  invested  me  with  two  Clokes,  one  of  fine
Woollen,  and  another  of  Cloth  of  Gold  :  giving  mee  his
most  kind  Letter  of  favour  to  the  King,  which  avayled
much.  That  done  he  imbraced  me,  and  so  we  departed.
The  Language  that  we  spoke  was  Turkish,  which  he
spake  very  well.

I  remayned  in  Bramport  unto  the  second  of  March  ; He  ttajeth  in
till  then  I  could  not  end  my  businesses  of  Monies  that  I 2J222?
brought  by exchange, staying  likewise for a Carravan, f^arc^
having  taken  new  Souldiers, I followed  my  Voyage  or
journey  to  Agra : where  after  much  labour, toyle, and
many  dangers,  I  arrived  in  safety  the  sixteenth  of  Aprill, His  anivall
i6oq. Being  in  the  Citie,  and  seeking  out  for  an  house  at%  -Agra  the

y  &  \-  •  *A- v ^.l j.  t sixteenth  of

in  a  very  secret  manner,  notice  was  given  the  King  that  1  jprm  ^oq
was  come,  but  not  to  bee  found  :  He  presently  charged
both  Horsemen  and  Footmen  in  many  troupes,  not  to
leave  before  I  was  found,  commanding  his  Knight  Mar-
shall to  accompany  mee  with  great  state  to  the  Court,  as
an  Embassador  of  a  King  ought  to  be  :  which  he  did  with
a  great  traine,  making  such  extraordinary  haste,  that  I
admired  much  :  for  I  could  scarce  obtayne  time  to  apparell
my  selfe  in  my  best  attyre.  In  fine,  I  was  brought  before  He  came  be-
the  King,  I  came  with  a  slight  present,  having  nothing  fore  tlie  Kt"£-
but  cloth,  and  that  not  esteemed  :  (for  what  I  had  for  the
King,  Mocreb-chan  tooke  from  me,  wherwith  I  ac-
quainted his  Majestic)  After  salutation  done,  with  a
most  kinde  and  smiling  countenance,  he  bade  me  most
heartily  welcome,  upon  which  speech  I  did  my  obeysance
and  dutie  againe.  Having  his  Majesties  Letter  in  my
hand,  he  called  me  to  come  neere  unto  him,  stretching
downe  his  hand  from  the  Seate  Royall,  where  he  sate  in
great  Majestie  something  high  for  to  be  seene  of  the  [I.  iii.  210.]
people :  receiving  very  kindly  the  Letter  of  me,  viewing
the  Letter  a  prettie  while,  both  the  Seale,  and  the  manner
of  the  making  of  it  up,  he  called  for  an  old  Jesuite  that
was  there  present  to  reade  it.  In  the  meane  space,  while
the  Jesuite  was  reading  it,  hee  spake  unto  mee  in  the
kindest  manner  that  could  bee,  demanding  of  mee  the

A.D.

1609.

Jesuitical/
Charitie.

The  Mogoll
skilfull  in  the
Turkish
tongue.

Spyes  upon
every  Noble-
man.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

contents  of  the  Letter,  which  I  told  him  :  upon  which
notice,  presently  granting  and  promising  me  by  God,  that
all  what  the  King  had  there  written,  he  would  grant  and
allow  withall  his  heart,  and  more  if  his  Majestie  would
require  it.  The  Jesuite  likewise  told  him  the  effect  of
the  Letter,  but  discommending  the  stile,  saying,  it  was
basely  penned,  writing  Vestra  without  Majestad :  my
answere  was  unto  the  King,  and  if  it  shall  please  your
Majestie,  these  people  are  our  enemies :  how  can  this
Letter  be  ill  written,  when  my  King  demandeth  favour  of
your  Majestie? he  said,  it  was  true.

Perceiving  I  had  the  Turkish  Tongue,  which  himselfe
well  understood,  hee  commanded  me  to  follow  him  unto
his  Chamber  of  Presence,  being  then  risen  from  that  place
of  open  Audience,  desiring  to  have  further  conference
with  me :  in  which  place  I  staved  some  two  houres,  till
the  King  came  forth  from  his  women.  Then  calling  mee
unto  him,  the  first  thing  that  hee  spake,  was  that  he  under-
stood that  Mocrebchan  had  not  dealt  well  with  mee,
bidding  mee  bee  of  good  cheere,  for  he  would  remedie
all.  It  should  seeme,  that  Mocrebchans  enemies  had  ac-
quainted the  King  with  all  his  proceedings :  for  indeed
the  King  hath  Spies  upon  every  Nobleman.  I  answered
most  humbly,  that  I  was  certaine,  all  matters  would  goe
well  on  my  side,  so  long  as  his  Majestie  protected  me.
Upon  which  speech  he  presently  sent  away  a  Post  for
Suratt,  with  his  command  to  Mocrebchan,  writing  unto
him  very  earnestly  in  our  behalfes  :  conjuring  him  to  bee
none  of  his  friend,  if  hee  did  not  deale  well  with  the
English,  in  that  kind,  as  their  desire  was.

This  being  dispatched  and  sent,  by  the  same  Messenger,
I  sent  my  Letter  to  William  Finch,  wishing  him  to  goe
with  this  command  to  Mocrebchan  :  at  the  receit  of  which
he  wondred  that  I  came  safe  to  Agra,  and  was  not  mur-
thered,  or  poysoned  by  the  way,  of  which  speech  William
Finch  advertised  me  afterward.

It  grew  late,  and  having  had  some  small  conference
with  the  King  at  that  time,  he  commanded  that  I  should

bin  in  the
West  Indies.

WILLIAM HAWKINS  a.d.

1609.

daily  be  brought  into  his  presence,  and  gave  a  Captaine
named  Houshaberchan  charge,  that  I  should  lodge  at
his  house,  till  a  house  were  found  convenient  for  me  :  and
when  I  needed  any  thing  of  the  King,  that  he  should  bee
my  Solicitor.  According  to  command,  I  resorted  to  the
Court,  where  I  had  daily  conference  with  the  King.  Both
night  and  day,  his  delight  was  very  much  to  talke  with
mee,  both  of  the  Affaires  of  England  and  other  Coun-
tries, as  also  many  demands  of  the  West  Indies,  whereof  m.  Will.
hee  had  notice  long  before,  being  in  doubt  if  there  were  Hawkins  had
any  such  place,  till  he  had  spoken  with  me,  who  had  beene
in  the  Countrey.

Many  dayes  and  weekes  being  past,  and  I  now  in  great
favour  with  the  King,  to  the  griefe  of  all  mine  enemies,
espying  my  time,  I  demanded  for  his  Commandement  or
Commission  with  Capitulations  for  the  establishing  of  our
Factory  to  be  in  mine  owne  power.  His  answere  was,
whether  I  would  remayne  with  him  in  his  Court,  I  re-
plyed,  till  shipping  came  :  then  my  desire  was  to  goe  home,
with  the  answere  of  his  Majesties  Letter.  Hee  replyed
againe,  that  his  meaning  was  a  longer  time,  for  he  meant
to  send  an  Embassador  to  the  King  of  England,  at  the
comming  of  the  next  shipping :  and  that  I  should  stay
with  him  untill  some  other  bee  sent  from  my  King,  to
remayne  in  my  place,  saying  this :  Thv  staying  would  be
highly  for  the  benefit  of  thy  Nation,  and  that  he  would
give  me  good  maintenance,  and  my  being  heere  in  his
presence,  would  bee  the  cause  to  right  all  wrongs  that
should  be  offered  unto  my  Nation  :  and  further,  what  I
should  see  beneficiall  for  them,  upon  my  petition  made,
hee  would  grant :  swearing  By  his  Fathers  Soule,  that  if
I  would  remayne  with  him,  he  would  grant  me  Articles
for  our  Factorie  to  my  hearts  desire,  and  would  never  goe
from  his  word.  I  replyed  againe,  that  I  would  consider
of  it.  Thus  daily  inticing  me  to  stay  with  him,  alleaging
as  is  above  written,  and  that  I  should  doe  service,  both  to
my  naturall  King  and  him,  and  likewise  he  would  allow
me  by  the  yeare,  three  thousand  and  two  hundred  pounds

13

A.D.

1609.
The  Kings
stipcndary
wages  and
honorable
Pensions  to  his
Nobles.

Jesuitical!
Christianitie.
[I.  iii.  211.]

The  practice
of  the  Portu-
gal against
our  Trade.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

sterling  for  my  first,  and  so  yeerely,  hee  promised  mee  to
augment  my  Living,  till  I  came  to  a  thousand  Horse.
So  my  first  should  be  foure  hundred  Horse.  For  the
Nobilitie  of  India  have  their  Titles  by  the  number  of
their  Horses,  that  is  to  say,  from  fortie  to  twelve  thou-
sand, which  pay  belongeth  to  Princes,  and  his  Sonnes.  I
trusting  upon  his  promise,  and  seeing  it  was  beneficiall
both  to  my  Nation  and  my  selfe,  beeing  dispossessed  of
that  benefit  which  I  should  have  reaped,  if  I  had  gone  to
Bantam,  and  that  after  halfe  a  doozen  yeeres,  your  Worships
would  send  another  man  of  sort  in  my  place,  in  the  meane
time,  I  should  feather  my  Neast,  and  doe  you  service  :
and  further  perceiving  great  injuries  offered  us,  by  reason
the  King  is  so  farre  from  the  Ports,  for  all  which  causes
above  specified,  I  did  not  thinke  it  amisse  to  yeeld  unto
his  request.  Then,  because  my  name  was  something  hard
for  his  pronuntiation,  hee  called  me  by  the  name  of  Eng-
lish Chan,  that  is  to  say,  English  Lord,  but  in  Persia,  it
is  the  Title  for  a  Duke,  and  this  went  currant  throughout
the  Countrey.

Now  your  Worships  shall  understand,  that  I  being  now
in  the  highest  of  my  favours,  the  Jesuites  and  Portugals
slept  not,  but  by  all  meanes  sought  my  overthrow :  and
to  say  the  truth,  the  principall  Mahumetans  neere  the
King,  envyed  much  that  a  Christian  should  bee  so  nigh
unto  him.  The  Jesuite  Peniero  being  with  Mocrebchan,
and  the  Jesuites  here,  I  thinke  did  little  regard  their
Masses  and  Church  matters,  for  studying  how  to  over-
throw my  Affaires :  advice  being  gone  to  Goa  by  the
Jesuites  here,  I  meane  in  Agra,  and  to  Padre  Peneiro  at
Surat  or  Cambaya,  hee  working  with  Mocrebchan  to  be
the  Portugals  assistance,  and  the  Vice-Roy  sending  him  a
great  Present,  together  with  many  Toyes  unto  the  King
with  his  Letter.  These  presents  and  many  more  promises,
wrought  so  much  with  Mocrebchan,  that  he  writeth  his
Petition  unto  the  King,  sending  it  together  with  the  pre-
sent, advertising  the  King,  that  the  suffring  of  the  Eng-
lish in  his  land,  would  be  the  cause  of  the  losse  of  his

WILLIAM HAWKINS

owne  Countries,  neere  the  Sea-Coasts,  as  Suratt,  Cambaya,
and  such  like  :  and  that  in  any  case  he  entertaine  me  not,
for  that  his  ancient  friends  the  Portugalls  murmured  highly
at  it :  and  that  the  same  is  spread  amongst  the  Portugalls,
that  I  was  Generall  of  ten  thousand  Horsemen,  readie  to
give  the  assault  upon  Diu,  when  our  shipping  came.

The  Vice-Royes  Letter  likewise  was  in  this  kind  :  the
Kings  answere  was ;  that  he  had  but  one  English-man  in
his  Court,  and  him  they  needed  not  to  feare,  for  hee  hath
not  pretended  any  such  matter :  for  I  would  have  given
him  Living  neere  the  Sea  parts,  but  he  refused  it,  taking
it  neere  me  heere.  This  was  the  Kings  answere,  upon
which  answere,  the  Portugalls  were  like  madde  Dogges,
labouring  to  worke  my  passage  out  of  the  World.
So  I  told  the  King,  what  dangers  I  had  passed,  and  the
present  danger  wherein  I  was,  my  Boy  Stephen  Gravener,
instantly  departing  this  World,  my  man  Nicholas  Ufflet
extreame  sicke,  and  this  was  all  my  English  Company,
my  selfe  beginning  to  fall  downe  too.  The  King  presently
called  the  Jesuites,  and  told  them  that  if  I  dyed  by  any
extraordinary  casualtie,  that  they  should  all  rue  for  it.
This  past,  the  King  was  very  earnest  with  me  to  take  a
white  Mayden  out  of  his  Palace,  who  would  give  her  all
things  necessary  with  slaves,  and  he  would  promise  mee
shee  should  turne  Christian :  and  by  this  meanes  my
meates  and  drinkes  should  be  looked  unto  by  them,  and  I
should  live  without  feare.  In  regard  she  was  a  Moore,  I
refused,  but  if  so  bee  there  could  bee  a  Christian  found,
I  would  accept  it :  At  which  my  speech,  I  little  thought  a
Christians  Daughter  could  bee  found.  So  the  King  called
to  memorie  one  Mubarique  Sha  his  Daughter,  who  was  a
Christian  Armenian,  and  of  the  Race  of  the  most  ancient
Christians,  who  was  a  Captaine,  and  in  great  favour  with
Ekber  Padasha,  this  Kings  Father.  This  Captaine  died
suddenly,  and  without  will,  worth  a  Masse  of  Money,  and
all  robbed  by  his  Brothers  and  Kindred,  and  Debts  that
cannot  be  recovered  :  leaving  the  Child  but  only  a  few
Jewels. I  seeing  shee  was  of  so  honest  a  Descent,  having

15

A.D.
1609.

Lying,  a  great
stratagcme.

The  Kings

answere.

Nicholas
Ufflet.

Mubarique

Sha  an

Armenian

Christian.

Ekber

Padasha.

A.D.

1609.

Hee  taketh  a
Christian
Gentlewoman
to  Wife.  Shee
came  over  with
him  for  Eng-
land, but  he
dying  by  the
way,  shee  was
after  marryed
to  M.  Toiver-
son.

The  Pinnasse
of  the  Ascen-
tion  cast  away
neere  Suratt.

The  Kings
Commission  in
the  favour  of
the  English
under  his  great
Seale  with
golden  Letters.
The  Ascention
cast  away.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

passed  my  word  to  the  King,  could  not  withstand  my
fortunes.  Wherefore  I  tooke  her,  and  for  want  of  a
Minister,  before  Christian  Witnesses,  I  marryed  her :  the
Priest  was  my  man  Nicholas,  which  I  thought  had  beene
lawfull,  till  I  met  with  a  Preacher  that  came  with  Sir
Henry  Middleton,  and  hee  shewing  me  the  error,  I  was
new  marryed  againe :  so  ever  after  I  lived  content  and
without  feare,  she  being  willing  to  goe  where  I  went,  and
live  as  I  lived.  After  these  matters  ended,  newes  came
hither,  that  the  Ascention  was  to  come  by  the  men  of  her
Pinnasse,  that  was  cast  away  neere  Suratt,  upon  which
newes,  I  presently  went  to  the  King  and  told  him,  craving
his  Licence,  together  with  his  Commission,  for  the  setling
of  our  Trade  :  which  the  King  was  willing  to  doe,  limit-
ing me  a  time  to  returne,  and  be  with  him  againe.

But  the  Kings  chiefe  Vizir  Abdal  Hassan,  a  man  envious
to  all  Christians,  told  the  King,  that  my  going  would  be
the  occasion  of  warre :  and  thus  harm  might  happen  unto
a  great  man  who  was  sent  for  Goa,  to  buy  toyes  for  the
King.  Upon  which  speach,  the  Kings  pleasure  was  I
should  stay,  and  send  away  his  Commission  to  my  chiefe
Factor  at  Surat,  and  presently  gave  order,  that  it  should
be  most  effectually  written.  In  fine,  under  his  great  Seale
with  Golden  Letters,  his  Commission  was  written,  so
firmely  for  our  good,  and  so  free  as  heart  can  wish.  This
I  obtained  presently,  and  sent  it  to  William  Finch.  Be-
fore it  came  there,  newes  came  that  the  Ascention  was  cast
away,  and  her  men  saved,  but  not  suffered  to  come  into
the  Citie  of  Surat,  Of  that  likewise  I  told  the  King,  who
seemed  to  be  very  much  discontented  with  that  great
Captaine  Mocreb  chan,  my  enemy :  and  gave  me  another
commandement  for  their  good  usage,  and  meanes  to  be
wrought  to  save  the  goods,  if  it  were  possible.  These
two  commandements  came  almost  together,  to  the  great
joy  of  William  Finch  and  the  rest,  admiring  much  at
these  things.  And  now  continuing  these  great  favours
with  the  King,  being  continually  in  his  sight,  for  the  one
halfe  of  foure  and  twentie  houres  serving  him  day  and

16

WILLIAM HAWKINS

night,  I  wanted  not  the  greater  part  of  his  Nobles  that
were  Mahumetans,  to  be  mine  enemies.  For  it  went
against  their  hearts,  that  a  Christian  should  be  so  great  &
neere  the  King :  and  the  more,  because  the  King  had  pro-
mised to  make  his  Brothers  children  Christians,  which
two  yeares  after  my  comming  he  performed,  commanding
them  to  be  made  Christians.  Awhile  after  came  some  of
the  Ascentions  Company  unto  me  (whom  I  could  have
wished  of  better  behaviour,  a  thing  pryed  into  by  the
King.)  In  all  this  time,  I  could  not  get  my  debts  of
Mocrebchan,  till  at  length  he  was  sent  for  up  to  the  King,
to  answere  for  many  faults,  and  tyrannicall  In-justice,
which  he  did  to  all  people  in  those  parts,  many  a  man
being  undone  by  him,  who  petitioned  to  the  King  for
Justice.  Now,  this  Dogge  to  make  his  peace,  sent  many
bribes  to  the  Kings  sonnes,  and  Noble-men  that  were
neere  the  King,  who  laboured  in  his  behalfe.  After  newes
came  that  Mocrebchan  was  approached  neere,  the  King
presently  sent  to  attach  all  his  goods,  which  were  in  that
abundance,  that  the  King  was  two  moneths  in  viewing  of
them,  every  day  allotting  a  certaine  quantitie  to  be  brought
before  me :  and  what  he  thought  fitting  for  his  owne
turne  he  kept,  and  the  rest  delivered  againe  to  Mocreb-
chan. In  the  viewing  of  these  goods,  there  came  those
Peeces  and  Costlet,  and  Head-peece,  with  other  Presents
that  he  tooke  from  me  for  the  King  of  mine  owne,  not
suffering  mee  to  bring  them  my  selfe :  at  the  sight
whereof,  I  was  so  bold  to  tell  the  King  what  was  mine.
After  the  King  had  viewed  these  goods,  a  very  great  com-
plaint was  made  by  a  Banian,  how  that  Mocrebchan  had
taken  his  Daughter,  saying ;  she  was  for  the  King,  which
was  his  excuse,  deflowring  her  himselfe :  and  afterwards
gave  her  to  a  Brammen,  belonging  to  Mocrebchan.  The
man  who  gave  notice  of  this  Child,  protested  her  to  passe
all  that  ever  he  saw  for  beautie.  The  matter  being  ex-
amined, and  the  offence  done  by  Mocrebchan,  found  to
be  true,  hee  was  committed  to  prison,  in  the  power
of  a  great  Noble-man :  and  commandement  was  given,
in  17  B

A.D.

1 6 1  o.
The  greater
part  of  the
Kings  'Nobles
are  Mahume-
tans.

Some  of  the
Ascentions
Company  and
M.  Alexander
Sharpy  their
General!  came
to  Agra.

[I.  iii. 212.]

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGR1MES

1610.

that the Brammene his privy members should be cut
off.

Before  this  happened  to  Mocrebchan,  I  went  to  visite
him  divers  times,  who  made  me  verie  faire  promises,  that
he  would  deale  very  kindly  with  mee,  and  be  my  friend,
and  that  I  should  have  my  right.  Now  being  in  this  dis-
grace, his  friends  daily  solliciting  for  him,  at  length  got
him  cleere  :  with  commandement,  that  he  pay  every  man
his  right,  and  that  no  more  complaints  be  made  of  him  if
he  loved  his  life.  So  Mocrebchan  by  the  Kings  com-
mand, paid  every  one  his  due,  excepting  me,  whom  he
would  not  pay,  but  deliver  me  my  Cloath,  whereof  I  was
desirous,  and  to  make,  if  it  were  possible,  by  faire  meanes,
an  end  with  him :  but  he  put  me  off  the  more,  delaying
time  till  his  departure,  which  was  shortly  after.  For  the
King  had  restored  him  his  old  place  againe,  and  he  was
to  goe  for  Goa,  about  a  faire  ballace  Ruby,  and  other  rare
things  promised  the  King.

§. HI.

The  Mogols  inconstancie,  and  Captaine  Hawkins
departure  with  Sir  Henrie  Middleton  to  the
Red-Sea  :  Thence  to  Bantam,  and  after  for
England.

LI  my  going  and  sending  to  Mocrebchan  for  my
Money  or  Cloath,  was  in  vaine,  I  being  abused  so
basely by him, that I was forced to demaund

Justice  of  the  King,  who  commanded  that  the  Money  be
brought  before  him  :  but  for  all  the  Kings  commaund  he
did  as  he  listed,  and  doe  what  I  could,  he  cut  me  off
twelve  thousand  and  five  hundred  Mamadies.  For  the
greatest  man  in  this  kingdome  was  his  friend,  and  many
others  holding  on  his  side,  murmuring  to  the  King,  the
suffering  of  English  to  come  into  his  Countrey  :  for  that
we  were  a  Nation,  that  if  we  once  set  foot,  we  would  take
his  Countrey  from  him.  The  King  called  me  to  make
answere  to  that  they  said  : I  answered  his  Majestie,  that

iS

WILLIAM HAWKINS

1610.

if  any  such  matter  were,  I  would  answer  it  with  my  life  :
and  that  we  were  not  so  base  a  Nation,  as  these  mine
enemies  reported. All this  was,  because I demaunded
my  due,  and  yet  cannot  get  it. At  this  time,  those  that
were  neere  favourites,  and  neerest  unto  the  King,  whom
I  daily  visited,  and  kept  in  withall,  spake  in  my  behalfe :
and  the  King  holding  on  my  side,  commanded  that  no •
more  such  wrongs  be  offred  me. So  I  thinking  to  use
my  best  in  the  recovery  of  this,  intreting  the  head  Vizir
that  he  would  be  meanes  that  I  receive  not  so  great  a
losse ; he  answered  me  in  a  threatning  manner  : that  if
I  did  open  my  mouth  any  more,  hee  would  make  me  to
pay  an  hundred  thousand  Mamadies,  which  the  King  had
lost  in  his  Customes  by  entertaining  mee,  and  no  man
durst  adventure  by  reason  of  the  Portugall. So  by  this
meanes  I  was  forced  to  hold  my  tongue,  for  I  know  this
Money was swallowed by both these Dogges. Now
Mocrebchan  being  commaunded  in  publicke,  that  by  such
a  day  he  be  ready  to  depart  for  Guzerat,  and  so  for  Goa,
and  then  come  and  take  his  leave,  as  the  custome  is  : in
this  meane  time,  three  of  the  principallest  Merchants  of
Surat,  were  sent  for  by  the  Kings  commaundement,  and
come  to  the  Court  about  affaires,  wherein  the  King  or  his
Vizir  had  imployed  them,  being  then  present  there  when
Mocreb  chan  was  taking  his  leave ; this  being  a  plot  laid
both  by  the  Portugals,  Mocrebchan,  and  the  Vizir. For
some  sixe  daies  before  a  Letter  came  unto  the  King  from ^  Letter  from
the  Portugall  Vice-roy,  with  a  Present  of  many  rare  things. /  v^t? dr
The  Contents  of  this  Letter  were,  how  highly  the  King  t0  ^  Mogul/,
of  Portugall  tooke  in  ill  part  the  entertaining  of  the  Eng-  against  the
lish,  he  being  of  an  ancient  amitie  with  other  comple- English.
ments : and withall, how that a Merchant was there
arrived,  with  a  very  faire  ballace  Ruby,  weighing  three
hundred  and  fiftie  Rotties,  of  which  stone  the  pattern  was
sent. Upon  this  newes,  Mocreb  chan  was  to  be  hastened
away,  at  whose  comming  to  take  his  leave  together  with
Padre  Pineiro,  that  was  to  goe  with  him,  the  above  named
Merchants  of  Surat  being  then  there  present,  Mocrebchan

19

A.D.
l6lO.

A  speech  of
Mocreb  chan
to  the  King
against  the
English.

[I.  iii. 213.]

The  Kings
commande-
ment  upon
false  informa-
tion against
the  English.

None  make
petition  to  the
King  without
some  Present.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

began  to  make  his  speech  to  the  King,  saying,  that  this
and  many  other  things  he  hoped  to  obtaine  of  the  Portu-
gall,  so  that  the  English  were  disanulled :  saying  more,
that  it  would  redound  to  great  losse  unto  his  Majestie
and  Subjects,  if  hee  did  further  suffer  the  English  to  come
into  his  parts.  Upon  which  speech  he  called  the  Mer-
chants before  the  King,  to  declare  what  losse  it  would  be,
for  that  they  best  knew.  They  affirmed,  that  they  were
like  to  be  all  undone  because  of  the  English,  nor  here-
after any  toy  could  come  into  this  countrey,  because  the
Portugal  was  so  strong  at  sea,  and  would  not  suffer  them
to  goe  in  or  out  of  their  Ports ;  and  all  their  excuse  was,
for  suffering  the  English.

These  speeches  now  and  formerly,  and  lucre  of  this
stone,  and  promises  by  the  Fathers  of  rare  things,  were
the  causes  the  King  overthrew  my  affaires  ;  saying,  Let  the
English  come  no  more  :  presently  giving  Mocreb-chan  his
commandement,  to  deliver  the  Viceroy  to  that  effect,  that
he  would  never  suffer  the  English  to  come  any  more  into
his  ports.

I  now  saw,  that  it  booted  me  not  to  meddle  upon  a
sudden,  or  to  make  any  petition  unto  the  King,  till  a  prety
while  after  the  departure  of  Mocreb-chan  ;  and  seeing  my
enemies  were  so  many,  although  they  had  eaten  of  me
many  Presents.  When  I  saw  my  time,  I  made  petition
unto  the  King.  In  this  space,  I  found  a  toy  to  give,  as  the
order  is :  for  there  is  no  man  that  commeth  to  make  peti-
tion, who  commeth  emptie-handed.  Upon  which  petition
made  him,  he  presently  graunted  my  request,  commanding
his  Vizir  to  make  me  another  commandement  in  as  ample
manner  as  my  former,  and  commanded  that  no  man  should
open  his  mouth  to  the  contrary  :  for  it  was  his  pleasure  that
the  English  should  come  into  his  Ports.  So  this  time
againe  I  was  a  floate.  Of  this  alteration,  at  that  instant
the  Jesuite  had  notice  :  for  there  is  no  matter  passeth  in
the  Mogols  Court  in  secret,  but  it  is  knowne  halfe  an  houre
after,  giving  a  small  matter  to  the  writer  of  that  day  :  for
there  is  nothing  that  passeth,  but  it  is  written,  and  writers

20

WILLIAM HAWKINS  ad

i  6  i  i

appointed  by  turnes,  so  that  the  Father,  nor  I,  could  passe
any  businesse,  but  when  we  would  we  had  notice.  So  the
Jesuite  presently  sent  away  the  most  speedy  messenger  that
could  be  gotten,  with  his  Letter  to  Padre  Pineiro,  and
Mocreb-chan,  advertising  them  of  all  that  had  passed.  At
the  receit  of  which,  they  consulted  amongst  themselves,
not  to  go  forward  on  their  voyage  for  Goa,  till  I  were  over-
thrown againe.  Wherefore  Mocreb-chan  wrote  his  peti-
tion unto  the  King,  and  letters  unto  his  friend,  the  head
Vizir,  how  it  stood  not  with  the  Kings  honour  to  send  him,
if  he  performed  not  what  he  promised  the  Portugal :  and
that  his  voyage  would  be  overthrowne,  if  he  did  not  call  in
the  commandement  he  had  given  the  Englishman.  Upon
the  receiving  and  reading  of  this,  the  King  went  againe
from  his  word,  esteeming  a  few  toyes  which  the  Fathers  had
promised  him,  more  then  his  honour.

Now  beeing  desirous  to  see  the  full  issue  of  this,  I  went
to  Hogio  Jahan,  Lord  General  of  the  Kings  Palace  (the
second  man  in  place  in  the  Kingdome)  intreating  him  that
he  would  stand  my  friend.  He  very  kindly,  presently
went  unto  the  King,  telling  him  that  I  was  very  heavy
and  discontent,  that  Abdall  Hassan  would  not  deliver  me
my  commandement,  which  his  Majestie  had  graunted  me.
The  King  answered  him  (I  being  present,  and  very  neere
him)  saying,  It  was  true,  that  the  commandement  is  sealed,
and  ready  to  be  delivered  him :  but  upon  letters  received
from  Mocreb-chan,  and  better  consideration  by  me  had  on
these  my  affaires  in  my  Ports  in  Guzerat,  I  thought  it
fitting  not  to  let  him  have  it.  Thus  was  I  tossed  and
tumbled  in  the  kind  of  a  rich  Merchant,  adventuring  all  he
had  in  one  bottome,  and  by  casualtie  of  stormes  or  pirates,
lost  it  all  at  once.  So  that  on  the  other  side,  concerning
my  living,  I  was  so  crossed,  that  many  times  this  Abdall
Hassan  his  answer  would  be  unto  me  ;  I  know  wel  enough
you  stand  not  in  such  need,  for  your  Master  beareth  your
charges,  and  the  King  knew  not  what  he  did  in  giving  to
you,  from  whom  he  should  receive.  My  answer  was,  that
it  was  the  Kings  pleasure,  and  none  of  my  request ; and

A.D.

1 6 1 1.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

seeing  it  is  his  Majesties  gift,  I  had  no  reason  to  loose  it :
so  that  From  time  to  time,  he  bad  mee  have  patience,  and
he  would  find  out  a  good  living  for  me.  Thus  was  I
dallied  withall  by  this  mine  enemie,  in  so  much  that  in  all
the  time  I  served  in  Court,  I  could  not  get  a  living  that
would  yeeld  any  thing,  giving  me  my  living  still,  in  places
where  Out-lawes  raigned :  only,  once  at  Lahor  by  an
especiall  commandement  from  the  King,  but  I  was  soone
deprived  of  it :  and  all  that  I  received  from  the  beginning,
was  not  fully  three  hundred  pounds,  a  great  part  whereof
was  spent  upon  charges  of  men  sent  to  the  Lordships.
When  that  I  saw  that  the  living  which  the  King  absolutely
gave  me,  was  taken  from  me,  I  was  then  past  all  hopes  :  for
before,  at  the  newes  of  the  arrival!  of  shipping,  I  had  great
hope,  that  the  King  would  performe  former  grants,  in  hope
of  rare  things  that  should  come  from  England.  But  when
I  made  Arse  or  Petition  unto  the  King  concerning  my
living,  he  turned  me  over  to  Abdal  Hassan  :  who  not
onely  denied  me  my  living  ; but  also  gave  order,  that  I  be

The  redRailes  suffered  no  more  to  enter  within  the  red  rayles  :  which  is  a
place  of  honour,  where  all  my  time  I  was  placed  very  neere
unto  the  King,  in  which  place  there  were  but  five  men  in
the  Kingdome  before  me.

Now  perceiving  that  all  my  affaires  were  overthrowne,
I  determined  with  the  Councell  of  those  that  were  neere
me,  to  resolve  whereto  to  trust,  either  to  be  well  in,  or  well
out.  Upon  this  resolution  I  had  my  petition  made  ready,
by  which  I  made  known  unto  the  King,  how  Abdall  Hassan
had  dealt  with  me,  having  himselfe  eaten  what  his  Majestie
gave  me  :  and  how  that  my  charges  of  so  long  time  (being
by  his  Majestie  desired  to  stay  in  his  Court,  upon  the
faithful  promises  he  made  me)  were  so  much,  that  it  would
be  my  utter  overthrow :  therfore  I  besought  his  Majesty
that  he  would  consider  my  cause,  either  to  establish  me  as

[I.  iii.  214.]  formerly,  or  give  me  leave  to  depart.  His  answere  was,
that  he  gave  me  leave,  commanding  his  safe  conduct  to
bee  made  mee,  to  passe  freely  without  molestation,
throughout  his  Kingdomes. When  this  Commandement

a  place  of
Honour,

WILLIAM HAWKINS

A.O.
l6ll.

was  made,  as  the  custome  is,  I  came  to  doe  my  obeysance,
and  to  take  my  leave,  intreating  for  an  answere  of  my
Kings  Letter.  Abdall  Hassan  comming  unto  me  from
the  King,  in  a  disdainfull  manner  utterly  denyed  me :
saying,  that  it  was  not  the  custome  of  so  great  a  Monarch,
to  write  in  the  kind  of  a  Letter,  unto  a  pettie  Prince,  or
Governour.  I  answered  him,  that  the  King  knew  more
of  the  mightinesse  of  the  King  of  England,  then  to  be  a
petty  Governour.  Well,  this  was  mine  answere,  together
with  my  leave  taken.

I  went  home  to  my  house,  studying  with  all  my
endeavours  to  get  all  my  goods  and  debts  together,  and
to  buy  commodities  with  those  Monies,  that  were  remayn-
ing  using  all  the  speed  I  could,  to  cleere  my  selfe  of  the
Countrey  :  staying  only  for  Nicholas  Ufflet,  to  come  from
Lahor,  with  a  remainder  of  Indico,  that  was  in  William  Will.  Finch
Finches  power,  who  determined  to  goe  over  land,  being  "
past  all  hopes  for  ever  imbarking  our  selves  at  Surat :  land  for
which  course  I  also  would  willingly  have  taken,  but  that  England.
as  it  is  well  knowne,  for  some  causes  I  could  not  travel!
thorow  Turkie,  and  especially  with  a  woman.  So  I  was
forced  to  currie  favour  with  the  Jesuites,  to  get  mee  a  safe
conduct  or  Seguro,  from  the  Vice-Roy  to  goe  for  Goa,
and  so  to  Portugal!,  and  from  thence  to  England :  think-
ing, as  the  opinion  of  others  was,  that  the  Vice-Roy  giving
his  secure  Royall,  there  would  be  no  danger  for  me.  But
when  my  Wifes  Mother,  &  Kindred  saw  that  I  was  to
carry  her  away,  suspecting  that  they  should  never  see  her
any  more,  they  did  so  distaste  me  in  these  my  travels,  that
I  was  forced  to  yeeld  unto  them,  that  my  Wife  go  no
further  then  Goa,  because  it  was  India :  and  that  they
could  goe  and  come  and  visit  her,  and  that,  if  at  any  time
I  meant  to  goe  for  Portugall,  or  any  other-where,  that  I
leave  her  that  portion,  that  the  custome  of  Portugall  is,
to  leave  to  their  Wives  when  they  dye :  unto  which  I  was
forced  to  yeeld  to  give  them  content,  to  prevent  all
mischiefes.  But  knowing  that  if  my  Wife  would  goe
with  me,  all  would  bee  of  no  effect,  I  effected  with  the

23

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1611.

Jesuite  to  send  for  two  Secures,  the  one  concerning  my
quiet  being,  and  free  libertie  of  conscience  in  Goa,  and  to
bee  as  a  Portugall  in  all  Tradings  and  Commerce  in  Goa :
(this  was  to  shew  my  Wifes  Parents.)  The  other  was  an
absolute  grant  for  free  passage  into  Portugall,  and  so  for
England,  with  my  Wife  and  Goods,  without  any  disturb-
ances of  any  of  my  Wives  friends :  and  what  agreements
I  made  with  them  to  be  void  and  of  none  effect,  but  I
should  stay  or  goe,  when  I  pleased  with  free  libertie  of
conscience  for  my  selfe.  This  last  Securo  I  should  receive
at  Cambaya,  which  at  my  departure  for  our  shippes  was
not  yet  come,  but  was  to  come  with  the  Carravan  of
Frigats.

This  and  much  more  the  Fathers  would  have  done  for
me,  only  to  rid  me  out  of  the  Country  :  for  being  cleere
of  me,  they  should  much  more  quietly  sleepe.  About  this
time,  I  had  notice  of  the  comming  of  three  English  ships,
that  were  arrived  at  Mocha,  and  without  faile  their  deter-
mination was  to  come  for  Surat,  at  the  time  of  the  yeare :
Nicholas  having  this  Advertisement  by  Nicholas  Bangham  from
<?"g  am-  Bramport,  who  departed  from  me  some  six  weekes  before,
both  for  the  recovery  of  certaine  Debts,  as  also  with  my
Letter  to  our  shipping,  if  it  were  possible  to  send  it,
advertising  them  of  my  proceedings.

In  this  time  of  my  dispatching,  newes  came  of  Mocreb-
chans  returne  from  Goa,  with  many  gallant  and  rare  things,
which  hee  brought  for  the  King.  But  that  Ballace  Ruby
was  not  for  his  turne,  saying  it  was  false,  or  at  the  least,
made  his  excuse  for  feare,  that  if  he  should  give  the
Portugall  his  price,  and  when  it  came  into  the  Kings  power,
it  should  bee  valued  much  lesse  (which  over-plus  he  should
be  forced  to  pay,  as  hee  had  done  in  former  times,  for  other
things)  hee  left  it  behind  him.  And  besides,  I  understood,
that  Mocreb-chan  had  not  his  full  content  as  he  expected
of  the  Portugalls.  And  likewise,  at  this  instant,  the
Vizir,  my  enemy  was  thrust  out  of  his  place,  for  many
complaints  made  of  him,  by  Noblemen  that  were  at  great
charges  and  in  debt,  &  could  not  receive  their  livings  in

24

WILLIAM HAWKINS  a.d.

161 1.

places  that  were  good,  but  in  barren  &  rebellious  places :
and  that  he  made  a  benefit  of  the  good  places  himselfe,
&  robbed  them  all.  For  these  complaints  and  others,  he
had  much  ado  to  escape  with  life,  being  put  out  of  his
place,  &  sent  to  the  Wars  of  Decan.  Now  one  Gaihbeig
being  the  Kings  chiefe  Treasurer  (a  man  that  in  outward
shew  made  much  of  me,  &  was  alwayes  willing  to  pleasure
me,  when  I  had  occasion  to  use  him)  was  made  chiefe
Vizir  :  and  his  Daughter  marryed  with  the  King,  being  his
chiefe  Queene  or  Paramor.  This  Vizirs  sonne  and  my
selfe  were  great  friends,  he  having  beene  often  at  my
house,  and  was  now  exalted  to  high  Dignities  by  the  King.
Perceiving  this  alteration,  and  being  certified  of  the  com-
ming  of  shipping,  by  certaine  advise,  sundry  wayes.
Knowing  the  custome  of  these  Moores  that  without  gifts
and  bribes,  nothing  would  either  goe  forward  or  bee
accomplished,  I  sent  my  Broker  to  seeke  out  for  Jewels,
fitting  for  the  Kings  Sister  and  new  Paramour :  and  like-
wise, for  this  new  Vizir,  and  his  sonne.

Now  after  they  had  my  Gifts,  they  beganne  on  all  sides
to  solicite  my  cause :  at  which  time  newes  came  to  Agra,
by  Banians  of  Diu,  how  that  of  Diu,  three  English  ships Three  English
were  seene,  and  three  dayes  after  other  newes  came,  that  **&***&*
they  were  at  the  Barre  of  Surat. Upon  which  newes  the  Surai
great  Vizir  asked  me  what  Toy  I  had  for  the  King,  I
shewed  him  a  Ruby  Ring  that  I  had  gotten :  at  the  sight
of  which  he  bade  me  make  readie  to  goe  with  him  at  Court
time,  and  he  would  make  my  Petition  to  the  King,  and  [I.  iii.  215.]
told  me  that  the  King  was  alreadie  wonne. So  once  more
comming  before  his  Greatnesse,  and  my  Petition  being
read,  he  presently  granted  mee  the  establishing  of  our
Factorie,  and  that  the  English  come  and  freely  trade  for
Surat :  willing  the  Vizir  that  with  all  expedition  my  com-
mandement  be  made,  upon  which  grant  the  Vizir  made
signe  unto  mee,  to  make  obeysance,  which  I  did  according
to the Custome. But now what followed? A great
Nobleman  and  neerest  Favourite  of  the  King,  being  the
dearest friend that Mocrebchan, and likewise Abdall

25

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

161 1.

Hassan  had,  brought  up  together  from  their  child-hood,
and  Pages  together  unto  the  King,  began  to  make  a  speech
unto  the  King  :  saying,  that  the  granting  of  this  would
be  the  utter  overthrow  of  his  Sea  Coasts  and  people,  as
his  Majestie  had  beene  informed  by  petition  from  divers
of  his  Subjects :  and  besides,  that  it  stood  not  with  his
Majesties  honour  to  contradict  that  which  he  had  granted
to  his  ancient  friends  the  Portugals,  and  whosoever
laboured  for  the  English,  knew  not  what  he  did ;  if
knowing,  hee  was  not  his  Majesties  friend.  Upon  the
speech  of  this  Nobleman,  my  businesse  once  againe  was
quite  overthrowne,  and  all  my  time  and  presents  lost :  the
King  answering,  that  for  my  Nation,  hee  would  not  grant
Trade  at  the  Sea  Ports,  for  the  inconvenience  that  divers
times  had  beene  scanned  upon.  But,  for  my  selfe,  if  I
would  remayne  in  his  service  he  would  command,  that
what  he  had  allowed  me,  should  be  given  me  to  my
content :  which  I  denyed,  unlesse  the  English  should  come
unto  his  Ports  according  to  promise,  and  as  for  my
particular  maintenance,  my  King  would  not  see  me  want.
Then  desiring  againe  answere  of  the  Kings  Letter,  he
consulted  a-while  with  his  Vizirs,  and  then  sent  mee  his
He  departeth  denyall.  So  I  tooke  my  leave  and  departed  from  Agra,
from  Agra  the  faG  second  of  November  1 6 1 1 .  being  of  a  thousand
November  thoughts  what  course  I  were  best  to  take  :  for  I  still  had
i6u.  a  doubt  of  the  Portugalls  that  for  lucre  of  my  goods  they

would  poyson  me.  Againe,  on  the  other  side,  it  was
dangerous  by  reason  of  the  Warres  to  travell  thorow  Decan
unto  Masulipatan  :  by  land,  by  reason  of  the  Turkes,  I
could  not  goe  :  and  to  stay  I  would  not  amongst  these
faithlesse  Infidels.

I  arrived  at  Cambaya,  the  last  of  December,  161 1.  where
I  had  certaine  newes  of  the  English  ships  that  were  at
Surat.  Immediately  I  sent  a  Footman  unto  the  ships  with
my  Letter,  with  certaine  advice,  affirmed  for  a  truth,  by
the  Fathers  of  Cambaya,  unto  me,  that  the  Vice-Roy  had
in  a  readinesse  prepared  to  depart  from  Goa,  foure  great
ships,  with  certaine  Gallies,  and  Frigats  for  to  come  upon

26

WILLIAM HAWKINS  ad.

l6i2.

them,  and  Treasons  plotted  against  Sir  Henry  Middleton
person  : of  which  newes,  I  was  wished  by  the  Fathers  to
advise  Sir  Henry  : which  I  found  afterward  to  bee  but
their  policie,  to  put  him  in  feare,  and  so  to  depart,  and d  '  fained
withall,  I  wished  them  to  be  well  advised. And  as  for  me  p0/^{the
my  shifts  were  to  goe  home,  by  the  way  of  the  Portugalls,
for  so  I  had  promised  my  Wife  and  her  Brother,  who  at
that  present  was  with  me  : and  to  delude  him  and  the
Fathers  till  I  had  notice  for  certaine,  that  I  might  freely
get  aboord  without  feare,  which  I  was  assured  to  know
at  the  returne  of  my  Letter ; in  the  meane  time,  I  did  all
that  I  could  to  dispatch  her  Brother  away  :  who  within  two
dayes  after  departed  for  Agra,  not  suspecting  that  I  had
any  intent  for  the  ships. Nicholas  UrHet  now  departing
from  mee  to  survey  the  way,  beeing  two  dayes  journey
on  his  way,  met  with  Captaine  William  Sharpeigh,  Master
Fraine,  and  Hugh  Greete  sent  by  Sir  Henry  to  Cambaya
unto  mee,  which  was  no  small  joy  unto  mee. So  under-
standing of  the  place  (which  was  miraculously  found  out
by  Sir  Henry  Middleton,  and  never  knowne  to  any  of  the
Countrey)  I  admired  and  gave  God  thankes  : for  if  this
place  had  not  beene  found,  it  had  beene  impossible  for  mee
to  have  gotten  aboord  with  my  goods. Wherefore  making
all  the  haste  that  I  could,  in  dispatching  my  selfe  away,
I  departed  from  Cambaya,  the  eighteenth  of  January  1 6 1 1 . H£e  came
and  came  unto  the  ships  the  six  and  twentieth  of  the  said p'v^L
moneth,  where  I  was  most  kindly  received  by  Sir  Henry
Middleton. From  this  place  we  departed  the  eleventh  of  They  dePart
February  1 6 1 1 .  and  arrived  at  Dabul  the  sixteenth  of  the  JKVS  Ef"g~
same  :  in  which  place  we  tooke  a  Portugall  ship  and  Frigat, §urat  t0
out  of  which  we  tooke  some  quantitie  of  goods. And  Dabull.
from  thence  we  departed  the  fift  of  March  1611.  for  the  4  Portugal
Red  Sea,  with  an  intent to revenge  us  of  the  wrongs p "'
offered  us,  both  by  Turkes  and  Mogols  : at  which  place 161 2. Tfoy
wee  arrived  the  third  of  Aprill  161 2. Here  we  found  arrive  at  Ob
three  English  ships, their  Generall  was  Captaine  John  ™"fs°£the
Saris. Having  dispatched  our  businesse  in  the  Red  Sea, The  Flat  of
wee  set  sayle  from  thence  the  sixteenth  of  August,  161 2.  M.  Join  Saris.

27

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1612.

They  arrive  at  and  arrived  in  Tecu  in  Sumatra,  the  nineteenth  of  October

lecoo  m  1 61 2.  and  having  ended  our  businesse  there,  we  departed

in  the  night,  the  twentieth  of  Novemb. 161 2.  and  came

on  ground  the  same  night,  three  leagues  off,  upon  a  Bed

of  Corall,  in  three  fathome  water,  or  thereabouts,  and  by

the  great  mercie  of  God  we  escaped : but  were  forced  to

returne  backe  againe  to  stop  her  leakes,  the  goods  being

taken  out,  and  some  damage  received. Now  her  leakes

being  somewhat  stopped,  and  her  goods  in,  not  losing  an

houre  of  time,  wee  departed  from  thence  the  eight  of

They  arrive  at  December, 1 612. and arrived at Bantam the one and

°*tttami  twentieth  of  the  same  : where  Sir  Henry  Midleton  not

,6,2 ' finding  the  Trade  sufficient  to  goe  home  that  yeare,  was

forced to stay  and  carine her. Having ended  account

with  him,  as  himselfe  liked  best,  I  tooke  my  goods  and

shipped  them  in  the  Salomon,  which  came  for  our  Voyage,

for saving of a greater Fraight : but 1 could not be

admitted  to  goe  in  her  my  selfe  ; Captaine  Saris  I  thanke

him,  accommodated  me  in  the  Thomas,  and  it  was  agreed,

that  the  Salomon  and  wee  should  keepe  company  together.

From  thence  we  set  saile  on  the  thirtieth  of  January

[I.  iii.  216.] 1 61 2.  and  arrived  in  Saldania  Roade,  the  one  and  twen-

77/,?  Expedi- tieth  of  April  16 13.  and  comming  neere  some  two  hundred

Saldaril^ *  leagues  from  the  Cape,  we  had  much  foule  weather  and

Many  advises  contrary  windes. Here  we  found foure sayle  of  Hol-

ofthe  Authour  landers  that  departed  Bantam  a  moneth  before  us. There

touching  Forts,  was  great  kindnesse  betwixt  us,  especially  to  me,  in  regard

tan ae- ^^  ^ j^  jlear(j  much  0f  my  nrreat  estate  in  India,  by

tones,  l3c.  I  . ' e . . .  t-5tv/t v  o J

have  omitted  as  an  Agent  or  theirs,  that  was  Lieger  at  Masulipatan. Some

not  so  fitting  eight  dayes  after  the  Expedition  came  in,  and  brought  mee
every  Eye.  a  Letter  from  your  Worships,  and  delivered  it  unto  me
hifivm"  two  ^ayes  a^"ter  tne*r  arrival!.  The  wind  comming  faire,
Saldania.  we  departed  from  Saldania  the  one  and  twentieth  or  May,
1613.

28

WILLIAM HAWKINS

A.  I  J.
(  . l6ll

§.  mi.

A  briefe  Discourse  of  the  strength,  wealth,  and
Government,  with  some  Customes  of  the  great
Mogol :  which  I  have  both  seene  and  gathered
by  his  chiefe  Officers,  and  Over-seers  of  all
his Estate.

Irst,  I  begin  with  his  Princes,  Dukes,  Marquesses,
Earles,  Viscounts,  Barons,  Knights,  Esquires,
Gentlemen, and Yeomen. As Christian Princes

use  their  degrees  by  Titles,  so  they  have  their  Degrees  and
Titles  by  their  number  of  Horses  :  unlesse  it  bee  those
that  the  King  most  favoureth,  whom  he  honoureth  with
the  Title  of  Chan,  and  Immirza.  None  have  the  Title  of
Sultan  but  his  Sonnes.  Chan  in  the  Persian  Language,
is  as  much  as  a  Duke,  Immirza  is  the  Title  for  the  Kings
Brothers  Children.

They  that  be  of  the  fame  of  twelve  thousand  Horsemen
belong  to  the  King,  and  his  Mother,  and  eldest  Sonne,  and
one  more,  who  is  of  the  bloud  Royall  of  Uzbeck,  named  jj^^
Chan  Azam.  Dukes  be  nine  thousand  Fame,  Marquesses
five  thousand  Fame,  Earles  three  thousand,  Viscounts  two
thousand,  Barons  a  thousand,  Knights  foure  hundred,
Esquires  an  hundred,  Gentlemen  fifty,  Yeomen  from
twentie  down-wards.  All  they  that  have  these  numbers
of  Horsemen,  are  called  Mansibdars,  or  men  of  Livings,
or  Lordships.  Of  these  there  be  three  thousand,  that  is
to  say,  foure  be  of  twelve  thousand  Horse  a-piece,  and
they  be  the  King,  his  Mother,  Sultan  Pervis,  Prince,  and
Chan  Azam.  Of  nine  thousand  Horsemen  there  bee
three,  that  is  to  say,  Sultan  Chorem,  the  Kings  third  Sonne,
Chanchanna,  and  Kelich  Chan.  Of  five  thousand  there
bee  eighteene,  named  Hasuff  Chan,  Chan  Ichan,  Abdula  be  Gentiles.
Chan,  Raga  Manging,  Ray  Durga,  Raga  Sursing,  Ramadas
Rechuva,  Raga  Bassu,  Emirel  Umera,  Mahabet  Chan,
Chan  Dowran,  Sedris  Chan,  Hogio  Bey  Mirza,  Mirza
Cazi,  Ettebar  Chan,  Abulfet  Dekenny,  Jelam  Cully  Chan,

29

Mansibdais.

These  Ragas

A.D.
C. I  6  I  I

Thirtie  sixe
thousand
Officers  and
SHpendaries

of  the  Court.
The  Rupia  is
t:vo  shillings
sterling,  some
say  two  shil-
lings and  three
pence:  some
t:co  shillings
and  sixe  pence .

Candahar.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Sheik  Fcrid.  Of  three  thousand  there  be  two  and  twentie,
to  wit,  Chan  Alem,  Imirza  Ereg,  Imirza  Darab,  Hogio
Jahan,  Hogio  Abdal  Hassan,  Mirza  Gaysbey,  Mirza
Shemchadin,  Mirza  Chadulla,  Seffer  Chan,  Kazmy  Chan,
Mirza  Chin  Kelich,  Saif  Chan,  Lalla  Bersingdia,  Mirza
Zeady,  Mirza  Ally  Ecberchuly,  Terbiat  Chan,  Mirza  Las-
chary,  Mirza  Charucogly,  Mirza  Rustem,  Ally  Merdon
Badur,  Tasbey  Chan,  Abulbey.  The  rest  bee  from  two
thousand  downwards  till  you  come  to  twentie  Horses,  two
thousand  nine  hundred  and  fiftie.  Of  Horsemen,  that
receive  pay  monethly,  from  sixe  Horse  to  one,  there  be
five  thousand,  these  bee  called  Haddies.  Of  such  Officers
and  men  as  belong  to  the  Court  and  Campe,  there  be
thirtie  sixe  thousand,  to  say,  Porters,  Gunners,  Watermen,
Lackeyes,  Horse-keepers  Elephant-keepers,  Small  shot,
Frasses,  or  Tent  men,  Cookes,  Light  bearers,  Gardiners,
Keepers  of  all  kind  of  Beasts.  All  these  be  payd  monethly
out  of  the  Kings  Treasurie,  whose  Wages  be  from  ten  to
three  Rupias.

All  his  Captaines  are  to  maintaine  at  a  seven-nights
warning,  from  twelve  thousand  to  twentie  Horse,  all
Horsemen  three  Leckes,  which  is  three  hundred  thousand
Horsemen :  which  of  the  Incomes  of  their  Lordships
allowed  them,  they  must  maintayne.

The  Kings  yeerely  Income  of  his  Crowne  Land,
is  fiftie  Crou  of  Rupias,  every  Crou  is  an
hundred  Leckes,  and  every  Leek  is  an
hundred  thousand Rupias.

THe  compasse  of  his  Countrey  is  two  yeares  travell
with  Carravan,  to  say,  from  Candahar  to  Agra,  from
Sough  tare  in  Bengala  to  Agra,  from  Cabul  to  Agra,  from
Decan  to  Agra,  from  Surat  to  Agra,  from  Tatta  in  Sinde
to  Agra.  Agra  is  in  a  manner  in  the  heart  of  all  his
Kingdomes.

His  Empire  is  divided  into  five  great  Kingdomes,  the
first  named  Pengab,  whereof  Lahor  is  the  chiefe  Seate  ;

30

WILLIAM HAWKINS  *.».

c.  1 61 1.

the  second  is  Bengala,  the  chiefe  Seat  Sonargham  :  the
third  is  Malua,  the  chiefe  Seate  is  Ugam  :  the  fourth  is
Decan,  the  chiefe  Seate  Bramport :  the  fifth  is  Guzerat,  the
chiefe  Seat  is  Amadavar.  The  chiefe  Citie  or  Seate  Royall
of  the  Kings  of  India,  is  called  Delly,  where  hee  is  estab-
lished King :  and  there  all  the  Rites  touching  his
Coronation  are  performed.

There  are  sixe  especiall  Castles,  to  say,  Agra,  Guallier,
Nerver,  Ratamboore,  Hassier  Roughtaz.  In  every  one
of  these  Castles  he  hath  his  Treasure  kept.

In  all  his  Empire  there  are  three  Arch-enemies  or  [I.  in.  217.]
Rebels,  which  with  all  his  Forces  cannot  be  called  in,  to
say,  Amberry  Chapu  in  Decan  :  in  Guzerat,  the  Sonne  of
Muzafer,  that  was  King,  his  name  is  Bahador  of  Malua,
Raga  Rahana.  His  Sonnes  be  five,  to  say,  Sultan  Cous-
sero,  Sultan  Pervis,  Sultan  Chorem,  Sultan  Shariar,  and
Sultan  Bath.  Hee  hath  two  yong  Daughters,  and  three
hundred  Wives,  whereof  foure  be  chiefe  as  Queenes,  to
say,  the  first,  named  Padasha  Banu,  Daughter  to  Kaime
Chan  :  the  second  is  called  Noore  Mahal,  the  Daughter  of
Gais  Beiig-e  :  the  third  is  the  Daughter  of  Seinchan  :  the
fourth  is  the  Daughter  of  Hakim  Hamaun,  who  was
Brother  to  his  Father  Ecber  Padasha.

His  Treasure  is  as  followeth,  The  first,  is  his
severall  Coine  of  Gold.

INprimis,  of  Serafrlns  Ecberi,  which  be  ten  Rupias  a ^  Tok  is  a
piece, there are sixtie Leckes. Of another sort of  yu^iaJi-f
Coyne,  of  a  thousand  Rupias  a  piece,  there  are  twentie  anj  /en  0f
thousand  pieces. Of  another  sort  of  halfe  the  value,  there  these  Toles,
are  ten  thousand  pieces. Of  another  sort  of  Gold  of  are  the  value
twenty  Toles  a  piece, there  are  thirtie  thousand  pieces.  °foneofg°M-
Of  another  sort  of  tenne  Toles  a  piece,  there  bee  five  and
twenty  thousand  pieces. Of  another  sort  of  five  Toles,
which  is  this  Kings  stampe,  of  these  there  be  fiftie  thousand
pieces.

[Of  Silver
31

A.D.
C. l6l  I

Esh'ime  a
precious  stone
camming  from
Cathaya.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Of  Silver,  as  followeth.

INprimis,  of  Rupias  Ecbery,  thirteene  Crou  (every  Crou
is  an  hundred  Leckes,  and  every  Leek  an  hundred
thousand  Rupias)  or  one  thousand  three  hundred  Leckes.
Of  another  sort  of  Coine  of  Selim  Sha  this  King,  of  an
hundred  Toles  a  piece,  there  are  fiftie  thousand  pieces.
Of  fiftie  Toles  a  piece,  there  is  one  Lecke.  Of  thirtie  Toles
a  piece,  there  are  fortie  thousand  pieces.  Of  twentie
Toles  a  piece,  there  are  thirtie  thousand  pieces.  Of
ten  Toles  a  piece,  there  are  twentie  thousand  pieces.
Of  five  Toles  a  piece,  there  are  five  and  twentie  thousand
pieces.  Of  a  certaine  Money  that  is  called  Savoy,  which  is
a  Tole  \.  of  these  there  are  two  Leckes.  Of  Jagaries,
whereof  five  make  sixe  Toles,  there  is  one  Lecke.  More
should  have  beene  coyned  of  this  stampe,  but  the  contrary
was  commanded.

Here  followeth  of  his  Jewells  of  all  sorts.

INprimis,  Of  Diamantes  i.£-.  Battman,  these  be  rough,
of  all  sorts  and  sizes,  great  and  small :  but  no  lesse  then
2. J.  Caratts.  The  Battman  is  fifty  five  pound  waight,
which  maketh  eightie  two  pounds  J.  weight  English.  Of
Ballace  Rubies  little  and  great,  good  and  bad,  there  are
single  two  thousand  pieces.  Of  Pearle  of  all  sorts,  there
are  twelve  Battmans.  Of  Rubies  of  all  sorts  there  are  two
Battmans.  Of  Emeraudes  of  all  sorts,  five  Battmans.
Of  Eshime,  which  stone  commeth  from  Cathaia,  one
Battman.  Of  stones  of  Emen,  which  is  a  red  stone,  there
are  five  thousand  pieces.  Of  all  other  sorts  as  Corall,
Topasses,  &c.  There  is  an  infinite  number.

Here  followeth  of  the  Jewels  wrought  in  Gold.

OF  Swords  of  Almaine  Blades,  with  the  Hilts  and
Scabberds  set  with  divers  sorts  of  rich  stones,  of  the
richest  sort,  there  are  two  thousand  and  two  hundred.
Of  two  sorts  of  Poniards  there  bee  two  thousand.  Of
Saddle  Drummes,  which  they  use  in  their  Hawking,  of

32

WILLIAM HAWKINS  aj>.

• .  1 6 1 1 .
these  there  are  very  rich  ones  of  Gold,  set  with  stones,
five  hundred.  Of  Brooches  for  their  heads,  whereinto
their  Feathers  be  put,  these  be  very  rich,  and  of  them
there  are  two  thousand.  Of  Saddles  of  Gold  and  Silver
set  with  stones,  there  are  one  thousand.  Of  Teukes  there
be  five  and  twentie,  this  is  a  great  Launce  covered  with
Gold,  and  the  Fluke  set  with  stones,  and  these  instead  of
their  colours,  are  carryed,  when  the  King  goeth  to  the
warres,  of  these  there  are  five  and  twentie.  Of  Kittasoles
of  state,  for  to  shaddow  him,  there  bee  twentie.  None  in
his  Empire  dareth  in  any  sort  have  any  of  these  carryed
for  his  shadow  but  himselfe,  of  these,  I  say,  there  are
twentie.  Of  Chaires  of  Estate,  there  bee  five,  to  say,
three  of  Silver,  and  two  of  Gold :  and  of  other  sorts  of
Chaires,  there  bee  an  hundred  of  Silver  and  Gold,  in  all  an
hundred  and  five.  Of  rich  Glasses,  there  bee  two  hundred.
Of  Vases  for  Wine  very  faire  and  rich,  set  with  Jewels,
there  are  an  hundred.  Of  drinking  Cuppes  five  hundred,
but  fiftie  very  rich,  that  is  to  say,  made  of  one  piece  of
Ballace  Ruby,  and  also  of  Emerods,  of  Eshim,  of  Turkish  Eshim  stones
stone,  and  of  other  sorts  of  stones.  Of  Chaines  of  Pearle,  °fLathay-
and  Chaines  of  all  sorts  of  precious  stones,  and  Ringes
with  Jewels  of  rich  Diamants,  Ballace  Rubies,  Rubies  and
old  Emerods,  there  is  an  infinite  number,  which  only  the
Keeper  thereof  knoweth.  Of  all  sorts  of  plate,  as  Dishes,
Cups,  Basons,  Pots,  Beakers  of  Silver  wrought,  there  are
two  thousand  Battmans.  Of  Gold  wrought,  there  are
one  thousand  Battmans.

Here  followeth of  all  sorts  of  Beasts.  [I.  Hi.  218.]

OF  Horses  there  are  twelve  thousand. Whereof  there
bee  of  Persian  Horses  foure  thousand,  of  Turkie  0r  Kasimir-
Florses  six  thousand,  and  of  Kismire  two  thousand,  all  are
twelve  thousand.

Of  Elephants,  there  be  twelve  thousand,  whereof  five

thousand  bee  teeth  Elephants,  and  seven  thousand  of  shee

ones,  and  yong  ones,  which  are twelve  thousand. Of

Camels  there  be  two  thousand. Of  Oxen  for  the  Cart,

m  33  c

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

c.  161 1.

and  all  other  services,  there  bee  tenne  thousand.  Of
Moyles  there  be  one  thousand.  Of  Deere  like  Buckes  for
game  and  sport,  there  be  three  thousand.  Of  Ounces  for
Game,  there  be  foure  hundred.  Of  Dogges  for  hunting,
as  Grey-hounds  and  other,  there  be  foure  hundred.  Of
Lions  tame  there  are  an  hundred.  Of  BufFalaes,  there  be
five  hundred.  Of  all  sorts  of  Hawkes  there  bee  foure
thousand.  Of  Pidgeons  for  sport  of  flying,  there  bee
ten  thousand.  Of  all  sorts  of  singing  Birds,  there  be  foure
thousand.

Of  Armour  of  all sorts  at an houres  warning, in  a
readinesse  to  arme  five  and  twentie  thousand  men.

H

Is  daily  expences  for  his  owne  person,  that  is  to  say,
for  feeding  of  his  Cattell  of  all  sorts,  and  amongst
them  some  few  Elephants  Royall,  and  all  other  expences
particularly,  as  Apparell,  Victuals,  and  other  petty  expences
for  his  house,  amounts  to  fiftie  thousand  Rupias  a  day.

The  expences  daily  for  his  Women  by  the  day,  is  thirtie
thousand  Rupias.

All  this  written  concerning  his  Treasure,  Expences  and

monethly  pay  is  in  his  Court,  or  Castle  of  Agra  :  and  every

one  of  the  Castles  above  nominated,  have  their  severall

Treasure,  especially  Lahor,  which  was  not  mentioned.

The  Mogoll  The  Custome  of  this  Mogoll  Emperour  is  to  take  pos-

hetre  to  every sessi0n  of  his  Noblemens  Treasure  when  they  dye,  and  to

bestow  on  his  Children  what  he  pleaseth : but  commonly

he  dealeth  well  with them, possessing  them  with  their

Fathers  Land,  dividing  it  amongst  them : and  unto  the

eldest  Sonne,  hee  hath  a  very  great  respect,  who  in  time

receiveth  the  full  title  of  his  Father. There  was  in  my

Raga  Gaginat  time  a  great  Indian  Lord  or  Prince,  a  Gentile  named  Rag-a

wea"a- Gaginat,  upon  whose  goods  the  Kings  seizing  after  his

death,  he  was  found  (besides  Jewels  and  other  Treasure)

to  have  sixtie  Maunes  in  Gold,  and  every  Maune  is  five

and  fiftie  pound  waight. Also  his  custome  is,  that  of  all

sorts  of  Treasure,  excepting  Coine,  to  say  of  all  sorts  of

Beasts,  and  all  other  things  of  value,  a  small  quantitie  is

34

WILLIAM HAWKINS

daily  brought  before  him.  All  things  are  severally  divided
into  three  hundred  and  sixtie  parts,  so  that  hee  daily  seeth
a  certaine  number,  to  say,  of  Elephants,  Horses,  Camels,
Dromedaries,  Moyles,  Oxen,  and  all  other  :  as  also  a  cer-
taine quantitie  of  Jewels,  and  so  it  continueth  all  the  yeere
long:  for  what  is  brought  him  to  day  is  not  seene  againe,
till  that  day  twelve  moneth.

He  hath  three  hundred  Elephants  Royall,  which  are
Elephants  whereon  himselfe  rideth  :  and  when  they  are
brought  before  him,  they  come  with  great  jollitie,  having
some  twentie  or  thirty  men  before  them  with  small
Stremers.  The  Elephants  Cloth  or  Covering  is  very  rich,
eyther  of  Cloth  of  Gold,  or  rich  Velvet :  hee  hath  follow-
ing him  his  shee  Elephant,  his  Whelpe  or  Whelpes,  and
foure  or  five  yong  ones,  as  Pages  which  will  bee  in
number  some  sixe,  some  seven,  and  some  eight  or  nine.
These  Elephants  and  other  Cattell,  are  dispersed  among
his  Nobles  and  men  of  sort  to  over-see  them,  the  King
allowing  them  for  their  expences,  a  certaine  quantitie  :  but
some  of  them  will  eate  a  great  deale  more  then  their  allow-
ance commeth  unto.  These  Elephants  Royall  eate  tenne
Rupias  every  day  in  Sugar,  Butter,  Graine,  and  Sugar
Canes.  These  Elephants  are  the  goodliest  and  fairest  of
all  the  rest,  and  tame  withall,  so  managed,  that  I  saw  with
mine  eyes,  when  the  King  commanded  one  of  his  young
Sonnes  named  Shariar  (a  Childe  of  seven  yeeres  of  age)
to  goe  to  the  Elephant  to  bee  taken  up  by  him  with  his
snout :  who  did  so,  delivering  him  to  his  Keeper  that
commanded  him  with  his  hooke :  and  having-  done  this
unto  the  Kings  Sonne,  he  afterwards  did  the  like  to  many
other  Children.  When  these  Elephants  are  shewed,  if  they
who  have  the  charge  of  them  bring  them  leane,  then  are
they  checked  and  in  disgrace,  unlesse  their  excuse  bee  the
better :  and  so  it  is  with  all  things  else  in  that  kinde,  that
every  man  striveth  to  bring  his  quantitie  in  good  liking,
although  hee  spend  of  his  owne.

When  hee  rideth  on  Progresse  or  Hunting,  the  com-
passe  of  his  Tents  may  bee  as  much  as  the  compasse  of

35

A.U.

c.  1C1  i .

Daily  survey
of  the  Kings
wealth.

Elephants
Royall.

The  Kings
Tents  as  large
in  compasse  as
London.

A.D.
C. l6l  I.

PURCHAS HIS PTLGRIMES

Forty  thou
sand  Ele-
phants.

London  and  more,  and  I  may  say,  that  of  all  sorts  of
people  that  follow  the  Campe,  there  are  two  hundred
thousand  :  for  hee  is  provided,  as  for  a  Citie.  This  King
is  thought  to  be  the  greatest  Emperour  of  the  East,  for
Wealth,  Land,  and  force  of  Men  :  as  also  for  Horses,
Elephants,  Camels  and  Dromedaries.  As  for  Elephants
of  his  owne,  and  of  his  Nobles,  there  are  fortie  thousand,
of  which  the  one  halfe  are  trayned  Elephants  for  the
[I.  iii.  219.]  Warre  :  and  these  Elephants  of  all  beasts,  are  the  most
understanding.  I  thought  good  here  to  set  downe  this
one  thing,  which  was  reported  to  me  for  a  certainty,
although  it  seemed  very  strange.  An  Elephant  having
journyed  very  hard,  being  on  his  travell,  was  misused
by  his  Commander,  and  one  day  finding  the  fellow  asleepe
by  him,  but  out  of  his  reach,  having  greene  Canes  brought
him  to  eate,  split  the  end  of  one  of  them  with  his  teeth,
and  taking  the  other  end  of  the  Cane  with  his  snowt,
reached  it  toward  the  head  of  the  fellow,  who  being  fast
asleepe,  and  his  turbant  fallen  from  his  head  (the  use  of
India  being  to  weare  their  haire  long  like  Women)  he
tooke  hold  with  the  Cane  on  his  haire,  wreathing  it  therein,
and  withall,  haling  him  unto  him,  untill  he  brought  him
within  the  compasse  of  his  snowt,  he  then  presently  killed
him. Many  other  strange  things  are  done  by  Elephants.

He  hath  also  infinite  numbers  of  Dromedaries,  which
are  very  swift,  to  come  with  great  speed,  to  give  assault
to  any  Citie,  as  this  Kings  Father  did  :  so  that  the  enemies
thought  he  had  beene  in  Agra,  when  he  was  at  Amadavar  :
and  he  came  from  Agra  thither  in  nine  daies,  upon  these
Dromedaries,  with  twelve  thousand  choyce  men,  Chan-
channa  being  then  his  Generall.  The  day  being  appointed
for  the  battell,  on  a  suddaine  newes  came  of  the  Kings
arrivall,  which  strucke  such  a  present  feare  into  the
Guzerats,  that  at  that  time  they  were  overthrowne  and
conquered.  This  King  hath  diminished  his  chiefe  Cap-
taines,  which  were  Rasbootes,  or  Gentiles,  and  naturall
Indians,  and  hath  preferred  the  Mahumetans  (weak  spirited
men,  void  of  resolution)  in  such  sort,  that  what  this  mans

a6

Dromedaries
swiftnesse.

From  Agra  to
Amadavar  in
nine  daies.

WILLIAM HAWKINS

c. l6ll.

Father,  called  Ecber  Padasha,  got  of  the  Decans,  this
King  Selim  sha,  beginneth  to  loose.  He  hath  a  few  good  Se/imi^
Captaines  yet  remaining,  whom  his  father  highly  esteemed,  re  e
although  they  be  out  of  favour  with  him,  because  that
upon  his  rebellion  against  his  father,  they  would  not  assist
him,  considering  his  intent  was  naught :  for  he  meant  to
have  shortned  his  Fathers  daies,  and  before  his  time  to  have
come  to  the  Crowne.  And  to  that  purpose,  being  in
Attabase,  the  regall  seate  of  a  kingdome  called  Porub,  hee
arose  with  eighty  thousand  horse,  intending  to  take  Agra,
and  to  have  possession  of  the  Treasury,  his  Father  being
then  at  the  warres  of  Decan  :  who  understanding  of  his
Sonnes  pretence,  left  his  conquering  there,  and  made  hast
to  come  home  to  save  his  owne.  Before  the  Kings  de-
parture to  the  warres,  hee  gave  order  to  his  Sonne  to  goe
with  his  Forces  upon  Aranna,  that  great  Rebell  in  Malua,  *OrRabanne.
who  comming  to  parle  with  this  Rebell,  he  told  the  Prince
that  there  was  nothing  to  bee  gotten  by  him  but  blowes :
and  it  were  better  for  him,  now  his  Father  was  at  Decan,
to  goe  upon  Agra,  and  possesse  himselfe  of  his  Fathers
treasure,  and  make  himselfe  King,  for  there  was  no  man
able  to  resist  him.  The  Prince  followed  his  counsell,
and  would  have  prosecuted  it,  but  his  Fathers  hast  before,
upon  notice  given,  prevented  his  purpose :  at  whose
arrivall  at  Agra,  hee  presently  sent  unto  his  Sonne,  that
he  make  choyce  either  to  come  and  fall  at  his  feete,  and
be  at  his  mercy  to  doe  with  him  as  he  pleased,  or  to  fit
himselfe  for  the  battell  and  fight  it  out.  He  well  con-
sidering the  valour  of  his  Father,  thought  it  meetest  to
submit  himselfe,  and  stand  to  his  Fathers  mercy :  who
after  affronts  shewed  him  and  imprisonment,  was  soone
released  and  pardoned,  by  reason  of  many  friends,  his
Mother,  Sisters,  and  others.

This  Selim  Padasha  being  in  his  rebellion,  his  father  Sultan  Cossere
dispossessed him, and proclaimed heire apparant, his  Proclam£(i-
eldest  Sonne  Cossero  being  eldest  Sonne  to Selimsha :
for  his  owne  Sonnes  younger  Brothers  to  Selim,  were  all
dead  in  Decan  and  Guzerat :  yet  shortly  after  his  Father

37

A.D.
C. l6l  I,

Hee  was  not
blinded,  and  is
since  (as  you
shall  see  in  Sir
Tho.  Roes
relations)
delivered  out
of  prison.

Cruell
Executions.

[I.  iii.  220.]

PURCHJAS HIS PILGRIMES

dyed,  who  in  his  death-bed  had  mercy  on  Selim,  possess-
ing him  againe.  But  Cossero,  who  was  proclaimed  heire
apparant,  stomached  his  father,  and  rose  with  great
troopes,  yet  was  not  able  to  indure  after  the  losse  of
many  thousand  men  on  both  sides :  but  was  taken,  and
remaineth  still  in  prison  in  the  Kings  Pallace,  yet  blinde,
as  all  men  report :  and  was  so  commaunded  to  be  blinded
by  his  father.  So  since  that  time,  being  now  eight  yeares
after,  he  had  commanded  to  put  all  his  sonnes  confede-
rates to  death,  with  sundry  kinds  of  death ;  some  to  bee
hanged,  some  spitted,  some  to  have  their  heads  chopped
off,  and  some  to  bee  torne  by  Elephants.  Since  which
time  hee  hath  raigned  in  quiet,  but  ill  beloved  of  the
greater  part  of  his  Subjects,  who  stand  greatly  in  feare
of  him.  His  custome  is  every  yeare  to  be  out  two
moneths  on  hunting,  as  is  before  specified.  When  he
meaneth  to  begin  his  journey,  if  comming  forth  of  his
Pallace,  hee  get  up  on  a  Horse,  it  is  a  signe  that  he  goeth
for  the  warres :  but  if  he  get  up  upon  an  Elephant  or
Palankine,  it  will  bee  but  an  hunting  voyage.

My  selfe  in  the  time  that  I  was  one  of  his  Courtiers,
have  seene  many  cruell  deeds  done  by  him.  Five  times
a  weeke,  he  commaundeth  his  brave  Elephants  to  fight
before  him :  and  in  the  time  of  their  righting,  either
comming  or  going  out,  many  times  men  are  killed,  or
dangerously  hurt  by  these  Elephants.  But  if  any  be
grievously  hurt  (which  might  very  well  escape)  yet
neverlesse  that  man  is  cast  into  the  River,  himselfe
commaunding  it,  saying  :  dispatch  him,  for  as  long  as  he
liveth,  he  will  doe  nothing  else  But  curse  me,  and  there-
fore it  is  better  that  he  dye  presently.  I  have  seene  many
in  this  kind.  Againe,  hee  delighteth  to  see  men  executed
himselfe,  and  torne  in  peeces  with  Elephants.  He  put  to
death  in  my  time  his  Secretary,  onely  upon  suspicion,
that  Chan-channa  should  write  unto  the  Decan  King,
who  being  sent  for  and  examined  about  this  matter,
denied  it :  whereupon  the  King  not  having  patience,  arose
from  his  seate,  and  with  his  Sword  gave" him  his  deadly

38

WILLIAM HAWKINS  aj>.

c.  i6i  i

wound, and afterwards delivered him to bee torne by
Elephants.

Likewise,  it  happened  to  one  who  was  a  great  friend  of  Severity.
mine  (a  chiefe  man,  having  under  his  charge  the  Kings
Ward-robe,  and  all  Woollen  Cloath,  and  all  sorts  of
mercery,  and  his  China  dishes)  that  a  faire  China  dish
(which  cost  ninetie  Rupias,  or  fortie  five  Rials  of  eight)
was  broken,  in  this  my  friends  time,  by  a  mischance
(when  the  King  was  in  his  progresse)  being  packed
amongst  other  things,  on  a  Cammell,  which  fell  and
broke  all  the  whole  parcell.  This  Nobleman  knowing
how  deerely  the  King  loved  this  dish  above  the  rest,  pre-
sently sent  one  of  his  trusty  servants  to  China-machina,  China-
ova:  land  to  seeke  for  another,  hoping  that  before  he  machma-
should  remember  that  dish,  he  would  returne  with  another
like  unto  it :  but  his  evill  lucke  was  contrarie.  For  the
King  two  yeares  after  remembred  this  dish,  and  his  man
was  not  yet  come.  Now,  when  the  King  heard  that  the
dish  was  broken,  he  was  in  a  great  rage,  commanding  him
to  be  brought  before  him,  and  to  be  beaten  by  two  men,
with  two  great  whips  made  of  cords :  and  after  that  he
had  received  one  hundred  and  twenty  of  these  lashes,  he
commanded  his  Porters,  who  be  appointed  for  that  pur-
pose, to  beate  him  with  their  small  Cudgels,  till  a  great
many  of  them  were  broken  :  at  the  least  twenty  men  were
beating  of  him,  till  the  poore  man  was  thought  to  bee
dead,  and  then  he  was  haled  out  by  the  heeles,  and  com-
maunded  to  prison.  The  next  day  the  King  demaunded
whether  he  was  living,  answer  was  made,  that  he  was  :
whereupon,  he  commanded  him  to  be  carried  unto
perpetuall  prison.  But  the  Kings  Sonne  being  his  friend,
freed  him  of  that,  and  obtained  of  his  Father,  that  he
might  bee  sent  home  to  his  owne  house,  and  there  be
cured.  So  after  two  moneths,  he  was  reasonably  well
recovered,  and  came  before  the  King,  who  presently  com-
manded him  to  depart  the  Court,  and  never  come  againe
before  him,  untill  he  had  found  such  a  like  dish,  and  that  china-
hee travell for China-machina to seeke it : the King  machina.

39

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

c.  161 1.

allowed  him  five  thousand  Rupias  towards  his  charges ;
and  besides,  returning  one  fourth  part  of  his  living  that
he  had  before,  to  maintaine  him  in  his  travell.  He  being
departed,  and  foureteene  moneths  on  his  travell,  was  not
yet  come  home :  but  newes  came  of  him,  that  the  King
of  Persia  had  the  like  dish,  and  for  pitties  sake  hath  sent
it  him,  who  at  my  departure  was  on  his  way  homeward.

Likewise,  in  my  time  it  happened,  that  a  Pattan,  a
man  of  good  stature,  came  to  one  of  the  Kings  Sonnes,
Sultan  Pervh.  named  Sultan  Pervis,  to  intreat  him  to  bestow  some-
what on  him,  by  petition  delivered  to  one  of  the  Princes
chiefe  men,  at  the  delivery  whereof,  the  Prince  caused  him
to  come  neere  :  and  demanding  of  him  whether  hee  would
serve  him ;  he  answered,  No,  for  he  thought  that  the
Prince  would  not  grant  him  so  much  as  he  would  aske.
The  Prince  seeing  him  to  be  a  pretty  fellow,  and  meanely
apparelled,  smiled,  demanding  what  would  content  him :
hee  told  him  plainly,  that  hee  would  neither  serve  his
Father  nor  him,  under  a  thousand  Rupias  a  day,  which
is  ioo.  pound  sterling.  The  Prince  asked  him  what  was
in  him  that  he  demanded  so  much ;  he  replyed,  make
tryall  of  me  with  all  sorts  of  weapons,  either  on  horse-
backe,  or  on  foote,  and  for  my  sufficient  command  in  the
warres,  if  I  doe  not  performe  as  much  as  I  speake,  let
mee  dye  for  it.  The  houre  being  come  for  the  Prince
to  go  to  his  Father,  he  gave  over  his  talk,  commanding
the  man  to  be  forth  comming.  At  night  the  Kings
custome  being  to  drinke,  the  Prince  perceiving  his  Father
to  be  merry,  told  him  of  this  man  :  so  the  King  com-
maunded  him  to  be  brought  before  him.  Now  while  he
was  sent  for,  a  wilde  Lyon  was  brought  in,  a  very  great
one,  strongly  chained,  and  led  by  a  dozen  men  and
keepers :  and  while  the  King  was  viewing  this  Lyon,  the
Pattan  came  in,  at  whose  sight  the  Prince  presently
remembred  his  Father.  The  King  demanding  of  this
Pattan,  whence  he  was,  and  of  what  parentage,  and  what
valour  was  in  him,  that  he  should  demand  so  much  wages  :
his  answer  was,  that  the  King  should  make  tryal  of  him.

4°

Proud
demand.

WILLIAM HAWKINS  ad

c.  1 6 1  i
That  I  will,  saith  the  King,  goe  wrastle  and  buffet  with  Cruel!  com-
this  Lyon.  The  Pattans  answer  was,  that  this  was  a  mand-
wild  beast,  and  to  goe  barely  upon  him  without  weapon,
would  be  no  triall  of  his  man-hood.  The  King  not
regarding  his  speech,  commanded  him  to  buckle  with  the
Lion,  who  did  so,  wrastling  and  buffeting  with  the  Lyon
a  pretty  while :  and  then  the  Lyon  being  loose  from  his
keepers,  but  not  from  his  chaines,  got  the  poore  man
within  his  clawes,  and  tore  his  body  in  many  parts :  and
with  his  pawes  tore  the  one  halfe  of  his  face,  so  that  this
valiant  man  was  killed  by  this  wilde  beast.  The  King
not  yet  contented,  but  desirous  to  see  more  sport,  sent  for
ten  men  that  were  of  his  horse-men  in  pay,  being  that
night  on  the  watch :  for  it  is  the  custome  of  all  those  that
receive  pay,  or  living  from  the  King,  to  watch  once  a
weeke,  none  excepted,  if  they  be  well,  and  in  the  Citie.
These  men  one  after  another,  were  to  buffet  with  the  Bloody  experi-
Lyon,  who  were  all  grievously  wounded,  and  it  cost  three  menU-
of  them  their  lives.  The  King  continued  three  moneths
in  this  vaine,  when  he  was  in  his  humors,  for  whose
pleasure  sake,  many  men  lost  their  lives,  and  many  were
grievously  wounded.  So  that  ever  after,  untill  my  com-
ming  away,  some  fifteene  young  Lyons  were  made  tame,
and  played  one  with  another  before  the  King,  frisking
betweene  mens  legs,  and  no  man  hurt  in  a  long  time.

Likewise,  he  cannot  abide,  that  any  man  should  have  Jewels  and
any  precious  stone  of  value,  for  it  is  death  if  he  know  it Gmmes-
not  at  that  present  time,  and  that  he  hath  the  refusall
thereof. His  Jeweller,  a  Bannian,  named  Herranand,  had [I.  iii.  221.]
bought  a  Diamond  of  three  Mettegals,  which  cost  one
hundred  thousand  Rupias  :  which  was  not  so  closely  done,
but  newes  came  to  the  King : Herranand  likewise  was
befriended, beeing  presently  acquainted therewith, who
before  the  King  sent  for  him,  came  unto  him,  and  chal-
lenged the  King  that  he  had  often  promised  him  that  he
would  come to his  house : the King-  answered that it
was  true. Herranand therefore  replyed, that now  was Costly  enter-
the  time,  for  that  he  had  a  faire  Present  to  bestow  upon tatnment-

41

A.D.
C. l6l  I.

PURCHAS HIS PILGR1MES

rich  coffer  of
Diamonds

his  Majestie :  for  that  he  had  bought  a  stone  of  such  a
weight.  The  King  smiled,  and  said.  Thy  lucke  was  good
to  prevent  me.  So  preparation  was  made,  and  to  the
Bannians  house  he  went.  By  this  meanes,  the  King  had
ingrossed  all  faire  stones,  that  no  man  can  buy  from  five
Carats  upwards,  without  his  leave :  for  he  hath  the  re-
fusall  of  all,  and  giveth  not  by  a  third  part  so  much  as
their  value.  There  was  a  Diamant  cutter  of  my  acquaint-
ance, that  was  sent  for  to  cut  a  Diamant  of  three  Mettegals
and  a  halfe,  who  demanded  a  small  foule  Diamant  to  make
powder,  wherewith  to  cut  the  other  Diamant.  They
A 'n inestimable  brought  him  a  Chest,  as  he  said,  of  three  spannes  long,
and  a  spanne  and  halfe  broad,  and  a  spanne  and  halfe  deepe,
full  of  Diamants  of  all  sizes  and  sorts :  yet  could  he  find
never  any  one  for  his  purpose,  but  one  of  five  Rotties,
which  was  not  very  foule  neither.

He  is  exceeding  rich  in  Diamants,  and  all  other  pre-
cious stones,  and  usually  weareth  every  day  a  faire
Diamant  of  great  price,  and  that  which  he  weareth  this
day,  till  his  time  be  come  about  to  weare  it  againe,  he
weareth  not  the  same :  that  is  to  say,  all  his  faire  Jewels
are  divided  into  a  certaine  quantitie  or  proportion,  to
weare  every  day.  He  also  weareth  a  chaine  of  Pearle,
very  faire  and  great,  and  another  chaine  of  Emeralds,  and
ballace  Rubies.  Hee  hath  another  Jewell,  that  commeth
round  about  his  Turbant,  full  of  faire  Diamants  and
Rubies.  It  is  not  much  to  bee  wondered,  that  he  is  so
rich  in  Jewels,  and  in  Gold  and  Silver,  when  he  hath
heaped  together  the  Treasure  and  Jewels  of  so  many
Kings,  as  his  forefathers  have  conquered,  who  likewise
were  a  long  time  in  gathering  them  together :  and  all
came  to  his  hands.  Againe,  all  the  money  and  Jewels
which  his  Nobles  heape  together,  when  they  die  come  all
unto  him,  who  giveth  what  hee  listeth  to  the  Noblemens
wives  and  children  :  and  this  is  done  to  all  them  that
receive  pay,  or  living  from  the  King.  India  is  rich  in
silver,  for  all  Nations  bring  Coyne,  and  carry  away  com-
modities for  the  same ; and  this  Coyne  is  buried  in  India,

42

Cause  of  so
great  ■wealth.

WILLIAM HAWKINS  a.d.

c. l6ll.

and  goeth  not  out :  so  it  is  thought,  that  once  in  twentie

yeeres  it  commeth  into  the  Kings  power. All  the  lands  Those  lands

in  his  Monarchic  are  at  his  disposing,  who  giveth  and  JjJfJjTlf

taketh  at  his  pleasure. If  I  have  lands  at  Lahor,  being  two  thirdi  0j

sent  unto  the  warres  at  Decan,  another  hath  the  lands,  the  profit  .•  and

and  I  am  to  receive  mine  in  Decan,  or  thereabouts,  neere  °f thoie  ™hkh

the  place  where  I  am,  whether  it  be  in  the  warres,  or  that f  &lve !n  .
T  , a  ,  '  ,  r  1  fee,  one  third

I  be  sent  about  any  other  busmesse,  tor  any  other  coun-  rema-inetht0

trey. And  men  are  to  looke  well  unto  their  doings :  for  the  King. In
if  they  be  found  tardie  in  never  so  little  a  matter,  they  all  the  world
are  in  danger  of  loosing  their  lands  :  and  if  complaints  of  "  not  more
Injustice  which  they  doe,  bee  made  unto  the  King,  it  is  ^JJ^  in  asm'e
well  if  they  escape  with  losse  of  their  lands.  great  parts  of

He  is  very  severe  in  such  causes,  and  with  all  severitie  his  Dominions.
punisheth  those  Captaines,  who  suffer  out-lawes  to  give  Punishment  of
assault  unto  their  Citie,  without  resisting. In  my  time  Cowards.
there  were  some  eight  Captaines,  who  had  their  living
upon the  borders of  Bengala, in  a  chiefe Citie called  AchiefeCitie
Pattana,  which  was  suffered  to  be  taken  by  out-lawes,  and  ^UedPattana.
they  all  fled :  but  that  Citie  was  againe  restored  by  a  great
Captaine,  who  was  Commander  of  a  Countrey  neere  there-
abouts ; who  tooke  all  those  Captaines  that  fled,  and  sent
them  to  the  King  to  use  punishment  upon  them  at  his
pleasure. So they were brought before the King in
chaines,  and  were  presently  commanded  to  be  shaven,  both
head  and  beard,  and  to  weare  womens  apparell,  riding
upon  asses,  with  their  faces  backwards, and  so  carried
about  the  Citie. This  being  done,  they  were  brought
before  the  King  againe,  and  there  whipped,  and  sent  to
perpetuall  prison  :  and  this  punishment  was  inflicted  upon
them  in  my  sight. He  is  severe  enough,  but  all  helpeth
not,  for  his  poore  Riats  or  Clownes  complaine  of  Injustice
done  them,  and  cry  for  Justice  at  the  Kings  hands. They
come  to  a  certaine  place,  where  a  long  rope  is  fastened
unto  two  pillars,  neere  unto  the  place  where  the  King
sitteth in Justice. This rope is hanged full of Bels,
plated  with  gold,  so  that  the  rope  beeing  shaken,  the  Bels
are  heard  by  the  King : who  sendeth  to  know  the  cause,

43

A.D.

c  1 6 1 1.

He  calleth
rebels  {as  the
Mogols  di,/)
those  that
refused  subjec-
tion, though
perhaps  some
of  them  were
free  Kings,  as
this  Raga/te,  or
Ranna,  sup-
posed the  true
successor  of
Porta  whom
Alexander
conquered.
He  is  now
brought,  or
bought  rather
(as  they  say)
peaceably  to
acknowledge
tribute  to  the
Mogol.
[I.  iii.  222.]

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

and  doth  his  Justice  accordingly.  At  his  first  comming
to  the  Crowne,  he  was  more  severe  then  now  he  is,  which
is  the  cause  that  the  Countrey  is  so  full  of  outlawes,  and
theeves,  that  almost  a  man  cannot  stirre  out  of  doores,
throughout  all  his  Dominions,  without  great  forces  :  for
they  are  all  become  Rebels.

There  is  one  great  Ragane  betwixt  Agra  and  Amadanar,
who  commandeth  as  much  land  as  a  good  Kingdome  :  and
all  the  forces  the  Mogol  hath,  cannot  bring  him  in,  for  his
forces  are  upon  the  Mountaines.  He  is  twentie  thou-
sand strong  in  Horse,  and  fiftie  thousand  strong  in  Foote,
and  many  of  these  Rebels  are  in  all  his  Dominions  :  but
this  is  one  of  the  greatest.  There  are  many  risen  at
Candahar,  Cabul,  Moldun,  and  Sinde,  and  in  the  King-
dome  of  Boloch  :  Bengala  likewise,  Decan,  and  Guzerat
are  full,  so  that  a  man  can  travell  no  way  for  out-lawes.
Their  Government  is  in  such  a  barbarous  kind,  and  cruell
exacting  upon  the  Clownes,  which  causeth  them  to  be  so
head-strong.  The  fault  is  in  the  Chiefe,  for  a  man  cannot
continue  halfe  a  yeere  in  his  living,  but  it  is  taken  from
him  and  given  unto  another :  or  else  the  King  taketh  it
for  himselfe  (if  it  be  rich  ground,  and  likely  to  yeeld
much)  making  exchange  for  a  worse  place  :  or  as  he  is
befriended  of  the  Vizir.  By  this  meanes  he  racketh  the
poore,  to  get  from  them  what  he  can,  who  still  thinketh
every  houre  to  be  put  out  of  his  place.  But  there  are
many,  who  continue  a  long  time  in  one  place,  and  if  they
remaine  but  sixe  yeeres,  their  wealth  which  they  gaine  is
infinite,  if  it  be  a  thing  of  any  sort.  The  custome  is,  they
are  allowed  so  much  living  to  maintaine  that  Port  which
the  King  hath  given  them,  that  is  to  say  ;  they  are  allowed
twentie  Rupias  of  everie  horse  by  the  Moneth,  and  two
Rupias  by  the  Moneth  for  every  horse  Fame,  for  the
maintenance  of  their  Table.  As  thus  :  A  Captaine  that
hath  five  thousand  horse  to  maintaine  in  the  warres,  hath
likewise  of  Fame  other  five  thousand,  which  he  is  not  to
maintaine  in  the  warres,  but  onely  for  his  Table,  allowed
upon  every  horse  by  the  Moneth  two  Rupias,  and  the

44

WILLIAM HAWKINS  sld.

c  i6i  i.

other  five  thousand,  twenty  Rupias  by  the  Moneth  : and
this  is  the  pay  which  the  greater  part  of  them  are  allowed.

Now  here  I  meane  to  speake  a  little  of  his  manners, The  great
and  customes  in  the  Court. First,  in  the  morning  about  5?^™
the  breake  of  day,  he  is  at  his  Beades,  with  his  face  turned  $ome  Ju^osf
to  the  West-ward. The  manner  of  his  praying  when  he  him  author  of
is  in  Agra,  is  in  a  private  faire  roome,  upon  a  goodly  jet  a  new  *&*•
stone,  having  onely  a  Persian  Lamb-skinne  under  him  :
having  also  some  eight  chaines  of  Beads,  every  one  of
them  containing  foure  hundred. The  Beads  are  of  rich
Pearle, ballace Rubyes, Diamonds, Rubyes, Emeralds,
Lignum  Aloes,  Eshem,  and  Corall. At  the  upper  end  of
this  Jet  stone,  the  Pictures  of  our  Lady  and  Christ  are
placed,  graven  in  stone : so  he  turneth  over  his  Beads,
and  saith,  three  thousand  two  hundred  words,  according
to  the  number  of  his  Beads,  and  then  his  Prayer  is  ended.
After  he  hath  done,  he  sheweth  himselfe  to  the  people,
receiving  their  Salames,  or  good  morrowes,  unto  whom
multitudes  resort  every  morning  for  this  purpose. This
done,  hee  sleepeth  two  houres  more,  and  then  dineth,  and  The  great
passeth his time with his Women, and at noone hee ■  T.'  !
sheweth  himselfe  to  the  people  againe,  sitting  till  three  of
the  clocke,  viewing  and  seeing  his  Pastimes,  and  sports
made  by  men,  and  fighting  of  many  sorts  of  beasts,  every
day  sundry  kinds  of  Pastimes. Then  at  three  of  the
clocke,  all  the  Nobles  in  generall  (that  be  in  Agra,  and  are
well)  resort  unto  the  Court,  the  King  comming  forth  in
open  audience,  sitting  in  his  Seat-Royall,  and  every  man
standing  in  his  degree  before  him,  his  chiefest  sort  of  the
Nobles  standing  within  a  red  Rayle,  and  the  rest  without. Theredray/e.
They  are  all  placed  by  his  Lieutenant  Generall. This
red  Rayle,  is  three  steppes  higher  then  the  place  where
the  rest  stand : and  within  this  red  Rayle  I  was  placed,
amongst the chiefest of all. The rest are placed by
Officers,  and  they  likewise  be  within  another  very  spacious
place  rayled : and  without  that  Rayle,  stand  all  sorts  of
horsemen  and  souldiers,  that  belong  unto  his  Captaines,
and  all  other  commers. At  these  Rayles,  there  are  many

45

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

c.  i 6 i i.

doores  kept  by  many  Porters,  who  have  white  rods  to

keepe  men  in  order. In  the  middest  of  the  place,  right

before  the  King,  standeth  one  of  his  Sheriffes,  together

with his Master Hangman, who is accompanied with

forty  hangmen,  wearing  on  their  heads  a  certaine  quilted

cap,  different  from  all  others,  with  an  Hatchet  on  their

shoulders : and others  with all sorts of  Whips, being

there,  readie  to  doe  what  the  King  commandeth. The

King  heareth  all  causes  in  this  place,  and  stayeth  some  two

houres  every  day  (these  Kings  of  India  sit  daily  in  Justice

every  day,  and  on  the  Tuesdayes  doe  their  executions.)

Then  he  departeth  towards  his  private  place  of  Prayer :

his  Prayer  beeing  ended,  foure  or  five  sorts  of  very  well

dressed  and  roasted  meats  are  brought  him,  of  which  as

hee  pleaseth,  he  eateth  a  bit  to  stay  his  stomacke,  drinking

once  of  his  strong  drinke. Then  hee  commeth  forth  into

a  private  roome,  where  none  can  come,  but  such  as  him-

Captain  sejfe  nominateth,  (for  two  yeeres  together  I  was  one  of  his

,  wo  attendants here.) In this place  he  drinketh other  five
yeeres  together  . /  r  .  .

neere  the  great  cupruls, which is the portion that the Physicians alot

Mogol.  him. This  done,  he  eateth  Opium,  and  then  he  ariseth,

and being  in the height  of  his  drinke, he  layeth him

downe  to  sleepe,  every  man  departing  to  his  owne  home.

And  after  he  hath  slept  two  houres,  they  awake  him,  and

bring  his  Supper  to  him,  at  which  time  he  is  not  able  to

feed  himselfe ; but  it  is  thrust  into  his  mouth  by  others,

and  this  is  about  one  of  the  clocke :  and  then  he  sleepeth

the  rest  of  the  night.

Now  in  the  space  of  these  sixe  cups,  he  doth  many  idle

things  ; and  whatsoever  he  doth,  either  without  or  within,

drunken or sober, he  hath  writers,  who  by turnes  set

downe  every  thing  in  writing  which  he  doth  : so  that

there  is nothing  passeth  in  his  life  time,  which  is  not

noted  :  no,  not  so  much  as  his  going  to  the  necessary ;  and

how  often  he  lieth  with  his  women,  and  with  whom :  and

all  this  is  done  unto  this  end,  that  when  he  dieth,  these

writings  of  al  his  actions  and  speeches,  which  are  worthy

to  be  set  downe,  might  be  recorded  in  the  Chronicles. At

46

WILLIAM HAWKINS

my  being  with  him,  he  made  his  brothers  children  Chris-
tians ;  the  doing  whereof  was  not  for  any  zeale  he  had
to  Christianitie,  as  the  Fathers,  and  all  Christians  thought ;
but  upon  the  prophecie  of  certain  learned  Gentiles,  who
told  him,  that  the  sonnes  of  his  body  should  be  disin-
herited, and  the  children  of  his  brother  should  raigne.
And  therefore  he  did  it,  to  make  these  children  hatefull
to  all  Moores,  as  Christians  are  odious  in  their  sight :  and
that  they  beeing  once  Christians,  when  any  such  matter
should  happen,  they  should  find  no  subjects  :  but  God  is
omnipotent,  and  can  turne  the  making  of  these  Christians
unto  a  good  ende,  if  it  be  his  pleasure.

This  King  amongst  his  children,  hath  one  called  Sultan
Shariar,  of  seven  yeeres  of  age,  and  his  Father  on  a  day,
being  to  goe  some  whether  to  solace  him  selfe,  demanded
of  him  whether  hee  would  goe  with  him  :  the  child  an-
swered, That  if  it  pleased  his  Highnesse,  he  would  either
goe  or  stay,  as  the  pleasure  of  his  Father  was.  But  be-
cause his  answer  was  not,  that  withall  his  heart  he  would
waite  upon  his  Majestie,  he  was  very  well  buffeted  by  the
King,  and  that  in  such  sort,  that  no  child  in  the  world
but  would  have  cryed  ;  which  this  child  did  not.  Where-
fore his  Father  demanded  why  he  cryed  not ;  he  answered,
That  his  Nurses  told  him,  that  it  was  the  greatest  shame
in  the  world,  for  Princes  to  cry  when  they  were  beaten  :
and  ever  since  they  nurtured  me  in  this  kind,  saith  he,  I
never  cryed,  and  nothing  shall  make  me  cry  to  the  death.
Upon  which  speech,  his  Father  being  more  vexed,  stroke
him  againe,  and  caused  a  bodkin  to  bee  brought  him,
which  he  thrust  through  his  cheeke ;  but  all  this  would
not  make  him  cry,  although  he  bled  very  much,  which
was  admired  of  all,  that  the  Father  should  doe  this  unto
his  child,  and  that  he  was  so  stout,  that  hee  would  not
crie.  There  is  great  hope  of  this  child  to  exceed  all  the
rest.

This  Emperour  keepeth  many  feasts  in  the  yeare,  but
two  feasts  especially  may  be  nominated ;  the  one  called
the  Nourous,  which  is  in  honour  of  the  New-yeares  day.

47

A.D.

C. I  6  I  I  .

The  Mogol
makes  his
brothers
children
Christians.
This  Chris-
tianitie is  since
disc  lay  med,  y
was  then  but  a
tricke,  rather
of sens  uali  tie,
then  of  devo-
tion or  state.

[I-

■23-]

Two  feasts.

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

c.  1 6 1 1 .

This  feast  continueth  eighteene  daies,  and  the  wealth  and
riches  are  wonderfull,  that  are  to  be  seene  in  the  decking
and  setting  forth  of  every  mans  roome,  or  place  where  he
lodgeth,  when  it  is  his  turne  to  watch  :  for  every  Nobleman
hath  his  place  appointed  him  in  the  Palace.  In  the
An  exceeding  middest  of  that  spacious  place  I  speake  of,  there  is  a  rich
rich  lent.  Tent  pitched,  but  so  rich,  that  I  thinke  the  like  cannot  bee
found  in  the  world.  This  Tent  is  curiously  wrought,  and
hath  many  Seminans  joyning  round  about  it,  of  most
curious  wrought  Velvet,  embroidered  with  Gold,  and
many  of  them  are  of  Cloath  of  Gold  and  Silver.  These
Seminans  be  shaddowes  to  keepe  the  Sunne  from  the  com-
passe  of  this  Tent.  I  may  say,  it  is  at  the  least  two  Acres
of  ground,  but  so  richly  spread  with  Si  Ike  and  Gold  Car-
pets, and  Hangings  in  the  principall  places,  rich,  as
rich  Velvet  imbroydered  with  Gold,  Pearle,  and  precious
stones  can  make  it.  Within  it  five  Chaires  of  Estate  are
placed,  most  rich  to  behold,  where  at  his  pleasure  the
King  sitteth.  There  are  likewise  private  roomes  made
for  his  Queenes,  most  rich  where  they  sit,  and  see  all,  but
are  not  seene.  So  round  about  this  Tent,  the  compasse
of  all  may  bee  some  five  Acres  of  ground.  Every  princi-
pall Noble-man  maketh  his  roome  and  decketh  it,  likewise
every  man  according  to  his  ability,  striveth  who  may
adorne  his  roome  richest.  The  King  where  he  doth
affect,  commeth  to  his  Noble-mens  roomes,  and  is  most
sumptuously  feasted  there :  and  at  his  departure,  is  pre-
sented with  the  rarest  Jewels  and  toyes  that  they  can  find.
But  because  he  will  not  receive  any  thing  at  that  time  as
a  present,  he  commandeth  his  Treasurer  to  pay  what  his
praysers  valew  them  to  bee  worth,  which  are  valewed  at
halfe  the  price.  Every  one,  and  all  of  his  Nobles  provide
toyes,  and  rare  things  to  give  him  at  this  feast :  so  com-
monly at  this  feast  every  man  his  estate  is  augmented.
Two  daies  of  this  feast,  the  better  sort  of  the  Women
come  to  take  the  pleasure  thereof  :  and  this  feast  beginneth
at  the  beginning  of  the  Moone  of  March.  The  other
feast  is  some  foure  moneths  after,  which  is  called  the  feast

4S

WTLIJAM HAWKINS

of  his  Birth-day  :  This  day  every  man  striveth  who  may
be  the  richest  in  apparell  and  Jewels.  After  many  sp<
and  pastimes  performed  in  his  Palace,  he  goeth  to  his
mothers  house,  with  all  the  better  sort  of  his  Nobles,
where  every  man  presenteth  a  Jewell  unto  his  Mother,
according  to  his  estate.  After  the  bancket  is  ended,  the
King  goeth  into  a  very  faire  roome,  where  a  ballance  of
beaten  Gold  is  hanged,  with  one  scale  emptie  for  him  to
sit  in  ;  the  other  scale  being  filled  with  divers  things,  that
is  to  say,  Silver,  Gold,  divers  sorts  of  Grain  a  little,  and  so
of  every  kind  of  Mettall  a  little,  and  with  all  sorts  of
precious  stones  some :  In  fine,  he  weigheth  himselfe  with
these  things,  which  the  next  day  are  given  to  the  poore,
and  all  may  be  valued  to  be  worth  *  ten  thousand  pounds.
This  day,  before  he  goeth  unto  his  mothers  house,  every
man  bringeth  him  his  Present,  which  is  thought  to  be
ten  times  more  worth,  then  that  which  he  giveth  to  the
poore. This  done,  every  man  departeth  unto  his  home.

His  custome  is,  that  when  you  petition  him  for  any
thing,  you  must  not  come  empty  handed,  but  give  him
some  toy  or  other,  whether  you  write  or  no :  by  the  gift
you  give  him,  he  knoweth  that  you  would  demand  some
thing  of  him :  so  after  enquiry  is  made,  if  he  seeth  it  con-
venient, he  granteth  it.

The  custome  of  the  Indians,  is  to  burne  their  dead,
as  you  have  read  in  other  Authors,  and  at  their  burning,
many  of  their  Wives  will  burne  with  them  :  because  they
will  be  registred  in  their  bookes,  for  famous  and  most
modest  and  loving  Wives,  who  leaving  all  worldly
affaires,  content  themselves  to  live  no  longer  then
their  Husbands.  I  have  seene  many  proper  Women
brought  before  the  King,  whom  (by  his  commande-
ment)  none  may  burne  without  his  leave  and  sight
of  them,  I  meane  those  of  Agra.  When  any  of  these
commeth,  hee  doth  perswade  them  with  many  promises  of
gifts  and  living  if  they  will  live :  but  in  my  time  no
perswasion  could  prevaile,  but  burne  they  would.  The
King  seeing  that  all  would  not  serve,  giveth  his  leave  for
in  49  d

A.D.
C. l6ll.

The  feast  of
his  liirth-day.

*See  hereof
Sir  Thorn.  Roe.

Voluntary
burning  of
ivotnen  with
their  dead
husbands.

A.D.

c.  1 6 1 1.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Favourable

entertainment

ofthcGrandcc.

her  to  be  carried  to  the  fire,  where  she  burneth  her  selfe
alive  with  her  dead  husband.

Likewise  his  custome  is,  when  any  great  Noble-man
hath  beene  absent  from  him  two  or  three  yeares,  if  they
come  in  favour,  and  having  performed  well,  hee  receiveth
them  in  manner  and  forme  following.

First,  the  Noble-man  stayeth  at  the  gate  of  the  Pallace,
till  the  Vizir  and  Lieutenant  Generall,  and  Knight  Mar-
tiall  come  to  accompany  him  unto  the  King  :  then  he  is
brought  to  the  gate  of  the  outermost  rayles,  whereof  I
have  spoken  before,  where  hee  standeth  in  the  view  of  the
King,  in  the  middest  betweene  these  two  Nobles ;  then  he
[I.  in.  224.]  toucheth  the  ground  with  his  hand,  and  also  with  his
head,  very  gravely,  and  doth  thus  three  times.  This
done,  he  kneeleth  downe  touching  the  ground  with  his
fore-head,  which  being  once  done,  he  is  carried  forward
towards  the  King,  and  in  the  midway  he  is  made  to  doe
this  reverence  againe  :  then  he  commeth  to  the  doore  of
the  red  rayles,  doing  the  like  reverence  the  third  time :
and  having  thus  done,  he  commeth  within  the  red  rayles,
and  doth  it  once  more  upon  the  Carpets.  Then  the  King
commandeth  him  to  come  up  the  staires  or  ladder  of  seaven
steppes,  that  he  may  embrace  him ;  where  the  King  most
lovingly  embraceth  him  before  all  the  people,  whereby  they
shall  take  notice,  that  he  is  in  the  Kings  favour.  The  King
having  done  this,  he  then  commeth  downe,  and  is  placed
by  the  Lieutenant  Generall  according  to  his  degree.  Now
if  he  come  in  disgrace,  through  exclamations  made  against
him,  he  hath  none  of  these  honours  from  the  King,  but  is
placed  in  his  place  till  he  come  to  his  tryall.  This  King
is  very  much  adored  of  the  Heathen  Comminalty,  inso-
much, that  they  will  spread  their  bodies  all  upon  the
ground,  rubbing  the  earth  with  their  faces  on  both  sides.
They  use  many  other  fopperies  and  superstitions,  which  I
omit,  leaving  them  for  other  Travellers,  which  shall  come
from  thence  hereafter.

After  I  had  written  this,  there  came  into  my  memory
another  Feast,  solemnized  at  his  Fathers  Funerall,  which

5°

Funerall  feast
or  Obit  for  his

Father?

WILLIAM HAWKINS

is  kept  at  his  Sepulchre,  where  likewise  himselfe,  with  all
his  posterity,  meane  to  be  buried.  Upon  this  day  there  is
great  store  of  victuals  dressed,  and  much  money  given  to
the  poore.  This  Sepulchre  may  be  counted  one  of  the
rarest  Monuments  of  the  world.  It  hath  beene  this  foure-
teene  yeares  a  building,  and  it  is  thought  it  will  not  be
finished  these  seaven  yeares  more,  in  ending  gates  and
walls,  and  other  needfull  things,  for  the  beautifying  and
setting  of  it  forth.  The  least  that  worke  there  daily,  are
three  thousand  people  :  but  thus  much  I  will  say,  that  one
of  our  Worke-men  will  dispatch  more  then  three  of  them.
The  Sepulchre  is  some  f .  of  a  mile  about  made  square  :
it  hath  seaven  heights  built,  every  height  narrower  then
the  other,  till  you  come  to  the  top  where  his  Herse  is.
At  the  outermost  gate,  before  you  come  to  the  Sepulchre,
there  is  a  most  stately  Palace  building :  the  compasse  of
the  wall  joyning  to  this  gate  of  the  Sepulchre  and  garding,
being  within,  may  be  at  the  least  three  miles.  This
Sepulchre  is  some  foure  miles  distant  from  the  Citie  of
Agra.

Chap. VIII.

The  Voyage  of  M.  David  Middleton  in  the
Consent,  a  Ship  of  one  hundred  and  fifteene
Tuns,  which  set  forth  from  Tilburie  Hope,
on  the  twelfth  of  March, 1606.

A.D.

1607.

E  anchored  in  the  Roade  of  Saldania  all
our  men  in  good  health :  onely  Peter
Lambert  the  day  before  fell  off  the  top-
most head,  whereof  he  dyed.

The  one  and  twentieth,  the  Captain
and  Master  went  to  Pengwin  Hand,  three
leagues  distant  from  the  Roade,  where
wee  saw  such  abundance  of  Seales  and  Pengwins,  that  it
was  admirable,  for  you  may  drive  five  hundred  Pengwins
together  in  a  flocke,  and  thousands  of  Seales  together
upon  the  shore. The  Hand  is  not  above  some  three  miles

5i

Sumptuous
Sepulchre.

The  16.  of
July,  1607.

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1607.

long,  and  some  two  miles  broad  :  but  in  mine  opinion,
there  is  not  an  Hand  in  the  world  more  frequented  with
Fowle  and  Seales  then  this  Hand.  It  hath  Pengwins,
Wilde-geese,  Ducke,  Drake,  and  Pellicanes,  and  divers
other  Fowle,  and  after  some  pleasure  taken  there,  we
returned  againe  unto  our  ship.

Having  bought  some  Cattle,  and  ended  all  our  busi-
nesse,  and  our  men  well  refreshed,  wee  weighed  Anchor
the  nine  and  twentieth  day,  about  foure  of  the  clocke  in
the  morning,  with  very  little  wind,  and  came  out  of  the
Road  of  Saldania,  our  men  in  very  good  health,  and  loath
to  depart  without  the  company  of  our  Admirall  and  Vice-
Admirall :  but  we  were  not  certaine  of  their  arrivall  there,
which  made  us  make  so  little  stay,  so  directing  our  course
for  S.  Laurence,  we  left  Saldania.

The  thirtieth  day  calme  all  day,  till  three  of  the  clocke
in  the  afternoone,  and  then  we  had  a  fresh  gale  at  South-
west, and  we  steered  away  halfe  a  watch  South  and  by
West,  and  two  watches  and  an  halfe  South-East,  and  at
tenne  of  the  clocke  at  night  the  Cape  De  Bona  Esperansa,
bare  North  of  us,  and  all  that  night  blew  very  much  winde,
and  the  Sea  much  growne  :  and  the  ship  came  betwixt
twelve  of  the  clocke  at  night,  and  twelve  of  the  clocke
next  day,  being  the  one  and  thirtieth  of  July,  nine  and
twenty  leagues,  all  this  day  a  very  pleasant  gale,  some-
times raine,  we  came  foure  leagues  from  the  Cape.
August  1.  The  first  of  August  we  had  very  faire  weather,  some-

r ■'  /f /r ^mes  a  &a^e5  and  sometimes  calme,  continuing  so  all  day,
Nort/iJj%  " anc*  we  steered  away  two  watches  South-East  and  by  East,
fivefathome. and  three  watches  at  East  and  by  South,  the  wind  variable,
sometimes at South, and sometimes  at South  by  East
darke  weather,  and  she  ran  some  one  and  twenty  leagues,
then  wee  were  in  five  and  thirty  degrees,  and  twenty  two
minuts  of  height.
[I.  iii.  225.] The  seven  and  twentieth  of  August,  the  winde  at  North-
west, and  we  steered  away  East,  and  by  South  ;  and  at  twc,
of  the  clocke,  we  saw  the  land  of  S.  Laurence,  or  Mada
gascar,  by  estimation  some  sixe  leagues  off; and  then  wt

DAVID MIDDLETON  ad.

1607.

steered  away  North,  and  by  West,  and  at  noone  we
observed,  and  made  the  ship  to  be  in  twentie  foure  degrees,
and  fortie  minutes,  the  variation  at  night  sixteene  degrees,
and  twentie  three  minutes.

The  thirtieth,  at  five  of  the  clocke  in  the  afternoone,  we
anchored  in  the  Bay  of  S.  Augustine,  in  sixe  fathome  and  Say  °/s-
an  halfe,  great  gravell ;  and  we  were  inforced  to  goe  to  u&u"
lee-ward,  being  to  the  roome-wards  of  the  Road  before  we
could  get  in,  by  reason  of  a  great  breach  that  lyes  off  the
bay,  and  then  came  in  close  upon  a  tacke,  and  had  in
comming  in  seven,  sixe  and  an  halfe,  and  five  fathomes
all  the  way,  and  came  very  faire  by  the  breach,  and  rid  in
the  Road,  with  two  Hands  in  the  wind  of  us,  and  the
breach  both.

The  one  and  thirtieth  day,  our  Captaine  with  M.  Davis
went  in  our  long  boat  to  viewe  the  Ilands,  and  I  my  selfe
as  we  went,  sounded  close  aboord  the  Breach,  and  had  sixe
fathomes.  One  of  the  Ilands  is  very  small,  as  it  were  a
banke  of  sand,  and  nothing  on  it :  the  other  is  about  a  mile
in  length,  and  halfe  a  mile  in  breadth,  and  nothing  upon
it,  but  some  small  store  of  Wood.

The  first  of  September,  1607.  we  weighed  anchor  from
our  first  place,  and  came  within  two  miles  of  the  mouth
of  the  River,  and  rid  in  five  fathome  and  an  halfe,  very
fast  ground,  for  where  we  rid  before  it  was  very  foule
ground,  so  that  we  brake  one  of  our  Cables  in  the  weigh-
ing. I  judge  it  to  be  some  three  leagues  from  our  first
place,  where  we  had  very  foule  ground.

The  seventh  day,  having  ended  all  our  businesse,  being  A  marke  on
provided  of  wood and  water, and  all things else, we  shore  most  ltke
weighed  anchor  in  the  morning  about  five  of  the  clocke,  ju-.w,
with  the  wind  at  East  and  by  North  a  pleasant  gale,  and
we  steered  away,  comming  out  West,  and  West  and  by
North,  til  we  were  cleere  of  the  Breaches,  and  we  brought
to  sea  with  us  foure  Goats, three Sheep, and  a  yong
Heifer : here  we  found  great  plenty  of  victualls,  both
Sheepe  and  Beeves  for  little  value. This  day  we  observed
some  three  miles  from  the  Hand,  before  the  Bay  of  S.

53

A.D.

1607.

Novemb.  1
1607.

Decemb.  6.
1607.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Augustine,  and  wee  made  it  to  be  in  twenty  three  degrees
and  for  tie  eight  minutes  of  latitude,  and  after  wee  were
cleare  of  the  Breach,  which  lies  to  the  North-ward  of  the
Hand,  we  steered  away  South  South-west,  and  South  and
by  West,  sometimes  with  very  faire  weather,  the  wind  at
South-East,  and  by  East  a  pleasant  gale.

The  eleventh,  a  fresh  gale  at  South-east,  and  South-east
and  by  East,  and  wee  stood  into  the  shore  till  midnight,
and  then  we  saw  a  great  breach,  right  a  head  hard  by  us,
but  wee  heard  the  rut  before  we  saw  it  (God  be  praised)
and  so  we  tackd,  and  stood  off  againe  presently.  And
at  noone  observed,  and  made  the  Ship  to  be  in  twentie  five
degrees,  and  twentie  two  minutes  of  latitude.

The  twelfth  of  November  in  the  morning,  we  saw  an
Hand,  and  stood  to  make  it,  and  found  it  to  be  Ingana,
and  came  to  the  North-side  of  it :  the  Hand  is  in  length
five  leagues  or  thereabot :  it  lies  East  and  by  South,  and
West  and  by  North :  the  Easter  end  is  the  highest  land,
and  the  Wester  end  is  full  of  trees.  It  lies  in  latitude  in
five  degrees  and  an  halfe,  and  the  variation  is  foure  degrees
and  thirteene  minutes.  So  after  we  had  made  it,  having
the  wind  at  West  North-west,  we  steered  away  for  the
maine  of  Sumatra  East  and  by  South,  and  East  South-east
a  pleasant  gale,  but  very  much  raine :  so  the  thirteenth
day  in  the  morning,  wee  saw  the  maine  land  of  Sumatra
some  foure  leagues  from  us.

The  foureteenth,  we  anchored  in  Bantam  Roade,  about
foure  of  the  clocke  in  the  afternoone,  being  Saturday,
where  we  found  the  Merchants  in  very  good  health,  and
all  things  in  good  order.  The  next  day  our  Captaine  went
on  shore,  and  spake  with  M.  Towerson  concerning  the
shippes  businesse,  and  agreed  to  have  our  Iron  and  Lead
a  shore,  which  we  brought  with  us  :  which  beeing  effected,
with  some  roomaging,  and  having  fitted  our  ship  in  good
order,  and  taken  in  Merchandize,  and  our  Merchants  for
the  Moluccos,  with  leave  taken  of  the  Merchants,  we  set
saile  from  Bantam  Roade  the  sixt  of  December,  1607.  with
little  wind,  and  came  out  of  the  Roade,  and  anchored  that

54

DAVID MIDDLETON

night  in  sight  of  the  high  land  of  Bantam.  The  next  day,
weighed  in  the  morning,  and  sailed  with  a  prosperous  wind
still  continuing  faire,  passing  many  Hands,  and  sunken
ground.  Some  nights  we  sayled,  and  other-some  lay  a
hull :  raine,  thunder,  and  lightening  was  no  strange  thing
to  us  in  those  parts,  but  one  comfort  we  had,  that  God
gave  us  a  fayre  wind,  wherewith  we  sayled  merrily  on  our
intended  Voyage.

In  the  beginning  of  Januarie,  they  arrived  at  the
Moluccos.  The  rest  of  this  Moneth  was  spent  in
entertainments  and  complements  betwixt  Ours  and  the
Spaniards,  as  likewise  with  the  Moluccan  Princes.  So
was  the  whole  Moneth  of  February  also.  The  reason  was,
The  Spaniards  durst  not  admit  us  trade  till  the  Camp
Master  had  given  leave.  And  he  in  those  broyles  twixt
him  and  the  Hollanders,  except  Ours  would  doe  or  seeme
to  doe  some  piece  of  service,  at  least  accompanying  their
ships  for  greater  shew  (which  our  Captaine  absolutely
refused,  being  against  his  Commission)  excused  himselfe.
Meane  while  they  had  privy  trade  with  the  people  by
night,  and  were  Joviall  and  frolicke  by  day  with  the
Spaniards,  which  both  gave  and  received  kind  welcomes.
In  the  beginning  of  March,  they  were  permitted  open
trade.  But  this  within  few  dayes  was  countermanded,  and
wee  commanded  to  bee  gone.  And  thus  they  spent  the
time  till  March  the  foureteene,  when  they  weighed  anchor,
and  set  saile.  Some  trade  they  had  also  in  the  way.  This
part  of  the  Journall  is  long,  and  I  have  omitted  it,  as  else-
where in  those  things  which  I  thought  might  be  tedious.

The  three  and  twentieth,  1608.  we  entered  the  Straits  of
Bangaya.  Whereunto  having  entered,  our  Captaine  deter-
mined to  send  off  his  long  boat  to  seeke  for  water,  for  here
he  purposed  to  store  himselfe  therewith.  While  he  was
thus  determining,  there  came  a  Praw  off  from  the  Hand,
with  all  the  speed  he  could  make,  who  came  unto  us,  and
spake  with  us,  of  whom  we  demaunded,  whether  there
were  any  fresh  water  in  that  Hand :  who  made  answer,
that  if  our  Captaine  pleased,  he  would  bring  us  to  very

55

A.D.
I  608.

[I.  iii.  226.]

March,  23.
1608.

Straits  of  Bar:-
gaya.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1608.

good  water :  whereupon  we  stood  over  for  the  East  shore,
and  anchored  about  one  of  the  clocke  in  the  afternoone,  in
sixtie  fathomes  of  water,  where  there  runs  a  most  crueil
Current.  Then  after  we  came  to  anchor,  fitting  our  long
Boat  with  caske,  we  went  with  the  Indian  to  fetch  water :
where  while  they  were  fitting  the  Boat,  he  sold  some  fresh
fish  for  China  dishes,  very  cheape.  So  at  night  our  men
came  aboord,  and  brought  very  good  water,  but  had  a
wearisome  rowth  of  it,  being  five  miles  distant  from  the
place  where  we  anchored.

The  foure  and  twentieth  in  the  morning,  we  went  againe
for  an  other  Boats  lading  of  water :  and  this  morning  by
day  breake,  there  came  of  the  countrey  people  above  one
hundred  Prawes,  men  and  women,  and  brought  us  fish,
both  dry  fish,  and  fresh  fish  very  good,  of  both  kinds  great
plentie,  and  very  cheape.  They  brought  us  also  Hogges,
great  and  small,  which  they  sold  us  for  course  white  cloth,
and  Hennes  and  Cocks  in  abundance  at  the  like  price :
some  for  China  dishes,  and  some  for  cloth.  They  brought
us  also  fruits,  as  Plantans,  Cassathoe  roots,  and  divers  other
fruits,  and  staied  aboord  us  all  day,  that  sometimes  we  were
not  able  to  stirre  up  and  downe  the  ship  for  them.  In  the
afternoone,  the  King  sent  our  Captaine  some  Plantans,  and
Irea  pote  to  drinke,  which  is  a  kind  of  water  called  by  that
name ;  our  Captain  gave  the  Messenger  great  thanks  in
his  Kings  behalfe,  and  to  requite  his  kindnesse,  sent  him
a  rich  Pintado.  Then  he  departed,  and  all  the  rest :  and
about  tenne  of  the  clocke  at  night  we  weighed  anchor,  and
in  the  weighing,  wee  broke  both  our  Star-boord  anchors
flooks.  Then  sayling  away  with  very  little  wind,  at  length
manned  our  long  Boate,  and  towed  our  ship  all  night :  for
if  we  had  not  towed  her  in  this  calme,  we  had  been  driven
to  lee-ward  more  then  we  should  have  gotten  againe  in
three  dayes,  without  a  fresh  gale  of  wind,  the  Current
runnes  so  strong  there.
King  of  The  nineteenth  of  Aprill,  the  King  of  Buttone  sent
Buttonc.  one  0f  his  brothers  againe,  to  know  whether  our  Captaine
were  willing  he  should  come  aboord  ; for  he  was  very

.6

DAVID MIDDLETON  ad.

1608.
desirous  to  see  both  him  and  our  ship  ;  because  he  had
heard  much  of  Englishmen,  but  never  saw  any.  Our
Captaine  sent  him  word,  that  he  should  think  himselfe
much  graced  if  he  came.  Presently  the  King  came  off
in  his  Caricoll,  rowed  at  least  with  an  hundred  oares,  having
in  her  besides  about  foure  hundred  men  with  armes,  well
appointed  to  fight,  and  sixe  brasse  pieces,  and  in  her  com-
pany five  Caricols  more,  which  had  at  the  least  a  thousand
men  in  them :  so  our  Captaine  sent  according  to  his
demand,  a  pledge  for  him,  one  Francis  Kelly  which  was
our  Surgeon.  Then  he  came  aboord  our  Captaine,  who
kindly  entertained  him,  and  intreated  him  to  take  part  of
a  banquet  of  sweet  meates,  which  he  kindly  accepted  ;  and
after  the  banquet  ended,  our  Captaine  demanded  what  he
had  to  sell :  who  replyed,  he  had  Pearle,  and  Turtell  shels,
and  some  cloth,  which  they  make  themselves,  which  as  we
thought  was  made  of  Cotton  stript.  Then  our  Captaine
intreated  to  see  some  of  his  Pearle  ;  who  said,  he  had  none
there,  for  he  came  but  upon  pleasure,  not  thinking  to  have
met  with  any  ship  :  but  if  it  pleased  him  to  goe  with  his
ship  to  Buttone  (which  was  some  night  and  a  dayes  sailing
thence)  he  should  see  great  store  of  Pearle,  and  any  thing
that  hee  had  to  sell.  And  because  (said  he)  the  place  is
unknowne  to  you,  I  will  send  you  a  Pilot,  which  shall
bring  you  thither  :  our  Captaine  and  Factor  considering  of
his  speeches,  thought  best  to  accept  of  his  kind  offer,  in
regard  it  was  nothing  out  of  the  way  to  Bantam  :  and
bestowed  upon  him  a  Musket,  a  Sword,  and  a  Pintado,
thanking  him  for  his  kindnesse,  that  he  would  vouchsafe
to  come  aboord  his  ship :  to  whom  the  King  made  answer,
that  he  had  not  any  now  worth  the  giving  to  bestow  upon
our  Captaine,  but  promised  to  requite  his  kindnesse  before
his  departure :  and  in  the  meane  time  intreated  our  Cap-
taine to  accept  of  two  peices  of  their  cloth,  who  received
them  with  many  thanks.  About  three  of  the  clocke  in  the
afternoone  he  tooke  his  leave  of  our  Captaine,  promising
presently  to  send  us  a  Pilot,  to  carry  us  to  the  Towne  of
Buttone. Then  wee  brought  the  Cable  to  the  Capstoll,

57

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1608.

and  weighed,  and  the  Pilot  came  aboord.  And  at  night
the  King  sent  a  Caricoll  unto  us,  to  see  if  we  wanted  any
thing,  and  to  beare  us  company  to  Buttone,  by  whom  he
sent  our  Captaine  a  Goat.  Then  we  stood  away  for
Buttone  with  a  small  gale,  but  at  night  it  was  calme,  and
the  tyde  against  us,  and  we  came  to  an  anchor  in  two  and
twenty  fathomes  of  water,  because  we  would  not  drive
to  lee- ward,  and  in  the  morning  weighed  againe,  and  stood
for  the  Towne  of  Buttone.

The  one  and  twentieth,  about  tenne  of  the  clocke,  our
Purser  (who  had  beene  sent  a  shore  the  day  before)  came
aboord  againe,  and  brought  with  him  Hennes  and  Cocos,
The  King  of  ancj  ^0\^  us  that  the  Indians  had  carried  him  unto  a  King,
who  when  he  came  unto  him,  was  very  glad  to  see  him,
because  he  was  the  first  Englishman  that  ever  he  had
seene.  At  his  first  comming  to  his  house,  hee  found  him
drinking  and  carowsing  with  his  Nobles,  and  round  about
where  he  sate,  all  hanged  about  with  divers  mens  heads,
which  he  before  had  conquered  :  so  after  some  little  stay,
[I.  iii.  227.]  hee  tooke  his  leave,  and  came  to  the  Caracoll  againe,  and
lay  all  night  aboord  her.  This  night  we  anchored  in
twentie  fathomes  of  water,  the  place  not  halfe  a  mile
broad.

The  two  and  twentieth  in  the  morning,  it  was  very
little  wind,  yet  wee  weighed,  and  our  long  Boat  towed  us
through  the  Straits,  seeing  the  tide  was  with  us,  and  she
went  a  head  amaine :  so  about  eleven  of  the  clocke,  we
came  in  sight  of  the  Towne  of  Buttone,  and  came  to
anchor  in  five  and  twentie  fathomes  of  water,  some  mile
and  an  halfe  from  the  Towne,  where  wee  staid  the  Kings
comming:,  but  he  came  not  that  nig-ht.  Here  we  sent
our  Boat  ashore,  and  bought  fresh  fish  for  our  Companie.

The  three  and  twentieth,  about  one  of  the  clocke  in  the
afternoone,  the  King  came  up  under  our  sterne,  and  with
him  some  fortie  Caracols,  and  rowed  round  about  us,  very
gallantly  set  forth  with  his  colours  and  pendants  :  and  after
this,  they  rowed  toward  the  towne,  and  our  Captaine
intertained  him  with  a  voley  of  small  shot,  and  all  his

58

shore  to
Buttonc.

DAVID MIDDLETON  a.d.

Ordnance ; and  after,  caused  his  long  Boat  to  be  manned,

then  accompanied  with  M.  Siddall  and  his  followers,  went

ashore  to  the  Towne  of  Buttone. The  King  likewise  Tfiey  Soe  on

entertained our Captaine with his smal shot, and his

Ordnance,  affirming  that  his  heart  was  now  at  rest,  seeing

he  had  seen  the  English  Nation  : promising  to  do  our

Captaine  all  the  kindnesse  that  in  him  lay : whereat  our

Captaine  gave  him  humble  thanks,  and  for  that  time  tooke

his  leave,  and  came  aboord,  and  in  the  morning  weighed,

and  stood  further  into  the  Roade,  and  anchored  in  seven

and  twentie  fathomes  of  water,  some  halfe  a  mile  from  the

shore.

The  foure  and  twentieth  in  the  morning,  there  came
aboord  our  ship  a  Java  Nokeyday,  which  had  a  Juncke  in
the  Road  laden  with  Cloves,  which  came  from  Amboyna,
with  whom  our  Factor  M.  Siddall  talked :  this  Javan
promised  our  Captaine  (if  so  he  pleased)  hee  should
have  all  his  Cloves.  The  King  intreated  our  Cap-
taine to  take  part  of  his  dinner,  and  to  beare  with
the  homely  fashion  of  their  Countrey :  for  comming
into  the  Roome  where  they  sate,  their  meate  was  served
in,  in  great  Chargers  made  of  a  kind  of  wood,  close  covered
with  clothes ;  thus  their  meat  being  set  before  them,  the
King,  our  Captaine,  and  M.  Siddall  dined  together,  where
we  had  great  cheare,  and  our  drinke  was  Jera  pote,  very
pleasant  and  sweete  in  tast,  and  the  King  was  very  merry.
And  after  dinner  he  had  some  talke  concerning  the  Cloves
which  wee  should  have,  and  promised  the  next  day  to  come
aboord  himselfe,  or  send  some  one  of  his  attendants,  to
see  a  muster  of  all  his  Cloath :  then  our  Captaine  give
him  great  thanks,  and  tooke  his  leave,  and  came  aboord.

The  five  and  twentieth,  the  Kings  Uncle  came  aboord
of  us  to  see  our  ship,  where  our  Captaine  kindly  intertained
him ;  and  after  him  came  the  Kings  brother,  and  stayed
dinner  with  our  Captaine,  and  after  tooke  his  leave,  we
still  expecting  the  Kings  comming,  but  he  came  not  him-
selfe, but  sent  his  Sonne  and  the  Pilot,  and  they  had  a
view  of  the  cloth,  and  liked  it  very  well.

59

A.D.

[61  B.

The  ship  full
laden  tilth
Cloves.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

The  sixe  and  twentieth,  the  King  and  his  Sonne  came
aboord,  and  dined  with  our  Captaine,  and  had  great  cheare,
and  the  King  was  very  merry,  and  much  desired  dauncing,
whereupon  some  of  our  men  danced  before  him,  who  was
well  pleased,  both  at  their  dauncing  and  musique  :  at  night
the  Kin^s  Unckle  sent  our  Captaine  foure  fat  Hogges.

The  seven  and  twentieth,  there  was  another  King  of  an
Hand  thereby,  which  came  in  his  Caracoll,  and  his  wife
with  him,  who  viewed  our  ship,  but  we  could  not  intreat
him  to  come  aboord.  Our  ship  being  laden  to  the  full  with
Cloves,  bought  in  this  place  of  the  Javans,  our  Captaine
bought  some  slaves  of  the  King,  and  as  we  were  busie
this  night,  one  of  them  stole  out  of  our  Captaines  cabbin
doore,  and  leapt  into  the  sea,  and  swumme  ashore,  and
was  never  heard  of.  Then  our  Captaine  the  next  morning
sent  Augustine  Spalding  our  Jurabassa,  to  certifie  the  King
of  his  escape,  and  in  what  manner,  who  presently  made
restitution  for  it,  and  gave  him  another ;  and  then  taking
leave  of  the  King,  came  aboord.  May  the  second,  we
proceeded  for  our  intended  and  wished  port  of  Bantam,
and  gave  the  Towne  of  Buttone  three  pieces  of  Ordnance
for  a  farewell.  The  third  we  had  sight  of  the  Straights  of
Celebes,  and  stood  into  it  with  all  the  saile  wee  could
make  ;  but  could  not  get  so  neere  before  night  approaching.

May  the  two  and  twentieth,  we  anchored  in  the  road  of
Bantam.  We  found  not  one  Christian  ship  there,  but
foure  China  Junckes  which  came  from  China,  as  their  use
is  with  Taffaties,  Damaskes,  Sattens,  and  divers  other
Merchandises.

July  the  fifteenth,  1608.  the  Captaine  and  Merchants
having  ended  all  their  businesse,  tooke  their  leaves.  After
whose  departure,  we  presently  set  saile  out  of  the  Road
of  Bantam,  now  bound  homewards  to  our  Native  Countrey
England,  after  our  long  and  tedious  Voyage.  And  to
avoide  the  Readers  like  long  and  tedious  voyage,  the  rest
of  this  Voyage  homewards  is  omitted,  and  in  steed  thereof,
we  have  set  downe  a  Table  of  the  Journal  of  this  ship  from
the  Lizard  to  Bantam,  as  it  was  set  forth  by  John  Davis.

60

ALEXANDER SHARPEY

A.D.
I608.

Chap. IX.  [I.  iii.  228.]

A  briefe  Narration  of  the  fourth  Voyage  to  the
East-Indies,  with  the  two  good  Shippes,  the
Ascention  being  Admirall,  and  the  Lnion
Vice-Admirall,  under  the  commaund  of
Alexander  Sharpey  Generall,  and  Richard
Rowles  Lieutenant  Generall,  with  the  dis-
covery of  the Redde-Sea  in the  Ascention.

i  1.

Relations of  the  said Voyage, written by
Thomas  Jones.

N  an  unfortunate  houre,  the  foureteenth
day  of  March,  in  the  yeare  of  our  Lord
1607.  with  the  two  tall  Shippes,  the
Ascention  and  the  Union,  we  weighed
anchor  at  Woolwich.

The  sixth  of  May  1608.  having  spent
some  daies  in  refreshing  our  men  at  Maio,
we  directed  our  course  for  the  passing  of  the  Equinoctiall,
and  so  for  the  Cape  of  Bona  Speranza  South-east,  and  by
South,  and  South  South-east. The  Equinoctiall  we  passed
very  speedily,  and  then  you  have  the  generall  wind,  that
bloweth  continually,  between  the  South-east  and  South-
east and  by  East : so  that  the  further  you  sayle  to  the
South- ward,  you  shall  finde  the  wind  to  Easter  the  more,
as  betweene  the  Equinoctiall  and  the  Tropicke  of  Capri-
corne. The  eleventh  day  of  June,  in  the  Latitude  of  sixe
and  twenty  degrees,  being  under  the  Tropicke,  we  met
with  a  Caracke  that  was  bound  for  India,  her  name  was Neva  Pa/ma  a
the  Nova  Palma. This  Caracke  was  cast  away  afterward  Carack-
upon the Coast of Soffala, within twelve leagues of
Mosambike : the Captaine of which said ship came T _  faPu
Passenger  home  in  the  same  Caracke  that  I  came  out  of  ^e  -jn  a
India  in,  being  Admirall  of  the  Fleete  of  foure  sayle. So Carack.

61

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1608.

according  to  the  custome  of  the  Sea,  having  spent  some
complements  in  friendly  manner,  we  departed  from  him,
to  follow  our  Voyage.

The  thirteenth  of  July,  we  came  to  an  Anchor  in  the

The  Bay  of  Bav  of  Saldania,  and  staying  there  unto  the  five  and  twen-

Saldama.  {ltxh  of  September,  in  building  of  a  Pinnasse  (at  which
time  the  Westerly  Monsons  have  done  blowing,  and  then
the  wind  bloweth  more  betweene  the  South  and  the  South-
east.) The  five  and  twentieth  of  September,  wee  came
out  of  the  Bay,  and  the  sixe  and  twentieth  of  the  same
moneth,  we  were  incountred  with  a  mighty  storme,  at  the
South  South-east,  which  blew  so  vehemently,  that  we  split
our  fore-corse  that  night,  and  lost  the  company  of  our
consort  the  Union,  and  our  Pinnasse  called  the  Good
Hope,  which  we  had  built  at  the  foresaid  Cape,  and  never
heard  of  them  afterward,  onely  the  Pinnasse  excepted,
which  came  to  us  to  Aden  in  the  Red-Sea.  Thus  with
contrary  winds,  having  before  neglected  our  season  of  time,
we  beate  up  and  downe  the  Sea  in  following  our  Voyage,
unto  the  eighteenth  day  of  November,  before  we  could
get  the  great  Hand  of  S.  Lawrence.  But  there  wee  beate
two  daies  to  get  about  Cape  De  S.  Roman,  but  could  not.
This  altered  their  minds,  that  they  bore  up  for  the  Hand

Comora.  of  Comora,  which  standeth  betwixt  the  Hand  of  S.  Law-
rence and  the  Maine,  in  the  Southerly  Latitude  of  eleven
degrees.  The  sixe  and  twentieth  day  of  October,  we  came
to  an  Anchor  on  the  Wester-side  of  the  Hand,  in  sixe  and
thirty  fathomes  water.  Heere  we  were  used  of  the  King
and  people,  with  all  the  kindnesse  that  might  be  :  but  could
get  no  fresh  water  ;  yet  had  marvellous  good  refreshing  of
Limes,  &  some  Hens,  and  Coco  Nuts,  which  was  a  great
comfort  unto  us.  The  last  day  of  the  said  moneth  we
weighed  Anchor,  and  departed  from  the  Hand  of  Comora,
and  directed  our  course  for  the  Hand  of  Zanzibar,  minding
there  to  relieve  our  wants  of  water.  But  through  the
default  of  our  Master,  wee  over-shot  the  Hand  of  Zanzibar,

Pemba.  and  fell  with  the  Hand  of  Pemba,  having  almost  runne
ashoare  in  the  night  before  we  did  see  it,  the  winds  being

62

ALEXANDER SHARPEY  a.d.

1608.

by  the  East  North-east,  we  cast  about,  and  stood  off  till
day,  thinking  it  to  bee  the  Hand  Zanzibar.  When  it  was
day,  we  found  a  place  on  the  South-side  of  the  Hand,
having  a  Ledge  of  Rockes  to  the  Eastward  of  us,  here
we  road  in  seven  or  eight  fathome  water,  being  the  seventh
day  of  December.  The  Latitude  of  the  place  is  sixe
degrees  to  the  South-ward,  being  the  South-west  end  of
the  Hand.  The  eight  of  the  said  moneth,  I  went  ashoare
to  seeke  for  water,  of  which  we  could  not  fill  above  sixe
Tuns  aday.  We  plyed  our  businesse  with  great  recourse
of  the  people,  and  familiarity  with  us,  but  all  was  in
treachery.  Having  almost  done  our  businesse,  and  onely
lacking  some  foure  or  five  Tunnes  of  water  to  fill,  being
the  eighteenth  day,  I  went  ashore  to  fill  those  empty  Caskes  [I.  iii.  229.]
with  water,  where  against  my  comming  they  had  laid  an
Ambush  of  some  two  hundred  men,  which  brake  out  upon  Treacherous
us,  yet,  praised  be  God,  wee  did  escape  their  hands,  onely  PeoP
my  Servant  John  Harington  excepted,  whom  they  tooke
and  murthered  most  cruelly,  I  not  being  able  to  rescue
him.  Also,  they  wounded  a  Servant  of  John  Elmors,
being  one  of  our  Masters  Mates  :  but  the  youth  recovered
of  his  wounds,  being  eleven  in  number.  Also  a  little
before  they  did  put  their  treachery  in  practice,  one  of  the
chiefe  of  them  came  unto  me,  desiring  me  to  send  one  of
our  men  with  him  to  fetch  a  present  for  our  Generall,
which  I  granted,  but  the  fellow  never  came  againe.
The  young-man  that  went  was  borne  in  Greenewich,
his  name  being  Edward  Church-man,  who  afterward
dyed  in  Mombasa  of  a  Bloudy-fluxe,  as  I  was  credibly
informed  of  the  Portugals.  Also,  while  wee  made
our  abode  at  Pemba,  the  Portugals  were  about  to
man  a  Flemmish  Hulke,  (which  had  wintered  in  Mom-
basa) to  come  to  take  our  Shippe  :  but  hearing  of  the  force
of  our  shippe,  they  altered  their  minds.  The  people  of
this  Hand  of  Pemba  be  very  cowardly  people,  and  dare  doe
nothing  of  themselves  without  the  inciting  of  the  Portu-
gals. We  departed  from  thence  the  nineteenth  day  of  the
said  moneth,  determining  to  beate  up  betweene  Pemba

63

A.D.

1608.

Me  I'm  da.

Three

Pangaies
taken.

W.  Revet
stabbed.

Revenge.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

and  the  Maine  of  Melinda,  in  hope  to  finde  the  Current
the  stronger.  But  that  night  (to  our  great  dismaying)  wee
came  aground  upon  the  Coast  of  Melinda,  but  at  that
very  instant  the  wind  did  lander,  so  that  with  the  backing
of  our  Sayles  a  sterne,  our  ship  went  off  to  our  no  little
comfort :  so  that  night  wee  stood  to  the  East-ward  till  day,
our  shippe  (praised  be  God)  having  received  no  harme  at
all.  When  it  was  day,  wee  saw  certaine  showlds,  that  lay
off  the  Easter  end  of  Pemba,  that  we  could  not  weather.
Then  wee  cast  about  and  stood  to  the  North- ward  :  but  in
the  end  we  had  sight  of  three  Barkes  of  Moores,  which  in
their  language  they  call  Pangaies,  which  we  gave  chase
unto  with  our  Ship  and  Boats,  and  in  the  end  fetched
them  up  :  they  strucke  saile  without  any  resistance,  and
with  our  Boates  we  fetched  them  all  aboord  our  shippe,
who  were  in  number  fifty  men,  or  there-abouts.  These
Moores  had  thought  to  have  betrayed  our  shippe,  as  after-
wards did  appeare.  For  the  chiere  of  them  being  in  the
Cabbin  with  our  Master,  and  our  chiefe  Merchant  William
Revet,  and  my  selfe,  he  with  his  long  Knife  which  he  had
hid  privily  about  him,  did  stab  our  Master  Philip  Grove
so  sore,  that  we  had  thought  he  would  not  have  lived  :  but
contrary  to  the  Moores  expectation,  I  ended  his  daies  in
the  place.  The  rest  of  the  Moores  likewise  that  were
within  the  ship,  did  at  that  very  instant  put  their  Tragedy
in  practise,  in  stabbing  of  our  Preacher,  and  one  of  our
Merchants,  but  (praised  be  God)  in  a  small  time  wee  van-
quished them  all,  so  that  there  did  not  escape  above  five  or
sixe  at  the  most,  to  carry  newes  of  their  fellowes,  being  a
just  revenge  for  our  former  wrongs.  For  when  they  did
put  this  wickednesse  in  practise,  we  had  not  aboord  our
shippe  above  fifteene  or  sixteene  men  at  the  most,  all  the
rest  being  imployed  in  our  Boates.  Afterwards,  I  was
credibly  informed  by  the  Portugals,  of  the  great  lamenta-
tion which  was  made  for  these  Moores,  because  they  were
of  the  cheife  Gentlemen  of  all  the  Coast  of  Melinda,  and
of  the  blood  Royall.  Now  after  the  spoile  of  these  Barkes,
we  determined  to  stay  no  longer  on  the  North  side  of

64  "

ALEXANDER SHARPEY  ad.

1609.
Pemba : so  we  put  out  of  the  West-end  of  the  Hand
againe,  determining  to  beate  up  for  the  Hand  of  Socotora  :
but  the  winds  hanging  betweene  the  East,  and  East  South-
East,  and  finding  small  helpe  of  the  Current,  did  altogether
frustrate our determination. Then we determined to
stand  off  to  the  South-ward,  some  two  hundred  or  three
hundred  leagues, thinking  to  finde the  windes  at  East
South-east. But  heere  likewise  we  were  frustrate  of  our
hopes. For  in  the  Offing  we  found  the  wind  to  hang  at
the  East  North-east,  and  at  the  North-East,  and  by  East,
that  we  lay  beating  in  the  Sea,  from  the  twentieth  day  of
December,  unto  the  sixe  and  twentieth  day  of  January,
and  then  it  was  our  good  hap  to  meete  with  certaine  Hands,
which  wee  named  the  Desolate  Hands,  because  there  are The  desolate
not  any  Inhabitants  upon  them. These  Hands  are  (at  the  jesoia'te  0r
least)  some  twelve  or  thirteene  in  number,  and  ought  very  Coco  Nuts  Is
diligently  to  be  sought  of  them,  that  shall  travaile  here-  other  pro-
after,  because  of  the  good  refreshing  that  is  upon  them.  Vlst0n-
Water  is  there  in  great  abundance,  also  great  store  of  Coco
Nuts, great store  of  fresh Fish, and  likewise store of
Turtle-Doves,  which  are  so  tame,  that  one  man  may  take
with  his  hand  twenty  dozen  in  a  day :  also  great  store  of
Palmeto-trees,  so  that  these  Hands  seemed  to  us  an  earthly
Paradise.

Having  refreshed  our  selves  at  the  aforesaid  Hands,
wee  determined  to  follow  our  Voyage,  but  still  were
crossed  with  contrary  winds,  untill  the  thirtieth  day  of
March,  and  then  beginne  the  Westerly  Monsons,  then
we  got  the  Hand  of  Socotora.  But  having  espyed  a
Sayle  which  was  bound  for  the  Red  Sea,  we  gave  chase,
and  in  the  end  fetched  them  up,  being  bound  for  Aden,
being  glad  of  his  company  we  consorted  with  him,  and
determined  to  goe  both  in  company  together.  This
ship  did  belong  to  Diu  :  but  hee  told  us  that  hee  did
belong  to  Surat,  telling  us  certaine  newes  of  Captaine
Hawkins,  and  of  his  being  at  Surat,  whereof  wee  were
very  glad.  Thus  we  held  on  our  determined  course
untill  the  eight  of  Aprill,  at  which  time  we  came  to
in  65  E

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1609.

Aden.  an  Anchor  in  the  Roade  of  Aden,  against  the  Citie. This

Citie  of  Aden  is  under  the  Dominion  of  the  Great  Turke,

and  is  the  Key  of  all  Arabia  foelix. The  same  day  wee

came thither, the Captaine of  the Castle  came aboord

of  us  with  twelve  Souldiers  to  guard  our  Generall  ashore  :

where  when  he  came,  he  was  received  with  all  the  honour

[I.  iii.  230.]  that  might  bee,  not  suffering  him  once  scantly  to  treade

on  the  ground,  but  mounted  him  upon  a  faire  Arabian

Horse, and so in triumph he was carryed to the

Our  Kings Governour  of  the  Towne  : where  after  kind  intertainment,

Letters  to  the ^  Governour  understanding  that  he  had  Letters  from  the

-/'  °  ... Kings Maiestie of England to the Bashaw of  Zenan,

L.enan  ot  o  J  .  ©  .  ,  '

Shan.  whose aboade is fifteene dayes journey up into the

Countrey  from  Aden,  whither  they  were  sent.

We  remayned in  the  Road  of  Aden  untill  the  tenth

Their  Pinnace  dav of  May, and then our Pinnace the Good Hope,

came  also  to wnicri  we  had  lost  before  at  the  Cape  of  Bona  Esperanza,

came  to  us,  having  indured  great  misery,  and  they  had

John  Lujf'ken murthered  most  shamefully  their  Master  John  LufFken,

murdered. because  (they  said)  he  would  not  put  in  with  the  shoare

to  relieve  them,  beeing  then  at  the  Easterne  end  of  Saint

Laurence (but the chiefe cause was for his provision)

and  the  next  day  they  put  in  with  the  shoare,  and  came

to an Anchor where they got both water and other

EdwardHtlles  provision. But heere they left my Servant Edward

fulnnce" HiUeS behi,ld them' wh° (aS theY Said) So[ng to cut
wood, could not  bee  heard  off. The parties that did

the Murther, so soone as they came to us had their

reward, according  to  their  deserts,  being  both executed

aboord  the  Pinnace  where  they  did  the  Murther,  whose

names were Thomas Clarke who was his Mate, and

Francis  Driver  Gunner  of  the  said Pinnace. Thus we

remayned  at  Aden  untill  the  fifteenth  of  the  said  moneth,

and then our General! and Master  determined to goe

for  the  Citie  of  Moka,  which  standeth  up  higher  in  the

Red  Sea  some  fortie  leagues  or  thereabouts.

But  at  our  departure  from  Aden,  the  Governour  did

detayne  two  of  our  Merchants,  whose  names  were  John

66

ALEXANDER SHARPEY

1609.

Jordan and  Philip  Glassecocke,  and  certaine Cloth,  and  John  Jordan

so  sent  them up  altogether to the Basha, where when  a»<j  Philip

they came, they were used most kindly  ; the Basha  ^7^7^™

demanding  of  them,  whether  they  had  brought  the  Great

Turke his Letter with them, they answered him no  :

whereupon he told them he could not  give them any

leave  to  settle  a  Factorie  : but  for  the  cloth  which  you

have  heere,  I  will  take  this  for  a  present,  because  your

ship  is  the  first  of  the  English  Nation, that  ever  came

into these parts. And seeing you are come, I give

you leave to  sell your goods, and  buy  what  you  will,

and  so  to  depart  at  your  pleasure  Custome  free,  because

of  the  cloth  which  I  detaine  in my  hands. Thus  with

much trouble,  (because the Westerly Monson beganne

to come in, and then the Current runneth out  of  the

Red Sea)  in  the  end  we  passed  the  Straights  being  not  They  passe  the

above  one  mile  and  an  halfe  broad  at  the  most.  hR>l%<

The eleventh of June we came to anchor in the  They  arrive  at
Roade  of  Moka,  where  we  were  most  kindly  entertayned,  Moka  or
and  the  same  day  our  Generall  went  ashoare,  where  he  Moka.
was most lovingly received. This Citie of Moka is
the chiefs Staple for all Indian Trade. For all the
goods that are brought to Cairo and to Alexandria
come  from  thence. We  stayed  in  this  Roade  of  Moka
in  trimming  of  our  Pinnace  untill  the  sixe  and  twentieth
day  of  July,  and  then  our  Generall and Master  deter-
mined to  follow  their  Voyage  for  Cambaya,  sore  against
the  mindes of  the Company, being the chiefe Officers
of  the ship. That  night  through the head-strongnesse
of  our  Master,  we  lost  two  Anchors.

The  seventh  day  of  August  we  came  to  the  Hand
of  Socotora,  where  we  had  so  much  winde  at  South,
and  South  South-east,  that  we  were  hardly  able  with
our  ship  to  keepe  the  shore,  which  our  Pinnace  not
being  able  to  doe,  was  blowne  off,  having  not  above
two  or  three  dayes  victuals  in  her  at  the  most.  Whilest
we  lay  at  this  Hand  of  Socotora  to  get  in  a  Boates  lading
of  water,  and  two  or  three  Boates  of  stones  for  ballast,

67

a.ix  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1609.

we  had  such  forcible  gales  of  wind,  that  we  broke  two
more  of  our  best  Anchors,  having  lost  (as  is  aforesaid)
two  before  in  the  Red  Sea  :  so  vehemently  doe  those
South-west  windes  blow  at  that  Hand.  In  that  time  of
the  yeare,  we  now  having  but  two  left  to  supply  our
uses  withall.  We  stayed  at  the  Hand  of  Socotora  untill
the  twentieth  day  of  August,  and  then  we  wayed  and
directed  our  course  for  Cambaya.

Septemb.  ^he  second  day  of  September  we  fell  with  the  Coast

of  Diu,  some  eight  leagues  to  the  Eastward  of  Diu,
we  steered  alongst  the  shoare  some  seven  leagues  more
to  the  Eastward,  and  then  came  to  an  Anchor  a  head-
land. The  third  day  we  sent  our  Skiffe  ashore,  where
the  people  resorted  unto  us,  having  certaine  conference
with  them,  as  also  buying  of  them  sheepe  and  other
things.  They  understanding  that  we  were  bound  for
Surat,  one  of  them  came  aboord  desiring  of  our  Generall
passage  to  Surat,  as  also  certifying  our  Generall,  that
the  way  was  very  dangerous,  offering  him  for
seven  pieces  of  eight,  to  fetch  a  Pilot  which  should
conduct  the  ship  safely  to  the  Port.  But  (being  ruled
in  most  things  by  our  Master)  hee  not  regarding  the
words  of  the  aforesaid  Moore  or  Bannian.  The  fourth
day  we  wayed  Anchor  about  three  of  the  Clocke  in  the
afternoone,  at  the  last  quarter  Ebbing  ;  (if  we  had  taken
the  first  quarter  floud,  we  should  surely  have  had  water

They  run  upon  over  all those shoulds) so  that  night  we  runne  on  the

the  should*  of  snoulds  and  strooke  our  Rudder  off,  and  the  next  day
being  the  fift  day  of  September,  wee  lost  our  ship  also,
that  night  we  forsook  our  ship,  and  betook  us  to  our
two  Boats,  being  a  thing  most  miraculous,  that  so  many
men  should  be  saved  in  two  such  small  Boates,  wee  beeing
at  the  least  eightene  leagues  from  the  shore. Thus  was

Asccntion  lost,  this  tall  ship  lost  to  the  great  hinderance  of  the  worship-
full  Company,  and  to  the  utter  undoing  of  all  us  the
poore  Mariners,  being  altogether  overthrowne  with  all
the  treasure  and  goods,  both  of  the  Merchants  and  the
poore  Companies  beeing  so  farre  from  our  Native  Coun-

68

ALEXANDER SHAHPEY

1609.

trey. We  remayned  upon  the  Sea  in our  Boates,  until  1

the  sixth  day  about  foure  of  the  clocke  in  the  afternoone, [I.  uL  231.]

and  then we  discovered  Land  which  we  made  unto,  with

all  the  means we could  possibly, indevouring the  best

we  could  to  fall  with  the River  of  Surat. But  note  how

the Lord did preserve us, having as I said before, Gods  mercifull

delivered  us  from  the  danger  of  the  Sea,  hee  would  not

now  suffer  us to fall into the hands  of  our Enemies,

I meane  the Portugalls, who lay at that time at the

Barre  of  Surat,  with five sayle of  Frigats to take  our

Boates  at  our  comming  ashore, for  they  had  intelligence

of our ships comming before. For contrary to our

mindes  wee  fell  with  the River  of  Gandeuee  some  five  Gandeuee.

leagues  to  the Southward  of  the  Barre  of  Surat,  where

we  were  kindly entertayned of the Governour of the

Towne. Heere  wee  heard  likewise  of  the comming  of

our Pinnace  into the same River, and  of  her  fetching

away  by  the  Portugalls : but  all  the  men  had  forsaken

her,  and  were  gone  to  Surat  by  Land.

The  Govenour  of  this  Towne  of  Gandeuee  is  Tfie  Twe  °f
a  Bannyan,  and  one  of  those  kind  of  people,  that  an  euee'
observe  the  Law  of  Pythagoras.  They  hold  it  a  great
sinne  to  eate  of  any  thing  that  hath  life  or  breath,  but
live  of  that  which  the  Earth  naturally  affoordeth  of  it
selfe.  They  likewise  honour  the  Cow  and  have  her  in
great  estimation  among  them,  and  also  observe  the
ancient  custome  of  burning:  of  their  dead.  It  hath
likewise  in  old  time  beene  a  great  custome  amongst
them,  for  the  women  so  soone  as  their  Husbands  were
dead,  to  burne  themselves  alive  with  him  :  but  now  of
late  yeares  they  have  learned  more  wit,  and  doe  not  use
it  so  commonly.  Yet  those  women  that  doe  it  not,
have  their  haire  cut,  and  ever  after  are  held  for  no
honest  women,  for  that  they  will  not  accompany  their
Husbands  into  the  other  World,  as  they  say.

The  seventh  day  wee  departed  out  of  this  Towne  to
travell  for  Surat,  which  might  bee  some  fortie  miles  or
thereabout,  and  the  ninth  day  came  thither  where  William

69

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1609.

Finch keeping the  Factory,  met  us; but  Captaine  Haw-

Agra.  kins  was  gone  up  to  the  King  to  Agra.  This  Citie  of
Agra  is  from  Surat  some  thirtie  dayes  journey  :  there
the  King  is  resident  and  keepeth  his  Court.  Heere  at
Surat  our  Generall  with  our  Company  stayed  till  the
latter  end  of  September,  and  then  himselfe  with  the  rest
of  our  Company  went  from  Surat,  and  tooke  their
journey  up  for  the  Citie  of  Agra,  so  to  travell  by  the
way  of  Persia  for  England.  But  I  holding  no  fit  course
for  mee,  determined  with  my  selfe  to  take  some  other
course  for  the  getting  into  my  Countrey.  Whilest  I
was  in  many  determinations,  it  pleased  God  of  his  good-
nesse  to  send  a  Father  of  the  Order  of  Saint  Paul  being
a  Portugall,  who  was  come  from  Cambaya  to  Surat  by
Land,  with  whom  I  came  acquainted,  he  promising  me,
that  if  I  would  commit  my  selfe  into  his  hands,  hee
would  send  mee  home  into  my  Countrey,  or  at  the
leastwise  into  Portugall,  which  promise  he  did  accomplish
most  faithfully.  In  company  of  this  Father,  my  selfe
and  three  more  of  our  Company,  (Richard  Mellis  who
dyed  in  the  Caracke  in  the  way  homeward  bound,  John
Elmor  and  one  Robert  Fox)  departed  from  Surat  the
seventh  day  of  October,  and  came  into  the  strong  Towne

Daman,  and  Fortresse  of  Daman,  where  once  againe  I  saw  our
Pinnace  the  Good  Hope,  that  wee  had  built  at  the  Cape

Chaul. of  Bona Esperanza : from  Daman wee  came to Chaul

Goa.  from thence  to  Goa, the eighteenth day of  November.

The  ninth  day  of  January  we  were  imbarked  in  a  Caracke

Our  Lady  called  Our Ladie  of  Pittie,  beeing the Admirall  of  the

of  Pine.  p}ee(-e  0f  foure  sayle,  and  so  departed  the  Coast  of
India.  The  eight  and  twentieth  day  of  January  wee
passed  the  Equinoctiall  upon  the  Coast  of  India,  and  the
one  and  twentieth  of  March  we  fell  with  the  land  in
thirtie three degrees and an halfe, some five leagues

Cape  dc Eastward  of  Cape  de  Agulas,  where wee  lay  with  con-

suc trary  windes, untill  the  second  of  Aprill,  and  then  wee

were incountred with a mightie storme at the West

South-west,  which blew so vehemently that wee were

70

ALEXANDER SHARPEY

i  (j  i  <-,  .

forced  to  beare  up  sixe hourcs  before  the  Sea,  and  then

it  pleased God to send us faire weather. The fourth

day  of  Aprill we fell with land againe in thirtie  foure

degrees  and  fortie  minutes. Then  we  lay  driving  to  and

againe  in the Sea, with contrary  windes, and in sight

of  the  shore, so that wee were twice  within three  or

foure  leagues  of  the  Cape  of  Bona  Esperanza,  yet  could

not  possibly get about. Thus we lay driving  to  and

againe  in  the Sea,  and  in  sight  of  the  shore,  untill  the

nineteenth  day  of  Aprill,  and  then it  pleased God  that

we  doubled  the  foresaid  Cape  of  Bona  Esperanza,  to  our  They  doubled

no  little comfort, being in great despayre before,  and  *e nic  l
r  . \  &.  , b  .  .  r,  /  . .  Bona  Esper-

rearing  our  wintering  at  Mosambique,  which  is  a  common  anxa

thing  amongst  the  Portugalls.  The  seven  and  twentieth
of  Aprill  we  passed  the  Tropicke  of  Capricorne,  and  the
ninth  day  of  May  wee  came  to  an  Anchor  at  the  Hand
of  Saint  Helena,  which  standeth  in  fifteene  degrees  of
Southerly  latitude ;  where  we  stayed  untill  the  fifteenth
of  the  said  moneth  in  watering  and  then  we  weighed
and  directed  our  course  for  the  passing  of  the  Equi-
noctiall :  and  the  second  of  June  we  passed  the  same.

The  sixe  and  twentieth  of  the  said  moneth  we  passed
the  Tropicke  of  Cancer with the winde at Northeast,
which the Portugalls call the generall wind, and the
sixteenth  of  July  we  passed  by  the Westerly  Hands  by
judgement  of  the Pilot in the Caracke, beeing  in the
latitude  of  fortie  degrees  and  odde  minutes  to  the  North-
wards, we  not  seeing  any  land  since  our  departure  from
Saint  Helena. So (praysed  be God) the third  day  of  The  third  of
August,  wee made the Land of  Portugall, being not  August  they
above  two  leagues  off  the  Rocke, to  our  no  little  com-  nshone
fort. And  the  same  day  we  came  to  an  Anchor  in  the 1610.
Road  of  Caskalles. I  the same  day  imbarked  my  selfe
in  a  Boat, and went  ashore, and  so  escaped  the  hands
of  the  Portugalls. I  remayned  in  Lisbone  secretly  untill
the thirteenth day of the said moneth, and then I
imbarked  my  selfe in a  ship  of  London,  with Master
Steed, which was thither bound. And the same day  [I.  iii.  232.]

71

A.D.
l6lO.

The  Compatiy
divide  them-
selves.

W.  Nichols
travelleth  to
Masulipatan.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

wee  wayed  Anchor  in  the  Bay  of  Wayers  there  was  a
Boat  full  of  Portugalls  to  have  taken  the  ship,  and  so
to  have  carryed  us  ashore,  having  had  intelligence  of
our  departure.  But  we  setting  sayle,  put  forth  to  Sea,
and  escaped  the  danger,  and  praysed  be  God  arrived  at
our  long  desired  home,  the  seventeenth  day  of  September,
Anno  1 6 10.  It  being  two  yeares  and  six  monethes  since
our  departure  out  of  England.

§.  11.

The  report  of  William  Nicols  a  Mariner  in  the
Ascention  which  travelled  from  Bramport  by
Land  to  Masulipatan,  written  from  his  mouth
at  Bantam  by  Henry  Moris,  Sept.  12.  161 2.
The  former  and  greater  part  is  the  same  in
substance  with  that  of  T.  Jones,  and  therefore
omitted.

He  Company  departed  from  our  Generall,  not  able
to  provide  for  them,  and  left  the  rest  to  stay  by
him  being  very  sicke.  Some  went  to  one  place,
and  some  to  another,  and  some  backe  againe  for  Surat.
And  I  my  selfe  being  one  of  them  that  were  willing
to  take  the  best  course  for  my  selfe  that  I  could,  I
told  them  I  would  travell  (God-willing)  to  Masulipatan,
for  I  knew  there  was  an  Holland  Factorie  there,  as  I
had  heard  at  Surat  before  we  came  from  thence.  I  could
not  finde  any  Christian  to  travell  over  Land  with  me ;
and  inquiring  at  Bramport  ;  if  there  were  any  that  would
travell  to  Masulipatan,  I  met  with  company  which  were
travelling  that  way  :  but  it  was  such  company  that  few
Englishmen  would  travell  with  them.  For  they  were
three  Jewes :  but  necessitie  hath  no  law.  After  I  had
agreed  to  travell  with  them,  I  thought,  if  I  travelled
with  any  money  the  Dogges  would  cut  my  throat.  So
I  made  away  with  all  my  money,  and  attyred  my  selfe
in the Habit  of  a  Turke, and tooke  my  journey  with

72

WILLIAM NICOLS  a.d.

1610.

those  Dogges,  without  any  peny  of  money  in  my  Purse  :
and  travelling  with  them,  foure  monethes,  had  nothing  to
eate  but  only  such  food  as  the  Jewes  gave  me,  and  many
times  when  I  was  hungry  they  would  give  mee  no  meate,
so  that  I  was  inforced  to  eate  such meate  as  they  gave
their Camels, and no better, and glad I could  get  it,
nay, sometimes I was infored to be in fee with the
Camel  Keeper  to  give  me  a  little. In  this  miserable  case
I  travelled with these  Dogges  foure monethes : some-
times they would say, come let us cut this Dogges
throate,  and  afterwards  open  his  belly,  for  he  hath  eaten
his  Gold  :  two  would  have  cut  my  throate,  but  the  third
was  an  honest  Dogge, for he would not consent  unto
it. So  with  many a weary  journey and hungry  belly,
after  a long  and dangerous travell we  came  safe unto  Hee  arriveth
Masulipatan,  where  I  presently  discharged  my  selfe  from  at usu'~
these  cruell Dogges, and came unto the Dutch house  is  ^n^/y
where  the Captaine used mee very kindly, and gave  intreated  at
mee  clothes,  and  meate  and  drinke  five  moneths  before  the  Hollanders
any  shipping  came there. At length there came  three  House-
ships  to  Masulipatan,  the  one  called  the  Hay,  the  other
the  Sunne,  and  the  third  was  a  Frigot,  which  they  had
taken  in  the Streights  of  Malacca, and the Sunne  and
the  Frigot being bound for Bantam. I intreated  the
Master  to  grant me passage, and I would labour  for
my  passage,  who  told  mee  very  kindly,  that he  would
not  only  give  me  passage,  but  would  also  give  me  wages  :
for  the which I gave him great thankes, and  so  came
aboord. Not  long  after,  we  set  sayle  from thence,  and
came to Bantam the sixth day of September, 16 10.  He  arriveth  at
being Thursday, and came presently to the English  ^-^/'it'io'
House  with  joyfull  heart. 16 10.

In  my  travell  (with  the  three  Jewes)  overland,  these
faire  Townes  I  passed,  which  I  bare  in  minde,  for  I  could
neyther  write  nor  reade.

First,  after  I  came  from  Bramport,  I  came  to  Jevaport,
from  thence  to  Huidare,  from  thence  to  Golacaude,  and
so  to  Masulipatania.

73

A.D.

l608.

IMKCIIAS HIS PILGRIMES

§. III.

The  unhappie  Voyage  of  the  Vice-Admirall,  the
Union  outward  bound,  till  shee  arrived  at
Priaman,  reported  by  a  Letter  which  Master
Samuel  Bradshaw  sent  from  Priaman,  by
Humphry  Bidulphe,  the  eleventh  day  of
March,  1609.  written  by  the  said  Henry
Moris  at  Bantam,  Sept.  the  fourteenth, 1610.

Ou  have  alreadie  heard  of  the  passage  of  the  two
ships  (the  Ascention  and  the  Union)  from  England,
to  the  Cape  De  Bona  Esperanza,  but  after  their

[I.

233-]

They  arrived
at  the  Bay  of
S.dugustinehi
Madagascar.

The  treachery
of  the  people  of
Zanzibar.

departure  out  of  the  Roade  of  Saldania,  and  of  their
loosing  one  another  in  doubling  of  the  Cape,  as  yet  you
have  not  heard.  Therefore  I  thought  good  to  make  some
relation  thereof,  as  well  as  of  the  other,  and  that  truly,
as  from  other  men  report  I  have  heard ;  and  thus  it  was.
After  they  had  lost  one  another  by  stormy  weather,  in
doubling  of  the  Cape,  the  Union  in  that  storme  sprang
her  Maine-Mast,  and  in  the  middest  of  the  storme  they
were  inforced  to  fish  it  againe  :  by  reason  whereof,  they
lost  the  company  of  their  Admirall,  and  at  last,  being
without  hope  either  to  meete  with  Ship  or  Pinnasse
there-abouts,  considering  that  the  storme  continued,  they
shaped  their  course  for  the  Bay  of  S.  Augustine,  being
upon  Madagascar.  Where  being  arrived,  they  went
ashore,  and  had  good  refreshing,  and  stayed  there  twenty
daies,  being  in  good  hope  to  have  met  our  Admirall  and
the  Pinnasse  there,  but  all  their  hopes  were  frustrate.
Then  being  out  of  all  hope  to  have  their  company,  they
set  sayle  from  thence,  and  directed  their  course  for
Zanzibar,  in  hope  to  meete  their  Generall  there  :  where
being  arrived,  they  went  on  shoare,  and  at  first  were
kindly  entertained  :  but  at  their  next  going  ashoare,  they
lay  in  Ambush,  and  as  soone  as  they  landed,  salied  out
upon  them,  and  killed  the  Purser  presently,  and  one
Manner,  and tooke one of  their  Merchants Prisoner ;

74

SAMUEL RRADSIIAW  a.u.

1609.
yet  by  great  chance,  they  gat  off  their  Boate  and  came
aboord.  The  names  of  them  that  were  slaine,  were
Richard  Kenu,  Purser,  the  Mariners  name  I  have  for-
gotten, but  the  Merchants  name  that  was  taken  Prisoner,
was  Richard  Wicham  :  they  put  to  Sea  about  the  moneth
of  February  1608.  with  the  winds  at  North-east  and
Northerly,  just  against  them  as  they  should  goe  for
Socotora.

Now  after  they  had  spent  much  time  at  Sea,  and  little
or  nothing  in  the  way, (and  the  most  part  of  the  men
very  much  troubled  with  the  Scurvy)  the  Captaine  pur-
posed, and  accordingly  bare  up  the  Helme  for  the  North ^Aey  bare
part  of  S.  Laurance,  determining  to  goe  for  the  Bay  of  b"k'  a^aine
Antongil :  but  they  fell  on  the  West  side  of  the  Hand,  ence  '
intending to recover their almost-lost men there, and
spend the unprofitable Monson. Upon which end of
S.  Laurance,  they  fell  into  an  exceeding  great  Bay,  which The  great  Bay
afterwards  they  understood  to  be  called  by  the  Countrey  °fCan<lU0-
people Canquomorra, a Countrey very fruitfull and  ^oamaro
pleasant to behold. The very  first view thereof, gave
great content to all their men in generall  : who no
sooner  arrived in the Bay, but within short time had
conference  with the Country  people, and at first  they
profered them great kindnesse, but after it  proved to
the  contrary. Whereupon Master  Rowles  the  Captaine,
and  Master  Richard  Reve,  chiefe  Merchant,  and  Jeffrey
Carlel,  with  three  others,  which  were  attendant  upon  the
Captaine,  adventured  to  goe  ashore  unto  the  King : and
that  made  them  the  more  venterous,  because  divers  times
before,  all  the  Merchants  had  beene  ashore  at  the  Kings
Palace  (in  their SkifFe  and  long  Boate)  and  spake  with
the  King,  who  profered  them  great  kindnesse,  and  came
aboord  againe,  as  safe  as  if  they  had  beene  in  their  owne
Native Countrey of England. Samuel Bradshaw had  Samuel  Brad-
beene often imployed about businesse unto the King :  sfiaiV-
yet  (it  pleased  God)  at  this  time,  the  Captaine  had  some
other occasion of businesse for him,  and  so  staid  him
aboord (a happy turne for him :) for they  no  sooner

75

A.D.

1609.

The  Captaine

and  sixe  others

betrayed.

Abundance  of
Pratves  £ff
great  Boatcs.

Sixe  Boates  of
the  enemies
destroyed.

A  fight  for
two  houres.

They  stayed
14.  dates
longer  in  this
Bay.

A  second

attempt  made
by  the  enemies.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

came  ashore,  but  they  were  betrayed  by  the  Countrey
people  :  but  by  the  great  Providence  of  the  Almightie
the  Boates  escaped,  and  presently  came  aboord,  and  in-
formed them  of  all  that  happened :  Where  they  no
sooner  had  made  knowne  unto  them  this  dolefull  newes,
but  presently  they  saw  such  abundance  of  Prawes,  and
great  Boates,  comming  out  of  the  River  unto  them,  that
it  was  admirable  to  behold.  The  Master  spake  unto  the
Gunner  to  make  the  Ordnance  ready,  which  was  soone
effected.  This  Fleete  of  Infidels  came  rowing  up  unto
their  Shippe,  as  though  presently  they  would  have
boorded  them  :  but  by  the  diligence  of  the  Gunner  and
his  Mates,  he  made  them  retire,  by  sinking  of  some
halfe  dozen  of  their  Boates,  and  they  retired  backe  againe
as  fast,  as  if  they  had  beene  Sheepe  chased  by  the  Wolfe.
But  before  we  made  such  massacre  amongst  them,  they
came  up  in  the  face  of  our  Ordnance,  and  we  thought
verily  they  would  have  taken  us  all :  for  the  fight  con-
tinued (at  least)  two  houres  very  dangerous,  till  we
plagued  them  so  with  our  Ordnance :  and  then,  he
accounted  himselfe  happiest  that  first  could  cleere  him-
selfe,  and  wee  continually  sent  after  them,  as  farre  as
the  Ordnance  would  reach.  After  they  were  gone  from
us  in  this  first  attempt,  we  stayed  in  the  Bay  some  foure-
teene  daies,  being  in  good  hope  to  recover  our  lost  men
againe,  in  which  time  we  lost  seven  men  more  through
a  suddaine  disease,  which  daunted  us  more  then  the
malice  of  those  Infidels.  The  men  which  died,  were
thev  that  wrought  so  lustily  about  the  Ordnance  in  the
fight,  that  within  two  daies  they  were  all  throwne  over-
boord.  These  crosses  comming  together,  and  no  hope
to  recover  our  lost  men,  they  thought  it  folly  to  make
any  longer  stay  there,  and  therefore  presently  made  hast
away.  And  being  not  throughly  watered,  they  thought
good  to  spend  a  little  time  in  another  place  thereby:  but
betore  they  could  dispatch,  they  attempted  against  them
the  second  time,  with  a  great  multitude  of  Boates,  and
many  of  them great  vessels,  and  so  thicke  pestered  with

76

SAMUEL BRADSHAW  a.o.

1609.

men,  that  it  was  wonderfull  :  but  they  liked  their  first
entertainement  so  well,  that  they  cared  not  for  comming
too  neere  them  the  second  time,  but  went  all  on  shoare,
and  placed  themselves  to  looke  upon  the  Ship.  Then
presently  perceiving  what  their  intended  purpose  was,
and  fearing  some  mischiefe  in  the  night,  they  weighed
and  stood  in  for  the  shore  (where  all  the  Infidels  sate)
and  gave  them  a  whole  broad  side  for  a  farewell :  which
fell  among  the  thickest  of  them,  and  in  their  sight  made
such  lanes  among  them,  that  they  soone  forsooke  their
places,  and  gat  out  of  their  sight  with  as  much  speed  as
might  be :  From  thence  they  tacked  and  stood  off  at  They  depart
Sea,  leaving  behind  them  foureteene  men,  seven  betrayed,  romi>-
and  seven  that  died  with  sicknesse.  Then  being  cleare  rj  ;;;  '  -1
from  those  Infidels,  they  directed  their  course  for
Socotora,  but  by  some  negligence,  for  want  of  hulling
in  betimes,  the  winds  tooke  them  short,  that  they  could
not  fetch  it,  but  they  fell  more  to  the  East-ward  upon
the  Coast  of  Arabia,  which  was  about  the  fourth  of  June,  They  fell  upon
and  the  Winter  Monson  being  come,  they  could  not,  ™J  Coast  °J
nor  durst  goe  for  Cambaya :  Moreover,  upon  that  Coast,
they  could  not  finde  any  good  place  to  harbour  them-
selves in,  untill  the  Winter  were  past.  Wherefore,  keep-
ing within  sight  of  the  Coast  foure  daies,  sometimes
being  in  danger  of  the  shore,  they  thought  it  but  folly
to  neglect  the  time  any  longer ;  and  therefore  resolved
upon  some  course  to  be  taken,  for  the  best  performance
of  the  Voyage.  So  the  Master  calling  the  best,  and  most
principall  men  in  the  shippe,  and  such  as  were  best  ex-
perienced in  those  affaires,  they  presently  concluded
altogether  to  goe  for  Achen  :  and  being  in  hope  there,
to  meete  with  some  Guzurats,  to  barter  their  English
Commodities  with  them,  directing  their  course  for  that
place, they arrived there the seaven and twentieth of  They  arrive  at

July. And  within  seven daies after their arrivall,  they  f  ™
111.  , *r-  •  i  -r»  i  Sumatra.

had admittance to the King,  with a Present that was

given,  (which  they  were  inforced  to  doe  somewhat  largely) The  Hollan-

because the Hollanders sought to crosse them, and  den  opposition.

77

A.D.
1609.

Priam  an.

Griffin
Mauris  the
Master  died.

Tecoo.

They  in  the
Union  returne
from  Sumatra
for  England.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

debarre  them  from  Trade.  Their  aspiring  minds  could
not  have  any  to  Trade  into  India,  but  themselves  ;  there-
fore after  Master  Bradshaw  had  beene  with  the  King,  and
spent  some  time  with  them  at  Achen,  he  fell  to  Trade
with  the  Guzurats  for  some  of  their  Commodities,  for
our  English  Cloath  and  Lead,  in  trucke  for  Baftas,  blacke
and  white,  which  is  Guzurat  Cloath,  which  they  sell  in
those  parts.  After  they  had  stayed  there  some  small
time,  and  trucked  with  the  Guzurats  for  some  Com-
modities, they  tooke  their  leave,  and  set  sayle  from
thence,  and  came  unto  Priaman,  and  had  Trade  there
in  short  space,  to  their  hearts  content.  And  although
Fortune  had  crossed  them  all  the  Voyage,  yet  God  at
length  brought  them  unto  a  pleasant  Port  to  make  some
Trade  and  benefit  of  their  Voyage.  Heere  they  staied
and  tooke  in  Pepper,  and  at  length  laded  their  shippe,
and  might  long  before,  if  there  had  not  beene  a  mutiny
among  the  Company,  for  the  Saylers  would  doe  as
pleased  themselves.  But  Master  Bradshaw  used  them
with  such  faire  words,  that  (at  length)  they  gat  that
they  came  for.  Heere  Griffin  Mauris  (the  Master)
dyed  :  all  businesse  being  ended,  Master  Bradshaw  sent
Humphrey  Biddulph  unto  Bantam,  and  Silvester  Smith
to  beare  him  company,  with  some  remainder  of  goods,
which  they  could  not  sell  at  Priaman,  nor  at  Tecoo :
not  long  after  that  he  had  taken  his  leave  of  them,  they
shaping  their  course  for  Bantam,  in  a  China  Junke,  he
presently  set  sayle  for  England,  in  the  month  of  February
1609.

The  lamentable  successe  of  the  said  ship  and  Voyage,
appeareth  by  the  Letters  following.

Laus  Deo  in Morlaix,  the  first  of  March  161 1.

BRother  Hide,  this  day  is  come  to  our  hands  a  Letter
from  Odwen,  written  by  one  William  Bagget  an
Irish-man,  dwelling  in  the  same  Towne,  advising  us  of
most  lamentable  newes  of  a  shippe  of  London,  called  the
Union,  which  is  upon  this  Coast,  about  two  leagues  from

73

THE WRECK OF THE 'UNION  a.d.

161  .

the  said  Odwen :  which  the  men  of  the  Towne  per-
ceiving, sent  out  two  Boates  unto  her  ;  and  when  they
came  there,  they  found  that  it  was  a  shippe  come  from
the  East-India,  richly  laden  with  Pepper  and  other  goods,
having  in  her  but  onely  foure  men  alive,  of  which  foure
men,  one  is  an  Indian,  and  other  three  dead  in  the  shippe :
which  the  foure  living  men  through  feeblenesse,  were  not
able  to  cast  over-boord,  nor  were  scarce  able  to  speake  :
so  the  men  of  the  two  Boates  have  brought  the  shippe
into  the  Roade  of  Odwen.  And  as  this  Irish-man  writeth,
they  of  the  Towne  have  unladen  the  most  part  of  the
goods,  and  having  directed  his  Letter  to  some  English
Merchants  in  this  place,  to  repaire  thither  with  all  ex-
pedition, to  see  the  ordering  of  the  ship  and  goods,  as
belonging  to  the  East-Indian  Company.  This  Letter,
is  confirmed  by  one  other  Letter  written  in  French  by
the  Bayliffe  of  Kimper,  and  directed  to  one  of  this
Towne,  which  I  have  seene  :  And  therefore  we  thought
it  good  to  send  three  Copies  of  this  Irish-mans  Letter,
by  three  severall  Barkes,  to  the  end  that  the  Merchants
may  be  advertised,  and  give  order  that  their  goods  and
shippe  may  be  in  safetie,  for  it  is  to  be  doubted,  that
the  rude  people  will  make  a  wracke  of  her.  I  thinke  it
not  amisse  therefore,  that  they  send  to  the  Court  of
France,  to  procure  the  Kings  Authoritie,  for  I  feare
there  will  be  much  trouble  about  the  matter.  In  the
meane  time,  my  selfe,  with  George  Robbins  will  ride
downe  to  see  in  what  state  all  things  are,  and  doe  the
best  we  can  in  the  Merchants  behalfe,  till  they  send
some  one  with  procuration,  good  and  ample  for  the
following  of  this  businesse,  as  in  their  discretion  shall
seeme  fitting.  The  ship  is  reported  to  be  of  three  or
foure  hundred  Tunnes,  and  hath  three  Deckes,  I  doubt
wee  shall  finde  her  shrewdly  riffled  when  we  shall  come
there.  The  importunate  writing  both  of  the  Irish-man
and  the  Bayliffe  of  Kimper,  hath  caused  us  to  take  this
journey:  And  we  doe  it  the  rather  in  consideration  of
the Company, presuming that they will consider our

79

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1610.

charge,  because  we  have  both  emplored  friends,  and  pro-
cured Money  in  the  place,  to  satisfie  such  as  have  taken
paines  in  saving  of  the  shippe  and  goods  if  need  be.
Notwithstanding,  I  would  wish  that  they  send  some  with
expedition  by  way  of  Rouen,  with  other  provision  of
Money  :  for  that  this  is  no  place  of  Exchange  as  you
know,  where  Money  may  be  had  at  all  times.  I  had
rather  give  fiftie  pound,  then  take  this  journey  at  this
[I.  iii.  235.]  time,  because  I  have  much  goods  upon  my  hands  as  I
partly  wrote  to  you  in  my  last.  The  Masters  name  of
the  shippe  is  Edmund  White,  the  Masters  Mate,  Thomas
Duckmanton,  and  the  other  Samuel  Smith,  and  the
Indian.  They  are  in  very  pittifull  taking,  and  in  great
want  of  Money,  neither  can  they  be  masters  of  their
goods :  therefore  let  them  send  men  of  good  experience
about  this  businesse.  And  thus  being  in  some  hast  readie
to  take  Horse,  I  commit  you  to  the  Lords  protection,
resting your  assured  friend  alwaies  to  command,

Bernard  Couper.

Neglect  no  time  in  making  this  knowne
to  the  Company.

Directed to Master Thomas Hide, Merchant in
London.

February 16 10. touching  the  Union  at
Andierne.

THe  eighth  day  of  February,  I  came  over  the  Pole-
head  of  Bourdeaux,  and  the  eleventh  of  the  same
I  lost  my  fore-mast,  my  Botsprit,  and  my  Ruther :  the
same  night  I  put  into  Olderyearne,  the  thirteenth  day  the
French-men  brought  the  Union  of  London  upon  the
Rockes  :  the  foureteenth  day  I  went  aboord  the  Union  with
my  Boate,  and  the  French-men  had  beene  aboord  foure
daies ;  the  same  time  I  brought  Samuel  Smith  on  shoare,
Thomas  Duttonton,  and  the  Master  Edmond  White.  The
fifteenth  day  I  got  William  Bagget  my  Merchant,  to  write
me  a  Letter  to  Morles  ;  the  eighteenth  day  the  Letter  was

80

THE WRECK OF THE 'UNION'  a.d.

1610.

sent,  and  I  paid  two  Crownes  for  the  carriage  :  the  twen-
tieth, the  Indian  dyed,  and  the  same  day  I  buried  him  :
the  one  and  twentieth  day,  the  Master  died,  and  I  buried
him:  the  two  and  twentieth  came  Master  Roberts,  and
Master  Couper :  the  sixe  and  twentieth,  Master  Couper
and  Master  Roberts  went  to  Morles.  Againe,  the  fourth
day  of  March,  William  Coarey,  the  Hoast  of  Master
Couper  and  Master  Roberts:  the  fifth,  I  went  aboord
with  my  Boates,  and  William  Coarey,  at  low  water,  I
went  into  the  shippes  hold  at  low  water,  and  I  brought
an  Example  of  the  worst  Pepper :  the  sixth  day,  I  came
from  Olde-yearne ;  the  eighth,  I  came  to  Morles  :  the
seventeenth,  came  Master  Hide  to  Morles :  the  one
and  twentieth,  I  came  from  Morles  ;  the  two  and  twen-
tieth at  night,  I  came  into  the  He  of  Wight  :  the  foure
and  twentieth,  I  came  to  Hampton :  the  eight  and
twentieth  day,  I  came  to  London.

Your  loving  Friend,

William  Wotton.

THey  saved  after  the  spoile  of  the  Brittons  almost
two  hundred  Tunnes  of  Pepper,  some  Benjamin,
and  some  China  Silkes,  which  they  bought  at  Techou
in  Sumatra,  out  of  a  shippe  of  China.  They  touched
outward  bound  at  Saldania,  where  they  stayed  long  in
setting  up  a  Shallop  or  Pinnasse,  they  lost  Master  Rowles
in  S.  Laurence :  they  lost  more  men  at  Zanzibar :  they
laded  Pepper  at  Achen,  Priaman,  Passeman,  and  Tecou :
there  they  bought  Silke  of  a  shippe  of  China.  In  their
returne,  they  met  with  Sir  Henry  Middleton,  having
thirtie  sixe  men  in  reasonable  good  state  aboord  then  :
they  delivered  unto  him  certaine  Chests  of  Silver :  They
missed  the  He  of  S.  Helena,  most  of  their  men  dyed,
on  this  side  Cape  Verde :  ten  English,  and  foure
Guzarats  were  taken  out  of  her  by  a  Barke  of  Bustol
and  a  Scot.  There  landing  in  the  Road  of  Anderne,
and  other  matters  are  before  set  downe :  The  shippe
after  the  Pepper  goods  were  taken  out  and  dried  was
in  81  F

A.D.

1 6  io.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

found  by  Master  Simonson,  a  skilfull  Ship-wright,  sent
thither  of"  purpose,  to  save  it  if  it  might  be,  utterly
unserviceable :  The  Ordnance,  Anchors,  and  other  fur-
nitures were  saved.

Thomas  Duckmanton  the  Masters  Mate,  Robert
Wilson  of  Detford,  Bullock  the  Surgeon,  Jacob  Peter-
son, and  five  English-men  more  remaine  alive,  of  seventie
five  that  went  out  of  England :  three  or  foure  Guzarats
also  came  home  alive.

§  IIII.

The  Voyage  of  M.  Joseph  Salbancke  through
India,  Persia,  part  of  Turkie,  the  Persian-
Gulfe,  and  Arabia,  1609.  Written  unto  Sir
Thomas  Smith.

*  Robert
Covert  teas  his
companion  to
Bagdat,  and
hath  written  a
Treatise  of  this
whole  Voyage,
which  beeing
printed  I  have
omitted.
Sabay.

[I.  iii.  236.]
Sural.

Nabon.

Daytaot  a

Citie.

Great  store  of

Drugs,  Pinta-

does,  and

Calicoes.

Nctherbcri.

Andeue  was  the  first  Towne,  where  after  the
wracke  and  descension  of  the  Ascension,  we  *
arrived,  having  a  very  faire  haven,  and  great
store  of  shipping,  whereof  some  are  of  five  hundred
tunnes  burthen.  From  thence  we  journied  to  Sobay,  a
Village  that  consisteth  altogether  of  Spinners  and  Weavers,
and  there  is  much  Calico  cotten  cloth  made.

From  thence  we  came  to  Surat,  which  hath  been  a
Citie  of  great  trade,  and  hath  great  store  of  shipping.
Those  of  the  greatest  burthen  are  laded  not  at  the  Towne,
but  are  carried  over  the  Barre  with  their  ballast  onely,
and  there  are  laden.  At  an  high  water,  they  have  six-
teene  foot  over  the  Barre.

From  Surat  we  travelled  toward  Agra,  the  principall
Citie  of  the  Grand  Mogol,  and  came  first  to  Nabon,
where  Sugar  groweth  in  great  abundance,  and  Cotton-
wooll,  and  all  manner  of  Graine.  Here  all  kind  of
victuals  are  very  cheape.  Then  to  a  Citie  called  Day-
taot, where  are  sold  great  store  of  Drugs,  Pintados,  and
Calico-lawnes.  Afterward  we  came  to  Netherberi,  where
is  a  market  of  all  Brasen  wares,  shirts  of  maile,  Swords

82

JOSEPH SALBANCKE

1609.

and  bucklers,  Lances,  Armours  for  Horses :  also  Cotton-
wools,  Cotton  yarne,  Pintados,  Shashes,  and  all  manner
of  drugges.  In  this  place  cloth  would  be  very  vendible,
because  course  cloth  is  there  exceeding  deare.

From  thence  we  proceeded  to  a  Village  called  Saylot,  Say/ot  a
where  is  store  of  Sugar,  and  fruites  of  all  sorts.  We  ^lllaSe-
departed thence to Sadise, a Garrison Towne. Here  Sandiseagar-

the  River  Tynde  runneth  downe  to  Surat. From  Sadise  r"°n

1  /-••  • r>  1 1 r* l"e  nver

we  came  to  the  great  Citie  Bramport,  governed by  Can Tynd.

Canow. This  Citie  standeth  in  eight  and  twenty  degrees,  Bramport  a

where Muskets, Snaphanses, Pistols, Petronels, and  &*** Gitie  **

Swords are  verv saleable. Woollen cloth in this place  2. de&rees-

•1  j-  1. 1 i- r  r> ti  j A  good  vent

wil  proove  a  great  commodity,  as  also  cloth  or  Gold  and ror  f/0//$
Silver, Velvets, Broad cloths, and  Bayes, because  there
are there  so many Gallants. From  thence  we  came  to
Caddor, and so to Sawbon. Then we travailed to a Gaddor  and
great  Citie, named Cannow,  where  is  much  trading  for Vv '  c-  .
Cloth, Swords, Shashes, Pieces, and Armour, besides  canea>  Qan.
colours  for  Diers  of  all  sorts. Here  our  clothes  would  now.
sell well: for it beareth somewhat to the Northward, Good  sale  of
and  is  very  cold  in  January,  February,  and March.  /£"

About a dayes  journey from this place, we passed  They  passe  the
over the  great River  Ganges, which runneth into the  great  River
Gulfe of  Bengala, issuing out  of  the North-west, and  Ganges.
running  directly  East  into  the  said  Gulfe. From hence I?'tyes
we set forward toward Agra, & spent eleven dayes
travelling  through  a  pleasant  Countrey, and abounding
with  severall  kinds  of  Indian  commodities,  and  so  arrived
at  Agra.

Agra  is  a  very  great  Citie,  and  populous,  built  with  Agra.
stone,  having  faire  and  large  streets,  with  a  faire  River
running  by  it,  which  falleth  into  the  Gulfe  of  Bengala.
It  hath  a  faire  Castle,  and  a  strong,  entrenched  round
about  with  a  ditch.  Hither  is  great  resort  of  Merchants
from  Persia,  and  out  of  India,  and  very  much  Merchan-
dize of  Silkes,  and  Cloths,  and  of  precious  stones,  both
Rubyes,  Diamonds,  and  Pearles.  The  Diamonds  are
found  in  diverse  places,  as  in  Bisnagar,  in  Deli,  and  here

83

A.D.

1609.

Fatipore,  a
c'ttie  as  great
as  London.

They  depart
from  Agra  for
Persia.

Biamy  z. dayes
journey  from
Agra.

What  Indico
is,  and  the
making
thereof.

Merta,  or
Menta.

The  river
Paddar  run-
neth unto
Guzerat.

Reurec.

Buckar  acitie.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

at  Agra.  But  Rubyes,  Saphyres,  and  Spinels  are  found
ill  Pegu.  In  this  Citie,  without  all  question,  our  richer
Silkes  and  Velvets,  but  especially  our  clothes  of  light
colours  will  sell  very  well,  beeing  a  place  of  great  trading,
being  not  above  twelve  miles  from  Fatipore,  a  Citie  as
great  as  London,  and  very  populous ;  besides  Lahor,
and  many  other  important  Cities  in  this  Kingdome.

At  Agra  we  abode  thirteene  dayes,  and  then  set  forward
toward  Hispaon  in  Persia,  by  the  way  of  Biani,  beeing
but  two  Moneths  journey,  leaving  the  way  by  Lahor,
which  is  foure  Moneths  journey.  From  Agra  to  Biamy,
we  spent  two  dayes  travell.  Biamy  is  the  cheifest  place
for  Indico  in  all  the  East  India,  where  are  twelve  Indico
milles.  It  groweth  on  small  bushes,  and  beareth  a  seede
like  a  Cabbage  seed.  Being  cut  downe,  it  lyeth  on
heapes  for  halfe  a  yeere  to  rot,  and  then  by  Oxen  it  is
troden  out  from  the  stalkes,  and  afterward  is  ground
very  fine,  and  then  boiled  in  fornaces,  and  so  sorted
out  into  severall  sorts.  The  best  Indico  is  there  worth
eight  pence  a  pound.

From  Biamy,  we  spent  eight  dayes  journey  to  Merta,
passing  by  many  Townes  and  Villages.  In  some  of  them
there  was  store  of  course  Indico,  in  others  Calicoes,  and
store  of  Cotton-wools.  Also  we  passed  over  the  faire
River  Paddar,  which  runneth  to  Guzerat,  and  falleth  into
the  Sea  to  the  East-ward  of  the  Persian  Gulfe.  In  Merta
there  are  three  Basars  or  Markets  every  weeke,  where
is  sold  great  store  of  Indico,  Cotton-wool,  yarne,  and
Cotton  cloths.  From  Merta  or  Menta  we  travelled  five
and  twentie  dayes,  through  these  three  chiefe  Townes,
Reuree,  Buckar,  and  Suker.  Reuree  is  a  Towne  con-
sisting of  husbandmen,  and  painfull  people,  who  deale
also  in  Merchandise,  as  Cotton  cloth,  Indico,  and  other
commodities,  and  are  a  peaceable  people  to  deale  withall.

Buckar  stands  toward  Lahor,  where  we  received  kind
entertainment  of  the  Governour.  Swordblades  are  very
good  chaffer  in  this  Towne :  my  selfe  having  experience,
who  might  have  had  ten  pounds sterling  for  my  Sword,

34

JOSEPH SALBANCKE  ad.

the  blade being  but  worth a Noble  in  England. Close
bv this  Citie of  Buckar runneth the River Damiadee, Tke  River
which  within  eight  dayes  journey  runneth  into  the  River  fl!"',-
of Synde, which falleth into the Ocean Sea, between  r-lver  0r
the  Countryes  of  Guadel  and  Guzerate. On  this  River  Sinde.
passe Barkes of  fortie or fiftie Tunnes, by meanes
whereof,  there  is  traffique  unto  diverse  parts  of  India.

Suckar is  situated on an Hand  in  the  middle  of  the  Suckar.
River,  and  consisteth  most  of  Weavers  and  Diers,  which
serve  the  Countrey  round  about. At  Suckar  we  stayed
foure  and  twentie  dayes  for  a  safe  convoy  to  Candahar, Candahar.
and  passed  to  Candahar  in  twentie  dayes,  through  many
desarts  and  woods,  and  with no small difficultie. Can-
dahar is  a  Citie  of  importance,  which  is  frequented  with
Merchants  out  of  Turkie,  Persia,  and  the  parts  of  India,
and  is  governed  by  a  Vice-roy. Here  we  abode twelve  [I.  iii.  237.]
dayes,  and  from hence  set  forward toward  Hispahan  in
Persia,  and  travelled  five  dayes  till  we  came  to  Grees,  the Grees  the  first
first  Towne  in  the  Countrey  of  Persia,  passing  over  the  yttne  °f
River  Sabaa,  which  divideth  the  Mogol  and  the  Persian, j^  river
Here  we  paid  a  custome  for  our  Cammels.  Sabaa  divideth

Grees  is  a  frontier  Towne,  where  the  Persian  hath  a  theMogolsand
Garrison  of  a  thousand  souldiers. From  Grees,  we  spent *rsiam
eight dayes to the Citie  Parra,  passing through a  vast
countrey, sometimes  passing  by  Villages  : one of  most
note  was  called  Vea,  for  the  store  of  Felts  and  Carpets  Vea  a  Village.
made  there,  and  for  the  plenty  of  Dates,  and  all  sorts  of
fruits. Parra  is  a  Citie  of  great  traffique,  but  especially  The  Citie  of
for  raw silke. Here  we rested two and twenty  dayes  Parra.
onely  for  a  Caravan.

From  Parra  we  spent  eighteene  dayes  to  Jesd,  a  Citie  Jesd  a  Citie.
of  Persia,  passing  through  a  very  desolate  countrey. Not
farre  from  this  Towne  is  Pahanaunis,  where  is  made  great  Pahanaunis.
store  of  raw  Silke  :  as  also  at  Godana  foure  dayes  journey  Godana.
off. From  Jesd  we  spent  seventeene  dayes  to  Hispahan, Gora  a  /aire
passing by  Gora,  a  faire  Towne,  where  is  store  of  raw T,0^"1':
Silkes,  Quilts,  Silke-carpets,  and  Turkeshes. And  so  we  ch5L-£  c^e .-
arrived  at  Hispahan. Hispahan  is one of  the  greatest  Persia.

85

ad  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1609.

Cities  in  Persia,  where  the  King  sometimes  keepeth  his
residencie. The  people  are  industrious  and  curious  in  all
Sciences,  but  especially  in  weaving  Girdles  and Shashes,
in making of  Velvets, Sattens, Dammasks, very  good
Ormuzines, and Persian Carpets of  a wonderfull fine-
Commoditics nesse. Here you may buy  all  manner  of  Drugs,  and
to  be  bought  at  Spices,  and  Turkeses,  with  store  of  Pearles,  Diamonds,
'***'  and  Rubies,  as  also  all  sorts  of  Silkes,  as  well  wrought,  as

raw.  Here  might  be  planted  a  profitable  trade,  if  our
ships  with  safetie  might  lade  in  the  Persian  Gulfe :  where
fiftie  in  the  hundred  may  bee  gained  from  Ormus  to
Hispahan,  and  that  in  eightie  dayes  travell :  whereof  I  was
throughly  informed  by  diverse  Prisoners,  and  Merchants
Commodities  Df  the  great  Towne  of  Julpha.  These  commodities  are
for  Persia.  to  |)ee  carrie(}  fr0m  England  into  Persia ;  Tinne,  Copper,
Brasil :  as  also  Carsies  for  the  Common  people :  Broad
cloths  for  the  Merchants  and  better  sort  of  people,  blacke
clothes  for  womens  garments,  good  Chamlets  and  Velvets
died  in  graine,  with  purple  colours,  and  fine  reds :  cloth
of  Gold  and  Tissue,  Velvets  imbroydered  with  Gold  :  fine
Holland  cloth  for  the  King  and  Sultans ;  Dagges,  and
Pistols,  compleat  harnesse,  targets  of  Steele,  shirts  of
maile,  stone  bowes,  brasse  and  yron  Ordnance.  The
colours  of  Cloth  must  be  Scarlets  Violets  in  graine,  fine
Reds,  Blacks,  browne  Blues,  London  Russets,  Tawnies,
Lyon  colours,  faire  lively  Greenes ;  all  which  will  be
vented  at  Hispahan,  Casban,  Casbin,  and  Tauris,  and
other  Cities  in  Persia.  I  am  perswaded,  that  Hispahan
will  vent  a  thousand  clothes  yeerely.  At  Hispahan  I
abode  thirteene  dayes,  and  spent  a  moneths  journey  to
Bagdat.  Bagdat  ; which is a Citie about two English miles in

compasse,  seated  on  Tigris  :  neverthelesse  it  is  very
populous,  and  of  great  traffique  of  strangers,  being  the
way  to  Persia,  Turkie,  and  Arabia.  Here  I  embarqued
my  selfe  for  Balsara;  and  was  twentie  eight  dayes  in
passing  downe  the  River  ;  but  it  is  to  be  done  in
eighteene  or  lesse,  if  the  water  be  high.  Many  Hands
are  in  this  River,  which  I  omit  to  speake  of.

86

JOSEPH SALBANCKE  a.d.

1609.

Balsara  is  a  Citie  neere  unto  the  Persian  Gulfe,  a  mile  Balsara.
and  an  halfe  in  circuit.  All  the  buildings,  Castles,  and
Walls  are  made  of  bricke  dried  in  the  Sunne.  The
Turke  hath  here  five  hundred  Janizaries,  besides  other
souldiers  continually  in  garrison.  But  his  chiefe  strength
is  of  his  Galies,  which  are  twentie  five  or  thirty  in
number,  very  faire  and  furnished  with  goodly  Ordnance.
To  this  port  of  Balsara  come  Monthly  diverse  ships  of
fortie  or  fiftie  tunnes  from  Ormus,  laden  with  all  sorts
of  Indian  Merchandizes.  Also  there  is  great  store  of
Wheate,  Rice,  and  Dates,  growing  thereabout,  with  which
they  serve  Bagdat,  and  all  the  Countrey,  Ormus,  and
many  parts  of  India.

From  Balsara,  I  passed  by  Sea  to  CatifFa,  on  the  Coast  Catiffa  in
of  Arabia Faelix, governed by a Turke, but a rebell  -Arabia
against the Grand Signior  ; where is great plenty of
sundry  sort  of  fruites,  as  Dates,  and  others. And  from
thence  we  sayled  by  many  Hands,  but  among  the  rest,  to
that  famous  Hand  Baharem,  sixe  dayes  sayling  from  Bal-  The  He  of
sara,  and  in  the  midway  to  Ormus ; where  they  fish  for /iarem,' ,
Pearles  foure  moneths  in  the  yeere  ;  to  wit,  in  June,  July,  pear/s  are
August, September. And here are the best Pearles,
which  are  round  and  Orient.

From  the  He  of  Baharem,  we  sayled  to  Calara  on  the  Ca/ara  or
coast  of  Arabia  Faelix,  and  so  passed  by  land  with  Camels, Catura-
to  Shiriff  Din,  (with  a  purpose  to  have  gone  to  Aman  Shiriff  Din.
where  one  John  White  an  Englishman,  which  refused  my  John  White  an
company,  was  poysoned)  to  have  given  some  intelligence  EnSltsh  Mer~
to Sir  Henry  Middleton,  of  our hard usage before  in
those  parts. But  hearing  that  he  was  traterously  taken
in  Moha,  in  the  mouth  of  the  Red  Sea,  and  carried  in
chaines  up  to  the  Bassha  of  Sinan,  into  the  maine  land  of ">u  a .  °[j

ai-t  t  '  1 V ti  in- Tow  nc  in  the

'•  Arabia,  1  returned  to  Lima  another  Towne  on  the  Persian  mut/j  0ft/ie

Gulfe,  and  there  imbarqued  my  selfe  to  have  passed  to  PersianGulfe.

Socotora,  an  Hand  neere  the  mouth  of  the  Red  Sea:  But  Snar  or  Soar  a

I  was  taken  by  Pirates,  and  so  was  driven  to  land  at  Snar  co?st  "'.

c  ' ■_ '  r  r  .  the  entrance  oj

or  boar,  a  coast 1  owne  not  rarre  rrom  Lima.  t^  pers\an

At  Snar,  certaine  Portugals,  whose  Barkes  were  there  Gulfe.

87

A.D.

1609.

Azibo,  of  old
Asabi.

Mascate  or
Muscat.
Father  Drurie
an  English
Jesuitc  at
Mascate  in
Arabia.
[I.  iii.  238.]
Ormus.

He  was  at
Sinde,  which
is  an  excellent
place  for  our
Trade.
The  best
Indico.

The  safetie  of
Sinde  from  the
Portugals.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

cast  away,  informed  the  Governour  that  I  was  a  Spie,  and
prayed  him  to  deliver  mee  up  into  their  hands ;  who
having  obtained  their  request,  carried  me  to  Azibo,  and
so  to  Mascate  or  Muscat,  an  Hand,  where  they  have  a
small  Garrison  of  some  fortie  men,  besides  their  gallies,
as  also  one  Church,  and  two  Friars.  And  here  I  had
abiden  for  ever,  if  one  Father  Drurie,  an  English  Jesuite,
which  I  found there,  had  not  procured  my  libertie.

From  thence,  I  was  conveied  in  chaines  to  Ormus,
crossing  the  mouth  of  the  Persian  Gulfe.  Ormus  is  an
Island  in  circuit  about  thirtie  miles :  and  is  the  driest
Hand  in  all  the  world :  for  there  is  nothing  growing  in
it  but  salt :  for  their  Water,  Wood,  Victualls,  and  other
necessaries  come  out  of  Persia,  which  is  about  twelve
miles  from  thence.  The  Portugals  have  a  strong  Castle
here,  which  standeth  neere  unto  the  Sea,  where  there  is  a
Captaine  set  by  the  King  of  Spaine,  having  under  him  a
convenient  number  of  souldiers,  whereof  some  part  re-
maine  in  the  Castle,  and  some  in  the  Towne.  In  this
Towne  are  Marchants  of  many  Nations,  and  many
Moores  and  Gentiles.  Here  is  very  great  trade  of  all
sorts  of  Spices,  Drugs,  Silkes,  cloth  of  Silke,  fine  Tapis-
tries  of  Persia,  great  store  of  Pearles,  as  also  Horses  of
Persia,  which  serve  for  all  India.  And  all  ships  which
passe  from  hence  to  Goa,  wherein  are  horses,  pay  no
custome  in  Goa ;  but  if  they  bring  no  horses,  then  they
pay  eight  in  the  hundred  for  their  goods.

From  Ormus  they  sent  me  prisoner  to  Goa.  And  we
sailed  first  to  Sinde,  which  lieth  between  the  Countryes
of  Guadel  and  Guzerate,  having  a  great  River  called
Damiade  falling  into  it,  which  River  commeth  from
Lahor,  and  so  to  Bucher,  and  Suchar.  In  these  places  is
the  best  Indico  sold.  You  may  transport  all  the  goods
which  the  Countrey  doth  afford,  by  water  to  Sinde:  where
your  shippes  may  ride  as  safely  as  in  the  River  of
Thames. The  Portugals  have  no  fort  in  this  River.

The  place,  (by  report  of  the  Governour,  who  gave  me  1
a  Passe  at  my  first beeing  there  to bee  a pledge, that

88

JOSEPH SALBANCKE  a.d.

1609.

whensoever  I  should  returne  with  these  and  these  goods,

I  should  bee  well  entertained)  doth  vent  cloth  of  all  sorts  A  good  vent

in reasonable  quantitie  both  fine and  course,  beeing  all  0£/hs°r'

light  colours ; Tinne, Lead, Iron,  and  Elephants  teeth,

and Spices of  all sorts, especially Pepper and Cloves.

The  commodities  that  the  Countrey  doth  affoord  in  great

plentie,  and  cheape  price,  are  fine  Calicoes  of  many  sorts,

Pintadoes, Quilts, Carpets, and other Silke in great

plentie. Many  of  these stufTes are  very  good for the

trade at Bantam,  and the Moluccos. Besides,  there is

great  store  of  Opium,  which is  a  very  good  commoditie

in  Bantam,  and  those  parts. And  many  other  drugs  fit

for  our  Countrey. The  people  are  of  a  good  disposition,

and  desirous  of  trade  :  victualls  are  very  good  cheape :  as

tenne  hennes  for  tenne  pence,  a  good  sheepe  a  shilling.

On  the  shore  the  Portugals  are  subject  to  the  Countrey

people :  and  if  they  doe  not  behave  themselves  well,  they

are  severely  punished.

Passing  this  coast  of  Sinde,  we  arrived  at  Diu  in  the  Diu.
Kingdome  of  Cambaya.  And  it  is  the  strongest  Towne
that  the  Portugals  have  in  these  parts.  It  is  but  little,
but  well  stored  with  Merchandise :  for  here  they  lade
many  great  ships  with  diverse  commodities,  for  Ormus
and  for  the  Straight  of  Mecca,  and  other  places :  and
these  be  ships  of  Moores  and  Christians.  The  Moores
passe  by  Passeport  from  the  Portugalls.

From  Diu  we  sailed  for  Goa :  which  is  the  principall  Goa.
Citie  which  the  Portugals  have  in  those  parts,  and  it  is
governed  by  a  Vice-Roy.  It  standeth  in  an  Hand,  which
may  be  thirtie  miles  about,  replenished  with  Orchards  and
Gardens,  Palme  trees,  and  some  Villages.  Here  be
Marchants  of  many  Nations.

[Chap.  X.

A.D.

1609.

A  prill  24.
1609.

They  arrived
at  Saldania.
They  arrived
at  Bantam.
By  the  altera-
tion of  State,
their  debts
were  almost
desperate,  nor
would  this
Governour
suffer  them  {as
before)  them-
selves to  im-
prison debters,
and  distraine.
He  also
exacted  un-
reasonable
s urn  me s  for
rent,  whereas
the  ground  had
been  given,
and  the  houses
built  at  the
Companies
charge.
[I.  iii.  239.]

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Chap.  X.

The  Voyage  of  M.  David  Midleton  to  Java,  and
Banda,  extracted  out  of  a  Letter  written  by
himselfe  to  the  Company,  this  being  the  fifth
Voyage  set  forth  by  them.

§•  i-

Their  affaires  at Bantam, Botun,  Bengaia.

E  set  sayle  in  the  Downes  the  foure  and
twentieth  of  April,  1609.  in  the  Expedi-
tion of  London,  and  got  sight  of  Forte-
venture,  and  the  Lansarot,  the  nineteenth
of  May,  and  with  such  winds  as  blow
(some  faire,  some  fowle)  we  arrived  at
Saldania  the  tenth  of  August,  and  watered,
and  made  hast,  and  set  sayle  the  eighteenth  of  the  same.
We  proceeded  for  Bantam,  and  arrived  there  the  seventh
of  December,  missing  Captaine  Keeling  very  narrowly
that  we  had  not  sight  of  him :  for  hee  passed  us  in  the
night,  else  we  should  have  surely  seene  him.  As  for  our
businesse,  I  made  all  the  dispatch  that  might  be  (both  by
day  and  night)  to  get  the  Iron  a  shore,  and  would  not
stay,  to  set  up  my  Pinnasse,  and  left  M.  Hensworth  in  the
house,  and  was  driven  to  give  a  great  many  of  gifts  more
then  was  requisite,  if  the  State  of  the  Countrey  had  beene
as  in  former  time :  and  left  Edward  Neetles,  and  three
more  of  my  Company  with  Master  Hemsworth  (as  his
desire  was)  beeing  in  a  strange  place,  and  knew  none
in  the  House.  So  1  tooke  such  Commodities  as  I
thought  most  vendible  in  those  places  whereunto  I  was
to  goe;  and  what  hope  was  of  making  a  Voyage,  I
trust  Captaine  Keeling  hath  long  since  made  manifest,
yet  for  all  this, I must  try  their  curtesie.

The eighteenth of  December I tooke my leave of
Master  Hemsworth,  who  was  very  loath  to  stay behind

90

DAVID MIDDLETON  a.d.

1609.

me, but I perswaded him to be  of  good  courage,  and

doubt nothing, seeing I was to take Master Spalding  M.  Jugusttne

with  me  for  his  Language,  and  had no bodie to leave ??**&&*

J° o '  i  with  him  to

in the House  but  himselfe: and told him that if  the  the  Moluccas.

Governour  sent  for  him,  hee  must  tell  him plainly  that

I had  left  expresse  order  in  any  hand, not  to  yeeld  to

any of  his  former demands, yet hee might take  what

he would,  for he must deliver  him nothing. Then I

set  saile  that  evening  for  the Maluccas  (as  I  supposed)  He  departeth

and  the  winds  favouring  us,  the  seven  and  twentieth  of-^vT'

the same, wee passed the Streights of Desolam, and  The  streirht  of

being  through them,  lay becalmed tenne dayes, which  Desolam.

was  no  small  griefe  to  me,  in  much  heate  under  the  Line,

being  doubtfull  of  the Westerly Monson, which (if  it

should  faile  me)  would  be  the  overthrow  of  my  Voyage.

The  eighth  of  January,  we  came  before  the  Towne  The  He  of
of  Botun,  and  sent  to  know  some  newes,  and  there  Botun-
the  King  was  gone  to  the  Warres,  and  very  few  people
in  the  Towne.  So  I  anchored  not,  but  went  through
the  Streights  the  same  day.  The  next  day  we  saw  a
great  company  of  Caracolles,  which  we  imagined  to  bee
the  King  of  Botunes  Armie,  which  proved  so  indeed.
The  King  sent  a  small  Prow  (when  we  drew  neere  unto
him)  to  see  what  we  were.  I  sent  him  word  who  I
was,  and  it  proved  little  wind,  and  wanting  water  I
demanded  whether  there  were  any  neere  hand,  so  the
people  shewed  me  where  there  was  great  store  of  good
water.  Then  I  stood  with  the  place,  and  the  King
and  all  his  Caricolles  came  under  sayle  after  mee,  and
came  to  an  Anchor  faire  by  us,  and  sent  one  aboord
in  his  owne  name  to  bid  mee  welcome,  and  desired
mee  to  send  Master  Spalding  with  the  Messenger  to
come,  and  speake  with  him  to  heare  some  newes.  The
Kings  desire  was  that  I  would  ride  all  night,  and  in
the  morning  hee  would  come,  and  see  the  ship  and  me.  ^  Banquet
It  proved  calme,  so  we  ride  still,  and  the  next  day  the  "!?de  t0Jj?e

V  11  IT  1  1 -  1  11 1 •  \T LI  kltlgOf  BOtUlly

Ring  came  aboord,  and  1  made  him,  and  all  his  JNobles  iV}<i  ^11  his
a Banquet, and gave the King  a gift worthy such a  Nobles.

91

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1609.

person  :  and  a  gale  came  fitted  to  be  under  sayle  : then
the King wept, and said I might thinke him but a
Dissembler,  seeing  he  had no  Merchandize  for  me,  for
foure  monethes  before  my  comming,  hee  had  his  House
Commodities  burned  to  the  ground,  where  he  had  provided  of  every
the1  Kin  of  ^mg  somewhat,  both  Nuts  and  Mace,  and  Cloves,  and
Botun.  " great  store  of  Sander wood  an whole house full, and
a great  Ware-house  full  of  the  cloth of  his Countrey,
which  is  very  vendible  in  most  part  of  the  Hands  there-
about : and  all the losse which formerly he received,
grieved him not halfe so much, as when I told him
that  I came,  and  had  caused the ship to  bee  fitted  of
purpose to come and buy his Commodities, that he
should  provide  for  me.

He  further  said,  that  I  had  kept  my  promise,  and
swore  by  the  head  of  Mahomet,  so  would  he  have  done,
if  God  had  not  laid  that  crosse  of  fire  upon  him,  having
sundry  of  his  Wives  and  Women  burned.  But  now
he  was  abroad  at  Warres  with  his  forces,  he  could  not
tell  the  issue  of  it,  and  as  the  case  stood  with  him,  hee
could  not  spare  any  of  his  people,  to  make  any  provision
for  me :  and  said,  that  if  I  had  not  come  by  the  night
afore,  he  had  beene  in  the  field  against  another  King  his
Enemie,  whose  Towne  he  shewed  me,  and  requested  to
shoot  at  it,  as  I  went  by.  I  said  I  was  a  Stranger,  and
knew  him  not,  and  to  procure  my  selfe  Enemies,  I  had
no  reason :  but  if  the  other  King  should  come  and  offer
him,  or  any  of  his  Subjects  wrong,  while  I  was  there,
I  would  doe  my  best  to  send  them  away :  which  speeches
of  mine  gave  the  King  great  content,  so  the  King  tooke
his  leave,  and  we  set  sayle  presently.
The  He  of  The  foure  and  twentieth  of  January,  we  arrived  at
Bangaia.  ^  Hand  of  Bangaia,  where  the  King  and  most  of  his
people  were  fled  for  feare  of  some  Enemy;  and  certainly
I  could  not  learne  the  truth.  There  was  a  Hollander
there  that  told  mee  that  the  King  was  fled  for  teare  of
the  King  of  Makasar,  who  i^as  he  thought)  would  torce
the  King to turne Moore, for  he  is  a  Gentile : but I

92

DAVID MIDDLETON  ad.

rather  thinke  they  fled  for  feare  of  the  Hollanders,  who  Tie  llollan-
would  have  built  a  Fort  there,  but  when they  perceived  dfn{or/1'
the  people  were  fled,  they  left  it  unefFected. This  one  peopje
Hollander  bore  such  a  sway,  that  never  a  man  left  upon The  manners
the  Hand  durst  displease  him. He  hath  as  many  Women  of  an  Hollan-
ds  he  pleaseth, two Houses  full of  the  choice  of the
Countries  Daughters,  and  many  Men  and  Women  Slaves,
and  is  a  pleasant  Companion, and will dance  and  sing
all  day  long,  neere-hand  naked,  as  their  manner  is : and
winneth  the  hearts  of  the  people,  and  will  be  drunke  two
dayes  together,  amongst  the  people  of  the  Hand  : and  is
of  himselfe, and hath  lived long  in the  Countrey, and
will  not  be  commanded  by  any  Hollander,  and  dwelleth
over  against  Amboina. If  the Governour of  Amboina
would speake with him, hee must send two of his
Merchants  to  bee  kept  in pawne  till his returne : He
taketh  up  the  Kings  Duties  of  Tarnata,  in  all  the  Hands
thereabouts,  and  serveth  his  owne  turne,  and  sends  the
King  what  he  may  spare. Heere  wee  had  good  refreshing
for my people, being (I prayse  God)  in  better  estate The  good
then  when  I  set  sayle  from England,  and  have  not  had ,  °f
a  man  sicke  to  that  present. There  I  sheathed  my  Long
Boate,  which  wee  towed  for  feare  of  the  Wormes  that
would have  spoyled her, and after set sayle the nine
and  twentieth  of  January. Comming  to  Sea,  we  found
the  windes  right  as  we  should  goe,  so  striving  (all  wee
might)  to  get  to  wind-wards,  but  could  not,  the  streame  [I.  iii.  240.]
carrying us directly South, and  ran so swift, that we
lost fifteene leagues in two dayes. Then I was  taine
to  alter  my  determination,  for  going  for  the Moluccos,
and bare  up  the  Helme  to goe  for  Banda, and might
goe  with  a  flowne  sheate.

93

A.D.
1609.

Banda.

Injury  of  Hol-
landers.

Fifteene  great
Junckes  de-
tained by  the
Hollanders.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

§.  II.

Occurrents  at  Banda  ; Contesting  with  the  Dutch  :
Trade  at Puloway,  and many  perils.

He  fifth  of  February,  we  got  sight  of  the  Hands
of  Banda,  and  made  all  the  sayle  wee  could,
to  get  neere  before  night :  and  drawing  neere,
I  sent  my  SkifFe  to  heare  some  newes,  of  some  of  the
Country  people,  who  sent  me  word  that  the  Hollanders
would  not  suffer  any  Sayle  to  come  into  the  Roade,
but  they  would  take  all  hee  brought,  (if  it  were  such
things  as  they  stood  in  need  of)  and  make  payment
at  their  owne  pleasures:  But  if  any  Juncke  came  and
brought  Commodities  very  vendible  for  the  Countrey
people,  they  were  not  permitted  to  have  any  speech
with  any  of  the  Countrey :  but  the  Hollander  would
bring  them  to  the  backside  of  the  Castle  within  Musket
shot  of  their  Ordnance,  that  one  must  not  set  his  foot
ashore,  but  they  would  send  a  Bullet  at  him :  They
had  fifteene  great  Junckes,  which  they  kept  in  that
manner.  What  hope  is  there  to  make  a  Voyage  there,
seeing  they  dealt  so  with  all  that  came  into  the  Roade,
and  banished  Captaine  Keeling,  not  permitting  him  to
stay  to  gather  in  his  debts,  but  gave  him  Bils  to  receive
his  money  at  Bantam,  as  (I  hope)  from  his  owne  mouth,
your  Worships  have  heard  at  large.  Yet  for  all  this,
I  stood  into  the  Roade  with  Flagge  and  Ensigne,  and
at  each  Yard  Arme  a  Pendant,  in  as  comely  a  manner
as  we  could  devise.  There  came  a  small  Pinnasse  of
thirtie  Tunnes  sent  from  the  Governour  of  the  Castle,
thinking  it  had  beene  one  of  their  Countrey  ships  :  but
comming  neere  us  stood  into  the  Roade  before  me,  after
they  had  haled  us,  I  could  have  no  other  speech  with
them.

As  soone  as  I  came  thwart  of  Lautor,  I  saluted  the
Towne  with  Ordnance,  and  came  to  an  Anchor  within
shot of  their  ships: then  presently  a  Dutch Boate  came

94

DAVID MJDDLKTOX  ad.

1609.
aboord  us  from  the  Governour,  to  have  me  come  into
the  Roade,  and  came  ashore  to  him,  and  shew  him  my
Commission  :  I  made  answere,  I  was  but  new  come,  and
to  shew  my  Commission  to  the  Governour,  or  to  make
any  man  acquainted  with  those  businesses,  which  belonged
to  the  making  of  my  Voyage,  I  would  not.  They  further
asked,  whether  I  was  a  Merchant,  or  a  Man  of  Warre  ?
I  answered  I  would  pay  for  what  I  take :  then  they
threatned  me :  who  told  them  I  was  there,  and  would  ride
there,  doe  as  they  should  please,  I  hoped  I  should  defend
my  selfe :  so  they  returned  to  the  Castle  in  a  great  rage.
The  Hollanders  no  sooner  gone,  but  great  store  of  the
men  of  Lautor  came  aboord  me,  and  bade  me  welcome.  Kindnesse  of
Then  I  understood  the  whole  Estate  of  the  Countrey,  and  theBandane">
the  Countrey  would  be  willing  to  deale  with  me,  if  I
could  procure  leave  of  the  Hollanders,  for  they  are  now
friends,  but  Pulaway  and  Polatronu  are  at  Warres  with
them.

Now  knowing  well,  that  in  troubled  waters  it  is
good  fishing,  there  being  one  of  Pulaway  amongst
them,  I  had  private  conference  with  him,  and  gave  him
money  in  his  Purse,  to  certifie  them  of  the  Hand,  that
I  would  give  them  money  or  Commodities  for  all  their
Spice,  and  that  the  Hollanders  and  I  were  like  to  be
Enemies,  and  let  them  not  doubt,  but  that  I  would
get  their  Spice  aboord,  one  way  or  other.  In  the
meane  season,  there  came  another  Boate  from  the  Vice-
Admirall,  and  the  same  Boate  from  the  Castle,  with
expresse  Commandement  from  the  Governour  to  me
to  come  in.  Being  dinner  time,  I  caused  them  to  stay
dinner,  and  after  dinner  told  them  that  I  would  ride
there,  and  stand  to  the  danger  of  the  Roade :  For  I
knew  full  well,  that  our  Nations  were  friends  in
Europe,  &  for  us  to  be  Enemies  amongst  the  Heathen
people,  it  were  not  good,  being  Christians.  Whereupon
they  told  me  plainly  I  must  not  ride  there,  and  if  I
did,  they  would  fetch  me  in  perforce :  I  said  I  would
ride  there,  till  I found the  inconvenience  of  the Roade

95

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1609.

(as  by  their  speeches  it  was  foule  ground)  then  would
I  come  into  the  best  of  the  Harbour:  for  neither  of
our  Princes  giveth  any  such  authoritie  to  any  of  their
Subjects,  but  that  every  man  may  ride,  and  goe  at  their
owne  perils.  They  said  that  the  Countrey  was  theirs,
then  may  I  the  more  boldly  (say  I)  ride  heere,  for
we  are  friends  : so  they  departed  in displeasure.

This  Evening,  I  was  about  to  land  Ordnance  upon
the  side  of  an  Hill,  where  wee  rid  and  began  to  fit
the  ship  to  fight  with  them  that  should  molest  mee :
and  sent  out  some  to  see  what  ground  there  was
round  about  the  ship,  and  it  was  all  Rockes,  so  by
no  meanes  the  shippe  could  ride  there :  so  we  left
our  pretence  of  landing  Ordnance.  In  the  morning  I
sent  my  SkifFe  with  Master  Spalding,  and  the  principall
of  the  ship  with  a  Letter  to  the  Governour,  and
bad  them  say  nothing  more  then  I  had  written,  and
make  no  long  stay,  but  bring  an  answere  presently,
for  we  ride  very  bad  :  the  Copie  of  which  Letter
hereafter  followeth.

[I.  Hi.  241.]  A/T-A-y  it  please  you  Worship  with  patience  to  con-
1\±.  sider,  That  whereas  you  have  divers  enemies
(and  few  friends  in  this  place)  I  being  a  Christian,  if
your  Worship  stand  in  need  of  any  thing  that  I  have,
I  pray  you  make  bold  to  demand  it,  and  I  will  be
as  readie  to  performe  it  to  my  power.  For  whereas
there  is  amitie  betweene  our  Princes  at  home,  I  should
be  unwilling  that  we  their  Subjects  should  be  at  en-
mitie  heere.  Further,  forasmuch  as  you  command  me
to  come  under  the  command  of  the  Castle,  I  hope
I  have  that  Priviledge  that  both  Princes  allow  their
Subjects,  to  come  and  goe  at  their  owne  pleasures,
and  stand  to  the  danger  of  the  Roade,  at  their  owne
perils.  And  whereas  you  demanded  to  see  my  Com-
mission, I  am  a  Gentleman,  and  willing  to  shew  it
upon  equall  termes,  for  if  you  would  meete  me  securely,
as  I  would  doe  you,  appoint  our  meeting  on  the  water,

96

DAVID MIDDLETON

1609.

in  our  Boates  equally  manned,  or  in  any  other  con-
venient place,  where  I  may  be  as  neere  my  force  as
you  are  to  yours.  And  whereas  it  is  reported,  that  a
contract  is  to  be  made  with  the  Inhabitants  of  Lantor,
and  your  Worship  ;  my  desire  is,  that  you  would  use
me  as  an  Indian  for  my  money  :  then  should  I  thinke
my  selfe  much  beholding  to  your  Worship,  and  am
more  willing  to  deale  with  you  then  with  them.  Fur-
thermore, forasmuch  as  you  be  at  enmitie  with  the
Hands  of  Puloway,  and  Polaron  ;  my  desire  is  to  bee
resolved,  whether  I  may  have  their  Spice  without  your
hinderance.  Thus  desiring  your  Answere  to  these  par-
ticulars, and  the  same  to  bee  returned  by  these  Bearers,
I  bid  you  farewell,  from  aboord  my  ship,  this  seventh
of  February, 1609.

Yours  in  friendship,  David  Middleton.
All  my  Companies  comming  to  the  Castle  were
brought  to  the  Governour,  where  they  sate  in  Councell,
so  they  delivered  my  Letter,  which  being  openly  read
they  would  send  mee  no  answer  but  by  word  of  mouth,
yet  detayned  my  Letter.  They  had  determined  by  Uncharitable
Counsell  (having  three  great  ships  of  one  thousand  ^r^°s,a
tunnes  a  piece,  and  three  Pinnasses  of  thirtie  tunnes
a  piece)  that  one  of  the  shippes  (being  unserviceable)
called  the  great  Sunne,  should  clap  me  aboord,  and
there  set  her  selfe  a  fire  :  and  had  for  the  same  pur-
pose sworne  sundry  persons  to  come  and  make  her
fast  with  chaines,  and  had  put  into  her  thirtie  Barrels
of  Powder  for  the  same  intent  :  which  beeing  manned
out  of  the  Castle  with  all  the  ships,  and  boates,  to
take  up  the  men  when  shee  should  fire,  the  Great
Home  should  come  and  ride  within  Musket-shot,  and
batter  upon  us,  and  the  Frigots  round  about  us,  to
keepe  us  doing  on  all  sides.  My  folke  seeing  their
speed  they  made  to  warpe  out  the  Great  Sunne,  made
small  stay  but  came  away,  and  told  me  what  preparation
was  made  to  have  us.  I  thought  it  fit  to  goe  and
speake  with  the  Governour  my  selfe,  and  before  wee
in  97  g

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1609.

would  try  it  by  Battaile,  to  see  what  hee  would  say
to  my  selfe.  And  so  taking  my  Commission  with  mee,
I  came  to  the  Castle,  and  was  met  at  my  landing  by
the  Governour,  and  all  the  principall  men,  that  were  in
the  Castle  and  ships  and  was  brought  through  a  Guard
of  small  shot  of  three  hundred  Souldiers,  who  gave  mee
three  Vollies  of  shot,  and  the  Castle  seven  Peeces  of
Ordnance  for  my  welcome  :  so  wee  came  to  the
Governours  Chamber,  where  for  us  two,  there  were
Chaires  set,  the  rest  had  formes,  and  after  many
Salutations,  and  Complements  of  welcome  to  the  Castle,
I  began,  and  said,

I  understand  by  my  Company,  which  was  with  them
before  my  comming,  that  they  would  not  be  perswaded
but  that  I  was  a  Pirate,  and  had  no  Commission  :  and
that  it  should  appeare  to  the  contrary,  I  came  my  selfe,
and  brought  my  Commission  with  mee,  to  manifest
that  I  was  no  such  person,  but  had  the  Kings  Majesties
broad  Seale to my  Commission,  and  called  to my  man

Commission  for  it, and  shewed  it  them, reading  the  first line unto

shewed.  them,  and  lapped  it  up  againe.  Then  they  said,  that
they  would  see  it  all.  I  said,  they  should  not  while
I  lived,  The  Commission  was  mine,  you  all  apparantly
see,  and  the  great  Seale  at  my  Commission,  and  my
selfe  nominated  therein,  and  if  they  would  see  more,
it  is  not  my  Commission  they  should  expect  it.  We
would  have  bin  gone  aboord,  but  were  willed  to  stay
awhile.  So  there  passed  words  betweene  us,  some  sharpe
and  some  sweet :  but  at  the  length  they  began  to  be
more  mild,  &  called  for  a  Cup  of  Wine,  then  the
Company  rose  all  up,  dranke  a  cup  of  Wine,  and  went
to  walke,  and  view  the  Castle,  the  Offices  whereof
were  very  neat  and  very  wel  furnished  with  Armor
and  great  store  of  Munition.

Taking  my  time,  I  put  in  practice  to  see  what  money
would  doe  (which  often  maketh  Wise-men  blinde)  that

The  might so I might attayne unto my  lading by large proffers.

of  money I offered one  thousand pound to be  sure  to have  my

98

DAVID MIDDLETON

1609.

lading,  and  to  give  my  chainc  from  about  my  nccke
to  one  to  procure  it,  offering  to  pay  more  then  they
paid  for  their  Spice.  Having  set  this  matter  abroach,
(knowing  the  ship  to  ride  in  danger)  I  told  the  Gover-
nour,  now  they  apparantly  saw,  I  was  no  man  of
Warre,  I  would  bring  in  my  ship:  hee  replyed  with
the  residue,  that  all  the  friendship  they  could  doe  me,
I  should  find  them  willing  to  pleasure  me  therein.  It
drawing  late  I  tooke  my  leave  to  goe  aboord,  at  what
time,  the  Governour  caused  all  the  Ordnance  in  the
Castle  to  bee  shot  off,  and  as  I  passed  by  the  ships,
they  and  the  Frigots  shot  off,  till  I  came  aboord.  The
next  day  being  the  eight  of  February,  I  brought  my
ship  into  the  Roade,  and  rid  betweene  their  ships  and
the  Castle,  and  gave  them  all  my  Ordnance,  and  was
answered  from  the  Castle,  and  shippes,  and  Frigats
with  great  store.

As  soone  as  we  came  to  an  Anchor,  the  Governor
with  all  the  chiefe  of  the  Castle  and  Ships  came  aboord
of  me :  so  I  intreated  them  to  dinner,  to  such  as  we
could  provide,  which  they  very  kindly  accepted :  and
after  dinner  the  maine  point  (which  was  my  lading)
I  could  not  by  gifts,  nor  any  meanes  I  might  devise,
have  any  grant  to  buy  one  pound  of  Spice.  And
having  prooved  sundry  meanes  to  induce  them  to  heare
reason,  the  Governour  told  me  plainly,  he  durst  not
give  me  leave  to  deale  for  any  Spice,  under  paine  of  [I.  Hi.  242.]
losse  of  his  head.  I  seeing  no  good  to  bee  done  in
riding  at  an  Anchor  amongst  them,  determined  to  take
in  water,  and  take  my  Fortune  :  but  they  would  not
suffer  my  Boate  to  goe  ashore  for  water,  but  they
would  send  a  man  with  us,  to  see  that  we  had  no  con-
ference with  any  of  the  Countrey  people.  After  I  had
water  aboord,  I  sent  Master  Spalding  to  shew  the
Governour  that  I  would  be  gone  and  that  I  had  sent
him  to  acquaint  him  therewith  :  for  my  selfe  would
not  come  out  of  the  ship.  Dutch  scru-

The Governour marvelled whither I would goe,  puloutie.

99

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1609.

the  winds  being  Westerly :  Master  Spalding  said,  he
knew  not,  So  I  warped  till  I  could  get  Sea-roome  to
set  saile.  The  Governour  sent  three  Pinasses  to  go
out  with  me,  and  one  came  in  a  Boate  aboord  us,
sent  from  the  Governour  to  command  me,  that  I  should
not  come  neere  any  of  those  Hands :  I  sent  him  word
I  would  not  be  at  his  commanding,  for  I  was  bound
to  Puloway,  as  soone  as  possibly  I  can,  and  bade  him
send  his  ships  to  send  me  away,  for  I  would  quickly
send  the  Frigots  further  from  me.  Hee  went  aboord
one  of  the  Frigots,  and  I  caused  our  men  to  get  up
their  small  shot,  and  fit  themselves  to  fight  with  their
ships  which  were  fitted,  and  their  sailes  brought  to  the
His  purpose  yarJ  Gf  purpose.  I  called  all  my  Company  to  know
for  Pulaivay.  thejr  mindes,  and  told  them  plainly  that  if  they  would
stand  by  mee,  I  meant  to  set  up  my  rest,  to  make  my
Voyage  at  those  Hands,  let  the  Hollander  doe  what
hee  could :  and  promised  them,  if  any  man  were
maymed,  hee  should  have  maintenance  during  his  life,
which  (if  it  pleased  God)  I  would  have  performed :
and  further  promised,  that  if  they  would  fight  it  out,
to  give  franckly  amongst  them,  those  things  that  were
mine  owne,  which  were  in  the  ship.  So  with  one  con-
sent, wee  were  all  willing  to  try  what  force  the
Hollander  would  send  out  to  drive  us  away.  The
Pinnasses  seeing  my  folke  to  bring  up  their  small  shot,
thought  it  would  be  smal  to  their  ease  to  guard  me
any  longer,  and  therefore  bore  up  for  the  Harbour.
While  we  were  a  warping  out,  the  Admirall  had  beene
twice  aboord  the  Pinnasses,  and  the  Vice-Admirall,
and  the  Lieutenant  Governor  of  the  Castle  also,  what
they  did  there  I  know  not.
English  rcso-  It  fell  calme,  and  the  winds  Westerly,  and  a  great
lutwn.  streame set to the East North-East, and we drove a

great  pace.  So  I  manned  my  Boate,  and  sent  Master
Spalding  away  with  Money  and  my  Pursers  Mate,  and
five  more,  to  goe  and  certifie  them  of  the  Hand  of
Pulaway,  that  we  had  parted  enemies  with  the  Hollanders,

DAVID MIDDLKroX  ad.

i  609.

and  that  I  had  sent  him  to  know  their  minds,  whether
they  would  sell  me  their  Spice,  and  I  would  give  them
Money  for  it:  and  would  have  come  my  selfe,  but
would  faine  see  the  shippe  in  some  place  where  she
might  ride,  and  then  I  would  come  either  in  the  ship,
or  in  a  Pinnasse  that  I  had  within  boord  to  set  up.
While  my  boat  was  absent,  there  came  two  Prawes
from  Lantor,  to  know  why  I  went  away ;  I  told  them,
the  streame  set  the  ship  away :  I  would  faine  have
gone  to  Pulaway,  if  the  streame  had  not  hindred  me,
and  had  sent  a  Factor  thither  to  buy  Spice  ;  they  said,
they  were  glad  that  I  went  not  away  for  altogether :
then  I  prayed  them  to  tell  them  of  Lantor,  that  I
would  give  them  Money  or  Commodities  for  all  their
Spice  which  they  had,  if  they  would  sell  it  me  before
the  Hollander,  that  came  to  take  their  Countrey  from
them.  One  of  them  said,  that  hee  would  goe  to  the
Hand  and  see  my  people,  and  then  he  would  shew
them  of  Lantor.

At Master  Spaldings comming  ashore, the Countrey  M.  Spaldlngs
flocked about him, and  bad him welcome, but would  welcome-
make no price with him, till I came my selfe  : but
would deliver Spice upon an account, till God should
send  me  thither,  to  goe  through  with  them  my  selfe. I
bid Master Spalding hire me  a  Pilot  (if  he could) to
harbour  my  ship  neere  hand ;  who  spake  to  the  Countrey
for one, and they hired him a couple, to whom the
Countrey gave twenty Rials, and I must give them
as much. So Master Spalding sent them aboord, and
writ to mee to send him more Money and Cloath,
which I did the same night, and bare up the Helme
for  Ceran,  and came  to  a  place  called Gelagula, being  The  lie  of
thirtie leagues from Banda, a reasonable  good Road : zfr.a"'
and  as  soone  as  possibly  we  could,  we  tooke  an  house,
and brought our Pinnasse ashore to set up, having
had  her  within  boord  thus  long,  and  could  never  have
time  to  set  her up,  because  the  time  of  the  yeare  did
so fast slip away, and the Monson was at an end.

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1609.

Labouring  all  that  night  to  get  her  dispatched,  being
The  Hope-  fitted,  I  named  her  the  Hope-well.  The  seven  and
twentieth  of  March,  we  made  all  things  readie  to  set
saile  to  the  Hand  of  Pulaway,  and  arrived  there  the
one  and  thirtieth  of  the  same  in  the  night,  and  could
not  lade  any  Spice,  till  I  had  agreed  with  the  Countrey
people.

The  Countrey  asked  many  duties,  and  great  gifts  ;
but  in  fine,  I  agreed  to  pay  as  Captaine  Keeling  paid  :
atter  the  chiefe  had  what  they  looked  for,  (for  every
one  must  have  somewhat,  that  all  must  not  know)
and  a  man  must  ever  be  giving,  for  they  never  cease
begging ;  and  it  is  not  for  a  mans  ease  to  deny  them
any  reasonable  matter,  especially,  as  the  case  stood  with
mee.  After  we  had  agreed,  we  laded  the  Hope-well
with  Mace,  and  sent  her  away,  she  being  but  nine
Tunne,  could  carry  but  little  of  such  Commodities,
which  fils  presently :  wherefore  I  was  driven  to  looke
They  lade  out  for  more  helpe  to  get  over  the  Spice ;  so  I  hired
sPlce-  a great Praw, and was to build her, which we laded

with  Nuts,  and  sent  to  the  ship,  and  there  builded  her
higher,  and  made  her  one  of  five  and  twentie  Tunne.
But  she  made  but  one  Voyage,  and  then  wee  heard  no
newes  of  her  in  three  moneths,  still  expecting  her
comming  to  Pulaway  a  long  time.  The  Hope-well
making  two  Voyages,  could  bring  mee  no  newes  of
her,  so  that  I  verily  thought  she  had  beene  sunke :  for
I  came  in  company  with  her  in  the  Hope-well  my
selfe,  and  having  a  great  storme,  was  perfectly  perswaded,
that  the  Sea  had  eaten  her  up,  and  gave  her  for  lost,
having  twelve  of  the  lustiest  men  in  the  ship  in  her.
It  was  no  small  griefe  to  mee,  to  see  the  time  of  the  yeare
[I.  iii.  24^.]  to  weare  away,  and  could  not  get  my  lading  over  to  the
ship,  nor  durst  bring  the  ship  over  (for  there  was  no
riding  for  her,  and  she  past  the  Hand  oft)  all  hope
was  past  for  sixe  moneths.  I  made  enquirie  for  other
Vessels,  and  heard  of  a  Junck  that  belonged  to  Lantor,
but  she  was old, and lay neere the Hollanders ships  :

DAVID MIDDLKTON  ad.

i  ■
I  went  and  bought  her,  and  got  such  helpe  as  I could
to  trim  her.

The  want  of  my  twelve  men  put  me  to  much
trouble,  if  I  had  had  them  with  mee  all  the  while,  it
had  beene  a  great  shortning  to  our  Voyage  :  for  most
of  our  men  were  downe  upon  sore  Legges,  and  as  Sore  kgges.
soone  as  one  was  any  thing  well,  hee  must  into  the
Hope-well,  and  another  poore  lame  man  take  his
roome,  having  some  three  times  well  and  downe  againe.
Thus  I  was  driven  to  my  wits  end,  not  knowing  which
way  to  turne  me,  being  every  houre  in  danger  of  the
Hollander  to  come  and  take  the  Hand,  who  (as  by
intelligence  from  time  to  time  we  heard)  sought  sundry
meanes  to  make  me  away,  by  offering  large  Money  tor
Rogues  to  effect  it,  either  by  poison,  or  otherwise.
But  (I  praise  God)  I  had  some  friends  upon  the  Hand,
who  gave  mee  secret  warnings  of  such  men,  or  to  be
aware  of  such  men-slaves,  for  they  would  do  me  some
mischiefe,  and  came  for  the  purpose.  Whereupon  I
was  faine  to  get  all  the  Hands  to  draw  to  an  head,  and
fit  their  Caracols,  and  keepe  the  Hollanders  Pinnasses
from  comming  aboord  :  so  the  Pinnasses  durst  not
stirre,  and  the  Ilanders  landed  secretly  upon  Nero,  and
cut  off  sundry  of  the  Hollanders,  that  they  durst  not
stirre  out  of  the  Castle,  except  they  were  many,  and
well  fitted.

These  Ilanders  built  a  Fort  upon  the  side  of  an  hill,  Treacherous
from  whence  thev  shot  into  the  Castle,  which  troubled  °ffers-
the  Hollander  much.  So  we  were  sure  that  the  Pin-
nasses could  not  come  out  as  in  former  time,  to  cut
us  off  as  oftentimes  they  had  attempted,  making  nine
Voyages  in  her  my  selfe,  and  never  could  spare  above
seven  men  to  goe  in  her,  and  but  five  at  Puloway  :
the  rest  in  a  manner  lame  and  sicke,  in  a  most  villanous
Countrey,  where  all  things  were  so  deere,  that  one
should  eat,  and  not  to  be  had  but  at  some  times,
which  was  a  great  griefe  unto  us  all  :  with  such  toule
weather  of  raines continually, which was like to have

103

A.D.  IMHCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1610.

made  an  end  of  us  all.  The  Junke  which  I  had
bought  at  Lantor,  I  was  faine  to  get  away  untrimmed,
for  the  Hollanders  sent  me  one  of  their  ships,  seeing
men  at  worke  upon  her,  (when  they  had  fitted  her)
to  batter  her  to  peeces.  So  that  night  she  waighed,  I
got  the  helpe  of  two  Townes  to  lanch  her,  and  was
to  carry  her  a  great  way  upon  Rowlers.  This  we  did
by  night,  and  got  her  out  of  sight  by  day,  and  brought
her  to  Puloway,  and  were  faine  to  buy  Sayles  for
her,  and  all  things  else,  for  she  had  nothing  belonging
unto  her  but  the  bare  Hull.  I  set  the  Countrey
Carpenters  aworke,  which  did  her  little  good,  as  proved
afterwards  :  and  had  sent  to  the  ship  by  the  Hope-well,
that  they  should  bring  over  some  rigging  for  the  Junke,
and  that  Master  Davis  should  come  and  carry  her
over,  fitting  her  (as  well  as  I  could)  with  those  silly
Carpenters  which the  place  affbrdeth.

The  Hope-well  stayed three weekes, and wee never
heard  any  word what  was  become  of  her,  being  doubt-
full  whether  any  mischance  had  befallen her  : and wee
might  stay  long  before  they  aboord  could hire any to
come  over, the  Hollanders have so seased them, that
they  have  taken  carrying  of  victuals  to  the  Bandanesses.
Being reasonable faire weather, having the Shippes
M.  John Skiffe  at  Puloway,  I  determined  to  goe over my selfe,
Davis. ancj mak;e  Some shift, and not to let the time passe
doing nothing. For I could not hire men to carrie
over  the  Juncke, if  I would  have  laded  her  with  Silver.
So  I  put  it  in  practise,  seeing  the  Hope-well  came  not,
and not  having  a  sound  man  with  me  that  could  stand
on his  legges,  I  hyred  three  Blackes and put to Sea  :
being out of sight of Land, there arose a grievous
storme,  that  I  was faine to spoone afore the Sea, to
save  our  lives  : yet  (God  be  praised) wee  got  sight of
The  He  of  the  Land  of  Ceran,  and kept  her right  afore the Sea,
Lcian. cleane  from  our  ship,  and  comming  neere  the  shoare  (the
Sea-pcrill. Sea  aloft)  did  breake,  and  tooke  away  all  hope  of  com-
ming  safe  ashore. Night being  at hand, we strove  all

104

DAVID MIDDLETON  ad.

1610.
we  might  to  keepe  her  upon  the  Sea  till  day,  the  storme
increaseth,  that  no  remedie  but  wee  must  hazzard  all
to  put  into  the  Breach,  over  a  ledge  of  Rockes.
Which  we  did,  and  no  man  durst  forsake  the  Boat,  for
being  beaten  to  pieces  against  the  Rockes.  So  the  next
day  we  set  her  ashore,  being  brim-full,  and  had  all
things  that  we  had  washed  over-boord  :  we  laid  hands
on  the  Boat,  and  got  her  out  of  the  Suffe  of  the  Sea,
and  gave  God  thankes  for  preserving  us  from  so
apparant  danger.  Being  extreme  foule  weather,  with
much  raine,  wee  could  not  tell  what  to  doe.

The  Blackes  came  and  told  us, that  we  must  goe  to
Sea  presently,  if  wee  meant  to  save  our  lives. I  asked
one  of  them  the  reason  ; who  said,  it  was  the  Canibals  The  Countrey
Countrey,  and  if  they  got  sight  of  us,  they would kill  y  , ,*'"

A *  A 1.U-  1.1  .c  bals,  or  Man-

US  and  eate  us,  and nothing  would ransome a man ir  eaten

they  take  him  :  and  all  Christians  that  they  get,  they
rost  them  alive,  for  wrongs  that  the  Portugals  have
done  them  :  and  therefore  if  we  would  not  goe  to  Sea,
they  would  go  hide  themselves  :  for  the  Canibals  would
be  at  the  water  side  as  soone  as  they  can  look  about
to  descry  if  they  can  discover  any  Fisher-men  or  Pas-
sengers, that  by  stealth  passe  by  in  the  night.  Wee
hearing  this  (and  the  Moone  began  to  shew  the  wind
to  Duller,  and  a  Tyde  of  floud  with  us)  we  got  a-head
a  good  reasonable  pace,  and  by  day  we  were  cleere  of
their  Watches,  &  keeping  the  shore  close  aboord,  we
espyed  a  Hul  of  a  Bark,  came  &  rowed  neere  it,  &
knew  it  to  be  the  Diligence,  So  we  came  &  hayled  her,  TheDiligence.
&  there  were  a  couple  of  Englishmen  in  her,  who  told
me  that  the  same  night  (that  we  had  the  storme  in  the
Skiffe)  she  chopped  to  an  Anchor  there,  and  the  Cable
burst,  &  she  drave  ashore,  &  that  M.  Herniman  was
gone  to  the  Towne  to  get  men  to  have  her  up,  &  save
her.  I  landed  my  selfe  to  goe  to  the  Governour  of  the
Towne,  to  come  and  bring  some  helpe  to  save  her.
The  Sand  was  full  of  people  which  came  ot  purpose  to
have pillaged her, & I willed them to make a shot

i°5

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1610.

[I.  iii.  244.]  now  &  then,  which  stayed  them  from  comming  neere
them  :  &  comming  to  the  Town,  M.  Herniman  was
gone  by  land  to  the  ship.  I  ofFred  the  Governour
mony  to  have  help  to  save  her,  who  said,  he  would
gather  the  Country  together  within  two  or  three  daies,
but  I  told  him  that  if  it  blew,  she  would  be  lost
Inhumanity  of  within  an  houre.  One  of  Puloway  being  there,  who
the  llanders.  jcnew  tne  Barke,  and  was  earnest  with  the  Governour
to  save  her,  plainly  told  mee,  that  he  gaped  only  to
have  her  bulged,  that  hee  might  have  the  Planke  to
build  him  a  Praw.

Then  perceiving  there  was  no  helpe,  but  must  come
from  the  shippe,  I  hired  Guides  to  follow  Master
Herniman  and  tooke  one  of  myne  owne  men  to  keepe
me  company,  and  so  proceeded  by  land,  being  twelve
miles  from  the  ship.  Being  halfe  way,  we  came  to  a
great  water,  which  we  must  swimme  over  :  my  man
could  not  swimme,  so  I  sent  my  clothes  back,  all  but
a  Scarlet  Mandilian,  which  these  Blackes  must  carrie
over  for  me,  who  told  me,  the  River  was  full  of
Danger  of  Aligatas,  and  if  I  saw  any,  I  must  fight  with  him,  else
Crocodiles.  ^e  WOuld  kill  me  :  and  for  that  purpose  did  carry  a
great  Knife  in  his  mouth.  I  being  weary,  not  having
slept  in  two  nights,  tooke  the  water  before  the  Indians,
knowing  they  would  bee  over  before  me.  The  River
being  broad,  and  a  swift  current,  which  the  great  raine
(that  had  fallen)  had  made,  the  Indians  would  have  had
me  turned  backe,  but  being  the  better  halfe  way,  I
was  very  unwilling  :  being  in  the  water,  one  of  the
Indians  that  carryed  my  Mandilion,  had  got  a  great
Cane  (which  I  knew  not  of)  and  strooke  me  on  the
side,  who  feeling  the  stroke,  suspecting  it  had  beene  an
Perilous  mis-  Aligata,  dived  under  water,  where  the  current  got  such
taking.  ^old  on  meej  that  before  I could come up, I was in

the  Sea,  and  there  the  Sea  threw  mee  against  the  Beech,
and  bruised  my  backe  and  shoulder,  till  the  time  that
hee  came,  and  gave  me  the  end  of  the  Cane,  whereof
I  got  hold,  and  he  pulled  mee  out,  neere  hand  drowned  :

106

DAVID MIDDLKTOX  in.

1 6  io.
being  tossed  with  the  Sea,  that  every  Suffe  washed  mee
into  the  Sea  againe.  I  prayse  God,  I  escaped  this
danger  and  got  aboord,  after  I  had  rested  my  selfe  a
reasonable  space,  to  the  amazement  of  all  my  Company.
So  that  night,  I  sent  all  that  were  able  to  crawle,  to
save  the  Bark  :  which  (God  be  praysed)  they  did  with
much  toyle  of  so  small  help.  The  Country  would  not
let  any  man  lay  his  hand  to  save  her,  expecting  we
would forsake her,  that  they  might  enjoy her.

The  next  day  after  my  comming  aboord,  the  Hope-  The  arrival!
well  arrived  with  her  lading  of  Spice,  who  told  me,  °f*j?  HoPe~
they  had  been  driven  to  the  East-wards  of  Banda
thirtie  leagues,  in  a  most  cruell  storme,  which  continued
long,  and  caused  them  to  have  a  long  passage  to  get
to  the  wind-wards,  but  arrived  the  next  day  after.  I
went  from  Puloway  in  the  Boat,  and  laded  presently,
and  M.  Davis  was  taking  in  of  his  lading,  making  all
dispatch  that  might  be,  with  a  poore  lame  Crewe  (the
whole  being  absent  as  your  Worships  have  heard,  about
the  Diligence)  we  presently  unladed  her,  and  that  night
set  saile  in  her  my  selfe,  to  see  if  I  could  come  before
M.  Davis  came  from  thence  :  for  they  told  me,  the
Juncke  was  very  leaky,  and  I  desired  to  have  the  Hope-
well come  in  her  company,  whatsoever  should  befall  :
for  she  had  never  a  naile  in  her,  but  such  as  we  our-
selves put  into  her  :  and  having  none  there  of  our
owne,  we  caused  the  simple  Smith  that  the  countrey
affoorded,  to  make  some  Iron  pinnes,  for  nayles  they
can  make  none ;  and  in  most  needfull  places  wee
bestowed  them.  As  for  my  selfe  in  the  Hopewell,
striving  to  attaine  to  Puloway,  I  was  put  by  it  by  the
streame,  in  a  mighty  storme  ;  the  more  the  wind,  the
stronger  the  Current  :  beeing  put  to  Lee-wards,  we
were  long  before  we  could  fetch  the  ship,  and  were
faine  to  seeke  to  the  Ceran  shore,  or  else  had  been
quite  blowne  away.  Having  made  many  Voyages,  and
still  fallen  to  Lee-ward  of  the  ship,  I  caused  M.  Davis
to  search  the  land  for  some  Harbour, that when those

107

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

i6ro.

provisions  (that  we  could  make  to  get  over  the  goods)
should  come  over,  they  might  come  from  Pulovvay  to
the  ship  directly,  and  not  to  boult  it  up  to  windwards
when  she  was  deepe  laden,  which  beeing  emptie,  having
discharged  her  burden,  might  better  ply  it  to  wind-
wards :  for  beeing  light,  she  would  feele  her  oares,
which  was  effected.
Fearc  of  the  Jn my  long  stay from Puloway, and the Hands of

Hollanders, Banja tney  had  intelligence, that  the  ship  had  weighed
cause  of  cruell  \  b  ' .  _  r  . <=>

handling. anchor,  and  were perswaded, that 1 was gone in the

ship  for  feare  of  the  Hollanders,  who  were  determined
to  come  and  looke  me  out,  and  surprise  mee.  Where-
upon, the  countrey  people  would  not  deale  with  my
people  any  more,  nor  sell  them  victuals,  and  began ne
to  abuse  them,  and  rayle  upon  them  :  and  said,  that  I
was  gone  in  the  ship,  and  left  them  in  the  Countrey
as  the  Holanders  did,  and  would  come  with  a  Fleete,
as  they  have  done,  and  take  their  Countrey  from  them.
Then  they  were  determined  to  seize  upon  the  house,
and  take  the  people,  and  keep  them  prisoners  upon  an
high  Rocke,  and  sent  for  the  Sabandar,  that  by  whole
consent  they  might  come,  and  take  possession  of  all
the  goods.  When  the  Sabandar  was  come,  M.  Spalding
went  unto  him,  to  shew  him  of  the  hard  usage  of  the
Ilanders,  who  began  to  take  things  out  of  the  house  by
force.  He  said,  They  would  be  sure  we  should  not
doe  as  the  Holanders  had  done,  and  were  determined  to
lay  them  fast  :  for  the  ship  was  gone,  and  our  meaning
was  not  good.  All  that  Master  Spalding  could  doe,  would
not  perswade  them,  but  they  were  left  of  purpose.

The  next  day,  being  in  counsel  in  the  Church  :
they  resolved  to  send  the  men  up  prisoners  to  the
Rocke.  Then  there  came  one  and  told  them,  that  I
was  in  sight  in  the  Hopewell  ;  whereupon  they  broke
up  their  devillish  determination.  At  my  comming  a
shore,  M.  Spalding  told  mee  of  their  hard  usage  of
them,  and  what  feare  they  were  in.  The  Chiefe  of  all
the Hands  sate  before  our  doore  to  stay  my  comming  :

1 08

DAVID MIDDLETON  a.».

161

I  went  unto  them,  and  asked  the  reason,  Whv  thev
dealt  so  with  my  people  in  my  absence  :  They  told  me
plainely,  that  if  I  had  not  come  my  selfe,  they  would
have  taken  the  goods,  and  kept  the  men  safe.  So  I  told  [I.  iii.  245.]
them  the  reason  of  the  remooving  of  the  ship,  and  said
further,  No  marvell  that  the  Holanders  built  a  Castle
to  defend  themselves,  when  I  beeing  in  friendship  with
them,  and  leaving  men  amongst  them,  with  Commodities
that  the  countrey  stood  in  neede  of,  and  made  the  Hol-
anders mine  Enemies,  which  were  their  enemies,  and
sought  all  the  meanes  that  in  me  lay  to  doe  all  the  Hands
good,  (as  they  all  very  well  knew)  should  receive  such
hard  measure  at  their  hands.  They  said  plainly,  I  must
not  blame  them  to  be  jealous  of  Christians :  for  many
yeeres,  the  Portugals  and  Holanders  have  done  as  I  have  Portugal*  and
done ;  but  in  the  ende  they  saw  apparantly,  they  would  Hollanders
have  their  Countrey  from  them :  yet  now  I  was  come
my  selfe,  they  hoped  I  would  not  thinke  the  worse  of
them.  So  wee  became  good  friends,  and  bought  Spice
apace :  and  had  bought  my  whole  ships  lading.  Having
an  over-plus  of  Stock  left  I  thought  I  could  not  doe  your
Worships  better  service,  then  in  laying  out  your  money,
and  therefore  made  shift  to  send  the  ships  lading  away:
and  laded  thirtie  Tunnes  more  in  a  Juncke,  and  bought
another  Juncke  of  fortie  Tunnes  (and  Spice  to  lade  her)
which  was  not  then  launched,  but  men  at  worke  upon
her :  and  left  M.  Spalding  to  come  in  her,  and  M.
Chapman,  for  Master  (a  very  honest  and  sufficient  man)
with  twelve  persons  in  the  whole.

§ III.

His  departure  for Bantam, escape  from the
Hollanders,  and  returne  home.

Fter this, I came  and  tooke  my  leave  ot  all  the
Countrey,  in most  loving  manner,  and  gave  them
1  divers  gifts  for  a  farwell,  intreating  them  to  helpe
Master  Spalding, if  hee  should  stand  in need  of  them :

109

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1610.

for  I  beeing  gone,  hee  must  rely  upon  them.  So  with
many  promises  of  all  lcindnesse,  I  tooke  my  leave  both
of  Master  Spalding,  and  of  his  company,  and  all  the
Hand.  Leaving  Master  Chapman  for  Master  in  the  new
Juncke,  I  was  faine  to  carry  over  the  Hopewell  my  selfe,
He  departeth  ant|  set  saile  the  seventh  of  September  from  Puloway,
^he'selfnTof  with  the  JLincke  Middleton  in  my  Company  (having
September.  J  stayed  longer  in  the  Countrey,  then  ever  any  Englishman
did)  arrived  at  the  ship  the  tenth.  And  there  I  heard
that  the  ship  was  not  fully  laden  :  for  there  were  seven
Tunnes  of  the  Nuttes  spoyled,  that  came  last  from
Puloway,  and  lost.  There  I  laded  the  ship  out  of  the
Hopewel,  and  the  Juncke,  and  turned  off  the  Hopewel,
which  had  done  us  very  good  service,  and  brought  an
hundred  Tunnes  of  goods  aboord  ;  being  so  wormeaten,
that  we  pumped  alwayes  in  her,  being  but  halfe  inch
planck,  and  never  could  stay  or  have  any  time  to  sheath
her.  After  the  shippe  was  wholly  laden,  wee  set  saile
Keeling  bay.  from  Keeling  Bay  the  same  day,  having  never  a  top-sayle
over  head  :  For  I  had  caused  Master  Davis  to  remove
the  ship  from  whence  I  left  her,  to  another  Bay,  seven
leagues  to  the  Westward,  where  I  said  I  would  come  with
the  Hopewell ;  and  the  Juncke  where  1  found  them  :
now  the  ship,  in  remooving  had  her  top-sailes  blowne
from  the  yard,  having  beene  at  the  yard  ever  since  we
came  into  the  Countrey  for  feare  of  Treason,  and  the
Hollanders  who  would  seeke  our  overthrow.  The  Juncke
going  better  then  we,  having  no  top-sailes,  I  sent  for  the
Master  of  her  aboord,  and  wrote  a  Letter  to  Bantam
by  them  :  and  requested  them  to  make  all  the  speed
they  could  thither,  and  I  hoped  I  should  come  after  them,
and  overtake  them,  when  I  could  make  my  top-sailes,
which  wee  plyed  night  and  day  :  and  made  Master  Mus-
grave  his  Mate :  wee  in  the  ship  having  our  top-sailes
finished,  did  overtake  the  Juncke  the  sixteenth  of  the
same,  and  comming  up  to  them,  they  could  not  keepe
us  company,  except  wee  should  take  in  our  top-sailes :
and to presse the  Juncke  with a saile they  durst not.

DAVID MIDDLETON

1 6 1  o.
I  called  unto  them,  and  bade  them  beare  such  saiie,  that
they  doe  not  wrong  her  (for  feare  a  leake  should  breake
upon  them)  and  come  to  Bantam ;  for  mee  to  keepe
by  them,  could  doe  them  small  pleasure,  for  wee  had  long
businesse  at  our  comming  to  Bantam,  to  trimme  the
shippe  for  England.  So  wee  tooke  leave  of  them,  and
bore  ahead,  and  the  ninth  of  October  arrived  in  Bantam  They  arrive  at
Roade,  where  Master  Hemsworth  and  Edward  Neetles  Uant«m  the
were  both  dead,  within  a  short  space  after  my  going  away  cjctot>/r
from  Bantam  :  so  that  all  the  goods  I  left  at  Bantam,  were
yet  there,  and  not  a  yard  of  cloth  sold  to  the  Chineses.
At  our  comming  to  Bantam,  being  very  weake  (for  most
part  of  the  company  had  sore  legs)  I  was  driven,  that  all
men  that  had  any  sores,  or  were  sickly,  should  remayne
aboord  by  the  Surgeon,  and  manured  the  Junckes  with  all
my  choice  men,  being  all  in  perfect  health.  There  came
a  small  ship,  that  had  beene  at  China,  and  at  Japan,
Tarnata,  Makian,  Coramandell,  Patane,  and  Jor,  and
came  to  Amboyna,  and  so  to  Banda  to  seeke  for  lading,
but  could  get  none,  so  was  faine  to  go  tor  Bantam  to  lade
Pepper.  This  ship  when  she  came  to  Banda,  came  neere
the  Hand  of  Puloway,  and  let  flye  all  her  Ordnance,  and  a
shot  came  through  another  mans  house,  through  two
Suckles  of  Mace  in  our  house,  and  strooke  the  Pursers
Mate  upon  the  shinne,  yet  broke  not  his  legge,  but  went
into  a  Chest  of  fine  Pintados,  and  spoyled  many :  the
poore  man  lay  long  upon  it  (sixe  moneths  at  the  least)
not  able  to  stand.

The  Hollanders  seeing  us  to  passe  by  them  at  Banda,
day  by  day  with  Spice  (who  after  my  comming  bought
not  one  pound,  I  wrought such  meanes  to procure  my
lading  first)  were  starke  madde,  having two  great ships  [I.  iii.  246.]
halfe  laden  before  I  came  into  the  Countrey : wherefore
they  determined  to  come  with  their  ships  and  Pinnasses,  Ho/Zanders
and  take  the  Hand, and  all the Spice  that  I  had  there,  {"!*.*[£
knowing I  had store bought,  and fitted such a time,  £?£%
as  that  they  might  easily  have  done  it. The  Bandaneses
being  fleshed  with  the  slaughter  of  some  ot  the  straggling

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1610.

Hollanders,  which  they  had  murthered,  tooke  all  the  able
men  to  give  assault  to  the  Hollanders  Castles :  and
determined  to  fire  their  ships,  at  an  Anchor,  and  burne
the  old  Sunne  close  to  the  Castle  gates.  All  able  men
being  gone  to  the  Warres,  and  not  passing  fortie  men  left,
beside  women  and  children,  the  two  great  ships  and
three  Pinasses  came  out  under  saile,  with  three  Boates
apiece  at  their  sternes,  and  the  Frigots,  two  Prowes  a
piece  to  land  men  :  They  chose  such  a  time,  that  they
might  have  come  ashore,  and  taken  every  man,  one,  in
their  armes,  and  carryed  them  quite  away,  for  there  were
no  Weapons  left  in  the  Hand,  but  what  we  had.  But  it
pleased  God  to  deale  better  with  us,  for  being  come  out
of  the  Harbour,  they  could  not  get  in  againe,  it  prooved
calme,  and  the  Tyde  of  Ebbe  (being  Springing  Tyde)  did
set  the  shippes  to  the  Southwards  of  the  Hand,  and  the
Pinnasses  must  follow  the  ships,  for  feare  the  Caricols
would  have  had  them.  Two  dayes  they  did  what  they
could  to  come  backe,  so  they  were  forced  to  proceed
for  Bantam  to  lade  Pepper :  Being  long  becalmed  by  the
way  to  Bantam,  they  descryed  a  shippe  right  to  Leewards
of  them,  which  they  thought  could  not  be  any  Saile,
but  wee  :  wherefore  it  was  agreed  by  counsell  that  they
should  come  and  fight  with  mee,  and  take  me,  and  all  the
Spice  from  mee :  and  what  their  determination  was  to
have  done  with  the  ship  and  Company,  I  could  not  learne.
It  proved  to  be  the  Provincia  of  Holland,  a  great  ship
that  was  bound  to  Banda,  to  looke  for  lading,  and  had
beene  at  the  Moluccoes,  but  could  not  get  one  pound  of
Spice.  So  those  two  ships  told  him,  that  they  came  from
thence,  with  halfe  their  lading,  so  all  three  came  to  Bantam
to  lade  Pepper  :  thus  the  Lord  kept  me  out  of  their  hands.
Eight  Holland  There  came  eight  ships  to  Bantam  for  Pepper,  and
ships.  must  stay  a  yeare  for  it :  so  the  shippes  that  must  stay

a  yeare  for  their  lading,  tooke  in  plankes  and  provision  of
building,  and  were  sent  with  them  to  Banda  and  Tarnata,
(for  their  Castles,  and  to  make  Flankers  to  make  them-
selves strong)  and  were  sent  away  after  I  came  to  Bantam.

112

DAVm MIDDLKTON  aa

i  6 1  o.

My lame Company being very weake fell sicke, and
my  Gunner,  and  one  of  my  Quarter Masters  dyed,  and
three more  presently  after  them. The  Carpenters  fitting
the ship,  and the Westerly Monson come, there was
no hope of  the Junckes comming till Mav : Master
Davis being sicke,  and very hardly escaping with life,
Master Clayborne weake  and sicke, and my selfe not Master
well with  griefe, to see  in  what poore  estate  we  were, 7 l,omai  c,ay-
made all speed that we might to be  gone from that
contagious  Countrey,  hoping,  that  if  we  were  out  at  Sea,
my  people  would  mend. Now  seeing  the  Juncke  came
not,  which  if  but  one  of  them  had  come, I would  have
remayned in the Countrey, and fitted her to goe for
Succadania,  (a place where the Hollanders have made  Succadania.
great  Voyages)  but  seeing  they  came not, I thought I
should  doe  your  Worships  as  good  service  to  come  home
in the  ship, (if  it should please God  to  take Master
Davis,  and Master  Clayborne  away)  to  bring  home  the
ship : and therefore set up my rest to come home.
Three  dayes  before  we  set  saile  from  Bantam,  foure  Saile  Foure  Sai/e  o,
of  a  new  Fleet  of  Hollanders  came  in  (which  brought  in
great  store  of  women,  to  inhabite  those  places  which  they  Women  to
had  conquered) and  were nine in  the whole, and five  '
remayned  behind. Those  that  came  into  the  Road,  were
very  weake,  so  that  the  other ships  company  that  were
in  the  Road,  were  faine  to  fetch  them  in  one  by  one.
That  same  day  came  a  Slupe  from  Tarnata  (sent  with
Letters to Amboyno, and so to Bantam) with newes,
that  the  Hollanders  had  lost  their  Admirall,  which  went  Dutch
to  Manilia ;  for  his  head  was  shot  off,  and  the  ship  taken ,.r
and two more, and  another (that  would  not  yeeld)  set  Three  ships  of
himselfe  a  fire : so  they  lost  three  ships  by  fight,  and  one  the  Hollanders
burned,  being:  all  great  shippes  of  one  thousand  Tunnes  teken^anitme
i-  j  u c  i.1.  c  burnt  at

apiece, boure daves before these newes came rrom ,, ...
* ...  ~  ii r i tt  it i  i  •  i  •  Mamaa.

Manilla,  a  Generall  of  the  Hollanders,  which  came  into

the  Indies  foure  yeares  passed, called  Paulus  VancarleS,  Pauhu  /

who had beene  taken  by  the  Spaniards at Tarnata, by  cer

Spanish  Gallies  (within  foure  monethes  after  I  came  from

m  113  H

A.D.

l6lO.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

thence  the  last  Voyage)  remained  a  Prisoner  in  the
Master  of  the  Campes  House  at  Tarnata,  and  all  his
company  were  chained  in  the  Gallies.  These  Prisoners
the  Hollanders  would  have  ransomed  with  money,  offer-
ing a  very  great  ransome :  which  the  Spaniard  would  not
accept,  but  would  have  them  deliver  up  the  Forts,  and  be
gone ;  so  they  would  set  their  Generall,  and  the  rest  at
libertie,  or  otherwise  not.  The  Hollanders  would  by
no  meanes  withdraw  their  forces,  so  the  Generall  re-
mained Prisoner  a  yeare  and  a  quarter,  and  then  was
released  by  the  new  Governour  that  came  from  Manilia,
to  take  the  Government  of  the  Moluccoes,  who  was
intercepted,  and  taken  by  two  ships  of  the  Hollanders,
which  released  their  Generall  with  exchange  of  man  for
man.  This  Generall  was  the  second  time  taken  by  the
Spanish  Gallies  (after  a  long  fight)  and  presently  sent
Prisoner  to  the  Manilia.

Having  left  Richard  Wooddies  for  Chiefe  in  the  house,
and order for Master Spalding (when God shall send
him to Bantam) to determine  a Voyage  to Succadania
in Borneo for  Diamonds,  I  tooke  my  leave  of  them  of
Bantam,  and set saile  the  sixteenth of  November, and
had a  very good passage to the Roade of Saldanha ;
where  I came  to  an  Anchor  the  one and twentieth of
January, and tooke in water, and made all dispatch
[I.  iii.  247.] that I could for England  :  and found that  my  Brother
Sir  Henry  Middleton  had  beene  there,  and  came  in  the
foure  and  twentieth  of  July,  and  departed  the  tenth  of
August,  and  there  I  found  the  Copie  of  a  Letter,  which
my Brother had written to your Worships, and sent
home  by  a  Hollander the  next  day  that  hee  came  into
the  Road :  which if  you have not received, you may
apparantly  see,  that they  will  detaine  all  your  Worships
Letters,  and  you shall have the Copie. Thus have  I
at  large  certified  your  Worships  of  all  matters  in  ample
manner,  which  I  thought  no  lesse  then  my  dutie  to  doe,
having  made  relation ot  all those  places  from  whence I
came. And  (I  prayse  God)  I  have  aboord  one hundred

114

Paulus  taken
the  second
time  and  sent
to  Manilla.

Hee  departeth
from  Bantam,

Saldanha.

DAVID MIDDLETON

1610.

thirtie  nine  Tunnes,  six  Cathayes,  one  quartcrnc  two
pound  of  Nutmegs,  and  sixe  hundred  two  and  twentie
Suckettes  of  Mace,  which  maketh  thirtie  sixe  Tunnes,
fifteene  Cathayes,  one  quarterne,  one  and  twentie  pound,
and  have  left  in  the  Juncke  with  Master  Herniman,  foure
and  twentie  Tunnes,  seven  Cathayes,  two  quartcrnes  and
eight  pound,  which  cost  with  the  charge  25071.].  Rials,
of  which  summe  I  have  disbursed  five  hundred  of  mine
owne,  for  Spice  which  lyeth  most  upon  the  Orlope  :
and  being  in  bond  unto  your  Worships,  shall  remaine
untill  I know  your  pleasures, whether  I shall  enjoy  it.

Chap. XL

The  sixth  Voyage,  set  forth  by  the  East-Indian
Company  in  three  Shippes  ;  the  Trades  In-
crease, of  one  thousand  Tunnes,  and  in  her
the  Generall  Sir  Henry  Middleton,  Admirall  ;
the  Pepper-Corne  of  two  hundred  and  fiftie,
Vice-Admirall,  the  Captaine  Nicholas  Doun-
ton  :  and  the  Darling  of  ninetie.  The  Barke
Samuel  followed  as  a  Victualler  of  burthen  one
hundred  and  eightie  :  written  by  Sir  H.
Middleton.

§. I.

The  proceeding  of  his Voyage till  hee came  to
Moha  in  the Redde  Sea.

He  first  of  May 16 10. wee came  to  an Cape  Verde.
Anchor in the Roade of Cape Verde,
under an Hand : where wee found a
Frenchman  of  Deepe,  that  was  setting  up
a  small  Pinnasse  upon  the  Hand.

The  second,  the  Carpenters  of  all  the
shippes  went  in  hand  with  my  mayne
Mast  pulling  off  the  fishes,  we  found  the  Mast  exceeding
bad,  and  above  the  upper  Decke  some  three  foot  wrung

ri5

A.D.

l6lO.

The  Samuell.

The  commen-
dation of  Cape
Verde.

They  arrive
in  the  Road  of
Sa/danha.

*  M.  Feme  II in
a  Letter  which
I  have,  written
from  thence,
mentions  two
French  ships
in  like  i mp hy-
men t,  which  he
suspected  to
lye  in  wait  for
distressed  ships
from  the
Indies.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

more  than  halfe  asunder  :  had  wee  met  with  any  foule
weather,  it  must  needs  have  gone  by  the  boord.  I  sent
one  of  my  Carpenters  a-land  to  the  maine  to  search
for  Trees,  who  returned  that  night,  and  brought  mee
word  that  hee  had  seene  some  which  would  serve  our
turne.

The  third,  we  beganne  to  unlade  the  Samuel,  and
sent  Carpenters  a-land  to  cut  downe  Trees,  having  leave
of  the  Alcayda,  who  came  aboord  and  dined  with  me,
I  gave  him  a  piece  of  Roan  cloth,  which  I  bought  of  the
Frenchman,  and  other  Trifles.

The  fifteenth,  we  made  an  end  of  watering,  all  our
Caske  being  full  :  we  stowed  all  our  Boats  this  night
and  fitted  to  be  gone  the  next  morning.  This  place  of
Cape  Verde  is  the  best  place  I  know  for  our  outward
bound  ships :  for  that  the  Road  is  excellent  good,  fit
for  dispatch  of  any  businesse,  and  fresh  fish  to  be  had
in  great  plentie :  besides  it  is  not  any  thing  out  of  the
way.  I  called  a  Counsell  of  Captaine  Dounton  and  the
Masters  what  course  was  best  to  hold  till  wee  came  to
the  Line,  so  it  was  concluded  South  South-west  for  sixtie
leagues  :  and  then  South  South-east  til  we  grew  neere
the  Line,  and  then  to  hale  over  Easterly.  We  dismissed
the  Samuel.

The  foure  and  twentieth  of  July,  we  came  into  the
Road  of  Saldanha,  and  saluted  the  Dutch  Admirall  with
five  Pieces  of  Ordnance,  and  hee  returned  the  like,  there
were  also  other  two  Holland  ships  which  came  to  make
traine  Oyle  of  Seales  :  they  had  made  three  hundred  Pipes.
*This  day  I  went  a-land  and  found  out  the  names  of
Captaine  Keeling,  and  others  bound  home  in  Januarv,
1609.  And  also  my  Brother  Davids  name  bound  out  in
August  the  ninth,  1609.  And  also  a  Letter  buried
under ground according: to agreement made betweene

o  DO

him  and  mee  in  England  :  it  was  so  consumed  with  the
dampe  of  the  aire,  that  I  could  not  reade  any  part
thereof.  The  sixe  and  twentieth,  we  set  up  a  Tent  for
my  sicke  men,  and  then  we  had  them  all  a  land  to  aire

116

SIR HENRY MIDDLETON  a*.

1610.

our  ships. From  this  day,  till  the  day  of  our  departure,  [I.  iii.  1

not  any  thing  happened  worth  the  writing.

The  sixt  of  September,  latitude  twentie  three  degrees

thirtie  minutes, the  winde all Southerly  a good gale  :

this  day  after  dinner  we  saw  land,  and  before night  wee

came  to  an  anchor  in  S.  Augustines  Bay,  where  we  found The  bay  of  $.

the  Union  distressed  for  lacke  of  victualls. The  seventh c  Uf?us

j t  •  tv  11  -r t  1  1  s-  Laurence.

day,  1  went  in  my  rinnasse  aland  to  see  it 1  could  get

any  fresh  victualls  : but  we  could  not  get  any  :  wee  got

wood  and  water  aboord,  and  so  returned  to  our  Ships.

The  tenth,  we  steered  alongst  the  land  with  a  good
gale  of  wind  at  South-east,  making  account  we  should
have  gone  at  least  twentie  sixe  leagues,  but  we  went
but  twentie  two  leagues,  by  reason  the  Current  setteth
to  the  Southward :  her  course  North  two  and  twentie
leagues.  The  eleventh,  we  steered  from  noone  till  night
North  North-east  along  the  land,  which  was  North
%.  a  point  Easterly  way,  and  till  midnight  North  North-
west. From  midnight  till  day  North  by  West,  and  so
till  noone  North,  all  her  true  way  North  North-west
J.  a  point,  North  twentie  seven  leagues.  We  have  a
great  Current  against  us  :  for  I  made  account  wee  should
have  gone  five  and  thirtie  leagues :  I  observed,  and  the
latitude  was  one  and  twentie  degrees  five  minutes,  wind
East  South-East.  The  twelfth  we  steered  betweene  the
North  North-east,  and  North  by  East,  her  true  way
North  Westerly  ^.  of  a  point  latitude  nineteene  degrees,
fortie  eight  minutes,  shee  ranne  twentie  seven  leagues.
The  Current  we  find  this  last  foure  and  twentie  houres,
setteth  to  the  North-ward,  the  wind  variable.

The  thirteenth,  we  steered  with  little  wind  and  calmes
for  the  most  part  North  by  East,  her  true  way  North
J.  part  West,  the  wind  as  the  day  before :  she  went
fifteene  leagues  more  then  I  would  have  given  her,  so
that  I  find  the  Current  setteth  to  the  North-ward,  by
my  observation,  latitude  nineteene  degrees  tenne  minutes.
The  twentieth  at  noone,  her  latitude  eleven  degrees  ten
minutes,  the wind  vering  Easterly, with calmes, varia-

117

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1610.

tion twelve  degrees  fortie  minutes. This  afternoone  we

The  Iks  <le saw  land,  being  the  lies  of  Queriba,  which  are  dangerous

.juri  a  jqw jjancjs environed  with rockes  and  shoales.

I  I .  dtvvccs

tenne  minutes,  The  first  of  October,  1610.  wee  steered  North-east,
neere  the  coast  her  way  North-east  by  North  \.  North  twenty  seven
of  Africa.  leagues,  the  wind  for  the  most  part  South-east.  The
second,  we  steered  North-east,  her  way  North-east  by
North  ^.  North  fiftie  seven  leagues.  Note  the  Current
hath  carried  us  these  eight  and  fortie  houres  to  the
North-ward,  more  then  by  reckoning  we  could  give  her
by  twentie  eight  leagues,  which  we  found  true  by  our
latitude,  which  was  three  degrees  thirtie  minutes  South
latitude  :  variation  twelve  degrees  twenty  foure  minutes,
wind  South  and  South-east.  The  third,  we  steered
North-east  by  East,  her  true  way  North-east  \.  North
fortie  one  leagues,  which  is  twelve  leagues,  carried  by
the  Current  to  the  North-wards  :  for  I  should  have  given
her  but  nine  and  twentie  leagues,  latitude  two  degrees
South,  the  winds  variable  betweene  the  South  and
South-east.

The  fourth,  we  steered  North-east  by  East,  her  true
way  North-east  ^.  point  Northerly  fortie  five  leagues  ;
whereof  foureteene  leagues  carried  with  the  Current,
South  latitude  foureteene  minutes,  variation  thirteene
degrees,  wind  variable,  betweene  the  South-east  and
We  crost  the  South,  we  crost  the  line  this  afternoone.  The  fifth,  we
JEqmnoctiall.  steered  twelve  houres  North-east  by  East,  and  twelve
houres  East  North-east,  her  true  way  North-east,  little
Northerly  fortie  seven  leagues :  shee  hath  been  carried
to  the  North  by  the  Current  at  the  least  twenty  leagues,
latitude  North  one  degree  thirtie  minutes,  the  wind  for
the  most  part  South  South-east,  with  sometimes  almost
calme.  The  sixt,  we  steered  East  by  North,  and  East
North-east  :  her  true  way  North-east  by  East  little
Easterly  thirtie  eight  leagues,  helped  by  the  Current  to
the  North-ward eighteene  leagues : latitude  two  degrees

Do  O

thirtie minutes, the wind South South-east, variation
foureteene  degrees  two  minutes.

118

SIR HENRY MIDDLETON  ajd.

i  6  io.

The  seventh,  we  steered  Kast  by  North,  her  true  way
East  North-east  \.  point  Northerly,  eight  and  twentie
leagues :  latitude  three  degrees  five  minutes,  wind  all
Southerly  :  variation  fifteene  degrees,  by  the  Current
tenne  leagues.  The  eighth,  we  steered  East  North-east,
her  true  way  North-east  by  East  £.  point,  Northerly  fortie
leagues:  latitude  foure  degrees  twentie  seven  minutes,
the  wind  South-west,  variation  sixteene  degrees  foure
minutes.  The  ninth,  wee  steered  North-east  by  East,
her  true  way  North-east  J  a  point  Northerly  twenty  seven
leagues,  latitude  five  degrees,  three  and  twentie  minutes,
wind  South-west,  variation  sixteene  degrees  foure
minutes.

The tenth calme :  Latitude in rive degrees, one  and They  loose  t'c
twenty  minutes. Here  we  lost  the  Current  that  set  to  Cur"

the  North-ward,  and  were  carried  to  the  South-ward  two
miles,  variation  seventeene  degrees  tenne  minutes.  The
eleventh,  calme,  latitude  five  degrees  twentie  minutes,
lost  one  mile.  The  twelfth,  calme,  latitude  five  degrees,
lost  by  being  carried  to  the  South-ward  twentie  miles.
The  thirteenth,  we  steered  two  watches  North-east,  and
foure  watches  North  North-east :  her  true  way  as  I  guest
North  North-east,  by  reason  the  Current  countervailes
the  variation,  she  ranne  seventeene  leagues  :  latitude  five
degrees,  fiftie  five  minutes,  the  wind  West  by  North,
variation nineteene  degrees  tenne  minutes.

The  foureteenth,  we  steered  North,  her  way  allowing
her  variation,  which  is  nineteene  degrees  fortie  minutes,  [I.  Hi.  249.]
should  be  one  point  £.  to  the  West-ward ;  but  the
variation  daily  rising,  sheweth  we  are  carried  to  the
East-ward  by  the  Current,  more  then  the  variation  A  Current.
commeth  unto,  she  went  this  day  forty  leagues,  the
wind  West  South-west,  latitude  seven  degrees  fifteene
minutes :  her  true  way  North-east,  carried  to  the  East
tenne  leagues.  The  fifteenth,  wee  steered  North,  our
latitude  eight  degrees  fifty  five  minutes,  her  true  way
North-east  fortie  five  leagues,  her  way  should  have
been North by West,  Westerly by the variation, but

rig

A.D.

DtUU

Irmatuh.

The  lie  of
Zaeotora.

Tamerin.

The  King
entertaineth
Sir  Henry
Mi  (id let  on.

PURCHAS HIS 1MLGRIMES

the  Current  hath  caried  her  to  the  East-ward  of  her
course  scventeene  leagues  :  the  variation  nineteen  degrees
five minutes, the  wind  West  South-west.

The  sixteenth,  we  steered  away  North,  her  way  by  the
Current,  North  by  East  thirtie  sixe  leagues,  carried  con-
trary to  the  variation  five  leagues  to  the  East-ward,  as
1  imagine:  the  wind  South  South-west,  variation  nine-
teene  degrees  eight  minutes.  The  seventeenth,  wee
steered  North,  and  ranne  nineteene  leagues :  in  the
morning  early  wee  did  see  the  Duas  Irmanas  sixe  leagues
off,  bearing  North  by  West  of  us  :  the  wind  at  South-
west, variation  eighteene  degrees  fiftie  five  minutes.
The  eighteenth  at  night,  we  came  to  an  anchor  in  a  sandy
Bav,  in  the  He  of  Zacotora,  whose  latitude  was  twelve
degrees  twenty  five  minutes:  in  the  evening  we  went
on  land  with  our  Sayne,  and  got  great  store  of  fish :
wind  East.

The  one  and  twentieth,  we  weighed  for  to  ply  for  the
road  of  Tamerin,  the  chiefe  towne  of  the  Hand,  but  we
found  the  wind  at  the  East,  and  East  by  South,  which
was  right  as  wee  should  goe,  so  that  we  could  not  get  the
place  till  the  five  and  twentieth  day.  The  latitude  of
Tamarin  is  twelve  degrees  thirtie  minutes,  the  variation
is  nineteene  degrees  eighteene  minutes.  The  Towne
standeth  at  the  foote  of  high  ragged  hills :  the  road
is  all  open  betweene  the  East  by  North,  and  West  North-
west. We  anchored  in  ten  fathomes  water,  good  ground.
The  five  and  twentieth  in  the  afternoon,  I  sent  M.  Femel
well  accompanied  ashore,  with  a  present  to  the  King,
which  was  a  vest  of  cloth,  a  peice  of  Plate,  and  a  Sword
blade  ; he  promised  all  kindnesses.

The  sixe  and  twentieth,  I  went  on  shore  with  the  chiete
Merchants  with  me,  and  a  good  guard  or  armed  men  :  I
was  conducted  to  the  Kings  house,  where  at  his  chamber
doore  he  came  and  intertained  me:  he  brought  me  into
his  Chamber,  where  being  set  in  a  chaire  by  him,  there
passed  manv  complements,  which  I  omit.  1  enquired
concerning the  trade  of  the Red  Sea,  and  he  commended

I  20

SIR HENRY MII)I)I,KTOX

161  .

it highly, saying, the people of  Aden and Moha were

good  people,  and  would bee  glad  of  trade  with  us;  and

that  the  Ascension had sold  all her  goods  there  at  good

rates,  and  came  so  lightly  to  this  place,  that  they  tooke  in

good  store  of  Ballast. This  newes  gave  me  good  content :

I  demaunded  leave  to  set  up  my  Pinnasse  upon  his  Hand,

but  he  would  not  graunt  it  in this  roade  ; but  if  I  would

returne,  and  doe  it  at  the  place  where  we  first  anchored,

he  was  content : he  feared  if  we  stayed in this  roade  of

Tamerin to set her up, we would feare  all men for

comming  thither. He  had  sent  all  his  Alloes  to  Fartaque Fartaque  In

to his Father, King of  that  part  of  Arabia Fcelix : his  Arabm-

chiefs  Citie  is  called  Chushem,  where  he  is  resident. I Chushem  or

asked  him  leave  to  wood  and  water  :  for  the  one,  which

was  water,  he  gave  me  free  leave ;  but  for  wood  I  must

pay  very  deare,  if  I  would  have  any  ;  saying  withall,  That

all other nations which came thither, payed for their

water; but of  mee he would not demaund  any  thing.

He  confirmed  the  losse  of  the  Ascension,  and  her  Pinnasse,  The  casting

which  was  no  little  griefe  to  me  to  heare. I  demaunded  away  °fthe

if  they  had  left  any  writing  behind  them  ; hee  answered

me, he had one,  but his servant had lost it ; I was

very  earnest  to  have  seene  it ;  but  it  could  not  be  found.

He  animated  me  to  goe  for  the  Red  Sea,  but  diswaded

me  from  seeking  trade  in  the  Countrey  of  Fartaque : for

that  he  doubts  his  Father  would  not  permit  us. I  and  all

my  people  dined  with  the King, which  beeing  done, I

tooke  my  leave,  and  went  aboord.

The  seventh  of  November,  we  steered  West  by  South,
and  West  South-west  alongst  the  Land  :  we  sawe  about
tenne  of  the  clocke  an  high  land,  which  we  imagined  to
be  the  high  land  of  Aden,  it  riseth  like  Abbadel-Curia,  Aden.
and  may  be  seene  a  great  way  off.  In  the  evening  about
sixe  of  the  clocke,  we  came  to  an  anchor  before  the  Towne
in  twenty  fathome  water,  sandy  ground.  The  Towne
standeth  at  the  foote  of  a  Mountaine  in  a  Vale,  and
maketh  a  faire  shew :  it  is  invironed  with  a  stone  wall,
and Forts  and  Bulwarks  in  many  places;  but  how  they

121

a.d.  IM'KCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1610.

he  appoointed  we  know  not.  This  night  there  came
a  small  Boat  from  the  Towne  to  view  us,  but  came  not
aboord  :  the  wind  East  South-east  we  stood  in,  standing
over  we  were  carried  to  the  East-ward  with  the  Current
at  least  twentie  leagues,  contrary  to  our  expectation,  who
rather  thought  the  Current  would  have  set  to  the  West-
wards.

The  eighth,  came  a  small  Boat  off  the  Towne  aboord,
with  three  Arabians  in  her :  they  said  they  were  sent
by  the  Lieftenant  of  the  Towne,  to  know  what  Nation
we  were,  and  wherefore  we  came  thither,  sending  us
word  by  them,  if  we  were  Englishmen,  we  were  heartily
Captain Shar-  welcome,  and  that  the  yeere  before,  Captaine  Sharpeigh
PatgAdan dbe7  had  been  tnere'  anc*  from  thence  went  to  Moha,  where  he
Moha  in  the  made  sale  of  all  his  goods :  I  demaunded  of  one  of  them
yeere  1609.  the  name  of  the  Basha,  and  whether  he  were  a  good  man  :
he  answered,  his  name  was  Jeffer  Basha,  and  that  the
Basha  that  last  was,  was  very  bad,  this  a  little  better ;  but
all  the  Turkes  in  generall  starke  naught.  I  asked,  if
Moha  were  a  good  place  of  trade  ?  they  answered,  that
there  was  one  man  in  Moha,  that  would  buy  all  our
goods  :  I  sent  my  Pinnasse  a  land,  and  John  Williams
one  of  my  Factors  in  her,  who  spake  the  Arabique
language,  at  their  comming  ashore  they  were  kindly
entertained.
[I.  iii.  250.]  The  ninth  in  the  morning,  I  sent  my  Pinnasse  ashore
for  a  Pilot  for  Moha :  in  the  meane  while  the  Boate  was
ashore,  we  brought  our  selves  loose,  and  under  sayle :
they  returned  without  a  Pilot,  and  would  not  let  us  have
any,  without  three  of  our  chiefe  Merchants  to  be  left  for
pledges :  they  intreated  me  not  to  depart  with  all  our
ships,  but  to  leave  one  for  that  Port ;  and  that  they
would  buy  all  the  goods  in  her  ;  we  beeing  desirous
of  trade  upon  good  consideration,  thought  tit  to  leave
the  Pepper-corne  there,  and  the  other  two  to  goe  for
Moha,  whereupon  we  did  what  we  could  to  get  the
Road  againe,  but  could  not,  beeing  carried  to  Lee-
ward with  the  Current : wee  anchored  to  the  South-ward

STR HENRY MIDDLKTON  am.

i  6  i  o.
of  the  Towne  :  I  sent  M.  Fowler  and  John  Williams
aland,  to  tell  them  I  minded  to  leave  one  of  the  ships
there  to  trade,  so  that  they  would  let  me  have  a  Pilot.
They  seemed  very  glad  that  one  of  the  ships  should  tarry,
and  promised  me  a  Pilot  the  next  day.

The twelfth, I seeing no hope of  any Pilot to he The  Trade
had  (which  had  been  often promised,  but  not  performed)  a.
dispatched my businesse with the Pepper-corne : and  f0f  Moha
about noone, I and the Darling set sayle for Moha :
the  wind  East  South-east,  wee  steered  alongst  the  land
sometimes West South-west, and West by North, in
twentie  eight  and thirtie  fathome,  we  saw  a  small  sayle
going  before  us,  which  we  followed  till  we  had  lost  sight
of  her  by  night. This  coast is high land, with  many  This  coast  is
head-lands.  AiiA  w

The thirteenth,  we  haled  on our course alongst the
land,  all  this  night  steering  betweene  the  West  by  North,
and  most  by  South,  her  true  way  West. The  next  day
betimes  we  saw  the  head-land  going  into  the  Red  Sea,  The  Headland
rising like an Hand; about eleven of  the clocke  wee  onthecoast<:
were thwart of  the entrance, being but three miles -lnt0  the  Re J
broad : on the North side is a ragged land like  an  Sea.
Hand,  and  on the  other side  is  a  flat  low  Hand,  called  The  North
Babelmandel: upon  the  South  of  the  Hand  there  seemeth  st^'aight  of  the
to be a broad channell or entrance. After we had  babelmandel
passed this straight of  Babelmandel, upon the North  or  the  Bab.
shore in a sandie Bay is a Village, to which place I
sent my Pinnasse for a Pilot : they staid not long,
but returned  with a couple  of  Arabs,  who tooke  upon
them to be very skilfull. Our  depth in  the  straights
was  betweene  eight  and  eleven  fathome  water  (betweene
the straight and Aden is thirty leagues) we steered
alongst the land North by West, and North North-
west,  betweene eighteene and  twentie  fathomes deepe  :
about foure  of  the clocke we discried the Towne  of
Moha : and about five a clocke in luffing in beeing  Moha.
much  wind,  we  split  our  maine  toppe  sayle,  and  putting
abroad  our  mizen,  it split  likewise :  our  Pilots  brought

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1610.

The  shippe our shippe  a  ground  upon a  banke of  sand,  the  wind

brought  on  blowing  hard,  and  the  Sea  somewhat  high,  which  made
us  all  doubt  her  comming  off.  This  night  came  a  Boat
aboord  of  us  from  the  Towne,  with  a  Turke  in  her,
a  proper  man,  sent  by  the  Governour  of  the  Towne,
to  know  what  we  were,  and  wherefore  wee  came  thither.
1  told  him  we  were  English  Merchants,  that  came  to
seeke  trade :  he  answered,  if  we  were  Englishmen  we
were  hartily  welcome,  and should not  faile  of  that we

Alexander  looke  for  :  for  Alexander  Sharpeigh  had  sold  all  his  goods
arpetg  .  there,  and  we  might  doe  the  like.  And  for  the  ground-
ing of  the  ship,  he  made  nothing  of  it,  saying,  It
was  ordinary  for  great  ships  of  India  to  come  a  ground,
and  yet  never  heard  that  any  of  them  sustained  any  harme
thereby :  he  made  hast  to  goe  ashore,  to  certifie  the  Aga
what  we  were,  with  promise  in  the  morning  to  returne
with  Boates  to  lighten  our  ship. This  man,  as  I  after-

The  Lord  of  warj  understood,  is  called  Lord  of  the  Sea,  for  that  his
office  is  to  go  aboord  all  ships  that  come  thither,  and
to  see  Lighters  sent  aboord  to  discharge  the  ships,
and  to  search  that  they  steale  no  custome  :  for  which
Office,  hee  hath  diverse  duties,  which  is  his  onely
maintenance.

The  fourteenth  in  the  morning  early,  he  returned
with  three  or  foure  Turkes  more  in  his  company,
whereof  two  of  them  spake  Italian,  they  brought  me
a  small  Present  from  the  Aga,  with  commendations
and  offer  of  any  thing  the  Countrey  could  affoord  me,
with heartie welcome to his Port, saying, we should

Stambola  is naVe  as  good  and  free  Trade as  wee  had in  Stambola,

Constantin- A1  °  r  *.i t> 1  n • •  •  1

.le  Aleppo, or any part or the 1  urkes Dominions, with

The  extreame  many  other  Complements  :  there  came  with  them  foure
dissimulation  or  five  Lighters,  in  which  we  put  any  thing  that  came
of  the  Turkes.  first  to  hanci5  to  lighten  the  ship.  Master  Femell  went
a-land  in  one  of  them  before  I  was  aware  thereof,  carrying
all  he  had  in  the  ship  with  him.  Wee  sent  all  our
Money,  Elephants  teeth,  and  all  our  shot  aboord  the
Darling : wee laid out our Anchors to passe, and in

124

SIR HENRY MIDDLETON  ajd.

I  MO.

the  Evening  proved  if  we  could  heave  her  off,  but  could
not  make  her stirre,  which  was  no  small  griefe to  me.

The  fifteenth,  we  did  what  we  could  to  lighten  our
ship,  sending  some  goods  a-land  and  some  aboord  the
Darling,  I  had  a  Letter  from  Master  Femell,  wherein
hee  certified  mee  of  kind  entertaynment  by  the  Aga,
and  that  he  had  agreed  for  Custome  to  pay  five  pound
the  hundred  for  all  we  should  sell,  and  that  we  could
not  sell  to  be  returned  aboord  custome  free.  Like-
wise the  Aga  sent  me  a  Letter  under  his  hand  and
Seale,  proffering  himselfe  and  any  thing  the  Countrey
afTborded  to  bee  at  my  disposing,  with  many  other
Complements  ;  about  five  a  clocke  wee  began  to  heave
at  our  Cap-staynes,  and  by  Gods  great  mercy  shee
went  off  to all  our comforts.

The  nineteenth,  came  two  Boates  from  the  shore
sent  by  Master  Femell  for  Iron,  which  I  caused  them
to  fetch  from  the  Darling.  I  writ  to  Master  Femell
not  to  send  for  any  more  goods  a-land,  for  that  I
would  see  sale  of  those  he  had  already  before  I  would
depart  with  any  more.  I  received  a  Letter  from
Master  Femell,  if  that  I  minded  to  have  Trade,  I
must  come  a-land  according  to  the  custome  of  the
place,  otherwise  they  would  not  be  perswaded  but  that
wee  were  men  of  Warre.  Likewise,  the  Aga  sent  our  [i.  iii.  251.]
Interpreter  to  me  to  intreate  me  to  come  aland,  if  J
were  a  Merchant  and  friend  to  the  great  Turke,  and
hoped  for  Trade  :  Alledging  that  Captaine  Sharpeigh
and  all  the  Indian  Captaines  did  the  like.

The  twentieth,  I  went  a-land,  I  was  received  at  the
water  side  by  divers  chiefe  men,  and  with  Musicke
brought  to  the  Agas  House ;  where  were  assembled  all
the  chiefe  men  of  the  Towne :  my  entertaynment  by  the
Aga  and  the  rest,  was  with  extraordinarie  great  kind-
nesse,  I  was  seated  close  to  the  Aga,  all  men  else  standing,
where  he  held  me  with  Complements,  many  times  bidding
me  welcome,  offering  himselfe  and  the  Countrey  to  be
at  my  service : I  delivered  his Majesties Letter  with a

125

A.D.
l6lO.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Present  to  the  Basha,  which  I  desired  might  be  sent  him
up  with  all  speed.  Likewise  I  gave  the  Aga  a  Present,
which  he  tooke  very  kindly,  telling  me,  I  and  my  people
should  have  as  good  and  peaceable  Trade,  as  any  of  our
Nation  had  in  any  parts  of  the  Turkes  Dominions,  and
that  if  any  man  in  the  Towne  offered  me  or  any  of
my  people  wrong,  he  would  see  them  severely  punished ;
he  caused  me  to  stand  up,  &  one  of  his  chiefe  men  put
upon  my  backe  a  Vest  of  Crimson  silke  and  silver,  saying,
I  needed  not  to  doubt  of  any  evill ;  for  that  was  the
Gran  Seniors  protection.  After  some  few  Complements
I  tooke  my  leave,  I  was  mounted  upon  a  Gallant  Horse
with  rich  Furniture,  a  great  man  leading  my  Horse  ;  and
so  in  my  new  Coate  with  the  Musicke  of  the  Towne
The  English  conveiged  to  the  English  House :  where  I  stayed
Dinner,  and  presently  after  went  aboord.  Much  he  in-
treated  my  stay  on  shore,  which  I  yeelded  to  for  building
my  Pinnasse,  the  daies  following  being  also  forced  by
foule  weather.

§•  11.

Turkish treacherie  at  Moha and  Aden with the

English.

House  in
Moha

The  Turkes
fasting.

Ne  day  past  not,  but  I  had  some  small  present  or
other  sent  mee  by  the  Aga,  with  commendations
from  him,  to  know  if  I  lacked  any  thing.  On
the  eight  and  twentieth  day  twice  he  sent  me  commenda-
tions, willing  me  to  be  merry,  and  when  their  time  of
Fasting  was  done  (which  was  almost  expired)  hee  would
have  me  ride  abroad  with  him  to  his  Gardens,  and  other
places  of  pleasure  to  make  merrv.  This  afternoone  came
Master  Pemberton  a-land  for  Coco  Nuts.  I  caused  him
to  stay  Supper  with  mee,  which  beeing  done,  he  tooke
his  leave  to  goe  aboord,  but  the  Turkes  would  not
permit  him,  saying,  it  was  too  late,  but  in  the  morning
he  should  goe  as  timely  as  he  would.  I  sent  to  intreate
that  he  might  go,  but  it  would  not  be  granted. All  this

126

SIR HENRY MIDDLKTOX  ad

1610.
time  we suspected no harme, but thought it was  over-
much curiositie in the Officer,  who wee thought had
done  it  without  order,  of  which  the next  day  I thought
to  have  complayned  to  the  Aga.

The  Sunne  being  set  (according  to  my  wonted  order)
I  caused  stooles  to  bee  set  at  the  doore,  where  my  selfe,
Master  Femell,  and Master  Pemberton sat  to  take  the
fresh aire, suspecting nothing of the present ensuing
harme that did befall us. About eight of  the  clocke,
came  a  Janizary  from  the  Aga  to  deliver  some  message
to  mee,  but  wee  could  not  understand  him  for  lacke  of
an  Interpreter ; I  sent  my  man  to  looke  for  one  of  my
company  that  spake  the  Turkish  Tongue,  my  Interpreter
presently  came,  by  whom  I understood  the  effect  of  the
Janizaries  message,  which  was,  that  the  Aga  had  sent  me
commendations,  willing  me  to  be  merry,  for  that  hee  had
received  good  newes  from  the  Basha. And  as  hee  was
about  to  say  somewhat  else,  my  man returnes  in  great
feare, telling us wee were all betrayed: for that the  The  treason  of
Turkes and  my  people  were  by  the  eares  at  the  backe  *??  Tu', \
of  the  House. The  Turke  that  sate  by,  was  desirous  to l6jQ
know  what  was  the  matter,  which wee tolde him, hee
presently  rose  up,  and  willed  my  man  to  shew  him  where
they  were,  divers of  my Company  running  after  them,
to  see  what  was  the  matter. And  I  my  selfe  ranne  after
them,  calling  upon  them  as  loud  as  I  could,  to  returne
backe  and  make  good  our  House :  but  whiles  I  was  thus
speaking, I was strooke upon the head downe to the  SirH.Middk-
ground by  one  which came behind  me ; I  remained  as  ton  strooje
dead  till  such  time  as  they  had  bound  my  hands  behind
mee, and so straite that the extreame paine thereof
brought  mee  to  my  memorie. Assoone  as  they  saw  me
stirre  they  lifted  me  upon  my  feet,  and  led  me  betweene
two  of  them  to  the  Agas : where  I  found  divers  of  my
Companie  in  like  taking  as  I  was  my  selfe. By  the  way
the Souldiers pillaged mee, and tooke from mee such
money  as  I  had  about  mee,  and  three  gold  Rings,  whereof
one  was  my  Seale,  the  other  had  seven  Diamonds  which

127

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1610.

were of  good worth,  and the third a Gimmall Ring.

When all of  us that escaped with life in this bloudie

Massacre,  were  brought  together,  then beganne they to

SirH. Middle-  pUt  us  [n  Irons  : my  selfe  with  seven  more  were  chained

ton,  and  seven  , ^  nec^es  au  together:  other  some  their  feete,  other

more  chained /  .  ,  . ©  _  .  '

£y  //fe  neckes. their  hands  ; this being  done,  they  left  two  bouldiers  to

guard  us,  the  rest  departed,  these  Souldiers  had  com-
passion of  us,  and  eased  us  of  our  bands,  for  the  most  of
us  had  our  hands  so  straite  bound  behind  us,  that  the
blood  was  readie  to  burst  out  at  our  fingers  ends,  with
pain  unsufFerable,  but  we  were  bound  to  endure  it.
After  I  had  received  this  ease  of  my  hands  and  armes
(though  still  over-charged  with  griefs  of  heart)  not  only
for  my  owne  necessitie  (and  these  with  me)  but  also  for

[I.  Hi.  252.]  the  safetie  of  the  ships,  which  I  greatly  doubted,  knowing
the  covetous  Turkes  would  leave  no  Villanie  nor  Treason
unattempted  ;  for  the  surprizing  of  them,  we  began  to
reason  amongst  our  selves,  what  should  be  the  reason  or
cause  of  this  their  villanous  usage  of  us ;  and  withall,  I
demanded  how  it  began,  and  if  any  of  our  Company  were
slaine. I  was  certified  by  those  of  my  Company  that  did

Eight  of  out see  j^  an  j  hardly  escaped  themselves,  that  Francis  Slanny,

, „  John  Lanslot,  and  sixe  more  were  slaine,  and  that  foure-

s/ayne.  J  »  >  .

teene  or  our  Company  there  present  were  grievously
wounded,  and  that  our  House  was  round  begirt  with
armed  Souldiers,  who,  at  the  instant  I  was  strooke  downe,
sallied  out  upon  us  using  their  mercilesse  crueltie  towards
us,  that  had  not  wherewithall  to  defend  our  selves,  much
lesse  to  offend  them.  Now  having  gone  through  their
first  pretence  of  mischiefs,  not  being  satisfied  with  Chris-
tian bloud,  they  aymed  at  our  ships  and  goods.  For
about  ten  of  the  clocke,  they  armed  three  great  Boates
with  one  hundred  and  fiftie  Souldiers  in  them  to  take
the  Darling,  who  rode  somewhat  neere  the  shore.  The
Boates  put  from  the  shore  altogether,  the  Turkes  tooke
off  their  white  Tuckes,  because  they  would  be  thought
boorded'b^fhe  to  ^e  Christians,  and  all  joyntly  boorded  her,  and  entred
Turkes.  most  of  their  men  :  it  was  so  sudden,  that  three  of  the

128

SIR HENRY MIDDLETON  aj>.

I  6  i  o.

Darlings  men  were  slaine,  before  they  could  get  downe :

the  rest  betake  them  to  their  close  fight. Now  it  pleased

God  in  mercie  to  looke  upon  us,  and  not  to  suffer  any

more  Christian bloud  to  be  shed. For  the  Captaine  of

them,  which  is  called  Emier-bahare  or  Lord of  the  Sea,

called  to  his  Souldiers  to  cut  the  Tables  in the  House,

the  Souldiers  mis-understanding  him,  many  of  them  leapt

into  the  Boates,  and  cut  the  Boate  Ropes,  and  so  drove

away : by  this  time  our  men had  gotten them to  their

Weapons,  and  to  their  close  fights,  the  Turkes  standing

very  thicke in the waste,  hollowing  and clanging their

Swords  upon  the  Decke, one  of  the  Company  threw  a

bigge Barrell of  Powder amongst them,  and  after  it  a

Fire-brand  ;  which  tooke  so  good  effect,  that  it  burned

divers  of  them  :  the  rest  for  their  better  safetie  (as  they

thought)  retyred  to  the  halfe  Deck  and  the  Poope,  where

they were set off  with Musket shot, and entertayned

with  another  trayne  of  Powder,  which  put  them  in  such

feare,  that  they  leaped  into  the  Sea,  hanging  by  the  ships

side,  desiring  mercy,  which  was  not  there  to  be  found,

for  that  our  men  killed  all  they  could  finde,  and  the  rest  TheTurkesall

were  drowned,  onlv  one  man  was  saved,  who  hid  him- , ' , '

r •  j  -i or  drowned,

selfe  till  the  rune  was  past,  who  yeelded  and  was  received  save  one%

to mercie. Thus God of his goodnesse and mercie

delivered our ship and men out  of  the hands of  our

Enemies,  for  which  his  holy  Name  be  blessed  and  praysed

evermore. Amen.

Now  let  us  looke backe to us imprisoned  at  Moha.

The  Boats  returning  brought  newes  the  ship  was  taken,

for which there  was great rejoycing. The Governour

sent  off  the  Boats  againe  with  order  to  bring  the  ship :

when  they  came  so  farre  off  as  where  the  ship  did  ride,

they  found her  gone  from  thence  under saile standing

off,  so  that  they  returned  and  told  the  Aga  the  ship  had

escaped and was gone, and that they thought Emeir

Bahars and his  Souldiers were taken Prisoners : which

newes  was  nothing pleasing  unto him. Before  day he

sent  our  Interpreter  to  tell  me  the  small  ship  was  taken  :

in  129  1

A.D.

l6lO.

SirH. Middle-
ton  convented
before  the  A ga,

Treason  at
Aden.

Besides  these
three  were
with  like  trea-
cherie  tiventie
men  more
betrayed  at
Aden,  having
leave  given
them  to  come
on  shore  for
businesse,  and
shackles  made
the  whiles,

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

which  I  did  verily  beleeve  to  bee  true;  when  it  was  day
I  was  sent  for  to  come  to  the  Aga,  so  I  and  seven  more
which  were  chained  by  the  neckes  with  mee  came  before
him. He with a frowning (and not his wonted dis-
sembling)  countenance, asked mee how I durst be so
bold  as  to  come  into  this  their  Port  of  Moha,  so  neere
their  holy  Citie  of  Mecca ; I  answered,  it  was  not  un-
knowne  unto  him  wherefore  I  came  thither,  having  long
before  certified  him  thereof,  and  that  I  came  not  a-land
but  at  his  earnest  intreatie  with  many  promises  of  kind
and  good  usage ;  he  answered  it  was  not  lawfull  for  any
Christian  to  come  so neere  their  holy  Citie  of  Medina,
this  being  the  Port  or  Doore  thereof,  and  that  the  Basha
had expresse order from the great  Turke,  to  captivate
all  Christians  that  should  come  into  those  Seas,  although
they  had  his  owne  passe. I  told  him  the  fault  was  his,
that he had not told mee so much at the first, but
deluded us  with faire promises : he  gave me  a  Letter
to reade of  Captaine  Dounton that came from Aden,
dated long before,  the  effect  whereof  was,  that  two  of
his  Merchants  and  Purser  were  detayned  ashore,  and  that
they  would  not  be  released  without  landing  of  Merchan-
dize, or paying of fifteene hundred Venetianos for
Anchorage, and withall to be advised by me what he
had  best  to  doe,  after  I  had  read  it,  hee  bade  mee  tell
him  the  effect  thereof: which  I  did,  hee  told me  since
the  writing of  this  Letter,  the  ship  was  comming  from
this  place,  and that she was cast away  upon  a Rocke,
and  that  all  the  goods  and men  were  lost  (this  was  cold
comfort  to  mee  to  heare)  he  willed  me  to  write  a  Letter
aboord, to know how many  Turkes  were  in  the  small
ship. I  told  him  that  should  not  need,  for  that  they  had
taken  the  ship,  hee  answered that  shee  was  once  taken
and  possessed  by  them,  but  she  was  rescued  by  the  great
ship and taken from them againe,  and  therefore  willed
me  to  write to  them  aboord  the  great  shippe,  to  come
all  of  them  a-land, and yeeld the ship into  his  hands,
and he would let us have the small ship to  carrie  us

130

SIR HENRY MIDDLETON  ad

16  i  o.

home. I  said  it  was  a  folly  to write any such thing  :

for  they  that  were  aboord  and  had  their  libertie  were  no

such  Fooles,  as  upon  my  Letter  to  forsake  the  ship  and

goods,  and come a-land and bee slaves. He said, he

knew  if  I  did  write  a  Letter  to  that  effect,  they  durst  not

disobey  me. I  told  him I would  write  no  such Letter,

he enquired  what  store of  money was in our shippes.

I  answered,  little,  and  that  was  not  for Merchandize  but

to  buy  Victuals. Hee  asked  what  store  of  Victuals  and

Water  ? I told him enough for two yeares,  which  hee

would not  beleeve. He urged  mee  againe  to  write,  to

will them to  come  all ashore  and yeeld  the  ship,  or  he

would  cut  off  my  head. I  bade  him  doe  so: for  therein  [I.  iii.  253.]

hee should doe  me  a great pleasure, for I was  weary

of  my  life,  but  write  to  that  effect  I  never  would.

I  was  taken  out  of  my  Chaine  and  Coller,  and  a  great
paire  of  Fetters  clapt  upon  my  legges,  and  Manacles  upon
my  hands,  and  so  separated  from  the  rest  of  my  company:
they  stowed  mee  all  that  day  in  a  dirty  Dogges  Kennell
under  a  paire  of  staires :  at  night,  at  the  intreatie  of
Shermall  Counsul  of  the  Bannians,  I  was  taken  out  and
placed  in  a  better  roome,  one  more  of  my  Company
which  spake  Turkish  being  with  me.  My  lodging  was
upon  the  hard  ground,  and  my  pillow  a  stone,  my  com-
panions to  keepe  me  waking  were  griefe  of  heart  and
multitude  of  Rats :  which  if  I  chanced  to  sleepe,  would
awake  me  with  running  over  me.  About  mid-night  came
the  Lieutenant  of  the  Aga,  and  our  Trugman  entreat-
ing me  very  fairely  to  write  my  Letter  aboord,  to  know
how  many  Turkes  were  aboord  Prisoners,  and  what  were
their  names,  but  in  any  case  willed  me  not  to  write  any
thing  of  the  losse  of  our  men,  nor  of  my  owne  and  my
peoples  hard  usage,  but  to  say  we  were  detayned  in  the
Agas  House  (where  wee  lacked  not  any  thing)  till  further
order  came  from  the  Basha.  This  Letter  I  did  willingly
write,  and  to  the  same  effect  they  willed  me,  but  withall
willing  them  to  looke  well  to  their  ships  and  Boat,  and
to  have  a  care  to  their  men,  that  not  any  of  them  came

131

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGR1MES

1610.

aland  for  feare  of  Treason.  This  Letter  they  had  with
them,  and  examined  two  or  three  of  my  men  whether
I had  so  written.

This  Letter  was  not  sent,  for  that  they  could  not
get  any  man  to  goe  aboord  with  it,  but  now  they  had
found  a  man  who  was  there  present  would  undertake
to  carrie  it  aboord,  so  that  I  would  write  they  should  use
him  well  and  doe  him  no  harme ;  this  man  was  borne
in  Tunes  in  Barbary,  and  spake  good  Italian.  I  writ
the  Letter as they desired ;  which was  perused  as  was

Decemb.  the  former,  and  the  next  day  was  sent  aboord,  and
answere  returned,  the  effect  was  that  all  the  Turkes  were
slaine  and  drowned  save  one,  whose  name  was  Russwan,
a  common  Souldier,  and  that  they  were  glad  to  heare
I  was  alive :  for  the  Prisoner  Turke  told  them,  he
thought  we  were  all  slaine.  We  continued  in  this  misery
till  the  fifteenth  of  December,  not  hearing  any  thing  from
the  ships,  nor  they  from  us.  The  Aga  came  divers
times  to  me,  sometimes  with  threats,  sometimes  with
faire  meanes,  to  have  me  write  that  all  our  people  should
come  ashoare  and  yeeld  up  the  shippes :  I  still  answered
him  as  I  did  at  the  first.  Hee  was  desirous  to  know
what  money  was  in  the  shippe,  and  what  store  of  water.
I  answered  him,  Money  had  we  little,  but  victuall  had
we  enough  for  two  yeares.  He  was  in  hope  for  lacke
of  water  and  victuals  to  have  the  ships  yeeld  unto  him,
knowing  that  we could not have a wind to carrie us

Decemb.  15.  out  of  the  straight  till  May:  he  said,  he  marvelled  how
so  great  a  charge  could  be  borne  with  so  small  a  stocke.
I  answered,  we  had  Factories  in  divers  places  in  India,
who  had  stocke  enough  in  their  hands  to  loade  us  if
we  had  brought  never  a  peny  worth  ot  Commodities
with  us,  and  that  stocke  wee  had  was  sufficient  to  lade
our  ships  with  Pepper,  which  in  India  was  good
cheape.

They  in  the  ships  were  very  evill  to  passe  riding  in
an  open  and  wide  Roade,  the  wind  blowing  continually
hard  at South South-east, enclosed round  with  shoales,

132

SIR HENRY MIDDLETON  aa

J  6  I  o.
their  water  beginning  to  faile  them,  for  that  we  had
staved  fiftie  Tunnes  to  lighten  our  ship  at  our  comming
a  ground:  and  hearing  nothing  from  us  aland  made
them  at  their  wits  ends,  not  knowing  well  what  to
do:  they  being  in  this  perplexitie,  an  honest  fellow  in
the  ship  called  John  Chambers  offered  them  to  goe  The  hardu
ashore to  see what  was  become  of  us,  and  to  put his  ?*,tofJ™

...  . ... .  .  •  i-  • Chambers.

lire  and  hbertie  in  venture  rather  then  see  men  live  in
this  discontent,  which  he  effected ;  &  also  this  day  being
the  fifteenth  of  December,  with  a  Flagge  of  Truce  was
set  upon  a  small  Hand,  a  little  to  wind-ward  of  the
Towne,  he  had  one  of  our  Indians  with  him  for  his
Interpreter :  they  were  brought  before  the  Aga,  who
asked  him  how  he  durst  be  so  bold  to  come  ashore
without  leave ;  he  answered  he  came  with  a  Flag  of
Truce,  &  was  but  a  Messenger,  which  was  permitted
amongst  enemies.  He  asked  what  message  he  had  to
deliver.  He  said,  a  Letter  to  me,  and  likewise  if  he
would  give  him  leave  to  see  how  wee  did.  They
examined  him  and  the  Indian  very  strictly  what  store
of  victuall  and  water  was  in  the  ships,  they  both  answered
as  I  formerly  had  done,  that  there  was  enough  of  all
sorts  of  victuals  for  two  yeares.

This  being  done  they  brought  him  to  my  darke  Cell ;
who  comming  out  of  the  light  was  a  great  while  before
he  could  see  me,  Hee  delivered  me  the  Letter  with
watery  eyes  to  see  mee  so  fettered  hands  and  feet  in
Irons.  I  demanded  how  he  came  ashore  ?  He  told  me
after  what  manner,  and  how  he  was  examined  by  the
Aga.  I  told  him  I  thought  they  would  not  permit  him
to  returne  aboord,  for  that  not  few  dayes  before  one
of  the  Pepper-Corne  men  was  come  from  Aden  with  a
Letter  to  me,  and  they  kept  him  Prisoner,  and  would
not  permit  him  to  returne,  nor  give  him  leave  to  goe
aboord  our  ships.  He  answered  he  came  with  that
resolution  from  aboord,  to  take  such  part  as  I  did,
if  they  would  bee  so  villanously  minded  to  stay  him
being  but a  Messenger.

i33

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1610.

The  sixteenth,  I  returned  answere  of  my  Letter  sent
me,  and  delivered  it  to  Chambers,  and  contrary  to  my
expectation,  they  let  him  and  the  Indian  returne  to  the
Boate,  with  leave  to  come  againe  the  next  day  if  they  had
occasion :  the  next  day  Chambers  returnes  alone,  for
the  Indian  was  so  frighted  that  he  durst  not  come:
my  man  sent  me  divers  things  by  him,  but  the  Aga
was  my  Receiver  and  kept  them  to  his  owne  use,  think-
[I.  iii.  254.]  ing  them  too  good  for  mee ;  he  returnes  aboord,  and
leaves  us  to  our  wonted  miserie,  attending  daily  what
should  become  of  us ;  looking  every  houre  for  the
sentence  from  the  Basha,  of  Death,  or  perpetuall  im-
prisonment or  captivitie.  Yet  God  dealt  more  mercifully
with  us,  who  never  faileth  them  that  put  their  trust
in  him.

For  upon  the  twentieth  of  December,  came  downe
from  Zenan  an  Aga,  Captaine  or  Chiefe  of  the  Chawsses,
with  order  to  bring  us  up  all.  At  his  first  lighting  he  was
desirous  to  see  me  &  my  poore  Company ;  there  were
three  Chaires  brought  into  my  Roome,  wherein  Regib
Aga,  Ismael  (which  was  the  Messenger  from  the  Basha)
and  Jasfer  Aga  seated  themselves.  Regib  Aga  began
to  aske  me  how  I  durst  be  so  bold  as  to  come  into  that
Countrey  so  neere  their  holy  Citie,  without  a  Passe  from
the  Gran  Senior  ?  I  answered,  the  King  my  Master
was  in  league  and  amitie  with  the  Gran  Senior,  and  that
in  the  Articles  of  peace,  it  was  allowed  us  free  Trade
in  all  his  Dominions,  and  this  being  part  of  his  Dominions
there  needed  no  passe.  Hee  answered,  this  was  the
doore  of  their  holy  Citie,  and  therefore  not  lawfull  for
any  Christian  to  come  hither ;  Likewise,  he  asked  me,
If  I  did  not  know  the  Gran  Seniors  Sword  was  long ;
I  answered  wee  were  not  taken  by  the  Sword,  but  by
Treason,  and  if  I  and  my  people  were  aboord,  I  cared
not  for  the  length  of  his  or  all  their  Swords ;  he  said
it  was  proudly  spoken  of  me.  Also  he  willed,  as
formerly  he  had  done  many  times,  to  write  a  Letter
aboord to command all the men out of the ships,

i34

SIR HENRY MIDDLKTON

1 6  io.
and  yeeld themselves  to the Basha; and received like-
answer.

Ismael  Aga  broke  off  this  idle  speech,  by  telling  me
he  was  come  from  the  Basha,  with  expresse  order  from
him  to  conduct  me  and  all  my  people  to  Zenan,  and
therefore  willed  mee  to  send  aboord  for  warme  clothes,
for  that  wee  should  find  it  very  cold  in  the  Mountaine
Countrey.  I  prayed  him  if  it  were  possible  that  my
poore  men  might  bee  sent  aboord,  and  that  I  and  some
few  more  might  be  sent  up.  Hee  said  it  was  not  in  him
to  remedie  it,  for  it  was  the  Bashas  order  we  should
all  goe  up :  Regib  Aga  said  I  should  have  my  desire,  that
I  and  five  more  should  goe  up  with  me,  and  the  rest
must  abide  where  they  are,  till  further  order  from  the
Basha. This  was  the  eighteenth  day  of  December.

This  twentieth  day,  Captaine  Dounton  in  the  Pepper-  Capt.Dounton
Corne,  came  into  the  Road  from  Aden  :  I  writ  to  him  my  co™meth  int0
minde,  what  I  thought  fittest  to  be  done.  Mg/ia

§.  m.

Sir  Henrie  Midleton,  and  foure  and  thirtie  others,
sent  to  the  Basha  at  Zenan.  Description  of
the  Countrey,  and  Occurrents  till  their  re-
turne.

He  two and twentieth of  December, our Irons  Decemb.  22.
were  knockt  off  all  our  legges,  save  the  Carpenters l6l°-
and  Smithes,  and  some  sicke  men  that  were  not
able  to  travell : the Carpenters  and Smithes  were kept
there  to  build  up  the  Pinnasse ;  and  my  selfe,  and  foure  S/r  Ht'"r>'
and thirtie  persons more  of  us,  were  appointed  to  goe , '°"ypn„
up  for  Zenan,  the  chiefe  Citie  of  the  Kingdome,  where  i]shmcn  ^erc
the Basha  is resident. About  foure of  the clocke we  sent  to  Zenan.
set  out  of  Moha,  all  my  Company  beeing  mounted  upon
Asses, and  my  selfe  and  M. Femel  upon  Horse-backe.  f

About ten  of  the clocke  in the night, being tenne  or  M  p£mber-
twelve  miles  from  Moha,  Master  Pemberton  slipt  away  ton.

i35

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1610.

from  us ;  we  missed  him  our  selves  presently,  but  said
not  any  thing,  the  best  helpe  we  were  able  to  doe  him,  he
had ;  which  was  in  beseeching  God  to  send  him  safe
aboord,  for  the  attempt  was  very  desperate.  About
one  of  the  clocke  after  midnight,  we  came  to  our Inne

Mowssi.  at a Towne called Mowssi : they told us all at our

comming  thither  :  yet  missed  not  him  that  was  wanting.
We  continued  in  this  lodging  till  foure  of  the  clocke
in  the  afternoone  the  next  day.  At  our  setting  out  of
doore  they  told  us,  and  found  one  missing :  the  Aga
inquired  of  me  how  many  we  were  that  set  out  of  Moha.
I  told  him  I  could  not  well  tell,  but  as  I  thought  we  were
foure  and  thirtie  of  us :  he  said,  we  were  five  and  thirtie,
and  that  one  was  missing :  I  said,  it  was  more  then  I
did  know.  The  chiefest  cause  that  mooved  M.  Pem-
berton  to  take  this  desperate  action  in  hand,  was  to
see  so  many  of  us  carried  up  together  manacled,  with
a  Captaine,  and  a  guard  of  Souldiers  to  conduct  us,  which
he  could  imagine  to  no  other  end,  then  death  or  cap-
tivitie,  which  was  the  opinion  of  us  all. I  found  a  great

Hamet  Jga  a  friend  of  one  Hamet  Aga,  who  sent  me  divers  Presents,

great  friend anj vvilled me to be of  good comfort, for my cause

to  us.  , .  °  ,  \  ■  ■  r

was good : he sent me and my people provision or

Bread for our  journey, and withall his letters to the

Kaha.

The  Consul  of Likewise, the Consul of the Bannians, who came

' *d 'TrTT*'  everv  day  to v^s^  me>  an<^ never  came  empty  handed,

their  great '  an(^  Tookehar  was  our  great  friend  all  the  time  we  were

friendship  to there  prisoners,  and  every  day  failed  not  to  send  to  each

us-  man, being one and fiftie in number, two cakes of

white  bread,  and  a  quantitie  of  Dates,  or  Plantans : he

departed from Moha two  dayes before us for Zenan,

promising  me  at  his  departure  to  doe  all  he  could  with

the  Basha  for  our  good : which promise, I thinke, he

well performed : for at Zenan I was told by divers,

he  laboured  hard  in  our  businesse,  both  with  the  Basha

and his Cayha, which is a verie discreet man, and

governes  the  Kingdome.

136

SIR HENRY MIDDLETON  a.d.

1610.

We  arrived  at  the  Citie  of  Ties  (which is  foure  dayes  Ties  a  citie

journey from Moha) upon Christmas day: where we  /wr'  ^"

1 11 j •  1 r~ •  1  •  1 journey  from

were  marshalled  into  the  Citie  two  and  two  in  a  ranke, m0„/

as they  doe  at *  Stambola with captives taken in the  [I.  iii.  255.]

warres,  our  Aga  riding  in  triumph  as  a  great  Conquerour, Cmstaa-

beeing  met a mile out of  the Towne with the  chiefe  tin0Ple-

men  of  the Citie on Horse-back, multitudes  of  people

standing  all  the  way  gazing  and  wondering  at  us :  thus

were we used in all Cities and Townes we passed

through. A  youth  of  M.  Pembertons  fell  sicke  in  this

Towne,  and was left with the Governour thereof,  for

that he was not able to travell. I kept no Journal

from  this  time  forward ;  but  this  I  remember,  we  found

it  very  cold  all  the  way  from  Tyes  to  Zenan,  our  lodg-  Great  col<i  in

in£  being  the  cold  ground ; I bought  most  of  our  men, J

°.  &  &  _ e  ' t urred gownes

which were slenderly clothed, furred gownes to keepe  needfull.

them  from the  cold ; otherwise, I thinke, they  would  Zenan  is  in

have  starved. I would not beleeve at Moha,  when  I  "xteen degrees

was told of  the cold wee should have upwards, and  M*'*"*

that  made me goe but thinly clothed my selfe ; but

experience  taught me otherwaies, wishing when it  was

too  late,  I had come  better  provided. Zenan  is  from

Moha  an hundred and eightie  miles,  or thereabouts,  as

I  judge, North North-west. It is  in the  latitude of

sixteene  degrees fifteene  minutes,  which I  observed  by

an  instrument  I  made  there.

Every morning the ground  was  covered with horie

frost:  and  in  Zenan  wee  had Ice  a  finger  thicke  in  one ,e.  ?An&er

night,  which I could hardly have beleeved, had I  not  nizht  in

seene  it. Wee  were  fifteene  dayes  betweene  Moha  and Zaun.

Zenan. The  fifth of  January  two houres before day, They

we  came within two miles of  the Citie, where we  lay  fifi£enf  *9*»

upon  the  ground  till  it  was  faire  day,  being  much  pinched jij%a}J

by  the cold, not beeing able scarce  to  stand  we  were Zenan.

so  benummed. About  a  mile  from  the  Towne  we  were

met by the Subbassie or Sheriffe, with at least two

hundred  Shot,  Drummes,  and  Trumpets :  we  were  caused

to  goe  one  by  one  in  order,  a prety  distance  one  from

i37

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1610.

the  other,  to  make  the  better  shew  ;  our  men  had  their
gownes  taken  from  them,  and  were  caused  to  march
a  foote  in  their  thinne  and  ragged  suites :  the  souldiers
lead  the  way,  after  came  our  men  one  by  one;  our
Trumpeters  were  placed  next  before  me,  and  commanded
by  the  Aga  to  sound ;  but  I  forbad  them :  after  the
Trumpets  came  M.  Femel  and  my  selfe  on  Horse-
backe ;  and  lastly  came  our  Aga  riding  in  Triumph,
with  a  spare  horse  richly  furnished  led  before  him.  In
this  order  wee  were  led  through  the  heart  of  the  Citie
The  Castle,  till  we  came  to  the  Castle,  all  the  way  beeing  so  full
of  people,  we  could  hardly  passe  for  them.  At  the  first
gate,  there  was  a  good  guard  of  armed  soldiers :  the
second  gate  had  two  great  pieces  of  Ordnance,  readie
mounted  at  the  entry  thereof;  after  we  had  passed  this
gate,  we  came  to  a  spacious  yard,  twice  the  length  of
the  Exchange  in  London  ;  the  souldiers  at  the  entry  of
the  Gate  discharged  their  shot,  and  placed  themselves
amongst  many  others  that  were  there  before  them,  some
on  the  one  side,  and  some  on  the  other,  and  a  lane
left  in  the  middest.  At  my  first  comming  in  I  alighted,
and  was  placed  on  the  one  side  with  my  men ;  where
I  had  not  staied  long,  but  I  and  M.  Femel  were  brought
Their  com-  before  the  Basha :  it  was  their  Dinano  or  Counsell  day :
lw?  ha  at  t^e  uPPer  end  °f  the  7ai"d,  we  mounted  up  a  paire
of  staires  some  twelve  steps  high :  at  the  head  thereof,
two  great  men  came  and  tooke  me  by  the  wristes,  and
held  mee  very  hard,  and  so  led  me  to  the  Basha.  The
place  where  he  was  seated  was  a  long  spacious  gallery ;
at  the  upper  end  thereof  he  was  seated  alone,  many
great  men  standing  on  each  side  of  him,  and  others
stood  on  either  side,  from  the  lower  part  of  the  Gallery
to  the  upper  end,  which  made  a  good  shew :  the  floore
was  covered  all  over  with  Turkie  Carpets.  When  I
came  within  two  yards  of  him,  we  were  stayed  ;  He,
with  a  frowning  and  angry  countenance,  demaunded  of
what  Countrey  I  was,  and  what  I  made  in  those  parts  ?
I  answered,  I  was  an  Englishman,  and  a  Merchant,  and

138

SIR HENRY MIDDLETON  ajx

16 1

friend  to  the Grand Senior,  and came  to seeke trade.
He  said, It  was not  lawful] for  any  Christian to  come
into  that  Countrey,  and that he had given  warning  to
Captaine  Sharpeigh,  that  no  more  of  our  Nation  should
come  thither. I  told him,  Captaine  Sharpeigh  was  cast
away  upon  the  Coast  of  India,  and  came  not  to  England
to  tell  us  so much,  which had  we  knowne,  wee  would
never  have put our selves into that trouble we  were
in  : I  told  him  Regib  Aga  was  the  man that  had  abused
me,  in  telling  me  we  were  welcome  into  the  Countrey,
and  that  we should have as free  trade  as  our  Nation
had  in  any  part  of  Turkie,  with  many  other  faire  pro-
mises, and that contrary to his  word he assaulted  us
with  armed  souldiers,  and  murthered  divers  of  my  men,
and  tooke me  and the  rest prisoners ; he  said, Regib
Aga  was but his  slave, and had no such power  as  to
passe his  word to  me  without  his leave,  and  what  was
befallen  to  me  and  my  people,  was  by  his  order  to  Regib  stamh/a'  or
Aga  ;  and  that  he  himselfe  likewise  had  such  order  from  stamboli,  is  a
the  Gran  Senior,  so  to  chastise  all  Christians  that  should  correction
come  into those parts. I told him we had received  andcorrup-
great  harme,  and  if  it  pleased  him  to  let  us  returne  to  Qree'ke  worjs
our  ships, it  would  bee  sufficient  warning  to  our  Nation,  &jrJ^«r®u»,
for  ever  comming  in  those  parts  againe. Hee  said.  No,  ivhlch l  the
hee  could  not so  let us depart, but that I should  sit r£\s Ur[, °

1  J"  1  1  A  1  J  *  C  SPeake  °fth£lr

there  and  write  my  letters  to  the  Ambassador  at  *otam-  g0\ng  thither,
bola,  and  he  would  likewise  write  to  the  Gran  Senior,  that  is,  to  the
to  know  his  pleasure  what  should  become  of  us,  or  Cltie,  s°  {*»-
whether  he  would  permit  us trade, or no  : he dismist  ins!  °Js*Ci

r  1  j i t  i j • eminence

me  tor that present, and bad me goe to my  lodging  a^ct,e  otj,er

which was appointed for me,  and take  with  me toure  Cities:  as

or  five  more, such  as I thought  good  : I and  those  I  A&**  1S  at

made  choise  of,  were conveyed to the Keeper of  the  ' /j-c°!
'  -11  •  traded  into

prisons  house,  and  the  rest  carried  to  the  common  prison, Satinesfrom

where  for their welcome they were clapt in waightie  «s  'A0V>'«-

Irons  ;  one  of  our  youths  at  such  time  as  I  was  brought  p°siel-  c°mP-

before  the  Basha,  thinking  I  was  so  led  to  have  my  head  p0f^t  Cret'

strook  off, fel  in  a  sound  with  very  feare,  thinking  his  [i.  iii.  256.]

i39

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1610.

turne  would  not  bee  long  after  ;  hee  fell  sicke  upon  it
and  shortly  after  died.

The  sixth  of  January,  I  was  sent  for  to  the  Basha  Caya,
or  Lieftenant  general!  of  the  Kingdome,  to  breake  fast
with  him  :  after  breake-fast  I  told  him  every  particular,
how  treacherously  and  vilely  I  was  used  by  Regib  Aga  ;
he  bad  me  be  of  good  cheare,  and  not  thinke  of  things
past,  which  could  not  be  remedied  :  and  he  doubted  not
but  all  would  be  wel  in  the  end,  and  his  best  endeavours
to  do  me  good  should  not  be  wanting.  Shermall  the
Bennian  of  Moha,  had  made  this  man  our  friend  ;  then  I
departed  with  my  Keepers  to  prison,  where  I  was  of
better  comfort  then  before.

The  seventh  day,  I  was  sent  for  to  the  Cayhas  garden,
where  he  feasted  me  and  M.  Femel,  telling  me,  that
shortly  I  and  my  people  should  have  libertie,  and  be
sent  to  Moha,  where  I  should  have  redresse  of  all  my
wrongs,  promising  me  to  be  my  friend,  and  before  many
great  Personages,  Turkes  and  Arabs  said,  what  kindnesse
he  did  me  was  onely  for  Gods  sake  ;  but  I  well  knew  it
was  in  hope  of  some  great  reward  from  me.  Hamet
Aga  his  letter  did  us  no  small  good.  This  day  came
A  Moore  of  to  towne  a  Moore  of  Cairo,  an  old  acquaintance  of  the
Lay ro  our Bashaes,  and one that had lent him great summes  of

crrp/it  Trii>tiH  •  r  0111

money  at  his  comming  from  Stambola,  when  he  was  but
poore :  this  man  was  our  next  neighbour  at  Moha  before,
and  when  we  were  betrayed,  and  had  a  ship  in  Moha
roade,  bound  for  India,  which  he  greatly  doubted  our
ships  would  have  taken,  in  regard  of  the  wrongs  offered
us,  but  they  let  her  quietly  depart,  contrary  to  his
expectation,  so  that  hee  became  our  great  friend  :  he  writ
his  letter  in  our  behalfe  to  the  Basha,  and  therein  did
much  blame  him  in  using  us  so  hardly,  saying,  he  went
about  to  destroy  the  Countrey  and  trade,  in  taking  such
courses  with  us  :  at  his  comming  before  the  Basha,  he
iterated  what  he  had  written,  and  much  more  ;  willing
him  to  have  a  care,  the  Trade  of  the  Red  Sea  were  not
destroyed by  his meanes, and therefore  counselled  him

140

great  friend.

SIR HENRY MIDDLKTOX  ad.

I  6  i  o.
to  returne  me  all  my  goods,  and  to  send  me  and  my
people  away  contented.  His  letter  prevailed  much  with
the  Basha :  for  when  he  sent  for  us  up,  it  was  his
purpose  to  have  put  us  to  death,  and  to  have  made
slaves  of  all  the  rest  :  none  in  the  Country  durst  speake
so  boldly  as  he.  Of  this  which  I  have  written  concerning
the  Moore  of  Cayro,  was  I  enformed  by  Shermall  and
Hamet  Waddy,  who  were  both  present  at  reading  the
letter,  and  likewise  heard  the  conference  betweene  the
Basha  and  him.  This  Hamet  Waddy  is  an  Arabian
Merchant,  very  rich  dwelling  at  Zenan,  and  is  called
the  Bashas  Merchant  :  he  stood  my  friend  very  much,  in
perswading  the  Basha  that  we  might  be  kindly  dealt
withall,  and  suffered  to  depart.

The  eighth,  I  made  petition  to  the  Basha,  requesting,
That  whereas  at  my  comming  from  Moha,  I  had  willed
the  Commanders  of  my  ships  to  forbeare  hostilitie  for
five  and  twentie  daies,  and  after  to  use  their  discretions,
if  in  that  time  they  heard  not  from  me  ;  the  time  beeing
almost  expired,  that  the  Basha  would  vouchsafe  speedily
to  censure  my  cause,  or  give  me  some  comfortable  news
to  write  them,  to  stay  them  from  doing  harme,  to
which  they  might  easily  encline,  being  without  Head  or
Governour.

The  eleventh  day,  I  was  sent  for  to  the  Cayha,  who
told  me  that  now  all  things  were  ended,  and  that  my
stay  there  was  for  the  rest  of  my  company  which  were
comming  from  Aden,  and  that  presently  after  their
comming  up,  we  should  all  be  sent  to Moha.

The  seventeenth, M.  Fowler and eighteene more  of  M.  Fader,

their  Company arrived at  Zenan: they  were  presently eighteen
1  i i r ,i t> 1  j  1 vi  •  j more  arrived

brought  before  the  Basha, and  such like  questions  de-  at  yifnan

manded of them as hee did of  me. Afterward, M.

Fowler,  John  Williams, and  Robert Mico  were  sent  to

keep  me company, and all the rest to the Common

prison  to  the  rest  of  my  men,  where  they  were  all  put

in  irons,  and their allowance from the Basha, browne

bread  and  water,  they  would  have  all  died  with  hunger

i4i

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1610.

and cold, had not I releived them better then the
Basha.

The  twentie  fifth,  I  was  sent  for  to  the  Cahays  garden,
where  we  spent  some  houres  in  conference :  he  told  me
I  should  presently  goe  with  him  to  the  Bashaes  garden,
where  the  Basha  would  have  conference  with  me :  he
counselled  me  to  sooth  him  up  with  faire  words,  and
not  crosse  him  in  any  thing ;  I  asked  him  what  he
thought,  whether  he  would  surrender  me  all  my  goods :
he  said,  he  could  not  tell  :  I  asked  him  whether  I  should
have  my  Pinnasse  againe  :  he  said  likewise  he  could  not
tell :  but  in  any  case  he  willed  me  not  to  speake  of  it
to  the  Basha,  but  at  my  comming  to  Moha  to  write
my  letters  to  him,  and  he  would  solicite  the  Basha  in
my  behalfe,  and  doubted  not  but  to  obtaine  it  for  me  :
I  told  him,  I  thought  it  fitter  to  demand  it  now,  then
hereafter ;  for  that  I  was  desirous  to  know  what  to  trust
unto :  he  bad  me  use  my  discretion.  The  chiefest  cause
that  made  this  man  our  friend,  was  for  a  summe  of
money  which  I  had  promised  to  give  him :  he  would
not  be  seene  to  meddle  therein  himselfe,  but  appointed
Shermall,  Consull  of  the  Bannians,  to  treat  with  me
concerning  the  same :  he  demaunded  much,  and  I  was
willing  to  part  with  nothing.  We  spent  three  or  foure
dayes  consulting  this  businesse,  in  the  ende  I  was  con-
strained to  give  them  content,  in  promising  after  my
deliverie  to  pay  him  fifteene  hundred  Venetianoes  :  which
beeing  done,  the  Cayha  tooke  Horse  and  rid  to  the
Bashaes  garden,  and  bad  our  Truchman  bring  me  and
M.  Femel  thither.  When  we  came  to  the  garden  doore,
wee  staied  an  houre  before  we  were  admitted  to  the
Bashaes  presence :  we  found  him  seated  in  a  Summer-
house,  in  a  chaire,  his  Cayha  standing  at  his  right  hand,
and  halfe  a  douzen  others  at  the  backe  of  the  Chaire.
[I.  iii.  257.]  I  was  lead  by  two  men,  which  held  me  by  the  cloake
till  I  came  within  two  paces  of  him ;  and  there  they
stayed  me,  M.  Femel  comming  behind  me  at  libertie,
without his leaders : he demaunded  of  me  how  I  did,

142

SIR HENRY MIDDLETON

1610.

and  bad  me  be  of  good  cheare,  for  that  shortly  I  and
all  my  people  should  have  their  libertie,  and  be  sent  to
Moha,  where  I  with  twentie  nine  more  should  remaine,
till  all  the  ships  of  India  were  come  into  Moha,  and  the
rest  to  be  sent  aboord  ;  and  when  all  the  said  ships  were
come  in,  and  the  winds  setled  Westerly,  I  and  the  rest  of
my  company  should  be  permitted  to  go  aboord,  and
proceed  on  our  Voyage  to  India.  I  besought  him  he
would  not  detaine  so  many  of  us  :  he  answered,  thirtie
have  I  spoken,  and  thirty  shall  stay :  then  I  demaunded,
if  our  goods  should  be  surrendered ;  he  answered,  no  :
for  they  were  all  put  to  the  Gran  Seniors  accompt.  I
demaunded  my  Pinnasse,  he  said  likewise  she  was  put  to
the  same  accompt.  I  told  him,  divers  provisions  belong-
ing to  the  ships  were  aland  at  Moha,  and  desired  I  might
have  them  surrendered ;  he  said  I  should  :  then  I  spake
to  M.  Femel,  willing  him  to  speake  againe  that  our  goods
might  be  surrendered ;  which  he  did,  and  was  answered
as  I  was :  then  I  prayd  him  to  assure  me  of  one
thing,  and  that  was,  whether  all  my  people  should  be
permitted  to  depart  aboord  the  ships,  the  time  of  our
abode  being  expired,  he  promised  me  upon  his  word,  not
any  one  should  be  stayed,  but  be  all  sent  aboord,  and  all
things,  had  I  Turke  to  my  slave,  hee  would  not  detaine
him  :  for  which  his  kindnesse  I  gave  him  thankes :  then
he  beganne  to  excuse  himselfe,  praysing  his  owne  milde
nature,  in  that  it  was  our  haps  to  fall  into  his  hands,  he
had  dealt  mercifully  and  favourably  with  us,  which  had
it  been  in  the  time  of  any  of  his  Predecessors,  we  had  all
suffered  death  for  our  presumption,  in  comming  into  that
Countrey  so  neere  their  holy  Citie  :  and  that  which  now
was  befallen  us,  was  by  order  from  the  Gran  Senior,  he
being  urged  thereto  by  the  complaint  of  the  Bashaes  of  The  complaint
Cairo  and  Snachen,  and  the  SherifFe  of  Mecca,  who  had  7.?.  ***J
certified  the  Gran  Senior  at  the  being  here  of  the  Ascen-  Snachen
sion  and  her  Pinnasse,  that  they  had  bought  all  the  against  the
choice  ware  of  India,  whereby  his  customes  were  much  English.
diminished,  and  would  be  the  overthrow  of  the  Trade  of

143

A.D.

l6lO.

February  1.
1 610.

The  Basha
made  a  Vizir.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

these  Seas,  if  it  were  permitted;  and  therefore  wished  it
might  be  carefully  looked  unto :  whereupon  the  Gran
Senior  dispatched  his  letters  with  a  commandement  to
him,  That  if  any  more  Englishmen,  or  any  other
Christians  did  come  into  those  parts,  to  confiscate  their
ships  and  goods,  or  to  kill  or  captivate  all  the  men
they  could  get  into  their  power :  but  he  minded  not
to  deale  so  with  me,  but  more  favourably,  in  permitting
us  without  further  harme  to  returne  to  our  ships,  hoping
it  would  be  a  warning,  that  neither  we  nor  any  other  of
our  Nation,  would  repaire  thither  any  more.

The  first  of  February,  I  and  M.  Femel  were  sent  for
to  the  Cayha,  who  gave  me  counsell  to  goe  to  the  Basha,
to  bid  God  give  him  joy  of  his  late  received  Dignitie :
which  was,  the  Gran  Senior  had  made  him  a  Vizir,  and
sent  him  letters  of  great  favour,  with  a  Sword,  and  rich
Robes  belonging  to  a  Vizir,  which  Robes  and  Sword  are
a  confirmation  of  him  in  so  high  a  place  and  calling.
These  Presents  from  the  Gran  Senior,  were  received  two
daies  before  with  great  solemnitie :  and  the  party  that
brought  them,  was  met  by  the  Basha,  and  all  the  chiefs
of  the  Citie,  with  all  the  souldiers,  horse  and  foote,  sixe
miles  without  the  Towne.  Where  a  Tent  was  set  up,
where  the  Basha  disrobed  himselfe,  and  vested  him  in
those  which  were  sent  him  by  his  Master ;  and  so  in  great
pompe  came  riding  through  the  Citie  to  his  owne  house :
I  and  others  of  my  company,  by  the  appointment  of  the
Cayha,  had  a  place  appointed  us,  where  we  did  see  his
comming  into  the  Citie  :  our  Trudgman,  by  the  appoint-
ment of  the  Cayha,  conducted  us  to  the  Vizirs  house,
where  we  stayd  not  long,  but  were  admitted  to  his
presence  :  I  told  him,  my  comming  was  onely  to  see
him,  and  to  congratulate  his  new  received  honour,  and
to  pray  God  give  him  joy :  hee  gave  mee  thanks,  and  bad
me  be  merry  :  for  what  he  had  promised  me,  he  would
performe,  and  be  better  to  me  then  his  promise  :  he  was
very  pleasant,  and  tooke  this  our  comming  kindly :  and
so, as a  great favour, Master Femel and I were per-

144

SIR HENRY MIDDLETON  ad.

i  6 1  o.

mitted to kisse his hand,  and dismissed, returning to
our  lodging.

Many  of  our  people  in  the  meane  while  fell  sicke  and
weake  through  griefe,  cold,  naughtie  aire,  bad  diet,  evill
lodging,  and  waightie  Irons;  I  never  ceased  soliciting  the
Cayha,  till  hee  had  procured  their  liberty  out  of  that  r)ur  men. set
loathsome  prison,  so  that  the  eleventh  day  they  were  all  i
free  of  prison  and  Irons,  and  had  a  house  in  the  Towne,
and  libertie  to  walke  abroad,  and  take  the  fresh  aire :
also  the  next  day  the  Cayha  sent  me  halfe  a  dozen  of
Beefes,  to  bestow  among  my  men  ;  so  that  in  fewe  dayes
all  of  them,  I  thanke  God,  recovered  their  former  health
and  strength.  The  Cayha  informed  me,  that  Regib  Aga
had  writ  earnestly  to  the  Basha,  that  we  might  all  be
sent  downe  to  Aden,  and  there  taken  into  our  ships :  by
which  meanes  his  Towne  of  Moha,  and  such  ships  of
India  as  should  passe  the  Bab,  should  be  secure  from
danger  or  any  harme  our  ships  might  doe  them.  This
wicked  counsell  had  prevailed  with  the  Basha,  had  not
God  raysed  the  Cayha  for  our  good  to  perswade  the
contrary.

The  seventeenth  in  the  morning  early,  the  Cayha  sent
for  me,  M.  Femel,  and  others,  and  told  me,  the  next
morning  I  and  my  people  should  depart  for  Moha.
After  wee  had  broke  fast,  hee  brought  us  to  the  Basha
to  take  our  leaves :  he  beganne  againe  to  extoll  his  owne
clemencie,  and  the  power  of  the  Gran  Senior,  saying,  he
had  a  long  Sword,  straightly  charging  me  I  came  no
more  into  those  Seas  :  adding,  that  neither  Christian  nor
Lutheran  might  come  thither,  no,  though  they  had  the  [I.  Hi.  258.]
Gran  Seniors  Passe :  for  so  had  he  commanded  him  :  then
I  requested,  if  any  of  our  Nation  came  thither,  before  I
could  give  advise  to  England,  that  they  might  not  be
betrayed,  as  I  was,  but  plainely  denied  Trade,  that  they
might  know  what  to  trust  to,  and  to  be  permitted  quietly
to  depart ;  which  my  request  he  would  in  no  wise  grant :
then  I  intreated  him  to  write  to  Regib  Aga,  to  effect
what  he  had  promised  me,  otherwise  he  being  my  mortall
in  145  K

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1610.

enemy,  would  wrong  me  and  my  people :  he  answered
with  great  pride,  Is  not  my  onely  word  sufficient  to  turne
a  whole  Citie  upside  downe  ?  if  Regib  Aga  wrong  you,  I
will  pull  his  skin  over  his  eares,  and  give  you  his  head :
is  he  not  my  slave  ?  and  therewithall  appointed  the
Cayha  to  write  my  dispatch.  I  demanded  answer  of
his  Majesties  letter,  but  he  would  give  me  none.  This
done,  I  departed.  I  told  the  Cayha  I  had  never  a
weapon,  and  therefore  I  desired  leave  I  might  buy  a
Sword,  and  ride  downe  as  I  came  up  like  a  prisoner :
he  acquainted  the  Basha  therewith,  and  he  sent  mee  one
of  his  cast  Swords.  The  Cayha  also  this  morning  gave
me  an  hundred  peices  of  gold  of  fortie  Madines  the  peice :
and  fiftie  pieces  had  he  given  me  not  many  dayes  before  :
so  that  I  received  from  him  in  all  an  hundred  and  fiftie
peices  of  gold,  and  from  the  Basha  nothing  but  his  rusty
Sword  :  the  Cayha  is  of  a  liberall  disposition,  and  the
Basha  exceeding  covetous:  if  any  man  be  knowne  to
bee  rich,  he  had  need  to  carrie  himselfe  uprightly  :  other-
waies  the  least  occasion  will  cost  him  his  head,  that  the
Basha  may  enjoy  his  goods,  as  lately  befell  a  rich  Aga,
whom  he  caused  privately  to  be  cruelly  murthered,  and
presently  after  seazed  upon  all  he  had.

The  eighteenth,  I  paid  all  duties of  the Prison,  and

went  to  the  Cayhas  Garden,  where  wee  brake  our  fast,

received  my  dispatch,  and  a  Letter  to  the  Governour  of

Aden for re-deliverie of  the Pepper-Cornes Boate ; I

requested his Letter to the Governour of  Tayes for

delivery  of  a  Youth  of  Master  Pembertons,  which  was

left sicke  there, (I was informed hee was inforced to

turne  Turke,  hee  writ  his  Letter  and  sealed  it :  the  effect

They  depart I know  not) which being  done  I  tooke my  leave and

from  Zenan. departed : my  selfe,  Master  Femell,  and Master  Fowler

were  mounted  on  Horses,  and  all the rest  upon  Asses

and  Camels,  we  had  two  Chauses  to  conduct  us,  and  a

Horseman,  the  other  afoot.

The  descrip-  This  Citie  is  somewhat  bigger  then  Bristoll,  ot  good

Hon  of  Zenan.  building  of  stone  and  lime,  with  Churches  or  Meskits  :

146

SIR HENRY MIDDLETON  ad.

i  6  io.
it  is  environed  with  a  mudde  wall  full  of  Battlements  and
Turrets.  On  the  West-side  there  is  a  great  deale  of
spare  ground  enclosed  within  the  walles,  there  they  have
their  Gardens,  Orchards,  and  Houses  of  pleasure,  it
standeth  in  a  barren  and  stony  Valley,  with  high  Hils
enclosing  it,  not  being  farre  off,  whereof  one  which  is  to
the  Northward  over-looketh  the  Towne,  whereon  is  built
a  small  Castle,  to  keepe  it  from  the  mountaine  people,
who  accustomed  from  thence  to  offend  the  Citie.  It  hath
no  water  but  Wel-water,  which  they  digge  deepe  for ;
Wood  is  very  scarce,  and  fetcht  from  farre,  and  very
deare ;  In  the  Easter-most  part  is  the  Castle  inclosed  with
mudde  Walles  full  of  Turrets,  in  which  Turrets  every
night  they  place  their  Watch,  which  keepe  such  a  hollow-
ing one  to  another  all  night  long,  that  a  man  that  is  not
acquainted  with  it  can  hardly  sleepe ;  the  Basha  and
some  other  principall  men  dwell  within  this  Castle  Wall,
the  Keepers  House  wherein  I  was  imprisoned,  joyneth  to
the  wall,  and  at  the  foote  of  the  Wall  is  a  spacious  yard,
wherein  a  great  number  of  people,  for  the  most  part
Women  and  Children,  are  kept  Prisoners  or  Pledges,  to
keepe  their  Parents,  Husbands,  and  Allies  from  Rebellion.
The  Boyes  while  they  be  little  goe  loose  in  the  yard,
but  after  they  bee  come  to  bignesse  they  are  clapt  in
Irons  and  carryed  to  a  strong  Tower,  where  there  bee
many  more  kept  in  like  case,  there  they  remayne  during
the  Bashas  pleasure,  those  Women  and  Children  which
remayne  in  the  yard  live  in  little  Cottages,  which  they
have  made  of  purpose  ;  the  Children  goe  for  the  most
part  naked,  without  it  be  very  cold,  and  then  have  they
Sheep-skinne  Coates  to  keepe  them  warme,  they  be  as
wilde  and  rude  as  if  they  were  brought  up  in  the  Moun-
taines.  This  night  we  arrived  at  Siam  distant  from  Siam  a  small
Zinan  sixteene  miles :  which  is  a  small  Towne  with  a  J!w
Castle  upon  the  side  of  a  Hill,  the  place  and  Countrey
about  it  is  very  barren,  and  yeeldeth  small  reliefe  to
Travellers.

About midnight we departed from Zenan, and the

147

Castle.

a.».  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1610.

Surage.  next  day  being  the  nineteenth,  we  came  to  Surage,  about

ten  a  clocke  in  the  forenoone :  it  is  likewise  a  small
Village  distant  from  Siam  about  eighteene  miles,  the
Countrey  barren  and  the  people  poore,  and  goe  almost
naked,  save  a  cloth  about  their  wastes  reaching  downe
to  their  knees. We  departed  from  hence  at  mid-night.

Damarcagood Wee  came  to  Damare  the  twentieth,  about  eight  of  the

Citte.  clocke in the  morning ; it  is  a  Citie  built  of  lime and

stone,  but  separated  in  five  parts  one  a  prettie  distance
from  the  other,  so  that  it  seemeth  to  be  so  many  Villages.
It  is  seated  in  a  spacious  Valley  or  Plaine,  having  plentie
of  water  and  all  kind  of  graine,  with  all  other  provision
for  sustenance  both  for  themselves  and  their  poore  Neigh-
bours, who  live  in  great  penurie  and  want,  it  is  distant
from  Surage  twentie  miles.  We  tarryed  heere  two  dayes
by  order  of  Abdela  Chillarby,  the  Bashas  Cayha,  who  is
Governour  of  this  Province.

The two and twentieth,  we departed from Damare

Ermin.  about  two  a  clocke  after  mid-night,  and  came  to  Ermin

betimes,  it  being  a  small  Village  and  distant  from  Damare
some  fifteene  miles.

Naqualsamare The  three  and  twentieth,  we  arrived  at  Naqual  Samare,

an  lime.  being a  common Inne  for  all Travellers. The  Turkes

call  them  Censors ;  which  are  built  at  the  cost  of  the  Gran

[I.  iii.  259.]  Signior,  for  the  reliefe  of  Travellers.  There  be  many  of
these  Censors  betweene  Moha  and  Zenan,  this  Censor
is  seated  in  the  middle  of  a  very  steepe  hill  called
Nackhilsamar,  and  some  few  scattering  poore  houses
about  it,  upon  the  top  of  this  hill  is  a  great  Castle,
wherein  the  Governour  of  the  Province  which  is  an
Arabian  dwelleth.  These  craggie  Mountaine  Countries,
are  for  the  most  part  governed  by  the  Arabians,  for  the
people  of  these  Mountaines  cannot  brooke  the  proud
and  insolent  Government  of  the  Turkes  :  no  Turke  may
passe  this  way,  neither  upward  nor  downeward  without
a  Pasport  of  the  Governour  of  the  Province  from  whence
they  come,  this  Censor  is  distant  from  Ermin,  some  four-
teene  miles.

148

mabicanlnne.

SIR HENRY MIDDLKTON  «a

i  6  io.

The  foure  and  twentieth  wee  arrived  at  Mohader,  Maiader  a
which  is  a  little  Village  at  the  foot  of  the  great  hill,  being  lutle  ytlla&-
distant  from  Nackelsamar,  some  thirteene  miles.  Our
Chauses  had  warrant  from  the  Basha,  to  take  up  Asses
for  our  men  to  ride  upon,  which  accordingly  they  per-
formed over-night;  but  the  next  morning  the  Arabians
lay  in  ambush  in  the  way  and  in  despight  of  our  Chauses
tooke  their  Asses  away,  neither  of  our  Guardians  daring
to  give  them  a  foule  word.

The  five  and  twentieth,  being  arrived  at  Rabattamaine  Rabatta-
a  Censor  with  some  Cottages  and  shops  adjoyning  there-
unto :  it  is  seated  on  the  side  of  a  hill  and  is  distant
from  Mohader  sixteene  miles,  groweth  Poppie,  whereof
they  make  their  Oppium  : but  it  is  not  good.

The  sixe  and  twentieth,  we  arrived  at  a Coughe  house
in  the  middle  of  a Plaine : it  is  called Merfadine,  and Merfadin.
distant  from  Rabattamaine  sixteene  miles.

The  seven  and  twentieth,  we  arrived  at  Tayes,  being  TayesaCitie.
a  Citie  of  halfe  the  bignesse  of  Zenan,  and  walled  round
with  a  mud  wall :  here  we  stayed  all  this  day  and  the
next,  in  which  time  of  my  abode  there,  I  used  the  best
meanes  I  could  for  recovery  of  a  Youth  of  Master
Pembertons,  whom  the  Governour  Hamet  Aga  had
forced  to  turne  Turke,  and  would  by  no  meanes  depart
with  him.  But  Walter  Talbot  having  the  Turkish
Tongue  was  permitted  to  speake  with  him  in  a  Chamber
amongst  other  Boyes  and  Youthes,  who  weeping,  said
unto  him  he  was  no  Turke,  but  was  deluded  by  them,  they
telling  him  that  I  and  all  my  people  were  put  to  death
at  Zenan,  and  if  he  would  turne  he  should  save  his  life,
but  he  would  not  yeeld  unto  them.  But  afterward  some
of  the  Agaes  servants  carrying  him  to  a  Hot-house,  when
they  had  him  naked  circumcised  him  perforce.  When
I  saw  I  could  not  get  him  I  delivered  Abdela  Chillarby
the  Cayhas  Letters,  which  was,  if  that  he  was  not  turned
he  should  deliver  him  me.  When  the  Aga  had  read  this
Letter,  he  told  me  the  effect  saying,  that  Letter  was
warrant  sufficient  for  keeping  of  him. I  suspected the

149

A.D.
l6lO.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Eufras.
March,  1.
1610.

Letter  was  to  that  effect  when  it  was  given  me,  and  that
made  me  not  deliver  it  at  first.  This  Citie  standeth  in
a  Valley  under  very  high  hils ;  and  upon  the  top  of  one
of  the  highest  hils  is  a  faire  and  strong  Castle  :  all  kind
of  victuall  is  very  cheape  here,  in  the  Countrey  there-
Indko  made,  abouts  is  made  some  Indico,  but  what  quantitie  or  of
what  goodnesse  I  could  not  learne.  This  Citie  is  very
populous,  and  so  is  all  the  Countrey  and  Cities  we
travelled  through.

The  first  of  March,  we  departed  and  came  to  Eufras
about  noone,  being  sixteene  miles  from  Tayes ;  the
Countrey  we  travailed  Mountainous  and  stoney.  The
Towne  little,  scituate  on  the  side  of  a  hill.  About  the
fift  of  January  great  multitude  of  people  resorteth  hither
from  farre,  where  they  doe  some  foolish  Ceremonies  to
one  of  their  Saints  and  holy  men,  which  lyeth  buried
there :  which  being  done  they  goe  all  in  company  to
Mecca  on  Pilgrimage.  The  Governour  of  this  Towne
is  a  Turke,  and  used  mee  and  my  people  very  kindly
at  our  going  up,  and  hearing  of  my  comming  downe,
he  sent  one  sixe  miles  to  a  place,  where  two  wayes  meete,
to  bring  us  to  his  Towne,  where  we  were  most  kindly
used  by  him.

The  second,  we  departed  thence  and  lodged  at  a
Censor  called  Assambine,  some  eleven  miles  from  Eufras.
Here  is  no  Towne  but  a  few  poore  Cottages.

The  third,  we  went  from  thence  and  came  to  another
Censor  some  thirteene  miles  off:  it  is  called  Accomoth
standing  in  a  barren  common  with  a  few  Cottages  by  it.

The  fourth  in  the  morning,  we  departed  thence  and
came  to  Mousa,  seventeene  miles  from  Accomoth :  the
Countrey  we  travailed  plaine  and  barren,  and  small  store
of  Inhabitants.  The  Towne  of  Mousa  is  not  great,  and
unwalled,  but  very  populous.  It  is  scituate  in  a  plaine
indifferent  fruitfull ;  hereabouts  likewise  is  made  some
Indico. Wee  departed  thence  about  mid-night.

The  fift  in  the  morning  about  eight  of  the  clocke  we
came  to  Moha. We  rested  two  or  three  houres  by  the

150

Assambine.

Accomoth.

Mousa  a
towne.

Moha.

SIR HENRY MIDDLKTON  a.u.

way  at  a  Church  or  Coughe  house  called  Dabully  built
by  a  Dabull Merchant. If  we  had  not  stayed  here,  we
had come to Moha before day. A mile without the
Towne,  we  were met by  our  Carpenters, Smithes, and
such  others  as  were  detayned  there,  the  day  before  their
Irons were taken off,  and they had libertie to walke
abroad. The  first question I demaunded  was  to  know
what  became  of  Master  Pemberton. They  told  mee  hee
lighted upon a  Cannoa, and  got  aboord,  wherof  I was
not  a  little  glad  ;  for  I  was  very  doubtful  never  to  have
seen  him  more. At  the  Townes  ends,  and  all  the  way  to
the  Agas house, the  people  stood  very  thicke, and as
wee  passed  by  bad  us  welcome  backe,  for  it  was  nothing
pleasing to the people of  the  Countrey to heare how
treacherously  the  Turkes  had  used us : we  rid  till  wee
came  to  the  Agas  house where wee alighted,  my  selfe,
Master Femell, Master Fowler, were brought before
him, where I delivered my Letters from Zenan, He
received me after his wonted dissembled  shew of  love
and  kindnesse,  bidding  me  and  the  rest  welcome,  saying,
he  was  glad  of  our  returne  safe,  and  sorrie  and  ashamed
of  what  was  past, and prayed me to pardon  him,  and  [I.  iii.  260.]
that  hereafter  he  bad me  assure  my  selfe  he  would  be
my  friend,  and  that  the  harme  that  had  be  fallen  us  was
not long  of  him, for hee did nothing but what his
Master  commanded  him. I  soothed  him  up,  but  beleeved
nothing  he  said,  he  read  the  command  of  the  Basha,  and
said  all  things  should  be  performed  accordingly. Where-
upon  he  called  in for Breakefast, and  caused  us  to  sit
downe  with  him,  bidding  mee  eate  and  bee  merry :  for
now  he  had  eate  Bread  and Salt  with  me,  I  need  not
doubt  of  any  harme. After  breakfast,  he  went  to  seeke
for  a  House  for  me,  we  had  a  faire  large  house  appointed
us  neere  the  Seaside,  where  we  continued  two  dayes,  but
afterward  wee  were  removed  from  thence  to  a  great  strong
House,  standing  all  alone  in  a  spacious  Church-yard  in
the  middle  of  the  Towne :  and  for  our  Guard  a  Captaine
and his Company were appointed to that charge,  who

*5i

A.D.
l6lO.

The  descrip-
tion of  Moha.

The  Darling
came  into  the
Roade.

The  Captaine
of  a  ship  of
Dabull.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

warded  all  the  day,  &  by  night  our  house  was  enclosed
round  with  his  armed  Souldiers.  The  cause  why  we  were
remooved  from  our  first  house,  was  because  it  was  too
neere  the  water  side,  they  doubting  from  thence  we
might  attempt  an  escape.

This  Towne  of  Moha  is  one  third  part  lesse  then
Tayes,  unwalled,  very  populous,  and  seated  close  by  the
Sea-side  in  a  salt,  sandy,  barren  soyle.  The  Governours
house  is  close  by  the  waters  side,  and  here  by  the  same
is  the  Key  or  Bridge  which  shooteth  a  prettie  distance
into  the  Sea :  to  which  Key  all  Boates  belonging  to  any
shipping,  are  enjoyned  to  land  for  feare  of  stealing  of
Custome.  And  close  adjoyning  to  the  Key  is  a  plat-
forme,  whereon  are  planted  some  doozen  of  Brasse  Peeces,
at  the  Westerne  end  of  the  Towne  there  is  a  Fort  wherein
is  the  like  quantitie  of  Ordinance :  this  Fort  was  ruinate
at  our  first  comming  thither,  but  since  pulled  downe  to
the  ground  and  new  builded.  This  after-noone  came
the  Darling  into  the  Roade,  who  brought  us  newes  of
the  wel-fare  of  the  rest,  which  was  no  small  comfort  to
me  after  so  many  troubles.

The  sixth,  Nohuda  Melech  Ambor,  Captaine  of  a
great  ship  of  Dabull,  which  came  into  the  Road  two
dayes  before  my  arrivall  at  Moha,  came  ashore  with  a
great  many  of  Merchants  with  him,  he  with  the  rest
were  carryed  about  the  Towne  in  pompe,  and  afterwards
feasted  by  the  Aga.  I  likewise  was  sent  for  to  this  Feast
and  entertayned  with  all  love  and  friendship.  The  Aga
in  presence  of  them  all  called  for  the  Alcoran,  kissed
it,  and  voluntarily  swore  and  protested,  that  he  ought
me  no  evill  will  but  wished  me  all  good,  and  would
endevour  himselfe  to  pleasure  me  the  best  he  could,  his
heart  being  cleere  of  malice  or  hatred,  and  was  much
grieved  for  what  was  past :  I  returned  him  thankes,
seeming  greatly  satisfied  therewith,  although  I  gave  no
credit  thereto,  but  was  forced  to  indure  with  patience
what  I  could  not  remedie,  till  it  pleased  God  to  provide
better.

152

SIR HENRY MIDDLETON

r.  i  K
The  seventh  day,  the  Aga  made  a  great  Feast  at  his
Garden-house  for  the  Dabullians,  to  which  I  and  Master
Femell  were  likewise  invited.  The  Dabullians  were  all
mounted  upon  gallant  Horses  with  rich  Furniture,  and
we  upon  a  couple  of  tyred  lame  Jades,  which  wee  brought
from  Zenan.

The  eight,  wee  were  all  sent  for  to  come  before  the
Aga,  my  selfe  with  all  the  Merchants,  Carpenters,  Smithes,
and  others,  whom  he  (to  the  number  of  thirtie)  thought
good,  were  appointed  to  stay  aland,  and  the  rest  which
were  thirtie  sixe,  were  sent  aboord  the  Darling.

The  ninth,  had  I  made  an  escape,  had  I  not  beene
more  carefull  for  others,  which  I  should  have  left  behind
me,  then  for  my  selfe.  This  day  the  Darling  having
taken  in  thirtie  sixe  men  as  aforesaid,  and  provided
of  some  necessaries  they  lacked,  departed  towards  the
other  ships  on  the  Coast  of  Habashe :  where  they  had
found  out  in  the  time  of  my  absence  an  excellent  Road,  4n  excellent
for  all  windes  that  blow  in  these  Seas,  it  is  called  Assab  ^set°"fthe
Road,  where  they  had  wood  and  water  enough  costing  Habashe
nothing  but  the  fetching,  the  water  is  a  little  brackish,  called  Assab
but  seemed  fresh  enough  to  them  that  had  lived  in  want  Roade.
thereof,  the  people  of  the  Countrey  bee  as  blacke  as  the
Negroes  of  Guinea,  they  be  all  Mahometans  alongst  the
Sea-coast :  but  up  in  the  Land  they  bee  Christians  and
Subjects  to  Prester  John,  they  goe  almost  naked  save
a  cloth  about  their  wastes,  which  reacheth  to  their  knees.
They  were  at  first  comming  of  our  people  very  fearefull,
but  after  they  were  acquainted,  and  a  peace  confirmed
by  oath  on  both  sides,  they  daily  repayred  with  refresh-
ing, as  Beefes,  Sheepe  and  Goates,  and  sold  them  for
money  at  reasonable  rates.  And  afterward  they  desiring
course  Callico  rather  then  money,  I  furnished  them  there-
with from  Moha :  In  trucke  whereof  they  sold  their
Cattle  farre  better  cheape  then  before  for  money,  dealing
faithfully  and  kindly  with  our  people,  notwithstanding
the  Turkes  sought  to  worke  them  to  the  contrary,  by
meanes of  small  Bark.es  which passe  to  and fro. The

i53

A.D.

l6lO.

Rahaita.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

King  of  this  Countrey  hath  his  abiding  at  a  Towne  lying
upon  the  Sea-coast  called  Rahaita,  some  fortie  miles  to
the  Southwards  neere  the  Bab,  hee  sent  some  of  his
chiefe  men  to  the  Commanders  of  the  shippes  with
presents,  they  returned  them  the  like :  who  entertayned
those  which  were  sent  very  courteously,  with  promise
of  any  thing  his  Countrey  yeelded.  Their  vulgar  speech
is  not  understood  by  the  Arabians,  the  better  sort  of
them  speake  and  write  the  Arabian  Language,  in  which
Tongue  their  Law  of  Mahomet  is  written.

[I.  iii. 261.]

April  1 .
161 1.

Another  ship
ofDabul

The  third  ship
ofDabul.

§.  mi.

Indian  shipping  at  Moha ;  Sir  Henry  Middletons
escape  from  the  Turkes,  and  enforcing  satis-
faction.

Prill  the  first,  1 6 1 1 .  the  Darling  departed  for
Assab,  with  leave  every  ten  dayes  to  returne,
to  see  how  I  did :  this  his  unlooked  for  kindnesse
I  hoped  in  God  would  bee  a  meanes  to  worke  my
freedome.  The  second,  came  into  the  roade  another
ship  of  Dabul,  full  of  people.  The  Nohuda  rid  about
the  Towne  in  a  painted  coate,  as  the  manner  is.  These
robes  are  but  lent  them  for  the  present,  and  afterward
returned  to  the  keeper  of  the  Ward-robe,  to  whom
belongs  a  dutie  for  lone  of  them.  The  third,  came  a
Jebba  from  Aden,  which  brought  the  Pepper-cornes  Boat.
The  fourth  day,  came  an  other  ship  of  Dabul,  which
laded  at  Achin  with  Pepper :  these  three  great  ships
belong  all  to  the  Governour  of  Dabul,  who  is  a  Persian,
and  a  great  Merchant,  and  hath  many  slaves,  whereof
Melick  Amber  is  one,  and  is  in  great  credit  with  him :
he  had  the  managing  of  the  goods  belonging  to  these
three  ships :  he  is  a  Negro,  borne  in  Habesse,  and
might  cost  his  Master  fifeteene  or  twenty  royalls  of
eight,  and  now  never  goeth  out  of  his  doores,  but  with
great  troopes  of  followers,  like  some  great  Lord.

i54

SIR HENRY MIDDLETOX  am.

i  61  i  .

The sixth, I sent to the Cayha Abdela Chillarby a
faire peice, and a small barrell of powder, which I
promised to send him at my comming from Zenan.
The  seventh,  came from India a  smal ship laden with Another  mall
cotton. The eleventh, came from India two small  lndian  ihlP-
barkes Mallabars, of  one of  the lies  of  Maldivia : the
chiefe of them came often to visit me, till he was
forbidden  by  the  Aga our enemie. The twelfth, there
came two Barks from India : for then the wind was
Westerly  ;  which  continued  so  for  five  dayes,  and  afterwards
came  to  the  South South-east  againe. The  fourteenth,
came  in  a  small  Barke  laden  with  Cotten,  for  the  Bannians.
The  fifteenth,  came  another  from  Bassanor  : the  Nohuda
came  to  visit  me  at  my house,  which  the Aga repined
at. The seventeenth, came into the Towne a great
many  Cammels,  and  divers  Merchants,  which  came  from  Merchants  of
Damasco,  Sues,  and  Mecca,  to  trade  with  the  Merchants  s  amasco>
of  India. The  nineteenth,  came  in  a  ship  and  a  barke  of  Mecca.
Cananor, the Captaine of  the  great  ship came to visit
mee with great troopes following of  him : which  the
Aga stomaking, sent for him whiles he was talking
with  mee,  and  forbad  such  resort  unto  me. The  twen-
tieth, came  in  a  ship  of  Calicut,  and  the  Darling. The
three  and  twentieth,  came  in  a  small  barke  of  the  Kings
of  Zacotora,  which  came  from  Goa.

The second of May, 1611. I dispatched Letters  May  2.1611.
for  England  of  all  our  proceedings  in  those  parts :  one
Copy to the English Consul at Aleppo, and another
to  the  French  Consul  at  Cayro  :  which  letters  I  delivered
to  a  Guzerat. The  tenth,  came  in  a  small  barke  from
the  Coast  of  Swahell  or  Magadoxo  with  Slaves,  Elephants
teeth, Amber : there had wont to come every yeare
hither from thence foure barkes with like lading, but
this  yeare  would  come  no  more,  for  that  their  Countrey  Cancamarra
are in warres, and the Portugals had burned their  mS.Lammce,
shipping. These men buy their Negroes and Amber  z<^ereCr'Pia,n
at  Cancamarra,  in S.  Laurence,  where Captaine  Rowles  0j-tfie  tj„j0„  '
was taken  and  betrayed ; we  enquired  of them  if  they  was  betraied.

*55

A.D.

161 1.

The  Indian
ships  were
come  in,  and
the  Turkes
promises  were
not  performed,
but  many
apparant
evidences  that
they  never
should,  caused
S.  Hen.
Middleton  to
shift  for  his
best  escape.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

could  informe  us  of  any  thing  touching  him.  Also
this  day  about  noone  came  in  the  Darling,  and  according
to  her  wonted  order  shot  off  a  peice  for  a  Boat ;  the
shot  grazed  upon  the  water  to  the  Towne-wards,  whereat
the  Aga  was  displeased ;  but  gave  leave  I  might  send
aboord.  I  writ  my  letter,  and  sent  one  of  my  servants
aboord  with  it,  commanding  him  to  tarry  aboord,  and
come  no  more  ashore,  and  withall  to  tell  M.  Pemberton,
hee  should  not  send  his  Boat  a  land  till  he  heard  further
from me.

The  eleventh  in  the  morning,  at  the  dawning  of  the
day,  the  Aga  with  all  the  chiefe  men  of  the  Towne,
were  rid  abroad  in  great  state  to  his  Garden  to  be
merrie  :  which  I  seeing,  did  not  a  little  glad  my  heart,
and  gave  God  thanks,  which  offered  me  so  faire  meanes
to  put  that  in  practise,  which  long  before  I  had  deter-
termined :  For  Hamet  Aga,  and  others  had  told  mee
the  Basha  would  not  performe  his  word,  but  for  feare.
I  writ  my  letter  to  M.  Pemberton,  wherein  I  certified
him,  I  minded  as  this  day  to  make  an  escape  aboord,
and  that  I  would  convay  my  selfe  into  an  emptie  But,
and  so  be  carried  downe  to  the  Boat  as  an  emptie  Caske :
and  therefore  willed  him  the  Boat  should  be  sent  with
all  speed,  manned  with  choice  men ;  and  withall  to  send
me  a  bottle  of  Aquavitae,  and  an  other  of  wine,  to  make
drunke  my  Keepers ;  which  he  accordingly  performed :
before  I  made  M.  Femel  acquainted  with  my  determina-
tion, I  made  him  sweare  unto  me  to  be  secret,  and  to
use  no  perswasions  with  me,  to  with-draw  my  mind
from  that  I  had  resolved  upon :  whereupon  I  shewed
him  what  I  had  written  to  M.  Pemberton ;  and  withall,
shewed  him  how  that  himselfe  and  others  should  walke
out  of  the  Towne  to  the  water  side,  to  such  a  place
as  hee  well  knew,  and  I  appointed,  where  I  would  not
faile,  God  sending  mee  into  the  Boat,  to  take  him  and
the  rest  in.  Also  I  acquainted  him,  that  the  Carpenters
and  others  I  had  appointed  to  embarque  themselves
to  the  South-ward  of  the  Towne,  where  lay  a  Boat  hard

156

SIR HENRY MmDLKTOX  a.d.

i  6  i  i .

by  the  shore,  with  mast  and  sayle  ready  fitted  for  their
purpose;  but  withall,  I  had  given  the  Carpenters  warning
not  to  embarque  themselves,  till  such  time  as  they  saw
the  shippes  Boat  put  off  from  the  Bridge.  All  things
sorting  out  well  to  our  purpose,  the  Subasha  (which
was  our  guardian,  and  left  in  Townc  onely  to  looke  [I.  iii.  262.]
to  me)  fell  to  drinking  hard  at  a  Racky-house :  and  I
beeing  doubtfull  of  any  good  performance  from  my
enemies  the  Turkes,  had  long  bethought  me  of  all  the
meanes  I  could  devise  from  time  to  time  to  make  an
escape,  but  could  not  light  upon  any  project,  that  had
not  apparent  danger,  both  to  my  selfe,  and  those  that
should  attempt  to  escape  away  with  me.  Onelv  this
devise  it  pleased  God  to  put  into  my  head,  whereby
I  might  bee  secretly  conveied  into  the  boat  without
beeing  discovered :  for  my  Keepers  and  Souldiers  eves
were  onely  upon  me,  wheresoever  I  went :  all  the  rest
of  my  company  might  walke  abroad  any  where  by  day
time  without  suspition,  or  any  great  regard :  I  never
went  out  of  doores,  but  two  or  three  souldiers  attended
upon  me  wheresoever  I  went.  The  Boat  being  come,
and  Keepers  all  drunke,  and  all  things  fitted,  about
twelve  a  clocke  at  noone  the  Subasha  returnes  from
the  Aracke-house,  and  being  in  one  ende  of  our
house,  but  a  wall  betweene  us,  where  his  abiding  was,
the  better  to  guard  us,  I  began  to  put  my  businesse
in  execution :  and  appointed  the  Carpenters  to  take
others  with  them,  and  to  go  by  two  and  two  in  the
best  manner  they  could  to  avoid  suspition,  and  shift
for  themselves  in  the  Boat  aforesaid ;  but  in  any  case
not  to  meddle,  before  they  saw  the  ships  Boat  under
sayle.  To  M.  Femel,  and  those  that  I  appointed  to
take  into  Lee-ward  of  the  Towne,  I  gave  order  likewise,
to  goe  two  or  three  in  company  alongst  the  Sea  side,
to  the  place  I  had  appointed  them  to  take  them  in,
and  there  to  tarry  my  comming.  After  I  had  given
these  directions,  I  was  conveied  into  my  Tub,  and  ton  gjca*,etk
safely  set  aboord  the  Boat : which  beeing  done,  I  forced  aboord.

iS7

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1611.

out  the  head  of  the  Caske,  and  came  aboord,  causing
them  to  beare  up  with  the  leeward  point,  where  I  tooke
in  John  Fowler,  Benjamin  Greene,  Rowland  Webbe,
Ro.  Mico,  Ro.  Conwey,  William  Bownes,  John  Wright,
Arthur  Atkinson,  Thomas  Evans,  John  Wood,  and
Henry  Fortune.  M.  Femel  and  other  beeing  too
slacke  in  comming  out  of  the  Towne,  were  taken  before
they  could  come  to  the  boat.  The  Towne  beeing  raised,
partly  by  the  undiscreet  running  of  some  of  our  people,
and  partly  by  seeing  the  Boat  beare  up  to  Leeward,
contrary  to  their  wonted  course,  M.  Femel  and  those
with  him,  had  likewise  escaped,  had  he  come  by  land
to  the  point,  and  not  taken  water,  so  soone  as  others
which  were  both  sicke  and  weake  did,  which  were
behind  him  when  he  tooke  the  water.  I  came  to  an
anchor,  and  brought  the  Boat  a  ground  in  tarrying
for  them,  to  the  no  little  danger  of  us  all :  I  caused
men  to  leape  over-board  to  reskue  him,  but  before
they  could  get  a  Pikes  length  from  the  Boat,  he  and
those  with  him  were  all  apprehended :  M.  Femel  dis-
charged a  Pistoll  in  the  face  of  one  of  them  that
hardly  pursued  him,  and  mortally  wounded  him  before
he  was  taken ;  it  booted  me  not  to  stay  longer,  having
all  the  Town  in  pursuit  of  me,  and  a  very  narrow
and  shoald  channell  to  passe  betweene  a  small  sandie
Hand,  and  the  maine :  it  pleased  God  wee  lighted  upon
the  right  channell,  which  quickly  brought  us  into  deepe
water,  and  out  of  danger  of  our  enemies,  for  which
his  great  mercie  towards  us,  his  holy  name  bee  blessed
and  praysed  for  evermore.

They  in  the  Darling  kept  good  watch  in  the  tops,
which  so  soone  as  they  saw  the  Boat  under  sayle,  let
slip  and  set  saile,  bearing  up  to  Lee-ward,  to  have
releived  us  if  need  had  bin :  being  come  aboord,  we
espied  the  Boat  wherein  the  Carpenters  were  comming
towards  us :  I  sent  the  ship  Boat  to  bring  them  and
their  Boat  aboord  of  us.  In  this  Boat  escaped  George
Collinson, Robert Pinis, Nathaniel Symonds,  and John

158

SIR HENRY MIDDLETON  ma

i 6 i  i.

Taylor; but  Walter  Talbot,  who  was  appointed  to  come

with them, tarried so long before he came, that the

Boat was put off, he thought to swim aboord, and

was drowned. About two houres after our comming

aboord,  came  two  poore  Arabs  in  a  Canoa,  but  so  fearefull,

they  durst  not  come  nigh  the  ship  till they  were  wonne

by faire words, and so with much  adoe, one  of  them

entered, and delivered me a letter from M. Femel, A  Utter  from

shewing  that  they  were  in  great  danger  of  beeing  slaine

or  spoyled by those  that  apprehended them, but some

of  the souldiers, through former acquaintance, bearing

them  good  will,  saved them, and  brought  them to  the

Agaes, where they tarried his comming. At the first

sight  of  them, he  looked  as  pale  as  ashes,  telling  them

they should all loose their heads, asking them how

they  durst  attempt  such  a  thing? They  answered,  they

came out of  England under my command, and did

nothing  but  what  I had  commanded,  which  in no  wise

they durst disobey. He againe threatned them with

losse of  their heads, and presently caused  them all  to

be  chained by  the  necks,  from  which  chaine  they  were

quickly released, at the intreaty of  Nohuda Melicke

Amber, & Nohuda Mahomet of  Cananor, and others,

and permitted to remaine in our former house, but

with  a  stronger  guard  then  before. This  their  kindnes

proceeded not of  love, but for feare of  their  ships  in

the road, which were then under my command. I

returned  answer  of  the  letter,  and sent  the  Aga  word, A  stout  mes-

that if  he did not  send me  all  my  people,  with  those  s*&  °

provisions of  the ships which he detained contrary to

the  Bashaes  order  (for  I  minded  not  to  be  put  off  with

Farriga)  I  would  fire  the  ships  in  the  road,  and  do  my

best to batter the Towne about his eares : likewise I

sent word to the Nohudas, that  they  should not  send

any  Boat  aboord  the  ships,  without  first  comming  aboord

of  me, and to acquaint mee with their businesse, nor

to  carry  any  thing  out  of  them  aland,  without  my  leave

and  order.

i59

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

161 1.

After  my  departure,  there  was  no  small  disturbance
in  the  Towne :  the  Aga  not  knowing  how  to  answer
the  Basha,  feared  it  would  cost  him  his  head,  the
Subbasha  which  was  my  keeper  at  his  wits  end,  and
knew  not  whether  he  might  stay  or  flee  for  his  life.
The  Emeryor  bahar  (or  Lord  of  the  Sea  as  they  terme
him)  in  little  better  taking,  beeing  accused  of  consenting
to  my  escape ;  one  of  our  Porters  tooke  Sanctuary  in
iii.  263.]  one  of  their  Churches,  and  would  not  be  gotten  out
from  thence  till  hee  had  his  pardon,  and  the  Nohudas
and  Merchants  in  great  feare  of  losse  of  their  ship  and
goods,  most  of  them  sending  Presents  of  victuals,  and
refreshing  to  Master  Femell  and  the  rest,  which  before
tooke  scorne  to  speake  to  them.  At  night  I  sent  the
Boat  well  manned  to  carrie  the  newes  to  our  ships,
with  order  for  their  comming  over  with  all  speed.  I
plyed  to  wind-ward  in  the  Darling,  when  the  Tyde
served,  and  rid  a  little  without  the  great  ship,  so  that
I  had  her  and  all  the  rest  under  the  command  of  our
Ordnance.

The  twelfth,  came  aboord  Nohuda  Mahomet  of  Cananor
with  Letters,  telling  me  the  Aga  was  sorrie  I  was  so
departed  (which  1  knew  to  be  true)  for  that  he  was  deter-
mined within  few  dayes  to  have  set  mee  at  libertie,  and
all  my  people,  to  my  owne  content :  and  for  the  pro-
visions belonging  to  our  ships  which  were  ashore,  hee
would  deliver  them,  but  for  my  people  hee  could
not  deliver  them  without  order  from  the  Basha,  in-
treating  fifteene  dayes  respite :  in  which  time  if  I  had
not  all  my  men  in  safetie  sent  aboord,  they  desired
no  favour.  I  told  him  likewise,  I  must  have  my
Pinnasse  surrendred  me,  for  that  I  would  not  depart
the  Road  without  her ;  he  sayd  hee  would  acquaint
the  Aga  with  my  demand  of  the  Pinnasse,  and  doubted
not  but  that  I  should  have  her  at  the  time  limited.
I  yeelded  to  his  request,  upon  his  promise  that  I
should  have  both  men  and  Pinnasse  within  the  time
prefixed, I durst not as vet demand restitution or

160

SIR HENRY MIDDLETON  ad

i  i.

satisfaction  for  my  goods,  till  such  time  as  I  had
all  our  men  from  the  shore.  At  his  comming  ashore,
hee  acquainted  the  Aga,  that  he  had  concluded  a  peace
for  fifteene  dayes,  upon  his  promise  that  I  should  have
my  men  and  Pinnasse  restored  within  the  same  time.
The  Aga  was  very  angry  that  I  demanded  the  Pin-
nasse, and  sent  for  Master  Femell  and  John  Williams,
and  asked  what  I  minded  in  demanding  the  Pinnasse,
which  was  the  Bashas  by  agreement  with  mee,  saying,
I  might  as  well  demand  the  goods  as  the  Pinnasse,
both  which  were  put  to  the  account  of  the  Gran
Signior  :  they  said  I  could  not  well  proceed  on  my  Voyage
without  the  Pinnasse,  but  for  the  goods  they  assured
him  I  would  never  demand  them ;  In  the  meane  time,
the  Darlings  Cables,  Anchors,  Pitch.  Tarre,  and  other
things  being  ashore,  were  brought  aboord :  And  few
dayes  escaped  that  I  had  not  one  present  or  other  of
refreshing  from  the  Aga,  Dabbullian,  and  other,  which
would  scarce  take  knowledge  of  me  whilest  I  was  ashore,
but  now  glad  to  flater  me.  This  morning  early  came
a  Boat  from  shore  aboord  the  innermost  ship :  I  caused
the  Gunner  to  make  two  shot  at  her,  which  caused
them  to  come  aboord  mee.  1  threatned  them  if  they
did  so  any  more  to  hang  them,  and  burne  their  ships ;
so  that  afterward  they  durst  not  attempt  the  like.

The  thirteenth,  the  Increase  and  Pepper-Corne  to-
ward night  came  to  anchor  in  the  sight  of  the  Roade :
for  they  could  not  fetch  in  that  night,  the  Lee-ward
tyde  beeing  come  against  them.

The  fourteenth,  they  got  into  the  Roade  and  I  went
aboord  the  Increase,  where  I  was  received  with  great
joy  of  all  my  Company.

The  eighteenth,  there  came  into  the  Roade,  a  ship  AshlpofDiu.
of  Diu,  belonging  to  Shermall  the  Shabander,  laden  with
India  Commodities,  which  I  did  imbarque  both  people
and  goods,  and  caused  her  to  ride  hard  by  me.  The
next  day  being  the  nineteenth,  at  the  intreatie  of
Shermall,  I  licensed  all  the  people  (save  some  tew  to
in  161  L

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGR1MES

1611.

looke  to  the  ship)  to  goe  ashore.  This  day  being
the  twentieth  day,  I  heard  nothing  from  the  shore.
The  one  and  twentieth,  Master  Femell  writ  to  me  they
had  bin all  chained  by the neckes.

The  five  and  twentieth,  came  aboord  Nohuda  Ma-
homet and  certified  me,  that  the  Basha  had  given  order
for  release  of  my  people  and  Pinnasse,  and  promised
to  bring  them  aboord  on  the  morrow.  I  shot  off
three  Peeces  at  his  departure.  This  day  all  our  people
ashore  were  chained  by  the  neckes,  and  the  next  day
released.  The  cause  they  were  so  used  they  could  not
learne.

The  six  and  twentieth,  Nohuda  Mahomet  returned,
saying,  the  Pinnasse  was  lanched,  but  the  Aga  would
neither  deliver  her  nor  the  men,  till  I  had  given  him
a  writing  firmed  by  my  selfe,  and  foure  or  five  more
of  the  principall  in  our  ships  with  oathes  to  performe
the  same,  to  contayne  in  effect  a  perfect  peace  with
the  Turkes  his  Subjects  and  Indians,  and  not  to  meddle
in  this  Sea  or  elsewhere  in  revenge  of  any  thing  that
had  passed,  nor  to  demand  restitution  or  satisfaction  for
any  goods  taken  from  me :  I  told  him,  I  marvelled
hee  came  every  day  with  new  matters,  he  had  the
day  before  promised,  as  this  day  to  bring  me  all
my  men  and  Pinnasse  aboord,  which  I  looked  to  have
had  performed,  and  for  better  securitie  he  and  those
with  him  should  remayne  Hostages  aboord  till  I  had
them,  and  therefore  willed  him  to  advise  the  Aga  :
he  alledged  that  he  being  imployed  of  his  owne
voluntary  motion  in  this  businesse,  should  reape  much
discredit  and  be  laught  at  for  his  forwardnesse,  if  he
should  write  to  that  purpose,  and  therefore  hee  told
me  plaine  he  would  not  write  whatsoever  betyde  him,
but  promised,  if  I  would  give  him  such  a  Writing
as  he  demanded  and  send  him  ashore,  he  would  bring
me  all  my  people  aboord  before  night :  I  seeing  I
could  get  him  by  constraint  to  yeeld  to  nothing,
thought best to give him some content, though it

162

SIR HENRY MIDDLETON

1611.

were somewhat that might but carrie the name of

what hee desired. I thereupon caused a Writing to

be made  in English,  firmed by  my  selfe  and five  more,

contayning  a  briefe Relation of the treacherous usage

of  us in this Countrey and nothing  else, wee  setting

to our hands as Witnesses of truth of the same

Writing : withall  I sent  advice  to Master Femell,  how  [I.  iii.  264.]

he should  interpret  it  unto  them. I delivered  him the

Writing he desired, but sweare I would not, saying,

my word should  be truer then a Turkes oath at all

times. Ashore hee went,  leaving some of the better

sort  of  his Company for  Pledges, whom he  bad  hang

if  he brought me not all my Company aboord that

night  : comming ashore he handled the matter so,

that a little before night he returned with Master  The  rat  of  our

Femell,  John  Williams, Christopher  Cuningham,  Water  ™en  sct  at

Woodward, John Clarke, Henry Bauldin, Edmund

Glover,  Tobie Birch,  Alexander James, and Merciline

Longfield. Three  of  them  were  vested,  to  wit, Master

Femell,  John Williams, and Cuningham, with paltry

Vests of  little  worth. Another  was  sent  to  me,  which

they said came from the Basha, the Nohuda would

have put it upon my backe, desiring mee to weare

it as a favour sent me from the Basha : I refused

it, telling him, I scorned to weare any thing that

should  come  from so  unconscionable  a  Dogge  and  my

Enemie, by whose order I had received so much

wrong ; he seeing I would not take it, left it with

my  man,  and  so  departed,  carrying  with  him  the  Turke

taken in the  Darling,  which  had remayned  aboord  the

Increase, till that present : hee  promised to returne  in

the  morning  with  our  Pinnasse.

The seven and twentieth,  according to promise  the
Nohuda came aboord and brought my Pinnasse,  and The  Pinnasse
demanded  of  me  if  all  he  had  promised  were  performed.  restore"-
I told him no, for that I had not all my company,
they  keeping  from  me  the Boy at Tayes, which  they
had forced to turne Turke, and him would I have

163

A.D.

161 1.

M.  Feme  11
dyed.

June  i . 1 6 1 1 .

Exceeding
heat  in  the
Red  Sea.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

before  I  would  release  the  ships :  he  told  me  he
would  tell  the  Aga,  and  returne  me  his  answere,  and
so  departed.  This  morning  early  I  called  a  Councell,
wherein  I  propounded  whether  I  should  release  the
ships  according  to  promise,  or  detayne  them  till  resti-
tution were  made  me.  It  was  concluded  that  I  should
release  all  the  ships  which  were  of  India,  and  our
friends ;  and  set  our  hopes  upon  the  ship  that  was
to  come  from  Sues.  Likewise  I  demanded  what  course
were  best  to  take  for  recovery  of  the  youth  at  Tayes ;
by  some  it  was  thought  bootlesse  to  demand  him,  but
to  hope  of  taking  some  Prisoners  of  worth,  which  might
procure  his  libertie.  I  was  of  a  contrarie  opinion,  and
thought  it  fittest  to  demand  him,  now  when  wee  should
have  many  to  sollicite  for  him,  rather  then  depend
upon  hopes  of  taking  of  Prisoners,  which  we  might
faile  of,  and  so  it  was  concluded  to  demand  the  Boy
presently,  and  no  speech  at  all  to  be  made  of  our  goods
restoring.

The  eighth  and  twentieth,  there  was  a  Writing  sent
me  from  the  Aga,  wherein  he,  Nohuda  Mahomet,  and
Shermall  Shebander  bound  themselves  ships  and  goods,
that  I  should  have  within  twelve  dayes  the  Boy  from
Tayes,  so  that  I  would  release  the  ships ;  I  gave  them
leave  to  unlade  the  ship  of  Diu,  and  goe  and  come
to  the  other  ships  at  their  pleasure.  This  night  Master
Femell  dyed  of  a  Callentura,  or  rather  poysoned  by
the  Turkes,  as  the  opinions  of  our  Chirurgions  are.

The  first  of  June,  were  discharged  out  of  the  ship,
three  Boats  lading  of  Cotton.  This  evening  we  had
a  gust  with  much  wind,  which  came  from  the  shore,
which  brake  our  Land  Cable.  The  wind  was  so  hot
we  could  hardly  indure  it.  I  was  faine  to  flye  to  my
Cabbin,  not  being  able  for  heate  to  stay  aloft.  I  writ
a  Letter  to  the  Basha  in  Italian  for  restitution  of  my
goods,  and  satisfaction  for  damages ;  I  was  answered
afterwards,  the  Letter  was  not  understood  for  lacke  of
an Interpreter. I againe imbarqued the ship of  Diu,

164

SIR HENRY MIDDLKTON  aox

i  6  i  i .

and  would  not  permit  them  to  unlade  any  more  goods
out  of  her,  till  the  Basha  had  satisfied  me  to  the
value  of  seventie  thousand  Rials  of  eight,  which  I  had
lost  and  was  damnified  by  him  :  I  considered  with  my
selfe  that  this  was  the  surest  way  to  attayne  to  some-
what in  liew  of  our  losse,  and  not  soly  to  relye  upon
the  taking  of  the  ship  of  Sues,  which  the  Turkes
might  easily  prevent me  of, by  giving  advice  by  land.

The  second,  came  Ally  Haskins,  my  Interpreter  at
Zenan,  aboord,  and  brought  mee  commendations  from
the  Basha,  saying,  he  was  sorrie  I  was  gone  after  that
sort  away,  for  he  was  minded  to  send  me  away  better
content,  and  that  he  had  prepared  a  rich  Vest  to  be
sent  me  and  a  Horse  :  and  likewise  the  Cayha  had  him
commended  heartily,  and  desired  mee  not  to  take  any
violent  courses  here,  but  seeke  for  Justice  at  Stambola,
for  if  I  did  any  thing  which  might  be  displeasing  to  the
Basha,  it  would  cost  him  his  head,  that  was  the  chiefe
cause  of  my  sending  backe  to  Moha ;  and  told  me
he  had  brought  the  English  youth  with  him  from
Tayes,  by  order  from  the  Basha,  which  the  next  day
he  said  should  be  sent  aboord,  conditionally  I  would
permit  the  ship  of  Diu,  and  the  rest  to  discharge.  I
answered  him  I  would  in  no  wise  release  the  ships,  till
I  had  restitution  or  satisfaction  for  my  goods  and  damages
to  the  value  above-said.

The  third,  the  Aga  desired  peace  for  twelve  dayes
till  the  Basha  had  knowledge  of  my  demands.  The
next  day  Ally  Haskins,  Tocoursie  a  Bannian,  and  others
came  aboord,  and  withall  desires  I  would  draw  out  the
particulars  of  my  losses,  that  they  might  consider  there-
of ashore.  I  fulfilled  their  desire,  and  by  writing  set
downe  my  losse  and  hinderances  to  bee  seventie
thousand  Rials  of  eight,  and  withall  sending  the  Aga
word,  whereas  at  first  I  was  received  by  him,  and
came  aland  at  his  intreatie,  and  upon  his  word  and
promise  of  kind  entertaynment  and  free  and  peaceable
Trade,  he  like  a  treacherous  Dogge,  without  any  cause

165

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1611.

or offence given, had cruelly slaine divers of my

people,  and  villanously  imprisoned  my  selfe  and  others,

and robbed and spoiled all he could sease upon to

the value of seventie thousand Pessos, beside great

[I.  in.  265.]  charges  and  losse  of  time,  if  therefore  he  did  not  presently

About  my make mee restitution or satisfaction for the same, I

demands  and  .  , .  ,  .  it-  1  1  •

the  A  gas  alii-  would  doe  my  best  to batter  the lowne  about  his  eares,

gations  and take  all  the  goods  out  of  the  Diu  ship  into  mine  owne,

answeres,mes-  ancj burne  all  the ships in the Roade,  and  not depart

sages,  and thence  till  I  were  sufficiently  revenged :  all  which  I  could

Letters  passed  ~

betweene  us doe without breach oi" promise, the time of Truce

daybyday,and  being out, and they not having performed Covenants

at  his  intreatie with me.

I  granted  This day being the sixt, the Aga sent  mee a per-

tivelvedayes  .■  emptory  answere,  demanding  who  gave  mee  leave  to
in  which  time  come  into  those  Seas,  saying,  sith  I  came  without  leave
he  certified  his  \  was  justly  dealt  withall ;  and  touching  the  goods,  and
Master  of  my  whatsoever  else,  he  had  done  nothing  but  what  he  had
order  from  the  Basha,  who  himselfe  told  me  so  much :
and  if  I  were  not  pleased  with  what  was  past,  the  best
way  were  to  referre  it  to  the  hearing  of  our  Betters  at
Stambola.  And  if  I  shot  at  the  Towne,  he  would  shoot
againe  at  my  ships ;  and  for  the  ships  and  goods  in  the
Road  they  were  none  of  his,  but  if  I  did  either  hurt  the
Towne  or  ships  in  the  Road,  it  would  not  be  pleasing
to  the  Sultan,  who  would  be  sure  to  be  recompenced
for  any  harme  I  should  doe  them.  To  which  I  answered,
to  come  into  this  Sea,  I  needed  no  leave  but  Gods  and
my  Kings,  but  for  my  comming  ashore,  the  Aga  had
not  onely  given  mee  leave,  but  much  intreated  mee.
And  for  my  goods  I  knew  nothing  I  ought  the  Basha,
neither  was  I  his  Factor,  neither  had  I  at  any  time
received  any  thing  of  his  or  any  the  least  curtesie,  neither
had  I  done  him  or  his  any  wrong,  and  therefore  no
way  his  Debtor  wherby  he  might  challenge  any  of  those
goods  which  by  his  order  I  was  robbed  of;  wherefore
I  must  and  would  be  paid  for  them,  not  at  Stambola
(where  neither  the  Basha  and  Aga  durst  shew  their  faces

166

SIR HENRY MIDDLKTON  *A

161 1.

to  answere  such  shamefull  wrongs,  which  they  had  falsly
charged  the  Sultan  to  have  commanded  them  to  doe)
but  even  there  where  I  had  beene  wronged,  would  I
be  righted :  and  if  they  found  themselves  agrieved,  they
might  goe  to  the  Court  of  England  to  seeke  their
remedie : for  to  Stambola  I minded  not  to  goe.

The  eight,  I sent Master  Pemberton  to  Assab  to  buy
fresh  victuals, we having  very  many  men  sicke in our
ships : I  was  afraid to have my  provision from Moha, Feare  °f
doubting  poysoning,  which  by  friends I  was  warned  to  ^°^n\  '
take  heed  of.

The  nineteenth,  came  aboord  Shermall  Sabander,  Ally
Tocorsie,  and  many  others  of  the  chiefe  of  the  Bannians,
to  make  agreement  with  me,  and  brought  with  them
Master  Pembertons  youth  decently  apparelled  in  new
clothes  after  the  Christian  fashion,  which  the  Sabander
bestowed  upon  him.  After  some  kind  congratulations
passed  on  either  side,  the  Sabander  began  to  tell  me,  that
he  had  alwayes  loved  and  favoured  me  and  my  people,  and
was  alwayes  readie  to  doe  me  what  kindnesse  he  was
able,  and  for  the  injuries  done  mee  by  the  Turkes  it
did  as  much  grieve  him  as  if  it  had  beene  done  to  his
owne  people,  for  which  his  love  and  pittying  of  me
in  my  miseries,  he  was  like  to  pay  at  too  deare  a  rate,
without  I  would  now  shew  my  selfe  favourable  unto  him,
For  that  the  Basha  had  enjoy ned  him  to  give  me  satisfac-
tion, or  had  sent  order  to  cut  his  throat,  and  sease  upon
his  goods :  and  this  he  protested  was  not  fained,  but
the  verie  truth.  I  answered,  it  was  the  Turkes  that
had  robbed  me,  and  done  me  many  injuries,  and  from
them  would  I  looke  for  satisfaction,  and  not  from  any
other :  he  willed  me  to  leave  those  talkes,  and  come
to  my  demands.  I  told  him  he  knew  what  I  demanded,
for  that  I  had  sent  it  ashore  in  the  Arabick  Tongue  in
writing ;  he  said,  if  my  demands  were  answerable  to  that
Writing,  it  were  but  labour  lost  to  have  further  con-
ference there  abouts.  We  spent  most  part  ot  the  day
in beating  the prizes of  our lost Commodities: and

167

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

161 1.

in  conclusion,  with  much  adoe,  we  came  to  agreement
that  all  the  Lead  and  Iron  should  be  surrendered,  and
eighteene  thousand  Rials  of  eight  in  money,  within
fifteene  dayes  for  satisfaction  of  all  our  goods  and  losses
sustayned,  and  thereupon  a  peace  concluded  betweene
us  and  them  for  two  yeares,  from  the  Por  of  Moha
to  Cannanor,  upon  the  coast  of  India,  conditionally,  that
the  Basha  give  mee  a  Writing  under  his  hand  and  Seale,
for  confirmation  of  this  peace  betweene  our  Nation  and
theirs, for the time  before specified. In this moneth,

Great  sicknes.  and  about  this  time  beganne  a  generall  and  most  grievous
sicknesse  in  our  ships,  few  or  none  escaping,  it  beganne
with  a  great  paine  in  the  head  and  stomacke,  bereaving
them  of  sleepe  :  the  best  remedie  for  it  was  vomiting  and
bleeding,  but  some  were  taken  with  Fevers  withall,  who
were  long  before  they  recovered  their  healths  :  the  rest
that  escaped  the  Fever  quickly  recovered,  and  God  be
praysed,  few  died  thereof.

July  2. 16 1 1,  And  the  second  of  July,  we  received  the  last  payment,
the  Sabander  being  there  himselfe,  I  cleered  all  reckon-
ings with  him,  as  well  for  money  borrowed  of  him  whiles
I  was  Prisoner,  as  for  money  disbursed  afterwards  by
him.  He  demanded  of  me  the  money  I  promised  the
Bashas  Cayha,  which  was  a  thousand  Venetianos :  which  I
would  in  no  wise  pay,  although  hee  much  urged  me
with  my  word  and  promise,  and  that  he  should  be  forced
to  pay,  for  that  he  had  passed  his  word  for  the  same.
I  told  him  the  Cayha  had  not  performed  what  hee
promised  mee,  in  setting  me  and  my  people  at  libertie.
How  the  Cayha  and  he  will  agree,  I  know  not,  but  I
doubt  the  Cayha  will  constraine  him  to  pay  it.  Drawing
towards  night,  the  Sabander  and  the  rest  tooke  their
leave  of  me  to  goe  a-land  :  and  for  his  farewell,  I  caused
three  Peeces  of  Ordnance  to  be  discharged.

The  third,  came  againe  Tacaroy  and  Ally,  and  bought
some  Vermillion  of  mee,  for  which  I  gave  them  credit :
they  promising to  come  over to the other side  within

[I.  iii.  266.]  fourteene dayes, and make me payment, also  to  bring

168

SIR HENRY M1DDLETON  aji.

16  i  i .

me  some  provisions  of  Graine,  as  I  had  given  them  order
to  buy  me  at  Moha,  and  a  Writing  from  the  Basha  for
confirmation  of  peace  concluded.  In  the  afternoonc  we
warped  out  of  the  Road,  and  that  night  set  saile  toward
Assab,  but  could  not  get  thither  till  the  flft  day  in  the  Assab.
morning.

The  sixth,  I  went  a-land  and  caused  all  the  Wels  to  T,,e  Turkn
be emptyed and  clensed for  feare of  poysoning,  for  it  /^ '",/
was  often  told  mee  at  Moha,  the  Turkes  practised  with  wds  0f
the  people  of  Assab,  to  poyson  the  Wels. From  this  day  Assab.
till  the  thirteenth  day  wee  spent  in  watering  and  buying
refreshing, not  any  thing  in that  time  happening worth
writing.

The  thirteenth,  the  King  of  this  Countrey  hearing
of  my  escape  at  Moha,  and  my  arrivall  in  his  Countrey,
sent  three  of  his  chiefs  Servants,  being  attended  with
thirtie  Souldiers,  with  a  Letter,  and  a  Present  of  refresh-  A  Letter  from
ing  to  me.  The  effect  of  his  Letter  was  to  bid  me  .  ,'  ^
welcome  into  his  Countrey,  with  offer  of  any  thing  I
stood  in  need  of,  and  that  his  Countrey  did  affoord :  as
also  not  a  little  rejoycing  of  my  escape  from  my  Enemies,
with  many  other  Complements.  I  feasted  and  rewarded
the  Messengers,  and  returned  them  with  a  Present  to
the  King  their  Master :  which  was  a  Vest  of  broad-cloth,
and  a  faire  looking  Glasse.

The  seventeenth,  came  Afelba  from  Moha,  wherein
was  Tocorcie  the  Sabanders  man,  and  another  Bannian.
They  brought  with  them  divers  provisions,  which  I  left
order  with  them  to  provide  me ;  as  also  the  money  they
ought  me,  but  the  Writing  from  the  Basha,  for  confirma-
tion of  peace  on  his  behalfe  they  could  not  get,  but  made
excuse  the  Basha  was  so  busie  in  the  Warres,  he  could  not
intend  it,  so  that  it  was  manifest  he  intended  to  keepe
no  quarter  with  our  Nation.

The  foure  &  twentieth,  we  all  set  sayle  out  of  Assab
Road,  to  put  that  in  practice  which  long  before  I  had
determined,  which  was  to  ply  to  wind-ward  as  high  as
Camaran,  &  there  to  abide  the  comming  of  a  great  ship,

169

A.D.
l6l  I,

August,  9.
161 1.

They  returne
for  India.

The  Westerne
chanellof  Bab-
mandell,  three
leagues  broad.

The  false
reports  of  the
Turkes  and
Indians.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

which  yearely  commeth  about  this  time  richly  laden  from
Sues  to  Moha:  hoping  to  bee  sufficiently  revenged  for
all  my  losses  and  disgraces  offered  mee  by  the  Turkes:
and  the  rather  did  I  desire  to  meete  with  her,  for  that  I
understood  the  Traytor  JefFor  Basha,  and  his  Disciple
Regib-Aga,  had  great  adventures  in  her.  From  this  day
till  the  last  of  this  moneth,  wee  plyed  it  to  wind-ward,  the
wind  still  opposite  to  us,  wee  sayled  by  day,  and  com-
monly anchored  by  night :  we  past  many  and  sundry
dangers  for  lacke  of  a  Pilot,  and  many  times  were  like  to
have  come  a-ground,  to  the  hazard  and  losse  of  all,  had
not  God  preserved  us.  And  yet  she  escaped  us  in  the
night,  as  we  found in  our  returne.

§  v.

Their  departure  from  Surat,  and what happened
there  with  the  Cambayans  and  Portugals.

He  ninth  of  August,  1 6 1 1 .  in  the  morning  we
set  sayle,  and  in  the  evening  about  eight  of  the
clocke  we  anchored  three  leagues  short  of  the
Bab-mandell.  The  tenth,  the  Darling  and  Release
appointed  to  goe  out  at  the  Wester  channell,  which  they
found  to  be  three  leagues  over,  from  the  Mayne  of
Habeshe  to  the  Hand  Bab-mandell ;  one  third  of  way  over
from  the  Hand  they  had  no  ground  at  forty  fathoms,  the
channell  cleere  without  dangers,  &  not  as  all  the  Turkes
&  Indians  reported,  to  be  full  of  sholes  and  Rocks,  and
not  navigable  for  shipping.  This  their  false  report  was  to
make  us  beleeve  there  was  no  other  passage  in  and  out
into  that  Sea,  but  at  the  Easter  channell,  which  may
be  so  fortified  that  no  shipping  can  passe  that  way,
but  shall  be  in  danger  of  their  Ordnance,  for  it  is  not
passing  one  mile  &  halfe  over  between  the  Arabian  shore,
and  the  He,  and  upon  the  Mayn  lyeth  sholes  a  good
distance  off;  we  in  the  Increase  and  Pepper-Corne  passed
out  at  the  narrow  channell  where  we  came  in.  About
foure  aclock  in  the afternoone we all  met without the

170

SIR HENRY MIDDLETON  ia

i  i.
straights, and were in nineteene fathome, being some
foure  miles  from  the  Arabian shore,  we steered all  this
night  our  course  alongst  the  Land.

From the twelfth day, till the  seven and twentieth,
much  wind  with  calmes  and  contrarie  winds  with  a  great  4  greater
current,  setting  South-west  about  foure  miles  an  houre  :  c"rre"n'"'"g
for  looke  in all this  time  what  we  got  when we  had a  nyuterL
favourable  gale,  we  lost  that  and  more  when  it  fell  calme,
being  carryed  backe  by  the  current.

The  seven  and  twentieth,  we  had  a  gale  of  wind  to
carrie  us  off.  Wee  had  sight  of  Mount  Fcelix  a  head-land  Monte  de
to  the  West-ward  of  Cape  Guardafui,  at  sixe  a  clocke  this  Farltx-
night.  This  hill  bore  South  halfe  West :  about  ten  at
night  it  fell  calme  with  a  great  Sea,  out  of  the  South-east.
At  mid-night  came  up  a  gale  at  South  South-east  and
South,  finding  still  as  we  sailed  this  great  Sea  which  was  a
manifest  signe  wee  brought  our  selves  open  of  Cape
Guardafai :  for  so  long  as  the  land  was  in  the  wind
of  us  we  felt  none  of  this  Sea.

The  thirtieth,  we  plyed  into  the  Roade  of  Delisha,  The  Road  of
and  about  noone  came  to  an  Anchor  in  the  Roade,  ^eluha '"
wee  found  there  riding  a  great  ship  of  Diu,  and  two
small  ships,  one  of  Naggina,  the  other  the  Kings,  both
ships  of  India,  both  bound  for  the  Red  Sea,  taken  short
with  the  Monson.  The  Captaine  of  the  ship  of  Diu
came  aboord  mee  with  divers  others,  who  certified  mee
our  people  at  Surat  were  well,  and  very  well  intreated,
and  were  daily  expecting  shipping  from  England  :  and
that  Captaine  Hawkins  was  at  Court  with  the  King,
where  hee  was  made  a  great  Lord,  and  had  great  allow-  [I.  iii.  267.]
ance  from  the  King  by  the  yeare.  And  for  Captaine
Sharpeigh,  the  King  had  given  him  money  to  build  a
ship,  which  then  was  almost  readie  at  Surat  to  bee
lanched,  this  and  many  other  things  he  told  me,  which
I  doubted  were  too  good  to  be  true.

The  Monson  was  farre  spent,  and  therefore  I  desired
the  Nohuda  of  Diu,  to  helpe  mee  with  his  Boates  and
people  to  ballast and  water,  which hee  with  the  others

171

ad  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

161 1.

most  willingly  granted,  proffering  me  all  the  water  in
their  ship  :  so  willing  were  they  to  have  mee  gone  from
them.  I  had  all  the  water  out  of  his  ship,  and  imployed
his  people  to  fetch  some  from the  shore.

I  was  often  in  hand  with  the  King  to  sell  mee  his
Alloes :  I  could  not  of  long  time  bring  him  to  aske
reason  for  it.  In  the  end,  with  much  adoe,  I  bargained
with  him  for  all,  paying  dearer  for  it,  then  Captaine
Keeling  did  for  his.  I  think  the  Indians  were  in  hand
with  him  for  it,  and  that  was  the  cause  he  held  it  so
deare.  I  left  Letters  with  the  King,  which  hee  promised
to  deliver  to  the  first  English  ship  that  should  come  there.
Sej>t.$.i6ii.  The  third  of  September,  having  finished  my  businesse,
I  made  haste  to  bee  gone.  I  had  with  much  adoe  a  simple
fellow  out  of  the  ship  of  Diu,  to  pilot  me  upon  the
Coast  of  India,  who  took  upon  him  to  be  a  good  Coaster,
in  the  afternoone  about  two  a  clocke  wee  weighed  Anchor
and  plyed  out of  the  Roade.

The  six  and  twentieth,  betweene  nine  and  ten  of  clocke
wee  weighed,  having  a  gale  of  wind,  which  brought  us
into  the  Roade  of  Surat,  we  ridde  by  the  three  Indian
Twentie  Por-  ships  in  seven  fathom.  A  mile  from  us,  ridde  seven
tugall  Fngft*  sayle  of  Portugall  Frigats  or  men  of  Warre  :  there  were
Surat  l  thirteene  more  of  them  which  were  within  the  River  of
Surat  ;  the  Portugalls  long  before  our  comming  thither,
had  intelligence  that  we  were  in  the  Red  Sea,  and  bound
for  this  place,  so  that  these  Frigats  were  purposely  sent
to  keepe  us  from  Trade  at  Surat,  or  else-where,  upon
that  Coast.  The  Captaine  Major  of  them  is  called  Don
Francisco  de  Soto  Maior,  is  intitled  Captaine  Major  of
the  North,  he  reapeth  great  benefit  to  himselfe  by  giving
Cartasses  or  Pasports  to  all  ships  and  Frigats,  which
trade  upon  that  Coast.  Any  ship  or  Frigat  which  hath
not  the  same  Passe,  are  confiscate  or  lost.  This  night
I  discharged  my  Pilots,  paying  them  well  for  their  paines :
I  sent  by  them  Letters  to  such  of  our  people  as  they
should  find  at  Surat,  for  I  could  not  learne  how  many
(or  who  they  were)  that  were  there  resident.

172

SIR HENRY MIDDLETON  -ld

i  61  i  .

The  nine  and  twentieth,  there  came  a  small  Portugal!
Frigat  from  the  Admirall  of  the  Armada,  (as  they  terme
them)  wherein  was  one  Portugall  and  his  Boy,  who
brought  mee  answere  of  my  Letter  sent  the  day  before  Anmertfrm
from  the  Captaine  Major,  wherein  hee  used  some  com-  the  PorluZalls-
plements,  certifying  me  that  he  was  glad  to  heare  I
belonged  to  a  King  a  Friend,  and  that  he  and  his  would
be  readie  to  doe  mee  service  in  any  thing  hee  might,
provided  I  brought  a  Letter  or  Order  from  the  King
of  Spaine,  or  the  Vice-Roy,  for  my  trading  in  these
parts,  which  if  I  could  shew  him,  he  would  willingly
obey  :  if  otherwise,  he  must  guard  the  Port  he  had  in
charge,  where  the  King  his  Master  had  his  Factorie.
I  returned  answere  by  word  of  mouth  by  the  same
Portugall,  that  I  had  neyther  Letter  from  the  King  of
Spaine  or  Vice-Roy,  neyther  had  I  need  thereof,  for
that  I  was  sent  by  the  Kings  Majestie  of  England  with
Letters  and  rich  Presents  to  the  Great  Mogoll,  and  to
establish  the  Trade  begunne  in  those  parts :  and  for  the
Factorie  they  had  there,  I  came  not  to  harme  the  same,
but  that  they  might  continue  in  the  same  estate  they
were :  and  for  our  Factorie  or  Trade,  I  see  no  reason
why  the  Portugals  should  oppose  themselves  against  us,
for  that  it  was  a  free  Countrey  for  all  Nations,  and  the
Great  Mogoll  nor  his  people  any  way  in  Vassallage  to
the  Portugals.  And  therefore  willed  him  to  tell  his
Captaine,  he  should  in  friendly  manner  permit  those
English  which  were  at  Surat  to  come  aboord,  and  con-
ferre  with  me  concerning  our  Affaires,  and  that  he
would  not  urge  me  to  use  force,  for  by  the  one  meanes
or  the  other,  I  must  and  would  have  them :  many  other
speeches  past  which  were  here  too  tedious  to  write,  I
bestowed  a  Vest  of  broad-cloth  upon  the  Messenger,
and  so  dispatched  him  away,  hee  promising  the  next  day
to  returne.

We  seeing  it  was  not  possible  without  Pilot  to  goe
over  the  Barre,  set  saile  from  the  Barre  foot  (where  I
had  beene  to  discover  in  the  Darling)  and  in  the  evening

i73

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

161 1.

came  to  an anchor in the Roade. I  went  aboord  the
Increase,  where  I  found  Letters  from the shoare : they
Nicholas  came from Surat from Nicholas Bangham, formerly  a

Lettfn  fro  J°yner  m  tne  Hector,  wherein  I  was  certified  that  wee
the  shore.  nad  no  Factorie  there,  and  that  he  was  sent  from
Captaine  Hawkins  from  Agra,  to  recover  some  Debts
that  were  owing  there,  and  likewise  he  had  Letters  from
Captaine  Hawkins,  but  durst  not  send  them  aboord,
lest  they  should  be  intercepted  by  the  Portugals.  What
was  become  of  the  Factors  and  goods  he  mentioned  not :
I  wrote  to  him,  to  send  mee  those  Letters  and  other
particulars  concerning  our  businesse.
Hoja  Nassan  The  third  of  October,  Hoja  Nassan  the  Governour
ovetnou?  of  Qf  guratj  an(}  the  Governours  brother  of  Cambaya,  sent
a  Mogoll  unto  me  with  a  present  of  refreshing,  and
in  their  names  offered  to  doe  me  all  the  kindnesse
they  could,  but  the  Portugals,  hee  said,  were  the  cause
they  could  not  doe  what  they  would,  but  for  their  part
they  desired  to  trade  with  us,  which  they  see  no  way
possible  to  effect,  so  long  as  we  should  ride  there,  and
the  Portugall  Armado  by  us,  and  therefore  they  would
counsell  me  to  goe  for  Goga,  a  better  place,  where
wee  should  ride  nearer  the  shore  with  our  ships,  where
the  Armado  could  not  hinder  our  landing ;  and  likewise
[I.  iii.  268.]  it  was  nearer  Cambaya,  where  there  were  more  Mer-
chants, and  greater  and  better  store  of  merchandize
for  our  turnes :  having  to  this  effect  delivered  his  mes-
sage, hee  was  desirous  to  know  what  I  determined  to
doe,  whether  I  would  stay  heere,  or  goe  thither  :  I
answered,  as  yet  I  had  received  no  answere  from  the
shore,  save  a  letter  of  small  import,  and  till  I  knew
what  was  become  of  our  country-men  and  goods  for-
merly left  in  the  Countrey,  I  could  not  resolve  him  ;
and  therefore  I  desired  him  to  be  a  meanes,  that
some  one  of  our  people  might  come  abord  to  con-
ferre  with  me,  and  Pilots  to  conduct  us  thither,  and
then  would  I  quickely  resolve  them  what  I  would
doe  : in the meane  while  I could  say nothing, I gave

i74

SIR HENRY MIDDLETON  a.d.

161 1,

him  and  his Interpreter  a  small reward,  and dispeeded
them.

The  fift,  a  Bramyney,  or  Priest  of  the  Bannians,  which
came with the Mogoll for an Interpreter, came  in  a
Boate  of  the  Towne  with  a  letter  from Nicholas  Bang-
ham, and Captaine Hawkins letter from Agra, dated  A \letter
in  Aprill  last,  relating  the  manner  of  his  favouring  and  ^aPta'nHav
dis-favouri ng by the Great Mogoll, his ficklenesse  in  ^gra
granting  us  Trade, and  afterward  disallowing  the  same,
giving  the Portugals Firmaes against us, contradicting
thereby  what formerly he had granted to us  and  our
Nation. By the same Messenger came two letters  o{  A  letter  of
a latter date from William Finch, from Lahor, the  WWamFinek

\ r*  j  c  T-i'ii*-  ••  from  Lahor.

one  to  the  Commanders  or  any  English  shipping  arriving
at  Surat,  the  other  to  the  Company  in  England,  relating
his  proceedings,  and  intent  to  goe  home  over  Land,
the  unconstancie  of  the  King  and  people  of  the  Countrey,
the  practice  of  the  Portugals,  and  many  other  circum-
stances, advising  me  in  any  wise  not  to  land  any  goods,
nor  hope  for  Trade  in  those  parts  :  for  that  the  people
were  all  fickle  and  unconstant  like  the  King,  and  durst
not  offend  the  Portugals.  I  having  perused  these  letters,
grew  hopelesse  of  any  Trade  in  that  place,  yet  resolved
to  trie  the  uttermost  what  might  be  done  before  I  would
depart :  I  understood  by  Nicholas  Banghams  letters,  that
Captaine  Sharpeigh,  John  Jordayne  and  others,  were
comming  from  Cambaya  to  Surat,  to  goe  along  with  me  ;
and  although  I  could  have  no  Trade,  yet  would  I
endeavour  my  selfe  in  all  I  might  to  get  them  all
aboord,  and  not  leave  them  behind  me.  The  Indian
shippes  which  rid  by  me  had  given  over  their  Voyage
to  the  Southward  ;  for  that  the  Monson  for  the  South-
ward was  past.  The  Braminey  desired  my  leave  that
they  might  carry  their  ships  into  the  River,  which  in
no  wise  I  would  grant,  willing  him  to  tell  the  Governour
and  the  rest  of  the  Owners,  that  their  ships  should  not
depart  thence,  till  I  had  all  the  Englishmen  at  Cambaya
and  Surat aboord of  me ; if  I had  permitted  them to

i75

A.D.
l6ll.

Novemb.  8.
161 1.

An  hundred
sailes  of  Por-
tugal! Frigats.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

have  gone,  I  should  have  frustrated  my  selfe  of  either
sending  too,  or  hearing  from  our  people  ashore  :  The
Portugals  intercepted  both  letters  and  men  as  much  as
they  could.

The  two  and  twentith,  the  Portugals  had  laid  them
in  ambush  to  cut  off  some  of  my  men  sent  on  shore :
which  when  they  saw  their  best  time  of  advantage  brake
out,  and  came  in  great  heapes,  confusedly  running
toward  our  men  and  boates ;  they  discharged  their  shot
at  us,  and  we  answered  them  againe  with  ours,  both
from  those  my  men  a  shore,  and  also  from  my  Frigat,
which  rid  close  to  the  Land,  all  my  men  retired  in
safetie  to  my  boats  and  Frigat,  and  the  Portugals  after
some  hurt  received,  returned  behind  the  hills  out  of
shot,  and  so  in  worse  case  then  they  came,  went  backe
to  their  Frigats.  There  were  of  them  seven  Ensignes,
and  might  be  in  number  about  three  hundred  men  ;  at
this  instant  when  they  came  upon  us  by  Land,  five  of
their  greatest  Frigats  which  rid  a  little  way  off  to  the
Northward,  came  running  upon  us,  and  shot  at  us,
being  nothing  neare  within  shot.  We  went  with  our
Frigat  and  boats  aboord  our  ships  to  dinner,  little  hoping
of  any  newes,  as  at  that  day,  from  our  people  ashore  :
the  Portugall  Frigats  rowed  to  the  Northward,  and
anchored  where  they  rid  before  :  I  advised  with  Captaine
Dounton,  Master  Jourdayne  and  others,  what  course
were  best  to  take,  and  it  was  thought  fit  to  abide  no
longer  there,  but  to  returne  to  the  roade  at  Surat,  where
rid  the  Increase,  and  there  to  determine  what  we  had
best  to  doe.

The  eight  of  November,  Nicholas  Bangham  came  from
Surat,  and  brought  with  him  some  refreshing,  which
with  himselfe  were  very  welcome  :  the  newes  held  of
the  comming  of  Mockrib  Can.  The  Vice-royes  sonne
came  into  the  River  with  an  hundred  saile  of  Frigats,
the  greatest  part  of  them  being  Merchants  bound  for
Cambaya  :  I  caused  this  night  our  ships  which  rid  with-
in to come  off and anchor by me, lest the enemies,

176

SIR HENRY MIDDI/F/rON  ad.

i  6  i  i  .
whose  strength  I  knew  not,  might  attempt  ought  against
them.

The  ninth,  The  ships  riding  without  the  Sand,  Hoja
Nassan  came  downe  to  the  Sea-side  :  I  went  to  him  with
my  Frigat  and  boats,  and  had  conference  with  him  ;  be
promised  mee  (not  to  saile)  two  dayes  or  three  at  the
furthest,  hee  would  returne  and  bring  goods  with  him
to  Trade  with  me  ;  I  told  him  I  had  been  heere  a  great
while,  and  could  get  no  refreshing  of  victuals  for  my
money,  and  therefore  desired  him  to  give  order  the
countrey  people  might  bring  me  some,  which  he  pro-
mised to  doe,  and  upon  the  same  tooke  his  leave  and
departed.

The  eighteenth,  I  received  a  letter  from  Nicholas
Bangham,  wherein  he  wrote  that  there  was  little  or  no
hope  of  trade  to  be  expected.

This  last  letter  of  Nicholas  Bangham,  together  with
the  breach  of  promise  of  Hoja  Nassan,  brought  me  out
of  hope  of  Trade,  thinking  all  their  former  promises
to  be  nothing  but  inventions  to  delude  and  weary  me,
and  in  the  end  to  turne  me  going  without  Trade,  which
they  durst  not  let  me  have  for  feare  of  offending  the  [I.  Hi.  269.]
Portugals,  and  yet  loath  to  offend  mee  with  absolute
deniall.  These  things  considered,  I  determined  to  be
gone,  and  therefore  had  often  writ  to  Nicholas  Bangham
to  come  away,  but  Hoja  Nassan  would  not  permit  him  :
he  seeing  he  could  not  get  leave  to  come,  he  stole  secretly
out  of  Towne,  and  as  this  day  arrived  heere.  Anone
after  Hoja  Nassan  missing  him  (as  it  seemeth)  and  doubt-
ing at  his  comming  that  being  hopelesse  of  Trade  I
would  be  gone,  sent  Jaddaw  the  Broaker  presently  after
him  with  a  letter  from  himselfe,  and  another  from
Mockrib  Can,  promising  speedily  to  come  both  unto
me.  To  which,  in  regard  of  his  former  promise  breach,
I  could  hardly  give  credit,  yet  I  resolved  to  spend
some  few  dayes  more  to  see  the  event  thereof.  The
Portugals  lying  all  in  the  River,  not  daring  to  come
nigh  us  by  Sea,  thought  to  entrappe  us  by  Land,  and
in  177  M

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

161 1.

therefore  a  great  number  of  them  ambushed  them-
selves behind  a  row  of  sand  hills,  not  farre  from  our
landing  place,  where  they  kept  close,  but  God  be  thanked
they  failed  of  their  expectation,  all  our  people  without
hurt  recovering  the  boate.  In  the  meane  season  they
in  the  ships  were  not  idle,  but  let  flye  apace  at  them,
both  with  great  shot  and  small :  the  Portugals  thinking
to  find  us  unprepared  to  bid  them  thus  welcome,
presently  betooke  them  to  their  heeles,  and  fled  behinde
the  hilles,  where  they  lurking  a  while,  not  daring  to
shew  their  heads;  they  left  one  lying  upon  the  Strand
being  mortally  wounded  in  the  head,  which  our  people
brought  aboord.

The  foure  and twentith being Sunday, Jaddaw the
Broaker  came  aboord,  and brought me word Mockrib
Can  was  comming,  and  would  be  with  me  before  night.
After  dinner  I  went to the  shore  side  with  my  Frigat,
where I found Hoja Nassan, who sent me word
Mockrib Can was comming,  and would be presently
there. I returned  aboord  and  made  choyce  of  a  good
Present  to  give  him ; which being  effected,  being well
accompanied, I went directly aland, where I found
The enterview  Mockrib  Can,  Hoja  Nassan,  with  great  troupes  of  men
of  Mockrib abiding my comming, at our meeting  we embraced
nour  of  Cam-  eac^ otner  > our ships at the same time discharging
baya,  and  Sir  some  Ordnance  to  bid him  welcome,  which  he  seemed
Henry  Mid- to take kindly. After I had delivered him a good
dleton.  Present, we  sate downe upon Carpets spred  upon  the

ground,  where  passed  some  conference  betweene  us :
being  neare  Sun-set,  I  entreated  him  he  would  be
pleased  to  go  aboord  my  ship,  and  there  take  his
lodging  for  that  night,  which  he  presently  granted,
carrying  with  him  his  owne  sonne,  Hoja  Nassan's  sonne,
and  divers  others  his  chiefe  Followers,  but  Hoja
Nassan  would  not  goe;  it  pleased  mee  well  to  see  him
so  confident,  and  made  mee  conceive  better  hopes  then
before,  he  having  all  this  part  of  the  Countrey  under
his command. I gave him the best entertainment I

t78

SIR HENRY MIDDLBTON

i6i  i.

could, setting before him such Gates  as upon such a

sudden I  could provide,  which he,  and those  with him

fel  roundly  to. After  they  had  done  eating,  I  delivered

him our King's Majesties Letter  directed to him, and

told him the effect thereof. He seemed to be very

much pleased that his Majestie would vouchsafe to

write unto him, and promised me to doe us all the

good he could, not  onely for our present Trade, but

also to  give us  any place  or harbour  I would  appoint

or name, where wee might fortifie ourselves,  if  we  so

pleased. In  fine,  I  not  demanded  any  thing,  but  I  found

him  as ready  to  grant,  as  I  was  to  aske :  growing  late,

I  left  him  to  his  rest  and  departed.

The  five  and  twenttieth  in  the  morning,  Mockrib
Can  busied  himselfe  in  buying  of  Knives,  Glasses,  or
any  other  toyes  he  found  amongst  my  Company :  I
went  with  him  and  showed  him  the  ship  aloft  and
below:  any  thing  he  liked  belonging  to  the  ship  he
carryed  with  him  away  gratis,  besides  many  toyes  of
my  Companyes,  which  he  liked,  I  bought  and  gave
him,  endevouring  in  all  things  I  might  to  give  him
content :  after  he  had  been  fore  and  after,  he  returned
to  my  Cabbin,  where  he  would  needs  see  all  my  Chests,
Trunckes,  and  Lockers  opened  and  searched.  What-
soever he  saw  there  of  mine  that  he  tooke  liking  to,
I  gave  him  for  nothing.  By  this  time  victualls  being
readie,  he  went  to  dinner,  which  being  done,  hee  was
desirous  to  be  gone  to  see  the  other  ships,  and  there
behaved  himselfe  in  like  sort.

The  thirtieth  and  one  and  thirtieth,  I  sent  Master
Fowler,  John  Jordayne,  and  other  our  Merchants  to
see  the  goods :  they  returned  and  brought  Mustrels
and  the  prices :  we  set  downe  what  we  would  give  for
each  sort,  desiring  them  to  doe  the  like  by  ours,
that  so  we  might  come  to  agreement  for  both :  they
held  me  off"  with  delayes,  posting  me  off  from  day  The  delusions
to  day,  but  concluding  nothing,  they  would  neither  X
offer for our commodities, nor abate  in theirs. And

179

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1611.

whereas  I  had  sold  Mockrib  Can  all  our  Sword-blades
the  cheaper,  because  he  should  take  the  one  with  the
other,  they  had  chosen  out  the  best  of  them,  and  returned
me  backe  the  worst,  being  the  better  halfe,  and  no  speech
when  we  should  be  paid  for  them :  which  done,  thev
removed  their  goods  to  bee  gone  for  Surat.  And  upon
the  same  made  Proclaimation  upon  great  penalties,  that
no  victuall  or  other  thing  should  be  brought  us  :  leaving
me  without  cause  thus  abused.

Decemb.  8.  The  eighth  of  December  in  the  morning,  came  Mock-

rib  Can  with  all  his  crew  upon  the  strand,  and  about
some  fortie  packs  of  their  goods ;  I  came  a  land  with
a  good  guard  of  shot  and  halberds :  I  went  to  him
to  his  tent,  where  after  friendly  salutation  and  comple-
ments past,  wee  fell  to  treat  of  businesse :  and  agreed  for
prices  of  all  our  Lead,  Quick-silver,  and  Vermilion,  and
for  their  goods  likewise  in  liew  thereof.  It  is  to  be
noted,  that  all  these  goods  did  not  belong  to  these  two
great  men,  but  also  to  the  Shabander,  and  divers  other
Merchants :  yet  for  the  most  part,  the  businesse  were
carried  soly  by  Hoja Nassan, no  man  daring either to

[I.  iii.  270.]  buy  or  sell  with  us,  without  his  prevention  and  leave,
by  that  meanes  advancing  the  prices  of  their  goods,  and
abasing  ours,  to  their  great  advantage,  and  our  great
hinderance  and  losse.

The  ninth  in  the  morning,  we  began  to  land  our  Lead,
and  to  receive  some  of  their  goods :  as  also  to  be  in  good

MogulU letter,  forwardnesse  to  make  price  for  the  rest,  when  a  Letter
came  to  Mockrib  Can  from  his  King,  which  dashed  all
his  mirth  and  our  proceedings  for  that  present.  Hee
was  very  pleasant  before  he  received  and  perused  it ;  but
afterwards  became  very  sad :  hee  sate  a  good  pretie  while
musing,  and  upon  a  sudden  riseth  up,  &  so  goeth  his
way,  without  once  looking  towards,  or  speaking  to  me,
I  being  seated  hard  by  him.  Before  he  tooke  horse,
he  better  bethought  himselfe,  and  sent  for  me :  when  I
came  to  him,  he  embraced  me,  telling  me  hee  was  my
Brother,  praying  me  to  excuse  this  his  sudden  departure,

180

SIR HENRY MIDDLETON  ad.

161 1.

for  that  he  had  earnest  businesse,  and  must  be  gone  :  but
he  would  leave  Hoja  Nassan  with  me,  to  receive  and
deliver  those  goods  already  bargained  for,  and  to  bargain e
with  me  for  more :  shortly  after,  we  heard  he  was  put
out  of  his  government  of  Cambaya,  Hoja  Nassan  being
lately  put  out  of  his  government  of  Surat  (and  others
put  in  their  places)  this  afterward  we  judged  to  be  the
effect  of  the  Kings  letter,  and  the  cause  of  his  discontent.
Mockrib  Can  being  of  late  Governour  of  Cambaya,  and
all  the  Sea-coast  thereabouts,  hath  now  nothing  left
him  in  this  Countrey,  but  the  place  of  the  Customer  of
Surat.

The  tenth,  the  new  Governour  of  Surat,  and  Assan
Ally  came  aboord  the  Pepper-corne  to  mee  to  see  the
ships.  After  they  had  been  there  a  while,  we  went  to
the  Trades-increase,  the  Factors  being  ashore  to  see  the
weight  of  the  Lead,  which  with  no  little  trouble  was
neere-hand  all  landed,  and  embarqued  ready  to  bee  sent
a  shore :  they  intreated  Hoja  Nassan  that  he  would  be
pleased  to  goe  in  hand  therewith,  for  that  it  would  aske
a  great  time  in  doing :  the  Factors  would  have  weighed
with  our  English  weights,  which  he  would  in  no  wise
agree  unto  :  the  Weigher  of  Surat  was  there  with  the
weights  of  the  Towne,  and  with  that  weight  would  he
have  it  weighed.  In  the  end,  seeing  no  other  remedie,
they  gave  him  way,  and  began  to  weigh  with  the
countrey  beame.  After  some  fewe  drafts,  they  desired
they  might  understand  the  beame  before  they  proceeded
any  further,  to  know  whether  the  Weigher  told  them
the  truth  what  it  weighed  :  for  he  knowing  it,  and  they
not,  he  might  give  them  what  weight  he  list :  likewise
they  made  triall  of  those  they  had  weighed  by  his  Beame,
by  ours,  and  found  very  great  difference,  in  five  Pigges
tenne  or  eleven  Maunds,  each  maund  being  three  and
thirtie  pound  English  weight.  Hee  seeing  he  might  not
have  the  Lead  at  what  weight  he  listed,  began  to  cavill,
saying,  he  would  have  halfe  money,  halfe  goods  for  his
commodities,  otherwise  we  should  not  have  them,  rayling

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1611.

and  raving  like  a  mad-man,  calling  for  the  Carmen  to
drawe  away  the  goods,  saying,  he  would  none  of  our
Lead,  nor  other  goods,  but  instantly  be  gone :  I  being
aboord  the  Increase  with  the  Governour  and  Sabandar,
the  Factors  which  were  a  shore  sent  one  aboord  a  pur-
pose, to  advise  me  of  their  proceedings,  and  how  that
Hoja  Nassan  was  causing  the  Carmen  to  yoake  their
Oxen,  to  draw  away  all  the  goods  they  had  brought,  and
if  I  did  not  take  some  speedie  course  for  preventing  the
same,  he  would  goe  from  his  bargaine,  and  returne  all
our  goods  upon  our  hands  againe  :  I  thought  hee  was
apt  enough  to  doe  so,  by  that  little  experience  I  had  of
Rude  cmtome  hirn,  as  also  a  custome  they  have  in  this  Countrey  (and
uyinS-  by  report  in  most  parts  of  India)  that  what  bargaine
soever  is  made  betweene  Merchant  and  Merchant  may
be  revoked,  so  it  be  done  within  the  compasse  of  twentie
foure  houres,  yea  although  he  have  given  earnest,  and
carried  away  the  goods  bought,  yet  hee  may  returne
them,  and  have  backe  his  earnest.  I  understood  this  bad
custome  before  I  landed  any  of  my  Lead,  and  doubting
to  have  such  a  tricke  put  upon  me,  I  did  purposely  send
unto  Hoja  Nassan,  John  Fowler  and  others,  to  know
whether  he  would  stand  to  his  bargaine,  before  I  landed
any  Lead,  which  would  put  us  to  much  trouble  to  land
it,  and  therefore  I  would  be  at  a  certaintie  with  him  :
he  before  many  witnesses,  promised  them  to  take  it
all,  and  be  as  good  as  his  word,  and  that  with  all  speed
they  should  land  it.  And  now  comming  to  the  point
of  performance,  hee  flies  from  all  he  had  formerly  pro-
mised :  I  advised  with  such  as  were  about  me  what  we
had  best  doe,  and  it  was  thought  the  surest  way,  to  keepe
those  men  which  were  aboord  me  for  pledges,  till  they
had  performed  with  us,  and  if  we  could  get  Hoja  Nassan
into  our  possession,  to  keepe  him,  and  free  those  :  where-
upon I  detained  the  Governour  and  Sabandar,  telling
them  how  Hoja  Nassan  had  dealt  with  me,  going  about
to  delude  me  as  formerly,  and  therefore  there  was  no
other  remedie,  but  to  keepe  them  for  pledges  for  perform-

SIR HENRY MIDDLETOJN  aj>.

161 1.

ance of  the bargaine. The Governour counselled mee

to goe a shore, and fetch the man himselfe, which I

did, giving the Governour  a good Present, I let him

depart, keeping Hoja Nassan and the Sabandar for  HoJa  N*"**

pledges  aboord  the  Pepper-corne.  **.'£  S(abanm

The  nineteenth,  Hoja  Assan  Ally  the  Sabandar  came  aboord  as
from  Surat  :  he  shewed  mee  a  couple  of  Letters,  which  Pledges,
were  sent  from  the  Vice-roy  from  Goa,  one  of  them
directed  to  himselfe,  the  other  to  the  Captaine  Major  of
Diu  :  I  opened  and  perused  them  both.  The  effect  of
the  letter  to  the  Captaine  Major  was,  that  he  had  received
his  letter,  whereby  hee  understood  the  especiall  good
service  done  against  the  English,  in  putting  the  English
Captaine  and  his  people  to  swim  to  his  Boates  for  their
safetie,  otherwise  he  had  taken  them  prisoners  or  slaine
them  :  for  the  which  he  highly  commended  him,  having
done  the  part  of  a  valiant  Captaine,  and  worthy  souldiour ;
which  good  service  done  to  his  King  and  Countrey,
would  redound  to  his  great  honour  :  for  the  which  hee
gave  him  as  many  thanks,  as  if  hee  had  taken  the
English  Captaine  prisoner  :  and  partly  to  gratifie  him,  [I.  iii.  271.]
he  bestowed  those  Frigates,  which  hee  lately  before  had
taken  from  the  Mallabers  upon  him,  certifying  him  he
had  sent  his  sonne  in  the  Armie,  which  was  young,
praying  him  to  assist  him  with  his  counsell,  whereby  he
might  gaine  a  great  name.  Thus  was  the  Vice-Roy  and
my  selfe  abused,  by  the  false  reports  of  a  lying  Braggard.
The  other  letter  to  the  Sabandar,  was  to  thanke  him  that
he  would  not  permit  the  English  Nation  to  trade  at  Surat,
willing  him  to  continue  in  that  mind,  and  he  should  doe
the  King  of  Portugal  great  service,  for  the  which  he
should  not  loose  his  reward.  This  day  came  divers  Carts
laden  with  provisions  for  the  ships  from  Surat,  bought  by
Nicholas  Banggam.

The  foure  and  twentieth,  the  accompts  on  both  sides
were  cleered,  and  businesse  finished,  the  pledges  on  either
part  released,  they  promised  us  to  deale  with  us  for  the
rest  of  our  Commodities :  they  tarried  till  the  sixe  and

183'

A.D.
l6l  I

A  letter  of
Peter  F/oris.

Januar.  2.
161 1.

Capt.  Haw-
kins commeth
aboord  our
ships.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

twentieth  day,  but  did  nothing  worth  noting.  The  seven
and  twentieth,  came  a  Jew  aboord  me,  which  brought  me
a  letter  from  Massulipatan,  dated  the  eighth  of  Septem-
ber, from  one  Peter  Floris,  a  Dantiscan,  employed  by  the
Company,  shewing  his  setting  out  in  February,  his  speedie
and  safe  passage  and  arriving  there  in  the  beginning  of
September.

The  second  of  January,  161 1.  I  wrote  to  Captaine
Hawkins,  from  whom  I  had  received  a  letter  the  eight
and  twentieth  of  December  :  and  sent  Captaine  Sharpeigh,
Hugh  Fraine,  and  Hugh  Greet,  to  set  the  minde  of
Captaine  Hawkins  in  some  better  course,  then  he  seemed
to  aime  at  in  his  last  letter  to  me.  As  also  to  buy  some
Indicoes,  and  other  commodities,  if  they  might  be  had
at  reasonable  rates.

The  sixe  and  twentieth,  Captaine  Hawkins  and  Captaine
Sharpeigh  came  to  the  water  side :  they  had  left  their
carriage  behind  them  five  miles  off:  I  landed  with  two
hundred  armed  men,  and  went  to  meet  them,  to  safe-
gard  them  and  their  goods  from  the  Portugals,  which
I  doubted  would  doe  their  best  to  intercept  them :  we
met  them  about  some  three  miles  off  and  brought  all
in safetie  aboord  our  ships,  not  seeing  any  Portugals.

The  seven  and  twentieth,  I  sent  John  Williams  and
one  of  our  Factors  to  Surat  upon  businesse.  This  day
Mockrib  Can  came  to  Towne ;  he  had  been  to  meet
a  great  Commander,  which  was  comming  from  the  warres
of  Decan,  and  was  to  passe  by  Surat.  Before  his  going
out  of  the  Towne,  he  sent  for  M.  Jourdaine,  and  willed
him  to  commend  him  to  me,  and  to  certifie  me  that  he
was  to  goe  out  of  the  Towne,  but  would  not  tarry  out
above  three  dayes,  and  at  his  returne  he  would  be  as
good  as  his  word,  for  what  he  had  promised  concerning
our  Factory.  Now  at  his  returne,  he  sends  for  him
againe,  and  with  a  frowning  countenance,  contrary  to  his
expectation,  demands  of  him  what  he  did  there,  and  why
were  we  not  all  gone  :  he  answered,  that  hee  staied  upon
his word  and promise  that  we should  leave  a  Factory,

184

SIR HENRY MIDDLETON  a.d.

161 1.

otherwise  he  had  not  been  there  :  he  said  againe,  we  should
have  no  Factory  there,  and  that  the  long  staying  of  our
shippes  there,  had  hindered  him  in  his  Customes  tenne
hundred  thousand  manuveys,  and  therefore  in  the  Kings
name  charged  them  to  be  gone  with  speed  out  of  the
Towne  :  for  neither  trade  nor  Factorie  was  there  to  be
had  for  us.  John  Williams  returned  this  morning,  and
two  carts  with  provisions  came  from  Surat.  The  nine
and  twentieth,  I  sent  for  the  Factors  at  Surat  to  doe
as  Mockrib  Can  commanded,  to  hast  and  come  away,
for  that  I  would  be  gone.

§. VI.

His  going  to Dabul,  and  thence  to  the Red  Sea,
and  enforced  trade  with  the Guzerates.

[He  ninth  of  February  in  the  morning,  beeing  calme,  February  9.
we  warped  over  the  sand  with  the  Increase :  had
we  not  got  over  this  tide,  we  had  lost  the  whole
Spring.  This  road  of  Swally  standeth  in  the  latitude
of  twentie  degrees  fifty  seven  minutes  :  variation  sixteene
degrees  thirty  minutes.  The  eleventh  in  the  morning,
we  set  sayle  for  the  road  of  Surat,  and  anchored  there  in
the  afternoone,  by  a  new  ship  of  Surat  lately  launched,
and  came  out  of  the  River,  she  was  bound  for  the  Red
Sea. The  latitude  of  this  roade  is  twenty  decrees  fortie  The  road  of

a  Sicalk  is  in

two  minutes.  _  ^  ^.

The  twelfth,  we  weighed  and  drove  to  the  South-ward,  jyfce  seven
& anchored two leagues from the road by a ship of  wam.Vmim6m
Callicut bound  for Surat,  out  of  which  ship  I  tooke a  sixteen  degrees
Pilot  for  Dabul. The  thirteenth,  we  weighed  &:  drove
down ; at noon came a gale Northerly : at the com-
ming of the wind we had seventeene fathome : we
hailed off West by South, in twelve and foureteene
fathome : after  steered  South  West by  West  till  foure
a clocke; betweene which time wee had from foure-
teene to twentie fathome : upon  a  sudden  we  came to
eight fathome, and then to sixe, being then in my

185

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1611.

opinion  from  the  ship  that  rid  in  the  road  of  Surat
tenne  leagues :  then  we  haled  in  East,  and  East  by
South  three  quarters  of  a  mile,  and  found  from  sixe
fathome  to  twentie  againe :  then  wee  steered  South-west
by  South,  till  one  a  clocke  after  midnight,  being  for
the  most  part  against  the  tide.  At  that  time  the  water
shoaled  in  two  casts  from  twentie  to  fifteene  fathome,
having  run  in  nine  houres  some  seven  leagues  and  a
halfe :  then  we  haled  off  three  houres  (being  little  wind)

[I.  iii.  272.]  till  we  came  to  twentie  fathome:  then  we  steered  South
South-west,  at  which  time  we  see  the  land,  with  two
hammocks thereon,  bearing  East  South-east  some eight

Damon.  leagues  off:  which  wee  judged  to  be  Damon. At  sixe

in  the  evening,  we  haled  in  South  South-east,  the  wind
Northerly :  it  suddenly  fell  calme,  and  so  continued  till
past  midnight.  This  morning  our  latitude  nineteene
degrees  fifteene  minutes,  having  steered  all  night  South
by  West,  and  our  depths  between  twelve  and  fourteene
fathome,  five  leagues  off  the  shore,  in  the  morning  little
wind,  at  noone  came  a  gale ;  we  steered  South,  the  winde
West  North-west.  In  the  evening  being  betweene  foure
and  five  leagues  from  the  shore,  we  had  thirteene
fathome; at Sun-set we  judged our selves thwart of

Chaul.  Chaul. We steered South all night with a faire gale

of  wind.

The  sixteenth,  wee  steered  alongst  the  coast  South
and  by  East,  till  six  a  clocke  in  the  evening,  keeping
for  the  most  part  in  ten  fathome  or  there  about,  at  which

He  arrive/A  at  time  we  arrived  in  the  Road  of  Dabull,  which  standeth

I* i  T m the  latitude of seventeene degrees,  two and fortie

there  hath  .  . .  .  .  b ' .  . .

Trade.  minutes,  variation  sixteene  degrees  and thirtie  minutes.

The seventeenth, the Pilot which I had out of  the

Mallabar, I sent  ashore in  a Fisher-boate  with  a letter

which  I  had  at  my  being  at  Moha,  from  Mollich  Abor,

Captaine or Nohuda of  a  great shippe of this place.

The  letter  was  to  the  Governour,  to  entreat  him  to  use

me kindly,  and  to  Trade  with  me. In  the  afternoone,

the  Governour  and Mellick  Amber, each  of  them sent

186

SIR HENRY MIDDLETOfl  a.d.

me  a  small  present  of  refreshing,  and  many  complements,
offering  me  any  thing  the  Countrey  did  afford  ;  and  if  I
pleased  to  send  ashore,  he  would  deale  with  me  for  our
commodities  :  I  sent  a  couple  of  Merchants  ashore  with
a  good  Present,  who  were  bid  kindly  welcome,  and  well
entertained  whiles  they  were  there.

The  eighteenth,  nineteenth  and  twentith  (Boats  passing
each  day  betweene  the  shippes  and  shore)  were  spent
about  the  sale  of  some  goods,  the  particulars  with  each
dayes  businesse,  I  referre  to  the  account  of  the  Mer-
chants, holding  it  not  fit  here  to  be  expressed.  By  the
three  and  twentith,  we  had  delivered  all  our  goods  we
had  bargained  for,  and  no  hope  of  further  sales  in  this
place ;  I  determined  with  all  speed  to  be  gone  from  hence.

The  foure  and  twentith,  I  called  a  Councell  to  advise
what  we  had  best  to  do  :  I  propounded  whether  it  were
better  to  goe  from  hence  directly  for  Priaman,  Bantam,
&c.  or  to  returne  to  the  Red-sea,  there  to  meete  with
such  Indian  shippes  as  should  be  bound  thither,  and  for
that  they  would  not  deale  with  us  at  their  owne  doores,
wee  having  come  so  farre  with  commodities  fitting  their
Countrie,  no  where  else  in  India  vendable :  I  thought
wee  should  doe  our  selves  some  right,  and  them  no
wrong,  to  cause  them  barter  with  us,  wee  to  take  their
Indicoes  and  other  goods  of  theirs,  as  they  were  worth,
and  they  to  take  ours  in  liew  thereof.  All  mens  opinions
were  for  the  Red-sea,  for  divers  reasons.  As  first,  the
putting  off  our  English  goods,  and  having  others  in  place
thereof  fitting  our  Countrey.  Secondly,  to  take  some
revenge  of  the  great  and  unsufferable  wrongs  and  injuries
done  me  by  the  Turkes  there.  And  the  third  and  last,
but  not  the  least,  to  save  that  ship,  men  and  goods
(which  by  way  of  Massulipatan)  wee  heard  was  bound
for  those  parts ;  which  we  held  unpossible  to  escape
betraying.  These  things  considered,  we  concluded  to
goe  backe  for  the  Red-sea  :  from  this  day  to  the  seven  and
twentith,  wee  spent  in  getting  fresh  water  aboord  :  they
had  bought  all  my  Red-lead,  and  it  was  carried ashore

187

A.D.
I  6  I  I.

A  Portugall
SAif>/>e  taken.

March  24.
Zacotora.

Anno  161 2.

Currents.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

and  delivered,  but  afterwards  disliking  it,  they  returned  it
backe.  In  the  evening  we  saw  a  ship  in  the  Offing,  two
or  three  Mallabars  which  rid  by  us,  told  us  shee  was  a
Portugall  ship  of  Cochin  bound  for  Chaul :  I  sent  the
Pepper-corne,  Darling  and  Frigat  to  fetch  her  in  to  me.

The  eight  and  twentith,  my  men  in  the  Frigat  had
pillaged  them,  which  I  tooke  from  them  and  returned
to  their  owners  :  her  lading  was  Coco-nuts,  having  little
else  in  her.  This  day  we  spent  in  romaging  the  Portu-
gals  ship,  I  could  find  no  bills  of  lading  in  her  ;  some
small  matter  I  tooke  from  her,  in  regard  of  former
injuries  offered  me  by  the  Captaine  Major  Don  Francisco
de  Soto  maior  at  the  barre  of  Surat,  as  namely,  taking
my  goods,  and  hindering  my  Trade.  In  that  I  sustained
no  further  harme  by  them,  it  was  not  for  lack  of  good
will,  but  lacke  of  meanes,  as  manifestly  appeared  by
letters  of  the  Vice-roy  and  others,  which  came  to  my
hands  by  chance ;  what  I  had  from  them,  I  have  under
the  hands  of  the  chiefe  men  in  her.

The  foure  and  twentith  of  March  wee  had  sight  of  the
Hand  Zacotora,  and  at  foure  in  the  afternoone,  the  point
of  Dellashaw  bore  South  South-west  six  leagues  off",  vari-
ation nineteene  degrees.  From  the  foure  and  twentith
at  noone  till  this  day  at  noone,  wee  steered  North-west
and  by  West,  and  West  North-west,  and  West  all  night,
thinking  by  day-light  to  have  beene  neare  the  Wester-
most  part  of  the  Hand ;  but  contrary  to  our  expectation,
wee  found  wee  had  gone  little  a  head,  having  had  a  faire
gale,  which  shewes  we  have  had  a  great  currant  against  us.
From  noone  till  foure  in  the  next  morning,  wee  steered
alongst  the  land  with  little  wind,  and  then  it  fell  calme,
the  currant  carrying  us  directly  upon  a  rocke,  which  lyeth
foure  or  five  leagues  from  the  wester  part  of  Loccatra  :
we  were  forced  to  anchor  till  we  had  a  gale  to  carry  us
from  it ;  about  two  houres  after  came  the  wind  Easterly,
wee  weighed  and  stood  to  the  Westward,  and  at  noone
we  were  foure  leagues  from  the  Rocke,  here  wee  found
a  currant  setting  to  the Northward.

188

SIR HENRY MIDDLETON  ad.

The seven and twentieth, we steered West South-
west, we  met  with  a  great  currant  setting  to  the  North-  [I.  iii.  273.]
ward;  in  the  morning  we  were  thwart  of  Abba  del  Curia,  Abba  dtl
and before night had sight of Cape Guada fui, being  Cur,a-
some  seven leagues  off: from  yesterday noonc till this
day  night,  our  course  West  South-west,  we  might  go  in
that  time  eight  and  twentie  leagues  our  true  way  West
little  Southerly :  we  stood  in  till  midnight,  and  then  haled
close  of  a  wind  to  the  Southward,  and  so  spent  the  night
till  day.

The eight and twentith, by eight of  the clock we
were  faire  by  the  shore,  mid-way  between  the  two  Capes  CaPe  de
of  Guardafui  &  Felux.  Guardafui.

The  second  of  Aprill,  Master  Pemberton  came  aboord  April  2.
of  me,  and  told  mee  that  he  had  been  at  Soccatora,  and  I^12-
the  King  shewed  him  a  writing  left  there  by  Captaine  Captaine  John
John  Saris  (who  was  Generall  of  three  ships)  wherein  he
related  wjiat  time  he  came  out  of  England,  his  places
of  refreshing  by  the  way,  and  his  arrivall  there ;  as  also
his  proceeding  to  the  Red-sea  to  seeke  Trade ;  specifying
likewise  that  he  had  perused  a  writing  left  there  by  mee,
wherein  were  alledged  many  reasons  to  disswade  him
from  going  thither ;  yet  having  the  Gran  Signiors  Passe,
he  hoped  of  better  entertainment  then  I  had.  Hearing
this  unexpected  newes,  I  called  a  Councell  to  advise  what
we  had  best  doe ;  whereabout  we  spent  but  small  time,
for  that  we  were  quickly  resolved  to  proceed  as  formerly
we  had  determined,  having  now  no  other  way  left :  for
backe  we  could  not  returne  till  the  Westerly  wind  were
come,  which  could  not  be  before  midde  May.  Where-
upon I  presently  dispeeded  Captaine  Nicholas  Dounton,
and  left  him  in  the  Pepper-corne  to  tarrie  there  abouts
till  the  fifth  of  this  moneth,  for  the  keeping  of  the  Port
of  Aden.  And  I  with  the  Trades-Increase  and  Darling
to  keepe  the  two-fold  entrance  of  Babbelmandell.  We  Aden  In
steered  from  thence  with  the  head  of  Aden,  being;  about  '

srecs  seven

seven  leagues  ofF: about  foure  in  the  evening  wee  were  an(i/brfjf
thwart  of  Aden  : this  evening  variation  thirteene  degrees  minutes.

189

A.D.

1612.

Babmandel.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

and  fortie minutes  latitude  of  Aden,  twelve  degrees  and
fortie  seven minutes.

The  third,  from  foure  a  clocke  the  second  day,  till
this  day  morning  little  wind,  wee  steered  alongst  the
Channell  West  by  North,  and  West  North-west,  towards
the  heat  of  the  day  it  began  to  blow,  we  continued  our
course  as  before.  About  Sun-set  we  anchored  in  twentie
fathome  foure  leagues  short  of  the  Bab,  where  we  rid  till
the  next  morning.

The  fourth,  in  the  morning  about  eight  a  clocke  we
weighed  and  set  saile,  and  about  ten  in  the  forenoone  wee
anchored  within  Bab-mandell  in  eight  fathome  water.
Faire  by  the  Channell  which  wee  came  in  at,  is  halfe
a  league  over  betweene  the  maine  of  Arabia  and  the
Hand.  Presently  at  our  comming  to  an  anchor,  there
came  a  Boat  from  the  shore  aboord  of  me,  wherein  was
a  Turke  and  three  or  foure  Arrabian  souldiers.  This
Turke  was  chiefe  of  the  place,  sent  by  the  Aga  of  Moha
to  guard  it.  He  promised  that  if  I  would  have  a  letter
sent,  he  would  presently  dispatch  a  foot-poste  away,  who
should  returne  within  three  days  with  answere,  whereupon
I  writ  a  letter  to  Captaine  Saris  at  Moha,  wherein  I  cer-
tified him  the  cause  of  my  comming,  and  what  I  deter-
mined to  doe.

The  sixth,  came  in  a  Jalba  of  Zela,  a  place  without
the  Bab,  upon  the  Habashe  shoare,  bound  for  Moha:
her  loding  was  Mats.  I  bought  of  her  twelve  sheepe,
and  so  permitted  them  to  depart.  This  dav  much
raine.

The  seventh,  came  in  a  ship  of  Basanor,  in  the  morn-
ing early  before  day,  which  I  caused  to  come  to  anchor
by  me,  one  of  Captaine  Saris  Merchants  called  Richard
Wickam,  came  this  morning  with  Letters  from  his  Cap-
CaptamSatts.  taine,  the  effect  thereof  I  omit  to  write  here.  I  returned
him  answere  thereof,  by  a  Turke  which  came  in  his
company,  but  Wickam  I  stayed  with  me,  for  that  I
doubted  they  of  Moha  would  have  kept  him  Prisoner,
for  that  I imbarqued  the India  ships.

190

A  ship  of
Basanor.

Letters  from

SIR HENRY MIDDLKTOX  <u>.

I ',12.

The  eight,  in  the  after-noone  came  in  a  ship  of  Diu,  A  ship  of  Dm.
(bound  for  Moha)  I  sent  off  my  Frigat  to  fetch  her  in,
who  brought  her  to  an  Anchor  by  me.  This  was  the
same  ship  I  detayned  the  last  yeare  in  Moha  Roadc.
This  day  we  romaged  these  two  fore-said  ships,  and
tooke  out  of  them  such  goods  as  were  for  our  purpose,
which  were  brought  aboord  me.

The ninth,  came in  a small Frigat  of  Shaher, laden A  Frigat  of

with  course  Ollibanum, wee  bought  some part  thereof, ^liafier-

and  paid  them  Rials  for  it  to  their  content:  we  continued

romaging  the  India  ships  for  more  goods. The  eleventh,

I  stayed  a  small  Barke  of  Sinde.  A  Barke  of

Note  that  ever since  our  comming  into the  Bab  till  \'"de-

Note
this  twelfth  day,  the  wind  kept  still  upon  the  South-east

quarter ;  but  now  at  North-west,  and  likely  to  blow  hard  :
the  last  yeare  the  same  day  the  wind  came  up  at  North-
west, and  continued  so  for  three  dayes.  This  course  the
wind  holds  every  yeare:  the  rest  of  the  day,  and  the
next  we  spent  in  moring  of  our  ship,  as  also  the  Indian
ships  which  were  readie  to  drive  ashore,  had  not  we  layd
out  moring  for  them,  the  wind  blowing  hard  at  North-
west.

The fourteenth,  came Captaine Saris into the Road  Captaine  Saris
about  eight  in the  morning,  and anchored  by  me  with  a"  , fet£

o  o '  j  op  three  ships.

his  three  shippes.  They  saluted  me  with  their  Ordnance,  "
and  I  them  ;  Captaine  Saris,  Captaine  Towerson,  and
Master  Cox  (their  chiefe  Merchant)  came  aboord  of  me,
where  we  spent  all  that  day  in  friendly  communication  :
I  acquainted  him  with  my  great  lacke  of  Cables,  which
he  promised  to  supply.  At  night  they  departed  to  their
ships,  Captaine  Saris  inviting  me  and  others  the  next  day
to  dinner  with  him.

The  fifteenth,  I  went  aboord  the  Clove,  where  I  and  rj m 2_ -i
those  which  came  with  me  were  kindly  entertayned, he The  Gran  Sig-
shewed  me  the  Gran  Signiors  Passe,  and  read  it  to  me.  "tors  P**x-
Many  words  passed  betwixt  us,  he  promising  to  himselte  r*"e  y

much  good  Trade  at  Moha  if  I  had  not  come,  which  my  ta-inc  sa,is  his
experience  found  to  the  contrarie. At last  wee  agreed  gift.

191

A.D.

1612.

A  ship  of
Calicut.
A  ship  of
Carapatan.

A  ship  of
Cananor.

The  Hassain
ofSurat.
Anothershippe
ofSurat.

A  ship  ofDiu.

A  ship  of
Dabul.

A  small  ship  of
Calicut.

A  Frigat  of
Shehor.

A  great  ship  of
Diu.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

and  sealed  it  in  Writings  interchangeable,  that  he  should
have  one  third  part  of  what  should  be  taken,  paying  for
the  same  as  I  did,  for  the  service  of  his  three  ships  in  the
Action  :  leaving  the  disposing  of  the  ships  afterward
to  me,  who  had  sustayned  the  wrongs.

The  sixteenth,  came  in  two  ships,  I  sent  my  Frigat  and
brought  them  to  anchor  by  mee,  the  one  was  of  Callicut,
laden  with  Rice,  bound  for  Moha,  the  other  was  of  Cara-
patan, laden  with  Pepper,  which  ship  came  from  Achen,
and  was  bound  for  Aden,  but  by  Captaine  Dounton  being
chased  to  Lee-ward  of  the  place,  they  determined  to  goe
for  Moha.  This  Carapatan  is  a  place  neere  Dabull,  they
being  subjects  to  the  same  King.

The  eighteenth,  came  in  a  ship  of  Cananor  bound  for
Moha,  she  came  from  Achen,  her  lading  for  the  most
part  Pepper.

The  nineteenth,  came  in  two  ships  of  Surat,  the  one
called  the  Hassany,  belonging  to  Abdelasan,  bound  for
Zidda,  the  other  a  small  ship  of  my  old  friend  Hoja
Nassan,  bound  for  Moha.  I  caused  them  to  anchor  by
me,  taking  their  Sayles  from  their  yards,  and  kept  some
of  the  chiefe  men  aboord  of  me ;  by  them  we  understood
the  Great  Mogols  Mothers  ship,  called  the  Rhemie,  was
shortly  to  come.

The  twentieth,  came  in  a  ship  of  Diu,  laden  with  India
Commodities,  bound  for  Moha,  and  presently  after  came  in
a  ship  of  Dabull :  shee  passed  by  us,  I  sent  my  Pinnasse
after  her,  which  caused  them  to  come  to  an  Anchor.

The  one  and  twentieth,  I  sent  away  Passengers  out
of  the  Surat  ships  :  about  noone  came  in  a  small  ship  of
Callicut,  bound  for  Moha,  which  ship  we  stayd.

The  two  and  twentieth,  came  in  a  Frigat  of  Shehor,
which  came  from  Goa,  bound  for  Zidda,  laden  with
grosse  Ollibanum  :  and  presently  after  came  in  sight  a
great  shippe  which  passed  the  great  Channell,  and  was
chased  by  the  Darling,  who  caused  her  to  anchor  by  the
Hector,  she  was  of  Diu,  bound  for  Swaken,  laden  with
India  Commodities.

192

SIR HENRY MIDDLETOX

1(j12.

The  three  and  twentieth,  came  in the  Khemy  of  Surat, Tie  Rhemy  a
the  Queene  Mothers  ship  laden  with India  Commodities j
bound  for  Zidda ;  she  was  stayed  with  the  rest. In  this
ship  were  fifteene  '*  hundred  persons. In  the  after-noone, *J>lfntt'of
I  made  signe  to  the  Darling  to  come  to  mee,  which  pre-  f/^'w!
sently  she perceived and came; I delivered each ship  it  seems  the
their Sayles,  and willed them in the morning betimes  Jesuites  have
to  be ready  to saile with me,  for that I would  go  to  kwd  *»
Lee-ward  to  the  Road  of  Assab.  j£'w«f

The foure and twentieth, we  weighed and set saile  whichinallthe
from  the  Bab,  and  all  the  India  ships  with  us : leaving  Indies
the  Thomas  and  Darling,  to  ply  up  to  the  Bab,  and  went  advance  the
for  the  Roade  of  Assab : we  arrived  at  Crab  Hand  about  s£ft™J'
five  aclocke,  and  came  to  an  Anchor  with  all  the  Fleet,  in  Merchandise
twelve  fathome  water ;  where  we  rid  all  night,  the  wind  to  their
at South South-west.  Countrey,  y

The  five  and  twentieth,  in  the  morning  wee  weighed  WJ

Jn  -\ • r i t? j c \ l Companies,

and  all  the  Fleet,  and  stood  in  for  the  Road  or  Assab,  under  colour  of
and  about  one  of  the  clock  we  came  to  an  Anchor  in  preaching  the
seven  and  a  half  of  fathoms.  Gospell;  as

The seven  and  twentieth,  we fetched good store of  [", '
Indicos out of  the  ships  of  Surat  and Diu,  the Clove  li'itneise5-
being  in  the  offing  in  sight,  plying  to  and  fro,  and  not  The  Roade  of
seeing  us,  I  caused  the  Gunner  to  shoot  off  a  Peece  of  Assab.
Ordnance  : which they hearing, answered mee with
another,  and  presently bore  up  for  the  Road.

[Chap. XII.

Ill  193  N

A.D.
l6lO.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

July,  22.
1610.

Chap.  XII.

Nicholas  Dounton  Captaine  of  the  Pepper-Corne,
a  Ship  of  two  hundred  and  fiftie  Tunnes,  and
Lieutenant  in  the  sixth  Voyage  to  the  East-
Indies,  set  forth  by  the  said  Company,  his
Journall,  or  certaine  Extracts  thereof.

§. I.

Their  comming  to  Saldania  and  thence  to
Socatora..

He  two  and  twentieth  of  July,  at  foure
in  the  after-noone,  wee  had  sight  of  the
Table  and  point  of  Saldania,  bearing  East,
distant  twelve  leagues,  but  by  reason  of
calmes  and  uncertaine  winds,  it  was  the
foure  and  twentieth  day  before  wee  were
mored  in  the  Roade,  where  we  found
three  Hollanders,  one  whereof  was  bound  for  Bantam,
and  in  her  Peter  But  Generall  of  thirteene  Saile  outwards
bound,  who  having  spent  his  maine  Mast,  and  lost  com-
[I.  iii.  275.]  pany  of  his  Fleet,  put  into  the  Road  for  to  refresh  his
sicke  men.  The  other  two  having  made  traine  of  Seales
at  Pengwin  Hand  bound home.

Saldania  is  a  Bay  some  fourteene  leagues  North  North-
east from  the  Cape  Bona  Speranza,  and  North  by  West
ten  leagues  from  Cape  Falso,  which  is  East-ward  of  the
former,  and  may  both  be  seene  in  the  said  Bay :  these
two  Capes  are  also  divided  by  another  great  Bay,  the
distance  betweene  these  two  Bayes,  is  some  three  leagues
being  low  marshie  ground,  extending  South  and  North,
which  on  either  side  is  invironed  with  Mountaines.  In
this  Bay  of  Saldania,  when  you  have  brought  the  Norther
point  thereof,  West  North-west,  North-west  and  by
West,  for  a  small  ship  North-west,  thwart  of  the  ledge  of
rockes  (or  watering  place)  neere  the  shore,  which  will  be

194

Bay  of
Saldania

NICHOLAS DOWNTON

i6xa

laid  (as  it  were)  in  the  swampe  betweene  the  high  iMoun-
taines,  called  the  Table  and  the  Sugar-loafe,  in  sixe,  five,
or  foure  fathome  according  to  the  draught  of  your  shippe,
in  cleane  ground,  and  good  anchor-hold  you  may  safely
ride.  Pengwin  Hand  with  his  ledge  distant  three  leagues
off,  bearing  North  North-west  halfe  West,  and  stretching
to  the  North  and  by  West  of  you  in  the  road.  The
maine  land  also,  though  it  be  thirteene  leagues  distant,
trendeth  a  way  to  the  West  and  by  West,  so  that  there  is
little  above  three  points  open  to  let  in  the  North-west
Sea,  which  is  the  greatest  stormes.  Saldania  having  in  Provision  more
former  time  been  comfortable  to  all  our  Nation  travelling  5C.arce  ,
this  way,  both  outwards  and  home-wards,  yeelding  them  times  past,  and
abundance  of  flesh,  as  Sheepe  and  Beeves  brought  downe  why.
by  the  Salvage  Inhabitants,  and  sold  for  trifles,  as  a  Beife
for  a  piece  of  an  Iron  hoope  of  foureteene  inches  long,
and  a  Sheepe  for  a  lesser  piece,  whereby  weake  sicke  men
in  former  Voyages  have  been  easily  recovered  and  made
strong  :  now  contrariwise,  whether  our  Trade  here  were
spoyled  by  the  Dutchmen  we  here  found,  who  use  to
spoyle  all  places  where  they  come  (onely  respecting  their
owne  present  occasions)  by  their  over-much  liberalise  ;  or
whether  the  Cattell  in  former  times  so  abundantly  brought
downe,  were  preyes  taken  by  warres  from  one  another,  or
other  differences  which  might  make  them  greedy  of  yron,
to  make  heads  for  their  Launces  or  Darts,  which  now  by
peace  or  reconciliation  they  have  little  need  of;  the  true
cause,  for  want  of  understanding  in  their  language,  I
know  not.  But  well  I  found,  that  all  the  devises  we
could  use  by  bribes  or  otherwise  to  them,  which  daily
came  downe  to  our  tents  in  faire  weather,  would  procure
nothing  from  them  for  our  sicke  mens  reliefe,  but  foure
Cowes,  and  those  foure  Cowes  which  we  did  buy,  were  so
old  and  leane,  that  there  was  but  little  goodnesse  in  the
flesh ;  for  which  they  would  take  no  yron,  but  thin  pieces
of  Copper  of  sixe  inches  square,  and  some  seven  sheep  at
peice  three  inches  square  of  copper,  cut  out  of  a  Kettle,
whereof  they  make  rings  by  sixe  or  eight  together,  which

!95

A.D.

l6lO.

Filthy  people
and  loathsome.

Saldania
sheep.

Jewels  and

Ornaments.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

they  weare  on  their  armes,  which  being  bright  and  smooth,
unto  them  seemeth  very  brave.

These  people  are  the  filthiest  for  the  usage  of  their
bodies,  that  ever  I  have  seene  or  heard  of:  for  besides  the
naturall  uncleannesse  (as  by  sweat  or  otherwise)  whereto
all  people  are  subject,  which  the  most  by  washing  cleare
themselves  of,  contrariwise  this  people  doe  augment,  by
anointing  their  bodies  with  a  filthy  substance,  which  I
suppose  to  be  the  juice  of  herbes  which  on  their  body
sheweth  like  Cow-dung,  and  on  their  wool  of  their  heads
is  so  baked,  like  a  scurfe  of  greene  herbes.  For  apparrell,
they  weare  before  their  privities  the  taile  of  a  Cat,  or
some  other  small  beast,  and  a  cloake  made  of  a  sheeps-
skin,  reaching  downe  to  the  middle  of  their  thighs ;  and
according  to  the  weather,  they  turne  some  time  the  hairy
side, and sometimes  the  drest  side  to  their  bodies.

Their  Sheep  have  no  wooll,  but  haire,  and  are  partie-
coloured  like  Calves ;  their  legges  are  longer,  and  their
bodies  larger  then  our  sheepe  in  England,  but  not  so  fat.
The  Principall  of  these  people  weare  about  the  bight  of
their  armes,  a  thin  flat  ring  of  Ivory,  beeing  very  smooth,
and  wrought  compasse  neere  sixteene  inches  wide,  and
on  their  wrists  some  sixe,  eight,  tenne,  or  twelve  rings
of  Copper,  bright  and  smooth,  all  either  fastned  together,
or  wrought  in  one.  Other  toyes  also,  as  Bracelets  of  blue
glasse,  and  pearle  shels,  which  are  either  presented  them,
or  by  idle  people  given  them  for  Estridge  egshels,  for
quils  of  Porcupines,  which  without  restraint  the  Dutch-
men did  ordinarily  buy,  also  an  other  most  strange  and
filthy  wearing,  to  what  purpose  I  know  not,  as  the  guts  of
Cattell  about  their  neckes,  which  makes  them  smell  like  a
Butchers  slaughter-house.  In  their  hands  they  carrie  a
small  Lance  or  Dart,  that  hath  a  small  yron  head,  and
a  few  Estridges  feathers  as  a  fan  to  keepe  away  the  flies :
they  have  also  Bowes  and  arrowes,  but  when  they  came
downe  to  us,  they  would  leave  them  in  some  hole  or  bush
by  the  way.  They  are  straight  made  people,  and  nimble
of  foote,  it  seemeth  that  their  habitation  is  mooveable,  to

196

NICHOLAS DOWNTOX  ad.

i  61  < .

places  of  best  pasture  for  their  Cattell,  as  in  the  Valley
betvveene  the  Mountaines,  whose  tops  (farre  up  into  the
Countrey)  were  covered  with  snow  at  this  time,  but  those
neere  the  Sea-side  are  cleare  thereof,  notwithstanding  they
are  very  high.

Wild  beasts  there  are  of  divers  sorts,  but  these  we  have  Wild  Beasts.
seene,  Fallow-deare,  Antilopes,  Porcupines,  land  Tortesses,
Baboones,  (also  the  Dutchmen  told  us  of  Lyons,  but  wee
saw  none)  Snakes,  and  Adders.

Fowles  also  abundance,  to  wit,  Wild-geese,  Duckes,  Fotvles.
Pellicans,  Passea,  Flemincos,  and  Crowes,  which  have  in
their  neckes,  as  it  were,  a  white  band,  and  small  birds  greene
coloured,  and  divers  other  sorts  unknowne.  Also  Sea-
fowles,  to  wit,  Penguins,  Guls,  Pentados,  which  are  spotted  [I.  iii.  276.]
blacke  and  white  ;  also  a  grey  fowle,  the  Pinions  whereof
are  blacke,  which  the  Portugals  call  Alcatrasses,  and  Shags
or  Cormorants  at  the  Hand  in  great  abundance,  and  an
other  kind  of  fowle  like  Moore-hennes.

Fishes  there  are  of  divers  sorts,  but  these  following
have  I  seene,  to  wit,  in  faire  weather  there  are  a  small  sort  Great  num-
of  Whales  in  great  numbers  ;  at  the  Hand  Seales  in  great  ""'  ofsmal
abundance.  With  the  Saine,  we  tooke  fish  like  Millets,
being  as  large  as  a  Trought,  Smelts,  Thornebackes,  and
Doggs  :  and  on  the  Rockes,  Limpets,  and  Mussels
abundance.  In  the  fresh  water  the  Unions  men  caught
with  a  Saine,  abundance  of  Millets,  as  when  we  met  with
them  they  told  us.  It  is  a  very  wholesome  aire,  and
aboundeth  with  good  fresh  water,  both  for  filling  in  the
roade,  and  for  travellers  in  the  land,  which  in  small
streames  descendeth  from  the  Mountaines.

One  morning  by  my  instigation,  my  Generall  and  I,
accompanied  with  thirteene  men  more,  whereof  foure
were  small  shot,  went  to  see  if  we  could  find  place  where
we  might  cut  wood  ;  and  beeing  gone  some  three  miles,
and  finding  none  but  small  greene  wood,  whereof  we  in
the  Pepper-corne,  by  reason  of  our  great  want,  were
forced  to  cut :  my  Generall  desirous  to  get  refreshing  tor
our weake sicke  men, determined to walke  about  the

197

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1610.

The  Tabic.  Table,  to  see  if  wee  could  see  any  Cattell,  that  we  might
by  any  meanes  buy  for  our  reliefe,  not  thinking  it  would
have  beene  so  long  a  journey,  where  we  past  through
a  most  uneasie,  unequall,  stony,  unbeaten  (and  as  it  were)
overgrowne  wildernesse,  wherein  often  we  were  to  descend
and  ascend,  through  many  deep  and  hollow  water-courses,
over  growne  with  trees  from  side  to  side,  which  were
made  with  the  raines  swift  descent  from  the  hill  called  the
Table,  and  after  a  while  found  a  beaten  path  (wherein  we
past,  seeing  many  pens  wherein  Cattell  had  been  kept)
which  for  that  it  lead  from-wards  our  ship,  we  were  forced
to  leave,  and  againe  had  a  most  vile  tiresome  travell  for  a
while,  till  we  hit  into  another  path,  which  led  along  the
Mountaines  towards  the  roade,  and  having  past  a  while
betweene  the  Mountaines,  as  neere  as  they  would  give  us
leave,  still  following  the  beaten  path  which  was  our  best
guide,  at  length  we  passed  over  in  the  Swamp,  betweene
the  Southermost  Sugar-loafe,  and  the  Table,  at  which
time  we  had  sight  of  the  Sea  side,  alongst  which  wee
went  over  the  sides  of  the  ClifFes,  which  at  length  we
forsooke,  going  by  judgement  East  towards  the  Swamp,
between  the  Norther-most  Sugar-loafe  and  Table,  where
in  the  morning  (after  we  had  rested  our  selves  a  little
by  a  fire)  we  made  haste,  and  past  over  the  afore-
said Swampe ;  and  before  breake  of  day  we  came  to  our
Tents,  where  we  found  all  our  men  that  could  be  spared,
disturbedly  in  armes,  divided  into  two  Companies,  the  one
halfe  under  M.  Thornton,  the  other  under  M.  Pember-
ton,  determining  at  day  light  to  separate  themselves,  and
againe  to  meete  on  the  other  side  of  the  Table,  to  goe  and
seeke  us,  which  intent  our  approach  did  prevent,  refresh-
ing our  selves  with  what  our  friends  had  prepared  for
their  intended  journey.  All  the  day  we  kept  the  Table
on  our  right  hand,  and  the  Marsh  on  our  left  hand,  which
neere  the  Mountaines  is  much  pestered  with  rockes,  which
have  fallen  from  the  top  of  the  Mountaine.  It  is  moist
ground,  and  seemeth  to  be  good  pasture  for  Cattell.  In
divers places  scatteringly wee  sawe  some  trees  of  small

198

NICHOLAS DOWNTON  a.w.

stature,  somewhat  broad  topped,  bearing  a  fruit  in  big-
nesse  and  proportion  like  a  Pine-aple;  but  the  huske,  not
so  hard,  and  spungie,  the  seed  whereof  were  devoured  by
the  birds,  and  the  husks  remaining  on  the  trees,  the
leaves  whereof  were  in  forme  of  our  Housleeke  in
England,  but  not  so  thicke.

At  this  time  was  their  Spring,  both  Trees  and  Herbes
blowing  over  the  earth.  It  much  repenteth  me  that  I
came  unprovided  of  all  sorts  of  Garden-seeds,  which  might  Garden-seeds
be  helpefull  or  necessary  for  reliefe  of  any  Christians,  /5 1
which  hereafter  might  come  hither,  which  though  the
Salvages  should  somewhat  spoyle,  yet  every  Christian
Captaine  would  seeke  to  augment,  and  re-edifie  the  same.
Also  Acornes,  which  in  time  may  doe  good  to  posteritie,
for  trees  are  not  here  so  long  in  growing,  as  in  our  cold
Countreys.  I  will  not  contradict  all  such  as  will  esteeme
it  more  idlenesse  in  me,  to  wish  to  sow  where  it  is  manv
to  one  I  shall  never  reape  ;  yet  for  my  selfe  I  esteeme  it
more  idlenesse  in  me,  that  I  had  not  bin  so  provident  as
to  have  sought  means  in  England  to  have  performed  the
same.  And  I  would  to  God  I  could  or  had  meanes,  to
leave  a  profitable  remembrance  for  Christian  Travellers
unto  the  ende  of  the  world,  in  any  place  where  I  shall
come.

Now  having  to  our  utmost  endeavours  here  finished  all
our  necessary  businesses,  to  wit,  watering,  and  somewhat
relieved  our  weake  sicke  men  with  what  refreshing  wee
could  get,  which  was  principally  Mussels,  we  prepared  our
ships  to  set  saile  the  ninth  of  August,  which  by  contrary  They  depart
winds  was  crossed, untill  the thirteenth day  following.  frm  SaUanta-

The  thirteenth  of  August  at  foure  in  the  morning,  we
set  saile  from  the  roade  of  Saldania,  having  the  wind  faire
at  South  South-east  :  and  at  sixe  a  clocke  in  the  after-
noone,  the  Cape  Bona  Speranza  bore  South-east,  distant
sixteene  leagues.

The  sixteenth  in  the  morning,  Cape  Bona  Speranza
bore  North-west  and  by  West,  distant  twelve  leagues,
and  by  foure  a  clocke  in  the  afternoone,  wee  had  brought

199

A.D.
l6lO.

Cape  des
Aguilhas.

[I.  iii.  277.]
Madagascar
orS.  Laurence,
in  the  latitude
of  23.  degr.
38.  minutes.

Three  of  the
Unions  men
betrayed  by  the
Portugals  at
Zanzibar.

OrVinganora.
The  Captaine
of  the  Union
with  the  Cape
Merchant  and
others  betraied
at  Jungomar
in  Madagas-

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

the  Cape  Aguilhas  North-east  sixteen  leagues  distant,  our
course  being  South-east.  The  eighteenth  day,  little  wind,
but  an  high  Sea  flowering  on  the  top  like  a  breach  in
shoald  water.  The  nineteenth,  we  had  a  very  strong  gale
of  wind.

The  sixth  of  September,  at  three  of  the  clocke,  wee
discried  the  Hand  of  Madagascar,  or  S.  Laurence,  in  the
latitude  of  twentie  three  degrees,  thirtie  eight  minutes,
and  at  sixe  a  clocke  we  anchored  in  twelve  fathome  water
in  the  bay  of  S.  Augustine,  where  we  found  the  Union
of  London,  the  Vice-Admirall  of  the  fourth  Voyage
(whose  people  was  distressed,  wanting  victualls  to  carry
them  home)  who  related  unto  my  Generall,  their  in-
fortunate  loosing  company  with  their  Admirall  and  Pin-
nasse  betweene  Saldania,  and  the  Cape  Bona  Speranza,
and  never  since  heard  of  them,  how  they  put  into  this
bay,  outward  bound  to  seeke  them,  followed  also  after
them,  and  put  into  Zanzibar,  (an  Hand  bordering  on  the
Abaxin  coast)  where  the  Portugals  made  shewes  of  favour
and  trade,  inticing  them  to  land  with  their  boat,  where
they  betrayed  and  tooke  three  of  their  men ;  the  rest
seeing  the  danger,  fled  with  the  boat  unto  the  ship,  who
proceeded  on  their  journey,  till  with  contrary  winds,
before  they  could  recover  any  fit  Port,  for  want  of  water
they  were  forced  to  return  towards  the  bay  of  Antongil
on  the  East  South-east  side  of  Madagascar,  but  the  wind
or  the  course  not  suiting  with  their  determination,  they
put  into  a  good  Harbor  or  Bay  of  Jungomar,  on  the
North-west  corner  of  Madagascar,  where  they  were  a
while  fed  with  good  words,  and  faire  promises,  and  kind
entertainement  by  the  King;  that  in  short  time  the  Cape
Merchant,  in  hope  of  trade  for  Ambergreece  and  other
things,  grew  so  conceited  of  this  heathen  Kings  plaine
meaning,  that  at  the  Kings  request  went  not  alone  to
him,  but  perswaded  his  Captaine  and  other  Merchants
to  accompanie  him,  who  being  brought  to  the  Kings
presence,  hee  sent  also  for  the  Chirurgion,  Trumpet,  and
Drum, who refusing to goe to him presently, there

NICHOLAS DOWNTON  ajk

1 6  •■
sallied  out  of  the  woods  a  great  number  of  people,  which
attempted  to  force  the  boat  and men  in  her,  with Darts,
Arrowes and Lances, who perceiving themselves pre-
vented by  the  good  care  and  endeavours  of  them  in  the
Boat,  they  pursued  the  Boat  with  armed Canoas  out  of
the river, untill by many shot from the  ship she was
rescued. And  few  dayes  after  while  they  lingred  in  hope
of  some  good  newes  from  their  Captaine  and  Merchants,
they attempted the ship with a demy army of  some  TAey  attempt
hundred  Canoas,  which  came  in order and forme  of  an  ;
halfe  Moone,  which  to  prevent  brought  themselves  under  vith  an  armie
saile,  and  shooke  them  off,  and  departed  on  their  journey,  of  100.  armed
It seemed that they could not fetch Socatra, or the  Canoas.
Master  unwilling  to  go  to the Red Sea, or  Surat, but
went  to  Achin,  and  there  dealt  for  some  fit  commodities
with  the  Guzerates,  &  from thence  to  Priaman  to  lade
Pepper :  where the Merchant made bargaine  to  receive
it  at  Teccoa,  an  Hand  three  leagues  distant  from  Priaman,
at  fifteene,  foureteene,  and  thirteen  Ryals  and  an  halfe  of
eight by the Bahar of Pepper, every Bahar is three
hundred  and  twelve  there. This  ship  the  Generall  plenti-
fully  supplyed  with  victuals, for  whose  reliefe  he  made
the  longer  stay ; he  also united  them  in  love  one  unto
another,  who at our comming in  were  divided,  to  wit,
Samuel  Bradshaw  for  his  sober,  discreet,  and provident
carriage  in  the  Companies  busines  much  envied  by  their
factious Master, and his adherents; whom  wee  left in TheUni

the  said  Bay,  as  seeming  lovers  and  friends.  ?  ~f

T i  • t»  ■  i  -i  , . ,. . . S.  Augustine

In  this  Bay  we  continued  seventie  houres ;  it  is  tor  the  Sepumb.  g.

most  part  all  deepe  water,  and  uncertaine,  no  ground  in 1610.  bound

divers  places  (by  divers  reports)  in  two  hundred  fathome ;  for  England.

by  us  further  examining  of  deeps  had  beene  in  vaine,  but

we  found  all the South shore in a manner, from the

Wester  point  to  the  high  cliffe-land,  all  flat  rockie,  whose

ledges  are  to be seene dry  at the  low water. At  the

Easter  end  of  the  rockes neere  the  cliffe,  wee  anchored

in  twelve  fathome,  and  might  have  rid  neerer  the  shore

in seven fathome : we came in out of  the  Sea  with a

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1 6  io.

strong  gale  at  South  South-west,  but  comming  neere  unto
the  land,  the  wind  grew  duller,  yet  blew  reasonable  fresh
in  the  day,  but  in  the  night  ordinarily  calme  the  time
we  were  there ;  but  that  beeing  the  newe  Moone,  which
makes  the  fowlest  weather  in  the  Countryes,  I  cannot  say
of  other  times.  On  the  land  it  seemes  alwaies  to  be  very
hot,  especially  when  the  Sunne  is  to  the  South-wards  of
the  Equinoctiall.

Strange  trees.  In  this  place  are  two  trees  of  divers  kinds,  some  so
full  of  fat  sappe,  that  fire  beeing  put  to  it  as  it  standeth
greene,  of  it  selfe  it  will  runne  up,  blazing  in  the  leaves
and  branches :  the  Timber  is  soft,  and  the  leaves  and
boughes  yeelds  a  yellow  sap.  An  other  sort  also  of  trees,
whose  timber  is  neere  as  hard  as  Lignum  vitae,  and  of
colour  white,  with  a  small  brown  heart,  whether  any  kind
of  white  Saunders  I  know  not :  that  wood  which  we  cut
off  for  fire-word  in  the  Pepper-corne,  which  was  the  most
plentifull  of  any  sort  there,  did  all  hang  trased  with  cods
of  greene  fruit  (as  big  as  a  Bean-cod  in  England)  called
Tamerim  :  it  hath  a  very  sowre  tast,  and  by  the  Apothe-
caries is  held  good  against  the  Scurvie ;  our  Admiralls
men  who  had  more  leasure  gathered  some  as  it  was
greene,  for  their  particular  uses.  Here  is  also  plentie  of
an  herbe  (which  for  his  forme  is  scarce  to  be  discerned

Semperz'ivum.  from  a  Sempervive)  whereof  the  Alloes,  called  Alloes
Socatrina  is  made  of  all  sorts,  but  I  know  not  whether
these  salvage  people  have  either  the  knowledge  or  the
use  thereof.

The  people,  by  what  occasion  I  know  not,  forbore  to
come  to  us,  so  that  wee  gat  no  kind  of  Cattell  for  re-
freshing, neither  beife  nor  mutton,  whereof  others
heretofore  have  been  ofFered  for  a  Ryall  of  eight  an
Oxe,  but  now  it  is  said,  that  for  want  of  government  in
the  Union,  when  any  was  brought  downe,  what  the
Factor  did  providently  forbeare  to  keepe  downe  the  price,

[I.  in.  278.]  bordered  fellowes  for  their  owne  particular,  grave  what

Disordered  ,  ,  ,  , ,  ,  l .  °

bartering tne  salvages  demanded,  so  that  now  they  can  scarce  get

hurtful!,  any  for tenne shillings a piece. It seemes, that  in all

NICHOLAS DOWNTON  *.*

1 6 1  o.

places  of  this  Hand,  men  must  stand  upon  their  guard,
for  the  people  are  treacherous.  Yet  by  report,  stout  and
valiant,  and  not  ignorant  in  ordering  of  their  people  in
battell  array,  as  it  seemed  by  their  order  at  Gungomar,
when  they  assaulted  the  Union.  Their  weapons  are
Bowes  and  arrowes,  Lances,  and  small  Darts  which
they  carry  in  bundles.

Now  having  performed  all  our  necessary  businesses,
as  wooding  and  watering,  and  relieved  our  Countrey-men
to  the  utmost  of  our  powers,  we  set  saile  out  of  the
said  Bay.

The  ninth  day  of  September,  at  foure  a  clocke  after-  September.
noone,  we  set  saile  out  of  the  Bay  of  S.  Augustine,  leaving
the  Union  there  as  afore-said.

The  one  and  twentieth,  the  wind  beeing  at  East  South-  Note.
East,  and  the  Current  by  my  judgement  setting  South-west,
wee  were  intangled  with  a  Lee-shore,  which  we  called
the  Carribas,  which  are  divers  small  Hands,  of  which  also
lieth  divers  ledges  of  Rockes  that  are  by  the  breach  of
the  Sea  onely  discerned ;  and  spent  sixe  dayes  before  we
could  quit  our  selves  of  them,  beeing  betweene  tenne  and
eleven  degrees  South  latitude.

This  Coast  lieth  neerest  North-easterly,  and  South-
westerly, and  the  wind  all  these  sixe  daies  betweene  the
East  North-east,  and  East  South-east ;  so  that  against
our  wills  wee  were  still  forced  to  Lee-ward,  though  by
towing  with  our  Boates,  and  otherwise,  we  endeavoured
to  get  off.  This  place  by  my  judgement  may  be  to  the
North-ward  of  Mozambique,  somewhat  more  then  Mozambique.
seventie  leagues :  by  night  for  the  most  part  we  were
neerest  those  dangers,  which  were  alwaies  betweene  us
and  the  shore,  that  wee  could  never  discover  neere  the
maine,  nor  give  any  good  judgement  of  the  distances
betweene  Hand  and  Land,  neither  set  them  downe  their
true  forme.

The  greatest  danger  is  in  the  strength  of  the  Current
setting  on,  and  no  place  to  anchor  in,  beeing  deepe  water
close  aboord the Rockes ; and though somewhat neere

203

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1610.

these  Rockes  you  have  ground,  yet  it  is  so  deep  and  foule
ground,  that  there  is  no  anchoring ;  and  on  the  Norther
part  hereof,  though  by  my  estimation  wee  were  little
more  then  two  leagues  from  the  shore,  yet  wee  had  no
ground  in  an  hundred  and  fiftie  fathome.  These  are
sandy  Hands,  and  (for  the  most  part)  were  full  of  Trees.
After  it  grewe  darke  every  night,  wee  might  see  the  fires
on  shore  made  by  the  Countrey-people,  but  wee  had  no
list  to  spend  so  much  time  as  to  goe  on  shore  to  speake
with  them.  After  it  pleased  God  that  we  had  once  got
cleare of  these dangers, wee to our great admiration,

Current.  found the Current  to  carry  us to  the North-wards, as

much  more  as  by  our  judgement  the  shippe  went :  as
when by our  judgement wee might goe some fifteene

October.  leagues,  we  went  thirty  leagues. The  second  of  October

we  had  much  raine.

The  ninth,  we  found  the  Current  to  cease,  except  it
set  to  the  East-wards,  which  we  could  not  discerne.  The
tenth,  eleventh,  and  twelfth,  we  found  our  selves  to  loose
every day, more  and  more  by  the  Current.

The  sevententh  at  Sun-rising,  wee  descried  two  Hands,

Duas  Irmanas.  which  for  their  likelihood  are  called  the  Duas  Irmanas
(or  the  two  sisters)  which  lie  one  from  the  other  West
by  South,  and  East  by  North,  and  are  distant  from  the
West  point  of  Zacotora  some  seaven  leagues  and  an
halfe  ;  we  steering  North  North-east  with  the  West  point
ot  Zocotora,  had  these  depths,  twentie  three,  twenty
foure,  and  twentie  sixe  fathome,  distant  from  the  said
point  some  three  leagues  and  an  halfe.  After  wee  had
got  about  the  Wester  point,  wee  found  the  wind  to
shorten,  so  that  it  would  not  permit  us  to  leade  it  alongst
the  coast,  but  by  the  helpe  of  a  Current  we  were  put  off,
the  Admirall  and  the  Darling  anchored  in  twelve  rathome,
while  I  in  the  Pepper-corne,  through  calmes,  and  a  gale
of  the  land,  could  not  get  into  shoald  water  to  anchor  in,
till  the  ninth  day  at  noone,  what  time  wee  anchored  in
twelve  fathome,  neere  to  a  Towne  called  Gallanzee,  and
toward  the  coole  of  the  evening  I  went  with  the  Pinnasse

204

NICHOLAS DOWNTON  <u>.

r  1
and  Saine,  unto  a  low  sandie  point,  thwart  the  Admirall
and  Darling,  a  league  to  the  East-ward  of  our  Shippc,  to
trie  to  get  Fish  for  refreshing  of  our  people;  hoping  in
the  coole  of  the  Evening  there  to  meete  with  my  Gene-
rall,  which  fell  out  accordingly  to  my  desire.  God
blessing  us  with  abundance  of  Fish,  which  served  all  the  Abundance  of
whole  Fleete  two  meales,  and  much  longer  if  it  would  fiih-
have  kept.  Heere  my  Generall  informed  mee,  how  that
the  people  with  whom  in  the  Morning  hee  had  spoken,
had  confirmed  that  which  hee  greatly  doubted  :  which  to
our  griefe  would  prolong  our  Voyage  :  which  was,  that
the  Easterly  Monson  was  alreadie  come,  and  all  our
hopes  of  getting  to  Cambaya  were  frustrate  for  this  nine
Moneths,  of  which  wee  expected  to  bee  better  informed
by  the  King  at  Tamerin,  the  place  of  his  residence.

The  twentieth  day  being  Saterday,  we  anchored  at  a
point  neare  six  leagues  short  of  Tamarin,  and  five  leagues  Tamarin.
from  the  point  of  Galanzee,  which  we  did  by  the  helpe
of  a  Sea-turne,  which  continued  long  that  night,  but  not
contented  by  gaining  and  holding  that  place,  till  we  could
by  day  bee  better  advised,  by  reason  of  an  edy  tide  by
the  shore  on  the  West-side;  by  the  shore  where  wee  p.  Hi.  279.]
rode,  on  the  West-side  thereof,  which  forced  our  sternes
to  wind-ward,  and  a  little  flattering  gale  of  the  land,  wee
weighed,  and  were  forced  off  into  the  Currant :  So  that
the  one  and  twentieth  day  wee  were  carried  back  thwart
of  the  Towne  of  Galanza,  and  farre  off  in  great  depth.

The  two  and  twentieth,  we  in  the  Pepper- Corne  were
like  to  have  bin  put  cleane  off  the  Iland,  but  the
Admirall  and  Darling  got  into  shoald  water,  and  there
anchored,  and  about  two  a  clock  I  also  anchored  in  the
Bay  Westward  of  Gallanza  in  six  fathom,  &  presently  Gallan-za.
went  on  shore  with  my  Pinnasse,  carrying  Barricos  to
seeke  fresh  water ;  going  with  a  flagge  of  truce,  to  see
if  any  of  the  Inhabitants  would  come  to  mee,  for  I
earnestly  desired  to  speake  with  some  of  them,  in  hope
to  have  procured  some  Goates,  or  other  refreshing  for
our  people,  but  none,  as  it  seemeth,  durst  come  to  us,

205

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1610.

for  feare  of  the  Kings  displeasure,  who  will  have
nothing  sold  to  any  stranger,  but  from  himselfe ;  it
seemeth  he  would  have  none  of  his  people  have  to  doe
with  any  strangers,  but  that  all  intelligences,  allowances,
for  fresh  victuals  and  prises,  must  come  from  himselfe,
as  afterwards  I  found,  though  now  I  wondered  to  see
the  people  stand  afarre  off  in  troupes,  and  came  not
neare  us,  which  made  me  thinke  they  had  spies  attend-
ing on  them  by  the  Kings  order  to  be  the  cause.  So
at  night  having  filled  thirteene  Barricos  of  water,  I  re-
turned aboord :  this  night  being  a  high  water  at  nine
of  the  clocke,  at  a  full  Moone,  I  esteemed  it  flowed
upright,  betweene  ten  and  eleven  foote ;  all  the  time
of  flowing  the  streame  sets  to  the  Northward,  I  meane
close  by  the  shore :  and  with  the  ebbe  and  a  small
gale  of  the  shore,  we  set  saile,  and  stretcht  it  alongst
the  shore  some  foure  or  five  mile,  thwart  of  the  sandy
Bay  of  our  fishing,  and  neare  our  Admirall,  and  finding

Currant,  the  Currant  there  to  set  off  to  the  Westward,  we
anchored  till  the  next  helpe  of  the  tide  or  wind.

The  five  and  twentieth  being  Thursday,  as  the  wind
served  we  set  saile,  and  about  eleven  of  the  clocke  we
anchored in eight  fathome, a  mile from  the  land  right

Tamarin.  against  the  Towne  of  Tamarin,  where  the  Kings  house
is  North  from  the  Castle,  on  the  top  of  the  hill  above
the  Towne ;  at  our  anchoring  the  Generall  shot  off"  five
peeces  of  Ordnance,  I  three,  and  the  Darling  one.  The
Generall  sent  Master  Femell  on  land,  handsomely
attended  with  the  Pinnasse,  fitted  with  a  red  Crimson
tilt,  presenting  the  King  with  a  Present,  which  was
from  the  Generall,  a  faire  gilt  Cup  of  ten  ounces,  a
Sword-blade,  and  three  yards  of  Stammell  broadcloath.
The  King  to  receive  them,  had  by  the  water-side  in
readinesse  fitted,  an  Orrange-tawny  coloured  Tent,  where
he  sate  attended  on  by  the  principall  of  his  Countrey-
men,  the  Arabs  and  a  guard  of  small  shot ;  they  con-
tinued conference  more  then  an  houre :  hee  thankfully
received  the  Generalls  Present,  bade  him  welcome,  shew-

206

NICHOLAS DOWXTOX  a.d.

161 .

ing desire to see him on land, promising  him water

free, and what else the Hand did afford, at reason,

according  to  the  drought  of  the  Hand,  which  continued

two  yeeres  without  raine ; for  Alloes not a pound to

be had, his  owne Frigat  being gone to  sell it in the

Red-sea. For  the  Ascension,  he  saith,  came  first  hither

in the moneth of February, and finding a Guzerat

ship here, within eight dayes shee departed in her

company towards the Red-sea, and eight dayes after

came in  her  Pinnasse,  who made  no  stay,  but  followed

her Admirall, and in July, both the Ascension and  The  Ascention

Pinnasse returned out of the Red-sea to Zacotora,  and  Pimasse

where they  hastened to  take  in  water : and  soone  after  t^e  Qoast  0f

departed  towards  Cambaya. Further  hee  saith,  that  his  India.

Frigat  being at the Port  of Bazain, neere Damon in

India, they  were  informed by  the Portugals, that the

said shippe and Pinnasse arriving on the Coast too

soone,  before the  Winter and foule  weather  was past,

were both cast  away, but the men saved. The King

sent  the  Generall  a  Present  of  twelve  Goates.

The  six  and  twentieth  being  Friday,  my  Generall
went  well  attended  on,  and  with  a  guard  to  visit  the  The  King
King ;  our  ships  gave  him,  as  before,  five,  three  and  vinted-
one  peeces  of  Ordnance,  and  hee  was  received  on  land
by  the  Kings  order,  with  ten  great  shot,  &  otherwise
he  was  received  by  the  King,  in  orderly  and  civill
sort,  and  had  both  for  him  and  his  followers  so  good
cheere  provided,  as  the  place  could  presently  afford :
but  the  King  shewed  no  willingnes  that  we  should  here
make  any  longer  abode,  for  he  would  not  yeeld  that  wee
should  set  up  our  Pinnasse  heere ;  his  excuse  was  this :
that  neither  his  own  ship,  nor  any  other,  as  the  Guzerat,
which  he  hath  great  profit  by,  dare  not  come  into  this
place  while  we  are  heere :  and  further,  I  suppose  the
time  we  stay  heere  is  very  chargeable  to  him  in  this
respect ;  for  to  shew  the  strength  of  his  Towne,  he  hath
drawne  downe  the  Arabs  and  others  from  all  parts  of  the
Land,  and  while  they  stay  heere,  they  live  on  his  charge,

207

ad  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1 6  io.

which  I  thinke  is  the  only  occasion  he  would  have  our
absence:  this  day  wee  filde  a  great  part  of  our  water.
Saterday,  we  almost  made  an  end  of  watering  out  of  a
pond,  fed  by  springs  descending  from  the  hilles.  Sunday
our  people  went  on  land  to  recreate  themselves,  and  did
no  other  businesse.

This  King  of  Zacotora  is  called  Mulli  Amore  Bensaide,
and now is  here  but  Vice-roy  under  his  father,  who  is

King  of King  of  Fartac  in  Arabia  not  far  from  Aden,  and  comes

Fartac,  or  jnto  ^  sea  at  camrjcan  ]-jee  Saith,  that  his  father  holds
warre  against  the  Turkes  of  Aden,  in  his  owne  defence,
for  hee  denied  us  a  letter  to  the  Governour  of  Aden,
saying,  hee  would  not  doe  us  so  much  wrong.  The
people that he useth for his Honor and strength in

[I.  iii.  280.]  Zoccatra,  are  the  Arabs,  the  rest  that  live  in  most  servile
slavery,  are  the  old  Inhabitants  of  the  Hand,  which  have
been  banished  people.

There is for Merchandize growing upon Zoccatra,

How  Alhes  is  Alloes  Soccatrina,  which  thev  make  about  August,  of  an
herbe  like  unto  Semper-viva,  which  we  have  in  Spaine,
but  no  great  quantitie,  not  passing  a  Tunne  in  a  yeere ;

Sanguis  there  is  a  small  quantitie  of  Sanguis  Draconis,  or  Dragons

blood,  a  little  whereof  our  Factors  bought  at  twelve  pence
a  pound.  And  Dates  which  serve  them  for  bread,  which
the  King  sells  at  five  Rialls  of  eight  by  the  hundred.
Cattell  for  mans  sustenance  these,  Bulls  and  Cowes  at
twelve  Rialls  of  eight  a  piece,  Goats  at  one  Riall  a
piece,  Sheepe  at  halfe  a  Riall  a  piece,  and  Hennes  at
halfe  a  Riall  a  piece ;  all  exceeding  small,  according  to
the  drie  rockie  barren  nesse  of  the  Iland:  wood  at  twelve
pence  a  mans  burthen ;  every  particular  is  a  very  deare
pennyworth ;  and  what  else  this  Iland  may  yeeld,  I  am
yet  to  be  informed  of,  but  of  rockes  and  stones,  drie
and  bare,  it  seemes  the  whole  Iland  is  composed.

208

NICHOLAS DOWNTON  a.d.

. II.

Of Abba del Curia, Arabia Faelix, Aden and
Moha, and the treacherous dealing of  both

olaces.

gj"QJH:$  day  all  our  important  businesse  being  done,  wee  Tin  ^mtt
set  saile, directing  our course  tc  n  ^7* Jf"**

the  Red-sr tak  ig  Leave  of  the  King  with  three

I£

shot  out  of  the  Admirall,  one  out  of  the  Pepper-Coi

and  one  out  of  the  little  Darling. Our  course,  after  wee

gate  off  the land,  alongst : Abba  del  Curia,  to Cape

Guardafui,  which  is  the  Eistermost  point  of  Abax,  \

nearest  West, distant  foure and thirtie  leagues, to

from  the  Wester  point  of  Zacotora,  to  the  East  end  of

Abba del Curia, is fourteene leagues. And Abba del  Tie  lewgti

Curia  a long narrow ragged Iland, may be  in length  ^*f«"

East  and  West,  some  five  leagues;  from  the  West  end

of  Abba  del  Curia,  to  Cape  Guardafui,  is  fifteene  leagues;

on this Iland, Abba del Curia, the King  of  Zoccatra

hath some people and  Goats; North from the  middle

thereof  neare  three  leagues,  are  two  great  white  rockes,  Twt  great

neare  adjoyning  one  to  the  other,  and  are  some  halfe  a *

mile  in  length;  these  rockes  are  not  white  ::  :r.e:r.se.ves.

but  made  white  with  the  filing  of  Birds.

The  one  and  thirtieth,  being  Wednesday,  at  eleven  a
clocke  we  were  thwart  of  the  Wester  point  of  Zacotora,
and at  two  a  clocke, the  white  rocke. called Sa  Ssin**-

wee left  North on our Star-boord side, which beareth
North-west, and bv West, roure  leagues of  the rr.
Wester point oi  Zacotora; and  at  three  ac".  ber-

noone,  we  descried  the  two  highest  Mountaines  of  Abba
del  Curia,  bearing  West  South-west iistant  ten  leagues

The  first  or"  November,  being  Thi  .:  r. -  -  - ■_ memk  i.

we  were  thwart  of  the  middle  of  Abba  lei  Ci
it on  our  Larboord side, two leagues  and  a  hake off,
the two Rockes on our Star-boor  c -  :.int

halfe a league; at noone wee were in North latit.

Ill  MM

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1610.

twelve  degrees  and  seventeene  minutes,  the  variation
seventeene  degrees  and  five  and  thirtie  minutes:  this
after-noone  we  met  with  a  currant,  which  set  us  to  the
South-ward.  At  one  in  the  after-noone,  we  descried
Cape  He  the  Cape  Guardafui,  but  it  was  night  before  we  came
Guardafui. neare  jt . so  tnat  we  past  jt  by  night, without  any  true

discovery thereof.

The  second,  being  Friday,  in  the  morning  we  were
thwart  of  an  high  Mountaine,  nine  leagues  Westward
from  the  Cape  Guardafui,  and  betweene  that  point,  and
another  high  point,  five  leagues  distant  West  southerly
by  the  Compasse,  there  is  a  low  sandie  point,  lying  one
league  and  a  quarter  off",  into  the  Sea ;  and  some  three
leagues  more  Westerly,  we  anchored,  and  went  on  land
with  all  our  Boats  for  to  cut  wood ;  wherof  we  in  the
Pepper-Corne  had  great  need  :  heere  we  met  with  some
of  the  Inhabitants,  who  informed  us  that  the  last
Mount  we  past,  is  called  Feluck,  or  by  the  Portugals,
Fcelix :  but  so  soone  as  they  knew  we  were  Christians,
they  fled  from  us.

The  third  day,  being  Saturday,  we  landed  againe,
and  cut  more  wood ;  and  after-noone  we  set  saile,
standing  on  our  way  Westward  towards  the  Red-sea,
Novemb.  5.  continuing  our  course  till  the  fifth  day  ten  a  clocke,  at
which  time  we  descried  the  Coast  of  Arabia  Fcelix,
bearing  North  North-west,  and  North  by  East,  being
distant  from  the  nearest  land,  some  twelve  leagues ;  at
noone  I  found  my  selfe  in  thirteene  degrees  eight  and
twentie  minutes  North  latitude :  at  Sun-set  wee  were
distant  from  the  land  some  twelve  leagues ;  the  Moun-
taines  within  the  Land  all  high,  very  rough,  without
shew  of  grasse,  wood,  or  any  other  fruittulnesse ;  wee
now  directing  our  course  West  and  by  South,  as  the
Coast  lyeth,  soone  expecting  to  see  the  Citie  of  Aden,
for  that  with  my  first  fall  with  the  land,  I  esteemed
my  selfe  not  above  foure  and  twentie  leagues  short  to
the  Eastward  thereof :  but  whereas  I  esteemed  the  ships
made  their  way  North-west by  North,  over  the  Gulte,

210

NICHOLAS DOWNTOX

i6i  ..

by reason of the  Currant,  we  finde they have made a

little  better  then North  ; and  that  at  our fall with the

land,  we  were  little  lesse  then threescore  leagues short

of Aden,  we continued our  course alongst the Coast

with a  good saile  all day, and a  short saile  all night,

to  the  end not to over-shoote  Aden all the  way,  for  [I.  iii.  281.]

the  most  part  in  five  and  twentie,  twentie,  fifteene,  twelve,

ten,  and  eight  fathoms.

Wednesday at Sun-setting, below the Mountaine,

being very neare  it, on the sudden we  descried  Aden,

which is situate under the foote of an unfruitfull  A  descriptor

mountaine,  a  place  where I should scarce have looked  v//z //'

r  /-r->  1  1  c  11  . of  the  L  itie  of

for  a lowne,  but  it  is set  there  for  strength,  where  it  jjcn  -in

is  very  defencible,  and  not  by  any  enemie  easily  to  be  Arabia
wonne,  if  the  defendants  within  be  men  of  resolution,  F<r/ix.
and  so  that  it  be  formerly  victualled,  and  provided  of
munition  ;  and  to  Sea-ward,  though  it  be  in  a  manner
drie  at  low-water,  there  stands  an  high  Rocke  some-
what larger  than  the  Tower  of  London,  which  is  not
by  enemies  to  be  in  hast  ascended,  by  reason  it  is  so
steepe,  and  that  but  one  way  by  narrow  steps  to  get
up,  where  foure  men  may  keepe  downe  a  multitude  :
this  Rocke  is  so  walled,  flankered,  and  furnished  with
Ordnance,  as  it  seemeth  to  me,  it  may  command  both
the  Towne  and  Roade  :  yet  who  will  avoid  it,  may
ride  in  nine  fathome  water  without  their  command,
or  within  their  command,  from  nine  fathome  down-
ward. Also  a  little  distance  to  the  Northwards  of
the  foresaid  Rocke,  is  another  rocke,  being  low,  almost
even  with  the  water,  which  is  of  small  compasse,
whereon  is  a  Fort  built  and  well  furnished  with
Ordnance,  the  souldiers  usually  continuing  in  this
Garrison  of  Aden  I  could  never  understand,  but  accord-
ing as  occasions  are,  they  are  drawne  down  from  other
Inland  Townes.  The  low  countrie  adjoyning  within
it,  doth  supply  it  with  provision,  and  partly  with  their
Barkes,  which  passe  in  Trade  from  Aden  to  Barbora,
a Towne  right  over  on the Abexin side,  from  whence

211

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1610.

they bring Cattell, and much fruit, and provision,
J  secret.  with Mirrh  and Incense,  and  what  else  I must  conceale

The  latitude  of  till further information gotten. This Towne standeth
Aden  12. jn ^  Latitude of  twelve  degrees,  and five  and  thirtie
the  variation minutes> tne variation Westerly, is twelve degrees  and
Westerly  12. fortie minutes; it floweth, by estimation, upright be-
degr.  40.  min.  tween six and seven foote water on the change day  :
a South-east  by  East,  or North-west  by  West  Moone,
maketh a full Sea : this mountaine, at whose foote
the Towne standeth, is a Peninsula  pointing  out into
the  Sea,  and  toward  the maine is first  a narrow necke
of  sandie  ground,  and  within  of  the  like,  a  larger  marsh-
like ground stretching up to the Mountaines, which
may be from the Towne sixteene or twentie mile.
At our first anchoring, the Governour in the darke
of  the evening sent an Arab in  a Canoa  to view our
ships, who refused to come aboord,  though he were
called.

Thursday morning, the  same Arab came  aboord the
Admirall from the Mir or Governour, to understand
what we were ;  if friends, we should be welcome to
They  send  a janc[  .  t}1js wn}le was a Present making ready  to  send
Present  to  the .1 s->  %  • 1  j t-> 1  ■ .r v- j

n  f the (jovernour, which was a graved 1  urkie-rashioned

Governour  of  ....  ^ n

Aden.  Peece,  and  a pnncipall sword blaae, sent to land by

John  Williams,  and  one  M.  Walter,  Linguists,  with
other  Factors  to  accompany  them.  The  Turkes  not
permitting  them  to  come  into  the  Towne,  entertained
them  without  the  Gate,  neere  the  waters  side,  yet  with
great  shew  of  joy,  pretending  much  kindnesse  to  our
Nation,  with  whom  they  say  they  have  had  much
familiaritie  in  Stambola,  Aleppo,  and  other  places,  but
used  not  one  word  of  any  trading  with  us,  but  framed
their  speech  to  make  us  understand,  that  they  every
day  expected  the  comming  of  thirtie  thousand  souldiers  :
which  to  us  seemed  very  strange,  that  so  barren  a
Countrey  as  that  seemed  to  bee,  could  yeeld  provision
for  so  many  people.  But  understanding  their  speeches
proceeded of  feare, it  was signified, that our Generalls

NICHOLAS DOWNTON  ad

10.

request  unto  the  Governour  was,  that  for  his  mrr
he  would  give  him  a  Pilot,  to  Carrie  his  ships  to
Moha  :  then  he  told  them  that  he  was  but  Deputy
to  the  Mir  or  Governour,  which  was  out  of  the  Towne,
and  the  next  morning  would  be  returned  ;  and  then
the  Generall  should  be  thereof  informed.  He  sent
the  Generall  a  Present,  which  was  two  Barbora  sheep,
with  broad  rumps  and  small  tailes,  some  Plantans,  and
other  fruits,  wherewith  our people  returned.

Friday,  the  Generall  sent  againe  betimes  in  the
morning,  to  require  a  Pilot  for  Moha  ;  then  they  were
brought  into  the  Mirs  house,  and  still  continued  with
faire  words  ;  but  the  Mir  was  not  yet  returned  :  but
when  the  Deputie-governour  heard  our  ships  were  under
sayle  bound  away,  he  sent  no  Pilot,  but  a  request  that  Turkish
if  the  Generall  would  not  stay  and  trade  with  all  his  /n
ships,  yet  that  he  would  stay  one  there  for  their  supply,
demaunding  the  prises  of  divers  of  our  Commodities,
which  gave  present  shew  of  content,  if  performance
might  follow  accordingly,  with  glozing  shewes  of
Indico,  Ollibanum,  Mirh,  and  divers  other  things  there
fit  for  us  ;  but  before  the  Messenger  came  to  give
knowledge  to  the  Generall,  our  ships  were  so  farre
about  the  point,  that  by  reason  of  the  Current,  we
could  not  againe  get  about  the  Easter  side  of  the  point
in  sight  of  the  Towne,  but  anchored  thwart  of  a  Bay
on  the  South  side  of  the Towne  :  The  Generall  seeing

o

divers people fishing in the Bay, and great store of

people of  fashion on the hil, went to the shore side

in  his  Pinnasse, to  enquire  of them when the  Current

might change, and that we might get about. The

Deputie-governour shewed himselfe angrv, pretending

our  comming  was  to  discover  their strength, and  with

no good  intent ; in so much that John  Williams was

in doubt they would have staied him  : but the Mir  Mir  is  Lord.

now present being lately come to  Towne, seemed not

so rigorous, but dissembled the matter, giving good

words,  granting  a  Pilot  for  Moha  ;  yet  desired  that  one

A.D.
l6lO.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

The  cunning
treachery  of
the  Turkcs.

of  our  ships  might  stay  for  their  supply,  saying,  that
that  Towne  by  former  Governours  ill  usage  of  strangers
was  growne  out  of  Trade,  which  he  did  endeavour  to
282.]  set  on  foote  againe,  hoping  by  us  to  make  a  beginning  ;
and  further,  that  as  he  was  a  Governour,  so  had  he  a
Basha  was  superiour  over  him,  from  whom  if  all  our
ships  departed  without  trading  at  his  Towne,  he  should
have  blame,  in  that  it  would  be  imputed  to  his  ill  usage
of  us,  to  drive  us  away.  And  for  that  we  understood
by  others,  that  the  former  part  of  his  speech  was  true,
our  Generall  and  we  thought  the  latter  part  to  be  true  also
(which  was  meerely  to  delude  us)  which  the  Generall
by  the  Messenger  did  in  a  manner  grant,  so  we  could
find  safe  riding  for  our  ships,  the  dangerous  Easterly
Monson  on  this  shore,  which  he  made  slight  or  little
regard  of,  wishing  our  ruine,  and  no  safetie.

Munday  morning  early,  John  Williams  was  againe
sent  to  the  Governour  for  his  Pilot,  according  to  the
last  nights  promise,  and  had  now  answer  from  the
Governour,  that  the  Pilots  wife  would  not  permit  he
should  goe,  unlesse  we  left  foure  of  the  principallest
men  in  the  shippes  in  pawne  till  his  safe  returne  ;  which
bred  in  us  a  generall  dislike  of  their  inconstancie,  yet
the  Generall,  for  performance  of  his  former  promise,
determined  to  leave  me  behind  in  the  Pepper-corne,
but  altered  his  determination  in  my  direction  ;  for
whereas  before  I  was  directed  not  to  carry  above  a
quarter  part  of  our  goods  on  land  at  one  time  ;  now
we  were  to  carry  none  at  all  ;  for  since  they  will  not
trust  us  with  one  of  their  rascall  people,  but  on  such
disgracefull  tearmes,  therefore  he  thought  lit  not  to
trust  them  with  any  of  our  goods  ;  but  if  they  had
need  of  any  of  our  commodities,  as  they  pretended  to
have,  they  should  buy  and  pay  for  it  aboord  the  ship  ;
and  in  case  they  mistrust  any  evill  dealing,  we  should
exchange  pledges  ;  so  that  for  so  many  as  for  doing
their  businesse  they  should  need  to  have  aboord,  we
should deliver on land so many or  the neerest  like  in

214

NICHOLAS DOWNTON  ad.

qualitie  : if  not  liking  of  this, that we may  follow  our

Admirall to Moha. The same day about noone, all

things being  determined  of,  the  Generall with his  owne

ship  and  Darling,  departed  towards Moha,  and  as  they  The  D^i»g

prepared  to  set  saile,  they  descried  a  saile  in  the  Offing,  W^baJma

which  they  supposed  to be  a  Guzerat  bound to Moha,  tunnts.

out  of  which  the  Generall  had  hope  to  procure  a  Pilot,

stood off  with her a little while, till perceiving it to

be  a  smaller  sayle  then before  they  expected,  gave  over

their  chase,  and stood on their course towards  Babel-

mandel.

Tuesday, we laboured with long warps to get up,

both against wind and Current,  whereby we got well

up (as men striving to hasten their owne harmes)

beeing thwart of  the fishing Bay. The Mir of  Aden

sent a Boat and a Messenger aboord, to desire to

speake with the Merchants, to know whether they

purposed to trade with them or no  : whereupon M.

Fowler, John Williams, and the Purser (for other

businesse) went on land, the Merchants declaring to

the Mir in what manner we had direction to trade

with them. The Mir not liking of  that  way, in no  Mir,orJmir,

wise accepted of  such trading: this seemed  a  contra-  °'hmrist£>m
,.  ,T  i  v •  1 r  1  c M™  Lord.

diet to his purpose and policie  ; therefore least atter

their  returne  aboord,  I  should  depart  for  Moha,  as  they

said,  he  thought  best  to  detaine  those  three  men,  thereby  Three  of  our

to procure him some thing, though he pretended ',  * s  a

that he staied them for anchorage, and other duties,

amounting to fifteene hundred Venetianoes of gold,

every  one  at  one  Ryall  and  an  halfe  of  eight.

Before  this  Towne  of  Aden,  I  made  my  unprofitable
aboad  untill  the  sixteenth  of  December,  living  in  con-
tinuall  danger,  if  any  storme  had  happened,  which  is
there  ever  very  doubtfull  on  this  Monson,  or  time  of
the  yeare  :  by  romaging  I  omitted  no  meanes  for  bringing
our  goods  in  readinesse,  if  so  it  should  happen  that
in  the  end  we  find  sale  or  trade  with  them  :  for  not-
withstanding by the varietie of  tricks, whereby from

215

A.D.
l6lO.

Cunning
treachery.

Aden  decayed:
the  present
state  thereof.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

day  to  day  they  falsly  deluded  our  people  in  their
hand,  as  to  send  Messenger  after  Messenger  to  my
Generall  to  Moha,  to  obtaine  license  to  bring  our  goods
into  their  Towne,  and  then  the  Merchants  would
resort  out  of  all  places  in  the  Countrey  neere-hand,
to  buy  the  same,  which  might  be  said,  least  we  had
discovered  the  unlikelihood  of  any  Merchants  in  that
Towne,  likely  to  doe  the  same  ;  yet  could  I  never
conceit  hope  of  trade  or  honest  dealing  amongst  them.
All  the  time  I  lay  there  for  the  most  part,  I  sent
my  Pinnasse  every  two  or  three  daies  to  land,  to  know
how  my  Factors  did,  with  some  one  or  two  men
besides  the  Cocks  gings,  which  whatsoever  they  had
to  doe,  they  were  curteously  dealt  withall,  the  souldiers
frequenting  their  company,  giving  them  drinke  ;  and
if  any  man  Jew  or  Bannian  had  over  reckoned  them
in  the  price  of  anything,  they  would  ever  be  readie  to
do  them  right  :  all  which  I  make  account  was  done
by  the  Governours  direction,  the  better  to  abuse  us,
by  drawing  our  people  to  conceit  well  of  them,  and
trust  their  flatterie  and  lyes,  wherein  they  excell  :  and
on  the  resort  of  any  extraordinary  people  into  the
Towne,  they  would  tell  our  men,  that  they  were
Merchants,  come  to  see  if  we  had  landed  any  of  our
goods  for  them  to  buy,  when  they  were  souldiers
called  in  out  of  some  other  neere  adjoyning  Inland
Townes,  upon  some  plot  in  their  head  newly  devised.
And  likewise  our  Factors  in  person  were  most  times
kindly  used,  and  were  resorted  unto  by  such  as  the
Governour  appointed,  and  that  should  tel  his  tale  :
whereas  he  had  so  provided,  that  not  any,  not  so
much  as  an  Arab  fisher-man  nor  other,  were  permitted
to  come  neere  unto  me,  least  they  should  tell  me  the
truth,  to  his  disadvantage.  By  my  people  in  the
Pinnasse  I  sent  of  purpose  to  discover,  by  whom  I  am
informed,  this  Citie  in  times  past  hath  been  great  and
populous,  but  at  this  time,  the  houses  both  great  and
small are greatly  ruinated and sunk in  everie  part  of

216

NICHOLAS DOWNTON

10.

the Towne, shops of merchandise there are none o\

any account, Merchants none to be discerned worthy

of that calling  : for money seemeth to he very scant  [*■  '"•  2

amongst them, which appeared when our men offered

to change a peece of  eight for Aspers, thev use to

take  it  from  hand  to  hand,  gazing  as  at  a  strange  thing;

an  ill  signe  in  a  place  where  a  ships  lading  of  merchandize

is  brought  to  sell.

This  present  Governour  time  growing  neere  out  that

he must be  gone, and therefore before his departure,

would  have  been  glad  to  have  seene  us  so  foolish  as  to

land some  of  our goods by any devise, would often

commend  Captaine  Sharpeighs  confidence in them, who

was  here  in  the  Ascension  sixteene  moneths  before  us,  and

how  at  first  he  brought  goods  on  land  without  mistrust,

and sold it, and his men came boldly on land like

Merchant men, of  which since  wee did not  the  like ;

he made  doubt  whether  we  were  so  or  not,  and  that  he

tooke  delight  to  heare  his  Trumpets  sound  on  his  walls ;

all  which  I  tooke  to  be  no  other  then  hooking  devises  and

untrue  delusions,  for  I  cannot  thinke,  but  that  if  at  the

first,  like  harmelesse  men  they  trusted  much,  they  repented

it  before  they  went  away. Captaine  Sharpeigh  was the |v  the  2nf

first  of  our  Nation  that  came  here,  and  perchance  might  Ofour  nation

passe  away  in  some  reasonable  sort :  but  since  then they  at  Aden.

have had time to advise  themselves  how to  doe more

villanie,) which they have,  nothing else  to  plead. My

conceit  is,  that  at  our  first  comming  they  made  account

to buy  our  goods  without  money, and that their plot

in  desiring  first  one  shippe  to  stay,  was  two-fold. First,

it  was  more  likely  for  them  to  worke  their  wills  on  one

shippe,  then  on  three. Secondly,  in  procuring  the  stay

of  this  heere,  the  other  two  were  the  better  to  bee  dealt

withall  at  Moha,  since  what villanie could be  wrought

on  them  at  both  places,  was  for  the  service  and  benefit  ot

our Basha :  And they knowing  that  we  were ignorant,

that  this  winter  time  now  ensuing  was  so  tempestious,  and

unfit for  any  such  businesse  of  Commerce,  and  that no

217

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1610.

ship  could  long  stay  there  without  their  favour  and
friendship,  as  in  the  case  of  fresh  water  to  drinke  onely,
if  there  were  no  wind  or  Sea  to  be  dreaded,  which  are
both  often  most  vehement,  and  at  Aden  is  low  shoare,
nothing  to  hinder  the  mayne  SufFe  and  violence  of  the
mounting  billowes,  whereby  they  might  with  good  judge-
ment thinke,  that  in  little  time  we  might  bee  forced
from  our  Road  at  nine  fathome,  into  five  fathome  neere
to  the  Towne,  in  some  shelter  of  the  Hand,  and  under
command  of  their  Ordnance.  From  whence  without
their  leave,  we  could  not  have  carryed  her  out  againe,
or  if  this  faile,  he  might  thinke  by  coloured  kindnesse,
or  some  other  device  for  our  owne  pleasures,  or  by  want
of  water,  sometime  to  draw  some  store  of  our  people,  and
that  of  the  better  sort  on  land  to  them,  which  alreadie
he  hath :  whereby  to  force  them  to  procure  the  rest
to  bring  in  the  ship,  but  indeed  hee  had  ill  counsell.
For  his  haste  spoyled  his  Market  at  the  first,  by  staying
our  three  men,  doubting  our  ship  would  be  gone :  which
made  me  very  suspicious  and  warie  in  sending  but  few
men  on  land  at  once.
Capt.  Doun- Saturday, I sent  my  first  Letters  to  the Generall to

tons  Letters  to  Moha,  by  a  Souldier  of  Aden,  fitted  for  the  Governours

SirH.MiMe-  .  ' /  .  ' , , ., . ,

,  turne,  whose  returne  was  so  ordered,  that  he  never  came
ton  suppressed.  »  '  ,

neere  any  or  us  with  an  answere :  he  pretended  that  the
Governour  of  Moha  promised  delivery  of  the  same,  but
presently  sent  him  backe  with  a  Letter  to  Aden.

Thursday,  the  Governour  rid  out  of  Towne,  who
remayned  absent  till  the  first  of  December,  in  the  meane
time  our  people  in  Prison  were  more  hardly  used,  paying
in  a  manner  as  much  to  the  Messenger  for  fetching  their
victuals,  as  it  cost  besides,  having  little  countenance  or
favour  any  way  shewed  them :  and  it  was  told  them
that  the  Mir  was  gone,  and  a  new  was  to  come  in  his
stead,  but  it proved  not  so  for  that  time.

Saturday,  about  mid-day,  the  same  Mir  returned  againe
into  the  Towne,  and  came  to  our  men  in  Prison,  speak-
ing  kindly unto them, and causing good provision to

218

NICHOLAS DOWNTON  a.d.

bee  made  for  them,  at  his  owne  cost,  whereby  he  guld  us
by  pretended  friendship,  promising  nothing  but  kind-
nesse  and  good  dealing,  so  soone  as  we  should  begin
to  trade,  and  then  they  shall  have  their  full  libertie
without  payment  of  the  aforesaid  fifteene  hundred  Vene-
tianos  formerly  demanded ;  the  custome  five  in  the
hundred,  all  other  charges  reasonably,  and  readie  Gold
for  what  wee  sold,  and  therefore  wishing  that  as  before  we
had  sent  a  Foole  of  our  Message,  that  now  we  should
send  a  man  of  our  owne,  with  a  guide  of  his,  whom  wee
might  be  sure  would  bring  true  answere  from  our
Generall.  This  day  I  made  shew  to  bee  preparing  to  bee
gone  with  the  ship :  aboord  came  a  Letter  from  John
Fowler  to  impart  to  mee  this  joyfull  newes,  urging  mee
againe  to  write  to  the  Generall,  to  know  his  pleasure
herein  for  landing  of  our  goods,  wherein  I  was  not  so
streightly  tyed,  but  I  might  have  done  it  my  selfe,  if  I
had  seene  any  signe  or  likelihood  of  good  dealing :  which
seeing  no  cause  of  encouragement  I  kept  to  my  selfe,
to  the  end  not  to  bee  urged  by  the  importunitie  of  others
to  doe  any  thing  unadvisedly,  which  might  either  pre-
judice my  friends  or  wrong  my  selfe ;  now  seeing  the
time  was  before  me  till  May,  to  goe  to  Moha  (for  so
long  the  Easterly  Monson  lasteth)  at  such  time  as  rigorous
weather,  or  being  wholy  frustrate  of  trade,  should  drive
me  hence,  and  being  once  gone,  I  cannot  come  hither
againe  till  the  fift  of  May  or  June,  whatsoever  thereby
were  to  bee  gotten,  wherefore,  for  divers  respects,  I
desired  to heare  from  the  Generall.

Munday,  I  dispatched  away  the  Messenger  with  a
Letter  to  my  Generall  (which  prooved  an  after-griefe
to  me)  and  eight  dayes  after  we  had  nothing,  but  shewes
of  kindnesse  and  good  quarter,  thinking  long  till  our
Messenger  returned,  that  we  might  beginne  our  good
Markets.

Saturday, my Boat-swaine  informed  mee of  his  great  [I.  iii.  284.]
wants  of  small  Cordage,  for  divers  purposes,  wishing  that
he  and some  others  might  goe  ashore, to  lay  some on

219

ad  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1610.

the  strand  by  the  Towne  wall,  now  while  we  had  leisure,
before  our  greater  businesse  came  in  hand,  for  which
I  sent  to  land  to  intreate  the  Governour  that  our  people
might  doe  such  a  businesse  in  safetie  under  his  wall :
which  was  promised  with  great  favour,  in  the  best  and
convenientest  place  they  could  find,  with  a  house  at  night
to  put  up  their  things  till  the  next  day.  In  the  meane-
time  the  Governour  set  Smithes  to  making  of  shackles  for
our  people,  and  some  of  them  were  by  signes  told  of
it,  which  suspecting  nothing,  tooke  it  as  a  merry  Jest,
which  afterwards  they  found  in  earnest.
Tzuentk  more  Wednesday,  afternoone,  my  men  were  all  betrayed  that
of  our  men  went  on  shoare,  bound,  shackled,  and  pinioned,  and
some  put  in  the  Stockes :  all  tortured  and  grievously
abused,  stript  of  their  money  and  all  else  they  had :  my
Pinnasse  lost,  the  gings  gone  amongst  the  Rope  layers.
So  there  was  two  Merchants,  a  Purser,  and  one  to  attend
on  them,  a  gadding  Apothecarie,  my  Chirurgion,  and
Master  Caulker  (who  carryed  my  Letter  to  Moha  as
aforesaid)  my  Boat-swaine,  and  one  of  his  mates,  two
quarter  Masters,  the  Cooper,  Carpenter  and  Gunners
mate,  and  my  Cock-swaine,  and  five  more  of  the  Cockes
ging,  which  in  all  are  twentie  persons,  some  few  for  their
pleasures,  the  rest  to  worke,  saw  the  ging  who  were  most
of  them  appointed  to  keepe  the  Pinnasse,  but  being  out
of  my  sight,  they  did  what  they  list,  and  the  Boat-swaine
seemed  to  want  their  helpe  about  his  Ropes.

Munday,  I  set  saile  out  of  the  Southermost  Road  of
Aden,  directing  my  course  towards  Moha  (through
the  streight  of  Babel-mandell,  in  the  entrance  of  the
Redde  Sea,  being  distant  from  Aden  (West  by  South)
thirtie  two  leagues.  The  Arabs  both  here  and  in  all
other  places  of  Arabia,  of  all  degrees,  are  in  great
servitude  to  the  Turkes.
An  Eclipse  of  Thursday,  at  foure  in  the  morning,  the  Moone  was
eclipsed,  and  at  one  in  the  after-noone,  I  past  the  Bab,
or  streight  being  halte  a  league  over,  having  in  the
midst  ten  fathome  water,  and  towards  both  sides  eight,

the  Moone.

NICHOLAS DOWNTON  aa

i  6 1  o.

sixe  or  foure  fathome  depth,  as  one  list  to  borrow  to,
and  may  be  some  two  miles  through  which  sets  a  gi
strong  tyde,  both  ebbe  and  floud.  I  left  on  my  star-boord
side,  a  Mountaine  and  Rockie  Peninsula,  extending  from
the  Mayne,  beeing  all  neere  low-land,  with  a  low  narrow
necke  of  sand,  and  on  the  lar-boord  side,  I  left  a  low
Hand  of  some  five  miles  long  East  and  West,  being  also
Rockie;  betweene  the  West  end  thereof,  and  the  Abaxin
Coast,  for  ought  I  can  discerne  is  a  cleere  channell  of  three
or  neere  foure  leagues  broad,  but  I  thinke  not  much
used  by  the  ships,  for  that  the  water  is  deepe,  and  not  for
anchoring,  besides  the  other  is  the  neerer  way.  We
being  past  the  Bab,  were  ignorant  what  dangers  lay  in
our  way,  or  how  farre  within  the  streight  the  Towne
of  Moha  stood,  whether  in  a  River  or  Bay,  or  how  else
we  knew  not,  but  discovering  we  kept  by  our  lead
betweene  nine  and  seven  fathomes,  all  alongst  the  Arab
Coast,  and  as  the  day  light  ended  we  anchored  in  eight
fathome,  nine  leagues  within  the  Bab,  against  a  little
Mount  standing  alone  by  the  Sea-side.

Friday,  at  sixe  a-clocke  in  the  morning  we  set  sayle,
standing  alongst  North,  and  North  by  West,  as  our
depths  directed  us,  first  betweene  nine  and  seven
fathomes,  and  lastly,  betweene  sixe  and  foure  fathomes,
when  wee  came  to  have  the  shoales  without  us ;  but  as
wee  came  neere  to  Moha,  which  is  scituated  eightene  Moha  eighteen
leagues  within  the  Bab :  on  the  verge  of  a  low  sandy  f^p  f
barren  ground.  Our  Admirall  we  saw  rid  alone  (and  no
Darling)  some  foure  mile  into  the  Sea,  in  sixe  fathome,
and  riding  with  two  shot  ahead,  by  reason  of  the  vehe-
mencie  of  the  weather,  which  erst  I  suspected  not :
My  present  cares  were  somewhat  in  this  unknowne
passage,  for  the  safetie  of  the  ship,  which  without  great
vigilancie  and  regard  to  our  depths,  might  have  beene
set  fast  to  our  further  famine :  but  the  neerer  I  came,
the  more  my  griefe  gnawing  at  my  heart,  as  one  while
reviving  my  griefe  for  the  losse  of  so  many  of  my  men,
and  then casting  doubts,  what might befall  my friends

A.D.

l6lO.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

here ;  their  Pinnasse  mand,  I  see  lye  along  by  the  ships
side  wherein  was  Master  Thornton  the  Master,  but  durst
not  put  off  till  wee  were  thwart  of  them,  for  feare  they
should  not  recover  their  owne  ship  againe,  being  once  put
off  by  reason  of  the  wind  and  currant.  I  being  some-
what neere,  as  a  signall  of  heavie  newes,  they  puld  downe
their  Flagge,  whereby  I  understood  some  misfortune  was
befallen  my  Generall,  I  beeing  anchored,  hee  with  the
Pinnasse  came  aboord ;  where  after  the  blasts  of  passion
and  griefe  (by  the  defects  and  frailtie  of  the  flesh)  some-
what blowne  over,  he  began  by  degrees  to  informe  me
of  all  things  that  had  happened  since  wee  parted  at  Aden :
as  first  of  their  quicke  passage  from  Aden  to  the  Bab,
where  they  tooke  in  a  Pilot  to  bring  them  to  Moha,
where  the  fourteenth  of  November  they  arrived,  that
was  from  Aden  in  thirtie  houres,  yet  their  misfortune  was
such,  that  against  the  Towne  and  very  neere  the  Road,
whether  by  mis-understanding,  or  the  Pilots  neglect  to
the  depths,  or  being  not  acquainted  with  the  working
of  our  shippes,  it  is  not  materiall  to  examine,  but  on  the
sands  the  shippe  came  aground,  and  so  stucke  fast  that
her  bilged  stood  on  the  shoaldest  of  the  bankes ;  so
as  notwithstanding  the  great  Sea  by  force  of  the  wind,
the  head  and  sterne  being  in  deeper  water,  did  heave  and
set  without  any  painful  striking,  but  to  get  her  off  without
lightning  they  could  not,  wherefore  they  could  not  be
precise  in  trusting  themselves  without  pledges  in  the
hands  of  the  Turkes,  who  omitted  nothing  to  prevent
[I.  iii.  285.]  our  doubt  of  being  welcom,  with  great  varietie  of  friendly
promises  in  every  thing  we  demanded,  and  request
once  made,  they  were  plyed  with  Barkes  to  lighten
the  ship,  wherein  they  used  great  expedition,  we  land
as  well  our  Wheat-meale,  Vineger,  Sea-coales,  Pitch  and
Tarre,  with  our  unbuilt  Pinnasse,  and  other  provisions
which  came  next  hand,  or  in  the  way,  as  well  Tinne,
Lead,  Iron,  and  other  merchandize  to  be  sould,  and
staved  neare  all  our  water.  And  of  all  others,  Master
Laurence  Femell  seemed most fearefull, for that in a

The  Trades
Increase
arriveth
before  Moha  in
the  Red  Sea,
Nove.  14..
1610.

NICHOLAS DOWNTON

I 6  I  o.
private  Boate  he  speedily  carryed  all his  things  on  land,
leaving  nothing  that  he  regarded  aboord  of  the  ship  of
his  owne.

The  ship  now  having  laine  a  ground  houres,

with  great  travaile  to  lighten and shift the ship, they The  Trades-
got her afloat.  Increase  set

It  is  also  to  be  understood,  that  this  part  of  Arabia,  afiMt-
from  Eastward  of  Aden,  and  up  the  Red-

sea  to  Cameran,  which  is  threescore  and  ten  leagues
within  Bab-mandell,  and  I  know  not  how  farre  within
the  Land,  is  called  the  Land  of  Yeoman,  and  now  or  Ayaman.
governed  by  one  Jeffor  Basha,  whose  residence  is  in
the  Citie  of  Zenan,  which  they  account  to  bee  by
moderate  travaile  fifteene  dayes  journey  ;  by  poste,  I
thinke  they  goe  and  come  in  that  time.  And  the
Governours  of  Aden  and  Moha,  which  is  the  better
place,  in  that  it  is  of  more  resort  of  ships ;  and  these
Governours  are  yeerely  placed  by  him  ;  as  at  this
present  in  Moha  is  one  Regib  Aga  by  his  place  or
office,  who  was  his  servile  slave  attending  on  him,  and
he  was  preferred  to  Aden,  where  he  commanded  the
other  yeere,  when  Captaine  Sharpeigh  was  there,  and
for  that  he  was  a  benefkiall  Knave  to  his  Master,  he
was  preferred  to Moha,  a  better  place.

Now  at  our  first  arrivall,  he  sent  to  give  knowledge
unto  his  Master,  with  what  informations  best  pleased
him,  and  was  to  stay  for  directions  from  his  Master
how  to  deale  with  us  ;  wee  trusted  them  as  men  of
humane  feeling,  being  ignorant  of  what  was  against  us.
Now  while  the  messenger  went  to  know  the  Bashas
pleasure  how  to  dispose  of  us  :  The  Aga  was  laying
the  ground  of  his  Treason,  and  drawing  every  thing
toward  readinesse,  for  the  effecting  of  his  desired  harvest,
omitting  nothing  which  might  further  his  villanous
purpose,  Also  by  drawing  into  the  Towne  from  the
nearest  neighbour  Hand  Townes  and  Countrey  adjoyning,
such  and  so  many  souldiers  as  might  tit  his  turne,
whose  rigour  and  malice  against us hee neglected not

223

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1610.

to  provoke,  by  scandalous  reproches,  as  might  best
serve  for  his  purpose,  as  that  wee  were  Pirats  and
Christians,  (which  they  account  as  bad  enemies  to  their
holy  Prophet  Mahomet  and  his  Lawes)  and  that  our
comming  was  to  discover  how  to  ruinate  and  destroy
the  holy  houses  of  their  god,  as  Meca  and  Medina,
and  what  service  they  should  doe  to  God  and  their
Country  in  destroying  of  us ;  as  also  informed  them
that  wee  had  so  much  money  and  goods,  as  if  they
would  behave  themselves  valiantly  when  time  served,  will
make  them  and  their  Countrey  happie,  with  so  many
other  deluding  devices,  as  seemed  fit  for  such  an
action  ;  meane  while  our  innocent  distrustlesse  men
hired  and  fitted  their  house,  and  preparing  against  the
returne  of  the  Basha  his  answere,  for  present  sale  of
their  commodities,  by  the  aboundant  shewes  and
promises  of  favour  to  them.  The  Aga  ever  urging,
by  wondering  at  our  small  quantitie  of  goods  in  the
ship  of  so  great  burthen,  and  ever  were  Boats  sent  for
goods,  after  the  shippe  was  afloat,  and  that  there  was
no  more,  till  further  occasion  to  be  landed  ;  his
greedinesse  seemed  to  be  such,  as  the  poore  Arab  Barque-
men  shewed  feare  to  returne  without  lading  ;  but  when
he  perceived  there  was  no  more  at  present  to  be  had,
he  went  another  way  to  worke  ;  which  was,  he  informed
our  Merchants,  that  all  ships  that  came  to  this  Towne
in  Trade,  their  Captaine,  for  their  better  assurance,  as
a  pledge  of  good  dealing,  received  the  Gran  Segniors
Vest  for  their  better  securitie,  which  being  once  invested
in  the  view  of  the  people,  no  man  after  durst  offer
them  any  wrong  ;  as  all  the  principall  officers  of  every
ship  had  signes  of  curtesies,  the  which  unlesse'  our
Captaine  doe  come  on  land  and  accept  of,  he  should
never  thinke  him  the  great  Turkes  friend,  nor  beleeve
his  meaning  was  good,  as  hee  pretended,  and  therefore
should  doubt  to  give  him  Trade,  lest  hee  being  a  Man
of  warre  should  turne  them  to  further  mischiefe  ;  which
unlesse  he  receive  such  right,  according  to  the  welcome

224

NICHOLAS DOWNTOX  aj>.

1610.
and  custome  of  the  place, he  could not but thinkc his
end  not  for  their  good.

The  ship  now  mored  in  a  place,  from  whence  within
seven  or  eight  months  was  no  returning,  the  vchemencie
of  the  stormes  so  great,  the  unknowne  dangers  in  these
Seas  such,  no  place  of  more  comfort  knowne,  and  no
man  permitted  to  come  neare  us,  that  either  could  or
would  better  informe  us  of  the  contagious  weather
ensuing,  the  dangers  there  to  bee  expected,  or  more
comfort  elsewhere  to  be  found,  but  as  it  were,  must
stand  at  the  Turkes  mercy,  whether  they  will  give  us
life,  or  restraine  water  or  other  reliefe  to  maintaine  the
same  ;  our  house  hired,  our  Factors  and  goods  on  land
in  readinesse  and  present  sales  after  answere  brought
excepted  :  And  now  this  unexpected  doubt  cast,  whether
we  be  true  men  or  theeves  :  And  no  way  left  to  approve
the  former,  or  to  shunne  the  latter  ;  but  the  comming
on  land  of  our  Generall,  on  whose  safetie  depended  the
carriage  and  estate  of  the  whole  voyage,  which  could
not  but  crosse  their  minds  and  conceit,  since  they  knew
his  determination  was  otherwise.  Master  Femell  gave
the  Generall  knowledge  of  the  Aga  his  words,  and
further  gave  him  to  understand,  that  the  Companies
businesse,  without  his  presence  on  land,  could  take  no
effect,  but  must  rest  without  doing  any  thing.  Which
once  knowne,  Sir  Henry  Middleton,  notwithstanding
the  little  trust  he  had  in  the  faith  and  honesty  of  the
Turkes  in  these  forren  places,  and  the  infinite  regard
and  care  he  had  to  follow  and  pursue  the  plot  and  [I.  iii.  286.]
benefit  of  this  his  journey,  as  well  here,  as  in  India,
and  places  of  more  hope,  now  being  urged  that  his
absence  was  likely  to  prove  prejudiciall  to  the  Company ;
answered,  that  all  his  endeavours  during  the  Voyage,
were  wholly  intended  for  the  benefit,  and  not  prejudice
of  the  company,  and  were  it  not  for  the  safetie  of  the
ships,  and  good  of  the  Voyage,  he  could  take  delight
to  recreate  himselfe  on  land,  as  well  as  others  :  where-
fore, now  since  his  company  there  might  turther  the
in  225  p

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1610.

businesse,  and  not  be  imputed  unto  him  for  his  pleasure,
he  would  not  be  niggardly  of  his  presence  amongst
them.  Therefore  he  prepared  himselfe  to  land,  to  put
them  out  of  doubt,  and  to  receive  that  Vest  of  the
great  Turke,  as  the  badge  or  assurance  of  safetie  to
such,  as  with  like  solemnitie  had  it  put  on  their  backes.
And  before  his  going  came  Master  Femell  aboord  to
informe  the  Generall  of  what  he  thought  fit  to  prepare
him  in,  against  his  landing  :  But  at  the  instant,  when
Sir  Henry  Middleton  was  to  enter  the  Boat,  whether
by  any  suspicious  whispering  amongst  the  Turkes,  or
whether  he  felt  any  guilt  of  conscience  for  being  the
occasion  to  hasten  the  Generals  landing,  to  stand  before
him  in  any  danger  that  might  happen,  or  some  sudden
MasterFemcIs  apprehension  of  feare  (as  in  faint-hearted  people  never
Jea,e-  wants) of any violent course by the Turkes to be

attempted,  the  first  day  of  the  Generalls  landing,  or
what  else  I  know  not,  but  at  the  Generalls  going  to
land,  hee  being  Cape-Merchant,  and  swaying  the  buying
and  selling,  would  have  stayed  aboord,  but  could  not
in  such  a  case  bee  spared,  being  so  great  an  actor  in
the  businesse.
Sir  Henry  The Generall being come to land,  was  met  by  the

; ,  eton, , Governour  and  principall  of  the  Towne,  was caried to

popth  on  land,  ft  '

the  Governours  house,  where  he  had  a  rich  Vest  of
Cloath  of  Gold  put  on  his  back,  a  horse  very  richly
furnished  for  him  to  mount  upon,  the  Governor  holding
the  horse  while  the  Generall  gat  up,  all  which  was
reason  Sir  Henry  Middleton  should  accept  of,  being,  as
they  pretended,  the  Badge  of  their  friendship.

The  communication,  after  the  solemnitie  was  ended,
was  such,  and  so  solemnely,  and  with  such  protestation
and  shewes  of  kindnesse  and  friendship,  as  might
deceive  any  honest  man,  or  which  is  not  a  deceiver
himselfe.  Sir  Henry  Middleton  in  short  time  atter
seeing  the  varieties  of  kind  shewes  by  the  Governour
toward  him,  and  in  regard  of  the  long  time  he  had  to
stay there, desired leave of the Governour, that he

226

NICHOLAS DOWNTON  a.d.

i6;
might  there  set  up  his  Pinnasse,  which he  brought  ready
framed  out  of  England  ; the  Governours  answere  was,
That  the Countrey  was before him to doe whatsoever
pleased him, as if he were in his owne Countrey  ;
seeming  glad that he  would command him any thing
which might content him  : for which, forthwith Sir
Henry Middleton caused presently all things to be
brought to land, which need to be used in the said
worke, with all  his  Carpenters, Smithes, or other that
might  further  that  worke  in  hand,  and  to  that  end  all
hast  possible  might  bee  used  for  dispatch  of  the  same.
Sir  Henry  Middleton,  with  his  attendance  and  furniture,
kept  house  on  land,  by  his  continuall  presence  to  further
the  said  worke,  which  also  caused  many  more  to  resort
on  land,  for their severall  ends, then otherwise  would
have done. The eight and twentieth of November,
Regib Aga  his plot  growing  to  ripenesse,  and  receiving
strength  by  the directions of  his Master  Jeffor Basha,
sent  the  Generall  word  in  the  afternoone, that he had
received  so  good newes  from  the  Basha  concerning  our
businesse, that he could not altogether conceale the
same,  but  thought  good,  for  his  content,  to  send  him  a
taste  thereof,  till  his  better  leasure  served  him  to  reveale
the particulers  ; this seemed to be done, to make
Sir Henry Middleton more secure, whose upright
thoughts gave him no cause to suspect any such
mischiefe,  as  at  present  was prepared  for him and his.
But in the evening, instead of  good newes from the
Basha,  he  effected  his  predeterminate  trecherie  with  iron Thebhodie
maces,  knocking  downe  the  Generall,  Master  Pemberton,  l!]fas0"  °-r
and  the Merchants,  with all  the  rest  that  at  that time
were  on  shore,  where  they  also  murthered  eight  or  our
men, who by reason of their former favours and
shewes  of  kindnesse,  not  deeming any  such treason to
be  intended  towards  them,  were  naked  without  weapons
to  resist  such  unexpected  murtherers. Thus  they  with-
out mercy,  not  only  in  chaines  kept  prisoners,  both  by
the  necke,  hands  and  feete,  the  Generall  with  eight  and

227

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1610.

fortie  of  his  company,  and  Master  Pemberton  with  nine
of  his  company  ;  but  also  with  three  great  Boats  full  of
souldiers  attempted  to  surprise  the  Darling,  who  rided
nearer  the  Towne  then  the  Trades-Increase  by
mile,  who  (not  knowing  of  the  betraying  of  their
Masters  Boat  and  men)  seeing  a  Boat  comming  aboord,
esteemed  it  to  be  their  own  boat,  but  presently  descrying
two  Boats  more,  and  all  full  of  people,  began  to  mis-
trust false  measure.  But  the  Turkes  comming  aboord,
and  seeing  no  man  stirring,  thought  themselves  surely
possest  of  her,  murthering  the  Trumpetter,  whom  they
found  aloft  asleepe  ;  but  in  the  end  our  mercifull  God
turned  their  pretended  mischiefe  toward  us,  upon  their
owne  pates,  and  made  them  fall  into  the  pit  that  they
had  made  for  us,  for  in  repelling  these  unexpected
enemies,  (though  to  the  losse  of  two  more  of  their  owne
men,  who  were  slaine  in  the  conflict)  were  slaine  and
Seven  and  drowned  of  the  Turkes  in  flight,  seven  and  twentie,
'ZTne^"^  whereof  the  Admirall  of  the  Towne,  who  was  their
Leader,  was  also  one  :  thus  having  cleared  themselves
of  them  quite,  they  cut  their  Cable,  and  set  saile,  and
stood  off  and  anchored  by  the  Trade,  who  as  yet  knew
not  of  the  betraying  of  the  Governour,  neither  of  their
attempting  the  Darling,  till  they  of  the  Darling  had
informed  them  thereof,  by  which  meanes  they  prevented
another  mischiefe,  for  that  the  Trades  Boat,  with  a
[I.  iii.  287.]  third  more  of  her  men,  some  to  fill  water,  and  others
for  pleasure  were  going  on  shore  :  also  this  morning
in  the  Darling,  on  her  gallery,  they  found  one  of  the
Turkes  souldiers,  who  had  escaped  with  life,  but  their
Boats  gone  was  left  behind  :  him  they  carrved  prisoner
aboord  the  Trades-Increase.  From  this  eight  and  twen-
tieth of  November,  till  the  fourteenth  of  December,
by  reason  of  the  continuall  stormes,  they  heard  no
newes  from  the  Generall.  But  the  fifteenth  day,  John
Chambers  one  of  the  Trades  quarter  Masters,  with  a
Flagge  of  Truce  went  on  shore,  where  he  found  the
Generall,  and  the  rest  in Chaines  as  afore-said,  in  most

228

NICHOLAS DOWNTOX  a..,.

1610.
inhumane  manner  so  that  one  could  not  goe  aside  to
ease  himselfe,  but  the  rest  in  a  row  must  goe  with
him,  to  their  great  annoyance  ;  yet  at  his  returnc
brought  hopefull  newes  of  the  inlargement  of  all  save
the  General!  and  Master  Femell,  who  were  to  goe  up
to  Zenan,  the  place  of  the  Bashas  residence,  there  to
answere  to  such  matters  as  should  be  objected  against
them.  Also  the  seventeenth  day,  the  same  Messenger
went  againe  on  shoare  (in  manner  afore-said)  carrying
with  him  certaine  provisions  and  other  necessaries  for
the  Generals  reliefe,  and  the  rest  there  with  him,  who
returned  with  varietie  of  newes,  but  none  good.  Thus
much  Master  Thorneton  at  his  comming  aboard  me,
as  afore-said  informed  me  of.

The  one  and  twentieth  day  in  the  afternoone,  by  the  Decemb.  21.
same  Messenger  I  sent  a  Letter  to  the  Generall,  to  give
him  knowledge  of  my  mis-fortunes  at  Aden,  who  returning
brought  me  a  letter  from  my  Generall,  in  briefe  informing
me  of  the  businesse  before  repeated,  as  willing  me  if  by
any  meanes  I  could  get  out  of  this  Sea,  and  to  stay  at
Aden,  till  I  had  heard  what  would  become  of  them  :  also
he  had  sent  the  Darling  to  ply  out  towards  Aden,  to  give
mee  information  of  his  betraying,  and  to  prevent  my
comming  to  Moha ;  also  that  he  and  sixe  more  of  his
companie  were  the  next  day  to  take  their  journey  towards
Zenan,  the  Bashas  Court,  as  afore-said.

The  two  and  twentieth,  the  Generall  with  all  his  com-
pany, except  the  Carpenters,  who  wrought  still  in  Chaines
upon  our  Pinnasse  for  the  Basha,  and  unable  hurt  men,
who  remayned  still  in  Chaines  at  Moha,  set  forth  in  their
journey,  attended  on  by  a  strong  Guard  of  Souldiers,  lest
any  of  them  should  escape :  yet  the  same  evening,  not-
withstanding their  narrow  looking  to  our  men,  M.
Pemberton  slipt  aside  among  the  bushes  with  so  much  «*.  Pember-
haste,  as  his  weak  sick  bodie  was  able,  made  to  the  waters  tom  escaPe-
side,  where,  although  tyred  with  running,  it  pleased  God
that  he  found  a  Canoa  having  in  her  a  paddle  wherewith
to  rowe  in  her,  hee  put  off  to  Sea,  committing  himselfe

229

A.D.
l6lO.

January  2.

They  passe
over  to  the
Abaxin  Coast.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

to  the  danger  thereof,  rather  then  to  stand  to  the  Turkes
mercie,  and  through  rowing,  his  faint  wearinesse  increased
so,  that  in  the  morning  his  inabilitie  forced  him  to  give
over  rowing,  having  nothing  to  refresh  himselfe  but  his
owne  water,  it  so  pleased  God  that  the  same  morning
aboard  the  Trades  Increase,  was  descryed  a  Canoa  in  the
offing,  which  seemed  to  drive,  unto  which  being  reasonable
faire  weather,  the  Trade  sent  off  her  Pinnasse,  who  brought
both  Master  Pemberton  and  his  Canoa  aboard  their  own
ship,  being  scarce  able  to  speake  through  faintnesse.

From  this  day  to  the  seven  and  twentieth  day,  the
weather  continued  for  the  most  part  boysterous  and
stormy.  Also  this  seven  and  twentieth  day,  the  Darling
through  foule  weather,  having  lost  Anchor  and  Cable,  and
not  able  to  performe  what  the  Generall  (as  afore-said)
had  sent  them  about,  returned  unto  Moha  Roade :  where
I,  whom  they  were  sent  unto,  in  the  Pepper-Corne  did
ride.

The  second  of  January  with  all  three  ships  we  set  saile
out  of  Moha  Road,  intending  to  ply  up  towards  Bab-
mandell,  for  three  respects.  First,  for  ease  of  our  ground
tackle,  being  through  long  boysterous  weather  much
decayed  :  and  secondly,  to  seeke  place  to  fill  water  for
our  people  to  drinke,  by  want  whereof  wee  were  very  much
distressed  ;  and  thirdly,  and  lastly,  there  to  stop  the  passage
of  all  the  Indian  ships  entring  this  Sea,  whereby  to  draw
the  Turkes  to  release  our  Generall,  people  and  goods,  our
great  necessitie  constrayned  this  our  present  attempt  in
this  faire  seeming  weather ;  at  our  first  setting  sayle,  we
stood  over  to  the  Abaxin  Coast,  where  wee  left  the  Darling
to  looke  for  her  Anchor  and  Cable  formerly  lost,  we.  with
the  Trades  and  Pepper-Corne  plying  up  to  wind-ward,  but
having  scarce  any  aboard,  the  better  in  the  evening
anchored  on  the  Arab  side  in  eight  fathome,  some  three
leagues  to  the  wind-wards  of  Moha,  and  some  foure  mile
from  the  shoare.

The  third,  in  the  morning,  the  tyde  of  ebbe  in  hand,
we  set  sayle  working  to  wind-ward,  as  before  in  the  after-

230

NICHOLAS DOWNTON  M>.

noone,  the  wind  so  increasing  that  I  in  the  Pepper-Cornc

spent  my  two  top-sayles  and  constrayned  to  bring  other

two  new  ones  to  the  yard,  before  which  was  effected,  the

night approched, and wee more then halfe Seas over

towards  the  Abaxin  Coast,  where  in  regard  of  the  foule

weather we formerly had at Moha for two respects I

must  desire  to  stop  ; first,  the  next  morning  if  the  weather

were  faire,  to  have  the  Darling  Company  to  proceed  on

our  former  purpose ; secondly,  the  weather  unfit,  by  the

place  and  sight  of  the  Darling  to  finde  easier  Roade  to

anchor  in  this  day  betweene  eight  and  nine  at  night,  so

soone  as  we  could  get  into  sixteene  fathome  water  by  our

sounding  lead  in  fast  seeming  ground  wee  anchored,  the

Trade  somewhat  to  the  North-ward,  or  Lee-wards  of  the

Pepper-Corne,  and  as  towards  morning  the  wind  increased

with  a  churlish  Sea,  with  cloudie  darke  weather,  in  which

wee  lost  sight  of  the  Trades  Increase,  but  by  reason  of  the

darke  weather  doubted  nothing,  at  which  time  shee  had

broke  an  Anchor  and  drove,  and  let  fall  another  Anchor, [I.  Hi.  288.]

which  afterward  driving  from  sixteene  to  sixe  fathome,

they  were  forced  to  cut  a  way  to  flat  the  ships  head  to

the  offwards  to  prevent  further  danger.

The  fourth  of  Januarie,  day  light  approching,  wee  pre-
paring to  weigh  our  Anchor  suddenly,  the  ship  drove
from  sixteene  to  eighteene  fathome,  and  before  wee  could
flat  our  ships  head  to  the  offwards,  we  had  lesse  then  sixe
fathome :  which  soone  after  increased  to  eight,  ten,  &c.
We  then  seeing  the  Trade  (to  my  disturbance)  standing
over  towards  Moha,  and  seeing  William  Pemberton  in
the  Darling  riding  in  an  easie  Roade,  to  whom  I  would
gladly  have  gone,  both  for  quiet  to  my  minde,  and  ease  to
my  ground  takle,  but  that  I  knew  not  what  need  the
Trades  Increase  might  have  of  my  Carpenters,  in  case  of
any  casualties  whatsoever  I  know  not  of,  in  my  hastening
after  her  the  weather  rigorous,  wee  split  both  our  new
top-sayles,  the  night  before  brought  to  the  yard.  They
being  sowed  with  rotten  twine,  as  all  our  sayles  for  the
most  part  hath  beene,  through  which  meanes  it  became

231

ad.  PUHCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1 6  io.

night,  by  what  time  I  got  into  the  Road,  where  presently
to  my  griefe  I  understood  of  the  Trades  misfortune  to
lose  two  Anchors  and  Cables  as  afore-said,  wherefore  I
sent  my  Carpenters  aboard  to  stocke  some  other  Anchors,
from  this  to  the  eighteenth  day  with  little  ease,  we  con-
tinued a  wearisome  Road,  to  the  spoyling  of  our  Cables,
as  afore-said.

From  the  sixth  day,  to  the  eleventh  day,  every  day  came
Canoas  from  the  Towne,  bringing  Letters  from  the
Carpenters  with  varietie  of  forged  newes,  informed  them
by  the  Aga,  who  permitted  their  sending  the  rather  for
that  most  commonly  it  was  to  get  wine  or  beere,  where-
with they  pleasured  the  Turkes,  and  sometimes  sent  some
little  fresh  victuals,  according  as  they  had  wherewithall  to
buy  or  were  permitted  to  send  aboard.

The  twelfth,  the  Darling  returned  into  Moha  Road  to
us,  saluting  me  with  three  Peeces  of  Ordnance,  as  a  signe
of good newes, and by Master Pembertons instant
comming  aboard  of  me,  to  my  great  comtort  confirmed ;
A  good  water-  for  that  hee  had  found  a  good  watering  place,  and  a  very
ingpjace  easie  Roade  for  our  ships,  and  his  Anchor  and  Cable  that

he  went  to  seeke,  which  as  aforesaid  they  in  his  absence
were  forced  to  let  slip.

The  eighteenth,  in  the  morning  there  came  certaine
from  Moha  to  us,  bringing  two  Bullockes,  two  Goates,
certaine  Hennes  Egges,  and  some  fruits,  but  no  newes
from  our  Generall ;  This  day  at  one  in  the  afternoone  we
set  saile,  standing  over  towards  the  Abaxin  Coast  (where
Master  Pemberton  found  the  safe  Roade  and  wattring
place,  and  at  night  wee  anchored  three  leagues  short  of
it,  under  an  Hand  (which  for  the  abundance  of  great
Crab  Hand. Crabs, thereon  wee  called  Crab Hand.)

The  nineteenth,  we  weighed  againe,  and  stood  neerer
into  the  Bay,  and  anchored  under  another  lesser  Hand.

The  twentieth,  we  weighed  againe,  and  stood  further
into  the  Bay,  and  anchored  right  against  the  watering
place,  some  halfe  a  mile  from  the  shoare,  in  eight  fathome
water. I  sent  George  Jeff  before  in  the  Pinnasse  to  seeke

232

knee.

NICHOLAS DOWXTOX  ad

1610.

out  the  River,  and  to  see  if  hee  could  speake  with  any

of  the  Countrey  people,  who  no  sooner  landed,  but  by

and  by  there  did  present  them  selves  unto  our  mens  sight,

at  least  an  hundred  of  the  Countrey  people  armed  with

Lances, whereof  one came to our people beeing of a

bolder  spirit  then  the  rest,  who  not  onely  spake  with  them,

but  also  desired  to  goe  aboard  with them, who  at his

comming  aboard  informed  mee  by  an  Interpreter,  how  that

the Turkes had sent word unto them, how they had \

betrayed  and  murthered  divers  of  our  men,  and  wishing

them  also  to  doe  the  like  to  as  many  of  our  men  as  they

could  lay  hand  on. This  yong-man  was  a  principall  mans

sonne,  and  was  very  kind  unto  us  all  the  time  we  were

in this  Bay : he this night did  lye  aboard the  Trades

Increase, where he was very kindly used to his  great

content.

The  one  and  twentieth,  I  with  all  our  Boats,  and  most
part  of  our  men  went  on  shoare,  setting  some  to  digging
of  Wels,  some  to  fetching  of  ballast,  others  to  filling  of
some  little  water  out  of  a  little  Well  wee  there  found
made  readie  to  our  hand,  and  the  rest  being  armed  to
guard  them  that  wrought,  and  soone  after  our  landing
came  downe  unto  me  the  Priest,  the  father  and  brethren
of  the  young  man  afore  mentioned  (who  as  yet  was  not
gone  from  us)  whom  at  his  comming  ashoare  they  very
joyfully  received,  presenting  me  with  a  Goat,  I  also  gave
unto  them  foure  of  the  Trades  shirts  put  in  by  the
Merchants  for  the  Companie,  which  they  very  kindly
received ;  promising  to  bring  downe  the  next  day  some
Goates,  to  sell  unto  us  for  our  money,  which  they  very
honestly  performed,  as  by  the  sequell  may  appeare.

The  two  and  twentieth,  I  having  continued  ashoare  all
night  with  a  good  Guard,  to  see  that  there  should  no  harme
be  done  to  our  water,  I  appointed  our  men  to  their  busi-
nesse  as  the  day  before,  but  by  reason  of  the  boysterous
weather,  none  of  the  Countrv  people  came  downe  to  us :
the  cause  of  my  present  continuance  on  shoare,  was  for
that  I  see  such  ill  usage  of  my  Generall,  and  his  people

233

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1610.

betrayed  both  at  Aden  and  Moha,  although  they  had  made
such  faire  shewes  and  promises,  I  having  no  assurance  of
the  honesty  of  this  people  to  us,  bred  in  mee  suspition
what  harme  might  be  attempted  against  us  here  by  the
Turkes,  or  by  their  perswasion  to  this  Country  people,
eyther  by  poysoning  our  water  or  other  wayes ;  therefore
[I.  iii.  289.]  further  then  needs  must  I  trusted  none,  so  also  I  continued
this  night  ashoare  with  a  good  strong  Watch.

The  three  and  twentieth,  having  setled  our  Company
to  every  particular  businesse,  there  came  downe  to  us  the
same  men,  who  the  other  day  had  beene  with  me,  and
after  them  followed  some  others,  driving  before  them
divers  Goates  to  sell  to  us  according  as  they  had  promised.
I  very  kindly  entertayned  them,  and  caused  the  Purser  to
buy  their  Cattle,  and  in  the  evening  they  departed  very
well  satisfied,  promising  every  day  to  bring  downe  more,
of  which  they  made  good  performance.  This  day  we
made  an  end  of  watering.

From  the  foure  and  twentieth  to  the  six  and  twentieth
day,  they  brought  downe  every  day  both  Goates  and
Sheepe,  whereof  we  bought  according  to  our  occasions  and
spending,  they  returning  well  satisfied.

The  nine  and  twentieth,  the  wind  at  North  North-west
we  set  saile,  I  determined  to  get  up  to  the  Bab  with  all  our
three  ships,  there  to  make  stay  of  all  the  Indian  shippes,
that  this  yeare  should  enter  this  Sea,  by  them  to  force
the  Turkes  to  re-deliver  my  General,  and  the  rest  of  his
Company  our  goods  and  Pinnasse,  as  aforesaid  :  but  being
thwart  of  Crab  Hand  it  fell  calme,  the  tyde  setting  right  on
the  Hand,  of  this  time  I  made  the  best  use  I  might,  for
so  soone  as  we  had  anchored,  I  accompanyed  with  Master
Thorneton  and  Master  Pemberton,  went  on  shoare  with
all  our  Boates,  and  most  part  of  our  men,  whom  I
appointed  to  cutting  of  wood,  both  for  dressing  our
victuals  and  other  needfull  uses.  This  after-noone  wee
deserved  comming  over  from  Moha,  two  Jelbas,  one
whereof  came  directly  aboord  the  Trade,  bringing  me  a
Letter  from  my  Generall,  dated  the  fifteenth  of  January,

234

NICHOLAS DOWNTON

informing  me  of  his  safe  arrivall  at  Zenan,  with  all  his
companie,  save  Richard  Phillips,  Master  Pembertons
youth,  whom  hee  left  very  sicke  at  a  place  called  Tyes,
who  desired  to  be  informed  of  Master  Pemberton,  whether
he  were  safely  escaped  aboord  or  no,  for  that  he  doubted
the  Arabs  attending  on  their  Asses,  to  have  murthered
him  for  his  Asse  he  rid  on,  of  the  varietie  of  hopefull
seeming  promises  of  his  inlargement,  beeing  onely
delusions ;  this  Letter  being  kept  till  the  seventeenth  of
the  same,  also  mentioneth  of  the  safe  arrivall  of  Master
Fowler,  and  the  rest  of  my  Company  (betrayed  at  Aden)
at  Zenan ;  how  God  had  raised  him  friends  among  the
middest  of  his  enemies,  to  wit,  the  Raha,  who  is  next  in
degree  to  the  Basha,  with  divers  other  that  favoureth  his
just  cause ;  contradicteth  my  present  determination  of
staying  the  Indian  ships,  for  that  as  yet  they  have  no  just
cause  to  object  against  him,  it  might  prove  prejudiciall,
not  only  to  him  and  his  Company,  but  also  to  our  Nation
trading  in  the  Mediterranian  Sea,  but  that  the  Basha  had
cleared  Regib  Aga  of  the  betraying  and  murthering  of
him  and  his  Company,  taking  it  upon  himselfe,  as  that  it
was  done  by  his  warrant  and  command.  To  this  my
Generalls  letter  by  the  same  messenger,  I  returned  an
answere ;  first  giving  him  to  understand  of  Master  Pem-
bertons safetie :  our  infortunate  loosing  and  spoyling  our
ground  tackle  ;  of  my  present  determination  intercepted  by
his  letter ;  my  opinion  of  their  faire  seeming,  yet  deluding
promises :  and  lastly  of  our  safe  Road  and  watring  place
on  the  Abaxin  Coast,  right  opposite  to  Moha,  being  some
13.  leagues  distant,  where  we  have  refreshing  reasonable
cheape.

The  seventh  of  February,  the  Trade  returned  to  me
in  the  Roade  of  Assab,  Master  Thorneton  bringing  me
my  Generalls  letter,  dated  the  five  and  twentieth  of
February,  therein  desiring  me  as  yet  to  forbeare  revenge
on  them  which  have  wronged  him :  also  informing  me  of
the  present  hopefull  estate  of  his  businesse,  also  that  five
dayes  after  the  date  hereof,  he  with  all  his  Company  are

235

A.h.

The  Road  on
the  Abaxin
Coast,  thir-
teen leagues
from  Moha.
February  1 7.
The  Road  of
Assab.

A.D.

l6lO.

March  1.
The  Towne.

u

The  Mahomet
ofDabull.

[I.  iii.  290.]

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

to  take  their  journey  downe  to  Moha,  willing  mee,  till  his
arrivall  at  Moha,  to  expect  no  more  letters  from  him  ;  also
giveth  me  knowledge  of  the  death  of  John  Baker,  one
of  my  Quarter  Masters,  and  Richard  Elmesmere,  one  of
the  Trades  Company.  To  this  my  Generals  letter,  for
want  of  conveyance,  I  wrote  no  answere.

The  first  of  March,  I  sent  the  Pinnasse  to  the  Towne,
and  in  her  the  Purser,  and  the  said  Alle,  who  in  their
going,  found  a  place  of  better  water  descending  from  the
mountaines,  by  reason  of  the  raines  within  the  land
(whereof  we  afterwards  filled  some  water ;  but  the  raines
once  ended  it  was  dried  up.)  They  having  bought  some
few  Goats  and  sheepe  returned ;  and  in  the  evening  we
descried  a  Boat  comming  over  from  Moha  to  us-ward.

The  second,  the  said  Boat  came  aboord  the  Trade,
bringing  me  a  letter  from  my  Generall,  wherein  he  gave
me  to  understand  of  the  cause  of  his  delay  of  his  journey,
partly  by  reason  of  a  great  solemne  feast  of  the  Turkes
approaching,  but  principally  to  have  the  Sabander  of  Moha
his  company,  for  the  more  safe  travell ;  also  wisheth  the
Carpenters  forbeare  to  proceed  any  further  in  building  the
Pinnasse,  for  that  the  Basha  intendeth  her  for  his  owne
use,  and  not  for  us ; also  willing  me  to  forbeare  revenge.

The  fifth,  I  sent  the  Darling  over  to  Moha,  to  expect
newes  from  my  Generall,  where  shee  found  in  the  Road
a  great  ship  of  Dabull,  called  the  Mahomet.  This  day
the  Generall  with  all  his  Company  arrived  at  Moha.

The  eleventh,  I  doubted  lest  any  evill  had  befallen  the
Darling,  by  reason  of  her  so  long  absence,  set  saile  with
the  Trade  and  Pepper-Corne,  standing  over  towards
Moha :  but  before  I  was  so  farre  off  as  Crab  Hand,  I  saw
the  Darling  comming  over,  and  for  that  the  wind  shortned
upon  us,  and  we  not  able  to  fetch  the  Road,  I  sent  Master
Thorneton  in  the  Pinnasse,  to  understand  what  newes,
but  I  in  the  Pepper-Corne  with  the  Trades-Increase,
returned  into  the  Road  againe  :  in  the  evening  Master
Pemberton  with  Master  Thorneton,  and  two  and  twentie
of  the  Trades  Company,  and  fourteene  of  the  Pepper-

236

NICHOLAS DOWXTON  a.u.

cornes  Company  betrayed  at  Moha  and  Aden,  came  over
the  point  of  the  Hand,  bringing  me  a  letter  from  my
general,  wherin  he  gave  me  to  understand  of  his  assured
hopes  of  inlargement,  so  soone  as  the  Indian  ships  of  this
yeere  were  all  come  in,  and  the  Westerly  winds  come.
Also  that  the  Turkes  had  seduced  the  aforesaid  Richard
Philips,  whom  in  his  journey  upwards  he  left  sicke  at  Ties,
him  by  threatning  they  had  forced  to  turne  Turke,  and
therefore  came  not  downe  to  Moha  with  him,  he  rejoyceth
to  heare  of  Master  Pembertons  safety,  also  informeth  me
that  none  of  the  letters  I  had  sent  him  were  delivered  to
him ;  also  desired  my  opinion,  whether  best  for  him  to
make  an  escape  aboord,  if  he  can,  or  to  remaine  at  the
Turkes  devotion ;  also  wisheth  that  the  Pepper-Corne
be  the  next  that  comes  to  Moha.

The  eighteenth,  I  with  the  Pepper-Corne  set  saile,
standing  over  to  Moha,  but  being  neare  over,  it  fell  calme,
and  a  lee-ward  tide,  whereby  I  was  forced  to  anchor  in
twentie  fathom  water,  on  a  banke  which  we  there  found
three  leagues  from  Moha  :  and  in  the  evening  there  came
off  a  Canoa  unto  me,  to  know  what  we  were,  deeming  me
to  be  an  Indian  ship,  for  that  by  reason  of  the  hazie
weather,  they  could  not  well  discerne  us.

The  nineteenth  in  the  morning,  I  set  saile,  the  wind  at
South  standing  into  the  Road,  whereas  yet  was  only  the
said  great  Dabul  man  :  but  before  I  came  to  an  anchor,  my
General  sent  his  man  aboord  me  with  a  letter,  that
frustrated  my  present  hopes,  wherein  he  gave  me  to  under-
stand that  he  must  be  forced  to  dispeed  me  away  very
suddenly,  for  that  my  presence  caused  feare  in  the  Dabul-
lians,  and  discontent  to  the  Aga.  Notwithstanding  this
my  Generalls  letter,  I  sent  George  Jeffe  in  the  Pinnasse
on  shoare,  by  whom  I  sent  two  letters,  the  one  briefely
to  give  to  understand  of  our  wants,  also  my  opinion  of
the  Turkes  performance,  who  through  custome  of  falsehood,
their  true  performance  is  not  to  be  expected,  but  only  to
feed  Sir  Henry  Middleton  with  faire  promises,  to  serve
their  owne  turnes  ;  and  then  we  having  no  matter  to  worke

237

A.D.
l6lO.

Sir  Henry
Middletons
letter  to  Cap-

taine  Dounton.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

upon,  save  the  emptie  ships,  which  the  Turkes  having
their  goods  on  land,  would  nothing  regard,  and  then  my
General  to  remaine  at  the  Turks  devotion,  whether  to  be
sent  aboord  according  to  the  Basha  his  inforced  agreement,
or  to  be  ransomed  at  their  pleasures,  or  sent  back  againe
to  Zenan,  and  so  to  Stambola.  The  other,  if  he  should
think  good  to  shew  the  Aga,  therin  making  shew,  that
so  long  as  he  was  detained  prisoner,  his  power  extended
not  to  command  us  that  were  free  &  at  liberty,  and  there-
fore could  not  keep  us  from  the  Road  of  Moha,  nor  in  any
other  thing  further  then  we  see  good  our  selves.  To
these  my  letters  the  General  writ  an  answer,  the  copy
wherof  followeth.

CAptaine  Dounton,  your  overmuch  care  may  worke
your  owne  harmes,  and  doe  me  and  my  company
no  good,  and  therefore  take  nothing  to  heart  more  then
is  cause,  for  I  have  had,  and  still  have  my  full  share
thereof :  and  whereas  you  alledge  you  are  loath  to  depart
this  Road  without  me,  I  am  more  loath  to  tarry  behind,
if  there  were  any  remedie :  I  made  a  forced  agreement
with  the  Basha  at  Zenan,  that  the  ships  should  absent
themselves  out  of  this  Roade,  till  all  the  Indian  ships
were  come  in,  and  then  at  the  first  comming  of  the
Westerly  winds,  both  I  and  all  my  Company  shall  be  set
free :  if  they  faile  to  performe  with  mee,  then  I  would
have  you  shew  your  endeavours ;  in  the  meane  time  you
must  have  patience,  as  well  as  my  selfe ;  I  would  be  loath
the  agreement  should  be  first  broken  on  our  side,  without
any  cause  given  by  them.  For  the  provision  that  should
have  been  sent  in  the  Jelba,  it  was  my  fault  it  was  not
sent,  in  that  I  did  not  urge  it  to  the  Aga.  After  your
departure  to  morrow,  as  I  desire  you  to  see  performed,
I  will  p-oe  in  hand  with  the  lading  of  the  goods  in  the
Jelba,  which  shall  not  bee  above  three  dayes  absent  from
you  :  I  have  promised  the  ships  shall  not  come  in  the
Roade  till  the  Westerly  winds  be  come,  which  will  be  a
moneth  hence  at  the  furthest,  in  the  meane  time  you  shall

238

NICHOLAS DOWNTON

.  i.
heare  from  me  by  Jelbas  or  Boats,  which  I  will  send  of
purpose  :  I  doubt  not  but  there  will  be  good  performance
made  with  me  by  the  Turkes,  in  that  my  agreement  was
made  with  the  Basha,  and  not  with  Regib  Aga.  If  I
doubted  any  new  stratageme,  I  would  have  attempted
to  have  escaped  away  before  this  time  :  I  have  had,  and
still  have  meanes  for  my  escape,  were  it  not  to  leave  my
people  in  danger  of  their  lives ;  doubt  not,  if  they  per-
forme  not  with  me,  when  the  Westerly  winds  come,  but  I
shall  have  good  opportunitie.  I  had  laid  a  plot  to  have
escaped,  if  I  could  have  perswaded  Master  Femell,  but  he
will  by  no  meanes  be  drawne  to  any  thing,  till  he  see
whether  the  Turkes  will  performe  or  no,  he  makes  no
doubt  but  to  be  sent  aboord  with  the  first  of  the  Westerly
winds,  when  you  shall  come  to  demaund  us ;  you  may
ride  in  your  quiet  road-stead  on  the  other  side,  with  all
your  ships,  till  God  send  us  that  long  wished  for  Westerly
wind,  unlesse  you  get  a  slatch  of  wind  to  carry  one  of
your  ships  to  the  Bab,  to  see  if  all  be  well  there,  and  so
returne  backe  to  you.  I  know  that  all  sorts  of  provisions
wastes  apace  in  all  the  ships,  which  God  sending  me  aboord,
I  hope  quickly  to  renew.

The  seven  and  twentieth,  according  to  my  Generalls
requests,  I  sent  the  Darling  over  to  Moha,  for  effecting
the  foresaid  businesse.

The  twentie  ninth  and  thirtieth,  the  Budwees  brought
downe  both  Goats  and  sheepe  to  sell.

The  first, second  and third of  Aprill, the Budwees  A  prill  \.
brought  downe  either  Bullockes,  Goates  or  sheepe,  to  sell
unto  us.

The  fourth,  the  Darling  returning  from  Moha,  but  the
wind  taking  her  short,  shee  was  forced  to  anchor  to  the
Northwards  or  lee-wards  of  the  Road,  till  the  wind  should
come  more  large.

The  sixt,  the  Darling  came  into  the  Roade  of  Assab, [I.  Hi.  291.]
and  anchored  neare  the  watering  place,  neare  the  Trade,
to  deliver  the  victuals  and  other  provisions,  which  had  been

239

A.D.
l6l  I.

Crane  Hand.

The  King  of
Raheta.

May.

Sir  Henry
Middleton
escapeth  with
Jifteene  more,
the  manner  you
have  in  his
owne  Journal! .

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

so  long  detained  by  the  Turkes,  and  also  brought  me  a
very  kind  letter  from  my  Generall.

The  seventh,  the  Darling  plied  up  to  an  Hand  neare
the  Pepper,  there  to  be  Carreind  (this  Hand  we  called
Crane-Hand,  for  that  on  it  we  killed  most  Cranes)  from
this  day  to  the  twelfth  day,  the  Darling  did  land  her  goods
and  victuals,  and  unrigged  their  shippes,  and  certaine  of
the  Trades  Company  were  gathering  of  Breming.

The  one  and  twentieth,  the  King  of  Raheta  sent  me  a
Present  (by  a  kinsman  of  his)  being  a  fat  Cow  and  a  Slave,
he  continued  aboord  the  Trades-Increase  all  night.

The  thirtieth,  the  Trades-Increase  was  heilded  and
trimmed  on  both  sides,  so  farre  as  conveniently  might
be  :  this  day  we  rilled  all  our  emptie  Caske  with  water,
being  nine  and  twentie  Tunnes,  the  water  being  faire.

The  fourth  and  fift  day  of  May,  wee  trimmed  all  our
Boats,  being  reasonable  faire  weather,  the  wind  at  South
South-east.  The  seventh  and  ninth  day,  the  Budwees
brought  downe  good  store  of  sheepe  and  Goates,  but
through  want  of  cloath,  we  bought  very  few,  onely  three
Bullocks,  which  we  gave  money  for.

The  eleventh,  my  Generall  made  his  most  happie  escape
aboord  the  Darling,  with  fifteene  more  of  his  Company.

The  twelfth,  my  Generall  sent  the  Pinnasse  over  from
Moha,  and  by  her  a  letter,  giving  me  knowledge  of  his
escape,  as  aforesaid ;  also  desiring  me,  upon  the  sight  of
this  letter,  to  repayre  over  to  Moha,  with  the  Trades-
Increase  and  Pepper-Corne ;  which  direction  I  presently
put  in  execution,  making  the  ships  in  readinesse  to  set
saile  :  but  before  my  comming,  hee  so  behaved  himselfe
in  the  Darling,  to  the  terrour  of  his  enemies  the  Turkes,
that  neither  Boat  from  the  shoare  durst  go  aboord  any  of
the  Indian  ships,  neither  from  the  ships  to  the  shore,
without  asking  his  leave,  and  making  knowne  their  busi-
nesses ;  so  that  now  Regib  Aga  of  Moha,  began  to  sing
a  new  song,  and  insinuate  with  Sir  Henry  Middleton  by
divers  messengers,  as  by  Nohuda  Mahumet  and  others
of  the  Generalls  best  friends  there,  with  Presents,  now

240

NICHOLAS DOWNTOX

161 1.

fearing  what  harmes  might  happen  unto  them,  in  recom-
pence  of  his  treachery  towards  him,  and  therefore  desired
to  have  peace  with  the  Generall :  for  Master  Femell,  before
his  returne  aboord,  in  more  especiall  favour,  was  by  the
Aga  invited  to  his  house,  whereto  he  was  urged,  and  there
too  soone  yeelded  to  eate  and  drinke  with  him  ;  whereupon
some  former  speeches  given  out  by  Master  Femell,  that
he  would  make  complaint  of  his  wrongs  in  Stambola,
which  now  he  remembring  at  his  departure,  with  a  smiling
countenance  told  him  they  might  meete  together  at  Stam-
bola. This  night  being  come  aboord  he  seemed  over-
joyed ;  but  three  dayes  after,  about  two  of  the  clocke  in
the  morning  he  ended  his  life,  as  we  all  thought,  by  poyson  ;
the  Chirurgions  opened  him,  and  this  was  their  conceit :
whereupon  the  Generall  embarged  all  his  ships.

The  nine  and  twentieth,  at  two  of  the  clocke  in  the
morning, as  aforesaid, Master Femell, Cape Merchant, Tfie  death  °f
died.  f"*T

t  c  nit  it

The  first  day  of  June  in  the  evening,  we  had  a  very  jme  \
strong  gust of  wind, being so hotte, that it was  able
to  take  away  our  breathes ; it  also  drave  the  sand  of  the
shore  in  such  sort,  we  could  scarce  looke  to  wind-ward.

The  second,  came  aboord  the  Admirall,  Alle  the  sonne
of  Portugall  parents,  being  a  Captaine,  turned  Turke,
who,  for  that  he  had  been  the  Generals  Trudgman,  or
Interpreter  at  Zenan,  and  so  had  some  acquaintance  with
him,  and  therefore  was  sent  downe  to  capitulate  with  him
of  a  Peace  :  he  informed  the  Generall  that  Master  Pember-
tons  said  Boy  was  alreadie  brought  downe  to  Moha,  and
promised  the  next  day  he  should  be  brought  aboord.  This
Alle  and  Taccacee  a  Bannean,  came  to  know  the  Generalls
demand,  which  was  an  hundred  thousand  Rialls  of  eight.

The  eight  in  the  morning,  the  Generall  sent  the  Darling
to  Beloule,  a  place  on  the  Abexin  Coast,  being  ten  leagues  Belou!e,a place
to  the  Northward  of  Assab,  to  fetch  water,  and  buy  some  on  the  ^ssa^
Goats  for  reliefe  of  our  men,  who  began  to  fall  sicke  of  a  Loast-
faint  disease ; the  best  remedie  for  which  as  we  found,
was  letting  blood,  and  purging  of  the  body ; this  disease
in  241  Q

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

161 1.

went  away  in  byles  and  scabbes,  and  this  disease  no  man
escaped  cleare  of.

The  nineteenth,  Shermall  Sabander  of  Moha,  accom-
panied with  many  of  the  chiefest  Merchants  of  the  Towne,
and  the  Alle  Haskie  and  Tacaccee  a  Bannian,  came  in
state  with  divers  sorts  of  musicke,  from  the  Aga  to  the
Generall  (aboord  the  Trades-Increase)  to  capitulate  of  the
fore-said  summe  by  him  demanded,  for  satisfaction  for  our
said  goods,  which  then,  in  regard  the  Generall,  and  all  we
saw  at  the  present  no  more  to  be  gotten,  and  that  which
should  be  agreed  upon,  to  come  out  of  the  said  Sabander
of  the  Bannians  our  friend  his  purse,  who  daily  relieved
our  men  in  their  misery  with  bread  and  other  sustenance,
not  so  much  as  our  dogge  but  also  had  daily  allowance
from  him ;  so  that  alwayes  his  presence  administred
comfort  to  our  distressed  people  :  therefore  it  was  con-
cluded, wee  to  receive  our  iron  and  lead  againe,  and  for
the  rest  of  our  goods  not  to  be  had  (wherein  was  concluded
all  Vests  and  other  presents  the  Generall  had  given)  the
summe  at  present  agreed  upon,  was  eighteene  thousand
Rials  of  eight,  and  for  that  at  present  they  had  not  money
to  defray  so  great  a  summe,  they  desired  the  Generall  to

[I.  Hi.  292.]  take  out  of  the  said  ship  of  Diu,  so  much  goods  as  he
should  esteeme  a  fit  pawne  for  so  great  a  summe  (which
they  would  daily  redeeme  as  they  could  raise  moneyes)  and
then  the  ship  to  goe  in  presently  to  land  and  make  sale  of
the  rest  of  her  goods :  the  utmost  time  limitted  for  the
last  payment,  was  fourteene  dayes. The  Sabander  brought

Richard  aboord  with  him,  according;  to  promise,  Master  Pembertons

Ptefpmb?rms  ^^  bein£  clad  in  aPPare11  of  the  English  fashion.

Boy,  restored.

242

NICHOLAS DOWNTON  a.d.

§. III.

Their  departure  from  Moha  to  Assab,  and  after
that,  higher  into  the  Red-sea,  thence  to  the
Socatora,  and  after  to  Surat.

He  third  of  July,  having  reasonably  provided  the  Juiy  3.
ships  with Rice  and  other  graine (for that our
English  provision  consumed  apace) the  Generall

with  all  three  ships  and  Pinnasse  set  saile,  and  standing
over  to  the  Bay  of  Assab,  there  by  getting  daily  refresh-
ing, to  recover  our  weake  faint  sicke  men  ;  where  we
arrived  the  fourth  day,  at  eleven  of  the  clocke  afore  noone.
The  fift,  sixt,  seventh,  eight  and  ninth  dayes,  the  Budwees
every  day  brought  downe  either  Bullocks,  sheepe,  or
Goats.

The  thirteenth,  we  made  an  end  of  watering.  The
King  of  Raheta  sent  the  Generall  three  fat  Bullockes  for  a
Present,  by  one  Abdella,  his  sisters  sonne,  the  Generall
very  kindly  entertained  him,  and  accepted  of  the  Kings
Present,  presenting  him  againe  with  a  Vest  of  Broad-
cloth ;  the  Generall  also  gave  the  King  heartie  thankes,
for  all  the  kindnesse  and  good  dealing  received  from  his
subjects,  at  this  his  Port.  The  said  Abdella  then  desired
the  Generall  to  come  with  his  ships  nearer  the  Bab,  being
by  their  report  a  good  harbour,  and  is  neare  the  Kings
Towne,  and  more  plentifull  of  refreshing,  where  he  might
better  shew  his  love  unto  the  Generall.  This  day  the
General  feasted  him  aboord  the  Trades-Increase,  and  in
the  evening  caused  a  banquet  of  sweet  meats  and  wine  to
be  prepared  on  shore  against  their  landing,  whereof  he
having  both  eaten  and  drunke,  very  thankfully  tooke
leave  of  the  Generall,  and  departed  to  the  King  againe.

The foure and twentieth, we set saile from Assab, Their  endevor
directing  our  course  towards  Cameran,  an  Hand  on  the *° ,e  a  rtch
Abaxin  Coast,  some  fortie  leagues  to  the  Northward  of  wBchctme*
Moha,  in  fifteene  degrees  North  latitude,  in  which  is  a  from  Sues.
Towne  and  fortresse,  to  which  place  they  thought  they

243

A.D.

161 1.

Two  Hands
called  Jubal
Succor,  and
Jubal  Arree.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

were  come  or  neare  comming  to  stay  for  directions,  by
reason  of  our  being  neare,  to  the  Northwards  it  is  seldome
seene  that  any  will  attempt  going,  while  the  Westerly
Monson  lasteth,  which  in  the  Red-sea  bloweth  most  all
Northerly,  till  the  last  of  July.  We  turned  up  all  day,
and  anchored  at  night,  in  which  we  were  pestered  with  a
dangerous  shoale,  to  which  wee  unawares  came  so  neare,
that  we  had  oftentimes  enough  to  doe  to  quit  our  selves
of  them,  when  we  had  little  more  water  then  we  needed :
this  continuing  two  dayes,  having  no  Pilot,  nor  other
meanes  (and  the  Currants  uncertaine)  readily  to  find  it :
And  the  weather  doubtfull,  being  in  uncertaine  places  to
ride  in  open  water,  if  the  weather  in  the  night  should
prove  adverse,  the  Generall  with  griefe  being  often  moved
to  give  over  the  businesse  of  seeking  the  Turkie  ship  of
Sues ;  himselfe  concluded  that  it  was  fit  for  him  to  pro-
vide for  the  safetie  of  his  owne  ships,  which  are  to  him
certaine,  then  with  too  much  hazard  to  pursue  things  un-
certaine, and  perchance  might  misse  finding  her  when  he
came  there  ;  so  wee  bore  up  with  the  Hand  of  Juball
Succor,  which  is  bigge  and  high,  and  another  great  Hand
to  the  Southwards  of  it,  being  also  high,  called  Juball
Arree ;  these  two  neighbour  Hands  are  invironed  with
divers  other  smaller  Hands  to  the  Southwards,  and  in
divers  places  ledges  of  sunken  rockes,  being  discerned
only  by  the  breaches  on  them  :  those  Hands  as  they  lye
South  and  North,  by  supposition  may  be  in  length  some
ten  leagues,  they  lye  North  North-west  from  Moha,
where  in  cleare  weather  they  may  plainly  be  seene,  which
happeneth  very  seldome  :  from  the  Wester  part  of  Juball
to  Beloula,  the  course  is  South-west  by  South  distant  some
twelve  leagues ;  little  wide  of  which  course  lyeth  two
sunken  rockes  knowne  by  the  breach,  they  are  neare
adjoyning  to  the  said  Hands  South  by  West :  from  the
Wester  part  of  Juball  Arree  are  two  Hands  and  a  Rocke ;
and  from  these  towards  the  Coast  of  Africa  South-west
lye  foure  other  small  flat  rockes,  lying  distant  from  the
former  some  foure  myles  and  an  halfe  :  there  is  no  danger

244

NICHOLAS DOWNTON  ad.

161 1.

in  going neare them, for  we found deepe water  close

aboord  the  South  Westermost  of  them,  being  the  nearest

to  the  Africke  Coast.

The  sixt  of  August,  at  foure  of  the  clocke  in  the  morn-  August  6.
ing,  we  set  saile  from  our  good  harbour  of  Assab,  and
before  sixe  at  night  we  anchored  in  the  Roade  of  Moha,
seeing  neare  the  Towne  wall  mored  and  unladen  the  said
Gallion  which  came  from  Sues,  which  we  had  gone  to
seeke  and  mist  us,  as  we  were  intangled  amongst  the
shoales,  and  was  come  into  Moha  five  dayes  before,  also
there  was  come  in  one  Gaily,  and  three  more  every  day
expected.

The  seventh,  the  Generall  went  in  with  the  Pepper-
Corne  and  Darling  (for  dispatch  of  his  businesse)  so  neare
as  the  ships  could  well  ride,  and  also,  if  need  required,  to
command  all  the  ships  in  the  Roade  :  and  about  ten  of  the
clocke,  our  old  friend  Taccacee  and  Sabrage,  the  Sabanders
man,  came  aboord  with  a  Present  from  Shermal  the  [I.  iii.  293.]
Sabander :  to  these  the  Generall  gave  notice  of  his  busi-
nesse, and  dispeeded  them  away.

The  tenth  about  eleven  of  the  clocke  before  noone,
wee  past  thorow  the  Easter  Channell  of  Bab-mandell,  Bab-mandel
finding  in  the  middest  nine  or  ten  fathom,  and  toward  s?~f
either  side,  seven,  six  or  five  fathom,  according  as  we
edged  in  or  off ;  the  Darling  and  Release  put  out  through
the  greater  or  South-wester  Channell,  which  may  be  some
foure  leagues  over,  all  seeming  very  cleare  of  danger,  the
Release  going  farre  by  the  shore,  on  the  South-west  side
of  the  Hand  of  Bab-mandell  in  twelve  fathom ;  the  Easter
Channell  is  not  above  a  mile  and  a  halfe  over.

The  eleventh  at  noone,  the  high  land  of  Aden  bore
North  North-west,  distant  some  eleven  leagues,  and  by
estimation  East  by  South  halfe  a  degree  some  sixe  and
thirtie  leagues.  Note  also  that  from  this  day  unto  the
end,  I  reckon  the  dayes  from  noone  to  noone,  for  that  by
every  daies  observation  of  latitude,  I  rectifie  my  traverse,
as  now  from  noone  the  eleventh  day,  to  noone  the  twelfth
day,  I  reckon  upon  the  twelfth  day  onely  in  my  discourses,

24s

sides.

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

161 1.

I  reckon  according  to  the  true  day,  as  from  midnight  to
midnight,  &c.

The  one  and  twentieth,  from  noone  to  six  at  night
East,  some  foure  leagues  before  Sun-rising,  we  descried
Mount  Fcelix,  bearing  East  by  North  eleven  leagues  dis-
tant (by  which  we  certainly  perceived  how  the  Currant
had  abused  us)  from  Tuesday  the  twentieth  day  after-
noone,  to  Munday  the  six  and  twentieth  day,  notwith-
standing some  while  of  the  land,  and  other  while  sea
turnes,  betweene  calmes  oftentimes  a  prettie  gale  continu-
ing sometime  foure,  sixe  or  seven  houres  together,  yet  by
reason  of  the  Currant  we  could  never  get  a  head ;  but  by
the  said  six  and  twentieth  day  in  the  morning,  we  were
fallen  to  the  Westward  some  foure  leagues,  the  six  and
twentieth  day  at  nine  of  the  clock  in  the  morning  (having
continued  under  a  steepe  high  whitish  cliffe  all  the  fore-
said time)  it  pleased  God  to  send  us  a  small  gale  of  wind
off  the  shore,  with  which  wee  came  off  North  North-east
into  the  Sea,  in  hope  there  to  finde  the  wind  more  pros-
perous.

The  seven  and  twentieth,  by  judgement  we  might
runne  East  North-east  fourteene  leagues.  This  day  at
foure  after-noone,  Mount  Fcelix  bore  South  by  East  some
nine  leagues  distant ;  this  Mount,  by  my  estimation,  may
Cape  de  bee  sixteene  leagues  Westward  of  Cape  Guardafui :  this
(juardajui  n[gfa  wnen  ft  was  calme,  as  also  when  the  wind  blew,
we  met  with  a  potching  sea,  which  well  informed  me,  that
we  grew  neare  the  length  of  the  Head-land,  and  began
to  bring  the  Southerne  sea  open  of  the  Cape,  or  the
point  of  the  land :  the  nine  and  twentieth  we  des-
cried Socatora.

Note  that  in  this  traverse  from  Aden  to  Socatora  is  no
certaintie,  by  reason  we  were  so  much  deluded  by  the  Cur-
rant, wherein  by  the  water  oftentimes  wee  seemed  to  get,
yet  by  the  Currant  we  lost,  or  were  driven  backe.

Now  having  effected  all  our  businesses,  as  watering  and
getting  some  ballast,  and  bought  all  the  Alloes  here  to  bee
had,  and  left  letters  of  advice  with  the  King  of  Socatora,

246

NICHOLAS DOWNTON  a.d.

161 1.

for  such  of  our  nation,  as  in  like  manner  might  come  to
Trade  in  the  Red-sea,  both  to  prevent  their  losse  of  time
and  further  trouble.

The  fourth  of  September,  at  two  in  the  after-noone,  we  September  4.
set  saile  from  the  Roade  of  Dellisha,  the  wind  presently
grew  calme,  so  that  we  did  little  good  all  the  night.

The  three  and  twentieth,  at  sixe  in  the  morning,  being
neare  the  end  of  an  ebbe,  we  set  saile  and  stood  away
North  and  North  North-east  two  howres,  some  two
leagues,  the  wind  at  South,  our  depths  from  ten  to  sixteene
fathom,  and  presently  as  against  a  wall,  seven,  sixe  and
five  fathoms.  About  eight  of  the  clocke,  we  had  sight
of  the  trees  of  India,  which  standeth  both  in  South  and
North  Swally,  which  bore  East  by  North  from  us  (by  a
meridian  Compasse  distant  six  leagues)  we  runne  in  East
North-east  and  North-east  by  East  with  the  floud,  still  rais-
ing the  land  to  the  Northward,  till  neere  two  of  the  clocke  ;
our  depths  uncertaine,  sometimes  more,  and  sometimes
lesse,  shunning  divers  suspicious  riplings,  keeping  betweene
eight  and  fifteene  fathom,  we  anchored  in  soft  Oze,  and
by  my  observation  it  floweth  East  North-east  one  quarter
North,  and  West  by  South  one  quarter  South  by  the
Moone,  and  by  this  time  the  floud  runneth  five  houres,
and  the  ebbe  seven  houres,  by  reason  of  the  Winter
freshes  by  the  aboundant  raines  are  not  yet  fully  expelled,
and  therefore  doth  overcome  or  shorten  the  floud-streames  ;
but  at  other  times,  though  the  Spring-streames  goe  al-
wayes  strong,  yet  the  floud  and  ebbe  are  equally  sixe
houres  a  piece.  In  the  Winter-streames,  which  is  June,
July  and  August,  my  conjecture  is  that  Cables  and  An-
chors, nor  Ships  bowes  can  be  made  of  force  to  resist  the
streames.  The  Coast  lyeth  heere  neare  North  and  South  ;
this  day  being  come  to  an  anchor,  my  Generall  sent  off  his
Pinnasse  to  fetch  a  Boat  which  sailed  neare  us,  who  came  d  boat  of
from  Surat,  and  was  bound  to  Goga,  loaden  with  Rice,  SuraL
who  informed  him  we  were  over-shot  Surat  a  great  way
toward  Cambaia,  and  that  we  must  returne  seven  or  eight
leagues,  if  wee  would  goe  to  the  Barre  of  Surat : this

247

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

161 1.

Boat  the  Generall  kept  with  him,  because  they  would  use
the  Master  of  her  for  a  Pilot.

The  foure  and  twentieth,  there  came  another  Boat  volun-
tarily aboord  the  Admirall,  and  also  continued  with  good
content  with  us  for  Pilots :  the  former  informed  the  Gene-
rall, that  there  were  staying  for  us  at  the  Barre  of  Surat,
fifteene  armed  Portugall  Frigats,  to  intercept  what  we
should  there  intend  ;  so  at  full  sea,  which  was  at  two  after-
[I.  iii.  294.]  noone,  we  set  saile  with  a  little  wind  at  South,  standing
off  West  into  the  deeper  Channell,  turning  downe  the  ebbe
while  daylight  would  permit,  and  then  anchored  in  foure
and  twentie  fathome  in  a  vehement  streame,  where  riding
till  morning  day-light,  when  the  ebbe  being  spent  and  we
not  able  to  weigh  our  anchors  till  the  tide  broake,  so  that
we  made  a  small  tides  worke ;  yet  this  five  and  twentieth
day  night  at  seven  of  the  clocke,  wee  anchored  some
league  short  of  the  Roade,  Southward  of  the  Barre,  where
we  saw  riding  at  anchor  three  Indian  ships.

The  six  and  twentieth  in  the  morning,  with  the  tide  of
floud  wee  set  saile,  standing  into  the  Roade,  where  we
anchored  by  the  said  three  ships  of  Surat,  which  were  in-
tended to  be  laden  for  to  goe  to  Sumatra,  but  partly  by
reason  of  our  approach,  and  partly  for  that  the  Portugals
would  come  to  no  reasonable  composition  with  them  for
their  Custome  and  Cartas  (or  Passe)  their  Voyage  was
given  over,  according  to  our  Pilots  former  information.
Eighteene  \Ve  here  found  eighteene  sayle  of  Portugall  Frigats,
say  es  oj 01- wnereof  sometime  more,  and  sometime  lesse,  according

tH.fr/il.thrio-nft.  .  '  .  1 1 •  1

as  they  see  occasion  appeared  in  our  view,  al  being  under
the  charge  or  conduct  of  Don  Francisco  de  Soto  Maior,
Captaine  Major  of  the  forces  of  Damon  and  Chaull,
accompanyed  also  with  the  Captaine  Major  and  forces  of
Diu  :  who  for  a  long  time  together  without  intermission,
so  pestred  the  streames  about  us,  that  none  could  neither
out  of  the  River,  nor  any  other  way  come  neere  us,  but
they  would  narrowly  search  and  see  that  they  had  neither
Letters  nor  other  provisions,  that  might  comfort  or  reliefe
our  necessities,  whereby  they  often  tooke  occasion  to  rob

24S

tugall  Frigats.

NICHOLAS DOWNTON  a..,.

16 1 1.

divers  of  sundry  things,  with  threatnings  that  they  were
bringing  them  unto  us  their  Enemies ;  and  therefore  con-
fiscated :  by  this  meanes  our  men  grew  to  great  weaknesse,
and  every  day  more  and  more  of  our  men  fell  downe  with
the  scurvie,  wanting  to  refresh  or  comfort  them  ;  at  last
by  our  Neighbours  the  ships  Boat  of  Surat,  we  received
a  lame  advice  from  one  Nicholas  Bangham,  left  by  the
Hector  to  attend  on  the  Merchants  there.  Yet  after
many  dayes,  was  gotten  from  him  (which  for  the  purpose
was  lying  by  him)  both  a  Letter  from  Captaine  Hawkins
remayning  in  Agra  (which  is  the  place  of  the  great  Mogul!
his  residence)  and  another  from  William  Finch  at  Lahor  nc.

which  was  going  home-wards  over  land  by  the  way  of returne  i„t0
Persia,  by  which  the  Generall  understood  the  little  hope  England  fa
they  conceived  of  any  good  for  our  Nation  in  this  Coun- the  way  of
trey people  without  faith. After  some time there  was  Penia-
knowledge given by the said Nicholas Bangham, that
Captaine Sharpeigh, John Jourdaine, and others were
every  day  expected  in  Surat,  being  comming  from  Agra
by  the  way  of  Cambaya,  which  gave  some  content  to  Sir
Henry  Middleton.

The  thirtieth,  by  the  Generals  direction,  I  with  the
Pepper-Corne,  Darling,  and  Release,  set  saile,  endevour-
ing  to  finde  the  passage  over  the  Barre  into  the  River  of
Surat :  but  partly  by  the  Portugals  diligent  attendance
to  cut  off  from  us  our  Boats  which  sounded  before  the
ships,  if  they  exceeded  the  command  of  our  Ordnance,
and  partly  the  uncertaine  and  dangerous  sudden  shoald-
ings  we  in  each  ship  found,  did  chiefly  frustrate  our  pre-
sent endevours.

[§•  nil.
249

A.D.

161 1.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

§.  mi.

Many  proud  affronts  of  the  Portugals. Disgusts
from  the  Indians.

alHe  first  of  October,  we  all  set  sayle  backe  againe
towards  the  Road,  where  our  Admirall  rid, but
the wind shortening upon us, and the tyde of
ebbe  growing  also  strong,  we  could  not  fetch  the  Road,
but  were  put  off  some  foure  miles  Westwards  of  theRoade,
wherefore  it  was  Wednesday  before  the  wind  and  tyde  so
much  favoured  us  as  to  get  into  the  Road. Sir  Henry
Middleton wrote unto the Portugall Captaine Major,
requiring  him  that  if  he  could  not  permit  him  to  Trade
here,  yet,  that  he  might  take  in  the  Merchants  and  others
his  Countrymen  which  were  heere  on  shoare  in  this  Coun-
trey,  and  then  hee  would  be  gone  from  this  place  ; but
Insolence  of  tne  Portugall  Captaines  answere  (to  this)  was  No,  for  hee
fortugah. ■SNCyu\c\  carrie  them  to  Goa,  and  from  thence,  they  should
be  sent  home ; also  it  seemed  that  John  Jourdaine,  had
beene  flattering  with  the  fathers  both  at  Agra  and  Cam-
baya,  and  had  obtayned  some  commendations  to  the  Vice-
Roy, or  request  or  hope  of  conduction into  Portugall,
knowing at present no better meanes to get into his
Countrey : by  which  Sir  Henry  Middleton  could  never
imagine  nor  expect  any  safetie  to  such  as  continue  firme
to  our  State  and  Countrey. And  neere  the  time  of  this
Letter  from Sir  Henry  Middleton, Captaine Sharpeigh
by  some  principall  Portugall  then  on  land  in  Surat,  made
motion either  by  Letter  or  otherwise, to the Captaine
Major  to  give  him  his  Segure  (or  safe  conduct)  for  his
safe  passage  aboard  the  English  ships ; whereupon the
Captaine  Major,  in  scoffe  wrote  unto  the  English  Cap-
taine and  his  Companions,  his  Segure  for  their  safe  com-
ming  aboard  his  Galliote,  without  addition  for  his  depar-
ture thence,  the  thing  which  he  required. And  further
to  shew  the  base  account  he  made  of  our  Nation,  added,
that  if  they  would  take  their  passage  along  with  him  to

250

NICHOLAS DOWNTOX

1 6 1 1.

Goa,  he  would  use  him  and  his  Company  with  as  much

favour,  as  he  would  doe to  Turkes, Moores, or  other

Nations  that  use  these  Seas ; and  all  other  Nations  (a  few

Persians excepted) are Jewes, Bannians, and Gentiles,

which  though  it  were  in  him  an  unpleasing  and  vile  speech, [I.  iii.  295.]

yet  I  like  well  his  plainenesse,  in  shewing  them  what  to

trust  to  before  (not  thinking  they  could  have  escaped  his

hands)  otherwise  it  is  likely,  that  some  of  them  would

have  beene  perswaded,  that  their  usage  should  have  beene

better  then  is  heere  promised.

Sir  Henry  Middleton  being  very  zealous  in  procuring
the  libertie  of  our  Countrymen,  though  both  by  Cap-
taine  Hawkins  and  William  Finch  his  Letters,  and  by  all
else  we  could  understand  of  the  Countrey,  all  hope  of
good  here  to  be  done  for  the  Company,  eyther  for  present
or  to  come  was  wholly  quenched ;  he  writ  to  have  them
come  by  land  and  meete  him  at  Dabull,  but  that  journey
was  thought  too  tedious,  and  by  reason  of  the  Warres  in
Decanie,  dangerous.  The  time  thus  lost  seemed  very
tedious ;  wherein  our  water  and  other  provisions  fast
wasted,  our  people  daily  for  want  of  comfortable  refresh-
ing, fell  generally  into  sicknesse,  which  made  our  estate
doubtfull,  not  knowing  where  or  by  what  meanes  to  get
refreshing,  we  being  so  garded  by  these  our  Enemies,
that  none  could  come  to  us,  neither  could  we  goe  from
our  ships  :  And  Captaine  Sharpeigh  made  provision  for
us  at  the  Towne,  though  without  hope  that  it  could
escape  the  Portugall,  who  lay  in  continuall  waite  for  it.
It  being  provided,  it  was  in  vaine  to  sell  it  againe,  but
order  being  given  to  send  it  howsoever,  it  was  immedi-
ately sent  towards  us.

The  eleventh,  Sir  Henry  Middleton,  much  disturbed
in  minde  at  our  present  doubtfull  estate,  and  our  great
losse  of  time,  and  that  to  so  little  purpose,  and  therefore
leaving  the  Trades  Increase  in  the  mayne  Road,  he  with
the  Pepper-Corne,  and  Darling,  and  Release,  put  in  prac-
tice to  discover  alongst  the  Coast  to  the  North-ward,  to
find  out  some  place  where  our  shippes  might  safely  ride

251

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

161 1.

so  neere  the  shoare,  as  to  command  the  place  of  landing,
and  frustrate  the  Portugalls  attempts  for  taking  our  Boates
and  people  :  but  the  day  neere  spent,  wee  anchored  neere
the  North  point,  thwart  of  the  barre  at  the  enterance  of
the  River  of  Surat. This  day  Allonso  Gransillio  dyed.

The  twelfth,  early  in  the  morning,  the  Portugalls  tooke
the  Boate  which  was  comming  towards  us  with  our  pro-
Ungracious  visions :  in  scoffe  the  Captaine  Major  presently  sent
gratitude,  thankes  to  Captaine  Sharpeigh,  for  his  care  of  him  in
sending  him  victuals  for  his  supply.  This  said  morning
at  the  first  of  the  floud  we  set  sayle  standing  with  the
point  to  the  Northwards,  and  by  reason  of  the  quicknesse
of  the  streame,  and  our  suspition  in  this  unknowne  place,
wee  ever  put  that  shippe  smallest  of  draft  headmost,  and
before  the  smallest  we  sent  our  rowing  Boates,  making
no  more  haste  with  our  Sayles,  then  that  our  Boates  might
keepe  head  with  their  Oares.  And  yet  farther  to  pre-
vent what  perill  by  these  strong  Tydes  might  happen,  wee
had  our  Anchors  alwayes  in  readinesse  to  let  drop  whenso-
ever by  their  signes  ahead,  wee  should  understand  of  any
sudden  shoalding-.  The  Armie  of  the  Portugals  likewise
weighed  and  followed  keeping  a  brest  betweene  the
Pepper-Corne  and  the  shore,  they  all  rowing  in  order
of  Battell  with  their  Colours  displayed,  oftentimes  making
great  shoutes  as  in  some  great  attempt ;  the  Captaine
Major  in  a  small  Frigat,  going  from  Frigat  to  Frigat
throughout  his  Fleet  incouraging  them,  at  length  the
Darlings  Boat  a  good  distance  of  betweene  the  ship  &
the  land,  by  occasion  of  a  suspicious  ripling  &  where  shee
was  sounding,  presently  by  the  Captaine  Majors  direc-
tion one  of  their  smaller  swiftest  Frigats  (being  over-
bold through  our  long  sufferance)  rew  forth  with  great
swiftnesse  to  cut  off  from  us  the  Darlings  Boat,  being
seconded  by  another  of  the  same  kind.  The  Master  of
the  Darling  seeing  his  Boat  and  men  in  such  danger,
could  no  longer  forebeare,  but  for  her  rescue  he  began  to
shoot  at  them,  the  former  Frigat  gat  cleere  ahead.  But
the  second  seeing  our  shoote  flye  so  fast  at  her  with  feare

252

NICHOLAS DOWNTON  a.„

i 6 i  i.

put  on  shoare,  the  men  abandoning  her  ranne  away  in

the  mudde ; the  Armie  now  comming  up  for  her  rescue

perceiving  our  shot  came  amongst  them  so  fast  shoved  a

sterne  leaving  that  Frigat  to  our  devotion  wee  perceiving

them  so  to  leave  her,  and  for  that  she  was  fit  to  serve  our

turnes,  bestowed  the  fetching  of  her. In  this  Frigat  wee  ^  Portugal!

found  some  small  quantity  of  Indico,  Cinamon,  Comin- rtgat

seed,  Cotton  Yarne,  Mirabolans  (dry  for  Phisick)  &  one

small  ballet  of  Candekins  mill,  &  very  course,  all  of  smal

value,  these  things  had  the  Portugals  lately  taken  from  a

poore  Bannian. By  this  occasion  we  anchored here in

seven  fathome  water,  thwart  of  the  North  point  in  the

mouth  of  the  River  of  Surat,  within  Musket  shot  of  the

shoare  at  low  water,  here  wee  rid  till  the  next  day.

The  thirteenth,  in  the  morning  we  weighed  and  stood
somewhat  neerer  into  the  shorewards,  and  anchored  in
sixe  fathome,  presently  we  descryed  divers  men  on  land,
wherefore  the  Generall  sent  Master  Jeffe,  and  Matthew
Bragge  ashore  with  a  Flagge  of  Truce  :  but  they  being
Portugals,  and  perceiving  them  landed,  retyred  flourishing
their  Swords  as  though  they  had  atchieved  some  worthy
exploit :  this  day  about  nine  a  clocke  in  the  fore-noone,
the  Generall  sent  a  way  the  Darling  into  the  maine  Road,
where  the  Trades  Increase  rid,  she  made  no  stay  there,  but
presently  againe  returned  bringing  with  her  one  of  the
Indian  ship  Boates,  and  seventeene  of  their  men  whom
the  Generall  at  times  sent  away  with  Letters  to  the  Towne
to  Captaine  Sharpeigh  whom  before  their  going  the  Gene-
rall royally  rewarded,  also  promising  them  better  satisfac-
tion at  their  returne :  five  of  them  were  this  evening-  sent
away  with  Letters,  who  promised  to  returne  againe  to  us
with  Letters,  but  according  to  their  accustomed  practice
of  lying  and  deceit,  they  onely  spake  to  give  present  con-
tent and  meant  the  contrary,  so  that  there  is  no  hold  in
their  words.  This  day  there  came  somwhat  neer  us  a
great  Indian  Boat  laden  with  Paddy,  the  General  made
stay  of  her,  and  for  our  present  supply,  bought  of  her  [I.  Hi.  296.]
one  Candie,  &  sixe  Maunds  of  Paddy,  which  the  next

253

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1 6 1 1.

day  we  tooke  into  the  Pepper-corne,  and  they  having
satisfaction  to  their  content,  being  dismissed,  departed.

The  sixteenth,  we  seeing  two  Frigats  riding  a  good
distance  to  the  North-ward  of  us,  which  the  Generall  had
a  desire  to  see  what  they  were,  and  to  know  the  cause  of
their  riding  there  :  which  being  Portugals,  and  seeing  us
rowing  alongst  the  coast  towards  them,  they  set  saile,
standing  awhile  alongst  the  coast,  and  then  to  the  Offing ;
but  finding  our  selves  further  and  further  a  sterne  gave
them  over,  and  stood  in  with  the  River,  and  point  of
South  Swally ;  we  landed,  determining  with  our  net  to
fish,  but  the  depth  of  the  water  not  serving,  the  General
was  going  up  the  River  in  his  Galliot  to  fish,  at  which
instant  there  came  a  good  gale  of  wind  off  the  sea,  wher-
with  againe  came  in  the  two  former  Frigats,  accompanied
with  two  other  Frigats,  newly  come  from  the  bar-foot  of
Surat.  In  which  was  the  late  Captaine  of  our  little
Frigats ;  who  lately  hazarded  his  life  by  running  away
in  the  deep  mud,  supposed  now  by  worthy  valour  to
recover  her  againe,  (as  soon  after  we  were  informed)  to
whose  attempt  the  wind  was  as  favourable,  as  adverse  to
us,  who  had  farre  to  row  to  wind-ward  over  a  broad  shoale,
whereon  we  alwaies  had  between  three  and  foure  foot
water ;  but  we  somewhat  gotten  off  to  set  saile,  and  the
Release  not  farre  off  to  second  us  :  and  contrary  to  their
expectations,  in  stead  of  flying  see  all  our  endeavours  bent
to  hasten  the  meeting  with  them,  and  seeing  our  Musket
shot  fell  but  little  short  of  them,  which  immediately  was
like  to  reach  them :  but  as  seemed,  their  former  resolu-
tion found  some  contradict,  for  they  all  at  once  exchanged
their  steerne  for  their  prowes,  giving  us  some  wast  base
shot  in  their  running  away ;  we  pursued  long,  since  we
lost  not  much,  we  were  ever  in  hope  to  get  ground  of
them,  but  the  wind  increasing,  and  what  betweene  our
people  tired  at  the  oare,  and  our  too  small  saile  to  our
little  Frigat,  put  them  cleane  from  us,  and  so  we  returned
to  the  Pepper-corne,  leaving  the  Darling.

The  twentieth  in  the  morning,  Thomas  Glemham  in

254

NICHOLAS DOWNTON

i6  ii

the  Pinnasse  went  on  shoare  to  attend  the  comming  downe
of  any  of  the  Countrey  people,  either  with  messages  or
provisions  to  sell,  all  giving  direction,  if  any  came  to  give
him  knowledge  by  shooting  off  three  Muskets  together,
that  the  Generall  in  the  Frigat  would  then  goe  on  shoare
the  Pinnasse  comming  on  shoare,  one  man  onely  for  a
Centinell  went  on  shoare,  who  no  sooner  came  to  the
top  of  a  small  hill  neere  the  water-side,  but  presently
seeing  a  troupe  of  Portugals  rush  out  of  their  ambush
towards  them,  retyred  to  the  Pinnasse,  who  rowed  a  little
from  the  shoare  and  anchored ;  the  Portugals  comming
to  the  water-side,  discharged  their  smal  shot  at  our  Pin-
nasse, who  so  well  repayd  them  with  their  Muskets,  that
presently  they  ran  away,  soone  after  they  saw  one  of  the
Inhabitants  on  Horse-back,  whose  comming  down  (as
they  suppose)  the  present  sight  of  the  Portugals  hindered,
and  therefore  shot  off  three  Muskets  together,  which  the
Generals  hearing,  presently  went  on  the  shoare  with  the
Frigat,  but  contrary  to  our  expectation  the  said  Indian
came  not  downe  to  them,  neither  any  Message  nor  Letter,
neither  from  the  General  nor  Captaine  Sharpeigh.  In  the
evening  some  of  the  poore  Inhabitants  brought  downe
some  few  fruits  to  sel,  which  the  General  caused  to  be
bought,  and  as  our  men  repayred  to  the  Frigat  to  come
aboord,  there  came  downe  unto  them  three  men  out  of
the  Portugall  Armie,  who  for  some  disgust  there  given
them,  fled  to  us  for  succour,  the  one  of  them  a  Dutchman
borne  in  Lisbone,  called  Lorenzo  de  Campo,  the  other  two
were  Portugals,  the  principall  of  them  called  Frances
Consalves.

The  one  and  twentieth  in  the  morning,  the  Generall  in
the  Frigat  went  on  shoare,  where  hee  no  sooner  landed,
but  presently  an  Indian  brought  him  a  Letter  from
Captaine  Sharpeigh,  certifying  Sir  Henry  Middleton
•that  the  next  day  he  would  come  downe  with  all  his
goods  guarded  by  an  hundred  Horsemen ;  this  day
a  Mallabar  Boy  called  Antonio,  who  had  beene  five
or sixe yeares Captive to a Portugall Souldier in

255

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

161 1.

this Armie, now finding good oportunitie to his
desire,  fled  unto  us  for  succour.

The  two  and  twentieth,  early  in  the  morning,  the  Gene-
rail  went  on  shoare  in  the  Frigat,  attended  by  the  Release,
to  expect  the  comming  downe  of  Captaine  Sharpeigh,
according  to  his  information  in  his  Letter  :  now  approach-
ing neere  the  shoare,  the  Frigat  anchored,  and  presently
landed  thirty  men  with  small  shot,  the  Generall  appointing
one  of  them  for  Centinell,  to  stay  on  the  top  of  a  small
hill  neere  the  water  side  ;  the  rest  also  to  be  neere  the
water  side,  for  the  better  avoiding  any  sudden  attempt,
but  all  to  looke  about,  to  see  if  they  could  discover  any
bodie  comming  downe  from  Surat-wards  :  the  Centinell
in  short  time  saw  two  Bannians  comming  from  the  North-
wards,  whereof  he  instantly  gave  knowledge  :  these  Ban-
nians brought  downe  some  Tobacco,  and  other  trifling
things  to  sell ;  they  beeing  come  aboord  the  Frigat,  certi-
fied the  Generall  that  the  last  night  five  Englishmen  came
from  Surat,  to  a  village  some  foure  miles  from  this  place ;
and  that  this  morning  they  came  from  them,  and  that  this
afternoone  they  would  come  downe  to  us,  presently  there
sallied  out  of  a  valley  betweene  two  hils  on  a  sudden,
Three  hun-  seven  troopes  of  Portugals,  with  their  colours  displayed,
dred Portugal;  whom  our  men  seeing  made  a  stand,  the  Portugals  also
made  a  stand,  as  having  no  list  to  come  within  the  reach
of  our  shot,  although  there  were  neere  three  hundred  of
them.  The  Generall  commanded  our  men  to  retire,  and
to  imbarque  themselves  :  which  being  done  accordingly,
the  Portugals  then  made  pursuit  after  them,  and  with  five
or  sixe  Basses  (by  them  brought  for  that  purpose)  and
[I.  iii.  297.]  other  small  shot,  they  began  to  shoot  at  our  Boates  and
men,  but  did  them  no  harme,  who  failed  not  to  answer
them  againe  with  the  like,  whereby  (as  afterwards  wee
were  informed)  they  went  away  with  the  worst.  Now
after  longer  stay,  and  our  people  not  comming  according
to  our  expectation,  the  Generall  returned  aboord  the
Pepper-corne,  determining  this  afternoon  with  the  ebbe
to  be  gone  from  this  place  to  the  Trades-increase ; but

256

assault  our
men

NICHOLAS DOWNTON  a.d.

i 6 1 1.

as  we  were  setting  saile,  a  company  of  men  were  descried
commi ng  from  the  North-ward,  wherefore  we  againe  an-
chored,  and the  General went on shore in the Frigat,
where  presently  came  downe  to  them  three  of  our  Coun- Gertame
try-men, of the Ascensions company, to wit, Thomas n&u ,me".

j  '  i j  '  '  come  aboord.

Musgrave,  Bartholmew  Davis,  and  William  Morgan,  who
with them brought Captain Sharpeigh, and John Jor-
daines  cloaths  and  provisions. On  Thursday  came  downe
to  them  Captaine  Sharpeigh,  with  an  hundred  horsemen ^taine,
for  his  guard, all armed  with Bowes and arrowes and  com^"tf
Swords :  with  him  came  aboord  Jaddow,  the  Broaker,  and  aboord.
a  Braman  (or  Bannian  Priest)  and  an  other  Indian,  Cap-
taine Sharpeigh  his  servant.

The  five  and  twentieth,  Sir  Henry  Middleton  in  the  0ur  Genera//
Frigat,  went  on  shore  (accompanied  by  Captaine  Sharpeigh,  ^°e
and  John  Jordaine)  where  Coja  Nassan  at  the  water  side
promised  to  meete  him,  who  was  there  in  readinesse  accord-
ing to  his  promise.  The  Frigat  comming  to  the  water
side,  the  Generall  was  fetcht  on  shore  on  a  Pallankin,  borne
on  foure  mens  shoulders,  and  there  kindly  entertained
by  Coja  Nassan,  and  according  to  the  Countrey  fashion,  a
Carpet  was  spread  whereon  they  sate  to  conferre  of  our
present  businesse.  It  was  by  them  in  a  manner  concluded,
our  ships  to  goe  to  Goga,  a  place  on  the  Wester  side  of  the
Gulfe  sreerer  to  Cambaya,  and  to  have  Pilots  from  the
shore  or  our  more  safe  conduct ;  but  a  sudden  (and  at
ti.'s  t-me  of  the  yeere  unusuall)  showre  of  raine  happening,
they  brake  up  their  conference,  promising  the  next  day
there  to  meet  againe,  fully  to  determine  of  our  said
businesse.

The  sixe  and  twentieth,  according  to  mutuall  promise,
the  Generall  in  manner  aforesaid  went  on  shore  in  the
Frigat,  who  anchoring  neere  the  shore  side,  Coja  Nassan  in
one  of  our  boats  sent  off  Jaddow  with  a  Present  of  tenne
fine  Bastas,  and  fiftie  Bushels  of  Wheate  to  the  Generall,
and  two  Pilots  for  our  safe  conduct  to  Goga  :  the  Generall
very  kindly  accepted  thereof,  and  with  the  Pinnasse  went
to  the  shore  side,  where  on  a  Pallankin  in  manner  aforesaid,
in  257  R

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1611.

hee  was  received  and  entertained  on  shore,  where  they
proceeded  on  their  former  conference ;  but  the  Pilots
having  discovered  the  manner  of  the  place,  whose  unfit-
nesse  gave  no  content,  and  therefore  their  determination
therein  soone  altered,  and  it  was  concluded  and  agreed
upon,  that  our  ships  should  for  the  space  of  sixe  dayes  be
gone  off  to  Sea,  which  the  Portugals  perceiving,  they
suppose  would  also  be  gone,  and  then  we  againe  to  returne,
and  suddenly  to  dispatch  our  businesse.  This  Evening  we
set  saile,  standing  to  the  South-wards  to  the  Trades-
increase,  but  the  wind  shortned  upon  us,  so  that  we
anchored  some  mile  West-ward  of  the  roade.  This  day
in  the  morning,  Thomas  Lane  died.
October.  The  seven  and  twentieth  in  the  morning,  the  Generall
departed  aboord  the  Trades-increase,  and  soone  after  sent
his  Pinnasse  for  Captaine  Sharpeigh  and  my  selfe,  to
conferre  about  our  present  businesse,  (also  he  sent  men
to  fetch  away  the  Frigat  and  Portugals  from  the  Pepper-
corne  : )  after  a  Counsell  held,  the  Generall  sent  a  letter  to
Don  Francisco  de  Soto,  Captaine  Major  of  the  Portugall
army,  therein  repeating  the  manifold  discurtesies  by  him
shewed  towards  us :  First,  not  onely  hindering  our  land-
ing, but  also  the  passage  of  our  letters,  kept  us  from  all
reliefe  for  our  sicke  men  ;  and  what  at  great  charge  was
provided,  he  had  taken  from  us,  and  kept  us  from  our
people  on  shore,  which  if  we  could  have  gotten,  we  had
been  gone  long  since  :  and  also  his  endeavours  the  twelfth
of  this  Moneth,  to  cut  from  us  our  boats  sounding  a  head
our  ships,  what  time  we  tooke  one  of  their  Frigats,  which
we  now  having  done  our  businesse,  if  hee  would  send
for  her,  we  would  freely  bestow  her  on  him  againe.  Also
the  Generall  released  the  Indian  shippes,  whom  for  con-
veiance  of  letters  betweene  Captaine  Sharpeigh  and  him,
he  restrained  from  o-oinor  into  the  River,  who  now  being
dismist,  they  presently  departed  towards  Surat :  also  wee
made  ready  our  ships  to  be  gone  off  to  Sea.

The  nine  and  twentieth,  we  set  saile  to  sea-wards,  the
Portugall  Frigats  still  following  us  in  their  accustomed

258

NICHOLAS DOWNTON

A.D.
l6l  I  ,

manner.

This  day  we  met  with  a  boat  bound  to  Cambaya,
laden  with  Coco  nuts,  of  whom  the  Generall  bought  seven-
teene  thousand,  which  he  distributed  amongst  our  people,
and  the  Indian  boat  was  presently  dismist :  this  day  was
M.  MulJenex  the  second  time  put  into  the  Pepper-corne.
The  one  and  thirtieth,  S.  Henry  Middleton  seeing  that  the
Portugals  still  followed  us,  determined  to  stand  off  no
further,  but  againe  to  returne  to  doe  our  businesse  so  farre
as  conveniently  we  could,  in  despite  of  them.

The  first  of  November,  according  to  the  Generals  November.  1.
predetermination,  we  returned  to  the  North-wards  as  the
winds  and  tides  permitted.  Saterday  in  the  morning,  we
anchored  thwart  of  South  Swally,  where  the  General  in
the  Frigat  went  on  shore,  but  heard  no  news  from  Surat.
This  night  the  Portugals  in  the  river  shot  off  divers  peeces,
which  they  told  the  Indians  was  for  joy  they  had  received
tidings  of  the  comming  of  two  great  Gallies,  and  twentie
Frigats  more  for  their  assistance,  whereby  they  abused
themselves,  in  thinking  with  their  lyes  to  terrifie  us,  who
were  now  armed  to  withstand  all  their  villainous  practises,
usurping  authority  in  an  other  Kings  Dominion,  where
they  have  no  more  to  doe  then  in  Denmarke.

The  fifth,  Sir  Henry  Middleton  sent  William  Pemberton  [I.  iii.  298.]
Master  of  the  Darling  (in  whose  endeavours  he  had  firme
confidence)  with  his  ship  the  Release  and  Frigat  againe,
to  discover  to  the  North-wards  as  afore-said ;  who  there
found  a  bard  place,  wherein  not  onely  our  smaller  ships
might  at  high  water  goe,  but  also  the  Trades-increase,
being  a  little  lightned,  might  also  goe  safely  over  the
Barre,  and  there  ride  within  Caliever  shot  of  the  shoare.

The  sixth  in  the  morning,  with  the  first  of  the  floud,
we  all  set  saile,  standing  to  the  North-wards,  and  anchored
thwart  of  the  place  discovered :  at  high  water  wee  with
the  Pepper-corne,  Darling  and  Release,  went  in  over  the
Barre,  whereon  the  least  depth  wee  found  was  three  fathome
and  a  foote,  but  at  low  water  three  foot.  Beeing  in,  we
all  anchored  within  Caliever  shot  of  the  shoare,  as  afore-
said in  eight  fathome,  and  right  a  head  or  to  the  North-

259

An  excellent
roade  found.

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

161 1.

ward  of  us,  anchored  twelve  Portugall  Frigats,  somewhat
without  the  reach  of  our  Ordnance.  This  afternoone  the
Generall  and  my  selfe,  with  a  guard  of  fortie  small  shot,
went  on  shoare  to  seeke  out  some  place  where  we  might
relieve  our  wants  of  fresh  water :  in  the  salt  marshes  we
found  a  place  of  brakish  water,  whereof  till  better  could
be  gotten,  we  were  forced  to  make  use.  Here  the  Inhabi-
tants brought  downe  to  sell  five  or  sixe  goats  and  sheepe.
and  some  fruits,  which  for  reliefe  of  our  out-tired  weake
people  were  all  bought.

The  seventh,  we  filled  some  water,  bought  some  small
provisions  as  the  people  brought  down :  we  haled  the
Release  a  ground,  in  hope  to  stop  her  leaks,  beeing  as  it
were  in  a  manner  devoured  with  wormes,  for  the  safetie
of  her  and  her  people  :  we  erected  a  Tent,  in  which  I
continued,  keeping  a  Court  of  Guard  and  Centinels  aboard,
to  prevent  the  practise  of  the  Portugals  our  enemies  to
prejudice  us.  The  eighth,  all  our  Carpenters  used  their
best  endeavours  to  trie  the  stopping  of  the  Pinnasse  her
leaks :  this  day  Nicholas  Bangham  came  downe,  bringing
provisions  such  as  by  the  Generals  directions  he  had  pro-
vided, as  Limes  for  our  diseased  people,  bread,  lamp-oyle,
Nezvesofmore  ancJ  candles,  and  his  owne  provisions.  This  evening,  some
Portugals.  Qf  our  inhabiting  neighbours  of  the  neerest  Villages,
informed  the  Generall,  that  in  the  River  was  arrived  two
Gallies,  and  eightie  Frigats :  upon  which  newes  the
Generall  altered  his  determination,  and  for  the  better
securitie  thought  good  to  bring  all  our  forces  together,  the
better  to  frustrate  any  practises  that  might  be  intended
against  us  ;  wherefore  at  his  first  departure  aboord  his  ship,
which  rid  in  the  Offing,  gave  me  directions  to  guard  the
said  Barke  upon  the  shoare,  and  as  soon  as  the  tide  served,
to  heave  her  a  float  by  my  ship,  or  the  Darling,  which
about  midnight  was  performed ;  when  presently  we  set
saile  over  the  Barre,  and  rid  by  the  Admirall.

The  ninth  in  the  morning,  Coja  Nassan  came  downe,
the  Generall  beeing  then  on  shoare ;  hee  certified  the
Generall,  that  so  soone  as  all  our  ships  were  come  into

260

NICHOLAS DOWNTOX  a.d.

161 1

the  roade,  hee  would  bring  downe  goods  and  trade  with

us ; in  the  meane  time  a  Market  should  be  kept  upon

the  sea  strand,  of  all  necessary  provisions; also  informed

the  Generall,  that  the  Frigats  last  come  into  the  River,

was  a  Caphala  or  fleete  or  Portugal! Merchant Frigats,

bound  to  Cambaya : at  his  departure  Nicholas  Bangham

went  up  to  Surat  with  him.

The  twelfth,  beeing  in  the  road,  we  had  a  Market  there  A  Market  at
kept  upon  the  strand  of  divers  sorts  of  provisions,  to  wit,  ™e  ™ad  °J
Meale,  Bread,  Bullocks,  Goats,  Sheepe,  Hennes,  Butter
and  Cheese,  Sugar  and  Sugar-Candie,  Limes,  Plantans,
Water- Mellons,  Goards,  Onions,  Radishes,  Pallingenies,
Cucumbers,  Milke,  a  kind  of  Peascod  which  they  call
Paupery,  and  Gindus,  a  small  fruit  as  big  as  a  little  Crab,
beeing  in  taste  betweene  sweet  and  sowre,  and  in  the  midst
thereof  hath  a  small  round  stone,  Sugar-canes,  and
Tobacco,  also  Salt-fish  dryed,  and  Praunes,  and  Palmita
wine,  which  they  call  Taddy.  All  these  afore-named
things  were  at  reasonable  cheape  rates.

The  one  and  twentieth,  my  Centinell  upon  the  Mount,
saw  over  the  top  of  an  other  hill  neere  adjoyning,  the
heads  of  some  of  the  Portugals,  who  there  lay  in  ambush
to  the  number  of  five  hundred  men  :  he  had  no  sooner
given  the  Alarum,  but  presently  they  seeing  themselves
discovered,  they  all  with  their  colours  advanced,  with  -A s£Conei
great  celeritie  ranne  downe,  to  cut  off  our  people  from  the  a"ault  °fthc
Boat ;  but  having  a  little  tasted  of  our  shot,  both  out  of
great  and  small  Peeces,  and  seeing  some  of  their  fellowes
tumbling  in  the  mud,  they  made  as  great  hast  backe  out
of  the  reach  of  them :  divers  of  them  that  fell  downe,
afterwards  came  to  themselves,  and  made  means  to  crawle
away,  onely  Antonio  de  Sowso,  a  Gentleman  of  Chaul,
having  a  deadly  wound  in  the  head,  lay  still.  We  seeing
the  neglect  of  compassion  by  his  friends,  in  commiseration
fetcht  him  aboord  ;  whose  wound  beeing  incurable,  he
died  within  two  houres  after,  and  we  buried  him  on  the
shoare.  Sir  Henry  Middleton  in  his  ship  in  the  offing,
hearing  our  peeces,  and  doubting  of  some  disgust,  hastned

261

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

161 1.

with  his  Frigat  full  of  people  unto  us,  yet  notwithstanding
we  gave  the  enemie  leave  to  take  his  pleasure  on  the
shoare,  without  landing  to  trie  any  further  fortunes  with
them  :  going  on  shoare  we  found  divers  of  their  reliques,
as  shooes  and  socks,  which  for  their  more  expedition  away,
they  left  behind  :  afterwards  we  were  informed  by  the
Muccadam  or  Constable  of  Swally,  that  the  Portugals  had
kild  and  hurt  in  this  attempt,  eight  of  their  people.
The  arrival!  of  The  foure  and  twentieth  afternoone,  came  downe  Mucrib
tkrG  ■  M  Chan,  with  one  hundred  horsemen,  and  many  more  foot-
ofCambaya.  men,  five  Elephants,  with  divers  Camels,  Carts  and  Oxen,
for  transportation  of  his  provisions,  wherein  he  shewed  his
greatnesse.  Furthermore,  he  had  divers  Carts  to  carrie  his
Leopards,  wherewith  at  his  pleasure  he  useth  to  hunt.
[I.  iii.  299.]  Hee  was  there  met  by  Sir  Henry  Middleton,  at  whose
landing  was  discharged  a  Volley  of  an  hundred  and  three-
score small  shot,  and  at  the  instant  of  their  salutation  each
ship  in  order  shot,  to  wit,  the  Darling  three,  the  Pepper-
corne  five,  and  the  Trades-increase  nine  peeces  of
Ordnance,  then  was  delivered  unto  him  the  King  of
Englands  Letter  and  Present  unto  himselfe,  whereof  with
all  shewes  of  kindnesse  he  accepted  :  and  Macrib  Chan
with  sixteene  Moguls  and  Moores,  such  as  he  made  choice
of  (leaving  the  rest  of  his  followers  a  shoare  with  Hoja
Nassan,  and  Coja  Arsan  Alle,  and  other  Merchants,  where
was  erected  as  it  were  a  little  Towne  of  tents)  boldly
Macrib  Chan  accompanied  S.  Henrie  Middleton  aboord  the  Trades
e*™e*  00J  Increase,  where  in  the  best  manner  the  ship  affoorded,  he
Increase.  was  entertained,  and  continued  all  night,  and  part  of  the
next  day.  Sir  Henry  Middleton  often  urged  him  con-
cerning our  maine  businesse,  which  he  still  put  off  with
delaies  till  an  other  time.  But  all  his  hooking  was,  both
himselfe  and  by  divers  instruments  to  find  out,  and  buy
all  such  fantasticall  toyes,  that  might  fit  his  turne  to  please
the  toyish  humour  of  the  great  King  his  Master,  and  for
ought  that  we  could  gather,  further  then  served  his  owne
turne,  he  little  respected  our  selling  or  buying  of  our
principall Merchandize  brought  for  that place ; having

262

NICHOLAS DOWNTON  a.d.

i  6  i  i

satisfied  himsclfe  in  that  ship  by  his  wittiest  inquisition,
desired  in  like  manner  to  see  the  other  ships,  where  he
ranne  the  like  course  aboord  the  Pepper-corne :  he  bought
all  our  Chests  of  Sword-blades,  whereof  he  seemed  to  be
so  greedy,  as  he  would  not  trust  us  to  send  them  after
him,  but  would  see  them  all  sent  a  shoare  before  his
departure,  which  in  few  dayes  after,  having  selected  out  all
the  crooked  ones,  and  such  as  liked  him,  sent  backe  the
rest  carelesly,  and  ill  conditioned,  as  their  accustomed
manner  is  to  doe  all  things  whatsoever  they  have  bought,
when  by  all  the  view  they  can  have  they  dislike  the  same.
Which  businesse  being  ended,  they  hastened  a  shoare
accompanied  by  S.  Henry  Middleton,  my  selfe,  Captaine
Sharpeigh,  and  John  Jordaine.  He  beeing  landed,  carried
us  to  his  Tent,  where  being  all  set  upon  Carpets,  with
many  of  his  friends,  Sir  Henry  Middleton  againe  mooved
speech  concerning  our  businesse,  as  aforesaid  :  which  he
againe  put  off  till  to  morrow.  When  wee  saw  nothing
to  be  done,  and  the  night  approaching,  we  tooke  leave,
departing  aboord  to  spend  the  night  in  consultation  of  our
next  dayes  businesse  or  affaires.

The  sixe  and  twentieth  in  the  morning,  Sir  Henry
Middleton  hastened  ashoare,  thinking  to  doe  much  busi-
nesse :  being  come  he  was  informed  that  Macrib  Chan  was
gone,  and  yet  the  better  to  pacifie  him,  they  told  him  he
was  gone  to  the  Portugals  to  make  friendship  betweene
us,  which  the  Generall  well  knew  was  not  so,  but  rather
suspected  that  his  going  to  the  Portugals  was,  having
received  alreadie  from  us  in  presents  all  hee  could  get,  that
hee  would  now  also  see  what  he  could  get  from  the  Portu-
gals  to  doe  ill  Offices  against  us.  Wherefore,  laden  with
discontent,  he  againe  departed  aboard  his  ship  in  the  offing,
Hoja  Nassan  yet  staying,  pretending  of  purpose  to  buy
our  Commodities,  whereof  the  Generall  set  downe  the
particular  prizes,  but  this  day  being  farre  spent,  it  was
referred  till  the  day  following.

The  seven  and  twentieth  in  the  morning,  Macrib  Chan
sent  one  of  his  chiefe  Gentlemen  and  his  Broker  with  a

263

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

161 1.

Base  Vanltle.  Letter  to  the  Generall :  which  I  supposing  to  be  of  import
and  behoofe  of  our  Common-wealthes  businesse,  presently
in  my  Boat  sent  the  Messenger  aboard  the  Admirall,  the
effect  whereof  was  soone  found  to  be  no  other  then  to  beg
his  perfumed  Jerkin  and  his  Spaniell  Dogge,  which  was
denyed  him  the  day  before  when  he  begged  his  Bever
Hat :  also  hee  desired  our  workmen  and  Smith  to  make
him  the  modell  of  a  chaine  pumpe ;  also  this  morning
Captaine  Sharpeigh  and  Master  Jourdaine  went  ashoare  to
Hoja  Nassan,  to  conferre  with  him  of  the  prizes  of  our
Commodities.

The  eight  and  twentieth,  Hoja  Nassan  departed  to  Surat,
carrying  with  him  the  Generals  Jerkin  and  Dogge,  which
Macrib  Chan  had  formerly  begged,  and  that  we  should
the  lesse  doubt,  he  left  behind  him  in  his  Tent  Hoja
Jellardin  his  sonne-in-law,  pretending  he  should  stay  till
his  returne.  Hoja  Nassan  being  once  gone,  he  set  slight,
being  carelesse  of  our  businesse,  and  the  next  night  he
dissolved  his  Tent  and  departed,  to  no  small  disturbance
to  us,  seeing  none  left  to  rectifie  any  businesse.  This
day  Bartholmew  Davis  one  of  our  Carpenters  was  sent
to  Surat,  to  make  provision  of  plankes  and  boards  for
re-edifying  of  the  Release,  wee  thereunto  incouraged  by
their  favourable  promise,  in  which  is  very  small  hold,
for  he  once  there,  found  nothing  but  delusions  or  delayes,
for  wheresoever  he  found  Timber,  either  he  could  not  find
any  to  sell  it,  or  not  to  saw  it ;  so  all  his  businesse  was
not  onely  frustrate,  but  he  also  in  despaire  of  libertie  to
returne.  This  day  Master  Jourdaine,  Master  Frain,  and
others  went  up  to  a  Village  neere  adjoyning  to  view  some
packes  of  Indian  Cloth,  which  Hoja  Nassan  had  brought
downe  thither  to  barter  with  us  for  some  of  our  Com-
modities :  they  returning  brought  downe  the  Mustraes
of  everie  sort,  and  the  prizes  demanded  for  them  per
Corge :  the  Generall  upon  such  as  he  liked  set  downe
what  prizes  he  would  give  for  them,  requiring  them  to  doe
the  like  by  his  Commodities,  and  to  have  answere  the  next
day :  but  they  held  them  at  high  rates,  and  offered  weakly

264

NICHOLAS DOWNTON

A.D.
l6ll.

for  our  Commodities,  which  they  esteemed  of  neccssitic,
we  must  be  forced  to  sell  them  howsoever.

The  first  of  December,  they  perceiving  that  Sir  Henry  becemb.  1.
Middleton  would  not  give  them  their  demand  for  their
Commodities,  nor  sell  them  his  at  their  owne  rates,  to
shew  their  carelesnesse,  or  to  try  his  temper,  did  not
onely  speedily  send  for  their  Mustraes  of  clothes,  but  also
carryed  backe  to  Surat,  all  such  packes  as  they  had  formerly
brought  downe  to  Damka,  a  Village  three  mile  from  us.  [I.  iil  300.]
Also  the  poore  Inhabitants  were  restrayned  from  bringing
downe  provisions  to  sell  us,  as  formerly  by  permission  thev
did.

The  sixth,  the  Generall  was  informed  the  Mock  rib
Chan,  and  Hoja  Nassan  were  comming  downe,  and  in  the
evening  we  see  as  it  were  a  Village  of  Tents  pitcht  some-
what more  then  a  mile  within  the  land,  to  the  East-ward
of  the  Road,  but  whether  they  came  in  peace  or  no,  we
knew  not.

The  seventh,  Jaddow  &  Narran  Brokers  came  downe,
certifying  the  General  that  Mockrib  Chan  and  Hoja  Nassan
were  comming  downe,  and  were  now  at  the  Tents,  and
to  morrow  would  bee  heere  with  him.  They  translated
our  Kings  Letter,  and  then  departed,  but  yet  their  extra-
ordinary sadnesse,  as  men  sent  by  constraint,  gave  us  no
hope  of  good  towards  us,  the  rather  for  that  they  had
formerly  restrayned  as  prisoner  our  man  sent  to  the  Towne
about  businesse,  as  also  their  severitie  in  proclayming  the
losse  of  their  noses,  to  any  that  should  bring  downe  any
provision  to  us,  whereby  they  shewed  their  desire  to  force
us  away  by  Famine.  This  day  the  Darling  was  againe
haled  off  to  her  moring.

The  eighth,  Mockrib  Chan  and  Hoja  Nassan,  came
downe  with  a  great  traine  to  the  water-side,  and  at  the
same  time,  to  put  jealousie  of  their  ill  dealing  from  us,
brought  downe  some  fortie  or  fiftie  packes  of  Indian
Clothes,  and  so  increasing  to  the  number  of  a  hundred
and  eight  packes,  yet  the  sight  thereof  could  not  moove
all  of  us  to  beleeve,  they  meant  faithfully  to  deale  with

265

Barbarous
inhumanitie.

Chiefe  Com-
modities fir
India.

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

161 1.

us  :  but  they  having  extraordinary  desire  to  our  Quick-
silver, and  Vermilion,  and  Mockrib  Chan  to  our  Velvet,
though  they  made  smallest  shew  thereof.  Yet  for  that
it  could  not  be  had  by  it  selfe,  without  our  Lead  and  other
Commodities,  by  which  meanes  they  condescended  to  deale
at  present  for  our  Lead  also,  deferring  all  the  rest  till
some  other  time,  but  would  not  deale  with  us  otherwise,
but  so  as  they  would  gaine  fiftie  in  the  hundred  at  their
owne  doores  without  further  adventure,  and  ours  which
we  have  brought  so  farre,  wee  could  not  draw  them  but
to  such  poore  rates,  as  will  beare  but  a  small  part  of  our
fraight  hither.

The  ninth  in  the  morning,  Sir  Henry  Middleton  went
on  shoare,  not  having  any  sure  confidence  in  their  perform-
ance, where  in  words  they  continued  firme.  Wherefore
the  Trades  Increase  began  to  land  her  Lead ;  somewhat
before  noone  was  brought  unto  Mockrib  Chan,  a  Letter
from  the  great  Mogull,  whereat  he  was  so  dampe,  that
scarce  any  words  was  to  be  gotten  from  him,  but  presently
after  dinner  he  departed,  but  Hoja  Nassan,  and  others
continued,  as  they  pretended,  to  effect  the  businesse  :  this
night  before  the  Generall  went  aboord,  being  still  in  sus-
pition  of  inconstant  dealing,  and  seeing  the  great  paines
and  toile  in  landing  our  Lead,  and  what  intollerable  disgust
or  discontent  would  arise  among  our  people,  if  by  shrink-
ing from  their  words  we  be  forst  againe  to  imbarque  the
same,  sent  some  of  our  Factors  with  the  Brokers  to  Hoja
Nassan  to  signifie  the  same,  and  before  further  trouble  to
know  his  full  resolution  :  who  returned  him  answere,  he
should  not  need  to  doubt,  for  they  would  have  it  all :
whereby  without  further  doubt,  the  greatest  expedition
was  used  for  landing  thereof.  This  day  in  the  evening,
William  Johnson  Sailer  of  the  Darling,  and  John  Cover-
dale  Trumpetter  of  the  Admirall,  ran  away  to  the  Portugall
Armie,  and  John  Pattison  to  Surat.

The  tenth,  there  came  aboord  to  see  our  ships  the
Governour  of  Surat,  and  Coja  Arsan  Alle,  being  departed
from the Pepper-Corne with the Generall aboard the

266

NICHOLAS DOWNTON  ad.

161 1.

Admirall,  in  the  offing  this  sudden  disturbance  happened,
which  crost  the  content  on  all  sides,  for  John  Jourdaine
came  speedily  from  the  shoare  to  informe  the  Generall,
how  that  Hoja  Nassan  having  alreadie  the  Velvet  and
some  other  things  which  he  most  desired,  was  now  in  a
great  fit  of  wrangling,  so  that  hee  thought  no  good  for  us
would  be  done :  for  he  had  both  made  them  give  over
weighing  the  lead  ;  and  also  sent  for  his  Oxen  to  draw
away  the  Carts  with  the  packes  of  Indian  Clothes  :  whereat
the  Generall  grew  so  impatient,  that  he  presently  made
stay  (to  inforce  performance)  both  of  the  Governour  and
Coja  Arsan  Ally,  to  their  great  trouble  of  minde,  but
after  some  little  pause,  the  Generall  caused  them  to  be
imbarqued  with  himselfe  in  the  Frigat,  and  came  in  calling
upon  me  in  the  Pepper-Corne,  to  impart  what  he  had
done,  wishing  my  opinion,  who  seeing  him  in  the  right
way,  saw  no  cause  to  counsell  him  to  revoke  the  same,
but  rather  for  securitie  of  our  businesse  to  persevere  :  from
me  he  departed  to  the  shoare  with  a  reasonable  Guard,
and  gave  Hoja  Nassan  knowledge,  what  his  crosse  dealing
had  forced  him  unto,  and  that  since  the  Governour  of
Surat  came  in  curtesie,  and  the  businesse  concernes  him
not ;  wisht  himselfe  to  come  aboard  and  take  his  place,
and  he  would  dismisse  the  Governour ;  who  seeing  no
other  remedie,  with  a  grimme  looke  and  sowre  coun-
tenance came  into  the  Frigat,  and  the  Governour  to  his
great  content  was  dismist,  and  they  were  brought  to
remayne  with  me  in  the  Pepper-Corne.

The  eleventh,  we  continued  landing  of  our  Lead,  and
had  so  lightned  the  Admirall,  that  at  high-water  the  night
following  to  our  great  content,  we  brought  her  in  over  the
barre,  also  having  now  all  our  strength  together  where  our
businesse  lay.

The  twelfth  in  the  morning,  Sir  Henry  Middleton  sent
for  the  Gentlemen  Prisoners  to  bee  brought  aboard  his
greater  ship ;  which  Hoja  Nassan  for  long  time  obsti-
nately refused,  till  I  had  order  to  send  him  perforce :  hee
being  there,  in  regard  of  the  hastening  of  our  businesse

267

ad  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

161 1.

it was  thought  fit  to  inlarge  them both, leaving  other

[I.  iii.  301.]  pledges in their places, as for Coja Nassan was Coja

Illardin  his  sonne  in  law,  and  one  of  his  sonnes :  and  for

Hoja Arsan Alle, two Persian Merchants. And for

pledges  on  our  side  to  remayne  with  them  in  their  Tents,

were  John  Williams  and  Henry  Boothby  :  this  night  were

opened,  counted,  sorted  and  agreed  for  fortie  packes  of

Indian  Clothes.

Portugall  The  fifteenth,  there  came  to  us  two  Portugall  youthes

Fugitives. from  the  Armie,  one  of  them  beeing  the  Captaine  Major

his  Paoe.
o

The  sixteenth,  in  the  morning  wee  saw  to  the  South-
ward five  Portugall  Colours  displayed ;  whereof  the
Generall  understanding  presently  by  his  command,  were
landed  some  two  hundred  armed  men  with  Shot  and  Pikes
to  meet  them  :  which  they  perceiving  retyred,  in  which
pursuit  being  neere  unto  our  Swally,  wee  met  with  Hoja
Portugalh  Nassan  and  all  his  troupes,  who  was  comming  downe  with
bravery  and  some  twentie  packes  more  of  Indian  Clothes  :  he  informed
'  the  Generall  that  the  Portugals  were  alreadie  gotten  over

the  muddie  Creekes,  and  were  neere  unto  their  Frigats,
wherefore  the  Generall  gave  over  his  pursuite,  and  returned
aboord.

The  nineteenth,  Peter  Rosemary  (a  Portugall  whom
wee  brought  out  of  England)  a  Sailer  of  the  Trade,
being  appointed  as  Guardian  to  attend  on  (or  looke
to)  Francisco  Consalves,  they  both  ran  away  to  the
Armie.

The  seven  and  twentieth,  there  came  from  Surat  Hoja
Nassan,  to  see  if  hee  could  buy  any  of  our  Clothes  and
other  Commodities  :  but  not  agreeing  upon  the  prices,  hee
againe  departed.  This  day  by  a  Jew  from  Masulipatan,
the  Generall  received  a  Letter  from  one  Peter  Floris  (a
Dutchman  imployed  by  the  Company  of  Merchants  of
London  trading  to  East-India,  who  had  there  setled  a
Factorie)  certifying  the  Generall  of  three  ships,  which  were
comming  out  of  England,  whereof  one  was  to  goe  into
Red-Sea :  which  was  very  unpleasing  to  the  Generall  and

268

NICHOLAS DOWNTON  mx

i  6  i  i  ,

us  all,  in  regard  of  the  danger  we  suspected  they  should

fall  into.

The  thirtieth,  Master  Jourdaine  and  Master  Fraine  were
sent  to  Surat,  to  agree  for  some  more  Indian  Clothes,  as
also  to  urge  the  putting  off  of  some  of  our  Commodities.
The  same  day  the  Generall  received  a  Letter  from  Captaine
Haukins  at  Cambaya,  signifying  that  his  determination
was  with  all  his  houshold  to  take  his  passage  to  Goa,  and
from  thence  to  England ;  But  Sir  Henry  Middleton  con-
ceiting, if  hee  once  get  to  Goa,  his  goods  would  stop  his
passage  to  England,  if  not  shorten  his  life,  by  the  same
Messenger  did  most  earnestly  and  friendly  advise  him  to
the  contrarie,  and  invited  him  to  take  his  passage  with  us
into  England :  also  our  people  at  Surat  informed  the
Generall  that  Mockrib  Chan  made  shew  to  bee  willing
that  wee  should  leave  a  Factorie  for  venting  of  the
remayne  of  our  Commodities :  which  kept  us  sometime
in  hope,  but  afterwards  vanisht  by  inconstancie.

The  eight  of  Januarie,  Nicholas  Uphlet  came  downe  January  8.
from  Cambaya,  with  Letters  from  Captaine  Haukins  to  the
Generall, certifying him that by reason of  his former
Letter,  hee  determined  to  come  downe  to  our  shippes,  and
take  his  passage  with  us.

The  sixe  and  twentieth,  Captaine  Sharpeigh,  Master
Fraine,  Captaine  Hawkins  with  all  his  goods  and  Family,  Capt.
and  the  rest  (Nicholas  Uphlet  excepted)  came  downe,  Hatvkins-
whom  the  Generall  with  a  Troupe  of  some  two  hundred
men,  went  some  three  mile  up  into  the  Land  to  meete
and  guard  them  from  the  Portugalls,  whose  Armie  was  not
fare  off.

The  seven  and  twentieth,  the  Generall  sent  John
Williams  to  Surat,  to  know  their  resolutions  for  leaving
a  Factory  there.

The  nine  and  twentieth,  John  Williams  returned  with
an  absolute  denyall  of  having  any  further  dealing  with
our  Nation,  but  were  all  commanded  to  bee  gone  out  of
Surat,  not  permitting  them  to  stay  to  receive  Debts  there
owing  them : wherefore  they  sent  to  know  the  Generals

269

A.D.
l6l  I.

February,

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

pleasure,  whether  they  should  presently  come  downe,  or
use  meanes  to  delay  the  time,  to  see  whether  their  deter-
mination therein  would  alter.

The  thirtieth,  Sir  Henry  Middleton  writ  to  our  people
at  Surat,  speedily  to  repaire  downe  to  our  ships.

The  one  and  thirtieth,  according  to  the  Generals  direc-
tion, all  our  people  came  downe  from  Surat  with  all  their
goods.
6.  The  sixth  of  February,  there  passed  by  towards  Cam-
baya,  a  great  Caphala,  or  Fleet  of  neere  five  hundred  saile
of  Portugall  Frigats.

The  ninth  in  the  morning,  upon  the  top  of  a  high  water,
the  Admirall  warped  out  over  the  Barre,  and  anchored  in
the  Offing.  This  day  about  noone  came  downe  from
Cambaya,  Nicholas  Uphlet,  Captaine  Haukins  servant,
whom  they  had  left  behind  in  pawne,  as  afore-said,  for
whom  we  stayed  since  the  last  of  Januarie,  what  time  our
Merchants  were  expelled  Surat.  This  day  in  the  evening
we  set  saile,  and  went  out  over  the  Barre,  and  anchored
in  eight  fathome,  some  mile  in  the  Offing  thereof,  neere
unto  the  Admirall.

[I.  iii. 302.]  §. V.

Their  departure  to  Dabull,  Socatora,  the  Red-sea,
and  Acts  there.

E  departed  the  ninth,  having  continued  heere  the
space  of  an  hundred  and  thirtie  eight  dayes,  in
which  we  sustayned  many  and  sundry  abuses  by
delayes,  breach  of  promises,  with-holding  the  Countrey
people  from  trading  with  us,  and  having  exchanged  a  few
Commodities  at  very  hard  and  unprofitable  Rates,  with-
holding further  trade,  disappointing  us  of  setling  a
Factorie,  with-holding  some  debts  formerly,  and  com-
manding our  Merchants  out  of  their  Towne,  and  our
ships  to  be  gone.  The  cause  moving  them  to  hasten  us
away  (as  we  afterwards  understood)  grew  thus  at  the  instant
of  their  conference,  whether  fit  for  them  to  permit  us  to

270

NICHOLAS DOWNTON

leave  a  Factorie,  to  vent  the  rest  of  our  goods  brought
for  that  place  there  or  no ;  was  delivered  into  the  hands
of  Mockrib  Chan  a  Letter  from  Dangie,  a  Bannian  in
Cambaya,  by  the  instigation  of  the  Jesuites  there  ;  advising
them,  that  if  they  gave  place  to  the  English  in  Surat,  the
Portugals  would  come  with  force,  and  burne  all  their  Sea
Townes,  and  make  spoile  of  all  the  ships  they  should  send
abroad,  the  contents  whereof  was  applauded  of  most ;  all
agreeing  it  to  be  their  best  course,  and  thereupon  dismist
our  people,  as  aforesaid.

This  Road  of  Swally  within  the  Bar  lyeth  in  twentie
degrees,  fiftie  five  minutes  North  latitude,  the  variation
in  sixteene  degrees  and  fortie  minutes  Westerly,  wee  found
the  water  highed  more  on  the  full  Moone  spring  then
on  the  change,  by  foure  foot :  the  one  beeing  foure  and
twentie  foot,  the  other  twentie,  the  night  tydes  higher  then
the  day  tyde  by  three  foot,  according  as  the  wind  blew,  the
Coast  or  Strand  within  the  Barre  lyeth  neerest  South  and
North  by  the  Compasse,  which  the  variation  allowed  is
North  by  East,  and  halfe  East,  and  South  by  West  halfe
West,  also  at  West  South-west  halfe  South,  and  East
North-east  halfe  North,  the  Moone  makes  a  full  Sea.

The  tenth,  the  Generall  stayd  to  dispatch  his  businesse
with  Jaddow  and  Narran  the  Brokers :  also  we  tooke  out
of  a  Frigat  bound  to  the  Rehemy  at  Goga,  certaine  Candies
of  Rice  and  Pitch,  giving  them  Bils  to  be  paid  at  Surat
by  two  men,  who  were  indebted  to  Captaine  Hawkins
account.

The  eleventh,  in  the  morning  at  sixe  a  clocke  at  high
water  wee  set  saile,  and  at  two  in  the  afternoone  we
anchored  in  the  South  Road  at  the  Barre  foot  of  Surat,
by  a  new  ship  called  the  Hassany,  bound  with  the  Rehemy
unto  the  Red-Sea :  also  we  tooke  out  of  another  Frigat
certaine  Charcole,  assigning  them  to  be  paid  at  Surat  in
manner  aforesaid.

The  fourteenth,  at  one  of  the  clocke  in  the  morning  we
met  with  a  Banke,  whereon  wee  had  from  sixteene  to
thirteene  fathomes,  and  suddenly  againe  to  twentie  and

271

A.D.
l6  I  I .

The  threat-
nings  of  the
Portugals.

Observations
of  the  Tides,
&c.atStva//y

They  depart
from  Surat.

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1611.

twenty  two  fathomes,  after  which  we  haled  up  by  a  wind

West  by  South  some  three  leagues :  from  sixe  a  clocke  in

the  morning  to  noone  South  South-east  some  nine  leagues,

the  wind  at  North,  our  depths  twentie,  nineteene,  seven-

teene,  and  sixteene  fathomes,  what  time  wee  were  some

tenne  leagues  off  the  Land  West-wards  in  North  latitude,

nineteene  degrees,  thirtie  seven  minutes. At  one  a  clocke

we  past  by  three  Mallaber  ships  bound  for  Surat,  laden

with  Cayro  (or  stuffe  to  make  Ropes)  &  Coco  Nuts,  who

there  rid  in  fourteene  fathome,  nine  leagues  off  from  the

land  to  spend  the  ebbe,  and  South-east  from  seven  other

ships  neere  in towards  the mountaines, from noone  to

mid-night,  we  went  South  South-east  some  five  leagues,

the  most  part  of  this  night  being  calme.

The  fifteenth  to  noone  South  South-east  sixe  leagues,
the  wind  Northerly  a  very  easie  gale  :  this  night  we  heard
divers  great  Ordnance  shoot  off  ashoare  :  this  night  our
passage  hath  beene  in  fifteene,  thirteene,  and  twelve
fathome,  this  land  is  mountainous  mixt  with  divers  Vallies
like  harbours  or  entries.  Our  latitude  at  noone  was  nine-
teene degrees,  foure  minutes.  At  Sunne-set,  wee  were
three  leagues  off  the  shore,  our  passage  in  betweene  twelve
and  sixe  fathome.  From  noone  to  mid-night  our  course
was  South  by  East  eleven  leagues,  the  winde  Northerly.

The  sixteenth  to  noone  South  by  East  twelve  houres,
eleven  leagues,  the  wind  Northerly,  the  land  high  and
full  of  harbor  like  Bayes  all  alongst  in  fine  shoalding  in
five  fathome,  and  foure  miles  of  the  land,  and  nine  fathome
three  leagues  of  our  latitude  eighteene  degrees,  one
minute.  This  day  at  Sun-setting  we  anchored  in  seven
Dabull.  fathome  thwart  of  the  Barre  of  Dabull,  to  which  Towne
the  General  went  in  hope  to  sel  some  of  his  English
Commodities,  or  (as  it  were)  to  shoot  another  Arrow  after
divers  formerly  lost.

The  seventeenth,  in  the  morning,  the  Generall  in  the
Frigat  went  in  neere  the  Barre  to  discover  the  depths  and
so  aboord  againe,  which  was  five  fathome  very  neere  the
South  point  of  the  entrance,  but  very  little  further  North-

272

NICHOLAS DOWNTON

1 6 1 1.

wards  towards  the  middle  of  the  entrance  but  two  fathome  :
the  latitude of this  South point is seventeene degrees, Latltpe^  '7-
thirtie foure minutes, the variation is fifteene degrees t,' "'
thirtie  foure  minutes.

This  day  about  noone  came  off  two  Boates  from  the  [J-  '"•  3°3-]
Governour,  the  one  with  a  present,  which  was  three
Bullockes,  certaine  Sheepe,  Plantans,  Bread,  and  water
Millions :  in  the  other  Boate  came  the  Messengers,  which
were  sent  to  know  what  we  were,  and  our  businesse,
though  they  before  did  imagine  who  we  were,  partly  by
our  acquaintance  with  them  at  Moha,  as  also  their  hearing
of  our  being  at  Surat.  The  Message,  according  to  the
Indian  manner,  was  delivered  with  many  complements
and  promise  of  all  friendship,  and  further  that  they  would
buy  our  goods  for  money,  and  give  us  Indico,  Cloth  and
Pepper  for  the  same,  (which  was  more  then  we  could
expect,  or  they  had  order  to  grant)  for  what  Indico  they
had  with  Cloth  and  Pepper  was  presently  to  be  imployed
in  their  owne  ships  now  bound  for  the  Red  Sea ;  upon
these  kind  promises  the  Generall  sent  Merchants  ashoare
both  with  a  present  to  the  Governour,  and  with  Mustres
of  English  Clothes,  and  other  of  our  Commodities  :  but
of  all,  except  some  little  Broadcloth  and  Kersies  of  our
best  colours,  as  Stammels,  Poppinjay  greene,  and  other
light  colours,  and  lead  in  barres,  we  could  sell  none  :  for
our  Red  Lead,  the  Governour  bought  and  sent  it  aboard  Dabull,doubk
againe  :  and  somewhat  after  the  manner  we  found  at  Surat,  "ea'in£-
the  Governour  dealt  double  with  us ;  granting  free  leave
to  sell,  yet  under-hand  had  men  in  waite  to  restrayne  or
beate  away  such  as  came  to  buy ;  so  that  no  man  buying
made  his  owne  price,  for  what  hee  desired  to  buy  :  for
Corne  and  other  provision  and  water  to  be  brought  aboard
for  money,  wee  had  with  all  favour,  and  at  last  we  had  a
Cable  of  eighteene  inches,  and  ninetie  sixe  fathome  of  the
Countrey  stuffe,  worth  eight  pound  sterling,  for  one  of
the  Darlings  Anchors.  Now,  whether  such  kindnesse  as
we  received  were  out  of  their  good  disposition  to  strangers,
or  not,  it  is  hard  to  judge,  they  having  presently  blowne
in  273  s

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGR1MES

1 6 1 1.

abroad  and  informed  at  Moha,  that  we  endeavour  to  right
what  wrongs  any  should  impose  upon  us,  and  therefore
might  seeme  to  make  the  best  shewes  unto  us.

The  sixe  and  twentieth,  in  the  after-noone,  besides  divers
Mallaber  Merchants  ships  which  anchored  by  us,  we  saw
Portugal! ship,  also  in  the  Offing  a  great  Ship  and  Frigat,  to  whom,  two
houres  before  night  the  Generall  sent  off  the  Darling  to
bring  in  the  said  ship  :  but  doubting  the  missing  of  her
by  night,  as  also  the  smalnesse  of  his  force  to  command
her,  when  night  came  sent  off  mee  also  in  the  Pepper-
Corne,  with  his  Frigat  well  manned  to  attend  upon  mee  in
regard  of  the  Frigat  in  her  companie.  About  mid-night,
though  very  darke,  I  gat  sight  of  her  riding  at  Anchor,
sending  our  Frigat  to  the  other  running  away,  and  the
great  ship  getting  sight  of  us,  was  come  to  saile,  but  being
commanded  to  strike  saile,  did  it,  also  their  Captaine  and
Principals  to  come  aboard  me,  he  sent  a  Souldier  and  two
more  in  a  Canoa,  who  excused  the  Captaine  to  be  aged  and
unweldie,  and  that  their  great  Boat  was  so  pestered  with
lading,  that  they  could  not  row  her ;  wherefore,  though
unwillingly,  I  was  forced  to  send  my  owne  Pinnasse  for
some  of  the  principall  Merchants  and  Souldiers,  but  with
such  streight  direction  to  my  Cock-swaine,  that  upon
paine  of  great  punishment  he  should  permit  none  to  goe
into  her,  to  the  end  to  prevent  spoyle.  I  intended  Sir
Henry  Middleton  should  be  the  first  Englishman  should
enter  her :  meane-while  our  Frigat  with  the  other  which
they  had  taken,  returned  to  us,  and  to  my  griefe  gave
knowledge  that  they  killed  one  of  the  Portugals  in  flying.
Now  having  divers  of  their  men  aboard  me,  I  gave  direc-
tion to  stand  in  for  Dabull :  but  by  reason  of  their  ill
sterage,  which  we  imputed  to  be  done  of  purpose,  and  for
that  with  all  our  sayles  wee  could  not  fetch  them  up  bee-
ing  gotten  a  little  a-head  us,  and  fearing  they  might  mend
their  sayling,  and  get  from  us,  I  caused  them  to  be  called
unto  to  take  in  their  sayles,  and  anchored  till  day,  which
directions  given  and  our  Anchors  readie  to  let  fall,  I  de-
parted into  my  Cabin  to  examine  some  of  the  Portugals,

274

NICHOLAS DOYVNTON

161 1.

what  their  ship  was  laden  withall :  meane-while  my  Master
pretended  to  doubt  whether  the  shippe  were  anchored  or
no,  without  any  order  or  knowledge  sent  my  Pinnasse
aboard,  wherein  went  one  of  his  mates,  more  greedie  of
pray  then  carefull  of  credit,  who  did  not  onely  goe  into
the  ship,  but  there  fell  to  rifling,  who  though  often  called
made  no  haste  away,  till  his  owne  pleasure  was  fulfilled.
Against  whose  comming  aboard,  I  caused  Thomas  Glen-
ham,  John  Staughten,  George  Cockam  and  Robert  Mico
the  Purser,  to  bee  readie  at  the  Ladder  with  a  Lanthorne
and  Candle  to  search  them  one  by  one  (in  the  Portugals
sight  aboard  our  ship)  and  turned  them  out  of  the  Boate  :
which  being  done,  and  the  things  throwne  into  the  Boats
sterne  by  Thomas  Glenham,  John  Staughten,  and  Robert
Mico,  I  sent  againe  aboard  the  Portugall  ships,  willing
the  Purser  to  tel  them  aboard  if  there  were  any  thing  else
wanting,  they  that  had  beene  aboard  without  my  direction
should  make  it  good  :  but  by  reason  that  Thomas  Love,
George  Jeff  and  Matthew  Bragge,  three  Masters  Mates
of  the  Admirall  lately  dead,  the  Frigat  was  now  com-
manded by  one  Terrie  a  servant  to  Giles  Thornton,  who
before  our  Boat  gat  aboard  againe,  notwithstanding  they
were  commanded  to  the  contrarie,  went  aboard  with  our
Frigat,  whereas,  like  disgoverned  pilfering  people,  they
runne  all  into  the  ship,  not  forbearing  to  breake  open  UnruRnesse  in
Chests,  tumble  into  the  Frigat,  and  make  spoyle  of  all  Mariners,
things  that  liked  them,  forbearing  no  ill  language  to  such  lresent  '
as  I  had  sent  to  restraine  them.  But  the  evill  being  done,
it  was  too  late  to  undoe  it :  and  though  it  bred  in  me
much  trouble  and  present  discontent ;  yet  I  used  the  best
meanes  I  had  left  to  cure  the  same,  which  was,  I  desired
William  Pemberton  who  with  the  Darling  came  newly  to
us,  to  make  the  more  haste  into  the  Road,  and  to  informe
the  Generall  of  our  peoples  misbehaviour,  to  the  end
before  they  should  have  meanes  to  convey  away  or  re-  [I.  Hi.  304.]
move  the  same  care,  might  bee  taken  for  bringing  off
all  things  to  light,  which  the  Generall  no  sooner  under-
stood, but  at  one  a  clocke  when  we  all  anchored  by  him,

275

tunnes  taken.

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

161 1.

commanded  both  the  Frigats  wherein  our  people  were,
to  anchor  of  and  none  of  them  to  come  aboard  him  ;  and
Sir  Henry  Middleton  and  my  selfe  with  the  Captaine,
and  Merchants  of  the  Portugall  ship,  went  first  to  our
owne  Frigat,  and  then  to  the  Frigat  newly  taken  where
our  people  were,  and  had  every  one  narrowly  searcht,  and
all  things  taken  from  them,  and  they  turned  one  by  one
out,  as  they  were  searcht,  of  all  what  was  found  belonging
to  the  Frigat  was  there  left,  and  then  our  small  Frigat
was  by  our  Pinnasse  towed  aboard  the  Portugall  ship,
where  all  the  rest  was  delivered  for  the  use  of  such  to
J  Portugal!  whom  it  belonged.  This  ship  belonged  to  Cochin,  called
ship  0/300.  tjie  5ajnt  Nicholas,  of  burthen  some  three  hundred  tunnes,
the Captaines name  being  bound to Chaull,

their  lading  confest,  was  principally  dryed  Coco  Nuts,
some  Tinne,  blacke  Sugar,  and  Racka  Nuts,  ten  Fats  of
China  Dishes,  certaine  Bags  of  Allome,  and  some  small
quantitie  of  China  Dishes,  and  some  Cayro,  or  bast  Ropes.
We  made  all  inquisition  possible  for  their  bils  of  lading,
but  none  they  would  bee  knowne  of,  which  put  us  to  great
trouble  to  find  out,  the  little  we  had  from  them,  which
were  certaine  bals  of  China  raw  silke,  some  small  quantitie
of  Cloves,  and  some  few  Cannastres,  and  three  Chests  of
Cinamon,  and  some  Waxe  to  make  us  Candles :  all  which
was  as  it  were  but  a  mite  in  comparison  of  the  dammages
done  us  by  the  Portugalls.

The  Frigat  belonged  to  Chaull  and  bound  to  Ormus,
of  burthen  sixtie  tunnes,  her  lading,  Rice  and  Tamarin,
out  of  whom  we  tooke  bagges  of  Rice  for  our

provision :  this  businesse  continued  us  in  doing  every
day  somewhat  till  the  first  of  March.  By  this  Frigat  the
Generall  dispatcht  away  all  such  Portugalls  as  came  to
him  from  the  Armie  at  Surat,  to  wit  Lorenzo  de  Campo,
and  his  consort,  the  fellow  taken  in  the  Frigat  and  the
two  Boyes,  that  came  away  from  their  Masters,  giving
them  money  in  their  Purses,  according  to  their  severall
qualitie,  besides  the  apparell  formerly  made  for  either  of
them  unto  the  Merchant,  that  ought  the  most  part  of  the

276

NICHOLAS DOWNTON  ad.

i  6  i  i  .
Silke,  the  Generall  gave  a  fine  Broad-cloth,  and  to  the
Captaine  of  the  Frigat,  from  whom  wee  tooke  the  Rice,
a  fine  Kersie.  Also  this  day  the  Governour  sent  to  give
the  Generall  knowledge,  that  the  next  day  or  night  follow-
ing the  great  Caphala,  which  past  by  us  the  sixth  of
February  afore-said,  towards  Cambaya,  would  either  the
next  day  or  night  following  againe  passe  by  towards  Goa  :
which  howsoever  they  past  either  by  night  or  day  we  saw
them  not.

The  fourth,  the  fore-said  businesse  being  effected,  the
Generall  called  us  all  to  consultation  what  was  best  to  be  Consultation.
done,  shewing  his  desire  to  goe  to  the  Barre  of  Goa,  there
to  demand  of  the  Vice-Roy  restitution  of  our  wrongs
done  to  us  and  our  Nation  by  the  Portugalls,  to  the  end
if  that  he  refused  to  doe  it,  we  might  the  better  have
warrant,  to  right  our  selves  upon  any  Portugalls,  which
by  our  endevours  wee  might  meete  withall ;  which  de-
mand of  the  most  was  thought  reasonable,  but  not  fit  in
regard  of  the  shortnesse  of  time,  and  varietie  of  delayes,
and  treacherous  plots  we  were  to  expect,  to  our  further
abusing ;  wherefore  it  was  concluded  and  agreed  upon,
for  that  the  time  not  yet  serving  to  go  to  the  South-
wards about  the  Cape  Commerin  ;  Againe,  to  returne  to
the  Red-Sea  in  this  vacant  time  to  see,  if  we  can  get  away
these  goods  lying  upon  our  hands,  in  a  manner  holden  for
lost,  to  recover  some  of  our  former  losses  from  the  sub-
jects of  the  great  Mogoll ;  as  also  to  crosse  the  Turkes
at  Moha  and  Aden,  for  the  mischiefe  they  have  formerly
done  us,  and  principally  for  to  rescue,  defend  or  recover
that  ship  sent  out  by  the  Companie,  the  yeare  after  our
comming  out,  which  wee  heard  of  from  Masulipatan.
which  we  have  great  doubt  of,  lest  she  be  fallen  into  like
mishap  as  we  did  in  the  Red-Sea,  but  for  that  this  day
the  wind  served  not  to  set  saile,  we  deferred  it  to  the  fift
day  in  the  morning.  They  depart

The  fifth,  at  sixe  a  clocke  in  the  morning,  we  all  set  f*'om  Dahul1
saile  from  Dabull  standing  away  North  North-west  alongst  the  Rea>_s£a
the Coast, the Generall wishing to see the shippe of  againe.

277

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

161 1.

Cochin,  neere  unto  her  Harbor  of  Chaull,  cleere  of  danger
by  the  Mallabars  their  enemies,  and  at  Sun-set  we  anchored
in  seven  fathome,  some  league  distant  from  the  land,  dis-
tant from  Dabull  some  sixe  leagues,  and  short  of  Chaull
some  nine  leagues,  the  wind  at  South,  and  so  veering  to
the  West-wards.

From  the  Coast  of  India  to  Socatora,  wee  this  time
daily  found  our  ship  further  to  the  South-wards,  then  by
our  course  we  could  expect,  and  especially  when  we  were
thwart  of  the  Gulfe,  or  entrance  of  Sinus  Persicus,  which
I  imagined  to  be  some  current  setting  thence  to  the  South-
wards.

The  twentieth  of  March,  the  Generall  despeeded  away
William  Pemberton  (in  the  Darling)  before  to  Socatora,
to  inquire  of  our  ship  bound  for  the  Red-Sea  and  India,
which  wee  heard  of  from  Masulipatan.

The  foure  and  twentieth,  at  tenne  a  clocke  in  the  morn-
ing wee  descryed  land  bearing  West  South-west, some
TheEasterend  eight  leagues  distant,  being  the  Easter  end  of  Socatora,
of  Socatora. being  high  land,  having  foure  white  clifFes  or  sand  hils,
the  Norther  part  whereof  by  reason  of  the  hazinesse  wee
could  not  discerne.

The  five  and  twentieth  of  March,  at  Sunne-setting,  the
point  of  Delisha  bore  South-east  foure  leagues  distant.
The  sixe  and  twentieth  at  five  a  clocke  in  the  morning
[I.  iii.  305.]  it  fell  calme,  and  the  current  setting  North-ward  upon  the
rocke,  whereby  we  were  forced  to  anchor  in  foure  and
twentie  fathome  water,  on  the  South  South-east  side  of
The  rocke the  rocke  (which  is  Saboyna)  some  halfe  a  mile  distant ;
Saboyna.  at  ^g  rocke  }s  great  store  of  fish. Betweene  nine  and

ten  a  clocke,  we  againe  set  saile,  standing  away  West-
wards of  Cape  Guardafui,  the  wind  being  at  South.

The  seven  and  twentieth,  about  foure  a  clocke  in  the
morning,  the  rockes  Northwards  of  Abba  del  Curia,  thence
distant  some  three  leagues  and  a  halfe,  bore  North  of  us
some  halfe  a  mile  off,  which  is  by  estimation  twentie
leagues  West  by  South,  from  the  Wester  point  of  Socatora  :
our  depthes  we  there  found  was  sixteene,  seventeene  and

278

NICHOLAS DOWNTON  ad

1612.

eighteene  fathome ;  day  being  come,  wee  saw  the  Hand  of
Abba  del  Curia.

The  eight  and  twentieth  in  the  morning,  at  sixe  a  March.
clocke,  the  Cape  Guardafui  bore  South-east  seven  leagues
distant,  and  Mount  Fcelix  West  halfe  a  point  Southerly
nine  leagues :  wee  came  within  foure  mile  of  the  land,
and  the  depthes  fortie,  nine  and  thirtie,  thirtie,  seven  and
twentie,  three  and  twentie,  one  and  twentie,  eighteene
and  fifteene  fathome,  and  about  three  afternoone,  in  a
fret  of  wind  at  East  North-east,  wee  anchored  in  rough
ground  in  seven  fathome  a  mile  and  halfe  Westwards  from
Mount  Foelix  ;  all  which  Coast  the  Generall  coasted  along
in  his  Frigat,  and  tooke  in,  and  brought  along  three  of  the
Countrie  people,  which  he  gave  letters  unto,  to  be  de-
livered unto  the  Darling,  if  shee  came  heere  after  our
departure,  and  so  put  them  a  shoare :  they  informed  the
Generall,  that  foure  dayes  since  there  passed  by  towards
the  Red-sea  foure  Indian  ships.

The  nine  and  twentieth  in  the  morning,  the  Generall
sent  letters  to  other  people  on  land,  to  be  delivered  to  the
Darling :  the  countrie  people  brought  downe  to  our  men
to  sell,  some  store  of  sheepe,  small  Goats,  with  some  small
frailes  of  Olibanum  and  gumme  Arabick,  all  which  they
had  at  reasonable  rates ; the  people  still  taking  us  to  be
Mahumetans,  and  not  Christians,  or  (as  they  call  them)
Franges,  whom  they  favour  not,  so  the  Boat  returning  Franges.  The
aboord  about  noone,  the  Generall  thought  good  no  longer  J*est.er!te .
to  stay  for  the  Darling ; wherefore  we  set  saile,  standing  thc  £asterne
away  towards  Aden  in  Arabia  Fcelix. At  foure  a  clocke  world  are  since
in  the  after-noone  Mount  Fcelix  bore  East  by  South  halfe  that  Expedi-
a  degree  South,  some  eight  leagues  distant.  twn  of  Godfrey

From  noone  the  thirtieth  day,  to  one  a  clocke  in  the  J&tf-ral-i  j
morning, the one and thirtieth day, thirteene houres, because  the
North-west  eighteen  leagues,  the  wind  at  North  North-  principallof
east ; this  day  after-noone  we  descried  the  land  of  Arabia  that  armte
Fcelix.  InllZnl

The  one  and  thirtieth  in  the  morning,  at  one  a  clocke,  original.
being  neare  the  land,  we  cast  about  to  the  Southwards,  to

279

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1612.

spend  time  till  day  ;  at  five  a  clocke  in  the  morning,  wee
cast  about  againe  North-west  to  landwards :  from  sixe  a
clocke  in  the  morning  to  sixe  after-noone  twelve  houres,
we  stood  alongst  the  Coast  West  by  South,  and  West
South-west  thirteene  leagues,  alwayes  keeping  within  five
mile  of  the  land,  in  depthes  betweene  eighteene  and  thirtie
fathom,  from  sixe  a  clocke  to  midnight,  sixe  houres  West
South-west  sixe  leagues.
Apnll  1.  The  first  of  Aprill,  from  midnight  till  sixe  a  clocke,
West  by  South,  halfe  South  five  leagues,  at  which  time,
by  estimation,  we  were  eighteene  leagues  short  of  Aden  :
This  day  the  Generall  sent  for  me,  Master  Lawse  and
Master  Fowler,  to  conferre  of  our  separation  :  at  length  it
was  concluded,  that  I  in  the  Pepper-Corne  should  continue
neare,  or  before  the  Towne  of  Aden,  to  keepe  that  no
Indian  ship  should  arrive  or  stay  there,  but  to  put  them
by  towards  the  Red-sea,  and  to  that  end  I  received  a
direction  or  commission  from  my  Generall,  who  was  with
all  expedition  with  the  Trades-Increase  to  repaire  to  the
Bab,  or  doore  of  the  Red-sea,  both  for  safetie  of  the
Companies  ship,  whereof  we  had  intelligence  from  Masuli-
patan,  to  be  following  our  tract,  both  to  the  Red-sea  and
India,  even  into  the  mouthes  of  the  Wolves,  which  by
Gods  mercy  we  have  escaped,  as  also  there  at  once  to
take  revenge,  both  of  the  Turkes,  and  subjects  of  the
great  Mogoll,  for  the  wrongs  done  to  our  King  and
Countrie.

The  second,  from  midnight  to  sixe  a  clocke,  West
South-west  three  leagues,  little  wind  at  East ;  about  eight
a  clocke  in  the  morning,  what  time  we  should  have  been
separated,  some  eight  leagues  Eastward  of  Aden,  we
found  at  an  anchor  the  Darling,  who  had  got  before  us,
by  reason  of  our  lingering  for  her  foure  dayes,  who  had
done  their  businesse  at  Socatora,  and  were  againe  departed
thence,  before  we  past  it,  and  gate  a  day  before  us,  by  the
Saboyna,  Abba  del  Curia,  and  Mount  Foclix,  where  we
Generall  lingered  for  them  :  they  brought  from  thence  the  copie
Saris. of  a  letter  left  with  the  King,  by  Captaine  John  Saris,

280

NICHOLAS DOWNTOX

I  6  I  2.

Commander  of  the  ships  of  our  Indian  Company,  to  wit,
the  Clove,  the  Hector,  and  the  Thomas,  signifying,  that
notwithstanding  by  Sir  Henry  Middletons  letter,  he
understood  of  the  villanies  there  done  to  us,  he  with  his
said  ships  was  gone  into  the  Red-sea.  Immediatly  the
Generall  with  the  Trades-Increase  and  Darling,  departed
towards  the  Bab,  leaving  me  in  the  Pepper-Corne  at  an
anchor,  some  eight  leagues  Eastwards  of  Aden,  according
to  former  determination.

The  third  at  one  a  clocke  in  the  morning,  we  set  saile,
and  stood  to  the  Southwards,  the  better  to  discover,  and
so  all  the  day  under  saile,  we  kept  up  to  windwards  of
Aden  :  in  the  morning  we  saw  three  saile  bound  for  Aden,
but  stood  away  from  us,  that  wee  could  not  come  neare
them  all  night,  for  that  it  blew  hard,  we  did  not  anchor,
but  lay  a  hull  to  trie  our  drift,  which  I  found  in  ten  houres
to  be  three  leagues,  so  running  further  in  :  and  the  fourth
day  morning,  about  seven  a  clocke,  I  anchored  in  twelve  [I.  Hi.  306.]
fathome,  some  league  or  foure  mile  from  the  Towne  of
Aden.

The  twelfth  in  the  morning,  a  little  after  midnight,  we
set  saile  to  crosse  her,  and  at  day-light  we  descried  her
riding  at  an  anchor  some  three  mile  Southward  of  us,  with
whom  presently  we  trimmed  our  sailes  to  stand  withall,
and  she  presently  was  under  saile,  and  stood  in  with
Aden.  Betweene  nine  and  ten  a  clocke,  by  shooting  off  a
Peece  at  them,  they  came  roome,  and  strucke  their  top-
sailes,  and  sent  in  their  Boat  to  us  :  they  told  us  they  were
of  Callicut,  and  bound  to  Aden,  and  their  ship  belonged  A  ship  of
to  the  Samorin,  or  King  of  Callicut,  from  whence  they  had  Ca"tcut-
beene  fortie  dayes  in  comming,  they  came  neare  Socatora,
and  toucht  at  Mount  Foelix,  where  they  saw  the  Generals
letter  left  there  for  the  Darling,  where  also  they  saw  a
ship  of  Dabull,  which  came  from  Achin.  The  Nohuda
of  this  ship  is  called  Abraham  Abba  Zeinda,  their  ships
Cargazon,  according  to  their  information  was  as  followeth  :
Tamerick  three  tunnes,  Rice  three  and  twentie  hundred
kintals,  Jagara  or  bowne  Sugar  forty  bahars,  Cardaminus

281

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1612.

seven  bahars,  Ginger  drie  foure  kintals  and  an  halfe,
Pepper  a  tun  and  a  halfe,  Cotton  one  and  thirtie  packs,
each  pack  containing  five  or  six  maunds  ;  shee  had  in  her
threescore  and  fifteene  persons,  for  the  uses  following :
twentie  to  bale  water,  and  other  businesse  below,  eight
for  the  Helme,  foure  for  top  and  yard,  and  other  businesse
aloft ;  twentie  Boyes  for  dressing  severall  mens  victuals ;
the  rest  Merchants  and  Pilgrims  :  this  ship  was  of  burthen
an  hundred  and  fortie  tunnes :  thus  having  to  the  utmost
examined  them,  and  they  being  of  a  place,  whose  Inhabi-
tants never  wronged  our  Nation ;  therefore  without
diminishing  any  part  of  their  goods,  but  only,  with  their
good  wills,  two  tunnes  of  water  for  our  need,  and  so  I
dismist  them ;  though  to  the  great  disturbance  of  their
mindes,  when  by  no  meanes  I  would  permit  them  to  goe
into  Aden  to  make  sale  of  their  commodities ;  which  if
they  did  once  attempt,  I  threatned  them  I  would  sinke
their  ship,  and  leave  only  their  Boat  to  save  their  lives ;  yet
their  unwillingnesse  to  depart  made  mee  adde  many  more
threatnings,  that  if  they  hastened  not  away  before  I  see
any  other  saile  to  give  chase  unto,  I  must  then  be  forced
to  sinke  their  ship,  to  be  sure  to  keepe  them  from  the
Turkes  our  enemies :  whereby  they  put  themselves  to
saile,  and  stood  somewhat  off  the  land,  but  to  lee-wards ;
so  to  our  disturbance,  wee  all  day  and  night  kept  off  and
on  under  saile,  for  feare  lest  in  the  night  they  should
slippe  into  Aden.

Note  that  any  ship  wee  heere  saw,  before  wee  could
come  to  speake  with  them,  there  hath  been  advise  sent
from  the  Governor  of  the  Towne  to  informe  them  of  us ;
and  when  we  had  the  Mallabar  under  command,  the  Gover-
nor sent  a  Boat  aboord  with  divers  Arabs,  and  two  Turkes
souldiers  of  the  Towne,  which  had  formerly  been  instru-
ments to  Abdraheman  Aga,  to  bind  and  torture  our  men
then  in  their  hands,  which  now  seeing  the  men  they  used
ill,  brought  them  in  no  small  doubt  what  their  usage  now
should  be,  as  their  guiltie  conscience  pricked  them,  whom
I  suppose  came  as  spies  to  see  what  wee  did,  brought  some

282

NICHOLAS DOWNTOX  a.».

i  6  i  2.

fruit  to  sell :  at  the  first  sight  of  our  men,  whom  they
knew,  they  would  faine  have  put  off  their  Boat  and  been
gone,  but  I  would  not  permit  them  ;  causing  them  to  be
put  in  mind  of  their  behaviour  formerly  towards  our  A  prill.
people  in  their  hand,  and  when  without  any  evill  speech
given  them,  I  thought  them  sufficiently  by  their  own
minds  terrified,  I  caused  to  be  told  them,  that  they  should
see  how  far  our  Nation  differeth  from  the  rigour  of  injuri-
ous Turkes,  which  most  cruelly  handled  our  men  without
offence,  whom  by  all  faire  promises  they  betrayed  ;  and
that  I  yet  knowing  them  to  have  exercised  their  forces  in
abusing  my  men,  yet  notwithstanding  I  would  without
discurtesie  or  harme,  dismisse  or  send  them  away ;  who
presently  departed,  with  many  promises  the  next  day  to
bring  us  more  refreshing :  the  next  morning  they  sent  us
a  boat  with  good  fish,  and  promising  to  come  anon  with
better  provisions,  which  they  were  providing :  but  by
reason  of  my  setting  saile,  and  standing  off,  to  put  the
Malabar  to  lee-ward  towards  the  Red-sea,  I  was  too  farre
for  them  to  row  unto  me,  which  ship,  if  shee  had  stayed,
might  have  been  occasion  that  the  Aga  might  have  per-
mitted them  to  performe  their  promises  to  us.

The  fourteenth  in  the  morning,  the  wind  at  East,  wee  4  ihlP  °.
discried  another  ship  of  like  burthen,  bound  also  for  Aden,
which  about  ten  a  clocke  we  forced  to  anchor :  I  sent
aboord  to  search  her,  and  to  bring  away  some  of  her  men,
while  I  caused  my  Boat  to  bee  hoysed  out ;  understanding
they  were  of  Pormean,  a  Towne  not  farre  from  Cutts-
nagone,  being  tributaries  to  the  great  Mogoll,  who  de-
spised our  King,  and  abused  our  Nation  ;  the  Nohuda
being  a  Bannian,  I  with  this  ship  being  at  an  anchor  some
two  miles  from  Aden,  our  enemies,  and  finding  by  the
Mallabars  working  the  day  before,  that  if  any  other  saile,
of  never  so  much  importance,  should  approch  this  place,
before  I  could  finish  my  businesse  with  this,  I  must  either
leave  the  one  or  the  other  to  their  owne  will ;  for  which
respect  I  was  more  carefull  to  send  to  search  what  shee
had  in  her,  by  my  owne  people,  then  to  examine  them

283

P  or  mean.

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1612.
Our  men belonging  to  her,  what  was  in  her. So  with  great  labour
unlade  this jn  romagjng  before  the  darknesse  of  the  night  over-tooke
'  us,  we  had  out  of  her  fourteene  packes  of  course  Duttie,

of  sixe  corges  a  packe  ;  and  sixe  and  thirtie  Ballets,  con-
taining some  six  and  thirtie  corges  of  Dutties  course  ;  one
small  Ballet  of  Candekins  mill  (or  small  blew  pieces  of
Callico)  with  some  thirtie  or  more  Bastas  white,  a  little
Butter  and  Lamp-oyle,  which  was  all  fit  for  us,  yet  dis-
covered the  rest  of  her  loading,  being  packes  of  Cotton-
[I.  iii.  307.]  wooll,  as  we  tearme  it,  which  the  next  day  we  thought
further  to  examine.  This  day  Maharim  Aga  of  Aden,
sent  me  a  present  of  Henne-egges,  Limes  and  Plantans,
which  I  would  not  looke  at,  as  to  receive  as  a  Present,  but
by  the  messenger  I  sent  the  Aga  word,  that  the  varitie  of
injuries  done  unto  my  friends  and  Nation  heere  the  last
yeere,  hath  constrained  my  present  approach,  to  do  my
Nation  and  my  selfe  what  right  I  may,  to  the  disturbance
of  the  Turkes.  And  as  my  comming  hither  was  not  to
deserve  any  favour  from  them  ;  so  my  meaning  was  to
forbeare  to  receive  any  of  their  dissembling  curtesies :
for  since  they  cut  our  throats  when  we  came  to  them  in
friendship,  what  may  we  expect  from  them  now,  when  we
come  in  hate  and  dispight  of  the  Turkes  of  all  these  parts  :
but  in  regard  it  was  sent,  my  people  should  give  them  for
their  owne  use,  so  much  as  the  things  were  worth  ;  also
there  came  aboord  a  fisher-boat,  bringing  good  store  of
fresh-fish,  which  I  caused  to  be  bought  for  our  suppers,
Feare  of  alwayes  making  the  bringer  to  eate  part  of  what  hee
poysoning.  brought.

The  sixe  and  twentieth  in  the  morning,  we  discried  a
saile  to  the  Southwards  of  Aden,  plying  to  the  Eastwards,
to  whom  in  the  after-noone  I  sent  my  Pinnasse,  which
brought  her  in  neare  unto  us,  shee  being  a  Jelba  of  Shaher
bound  home,  laden  with  Graine  and  other  commodities,
as  Opium  and  others,  also  divers  Pilgrims  from  Mecca
were  passengers  in  her  bound  home.

The  seven  and  twentieth  in  the  morning,  we  saw  a
Jelba  plying  to  the  Eastwards  betweene  us  and  the  shoare,

284

NICHOLAS DOWNTON

wherefore  I  sent  my  Pinnasse  to  fetch  her  off,  whom  I
found  to  bee  the  same  Jelha  of  Shaher,  that  had  passed  by
us  the  seventeenth  and  two  and  twentieth  of  this  present,
as  aforesaid  :  of  them  for  a  triall  we  bought  nine  pound
and  a  halfe  of  Opium,  and  so  againe  dismist  them.

The  eight  and  twentieth  in  the  morning,  we  set  saile,
plying  off  and  on  to  windwards  of  Aden,  with  the  wind
at  East.  The  nine  and  twentieth,  still  under  saile,  as
aforesaid  in  the  after-noone,  we  discried  two  sailes  stand-
ing towards  Aden,  unto  whom  in  the  evening  I  sent  off
my  Pinnasse  well  mand,  to  bring  them  in  neare  unto  the
ship,  which  by  foure  a  clocke  the  thirtieth  day  was  effected  ;
they  both  belonged  to  a  place  on  the  Abaxin  Coast,  called
Bander  Zeada,  the  one  of  them  laden  only  with  Mats ;
the  other  with  some  Mats,  and  threescore  and  eight  sheepe
with  great  rumpes,  which  we  bought  of  them,  and  so  dis-
mist them,  who  presently  set  saile  and  went  in  unto  Aden,
the  wind  at  East  South-East,  East  and  North-east.

The  eighth,  with  an  easie  gale  of  wind  at  North-east  by
East,  we  continued,  plying  towards  the  Bab.  At  tenne  a
clocke,  we  discried  the  land  on  the  Abaxin  Coast  side,
which  at  first  shewed  like  an  Hand,  but  approaching  a
little  neerer,  we  plainly  perceived  it  to  be  the  maine  land  :
from  thence  we  steered  away  North-west  towards  the  Bab,
which  by  estimation  was  some  tenne  leagues  distant,  which
at  neere  foure  in  the  afternoone  we  discried,  where  wee
lay  lingering  off  and  on  to  spend  the  night.  Day  light
appearing,  we  stood  in  towards  the  Bab,  where  in  "the
entrance  of  the  Bab,  we  discried  a  small  saile  a  sterne  of
us,  comming  into  the  straight ;  wherefore  I  strucke  my
top-sailes  to  stay  for  her,  and  sent  off  my  Pinnasse  to  her,
who  comming  up  with  us  againe,  brought  the  Nohuda
and  Malim  aboord,  whom  I  examined,  and  found  them  to
bee  subjects  to  the  great  Mogol ;  they  belonged  to  a
place  called  Larree,  situate  at  the  mouth  of  the  River  of
Zinde  :  with  them  I  luft  up  into  a  bay  on  the  East  side,
and  anchored  in  seven  fathome ;  I  sending  my  Merchants
to  search  what  she  was  laden  with,  who  found  divers  packs

285

A.Ij.

1 6 1 2 .

BanderZeada
a  place  on  the
AbaxinCoast.

May.

A  ship  of
Larree  stand-
ing at  the
mouth  of  the
river  of  Zinde.

A.D.

1612.

A  ship  of  zoo.
Tunnes.

The  Maha-
mody  of
Dabul.

A  ship  of
Cuts-nagone,
a  place  not
farre  from
Zinde.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

and  fardels  of  cloath,  packs  and  fardels  of  seedes  of  divers
sorts,  leather,  jarres  of  Butter,  and  oyle  (whereof  some
they  eate,and  some  they  burne  in  lamps)  a  great  quantitie  :
and  since  for  want  of  water,  she  having  many  Passengers,
I  could  not  fitly  keepe  her  with  me,  being  uncertaine  of
wind  I  resolved  to  take  out  of  her  the  likeliest  packs  of
Indian  Cloath  to  serve  for  our  turnes,  with  some  Butter
and  Oyle  for  our  needfull  uses,  as  by  the  Pursers  and
Factors  notes  appeare,  and  so  dispeeded  them  to  Moha.
Into  which  businesse  before  we  could  well  make  an  entrie,
about  three  a  clocke  in  the  afternoone,  I  discried  opening
the  East  land  of  the  straights,  a  ship  of  two  hundred
Tunnes ;  and  immediately  following  her  an  huge  saile,
whose  maine  yard  was  fortie  three  yards  long.  At  sight
of  which  ship  (they  being  very  neere  before  the  land  per-
mitted me  to  see  them)  by  what  time  I  had  gotten  my
people  aboord,  five  onely  excepted,  which  I  left  armed  to
keepe  the  ship  of  Larree,  had  gotten  up  my  anchor,  and
was  come  to  saile ;  but  the  great  shippe  though  short  of
me,  yet  beeing  in  a  good  streame,  and  a  fresh  gale,  and  I
in  a  Bay  had  a  eddy  and  faint  gale,  she  got  an  end,  &  had
somewhat  over-reacht  me  before  I  could  come  to  crosse
them,  so  that  I  was  brought  to  a  sterne  chase,  and  being
come  neere  her,  by  her  masts  and  tops  wee  knew  her  to
be  the  Mahomedy  of  Dabull  our  friend,  which  we  could
expect  no  good  by  ;  yet  knowing  the  pride  of  the  Captaine,
I  would  very  gladly  have  commanded  over  him,  for  that
he  would  never,  neither  formerly  in  the  Road  of  Moha,
nor  yet  at  Dabull  come  to  visit  Sir  Henry  Middleton,  but
I  found  he  reacht  from  me,  wherefore  I  gave  them  one
shot  and  stood  with  the  other  ship,  who  seeing  us  stand
with  the  great  shippe  strucke  a  Hull  thinking  to  lose  us
by  the  darknesse  of  the  night  now  approaching :  I  tooke
her  to  be  a  ship  of  Diu,  but  when  we  came  to  them,  they
told  us  they  were  of  Cuts-nagone,  a  place  not  farre  from
the  river  of  Zinde,  her  lading  Cotton-wool,  some  few
packs  of  Indian  cloth,  some  Butter  and  Oyle  :  having
gotten  some  of  her  principall  men  aboord  me,  I  caused

286

NICHOLAS DOWNTON  A4>,

l6l2,

them  to  edge  up  with  me  into  shoale  water  on  the  Arab
Coast,  where  by  lights  I  endeavoured  to  find  out  my  five
men  in  the  Larree  ship  ;  and  at  midnight  we  anchored  in
twelve  fathome,  foure  leagues  within  the  Bab  ;  where  the  [I.  iii.  308.]
next  two  dayes  we  tooke  out  of  the  Larree  ship,  sixtie
sixe  fardels  of  Indian  Cloath  (which  for  that  we  were  other-
wise furnished  for  all  our  English  Commodities,  and  needed
it  not,  was  redelivered  to  them  againe,  with  part  of  the
Butter  and  Oyle  ;  onely  eight  Corges  of  Bastas,  for  which
they  had  content.)  These  things  beeing  taken  out,  I  put
into  them  the  Passengers  and  Pilgrims  of  the  Cotton  ship,
they  using  their  best  diligence  as  the  wind  would  permit
them  to  hasten  to  Moha,  I  sending  by  them  a  letter  to  Sir
Henry  Middleton,  if  they  should  finde  him  in  the  Roade  :
but  before  they  departed,  we  seeing  a  Jelba  comming  from
the  Bab,  and  for  that  the  wind  was  not  good,  they  sent
away  their  Canoa,  rowing  before,  and  hastning  to  us,  who
informed  me,  his  Jelba  belonged  to  Bender  Zeada,  a
Towne  on  the  Abaxin  Coast,  halfe  a  dayes  journey  West-
ward from  Bender  Cassum,  who  was  bound  to  Moha  with
his  Boat  full  of  Mats,  who  going  a  land  as  he  passed  the
Bab,  was  told  by  one  that  had  a  letter  for  me,  that  my
Countrey-men  whom  I  looked  for  were  gone  to  Assab,
with  eight  or  nine  Indian  ships,  but  he  that  had  the  letter
would  not  send  it  by  him,  expecting  a  reward,  if  by  the
wind  I  should  be  put  backe  to  the  Bab.  I  now  knowing
where  my  General!  was,  this  afternoone  set  saile  ;  but  the
wind  not  favouring  me  we  anchored  againe.

§•  VI.

Their  barter  with  the  Indian  ships,  and  departure
to  Sumatra.

He  next  day  in  the  morning,  S.  Henry  Middleton
sent  Giles  Thorneton  his  Master, to  certifie  me
how  glad  he  was  of  my  comming ; and  to  let  me
know  that  he  had  at  command  all  the  desired  ships  of  ^Z  "j-™"
India,  as  the  Rehemy  of  burthen  fifteene  hundred  tunnes, Tunnes

287

The  Re  he  my  a
00.

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1612.

the  Hassany  of  sixe  hundred,  the  Mahumady  of  one
hundred  and  fiftie  tunnes  of  Surat,  the  Sallamitae  of  foure
hundred  and  fiftie  tunnes,  the  Cadree  of  two  hundred
tunnes,  the  Azum  Cany,  the  Sabandar  of  Moha  his  ship
of  two  hundred  tunnes  all  of  Diu,  besides  three  Mallabar
ships ;  the  Cadree  of  Dabul  of  foure  hundred  tunnes,
and  a  great  ship  of  Cananor.  He  further  informed  me,
that  before  I  could  get  into  the  Road,  the  Generall  with
all  the  pride  of  his  people,  and  Captaine  Saris  with  his
people,  would  be  gone  on  shoare  to  receive  the  King  of
Rahita,  who  was  come  with  his  Nobilitie  and  Guard,  to
see  and  visit  the  Generall,  and  new  come  Generall.  The
Captaine  dav  beeing  neere  spent,  S.  Henry  Middleton  and  Captain
Saris  left  the  King  in  his  Tent,  and  went  aboord  the
Trades-increase  to  supper,  where  I  understood  of  a  con-
tract made  betweene  them  first  at  the  Bab,  wherein  it  was
agreed,  here  to  put  off  all  our  English  goods,  for  such
Indian  wares,  as  by  mutuall  consent  of  certaine  of  the
Merchants  of  both  sides  should  be  thought  fit.

Neere  about  that  time,  as  I  was  also  informed,  there
came  from  the  Governour  of  Moha  to  Sir  Henry  Middle-
ton,  to  capitulate  of  peace,  Mammy  Captaine  of  the
Gallies,  and  others,  who  demanded  what  was  the  summe
that  in  satisfaction  he  required :  Sir  Henry  Middleton
neere  the  proportion  of  the  last  yeares  demand,  required
one  hundred  thousand  Rialls  of  eight ;  which  knowne,
they  desired  respite  to  send  to  Zenan,  to  know  the  pleasure
and  resolution  of  Jessor  Basha  therein  ;  and  then  he  should
heare  from  them  againe,  and  so  tooke  their  leave.  By
Sir  Henry  Middletons  direction,  the  Darling  was  in  pre-
paring with  a  small  Cargazon  of  Indian  cloaths  to  be  gone
for  Tecoa.

The  nineteenth,  the  Darling  departed  towards  Tecoa.
Also  Captaine  Saris  prepared  the  Thomas  to  follow  the
Darling  to  Tecoa ;  who  also  departed  the  three  and
twentieth  day.  This  day  also  Sir  Henry  Middleton  dis-
missed a  ship  of  Diu  (called  the  Azumcany)  belonging  to
Shermall  Sabander  of  Moha.

288

NICHOLAS DOWNTON  a.d.

1612.

The  thirtieth,  a  generall  meeting  was  aboord  the  Trades-
increase  at  dinner,  where  Captaine  Saris  and  Captainc
Towerson  were  invited,  for  the  further  conference  of  our
present  businesse.  At  noone  there  came  over  from  Moha
the  Sabander  of  Moha,  Mammy  Captaine  of  the  Gallies,
and  an  Aga,  they  all  appointed  by  the  Basha,  to  conferre
with  Sir  Henrie  Middleton  about  an  agreement,  for  satis-
faction of  our  former  abuses,  the  summe  whereof  they
demaunded  of  Sir  Henrie  Middleton,  who  as  formerly
required  one  hundred  thousand  Ryals  of  eight,  and  seeing
nothing  to  be  abated  thereof,  they  desired  leave  to  have
conference  with  the  Nohudas,  or  Captaines  of  the  Indian
ships,  and  other  principall  Merchants  (which  was
graunted)  which  as  it  seemed  was  to  trie  what  customes
they  could  augment  upon  the  Indian  goods,  towards  pay-
ment of  the  said  summe :  so  they  departed  on  shoare,
where  they  had  prepared  for  them  a  faire  Tent :  but  divers
of  the  Nohudas,  in  regard  of  former  injuries,  either  forbore
conference,  or  with-stood  their  augmentation,  which  seeing
by  no  meanes  to  be  accomplished,  they  tooke  leave  of  Sir
Henry  Middleton,  promising  so  soone  as  they  had  answer
from  the  Basha,  they  would  give  him  knowledge  thereof,
and  what  therein  they  may  doe :  and  so  againe  the  ninth  June%
of  June  they  departed  toward  Moha.  All  this  time  our
people  were  employed  in  romaging,  opening,  packing,  and
repacking  of  Indian  cloaths  fit  for  our  turnes,  giving  them
of  our  English  commodities  in  liew  thereof.

The  eleventh,  Sir  Henry  Middleton  with  the  Trades-  July.
increase,  and  Captain  Saris  with  the  Clove  and  Hector, TheJ  dePart
departed  the  road  of  Assab,  carrying  with  them  in  company  *™\  ^
towards Moha all the Indian ships. But I with the  rj.  \{i  30q  1
Pepper-corne  remained  in  the  roade,  with  a  small  shippe  A  small  ship
called  the  Jungo,  into  whom  I  re-delivered  all  the  goods  ^lled  the
that  I  had  formerly  taken  out  of  her,  the  ninth  and  tenth  Ju"S°-
of  May.

The  twelfth,  at  three  of  the  clocke  in  the  morning,  we
both  set  saile,  following  our  Admirall  and  the  rest  towards
Moha ; but  the  wind  being  adverse,  together  with  a  lee-
iii  289  t

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1612.

tide,  we  were  forced  to  anchor  neere  three  leagues  to  the
Lee-ward  of  the  Road.  The  thirteenth,  at  nine  of  the
clocke  in  the  morning,  the  wind  and  tide  somewhat  favour-
able, we  all  weighed,  and  stood  up  with  the  Roade,  where
about  foure  of  the  clocke  in  the  afternoone  we  anchored.
The  nineteenth,  Sir  Henry  Middleton  perceiving  that
the  Turkes  intended  nothing  but  delaies,  further  to  abuse
us,  who  now  in  our  owne  view  laboured  in  unlading  of  a
ship  of  Cuts-nagone,  laden  with  Cotton,  which  Sir  Henry
Middleton  determined  to  hinder,  till  such  time  as  the
Turkes  should  have  made  agreement  with  him  for  his
wrongs  sustained,  and  therefore  came  aboord  the  Pepper-
corne,  by  whose  direction  I  warped  in  neerer  unto  them,
discharging  at  them  divers  peeces  of  Ordnance,  till  they
ceased  their  labour.  Also  all  this  weeke  following  they
kept  us  in  hand  with  delayes,  but  made  no  agreement
at  all.

The  sixe  and  twentieth,  Sir  Henry  Middleton,  and
Captaine  Saris  appointed  a  meeting  aboord  the  Mahumody
of  Dabul,  where  all  the  Nohudas  of  the  Indian  ships  being
sent  for,  S.  Henry  Middleton  (as  often  times  before)
related  unto  them  the  wrongs  and  damages  sustained  from
the  Turkes,  with  whom  (till  he  received  satisfaction  from
them  for  the  same)  hee  could  in  no  wise  permit  them  to
trade.  But  notwithstanding  he  had  already  quited  him-
selfe  for  the  injuries  sustained  in  India ;  yet  must  also
now  be  forced  to  carrie  out  of  this  Sea  with  him,  all  the
Indian  ships,  that  this  yeere  by  them  the  Turkes  may
receive  no  benefit.  But  the  Indians  seeing  that  by  reason
of  the  Turkes  abuses  and  delayes,  it  was  likely  to  proove
unto  them  an  unprofitable  Monson,  though  their  departure
would  be  much  prejudicial  to  the  Turks  without  trading
with  them,  by  reason  of  the  losse  of  their  Customes ;  yet
rather  then  to  carry  backe  againe  their  Indian  Commodi-
ties, they  desired  to  make  a  composition  with  Sir  Henry
Middleton  and  Captaine  Saris,  every  ship  severally  to  pay
a  certaine  summe  of  money,  and  we  to  forbeare  to  hinder
their  quiet  trade. Upon  this  proffer  made  by  the  Indians,

290

NICHOLAS DOWNTON  a.d.

1612.

Sir  Henry  Middleton  after  good  consideration,  having  no
meanes  to  force  satisfaction  from  the  Turkes,  without
further  prejudicing  of  the  Indians,  and  therefore  at  present
determined  to  accept  of  their  offer,  still  leaving  the  satis-
faction due  from  the  Turkes,  till  future  time.  And  to
begin  withall,  composition  was  this  day  made  with  Meere
Mahumet  Tackey,  Nohuda  of  the  Rehemy,  for  fifteene
thousand  Rials  of  eight,  she  being  in  value  neere  equall  to
the  other  foure  ships.

The  sixth  of  August,  composition  being  made  with  all  August.
the Indian ships, and their severall summes in part  C?Ptain
received,  Captaine  Saris  dispeeded  away  his  Vice-Admirall,  departethfrom
Captaine  Towerson  in  the  Hector,  who  this  day  departed  the  Red  Sea.
the Red Sea. The thirteenth, Captaine Saris having  Genera// Saris
received  all  moneyes  due  to  him  by  composition  from  the  dePa^tetJlfrom
Indians,  departed  the  Red  Sea.  They  leave  the

The  sixteenth,  at  eight  of  the  clocke  in  the  morning,  Red  Sea,  and
we  set  saile  with  the  Trades-increase,  and  Pepper-corne,  coasting  the
and  about  nine  a  clocke  at  night,  we  anchored  eight  leagues  East  lldlp
short  of  the  Bab,  in  seven  fathome  water. The  seven-  ^S0^0J„ ***
teenth,  at  five  of  the  clocke  in  the  morning,  wee  set  saile  Zelan,  and  so
with  little  wind ; and  at  two  of  the  clocke  afternoone,  to  Sumatra.
we  againe  passed  the  streight  of  Bab-mandel ; and  from
thence  at  sixe  of  the  clocke,  we  were  East  South-east  seven
leagues  :  from  sixe  a  clocke  to  tenne  a  clocke  the  eighteenth
day,  we  lay  becalmed, so  that  her  way  was  not  to  be
regarded : from tenne  a  clocke to Sun-set, East-wards
some  three  leagues,  and  before  seven  a  clocke,  we  anchored
in  one  and  twentie  fathome,  two  miles  from  the  Coast  of
Arabia,  thwart  of  the  East  end  of  the  great  Mountaine,
and  seventeene  leagues  from  the  Bab.

The  nineteenth,  at  sun-setting,  the  said  Mountaine  bore
North- West  by  West,  some  eight  leagues  distant.  All
this  night,  and  the  twentieth  after  noone,  the  winds  so
variable,  that  wee  were  alwaies  trimming  of  our  sailes  from
tacke  to  tacke :  so  that  betweene  the  disadvantage  of  the
winds,  and  the  Current  together,  we  were  set  so  farre
backe  west-wards,  as  brought  the  said  Mountaine  North

291

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1612.

North-west  of  us  againe.  At  eleven  a  clocke,  the  wind
came  at  West  a  fresh  gale,  and  at  Sunne-set  the  high  land
of  Aden  bore  North-east  by  East  eight  leagues  off.  All
this  night  following,  we  had  very  little  wind  and  variable,
so  that  the  one  and  twentieth  at  Sun-rising,  we  perceived
our  selves  lost,  at  least  two  leagues  west-ward.  From
Sun-rising  till  noone,  we  had  a  small  gale  of  wind,  increas-
ing stronger  and  stronger  at  South-west,  and  South-west
by  South  :  so  that  I  esteemed  to  have  gone  East  South-east
some  nine  leagues.  At  Sun-set,  Aden  bore  North  North-
east seven  leagues  off,  by  a  meridian  Compasse.  All  this
night  was  in  a  manner  calme,  from  foure  a  clocke  in  the
morning  to  Sun-set,  being  foure  and  twentie  houres  I
estimate  to  have  gone  some  fifteene  leagues,  at  which  time
Aden  bore  North-west  halfe  North  distant  five  leagues,
being  cleare  weather.

The  three  and  twentieth  we  descried  the  Abaxin  Coast
beeing  fifteene  leagues  distant,  and  cleare  weather.  The
Force  of  a  siXe  and  twentieth,  we  found  such  a  Current,  that  though
we  lie  up  North-east  by  East,  North-east  or  North  North-
east, we  made  our  way  all  Easterly,  being  carried  to  the
South-ward  by  force  of  the  Current.  The  nine  and
310.]  twentieth,  we  againe  descried  land,  which  for  the  highnesse
we  at  first  esteemed  to  be  the  land  of  Cape  Guardafui,  but
the  clouds  clearing  up  from  the  tops  of  the  hils,  we  plainely
perceived  it  to  be  the  same  land  seene  yesterday,  whereby
we  the  better  understood  how  the  Current  had  abused  us,
which  by  my  estimate  setteth  neerest  South-west.

From  the  thirtieth  in  the  morning,  to  the  one  and
thirtieth  at  noone,  wee  found  that  the  Current  had  set  us
to  the  North-ward  of  our  course  from  the  last  day  at
noone,  what  time  our  latitude  was  twelve  degrees  and
thirtie  five  minutes,  to  the  first  of  September  at  noone,
the  wind  at  South  East-wards,  and  not  to  have  runne  above
twelve  leagues,  and  by  our  latitude  being  thirteene  degrees
thirty  minutes,  we  find  our  selves  almost  a  degree  differing
to  the  North-wards,  and  also  to  have  lost  to  the  West-
wards, as  by  the  variation  appeareth,  beeing  lesse  by  fiftie

292

Current.

NICHOLAS DOWNTON

A.D.

1612.

Snakes  swim-
ming on  the
top  of  the
water,  a  signe
of  being  neere
the  Coast  of
India.

five  minutes,  by  reason  whereof  I  estimate  the  Current
there  to  set  neerest  North-East.

The  second,  third,  fourth,  fifth,  sixth,  seventh,  eighth,  September
and  ninth  dayes,  wee  had  all  for  the  most  part  close
weather.  The  tenth  and  eleventh  cloudy  weather,  with
often  showers  of  raine.  The  twelfth,  we  saw  divers  snakes
swimming  on  the  toppe  of  the  water,  which  in  boysterous
weather  sildome  appeare,  yet  an  apparent  signe  of  beeing
neere  the  coast  of  India.  The  thirteenth  we  also  saw  more
snakes.  This  day  we  had  sounding  from  fiftie  five  to
fortie  fathome.

The  foureteenth  in  the  morning,  at  Sun-rising  we
discryed  high  land,  bearing  East  by  North  some  sixteene
leagues,  we  stood  in  East  by  South  till  foure  a  clocke
afternoone,  till  the  neerest  sea-coast  land  betweene  us  and
the  high  land,  bore  East  eight  leagues  off,  what  time  we
directed  our  course  South  alongst  the  Coast  of  India,  wee
found  the  water  for  the  most  part  muddy  and  thicke,  and
some  sudden  spots  of  cleere :  our  depth  while  we  stood
in  East  and  by  South  were  from  thirtie  to  twentie  fathome  ;
and  in  our  South  course  edging  into  sixteene  fathome,
and  so  to  five  and  twentie  fathome.

The  fifteenth,  we  still  kept  at  the  like  depths,  having  a
gentle  gale  at  North  North-west,  and  cleere  water,  but  no
snakes  appeared.  The  sixeteenth,  running  alongst  the
Coast  of  India  or  Mallabar,  betweene  twentie  and  sixteene
fathome ;  about  one  a  clocke  we  were  West  from  an  high
hill  of  especiall  note,  which  stretcheth  out  like  a  point  into
the  Sea,  having  all  low  land  to  Sea-wards ;  on  the  North-
side,  the  land  fell  away  to  the  East-wards,  and  on  the
South-side  maketh  a  Bay ;  the  highest  of  this  Sea-coast
Mountaine,  standeth  neerest  in  twelve  degrees  ten  minutes,
which  should  be  the  land  of  Magricilan.

The  seventeenth,  the  wind  came  opposite  to  us  at  South-
west, at  two  a  clocke  in  the  morning,  with  thicke  weather,
and  much  raine,  continuing  till  day-light,  wee  on  a  Lee-
shoare,  and  an  unknowne  Coast,  what  time  the  wind  veered
up  to  the  North-wards,  and  we  edged  off  into  deeper

293

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1612.

water.  In  this  gustie  time,  we  lost  company  of  our
Admirall,  but  at  day-light  the  weather  clearing  up,  we
came  together,  directing  our  course  againe  to  the  South-
ward, being  edged  off  from  the  land.

The  eighteenth,  the  land  beeing  all  foggie,  was  hardly
to  be  discerned,  the  most  part  of  our  way  this  day,  beeing
by  the  helpe  of  the  Current,  our  depths  all  this  day  were
betweene  five  and  twentie,  and  nine  and  twentie  fathom,
all  Ozie  ground.  The  nineteenth,  we  were  some  foureteene
leagues  distant  from  the  Coast,  the  wind  at  South-west,
faire  weather,  with  some  little  drisling  raine,  till  nine  a
clocke  at  night,  no  ground  at  fortie  fathome.  From  nine
to  eleven  a  clocke  at  night,  we  had  a  very  vehement
showre  of  raine,  and  the  wind  very  little  Northerly,  and
after  the  raine  East  North-east,  our  depth  at  midnight  was
fortie  foure  fathome,  beeing  by  estimation  some  tenne
leagues  off  the  land  of  Mallabar.  The  twentieth,  we
had  faire  weather,  the  wind  very  variable,  our  depths  fortie
foure  and  fortie  five  fathome  all  day,  beeing  Ozie  ground.
The  one  and  twentieth,  we  had  very  little  wind,  variable
till  three  a  clocke  afternoone,  when  fell  abundance  of  raine,
with  the  wind  at  North  North-west,  thicke  weather,  and
fortie  five  fathome  water. The  two  and  twentieth  in  the

Cape  Com-  morning  at  nine  a  clocke,  we  discried  the  Cape  Commerin  :
and  by  my  neerest  estimation  the  Coast  here  lieth  away
South-east  alongst  unto  the  Cape.

The  three  and  twentieth,  we  had  faire  weather,  and  the
wind  at  South-west  by  West,  discrying  the  high  land  to
the  East-wards  of  the  Cape  Commerin,  at  neere  five  a
clocke  afternoone,  bearing  North  North-west,  distant
eighteene  leagues.  The  foure  and  twentieth,  we  had  a
very  stiffe  gale  of  wind  betweene  the  South  South-west
and  West,  and  much  raine,  clouds  and  fogge,  and  our
course  East  South-east,  by  a  reformed  Compasse,  at  five
a  clocke  after  noon  we  had  sight  of  Zeilan  through  the
fogge,  rising  all  full  of  Humocks,  and  bearing  from  the
North-east  by  East,  to  the  South-east  by  South,  some  sixe
leagues  distant. The  five  and  twentieth,  from  breake  of

294

menu.

NICHOLAS DOWNTON

A.D.

1612.

day  till  noone,  we  were  pestered  with  varietie  of  gusts  and
showers  of  raine,  the  wind  being  large,  but  the  weather
clearing  up  about  noone,  we  discried  the  Souther-most
point  of  Zeiland,  called  the  Cape  de  Galle,  bearing  North  Zeilan.
North-east  distant  five  leagues,  finding  the  latitude  thereof
to  bee  five  degrees  fortie  minutes.

The  sixe  and  twentieth,  seven  and  twentieth,  and  eight
and  twentieth,  wee  had  faire  weather,  with  some  fewe
droppings  of  raine,  and  the  wind  between  the  South-west
and  West  South-west.  The  nine  and  twentieth  and  thir-
tieth, we  continued  our  course  East  South-east,  the  wind  [I.  iii.  jii.]
constant  betweene  the  South-west  and  West  South-west,
with  very  much  raine,  and  vehement  sudden  gusts  of  short
continuance,  and  followed  with  an  easie  steering  gale.
The  thirtieth,  in  our  bread  roome  we  found  much  harme
done  to  our  wheat  by  wet ;  also  al  our  course  Dutties  or
browne  Callicoes  of  Pormean  (for  sailes)  put  there  for  most
securitie,  wee  found  twentie  pieces  rotten.

The  nineteenth,  at  three  a  clocke  after  noone,  we
anchored  in  the  road  of  Tecoa,  where  wee  found  the
Darling,  who  had  continued  there  from  July  (unto  our
comming  in)  in  a  great  part  of  the  raines,  which  are  not
yet  ended,  they  having  before  our  comming  buried  three
Merchants,  and  three  Sailors,  to  wit,  John  Fowler,  Francis
Glanfield,  and  William  Speed.  Also  they  had  most  of
their  men  sicke,  and  had  gotten  but  little  Pepper,  which
remaineth  on  the  Hand,  and  little  more  is  here  to  be  had,
untill  the  next  season,  which  will  be  Aprill  and  May ;  but
the  civill  warres  is  a  hinderance  to  our  trade.  Here  also
we  found  the  Thomas,  a  ship  of  the  eighth  Voyage,  beeing
newly  come  from  Priaman,  where  they  had  as  slender
successe  as  our  Darling  here.  Here  wee  heard  of  the  safe
returne  and  prosperous  successe  of  Captaine  David
Middleton  his  Voyage ;  also  of  the  foure  ships  of  the
ninth  Voyage,  whereof  two  were  alreadie  arrived  at
Bantam ;  also  of  Captaine  Castleton  his  man  of  warre,
who  having  been  here  lately  informed  of  fifteene  saile  of
Hollanders  alreadie  come,  or  neere  hand,  all  laden  with

295

October.
Tecoa  in
Sumatra.

Civill  warres
an  hindrance
to  our  Trade.

Captaine

Castleton.

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1612.

munition,  and  of  two  ships  of  New-haven  in  France  come
also  to  trade,  all  which  quell  the  life  of  the  present  hopes  of
our  out-tired,  crost,  and  decayed  Voyage.
Sir  Henry  The  two  and  twentieth,  Sir  Henry  Middleton  finding

Middleton  in  SQ  QQ^  comfort  at  tnis  place)  departed  the  night  following
come  hasteth  m  tne  Pepper-corne  towards  Bantam,  leaving  me  in  the
to  Bantam. Trades-increase  to  remaine  till  the  sixteenth  of  the  next

Moneth.

November.  The  second  of  November,  all  the  men  of  all  sorts  in

Raja  Boonesoo  Tecoa,  went  with  Raja  Boonesoo  to  the  warres,  till  whose

gpeth  to  the returne  we  can  expect  no  businesse  to  be  done  on  the

maine. This  day  in  taking  up  the  wine,  by  the  rottennesse

of  the  Caske,  there  prooved  great  leakeage.

The  twentieth,  we  fetcht  the  remaine  of  the  Pepper
weighed  the  day  before,  in  which  by  the  people  we  found
Great  deceit  of  much  deceit ;  in  some  bags  were  small  bags  of  Paddy,  in
e  a  ura  s.  some  Ricej  an(}  \n  some  great  stones :  also  rotten  &  wet
Pepper  put  into  new  drie  sacks,  to  our  further  abusing ;
yet  knowing  it,  we  have  no  remedie.  Having  gotten  all
things  in,  and  our  men  aboord,  we  fitted  our  things  to
hasten  away,  and  neere  midnight  in  the  Moone-shine,  the
wind  at  North-east  of  the  shoare,  we  set  saile  ;  we  wrought
not  onely  to  avoid  the  two  knowne  Rockes,  three  leagues
from  the  Hand  of  Tecoa,  the  one  South  by  West,  the  other
South  by  East,  having  sixe  and  twentie  fathome  between
them,  Ozie  ground :  But  for  the  better  securitie,  we
directed  our  course  so  neere  as  wee  could,  the  same  way
we  came  in ;  yet  as  we  stood  off,  the  wind  something
shrunke  on  us  ;  yet  we  lay  first  West,  then  West  by  South,
and  West  South-west,  and  last  of  all  South-west  and  by
West,  and  the  Current  set  us  somewhat  South-ward,  our
depths  proportional  from  foureteene  to  seven  and  twentie
fathome,  all  Ozie  ground ;  the  next  cast  foure  fathome,
The  ship  fast  anc[  the  ship  fast  on  a  rocke,  a  sterne  foure  fathome,  and
on  a  rocke.  on  ^q  Star-boord  mid-ship  a  quarter  lesse  then  three
fathomes,  and  under  the  head  three  fathomes,  a  ships
length  five  fathome,  a  ships  length  on  the  Lar-boord  bow
sixe  foot,  in  the  Lar-boord  mid-ship  sixteene  foote,  under

296

the  rocke.

NICHOLAS DOWNTON  <u>.

1612.

the  Lar-boord  gallery  twenty  foote,  and  round  about  within
a  Cables  length  deepe  water  : she  remained  on  the  rocke
from  a  little  after  three  untill  five  a  clocke  : the  merciful!
God  so  provided,  that  the  wind  grew  calme,  and  the  sea
smooth,  and  in  our  feeling,  the  set  or  motion  of  the  ship,
the  place  considered,  was  very  easie ; yet  the  water  did
so  increase,  that  both  our  chaine  Pumps  with  painefull
labour,  could  not  in  long  time  free  the  same. But  our
generall  endeavour,  with  most  expedition  possible,  was  to
get  out  a  sterne  anchor,  which  was  let  fall  in  sixe  and
twentie  fathome  right  asterne,  and  two  thirds  of  a  Cable
out,  to  heave  her  off  right  asterne  :  wherein  the  gracious
Lord  so  blessed  our  endeavours,  that  before  we  could  with
the  Capstaine  heave  the  Cable  taught,  the  ship  was  of  her Tfiey  &*  °ff
own  accord  set  into  deepe  water,  which  no  sooner  done,
but  we  had  a  Westerly  gust,  which  put  us  off  some  mile
from  the  rocke,  where  we  anchored  for  our  Boat,  which
brought  our  Cadger  after  us,  and  it  being  cleare  day,  we
could  not  discerne  where  the  rocke  stood  :  also  a  principall
reason  we  anchored  was,  our  exceeding  desires  and  haste
for  Bantam,  that  without  necessitie  enforced,  I  wished  not
to  put  backe  againe,  and  wast  more  time,  hoping  our  leake
would  easily  be  over-come  at  an  anchor. I  past  the  day
till  two  a  clocke,  consulting  and  advising  with  such  as  with
their  best  counsell  are  appointed  to  assist  me,  what  was
best  to  be  done,  our  present  estate  considered,  which  we
find  divers  wayes  to  rest  dangerous  : First,  in  regard  of
the  leakenesse  of  our  ship,  which  continually  imployes
many  people  at  once  to  keepe  downe  the  water. Secondly,
in  a  manner  no  provision  of  Iron-work  for  the  chaines,
but  that  the  Pumps  presently  employed,  which  often  break,
or  for  weakenes  slip  to  our  great  discomfort : for  if  they
should  be  any  long  while  in  mending,  and  the  water  so
increase,  that  we  cannot  reach  under  the  Pumpe  to  ceve
the  chaines, our  worke  will  soone  draw  neere  an end.
Thirdly,  the  desperate  carelesnesse  of  many  of  our  people,
in  the  greatest  neede  considered,  their  faint  weakenesse
and  inabilitie  to  hold  out  labour  (by  course  diet  as  they

297

A.D.

1612.

PURCHAS HIS PILGR1MES

They  returne
to  Tecoa.

December.

pretend.)  Fourthly,  to  remember  what  is  certaine  in  the
ship,  which  requires  care  to  preserve  it.  Fiftly,  Captaine
Sharpeighs  mis-fortunes,  and  the  lewd  demeanours  of  his
[I.  iii.  312.]  people,  in  like  case  of  greatest  need,  too  late  to  bee  for-
gotten. The  dangers  in  proceeding  diversly  cast  up
(notwithstanding,  at  the  first,  divers  of  our  men  did  urge
the  same)  by  counsell  reasonable  for  the  safegard  of  all,  I
made  choice  to  returne  within  the  Hand  of  Tecoa,  there
by  Gods  helpe  to  endeavour  the  stopping  of  such  a  part
of  our  leake,  as  we  found  to  be  in  the  fashioning  pieces
in  the  sterne.  At  Sun-set  we  anchored  in  the  place,  which
for  our  turnes  we  desired.  This  day  long  time  we  kept
both  our  chaine  pumps  going  to  free  the  water,  which  ever
increased  when  the  chaines  happened  to  breake,  which
happened  often  ;  the  two  pumpes  employes  at  once  twelve
men,  which  labour  indeed  is  so  extreame,  that  it  can  but
little  while,  without  shifting  of  spells  be  continued ;  but
the  water  once  brought  low,  and  the  chaine  holding  one
pumpe  at  once,  hath  ever  discharged  it,  and  yet  it  tires
all  our  people  by  often  shifting :  in  which  businesse,  1
found  it  required  more  then  ordinary  meanes  to  appease
their  discontented  clamours  and  murmurings,  if  the  place
might  have  afToorded.

The  two  and  twentieth,  three  and  twentieth,  and  foure
and  twentieth,  we  laboured  to  land  Indico,  Cinamom  and
other  things,  still  making  way  to  lighten  the  sterne  of  the
ship,  where  we  know  the  leake  is,  but  we  cannot  come
to  it.

Untill  the  eight  of  December,  we  were  thus  employed
in  the  amending  of  our  leakes :  which  done,  we  set  saile
from  Tecoa,  and  with  our  Boats  a  head,  we  gate  over
the  Barre,  having  foure  fathome  at  a  low  water,  and  being
without  the  Hand,  by  the  helpe  of  a  fine  breach  at  North
North-east,  North  North-west  and  North-west,  as  the
Sunne  grew  high,  both  dullerd  and  shrunk  upon  us ;  so
that  wee  lay  but  South  South-west,  and  South  by  West,
and  by  estimation  came  neare  the  rocke  we  had  formerly
sate  upon,  we  used  great  diligence  with  Boats  a  head,  but

298

NICHOLAS DOWNTON  m>.

1613.

could  discerne  no  shew  of  it,  the  sea  being  smooth ;
we  stood  away  to  the  Southwards,  South  by  West  and
South,  from  Sun-set,  to  Sun-rising  the  ninth  day,  with  a
small  gale,  at  North-west  by  West,  we  stood  away  South-
west by  South  ten  leagues,  and  the  wind  at  West  North-
west and  West,  at  which  instant  we  discried  some  part  of
a  great  Hand  bearing  South  Westerly,  at  which  time  we
steered  away  South ;  this  night  we  had  much  raine  in
gusts,  with  thunder  and  lightning,  the  wind  very  fickle,
shrinking  to  the  South-west,  and  South  South-west,  which
stayed  not  long ;  then  to  the  South-east,  East  South-east
and  East,  and  againe  to  the  South-east ;  in  which  time  to
Sun-rising  we  had  sailed  about  some  eight  leagues.  Also
that  part  of  the  Hand,  the  last  night  seene,  now  beareth
South-east  distant  eight  leagues,  also  Eastward  wee  see
the  high  land  of  the  maine  of  Sumatra,  neare  twentie  The  hl&h  iejnd
leagues,  at  noone  in  two  degrees  and  eleven  minutes  South  °ys  e  aine
latitude ;  and  the  Northermost  part  of  these  Hands  are  '
from  the  sound  we  came  through,  between  the  Wester  lies
South-east  distant  nine  leagues :  it  was  the  twentieth  day
before  they  arrived  at  Pulupanian.

The  Pepper-corne  being  fitted  there,  Sir  Henry  Middle-
ton  called  a  Councell  to  advise  touching  the  late  harmes
which  the  Trades-Increase,  had  received  upon  the  rocke :
by  which  Councell  it  was  resolved,  that  shee  must  of
necessitie  bee  new  strengthened  and  careend,  before  shee
could  well  returne  home ;  which  requiring  long  time,
whereby  shee  could  not  goe  home  this  yeere,  it  was
concluded  that  the  Pepper-Corne  should  immediatly  be
dispatched  for  England,  to  give  some  satisfaction  unto
the  Adventurers,  untill  the  Trades-Increase  might  follow.
The  Pepper-Corne  being  laden  on  the  fourth  of  February,
set  saile  from  thence  for  England,  leaving  Sir  Henry
Middleton  with  the  Trades-Increase  behind.  We  arrived
on  the  tenth  of  May  in  the  Road  of  Saldanie,  where  I  The  Road  °f
hoped  to  have  found  all  the  shippes  formerly  departed  a
homewards :  but  comming  into  the  Road,  I  only  found  Hector  and
the  Hector  and  Thomas,  two  ships  of  the  eight  Voyage,  Thomas.

299

A.D.
1613.

PURCHAS HIS PILGR1MES

Capta'ine
Newport.

and  Captaine  Newport  in  the  Expedition  of  the  twelfth
Voyage.  Heere  we  continued  but  foure  dayes ;  where,
with  the  helpe  of  Captaine  Newport  his  men  and  Coopers,
wee  had  taken  in  all  our  water,  and  the  fourteenth  day  at
night  ended  our  labour  therein.

The  fifteenth  having  watered  (but  no  whit  refreshed  our
weak  people  yet,  to  keepe  company  with  the  Hector  and
Thomas  homewards)  at  nine  a  clocke  in  the  morning  we  set
saile  with  the  wind  all  Southerly :  but  being  out,  we  were
much  pestered  with  opposite  wind,  wherby  we  were
driven  to  the  Southwards.  This  night  we  kept  company
with  the  Hector  and  Thomas  (the  Expedition  being  gotten
about  the  Cape  Bona  Speranza,  determining  their  course
towards  the  confines  of  Persia,  to  some  place  where  they
might  in  safetie  land  Sir  Robert  Sherly  and  his  Persian
Lady,  and  Sir  Thomas  Powell  with  his  English  Ladie,
who  were  bound  into  Persia,)  Also  the  next  day  we  were
all  in  company  together ;  but  toward  evening  the  Thomas
became  farre  a  sterne,  but  the  Hector  with  loftie  saile  bore
away.  This  night,  by  what  meanes  I  know  not,  they  lost
our  company,  which  by  all  meanes  we  againe  endeavoured
to  get :  and  for  that  by  standing  to  the  Southwards,  we
knew  they  could  not  run  us  out  of  sight ;  yet  we  thought
against  all  reason  to  stand  in  upon  a  lee-shoare,  stood  into
the  land-wards  to  seek  to  discover  them,  but  not  seeing
them,  we  lingred  in  for  them  untill  the  nineteenth  day
Sun-rising,  in  which  time  we  were  employed  in  repairing
our  weake  and  decayed  sailes.  This  day  at  Sun-rising,
Saldania  bore  South-east  halfe  a  degree  East  distant  seven-
teene  leagues,  the  weather  being  cloudie  and  darke.  The
twentieth,  one  and  twentieth  and  two  and  twentieth  daies,
cloudie,  dark  and  overcast  weather.

The  sixt  of  June,  as  we  came  about  the  North-east  point,

[I.  iii.  313.]  opening  the  Road,  and  being  luffed  in,  having  our  anchors

Two  Cat-ricks,  readie  to  let  fall,  we  discried  two  Carrickes  in  the  Roade,

whose  neighbourhood  was  not  to  my  content,  neither  durst

I  trust  to  anchor  by  them,  in  regard  of  their  accustomed

treachery  :  I  stood  off  againe  by  a  wind,  a  while  to  deliber-

300

June

NICHOLAS DOWNTON

ate  what  to  doe,  and  thinking  to  stand  in  againe,  to  trie
whether  they  would  be  gone,  which  if  they  were  readie,  I
supposed  they  would  thinke  we  had  more  company  neare-
hand :  but  we  found  the  Current  set  us  so  fast  to  the
lee-ward,  that  we  could  hardly  recover  the  Road  at  two
a  clocke  in  the  after-noone :  seeing  no  other  remedie,  wee
bore  up  the  helme,  and  stood  on  our  course  for  England,
our  hopes  being  frustrated  both  of  refreshing  our  weake
sicke  people,  and  also  of  further  staying  to  regaine  the
company  of  the  Hector  and  Thomas.  The  fifteenth  and
sixteenth,  we  had  divers  showers  of  raine.  The  eighteenth,
we  crost  the  Equinoctiall  line.

The  tenth  of  September,  we  had  a  very  strong  gale  of
wind  and  an  hollow  sea,  and  not  able  to  get  any  part  of
the  South-coast  of  England,  wee  stood  on  our  course
North-east,  in  hope  to  fetch  Milford-Haven  in  Wales,  the
sooner  to  send  letters  to  the  Company.

The  eleventh,  at  five  a  clocke  in  the  after-noone,  we  dis-
cried  the  Coast  of  Wales  to  windward,  and  the  Coast  of
Ireland  lee-wards,  being  an  high  hill  betweene  Waxford
and  Waterford.  This  night  we  spent  with  our  head  to  the
Southwards ;  and  in  the  morning  we  stood  in  towards  the
Irish  Coast :  resolving  now,  the  winds  being  constantly
adverse,  and  impossible  to  fetch  Milford-Haven,  and  our
meanes  allowing  no  longer  deliberation,  I  determined  to
goe  into  Waterford  rather  then  into  any  other  harbour.

The  thirteenth  in  the  morning,  we  discried  the  Tower
of  Whooke,  the  only  marke  for  the  river  of  Waterford,
being  some  three  leagues  distant  from  it :  at  eight  a
clocke  we  discried  a  small  Boat  comming  forth  of  the  river
of  Waterford,  unto  whom  we  made  a  waft,  which  they
perceiving,  presently  came  unto  us,  being  a  Frenchman
bound  to  Waxford,  whom  I  hired  to  goe  againe  into  the
river,  before  to  give  knowledge  of  our  comming  unto  the
Lieutenant  of  the  Fort  of  Don  Canon,  to  prevent  our
stopping  there,  for  that  by  reason  of  the  narrownesse  of
Channell,  it  might  endanger  the  ship  in  winding  up  at
an  anchor  there ; and  at  noone  wee  gate  up  into  the  river

301

A.U.
1613.

They  Crosse
the  Equinoc-
tial!.
Septemb.

They  arrive  at
Waterford  in
Ireland.

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1613.

so  high  as  the  passage.  Heere  we  found  Master  Stephen
Bonner  of  Lime,  with  his  Barque,  come  hither  a  fishing,
who  putting  apart  his  owne  businesse,  with  great  diligence
endeavoured  the  best  for  the  ease  and  reliefe  of  our  weake
and  sicke  people.

The  eighteenth,  I  dispeeded  away  Master  Bonner
towards  London  with  letters  to  the  Company,  to  give
knowledge  of  our  arrivall,  and  of  our  wants,  wherein  I
desired  to  be  supplyed.

The  one  and  twentieth,  Doctor  Lancaster,  Bishop  of
Waterford,  very  kindly  visited  me,  bringing  downe  with
him  his  good  cheere,  and  made  a  Sermon  aboord  the
shippe,  and  offered  mee  the  Communion  ;  but  thereto
being  unprepared  I  refused ;  yet  heartily  thanking  him
for  his  good  will.

The  tenth,  Captaine  John  Burrell  came  unto  me  to
visite  me,  promising  me  money  to  supply  my  wants,  if
I  would  send  some  man  with  him  to  Corcke  for  it.  The
eleventh  day,  I  dispeeded  away  Master  Mullineux  with
Captaine  Burrell  to  Corcke  for  the  money,  which  he
promised  to  supply  me  withall.

The  twelfth,  Anthony  Stratford  Lieutenant  of  the  Fort
of  Don  Canon,  having  hired  a  villanous  fellow  (whom  for
his  misdemeanour  I  had  caused  to  be  kept  in  the  prison  of
Waterford)  to  say  what  might  befit  his  present  practise,
to  bring  us  within  the  compasse  of  Piracie,  having  obtained
a  warrant  from  the  Earle  of  Ormond,  came  to  the  passage,
where  hee  sent  to  desire  mee  to  send  my  Boat  well  manned,
to  fetch  himselfe  and  divers  other  Gentlemen  aboord  to
see  my  ship  :  but  my  Boat,  according  to  his  desire,  being
come  to  land,  hee  apprehended  my  men,  and  presently
came  aboord,  where  he  arrested  me  and  my  ship  for
Piracie,  and  so  committed  mee  to  the  Fort  of  Don  Canon
to  prison,  giving  extraordinary  straite  charge  over  me,
that  none  should  come  at  me,  but  whom  he  list,  without
warrant  from  him  ;  and  such  as  by  his  permission  came  to
me,  he  would  have  put  to  their  oathes  to  declare  what
conference  they  had  with  me ; my  man  sworne  to  bring

302

NICHOLAS DOWNTON  a.d.

1613.

no  letters  from  me  to  any  one,  neither  from  any  to  me  :
also  divers  of  my  people  they  this  night  examined  upon
their  oathes,  omitting  no  meanes  to  draw  them  to  accuse
me,  so  I  continued  in  prison  till  the  sixteenth  day  morning,
what  time  the  said  Stratford  brought  me  a  letter  from  Sir
Laurence  Esmond  his  Captaine,  inviting  me  to  meet  him
at  the  passage,  with  whom  when  I  came  up  to  the  passage,
I  there  met  with  Sir  Laurence  Esmond,  accompanied  with
the  Bishop  of  Waterford,  came  from  the  Earle  of  Ormond,
to  replace  mee  in  my  charge  againe,  which  by  their  great
intreatie  and  perswasion  I  againe  undertooke.

The  three  and  twentieth,  Master  Mulleneux  having
sent  my  letters  to  the  Company,  to  give  knowledge  of  the
afore  mentioned  troublesome  businesse,  returned  from
Corke  with  money  to  supply  my  wants.

The  five  and  twentieth,  Master  Benjamin  Joseph,  in
a  small  ship  of  Bristoll,  came  unto  me,  bringing  with  him
both  men,  money,  and  provisions  for  my  supply,  which
with  all  speed  wee  tooke  in,  hastening  to  be  gone.

The  sixt  of  October,  wee  departed  the  River  of  Water- October.
ford  towards  our  long  desired  home.

The  twelfth  in  the  morning,  we  were  thwart  of  Beachy,  [I.  iii-  m-]
and  at  eight  a  clocke  at  night,  wee  anchored  in  Dover
Road.

The  thirteenth  in  the  morning,  we  set  saile  out  of  Dover
Road,  and  at  ten  a  clocke  wee  anchore  in  the  Downes,
neare  unto  the  Assurance  (the  Kings  ship)  saluting  her
with  five  peeces  of  Ordnance ;  immediatly  came  aboord
of  me,  Master  Cocket,  the  Master  of  her,  who  againe
made  stay  of  my  ship,  till  further  order  from  the  Lord
Admirall :  upon  this  I  presently  sent  away  Master  Mul-
lineux  to  London,  with  letters  to  certifie  the  Company
hereof.

The  seventeenth,  came  downe  from  the  Company,
Master  Adersly,  bringing  me  a  letter  from  the  Company,
a  release  for  the  ship ;  and  Master  Punniat  a  Pilot,  to
bring  her  about.  The  eighteenth  in  the  morning,  wee
set  saile,  and  at  sixe  a  clocke  at  night,  wee  anchored  in  the

3°3

A.D.
1613.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Road  of  Gorend.  The  nineteenth  in  the  morning,  at  sixe
a  clocke  we  set  saile,  and  at  night  we  anchored  at  Tilbury.
The  twentieth  in  the  morning,  we  set  saile,  and  at  ten  a
clocke  wee  anchored  at  Blackwall :  where  in  the  afternoone
came  downe  Master  Deputy,  and  divers  of  the  Com-
mitties,  unto  whom  I  delivered  up  my  charge.  And  so
concluded  this  our  tedious  and  out-tyring  journey.

Chap. XIII.

The  seventh  Voyage  ;  made  in  the  Globe  into  East-
India,  set  out  under  the  Command  of  Captaine
Anthony  Hippon,  observed  and  written  by
Nathaniel  Marten,  Masters  Mate  in  the  said
Shippe.

Ee  weighed  from  the  Black-wall,  in  the
good  shippe  called  the  Globe,  being
bound  for  the  East-Indies,  the  third  of
January  16 10.  and  about  five  of  the
clocke  we  anchored  at  Graves-end.

They  arrived  at  Soldania,  the  one  and
twentieth  of  May  161 1,  and  thence  set
saile  the  sixt  of  June  following.  They  sailed  not  farre
from  Mosambique,  and  Comoro,  and  Pemba  :  and  on  the
last  of  July  passed  before  Punta  de  Galle,  upon  Ceilon  (all
which  as  beingr  a  meere  maine  relation,  and  the  like
course  oft  runne  by  others,  is  omitted.)
August  4.  The  fourth  of  August  in  the  morning,  I  observed  the
variation,  and  made  it  to  bee  thirteene  degrees,  seven
minutes,  and  at  noone  we  were  in  the  latitude  of  nine
degrees  fifteene  minutes,  and  the  land  was  about  sixe
leagues  off,  and  as  much  as  wee  could  see  it  on  the  poope,
the  wind  veered  North  by  West,  and  the  North  North-
west, and  we  stood  in  three  houres,  and  then  sounded,
being  about  three  leagues  off  the  shoare,  and  had  nine
fathome,  and  the  land  then  bore  West  North-west  to  the
Northwards,  and  South  the  other  way,  and  we  judged  the

304

ANTHONY HIPPON  *J>

1611.

land  to  lye  Northwest,  or  North-west  by  North.  At  three
of  the  clocke  wee  cast  about,  and  stood  to  the  North-
ward, and  the  wind  veered  to  the  West,  and  West  South-
west, and  we  lay  as  neare  as  we  could  till  five  of  the  clocke.
The  sixt,  we  kept  our  selves  in  eight  and  twentie  and
thirtie  fathome,  and  then  the  wind  scanted  and  veered  to
the  West  North-west,  so  the  water  deepened  presently.

The  sixt  in  the  morning,  we  perceived  our  selves  to  be
in  a  great  Current  by  the  rippling,  and  we  sent  off  our
Pinnasse  to  come  to  an  anchor,  and  we  found  the  Current
to  set  North  by  West,  and  we  made  our  way  from  foure
of  the  clocke  in  the  after-noone,  the  fift  till  noone,  the
sixt  North  North-west,  and  ran  seventeene  leagues,  and
then  we  were  in  the  latitude  of  ten  degrees,  and  one  and
thirtie  minutes,  and  from  noone  till  two  of  the  clocke  wee
steered  away  North-west ;  and  then  we  saw  divers  Fisher-
men hard  by,  so  we  looked  out  at  top-mast  head,  and  saw
land  West  North-west  and  North-west,  and  so  we  ran  in,
and  then  we  were  in  twenty  fathom  about  eight  leagues
off ;  and  as  we  ranne  in,  the  water  shoalded  easily,  and  at
three  of  the  clocke  wee  saw  a  Tower  or  Pagod,  and  a
ship  that  bore  North-west  of  us,  and  then  the  great  Pagod
of  Negapatan  and  the  ship,  were  one  in  another,  and  then  Negapatan.
wee  ran  in,  till  we  came  into  eight  fathom  North-west,
and  then  we  were  about  two  leagues  off  the  ship,  and
three  leagues  off  the  shoare.

From  sixe  of  the  clocke  at  night  the  sixt,  till  seven  at
noone,  we  steered  away  North  by  East,  and  so  kept  alwayes
betweene  twelve  and  fourteene  fathom,  and  ran  sixteene
leagues,  and  were  in  the  latitude  of  eleven  degrees,  seven
and  fiftie  minutes.

From  the  seventh  till  the  eight  at  noone,  wee  steered
away  North  by  East,  and  ranne  about  twentie  leagues  by
judgement,  and  then  we  were  thwart  of  the  high  land,  up
in  the  Countrey,  that  rose  in  hammocks.  This  day  we
tooke  the  Boat  of  S.  Thome.  The  ninth  at  noone,  the
Towne  of  Majiapor  bore  North  North-west  two  leagues
off,  and  the  marke  to  know  the  Towne,  is  the  high  hill  up
in  305  u

A.D.

1 6 1 1.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

in  the  countrey.  There  is  a  shoale  about  two  leagues  to
Paleacate.  the  Southward  of  Paleacate,  which  lyeth  about  a  mile  or
more  from  the  shoare,  and  the  North-east  end  of  it  lyeth
off  about  a  league  :  we  ran  over  the  very  end  in  three
[I.  iii.  315.]  fathom,  but  if  you  keepe  in  ten  or  twelve  fathome,  you
shall  not  need  to  feare  any  part  of  it.  The  ninth  at
foure  a  clocke,  we  anchored  against  the  Towne,  and  it  bore
West  by  North  off  us ;  there  is  a  crosse  to  the  Northward
of  the  Town,  which  if  you  be  betweene  two  or  three  miles
of  the  shoare  you  see  it,  but  you  cannot  see  the  Towne.

The  tenth  in  the  morning,  we  weighed  and  stood  fur-
ther to  the  Northward,  and  anchored  in  eight  fathom  (we
not  liking  our  former  Road)  and  then  the  Crosse  bore
West  by  South  of  us,  when  the  Westermost  point  bore
West  by  North,  and  the  Northermost  point  bore  North-
west. The  tenth  at  noone,  Master  Browne  and  Master
Floris  went  ashoare  (there  comming  a  Boat  from  the
Governour  for  them)  but  they  went  in  our  Skiffe,  and  as
they  were  going  over  the  Barre,  the  Skiffe  was  sunke,  but
never  a  man  drowned,  God  be  blessed  :  Paleacate  standeth
in  thirteene  degrees  and  thirtie  minutes.

The  thirteenth,  I  observed  the  variation,  and  made  it
to  bee  one  degree  and  fifteene  minutes,  upon  the  semi-
circle. The  fifteenth,  Master  Anthony  Hippon,  our  Cap-
taine,  went  ashoare  to  speake  with  the  Governesse.  The
sixteenth,  the  Captaine  and  all  the  Merchants  came  aboord,
because  they  could  get  no  trade.

The  sixteenth  at ten  of  the  clocke, we  set saile  for
Petepoly.  Petepoly,  and  from  ten  till  the  seventeenth  at  noone,  we

ran  about  thirteene  leagues,  and  were  in  the  latitude  of
fourteene  degrees  and  fifteene  minutes,  and  made  our  way
North  by  East.  From  the  seventeenth  to  the  eighteenth,
we  ran,  by  my  judgement,  about  three  and  twentie
leagues,  and  made  the  way  North,  but  it  was  sad  weather,
and  we  could  not  observe.  About  seven  of  the  clocke
in  the  morning  the  eighteenth,  we  spied  a  Galliot,  riding
in  seven  fathom,  some  foure  miles  off"  the  shoare,  and  shee
road  till  wee  were  almost  within  Sacker  shot  of  her,  and

306

Paleacate
standeth  in
thirteene
degrees,  thirty
minutes.

ANTHONY IIIPPON  A  IJ

1 6 1 1  •

then  shee  weighed  and  ran  into  shoale  water  into  the  shoare,

but  we  stood  not  after  her,  because  the  water  shoalded,

and  at  that  time  we  saw  a  breach,  some  two  leagues  off

the  shoare  to  my  judgement,  and  whereas  we  steered  away

North  North-east,  wee  steered  away  East  North-east,  and

East  by  North,  but  had  no  deepe  water  till  wee  brought

the  breach,  North  North-west  of  us,  &  when  we  saw  it

first,  it  bore  North  by  East  of  us.

From  the  eighteenth  at  noone,  till  five  of  the  clocke  in
the  after-noone,  wee  steered  away  North-east  by  East,
partly  because  wee  would  runne  into  deeper  water,  and
partly  because  the  land  grew  out  more  Easterly,  and  at
five  of  the  clocke  we  made  a  tuft  of  trees  that  is  neare
Petepoly,  and  it  bore  North-east  by  East  of  us  sixe  leagues
off,  and  then  is  the  high  land  to  the  North-westward
of  the  Towne,  which  did  then  beare  North  by  West  off  us,
and  at  seven  of  the  clocke  we  anchored  in  nine  fathom,
the  trees  bearing  North-east  and  by  East  of  us  five
leagues  off,  and  the  wind  Westerly.

The  nineteenth  in  the  morning,  by  five  of  the  clocke,
we  weighed  and  stood  with  the  trees,  and  about  nine  of
the  clocke  we  anchored  about  two  leagues  short  of  them
in  five  fathom,  and  the  trees  bore  East  North-east  of  us,
and  then  presently  there  came  aboord  two  Gingathas  or
Boats :  our  Merchants  sent  them  ashoare  with  a  letter ;
and  about  two  of  the  clocke  there  came  another,  and  a
messenger  from  the  Sabandar,  who  the  twentieth  day  did
send  aboord  two  Boats  for  our  Merchants,  and  brought  a  Tf,ey  land  at
Present,  and  then  went  ashoare  Master  Floris,  Master  eteP°y-
Lucas,  Master  Essington,  and  Adam  Dounton,  and  the
Pursers  Mate,  and  Lemon.

The  one  and  twentieth  about  eight  of  the  clocke,  there
came  a  Gingatha  from  the  shoare,  and  brought  a  letter
from  our  Merchants,  who  did  let  us  understand  that  they
were  kindly  entertained,  and  presently  we  weighed  with
the  wind  at  North  North-west,  and  ran  off  and  anchored
almost  thwart  of  the  Rivers  mouth,  and  about  three  of  the
clocke  in  the  after-noone,  wee  weighed  and  anchored  in

3°7

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

161 1.

the  Road,  where  the  tuske  of  trees  bore  North-east  by
East  Easterly ;  and  we  did  anchor  in  nine  fathom  and  a
halfe  :  the  marke  to  goe  in  over  the  barre,  is  a  Palmito
tree,  on  the  bancke,  upon  the  Northermost  end  of  the
high  cliffe,  it  is  but  a  little  tree.  I  observed  the  variation,
and  made  it  to  be  twelve  degrees,  seven  and  twentie
minutes.

The  eight  and  twentieth,  Master  Floris  came  aboord,
and  Simon  Evans,  about  twelve  of  the  clocke  :  and  about
foure  of  the  clocke,  we  weighed  for  Masulipatan,  with  the
wind  at  South-west,  and  wee  steered  off  into  eight  and
nine  fathom  South  South-east,  and  then  wee  bore  up
South-east,  and  South-east  by  East,  and  kept  our  selves
in  nine  and  ten  fathom  till  eleven  of  the  clocke  at  night,
and  then  the  wind  veered  to  the  East,  and  East  South-east ;
so  wee  anchored  in  nine  fathom,  till  five  of  the  clocke  in
the  morning.

The  nine  and  twentieth  in  the  morning,  about  five  of
the  clocke,  we  weighed  with  the  wind  at  South  South-west,
and  steered  away  East  South-east,  and  East  North-east,
and  North-east ;  and  at  noone  the  uttermost  part  of  the
land  bore  North  of  us :  so  by  my  judgement,  the  land
Eastward  from  Petepoly  lyeth  East  and  by  South,  and
West  by  North  :  and  at  noone  wee  came  into  white  water
off  the  point,  and  it  shoalded  a  little  before  wee  came  into
it  halfe  a  fathom,  but  when  we  were  in  it,  we  had  the  same
depth  sixe  fathom  three  leagues  off :  about  two  of  the
clocke  in  the  after-noone,  the  wind  veered  Northerly,  so
wee  came  to  an  anchor  in  seven  fathom  :  about  five  of  the
clocke,  we  weighed,  and  stood  in  North  North-west,  and
North-west  by  North,  till  seven  of  the  clocke,  and  being
calme,  wee  anchored  in  five  fathom,  the  Westermost  land
bore  West  North-west  Westerly,  and  we  saw  two  ships
which  bore  North  Westerly  and  North-west,  and  the
Norther-most  land  bore  North.
[I.  iii.  316.]  The  thirtieth,  about  one  of  the  clocke  wee  weighed,
Masulipatan.  and  stood  in  for  the  Road  Masulipatan,  which  bore  North
of  us,  and  we  never  had  above  five,  and  foure  and  a  halfe

308

ANTHONY HIPPON  a .».

all  the  way  :  so  about  five  of  the  clocke,  we  anchored  in
three  fathom  and  a  foote  ;  and  the  great  tree  which  is  the
marke  for  the  Road,  bore  West  by  North  Westerly  of
us,  and  the  Southermost  land  bore  South  and  by  West
Southerly  of  us,  and  the  Northermost  bore  North-east
Easterly  of  us.

The  one  and  thirtieth,  Master  Floris,  Master  Hess-
ington,  Simon  Evans,  Cuthbert  Whitfield,  and  Arthur
Smith,  went  ashoare  to  stay  there  in  our  Skiffe.

The  eight  and  twentieth  of  December,  I  observed  the  Decemb.  28.
variation,  and  made  it  to  be  twelve  degrees, two  and
twentie  minutes.

The thirtieth, we weighed from Masulipatan about The  Pomt  °f
seven  of  the  clocke  in  the  morning,  with  the  wind  at .  as^lPfL
North-east  by  East,  and  we  halde  it  off  South-east  and  ^w/>'--
South-east  by  South,  till  we  came  into  eighteene  fathom, minutes  Korth.
At  noone  the  point  that  bore  South  by  West  Southerly
off  us,  was  West  and  by  North,  by  the  Compasse,  and
then  I  observed,  and  made  it  to  be  in  fifteene  degrees
seven  and  fiftie  minutes,  and  at  eight  of  the  clocke  at
night  wee  anchored  in  sixe  fathome  and  an  halfe.

The  fourth  of  January,  I  observed  at  noone,  and  made  January  4.
theRoade  to  be  in  fifteene  degrees,  sixe  and  thirtie  minutes.

The  five  and  twentieth  and  the  sixe  and  twentieth,  wee
observed  the  Sunne  and  certaine  Starres,  by  the  Sunne  we
made  the  Towne  of  Petepoli  to  be  in  fifteene  degrees,
nine  and  fortie  minutes  :  the  Starre  called  the  Ships-sterne,
we  had  in  one  and  twenty  degrees,  nine  and  twenty
minutes ;  the  foot  of  the  Crosiers  twelve  degrees,  foure
and  fiftie  minutes,  and  the  flanke  of  the  Centaur,  in
fifteene  degrees,  two  and  thirty  minutes,  the  foot  in  four-
teene  degrees,  one  and  fortie  minutes,  the  wind  at  South-
east, and  South  South-east.

The  seventh  of  February,  the  Merchants  came  aboord February  7.
and  carryed  all  the  luggage  quite  away,  the  wind  at  South
South-east  night  and  day.  r,  t  ,

The  eleventh  of  February,  we  weighed  out  of  Petepoly  outof  the  road
Roade,  having  the  wind  at  North  North-west  about  sixe  of  Petepoli.

309

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

161 1.

of  the  clocke  in  the  morning,  and  stood  off  South  South-
east, but  verie  little  wind,  and  the  current  set  to  the
North-east,  and  we  anchored  in  five  fathom  and  an  halfe,
it  being  calme,  we  having  runne  off  about  a  mile  and  an
halfe,  and  the  wind  came  off  the  Sea  all  Southerly.

The  twelfth,  about  nine  of  the  clocke  in  the  morning,
we  weighed  with  the  wind  at  South-east,  and  South-east
and  by  East, and  we  haled  off  South South-west, and
South  by  West,  and  South-west  as  the  wind  would  give
us  leave,  till  three  of  the  clocke  in  the  after-noone,  and
then  we  anchord  in  nine  fathome  water,  with  the  wind  at
They  strike  South  and  South  and  by  East,  and  made  our  way  South-
er/™/// west  an(j  ^y  South,  sixe  leagues  out  of  the  Road  by  my
Bantam  in judgement,  and  the  high  land  bore  West  halfe  a  point
Java.  Southerly  : in  the  Road  it  bore  West  halfe  a  point  Nor-

therly.

The  fourteenth,  about  foure  of  the  clock  in  the  morn-
ing, we  weighed  with  the  wind  at  South  South-west,  and
stood  away  South-east,  and  South-east  and  by  South,  as
the  wind  would  give  us  leave  :  At  noone  the  Palmito
Trees  bore  North  halfe  a  point  Easterly,  about  sixe
leagues  off,  or  seven,  and  we  ranne  in  ten  fathome.
March  12.  From  the  twentieth  of  March,  at  noone  till  the  one  and
twentieth,  we  had  very  little  wind  Easterly  and  calme :
we  made  our  way  South  South-west  by  my  judgement,
and  ranne  seven  leagues,  and  at  noone  were  in  the  latitude
of  two  degrees,  sixe  and  twentie  minutes,  at  night  we
observed  the  variation,  and  had  it  in  thirteene  degrees,
fiftie  seven  minutes  on  the  Semicircle,  and  the  amplitude
was  foure  degrees,  twentie  seven  minutes,  which  being
subtracted  to  thirteen  degrees,  fiftie  seven  minutes,
makes  the  variation  to  be  nine  degrees,  twentie  five
minutes.

From  the  one  and  twentieth  at  noone,  till  the  two  and
twentieth  at  noone  we  had  the  wind  all  Northerly,  we
steered  away  South  and  ran  fifteene  leagues  by  the  logge,
and  then  wee  were  in  the  latitude  of  one  degree,  thirtie
foure minutes : at night, I observed the  variation and

310

ANTHONY HIPPON  a.d.

1612.
made  it  to  be  ten  degrees  ten  minutes,  which  did  prove  a A  great  cur-

great  current  to  the  West-ward.  r'n/  *  the .

T-i  1  1  1  11  j  1 ^Vest-ward,

brom  the  two  and  twentieth,  to  the  three  and  twentieth

at  noone,  wee  had  the  wind  variable  betweene  the  North

and  the  West,  we  had  little  wind  and  gustie  weather,  we

steered South by  East, and  ran  eight  leagues : and at

noone  we  observed  the  latitude  of  fiftie  seven  minutes,

at  night  I  observed  the  variation,  and  made  it  to  bee  ten

degrees. The Magneticall  Azimuth is  fifteene degrees

fifteene  minutes  ; the  Amplitude  is  five  degrees,  thirteene

minutes. From the three and twentieth at noone till

the foure and twentieth at noone, we had the wind

betweene the West and South-west, we steered away

South by East, and ranne three and twentie leagues

by the logge, and then we were under the Line by The  Equinoc-

our  observation.  ■

From  the  foure  and  twentieth  at  noone,  till  the  five  and
twentieth  at  noone  we  had  the  wind  betweene  the  North
North-west,  and  the  South  South-west,  and  we  steered
away  South  South-east,  we  ran  by  the  logge  one  and
twentie  leagues,  and  then  we  were  in  the  latitude  of  fiftie
seven  minutes  to  the  Southward  of  the  Line.  At  night  I
observed  the  variation,  and  made  the  Magneticall  Azi-
muth to  be  fifteene  degrees,  fortie  minutes.  The
Amplitude  sixe  degrees,  no  minutes,  which  made  the
variation  to  be  nine  degrees  fortie  minutes.

From  the  five  and  twentieth  at  noone,  till  the  sixe  and  [I.  iii-  317-]
twentieth  at  noone  wee  had  the  wind  variable  betweene  1^lz-
the  North  North-west,  and  the  West  South-west ;  wee
steered  South  South-east,  we  ranne  fifteene  leagues  by  the
logge,  and  then  wee  were  in  the  latitude  of  one  degree,
thirtie  minutes  at  night.  I  observed  the  variation,  and
the  Magneticall  Azimuth,  was  fifteene  degrees  five
minutes.  The  Amplitude  was  sixe  degrees,  one  and
twentie  minutes,  which  made  the  variation  eight  degrees,
fiftie  foure  minutes.

From  the  one  and  thirtieth  at  noone,  till  the  first  of  Apr'ill  161 2.
Aprill  at  noone  we  had  the  wind  Southerly  and  very  little,

3"

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1612.

and  made  our  way  East  South-east  twelve  leagues,  and  at
noone  we  were  in  the  latitude  of  foure  degrees,  one
minute.  From  the  first  at  noone  to  the  second  at  noone,
wee  had  the  wind  betweene  the  West  North-west,  and
South  South-west,  variable  and  gustie,  wee  steered  away-
South-east  by  East,  halfe  a  point  Easterly :  wee  ranne  by
the  logge  one  and  twentie  leagues  and  two  thirds  and
then  we  were  in  the  latitude  of  foure  degrees,  twentie  foure
minutes,  we  made  our  way  twelve  leagues  East  South-
east, and  ten  leagues  South  and  by  East  by  judgement :
which  did  agree  with  my  Observation.  In  the  morning
they  observed  the  variation,  and  had  the  Almicanter  and
Magneticall  Azimuth,  one  degree  thirtie  minutes,  the
Amplitude  eight  degrees,  fortie  seven  minutes,  which
made  the  variation  to  be  seven  degrees,  twentie  seven
minutes.  About  two  of  the  clocke  in  the  morning,  Adam
Duglas  departed  this  life.  From  the  second  at  noone  till
the  third,  we  had  the  wind  betweene  the  North-west,  and
the  West  South-west,  we  steered  away  betweene  the  East
South-east,  and  the  South-east  by  East,  but  because  of  our
latches  to  the  South-ward,  I  judge  that  she  made  her  way
East  South-east,  we  ranne  thirtie  two  leagues  by  the  logge,

The  lie  of and  then  was  I  just  with  the  Wester  most  part  of  the  He

Eugano.  Qf  EUgan0)  by  my  reckoning.

The  sixe  and  twentieth  or  Aprill,  about  foure  of  the
clocke  in  the  after-noone,  through  the  Almighties  good

They  arrive  in  assistance,  we  came  to  an  Anchor  in  Bantam  Road, in

the  Road  of  three  and  a  halfe,  where  Puloponian  bore  North  the  bodie,
and  Pulotundo  bore  North-west  by  North,  and  Puloduo
East  South-east,  and  the  Wester-most  point  thwart  of
Pulorange,  bore  North-west  by  North  Northerly :  the
uttermost  point  bore  East  by  North  Northerly,  and  the
Eastermost  Hand  Pulo  Lima,  was  even  joyning  to  the
Westermost  point  of  Java,  and  presently  after  we  were  at

August.Spald-  an  Anchor, came  aboord  Master  Spalding  which  two  others,

tn&  and  two  of  them  lay  aboord.

The  one  and  thirtieth  of  May,  in  the  after-noone  about
foure of  the clocke, our Merchants came aboord, and

312

ANTHONY HIPPON  a.d.

1612.
about  nine  of  the  clocke  we  set  saile : wee  steered  away They  depart
North  North-east,  with  the  wind  at  South.  ^PetonT

The  first  of  June  in  the  morning,  the  wind  veered  to  -^  *-t*™
the  East-ward  and  so  to  the  North-ward,  very  foule  and  june,
gustie  weather. Wee  bore  up  and  anchored  under  Pulo-
tando in  nineteene fathomes, halfe a league from the
shoare.

About  five  and sixe of the clocke in the morning,
we  weighed  with  the  wind  at  South-east,  and  within  a
heave  or  two  we  had  but  five  fathome,  and  so  shoalded
till  wee had but foure fathome, steering away North
North-west,  the  neerest  land  being  South-west  sixe  leagues
off,  which  was  a  long  woodie  Hand,  some  foure  miles  long, A  lonZ  u'00^-
of  which  we  looked  for  a  ledge  of  rockes  or  sand. From  c
sixe»  till  noone,  we  made  our  way  North  by  West  seven
leagues. About eight of the clocke in the morning,  Lucapara.
I  espyed  Lucapara  at  top-mast  head,  about  eight  leagues
off.

The  seventh  in  the  morning,  about  sixe  of  the  clocke,
we  weighed  the  wind  South-west,  and  betweene  sixe  and
noone  we  made  our  way  North-west  seven  leagues,  and
about  tenne  of  the  clocke,  we  raised  Mompyne  North-east  Mompyne.
eight  leagues  off  at  least ;  and  after  we  raised  this  hill,
we  had  never  lesse  then  ten  fathome,  keeping  the  shoald-
ing  of  Sumatra.

The  ninth  in  the  morning,  about  five  of  the  clocke,  we
weighed  with  the  wind  at  South-east  by  South,  and  steered
away  North-west  by  North,  &  so  Northerly  as  the
Coast  did  lye :  but  we  never  came  neerer  the  point  of
Mompyne,  then  three  leagues  and  an  halfe,  or  foure
leagues,  because  of  a  ledge  of  rockes  that  lyeth  two  leagues
of  the  Easter-most  point  of  Sumatra,  beeing  the  seventh
point  of  the  Straights :  and  these  ledge  of  rockes  beare
East  and  West  one  of  another.  We  had  no  sooner
weighed,  but  the  water  deepened  to  eight,  nine,  tenne,
and  so  to  foureteene  fathomes.  When  you  have  Mom-
pyne South-east  of  you,  then  are  you  cleere  of  the  rockes.
At  noone  I  observed  with  my  quadrant,  and  made  her  to

313

A.D.

1612.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

They  passe  the
Equinoctiall
Line  to  the
North.

This  lie  of
Bintam.

be  in  one  degree,  thirtie  nine  minutes,  and  then  Mom-
pyne  bore  South-east  Easterly  of  us.

The  tenth,  about  three  of  the  clocke  in  the  morning,
we  espyed  an  Hand  that  bore  North  Northwest  three
leagues.

From  noone  till  sixe  of  the  clocke  at  night,  we  made
our  way  North  halfe  a  point  Easterly  sixe  leagues  :  and
from  sixe  till  noone  the  eleventh,  wee  made  our  way  North
eighteene  leagues,  and  wee  were  in  the  latitude  of  one
degree  to  the  Northward,  having  two  Hands,  the  Souther-
most  bore  South-west  by  West  of  us  seven  leagues  off,
and  the  Northermost  bore  West-ward  South-west  seven
leagues  off,  and  then  wee  had  five  and  twentie  fathomes :
all  the  night  long,  we  had  from  twentie  to  five  and  twentie
fathomes.  I  espyed  land  at  top-mast  head,  West  by
North  twelve  leagues  off,  which  was  the  high  land  of
Bintam.

From  noone  till  sixe  of  the  clocke  at  night,  we  made

[I.  iii.  318.]  our  way  West  by  North  seven  leagues,  we  had  five  and

twentie  fathome  water,  and  then  the  high  land  of  Bintam

bore West South-west sixe leagues off, and there are

three  little  Hands  at  the  South-east  end  of  Bintam.

The  twelfth,  we  made  our  way  North  by  East  Easterly
five  leagues,  and  then  we  were  in  the  latitude  of  one
degree  thirtie  five  minutes,  having  twentie  sixe  fathome,
and  the  Northermost  part  of  Bintam,  West  North-west
tenne  leagues :  when  foure  glasses  were  running  after
noone,  I  espied  at  top-mast  head  an  Hand  that  bore
North-west  Northerly  nine  leagues  off.

From  sixe  of  the  clocke  at  night  the  thirteenth,  till  the
foureteenth  at  noone,  we  to  my  judgment,  made  our  way
North-west  by  North,  in  regard  of  the  Current  nine
leagues :  tenne  glasses  in  the  night  we  had  it  calme,  and
drove  North  North-west,  and  we  should  have  it  deeper,
and  shoald  a  fathome  at  a  cast,  till  we  had  but  eleven
fathome,  and  then  deeper  till  it  came  to  fifteene  or  six-
teene  fathome.  From  sixe  at  night,  till  the  fifteenth  at
noone,  we  made  our  way  by  judgement  North  North-east,

3M

ANTHONY HIPPON  ad

I  6 1  2.

Northerly  tenne  leagues ;  but  at  noone  we  made  her  to
bee  in  foure  degrees  fortie  eight  minutes,  and  then  we
had  thirtie  fathome  :  at  eight  of  the  clocke  we  had  an
Hand  bore  North  by  West  of  us,  five  leagues  off  the
maine,  being  foure  miles  off,  and  then  wee  had  twentie
sixe  fathome.

This  great  Hand,  and  the  Rocks,  beare  North  by  West,
and  South  by  East  one  of  another,  and  are  foure  miles  in
length  we  perceived  in  the  night,  being  calme,  to  have  a
great  Current  setting  to  the  North-wards,  and  I  judged
this  Hand  to  stand  in  foure  degrees  thirtie  five  minutes.  Latitude  4.
From  noone  til  the  sixth  at  night,  we  made  our  way  North efees

o '  J  mm.

North-west  halfe  Northerly  eight  leagues,  our  sounding
was  thirtie  and  twentie  five  fathome,  and  then  we  had  an
other  Hand  bore  West  by  North  of  us,  not  unlike  the
former :  we  had  five  and  twentie  fathome  at  sixe  of  the
clocke,  five  or  sixe  leagues  off  the  maine :  the  Hand  lieth
about  one  league  from  the  maine.

From  the  sixteenth  at  noone,  till  the  seventeenth
at  noone,  we  made  our  way  North  North-west  twelve
leagues,  but  as  we  were  almost  in  the  narrowest,  we  spied  a
sunken  rocke  in  the  faire  way;  so  we  fearing  the  worst,  A  sunken  rock.
having  eleven  fathome  &  one  league  of  the  maine,  we
haled  it  off  North-east,  and  North-east  by  East,  to  get
cleere  of  two  little  Hands  that  are  to  the  East-ward,  and
so  we  went  to  the  East-ward  of  all.  At  noone  we  ob-
served, and  made  the  ship  to  bee  in  five  degrees  fiftie
foure  minutes.

From  the  seventeenth  at  noone,  till  the  eighteenth  at
noone,  we  made  our  way  North-west,  Westerly  eight
leagues.  From  the  nineteenth  at  noone  till  the  twentieth,
wee  made  our  way  North-west  Northerly  eight  leagues  :
in  the  morning  about  seven  of  the  clocke,  I  saw  a  little  A  little  rocke.
Rocke,  about  three  leagues  off  at  the  top-mast  head,  and
as  we  came  up  with  it  about  noone,  I  went  with  the
Skiffe  to  sound  about  it,  and  we  had  twelve  fathome  a
stones  throw  off  it :  and  when  our  Skiffs  head  was  a  shoare
we  had  sixe  fathomes  and  an  halfe,  up  and  downe  by  the

315

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1612.

rock :  it  lieth  betweene  three  or  foure  leagues  of  the
Westermost  point  of  the  land,  and  beareth  South-East
Southerly  a  little ;  and  about  two  leagues  and  a  halfe
from  the  Souther-most  land,  or  three,  we  had  little  wind
Westerly,  and  variable,  but  for  the  most  part  Northerly.

From  noone  the  twentieth,  till  the  one  and  twentieth
at  noone,  wee  made  our  way  North-west  Northerly  sixe
leagues,  with  the  wind  Westerly  and  Northerly ;  we  were
fain  to  anchor  twice  in  the  night,  because  it  was  calme,
and  the  Current  setting  to  the  South-ward,  wee  had  very
faire  shoaldings  off,  into  foureteene  and  into  seven  or
eight.  From  the  one  and  twentieth  at  noone,  till  the  two
and  twentieth  at  noone,  we  turned  it  alongst  the  shoare,
with  the  wind  Westerly,  and  then  we  had  the  low  sandie
point  South  of  us  two  leagues  off.
August.  4.  The  fourth  of  August  at  night,  we  weighed  out  of
They  depart  Patane  road,  about  nine  of  the  clocke,  with  the  wind  at
from  Fatane  south  South-west,  and  we  steered  away  North-west,  and
North-west  by  West,  North-west  by  North :  but  by  my
judgement,  from  nine  till  noone  wee  made  our  way  North-
west, halfe  a  point  Northerly  tenne  leagues,  and  then  the
high  land  bore  South-west  of  us  in  the  Roade.  Our
depths  from  three,  to  seven,  eight,  and  tenne  fathome.
From  noone  till  sixe  a  clocke  at  night,  we  had  tenne
leagues,  little  wind  at  North-west  and  North  and  North-
east, but  we  made  our  way  North  North-east  one  league :
and  from  sixe  till  sixe  in  the  morning,  we  made  our  way
North  North-west  halfe  a  point  Northerly  eight  leagues,
with  the  wind  variable  and  Westerly ;  and  then  we  espied
land  that  bore  West  North-west  of  us  tenne  leagues  off.

From  sixe  of  the  clocke  in  the  morning,  till  noone  the
sixt  day,  wee  made  our  way  North  North-west  five
leagues  to  our  judgement,  and  we  observed,  and  made  the
Latitude  8.  ship  to  be  in  eight  degrees  seven  minutes,  and  then  the
degrees  7.  high  janj  bore  West  and  North  tenne  leagues  off,  and
then  we  had  seventeene  fathome.  From  the  sixt  at
noone  till  the  seventh  at  noone,  wee  had  little  wind  and
calme,  we  made  our  way  North  North-west,  to  my  judge-

316

ANTHONY HIPPON

1612.

ment  wee  could  not  runne  above  sixe  leagues,  but  we  made

it  to  be  in  eight  degrees  three  minutes. From  the  seventh

at  noone,  till  the  eight,  we  had  little  wind,  and  variable

round  about,  wee  made  our  way  North  North-west  eight

leagues or tenne, our depths eighteene and nineteene

fathome. From  the  eighth,  to  the  ninth  at  noone,  wee

had  little  wind,  and  variable  round  about,  and  then  we

made  the  shippe  to  be  in  nine  degrees  fortie  minutes ;  Latitude  9.

and  then  the  Northermost  great  Hand  bore  West  South-  defees  +a

west, and the Souther-most bore South-west. In the

morning  we  saw  two  Hands.

From  the  ninth  to  the  tenth  at  noone,  we  had  it  calme,
and  went  little  or  nothing  the  wind  Northerly,  our  depth  P«  m-  3 » 9-]
one  and  twentie  and  two  and  twentie  fathome.  From  the
tenth  to  the  eleventh  at  noone,  we  had  little  or  no  wind,
and  went  two  leagues  North  North-west,  we  had  it  Nor-
therly and  Westerly,  and  our  depths  twenty  and  twentie
one  fathomes.  From  the  eleventh  at  noone  to  the  twelfth,
we  had  the  wind  variable  and  gusty  round  about,  and  we
ran  about  eight  leagues  North  by  West,  and  the  depth
twenty  sixe  and  twenty  five  fathome.  From  the  twelfth
at  noone  till  the  thirteenth,  we  made  our  way  North  by
East  twentie  foure  leagues,  with  the  wind  at  South,  and
South  South-west,  and  South-west,  our  depth  twentie  sixe
and  twentie  eight  fathom,  seven  or  eight  leagues  off  the
shoare.

From  the  thirteenth  to  the  foureteenth,  we  made  our
way  North  by  West  sixteene  leagues,  the  wind  South-
west, our  depths  two  and  twentie,  and  five  and  twentie
fathomes,  five  or  sixe  leagues  from  the  shoare.  From
the  foureteenth  to  the  fifteenth,  wee  made  our  way  six-
teene leagues  North  by  West,  with  the  wind  Westerly,
our  depth  nineteene,  &  twentie  fathomes,  sixe  leagues  off.
From  the  fifteenth  to  the  sixteenth  at  noone,  we  made  our
way  North  and  by  West  tenne  leagues,  we  had  eight,  nine,
and  tenne  fathome,  alongst  the  low  land  foure  leagues  off,
then  we  bore  up  to  the  East,  and  East  South-east  till
midnight,  and  for  an  houre  wee  steered  away  East  North-

317

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1612.

east,  till  we  came  into  foure  fathome,  and  then  tooke  in
our  sailes  as  fast  as  wee  could,  but  presently  we  had  but
three  fathome  and  a  foote,  before  we  could  get  in  our
sailes,  so  we  anchored  in  three  and  a  foot  till  the  next  day,
and  the  water  fell  thirteene  foot,  and  more,  so  that  we  had
but  sixe  fathome  and  an  halfe  at  low  water,  and  then  we
laid  out  a  warpe,  and  when  she  fleeted  we  warped  into
deepe  water. The  eighteenth  we  set  saile,  and  haled  it
They  arrive  off into five fathome, where  we anchored, having the
at  Syam. Souther-most  Hand  South  by  East  of  us,  and  the  Easter-
most  East  and  by  South,  and  the  Rivers  mouth  North  of
us  Westerly.
Novemb.  Tne  third  of  November,  about  one  of  the  clocke  in

j?,12" , the  afternoone  we  weighed  out  of  the  bay,  where  we  left
from  Syam. our  men>  and  graved  our  ship,  and  haled  it  off  from  the
West  to  the  South  South-East,  to  goe  cleare  of  the  Hand,
and  so  steered  away.

The  fourth  at  noone  I  made  the  ship  to  be  in  twelve
degrees  thirtie  three  minutes,  having  run  in  these  three
and  twentie  houres,  but  five  and  twenty  leagues,  and  to
my  judgement  had  made  her  way,  one  thing  with  an
other  counted,  South  by  West,  the  wind  Northerly.

On  the  eleventh,  we  arrived  at  Patane.  He  was  after
this  at  Syam  againe,  and  againe  at  Patane  :  and  made  a
second  Voyage  from  Masulipatan  to  Bantam,  16 14.  and
thence  to  England,  161 5.  But  his  Journall  is  so  large,
that  I  dare  not  expresse  it.  Note  that  he  saith,  that  the
He  of  S.  Helena  is  an  hundred  leagues  more  to  the  West-
ward, then  is  laid  downe  in  Plats.

The  twentieth  of  August  161 5.  they  came  before  the
Lizard.  They  spent  in  this  whole  Voyage  foure  yeares
and  about  eight  Moneths.  Their  actions  and  exploits  in
this  Voyage  are  delivered  more  fully  by  M.  Floris,  out  of
whose  Journall  I  have  taken  the  most  remarkeable.  For  I
thinke,  these  meere  marine  relations,  are  (though  to  some
profitable)  to  the  most  tedious.  For  which  cause  I  have
abridged  this  to  make  way  to  the  next,  written  by  a  Mer-
chant of  long  Indian  experience, and  full  of  pleasant  varietie.

3*8

PETER WILLIAMSON FLOWS

A.lJ.

1 6 1 1 .

Chap. XIIII.

Extracts  of  Peter  Williamson  Floris,  his  Journall,
for  the  seventh  Voyage,  (in  which  he  went
Cape  Merchant)  translated  out  of  Dutch.  He
arrived  in  England  1615.  and  died  two  Moneths
after  in  London.

§.  1.

The  Voyage  to  Paleacatte,  Petapoli,  Masulipatan,
Bantam,  Patania,  and  Siam.

Aving  covenanted  and  agreed  with  the
Right  Worshipfull  the  Governour  and
Deputy  of  the  East-Indian  Societie,  we
embarqued  our  selves  in  the  Globe,  the
fift  of  January  16 10.  Stylo  Angliae,  and
set  saile  for  Gravesend  :  the  fift  of  Feb-
ruary we  set  saile  from  the  Downes.  The
one  and  twentieth  of  May  161 1.  wee  came  into  Saldania  Saldania  Bay.
Bay,  where  wee  found  three  ships,  and  two  boates  came
aboord  us,  one  from  Isaac  le  Maire,  and  the  other  from
Henrike  Brouwer.  Much  refreshing  was  not  here  to  be
had  at  this  time  of  the  yeare,  by  reason  of  great  store  of
raine,  being  now  their  winter,  the  mountaines  also  covered
with  snow.  Wee  used  great  diligence  in  seeking  of  the
roote  Ningim,  for  which  purpose  the  said  two  Holland  Root  Ningim.
ships  had  come  thither,  one  being  of  Japan  that  first
discovered  the  secret.  But  at  this  time  the  newe  leafe
began  only  to  peepe  forth,  that  had  we  not  received
instructions,  wee  could  not  have  knowne  it ;  the  right
and  ripe  time  thereof  beeing  December,  January  and  [I-  «»•  32°-]
February. It  is  called  of  these  Inhabitants  Canna.

We  having  filled  our  water,  and  refreshed  our  selves
with  eight  Sheepe  and  twentie  Neat,  set  saile  out  of  the
Bay,  leaving  behind  us  the  boat  of  Isaac  le  Maire  with  Barter  at  the
his  sonne  Jacob,  who  lay  there  to  barter  for  hides  and bay  for  hides.

3*9

A.D.

1 6 1 1.

August  i.
Zelon.

Negapatan.
Note  fa  Is  hood
of  Maps.

Lanagapatan.

S.  Thome.
Paleacatte.

Hollanders
triumphing  in
our  way.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

skinnes,  and  to  make  traine  oyle ;  which  was  to  continue
there  till  December.  To  him  we  gave  letters  for  England.
Neere  Tena  de  Natat,  June  the  tenth,  wee  were  in  great
danger :  a  storme  of  thunder,  lightning,  wind  and  raine,
almost  violently  thrust  us  on  shoare ;  but  God  mercifully
and  powerfully  gave  us  unexpected  deliverance.

The  first  of  August,  we  saw  the  land  of  Ceylon  falling
with  Punta  de  Galle,  and  running  along  the  coast.  On
the  sixt  we  fell  before  Negapatan,  beeing  twentie  eight
miles  (leagues)  from  our  guessing,  the  Map  in  that  place
beeing  very  false.  The  like  hath  also  happened  to  the
Hollanders,  which  in  the  night  might  be  very  dangerous.
Neither  found  we  the  Hand  so  broad  as  it  is  there  laid.
M.  Mullineux  layeth  Punto  de  Galle  in  foure  degrees,
which  lyeth  in  sixe.  Towards  evening  we  passed  before
the  Road,  and  might  see  the  Towne  and  houses  very
plainely.

The  seventh,  wee  passed  Lanagapatan,  where  the  Hol-
landers having  a  Factorie,  are  wearie  because  of  little
doings.  On  the  eight,  we  came  before  Saint  Thome,  and
on  the  ninth  before  Paleacatte,  passing  over  the  shallow
being  in  length  above  a  Musket  shot,  having  but  three
fathome  water.  Here  came  two  Boates  aboord  us,  one
from  the  Sabander,  another  from  the  Hollanders.  The
tenth,  the  Sabanders  men  brought  us  a  Caul  or  conduct  to
come  safely  ashoare.  Whereupon  I  and  Master  Browne
went  ashoare,  but  by  the  roughnesse  of  the  Sea  were
turned  over,  yet  (God  be  thanked)  no  man  was  drowned.
The  Sabander  met  us,  compassionating  our  mischance  and
appointed  us  a  house,  promising  us  to  procure  a  Letter
from  the  King  to  the  Governesse  of  Conda  Maa.

On  the  eleventh,  John  Van  Wersicke  the  Dutch  Presi-
dent on  the  Coast  of  Choromandell,  shewed  us  a  Caul
from  the  King  of  Narsinga,  Wencapati,  Raja,  wherein  was
granted,  that  it  should  not  be  lawfull  for  any  that  came
out  of  Europe  to  trade  there,  but  such  as  brought  Prince
Maurice  his  Patent,  and  therefore  desired  our  departure.
We  answered  we  had  Commission  from  his  Majestie  of

320

PETER WILLIAMSON F  LOR  IS  ad.

i  6 1 1 .

England,  and  would  therefore  doe  what  we  could.  Hence
arose  high  words,  which  the  Sabander  calmed,  telling  of
the  Governesse  her  comming  thither  within  three  dayes.

On  the  seventeenth,  came  Conda  Maa,  and  Captaine
Hippon,  comming  on  shoare,  wee  were  readie  to  goe  to
her,  when  we  received  word  to  the  contrarie,  and  that  the
next  day  shee  would  send  for  us.  We  suspected  the  Hol-
landers close  dealing,  and  the  next  day  sent  to  the  Sabander
(no  man  comming  for  us)  who  answered  the  King,  had
made  grant  to  the  Hollanders,  and  wee  must  goe  to  him
(the  dispatching  of  which  businesse  would  have  cost  us
two  monethes  space,  and  hazarded  theMonson  for  Patane)
if  we  would  procure  libertie.  The  Hollanders  also  had
made  readie  two  Elephants  to  send  to  the  King.  Where-
fore we  resolved  to  prosecute  our  Voyage  for  Petapoli  and
Masulipatan.

The  twentieth,  we  arrived  before  Petapoli,  and  the  Petapoli.
Governour  sent  us  a  Caul.  Wee  agreed  with  him  for
three  thirds  per  Centum  Custome,  and  sent  goods  on
shoare,  resolving  that  Master  Lucas  and  Master  Browne
should  stay  there  :  and  that  I  should  goe  to  Masulipatan,  Masulipatan.
where  was  a  better  Road  for  the  ship.  Thither  we  came
on  the  last  of  August,  and  Zaldchar  Chan  brought  us  a
Caul.  We  agreed  to  send  a  present  to  Mir  Sumela  (a
great  Officer  under  the  King,  which  farmeth  out  his
Revenues)  to  Condapoli,  in  regard  of  the  shifts  of  the
under  Officers.  On  the  twentieth  of  January,  deceased
Cotobara  King  of  Badaya,  or  Lollongana,  and  of  Masuli-
patan, and  great  tumults  were  feared.  But  the  wisdome
of  Mir  Masunim  prevented  the  same,  presently  electing  Nea  King.
Mahumad  Unim  Cotobara,  sonne  to  the  Brother  of  the
deceased  (who  had  left  no  children  behind  him)  a  yong-
man  of  great  hope.  His  Uncle  had  put  all  in  the  hands
of  the  Persians,  but  this  sheweth  himselfe  contrarie,  and
an  Enemie  to  Mir  Sumela  the  fountaine  of  Tyrannic

The Governour dealt treacherously with mee, in a  Govemours
bargaine  of  Cloth  and  Lead  for  Launces ; saying,  he  had  Pcrfi(he-
agreed  with  me  for  foure  thousand  Pagodes,  (intending
in  321  x

A.D
l6ll,

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Golconda.

Bantam.

by  that  coozenage  to  raise  the  Custome  agreed  at  foure
per  Centum  to  twelve)  alleaging  for  reason,  that  hee  was
a  Mir,  and  that  he  was  borne  of  Mahomets  Posteritie,
whose  words  must  bee  beleeved  before  a  Christians.  I
not  knowing  how  to  deale  with  this  Knave,  the  time  not
suffering  to  send  to  the  new  King  at  Golconda,  seeing  no
meanes  to  end  with  friendship,  resolved  to  practise
enmitie :  but  at  last  by  intercession  of  other  Moores,  we
ended  in  a  kind  of  agreement.  Having  also  cleered  at
Petapoli,  we  having  a  good  Monson  departed  for  Bantam,
and  arrived  there  the  sixe  and  twentieth  of  Aprill  1612.
We  found  the  Dutch  readie  to  depart  thence  for  Jacatra,
by  reason  of  the  Governours  new  exactions.  But  we
having  no  house  there,  after  some  contesting,  agreed  with
him  for  three  per  Centum  Custome.

By  order  of  David  Middleton,  a  Factorie  was  setled  at
Succadania,  and  continued  by  Master  Spalding,  but  it
seemeth  (as  things  are  carryed)  rather  to  private  then
publike  benefit.

The  first  of  June,  we  set  saile  from  Bantam,  and  on  the
two  and  twentieth  came  into  the  Road  of  Patane,  where
we  found  the  Bantam  a  ship  of  Enkhusen,  of  whom  wee
learned  the  manners  of  the  Countrey.  On  the  sixe  and
twentieth,  we  went  on  shoare  in  great  state,  taking  with
[I.  iii.  321.]  us  a  present  of  about  sixe  hundred  Rials  of  eight,  to
accompanie  the  Kings  Letter.  Wee  were  well  received
according  to  the  manner  of  the  Countrey,  the  Letter  being
laid  in  a  Bason  of  Gold,  and  carryed  upon  an  Elephant
with  Minstrels,  many  Lances  and  little  Flagges.

The  Qyeenes  Court  was  sumptuously  prepared,  the
Letter  read,  and  free  Trade  granted  us,  paying  such  duties
as  the  Hollanders  did.  Wee  departed  from  the  Court
without  sight  of  the  Queene,  and  were  brought  to  Dato
Laxmanna  the  Sabander  and  Officer  appointed  for
Strangers,  where  a  Banquet  of  Fruits  was  set  before
us :  and  thence  to  the  Oran-caya  Sirnona,  and  there  also
did  eate  something.  The  next  day  the  Queene  sent  us
meate  and  fruits  aboord.

Factory  at
Succadania  in
Borneo.

Patane.

The  Kings
Letter.

Queene  of
Patane.

322

PETER WILLIAMSON FLORIS  ad.

1612.

The  third  of  July,  departed  hence  a  Dutch  Pinnasse  July  3.
called  the  Grey-hound  for  Japon,the  Masters  Mate  thereof
was  the  same  man  which had  brought  the  Letter  from
William  Adams  to  the  English  at  Bantam  : by  whom  we W'  A<iami  ln
sent  the  Companies  Letters  to  Master  Adams,  which  he a^a'
promised  to  deliver  with  his  owne  hands. This  other-
wise wee  could  not  have  done  ; for  those  of  Japon  are
at  enmitie  with  this  place,  and  have  burned  Patane  twice  JaPanites
within  these  five  or  sixe  yeares.  „ .

Much  adoe  we  had  to  get  leave  to  build  a  Ware-house
here,  fire-free,  which  we  did  hard  by  the  Dutch-house
in  a  place  assigned  us  thirtie  fathome  in  length,  twentie  in
breadth :  the  House  eight  fathome  long,  and  foure
broad.  But  their  demands  seemed  very  unreasonable,
amounting,  besides  former  charges,  to  foure  thousand
Rials  of  eight,  whereunto  yet  in  hope  of  future  benefit
we  yeelded.  Sicknesse  also  much  afflicted  us,  as  if  the
plague  had  beene  in  our  ship  :  and  Captaine  Hippon  dyed  Death  of  Cap-
the  ninth  of  July.  Whose  Successor  was  nominated  in  taine  l^en'
the  Boxe  N.  1 .  Master  Browne  ;  but  he  being  dead  before,
the  Boxe  N.  2.  was  opened,  wherein  Thomas  Essington  CaPL  Essw£-
was  named,  and  did  succeed.  Hereunto  was  added  losse
by  Theeves,  which  like  resolute  Dissolutes  came  into  the
house,  a  Lampe  burning,  and  stole  money  out  of  my
Chest,  two  hundred  eightie  three  Rials  of  eight,  and  other
goods  ;  fifteene  persons  sleeping  in  the  house,  and  a  great
blacke  Dogge,  and  Watch  kept  in  the  yard,  which  made
suspition  of  some  of  our  owne,  but  we  could  never  learne
any  certaintie.

I  and  John  Persons,  and  sixe  more  were  left  here  in
Factorie ; and  the  ship  departed  the  first  of  August  for
Syam. I  would  have  written  to  Syam,  of  my  ill  Market Tke  Globe  at
of  Lawnes,  but  could  not  send  by  water,  and  by  land  no yai
lesse  then  foure  together  would  travell  for  feare  of  Tygres, Tigres.
and many Rivers they must passe, which made their
demands  to  passe so farre, that I  was forced to  waite n n  ,

1  r .  .  to  1  1 -rr-  r  x  P™  orPahan

better  opportunity, ln  September  the  King  or  Jor  over-  anj  Qampon
ranne  the  Suburbes  of  Pahan,  burning  all  before  him,  and  Sina.

323

A.D.

1612.

Maccasar  in
Celebes.

Cambois,
Laniam,  iff
Jagoman.

A  Dutch-mans
testimony  of
Dutch

iniquitie  in  his
ozvne  words,  as
they  are  in  the
translated
Copie.
November  1 1 .

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

likewise  Campon  Sina,  which  caused  great  dearth  in  Pahan.
The  cause  of  our  want  of  vent  here  (where  foure  yeares
before  I  had  seene  such  quicknesse,  as  if  the  World
would  not  have  provided  sufficient)  is  the  Portugalls
bringing  to  Malacca  the  wonted  quantitie,  and  the  Hol-
landers filling  Bantam  and  the  Moluccas,  as  also  the  Trade
of  Moores  at  Tanasserin  and  Syam,  besides  Tarangh  a
Haven  new  found  out  by  Keda ;  the  Guzerates,  and
another  from  Negapatan  and  we,  helping  to  cloy  the
Market ;  so  that  the  rumour  is  sufficient  to  keepe  downe
the  price  for  ten  yeares.  I  cannot  at  this  present  make
five  per  Cento,  which  have  made  foure  of  one.  Thus  is
mans  wisdome  disappointed.  I  resolved  to  send  a  Car-
gason  for  Maccasar,  sending  John  Persons  as  Chiefe,  in
a  Juncke  of  Empan,  October  the  eight.

On  the  ninth,  arrived  two  Junckes  from  Siam,  in  one
of  which  was  sent  mee  a  Tetter  from  Master  Essington
and  Master  Lucas  of  their  trouble  and  small  likelihood  of
sale,  besides  the  former  causes,  the  Countrey  being  filled
with  warres  ;  those  of  Cambois,  Laniam,  and  Jagoman,
preparing  against  Syam.

The  five  and  twentieth,  departed  hence  the  Junckes  for
Borneo,  Jambi,  Java,  Maccasar,  Jortan  and  other  places,
among  whom  was  the  Juncke  of  Orancaya  Raya  Indra-
mouda  for  Bantam,  and  thence  to  Jortan,  Amboyna,  and
Banda,  and  backe  to  Maccassar.  I  cannot  imagine  what
the  Hollanders  meane  to  suffer  these  Maleysians,  Chines-
ians,  and  Moores  of  those  Countries,  and  to  assist  them
in  their  free  Trade  thorow  all  the  Indies,  and  forbid  it
their  owne  Servants,  Countrymen  and  Brethren,  upon
paine  of  death  and  losse  of  goods.  Surely  a  token  of
great  ignorance  or  envie,  suffering  Turkes  and  Heathens
to  grow  rich,  rather  then  their  owne  Countreymen  should
get  their  living.  Surely  a  great  ingratitude,  and  a  token
that  Gods  punishment  is  comming  upon  them.

The  eleventh  of  November,  the  Globe  arrived  from
Syam,  having  beene  eight  dayes  in  the  way.  They  had
arrived  in  the  Road  of  Syam  the  fifteenth  of  August,  and

324

PETER WILLIAMSON FLORIS

A.\).

lb  1 2.

Customers
Customes.

cast  Anchor  at  three  fathome  high  water  :  but  the  next
day  the  water  ebbing  thirteene  houres  together  they  had
but  seven  foot  muddie  ground,  and  therefore  not  very
hurtfull.  They  removed  further  off,  where  they  had
three  fathome  at  a  low  water,  being  foure  miles  (leagues)
from  the  Barre.  The  Towne  lyeth  some  thirtie  leagues
up  along  the  River,  whether  they  sent  newes  of  their
arrivall.  The  Sabander  and  the  Governour  of  Mancock
(a  place  scituated  by  the  River)  came  backe  with  the
Messengers  to  receive  his  Majesties  Letters,  but  chiefly
for  the  presents  expected.  Captaine  Essington  and  Master
Lucas  went  with  them  to  the  Towne,  where  the  seven-
teenth of  September  they  came  before  the  King,  who
promised  free  Trade,  and  gave  every  one  a  little  golden
Cup,  and  a  little  piece  of  clothing.  The  Mandorins
(Officious  Officers)  would  have  interverted  the  Kings  com-  [I.  iii.  322.]
mand  for  their  owne  covetousnesse,  taking  at  their  owne
prices  what  they  please,  and  paying  when  they  are  pleased
with  Bribes,  with  worse  demeanure  then  in  any  other  parts
of  the  Indies  (though  the  rest  bad  enough)  till  complaint
being  made  to  the  King,  they  were  charged  not  to  molest
them ;  and  the  goods  were  carried  to  the  house  which
the  King  had  assigned,  being  of  bricke,  the  best  in  Siam,
neare  to  that  of  the  Hollanders.  Now  was  the  time  of
raines,  and  the  countrey  covered  with  water.

The  sixe  and  twentieth  of  October,  arose  such  stormes,  Tempest.
that  old  folkes  had  not  there  seene  the  like,  renting  up
trees  by  the  roots,  and  blowing  downe  the  Kings  monu-
ment, which  hee  had  erected  to  his  Father.  The  ship
hardly  escaped  by  the  diligence  of  Master  Skinner  and
Samuel  Huyts,  casting  out  a  third  anchor,  being  driven,
notwithstanding  her  two  anchors,  from  sixe  fathome  to
foure,  and  not  passing  an  English  mile  from  the  land.
Master  Skinner  was  beaten  from  the  anchor-stocke,  but
very  strangely  recovered.  Five  men  were  drowned  ;  one
after  the  rest,  whom  they  supposed  devoured  of  a  Whale,
which  they  saw  soone  after  they  had  seene  him.  Thisstorme
lasted  foure  or  five  houres,  and  then  followed  a  smooth

325

Road  of  Siam,
a  safe  harbour,
but  in  a  South
South-tcest
wind.

A.D.

1612.

Bantam
Patane  and
Siam,  three
primipall
places  of
Trade.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

sea,  as  if  there  had  beene  no  tempest.  A  tempest  yet
continued  aboord  the  ship,  by  reason,  as  was  reported,  of
the  reasonlesse  masterly  Master,  who  was  therefore  appre-
hended, and  Skinner  placed  in  his  roome,  whereby  that
weather  also  calmed.  As  for  their  Trade,  they  were  too
much  becalmed,  this  being  the  third  place  of  Trade  in  all
the  Indies,  and  so  farre  distant  from  Bantam  and  Patane.
The  cause  whereof  is  this.

§..  ii.

Relations of  strange Occurrents in Pegu, Siam,
Joor, Patane, and  the Kingdomes  adjacent.

lam  hath  been  a  mightie  Kingdome  and  ancient,
since  subdued  and  tributary  to  Pegu,  which  yet
continued  not  long. For  the  King  of  Siam  dying,

See  this  Pegu
story  in  my
Pilgrim,  lib.  5.

Kings  of
Tangu  and
Arracan
sharers  of
Pegu.

left  two  sonnes,  which  were  brought  up  in  the  Kings  Court
of  Pegu.  But  flying  from  thence  to  Siam,  the  eldest
called  in  the  Maleyan  language,  Raja  api,  or  the  Fiery
King,  and  by  the  Portugals  the  Blacke  King,  set  up
himselfe  as  King  :  against  whom  the  King  of  Pegu  sent
his  son  the  Prince,  who  was  slaine  in  these  warres,  and
hath  beene  occasion  of  the  destruction  of  the  whole  King-
dome,  and  many  millions  of  Peguan  lives.  For  the  King
sore  grieved  for  the  death  of  his  sonne,  caused  his  chiefe
Peguan  Lords  and  Souldiers  (himselfe  being  of  the
kindred  of  the  Brama's)  to  bee  slaine.  This  caused  great
perturbation,  divers  tributary  Kings  (whereof  hee  had
twentie)  falling  daily  from  him  :  which  at  the  last  encour-
aged this  Blacke  King  to  make  warre  against  him,  going
to  the  Citie  of  Unxa  or  Pegu,  before  which  he  lay  some
two  moneths,  without  doing  any  thing ;  he  brake  up  his
siege  and  returned  to  Siam.  But  the  King  of  Pegu  not
long  after,  because  of  the  great  dearth  and  death,  gave  over
himselfe,  and  all  his  treasure,  into  the  hands  of  the  King
of  Tangu ;  to  prevent  also  falling  into  the  hands  of  the
King  of  Arracan,  comming  against  him  with  a  mightie
power. This King of Arracan easily made himselfe

326

PETER WILLIAMSON FLOWS

A.D.

1612.

Master  of  the  Towne  and  Countrey,  almost  emptie  and
famished.  Thinking  to  goe  into  Tangu  :  That  King  sent
Embassadors,  offering  to  deliver  unto  him  certaine  por-
tions of  the  treasures  of  Pegu,  the  White  Elephant,  and
the  Kings  daughter  (both  which  I  have  seene  in  Arracan,
Anno  1608.)  as  also  the  King  of  Pegu,  or  else  to  kill  him
(as  afterwards  it  happened  that  the  King  of  Tangu  slew
him  with  a  Pilon,  wherewith  they  stampe  their  Rice,  as
being  free  against  any  stabbing.)  In  this  manner  came
this  mightie  Empire  to  ruine,  so  that  at  this  day  there
is  no  remembrance  of  it.  The  King  of  Arracan  gave  the
Towne  or  Fort  of  Siriangh,  lying  upon  the  same  River  of  Siriangh
Pegu,  in  keeping  to  the  Portugals,  especially  to  Philip  de
Britto  de  Nicote,  to  whom  hee  gave  the  name  of  Xenga,
that  is,  Honest,  which  honor  Xenga  did  after  requite,
taking  his  sonne  prisoner  some  three  or  foure  yeeres  after,
and  ransomed  him  at  eleven  hundred  thousand  Tangans,
and  ten  Galeas  of  Rice ;  who  yet  also  domineereth  and
careth  for  no  bodie.

Thus  by  Pegu's  destruction  was  Siam  received,  and
hath  since  brought  in  subjection  the  Kingdomes  of  Cam-
baya,  Lanjanh,  Jagomai,  Lugor,  Patane,  Teneserin  and
divers  others.  Anno  1605.  tne  Blacke  King  deceased  with-
out issue,  and  left  his  Kingdome  to  his  brother,  called  the
White  King,  a  covetous  man,  but  enjoying  his  kingdomes
in  peace:  he  dyed  Anno  16 10.  leaving  divers  children
behind  him.  Hence  much  alteration :  For  lying  in  his
death-bed,  hee  caused  his  eldest  sonne  to  be  slaine,  being
a  yong  man  of  great  hope,  at  the  instigation  of  one  Jock-
rommeway,  one  of  the  principall  Lords  of  Siam,  who
having  many  slaves,  thought  to  make  himselfe  King.

This  present  King  was  the  second  sonne  of  the  White
King,  who  not  long  after  dispatched  that  Traytor,  which
had  amongst  other  slaves,  two  hundred  and  eightie
Japanders.  These  thinking  to  revenge  their  Masters
death,  and  to  atchieve  some  memorable  exploit,  ran
together  to  the  Court  of  this  new  King,  possessed  them-
selves of  King  and  Court  (being  without  suspition)  and

327

Jeckromme-
tcay  a
Traytor.

Japanders
insolence.

A.D.

1612.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Rebellion.

Oudija.

[I.  iii.  323.]  compelled  him  to  deliver  foure  of  the  principall  Nobles
to  be  slaine,  as  causes  of  their  Masters  death.  And  having
sometime  used  him  at  their  pleasure,  they  compelled  him
to  subscribe  with  his  owne  blood,  and  to  give  some  of  the
chiefe  Palapos  or  Priest  for  hostages,  to  such  agreement
as  they  propounded,  and  so  departed  with  great  treasure
after  much  violence,  the  Siamites  not  being  able  to  right
themselves.  Upon  this  occasion,  the  kingdomes  of  Cam-
baya  and  Lanjangh  rebelled,  as  also  one  Banga  de  Laa  a
Peguan.  And  the  King  of  Lanjangh  came  the  last  yeere
into  Siam,  within  three  dayes  journey  of  the  Towne  of
Odija,  hoping  to  find  the  Countrey  still  entangled  with
these  slavish  Japonian  broyles.  But  they  being  departed,
the  King  of  Siam  came  forth  to  meete  him,  which  the  other
durst  not  abide.  The  two  other  Kings  are  said  to  have
joyned  league  to  come  together  in  Aprill,  to  dispossesse
this  yong  King,  being  about  two  and  twentie  yeeres  of
age,  which  yet  without  treason  of  his  owne,  they  are  not
likely  to  effect.  Once,  it  was  our  hard  happe  to  hit  upon
these  bad  times  so  unfitting  for  Trade.

We  resolved  that  the  ship  should  winter  here  in  Patanie,
forced  thereto  by  divers  causes.  The  one  and  thirtieth
of  December,  the  Queene  accompanied  with  above  sixe
hundred  Prawes,  went  to  sport  her  selfe :  shee  lay  first  at
Sabrangh,  where  we  went  to  salute  her,  having  both  sight
and  speech  with  her,  in  company  of  the  Hollanders :  Shee
was  a  comely  old  woman,  threescore  yeeres  of  age,  tall  and
full  of  Majestie ;  in  all  the  Indies  we  had  seene  few  like
her.  Shee  had  in  company  her  Sister  (which  was  next
heire)  and  her  yonger  sisters  little  daughter,  which  hath
been  married  to  Raja  Siack,  brother  to  the  King  of  Joor.
This  her  sister,  commonly  called  the  yong  Queene,  was
yet  an  unmaried  Virgin,  about  sixe  and  fortie  yeeres  of
age.  After  we  had  had  some  conference  with  her,  shee  let
fall  the  curten,  intimating  thereby,  that  wee  should  depart,
signifying  that  next  day  we  should  come  againe ;  which
wee  did,  and  were  well  entertained.  There  were  twelve
women  and  children  to  dance,  which  I  have  not  seene

328

Queene  of
Patanie  goeth
a  hunting.

They  had
speech  with
her.

PETER WILLIAMSON FLOWS

A.U.

1612.

better  performed  in  the  Indies.  Then  were  all  the  Gen-
tilitie  commanded  to  dance,  or  at  least  make  shew  thereof  :
which  caused  no  small  laughter.  We  and  the  Hollanders
must  doe  likewise,  and  the  Queene  thereat  rejoyced.  She-
had  not  been  out  of  her  house  in  seven  yeeres  before,  till
this  going  to  hunt  wilde  BufFes  and  Bulles,  whereof  there-
is  great  abundance.  As  shee  passed  along  with
her  traine  betwixt  our  house  and  the  ship  we
saluted  her  with  some  Peeces  from  one  ship,  and
Musket  shot  on  shoare.

In  this  winter  of  November  and  December,  the  water,  Great  waters
by  continuall  raine,  was  higher  then  had  been  in  the
memery  of  man,  so  that  many  beasts  died,  many  houses
were  driven  away,  and  much  harme  done.  The  five  and
twentieth  of  January,  we  had  newes  by  a  Dutch  ship  from  January.
Siam,  that  Master  Lucas  had  sold  more  then  halfe  his
goods,  and  that  the  King  had  bought  a  great  parcell
thereof :  neither  would  he  suffer  the  Officers  to  carry  away
the  goods,  with  a  pretext  of  the  Kings  name,  without  a
testimoniall  from  the  King.  We  had  also  newes  from
Keda,  that  the  Portugals  had  come  with  fifteene  hundred
men  from  Saint  Thome,  and  taken  the  Hollanders  house
in  Paleacate,  slaine  their  men,  and  carried  away  the  goods.
In  March  I  sent  the  ship  for  Siam  with  more  goods.

The  King  of  Pahan  married  the  yonger  sister  of  the
Queene  of  Patane,  whom  shee  having  not  seene  in  twentie
eight  yeeres,  having  requested  the  same  by  often  solemne
Embassies,  and  not  obtaining ;  hath  made  stay  of  all  the
Junkes  that  came  from  Siam,  Cambaya,  Bordelongh,
Lugor,  or  any  other  places  laden  with  Rice  for  Pahan,  and
sent  forth  all  her  power  by  water,  consisting  of  about
seventie  sailes,  with  some  foure  thousand  men,  under  the
command  of  Maha  Raja,  Datoe  Bessar,  and  Orancayo
Sirnora,  with  order  to  bring  her  sister  hither,  either  in
friendship  or  by  force,  so  that  Pahan  shall  have  much  to
doe  by  reason  of  the  great  dearth,  the  burning  of  his  house,
Rice  and  barnes  ;  as  also  the  warres  of  Joor,  who  as  is  said,
maketh  great  prepartion  to  goe  in  his  owne  person  for

329

Hollanders
house  in  Palea-
cate taken.

A.D.
1613.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Fires  at

Bantam.

The  Trades
Increase.

Pahan  ; and  the  King  of  Borneo  prepareth  on  the  other
side  to  their  succour.

In  Aprill  1613.  here  arrived  divers  Juncks  from  Cam-
baya  and  China.  In  May  I  received  letters  from  Siam,  and
good  newes  of  sale,  and  of  the  Globes  arrivall.  He  was
busie  to  send  a  Cargason  of  goods  for  Japan.  Seeing
good  to  be  done  with  China  Commodities,  I  tooke  up
three  thousand  Rials  of  eight  of  the  Queene  at  interest,
for  three  or  foure  Moneths,  allowing  sixe  per  Centum  to
the  Queene,  and  one  per  Centum  to  the  Treasurer.  We
received  ill  newes  from  Bantam,  that  Campochina  had
twice  been  burnt,  the  great  English  house  also  full  of
cloath,  and  that  of  the  Hollanders  with  great  losse  :  of  a
great  English  ship  at  Pulo  Panian  much  distressed,  and
great  mortalitie.  There  came  newes  also,  that  the  Acheners
had  besieged  Joor.

July  the  twelfth,  here  arrived  the  King  of  Pahan,  with
his  Wife  the  Queenes  sister,  and  two  Sonnes,  much  against
his  will,  leaving  his  countrey  in  great  povertie,  famine,  fire,
and  warre,  having  joyned  conspiracie.  He  brought  newes
that  the  Acheners  had  taken  Joor,  and  carried  all  the
Ordnance,  Slaves,  and  other  things  away  with  them  ;  Raja
Boungson  with  his  children  were  taken  prisoners,  and  the
King  of  Joor  fled  to  Bintam.  It  was  besieged  nine  and
twentie  dayes.  Some  Hollanders  also,  whose  ship  was
then  at  Joor,  were  there  taken  and  slaine.  None  of  the
Grandes  went  to  entertaine  this  King  of  Pahan,  onely  all
Dogges  killed,  the  dogs  were  killed  for  his  sake,  because  he  can  endure
none.  He  tooke  our  shooting  as  he  passed  by  us  in  his
honour  very  kindly,  desiring  us  to  visit  him,  and  to  trade
in  his  Countrey.

July  the  sixteenth,  we  had  newes  of  Captaine  Saris  his
being  at  Mackian,  in  the  way  to  Japan  :  also  of  the  death
of  Sir  Henry  Middleton  on  the  foure  and  twentieth  of

July.

Joor  or  Johor
taken.

[I.  iii.  324.]
Death  of  Sir
Hen.  Middle-
ton.

May,  as  was  thought  by  griefe  for  the  most  part,  the
Trades-increase  lying  there  on  ground  without  Mast,  with
three  and  thirtie  men  the  greatest  part  sicke  :  the  ship
being  sheathed  on  the  one  side,  and  not  on  the  other. In

33°

PETER WILLIAMSON FLORIS

her  had  deceased  an  hundred  English,  and  more  Chineses
which  wrought  for  wages,  and  eight  Dutch,  by  some
strange  sickenesse.  Captaine  Schot  had  taken  the  Castle
and  Iland  of  Solor,  with  great  quantitie  of  Sandalwood.
In  the  Moluccos  also  they  had  done  much  on  the  Span-
yard,  and  a  hot  warre  was  likely  to  ensue.  July  the  one
and  thirtieth,  came  the  King  of  Pahan  to  our  house  with
great  state,  making  great  promises  of  kind  entertainment
in  his  Countrey.

August  the  first,  the  Queene  sent  for  us  to  the  Court,
where  was  made  a  great  feast  in  honour  of  the  King  of
Pahan.  There  was  also  plaid  a  Comedie  by  women  after
the  Javan  manner,  apparelled  antikelike,  very  pleasant  to
behold.  On  the  ninth,  the  King  of  Pahan  departed,
having  been  here  a  mocking  stocke  to  the  Patanees  :  but
the  Queenes  Sister  would  not  leave  him,  but  returned
backe  with  him  ;  in  liew  of  getting  great  presents,  having
spent  almost  all  shee  had.  On  the  sixteenth,  I  received  a
letter  from  Thomas  Bret  at  Maccasar  of  a  bad  Market,
and  that  John  Persons  was  fallen  frantike  :  and  that  they
had  bought  a  Junke  with  purpose  to  have  come  away,  but
that  in  the  meane  time  the  Darling  came  thither,  Seeing
full  of  cloathing  to  settle  a  Factorie  there.

September  the  eighteenth,  arrived  here  Raja  Indra
Monda,  which  had  gone  from  hence,  October  the  twentie
fift :  he  had  been  at  Maccasar,  and  thence  to  Banda,  where
hee  made  a  good  Market.  He  brought  about  two
hundred  sockles  Mace,  and  a  great  parcell  of  Nutmegs.
Hee  brought  me  a  letter  from  Richard  Welden.  By  him
I  learned  the  State  of  Banda ;  the  Generall  Peter  de  Bot,
had  ministred  severe  justice,  hanging  some  for  sleeping  in
the  watch,  on  a  Gallowes  hard  by  the  Castle  :  which  caused
divers  to  runne  to  the  Bandesians,  and  ten  were  turned
Moores ;  neither  could  they  of  the  Castle  by  any  meanes
recover  them.  Nor  have  they  of  the  Castle  any  command
at  all  over  the  Bandesians :  onely  they  make  the  Junkes
to  ride  under  the  Castle,  as  also  the  ships,  so  commanding
the  Sea,  but  not  daring  to  give  a  bad  word  on  land  to

33i

A.D.

1613.

Solor  taken  by
the  Dutch.

King  of  Pahan
departed.
Wifely  con-
stancie.

Maccasar  in
Celebes.

Hollanders  in
Banda.

R.  Welden

Englishman.

Banda  not
commanded  by
the  Dutch.

A.D

161 1.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Golconda.

Bantam.

by  that  coozenage  to  raise  the  Custome  agreed  at  foure
per  Centum  to  twelve)  alleaging  for  reason,  that  hee  was
a  Mir,  and  that  he  was  borne  of  Mahomets  Posteritie,
whose  words  must  bee  beleeved  before  a  Christians.  I
not  knowing  how  to  deale  with  this  Knave,  the  time  not
suffering  to  send  to  the  new  King  at  Golconda,  seeing  no
meanes  to  end  with  friendship,  resolved  to  practise
enmitie  :  but  at  last  by  intercession  of  other  Moores,  we
ended  in  a  kind  of  agreement.  Having  also  cleered  at
Petapoli,  we  having  a  good  Monson  departed  for  Bantam,
and  arrived  there  the  sixe  and  twentieth  of  Aprill  1612.
We  found  the  Dutch  readie  to  depart  thence  for  Jacatra,
by  reason  of  the  Governours  new  exactions.  But  we
having  no  house  there,  after  some  contesting,  agreed  with
him  for  three  per  Centum  Custome.

By  order  of  David  Middleton,  a  Factorie  was  setled  at
Succadania,  and  continued  by  Master  Spalding,  but  it
seemeth  (as  things  are  carryed)  rather  to  private  then
publike  benefit.

The  first  of  June,  we  set  saile  from  Bantam,  and  on  the
two  and  twentieth  came  into  the  Road  of  Patane,  where
we  found  the  Bantam  a  ship  of  Enkhusen,  of  whom  wee
learned  the  manners  of  the  Countrey.  On  the  sixe  and
twentieth,  we  went  on  shoare  in  great  state,  taking  with
[I.  iii.  321.]  us  a  present  of  about  sixe  hundred  Rials  of  eight,  to
accompanie  the  Kings  Letter.  Wee  were  well  received
according  to  the  manner  of  the  Countrey,  the  Letter  being
laid  in  a  Bason  of  Gold,  and  carryed  upon  an  Elephant
with  Minstrels,  many  Lances  and  little  Flagges.

The  Queenes  Court  was  sumptuously  prepared,  the
Letter  read,  and  free  Trade  granted  us,  paying  such  duties
as  the  Hollanders  did.  Wee  departed  from  the  Court
without  sight  of  the  Queene,  and  were  brought  to  Dato
Laxmanna  the  Sabander  and  Officer  appointed  for
Strangers,  where  a  Banquet  of  Fruits  was  set  before
us :  and  thence  to  the  Oran-caya  Sirnona,  and  there  also
did  eate  something.  The  next  day  the  Queene  sent  us
meate  and  fruits  aboord.

Factory  at
Succadania  in
Borneo.

Patane.

The  Kings
Letter.

Queene  of
Patane.

322

PETER WILLIAMSON FLOWS  a.d.

i  6  i  2.

The  third  of  July,  departed  hence  a  Dutch  Pinnasse  July  3.
called  the  Grey-hound  for  Japon,the  Masters  Mate  thereof
was  the  same  man  which had  brought  the  Letter  from
William  Adams  to  the  English  at  Bantam  : by  whom  we w-  Adam  ln
sent  the  Companies  Letters  to  Master  Adams,  which  he **""
promised  to  deliver  with  his  owne  hands. This  other-
wise wee  could  not  have  done  ; for  those  of  Japon  are
at  enmitie  with  this  place,  and  have  burned  Patane  twice  JaPamtes
within  these  five  or  sixe  yeares.  Patanie

Much  adoe  we  had  to  get  leave  to  build  a  Ware-house
here,  fire-free,  which  we  did  hard  by  the  Dutch-house
in  a  place  assigned  us  thirtie  fathome  in  length,  twentie  in
breadth :  the  House  eight  fathome  long,  and  foure
broad.  But  their  demands  seemed  very  unreasonable,
amounting,  besides  former  charges,  to  foure  thousand
Rials  of  eight,  whereunto  yet  in  hope  of  future  benefit
we  yeelded.  Sicknesse  also  much  afflicted  us,  as  if  the
plague  had  beene  in  our  ship  :  and  Captaine  Hippon  dyed  Death  of  Cap-
the  ninth  of  July.  Whose  Successor  was  nominated  in  (  e  l^n
the  Boxe  N.  1 .  Master  Browne  ;  but  he  being  dead  before,
the  Boxe  N.  2.  was  opened,  wherein  Thomas  Essington  CaPL  Essinl-
was  named,  and  did  succeed.  Hereunto  was  added  losse
by  Theeves,  which  like  resolute  Dissolutes  came  into  the
house,  a  Lampe  burning,  and  stole  money  out  of  my
Chest,  two  hundred  eightie  three  Rials  of  eight,  and  other
goods  ;  fifteene  persons  sleeping  in  the  house,  and  a  great
blacke  Dogge,  and  Watch  kept  in  the  yard,  which  made
suspition  of  some  of  our  owne,  but  we  could  never  learne
any  certaintie.

I  and  John  Persons,  and  sixe  more  were  left  here  in
Factorie ; and  the  ship  departed  the  first  of  August  for
Syam. I  would  have  written  to  Syam,  of  my  ill  Market The  Globe  at
of  Lawnes,  but  could  not  send  by  water,  and  by  land  no ya'
lesse  then  foure  together  would  travell  for  feare  of  Tygres, Tigres.
and many Rivers they must passe, which made their
demands  to  passe so farre, that I  was forced to  waite D n  ,

,  r . .  to.-  1  1 -it'  r  t  ™an  orPahan

better  opportunitie. In  beptember  the  King  or  Jor  over-  ana>  Qampon
ranne  the  Suburbes  of  Pahan,  burning  all  before  him,  and  Sine.

323

A.D.
1613.

Iks  Ridangh,
Capas,  Pulo
Tingi.

Bintam.

Lhschoten.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Kitchin,  the  people  being  their  enemies.  They  came  to
Patania  with  eighteene  men,  the  most  lying  in  pitifull
plight  in  their  Cabbins.  Shee  brought  seventie  thousand
Rials  of  eight,  and  twentie  nine  packs  with  Indie  cloth.

§. III.

Their  Voyage  to  Masulipatan  ; accidents  during
their  long  stay  there,  and  their  returne.

He  next  morning  we  set  saile.  The  five  and
twentieth  we  were  with  the  Southerliest  Hands  of
Ridangh  (which  are  about  eighteene  or  twentie,

lying-  in  sixe  degrees)  and  in  the  Evening  by  the  lies  of
Capas,  which  are  three  little  lies,  lying  some  thirteene
leagues  from  the  former,  and  two  from  the  Continent.
The  sixe  and  twentieth,  we  saw  Pulo  Tyaman,  South  and
South  by  East  from  Capas  twentie  eight  league.  The
nine  and  twentieth,  being  calme,  we  came  to  Pulo  Tingi.
If  you  keepe  at  eighteene  fathome,  you  neede  feare  nothing
but  what  you  may  see.

The  first  of  November,  we  saw  the  point  of  Jantana  or
Johor,  and  the  Mount  upon  the  Hand  of  Bintam,  and  the
next  Morning  came  in  sight  of  Pedra  Branca  :  and  about
ten  of  the  clocke  came  to  the  dangerous  riffe  which  fals
off  from  the  point  of  Johor  foure  leagues  into  the  Sea.
John  Hugens  describes  this  shoald  very  well,  which  we
passed  not  without  danger,  having  the  point  with  the  three
little  Hands  West  South-west  from  us.  It  is  good  to
keepe  towards  the  Sea,  till  you  bring  the  little  lies  shut
in  with  the  point  of  Johor,  and  Pedra  Branca  open  with  the
He  of  Bintam.  Pedra  Branca  is  a  rocke  full  of  fowle,  and
be-dunged,  which  causeth  the  toppe  thereof  to  be  white,
and  gives  it  that  name.  Till  the  seventh,  we  were  every
day  busie,  turning  up  with  the  floud  till  we  were  past  the
River  of  Johor,  and  came  about  two  leagues  from  Sinca
pura.  On  the  eighth,  divers  Prawes  came  aboord  us  hard
by  the  straight,  being  of  the  Salettes  under  the  King  of
Johor,  which  for  the  most  part  keep  in  their  Prawes,  with

334

PETER WILLIAMSON FLORIS  ad.

1613.

their  Wives  and  Children,  and  live  on  fishing.  By  these
we  understood,  that  the  King  of  Achen  had  sent  Raja
Bouny  Soe,  younger  brother  of  the  King  of  Johor,  backe
againe  with  great  honour,  attended  with  thirtie  Prawes  and
two  thousand  Acheners,  to  rebuild  the  Fort  and  Citie  of
Johor,  with  good  store  of  Ordnance,  and  other  necessaries,
having  married  him  to  his  Sister,  and  that  he  should  bee
set  up  in  the  old  Kings  place.  Here  we  tooke  a  Pilot  to
carry  us  through  the  Straights.

The  nineteenth  of  December,  we  arrived  at  Masuli-  Masulipatan.
patan,  where  we  found  an  English  shippe,  and  two  Hol-
landers. We  understood  that  Mirsadardi  was  out  of  place,
and  that  Atmachan  and  Busebulleran  did  governe.  The
English  ship  was  the  James,  and  was  sent  expressely  to  The  James.
second  us  in  our  Voyage.  M.  Marlow,  M.  Davis,  M.
Gumey,  and  M.  Cob  came  aboord  us,  and  delivered  us
Letters.  The  one  and  twentieth,  I  went  on  shoare,  where
we  were  met  by  Wentacadra,  sonne  to  Busebulleran,  with
the  Sabandar  and  other  Moores,  and  were  well  received.
They  gave  us  divers  tesseriffes,  and  to  the  Director
Warner  and  me,  to  each  a  faire  horse,  which  I  refused,
suspecting  their  treachery,  but  was  compelled  to  accept  it.
I  took  a  Caul  at  foure  per  Centum,  &  landed  goods.

The  twentie  fift  of  January,  the  James  departed  for
Petapoli :  and  on  the  seventh  of  February,  from  thence
for  Bantam.  On  the  eighteenth  of  February,  I  went  to
Narsapur  Peca,  and  the  nineteenth,  the  ship  was  brought
into  the  River  drawing  nine  foot  three  quarters,  and  having
ten  and  an  halfe,  contrary  to  the  reports  of  some,  which
wished  no  good  to  us.  The  three  and  twentieth,  I  arrived
againe  at  Masulipatan,  and  dispatched  the  Peon  for  Surat,
writing  to  M.  Aldworth.  That  day  arrived  a  Navette
from  Pegu,  wherein  came  Cornelius  Franke,  by  whom  we  N ewes  from
understood,  that  it  was  certaine  that  the  King  of  Awa  had  Pe&u"
taken  the  Fort  of  Sirjangh,  and  slaine  all  the  Portugals,
and  that  Xenga  or  Philip  de  Britto,  was  either  spitted  or
soulath'd.  This  was  done  in  March  last.  The  King  had
given  order  for  rebuilding  the  old  Towne,  calling  all  the

335

A.D.
1614.

ri.

326.]

Tho.  E s sing-
tons  sudden
death.

Objama
Queen  of
Paleacatte.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Peguers  together,  and  making  many  faire  promises.  Him-
selfe  went  forward  toward  Tenesserin,  where  Banga  de  la
came  to  him  with  fiftie  thousand  Peguers,  who  before  had
been  under  the  King  of  Siam.  The  Moores  in  Masuli-
patan  rejoice  greatly  at  this  conquest,  hoping  to  get  the
trade  of  Pegu  into  their  hands  againe,  and  prepare  two
ships  to  send  thither  in  September.  In  March  came
newes  of  eleven  ships  arrived  at  Goa,  eight  from  China,
and  three  from  Malacca,  which  brought  downe  the  price
of  the  Market,  in  a  good  houre  for  me,  which  had  almost
dispatched  before.

In  Aprill  1 614.  Atmachan  departed  for  Golanda  to  give
up  his  accounts,  the  yeare  comming  to  an  end.  It  was
well  for  him,  the  King  having  deposed  the  great  Treasurer,
and  given  his  Office  to  Malick  Tusar,  Atmachans  friend :
and  well  for  us,  these  Governours  Debts  beeing  good
whiles  they  continue  their  place  ; otherwise  doubtfull.

The  eighteenth  of  May,  at  five  in  the  evening  dyed
Captaine  Essington  of  a  sudden  heat,  having  eaten  his
Dinner  at  the  Table.  He  had  some  Biles  about  him,
which  at  that  time  of  the  yeare  are  very  common  :  one
great  one  on  his  shoulder,  which  would  not  breake,  sup-
posed the  cause  of  that  heate.  I  went  and  set  the  ship
in  the  best  order  I  could,  they  all  refusing  other  Governour
but  me,  which  thought  it  an  abasement  to  tread  in  the
steps  of  my  under  Merchant.  I  committed  it  for  thai
time  to  Master  Skinner,  holding  all  in  hope  that  they
might  doe  their  best  endeavours,  and  returned  to  Masuli-
patan,  where  I  found  three  persons  which  said  that  they
were  sent  with  Letters  from  Objama  Queene  of  Paleacatte,
Jaga  Raja  Governour  thereabout,  and  of  Saint  Thomee,
Apa  Condaja  Secretarie  of  the  Great  King  Wencatadraia,
wherein  they  sent  me  word  that  if  I  would  come  thither,
they  would  grant  me  a  place  right  over  against  the  Fort  of
Paleacatte,  with  all  such  Priviledges  as  we  should  desire,
and  other  great  promises  besides.  But  I  considering  how
I  and  the  James  had  beene  entertayned  there,  could
beleeve  but  little  :  yet  at  last  we  agreed  that  one  of  them

336

PETER WILLIAMSON FLOWS

A.D.

1614.

Wentcatadria
K.  ofNarsinga
his  Caul  and
Abestiam  to
the  English.

should  stay  with  me,  and  the  rest  should  depart  with  one
of  my  folkes,  who  should  carrie  the  Letters  to  the  aforesaid
persons ;  as  also  to  the  King ;  wherein  I  repeated  the  bad
entertainment  which  we  had  at  Paleacatte.  And  if  now
it  pleased  him  that  we  should  come  into  his  Countrey,
then  to  send  us  his  Caul  or  safe  Conduct,  to  which  we
might  trust.

The  nine  and  twentieth  of  July,  arrived  foure  persons
as  Embassadors,  with  my  man  Wengali ;  from  the  Great
King  of  Narsinga  or  Velur,  bringing  me  a  Caul  with  his
Abestiam,  (which  is  a  white  Cloth  where  his  owne  hand  is
printed  in  Sandall  or  Saffron)  as  also  one  from  the  Queene
of  Paleacatte,  and  divers  Letters  from  Jaga  Raja,  Tima
Raja,  Apocondaia  and  others.  The  Kings  Letter  was
written  upon  a  leafe  of  Gold,  wherein  he  excused  the
former  fault  done  to  us  in  Paleacatte,  desiring  that  now  His  offers.
we  would  come  into  his  Countrey,  and  chuse  a  place  to
our  best  liking,  and  that  there  we  should  build  a  house
or  Castle  according  to  our  owne  liking,  with  other  privi-
ledges.  He  gave  me  a  Towne  of  about  foure  hundred
pound  of  yearely  revenue,  with  promise  to  doe  more  at
my  comming  thither.  The  Hollanders  had  wrought  much
against  it,  but  their  words  were  not  now  in  such  force  ;
the  Inhabitants  grieving  to  see  every  yeare  English  ships
passe  by  without  any  profit  to  them,  and  therefore  filling
the  King  with  complaints,  and  procuring  these  friendly
offers.  I  kept  them  with  mee,  allowing  their  daily  charges
till  the  ship  be  come  into  the  Road,  then  to  consider
further.  My  man  Wengali  had  beene  in  person  before
the  King  and  spoken  with  him,  the  King  laying  his  hand
on  his  head,  and  presenting  him  with  a  Tesseriffe.

In  August,  was  in  Narsapur  Peta  and  thereabouts,  a
greater  over-flowing  then  had  beene  seene  in  nine  and
twentie  yeares ;  that  whole  Salt  hils,  Townes,  and  Rice
drave  away,  and  many  thousands  of  men  and  cattell  were
drowned,  the  water  being  three  yards  above  the  common
high-way.  In  Golconda  (which  hath  a  branch  running
into  this  great  River,  dry  in  the  Summer)  were  about  foure

337  v

Over-flotc-
ings.

Ill

A.D.
1614.

King  of  Nar-
singas  death:
Iff  his  wives
burning  with
him.

James  for
Patania.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

thousand  houses  washed  away.  Two  stone  Bridges,  one
of  nineteene ;  the  other  of  fifteene  arches  (as  artificially
made  as  the  like  may  scarsly  bee  seene  in  Europe,  in  my
judgement,  at  least  three  fathome  high  above  water)  were
three  foot  under  water,  and  sixe  arches  of  that  of  nineteene
washed  away,  beeing  a  Bridge  which  might  well  bee  com-
pared with  that  of  Rochester.

The  fourth  of  October,  the  ship  being  sheathed  came
over  the  Barre  without  hurt,  hindered  before  by  the  foule
weather.  And  now  I  called  freshly  for  my  Debts,  and
writ  thereof  the  third  time  to  the  Court,  telling  them  that
I  would  be  payd  the  interest  also  ;  whereupon  they  writ
to  Mir  Mahumad  Rasa  and  the  Sabander,  to  looke  that  I
be  contented.  The  three  and  twentieth,  the  ship  came  into
the  Roade  of  Masulipatan,  and  I  tooke  order  for  shipping
the  goods.  On  the  five  and  twentieth  came  newes  of  the
death  of  Wencatadrapa  King  of  Velur,  after  his  fiftie
yeares  raigne,  and  that  his  three  Wives  (of  whom  Obyama
Queene  of  Paleacatte  was  one)  had  burned  themselves
quicke  with  the  Corps.  Great  troubles  are  feared ;  the
Hollanders  are  afraid  of  their  Castle  new  built  in
Paleacatte.  Soone  after  came  sixtie  sixe  Souldiers  to
strengthen  it,  in  the  Lion.

The  first  of  November,  arrived  the  Lion  from  Bantam,
which  brought  newes  of  the  casting  away  of  the  Bantam
in  the  Tessell,  and  of  the  White  Lion  at  Saint  Helena  ;  of
the  James  arrivall  at  Bantam  and  going  thence  for  Patania.
I  seeing  the  Governours  trifling  delayes  for  his  Debt,  and
being  in  danger  thereby  not  to  returne  this  yeare,  resolved
to  carrie  him  or  his  sonne  from  the  Custome  house  aboord
the  ship,  how  dangerous  soever  the  attempt  seemed,  the
whole  Company  promising  therein  to  live  and  dye  with
me.  Whereupon  I  gave  order  for  the  Boat  to  goe  aboord,
and  to  bring  sixe  Muskets  wrapped  up  in  the  Sailes,  and
so  to  lye  in  the  Custome  House,  till  we  should  see  our
oportunitie.  Moreover,  seeing  we  may  not  bring  any
weapons  on  shore,  I  gave  order  that  all  our  folkes  should
stay  within  the  House,  and  come  to  mee  in  the  Custome

338

PETER WILLIAMSON FLORIS  aj>.

i  6 1 4.

House  as  soone  as  I  should  send  for  them  five,  to  take

hold  of  the  Souldiers  Pikes,  that  were  of  the  Governours

or  his  sonnes  Guard,  and  so  presently  to  enter  the  Custome  [I.  iii.  327.]

House,  which  standeth  hard  by  the  Rivers  side,  and  then

to  shut  the  doore. So  might  we  be  able  to  carry  them

into  the  Boat,  before  the  alarme  be  knowne  in  the  Towne  :

wee  having  them  in  the  Boate,  wee  needed  not  to  feare.

We  kept  it  secretly,  yet  had  the  Hollanders  intelligence,

who  esteemed  it  a  bragge,  and  so  revealed  it  not.

The  one  and  twentieth  of  November,  the  Gentiles  had  Gentile  Feast.
a  Feast,  which  Solemnitie  happens  thrice  a  yeare,  when
the  New  Moone  commeth  on  a  Monday  :  in  which  both
Men  and  Women  come  to  wash  themselves  in  the  Sea,
esteeming  thereby  to  have  great  indulgence.  The  Bra-
menes  also  and  Cometis  doe  the  same.

On  the  foure  and  twentieth,  I  demanded  my  money  of
the  Governour  very  angerly,  having  stayed  seven
monethes  longer  then  bargaine,  asking  also  Mir
Mahumad  Rasa,  why  he  did  not  helpe  me  according
to  the  Letters  of  the  Court :  who  laughingly  answered,
they  would  talke  with  me  at  the  Custome  House  when
my  anger  was  over.  I  replyed,  I  would  no  longer  bee
made  a  Foole,  I  would  shew  my  selfe  a  Captaine  of  the
King  of  England,  who  are  not  accustomed  to  such
Knavish  dealing.  Thus  went  I  to  the  Custome  House,
where  I  found  the  Governours  Sonne  with  a  small  Guard,
his  Souldiers  having  set  their  Launces  over  against  the
Custome  House,  it  now  being  also  high-water,  as  if  God
had  offered  Occasions  fore-locke.  Wherefore  I  sent  home
(as  was  before  agreed)  for  Master  Skinner  and  the  rest,
(leaving  only  three  to  looke  to  the  house)  who  presently

came  &  laid  hold  on  the  Pikes,  and  entrW  the  Custome V*hrom  and

~  &  strange

house,  shut  the  doore. In  the  mean  time  I  held  Wen-  attempt  of  the

catadra  arrested  by  the  armes,  til  two  or  three  came  to  English.

me,  who  taking  him  in  their  armes  carryed  him  into  the  The  Gover-

Boat,  into  which  I  presently  leaped,  and  beeino-  followed  nors  s0"ne

r 1  rr r  1  •  &  1 carryed

or  the  rest,  put  oft  from  shoare,  rowing  away : so  that  p^/oner
before  his  Father  and  Mir  Mahumad  Rasa  could  come  to  aboord.

339

ad  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1 614.

the  Custome  House,  wee  were  in  full  rowing.  But  in
regard  that  it  blew  hard,  and  that  we  were  forced  to  row
under  land,  within  the  length  of  two  Cables  to  keep  the
depth  of  the  Channell ;  they  came  with  might  and  mayne
to  pursue  us :  some  comming  hard  by  the  Boate,  but  were
out-rowed.  Some  met  us  in  front  which  had  indangered
us,  but  discharging  three  Muskets  we  frighted  them,  and
carryed  away  our  prey  in  sight  of  three  thousand  people,
being  much  past  the  Barre  before  they  could  come  to  it,
and  came  safe  aboord.  I  had  given  order  to  George
Chancey,  to  stay  ashoare  with  three  men  more  to  give  a
reason  of  this  Hostilitie,  &  to  get  in  the  Debts :  but  he,
contrary  hereto,  going  forth  of  the  house  to  see  this  Enter-
prize,  was  by  some  unruly  fellowes  set  upon  and  thorowly
beaten  :  which  comming  to  the  Governours  eare,  hee  tooke
him  into  his  protection,  fearing  his  sonne  might  pay  for  it.
In  the  after-noone  came  from  shoare  Werner  Van
Berchem  the  Hollander,  with  the  Kings  Interpreter,  to
demand  the  cause  of  this  action,  whom  I  answered  that
they  knew  it  well  enough,  and  I  had  also  left  my  under
Merchant  on  shore  to  tell  them  :  of  whose  hard  usage
understanding,  I  made  as  though  I  would  be  revenged  on
Wencatadra,  but  by  Van  Berchems  intercession  remitted
it,  conditionally  to  execute  the  same,  hanging  him  at  the
yard  (which  he  writ  to  his  Father)  if  any  of  my  men
should  be  wronged.  I  prohibited  also  any  Boat  to  come
aboord  without  a  Letter  from  George  Chancey,  else  would
I  set  them  all  before  the  Mast.  The  Hollanders  Van
Berchem  with  the  Secretarie  came  aboord  againe  on  the
seven  and  twentieth,  offering  the  Governours  owne
Debt :  I  demanded  no  more  but  his  and  Callopas  whose
Suretie  hee  was,  and  for  the  rest,  that  he  as  Governour
should  send  such  as  refused  to  pay  aboord ;  &  I  would
hold  my  selfe  satisfied.  Berchem  also  protested  against
me  of  all  dammages,  which  thev  had  bound,  or  might
beare,  because  of  my  hostilitie ;  to  which  protest  I
answered  by  writing,  shewing  the  nullitie  thereof,  and
their  ship  the  same  night  departed  for  Patane. In  the

34°

PETER WILLIAMSON FLOWS  ad.

16  i  4.

meane- while,  Wencatadra  remayned  aboord  without  eating

or  drinking. For  he  being  a  Bramene,  may  neither  eate  Superstition  of

nor  drinke  in  any  mans  house  but  what  he  hath  dressed jn

himselfe ;  which  made  mee  so  to  pittie  him,  that  I  offered

if  any  two  Moores  of  qualitie  would  come  aboord  in  his

place,  I  would  let  him  goe  on  shoare. But  none  would

undertake it, and he must continue his fast. The

Governour  therefore payd his  and Callopas Debt, and

made  all  the  rest  to  pay  except Miriapeik  and  Datapa

which  were  in  Golconda,  and  I  sent  backe  my  Prisoner,

the  thirtieth  of  November.

After  this  agreement  divers  Moores  and  others  came
aboord  to  visit  mee,  promising  to  write  to  the  King  the
truth  of  these  proceedings,  desiring  me  not  to  hurt  any
Moores  ships.  I  answered  I  was  for  this  time  satisfied :
but  let  them  hereafter  take  heed  of  giving  like  cause,  and
have  better  eares  for  Englishmens  complaints.  I  also  sent
Letters  to  the  King  at  Golconda  to  the  same  purpose  for
quicker  Justice.  I  dispatched  likewise  the  Embassadors
of  Velur,  in  respect  of  the  troubles  there,  and  my  short
stay  denying  fit  oportunitie  :  yet  I  left  Letters  with  them
for  the  first  English  ships,  with  my  best  advice.

The  seventh  of  December,  Master  Chancey  came  aboord
with  the  rest,  and  next  night  I  put  to  Sea,  having  offered
to  come  and  take  a  friendly  fare-well  on  shoare  :  but  the
Governour  fearing  I  would  write  of  his  dealing  by  those
Moores,  refused,  pretending  hee  was  ashamed  to  see  my
face,  whom  of  a  good  friend  he  had  made  his  Enemie.
The  third  of  Januarie,  we  arrived  at  Bantam,  where  we
found  the  James  come  from  Patane,  the  Hosiander,  and
Concord.  I  went  on  shoare  and  received  of  Master  John  [I.  Hi.  328.]
Jordaine,  (principall  Factour  at  Bantam)  Letters,  from  Sir
Thomas  Smith,  testifying  that  the  Companie  was  joyned  The  several/
in  one,  &c.  From  Master  Cockin  at  Maccasar,  that  he  had  stockes  umted-
received  the  Cargason  sent  by  William  Ebert,  with  other
circumstances :  from  Adam  Denton  and  Master  Gourney,
complayning  of  the  dead  Market  because  of  the  Warres  :
from  Master  Lucas  also,  of  his  feares  in  the  same  regard ;

34i

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1614.

but  the  Darling  being  gone  thither,  I  hope,  will  comfort
him.

Here  we  agreed  that  the  Hosianders  goods  should  be
discharged  into  the  Globe,  and  Edward  Christian  (made
Captaine  thereof  in  that  Countrey  by  Generall  Beast)
should  bee  Captaine  of  the  Globe,  and  Nathaniel  Salmon
Master ;  and  Master  Skinner  should  goe  Master  in  the
Hosiander :  and  that  in  the  Globe  should  goe  fiftie  men,
in  the  James  five  and  fiftie,  twentie  in  the  Hosiander  which
was  to  stay  here  ;  and  three  or  foure  to  keepe  the  Con-
cord. On  the  thirtieth,  the  James  departed  to  goe  on  a
moneth  before  and  to  stay  at  the  Cape,  or  at  Saint  Helena,
that  we  might  go  together.  Seeing  the  Hosiander  could
not  so  quickly  bee  made  readie,  it  was  thought  fit  to  send
the  Concord  for  Amboyna,  George  Bale  going  in  her  ;  and
George  Chancey  was  to  stay  in  Macasar.  The  ship
Letters  from  Zelandia  arrived  from  Japan,  and  brought  Letters  from
Japan.  Master  Cockes,  that  Master  Peacocke  with  the  Hollanders

was  slaine  in  Cochin  China,  and  that  Master  Adams  and
foure  other  English  were  gone  thence  for  Syam.

The  fourteenth  of  Februarie,  arrived  Captaine  David
Middleton  with  the  Samaritan,  Thomas,  and  Thomasin,
the  men  being  well  and  in  good  disposition.  Captaine
Middleton  understanding  of  his  Brothers  death,  and  the
This  is  sup-  losse  of  his  ship  the  Trades  Increase,  was  perplexed  and
M  M*  resolved  to  goe  home,  wherefore  he  called  a  Court  to  see
Journal!.  tne  disposing  of  the  ships,  and  the  manning  againe  of  the
Hosiander.  It  was  then  thought  fit  to  send  home  the
Samaritan  with  the  very  first,  the  Thomas  to  Sumatra,
and  the  Thomasin  for  Amboyna,  to  succour  the  Concord
and  the  Hosiander  for  Petania  and  Japan,  to  visit  those
Factories,  which  was  put  in  execution.  They  set  sayle  out
of  Bantam  Road,  the  two  and  twentieth  of  February.
Aprill  the  thirtieth,  they  entred  the  Road  of  Soldania,
where  they  found  the  James  which  arrived  the  day  before,
the  Advise  &  Attendant  outward  bound.  The  seven-
teenth of  May,  they  weighed,  and  the  first  of  June  came
to  Saint  Helena.

342

SAMUEL CASTELTON

A.D.

1612.

Chap. XV.
A  Journall  of  a  Voyage  made  by  the  Pearle  * to  *Forthefur-

i  t^tti  •  r>  •  therinv  of

the  Last-India,  wherein  went  as  Captaine
Master  Samuel  Castelton  of  London,  and  Cap-
taine  George  Bathurst  as  Lieutenant  :  written
by  John  Tatton, Master.

He  two  and  twentieth  of  August  1612.  we
departed  from  Black-wall  for  Gravesend,
and  being  much  hindered  by  contrary
windes,  it  was  the  fift  of  November,
before  we  could  attayne  to  the  Lands  end
of  England.

The  seven  and  twentieth  of  November,
we  fell  with  Lancerota,  one  of  the  Canarie  lies.

The  third  of  December,  we  towed  into  Lauratavi  Road.
The  fifth  wee  were  put  out  of  the  Roade  by  foule  weather,
and  spent  the  whole  moneth  about  this  He,  and  TenerifFa,
and  tooke  in  sixteene  Pipes  of  Wine.

The  last  of  this  moneth,  we  met  with  a  small  ship  of
London,  a  little  in  the  Offing,  which  had  formerly  beene
in  the  Road  with  us,  which  an  Holland  ship  of  Warre  had
taken,  whose  men  being  all  drunke  in  the  night,  she  stole
away  having  but  three  men  in  her :  into  whom  we  put  two
men,  and  a  Merchant,  whom  we  should  have  set  on  shoare
at  the  Grand  Canarie,  but  the  weather  not  permitting  us,
he  agreed  to  goe  for  the  He  of  Palme,  we  thinking  there
to  better  our  provision.  The  small  ship  this  day  did  beare
us  companie.

The  fifteenth  day,  we  anchored  in  the  Roade  of  Cape
Verde  where  we  watered,  and  got  some  Oxen.

The  one  and  twentieth,  we  weighed  and  went  over  to
Rosisco  for  Beeves,  and  at  five  of  the  clocke  anchored  in
Rosisco  Roade  in  five  fathomes.  Note  that  there  is  but
eleven  fathomes  over  the  Bay  in  an  East  and  by  North
course : for  so  lyeth  Rosisco  from  the  He  which  maketh

343

Marine  know-
ledge, I  have
thought  good
to  adde  this
Voyage,  how
ever  holding
Societie  with
the  East-
Indian
Societie.

Lancerota.

Decemb.

1612.

Teneriffa.

A  small  ship  of
London  taken
by  an  Holland
man  of  Warre.

Rosisco  Road.

A.D.

1612.

The  first  Ter-
nado.

February  20.
They  crossethe
Line.

[I.  iii.  329.]
A prill  15.
Weeds  called
Trombas,
signes  of  being
neare  the  Cape
of Buona
Esperanza.
Punta  de
Sancta  Luzia.

The  Bay.

They  goe  on
share,  and
finde  people.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

the  Roade  at  Cape  Verde.  The  two  and  twentieth,  we
got  seven  Beeves.

The  three  and  twentieth,  in  the  morning  wee  departed
from  Rosisco.  The  eight  and  twentieth,  being  in  latitude
sixe  degrees,  thirtie  two  minutes,  we  met  with  the  first
Ternado,  lasting  some  two  houres.

The  twentieth  of  Februarie,  wee  crossed  the  Equinoc-
tiall  Line,  and  made  our  way  South  South-east.

The  fifteenth  of  Aprill  16 12.  the  latitude  thirtie  two
degrees,  thirtie  nine  minutes,  the  wind  South-west  we
steered  in  East  South-east,  and  met  with  many  great  weeds,
called  Trombas  by  the  Portugals,  and  the  water  was  much
changed  :  we  steered  away  East  South-east  till  five  of  the
clocke ;  then  wee  saw  the  land  betweene  the  East  South-
east, and  East  North-east :  wee  steered  away  East  till  seven
in  the  morning :  then  we  were  thwart  Punta  de  Sancta
Lucia,  some  foure  leagues  off ;  we  sounded,  and  had  forty
three  fathomes,  Rockes :  then  it  fell  aland.

The  sixteenth  at  noone,  latitude  thirtie  three  degrees,
no  minutes.  At  five  of  the  clock  at  night,  we  were  shot
so  farre  into  the  Bay,  that  we  brought  a  ledge  of  rockes
South  South-west  off  us  :  then  we  steered  off.

The  seventeenth  in  the  morning,  we  were  some  seven
leagues  off  the  shoare,  having  got  some  three  leagues  to
the  Southward.  This  day  our  latitude  was  thirtie  three
degrees,  no  minutes,  we  stood  in  for  the  shoare,  and  at
three  of  the  clocke  came  in  faire  by  the  point  in  fifteene,
fourteene,  and  thirteene  fathoms,  and  had  sometimes  hard
ground,  sometimes  soft  Ozie :  and  when  wee  were  shot
within  the  point  two  miles  off  the  shoare,  we  had  nine
fathoms  for  the  most  part  soft  Ozie  :  Then  we  anchored
in  the  South-east  side  of  the  Bay  in  seven  fathoms  soft
ground,  the  one  point  North  North-east  some  seven
leagues  off ; the  other  which  we  came  in  by,  North-west.

The  eighteenth  in  the  morning,  we  sent  our  Boat  and
Skiffe  on  shoare  ;  the  Skiffe  presently  returning,  brought
newes  of  people,  whereof  some  twentie  came  to  them.
Wee  sent  the  Skiffe  on  shoare  againe  with  an  iron  hoope

344

SAMUEL CASTELTON

cut  in  pieces,  and  some  hatchets :  and  for  a  small  piece  of
this  iron  hoope  we  had  a  Calfe,  and  for  an  hatchet  an
excellent  good  sheepe.  Then  we  sent  our  Boat  to  seeke
for  water,  but  ranging  the  Bay  could  find  none  :  a  little
puddle  we  saw,  of  which  the  people  dranke,  making  signes
that  there  was  none  other.  This  Countrey  seemed  to  bee
a  very  barren  place.  Our  Boat  went  into  a  River  in  the
bottome  of  the  Bay,  having  sixe  foote  water  upon  the
Barre  at  an  high  water,  and  went  a  mile  up  a  very  fine
River,  but  all  salt  water,  and  a  barren  Countrey.

The  nineteenth  in  the  morning,  at  two  of  the  clocke,
the  wind  came  up  at  North  North-west,  and  blowing  right
in,  we  weighed,  and  made  a  boord  over  the  bottome  of  the
Bay  in  ten,  nine,  eight  and  seven  fathoms.  Then  the
wind  came  to  the  West  South-west,  and  West  by  South,
and  so  we  plyed  it  out,  all  night  becalmed  some  three
leagues  without  the  point  of  the  road.  The  two  and
twentieth  at  noone,  latitude  thirtie  three  degrees,  fiftie
three  minutes,  we  were  some  eight  leagues  off  the  shoare.
The  three  and  twentieth  in  the  morning,  the  Table  bare
South-east  some  five  leagues  off.  All  night  was  calme.
The  foure  and  twentieth,  we  came  into  the  Road  of
Saldanha  :  The  people  desire  nothing  so  much  as  Copper  :
Brasse  they  regarded  not.

The  foure  and  twentieth  of  August,  we  departed  from
Priaman  for  Tecon :  Priaman  standeth  in  thirtie  eight
minutes  of  South  latitude,  and  the  variation  there  is  foure
degrees,  fiftie  minutes  North-west.  Tecon  standeth  in
five  and  twentie  minutes  of  South  latitude,  having  three
or  foure  shoalds  betweene  them :  but  keepe  some  foure
leagues  off  the  shoare,  and  there  is  no  feare.

The  one  and  thirtieth,  we  ran  into  a  Bay,  and  there
(being  a  wildernesse)  wee  brought  on  a  false  keele  on  our
Pinnasse.  This  Bay  is  called  by  the  name  of  a  Towne,  a
little  to  the  Southward  of  it,  called  Airebangye.  The
latitude  of  this  Bay  is  some  eight  minutes  North  latitude.
Round  about  the  shoald  going  in,  is  nine  fathome  and  a
quarter  lesse :  but  betweene  the  maine  and  it,  is  the  best

345

A.D.

1612.

A  Calfe  for  a
piece  of  an
iron  hoope,
and  a  good
sheepe  for  an
hatchet.

The  Table.

The  Road  of
Saldanha.
Copper  in
chiefe  request.
August.
Priaman  in
thirtie  eight
minutes  of
South  latitude.
Variation
foure  degrees
fiftie  minutes.
Tecon.

Airebangye,  a
Towne  eight
minutes  North
latitude.

A.D.

1612.

A  shoald.

The  River  of
Pattahan.

Latitude  no
degrees,
twentie  eight
minutes.

A  bigge  Island
in  one  degree
for  tie  minutes.

A  shoald.

33°.]

PURCHAS HIS PILGR1MES

channell  with  a  Northerly  wind,  because  the  point  of  the
Isle  lyeth  shoald  a  good  cables  length  off  to  the  North-
ward :  some  two  miles  off  the  shore  thwart  the  wester
point,  which  is  to  the  Northward  of  Airebangye,  lyeth  a
shoald,  whereon  is  but  eight  or  nine  fathomes  water,  being
rockes :  but  all  over  betweene  that  land  and  the  long  Isle
in  the  offing,  which  lyeth  some  seven  leagues  off,  is  but
eight  and  twentie  and  thirtie  fathoms.  The  tenth  of
September,  we  got  up  with  the  wind  off  the  shoare,
within  two  miles  of  Pattahan.

The  eleventh  in  the  morning,  we  anchored  at  the  South-
west end  of  the  Isle  of  Pattahan  in  fourteene  fathoms
Ozie :  and  at  two  in  the  after-noone  we  anchored  thwart
the  River  of  Pattahan,  in  five  fathoms  Ozie.  All  this
Coast  is  Ozie  neare  the  shoare,  without  it  be  the  shoalds.
This  River  is  very  good  water,  and  you  may  goe  into  it
six  or  seven  foot  upon  the  Barre,  it  standeth  in  no  degree,
twentie  eight  minutes  of  North  latitude.

The  fourteenth,  we  went  from  Pattahan  with  two
Governours  for  our  Pilots,  for  Barons  and  Achen,  with
three  Boyes.

The  sixteenth,  we  were  a  little  short  of  a  bigge  Island,
which  lyeth  some  two  miles  off  the  maine,  with  two  other
small  Isles  on  the  South-side  of  it :  and  betweene  the
maine  and  it  lyeth  an  high  round  homocke  being  an  Isle :
This  is  some  twentie  five  or  twentie  sixe  leagues  to  the
Northward  of  Pattahan.  This  bigge  Isle  standeth  in  one
degree,  fortie  minutes.  And  on  the  North-west  side  is
a  fresh  running  downe  a  steepe  cliffe,  like  a  little  River,
all  in  a  breach,  and  sheweth  white  a  great  way  off,  seven
or  eight  leagues  you  may  very  well  see  it.  On  the  North-
side  of  this  Isle  is  a  fine  Bay :  going  faire  by  it,  we  had
thirty  fathoms  Ozie.  South-west  or  West  South-west
some  foure  leagues  from  this  Island  lyeth  a  shoald  :  within
this  Isle  your  depth  is  two  and  twentie  fathoms,  and  so
close  into  the  maine  twentie  fathoms,  all  Ozie,  your  anchor
over  both  floockes.

The  last  of  October,  we  departed  from  Nicubar,  where

346

SAMUEL CASTELTOX  *n

1612.

we had good refreshing, for the Isle of Ceylon ; the
Canoes  still  trading,  so  long  as  we  were  any  thing  neare.

The  twelfth  of  November  at  noone,  the  Sunne  shining,  November.
we  made  our  ship  in  five  degrees,  thirtie  five  minutes.
By  which  observation  I  found  our  ship  fortie  leagues
farther  Southerly,  then  I  could  judge  by  our  sailing,  in
lesse  time  then  two  dayes.  At  eight  of  the  clocke  in  the
morning,  we  saw  the  land  of  Ceylon,  North-east  by  north
off  us  some  twelve  leagues  off,  being  the  high  land  within
Punta  de  Galle.  Then  it  proved  calme,  and  we  got  out  PuntadeGalU
our  Skiffe  to  sound,  but  found  no  ground.  '" y  01U

The  thirteenth  at  noone,  latitude  five  degrees,  thirtie
two minutes, variation thirteene  degrees, twentie foure ^fwft»
minutes  at  night :  all  night  the  wind  variable,  little  wind,  /  e~.

but  very  much  raine ; we  slented  it  in  to  the  Northward  : fourg  mi„utes,
the  next  morning  the  land  was  East  North-east. The
fourteenth  at  noone,  our  latitude  was  sixe  degrees,  or  six
or  five. The  Souther  point  of  Ceylon,  called  Diundra,
East  of  us.

The  sixteenth  in  the  after-noone,  the  wind  Southerly
out  of  the  sea,  we  weighed  and  went  into  the  Bay,  where  The  Bay  of
the  Boats  were,  called  Velagam,  thinking  there  to  water,  VelaZam-
and  anchored  in  seven  fathoms  fine  blacke  sand,  the  one
point  West  North-westerly,  the  other  point  which  wee
came  in  by  South  South-west  Westerly,  and  rode  within
a  quarter  of  a  mile  from  the  shoare.  This  night  wee  sent
our  Skiffe  on  shoare  with  a  flagge  of  truce,  but  went  not
on  shoare,  the  people  making  shew  they  could  not  under-
stand Portuguise.

The  seventeenth,  we  sent  our  Boat  to  the  other  side  of
the  Bay,  where  there  were  houses  built  by  Christian
Portugals :  where  the  people  came  downe  to  our  Boat,  and
one  of  them  came  into  the  water  neare  the  Boat,  speaking
very  good  Portuguise,  in  habite  like  one  of  the  Countrey
people :  but  we  judged  him  to  be  a  Portugall.  He
answered  our  men,  that  wee  could  have  nothing  till  they
had  acquainted  their  King ;  and  so  bid  us  returne  the
next  morning,  and  we  should  have  answere  from  their

347

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1612.

King,  with  very  pleasing  words : but  soone  after  we  per-
ceived an  ambush  of  the  Portugals,  and  weighed.

The  two  and  twentieth,  we  sent  our  Boat  and  Skiffe
on  shoare,  thinking  that  for  their  two  Boats  and  men,
they  would  have  given  us  water.  But  we  commanded
our  long  Boat  not  to  goe  neare  the  shoare,  but  to  lye  off
to  succour  the  Skiffe,  if  need  were.  The  people  on  shoare
keeping  themselves  close,  sent  one  man  downe  to  speake
to  our  Skiffe,  that  if  they  would  give  them  money  wee
should  water :  who  made  answere,  that  our  Captaine  was
very  well  content  to  give  them  what  it  pleased  them  to
require,  and  told  them  that  we  were  bound  for  Maticalo,
a  Citie  upon  the  Isle,  to  Trade.  Then  he  drawing  nearer
to  the  Skiffe,  seemed  to  be  afraid,  and  told  them  in  the
Skiffe  that  they  had  Gunnes  and  would  shoote  him :  but
they  making  answere  they  had  none,  as  indeed  they  had
not,  (for  the  Boat  was  fitted  for  their  defence)  comming
The  treason  of  neare,  hee  talked  very  friendly,  seeming  to  yeeld  to  any
the  Portugals.  t}1ing#  gut  on  tne  sudden  he  retiring  from  the  Skiffe,
there  came  off  such  a  volly  of  small  shot,  as  the  like  hath
been  seldome  seene,  I  thinke  not  lesse  then  two  hundred,
which  hurt  all  our  men  in  the  Skiffe,  being  sixe,  but  none
deadly,  thanked  be  God.  In  the  long  Boat  none  were
hurt ;  but  the  Skiffe  was  even  in  the  wash  of  the  shoare.
At  their  discharging  of  their  shot  they  sallied  out  of  the
bushes,  some  of  them  running  up  to  the  necke,  to  have
gotten  hold  of  the  Skiffe  :  But  two  of  our  men  having
better  hearts  then  the  rest,  although  hurt,  rowed  her  off.
The  long  Boate  discharging  her  fowler  and  her  small  shot,
made  them  retire  into  the  bushes  againe ;  and  so  both
our  Boats  came  aboord  againe.

The  foure  and  twentieth,  we  stood  to  the  Eastward
about  Diundra,  the  Souther  point  of  the  Isle,  and  anchored
all  night  some  seven  leagues  to  the  East.

The  sixe  and  twentieth,  wee  stood  to  the  Eastward  along

The  Rher the  shoare,  and  at  noone  anchored  thwart  a  River,  which

Walkway. tne  pe0ple  called  Walkway,  in  eight  fathoms,  black  Ozie

sand,  yet  shewed  a  great  River  within,  but  the  mouth  was

348

SAMUEL CASTELTON  ad

1612.

dord  up.  Our  Boat  being  at  the  mouth  of  it,  thought
it  to  be  a  Rocke  that  lay  thwart  of  the  Rivers  mouth  :  and
the  Sea  going  high  they  could  doe  no  good,  but  came
aboord.

The  seven  and  twentieth,  at  five  of  the  clocke  at  night,
we  were  thwart  a  shoald  in  the  offing  of  us,  and  being  A  shoald.
shot  to  the  Eastward  of  it,  we  tooke  in  all  our  sailes  but
our  fore-course,  and  stood  it  off  a  try  to  spend  the  night,
and  not  liking  the  weather,  I  called  to  get  up  our  new
fore-course ;  and  while  it  was  getting  up,  the  other  split.
Being  some  foure  miles  off  the  shoare,  we  laid  it  a  hull  till
nine  of  the  clocke,  having  foure  and  thirtie  fathoms.  Then
we  laid  it  about  to  the  shoare,  and  at  eleven  of  the  clocke
anchored  in  thirteene  fathom  fine  sand,  some  three  miles
and  an  halfe  from  the  shoare,  being  lesse  wind.

The  eight  and  twentieth,  in  running  some  five  leagues,
wee  met  with  another  shoald  without  us  some  three  leagues  Another
from  the  land,  the  shoare  being  sandie  hills. The  depth  s^oald-
some  five  or  sixe  miles  oft,  sixe  or  eight  fathoms :  at  one
cast  we  had  but  five  fathoms,  which  was  another  shoald,  A  third  shoald.
but  it  shewed  not,  being  a  smooth  Sea. Then  we  came
into  ten  and  fifteene  fathoms : and  standing  still  to  the
Eastward,  we  came  to  a  point  of  rockes,  and  there  seeing  A  Point  °f
a  fine  River,  we  anchored  on  the  East-side  of  the  point  in  J  fs'  R  ■
nine  fathoms  blacke  Ozie  sand ; the  point  bearing  South-
west  and  by  South  off  us. Heere  we  watered,  keeping  They  water.
a  guard  upon  the  Rocke  of  thirty  small  shot. Here  some  [I.  iii.  331.]
people  came  to  us  with  feare,  making  shewes  of  great
friendship. They  have  for  the  most  part  of  them  very  Tfie  descrip-
great  holes  in  their  eares : and  some  of  them  have  their hon  f

•  t>60t)l£.

haire  upon  their  heads,  like  the  Chineses,  long,  and  made
up  with  a  knot  upon  their  Crownes.  They  are  all  naked,
they  weare  onely  a  piece  of  cloth  about  their  middles,
hanging  downe  to  their  knees.  Here  two  came  aboord  us
at  severall  times,  which  spake  good  Portuguise.  They
promised  all  things,  but  performed  nothing.  But  finding
the  first  to  play  the  villaine  with  us,  yet  as  farre  as  we
perceived,  not  by  his  owne  meanes,  we  tooke  occasion  to

349

A.D.
l6l2.

De.err.ber.

Latitude  6.

degrees  40.

-;r.

Faris:

12.  degr.  46.

_.._-~:V.

January.

They  take  a

PURCHAS HIS PILGRTMES

detaine  the  one  aboord,  sending  the  other  with  threatnings
and  promises  on  shoare  to  procure  us  victualls :  who
staving-  somewhat  long,  put  his  fellow  which  we  had
detained  in  great  feare ;  who  fained  himselfe  sicke,  and
would  faine  have  gone  on  shore.  But  the  next  day  his
consort  came  with  two  Calves.

The  fourth  of  December  in  the  morning,  we  stood  to
the  East-ward  till  the  brise  came,  which  was  about  two  of
the  clock,  &  fetcht  not  the  place  by  sixe  leagues :  we
anchored  in  ten  fathomes  two  miles  from  the  shoare,  fine
blacke  sand  :  latitude  sixe  degrees  fortie  minutes.  Varia-
tion twelve  degrees  fortie  sixe  minutes  North-westing.
Here  we  rode  till  the  eighth  :  then  we  stood  to  the  West-
ward, and  anchored  all  night  thwart  a  great  Hamocke.
The  ninth,  we  anchored  all  night  a  little  to  the  West- ward
of  the  Westermost  Shoald.  The  eleventh  in  the  morning,
we  stood  faire  in  by  the  river  Wallaway  ;  but  the  sea  going
high,  we  went  along  to  the  West-ward,  and  at  night  were
thwart  the  point  some  five  leagues  to  the  East-ward  of
Diundra.  Here  wee  rode  till  the  sixteenth,  at  which  time
the  Current  setting  strongly  to  the  East-ward,  which  was
very  seldome,  we  weighed  and  plyed  to  the  Eastward.

The  seventeenth,  we  stood  it  in,  and  fetcht  in  a  little
to  the  West-ward  of  Diundra,  thwart  the  two  red  Cliffes,
and  anchored  in  twentie  five  fathomes,  the  point  East  a
little  Northerly.  The  eighteenth,  we  broke  up  our  Pin-
nasse,  being  so  worme-eaten,  that  she  wearied  our  men
with  freeing  her  of  water.  Here  we  rode  the  wind
Easterly  all  this  Moneth  out.

Januarie  the  seventh,  Easterly  winds  began  to  blow,
then  we  bare  up  for  the  river  of  Wallaway,  where  we  staid,
and  laid  up  new  shrowds  upon  our  maine  Mast,  having
very  much  wind  Easterly.  We  rode  here  tenne  dayes
together  in  tenne  fathoms,  three  quarters  of  a  mile  from
the  shoare,  the  point  lying  East  Southerly  off  us.  The
nineteenth  at  midnight  we  espied  a  sayle.  The  twentieth
in  the  morning  in  lesse  then  three  leagues  chase  we  tooke
her. And  the  same  day  we  stood  it  away  to  the  North-

35°

SAMUEL CASTKLTOX  a.d.

:2.
west  out  of  sight  of  land  ; then  we  stood  in  againe. The
foure  and  twentieth,  wee  anchored  some  seven  leagues  to
the  North-ward  of  Punta  de  Galle. The  five  and  twen-
tieth, we  began  to  discharge  her,  riding  in  thirtie  fathor  .
some  three  miles  from  the  shoare.

The  second  of  Februarv,  we  had  done  with  the  ship,  Febrntrj.
leaving  in  her  neere  an  hundred  tunnes  of  Pepper  and
Sanders. The  third lay,  we  set  saile  home- war  .: Thej  retarae

sixe  of  the  clocke  at  night  we  were  in  fourteene  fathomes,
some  five  or  sixe  miles  from  the  shoare,  thwart  an  Iland,
which  is  some  sixe  leagues  to  the  South-ward  of  the
Portugals  fort  upon  Ceylon  called  Colombo.  J  ,.-.:.-.

The  twentieth of  March, Latitude  thirteene  degree
seven  minutes  : Variation  twentie  foure  degrees  twentie  Tie  gre*****
sixe minutes, being the greatest that we found. We  ^  z
steered  awav  South-west,  and  felt  no  current. Note,  that
we  met  with  Currents,  and  many  ripplings  from  South
latitude  foure  degrees  thirtie  minutes,  till  we  came  into
thirteene  degrees  no  minutes. Sometimes  the  Ripplings
making  a noyse like over-fals, especially being in the
parallels  of  Pedras  Brancas  to  the  West-ward  of  it.

The  foure  and  twentieth,  latitude  sixteene  degrees  fiftie
minutes,  variation  twenty  three  degrees  tenne  minutes : 7*™***  23-
we steered South-west. The twentie seventh, latitude  ^r"
twentie  one  degrees,  then  we  saw  an  Iland  West  South-  jrj*f*~7^
west,  and  South-west  and  by  West  some  five  leagues  from 2I  &,-&;
us,  being  very  high  land. At  sixe  ot  the  clocke  at  night,
we  anchored  on  the  E~s:er  side  ot  it  in  tenne  fathomes
fine blacke sand  a mile  from  the shoare. From fortie
fathomes  to  foure  fathomes  close  into  the  shoare,  you  have
fine  black  sand. Here  we  sent  our  Boat  on  shoare,  and
found  infinite  numbers  of  great  land  Tortoises,  is  : s  {^~*5***~
a  man  might  well  carrie,  which  were  verv  good  meate. tvj^JT*
The  North-east  point  of  this  He  is  verv  high  and  s:eere  :
and  a  little  to  the  South-east  of  the  point  is  low  I  ere

is  a  fine  running  water  like  a  river: and  though  a  Boat
cannot  goe  in,  yet  it  is  a  very  good  place  to  water  in,  4&*4***r-
somewhat  distant  from  the  shoare. The  He  is  like  a  "s^

s:

A.D.

1612.

Pcarlc  lie.

An  excellent
place  for
refreshing.

[I.  iii.  332.]
A  prill  161  3.

Variati.
deg.  48.
minutes.

38.  degres,
47.  minutes,
the  greatest
latitude
Southward.
They  are  to
the  West  of
CapedeBuona
Esperanza.
June  1 61  3.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Forrest,  and  therefore  I  called  it  Englands  Forrest ;  but
others  call  it  Pearle  Hand,  by  the  name  of  our  ship.  There
is  store  of  land  fowle  both  small  and  great,  plentie  of
Doves,  great  Parrats,  and  such  like :  And  a  great  fowle
of  the  bignesse  of  a  Turkie,  very  fat,  and  so  short  winged,
that  they  cannot  flie,  beeing  white,  and  in  a  manner  tame  :
and  so  are  all  other  fowles,  as  having  not  been  troubled
nor  feared  with  shot.  Our  men  did  beate  them  downe
with  sticks  and  stones.  Ten  men  may  take  fowle  enough
to  serve  fortie  men  a  day.  Our  men  travelling  into  the
land,  found  another  river  and  a  Pond  with  great  store  of
Mallards  in  it,  and  wild  geese.  Moreover,  they  found
infinite  store  of  great  Eeles,  as  good,  I  thinke,  as  any  in
the  world.  Strike  them  with  a  Pike,  and  they  will  flie
from  you  not  past  two  or  three  yards,  and  there  will  lie
still  againe :  you  may  wade  after  them  at  your  pleasure.
I  weighed  one  of  them,  because  they  were  bigger  then
ever  I  saw,  and  it  weighed  five  and  twentie  pounds,  and
they  are  the  sweetest  fish  that  can  be  eaten.  I  thinke  it
is  so  good  a  place  as  the  world  can  affoord  for  refreshing,
beeing  also  without  people.

The  first  of  Aprill  161 3.  we  went  away,  and  bearing
about  the  North-east  point,  all  the  North  side  of  the  He
was  fine  low  land,  and  full  of  trees,  more  pleasant  in  sight
then  the  South-side.  The  second,  latitude  twentie  degrees
fiftie  eight  minutes.  The  He  bare  South-east  by  East  some
five  leagues  off :  Note  that  we  saw  no  dangers  about
the  He,  but  the  shore  it  selfe.  At  sixe  of  the  clocke  at
night,  the  South-west  point  was  off  us  South-east  by  East,
variation  twenty  two  degrees  fortie  eight  minutes.

The  first  of  May,  latitude  thirtie  eight  degrees  fortie
seven  minutes,  which  was  the  greatest  latitude  that  wee
ever  raised  to  the  South-ward,  wee  steered  away  West
North-west.  The  eleventh  at  noone,  latitude  thirty  three
degrees  fiftie  eight  minutes,  by  which  observation  I  found
a  Northerly  Current,  and  found  my  selfe  to  the  West-ward
of  Cape  de  Buona  Esperanza.

The  first  of  June,  all  these  ships,  the  Salomon  and  foure

352

SAMUEL CASTELTOX  a.u

1613.

great  Hollanders  departed  from  the  Road  of  Saint  Helena.
But  within  foure  houres  after  they  were  gone,  there  came
about  the  point  two  great  Carackcs,  the  other  ships  being
still in sight ; we having most part  of  our  Companie
ashoare  sicke,  I  sent  the  Boat  on  shoare,  having  not  above
ten  men  aboord  :  so  there  came  as  many  as  were  able,  some
of  our  soundest  men  being  up  in  the  Mountaines. When
the  Boat  was  come  aboord,  we  cut  our  Cables  in  the  hause
and  drove  away,  setting  sayle  as  fast  as  we  were  able,  being
in  all  but  sixe  and  twentie  men  ; having  left  behind  us
sicke  and  sound  five  and  twentie  men  of  our  owne  Com-
panie, and  one  Indian,  with  all  our  water  Caske,  and  divers
other  things  for  the  use  of  our  sicke  men  were  left  on
shoare. So  hastening  toward  the  Hollanders,  and  making
signes  for  their  stay,  and  within  night  comming  up  with
the  Admirall  of  the  Hollanders,  and  telling  him  of  this
newes,  hee  was  very  glad,  and  desired  to  make  saile  for
the  Road  againe,  and  made  signes  to  his  Fleet  to  follow,
and  so  stood  for  the  Road  as  wind  would  serve. But
in  the  morning  his  biggest  ship  both  of  force  and  burthen
was  missing,  with  the  Salomon  of  London. Yet  his  three
ships  and  we  plyed  it  up  for  the  Roade,  and  gat  in  the
third day  at noone. The  Admirall  of  the Hollanders The  third  °f
went  first  in,  and  anchored  on  the  Broad side of  the ^'r  ht
Admirall  Caracke. He  veered  so  much  Cable  before  hee  betweene  the
brought  up  his  ship,  that  his  sterne  hung  by  the  galleries  three  Holkn-
of  the  Caracke  :  but  with  his  two  sterne  peeces  lying  very  den  and  ifC0
low,  and  his  quarter  Peeces  hee  so  galled  the  Caracke,  that Laracka-
he  put  her  from  two  peeces  of  Ordnance,  and  might  have
sunke  her,  if  they  had  not  been  too  covetous,  having  desire
to  carrie  both. The  next  came  the  Bantam,  and  anchored
in  such  sort,  that  she  had  her  Broad-side  upon  the  Bow
of  the  same  Caracke,  and  so  racked  her  afore  and  baft,
that  it  much  cooled  the  Portugals  courage. Then  came
the  white  Lion,  whereof  one  Simons  was  Captaine,  and
laid  her  thwart  the  hause,  and  so  tare  her  that  a  man
might  see  all  the  Sea  wash  into  her  betweene  wind  and
water,  and  withall  cut  her  Cables,  and  so  she  drove  off
"i  353  z

A.D.
1613.

The  Lion  of
Holland
blowne  up  and
sunke.
Forty  nine
Hollanders
blowne  up  and
drowned.

7«/yi8.i6i3.

The  Sea  of
Grasse,  or
Saragasso.
They  crosse  the
Tropicke  of
Cancer,

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

from  the  white  Lion,  and  had  driven  on  shoare,  but  that
the  Vice-Admirall  Caracke  had  a  Cable  fast  on  shoare  :  and
so  the  Caracke  lying  in  the  byte  of  this  Cable,  in  time  got
another  Cable  and  Anchor  readie,  and  so  brought  her  up
againe,  though  long  first.  Then  the  white  Lion  making
way  to  veere  aboord  againe,  with  a  generall  consent  that
all  three  ships  should  lay  her  aboord  :  the  white  Lion
falling  with  her  Broad-side  along  the  Vice-Admirall  Carack,
let  flye  her  whole  Broad-side,  and  likewise  the  Carack  at
her.  But  stil  vering  to  get  aboord  the  Admirall  Caracke,
his  men  still  plying  his  lower  Ordnance  upon  the  Vice-
Admirall,  one  of  his  Peeces  brake  over  his  Powder  Roome,
as  some  thought,  and  the  shippe  blew  up  all  to  pieces,  the
after  part  of  her,  and  so  sunke  presently.  In  the  time  of
this  fight  eleven  of  our  men  came  out  of  the  Mountaines  :
whom  wee  espying  fetched  from  the  shoare,  out  of  the
Bay  to  the  East-ward  of  the  chappell,  leaving  on  shore
fifteene  of  our  Companie,  one  being  an  Indian.  In  the
white  Lion  were  Henrie  Bacon,  and  Henrie  Teddiman
blowne  up,  &  nine  and  fortie  of  the  Hollanders.  Then
the  Admirall,  whereof  John  Derickson  Lambe  was  Cap-
taine,  seeing  his  forces  so  much  weakened,  himselfe  having
two  of  his  Peeces  dismounted,  with  many  of  his  men  killed
and  hurt,  and  we  being  of  small  force,  thought  it  best  to
leave  them,  for  want  of  helpe,  promising  to  furnish  us
with  water.

The  third  of  June,  loosing  one  after  another,  and
changing  a  few  shot  with  the  Carackes,  we  stood  away  for
England.

The  eighteenth  of  July  in  the  morning,  we  met  with
many  weeds,  and  a  small  long  leafe  with  white  Berries  of
the  bignesse  of  a  corne  of  Pepper.  The  Master  of  the
Caravell  aboord  the  Hollanders  reported,  that  farther
Westerly  the  Sea  is  so  thicke  with  these  kind  of  weeds,
that  they  hinder  a  ships  way.  They  call  it  The  Sea  of
Grasse.  Hee  affirmed  that  in  former  Voyages  he  had
beene  in  it.  The  nineteenth,  we  crossed  the  Tropicke  of
Cancer,

354

English Voyages  P-  iv  333  ]

beyond  the  East-Indies,  to  the  Hands  of  Japan,

China,  Cauchin-China,  the Philipinae  with

others,  and  the  Indian  Navigations

further  prosecuted.

Their  just  Commerce,  nobly  vindicated  against

Turkish Treachery, victoriously defended

against  Portugall  Hostility,  gloriously

advanced  against  Moorish  and

Ethnike Perfldie  ;

hopefully  recovering  from Dutch Malignitie  ;

justly  maintayned  against  ignorant  and

malicious  Calumnie.

THE FOURTH  BOOKE.

HAving  brought  to  light  (rather  as  a  Midwife,  the
fruit  of  Others  Travels  then  mine  owne  as  a  Parent)
the  imperfect  untimely  Births  of  Other  Englishmen,  and
that  more  mature,  well  complexioned,  strong  limmed,  and
(if  Genethliacall  conjectures  faile  not)  hopefully  promising
Riches,  Honour,  Happie  Successe  and  Long-life,  of  the
East-Indian  Societie,  which  we  have  also  in  a  Scenicall
Historie,  or  an  Historicall  Scene,  (the  Actors  being  the

355

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Authors,  and  the  Authours  themselves  the  Actors  of  their
owne  Parts,  Artes,  Acts,  Designes)  brought  from  the
Cradle  to  the  Saddle,  from  weaker  Infancie  of  first
beginnings  to  the  happie  Progresse  and  growth  of  youth-
full  vigour  and  courage  :  I  made  a  stand,  and,  in  the  mids
of  our  Indian  Course,  finished  the  former  Booke ;  that  as
after  a  long  ascent  of  some  steeper  Hill,  Men  take  breath,
and  review  with  delight,  that  which  with  irkesome  labour
and  wearie  steps  they  have  passed ;  or  like  the  Land-
traveller  resting  in  his  Inne,  or  the  Weather-beaten
Mariner  refreshing  himselfe  in  some  mid-way  Harbour
(which  heere  you  see  our  Indian  Navigators  doe  in  Sol-
dania,  or  at  Saint  Helena.)  You  might  also  after  that
stay  beginne  a  fresh  Career,  with  revived  spirits,  and
renewed  alacritie,  resume  this  Booke- Voyage,  and  Reading
Navigation.  So  may  your  Mindes  in  few  houres  and  a
safe  course,  without  feare  of  Rockes,  Sands,  Winds,
Stormes  of  unseasonable  Monsons,  unreasonable  Men
(Fugitives,  Traytors,  Pyrates,  false  Friends,  open  Foes)
of  an  ill  Market,  hard  Customes,  or  harsh  accounts  to  be
given  at  last ;  communicate  in  that,  which  These  with  so
long  labours,  and  so  perillous  dangers,  have  done  and
suffered.

And  here  first  we  present  unto  you,  the  East-Indies
made  Westerly  by  the  Illustrious  Voyage  of  Captaine
John  Saris,  who  having  spent  some  yeares  before  in  the
Indies,  by  Observations  to  rectifie  Experience,  and  by
Experience  to  prepare  for  higher  Attempts,  hath  heere
left  the  knowne  Coasts  of  Europe,  compassed  those  more
unknowne  of  Afrike  from  the  Atlantike  to  the  Erythraean
Sea,  and  after  Commerce  there  (tarn  Marte,  quam  Mer-
curio)  compasseth  the  Shoares,  and  pierceth  the  Seas,  to
[I.  iv.  334.]  and  beyond  all  justnames  of  Indian  and  Asia,  penetrating
by  a  long  journey  the  Hands,  Cities,  Court  of  the  Japonian
Empire  ;  there  setleth  an  English  Factorie,  and  after  safe
returne,  is  readie  to  render  thee  the  pleasure  of  his  paine,
and  (why  stay  I  thee  any  longer?)  by  a  more  pleasant
Discoursive  way,  to  discover  to  thee  the  Rarities  of  that

356

JOHN SARIS  a.d.

i6ii.

Discoverie ;  and  by  hand,  by  the  Eyes  to  lead  thee  alongst
with  him  all  the  way  :  and  then  leave  thee  to  those  that
shall  tell  thee  after  Accidents  and  later  Occurents  in  the
Japonian,  Indian  and  Asian  Affaires.

Chap. I.

The  eighth  Voyage  set  forth  by  the  East-Indian
Societie,  wherein  were  imployed  three  Ships,
the  Clove,  the  Hector,  and  the  Thomas,  under
the  command  of  Captaine  John  Saris  :  His
Course  and  Acts  to  and  in  the  Red  Sea,  Java,
Molucca's,  and  Japan  (by  the  Inhabitants
called  Nessoon,  where  also  he  first  began  and
setled  an  English  Trade  and  Factorie)  with
other  remarkable  Rarities,  collected  out  of
his  owne  Journall.

§• I;

Their  sayling  about  Africa,  visiting  divers  Hands
thereof,  and  comming  to  Socatora.

He  eighteenth  of  Aprill  1 6 1 1 .  wee  set  saile  A  prill  i  S
out  of  the  Downes.  \6\\.

The  sixth  of  June  following,  we  passed
the  Equinoctiall  Line.

The  first  of  August  1 6 1 1 .  we  arrived
in  the  Bay  of  Soldania,  where  having  well
refreshed  our  selves  the  space  of  eight
dayes,  the  ninth  of  August  in  the  morning  we  weighed
Anchor,  and  about  foure  in  the  after-noone  were  five
leagues  off  the  Cape  Buona  Esperanza.

The  second  of  September,  of  latitude  twentie  foure
degrees,  twentie  one  minutes,  way  East  by  North  Northerly
sixe  leagues.  Nota,  That  since  our  comming  from  Cape
Buona  Esperanza,  We  found  no  Monsons  of  West-winds,
(as  hath  beene  reported)  but  to  the  contrarie,  did  find
North  Easterly,  South  Easterly  and  Easterly  winds  with

357

A.D.
l6l  I,

The  Bay  o/S.
Augustine  in
the  He  of  Saint
Laurence.

A  strong  cur-
rent.

Note.

[I.  iv.
llhas

Primeiras.

335-]

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

extreame  Stormes,  Raine,  Thunder  and  Lightening :  yet
at  that  present  very  faire  and  so  hot  that  calmes  were  to
bee  doubted.

The  third,  latitude  twentie  three  degrees,  fiftie  minutes,
way  South  by  West  twentie  three  leagues  wind  at  South.

About  five  at  night  we  made  land  being  the  Hand  of
Madagascar,  otherwise  called  Saint  Laurence,  the  Bay  of
Saint  Augustine  bearing  East  by  North  about  sixe  leagues
off.  And  then  steered  away  North  North-east,  variation
at  Sun-setting  fifteene  degrees,  eleven  minutes  Westerly.
We  sounded,  but  had  no  ground  at  one  hundred  fathome.
The  land  not  very  high,  but  Sandie.  And  then  we  passed
the  Tropicke  of  Capricorne,  to  the  North-ward.

The  tenth  of  September,  latitude  seventeene  degrees,
three  minutes,  way  North-west  twelve  leagues,  wind  at
North-east :  we  steered  North  North-west,  variation  at
Sun-rising  thirteene  degrees,  fiftie  foure  minutes  Westerly.
Heere  wee  found  a  strong  Current  setting  South  South-
west ;  for  these  last  foure  and  twentie  houres,  shee  could
not  have  runne  lesse  then  foure  and  twentie  leagues,  having
a  stiffe  gale  :  but  for  the  reason  aforesaid,  in  the  evening
we  made  the  Island  Primeiras  bearing  West  by  North
about  foure  leagues  off.

The  eleventh,  latitude  seventeene  degrees,  thirty  three
minutes  way  South  by  East  halfe  a  point  Easterly  fourteene
leagues,  the  wind  at  North-east,  and  North-east  by  East,
a  storme.

Note  that  having  stood  but  one  watch  and  an  halfe  to
the  East-wards,  the  Current  did  carry  us  thirtie  minutes
to  the  Southwards  of  the  latitude  we  were  in,  by  the
last  observation :  then  we  stood  in  for  the  land  North
North-west,  hoping  of  a  better  wind  neare  the  shoare
with  lesse  current,  and  suddenly  the  water  changed,  but
we  could  find  no  ground  at  an  hundred  fathom.  In  the
evening  we  made  the  land  bearing  North,  and  North  by
West  about  sixe  leagues  off,  finding  it  to  be  the  Islands
Primeiras,  but  being  to  the  Northward  of  it,  it  shewed
somewhat  longer  then  before,  for  it  did  beare  from  the

358

JOHN SARIS  a.d.

1 6 1 1.

North-west  to  the  North  of  us ; wee  sounded  and  had

twentie  fathom  small  glittering  sand  ;  and  sounding  againe,

had  twentie  fathom  blacke  Ozie,  with  black  shels. Then

we  stood  off  to  the  Eastward,  the  storme  continuing  with

more  wind  in  the  night,  then  in the  day  ; and  having

stood  off  one  glasse,  we  sounded  and  had  two  and  twenty

fathome,  gray  sand  and  shels.

The  twelfth,  latitude  eighteene  degrees  seventeene
minutes,  way  South-east  by  East  eight  and  twentie  leagues,
wind  at  North-east,  a  storme  :  so  that  these  last  twenty
foure  houres  we  were  carryed  by  the  force  of  the  Current
forty  foure  minutes  to  the  Southward  of  the  former  obser-
vation, variation  fourteene  degrees,  one  and  forty  minutes
Westerly.  About  night  the  wind  veered  to  East  North-
east, so  that  we  lay  North  with  the  sterne.

The  thirteenth,  latitude  nineteene  degrees,  sixteene
minutes,  way  South-east  by  South,  two  and  twentie  leagues,
wind  North-east  by  East  little  wind,  the  Current  very
strong  against  us.

The  fifteenth,  latitude  sixteene  degrees,  six  and  forty
minutes,  way  North  North-east,  halfe  a  point  Easterly
thirty  leagues,  wind  South-west  wee  steered  North-east
by  North.  Note  heere  we  found  not  the  Current  so
forcible,  for  we  have  deprest  the  Pole  one  degree,  seven
and  twenty  minutes  these  foure  and  twentie  houres.  The
reason  wee  supposed  to  bee  that  the  Island  Juan  de  Nova,
was  betweene  us  and  the  Current,  for  we  made  account
it  did  beare  East  by  North  eighteene  leagues  off,  variation
at  Sun-setting  twelve  degrees,  eight  minutes  Westerly.

The  sixteenth,  latitude  sixteene  degrees  not  nine
minutes,  way  North  North-east  eighteene  leagues,  we
steered  North-east  by  North,  wind  South-west  by  South,
little  wind,  but  a  strong  Current,  variation  at  Sun-rising
thirteene  degrees,  not  three  minutes  Westerly.

The  seventeenth,  the  ships  way  North  by  West  eight
leagues,  variation  twelve  degrees  one  minute  Westerly  :  in
the morning  we made the  land to the Southward of  The  Islands  de
Mosambique,  making  it  to  be  the  Islands  de  Angoxa,  bear-  Jngpxa.

359

A.D.

161 1,

An  extreame
Current  to  the
Southward.

A  very  dan-
gerous shoald.

The  Isles  de
Angoxa  in
sixteene
degrees,  twen-
tie  minutes.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

ing  West  South-west  seven  leagues.  The  Westermost
part  of  the  said  Islands  seeming  whitish.  The  maine  to
the  Northward  bearing  North  by  East,  smooth  champion
ground :  we  steered  North-east  by  East,  and  towards
evening  we  saw  the  land  trending  to  the  Northward,  seem-
ing to  the  Seaward  to  be  full  of  trees ;  here  we  found  the
Current  to  set  North  North-west,  for  we  could  perceive  by
the  land  that  we  ran  very  fast  to  the  North-ward,  and
having  little  wind,  wee  sounded  often,  but  could  not  find
ground  at  an  hundred  fathome.

The  nineteenth,  latitude  fifteene  degrees,  twentie  nine
minutes,  way  South  by  East  foure  leagues,  wind  at  East
South-east,  we  steered  North-east,  but  by  extremitie  of  the
Current,  wee  were  carryed  to  the  Southward.  So  that  wee
were  heere  ten  dayes,  and  could  not  get  to  the  Northward  ;
notwithstanding  we  had  a  faire  and  reasonable  stiffe  gale.

The  one  and  twentieth,  latitude  sixteene  degrees,  twentie
minutes,  way  South  by  West  foure  leagues,  wind  North-
east, and  North-east  by  East,  little  wind :  in  the  morning
wee  were  neare  the  Northermost  of  the  Islands  de  Angoxas,
bearing  West  by  North  about  three  leagues  off.  And  to
windward  of  us,  we  espied  a  very  dangerous  shoale,  lying
East  off  the  North  part  of  the  main,  at  the  least  three
points  into  the  sea,  having  a  drie  splat  of  white  sand
betweene  it  and  the  maine :  We  sounded  and  had  ground
at  thirtie  fathom,  red  stones  like  Corall,with  gray  sand  and
shells ;  we  stood  off,  it  being  a  lee-shoare  and  Westerly
Current.  And  finding  by  our  skiffe,  which  was  sent  off,
that  the  Current  did  set  exceeding  strongly  to  the  South-
west by  West,  and  such  uncertaine  shoaling,  we  stood  off
for  Saint  Laurence.  Note  that  these  Islands  de  Angoxas
(which  are  many)  doe  stand  in  the  plat  in  fifteene  degrees,
fortie  minutes,  and  we  find  them  in  sixteene  degrees,
twentie  minutes  to  the  Southward  of  the  Equinoctiall,
variation  thirteene  degrees,  no  minutes  Westerly.

The  two  and  twentieth,  latitude  seventeene  degrees  five
minutes,  way  South  South-east  eighteene  leagues,  wind
North-east,  and  in  foure  and  twentie  houres  that  we  parted

360

JOHN SARIS  A..,

1 61 1.

from  the  land,  we  lost  no  degrees,  fortie  five  minutes.
But  towards  evening  the  wind  came  to  the  South-east,  and
South-east  by  South;  we  steered  North-east,  and  North-
east by  east,  and  East  North-east  for  the  Island  Saint
Laurence,  looking  out  for  Juan  de  nova,  which  Hugen  van
Linschoten,  willeth  to  beware  of,  and  not  to  come  neare
it  in  a  small  Moone ;  notwithstanding  wee  were  inforced
to  put  our  selves  in  hazard  to  get  out  of  this  Current  and
dangerous  place,  variation  at  Sun-setting  twelve  degrees,
fortie  foure  minutes  Westerly.

The  three  and  twentieth,  latitude  sixteene  degrees,  foure
and  twentie  minutes,  way  North-east,  two  and  twentie
leagues,  wind  at  South  South-west,  we  steered  East  North-
east, to  rid  us  of  the  Current,  having  deprest  the  Pole
these  last  foure  and  twentie  houres,  no  degrees,  one  and
fortie  minutes,  variation  at  Sun-setting  thirteene  degrees,
sixteene  minutes  Westerly.

The foure and twentieth, latitude sixteene degrees,
sixteene  minutes,  way  East  North-east  ten  leagues,  wind
at South-west, and South South-east, till eight in the
morning,  it  came  then  to  the  North,  and  North  by  East,
little  wind. In  the  morning  at  breake  of  day  (to  our  great  Land  unex~
admiration)  wee  saw  land  to  the  Westward,  bearing  North  ^f j'k' >
by  West  five  leagues  off,  not  once  looking  for  any  that  r^  jv xx(>\
way,  but  to  the  Eastward  for  Juan  de  nova,  which  we
made  account  could  not  be  above  sixe  leagues  South  from
us,  and  being  be-calmed,  did  doubt  least  the  Current  would
set  us  upon  it  in  the  night :  but  the  day  clearing,  we  found
it  to  be  the  Northermost  Hand  of  the  Angoxas,  whence The  lie
we  departed  the  one  and  twentieth,  ditto  in  the  afternoone,  Angoxas.
which  so  amazed  our  Marriners,  as  that  they  were  dis-
couraged of  getting  our  Voyage  this  way. The  reason  of
this  difference  was  (as  we  supposed)  by  a  Counter  current,
which  certainely  in  the  small  of  the  Moone  doth  set  East
North-east,  and  West  South-west,  from  the  Plashella  or
point  of  the  shoare,  which  lieth  North-east  by  East  off  the
Northermost  part  of  Juan  de  nova,  which  meeting  with
our  auncient  enemie  the  North  North-east  Current,  hath

361

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1 6 1 1.

thus  violently  put  us  over  to  the  Westwards,  notwith-
standing we  have  had  a  fresh  gale  and  faire  wind,  untill

Note  of  J.  de  this  morning  that  it  fell  calme.  Note,  that  if  there  be
*"  any  such  Hand  as  Juan  de  nova,  it  lies  not  so  farre  to  the

West-ward  as  Daniels  plots  make  mention,  but  stands
neerer  the  maine  Hand,  otherwise  we  must  of  necessitie
have  seene  it.  They  of  the  fourth  Voyage  in  the  Ascen-
sion, made  accompt  that  they  passed  to  the  East-wards  of
it,  and  S.  Laurence,  which  thing  the  Portugals  hold
impossible,  saying,  that  it  stands  so  neere  the  maine  Hand,
as  that  there  is  no  passage  but  a  little  channell,  which  once
one  of  their  ships  was  inforced  to  put  through,  and  since
nor  afore  they  have  not  heard  of  any  to  have  done  the  like.

A  falsehood  of  Wherefore  it  was  held  amongst  us  to  be  but  a  cunning  of

the  Portugals. ^ portUga}Sj to p}ace such an Hancj so farre to the

West-ward,  to  the  end  that  such  as  shall  saile  this  way,
being  not  so  well  experienced  as  themselves,  might  (giving
it  a  birth)  fall  into  this  extreame  Current  which  we
certainely  found  to  set  more  Westerly  then  North-East,
and  South-west.  Wherefore  it  is  necessary  for  all  such
as  shall  be  bound  this  way,  to  be  upon  the  Coast  of  S.
Laurence  by  the  first  of  June,  and  from  the  Cape  S.
Augustine,  untill  they  come  into  twelve  degrees  no
minutes,  to  keepe  up  to  the  East-ward,  and  not  to  make
their  way  to  the  West  of  the  North,  or  North  by  West,  for
feare  of  the  South-west  Current,  which  with  calmes,  and
foureteene  degrees  two  minutes  variation  Westerly,  will
perforce  set  them  over  upon  the  Coast  of  Soffala.  And
most  certaine  it  is,  that  in  August  and  September,  you
shall  find  very  violent  North-west  winds,  so  that  if  yee
would  stand  it  over  for  S.  Laurence,  you  shall  not  fetch  it
without  great  danger  of  the  shoalds  of  India,  (the  Current
taking  you  on  the  broad  side : )  I  meane,  if  you  bee  to  the
North  of  the  said  shoalds,  neither  can  you  stop  upon  the
maine  to  keepe  your  Latitude,  for  it  is  broken  ground,  and
very  deepe  water.
October.  The  third  of  October  we  came  to  an  anchor  (after  much

trouble  by  Currents)  betweene  Soffala  and  Mosambique,

362

JOHN SARIS  ad.

161 !.
in  thirteene  and  foureteene  fathome  :  Latitude  sixteene
degrees  thirty  two  minutes :  Longitude  seventie  sixe
degrees  tenne  minutes :  Variation  eleven  degrees  fiftie
minutes  Westerly.  We  anchored  under  an  Hand  neere
unto  the  maine,  upon  which  wee  neither  found  people  nor
fresh  water,  though  we  digged  very  deepe  in  the  sand.
The  tenth,  wee  weighed,  the  wind  at  South  South-west,
and  stood  over  East  by  North  for  S.  Laurence,  hoping
thereby  to  get  out  of  these  Currents.  Thus  were  we
tossed  to  and  fro  with  variable  winds,  and  still  troubled
with  the  Current  comming  out  of  the  North-east,  untill  Vl  u
the  twentie  sixth,  wee  came  to  an  anchor  under  Moyella,  t^t\ad
which  is  one  of  the  Hands  of  Comora,  Latitude  twelve  refreshing.
degrees  thirteene  minutes,  to  the  Southward  of  the  JEqui-
noctiall,  where  we  refreshed  our  selves  eight  dayes,
procuring  Bullocks,  Goates,  Hennes,  Limons,  Cocos,
Pines,  Papanes,  Plantans,  Pomgranates,  Sugar  canes,
Tammarin  hennes,  Rice,  Milke,  Rootes,  Egges  and  Fish,
in  exchange  of  small  Haberdashery  wares,  and  some
money,  and  had  here  kind  usage  and  great  store  of  fresh
water,  the  rather  for  that  we  stood  still  upon  our  guard.
I  invited  the  King  of  Moyella  beeing  a  Mahometan
aboord  the  Clove,  and  intertained  him  with  a  noyse  of
Trumpets,  and  a  consort  of  Musique,  with  a  Banket,
which  he  refused  to  eate  of,  because  it  was  then  his  Lent,
which  amongst  them  is  called  Rammadam,  but  hee  tooke  Mahumetan
away  with  him  the  best  of  the  Banket  to  carrie  to  the  ^stinztill
Queene  his  Mother,  saying,  they  would  eate  it  when  the  Sunset.
Sunne  was  downe.  The  Queenes  name  was  Sultanna
Mannangalla.  The  Kings  name  was  Sariffoo  Booboocar-
ree.  He  requested  the  Generall  to  leave  him  a  letter  in
his  commendations  to  those  that  should  happen  hereafter
to  come  thither,  wherby  they  might  understand  of  his
honest  dealing  with  us.  The  like  letter  he  had  procured
from  Stephen  Verhaghen,  Admirall  of  twelve  Holland
ships,  who  arrived  there  in  the  yeare  1604.  which  he
delivered  unto  our  Generall,  who  gave  him  the  like,  with
this  caution  in  the  end  thereof,  that  they  should  not  give

363

A.D.
l6l  I.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

too  great  credit  to  them,  but  stand  upon  their  guard,  for
that  oftentimes  weapons  continue  peace.

The  Inhabitants  here  are  Negroes,  with  short  curled
haire,  and  Pintados  about  their  middles,  some  wearing
white  caps,  others  turbants,  by  which  we  knew  they  were
Mahometans.  The  King  himselfe  was  apparrelled  in  a
white  Cotten  coate,  a  Turbant  upon  his  head,  and  a
Guzerate  Pintado  about  his  middle :  he  was  little  whiter
then  the  ordinary  people,  who  are  blacke :  hee  was  leane,
he  had  a  round  thinne  blacke  beard,  great  eyes,  of  a  low
stature,  and  of  very  few  words ;  he  could  speake  a  little
Arabique,  which  he  had  learned  in  his  Pilgrimage  to
Mecca,  from  whence  he  had  the  name  of  Sheriffe.  Here
they  desire  money  (whereby  we  understand  Spanish  Rialls
of  eight)  rather  then  commoditie.  But  for  Crimson  broad
[I-  >v-  337-]  Cloath,  Red  sculd  Caps,  Cambaya  cloaths,  and  Sword
blades,  you  may  have  any  thing  the  Hand  affoords,  which
serveth  onely  for  refreshing,  and  no  way  for  merchandizing.
He  gave  the  Generall  a  note  under  his  hand  of  friendship,
which  beeing  not  long,  I  have  here  inserted.

Sharefoo  Boo-
backar  King
of  the  Hand
called Moyela,
his  note  under
his  hand  for
further  friend-
ship. 1 6 1 1 .
written  in
Arabique.

"November.

The  maine
land  of
Melinde.

Ad  PaUj^iS  JL3by

The  fourth  of  November,  we  set  saile  from  this  Hand
Moyella.  The  seventeenth  in  the  morning,  we  made  the
land  being  the  maine  of  Melinde,  the  Bay  or  Gulfe  called
Formosa,  bearing-  North-west  about  foure  leagues  off.
The  land  trending  North-east  South-west,  wee  had  thirtie
fathome,  small  gray  sand  and  shels,  wind  at  East  North-
east, we  stood  off  South-East  a  stiffe  gale,  and  a  very
great  sea,  which  sheweth  to  be  shoale  water,  and  a  Current

364

JOHN SARIS  ad.

1 6 1 1.

which  we  found  to  set  alongst  the  shoare,  North-east.
Latitude  two  degrees  tenne  minutes,  variation  at  Sunne-
setting  twelve  degrees  thirtie  one  minuts  Westerly.  Note,  Note.
this  land  lieth  more  Easterly  then  in  our  plats,  otherwise
we  should  not  have  fallen  therewith  so  soone  :  for  by  our
reckonings  we  were  at  least  fortie  eight  leagues  off.

The  nine  and  twentieth,  latitude  foure  degrees  fortie
foure  minutes,  variation  seventeene  degrees  thirtie  foure
minutes  Westerly,  beeing  as  we  supposed  twelve  leagues
off  the  shoales,  called  Baxos  de  Malhina  East  by  South,
we  had  a  great  Rippling,  and  over-fall  of  water,  as  if  it  had
beene  shoal-water ;  but  sounding  found  no  ground  at  an
hundred  fathome,  the  wind  came  about  here  to  South
Southeast,  our  course  North-east.

The  first  of  December,  Latitude  three  degrees  fortie  December.
minutes,  our  way  North  North-east  eight  leagues,  wind
at  North  North-east,  East,  East  South-east,  and  North
East  by  North,  little  wind  for  the  most  part  calme,  and
had  a  very  fearefull  rippling  of  the  water,  much  like  unto  *J?rf/u^
the  fall  at  London  Bridge,  beeing  out  of  sight  of  land,  tff™jfe°r
and  finding  no  ground  at  an  hundred  fathome  :  when  we
stood  into  the  land  it  left  us,  but  bearing  off,  (beeing  fiftie
leagues  from  land)  we  found  very  terrible.  Variation
sixteene  degrees  firteene  minutes  Westerly.  The  second,
Latitude  two  degrees  fiftie  five  minutes,  way  North-east
by  North  eighteene  leagues,  wind  variable,  the  Rippling
continuing,  variation  fifteene  degrees  fiftie  seven  minutes
Westerly,  which  mooved  us  to  thinke  that  wee  had  a
Current  setting  to  the  West,  the  variation  decreasing  so
suddenly.  The  third,  Latitude  foure  degrees  foure
minutes,  way  South  twentie  three  leagues,  wind  variable,
most  part  calme,  with  great  Rippling  of  the  water,  and  a
very  strong  Current  Southerly,  so  that  these  last  twentie
foure  houres,  we  are  carried  backe  to  the  South-wards  of
our  former  latitude,  one  degree  nine  minutes.  The  fourth,
latitude  foure  degrees  thirtie  three  minutes,  way  South
tenne  leagues,  little  wind  and  variable  betwixt  the  North-
east, and  East  by  South, very  strange  Rippling  of  the

365

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1611.

water,  and  strong  Current  Southerly,  variation  eighteene

degrees  fortie  foure  minutes  Westerly. The  fifth,  latitude

foure degrees  fiftie foure minutes, way South  by  East

seaven  leagues,  wind  variable,  betwixt  North-east  by  North,

&  East  by  South,  the  Rippling  continuing  and  Current

Southerly, variation eighteene degrees eleven minutes

Westerly  at  Sun-setting. The  sixth,  latitude  five  degrees

five  minutes,  way  South-east  by  East  eighteene  leagues,

wind  variable  betwixt  North-east  by  North,  &  North-east

by  East  a  gale,  and  at  sometimes  more  fearefull  Ripplings

of  the  water  then  before,  yet  could  have  no  ground  at  an

hundred  fathome. These  Ripplings  shew  like  shelfes,  and

are  not  at  all  times  alike,  but  sometimes  more,  sometimes

lesse  ; but  met  with  many  times  in  a  day,  and  make  a

noise  by  the  ships  side,  as  if  she  did  runne  five  leagues  a

Watch,  when  she  doth  scarce  goe  a  head. We  were  much

terrified there-with, the rather because wee could not

imagine  from  whence  it  should  proceed,  seeing  no  land ;

but  supposed  our  selves  to  bee  amongst  the  Easter-most

Islands,  which  lie  off  the  Northermost  point  of  S.  Laurence.

Here  wee  had  raine,  thunder,  lightning,  and  sudden  gusts

which  continued  not  long. The  seventh,  way  East  by

South eighteene  leagues,  wind  betwixt the  North and

North-east, the Rippling still  continued. The eighth,

way  North-east  twenty  two  leagues,  wind  at  South-west,

and  Southwest  by  West,  with  Rippling,  but  no  ground

at  an  hundred  fathome : variation  twenty  degrees  seven

minutes  Westerly. The ninth, latitude foure degrees

eighteen  minutes,  way  North-east  eighteen  leagues,  wind

variable,  little  Current  and  no  Rippling :  variation  twentie

[I.  iv.  338.]  degrees  fortie  seaven  minutes  Westerly; heere  we  found

it  extreame  hot. The  tenth,  latitude  foure  degrees,  twelve

minutes,  way  East  North-east  seven  leagues,  wind  from

North-west  by  North,  to  North-east  by  East,  many  times

calme,  with  no  ripling,  nor  Current  Southerly. Note  wee

have  found  continuall  calmes,  ever  since  we  came  off  the

Maine,  and  the  further  off, the  lesse  wind. Variation

twentie  degrees,  fiftie  seven  minutes  Westerly.

366

JOHN SARIS

The  five  and  twentieth  :  Note,  it  is  a  moneth  and  five
dayes  since  we  were  in  latitude  no  degrees,  one  minute  to
the  Northward,  close  by  the  shoare  :  since  which  time  wee
have  been  put  backe  into  five  degrees,  five  and  twentie
minutes  to  the  Southward :  wherefore  those  bound  to
Socatora  at  this  time  of  the  yeere,  must  hold  to  the  East-
ward of  Pemba  two  hundred  leagues,  East  by  North,  the
variation  there  encreasing  Westerly,  which  will  bring  you
the  more  Northerly  :  and  so  keeping  the  Island  Socatora
open  of  you,  betweene  the  North  by  East,  and  the  North
North-east,  you  shall  be  in  the  greatest  possibility  to  make
the  best  use  of  these  winds,  which  neare  to  the  maine  we
found  to  keepe  betweene  the  East  by  North,  and  East  by
South  a  continuall  gale  :  but  off  at  Sea,  about  the  Islands
Mascharenas  at  North-east  North,  and  sometimes  at
North-west  West,  and  West  by  South,  with  calmes,
riplings  of  the  water  very  fearefull,  thunder  and  lightning.
And  albeit  the  North-east  and  Northerly  winds  are  but
bare  helpes,  plying  to  the  Northwards  :  yet  this  benefit  you
shall  have,  that  by  how  much  easterly  you  are,  by  so  much
the  more  you  shall  recover  to  the  Northward  of  the  Line,
before  you  meete  with  the  Maine,  which  if  you  can  avoid,
see  not  in  this  time  of  the  Easterly  Monson,  untill  you  be
full  in  the  latitude  of  ten  degrees,  to  the  Northwards  of
the  Equinoctiall.  But  in  the  time  of  the  Westerly
Monson,  keepe  the  shoare  aboord,  for  it  is  very  bold,  but
lyeth  much  more  Easterly,  then  in  our  Plats.

The  first  of  January,  latitude  three  degrees,  fiftie  eight
minutes  to  the  North-ward  of  the  Equinoctiall,  heere  we
made  land,  being  the  Maine  of  Magadoxa,  Cape  Das
Baxas  bearing  North  North-east  eight  leagues  oft ;  the
land  low,  sandie  and  barren,  all  alongst ;  the  wind  at
North-east  and  East  by  North,  a  stiffe  gale,  we  stood  off
to  the  Eastward,  way  North  by  West  twelve  leagues.

The  second  day,  latitude  two  degrees,  one  and  thirtie
minutes,  way  South-east  by  South  five  and  thirtie  leagues,
much  wind  and  Current  Southerly,  having  deprest  the
Pole  in  these  last  foure  and  twentie  houres,  one  degree,

367^

A.D.

l6l  I.

Thty  had
passed  the  Line
a  moneth  and
five  dayes
before.

Note.

January  1.

Magadoxa.
Cape  Das
Baxas.

The  Maine
land  called
Doara.

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

161 1.

seven  and  twentie  minutes,  whereof  sixe  and  twentie
leagues  shee  had  runne  by  dead  reckoning,  and  nine  leagues
shee  was  carried  by  the  Current  contrary  to  expectation.
The  eighteenth,  latitude  sixe  degrees,  seven  and  twenty
minutes  to  the  Northward  of  the  Equinoctiall,  way  North-
west by  North  foure  and  twentie  leagues,  wind  at  North-
east, and  North-east  by  East.  About  two  of  the  clocke
we  made  the  land,  being  the  maine,  called  Doara,  the
South-part  bearing  West,  and  the  North-part,  North-west
by  North  about  eight  leagues  off,  seeming  not  very  high,
but  sandie  and  barren,  we  stood  off  with  much  wind,  and
a  Current  setting  North-west,  as  we  supposed ;  otherwise
wee  should  have  gotten  further  to  the  North-ward.

Note,  that  although  the  variation  holdeth  little  propor-
tion, yet  did  we  find  by  experience,  that  in  running  to  the
Eastward  wee  have  variation  Westerly  increasing :  and
standing  into  the  shoare  North-west  our  variation  was
Westerly  decreasing :  so  that  by  reckoning  according  to
our  plats,  we  found  our  selves  much  further  off  the  land,
then  by  just  proofe  by  variation  :  which  truely  is  a  most
certaine  thing  to  bee  credited ;  observation  being  taken
by  one  of  experience,  with  an  exact  instrument,  our  so
often  falling  with  this  maine,  hath  gained  us  this  know-
ledge, variation  at  Sun-rising  seventeene  degrees,  thirty
sixe  minutes  Westerly,  and  at  setting  seventeene  degrees,
twentie  minutes  Westerly.

February  i.  The  first  of  February,  we  made  the  land  bearing  North-
east by  North,  about  seven  leagues  off :  we  sounded,  and
had  ground  at twenty  seven  and  twenty  eight  fathom,

Cape  Dorful  soft  sand :  this  Land  is  called  Cape  Dorfuy,  being  very
high  and  barren  by  the  Sea-side  ; many  gusts.

The  ninth,  latitude  ten  degrees,  thirtie  seven  minutes,
way  West  by  North  sixteene  leagues  wind  North-east  by
East :  we  had  now  sight  againe  of  Cape  Dorfuy,  from
whence  we  departed  the  first  day,  contrary  to  our  expecta-
tion, bearing  North-west,  about  nine  leagues  off,  having
found  a  strong  Current  in  the  offing,  setting  West  North-
west ; which untill meeting  with this  land againe,  we

368

A  notable
thing  concern
ing  the  Varia
tion.

JOHN SARIS

A.n.
1 6 1 1 ,

Cape  de
Guardafui.

Abba  del
Curia.

dreamed  not  of,  but  rather  thought  we  had  been  fortie
five  or  fiftie  leagues  off,  not  once  looking  for  the  land,  we
sounded  and  had  fifty  fathom  fine  small  sand,  about  five
leagues  off :  this  land  is  high  and  full  of  mountaines.

The  tenth,  latitude  eleven  degrees,  twentie  minutes,  way
North-east  by  East,  Easterly  sixteene  leagues,  wind  from
East  by  North,  to  North-east,  we  sounded  and  had  ground
at  five  and  fortie  fathom,  small  blacke  sand,  about  eight
leagues  off  the  high  land  of  Cape  Guardafui,  wee  made
triall  of  the  Current  with  our  Pinnasse,  and  found  it  to
set  North  by  East.  Towards  evening  we  had  sight  of  the
Island  Abba  del  Curia,  bearing  East  North-east  about  ten
leagues  off,  being  very  high  land,  rising  in  two  parts  like
two  Islands.

The  fourteenth,  latitude  eleven  degrees,  two  and  thirty
minutes,  wind  North-east,  and  East  North-east  calme  :
heere  we  had  sight  of  the  Eastermost  Irmana,  seeming  to
the  Eastward  low  land,  about  sixe  leagues  off.

The  fifteenth,  latitude  eleven  degrees,  seven  and  twenty  [I.  iv.  339.]
minutes,  way  East  South-east  sixe  leagues,  wind  East,
East  North-east,  East  South-east,  and  North-east  calme
for  the  most  part,  making  account  to  be  eight  leagues  off
the  Eastermost  Irmana :  But  wee  were  mistaken  ;  for  it
was  Abba  del  Curia,  and  the  Duas  Irmanas  did  beare
North-east  of  us  twelve  leagues  off,  variation  at  Sun-
setting  seventeene  degrees,  three  and  twenty  minutes
Westerly,  and  in  the  night  the  wind  came  faire  to  the
South  South-east,  we  lay  East  with  the  stemme,  with  helpe
of  a  Current  Easterly  ;  contrary  to  the  report  of  former
Navigants,  and  by  breake  of  day,  wee  were  sixe  leagues
off  the  Westmost  Irmana,  bearing  East  South-east,  and
had  sight  of  Socatora  ten  leagues  off.  Socatora.

The  sixteenth,  latitude  twelve  degrees,  nineteene
minutes,  variation  at  Sun-rising  seventeene  degrees,  two
and  twentie  minutes  Westerly,  wee  bare  up  and  went
about  the  Wester  point  of  Socatora :  towards  evening  we
had  sight  of  the  white  Rock,  which  lyeth  about  foure
leagues  off  the  Westermost  point  of  Socatora,  the  point
in  369  2  A

A.D.
l6l  I.

The  Road
Tammarin

of

Socatora.
This  Letter
was  a  briefe
summe  of  Sir
Henry  Mid-
dleton  his  dis-
adventures  in
the  Red-Sea  by
Turkish  per-
fdie,  as  in  his
owne  Journal/
you  have  read,
with  caveat  to
all  English,
and  notice  of
the  Road
As  sab.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

and  the  Rocke,  bearing  one  off  the  other  North-west  by
North,  and  South-east  by  South,  the  said  Rock  looming
like  a  saile,  standing  to  the  Eastward,  larboord  tacke
aboord  ;  and  was  so  made  for,  by  them  of  former  Voyages.
The  Current  still  helping  us  to  the  East-ward.

The  seventeenth,  latitude  twelve  degrees,  seven  and
fortie  minutes,  variation  at  Sun-setting  seventeene  degrees,
two  and  twentie  minutes  Westerly,  wind  variable,  at
South-east,  and  South-east  by  South  calme,  but  a  strong
Current  setting  alongst  the  land,  after  we  were  about  the
Wester  point.  This  night  wee  came  to  an  anchor,  one
league  and  an  halfe  to  the  Westward  of  the  Kings  Towne,
called  Tammarin,  in  twentie  fathom  water,  distant  from
the  shoare  two  miles ;  our  shoalding  in,  after  we  had
ground,  was  two  and  twentie,  twenty,  nineteene,  twenty,
twentie,  twentie,  small  white  sand,  the  wind  East  South-
east, and  South-east  calme.

The  eighteenth,  we  came  to  an  anchor  in  the  Road  of
Tammarin,  right  before  the  Kings  house,  in  nine  fathom
water,  a  league  from  the  shoare,  fine  sandie  ground.

§.  ii.

Occurrents  at Socatora  and  in the Red-Sea.

He  Generall  sent  Master  Richard  Cockes,  Cape
Merchant,  with  the  Skiffe  well  appointed  unto
the  King,  to  acquaint  him  what  wee  were,  and
the  cause  of  our  comming,  and  to  provide  cattell  and  fresh
victuall.  Master  Cockes  returned,  having  beene  friendly
entertained  and  feasted  by  the  King,  and  the  rest  that
went  with  him.  They  brought  a  Present  of  fresh  victuall
from  the  King  to  the  Generall,  together  with  a  Letter  left
there  by  Sir  Henry  Middleton,  dated  the  first  of  September
1611.  aboord  the  Trades-Increase  in  Delisha  Road,  in  the
Island  of  Socatora  :  the  originall  our  Generall  kept,  and
returned  the  copie  verbatim,  for  the  future  ships.

The  nineteenth,  They  went  in  solemnest  manner  on
shoare,  where  the  King  bid  us  welcome,  and  feasted  all

370

JOHN SARIS  a.d.

161 1.

the  Company  in  his  Royal  maner,  himself  being  richly

vested  in  crimson  Velvet,  laid  rich  with  gold-lace. His

house  was  built  of  free-stone,  Castle-like : he  had  above

an hundred attendants, wherof about fifty were wel

apparelled,  according  to  the  Moors  fashion,  the  rest  were

naturalls  of  the Island. After  many  complements  and

curtesies,  at  night  we  took  our  leave  of  him. His  name

was  Sultan  Amur  Bensaid,  sonne  to  the  King  of  Cushin  Or  Caixem.

upon  the  Arab  side. We  paid  heere  for  kine  twelve  Ryalls

of  eight  the  piece,  sheepe  three  shillings  the  piece,  and  for

Goats  one  Ryall  of  eight  a  piece,  which  though  it  be  deare,

yet  are  the  most  of  them  not  mans  meate,  being  so  vildely,

and  more  then  beastly  buggered  and  abused  by  the  people,

as  that  it  was  most  lothsome to see,  when they  were

opened. We  paid  for  Rice  three  pence  a  pound,  Dates

three  pence  a  pound,  Hens  twelve  pence  a  piece,  Tobacco

seven  hundred  leaves  a  Ryall  of  eight,  Egges  pence  a

piece. The  King  will  take  no  English  money,  but  all

Ryalls  of  eight.

The  twenty  seventh,  our  General  caused  a  meeting  of
his  merchandizing  Councel,  unto  whom  he  read  the  Com-
panies Remembrance,  and  the  Letter  received  by  the  hands
of  the  King  of  Socatora,  from  Sir  Henry  Middleton :  and
shewed  them,  That  whereas  he  had  been  put  in  good  hope
by  the  Companies  Remembrance,  to  have  obtained  good
store  of  Aloes  heere  at  Socatora,  which  now  he  found
frustrate,  the  King  being  wholly  unprovided,  and  not  able
to  furnish  us  therewith  untill  August :  And  whereas  we
were  appointed  to  goe  from  hence  to  Aden  and  Moha  in
the  Red-sea,  (the  Monson  not  serving  for  Surat)  we  were
now  utterly  disswaded  from  the  view  of  those  parts,  by
the  treachery  and  wrong  done  to  Sir  Henry  and  his  Fleet.
And  lastly,  whereas  if  we  did  not  goe  for  the  Red-sea,
if  we  should  remaine  heere  in  Delisha  Road  sixe  monethes
attending  the  Monson,  wee  should  find  it  very  chargeable,
and  be  able  to  effect  nothing,  (for  untill  the  end  of
September,  there  is  no  comming  upon  the  Coast  of  Cam-
baya) his  opinion  was, that  notwithstanding  these  bad

37i

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

161 1.

tydings  received  from  Sir  Henry,  yet  that  we  should  go
[I.  iv.  340.]  for  Moha,  we  having  with  us  the  Grand  Segniors  Passe,
which  the  former  ships  never  had.  For  hereby  wee  should
be  able  to  certifie  the  Company  what  stead  the  Passe  might
stand  them  in,  determining  to  stand  upon  our  guard,  and
not  to  adventure  any  one  man  without  good  pledge,  so
that  wee  might  ride  securely,  and  obtaine  trade  aboord,
though  none  on  shoare,  our  force  being  able  to  defend  and
offend  upon  occasion,  the  greatest  power  that  Port  could
raise.  And  finding  no  hope  of  Commerce,  then  he
intended  to  make  use  of  his  Majesties  Commission,  in
respect  of  the  violence  offered  unto  Sir  Henry  and  his
Company,  and  so  enforce  the  putting  off  of  our  English
commodities,  or  to  make  spoile  of  their  Skale  and  Cus-
tome,  by  not  permitting  the  Indian  ships,  which  were
expected  in  the  fift  of  March  to  enter  there,  which  would
be  a  matter  of  no  small  hinderance  unto  them :  but  untill
then  hee  would  be  very  unwilling  to  deale  with  them  by
force.  And  this  course  he  did  the  rather  approove  of,
because  heere  needed  no  parting  of  company,  but  the  Fleet
might  keepe  together,  and  assoone  as  the  Monson  should
permit,  goe  joyntly  together  for  Surat,  according  to  the
Companies  order,  their  force  united  the  better  to  resist
whatsoever  the  enemie  should  attempt.  The  Councell
generall  assented  to  what  he  propounded ;  and  so  con-
cluded to  keepe  company  together,  and  goe  for  the
Red-sea.
March  1.  The  first  of  March,  we  weighed  anchor,  &  set  saile  for

the  Red  sea,  the  wind  at  S.  E.  and  South,  sometimes  little
Note.  wind. The  winds  since  we  came  to  an  anchor  heere,  were

in  the  mornings  and  so  till  night  for  the  most  part  at
North-east  by  East,  and  East  North-east,  and  at  night  off
the  land  between  the  South  and  South-east,  faire  and
temperat  weather :  until  you  come  to  foure  fathom,  where
we  might  have  rid  a  musket  shot  off  the  shore,  &  further
in,  is  three  &  three  fathom  and  an  halfe,  it  is  bold  all  the
Bay  alongst,  keeping  two  Cables  length  off  the  land,  faire
sand,  and  some  stones  amongst : a  demie-culvering  will

372

JOHN SARIS

reach  the  Castle,  which  is  of  no  force.  Latitude  in  Tam-
marin  Bay  twelve  degrees,  five  and  thirtie  minutes  to  the
North,  variation  eighteene  degrees,  two  and  fortie  minutes
Westerly.  The  King  of  Socatora  gave  counsaile,  that  if
we  went  to  the  Red  sea,  we  should  ply  to  the  Southward
of  Abba  del  Curia,  for  that  keeping  on  the  north-side  wee
should  bee  put  over  to  the  Arabian  shoare,  and  should
not  without  great  trouble  fetch  Cape  Guardafui,  so  that
by  proofe  we  found  it  best  to  keepe  the  Abash
shoare  aboord.

The  fourth  in  the  morning,  wee  saw  Cape  Guardafui
bearing  West  eight  or  nine  leagues  off,  we  steered  in  West
North-west  latitude  twelve  degrees  one  minute,  the  Cape
South  by  West  foure  leagues  off,  no  ground  at  an  hundred
fathom,  the  land  high  and  smooth,  variation  at  Sun-rising,
seventeene  degrees,  foure  and  thirtie  minutes  Westerly.
In  the  evening  wee  had  ground,  standing  in  alongst  the
land,  to  find  the  Bay  of  Feluke,  our  depth  was  twentie
sixe,  seventeene  and  eighteene  fathome.  Heere  we
resolved  to  go  for  Moha,  and  not  for  Aden,  because  Aden
is  a  Towne  of  Garrison,  and  of  little  Trade,  with  other
inconveniences,  as  exaction  of  custome,  &c.  as  appeared
by  the  sixt  Voyage.  Here  we  took  good  store  of  Mullets
with  our  Sayne,  other  large  excellent  fish  with  lines  and
hookes.  Heere  are  Gummes  of  severall  sorts  very  sweet
in  burning,  also  fine  Mats  well  requested  at  Aden  and
Moha,  and  the  Indies :  For  ordinarily  the  Indian  ships
touch  heere,  both  inward  and  outward,  to  buy  thereof,
and  of  the  Gummes :  also  victuall,  sheepe  and  Butter ;
which  is  farre  better  cheape  then  at  Moha,  for  daily  Boats
goe  over  laden  with  victuall,  to  sell  at  Aden  and
Moha ;  but  they  will  not  barter  for  any  thing  but
linnen  cloath.

Note  that  at  Feluke  Towne,  there  is  wood  and  water
to  be  had  plentie,  but  not  in  the  bottom  of  the  Bay,  the
passage  up  to  the  Towne  is  so  large,  as  that  three  ships
may  passe  a  brest  without  danger.  The  going  in  is
betweene  the  high Homock  and the low  sandie  point.

A.D.
l6l  I.

Tammarin
lia-j.

MountFeluke.

Severall  sorts
of  sweet  gums.

The  benefit  of
the  Totcne  of
Feluke.

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

161 1.

The  Masters  were  willed  to  steere  from  hence  West  by
North,  alongst  the  South-shoare  to  Demity,  and  then  to
shape  their  course  over  to  Aden.

The  ninth,  latitude  eleven  degrees,  fiftie  eight  minutes,
way  West  five  and  twentie  leagues,  wind  at  East  and
East  by  South,  a  stiffe  Breese  all  day,  but  at  night  little
wind,  keeping  alongst  the  shoare  about  eight  leagues  off,
we  steered  West  by  North,  variation  at  Sun-rising  fifteene
degrees,  ten  minutes  Westerly.

The  tenth  in  the  morning,  steering  West  by  North,  the
Two  small  wind  Easterly,  wee  had  sight  of  two  small  Islands,  lying
islands.  Qff  ^  high  }an(}  Qf  Demety  about  a  league  off  the  maine,

distant  one  from  the  other  foure  leagues,  the  Eastermost
bearing  South  by  West  seven  leagues  off,  and  the  Wester-
most  South-west,  the  same  distance ;  we  stood  over  for
the  high  land  of  Aden  North-west  by  North,  and  North-
west, the  wind  at  East,  and  East  by  North,  a  stiffe  breese ;
Easterly  Current :  variation  fifteene  degrees,  no  minutes,
Westerly,  latitude  eleven  degrees,  fiftie  eight  minutes.

The  eleventh  we  had  sight  of  the  high  land  of  Arabia
making  it  to  be  the  high-land  of  Darsina,  bearing  North
by  East,  by  the  compasse  eight  leagues  of  latitude  at  noone
thirteene  degrees  eleven  minutes,  of  variation  at  Sunne-
rising,  fifteene  degrees  two  minutes  Westerly,  having  had
a  strong  Easterly  current  comming  over,  for  wee  steered
betweene  the  North  North-west  and  North-west,  and  were
so  carryed  to  the  East-ward  that  shee  made  but  a  North
by  West  way,  contrarie  to  expectation,  for  had  wee  had  no
current,  wee  should  by  course  have  given  her  a  North-west
way  Westerly.  But  after  we  were  shot  in  about  some
twelve  leagues  off  the  shoare,  we  found  no  current,  the
point  or  head-land  of  Aden  breaking  it  off,  as  we
supposed.

I sent certaine instructions in writing to Captaine
[I.  iv.  341.]  Towerson  and  Master  Davis,  to  be  observed  at  our  arrivall
in  the  Roade  of  Moha  for  the  better  grace  and  coun-
tenancing of  our  action  and  safe  guarding  of  our  ships ;
having  to  doe  with  so  treacherous  a  Nation.

374

JOHN SARIS  a.d.

1 61 1.

The  twelfth,  variation  at  Sunne-rising  foureteene  degrees
five  minutes  Westerly  in  sight  of  the  high-land  of  Aden,
bearing  West  by  South  ten  leagues  off,  We  steered  in
West  South-west,  and  at  noone  had  latitude  twelve  degrees,
fortie  nine  minutes  about  five  leagues  off.  The  South-
most  point  bearing  South-west  by  West,  we  sounded  and
had  ground  eighteen  fathome  soft  sand.

The  thirteenth,  in  the  evening  fourteene  leagues  to  the
East-ward  of  the  entrance  into  the  straights,  and  to  the
West-ward  of  Aden  sixteene  leagues,  we  came  to  an
anchor,  in  respect  we  were  not  acquainted  with  the  Coast,
and  finding  the  inconveniences  afore-said,  keeping  all  day
within  three  or  foure  leagues  off  the  shoare  to  the  time
wee  anchored,  our  sounding  was  fortie,  thirtie  eight,  nine
and  twentie,  eighteene,  seventeene,  sixteene,  fifteene,  six-
teene, seventeene,  nineteene,  eighteene,  nineteene  fathome.
Here  wee  let  fall  our  anchor,  sandie  ground,  the  Wester-
most  land  we  could  see,  bearing  West  by  South  Southerly,
and  the  high-land  to  the  Eastward.  North  North-east
about  foure  or  five  leagues  off.

The  foureteenth,  in  the  morning  we  weighed,  the  wind
at  West  by  North,  a  small  gale  with  raine,  having  had  N°  raine  in
none  till  this  present,  these  foure  monethes. We  steered  foure  moneths-
South-west  by  South  as  neere  as  we  could  lye  for  the
straights.

In  the  evening,  esteeming  our  selves  to  be  off  the
straights,  we  shortned  sayle  and  stood  it  off  and  in  with
a  short  sayle,  keeping  our  Leade  all  night,  beeing  eight
or  nine  leagues  off  the  Mayne  of  Arabia,  we  stood  off
West  by  South,  and  had  no  ground  at  an  hundred
fathome.

The  fifteenth,  our  course  West  by  South  Southerly  sixe
leagues,  wind  East  South-east,  the  land  which  on  the
foureteenth  about  sixe  at  night  did  beare  West  by  South
ten  leagues  off,  did  now  beare  South-west  by  South  foure
leagues  off.  To  the  East-ward  heere  we  had  sight  of
three  small  Hands  or  Hummockes  bearing  North  North-
west one  league  &  an  halfe,  the  greatest  showing  as  if  it

375

ad  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1 6 1 1.

had  a  Castle  upon  it,  beeing  the  Eastermost,  heere  is  a
current  setting  from  the  South-east.

And  about  noone  opened  the  straights,  we  steered  North
North-east,  the  wind  at  East  by  South,  then  we  steered
North  and  North  by  East,  having  thirtie,  eight  and  twentie,
seven  and  twentie,  eight  and  twentie,  three  and  twentie,
one  and  twentie,  nineteene,  eighteene,  seventeene,  fifteene,
sixteene,  ten,  ten,  twelve,  ten,  nine,  seven  and  nine,  and
when  wee  had  opened  the  White-house  which  standeth  on
a  sandy  Bay  on  the  star-boord  side  of  the  entrance  North-
east, and  the  rocke  or  low  point  on  the  same  side  East
North-east,  we  had  sixe  and  seven  fathome  fine  blacke
sand.  Then  we  steered  North  North-east  untill  wee
brought  the  rocke  or  low  point  East  halfe  a  point  South-
erly, then  North  by  West,  latitude  at  noone  twelve  degrees,
fiftie  six  minutes  ;  And  keeping  this  course  we  had  seven,
sixe,  six  and  a  halfe,  and  as  wee  went  in  the  deeper  water,
foureteene,  fifteene  and  sixteene  fathome  good  ground,  and
at  night  did  let  fall  our  anchor  in  fifteene  and  a  halfe
fathome  blacke  Ozie  ground,  distant  from  the  Arabian
shoare  three  leagues,  and  from  the  Abesh  shoare  on  the
other-side  ten  leagues  faire  cleere  weather,  so  that  we
They  could  see  could  see  from  side  to  side,  the  wind  at  South  South-east,

^ideofthe0 little  Wind'

straight.  The  sixteenth,  in  the  morning  we  weighed,  the  wind

at  East  South-east,  wee  steered  North  by  West  for  Moha,
and  had  eighteene,  sixteene,  fifteene  fathome  about  foure
leagues  off  the  shoare.  Then  we  steered  North  and  North
by  East,  and  had  nine,  ten,  eight  and  seven  fathome  :  but
finding  a  shoale  or  banke,  which  lyeth  to  the  South-east-
ward of  the  Towne,  wee  steered  North  North-west  keeping
in  eight,  nine,  seven  fathome,  and  edging  to  the  Southward
we  had  ten,  eleven,  ten  and  a  halfe,  untill  we  brought  the
Towne  East  by  South  Southerly  of  us,  and  were  in  five
and  a  halfe  fathome  where  we  let  fall  our  anchor,  the
Steeple  or  high  Church  standing  in  the  Towne  bearing
East,  and  one  league  of  the  point  to  the  South-ward  South
by  East three  leagues  off. Nota,  you must  bring  the

376

JOHN SARIS  a».

161 1 .

high  Church  East  Northeast  Easterly,  before  you  shall  he
cleered  of  the  shoale  afore-said  at  your  comming  into  the The  ihoale
Roade : which  is  very  dangerous,  and  where  the  Trades-  ^'^™
Increase  did  set  at  least  foure  and  twentie  houres. But  increase
it  shewes  it  selfe  by  the  colour  of  the  water  :  here  at  entrie,  strooke.
wee  had  very  much  wind  at  South  and  South  South-east
with  a  great  Sea.

Not  long  after  we  were  at  anchor,  the  Governour  sent
off  a  poore  old  slave  in  a  small  Canoa,  to  know  what  was
the  cause  of  our  comming.  The  Generall  used  the  poore
man  kindly :  who  of  his  owne  accord  told  him  that  the
English  that  lately  were  heere,  were  not  well  used  by
Regib  Aga  then  Governour,  whereupon  he  was  cashiered,  Rfie^  ^Sa
and  that  the  Governour  at  the  present  was  called  Ider  Aga,  ^  "£ces*
a  Grecian  by  birth,  a  man  very  kinde  to  Strangers,  and  a
great  friend  to  Merchants.  The  Generall  willed  the
Purser  to  give  the  poore  man  two  Rials  of  eight,  and  so
returned  him  to  his  Master,  with  answere  that  we  were
Englishmen,  and  friends  to  the  Grand  Signior,  and  would
upon  his  sending  of  a  worthy  and  fit  man,  acquaint  him
further  with  the  cause  of  our  comming.  Presently  after
he  sent  off  an  Italian  turned  Moore,  well  clad,  with  the  like
message,  and  to  know  whether  we  had  the  Grand  Signiors
Passe.  The  Generall  told  him  hee  had  not  only  such
a  Passe,  but  likewise  Letters  from  the  Kings  Majestie  of
Great  Britaine  unto  the  Basha.  The  Italian  desired  to  see
them.  Which  the  Generall  denyed,  in  respect  hee  held
him  a  base  fellow,  from  Christian  to  turne  Moore,  but  [I.  iv.  342.]
willed  him  to  acquaint  the  Governour  therewith,  and  that
we  were  appointed  in  honour  of  the  said  Passe  to  shoote
off  fiftie  one  Peeces  of  Ordnance  at  our  arrivall  heere  in
this  Road,  which  he  intended  presently  to  doe.  The
Italian  intreated  that  he  might  first  give  his  Master  to
understand  thereof,  which  was  granted,  and  the  Purser
willed  to  give  him  five  Rials  of  eight,  and  his  Boate  one,
his  name  was  Mustafa  Trudgeman.  The  Ordnance  shot
out  of  each  shippe  was,  The  Clove  nineteene,  Hector
seventeene,  Thomas  fifteene  Peeces. The  Towne  answered

377

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGR1MES

1611.

with  five  Peeces  of  excellent  Ordnance,  and  two  Gallies
three  a-piece.  These  Gallies  were  stout  Gallies,  of  five
and  twentie  Oares  on  a  side,  and  well  fitted,  yards  up.
The  Captaines  name  whereof  was  Mamy,and  the  Captaines
name  of  the  Towne  Mahumet-bey.

The  seventeenth,  the  Generall  received  a  present  from
the  Governour  Ider  Aga,  that  is  to  say,  three  Bullockes,
twentie  Hens,  two  baskets  of  Plantens,  and  two  of  Limons,
with  many  complements,  desiring  him  to  come  ashore.
He  returned  him  a  faire  fowling  Peece,  and  willed  the
Messenger  to  tell  him  that  hee  desired  to  have  a  sufficient
pledge  from  him  for  his  safe  returne,  (when  he  should
come)  for  reasons  not  unknowne  to  the  Governour.

The  Governour  sent  his  Secretarie  unto  the  Generall
with  a  Letter  to know  what  answere he  had formerly
returned  him  by Mustafa Trudgeman : for  he  having
given  him  at  much  intreatie  a  Bottle  of  Wine  was  so
drunke  therewith  before  he  got  to  the  Governour,  as  that
he could not speake : which being certified by the
Secretarie,  on  the  eighteenth  Master  Cockes,  and  Bolton
our  Linguist  were  sent  ashoare,  to  acquaint  the  Governour
that  the  Generalls  comming  was  to  intreate  Trade,  and
that  whensoever  it  pleased  him  to  send  a  man  of  equall
worth  to  remayne  with  the  ships,  as  a  pledge  for  his  safe
returne,  hee  would  in  person  come  and  visit  him  : and
also  to  let  him  to  understand  that  our  Generall  was  not
ignorant of the wrongs done by Regib  Aga unto Sir
Henry  Middleton  his  Countrey-man  and  his  Companie.
But  if  we  might  now  have  quiet  Trade,  all  matters  passed
should  be  forgotten,  and  we  would  treate  with  him  of  such
our  businesse  as  the  Grand Signior  had  given  us  leave,
which  we  hoped  should  bee  for  all  our  goods. The  Secre-
tarie  remayned aboord, pledge for Master Cockes and
Bolton ; he  did  eate  of  our  victuals,  but  had  it  dressed  by
his  owne  people. At  night  they  returned  having  beene
well  used,  feasted,  vested  in  cloth  of  Silver,  and  carryed
up  and  downe  the  Towne  with  Musicke  before  them,  to
give  the  people  to  understand  how  welcome  they  were,

378

JOHN SARIS  a.d.

161 1,

as  Master  Cockes  understood  it. But  at  their  comming

away,  they  were  brought  into  a  house,  and  dis-robed  of

their  Vests. The  Generall  asked  the  Secretarie  whether

it  were  ordinary  and usuall with them to doe so, he

answered  ;  Yes  :  he  replyed  that  in  no  other  part  of  Turkie

the  like  was  done,  that  ever  he  heard  of. In  the  end  the

Secretarie  was  dismissed,  and  halfe  a  Violet  Kersie  given

him : hee  was  very  importunate  to  know  whether  the

Generall  were  not  of  kinne  unto  Sir  Henry  Middleton.

The  like  was  demanded  of  Master  Cockes  by  them  ashore,

fearing  that  hee  was  come  to  take  revenge  of  them.

The  Letter  written from  his  mouth is  this.

Right  worthy  and  my  esteemed  good  Friend,  I  have
had  conference  with  them  you  sent  ashoare,  and  have
used  them  in  the  best  sort  our  Countrey  fashion  doth
affoord,  investing  them  with  Robes,  and  conducting  them
backe  with  Musicke,  that  the  Countrey  people  might
take  notice  how  you  come  and  are  received  in  Amitie.
And  if  it  be  your  pleasure  to  come  ashore  to  me  to
morrow,  I  will  give  you  the  best  entertaynment  the  place
will  affoord,  with  a  true  and  upright  heart,  without  guile
or  deceit,  &  will  send  you  my  Secretarie  or  any  other
pledge  you  shall  esteeme  fitting,  if  it  please  you  to  send
me  word  thereof  by  my  Interpreter,  which  is  now  aboord
your  ship,  the  time  you  will  have  me  send  my  pledge,
and  houre  you  meane  to  come  ashoare.  I  have  written
yesternight  to  Jeffer  Basha,  and  it  will  bee  some  fourteene
or  fifteene  dayes  before  I  have  answere  from  him.  Yet  in
the  meane-time  if  you  please  to  send  any  of  your  people
ashoare  to  buy  either  fresh  victuals,  or  any  thing  else  the
Countrey  will  affoord,  they  shall  be  welcome.  As  also  to
sell  any  thing  they  please,  without  any  molestation  at  all
And  so  expecting  your  answer,  I  cease :  from  Moha,  the
five  and  twentieth  of  Moharem,  De  1021.  de  Mahomet.

Dus  Como  bono  Amico
Aidar  Aga  Aga  de  Mucha.
379

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

161 1.

iv.  343.]  I  have  also  divers  Letters  of  Mamy  Captaine  of  Mucha
(Moha)  or  of  the  Gallies  there,  unto  the  Generall,  which
to  avoide  prolixitie,  and  because  the  substance  is  as  the
former,  I  omit.  I  have  yet  caused  some  of  the  Seales  to
be  cut,  and  heere  added  for  the  raritie,  being  not  in  wax
but  stampes  of  Inke,  in  forme  as  heere  is  expressed.

Likewise  I  have  added  a  piece  of  a  Letter  in  the  Banian
hand  and  Language  (common  in  great  part  of  the  Indies)
written  from  the  Sabandar  in  Moha,  to  Captaine  Saris.

iiA^k\^)ff  <

AMPT&yfamri&te

Genera// Saris  The  twentieth,  the  Governour  sent  aboord,  according
Iwdeth  at  to  agreement  the  day  before,  Mahumet  Aga  Admirall  of
the  shoare,  and  Commander  of  the  Roade  for  the  Turkes
Custome  and  Anchorage,  And  Nasuffe  a  grave  old  man,
with  two  attendants  proper  men  to  remayne  pledges  for
the  Generall.  So  he  went  ashore  with  all  the  Merchants,
the  three  SkifTes  well  fitted,  and  had  one  and  fiftie  Peeces
of  Ordnance  shot  out  of  the  ships  at  parting.  Hee  was
received  at  the  landing  place  by  the  Captaine  of  the
Gallies,  and  divers  other  principall  men,  with  Waites,
Drums,  and  other  Musical!  Instruments  playing  before,
and  divers  Peeces  shot  out  of  the  Castle,  the  people  fol-

380

JOHN SARIS  a.d.

ton

lowing  in  such  abundance,  that  we  could  hardly  passe.
Having  passed  two  Guards  of  verie  proper  men  well  clad,
we  were  brought  into  the  Governours  House,  which  is
built  all  of  Freestone,  with  very  faire  and  large  staires,
and  so  were  led  into  a  roome  spred  with  rich  Carpets,  at
the  upper  end  of  the  roome  was  a  window  made  after  the
fashion  of  our  Bay-windowes :  where  a  Silke  Quilt  was
spread  upon  the  floore,  and  two  Cushions  of  Cloth  of
Silver,  laid  thereon,  he  was  requested  to  sit  downe.  But
presently  the  Governour  came  forth  of  another  Chamber
accompanied  with  five  or  sixe  persons  richly  apparelled,
himselfe  in  a  Gowne  of  Cloth  of  Silver,  faced  with  rich
Furre.  He  tooke  the  Generall  by  the  hand,  kist  his
owne  hand,  and  put  it  to  his  head.  Then  he  led  him  by
the  hand  to  the  said  window,  where  they  sate  downe,  and
after  some  few  complements,  he  delivered  unto  the  Gover-
nour our  Kings  Letter,  which  Master  Cockes  did  reade,
and  Bolton  our  Linguist  interpreted  to  the  Captaine  of
the  Gallies,  and  hee  to  the  Aga,  which  course  hee  held  for
state.  After,  he  delivered  him  the  Grand  Signiors  Passe,
which  he  gave  to  his  Secretarie  to  reade,  which  done,  he
tooke  it,  kist  it,  and  layd  it  upon  his  head  without  further
ceremonie.

The  Originall  I  have  in  my  hands,  and  have  caused  a
little  of  the  beginning  to  be  here  expressed,  and  therewith
the  forme  of  the  Grand  Signiors  Seale,  (a  little  contracted
to  come  within  the  Page)  and  heere,  to  give  delight  to  the
Curious  Reader,  annexed.  All  the  larger  strokes  or  lines
are  Gold,  the  rest  Azure,  with  Red  here  and  there  beauti-
fully intermixed.  After  which  folio weth  the  same  Letters
Patent,  for  better  Patencie,  Englished  out  of  the
Arabique.

[The  forme
381

A.D.

161 1.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

[I.  iv.  344.]  The forme of the Grand Signiors Seale, with

part  of  his Passe.

U^

^$m&^*w\

382

JOHN SARIS  a.d.

161 1.

The  Great  Turkes Letters Patents  Englished.

YOu  that  are  My  most  Laudable,  Fortunate,  Wealthie,
and  great  Vice-reys  and  Beglerbeys,  that  are  on  the
way  from  My  most  Happy  and  Imperiall  Throne  (both
by  Sea  and  Land)  unto  the  Confines  and  Bounds  of  the
East-Indies ;  Owners  of  some  part  of  Dignitie,  and  those
unto  whom  belongeth  to  give  aide,  helpe,  and  succour  in
Gods  cause,  and  Mussulmanicall  Religion,  upon  their
Emperours  becke,  The  Wealth  and  Greatnesse  of  whom
let  it  continue  for  ever.  Likewise  unto  yee  My  most  P*  1V-  345-]
Laudable  and  Valiant  Saniacq  Beys,  that  are  under  the
above-named  Beglerbeys,  owners,  and  hope  of  future
greater  Dignities,  and  those  unto  whom  belongeth  duti-
full  aide  and  help  in  Gods  cause  and  Religion,  upon  their
Emperours  direction  :  the  Honour  and  Dignitie  of  whom
bee  ever  continuing.  And  unto  yee,  My  most  Laudable
Wise,  and  Prudent  Justices  of  Peace,  Judges,  and
Ministers  of  Justice,  that  are  within  the  Precincts  of  the
said  Saniacqbeys,  whose  Judgements,  Justice,  and  Words
doe  flow,  as  from  a  fountaine  of  all  Wisedome  and  Prud-
ence :  The  Worthinesse  and  Greatnesse  of  whose  Dignitie
and  Function,  let  it  continue  for  ever.  Also  unto  yee
My  Laudable,  Great,  and  most  Worthy  Captaines  and
Reyses  of  all  Our  Navies  and  Shipping  that  swimme
upon  the  face  of  the  Sea.  Unto  yee  My  laudable  Cap-
taines, of  the  Castles,  Cities,  and  Townes :  And  unto  yee
worthy  and  laudable  Customers,  dwelling  upon  the  Sea-
coast,  upon  Rivers,  Bridges,  and  all  other  parts  of  our
Dominions,  and  thereunto  adjacent.  Upon  sight  of  this
My  most  High  and  Imperiall  Commandement,  in  con-
formitie  of  your  most  bound  duties,  yee  shall  arise,  and
doe  obeisance  and  Reverence  thereunto.

Hereby  yee  shall  understand,  that  the  Embassadour  of
the  King  of  Great  Brittanie  that  resideth  in  Our  happie
and  most  high  Port,  hath  given  us  to  understand  by  his
Supplication ;  That  forasmuch  as  some  of  his  Masters
the  King  of  Great  Brittaine  his  subjects,  have  with  great

383

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

161 1.

charge  and  labour,  discovered  a  Trade  in  the  East-Indies,
and  withall  understand  of  Wealth,  &  likelihood  of  Trade
in  some  Parts  of  Our  Dominions  by  the  way  to  be  had  in
their  Passage  to  the  said  Indies,  beeing  therefore  desirous
to  visit  those  places  for  the  better  enlarging  of  their  said
Trade.  To  the  ende  that  such  men  may  in  so  good  and
laudable  enterprises  have  all  favour,  aide,  and  helpe  (so
farre  as  lawfully  and  conveniently  may  be  graunted)  Hath
requested  us  in  the  Name  of  his  said  Master  the  King  of
Great  Brittaine,  to  vouchsafe  them  our  safe-conduct  and
recommendations.  In  conformitie  of  whose  request,  as
also  in  regard  We  and  our  Predecessors,  are  and  have
beene  for  the  space  of  many  yeeres  in  strict  league  and
Amitie,  with  the  afore-mentioned  King  of  Great  Brittaine,
and  the  Subjects  of  that  Kingdome,  who  long  have  had,
and  at  this  present  have  free  Traffique  and  Trade  in  mer-
chandizing in  our  Dominions  and  Provinces  through  the
Mediterranean  Seas.  Wee  therefore  doe  command,  and
expressely  charge  yee  all,  and  every  of  yee,  our  above
mentioned  Subjects  and  Officers,  that  yee  will  not  only
kindly  and  lovingly  intertaine  and  receive  the  said  Mer-
chants and  Subjects  of  Great  Brittaine,  comming  or  pass-
ing through  or  by  any  of  Our  Dominions,  especially
intending  to  trade,  to  the  Dominions  of  Yemen,  Aden,
and  Moha,  and  the  parts  adjoyning  thereunto.  Assisting
and  relieving  them  with  all  things  needfull  for  themselves,
their  men  and  Ships :  but  also  freely  to  permit  them  by
Land  or  by  Sea,  to  goe  or  saile,  outward  and  returning,
even  as  their  occasions  shall  require,  and  to  remaine  in
any  of  our  Dominions,  Countreys,  or  Cities,  granting
them  such  libertie  of  Traffique,  and  Priviledges  as  shall
be  reasonable  without  giving  or  suffering  any  let  or
hinderance,  injurie,  or  molestation  to  be  offered  or  done
unto  them.  Yea,  yee  shall  yeeld  unto  them  such  Offices
of  Benevolence  and  Humanitie,  as  shall  bee  meet  and
convenient  to  be  yeelded  unto  honest  men,  and  strangers,
undertaking  so  long  and  laborious  a  Voyage.  And  if  so
be  that  We  shall  understand,  that  contrary  to  the  Capitu-

384

JOHN SARIS  ad.

1 6 1 1.

lations,  the  Amitie,  and  League,  which  is  betweene  us
and  the  King  of  Great  Brittaine,  yee  doe  offer  them  the
least  wrong,  and  any  way  molest  and  trouble  the  said
Merchants  in  their  Traffique,  and  ought  else  :  Know  ye
for  certaine,  that  yee  shall  not  onely  incurre  Our  high  dis-
pleasure, but  yee  shall  be  punished  for  example  unto
others :  and  therefore  carry  your  selves  conformable  to
this  My  Imperial  Commandement,  and  give  credit  to  this
My  Imperiall  Ensigne.  Written  at  Our  Mansion  Guard
at  Constantinople,  on  the  fifteenth  day  of  the  Moone
called  Zilkigie. Anno.  1019.

The  Governour  afterward  tooke  a  Copie  thereof,
and  returned  it  againe.
He  told  our  Generall  that  he  was  welcome,  desiring
that  what  had  formerly  been  past,  touching  Sir  Henry
Middleton,  might  not  be  remembred,  for  that  the  quarrell
grew  by  two  drunken  men,  and  was  by  the  then  Governour
rashly  followed,  for  which  he  was  displaced  five  Moneths
since.  And  as  concerning  Trade,  he  could  not  permit
any  great  matter,  till  he  had  direction  from  his  Master
Jafar  Basha  of  Sinan,  whom  he  had  written  unto,  and
would  within  tenne  or  twelve  dayes  returne  an  answer,
earnestly  intreating  that  he  would  permit  his  people  to
come  on  shoare  to  buy  what  they  wanted,  and  to  sell  small
matters,  to  the  end  that  the  Naturalls  might  see  that  we
were  in  peace  and  amitie  together,  and  that  what  was  past
was  forgotten.  These  his  speeches  made  good  what  the
General!  had  formerly  conceived,  touching  the  doubt  that
the  East-Indian  ships  would  make  of  their  comming  in
here,  unlesse  they  understood  that  wee  were  all  friends :
and  their  not  comming  in  here,  would  bee  a  great
hinderance  to  every  Officer  of  this  Port.  Besides,  we
riding  so  neere  the  shoare  (as  we  did  of  purpose)  as  that
no  laden  ship  could  come  in,  but  that  she  must  perforce
ride  within  call  of  us,  which  did  put  them  in  the  greater
feare  :  whereby  he  reckoned  himselfe  sure  of  Trade,  either
a  shoare  or  aboord  the  ships,  and  that  keeping  the  Towne
in  385  2  B

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

161 1.

in  this  awe,  he  might  the  more  boldly  adventure  his  skiffe
and  people  to  the  shoare,  to  fetch  what  our  ships  wanted.

The  Governour  feasted  them  very  royally  at  a  dinner,
with  all  sorts  of  wild  fowle,  Hennes,  Goates,  Mutton,
Creame,  Custards,  divers  made  dishes,  and  Confections,
all  served  in  Vessels  of  Tinne  (different  from  our  Pewter)
and  made  Goblet-fashion  with  feet,  the  dishes  so  placed
the  one  upon  the  other,  that  they  did  reach  a  yard  high
as  we  sate,  and  yet  each  dish  fit  to  bee  dealt  upon  without
remoove.  The  meate  was  all  served  up  at  once,  and  that
[I.  iv.  346.]  befbre  we  sat  down.  Our  drinke  was  water  simply,  or
else  water  boyled  with  an  herbe  called  Cauhaw  therein,
which  is  in  tast  somewhat  bitter.  We  did  sit  crosse-
legged  upon  Carpets  laid  upon  the  floare  :  for  there  they
used  neither  Tables  nor  Stooles.  Dinner  ended,  he  led
the  Generall  into  an  inner  Chamber,  where  he  had  fowre
little  boyesthat  attended  him,  beeing  his  buggering  boyes  :
there  they  two  being  set  upon  a  crimson  Velvet  Carpet,
the  rest  of  the  Chamber  floare  beeing  spread  with  very
rich  Carpets,  one  of  the  boyes  bearing  a  linnen  napkin  in
his  hand,  did  usher  in  two  of  the  other,  whereof  the  first
had  a  silver  Chaffing-dish  with  coales,  the  other  brought
a  dish  wherein  were  divers  rich  perfumes,  viz.  Amber-
greece,  Lignum  Aloes,  and  others.  The  Governour
requested  the  Generall  to  let  the  Boy  cover  his  head  close
with  the  napkin  ;  which  done,  the  other  Boy  held  the
Chaffing-dish,  with  the  perfumes  put  therein,  under  his
head,  that  he  might  receive  the  fume  which  was  very
pleasant.  After  he  had  finished,  the  Governour  and  two
other  chiefe  men  about  him  did  the  like,  being  as  it
seemeth  a  ceremony  much  used  among  them.  Having
conferred  a  while  together,  there  came  in  three  of  the
Boyes  again.  The  one  brought  a  Vest  or  Gowns  of
cloth  of  Gold,  wrapped  up  in  a  case  of  Taffatie,  died  in
Saffron  to  preserve  the  colour  of  the  Gold.  The  other
Boy  had  a  Shash  or  Turbant  striped  all  with  Gold,  and  in
length  twenty  two  yards :  the  third  a  Damaskeen,  or
Turkish Sword, richly garnished  with Silver  and Gilt,

386

JOHN SARIS  a.d

161 1,

both  Hilt  and  Scabberd.  The  Governour  himselfe  did
put  the  Vest  upon  the  General,  &  did  girt  the  Damaskeen
unto  his  side,  telling  him,  That  they  were  not  presents
from  himselfe,  but  commanded  by  the  Grand  Signior,
who  (as  he  said)  did  bestow  them,  and  intreated  him  to
ride  with  the  Cady,  (who  is  chiefe  Justice  there)  and  the
Captaine  of  the  Gallies,  about  the  Towne,  that  the  people
might  take  notice  of  the  amitie  and  friendship  that  was
betwixt  us.  They  brought  a  horse  richly  trapped,  the
mettall  worke  of  the  bridle  all  of  Silver  :  but  he  rather
chose  to  goe  on  foot,  that  he  might  the  better  view  the
Towne,  whereto  they  gave  consent,  and  so  wee  walked
together  about  the  Town,  and  having  viewed  a  house
wherein  to  have  setled  our  Factory,  I  was  brought  to
the  house  of  the  Captaine  of  the  Gallies,  where  he  had  a
costly  banquet.  And  thus  returning  by  the  Governours
house,  he  met  him  upon  the  stayres,  where  againe  earnestly
intreating  that  the  discourtesies  offered  Sir  Henry  might
be  forgotten,  and  that  it  might  appeare  by  his  often  com-
ming  or  sending  his  people  a  shoare,  they  tooke  their
leaves  one  of  another.  And  so  accompanied  with  a  great
traine  of  the  best  of  the  Towne,  he  returned  aboord,
where  the  shippes  discharged  fifteene  peeces  of  Ordnance.
The  Turkes  that  remained  pledges  having  divers  Pre-
sents given  them,  were  sent  friendly  on  shoare,  and  had
fifteene  Peeces  shot  off  at  their  parting.

The  one  and  twentieth,  the  Generall  sent  M.  Cocks  and
others  a  shoare  with  a  Present  to  the  Governour,  a  case  of
Bottles  fild  with  Rosa  Solis,  which  he  did  earnestly  desire
the  Generall  to  give  him,  and  to  send  it  so  wrapped  up,  as
that  it  might  not  be  knowne  what  it  was  :  likewise  was
sent  two  Vests  of  Violet  broad  cloth  to  his  Eunuches.
They  had  further  directions  given  them  to  enquire  a
shoare  what  Customes  were  due  in  and  out,  the  weights,
measures,  valuations  of  Coynes,  prizes  of  Indicos,  Calli-
coes,  Cotton-yearne,  and  other  Commodities  fit  for  us  to
lade.  Also  to  procure  the  Jewe  to  come  aboord,  who  was
in  the  Ascension  at  her  casting  away,  neere  the  Barre  of

387

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

161 1.

Surat, and could give us certaine intelligence of Sir
Henries  successe.

Note  o/Moha  Note,  that  this  Road  of  Moha  is  very  open  and  danger-
ous, with  very  shoald  water  a  mile  off  the  Towne  low
land  even  with  the  Sea.  At  this  present  the  wind  South
South-west  a  great  storme,  which  caused  such  a  Sea,  as
that  we  did  send  not  lesse  then  seven  f^etc,  riding  in  five
fathome ;  and  the  wind  at  West  you  have  no  succour.
But the  country  people  say, that  in the  time  of  those

Extremitie  of  wincjS5  which  beginne  in  the  fine  of  May,  the  extremitie
a eginnc £  heate  is  such,  as  that  it  deads  the  wind,  which  maketh

/;/  the  Jine  of  '  '

May.  that  season  very  contagious.

The  thirtie  one,  the  General  understood  from  the  Cap-
taine  of  the  Towne  that  yester-night  late  arryved  the
Messenger  from  the  Grand  Basha,  with  Letters  to  the
Governour  to  this  effect,  That  he  should  yeeld  us  peace-
able Trade,  both  on  shoare,  and  with  the  Indian  ships,  as
he  would  answer  the  contrary  at  his  perill,  and  to  let  us
furnish  our  selves  with  what  we  wanted.  He  was  doubt-
full  of  the  certaintie  of  this  pleasing  newes,  for  that  not
halfe  an  houre  before,  M.  Cockes  had  speech  with  the
Governour,  who  spake  of  no  such  matter.  The  Cap-
taine  said,  that  the  reason  of  the  Governours  not  speak-
ing thereof,  was,  because  here  was  a  Jelba  bound  for
Mecca,  and  readie  to  depart,  which  he  would  not  have  to
know,  that  the  Basha  had  graunted  us  trade,  fearing  least
they  should  acquaint  the  Sheriffe  at  Mecca  therewith,
who  by  his  Letters  to  the  Grand  Signior,  might  cause  the
graunt  to  be  revoked.  But  we  rather  thinke  the  Basha
hath  returned  some  harsh  answer,  with  direction  to  doe
that  unto  us,  which  as  yet  he  cannot  effect,  we  being  so
watchfull  and  wary  over  him,  and  therefore  will  not  be
knowne  to  have  received  answer  from  Sinan,  till  better
bethinking.  Note  that  Hosoroofe  (one  that  closely  had
sent  a  letter  of  M.  Femells,  testifying  their  treacherous
usage  here)  did  now  send  word  by  our  Linguist,  That  the
Generall  should  beware  of  comming  a  shoare  himselfe,
unlesse he  had  good  pledges  as  formerly,  and  then  he

?88

JOHN SARIS

might  boldly  come,  but  otherwise  not  to  trust  them,
though  the  Governour  should  sweare  upon  his  Alcaron  :
for  they  were  souldiers,  and  did  not  much  respect  oathes :
and  as  hee  heard,  the  newes  that  was  come  from  the  Basha
did  not  tend  to  our  Benefit :  for  that  the  Copy  of  the
Grand  Signiors  passe  was  not  as  then  come  to  the  Bashaes
hands :  But  then  should  be  fully  seene  what  would  be
done,  which  would  be  within  sixe  dayes.

The  second  of  Aprill,  1612.  the  Caravan  from  Grand
Cayro  in  Egypt,  arrived  here  in  Moha.  The  third,  came
into  the  Road  two  Indian  ships,  one  of  Chaul,  the  other
of  Cananor,  their  lading  Indicos,  Callicos,  Pintados,
Amber-greece,  and  Cotten-yarne,  with  at  least  foure  hun-
dred passengers,  who  carried  much  wealth  about  them.
We  saluted  them  with  nine  Peeces  of  Ordnance  out  of
our  Fleet.  They  answered  with  three  Chambers  a  Peece
beeing  all  they  had.  The  Generall  sent  the  Skiffe,  to
enquire  what  newes  upon  the  Coast  of  Surat.  The  Cap-
taine  sent  word  that  there  were  three  English  ships  trading
there,  but  further  could  not  tell.  The  Captaine  of  the
Towne  with  five  chiefe  Janisaries  came  aboord,  beeing  sent
by  the  Governour,  to  let  our  Generall  understand,  that
the  Basha  had  written  unto  him  to  intreate  and  use  us
kindly,  and  to  permit  us  peaceable  Trade,  desiring  the
Generall  that  hee  would  in  person  come  a  shoare  the  next
morning,  and  he  should  further  understand.  He  craved
pardon,  not  forgetting  Hosoroofes  admonition.  But
Captaine  Towerson  being  desirous  to  goe  a  shoare,  the
Captaine  was  requested  to  tell  the  Governour,  that  the
Generall  upon  good  pledge  would  the  next  morning  send
his  Brother  unto  him,  which  was  well  liked  of :  so  having
feasted  the  Captaine  and  his  retinew,  and  given  them
divers  Presents,  they  were  sent  a  shoare,  with  twentie  one
Peeces  of  Ordnance  at  parting,  which  he  sent  word  that
he  tooke  so  well,  as  that  we  should  not  want  the  best
assistance  he  could  doe  us.

The  fourth  in  the  morning,  though  the  pledges  were
not  yet  come,  yet  desirous  to  see  what  the  Basha  had

389

A.IJ.
l6l2.

[I. iv. 347.]
Aprill.
Caravan  of
Cayro.
Indian  ships.

A.D.

1612.

Three  letters
from  Sir  Henry
Middleton
and  Capt.
Sharpeigh.

Indian  Mer-
chandise.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

ordered,  Captaine  Towerson  was  sent  a  shoare  :  for  we
held  the  two  Indian  shippes  which  rid  hard  by  us,  for
sufficient  pledge,  if  on  shore  any  injury  should  be  offered.
The  Governour  used  him  friendly,  and  vested  him  to  con-
tent, but  nothing  was  effected  of  that  hee  went  about,
the  Turkes  not  performing  their  promise.  The  Gover-
nour sent  word,  that  it  would  be  fitting  to  send  two  of
our  men  of  good  fashion  up  to  the  Basha  to  Sinan,  with
the  Kings  Letter  and  Present,  and  then  speedy  dispatch
would  be  had  to  our  liking.  Whereof  the  General
approoved,  intending  the  next  day  to  lay  out  a  Present  for
him.

The  fifth,  the  Captaine  of  the  Gallies  sent  aboord  three
letters,  which  the  last  night  came  to  the  Governours
hands,  from  S.  Henry  Middleton,  and  Captaine  Sharpeigh,
who  rid  then  at  an  anchor  at  Babmandel.  The  effect
whereof  was,  That  he  was  come  from  Surat,  and  had
little  or  no  Trade  there.  That  Captaine  Hawkins  upon
distast  was  come  from  Agra,  and  with  his  wife  was  aboord
his  ship.  That  he  had  brought  all  away  from  thence,
except  one  man  of  Captaine  Hawkins,  which  went  over
Land  for  England.  And  that  he  was  come  backe  to  bee
revenged  of  the  Turks,  wishing  our  Generall  to  get  his
goods  and  people  aboord  with  all  speed.  Hereupon  he
altered  what  yesternight  was  agreed  upon,  and  forthwith
sent  one  of  the  Marchants  away  to  Sir  Henry  with  a  letter
of  the  proceedings  of  his  Voyage,  and  of  the  manner  of
our  entertainement  here  hitherto  :  that  if  he  had  not  thus
come  in,  he  had  on  Monday  sent  two  men  of  fashion  up
to  Sinan.

Note,  the  two  Indian  ships  aforesaid,  did  discharge  here
these  goods  following :  Lignum  Aloes  sixtie  Kintals,
Indico  sixe  hundred  Churles  out  of  both  ships,  Shashes
of  all  sorts  great  store,  Cinamon  of  Celon  one  hundred
and  fiftie  Bahars,  each  Bahar  three  Churles  and  an  halfe,
Osfar  which  is  a  red  die,  great  quantitie,  Cloves  great
store,  Bastas  or  white  Callicos  from  twentie  to  rortie
Royals  the  Corge,  (a  Corge  being  twentie  pieces)  a  great

39°

JOHN SARIS  ad.

1612.

quantitie. The  Price  of  Indico  was  from  thirty  to  thirty
five,  fortie,  and  fiftie  Rials  the  Churle.

The  seventh,  the  Generall  writ  to  the  Captaine  of  the
Towne,  that  he  should  procure  the  Indian  Merchants  to
barter  with  him  at  reasonable  rates  for  such  of  their  com-
modities as  he  should  desire,  and  as  might  serve  to  lade  one
of  our  ships,  which  doing  would  satisfie  S.  Henry  of  their
now  friendly  meaning  towards  us,  and  cause  him  to  for-
beare  all  hostile  attempts.

At  this  present,  there  was  a  great  rumour  spread  in  the
Towne,  of  a  Jelba  or  two,  which  Sir  Henry  had  taken
(comming  over  from  the  Abesh  side  with  victuall)  in
respect  whereof,  we  durst  scarcely  adventure  our  SkirTe
and  Ging  a  shoare.

The  Generall  received  another  letter  from  Captaine
Mamee,  That  the  answer  which  the  Governour  had  re-
ceived from  the  Basha,  was  in  these  words ;  Ider  Aga,
You  have  writ  me  that  three  English  ships  are  come  to
Moha,  to  trade  in  merchandise,  with  the  Grand  Signiors
Passe :  Give  them  faithfull  promise  from  me  to  come  on
shoare,  to  take  a  house  untill  the  Monson  be  past,  to  buy
and  sell.  You  have  likewise  writ  me,  that  they  will  send
up  two  men  unto  me :  give  them  all  things  fit  for  their
journey,  &c.  Captaine  Mamee  did  further  write,  that
what  our  Generall  would  propound,  the  Aga  and  hee
would  underwrite.  That  for  bartering,  they  would  doe
something  for  love,  but  nothing  by  force,  and  were  as
willing  to  lade  all  the  three  ships  as  one.

Note,  as  we  were  informed,  the  weight  here  used  is  Weights  of
called  an  Inen,  which  is  two  Rottalas,  a  Rottala  is  a  pound  Moha-
of  their  weight :  tenne  Inens  is  twentie  pound  of  theirs,
which  makes  twenty  three  pound  English  haberdepoize,
sometimes  foure  and  twentie  pounds  as  the  Weigher  will
befriend  you.  A  Churle  of  Indico  by  their  weight  is  an
hundred  and  fiftie  pound,  and  of  ours  betwixt  an  hundred
and  sixtie  sixe,  and  an  hundred  and  seventie  pound.
Cotten  wooll  is  sold  by  the  Bahar,  which  is  three  hundred
Rottalas,  making  betwixt  three  hundred  thirty  two  pound,

39i

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1612.

and  three  hundred  forty  foure  pound  English,  at  eigh-
teen Royals the Bahar, very good & cleane. Their
[I.  iv.  348.]  measure  of  length  is  called  a  Peeke,  contayning  seven  and
twentie  inches,  or  three  quarters  of  our  English  yard.

The  ninth,  the  Governour  sent  off  a  Canoa  to  intreate
me,  that  the  Generall  in  the  morning  he  would  send
ashoare,  and  he  should  have  both  the  Bashas  answere,  and
a  warrant  to  stay  all  such  Junckes  as  shall  passe  Sir  Henrie,
and  force  them  to  come  in  hither,  and  trade  with  them  for
such  of  their  goods  as  he  desired,  &c.  and  that  he  would
suffer  his  people  to  come  ashoare,  because  the  Merchants
were  now  growne  fearefull,  by  reason  of  Sir  Henries
staying  some  of  the  ships.

The  tenth,  Master  Cockes  was  sent  ashoare,  had  con-
ference with  the  Governour,  and  Captaine  Mamy  :  who
told  him  that  they  were  now  fully  resolved,  that  what  they
had  formerly  promised,  they  might  not  performe,  the
Cadie  disliking  thereof,  saying,  that  they  might  hazard
their  owne  lives  thereby :  That  neither  Merchant  nor
Broker  would  come  aboord  (as  our  General  had  requested)
the  Knight  had  so  discontented  them :  That  they  of
Grand  Cairo  had  their  Factors  there,  which  lay  purposely
to  ingrosse  Indicoes,  and  other  Indian  Commodities,
whereof  they  would  not  buy  untill  they  should  see  what
quantitie  would  come :  That  the  Bannians  (or  Indian
Liegers  ashoare)  which  have  Indicoes  in  their  hands,  would
not  sell,  hoping  of  a  scarcitie :  he  also  brought  word,  that
they  denie  ashoare  to  buy  any  of  our  goods,  unlesse  wee
will  land  them  first.

Note,  the  Grand  Signiors  Custome  of  this  Port  Moha,
is  worth  yearly  unto  him  fifteen  hundred  thousand  Chic-
quenes,  (which  rated  at  five  shillings  sterling  a  piece,  is
yeerely  thirtie  seven  thousand  five  hundred  pounds  ster-
ling) according  to  the  report  of  the  Governour  to  Master
Cockes.

392

JOHN SARIS  a.d.

1612.

§. III.

Their  Adventures  with  Sir  Henry  Middleton,
with  other  Observations  of  those  parts,  and
arrivall  at  Bantam.

He  eleventh,  the  Generall  caused  the  Merchandiz-
ing Councell  to  meete  and  consult  what  was  best
to  be  done,  seeing  that  Sir  Henrie  thus  kept  the

Junckes  from  comming  in  thither,  and  that  there  was
then  no  further  hope  of  Trade  heere.  It  was  agreed
upon,  that  untill  the  Monson  would  permit  us  to  proceed
further,  wee  should  continue  friendship  with  the  Towne,
as  hitherto  we  had  done,  &c.

The  twelfth,  the  Generall  being  informed  of  Sir  Henries
earnest  desire  to  speake  with  mee,  and  protestations  of
great  kindnesse  and  love,  resolved  to  goe  unto  him  ;  and
so  willed  the  Master  with  the  first  wind  to  set  sayle  for
Babmandell.  Whereof  hee  did  let  the  Governour  of  the
Towne  to  understand,  and  tooke  a  Letter  of  his  to  carrie
to  Sir  Henrie,  the  better  to  continue  friendship  still  with
him.

The  fourteenth,  in  the  morning  we  arrived  at  the  Bab,
where  wee  found  the  Trades  Increase  riding,  and  foure
Indian  Junckes  or  ships.  The  Generall  went  aboord  the
Trade,  where  hee  remayned  untill  night,  but  nothing
could  at  that  time  be  concluded  upon  betwixt  the
Generals.

The  fifteenth  Sir  Henry  came  aboord  the  Clove.

The  sixteenth,  our  General  seeing  Sir  Henries  resolu-
tion, called  his  Councel  together,  &  acquainted  them  with
what  he  observed  thereupon,  and  that  in  regard,  that  by
these  brabbles  and  jarres  happened  betwixt  Sir  Henrie,
the  Turkes  and  the  Cambayans,  our  hopes  of  any  Trade
to  be  had  at  Surat,  was  as  small,  as  that  which  we  had
already  found  at  Moha :  Our  best  course  would  be,  that
the  Hector  and  Thomas  should  waigh  anchor  &  ply
between  Aden  and  the  Bab,  The  Clove  to  keep  the  Abesh

393

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1612.

Channell  there,  that  none  might  passe  by  in  the  night,
and  so  to  meet  with  as  many  of  the  Indian  ships  as  we
could,  to  whom  we  might  put  off  our  Broad-cloth,  Leade,
Tinne,  Iron,  and  Elephants  Teeth  (Commodities  which
were  provided  for  those  parts)  in  barter  for  such  as  he
knew  would  vent  well  in  those  Countries,  whither  wee
were  afterwards  to  goe  :  if  wee  lighted  upon  Indicoes,  they
would  be  good  for  England  also.  That  he  had  certaine
intelligence  of  two  very  great  ships  daily  expected,  called
the  Rehmi  and  the  Hasani  the  least  of  them  (by  report)
able  to  lade  the  Hector,  with  requestable  Commodities :
Hereunto  they  generally  assented,  to  be  put  in  practice
with  the  first  wind.

The  Generall  went  aboord  the  Trade,  where  at  length
this  agreement  was  made  :  that  both  Fleets  should  joyne
to  trade  with  as  many  of  the  Indian  ships  as  they  could
meet  with,  and  to  exchange  our  English  Commodities
with  them  for  theirs :  Sir  Henrie  to  dispose  of  two  third
parts  of  all  the  goods  which  should  be  bartered  for  from
this  day  forwards,  and  Generall  Saris  the  other  third.
The  Grand  Signior  to  have  his  Custome  paid.  Hereof
Writings  were  made,  being  sealed  and  delivered  betwixt
them.  The  Hector  and  Thomas  were  appointed  to  ply
betweene  the  North  end  of  Babmandell  and  the  Abesh
shoare,  to  meete  with  all  such  as  should  come  that  way :
with  charge  that  no  man  should  take  the  value  of  a  penie
out  of  them,  or  offer  the  least  violence  to  any  of  their
persons,  &c.
[I.  iv.  349.]  The  eighteenth,  in  the  evening,  a  ship  of  Cananor
arrived  laden  with  Spice,  Drugs  and  other  Commodities.

The  Generall  set  sayle  for  Moha,  the  wind  at  South
and  South  by  East  a  stiffe  gale,  where  we  arrived  within
five  houres  after.  The  Governour  presently  sent  off  to
us  intreating  to  know  how  all  things  passed  at  the  Bab  ;
requesting  that  our  Linguist  might  bee  sent  ashoare  to
acquaint  him  therewith,  which  was  accordingly  done.

The  twentieth,  the  Skiffe  was  sent  ashoare  to  fetch  our
Linguist,  who  returned  and  brought  a  present  of  fresh

394

JOHN SARIS  a.d.

l6j2.

victuals  from  the  Governour  to  our  Generall.  The  Gover-
nour  intreated  to  have  a  muster  of  our  Commodities,
which  Master  Cockes  carryed  presently  to  him  :  hee  liked
of  divers  colours  of  our  Broad-cloth,  promising  to  take
for  a  thousand  Rials  besides  some  quantitie  of  Tinne  and
Lead.  Many  others  desired  to  have  Lead  and  Iron,
wherefore  he  intreated  that  in  the  morning  some  quantitie
thereof  might  bee  brought  ashoare,  for  hee  having  once
begun,  the  Merchants  would  certainly  follow  and  trade
with  us.

He  sent  three  samples  of  Indico,  but  none  of  Lahor,
which  is  round  and  the  best.  The  price  a  hundred  Rials
the  Churle  ;  which  is  an  hundred  seven  and  twentie  pound
or  Rottalas  of  Moha,  and  about  a  hundred  and  fiftie
pound  English.  But  they  would  not  sell  by  any  other
weight,  then  that  they  bought  by,  which  they  might  very
well  doe,  the  price  so  unreasonable :  for  wee  esteemed  the
three  sorts  to  bee  worth  but  thirtie,  fortie  and  five  and
fortie  the  best  the  Churle.

Our  Generall  writ  to  Sir  Henry  and  Captaine  Tower-
son,  and  sent  his  Letters  over  land  by  Mahumed,  Secre-
tarie  to  the  Gallies.

The  one  and  twentieth  we  sent  ashoare  eight  Clothes,
one  Tunne  of  Iron,  one  Tunne  of  Lead,  two  Chests  of
Tinne  of  sixe  hundred  weight.  They  offered  for  foure
of  the  best  clothes  three  halfe  Rials  the  Peeke,  which
should  be  seven  and  twentie  inches,  but  measured  by
another  Peeke,  proved  to  be  one  and  thirtie  inches.  The
Bahar  of  Tinne,  an  hundred  and  twentie  Rials.  The
Bahar  of  Iron,  twelve  Rials.  Lead  fifteene  Rials,  which
were  no  prices  to  our  liking.  At  night  the  Merchants
returned  with  their  Commodities  aboord  againe.

The  five  and  twentieth,  the  Generall  (upon  conference
with  Master  Cockes)  resolved  to  set  saile  and  goe  to
Assab,  where  we  came  to  an  anchor,

The  seven  and  twentieth,  about  eight  at  night  hee  found
the  Trade  and  Hector  riding  there,  with  eleven  saile  of
Junckes  or  Indian  shippes  of  severall  places. Note,  that

395

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1612.

comming  into  this  Road  or  Harbor,  keepe  the  Northerne
side  aboord,  leaving  a  little  Rocke  or  Hummocke  on  your
star-boord  side,  then  we  had  twelve,  eleven,  ten,  nine,
eight  and  seven  fathome  sandie  ground,  and  in  seven
fathome  wee  let  fall  our  anchor  about  halfe  a  mile  off  the
shoare.

The  thirtieth,  the  Generall  sent  his  Skiffe  to  the
Junckes,  to  give  warning  to  the  Nohodaies,  and  Mer-
chants, that  they  should  not  offer  to  set  saile  without  his
leave.  The  Nohodas  and  principall  of  them  requested,
that  such  of  their  goods  as  wee  desired  might  bee  sorted
out  of  hand,  that  they  might  not  loose  their  Monson  of
going  to  Judda,  offering  to  bring  aboord  our  shippes
what  packes  wee  would  to  be  opened  there,  and  to  carrie
backe  what  we  refused.

The  ninth  of  May,  1612.  I  caused  the  Indian  ships  to
be  measured,  which  were  found  to  bee  of  the  scantlings
following,  viz.  The  Rehemy,  was  long  from  stem  to
sterne-post,  an  hundred  three  and  fiftie  toot.  For  rake
from  the  Post  afte,  seventeene  foot.  From  the  top  of  her
sides  in  bredth,  two  and  fortie.  Her  depth,  one  and
thirtie.

The  Mahomedee  in  length,  an  hundred  sixe  and  thirtie
foot.  Her  rake  afte,  twentie.  In  bredth,  one  and  fortie.
In  depth,  nine  and  twentie  and  an  halfe.  Her  maine
Mast  in  length,  was  sixe  and  thirtie  yards,  an  hundred
and  eight.  Her  maine  yard,  foure  and  fortie  yards,  an
hundred  two  and  thirtie.

The  other  were  not  much  lesse.

The  tenth,  Captaine  Mamy  came  from  Moha  to  treate
with  Sir  Henry  concerning  his  demand.  But  first  he
came  aboord  the  Clove,  where  hee  was  friendly  enter-
tayned,  and  after  the  Generall  went  with  him  aboord  the
Trade,  where  he  delivered  to  Sir  Henrie  two  Letters,  viz.
one  from  the  Basha  of  Sinan,  and  the  other  from  the  Aga
of  Moha  :  the  effect,  to  know  what  he  demanded  of  them,
for  they  were  ignorant  of  any  after  injurie  offered  to  him,
&  for  the  former  they  said  that  they  had  given  him  satis-

396

JOHN  SARIS  a.d.

1612.

faction  before  his  departure.  Wherefore  they  intreated
the  Junkes  might  bee  discharged  and  sent  for  Moha.  His
answere  was,  that  hee  demanded  satisfaction  for  the  losse
of  his  mens  lives,  &  for  the  making  of  him  lose  his  Mon-
son,  to  the  overthrow  of  his  Voyage.  Mamy  said,  if  he
would  write  his  minde,  he  should  have  answere  from  the
Basha  in  fourteene  dayes.

The twelfth, Captaine Mamy returned with Letters
from  Sir  Henrie.

The  fifteenth,  the  King  of  Rehita  being  a  pettie  Prince The  K.  of
upon  the  African  or  Abesse  side,  came  riding  downe  upon lta  "  '"%
a  Cow  to  visit  Sir  Henrie  and  our  Generall : he  had  a  Jis-ttetfj  ^
Turbant  on  his  head,  a  piece  of  a  Periwinkle  shell  hang-  the  Generals.
ing  on  his  fore-head,  in  stead  of  a  Jewell,  apparelled  like
a  Moore,  all  naked  (saving  a  Pintado  about  his  loines)
attended  with  an  hundred  and  fiftie  men  in  battaile  after
their  manner,  weapond  with  Darts,  Bowes  and  Arrowes
and  Sword  and  Targets  : both  the  Generals  went  ashoare
with  an  hundred  shot  and  Pike  to  prevent  all  Treacheries,
that  the  Turkes  might  plot  against  them  by  colour  of  [I.  iv.  350.]
this  courtesie,  being  loath  to  let  him  returne  without  an
enterview, lest they should want the refreshing which
they  might  have  by  his  friendship  heere  at  Assab,  which
is  under  his  command. They  presented  him  with  divers
gifts,  and  (according  to  his  desire)  did  give  him  his  lading
of  Aquavitse,  that  hee  was  scarce  able  to  stand  ; they  are
Mahometanes,  being  a  blacke  hard-favoured  people,  with
curled  pates. The  King  bestowed  upon  our  Generall  five
Bullockes,  and  proffered  all  the  assistance  he  might  doe
them.

This  day  the  Pepper-Corne  arrived  from  Aden,  bring-
ing with  her  a  Juncke,  which  came  from  Sinde,  or  the
River  Indus,  laden  with  Butter,  Oyle,  and  Cambaya  cloath.
They  brought  us  newes  that  Mallacamber,  Captaine  of
the  great  shippe  of  Diu  had  escaped  them  with  his
shippe,  and  was  arrived  at  Moha,  passing  in  sight  of
them ;  the  Pepper-Corne  shot  at  her,  but  could  not
reach  her,  shee  went  so  well. This  was  the  ship  for  which

397

A.D.

1612.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

the  Pepper-Corne  had  purposely  weighed,  and  which  the
Thomas  and  Darling  had  so  long  expected  to  have  come
to  Babo.

This  day  our  Generall  had  a  note  delivered  him  of  the
prises  of  commodities,  how  they  were  lately  bought  and
sold  at  Surat,  whereof  the  copie  followeth,  viz.  Broad-
cloath  of  three  and  twentie  pound  a  Cloath  severall  col-
ours, twentie  Mamoodyes,  the  Conido  of  five  and  thirtie
Inches  and  five  Mamoodyes  make  one  Riall  of  eight.
Kersies  eightie  foure  Mamoodyes  the  piece,  which  was
lesse  then  ours  did  cost  in  England.  Lead  the  great
Maund,  thirtie  three  pound,  at  seven  and  one  third  part
of  Mamoodyes.  Tinne  the  small  Maund,  five  and
twentie  pound,  at  five  and  a  halfe  Rialls  of  eight.  At
Dabull,  Iron  the  Bahar,  containing  three  hundred  and
threescore  pound,  at  one  and  twentie  Rialls  the  Bahar.
Peeces  damasked,  from  twelve  to  eighteene  Rialls  the
piece.  Ellephants  teeth,  threescore  and  five  Mamoodyes,
the  great  Maund  of  three  and  thirtie  pound.  Indico
Cirkesa,  three  sorts,  whereof  the  best  at  fourteene  Rupias,
which  make  halfe  a  Riall  of  eight :  the  second  sort,
twelve  Rupias ;  the  third  sort  eight,  the  great  Maund  of
three  and  thirtie  pound.  Indico  Lahor,  which  is  best  of
all ;  three  sorts,  whereof  the  best  at  sixe  and  thirtie,  the
second  at  thirtie,  the  third  at  foure  and  twentie  Rupias,
the  Maund  of  five  and  fiftie  pound.  Charges  of  bringing
it  to  the  waterside,  ten  in  the  hundred  for  the  Cirkesa,
and  twentie  in  the  hundred  custome  for  Lahor.

The  seventeenth,  we  began  to  weigh  Lead,  and  deliver
our  English  commodities  to  the  Captaines  &  Masters  of
the  Juncks,  in  part  of  paiment  of  the  goods,  which  we
had  received  of  them.

The  three  and  twentieth,  the  Thomas  manned  with  nine
ilf^du5L  anc*  fortie  men>  aU  m  health,  set  saile  for  Socatora,  for
Aloes : and  from  thence  for  Priaman  and  Tecoo,
Sumatra,  for  Pepper.

The  one  and  thirtieth,  the  messenger  from  the  Basha
of  Sinan, the Sabander  of  the  Bannians  at Moha,  and

398

The  Thomas  is

Socatora,  Prio
man  and
Teco".

upon

JOHN SARIS  a.d.

1612.

Captaine  Mamy  arrived  at  Assab,  to  compound  the  differ-
ences with  Sir  Henry  Middleton.

The  foure  and  twentieth  of  June,  the  Trade  set  saile  June  24.
out  of  Assab  Road  for  Moha,  and  the  five  and  twentieth
day,  the  Cloave  did  follow.  The  same  night  they  in
Moha  made  great  Bonefires,  and  Fire-workes,  which  for
that  they  had  not  done  the  like  before  when  wee  were
there,  wee  supposed  them  therewith  to  brave  us.

The  sixe  and  twentieth,  our  Generall  sent  his  Skiffe  to
the  shoare  with  letters  to  the  Aga,  the  Sabandar,  and
Captaine  Mamy,  and  gave  the  Cockson  charge  not  to
put  ashoare,  for  feare  of  surprising.  The  effect  of  these
letters  was,  to  see  what  readie  money  might  bee  procured
to  cleare  the  accounts  betwixt  the  Indians  and  us.  The
nine  and  twentieth,  the  Governour  returned  an  answere
to  our  Generall,  more  ceremonious  then  of  substance  ;  so
that  the  thirtieth  day  we  returned  againe  to  Assab  Road.

The  first  of  July  the  Trade  came  thither  likewise,  and
fell  to  our  old  trade  of  bartering  for  Indian  commodities. 1*1)  1.

The  fift,  Mere  Mahumood  Tookee,  Captaine  of  the
Rehemi  of  Surat  (which  was  the  Queene  Mothers  ship)
brought  divers  dishes  of  meate  aboord  the  Cloave,  being
dressed  after  their  fashion ;  he  was  accompanied  with
divers  of  his  principall  merchants,  who  were  all  kindly
entertained  :  his  shippe  was  at  the  least  of  twelve  hundred
Tunnes.

The  eleventh,  we  all  visited  the  Cloave  and  Hector :
the  Trade  and  Pepper-Corne  weighed  anchor  and  set
saile  for  Moha,  together  with  seven  of  the  Indian  ships,
which  for  the  most  part  of  them  were  better  then  any  of
us  any  way :  in  the  evening  we  anchored  short  of  Moha.

The  twelfth,  we  weighed  and  stood  for  Moha,  and
about  three  in  the  after-noone,  we  all  anchored  before  the
Towne  of  Moha.

The  eighteenth,  one  of  the  Junckes,  which  was  indebted
to  us,  got  in  so  neare  the  shoare,  that  we  doubted  shee
would  steale  all  her  goods  ashoare.  Whereupon  the  next
day,  the  Cloave  and  the  Pepper  Corne  did  warpe  nearer,

399

A.D.

1612.

[I.  iv.  351.]
August  7.

The  Hector
departeth  for
Priaman  and
Tecoo.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

and  discovered  many  Jelbaes  aboord  the  Juncke  to  unlade
her,  but  at  their  going  ashoare,  the  Cloave,  Hector  and
Pepper-corne,  made  many  shot  at  them,  so  as  the  men
forsooke  both  the  Junckes  and  the  Jelbaes  and  swomme
ashoare ;  the  Castle  nor  Towne  not  once  shooting  at  us,
albeit  we  were  much  within  command  of  their  Ordnance.

The  twentieth,  the  Gallyes  fearing  our  comming  so
neare,  warpt  behinde  an  Island  to  the  Northward.

The  seventh  of  August,  wee  had  advice  of  the  arrival
of  the  great  shippe  of  Sues,  and  foure  great  Gallyes  at
Bogo,  a  Towne  on  the  Abesse  side,  about  halfe  a  dayes
saile  from  Moha.  Our  Generall  received  a  Letter  from
the  Governour  of  Moha,  shewing  that  this  day  was
Festivall  amongst  them,  and  that  thereon  they  were
accustomed  to  shoote  off  certaine  Peeces  of  Ordnance,
desiring  that  it  might  not  be  taken  in  evill  part,  doubting
lest  we  should  hold  it  done  in  a  bravado,  and  so  in
requitall  shoote  into  the  Towne  againe.  About  noone
they  discharged  seventeen  Peeces  out  of  the  fort,  three
from  the  landing-place,  and  divers  from  within  the  land,
with  abundance  of  small  shot,  which  went  off  in  good
order ;  some  of  their  great  shot  went  a  head  us,  and  some
a  sterne,  to  shew  what  they  could  doe,  but  all  past  in
kindnesse :  hereby  wee  found  the  report  of  this  place
false,  viz.  That  heere  were  only  two  Peeces,  and  that  they
were  not  able  in  two  houres  to  discharge  them.

The  eight,  the  Hector  set  saile  for  Priaman  and  Tecoo
(the  Monson  now  serving)  having  eightie  eight  English
in  perfect  health.  The  Nohodais,  or  Captaines  of  the
Junckes,  desired  to  have  Pasports  from  our  General,  for
their  better  getting  into  their  Countrey,  in  case  they  should
meet  with  any  more  of  our  Nation  :  which  was  granted.

The  tenth,  all  rekonings  were  cleared  with  the  three
Junckes,  the  Hasani,  Caderi,  and  Mahomodi.  The
eleventh,  we  cleared  the  Rehemey  and  Salameti.  Note
our  whole  cargason  of  commodities  and  Rialls  bartred
for  in  this  place,  did  amount  but  to  fortie  six  thousand
one  hundred  seventie  foure  Rialls  of  eight.

400

JOHN SARIS

I  have  thought  good  to  adde  heere,  two  Acquittances
for  better  understanding  the  premises.

In Moha  Road  in the Red-sea  the  tenth
of  August 1 612.

Memorandum,  That  I  Mahomed  Hashen  Comall
Adeene  Ashen,  Captaine  of  the  Hassavy  of  Surat,  have
bartered  and  sold  unto  Captaine  John  Saris,  Generall  of
the  eight  Voyage  into  the  East-Indies,  for  the  summe  of
seven  thousand  foure  hundred  Rialls  of  eight,  and  H  of
a  Riall  in  these  goods  following,  viz.

Indicoes  of  both  sorts  86.  balles  amount

with  profit  unto  the  summe  of  -  30464^

Cambaya  Cloath  3  i6.Corges,  7.^  peeces,

amounts  to  with  profit,  summe, -  4136 —

Carpets  three,  valued  at - - -  0020 —

Quilts  of  Cottonia,  two,  at  eightie  Rialls

a  Corge _____  0008 —

Rice,  Butter,  Ginger  and  Sugar,  amount

in  Rialls -  00532T

For  eighteene  yards  Broad-cloath  re-
ceived backe  in  account,  summe -  0096 —

Foure  bales  Gumme,  lacke  with  profit  -  00402-!

Summe  totall  of  all  the  Merchandizes  sold,  as  above
said,  is  Rialls  j^oOt^.

And  I  have  Receits  in  payment  thereof  these  goods
following,  viz.

Eight  and  twentie  and  an  halfe  Broad-

cloathes  amounts  to  in  Rialls  - -  45 74^!
Ten  pieces  of  Kersies  amounts  to -  050 if
Thirtie  Bahars  of  Lead,  amounts  to -  0720 —  1  1X

Twentie  Bahars  Iron,  amounts  to  -  0480 —  [  ^

Foure  and  an  halfe  Bahars  of  Tinne,

amounts  to  - - - - -  0679I-
Fifteene  Fowling-peeces,  amounts  to -  0445-

iii  401  2C

A.D.

1612.

\  7400H

A.D.

1612.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Summe  totall  of  these  goods  Received,  amounts  unto
in  Rialls — 7400H

And  in  witnesse  of  the  truth,  I  have  hereunto

set  my  hand  and  Seale  the  day  and

yeere  above  written.

[1.  iv.  352.] In Moha  Road  in  the Red-sea,  the twelfth

day  of  August 1612.

Memorandum,  That  I  Nohada  Hassan,  Captaine  of  the
good  ship,  called  the  Cawdrie  of  Diew,  have  bartered  and
sold  unto  Captaine  John  Saris,  Generall  of  the  eight
Voyage  into  the  East-Indies,  for  the  summe  of  two
thousand  nine  hundred  fortie  and  sixe  Rialls  of  eight,
and  irf  parts  of  a  Riall,  in  these  goods  following,  viz.

Indicoes  of  both  sorts,  one  and  thirtie
Bales,  with  profit,  amounts  to  in
Rialls- _____ 1694H-

Spicknard  one  Bale,  Turbith  one  Bale,
Cinamon  five  Bales,  with  profit
amounts  Rialls -  00641-

Cloath  of  Cambaya  an  hundred  thirtie
seven  Corges,  and  three  pieces  with
profit,  amounts  to  Rialls - - n88f

Summe  totall  - -  2947^-

And  I  have  received  in  payment,  these  goods  follow-

►  2947

TS"

lng>

viz.

402

JOHN SARIS

A.D.

1612.

^947

Broad-cloathes, sixe pieces, for the

summe  of  Rialls  -  0890^

Kersies,  ten  pieces,  amounts  to  Rialls  -  0477-
Lead  one  and  thirtie  Bahars  and  three

quarters,  amounts  to Rialls -  -  0762] -£•

Iron  ten  Bahars,  amounts  to  Rialls -  0240 —
Tinne  one  Bahar  and  an  halfe,  amounts

to  Rialls -----  0226?.
Fowling-peeces  fourteene,  amounts to

Rialls  ------  0350 —

More Receits in money to ballance,

Rialls  ------  0000-H-

Summe  totall  amounts  to  Rialls  -  2947^-

And  in  witnesse  of  the  truth,  I  have  hereunto

set  my  hand  and  Seale  the  day  and

yeare  above  written.

1 0

mfy^FTWU^

At  the  Port  of  Moha  we  found  not  our  English  com-
modities vendible  for  any  quantitie :  the  Naturalls  poore,
and  the  Turkes  unwilling  to  deale  with  us.

The  thirteenth,  we  set  saile  from  Moha  for  Bantam,
our  Company  seventy  five  men  all  in  perfect  health.

The  fourteenth  in  the  morning,  in  sight  of  Babo,  but
the  wind  large  at  North-west,  we  steered  East  by  South
through  the  great  Channell  on  the  Abesse  side,  having
eighteene  fathom,  about  one  league  of  the  Island  Babo,
where  is  very  good  and  safe  harbour  for  shipping,  and  of
good  receit,  but  the  place  is  barren.

The  third  of  September,  we  arrived  at  Socatora  in  the
Road  of  Delisha,  having  been  much  hindred  in  our  pas-
sage hither,  by  a  West  and  North-west  Current.  We
understood  that  the  Thomas  had  been  heere  three  moneths
past,  but  stayed  not,  for  that  they  could  not  agree  upon
the  price  of  Aloes.

The fourth, the Merchant and Linguist were sent

403

English  com-
modities not
vendible  in
any  quantitie
at  Moha.
We  departed
for  Bantam  in
Java.

September  3.
1612.

A.D.

1612.

Cuttle  fish
yeelding  a
wonderfull
glare  in  the
Sea.

Selon  or
Zeilan.

[I.  >v.  353-1

Cape  Comorin
in  seven  de-
grees, tzvo  and
fortie  minutes.
False  plats.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

ashoare,  friendly  entertained  and  furnished  with  horses  to
returne  to  the  Skiffe,  but  could  not  agree  upon  the  price,
hee  holding  it  at  fortie  Rialls  of  eight,  the  kintall  of  one
hundred  and  foure  pounds ;  saying,  he  had  only  five  and
twentie  hundred  weight,  for  which  he  was  earnestly
solicited  by  the  Portugals.

Being  loath  to  lose  time  heere,  it  was  concluded  that
hee  should  have  thirtie  Rials  for  one  parcell,  and  thirtie
eight  for  another ;  so  he  delivered  foure  thousand  sixtie
seven  pound,  which  cost  one  thousand  foure  hundred
eighteene  and  an  halfe  of  Rialls  of  eight :  we  found  the
King  very  false  both  in  his  weight  and  word,  but  we  used
him  kindlv  for  the  good  of  future  Voyage.  The  eight,
we  set  saile  for  Bantam.

The  two  and  twentieth,  latitude  by  the  Starre  eight
degrees,  twelve  minutes,  the  wind  at  West  South-west,
we  steered  East  by  South.  About  midnight  we  fell  into
the  strangest  and  fearfullest  shining  water  that  ever  any
of  us  had  seene :  the  water  giving  such  a  glare  about  our
ship,  as  that  we  could  discerne  a  letter  in  the  book  thereby,
it  being  not  halfe  an  houre  before  so  darke,  as  that  it
was  not  possible  to  see  halfe  our  shippes  length  any  wav
We  doubted  it  had  beene  the  breach  of  suncken  ground,
and  thought  to  have  cast  about :  but  finding  that  wee  had
sailed  in  it  for  halfe  an  houre,  and  saw  no  alteration,  we
held  on  our  course,  quartering  very  much  wind  ;  but  at
length  it  proved  to  be  Cuttle-fish,  which  made  this  feare-
full  shew.

The  seven  and  twentieth,  in  the  morning  we  had  sight
of  the  Island  Selon,  bearing  Northeast  by  East,  about
seven  leagues  off,  being  very  high  land  up  into  the
countrey,  but  low  to  Sea-ward.

The  nine  and  twentieth  about  noone,  we  fell  with  Cape
Comorin,  bearing  East  by  South  about  fourteene  leagues
off,  being  high  land,  and  towards  the  North,  shewing
double  land  neare  the  water-side,  we  sounded  and  had  no
ground  at  an  hundred  fathom.  Note,  that  this  land  lyes
in  the  latitude  of  seven  degrees,  two  and  fortie  minutes

404

JOHN SARIS

to  the  Northward  of  the  Line :  but  in  our  Plats  it  is
made  to  stand  in  sixe  degrees,  and  ten  minutes,  which
differs  one  degree,  two  and  thirtie  minutes,  stretching
South  South-east.  By  experience  we  find  that  it  lyeth
more  Northerly ;  and  in  our  course  we  had  no  sight  of
any  of  the  Islands  described  in  our  Plats,  neither  did  we
discover  any  of  the  Maldive  Islands,  whereof  the  number
is  said  to  bee  so  great ;  making  our  account  to  have  past
betweene  the  Maine  and  the  Northerne  Coast  of  the
Maldivas,  in  eight  degrees  no  minutes,  discrying  no  land,
untill  we  saw  this  Maine.

The  fifteenth  of  October,  latitude  foure  degrees,  nine
and  fortie  minutes  to  the  Southward  of  the  Line :  This
day  we  had  sight  of  Sumatra,  whereof  the  Eastmost  part
did  beare  East  North-east  fourteene  leagues  off,  high
land  :  heere  we  found  a  very  strong  Current  setting  to
the  South-ward,  which  put  us  off  from  the  land.  Note,
that  those  bound  for  the  Straights  of  Sunda,  must  keepe
Sumatra  aboord,  after  they  are  come  into  one  degree,
thirtie  minutes  to  the  Southward  of  the  Line,  for  there
begins  the  current :  keep  thirtie  leagues  off  with  good
looking  out,  for  there  are  many  Cayos  fifteene  or  twenty
leagues  off,  which  by  reason  of  the  current,  we  did  not
see.

The  eighteenth,  latitude  five  degrees  and  twentie
minutes,  way  East,  Northerly,  very  tempestuous,  with
thunder  and  lightning  very  fearefull,  with  much  raine,
so  that  we  could  not  see  the  land :  But,  praised  be  God,
notwithstanding  the  evill  weather,  our  people  were  all
then  in  as  good  health  (if  not  better)  as  when  we  parted
out  of  England.

The  foure  and  twentieth,  we  came  to  an  anchor  in  the
Road  of  Bantam,  where  (though  contrary  to  expectation)
we  found  the  Hector,  which  arrived  there  the  day  before,
with  the  James  in  her  company,  and  certaine  Flemmings.
The  arrivall  of  all  these  ships,  and  expectation  daily  of
the  Trades-Increase,  the  Pepper-Corne,  Darling  and
Thomas  to follow, occasioned  a  great (though sudden)

4°5

A.D.

1612.

October  I  5 .
South  latitude
foure  degrees,
nine  and  fortie
minutes.

Sumatra.

We  arrived  in
the  Road  of
Bantam.

The  James.

A.D.

1612.

A  letter  of
Master  Wil-
liam Adams
from  Japan.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

alteration  in  the  prices  of  commodities.  Those  of  any
request  being  raised  very  neare  to  thrice  the  value  of
what  they  were  bought  for,  the  day  before  the  Hectors
arrivall.  Cloaves  which  the  Marriners  of  the  Hector  and
James  had  bought  the  day  before  for  sixteene  Rialls  of
eight  the  Peecull,  were  now  risen  to  fortie  Rialls  and  up-
wards :  Pepper  the  day  before  was  at  ten  Rialls  of  eight
the  ten  sackes,  but  upon  our  comming,  were  raised  to
twelve  Rialls  and  an  halfe,  &c.

The  sixe  and  twentieth,  we  went  ashoare,  and  so  to
the  Court,  accompanied  with  the  Merchants,  and  gave
divers  presents  to  the  Governour  Pangran  Chamarra,
(who  is  as  Protector  to  the  King,  ruling  all,  the  King
being  as  no  body,  though  of  yeares  sufficient)  which  Pre-
sents hee  well  accepted  :  we  desired  his  Order  for  speedie
landing  of  our  goods,  which  he  granted ;  provided,  that
the  Kings  officers  might  be  acquainted  with  what  wee
landed,  that  the  King  might  not  be  wronged  in  his  Cus-
tome.

The  eight  and  twentieth,  a  Letter  from  Master  William
Adams  out  of  Japan,  was  read  to  all  the  Merchants,  that
they  might  take  notice  of  the  hopes  of  that  Countrey.
It  was  now  concluded  upon,  that  in  regard  the  Flem-
mings  were  so  strong,  and  almost  sole  Commanders  of  the
Moluccas  and  Banda,  and  that  the  place  heere  is  so  un-
healthfull,  besides  our  people  dangerously  disordering
themselves  with  drinke  and  Whores  ashoare :  The  Hector
should  with  all  speed  bee  dispatched  for  England,  and
that  fourteene  thousand  sackes  of  Pepper  should  be  pro-
vided for  the  lading  of  her,  and  the  Thomas  :  doubting
that  if  once  there  should  come  newes  of  the  other  ships
expected,  Pepper  would  be  much  raised  over  that  it  now
was.

We  bargained  with  Lackmoy  for  two  thousand  sackes
of  Pepper,  at  an  hundred  twentie  seven  Rialls  of  eight
and  an  halfe  the  hundred  sackes  :  and  with  Keewee,  for  a
thousand  sackes,  at  an  hundred  twentie  five  Rialls  the
hundred  sackes  : and  for  three  thousand  sackes  more,  at

406

JOHN SARIS  a.d.

1612.
an  hundred  and  fiftie  Rialls  the  hundred. Wee made
triall  on  shoare,  what  a  Peecull  of  Cloaves  might  weigh
by  our  English  weights,  and  found  it  to  be  an  hundred
and  thirtie  two  pound  subtill,  good  weight.

The  ninth  of  November,  Sir  Henry  Middleton  arrived  November  9.
at  Bantam  in  the  Pepper-Corne.  The  fifteenth,  (the
Governour  having  earnestly  requested  it)  there  mustered
before  the  Court  fortie  men  out  of  the  Cloave  and  Hector,
thirtie  out  of  the  Pepper-Corne,  and  ten  out  of  the
Salomon,  in  all  eightie  men,  which  gave  him  good  con-
tent. The  Flemmings  denyed  him  :  it  was  for  the  break-
ing up  of  the  Mahometanes  Lent.

The  seventeenth,  agreed  with  Keewee  for  foure  thou-
sand sackes  of  Pepper,  at  sixteene  Rialls  ten  sackes,  with
allowance  of  three  in  the  hundred  basse.

The  eighteenth,  heere  arrived  eleven  saile  of  Flem-
mings, great  ships,  and  the  Thomas  in  their  company ;
shee  had  gotten  at  Priaman  only  three  hundred  and  twelve
Bahars  of  Pepper,  and  twentie  Taile  of  Gold.  Twentie  Taile

The  two  and  twentieth,  an  hundred  Flemmings,  with  °fGol<i-
their  furniture  and  their  pike-men  in  bright  armour
marched  to  the  Court,  where  they  brought  themselves
into  a  ring,  and  gave  three  vollyes  of  shot :  The  Gover-
nour sent  word  to  them,  that  the  King  thanked  them,
that  they  had  done  enough,  and  might  depart  with  their  [I.  iv.  354.]
iron  hats ; for  so  the  Javans  call  head-peeces.

The  eight  and  twentieth,  three  Holland  ships,  laden
for  the  most  with  Pepper  and  Mace,  set  saile,  homeward
bound :  five  more  of  their  ships  set  saile  for  Banda,  and
the  Moluccas.

The  fourth  of  December,  a  Dutch  ship  arrived  heere  December  4.
from  Choromandell :  by  whom  wee  understood  that  they
left  the  Globe  in  Patane,  bound  for  Siam.  The  Globe  in

The  eleventh,  the  Hector  set  saile  from  Bantam  for  Pata"e,  bound
Morough  the  watering  place,  where  there  is  a  sweet  ayre,
and  where  good  refreshing  of  Orrenges,  and  other  whole-
some  fruits are to bee had ; there to attend till the
Thomas  were  full  laden.

407

A.D.

1612.

Kcwee  a  chief e
China  Mer-
chants curtesie.

January  12.

Pulo  Lack.

We  came  on
ground.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

The  two  and  twentieth,  the  Trades-Increase  and  the
Darling  arrived  heere  from  Priaman.

The  five  and  twentieth,  in  honor  of  the  Birth-day  of
our  Saviour  Christ,  certaine  Chambers  were  discharged
at  the  English  house  in  Bantam,  and  were  answered  with
Ordnance  out  of  the  shippes.

The  eight  and  twentieth,  Kewee,  the  chiefe  China  Mer-
chant, invited  Sir  Henrie  and  my  selfe,  with  all  the
Merchants,  to  dinner,  and  caused  a  Play  to  be  acted  before
us  by  Scenicks  of  China,  which  was  performed  on  a
Stage  with  good  pronunciation  and  gesture.

The  twelfth  of  January,  the  Thomas  set  saile  for
England,  having  in  her  sixe  and  thirtie  English,  and  three
Indians.

§.  IIII.

The  Voyage  of  Captaine  Saris  in  the  Cloave,  to
the  He  of  Japan,  what  befell  in  the  way :
Observations  of  the  Dutch  and  Spaniards  in
the Molucca's.

He  fourteenth  of  January  1612.  in  the  morning,
wee  weighed  out  of  the  Road  of  Bantam,  for
^  Japan,  having  taken  in  heere  for  that  place  seven
hundred  sackes  of  Pepper  for  a  triall  there.  Shee  had  in
her  seventie  foure  English,  one  Spaniard,  one  Japan,  and
five  Swarts  or  Indians.

The  fifteenth  in  the  Morning,  little  wind  at  West,  and
haling  into  fourteen  fathom,  we  steered  East  by  South,
and  East  South-east,  leaving  Pulo  Lack  on  our  Star-
boord,  and  eleven  or  twelve  on  our  Larboord  side,  our
depth  from  fourteene  to  ten  fathoms,  going  within  two
Islands,  which  lye  to  the  Eastwards  of  Pulo  Lack.  And
in  the  faire  way  there  lyeth  a  shoald,  which  hath  not
above  sixe  foot  on  the  toppe  of  it,  and  is  not  above  halfe
a  Cables  length  every  way,  and  hard  aboord  it  there  is
ten  fathomes,  and  the  next  cast  on  ground,  as  by  experi-
ence : for heere we lay three houres beating, with a

408

JOHN SARIS  a.d.

1612.

reasonable  stiffe  gale ;  but  through  Gods  mercy,  and  the
extraordinary  labour  and  endeavour  of  the  Company,  got
her  off ;  but  sprung  a  leake,  that  for  all  night,  and  till
ten  the  next  day  we  continued  pumping  every  man  (my
selfe  only  excepted)  taking  his  turne,  and  all  little  enough
to  keepe  it  from  increasing,  which  made  us  all  to  doubt
that  wee  should  be  enforced  to  put  backe  againe  to  Ban-
tam, to  the  overthrow  of  all  our  men  and  Voyage  for
Japan.  The  Carpenter  by  his  diligence  having  found
out  the  leake,  made  it  Tite,  thankes  bee  to  God.  To
goe  cleare  off  this  shoald,  keepe  close  to  the  Islands,  for
the  Maine  is  shoald.

The  sixteenth,  we  anchored  at  the  watering  place  called
Tingo  Java,  beeing  foureteen  leagues  from  Bantam,  and  Tinga  Java.
some  three  leagues  and  an  halfe  to  the  West-wards  of
Jaccatra,  riding  between  two  Hands  which  lie  off  the  point,  Two  Islands.
distant  five  miles.  Depth  ten  and  nine  fathomes  close
to  the  Hand,  but  the  maine  is  shoald.  I  sent  Presents  to
the  King,  to  his  Sabandar,  and  Admirall  requesting  leave
to  buy  such  necessaries  as  we  wanted.

The  eighteenth,  the  King  of  Jaccatra  sent  his  chiefe
man  unto  me,  with  thanks  for  the  Presents,  and  proffer
of  what  his  Countrey  affoorded.  The  twenty  one,  we
set  saile,  steered  neere  unto  the  East-most  Hand  of  the
two,  that  are  against  the  watering  place :  depth  ten  and
nine  fathome,  and  so  to  Sea-boord  of  all  the  Hands  East
North-east  from  the  watering  place.  For  the  outward-
most  of  them  beareth  East  by  North  Northerly,  and  off
the  Norther  point  of  the  said  Hand  lieth  a  shoald,  which
yee  shall  see  breake,  distant  from  the  Hand  halfe  a  league,
and  having  that  South  of  you,  the  East  point  of  Java
will  beare  East  Southerly,  depth  seventeene  and  eighteene
fathome,  and  all  the  way  out  from  twentie  to  foureteene
fathome,  but  here  you  shall  find  a  Current  setting  East  A  Current.
South-east,  which  you  must  allow  for,  as  you  have  the
wind.  In  the  evening  we  anchored,  little  wind  at  North
by  West,  the  Current  setting  us  to  the  South-east  upon  the
shoare : depth  thirteene  and  thirteene  fathomes  and  an

409

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1612.

halfe,  being  shot  three  leagues  to  the  East-wards  of  the
East  point  of  Jaccatra,  wind  at  North-west.

The  twenty  two,  the  wind  at  South-west,  we  weighed
and  steered  East  North-east  to  get  deepe  water,  and  find-
ing foureteene  fathome,  the  high  hill  over  Bantam  did
beare  West  South-west,  halfe  a  point  Westerly.  The
three  and  twentieth  in  the  morning,  we  deckt  up  our
[I.  iv.  355.]  sailes,  the  wind  at  South-east,  and  had  sight  of  an  Hand
which  lieth  off  Cherribon,  with  three  of  those  high  piked
hils  of  Java,  the  Eastermost  bearing  South-east,  and
Cherrybon  South  by  East.  Latitude  at  noone  sixe
degrees  tenne  minutes,  the  wind  at  North  North-west,
the  Hand  bearing  East  by  North  three  leagues  and  an
halfe  off.

Note,  that  yee  may  boldly  keepe  betweene  twentie
three  and  twenty  foure  fathome  water  in  the  Offing,  and
in  twentie  fathome  upon  Java,  the  darkest  night  that  is,
and  in  the  day  upon  Java  in  what  depth  yee  please.

The  twentie  fourth  in  the  morning,  we  had  sight  of
three  high  piked  hils,  and  three  other  to  the  East-ward,
like  Hands :  depth  twentie  fathome,  the  point  of  Java
bearing  South-east  by  South,  and  the  Hand  lying  off  it
South-east  and  North-west  about  nine  leagues  off.  We
steered  East  by  South,  and  East  South-east.  Latitude
sixe  degrees  tenne  minutes,  way  East  twenty  eight
leagues.

The  twentie  sixth,  at  breake  of  day  we  had  sight  of
Pulo  Labuck.  the  Hand  called  Pulo  Labuck,  bearing  North-east  by  East
eight  leagues  off,  wind  West  by  North.  We  steered  East
by  South,  depth  thirtie  foure  and  thirtie  five  fathomes,
and  about  nine  of  the  clocke  had  sight  of  land,  bearing
South-east  and  South-east  by  South,  the  Hand  aforesaid
bearing  now  North-east  by  North  little  wind,  latitude
sixe  degrees  twelve  minutes,  way  East  and  East  by  North
twentie  two  leagues,  wind  at  West,  the  Hand  at  foure  in
the  after-noon,  bearing  West  by  North  nine  leagues  off,
depth  thirtie  foure  fathomes.  The  twentie  seventh,  lati-
tude  sixe degrees foure minutes, way East Northerly

410

JOHN SARIS  A.a

lb  12.
twenty  eight  leagues,  depth  thirtie  eight  fathome,  and  at
three  in  the  afternoone  had  sight  of  an  Iland  bearing  North
North-east  seven  leagues  off,  and  at  five  of  the  clocke
sounded,  and  had  thirtie  foure  fathomes.

The  twenty  eighth,  at  foure  in  the  morning,  we  had
twentie  five  fathomes,  steering  East  till  noone,  latitude
five  degrees  fiftie  five  minutes,  way  East  Northerly
twenty  leagues,  depth  thirty  fathome.  From  noone  we
steered  East  by  South,  and  at  foure  a  clocke  had  thirty
five  fathome.  The  twenty  ninth,  in  the  morning  about
foure,  wind  at  West  by  North,  we  steered  East  by  South,
but  had  no  ground  at  fortie  fathome,  but  at  noone  fiftie
two  fathomes,  with  many  overfalls.  Latitude  sixe  de-
grees nine  minutes,  way  East  by  South  twentie  eight
leagues,  wind  at  West  and  WTest  by  North,  with  a  Cur-  A  Current.
rent  setting  to  the  West-ward,  afternoone  we  sounded,  but
had  no  ground  at  an  hundred  fathome,  and  steered  East.

The  thirtieth  in  the  morning,  latitude  five  degrees
fiftie  seven  minutes,  way  East  Northerly  twenty  eight
leagues,  and  in  longitude  from  Bantam,  two  hundred
twenty  foure  leagues,  the  over-fals  continuing,  but  sound-
ing had  no  ground  at  an  hundred  fathome.  At  three  in
the  afternoone,  we  had  sight  of  a  low  flat  Iland  at  top-
mast head,  bearing  North-east  by  North  five  or  six
leagues  off,  full  of  trees,  and  had  eighteene  fathome,  and
at  next  cast  eightie  five  fathome :  then  we  steered  East
by  South,  and  at  foure  a  clocke  it  did  beare  North  by  East
halfe  a  point  Northerly,  three  or  foure  leagues  off.  Then
we  had  sight  of  two  other  low  flat  Hands,  the  one  opening
to  the  East-ward,  the  other  to  the  West-ward,  so  that
this  was  the  middle-most.  At  sixe  at  night,  it  bearing
North  halfe  a  point  Easterly,  we  sounded  againe,  but  had
no  ground  at  eightie  fathom,  we  steered  East  by  South,
keeping  our  lead  in  respect  of  the  over-fals  or  Ripplings,
which  were  fearefull,  yet  had  no  ground  at  sixtie  fathome.

The  one  and  thirtieth,  at  breake  of  day  we  had  sight
of  the  Celebes,  the  Wester  end  rising  like  an  Iland,  and  Celebes.
the outward-most high land bearing East by North :

411

A.D.

1612.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

The  Straight
of  Dc salon  or
So/ore.

February.

Latitude  five  degrees  fiftie  two  minutes,  the  East  part
bearing  East  by  North  sixe  leagues  off,  way  East  Nor-
therly sixteene  leagues  and  a  Current  setting  to  the  North-
west ward.  At  Sunne-setting  we  tooke  in  our  sailes  to
keepe  short  of  the  straights  of  Desalon,  by  the  Naturals
called  Solore,  and  keeping  our  Lead  all  night,  we  found
first  twenty  fathome,  the  high  land  North,  and  so  drove
into  thirtie  three,  and  fortie  seven  fathome,  fearing  a
shoald  which  lyeth  two  third  parts  of  a  league  from  the
Celebes,  and  at  low  water  the  breach  upon  it  may  be
seene.  On  the  Celebes  side  it  is  very  dangerous,  and
full  of  sunken  ground.  Wherefore  we  haled  over  for
Desalon  side,  keeping  a  good  birth  of  it,  having  a  piked
hill,  which  is  next  to  the  Sea-side,  rising  like  an  Iland,
being  to  the  West-wards,  then  it  is  North  North-east,
and  when  it  is  North,  then  yee  are  thwart  of  the  West
end  of  the  shoald,  and  then  will  the  Iland  which  yee
leave  on  your  Star-boord  side,  beare  East  North-east,  so
that  yee  may  be  bold  to  steere  out  in  the  middest  betweene
the  two  Hands.  And  when  the  Pike  hill  beares  North  by
West,  then  are  you  thwart  of  the  East  end.  Note  that
the  East  end  of  Desalon  showeth  like  an  Island,  and  will
deceive  you  till  you  come  to  it,  but  having  brought  the
North  end  of  the  point  East  North-east,  halfe  a  point
Easterly,  then  bee  bold ;  for  you  are  cleare  of  the  shoald
afore-said.  It  is  about  foure  leagues  betweene  them :
we  came  within  halfe  a  mile  of  the  Iland  of  our  Star-
boord  side,  going  through,  and  the  wind  taking  us  sud-
denly short,  we  sounded,  but  had  no  ground  at  fiftie  five
fathome,  right  up  and  downe.

The  first  of  February  afternoone,  we  were  thwart  of  the
point  of  the  Iland  bearing  South  off  us,  and  the  two
Ilands  which  make  the  straights,  lying  one  from  the  other
North  and  South,  distant  five  small  leagues.

The  second  in  the  morning,  we  had  sight  of  the  South

[I.  iv.  356.]  part  of  Desalon, South-west  by South,  and the North

part  West  by  North  eight  leagues  off. We  steered  East

by North, the wind at North by East, latitude five

412

JOHN SARIS

degrees  fiftie  two  minutes,  distant  from  Desalon  tenne
leagues.  The  third  in  the  morning,  the  Southerne  end
of  Cambina  did  beare  North-east  by  East,  and  the  Hand
or  Hammocke  North-east  eight  or  nine  leagues,  latitude
five  degrees  fiftie  seven  minutes :  the  Hand  North-east
halfe  a  point  Northerly  eight  leagues,  way  East  Southerly
five  or  sixe  leagues,  and  towards  night  the  wind  at  South,
and  South  South-east,  we  steered  all  night  East  by  North.
The  fourth  in  the  morning,  the  wind  at  North-east,  lati-
tude five  degrees  no  minutes.  At  three  we  saw  land  East
by  North,  making  it  to  be  Botun.

The  fifth,  three  or  foure  leagues  off  Cambina,  we  found
the  Current  to  carry  us  to  the  North-ward,  the  wind  at
East  by  North ;  and  the  Hand  of  the  East  end  of  Cam-
bina, North-east  halfe  a  point  Easterly  foure  leagues  off.
The  sixth  at  breake  of  day,  the  Hand  North-east  by  North
Northerly  foure  leagues  off,  the  wind  at  North  ;  so  that
these  twenty  foure  houres  we  have  gotten  to  the  East-
wards one  point.

The  seventh  at  breake  of  day,  the  Northern  point  was
North  by  East,  &  a  smal  high  land,  that  lieth  to  the
South-ward  sixe  or  seven  leagues  off  Botun,  South-east,
and  the  Easter  land  of  Botun  East  North-east :  we
steered  East  by  North,  and  East,  but  left  the  high  land
to  the  South-wards  on  our  Star-boord  side,  and  it  did
beare  South-east  halfe  a  point  Easterly,  then  was  the
point  of  Botun  shut  in,  in  a  long  great  Hand.  The  Nor-
ther end  will  be  North  North-west.

The  eighth  in  the  morning,  we  saw  another  Hand,
called  Tingabasse,  rising  round  and  flat.  Here  we  had
a  Current  setting  North-east,  the  wind  at  North-east  by
North  and  North  North-east.  The  ninth,  wind  at  North-
West  by  North,  the  point  of  Botun  North-west  halfe
a  point  Northerly,  we  had  sight  of  two  Curra  Curras
between  us  and  Botun  :  The  Skiffe  was  sent  off  to  them,
and  brought  one  M.  Welden,  one  of  the  Expeditions
Companie,  and  a  Flemming  bound  for  Banda.  The  said
Welden  beeing  employed  in  the  King  of  Botuns  affaires

413

A.D.
l6l2.

The  lie
Tingabasse.

M.  Welden  an
Englishman
imploded  in
the  King  of
Botuns

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1612.

for  Banda,  and  had  now  the  command  of  these  Curra
Curras.  Latitude  five  degrees  twentie  minutes,  wind  at
East  North-east,  we  steered  North,  and  at  night  the  wind
Southerly,  we  steered  North  North-east :  and  from  the
East  point  of  Botun,  the  land  fals  away  suddenly,  with
two  or  three  great  Bayes  to  the  North-westwards ;  and
three  great  Hands  which  lie  to  the  Northward  of  Botun,
which  make  the  straights.
Advertise-  Note,  to  goe  through  the  straights  of  Botun,  it  is  not

mcnnts  c°"rce™~(  above  a  league  broad,  and  the  entrance  is  on  the  North-
0/ Botun.  s^e  of  the  Hand  ;  and  if  you  come  from  the  Westward,
being  thwart  of  the  North-west  point,  your  course  is
East  North-east,  and  East  by  North,  up  to  the  Roade,
and  no  danger  but  what  you  shall  see ;  but  you  must
leave  the  three  great  Hands  to  the  North-wards  of  you,
yet  goe  not  betweene  any  of  them,  and  falling  with  the
West  end  of  Botun,  goe  not  betweene  the  Hand  that
lyeth  off  it.  There  are  two  long  Hands,  but  leave  them
on  your  star-boord  side,  for  it  is  full  of  broken  ground
betweene  them  and  Botun.  But  if  the  wind  serve  you,
then  hale  to  the  North-ward  of  all  the  Hands  either
betweene  Botun  and  Cambina,  or  else  to  the  North-ward
of  that  too,  and  so  you  may  keepe  the  Coast  of  Celebes,
for  it  is  bold :  we  steered  with  little  wind  all  night,  North
North-east.

The  tenth  in  the  morning,  the  straights  of  Botun  did
beare  North-west  by  West,  and  the  maine  Hand  of  Tinga-
basse  South  South-east  halfe  a  point  Southerly.

The  eleventh,  at  five  in  the  morning,  the  wind  at
North-west,  the  Hand  West  ten  leagues  off,  we  steered
North  North-east,  latitude  at  noone  foure  degrees  eight
minutes ;  way  North  North-east  Easterly  a  little,  foure
and  twentie  leagues,  and  off  the  East  point  of  Botun,  five
and  thirtie  leagues,  the  wind  all  night  betweene  North  and
North  by  West.

The  twelfth,  little  wind  at  North  by  West,  latitude
foure  degrees  sixe  minutes,  way  East  by  North  twentie
leagues.

414

JOHN SARIS

The  thirteenth  in  the  morning,  we  had  sight  of  the
Hand  Buro,  beeing  high-land,  the  one  point  bearing
North-east  by  North,  and  the  other  North-east  ten
leagues  off,  the  wind  at  North  by  West,  having  made  to
noone  seven  leagues  of  latitude,  three  degrees  one  and
fortie  minutes.

The  fourteenth  in  the  morning,  we  bore  up  with  the
East  part  of  the  Hand  to  seeke  for  some  place  to  ride  in.

The  fifteenth  and  sixteenth  of  latitude,  three  degrees,
fortie  minutes,  breake  of  day  the  Northermost  part  of
Buro,  East  by  North  nine  leagues  off,  little  wind  at  East
North-east,  and  North  by  East.

The  seventeenth,  little  wind,  the  East-part  of  Buro,
bearing  East  Northerly,  wind  at  North,  at  noone  North-
west by  North,  the  North  part  of  Botun  East  by  South,
and  three  Hands,  which  we  then  had  in  sight  at  Top-mast
head,  North-east  by  North.

The  eighteenth,  in  the  morning,  we  were  by  the  Easter-
most  Hand  three  leagues  off,  wind  at  North  North-west,
it  bearing  North  North-east.  At  noone  we  were  within
a  mile  off  the  shore.  The  Skiffe  was  sent  to  speake  with
the  Countrey  people.  This  Hand  is  called  Sula :  wee  had
fifteene  fathome,  the  ships  length  off  the  shoare,  and  a
mile  off  no  ground  at  a  hundred  fathomes :  the  West
part  of  Buro  lying  South  halfe  a  point  Westerly,  and
North  halfe  a  point  Easterly  fourteene  leagues  the  one
from  the  other,  wind  at  West,  the  Land  stretching  North
North-east.

The  twentieth,  wind  at  East  by  North,  steered  North
by  East,  of  latitude  one  degree  thirtie  minutes,  way
North-east  seven  leagues.

The  one  and  twentieth  in  the  morning,  we  were  foure
or  five  leagues  off  an  Hand,  called  Haleboling  by  our
Saylers,  being  a  high  copped  round  Hand,  different  in
shape  from  all  the  rest  of  the  Hands  in  sight.  The  wind
at  North-east,  and  at  East  having  made  to  this  noone  a
North-east  way  fourteene  leagues  of  latitude  one  degree,
sixteene  minutes  the  point  of  Haleboling, or  Bachian,

4i5

A.D.
l6  I  2.

The  Ik  of

Buro.

The  lie  of
Sula.

[I. iv.  357.]
The  He  of
Haleboling,  so
called  by  the
English
Saylers,  by
others  Boa  de
Bachian.

A.D.

1612.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

North-east  by  North  foure  leagues  off :  and  the  outward-
most  land,  North  a  quarter  Westerly,  finding  a  current
setting  North-east,  wind  all  night  at  North  North-east
and  North.

The  two  and  twentieth  in  the  morning,  wee  had  sight
Machtan.  of  land  North  by  East,  it  being  the  Hand  Machian  very
hiQ-h  land  :  heere  we  had  a  current  setting  North  North-
east  of  latitude  at  noone  no  degrees,  one  and  fiftie
minutes,  way  North  seven  leagues,  variation  at  Sun-
setting,  foure  degrees  twelve  minutes,  wind  at  North  by
East,  and  North  North-east.

The  three  and  twentieth  in  the  morning  we  were  three
leagues  off  the  Land,  wind  at  North  North-east  seeking  a
place  to  anchor  in  :  and  within  a  quarter  of  a  mile  of  the
shoare  had  fortie  fathome,  wherefore  we  bore  up  to  the
South  part  of  the  Hand,  where  we  had  twentie  and  nine-
teene  fathomes  for  a  cast  or  two,  but  then  no  ground.
Wee  steered  from  this  South  point  East  South-east,  for  so
the  Land  lyeth  open  off  the  point  of  the  high  round
Hand,  being  foure  leagues  betweene  the  two  points,  but
the  Wester  point  is  an  Hand  with  three  or  foure  other  to
the  East-wards,  which  you  cannot  perceive  till  you  bee
verie  neere  them.  Then  the  Land  falleth  away  North-
east, and  sheweth  a  large  and  round  sound  or  Bay  with
Land  of  both  sides  very  deepe.  This  round  Hill  is
Bachian,  and  yeeldeth  great  store  of  Cloves ;  but  by
reason  of  the  Warres  they  are  wasted.  The  people  not
suffered  to  make  their  benefit  thereof,  forbeare  to  gather
them,  and  let  them  fall  and  rot  upon  the  ground.  Beeing
by  the  Flemmings  and  Spaniards  opprest,  and  wrought  to
spoyle  one  another  in  Civill  Warre,  whilest  they  both
secure  in  strong  Forts,  sit  and  looke  on,  prepare  to  take
the  bone  from  him  that  can  wrest  it  from  his  fellow.
Having  no  ground  to  anchor  in,  and  not  able  to  get  to
the  Northward,  we  resolved  to  stand  off  all  night,  hoping
to  have  a  shift  of  wind  to  carrie  us  to  the  Hand  Machian,
whither  we  intended.

The  foure  and  twentieth,  in  the  morning  the  high  land

416

Misery  of
tears  in  the
Moluccas.

JOHN SARIS  a.d.

1612.

South  by  East  ten  or  twelve  leagues  off  the  Hand  seemed

ragged,  we  stood  in,  and  a  league  off  the  point,  sent  off

the  Skiffe  to  sound  and  to  looke  for  water,  but  returned

aboord  finding  no  water  nor  place  to  anchor  in,  wherefore

we  stood  into  the  Bay,  and  presently  had  sight  of  a  Fort  A  mall  Fort

and  Towne  called  Bachan. The  Pinnasse  a  head  finding  of  the  Hol-

fresh  water  in  divers  places,  but  steepe  too  into  the  cod  J*  erj'

of  the  Bay,  where  the  Flemmings  have  a  Fort  artificially  Bachan,  being

and  warlike  built ; the  Towne  hard  by  it. Heere  we  the  Norther

came  to  an  anchor  (saker  shot  off  the  Fort)  having  had  end  of  the

very  uncertaine shoaling, as seventie, sixtie, eight and  llfnds>  j?  our

Jr ,  1  aa • 6  6  plats  called

ten  fathome; but  Ozie.  Haleboling.

The  Dutch  saluted  us  with  five  Peeces ;  whom  I
requited  with  the  like  number,  but  the  Kings  man  being
then  a-boord  our  ship,  we  told  him,  it  was  done  to  the
honour  of  his  King,  who  sent  mee  word  that  hee  would
have  come  to  visit  mee,  but  that  the  Dutch  intreated  him
to  forbeare.  In  this  Fort  are  thirteene  Peeces  :  viz.  one
Demy-culvering  of  Brasse,  the  rest  Saker  and  Minion.
The  Flemmings  here  resident  are  more  feared  of  the
Naturals  then  loved,  which  notwithstanding  is  cause  of
their  better  benefit.  For  the  Naturals,  assoon  as  we  were
arrived,  told  us  that  they  durst  not  bring  us  a  Cattie  of
Cloves,  but  upon  their  lives.  As  wee  rid  heere,  the  out-
wardmost  point  was  South  South-west,  and  the  other
South-west,  distant  from  us  foure  leagues.  The  King
sent  his  Admirall  and  divers  of  his  Nobles  aboord  to  bid
me  welcome,  saying,  that  they  knew  of  what  Nation  we
were  by  our  Flagge,  using  much  Ceremonious  courtesie,
wishing  that  we  were  seated  there  in  stead  of  the  Flem-
mings, that  they  might  bee  cleered  of  them,  their  Coun-
trey  now  almost  ruined  by  these  Warres.  I  entertayned
them  friendly,  and  told  them  that  our  comming  was  to
procure  Trade  and  to  leave  a  Factorie  amongst  them,  if
their  King  so  pleased.  They  answered  that  it  was  a
thing  by  them  much  desired,  but  at  present  not  to
bee  granted,  yet  they  would  acquaint  their  King
therewith.

HI  417  2D

A.D.

1612.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

The  small
forces  of  the
Hollanders  in
Bach  tan.

The  Captaine  of  the  Dutch  Fort  came  aboord  to  visit
mee,  by  whom  I  understood  their  force  to  be  but  of
thirteene  Peeces  and  thirtie  Souldiers.  The  most  of
them  marryed,  some  to  the  Countrey-women,  and  some
to  Dutch  women,  whereof  the  Fort  was  fitted  with  eleven
able  to  withstand  the  furie  of  the  Spaniard  or  other  Nation
whatsoever,  beeing  of  a  very  lustie  large  breed,  and  fur-
nished with  few  good  qualities.  But  it  seemed  they
followed  their  Leader  :  for  no  sooner  was  the  Captaine
aboord,  but  the  Amazon-band  followed,  complayning  of
great  miserie,  sitting  downe  with  our  Saylors  to  victuals
at  their  first  comming,  with  small  intreatie.  They  had
what  the  ship  affoorded,  and  they  returned  ashore  with
their  Captaine.

The  third  of  March,  we  sounded  with  the  Skiffe  alongst
the  East-side  of  this  Bay,  and  at  the  opening  or  going
out  neere  to  a  little  Hand,  we  found  a  place  to  anchor,  in
twelve,  sixteene,  twentie  fathome,  Corall  ground,  with-
out command  of  the  Fort.  Note,  there  is  a  shoald  to
the  South-wards  the  length  of  three  Cables,  latitude  no
degrees,  fiftie  minutes.

The  fourth,  the  King  of  Ternata  sent  me  a  present  by
his  Priest.

The  fifth,  variation  at  Sun-rising,  foure  degrees  fortie
eight  minutes  Easterly.  A  Moore  came  aboord  with  a
muster  of  Cloves,  offering  to  sell  some  quantitie,  if  wee
would  goe  to  Machian.  This  Moore  was  sent  by  a  man
of  great  account  of  that  place,  who  at  the  present  was
[I.  iv.  358.]  heere.  Wherefore  it  was  thought  good  to  stay  a  day
longer  to  have  some  conference  with  him,  his  name  was
Key  Malladaia ;  and  was  Brother  to  the  old  King  of
Ternata.

The  sixth,  we  stayed  to  speake  with  this  Cavalier,  who
Tahannee,isa  came  and  promised  to  goe  with  us  to  Machian,  and  to

MacYiaT" britl£ US t0 a PlaCe there Called Tahannee> and did Put

where  the  aboord  us  two  of  his  chiefe  men  to  be  as  our  Pilots
Portugals  heretofore  have  had  a  Fort,  but  now  there  is  none,  neither  for  them  nor  the  Flemmings,
there  is  the  best  riding  of  the  whole  Hand,  but  very  neere  the  shore,  yet  free  of  all  danger.

418

Variation  4.
degrees,  48.
minutes
Easterly.

JOHN  SARIS

A.D.

1612.

thither,  appointing  us  to  goe  before  and  stay  for  him  at
an  Hand  by  the  way,  and  within  two  dayes  he  would  be
with  us,  giving  us  great  incouragement  of  good  store  of
Cloves.  He  told  me  that  the  Dutch  gave  fiftie  Rials  of
eight  the  Bahar,  but  they  would  cost  us  sixtie  Rials,  which
I  willingly  promised  to  give  him.

The  seventh  in  the  morning,  we  weighed  anchor  and
parted  out  of  this  Road  called  Amasan,  &  by  direction  of
our  new  Pilots,  steered  in  West  &  West  by  North  for  the
Hand  Machian,  leaving  two  Hands  (which  lye  foure  or
five  miles  from  the  place  where  we  last  anchored)  on  our
lard-boord  side,  depth  two  and  twentie,  thirtie  and  fortie
fathomes,  two  Cables  length  off  the  Hand.

The  tenth,  we  had  sight  of  Machian  being  a  high  and
copped  Hand  bearing  North-easterly,  and  the  Hand  Tidore
opening  like  a  Sugar-lofe  on  the  Wester  side,  but  not  so
high  Land  as  Machian  :  it  is  shut  into  the  point  of  the
Wester  side  of  the  outwardmost  Hands,  of  the  three  that
lye  in  the  going  out,  two  of  them  being  without  the
narrow  or  straight,  and  the  third  maketh  the  straights  it
selfe,  yet  there  are  more  Hands  on  the  Easter  side.  But
the  current  setting  to  the  South-wards,  we  anchored  in
three  and  twentie  fathomes,  a  mile  off  the  little  Ilande  in
the  straights  mouth :  so  that  the  distance  from  the
straights  of  Namorat,  to  this  passage,  is  five  leagues,  and
from  the  Roade  of  Amasane,  where  the  Flemmish  For-
tresse  standeth,  fourteene  leagues.

The  eleventh  in  the  morning,  we  weighed  the  wind  at
South  South-east,  and  current  setting  to  the  North-ward,
we  passing  the  streights.  The  wind  vered  to  the  North-
west by  North,  we  stood  to  the  East-ward  till  noone,  then
we  tackt  to  West-ward  the  wind  at  North  North-west,
and  had  sight  of  Geilolo,  being  a  long  Land,  depth  going  Geilolo
out  nine  and  twentie,  and  foure  and  thirtie  fathome,  and
many  Hands  to  the  East-ward,  and  East  South-east.  The
point  of  old  Bachian  lying  to  the  North-ward  of  the
streights  some  three  or  foure  leagues,  leaving  foure  Hands
on  the  star-boord  side. That  which  maketh  the  straights

419

The  Roade  of
Amosane
where  the  Hol-
landers Fort
standeth.

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1 612.

Tavally  on  that  side  is  called  Tavally  Bachar,  and  when  you  are  a

Bachar.  \\[\\^  without  the  small  Hand  which  lyeth  in  the  straights,

you  shall  have  eighteene  fathome,  a  cast  or  two,  and  then
it  will  deepen,  and  standing  to  the  North-wards  you  shall
open  another  Hand  to  the  West-ward  called  Tamata,  with
a  Rocke  like  a  Sayle  a  good  distance  off  the  point  of  it.
And  anchored  at  an  Hand  bearing  North  Westerly,  three
leagues  from  the  straights  in  three  and  fortie  fathomes,

A  shoak.  where  on  the  Southerne  point  is  a  shoale  having  three
fathome  on  the  skirts,  and  is  dry  at  low  water,  which
shoale  reacheth  over  to  the  South  part  of  Bachian,  we
riding  halfe  a  mile  off  the  shoare.  This  Hand  is  called
Tavally,  the  wind  at  North  North-west.

Heere  we  stayed  all  the  twelfth  day,  for  Keymalladaia,
being  the  place  where  hee  appointed  to  come  unto  us.
This  Hand  is  distant  from  Machian  ten  leagues :  here  we
had  good  store  of  wood,  but  no  water.

The  thirteenth,  our  Cowpers  provided  themselves  of
Rottans  for  Water-caske,  which  make  excellent  hoopes,
and  are  heere  of  all  assises  in  great  abundance.  The
shoale  afore-said  now  dry,  beareth  West  by  South,  halfe  a
mile  off  us,  and  another  point  a  mile  off,  North  North-
east. The  wind  at  North.

The  fourteenth,  for  that  Keymalladaia  came  not,  his
servant  doubted  that  the  Flemmings  seeing:  us  to  adven-
ture  through  this  passage  amongst  the  Hands  did  suspect
him  and  perforce  kept  him.  Wherefore  we  did  set  sayle,
the  wind  at  North  by  West,  and  plyed  up  for  Machian.
The  Norther  point  of  Tavally,  and  the  Norther  point  of
Lattetatte  (from  whence  wee  set  saile)  bearing  one  of  the
other  West  by  North,  and  East  by  South,  distant  sixe
leagues,  and  the  Norther  end  of  Tavally,  and  the  bodie  of

Grockyagreat  Grochie,  the  great  Hand,  lye  the  one  from  the  other
North-west  foure  leagues,  and  North  North-west  from
Grochy,  are  foure  or  five  small  Hands  which  cover  the
Mayne  of  the  great  Hand,  and  are  distant  from  it  five
leagues  North-wards,  and  there  are  many  Hands  North-
east by  North,  called  Motere. The  sound  lyeth  cleere

420

JOHN  SARIS

of  all  the  Hands  betweene  Bachan  and  Geilolo,  (alias  Batta
China)  South-east  and  North-west,  and  is  very  broad,  but
hath  Ilands  on  the  star-boord  side  as  you  goe  to  the
North-wards.  The  Channell  betweene  Bachian,  Machian,
Tidore,  and  Ternata  lyeth  North  by  West,  and  South  by
East,  and  is  sixe  leagues  over  in  the  narrowest  part.

The  fifteenth  in  the  morning,  we  passed  betweene
Battachina  and  Caia.  Latitude  at  noone  no  degrees
seventeen  minutes  to  the  North-ward  :  so  that  Machian
is  not  truely  placed  in  the  Plats :  for  that  there  the  Equi-
noctiall  cuts  it  in  the  middle,  and  wee  find  it  to  stand  five
leagues  more  Northerly,  wind  at  North  by  East,  and
North  by  West,  with  a  Current  setting  to  the  South-
wards, variation  foure  degrees  fiftie  eight  minutes
Easterly.  The  sixteenth  in  the  morning,  we  were  faire
by  the  Hand  of  Caia,  the  wind  at  North  by  East.  Here
we  had  sight  of  a  saile  to  the  North-wards,  which  by  a
Fisherman  we  understood  to  bee  a  Flemming  bound  from
Machian  to  Tidore  with  Sago,  which  is  a  *  Roote  whereof
the  Naturalls  make  their  bread.

The  seventeenth  in  the  morning,  we  were  neere  a  Fort
of  the  Flemmings  called  Tabolola,  wind  at  North-east :
we  stood  to  the  Southwards,  the  Current  setting  us  to
the  North-wards.  Then  the  wind  at  East  by  North,  we
steered  with  the  East-most  point,  and  came  to  an  anchor
at  foure  in  the  afternoone  in  the  Road  of  Pelebere,  hard
by  Tahanne  in  fiftie  fathome,  within  call  of  the  shoare,
having  one  point  of  the  land  South  South-west  two
miles  ofT,  and  another  North-east  by  North  one  mile  and
an  halfe  off,  and  the  Hand  Caia  five  leagues  off.  This
night  some  small  quantitie  of  Cloves  were  brought  aboord,
the  price  set  at  sixtie  Rials  of  eight  the  Bahar,  of  two
hundred  Cattees,  each  Cattee  three  pound  five  shillings
English.  I  received  a  letter  from  Key  Malladaia  from
Bachian,  excusing  his  stay,  with  promise  that  he  shortly
would  bee  with  me,  in  the  meane  time  that  he  had
written  to  the  people  to  helpe  me  with  all  the  Cloves
they  could.

421

AD.

l6l  2.

Machian  five
leagues  North
off  the  Line.

Caia  an  I  land.

C1-  iv-  359-J
*Some  say  the
tops  of  trees.
A  Fort  of  the
Hollanders
called  Tabo-
lolo.

A.D.

1612.
The  Hollan-
ders entertain-
ment of  us.

Tahane.
Pelebre.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

The  eighteenth,  a  Samaca  came  aboord  and  proffered
much  curtesie :  two  Hollanders  came  with  him,  being
very  inquisitive  to  know  who  directed  us  to  this  roade,
saying,  that  it  must  needs  bee  one  of  the  Naturalls,  and
if  they  knew  him  they  would  cut  him  in  peeces  before  our
faces  ;  that  we  did  wrong  them  in  comming  hither,  this
beeing  their  Countrey,  as  having  conquered  it  by  the
Sword.  They  were  appointed  to  return e  to  their  Forts,
and  tell  their  Captaines  that  if  they  needed  ought  that
we  might  spare,  they  should  have  it  for  reasonable  con-
tent before  all  others,  because  we  acknowledged  them  our
neighbours  and  brethren  in  Christ :  but  for  any  propertie
of  this  Countrey  to  be  more  in  them  then  us,  we  tooke
no  notice,  and  therefore  would  ride  there,  and  trade  with
whosoever  it  pleased  to  come  aboord.  So  they  parted,
threatning  the  Naturalls  which  were  then  aboord,  that  if
any  did  bring  Cloves  aboord  us,  they  would  put  them
to  death.  The  countrey  people  made  light  of  their
threats,  and  said  they  held  us  their  friends,  and  would
come  aboord  to  us.  Bought  this  day  three  hundred
Catties  Cloves  for  Cambaya  cloth,  and  some  sold  for
ready  money.

The  nineteenth,  the  two  Flemmings  came  aboord
againe,  and  beganne  to  note  downe  in  their  Table-bookes
the  names  of  the  Countrey  people  which  came  aboord.
Whereupon  I  caused  the  Boat-swaine  to  turne  them  out
of  the  ship,  and  command  them  to  come  no  more  aboord.
Divers  of  our  Companie  were  sent  to  walke  ashoare,  to
see  what  intertainement  the  Countrey  people  would  give
them.  They  went  up  to  the  Townes  of  Tahanne  and
Pelebere,  and  were  very  friendly  used.  They  told  our
men,  that  the  Flemmings  had  wrought  so  with  Key
Chillisadang,  the  King  of  Ternataes  sonne,  who  was
newly  come,  that  he  had  forbidden  them  to  sell  us  any
Cloves  upon  paine  of  death,  otherwise  we  should  have
had  them  before  the  Flemmings,  whom  they  find
great  oppressors  of  them.  Towards  night,  the  Prince
passing  by  our  ship  in  his  Curracurra,  I  sent  my  Pin-

422

the  Hollanders
to  us.

JOHN SARIS  a.d.

1612.

nasse  well  fitted  with  a  faire  Turkie  Carpet,  and  Crimson

Silke  and  Gold  Curtaines,  intreating  him  to  come  aboord ;

which  he  tooke  kindly, but  excused it, saying, that  in

the  morning  he  would  visit  me.

The  one  and  twentieth,  an  Oran  Caya  came  aboord,  and

told  me  that  a  Curra  Curra  of  the  Flemmings  had  searched

three or foure Prawes or Canoas comming aboord us

with  Cloves,  and  had  taken  them  from  them,  threatning

death  to  them  for  the  next  offence. And  that  since  our

comming  hither,  they  disfurnished  their  Forts,  and  placed

their  people  round  about  the Hand, that the  Naturalls T!'\iHhtf
111111  1 •  p  «

should  not  be  able  to  bring  us  any  more  Spice,  and  that

they  had  sent  over  a  Curra  Curra  to  Tidore,  to  cause  two

great  ships  of  theirs  to  come  hither  and  ride  by  us,  the

one  a  head,  the  other  a  sterne,  to  beate  us  out  of  the

Road,  without  trade  or  refreshing.

The  twentie  two,  we  had  sight  of  one  of  the  Flemmish
ships  comming  about  the  point,  by  reason  whereof  we
had  little  trade  now,  the  peopb  being  afraid.  I  received
a  Present  from  Key  Malladaia,  who  as  yet  was  not  come.
The  Naturals  expected  what  would  now  become  of  us,
the  Flemmings  having  reported  ashoare,  that  they  should
see  us  runne  out  of  the  Road  at  sight  of  one  of  their  ships.
It  was  the  Redde  Lion,  had  thirtie  Peeces  of  Ordnance,
anchored  a  sterne  of  us.

The  twentie  fourth,  the  Prince  of  Ternate,  Key  Chil-
lisadang  sent  to  tell  me,  that  hee  would  come  and  visit
me.  So  all  things  were  fitted  in  the  best  manner  for  his
entertainment.  Hee  came  attended  with  divers  great
Curracurras,  and  rowed  thrice  round  about  the  ship  before
he  entred.  At  his  boording  of  us,  our  ship  discharged
five  Peeces  of  Ordnance :  I  brought  him  to  my  Cabbin,
where  I  had  prepared  a  Banquet,  meet  enough  to  have
been  set  before  the  King  of  Ternata  himselfe  (had  he  been
there)  with  a  very  good  comfort  of  Musique,  which  much
delighted  him.  He  promised  me  to  give  the  people
license  to  bring  Cloves  aboord  us,  and  requested  that  I
would  but  have  patience  for  a  day  or  two,  that  he  might

423

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1612.

have  advice  from  his  brother  then  beeing  at  Tidore.  I
bestowed  on  him  divers  Presents,  and  at  parting  ordered
seven  Peeces  for  his  farewell.

The  twenty  fifth  in  the  morning,  a  Curracurra  of  the
Flemmings  came  rowing  by  our  shippe,  scoffing  at  our
people,  and  singing  a  song  which  they  had  made  in  deri-
sion of  us :  they  often  using  thereof  caused  our  men
justly  to  find  themselves  therewith  aggrieved,  as  also  for
their  rowing  over  our  Can-bodyes  divers  times,  ende-
vouring  to  sinke  them.  Wherefore  I  caused  the  Pin-
nasse  to  be  wel  fitted,  and  gave  order,  that  if  at  their
returne  they  continued  their  mocking  of  us,  to  run  aboord
A  Curracurra  anc|  smke  them.  They  came  singing  and  scoffing;  accord-
of  the  Hollan- ■  . ., .  .  '  *u T>*  U A *u

d  -s  al  1  / mto their  custome, the  Pinnasse  ranne  aboord  them

sunke.  with  sucn  a  surge,  as  that  the  water  came  through  her

[I.  iv.  360.]  sides ;  there  beeing  in  her  two  of  the  Captaines  of  their
Forts,  well  fitted  with  shot  and  darts :  our  men  were
well  provided,  and  had  two  good  Fowlers  in  the  Skiffes
head.  They  lay  a  good  while  aboord  her,  and  willed
them  to  take  this  for  a  warning,  and  leave  off  their  scoff-
ing and  mocking  of  us,  for  else  they  would  teach  them
better  manners  the  next  time,  and  so  they  returned  aboord
with  their  promise,  that  it  should  be  no  more  so.
J  writing  sent  Towards  evening  they  sent  one  of  their  Merchants
jrom  tne  not-  unto  me^  wifa  a  writing  from  their  Doctor  in  Droits,  who
as  we  were  informed,  was  chiefe  amongst  them  in  absence
of  But  or  Blocke,  who  had  come  out  of  Holland,  Generall
of  eleven  Saile.  The  effect  whereof  was  to  let  me  know,
That  all  the  people  of  the  Moluccas  had  made  a  perpetuall
contract  with  them  for  all  their  Cloves,  at  fiftie  Royals  of
eight  the  Bahar,  of  two  hundred  Cattees,  in  respect  that
they  had  delivered  them  out  of  the  servitude  of  the
Spaniards,  not  without  losse  of  much  blood,  and  expence
of  great  wealth  ;  willing  me  that  I  should  not  moove  the
people  from  their  obedience,  which  might  redound  to
their  greater  damage,  they  holding  the  Countrey  to  be
their  owne,  as  conquered  by  the  Sword.  Also  that  the
Naturals  ought  them  much  money,  which  was  advanced

424

JOHN SARIS  a.d.

1613.

to  be  paid  in  Cloves.  Answer  was  returned  that  we  would
not  meddle  with  their  businesse,  our  comming  being  only
to  trade  with  such  as  desired  to  trade  with  us,  and  so  dis-
missed him.

The  twentie  seventh,  the  Flemmings  inforced  the
Prince  to  lie  with  his  Curracurra  a  sterne,  to  keepe  watch
that  none  bring  any  thing  aboord  us  :  for  in  our  sight  he
commanded  a  Canoa  aboord  him,  which  was  comming  to
us  (as  we  thought  with  Spice)  making  him  returne.  To-
wards night,  two  of  the  Naturalls  brought  us  some  re-
freshing.

The  twentie  eighth,  the  Prince  understanding  that  we
tooke  it  not  well,  that  hee  rid  so  neere  us  to  the  fearing
of  the  Naturals,  remooved  and  went  about  a  point  further
off,  which  much  discontented  the  Flemmings.  After
noone,  with  the  Skiffe  well  manned,  I  went  to  see  if  I
could  deale  with  the  Prince  for  a  parcell  of  Cloves,  but
found  him  gone  to  the  Wester  side.  Captaine  Blocke  see-
ing my  Skiffe  gone  into  the  Bay,  followed  us  with  his
Curracurra,  and  would  have  landed  where  I  was,  but  that
I  would  not  suffer  him,  which  the  Naturals  seeing,  and
that  Captaine  Blocke  returned  aboord  againe  without
landing,  divers  of  the  better  sort  came  downe  to  us,
protesting  great  love  towards  us,  and  sent  for  Cocos  and
other  fruites,  and  bestowed  them  upon  the  Ging.  The
Master  of  the  Clove  seeing  Captaine  Blocke  to  make
such  speed  after  us,  manned  the  long  Boat  for  aide,  but
upon  a  signe  given  returned  aboord.

The  thirtieth,  the  Flemmings  brought  the  Prince  to
ride  by  us  in  his  old  place.  Towards  evening  another
Flemmish  ship  came  in,  called  the  Moone,  a  proper  ship
of  thirtie  two  Peeces  of  good  Ordnance,  but  not  above
fiftie  men  :  she  came  to  an  anchor  so  neere  a  head  us,  as
that  wee  could  scarcely  wind  cleare  one  of  the  other.  The
Prince  sent  unto  me  to  excuse  his  comming  backe,  but
now  we  saw  that  he  durst  not  displease  the  Flemmings.
The  thirtie  one,  divers  harsh  dealings  and  discourtesies
passed  betwixt  the  Flemmings  and  us.

425

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1613.

A pnll  the The  first  of  Aprill, the  Flemmings  brought  an  hun-

fint  1 61 3.  jred  anj  t'wentie  of  their  men  ashoare,  which  morning

and  evening  did  set  and  discharge  the  watch  with  Drum,

Fife  and  Ensigne. This  force  they  had  gathered  together

out  of  their  Forts  and  ships.

The  second,  I  seeing  no  more  hope  of  lading,  and  that
Key  Malladaia  came  not  according  to  promise,  gave  order
to  the  Master,  to  cause  water  to  be  filled,  and  to  make
readie  to  set  saile  with  the  first  faire  wind.  At  noone,
Road  of  observing  we  found  this  Road  of  Pelabry,  to  stand  in  no
Pelabry.  degree>  twentie  sixe  minutes  to  the  Northward  of  the
Equinoctiall,  Variation  three  degrees,  eight  and  twentie
minutes,  the  highest  land  in  the  Island,  Mechian  bearing
West  North-west  halfe  a  point  Westerly.

The  fift,  we  weighed  anchor,  little  wind,  the  Current
setting  to  the  Southward,  we  drove  to  sea,  being  under
our  fore-saile,  and  ahead  the  Moone  the  greater  ship  of
the  Flemmish,  which  made  a  faire  shot  under  our  sterne,
which  we  presently  answered,  close  a  head  his  Admirall,
expecting  further,  but  heard  no  more  of  them.  At  noone
they  both  weighed  and  followed  us,  but  the  wind  at
South-west  had  put  us  so  farre  to  the  windward,  as  that
the  Naturalls  came  aboord  with  Cloaves  for  a  time,  as
fast  as  we  could  weigh  and  pay  for  them,  the  Flemmings
not  able  to  hinder  them.  Also  there  came  an  Oran
Caya  aboord  who  promised  us  a  good  parcell  of
Cloaves,  if  we  would  but  come  nearer  the  shoare  in
the  morning.

The  sixt,  about  fiftie  Cattees  of  Cloaves  were  brought
aboord  in  divers  Canoas,  but  no  newes  of  the  Gallant.
Towards  evening  I  standing  nearer  the  shoare  then  we
were  willing,  but  for  this  occasion,  we  had  sight  of  a  weft
ashoare  :  the  Skiffe  was  sent  and  spake  with  the  Oran
Caya,  who  said  the  Cloaves  were  readie,  and  in  the  darke
should  be  brought  aboord ;  but  presently  a  Curra  Curra,
of  the  Flemmings  passing  by,  put  him  into  such  a  feare,
as  albeit  our  people  would  have  wafted  him,  yet  durst  he
not  adventure  : so  they  returned.

426

JOHN SARIS

The  seventh  in  the  morning,  wee  were  thwart  of
Mootiere,  being  distant  from  the  Wester  point  of  Machian
foure  leagues  North  by  East,  halfe  a  point  Easterly  ;  and
from  it  North  three  leagues,  is  the  Island  Marro,  and
from  that  two  leagues  Tidore.  There  is  passage  betweene
these  Islands,  or  on  any  side  of  them,  without  danger.
Wee  had  sight  of  the  two  Flemmings  to  the  Southwards
of  us,  plying  after  us  :  Latitude  at  noone  no  degrees,  five
and  thirtie  minutes,  wind  Westerly.

The  eight,  Marro,  North  by  West,  some  two  miles  off
the  body  of  it  and  one  point  North  by  East,  halfe  a  point
Easterly,  and  the  other  North-west  by  North,  halfe  a
point  Westerly,  and  the  pike  of  Tidore  North  by  West,
and  opening  the  East  point  of  Tidore,  and  the  Wester
point  of  Bachian,  they  will  beare  the  one  from  the  other
North  and  South,  and  the  body  of  Marro  West  South-
west halfe  a  point  Southerly,  and  the  Westerne  part  of
Tidore,  that  you  shall  see  West  by  North.  Looke  well
out,  for  in  the  faire  way  is  a  long  shoale,  which  lyeth  even
with  the  water  at  high  water,  the  water  shewing  whitish,
and  stretcheth  North-east  and  South-west,  betweene
Marro  and  Battachina :  and  having  brought  the  points  of
the  Islands,  as  above-said,  then  it  will  be  East  of  you,  at
low  water  you  shall  see  it,  for  it  ebbeth  sixe  foote,  the
tide  setting  sixe  houres  to  the  Northward,  and  sixe  to  the
Southward  :  but  keepe  close  to  the  Islands  for  there  is  no
feare.  The  Spaniards  Fort  is  on  the  East-side  of  Tidore,
where  is  deepe  water  shoare-too.  It  fell  suddenly  calme,
so  that  a  great  sea  did  set  us  into  the  shoare.  The  Fort
made  a  shot  at  us,  but  willingly  short :  we  answered  with
one  to  Sea-boord :  then  the  Fort  made  two  more,  intend-
ing to  strike  us,  one  betweene  our  missen  mast  and  ancient
staffe,  the  other  betwixt  maine-mast  and  fore-mast.  Then
they  shot  a  Peece  from  the  Top  of  the  Fort  without
sharpe ;  wee  answered  that  without,  and  presently  they
sent  off  a  Boat  with  a  flagge  of  truce,  the  Sea  still  setting
us  upon  the  shoare,  no  wind,  nor  ground  at  an  hundred
fathom,  so  that  we  could  lay  it  off  no  way,  two  Gallyes

427

A.D.
J613.

Mootiere.

[I.  iv.

Marro.

36..]

A  dangerous
should.

The  Spaniards
Fort  on  the
East-side  of
Tidore.

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1613.

riding  under  the  Fort :  when  their  Boat  was  put  from
the  shoare,  they  shot  their  two  chase  peeces,  but  without
sharpe.  They  came  and  tooke  a  fast  a  starne  our  shippe  :
there  were  two  Spaniards  souldiers  of  good  ranke,
(knowne  to  Hernando  the  Spaniard,  whom  wee  tooke
with  us  from  Bantam)  sent  from  the  Captaine  Generall  of
the  shoare,  Don  Fernando  Byseere,  to  know  of  what
Nation  we  were,  what  we  came  for,  and  wherefore  we
came  not  to  an  anchor  under  the  Kings  Fort.  We  re-
quested them  to  come  aboord :  they  said  they  were
commanded  to  the  contrary :  wherefore  I  willed  to  let
downe  wine  and  bread  unto  them  in  a  string,  from  the
poope,  which  they  fell  too  lustily,  in  so  great  a  showre  of
raine,  as  we  had  seene,  yet  would  not  enter  the  ship.  I
returned  answere,  that  I  was  the  subject  of  the  Kings
Majestie  of  Great  Britaine,  as  by  my  Colours  they  might
well  discerne.  They  said  the  Flemmings  had  many  times
past  by  scot-free,  by  shewing  the  like,  which  made  them
shoote  the  second  shot  with  sharpe  at  us,  thinking  us  to
bee  Flemmings.  I  sent  them  word  that  my  commiiig
was,  to  doe  the  best  good  I  could  to  the  friends  of  the
Kings  Majestie  of  Spaine,  but  was  not  minded  to  anchor
heere,  but  further  a  head,  where,  if  it  pleased  Don  Fer-
nando to  come  aboord,  he  should  be  welcome  :  with  which
answere,  they  returned  ashoare  contented.  Suddenly  it
pleased  God  to  grant  us  a  gale,  so  that  we  stood  alongst
the  shoare.  The  Captaine  Generall  sent  off  the  Pilot
Major  of  the  Gallyes,  Francisco  Gomes,  a  man  of  good
presence,  to  bid  mee  welcome,  offering  his  assistance  to
bring  us  into  the  best  anchoring  place  under  the  Fort,  or
elsewhere  about  the  Island.  Being;  darke,  he  brought  us
to  a  place  about  one  league  and  an  halfe  off  the  Fort,
whereas  he  said  no  force  was,  and  so  intreated  after  supper
to  be  set  ashoare,  for  that  the  Captaine  Generall  would
dispatch  away  letters  to  Ternate,  to  the  Master  Del
Campo,  Don  Jeronimo  de  Sylva,  for  resolution  in  all
points,  and  so  departed.

The  ninth  in  the  morning  before  day,  finding  that  we

428

JOHN SARIS

A.lJ.
l6l3.

were  within  command  of  eight  peeces  of  Ordnance,  wc
got  up  our  anchor  and  removed  a  league  further  to  the
Southward,  where  we  rid  in  five  and  thirtie  fathome  :
Gomes  the  Pilot  came  aboord  with  two  Spaniards  more
of  good  fashion,  whom  I  bid  kindly  welcome,  so  that  they
tooke  their  lodging  aboord.  They  brought  with  them  a
Present  of  eatable  commodities  from  their  Generall.  I
returned  the  like  to  theirs,  with  proffer  of  all  friendship
and  assistance,  that  in  mee  lay,  to  supply  his  wants,  and
to  accept  of  Cloaves  for  payment,  desiring  speedie  an-
swere,  for  that  I  would  not  stay  long  there.  The  two
Flemmish  shippes  plyed,  as  if  they  would  have  come  to  an
anchor  by  us ;  but  afterwards  went  and  rid  at  their  new  Marasco,  a
Jbort  Maracco.

The  tenth,  the  Captaine  Generall  sent  to  request  me  to
stay,  and  the  next  morning  hee  would  visit  me,  with  the
Sergeant  Major  of  Ternate,  who  was  arrived  with  a
letter  from  the  Master  Del  Campo,  giving  them  leave
thereby  to  trade  with  me  for  divers  matters,  and  to  con-
tent mee  in  what  I  requested ;  wherefore  I  resolved  a
while  longer,  to  see  what  good  might  be  done.

new  Fort  of  the
Hollanders.

§.  v.

Further  observations  touching  the  Molucca  Hands,
and  their  proceeding  on  their  Voyage  to  Japan.

He  eleventh,  wee  expected  the  Captaine  Generall
according  to  promise,  and  hearing  nine  peeces  of
Ordnance  to  be  shot  out  of  the  Fort,  provided  for
them,  thinking  verily  that  they  were  comming :  But  it
proved  to  bee  for  the  arrival  of  the  Prince  of  Tidore,  who
had  bin  abroad  in  war,  and  was  now  returned  with  the
heads  of  an  hundred  Ternatans,  his  force  being  only
sixtie  small  shot,  two  brasse  Bases,  and  three  or  foure
Fowlers :  having  overthrowne  Key  Chilly  Sadang,  the
King  of  Ternate  his  sonne,  whom  the  Flemmings  had
enforce over from Ternate to Machian, to keepe the

429

[I. iv. 362.]
Key  Chilly
Sadang,  the
King  of  Ter-
nate his  sonne,
slaine  by  the
Tidorians.

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1613.

countrey  people  from  selling  of  Cloaves  to  us.  For  whom
returning  back  towards  Ternate,  (after  our  departure)  the
King  of  Tydores  sonne,  lying  purposely  in  waite  upon
sight  of  them,  the  Tydorians  keeping  themselves  behind
a  point  of  land,  sent  out  two  small  Praws  to  fish  in  their
way,  whom  the  Ternatans  espying,  did  presently  give
chase  unto.  The  Fishermen  easily  retire,  the  other
earnestly  pursue,  untill  before  they  once  thought  thereof,
they  fell  into  their  enemies  hands,  who  spared  not  one
man  of  an  hundred  and  sixtie,  the  Prince  of  Ternate  him-
selfe  being  one  of  the  number,  whose  head  the  Con-
querour  brought  to  his  wife,  who  was  sister  to  the  Prince
of  Ternate,  so  slaine.  At  their  first  incounter,  a  barrell
of  powder,  which  the  Prince  had  bought  of  us  at  Machian,
tooke  fire,  which  was  the  confusion  and  losse  of  them  all.
With  the  Prince  was  slaine  one  of  his  yonger  brethren,
and  the  King  of  Geilola.  Towards  evening  came  aboord
us  the  Sergeant  Major  of  Ternate,  and  Secretary  of  State  ;
with  the  like  complements  to  those  of  the  Tydorian
Officers,  requesting  me  to  come  thither,  and  they  would
doe  what  in  them  lay  for  me :  whereto  I  consented,  the
rather  because  it  was  in  my  way.

The  twelfth,  the  Prince  of  Tidore  sent  unto  mee,  to
excuse  his  hitherto  not  visiting  of  mee,  and  to  acquaint  me
that  he  had  some  store  of  Cloaves,  which  I  should  have.
I  thanked  him,  and  requested  speedie  dispatch.  They
promised  mee  to  be  aboord  againe  before  day.  Where-
fore to  prevent  all  treachery,  we  kept  double  watch,  match
in  cocke,  and  all  things  in  readinesse.  This  Tidorian
Prince  being  a  very  resolute  and  valiant  souldier,  having
performed  many  dangerous  exploits  upon  the  Flemmings,
and  not  long  since  surprized  one  of  their  ships  (being
a  Man  of  War)  then  riding  not  farre  from  this  place.
Before  day,  a  Gaily  (which  the  Spaniards  told  us  they
expected)  came  over  from  Batta  China,  and  were  neare  us
in  the  darke  before  they  were  aware,  we  haled  her,  they
answered,  Spaniards,  and  your  friends,  and  so  made  to
the  shoare  with  all  speed,  shee  was  but  small,  of  fourteene

43°

JOHN SARIS  a.d.

1613.

oares on a side. At noone latitude no degrees, fiftic
minutes  to  the  Northward  of  the  Equinoctial!.

The  thirteenth,  we  weighed,  the  wind  Northerly,  and
a  Current  setting  out  of  the  South-ward  :  passing  by  the
Fort,  we  gave  them  five  peeces,  which  they  requited.
Divers  Spaniards  boorded  us  with  complements,  and  the
Princes  man,  saying,  that  if  we  had  stayed  but  foure  and
twentie  houres  longer,  we  should  have  had  good  store  of
Cloaves,  but  wee  rather  thought  they  intended  some
treachery  against  us  with  their  Gallyes,  Frigats,  and  Curra
Curra's,  which  by  sudden  departure  we  thus  prevented.
Comming  about  the  Wester  point  of  Tidore,  we  had  sight
of  the  foure  Flemmish  shippes,  riding  before  their  Fort  F°ure  itllP5  °f
of  Maricco :  one  of  them  at  sight  of  us,  shot  off  a  peece  HollaT,d-
of  Ordnance,  as  we  supposed,  to  call  their  people  aboord
to  follow  us.  We  steered  directly  with  the  Fortresse  of
Ternate :  comming  neare,  shortned  our  sailes,  and  lay
by  the  Lee,  and  shot  off  a  peece  towards  the  Towne,
without  sharpe  ;  which  they  readily  answered,  and  sent
off  a  Souldier  of  good  fashion,  but  to  as  little  purpose  as
those  of  Tidore  had  done.

But  little  wind  our  shippe  sagged  in,  and  no  anchoring,
but  at  night  a  gale  at  South,  we  stood  into  the  Sea,  having
lost  much  by  the  Current  of  that  wee  had  gotten,  finding
it  to  set  to  the  Southward.

The  fourteenth,  the  wind  at  South  South-west,  we
steered  North  North-west,  and  at  noone  had  latitude  one
degree  no  minutes :  we  had  sight  of  a  Gallie,  wherefore
we  cast  about,  but  finding  her  to  stand  away,  went  our
course  for  Japan.

But  before  we  part  further  from  this  Moluccan  Coast,
I  thinke  it  not  amisse,  to  acquaint  the  Reader  with  a  few
Notes  that  I  hold  worthy  observance,  touching  the  Trade
and  state  of  those  Hands.

Throughout  all  the  Molucca?  Hands,  a  Bahar  of  Cloves
doth  weigh  two  hundred  Cattees  of  that  Countrey,  every
Cattee  three  pound  five  ounces  haberdepoiz,  which
maketh  the  Bahar  to  be  sixe  hundred  sixtie  two  pound

431

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1613.

eight  ounces  haberdepoiz  subtill.  For  which  Bahar  cf
Cloves,  the  Flemmings  by  their  perpetuall  contract  (as
they  terme  it)  give  fiftie  Rials  of  eight.  My  selfe  for
more  speedie  obtayning  of  lading,  yeelded  to  pay  them
sixtie  Rials  of  eight  the  Bahar.  Which  increase  of  price
made  them  so  forward  to  furnish  us,  that  had  not  the
Flemmings  by  their  force  over-awed  the  nationals,  im-
prisoning and  threatning  them  with  death,  and  keeping
watch  and  good  guards  alongst  the  Sea-Coast,  I  had  in
one  moneth  procured  our  full  lading.  The  most  of  these
Hands  beare  store  of  Cloves.  Those  of  note  inhabited,
yeeld  one  yeare  with  another  as  followeth,  that  is  to  say,
Ternate,  one  thousand  Bahars.  Machian,  one  thousand
and  ninetie.  Tydore,  nine  hundred.  Bachian,  three
hundred.  Moteer,  sixe  hundred.  Meau,  fiftie.  Batta
China,  five  and  thirtie.  The  totall  is  three  thousand
nine  hundred  seventie  five.

Every  third  yeare  is  farre  more  fruitfull  then  either  of
the  former  two,  and  is  called  the  great  Monson.  It  is
lamentable  to  see  the  ruines  that  Civill  Warre  hath  bred
in  those  Hands,  which  as  I  understood  at  my  being  there,
beganne  and  continued  in  manner  following.  The  Por-
tugall  at  his  first  discoverie  of  them,  found  fierce  warres
betwixt  the  King  of  Ternate  and  the  King  of  Tydore,
under  which  two  Kings  all  the  other  Hands  are  either
[I.  iv.  363.]  subjected  or  confederated  with  one  of  them.  The  Por-
tugall  for  the  better  setling  of  himselfe,  tooke  part  with
neither  of  them,  but  politikely  carrying  himselfe  kept
both  to  bee  his  friends,  and  so  fortified  upon  the  Hands
of  Ternate  and  Tydore,  where,  to  the  Portugals  great
advantage,  having  the  whole  Trade  of  Cloves  in  their
owne  hands,  they  domineered  and  bore  chiefest  sway
The  Hollan-  untill  the  yeare  1605.  wherein  the  Flemming  by  force
ders  planted  in  displaced  them,  and  planted  himselfe :  but  so  weakly  and
thc^Mokccas,  unprovideci  for  future  danger,  that  the  next  yeare  the
Spaniard,  (who  whilest  the  Portugall  remayned  there,  was
ordered  both  by  the  Pope  and  King  of  Spaine  not  to
meddle  with  them)  came  from  the  Philippinas,  beat  the

432

JOHN SARIS  a.d.

1613.

Flemmings  out  of  both  the  Hands,  tooke  the  King  of

Ternate Prisoner, sent him to the Philippinas, and

kept  Ternate  and  Tydore under their  command. The

Flemming since that time hath gotten footing there

againe, and at my beeing there had built him these

Forts,  viz.

Upon  the  Hand  Ternate,  They  have  a  Fort  called  Mala-
you,  which  hath  three  Bulwarkes,  and  is  walled  round
about.  Secondly  Tolouco,  which  hath  two  Bulwarkes,
and  a  round  Towre  walled  about.  Thirdly,  Tacome,
which  hath  foure  Bulwarkes,  and  is  walled  about.

Upon  the  Hand  Tydore,  Marieko  which  hath  foure
Bulwarkes.

Upon  the  Hand  Machian,  First,  Tafasoa,  (the  chiefe
Towne  of  this  Hand)  where  they  have  foure  great  Bul-
warkes walled  about,  sixteene  Peeces  of  Ordnance,  and
about  one  thousand  Inhabitants  of  the  Naturals.

Secondly,  Nofakia,  another  Towne,  where  they  have
two  Forts  walled  about,  and  another  Fort  upon  the  top
of  a  high  hill  there,  which  freeth  the  Roade  on  the  other
side,  and  hath  five  or  sixe  Peeces  of  Ordnance.

Thirdly,  Tabalola,  a  Towne  where  they  have  two  Forts
walled,  eight  Peeces  of  Ordnance,  and  the  Inhabitants
hereof,  (as  of  the  former)  under  their  command.  This
place  is  very  strongly  scituated  by  nature.

Those  of  Nofakia  are  esteemed  no  good  Souldiers,  but
are  reported  to  take  part  alwayes,  as  neere  as  they  can
ghesse  it,  with  the  strongest.  But  the  Naturals  of  Taba-
lola, which  formerly  dwelt  at  Cayoa,  are  accounted  the
best  Souldiers  of  the  Moluccas  Ilands,  and  are  deadly
Enemies  to  the  Spaniards  and  Portugal s,  and  as  weary
now  of  the  Flemmings.

In  these  three  Forts  upon  Machian,  there  were  at  my
being  heere  an  hundred  and  twentie  Holland  Souldiers,
viz.  eightie,  at  Tafasoa ;  thirtie,  at  Nofakia ;  and  ten,  at
Tabalola : which  Garrison  is  with  the  least.

This  Hand  Machian  is  the  richest  of  Cloves  of  all  the
Moluccas  Ilands,  and  according  to  the  generall  report  of
in  433  2  E

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1613.

the  Inhabitants,  yeeldeth  in  the  yeare  of  the  great  Monson
above  eighteene  hundred  Bahars  of  Cloves.

Upon  the  Hand  Bachian,  The  Flemmings  have  one
great  Fort.

Upon  the  Hand  Moteer,  They  have  foure  Bulwarkes.

These  Civill  Warres  have  so  wasted  the  Nationals,  that
a  great  quantitie  of  Cloves  perish,  and  rot  upon  the
ground  for  want  of  gathering.  Neither  is  there  any
likelihood  of  peace  to  bee  made  betwixt  them,  untill  the
one  part  be  utterly  rooted  out.

Thus  leaving  them  to  their  warres  I  will  returne  to
our  Trafficke,  and  shew  in  what  manner  we  traded  with
the  Naturals  for  Cloves,  which  for  the  most  part  was  by
bartering  and  exchanging  Cotton  cloth  of  Cambaya,  and
Coromandell  for  Cloves.  The  sorts  requested,  and  prices
that  they  yeelded.

Candakeens  of  Barochie,  six  Cattees  of  Cloves.  Can-
dakeens  Papang,  or  flat,  three  Cattees.  Selas,  or  small
Bastas,  seven  &  eight.  Patta  chere  Malayo,  sixteen.
Dragam  chere  Malayo,  sixteen.  Five  Cassas  twelve.
Course  of  that  kind  eight.  Betellias,  or  Tancoulos  red,
fortie  foure  and  fortie  eight.  Sarassas  chere  Malayo,
fortie  eight  and  fiftie.  Sarampouri,  thirtie.  Chelles,
Tapsiels,  &  Matafons,  twentie,  &  foure  and  twentie.
White  Cassas,  or  Tancoulos,  fortie,  and  foure  and  fortie.
Dongeriius,  the  finest,  twelve.  Course  of  that  kind,
eight  and  ten.  Pouti  Castella,  ten.  Ballachios  the  finest,
thirtie.  Patta  chere  Malayo,  of  two  fathomes  eight  and
ten.  Great  Potas,  or  long  foure  fathome,  sixteene  Cat-
tees of  Cloves.  Parcallas  white,  twelve.  Salalos  Ytam,
twelve  and  fourteene.  Turias  and  Tappe  Turias,  one
and  two.  Patola,  of  two  Fathomes,  fiftie  and  sixtie.
Those  of  foure  and  one  fathome  accordingly.  Rice  eight
and  twentie  pound,  a  Riall  of  eight.  Sagu,  which  is  a
roote  whereof  the  Naturals  make  their  Bread,  and  is
their  chiefest  food  through  the  whole  Countrey,  it  is
sold  in  bunches,  and  was  worth  there  one  quarter  of  a
Riall  of  eight  a  bunch. Velvets,  Sattins,  Taffataes,  and

434

JOHN  SARIS  a.u.

1613.

other  stuffes  of  Silke  of  China,  are  very  well  requested

heere. And this shall serve for  advice  concerning the

Molucca?  Hands.

The  sixteenth,  calme  till  night,  then  a  gale  at  West :
we  steered  North  North-west.

The  seventeenth  in  the  morning,  wind  at  East  by
South,  we  steered  North  but  after  variable,  shifting  to
all  the  points  of  the  Compasse  :  towards  night  we  had
sight  of  land  to  the  North-ward.

The  eighteenth,  calme,  much  raine  and  contrarie  windes,
I  therefore  resolved  to  goe  for  the  Hand  Saiem  which  was
to  the  West-ward,  and  there  to  stay  and  refresh  till  the
Monson  would  permit  me  to  proceed.  But  instantly  the
wind  came  to  the  West,  so  that  wee  stood  North  and
North  by  East.  The  nineteenth,  little  wind  at  West,  [I.  iv.  364.]
wee  continued  our  course  North  by  East,  very  much
raine  and  extreame  hot.

The  twentieth,  in  the  morning  calme,  and  a  continuall  A  Current  to
current  setting:  to  the  East- ward,  which  we  have  felt  ever  the  East-
since  our  departure  from  Ternate. In  the  after-noone  war  '
the  wind  North  a  gale  we  stood  to  the  West-ward  to
stemme  the  current,  in  regard  of  the  Northerly  winds
subject  to  calmes  and  the  Easterly  current,  we  stood  in
with  a  great  Hand  called  Doy,  to  rest  and  refresh  our &°y  a  ireat
selves.  lland-

The  one  and  twentieth,  in  the  morning  we  were  faire
before  the  said  Hand,  neere  the  Northerne  point,  being  a
low  point  stretching  to  the  Southwards,  we  stood  in  East
by  South,  wind  at  North  by  East :  at  noone  the  Skiffe
was  sent  to  search  out  a  convenient  place  to  ride  in,  but
the  current  did  set  so  strong  to  the  East-ward,  as  that  we
could  not  get  a  head,  onely  discovered  a  Bay  very  large,
but  it  had  a  great  shoale  lying  off  the  Northerne  point  A  great  shoale .
halfe  a  league  into  the  Sea,  and  had  sixtie  fathome  two
mile  off  the  shoare  sand,  but  night  approaching  wee  stood
off  till  morning.

The  two  and  twentieth,  after  Sun-set  we  anchored  in
foure and twentie fathomes, in the Bay having had

435

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1613.

(standing in) fiftie sixe, thirtie five, twentie sixe, and
twentie  foure  fathomes.

The  three  and  twentieth,  I  sent  the  SkirTe  ashoare  to
seeke  a  convenient  place  to  water  in,  and  to  pitch  a  Tent
for  the  company  to  defend  them  from  the  raine.  They
found  such  a  place  right  over  against  the  ship,  together
with  a  great  tracke  of  Deare  and  Swine,  but  no  signe  of
people :  the  Countrey  full  of  Trees  and  abundance  of
Cokers,  Penang,  Serie,  Palmitas,  and  Fowle,  Phesant  and
Wood-cockes.  I  went  ashoare,  the  Merchants  with  mee,
a  Tent  was  set  up,  our  Carpenter  made  Fal-pits  very
artificially  to  take  Swine,  some  fish  we  tooke  amongst
the  rockes,  but  cost  much  labour,  one  Phesant,  and  two
Wood-pidgeons  very  large  bodied  like  Hens,  some  of
the  Companie  stayed  all  night  on  shoare,  to  looke  for  the
comming  of  the  Swine  to  the  Trap.

The  foure  and  twentieth,  we  saw  very  large  Swine,  but

got  none. This  day  about  halfe  an  houre  after  seven  in

A  strange the  morning,  the  Moone  in  the  full  was  eclipsed  in  the

Eclipse  of  the strangest  manner  that  ever  any  of  us  had  seene,  being

obscured  three  houres  and  an  halfe  before  she  recovered

her  perfect  light,  which  unto  us  was  very  fearefull.

The  five  and  twentieth,  our  people  searched  abroad,
brought  to  the  ship  great  store  of  Cokers,  some  Fowles,
and  heads  of  Palmita  Trees,  which  boyled  with  Beefe  are
as  good  as  Cabbage.

The  eight  and  twentieth,  the  Companie  laboured  to
get  in  wood  and  water.  The  SkirTe  sounded  about
the  shoale,  and  found  ten  and  twelve  fathome,  at  the
Norther  point  neere  to  it,  night  and  day  very  much
raine.

The  nine  and  twentieth  and  thirtieth  were  spent  in
getting  aboord  our  wood,  whereof  wee  had  great  store,
and  as  good  as  our  Billets  in  England.
Mrfyi.1613.  The  first  of  May,  the  SkifFe  was  sent  to  sound  to  the
Wester  point  into  the  Bay,  and  found  very  deepe  water..
Landing,  they  found  the  ruines  of  houses,  and  certaine
brasse  pannes,  so  that  we  were  of  opinion  that  the  place

436

JOHN SARIS  a.d.

1613.
had  lately  beene  inhabited, but the Inhabitants  by the
Warres  hunted  from  their  home.

The  twelfth,  we  set  sayle  from  this  Island  Doy,  being  D°J  at  the
the  North-east  most  Hand  of  Batta  China  or  Geilolo  in  ^f™^
the  Moluccas,  latitude  two  degrees,  thirtie  five  minutes,
variation  five  degrees,  twentie  minutes  Easterly,  having
remayned  heere  twentie  dayes,  beeing  seventie  one  per-
sons bound  for  Japan,  and  at  noone  fourteene  leagues
North  by  East,  off  the  place  where  wee  anchored.

The  thirteenth,  the  shippes  way  to  noone  North  by
East,  twentie  two  leagues.  Wee  steered  North  the  wind
West,  variation  five  degrees  thirtie  minutes  Easterly,
with  a  strong  Current  setting  to  the  East-ward,  then  the
wind  shifted  to  the  West  by  South,  West  North-west,
East,  then  a  gale  at  West  by  South,  and  West  South-
west. The  fourteenth,  latitude  five  degrees  twentie  sixe
minutes,  way  North  by  East  twentie  sixe  leagues,  wind
West,  and  Current  as  afore-said :  cleere  weather.  The
fifteenth,  latitude  five  degrees  fiftie  sixe  minutes,  way
North  North-east,  fourteene  leagues  current  as  formerly.
The  sixteenth,  latitude  seven  degrees  ten  minutes  way
North  Easterly,  twentie  seven  leagues,  wind  at  South-
west, and  West  rainie.  The  seventeenth,  latitude  eight
degrees  twentie  two  minutes,  way  North  twentie  foure
leagues  wind  South-west,  but  in  the  morning  at  East
with  raine.  The  eighteenth,  latitude  nine  degrees  seven
minutes,  way  North-easterly  fifteene  leagues,  wind  at
East  and  East  North-east  very  cleere  weather.  The  nine-
teenth, latitude  nine  degrees  fortie  one  minutes,  way
North  eleven  leagues  one  third  part,  wind  East  and  East
North-east.  The  twentieth,  latitude  ten  degrees  fortie
minutes,  way  North  halfe  a  point  Westerly,  twentie
leagues,  wind  East  and  North-east,  with  helpe  of  a  cur-
rent Northerly.  The  one  and  twentieth,  latitude  eleven
degrees  thirtie  sixe  minutes,  way  North  North-west
twentie  leagues,  wind  North-east  East,  North  North-east,
and  North-east  by  East  star-boord  tacke  aboord.  The
two  and  twentieth,  latitude  twelve  degrees  thirtie  nine

437

A.D.
1613.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

minutes,  way  North  North-west,  twentie  three  leagues,
wind  East  North-east,  North-east  by  East,  and  North-east.

[I.  iv.  365.]  The  three  and  twentieth,  latitude  twelve  degrees  fiftie
seven  minutes,  way  North  by  West,  sixe  and  two  third
parts  of  a  league  wind,  South-east  calme.  The  foure  and
twentieth,  latitude  thirteene  degrees  fortie  two  minutes,
way  North  fifteene  leagues,  wind  South  by  East,  very
smooth  water.  The  five  and  twentieth,  latitude  fifteene
degrees,  twelve  minutes,  way  North  thirtie  leagues,  wind

Note.  South,  we  steered  North  Westerly. Note,  that  wee  find

those  favourable  winds  in  the  full  of  the  Moone.  The
sixe  and  twentieth,  latitude  seventeene  degrees,  sixe
minutes,  way  North  thirtie  eight  leagues,  wind  South  by
West  South,  and  South  South-west  a  continuall  stiffe  gale
and  smooth  water.  The  seven  and  twentieth,  way  North-
east twentie  foure  leagues,  wind  at  West  North-west  and
West,  with  Raine,  Thunder  and  Lightning.  The  eight
the  twentieth,  way  North  nine  leagues,  wind  West,  and
West  North-west.  The  nine  and  twentieth,  latitude
nineteene  degrees  fifteene  minutes,  way  North  nine
leagues,  winde  North-east  East,  West,  West  North-west
and  South,  calmes  and  gusts.  The  thirtieth,  latitude
twentie  degrees  twelve  minutes,  way  North  twentie
leagues,  wind  at  South-east  and  East  South-east.  The
one  and  thirtieth,  latitude  twentie  one  degrees,  thirtie  five
minutes,  way  North  by  West,  thirtie  leagues,  wind  East,
and  East  by  North.  Variation  sixe  degrees  no  minutes
Easterly.

The  first  of  June,  we  passed  the  Tropick  of  Cancer,  the
Sunne  in  our  Zenith  wee  could  not  observe,  way  North
fortie  leagues,  wind  at  South-east,  and  South-east  by  East,
variation  five  degrees  twentie  five  minutes  Easterly.

The  second,  latitude  twentie  five  degrees  fortie  foure
minutes,  way  North  fortie  two  leagues,  wind  South-east
and  South-east  by  South,  making  account  we  should  have

The  lies  Dos seene  the  Hands,  Dos  Reys  Magos,  about  eight  of  the

Re'ys  Magos.  clocke  in  the  morning,  but  as  yet  see  none.  About  foure
a  clocke  in  the  after-noone  we  made  land,  being  a  very

438

Variation
sixe  degrees
Easterly.
June  1 . 1 6 1  3

JOHN SARIS  a.d.

1613.

low  Hand  bearing  North-west  about  three  leagues  off,
wind  South-east  by  East,  and  having  it  North  North-east,
we  had  sight  of  the  high-land  over  the  low  land,  there
being  many  little  Hands  to  the  number  of  ten  or  eleven,
with  broken  ground  and  breaches  reaching  over  to  each
Hand,  so  that  wee  could  discerne  no  passage  to  the  West-
ward. At  night  we  tackt  off,  tooke  in  our  Top-sayles,
and  lay  close  by  in  our  courses  all  night,  wind  very  much
at  South  South-east,  we  steered  East.  The  Hands  lye
alongst  North-east  and  South-west.

The  third  we  stood  in  for  the  land,  being  a  high  Hand
bearing  North-west,  seeming  to  us  a  most  pleasant  and
fruitfull  soyle,  as  any  we  had  seene  since  our  comming  out
of  England,  well  peopled,  and  great  store  of  Cattle.  Wee
purposed  to  have  come  to  an  anchor  about  the  North-east
point,  and  sounding  had  sixty  fathome,  had  sight  of  two
Boates  comming  off  unto  us,  wee  used  all  the  meanes  we
could  to  speake  with  them,  being  desirous  of  a  Pilot,  and
to  know  the  name  of  the  Hand,  the  better  to  bee  assured
where  we  were.  But  the  wind  was  so  forcible,  as  that
we  could  not  get  in,  wherefore  we  stood  away  North-west,
and  had  sight  of  another  Hand  bearing  West  North-west,
we  steered  with  it,  and  from  thence  had  sight  of  another
Hand,  bearing  North-east  halfe  a  point  Easterly,  some
seven  or  eight  leagues  off,  and  comming  under  the
Wester-most  Hand,  we  discerned  certaine  Rockes  that  lay
off  the  shoare  above  two  miles,  the  one  above  water,  and
the  Northermost  under-water,  and  is  a  great  way  without
the  other,  the  Sea  breaking  upon  it.  Then  the  land
falleth  away  to  the  South-wards  round,  and  neere  to  the
point  you  shall  open  a  steepe  Rocke,  that  is  upon  the
West-side  of  the  Hand,  resembling  Charing-Crosse.
Then  we  steered  North-west  with  an  extreame  gale  at
South  by  West,  and  South  South-west.  When  we  had
opened  the  Hand,  and  a  current  setting  to  the  South-
ward, at  foure  of  the  clocke  we  tooke  in  our  Top-sailes
and  haled  close  upon  a  tacke,  the  Hand  being  about  seven
leagues  North-west  off  us. Way  to  noone  North  halfe  a

439

A.D.
1613.

Variation
fourc  degrees
fortte  minutes,

Easterly.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

point  Easterly,  sixteene  leagues,  way  North  North-west
three  quarters  Westerly,  twentie  leagues.  At  three  a
clocke  in  the  afternoone  we  set  our  courses,  the  wind  at
North-west,  and  North-west  by  North,  wee  steered  North-
east some  two  houres,  then  calme  and  raine,  variation  at
Sunne-setting  foure  degrees  fortie  minutes  Easterly.

The  fifth,  way  West  by  North  foure  leagues  and  an
halfe,  wind  North  North-east,  wee  steere  North-west  star-
boord  tackt,  variation  foure  degrees  fortie  two  minutes.

The  sixth,  way  North  North-west  nine  leagues,  wind
East  North-east,  North-east  by  North  and  North-east  by
East,  little  wind,  much  raine,  variation  foure  degrees
nineteene  minutes  Easterly.  At  night  the  wind  at  East
and  East  South-east.

The  seventh,  way  North-east  by  North  sixteene  leagues,
wind  at  South-east  and  South  South-west,  then  we  steered
away  North-east  by  North,  supposing  to  bee  off  Tonan
twentie  eight  or  thirtie  leagues.

The  eight,  in  the  morning  wee  had  sight  of  a  high
round  Hand  bearing  East  sixe  leagues  off  with  divers
other  Hands  rising  in  sixe  or  seven  parts  bearing  West
five  or  sixe  leagues  off  :  having  made  to  this  noone  twentie
two  leagues  North-east  by  North,  wind  at  South  South-
west a  stiffe  gale.  Then  we  haled  over  North-west  with
another  Hand,  which  we  found  to  be  foure  in  number,
being  barren  and  many  picked  Rockes.  Then  we  steered
North  by  East,  the  wind  at  South  by  West,  about  three
of  the  clocke  wee  had  sight  of  an  Hand,  with  three  Hils
like  three  round  Sugar-loves,  bearing  East  by  S.  five
leagues  off.  At  five  of  the  clock  we  had  sight  of  an
[I.  iv.  366.]  Hand  rising  in  two  parts,  bearing  North  North-east,  the
Northren  end  being  an  high  steep  upright  point,  the  land
falling  away  to  the  Eastward  North-east,  and  at  sixe  of
the  clock  the  body  of  it  did  beare  East  one  league  and
an  halfe  off.  The  wind  West,  we  stood  off  upon  a  tacke
North  North-west.

The  ninth,  in  the  morning  wee  had  sight  of  land,  bear-
ing North  North-east,  and  sixe  great  Islands  on  a  ranke.

440

JOHN SARIS

1613.

A7/7//2  or
Mashma.

From  the  Island  we  descried  yesternight  North-east  and
South-west,  and  at  the  Northermost  end  of  them  all,
many  small  rockes  and  hummockes,  and  in  the  Bay  to  the
Eastward  of  the  hummockes  we  saw  an  high  land  bearing
East,  East  by  South,  and  East  South-east,  which  is  the
Island  called  Xima  in  the  Plats,  but  called  by  the  Naturals
Mashma,  and  the  Island  aforesaid,  North  North-east,  is
called  Segue  or  Amaxay  :  it  lyeth  East  by  North,  and
West  by  South,  with  many  small  Islands  and  rockes  on
the  Southerne  side  of  them,  and  is  distant  from  the  Island
with  the  steepe  point,  (which  wee  did  see  the  eight  day)
South  South-west  twelve  leagues,  the  wind  calme  all
night,  yet  we  got  to  the  Northward,  as  wee  supposed,  by
the  helpe  of  a  current  or  tide.

The  tenth,  by  breake  of  day  the  outward-most  land  to
the  Westward  did  beare  North  by  East  ten  leagues  off,
the  wind  at  North-east  by  North :  at  nine,  a  gale  at
South,  wee  steered  North  by  West,  and  had  sight  of  two
hummockes  without  the  point.  Then  wee  steered  North
North-west,  and  soone  after  came  foure  great  Fisher-boats
aboord,  about  five  tunnes  apeece  in  burthen,  they  sailed
with  one  saile,  which  stood  like  a  Skiffe  saile,  and  skuld
with  foure  oares  on  a  side,  their  oares  resting  upon  a  pinne  dn  excellent
fastned  on  the  toppe  of  the  Boats  side,  the  head  of  which  kind  °foares-
pinne  was  so  let  into  the  middle  part  of  the  oare,  that  the
oare  did  hang  in  his  just  poize,  so  that  the  labour  of  the
Rower  is  much  lesse,  then  otherwise  it  must  be ;  yet  doe
they  make  farre  greater  speed  then  our  people  with  row-
ing, and  performe  their  worke  standing,  as  ours  doe
sitting,  so  that  they  take  the  lesse  roome.  They  told  us
that  we  were  before  the  entrance  of  Nangasaque,  bearing  Nangasaque.
North  North-east,  and  the  straights  of  Arima,  North-east
by  North,  and  the  high  hill,  which  we  did  see  yesterday,
is  upon  the  Island  called  Uszideke,  which  maketh  the
straights  of  Arima,  where  at  the  Norther-most  end  is
good  riding,  and  at  the  South  end  is  the  going  into
Cochinoch.  To  this  noone  we  have  made  a  North-way
sixe  leagues. Wee  agree  with  two  of  the  Masters  of  the

441

A.D.
I613.

June  1 1 .
1613.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Fisher-boats  (for  thirtie  Rialls  of  eight  a  piece  in  money,
and  Rice  for  their  food)  to  Pilot  us  into  Firando  ;  which
agreement  made,  their  people  entred  our  shippe,  and  per-
formed voluntarily  their  labour,  as  readily  as  any  of  our
Mariners.  We  steered  North  by  West,  the  Pilots  mak-
ing account  to  be  thirtie  leagues  off  Firando.  One  of  the
foure  Boats  which  came  aboord  us,  did  belong  to  the
Portugals,  living  at  Langasaque,  and  were  new  Christians,
and  thought  that  our  ship  had  been  the  Macau  ship ;
but  finding  the  contrary,  would  upon  no  intreatie  stay,
but  made  hast  backe  againe  to  advise  them.

§.  VI.

Their  arrivall  at  Firando  :  the  Habite,  Rites,  and
Customes  of  the  Japonians.

He  eleventh,  about  three  of  the  clocke  in  the  after-
noone,  we  came  to  an  anchor  halfe  a  league  short
of  Firando,  the  tide  so  spent  that  we  could  not

his  Nephew.

Japonian
habite.

The  King  of  get  further  in  :  soone  after  I  was  visited  by  the  old  King
h-™*fLhld  Foyne  Sama,  and  his  Nephew  Tone-Sama,  Governour
then  of  the  Hand  under  the  old  King.  They  were  at-
tended with  fortie  Boats  or  Gallyes,  rowed  some  with
ten,  some  with  fifteene  oares  on  a  side  :  when  they  drew
neare  to  the  ship,  the  King  commanded  all,  but  the  two
wherein  himselfe  and  his  Nephew  were,  to  fall  a  sterne,
and  they  only  entred  the  ship,  both  of  them  in  silke
gownes,  girt  to  them  with  a  shirt,  and  a  paire  of  breeches
of  flaxen  cloath  next  their  bodies,  either  of  them  had  two
Cattans  or  swords  of  that  Countrey  by  his  side,  the  one
of  halfe  a  yard  long,  the  other  about  a  quarter.  They
wore  no  bands,  the  fore-parts  of  their  heads  were  shaven
to  the  crowne,  and  the  rest  of  their  haire,  which  was  very
long,  was  gathered  together  and  bound  up  on  a  knot
behind,  wearing  neither  Hat  nor  Turbant,  but  bare-
headed. The  King  was  aged  about  seventie  two  yeeres,
his  Nephew  or  Grand-child,  that  governed  under  him,
was  about  two  and  twentie  yeeres  old,  and  either  of  them

442

JOHN  SARIS

had  his  Governour  with  him,  who  had  command  over
their  slaves,  as  they  appointed  him.  Their  manner  and
curtesie  in  saluting  was  after  their  manner,  which  is  this.
First,  in  presence  of  him  whom  they  are  to  salute,  they
put  off  their  shooes  (stockings  they  weare  none)  and  then
clapping  their  right  hand  within  their  left,  they  put  them
downe  towards  their  knees,  and  so  wagging  or  moving  of
their  hands  a  little  to  and  fro,  they  stooping,  steppe  with
small  steps  sideling  from  the  partie  saluted,  and  crie  Augh,
Augh.  I  led  them  into  my  Cabbin,  where  I  had  prepared
a  Banquet  for  them,  and  a  good  consort  of  Musicke,  which
much  delighted  them.  They  bade  me  welcome,  and  pro-
mised me  kind  entertainment.  I  delivered  our  Kings
Letters  to  the  King  of  Firando,  which  he  received  with
great  joy,  saying  hee  would  not  open  it  till  Ange  came,
who  could  interpret  the  same  unto  him ;  this  Ange  is  in
their  language  a  Pilot,  being  one  William  Adams  an
English  man,  who  passing  with  a  Flemming  through  the
South-sea,  by  mutiny  and  disorder  of  the  Marriners  shee
remained  in  that  Countrey,  and  was  seised  upon  by  the
Emperour  about  twelve  yeares  before.  The  King  having
stayed  aboord  about  an  houre  and  a  halfe,  tooke  his  leave  :
he  was  no  sooner  ashoare,  but  all  his  nobilitie,  attended
with  a  multitude  of  souldiers,  entred  the  ship,  every  man
of  worth  brought  his  present  with  him,  some  Venison,
some  Wilde-fowle,  some  wilde  Boare  the  largest  and
fattest  that  ever  any  of  us  had  seene,  some  Fruits,  Fish,
&c.  They  did  much  admire  our  shippe,  and  made  as  if
they  had  never  seene  it  sufficiently.  We  being  pestered
with  the  number  of  these  visiters,  I  sent  to  the  King,
requesting  him  that  order  might  bee  taken  to  remove
them,  and  to  prevent  all  inconveniences  that  might  happen.
Whereupon  he  sent  a  Guardian,  (being  a  principall  man
of  his  owne  Guard)  with  charge  to  remaine  and  lye  aboord,
that  no  injury  might  be  offered  unto  us ;  and  caused  a
proclamation  to  be  made  in  the  Towne  to  the  same  effect.
The  same  night,  Henrick  Brower,  Captaine  of  the  Dutch
Factory  there,  came  aboord  to  visite  me,  or  rather  to  see

443

A.D.
1613.

J  aponian
manner  of
salutation.

[I. iv. 367.]

William
A 'dams.
His  story
written  by
himselfe  you
have  before.

A.D.
1613.

Osackay.

A  strong  tide.

We  anchored
before  the
Towne.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

what  passed  betwixt  the  King  and  us.  I  did  write  the
same  day  to  Master  Adams  (being  then  at  Edoo,  which  is
very  neare  three  hundred  leagues  from  Firando)  to  let
him  understand  of  our  arrivall.  King  Foyn  sent  it  away
the  next  day  by  his  Admirall  to  Osackay,  the  first  Port  of
note  upon  the  chiefe  Island,  and  then  by  post  up  into  the
Land  to  Edoo  :  giving  the  Emperour  likewise  to  under-
stand of  our  being  there,  and  cause  thereof.

The  twelfth  in  the  morning,  there  was  brought  aboord
such  abundance  of  fish,  and  so  cheape  as  we  could  desire.
We  weighed  and  set  saile  for  the  Road.  The  King  sent
at  the  least  threescore  great  Boats  or  Gallyes  very  well
mand,  to  bring  us  into  the  harbor.  I  doubted  what  the
cause  of  their  comming  might  be,  &  was  sending  off  the
Skiffe  to  command  them  not  to  come  neare  the  ship  but
the  King  being  the  head-most,  weaved  with  his  hand-
kercher,  and  willed  the  rest  to  attend,  and  himselfe
comming  aboord,  told  me  that  he  had  commanded  them
to  come  to  tow  our  ship  in  about  a  point,  somewhat  dan-
gerous, by  reason  of  the  force  of  the  tide,  which  was  such
that  having  a  stiffe  gale  of  wind,  yet  we  could  not  stemme
it,  and  comming  into  the  eddie,  we  should  have  been  set
upon  the  Rockes.  So  we  sent  Hawsers  aboord  them,
and  they  fell  to  worke.  In  the  meane  while  the  King  did
breake  his  fast  with  me.  Being  at  an  anchor,  I  would
have  requited  the  people  for  their  paines,  but  the  King
would  not  surfer  them  to  take  any  thing.  Wee  anchored
before  the  Towne  in  five  fathome,  so  neare  the  shoare,
that  we  might  talke  to  the  people  in  their  houses.  We
saluted  the  Towne  with  nine  peeces  of  Ordnance,  but
were  not  answered,  for  they  have  no  Ordnance  heere,  nor
any  Fort,  but  Barricados  only  for  small  shot.  Our
ground  heere  was  Ozie.  Divers  Noblemen  came  to  bid
me  welcome,  whereof  two  were  of  extraordinary  account,
called  Nobusane  and  Simmadone,  who  were  very  well
entertained,  and  at  parting  held  very  great  state,  one  stay-
ing aboord  whilest  the  other  were  landed  ;  their  children
and  chiefe  followers  in  the  like  manner. There  came  con-

444

JOHN SARIS

tinually  such  a  world  of  people  aboord,  both  men  and
women,  as  that  we  were  not  able  to  go  upon  the  decks :
round  about  the  ship  was  furnished  with  Boats  full  of
people,  admiring  much  the  head  and  sterne  of  the  ship.
I  gave  leave  to  divers  women  of  the  better  sort  to  come
into  my  Cabbin,  where  the  picture  of  Venus,  with  her
sonne  Cupid,  did  hang  somewhat  wantonly  set  out  in  a
large  frame,  they  thinking  it  to  bee  our  Ladie  and  her
Sonne,  fell  downe  and  worshipped  it,  with  shewes  of  great
devotion,  telling  men  in  a  whispering  manner  (that  some
of  their  owne  companions  which  were  not  so,  might  not
heare)  that  they  were  Christianos  :  whereby  we  perceived
them  to  be  Christians,  converted  by  the  Portugall
Jesuits.

The  King  came  aboord  againe,  and  brought  foure  chiefe
women  with  him.  They  were  attired  in  gownes  of  silke,
clapt  the  one  skirt  over  the  other,  and  so  girt  to  them,
bare-legged,  only  a  paire  of  halfe  buskins  bound  with  silke
riband  about  their  instep  :  their  haire  very  blacke,  and
very  long,  tyed  up  in  a  knot  upon  the  crowne  in  a  comely
manner :  their  heads  no  where  shaven  as  the  mens  were.
They  were  well-faced,  handed,  and  footed  ;  cleare  skind
and  white,  but  wanting  colour,  which  they  amend  by  arte.
Of  stature  low,  but  very  fat ;  very  curteous  in  behaviour,
not  ignorant  of  the  respect  to  be  given  unto  persons
according  to  their  fashion.  The  King  requested  that  none
might  stay  in  the  Cabbin,  save  my  selfe  and  my  Linguist,
who  was  borne  in  Japan,  and  was  brought  from  Bantam
in  our  ship  thither,  being  well  skild  in  the  Mallayan
tongue,  wherein  he  delivered  to  mee  what  the  King  spoke
unto  him  in  the  Japan  language.  The  Kings  women
seemed  to  be  somewhat  bashfull,  but  he  willed  them  to  bee
frollicke.  They  sung  divers  songs,  and  played  upon  cer-
tain Instruments  (wherof  one  did  much  resemble  our
Lute)  being  bellyed  like  it,  but  longer  in  the  necke,  and
fretted  like  ours,  but  had  only  foure  gut-strings.  Their
fingring  with  the  left  hand  like  ours,  very  nimbly  :  but  the
right  hand  striketh  with  an  Ivory  bone,  as  we  use  to  play

445

A.U.
1613.

Note  the
danger  of
idolatry,  even
in  Popish
sense,  by
veneration  of
Images.

The  Kings
women,  their
habite.

Their  musicke
instrumentall
and  vocall.

A.D.
1613.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Prick-song.

Presents.

Feasting  and
drinking  of
healths  in
Japan.

upon  a  Citterne  with  a  quill.  They  delighted  themselves
much  with  their  musicke,  keeping  time  with  their  hands,
and  playing  and  singing  by  booke,  prickt  on  line  and
space,  resembling  much  ours  heere.  I  feasted  them,  and
presented  them  with  divers  English  commodities :  and
after  some  two  houres  stay  they  returned.  I  moved  the
King  for  a  house,  which  hee  readily  granted,  and  tooke
two  of  the  Merchants  along  with  him,  and  shewed  them
[I.  iv.  368.]  three  or  foure  houses,  willing  them  to  take  their  choise,
paying  the  owners  as  they  could  agree.

The  thirteenth,  I  went  ashoare,  attended  upon  by  the
Merchants  and  Principall  Officers,  and  delivered  the  Pre-
sents to  the  King,  amounting  to  the  value  of  one  hundred
and  fortie  pounds  or  thereabouts,  which  he  received  with
very  great  kindnesse,  feasting  me  and  my  whole  com-
panie  with  divers  sorts  of  powdered  wild  fowles  and  fruits  :
and  calling  for  a  standing  Cup  (which  was  one  of  the  Pre-
sents then  delivered  him)  he  caused  it  to  be  filled  with  his
Countrey  wine,  which  is  distilled  out  of  Rice,  and  is  as
strong  as  our  Aquavitse :  and  albeit  the  Cuppe  held
upward  of  a  pint  and  an  halfe,  notwithstanding  taking  the
Cup  in  his  hand,  he  told  me  hee  would  drinke  it  all  off,
for  a  health  to  the  King  of  England,  and  so  did,  my  selfe
and  all  his  Nobles  doing  the  like.  And  whereas  in  the
roome  where  the  King  was,  there  was  onely  my  selfe  and
the  Cape  Merchant,  (the  rest  of  our  Company  being  in
an  other  roome)  the  King  commanded  his  Secretarie  to
o-oe  out  unto  them,  and  see  that  everie  one  of  them  did
pledge  the  health.  The  King  and  his  Nobles  did  sit  at
meat  crosse-legged  upon  Mats,  after  the  Turkie  fashion,
the  Mats  richly  edged,  some  with  cloath  of  Gold,  some
with  Velvet,  Satten,  and  Damaske.

The  foureteenth  and  fifteenth,  we  spent  with  giving  of
Presents.  The  sixteenth,  I  concluded  with  Captaine
Audassee,  Captaine  of  the  China  quarter  here,  for  his
house,  to  pay  ninetie  five  Rvals  of  eight  for  the  Monson
of  sixe  Moneths,  he  to  repaire  it  at  present,  and  wee  to
repaire  it  hereafter,  and  alter  what  we  pleased  :  he  to  fur-

446

Gesture  at
meate.

JOHN  SARIS  ad.

1613.

nish  all  convenient  roomes  with Mats  according  to the
fashion  of  the  Countrey.

This  day  our  ship  was  so  pestered  with  people,  as  that
I  was  enforced  to  send  to  the  King  for  a  Guardian  to
cleare  them  out,  many  things  being  stolne,  but  I  more
doubted our owne people, then the Naturals. There
came  in  a  Flemming  in  one  of  the  Countrey  boates,  which
had  been  at  the  Hand  Mashma,  where  he  had  sold  good Mashma  a
store  of  Pepper,  broad  Cloth,  and  Elephants  teeth,  but  ^' fg0°°J
would  not  be  acknowne  unto  us  to  have  sold  any  thing,  commodities.
yet  brought  nothing  backe  in  the  boat  with  him. But
the  Japons  his  watermen  told  us  the  truth,  viz.  That  he
had  sold  good  quantitie  of  goods  at  a  Mart  there,  and
returned  barres  of  silver,  which  they  kept  very  secret.

The one  and twentieth, the old  King  came aboord
againe,  and  brought  with  him  divers  women  to  be  frol-
licke. These  women  were  Actors  of  Comedies,  which  Women  Acton
passe  there  from  Hand  to  Hand  to  play,  as  our  Players  doe  °j ome, .  in
here from  Towne to Towne, having severall shifts of  a/s0  dmmn
apparrell  for  the  better  grace  of  the  matter  acted ; which  women,  and
for  the  most  part  are  of  Warre,  Love,  and  such  like, their  price
These  Women  are  as  the  slaves  of  one  man,  who  putteth  a  ri \ .
price  what  every  man  shall  pay  that  hath  to  doe  with  any  japattm
of  them ; more  then  which  he  is  not  to  take  upon  paine
of  death,  in  case  the  partie  injured  shall  complaine. It
is  left  to  his  owne  discretion  to  prize  her  at  the  first,  but
rise  he  cannot  afterwards,  fall  he  may. Neither  doth  the
partie  bargaine  with  the  Wench,  but  with  her  Master,
whose  command  she  is  to  obey. The  greatest  of  their
Nobilitie  travelling,  hold  it  no  disgrace  to  send  for  these
Panders  to  their  Inne,  &  do  compound  with  them  for  the
Wenches,  either  to  fill  their  drinke  at  Table  (for  all  men
of  any  ranke  have  their  drinke  filled  to  them  by  Women)
or  otherwise  to  have  the  use  of  them. When  any  of  these  Their  abho-
Panders  die  (though  in  their  life  time  they  were  received  ^l^emCe  aft£r
into  Company  of  the  best,  yet  now  as  unworthy  to  rest  death.
amongst  the  worst)  they  are  bridled  with  a  bridle  made
of  straw,  as  you  would  bridle  an  Horse,  and  in  the  cloathes

447

A.D.
1613.

Five  thousand
Chinese  done
to  death  for
trading  in  for-
rain  parts.

The  Hollan-
ders formerly
passed  under
the  name  of
Englishmen.
Note.

Japonian  song
of  the  English.

July.

Severitie  for
fighting  and
drawing
zveapons.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

they  died  in,  are  dragged  through  the  streetes  into  the
fields,  and  there  cast  upon  a  dunghill,  for  dogges  and
fowles  to  devoure.

The  twentie  three,  we  had  newes  of  two  China  Junkes
arrived  at  Langasaque,  laden  with  Sugar.  By  him  we
understood,  that  the  Emperour  of  China  had  then  lately
put  to  death  about  five  thousand  persons,  for  trading  out
of  the  Countrey,  contrary  to  his  Edict,  confiscating  all  their
goods :  notwithstanding  hope  of  profit  enticed  these  men
to  put  it  in  hazard,  having  bribed  the  new  Pungavas  and
Officers  upon  the  Sea-coast,  which  upon  the  execution  of
the  former,  were  placed  in  their  steads.

The  twentie  ninth,  a  Soma  or  Junke  of  the  Flemmings
arrived  at  Langasaque  from  Syam,  laden  with  Brasill
wood  and  Skins  of  all  sorts,  wherein  it  was  said  that  there
were  Englishmen,  but  prooved  to  be  Flemmings.  For
that  before  our  comming,  they  passed  generally  by  the
name  of  Englishmen  :  for  our  English  Nation  hath  been
long  known  by  report  among  them,  but  much  scandalled
by  the  Portugals  Jesuites,  as  Pyrats  and  Rovers  upon  the
Seas ;  so  that  the  Naturals  have  a  song  which  they  call
the  English  Crofonia,  shewing  how  the  English  doe  take
the  Spanish  ships,  which  they  (singing)  doe  act  likewise
in  gesture  with  their  Cattans  by  their  sides,  with  which
song  and  acting,  they  terrifie  and  skare  their  children,  as
the  French  sometimes  did  theirs  with  the  name  of  the
Lord  Talbot.

The  first  of  July,  two  of  our  Company  happened  to
quarrell  the  one  with  the  other,  and  were  very  likely  to
have  gone  into  the  field,  to  the  endangering  of  us  all.
For  it  is  a  custome  here,  That  whosoever  drawes  a  weapon
in  anger,  although  he  doe  no  harme  therewith,  hee  is
presently  cut  in  peeces :  and  doing  but  small  hurt,  not
only  themselves  are  so  executed,  but  their  whole  genera-
tion.

The  second  day,  I  went  ashoare  to  keep  house  in  Fir-
ando,  the  houshold  consisting  of  twenty  sixe  persons.
Note, that  at  our  comming  we  found Broad-clothes  of

448

JOHN SARIS  aj>.

1613.

fifteen  or  sixteene  pound  a  cloth  to  be  sold  by  the  Dutch [I.  w.  369 ■]
in  Firando,  for  fortie  Rials  of  eight,  which  is  eight  pound *^j£%
sterling  the  Mat,  which  Mat  is  two  yards  and  a  quarter  : ^  Du((h  in
but  desirous  to  keep  up  the  price  of  our  cloath,  and  hear-  Japan.
ing  that  the  Dutch  had  great  store  there,  I  had  conference
with  Brower,  Captaine  of  their  Factorie  to  this  effect ;
That  betwixt  us  we  should  set  rates  upon  such  clothes  as
both  of  us  had,  and  neither  of  us  in  any  wise  to  sell  under
the  price  agreed  upon  : for  performance  whereof,  I  prof-
fered  to  enter  into  bond to  him. In the morning he
seemed  to  approove  hereof,  but  ere  night  sent  word  that
he  disliked  it,  excusing  himselfe  that  he  had  no  warrant
from  his  Masters  to  make  any  such  agreement. The  next
morning,  he  shipped  away  great  store  of  Cloath  to  divers
Hands,  rating  them  at  base  prizes,  viz.  at  twentie,  eighteene
and  sixteene  Rials  the  Mat,  that  he  might  procure  the
more  speedie  dispatch  of  his  owne,  and  glut  the  place
before  the  comming  of  ours.

Bantam  Pepper  ungarbled,  which  cost  at  Bantam  one
Riall  three  quarters  of  eight  the  sacke,  was  worth  here  at
our  comming  tenne  Tayes  the  Peecull,  which  is  one  hun-
dred Cattees,  making  one  hundred  thirtie  pound  English
subtill.  A  Taye  is  five  shillings  sterling  with  them.  A
Riall  of  eight  is  worth  there  in  ordinary  payment  but
seven  Masse,  which  is  three  shillings  sixe  pence  sterling.
For  a  Masse  is  as  a  Riall  of  Plate.

Tinne  the  Peecull,  thirtie  Tayes :  Elephants  Teeth  the
Peecull  eightie  Tayes :  Iron  cast  Peeces  the  Peecull  sixe
Tayes  :  Powder  the  Peecull  twentie  three  Tayes  :  Aloes
Socatrina  the  Cattee  sixe  Tayes :  Fowling  Peeces  the
peece  twentie  Tayes :  Callico  and  such  like  Commodities
of  Choromandel,  and  of  the  Guzerates,  as  they  are  in
goodnesse.

The  seventh,  the  King  of  the  Hand  Goto,  not  farre  King  oj  Geo.
from  Firando  came  to  visit  King  Foyne,  saying,  that  he
had  heard  of  an  excellent  English  ship  arrived  in  his
Dominions,  which  he  greatly  desired  to  see,  and  goe
aboord  of.  King  Foyne  intreated  me  that  he  might  be
in  449  2  F

A.D.
1613.

The  King  of
Goto  desirous
that  our  men
would  come
into  his  King-
dome.
Japonian
manner  of
Execution.

To  steak

anothers  slave,
death.

The  manner  of
their  going  to
execution.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

permitted,  for  that  hee  was  an  especiall  friend  of  his.  So
he  was  well  entertained  aboord,  banqueted,  and  had
divers  Peeces  shot  off  at  his  departure,  which  he  very
kindly  accepted,  and  told  me,  that  hee  should  bee  right
glad  to  live  to  see  some  of  our  Nation  to  come  to  his
Hand,  whither  they  should  be  heartily  welcome.

The  eighth,  three  Japonians  were  executed,  viz.  two
men  and  one  woman  :  the  cause  this ;  The  woman  none
of  the  honestest  (her  husband  being  travelled  from  home)
had  appointed  these  two  their  severall  houres  to  repaire
unto  her.  The  latter  man  not  knowing  of  the  former,
and  thinking  the  time  too  long,  comming  in  before  the
houre  appointed,  found  the  first  man  with  her  already,
and  enraged  thereat,  he  whipt  out  his  Cattan,  and  wounded
both  of  them  very  sorely,  having  very  neere  hewne  the
Chine  of  the  mans  backe  in  two.  But  as  well  as  he
might  hee  cleared  himselfe  of  the  woman,  and  recovering
his  Cattan,  wounded  the  other.  The  street  taking  notice
of  the  fray  forthwith  seased  upon  them,  led  them  aside,
and  acquainted  King  Foyne  therewith,  and  sent  to  know
his  pleasure,  (for  according  to  his  will,  the  partie  is
executed)  who  presently  gave  order  that  they  should  cut
off  their  heads  :  which  done,  every  man  that  listed  (as  very
many  did)  came  to  trie  the  sharpenesse  of  their  Cattans
upon  the  Corps,  so  that  before  they  left  off,  they  had
hewne  them  all  three  into  peeces  as  small  as  a  mans  hand,
and  yet  notwithstanding  did  not  then  give  over,  but
placing  the  peeces  one  upon  another,  would  try  how  many
of  them  they  could  strike  through  at  a  blow :  and  the
peeces  are  left  to  the  Fowles  to  devoure.

The  tenth,  three  more  were  executed  as  the  former,
for  stealing  of  a  woman  from  Firando,  and  selling  her  at
Langasacque  long  since,  two  of  them  were  brethren,  and
the  other  a  sharer  with  them.  When  any  are  to  be
executed,  they  are  led  out  of  the  Towne  in  this  manner :
There  goeth  first  one  with  a  Pick-axe,  next  followeth  an
other  with  a  shovell  for  to  make  his  grave  (if  that  bee
permitted him) the third man beareth a small Table

45°

JOHN SARIS

whereon  is  written  the  parties  offence,  which  table  is
afterwards  set  up  upon  a  Post  on  the  grave  where  he  is
buried.  The  fourth  is  the  partie  to  be  executed,  his
hands  bound  behind  him  with  a  silken  cord,  having  a
little  Banner  of  Paper  (much  resembling  our  wind-vanes)
whereon  is  likewise  written  his  offence.  The  execu-
tioner followeth  next,  with  his  Cattan  by  his  side,  holding
in  his  hand  the  cord  wherewith  the  offender  is  bound.
On  either  side  of  the  executioner  goeth  a  souldiour  with
his  Pike,  the  head  thereof  resting  on  the  shoulder  of  the
partie  appointed  to  suffer,  to  skare  him  from  attempting
to  escape.  In  this  very  manner  I  saw  one  led  to  execu-
tion, who  went  so  resolutely  and  without  all  appearance
of  feare  of  death,  that  I  could  not  but  much  admire  him,
never  having  seene  the  like  in  Christendome.  The
offence  for  which  he  suffered  was  for  stealing  of  a  sacke
of  Rice  (of  the  value  of  two  shillings  sixe  pence,)  from
his  neighbour,  whose  house  was  then  on  fire.

The  eleventh,  there  arrived  at  Langasacque  three  China
Junckes  laden  with  Silkes.  The  nineteenth,  the  old  King
Foyne,  intreated  me  for  a  peece  of  Poldavis,  which  I  sent
him ;  hee  caused  it  presently  to  be  made  into  Coates,
which  he  (notwithstanding  that  hee  was  a  King,  and  of
that  great  age,  and  famed  to  be  the  worthiest  souldiour  of
all  Japan,  for  his  valour  and  service  in  the  Corean  warres)
did  weare  next  his  skinne,  and  some  part  thereof  was  made
into  handkerchiefes,  which  he  daily  used.

The  twentieth,  a  Soma  or  Juncke  comming  from
Cochinchina  arrived  at  Langasaque,  laden  with  Silkes,
and  Benjamin,  excellent  cleere  and  rich.  The  nine  and
twentieth,  M.  Adams  arrived  at  Firando,  having  been
seventeene  dayes  on  the  way  comming  from  Sorongo,  we
having  staied  here  for  his  comming  fortie  eight  dayes.
After  I  had  friendly  entertained  him,  I  conferred  with  him
in  the  presence  of  the  Merchants,  touching  the  incourage-
ment  hee  could  give  of  trade  in  these  parts.  He  answered,
that  it  was  not  alwaies  alike,  but  sometimes  better,  some-
times worse,  yet  doubted  not  but  we  should  doe  as  well

45i

A.D.
1613.

Poldavis  worn
by  the  King.

William
Adams  comm-
eth  unto  them.
[I. iv.  370.]
The  first  Car-
rier for  not
making  haste
with  the  letters
to  Adams,  teas
banished  by  the
angry  King.

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1613.

as  others ;  giving  admirable  commendations  of  the  Coun-
trey,  as  much  affected  thereunto.

The  thirtieth  in  the  morning,  one  of  the  yong  Kings
Governours  was  by  his  order  cut  into  pieces  in  the  street,
for  being  (as  it  was  thought)  too  familiar  with  his  mother.
A  slave  of  his  died  with  him,  for  endeavouring  to  defend
his Master. This  day there came to Firando certaine
Spaniards  of  M.  Adams  his  acquaintance,  to  desire  passage
in  our  ship  for  Bantam. These  Spaniards  had  been  be-
longing to  a  Spanish  Gentleman  their  Generall,  who  about
a  yeare  past,  were  come  (upon  the  King  of  Spaines  charge)
An  intention from Nova Hispania, to discover to the Northward
°{ e. , of  Japan,  and  arriving  at  Edoo,  attending  the  Monson  to
discover  to  the  goe  t0  tne  Northward,  which  beginneth  in  the  end  of  May,
Northward  of  his  Company  (whereof  these  were  two)  mutinied  against
Japan.  him,  every  man  taking  his  owne  way,  leaving  the  ship

utterly  unmanned,  wherefore  I  thought  it  best  to  keepe
them  out  of  my  ship.
August.  The  third,  King  Foyne  sent  to  know  of  what  Bulk  our

Kings  Present  to  the  Emperour  was,  also  what  number  of
people  I  would  take  with  me,  for  that  he  would  provide
accordingly  for  my  going  up  in  good  fashion  both  for
Barke,  Horses,  and  Pallanchins.

This  day  I  caused  the  Presents  to  be  sorted  that  were
to  be  given  to  the  Emperour,  and  to  those  of  office  and
esteeme  about  him,  viz.

I s b
To  Ogoshosama,  the  Emperour,  to  the  value

of ----- -

To  Shongosama,  the  Emperours  sonne

To  Codskedona,  the  Emperours  Secretarie -

To Saddadona, the Emperours Sonnes

Secretarie  -----
To  Icocora  Juga,  Judge  of  Meaco
To  Fongo  dona,  Admirall  of  Orungo  -
To  Goto  Shozavero,  the  Mintmaster -

Totall -
452

-  87

7

6

-  43

lS

0

-  J5
is

17

6

- 14

03

4

-  04

10

6

-  03

10

0

1 1

00

0

-  180

03

10

JOHN SARIS

A.D.
1613.

Captaine  Saris  his  Journey  to  the  Court  of  the
Japonian  Emperour,  and  observations  there,
and  by  the  way.

He  seventh  of  August,  King  Foyne  furnished  me
with  a  proper  Galley  of  his  owne,  rowed  with
twentie  five  oares  on  a  side,  and  sixtie  men,  which

I  did  fit  up  in  a  verie  comely  manner,  with  waste  clothes,
ensignes,  and  all  other  necessaries,  and  having  taken  my
leave  of  the  King,  I  went  and  remained  aboord  the  ship,
to  set  all  things  in  order  before  my  departure.  Which
done,  and  remembrances  left  with  the  Master  and  Cape
Merchant,  for  the  well  governing  of  the  ship  and  house
ashoare  during  my  absence,  taking  with  mee  tenne  English,
and  nine  others,  besides  the  former  sixtie,  which  were
onely  to  attend  the  Gallie,  I  departed  from  Firando  to-
wards the  Emperours  Court.  Wee  were  rowed  through,
and  amongst  divers  Hands,  all  which,  or  the  most  part  of
them,  were  well  inhabited,  and  divers  proper  Townes
built  upon  them  ;  whereof  one  called  Fuccate,  hath  a  very
strong  Castle,  built  of  free  stone,  but  no  Ordnance  nor
Souldiers  therein.  It  hath  a  ditch  about  five  fathome
deepe,  and  twice  as  broad  round  about  it,  with  a  draw
bridge,  kept  all  in  very  good  repaire.  I  did  land  &  dine
there  in  the  Towne,  the  tyde  and  wind  so  strong  against
us,  as  that  we  could  not  passe.  The  Towne  seemed  to  be
as  great  as  London  is  within  the  wals,  very  wel  built,  and
even,  so  as  you  may  see  from  the  one  end  of  the  streete
to  the  other.  The  place  exceedingly  peopled,  very  Civill
and  curteous,  onely  that  at  our  landing,  and  being  here
in  Fuccate,  and  so  through  the  whole  Country,  whither-
soever we  came,  the  boyes,  children,  and  worser  sort  of
idle  people,  would  gather  about  and  follow  along  after  us,
crying,  Core,  Core,  Cocore,  Ware,  that  is  to  say,  You
Coreans  with  false  hearts :  wondering,  hooping,  hollow-
ing, and

453

The  old  King

sent  100.
Tayes  of
Japan  money
for  him  to
spend  by  the
way. A  Tay
is  five  shil.  of
our  money.
My  setting
forward
toward  the
Emperours
Court.

Fuccate  a  large
andfaire
Towne.

making  such  a  noise  about  us,  that  we  could

A.D.
1613.

Women  with
their  hous-
holds  that  live
in  boats  upon
the  water.
Women-
divers.

[I.  iv. 371.]
Straights  of
Xeminaseque.
A  strange
Juncke.

Osaca.

Description  of
Osaca.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

scarcely  heare  one  an  other  speake,  sometimes  throwing
stones  at  us  (but  that  not  in  many  Townes)  yet  the  clam-
our and  crying  after  us  was  every  where  alike,  none
reprooving  them  for  it.  The  best  advice  that  I  can  give
those  who  hereafter  shall  arrive  there,  is  that  they  passe
on  without  regarding  those  idle  rablements,  and  in  so
doing,  they  shall  find  their  eares  onely  troubled  with  the
noise.  All  alongst  this  Coast,  and  so  up  to  Ozaca,  we
found  women  divers,  that  lived  with  their  houshold  and
family  in  boats  upon  the  water,  as  in  Holland  they  do  the
like.  These  women  would  catch  fish  by  diving,  which  by
net  and  lines  they  missed,  and  that  in  eight  fathome
depth  :  their  eyes  by  continuall  diving  doe  grow  as  red
as  blood,  whereby  you  may  know  a  diving  woman  from
all  other  women.

We  were  two  daies  rowing  from  Firando  to  Fuccate :
about  eight  or  tenne  leagues  on  this  side  the  straights  of
Xemina-seque,  we  found  a  great  Towne,  where  there  lay
in  a  Docke,  a  Juncke  of  eight  hundred  or  a  thousand
Tunnes  of  burthen,  sheathed  all  with  yron,  with  a  guard
appointed  to  keep  her  from  firing  and  treachery.  She  was
built  in  a  very  homely  fashion,  much  like  that  which
describeth  Noahs  Arke  unto  us.  The  Naturals  told  us,
that  she  served  to  transport  souldiers  into  any  of  the
Hands,  if  rebellion  or  warre  should  happen.

We  found  nothing  extraordinary  after  we  had  passed
the  straights  of  Xemina-seque,  untill  we  came  unto
Osaca,  where  we  arrived  the  twenty  seventh  day  of
August :  our  Galley  could  not  come  neere  the  Towne  by
sixe  miles,  where  another  smaller  Vessell  met  us,  wherein
came  the  good  man  or  Host  of  the  house  where  we  lay  in
Osaca,  and  brought  a  banquet  with  him  of  wine  and  salt
fruits  to  intertaine  me.  The  boat  having  a  fast  made  to
the  mast-head,  was  drawn  by  men,  as  our  Barkes  are
from  London  Westward.  We  found  Osaca  to  be  a  very
great  Towne,  as  great  as  London  within  the  walls,  with
many  faire  Timber  bridges  of  a  great  height,  serving  to
passe  over  a  river  there  as  wide  as  the  Thames  at  London.

454

JOHN SARIS

Some  faire  houses  we  found  there,  but  not  many.  It  is
one  of  the  chiefe  Sea-ports  of  all  Japan  ;  having  a  Castle  in
it,  marvellous  large  and  strong,  with  very  deepe  trenches
about  it,  and  many  draw  bridges,  with  gates  plated
with  yron.  The  Castle  is  built  all  of  Free-stone,  with
Bulwarks  and  Battlements,  with  loope  holes  for  smal  shot
and  arrowes,  and  divers  passages  for  to  cast  stones  upon
the  assaylants.  The  walls  are  at  the  least  sixe  or  seven
yards  thicke,  all  (as  I  said)  of  Free-stone,  without  any
filling  in  the  inward  part  with  trumpery,  as  they  reported
unto  me.  The  stones  are  great,  of  an  excellent  quarry,
and  are  cut  so  exactly  to  fit  the  place  where  they  are  laid,
that  no  morter  is  used,  but  onely  earth  cast  betweene  to
fill  up  voyd  crevises  if  any  be.  In  this  Castle  did  dwell
at  our  beeing  there,  the  sonne  of  Tiquasamma,  who  being
an  infant  at  the  time  of  his  Fathers  decease,  was  left  to
the  governement  and  education  of  foure,  whereof  Ogosho-
samma,  the  now  Emperour  was  one  and  chiefe.  The
other  three  desirous  of  Soveraigntie  each  for  his  particular,
and  repulsed  by  Ogoshosamma,  were  for  their  owne  safetie
forced  to  take  up  Armes,  wherein  fortune  favouring
Ogoshosamma  at  the  triall  in  field,  two  of  them  beeing
slaine,  the  third  was  glad  to  save  himselfe  by  flight.  He
beeing  Conquerour,  attempted  that  which  formerly  (as  it  is
thought)  hee  never  dream'd  of,  and  proclaimed  himselfe
Emperour,  and  seazing  upon  the  true  heire,  married  him
unto  his  daughter,  as  the  onely  meanes  to  worke  a  perfect
reconcilement,  confining  the  young  married  couple  to  live
within  this  Castle  of  Osaca,  attended  onely  with  such  as
had  been  brought  up  from  their  cradles  by  Ogoshosamma,
not  knowing  any  other  Father  (as  it  were)  then  him :  So
that  by  their  intelligence  he  could  at  all  times  understand
what  passed  there,  and  accordingly  rule  him.

Right  over  against  Osaca,  on  the  other  side  of  the
River,  lyeth  another  great  Towne  called  Sacay,  but  not
so  bigge  as  Osaca,  yet  is  it  a  Towne  of  great  Trade  for
all  the  Hands  thereabout.

The eight and twentieth day at night, having left

455

A.D.
1613.

A  fair e  and
strong  Castle.

The  son  of
Tiquasamajhe
true  heire  of
Japan  how
defeated  of  his
right.

Sacay.

A.D.
1613.

Fushimi.

Garrisons
changed  every
three  yeares.

Their  March
and  Weapons.

No  Ensignes
nor  Drums  or
other  Martiall
Musicke.

Strange
riding.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

musters  and  prices  of  our  Commodities  with  our  Host,
we  parted  from  Osaca  by  Barke  towards  Fushimi,  where
we  arrived.

The  nine  and  twentieth  at  night  we  found  here  a  Gar-
rison of  three  thousand  Souldiers  maintayned  by  the
Emperour,  to  keepe  Miaco  and  Osaca  in  subjection.  The
Garrison  is  shifted  every  three  yeares,  which  change
happened  to  be  at  our  being  there,  so  that  we  saw  the
old  Bands  march  away,  and  the  new  enter,  in  most
Souldier-like  manner,  marching  five  abrest,  and  to  everie
ten  files  an  Officer  which  is  called  a  Captaine  of  fiftie,  who
kept  them  continually  in  verie  good  order.  First,  their
shot,  viz.  Calievers,  (for  Muskets  they  have  none,  neyther
will  they  use  any)  then  followed  Pikes,  next  Swords,  or
Cattans  and  Targets,  then  Bowes  and  Arrowes  :  next  those
weapons  resembling  a  Welch-hooke  called  Waggadashes ;
then  Calievers  againe,  and  so  as  formerly,  without  any
Ensigne  or  Colours :  neyther  had  they  any  Drummes  or
other  Musicall  Instruments  for  Warre.  The  first  file  of
the  Cattans  and  Targets  had  silver  scabberds  to  their  Cat-
tans,  and  the  last  file  which  was  next  to  the  Captaine  had
their  scabberds  of  gold.  The  Companies  consisted  of
divers  numbers,  some  five  hundred,  some  three  hundred,
some  one  hundred  and  fiftie  men.  In  the  midst  of  every
Companie  were  three  Horses  very  richly  trapped,  and  fur-
nished with  Sadies,  well  set  out,  some  covered  with  costly
Furres,  some  with  Velvet,  some  with  Stammet  broad-
cloth, every  Horse  had  three  slaves  to  attend  him,  ledde
with  silken  halters,  their  eyes  covered  with  lether  covers.
After  every  Troope  followed  the  Captaine  on  Horse-backe,
his  bed  and  other  necessaries  were  laid  upon  his  owne
Horse,  equally  peased  on  either  side,  over  the  same  was
spread  a  covering  of  redde  felt  of  China,  whereupon  the
Captaine  did  sit  crosse-legged,  as  if  hee  had  sate  betwixt
a  couple  of  panniers  :  and  for  those  that  were  ancient  or
otherwise  weake-backt,  they  had  a  staffe  artificially  fixed
unto  the  Pannell,  that  the  Rider  might  rest  himselfe,  and
leane  backward  against  it,  as  if  he  were  sitting  in  a  chaire.

456

JOHN SARIS

The  Captaine  Generall  of  this  Garrison  wee  met  two  dayes
after  we  had  met  his  first  troop,  (having  stiJl  in  the  meane-
time  met  with  some  of  these  Companies  as  we  passed
along,  sometimes  one  league,  sometimes  two  leagues
distant  one  from  another.)  Hee  marched  in  very  great
state,  beyond  that  the  others  did,  (for  the  second  Troope
was  more  richly  set  out  in  their  armes  then  the  first :  and
the  third  then  the  second,  and  so  still  every  one  better
then  other,  untill  it  came  unto  this  the  last  and  best  of
all.)  He  hunted  and  hawked  all  the  way,  having  his
owne  Hounds  and  Hawkes  along  with  him,  the  Hawkes
being  hooded  and  lured  as  ours  are.  His  Horses  for  his
owne  Sadie  being  sixe  in  number,  richly  trapped.  Their
Horses  are  not  tall,  but  of  the  size  of  our  midling  Nags,
short  and  well  trust,  small  headed  and  very  full  of  mettle,
in  my  opinion,  farre  excelling  the  Spanish  Jennet  in  pride
and  stomacke.  He  had  his  Pallankin  carryed  before  him,
the  inside  of  Crimson  Velvet,  and  sixe  men  appointed  to
carrie  it,  two  at  a  time.

Such  good  order  was  taken  for  the  passing  and  provid-
ing for,  of  these  three  thousand  Souldiers,  that  no  man
either  travelling  or  inhabiting  upon  the  way  where  they
lodged,  was  any  way  injured  by  them,  but  cheerefully
entertayned  them  as  other  their  guests,  because  they  paid
for  what  they  tooke,  as  all  other  men  did.  Every  Towne
and  Village  upon  the  way  being  well  fitted  with  Cookes
and  Victualling  houses,  where  they  might  at  an  instant
have  what  they  needed,  and  dyet  themselves  from  a  pennie
English  a  meale,  to  two  shillings  a  meale.

The  Dyet  used  generally  through  the  Countrey,  is
Rice  of  divers  sorts,  one  better  then  other  (as  of  our
Wheate  and  Corne  here)  the  whitest  accounted  the  best,
which  they  use  in  stead  of  Bread,  Fish,  fresh  and  salted,
some  pickeld  Herbes,  Beanes,  Raddishes  and  other  Roots
salted  and  pickled,  Wild-fowle,  Ducke,  Mallard,  Teale,
Geese,  Phesant,  Partridge,  Qyaile,  and  divers  others,  which
they  doe  powder  and  put  up  in  pickle,  of  Hens  they  have
great  store,  as  likewise  of  Deere  both  red  and  fallow :

457

A.D.
1613.

Hunting  and
Hatching.

[I. iv.  372.]
Their  Horses.

Their  good
order.

The  Dyet  in
Japan.

Store  of  pro-
vision.

A.D.
l6l  I.

The  Bay  o/S.
Augustine  in
the  lie  of  Saint
Laurence.

A  strong  cur-
rent.

Note.

[I.  iv.

llhas

Primeiras.

335-]

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

extreame  Stormes,  Raine,  Thunder  and  Lightening :  yet
at  that  present  very  faire  and  so  hot  that  calmes  were  to
bee  doubted.

The  third,  latitude  twentie  three  degrees,  fiftie  minutes,
way  South  by  West  twentie  three  leagues  wind  at  South.

About  five  at  night  we  made  land  being  the  Hand  of
Madagascar,  otherwise  called  Saint  Laurence,  the  Bay  of
Saint  Augustine  bearing  East  by  North  about  sixe  leagues
off.  And  then  steered  away  North  North-east,  variation
at  Sun-setting  fifteene  degrees,  eleven  minutes  Westerly.
We  sounded,  but  had  no  ground  at  one  hundred  fathome.
The  land  not  very  high,  but  Sandie.  And  then  we  passed
the  Tropicke  of  Capricorne,  to  the  North-ward.

The  tenth  of  September,  latitude  seventeene  degrees,
three  minutes,  way  North-west  twelve  leagues,  wind  at
North-east :  we  steered  North  North-west,  variation  at
Sun-rising  thirteene  degrees,  fiftie  foure  minutes  Westerly.
Heere  wee  found  a  strong  Current  setting  South  South-
west ;  for  these  last  foure  and  twentie  houres,  shee  could
not  have  runne  lesse  then  foure  and  twentie  leagues,  having
a  stiffe  gale  :  but  for  the  reason  aforesaid,  in  the  evening
we  made  the  Island  Primeiras  bearing  West  by  North
about  foure  leagues  off.

The  eleventh,  latitude  seventeene  degrees,  thirty  three
minutes  way  South  by  East  halfe  a  point  Easterly  fourteene
leagues,  the  wind  at  North-east,  and  North-east  by  East,
a  storme.

Note  that  having  stood  but  one  watch  and  an  halfe  to
the  East-wards,  the  Current  did  carry  us  thirtie  minutes
to  the  Southwards  of  the  latitude  we  were  in,  by  the
last  observation :  then  we  stood  in  for  the  land  North
North-west,  hoping  of  a  better  wind  neare  the  shoare
with  lesse  current,  and  suddenly  the  water  changed,  but
we  could  find  no  ground  at  an  hundred  fathom.  In  the
evening  we  made  the  land  bearing  North,  and  North  by
West  about  sixe  leagues  off,  finding  it  to  be  the  Islands
Primeiras,  but  being  to  the  Northward  of  it,  it  shewed
somewhat  longer  then  before,  for  it  did  beare  from  the

358

JOHN SARIS

161 1.

North-west  to  the  North  of  us ;  wee  sounded  and  had
twentie  fathom  small  glittering  sand  ;  and  sounding  againe,
had  twentie  fathom  blacke  Ozie,  with  black  shels.  Then
we  stood  off  to  the  Eastward,  the  storme  continuing  with
more  wind  in  the  night,  then  in  the  day  ;  and  having
stood  off  one  glasse,  we  sounded  and  had  two  and  twenty
fathome,  gray  sand  and  shels.

The  twelfth,  latitude  eighteene  degrees  seventeene
minutes,  way  South-east  by  East  eight  and  twentie  leagues,
wind  at  North-east,  a  storme  :  so  that  these  last  twenty
foure  houres  we  were  carryed  by  the  force  of  the  Current
forty  foure  minutes  to  the  Southward  of  the  former  obser-
vation, variation  fourteene  degrees,  one  and  forty  minutes
Westerly.  About  night  the  wind  veered  to  East  North-
east, so  that  we  lay  North  with  the  sterne.

The  thirteenth,  latitude  nineteene  degrees,  sixteene
minutes,  way  South-east  by  South,  two  and  twentie  leagues,
wind  North-east  by  East  little  wind,  the  Current  very
strong  against  us.

The  fifteenth,  latitude  sixteene  degrees,  six  and  forty
minutes,  way  North  North-east,  halfe  a  point  Easterly
thirty  leagues,  wind  South-west  wee  steered  North-east
by  North.  Note  heere  we  found  not  the  Current  so
forcible,  for  we  have  deprest  the  Pole  one  degree,  seven
and  twenty  minutes  these  foure  and  twentie  houres.  The
reason  wee  supposed  to  bee  that  the  Island  Juan  de  Nova,
was  betweene  us  and  the  Current,  for  we  made  account
it  did  beare  East  by  North  eighteene  leagues  off,  variation
at  Sun-setting  twelve  degrees,  eight  minutes  Westerly.

The  sixteenth,  latitude  sixteene  degrees  not  nine
minutes,  way  North  North-east  eighteene  leagues,  we
steered  North-east  by  North,  wind  South-west  by  South,
little  wind,  but  a  strong  Current,  variation  at  Sun-rising
thirteene  degrees,  not  three  minutes  Westerly.

The  seventeenth,  the  ships  way  North  by  West  eight
leagues,  variation  twelve  degrees  one  minute  Westerly  :  in
the morning  we made the land to the Southward of  The  I  stands  de
Mosambique,  making  it  to  be  the  Islands  de  Angoxa,  bear-  Jngoxa.

359

ad  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

,6l3-

Assoone  as  we  were  setled  in  our  lodging  in  Surunga,

I  sent  Master  Adams  to  the  Court,  to  let  the  Secretarie
understand  of  my  comming,  and  desire  of  as  speedie  dis-
patch as  might  bee.  Word  was  returned  that  I  was  wel-
come, that  I  should  rest  me,  and  within  a  day  or  two  I
should  have  accesse  to  the  Emperour.

The  seventh  was  spent  in  fitting  up  of  the  presents,  and
[I.  iv.  373.]  providing little Tables of slit deale of that Countrey
(which  smelleth  verie  sweet)  to  carrie  them  upon,  accord-
ing to  the  custome.
The  Castle  13 The  eighth,  I  was  carryed  in  my  Pallankin  to  the  Castle
Court  of  the Qf  Surunga  (where  the  Emperour  kept  his  Court)  and  was
p  attended  with  my  Merchants  and  others  carrying  the  pre-

sents before  me.  Being  entred  the  Castle,  I  passed  three
draw  bridges,  every  of  which  had  a  corps  of  Guard,  and
comming  up  a  paire  of  verie  faire  and  large  stone  staires,
I  was  met  by  two  grave  comely  men  the  one  them  Codske
dona,  the  Emperours  Secretarie ;  the  other  Fungo  dono
the  Admirall,  who  led  me  into  a  faire  roome  matted,  where
we  sat  downe  crosse-legged  upon  the  Mats.  Anon  after
they  lead  mee  betwixt  them  into  the  Chamber  of  Pres-
ence, where  was  the  Emperours  Chaire  of  State,  to  which
they  wished  me  to  doe  reverence.  It  was  of  cloth  of
Gold,  about  five  foot  high,  very  richly  set  forth  for  backe
and  sides,  but  had  no  Canopie  over-head.  Then  they
returned  backe  againe  to  the  place  where  before  they  did
sit,  where  having  stayed  about  one  quarter  of  an  houre,
word  was  brought,  that  the  Emperour  was  come  forth.
Then  they  rose  up  and  led  me  betwixt  them  unto  the
doore  of  the  roome  where  the  Emperor  was,  making
signes  to  me  that  I  should  enter  in  there,  but  durst  not
looke  in  themselves.  The  presents  sent  from  our  King
to  the  Emperour,  as  also  those  which  (according  to  the
custome  of  the  Countrey)  I  gave  unto  the  Emperour,  as
from  my  selfe,  were  placed  in  the  said  roome  upon  the
Mats  very  orderly,  before  the  Emperour  came  into  it.
Comming  to  the  Emperour,  according  to  our  English
Complements, I delivered our Kings Letter unto his

460

JOHN SARIS

Majestie,  who  tooke  it  in  his  hand,  and  put  it  up  towards
his  fore-head,  and  commanded  his  Interpreter,  who  sate  a
good  distance  from  him  behind,  to  will  Master  Adams  to
tell  me  that  I  was  welcome  from  a  wearisome  journey,
that  I  should  take  my  rest  for  a  day  or  two,  and  then  his
Answere  should  be  readie  for  our  King.  Then  he  asked
whether  I  did  not  intend  to  visit  his  sonne  at  Edoo.  I
answered,  I  did.  The  Emperour  said  that  order  should
be  taken  to  furnish  mee  with  men  and  Horses  for  the
Journey,  and  against  my  returne  his  Letters  should  be
readie  for  our  King.  So  taking  my  leave  of  the  Emper-
our, and  comming  to  the  doore  where  I  had  left  the
Secretarie  and  Admirall,  I  found  them  there  readie  to  con-
duct me  to  the  staires  head  where  formerly  they  had  met
mee,  and  there  I  tooke  my  Pallankin,  and  with  my  Atten-
dants returned  to  my  lodging.

The  ninth,  I  went  to  deliver  the  Secretarie  his  present,
which  in  no  wise  hee  would  receive,  but  heartily  thanked
me,  saying,  that  the  Emperour  had  commanded  the  con-
trarie,  and  that  it  were  as  much  as  his  life  if  he  should
take  any  gift.  But  hee  tooke  five  pound  of  Aloes
Socatrina  to  use  for  his  health.  I  delivered  the  Articles
of  priviledge  this  day  to  Codskedona,  being  in  number
fourteene.  He  requested  to  have  them  abbreviated  and
made  as  short  as  might  bee,  for  that  the  people  of  Japan
affect  brevitie.

The  tenth,  the  Articles  so  abridged,  were  sent  by  Master
Adams  to  the  Secretarie,  who  shewed  them  to  the  Emper-
our, and  he  approved  thereof,  denying  one  only,  which
was,  That  whereas  the  Chineses  had  refused  to  trade  with
the  English,  that  in  case  we  should  now  take  any  of  them
by  force,  that  our  Nation  might  have  leave  and  libertie
to  bring  them  into  Japan,  and  there  make  sale  of  the
goods  so  taken.  At  the  first  motion,  the  Emperour
answered,  that  seeing  they  denyed  us  Trade,  we  might
take  them.  But  upon  conference  with  the  Lieger  of
China,  the  Emperours  minde  was  changed,  and  would  not
allow  of  that  Article. The  rest  were  passed  under  his

461

A.U.
1613.

Japon'ians

affect

brevitie.

The  Copie  of
which  hee
brought  home
and  gave  mee
■which  after
follozveth.

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1613.

great  Seale,  which  is  not  of  Waxe  (as  ours)  but  stamped
like  a  print  and  coloured  red.

The  eleventh,  the  Present  appointed  for  the  Mint-
master,  was  delivered  him,  which  he  took  thankfully,  and
returned  to  me  two  Japonian  Gownes  of  Taffata,  quilted
with  silke  Cotton.

The  twelfth,  Master  Adams  was  sent  to  the  Mint-
master  (being  the  Emperours  Merchant,  and  having
charge  of  his  Mint  and  readie  monies,  a  man  of  very  great
esteeme  with  the  Emperour,  and  one  that  hath  vowed  that
whensoever  the  Emperour  shall  dye,  he  will  cut  out  his
own  guts  and  dye  with  him.)  Master  Adams  carryed
unto  him  the  particular  prices  of  our  English  Commodities
(as  before  is  specified.)

About  noone  the  same  day,  wee  departed  for  Edoo,  to
the  Emperours  sonne,  beeing  furnished  with  horse  and
men  by  the  Emperour,  as  formerly.

The  Countrey  betwixt  Surunga  and  Edoo  is  well  in-
habited. We  saw  many  Fotoquise  or  Temples  as  we
passed,  and  amongst  others  one  Image  of  especiall  note,
The  descrip- Ca\\ed  Dabis,  made  of  Copper,  being  hollow  within,  but

ton  of  an Qf  a  verv  substantiall  thicknesse. It  was  in  height,  as
Image  called  >  .  & . '

Dabis.  wee  ghessed,  from  the  ground  about  one  and  twentie  or

two  and  twentie  foot  in  the  likenesse  of  a  man  kneeling

upon  the  ground,  with  his  buttockes  resting  on  his  heeles,

his  armes  of  wonderfull  largenesse,  and  the  whole  bodie

proportionable, he is fashioned wearing of a Gowne.

This  Image  is  much  reverenced  by  Travellers  as  they  passe

there. Some  of  our  people  went  into  the  bodie  of  it,  and

hoope  and  hallowed,  which  made  an  exceding  great  noyse.

We  found  many  Characters  and  Markes  made  upon  it  by

Passengers,  whom  some  of  my  Followers  imitated,  and

made  theirs  in  like  manner. It  standeth  in  the  maine

Pilgrimage  to Roade  of  the  Pilgrimage  to  Tencheday,  which  is  much

Tencheday. frequented  : for  night  and  day,  rich  and  poore,  are  com-

ming  and  going  to  visit  Tencheday. M.  Adams  told  me

that  he  had  beene  at  the  Fotoqui  or  Temple  dedicated  to

this  Tencheday,  to  whom  they  make  this  devout  pilgrim-

462

Edoo.

JOHN SARIS  A.n.

1613.

age ; and  as  he  reported, there  is  monthly  one  of  the

fairest  Virgins  of  the  whole  countrey  brought  into  that [}•  1V-  374-]
„  • "1 1  1 • 11 1  •  .11  yireins  dedt-

Fotoqui,  and  there  she  sits  all  alone  in  a  roome  neatly  kept,  (a/£  (rj  an

in  a  very  sober  manner,  and  at  certaine  times,  this  Tenche-  /j0//.

day  (which  is  thought  to  be  the  Divell)  appeareth  unto

her,  and  having  knowne  her  carnally,  leaveth  with  her  at

his  departure  certaine  skales,  like  unto  the  skales  of  fishes  :

what  questions  shee  is  willed  by  the  Bonzees,  or  Priests

of that Fotoqui to aske, Tencheday resolves : and

every moneth a fresh Virgin is taken in ; but what

becomes of the old, Master Adams himselfe did not

know.

The  fourteenth,  we  arrived  at  Edoo,  a  Citie  much  We  arrived  at
greater  then  Surunga,  farre  fairer  building,  and  made  a
very  glorious  appearance  unto  us ;  the  ridge-tiles  and
corner-tiles  richly  gilded,  the  posts  of  their  doores  gilded
and  varnished :  Glasse-windowes  they  have  none,  but
great  windowes  of  board,  opening  in  leaves,  well  set  out
with  painting,  as  in  Holland  :  there  is  a  Cawsey  which
goeth  thorow  the  chiefe  streete  of  the  Towne  ;  underneath
this  Cawsey  runneth  a  River,  at  every  fiftie  paces  there  is
a  Well-head,  fitted  very  substantially  of  free-stone,  with
buckets  for  the  neighbours  to  fetch  water,  and  for  danger
of  fire.  This  streete  is  as  broad  as  any  of  our  streets  in
England.

The  fifteenth,  I  gave  the  Kings  Secretary,  Sadda-dona,
to  understand  of  my  arrivall,  requesting  him  to  let  the
King  know  thereof.

The  seventeenth,  I  had  accesse  to  the  King,  and  delivered
him  the  Presents  from  our  King,  as  also  certaine  from  my
selfe  (according  to  the  custome  of  the  Countrey.)  The
King  kept  his  Court  in  the  Castle  of  Edoo,  which  is
much  fairer  and  stronger  then  that  of  Surunga,  hee  was
better  guarded  and  attended  upon,  then  the  Emperour
his  Father.  Sadda-dona  the  Kings  Secretary,  is  father  to
Codske-dona  the  Emperours  Secretary,  whose  yeeres
affoording  better  experience,  hee  is  therefore  appointed
to  have  the  government  and  direction  of  the  yong  King,

463

A.D.
l6l  I.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

too  great  credit  to  them,  but  stand  upon  their  guard,  for
that  oftentimes  weapons  continue  peace.

The  Inhabitants  here  are  Negroes,  with  short  curled
haire,  and  Pintados  about  their  middles,  some  wearing
white  caps,  others  turbants,  by  which  we  knew  they  were
Mahometans.  The  King  himselfe  was  apparrelled  in  a
white  Cotten  coate,  a  Turbant  upon  his  head,  and  a
Guzerate  Pintado  about  his  middle :  he  was  little  whiter
then  the  ordinary  people,  who  are  blacke :  hee  was  leane,
he  had  a  round  thinne  blacke  beard,  great  eyes,  of  a  low
stature,  and  of  very  few  words ;  he  could  speake  a  little
Arabique,  which  he  had  learned  in  his  Pilgrimage  to
Mecca,  from  whence  he  had  the  name  of  Sheriffe.  Here
they  desire  money  (whereby  we  understand  Spanish  Rialls
of  eight)  rather  then  commoditie.  But  for  Crimson  broad
[I.  iv.  337.]  Cloath,  Red  sculd  Caps,  Cambaya  cloaths,  and  Sword
blades,  you  may  have  any  thing  the  Hand  affoords,  which
serveth  onely  for  refreshing,  and  no  way  for  merchandizing.
He  gave  the  Generall  a  note  under  his  hand  of  friendship,
which  beeing  not  long,  I  have  here  inserted.

Skarefoo  Boo-
backar  King
of  the  Hand
called Moyela,
his  note  under
his  hand  for
further friend-
skip.  1 6 1 1 .
written  in
Arabique.

November.

The  maine
land  of
Melinde.

^&Sj£

The  fourth  of  November,  we  set  saile  from  this  Hand
Moyella.  The  seventeenth  in  the  morning,  we  made  the
land  being  the  maine  of  Melinde,  the  Bay  or  Gulfe  called
Formosa,  bearing:  North-west  about  foure  leagues  off.
The  land  trending  North-east  South-west,  wee  had  thirtie
fathome,  small  gray  sand  and  shels,  wind  at  East  North-
east, we  stood  off  South-East  a  stiffe  gale,  and  a  very
great  sea,  which  sheweth  to  be  shoale  water,  and  a  Current

364

JOHN SARIS

A.D.

1 6 1 1

Note.

which  we  found  to  set  alongst  the  shoare,  North-east.
Latitude  two  degrees  tenne  minutes,  variation  at  Sunne-
setting  twelve  degrees  thirtie  one  minuts  Westerly.  Note,
this  land  lieth  more  Easterly  then  in  our  plats,  otherwise
we  should  not  have  fallen  therewith  so  soone  :  for  by  our
reckonings  we  were  at  least  fortie  eight  leagues  off.

The  nine  and  twentieth,  latitude  foure  degrees  fortie
foure  minutes,  variation  seventeene  degrees  thirtie  foure
minutes  Westerly,  beeing  as  we  supposed  twelve  leagues
off  the  shoales,  called  Baxos  de  Malhina  East  by  South,
we  had  a  great  Rippling,  and  over-fall  of  water,  as  if  it  had
beene  shoal-water ;  but  sounding  found  no  ground  at  an
hundred  fathome,  the  wind  came  about  here  to  South
Southeast,  our  course  North-east.

The  first  of  December,  Latitude  three  degrees  fortie  December.
minutes,  our  way  North  North-east  eight  leagues,  wind
at  North  North-east,  East,  East  South-east,  and  North
East  by  North,  little  wind  for  the  most  part  calme,  and
had  a  very  fearefull  rippling  of  the  water,  much  like  unto  F*?jfu^
the  fall  at  London  Bridge,  beeing  out  of  sight  of  land,  tff™ffJy
and  finding  no  ground  at  an  hundred  fathome  :  when  we
stood  into  the  land  it  left  us,  but  bearing  off,  (beeing  fiftie
leagues  from  land)  we  found  very  terrible.  Variation
sixteene  degrees  fifteene  minutes  Westerly.  The  second,
Latitude  two  degrees  fiftie  five  minutes,  way  North-east
by  North  eighteene  leagues,  wind  variable,  the  Rippling
continuing,  variation  fifteene  degrees  fiftie  seven  minutes
Westerly,  which  mooved  us  to  thinke  that  wee  had  a
Current  setting  to  the  West,  the  variation  decreasing  so
suddenly.  The  third,  Latitude  foure  degrees  foure
minutes,  way  South  twentie  three  leagues,  wind  variable,
most  part  calme,  with  great  Rippling  of  the  water,  and  a
very  strong  Current  Southerly,  so  that  these  last  twentie
foure  houres,  we  are  carried  backe  to  the  South-wards  of
our  former  latitude,  one  degree  nine  minutes.  The  fourth,
latitude  foure  degrees  thirtie  three  minutes,  way  South
tenne  leagues,  little  wind  and  variable  betwixt  the  North-
east, and  East  by  South, very  strange  Rippling  of  the

365

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1613.

The  Japonian  Charter,  the  lines  to  be  read  down-
wards, beginning  at  the  right  hand.

This  last  is  the  Seale.
466

JOHN SARIS  *•"•

1613.

Priviledges granted by Ogoshosama, Emperour  p.  w.  376]
of  Japan, unto the Right Worshipfull Sir
Thomas  Smith,  Knight,  Governour,  and  others
the Honorable and Worshipfull Adventurers
to  the  East-Indies.

1  TNprimis,  Wee  give  free  licence  to  the  subjects  of
A  the King of Great Britaine, viz. Sir Thomas

Smith,  Governour,  and  Company  of  the  East-Indian
Merchants  and  Adventurers,  for  ever,  safely  to  come  into
any  of  our  Port  of  our  Empire  of  Japan,  with  their
shippes  and  merchandizes,  without  any  hinderance  to  them
or  their  goods.  And  to  abide,  buy,  sell,  and  barter,
according  to  their  owne  manner,  with  all  Nations  :  to  tarry
heere  as  long  as  they  thinke  good,  and  to  depart  at  their
pleasures.

2  Item,  Wee  grant  unto  them  freedome  of  Custome,
for  all  such  merchandizes  as  either  now  they  have  brought,
or  hereafter  shall  bring  into  our  Kingdomes,  or  shall  from
hence  transport  to  any  forraigne  part.  And  doe  authorize
those  ships  that  hereafter  shall  arrive,  and  come  from
England,  to  proceed  to  present  sale  of  their  commodities,
without  further  comming  or  sending  up  to  our  Court.

3  Item,  If  any  of  their  shippes  shall  happen  to  be  in
danger  of  shipwracke,  Wee  will  our  subjects  not  only
to  assist  them,  but  that  such  part  of  shippe  and  goods  as
shall  be  saved,  be  returned  to  their  Captaine,  or  Cape  Mer-
chant, or  their  assignes.  And  that  they  shall  or  may
build  one  house  or  more  for  themselves  in  any  part  of  Our
Empire,  where  they  shall  thinke  fittest.  And  at  their
departure  to  make  sale  thereof  at  their  pleasure.

4  Item,  If  any  of  the  English  Merchants  or  other  shall
depart  this  life,  within  our  Dominions,  the  goods  of  the
deceased  shall  remaine  at  the  dispose  of  the  Cape  Merchant.
And  that  all  offences  committed  by  them  shall  be  punished
by  the  said  Cape  Merchant,  according  to  his  discretion  :
and  Our  Lawes  to  take  no  hold  of  their  persons  or  goods.

467

A.D.
1613.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

The  discovery
ofTeadzo  to
the  northward.

5  Item,  Wee  will  that  yee  Our  subjects  trading  with
them  for  any  of  their  commodities,  pay  them  for  the  same,
according  to  agreement,  without  delay,  or  returne  of  their
wares  againe  unto  them.

6  Item,  For  such  commodities  as  they  have  now
brought,  or  shall  hereafter  bring,  fitting  for  Our  service
and  proper  use  :  Wee  will  that  no  arrest  bee  made  thereof,
but  that  the  price  bee  made  with  the  Cape  Merchant,
according  as  they  may  sell  to  others,  and  present  payment
upon  the  delivery  of  the  goods.

7  Item,  If  in  discovery  of  other  Countries  for  Trade,
and  returne  of  their  shippes,  they  shall  need  men  or
Victualls,  Wee  will  that  yee  Our  subjects  furnish  them  for
their  money,  as  their  need  shall  require.

8  And  that  without  other  Passe-port,  they  shall  and
may  set  out  upon  the  discovery  of  Yeadzo,  or  any  other
part,  in  or  about  our  Empire.

From  our  Castle  in  Surunga,  this  first  day  of  the  ninth
*Or  Raigne.  moneth, and in the eighteenth yeere of Our *  Dary,
according  to  Our  Computation. Sealed  with  our  Broad-
seale,  &c.

Under-written :

Minna.  Mottono.

yei.  ye.  yeas.

Note  that  Oringgaw  is  a  very  good  harbour  for  ship-
ping, where  ships  may  ride  as  safely  as  in  the  River  of
Thames  before  London,  and  the  passage  thereto  by  Sea
very  safe  and  good  :  so  that  it  will  be  much  better  for  our
ships  to  saile  thither,  then  to  Firando,  in  respect  that
Oringgaw  is  upon  the  maine  Island,  and  is  distant  from
Edoo  (the  chiefe  City)  but  fourteene  or  fifteene  leagues.
The  place  is  not  so  well  replenished  with  victuall  and
flesh-meat,  as  Firando  is,  which  want  only  excepted,
Oringgaw  is  for  all  other  matters  to  be  preferred  before
Firando.

At  my  returne  to  Surunga,  I  found  a  Spanish  Embassa-
dor arrived  there  from  the  Philippinas,  who  only  had

468

Oringgaw  the
best  haven  or
road  for  us.

A  Spanish
Embassador
from  the
Philippinas.

JOHN SARIS

sight  of  the  Emperour,  and  delivered  him  his  presents,
which  were  certaine  China  Damask.es,  and  five  jarres  of
sweet  wine  of  Europe.  After  the  first  time,  he  could  not
obtaine  accesse  to  the  Emperour.  His  Embassage  was,
that  such  Portugals  and  Spaniards  as  were  within  his
Dominions,  not  authorized  by  the  King  of  Spaine,  might
be  delivered  up  unto  him  to  carry  away  to  the  Philippinas  :
which  the  Emperour  denyed  to  doe,  saying,  That  his
Countrey  was  a  free  Country,  and  none  should  be  forced
out  of  it ;  but  if  the  Embassadour  could  perswade  any  to
go,  they  should  not  be  staied.  This  comming  of  the
Spanish  Embassadour  for  men,  was  caused  by  the  great
want  of  men  they  had  to  defend  the  Molucca  Hands  from
the  Dutch,  who  then  made  great  preparation  for  the
absolute  conquest  thereof.  After  that  the  Embassadour
had  attended  for  the  Emperours  answere,  the  time  limitted
him  by  his  Commission,  seeing  it  came  not,  hee  departed
discontented.  But  being  at  the  Sea-side,  there  was  an
answere  returned  for  him  to  carry,  with  a  slender  Present,
viz.  five  Japan  Gownes,  and  two  Cattans  or  Swords.

The  ninth  we  departed  from  Surunga  at  Edoo.  About
a  month  before  my  comming  thither,  the  Emperour  being
displeased  with  the  Christians,  made  proclamation,  that
they  should  forthwith  remove  and  carry  away  all  their
Churches  to  Langasacque,  a  Towne  situate  on  the  Sea-side,
and  distant  from  Firando  about  eight  leagues :  And  that
no  Christian  Church  should  stand,  nor  Masse  be  sung,
within  ten  leagues  of  his  Court,  upon  paine  of  death.  A
while  after,  certaine  of  the  Naturalls,  being  seven  and
twentie  in  number,  (men  of  good  fashion)  were  assembled
together  in  an  Hospitall,  appointed  by  the  Christians  for
Lepers,  and  there  had  a  Masse  :  whereof  the  Emperour
being  informed,  commanded  them  to  be  shut  up  in  an
house  for  one  night,  and  that  the  next  day  they  should
suffer  death.  The  same  evening  another  man  for  debt
was  clapt  up  in  the  same  house,  being  an  Heathen  at  his
comming  in,  and  ignorant  of  Christ  and  his  Religion  :
But  (which  is  wonderfull) the  next  morning,  when  the

469

A.D.
l6  I  3.

[I.  iv.  377.]
A  proclama-
tion against
the  Christians.

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1613.

Officer  called  at  the  doore  for  those  which  were  Christians
to  come  forth,  and  goe  to  execution,  and  those  which  were
not,  and  did  renounce  the  same,  to  stay  behind  :  this  man
in  that  nights  space  was  so  instructed  by  the  other,  that
resolutely  he  came  out  with  the  rest,  and  was  crucified
with  them.

In  our  passage  towards  Miaco  from  Surunga,  we  had

for  the  most  part  much  raine,  whereby  the  waters  did  so

rise,  that  wee  were  forced  to  stay  by  the  way,  so  that  it

was the sixteenth of October before we got thither.

The  dcsaip- Miaco  is  the,  greatest  Citie  of  Japan,  consisting  most  upon

tionoftheCitie  merchandizing. The  chiefe  Fotoqui  or  Temple  of  the

of  Miaco. whole  Countrey  is  there,  being  built  of  free-stone,  and  is

as  long  as  the  Westerne  end  of  Saint  Pauls  in  London,

from  the  Quier,  being  as  high  arched  and  borne  upon

Their  Bon- pillars  as  that  is  :  where  many  Bonzees  doe  attend  for  their

zees,  Idols, maintenance,  as  the  Priests  among  Papists. There  is  an

. (i  ^er'  Altar  whereon  they  doe  offer  Rice  and  small  money,  called

Condriius  (whereof  twentie  make  one  shilling  English  : )

which  is  employed  for  the  use  of  the  Bonzees. Neare

unto  this  Altar  there  is  an  Idoll,  by  the  Natives  called

Mannada, made of Copper, much resembling that of

Dabis formerly spoken of, but is much higher, for  it

reacheth  up  to  the  very  Arch. This  Fotoqui  was  begun

to  be  built  by  Taicosania  in  his  life-time,  and  since  his

sonne  hath  proceeded  to  the  finishing  thereof,  which  was

newly  made  an  end  of  when  wee  were  there. Within

the  inclosure  of  the  walles  of  this  Fotoqui  there  are  buried

(by  the  report  of  the  inhabitants)  the  Eares  and  Noses  of

three thousand Coreans, which were massacred at one

time  :  Upon  their  grave  is  a  mount  raised,  with  a  Pyramis

on  the  toppe  thereof ; which  mount  is  greene,  and  very

neatly  kept. The  horse  that  Taico-sania  last  rode  on,  is

kept  neare  unto  this  Fotoqui,  having  never  been  ridden

since,  his  hooffes  being  extraordinarily  growne  with  his

age,  and  still  standing  there.

The  Fotoqui  standeth  upon  the  top  of  an  high  hill,  and
on  either  side,  as  yee  mount  up  to  it,  hath  fiftie  pillars  of

470

JOHN SARIS  a.d.

1613.

free-stone,  distant  ten  paces  one  from  the  other,  and  on
every  pillar  a  Lanterne,  wherein  every  night  lights  are
maintained  of  Lampe-oyle. In  this  Citie  of  Miaco,  the Ce/UJge  of
Portugall  Jesuits  have  a  very  stately  Colledge,  wherein ^S"J^  '
likewise are divers Jesuits, Naturall Japonians, which
preach,  and  have  the  new  Testament  printed  in  the  Japan fje  netv .
language. In  this  Colledge  are  many  Japonian  children the  j n
trayned  up,  and  instructed  in  the  rudiments  of  Christian  language.
Religion,  according  to  the  Romish  Church  :  There  are  not
lesse  then  five  or  sixe  thousand  Japonians  in  this  Citie  of
Miaco  professing  Christ.

Besides  the  Fotoqui  before  described,  there  are  many
other  Fotoquis  in  this  Citie.  The  Tradesmen  and  Arti-
ficers are  distributed  by  themselves,  every  Occupation  and
Trade  in  their  severall  streets,  and  not  mingled  together,
as  heere  with  us.

At  Miaco  we  stayed,  expecting  the  Emperours  Present,
which  at  length  was  delivered  to  me  out  of  the  Castle,
being  ten  Beobs,  or  large  Pictures  to  hang  a  chamber
with.

The  twentieth,  wee  departed  from  Miaco,  and  came  the
same  night  to  Fushimi.

The  one  and  twentieth,  about  noone  we  arrived  at
Osaca  :  heere  wee  found  the  people  very  rude,  following  Osaca.
us,  crying  Tosin,  Tosin,  that  is,  Chinaes,  Chinaes ;  others
calling  us  Core,  Core,  and  flinging  stones  at  us ;  the
gravest  people  of  the  Towne  not  once  reproving  them,
but  rather  animating  of  them,  and  setting  them  on.  Heere
we  found  the  Gaily  readie,  which  had  attended  for  us
ever  since  our  landing,  at  the  charge  of  the  King  of
Firando.  The  foure  and  twentieth  at  ni^ht  we  all  We  embarked
embarked  for  Firando.  for  Firan^°-

The  sixt  of  November  we  arrived  at  Firando,  and  were  November  6.
kindly  bid  welcome  by  King  Foyne.  All  this  while  our
people  sold  little,  the  custome  of  the  Countrey  being,  that
without  expresse  permission  from  the  Emperour,  no
stranger  may  offer  goods  to  sale.  Besides,  our  chiefest
commoditie  intended  for  those  parts  being  Broad-cloath,

47i

A.D.
1613.

[I.  iv.  378.]

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

(which  according  to  former  intelligence,  had  lately  been
sold  there  at  fortie  Rialls  of  eight  the  matte,  which  is  two
yards,  as  aforesaid)  the  Natives  were  now  more  backward
to  buy  then  before,  because  they  saw  that  we  our  selves
were  no  forwarder  in  wearing  the  thing  which  wee  recom-
mended unto  them.  For,  said  they,  you  commend  your
Cloath  unto  us,  but  you  your  selves  weare  least  thereof,
the  better  sort  of  you  wearing  Silken  garments,  the  meaner
Fustians,  &c.  Wherefore  hoping  that  good  counsell  may
(though  late)  come  to  some  good  purpose,  I  wish  that  our
Nation  would  be  more  forward  to  use  and  spend  this
naturall  commoditie  of  our  owne  Countrey,  so  shall  wee
better  encourage  and  allure  others  to  the  entertainment
and  expence  thereof.

§•  viii.

Accidents  after  his  returne  to  Firando,  the  setling
of  a  Factory  there,  departure  for  Bantam,  and
thence  for  England.

He  seventh  of  November,  I  visited  the  Kings  with
Presents  first,  and  after  with  Presence,  and  was
kindly  entertained. The  eighth,  Andrew  Palmer,

Steward  of  the  ship,  and  William  Marnell  Gunners  Mate,
lay  ashoare  all  night,  and  in  a  drunken  humour,  went  into
the  field  and  fought,  and  wounded  each  other  so  sore,  that
it  is  thought  Palmer  will  hardly  escape  with  his  life,  and
Marnell  be  lame  of  his  hands  for  ever.

The  ninth,  in  the  morning  very  early  I  went  aboord  the
Ship,  and  carried  M.  Cockes  along  with  me,  and  called
the  Master  and  all  the  Officers  into  my  Cabbin,  making
it  knowne  unto  them,  that  it  much  greieved  me  the
indirect  course  some  of  them  tooke,  namely,  Palmer  and
Marnell,  who  went  out  of  the  Ship  without  license,
and  had  wounded  one  an  other  so  sore,  that  the  one
was  in  danger  of  his  life,  and  the  other  a  lame  man  for
ever ;  and  that  which  was  more,  the  Surviver  in  danger
to  be  hanged  if  the  other  died,  which  could  not  choose  but

472

JOHN SARIS  ad

1613.

bee  a  great  hearts  griefe  unto  me  :  as  also  to  understand,
that  Francis  Williams  and  Simon  Colphax  were  in  the
boat,  going  ashoare  to  have  fought,  and  John  Dench  and
John  Winston  appointed  to  doe  the  like,  and  Dench  con-
fessed it  was  true,  and  that  he  saw  Palmer  and  Marnell
fighting,  and  went  and  parted  them,  otherwise  both  had
remained  dead  in  the  field  :  these  matters,  I  told  them,
were  grievous  unto  me,  and  therefore  I  willed  them  it
might  be  amended  in  time,  otherwise  they  would  dis-
people the  Ship,  to  the  utter  overthrow  of  our  Voyage,
and  deceive  the  Honourable  Companie,  that  had  put  their
trust  in  us.

After  much  contestation,  each  one  departed,  with  pro-
mise to  amend  what  was  amisse,  and  not  to  offend  in  any
sort  hereafter,  which  God  graunt  may  proove  true.  I  told
them  also,  that  Foyne  Same,  the  old  King,  had  made
complaint  unto  me,  that  if  any  more  came  ashoare  to  fight
and  shed  blood  in  his  Countrey  (contrary  to  his  Lawes)  he
would  cause  them  to  be  cut  in  peces,  for  that  he  would
not  suffer  strangers  to  have  more  Priviledge  in  that  matter
then  his  owne  Subjects.  And  at  my  returne  to  the
English  house,  Foyne  Same  the  King  came  to  visit  me,
and  told  mee  the  piece  of  Poldavis  and  a  Shash  I  gave
him,  were  consumed  with  fire  when  his  house  was  burned,
which  was  a  manner  of  begging  two  more,  which  I  pro-
mised him,  and  got  him  to  send  of  his  people  aboord,  with
my  Jurebasso  John  Japan,  to  signifie  to  the  Company,
that  if  any  of  them  came  ashoare  to  fight  any  more,  the
King  had  given  order  to  cut  them  in  pieces,  and  not  to
suffer  any  one  to  returne  aboord.  I  did  this  in  hope  to
restraine  them  from  such  drunken  Combats.

Towards  night  came  a  Spaniard  from  Langasaque,
called  John  Comas,  and  brought  two  Letters  from  Dom-
ingo Francisco,  one  for  me,  and  the  other  for  M.  Cockes,
and  sent  me  a  Present  of  three  baskets  of  Sugar,  and  a
pot  of  Conserves,  with  many  no  lesse  sugred  conserved
words  of  complement  in  his  Letters,  that  he  was  sorie  that
our  seven  men  were  gone  away  in  his  absence,  excusing

473

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1613.

both  himselfe,  and  the  Fathers  or  Jesuites,  that  they  had
no  hand  in  the  matter,  neither  ever  spoke  such  word,  that
we  were  heretikes  or  theeves,  yet  said  our  men  were  gone
away  from  thence,  three  of  them  in  a  China  or  Japan  Soma
for  the  Manillias,  and  the  other  foure  in  a  Portugall
Vessel] ;  but  I  hold  these  but  words  to  excuse  themselves,
and  put  other  men  in  fault :  for  the  Spaniards  love  not  the
Portugals,  neither  either  of  both  the  Japan,  much  lesse  the
Japan  them.

The  eleventh,  I  went  and  visited  Nobesane ;  he  used
me  kindly,  and  would  have  had  mee  come  to  dinner  to
morrow,  but  I  excused  the  matter,  in  respect  of  the  much
businesse  I  had,  and  short  time  of  stay.  I  met  the  old
King  Foyne  at  his  house,  who  desired  to  have  two  peeces
English  poudred  Beefe,  and  two  of  Porke  sod  with  Tur-
nips, Raddish  and  Onions  by  our  Cooke,  and  sent  unto
him,  which  I  caused  to  be  done.  Wind  Northerly  a  fresh
gale  day  and  night,  faire  dry  weather,  but  cold.

The  twelfth,  the  two  Kings  Governours,  came  to  visit
me  at  the  English  house ;  and  from  thence  went  abord
the  Clove  (Master  Cockes  accompanying  them)  to  signifie
unto  the  Master  and  the  rest  of  the  Companie,  that  from
hence  forward,  our  ships  Companie  should  have  a  care  how
they  came  a  shore  to  fight  and  shed  blood,  for  that  the
Law  of  the  Countrey  was,  that  they  which  went  out  to
fight,  and  drew  weapon,  were  to  die  the  death,  and  all
those  which  did  behold  them,  obliged  to  kill  both  parties,
in  paine  of  ruinating  all  their  generation  if  they  did  not
kill  both  parties.

The  foureteenth,  I  sent  M.  Cockes  and  my  Jurebasso
to  both  the  Kings,  to  entreat  them  to  provide  me  of  a
dozen  Sea-men,  that  were  able  to  doe  their  labour,  to  goe
with  me  for  England,  and  for  wages  I  was  willing  to  give
them  what  in  reason  their  Highnesses  thought  fit.  The
Kings  were  impeached  about  other  matters  ;  so  they  spake
with  their  Secretaries,  who  told  them,  they  need  not  to
speake  about  that  matter  to  the  Kings,  for  that  they  would
provide  mee  a  dozen  such  as  should  be  fit ; but  that  there

474

JOHN SARIS  ajjl

1613.

were  divers  vagrant  people  about  Towne,  which  no  doubt

would  be  willing  to  goe,  yet  were  not  fit  to  be  carried  to

Sea; for  that  when  they  came  there,  they  would  serve  for  [I.  iv.  379.]

nothing  but  to  spend  victuals,  and  of  such  the  Flemmings

served  their  turne  without  making  request  unto  them  :

and  what  is  become  of  them  or  the  Ship  is  not  known  to

this  day. But  seeing  that  now  the  matter  was  referred  to

them, they  would  looke  out  for  such  as  were  for  our

purpose.

The  eighteenth,  Foyne  the  old  King  sent  me  word  he
would  come  and  visit  me,  and  bring  the  dancing  Beares
or  Curtesans  of  the  Countrey,  which  soone  after  he  did,
being  three  whoores  of  the  Countrey,  and  two  or  three
other  men  with  them,  they  all  dancing  and  making
musique  after  the  Countrey  fashion,  although  harsh  to  our
hearings.

The  nineteenth,  the  Captaine  Chinesa  and  George  Severe  justice
Duras  the  Portugall  came  unto  me,  desiring  me  to  send  in  JaPan-
to  Semidone,  to  procure  the  libertie  of  two  honest  poore
men,  who  were  like  to  loose  their  lives,  for  bidding  a
poore  Knave  flie,  which  had  stolne  a  little  piece  of  Lead
not  worth  three  halfe  pence,  and  yet  the  Malefactor  was
taken  and  put  to  death,  and  these  men  in  danger  to  have
done  the  like,  had  I  not  sent  M.  Cocks  with  my  Ring  to
Semidone,  to  desire  pardon  for  them  for  my  sake,  which
he  granted  to  procure,  and  did  effect  it.

The  twentieth,  Samedon  the  King  of  Crats  sent  mee
word  hee  would  come  aboord  our  Ship :  So  I  met  him
there,  he  beeing  accompanied  with  both  the  Kings  of
Firando,  they  had  five  peeces  of  Ordnance  at  their  entrie
aboord,  and  three  with  shot  or  Bullets,  were  shot  at  a
marke  at  the  request  of  Samedon.  He  gave  me  two
Pikes  or  Japan  staves  with  Cattans  or  Sables  on  the
ends,  and  so  they  departed  with  seven  peeces  of  Ord-
nance for  a  farewell,  one  being  with  shot  at  the  marke
aforesaid.

The  twentie  two,  a  Present  was  laid  out,  and  sent  to
Samedon  King  of  Crats : it  was  delivered  unto  him  at

475

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

l6l3-

Tomesanes  the young Kings  house, he being there  at

Breakfast,  and  tooke  in  very  kind  part,  sending  me  word
by  M.  Cockes,  that  he  was  doubly  obliged  unto  mee,  first
in  his  kind  entertainement  aboord,  and  now  in  sending
him  such  a  Present  of  worth,  of  such  things  as  his  Coun-
trey  afFoorded  not  the  like,  and  all  without  any  desert  of
his  :  onely  the  recompence  he  could  make  was,  that  for  his
sake,  if  ever  any  of  the  English  Nation  did  come  within
his  Dominions,  he  would  bid  them  kindly  welcome,  and
shew  them  any  favour  he  could.

The  twentie  fifth  in  the  morning  betimes,  the  Purser
and  M.  Hownsell  came  ashore,  and  told  me  Andrew  Palmer
the  Steward  departed  out  of  this  world  about  tenne  of  the
clocke  the  night  past,  and  that  the  Chirurgion  Thomas
Warner  affirmed  (as  he  told  me  the  like  many  times  before)
that  Palmer  was  the  occasion  of  his  owne  death,  his  wound
beeing  curable,  if  he  would  have  bin  ruled.  I  willed  the
Purser  M.  Melsham  to  goe  aboord,  and  that  the  Master
and  he  should  take  order  to  carry  him,  and  bury  him  on
an  Hand  as  secretly  as  might  be,  in  respect  we  were  about
to  get  some  Japans  to  goe  along  in  our  ship,  which  it
might  be  hearing  of  the  death  of  any  one,  would  make
them  the  more  unwilling.

The  twentie  eighth,  a  Japan  was  put  to  death  :  some
said  for  theft ;  others  said  he  was  a  house-burner :  He
was  lead  by  the  Hang-man  to  execution,  one  carying  a
board  before  him,  wherein  was  written  the  fact  he  had
committed,  as  the  like  was  written  in  a  paper  flag  over
his  head,  and  two  Pikemen  followed  him  with  the  points
of  their  Pikes  hard  to  his  backe,  to  have  killed  him  if  he
had  offered  to  resist.  Divers  of  this  place  complained,
that  the  Ships  Company  owed  them  money,  and  now  the
Ship  was  ready  to  depart,  desired  payment,  which  to  pre-
vent a  greater  inconvenience,  I  hearkened  unto,  and  wrote
to  the  Master  to  enquire  aboord  who  they  were  that  were
indebted,  and  what  the  summe  was  they  owed,  to  the
intent  to  make  satisfaction,  and  so  to  abate  it  out  of  their
wages.

476

JOHN SARIS

Now  touching  a  Factorie  to  be  left  there,  I  had  on  the
twenty  sixth,  assembled  my  Merchandizing  counsell,
where  upon  these  considerations,  viz.  The  encouragement
wee  had  received  in  the  Moluccas  by  private  intelligence,
the  Dutch  Factorie  alreadie  planted  here  in  Firando  :  The
large  Priviledges  now  obtained  of  the  Emperour  of  Japan  :
The  certaine  advise  of  the  English  Factories  setled  in
Siam  and  Patane  :  The  Commodities  resting  unsold  upon
our  hands  appointed  for  these  parts,  and  the  hoped  for
profit  which  further  experience  may  produce :  It  was
resolved,  that  a  Factorie  should  be  left  here,  viz.  eight
English,  three  Japan  Jurebasses  or  Interpreters,  and  two
servants,  who  were  appointed  against  the  comming  of  the
next  ships,  to  search  and  discover  the  Coast  of  Corea,  Tush-
may,  and  other  parts  of  Japan,  and  Countreys  thereunto
adjoyning,  to  see  what  good  might  be  done  in  any  of  them.

The  fifth  of  December,  M.  Richard  Cockes,  Captaine
and  Cape  Merchant  of  the  English  Factorie,  setled  at
Firando  in  Japan,  tooke  his  leave  of  me  aboord  the  Clove
with  his  Companie,  beeing  eight  English,  and  five  others.
After  their  departure,  our  Companie  was  mustered  aboord,
finding  fortie  sixe  English,  five  Swarts,  fifteene  Japaners,
three  Passengers,  in  all  sixtie  nine :  having  lost  since  our
arrivall  here  three  English,  two  by  sicknesse,  one  slaine,
and  seven  which  ranne  away  to  the  Portugals  and
Spaniards,  whilest  I  was  at  the  Emperours  Court.  The
names  of  the  English  we  left  in  the  Factorie  with  M.
Cockes  were  William  Adams,  (entertained  at  an  hundred
pounds  the  yeere  into  the  Companies  service)  Tempest
Peacocke,  Richard  Wickham,  William  Eaton,  Walter  Car-
warden,  Edward  Sares,  William  Nelson.

The  wind  Northerly  a  stirTe  gale,  we  set  saile,  beeing
foure  leagues  from  the  place  where  wee  rid :  our  course
South  by  West,  halfe  a  point  Westerly,  Latitude  thirtie
three  degrees  foureteene  minutes.  Note,  that  by  exact
observation  on  the  shoare,  we  found  this  Hand  of  Firando
to  stand  in  latitude  thirtie  three  degrees  thirtie  minutes,
variation  two  degrees  fiftie  minutes  Easterly.

477

A.l).
1613.

The  setting  of
an  English
Factorie  in
Japan.

December.

We  returne

home  from

Japan.

[I.  iv. 380.]

Variation  at

Firando  2.

deg.  50.

minutes

Easterly.

A.D.
1613.

IVe  sayled
alongst  the
Coast  of
China.

A  great  Cur-
rent shootcth
out  betweene
Corea  and  the
maine  of
China.

Sumbor.

Three  hun-
dred sailes  of
small  Fisher-
men.

PURCHAS HIS PILGR1MES

It  was  resolved  to  keepe  alongst  the  Coast  of  China,
directly  to  Bantam,  and  so  wee  brought  aboord  our  star-
boord  tacke,  and  steered  away  South-west,  edging  over
for  China,  the  wind  at  North  North-east,  a  stiffe  gale  and
faire  weather.

The  sixth,  Latitude  thirty  one  degrees  thirty  nine
minutes,  way  South  by  West  forty  leagues.

The  seventh,  it  blew  very  much  wind,  a  storme  at  North-
west, wee  steered  South  South-west  no  observation,  there
we  felt  the  great  Current  which  shoots  out  betweene  the
Hand  Corea  and  the  maine  of  China,  which  made  a  very
great  Sea,  way  South  South-west  halfe  point  Westerly
twentie  five  leagues.

The  eight,  Latitude  twentie  nine  degrees  fortie  one
minutes,  way  South-west,  twentie  sixe  leagues,  wind
North-west  a  very  stiffe  gale,  we  steered  West  South-
west, to  make  Cape  Sumbor  upon  the  Coast  of  China :
the  Sea  very  much  growne,  so  much  wind,  that  it  blew
our  maine  course  out  of  the  bolt  ropes.

The  ninth,  Latitude  twentie  eight  degrees,  twentie
three  minutes,  way  South-west  three  quarters  Westerly,
twentie  two  leagues  and  two  third  parts,  we  sounded  and
had  fortie  nine,  and  fortie  five  fathome  Ozie,  the  weather
cleered,  and  the  wind  came  to  the  North,  but  wee  could
see  no  land.

The  eleventh,  no  observation  :  way  West  South-west
thirtie  five  leagues,  verie  greene  water,  we  kept  our  Leade,
and  had  fortie  nine,  fortie  three,  thirtie  five,  thirtie  seven,
thirtie  fathome,  no  sight  of  land,  yet  very  cleere,  wind
North  and  North-west  by  North.

The  twelfth,  before  day  we  sounded,  and  had  thirtie
five  fathome  Ozie,  wind  North  and  North-west  by  North
a  stiffe  gale,  and  in  the  morning  esteeming  our  selves  to
bee  neere  the  Coast  of  China,  we  had  sight  of  (at  the
least)  three  hundred  sailes  of  Junckes  of  twentie,  thirtie,
and  upwards  tunnes  apiece,  whereof  two  came  to  the  wind-
ward close  by  us,  but  perceiving  them  to  be  Fisher-men,
we  let  them  passe,  using  all  the  faire  meanes  wee  could  to

478

JOHN  SARIS

get  some  of  them  to  come  aboard,  but  could  not  prevayle.
Wherefore  we  stood  on  our  course  West  by  South,  and
presently  descryed  the  land,  being  two  Hands  called  the
Ilands  of  Fishers,  bearing  West  by  North  halfe  a  point
Northerly  some  foure  leagues  off.  Latitude  at  noone
twentie  five  degrees  fiftie  nine  minutes,  way  South-west
by  West  fiftie  leagues,  Depth  twentie,  and  twentie  sixe
fathome.  Soone  after,  the  wind  came  to  North-east,  wee
brought  our  Lar-boord  tacke  aboord,  and  steered  alongst
the  land  South  South-east,  very  much  wind.  About  seven
at  night  we  came  faire  by  a  Rocke,  which,  by  Gods  mercie,
wee  descryed  by  Moone-light,  and  lay  right  in  our  course,
supposing  to  have  runne  from  noone  to  this  time  twelve
leagues.  We  were  within  twice  our  ships  length  of  the
Rocke  depth  thirtie  fathome.  Then  we  haled  off  South
one  watch  to  give  the  land  a  berth,  and  after  mid-night
steered  South-west,  the  wind  at  North-east  very  much
wind,  and  continually  following  us  as  the  Land  trents.

The  thirteenth,  Latitude  twentie  foure  degrees  thirtie
five  minutes,  variation  one  degree,  thirtie  minutes  Easterly,
way  South-west  fiftie  foure  leagues,  wind  at  North-east
faire  weather,  wee  steered  South-west  keeping  faire  by  the
Ilands,  lying  alongst  the  maine  of  China,  some  five  leagues
off,  much  wind.

The  fourteenth  in  the  morning  little  wind,  having  this
night  past  had  twelve  and  fourteene  fathome,  then  stood
off  into  deeper  water.  Latitude  at  noone  twentie  two
degrees  ten  minutes,  way  South-west  by  South  one  quarter
Westerly  fortie  two  leagues  wind  at  East  North-east,  and
at  eight  at  night  we  had  fifteene,  thirteene  fathome,  at  nine
a  clocke  sixteene,  twentie  seven,  twentie  one  and  twentie
five,  sandie  ground.

The  fifteenth,  in  the  morning  we  came  amongst  many
Fisher-boates,  but  had  so  much  wind  as  that  we  could  not
speake  with  them.  They  made  signes  to  us  to  keepe  up
to  the  WTest-ward  (as  we  thought.)  Our  sounding  the  last
night  to  this  present  was  twentie,  twentie  foure,  twentie
five,  twentie  fathomes,  three  leagues  off  the  land. Lati-

479

A.U.
l6l3.

Hands  of
Fishers.
Latitude  2  5 .
deg.^.minut.

A  Rocke.

Variation  I ,
degree  30.
minutes
Easterly.

Latitude  22.
de.  10.

minutes.

Many  Fisher-
boates.

A.D.
1613.

Latitude, 2  1 .
de.  40.
minutes.

Note.

Latitude  18.
deg.19.mi/1ut.
Variation  50.
min. Westerly.

[I. iv. 381.]

Pulo  Cotan.

Plaxel.

Camboia.

A  Varella.
Camboia  is  not
so  far  Easterly,
as  it  is  set  in
our  Plats.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

tude  at  noone  twentie  one  degrees,  fortie  minutes,  way
West  South-west  one  quarter  Southerly  fiftie  two  leagues.
The  wind  at  North  North-east  a  stiffe  gale,  we  steered  in
West  North-west  Northerly  to  make  the  land,  and  about
two  houres  after  had  sight  of  it,  but  by  reckoning  should
not  have  beene  neere  it  by  fiftie  sixe  leagues,  so  that  the
distance  from  Firando  hither,  is  lesse  by  fiftie  sixe  leagues.

Note,  that  the  Hands  which  lye  alongst  the  Coast  of
China,  lye  more  Southerly  then  in  the  plats ;  about  three
in  the  after-noone  wee  were  by  an  Hand  called  Sancha
about  two  leagues  off,  we  steered  South-west  alongst  the
land,  esteeming  to  have  runne  since  noone  three  leagues
West  North-west.

The  sixteenth,  at  noone  no  observation :  way  fortie
leagues,  South-west  by  South  one  quarter  Westerly,  wind
at  East  with  drisling  raine.

The  seventeenth,  Latitude  eighteene  degrees  nineteene
minutes,  course  South-west  by  South  one  quarter  Wes-
terly fortie  seven  leagues,  wind  at  East,  variation  fiftie
minutes  Westerly,  we  sounded,  but  had  no  ground.

The  eighteenth,  latitude  fifteene  degrees  fortie  three
minutes,  course  South-west  by  South  sixtie  leagues,  wind
at  East  a  stiffe  gale,  and  at  five  at  night  wee  had  sight  of
land  beeing  an  Hand  called  Pulo  Cotan,  bearing  West
South-west,  about  five  leagues  off,  wee  steering  South-
west. This  Hand  is  high  land,  and  lyeth  about  twentie
leagues  (by  report)  from  the  shoale  called  Plaxel,  to  the
West-ward  of  it  we  sounded  about  eight  of  the  clocke,
but  had  no  ground.

The  nineteenth  in  the  morning,  the  maine  of  Camboia
was  on  our  star-boord-side  about  two  leagues  off :  we
steered  alongst  South  by  East  Easterly,  keeping  the  maine
in  sight.  Latitude  at  noone  thirteene  degrees  one  and
thirtie  minutes,  way  South  by  West  fortie  foure  leagues,
wee  steered  alongst  South  South-west,  making  account  to
bee  thwart  Varella :  keeping  about  two  leagues  off  the
shoare,  we  sounded  but  had  no  ground  at  fiftie  fathome.
Note,  that  this  land  of  Camboia  lyeth  more  Easterly  in

480

JOHN SARIS  a.d.

1O13.

our  plats,  then  it  should,  for  wee  find  South  South-west  to
goe  alongst  the  land  a  faire  berth  off.  So  that  the  land
heere  lyeth  South  South-west,  and  North  North-east,
having  divers  Rockes  like  Hands,  some  one  league  some
league  and  an  halfe  off  the  maine,  but  otherwise  no  danger
that  we  could  see.  Note  also,  that  heere  wee  found  the
windes  trade  alongst  the  shoare,  for  from  Firando  hither
we  did  goe  large,  finding  the  wind  to  follow  us  as  the
land  trents.

The  twentieth,  Latitude  ten  degrees  fiftie  three  minutes,
course  South  by  West  fiftie  foure  leagues  wind  at  North,
a  stiffe  gale  alongst  the  shoare. And  three  Glasses  after
we  had  observed,  wee  had  sight  of  a  small  Hand,  which
wee  made  to  be  the  Hand  at  the  end  of  the  shoale,  called
Pulo  Citi,  and  at  five  Glasses  running  we  sounded  and  had  Pul°  Cltt> or
eleven fathome, fine sand, two leagues  off the shoare. u0
We  steered  alongst  Southwest  to  bring  the  point  of  the
shoale  called  Pulo  Citi  a  starne :  then  wee  sounded  about
two  Glasses  after,  and  had  fifteene  fathome. Note,  that  Lmsehotem
wee  found  Jan  Huijghen  Van  Linschotens  booke  very .  sert
true,  for  thereby  we  directed  our  selves  ever  from  our
setting  forth  from  Firando.

The  one  and  twentieth,  Latitude  nine  degrees  fortie
three  minutes  course  South-west  a  quarter  Westerly  thirtie
foure  leagues,  wind  at  East  North-east  a  continuall  stiffe
gale  till  noone,  then  calme,  and  found  that  we  were  in  a
tyde  girt,  our  depth  all  the  last  night  to  this  noone
was  ten,  sixteene,  seventeene,  eighteene,  twentie  one,
twentie  one,  nineteene,  twentie,  twentie,  nineteene,
eighteene  fathome  good  ground,  but  had  no  sight  of
land.

The  two  and  twentieth  in  the  morning,  we  had  sight
of  land  being  an  Hand  called  Pulo  Condor,  bearing  off  us  Pulo  Condor.
about  five  leagues  off,  we  steered  South-west,  the  wind  at
North-east,  latitude  at  noone  eight  degrees,  twentie  Latitude  8.
minutes,  way  South-west  by  West,  fortie  leagues  and  two
third  parts.  Depth  eighteene,  nineteene,  twentie  two,
twentie  one,  twentie  one,  twentie  two  and  twentie  one

III  481  2H

20.  mm.

A.I).
1613.

Latitude  z.
deg.  38.  min.

Pulo  Timon.

Pulo  Tinga.

China-bata^or
Pulo  bato.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

fathomes,  we  steered  South  South-west,  for  the  land  called
the  seven  Points.

The  three  and  twentieth,  no  observing,  way  South-west
by  South  one  quarter  Southerly,  fiftie  one  leagues,  depth
twentie,  twentie  two,  twentie  foure,  and  at  noone  twentie
seven  fathomes.

The  foure  and  twentieth,  way  South-west  halfe  a  point
Westerly,  thirtie  three  leagues  one  third  part,  wind  at
North-west  by  North,  depth  thirtie  seven,  thirtie  nine,
fortie  three,  fortie,  and  at  noone  thirtie  five  fathome  Ozie
ground.

The  five  and  twentieth,  latitude  two  degrees,  thirtie
eight  minutes,  course  South  by  East,  one  quarter  of  a
league  Easterly,  twentie  two  leagues  one  third  part,  the
wind  at  North-west  and  East  by  North,  Depth,  thirtie
foure,  thirtie  two,  thirtie,  thirtie  foure,  thirtie  foure,  thirtie
foure,  thirtie  five.  And  about  foure  a  clocke  in  the  morn-
ing, we  made  the  land,  beeing  an  Hand  called  Pulo  Timon,
distant  from  us  some  five  leagues.  And  at  sixe  in  the
morning,  the  Northermost  part  bearing  South-west  Wes-
terly :  and  the  South  part  South  South-west  halfe  a  point
Westerly,  we  had  sight  of  another  Hand  called  Pulo  Tinga,
bearing  South  South-west  Westerly,  about  sixe  leagues
off  at  noone.

The  sixe  and  twentieth,  Latitude  one  degree  eighteene
minutes,  course  South-east  by  South,  thirtie  two  leagues
wind  at  East  and  East  by  North,  Depth  thirtie  seven,
thirtie  sixe,  thirtie  seven,  thirtie  five,  thirtie,  and  twentie
seven  fathome.

The  seven  and  twentieth,  course  South  by  East  fortie
leagues,  and  two  third  parts,  Depth,  twentie  seven,  thirtie
one,  twentie  eight,  twentie  nine,  twentie  eight,  twentie
sixe,  and  twentie  foure  fathomes  at  noone.

The  eight  and  twentieth,  way  South  South-east,  fortie
leagues  and  two  third  parts,  Depth  eighteene,  nineteene,
sixteene,  eighteene,  nineteene,  sixteene,  &  at  noone
fifteene  fathome  sandie  ground,  making  account  that
China-bata  was  about  one  league  and  an  half  off  being

482

.JOHN SARIS

lowland,  and  at  the  South-west  point  full  of  Trees  or
Bushes.  At  sixe  Glasses  after-noone  wee  sounded,  and
had  twentie  fathomes  Ozie  ground,  steering  alongst  the
Land  South  South-east,  the  wind  at  North  North-west.
Note,  that  those  long  Hands  on  our  star-boord-side  heere,
and  divers  small  Hands  on  our  Lar-boord-side  doe  make
the  Straights  of  China-bata,  finding  it  to  be  truely  laid
downe  in  Plat  or  Draught  made  by  Jan  Janson  Mole  a
Hollander,  which  he  gave  to  Master  Hippon,  and  he  to
the  Companie.

The  nine  and  twentieth,  a  little  before  noone,  we  per-
ceived the  water  to  be  much  changed  a  head,  and  therefore
doubted  it  to  bee  a  shoale ;  so  narrowly  escaping  a  very
great  danger.  Wee  sounded  and  had  eleven,  twelve,
fourteene,  fifteene  fathome,  but  within  halfe  a  Glasse  had
eight  &  seven  fathomes  &  a  halfe,  it  seemed  three  square
sharp  to  the  South-west-ward,  &  so  we  steered  when  we
had  first  sight  thereof,  not  farre  from  the  entrance  of  the
straights  of  China-bata.  This  shoale  lyeth  very  danger-
ously, but  is  truly  placed  with  his  depths.  Latitude  at
noone  foure  degrees  sixe  minutes,  course  South  by  West
thirtie  leagues,  wind  at  North-west  and  North,  depth
twentie,  thirteene,  fifteene,  twentie  foure,  twentie  seven,
twentie,  twentie  five,  twentie,  eighteene,  ten,  ten,  ten,
eight  and  ten  fathomes  soft  sand.  And  at  eight  a  clocke
in  the  night,  we  came  to  an  anchor  in  seven  fathomes,  the
weather  likely  to  bee  fowle,  and  our  experience  little  or
nothing,  the  place  verie  full  of  shoales,  and  before  our
anchor  was  a  ground  wee  were  in  sixe  sixe  and  a  quarter,
five  and  an  halfe,  sixe,  and  then  in  seven  fathomes  soft
sandie  ground,  then  wind  at  North-west  a  small  gale  and
rainie.

The  thirtieth,  this  morning  we  had  sight  of  the  Darling,
plying  for  Coromandell,  her  Companie  one  and  twentie
English,  and  nine  Swarts.  By  them  wee  first  understood
of  the  death  of  Sir  Henrie  Middleton,  and  losse  of  the
Trades  Increase,  &c.  The  weather  close,  wee  observed
not :  way  South  South-west  halfe  a  point  Westerly  fifteene

483

A.IJ.

l6l  ■>

The  Plat  of
Jan  Janson
Mole.

[I.  iv. 382.]
A  dangerous
shoale  not  far
from  the
entrance  of  the
Straight  of
China-bata.

Latitude  foure
deg.  six  min.

The  Darling
say  ling  for
Coromandell.
Death  of  Sir
H.  Middleton,
and  losse  of
the  Trades
Increase.

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS P1LGRIMES

1 613.

leagues,  depth,  ten,  thirteene,  fourteene,  eleven,  ten,  nine,
eight,  seven,  sixe  and  an  halfe,  ten,  ten,  sixe  and
a  halfe,  seven,  five,  foure  and  an  halfe,  foure  and
a  quarter,  five,  five,  and  foure  fathome,  hard  sandie
ground,  esteeming  this  the  shoale  described  in  Moles
Plat,  and  not  that  which  we  made  it  for.  This
ni^ht  God  mercifully  delivered  us  out  of  a  great  danger.
A  sunken  For  wee  passed  by  a  sunken  ledge  of  Rockes,  under  all
ledge  of  rocks.  our  savieS)  within  a  stones  cast  of  the  top  thereof,  which
was  onely  seene  above  water,  and,  had  not  the  noyse  of
the  breach  upon  it  wakened  us,  wee  could  not  have  cleered
our  selves.  Wee  did  let  fall  our  anchor  presently,  being
in  a  oreat  Tide  girt,  and  had  seventeene,  seventeene
fathomes  and  an  halfe  Ozie  ground.

The  one  and  thirtieth,  in  the  morning  as  we  rid,  the
The  high  land  high  land  of  Sumatra  was  about  leagues  off  us,

of  Sumatra.  ancj  one  j]an(j  a  starne.  The  passed  shoale  or  ledge  of
Rockes  on  the  star-boord  side,  and  three  small  Hands  on
our  lar-boord  bow,  lying  three  square  :  way  South  three
quarters  Easterly,  one  and  twentie  leagues  wind  at  North-
west. Depth,  ten,  nine,  eight,  seven,  nine,  ten,  eleven,
twelve,  fifteene,  twentie  two  fathome,  about  eight  leagues
off  the  high-land  of  Java.  We  could  not  get  in,  because
it  fell  calme.
January  1.  The  first  of  January,  beeing  calme,  was  most  spent  at

an  anchor.  The  second  having  a  little  wind  we  set  saile,
The  Expedi-  and  about  eight  of  the  clocke  met  with  the  Expedition,
t ion  bound  jor  ancj  uncferstanding  that  shee  was  bound  home- ward  laden
with  Pepper,  we  writ  by  them  to  our  friends  in  England

We  arrived  in The  third,  we  came  to  an  anchor  in  Bantam  Roade,
Ban  tat

Roade.

finding  (to  our  great  griefe)  no  lading  in  readinesse :  For

which  I  justly  blamed  those  whom  I  had  left  there  to
provide  the  same,  who  excused  themselves,  saying,  that
they  did  not  as  yet  expect  me.

I  questioned  with  Kewee,  the  chiefe  Merchant  of  the
Chineses,  (being  come  aboord  to  visit  me)  what  price
Pepper  did  beare,  and  how  he  would  sell.  He  answered
that  it  was  alreadie  knowne  ashoare  that  I  was  home-ward

484

JOHN SARIS

bound,  and  must  of  neccssitie  lade  Pepper,  whereof  my
Merchants  having  provided  none  afore-hand,  I  might  be
assured  it  would  rise.  He  said  it  was  then  at  twelve  Rials
of  eight,  the  ten  sackes,  but  he  would  not  undertake  to
deliver  any  quantitie  at  that  price.  I  offered  him  twelve
Rials  and  an  halfe  for  ten  sackes,  but  found  him  so  farre
off,  as  that  there  was  no  hope  of  dealing  at  the  present.

Note,  that  of  the  ten,  left  in  the  Factorie  heere  for  the
eight  Voyage  at  our  departure  for  Japan,  we  found  now
but  five  living  at  our  returne.  Betweene  Firando  and
Bantam,  wee  lost  only  one.

The  fourth,  in  the  morning,  I  went  ashoare,  visited  the
Governour  of  Bantam,  and  presented  him  with  two  faire
Cattans,  and  divers  other  things  of  worth.

This  day  I  bargained  with  Kewee  and  Lackmoye  for
foure  thousand  sackes  of  Pepper,  at  thirteene  Rials  of
eight  the  ten  sackes :  Basse  three  the  hundred,  and
appointed  the  Merchants  to  hasten  the  milling  thereof,
all  that  might  be.

The  fifth  was  spent  in  reducing  the  severall  English  Fac-
tories in  Bantam  to  one  Government,  and  setling  them  in
one  house :  also  order  was  taken  that  the  expence  of  Dyet
should  bee  more  frugally  managed,  and  not  spent  in  racke
houses  abroad,  or  on  Hang-by  Swarts  at  home,  as  of  late
it  had  beene :  and  that  the  Ware-houses  in  the  Towne
should  be  fewer  in  number  and  better  looked  unto,  as  well
it  might  be,  the  goods  being  with  more  discretion  orderly
stowed.

The  sixth,  in  the  reweighing  of  the  Pepper  received  the
day  before,  wee  found  most  of  the  sackes  hard  weight,  and
many  to  want  of  what  the  Kings  Beame  did  allow.  Where-
fore I  sent  for  the  Weigher,  used  him  kindly,  intreated
him  to  take  a  little  more  care  and  paines  to  amend  this
fault,  which  he  promised  to  doe  :  whereto  the  better  to
incourage  him,  I  appointed  the  value  of  five  Rials  of  eight
to  be  given  him.

The  sixteenth,  being  the  Sabbath  day,  I  stayed  aboord.
About  two  of  the  clocke  in  the  afternoone  the  Towne

485

A.U.

The  multipli-
citie  of
Factories  for
each  Voyage,
caused  the
prices  to  rise,
each  out-bid-
ding others  for
the  particular
accounts  of
their  ozene
Voyage,  not
zvithout  losse  to
the  publike.

A.D.
1613.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

The  whole
Totvne  of
Bantam
burned  downe,
saving  the
English  and
Hollanders
houses.

was  all  on  a  fire.  Wherefore  our  Skiffe  being  well  manned
[I.  iv.  383.]  was  presently  sent  ashoare  to  helpe  the  Merchants  to
guard  the  goods.  The  wind  was  so  violent,  that  in  a
moment  of  time  almost  the  whole  towne  was  burnt  downe,
the  English  and  Dutch  houses  excepted,  which  it  pleased
God  of  his  mercy  to  preserve.

The  twentieth,  being  ashoare,  I  procured  Lackmoy  and
Lanching,  two  Chinesa  Merchants,  to  translate  the  Letter
which  the  King  of  Firando  in  Japan,  had  delivered  mee
to  carry  to  our  King  James ;  it  was  written  in  China
Character  and  Language,  they  translated  it  into  the
Malayan,  which  in  English  is  as  followeth,  viz.

To  the  King  of  Great  Britaine,  &c.

MOst  mightie  King,  how  acceptable  your  Majesties
loving  Letter  and  bountifull  Present  of  many
worthy  things  sent  mee  by  your  servant  Captaine  John
Saris  is  unto  mee,  I  cannot  sufficiently  expresse :  neither
the  great  happinesse  I  esteeme  my  selfe  to  be  in,  by  enjoy-
ing your  Highnesse  friendship  :  For  which  I  render  you
many  thankes,  desiring  the  continuance  of  your  Majesties
love  and  acquaintance.  I  am  heartily  glad  of  your  subjects
safe  arrivall  at  my  small  Island,  from  so  long  a  journey.
My  helpe  and  furtherance  they  shall  not  want  to  the
uttermost,  for  the  effecting  of  their  so  worthy  and  laud-
able enterprises  of  Discovery  and  Merchandizing,  greatly
commending  their  forwardnesse  therein :  referring  their
hitherto  entertainment  to  the  report  of  your  servant,  by
whom  I  returne  unto  your  Majestie  an  unworthy  token,
wishing  your  Majestie  long  life.  From  my  Place  of
Firando,  the  sixt  day  of  our  tenth  moneth.

Your  Majesties  loving  Friend,  Commander  of  this
Island  Firando  in  Japan,

FOYNE SAM-MASAM.

*  This  comes
to  passe  by  the
ChinaCharac-
ters,  which  in
proper  names
borrow  the
Characters  of
other  words  of
like  or  nearest
sound,  and
therefore  cause
often  mistak-
ing, as  Joseph
Acosta  hath
observed.

They  could  not  well  pronounce  his  name,  for  Lanching
said  it  was  *  Foyne  Foshin  Sam  :  but  Lackmoy  said  as  is
above  written.

486

JOHN SARIS

The  two  and  twentieth,  such  houses  as  the  former  fire
had  spared,  were  now  burnt  downe ;  yet  the  English  and
Dutch  houses  escaped  againe  : thankes  be  to  God.

The  sixe  and  twentieth,  heere  arrived  a  Flemmish
shippe  of  a  thousand  tunnes  from  Holland,  called  the
Flushing.  At  the  Island  Mayo  the  Company  had  mutined
against  the  Captaine,  and  had  murthered  him  in  his  Cab-
bin,  but  that  it  pleased  God  a  Scotch-man  revealed  the
matter,  even  when  they  were  armed  to  the  exployt,  so
that  they  were  taken  betwixt  the  deckes  with  their  wea-
pons about  them.  In  this  shippe  were  divers  English  and
Scottish  souldiers.  Shee  stayed  not  heere,  but  towards
evening  set  saile  for  Jaccatra.

The  seven  and  twentieth,  I  went  ashoare  to  hasten  the
Merchants,  divers  of  our  Company  being  at  this  present
fallen  sicke. Our  ship  had  now  her  full  lading  in.

The  first  of  February,  the  Darling  was  enforced  to
returne  hither,  and  order  by  common  councell  was  taken,
both  for  her  goods  and  present  sending  to  Socadanna,  and
after  to  Patane  and  Siam.

The  thirteenth  day,  we  got  out  of  the  Straights  of
Sunda.  Note  that  in  the  Straight  of  Sunda,  the  Tides  set
twelve  houres  to  the  Eastward,  which  is  floud,  and  twelve
houres  to  the  Westward,  which  is  ebbe.

The  sixteenth  of  May  1614.  we  came  to  an  anchor  in
the  Bay  of  Saldania,  where  wee  found  the  Concord  of
London,  being  the  first  that  was  set  out  for  the  joynt
stocke.  We  found  the  Naturalls  of  this  place  very  trea-
cherous at  the  present,  making  signes  unto  us  of  the
forcible  carrying  away  of  two  of  their  people.  They  had
wounded  one  of  the  Concords  men  very  sore ;  and  whilst
we  were  up  in  the  Land,  they  did  assault  those  that  kept
our  Skiffe,  carried  away  our  Grapnell,  and  had  spoiled
those  that  were  left  to  tend  her,  but  that  they  tooke  the
water.

The  nineteenth,  heere  arrived  a  Flemmish  shippe  bound
for  Bantam,  the  Master,  Cornells  Van  Harte.  We
remained  heere  three  and  twentie  dayes,  and  having  well

487

A.D.
I  6  I  4.

Divers
English  and
Scottish
Souldiers.

February

Tide  of  twelve
houres  fioud,
and  twelve
ebbe  in  Sunda.
May  16.
1 614.

The  Concord,
the  first  ship
set  out  for  the
joynt  Stocke.

A.D.

1 6 14.

The  Beefe  of

Saldania
takcth  salt
well.

Scptemberzy.
We  arrived  at
Plimmouth.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

refreshed  our  selves,  tooke  with  us  fourteene  Oxen  and
seventie  sheepe  alive,  besides  good  store  of  Fish  and  Beefe,
which  we  powdered  there,  finding  it  to  take  salt  well,  con-
trary to  former  reports.  For  ten  dayes  after  our  depart-
ing from  Saldania,  we  had  the  wind  at  North-west,  and
West  North-west,  but  then  came  to  South-west,  so  that
we  might  goe  our  course  North-west.

The  seven  and  twentieth  of  September,  we  arrived,
thankes  be  to  God  at  Plimmouth,  where  for  the  space  of
five  or  sixe  weekes  wee  endured  more  tempestuous
weather,  and  our  lives  more  endangered,  then  upon  the
whole  Voyage  besides.  Since  which,  having  had  some
spare  time,  I  have  collected  certaine  notes  (in  the  Journall
omitted)  and  have  thought  good  to  cause  them  heere  to
attend  the  former  Relation.

[I.  iv.  384.]

Intelligence  concerning  Yedzo,  delivered  in  the
Citie  of  Edoo  in  Japan,  by  a  Japanner,  who
had  beene  there  twice.

Tedzo  is  an
Hand.

Hat  Yedzo  is  an  Island,  and  lyeth  on  the  North-
west side  of  Japan,  and  distant  from  thence  ten
leagues  :  That  the  people  are  white,  and  of  good
Hairie  people,  condition,  but  very  hairy  all  their  bodies  over  like  Mun-
keyes.  Their  weapons  are  bowes  and  arrowes  poysoned.
The  people  in  the  Southermost  part  thereof  doe  under-
stand weight  and  measure :  whereof  within  the  Land
thirtie  dayes  journey  they  are  ignorant.  They  have  much
silver  and  sand-gold,  whereof  they  make  payment  to  the
Japanners  for  Rice,  &c.  Rice  and  Cotton  cloath  of  Japan,
is  heere  well  requested.  Iron  and  Lead  is  brought  to  them
from  Japan.  Necessaries  for  the  belly  and  backe  are  most
vendible  to  them.  Rice  transported  from  Japan  to  Yedzo,
hath  yeelded  foure  for  one.

The  Towne  where  the  Japanners  have  their  chiefe  resi-

Matchma. dence and Mart, is called Matchma, therein are five

hundred housholds of  Japanners, who likewise  have  a

488

JOHN SARIS  a.d.

J  C 1 4 .
Fort  there,  the  Governour  whereof  is  called  Match  ma-
donna. This  Towne  of  Matchma,  is  the  principall  Mart
Towne  of  all  Yedzo,  whither  the  Natives  most  resort  to
buy  and  sell,  especially  in  September,  for  their  provision
for  winter.  In  March,  they  bring  downe  Salmon  and
dryed  fish  of  sundrie  sorts,  and  other  wares,  for  which  the
Japanners  barter,  which  the  Japanners  rather  desire  then
silver.

The  Japanners  have  no  setled  being  or  Trade,  in  any
other  Towne  then  Matchma. That  further  to  the  North-  Pe^k ^JT.
ward,  upon  the  same  Land,  are  people  of  very  low  stature  totheliorth-
like  Dwarfes. That  the  Yedzos  are  people  of  the  stature  ward.
of  the  Japanners : and have no  apparrell, but  what is
brought them from  Japan. That there setteth a very  A  current  to
violent  current  betweene  Yedzo  and  Japan,  which  com-  xort™ ast
meth  from  Corea,  and setteth to the East North-east.
That  the  winds  are  for  the  most  part,  as  usually  they  are
in Japan, viz. That the Northerly winds beginne in
September,  and  end  in  March,  and  then  the  Southerly
winds  begin  to  blow.

[Chap. II.
489

A.D.

1605.

Left  eighteene
men  in  all,
viz.  Jive
Mariners,
and  thirteene
Sailers.

A  Flemmish
J  uncke  from
Priaman  :
newes  of  Sir
Edzvard
Michelborne.
The  danger
from  our  men
of  wane  to  our
Merchants.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Chap.  II.

Observations  of  the  said  Captaine  John  Saris,  of
occurrents  which  happened  in  the  East-Indies
during  his  abode  at  Bantam,  from  October
1605.  till  Octob.  1609.  As  likewise  touching
the  Marts  and  Merchandizes  of  those  parts  ;
observed  by  his  owne  experience,  or  relation
of  others,  extracted  out  of  his  larger  Booke,
and  heere  added  as  an  Appendix  to  his  former
greater  Voyage  ;  and  may  serve  as  a  continua-
tion of  Master  Scots  premised  Relations.  To
which  are  added  certaine  Observations  of  the
said  Author,  touching  the  Townes  and  Mer-
chandize of  principall  Trade  in  those  parts  of
the  World.

w$

1

He  seventh  of  October  1605.  ^ur  Gene-
rail  Henry  Middleton,  and  Captain
Christopher  Coulthurst  departed  this
Roade  for  England.  The  eight,  we
killed  one  of  Keygus  Varowes  Slaves,
which  would  have  fired  our  house.

The  three  and  twentieth,  here  arrived
a  Junck  of  the  Flemmings  from  Priaman,  by  whom  we
understood  of  Sir  Edward  Michelborne  and  Captaine
Davis,  there  being  upon  the  coast,  and  that  they  had  taken
a  Guzerate  Juncke  in  the  Straights  of  Sunda,  which  came
from  Bantam,  bound  to  Priaman.

The  five  and  twentieth,  we  were  commanded  to  the
Court,  upon  the  report  the  Flemmings  had  made  of  Sir
Edward,  where  it  was  demanded  whether  wee  knew  him,
and  wherefore  hee  should  offer  violence  to  the  Kings
friends,  which  had  done  him  no  wrong.  It  was  answered,
we  knew  a  Knight  so  called,  but  whether  he  were  upon
the  coast  or  no,  we  knew  not,  nor  did  know  the  Guzerate

490

JOHN SARIS

to  be  taken,  but  by  the  report  of  the  Flemmings,  which
we  held  fabulous,  and  that  upon  their  better  considera-
tions, it  might  proove  rather  to  be  one  of  the  Flemmings
ships,  which  set  saile  two  dayes  before  the  departure  of  the
said  Guezerate  from  Bantam.  Whereupon  we  were
willed  to  depart,  till  further  proofe  could  be  made.

The  sixe  and  twentieth,  Admirall  Vanhangen  of  Utricke
departed  for  Holland,  with  two  ships  more  in  company,
by  whom  we  advised  the  Company  of  all  matters  at
large.

The  nine  and  twentieth,  Sir  Edward  Michelborne  came
to  anchor  heere,  in  the  Road  of  Bantam,  Master  Towerson
and  my  selfe  went  aboord  to  him,  where  we  had  good
entertainment :  And  he  did  intimate  unto  us  the  taking
of  the  Guzerate :  wee  intreated  him  that  he  would  not
take  the  China  Junckes,  the  which  he  promised  us,  as  he
was  a  Gentleman,  he  would  not.

The  second  of  November  1605.  Sir  Edward  set  saile,
directing  his  course  for  the  Straights  of  Pallingban.

The  thirteenth  heere  arrived  a  small  ship  of  the  Flem-
mings from  the  Moluccas,  called  the  little  Sunne.

The  eighteenth,  heere  departed  a  small  Pinnasse  of  the
Flemmings,  for  the  discovery  of  the  Hand  called  Nova
ginnea,  which,  as  it  is  said,  affordeth  great  store  of  Gold.
The  foure  and  twentieth,  Vansoult  set  saile  for  Choro-
mandell.

The  second  of  December  1605.  neere  arrived  three
Junckes  from  Pattanny,  they  brought  newes  of  the  great
losse  the  Flemmings  had  had  by  fire  there.

The  seventeenth,  Generall  Warwicke  arrived  heere
from  Patanny,  where  hee  had  taken  a  very  rich  Carracke,
which  came  from  Mackcan,  the  greatest  part  of  her  lading
was  raw  Silke.

The  second  of  January  1605.  heere  departed  a  Juncke
of  this  Towne,  fraughted  by  Chineses  for  Temore  :  their
lading  or  commodities  they  caried  was  Brand  peeces  of
silver,  beaten  very  thin  of  an  hand-breadth  English,  Iron,
course  Purseline,  Taffaties,  China  Pans  and  Belles. The

49 1

A.IJ.
[605«

Admiral!  Ver-
hagen  set  saile
for  Holland.

Sir  Edward

Michelborne

came  into  the

road.

[I.  iv.  385.]

Nov.  2. 1605.
Sir  Edward
set  saile  for  the
Straights  of
Pallingban.
A  Flemmish
Pinnasse  upon
discovery  of
the  Hand
called  Nova
ginnea.
Paul  Vansoult
set  saile.
Decern.  2.
1605.

A  Flemmish
Juncke  from
Pa  tarty.
Generall
Warwicke
arrived.
Januar.  2.
1605.

A  Java  Juncke
set  saile  for
Tymore
fraughted  by
Chineses.

A.D.

I  606.

May  23.
1606.
"Hemes  of  the

F lemmings
lossofTernata.

The  Flem-
miugs  Pinnasse
pillaged  by  the
Kings  Fleete
of  Bantam.
The  Kings
Fleet  returned.

June  1  5 .
Nockhoda
Tingall  from
Banda.
Mace  sold  for
in  Bantam  an
hundred  and
fiftie  Rialls,
the  Bakar
foure  hundred
and  fiftie
Cattees.
The  Flem-
mings  returne
from  Nova
ginnea.
August  6.
The  Moone
Eclipsed  in
Bantam.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

twentieth,  arrived  a  China  Juncke,  which  Sir  Edward
Micheiborne  had  taken,  and  restitution  was  demanded  of
us,  the  Governour  and  principall  Courtiers  being  very
much  offended,  but  by  the  Admirall  and  Sabandar  were
pacified.  The  Nockhoda  of  the  Juncke  alledged  many
rich  parcells  taken.

The  three  and  twentieth  of  May  1606.  heere  arrived  a
small  Frigat  of  the  Flemmings  from  Ternate,  and  brought
away  their  Merchants,  which  had  been  left  there  by  Bas-
tianson.  The  Spaniard  had  taken  away  all  they  had,  but
gave  every  man  his  libertie.  They  carried  the  King  of
Ternate  for  the  Mannelyes,  and  as  it  was  reported,  they
purposed  to  send  him  for  Spaine.  Some  ten  leagues  from
Jackatra,  this  Flemmish  Frigat  chanced  to  meete  with  the
King  of  Bantams  Fleete,  which  pillaged  them  of  all  which
they  had  saved  from  the  Spaniards.  The  Flemmings
laboured  to  get  restitution,  but  could  get  none  of  the
Javanes.

The  nine  and  twentieth,  the  Kings  Fleete  returned,
having  done  verie  little  against  their  enemies  the  Palling-
banes.

The  fifteenth  of  June,  heere  arrived  Nockhoda  Tingall
a  Cling-man  from  Banda,  in  a  Java  Juncke,  laden  with
Mace  and  Nutmegs,  the  which  he  sold  heere  to  the
Guzerats  for  an  hundred  and  fiftie  Rialls  of  eight  the
Bahar  Bantam,  which  is  foure  hundred  and  fiftie  Cattees :
he  told  me  that  the  Flemmings  Pinnasse  which  went  upon
discovery  for  Nova  Ginny,  was  returned  to  Banda,  having
found  the  Hand  :  but  in  sending  their  men  on  shoare  to
intreate  of  Trade,  there  were  nine  of  them  killed  by  the
Heathens,  which  are  man-eaters  ;  so  they  were  constrained
to  returne,  finding  no  good  to  be  done  there.

The  sixt  of  August,  the  Moone  was  eclipsed  about
eight  of  the  clocke  in  the  evening,  continuing  for  the
space  of  two  houres,  the  Chineses  and  Javanies  beating
of  Pans  and  Morters  during  her  obscuritie,  in  such
manner,  as  you  would  thinke  there  were  no  hell  but  there,
and  crying  out  the  Moone  was  dead.

492

JOHN SARIS

1607.

The  fourth  of  October,  1606.  the  China  quarter  was  all October  4.
burnt  downe,  yet  it  pleased  God  to  preserve  Ours. The Thc  c/""a

• 1  i/~.i  ri T-i  •  -\ c quarter  burnt

same  night,  the  Carracke  of  the  Hcmmings  set  saile  tor  dou.ne
Holland, her lading was fifteene thousand sackes of
Pepper, some rawe Silke, and great store of China
Sugar.

The  fifth,  the  West  Frisland  arrived  here  from  Ternata, The  West
whence  she  was  beaten  by  the  Spaniards  : she  was not ^ten  rrm
above halfe laden with Mace, Cloves, and Cotton- Ternata.
yarne.

The  ninth,  here  arrived  a  small  Frigat  from  Soocadanna, A  Fngat  of
the  Merchant  was  Claes  Simonson,  his  lading  was  Wax, fo™**J"gI
Caulacca,  and  great  store  of  Diamonds. The  thirteenth,  ^anna.
about  midnight  we  had  an  Earthquake,  it  continued  not An  earth-
long,  but  for  the  time  it  was  very  fearefull.  q»ake  in

The  thirteenth  of  December,  here  arrived  two  Junkes  ^ntam-
of  the  Flemmings  from  Jor,  by  whom  we  understood, intelligence
that  there  was  a  Fleete  of  Flemmings,  beeing  eleven  ships  given  by  the
before  Mallacca. The  Commander  whereof  was  Matte-  Junckes  of
leefe  the  younger. The  ships  names  were  as  followeth  : Jor.e  °f  e^even
The  Orangia  Admirall,  Amsterdam  Viceadmirall,  Midle-  p/em„f„„  at
burgh,  Mauritius,  Erasmus,  Great  Sunne,  Little  Sonne,  Mallacca.
Nassaw,  Provincies,  White  Lyon,  Blacke  Lyon.

The  twentie  two  of  May,  they  came  to  an  anchor  before  May  22.
Mallacca  with  nine  ships :  for  their  Admirall  before  their
comming  thither,  had  sent  the  Provincies  and  the  Erasmus,
for  Achen.

The  fifth  of  June,  they  landed  their  men,  but  a  little  June  5.
before  their  landing,  the  Portugals  set  fire  of  one  Car-
racke  and foure Juncks  which  were in the Road. In
July,  the  Provincies  and  Erasmus  came  to  the  Fleet  at
Mallacca. The  twenty  fifth  of  August,  the  Viceroy  with The  Flem~

a  Fleete  of  sixteene  great  ships,  were  discovered  by  the  mngs  ,"",

t  # _ o  i-7  j  covered  thc

Little  Sunne,  which  was  appointed  to  keepe  watch  at  an vice-Roy  of
Hand  called  Cape  Rochado,  who  immediately  came  and Goa  with  a
certified  their  Admirall,  finding  him  very  much  unpro- Fleet  of  six-
vided,  his  Ordnance  and  men" beeing  ashoare. But  by  ie™  sailc  °f
the  Portugalls  calling  of  a  Councel,  they  gave  the  Flem-

493

A.D.

1607.

[I.  iv. 386.]

The  Flcm-
m'tngs  stand
out  of  the  road,
and  meet  with
the  Fice-roy,
where  they
performe  a
good  fight.

Three  Portu-
gal ships  burnt
by  the  Flem.
and  three  by
themselves.
The  Flem.
finds  the  Vice-
roy at  the
Nicubars,  but
they  were  so
strong  ashoare,
as  they  could
not  deale  with
them.
Mateleefe
departed  for
the  Molluccas.
Julius  and  five
Flem. more  put
to  death  at
Bemermasser.
A  ship  called
the  Great
Sunne  arrived
from  Choro-
mandel.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

mings  twenty  foure  houres  time,  to  get  his  men  and  furni-
ture aboord,  and  to  fit  himselfe  before  he  came  to  them.
Thus  being  readie,  the  Flemmings  weighed,  and  stood  out
of  the  Harbour  to  them,  where  they  beganne  a  good  fight,
which  continued  two  nights  and  one  day :  in  which  fight
was  burned  the  ship  Middleburgh,  the  Nassaw,  and  three
Portugal  ships.  The  Orangia  having  sprung  a  great
leake,  was  faine  to  put  into  Jor,  the  King  beeing  their
great  friend  and  assistant,  the  Fleet  following  him,  where
he  remained  one  moneth,  and  then  set  saile  for  Mallacca
againe,  where  he  met  with  sixe  ships  of  the  Portugals,  of
the  which  the  Flemmings  burnt  three,  and  the  Portugals
themselves  burnt  three.  From  thence  they  departed  for
the  Nicubars,  where  they  found  the  Vice-roy  with  seven
ships,  but  they  were  haled  so  close  ashoare,  that  they  durst
not  deale  with  them.

The  twentieth,  he  arrived  here  with  sixe  ships.  The
twenty  ninth,  he  departed  for  the  Moluccas.

The  foureteenth  of  May,  1607.  nere  arrived  a  Malaia
Junke  from  Grese,  by  whom  we  understood,  that  Julius
a  Flemming,  and  five  more,  which  departed  this  Road  the
thirtieth  of  November,  1606.  for  Soocadanna,  was  put  to
death  at  Bemermassen,  and  all  their  goods  taken  by  the
King  of  that  place,  the  occasion  (as  it  is  reported)  pro-
ceeded from  the  Flemming,  who  had  used  certein  foule
speeches  of  the  King,  which  he  came  to  the  hearing  of,  and
thereupon  sent  for  the  Merchant  and  Master,  and  by  the
way  gave  order  to  kill  them.

The  seventeenth  of  August,  here  arrived  the  Great
Sunne  from  Choromandell,  the  Captaine  Peter  Isaacson,
by  whom  we  understood,  that  upon  the  Hand  of  Selon,
they  tooke  a  very  great  ship  of  the  Portugals,  out  of
whom  they  had  eightie  Packs  several  sorts  of  cloath,  eight
hundred  Bades  of  Sugar  bound  for  Malacca.  Item,  that
in  the  Road  of  Masulipatan,  where  their  Factory  lieth,
they  took  a  Portugal  ship  very  richly  laden  with  all  sorts
of  Commodities  fit  for  that  Coast,  which  was  greatly  for
their  benefit,  for  that  they  were  ignorant  what  Commo-

494

JOHN SARIS

dities  were  most  vendible  there  :  her  lading  was  Cloves,
Mace,  Nut-megs,  China  Taffaties,  Velvets  and  Dam-
masks  of  the  brightest  colours,  but  no  white,  China  Porse-
line  fine  and  course,  but  your  great  Basons  with  brims  are
the  best.  Item,  the  Flemming  hath  Factories  in  three
severall  places  upon  that  Coast,  but  not  farre  the  one  from
the  other,  viz.  At  Masulipatan,  at  Pettapoli,  and  Balli-
gat.  Mesulipatan  lieth  in  the  latitude  of  seventeene
degrees.  It  is  a  place  of  great  plentie  of  victualls,  thirty
two  Hennes  for  a  Riall,  two  sheep  for  a  Riall,  an  Oxe  for
a  Riall.  Item,  in  the  moneth  of  May,  the  wind  at  West,
it  is  so  extreame  hot  there,  that  you  would  thinke  the  wind
would  take  away  your  breath,  yet  can  you  not  by  any
meanes  sweat  till  the  Sunne  be  downe,  and  then  you  shall
sweat  very  much  :  wherefore  in  this  Moneth  they  goe  not
abroad  in  the  day  time,  but  in  the  night,  for  there  have
been  many  smoothered.

The  seventh,  here  arrived  a  small  Pinnasse  from  an
Hand  called  S.  Lucia,  in  the  latitude  of  twentie  foure
degrees  and  an  halfe,  about  a  mile  from  the  Hand  of  Mada-
gascar, where  they  were  forced  in  by  a  leake  in  the  Car-
racke,  which  departed  from  hence  the  fourth  of  October,
1606.  they  were  forced  to  throw  away  three  thousand
sacks  of  Pepper,  besides  other  Commodities  to  great
value.  They  reported  unto  us,  that  it  is  a  very  good
place  to  refresh  in.  The  people  have  no  knowledge  of
Coyne :  they  bought  a  fat  Oxe  for  a  Tinne  spoone,  and  a
sheep  for  a  small  peece  of  Brasse :  it  is  hard  ground,  and
very  good  riding  in  seven  and  eight  fathome.  The
foureteenth  of  November,  1607.  Captaine  David  Middle-
ton  arrived  here  in  the  Consent  of  London.

The  seventeenth,  the  Flemmish  Admirall  Matteleefe
arrived  here  from  the  Coast  of  China,  where  he  hoped  to
have  gotten  Trade,  but  could  not :  he  proffered  them  at
Canton  an  hundred  thousand  Rialls  of  eight  for  a  gift
onely,  but  they  would  not  accept  it ;  he  was  there  in  great
danger  of  taking,  by  sixe  Carracks  which  came  out  of
Maccau  of  purpose  for  him : they  made  him  cast  off  his

495

A.D.
l607.

The  places
where  the
Flemmings
hath  left  Fac-
tors upon  the
coast  oj  Chore  ■
mandell.
The  latitude  oj
the  Countrey.
In  the  Month
of  May  much
wind.

A  Firm,  from
S.  Lucia  upon
the  Hand  of
Madagascar.

C  apt. Middle-
ton  arrived  in
the  Consent  of
London.
Matteleefe
arrived  from
the  coast  of
China.

A.D.

1607.

The  ship  Gcl-
derland  from
Holland.

Admiral
Paulas  van
Carle  with  7.
ships.

The  Flem.
assault  the
Castle  of
Mosambique.

[I. iv. 387.]

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Pinnasse,  the  which  the  Portugals  tooke.  He  touched
at  Camboya  and  Pahang,  but  bought  nothing  but  vic-
tuals.

The  seventeenth  of  December,  1607.  here  arrived  the
Gelderland  from  Holland.  They  came  betweene  S.  Laur-
ence and  the  maine  :  their  first  place  of  refreshment  was
at  Mayot,  one  of  the  Hands  of  Gomora,  where  they  set
up  a  fine  Pinnasse.  It  is  a  good  harbour,  but  there  is
little  cattel  to  be  had.  From  thence  to  Callicut,  where  in
their  way  they  tooke  a  small  Boat  of  Meeca,  laden  with
Rice  and  people  of  divers  Nations.  The  Towne  of  Cali-
cut lieth  by  the  Sea-side,  and  is  thought  to  be  five  English
miles  long.  The  Sambrin  which  is  their  King,  came
downe  unto  them,  he  was  very  rich  in  apparell,  having  a
Crowne  of  Gold  over  his  Turbant,  a  naked  Sword  in  his
hand,  which  is  the  manner  there,  he  gave  the  Flemmings
good  words,  offering  to  let  them  leave  a  Factorie  there :
but  they  durst  not  trust  him,  the  Portugal  being  so  great
with  him.

The  twenty  seventh,  here  arrived  Admirall  Paulus  van
Carle,  with  seven  very  good  ships,  and  one  Portugall
Frigat.  They  refreshed  at  Cape  de  Lope  Gonsalvo,  which
lieth  upon  the  Coast  of  Ginnie,  where  they  found  very
good  water  and  fish  ;  they  continued  here  sixe  weekes,
having  the  wind  at  South-east  by  East.  From  hence  to
an  Hand  called  Annabon,  upon  the  same  Coast.

The  thirtieth  of  March,  Stilo  novo,  we  (say  they)  came
to  an  anchor  in  the  road  of  Mosambique,  letting  fall  our
anchor  in  eighteene  fathomes,  the  Castle  shooting  very
hotly  at  us,  but  wee  answered  them  not  againe,  but  made
all  the  speed  we  could  aboord  of  two  great  Guzerate
shippes  and  a  Frigat  which  ride  hard  by  us,  laden  with
Callicoes,  course  blue  cloth  with  white  spots,  and  some  with
red  spots,  the  which  for  the  most  part  we  tooke  out,  and
set  the  great  ships  on  fire,  but  the  Frigat  we  kept.  The
thirtie  one,  we  mustred  our  men,  finding  nine  hundred
ninetie  five,  all  well  and  in  perfect  health.

The  first  of  Aprill,  we  landed  seven  hundred  men,  and

496

JOHN SARIS

1607.

seven  peeces  of  Artillerie,  viz.  eight  Demy-Cannons  of
Brasse,  two  Demy-Culverings  of  Iron,  and  battered  upon
the  Castle,  but  to  little  purpose  :  wherefore  we  brought
our  trenches  so  neere  the  enemie,  as  we  could  heave  stones
into  them.  And  the  same  night  we  began  to  make  our
mine,  but  there  fell  so  much  raine,  that  we  were  constrained
to  give  it  over.  Here  they  heaved  fire-pots  downe  from
the  walls  upon  us,  which  scalded  our  men  very  much,  and
perceiving  hereof,  sallied  out  upon  us,  to  our  great  detri-
ment. Thus  having  been  here  sixe  weekes  ashoare,  our
men  beeing  hurt  and  sicke,  wee  brought  our  Ordnance  and
men  aboord,  having  lost  in  all  fortie  men,  we  set  saile  out  Fortie  Flem-
of  the  Roade,  the  Castle  shooting  very  hotly  at  us,  so  that  *
they  sunke  the  sterne  Most  of  our  Fleete,  which  was  a
very  tall  ship  :  and  other  of  our  ships  had  thirtie  shot
through  their  sailes  and  hull.  The  Gunner  was  an
Englishman.

From  hence  we  went  for  Mayotto,  which  is  one  of  the  Mayoi  a  g°°d
Hands  of  Gomora,  to  refresh  our  men. Here  we  bought  ^  acJ  f
sixe  hundred  twenty  Oxen,  thirty  five  Sheepe,  and  Goates,
to  the  great  comfort  of  us. These  people  have  know-
ledge of  Coyne,  and  would  deale  with  us  for  no  Commo-
ditie  but  Rialls. The  King  made  a  decree,  that  no  man
should  sell  us  any  Cattell,  untill  the  Kings  were  sold,  the
which  he  would  not  sell  us  under  three  Rialls  of  eight  the
piece ; but  his  peoples  cattell  we  bought  for  a  Riall  of
eight  the  piece,  but  sheepe  and  Goats  cheaper. Here
we  mustred  our  men  againe,  having  bin  here  six  weeks
&  found  our  selves  nine  hundred  &  forty  strong :  where-
fore it  was  determined  to  goe  againe  for  Mosambique,  to
assault  the  Castle  once  againe. But  comming'  into  the
Roade,  we  found  three  Carracks  riding  there,  which  were
newly  come  from  Portugal,  whereupon  it  was  held  best,
not  to  goe  in  againe,  but  to  ply  off  and  on,  to  see  if  they
would  come  forth  ; but  they  did  not,  wherefore  we  stood
away  alongst  the  shoare  some  thirtie  leagues  off  the  land « rdowm  a
for  Goa  :  where  at  a  Towne  called  Seperdowne,  we  landed  g00d place  to
all  the  Guzerats  which  wee  had  out  of  the  ships  at  Mosam-  refresh  at.
in  497  2 1

A.I).
1607.

A  Carracke
taken  hard  by
the  Hands  of
Commodo.

Ten  Gallies  in
the  Road  of
Calicut  of  the
Portugals.
The  Flem. give
the  Sambrine
of  Callicut  a
Present.

Paulus  van
Carle  set  saile
for  the
straights  of
Mallacca.
Paulus  van
Carle
returned.
Mattaleefe  set
saile  for
Holland.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

bique.  At  this  place  is  good  refreshing  and  cheape,
twentie  hennes  for  a  Riall,  one  hundred  and  fiftie  Egges
for  a  shilling,  and  as  much  fresh  fish  as  would  serve  all  the
ships  companie  for  a  day,  for  a  Riall  of  eight.  It  lieth  in
eighteene  degrees  to  the  North  of  the  line,  and  is  not  far
from  Chaul :  we  rid  in  seven  fathomes  clay  ground.  The
people  are  Moores,  and  great  enemies  to  the  Portugals  :
it  affoords  no  Marchandise  but  a  little  Pepper.  From
hence  hard  by  the  Hands  of  Commodo  to  the  North  of
Goa  seven  leagues,  we  tooke  a  Carracke  which  was  come
from  Lisbone,  her  lading  was  most  Rialls  of  eight,  currant
Spanish  coine ;  all  which  we  tooke  out,  and  set  her  on  fire.
The  Captaine  we  tooke  with  us,  his  name  was  Jeronymus
Telbalditto.  At  Goa  we  remained  a  Moneth  at  anchor,
hoping  to  have  met  with  the  Carrackes  which  we  had  seene
at  Mosambique,  but  they  came  not :  wherefore  we  set
saile,  and  went  for  Callicut,  purposing  to  have  spoken
with  the  Sambarine,  but  by  reason  of  tenne  Gallies,  which
were  come  from  Goa  and  lay  there,  we  went  not  ashoare,
fearing  some  Treason.  We  sent  him  a  Present,  which  was
two  pieces  of  Iron  Ordnance,  and  one  piece  of  Brasse,  we
sent  our  Caske  ashoare  to  fill  with  water,  but  we  could
find  none  that  we  durst  drinke.  From  hence  we  shaped
our  course  for  Cape  Commerin  to  looke  for  water  but
could  get  none :  wherefore  we  directed  our  course
for  the  straights  of  Mallacca,  but  finding  the  winds
and  Current  contrary,  we  came  directly  for  Bantam,
having  been  out  of  Holland  twenty  one  Moneths  and
an  halfe.

The  thirtie  one  of  December,  he  departed  this  Roade
with  seven  ships,  and  one  Frigat  to  spend  some  time  in
the  straights  of  Malacca,  in  hope  to  have  met  with  the
Mackaw  shippes,  but  could  not.

The  fourth  of  January,  1607.  ne  arrived  in  the  Road
here,  leaving  his  ships  riding  at  Poolo  Tindoo.  The  fifth,
he  departed  hence  for  the  Molluccas.

The  eighteenth,  Admirall  Matteleefe  the  younger  set
saile  for  Holland : his  lading  was  twelve  thousand  sackes

498

JOHN SARIS

of  Pepper,  foure  hundred  sackes  of  Nutmegs,  Sugar,
Ebony  wood,  and  some  raw  Silke.

This  yeare,  1608.  arrived  here  many  Junkes  of  China,
and  other  places,  which  I  forbeare  to  mention.

The  nineteenth  of  August,  arrived  a  Flemmish  ship
called  the  Erasmus  from  Amboyna,  having  in  her  some
seven  hundred  Bahars  of  Cloves,  which  she  laded  at
Hitto.

The  first  of  September,  arrived  a  small  Pinnasse  of  the
Flemmings  from  Mackian,  by  whom  we  understood  of
two  ships  called  the  China  and  the  Dove  were  cast  away,
riding  at  anchor  afore  Mackian,  with  very  litle  wind  at
West,  which  makes  such  a  Sea,  that  it  is  not  possible  for
ships  to  ride  there,  by  reason  it  is  foule  ground,  and  very
deepe  water,  as  seventy  and  eightie  fathomes.  Item,  that
they  had  taken  Mackian  and  Taffasal  without  the  losse
of  a  man,  and  had  left  in  each  place,  one  hundred  and
twenty  Flemmings  :  in  like  manner  they  had  strengthened
the  Castle  at  Malayo.

The  tenth,  departed  a  Pinnasse  of  the  Flemmings  for
Soocadanna,  to  fetch  away  the  Merchants  whom  they
heard  could  get  in  no  part  of  their  debts,  left  there  by
Clawes  Simonson,  and  that  they  were  very  sicke.

The  three  and  twentieth,  arrived  the  ship  Zeland  from
Banda,  halfe  laden  with  Mace  and  Nutmegs,  her  burthen
was  an  hundred  and  fiftie  last.  The  five  and  twentieth,
arrived  the  Hay  from  Choromandell,  her  lading  was
divers  sorts  of  Mallayo  cloth,  and  cloth  Cherra  Java.

The  second  of  October,  arrived  the  Dragon  from  Pria-
man,  wherein  was  Generall  William  Keeling.  The
seventh,  the  Generall  went  up  to  the  Court,  and  delivered
the  King  our  Kings  Letter,  with  a  Present,  which  was  five
Peeces,  one  Bason  and  Ewer,  one  Barrell  of  powder.

The  thirteenth  in  the  morning  very  early,  the  Gover-
nour  and  his  Jerotoolies  were  killed  by  the  Pungavas,  the
Sabandar,  Admirall,  Key  depatty  Utennagarra,  &c.  who
assembled  themselves  over  night  at  Keymas  Patties  house,
and  beset  the  Court,  first  laying  hold  of  the  King  and  his

499

A  A).
l608.

A Flem.  ship
from
Amboyna.

A  Flem.  Pin-
nasse from
Mackian.

Mackian  and
Taffasall
taken  without
losse  of  one
man.

A  Flem.  Pin-
nasse for
Soocadanna.

[I. iv. 388.]
A  Flemmish
ship  from
Banda.
The  Hay  from
Choromandell.
The  Dragon
from  Priaman.

A  Present
given  the  King
of  Bantam.
The  Gover-
nour  and  his
Jerotooles
killed.

A.  IX
1608.

A  Flem.  Pin-
?iasse  from
Soocodanna.

Five  saile  of
Flem.  bound
for  Holland.

A  Flem.  Pin-
nasse  from
Malacca.

A  Pinnasse  of
thcFlemmings,
for  Sooca-
danna.
W.  Keeling
set  sayle  for
England.
He  returned
backe.

He  departed.
He  returned
meeting  with
the  Hector  in
the  Straights.

A  Flem.  from
Hollandwhich
had  met  with
two  English
ships  in  3  2 .  de.
to  the  North
of  the  Cape  of
Cop  Premeros.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Mother  ;  and  then  they  ranne  into  the  Governours  Court,
thinking  to  have  found  him  in  bed,  but  he  was  on  the
backeside  his  bed,  where  they  found  him,  and  wounded
him  first  on  the  head,  whereupon  he  fled  to  the  Priest  called
Keyfinkkey,  who  came  forth  and  intreated  them  for  his
life,  but  they  would  not  be  perswaded,  but  perforce  ran  in,
and  made  an  end  of  him.

The  eighteenth,  arrived  the  Flemmings  Pinnasse  from
Soocodanna,  and  brought  away  their  Merchants,  leaving
the  Countrey  much  indebted  unto  them.

The  sixth  of  November,  set  saile  the  Vice-Admirall  of
Paulus  van  Carle,  with  five  saile  for  Holland  :  their  lading
was  Cloves,  Mace,  Nutmegs,  Pepper  and  Diamonds.  The
eighth,  arrived  a  small  Pinnasse  of  the  Flemmings  from
Malacca,  by  whom  wee  understood  of  thirteene  saile  of
ships  which  rid  there,  and  that  in  their  Voyage  they  had
taken  two  Carrackes.

The  ninth  of  November,  1608.  Samuel  Plummer  de-
parted this  Roade  for  Soocadanna,  to  remayne  there.

The  fourth  of  December,  being  Sunday  in  the  after-
noone  our  Generall  William  Keeling  departed  this  Roade
for  England  in  the  Dragon.  The  sixth,  hee  was  forst
backe  by  foule  weather  and  West-winds.  The  tenth,  hee
departed  from  the  West  point.  The  thirteenth,  hee  re-
turned having  met  with  the  Hector  in  the  Straights  of
Sonda.  They  were  very  weake,  their  men  for  the  most
past  toucht  with  the  Scurvie.  The  Portugalls  of  Damas
had  betrayed  their  Boates  at  Surat,  taken  nineteene  of
their  men,  and  nine  thousand  Rials  in  Cloth  as  it  cost
there.  Item,  as  they  came  for  Bantam,  they  tooke  a  small
Frigat  of  Collumba,  out  of  which  thev  tooke  eleven  packes
of  Cloth,  contayning  in  all  eig-htie  three  Clothes,  thirteene
pieces  poulings,  which  were  sent  for  the  Hands  of  Banda.

The  sixteenth  of  December,  arrived  a  small  ship  from
Holland,  by  whom  we  understood  of  two  ships  which
they  met  withall  to  the  North  of  the  Cape  Bona  Speransa
in  thirtie  two  degrees.  They  made  them  to  bee  English
ships,  but  whether  they  were  bound  they  were  not  cer-

500

JOHN SARIS  ad.

ifoa

tainc,  but  the  smaller  shippe  bore  the  Flagge  in  the  maine-

top. This shippe had beene on her Voyage eip_'hr

monethes  and  ten  dayes,  they  refresht  at  one  of  the  Hands

of  Comora,  called  Pulo  Lamone,  where they  had  great

store of Beeves  and  Goats  for  old Knives and Tinne

Spoones.

The  two  and  twentieth,  she  set  saile  for  Mallacca,  to A  FUm.  Pin-

their  fleet  which  lay  there,  to  will  them  to  give  over  their  nfs5eJetnsa:>le
J  '  fo  for  Mallacca.

siege.

The three and twentieth, departed the Dragon for The  Dragon
England  :  Captaine,  Gabriell  Towerson.  >'  EnZland-

The  first  of  January,  1608.  our  Generall  William  Keel- The  Hector
ing  set  sayle  in  the  Hector  for  the  Hands  of  Banda.  for  Banda-

The  seventh,  arrived  two  shippes  and  a  Pinnasse  of  the Two  ships  and
Flemmings from Choromandell, laden with Cloath the  a, ""^1"
which  some  part  they  had  taken,  and  the  rest  bought. „,andell.
They  had  taken  five  prizes,  one  a  Carricke  at  Mosam-
bique.

The fifteenth of January, 1608. departed the great Three  FUm.
Sunne,  and  the  two  ships  which  came  from  Choromandell. J^s^or

The  third  of  Februarie,  arrived  Admirall  Williamson j  Fleet  from
Verhoofe  with  twelve  sayle  of  good  ships  from  Mallaca. Holland, being

The fourteenth, the Admirall with seven ships de-  twelve  saile.
parted  for  the  Molluccoes.  fo'heMM/ue

The  ninth  of  March,  the  Flemmings  caused  a  meeting J  meeting  at
at  the  Court  of  all  the  Pungavas,  To  tell  the  King  that  the  Court  by
they  had  received  Letters from their King, which did  the  Flem.  pro-
make,  mention  of  peace  betweene  them  and  the  Portugalls. curement-
Wherefore  they  thought  good  to  certifie  so  much  unto
them,  To this  end that  if  the  Portugalls  should  come
thither  under  colour  to  trade  with  them,  and  so  set  upon
them  for  their  Countrey,  they  could  not  take  their  parts
as  aforetime  they  could  have  done,  by  reason  the  King  of
Holland  and  Portugall  were  friends. Where  at  the  Javans
fell  all  into  a  great  laughter,  smoking  them,  that  their  pre-
tence was to strike feare into them of the Portugall,
doubting  the  King  would  if  they  came,  give  them  peace-
able Trade,  which  would  be  the  overthrow  of  the  Flem-

501

A.D.

l608.

Our  House
escaped  burn-
ing.

I  was  sent  for
to  the  Court.

[I. iv. 389.]

The  Gover-
nors order.
I  was  sent  for
to  the  Court,
and  willed  to
deliver  the
Chineses  up.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

mings.  The  Governour  gave  them  no  answere,  but
willed  them  to  take  their  course.

The  twentieth,  It  pleased  God  to  deliver  us  from  a  great
danger,  for  a  Chineses  house  next  unto  our  Ware-house
tooke  fire  and  was  burnt  downe,  but  ours  escaped.

The  one  and  twentieth,  I  was  sent  for  to  the  Court  by
Pangran  Areaumgalla  the  Governour.  I  went  and  carryed
with  me  a  Present  which  was  one  Peece,  one  Mallee  Goo-
baer,  one  piece  Morey,  one  piece  Mallayo  Pintado,  one
Bandaleere,  one  roll  of  Match,  the  which  he  accepted  very
kindly,  he  told  me  he  had  sent  for  me,  hearing  that  there
were  two  men  in  chaines  in  our  house  for  debt,  and  he
would  know  by  whose  order  I  kept  them.  I  told  him  by
the  order  of  the  King  we  had  taken  them  up,  and  hoped
that  he  would  not  take  them  from  me  before  I  were  satis-
fied my  debt,  or  some  part,  and  that  it  was  due  by  them,
I  shewed  their  Bils :  hee  said,  hee  thought  they  were
indebted,  but  that  the  King  gave  us  leave  to  chaine  them
up,  he  knew  to  the  contrary,  wherfore  he  would  have
them  loosed,  but  with  much  intreatie,  I  perswaded  that
he  gave  me  leave  to  keep  them  til  Tanyomge,  which  ought
foure  hundred  twenty  Rials  &  a  half,  should  pay  one
hundred,  and  Bungoone  which  ought  five  hundred  Rials,
&  one  hundred  sacks  of  Pepper,  should  pay  twentie  bagges
of  Pepper,  and  one  hundred  Rials  in  money,  according  as
hee  had  before  agreed  and  given  me  his  Bill.  Wherefore
hee  sent  one  of  his  slaves  home  with  me  to  tell  the
Prisoners  thereof,  willing  them  to  resolve  and  pay  me.

The  foure  and  twentieth,  I  was  sent  for  to  the  Court,
and  the  Flemmings :  hee  demanded  of  the  Flemming
whether  it  was  their  Countrey  manner  to  take  up  a  man
for  debt  without  telling  of  the  King,  the  Flemming  said
no,  whereupon  he  willed  me  presently  to  let  them  out,
cleane  forgetting  his  promise  three  dayes  before,  the  which
I  charged  him  with,  but  all  would  not  prevayle ;  where-
fore he  sent  one  of  the  Kings  slaves  and  tooke  them  out
of  the  house.  The  which  strict  course  I  hold  to  be  taken
against  us,  by  the  instigation  of  the  Flemmings,  wrought

502

JOHN SARIS

by  Lackmoye,  to  the  end  we  should  not  trust  the
Chineses :  so  that  by  this  course  they  must  needs  come
to  him,  &  he  being  fitted  with  all  sorts  of  Commodities
from  the  Flemming,  will  wholly  overthrow  our  Trade,  in
respect  wee  cannot  trust  but  at  hazard,  for  there  is  no
Justice  to  bee  had.

The  three  and  twentieth  of  Aprill,  1609.  here  arrived
a  small  Pinnasse  of  the  Flemmings  from  Soocadanna  and
Ternata :  by  whom  wee  understood  that  Admirall  Pauls
Vankerle  was  taken  at  Ternata.

The  one  and  twentieth  of  May,  1609.  A  Pinnasse  of
the  Flemmings  set  saile  for  Bemermassin,  upon  a  league
made  betweene  them.  And  with  purpose  to  search  every
Creeke  and  corner  of  the  Hand.  For  they  have  heard
there  is  much  Gold  there  and  Bezars,  the  which  is  to  bee
traded  for  with  Beads  and  other  Haberdasher-ware.

The  sixe  and  twentieth  of  August,  1609.  arrived  Cap-
taine  William  Keeling  from  Banda,  having  laden  there
twelve  thousand  foure  hundred  eighty  foure  Cattees  one
halfe  quarter  of  Mace,  fiftie  nine  thousand,  eight  hundred
fortie  sixe  Cattees  of  Nutmegs,  which  stood  them  in  nine,
ten  and  eleven  Rials  the  Bahar,  the  Cattee  there  weighing
thirteene  and  an  halfe  of  our  English  Ounces.  The  smal
Bahar  Mace  is  ten  Cattees,  or  one  hundred  Cattees  of  Nut-
megs :  &  the  great  Bahar  is  one  hundred  Cattees  of  Mace,
or  one  thousand  Cattees  of  Nutmegs :  so  that  if  a  man  be
indebted  unto  you  ten  Cattees  of  Mace,  and  will  give  you
one  hundred  Cattees  of  Nutmegs  you  cannot  refuse  it.

The  fourth  of  October,  1609.  Captaine  Keeling  set
saile  from  Bantam,  having  taken  in  the  rest  of  his  lading,
which  was  foure  thousand  nine  hundred  bagges,  three
Cattees  of  Pepper,  in  the  which  ship  called  the  Hector,  I
came  for  England  having  beene  in  the  Countrey  foure
yeares,  nine  monethes,  eleven  dayes.

A.D.

1609.

A  Pinnasse  of
the  Flemmings
from  Sooca-
dana.

A  Pinnasse  of
the  Flemmings
for  Bemer-

The  Hector  set
say  le  from
Bantam.

[Certaine Rules

5°:

A.D.

1605-O9.

Also  from
Sumatra,
Potannie,Cau-
chauchene.

Burrowse
yeeldeth
Tyurall,
called  in  Eng-
lish Buris,
worth  there  a
Riall  the
Cattee,  and
heere  ten
shillings  the
pound,itiskept
in  Grease.

[I. iv. 390.]

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Certaine  Rules  for  the  choise  of  sundry  Drugges,  as
also  from  whence  they  may  be  had,  as  followeth.

Lignum  Aloes,  is  a  wood  so  called  by  us,  but  of  the
Mallayens,  it  is  called  Garroo.  The  best  commeth
from  Mallacka,  Syam,  and  Cambaya.  The  best  is  that
which  is  in  large  round  stickes  and  very  massie,  of  blacke
colour  intermixed  with  Ashe-coloured  veines.  In  taste
some-what  bitter  and  odoriferous,  and  being  burnt,  it
becommeth  like  unto  Pitch  in  bubbles.  If  a  splinter
thereof  be  laid  upon  a  fire-coale,  for  if  it  be  good,  it  will
not  leave  frying  till  it  bee  quite  consumed,  casting  forth  a
most  delectable  Odour.

Benjamin,  is  a  Gumme  called  by  the  Mallayens  Min-
nian.  The  best  sort  commeth  from  Syam,  which  is  very
pure,  cleere  and  white,  with  little  streakes  of  Amber
colour.  The  other  sort  which  is  not  altogether  so  white,
but  is  also  very  good,  commeth  from  Sumatra.  And  a
third  sort  which  commeth  from  Priaman  and  Barrowse,  is
very  course  like  Horse-bread,  not  vendible  in  England,
but  well  esteemed  in  Bantam.

Civet,  the  best  is  that  which  is  of  a  deepe  yellow
colour  some-what  inclining  to  the  colour  of  Gold,  not
whitish,  for  that  is  usually  sophisticated  with  Grease,  yet
if  it  bee  newly  taken,  it  is  naturally  whitish,  and  will  in
continuance  of  time  become  of  a  yellowish  colour.

Muske,  there  are  three  sorts,  blacke,  browne  and  yel-
low, of  which  the  first  is  naught,  the  second  is  good,  the
last  best :  which  ought  to  be  of  colour  like  the  best  Spick-
nard,  that  is,  of  a  deep  Amber  colour,  inclosed  with  one
onely  skinne,  and  not  one  over  another,  as  it  is  oftentimes
to  be  seene,  not  over-moist  which  maketh  it  waightie,  but
in  a  meane,  having  some  haires  like  bristles,  but  not  over-
many,  cleere  of  stones,  leade,  or  other  trash  intermixed,
and  of  so  strong  and  fragrant  a  smell,  that  to  many  it  is
offensive,  and  being  tasted  in  the  mouth,  it  pierceth  ihe
very  braine  with  the  scent,  and  ought  not  over-soone  to
dissolve  in  the  mouth,  nor  yet  to  remayne  very  long  undis-

5°4

JOHN SARIS

solved  in  any  hand,  it  must  not  be  kept  neere  to  any
sweet  Spices,  least  it  lose  the  sent.

Bezar,  there  are  heere  of  two  kinds,  the  one  brought
from  the  West,  the  other  from  the  East-Indies,  whereof
the  East-India  Bezar  is  worth  double  the  price  of  the
other.  The  formes  of  both  are  divers,  some  round,  others
long  like  Date-stones,  others  like  Pidgeons  Egges,  some
like  the  Kidneyes  of  a  young  Goate,  and  others  in  torme
of  a  Ches-nut,  but  all  for  the  most  part  are  blunt  at  the
ends,  not  picked,  and  no  lesse  varietie  is  also  to  be  seene
in  the  colours,  for  some  are  of  light  redde,  others  of  colour
like  Honey,  many  of  a  darke  Ash-colour  like  that  of  the
Civet-Cat,  but  for  the  most  part  of  a  waterish-greene.
The  East-India  Bezars  consist  of  many  peelings  and  scales,
as  it  were  artificially  compacted  together,  in  manner  of  the
skinnes  and  peeles  of  an  Onion,  each  inclosing  other,
bright  and  splendent,  as  if  they  were  polished  by  Art,  the
one  peeling  being  broken  off,  the  next  is  more  splendent  or
brighter  then  the  former,  these  peelings  are  some  thicke,
some  thinne,  according  to  the  largenesse  of  the  stones,
and  the  larger  the  stone  is,  the  better  for  sale.  This  is  a
certaine  way  to  make  try  all  of  Bezars ;  take  the  direct
waight  of  the  stone,  then  put  him  into  water,  and  let  it
stand  for  the  space  of  foure  houres,  then  see  if  he  be  not
crackt,  wipe  it  dry,  and  weigh  it  againe,  if  it  weigh  never
so  small  a  matter  more  then  he  did  at  the  first,  then  build
upon  it,  it  is  not  good.  Thus  have  I  proved  my  selfe
many  times  in  Bantam,  and  have  had  divers  turne  to
Chalke  with  a  little  sticke  in  the  middle,  which  hath
weighed  a  Taile  Java,  which  is  two  Ounces.  The  most
Counterfeites  come  from  Soocodanna,  which  is  upon
Burneo.  These  names  in  the  M argent,  are  the  places
from  whence  they  may  be  had.

Amber,  there  is  hereof,  if  you  regard  the  colour,  many
sorts,  as  blacke,  white,  browne,  and  gray ;  of  all  which  the
blacke  is  usually  the  basest,  and  the  gray  the  best,  of
which  choose  what  is  best  clensed  from  filth  or  drosse,
pure  of  it  selfe,  of  colour  inclining  to  a  white,  and  of  an

5°5

A.D.
1605-O9.

Pa  Many,
Bemermass'm,
Soocadanna,
Mackasser,
Insula  das
t'acas,  which  is
at  the  entring
into  Cambaya.

A.D.

1605-O9.

The  Java
Alphabet  is
twentie  letters,
the  M allay  ens
foure  and
twentie.
Bahar  Ban-
tam :

Coolack  Oj
Bantam.

Deceit  in  the
weigher.

J unc kes  from
Cheringin  and
Jauby.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Ash-colour  intermixed  with  veines,  some  Ash-colour,
other  whitish,  being  put  into  a  bowle  of  water,  it  ought
to  floate  aloft.  The  which,  although  some  which  is
sophisticated  may  doe,  yet  this  is  certaine,  that  none  which
is  pure  will  sinke  in  the  water.  The  greatest  quantitie
commeth  from  Mosambique  and  Sofala.

Of  all  the  chiefe  and  principall  Townes  for  Trade
in  these  parts,  with  their  severall  names  and
situations,  and  also  what  commodities  they  doe
affoord,  and  what  is  there  desired.

BAntam,  a  Towne  situate  in  the  Hand  of  Java  Major,
standeth  in  the  latitude  of  sixe  degrees  to  the  South
of  the  Equinoctiall,  and  hath  three  degrees  variation  West.
To  this  place  is  great  resort  of  divers  Nations,  in  sundrie
sorts  of  commodities.  For  of  it  selfe  it  affoordeth  little
but  victuals,  Cotton  wooll  and  Pepper,  whereof  the  quan-
titie may  be  at  a  harvest  (which  is  in  the  moneth  of
October)  some  thirtie  or  thirtie  two  thousand  sackes,  each
sacke  containing  forty  nine  Cattees  and  an  halfe  China,
and  each  Cattee  twenty  one  Rials  and  an  halfe  English,
a  sacke  is  called  a  Timbang,  and  two  Timbanges  is  one
Peecull,  three  Peeculls  is  a  small  Bahar,  and  foure  Peeculls
and  an  halfe  a  great  Bahar,  which  is  foure  hundred  fortie
five  Cattees  and  an  halfe.  Item,  there  is  a  Coolack,  by
the  which  the  Javanes  most  commonly  deale,  because  they
are  not  very  perfect  in  the  use  of  the  Beame  ;  it  con-
taineth  seven  Cattees  and  a  quarter,  and  seven  Coolackes
is  a  Timbang  (water  measure)  the  which  is  one  Cattee  and
a  quarter,  greater  then  the  Beame  (there  should  be  no
difference,  but  that  the  weigher,  which  is  alwayes  a
Chinesa,  doth  give  his  Countrimen  leave  to  get)  for  ac-
cording as  he  favours,  he  can  fit  them  with  a  great  or  a
small  measure,  at  his  pleasure.  Item,  there  commeth  in
the  moneths  of  December  and  January  to  this  place,  many
Junckes  and  Prawes  laden  with  Pepper  from  Cherringin
and  Jauby,  so  that  in  the  fine  of  January  there  is  alwayes

506

JOHN SARIS

Pepper  sufficient  to  lade  three  good  shippes.  Item,  the
King  hath  no  Coine  of  his  owne,  but  what  commeth  from
China,  which  is  called  Cashes,  and  is  made  of  the  drosse  of
Lead,  it  is  round  and  thin,  with  holes  to  string  them  on,
a  thousand  Cashes  upon  a  string,  called  a  Pecoo,  which  is
of  divers  values,  according  as  Cashes  rise  or  fall,  where-
with they  know  how  to  make  their  accounts,  which  is  as
followeth  :  ten  Pecooes  is  a  Laxsau,  ten  Laxsaues  is  a
Cattee,  ten  Cattees  is  an  Uta,  ten  Utaes  is  a  Bahar.

Item,  you  are  to  understand,  there  are  two  manner  of
wayes  of  the  stringing  of  Cashes  ;  the  one  called  Chu-
chuck  China,  the  other  Chuchuck  Java,  of  which  the  Java
is  the  best,  for  there  should  be  two  hundred  Cashes  upon
a  Tacke,  but  for  the  China  Tackes  you  shall  find  but  an
hundred  and  sixtie,  or  an  hundred  and  seventie :  five
Tackes  should  make  a  Pecoo ;  so  that  you  lose  two
hundred  Cashes  upon  a  Pecoo,  or  an  hundred  and  fiftie,
which  will  rise  to  a  great  matter,  if  you  deale  for  much  ;
but  by  the  law  of  the  Countrey  they  are  to  be  just  a
thousand  Cashes  upon  a  string,  or  to  give  Basse,  which  is
allowance.

Item,  upon  the  departing  of  the  Junckes,  you  shall  buy
thirtie  foure  and  thirtie  five  Pecooes  for  a  Riall,  which
before,  the  next  yeere  you  may  sell  for  twentie  two  and
twentie  for  a  Riall,  so  that  there  is  great  profit  to  be  made,
but  the  danger  of  fire  is  great.

Item,  the  weight  used  to  weigh  Bezars,  Civit  and  gold,
is  called  a  Taile,  which  is  two  Rialls  of  eight  and  a
quarter,  or  two  ounces,  English.  Item,  a  Mallaya  Taile
is  one  Riall  of  eight  and  a  halfe,  or  one  ounce  and  one
third  part  English.  Item,  a  Taile  China  is  i-oV-  Riall  of
eight,  or  one  ounce  and  one  fift  part  English,  so  that  ten
Tailes  China  is  sixe  Tailes  Java,  exactly.  Item,  the
English  commodities  vendible  heere,  are  as  followeth :
English  Iron,  long  and  thinne  barres,  sixe  Rials  the  Pee-
cull :  Lead,  in  small  pigges,  for  five  and  twentie  or  sixe
and  twentie  peeces,  five  Rialls  and  a  halfe  the  Peecull :
Powder,  fine  round  cornd,  the  barrell  five  and  twentie

5°7

A.D.

1605-09.

In  the  fine  of
Janury  three
ships  may  find
lading  of  Pep-
pct  in  Bantam.
ChinaCashcs.

The  best
Cashes  in
Bantam  called
Chuchuck
Java.

Basse  called
allowance  upon
Cashes.
Profit  to  bee
made  in
ingrossing  of
Cashes.

[I. iv. 391.]
The  weight
used  in  weigh-
ing of  Bezars,
Civet  and
Gold,  with  the
c o?i tent  of  their
severalTailes.
English  Com-
modities
vendible  in
Bantam.

A.D.
1605-O9.

February  and
March,  the
time  of  the
ramming  of  the
ChinaJunckes
for  Bantam,
and  what  com-
modities they
are  laden  with.

Commodities
from  China.

Benjamine.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Rialls  :  Peeces  square,  sanguined,  the  peece  ten  Rialls,  of
sixe  foot  long :  Peeces  square,  damasked  all  over,  fifteene
Rialls,  of  sixe  foote  long  and  a  halfe :  Broad-cloth  of  ten
pound  the  Cloath,  of  colour  Venice  red,  a  Gasse,  which  is
three  quarters  of  a  yard,  three  Rialls  of  eight :  Opium
Misseree,  which  is  the  best,  eight  Rialls  the  Cattee :
Amber,  in  great  beads,  one  Wamg  and  a  halfe  Taile  Mal-
laya,  sixe  Rialls  of  eight :  Corall,  in  large  branches,  five
and  sixe  Rialls,  the  weight  of  the  Taile  Mallaya :  Rialls
of  eight,  the  principallest  commodities  you  can  carry.

Item,  in  the  Moneths  of  February  and  March,  heere
commeth  three  or  foure  Junckes  from  China,  very  richly
laden  with  Silkes  raw  and  wrought,  China  Cashes,  Purse-
line,  Cotton  cloath  of  divers  fashions  and  prices,  as  fol-
loweth,  viz.  Raw-silke  of  Lamking,  which  is  the  best,  an
hundred  and  ninetie  Rialls  the  Peecull :  Raw-silke  of
Canton,  which  is  courser,  eightie  Rials  the  Peecull :
Taffata  in  boults,  an  hundred  and  twelve  yards  the  peece,
fortie  six  Rials  the  Corge,  twenty  peeces :  Velvets
all  colours,  thirteene  yards  the  peece,  twelve  Rialls
the  peece :  Damaske  all  colours,  twelve  yards  the
peece,  sixe  Rialls  the  peece ;  white  Sattins,  twelve
yards  long  the  peeces,  eight  Rialls :  Burgones,  ten
yards  long  the  peece,  fortie  five  Rialls  the  Corge  :  Sleve-
silke,  the  best  made  colours,  three  Rialls  the  Cattee :
Muske  the  best,  two  and  twentie  Rialls  the  Cattee :
Sewing  Gold  the  best,  fifteene  knots,  every  knot
thirty  strings,  one  Riall :  Velvet  Hangings  imbroydered
with  gold,  eighteene  Rialls  ;  upon  Sattins,  fourteene  Rials  :
white  Curten  stuffes,  nine  yards  the  peeces,  fiftie  Rialls
the  Corge ;  white  Damaske  Flat,  nine  yards  the  peeces,
foure  Rialls  :  Sugar  white  the  Peecull,  three  Rials  and  a
halfe,  very  drie  :  Sugar  Candy  very  drie,  five  Rials  the
Peecull :  Purseline  Basons  the  peeces,  two  Rialls,  very
broad  and  fine :  Callico  cloath,  course,  white  and  browne,
fifteene  Rialls  the  Corge  :  Course  Purseline,  Drugges,  and
divers  other  commodities  they  bring,  but  because  they  are
not  for  our  Countrey,  I  doe  omit. Benjamine  very  good

508

JOHN SARIS

and  white,  five  and  thirtie,  and  thirtie  Rialls  the  Peecull  :
Lignum-Aloes,  eightie  Rialls  the  Peecull  :  Allum,  which
is  as  good  as  the  English,  and  comes  from  China,  two
Rialls  and  a  halfe  the  Peecull.  Choromandell  Cloath  is  a
principal!  commoditie  heere,  the  most  vendible  sorts  are
called  Goobares ;  Pintadoes  of  foure  and  five  covets :
Fine  Tappies  of  Saint  Thomas,  Ballachos,  Java  Girdles,
alias  Caine-Goolong,  Callico  Launes,  Booke  Callicos,  and
Callicos  made  up  in  rowles,  white.  Item,  a  Goober  is
double,  and  containeth  twelve  yards,  or  sixe  Hastaes
single.  Item,  Ballachos,  course  and  fine,  containing  two
and  thirtie  or  foure  and  thirtie  Hastaes,  but  the  finest  are
alwayes  longest.

Item,  the  fine  Tappyes  of  Saint  Thomas,  sixe  Hastaes.
Item,  Moorees  is  a  fine  sort  of  cloath,  but  not  very  much
used  heere,  for  it  is  deare  and  short,  containing  sixteene
Hastaes,  at  two  Rialls  and  a  quarter.  Item,  Booke  Cal-
licos, if  they  be  not  corted,  are  two  and  thirtie  Hastaes.
Item,  all  sorts  of  Mallayan  cloath  are  generally  eight
Hastaes  long,  wherefore  it  is  called,  Cherra  Mallaya.
Item,  generally  all  sorts  of  Cotton  cloath,  which  is  broad,
and  of  good  length,  is  well  requested  heere.

Item,  Callico  Lawnes,  white  and  red,  are  two  and  thirtie
Hastaes.  Item,  a  Hasta  is  halfe  a  yard,  accounted  from
your  elbow  to  the  toppe  of  your  middle  finger.  Item,  the
Kings  Customes  heere,  are  as  followeth  :  The  Kings  Cus-
tome  called  Chukey,  is  eight  bagges  upon  the  hundred
bagges,  rating  Pepper  at  foure  Rials  of  eight  the  sacke,
what  price  soever  it  beares :  Billa-billian  is,  if  any  ship
arrive  in  the  Roade,  laden  with  cloath  or  such  like ;  the
King  is  to  be  made  acquainted  therewith,  and  with  the
sorts,  quantitie,  and  price  thereof,  before  you  may  land
any  part :  then  hee  will  send  his  Officers,  and  such  sorts,
as  he  likes,  he  will  have  at  the  halfe  of  your  price,  or  some-
what above,  as  you  can  agree  :  for  if  you  prise  your  cloath
at  twentie  Rialls  for  Corge,  hee  will  give  you  but  fifteene
or  sixteene  Rialls  a  Corge  :  but  the  Flemmings  course
hath  been  to  give  him  seven  or  eight  hundred  Rialls  at

5°9

i

Lignum  Akcs
to  be  bought  at
Bantam.

Commoditie!
vendible  in
Bantam.

Content  of
cloath  Chera
Java,  which
comes  from
Choromandell.

Generally,
Cotton  cloath
requested  in
Bantam.

Custome.

Billa-billian
or  Labba,  is
upon  six  thou-
sand sackes  six
hundred  sixty
sixe  Rialls,
and  so  higher
or  lower
according  to
the  burden  of
your  shippe.

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1605-09.

a  time  for  a  shippes  lading,  to  cleare  them  of  the  dutie
and  trouble.  But  by  the  custome  of  the  Countrey,  this
dutie  is  upon  sixe  thousand  sackes  of  Pepper,  sixe  hundred
sixtie  sixe  Rialls,  if  you  lade  Pepper,  otherwise  to  take  so
many  thousand  sackes  of  the  King,  at  halfe  a  Riall,  or  three
quarters  of  a  Riall  upon  a  sacke,  more  then  the  price  cur-
rant is  in  the  Towne.

Item,  if  you  shall  have  provided  afore-hand  sufficient
lading  to  dispatch  your  shippes,  yet  you  are  to  pay  for  this
dutie  as  aforesaid,  or  else  they  will  not  permit  you  to  lade.
Rooba.  Item,  Rooba,  Rooba,  is  a  duty  for  anchorage,  and  is

upon  sixe  thousand  sackes  five  hundred  Rialls  of  eight.
Item,  the  Sabandars  duty  is  upon  sixe  thousand  sackes
two  hundred  fiftie  Rials.  Item,  the  Waighers  dutie  is
one  Riall  upon  an  hundred  sackes.  Item,  the  Jerotoolis
No  custome.  or  Waighers  belonging  to  the  Custome-house,  their  dutie
is  one  Riall  for  an  hundred  sackes.

Jortan,  is  to  the  Eastwards  of  Jacatra,  it  is  called  Sere-
baya.  It  affoordeth  of  it  selfe  victuals,  and  great  store
of  Cotton-wooll,  and  spun  yarne.  There  commeth  many
[I.  iv.  392.]  Junkes  from  Jauby,  whose  lading  is  Pepper ;  also  there
are  small  Prawes  of  the  Towne,  which  goe  to  Banda ;  so
that  there  are  some  few  Mace  and  Nuts  to  be  had  there.

Mackassar,  is  an  Hand  not  farre  from  the  Celebes.  It
affoordeth  great  store  of  Bezar  stones,  which  may  be  had
reasonably :  also  Rice  and  other  Victualls  great  plentie.
There  are  Junkes  also  which  trade  to  Banda,  so  that  a
small  quantitie  of  Mace  and  Nuts  is  there  to  be  had  also.

Balee,  is  an  Hand  to  the  East-wards  of  Mackassar,
standing  in  eight  degrees  and  an  halfe  to  the  South  of  the
Equinoctiall.  It  hath  of  it  selfe  great  store  of  Rice,  Cot-
ten-yarne,  slaves,  and  course  white  Cloth,  well  requested
at  Bantam.  The  commodities  for  this  place  are  the  smallest
sort  of  blue  and  white  beads.  Iron  and  course  Purseline.

Tymore,  is  an  Hand  which  lieth  to  the  East-ward  of
Baly,  in  the  latitude  of  tenne  degrees,  fortie  minutes.
This  place  affoordeth  great  store  of  Chindanna,  by  us
called,  white  Saunders ; the  greatest  logges  are  accounted

510

JOHN SARIS  ai,.

1605-09.

best,  it  is  worth  at  Bantam  twentie  Rials  of  eight  the  Pee-

cull,  at  the  comming  of  the  Junkes  :  Waxe  in  great  cakes,

worth at Bantam eighteene, nineteene, twentie, thirtie

Rials  the  Peecul,  as  the  time  serves. Item,  you  must  be

verie  carefull  in  the  choosing  of  it,  for  there  is  great  deceit

therein  ; wherefore  you  must  break  it,  to  see  whether  it

bee  mingled  or  not.

The  Commodities  which  are  carried  thither,  are  Chop-
ping-knives,  small  Bugles,  Porseline,  coloured  Taffataes,
but  no  blackes,  China  frying-Pannes,  China  bels,  and
peeces  of  silver  beaten  flat  and  thin  as  a  wafer,  of  the
bredth  of  a  hand.  Item,  there  is  great  profit  made  of  this
trade,  for  the  Chineses  have  given  to  our  men  which
adventured  with  them  thither,  foure  for  one.

Banda  lieth  in  the  latitude  of  five  degrees  to  the  South-
wards of  the  Equinoctiall. It  affoordeth  great  store  of
Mace  and  Nutmegs,  with  Oyle  of  both  sorts: it  hath  no Oyleo/Mace
King,  but  is  governed  by  a  Sabandar,  which  joyneth  with 'rt  atBan-
the  Sabandars  of  Nero,  and  Lentore,  Puloway,  Pulorin,  tam  5.  or  6.
and  Labatacca,  Hands  neare  adjoyning. These  Hands  in  Riallsaquart.
former  times  have  been  under  the  governement  of  the
King  of  Ternata,  but  at  this  present  they  governe  of  them-
selves. Item,  on  these  Hands  is  harvest  thrice  a  yeare,
viz.  in  the  Moneth  of  July,  October,  and  February. But
the  gathering  in  July  is  the  greatest,  the  which  is  called,
the  Monson  Arepootee.  Momon  Are-

Item,  the  manner  of  dealing  for  their  price,  is  as  fol-  ^pief\ m
loweth. A  small  Bahar  is  tenne  Cattees  Mace,  and  an  anas  thedevils
hundred  Cattees  Nuts ; &  a  great  Bahar  Mace,  is  an  hun-  Hand  comes
dred  Cattees,  and  a  thousand  Cattees  Nuts,  and  a  Cattee  the foule  called
is  five  pound,  thirteene  ounces  and  an  halfe  English,  the  Casuarte-
prices  variable.

Item,  the  Commodities  requested  in  these  Hands,  are
Choromandel  cloth,  Cheremallaw,  viz.  Sarrasses,  Pintados
of  five  Coveyts,  fine  Ballachos,  blacke  Girdles,  Chellyes,
white  Callicoes,  broad  cloath  Stammell,  Gold  in  coyne,
viz.  Rose-nobles  of  England  and  the  Low  Countreys,
Royalls  of  eight. Item,  you  shall  have  that  there,  for

5"

A. IX
1605-O9.

Lignum  Aloes.
Oph'ion  missc-
rcc  zvhich  is
soft  like  zvax.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

seventy  Rialls  in  Gold,  which  will  cost  you  ninetie  in
Rialls,  China  Basons  fine  large,  and  without  brims,  Dam-
asks of  light  colours,  Taffataes,  Velvets,  China  Boxes,  or
Counters  gilded,  Gold  chaines,  Plate  cups  gilded,  Head-
peeces  bright  damasked,  Peeces  for  shot,  but  not  many
Sword  blades  brand  and  backt  to  the  point.  Item,  Cam-
baya  cloth,  Callicoes  blacke  and  red,  Callico  lawnes,  &c.
Ttem,  Rice  is  a  very  good  commoditie  to  carrie  thither.

The  Hands  of  the  Moluccos  are  five,  viz.  Molucco,
Ternate,  Tydore,  Gelolo,  Mackean,  and  are  under  the
Equinoctial!  line.  These  Hands  affoord  great  store  of
Cloves,  not  every  yeare,  but  every  three  yeares.  The
Cattee  there  is,  three  pound  five  ounces  English,  the
Bahar  two  hundred  Cattees.  Item,  nineteene  Cattees
Ternata,  makes  fifty  Cattees  Bantam  exactly.

The  commodities  vendible  for  these  places,  are  Choro-
mandell  cloth,  Cheremallaw,  but  fine ;  and  Siam  girdles,
Salolos,  fine  Ballachos  and  Chelleys  are  best  requested.
Item,  China  Taffata,  Velvets,  Damaske,  great  Basons,
varnished  Counters,  Broad  cloath  crymson,  Opium  and
Benjamin,  &c.

Siam,  lieth  in  the  latitude  of  foureteen  degrees  &  a
halfe  to  the  Northward  of  the  Equinoctial.  It  affoords
great  store  of  very  good  Benjamin,  and  many  rich  stones,
which  are  brought  thither  from  Pegu.  Item,  a  Tayle  is
two  Rials  of  eight  and  a  quarter.  Item,  here  is  much
Silver  in  bullion,  which  commeth  from  Japan,  but  Rials  of
eight  are  in  more  request,  for  two  Rialls  and  a  quarter  in
coine,  will  yeeld  two  and  a  halfe  in  bullion.  Broad  cloth
stammell  colour,  Iron,  and  faire  looking  glasses  are  well
requested,  all  manner  of  China  Commodities  are  there
better  cheape  then  at  Bantam.

Item,  the  Guzerat  Junkes  come  to  Siam  in  the  moneths
of  June  and  July,  touching  first  at  the  Maldives,  and  then
at  Tenassere,  from  whence  they  may  goe  over  land  to
Siam  in  twentie  dayes.  Item,  at  Tenassere,  there  is
alwayes  five  and  an  halfe,  and  sixe  fathomes  water.

Borneo,  lieth  in  the  latitude  of  three  degrees  to  the

512

JOHN SARIS  a.d.

1605-09.

South  of  the  Equinoctial.  It  affoordeth  great  store  of
Gold,  Bezar  stones,  Wax,  Rotans,  Cayulacca,  and  Sanguis
Draconis.  Item,  at  Bemermassin,  a  Towne  situated  on
this  Hand,  is  the  principallest  trade  for  the  Commodities
afore-said.  Item,  the  Commodities  requested  there,  are
as  followeth,  Choromandell  cloth  of  all  sorts,  China  Silkes,
Damasks,  TafFataes,  Velvets,  all  colours  but  blackes,  Broad
cloth,  Stammell,  and  Rialls  of  eight.  Item,  Bezar  stones
are  there  bought  by  the  Taile,  which  is  the  weight  of  one
Riall  and  an  halfe  of  eight,  for  five  or  sixe  Rials  the  Taile,
which  is  one  Ounce,  and  the  third  part  English.

Soocodanna,  is  a  Towne  situate  upon  Borneo,  in  the
latitude  of  one  degree  and  an  halfe  to  the  South  of  the  p.  »▼«  393-]
Equinoctiall,  and  is  North-east  from  Bantam  one  hundred
and  sixtie  leagues.  There  is  in  the  entrance  of  the  har-
bour  five  fathomes,  and  at  low  water  three  fathomes,  a
Faulcon  short  of  the  shore,  Ozie  ground.

To  this  place  is  great  Trade  in  Junkes  and  Prawes,  for
it  yeeldeth  great  store  of  Diamonds,  the  which  are  ac-
counted the  best  in  the  world.  There  is  store  to  be  had
at  all  times,  but  specially  in  the  moneths  of  January,
Aprill,  July  and  October,  but  the  greatest  quantitie  in
January  and  Aprill,  at  which  times  they  are  brought
downe  the  River  called  Lave  by  Prawes.  The  manner  of
getting  of  them,  is  as  you  dive  for  Pearle.  The  reason
why  more  quantitie  is  gotten  in  one  Moneth  then  in  an
other  is,  for  that  in  July  and  October,  there  falleth  so
much  raine  that  it  riseth  nine  fathomes  which  causeth
such  a  streame  that  they  can  hardly  dive  and  in  the  other
moneths  there  is  but  foure,  or  foure  fathomes  and  an  halfe,
which  is  held  the  best  depth  for  their  diving.

Item,  Commodities  vendible  and  in  request  here  at
Soocodanna,  are  Mallacca  Pintados,  verie  fine  Sarrassa,
Goobares,  Poulings,  Chera  Java,  Callico  Lawnes,  China
Silkes  light  colours,  sewing  Gold,  sleave  Silke,  Broad
cloth,  Stammell,  all  sorts  of  small  Bugles,  Bugles  which
are  made  in  Bantam,  of  colour  blue,  and  in  fashion  like  a
Tunne,  but  of  the  bignesse  of  a  Beane,  and  cost  at  Ban-

III  513  2K

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1605-09.

tarn  foure  hundred  a  Riall  of  eight,  worth  at  Soocodanna,
a  Masse  the  hundred,  the  Masse  beeing  three  quarters  of
a  Riall  of  eight,  China  Cashes,  Rials  of  eight,  but  princi-
pally Gold,  without  which  you  can  doe  little,  for  you  shall
have  a  stone  for  one  Rial  in  Gold,  which  you  shall  not
have  for  a  Rial  and  an  halfe,  or  a  Riall  and  three  quarters
in  silver.

Item,  you  are  to  understand,  that  it  is  the  best  course
when  you  are  bound  for  this  place,  to  goe  for  Bemer-
massen  first,  where  you  may  barter  the  Commodities  afore-
said for  Gold,  which  you  shal  have  for  three  Cattees
Cashes  the  Mallacca  Taile,  which  is  nine  Rials  of  eight,
as  I  have  beene  credibly  informed,  it  hath  been  worth  of
late  years.  And  bringing  it  to  Soocodanna  you  shall  put
it  away  for  Diamonds,  at  foure  Cattees  Cashes  the  Taile,
which  is  one  and  three  quarters  and  halfe  quarter  of  a
Riall  in  weight,  so  that  you  shall  gaine  three  quarters  of  a
Riall  of  eight  upon  a  Taile.  But  the  principall  gaines
must  be  in  the  Diamonds.

Item,  you  must  understand,  that  there  are  Diamonds
of  foure  waters,  which  is  called  Varna,  viz.  Varna  Ambon,
Varna  Loud,  Varna  Sackar,  Varna  Bessee.  The  first  is
white,  greene,  yellow,  and  neither  greene  nor  yellow,  but  a
colour  betweene  both. But  the  white  water  is  the  best.

Their  Weights  are  called  Sa-Masse,  Sa-Copang,  Sa-
Boosuck,  Sa-Pead.  Item,  foure  Coopangs  is  a  Masse,  two
Boosucks  is  one  Copang,  and  one  Pead  and  an  halfe  is  a
Boosuck.  Item,  there  is  a  Pahaw  which  is  foure  Masse,
and  sixteene  Masse  is  one  Taile,  and  by  this  weight,  they
doe  not  onely  weigh  Diamonds,  but  Gold  also.

Of  China  wares,  raw  Silke  the  best  is  made  at  Lanking,
and  is  called  Howsa,  worth  there  eighty  Rials  the  Peecul.
TafFata,  called  Tue,  the  best  made  at  a  small  Towne  called
Hocchu,  worth  thirtie  Rials  the  Corge.  Damaske  called
Towne,  the  best  made  at  Canton,  worth  fiftie  Rials  the
Corge.

Sewing  Silke  called  Couswa,  worth  one  hundred  Rials
the  Peecull. Imbrodered  Hangings  called  Poey,  the  best

5*4

JOHN SARIS

1605-09.

ten  Rials  the  piece.  Sewing  Gold  called  Kimswa,  is  sold
by  the  Chippau,  which  is  a  bundle,  each  Chippau,  con-
tayning  ten  Papers,  and  in  each  Paper  is  five  knots  sold
for  three  Pawes,  two  Rials  of  eight,  and  the  best  hath
thirtie  sixe  threds  in  a  knot.  Sattins  called  Lyn,  the  best
one  Riall  the  piece.  Great  Basons  called  Chopau,  worth
three  by  the  Riall.  White  Sugar  called  Petong,  the  best
one  halfe  Riall  the  Peecull.  Purseline  of  the  small  sorts
called  Poa,  the  best  one  Riall  the  Cattee.  Pearle  Boxes
called  Chanab,  the  best  five  Rials  the  piece.  Velvets
called  Tangojounck  of  nine  yards  long,  five  Rials  the
piece,  Sleave  Silke  called  Jounckes,  the  best  one  hundred
and  fiftie  Rials  Peecull.  Muske  called  Saheo,  seven  Rials
the  Cattee. Cashes  sixtie  Pecooes,  the  Riall.

Item,  Broad-cloth  called  Toloney,  Sasocke,  which  is
three  quarters  of  a  yard,  worth  seven  Rials  of  eight.
Looking  Glasses  very  large,  called  Kea,  worth  ten  Rials  the
piece.  Tinne  called  Sea,  worth  there  fifteene  Rials  the
Peecull.  Waxe  called  La,  fifteene  Rials  the  Peecull,
Muskets  called  Cauching,  the  Barrell  twentie  Rials.
Japon  Sables  called  Samto  worth  eight  Rials  the  piece.
Elephants  teeth  the  greatest  and  best  two  hundred  Rials
the  Peecull,  and  small,  one  hundred  Rials  the  Peecull,
called  Ga :  White  Saunders  called  Toawheo  :  The  best  in
great  logges  fortie  Rials  the  Peecull.

Item,  the  Custome  of  Pepper  inwards,  as  one  Taile
upon  a  Peecull,  and  out-wards  no  Custome.

Item,  it  is  very  straightly  looked  into  that  they  carry
no  munition  out  of  the  Land  in  any  sort.

Item,  in  the  moneth  of  March,  the  Junckes  bound  for
the  Mannelies,  depart  from  Chauchu  in  Companies,  some-
time foure,  five,  ten,  or  more  together,  as  they  are  readie.

Item,  there  lading  out-wards  is  raw  and  wrought  Silkes,
but  farre  better  then  those  which  they  carrie  for  Bantam.

Item,  betweene  Canton  and  the  Mannelies  is  ten  dayes
sayle.

Item,  in  the  beginning  of  June  they  returne  from  the
Mannelies,  there  lading  is  Rials  of  eight,  and  there  is  not

5*5

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1605-09.

lesse  then  fortie  sayle  in  a  yeare,  which  are  bound  thither,
there  force  is  nothing,  so  that  you  may  take  them  with
your  ships  Boate.
[I.  iv.  394.]  Item,  in  this  yeare,  1608.  Pepper  was  worth  in  China
sixe  Tades  and  an  halfe  the  Peecull,  and  at  the  same  time
in  Bantam  worth  two  and  an  halfe  Rials  the  Tinbang.

A  note  of  requestable  Commodities  vendible  in
Japan,  together  with  their  prices  there  Cur-
rent, being  Masses,  and  Canderines,  each  Can-
derine  contayning  the  ^.  of  a  Masse:  viz.

B Road-clothes  of  all  sorts,  viz.  Blackes,  Yellowes,  and
Reds,  which  cost  in  Holland  eight  or  nine  Gilders
the  Flemmish  ell,  two  ells  three  quarters  is  worth  three,
foure  to  five  hundred.  Note  that  cloth  of  a  high  Wooll
is  not  requestable,  but  such  as  is  low  shorne  most  ven-
dible. Fine  Baves  of  the  colours  afore-said  vendible  :  not
according  as  the  Portugalls  were,  but  well  cottoned.

Sayes.  Rashes.  Bouratts  single.  Bouratts  double.
Silke  Grogarams.  Turkey  Grogarams.  Chamlets.  Divo
Gekepert.  Weersetynen.  Canjant.  Gewart  Twijne.
Velvets.  Muske  sold  in  weight  against  Silver.  India
cloth  of  sorts  requested.  Sattins.  Taffataes.  Damaskes.
Holland-cloth  from  fifteene  to  twentie  Stivers  the  Flem-
mish ell,  and  not  above.  Diaper.  Damaske  the  better  it
is  wrought  with  figures  or  branches.  Threed  of  all  colours.
Carpets  for  Tables.  Gilded  Leather  painted,  with  Pictures
and  Flowres,  the  smallest  worke  best.  Painted  Pictures,
they  delight  in  lascivious  Stories  of  Warres  by  Sea  and
Land,  the  larger  the  better  worth,  one,  two,  to  three  hun-
dred. Quick-silver  the  hundred  Cattees,  from  three  to
foure  hundred.

Vermillion,  the  hundred  Cattees,  worth  from  three  to
sixe  hundred.  Painting  for  Womens  faces,  the  hundred
Cattees  twentie  eight.  Copper  in  Plates,  one  hundred
twentie  five.  Flemmish  weight  worth  from  ninetie  to  an
hundred. Lead in small Barres, the hundred Cattees

516

JOHN SARIS  *"

1605-09.

worth  from  sixtie  to  eightie  eight.  Lead  in  sheetes  best
requested,  the  thinner  the  better,  one  hundred  pounds
Flemmish,  to  eightie.  Tinne  in  logs  line,  one  hundred
and  twentie  pound,  Flemmish  three  hundred  and  fittie.
Iron,  twentie  five  Ounces  Holland,  worth  toure.  Steele
the  hundred  Cattees,  worth  from  one  to  two  hundred.

Tapistrie.  Civet  the  Cattee,  worth  from  one  hundred
and  fiftie  to  two  hundred.  China  roots  the  hundred  Cat-
tees  or  Peecull  worth  fortie.  China  sowing  Gold  the
Paper,  three  masse,  three  Powder  Sugar  of  China,  the
hundred  Cattees  or  Peecull  worth  fortie  to  fiftie.  Sugar
Candie  the  Peecul,  or  one  hundred  Cattees,  worth  from
fifty  to  sixty.  Velvets  of  all  colors,  eight  els  the  piece,
worth  from  one  hundred  &  twenty,  to  one  hundred  and
thirtie.  Wrought  Velvets  like  fabricke,  worth  from  one
hundred  &  eighty  to  two  hundred.  Taffataes  all  colours,
&  good  Silke  worth  the  piece,  from  foure  and  twentie,
thirtie,  to  fortie.  Sattin  of  seven  or  eight  ells  long,  the
piece  worth  from  eightie  to  one  hundred.  Figured  Sattin,
worth  from  one  hundred  and  twentie  to  one  hundred  and
fiftie.  Gazen  of  seven  pikes  or  ells,  worth  from  fortie  to
fiftie.  Raw  Silke  the  Cattee,  of  twelve  pound  Flemmish,
worth  from  thirtie  to  fortie.  Untwisted  Silke  of  eight
and  twentie  pound  Flemmish,  worth  from  thirtie  five  to
fortie.  Twisted  Silke,  worth  from  eight  and  twentie  to
fortie.

Drinking  Glasses  of  all  sorts.  Bottles,  Cans  and  Cups,
Trenchers,  Platters,  Beere  Glasses,  Salts,  Wine  Glasses,
Bekers  gilt,  Looking-glasses  of  the  largest  sort,  Muscovie
Glasse,  much  Salt,  Writing  Table-bookes,  Paper-bookes,
Lead  to  neale  Pots,  Spanish  Sope  well  requested,  it  is  sold
for  one  masse  the  small  Cacke.  Amber  in  beades,  worth
one  hundred  and  fortie,  to  one  hundred  and  sixtie.  Silke
stockings  of  all  colours.  Spanish  Leather,  Neates  Leather,
with  other  sorts  of  Leather  used  for  Gloves,  worth  from
sixe,  eight,  to  nine.  Candiques  of  China,  worth  from
fifteene  to  twentie.  Candiques  of  the  same  place  blacke,
the  former  being  blew,  from  ten  to  fifteene. Wax  for

5i7

ad  PURCHAS HIS PIJLGRIMES

1605-09.

Candles  one  hundred  pounds  Flemmish,  worth  from  two
hundred,  to  two  hundred  and  fiftie.  Hony  the  Peecull,
worth  sixtie.  Samell  of  Cochinchina,  the  Peecull,  one
hundred  and  eightie.  Pepper  the  Peecull,  if  there  come
not  much,  worth  one  hundred.  Nutmegs  the  Peecull,
twentie  five,  Campheir  of  Barous  or  Borneo,  the  pound
hollaus,  from  two  hundred  and  fiftie  to  foure  hundred.
Sanders  of  Solier  the  Peecull,  worth  one  hundred.  Callom-
back  wood  good  and  weightie,  the  pound  worth  from  one,
two,  three  to  five.  Sapon,  or  red  wood  the  Peecull,  from
twentie  to  twentie  sixe.  Elephants  teeth  the  greater,  the
better  worth  from  foure,  five,  sixe,  seven,  to  eight  hun-
dred. Renosceros  home,  the  Javan  Cattee  worth  thirtie.
Harts  homes  gilded  the  piece,  three,  foure,  or  five  hundred.
Roch  Allome  esteemed  good  ware,  and  enquired  after  :
that  which  cost  but  three  Gilders,  hath  beene  sold  for  one
hundred  Gilders,  but  not  every  mans  money.

Note,  that  the  Chineses  will  commonly  trucke  for  your
Silver,  and  give  you  Gold  of  twentie  three  Carrackes :
from  fifteene  to  twentie  the  Ounce  Silver,  but  some  times
there  commeth  much,  and  other  some  times  little.

[I.  iv.  395.]  j±  Memoriall  of  such  Merchandize  as  are  to  be
bought  in  Japan,  and  the  prices  as  they  are
there  worth.

HEmpe  very  good,  one  hundred  Cattees  beeing  one
hundred  and  twentie  pound  Holland,  worth  from
sixtie  five  to  seventie.  Eye  colours  for  dying  blew,  almost
as  good  as  Indico,  made  up  in  round  cakes  or  pieces,  and
packed  one  hundred  cakes  in  a  Fardell,  worth  the  Fardell,
fiftie  to  sixtie.  Dying  for  white,  turning  to  red  colour,
made  in  Fardels  or  Bales  of  fiftie  Gautins  Malios  worth
five  to  eight.  Rice  very  white  and  good,  cased,  worth
the  Fares,  eight,  three  fifth  parts.  Rice  of  a  worser  sort,
the  Bale  worth  seven,  three  tenth  parts.

At  Edo,  Saccaio,  Osacaio  and  Meacow,  is  the  best  Dying
for  all  sorts  of  colours  whatsoever  your  desire,  viz.  Red,

518

JOHN SARIS

Blacke  and  Greene,  and  for  gilding  Gold  and  Silver,  and
is  better  then  the  Chinese  Varnish.

Brimstone  in  great  abundance,  cost  the  Peecull,  seven.
Salt-peeter  dearer  in  one  place  then  another,  worth  one
and  an  halfe. Cotton-wooll  the  Peecull,  ten.

Chap. III.

Relation  of  Master  Richard  Cockes  Cape  Mer-
chant, Of  what  past  in  the  Generals  absence
going  to  the  Emperours  Court.  Whereunto
are  added  divers  Letters  of  his  and  others  for
the  better  knowledge  of  Japonian  Affaires,  and
later  Occurents  in  those  parts.

A.D.

1613.

The

§. I.

Kings  care,  unreadinesse  of  ours,  Japonian
Superstitions,  strange  tempest.

He  seventh  of  August,  all  things  being  in
a  readinesse,  our  Generall  in  company  of
Master  Adams,  departed  from  Firando
towards  the  Emperours  Court  of  Japan,
and  tooke  with  him  Master  Tempest,
Peacocke,  Master  Richard  Wickham,
Edward  Saris,  Walter  Carwarden,  Diego
Fernandos,  John  Williams  a  Taylor,  John  Head  a  Cooke,
Edward  Bartan  the  Chirurgions  Mate,  John  Japan  Jure-
basso,  Richard  Dale,  Cox  Swaine,  and  Anthonie  Ferre  a
Sayler,  with  a  Cavaleere  of  the  Kings  for  Guardian  and
two  of  his  Servants,  and  two  Servants  of  M.  Adams.  And
so  they  departed  in  a  Barke  or  Barge  of  the  Kings,  which
rowed  with  some  twentie  Oares  on  a  side,  and  had  thir-
teene  Peeces  of  Ordnance  shot  off  at  departure.

I  went  to  complement  with  the  two  Kings,  (as  being
sent  from  the  Generall)  to  give  them  thankes  for  provid-
ing so  well  for  him  for  his  Journey ;  they  tooke  it  kindly.
And  I  verily  thinke  the  old  King  tooke  notice  of  some  of

5*9

The  old  King
sent  100.  Tais
in  Japan
money  for  our
Generall  to
spend  on  the
way,  which  I
put  to  account
by  our
Generals
order  as  money
lent.

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

l6l3-

our  mens  evill  behaviour  this  last  night. For  he  willed

me  to  put  the  Master  in  minde  to  looke  well  to  them
aboord,  and  that  I  should  have  a  care  on  shoare,  that
matters  might  be  as  well  managed  in  the  Generals
absence,  as  when  hee  was  heere  present,  otherwise,  the
shame  would  bee  ours,  but  the  dishonour  his.  Wind  a
stiffe  gale  at  North-east,  most  part  of  the  day  but  calme
all  night.

The  ninth,  a  Japan  Boy  called  Juan,  came  and  offered
me  his  service,  hee  speaking  good  Spanish,  asking  me
nothing  but  what  I  pleased,  and  so  to  serve  nine  or  ten
yeares,  and  to  goe  with  me  for  England,  if  I  pleased.  I
entertayned  him,  the  rather,  because  I  did  find  the  Juri-
basso  Migell,  which  Master  Adams  left  with  me  to  bee
something  stubborne,  and  loved  to  runne  abroad  at  his
pleasure,  leaving  mee  without  any  one  that  could  speake
a  word.  I  bought  him  two  Japan  Garments  cost  me
fourteene  Mas,  hee  is  a  Christian  and  most  of  his  Kinred
dwell  at  Langasaque  :  only  one  dwelleth  heere,  who  came
with  him  and  passed  his  word  for  him.  Hee  served  a
Spaniard  three  yeares  at  Manillas.

The  thirteenth,  I  shewed  our  commodities  to  certaine
Merchants  of  Maioco,  but  they  bought  nothing,  only
their  chiefe  desire  was  to  have  had  Gun-powder.  Semi-
done  went  aboord  the  ship  to  accompany  certaine  strange
Cavaleroes,  and  afterward  hee  brought  them  to  see  the
English  House.  I  gave  them  the  best  entertaynment  I
could.
Pagan  Feast  at  The  nineteenth  at  night,  began  the  great  Feast  of  the
Firando,  being  Pagans, they inviting their dead kindred, banquetting

* j,-  and making  merry  all night  with  candle-light at their

Candlemas,  ,v „ '  . ° , .  ,  b ,

Ahouks.  graves: this .beast endured three dayes, and as many

nights. And  very  strict  command  was  given  from  the

[I.  iv.  396.]  King,  that  every  house  should  gravell  the  street  before

their  doores,  and  hang  out  candle-light  in  the  night : in

doing  whereof  I  was  not  slacke  ; and  as  I  was  informed,

a  poore  man  was  put  to  death,  and  his  house  shut  up,  for

disobeying therein. The  China  Captaine  furnished  me

520

RICHARD COCKS  a.d.

1613.

with  a  couple  of  paper  Lanternes  very  decent.  And  I
was  informed  the  Kings  would  ride  about  the  streets,  and
come  to  visite  me  :  so  I  made  readie  a  banquet,  and  ex-
pected them  untill  after  midnight,  but  they  came  not  at
all.

On  the  twentieth,  one  and  twentieth,  and  two  and  twen-
tieth, I  sent  presents  to  both  the  Kings  (being  informed
that  it  was  the  use  of  the  Countrey)  of  Wine  and  ban-
quetting  stuffe ;  as  likewise  to  Nobesane  the  yong  Kings
brother,  and  to  Semidone,  the  old  Kings  Governour,  and
Unagense,  which  were  well  accepted.  Some  Cavaleros
came  to  visite  our  house,  and  received  the  best  entertain-
ment I  could  give.

On  the  three  and  twentieth,  we  made  an  end  of  landing
our  Gun-powder,  being  in  all  ninety  nine  barrells,  of  which
I  advised  the  Generall  by  letter,  to  reserve  convenient
store  for  our  selves,  if  he  sold  the  Emperour  the  rest.
We  landed  divers  other  things,  which  things  the  Master
thought  good  to  send  ashore,  because  our  men  begin  to
filtch  and  steale,  to  go  to  Tavernes  and  Whore-houses.  Looscnesse  of
The  Purser,  Master  Melsham  and  my  selfe,  dined  at  som'
Semydones  this  day  :  and  the  Master  and  Master  Eaton
were  likewise  invited,  but  did  not  goe  :  he  used  us  kindly.

This  day  the  great  Feast  made  an  end,  and  three  com-  End  of  the
panies  of  Dancers  went  up  and  downe  the  Towne  with  &eat
flags  or  banners,  their  musicke  being  Drummes  and  Pans  ;
at  the  sound  whereof  they  danced  at  every  great  mans
doore,  as  also  at  all  their  Pagods  and  Sepulchres.

The  foure  and  twentieth  at  night,  all  the  streets  were  Masking  and
hanged  with  candle-light,  for  that  the  yong  King  and  his  dancwS-
brother,  NabesoneSemydone,  and  many  others  went  with  a
Maskarado,  or  to  dance  at  the  old  Kings  house  :  the  yong
King  and  his  brother  were  mounted  on  horse-back,  and
had  Canopies  caried  over  them ;  the  rest  went  on  foote,
and  the  musicke  was  Drummes  and  Kettles,  as  aforesaid ;
and  Nabesone  winded  a  Phife  :  I  was  informed  they  meant
to  visite  the  English  House  at  their  backe  returne  :  so  I
sate  up  untill  after  midnight,  having  a  banquet  in  readi-

521

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1613.

nesse,  and  in  the  end  they  returned  confusedly,  and  out  of
order ;  so  I  thinke  there  was  some  discontent,  once  none
of  them  entred  into  the  English  house  :  Captaine  Brower
went  along  by  the  doore,  but  would  not  looke  at  us,  and
we  made  as  little  account  of  him.

The  seven  and  twentieth,  we  landed  other  three  peeces
of  Ordnance,  viz.  all  whole  Culverin,  all  which  sixe  peeces
are  Iron  Ordnance.  The  old  King  came  downe  when  they
were  about  it,  and  seeing  but  twentie  men,  offered  them
seventie  or  an  hundred  Japans  to  helpe  them ;  but  very
quickly  in  his  sight,  our  men  got  them  ashore,  which  he
marvelled  at,  and  said  an  hundred  of  his  men  would  not
have  done  it  so  soone ;  so  hee  sent  for  a  barrell  of  wine,
and  certaine  fish,  and  gave  it  to  our  people  for  labouring
so  lustily.

The  eight  and  twentieth,  I  received  two  letters  from
our  Generall,  by  the  Governour  of  Shimonaseke,  dated
the  nineteenth  and  twentieth  of  this  moneth,  with  two
other  from  Master  Peacock,  and  Master  Wickham  :  this
Governour  came  not  ashore  at  Ferando,  but  delivered  the
Letters  aboord  to  the  Master,  and  so  went  directly  for
Langasaque,  and  promising  to  returne  hither  shortly.
Also  I  carried  a  letter  to  the  old  King  Foyne,  which  the
said  partie  brought :  Master  Melsham  and  Harnando
accompanied  me :  the  King  gave  a  Cattan  to  Master
Melsham,  and  another  with  a  Spanish  dagger  to  Har-
nando, and  gave  both  me  and  them  certaine  bunches  of
Garlick,  and  gave  us  leave  to  drie  our  Gun-powder  on  the
toppe  of  the  Fortresse  ;  offering  us  of  his  people  to  helpe
ours,  if  they  thought  good.  And  I  received  aland  into
the  English  House  two  and  twentie  barres  of  lead,  and
put  into  our  new  lodge  an  hundred  and  twentie  five
Culverin  shot,  round  and  langrell.  And  as  wee  were
going  to  Supper,  the  old  King  came  and  supped  with  us,
being  very  merry,  and  tooke  such  fare  as  we  had,  in  good
part.
Septemb.  1.  The  first  of  September,  the  old  King,  with  all  the
A  Maske. Nobilitie,  made  a  Maskerado  ; and  this  night  following

522

RICHARD COCKS  a j>.

1613.

went  to  visite  the  yong  King  his  Grand-child,  with
musicke  as  aforesaid,  all  the  streets  being  hanged  with
Lanternes ;  and  I  was  informed  he  meant  to  visite  our
English  House  at  returne  :  so  I  made  readic  for  him,  and
stayed  his  returne  till  after  midnight,  but  he  passed  by
with  the  rest  of  the  company,  and  entred  not  into  the
House.  I  thinke  there  was  not  so  few  as  three  thousand
persons  in  company  with  him,  which  I  make  account  was
the  occasion  he  went  by,  because  he  would  not  trouble  us.

The  second,  Semydon  and  others,  being  appointed  by Taxe for
the King, measured all the houses in the street ; our  Forts-
English  house  being  measured  amongst  the  rest :  I  under-
stand it  was  for  a  generall  taske  to  bee  paid  for  making
Fortresses  by  the  Emperours  appointment. I  entertained
them  to  content.

The  fourth,  we  had  newes  the  Queene  of  Spaine  was
dead,  and  the  King  a  Suter  to  the  Princes  Elizabeth  of
England.

The  sixt,  a  Cavalero,  called  Nombosque,  came  to  visite
our  English  House,  and  brought  mee  a  present  of  two
great  bottells  of  wine,  and  a  basket  of  Peares.  I  gave
him  the  best  entertainment  I  could,  and  he  departed
content.

The  seventh  in  the  morning,  much  raine,  with  wind
encreasing  all  day  and  night  variable,  from  the  East  to [I.  iv.  397.]
the  South,  and  in  the  night  happened  such  a  storme  or
TufFon,  that  I  never  saw  the  like  in  all  my  life ; neither -d  mighty
was  the  like  seene  in  this  Countrey  in  mans  memory,  for "*on  G1 .  ,
it  overthrew  above  an  hundred  houses  in  Firando,  and the  ftra'„ze
uncovered  many  other ; namely, the old Kings house,  effects  thereof.
and  blew  downe  a  long  wall  which  compassed  the  young
Kings  house,  and  carryed  away  boughes  or  branches  of
trees :  &  the  Sea  went  so  high,  that  it  undermined  a  great
Wharf  or  Key  at  the  Dutch  House,  and  brake  downe
the  stone-wall,  and  carryed  away  their  Staires,  and  sunke
and  brake  them  two  Barkes,  as  also  fortie  or  fiftie  other
Barkes  were  broken  and  sunke  in  the.  Roade. It  brake
downe  our  Kitchen  wall  at  the  English  House,  which  was

523

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1613.

newly  made,  and  flowed  into  our  Oven,  and  brake  it
downe,  and  blew  downe  the  tyles,  and  uncovered  part  both
of  the  house  and  kitchen,  and  the  house  did  shake,  like
as  if  there  had  beene  an  Earthquake ;  I  never  passed
Foolish  super-  night  in  all  my  life  in  such  feare,  for  the  barbarous  unruly
stitions.  people  did  runne  up  and  downe  the  streets  all  night  with

fire-brands,  that  the  wind  carried  great  coales  quite  over
the  tops  of  houses,  and  some  houses  being  carryed  away,
the  wind  whirled  up the  fire  which  was  in them, and
carried  it  into  the  ayre  in  great  flakes,  very  fearefull  to
behold  ; so  that  the  greatest  feare  I  had  was  that  all  would
have  been  consumed  with  fire ; and  I  verily  thinke  it
had,  had  it  not  been  for  the  extreame  raine  which  fell
(contrary  to  the  true  nature  of  a  Tuffon)  being  accom-
panied with  lightning  and  thunder. Our  shippe  roade  at
an  anchor  with  five  Cables,  and  as  many  Anchors,  whereof
one  old  Cable  burst,  but  God  be  thanked  no  other  hurt
done  :  our  long  Boat  and  Skiffe  were  both  driven  from  the
Merchants  of snippe,  yet  berth  recovered  againe : And  as  it  is  said,  it
Of  mam  mis-  &&  more  nurt  at  Langasaque  then  heere,  for  it  brake  above
demeanours,  I  twentie China Junckes, and the Spanish ship which
permit  some  to  brought  the  Embassadour  from  the  Manilleas  or  Philip-
passethePresse r>jnas

of  so  mam  "S  ^e  twelftn  two  Merchants  of  Miaco  came  to  our
deaths  in  the  English  house,  unto  whom  I  shewed  all  our  Commodi-
Indies,  might  ties ;  they  laid  by  two  broad-cloths,  viz.  a  Stammel  and
befoundrather  a  Blacke,  the  best  they  could  find,  and  offered  seven  Tais
to  the fr  wane  JaPan  money  the  yard  :  also  they  saw  our  Priaman  Gold,
then  the  and  offered  eleven  Tais  Japan  plate,  for  one  Tais  Gold  :

Elements  dis-  but  went  away  without  doing  any  thing.  Francis
temper,andfor  Williams  beeing  drunke  ashoare,  did  strike  one  of  the
a  caveat  to Q^  ]£in2rS  men  with  a  cudgell,  which  £ave  him  no  occa-

others  which  c*  0^0

shall  send  or  si°n  at  an\  nor  spake  a  word  to  him. The  man  came  to

be  sent  into  the  English  house  and  complained,  being  very  angry  (and

Ethmcke  not  without  cause)  giving  me  to  understand,  that  he  would

egtons;  yet  informe  tne  King-  his  Master  how  he  was  misused  by  our

doe  1  conceale  .  t  t 1 1 1  r  r*  ■  1 1  ■

the  most  and People. rie  had  three  or  roure  in  Company  with  him,

worst.  who  did  see  him  abused,  and  that  he  which  did  it,  was

524

RICHARD COCKS  a.d.

1613.

newly  gone  aboord  the  ship. I  gave  them  faire  words,

and  desired  them  to  goe  aboord,  and  find  out  the  partie,

and  they  should  see  him  punished  to  their  contents ; and

to that effect, sent Miguell our Jurebasso along with

them  : so  they  found  out  the  said  Williams,  who  would

have  denied  it,  if  the  matter  had  not  been  too  manifest ;

but  he  stood  stiffely  against  it  with  oathes ;  yet  the  Master

caused him to be brought to the Captaine in their

presence, which they seeing, intreated for his pardon,

knowing  he  was  drunke,  but  he  was  so  unruly,  that  he

tooke  up  a  crow  of  Iron  to  have  stricken  the  fellow  in

presence  of  the  Master,  using  the  Master  in  very  bad

termes.

The  thirteenth,  I  understood,  that  Foyne  the  old  King
of  Firando  was  sicke,  whereupon  I  sent  Miguel  our  Jure-
basso to  visit  him,  and  to  carry  a  Present  of  one  great
bottle  of  the  Generals  sweet  wine,  and  two  boxes  of  Con-
serves, Comfits,  and  Sugar-bread,  offering  him  my  Ser-
vice, beeing  very  sory  to  heare  of  his  sicknesse,  and  that  I
would  have  come  my  selfe,  but  that  I  knew  company  was
not  pleasing  to  sicke  men.  He  tooke  my  Present  in  very
good  part,  and  returned  me  many  thanks ;  wishing  me
not  to  let  to  aske  for  any  thing  we  had  need  of,  either  for
the  ship,  or  ashoare,  and  he  would  give  such  order,  as  we
should  be  furnished.

The  foureteenth  in  the  morning  betimes,  the  Master
came  ashoare,  and  told  me  that  most  part  of  the  ships  com-  Unruhnesse
pany  had  lien  ashoare  all  night  without  asking  him  leave,  j^a".-inets
notwithstanding  the  great  wind  which  had  continued  all
night,  and  the  ship  on  ground.  So  he  willed  me  to  let
Miguell  our  Jurabasso  goe  along  with  him  to  seeke  them
out,  which  I  was  content  he  should  doe,  and  would  have
accompanied  him  my  selfe,  but  he  was  unwilling,  telling
me  it  was  needlesse.  But  M.  Melsham  the  Purser  went
along  with  him,  and  he  found  divers  drinking  and  domi-
neering ;  he  bestowed  blowes  amongst  some  of  them,
and  notwithstanding  the  Master  had  commanded  Lambart
and  Colphax  to  retire  aboord,  yet  they  staid  ashoare  all

525

A.D.
1613.

September.xj.
1613.
Bastian  the
Bawd  angry
that  his  guests
were

disturbed.
The  Kings
Justice.

[I.  iv. 398.]

The  Kings  care
of  good
Government.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

day,  notwithstanding  the  great  need  was  aboord  about
ships  businesse,  divers  Japans  being  hired  to  helpe  them :
and  Lambart  and  Colphax  being  drunke,  went  into  the
field  and  fought,  Lambart  being  hurt  in  the  arme,  and
remained  drunken  ashoare  all  night,  as  Boles  did  the  like,
and  so  had  done  two  or  three  nights  before,  and  quarrelled
with  Christopher  Evans,  about  a  whoore.

The  seventeenth  of  September,  I  was  given  to  under-
stand the  Bastian  which  keepeth  the  whoore-house  gave
it  out,  that  if  I  came  any  more  into  his  house  to  seeke  for
our  people,  he  would  kill  me,  and  such  as  came  with  me.
Whereupon  I  went  and  complained  to  the  young  King,
because  the  old  was  sicke  :  and  at  my  request,  the  King
made  Proclamation,  that  no  Japanese  should  receive  any
of  our  people  into  their  houses  after  day  light  was  done,
upon  great  paine,  and  that  it  should  be  lawrull  for  me,  or
any  other  that  accompanied  me  to  goe  into  any  Japans
house  to  seek  for  our  men,  without  any  molestation  ;  and
that  they  themselves  should  aide  and  assist  me  :  and  if  the
doore  were  not  opened  at  my  comming,  I  might  lawfully
breake  them  downe :  and  a  souldiour  was  sent  to  Bastian
to  signifie  unto  him,  he  should  take  heed  he  did  not  molest
or  disturbe  me  in  my  proceedings  :  for  if  he  did,  he  should
be  the  first  that  should  pay  for  it.  This  angred  our  people
in  such  sort,  that  some  of  them  gave  it  out,  they  would
drinke  in  the  fields,  if  they  might  not  bee  suffered  to  doe
it  in  the  Towne ;  for  drinke  they  would,  although  they
sought  it  in  the  countrey.

The  sixe  and  twentieth,  Nouasca  dona  came  to  visit  me
at  the  English  house,  and  brought  me  two  bottles  of  wine,
seven  loaves  fresh  bread,  and  a  dish  of  flying  fish,  and  as
he  was  with  me,  the  old  King  came  by  the  doore,  and  said,
he  met  two  men  in  the  street  as  he  came  along,  which  hee
thought  were  strangers,  and  none  of  our  people,  wherefore
he  willed  that  Swanton  and  our  Jurebasso  might  goe  along
with  one  of  his  men,  and  he  would  shew  them  to  them,
which  they  did,  and  found  it  was  John  Lambart  and  Jacob
Charke,  who  were  drinking  water  at  a  doore  in  the  streete

526

RICHARD COCKS

as  he  passed  by.  I  was  glad  the  King  looked  so  neare
after  them ;  for  it  caused  our  men  to  have  a  better  care  of
their  proceedings.

The  seven  and  twentieth,  M.  William  Pauling  Masters
mate,  having  been  long  sicke  of  a  consumption,  died  at
the  English  house,  whereof  I  advertised  the  old  King  by
Miguel  our  Jurebasso,  desiring  a  buriall  place  for  him
among  the  Christians,  which  he  graunted  me.  So  we  put
the  dead  corps  into  a  winding  sheete,  and  coffind  it  up,
others  of  the  ships  company,  came  to  the  English  house,
to  accompanie  the  dead  corps  to  the  grave,  and  then  were
we  given  to  understand,  that  of  force  we  must  transport
it  by  water,  as  farre  as  the  Dutch  house,  onely  because  the
Bose  (or  Priests)  would  not  suffer  us  to  passe  through  the
street  (with  the  dead  corps)  before  their  Pagod  or  Temple  :
so  the  Master  sent  for  the  SkifFe,  and  conveied  the  dead
body  by  water  to  the  place  aforesaid,  we  going  all  by  land,
and  met  it,  and  so  accompanied  it  to  the  place  of  buriall,
the  Purser  going  before,  and  all  the  rest  following  after,
the  coffin  being  covered  with  a  Holland  sheet,  and  upon
that  a  Silke  quilt,  we  being  followed  with  many  of  that
countrey  people,  both  young  and  old.  And  after  the
corps  was  enterred,  we  returned  all  to  the  English  house,
and  there  made  collation,  and  so  our  people  returned
aboord  about  ships  businesse.  But  I  had  almost  forgot
to  note  downe,  that  we  had  much  adoe  to  get  any  one  of
these  countrey  people  to  make  the  grave,  that  a  Christian
was  to  be  buried  in  ;  neither  would  they  surfer  the  dead
corps  to  be  conveied  by  water  in  any  of  their  boates.
The  King  commaunded  that  all  the  streetes  in  Firando
should  be  made  cleane,  and  channell  rowes  made  on  either
side,  to  convey  away  the  water,  the  streetes  being
gravelled,  and  the  channels  covered  over  with  flat  stones  ;
which  worke  was  all  done  in  one  day,  every  one  doing:  it
before  his  owne  house.  It  was  admirable  to  see  the  dili-
gence every  one  used  therein :  our  house  was  not  the  last
a  doing,  the  Captaine  Chinesa  (our  Land-lord)  setting
men  a  worke  to  doe  it.

A.D.

1613.

Death  and
buriall  of  W.
Pauling.

Bonses  super-
stition, and  no
lesse  in  the
people.

Good
obedience.

527

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1613.

The  thirtieth,  certaine  Merchants  of  Miaco  came  and

had  sight  of  all  our  commodities,  and  laid  out  the  best

Stammell  cloth  we  had,  and  offered  twelve  Tais  a  fathome

for  it,  and  so  departed  without  doing  any  thing. We  had

extream winds both day  & night, so that  we thought

another  Tuffon  had  beene  come ; for  all  the  fishermen

haled  their  boates  on  shoare,  and  every  one  bound  fast  the

Conjuring covering  of  their  houses  :  for  a  Bose  (or  Conjurer)  had  told

. -  the  King  (a  weeke  since)  that  this  tempest  would  come.

Our Chirurgion being in his  pots, came into  a  house

where  a  Bose  was  conjuring  tor  a  woman  to  know  of  her

husbands  or  friends  returne  from  Sea  : so  when  he  had

done  he  gave  him  three  pence  to  conjure  againe,  and  tell

him  when  our  General  would  returne  tor  this  place,  which

in  the  ende  he  assured  him  would  be  within  eighteene

laves; hee said, hee heard a voice answer him from

behind  a  wall,  both  when  he  conjured  for  the  woman,  as

also  when  hee  conjured  for  himselfe.

0:t-r.  2.  The  second  of  October,  the  Master  sent  me  word  that

some  of  our  ships  company  were  runne  away  with  the

E  • ■ Skiff e.  viz.  John  Bowles,  John  Sares,  John  Tottie,  Chris-

T  -  shcnd toP^er Evans, Clement Locke, Jasper Malconty, and

tnuFkmmma  James  the  Dutchman. I  was  in  wav  to  goe  to  the  King

which  arc-re to  get  boats  to  send  after  them,  but  our  Dutch  Jurebasso,

■_ '•'■'";•".' •" (entertained  for  ships  use)  came  running  after  mee,  and

told  me  our  people  were  on  the  other  side,  making  merrv

at  a  Tap-house  :  which  speeches  caused  me  to  returne  to

the  English  house,  and  to  get  a  boat  for  the  Master  to  goe

looke  them  out :  but  they  prooved  to  be  others  ; namelv,

William  Marinell,  Simon  Colphax,  and  John  Dench,  who

had  hired  a  Boat,  and  were  gone  over  to  an  other  Hand,

because  they  could  not  have  swinge  to  walke  bv  night  in

Firando. So  in  the  meane  time,  our  Run-awayes  had  the

more  time  to  runne  away.

The  Kings  This  night  about  eleven  a  clock,  the  old  Kings  house

house  burned. on  ^  other  sjje  tnc  water  was  set  on  fire,  and  quite

burned  downe  in  the  space  of  an  houre. I  never  saw  a

more  vehement  fire  for  the  time,  it  is  thought  his  losse

528

RICHARD COCKS  ad.

1613.

is  great;  and  as  it  is  said,  he  himselfe  set  it  on  fire,  in
going  up  and  downe  in  the  night  with  lighted  canes,  the
coales  whereof  fell  amongst  the  mats,  and  so  tooke  fire.

The  third,  I  went  to  visit  the  old  King,  giving  him  to
understand  by  his  Governour,  that  I  was  very  sorry  for
the  mischance  happened  the  night  past,  and  that  I  pre-
tended to  have  come  my  selfe  in  person  to  have  holpen
the  best  I  could,  but  that  I  stood  in  doubt  whether  my
companie  would  have  been  acceptable,  I  being  a  stranger,
yet  assuring  him  that  he  should  find  me  readie  at  all  times,
to  doe  him  the  best  service  I  could,  although  it  were  with
hazard  of  my  life :  he  returned  me  many  thanks,  saying,
the  losse  he  had  sustained  was  nothing.  And  in  return-
ing to  the  English  house,  I  met  the  young  King  going  to  [I.  iv.  399.]
visit  his  Grandfather.  And  before  noone  wee  had  word,
that  our  Run-awayes  were  at  a  desart  Hand,  some  two
leagues  from  Firando,  which  I  made  knowne  to  both  the
Kings,  desiring  their  assistance  and  counsel,  how  we  might
fetch  them  backe  againe  ;  they  answered,  that  backe  they
would  fetch  them  either  alive  or  dead :  yet  they  would
be  loth  to  kill  them,  in  respect  we  might  want  men  to
carry  our  ship  backe  for  England.  I  gave  them  thanks
for  the  care  they  had  of  us ;  yet  withall  gave  them  to
understand,  that  although  these  knaves  miscarried,  yet
we  had  honest  men  enough  to  saile  the  ship  for  England.
In  fine,  the  King  made  ready  two  boats  full  of  souldiours
to  goe  after  them,  with  full  determination  to  bring  them
backe  either  alive  or  dead,  which  I  made  knowne  to  the
Master,  who  desired  verie  much  to  goe  along  with  them.

[§. II.

Ill  529  2L

A.D.
l6l3.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

§• II.

Lies  of  or  on  the  Devill,  and  uproares  about  fire.
Deceit  of  Nangasack.  Suspitions,  Feasts,
Spanish Occurrents.

or  belied.

He  fourth  of  October,  there  was  report  given  out,

their  Bose  or  Conjurers,  that  the  Towne  of  Fir-

that the  devil  had  answered  by  their Oracle  to

ando  should  bee  burned  to  ashes  this  night,  so  that  cryers

went  up  and  downe  the  streets  all  night,  making  such  a

noyse,  that  I  tooke  but  little  rest ; they  gave  warning  that

every  one  should  put  out  their  fire,  yet  God  be  thanked,

Devill  a  liar,  fat  Devill  was  prooved  a  Iyer  therein  :  for  no  such  matter

happened.

The  fifth,  the  old  King  Foyne  Same  came  to  the  English
house,  where  I  gave  him  the  best  entertainement  I  could :
he  also  told  me,  that  our  Fugitives  could  not  escape  taking,
and  that  hee  had  sent  out  two  other  men  of  warre  after
the  two  former.  And  as  I  was  talking  with  him  about
these  matters,  there  came  a  Cavelero,  and  brought  him  a
Letter  from  the  Emperours  Court,  and  said,  that  our
Generall  would  be  here  at  Firando  within  eight  or  tenne
dayes ;  for  that  the  Emperour  had  dispatcht  him  away
before  his  comming  from  thence.

The  King  told  me,  that  the  Governour  (or  King)  of
Langasaque,  called  Bon  Diu,  would  bee  here  at  Firando
to  morrow,  telling  me  it  were  s;ood  our  ship  shot  off  three
or  foure  Peeces  of  Ordnance  as  he  passed  by.  This
Governour  is  the  Empresses  brother.  And  there  is  an
other  Japan  Governour,  or  King,  in  Towne,  of  a  place
called  Seam.

The  seventh,  our  Master,  M.  James  Foster  returned
from  Langasaque,  and  had  brought  the  Skiffe  with  him,
but  all  the  men  were  gotten  into  Sanctuarie  in  the  Towne,
so  that  he  could  not  come  to  speech  of  any  one  of  them.
I  was  informed,  that  Miguell  our  Jurebasso  dealt  doubly
both  with  the  Master  and  my  selfe  :  for  I  sent  him  along

530

RICHARD COCKS

1613.

to  be  linguist,  and  assist  the  Master,  and  divers  Japans
came  to  me,  telling  me,  that  he  both  spake  with  our  people,
and  gave  them  counsell  to  absent  themselves.  Once  I
did  perceive  how  the  world  went,  and  doubted  the  privy
conveyance  of  our  people,  which  was  like  to  ensue,  if
this  Bon  Diu  the  Governour  were  not  extraordinarily  dealt
withall : whereupon  a  Present  was  laid  out.

Afternoone,  the  Bon  Diu  passed  along  the  street  before
our  English  house  on  foot,  hee  being  accompanied  with
the  young  King  (who  gave  him  the  upper  hand)  with
above  five  hundred  followers  after  them.  I  went  out  into
the  streete,  and  did  my  dutie  to  them,  and  the  Bon  Diu
stood  still  when  he  came  to  the  doore,  and  gave  me  thanks
for  the  Ordnance  were  shot  off  at  his  passing  by  our  ship.
I  desired  pardon  of  his  Greatnesse,  if  I  had  neglected  my
dutie  hitherto,  which  was  by  meanes  of  the  small  acquaint-
ance I  had  in  the  Countrey,  but  that  I  meant  to  visit  him
at  his  lodging,  or  aboord  his  Juncke,  before  he  went ;  he
answered  me,  I  should  be  very  welcome.  So  it  was  darke
night  before  he  came  to  his  lodging.  At  which  time  I
carried  the  Present  abovesaid,  which  hee  accepted  of  in
very  good  sort,  offering  to  doe  our  Nation  any  good  he
could  at  the  Court,  whither  he  was  now  bound,  or  else
where.  And  so  of  his  owne  accord,  hee  beganne  to  speake
of  our  Fugitives,  asking  me  if  he  brought  them  backe
againe,  whether  they  should  be  pardoned  all  for  his  sake
for  this  fault  ?  I  answered  him,  it  was  not  in  my  power  to
pardon  them,  but  in  our  General,  which  no  doubt  (except
it  were  one  or  two,  which  were  the  chiefe  authors  of  this
and  other  evils  which  deserved  punishment)  that  the  rest
might  easily  goe  free.  He  said,  that  his  desire  was  for
pardon  for  all  in  generall,  without  exception.  I  answered,
that  I  knew  our  Generall  would  be  contented  with  any
thing,  his  Greatnesse  and  the  two  Kings  of  Firando  would
desire.  To  conclude,  he  told  me,  that  if  I  would  give  it
under  writing  of  my  owne  hand,  in  faith  of  a  Christian,
that  all  in  generall  should  be  pardoned  for  this  time,  and
that  I  would  procure  the  Generall  to  confirme  the  same  at

53i

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1613.

his  returne,  that  then  he  would  send  to  Langasaque  for
them,  and  deliver  them  into  my  owne  custody :  other-
waies  he  would  not  meddle  in  the  matter,  to  be  the  occa-
sion of  the  death  of  any  man.  I  said  I  was  contented
with  any  thing  it  pleased  his  Greatnes  to  command,  and
so  to  give  the  said  writing  under  my  hand,  provided  all
our  men  might  be  brought  backe.  And  so  I  returned  to
the  English  house,  the  Dutch  comming  after  with  an  other
Present,  but  we  were  before  them.

iv.  400.]  The  eight,  Semidone  passing  by  our  doore,  told  mee
that  Bon  Diu  had  a  Brother  in  companie,  which  expected
a  present,  although  it  was  not  fitting  it  should  be  so  much,
as  his  Brothers.  So  upon  advice  with  others  I  laid  by  a
present  for  him,  as  followeth  ;  &  going  to  deliver  it,  the
Flemmings  were  before  me  with  another,  Captaine  Brower
himselfe  being  with  it.  Hee  accepted  very  kindly  of  the
present,  offering  his  assistance  to  our  Nation,  either  at
Court,  or  in  the  Countrey.  And  soone  after  he  came  to
the  English  House  himselfe,  accompanied  with  many
Cavaleeres,  where  they  looked  on  all  our  Commodities,
yet  hee  went  away  and  bought  nothing,  but  gave  mee  a
small  Cattan,  and  I  gave  him  two  Glasse  Bottles,  two
Gally-pots,  and  about  halfe  a  Cattee  of  great  Cloves,
picked  out  from  the  rest  of  purpose,  hee  being  desirous
to  have  them  for  Physicall  matters,  as  he  rold  me.  I
made  him  and  his  followers  a  collation,  and  so  they  de-
parted content.  And  soone  after  Bon  Diu,  &  the  two
Kings  sent  a  Cavaleero  to  me,  to  have  me  to  give  it  in
writing  under  my  hand,  that  our  Run-awayes  should  not
receive  any  punishment  for  this  fact,  so  by  counsell  of
others  I  condescended  thereunto,  and  made  a  Writing  in
promise  and  faith  of  a  Christian,  they  procure  their  pardon
for  this  time  of  the  Generall ;  if  I  had  not  done  this,  out  of
doubt,  we  should  never  have  got  them  againe,  but  the
Spaniard  would  have  convayed  them  to  the  Manillies  or
Maluccoes,  I  not  doubting  but  the  Generall  will  allow  of
what  I  have  done.  And  presently  after  this  man  was  gone
I  had  word,  that  the  Bon  Diu,  and  his  Brother  would  goe

532

RICHARD COCKS  a.d.

1613.

aboord  to  visit  our  ship,  so  I  sent  some  banketting  stuffe
aboord,  and  went  my  selfe  and  met  them,  where  they  were
entertayned  in  the  best  sort  we  could,  and  Bon  Diu  gave
mee  two  Cattans  for  a  present,  and  so  they  departed  with
seven  Peeces  of  Ordnance  shot  off  for  a  fare-well.  But
forth-with  his  Brother  returned  aboord  againe,  desiring  to
have  one  of  the  little  Monkeyes  for  his  Brothers  children  :
so  I  bought  one  of  the  Master  Gunner,  cost  me  five  Rials
of  eight,  and  sent  him  to  Bon  Diu,  and  being  readie  to
goe  ashoare,  he  was  desirous  to  have  me  goe  along  with
him  in  his  Boate,  which  I  did,  he  having  three  Peeces  of
Ordnance  for  a  fare-well,  which  as  I  understood  afterwards,
was  much  esteemed  off  of  both  Brothers,  and  being  ashoare
hee  would  needs  accompany  me  home  to  our  English
House,  which  I  was  unwilling  of,  yet  hee  would  of  force
doe  it.  So  I  made  him  collation  againe  in  Captaine  Adams
chamber :  and  so  hee  and  the  rest  departed  well  contented,
(as  it  seemed)  I  offering  to  have  accompanyed  him  backe
to  his  lodging,  but  he  would  not  suffer  mee.  And  late  at
night  Foyne  Same  the  old  King  sent  a  man  to  me  to  know
the  particular  of  the  presents  given  to  both  the  Brothers,
and  put  it  downe  in  writing,  but  for  what  occasion  I  know
not.  And  I  forgot  to  note  downe  how  Bon  Diu  went  to
the  Dutch  House  to  wash  himselfe  in  the  new  Hot-house,
and  from  thence  it  was  that  hee  came  aboord  our  ship.

The  ninth,  Bon  Diu  sent  one  of  his  men  to  me  to  give
mee  thankes  for  his  kind  entertaynment  aboord,  and  by
the  same  Messenger  sent  mee  two  Barrels  of  Miaco  Wine
for  a  Present.  And  soone  after  his  Brother  sent  another
man  with  two  Barrels  of  Japan  Wine,  with  the  like  cere-
monie :  both  of  them  being  very  earnest  to  have  a
Prospective  Glasse,  and  in  the  end  I  found  an  old  one  of
Master  Eatons,  but  soone  after  he  returned  me  the  said
Glasse  with  thankes,  not  desiring  at  all  to  have  it.

The  tenth,  two  of  the  Governours  sonnes  of  Langasaque
(I  meane  another  Governour  which  dwelleth  in  the  Towne)
came  to  see  our  English  House,  they  are  Christians.  I
entertayned  them  in  the  best  sort  I  could,  and  shewed  them

533

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1613.

our  commodities,  and  after  made  them  collation  and  gave
them  Musicke,  Master  Hownsell  and  the  Carpenter  by
chance  being  heere  :  and  as  wee  were  at  it,  old  Foyne  the
King  came  stealing  in  upon  us,  and  did  as  the  rest  did,
and  seeing  the  King  and  these  Langasakians  together,  I
willed  our  Jurebasso,  to  put  out  a  word  for  the  speedie
sending  backe  of  our  Run-awayes :  which  they  all  pro-
mised, provided,  that  they  should  be  pardoned  for  this
fault,  as  I  had  formerly  promised,  which  now  againe  I
acknowledged.  The  old  King  desired  to  have  a  piece  of
English  Beefe,  and  another  of  Porke,  sod  with  Onions  and
Turnips,  and  sent  to  him  to  morrow.

The  eleventh,  I  sent  Migell  our  Jurebasso  to  the  old
King,  with  the  Beefe  and  Porke  accommodated  as  afore-
said, with  a  bottle  of  Wine,  and  sixe  Loaves  of  white
Bread  :  he  accepted  of  it  in  very  kind  part,  having  in  his
company  at  eating  thereof,  the  young  King  his  Grand-
childe,  and  Nabisone  his  Brother,  with  Semidone  his  Kins-
man.
A  great  Feast  The  twelfth,  I  went  to  visit  both  the  Kings,  and  found
among  t  e Q^  p0yne  asleepe,  but  spake  with  his  Governour,  and

l&q&tis  begun  ^  r ?  l  t  *

this  day,  it  from  thence  went  to  the  young  King,  and  spake  with  him

being  told  me  himselfe  : they  gave  me  thankes  for  the  kind  entertayn-

it  was  like  a  ment  I  gave  unto  these  strangers ; which  they  tooke  as

Lent,  or  done  unto  themselves. And  towards  night  the  old  King:

idSQUCS  Of  tn€

Papists.  sent  to  visit  me>  and  to  tell  me  he  understood  these  people

which  are  departed,  had  taken  away  certaine  commodities
from  me,  and  payd  mee  what  they  themselves  thought
good,  and  not  that  which  I  required,  I  returned  him
answere,  that  it  was  true  that  they  had  done  so,  but  I  know
not  whether  it  were  the  custome  of  this  Countrey  or  no  ;
for  that  I  was  given  to  understand  they  used  the  like  course
both  with  Chineses  and  Portugalls  at  Langasaque,  and
that  that  which  they  had  taken  from  mee,  was  not  worth
the  speaking  of.  I  was  answered,  that  although  they  did
so  with  the  Chineses  at  Langasaque,  which  were  a  people
defended  not  to  trade  into  Japan,  yet  could  they  not  doe

[I.  iv.  401.]  so  to  Strangers  that  had  free  priviledge  to  trade,  especially

534

RICHARD COCKS

heere  in  this  place  where  these  fellowes  had  no  command
nor  nothing  to  doe.  I  replyed,  I  would  come  and  speake
with  his  Highnesse  my  selfe,  and  informe  him  of  the
truth  :  and  in  the  meane-time  returned  humble  thankes,
for  the  care  hee  had  to  use  Justice  to  Strangers  as  well  as
home-borne.  Captaine  Brower  sent  me  word  that  they
had  taken  divers  sorts  of  commodities  from  him,  and  paid
him  what  they  list  for  it :  he  also  sent  an  emptie  Bottle,
desiring  to  have  it  filled  with  Spanish  Wine,  for  that  hee
had  invited  certaine  Strangers,  and  had  none.

The  thirteenth,  I  heard  three  or  foure  Gunnes,  or  Cham-
bers goe  off,  which  I  thought  had  bin  done  to  entertayne
the  King  at  the  Dutch  House  :  but  they  were  shot  out  of
a  China  Juncke,  which  passed  by  this  place,  and  so  went
for  Langasaque,  and  presently  after  the  old  King  sent  for
me  to  come  to  dinner  to  the  Dutch  House,  and  Master
Eaton  with  mee,  and  to  bring  a  Bottle  of  Wine.  Master
Eaton  had  taken  Physicke  and  could  not  goe,  but  I  went :
wee  had  a  very  good  Dinner  at  the  Dutch  House,  the
meate  being  well  drest  both  after  the  Japan  and  Dutch
fashion,  and  served  upon  Tables,  but  no  great  drinking.
The  olde  King  sate  at  one  Table,  accompanied  with  his
eldest  Sonne,  and  both  the  young  Kings  Brothers  (for  the
young  King  himselfe  was  not  there,  sending  word  he  was
not  well)  at  the  other  Table.  First,  sate  Nabesone  the  old
Kings  Brother,  and  then  my  selfe,  and  next  me  Semidone,
and  then  the  old  Kings  Governour,  and  next  him  Zanze-
bars  Father-in-law,  and  divers  other  Cavaleeroes  on  the
other  side.  Captaine  Brower  did  not  sit  at  all,  but  carved
at  Table,  all  his  owne  people  attending  and  serving  on
their  knees,  and  in  the  end,  he  gave  drinke  to  every  one
of  his  ghests,  with  his  owne  hands,  and  upon  his  knees,
which  seemed  strange  to  me,  and  when  they  had  dined,
all  the  Nobles  went  away,  and  Captaine  Brower  would
needs  accompany  me  to  the  English  House.  I  asked  him
why  he  served  these  people  upon  his  knees,  they  sitting
at  Table  :  he  answered  me  it  was  the  fashion  of  the  Coun-
try ; and  if  the  King  himselfe  made  a  Feast,  hee  did  the

535

A.D.
l6l3.

Bon  Dius  Bro-
ther injurious
to  the  English
and  Dutch.

A  China
Juncke  for
Langasaque.

Dinner  with
the  Dutch.

A.D.

1613.

*  George
Peterson  a
Flush.

*  Daman
Maryn  a
Venetian.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

like  for  the  more  honour  of  his  ghests.  And  before  night
the  old  King  Foyne  came  to  the  English  House,  and
visited  all  parts,  and  made  collation,  staying  an  houre
talking  of  one  thing  and  other.

The  sixteenth,  I  was  given  to  understand  that  two
Christians  were  come  from  Langasaque,  so  I  went  to  their
lodging  to  see  what  they  were,  as  also  to  understand  some
newes  from  our  men  (or  Fugitives)  I  found  the  one  of
them  to  bee  a  *  Flemming  borne  in  Flushing,  (as  hee  told
mee)  and  the  other  an  Italian  borne  in  the  *  Duchie  of
Venice.  They  told  mee  that  our  seven  men  (or  Run-
awayes)  were  conveighed  away  secretly  in  a  small  Barke,
which  is  gone  for  Macoro,  and  that  they  were  runne  to
get  passage  in  our  ship  to  returne  into  their  Countries,
they  told  me  Master  Adams  knew  them  well.  And  they
were  very  desirous  to  have  gone  immediately  aboord  our
ship,  there  to  have  remayned,  because  they  were  Sea-faring
men.  The  Flemming  having  served  the  Spaniard  three
and  twentie  or  foure  and  twentie  yeares,  and  came  a
Masters  Mate  from  Agua  pulca  for  the  Manillias  or
Phillippinas,  they  had  good  store  of  money,  and  would
have  sent  it  aboord  our  ship,  or  have  brought  it  to  the
English  House :  but  I  told  them  that  in  our  Generalls
absence  I  durst  not  presume  to  give  them  entertainment.
Yet  notwithstanding,  I  would  doe  them  any  favour  I  could
at  his  returne,  and  so  sent  Migell  our  Jurebasso  to  the  King
to  let  him  understand,  that  two  such  Strangers  were  come
to  Towne  to  seeke  passage  in  our  shippe,  they  being  no
Spaniards,  nor  yet  Subjects  to  the  King  of  Spaine.  The
King  returned  mee  answere,  that  if  they  were  such  as  I
said  they  were,  they  were  welcome  :  but  if  they  were  Cas-
tillians,  or  Portugalls,  hee  would  permit  none  to  stay  in
this  place,  his  reason  is,  for  that  the  Spanish  Ambassador
hath  procured  order  from  the  Emperour  of  Japan,  that  all
Spaniards  which  are  to  be  found  in  his  Empire,  shall  retyre
themselves  into  the  Phillippinas,  but  these  being  no
Spaniards,  are  out  of  that  number.

The seventeenth  betimes, the two strangers  came  to

536

RICHARD COCKS

mee,  desiring  me  to  accompany  them  to  the  old  King,  the
better  to  countenance  them  ;  which  upon  good  considera-
tion I  did.  They  told  me  in  the  way,  that  our  Fugitives
had  reported  at  Langasaque  that  more  would  come  after
them,  and  not  any  man  of  account  stay  to  carry  away  the
ship  ;  the  occasion  they  said  was,  for  that  they  which  had
command  over  them,  used  them  more  like  dogges  then
men :  adding  further,  that  if  but  twentie  resolute
Spaniards  would  take  the  matter  in  hand,  with  a  small
Boat  or  two  they  might  easily  take  our  shippe.  The  old
King  gave  us  all  kind  entertainment,  and  asked  the
strangers  many  questions  about  the  warres  betwixt  the
Spaniards  and  Flemmings  in  the  Moluccas ;  the  which
they  said  the  Spaniards  were  determined  to  pursue  very
hotly,  and  to  that  effect  had  great  forces  prepared.  They
also  told  the  King,  they  thought  verily  all  our  Fugitives
were  secretly  conveyed  from  Langasaque  seven  daies  past
in  a  Soma,  that  departed  from  thence  for  Macow :  but  the
King  would  not  beleeve  them,  saying,  it  was  not  possible
that  such  a  man  as  Bon  Diu,  having  passed  his  word  to
bring  them  backe,  should  be  found  to  be  false  of  his  pro-
mise. In  fine,  he  was  very  well  contented,  that  these  two
strangers  should  stay  heere,  and  goe  along  in  our  ship,  if
it  pleased  the  Generall  to  carry  them.  So  the  poore  men
returned  to  their  lodgings  with  much  content :  and  told
me  in  the  way,  that  we  might  make  account  we  had  not
lost  all  our  men,  but  recovered  two,  that  would  remaine
as  faithfull  to  the  death,  as  the  others  had  proved  false.
Adding  further,  that  we  needed  not  to  wish  any  worse
revenge  to  our  Fugitives,  then  the  bad  entertainment
they  were  sure  to  have  of  the  Spaniards,  comming  bare
and  beggerly  as  they  did,  in  such  base  sort.

The  eighteenth,  there  was  a  great  Eclips  of  the  Moone
this  night,  it  began  about  eleven  of  the  clocke,  and  en-
dured from  the  beginning  to  the  end  houres,  it
was  quite  darkned.

The  nineteenth,  at  night,  about  eleven  of  the  clocke,
a  fire  began  in  Firando,  neare  unto  the  yong  Kings  house,

537

A.lJ.
1613.

Macow  a
Town  ofPor-
tugalh  neere
the  Continent
of  China.
Miguell  the
Jurebasso,
Capt.  Adams
his  man  was
suspected  of
double  dealing
in  this  case  of
the  Fugitives:
the  circum-
stances I  omit.

[I.  iv.  402.]
An  Eclips  of
the  Moone.

Fire  in
Firando.

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1613.

the  wind  being  at  North-east,  which  if  it  had  so  con-
tinued, most  part  of  the  Towne  had  beene  burned  : but
the wind fell variable South-easterly, and in the end
calme : yet  notwithstanding  forty  houses  were  burned  to
the  ground  ;  and  had  not  our  English  men  bestirred  them-
selves lustily,  many  more  houses  had  gone  to  wrack,  for
the  fire  tooke  hold  three  or  foure  times  on  the  other  side
the  street,  where  our  English  house  was,  but  they  still
put  it  out,  and  were  very  much  commended  of  the  Kings,
and  all  other  in  generall. The  old  King  Foyne  came  on
horse-backe  to  our  doore,  and  wished  lis  to  put  all  things
into  the  Gadonge,  and  daube  up  the  doores,  and  then  it
was  out  of  danger. Captaine  Brower,  and  some  of  his
people,  came  very  kindly  to  the  English  house,  to  have
assisted  us  by  land  or  water,  if  need  had  bin  : it  cannot
certainly be known how this fire began, but there is
speeches  amongst  the  Japans,  that  there  will  be  a  greater
fire  then  any  of  these,  it  being  told  them  by  the  Divell
and  their  Conjurers :  God  grant  it  bee  not  done  by  some
villanous  ill  minded  people,  thinking  to  rob  and  steale
what  they  can  lay  hold  on,  in  time  of  such  trouble  and
confusion.

The  twentieth  in  the  morning,  I  went  to  the  Dutch
house  to  visite  Captaine  Brower,  and  to  give  him  thankes
for  his  friendly  visitation  and  assistance  the  last  night.
And  towards  night  Harnando  the  Spaniard,  and  Edward
Markes,  returned  from  Langasaque,  but  could  not  come
to  sight  of  any  of  our  Runawayes,  yet  it  is  certaine  that
they  are  in  Langasaque.  And  a  Portugall  or  Spaniard,
a  great  man  in  Langasaque  about  Sea-matters,  told
Edward  Markes  that  wee  should  have  none  of  these  men
backe  ;  but  to  the  contrary,  if  all  the  rest  would  come,  and
leave  the  shippe  emptie,  they  would  give  them  entertain-
ment :  yea,  and  that  which  was  more,  if  they  would  bring
away  the  shippe  and  all,  they  should  be  the  more  welcome.
The  Japan,  which  the  King  sent  to  accompany  Edward
Markes  and  Harnando,  and  to  looke  out  our  people,
would  not  let  Edward  Markes  budge  out  a  doores  in  the

538

RICHARD COCKS  ad

i  6 1 3.

space  of  one  night  and  halfe  a  day  after  they  were  arrived
there  at  Langasaque,  He  going  abroad  himselfe,  and  the
Spaniard  Harnando  lying  at  another  place.  So  I  doubt
some  legerdy-maine  betwixt  them  two,  and  am  now  out
of  all  hope  to  have  any  of  our  people  come  backe.  I
blamed  the  Jesuits,  and  the  old  King  liked  well  of  my
speeches :  and  told  me  he  would  take  such  order  here-
after, that  none  of  our  people  should  be  carried  to  Langa-
saque, except  they  stole  away  our  ship-boats,  as  the  others
did  :  of  which  I  advised  the  Master,  Master  James  Foster  :
and  so  an  Edict  was  set  out,  that  no  man  should  carry  or
convey  away  any  of  our  people,  without  making  it  knowne
unto  me,  and  telling  the  King  thereof.

The  three  and  twentieth,  I  was  given  to  understand  of
a  great  Pagan  Feast  that  was  to  be  performed  this  day,
and  that  both  the  Kings,  with  all  the  rest  of  the  Nobilitie,  So/emae  Feast,
accompanyed  with  divers  strangers,  met  together  at  a  ,e  ma"ne
Summer-house,  set  up  before  the  great  Pagod,  to  see  a
Horse-race :  I  thinke  there  was  not  so  few  as  three  thou-
sand persons  assembled  together,  as  I  esteemed  in  viewing
of  them.  Every  Nobleman  went  on  horse-backe  to  the
place,  accompanied  with  a  rout  of  Slaves,  some  with  Pikes,
some  with  Small-shot,  and  others  with  Bowes  and
Arrowes :  the  Pike-men  were  placed  on  the  one  side  of
the  streete,  and  the  Shot  and  Archers  on  the  other ;  the
middest  of  the  streete  being  left  void  to  runne  the  race  :
and  right  before  the  Summer-house  (where  the  King  and
Nobles  sate)  was  a  round  Buckler  of  straw  hanged  against
the  wall,  at  which  the  Archers  on  horse-backe  running  a
full  Careere,  discharged  their  arrowes,  both  in  the  streete
and  Summer-house,  where  the  Nobles  sate  ;  that  neither
the  Present  which  we  sent,  nor  we  could  have  entrance  :
And  so  we  passed  along  the  streete,  beholding  all,  and
returned  another  way  to  the  English  house.  And  late  at
night  Zanzebars  wives  brother  came  to  the  English  house,
and  brought  me  a  Present  of  a  hanch  of  Venison,  and  a
basket  of  Orenges :  Zanzebar  himselfe  did  accompany
him. And  about  ten  of  the  clocke  in  the  night,  the  Cap-

539

A.D.
1613.

The  Divell
agalnc  a  Iyer,
if  the  Knaves
belyednot  their
Master.

4°3-]

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

taine  Chinesa  (our  Landlord)  came  and  knocked  at  the
doore,  telling  me  that  the  King  had  given  expresse  com-
mand, that  every  house  should  have  a  Tubbe  of  water
ready  on  the  toppe  of  their  houses,  for  that  the  Divell  had
said  the  Towne  should  be  burned  this  night :  yet  he
proved  a  Iyer.  But  for  all  that,  we  got  a  great  Tubbe  of
water  on  the  top  of  our  house,  which  held  twentie  buckets
of  water :  and  men  did  runne  up  and  downe  the  streetes
all  night,  bidding  every  one  looke  to  their  fire,  that  it  was
strange  and  fearefull  to  heare  them.

The  foure  and  twentieth,  this  report  of  burning  the
Towne  being  still  current,  and  every  one  making  provision
to  prevent  it,  I  made  readie  fifteene  buckets,  which  cost
sixe  Condrins  a  peece,  and  filled  them  full  of  water,  and
hanged  them  up  in  the  yard,  and  set  another  great  Tubbe
by  them  full  of  water,  besides  that  which  stood  on  the
toppe  of  the  house ;  and  gave  order  to  make  a  couple  of
ladders,  to  carry  water  to  the  top  of  the  house,  and  had
formerly  provided  nine  emptie  wine-barrels  full  of  tem-
pered clay,  to  daube  up  our  Gadonge  doores,  if  need
should  require,  God  defend  us  from  any  such  necessitie.
Three  or  foure  men  did  runne  up  and  downe  the  streetes
all  night,  making  a  horrible  noyse,  that  every  one  should
have  a  care  thereof ;  that  it  was  both  strange  and  fearefull
to  heare  them.

The  five  and  twentieth,  the  Captaine  Chinesa  our  Land-
lord, being  sicke,  sent  for  a  piece  of  Porke,  which  I  sent
him,  and  presently  followed  after  my  selfe  to  visite  him,
and  carried  him  a  small  bottle  of  Spanish  wine,  and  while
I  was  there,  Semedone  and  our  Guardians  father  in  law
came  likewise  to  visite  him.

The  King  sent  me  word  by  Miguell  our  Jurebasso,  that
he  had  a  bad  opinion  of  Harnando  Ximenes  our  Spaniard,
and  that  he  went  about  to  have  runne  away  when  he  was
last  at  Langasaque  :  but  that  I  know  is  not  so,  for  he  had
free  libertie  to  goe  when  he  would,  without  running  away.
Another  complaint  was  also  made  of  him,  that  he  was  a
common  Gamster,  and  had  brought  on  divers  to  play,  and

54°

RICHARD COCKS  aj>.

1613.

got  their  money :  which  report  I  doe  rather  beleeve  then

the  other ; and  I  find  by  experience,  these  people  are  no  A  sham  <"

friend,  neither  of  Spaniard  nor  Porturrall,  and  love  them ,eJe „e  A

-'  .r  111  1 iJiveli so  often.

of  Langasaque  the  worse,  because  they  love  them  so  wel.

And  I  had  almost  forgotten  to  note  downe,  that  the  night

past ill  disposed  people  had thought to have  fired the

Towne  in  three  places,  and  in  one  place  set  a  house  on

fire,  but  it  was  soone  put  out,  and  no  hurt  done  ; but  the

partie  that  did  it  was  not  found  :  out  of  doubt  it  is  nothing

but  a  villanie  of  these  Conjurers,  and  other  base  people,

which  are  given  to  the  spoile,  hoping  to  get  or  steale  away

something  when  the  Towne  is  on  fire.

The  sixe  and  twentieth,  Master  Melsham  being  very
sicke,  Zanzebar  came  to  visite  him,  and  put  him  in  mind
to  take  the  Physicke  of  this  Countrey,  and  that  it  would
presently  stop  his  Flux ;  and  brought  a  Bonze  or  Doctor  Bonze
with  him,  to  administer  it :  Master  Melsham  was  very  Fhysttian-
desirous  to  take  it,  but  that  first  our  Chirurgion  should
see  it :  and  so  he  gave  him  two  pils  yesterday,  two  in  the
night,  and  two  in  the  morning,  with  certaine  other  seeds ;
but  for  ought  I  could  see,  it  did  him  no  good  at  all :  God
send  him  his  health.  All  our  waste-clothes,  pendants,
Brasse  shivers,  and  other  matters  were  sent  aboord,  and
the  ship  put  in  order  to  receive  the  Generall.  Another
house  was  set  on  fire  the  night  past  by  villaines,  but  soone
put  out,  and  no  hurt  done.  Our  night-criers  of  fire  doe
keepe  such  a  horrible  noise  (without  forme  or  fashion)
that  it  is  impossible  for  any  man  to  take  rest.

The  Captaine  Chinesa  being  sicke,  sent  for  some  spiced
Cakes,  and  a  couple  of  waxe  candles  which  I  sent  him,  as
I  had  done  the  like  heretofore.  Master  Melsham  now
being  weary  of  his  Japan  Physicke,  returned  to  our
Chirurgion,  Master  Warner.  Whereat  Zanzebar  and  his
Doctor  tooke  pepper  in  the  nose.

[§.  HI.

54i

A.D.
1613.

PURCHAS HIS PILGR1MES

with  a
Comcedie

§. III.

A  srtange  Comoedie  acted  by  Kings  and  Nobles :
Preventions  for  Night-cries  and  fires :  Returne
of  the  Generall  from  Court.

He  thirtieth  day,  the  Captaine  Chinesa  (our  Land-
Collection which was made throughout every
lord)  came  unto  me,  and  told  mee  of  a  generall
house  in  the  Towne,  to  send  presents  of  eatable  commodi-
Another  Feast  tjes  to  the  Kings,  for  the  more  honor  of  a  great  Feast  they

• 1  r*  1  •  t-»i  1  1 1 •

have  to  morrow,  with  a  Comcedie  or  Play :  and  so  by  his
counsell  (with  advice  of  others)  I  ordained  two  bottles  of
Spanish  wine,  two  roasted  Hennes,  a  roasted  Pigge,  a
small  quantitie  Ruske,  and  three  boxes  banquetting  stuffe,
to  send  to  their  Feast  to  morrow.  And  before  night  the
yong  King  sent  one  of  his  men  unto  me,  to  furnish  them
with  some  English  apparell,  for  the  better  setting  out
their  Comcedie,  namely,  a  paire  of  Stamel-cloath  breeches.
I  returned  answere,  I  had  none  such,  neither  did  know
any  other  which  had :  notwithstanding,  if  any  apparell  I
had  would  pleasure  his  Highnesse,  I  would  willingly  give
it  him.  And  within  night  both  the  Kings  sent  to  me,  to
bring  Master  Foster,  the  Master,  and  be  a  spectator  of
their  Comcedie  to  morrow.

The  one  and  thirtieth,  before  dinner,  I  sent  our  Present
aforesaid  to  the  Kings  by  our  Jurebasso,  desiring  their
Highnesses  to  pardon  the  Master  and  my  selfe,  and  that
we  would  come  to  them  some  other  time,  when  there  were
lesse  people  :  but  that  would  not  serve  the  turne,  for  they
would  needs  have  our  company,  and  to  bring  Master
Eaton  along  with  us ;  which  wee  did,  and  had  a  place
appointed  for  us,  where  we  sate  and  saw  all  at  our  plea-
sures :  and  the  old  King  himselfe  came  and  brought  us
Collation  in  sight  of  all  the  people :  and  after  Semidone
did  the  like  in  the  name  of  both  the  Kings ;  and  after
divers  Noblemen  of  the  Kings  followers,  made  us  a  third
Collation. But  the  matter  I  noted  most  of  all,  was  their

542

Junkctting.

RICHARD COCKS

Comoedie  (or  Play)  the  Actors  being  the  Kings  them-
selves, with  the  greatest  Noblemen  and  Princes.  The
matter  was  of  the  valiant  deeds  of  their  Ancestors,  from
the  beginning  of  their  Kingdome  or  Common-wealth,
untill  this  present,  with  much  mirth  mixed  among,  to  give
the  common  people  content.  The  Audience  was  great,
for  no  house  in  Towne  but  brought  a  Present,  nor  no
Village  nor  place  under  their  Dominions,  but  did  the  like,
and  were  spectators.  And  the  Kings  themselves  did  see,
that  every  one,  both  great  and  small,  did  eate  and  drinke
before  they  departed.  Their  acting  Musique  and  singing
(as  also  their  Poetry)  is  very  harsh  to  us,  yet  they  keepe
due  time  both  with  hands  and  feet.  Their  Musique  is
little  Tabers,  made  great  at  both  ends,  and  smal  in  the
middest,  like  to  an  Houre-glasse,  they  beating  on  the  end
with  one  hand,  and  straine  the  cords  which  goe  about  it,
with  the  other,  which  maketh  it  to  sound  great  or  small
as  they  list,  according  their  voices  with  it,  one  playing  on
a  Phife  or  Flute ;  but  all  harsh,  and  not  pleasant  to  our
hearing.  Yet  I  never  saw  Play  wherein  I  noted  so  much,
for  I  see  their  policie  is  great  in  doing  thereof,  and  quite
contrary  to  our  Comcedies  in  Christendome,  ours  being
but  dumbe  shewes,  and  this  the  truth  it  selfe,  acted  by  the
Kings  themselves,  to  keepe  in  perpetuall  remembrance
their  affaires.  The  King  did  not  send  for  the  Flemmings,
and  therefore  I  accounted  it  a  greater  grace  for  us.  At
our  returne  to  the  English  house,  I  found  three  or  foure
Flemmings  there,  one  of  them  was  in  a  Japan  habit,  and
came  from  a  place  called  Cushma,  within  sight  of  Corea.
I  understand,  they  sold  Pepper,  and  other  Commodities
there,  and  I  thinke  have  some  secret  trade  into  Corea,  or
else  are  very  likely  to  have.  I  hope,  if  they  doe  well,  we
cannot  doe  amisse,  M.  Adams  being  the  man  that  put
them  forward  unto  it,  and  no  doubt  will  bee  as  forward  for
the  good  of  his  owne  Countrey,  as  for  Strangers.  Her-
nando Ximenes  was  with  Captaine  Brower,  and  saw  the
two  men  which  came  from  Cushma,  and  did  but  aske  him
from  whence  they  came ; whereat  Captaine  Brower  was

543

A.D.
1613.
Their  Play,  in
which  the
Kings  them-
selves were
Authors,  with
their  greatest
Nobles.

Their  acting,
song  and
musicke.

[I. iv.  404.]

Cushma.
Corea.

A.D.
1613.
Dutch
jealouste.

Langasaque
bad  people.

November.
1613.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

angry,  telling  him  he  would  give  him  no  account  thereof.
And  towards  night,  I  understood  that  two  Spaniards  were
come  from  Langasaque,  and  lodged  at  Zanzibars,  and  sent
for  our  Jurebassa  to  come  to  them  ;  but  I  would  not  let
him  go  so  soone.  After,  Zanzibar  and  they  came  to  the
English  house,  the  one  of  them  beeing,  Andres  Bulgaryn,
the  Genowes,  which  passed  by  this  place  the  other  day ;
and  the  other  is  called  Benito  de  Palais,  and  is  Pilot  Major
of  the  Spanish  ship,  which  was  cast  away  on  the  Coast  of
Japan,  and  is  the  same  man  which, came  from  Langasaque,
to  visit  M.  Adams  at  his  being  here.  They  told  me  they
were  come  of  purpose  to  visit  their  friends ;  namely,  my
selfe  first  of  all,  with  many  other  words  of  complement,
and  then  entred  into  speeches  of  our  Fugitives ;  saying,  it
was  not  the  Fathers  (as  they  call  them)  which  kept  our
people  secret,  or  went  about  to  convey  them  away ;  but
rather  they  of  Langasaque  themselves,  who  they  reported
to  be  very  bad  people.  In  fine,  I  stood  in  doubt  that  these
fellowes  are  come  of  purpose,  to  inveigle  more  of  our
people  to  doe  as  the  others  have  done,  and  thereof  ad-
vised the  Master,  to  have  a  care  both  to  ship  and  boats,  as
also  to  take  notice  of  any  such  as  went  about  to  keepe  them
company :  for  that  it  is  good  to  doubt  the  worst,  for  the
best  will  save  it  selfe.

The  first  of  November  at  night,  two  houses  were  set  on
fire  on  the  other  side  the  water,  but  fire  was  soone  put  out,
but  the  villaines  that  did  it  could  not  be  found.  I  sent
M.  Foster  the  Master  a  letter,  advising  him  to  take  care
of  ship  and  boats,  as  also  to  looke  unto  the  behaviour  of
our  people,  for  that  I  doubted  these  two  Spaniards  were
but  come  as  Spies  to  see  what  we  did,  and  to  intice  some
other  of  our  people  to  do  as  the  former  did.  Also,  I
advised  him  how  I  understood  the  said  Spaniards  did  pre-
tend to  invite  him  to  dinner  this  day ;  but  I  wished  him
to  take  heed  they  gave  him  not  a  Higo  :  he  returned  me
answer,  that  he  esteemed  them  such  as  I  tooke  them  for,
and  therefore  would  have  a  care  to  the  maine  chance.  But
soone  after  he  came  ashoare,  and  the  Spaniards  came  to

544

RICHARD COCKS  aj>.

1613,

the  English  house,  and  with  much  intreaty,  got  M.  Foster,

and  M.  William  Eaton  to  goe  along  to  dinner  with  them

to  Zanzebars,  and  the  other  two  Spaniards  and  Harnando

did  the  like. But  these  two  Spaniards  came  unto  me,  and

bade  mee  tell  the  Master  or  any  other  that  went  with  them,

to  take  heed  they  did  not  eate  nor  drinke  any  thing,  but  Forewarned

such  as  they  did  see  the  others  taste  before  them  ; for  that *0,ear

it  was  no  trusting  of  them,  of  which  I  advised  both  the

Master,  and  M.  Eaton. Also  I  sent  Miguell  our  Jure-

bassa,  to  both  the  Kings  (and  other  Nobles)  to  give  them

thanks  for  our  kind  entertainment  yesterday,  Harnando

Ximenes  told  me  that  M.  Adams  had  goods  in  his  hands,

belonging  to  this  Pilot  Major  the  Spaniard,  and  that  his

chiefe  comming  was, thinking  to  have  met M. Adams

here,  and  doth  meane  to  attend  his  comming  to  have  an

accompt  of  those  matters. As  also  they  brought  Letters

of  recommendation  from  the  Bishop,  and  other  Fathers  to  BuhoP  '"

the  other  two  Spaniards  (or  strangers)  to  perswade  them a^ai

to  returne  backe  to  Langasaque  : but  I  thinke  it  is  not

their  determination  so  to  doe.

The  second,  some  villaines  set  an  house  on  fire  in  the
Fish  streete ;  and  it  was  soone  put  out,  and  the  partie
escaped  :  and  it  is  generally  thought  to  be  some  base  people
or  Renegados,  which  lie  loytering  up  and  downe  the
Towne,  and  came  from  Miaco,  and  three  are  much  sus-
pected, but  no  proofe  as  yet  found  against  them.  But
there  is  order  given,  to  make  Gates  and  Partitions  over
every  streete  in  divers  places,  and  watch  to  be  kept  at  each
place,  and  no  man  be  suffered  to  walke  in  the  night,
except  he  be  found  to  have  earnest  businesse.  Another
villaine  got  into  a  poore  widowes  house,  thinking  to  have
robbed  her,  but  she  making  an  out-cry,  hee  fled  up  into
the  wood,  over  against  the  English  house,  where  the
Pagod  is  ; and  soone  after,  the  wood  was  beset  round The  PaS0li  1S

about,  with  above  five  hundred  men,  but  the  theefe  could 7f }J,0'i

1 r 1 a • 1  •  111  Idol-Temple,

not  be  round. At  night,  as  we  were  going  to  bed,  there  Qr  both.

was  an  out-cry  on  a  sudden,  that  theeves  were  on  the  top

of  our  house,  setting  it  on  fire ; but  our  ladders  being

in  545  2  M

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1613.

ready  reared,  both  my  selfe  and  others  were  not  long  a
going  up,  but  found  nothing,  but  that  all  our  neighbours
houses  were  peopled  on  the  tops  on  a  sudden,  as  well
as  ours.  And  it  is  to  be  thought  it  was  nothing  but  a
false  larum,  given  of  purpose  to  see  how  every  one  would
be  found  in  a  readinesse.  Yet  at  that  very  instant  there
was  a  house  set  on  fire,  but  soone  quenched,  it  being  a
good  way  from  our  English  house.

The  night  past,  three  houses  were  set  on  fire  in  divers
[I.  iv.  405.] parts  of  the  Towne,  but  all  put  out  at  beginning,  so  that
Order  to  pre-  n0  nurt  was  done. So  now  order  is  given,  to  take  notice
vent  Fire- jn  every  house  what  people  are  in  them,  whether  strangers
Nieht-cnes. or  others  ; and  such  as  are  found  to  be  suspected  are  to
bee  banished  out  of  the  Countrey  ;  and  gates  or  bars  made
to  shut  up  the  passages  or  ends  of  streets,  and  watch  set
in  divers  places,  without  crying  and  making  a  noyse  up
and  downe  streets  in  the  night,  as  hath  been  for  a  time
heretofore  without  either  forme  or  fashion  : yet  notwith-
standing all  this,  a  villaine  about  tenne  a  clocke  in  the
night, set  a  house  on  fire  neare  unto  the  Pagod,  over
against  our  English house  : but  he  was  espied  by  the
watch,  who  pursued  him  with  all  speed,  but  he  got  into
the  wood  above  the  Pagod,  which  forthwith  was  beset
round  about,  with  above  five  hundred  armed  men,  and
the  old  King  Foyne  came  in  person  with  many  other  Noble
men, assisted  in  the  pursuit ; yet I  verily  thinke, the
villaine  did  runne  up  and  downe  amongst  the  rest,  crying,
Keepe  theefe,  as  well  as  the  best.

The  fourth,  the  night  past  there  was  fire  put  in  divers
places  more,  one  in  the  Towne  and  an  other  in  the  Coun-
trey, besides  the  House  neere  ours,  as  I  said  before.
Order  is  now  given,  to  have  secret  watch  in  divers  parts  of
the  Towne  every  night,  and  no  man  to  goe  out  in  the
night  except  upon  urgent  occasion,  and  then  to  have  a
light  before  them,  to  the  end  they  may  bee  seene.  If  this
decorum  be  duly  kept,  our  House  burners  will  play  least
in  sight.  I  told  the  Kings,  and  others  hereof  above  a
weeke  past,  and  now  it  is  put  in  execution,

546

RICHARD COCKS

A.J).
1613.

The  fifth,  this  morning  I  received  two  Letters,  the  one
from  Domingo  Francisco  the  Spanish  Ambassadour  dated
in  Ximonaseque  five  dayes  past,  and  the  other  from  George
the  Portugal! :  the  Ambassadour  went  over  Land  from
thence  for  Langasaque,  and  sent  his  Servant  with  the
Letters,  unto  whom  I  shewed  such  Commodities  as  he
enquired  for,  and  referred  him  off  for  others  till  our  Gene-
rals returne  writing  him  a  Letter  in  answere  of  his,  the
Copie  whereof  I  kept :  his  man  tooke  liking  of  two
peeces  of  fine  Semian  Chowters,  and  eight  pieces  of  white
Bastas,  and  paid  seven  Tais  the  piece  for  Chowters,  and
two  Tais  the  piece  for  Bastas.  There  came  a  Spanish  Frier
or  Jesuite,  in  the  Boat  with  the  Ambassadours  man,  &  A  Jesuite
desired  to  see  our  ship,  which  I  willed  our  Master  to  let
him,  and  to  use  him  kindly,  which  he  did.  For  as  the
olde  saying  is,  It  is  good  sometimes  to  hold  a  Candle  to
the  Devill,  &c.  Master  Eaton,  Harnando  and  my  selfe
dined  with  Unagense,  and  were  kindly  entertayned.

The  sixth,  this  day  about  ten  a  clocke,  our  Generall  and
all  his  company  arrived  heere  from  the  Japan  Court,
Master  Adams  being  in  company  with  him.  And  pre-
sently the  Generall  sent  me  with  John  Japan  our  Jure-
basso,  to  visit  both  the  Kings,  and  thanke  them  for  their
kindnesse  in  so  well  accommodating  him  with  a  Boate,  as
also  for  the  care  they  had  of  the  ship,  and  the  rest  in  his
absence,  and  that  he  would  come  on  the  morrow  to  visit
them,  beeing  now  weary  of  his  long  Voyage.  They  tooke
this  visitation  kindly,  saying,  they  would  be  glad  to  see
him  at  their  Houses.  Also  certaine  Merchants  of  Miaco
which  came  from  Langasaque,  came  to  our  English  House,
and  had  sight  of  all  our  commodities,  and  amongst  the
rest,  took  liking  of  ten  pieces  of  Cassedy  nill,  and  made
price  for  them  at  three  Tais  the  piece,  which  is  in  all
thirtie  Tais,  and  so  sent  them  to  their  lodging,  as  other
Merchants  before  had  done  the  like,  and  so  returned  mee
money  to  my  content,  but  these  sent  mee  nothing  but  a
Paper,  and  consigned  mee  to  receive  my  money  of  Semi-
done,  who  was  newly  gone  out  of  Towne  on  a  Voyage,

547

C  apt.  Saris  his
returne  from
the  Emperours
Court.

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGMMES

1613.

our  Generall  meeting  him  on  the  way :  but  I  returned
these  Merchants  word,  that  I  would  have  my  payment  of
them,  or  else  my  Merchandize  backe  againe,  but  they
made  answere,  I  should  have  neither  the  one  nor  other ;

Merchants  of  neither  would  the  Host  of  the  House  where  they  lodged
tacopiay  the  passe  ^js  word  for  payment,  so  I  was  forced  to  goe  to  both
the  Kings  to  seeke  for  Justice,  but  first  sent  word  aboord,
that  if  the  Boate  of  Miaco  weighed  anchor  to  goe  away,
that  they  should  man  out  the  Skiffe,  and  stay  her,  which
they  did,  and  made  her  to  come  to  an  anchor  againe,  and
in  the  meane-time  I  spake  to  the  Kings,  but  the  younger
said  that  Semidone  was  a  man  able  enough  to  pay  me.
And  then  I  answered  and  asked  him,  that  if  Semidone  did
not,  whether  he  would,  and  he  told  me  no,  and  while  we
were  talking  of  it,  old  Foyne  Same  came  in  and  told  me
he  would  take  order  that  I  should  have  content :  yet  his
order  had  come  too  late,  if  our  Pinnasse  had  not  stayd
them.  So  in  the  end  the  Host  where  they  did  lodge,
passed  his  word  for  payment.

George  the  Captaine  Brower4  and  all  his  Merchants  came to the

a ga sent  £ng}is]1  House  to  visit  our  Generall,  and  Nobisana  sent

Present  of n^m  a  young  Porke  for  a  Present,  saying,  hee  would  come

Japan  Figs himselfe  and  visit  him  within  a  day  or  two.

and  Chesnuts.  Here  follow  certaine  Letters,  the  first  sent  from  the
Emperour  to  the  Prince  of  Orange,  the  rest  from  the
English  in  Japan,  and  principally  from  Master  Cocke,
wherein  the  Japonian  Affaires  and  various  Occurrents  for
divers  yeares  are  expressed.

[I.  iv.  406.]  The  Copie  of  a  Letter  sent  by  the  Emperour  of
Japan,  unto  the  King  of  Holland,  by  the  Ship
called  the  Red  Lyon,  with  Arrowes,  which
arrived  in  the  Texel,  the  two  and  twentieth  of
July,  1 6 10.

Emperour  and  King  of  Japan,  wish  to  the  King  of
Holland, who hath  sent  from  so farre Countries  to
visit  me,  greeting.

548

I

LETTER  TO  THE  PRINCE  OF  ORANGE  a.d.

i  6 1  o.

I  rejoyce  greatly  in  your  writing  and  sending  unto  me,
and  wish  that  our  Countries  were  neerer  the  one  to  the
other,  whereby  wee  might  continue  and  increase  the
friendship  begunne  betwixt  us  through  your  Majesties
presence,  whom  I  imagine  in  conceit  to  see,  in  respect  I
am  unknowne  unto  your  Majestie,  and  that  your  love
toward  me  is  manifested  through  your  liberalise  in  hon-
ouring mee  with  foure  Presents,  whereof  though  I  had
no  need,  yet  comming  in  your  name  I  received  them  in
great  worth,  and  hold  them  in  good  esteeme.

And  further,  whereas  the  Hollanders  your  Majesties
Subjects  desire  to  trade  with  their  shipping  in  my  Coun-
trey,  which  is  of  little  value  and  small,  and  to  traffique
with  my  Subjects,  and  desire  to  have  their  abiding  neere
unto  my  Court,  whereby  in  person  I  might  helpe  and
assist  them ;  which  cannot  bee  as  now  through  the  incon-
veniencie  of  the  Countrey :  yet  notwithstanding  I  will
not  neglect,  as  alreadie  I  have  beene,  to  be  carefull  of
them,  and  to  give  in  charge  to  all  my  Governours  and
Subjects,  that  in  what  places  and  Havens  in  what  part
soever  they  shall  arrive,  they  shall  shew  them  all  favour
and  friendship  to  their  Persons,  Ships  and  Merchandize  :
wherein  your  Majestie  or  your  Subjects  need  not  to
doubt  or  feare  ought  to  the  contrarie.  For  they  may
come  as  freely  as  if  they  came  into  your  Majesties  owne
Havens  and  Countries  ;  and  so  may  remayne  in  my  Coun-
trey to  trade.  And  the  friendship  begunne  betwixt  mee
and  my  Subjects  with  you  shall  never  bee  impayred  on
my  behalfe,  but  augmented  and  increased.

I  am  partly  ashamed  that  your  Majestie  (whose  Name
and  Renowme  through  your  valorous  Deeds  is  spred
throughout  the  whole  World)  should  cause  your  Subjects
to  come  from  so  farre  Countries  into  a  Countrey  so  unfit-
ting as  this  is,  to  visit  me,  and  to  offer  unto  me  such
friendships  as  I  have  not  deserved.  But  considering  that
your  affection  hath  beene  the  cause  thereof,  I  could  not
but  friendly  entertayne  your  Subjects,  and  yeeld  to  their
requests : whereof  this  shall  serve  for  a  testimonie,  That

549

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1610.

they  in  all  places,  Countries,  and  Hands  under  mine  obedi-
ence may  trade  and  traffique,  and  build  Houses  serviceable
and  needfull  for  their  Trade  and  Merchandizes,  where  they
may  trade  without  any  hinderance,  at  their  pleasure  aswell
in  time  to  come  as  for  the  present,  so  that  no  man  shall
doe  them  any  wrong :  And  I  will  mayntayne  and  defend
them,  as  mine  owne  Subjects.

I  promise  likewise,  that  the  persons  which  I  understand
shall  bee  left  heere,  shall  now  and  at  all  times  be  held  as
recommended  unto  me,  and  in  all  things  to  favour  them,
whereby  your  Majestie  shall  find  us  as  your  Friends  and
Neighbours.

For  other  matters  passed  betwixt  me  and  your  Majesties
Servants,  which  would  bee  too  long  heere  to  repeate,  I
referre  my  selfe  unto  them.

Firando  in  Japan,  the  tenth  of  December  16 14.

O  this  day  I  have  not  had  time  to  perfest  up  my  old
bookes  of  Accounts,  by  meanes  of  the  dispatching
away  our  people,  some  to  one  place,  some  to  another,  and
then  the  new  building  of  our  house,  and  after  that  the
buying  of  a  Juncke,  and  repairing  of  her,  which  is  now
ready  to  depart  for  Syam,  and  hath  been  any  time  this  ten
dayes  riding  at  an  anchor  at  Cochi,  a  league  from  Firando,
where  your  ship  rode  at  your  departure  from  hence,  ex-
pecting but  a  faire  wind  to  set  forward  on  her  voyage  :
shee  is  called  the  Sea  Adventure,  being  about  some  two
hundred  Tunnes,  in  whom  Master  Adams  goeth  for
Master,  and  Master  Wickham  and  Edward  Sayer  for
M.  Peacocke  Merchants,  by  meanes  of  the  death  of  Master  Peacock
s/aine  in  slaine  in  Cochinchina,  and  likelihood  of  casting  away
Walter  Carwarden,  returning  backe  from  thence,  for  to  this
houre  we  have  no  newes  of  him,  nor  the  Juncke  they
went  in,  as  I  have  at  large  advised  the  Worshipfull  Com-
pany, &c.  Since  your  departure  from  hence,  the  Emper-
our  hath  banished  all  Jesuits,  Priests,  Friers  and  Nunnes
out  of  Japan,  and  pulled  downe,  and  burned  all  their
Churches  and  Monasteries,  shipping  them  away,  some  for

55°

Trade  at
Syam.

T

Jesuitcs
banished.

RICHARD COCKS  ad.

1614.

Amacau in China, and the rest for Manillias. Foyne  Foyne  Same
Same  the  old  King  of  Firando  is  dead,  and  Ushiandono e •
his  Governour,  and  two  other  Servants  cut  their  bellyes
to  beare  him  company  ; their  bodies  being  burned,  and
ashes  entombed  by  his. Heere  are  warres  like  to  ensue Cwiltif'arres
betwixt  Ogusho-same  the  old  Emperour,  and  Fidaja-same  ' a^ar'
the  yong  Prince,  sonne  to  Tico-same,  who  hath  fortified
himselfe  strongly  in  his  Castle  or  Fortresse  of  Osakey, Osakay.
having  eightie  thousand  or  an  hundred  thousand  men,  run
awayes  and  banished  men, mall-contents, which  are  re-
tyred  out  of  all  parts  unto  him,  &  victualled  themselves
for three yeares. The old Emperor himselfe is come
downe  against  him  in  person  with  an  armie  of  three  hun-
dred thousand  souldiers,  and  is  at  the  Castle  of  Fushma  : Fmhma.
their fore-runners have had two or three bickerings
already,  and  many  slaine  on  each  part. All  Osakey  is  Ozacay burnt.
burned  to  the  ground,  but  only  the  Castle. So  Master
Eaton  is  gone  to  Sackey  with  his  goods ; yet  not  without Sacay.
danger,  for  part  of  that  Towne  is  burned  too.

Such  a  Tempest  or Tuffon hath lately happened at  P-  IV-  +o"0
Edoo,  that  the  like  was  never  seene  in  that  place,  the  sea  ^,°i-

1  ...  *■  ,  I  tiff  on.

overflowing  all  the  City,  driving  the  people  up  into  the
mountains,  defacing  and  breaking  downe  all  the  Noble-
mens  houses,  which  you  know  were  beautifull  and  faire.
So  let  thus  much  suffice  for  newes  in  Japan.

And  now  for  Sales  of  our  goods :  the  Emperour  tooke
our  Ordnance,  with  a  good  part  of  our  Lead,  and  ten
barrels  of  powder,  and  two  or  three  Broad-cloathes,  and  a
good  part  of  our  other  Broad-cloathes  are  sold,  namely,
Blacke,  Haire-colour,  Synanon-colour,  at  fifteene,  four-
teene,  thirteene,  and  twelve  Taies  the  Tattamy  :  but  they
will  not  looke  on  a  Venice-red,  nor  a  Flame-colour,  neither
are  Stamels  in  such  request  as  heretofore :  they  enquire
much  after  white  and  yellow  Broad-cloath.  The  Hol-
landers have  sold  most  of  their  Broad-cloath  at  base  rates,
which  maketh  us  to  doe  the  like.  And  for  our  Cloath  of
Cambaya,  they  will  not  looke  on  our  red  Zelas,  blew
Byrams,  nor  Duttis,  which  are  the  greatest  part  of  that

551

A.D.
1614.

Hope  of  Trade
in  China.

Hollanders
distasted  by
Chinois  and
Japan : Por-
tugalls  not
accepted.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

you  left  with  us,  only  some  white  Bastas  are  sold  at  four-
teene  and  fifteene  Masse  a  peece :  And  Cassedys  nill,
Allejas,  broad  Pintados,  Chader  Pintados,  with  such
spotted,  striped  and  chequered  Stuffes,  most  looked  after,
and  sold  at  profit.  We  have  also  sold  neare  halfe  our
Bantam  Pepper  for  sixtie  five  Masse  the  Peecull,  and  all
the  rest  had  been  gone  before  now,  had  it  not  been  for  this
rumour  of  warres.  I  stand  in  great  hope  we  shall  procure
Trade  into  China,  by  meanes  of  Andrea,  the  Captaine
China,  and  two  other  of  his  brothers,  which  labour  in  the
matter,  and  make  no  doubt  but  to  bring  it  to  effect,  for
three  ships  a  yeere  to  come  and  goe  to  a  place  neare  Lan-
quin,  to  which  place  we  may  goe  from  hence  in  three  or
foure  dayes,  if  the  wind  be  good.  I  have  written  hereof
at  large  to  the  Worshipfull  Company,  as  the  like  to  my
Lord  Treasurer.

Some  little  sicknesse  I  have  had,  but  now  I  praise  God
it  is  past.  Master  Wickham,  Master  Eaton,  Master
Nealson,  and  Master  Edward  Sayer,  have  all  foure  been
very  sicke,  but  now  well  recovered  all,  except  Master
Eaton,  who  is  troubled  with  the  Fluxe  and  a  tertian  Ague,
God  send  him  his  health,  for  I  cannot  too  much  praise  that
man,  for  his  diligence  and  paines  taken  in  the  Worshipfull
Companies  affaires.  Jacob  Speck,  who  was  thought  to  be
cast  away  in  going  from  hence  to  the  Moluccas,  is  now
returned  to  Firando,  Captaine  of  a  great  ship  called  the
Zelandia,  with  a  little  Pinnasse,  called  the  Jaccatra  :  the
cause  of  his  so  long  missing  was,  for  that  the  ship  wherein
he  went  from  hence,  passed  to  the  Eastward  of  the  Philip-
pinas,  the  same  way  we  came,  yet  by  currents  and  contrary
winds  (as  they  say)  they  could  not  fetch  the  Moluccas,  but
were  driven  to  the  Westward  of  the  Hand  Celebes,  and  so
passed  round  about  it  through  the  Straights  of  Desalon,
and  so  backe  to  the  Moluccas,  &c.  The  Chinaes  doe  much
complaine  of  the  Hollanders  robbing  and  pilfering  their
Juncks,  for  (as  they  say)  they  have  rifled  and  taken  seven.
The  Emperour  of  Japan  hath  taken  some  distaste  against
the  Hollanders,  for  he  refused  a  Present  they  lately  sent

552

RICHARD COCKS  ad.

(614.

up  to  him,  and  would  not  speake  to  them  which  brought

it : as  he  did  the  like  by  another  Present  the  Portugalls

sent  him,  who  came  in  the  great  ship  from  Amacau,  this

yeare,  to  Langasaque  ; he  refusing  both  the  Present,  as

also  to  speake  to  them  which  brought  it. You  thought

at  your  being  heere,  that  if  any  other  ship  came  out  of

England,  we  might  sell  our  Goods  without  carrying  up

any  Present  to  the  Emperour : but  now  I  find  it  to  be

otherwise,  for  every  ship  which  commeth  in  must  carry  a  Presents  a

Present  to  the  Emperour,  as  a  custome  : neither  can  we  customefor
t 1  •  1  •  1  it-  every  ship.

set  out  any  Juncke,  without  procuring  the  yearely  License

of  the  Emperour,  otherwise  no  Japan  Mariner  dare  goe
out  of  Japan  upon  paine  of  death,  only  our  owne  shippes
from  England  may  come  in,  and  goe  out  againe  when
they  will,  and  no  man  gain-say  it.

Wee  cannot  yet  by  any  meanes  get  Trade  from  Tushma
into  Corea,  neither  have  they  of  Tushma  any  other  privi-
ledge,  but  to  enter  into  one  little  Towne  (or  Fortresse)
and  in  paine  of  death  not  to  go  without  the  walles  thereof,
to  the  Landward,  and  yet  the  King  of  Tushma  is  no  Sub-
ject to  the  Emperour  of  Japan.  We  could  vent  nothing
but  Pepper  at  Tushma,  and  yet  no  great  quantitie  of  that,
and  the  weight  is  much  bigger  then  that  of  Japan,  but
sold  at  a  better  rate.  I  am  given  to  understand,  that  up
in  the  Countrey  of  Corea,  they  have  great  Cities,  and  Corea  Bogges
betwixt  that  and  the  Sea  mightie  Bogs,  so  that  no  man  "'"* '  saillTtS
can  travell  on  Horse-backe,  nor  very  hardly  on  foote ;  "*
but  for  remedie  against  that,  they  have  great  Waggons  or
Carts,  which  goe  upon  broad  or  flat  wheeles  under  saile,
as  ships  doe.  So  that  observing  Monsons,  they  transport
their  goods  to  and  fro  in  these  sayling  Waggons.  They
have  Damaskes,  Sattins,  Taffeties,  and  other  Silke  stuffes
made  there,  as  well  as  in  China  :  it  is  said  that  Ticus-
same  (otherwise  called  Quabicondono)  the  deceased  Em-
perour, did  pretend  to  have  conveyed  a  great  armie  of
Souldiers  in  these  sailing  waggons,  to  have  assaulted  the
Emperour  of  China  on  a  sudden  in  his  great  Citie  of
Paquin,  where  hee  is  ordinarily  resident,  but  he  was  pre-  Paquln.

553

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1614.

vented  by  a  Corean  Noble-man,  who  poysoned  himselfe,
to  poyson  the  Emperour,  and  other  great  men  of  Japan,
which  is  the  occasion  the  Japans  have  lost  that,  which  some
two  and  twenty  yeares  past  they  had  gotten  possession  of
in  Corea.  James  Turner  the  fidling  youth,  left  a  wench
with  child  heere,  but  the  whore,  the  mother,  killed  it  so
soone  as  it  was  borne,  although  I  gave  her  two  Taies  in
plate  before  to  nourish  it,  because  shee  should  not  kill  it,
it  being  an  ordinary  thing  here.  Master  Foster,  the  Mas-
ters whistle  and  chaine  is  found,  and  Master  Adams  hath
it,  and  will  be  answerable  unto  him  for  it.  I  did  thinke
to  have  sent  you  a  Japan  Almanacke  in  another  Letter  to
the  same  effect  as  this,  dated  the  five  and  twentieth
Ultimo,  and  sent  by  Sea-adventure,  by  way  of  Syam,  but
forgot  to  put  it  in,  yet  now  commeth  here  inclosed.  I
pray  you  let  this  Letter  suffice  to  Master  George  Saris
your  brother,  and  the  rest  of  my  loving  friends ;  and  with
heartie  Commendations  in  generall,  I  leave  you  all  to  the
holy  protection  of  the  Almightie,  resting  alwayes

Your  ever  loving  friend  at  command,

Richard  Cocks.

[I.  iv.  408.]  To  the  Worshipfull  Thomas  Wilson  Esquire,  at
his  House  at  the  Britain e-Burse,  at  the  Strand,
give  these.

Sir,  my  last  unto  you  was  of  the  first  of  December  16 13.
dated  in  the  Isle  of  Firando  in  Japan  ;  and  sent  by
Captaine  John  Saris,  in  the  ship  called  the  Cloave :  where-
in I  advertised  you,  how  unkindly  the  Hollanders  dealt
with  us  in  the  Maluccas.  Since  which  time,  there  is  not
any  matter  of  moment  to  advise  you  of,  more  then  I  have
touched  in  another  Letter  to  my  good  Lord  Treasurer.
The  Hollanders  give  it  out  heere,  That  it  is  very  likely
our  East-India  Company  of  England,  and  that  of  Holland
shall  be  joyned  all  in  one  :  which  if  it  prove  true,  it  is
thought  an  easie  matter  to  drive  both  Spaniards  and
Portugals  out  of  these  Easterne  parts  of  the  world ; or

554

RICHARD COCKS  ad

i  6  i  4.
else  utterly  to  cut  them  off,  or  debarre them from  all
Trade. For  you  will  hardly  beleeve  how  the  Hollanders  Hollanders
alreadie  have  daunted  the  Spaniards  and  Portugals  in  these  afl' !"
parts,  especially  in  the  Maluccas,  where  they  daily  encroach
upon  the  Spaniards,  which  are  not  able  to  withstand  their
proceedings : but  now  stand  in  much  feare,  that  in  short  Spaniards  and
time  they  will  also  take  the  Philippinas  from  them. Also ortuZc  i
the  Portugals,  which  trade  from  Ormus  to  Goa,  and  so
for  Malacca  and  Macao  in  China,  stand  daily  in  feare  to  be
surprised  by  them.

One  thing  there  is,  the  issue  whereof  I  cannot  well  con-  Hollandersrob
ceive :  and  that  is  the  robbing  of  the  Junckes  of  China,  jSLjj?**"  ^
daily  practised  by  the  Hollanders  in  these  parts  :  the  goods
whereof  cannot  choose  but  amount  to  great  matters,  and
suffice  to  set  out  and  maintaine  a  great  Fleete,  which  is
worthy  of  consideration.  And  if  it  should  happen,  that
the  King  of  Japan  should  fall  out  with  the  Hollanders,
and  debarre  them  from  Trade  into  his  Dominions,  (as  it
may  fall  out  that  he  will : )  then  is  it  likely  the  Hollanders
will  make  prize  as  well  of  Japans  as  Chinaes.  For  out  of
doubt,  their  Forces  at  sea  in  these  parts  are  sufficient  to
doe  what  they  lust,  if  they  have  but  a  victualing  place  to
retire  unto.  And  they  are  of  late  growne  very  stout,  and
mocke  at  them,  which,  all  the  world  knoweth,  were  their
masters  and  teachers.  And  it  is  very  certaine  that  they
have  gotten  possession  of  divers  Fortresses  in  the  Maluccas,
and  those  parts :  yet  on  my  knowledge  the  people  of  those
parts  doe  rather  encline  to  the  Spaniards,  then  to  them  :
although  at  the  first,  they  were  glad  of  their  arrivall,  by
meanes  of  the  intolerable  pride  of  the  Spaniards.  But
now  time  telleth  them,  that  the  Spaniard  brought  them
store  of  Rialls  of  plate ;  and  in  their  proud  humors  were
liberall,  which  was  easie  for  them  to  doe,  in  respect  they
had  wherewithall  to  doe  it.  But  the  poore  Hollanders,  Hollanders  sea
which  serve  in  these  parts  for  souldiers,  both  by  sea  and  force'
land,  have  such  bare  pay,  that  it  will  hardly  find  them
clothing  to  their  backes,  and  meate  for  their  bellies :  Their
Commanders  alledge,  that  all  the  benefite  which  hapneth,

555

A.D.

1 6 14.

Jesuits  play
the  Factors,
Agents,  and
Beggers  in
these  parts,  as
by  all  Indian
relations  may
appeare.

Fame  of  the
English  in  the

remote  East.

Force  of  Tem-
pests in  Japan.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

either  by  reprisall  or  conquest,  is  for  the  States,  and  Win-
thebbers,  as  they  call  them.  So  that  what  will  come  of  this
in  the  end,  is  hard  to  judge.

But  letting  these  matters  passe,  I  am  verily  of  opinion,
that,  if  it  be  not  for  the  misdemeanour  of  the  Hollanders,
we  shall  obtaine  a  Trade  in  China :  for  our  demand  is  but
for  three  ships  a  yeare  to  come  and  goe  ;  and  only  to  leave
Factors  sufficient  to  doe  the  businesse,  without  bringing  in
any  Jesuits  or  Padres,  as  they  tearme  them,  which  the
Chinaes  cannot  abide  to  heare  of,  because  heretofore  they
came  into  these  parts  in  such  numbers  to  inhabite,  that
now  they  will  not  endure  it,  and  were  alwayes  craving  and
begging  without  shame,  which  is  a  common  saying  among
the  Pagans.

One  thing  there  is,  which  putteth  me  in  good  hope,  and
that  is  the  good  report  and  fame,  which  our  English  Nation
hath  gotten  in  these  parts,  since  our  Arrivall :  which,  as  I
am  given  to  understand,  is  come  to  the  knowledge  of  the
Emperour  of  China :  and  how  the  chiefe  King  of  Japan
hath  received  us,  and  granted  unto  us  very  large  privi-
ledges.  As  also,  how  that  the  English  at  all  times,  have
held  the  Castilians,  as  they  call  them,  to  hard  meate,  both
by  sea  and  land.  These  things  the  Chinaes  themselves
tell  me  :  and  that  the  Emperour  and  other  great  men  in
China,  delight  to  heare  reports  of  our  Nation.  But  I  had
almost  forgotten  to  note  downe,  how  some  China  Mer-
chants put  out  a  question  to  me,  to  know,  if  we  had  a
trade  in  China,  whether  the  King  of  England  would  de-
barre  the  Hollanders  from  robbing  and  spoiling  of  their
Junckes  ?  Which  question  was  doutfull  unto  me :  yet
I  answered  them,  that  his  Majestie  would  take  such  order,
that  the  Hollander  should  not  misuse  them.

Of  late  heere  is  come  newes  from  Edoo,  a  Citie  of  Japan
as  bigge  as  London,  wherein  the  chiefe  of  the  Nobilitie  of
Japan  have  beautifull  houses,  that  by  meanes  of  an  exceed-
ing Tuffon  or  tempest,  all  or  the  most  part  of  them  are
defaced  ;  the  whole  Citie  being  over-flowen  with  water,
and  the  people  forced  to  flye  up  into  the  mountaines,  a

556

RICHARD COCKS  *  •>•

1614,

thing  never  heard  of  before  :  and  the  Kings  Palace  beinj
stately  builded  in  a  new  Fortresse,  the  tyles  being  al
gilded  on  the  out-side,  were  all  carryed  away  with  a  whirle-
wind,  so  that  none  of  them  are  to  be  found.  The  Pagans
attribute  it  to  some  Charmes,  or  by  Conjurations  or  the
Jesuits  lately  banished :  but  the  Papist  Japonians  doe
rather  ascribe  it  to  the  punishment  of  God,  for  the  banish-
ing of  such  holy  men.

Another  matter  there  is,  which  I  thought  good  to  adver-  II1  tiueesse  0/
tise  you  of,  and  that  is  of  a  disaster  lately  happened  to  us  some  tn&u
in  Cauchin-China :  To  which  place  we  sent  a  quantitie  of  Q^Mt
goods  and  money,  to  the  value  of  seven  hundred  and
thirtie  pound  sterling,  as  it  cost  in  England.  Master
Tempest  Peacock,  and  Master  Walter  Caerwarden,  going
for  Merchants  in  a  Japan  Juncke,  carryed  the  Kings
Majesties  Letters  of  England,  with  a  Present  of  worth  for
the  King  of  Cauchin-China,  and  arrived  at  their  Port  of
Discharge,  called  Quinham :  delivered  his  Majesties
Letters,  and  the  Present,  which  were  taken  in  good  part,
and  they  entertained  with  kind  speeches,  and  large  pro-
mises. The  Hollanders  seeing  we  adventured  to  that  [I-  iv.  4°9-]
place,  would  needs  doe  the  like,  and  tooke  fraught  in  other
Junkes,  and  were  likewise  well  entertained  at  first.  But
in  the  ende,  Master  Peacock  and  the  Chiefe  Merchant  of
the  Hollanders,  going  on  shoare,  both  in  one  boat,  to
receive  certaine  summes  of  money  of  the  King  for  broad-
Cloath,  and  other  Commodities  sold  him,  were  treacher-
ously set  upon  in  the  water,  and  their  boat  overturned,
they  beeing  killed  in  the  water  with  harping  yrons  like
fishes,  with  their  Interpreters  and  other  followers  which
were  Japonians  :  Walter  Caerwarden  beeing  aboord  the
Juncke,  escaped  and  came  away.  But  from  that  day  to
this,  wee  can  heare  no  newes  neither  of  him,  nor  of  the
Junke,  wherefore  we  feare  hee  is  cast  away.

The  common  report  both  of  the  Chinas  and  Japans  is, Perfity
that  the  King  of  Cauchin-China  did  this,  to  be  revenged  rcve"SeJ-
on  the  Hollanders,  for  burning  a  Towne  of  his,  and  put-
ting his  people  to  death  without  mercie. The  originall

557

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1614.

grew,  from  a  great  quantitie  of  false  Dollers  or  Rials  of
eight,  sent  to  Quinham  by  the  Hollanders,  certaine  yeeres
past ;  and  there  put  away  for  Silkes,  and  other  China
stuffes,  with  the  Merchants  of  that  place.  But  the  fals-
hood  of  the  money  beeing  espied,  they  laid  hands  on  the
Holland  Factors,  and  I  thinke,  some  one  was  put  to  death
in  revenge  :  whereupon  the  Holland  ships  comming  on
that  Coast,  landed  their  men,  and  burned  a  Towne,  put-
ting Man,  Woman,  and  Child  to  the  sword.  This  was
the  chiefe  occasion  (as  report  goeth)  that  this  mischance  is
happened  now ;  M.  Peacocke  being  slaine,  because  he  was
in  company  with  the  Hollanders.  Here  inclosed,  I  send
you  a  Japan  Almanacke,  whereby  you  may  see  their  order
of  Printing,  Figures,  and  Characters.  And  so  I  leave
you  to  the  holy  protection  of  the  Almighty.  Resting
alwaies

Your  Worships  to  command,

Richard  Cock.

From  Firando  in  Japan. December  10.  1614.

December  5.  161 5.

Sir,  I  received  a  Letter  from  you  by  the  hands  of  Cap-
taine  Copendall,  Captaine  of  the  Hosiander,  which
arrived  here  in  Japan  the  twentie  ninth  of  August,  161 5.
wherein  I  understood  of  your  safe  arrivall  at  the  Cape
Bona  Esperanza  homeward  bound  :  wherein  your  Wor-
ship gave  mee  to  understand,  of  the  losse  of  some  of  your
Company,  yet  I  make  no  doubt,  but  by  the  grace  of  God,
you  are  safely  arrived  in  England  long  before  this  time.
I  sent  you  a  Letter,  dated  the  last  of  November,  16 14.  by
the  Hollanders  ship  called  the  old  Zealand,  wherein  I  gave
you  to  understand  of  the  death  of  M.  Peacocke,  and
Walter  Carwarden  betrayed  in  Cauchinchina,  which  was
not  a  little  griefe  to  us  all,  besides  the  losse  of  the  Com-
panies goods.  This  last  yeere  past,  M.  Wickham,  M.
Adams,  and  my  Selfe,  beeing  bound  in  a  Juncke  which  we

558

EDMOND SAYEK  ad.

1616.

bought  for  Siam,  having  great  stormes  and  foule  weather,

sprung  leakes  in  her,  and  were  faine  to  beare  up  for  the

Hands  Leuckes,  where  we  stayed  so  long,  and  could  not

stop  our  leakes,  we  lost  our  Monson,  and  came  to  Firando

againe. This  yeere  we  have  trimmed  her  againe,  and  at

this present readie to set sayle  againe for Siam. My

greatest  hope  in  these  parts  is,  that  we  shall  have  a  trade

into  China,  for  we  have  great  possibilities,  and  I  make  no

doubt  but  ere  long,  to  see  a  Factory  established  there,  by

meanes  that  the  Captaine  Cheny  and  his  brothers  have

made. We  have  had  here  the  last  Summer  great  troubles

of  Warres,  betwixt  the  Emperour  and  Fidaja  Sama,  which

we  doe  not  know  whether  hee  bee  slaine  or  fled,  but  the

Emperour  hath  got  the  victory  with  losse  of  men  of  both  Forty  thousand

sides, the summe of foure hundred thousand. Thus  Ja^'a"s,  loit

,  T  ,  in  Livill

having  no  more  newes  to  write,  1  commit  you  to  the  pro- warres
tection  of  the  Almightie. From  Firando  in  Japan.

Your  Servant  alwaies  to  command,

Edmond  Sayer.

Firando  in  Japan. December  4.  1616.

WOrshipfull  Sir,  my  humble  dutie  alwayes  remem-
bred  :  having  so  fit  an  opportunitie,  I  could  not
choose  but  trouble  your  Worship  with  these  few  lines,  I
being  but  newly  arrived  heere  in  Firando,  of  a  hard  and
tedious  Voyage  from  Siam,  which  went  in  a  Junke  of  the
Right  Honourable  Companies,  M.  Adams  being  Master,
and  my  selfe  Factor  in  her,  having  bought  more  goods
then  we  could  lade,  we  fraighted  an  other  Junke  for  Japan  :
M.Benjamin  Fary  being  principall  of  the  Factory  of  Siam,
thought  it  fit  for  me  to  goe  in  this  Junke  for  Japan,
for  the  safegard  of  the  Worshipfull  Companies  goods :
wherein  I  tooke  my  Voyage,  the  yeare  beeing  far  spent,
that  we  were  from  the  first  of  June,  to  the  seventeenth  of
September,  betweene  Siam  and  Shachmar,  with  much  tor-
ments and  fowle  weather,  having  lost  twenty  of  our  men

559

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1616.

with  sicknesse  and  want  of  fresh  water.  The  greatest
occasion  of  this  first,  was  for  want  of  a  good  Pilot,  for  we
had  a  China  Pilot,  which  had  no  understanding  of  Navi-
gation :  for  when  he  was  out  of  sight  of  the  Land,  hee
knew  not  where  he  was,  nor  what  course  to  take  :  then  he
falling  sicke,  was  not  able  to  creepe  out  of  his  Cabbin,  I
beeing  forced  with  the  small  skill  I  had,  to  doe  my  best,
and  with  the  helpe  of  God  brought  the  Junke  safe  to
Shachmar,  where  we  arrived  the  seventeenth  of  September,
having  but  five  men  able  to  stand  on  their  legges,  com-
ming  so  late  to  Firando,  that  I  could  not  goe  this  yeere  to
Siam,  but  the  Companies  Junke  is  gone  with  M.  Wil.
Eaton,  and  two  English  Pilots,  whose  names  are  Robert
Burges,  and  John  Burges.

Your  Worships  servant  till  death,

Edmond  Sayer.

c

[I.  iv.  410.]  Firando  in  Japan. February  15.  16 17.

'Aptaine  Saris,  My  last  Letter  unto  you,  was  the  fifth
of  January,  161 6.  sent  by  way  of  Bantam,  in  the  ship
Thomas,  which  went  from  hence  that  yeere,  with  an  other
small  ship  called  the  Advice  :  in  which  Letter  I  wrote  you
at  large,  of  all  matters  which  occasion  then  offered  :  as
also  of  the  receipt  of  two  Letters  of  yours,  the  one  dated
in  London  the  twenty  fourth  of  November,  16 14.  and  the
other  the  fifteenth  of  August,  161 5.  Since  which  time
the  ship  Advice  is  returned  againe  into  Japan,  and  arrived
at  Firando,  the  second  of  August  last  past.  By  which  con-
vaiance  I  received  a  Letter  from  the  Honourable  Com-
pany, dated  in  London  the  thirtieth  of  January,  161 5.
Wherein  they  write  me,  &c.
Capt.  George  There  are  some  which  can  tell  you,  that  Captaine
at  e  ey.  Barkely  lying  on  his  death  bed,  escaped  a  scowring  of  loos-
ing sixe  thousand  Rialls  of  eight ;  and  had  he  died  before
it  was  found  out,  paid  out  for  Custome  of  Pepper,  it  may
be  some  other  man  might  have  had  the  credit  of  paying  it.
It  is  a  common  Proverbe,  that  it  is  a  small  matter  for  men

560

RICHARD COCKS  a.d

1617.

which  lie  at  Bantam,  to  be  rich  if  they  live  but  a  little-
time:  for  as  the  old  saying  is,  No  man  dieth  without  an
heire.

Wee  have  beene  this  yeare  againe,  before  the  Emperour
of  Japan,  but  cannot  get  our  Priviledges  enlarged,  but
trade  onely  at  Firando  and  Langasaque,  and  our  English
shipping  to  come  for  Firando  only.

M.  Edmond  Sayer  went  this  last  yeare  for  Cochinchina,  Trade  tn
with  a  Cargeson  of  some  one  thousand  eight  hundred  J" j^n
Tays  Goods  and  money  :  and  being  ready  to  come  away,
was  coozened  of  sixe  hundred  and  fifty  Tays  by  a  China
&  others,  of  whom  he  had  bought  Silke  for  the  Worship-
ful Company,  and  weighed  out  the  Money,  attending  to
receive  the  Silke,  the  Money  lying  by  till  it  came,  he  and
an  other  being  in  the  roome  where  it  lay  :  but  those  false
people  made  a  hole  through  the  Cane-wall,  and  stole  out
the  Money,  they  not  seeing  when  it  was  done.  I  am  sorrie
for  the  mischance,  but  he  hopeth  to  recover  it  againe  this
yeare,  having  left  a  man  to  follow  the  suite,  and  returneth
backe  this  Monson  in  a  China  Junke,  with  a  Cargeson  of
two  thousand  Tais  in  Plate  to  bestow  in  Silke,  and  one
Robert  Hawley  goeth  with  him  for  mortalities  sake,  and
M.  William  Adams  goeth  Pilot  for  the  Chines.  God
send  them  a  prosperous  Voyage,  and  to  recover  the  money
lost.

Our  Junke,  the  Sea  Adventure,  made  an  other  Voyage
the  last  yeare  to  Siam,  M.  William  Eaton  going  Mer-
chant in  her,  and  is  returned  againe  in  her  thither  this
yeare,  God  send  them  a  prosperous  Voyage.

The  Hollanders  sent  a  Fleete  of  ships  the  last  yeare
from  the  Moluccas  to  the  Manillias,  to  fight  with  Spanish
Fleete :  but  they  kept  in  for  the  space  of  five  or  sixe
moneths,  so  that  the  Hollanders  made  account  they  durst
not  come  out  at  all :  and  therefore  separated  themselves,
to  looke  out  for  China  Junkes  whereof  they  tooke  and
rifled  some  say  twentie  five  Juncks,  others  say  thirtie  five  :
once  they  tooke  great  riches,  and  all  under  the  name  of
Englishmen.  But  in  the  end,  the  Spanish  Fleete  came
in  561  2  N

A.D.
1617.

Fight  of  Hol-
landers and
Spaniards.

Hollanders
wronging  the
English  name.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

out,  and  set  upon  five  or  sixe  of  their  ships,  burning  and
sinking  the  Admirall,  and  two  other  Holland  ships,  the
rest  escaping  :  but  the  Spaniards  separating  themselves  to
seeke  out  the  Hollanders,  the  Viceadmirall  of  them  fell
with  two  fresh  Hollanders  on  the  morning,  who  fought
with  her  all  day,  and  made  her  to  runne  on  ground,  and
set  her  selfe  on  fire,  because  the  Hollanders  should  not
take  them  :  the  which  two  ships,  and  one  of  them  which
was  at  former  fight,  came  after  to  Firando,  with  two  other
great  Hollanders  from  Bantam,  to  looke  out  for  the
Amacau  ship,  but  missed  narrowly  of  her,  so  that  five
great  Holland  ships,  the  least  of  them  as  big  as  the  Clove,
came  into  Japan  this  yeare,  one  of  which,  called  the  Red
Lyon  (which  was  she  which  rid  by  us  at  the  Moluccas)
was  cast  away  at  Firando  in  a  storme,  with  a  China  Juncke
they  brought  in  for  Prize,  but  all  the  Merchandize  re-
covered, although  wet.  The  Emperour  letteth  them
make  good  price  of  all.  They  sent  away  the  Blacke
Lyon  for  Bantam,  a  ship  of  nine  hundred  Tunnes,  full
laden  with  Raw  Silke,  and  other  rich  China  stuffes.
Another,  called  the  Flushing,  of  seven  or  eight  hundred
Tunnes,  is  gone  for  the  Moluccas,  full  laden  with  pro-
vision and  money :  and  the  Sunne,  a  ship  of  sixe  or  seven
hundred  Tunnes,  with  the  Gallias  of  above  foure  hun-
dred Tunnes,  are  left  to  scowre  the  coast  of  China,  to
take  what  booty  they  can,  and  returne  the  next  Monson  :
the  Gallias  is  gone  out  already,  but  the  Sunne  attendeth
the  going  out  of  the  Amacau  ship  from  Langasaque,  to
be  doing  with  her.  She  was  going  out  heretofore,  but
comming  in  sight  of  the  Gallias,  (the  wind  serving  her)
returned  into  Langasaque  againe,  so  I  thinke  she  will
hardly  goe  out  this  yeare  :  and  as  I  said  before,  they  have
robbed  all  the  Chines  in  the  name  of  Englishmen,  which
hath  done  much  hurt  to  our  proceeding,  to  get  trade  in
that  place  ;  so  that  we  were  forced  to  send  new  supplies,
to  give  the  Governours  in  China  to  understand,  that  they
are  Hollanders  which  did  it,  and  not  Englishmen.  In
fine,  I  have  advised  the  Worshipfull  Company  at  large  of

562

RICHARD COCKS  ad.

all,  of  which  I  make  no  doubt  but  you  will  heare  : And
so  I  commit  you  to  God,  resting

Your  loving  Friend  assured  at  command,

Ric.  Cock.

The  Coppie  of  my  Letter  the  last  yeare,  I  send  you
here  inclosed.

A  piece  of  another  Letter  of  M.  Cockes.

There  came  two  Friers  in  that  ship  as  Embassadours
from  the  Viceroy  of  new  Spaine,  with  a  Present  for  the
Emperour,  but  he  would  neither  receive  the  Present,  nor
speake  to  them  which  brought  it,  but  sent  M.  Adams  [I.  iv.  411.]
to  tell  them,  they  should  avoide  out  of  his  Dominions,
he  having  formerly  banished  all  of  their  coate,  and  re-
mained still  in  the  same  opinion.  It  is  said,  that  Fidaja
Same  had  promised  the  Jesuites  entrance  againe,  if  he  had
got  the  victorie,  and  been  setled  in  the  Empire,  which
if  it  had  taken  effect,  out  of  doubt  both  Hollanders  and
we  had  been  turned  out  of  Japan.  And  therefore  better
as  it  is.

Also,  the  last  yeere  when  we  set  out  our  Junke,  we
entertained  a  Spaniard,  called  Damian  Marina,  and  was
the  same  man  which  thought  once  to  have  gone  along
with  you,  in  Company  of  George  Peterson.  This  Damian
was  a  good  helme  man  :  and  therefore  entertained,  and
an  other  Spaniard,  called  Juan  de  Lievana  went  with  them
as  a  Passenger :  but  the  Junke  loosing  her  Voyage,  they
returned  to  Langasaque,  where  soone  after  arrived  the
Carracke  from  Amacau ;  and  understanding  that  these  two
men  had  gone  in  our  shipping,  they  laid  hands  of  them,
and  put  them  in  chaines  aboord  the  great  ship,  condemn-
ing them  to  death,  as  Traytors  to  their  Prince  and  Coun-
trey,  in  serving  the  English  their  enemies.  Which  com-
ming  to  my  knowledge,  I  tooke  their  defence  in  hand,
and  by  authoritie  from  the  Emperour  got  them  set  at
libertie,  to  the  great  spight  and  hearts  griefe  of  both
Spaniards  and  Portugals,  these  two  men  going  Passengers

563

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1617.

in  the  Hosiander  for  Bantam,  &c.  We  have  had  extreame
troubles  in  Japan,  by  meanes  of  these  warres,  in  posting
or  transporting  of  our  goods  from  place  to  place,  to  save
it. I  long  to  heare  from  you  of  your  safe  arrivall,  &c.

M.  Adams  is  gone  againe  in  the  Junke  for  Siam,
accompanied  onely  with  M.  Edmond  Sayer ;  and  M.
Nealson  is  very  sicke,  but  M.  Wickham,  and  M.  Eaton
well : I  pray  you  deliver  the  enclosed  to  my  brother.

Yours,  most  assured  at  command,

Richard  Cock.

Naugasaque  in  Japan,  the  tenth  of  March  i6|o.

IT  is  now  almost  three  yeeres  last  past  since  I  wrote
your  Worship  any  Letter,  and  is  by  meanes  of  the
unlooked  for  &  unruly  proceedings  of  the  Hollanders  *
against  our  English  Nation  in  all  these  parts  of  the
World,  not  sparing  us  in  these  Kingdomes  of  Japan,  con-
trarie  to  the  large  Priviledges  which  the  Emperour  of
Japan  hath  given  us,  that  the  Japans  should  not  meddle
with  us.  But  these  Hollanders  this  yeere  having  seven
ships  great  &  small  in  the  Harbor  or  Port  of  Firando,
have with sound of Trumpet proclaymed open War

*  Hollanders  abuses  of  the  English  in  those  parts,  are  here  published
for  knowledge  of  the  Easterne  Affaires,  and  Occurrents,  as  it  is  meet  in
a  Historic  But  neither  were  these  Nationall  but  personall  Crimes,
and  done  in  time  and  place  of  pretended  Hostilitie,  and  now  I  hope
satisfaction  is,  or  shall  be  made.  Neighbourhood  of  Region,  Religion
and  Customes,  are  easily  violated  by  Drink,  Covetousnesse  &  Pride,  the
three  Furies  that  raysed  these  Combustions.  This  Historie  hath  related
the  worth  of  many  Worthy  Hollanders ;  if  it  yeelds  a  Close-stoole  for
Westarwood  (as  Excrements  rather  then  true  Dutch)  or  a  Graine-Tub
or  Swil-tub  for  some  brave  Brewers  and  Bores,  that  embrewed  with
Nobler  bloud  then  themselves  have,  preferre  their  brutish  passions  to
Gods  Glorie,  Religion,  and  publike  Peace,  let  it  be  no  imputation  to  the
Nation  (which  I  love  and  honour)  but  to  such  baser  spirits  as  have  (like
Scorbuticall  humours  in  these  long  Voyages,  and  their  longer  peace  and
want  of  wonted  employments)  beene  bred  as  Diseases  to  their,  and
infections  to  our  bodie.  My  intent  is  to  present  others  with  their  Acts,
my  selfe  with  Prayers  that  all  may  be  amended.

564

RICHARD COCKS

against  our  English  Nation,  both  by  Sea  and  Land  to  take
our  English  ships  &  goods,  and  kill  our  persons  as  their
mortall  Enemies,  which  was  done  by  one  Adam  Westar-
wood,  their  Admirall  or  Lord  Commander  (as  they  tearme
him)  and  openly  proclaymed  aboord  all  their  shippes.
Also  they  came  to  brave  us  before  our  owne  doores,  and
picking  quarrels  entred  into  our  House,  thinking  to  have
cut  all  our  throates,  yet  wounded  but  two  persons,  and
had  it  not  beene  for  the  assistance  of  the  Japanesses  our
Neighbours,  which  tooke  our  parts,  they  had  killed  us
all,  they  being  a  hundred  Hollanders  to  one  Englishman  :
and  not  contented  with  this,  they  tooke  our  Boat  going  out
about  our  businesses,  wherein  there  was  one  Englishman
which  they  carryed  Prisoner  into  their  owne  House,
threatning  to  have  killed  him,  putting  him  in  great
danger  of  his  life,  by  meanes  of  a  Company  of  drunken
Consorts  which  were  about  him,  threatning  him  to  stab
him  with  their  Knives.  The  young  mans  name  is  Richard
King  and  sonne  to  Captaine  King  of  Plimmouth.  And
besides  this,  two  other  of  our  Barkes  going  besides  their
ships  within  the  Towne  and  Harbour  of  Firando,  they
bent  a  Peece  of  Ordnance  against  them,  which  tooke  false
fire,  but  they  shot  at  them  with  Muskets,  but  missed  the
Englishmen,  and  killed  a  Japan  :  Yet  for  all  this  there  is
no  justice  executed  against  them  by  the  King  of  Firando,
although  the  Emperour  hath  commanded  him  to  doe  it.

Also  may  it  please  you  to  understand,  that  two  of  these
shippes  which  they  brought  into  Firando  this  yeere,  are
English  ships  which  they  tooke  from  Englishmen  in  the
Indies,  as  also  they  tooke  two  other  this  yeere  from  them,
riding  at  an  anchor  in  the  Roade  of  Patania,  where  wee
have  a  Factorie,  and  not  doubting  any  such  matter :  in
which  broyle,  they  killed  Captaine  *  John  Jordaine,  our
Chiefe  President  for  the  right  Worshipfull  Companie  in
the  Indies,  with  divers  others,  and  carryed  the  ships  and
goods  quite  away,  but  sixe  of  the  Mariners  which  were  in
the  English  ships  which  they  tooke,  escaped  from  them
and  came  to  the  English  House,  they  sending  to  me  to

565

A.D.

16 10.

*  This  John
Jordaine  is
said  in  the
time  of  treatic
to  have  beene
treacherously
slaine.

A.D.
l6lO.

[I. iv. 412.]
*Andwhowas
the  happy
instrument  of
their  deliverie,
from  that
which  they
account
slaverie,  but
the  English  ?

Unchristian,
uncivill,  inhu-
mane,immane,
Devi  His  h
Impietie.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

have  them  sent  backe  againe :  unto  whom  I  answered,  I
would  first  see  their  Commission,  how  they  durst  presume
to  take  our  shipping  and  goods,  and  kill  our  Kings
Majesties  faithfull  Subjects  as  they  did :  so  then  they
went  to  the  Tono  or  King  of  Firando  ;  desiring  to  have
their  *  English  slaves  (as  it  pleased  them  to  call  them)
delivered  unto  them,  but  they  had  answere,  they  must
first  demaund  them  of  the  Emperour,  and  looke  what  he
ordayned  should  be  fulfilled.  Yet  in  the  meane  time,  they
held  not  the  English-men  to  bee  slaves  unto  them.  This
was  the  chiefe  occasion  which  made  them  to  picke  quarrels
against  us,  to  have  killed  us  all,  but  I  hope  in  God,  his
Majestie  by  the  Solicitation  of  our  right  Honourable,  and
right  Worshipfull  Imployers,  will  not  suffer  his  true  and
loyall  Subjects  to  lose  their  shipping,  lives  and  goods,  in
such  order  as  they  doe  by  such  an  unthankefull  and
theevish  Rabble  of  them,  which  are  assembled  together  in
these  parts  of  the  World,  who  make  a  daily  practice  to  rob
and  spoile  all,  both  friends  and  foes,  and  I  trust  that  you
your  selfe  will  be  a  Solicitor  in  this  so  just  a  cause,  against
so  common  an  Enemie.

This  Adam  Westerwood  their  Lord  Commander,  set
my  life  at  saile,  offering  fiftie  Rials  of  eight,  to  any  one
that  would  kill  me,  &  thirtie  Rials  for  each  other  English-
man that  they  could  kill :  but  hitherto  God  hath  pre-
served me  and  the  rest  in  this  place,  although  they
wounded  two  or  three,  yet  they  are  not  dead.  And  this
proceedings  of  their  Lord  Commander,  was  told  me
secretly  by  some  of  their  owne  people  (willing  me)  and
the  rest  to  take  heed  of  our  selves.  They  also  informed
mee  of  the  Noble  Parentage  of  their  Lord  Commander
Westerwood,  telling  that  his  Father  is  a  Close-stoole-
maker  at  Amsterdam,  or  thereabouts,  and  the  best  of  their
Captaines  either  Shoomakers,  Carpenters,  or  Beere-
brewers  Sonnes,  God  blesse  such  an  Honourable  and  Wor-
shipfull Generation,  I  meane,  God  blesse  mee  from  them.
And  so  to  make  an  end  of  this  matter,  I  was  this  yeere
above  at  the  Emperours  Court  at  Miaco,  to  make  com-

566

RICHARD COCKS

A.D.

1 6 1  o .

Brags  of  a

Hollander.

plaint  of  the  abuses  offered  to  us  within  his  Dominions,
contrary  to  the  Priviledges  his  Majestie  had  given  us,
and  I  had  very  good  words  and  promises  that  wee  should
have  Justice,  and  the  Tono  or  King  of  Firando  com-
manded to  see  it  performed,  but  as  yet  nothing  done,
although  I  have  many  times  earnestly  sued  for  it.

And  at  my  beeing  at  Court,  and  at  the  Emperours
Palace,  Portugals  and  Spaniards  being  there  at  the  same
time,  to  doe  their  duties  to  the  Emperour,  as  they  doe
every  yeere  when  shipping  commeth.  There  was  a  Hol-
lander in  the  Court,  (which  had  lived  in  Japan  almost
twentie  yeeres,  and  speaketh  the  Japan  Language  well)
this  fellow,  in  my  hearing  and  others,  beganne  to  extoll
their  King  of  Holland,  to  be  the  greatest  King  in  Chris-
tendome,  and  one  that  held  all  the  others  under,  he  little
thinking  that  we  had  understood  what  he  said  :  but  I  was
not  behind  hand  to  tell  him  that  he  needed  not  to  lye  so
loud,  for  that  they  had  no  King  at  all,  in  Holland,  but
were  governed  by  a  Count,  or  rather  they  governed  him.
But  if  they  had  any  King  at  all,  in  whom  they  might
boast  it  was  the  Kings  Majestie  of  England,  who  hitherto
had  beene  their  Protector,  otherwayes  they  had  never
bragged  of  their  States,  at  which  speeches,  both  Spaniards,
Portugals,  and  others  did  laugh  apace,  and  so  the  Hol-
landers mouth  was  stopped,  &c.

And  now  for  newes  in  these  parts,  may  it  please  you  to  Persecution.
understand  that  this  Emperour  is  a  great  Enemy  to  the
name  of  Christians,  especially  Japans,  so  that  all  which
are  found  are  put  to  death,  I  saw  fifty  five  martyred  at
Miaco,  at  one  time  when  I  was  there,  because  they  wold
not  forsake  their  Christian  Faith,  &  amongst  them  were
little  Children  of  five  or  sixe  yeeres  old  burned  in  their
mothers  armes,  Crying  out,  Jesus  receive  their  soules.
Also  in  the  Towne  of  Naugasaque,  there  was  sixteene
more  martyred  for  the  same  matter,  whereof  five  were
burned  and  the  rest  beheaded  and  cut  in  pieces,  and  cast
into  the  Sea  in  Sackes  of  thirtie  fathome  deepe  :  yet  the
Priests  got  them  up  againe,  and  kept  them  secretly  for

567

A.D.
l6lO.

Fushma
destroyed.

FidajaSamma
sonne  ofTico
Sama.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Reliqucs.  There  is  many  more  in  Prison  in  divers  other
places,  as  also  heere,  which  looke  hourely  when  they  shall
die,  for  very  few  turne  Pagans.  Also  this  last  yeere  be-
fore Christmas,  the  Emperour  hath  displaced  one  of  the
greatest  Princes  of  Japan,  called  Frushma  Tay,  of  sixtie
or  seventie  Mangocas,  and  turned  him  into  a  Corner,  in
the  North  parts  of  Japan,  where  hee  hath  but  a  small
portion  in  respect  of  that  was  taken  from  him,  and  this
must  hee  doe  or  cut  his  belly.  It  was  thought  there
would  have  beene  much  trouble  in  Japan  about  it,  for  all
Frushma  Tayes  Subjects  were  in  Armes,  and  meant  to
have  held  it  out  to  the  uttermost,  having  fortified  the
Citie  of  Frushma,  and  gotten  provision  into  it  for  a  long
time,  but  the  Tay  himselfe  and  his  Sonne  being  in  the
Emperours  Court,  he  commanded  them  to  write  to  their
Vassals,  to  lay  downe  their  Armes  and  submit  themselves
to  the  Emperours  pleasure,  or  else  forth-with  to  cut  their
bellies.  So  life  was  sweete  unto  them,  and  all  rendred
unto  the  Emperour,  and  those  pardoned  which  had  taken
up  Armes  in  the  defence  of  the  Tay.  And  the  Emperour
hath  given  his  Dominions  being  two  Kingdomes,  to  two
of  the  Emperours  owne  Kinsmen,  and  now  this  yeere  the
Emperour  hath  pulled  downe  his  Castle  at  Frushamy,
which  I  thinke  was  farre  bigger  then  the  Citie  of  Rochester,
a  very  beautifull  and  gallant  thing,  wherein  I  saw  him
this  yeere,  and  all  the  stones  are  carried  to  Osackay,  and
that  old  ruinated  Castle  which  Ticus  Samma  built,  and
Ogosha  Samma  pulled  downe,  must  now  bee  built  againe,
three  times  bigger  then  it  was  before,  so  that  all  the  Tonos
or  Kings,  have  each  one  their  taske  set  them  to  doe  at
their  owne  proper  charge,  not  without  much  grudging,
they  having  leave  after  so  many  yeeres  to  returne  to  their
owne  Lands,  and  now  on  a  suddaine,  are  all  sent  for  againe
to  come  to  the  Court,  which  angreth  them  not  a  little,  but
they  must,  will  they  nill  they ;  in  paine  of  belly-cutting.
Yet  at  this  very  instant,  heere  is  a  secret  muttering,  that
Fidaja  Samma  the  Sonne  of  Ticus  Samma  is  alive ;  and
in  the  Daires  House  at  Miaco,  but  I  thinke  it  hath  beene

568

RICHARD COCKS  a.d.

1618.

reported  divers  times  heretofore  that  hee  was  alive,  and  in

other  places  but  proved  untrue,  yet  here  are  some  rich

Merchants  at Miaco, hereat present, which are affraid,

and  are  readie  to  goe  up  on  a  suddaine,  for  feare  the  Em-

perour  should  burne  Miaco,  if  it  be  true,  he  be  alive,  and

out  of  doubt  if  he  be  alive,  it  may  turne  the  Emperours

Estate  upside  downe,  for  hee  is  no  Marshall  man,  but  a

great  Politician  : once,  howsoever  it  bee, it  cannot  bee

worse  for  us  then  it  is,  &c. And  as  I  advised  you  in  my

last,  of  the  pulling  downe  of  all  the  Churches  in  Japan,

yet  there  were  some  remnants standing  in  Naugasaque  L1-  iv-  4'3-J

till  this  yeere,  and  the  Monasterie  of  Misericordia  not

touched,  neither  any  Church-yard  nor  Buriall  place,  but

now  by  order  from  the  Emperour  all  is  pulled  downe,  and

all  Graves  and  Sepultures  opened,  and  dead  mens  bones

taken  out,  and  carried  into  the  Fields  by  their  Parents

and  Kindred  to  be  buried  else-where. And  streets  made

in  all  their  places,  where  both  Churches  or  Church-yards

were,  except  in  some  places,  where  the  Emperour  hath

commanded  Pagods  to bee  erected, and sent Heathen

Priests  to  live  in  them,  thinking  utterly  to  roote  out  the

memory  of  Christianitie  out  of  Japan. For  there  were

certaine  places  a  little  without  the  Citie  of  Naugasaque,

where  divers  Fathers  and  other  Christians  were  martyred,

in  the  time  of  Ogosha  Samma,  where  their  Parents  and

Friends  had  planted  greene  Trees,  and  set  up  Altars  neere

each  Tree,  unto  which  place  many  hundreds  went  every

day  to  pray,  but  now  by  command  from  the  Emperour,

all  the  said  Trees  and  Altars  are  quite  cut  downe,  and  the

ground  made  even,  such  is  his  desire  to  root  out  the

remembrance  of  all  such  matters.

And  in  Anno  161 8.  in  the  moneths  of  November  and  Comets  which
December,  heere  were  two  Comets  seene  over  all  Japan,  °PPe^ed  als9
the  first  rising  in  the  East,  being  like  a  great  fiery  beame
rent  to  the  South-wards,  and  there  within  the  space  of  a
moneth  vanished  away.  The  other  did  also  rise  just
East,  being  a  great  biasing  Starre,  and  went  North-wards,
and  within  a  moneth  vanished  quite  away  about  the  Con-

569

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1618.

stellation  of  Charles-wayne  or  Ursa  Major. The  Wis-
sards in these parts doe prognosticate great matters
thereof,  but  hitherto  nothing  of  moment  hath  happened,
but  the  deposing  of  Frushma  Tay,  aforesaid.
Ex  unque  guj-  j  am  ashamed  to  write  you  the  newes  the  Portugals

ott  and  Spaniards  report,  and  some  of  them  have  shewed  me

may  guesse  of T  r  . r .  - >  p  .

their  Talcs  of  -Letters  to  verine  it,  and  is  or  a  bloudie  Lrosse  seene  in
Miracles  at  the  Ayre  in  England,  against  which  an  English  Preacher
home  iff  speaking  in  the  Pulpit  was  strooke  dumbe,  which  Miracle,

abroad^  by  as  ^gy  terme  it,  caused  our  Kings  Majestie  to  send  to  the
Pope,  to  have  some  Cardinals  and  Learned  men  to  come
into  England,  for  that  he  meant  all  England  should  turne
Roman  Catholikes.  I  pray  you  pardon  me  for  writing
such  fopperies  which  I  doe,  to  the  intent  to  have  you
laugh  a  little,  yet  I  assure  you,  heere  are  many  Portugals
and  Spaniards,  will  not  be  perswaded  to  the  contrary.  I
know  not  what  else  to  write,  but  I  hope  by  the  next  ship-
ping which  commeth  for  this  place  to  come  towards
England,  where  God  grant  I  may  find  you  in  good
health,  &c.

Your  Worships  at  command,

Richard  Cock.
To  the  Right  Worshipfull  Sir  Thomas  Wilson,  &c.

I  have  heere  added  for  the  Readers  profit  and  delight
this  Map  of  Japan,  published  by  J.  Hondius.

END OF VOLUME III.

-irrrr

Szirnn

n-rrrnna

=33

rT-T-rfTxri

M^n

I 111  I  till I  I  ,U-C

5H

e$  >7«i

33ZLLLL  ;'  I ! I  I ff\  1  M  iTT  fi  □

HONDIUS HIS MAP OF JAPAN

i9  a  05

BOSTON  PUBLIC  LIBRARY

3  9999  06663  984  8
