The Quest of the Holy Grail (Queste del Saint Graal)
Anonymous (13th century, Vulgate Cycle)
Translated by William Wistar Comfort (1926) (New York: E. P. Dutton)
Source: Internet Archive (Google Books scan)
Rights: Public Domain
Note: Old French Vulgate Queste in English; OCR-derived from 1926 edition, lightly cleaned. Complete. Comfort's introduction and notes not included.

2 THE QUEST OF THE HOLY GRAIL


highroad and continued half a league until they came into a
valley. and saw before them by the road abbey of nuns,
whither the damsel turned in. And when they Camie to thé gate,
the squire called, and the gate was opened. Then they dis-
mounted and entered. And when those within knew that
Lancelot had come, they all went to meet him and welcomed
him joyfully. And when they had taken him to a chamber, and
he was disarmed, he saw his two cousins, Bors and Lyonel,
lying on their beds. Greatly delighted at the sight, he woke
them; and when they saw him, they embraced him and kissed
him. Then began a happy scene between the cousins. “ Fair
sire,’ said Bors to Lancelot, “‘what adventure has brought
you here? We expected to find you at Camelot.” Then he told
them how a damsel had brought him here, but for what reason
he did not know.

And while they were conversing thus, three nuns came in
bringing Galahad, so fair and shapely a.youth that one could
_hardly find his equal in the. world. Then she who was most
' high-born, gently weeping, took him by the hand, and standing
before Lancelot, she said to him: “Sire, here I bring you_our
ward, our greatest joy, our comfort and our hope, that you
‘may makehim a Gagne. ‘Forto our thinking’ then is no more
honourable man than you from whom he could receive the
order of chivalry.”’ He looked at the youth and saw him to be
so marvellously endowed with every beauty that he thought
he would never again seé such 4 fine figure of a man. And from
the modesty which he saw in him he hoped for so much that he
was greatly pleased to make him a knight. So he replied to the
ladies that he would not fail to perform this request, and that
he would gladly make him a knight, since they wished it so.
‘‘Sire,”’ said she who had brought him in, “we wish it to be
done to-night or to-morrow.” “In God’s name,” said he, “it
shall be as you desire.”

Lancelot spent the night there and made-the youth keep
watch in.the church throughout the night. In the morning at
the hour of prime he made him a knight, he himself fastening
one_of his spurs and Bors the ther Then Tancelot girded him
with the sword and gave him the accolade, and told him that
God would make him an honourable man, seeing that he had
not yet been found lacking in any good trait. And when he had
done everything connected’ with this ceremonial, he said to
him: ‘‘ Fair sire, will you come with me to my lord King Arthur’s
court?” “Nay, sire,” said he, “I will not go with you.” Then

. Lancelot said to the abbess: “Lady, allow our new knight to
come with us to the court of my lord the king. For he will make
more progress there than if he stays here with you.” “Sire,”
she replied, ‘‘he shall not go now; but as soon as we think
that the time and the circumstances are favourable, we shall
send him.”

Then Lancelot and his companions left and rode together
until they came to Camelot at the hour of tierce, when the
king had gone to hear mass with a great company of his noble
men. Upon, arrival the three dismounted in the court-yard and
“went upstairs to the great hall. Then they began to talk about
the young man whom Lancelot had knighted, and Bors remarked
that he had never seen any other man who so much resembled
“Lancelot. “Upon my word,” said he, “I will never believe
“anything again, if he is not Galahad who was born of the fair ¥ ¥
daughter of the Fisher King; for he bears a marvellous resem-
blance to that family and to ours.” “In truth, I believe that is
who he is,”’ Lyonel replied, “for he is much like my lord (Lance-
lot).” They spoke of this subject for a long time in hope of
drawing something from Lancelot, but to all they said he
answered never a word.

When they had ceased speaking of this, they surveyed the
seats placed about the Round Table and found on each one
written ‘‘This is the seat of such an one.” And they examined
each one until they came to the large seat called “the Perilous
Seat.” There they found letters which had been newly wnitten,
as it seemed to them. And they saw that the letters said “Four
hundred and fifty-four years are accomplished since the Passion
of Jesus’ Christ; and on the day of Pentecost this seat is to find
" jts. accupant.” "At the sight of these words, they said one to”
another: “In faith, here is some marvellous adventure!” “In
God’s name,” said "Lancelot, “were one to count up the time
elapsed since the resurrection of Our Lord until now, he would
find, I believe, that this seat is due to be occupied this very day;
for this is Pentecost after four hundred and fifty-four years
elapsed. And I wish that no one else should see these words
before the arrival of him to whom this adventure is to- fall.”
Then the others said that they would take good care that they
should not be seen; so they ordered a silken cloth to be brought,
and with it they covered the words on the chair.

When the king had returned from church and saw that
—= ar


4 THE QUEST OF THE HOLY GRAIL


Lancelot was come with Bors and Lyonel, he showed great
joy and bade them welcome. Then the festival began to be
great and marvellous, for the companions of the Round Table
were very happy over the arrival of the two brothers. My
lord Gawain asked them how they had been since they left
the court, and they replied: ‘Very well, thank God,” for they
had been hale and hearty all the time. “Certainly,” said my
lord Gawain, “I am glad to hear that.”’ Joyous was the welcome
that those of the court gave to Bors and Lyonel, for it had
been some time since they had seen them.

When the king thought it was time to eat, he had the tables
laid. But Kay the seneschal said: “Sire, if you sit down now to
dinner, it seems to me that you will be breaking our custom
here. For we have always observed that on a high feast-day
you do not sit down at table before some adventure should
have come to court in the sight of all the knights of your house-. .
hold.” ‘Kay, you are right,” said the king, “in truth. I have
always maintained this custom, and shall continue to do so
as long as I can. But I was so. glad to see Lancelot and his
cousins safe and sound again at court that I forgot the custom.”
“Well, remember it now,” said Kay. |

While they were talking thus, there entered a valet who
said to the king: “Sire, I bring you strange news.” “What?”
said the king, “tell me quickly.” “Sire, down below the palace
yonder there is a great stone which I saw floating upon the water.
Come and see it, for [am itt On =


_ ture.” Then the king went down at once to see this wonder,


and so did all the others. And when they had come to the bank,
they found the stone which had emerged from the water, and
was of red marble. In the stone there was affixed a sword of
fair and rich appearance, and its pommel was a precious stone
skilfully inlaid with letters of gold. The knights looked at the
words, which ran thus: “No one shall remove me from here but
the one at whose side I am destined to hang. And he shall be
the best knight in the world.” When the king saw these words,
he said to Lancelot: “Fair sire, this sword is yours by right,
for I am sure you are the best knight in the world.”’ And he
replied ill-humouredly: ‘Surely, sire, neither is it mine, nor
would I be so bold or so imprudent as to set my hand to it;
for J am neither sufficiently worthy nor adequate that I should
take it. SoT shall hold back and not totich it, for it would be


‘madness on my part to seek to take it.” “ But try anyhow, and
see if you can pull it out.” “I will not, sire,’ said he, “for I know


full well that if anyone : : °
from it.” “And how do you know that?” the king inquired.


“Sire,” he replied, “I know it well enough. And I will tell you
still another thing; for I want you to know that this very da
will begin the great adventures and Marvels of the Holy Crail.”
~~ When the king heard that Lancelot * would not do it, he said
to my lord Gawain: “Fair nephew, do you try it.” “Sire,” said
he, “saving your grace, I will not, since my lord Lancelot will
not make the attempt. It would be useless for me to touch it,
for you know well that he is a better knight than I.” “Never-
theless,” the king replied, “you will try because I wish it, and
not because of the sword.” So he stretched forth his hand and
seizing the sword by the hilt, pave a pull, but he could not
draw it out. Then the king said at once: “Let it be, fair nephew,
for you have done my bidding.” “My lord Gawain,” said
Lancelot, ‘“‘ be sure that this sword will yet touch you so closely
that you would wish not to have sought to possess it for the
price of a castle.” “Sire,” replied my lord Gawain, ‘I could
not help it; were I to die for it on the spot, I would do it to carry
out my lord’s command.” And when the king heard these words,
he repented of what my lord Gawain had done.

Then he told Perceval to try the sword. And he said he would
gladly do so, to keep company with my lord Gawain. So he put
his hand on the sword and pulled, but he could not get it loose.
Then all the others present were persuaded that Lancelot had
been right and that the words on the hilt were true. So there
was no one else so bold as to dare to touch the sword. Then my
lord Kay said to the king: “Sire, upon my word, you may
surely now sit down to meat whenever you please; for you have
had no lack of adventure before dinner, as it seems to me.”
“Let us go then,” the king replied, “for it is indeed high time.”

Then the knights left the stone by the river’s brim and went
away. And the king ordered the horn to be blown for the washing
of hands, then sat down on his raised-seat;-while each ofthe”
Eompanion s of the Round Table took his allotted seat. That
day four crowned kings rendered the service, and along with
them So many men of high degree that !t was a wondrous sight
to see. That day the king was seated on his high seat in the
palace, and there was a great company of noble men to do
his service. And it came about that when they were all seated,
they found that all the companions of the Round Table were


f
6 THE QUEST OF THE HOLY GRAIL


present and the seats occupied, except only the one called
“the Perilous Seat.”

When they had finished the first course there happened such
a marvellous adventure that all the doors and windows of the
palace where they were dining were closed of their own accord
without anyone having touched them, and yet the hall was not
darkened. At this the wise and foolish were alike amazed. And
King Arthur, who spoke first, said: “By God, fair lords, we
have seen strange things to-day both here and at the river.
But I believe we shall see to-night still greater wonders.”

While the king was speaking thus, there entered a_w ortty
old man with a white robe, but there was not a knight in
“hall who saw whére-he came in. He came on foot and. led by
the hand a knight with’ scarlet armour, but having no sword
_or shiéld. And as soon as Ke Was tiicide the hall, he said." oo
be with you!” Then when he saw the king, he said:
Arthur, I bring thee the Knight Desired, who is coli
the high | lineage of King David and-fromr-the famity of Joséph
- of Arimathea: it is he through whortr the marvels of ag k ee


\~" and of foreign lands will terminate. Behold him here!” Then


the king, delighted with this mews, said to the worthy man:
“Sine, welcome indeed if this news be true, and this knight
be welcome too! For if itis be whom we have ‘been awaiting 2
achieve the adventures. of the Holy, Grail, 3 never was Such & ~
joyous reception given to any man as we shall give to him.
But, whoever he FS whether the one’ you say or some other,
I should wish him welcome, since he is such a gentle man and
of such high lineage as you say.” “Upon my word,” the worthy
man replied, ‘“‘ you shall soon have early evidence of what I say.’
Then he made the knight disarm, who was left clad in a jacket
of red silk cloth; then he gave him a red mantle which he threw
over his shoulder, all of heavy silk and furred inside, with
‘white ermine. Rn et

When~he had clothed and equipped him, he said to him:
“Follow me, sir knight,” and so he did. Then he led him straight
to the Perilous Seat beside the one occupied by Lancelot, and
“he raised the silken cloth with which it was covered.-And there
he found the words which said: “This is the seat of Galahad.”
When the worthy man looked at the-words he saw that they-
were apparently recently inscribed, and he recognised the name.
So he said in the hearing of all present: “Sir knight, take your
seat here, for it is your place.” And he sat down confidently
and said to the worthy man: “Now you can go, for you have
done all that you were commanded. And greet for me all those


in the hély hostel and my uncle King Pellés and my grandsire :
the rich Fisher King, and tell them from me that IT shall go to”


see them as soon as I can and when I have the leisure.’’ Then
the worthy man took his leave and commended King Arthur
and all the rest to God’s keeping. But when they wished to ask
him who he was, he vouchsafed them no satisfaction, but simply
answered that he would not tell them now, for they should know
in good time if they dared to ask. When he came to the main
doorway of the palace which was closed, he opened it and went
down into the court-yard, where he found as many as fifteen
knights and squires who had come with him and were awaiting
him. So he mounted and departed from the court without their
knowing more of his identity for this time.

Now when those in the hall saw the knight sitting in the seat
which so many worthy men had feared and which had given
rise to so many great adventures, they were all amazed, for
they saw him to be so young a man that they did not know
how such a favour could have come to him except by the will
of Our Lord. Then_the reat festival began 1; and they all did
great honour to the knight, for they thought it must be he
‘who would bring to a conctusion the marvels of the Hoty Grail;
and they knew well that it was he by the test of the Seat, in
which no one, excepting him, had tried to sit without some
mischief befalling him. So they served and honoured him all
they could as one whom they regarded as their master and lord
above all those of the Round Table. And Lancelot who looked
upon him with pleasure and surprise, knew that it was.he whom
he had that very day made a knight; and that gave him all


ea


the greater joy. So he did him all the honour he could, and while ©


speaking with him of divers things, asked him to tell him some-
thing about himself. And he, who recognised him and dared
not refuse his request, replied freely to his questions. But Bors

o was as happy as he could be and knew well that it was
Galahad, Lancelot’s own son\ who was destined to conclude the

ventures, 0 his brother Lyonel and said: “ Fair brother,
do you know who this knight is who occupies the Perilous
Seat?” “TI don’t know much,” said Lyonel, “except that he
is the new knight whom Lancelot dubbed to-day with his own
hand. Moreover, it is he of whom we have been speaking between
ourselves and whom my lord Lancelot begot with the daughter
ila te


8 THE QUEST OF THE HOLY GRAIL


of the rich Fisher King.” “You are right,” Bors replied, “for
it is he, and he is our near cousin. And we ought to be very
happy over this adventure; for there is no doubt that he will
come to greater things than any knight I ever knew, and already
we have a fine beginning.”’

Thus the two brothers spoke about Galahad, as did also the
others who were present. The news travelled so quickly that
the queen who was dining in her apartment heard it from a


valet who said to her: “Lady, wondrous things are happening


here.” “ How is that? ” she inquired ; “tell me about it.” “Truly, |
lady,” he replied, ‘‘a knight has come to court who has accom-
plished the adventure of the Perilous Seat, and he is such a
young man that everyone is wondering whence the power to
do so came to him. ”” “Really,” said she, “can this be true?”
“Yes,” he replied, “you may be sure of it.” “In God’s name,’
said she, ‘then he is welcome indeed ; for no man has ever sought
to accomplish this venture but he has died or been injured
before achieving it.” “Ah God!” the other ladies exclaimed,
“‘m a good hour the knight was born. Never could any other
man, whatever his prowess might be, accomplish what he has
done. And from this adventure it may be inferred that he it is
who will achieve the adventures of Great Britain and by whom
the Cripple King shall receive his cure.” “Fair friend,” said
thé queen to the valet,“with God's-help, tell me now what
he is like.” “Lady,” he replied, “so help me God, he is one of ©
the handsomest knights of the world. But he is wonderfully
young and so strangely resembles Lancelot and the family of
King Ban that they are all saying he must belong to it.” Then
the quéen was more anxious to see him than she had ‘been
before. When she heard of the resemblance, she thought it
must be Galahad whom Lancelot had begotten with the daughter
of the rich Fisher King, in accordance with the story she had
often been told of how he had been deceived; and that was why


_ she was so angry with Lancelot, if the fault had been his.


When the king and the companions of the Round Table had
dined, they rose from their-places. And the king himself came to
the Perilous Seat and , raising the silken cloth, he found the name
of Galahad of which he had greatly desired to be assured. Then
he pointed it out to my lord Gawain, saying: “Fair nephew,
now we have with us Galahad the good and perfect knight whom
we and those of the Round Table.have so much desired to see.
Let us strive to honour and serve him so long as he is with us;
THE QUEST OF, THE HOLY GRAIL g


for I know right well that he will not stay here long because of
the great Quest of the Grail which I doubt not will soon com-
mence. And Lancelot has already given us to understand that
he would not have said so if he had not known something
about it.” “Sire,” my lord Gawain replied, “you and we ought
to serve him as ‘the one whom God has sent us to deliver our
country from the great marvels and the strange adventures
which have been happening so often for a long time past.
Then came the king to Galahad and said: ‘Welcome, sire,
. for we have greatly yearned to see you. Now at last we have
you here, thanks be to God and also to you who have deigned
,to come.” “Sire,” he replied, ‘““I have come because I was
‘bound to do so; for all those who are to be companions in the
‘Quest of the Holy Grail must start from here, and the Quest
\will soon begin.” “Sire,” said the king, “we had great need of
your artival for many reasons, both in order to terminate the
great marvels of this land and to achieve an adventure which
has this day come to us and in which the knights here have
met defeat. But I know that you will not fail, for you are des-
tined to succeed in the adventures where the others have
failed. For this reason has God sent you to us, that you should
accomplish what the others have had to leave undone.” “Sire,”
said Galahad, “where is this adventure of which you speak?
I should be glad to see it.” “I will show it to you,” the king
replied ; then he took him by the hand and they went down from
the palace, followed by all the other knights to see how the adven-
ture of the stone would turn out. They all ran thither so that
there did not remain behind a single knight in the entire palace.
The news of this quickly reached the queen. And as soon as
she heard it, she had the food removed and said to four of the
noblest ladies with her: “Fair ladies, come with me to the
river, for I would not miss seeing the end of this adventure,
if-Ecan arrive in time.” Then the queen went down from the
palace and with her a great company of ladies and damsels.
When the ladies had reached the water and the knights saw
them approaching, they began to say: “Turn around, here is
the queen!” And all those who stood nearest made way for her.
Then the king said to Galahad: “‘Sire, here is the adventure of
which I told you. Some of the most valued knights of my
household have to-day failed to draw this sword out of this
stone: they have failed utterly in their attempt.” “Sire,” said
Galahad in reply, ‘that is not surprising, for the adventure was
B
_—


—


1o THE QUEST OF THE HOLY GRAIL


’ reserved for me, and not for them. And because I was sure to

-gét this sword, I did not bring any to court, as you can see.”’
Then he stretched forth his hand and drew the sword from the
stone as easily as if it had no hold there; then he took the
scabbard and placed the sword in it. Then he girded it on him
and said to the king: “‘Sire, now it is better placed than it

_was before. Now I lack nothing but a shield.” “Fair sire,” the
king replied, “God will send you a shield from some source,
as He has sent you a sword.”

Then they looked down the stream and saw a damsel riding
rapidly toward them on a white palfrey. And when she had
come up to them, she greeted the king and all the company
and asked if Lancelot was there. As he was standing right
before her, he himself replied: ‘‘ Damsel, here I am.” Then she
looked at him and recognised him, and said to him in tears:
“Ah, Lancelot, how changed is your situation since yesterday
morning!” And when he heard that, he said to her: “How is
that, damsel? Tell me.” “Upon my word,” she replied, “I will
tell you in the presence of all who are here. Yesterday morning
-you were the best knight in the world. Anyone who should
have called you then the best knight of all, would have said |
the truth, for then you were so. But whoever should say it
now would be considered a liar; for there is one better than
you, as is proved by the adventure of this sword on which you
did not dare to lay your hand. Now such is the change and altera-
tion in your position, which I have pointed out in order that
you may not henceforth think that you are the best knight in
;the world.” And he said that he would never more think so,
after this adventure which made it impossible for him so to

_-regard himself. Then the damsel turned to the king and said:
“King Arthur, I bring thee word from Nascien the hermit ee


on


there shall come to thee this day the greatest honour that ever
\__befell a knight of Bn ; And this will not be forthy sake
but for another’s. Dost thou know what this honour is to be?
It is the Hoty Grail which will appear to-day in thy palace and
will nourjsh the companions of the Round Table.” Then as soon
as she had said these words, she turned away and left by the
same road as she had come. Now there were there many barons
and knights who would fain have detained her in order to learn
who she was and whence she came; but she would not tarry
for any request that was made of her.
Then the king said to the barons of his household: “Fair
THE QUEST OF THE HOLY GRAIL II


sirs, thus we have had true evidence that you are soon to enter
upon the Quest of the Holy Grail. And Because I well know that
I shall never again see you all together as you are now, I desire
that in the meadow of Camelot there should now be held so well-
contested a tournament that ‘after our death our descendants
who come after us shall still hold it in remembrance.” To this
they all agreed. So they came back to the city and got their
arms; some taking weapons wherewith they might joust more
securely, and some who took nothing but coverings and shields,
for most of them trusted in their prowess. Now the king, who
had planned all this, had done it only to see an example of
Galahad’s chivalry. For he thought he would not return for
some time to court, when he once should have gone away.
When all, both great and small, were assembled in the meadow
of Camelot, Galahad at the request of the king and queen
donned his hauberk and placed his helmet upon his head; but
he would not take a shield for anything that they might say.
And my lord Gawain, who was delighted at this, said that he
would fetch him lances, and so said my lords Yvain and Bors
de Gaunes. The queen had gone up on the walls with a great
company of ladiés ‘and damsets: Then Gatatad;>-who had come
into the meadow with the others, began to break lances so _
lustily that all who beheld him considered him a marvel. He
‘accomplished so much in a short time that every man and
woman present who saw his chivalry regarded him as a marvel
and the best of all. And those who had never seen him before
said that he had begun well his knightly deeds, and it clearly
appeared from what he had done that day that henceforth he
could easily outstrip all the other knights in prowess. For when
the tourney was concluded, they found that of all the companions
of the Round Table who had taken part, there were only two
_whom he had not defeated, and they were Lancelot and Perceval.
~~ So thé tourney continued until after three o ‘clock, and then
concluded. For the king himself, fearmg some anger might
finally develop, had the contestants separated, and caused
Galahad to unlace his helmet, and gave it to Bors de Gaunes
to carry. Then they took him from the meadow into the city
of Camelot through the main street with face uncovered; so”
that all might see him openly. And when the queen had gazed
at him fixedly, she said that truly Lancelot had begotten him,
for never did two men so marvellously resemble each other as
did they two, Therefore it was no wonder if he was endowed
* cover th; but no one was able to seé who
“was carrying it. It entered by the great door of the hall, and as


12 THE QUEST OF THE HOLY GRAIL


with great chivalry, for otherwise he would be too degenerate
a scion of his line. And a lady who had heard a part of what
the queen said, replied to her at once: “Lady, in God’s name,
is he then destined by right to be so good a knight as you say?”
“Yes verily,” said the queen; “for he is-on both sides descended


from the best knights in the world and from the highest lipgage


7 known:’


Then the ladies came down to attend vespers because it was
a high feast-day. And when the king had come out from the
church and had come into the upper hall, he ordered the tables
to_ be laid. Then the knights went to take their seats as they
had done in the morning. When they were all seated in silence,
there was heard such a great and marvellous peal. of thunde
that it seemed to them the palace must -collapse. But at once
there shone in upon them a ray of sunlight which made the.
palace seven-fold brighter thai it was before. And straightway
they were as if Mumined with the grace of the Holy Spirit, and
they began to look at one-another; for they knew not whence


this experience had befallen them. Yet, there was no man


present who could speak or utter_a word: for great and small,


alike were dumb: Theti when they had-remmained for some time


so that none of them had power to speak, but rather they gazed


at each other like dumb beasts, there entered the Holy Grail


soon as it had come in, the hall was filled with odours as sweet
as if all the spices of the earth were diffused there. And it passed
down. the middle of the hall and all around the high seats; and


_ as it passed before the tables, they were straightway filled at


each place with such viands as the occupant desired. When all
-weére served, thé Holy Grail departed at once’so that they knew
not what had become of it nor did they see which way it
went. At once the power of speech was restored to those who


before could not utter a word. And most of them gave thanks _


to Our Lord for the great honour he had done them in feeding
them with the grace from the Holy Vessel. But more than all


the others present, King “Arthur-was joyous and glad because


Our Lord had“shown him greater fa¥étr-than to any king


before him.


Thus the familiars and the strangers at the court alike re-
joiced, for it seemed to them that Our Lord had not forgotten
them in showing them such a favour. And they continued to
speak of it as long as the meal lasted. The king himself spoke
of it to those who were seated nearest to him, and said: “Surely,


my lords, we ought to be glad and rejoice greatly that Our Lord -


—_—- -~-ooror-- —--


has given such evidence of His love that He has consented to
_feed us with His grace upon such a high festival as Pentecost.”
“Sire,” replied my lord in, “‘there is something else that
you do not know: there is not a man here who has not been
served with what he desired in his mind. And that is something
that never happened ffany court, unless it be in that of the
Cripple King. But they are all’ so confounded that they could
not see 1€ Openly, the true likeness being concealed from them.


_ Wherefore, for my part I make this vow, to enter to-morrow


-


|


“without dela upon the Quest and to prosecute it for a year and
_a day, and longer yet if need be; and I will not return to court
for any reason whatsoever until I have seen it more clearly

than it has been manifested to me here, if peradventure it be
_destined that I can behold it. And if it be destined otherwise,

I will return.” |

When the knights of the Round Table heard these words,
they all rose from their seats and made the same vow that my
lord Gawain had made, and said they would not cease from their
wandering until they should have sat at the high table where
such sweet meat was daily served as that whith they had just
tasted. And when the king saw that they had made this vow, he
was in sore distress; for he knew well that he could not turn
then asid€from this enterprise. So he said to my lord Gawain:


death of me, for you have deprived me of the fairest and most
loyal company that I have ever found—the company of the
Round Table. For when they shall have left me, whenever the
time may come, I know well that they will never all come back;


| “Alas, Gawain, this vow which you have made will be the.


rather will most of them continue in this Quest which will not.
_end so soon as you think. So I am not a little distressed. For I
have prospered and raised them with all my power, and have.


always Toveat vé them still as ifthey-were my sons
er Drothers._and therefore their departure will sorely grieve |
me; for I had grown accustomed to see them often and to have


their company.” Thereupon the king grew very pensive and
tears came to his eyes, as those present could plainly see. When
he spoke again, it was so loudly that everyone there could easily


\\ror him: “Gawain, Gawain, you have brought great sorrow


to my heart, from which I can never recover until I know truly
}


Original from
Digitized by (GO gle UNIVERSITY OF VIRGINIA


14 THE QUEST OF THE HOLY GRAIL
how this Quest is going to turn out. For I greatly fear that.


my earthly friends will never come back from it.” “Ah, sire,”
Lancelot replied, ‘“‘for God’s sake, what. is, this you say? Such.
@ man as you ought not to give place in his heart to fear, bul
to justice, courage and good hope. You ought to take comfort;
or Surely 1f we Shoutd alt dié on this Quest, it would be a greater-
honour for us than to die anywhere else.” “Lancelot,” the kin
replied, “the great love that I have always ctierished for them
_makes me speak this way, and it is‘no wonder if I am distressed
at their departure. For never did a Christian king have so many
good knights and worthy men at his table as I have had this
day; nor will it ever happen again after they have gone, nor will
they ever again be gathered about my board as they have been
this day; and this it is that troubles me most.” My lord Gawain
knew not how to reply to this, for he knew well that the king
spoke the truth. So he would have gladly taken back the promise
he had made, if he had dared; but it could not be, for it was
already too well known.

Soon it was announced through all the apartments of the
palace how the Quest of the Holy Grail had been undertaken,
and that all those who were to share in the Quest would leave
court on the morrow. And many of thos€-Who heard the news
were rather sorry than glad; for the prowess of the companions
of the Round Table had made the household of King Arthur
respected above all others. When the ladies and damsels who
were seated with the queen in her apartments at supper heard
this news, there were many who grieved and sorrowed, espe-
cially those who were wives or sweethearts of the companions
of the Round Table. Nor was there cause for surpris@ ir this: —
for they were honoured and held dear by those who they now
feared would lose their lives on this Quest. So they began to
make great lamentation. And the queen asked the valet who
stood before her: “Tell me, valet,” she said, “wast thou present
when this Quest was pledged?” “Yes, lady, I was,” said he.
“And my lord Gawain, and Lancel ake, are they also
to take part in it?” she inquired. “Yes, certainly, lady,” he
replied ; ‘my lord Gawain was the first to take the vow, and after
him Lancelot and all the rest, until none held back who was a
companion of the Table.” When she heard these words, she
grieved so for Lancelot that she thought she would die
sorrow, and could not keep the tears from coming to her eyes. _
Then at last she replied as ome whose cup of woe was full: —
“Surely,” said she, “this is a great misfortune. This Quest
will not be concluded without the death of many worthy men,
since so many of them have undertaken it. I marvel greatly
that my lord the king, who is so wise, has permitted it. For
the better part of his lords will leave us now and the remainder
will not be worth much.” Then she began to weep tenderly, as
did all the ladies and damsels who were with her.

o all the court was troubled at the news of those who were
about to leave. And when the tables were removed in the hall
and in the apartments, and the ladies had gathered with the
knights, then the grief broke out afresh. For each lady or
damsel, whether wife or sweetheart, said to her knight that she
would go with him on the Quest. And there were some present —
who would have easily agreed to this and who would have
wished it well enough, had it not been for a worthy old man,
dressed in the garb of religion, who entered there after supper
was concluded. And when he came before the king he said so
loudly that all could hear him: “Hear ye, lords of the Round —
Table soa ve sworn to enter upon the Quest of the Holy
Grail! NasM en_the hermit sends you word by me that no one
shall take with him upon this Quest either lady or damsel_
_lest he fall into mortal sin; let no one enter upon it who is not |
confessed or who will not go to confession, for no’ one ought _
to enter upon such a lofty service before being cleansed and
purged of all villainy and mortal sins~ This Quest is not a quest ,
for earthly things, but is to be the search for the deep secrets ;
and confidences _ ‘of Our Lord and"for the great mysteries which ,
the High Master. will show openly to that Piramnrieg Sa whom.
he fae electet- among all the other knights of earth "e be his.
servant. To him he will reveal the great marvel of the Holy

rail and will show him what mortal heart in not conceive |
nor the tongue of earthly man utter.’’ Because of these words
it came about that no one took with him his wife or friend.
And the king entertained the worthy man well and richly, and
asked him much about himself; but his replies were brief, for’ ;;
his mind was occupied with other things than with the king. ||

~ Then the me and sat down beside Galahad, and began
to ask him about his origins, his country and his family. And
he told her a good deal, as one who was well informed, but he
never said anything about being the son of Lancelot. However,
from what the queen heard she learned well enough that he
was the son of Lancelot and that he had been born to the


» Google


.16 THE QUEST OF THE HOLY GRAIL


daughter of King Pellés, of whom she had often heard. But
because she was determined to learn this from his own mouth,
if possible, she asked him for the truth about his father. He
replied, however, that he was not sure whose son he was, ‘‘ Ah,
sire!” said she, “you are concealing the truth from me. Why do
you do that? So help me God, you need never be ashamed of
hearing your father’s name. For he is the handsomest knight
in the world, and he is descended on all sides from S and

ueens and from the highest Tinéagé known, and has har until
dow the reputation of b being the best knight in ‘the world ; where-
fore you too ought to surpass all those in the world. And cer-


tainly you a ae
here so foolish as to fail to notice it, if he should take heed


hen Galahad heard these words he was filled with embarrass-
ment. But he replied at once: _eady,, Ssnce— you know him .
so well, you will be able to tell me who he 1s. And if it 1s he whom
T think to bet my father, I shall know that you speak the truth;
and if it is not ae I should not be able to agree with you,
whatever you might say.” “In God’s name,’ she replied,
“since you will not mention his e, I will. He who begot
» -tyou is my lord Lancelot of the Lak, the handsomest, best
and most gracious knight, the most desired and best beloved
of any born if cir Hime. So it seems to me that you ought not
to conceal the fact either from me or anyone else; for you could
not be sprung from a more honourable man or a better knight.”
" “Lady,” he replied, “since you know it so well, why should
I tell you? In time it will be known well enough. r
The queen and Galahad continued their conversation until
night fell. And when the time had come to retire, the king
took Galahad to his own room and put him in his own bed
where he himself was wont to Tie, this paying all honour and
respect to him. Then the king retired and Lancelot and the
other knights who were there. That night the king was very
pensive and troubled because of the love he bore the worthy
men who were to leave on the morrow and go to a place where he
thought they would tarry long. His heart was filled with grief
at the thought that many of them would die on the Quest, and
this it was that made him sad. All night the noble barons and
the people of the kingdom of apres were in sorrow and distress.
And when it pleased Our Lord to end the shadows of the night
by the light of the breaking day, all the knights whose minds
were intent upon their business arose and dressed and equipped
, themselves. When the day was fully come, the king too rose
from his bed. When he was dressed, he came ‘into the room of
my lord Gawain and Lancelot, who had slept together. When
ie enteréd- he found them dressed and accoutred to go to hear

} | mass. Then the king, who loved them both as if they were his
ons greeted them ik an embrace, while they stood up and
welcomed him. Bidding them be seated, he sat down with them,
and looking at Gawain he began to speak: “Gawain, Gawain,
you have betrayed me! your presence never enhanced my
court so much as your departure now will work it harm. For it
will never be honoured by such a noble and valiant company
as that of which your action is depriving it. Yet I am not so
much distressed for the others a8’ I'am for you two. For I have
~Toved you with all the love oné mani ¢afi Nave for another, and”

“not just ndéw for ‘the first time; but ever since I first recognised _,
the excellent qualities you possess.” When thé King had spoken
these ade fe was silent and turned very pensive while the .
tears flowed down his face. And they seeing this, and being
‘themselves as sad as. possible, dared not reply when they saw
him so miserable. After being for a long time plunged in grief,
he said sadly: “Alas, God!T never thought to see myself sepa-
rated from this company which fortune had bestowed upon me!”

~ Then he added to Lancelot: “Lancelot, on the faith and on the
oath which you and I have exchanged, T charge you to help

“me with counsel in this affair,” “Tel me, sire,” said he, “haw
‘Timay do so.” “*T would fain have this Quest put off if possible,”
the king replied. “Sire,” said Lancelot, “I have heard the oath
of so many noble men that I do not believe they would renounce
it for any cause. For every one of them would be a perjyrer, and
it would be a disloyal act to ask them to renounce their pledge.” _
®Tndeed, know you speak ‘thetruthy,” the king replied. Bat
the great love I bear you and the others makes me speak this
way. And if it were only a proper and fitting thing, I could wish

80, for I shall be sorely grieved by their departure.”

Thus they conversed until the day was bright and clear and
the sun had dried the dew. Then the palace began to fill
with the barons of the realm. And the queen, having arisen,
came to the king and said: “Sire, the knights are awaiting you
below to hear mass.” Then he arose and wiped his eyes in
order that those who saw him might not knéw what sdtrow he
had felt. My lord Gawain gave orders to bring his arms, as also
did Lancelot. And when they were accoutred, except for their
18 THE QUEST OF THE HOLY GRAIL


shields, they came into the hall and found their companions
prepared like themselves for the start. When they had been
to the chapel and had heard mass, they returned to the hall,
and those who were pledged fo pursue the Quest sat down
beside one another. Then King Bademagus said: “Sire, since
this affair has been undertaken so seriously that it cannot be
allowed to drop, I recommend that the sacred pre Be een
in. Then the companions will take such an 0a ing tor °’
“those who are starting on a quest.” “I consent to that, since
it pleases you, and since it cannot be otherwise,’ King Arthur
made reply. Then the priests bade the relics to be brought in,
on which the oaths of the court were wont to be sworn. And
when they were carried in before the high table, the king called
my lord Gawain and said: “You who first assumed this Quest,
come forward and be the first to take the oath which should
be taken by those who engage in it.” “Sire,” said King Bade-
magus, “saving your grace, he shall not be the first, but that
one shall do if before us all whom we are bound to regard as
lord and master of the Round Table: that is my lord Galahad.
And after he has sworn, the rest of us without dissent will all
take the same oath, as is fitting.” Then Galahad was called;
and he came forward and, kneeling before thé relics, swore as

a loyal knight that he would pursue this Quest for a year and

a day, or longer if need be, and would never return to court
until he -had-learmed.the truth concerning the Holy Grail, if -
he could in any way do so. Then Lancelot swore to the same
‘effect, and following ‘Hititmy lord Gawain and Perceyal and (
Bors and Lyonel and Helains li Blans, Then all the companions
of the Round Table took the oath in turn. And when all who
had engaged themselves had sworn, it was found by those who
they were such worthy men that there was not a coward among. -
them all. After taking some breakfast at The king’s request,
‘they donried_their_ helmets and it became evident that they

| would fot tarry long. So with tears and sadness they commended——-

| the queen to God.

~~ When she saw that they were about to start without more
delay, she began to grieve sorely,.as. though she already sew
all her friends dead before her; and in order that the others
might not see how deeply she was moved, she went to her room
and threw herself upon her bed. Then she béguti ‘to make such —
moan ‘that there was no man in the world so hard-hearted but,
on seeing her, would have pitied her. And when Lancelot was
all prepared to mount, being extremely grieved for the sorrow
of his lady the queen, he went to the room where he had seen
her withdraw, and entered. And when the queen saw him come
in all_armed, she cried out to him: “Ah, Lancelot! you have

trayed me even to death in leaving the household of my lord


o tit order to to stra a whith you will
hhever return unless God restores you.” y,” said he, “T shall
tome back much sooner than you think.” “Ah, God!” said she,
_“tot's0 Speaks my heart which drives me to such anxiety and
fear as never gentle lady felt for a man.” “La y,” he replied,
“T must go now, if it please you to give me leave.” ‘You would

__never go, if I could help it,” she made answer. “But since go
» you must, go in the keeping of Him who consented to suffer


_————— ~~


_on the true Cross to deliver man from eternal death. May He »


conduct you in safety wherever you go!” “Lady,” said he,
“may God do so in His great pity!”

Then Lancelot left the queen and came down into the court-
yard where he found his companions already mounted and
waiting only for him to start. So he went to his horse and
mounted. But the king seeing Galahad without a shield and


about to start like the others on the Quest, came up to him-


and said: “Sire, methinks you are not adequately equipped in
starting without such a shield as your companions have.”
“Sire,” said he, “it would be wrong for me to take one. I will


‘take none until some adventure brings me one.” “Well, God’


hetp~you;” the king replied. “TI will hold my peace, since it
must be so.”

Then the barons and knights got to horse, and riding forth
from the castle passed down through the town.\Yqu never saw
such sorrow and weeping as that of thé Citizens as they watched

“the compartionsteave for thé Quest of the Holy Grail. There
was not a man, poor or rich, of all those who were to stay behind,
who did not weep bitterly: they were so sad at this leave-taking.
But those who Were to go away showed no signs of any concern;
rather you would have thought, if you had seen them, that they
were more than happy at the prospect, as indeed they were.

Now when they Rad come near the castle of Vagay in the
forest,they stopped at a cross, and my lord Gawain said to the


king: “Sire, you have come far enough; go back now, as must


needs be, for iti Or you to convoy us farther.” Then the “


king said: “It is much harder for me to turn back than to come
20 THE QUEST OF THE HOLY GRAIL


thus far: for I am loth to part with you. But since I see that it
must be done, I will return.” Then my lord Gawain took his
helmet from his head, as did the other compamromns; then he
ran to embrace the king, and the other barons did so after
him. Then, when they Fad relaced their helmets, with tears
in their eyes they commended_each other to God. After their
separation, the king-returned-to Camelot, and the companions
rode on through the forest until they came to the castle of Vagan.

This Vagan was a worthy man of exemplary life who had
been in his youth one of the world’s good knights. And when
he saw that the companions were entering his castle, he had
the gates closed on all sides, saying that since God had done
him such honour as to place them in his power, they should
not go forth until he had served them to the extent of his
ability. So he detained them, as it were, by force, disarmed
them, and served then 30 Mety-and-royally that might that

uc


wealth.


And on the morrow they decided that each should .go off by
himself, becausé it would be a shame for them to travel in com-—~
“pany. So as soon as it was light, the companions arose and,
taking their arms, went to hear mass in a chapel there. Then
they mounted and commended the-Tord of the place to God
and thanked him warmly for the honour he had done them.
Sallying forth from the castle they took leave of each other
as had been agreed, and entered the forest at divers places
where they saw it to be thickest and wherever they saw there
was no road or path._At the ‘of partin

who thought their hearts were hard and insensible. But for
the present the story will take leave of them and turn to speak


of Galahad, because he had initiated the Quest.
CHAPTER II
Now the story tells that after Galahad had left his companions,


he rode for three or four days without encountering any adven-
ture worthy of mention. And on the fifth day after the vesper
hour it happened that his path brought him to an abbey of |
White Friars. On his arrival he knocked at the gate and the
friars came out and helped him to dismount with much courtesy,
as knowing that he was a knight-errant. While one took his
horse, another led him into a hall ori th€ pround floor to disarm
him. And when they had relieved him of his arms, he beheld
two of the companions of the Round Table, of whom one was ~
“King Bademagus and the otlier Yvain the Avoltres. And as
“soon as they espied him and recognised him, they ran to him
with outstretched arms to welcome him joyfully, for they were
very happy to have found him. When they had made them-
selves known to him, he too showed his joy at meeting them
and honoured them as those whom he ought to regard as
brothers and companions.

That evening when they had eaten and had gone to enjoy
themselves in a beautiful garden of the abbey, they sat down
under a tree and Galahad asked them what adventure had
brought them there. “In truth, sire,” they replied, ““we came


ors apse


my part I wish to try to carry it off in the morning,” said
King Bademagus, “and then I shall know if the adventure 1s
as it is described to us.” “In God’s name,” said Galahad, “ you
tell me a marvellous thing, if this shield is such as you say. And
if you cannot carry it off, it is I who shall do so, for I have no
shield.” “Then, sire, we shall leave it to you,” they said, “for
we know full well that you will not fail in this adventure.”
“I consent,” said he, “that you try it first, in order to learn
21
22 THE QUEST OF THE HOLY GRAIL


if what they have told you is true or not.” So to this they all
agreed. That night the companions were served and regaled
with all that the friars could command; and the friars showed
great honour to Galahad when they heard the testimony which
the two knights bore him. So they gave him a rich and noble
bed fitting for such a man as he. And near him lay King Bade-
magus and his companion.

The next day when they had heard mass, King Bademagus
asked one of the friars where the shield was of which there was
so much talk over the country. “Why do you inquire, sire?”
asked the worthy man. “ Because I shall carry it off with me to -
see whether it possess such qualities as they say,” he replied.
‘T advise you not to carry it off,” the friar said, “for nothing
but shame would come to you.” “Nevertheless,” he replied,
“T wish to know where it is and what it is like.” Then the other

\ took him behind the High Altar, and there he found a white


‘the shield you inquire for.” Then the knights looked at it and
said they thought it the finest and richest shield they hac ever-—-.
.seen;.and it. smelt.as sweet as if all.the spices in the world were
Spread ypon it. When a eu Avoltres saw it, he said: ‘So
help me God, this is the shield which no one is to hang about
his neck unless he is a better knight than all the rest. And it
will never hang about my neck, for surely I am not so valiant
or so worthy that I should hang it about my neck.” “In God’s
name,” said King Bademagus, “whatever may happen to me,
I will carry it off from here!” Then he hung it about his neck
and carried it out of the church. And when he came to his
horse, he said to Galahad: “Sire, if it please you, I should like
you to wait for me here until I can inform you how this adven-
ture will turn out for me. If some mischance should befall me,
I should like you to know of it; for I know very well that you
could accgmplish the adventure easily.” “I am very willing
to wait for you,’ Galahad replied. Then he mounted at once,
and the fnars gave him a squire to accompany him and to
bring back the shield if necessary.
Thus Galahad stayed behind with Yvain to bear him company
until he should learn the result of the adventure. And King
who started out with the squire rode two leagues
and more until he came to a hermitage which lay at the bottom
of a valley. Looking toward the hermitage, he saw approaching |
from that direction a knight in white armour riding as fast as
his horse could carry him; he held his lance-extended before


him and came thrusting.at him. As soon as he saw him approach, |


he turned toward him and broke over him his lance which
flew in pieces. And the white knight, who had caught him
unprotected, struck him so hard that he broke the mail of his
hauberk and thrust his lance-head through his left shoulder,
striking him as one who had plenty of courage and strength,
and knocking him from his horse..And when he fell, the knight
_took the shield from his neck and said so loudly that both he
and the squire could hear: “Sir knight, you were foolish and
_ rash to hang this shield about your neck. For no man is permitted
' to carry it unless he be the best knight in the world. And because
of the sin you have committed Our Lord has sent me here to
take vengeance suited to the crime.” Having said this, he
came up to the squire and said: “Here, take this shield to the
Servant ‘of Jesus Christ, to the good knight named Galahad
whom thou didst leave at the abbey; and tell him that the
High Mester bids him carry it. For he will always find it as fresh
“and as Sound as‘tffsat"present, and for this reason he should
valié ‘it highty. And give him my greetings as soon as thou
seest him.” ‘And the valet asked him: “Sire, what is your name,
that I may tell him when I come to him?” “My name,” he
answered, “thou mayst not know; for it is something that must
not be told to thee or any mortal man; with so much thou
must be satisfied. But-do as I command thee.” “Sire,” said
the valet, “since you will not tell me your name, I pray and
conjure you by what you hold most dear to tell me the truth


about this shield, how it was brought into this cuuntry and-why .


“so Many marvels.are connected with it. Fer no man in our time
has been able to hang it about his neck without mischief be-
falling him.” “Thou hast urged me so,” the knight replied,

. “that I will tell thee. But it shall not be to thee alone; rather

I wish thee to bring me the knight to whom thou shalt take

the shield.” And the valet said he would do so, but he added:

“Where can we find you when we come this way?” “In this

very place you will find me,” was the reply. Then the valet

went to King Bademagus and asked him if he was much

wounded. “Yes;truly,” the king replied, “so seriously that I

cannot escape death.” “Can you ride a horse?” the valet


asked. And he answered that he would try to do so. So he got.


_up, wounded as he was, and the valet supported him to where
the horsé was from which the king had fallen. Then the king
24 THE QUEST OF THE HOLY GRAIL


got up in front and the valet behind to hold him about the waist;
for he thought he would fall otherwise, as indeed he would
have done. :

So they left the place where the king had been wounded and
rode until they reached the abbey from which they had recently
set out. And when the inmates learned that they were approach-
ing, they came out to meet them. They helped King Bademagus
from his horse and took him to a room and took good care of
his wound, which was deep and serious. Then Galahad asked
one of the friars who was caring for him: “Sire, do you think
he can recover? For it seems to me it would be too bad if he
should die as the result of this adventure.” “Sire,” the friar
replied, “he will recover, if God wills. But I tell you, he is ve
-badly wounded, though he ought not to be greatly Ted.
For we told him that if he carried off the shield, evil would
befall him; yet he carried it off in spite of our advice, which
was very foolish on his part.’’ Now when the friars had done
all they could for him, the valet said to Galahad in the hearing
of all present: “Sire, greetings from the good knight with the
white armour, who wotinded King Bademagus, and who sent
you this shield! He bids you to carry it henceforth, in the
namie of the High Master--For there is no one, as he said, except
you alone who should carry_it. Therefore he has sent it to you.
And if you wish to know whence these great adventures have so
often come about,.come to him with me, and he will tell us
according to his promise.”

When the friars heard this piece of news, they bowed low
before Galahad, and blessed the good fortune that had brought
him that way: for now they were persuaded that the great
and perilous adventures would be Brought ‘to an end. And
Yvain the Avoltres said: “My lord Galahad, put about your
neck this shield, which was intended for none other than you.
So shall my desire be in some measure accomplished: for surely
I desired nothing so much as to know the Good Knight who
should bear the lordship of this shield.”” Then Galahad replied
that he would place it about his neck, since it had been sent
to him, but first he wished his arms to be brought to him; so
he asked for them, and they were brought. When he was armed
and mounted upon his horse, he hung the shield about his neck
and departed, commending the friars to God. And when Yvain
the Avoltres was armed again and mounted upon his horse,
he announced that he would bear Galahad company. But he


Original tron
Digitized by (40 gle UNIVERSITY OF VIRGINIA
answered that this could not be, for he would go alone with
the-valet. So thus they parted and each went his way. = —~
Yvain struck into the forest, while Galahad and the valet
journeyed until they found the knight with the white arms
whom the valet had seen before. And when he saw Galahad
approach, he went to meet him and greeted him, and Galahad
greeted him as courteously as he could. After engaging in some
familiar talk, Galahad said to the knight: “Sire, I have heard
that many marvellous adventures have come to pass in this
country because of this shield which I am wearing. So I would
“kindly and frankly beg of you to tell me the truth, how and why
all this has happened, for fanneure that you know.” “Certainly,
“T’will tell you gladly,” said the knight; “‘for I know the truth
full well. So listen, Galahad, if you please.


Forty-two years after the Passion of Jesus Christ it came
about That eae of Arimathea, the gentle knight who took
down Our Lord from the true and holy i a cose from
the city of Jerusalem with a large number of his relatives, And
“they fotittieyed “as they were directed by Our Lord’s command
until they came to the city of Sarraz, which a Saracen, King

Now Wier Joseph reac hed Sarraz, Ewalach was

t war with a rich and powerful neighbouring king, named
qaolomer, whose lands bordered upon his own. And when
walach was Teddy to go against Tholomer, who required of


him his land, Josephe the son of JoSepht said to him that if he. +-


went to battle ill-prepared as he was, he would be discomfited
and put to shame by his enemy. ‘What then is your advice?’
Ewalach inquired. ‘I will tell you,’ he replied. Then he began
to expose to him the features of the new dispensation and
the truth of the gospel and of the crucifixion of Our Lord ‘and
~of. the resurrection, and he had 4 shield brought whereon he~
attached _a Cross. of. silk, and said; ‘King Ewalach, now I will
show you clearly how you may recognise the power and virtue
of the true Crucified One. It is true that this caitif Tholomer
will have the mastery over you for three days and three nights.
and will bring you into the fear of death. But when you think
that you cannot longer escape, then uncover the cross and say:
“Fair Lord God, of whose death I bear the sign, deliver me from
this peril, and lead me safe and sound to receive your faith
and trust.” ’

“Then the king left and started to attack Tholomer. And
it happened to him as Josephe had said. But when he saw

Cc
26 THE QUEST OF THE HOLY GRAIL


himself in such peril that he thought he must surely die he un-
covered his shield and saw portrayed in the-midst of it a man—
-tfucified who was bathed in blood. Then he uttered thé words
which Josephe had taught him, whereupon the victory and
honour rested with him and he was delivered from the hands
of his enemies and he triumphed over Tholomer and all his
men. And when he had returned to the city of Sarraz, he told
all the people how Josephe had spoken the truth, and he so
showed forth the power of the Crucified One that Nascien
“consented to receive baptism. And while they were baptising
him a Christian, it happened that a man passed by who had one
_ hand cut off which he was carrying -in his other hand: When
Josephe called him, he drew near. And as soon as he had touched
the cross upon the shield, his hand which he had lost was healed. -’.
Then happened another marvellous ee to eo the
shield left.its place and adhered to the man’s arm so that it was
no more to be seen on the shield. Then Ewalach received baptism
and became a servant of Jesus Christ, and held him in great
love and reverence and had the shield very carefully preserved. .
“Afterwards it came about, when _Josephe had left Sarraz /
with his father and they had arrived in Great Britain, that they
' encountéréd a wickéd and cruel king who threw them both
into prison, together with a numerous company of Christians.
The report soon spread abroad that Josephe was in prison, for _
there was then no man in the world of greater fame, and even
King Mordrain heard-the news. So -he-summoned-ns men and ~~
retainers to join him and his brother-in-law Nascien and they
came to Great Britain and attacked him who held Josephe
_? "san prison. And they totally defeated him and confounded all
'~)..-\ those of the country, so that holy Christianity was spread in
a. land, So great was their love for Josephe that they never
left the country, but stayed with him and followed him wherever
he went. Now when Josephe came to his death-bed and Ewalach
knew that he must leave the world, he came before him weeping
tenderly and said: ‘Sire, now that you are leaving me, I shall
remain all alone in this country, having resigned for your sake
my native land and the satisfaction of living among my own
people. For God’s sake, since you must leave this world, give
, rve me after your death as a remembrancé.”
‘Sire,’ said Josephe, ‘that will I do.’
“Then he began to think what he could leave him. And when
he had thought for some time, he said: ‘King Ewalach, send


ae
Fen
for that shield which I gave thee when thou didst go to battle
against Tholomer.’ The king said he would do so gladly, for
the shield was close by, being the one he took with him wherever
he went. So he had the shield brought to Josephe, when straight-_
rey losephe began to bleed severely at the. nase.so. that it .
could not be stanched. But taking at once the shield, he made
“Upon it with his blood the cross which you here behold: for you
must know this is the very same shield of which I am telling
you. And when he had made the cross as you can see it here,
he said to him: ‘ Behold this shield which I leave you as a remem-
brance of me. You shall never see this shield but it shall remind
you of me, for you know that this cross is made withmy-hlood. |
which will always remain as fresh and crimson as you see it ;
now so Tong as thé shield endure. And it will endure for a long |
time; hecause no one will hang it about his neck, even though
he be a knight; who will not repgni af it, until Galahad the -
Good Knight, last of the line of \Nascien\ shall hang it about |
his neck’So let no one seek to wear it except the one destined
by God, Moreover, it has such properties that, just as in this
shield greater marvels have been seen than in any other, just
so there shall be seen in him more marvellous prowess and a.
nobler life than in any other knight.” ‘Since you are to leave me
Gich W goad TereniDrAHGe” The king replied, ‘tell me, if you
please, where I shall leave this shield. For I should like it to —
be put in such a place as the Good Knight may find it.’ ‘Then _
I shall tell you,’ said Josephe, ‘what to do. gout theshicle where -:
you see Nascien lajd iter his death; for thither the Good Knight |
“wii Coie on the fifth day after he receives the order of chivalry.’ -
Now it has all happened as he said, for on the fifth day
after receiving knighthood you have come to this abbey where
Nascien lies. So now I have told you why the great adventures
happened to the foolhardy knights who in spite of this prohibi-
tion wished to carry off the shield which was vouchsafed to
you alone.”

And when he had told this story, he disappeared so that
Galahad knew not what had become of him nor whither he had
gone. When the valet who was present had heard this strange
story, he dismounted from his nag and fell at the feet of Galahad,
begging him in tears for the love of Him whose sign he carriéd
on his shield to permit him to go with him as his squire and to
make him a knight. “Certainly,” said Galahad, “if I wished for
any company, I would not refuse thee.” “For God’s sake, sire,”
28 THE QUEST OF THE HOLY GRAIL


the valet said, ‘I beg of you then to make me a knight, and I
promise you that knighthood shall be well served by me, if


God will.” Golahad wept softly as he laaked at him ; and because
of the great ity he felt, he granted him his request. “Sire,”
said the valet return to the place we started from, for there
I shall get arms and a horse. And this you ought to do, not
only for my sake, but because of an adventure there, which no
one else can achieve, but I know that you will do so.” And
Galahad said he would gladly go.

So he returned at once to the abbey. And when the friars
saw him return, they were very gtad and inquired of the valet
why the knight had come back. “‘To make me a knight,” said
he ; and for his sake they were very glad. Then the Good Knight
asked where the adventure was to be found. “Sire,” they said,
“do you know what this adventure is?” “Not in the least,”
he replied. ‘Then you must know,” they said, “that it is a
voice which issues from one of the tombs in our cemetery. And
it is Of Such strength that anyone who hears it loses his bodily —
powers for a long time afterward.” Then Galahad inquired,
*TDo you know whose voice this is?” “No,” they answered,
“unless it is the devil’s.” “Then lead me thither,” said he,
“for I am very anxious to learn the truth about it.” “Then you
must come along with us.” Then they escorted him outside the
church. all armed-as he was, but without his helmet. And one
of the friars said to him: “Do you see that great tree with the
tomb beneath it?”“‘Yes,” said he. “I will tell you, then, what
to do,” said one of the friars: “(go to the tomb and raise the
lid, and I promise you shall find~andér it some marvellous-

“thing.” Then Galahad approached and heard a voice utter a
~marverously dolorous cry, and It said so loudly that all could

ar: - Ah, Galahad! servant of Jesus Christ, approach me not,
for thou wouldst make mé€ move from where I have been so
long.”’ Now Galahad, hearing that, was not afraid, but went
to the tomb. “And when he tried to seizéit"by thé Neavy end,
che saw smoke come forth and a flame after it, and he saw émerge
the most hideous face that‘ever bore human semblance. Then he —.

_-- crossed “himself, knowing this was the devit And he heard a


voice saying to him: “Ah, Galahad! holy creature, I see thee
so compassed about with angels that my power cannot prevail —
“against thy might: I leave this place to thee.’ Hearing this,
he crossed himself again and thanked Our Lord. Then he raised
up the lid of the tomb and saw lying there a body fully armed,
with a sword alongside and all that was needed to create a
Laight Seeing these things, he summoned the friars, saying:
“Come, see what I have found, and tell me what I shall do, for
I am ready to do more, if so I must.’’ And when they drew
near, they saw the body lying in the grave and said to him:
‘Sire, there is nothing more to be done, for this body which ©
lies here shall never be moved from its place according to our
_ pelief.” “Yes, it shall be,’’ said the old man who had told
Galahad of this adventure; “the body must be“taken froin -
this ee out, for this ground is holy and sanctified;


é body of-e-wickett-anti false Christian must not


nena


ms.


yemain here,”” Then he ordered the servants to remove the body _
from the grave and to cast it out of the cemetery, and they
did so. Then Galahad said to the worthy man: “Sire, have
I accomplished all of this adventure which I ought to do?”
“Yes,” he replied, “for never again shall be heard the voice
which has brought us so much woe.” “And do you know,”
Galahad inquired, “why so many marvels have come to pass?”
“Yes, indeed, sire,’ he replied, ‘and I will tell you gladly;
for you ought to understand it as being a matter of great
ignificance.”’ ee

Thereupon they left the cemetery and returned to the abbey.
And Galahad told the valet that he must keep watch that night _

in the church and that on the morrow he would make him a
knight, as was right. And he replied that he had no other wish.
So he prepared himself as instructed to receive the high order
gf. chivalry which he so much desired. But the worthy man took
Galahad into a room where he relieved him of his arms and
armour. Then making him sit down on a bed, he said to him:
“Sire, you asked me the meaning of this adventure which you
have just achieved, and Iwill gladly explain it to you. Ip this
adventure there were three things which gave cause for fear:
the tomb itself which was not easy to open, the body of the
knight which had to be cast out, and.the voice which caused
all who heard it to lose their bodily strength and their senses
and memory.. Now of these three things I will tell you the
meaning.

“The tomb which enclosed the dead body signifies the hard-
ness of this world which Our Lord encountered when He came
to earth and found nothing but hardness there. For the son
did not love the father, nor the father the son, wherefore the
devil carried them all off to hell. When the Father in Heaven
30 THE QUEST OF THE HOLY GRAIL


saw that there was such hardness on earth that one man did
not know another nor believe another nor the words of the
_prophet, but that on the other hand they set up new gods
each day, He sent His Son to earth to soften this hardness and
to give sinners new and tender hearts. But when He came down
to earth, He found them so hardened in mortal sin that one
might as soon soften a rock as their hearts. Wherefore He said
by the mouth of the prophet David: ‘My soul is exceeding
sorrowful, even unto death’; as if to say: ‘Father, thou hast
converted very few of this people before my death.’ And as
the Father sent His Son to deliver His people, so the same
situation is renewed to-day. For just as error and folly took
flight at His coming and the truth was plainly manifested, so
Our Lord has chosen you above all other knights to send into
_strange lands to put an end to dire adventures and to learn
their_source,.Wherefore.your coming may be compared with
that of Jesus Christ, but in aAppearanc€ rather than in degree.
And just as thé’ prophets a long time beforé He came prophesied
that He would come and said that He would deliver the people
from the bonds of hell, so have hermits and holy men announced |
your coming for more than twerty~years. And they have all |
said that the adventures of the kingdom of Logres would never
cease until you came. But, thank God, we have waited until
now we have you.”

“Now tell me,” said Galahad, “what the dead body signifies ;
for you have made clear the meaning of the tomb.” “That too
I will explain,” said he. ‘The dead body signifies the people
whose heart had been so long hardened that they were all as
if dead and blinded by the great weight of the sins they had
committed day after day. And that they were blind appeared
plainly when Jesus Christ was manifested. For when they had
in their midst the King of kings and the Saviour of the world,
they regarded Him as a sinner and thought He was even as
they were. And they trusted rather in the devil than in Him,
and they delivered His body to death at the instigation of the
devil who was constantly whispering in their ears and who had
entered into their hearts. Thus for these their works Vespasian
overwhelmed and destroyed them as soon as he learned the
truth about the Prophet to whom they had proved disloyal;
thus they were destroyed by the devil and his counsel.

“‘Now we must see how these two instances agree. The tomb
signifies the great hardness of the Jews, while the dead body


Original from


Digitized by (Or gle UNIVERSITY OF VIRGINIA


ae eae OF THE HOLY GRAIL 31


ee


the doleful words théy-spoke to Pilate the governor: ¢
be upon us and upon our children!’ And because of this saying
“hey Wee DUE TO Shame and lost themselves and all that they |
had. Thus. you.can see in this adventure the significance ofthe.
Passion. of Jesus Christ and the likeness of His coming. One |
other thing happened in former times: for as soon as the knights-
errant used to come and approach the tomb, the devil, who
knew them to be vile and corrupt sinners and saw that they
were wrapped in luxury and iniquity, frightened them so with
his horrible and téffid!l€ voice that they lost their bodily power.
Nor would the adventure ever have ceased to discomfit the
sinners, if God had not brought you to carry it through. But
as-soon as you arrived, the devil, who knew you to be pure,
and as free from every sifi ft ascmertat man cai ‘be, dared not.
wait for You, but ‘Red and fost all his’ power through your
advent. ‘Phen-concludéd thé advetitité which many a noted
knight had tried. So now I have told you the truth about this
matter.”’ And Galahad said that it had much greater significance-
than he had thought.

That night the friars did their best to serve Galahad. And
in the morning he made the valet a knight in accordance with
the custom of those days. When he had done all he ought for
aa he asked him what his name was. And he said his name

elyant and that he was the son of the King of Denmark.
air friend,” said Galahad, “now that you are a knight and
since you are descended from the high lineage of a king and
queen, see to it that chivalry be so worthily shown forth in
you that the honour of your lineage may be preserved. For
as soon as a king’s son receives the order of chivalry, he ought
to outshine all other knights in goodness as the rays of the
sun outshine the stars.’”’ Then he replied that, if it please God,
the honour of chivalry would be safe with him ; for he would never
fall short of his duty because of any pain he might have to bear.
Then Galahad called for his arms, and when they were brought,
Melyant said to him: “Sire, thanks to God and to you, you have
made me a knight, which gives me more joy than I can say;
and you know that it is a custom that whoever makes another
an...a. knight. must not refuse to. grant him the first request...
he makes, provided the request, be reasonable.” “That is true,”
32 THE QUEST OF THE HOLY GRAIL


Galahad replied, “but why do you say it?” “ Because I wish to
ask for a boon,” said he; “and I beg you to grant it to me, for
it is something from which no harm can come to you.” “TI will
grant it to you,” said Galahad, “even were it to my cost.”
“Many thanks,” said Melyant; “now. I ask you to let me.accom- -
pany you on this Quest until fate separate us, and afterward,
df we. are brought together again, do not deprive me of your
company to bestow it. upon another.”

Then he ordered a horse to be brought in order to depart
with Galahad ; and when this was done, they went off together.
All day they ‘rode, and all that week. And it happened on a
Tuesday-moring that they came to a cross where there was a
parting of the ways. Coming’ to the cross they found words
Which -were-cut-mr-ttie wood and which said; Give heed, thou
knight who seekest adventures ; here are two roads, one to the right
and the other to the left. I forbid thee to take the left, for he must
be an exceptionally worthy man who enters there with the expecta-
tion of coming through. And if thou takest the right-hand road,
thou art likely to perish soon. When Melyant saw this inscrip-
tion, he said to Galahad: “Ah! generous knight, for God’s
sake let me take this left-hand road, for then I shall be able
to try my strength and learn if there be in me such prowess and
courage as shall gain me the praise of chivalry.” “If you were
willing,” said Galahad, “I would take that road myself, for
I think I should fare better than you.” But the other said that
he would take. it, if anyone did. So they parted, and each went
his way. Now the story takes leave of Galahad and tells how
it fared with Melyant.
CHAPTER III


Now the story tells how Melyant, having left Galahad, rode
until he came to an ancient forest which stretched for two
days’ journey; and on the morrow about the hour of prime he
came to a meadow. Then in the middle of his road he saw a
fine rich seat on which lay a beautiful crown of gold; and in
front of the seat there were several tables filled with rich viands.
On looking at this strange sight, he envied nothing he saw except
the beautiful crown, and he said to himself that anyone would
be happy who should wear it on his head in the presence of his
people. Then he seized it, saying he would carry it off himself,
and slipping it over his right arm, he rode into the forest again.
But he had not gone far when he saw a knight riding after him,
who called to him: “Sir knight, put down that crown which is
not yours and which it was wrong for you to take.”

Upon hearing these words Melyant turned round, knowing
that he must fight with him. So he crossed himself ‘and said:
“Fair Lord God, now help your novice knight!” Then the knight
charged him and struck him with such violence that his lance
pierced shield and hauberk to his very body; indeed, he struck
him so skilfully that he gverthrew him on the ground, leaving.
the iron of the lance and a great piece of the wooden stock in .
his body. And the knight coming up to him took the crown
‘from his arm and said: “Sir knight, give up the crown to which
you have no right.’”’ Then he turned away in the direction he
had come. And Melyant lay, without strength to rise, as one
who believes he is mortally “wounded. Then he blamed him-
self for not following Galahad’s advice, seeing woe had now
befallen him.

While he lay in pain it chanced that Galahad rode by that _
_way. And seeing Melyant lying wounded on the ground, he was
much distressed, for he thought he had a mortal wound. So
Coming up to him, he said: “‘ Ah! Melyant, who has treated you
thus? Do you think you can recover?” And when he heard
him, he recognised him and said: “Ah! sire, for God’s sake do
not leave me to die in this forest, but carry me to some abbey


33
34 THE QUEST OF THE HOLY GRAIL


where I may receive the consolation of religion and die there
like a good Christian!” “What is it, Melyant?” said my lord
Galahad, “are you so badly wounded that you expect to die?”
“Yes,” he replied. Then Galahad was sorely grieved and asked
what had become of those who had injured him.

Then there issued forth from among the trees the knight who
had wounded Melyant, and said to Galahad: “Sir knight, be
on your guard, for I shall do you all the harm I can.” “ Ah! sire,”
' said Melyant, “this is he who gave me my mortal blow. In
God’s name, be on your guard against him.” Galahad replied
not a word, but faced the knight who came at him at such
great speed that he failed to strike him squarely, But Galahad
gave him such a blow that his lance pierced his shoulder,
throwing horse and rider together in a heap and breaking his
lance. And Galahad rode past him in full career, but when he
turned he looked and saw another armed knight coming who
called to him: “Sir knight, you will leave your horse to me.”
Riding at him with lance outstretched, he broke it upon Gala-
had’s shield, but without unseating him, while Galahad cut
off his left hand with his sword. When the other felt himself
thus crippled, he turned in ftight for fear of death. And Galahad,
not wishing to do him further harm, did not ride after him, but
turned to Melyant, not heeding the first knight whom he had
laid low.

Then he asked Melyant what he wanted him to do, for he
was ready to do anything he could for him. “Sire, if I could
bear to ride, I should like you to lift me up before you and
carry me to an abbey near here. For I know, if I were once
there, they would do everything they could to cure me.” And
Galahad said he would gladly do so: “But I think it would be
better to draw out the lance-head first.” “Ah! sire, I would
never run that risk before miaking my confession, for I think
I shall die when it is drawn out. But hft me up.” Then he
took him as gently as he could and set him on the horse in front
of him, holding him so that he would not fall in his weakened
state. Thus they rode until they came to an abbey.

Arriving at the gate, they called, and the friars who were
worthy men, opened to them and received them tenderly,
carrying Melyant to a quiet room. As soon as his helmet had been
removed, he requested the Eucharist to be brought, which was
done. And when he had been conféssed and had begged for
forgiveness like a good Chnistian, he received the Body of Our
Lord. Then, after communion, he said to Galahad: “Sire, let
__death come now, for I am equipped to receive it. Now you may —
try to draw out the lance-head from my body.” And he laid hands
on the iron and drew it out together with the wooden stock.
When Melyant swooned with pain, Galahad inquired if there
was anyone there who could look after the knight’s wounds.
“Yes, sire,” they answered. So they sent for an elderly monk,
who had been a knight, and showed him the wound. And after
examining it, he said he would make him whole within a month.
At this news GaJahad was very glad, and, after having had his
arms removed, said he would tarry there all that day and the

next to learn whether Melyant could recover.

So he stayed there three days. And when he asked Melyant
how he was, he told him his recovery was begun. “Then I can
go away to-morrow,’ said Galahad. But Melyant replied sadly:
“Ah! my lord Galahad, will you leave me here? I am the man
who most in the world desires your company, if he could retain
it.” “Sire,”’ said Galahad, “I am of no use to you here; and it
is more important for me to do something else than to rest
here: I must seek the Holy Grail whose Quest I have under-

taken...“ What!” said one of the friars, “has it been begun?”
“Ves,” Galahad replied, ‘‘and we two are companions in the
Quest.” “In faith, I tell you, sir wounded knight,” said the
friar, “that this misfortune has befallen you because of your

_sin. And if you would tell me of your experiences since the
Quest was begun, I would show you for what sin this had
befallen you.” “Sire,” Melyant replied, “I will téll you.”

Then Melyant told him how Galahad had knighted him, and
about the inscription which they had found upon the cross
forbidding them to take the left-hand road, and how he had
taken it notwithstanding, and of all that had then befallen him.
Then the friar, who was a saintly and learned man, said to
him: “Surely, sir knight, these are adventures of the Holy
Grail; for you have told me nothing but what possessed great
significance, as I shall now explain to you.

“‘When you were about to be made a knight, you went to
confession, and you entered the order of chivalry clean and
purged of all the filth and sin with which you knew you were
befouled ; amd-thus-you entered upon the Quest of the Holy
Grail as pure as you ought to be. But when the devil saw this,
he was very sorrowful and made up his mind to attack you as
soon as he saw his chance. So he did, and I will tell you when
36 THE QUEST OF THE HOLY GRAIL


it was When you left the abbey where you were made a knight,
the first thing you met was the sign of the true Cross, which
is the sign in which a knight ought most to trust. And there
was something else: there was an inscription which pointed out
_ to you two ways, one to the right and the other to the left.
: By the right-hand road were to understand the way of
" Jesus Christ, the way of pity, which the knights of Our Lord
_tread by night and day, by ay according to the soul and by
night according to the body. And by the Jeft-hand road you were
to understand the sinners’ way. where great dangers come to
those who tread therein. Now because this way 1s not so safe as
the other, the inscription forbade anyone to enter it unless he
was a worthier man than anyone else, that is to say,upless he —
~was so rooted in the love of Jesus Christ _that he would not
fall peradverture-into si But when you saw the inscription
you marvelled what it could be; and there at once
struck you with one of his darts. And with what dart? With
_the dart_of pride, for you thought you could travel that road
with your prowess. But your understanding was deceived ; for
the writing-referred to the heavenly chivalry, and you took it.
to mean the chivalry of. ea near you became
‘captive of pride and fell into mortal sin..

“‘When you parted from Galahad, the enemy, finding you
unresisting, joined you and felt that "he had not accomplished
much unless he caused you to sin again so that from sin to sin
he could cast you into hell. So he set before you a crown of gold
and made you covet. jt as soon as you saw it. And as soon as
you seized it, you fell into two mortal sins, pride and covetous-_
ness. When he saw that you were in the grip of covetousness
and that you were carrying off the crown, he assumed_ the
-guise of a wicked knight and incited him to such cruelty, as


being of the devil himself, that he sought to compass your
death. So he attacked you with outstretched lance and would
have killed you, but you madé the sign of the cross and were
-saved. However, as a punishment for deserting His service
Our Lord brought you into the very shadow of death in order
that another time you might trust more in the help of Our Lord
than in your own strength. And in order that you might have
speedy succour He sent you Galahad, this holy knight, together _,
with the two knights who typified the “two within
you; but they could not withstand him because he was aickout:


mortal sin. Now I have told you the significance of these adven-
tures which have befallen you.” And they admitted that the
significance was fair and wonderful.

The worthy man and the two knights talked at length that
night abgut. the adventures of the Holy Grail. And Galahad
Besouitit Melyant so urgently that he gave him leave to depart
whenever he pleased. And he said that, since he allowed him to
do so, he would go away. So the next day, as soon as he had heard
mass, Galahad armed himself and, commending Melyant to

_ God’s care, rode for many a day without meeting with any
adventure worthy of mention. But one day it happened that
hé“fad left the house of a vavassor without hearing mass; and
“‘Journeying until he came to a high mountain, he found there
an ancient chapel. He turned in theré to hear mass, for he
disliked to spend a day without being present at God’s service.
But on drawing near he found no living soul about, and the
chapel was in ruins. However, he fell upon his knees and prayed
.to Our Lord for counsel. And when he had prayed, a voice
spoke to him: “Hear thou, adventurous knight! Go directly.
to the Maidens’ Castle and put to an end the evil practices there.”’
“On heuring this, tie thanked Our Lord for the message He had
given him, and he promptly mounted and rode away. Then he
espied at some distance in a valley a strong castle in a goodly
sité; and through the midst of it there flowed a swift stream
called the Severn, When he turned thither and was drawing
near, he met an old man poorly clad who greeted him courteously.
Saluting hini'ir-turn, Galahad inquired of him the name of the
castle. “Sire,” said he, “the Maidens’ Castle; it is a cursed |
castle, and all they are cursed who dwell therein; for all pity
"is Danished thence, and hardness of heart dwells there instead.”
_ *How is that?” Galahad inquired. “Because they treat shame-
fully all who enter there,” he replied. “And therefore I advise
“you, sir knight, to turn back; for shame awaits you if you press
on.” “Now God help you, worthy sir, but I am loth to turn
back,” said Galahad. Then he examined his arms to see that
nothing was lacking; and when he found that all was right, he
pressed on hastily to the castle. 3
~~“And there he met seven damsels richly mounted who said to
him: “Sir knight; youhave passed the bounds.” And he answered
that no bounds should keep him from going to the castle. So he
continued to advance until he met a valet who told him that
those within 1 forbade him to come farther until they knew what _
his errand was. “I have no desire,” said he, “but to comply
38 THE QUEST OF THE HOLY GRAIL


with the practices followed here.” “Surely,” he replied, “you
will be sorry you ever cherished this desire; for you shall have
such an adventure as never knight has been able to accomplish.
But await me here, and your desire shall be fulfilled.” ‘Go
quickly then,” said Galahad, “and hasten the business before me.”

Then the valet entered the castle. And presently Galahad
saw seven knights who were brothers come forth, who cried to
him: “Sir knight, look out for us, for we are intent upon nothing
but your death!” “What!” said he, “do you all intend to join
in attacking me?” “Yes,” they answered, “for such is thé
adventure and the practice here.” When he heard that, he
charged them with lance out-thrust and struck the first so hard
that he cast him on the ground and almost broke his neck.
Then the others joining their efforts struck him on the shield,
but they could not budge him from his saddle. Yet the shock
of their lances stopped his horse in full career and almost threw
him on the ground. In this encounter all lances were broken, |
but not until Galahad had unhorsed three of the knights with
his. Then he took his sword in hand and engaged those who
“were still in the saddle, they also attacking him. Between them

a great and fierce fight began. Meanwhile those who had been
unhorsed remounted their steeds, and the battle was fiercer
than before. But he who was the best knight of them all strove
so valiantly that he made them all retreat, attacking them so
fiercely with his trenchant sword that their armour was of no
avail and blood flowed from their bodies. And they found him
to be so strong and agile that they thought he could not be a
mere mortal man; for there is no man in the world who could.
‘withstand half of what he had withstood. So they were much
‘amazed, seeing they could not move him from his place and
that his th continued as great as at first. For it was true,
. as the history of the Holy Grail testifies, that no one ever saw __

“him exhausted by the labours of chivalry.

Thus the confhct lasted until noon. But when that hour
arrived, the seven brothers, despite their great prowess, found
themselves so weary and hard pressed that they were power-
less to defend themselves. And he who never drew back from
fear continued to unhorse them. When they saw that they
could no longer hold out, they turned in flight. And he, seeing
this, did not pursue them, but came to the bridge leading to
the ‘castle, where he met an old man clad in a religious garb
who handed him the ‘keys of the place, and said: “Sire, take
these keys. Now you may do what you please with this castle
and those who are within; for you have done so well that the
castle now is yours.”

Soe took the keys and entered the castle. And as soon as
he was inside, he met in the streets so many damsels that he
could not count them. And they all said to him: ‘‘ Welcome, sire!
We have long awaited our deliverance. Praised be God that He
has brought you hither; else we should never have been de-
livered from this doleful castle.” And he in turn wished them
God’s blessing. Then they seized his horse’s bridle and led him
inside the stronghold where they removed his arms as it were
by force, for he said it was not yet time to seek a lodging. But
one of the damsels said to him: “ Ah! sire, what is this you say?
Surely if you go off now, those whom your prowess has put to
flight would straightway return to-night and resume the hateful
practice which they have so long maintained in this castle.
Then all your labour would go for nothing.” “Well, what do
you want me to do?” said he; “I am ready to do your will,
provided J think that it is right,” Then the damsel answered:
“We want you to summon the knights and vavassors of the
country round who hold their fiefs from this castle; and make
them swear, as well as all the people here, that they will never
_ again maintain this custom.” So he gave the command. And
when they had taken him to the principal residence, he dis-
mounted and removed his helmet and went upstairs into the
hall. Then a damsel came from a neighbouring room bringing
an ivory horn richly circled with gold. Giving it to Galahad,
she said: “IF you wish them to come who shall henceforth
hold this land in fief from you, sound this horn which can be
heard for ten leagues.”’ And he said that that was a good thing
to do. So he handed it to a knight whom he saw close by. He
taking it blew it so loudly that it could be heard all through
the country round. After this, they all sat down around Galahad.
And he asked the man who had given him the keys whether he
was a priest. And he said he was. “Tell me then,” said he, “about
the custom here and where all these damsels here came from.”
“‘T will gladly do so,” the priest replied.

“Tt is true that ten years have passed since the seven knights
whom you have deféated came by chance to this castle and
lodged with Duke Lynor, who was lord of all this couhtry and
the most honourable man known. And at night after the meal
was done, a strife broke out between the seven brothers and the
40 THE QUEST OF THE HOLY GRAIL


duke over a daughter of his whom the seven brothers sought
to possess by force. Finally the duke and one of his sons were
killed, and she who was the cause of the strife fell into their
hands. And when the brothers had accomplished their purpose,
they took all the treasure here and, summonpg knights and
sergeants, began a war against the people of this country. And
they succeeded so well that they put them down and took over
their fiefs from them. When the duke’s daughter saw this, she
was very angry and said as if in prophecy: ‘Surely, gentlemen,’
said she, ‘we do not care if you now have the lordship of this
castle. For as you have won it through a woman, so shall

ou lose it through a damsel; and all seven of you shall be

efeated at the hands of3 single knight.’ They were much
displeased at this and answered that because of what she had
said, every damsel who should ever pass before the castle should
be held prisoner by them until the knight shout! come who ~
could defeat them. This they have done until now, so the castte
has been called ‘the Maidens’ Castle.” “And the damsel for
whose sake the strife was first begun,” Galahad inquired, “‘is
she still here?” ‘No, sire,” he replied; “she is dead. But a
younger sister of hers is here.” “And how did these damsels
fare?” asked Galahad. “They were very wretched,” he replied.
“Well, they are free now,” said Galahad.”

* At noon the castle began to fill up with those who had learned
the news that the castle had been won. So they made much of
Galahad as their lord. And he reinvested the duke’s daughtér
“with the castle and its appanages, and made all the knights of

- the country acknowledge themselves the damsel’s vassals, and
made them swear they would never again support this custom.
And the maidens all departed to their homes.

All day Galahad tarried there, and they did him great honour.
And on the morrow came the report that all seven brothers
had been killed. ‘And who killed them?” Galahad inquired.
“Sire,” a valet replied, “when they left you yesterday, they
met on yonder hill my. lord_Gawain and his brother Gaheriet
and my lord Yvain! And when they attacked each other, the
seven brothers were discomfited.”” And he marvelled at this
adventure, and asked for his arms, which were brought to him.
And when he was armed, he left the castle accompanied by the
people for a long distance until he made them turn back, when
he rode on his way alone. But now the story leaves him and
returns to my lord Gawain.
CHAPTER IV


fee ie poe at =


and rode for many a day without encountering any adventure
worthy of mention. And finally he came tothe abbey where
Galahad had taken the white shield with the red cross upon
it-and where-he-was told of the adventures which Galahad had
‘accomplished. When he heard all this, he asked which way he
had gone, and they told him. So he started out after him and
rode until chance brought him to the place where Melyant lay
ill, who, when he recognised my lord Gawain, told him that
Galahad had but that morning gone away. “God!” said my
lord Gawain, “how unlucky I am! I am surely the most ill-
starred knight in the ward: to go following this knight so
closely and not to be able to come up with him! Truly, if God
should grant that I find him, I would never more leave him,
provided he desired my company as much as I his.”

One of the friars present heard these words, and replied to

my lord Gawain: “The companionship of you two, sir, would
not be at all suitable. For you are a wicked and disloyal servant, .”
while he is such a knight as he ought to be.” “Sire,” replied my
lord Gawain, “from what you say it appears that you know
me well.” “I know you,” said the worthy man, “much better
‘than you suppose.” “Fair sire,” said Gawain, “then you can
tell me, if you please, how I deserve the character you have
given me.” “It is not for me-to tél ' you,” ” said he, “but you
shall meet someone soon who will tell you.”
’ While they were conversing thus, there entered a knight
fully armed who dismounted in the courtyard. Then the friars
ran to disarm him and took him to the room where, my lord
Gawain was. And as soon as he was disarmed and Gawain saw
him, he knew him to be his brother Gaheriet; so running to
him with outstretched arms hé welcomed him joyfully, and
asked him if he was well and happy. And he answered: “Yes,
I am, thank God.”

That night they were well cared for by the friars, and the
next morning, as soon as it was day, they heard mass all armed

D 41 :
42 THE QUEST OF THE HOLY GRAIL


except their helmets. Then, when they were mounted and
equipped, they left and rode until the hour of prime. Then
looking ahead they saw my lord Yyain nding alone; and they
knew him by the arms he wore. So they called him to stop.
He looked back when he heard his name called, and stopped
and knew them by their voices. And they welcomed him gladly
and asked him how it had been faring with him. He replied
that he had accomplished nothing, for he had not yet encoun-
tered any adventure to please him. “Then let us ride all
together, , said Gaheriet, “until God shall send us some adven-
ture.” As that was agreeable to all of them, they all three
continued on their road together until they came near the
Maidens’ Castle. Now this was the very day that the castle
had been captured. When the seven brothers saw the three
companions approaching, they said: “ Now let us attack and
kill them; for they are some of the party who have driven us
out, and they are knights seeking adventure.” Then they rode
at the three companions and shouted to them to be on their
guard, for they are headed straight for death. Hearing this
warning, they turned about their horses’ heads. And it happened
at the first encounter that three of the seven brothers lost
their life: for my lord Gawain killed one, my lord Yvain another,
and Gaheriet the third. Then they drew their swords and attacked
the others. And they defended themselves as best they could,
but to little avail, for they were very weary and exhausted by
the great conflict and strife already offered them that day by
Galahad. So the three companions, being good men and doughty
nights, used them so ill that they killed them in short order.
Then leaving them dead where they fell, they went whither
fortune led them.

They did not return to the Maidens’ Castle, but turned off
to the right and thus lost track of Galahad. And at the vesper
hour they separated, and each one went his way. My lord
Gawain rode until he came to a hermitage and found the hermit
was in his chapel singing vespers in honour of Our Lady. So
he dismouiited and listened to the service, then-asked for a
lodging in the name of holy charity. And the hermit gladly
welcomed him.

That evening the worthy man asked my lord Gawain whence
he came. So he told him the truth and also the quest which he
had undertaken. And the hermit, understanding that this was
my lord Gawain, said to him: “If it pleased you, sire, I should
surely like to know how it goes with you.”’ Then he began to

speak to him about confession and to call to mind many fair

lessons from. the gospel, and he advised him to make his con-

fession to him, and he would do his best to counsel him. “Sire,”’

said my lord Gawain, “if you would explain to me something

which was said to me yesterday, I would tell you all about

myself, for you seem to be a very worthy man, and I am aware

that you are a priest.” And the worthy man promised him that

he would counsel him as well as he could. Then my lord Gawain

looked at the hermit and saw him to be so old and so worthy of

respect that he felt drawn to make his confession to him. So_
he told him the cause of the greatest guilt he felt towards Our.
Lord, not forgetting to mention what had been told him by

the friar. Thus the hermit learned that full. four..years had.
passed since his last confession. So he said to him:

"With good reason you were called. a wicked and disloyal
servant. For when you were admitted into the order of chivalry
_you weré not admitted in order that you should become a
servant of the devil, but that you might serve our Creator and
“ defend Holy Church and render to God the treasure which He
gave you to keep, that is . on. Soh That is why you were made
a knight, but your chivalry has Been ill employed. For you have
completely served the devil, and desértéd your Creator, and led
the most foul and wicked life that a knight ever led. So you can
‘plainly see that he who called you a wicked and disloyal servant
was well acquainted with you. And surely, if you were not such
a sinner as you are, the seven brothers would not have been
killed by you or with your assistance, but they would have
repented of the wicked custom they had so long maintained
in the Maidens’ Castle and would have been reconciled with
God. Far otherwise did the Good Knight Galahad of whom
you are now in quest: for he defeated them without taking
. their life. And it was not without great significance that the
seven brothers had maintained this custom in the castle and
detained all the maidens who came into this region, whether
rightfully or not.” “Ah! sire,” said my lord Gawain, “tell me
the meaning of it, that I may relate it at court when I return.”
“T will gladly,” said the worthy man.

“By the Maidens’ Castle you must understand that hell is —
Geant and by the damsels the good souls who were detained
there wrongfully before the Passion of Jesus Christ. And by
“the seven knights you must understand is meant the seven
44 THE QUEST OF THE HOLY GRAIL


capital sins that held sway. then in the world, so that there was
‘no righteousness. For as soon as any soul, be it of a good or a
wicked man, left the body, it went straight to hell and was
imprisoned there precisely as the damsels were. But when the
Father in Heaven saw that what He had created was doomed
to such an evil fate, He sent His Son to earth to deliver the
good damsels, that is the good souls. And just as He sent His
Son whom He had before the world began, so He sent Galahad,
His chosen knight, and servant, to release from the castle the
‘good damsels, who are as pure and clean as the fleur-de-lys
which never feels the summer’s heat.”
On hearing these words, he did not know what to say; and the
ood man continued: “Gawain, Gawain, if you would forsake
this wicked life which you have lived so long, you might yet
be reconciled with Our Lord. For the Scripture says that not
one sinner shall fail to find Our Lord’s mercy if he seek it
earnestly. Therefore, I counsel you with my best advice to do
penance for your crimes.” But he replied that he could not
bear the burden of doing penance. So the hermit left him alone,
without saying more, for he saw his advice would be thrown away.
In the morning my lord Gawain went away and rode until
he met by chance Agloval and Girflet the son of Doon. And
they journeyed togethér for four days without meeting any
adventure worth mentioning, and on the fifth day they sepa-
rated and each one went his own way. So now the story turns
from them and takes up Galahad.
CHAPTER V


Now the story tells that when Galahad had left the Maidens’
Castle he rode until he came to"thé Forest Gaste. One day it
happened that he met Lancelot.and. Perceval who were riding
in company; but they did not recognise him, not having had
an occasion to see his arms before. So Lancelot attacked him.
first.and-broke his lance against Galahad’s breast. Then Galahad
struck him so hard that he upset him and his horse in a pile,
but he did him no other harm. Having broken his lance, he
drew his sword.and.dealt Perceval such a blow that he split
his helmet and cap of mail; and if the sword had not turned
in his hand, he would surely have killed him. However, Per- |
ceval had not the strength to keep his saddle, but fell to the
round so weak and stunned from the terrific blow he had
received that he did not know whether it was night or day.
Now this conflict was waged in front of a hermitage where a
recluse. dwelt. When she saw Galahad going away, she called
* fo him: “Farewell now, and may God lead you! Certainly, if
_ they had known you as well as I know you, they would never
"have been so bold as to attack you.’’ When Galahad heard
‘these words, he was in great fear of being recognised. So he
spurred his horse and rode away as fast as he could urge him.
Now when the two knights saw that he was going away, they
mounted their steeds as quickly as possible. But when they
saw that they could not follow him, they turned back so abashed .
apd so angry that they would fain have died at once; for their
lives were hateful to them. So they struck into the Forest Gaste.
Lancelot was in the Forest Gaste, wretched and furious at
having lost trace of the knight. And he said to Perceval: “What
can we do?” and he replied he could think of no plan to pursue.
For the knight went away so fast that they could not follow
after him. “You see yourself,” said he, “that night has sur-
prised us in a place whence we cannot escape unless some
chance should assist us. So it seems to me that we had better
go back to the road. For if we begin to wander about here,
I think we shal} not get back to the right road for a long time.


45
46 THE QUEST OF THE HOLY GRAIL


Now you may do what you please; but I see more advantage
in our turning back than in pushing forward.” Then Lancelot
said that he would not agree to turn, back, but would go after
the knight with the white shield: for he would never be satisfied
until he learned.whe-he -was. “You can at least wait,” said
Perceval, “until the morrow comes. Then you and I will pursue
the knight.” But Lancelot said he would do nothing of the kind.
“God help you, then,” said Perceval; “for to-day I go no
farther, but I’ll turn back to the recluse who said she knew
well who he was.”

Thus the companions separated, and Perceval returned to
the recluse. Meanwhile Lancelot rode in pursuit of the knight
hither and thither through the forest, following no trail or
pathway, but going at random where chance took him. His
regret was great that he could see neither in the distance nor
near at hand any path to follow, for the night was very dark.
Yet he pushed on until he came tg a stone cross at the parting
of two ways in a deserted place. And looking more closely at


a ME


«


to it he dismounted and, fying Ts horse_to_an_oak-tree, he
removed_his shield from his neck and hung it on the tree. Then,

coming to the chapel, he found it deserted and in ruins. And

when he was about to enter, he found at the entrance some iron

prongs so closely joined together that it would be no easy task

for anyone to get in. Looking through the bars he saw inside an

altar very richly adorned with silken cloths and other things,

“an ore it stood a silver candelabra holding six Sarning:
tapers which cast a bright light around. At the sight of this,

he yearned to enter to see who inhabited the place: for he could

not imagine that there should be such beautiful things in such

a remote place. So he examined the grill, and when he found

he could not go farther, he was so distressed that he left the

chapel and led his steed back by the bridle to the cross, where

he took off the saddle and bridle and let him browse. Then he~
unlaced his helmet and set it down before him, and he femoved

his sword and lay down upon his shield in front of the cross

and being weary fell into a light doze, though he could not entirely

banish from his mind the Good Knight with the white shield.
When he had been there for some time, he saw coming in
a litter borne by two palfreys, a sick knight who was lamenting
bitterly. And when Re diee near Lancelot, he stopped and gazed
at him, but did not say a word, thinking he was asleep. Nor
did Lancelot say a word, but lay as one in a doze between a
sleep and wakefulness. And the knight in the litter who had
stopped at the cross began to bewail his fate aloud, crying:
“Ah! God, is there to be no end to my distress? Ah! God, when
will the Haly. Vessel.come-who..will cause my agony to .ceasé?


— -'


did not stir nor say a word, lying still as one in a trance, though
he saw him and heard what he said. |
And when the knight had waited for a long time in this way,
celot looked and saw approaching from the direction of the
chapel the silver candelabra which he had seen in the chapel
wath the tapers. As he looked at the candelabra, he saw it

ing taward. the cross, but he could not see who was bearing

..1t; and he was filled with wonder. Next he saw drawing near
upon a silver table the Holy Vessel which he had seen once
\ before at the Fisher King’s, the very same which was called the
‘‘ Holy Grail As Soon as the sick knight saw it approaching, he
fell his full length upon the ground, and with hands clasped
toward it, he exclaimed: “Fair sire God, who hast wrought
so many miracles in this and other lands through this’ Holy
Vassl which I see drawing near, Father, look upon me in pity,
“that this woe which [ suffet may be speédily relieved, and that .
I too may enter upon the Quest evén as other worthy men have
done.” Then he dragged himself along by his arms to the.stone
where the table rested with the Holy Vessel upon it. And he
raised himself up by his two hands until hé could kiss the
-touch it with his eyes. As soon as he had done
this he felt, as it were, cured of his woes: so he uttered a great
sigh and said: “Ah! God; T am healed.” And at once he fell.
asleep..Now when the Vessel had stayed there a while, the
candelabra moved away toward the chapel and the Vessel
with it, so that Lancelot did not know by whom it could
be carried either when it approached or when it withdrew.
‘However, it came about that either because he was wearied
| (by his labours or because of sin which had overcome him,
‘the did not stir when the Hely—Grail passed by nor did he


> a


—
4,


48 THE QUEST OF THE HOLY GRAIL


manifest any concern for it; wherefore later on the Quest
many a word of shame was said to him and many a misfortune
befell him.

When the Holy Grail had left the cross and returned to the
chapel, the knight of the litter rose up restored and sound and
kissed the cross. At once there appeared a squire bringing some
fine rich arms, and going up to the knight he asked him how it
was with him. “Well, in faith,” said he, “thank God: I was
healed at ance as soon as the Holy Grail visited me.-But I marvel


“at yon knight who is. sound asleep. and never woke up when


it passed by.” “In truth,” said the squire, “he is some knight
who is living in some | great sin which he has never confessed,

and of which he is perchance so guilty before Our Lord that
He would not permit him to behold this fair adventure.”
“Surely,” the knight replied, “he is unfortunate, whoever
he be; for I believe he is one of the companions of the Round
Table who have taken up the Quest of the Holy Grail.” “Sire,”
said the squire, “I have brought here your arms, which you
may take when you please.” The knight replied that now he
needed nothing else. So he armed himself and put on his iron
greaves and his hauberk. Then taking Lancelot’s sword and
helmet, the squire gave them to him, and then he put the
saddle and bridle on Lancelot’s horse. When he had equipped
the steed, he said to his lord: “Mount now, sire, for you are
not lacking a good horse and a good sword. Truly, I have given
you nothing which will not be better used by you than by that


_ wretched knight lying yonder.” The moon had now risen fair


and clear, for it was already past midnight. And the knight
inquired of the squire how he knew about the sword; and he
replied that he knew it must be good by its beauty: for he had
already drawn it from the scabbard and had thought it so
beautiful that he had coveted it. And when the knight was
fully armed and mounted upon Lancelot’s steed, he raised his
hand toward the chapel and swore that with the help of God
and the saints he would never cease his w until he.


_found out how it was that the Holy Grail appeared in so many
Eo Beg in the kingdom of Logres, and by whom it was brought.


‘and for what purpose, unless someone else should
‘anticipate him in discovering the truth. “So help me God,”


said the valet, “you have said enough. Now may God grant


"you to come out with honour from this Quest, and with salva-__
tion BOF your soul; for surely you-cannot long maintain it with- —
out running danger of death.” “If I die,” the knight replied,
“it will be rather to my honour than my shame. For no man of —
honour ought to refuse to undertake this Quest either for fear
' of death or love of life.” Then he and his squire, taking the
arms of Lancelot, left the cross and rode whither they were
led by chances | | 7
‘Now when he had gone perhaps half a league or more, it
happened that Lancelot sat up like one who now for the first
time was completely awake. And he wondered whether what .
_he had seen had been a dream or a reality, for he did not know
whether he had beheld the Holy Grail in fact or only in a dream.
Then he stood up and saw the candelabra in front of the altar,
but he saw no sign of what he would more like to see, that is
: the Holy Grail, about which he would fain learn the truth
“if possible. | _
‘"“When Lancelot had stood for a long time before the iron


sighing deeply and weeping,’and-he-cursed the hour he was
Born, for he knew well he had come to a place where he would
have no more honour, since he had failed to learn the truth
about the Holy Grail. But he did not forget the three expres-
sions that had been addressed to him, nor will he forget them
as long as he lives, nor will he be much relieved until he learns
why he was addressed in this manner. And coming to the cross
he found neither his helmet nor his sword nor his horse: then
-he perceived it had been the reality which he had beheld.
Then he began a great marvellous lament, reproaching himself
as a sorrowful wretch: “ Ah! God, now my sins and my wicked
life appear openly. Now I see that my own wickedness has been
the cause of my confusion more than anything else. For when
T ought to have reformed my conduct, the devil destroyed me
by taking from me my sight. so that I could not see anything
that came from God. It is no wonder that I cannot see clearly,
for since I was first made a knight: eel no time when
[was not covered’ with the darkness of mortal sin, for more
1 A strange comparison: see below, pp. 55-6.
50 THE QUEST OF THE HOLY GRAIL


than any other man I have lived in the lust and degradation
of this world.” eee ee ree ae ©
~ Thus Lancelot violently reproached and blamed himself and
uttered his lament all night. When the day dawned fair and
clear and the birds began to sing in the woods and the sun
began to shine among the trees, he saw the fine weather and
heard the song of the birds which had many a time brought
joy to his heart; then he saw himself stripped of his arms and
his horse and everything, and he realised that in truth Our.
_Lord was a with him. And he thought he could never
again find aageing ih the world to restore his joy to him. For
he had been wanting at the very place where he. expected: to.
find his joy and every earthly honour, that is in the adventures
“of the Holy Grail. And- this it was that made him disconsolate.

And when he ‘hhad for a long time lamented and raved and
regretted his misfortune, he left the cross and went through
the forest on foot, without helmet, sword or shield. So he did
not go back to the chapel where he had heard the three strange
words addressed to him; but he turned off by a path which led
him at the hour of prime to a_hill where he found a hermitage _
and a hermit who was about to begin the mass and who had
already donned the robes of Holy Church: Gloomy, pensive
and immeasurably sad, he entered the chapel, and kneeling in
the middle of thé chancel he confessed his sins and cried aloud
upon Qur Lord for forgiveness for the evil deéds he had done
in this world. Then he gave heed to the mass celebrated by the
worthy man and his clerk. When the mass was over and the
good man had laid aside the robes of Our Lord, Lancelot called
him aside and begged him for God’s sake to give him advice.
-And when the hermit asked him who he was, he replied that he
belonged to King Arthur’s household and was a companion of
the Round Table. Then the good man asked him: “What do
you want advice about? Is it a confession you wish to make?”
“Yes, sire,” he replied. “Then in Our Lord’s name, let us
proceed,” the hermit said.

Then he led him in front of the altar and they sat down to-
gether. When the good man asked him his name, ‘he said he
was Lancelot of the Lake, son of King Ban of Benoyc, Then
when the worthy man heard that He’was Lancelot of the Lake,
the man in the world of whom most good was spoken, he was
amazed to see him display such grief, and he said to him:

“Sire, you owe a great debt to God for making you so fair
and valiant that we know no one in the world who tienes’


a rere we ge


atch for beauty and valour. He has given you the intelligence
anid the memony-yor possess, and you ought to deal so kindly
with Him that His love may be safely bestowed in you and
that the devil may derive no advantage from the great, talent
He has granted _you. So serve Him with all your power and do
His commandments. With the talent He has given you, serve
not His mortal enemy, the devil. For if He has been generous
to you above all others and He should Tose after all, then you" -
would be greatly to be blamed.

“So be not like the unprofitable servant of whom it speaks
in the Gospel, whom one of the evangelists mentions when he
tells that a certain rich man handed over to three of his servants
a great part of his gold. For to one he gave one besant, and
to another two, and to the other five. He to whom he gave five
increased them so that when he came before his master to give
him an account of his profits, he said: ‘Lord, thou gavest me
five besants: behold, here they are with five others which I have
gained.’ And when the lord heard it, he replied: ‘Come, good and
faithful servant: I admit thee into the company of my house-
hold.’ Afterward came he who had received the two besants
and told his master that he had gained two others. And his lord
replied to him as he had done to the other servant. But it hap-
pened that he who had only received one had buried it in the
earth and had fled from before his master’s face, not daring to
come forward. This was the wicked servant, the false simoniac, _
the hypocritical heart into which the flame of the Holy Spirit -
never entered. Therefore he cannot burn with the love of Our.
Lord nor kindle those to whom He announced the holy gospel.
For as the holy scripture says: ‘He who is not on fire himself
will not burn another,’ which isto say: ‘If the flame of the
Holy Spirit does not warm him who speaks the Gospel word,
then the man who hears it will neither burn nor be warmed.’

“These words I have quoted because of the great gift which
Our Lord has bestowed on you. For I see that He has created
you fairer and better than other men, so far as can be judged
from the outward semblance. And if you in spite of this gift
which He has granted you are His enemy, then be sure that He
will reduce you to nothingness in a short time, if you do not
-beseech Him for mercy in trie tonfesston and in hearty repent-
ance and in amendment of your life. But I promise you that,
if you beseech His mercy in this way, He is kind and loves the
52 THE QUEST OF THE HOLY GRAIL


true repentance of the sinner more than He does the error, and
He will raise you up stronger and more vigorous than you
ever were before.”

“Sire,” said Lancelot, “this parable which you have shown
me of the three servants who had received the besants, dis-
tresses me more than anything else. For I. know well that
_Jesus Christ furnished me in childhgod with.all the good graces.
that any man could “have; but because He was so generous to
me with what I have so ill repaid Him, I know that I shall be
judged as the wicked servant who hid his besant in the earth.
For all my life I have served His enemy, and have warred ¢ ainst


Sree


ae. of sin. The devil showed me the sweetness and the
honey; but he did not show me the eternal punishment to be
suffered by him who travels that road.”

When. the worthy man heard these words, he wept and said
to Lancelot: “Sire, I know that no one continues in this path
you mention who isnot consigned to an endless death. But™
just as you may see how a man sometimes loses his road when
he falls asleep and returns to it when he wakes up, so it is
with the sinner who is lulled asleep in mortal sin and loses the
right path, but later returns to his way, that is his Creator, and
directs himself to the High Lord who cries continually: ‘J am _

-the way, the truth, and the life,’” At that moment he looke
and beheld a cross on which the sign of the true Cross was
portrayed ; and pointing it out to Lancelot, he said: “Sire, do
you see that cross?” “Yes,” he replied. “Then know truly,”
said the hermit, ‘“‘that that figure has stretched out its arms as
if to draw all men unto it. In like manner Our Lord-stretthed ~
out His arms ‘fo recéive every sinner, you and all others who
appeal to Him, and He ¢ries continually: ‘Come, came!’ And
since He is so kind as to receive all men and women who return
to Him, know that He will not refuse you, if you offer yourself
up to Him in the way I describe, with true confession of mouth
and repentance of heart and _amendment. of life. So recount”
your state and your affairs to Him in my hearing, and I will
“do my best-te-help you to find succour, and I will counsel you
as best I may.”

Lancelot was still a while as one who never admitted his
relations with the queen, and would never mention them as
long as he lived, unless great pressure should be brought upon
him. Then he heaved a sigh from the depths of his heart and
_ was so moved that he could not utter a word. Though he would -
fain speak, he did not dare, being more cowardly than brave.
‘Meanwhile the good man exhorted him to confess his sin and
have it out; otherwise he would be ashamed for not doing as
he was bid, and he further assured him of eternal life if he
confessed his sin and of hell if he concealed it. He spoke to him
so kindly and so appealingly that finally Lancelot began to speak:

“Sire, the fact is that I am dead in sin because of my lady
whom I have loved all my life, and she is Queen Guinevere, the
wife of King Arthur. It is she who has given me abundance of

_gold and silver and the valuable gifts which I have sometimes
_handed on to poor knights. It'is she who has set me up in great
luxury in the high places I occupy. It is for love of her that I have
performed the great deeds of prowess of which the whole world
talks. It is she who has raised me from poverty to riches and
from misery to all the bléssings earth affords. But I know well
that because of my sin with her Our Lord is sorely displeased
with me as He clearly revealed to me last night.” Then he told
him how he had beheld the Holy Grail without stirring in its
presence either to do it honour or to prove his devotion to
Our Lord.

Then when he had rehearsed his state and all his past life
to the worthy man, he begged him for God’s sake to counsel |
him. “Certainly, sire,” he then replied, “there is no use in
counselling you unless you promise God that you will never,
again fall into this sin. But if you were willing to renounce it
altogether and cry for mercy and heartily repent, I think that
“Our Lord would stiff recatr you to the number of His servants
and would open for you the door of Heaven, where eternal
life 1s prepared for those who enter in. But in your.present
state of mind there is no use in giving you advice. For it would
‘bea ii the case of fhe man who Bulle a Strong, high tower upon
a poor foundation: and it turned out that when he had built

or some time, It alf fell in a heap. In like manner all my trouble
would be wasted on you, if you did not receive my advice
gladly and apply it. It would be like the seed sown upon the
rock, which the birds carry off and scatter so that it never
yields anything.” “Sire,” said he, “you cannot tell me anything
that I will not do; tfGod yratit me Hife.” “Then I insist,”
said the worthy man, “that you promise me that you will never
wrong your Creator by committing mortal sin with the queen
eee


54 THE QUEST OF THE HOLY GRAIL


or any other woman or in any other way which would anger

_Him.”” And this he promised Tike aloyal knight. = ~
~ “Now tell me again,” said the good man, “of your experience
with the Holy Grail.” Then he told him and repeated the three
words which the voice had said to him in the chapel when he
had been called a stone, wood, and a_fig-tree. ‘Now in God’s
name,” said he, “télItne the meaning of these three things.
For I never heard anything which I so desired to understand.
Therefore, I pray you to explain them to me: for I know that
you know their meaning.”’ Then the worthy man began to think
a long while, and when he spoke, he said: “I am certainly_not
astonished, Lancelot,”’ said he, “that these three words have
been addressed to you. For you have always been the most_

marvellous man in the world, and so it is not strange that more
marvellous words should be addressed to you than to others.

And since you desire.to know their meaning, I will gladly tell
-you. So listen.

7 “You say that you were told: ‘Lancelot, harder than stone,

( more bitter than wood, more barren and stripped than the
fig-tree, get thee. hence.’ When you were called harder than
stone, a strange thing is to be understood. For every stone is
hard by nature, the only difference being in degree. By the stone
with its hardness.is meant the sinner who has become so Talled
and hardened in his sin that his heart cannot be softened b
fire or water. It cannot be softened by fire; for the fire of the —~
Holy Spirit cannot penetrate it or find access because of the
filthy vessel and the mortal sins which have been increased
and accumulated day by day. And it cannot be softened by
water ; for the word of the Holy Spirit, which is the sweet water


and the gentle rain, be-received into such a heart as
his. ] will never seek lodgment in a place where His ~


enemy is, but insists that the place where He lodges be clean

and purged of all vice and filth. Now the sinner is likened to a

stone because of the exceeding hardness which He finds in him.

But it remains to be seen why you are harder than stone, that

is, why you are a greater sinner than all others.” And, saying

that, he began to think and then continu

“T will tell you wherein you are worse than other sinners.

You have heard of the three servants to whom the rich man
gave the besants to increase and multiply. The two who had

received most were good and faithful servants, wise and prudent. :
And the other, who had received less, was a stupid and disloyal
servant. Now consider whether you could be one of His servants
to whom Our Lord gave the five besants to multiply. It seems
to me that ta you He gave much more. For if one were to -con-
sider the knights of the world, methinks he could not find a
man to whom Our Lord has granted so much grace as He has
bestowed upon you. He gave you exceeding beauty; He gave
you intelligence and discretion to distinguish the good from
the evil; tie gave you prowess and valour. And moreover He
gave you happiness so generously that you have risen far above
where you began. Alt these things Our Lord granted you in
order that you might be His knight and servant. But He did
not give you these things in order that they should be wasted


on you, but that they should be increased and improved. But .


“you have been such a wicked and disloyal servant that you
have forsaken Him and served His enemy, for you have con-
tinually been at strife with Him. You have been like the wicked
soldier who leaves his lord as soon as he has received his wages
and goes to help his enemy. Thus you have acted toward Our
Lord: for as soon as He had paid you richly and well, you left


Him to go and serve him who is always at war with Him. This .


would not_be done. by.any.man, I think, whom He had paid
__as well as He has paid you. Thus you may see that you are
harder than.stone, afid“a greater sinner than any other. How-
ever, whoever wishes may interpret the word stone in another
_mannet. For a multitude of people saw sweet water issue from
the rock in the desert beyond the Red Sea where the people
of Israel tarried so long a time. There it was clearly seen that
when the people were athirst and quarrelled with each other,
Moses came to a hard old rock and said, just as if it were im-


peer) ee


are harder than stone.’


“Sire,” said Lancelot, “now tell me why it was said that -


I was more bitter than wood.” “T will tell you,” the hermit
made reply. “Now listen to me. I have shown you that in you
there is nothing but hardness, and where hardness is there can
be no sweetness, and we ought not to expect to find anything
there but bitterness; and there is as much of bitterness in you
56 THE QUEST OF THE HOLY GRAIL


» as there ought to be of sweetness. So you are like the dead and
rotten wood in which no sweetness is to be found, but only
bitterness. Now I have shown you how you are harder than
_ stone and more bitter than wood.
‘ “Now the third thing to explain is how you are more barren
and stripped than a fig-tree. The fig-tree here concerned is
mentioned in the Gospel where it speaks of Palm Sunday when
Our Lord entered the city of Jerusalem on an ass, the day when
the children of the Hebrews sang to welcome Him the sweet
songs of which Holy Church reminds us each year on the day
we call the day of palms. That day the High Lord, the High
Master, the High Prophet preached in the city of Je Sa ies
surrounded by those in whom all hardness was we And
when He had toiled all day and had finished Fis-sermon, He
found no one in the city who would lodge Him, wherefore He
went forth from the city. And when He was outside the city,
He saw by the road a fig-tree which was fine-looking and well
furnished with leaves and branches, but without fruit. And
Our Lord came to the tree, and when He saw it bare of fruit,
He was angered and cursed the tree which bore no fruit. So
it was with the fig-tree outside of Jerusalem. Now consider
whether you might be such an one, only more barren and
stripped than it was. When the High Lord came to the tree,
He found on it leaves which He might have picked, had He
wished. But when the Holy Grail passed where you were, it
found you so stripped as to be without any good thought 6: or
intention; rather it found you mean and filthy and lying’ in
luxury and stripped of leaves and blossoms, that is to say, of
all good works. Therefore, you were told what you have reported ~
to me: ‘Lancelot, harder than stone, more bitter than wood,
more barren and stripped than a fig-tree, get thee hence.’”’
“Certainly, sire,’ said Lancelot, “you have spoken and
shown me clearly that I have good reason to be called a stone,
wood, and a fig-tree; for all those things you have mentioned
are found im me. But since you told me that I have not gone so
| far astray that I may not yet return, if I am willing to Pay
from falling again into mortal sin, I promise God first and you
afterward that I will never resume the life I have so long. led,
Jut.will observe chastity and keep my body as pure as I can.
But I could not cease from chivalry and feats of arms so long
as I remain strong and healthy as I am now.” When the good
man heard these words, he was very happy and replied: “ With-


Go gle
out doubt,if you willingly renounced your sin with the queen,

I tell you truly that Our Lord would love you again, and would
& SuCCONT your ana Would Took upon you with pity, and would
grant you power to achieve many a thing which you cannot do
now because of your sin.” “Sire,” said Lancelot, “I renounce
them all, and will never more sin witti Hef or anyone else.” *”

When the worthy man heard that, he prescribed such penance
as he thought he could accomplish, then absolved him and
blessed him and invited him to spend that day with him. And ~
“he replied that he must needs do so, as he had no horse to mount,
nor shield nor lance nor sword. “I can help you about that,”
the hermit said, “before to-morrow evening. For close by there
lives a brother of mine who is a knight and who will send me
a horse and arms and everything else required as soon as I send
word to him.” Lancelot replied that in that case he would gladly
stay, which made the good man happy and glad.

Thus Lancelot tarried with the hermit who exhorted him
to do the right. And he gave him so much good advice that
Lancelot repented of the life be. had_so_long led. For he saw.
clearly that ‘if he should die, his soul would be lost; and his
body peradventure would suffer too, if it could’ be reached
by punishment. So he repented that he had ever cherished
this mad love for the queen, for he had ill spent his time. So
“he blamed himself and was ashamed, and promised in his heart
that he would never again relapse. But now the story ceases
to speak of him and returns to Perceval.
CHAPTER VI


Now the story tells how when Perceval had left Lancelot, he
started back to the recluse from whom he thought to hear news
of the knight who had escaped them. And when he had turned
about, he could not find any direct path which led in that
direction. Nevertheless, he followed the direction as best he
could. Coming to the chapel, he knocked at the little window
belonging to the recluse, which she opened at once, as she had
not been asleep, and thrust out her head as far as possible to
Inquire who was there. And he told her he belonged to the house-
hold of King Arthur and that his name was Perceval le Gallois.
When she heard this name, she was very glad; for she love
him dearly, as was natural, seeing that he was her nephew. So
she called her servants and ordered them to open ihe dock for
the knight outside and give him something to eat if he needed
it, and to serve him in every way they could, for he was the man
whom she loved most in the world. Then the servants obeyed
her and opened the door and, after admitting the knight, they
removed his arms and gave him something to eat. And he asked
if he might speak with the recluse again. ‘“‘ Nay, sire, not now,”
they said, “but to-morrow after mass we think you can speak
with her.” So he resigned himself and lay down on a bed which
they prepared for him; and there he rested all night, being
weary and exhausted.

The next morning when it was bright daylight, Perceval
got up and heard mass which the hermit there celebrated for
him. And when he was armed, he went to the recluse and said
to her: “Lady, for God’s sake give me some news of the knight
who passed by here, to whom you said that you had good reason
to know him: for I am very anxious to know who he is.”” When
the lady heard that, she asked him why he was seeking him.
“Because,” he replied, “I shall not be happy until I have found
him and fought with him. For he has done me so much wrong
‘that I could not give him up without being ashamed:”

“Ah! Perceval,’ said she, “what is this you say? Do you
wish to fight with him? Do you wish t die like your brothers,

58
who were killed as the result of their outrageous behaviour?
And surely if you die in like manner, it will be a great pity and
your lineage will be greatly humiliated. Do you know what you
would lose, if you fight that knight? I will tell you. It is true
that the Quest of the Holy Grail has been begun, that you are
a companion in the Quest, I believe, and it will soon be accom=
plished, if God will, Now you are seeking much greater honour
than you realise, if you insist on fighting alone against this
knight. For this. we know well, in this country and in many
other places, that at the finish there will be three valued knights
“who above all others shall receive the credit and the reward
in this Quest; two of them shall be virgin and the third shall
be chaste. Of the two virgin knights, he whom you seek shall
be one and. you.the.other, while the third shall be Bors: de
Gaunes. By these three the Quest shall be accomplished. And
since God has destined you to receive this honour, it would be
too bad if you should seek your own death. And you certainly
will hasten it, if you fight with this knight whom you are
seeking, for he is surely a much better knight than you are
or anyone else.” | .
idy,”” said Perceval, ‘“‘it appears from what you say of my
brothers, that you know who I am.” “I do know,” said she,
“and have good reason to do so: for I am your aunt, and you
are my nephew. Do not doubt my words because I am here in
this humble place: rather believe that I am she who was for-
merly called queen of the Terre Gaste7 You have seen me in
very different circumstances from the present; for I was one of
the richest ladies in the world. Yet'my wealth never pleased
‘hor suited me so well as does this poverty in which I now live.”
__ When Perceval heard this, he began to weep for pity; and as
he thought it over, he knew that it was his aunt. Then he sat
down beside her and asked about his mother and his family.
“How is this?” she inquired; “have you no news of your
_mother?” “Absolutely none, lady,” he replied; “I do not know
whether she is living or not. But many a time in my dreams it
has come over me that she had much more cause to complain
_ of me than to praise me, seeing how ill I treated her.”” When the
lady heard him say this, she replied sadly and pensively:
“Indeed, unless in a dream, you have not beheld your mother,
for she died as soon as you went to King Arthur’s court.” “ How
was that, lady?” he inquired. “Upon my word,” she replied,
“your mother was so grieved at your departure that that very


Original tron
sis eae Go gle UNIVERSITY OF VIRGINIA


60 THE QUEST OF THE HOLY GRAIL


day, as soon as she had made confession, she died.” “Now may
God have mercy on her soul,” said he, “for surely this is a
heavy sorrow. However, since it has happened, I must bear
it, for to this end we all’ must come. I never heard news of her
after we parted. But in God’s name, can you tell me who this
knight is whom I seek, and where he comes from, and whether
it was he who came to court with the red arms?” “By my head,
I swear it was he,” she said. “He“Came there with 1 perfect
right, and I will tell you what the meaning of it was.
* “You are aware that. since the advent. of Jesus Christ there
have been three famous tables in the world. The first was the
‘table of Jesus Christ at which the apostles ate several times.
“That was the table which nourished both bodies and souls with
meat from heaven. At this table sat the brethren who were
united in body and soul, about whom the prophet David uttered
a marvellous saying in ‘his book: petiole how ae Aad how
pleasant it is for brethren to dwell together uty Peace
concord “and patience dwelt in the brethren Sat at that
table, and all good works shone forth in them. And that table
was established by the Lamb without blemish who. was sacrificed
for our redemption. ~—

“ After that table there was another like it and in remembrance
of the first. That was the table of the Holy Grail which gave’
rise to so many great miracles in ‘this country in the time of

oseph of Arimathea when Christianity was first introduced |
into this land,—a miraculous event which must dwell in the
memory of all’ men, good and bad, for ever. It came about in
those days that Joseph of Arimathza arrived in this country -
' bringing many people with him, perhaps four thousand in
number and all poor men. And when’ they arrived here, they —
were greatly distressed for fear that there would be insufficient
food for such great numbers. One day they were! wandering in
a forest, where they found no one and nothing to eat. And ‘they
“were much dismayed, for they had not anticipated this. Thus
they suffered want_that day, but the next they searched up
hill and ‘down dale until they met an old_woman who was
carrying twelve loaves of bread from the oven. And they bought
them. And when they came to divide them, they got angry and
‘quarrelled among themselves, for some would not agree to
what the others proposed. When Joseph heard of this situation,
he was much displeased. So he commanded that the loaves
should be brought to him, which was done. Then came those
THE QUEST OF THE HOLY GRAIL 6r1


who had bought the loaves, and from them he learned how
some would not agree with the others. Then he commanded all
the people to sit down.as though they had been at Communion.
} Then he broke the bread and distributed it; at the head of the
! table he ptacet the Holy Grail, and in its presence the twelve.
 Toaves were multiplied so that all the people, of whom there
might have been four thousand, were miraculously fed and
| satisfied. When they saw this they thanked God for His mercy
in that He had succoured them so openly.
“At this table there was a seat which was to be occupied by
_Josephe, the son of Joseph of Arimathza. This seat was estab-
lished in order that the master and pastor of them all might
occupy it, and no one else was authorised to sit in it. It was
hallowed and blessed by the hand of Our Lord Himself, as the
story tells, and was the seat of that authority which Josephe
was to exercise over the Christians. In that chair Our Lord ©
imself had placed him; and consequently there was no one so
bold“as to dare to occupy it. And this seat had been constructed
on the model of the one occupied by Our Lord at the Last
Supper, when He sat among His apostles as shepherd and
master, And just as He was lord and master of all His apostles, |
so. was. Josephe destined to lead all those who sat at the table
_of the Holy Grail: he was to be their lord and master. But it
came about, when they had arrived in this country and had
| wandered in strange lands, that two brothers who were
Telatives of Josephe, were envious because Our Lord had
..elevated him above them and had chosen him as the best of
the company, So they spoke of it privily and said that they
would not endure him as their master: for they were of as high
lineage as he, and therefore they would no longer regard them-
selves as his disciples nor call him master. The next day, when
_they had climbed a high hill, and the tables were spread, and
they were“about to place Josephe in the highest seat, the two
_ brothers opposed him, and one of them took the seat himself
in the sight of all. But at once a miracle took place, for the earth
swallowed up him who had taken the seat. This miracle was
promptly known throughout the country, wherefore the seat


was thereafter called the Perilous Seat, And no one since that .’


time has been so foolhardy as to sit in it, except the one whom
Our Lord had chosen for it.

“After this table the Round Table was constructed, nat
without great significance, upon the advice of Merlin. By its
62 THE QUEST OF THE HOLY GRAIL


name the Round Table is meant to signify the round world and
the round canopy. of the planets and the elements in the firma-
ment, where are to be seen the stars and many other
Wherefore one may say that in the Round Table the world is
\V accurately bolised, For you can see that from all countries.
where chivalry is established, whether Christian or pagan, the
‘knights come oe the Round Table. And when God gives them
grace to become companions, they esteem themselves more
fortunate than if they had gained the whole world, and we can
see how for it they leave their fathers and mothers and wives
and children. You have seen this happen in your own case. For
since you left your mother and became a companion of the
Round Table, you have had no desire to return, but rather you
were at once possessed by the gentleness and brotherhood
which are bound to exist between those who are companions.
“*When Merlin, had established the Round Table, he said
that through the agency of those who shauld be its companions
the truth would be known.concerning.the Holy Grail, of which
no sign was to be seen in the days of Merlin. And they asked__
him how they could distinguish those who were to be accounted
~ ‘most excellent. And he replied: ‘There shall be three who will ~
‘accomplish the Quest: two of them virgin and the third chaste.
One of the three shall surpass his father as much as the lion
surpasses the leopard in strength and courage. He shall be


accounted master and shepherd above all_ others; “and the
companions of the Round Table” will continue to idle away
their time in search for the Holy Grail until Our Lord shall
send it into their midst so suddenly that it will be a marvellous
thing.’ When they heard this, they said: ‘Now, Merlin, since
this is to be so excellent a man as you say, you ought toc to construct
a proper seat in which no one should sit excepting him, and
which should be so much larger than all the others that every-
one could distinguish it.’ ‘That I will do,’ Merlin replied. Then
he made a great and marvellous seat, distinguished from all the
rest. When he had finished it, he began to kiss it and said that
he had done this for_love-of the Good Knight who should sit
“in it. Then they said to him: ‘Merlin, what will be the future
of this seat?’ ‘Indeed,’ said he, ‘in the future many strange
things shall happen because of it: for no one will ever sit down
in it without meeting death or ‘injury until the True_Knight
shall sit in it.’ ‘In God’s name,’ they said, ‘then whoever should
sit in it would run a great risk?’ ‘He would, indeed,’ Merlin
replied, ‘and because of the danger attached to it, it shall be


called the Perilous Seat.’

“Fair nephew,” said the lady, “now I have told you why the

Round Table was made and why the Perilous Seat was made,
_in which many a knight has died who was not worthy to sit in
it. Now I will tell you in what manner the knight with the
scarlet aya came to court. You know how Jesus Chyst. sat
among His apostles as shepherd and master at the table of the
Last Supper, and what significance was given to the table of |
the Holy Grail by Joseph and to the Round Table by this knight. ~
Our, Lord promised. His, apostles. before His Passion that He
wuld come to see and. visit them, and sad and dismayed they
waited for Him to fulfil the promise. Then it came about that
on the day of Pentecost,.when they were all in one room and
e.door was shut, the Holy Spirit descended among them like
a flame and comforted them and assured them of that concern-
“Ing which they were in doubt. Then they were dismissed and
“sent through the lands to préach to the people and to teach
the Holy Gospel: These things happened to the apostles on the
day of Pentecost when Our Lord came to visit and comfort
them. In ‘the satie way; T think, the knight whom youl ought
to regdtd as‘master and shepherd came to comfort you. For '
“just as Our Lord came in the appearance of a flame, so the
ight came in scarlet armour, in colours like fire. Moreover,
“just as the doors of the house in which the apostles were gathered
were closed at the coming of Our Lord, so the doors.of the palace \
were closed when the knight came. Hence, he arrived so suddenly
‘among you that no one was Clever enough to know where he
came from. And that very day was undertaken the Quest of
\, the Holy Grail, which will never be given up until the truth.
| concerning it be known, and concerning the lance, and why so.
many adventures have befallen this country Because of_ it.
Now T have told you the truth about the knight so that you
may not fight with him; for know well that you ought not to
do it, seeing that you are his brother in the fraternity of the
Round Table, and that you would not have a chance to with- ~
stand him, for he is a much better knight than you.”

“Lady,” said he, “you have told me so much that I shall
never again desire to fight with him. But for God’s sake show
me what to do and how to find him. For if I had him as a com-
panion, I should not leave him so long as I could follow after
him.” “TI will give you the best advice I can on that subject,”


ae
.
, \ :


64 THE QUEST OF THE HOLY GRAIL


she replied. ‘“‘Where he is just now, I cannot say; but I can

tell you by what signs you may the sooner find him, and then,
when you have found him, stay with him as.jong as you can.
You shall go from here to a castle called, Got,) where he has a |
cousin—a lady for whose Jove T expect that he lodged” there

“Yast night. And if she can tell you which way he is bound,
follow him as fast as you can. And if she tells you nothing about

‘him, go directly to the castle of Corben : where dwells the.

3 Cripple King. eré fam sure you will ke r of him, if indeed
you do not find him there.”

Thus Perceval and the recluse talked about the knight until
noon. Then she said to Perceval: “Fair nephew, you must stay
with me to-night, and I shall be greatly pleased. For it has
been so long since I last saw you, that I shall be very sorry if
you leave me now.” “Lady,” said he, ‘I have so much to do
that I really ought not to tarry longer: I pray you for God’s
sake to let me go.” “Certainly, you shall not go to-day with
my permission,” she replied. “But to-morrow as soon as you
have heard mass, I will gladly give you leave to go.” Then
he consented to remain. And as soon as he had his armour
removed, the table was spread and they ate what the lady
had had prepared.

That night Perceval stayed there with his aunt. They talked
about the knight and many other things, until she said to him:
“Fair nephew, up to the present time you have guarded your-
self with such vigilance that your virginity has not been vio-.
lated or injured, and you have never known what the flesh and
‘the lust of the flesh may mean. And that is well for you, for
if your flesh had been corrupted by sin, you would have proved


\ wanting as one of the leading companions of the Quest, just


as Lancelat.of the Lake has done, who through lust of the
flesh and lechery has a long time since forfeited the chance to
accomplish that for which all the others are struggling. There-
fore, I pray you to keep your body as pure as when Our Lord
admitted you to knighthood, so that you may come into the
“presence of the Holy Grail virgin, pure, and without a taint
‘of lust. And certainly that will ke one of the finest deeds of
prowess that ever.a knight performed: for of all those of the
Round Table there is none that has not forfeited his virginity
\except you and Galahad, the Good Knight of whom I speak.”
‘And he replied that with God’s help he would be on his guard
ps he ought to be.
Perceval stayed there all that day while his aunt gave him
much advice and counsel about doing night. But above all she
besought him to keep his body pure as he ought to do, and he
promised her he would do so. And when they had talked a long
time about the knight and King Arthur’s court, Perceval asked _
her_why she had left her own country and had established _
herself in such a desert place:~“Béféré Godt” she replied,
_1 fled here in fear of death. For you know. that,when.you_went ..
to court, my lord the king was at war with King Librap; where-

oré, 48 Soon as my Jord died, T, a timorous woman, feared that
he would kill me if he captured me. So I took a great part of my
possessions and fled to this desert place in order that I might
not be discovered. Then I had this retreat constructed and this
house as you see it, and established here my chaplain and my
servants with me, and I have dwelt in this retreat with the in-~

“terition of not Teaving it, if God will, so long as I live, but rather
of spending the rest of my life here and dying in the service af
Our Lord.” “Upon my faith,” said Perceval, “this is a strange
thing. But now tell me what has become of your son_Dyabiaus:.
for I desire greatly to know how he is doing.” “In truth,” she_
replied, “he went to serve King Pellés your relative to gain
hts “atts; "and T have ‘since heard that he has knighted him.
But it has been two years since I saw him, while he was followin

_the tournaments over Great Britain. But I think you will find
him at Corbenye if you go there.” “I will surely go there,”
said he, “if for no other reason than to see him, for I greatly
desire to bear him company.” “In God’s name,” said she, “I
wish that he might meet you, for then I should be happy, if
you were together.”

So Perceval stayed with his aunt all that day. And on the
morrow, as soon as he had heard mass and was armed, he went
away and rode all day through the forest which was so vast
that he mef€‘éither man nor woman. But after vespers he hap-
pened to hear a bell ringing on his right-hand side. So he turned
in that direction, knowing that it was some religious house or
hermitage. When he had gone a little farther, he saw it was a _
religious house surrounded by walls and deep moats. And he
drew near and called at the gate until it was opened. When
those within saw that he was fully armed, they fought at once
that he was a knight-errant; so they had his armour removed
and welcomed him gladly. And they took his horse to the
stable and gave him plenty of hay and oats. Then one of the
66 THE QUEST OF THE HOLY GRAIL


friars took Perceval to his room to rest, and that night he was
lodged as well as the friars could afford. In the morning he awoke
before the hour of prime, and went to hear mass in the abbey.
And when he had entered the church, he saw on the right
an iron grating where there was a friar clad in the robes of
Our Lord about to begin the mass. Turning in that direction
as one who desired to hear the service, he came to the grating
and thought to enter in; but he realised that he could not do
so, as he could not find any entrance. Wherefore he gave up
the idea and kneeled down outside. And looking beyond where
the priest was standing, he saw a couch richly spread_as if with
silk and other-stuffs; there was nothing about it that was not
white. Perceval looked at the couch 80 intently that he per-
ceived there was lying upon it either a man or a woman, he
could not tell which, for.the face was covered with a white
cloth spread out, so that it could not be clearly seen. When he
realised that he would only waste his time by gazing, he turned
his attention to the service which the good man had begun.
And when the time came for the priest to elevate the body of
Our Lord, the figure upon the couch sat up and uncovered his
face. And behold! it was an old white-haired man with a crown
of gold on his head, and his shoulders were bare and he was
uncovered to the waist When Per ooked at him, he saw
that his body was covered_ with‘ wounds and that there were
scars upon his palms, arms and face. When the priest presented
openly the Body of Jesus Christ, he stretched forth his hands
and began to cry: “Fair gentle Father, do not forget my
guerdon!” Nor would he lie down again, ‘put remained at his
-prayers and orisons with hands outstretched toward his Creator
and witlr the crown of gold still upon his head: Perceval looked
long at the man sitting upon the couch, who seemed in distress
because of his wounds; and he saw that he looked so old that
he thought he must be three hundred years old or more. And he
continued to watch him, thinking this a very strange thing.
When the mass was concluded, he saw the priest take in his
-hands-the_body of Our Lord-and. carry it to the man upon the |
couch for him to partake of it. And_as soon as he had received”
it, he took the crown from his head and had it placed upon the
altar. Then he lay down again upon his couch as before and was
‘covered up so that no part of him was visible. Then the priest
took off his robes, having’finished the mass. eo
After Perceval had witnessed these things, he left the church


QO Wwnal Trot
viatized by GOOle SRR Or RCIND
o) NIV BR \ >I | UU a V IRGI VIA
and went to the room where he had spent the night, and calling
one of the friars said to him: “Sire, for God’s sake, answer the

Guettion 191 am going to ask, for I am sure that you know the
“truth.” “Sir knight,” he replied, “tell me what it is, and if
I know I will tell you gladly, provided I can do so lawfully.”
“Upon my word,” he said, “I will tell you what it is. I was in
the church just now and heard the service; and there I saw
inside a grating and before an altar a very old man lying on a
couch with a crown of gold upon his head. And when he sat up,”
T saw that he was covered with wounds all over. When mass
had been sung, the priest gave him to partake of the body of
Our Lord And as soofias he had “‘partaken, he lay down again
apd removed the crown from his head. Fair sir, it seems to me
that there must be somé deep meshing in all this, and I would
fain know what it can be; cherclore Thee of you to enlighten
me.” “Certainly,” said the worthy man, “that will I gladly do.

“It is true, as you have heard many people say, that_Joseph

' of Arimatheza, that worthy man and true knight, was first
sent to this land by the High Master to plant and strengthen,

Roly Christianity with the help of his Creator. And, when he
‘came, he suffered much persecution and adversity from the
enemies of the Faith, for in those days there were nothing but

aracens in, this country. There dwelt here a king named Crudel,
the most wicked and cruel in the world, without pity or humility.
When he heard that the Christians had arrived in his country
and had brought with them a precious vessel so marvellous
that nearly all could live in the grace which it shed abroad, he -
répatded the report as a Tie. But they continued to assert to
him that it was true. Then he said he would soon find out for
himself. So he took Josephe the son of Joseph and two of his
nephews and a hundred of those whom he had elected to be

“masters and shepherds over the Christians. And when he had
seized them and cast them into prison, they had with them
the Holy Vessel, wherefore they had no fear as regards
‘their bodily food. Now the king kept them thus in prison
for forty ays without sending them anything to eat or drink,
and ‘strictly forbidding anyone to be so bold as to do anything

for them during that time.

_ “Now the news travelled through all the lands where Josephe

had been that King Crudel held him and a great part of the

_ Christians in prison. Finally, King Mordrain who dwelt at

_ Sarraz in the regions toward Jerusalem and had been converted |


ae gle


68 THE QUEST OF THE HOLY GRAIL


by the preaching of Josephe, heard the news. And he was very
sad: for it had been by the counsel of Josephe that he had
recovered his land which Tholomer had tried to take from him;
and the attempt would have been successful had it not been


for the counsel of Josephe and the aid of his bYother-in-law _


Seraphe. When King Mordrain heard that’ Josephe was in
prison;he said he would do his utmost to deliver him. So he
hastily summoned all the forces he could collect and put to


_ sea, equipped with arms and horses, and finally arrived by ship _


jn this country. And when he had arrived with all his followers,
he sent word to King Crudel that if he did not surrender Josephe
to him, he would take his land and ruin him. But being in little
awe, King Crudel instead led his army against him. So the two
hosts met in” battle array. Now it came about by the will of


Our Lord that the Christians won the victory, and King Crudel


and his people were killed: And King Mordraiii, who had been
named Ewalach before he became a“Christian,’ acquitted him-
self so well in the battle that all his men considered him won-
derful. And when they removed his arms, they found he had
So many wounds that any other man would have died of them.
So they askéd-himr hew -he-fared, and he said he did not feel
badly and was not aware of any wound. So he removed Josephe
from prison, and when he saw him, he rejoiced greatly, for he
loved him deeply. And Josephe asked him who had brought
him into those parts, and he answered that he had come to
deliver him. |

“The next day the Christians presented themselves before


of beholding it that he continued to edge closer. Then suddenly
there descended a clofd peloré him which q
sight Sind of his bodily strength, so that he Could not see any-


‘thing’ of help himself. “And “when he saw that Our Lord had |
taken such vengeance upon him, because he had disobeyed


His commafrimertt; he cried in the hearing of all the people:
‘Fair Lord God JesusChrist, who hast shown me so plainly
that it is madness to disobey your commandment, as it is true
| déprived him of his_.


aa


VE Pins


¢
that this affliction with which you have visited me pleases me,
and _as I endure it gladly, so grant in your good pleasure as a
reward for my service that I may not die until the Good Knight,


+ the ninth of my line in descent, he who is to behold the wonders
of the Holy Grail ae oF shall come to visit me, so that I may.
embrace and kiss him.” When the king had addressed this
request to God, the voice was heard saying: ‘Be not dismayed,
O king: Our Lord has heard thy prayer. Thy desire shall be
accomplished in this respect: for thou shalt not die until the
knight whom thou requirest shall come to see thee; and when
he shall appear, the light of thy eyes shall be restored and thou
shalt see clearly, and thy wounds shall be healed, though until

“Thus spake the voice to the king, telling him that he should
behold the coming of the knight whom he so desired. And it
appears now that all those things are true. Behold! four hundred

_years are passed since this adventure happened to him, and his
eyes have not seen, nor his wounds been healed, nor has he been
able to help himself. But now, they say, the knight is in this

.country who is to concliidé this “adventure. And by the signs,
.which we have noticed, we think that he will yet see and have
the use of his limbs again, but after that he will not live long.

_ “Thus it has happened to King Mordrain as I Have told you.
He has lived for four hundred years in such saintly and religious
fashion that he has never tasted of earthly food except that
which the priest offers us in the sacrament of the mass, and
‘ that is the body of Jesus Christ. This you could see for yourself
to-day: for as soon as the priest had celebrated mass, he brought
the body of Our Lord to the king and made him partake of it.
Thus the king has waited.since the time of Josephe until now
for the coming of that knight whom he has so desired to see.
He is like old Simeon who waited for the coming of Our Lord,
and being brought to the temple there the old man received
Him and took Him in his arms, happy and rejoicing that His
promise was fulfilled. For the Holy Spirit had showed him that
he would not die before he had Senn yess CHrist, And when he
saw Him, he sang that sweet song which is mentioned by the
prophet David. Now as he awaited with great desire for Jesus
Christ, the Son of God, the high Prophet, the sovereign Shep-
herd, so this king awaits the coming of Galahad, the good and
perfect knight. ;
“Now I have told the truth about what you asked me,
70 THE QUEST OF THE HOLY GRAIL


just as 1t has happened; and now I ask you to tell me who
you are.”

Then he told him that he belonged to King Arthur’s house-
hold and was a companion of the Round Table, and that his
name was Perceval le Gallois. And when the good man heard
his name, he was very glad, for he had often heard of him. And
he invited him to tarry there that day, and the friars would
entertain and honour him, as it was their duty to do. But he
said that he had so much to do that he could by no means
tarry, but must needs be on his way. So he asked for his arms
which were brought to him. When he was equipped, he mounted
and took leave of them, riding through the forest until noon.

At noon his road led him into a valley, and there met
‘as many as twenty.armed men carrying upon a noblé~bier
“a man he had just been killed. ie as they saw him,
‘they asked him whence he came. And when he replied that he
was of King Arthur’s household, they all cried at once: “At_
him now!” Whereupon he prepared to defend himself as best
he could, and turned to face the one who was coming at him
first, striking him with such violence that he knocked him to
the ground with his horse on top of him. But as he was about to
continue his charge, he was prevented by more than seven of
them striking him upon the shield, while the others killed his
horse, so that he fell to the ground. Then he tried to get up,
like .one possessed of great courage, and drew his sword and
prepared to defend himself. But the others ran upon him so
fiercely that defence was useless, and they struck him upon the
shield and helmet and dealt him so many blows that he could
not stand upright, but fell with one knee upon the ground.
_And they struck and pounded. sade him and handled him So-severty_
snatched his helmet-fronrtis head and~ paunde! him, if it had
not been that chance brought that way the ‘kfiight with the
scarlet armour. Now when he saw the knight all Tralone on foot
struggling with so many enemies who were trying to kill him,
he turned that way as fast as his horse could carry him, and
shouted to them: “Let that knight alone!” Then with lance
qutstretched he rode among them, arrtstrick the first one so—
heavily that he brought him to earth. Then, when his lance
was shattered, he took his sword in hand. As he spurred uP and


down he struck first one and then another so amazingly that all
whom he struck squarely he threw upon the ee dn a short
—_
time he wrought such execution with the great blows he dealt
and the speed he showed that there was none left so bold as to
face his attack; tather did they flee in different directions and
scatter through the forest, which was extensive, so that only
three remained to be seen, of whom Perceval had unhorsed one
and wounded two. When he saw that they all had fled and that.
Perceval had nothing more to fear, he re-entered the forest
where he saw it was thickest, like a man who did not wish to
be followed.

When Perceval saw him going off so hastily, he cried out to
him as Toudly as he could, saying: ‘Ah! sir ache: for God’s
sake stop a moment to speak with me!” The Good Knight
showed no sign of hearing Perceval, but rode away rapidly
like one who had no desire to turn back. And Perceval, without
his horse which had been killed, fgllowed him as fast as he could
an. foot,, Presently he met a valet on a strong fast nag, leading
a. big black steed. When Perceval espied him, he knew not
what to do. For he would fain possess the steed to pursue the

d do great execution with him, provided he could
have him with the valet’s permission; for he would not take
him by force, unless under stress of great need, for fear he might
ke considered mean. So he greeted the valet as he approached,
and the valet gave him God’s blessing. ‘‘ Fair friend,” said Per-
ceval, “in return for my service and favour and upon my word
that I will serve as your knight the first time you ask my help, ~
I beg of you to lend me that steed until I have overtaken a
knight who is riding away from me.” “Sire,” said the valet,
“T could not possibly do so, for there is a man who would do
me violence, if I should not return the steed to him.” “Fair
friend,” said Perceval again, “do me the favour I ask. For I have
never been so sorry for anything as I shall be to lose that
knight for lack of a horse.” “ Upon my word,” the valet replied,
“T shall do nothing of the kind. You shall never take him with
my permission as long as he is in my care. You can take him
by force, of course, if you: will.”’ When he heard that, he was
so distressed that he thought he must go out of his mind, Far
Ke would not do anything mean to the valet; yet, if he should
lose the knight who had gone away, he would never be happy
again. These two things filled his heart with such distress that
whe could no longer stand up, but fell beneath a tree and his
heart failed him. Then he turned ‘pale and faint, as if he had
lost all his strength, and he was so stricken with grief that he
72 THE QUEST OF THE HOLY GRAIL


hoped to die. Then he took off his helmet, and took his sword,
and said to the valet: “Fair friend, since you will not relieve
me of the grief from which I cannot escape but by death, I beg
you to take this sword and kill me now: then will my sorrow
be at an end. Then, if the Good Knight, whom I wished to
seek, hears that I died of grief on his account, he will not be
so mean as not to pray Our Lord to have mercy on my soul.”
“In God’s name,” the valet replied, “I will never kill you, if
it please God; for you have not deserved it.” Then he rode off
rapidly, and Perceval stayed behind so sorrowful that he thought
he would die of grief. And when he saw neither the valet nor
anyone else, he began to lament bitterly and to call himself
a miserable wretch: “Ah! alas! unhappy one, now hast thou
missed what thou didst seek, for he has escaped thee. Never
again shalt thou have such a good chance of finding him as
that thou hast just missed!”

While Perceval was lamenting thus, he listened and heard
the noise of horses coming; and opening his eyes, he saw an
armed knight riding along the forest road, and he was riding
the very horse which the valet had shortly before been leading.
_Perceval recognised the horse, but did not know that he had


acquired him by force. When he had passed out of sight, his ~


grief broke out anew. But presently he saw the valet approach-
ing on his nag and deeply distressed. As soon as he espied
Perceval, he said to him: “ Ah! sire, did you see pass by an armed
knight mounted on the horse you asked me for a while ago?”
“Yes,” said Perceval, ‘but why do you ask?” “Because he
took him from me by force,” was the reply. “He treated me
badly and has caused my death; for my lord will kill me wherever
he finds me.” “And what do you want me to do about it?”
asked Perceval. “I cannot recover him for you, as I am on
foot. But if I had a horse, I believe I could soon bring him
back to you.” “Sire,” said the valet, ‘mount my nag, and if
you can recover the horse, you may have him.” “But,” said
Perceval, “how can you have your nag again, if I recover the
horse?” “I will follow you, sire, on foot,” the valet said, ‘‘and


if you can defeat the knight, I will take my nag, and the horse »


shall be yours.”’ And Perceval said that that suited him perfectly.

Then Perceval relaced his helmet, mounted the nag, took his
shield, and went after the knight with all the speed he could
get out of his mount. He rode until he came to qne of the little


fields of which there were many in the forest. There he saw in ~
front of him the knight who was galloping along on the steed.
As soon as he espied him, he cried out to him: “Sir knight,
turn back and restore to the valet his horse which you have
wickedly taken from him!” At the sound of his shout, the knight
dashed at him with lance outstretched; and Perceval drew his
sword, seeing that the shock was imminent. But the knight,
wishing to make short work of him, rushed on as fast as the
horse could carry him and struck the nag in the breast so hard
that he pierced him through and through. The nag fell to the


Siound. mortally wounded, and Perceval flew ‘over his. head.
en the knight saw the effect of his blow, he continued his
charge and rode away across the meadow into the forest where
he saw it was thickest. When Perceval realised what had hap-
pened, he was so grieved that he did not know what to do or
say. But he cried to the knight as he went away: “Coward of
body_and craven of heart, turn back and fight me who’4m on
oot while you are mounted! ” but he made no reply to what ©
was said, having no further fear of him, and struck into the
forest as soon as he reached it. And when Perceval had lost
sight of him, he was so sad that he threw his shield and sword
upon the ground, and took his helmet from his head, and began
his wail of grief more bitterly than before. He wept and cried
alouw; calfing himself wretched, miserable and the most unlucky
of all knights, saying: “Now I have failed in all my desires!”
All that day Perceval stayed there in his grief and anger,
without anyone coming by to comfort him. When night came
on, he felt so weary and exhausted that it seemed to him all
his limbs had lost their strength. Overcome with drowsiness
he fell asleep and did not awake until midnight. And when he
was awake he looked and saw in front-of him a woman who
asked him with. much. trepidation: “Perceval, what are you
doing here?” He said he was not doing anything good or bad,
and that if he had a horse, he would go away. “If you would
“promise,” said she, “to do my will whenever I should summon
you, I would give you a good fine horse which would carry you
anywhere you wished to go.” Hearing that, he was as happy
as possible, and paid no attention to the person to whom he
was speaking. He supposed it was some woman he was speaking
with, but it was the devil seeking to deceive him and to fix
him so his soul would be lost forevermore. And’ when he heard
her promise him what he most desired, he replied that he was
all ready to assure her of what she wished, and that if she gave
F
74 THE QUEST OF THE HOLY GRAIL


him a good fine horse, he would do what she asked of him. “Do
you promise it as a loyal knight?” she asked. “Truly, I do!”
said he. “‘Then wait for me,” she said, “for I shall soon be back.”
Then she went into the forest and returned presently leading
a splendid great horse, so black that he was marvellous to see.

‘When Perceval beheld the horse, he looked at him and took
a dislike to him; yet he was bold enough to mount him as one"
who cared not forthe enemy’s snare. And when he was mounted
and had taken his lance and sword, the woman standing there
said to him: “ Perceval, are you going away? Remember that -
you owe me a gift in return.’ And he said he would. Then he
rode away rapidly and entered the forest in the clear moonlight.
But he was borne along so fast that he was soon out of the
forest and had been carried more than three days’ journey. So
he rode until he saw before him in a valley a swiftly flowing
stream. And when the steed came to it, he was about to plunge
in. But when Perceval saw that the stream was so wide, he was
afraid to cross, seeing it was night and that there was no bridge
or plank. Then he raised his hand and crossed himself on the
forehead. As soon as the devil felt himself burdened with the
weight of the cross which was very heavy and grievous for him ..
to bear, he shook himself loose from Perceval and dashed into
the water barking and crying ‘and finishing his career with
shame. And at once the water gleamed here and there with fire
‘and a bright flame, so that it seemed as it were on fire.

When Perceval beheld this strange sight, he realised at
once that it was the devil who had brought him thither to
deceive him and to ruin his body and soul. Then he crossed:
himself and commended himself to God and prayed Our Lord
not to let him fall into any temptation by which he might lose
the companionship of the heavenly knighthood. And he raised
his hands to heaven and thanked Our Lord from the bottom of
his heart that He had so effectively aided him in this time of
need. For if the devil had got him into the water, he would have
surely let him fat] and then he would have drowned and perished,
losing at once both body and soul. Then he withdrew from the
water’s edge, still fearing some assault of the devil, and knelt
toward the east and made the prayers and orisons he knew.
Thinking that the devil must have carried him far from the abbey
where he saw King Mordrain the day before, he longed for the
day to break in order to learn in what land he was. | i
’ Thus Perceval remained engaged in prayer until daylight,
w/?
waiting until the sun should have completed its journey through
the firmament and should reappear to the world. Then when
the sun was risen bright and clear and had somewhat dried
the dew, Perceval looked about him and saw that he was on.
top of a great marvellous_mountajn, ver wild, which was
™ surrounded on all sides by a sea so broa Gale ae no sign |
af land except in the far distance. Then he noticed that he had
been transported to some island, but he knew not what; he would
gladly have learned the truth, but knew not how to do so, for
so far as he could see, there was nowhere near any castle, fortress,
retreat or house where people could live. Yet he was nat so
lonely but that he saw about him wild -beasts, bears, lions,
- leopards and flying serpents, And when he realised where he
was, he was very uncomfortable, for he feared the wild beasts,
knowing well they would not leave him in peace, but would kill
him unless he could defend himself, Nevertheless, if He who .
saved Jonah in the whale’s belly and who protected Daniel .
_in the lions’ den would be as welfhis shield and defence, he would _
not fear all he saw. So he trusted more in His aid and succour
than in his own sword, seeing clearly that by no prowess of
earthly chivalry could he escape, unless Our Lord was with him.
Then he looked about him and saw in the middle of the isle a
very high and wondrous rock, where he thought he would fear
no wild beast if he could only get there. So, armed as he was,
he made his way thither. And on his way he looked and saw
a serpent carrying by the neck a lion’s cub in his teeth, and
It stopped on the top of the mountain. After the serpent came
a lion running and roaring and making such an outcry that it
seemed to Perceval it was making lament for the cub which
the serpent was carrying off.

When Perceval saw this strange sight, he started to run up
the mountain as fast as he could. But before he could reach
the top, the lion being swifter had already passed him and
was engaged in a struggle with the serpent. However, as soon
as he was up on the rock and saw the two beasts, he thought
he would help the lion as being a more natural creature and
nobler than the serpent. So he drew his sword and holding his
shiettt before his face as a protection against the serpent’s flame,
he attacked the serpent and dealt it a great blow between the
ears. Then the creature cast forth fire and flame which burned
all his shield and the front of his hauberk. It might have done
him still more harm, had he not been quick and agile enough to


e
a


”


76 THE QUEST OF THE HOLY GRAIL


handle it as one does fire-brands, so that the flame did not strike
him fairly and hence was less dangerous. But when he saw
this, he was much afraid lest poison might be mingled with
the flame. However, he attacked the serpent again, giving it
great blows wherever he could reach it. And it happened that
he succeeded in hitting it again in the same place where he had
first struck it. His sword being light and good, it easily cut
through the head where the skin had been already bruised and
where the bones were soft, and the serpent lay dead upon the spot.

When the lion saw that it was freed from the serpent by the
help of the knight, it showed no sign of wishing to attack him,
-but came and bowed before him and showed all the apprecia-_


tion it could, so that Perceval saw that it had no desire to do


him harm. Then he put back his sword in its sheath and threw
down the shield which was all burned, and took off his helmet
to get some air, for ‘the serpent had made him hot enough.
Meanwhile the lion kept close beside him wagging his tail and
showing his satisfaction. At the sight of this, he began to, stroke
the animal’s neck, head and shoulders, thinking that Our Lord
had sent him this beast to bear him company: and he was
pleased with the adventure. And the lion showed all the joy a
dumb beast can show to a man, and stayed with him all day
until noon. But as soon as the hour of noon was passed, he went
down from the rock carrying the cub on his neck back to his
lair. When Perceval saw himself alone on the strange high and
remote rock, it is no wonder that he was ill at ease; but he
would have been still more so, had he not placed great hope in
his Creator; for he was one of the knights in the world who
believed most perfectly in Our Lord. Yet in ‘this respect he
differed from others in the land: for in those days the people
throughout the kingdom of Wales were so mad and unrestrained
that if a son found his fathér lying sick in bed, he would drag
him out by the head or arms and kill him on ‘the spot, for it
would be a shame to him if his father should die in bed. But
if it happened that the son killed the father, or the father the
son, and all the family died in battle, then "the people of the
country said they were of high lineage.

All that day Perceval stayed upon the rock, looking far
out to sea for sight of some passing ship. But gaze as he might
far and wide, he saw none that day. However, he took heart ©
and sought comfort in Our Lord, praying that He would keep
him from falling into any temptation either through the devil’s


Google |


4
wiles or his own evil thoughts, but that He would protect and
nourish him as the father ought to protect the son. And raising
his hands to heaven, he said:

‘“‘Fair Lord God, who have permitted me to mise to such a
height as the order of chivalry, who chose me to be your servant,
unworthy as I was; Lord, in your pity let me not depart from
serving you, but let me be like the good and sure champion
who defends his lord’s quarrel against anyone who wrongly
accuses him. Fair gentle Lord, in like manner grant that I may
defend my soul, which is your concern and your rightful heritage,
‘against him who wrongfully seeks to obtain it. Fair gentle
Father, who said of yourself in the Gospel: ‘I am the good shep-
herd, and the good shepherd giveth his life for the sheep; but
the hireling shepherd doeth not so; rather does he leave his
sheep without protection so that the wolf strangles them and
devours them as soon as he comes’; Sire, be my shepherd and
defender and _Jeader, so that J. may be one of your sheep. And
if t@ happens, fair Lord God, that I be the hundredth foolish
and wretched sheep who wandered away from the ninety and
nine and was lost in the desert, Lord, take pity on me and leave
me not in the desert, but bring me back to your fold, which is
the Holy Church and hol faith, where the good sheep are and
where true men, good tistians, are, so that the jet who
seeks nothing in me but my substance, that is my soul, may not
find me defenceless.”’

When Perceval had spoken thus, he saw coming toward him
the lion for whose sake he had fought the serpent; but he made
no show of wishing to harm him, but rather came to him gladly.
When Perceval saw this, he called him and approached him,
stroking his neck and head. And the lion lay down before him
as if he were the tamest animal in the world. Then Perceval
lay down beside him, putting his head upon his shoulder, and
waited until the black darkness of night came on, when he
quickly went to sleep beside the lion. And he had no desire to
eat, for his mind was full of other ~
When Perceval had gone to sleep, a_strange thing happened
to him: for in his sleep he seemed to see before him two ladies,
one very old and the other young and fair, The two ladies came
not on foot, but were riding on very different mounts, one on
a lion and the other on a serpent. And he looked at ‘the two
“ladies, astonished that they were able to handle two such beasts.
Then the younger one said to him; “ Perceval, my lord salutes
78 THE QUEST OF THE HOLY GRAIL


gu_and bids you prepare, as best you can, to fight to-morrow
with the most redoubtable champion in the world. And if you
are defeated, you will not get off with the loss of some limb,
but he will treat you so cruelly that you will be ashamed the
rest of your life.’”” When he heard this, he replied to her: “Lady,
who 1s your lord?” “Surely,” richest
‘man in the world. So see to it that you be so valiant and stead-
fast that you gain honour in the fight.”’ Then she disappeared
so suddenly that Perceval knew not what became of her.

Then the other lady came forward, who,was mounted on the
serpent, and sakt-to him: “ Perceval, I have good reason to
complain of you: for you have done wrong to me and mine,
and I had not so deserved of you.’’ When he heard these words,
he replied in confusion: “Lady, I do not think I have done
wrong to you or ay lady in the world. So I beg you to tell me
‘in what respect I have dene-wrong to-you, and if I can make
amends, I will do so gladly 1 in any way you say.” “I will tell
“you indeed, ” said she, “how you have’ dorié "me wrong. I had
for some time nourished in my castle a-beast called a serpent,
which’ served me more than you can imagine. Yesterday this
creature flew by chance to this mountain and found a lion’s
cub which it carried to this rock. And you came running after
it with your sword and killed it without its giving you any cause.
Now tell me why you killed it. Had I done you any harm that
you should slay 1t? Was the lion yours or in your charge, that
you were obliged to fight in his behalf? Are the beasts of the
air so without the pale that you are obliged to kill them without
cause?”’ When Perceval heard what the lady said, he replied:
“Lady, you had done me no harm so far as I know, nor was
the lion mine, nor are the creatures of the air so without the
pale. But because the lion is of a more pleasing nature and of
a nobler character, and because IT saw that the lion was less
harmful than the serpent, I attacked the latter and slew it.
So it seems to me that I have not done you any wrong, as you
say.’ When the lady heard this reply, she said: “Perceval, is
that all you are going to do for me?” And he replied: “Lady,
what more do you wish me to do?” “I wish,” said she, “that
to compensate me for my serpent you should become subject
unto me.” But he reptied that he would not do so. “No?” said
she; ““yeu once were mine; before you became subject to your
present lord, you were mine. And because you belonged to me
before anyone else, I will not let you off; but I promise you
that wherever I find you defenceless, I shall seize you as one


"who formerly belonged to me.”

ter saying this, the lady disappeared. Meanwhile Perceval
remained asleep, though much disturbed by this dream, and he
slept all night without once waking. On the morrow when the
day had dawned bright and the sun was up and already shinin
warmly on his head, Perceval opened his eyes and saw that it
was day. Then he sat up and, raising fis Hand, he crossed him-—
Self and prayed Our Lord to give him such counsel as should
be profitablé to his soul? for his body he was not so much con-
cerned as usual, thinking he could never escape from the rock
where he was. Then he looked all about him, but saw nothing,
not even the lion which had borne him company, nor the dragon
which he had slain; so he marvelled greatly what had become
of them.

While Perceval was thinking of these things, he looked far
out to sea and beheld a ship with sail set coming straight
toward the place whére Perceval was waiting to see whether
God would send him some welcome adventure. And the ship
sailed fast, having a fair wind which hastened it, as it pursued
its course toward him and arrived at the foot of the rock. When

Perceval saw this from his place up on the rock, he was filled
with joy, thinking there must be plenty of people on board.
So he stood up and took his arms. Then he went down from
the rock to find out what people were in the ship. Coming nearer,
he saw that the ship Was decorated tiside and out with sik,
so that the whole effect was white. When he stepped on board,
he found a man clad in a surplicé and alb like a priest,-and on
“his head“hé wore-a crown of white silk as wide as two fingers,
and on this crown were inscribed words in which the worthy
_attnibutes of Our Lord were set forth. At the ‘sight of this
Perceval was astonished, and drawing near him saluted him
with these words: ‘‘ Welcome, sire! May God conduct you!”
“Fair friend,’ said the worthy man, “who are you?” “I am,”
he answered, “of King Arthur’s household.” ‘‘ And what adven-
ture has brought you here?” he inquired. “Sire,” said he,
“T know not how I got here.” “‘ And what do you intend to do?”
asked the worthy man. “Sire,” said he, “if it pleased Our Lord,
I would fain get away from here and join my brothers of the
Round Table in the Quest of the Holy Grail: it was for this
purpose only that I stirred from the court of my lord the king.”
“In God’s own time,” said the worthy man, “you will safely
80 THE QUEST OF THE HOLY GRAIL


get away. He will soon release you when it pleases Him. If He
knew you were His servant and that you would do His service
better somewhere else than here, be sure that He would soon


i eee as


1S ae = the order of ee For.since.you have risen_
to such a high degree, your heart ought not to be abased by
féar-oreafthly peril” The heart of a-knight ought.to be so hard.
and proof against the enemy of his lord that nothing could
“affect it, And if he is reduced to fear, he is not one of those
true knights and champions who would let themselves be killed
on the field rather than not defend their lord’s cause.’
“Then Perceval asked him whence he came and from what
land; and he replied that he came.from.a. foreign land. “And
what adventure” asked Perceval, “ brought you to such a
strange and wild place as this seems to be?”

“Upon my word,” the good man said, “I came here to see
and comfort you, and in order that you might tell me about
yourself. For if you will tell me in what respect you need advice,
I will counsel you as well as anyone could do.” “It is passing
strange,” said Perceval, “that you should say that you came
here to counsel me. I do not see how’ that can be, for none but
God and me knew that I was on this rock. And even if you had
known I was here, I don’t believe you know my name, for to
the best of my krrewledge you never saw me. So I marvel at
what you say.” “Ah! Perceval,’ the worthy man replied, “IL
know you much better than you think. For a long time you
have done nothing that I did not know much better than you
did yourself.”” When he heard the good man call him by name,
he was indeed amazed. Then he regretted what he had said
and apologised, saying: “Ah! sire, for God’s sake pardon me
for what I said. I thought you did not know me, but now I see
that you know me better than I you: so I think I am foolish
and you are wise.’

Then Perceval leaned on the rail of the boat with the good
man, and they spoke together of many things. And Perceval
found him to be so wise jn all matters | that he marvelled greatly
who he could be. He was so happy in his company and in
listening to his gentle and pleasing conversation that, if he
‘could be always with him, he would never need to eat or drink.
Now when they had talked together for a long time, Perceval
said to him: “Sire, explain t to me a — which came to me _


ene
last night in my sleep, which seems to me so remarkable that
I shall not be easy until I know the truth about it.” “Tell it
to me,” said the worthy man, “and I will explain it to you so
that you will see clearly what it means.” “TI will tell you,”
said Perceval. “Last night as I slept two ladies appeared to me,
one of whom was mounted on a lion and the other on a dragon.
She who was on the lion was a yourlg lady, and she who was on
the dragon was old; and the younger one spoke to me first.’”” ~
Then he began to tell him all that he had heard in his sleep,
just as it had been told to him, for as yet he had forgotten
nothing. And when he had told his dream, he begged the good
man to tell him its meaning. Then he said he would gladly do
so and began thus: |
“Perceval,” said he, “of these two ladies whom you saw
mounted one upon a lion and the other on a dragon, the sig-
nificance is wonderful, and I will tell you what it is. She on
The Tion ‘signifies the ‘new ‘dispensation, which is founded on the ;
Tron, that is on Jesus Christ, which by Him was established, |
raised up and shown forth to the view of all Christendom, and so }
that it might become the mirror and true light of all those who
set their hearts upon the Trinity. And this lady is seated upon
the lion, that is upon Jesus Christ, and she represents faith, |
hopé; belief, and baptism. She is the sure and firm foundation
upon which Jesus Christ said that He would found Holy Church,
when He said: ‘On this rock I will build my church,” And this |
lady who was seated on the lion typifies the new dispensation,
which Our Lord maintains in strength and power as the father
does the child. It is not strange that she seemed to you younger
than the other lady, for she has neither her age nor her appear-
ance: for she was born in the Passion and Resurrection of Jesus
ist, while the other had already reigned long upon the earth.
She spoke to you as to her son, for all good Christians are her
sons,-and- she ‘showed “ptainty “that™she was your mother: for
she was so solicitous on your account that she came to announce
in advance what was she came to inform
you on behalf of her Lord Jesus Christ. that yaoi would have to
Bane, Upon my word, I assert that if she had not loved you, she ~
would not have come to warn you, for she would not have cared


because of whom Enoch and Elijah, who were such excellent


we ree we pee a eee
Petit


82 THE QUEST OF THE HOLY GRAIL


men, were translated from earth to heaven, and who will not |
Yetuin before thé day of ju ae
to_be feared. This champion is the devil himself, who so strives
and toils that he leads man into mortal sin and then drives
him into hell. This 1s the champion whom you must fight, and
if you are defeated, as the lady told you, you will not get off
with the loss of some limb, but you will be disgraced for ever.
You can see for yourself whether this is true; for if it turns out
that the devil can vanquish you, he will bring your body and
soul into perdition and thence will lead you into the house of
darkness, that is into hell, where you will suffer shame and
grief and torment as long as the power of Jesus Christ shall last.
‘Now I have explained to you what is typified by this lady
whom you saw in your dream nding upon a lion. And by what
I have shown you, you can easily imagine who the other one
must be.” Ce reeeee e italien ie
“Sire,” said Perceval, ‘you have told me so much of the one
that I know for what she stands. But now tell me about the
other who rode upon the dragon; for I shall not understand
her significance, unless you explain it to me.” “Then I will
tell. you,” said the worthy man; “now listen to what I say.
! The lady whom you saw mounted upon the dragon is the Syna-_ |
" pogue, the first dispensation, which was set ade” aS Soon-as.
Foes Christ introduced the néw dispensation. And the dragon
‘ which carries her is the Scripture badly understood and ex-
pounded, namely hypocrisy and heresy and iniquity and mortal
sin—in short, the agai himself. This is the serpent which because
“of his pride was cast out of paradise and hich said to Adam
and his wife>-4 H-yeu-eat-of-this fruit, you shall be like God,’
and through this word envy entered into them. For then they
-~\ longed to be higher than they were, and they believed the
devil’s counsel and sinned, wherefore they were cast out of
paradise and sent into exile. In this sin all their descendants
have their part and pay the penalty even to this day. When
the lady came before you, she complained about her serpent
which you had killed. But do you know about what serpent she
complained? She did not complain of the serpent which you
| killed yesterday, but of the serpent which she rides, that is
the devil. And do you know when you caused her such grief?
At the moment when the devil was carrying you to this rock
and you made the sign of the cross upon yourself. For when you
j crossed yourself, he could not endure it, but was so afraid that
he thought he was dead: so he fled hastily as one who could not
bear your company. And thus you killed him and destroyed and
took away from him the power and strength of his mastery and
control when he thought he had you in his grasp: and_this is
eat anger with you, When you had answered
her question as well as you could, she required of you that you
should become subject to her as a compensation for the mischief
you had done her. But you said you would not do so. Then she
said that you had already been subject to her before you did
homage to your lord. You have pondered much upon this to-day,
and yet you ought to know what she meant. For doubtless before
ou received baptism and Christianity, you"were subject to the.
devil Bat a S60iras ‘you tad received the seal of Jesus Christ,
that is when you had been anointed with the holy oil, you
abjured the devil and his mastery, for you had done homage
to your Creator. So I have told you the meaning of both these
ladies. Now I must go, for I have much to do. And do you
remain here, and remember the battle you have to fight; for
if you are defeated, you shall receive just what has been foretold
to you.”
“Fair sire,” said Perceval, “why do you go away so soon?
Certainly your speech and your company please me so that
I could wish never to leave you more. For God’s sake, if you
can, stay with me; for surely I shall profit all my hfe by what
you have told me.” “I must gor" the good man replied, “be.
cause many people are waiting for me, and you shall stay behind.
Take care not to be unprepared for him whom you must fight.
For if he finds you unprepared, misfortune will soon come to you.”
Having said this, he went away; and when the wind filled
the sail, it carried the ship away faster than the eye could
follow it, aiid soon it was so distant that Perceval could see
nothing more of it. And when it was completely out of sight,
he climbed upon the rock again all armed as he was. As soon
as he was on top, he met the lion which had been with him the
day before. And he begari-to stroke him because he saw that
the lion was very glad to see him. When he had been there
until noon, he looked out over the sea and beheld another
_ship coming toward bim_as. swaltly_as if all the winds in the
world were driving it on; and in front of it there travelled a
whirlwind which stirred ‘the sea and ‘beat up the waves on all
sides. At the sight of this, he marvelled greatly what it could
be; for the whirlwind concealed the ship from sight. Never-
84 THE QUEST OF THE HOLY GRAIL


theless it drew so near that he knew it was a ship and that it
was draped with black cloth, but whether of silk or linen he
could not-telt“Whien 1€ was now close to land, he went down
to find out what it was. So he went down, wishing it might be
again the good man with whom he had talked that day. Now it
happened somehow, either by the grace of God or for some other
reason, that there was no beast on the mountain that dared to
attack or assail him. So he went down the hill and came to the
ship as quickly as he could. And when he was about to go on _
board, he saw sitting in the ship a damsel of passing beauty,
and clad ‘in richest raiment. —
~~ As-soorr 4s she saw Perceval approach, she rose to meet him
and said without further greeting: “Perceval, what_are you
doing here ? Who brought you to this mountain, which is so
remote that you would never be. rescued unless by some chance,
nor would you find anything to eat here, but you would die of
hunger and of misery at finding no one to give heed to your
needs?” ‘“Damsel,” he replied, “if I should die of hunger,
fi should not be a loyal servant. For no one serves such a high
' Master as I do but can ask for what he needs, provided he serve
! ‘Him faithfully and heartily. Hé Himsélf said that His door is”
never closed to anyone who comes to it, but that he who knocks
may enter, and that he who asks receives. And if anyone seeks
Him, He does not hide Himself, but may be easily found.”
When‘she héard mention of the gospel, she replied not a word,
but changed the subject, saying: ‘‘ Perceval, do you know where
I came from?” “Damsel,” said he, “how did you know my
name?” “I know it well enough,” she replied, “and I know
you better than you think.” “And where did you come from
thus?” he asked. “In truth,” said she, “I came from the Forest
Gaste, where I witnessed the strangest adventure in thé world
connected with the Good Knight.” “Ah! damsel,” said he, “tell
me about the Good Knight, in the name of what you love
dearest in the world" T will y no means tell you what I know,”’
said she, “unless you swear by the order of chivalry you profess
that you will do my will whenever I summon you.” Then he
said he would do it if he could. “You have said enough,” she
replied. “Now I will tell you the truth. It is a fact that I was’
_a while ago in the midst of the Forest Gaste, just where the
broad stream called the Marcoise flows. There I saw the Good
Knight come and drive before him two other knights whom he
tried to kill. In fear of death they plunged into the water and


~~
succeeded in getting across. But he had bad luck; for his horse
was drowned, and he would have been too, had he not turned ,
back and saved his life. Now you have heard the Good Knight’s °
adventure which you asked of me. Now I wish you to tell me
what you have been doing since you arrived in this remote
island, where you will be as good as lost if you are not delivered
from it. For you see that no one comes here to help you, and you
must escape from here or die. So, if you do not wish to die, you

_Must make some compact with someone which will result in”
gout freedom. And you cannot be set free except by me; where-
ore, if you are wise, you are bound to do for me so much that
I will release you, for I know no greater folly than his who can
help himself and does not do so.”

“‘Damsel,”’ Perceval replied, “if I thought that it would
please Our Lord for me to escape, I would escape if I could ; but
under any other condition I would not wish to be at large.
There is nothing in the world which I should wish to have done,
if I did not think that it was pleasing in His sight; for in that

, case I should have received chivalry in an evil hour, if I were
| found to be warring against Him.” “Never mind all that,”
‘ said she, “and tell me if you have had anything to eat to-day.”
“Tt is true,” said he, “that I have eaten no earthly food this
, day. But there came here a worthy man to comfort me, who
spoke to me such satisfying words that he fed and filled me so
generously that I shall never hunger nor thirst so long as I may
. remember him.” “Do you know who he is?” she asked. “He
is an enchanter, a monger of words who says a hundred words
instead of one and will never tell the truth if he can help it. If
you believe him, you are undone, for you will never escape
from this rock; instead, you will die of hunger and the wild
beasts will devour you, as you can see to be very probable.
Already you have been here two days and nights and part of
this third day; all this time the person of whom you speak has
brought you no food, but has left you and will leave you here,
for you will never be helped by him. It will be a great pity and
misfortune if you die here: for you are such a young and worthy
knight that you might yet be of great value to me and to others,
if you were released from here. And I say I will release you,
if you wish.”

When Perceval heard what she offered him, he said: “‘ Damsel,
who are you, who would so willingly release me from here, if
I should consent?” ‘“‘J am a disinherited damsel,” she replied,
86 THE QUEST OF THE HOLY GRAIL


‘who would now be the richest lady in the world, had I not
been driven from my heritage.” “ Disinherited damsel, ” said
he, “now tell me who deprived you of your heritage: for I feel
much greater pity for you than I did before.” “T will tell you,”
she replied; “the truth is that once upon a time a rich man
established me in his house as his servant, and this rich man
was the richest king known. And I was so fair and beautiful
that everyone marvelled at my beauty: for I was passing fair.
Being areas more proud of my beauty than I should have
been, I said something which displeased him. And as soon as
I had said it, he became so angry with me that he would no
longer tolerate my presence, but drove me out poor and stripped,
and felt no pity either for me or for anyone who was concerned
for my welfare. Thus the rich man drove me out with my
dependents, and sent me into the wilderness in exile. He thought
he had disposed of me in this cruel fashion; and so he would
have done, had it not been for the skill with which I began at
once to war against him. Since that.time I have had such good
fortune that I have made great gains: for I have taken from
him part of his men, who have deserted him to join me and the
fine company J have to offer them. For I give them everything
they ask of me, and more. So I am at war day and night against |
him who banished me. And I have- assembled knights and
sergeants and people of all kinds; and I will tell you that to
every knight and gentleman of whom I learn I offer the honour
of joining my party. Because I know that you are a good knight
and a gentleman, I have come here to secure-your aid. You
ought to help me, because you are a companion of the Round
Table, and no one who is a companion ought to deny a damsel
in distress when she asks him for his aid. You know well that
this is true, for when you took the place given you by King
Arthur, you swore as the first oath you took that you would
-never deny a damsel’s request for aid.” Then he said he had
certainly taken this oath, and that he would gladly help her
in accordance with her request. Then she thanked him heartily.
They talked together until it was past noon and nearly three
o’clock. The sun was burning hot, and the damsel said to
Perceval: “Perceval, there is on board this ship the richest
tent of silk that you ever saw. If you like, I'shall have it brought
out and set tip -hereto-proteet you from the sun’s heat.” And hie
said that he approved of that. Then at once she went inside
the ship, and commanded the servants to erect the tent on
the shore. When they had done so as well as they could, the

damsel said to Perceval: ‘Sit down and rest yourself until

night comes, and move out of the sun, for I think you are

getting too warm.” Then he went into the tent_and promptly _

fell asleep; but she had first made him lay aside his helmet,

hauberk and sword; and she let him go to sleep thus without
" Jis arms.

When he had slept a long time, he awoke and asked for food.
At her command the table was spread, and he saw that it was
covered with such a plenty of viands that it was marvellous to
behold. When he asked for drink, it was furnished him, and
he found it to be the best and strongest wine, so he wondered
whence it could have come. For in those days there was no
wine in Great Britain except in the houses of the rich, but
they commonly drank beer and other beverages which they
made. He drank so much of this wine that he became heated .
to excess, Then looking at the damsel, he thought her so fair
that he had never seen her equal for keauty. She caused him
such pleasure and delight by the elegance he saw in her and by
the gentle words she spoke, that he desired ardently to possess
her. After speaking to her of divers things, he sought her love
and begged her to give herself to him and he would give himself .
‘to her. She put him off as long as she coutd, wishing his desire
‘to be further kindled. But he continued to urge her. So when
she saw that his ardour was sufficiently aroused, she said to
him: “Perceval, you know full well that I will not do your
pleasure, unless you promise me that henceforth you will be
mine and will help me against all men, and will never do any-
thing except what I command you.” And he said he would agree
to that. ‘Do you promise me as a loyal knight?” said she.
He answered, ‘“‘Yes.” “Then I will resign myself,” said she,
“and will do your pleasure. But know of a truth that you have\
not desired tg possess me so much as I have desired you. For. ;
you are one of the knights in the world upon whom I have |
most cast my eyes.” |

Then she ordered the servants to prepare the finest and most
elegant bed they could in the middle of the tent; and they ,
said they would obey her command. So they soon set up a bed,
undressed the damsel, and put her in it, and Perceval as well. -
When he had taken his place by the damsel’s side and was about
to pull the covers up, he happened to catch sight of his sword
lying upon the ground where it had fallen when they relieved
88 THE QUEST OF THE HOLY GRAIL


him of it. When he stretched over to reach it and lean it against |
the bed, he saw a red cross carved in the pommel. At once he
came to himself. He crossed himself upon the forehead, when |
behold! the tent was overturned, and such a thick cloud of*
smoke surrounded him fhiat he could not see a thing; and he
smelt such a stench all about him that he thought he must
be in hell. Then he cried with a loud voice, saying: “Fair gentle
Father Jesus Christ, let me not perish, but succour me with
your grace, or otherwise I am lost!”” When he had said this, he
opened his eyes again, but he saw nothing of the tent in which
he had just now lain. And as he looked toward the shore, he
saw the ship just as it had been previously, and the damsel, who,
said to him: “Perceval, you have betrayed me!” And at once'
the ship put out to sta, ant’ Perceval saw that such a storm:
followed it that it seemed the ship must be driven from its
course; meanwhile the entare surface of. the sea was covered
with flames so that it seemed that all the fires in the world had |
caught there; and the ship tore on faster apparently than as
blast of wind could blow.
When Perceval saw how this adventure turned out, he was
so stricken with grief that he thought he would die. He watched
the ship as long as he could see it and called down upon it
curses and pestilence; and when he saw the last of it, he said:


» “Ah! alas! Iam dead.” And he was so wretched that he would
’ fain be dead. Then he drew his sword from the scabbard and
~4slashed himself so fiercely that he cut his left thigh and the
‘blood’ spurted out in alftiirections. Wher hé saw this, he-sard:
“Fair Lord God, this is to repay you for the wrong I have done
zyou.” Then he surveyed himself and saw that he was completely
‘naked except for his breeches, and seeing his clothes in one
place and his arms in another, he cried: “ Alas! wretch that Iam!
I have been vile and foul to have been brought so soon to the
point of Tositig what-roone can ever recover—his virginity,
.which can never be recovered when it has been onceé lost.”
‘Then he replaced his sword in the scabbard, and regretted more
ithe thought that God was angry with him than the fact that
he was wounded. Putting on his shirt and jacket, he dressed
‘as best he could, and then lay down upon the rock and prayed
Our Lord to send him such counsel that-he might find pity and
-maercy. For he felt that he was guilty of such sin in His éy
that he thought he could never find peace again except through
His mercy. Thus Perceval lay all day near the shore, as one
ft ; i: ie ee
ae
who could not move either forward or backward because of
his wound. And he prayed Our Lord to help him and to send
him counsel profitable for his soul, for he thought of asking
nothing else. “Nor do I desire, fair Lord God,” said he, “ever
to move from here either dead or alive, unless it be your will.”
-4 Thus Perceval remained all day on the rock and lost much
blood from his wound. But when he saw night coming and
shrouding the world in darkness, he reached for his hauberk_
and laid his head upon it, making the sign of the true Cross and
beseeching Our Lord in His gentle pity to guard’ him-so-that™
e devil, his enemy, should not have power to lead him into .
temptation. When he had finished his prayer, he stood up and
- cut a piece from his shirt with which to stanch his wound.
from bleeding too much. Then he began his prayers and orisons,
of which he knew several, and waited thus employed until
day dawned. When it pleased Our Lord to shed the light of
day upon the earth, and when the sun was casting its rays where
Perceval was lying, he looked about him and saw the sea on
one hand and the rock on the other. When he remembered
the devil, who in the guise of a damsel had possessed him, for
he was sure it must have been the devil, he eee a great and
marvellous lament, saying that he was now a dead man, unless
the grace of the Holy Spirit should comfort him.
~ While he was communing thus with himself, he looked out
across the sea toward the east and saw approaching the ship
which he had seen before, the one draped in white silk, in which
the good man clad like a priest had been. When he recognised
it, he was greatly comforted because of the excelent words
which the good man had spoken to him before and the wisdom
he had found in him. When the ship had arrived and he saw
the good man on board, he sat up as best he could and bade
him welcome. Then the good man came ashore and sat down
on the rock near Perceval and said to him: “‘ How have you been _
getting on?” “Badly, sire,” said Perceval; “for a damsel came
near leading me into mortal sin.” Then he told him how it had
come about. Then the good man asked him: “Do you know
who she is?” “No, sire,” said he. “But I am sure the devil
sent her here to put me to shame and deceive me. And I would
surely have been disgraced, had it not been for the sign of the
_cross which restored me to my night mind and memory. As soon
as I made the sign of the cross, she departed at once, and I have
not seen her since. Now I beseech you for God’s sake to tell
G
go THE QUEST OF THE HOLY GRAIL


me what to do; for I never stood in such need of advice as now.”

» “Ah! Perceval," said the good man, “will you always be so
innocent? Don’t you recognise the damsel who brought you to
‘the brink of mortal sin, when the sign of the cross delivered
you?” “T certainly do not know who she is. But I beg you for

_ God’s sake to tell me who she is and from what country, and
-who this rich man is who drove her out into exile, and against
whom she sought my aid.” “Well, I will tell you,’ ’ the good man
replied, ‘‘and then you will know. Now listen to me.

“The damsel with whom you spoke 1 is the devil, the lord of
hell, he who has authority over all the rest: Tt is true that
he was once in heaven in company with the angels, and, as an
“angel, was so fair and radiant that because of his great beauty
‘he grew proud and wished to make himself equal with the Trinity,
and said: ‘I shall rise on high and be like the fair Lord
But as soon as he had formed this resolve, Our Lord, who had
no desire for His mansion to be contaminated with the poison
of pride, cast him down from his high place where He had placed
him, and sent him to the dark dwelling-place called hell. When
he saw that he was cast down from the high place of dignity he
was wont to occupy and was set in eternal darkness, he resolved
to make war to the extent of his ability upon Him who had cast
him out. But he could not see any way to do so. Finally, he
made the acquaintance of Adam’s wife, the first woman of the
human race; and he spied upon her and beguiled her until he
had caught her in the same mortal sin for which he had been

expelled and cast down from heavenly glory, namely covetous-
ness. He influenced her disloyal desire to pick the deadly fruit
of the tree which had been prohibited her by the mouth of the
Creator. When she had picked it, she ate of it and gave it to
her husband Adam to eat, with the result that all their heirs
have felt the mortal effect of their sin. The devil who brought
them to this pass was the serpent you saw the day before yester-
day bearing the old lady, and he was also the damsel whom you
saw last evening. When she said she was at war day and night
she spoke truly, as you yourself iow Tuit-wellTor she Is ever”
on the watch to ensnare the knights of Jesus Christ and all
worthy men and the servants in whom the Holy Spirit is lodged.

“When she had softened you by her false words and trickery,
she commanded her tent to be set up that you might find shelter
there, and said: ‘Perceval, come to sit down and rest until
nightfall, and seek shelter from the sun, for I think it is too
THE QUEST OF THE HOLY GRAIL or


hot for you.’ These words of hers are not without great signifi-
cance. For she meant something quite different from what you
understood. The tent, which was round like the canopy of the
world, signifies evidently the world which will never be purged
SEsinrand because sin dwells forev forever in it, she would not have
you lodged anywhere but in the tent; therefore she had it
prepared for you. And when she called you and said: ‘ Perceval,
come to sit down and rest until nightfall,’ she meant that you
should be idle and should feed your body upon earthly and
lust-satisfying meats. She did not recommend that you do any
work in this world or sow any seed such as good men will reap
on the day of judgment. She invited you to rest until nightfall,
that is until death shall overtake you, which in truth is always
called night whenever it overtakes man in mortal sin. She
called you because she was afraid that the sun would overheat a
you, No wonder. she was. afraid! For when the sun, by which
we_mean Jesus Christ, the true light, warms the sinner with” = -
the fire of the Holy Spirit, 1 the chill and ice of the devil. cannot.
do bim much harm \. provided he has fixed his heart upon the
lofty sun. Now I have told you enough about this lady to enable
you to know who she is, and that she visited you rather for
your woe than for your good.”

‘‘Sire,” said Perceval, ‘you have told me enou h about this ,
lady for ine to Know that she i is the champion whom I was to
_fight.” “Upon my word,” the good man replied; “you aretight.—
Now see what kind of a fight you have made.” “A sorry enough
showing, sire, I fear. For I would have been beaten, but for
the grace of the Holy Spirit who did not let me perish, thanks
be to Him!” " However it may have been this time,” said the
worthy man, “in future be on your guard. For if you go down
again, you will not find anyone to set you up so quickly as you
did this first time.”

The good man spoke at length with Perceval and counselled
him to do right, saying that God would not forget him, but
would soon send him succour. Then he asked him how his
_wound was. “In truth,” said he, ‘‘since you came I hav
no paifr or discomfort any more ‘than if I never had a wound ;
nor, while you are speaking with me, do I feel the slightest
pain, but rather from your words and your face there come such
balm and relief to all my members that I-cannot believe you
are a mortal man, but rather some creature of the spirit. And -
I know surely that if ¥ you would atways abide with me, I should
92 THE QUEST OF THE HOLY GRAIL


suffer neither hunger nor thirst; and if I dared, I would main-
tain that you are the living Bread which comes down from
heaven, and Of -whieh-ii-any-“man- eat worthily he shall have
. everlasting life.”

As soon as he had said this, the good man vanished so that
he did not know what became of him. Then a voice said:
“Perceval, you have gained the victory and are healed. Enter
this ship and go whithersoever fortune may lead you. And be
not dismayed by anything that you may see, for wherever you
go God will lead you. You have at least earned this reward,
that you shall see after a while your companions Bors and
Galahad, which is what you most desire.”

“When he heard this, he felt the greatest joy any man could
feel, and thanked Our Lord for his good fortune. He took his
arms and, arming himself, entered the ship, and put out to sea
from the rock as soon as the wind filled the sail. But now the
story takes leave of him and returns to Lancelot, who had
tarried with the good man who had interpreted to him so
clearly the meaning of the three words which the voice had
uttered in the chapel.
CHAPTER VII


Now the story tells how the worthy man made Lancelot stay
with him for three days. While he had him with him, he talked
with him constantly, counselling him to do night and saying :
“Surely, Lancelot, there is no use in your going upon this
Quest unless you abstain from all mortal sin and withdraw your
heart from earthly thoughts.and from lust of. the world, For
rest assured that in this Quest your chivalry can avail you —
nothing, unless the Holy Spirit prepares the way before you
in all the adventures which you will meet. You are aware that
Quest~is umdertaken in order to learn something. of the
marvels of the Holy Grail, which Our Lord has promised to
‘véveal to the true knight ht who-sha surpass in in pooteess ‘and in ;
r chivalry all those who have lived before him or who shall live
tafter him. This chosen “knight you saw at Pentecost in the
erilous~“Seat of the Round Table, where no one before had
sat without losing his life. Upon one occasion you had a fore- -
cast of this adventure to come. This knight is the great man
ioe will exhibit in his life-time the acme of earthly chivalry.
And-when- tis“ déed5"shall have qualified him to be no longer
“a creature of earth but a creature of spirit, then he will quit
his earthly tenement and will join the chivalry of heaven.
~ Thus spoké Méflin, who was very wise concerning future events,
regarding that ‘knight whom you have once seen. And yet,
though it be true that this knight has in him more prowess and
courage than anyone else, know of a truth that if he should
allow himself to fall into mortal sin—from which may Our Lord
in His pity preserve him—he would accomplish in this Quest
no more than any other simple knight. For this service upon
which you are are eMtering tas nothing todo with earthly things,
‘but with heavenly things; wherefore, you can see that whoever
wishes to enter upon it 4nd accomplish anything must first and
purge and cleanse himself from all worldly filthiness, so that x
.the devil may have no part in him. Then, when he shall have
turned his back upon the devil and shall be cleansed and washed .-
of all mortal sins, he will be able with confidence to enter upon


93
94 THE QUEST OF THE HOLY GRAIL


this high Quest and service. But if he be of such feeble and
‘insuffttent fatth that he thinks he will accomplish more by his
own chivalry than by Our Lord’s grace, then be assured that
he will not escape shameless, and that in the end he will achieve
nothing of what he sets out to do.”
Thus spake the good man to Lancelot as he kept him three
» days with him. And Lancelot held himself fortunate in that
God had brought him thither to this good man who had in-
| structed him so well that he thought he would be the better for
1 it all his life.

When the fourth day had come, the good man sent word to
his brother to send him arms and a horse for a knight who
was tarrying with him. And his request was gladly complied
with. So, on the fifth day, when Lancelot had heard mass and
was armed and mounted upon the horse, he left the good man
in tears, earnestly beseeching him for God’s ‘sake ‘to pray Our ~
“Lord not to forget him and allow him to relapse into his former
state of wretchedness. And he promised him that he would

. do so; whereupon he went away.


Pad


forest until the hour of prime, when he met a valet who asked
, him: : “Sir knight, where do you come from?” “TI belong to
' the household of King Arthur,” he replied. ‘“‘ And tell me, what
‘is your name?” Then he answered that he was Lancelot of
| the Lake. “‘Lancelot,” said he, “before God! I was not looking
‘ for you: for you are one of the most unhappy knights in the—
t world. ”? “Ffow do you know that, fair friend?” asked Lancelot.
“I kriow-it well enough,” the valet replied; ‘“‘are you not he
‘who saw the Holy Grail pass before him and work an open
miracle, yet did not stir in its presence any more than an
‘infidel? ” “I certainly saw it, yet did not stir,” Lancelot replied,
“but I grieve rather than boast about it.” “I am not surprised
that you grieve,” the valet said; “for you certainly showed
plainly that you were neither an “honourable man nor a true
knight, but a faithless unbeliever. And since you declined to
show it honour, do not be-surprised if shame is your portion
in: this Quest upon which you have entered among others who
are honourable men. Certainly, you who have been tried and
have miserably failed ought to grieve, you who were wont to.
be considered the best knight.in. the world, and are now held
, to be the most despicable and disloyal!”
Hearing these words, he knew not what to say, for he knew
the valet’s accusation was warranted. Nevertheless he said:
“Fair fnend, you may say whatever you wish to me, and I will
listen to you. For no knight ought to resent what a valet says
to him, unless he shames him by his words.” “That is just what
you are going to hear,” the valet said, “for henceforth no good
can come out of yoy, Yet, you were wont’to be called the flower
of the world’s chivalry! Wretch! You are bewitched by her who -
neither loves you nor even holds you in much ésteem. She has
brought you where you have lost the joy of heaven and the
company of the angelic host and all honour here below, and
have come to receive all obloquy.” To this he dared not make
reply, being so mortified that he fain would die. And the valet
continued reviling him and putting him to shame by heaping
him with all the contumely he could command. And all the
time he listened like one who was so overcome that he did not
dare even to look at him. When the valet had finished saying
what was on his mind and when he saw that he would not
reply, he went on his way. But Lancelot never once looked at |
him, but wept_and sadly prayed Our Lord to lead him back
_into such a way as might be profitable to his soul, For he saw .
clearly that he had sinned so deeply in his life and had so |
strayed from his Creator that unless Our Lord’s mercy was
very great, he could never find pardon. Thus he was brought
to the point where the way before him held out more satisfaction .
than any prospect he had ever entered upon before.
When he had ridden until noon, he saw in front of him off
the road a little house, and knowing it must be a hermitage, he
turned toward it. When he drew near, he saw a little chapel
inside of a small building. In front of the entrance there was
sitting an old man robed in white like a man of the Church,
inaking loud moan and saying: “Fair Lord God, why have you
"permitted this? He had served you for so long a time and had
toiled so much in your service!”” When Lancelot saw the good
man weeping so bitterly, he felt great pity for him and, greeting
him, said: “God keep you, sir.”’ “May He do so indeed, sir
knight,” the good man replied; ‘“‘for if He does not keep me
closely, I do not doubt that the devil will be able to surprise
me easily. And may God deliver you from the sin in which you
are: for surely you are in a worse way than any knight I know.”
When Lancelot heard what the good man said, he dismounted
and determined not to leave the place that day, but rather to
seek counsel of the good man who evidently knew him, judging


Go | gle


96 THE QUEST OF THE HOLY GRAIL


by the words he had spoken to him. So he tied his horse to a
tree and stepped forward; whereupon he saw that inside the
entrance of _the. chapel there la apparently dead an olf mani~_
clad in a loose white shirt with a garment of coarse_prickly-

sackcloth besidé him. At the sight of this, Lancelot greatly won-
dered and asked the hermit the meaning of this death. He sat
down and inquired how the old man had died. And the good
man replied: “Sir knight, I do not know; but I see plainly that
he did not die as God and his Order would have it. For in such’
a garb as you see her€ no Such man can dié without breaking
his religious vows ; therefore I can tell that the devil has attacked
him thus fatally. ‘And it is a great pity, too, I think; for he has
been in Our Lord’s service more than thirty years.” “ Before
God!” said Lancelot, “I think it a great pity indeed that he
has wasted his service only to be deceived by the devil at such
an age as his.”

Then the hermit entered the chapel and got a book and a
stole which he put about his neck. Then he steppetout and
began to conjure the devil. When he had read and conjured
for some time, he looked and saw the devil standing before him


whiten


-so hideous of mien that the heart of any man would have been


afraid. “You are worrying me too much,” the devil said; “now
you Fiave me, what do you want?” ae wish you_to ) tell | me,”
he replied, “how. this companion | of mine has met.

and whether he is lost or saved.” Then the devil spoke in a
horrible and terrible voice, saying to the worthy man: “He is
not lost, but saved.” “ How can that be?” the good man asked.
“It seems to me you must be lying. For our Order does not
command, but plainly forbids, that anyone should be clad in
a linen. shirt; and whoever wears one transgresses the rules of
the Order. And it seems to me that it cannot be well with anyone
who dies while flouting his Order.” “I will tell you what happened
to him,” the devil replied.

“You know that he was a gentleman and of high lineage, and
his nephews and nieces are still living in this country. Now it
happened a few days ago that the Count del Val began to war
against a man named Agaran who is a nephew of the dead
man here. When the war was begun, Agaran, seeing the odds
were against him and not knowing what to do, came to seek
counsel of his uncle here, who at his nephew’s urgent request
left the hermitage and went to help him in his war against
the count. Thus he returned to his wonted life under arms.
And when he had joined his other relatives, he used his chivalry
to such good purpose that the count was taken prisoner on the
third day after they had joined forces. Then the count and
Agaran made peace, while the count gave surety that he would
never again make war on him.

“When the war was over and peace was made, the good man
returned to his hermitage and took up again the service in
which he had long been engaged. But when the count realised
by whom he had been defeated, he requested two of his nephews.
to avenge him. And they said that they would do so. So they
came here at once, and when they arrived at this chapel they
saw that the hermit was saying mass. So they did not dare
to attack him just then, but said they would wait until.he came
out; so they set up a tent outside. And when he had finished his
office and came out of the chapel, they told him he was a dead_
man. Then they seized him and drew their swords. But when

“cut his head off speedily, He whom he had
always served wrought such a miracle in his behalf that they
could not harm him with their blows, though he had on nothing
but his robe. Their swords broke and bounded off from him
as if they were struck upon an anvil. Though they struck at
him untit their swords were in pieces and they were tired and
exhausted by their efforts, yet they had not harmed him even
to the extent of drawing blood.

‘“‘When they saw this, they were beside themselves with
wrath and hatred. They brought tinder and a piece of steel,
saying that they would burn him, for he would be unable to
resist fire. So they stripped him naked and took off his hair
shirt which you see yonder. When he saw that he was naked,
he was ashamed of his condition, and begged them to give
him some garment that he might not be thus shamefully
exposed. But they were so wicked and cruel that they told
him that he should never more wear linen or wool, but should
die. Upon hearing this, he smiled and replied: ‘Do you think
that I can perish in this fire which is here prepared for me?’
They replied: ‘There is nothing but death in store for you.’ ‘To
be sure, sirs,’ he replied, ‘if Our Lord desires my death, it will .
please me much. But if I die, it will be rather because of Our
Lord’s will than because of the fire: for this fire cannot so much
as singe my hair; nor is there in the world so thin a shirt, if I put
it on and walked nght into the fire, that it would be harmed or
damaged.’ When they heard this, they thought that what he
98 THE QUEST OF THE HOLY GRAIL


was saying was all nonsense; nevertheless, one of them said
that he would soon see whether this was true. So he took off
his own shirt and made the hermit put it on; then they_cast
.him in the fire which they had made so great that it burned from
yesterday morning until late last night. And when it was burned
out, they found the good man indeed lifeless; but his flesh
was sound and whole as you can see, and the shirt he had on
was no more damaged than you see. When they beheld him
thus, they were sore afraid; so they took him out of the fire
and carried him here where you see him, and laid his hair shirt
beside him, and went away. By this miracle which was wrought
for him by Him whom he had so long served, you may clearly
see that he is not lost, but saved. I myself will be gone now, for
I have fully explained what you did not understand.”

Thereupon he went off, overthrowing the trees in his path
and making the greatest uproar in the world, so that it
seemed that all the devils in hell were passing through the
forest.

When the worthy man heard the account of this event, he
felt much happier than before. He put away the book and his
stole and, approaching the dead body, kissed it and said to
Lancelot: “In faith, sire, Our Lord has wrought a glorious
miracle for this man who I thought had died in some mortal
sin. But it is not so, thank God! Rather is he saved, as you
yourself have heard. ” “Sire,” said Lancelot, “who was it that
spoke with you so long? I could not see him, but I heard his
~ voice, which was so ugly and terrible that anyone | would have
been afraid of it.” “Sire,” the hermit replied, “anyone might
well be afraid, for nothing i is so redoubtable as he, seeing that
it is he who helps a man to lose his body and ‘soul.”” Then
Lancelot knew of whom he spoke. And the hermit asked him
to keep vigil with him over the sacred body, and to help him
bury it on the morrow. And he said he would gladly do so and
that he was very happy that God had brought him where he
could be of service to such a good man as he.

Then he removed his arms and put them in the chapel, and
- took off his horse’s saddle and bridle; then he returned to the

good man to bear him company. And when they were seat
together, he asked him: “Sir knight, are you not Lancelot of
the Lake?” And he said he was. “ And of what are you in search
all armed this way?” “Sire, with my other companions I am |
seeking the adventures of the Holy Grail.” —-


Goc gle


af, Nt
THE QUEST OF THE HOLY GRAIL ‘gg.


. “Well,” said the hermit, “you may search for them, but you
‘ have already failed of success. For if the Holy Grail should
appear before you, I don’t think you could see it any more
\..than a blind man would see a sword before his eyes.4Yet, many
people have remained in the darkness and obscurity: of sin for
a long time whom Our Lord has later summoned to the true
light as soon as He saw that their hearts were attentive to it.
Our Lord is not slow to help a sinner; as soon as He sees that
he is inclined toward Him either in his heart or in thought or
in some good work, He quickly comes to visit him. And if he
has prepared ‘and cleansed his dwelling as a sinner ought to
do, He comes down and lodges with him, and the sinner need
have no fear that He will go away unless he drives Him out.
But if he calls in another guest who is opposed to Him, He
goes away as one who cannot longer tarry when he who is always
at war with Him has been admitted.

“Lancelot, I have instructed you thus because of the life
which you have so long lived ever since you fell into sin, that
is ever since you received the order of chivalry. For until you
became a knight you had all the virtues lodged in you so natur- *
ally that I know of no young man who was your equal. For
at the outset you possessed virginity so naturally that you had
never violated it either in intention or in deed. You even had .
no desire to violate it; for many a time when you considered
the abomination of the carnal sin in which virginity is corrupted,

you used to spit in disgust and assert. that you would never
fall into such lewdness. Then you used to proclaim that there ~
was rosuch lofty chivalry as that of being virgin and of eschewing
lust and keeping one’s body pure. .

“Beside this virtue, which is so lofty, you possessed humility.
Humility treads gently and softly, with head bowed. It does not
act as the Pharisee did when he said in his prayer in the temple:
‘Fair Lord God, I thank thee that I am not as wicked and
disloyal as are my neighbours.’ You were not like him, but rather
like the publican who did not dare so much as to raise his eye
toward the holy place lest God should be angry with him because
he was too sinful, but rather stood afar off from the altar and
beat his breast, saying: ‘Fair Lord God Jesus Christ, have
mercy upon me a sinner!’ So must he demean himself who |
desires sincerely to accomplish the works of humility. So did —
you use to do when you were a young man, for you then used
to love and fear your Creator above all else and say that one__
I00 THE QUEST OF THE HOLY GRAIL


should not fear anything on earth, but one ought to fear Him
who can destroy body and soul and cast them into hell.

“Beside thése two virtues which I have mentioned, you had
patience. Patience is like the emerald which is always green.
For patience cannot be so sorely tempted as to succumb, but
rather is it always green and vigorous, and in every conflict
it wins the victory and the honour. For no one can so well defeat
his enemy as by patience. Whatever sin you may commit in
the outward man, you know full well within your heart that
you possessed this virtue by gift of nature.

“In addition, you had another virtue similarly lodged in
you as if by nature: that is justice. Justice is such a strong
and powerful virtue that all things are maintained by it in
their proper place, it will never change, andit will render ‘to -
every man what he deserves and merits at the hands of justice.
Justice grants no favours through favouritism and takes none
away through dislike; it will spare neither fnend nor relative,
but will always pursue its straight course without deviation
. for any cause that may arise.

“Finally, you had the virtue of charity so highly developed
in you that it was a marvel. For if you had had all the riches
of the world in your possession, you woutt havé dared to sur-
render them’ alf for tove of your Creator. In those days the
flame of the Holy Spirit was hot and ardent in you, and your
heart and soul were desirous and attentive to hold to what
these virtues had granted you.

“Thus equipped with all goodness and all earthly virtues
you entered the high Order of chivalry. But when the devil,
who first caused man’s sin and brought him into condemnation,
saw you So equipped and protected on all sides, he feared that
he could not surprise you in any way. But he saw plainly that
he could more than accomplish his purpose if he could dislodge
you from one of the points which supported you. He saw that
you were set apart to be a servant of Our Lord and were exalted
in such high degree that you were not likely ever to abase your-
self to serve the devil. Yet he long hesitated to assail you for
fear lest he would waste his time. Then he turned over in his
mind how he could ensnare you. At last he thought that he
~ could more readily lead you into mortal sin by a woman than
an any other way; and he reflected that our first father had
' been deceived by a woman, as well as Solomon the wisest of
all men, and Samson the strongest man, and Absalom the son


e
.
.
THE QUEST OF THE HOLY GRAIL tor


of David, the fairest man in the world. Then said he: ‘Since
all these have been deceived and brought to shame by women,
it seems to me that this youth ought not to offer much resistance.’
“Then he entered into the Queen Guinevere, who had not
gone to confession since she was first married, and hé promptéd”
r to look upon. yor with desire while you were at her residenite,~
the day that you became a knight. When you saw that her
gaze was fixed upon you, you too thought of her; and at once
the devil smote you unawares with one of his darts with such
violence that he made you tremble, thus causing you to turn
aside from the straight path and to enter upon one which you
had never trod: the path of lust which ruins body and soul
more strangely than can be conceived by any who have not
experienced it. From that moment the devil has destroyed your
sight. For as soon aS your eyes were fieated with lustful desire,
you at once banished humility and summoned pride, wishing |
to walk with your head high as proudly as a lien, and saying
‘within yourself that you ought and would value nothing hence-
forth, if-you did not have your way with her whom you beheld
so fair. When the devil, who hears everything as soon as the ~
torigue speaks, knew that you were in mortal sin so far as your
thoughts and desires were concerned, he entered into you, and
drove out Him whom you had so long lodged.
“Thus you were lost to Our Lord, who had nourished and
_raised you and equipped you with all good virtues, and had so
exalted you as to establish you in His service. So that when
He thought you were His servant and that you would serve
Him with the favours which He had bestowed upon you, you
left Him suddenly, and when you ought to be a servant of
Jesus Christ you became a servant of the devil and adopted as
many of the devil’s virtues as Our Lord had endowed you with
His. For, opposed to virginity and chastity you now gave place
to luxury which puts them to confusion; and as against humility
qo now embraced pride like a man who esteemed no one so
ighly as himself. Then you banished all the other virtues I
‘have mentioned and harboured those which were their oppo-
sites. Nevertheless, Our Lord had vested you with so many
favours that it could not be but that from such abundance
some vestige should survive. With this remnant which God
left to you you have accomplished the great deeds of prowess
in foreign lands of which the whole world talks. Just think
‘now what you might have done, if you had conserved all these


Go gle


eee


102 THE QUEST OF THE HOLY GRAIL


virtues which Our Lord had bestowed upon you. You would
not have failed to accomplish the adventures of the Holy Grail
about which all the others are in travail; rather would you
have successfully terminated them as no one else could do,
save the True Knight. And your eyes would not have been
blinded in the presence of your Lord’s face, but you would


. Rave seen Him openly. All these things have I told you because


I grieve that you are so badly off and so disgraced that wherever
you go you will be dishgnoured, and all those who know the
truth of what has happened to you on the Quest will charge
you with base conduct.
“Nevertheless, you have not wandered so far astray that you
_cannot find pardon, if you sincerely cry for mercy to Him who
had equipped you so excellently and had summoned you to


this service. But unless you can do this sincerely, I advise you


not to go on with this Quest. For be very sure that anyone who
enters upon it without making a true confession is certain to
come out of it covered with shame. The Quest is not for earthly


pact a for heavenly. treasure, and “who wishes to enter


heav' ilé still filthy and vile shall be cast out so cruelly
that he will feel the effects of it all his life. So is it with those
who have entered upon this Quest vile and befouled with
worldly vices; for they shall not know how to keep to the paths
and roads, but shall wander idly in foreign lands. The case is
like that of the parable in the Gospels where it 1s said:

“There was once a rich man who had prepared to celebrate
a wedding and invited his friends and relatives and neighbours.
When the tables were ready, he sent his messengers to those


_ whom he had invited and bade them come for all things were


now ready. But they tarried and delayed until the good man
grew angry. When he saw that they would not come, he said
to his servants: go-thraugh-the_streets and lanes and bid
friends and strangérs, the poor and the rich, to ‘come and éat,
forthe tablés are sét“arid_all is ready.” They carried out their
“Tord’s behest and brought with them so many that the house
was full. When they were all seated, the lord looked and saw
among the others a man who was not dressed in a wedding
garment. So he came to him and said: ‘Fair friend, what are —
you here for?’ ‘Sire, I came like the rest.’ ‘ Indeed,’ said the lord,
‘you did not: for they have come full of joy and rejoicing and
are dressed as one ought to be for a wedding feast. But you
have brought nothing suitable for a wedding.’ Then he had
him put out of the house and , in the hearing of all who were
seated at the tables, said that he had bidden ten times as many


guests as had come to the wedding: wherefore one can truly ~-


say that many are called, but few chosen.

“This sarable in the Gospels enables us to understand this
Quest. For by the wedding-feast which was proclaimed we ma
understand the table of che Holy Gril where worthy wen and
troe-Rnifghts shall eat, those whom Our Lord shall find robed
in wedding garments, that is, in the goodly graces and virtues

which God accords to them that serve Him. But thosé whom >

He shall find unadorned and stripped of true confession and
good works He will not receive, but will have them banished
from the company of the others, so that they shall receive
shame and humiliation while the others receive honour.”

Then he paused and looked at Lancelot who was weeping as
bitterly as if he saw before him dead the one in the world whom
he Joved bes én with grief that he
does not know what is to become of him. And when he had
looked at him for some time, he asked him if he had made any
confession since he had entered upon the Quest. With difficulty |
he replied that he had; and he told him all about himself and
the three things that”had been said to him and their meaning.
When thg.bermit had heard what he had to say, he replied to
him: “Lancelot, I summan you, by that Christianity which
you. have embraced and by the order of chivalry which you
received long since, to tell me which manner of Tife ‘iene you
most, t ae which yell wed to lead, or this upon which you have
newly” entered.” ‘Sire, I swear by my Creatof that this new
existence pleases me more a hundred times than the other
ever did, and so long as I live I hope I may never leave it for
any reason whatsoever.” “Then be not dismayed,’ the good
man said, “for if Our Lord sees that you sincerely seek His
pardon, He will so endow you with grace that you will become
a temple and a dwelling-place for Him, and He will establish
Himself in you.”

In such conversation they spent the day. And when night
came, they ate some bread and drank some beer which they
found in the hermitage. Then ay se, but
slept little, for their minds were More upon heavenly than
earthly things. The next morning, when the hermit had_buried

ore the altar, he went into his hermitage, saying
that he would never leave it again, but would serve his Lord
wer


104 THE QUEST OF THE HOLY GRAIL
in heaven all his life. When he saw that Lancelot was about


to take his arms, he said to him: “Lancelot, ] recommend to _


you in the name of holy penitence to put on and wear in future
the hair shirt worn formerly by this sainted corpse. And I


“assure you that such a blessing will come to you from it that


you will never fall into mortal sin so long as you wear it; and
this ought to give you great confidence. Moreover, I recommend
that so long as you are on this Quest you eat no flesh and donk
no wine, but go daily to church to hear the. service of Our Lord,
1f you are where you can do so.” And he received this injunc-
tion as a penance, and stripping himself in the hermit’s presence
he submitted willingly to chastisement. Then he took the hair


‘shirt, whith was” coafsé and prickly, and put it on his back


with his cloak outside. And when he was thus equipped, he took
his arms, anc mounting, asked the good man for leave to go.
And he dismissed him willingly, but urgently besought him
to do nght, and by no means to fail to confess himself each
week, so that the devil might have no power to do him harm.
And he promised so to do. Then he left and rode through the
forest_all day until vespers without meeting any adventure
worthy of mention.

After vespers he met a damsel riding upon a white palfrey
and coming rapidly towafd him. When she espied Lancelot,
she greeted him with the words: “Where are you going, sir
knight?” “Damsel,” said he, “I hardly know, except where
fortune leads me. For I do not know which way I can find what
I am seeking.” “I know what you are looking for,” said she;
“you were nearef to it before than you are now, and you are ©
nearer to it now than you were before, if you keep on-the way
you are going.” “Damsel,” said he, “these two statements
which you make seem to be contrary.” “Never mind,” said she;
“you will see it all more plainly than you see it now, and I have
not said anything which you will not later understand.”

When she had said this and was about to go away, he asked
her where he could find a place to lodge. “You will not find any
lodging to-night,” said she, “but to-morrow you shall find a
suitable place and then your present doubt will be relieved.”
After they had commended each other to God’s keeping, he
left her and rode through the forest until nightfall found him
at a forkin-the-roads, where a wooden cross stood at the parti
of the-ways. When he saw the cross, he was very happy to have
found it and said that there he would stop for the night. So he
bowed his head and dismounted, removing the saddle and bridle
from his horse and allowing him to graze; then. he took the
shield from his neck, and unlacing his helmet, removed it from
his head. Then, kneeling before the cross, he said_his-prayers
and orisons, beseeching Him who had been crucified, in honour
and-memory of whom this cross had been raised there, to kee
him from falling into mortal sin. For he feared nothing so mach
-asarelapseintosin, == |
’ When he had finished his orisons and had prayed Our Lord
for a long time, he reclined upon a stone in front of the cross.
Now he had a great desire to sleep, being weary and exhausted
by his fasting and vigils. So it came about that he fell asleep at
once as soon as he stretched out upon the stone. When he was
asleep, it seemed to him that there appeared before him a man
all surrounded by stars; and in his company there were seven.
Kings and two. knights, and he himself had a golden crown upon
his head. When they had all come before Lancelot, they stopped
and adored the cross and as a penance scourged themselves.
And after they had been on their knees some time, they all sat
down and raised their hands toward heaven, saying in a loud
voice: “Father in heaven, visit us now, and render to each one
according to his deserts, and receive us into Thy abode, into
the mansion where we desire so earnestly to enter!” When they
had said this, they all held their peace. Then Lancelot looked
toward heaven and. saw the clouds part, and a man came forth
with a great company of angels; and he descended upon them
and gave each one his blessing arid called them goo and toyat
Nérvants, Saying: “My mansjon js prepared for you all: enter
“into eternal joy.” And when he had said this, he came to the
elder of the two knights and said: “Depart hence, for I have
lost all ‘that I invested in you. You have not been a_san to me, .
you haye.not beta friend to me, but an enemy.
I tell you that I will put you to confusion, if you do not restore .
my treasure.” Wherr treheard this, he fled from the others and
most piteously cried for mercy. Then the man said to him:


. y you wish, I will love You and if you wish, I will hate you.” ;
ereupon the older knight departed from the rest of the
company. Then the man who had come down from heaven
came to the younger knight and transformed him into the
figure of a lion, and gave him wings, and said to him: “Fair
son, now you can go everywhere and soar above all chivalry.”
And he began to fly, and his wings grew so great and marvellous ©
Sn ee ee 8 f 4s eS
\
(
|


106 THE QUEST OF THE HOLY GRAIL


that they covered the whole world. And when he had flown so

far that all the world thought it a marvel, he went up toward
the clouds; then heaven opened to receive bim, and he entered
in without delay.

This was the vision which Lancelot saw in his sleep. And
when he saw that it was day, he crossed himself and commended
himself to Our Lord, saying: “Fair Father Jesus Christ, who
art the true saviour and comfort of all those who call upon
Thee with a pure heart; Lord, I adore Thee and thank Thee
for protecting and delivering me from the great shame and
torment which I should have rightly suffered, had it not been
for Thy great goodness. Lord, I am Thy creature, to whom
Thou hast shown such great love that when my soul was about
to descend into helt and “eter! perdition, Thou ‘in Thy pity
didst déliver it-andcatf it’ back to the knowledge and fear of
Thee. Lord, in Thy pity, let me not wander henceforth from
the straight path, but guard me so closely that the devil, who
seeks but to deceive me, may not find me out of Thy hands!”

Having said this, he arose and saddled and bridled his horse.
Then he laced on his helmet and, taking his shield and lance,
he mounted. Setting out upon his road as he had the day before,
he pondered over what he had seen in his sleep, for he did not
know what would come of it. But he would fain learn if possible.
After riding until noon, he felt very warm. Then in a valley he
met the knight who had carried off his arms some days before.
When the knight saw him coming, he did not salute him cour-


teously, but shouted: _ Laneslot,beon your guard! For you
are a dead man, unless you can defend yourself against me.”
Then he came at him with his lance outstretched and struck
him so furiously that he pierced his shield and hauberk, but
did not touch his flesh. And Lancelot, putting all his strength
into the blow, struck him with such violence that he overthrew
to earth rider and horse so hard that he nearly broke his oppo-
nent’s neck. His charge carried him beyond, but on turning
back he saw the horse already struggling to rise. So he seized
him by the bridle and tied him to a tree so that the knight
might find him ready when he rose. Then he continued on his
way and rode until evening. Then he was weary and exhausted,
not having eaten all that day and the day before, and in the
meantime having been in the saddle two long days.


He rode until he arrived in front of a pe Se aon
upon a hill. Looking, he saw an old hermit seated before the
ee :
door. He greeted him very gladly, and the hermit returned
his salutation courteously. ‘“‘Sire,’’ Lancelot inquired, ‘‘can you
lodge a wandering knight?” “Fair sire,’ the good man replied,
“if you like, I will lodge you to the best of my ability, and will
give _you _to eat_of what God has loaned to me.” When’ he
replied that he asked for nothing better, thé hermit took his
horse and led him to a shed in front of his abode, removing his
saddle and bridle, and giving him some hay of which there
was plenty there. Then he took Lancelot’s shield and lance and
carried them into his dwelling. Meanwhile Lancelot had unlaced
his helmet and lowered his vizor; then he removed his hauberk
and carried it inside. When he had taken off all his arms, the
good man asked him if he had heard vespers, to which he
replied that he had not seen a man or a woman or.g dwelling
of any kind, except one man whom he had met about noon.
Then the hermit went into his chapel and, summoning his
clerk, began the yespers of the day and then of the Virgin. And
when he had confined the service fixed for that day, he came
forth from the chapel. Then he asked Lancelot who he was
and from what country. And he told him about himself, con-
cealing nothing that had happened to him in connection with
the Holy Grail. When the worthy man heard of this experience,
he felt great pity for Lancelot; for he noticed that he began to
weep when he spoke of his meeting with the Holy Grail. Then
he urged him in the name of St. Mary and for the sake of holy
faith, to make to_him a full and frank confession, which he said
he would gladly do to please him. Then he took him back into
his chapel, and Lancelot told him_all about himself as he had
already done once befgre, and then asked him for God’s sake to


¥ + oe ena


give him help. |
When the hermit had heard him confess his entire life, he
gave him much comfort and confidence, and said so many
kind words to him that Lancelot was much happier than before.
And he said to him: “Sire, give me advice about.a question _
I am going to ask you; if you can do so.” “What is it?” the
Worthy man inquired ; “for I will counsel you in any matter to
the best of my ability.” “Sire,” said Lancelot, ‘“‘there appeared
to me last night in my sleep a man all surrounded by stars, and
he had with him seven kings and two knights.” Then he told
him in detail all he had seen in his dfeam. When the'good man
had heard the story, he said: “Ah! Lancelot, in all this you ;
can see the nobility of your lineage and from what forebears .
108 THE QUEST OF THE HOLY GRAIL


you are descended. You may be sure that there is much more
meaning in this than some people might think. Now listen to
me if you will, and I will tell you the origins of your family.
But I must go back a long way.

“Forty-two years after the Passion of Jesus Christ, Joseph

of Aritmathza, fhat good man and true‘knigh®, left Jerusalem

“py Our Lord’s command to preach and proclaim the truth of
the new dispensation and commandments of the gospel. Upon
reaching the city of(Sarraz\he found a pagan king, Ewalac |
“Ware, -who was at war with a rich and powerful neighbour.

~ When he-became acquainted with the king, he gave him such
counsel that he prevailed over his enemy and vanquished him
in battle with the help which God sent him. And when he re-
turned to his city, he received baptism,at.the hand of Josephe.
the son of Joseph. Now he had a brother4in-law named Seraphe;
while yet a pagan, but who when he had forsaken his 0

' religion received the name of Nascien. When this knight had
forsaken his earlier faith and had become a Christian, he believed
so thoroughly in God and loved his Creator so dearly that he
was, as it were, a pillar and foundation of the faith. His worth
and loyalty were proved by the fact that Our Lord permitted
him to behold the great secrets and mysteries of the Holy
Grail, which no knight as yet had ever seen except Joseph,
and which no knight since then has ever seen, unless it be
yourself in a dream.

“In those days it appeared to King Ewalac tbat from a
nephew of his, Nascién’s son, there flowed a great lake us“it:
were from his belly. And from this lake there issued nine streams,
all of which were indeed wide and deep, but the Iast one was
wider and deeper than all the rest, and it was so swift and
tumultuous that nothing could withstand it. This stream at

. its rise was turbid and as thick as mud, and in its middle course

Te was-cleaY and clear, but at its mouth it was still more so: ©

fort was a hundred times fatrer-and clearer than at {tS sourcé,

_and so sweet to drink that no one could get enough of it. Such
was the last of the nine streams. Then King Ewalac looked ard --.
‘saw a man coming from heaven who bore the appearance and |

‘semblance of Our Lord. And when he had comé to the lake, he
washed his hands and feet in it and ‘in each of the rivers. And |
‘when he came to the ninth stream, he washed not only his hands_ |
and feet, but his whole body- ~~ pia kaa

. '“This vision came to King Mordrain (i.e. Ewalac) as he lay
THE QUEST OF THE HOLY GRAIL 10g


aslegp. And I will show you the significance and meaning of it
a i g Mordrain’s nephew, from whom the lake issued, was
Cel¥doine, the son of Nason whom Our Lord sent into the
world to confound and put down the unbelievers. Tis man
was truly one of the servants of Jesus Christ, one of the knights
of God. He knew “the course of the-stars and planets and the.


mae ao


Take, so far as science and mechanics are concerned, for from
him could all the traits and strength of divinity be drawn.
_Froiri thts T4ké flowed nine streams, namely, the nine mén who
were descended from him} Mot that they were all his own sons,
But they were descended one from the other in direct line.
Of these nine, seven are kings and two are knights.{The first
king who was Celydoine’s son was named Narpus, a worthy
man dearly devoted to Holy Church. The next was named
Nascien after his grandfather; Our Lord dwelt'so marvellously
in him that no better man was known in his time. The third
\ {At one was named Elyan le Gros, who would rather have perished
than do aught against his Creator. The name of the fourth was
Ysaies, a good and loyal man, who feared Our Lord above all
else, and who never consciously incensed his heavenly Master.
The fifth one’s name was Jonaans, a good and loyal knight who
was braver than any other man, and never knowingly did any-
, thing to anger Our Lord. He removed from this country and
_ went inte Gaul, where he married the daughter of Maronex
. fom whom he received the kingdom. From him sprang King
| acelot_your grandfather, who left Gaul and came to dwell
in this country and took to wife the daughter of the King of |
Ireland: He was a very worthy man, as you heard when you
* found’at the fountain your grandsire’s horn which was guarded
' by the two lions. His son was King Ban your father, who was
a much more worthy and sanctified man than was thought by
some, who imagined that grief for his land had caused his death,
but it was not that; for all his life he had besought Our Lord
to quit this life when he should request His permission. And Our
Lord showed that He had heard his prayer: for as soon as he
asked to die in the body, he was allowed to do so, and to find
life for his soul. 7
“These seven persons whom J have mentioned, and who are
110 THE QUEST OF THE HOLY GRAIL


the earliest of your line, are the seven kings who appeared to
you in your dream, and they were the seven streams that
issued from the lake seen by King Mordrain in his dream;_and
in all seven of them Our Lord has washed His hands and feet.
~ Now I must tell you who are the two knights in their company.
a older of them who followed t hers, that is who was
de from them, igs you-yourself: for you are sprung from .
King Ban who was last of the seven kings. When they: were all
gathered before you, they said: ‘Father in heaven, come visit
us and grant to each one according to his deserts, and réceive
us into Thy abode!’ In saying ‘Father, come visit us,’ they
admitted you into their company and begged Our Lord to
come and seek them and you, because they were your origin
and root. When they said: ‘Grant to each one according to
his deserts,’ you should understand that there was nothing in
them but justice: for because of their love for you, they would .
not ask Our Lord for more than was night, namely to render
justice to each one. When they had said this, it seemed to
you that there came a man from heaven with a multitude
of angels, and descended upon them and gave to each of them
his blessing. And as it happened in your vision, so it happened
in reality Jong ago: for there is not one of them but is in the
company of the angels.

‘When he had spoken to the older of the two knights and had
said the words that you remember, for you ought to take them
for yourself inasmuch as they were uttered concerning you and
for your sake, and as you are typified in him to whom they were
addressed, he came to the younger knight who is your offspring; -
for you engendered him with ‘the Fisher King’s daughter, so
that he takes his descent from you. Him he changed into the
figure of a lion, that is, he placed him above all earthly men, so
that none should equal him in pride or power. And he gave him’
wings so that none should be so fast and speedy as he was,
and so that none should mount so high in prowess or in any
other quality, and he said to him: ‘Fair son, now you can go
everywhere and soar above all earthly chivalry.’ And straight-
way he began to fly; and his wings grew’so =f and marvellous


!


_ that the whole world was covered with them. (All that you then
beheld has now happened to Galahad, this kilight who is your
“son: for his tife is so noble that it is a wondrous thing, “anct-
“neither you nor anyone else can equal him in chivalry. And |
because he has mounted so high that no one can attain to him,
we have a right to say that Our Lord gave him wings to soar
above all the rest. By him we ought to understand the ninth
river which King Mordrain saw in his dream, which was wider
and deeper than all the rest combined. Now I have told you
who are the seven kings whom you beheld in your dream, and
who was the knight who was separated from their company,
and who was the last one upon whom Our Lord conferred such
favour that He caused him to soar above all the rest.”

“Sire,” said Lancelot, “ your. statement that the Good Knight
is my son causes me great astonishment.” “You ought not to
‘be astonished or amazed,” the good man replied, “for you
. are well aware that you had carnal acquaintance with the
daughter of King Pellés and begot Galahad, as you have many
a time been told. And this Galahad whom you begot with this
damsel is the knight who sat in the Perilous Seat on the day of
Pentecost: he is the knight whom you seek. I have told you and
informed you of this because I did not wish you to join battle
with him: for you might cause him to commit a mortal sin in
doing you injury. For if you should undertake to fight with him,
you may be sure that it would soon be all over with you, since

O pr ual his.”

“Sire,” said Lancelot, “I am much comforted by what you
have told me. For it seems to me, since Our Lord has permitted
such fruit to spring from.me, that he who is such an excellent
man ought not to allow his f
but rather should pray Our Lord night and day to remove me
in His gentle pity from the evil life I have so long led.” “TI will
. tell you,” the good man replied, “‘how it is Of mortal sins the
father bears his own burden, and the son bears his; the son
shall never share in the sins of his father, and the father shall


Not share in the sins of his son; but each one shall receive his-


reward according to his deserts. Therefore, you should place
no hope in your son, but only in God, for if you ask aid of Him,
He will aid‘ yow and succour you in every need.” “Since no one
but Jesus Christ can help me or avail me anything,” said Lance-
lot, “I pray Him to be my strength and help lest I fall into the
hands of the devil, so that I can restore to Him the treasure he
asks of me, that is my soul, on that awful day when He shall
say to the wicked: ‘Depart from me, ye cursed, into eternal
fire!’ and He will speak to the good these gentle words: ‘Come,
ye blessed of my Father, ye blessed children, enter into the joy
that shall never end!’” |
ather, whoever he be, to be lost,


¢


112 THE QUEST OF THE HOLY GRAIL


The hermit and Lancelot talked long together; and when it
was time to eat, they left the chapel and sat down in the good
man’s dwelling, and ate bread and drank beer. When they had
eaten, the hermit made Lancelot he down upon the grass,
having no other bed at his disposal. And there he slept very
well, being weary and exhausted, and he did not think so much _
as usual about the great luxury of the world. For if he had

thought of that, he would not have gone to sleep, on account of
the earth which was very hard and the hair shirt which was .
coarse and prickling next his skin. But he had been brought

“to thé point where this discomfort and this hardness pleased —
_and gratified him so much that he never made trial of anything
which gave him such satisfaction. So nothing that he did
distressed him now. |

That night Lancelot slept and rested in the good man’s dwell-
ing. And when it was day, he arose and went to hear the service
of Our Lord. When the hermit had finished his chant, Lancelot
took his arms, mounted his steed, and commended his host to
God. The worthy man exhorted him to keep on the way as he
had begun, and he replied that he would, if God gave him health.
Then he went away and rode through the forest all day without.

“keeping to ariy road or path. For he was thinking much of his

~ past life and estate, and repented deeply of the great sins he had
committed, for which he was excluded from the noble company
which he had seen in his dream. And he was so grieved at this,
that he feared greatly lest he would despair. Yet, because he
set all his expectation upon Jesus Christ, he thought he might
regain the place from which he had been cast out and keep
company with those from whom he was excluded.

When he had ridden until midday, he came to a great plain
in the forest, and saw before him a_castle, strong and. well
situated, surrounded by walls and moats. In front of the castle’.
there was a field where there were raised as many as a hundred -.
silk tents of divers colours. In front of the tents there were

“fully five hundred knights ‘or more who were engaged in a-
_wonderful tournament, and whose arms were either white or
black, but not otherwise distinguished. Those with the white
“arms stood toward the forest, and the others toward the castle.
They had already begun their wonderful tournament, and there
were So many worsted knights that it was a strange thing. He
watched the jousting for a while, until he thought that those
on the castle side were getting the worst of it and were losing
THE. QUEST OF THE HOLY GRAIL 113


ground, though they had more men than the other side. When
he noticed this, he turned toward them with the intention of
doing his best to help them. Lowering his lance and giving
rein to his steed, he struck his first opponent so hard that he
carried him and his horse to earth. Spurring forward he struck
another and broke his lance, though he nevertheless bore him
to the ground. Then taking his sword he began to deal great
blows here and there through the ranks with great valour; and
in a short time he did so well that all witnesses admitted that
the honour and distinction of the tournament were his. Never-
theless, he could not yet dispose of those who opposed him:
- for their hardiness and endurance amazed him. He struck and
hammered them as he might have done on a piece of wood.
But they gave no evidence of feeling the blows he dealt them,
nor did they retreat, but rather gained ground on him. And
they wore him out so thoroughly in a short time that he could
not hold his sword, and was so tired and exhausted that he
thought he could never carry arms again. So they took him by
force and led him away into the forest. And all his partners
were quickly vanquished as soon as his help was withdrawn.
Those who led Lancelot away said to. him: “Lancelot, we have
__succeeded in getting possession ef-you-and yeu -%
risoner; if you wish to gain your freedom, you must do our
”? Then he promised them, and straightway went off, texving
them in the forest. But he took another path than the one
by which he had come.

And when he was a long distance from those who had taken
him prisoner, he reflected how he had been reduced to a point
he had never reached before: for he had never before faited-to
“win any tournament in which he had engaged, and had néver
‘been taken prisoner. When he thought of this, he was sorely
grieved and said'to himself that he was evidently a greater sinner
than anyone else. For his sins and his bad luck have deprived
him of his sight and his physical powers. The loss of his sight
was proved by his failure to. see-the- Holy. G?aiwhentt-passed-.
before him. He had just made sad test of his bodily strength,
forte Tiad never been tired or exhausted by such a number of
men as were present at this tournament, but rather had put .

_them all to flight willy-nilly. Thus sad and sorrowful he rode
on until nightfall surprised him in a great deep valley. When he
saw that he could not reach the mountain, he dismounted
under a.tall poplar tree and took the saddle and bridle from
7 earemae


114 THE QUEST OF THE HOLY GRAIL


his horse; then he relieved himself of his helmet and hauberk
and lowered his vizor. Then he lay down on the grass and
quickly went-to-sieep, more tired and weary than he had been
for many a day.

When he had gone to sleep, it seemed to him that there came
toward him from heaven someone who seemed a very worthy
man; and he approached as one who Is angry and said to him:
“Ah! man of little faith and of meagre trust, why.is your-will—


_ So easily changed regarding your mortal enemy? If you do not.


_take care, he will make you fall into the deep abyss from which _
none returns.” And having said this, he vanished so that
Lancelot did not know what had become of him. He was much
distressed at these words, but he did not awake on this account;
rather did he remain asleep and did not awake until morning.
Then he arose and, making the sign of the cross upon his fore-
head, he commended himself to Our Lord. Then he looked all
about him, but could see nothing of his horse; however, he
searched until he found him. Then he put on his saddle and
mounted as soon as he was prepared.

When he was about to go away, he saw to the right of the
road about a bow-shot from him a chapel where there lived a
recluse, reputed to be one of the best en in the country.
“At the sight of this, he said to himself that he was really unlucky
and that his sin truly interfered with all his blessings. For
he could easily have come that far the evening before while
it was yet daylight and asked advice about his estate and his
conduct. However, he now turned thither and, dismounting at
the entrance, tied his horse to a tree, took off his shield, helmet


_ and sword, and placed them all outside the door. When he went


in, he saw that above the altar were the robes of Holy Church
all ready to put on, and before the altar kneeled a chaplain
saying his orisons. And presently he assumed the robes-of-Otr
Lord and began the mass of the Blessed Mother of God. And
when he had finished the service and had taken off his robes,
the recluse who had a little retreat from which she could view
the altar, called Lancelot, seeing that he seemed to be a knight-
errant in need of counsel. So he came to her, and she asked him
who he was, whence he came, and what he was seeking. And he
answered all her questions faithfully. And when he had told
her everything else, he related to her the adventure of the
tournament where he had been the day before, and how those ~
with the white arms had taken him pnisoner, and what had
been said to him. Then he told her of the vision he had had in
his sleep. And when he had told her all about himself, he begged
her to counsel him as best she could. Then she straightway said:
“Lancelot, Lancelot, so long as you were a knight of this
world’s chivalry, you were the most marvellous and adventurous
man in the world. But now that you have enrolled yourself in
the ranks of heavenly chivalry, be not surprised if marvellous
adventures fall in your way. Nevertheless, I will tell you the
meaning of the tournament which you witnessed ; for doubfless “~
what you saw was only as it were an allegory of Jesus Christ.
Yet, the tournament was unquestionably between knights of-
-4 Hesh and blood ; but there was greater meaning in it all than they
, themselves understood. First, I will tell you why the tournament
was held and who the knights were. The tournament was held
to decide who would have more knights, whether Elyezer, son
of King Péllés, or Argustes, son of King Hérlen. And in otder
that they might be distinguished from each other, Elyezer
made his party wear white arms. And when they met in the
jousting, the blacks were defeated, although you gave them
your aid, and although your party was more numerous than
theirs.
“Now I will explain to you the significance of this. Some
time ago, on the day of Pentecost, the knights of the world and.
_ the knights of heaven engaged in a tournament together, that
is, they began together the Quest. The knights who are in a state
of mortatsin are the knights of this world, and the celestial
tights are-the true knights, the worthy men who were not
“'soiléd by ‘str: these began the Quest of the Holy Grail, which’
- +3 the tournament they organised. The earthly knights, who had
this world before their eyes and in their hearts, took black arms,
as being those who were covered with black and horrible sin.
The others, of the celestial knighthood, took white armour to
signify virginity and chastity in which there is neither blackness
nor blemish. When the tourney was begun, that is, when the
Quest was begun, you watched the sinners and the virtuous
men, and you thought the sinners were being worsted. And
_ because you belonged in the sinners’ ranks, being yourself in
mortal sin, you turned to help them and fought against the
virtuous knights. You got into the thick of the fray when you
essayed to joust with Galahad your son; but he overthrew your
“horse and Perceval’s ‘as wett: When you had been for a long time
in the struggle and were so weary that you could not longer
i


iad


116 THE QUEST OF THE HOLY GRAIL


help yourself, the good knights took you prisoner away into the
forest. When you undertook the Quest some time ago and the
Holy Grail appeared to you, then you found yourself to be so
vile and befouled with sin that you thought you could never bear
arms again, that is, you saw yourself to be so base and filthy
with sins that you thought that Our Lord would never make of
you His knight and servant. But at once good men took care
of you, hermits-and religious persons who set you in the path
of Our Lord, which is full of life and verdure like the forest
itself. And they gave you counsel which was profitable to your
soul. When you left them, you did not return to the path yeu
had trod before, that is, you did not turn again to mortal sin
as you had turned before. Nevertheless, as soon as you recalled
the vainglory of this world and the great pride with which you
used to be puffed up, you began to grieve because you had not
been completely, vintoscus Sheree Our Lord was naturally
you. And He-showed this to you clearly in your
sleep in that He told you that your faith was weak and your
trust was poor, and He warned you that the devil would cause
you to fall into the deep pit, which is hell, if you did not take
ment and of your dream, in order that you may not depart
from the way of truth through vainglory or for any other
reason. Inasmuch as you have so greatly erred toward your
Creator, be very sure that if you do anything more against
His will, He will let you stumble from sin to sin until you fall
into eternal punishment, which is hell.” |
Thereupon the lady ceased speaking and Lancelot replied:
“Lady, you have said so much, and the worthy men with whom
I have spoken, that if I should fall into mortal sin, I should
be more worthy of blame than any other sinner.” “May God
grant,” said she, “in His mercy that you never fall into sin
again!” Then she added: “Lancelot, this forest is very wide
and pathless; a knight may well travel for a day without finding |
house or habitation. So I wish you to tell me whether you have
had anything to eat to-day. For if you have eaten nothing,
I shall give you of such store as God has loaned us.” Then he
Said that ‘he had eaten neither that day-nor the day before. So
she had bread and water brought to him. And he entered the
chaplain’s house and partook of the God-given store. When he
had eaten, he went away, commending the lady to God, and rode
all day until evening. : | |
That night he lay upon a high and marvellous rock, deprived
of all company, except of God. And a part of the night he
spent in prayers and orisons, and a part he slept. The next day
when he saw the light appear, he crossed himself upon his
forehead, and humbly kneeled toward the east, and prayed as
he had the day before. Then he went and saddled and bridled
his horse and mounted; then he resumed his journey as he had
done before. He rode until he came into a deep valley, fair to
see, lying between two great marvellous rocks, When he entered”

rand saw the river Marcoise which divided the forest in two parts.
At the sight of this, he knew not what to do. For he saw that
he would have to ford the river which was deep and dangerous,
and the prospect filled him with dismay. However, by putting
his hope and trust in God, he was delivered from his gloomy
thoughts and concluded that he could cross safely with the
_ help of God.
- While he was turning this over in his mind, a marvellous
adventyre happened to him; for he saw coming out of the river
a knight with arms blacker than a mulberry, and he was seated
upon a great black steed. At the sight of Lancelot, he lowered
his lance without saying a word, and struck his horse so violently
that he killed him, but without touching Lancelot; then he went
off so fast that after a moment Lancelot could see nothing more
of him. When he saw that his horse was killed under him, he
got up, and was not too much cast down since so it was pleasing
to Our Lord. Without looking at his steed again, he went on
armed as he was. When he reached the water and could not see
how he was to cross, he stopped and removed his shield, sword,
and lance, and lying down beside a rock, decided to wait there
until Our Lord should send him succour.

Thus Lancelot was shut in on three sides, on one side by the
water, on another by the rocks, and on the third side by the
forest. And look though he would in the three directions, he saw
no human possibility of safety. If he went up in the rocks and
wanted something to eat, he would find nothing there to satisfy
his hunger, unless Our Lord should vouchsafe His help. If he
entered the forest, which was more pathless than any he ever
saw, he might well lose his way and stay there a long time before
finding anyone to help him. And if he went into the water, he
did not see how he could escape danger: for it was so dark and
deep that he could not get a footing. These three considerations
118 THE QUEST OF THE HOLY GRAIL


induced him to stay on the bank and pray Our Lord in His
mercy to come and comfort him and counsel him in order that
he might not fall into any hostile temptation through the devil’s
wiles nor be reduced to despair. But now the story ceases to
speak of him and returns to my lord Gawain.
CHAPTER VIII


Now the story tells how, when Gawain had left his companions,
he rode far and near for many a day without finding any adven-
ture worthy of mention. Such was the case also with the other
companions, for they did not find one-tenth as many adventures
“as usual, so that they were the more dissatisfied with the Quest.
“My ford Gawain rode from Pentecost until the feast of St. Mag-
dalene without encountering any adventure worth mentioning;
at this he marvelled, for he had expected that mightier and
stranger adventures would be encountered upon the Quest of |
the Holy Grail than anywhere else. One day he happened to
meet Hector des Mares riding alone. They recognised each
other at sight and were delighted at the meeting. When Gawain
asked Hector about himself, he replied that he was well and
strong, but had met with no adventure anywhere for some time.
“Upon my word,” said my lord Gawain, “I was about to
complain to you of the same thing: “for, so help me God! since
leaving Camelot I have met with no adventure at all. I do not
Know how to explain it: for it is certainly not for lack of riding
gay and night through strange lands and distant countries.
For I will swear to you loyally as to my companion that in
going about alone, without other business on hand, I have
slain more than ten knights of whom the worst showed consider-
able’valour, yet have I met with no adventure.” At this Hector
crossed himself in surprise. “ Now tell me,” said my lord Gawain,
‘if you Have met any of our companions.” “Yes,” said Hector,
“in the past fortnight I have met more than a score of them
travelling singly, but there was not one who did not complain
to me that he had met with no adventure. ” “Upon my word,
that is strange,’ said my lord Gawain; ‘“‘and have you heard
any news lately of my lord Lancelot?” “ey certainly have not,”
said he; “I can find no one to give me news of him, any more
than if he had been swallowed up by the earth. So I am much
worried about him, and fear he may be somewhere in confine-
«ment. “‘ Have you heard anything of Galahad and Perceval and
“Bors? ? Gawain inquired. “Not a word,” Hector replied; “all
119
120 THE QUEST OF THE HOLY GRAIL


four of them have so completely disappeared that we have lost all
scent and trace of them.” “‘ May God guide them, wherever they
are,” said my lord Gawain; “for surely if they lack adventures of
the Holy Grail, the rest will find none. Yet, I think they will
end by finding some, for they are the best men on the Quest.”
After they had been talking together for a long time, Hector
said: “You and I have each been riding alone for a long time
without meeting anything. Let us ride together now, to see if
we may be more lucky in finding some adventure than when
each one was for himself.” “Upon my word,” said my lord
Gawain, ‘“‘that is a good idea and I agree. Let us join forces
now, and may God conduct us where we may find some trace
of what we are looking for.” “Sire,” said Hector, “we shall
find nothing in the direction from which I have come nor in
the direction from which you have come.” And Gawain air
that this might well be so. “Then my advice,” said Hector, “1
that we strike out in-anew.-dizection,” To this also Cavain
agreed. Then Hector entered a path which ran across the plain
where they had met, and they turned away from the mahrroacd—
Thus they rode for a week without finding any adventure,”
and they were much disgusted. One day it happened that
they were riding through a_wide and unfamiliar forest where
they met neither man nor woman. woman. When evening came they
found between two rocks on.a. mountain an ancient chapel,
which appeared ‘to be in such a state of ruin that no one fre-
quented it. On arriving there, they dismounted and removed
their shields and lances and left them outside the chapel against
the wall. Then removing the bridles and saddles, they allowed
their horses to pasture on the mountain. Unfastening their
swords, they laid them down, and then advanced to the altar
to say their orisons_and prayers, as good Christians should do.
When they had concluded their orisons, they sat down on a
seat in the chancel and talked of many things; but they said
nothing about eating for they knew that they should only
worry about that subject to no purpose. It was very dark
inside, because there was no lamp or candle burning there. So
when ‘they had sat up for a while, they fell asleep each where
he was. 7
When they had gone to sleep, there came to each of them a
onderful vision which ought not to be omitted, but whrch—
ought to Be me mentioned in this account; for 1t was full of meaning.
As for my lord Gawain’ s dream, it seemed to him ‘that "he-was
THE QUEST OF THE HOLY GRAIL 1ar


in a meadow full of green grass and with flowers in plenty. In |
this meadow there-was a rack at which one hundred and fifty
bulls were feeding. Thé-bults were fierce, and all were spotted —
“excepting three. Of these three, one was just slightly spotted,
while the others were as fair and white as they could be. These
three bulls were bound together by the neck with strong and
firm yokes. Then all the bulls said: “Let us go to seek better
feeding-ground than this.” So with that they scattered over
the waste lands, leaving the meadow, and were gone for a long
time. When they. came back, a great number of them were
missing. And those which returned were so thin and exhausted
“that they could hardly stand up. Of the three spotless bulls,
one came back and the others did not. And when they had
come back to the rack, there arose such a strife among them
that the food was exhausted and they had to scatter, some
here and others there.
This was the vision of Gawain. But Hector had a very dif-
ferent dream. For it seemed to him that he and Lancelot came —
‘down from a high seat, and mounted two great steeds, and said:
7 Let us go to seek what we shall never find.”’ Then they started
forth and wandered for many a day until Lancelot fell from
his horse, for a man cast him down who robbed him of all his
gear. And when he had stripped him, he clothed him with a
“robe that was all full of nettles and set him upon an ass. And |
‘when he was mounted, he rode for a long time until he came to
@ spring, the most beautiful he had ever seen. But when he
stooped over to drink, the spring disappeared so that he saw
jothing more of it. And when he saw that he could get no water,
he returned to the place where he had started. Meanwhile,
Hector without being once disturbed was wandering about
aimlessly until he came to a rich man’s house where there was
a wedding and a great feast. He called at the door saying:
“Open! open!” but the master came forward and said to him:
‘Sir knight, seek some other lodging-place than this: for no -
one enters here who has risen so high as you.” Then he went
away very sorrowfully, and returned to the high seat which
he had left. 7 aa
Hector was so disturbed by this dream that he woke up and
began to turn this way and that like a man who could not
sleep. My lord Gawain who could not sleep either, but who had
been awakened by his dream, when he heard Hector tossing
about, said to him: “Sire, are you asleep?” “‘No, sir,” said he,
I
122 THE QUEST OF THE HOLY GRAIL


“I have just been aroused by a strange dream which I have had
in my sleep.” “ Upon my word,” said my lord Gawain, “I have
had the same experience. I too have had a remarkable dream
which has aroused me, and I tell you that I shall never be
satisfied until I know the meaning of it.” “I can say the same
thing,’ Hector replied, “for I shall never be content until
I learn the truth about my brother my lord Lancelot.” While
they were speaking thus, they saw enter the door of the chapel
a hand which was covered as far as the elbow. with red SHE
‘From this hand there hung suspended a plain bridle, and in
the hand there was a great taper burning brightly; and the™
hand passed before them, entered the chancel, and then dis-
poe so that they could not tell what became of it. Then —
they heard a voice saying to them: “ Knights poor in faith and
trust, these tif€e things which you have just seen are lackin
to you; and therefore you cannot attain the adventures of ie
Holy Grail.’’ When they heard this; they were greatly dismayed.
And when they had been silent for a long time, my lord Gawain
spoke first and said to Hector: “Did you understand that?”
“TI certainly did not,” Hector replied, “though I heard it well
enough.” “In God’s name,” said my lord Gawain, “we have
heard so much to-night while asleep and awake that I believe
the best thing for us to do is to go seek some hermit, some
good man who will tell the meaning of our dreams and of what
we have heard. Then we can do whatever he may advise: for
otherwise I believe we should be wasting our efforts as we have
hitherto.”’ Hector replied that he could see nothing but good
sense in this plan. So the two companions stayed all night in
the chapel, without going to sleep again, but each one thinking
intently upon what he had seen in his dream.

When day dawned, they went to see where their horses were,
and sought for them until they found them. Putting saddles
and bridles on their steeds, they took their arms, mounted and
left the mountain. In the valley they met a valet who was
riding alone on a hack, and they greeted each other. “Fair

tiend;*~saitt-my lord Gawain, “could you direct us to some
- hermitage or religious house near here?” “Yes, sire,” the valet
replied. Then he pointed out a little path leading to the night,
and said: “This path will lead you directly to the hermitage
which stands on a slight elevation; but the hill is so steep that
horses cannot climb it, and you will have to ascend on foot.
There you wilt find a hermit who is the best and most upright
man in this country.” “Well, fair friend, we commend you to
God,” said my lord Gawain, “for you have done us a great
service by the words you have spoken.”

So the valet went away in one direction, and they in another.
And when they had proceeded a short distance, they met in
the valley a knight completely armed who shouted as soon as

“he saw them: ‘! Joust!” “In God’s name,” said my lord Gawain,
“T have not met anyone who asked me for a joust since I left
Camelot; and since this knight asks for it, he shall have it.”
“Sire,” said Hector, “let me go to meet him, please.” “ Indeed
not,” he replied, ‘“‘but if he overthrows me, I don’t mind your
going after me.” Then, putting his lance in rest and grasping
his shield, he charged at the knight, who also came at him as
fast as his horse could carry him. They struck each other so
lustily that both shields were pierced and both hauberks crushed,
and each knight was wounded. My lord Gawain was injured in
the left side, but not seriously; but the other knight was wounded
so mortally that the lance had completely run him through.
They both were knocked from their saddle-bows, and in falling
broke their lances, while the strange knight lay in confusion,
feeling himself to be so mortally wounded that he was unable
to rise.

When my lord Gawain found himself lying on the ground, he
sat up quickly, and taking his sword in hand and holding his
shield before his face, he prepared to make as brave a showing
as he could, like a man who had plenty of courage in him. But
when he saw that the knight did not get up, he thought he
must be mortally wounded. So he said to him: “Sir knight, you
must continue our joust, or I shall kill you.” “Ah! sir knight,
].am_killed already, as you well know. So I beg you to heed my
request.” And he said he would gladly do anything he could
for him. “Sire,” said he, “I beseech you to carry me to an
abbey near here and let me receive the sacraments as a knight
should do.” “Sire,” said my lord Gawain, “I know of no religious
house in the neighbourhood.” “ Ah! sire,” said he, “put me on
your horse and I will lead you to an abbey I know, which is
not far from here.” Then my lord Gawain gave Hector his
shield to carry, and lifted him up in front of him on his horse,
holding him around the waist in order that he might not fall.
And the knight guided the horse straight to an abbey which
was near by in a valley. ‘

When they came to the gate, they called until those within
124 THE QUEST OF THE HOLY GRAIL


heard and came to open the gate; then they welcomed them and
helped the wounded knight from his horse and put him tenderly
to bed. As soon as he was in bed, he asked that his Saviour
should be brought to him. And when he saw the body of his
Lord approaching, he began to weep bitterly, stretching out
his hands, and in the hearing of all present, he confessed the
Sins of which he was gutlty toward his Creator, and begged Him
in tears to have mercy upon him. And when he had confessed
everything he remembered, the priest administered to him
the sacrament which he devoutly received. When he had par-
taken of the body of Our Lord, he bade my lord Gawain draw
out the lance head from his breast. But first he asked him who
he was and from what country. “Sire,” said he, “I am of Ki

Arthur’s household and a companion of the Round Table; my |
name is Yvain the Avoltres, son of King Urien. I started out
upon the Quest of the Holy Grail with my other companions.
But now it has come about, by Our Lord’s will or through my
own sin, that you have slain me; but I gladly pardon you, and
may God do the same!” When my lord Gawain heard that, he
was very sorry and sad, and said: ‘‘ Ah God! what a sad accident
is this 1 Ab, Yvain , 1 am sq sorry for you!” “Sire,”’ said he, “who
are you?” “am Gawain, Seale nephew.” “Then I do
not regret,” said he, “being killed by such a worthy man as
you. For God’s sake, when you come to court, greet for me all
our companions whom you find alive, though I am persuaded
that many of them will die on this Quest; and tell them for
the sake of our common brotherhood to remember me in their
prayers and orisons, and to pray to Our Lord to have mercy
on my soul.” Then my lord Gawain and Hector both began to
weep. And my lord Gawain seized the head of the lance in
Yvain’s breast, and when he pulled it out Yvain stiffened with
the agony he felt and passed away in Hector’s arms. My lord
‘Gawain and Hector were sorely grieved, for many a deed of


em wee


fitting for the dead, and buried him before the high altar, and
built a fine tomb over him, where they inscribed his name and
the name of him who had killed him.

Thereupon my lord Gawain and Hector went away sorrowful
and grieving for this misfortune which had befallen them and
which they saw to be the result of pure mischance. So they
rode until they came to the foot of the hill on which was perched
the hermitage. There they tied their horses to two oak trees,
and started up the path which climbed the hill; but they found
it so steep and tiresome to climb that they v were all weary and
exhausted before they arrived at the top. But having gained
the summit, they saw the hermitage where dwelt the good man
Nasciens. It consisted of a poor dwelling anda tiny chaper. —
When they approached, they saw in a small yard beside the
chapel an old, old man plucking nettles for his table, like one
who had tasted of no other food for many a day. As soon as
he saw them with their arms, he thought they must be knights-
errant in search of the Holy Grail, of which he had already heard.
So turning from his occupation, he came and greeted them.
They humbly returned his salutation. ‘Fair lords,” said he,
“what adventure has brought you here?” “Sire,” said my
lord Gawain, “hunger, and the great desire we have to speak
with you, to receive advice wherein we need it, and to be assured
concerning our doubts.” When he heard my lord Gawain speak
thus, he thought he must be very wise in worldly matters, and
he replied to him: “Sire, I shall not fail you in anything I know
or in anything I can do for you.”

Then he led them both to his chapel and asked them who
they were. They told him their names and introduced them-
selves, so that he understood perfectly who they were. Then
he asked them to tell him what their trouble was, and he would
advise them as best he could. Then my lord Gawain said:
“Sire, it happened yesterday while this companion of mine and
I were riding through a forest all day without meeting a single
man or woman, that we came upon a chapel in the mountain.
We dismounted there, for we preferred to spend the night
under cover rather than outside. And when we had removed
our armour, we went inside and fell asleep, each in his own
place. When I had gone to sleep, a marvellous dream came to
me.” Then he told him about it, and when he had finished,
Hector related his. Afterwards they told him about the hand
which they had seen while awake, and about the words which
the voice had spoken to them. And when they had told him
everything, they asked him for God’s sake to tell them what
it meant: for it had not been without deep significance that all
this had happened to them in their sleep.

When the hermit had heard why they had come to him, he
replied to my lord Gawain: “Now, fair sire, in the meadow
126 THE QUEST OF THE HOLY GRAIL


which you saw there was a rack. By this rack we must under-
stand the Round Table: for just as in a rack there are spindles
which separate the compartments, so in the Round Table there
are pillars which separate the seats. By the meadow we should
undérstand humility and patience which are always lively and
effective. And because humility and patience can never be
overcome, the Round Table was established, where chivalry
has ever since been maintained so powerful through the gentle-
ness and brotherhood of the knights, that it has never been
possible to overthrow it. Therefore it is said to be founded upon
humility and patience. At the rack there were feeding one
hundred and fifty bulls. They chose to eat there rather than in
the meadow; for if they had been in the meadow, their hearts
would have dwelt in humility and patience. The bulls were
haughty and all were spotted except three. By the bulls you
must understand the companions of the Round Table, who
_ through luxury and pride have fallen into mortal sin so deeply
that their sins can no longer be concealed within, but must
’ needs appear outwardly, so that they are spotted and speckled
_and befouled and hideous because of them, just as the batts”
were. But there were three of the bulls which were not spotted,
that is, they were without sin. Two were fair and white, while
the third had a mere trace of spots. The two which were whité
and fair stood for Galahad and Perceval, who are whiter and
fairer than any of the rest. They are fair indeed, being perfect.
in all virtues; and they are white without spot or blemish, such
as few can now be found. The third, who had a trace of blemish,
is Bors, whose virgin purity had once been stained. But. he has
sincé made such amends by a life of chastity that his sin has.
been pardoned. The three bulls were bound together by the
necks, representing the three knights in whom chastity is so
deeply rooted that they cannot raise their heads, that is, they ©
are careful that no pride find place in them. The bulls said:
‘Let us ‘seek elsewhere better pasture than this.’ The knights
of the Round Table said on the feast of Pentecost: ‘Let us go
on the Quest of the Holy Grail, and we shall be filled with
‘ worldly honours as well as with that celestial food whieh the
Holy Spirit sends to those who sit at the table of the Holy
Grail. There is the good pasture. Let us leave this, and go
there.’ Then they left the court and travelled over waste lands .
instead of remaining in the meadow. When they left the court,
they did not go to confession, as those should do who engage
in the service of Our Lord. They went not in humility and
patience, which is typified by the meadow, but they wandered
_In the waste places and deserts where neither flower nor fruit
grows, that is, in hell, that is, the place where all things which
are not right go to destruction. When they came back, most
of them were missing, which means that all never will return,
but that some of them will die. Those which came back were
so lean and weak that they could hardly stand up; that is to
say that those which return will be so blinded with sin that
some of them will have killed the others; the fact that they
will not have a single limb to sustain them means that they
will possess no virtue in them such as keeps a man from falling
into hell, and they will be filled with all kinds of uncleanness
and mortal sins. Of the three without sin, one will come back
and the other two will not, meaning that of the three good
knights one will return to court, not to get the food in the
rack, but to tell of thé good pasture which they have lost who
are in_mortal sin. The other two will stay away, for they shall
find such sweetness in the food of the Holy Grail that they
would not .leave it for anything after they have relished it.
The last part of your dream I will not explain to you, for no
advantage could come of it, and it might be wrong for anyone
to avert from you the consequences of it.” “Sire,” said my lord
Gawain, “since you prefer it so, I shall abide the consequences.
And indeed I ought to do so; for you have explained so clearly
what caused my doubt that I understand fully the meaning of
my dream.” |

Then the hermit addressed Hector, saying: “ Hector, it seemed
to you that you and Lancelot stepped down from a high seat;
the seat signifies mastery or lordship. The seat from which you
stepped down is the great honour and respect which was
shown to you at the Round Table; and the meaning is that
you left all this when you went away from King Arthur’s court.
You two mounted two great steeds, that 1s, pride and arrogance,
both of them the devil’s steeds. Then you said: ‘Let us go to
seek what we shall never find,’ that is, the Holy Grail, the secret
mysteries of Our Lord, which shall never be revealed to you
because you are not worthy to behold them. When you separated
from each other, Lancelot rode until he fell from his horse, that
is, until he gave up his pride and took on humility. And do you
know who delivered him from pride? He who cast pride out of.
heaven, Jesus Christ, who brought him to the point of humility
128 THE QUEST OF THE HOLY GRAIL


where he was stri . He stripped him of his sins, so that he
saw himself bare of all those good virtues which a Christian
ought to possess, and he cyed_for mercy. Then Our Lord clothed
him again, and do you know with what? With patience and.
humility: that was the robe which He gave him full of nettles, -
‘namely, the sack-cloth which is as sharp as nettles. Then he
set him upon an ass, the beast of humility, as was appropriate,
for Our Lord rode such an one when He entered the city of
Jerusalem—He who was King of kings and who had all wealth
at His command, yet who would not come upon a war-horse
or even a palfrey, but preferred to come upon an ass, the poorest
and meanest beast, in order that poor and rich alike might
take it as an example. Upon such a beast you saw Lancelot
riding in your dream. And when he had ridden a while, he came
to a spring, the fairest ever seen, and he dismounted to drink
of it; but when he stooped over, the spri 4 disappeared ; and.
when he. saw. that he could get no water, he Yeturnéd’to the —
high seat he had left. A spring indeed it is, which can never
“be exhausted however much’ one-may: draw from it: for it is
the Holy Grail; that is, the grace of the oe ‘Spirit. The spring
iS like the geritle rain, "the sweet word of the gospel, in which
the truly repentant heart finds such sweet ase that the more
he tastes of it, the more of it he desires: that is, the grace of the
Holy Grail. For as it is large and abundant, so is it the more
unfailing. Wherefore it ought by tight to be called a spring.
When he came to the spring, he dismounted, which means that
in the presence of the Holy Grail he will ‘Step down, and will
“no longer consider himself a man, because upon occasion he
had fallen into sin. And when he shall stoop over, that is, when
he shall kneel to drink and be satisfied and nourished with
its abundant grace, then the spring, the Holy Grail, shall dis-
appear. For in ne resence of the Holy Vessel he shall Tose _
the sight of his e: scausé he befouled them by looking upon —
earthly filth, an é é shall lose the strength of his body because
; he has devoted it so long to the devil’s service. And this punish-
ment shall endure twenty-four days, during which he Shall
neither eat nor drink, nor speak, nor move his hand or any
other of his members; rather he will think that he will always
continue in the same state of bliss as when he lost his sight.
Then he will tell a pard of whdt hé-has seen, then straightway
leavethat country and return to Camelot: -~
* And you, who in the meantime will be riding the great
t/
steed, are destined to be always in mortal sin, pride, envy, and

many other vices, and to go wandering untit ©
you come to the résidence of the Rich Fisher, where the good
qaen and true knights will hold their féstival over the rich

treasure which they will have found. But when you arrive there

and seek to enter, the king will tell you that he cares nothing

for a man mounted so high as you, that is, who iselying in

mortal sin and pride. When you hear this, you will return to

Camelot without having accomplished much to your honour

upon this Quest. Now I have told you and explained a part

of what will happen to you.

“Now you must learn plainly about the hand which you
saw pass before you carrying a taper and a bridle, and about
the voice which said that these three things were lacking to
you. By the hand you should understand charity, and by the
lred silk cloth the grace of the Holy Spirit, in which charity is
always bound up. Fle who has charity in Mitt is warm and glow-
ing with the love of our celestial Lord, Jesus Christ. The bridle~
signifies abstinence. For abstinence is the bridle, as it were,
with which a man guides his horse whithersoever he will have
him go. For it is so firmly set in the Christian’s heart that he
cannot fall into mortal sin, nor follow his own will except to
engage in good works. By the taper is to be understood the
gospel truth, that is, Jesus Christ who gives light and sight ~
to all those who draw back from sin and return to the way of
Jesus Christ. Therefore, when charity, abstinence, and truth:
appeared to yoilii the chapel, it signified that when Our Lord
came to His abode in His chapel, which He had not built for
vile, filthy and corrupt sinners to enter, but in order that truth
might be proclaimed in it, and when He saw you there, he
departed because the place had been polluted by your presence,
and He said to you: ‘Knights poor in faith and trust, these three
things are lacking to you, charity, abstinence and truth; and
therefore’ you cannot attain the adventures’ of ‘the Holy Grail?
Now T have told you the meaning of your dreams and the
significance of the hand.”

“Certainly,” said my lord Gawain, “you have explained it
all so truly that I understand it clearly. Now I beg you to tell
us why we do not find so many adventures as we were wont
to do.” “TI will tell you,” the good man said, “how that is. The
adventures which happen now are the indications and demonstra-__
tions of the Holy Grail, and the signs of the Holy Grail will °
pane


130 THE QUEST OF THE HOLY GRAIL


never appear to a sinner or to any man enveloped in sin. There-


fore these signs will never appear to you, who are disloyal
sinners. Now you must not think that these adventures which—


_ are happening at present consist of killing men and knights;
_Instead, they have to do with spiritual things which are much


greater and more important.” “Sire,” my lord Gawain then


said,“ for this reason which you allege, I believe fhat since


we are in mortal sin it is futile for us to continue upon this
Quest; for my part I shall accomplish nothing.” “That is surely
the truth,”’ the hermit replied; “and there are many others
who shall win nothing but shame.” “Sire,” said Hector, “if
we followed your advice, should we return to Camelot?” “‘T advise


_ you to do so,” the good man said; “and I would add that so


long as you are in mortal sin, you will derive no honour from ©
anything you do.” When he had said that, they went away.
But when they had gone off a little way, the hermit called back
my lord Gawain. And when he came back, the hermit said to him:
“Gawain, it is a long time since you became a knight, and | |
little enough have you served your Creator since then. You
are an old tree, bearing no longer either leaf or fruit. Now
consider how Our Lord may have at least the pith and the


bark, if nothing more, since the devil has had the flower and


the fruit.” “Sire,” said my lord Gawain, “if I had the leisure


‘to speak with you, I should gladly do so. But my companion


yonder is already going down the hill, so that I must go now.
But be sure that as soon as I shall have an opportunity to
come back, I shall do so; for I greatly desire to speak with you
privately.” Then they separated; and the two knights went
down the hill, and on coming to where their horses were, they
mounted and rode until evening. That night they lay at a
forester’s, who lodged them and gave them a warm welcome.
Next day they resumed their journey and rode a long time
without finding any adventure worthy of mention. But now
the story leaves them a while and returns to my lord Bors
de Gaunes.
CHAPTER IX


Now the story tells that when Bors had left Lancelot, he rode
until the hour of noon. Then he came upon a man “of great
_age, dressed in religious ge arb, and riding upon an ass; there
was neither servant nor valet in his company. Bors saluted him
and said: “Sire, may God be with you!” Then the other looked
at him and, recognising him as a knight-errant, returned his ~
greeting. When Bors asked him whence he came thus alone:
“T come,” said he, “from visiting a servant of mine who is
sick, but ‘who was wont to attend to my affairs. And you, who
are you, and whither are you going?” ‘I am a knight-errant,”
he replied, “who has started upon a Quest about which I fain
would have Our Lord’s counsel. For it is the highest Quest
which was ever begun, that is, the Quest of the Holy Grail, in
which he who can accomplish it will receive such honour that
the heart of mortal man could not conceive of it.”

“Certainly,” said the good man, “you say the truth: he shall
have t honour, and it will be no wonder, for he will be the
most loyal and true knight of all the Quest. He shall not enter
upon this Quest vile, or filthy, or befouled, “as are the disloyal’

“sinners who have engaged in it without amending their lives:
for this is the very’ service of Our Lord. Consider now how

‘footish fhey are. They know well, and have often heard it said,

that no one can approach his Creator but by the gate of puri-

-fication, which is confession. For no one can be cleansed and
purified unless true confession visits him, for by confession the

devil i is cast out. When the knight, or any other man, commits
mortal sin, he receives and partakes of the devil, and cannot
prevent his abiding with him. And after he has ‘been in this.

state for ten or twenty years, or any other length of time, he
comes to confession and vomits him forth and.casts.him out.

of his body, and Iodges another instead from whom he receives

greater honour, namely Jesus Christ. For a long time He has
furnished the knights of this world with food for the body.

“But now He has evidently become more generous and solicitous
than tHe was before. For He has vouchsafed to them the food .
131
132 THE QUEST OF THE HOLY GRAIL


of the Holy Grail which is food for the soul and nourishment.
for the body. This ‘is that sweet food with which He so long _
fed and sustained the people of Israel in the desert. Thus He
has become more generous toward them in promising them gold
where they used to find lead. But just as the earthly has been
changed into heavenly food, so must those who hitherto have
been earthly, that is, those who have until now been sinners,
be changed from earthly to heavenly, leaving their sins and
their corruption, and coming to confession and repentance,
becoming knights of Jesus Christ and carrying His shield,
which is patierice and humility. For no other defence did He
carry against the devil, when He conquered him upon the
cross where He suffered death in order-to redeem His knights
from the death of hell and servitude in which they languished.
Through this gate, called confession, which none can avoid
who would come to Jesus Christ, it is necessary to enter upon
this Quest, and all must change their nature, corresponding to
their food which is also changed. Whoever would enter in by
some other way, that is, whoever strives to attain without
first going to confession, shall not find what he seeks, but shall
return without tasting the food which is promised to them.
Then there is another thing which will happen to them. For,
because they shalfpose)as celestial knights contrary to the
fact, that is, because they pretend without warrant to be
companions of the Quest, they shall be more filthy and wicked
‘than I can express, and some shall fall into adultery, and’some
into fornication, and some into murder. Thus they shall be mocked
and ridiculed through their sin and the devil’s wiles, and they
shall return to court without finding anything, except the
_ devil’s salary, which is shame and dishonour, of which they
shall receive plenty before they get back. Sir knight, all this
have I told you because you have started on the Quest of the
Holy Grail. For I should not advise you to persevere in this
Quest, were you not such as you ought to be.”

“Sire,” said Bors, “it seems to me from what you say that
they will all be companions in failure if left to themselves;
for it appears to me certain that upon such an exalted service
as this, which is the very service of Jesus Christ, no one ought
to enter except through confession. If anyone seeks to enter
otherwise, I do not see how he can find any such great treasure
as this is.” *‘You are right,” said the worthy man.


1] am not sure of the meaning of this phrase in the original [TRANSLATOR].


, Google
Then Bors asked him whether he was a priest, and he replied
that he was. “Then I beg of you,” said Bors, “in the name of
holy charity, that you counsel me as a father ought to counsel


ee ae es


his son, that is, the sinner who comes to confession; for_the
esas stands in place of Jesus Christ, who is a father to all
ose who believe in Him. So I beg you to counsel me to the
‘profit of my soul and the honour of chivalry.” “In God’s name,”
said the hermit, “you are asking much of me. Yet, if I should
fail you now, and later you should fall into mortal sin or error,
you would have a right to blame me before the face of Jesus
Christ on the great and terrible day. Therefore, I shall counsel
you as well as I can.” Thén he asked him what his name was,
and he replied that he was Bors de Gaunes, son of King Bors
and ssa of my lord Lancelot of the Lake. ri
en the good man heafd’ that, he replied: “Surely, Bors,

if the word of the Gospel applied in your case, you would
be a good and true knight. For if Our Lord said: ‘The good
tree brings forth good fruit,’ you ought by right to be good,
or you are the fruit of a very good tree. Your father, King
Bors, was one Of the best men I ever saw, a kind and humble
king; and your mother, Queen Eveine, was one of the best
ladies I have seen for many a day. They two formed one single
‘tree and one flesh by the union of marriage. And since you are
their fruit, you ought to be as good as the parent trees were
good.” “Sire,” said Bors, “even if a man is sprung from an
evil tree, that is, from an evil father and mother, yet is he
changed from bitterness to sweetness as soon as he receives
the holy oil, the holy unction; wherefore it seems to me that,
it does not depend upon fathers and mothers whether a man
good or evil, but upon his own heart. The heart of a man is


like the helm of a boat, which steers it wherever it wishes, °


either into a safe port or into peril.” “The helm has a master,”
the hermit replied, “who holds it and controls it and directs it
as he wishes; so is it with the heart of man. For when he does
ught, it comes from the grace and counsel of the Holy Spirit;
and when he does wrong, it comes by instigation of the devil.”

Thus they discussed this subject until they saw in front of


them a hermit’s dwelling. The good man turned in there and .


bade Bors follow him, saying that he would lodge him that
night, and in the morning he would speak with him in private
about the subject concerning which he had asked his advice;
and Bors willingly agreed to this. On their arrival they dis-
|


134 THE QUEST OF THE HOLY GRAIL


mounted and found inside a clerk, who removed the saddle
and bridle from Bors’ horse and took charge of him, then helped
Bors to take off his arms. When he was disarmed, the hermit
told him to go to hear vespers. And he answered: Bissell
will I.” So they entered the chapel and he began the ves
service. When he had finished chanting the service, he h
tablé set and gave Bors bread and water, saying to o him: ‘ ‘Sire,
with such meat ought celestial knights to nourish their body,
and not with heavy food whictr teadts men to luxury. and. mortal
ind so help me God!” said he, “if I thought you would
: soneent to do something for me, I .would make a request of
you.” Then Bors asked him what it was. “It is something,”
“ said the worthy man, “which would be good for your soul and
would at the same time sufficiently nourish your body.” Then
he promised to grant his request. “Many thanks,” the worthy
man replied; ‘do you know to what you have agreed ? That
you will eat no other food than this until you shall be at the
‘table of the Holy Grail.” “And how do you know,” Bors in-
quired, “that I shall ever be there?” “I know well enough,”
_was the reply, “that you will be there with two companions of
the Round Table.” “Then I promise you,” said he, “as a loyal —
knight, that I shall never eat aught but bread and water until

I shall be at the table of which you speak.” Then the hermit
Teaee him for this abstinence which he was ready to observe
out of love for the true Crucified One.

That night Bors lay upon the green grass which the clerk
gathered for him beside the chapel. The next morning, as soon
as day broke, he got up, and the good man came to him saying:
“Sire, here is a white jacket for you to put on instead of a shirt.
It will serve as a sign of penitence and will be a chastisement
for your flesh.” Then he took off his suit and his shirt, and put
it on as directed by the hermit who gave it to him; then he
put on over it a scarlet suit. Then he crossed himself and _
entered the hermit’s chapel, and confessed to him all the sins
of which he felt guilty toward his Creator. The hermit found
him to be of such excellent and religious life that he was greatly
amazed, and knew that he had never given away to fleshly
lust except when he had begotten Elyan le Blanc. For this he
felt that Our Lord should be thanked. When the good man had
absolved him and laid upon him such penance as he knew to be
appropriate, Bors asked him to administer to him Communion:
then he would feel more secure wherever he might go, for he
4
did not know whether he would die upon this Quest or survive.
The hermit told him to wait patiently until he had heard mass,
which he said he would do. |

Then the worthy man began matins; and when he had

finished his chant-hechanged~his-garb-and began the mass:
When he had pronounced the benediction, he took the body
of Our Lord and motioned to Bors to come forward. This he
did and kneeled before him. And when he had taken his posi-
tion, the hermit said to him: “Bors, do you see what I have |
here?” “T do, sire,” said he; “I see that you hold my Saviour
and my redemption in the form of bread; I would not behold
it in such form, but that my eyes which are earthly and cannot
discern spiritual things, do not allow me to see it otherwise, but
deprive me of its true nature. For I do not doubt that it is
really true flesh and true man and at the same time my God.”
Then he began to weep bitterly, and the good man said to him:
“Now you would be foolish if you received such a precious thing
as you say this is without bearing it loyal company as long
as you live.” “Sire,” said Bors, ‘‘so long as I live I shall be no
one’s servant but His, and I shall néver depart from His law.”
Then the hermit gave him Communion which he received very
devoutly, and so happily and gladly that he thought he would
_never be unhappy again for anything that might happen to him.

When he had partaken and had remained kneeling as long
as he pleased, he went to the hermit and told him that he was
ready to go, for he had tarried there long enough. And the good
man told him he could leave when he wished, for now he was
armed as befitted a celestial knight, and was so well protected
against the devil that he could not be more so. Then he went
and took his arms. And when he was armed, he went away
commending to God the worthy man. The latter requested
him to pray to God for him when he should come to the Holy
Grail. And Bors asked him to pray to Our Lord not to allow him
to fall into mortal sin through the devil’s wiles. Then the hermit
said that he would think of him in every way he could.

Then Bors went away and rode all day until the hour of noon.
When this hour was a little passed, he looked up and saw a great |
bird flying around an old dead and deserted tree, without leaf
or fruit. When it had circled about the tree for a while, it perched
on it, for it hag its young there, I know not how many, and they |
were all dead @And when the bird visited its nest and found all
the young birds dead, it plucked its breast with its bill so that
136 THE QUEST OF THE HOLY GRAIL


it made the blood issue forth. When the young birds felt the
warm blood, they came to life, while the bird died in their
midst, and thus they were reborn from the blood of the parent

_ bird. {When Bors saw this strange sight, he marvelled at it and
could not make out what its significance might be. But he
realised that it must have some important meaning. He watched
for a long time to see if the large bird would rise, but that
could not be, for it was dead. And when he saw that it was dead,
he proceeded on his way until after vespers.

At evening it happened, as he rode aimlessly, that he came
to a strong high tower where he asked for lodging, which was ©
willingly granted to him. When those within had eased him of
his arms in one of the rooms, they led him into a lofty hall
where he found the lady of the place, who was young and fair
but poorly clad. When she saw Bors enter, she ran to meet and
welcome hii. He saluted her as the lady of the place, and she
received him joyfully, offering him a seat beside her and making
much of him. When if was time for the meal, she made Bors
sit by her side, while the servants brought great plates of meat
and placed them on the table. At the sight of this, he resolved
not to touch them and, calling a servant, asked him to bring
him some water. When it was brought in a silver bowl, Bors
set it before him and dipped three sops in it. Noticing this, the
lady said to him: “Sire, do you not like the meat which has
been set before you?” “Yes, lady, very well,” said he, “yet
I shall eat nothing more than what you see.” With that, she
left him alone, not daring to insist on anything against his
will. When the meal was finished and the tables cleared, they
got up and went to the palace windows, where Bors sat down
beside the lady.

While they were talking, a servant came and said to the lady:
“Lady, things are going badly. Your sister has seized two of
your castles and all of your vassals who were in them, and now
she informs you that she will not leave you.a square foot of .
land if by to-morrow at the hour of prime you have not found
a knight to fight for you against Priadan le Noir, who is her
champion.” Upon hearing this, the lady was sorely grieved and
said: ““Ah! God, why did you ever delegate me to hold land,
only to be deprived of it without cause?” When Bors heard
this, he asked the lady what the trouble was. “Sire,” she replied,
“it is the strangest story in the world.” “Tell me about it,”
said he, “if you please.” “I will do so gladly, sire,” she said.
“The fact is that King Amanz, who once owned all this land —
and even more, oncé lovéd a Tady who is my sister and much
older than I, and he gave her full control over his land’ and
people. White she was with him, she introduced some evil and
onerous customs, which were not only unjust but absolutely
wrong, which resulted in the death of many of her people. When
the king saw the evil of her acts, he drove her from the land |
and put me in charge of all his possessions. But no sooner was
he dead than she began a war with me, in which she has deprived
me of a great part of my land and has won over many of my
men to her side. Even with that, however, she does not consider
that she has been compensated, and says that she will take

_ from me all I have. And she has made such a good beginning
‘that she has left me nothing but this tower, which I shall not
have long, unless I can find to-morrow someone to fight for me
against Pradan le Noir who is willing to enter the lists as
her champion.”

“Now tell me,” said he, “who this Priadan is.” She replied:
“He is the most redoubtable champion of the country, and a
man of the greatest prowess.” “And is this battle of yours to
be to-morrow?” he inquired. “Yes,” said she. ‘‘ Well,” said he,
“‘you can send word to your sister and to this Priadan that you

. have found a knight who will fight for you; that you ought by
right to have the land, since King Amanz gave it to you, and
that she ought to recover none of it, since her lord drove her
from it.”

The lady was not a little pleased at hearing this, and said
with gladness: “Sire, well it is that you have come here! For
this promise of yours has made me happy indeed. May God
give you strength and power to defend my cause in accordance
with its justice! That is all I ask.” Then he gave her great
confidence, saying that she need not fear to lose her cause so
long as he remain well and strong. So she informed her sister
that her champion would be prepared on the morrow to execute
everything that the knights of the country should declare
requisite. So it was agreed that the battle should be set for
the next day.

That night Bors was happy and glad, and the lady had
prepared for him a_ fine mch bed. When it was time to retire
and they had undressed him, they conducted him to a large
and handsome room, where he saw the bed prepared for him.
Then he bade them all leave him alone, which they did at his

K
138 THE QUEST OF THE HOLY GRAIL


request. Then he quickly put out the tapers, lay down upon the
hard floor, put a box beneath his head, and made his prayers

“and orlsons that God in His mercy would lend him aid against
that knight whom he must fight, since he was undertaking the
task in order to cause the triumph of justice and loyalty and to
punish violence.

After making his prayers and orisons, he fell asleep. Then
at once it seemed to him that there came ‘before him two birds,
one of which was large and white like a swan which it resembled.
The other was wonderfully black and not so large. Upon examina-
tion, it resembled a crow, but it was very beautiful because of
its blackness. The white ‘bird came to him and said: “If you
would consent to serve me, I would give you all the wealth in
the world, and would make you as fair and white as I am.”
Then he asked it what it was. “‘ Don’t you see, then, what Iam?”
it replied; “I am even more white and fair than you think.”
When he made no reply to this, the bird departed. Then straight-
way the black bird came and said to him: “You must serve
me to-morrow, and do not be prejudiced against me because
I am black. Remember that my black hue is worth more than
another’s white.” Then it too went away, so that he saw neither
bird again.

After this there came to him another very marvellous vision.
For it appeared to him that he was in a great fair residence
which resembled a chapel, where he found a man seated upon |
a high chair. At his left, some distance from him, there was a
rotten, worm-eatén tree, so weak that it could hardly remain
standing; and on his right there were two fleurs-de-lys. One of
the flowers drew near the other and tried to deprive it of its
whiteness. But the good man separated them, so that one could
not touch the other, and soon from each flower there issued a |
tree bearing fruit in great plenty. After this, the good man
‘seemed to say to Bors: “Bors, would not anyone bea fool who.
should allow these flowers to ee in order to keep this rotten
‘tree from falling down?” “ said he, “he would indeed.
For it appears that this tree is of no use, while the flowers
are more wonderful than I thought.” “ Take care now,” the
good man said, “that, should such an adventure happen to
you, you do not allow these flowers to perish in order to_
give aid to the rottéh tree. For they might soon perish in
 -excessive heat.” And he said that he would remember this,
if the occasion should arise.
Thus there came to him that night these two visions, which
greatly astonished him, for he could not think what tt could
all mean. And so great was his concern as he slept that he awoke
and crossed himself upon his forehead, and fervently commended.
himself to Our Lord. Then he awaited the dawn of day. And when
the day came bright and fair, he got into the bed and arranged


. itso that no one might see that he had not spent the night in
it. Then the lady came and greeted him, and he wished her


joy in God’s name. Then the lady led him to a chapel in the
building, where he heard matins and the service of the day.

A little before the hour of prime he left the chapel and entered
the hall with a t company of knights and sergeants whom the
fade had bidden to see the battle. When he came into the
palace the lady told him to eat before he put on his arms, that
he might be more fit. But he said that he would eat nothing
until he had finished the battle. “Then,” said the retainers,
there is nothing to do but to take your arms and make ready.
For we believe that Priadan is already armed on the battle-
ground.” Then he asked for his arms which were brought to
him. When he was all prepared and nothing was lacking, he
mounted his steed and told the lady to mount with her escort
and take him to the field where the battle was to be fought.
So she mounted with him and her followers, and they started
forth. Coming to a meadow in a valley, they saw down in the
valley a great crowd of people who were awaiting Bors and the
lady whom hé was to @efend. They came down the hill, and when
they were arrived on the ground the two ladies caught sight of
each other and came to meet each other. Then said the younger
lady, for whom Bors was to fight: “Lady, I have good reason
to complain of you. For you have deprived me of my heritage
and my rights which were given me by King Amanz, to which
‘you can have no claim, having been disinherited by the king’s
own command.” Then the other retorted that she had never
been disinherited, as she was ready to prove, if her sister dared
to offer a defence. When the latter saw that she had no other
recourse, she said to Bors: “Sire, what do you think of this
lady’s claim?” “I think,” said he, “that she 1s both wrong and.
disloyal to war against you, and so are all those who give her
aid. I have heard enough from you and from others to know
that she is in the wrong and you are in the nght. And if any
knight wishes to maintain that she is in the nght, I am ready
at once to make him recant.” Then the other knight leapt
140 THE QUEST OF THE HOLY GRAIL


forward and announced that he did not care a button for his
threats, and was ready to defend the lady. “‘I am ready too,”
Bors replied, “to fight against you on behalf of this lady; for
she ought to have the land, since the king bestowed it upon her,
and the other lady ought by right to lose it.” ~
Then those who were gathered on the field separated on
opposite sides, leaving clear the space where the battle was to
>‘Then the two knights drew apart and took their
distance; after which, they charged each other and dealt such
fierce blows in mid-career that ‘their shields were pierced and
their hauberks crushed. If their lances“had not broken into
pieces, they would both have been killed. Then they rushed upon
each other so violently with their bodies and shields that both
were thrown to earth from their horses. But brave as they were,
they got up quickly, and raising their shields over their heads,
they drew their swords and each struck his opponent where
he thought him most vulnerable. Thus they shattered their
shields at top and bottom, causing great splinters to fall to
“the ground, and they crushed their hauberks over arms and.
hips, making great deep gashes in the flesh, whence flowed the.
—tiood on their sharp flashing swords. Bors found the knight’s
defence to be stronger than he had anticipated; yet he knew
that he was engaged in a righteous and loyal cause, and this fact
gave him confidence. He allowed the knight to strike him again
and again, being satisfied to protect himself and let the other —
wear himself out. When he had permitted this for a long time
and when he saw that the knight was breathing hard, he attacked
him as quickly and as freshly as if he had not yet dealt a blow.
So he struck titi great blows with his sword and reduced him
in a short time so that he could not defend himself, because
he had received so many strokes and had lost so much blood.
When Bors saw that he was thus worn out, he pressed him more
and more as he faltered and finally fell down upon his face.
Then Bors seized him by the helmet and pulled it from his head
and threw it away; then he struck him upon the head with the
pommel of his sword until he tfradethe-biood spurt and drove
“the rings of his hauberk into his head. He said he would kill
him if he did not admit his deféat, and pretended to be about
“to cut off his head. When he saw the sword suspended above
“his head, he was deathly afraid, and cried out for mercy, saying:
“ Ah! fair knight, have mercy and do not kill me. I promise
never to make war against the young lady so long as I live,
7,


A a
and I will keep hands off.’”’ Then Bors let him alone. And when
the older lady saw that her champion was defeated, she fled
from the place as fast as she could, as one who thought she had
been disgraced. Then Bors came at once to those present who
were her vassals and told them that he would slay them if they
did not renounce their allegiance to her. Many of the men
at once did homage to the younger lady. But those who refused
to do so were either killed, or deprived of their goods, or were
driven from the land. Thus it came about that through Bors’ |
prowess the young lady recovered the high place which had

“been given her by the king. The other continued, however, to
war upon her ‘all her life, as one who was still jealous of her.

“When the country had been pacified, so that the young
lady’s enemies no longer dared to raise their heads against
her, Bors went away and rode through the forest,.thinking about
what he had-seen-in. his sleep; for he greatly desired that God
would conduct him somewhere to learn its meaning, The first
night he spent at the dwelling of a widowed lady, who gave
him a good lodging, and who was glad of his arrival and delighted
when she learned who he was.

The next day as soon as dawn appeared, he left there and
travelled the great high-road. through the forest. And when he
had proceeded until noon, a marvellous adventure befell him.
For at the bens of the roads he met two knights who were
leading his brother Lyonel, stripped to his breeches and seated
ona big strong hack his hands Ae before his breast; each one
held a handfat“ofSharp thorns, with which they beat him so
cruelly that the blood ran down his back from more than a
hundred wounds, and he was covered with blood both behind
and before. But he said never a word, as one possessed of great |
fortitude, and endured all that they did to him as if he felt
‘nothing: ‘As he was about to go to succour him, Bors looked in
another direction and beheld an armed knight who was carry-
ing off by force a fair damsel, whom he was trying to transport
into the thickest part of the forest, in order that she might not
be discovered by those who might seek her, in case anyone came
to lend her aid. And she in her terror said aloud: “ Holy Mary,
save your_darm damsel!” When she behiéld Bors riding alone, she
thought it might be one of the knights-errant of the Quest. So
she turned toward him and shouted as loud as she could: “ Ah!
knight, I beseech you by the faith you owe Him whose liege-
man you are and in whose service you are engaged, to aid me
142 THE QUEST OF THE HOLY GRAIL


and not to allow me to be dishonoured by this knight who 1s
carrying me off by force!”

When Bors heard her beseeching him in the name of Him
whose liege-man he was, he felt so disturbed that he did not know
what he ought to do; for if he allowed his brother to be led away
by those who had him in hand, he need not expect to see Hifi _
safe and hearty again; whereas, if he did not help this maiden,
she would soon be violated and dishonoured, and her shame .
“would result from his remissness. Then he raised his eyes to
Reaven and said weeping: “Fair gentle Father Jesus Christ,
whose liege-man I am, guard my brother from death at the hand
of these knights. Mindful of your pity and mercy I will in the
meantime defend this maiden from violence: for I think this
knight intends to assault her.” Then he turned where the knight
was carrying off the damsel, and spurred his horse until the
blood dripped from both his flanks. And when he drew close
to him, he cried out: “Sir knight, let the damsel alone, or you_
are a dead man!” Upon hearing this, he set the damsel down.
He was completely armed except for a lance; so he grasped his
shield, drew his sword, and advanced toward Bors. But the
latter struck him with such violence that he thrust his lance
through both shield and hauberk, so that he fainted with the
pain he felt. Then Bors came to the damsel, and said: “ Damsel,

I believe you are now delivered from this knight. What else do
you wish me to do?” “Sire,” she replied, “since you have
saved me from loss of honour and from shame, I beg of you
to take me back to the place where this knight seized me.”
This he said he would gladly do. So, taking the horse of the
wounded knight, he set the damsel upon it and escorted her
as she directed. And when they had gone a little distance, she
said to him: “Sir knight, you have done a greater service than
you think in rescuing me. For if he had assaulted me-five—
hundred men would..have met their death who now will be
saved.” Then he asked her who the knight was. “He is a cousin
of mine,” she said, “who through some devilish inspiration _
‘coveted me so lustily that he seized me privily in my father’s
-house and carried me into this forest to attack me. If he had
succeeded, he would have been dishonoured in his body and
would have died for his sin, while I should have lived in shame
all my days.” As they talked thus, they saw approaching»
twelve knights who were searching through the forest for _
the damsel. And when they saw her, they welcomed her with”
great joy. She asked them to make much of the knight and to
keep him in their company, for she would have been dishonoured
but for God and his help. S6 they took his horse’s bridle and
said: “Sire, you must come with us, for thus it is fitting. We
beg you to come, for you have rendered us such a service that
we cannot do too much to requite you.” “Gentlemen, I can
by no means go,” said he; “‘for I have so much to do elsewhere,
that_I cannot tarry. So I pray you not to feel hurt; for be sure
that SHOund EIaaty go, but the demand upon me is so great,
and the loss would be so great if I failed to respond, that none _
kut God could make it good.” When they heard that the need
for him was so urgent, they did not dare longer to insist, but
commended him to God. And the damsel prayed him gently
’s sake to come to see her as soon a8 he should be free>
and told him where he would find her. Then he said that if
fortune brought him that way, he would remember what she
had said. Thereupon he left them and they led the damsel
away to safety.

Then_Bors rode toward the place where he had seen his
Peavegienrag er when he arrived where he had’ Yast "ster
him, he looked up hill and down dale as far as the forest per-
mitted him to see. Then he listened attentively to see if he —
could hear anything. When he heard nothing that gave him
any hope of his brother, he started out on the road he had
last seen them take. After going along for some distance, he
caught up with a man clad in religious garb, and riding a horse
blacker: than a mulberry” When he heard Bors coming behind
him, he called out to him: “Knight, what are you seeking?”
“Sire,” said Bors, “I am looking for a brother of mine whom
I saw a while ago being Ted along and beaten by two knights.”
‘Ah! Bors,” said he, “if I'did not think you would be too much
cast down and that you would fall a prey to despair, I would
tell you what I know about him, and would show him to you.”

When Bors heard this, he thought at once that the two
knights had killed him. Then he began to lament bitterly, and
when he was able to speak, he said: “Ah! sire, if he 1s dead,
show me his body, and I shall have him interred and shall
have such honour done to him as is fitting for the son of a
king: for surely he was the son of honourable parents.” ‘‘ Look
about you now,” said the man, “and you will see him.’” Then
he looked and saw a body lying stretched ouif and Bloody upon.
the ground, evidently recently killed. He looked at it and knew
_ 444 THE QUEST OF THE HOLY GRAIL


that it was his brother. Then he was so grieved that he could
‘not stand up, but fel in a faint and lay for some time in a
swoon. When he got up, he said: “Ah! fair sire, who has done
this thing to you? Surely, I shall never be happy again, unless
He comforts me who comes to visit sinners in their troubles
and afflictions. Fair, sweet brother, since we are parted, may
He whom I chos”as my ‘comparnion“and master be niy’ ¢oi-~
ductor and delfiverer in all dangers. Henceforth I have nothing
j to think of but my soul, since you have passed from life.” —
Having said this; he took the body and lifted it into the saddle
as if it seemingly had no weight, and then said to the man who
was standing by: “Sire, for God’s sake tell me if there is in the
neighbourhood any church or chapel where I can bury this
knight.” “Yes,” said he, “there is a chapel near by, before a
tower, where he may be interred.” “Sire,” said Bors, “for God’s
sake lead me thither.” “TI shall be glad to do so,” he replied;
“follow me.” Then Bors mounted upon his horse’s croup,
holding in front of him his brother’s body. They had not gone
far when they saw before them a strong high tower, and ig
+ front of. it there was an old ruinéd structure’like a chapel.
_ They dismounted before the entrance and went in, and laid
the body on a great marble tomb which was in the middle of
the building. Bors looked all about, but he saw no holy water,
nor cross, nor any symbol of Jesus Christ" “Lt tis leave him
here,” said the man, “and let us lodge in this tower until to-
morrow, when I shall return to celebrate a service for your
brother.” “Are you then a priest, sir?”’ Bors asked. “J am,”
said he. “Then I beg of you,’ Bors said, “to tell me the truth
about the dream I had in my sleep and about another thing
concerning which I am in doubt.” “What is it?” said he. ‘Then _
he told him about the bird he had seen in the forest. Then he
told him about the two birds, of which one was white and the
other black, and about the rotten tree and the white flowers..
“T will explain a part of if to you now,” he said, “and the
rest to-morrow.
“The bird which appeared to you in the guise of a swan signifies
a damsel who will love you truly and has already loved you__
long, and will come soon to ask you to be her friend and para-
‘mour. And the fact that you did not consent to her request
means that you will reject her, and she will go off at once and
die_of grief, unless you relent. The black bird signifies your
great sin which will cause you to reject her. For you will not
reject her because of any fear of God or for any virtue there
is in you; but you will do it to “aah a reputation for chastity,
d to winthe praise and’ vainglory of the world. Such great
evil shall come from this sMasees that your cousin Lancelot
will die because of it; for the maiden’s relatives will kill him,
and she herself will die of grief at being rejected by you, Thus
it may be truly said that you are ‘the murderer of both, as you"
“have already ‘ean of your brother; for you could easily have
rescued him, had you wished it, when you forsook him to go
to succour the damsel who had no connection with you. Now
consider which is the greater loss—that she should lose her


honour, or that your brother, one of the good knights in the - ;


' world, should be killed. Surely it would be better for all the
GaiseIs tir the wortd'to be undone than for him to be killed.”
When Bors heard himself thus blamed, for the service he had
rendered the damsel, by one whose life he thought to be so
exemplary, he did not know what to say. And the other asked
him: “Have you understood the meaning of your dream?”
“Yes, sire,’ said Bors. “Well, now the fate of Lancelot your
cousin is in your hands,” he said. “For if you wish, you can
save him from death; tind if you wish, you can cause his death,
It is for you to decide what fate you wish to be in store for him.”
“There is certainly nothing,” said Bors, “which I would not
do rather than kill Lancelot.” “That we shall see by and by,”
said he. |
Then he took him to the tower. And when he went in, he found
knights and Tadies and damsels who all said to him: “ Welcome,
Bors!” And they took him into the hall and removed his
armour. When he was stripped of his armour, they brought
him a rich mantle lined with ermine and threw it about his
neck, and théy seated him upon a white bed, comforting him
and striving to cheer him up, so that they made him forget
a part of his sorrow. While they were intent upon comforting
him, there entered a damsel so fair and charming that she
appeared the’ embodiment of all earthly beauty, and she was
as richly dressed as if she had had her choice of all the beautiful
dresses in the world. “Sire,” said one of the knights, “this is
our mistress, the fairest and richest lady in the world, and the
one who has loved you most. She has waited for you long, not .
wishing to take any knight as her lover-excepting you.”” When
he heard that, he was dumbfounded. But when she approached,
he saluted her, and she greeted him in turn and sat down by
146 THE QUEST OF THE HOLY GRAIL


his side. They talked of many things, until she asked him to be
her lover, for she loved him above ngs on earth; 1
he would give her his love, she would make him richer than
any man of his line had ever been.

Upon hearing this, Bors was very uncomfortable, for he had
no intention of violating his chastity; so he did not know how
to reply to her. Then she said: “‘ How is it, Bors? Will you not
comply with my request?” “My lady,” said he, “there is no
lady in the world so rich that I would comply with her request
* yn this respect. No one ought to make such a request of me in
my present position: for close by here my brother lies dead,
‘who-has beth killed to-day, though I know not. how.” “Ah!
Bors,” she replied, “give no heed to that! You must do what
I ask of you. Be sure that, if I did not love you more than
woman ever loved a man, I should not make this request of
you: for it is not the custom or practice that the woman should
woo the man, however much she may be in love with him. But
the great desire that I have always felt for you brings my
heart to this point and compels me to speak out what I have
hitherto concealed. Therefore, fair sweet friend, I beseech you
to comply with my request, which is to lie with me to-night!”
Then he said that he would by no means do such a thing. When
she heard that, she made such a display of grief that she seemed
to him to weep and make loud moan; but all this did not
advance her case.

When she saw that she could by no means persuade him,
she said:. “Bors, by this refusal you have reduced me to the
boot of dying at once in your very presence.” Then she took

im by the hand and led him to the door of the palace, and
said to him: “Stand here, and you shall see me die for love
of you.” “Upon my word,” said he, “I shall never see any
such thing.” Then she bade her men hold him there, which
they said they would do. And she went up at once to the battle-
ments, with twelve of her damsels. When they were up there,
one of tte damsels called out: “Ah! Bors, have mercy upon
us all, and grant my lady’s desire. If you do not consent, we
shall all cast ourselves from this tower before our mistress
does, for we could not bear to see her die. If you allow us to
die for so slight a cause, surely never did a knight act so dis-
loyally.”’ Then he looked at them and reflected how they were
really gentle women and noble ladies; and he felt great pity for
them. However, he was minded to prefer that they should
li lose their souls rather than that he should lose his alone: so
he told them that he would not interfere either for their death
or for their life. Then they cast themselves at once from the |
high tower to the ground. At the sight of this he was astounded, ~
and raising his hand, he crossed himself. And immediately
theéfé was such 4 noise and outcry round about him that he
thought that all the-devils of hell were surrounding him: and
doubtless there were many there in fact. On looking about him,
he saw neither the tower nor the lady who sought his love, nor

“unything he had seen before, excepting only his arms which
he had brought with him and the building where he thought
he had left the dead body of his brother.

When he saw this, he perceived that it was the devil who had
laid this trap for him, because he wished to bring his body to—
destruction and his soul to perdition, but by the virtue of Our
Lord he had escaped. Then he raised his hands towards heaven,
and said: “‘Fair Father Jesus Christ, blessed be Thou who hast
given me strength and power to fight with the devil and hast
vouchsafed me the victory in the strife!” Then he went where
he thought he had left his brother’s body, but found nothing
‘there. Then he was greatly relieved, for he thought that perhaps
he was not dead at all and that it had been some phantom he
had seen. So he went to his arms and put them on and mounted,
leaving the place where he would no longer tarry, as he said,

because the devil was thereabouts.

.When he had ridden some distance, he listened and heard
a_bell ringing on the left of where he was, He was very glad of |
this, and turned in that direction; and before long he saw an
abbey surrounded with stout walls, belonging to the White
Friars. Then coming to the gate, he knocked until it was opened
Yor Him. When they saw him all armed, they. thought at once
that he must be a companion of the Quest. They helped -him
from his horse and took him to a chamber to disarm, and they
showed him all the attention they could. Then he said to a
good man whom he took to be a priest: “Sire, for God’s sake
take me to the brother here whom you think to be the most
worthy man. For to-day a most marvellous thing has happened
to me, concerning which I wish to receive God’s counsel and his.”’
“Sir knight,” he replied, “if you take my advice, you will go
to the abbot: for he is the worthiest man here both in rank
and in excellence of life.” ‘Sire,’ said Bors, “in God’s name
take me to him.” And he said he would gladly do so. Then


-—*
\
448 THE QUEST OF THE HOLY GRAIL


he took him to a chapel where the good man was, and when
he had pointed him out, he turned away. Then Bors stepped
forward and saluted him, while the abbot bowed and asked
him who he was. Then Bors told him that he was a knight-
errant, and told him what had happened to him that day.
When he had told him the whole story, the good man said
to him:

“Sir knight, I know not who you are, but upon my word!
I should never have supposed that a knight of your age was so

| strong in the grace of Our Lord as you are. You have spoken
to me of your affairs, but I could not now give you such advice
as I should like, because it is too late. Go to rest yourself now,
and in the morning I will coun$efyou the best I can.”’

Bors went off, commending the good man to God. But the
abbot remained behind, thinking of what he had been told,
and he bade the friar serve Bors well and generously, as
being a more worthy man than one might think. That night
Bors was more richly.served_ and entertained than he wo
have preferred, for they set meat and fish before him. But he _
partook of none of it, but only ate as much bread and water ~

_ as he required, and did not even taste of anything else, not

\ wishing in any way. to go counter to the penance which had
been laid upon him, either as regards his bed or anything else.
In the morning, as soon as he had heard matins and the mass,
the abbot, who had not forgotten him, came and wished him
good-day in God’s name. To this Bors replied i in kind. Then the
good man drew him to the altar, apart from the others, and
asked him to tell him what had happened to him on the Quest
of the Holy Grail. So he told him word for word what he
had heard and seen both while asleep and while awake, and
begged him to tell the meaning of all these things. The abbot
thought a while, and then said he would be glad to do 0, and
he began thus:

“Bors, when you had received the High Master, the High
Coripanion, that is, when you had partaken of the body of
Our Lord, you set out to learn if Our Lord would vouchsafe
to you to find the precious treasure which will fall to the knights
of Jesus Christ, the true men of worth in this Quest. You had
not gone far when Our Lord appeared to you in the. form of
a bird, and manifested-to you the’griéf and pain He suffered”
“for us. First I will rehearse what it was you saw. When the
bird came to the tree that was without leaf and fruit, he looked
at his young and saw that none of them was alive. Then he
took his place among them and began to smife his-breast with
é blood streamed. forth, then he died, while


his beak until the


the young birds revived with his blood. This much you saw.


Now I will tell you the meaning of it.


“The bird. signifies Our Creator, who formed man in His .


own likeness. And when he was driven out of paradise because
of his own sin, he came into a land where he found naught but
death, for there was no life there. The leafless and fruitless
“tree plainly signifies the world, where there was nothing then
Bie“ unhappiness and poverty and suffering. The young..birds


—_


signify the human race, the members of which were then so -


Yorlérn that they were all bound for hell, the good as well as
the bad, for they were all alike in merit. When the Son of God
beheld this, He ascended the tree, namely the Cross, and was
there pierced with the beak of the lance, that is, the point, in
the feft’side until the blood gushed forth. With this blood the
young birds were revived, for they were His own creation for
Fle dekvéred them ftorn Nei where all was death, and Where
even yet theré is‘no Tife. This bounty to the world, to me and
you and all other sinners, God came to reveal to you in the guise
of a bird, in order that you should not fear to die for Him any
more than He did for you...
“ ©Then He conducted you to the lady to whom King Amanz
had committéd the charge of his Iand. By King Amanz. you
‘must understand Jesus Christ, who is the king in the world who
most truly loved, and in whom can be found more gentleness
and pity than in any mortal man. Against her fought the other
woman as fiercely as she could, she who had been driven from
the land. Then you fought and.won the battle, and I will tell
you what that means. - |
“Our Lord had shown you that He had. shed.His blood for


.you; and you promptly undertook a battle.on His behalf. For ~


it was indeed really for Him when you undertook it for the


lady’s sake: for by her we understand Holy Church, which |
- maintains holy Christianity in its proper faith and belief, *-


‘which is the estate and the lawful hentage of Jesus Christ.
. By the other lady who had been cast out and was warring
. | agaltist Her, we understand the Old Dispensation, that is, the
.. devil which still makes war upon Holy Church and ‘her followers.
"When the young lady had told you why the other made war
against her, you undertook to fight on her behalf, as was right;
- 150 THE QUEST OF THE HOLY GRAIL


for you were a renught of Jesus Christ, wherefore you were
obligated to defend

to visit you in the guise of a sad and distressed woman who
was wrongfully dispossessed. She came not in joyous and
festal garb, but robed in sorrow, that is in black. She appeared
to you sad and gloomy because of the distress caused her by
her sons, who are the sinfyl Christians and who ought to be
her sons, but who tredt her like step-sons. Though they ought
to treat her.as their mother, they do not, but cause her troubte


day and night. Therefore she visited you in the guise of a sad _


and troubled woman, in order that you might feel greater
pity for her.
“By the black bird which appeared to you must be under-


stood Holy Church, which said: ‘Tam Black, yet fair? remember


that my black hue is worth more than another’s white.’ By the
white bird which looked like a swan must be understood the


oly Church. At night"Holy Church came”


-


_devil, and I will tell you why. The swan is white outside and _


black inside, like the hypocrite who is yellow and pale and
appears, so far as can be seen outwardly, to be a servant of


Jesus Christ; but within he is so black and disgusting with his |


filth and sin that he completely deceives the world. The bird
appeared to you not only as you slept, but also when~you


-were awake. Do you know when that was? When the devil.


appeared to you in the guise of a religious man, saying that
you had allowed your brother to be killed. In this ‘he lied,
“for your brother is not killed, but is still alive. But he said so
to deceive you and to bring you to despair and debauchery.
Thus he would have led you into mortal sin, and “thus you
would have missed the adventures of the Holy Grail. Now
I have explained to you what the white bird was and what
the black, and who the lady was for whose sake you undertook
the battle, and against whom you fought.

“‘Now I must explain to you the 7H emapena of the rotten
tree and of the flowers. The tree wifhout strength or vigour


signifies Lyonel, your brother, who has in him no virtue of.
Our Lord to sustain him. The rotten state signifies the great _


quantity of mortal sins which he has harboured within himself
and multiplied day by day, wherefore he may by right be called
a rotten and worm-eaten tree. By the two flowers on.


right are meant two virgin creatures, one of whom is the knight


whom you wounded yesterday, and the other the damsel whom.
you rescued. When one of the flowers drew near the other, it
was the knight who wished to possess the damsel by force
in order to dishonour her and rob her of her whiteness. But
the good man separated them, which means that Our Lord
did not wish her whiteness to be lost; so He brought you


thither to separate them and preserve the purity of each. 7
He said to you: “Bors, anyone wou hése


flowers to perish in order to help this rotten tree. Take care
now that, should such an adventure happen to you, you do
not allow those flowers to perish in order to giva aid to the
rotten tree.’ This commandment He gave you, indo obeyed


jt, wherefore He is highly pleased with you. For ydu saw your —


brother whom the two knights were Teading, and you saw the
damsel whom one knight was leading. She asked for your aid
so gently that you were won by pit ‘Ys and for the sake of Jesus ,
Christ you put behind you all natural love: you aa to succour
the damsel and allowed your own brother to be jed away into
danger. But He in whose service you were engfiged took your

lace, and there resulted such a fair miracle, because of the
ete which ‘you showed for the King of Heaven, that both
the knights fell dead who were leading your brother away. .
So he unbound himself and took the arms of one of them,
then mounted a horse and resumed the Quest with his com-
panions ; and you shall learn soon enough how this adventure
has turned out.


“‘When you saw that leaves and fruit issued from the flowers Sod


it méant-thet-fromr the knight thére would ‘yet spring a great
Iitte-of worthy men and true knights, who may well be regarded

s fruit; and the same shall issue from the damsel, And if it
had befallen that she lost her virginity in loathsome sin, Our
Lord would have been so incensed that both of them would
have been damned with sudden death, and thus they would
have perished, both body and soul. But just here you came to
the rescue. Wherefore you are to be regarded as a good |
and loyal servant of Jesus Christ. So help me God! if you were
a mere creature of earth, so high an adventure would never
have befallen you as that you should deliver the. Christians
of Our Lord—thcir bodies from trouble here on earth, and their
souls from the pains of hell. Now I have explained to you the
meaning of the adventures which have befallen you on the
Quest of the Holy Grail.”

“Sire,” said Bors, “you tell the truth. You have made it
all so clear to me that I shall be the better for it all my life.”


Go gle


’


152 THE QUEST OF THE HOLY GRAIL


“Now I beg you,” said the worthy man, “to pray on my behalf,
for, so help me God? I believe He would hear you more readily
than He would me.” But Bors kept silent, as if ashamed that
the abbot should consider him ack a ‘good | man.

When they had conversed for a tong*time, Bors left the
abbot and commended him to God. When he had put on his
arms, he went his way and rode until evening, when he lodged
with a widowed lady who received him kindly. The next morning
he resumed his journey and rode until he came to a castle called
Tubele, which stood in a valley. Approaching the-castte;~he
met” a valet who was riding rapidly toward a forest, and he
asked him if he had any news. “Yes,” said the valet, “ to-morrow
there will be held before this castle a very wonderful tourrtitrent:?
“Between whom?” Bors inquired. “Between the Count des.
Plains and the widowed lady here,’ was the reply. When
Bors heard this, he thought he would tarry there, for he could
not fail to see some of his companions of the Quest, who might
tell him news of his brother, or perchance his brother might
be there in person, if he was somewhere near by and in good
health. So he turned toward a hermitage which stood by the
edge of the forest. And when he came there, he found his
brother Lyonel all disarmed sitting by the door of the chapel,
he having qinsen® “to lodge there in order to be present on the
morrow at the tournament which was to be contested in the
meadow. When Bors saw his brother, he was so overjoyed
that it could not ‘be-totd—-He-teapt- from his horse and said:
“Fair brother, when did you get here?” When Lyonel heard
this, he did not stir, but he recognised him and said: “Bors,
Bors, it was not your fault that I was not killed the. other.
day, when the two knights were scourging me and leading me
away; you let them do it and never helped me, but you went
instead to help the damsel whom the knight was carrying
off, and you left me in danger of death. Never did my brother
commit so disloyal a deed, and for this misconduct I offer you
nothing but the death you have so richly deserved. So be on
your guard, for be very sure that you may expect from me
nothing but death, wherever I find you, as soon as I can get
my armour on.’

When Bors heard these words, he was very sorry that his
bréther was angry with him. So Ke kneeled before_him and”
“with hands clasped cried for mercy, asking him for God’s sake
to pardon him. But he answered that it could not be, but that


Go gle
he would kill him, with God’s help, if he could get the better
of him. Not wishing to listen to him any longer, he went into
the house where he had put his arms, and taking them, he
quickly put them on. And when he was armed, he went and
mounted his horse, and shouted to Bors: “Be on your guard!
For so help me God! if I can defeat you, I shall give you what
a disloyal traitor deserves. For surely youare thé greatest ~
traitor and the most disloyal man that ever sprang from such
a worthy man as King Bors was, who begot both me and you.
Now mount your forse so as to be better prepared; but" if’
you do not do it, I shall kill you on foot as you are; in that
case mine will be the shame and yours the loss; but I do not
mind the shame, for I prefer to bear a little shame and to be
blamed by some than that you should fail to be stamped with
disgrace as you ought to be,” -

en Bors saw that he was brought to a point where he
had to fight, he did not know what to do, for he could not
feel reconciled to fight. against him. Yet, in order to be more
secure, he was prepared to mount his steed. However, he was
determined to try once more to see if he could obtain mercy.
_So he kneeled on the ground in front of his brother’s horse and,
‘weeping tenderly, said to him: “For God’s sake, fair brother,
have mercy on me! Pardon me for my mistake and slay me
_ not; remember the great love that ought to exist between me
- and you!” _

Lyonel cared not for what Bors said, the devil having incited
his desire to kill his brother. Still Bors remained on his knees
before him and begged for mercy with clasped hands. When
Lyonel saw that he would not get up and fight, he spurred
forwatd and struck Bors with his horse’s breast so violently
that he knocked him over backward on the ground, so that
he was badly wounded. Then he rode straight over him and
trampled him severely. Bors swooned with the pain he felt,
and thought he was about to die without making any confession.
_ When Lyonel had placed him in such a fix that he could not

get up,’ he got off his horse with the intention of cutting off
his head. |

When he had dismounted and was about to snatch his helmet
from his head, there came running up the hermit, who was a
venerable old man atid” Who Had heard the brothers’ words.
When he saw Lyonel about to cut off Bors’ head, he threw
himself upon Bors’ body and said to Lyonel: “Ah! noble

L
/


154 THE QUEST OF THE HOLY GRAIL


knight, for God’s sake have mercy on yourself and on your
brother! For if you kill him, you yourself will die in sin, and
his loss will be inestimable; for he is one of the best men in

the world and one of the most’ éxcellent knights.” “So help
me GodT sire,”’ said Lyonel, “if you do not get away from him,

I will kill you first and not spare him.” “I certainly prefer,”’

the good man said, ‘‘to have you kill me than him, for my

death will not be so great a loss as his: so I prefer to die rather

than see him perish.” So he lay close upon his body and clung_
to his shoulders, When Lyonel saw this, he drew his sword

from the scabbard and striick the worthy man so hard that

he broke his neck behind. Then he stretched out stiff in the

agony of death.

After doing this, his evil desire was not yet satisfied; so he
seized his brother by the helmet and unlaced it so as to cut
off his heattAnd-thts-he-wentd have promptly done when b
Our Lord’s design there arrived Calogrenant, a knight of King
art hur’s household and a companion of the Round Table.

en he beheld the hermit dead, he marvelled what the cause
could be. Then he looked farther and espied Lyonel about to
kill his brother, and he already had unlaced his helm. Now he
knew Bors and loved him devotedly. So he jumped from his
horse “and, seizing Lyonél”“ by His shoulders, he pulled him
back and said: ‘‘ What is this, Lyonel? Are you beside yourself,
to wish to kill your brother, who is one of the best knights we
know? In-God’s name, no decent man would let you do this.”
**What?” said Lyonel; ‘do you intend to rescue him? If you"
interfere, I will leave him and attack you.” Calogrenant looked
at him in amazement, and said: “How is this, Lyonel? Do
you really intend to kill him?” “TI intend to kill him and shall
do so,” Lyonel replied, “‘and neither you nor anyone else can
stop me: for he has done me such a wrong that he richly deserves.
to die.”” Then Lyonel resumed his intention and was about to
cut off his head. But Calogrenant stepped between the two
and said that if he dared to lay hands on him, he would join
in the fray himself.

When Lyonel heard this, he seized his shield and asked
Calogrenant who he was. So he told him. Upon learning his
identity, he defied him and ran at him with drawn sword,
giving him as hard a blow with his weapon as he could. Seeing
that a fight was inevitable, Calogrenant seized his shield and
drew his sword. He was a good and powerful knight, and de-
fended himself vigorously. The strife continued so long that
Bors sat up, though he was distressed to think that he would
‘not get back his strength for months, unless Our Lord should
,come to his aid. When he beheld Calogrenant engaged with
his brother, he was greatly concerned. For if Calogrenant t-
should kill his brother before his eyes, he could never be happy |
again; whereas, if he should kill Calogrenant, the shame would '
be his: for he knew well enough that he began the fight only |
on his account. Therefore, he was greatly distressed, and would —
have gladly gone to separate them, if he had had the strength;
but he was in such pain that he had not the power to defend
himself or to attack anyone else. So he watched until he saw
Calogrenant jee Rak worst of the struggle. For Lyonel
was very skilled and brave, and‘he had splintered his opponent’s
shield and helmet, and had brought him to the point where
he expected nothing but death: for he had lost so much blood
that it was surprising that he could stand up. Seeing himself
in danger of death, he was afraid, and seeing Bors now sitting
up, he said to him: “ Ah! Bors, come, come to my aid and deliver
me from the peril of death, to which I have come from trying
“to Yescue you when you were nearer death than I am now.
Surely, if I die, it is you wham everyone should. blame.” “There
‘Is certainly no need of all this talk,” said Lyonel; “you shall
die for this, and no one can prevent my killing both of you
with this sword!” |
Upon hearing this, Bors felt very insecure, knowing well
that if Calogrenant should die, he himself would be in danger
of death. So he exerted himself, and got up and taking his
helmet, set it on his head. When he saw the hermit was dead,
he was very sorrowful and prayed Our Lord to have mercy
“on his soul; for never did such a good man die with so little
cause. But Calogrenant called to him: “ Ah! Bors, will you allow
me to be killed? If you wish to see me die, death will please me
too, for I could not suffer death in an effort to save a better
man than you.” Thereat Lyonel struck him with his sword and
sent the helmet flying from his head. When he saw that his head
was bare and uncovered, he realised that he could not escape, .
and said: “ Ah! fair Father Jesus Christ, who didst permit me
to enter Thy service, though I have not served so worthily as |
I should have done, have mercy on my soul so that this pain, '
which my body must endure because of the good and kind
service I tried to render, may be counted as penance and relief


7 =
156 THE QUEST OF THE HOLY GRAIL


to my soul.” As he said this, Lyonel struck him so hard that
he laid him out dead upon the ground, and his body grew stiff
in agony.

Not satisfied with killing Calogrenant, he ran at his brother
and gave him such a blow that it made him double up. But the
latter, being rooted in humility, prayed God to pardon him
for waging this battle. ‘For if it turns out, fair brother, that
I kill you or you kill me, we shall die in our sins.” “May God
never help me,” said Lyonel, “‘if I ever have mercy on you and
do not kill you if I can get the better of you: for it is not your
fault if I am not killed.” Then Bors drew his sword and said

s weeping: “Fair Father Jesus Christ, let it not be counted to
{ me as a sin if I defend my life against my brother!” Then he
raised his sword in air, and as he was about to bring it down, he
heard a voice saying to him: “Flee, Bors, do not touch him,
for you would slay him.” Then there felt between them a fiery
brand like a lightnitig-bote;and it came from heaven, and from
. It there issued such a marvellous consuming flame that both
'-\ their shields were burnt, and they were both so terrified that
they fell to theearth and lay for a long time in a swoon. And
when they got up, they gazed at each other fixedly; and they
saw that the ground between them was“all red with the fire
which had been there. But when Bors saw that his brother was
not hurt, he raised his hands to heaven and thanked God from
the bottom of his heart.
. Then he heard a voice which said: “Bors, get up, and be gone
' from here. Keep company no longer with your brother, but
travel toward the sea, and make no delay anywhere, for Per-
ceval awaits you there.” When he heard this, he kneeled and,
“stretching his handStoward heaven, said: “Father in heaven,
blessed be Thou for deigning to summon me to Thy service!”
Then coming to Lyonel, who was still quite stunned, he said
to him: “Fair brother, you have ill-treated this knight, our
companion, whom you have put to death, as well as this hermit.
For God’s sake, do not go away until the bodies have been
interred and until the honour has been done them to which
they are entitled.” “And what are you going to do?” asked
Lyonel; “are you going to wait here until they are buried?”
“Nay,” said Bors; “I am going to the sea, where Perceval /.
awaits me, as the divine voice has given me to understand.” ~~”
Then he went away and took the road which led toward the
sea. And he rode on his journey until he came to an abbey
overlooking the sea. That night he lay there; and when he
had gone to sleep, behold a voice which spoke to him, saying:
“Bors, rise up and go diretthy to the sea where Perceval awaits

ou on the shore!” Thereupon, he jumped to his feét and ‘cross-°
ing himself upon his forehead, he prayed Our Lord to guide
him. Going to the place where he had left his arms, he took
them and put them on at once; then he went to his horse and
put on the saddle and bridle. When all was ready, not wishing
anyone to know that he was going away at such an hour, he
searched for some way to escape, until he found in the rear a
break in the wall, through which he could safely ‘pass."So he
got his horse, mounted him, and coming to the break in the
wall, he passed through.

So he got away without the knowledge of anyone. Riding
until he reached the seashore, he found a boat at the beach,
all covered with a white silk cloth. He dismounted, and entered
the boat; and commended himself to Jesus Christ. And as soon “
as he went on board, he noticed that the boat left the beach,
and the wind caught the sail and carried’ the boat along so
swiftly that it seemed to be flying over the waves. .When he
realised that he had omitted to take his.steed on board, he was.
sorely grieved. Then he looked about the boat, but saw nothing,
for the night was so dark and obscure that it was impossible
to see anything. So he leaned on the edge of the boat and prayed
Jesus Christ to conduct him where his soul might be safe. And
when his prayer was ended, he went to sleep until daybreak.

On awaking, he looked about the boat and saw a knight
fully armed, except for his helmet, and he recognised him as
Perceval té-Gallois. He ran at once to embrace him and greet
him joyfully. But the latter was amazed to see him standing
before him, for he did not know how he could have come there.
So he asked him who he was. “Why! don’t you know me?”
Bors said. “Certainly not,’ Perceval replied; “and I marvel
greatly how you got on board; unless Our Lord Himself placed
you here.”’ At this, Bors smiled and removed his helmet. Then |
Perceval knew him; and it would not be easy to tell their delight
in meeting each other. Then Bors began to tell him how he
came to the ship, and how he had been instructed to do so.
And Perceval in turn told him the adventures which had befallen
him on the rock where he had been, where the devil had appeared
to him in the guise of a woman who had brought him to the
point of mortal sin."Thus the two friends were together in
158 THE QUEST OF THE HOLY GRAIL


accordance with Our Lord’s plans for them, and they waited
for the adventures which Our Lord might wish to send them.

Thus they drifted on the sea, now here, now there, as the wind
carried them: And théy spoke of many things and\.comforted
one another. Perceva] remarked that only Galahad was lacking
to the fulfilment of the promise which had been made to him.
Then he told Bors how a promise had been made to him. But
now the story ceases to tell of them and returns to the Good
Knight.
A “ : a : é
: aie
tq


“RY get ae


| CHAPTER X
POR OS ;


~Y
Now the story tells how, when the Good Knight had left Per- |
ceval and had rescued him froni the twenty knights who had |
attacked him, he entered the high-road of the Forest Gaste, .
and wandered batk-and*forth for ‘many a day as chance led ‘_


me


4
4
<
oa
:
%
ee)
7}
ce
=
eo)
72)
ca)
Z
ct
=
©
G
ec
3
oS
G
GQ
Ho
ce
wm
(o)


well that those from within had taken to flight, for those on the
outside were more numerous and were better knights, -
_ When. Galahad perceived that those within were in great
trouble and that they were being slain at the castle gate, he
turned toward them with the intention of helping them. So
lowering his lance and spurring his steed, he struck the first
man he met so hard that he brought him to earth, and his
lance flew to pieces. Then he took his sword in hand like an
expert and, attacking where he saw the thickest press, began ©
to cut down men and horses, and to perform such wonderful
feats of arms that no one saw him but considered him’a cham-
_pion. Meanwhile’ my Jord Gawain, who had come with Hector
to the conflict, was aiding those on the outside. But as soon as
they saw the white shield with the.red cross, they exclaimed to
each other: ‘‘There is the Good Knight! Anyone will be mad
to face him, for against his sword no arms will avail.” While
they were speaking thus, as luck would have it, Galahad came
spurring toward my lord Gawain. And he dealt him such a
blow that he split his helmet and his steel cap. My lord Gawain,
who thought he was dead of the blow he had received, flew from
his saddle-bow. But Galahad, unable to control his thrust,
struck the horse in front of the saddle-bow, and pierced his _
shoulders so deeply, that he laid him over dead on top of my


oe ee


ae 159


160 THE QUEST OF THE HOLY GRAIL


When Hector saw my lord Gawain unhorsed, he drew back,
seeing that“tt-would be madness to withstand one who could
deal such blows, and also because he was bound to protect and
love Galahad as his nephew. Meanwhile Galahad charged up
and down, and in a short time did such execution that those
from the castle rallied, who just now had been undone; and they
_continued to_strike and wound until those from outside were_
beaten by sheer force and sought safety in flight. Galahad
pursued them a long distance, but when he saw there was no
danger of their coming back, he disappeared so quietly that no
one knew where he went; but he carried off the praise and
prize of both parties in the fight. Then my lord Gawain, who
was in such pain from the blow he had received that he thought
he could not escape alive, said to Hector who was standing
before him: “Upon my honour, now has come true the word
that was spoken to me om the day of Pentecost, about the stone.
and the sword upon which I had laid hands, that I should _
receive from it such a blow before a year had passed, that I
would give a castle not to have been struck by it. And now,
upon my honour, this is the sword with which this knight has
just now wounded me. I can well say that the affair has turned
out as was promised.” “Sire,” said Hector, “has the knight
wounded you as badly as you say?” “He certainly has,” my
lord Gawain replied; “I cannot escape without danger, unless
God comes to my aid.” “Then what can we do?” asked Hector.
“Tt appears that our quest 1s at an end, now that you aré so
woundéd.”"“Sire,* he answered, “yours is not ended, but mine
is, until it please God that I follow you.” ;

While they were speaking thus, the knights of the castle
gathered there. And when they recognised my lord Gawain
and knew that he was wounded, most of them were much dis-
' tressed ; for he was certainly the man in the world most loved ©
' by strangers. So they took hif-up-and carried him into the
castle, where they removed his arms and laid him in a quiet,
peaceful room, far from all disturbance. Then they sent for a
physician and had him examine the wound, and asked whether
he would recover. And he assured them that in a month’s
time he could make him so well and strong that he would be
able to nde and bear arms. Then they promised that, if he
could accomplish this, they would give him enough money to
make him rich all his life. And he told them that they might
be at ease, for he would do what he had said. So my lord Gawain
tarried there with Hector, who would not leave him until
he was cured.

When he had left the scene of the conflict, the Good Knight,
rode aimlessly until he came at night within two leagues of
Corbenyc. And it chanced that night overtook him when he
was in front ofa hermitage . When he noticed’ that’ night had
fallen, he dismounted and ‘nocked at the hermit’s door until
it was opened to him. When the hermit saw him to be a knight-
errant, he welcomed him, stabling his horse, and helping him
to lay aside his arms. After he was disarmed, he gave him to
eat of such fare as God had provided. Of this he partook gladly,
having eaten nothing all that day. After the meal he fell asleep
upon a bundle of hay there was inside. |

én they Had goné to bed, a damsel came who knocked at
the door and called Galahad. The hermit went to the door and
inquired who could wish to enter at such an hour. “Sir Ulfin,”
said she, “Tam adamsel who wishes to speak to the knight inside,
for I am in great need of him.” Then the hermit woke him up
and said: “Sir knight, a damsel wishes to speak with you; she
Is outside, and apparently has great need of you.” Then Galahad
arose, and went to ask her what she wanted. “Galahad,” said
she, “] want you to arm yourself, then mount and follow me.
I will promise to reveal to you the highest adventure any knight
‘ever saw.” When Galahad heard that, he went and armed
Tiimself’ And when he had saddled his horse, he mounted and,
commending the hermit to God’s keeping, he said to the
damsel: ‘Now you can go where you please, for I will follow
you anywhere.” Then she rode ahead as fast as her palfrey
could carry her, and he followed her. They proceeded until
day began to dawn, and when it was bright and clear, they
entered a forest named Celibe which stretched as far as the
sea, And they rode along the highway all that day without
stopping even to eat or drink.

In the evening after vespers they came in a valley upon a
castle which was thoroughly furnished in all respects and was
surrounded by flowing water and good strong walls and dee
moats. The damsel went straight into the castle, and Galahad
after her. When the people of the place saw her, ‘they began to
call: “Welcome, lady.” And they received her ‘gladly as their
mistress. She told them to make much of. the.knight, for he
was the best man who ever bore arms. So as soon as they had
helped him to dismount, they hastened to relieve him of his
162 THE. QUEST OF THE HOLY. GRAIL


arms. Then he said to the damsel: “ Lady, are we going to tarry
here a while?” “Nay,” said she, “but as soon as we have eaten
and slept a little, we shall go on.”” Then they sat down to eat,
and afterward they went to sleep. No sooner had she fallen
into her first slumber than she awoke and called out to Galahad:
“Sire, rise up!” So he rose up, and the servants brought tapers
and torches that he might see to arm himself. Then he mounted
his steed, and the lady took a fine rich casket which she held _.
in front of her-om her mount. "7" 0 _
” Théh they hastily left the castle and rode rapidly through
the night until they reached the sea. There they found the
ship in which Bors and Perceval were waiting. They were not
asleep, but called from afar to Galahad: ‘Welcome, sire! We
have long awaited you until now you have come, thank God!
Come on, for now nothing remains. but to start on_the high |
-- adventure to which God has called us.” And when he heard
them, he asked them who they were and why they said they
had waited for him so long. And he inquired of the damsel
whether she was going to dismount. “Yes, sire,” said she, “‘and
leave your horse here, as I shall leave mine.” Then he dis-
mounted at once and removed the saddle and bridle from his
horse, and did the same for the damsel’s palfrey. Then, making.
the sign of the cross upon his brow and commending himself.
to Our Lord, he entered the ship with the damsel following him.
The two companions. received them with the greatest possible
joy and rejoicing. And.at once the ship began to move rapidly
across the sea as the wind rose and urged it on. In a short time
they sailed so far-that they could see no land either near or
far. When day broke, they recognised each other, and all three
-of them wept at finding themselves thus reunited. ;
Then Bors took off his helmet and Galahad took off his helmet
and sword, but he would not take off his hauberk. When he
saw the ship was so fair both without and within, he asked his
two companions whether they knew where so fine a ship came
from. And Bors said he knew nothing about it. Then Perceval
told him all-he knew about it, and also how he had fared on the
rock and how the worthy man who seemed to be a priest had __
‘bade him enter the ship. “‘ And he said that before long I should
have you in my company; but of this damsel he made no
mention.” “Upon my word,” said Galahad, “I should never”
have come this way, I guess, if she had not brought me hither.
So it may be truly said that I am here because of her rather
than of myself. For I never passed this way before, and I should
never have expected to hear of you, my two companions, in
such a strange place as this.” At this they began to laugh.
Then they told each other of their adventures, until Bors
said to Galahad: “If your father, my lord Lancelot, were here,
[should féél that we lacked nothing.” But he replied that
this could not be, since Our Lord had not willed it so.
Thus they conversed until the noon hour, when they might


~~


be some distance from the kingdom of Logres, for the ship
had proceeded all night and all day under full sail. Then they


arrived” betweén two rocks at a wild island, marvellously


secluded, which must have been in’a bay of-the sea. And when
they arrived there, they beheld before them another ship on
the other side of a rock to which they could not attain unless
they proceeded on foot. “Fair lords,” the damsel said, “in
yonder ship lies the adventuré for which Our Lord has brought
you together: you must leave this ship and go to that one.”
So they said they would do so willingly. Then they stepped
forth and assisted the damsel to disembark; then they made
fast their ship, that the waves might not set it adrift. When
they were on the rock, they went in the direction where they
saw the other ship. And when they reached it, they found it
to be yet more magnificent than the one they had just left,
but they marvelled greatly to find no man or woman in it. So
they drew closer to see if they could see anything. And as they
examined the side of the ship, they saw letters written in
Chaldee which spelt an awful and mysterious legend to anyone
who would enter in; and this was the manner of the inscription:

‘‘Hear, thou man, who wouldst enter me, whoever thou be,
see well that thou be full of faith, for I am nothing if not faith.
So, before thou enter, see to it well that thou be without blemish,
for I am nothing if not faith and belief. And as soon as thou
desert thy faith, I will desert thee so that thou shalt receive
no comfort or aid from me; rather will I leave thee helpless
wherever thou mayst fall into unbelief, however slight the
delinquency.”

When they had read those words, they looked at one another.
Then the damsel said to Perceval: “‘Do you know who I am?”
“Certainty not,” he replied; “to the best of my knowledge,
I never saw you.” “Learn, then,” said she, “that I am your
sister and the daughter of King Pelléhen., And do. you know

-revedled myself to you? In order that you may


vigtzed by (GOOGle


=


rd


164 THE QUEST OF THE HOLY GRAIL


better believe what I shall say to you. So in the first place

I shall say to you as to him whom I love most, that, if you do_
not believe perfectly in Jesus Christ, you Shall not énter this __
ship, for be very sure that you would straightway perish, For
the ship is such a precious thing that no one affected with any
evi] vice can remain in it with impunity.”

Upon hearing this, Perceval looked and saw that she was
indeed his sister. Then he showed her his happiness, and said:
“Certainly, fair sister, I will enter; and do you know why?
In order that, if I lack faith, I may perish as a disloyal man;
and if I am full of faith and such as a knight ought to be, in
order that I may be saved.” “Enter then with confidence,”
said she, “and may Our Lord be your protection and defence!”

While she was saying this, Galahad, who was ahead, raised
.-his hand and, crossing himself, went on board. And when he

was inside, he began to look about, and the damsel followed
_him after crossing herself. Seeing this, the others delayed no
longer, but also went on board. And when they had examined
it above and below, they said that they did not suppose that
there was on land or sea such a fair and costly ship as this
seemed to be. And after they had looked everywhere, they saw
in the body of the ship a very precious cloth stretched like a
-curtain, and beneath it a very large fine couch.
.Galahad approached the cloth and, raising it, looked under

it, where he saw the most beautiful couch he

For the couch was large and nich, having at the head a beautiful
crown of gold, and at the foot a very fair and shining sword,
lying across the couch and drawn a half-foot from its scabbard.
~~ This sword had various peculiarities: for the pommel was
formed of a stone containing all the colours to be found on ~
earth. And it had this other strange property, which was still
more precious, that each colour had a virtue of its own. More-
over, the story tells that the hilt was formed from thé bones
of two different beasts.-The first was of a kind of serpent which
dwells in Scotland rather than in any other Tatid, called’ the”
“papalustes”’; such is the property of this serpent that anyone
who holds any of its bones need have no fear of feeling excessive
heat. Such was the character and virtue of one bone. And the
otter was that of a medium-sized fish called the “gstenax,”
which livés in the river Euphrates and in no other waters. Its
bones are of such a nature that if'& man takes one of them, so
long as he has it, he will have no recollection of any other joy \\
THE QUEST OF THE HOLY GRAIL 165:


gr ‘pain, save only for that thing which prompted him to seize
this bone. But so soon as he shall put it down, his memory will
function again as usual in a normal man. Such was the virtue
of the two bones in the hilt of the sword, and they were covered
with a rich vermilion cloth inscribed with letters which said:
~ “T am marvellous to see and know. For no man has ever
been able to grasp me, however large his hand, nor shall any ,
be able to do so, save one; and this one shall surpass in skill
all who have been before bim or who shall come after him.”

Thus said the words on the hilt; and as soon as they who
could read had read the letters, they looked at each other and
said: “‘Here are wonders to be seen indeed.” “‘In God’s name,”
said Perceval, “I shall see.if I can grasp this sword.” So he
ba hand to the sword, but he could not grasp the hilt.
“Upon my faith,” said he, “now I believe that those letters
tell the truth.” Then Bors stretched forth his hand, put to
no effect. And when they saw this, they said to Galahad: “Sire,
do you try this sword. For we know that you can achieve this. |

adventure from the fact that we have failed in it.” But he said
that he would not try it. “For I see greater marvels here,”
‘said he, “than I have ever seen before.” Then he examined _
“the bladé of the sword which was partially drawn from the
_scabbard as you have heard; and. on.it he saw more letters,
red as blood, which said: —

“‘Let no one be so bold as to draw me from the scabbard
unless he can ‘fight better and more boldly than anyone else.
Whoever else may draw me out must know that he will soon
be dead or injured. And this has already been proven once.” ~
' When Galahad saw this, he said: “Upon my word, I intended
to take this sword; but,since the penalty is so severe, I shall
not touch it.” also said Perceval and Bors. “Fair sires,”
said the damsel, “be sure that all are forbidden to draw it out_
save ope, and I will tell you what happened not long ago.”

“It was true,” said the damsel, “that this ship arrived at
the kingdom of Logres; in those days there was a mortal war
between King Lambar, who was father of him whom they
call the Cripple King, and King Varlan, who, after being a .
Saracen all his life, had-then~tecently become a Christian, so ,
that he was considered one of the worthiest men in the world.
One day it happened that King Lambar and King Varlan had
assembled their hosts on the coast where the ship had arrived,
and King Varlan had been defeated. When he saw that he was
166 THE QUEST OF THE HOLY GRAIL


undone and his men slain, he was afraid that he himself would
die. So he came to this ship which had arrived there, and Jeaped
aboard of it. And when he found this sword, he drew it from its
“scabbard and issued forth again. Then he found King Lambar,
that’ Christiarr in the world whio had the greatest faith and
confidence and in whom Our Lord had the greatest share. When
ng Varlan saw King Lambar, he drew the sword and smo
him on. the helmet so heavily that he split both him and his
) horse to the earth. Such was the first blow dealt by this sword
 iJin_the kingdom of Logres. And there resulted from it such_a
| pestilence and persecution in the two kingdoms that never
'"since has the land rendered ‘its produce to the labourers; for
since that time neither wheat nor any other crop has grown,
nor have the trees borne fruit, nor have any fish ew, been
found in the waters. Therefore the land of the au kingdoms
has been called the ‘Terre Gaste,’ because it had been Sed
by this fell stroke.
~ "When King Varlan saw that the sword was so keen,he thought
he would go back and get the scabbard. So he went to the ship
and entered it and replaced the sword in the scabbard; but as
“soon as he had done this, he fell down dead in front of the bed.
Thus it was demonstrated that no one should draw this sword
without dying or suffering injury. The body of the king lay here
in front of this bed until a damsel cast it forth; for no man
was bold enough to enter this ship because of the prohibition
expressed by the letters on the side.”
“Upon my word,” said Galahad, “this is a fine adventure
: | indeed, and I can well believe that it happened thus, for I do
not doubt that this sword is much more marvellous than any~
other.” Then he went to draw it forth. “Ah! Galahad,” the
damsel ‘said, “wait a moment until we have looked at the
marvels on it.”’ So he left it alone, and they began to examine
the scabbard, but they could not make out of what matenal
it was composed unless it was of serpent skin. Yet they saw
‘that it was as red as a rosé Téaf, and that upon it were inscribed_
letters of gold and of aziiré. But whenthey came to examine
the sword-belt, they all marvelled more than ever. For they
saw that the belt was not suitable for such a fine weapon as
this: for it was of some such poor material as hempet
and appeared to be so weak that they thought it could not
support the sword for an hour without breaking. And the
letters which were-on the scabbard said:


4
ae
Jha Gees
“He who will carry me myst be much braver and surer than _
anyone else, if he is to carry me as purely as he should. For
Tamtioe made to enter ang clans where Chere 1s filthiness or
sin. Anyone who carries me into such a place will be the first
to repent of it. But if he keeps.me.with purity, he can go any-
where with security. For the body of him at whose side I hang

ver be disgraced so long as he is girt with the belt from
which I hang. But let no one be so bold as to remove the belt
which is here attached. For it must'not be removed by any man
now or in the future, but only by the hand of a daughter of a
king and queen. And she shalf'make a substitution for it of the
personal possession which she values most, and this she shall
put in place of this belt. And this damsel must be all her life
a virgin in intent and in act. If it happen that she violates her
Virginity, she shall surely die the most ignominious death that.
any woman can die. And this damsel shall call this.sword by |
its right name and me by my right name; but before she comes,
no one shall know how to calf'us by our proper names.”

When they had read these words, they..began to Jaugh and
said that these were indeed strange things to see and to hear.
“Sire,” said Perceval, “turn the sword and see what there is
gn the other side.” And turning it at once, they saw that it
was as red as blood on the other side, and there were letters
which said:~ “~ 7 :
~~ He who..will. poze me most will find greater cause to blame
me in time of need than he could expect, and to him to whom
Tshiould be the greatest blessing I shall prove the greatest curse.
But this shall happen only once, for thus it is destined to occur.”
Such ‘were the words inscribed on this side. And when they
saw them, they were more amazed than before. “In God’s
name,” said Perceval to-Galahad, “T was about to tell you to
seize this sword. But since these words say that it will fail in
time of need, and that it will be a curse to him to whom it ought
to prove a boon, I will not allow. you to take it: for it might
Some.ti ‘to disgrace, and that would be a grievous
pity.” Upon hearing this, the damsel said to Perceval: “Fair
brother, these. two things have alféady happened, and T will
tell you when and to whom; wherefore no one should hesitate
to take this sword, provided he be worthy to do so.

“Once upon a time it happened, full forty vents after the


Passion of Jesus Christ, that Nascien, the br -in-law of
King Mordrain, was transported in a cloud more than fourteen


.
168 THE QUEST OF THE HOLY GRAIL


days distant from his country by the command of Our Lord
to an isle near the western country called ‘the Turning Island.’
When he arrived there, it happened that he found this ship,
in which we are, at the entrance of a rock. And when he had
entered it, he found this couch and this sword just as you see
it now, and he tooked at it a long time and desired greatly to
possess it. Yet he did not dare to draw it forth. Thus he continued
desiring and yearning to possess it. Eight days he tarried in
the ship, almost depriving himself of drink and food. On the
ninth day it happened that a great and marvellous wind arose


and carried him away from the Turning Island to another


isle far removed in the west. There he arrived directly upon a

rock. And when he went on land, he encountered the biggest
_ and most marvellous giant in the world who cried out to hi
that he was a dead man. And he was indeed in mortal fear
when he saw this devil running toward him. But when he looked
about him, he saw nothing with which to defend himself. Then
he ran to the sword, like one driven by the fear and terror of
death, and drew it from the scabbard. When he saw it bared,
he prized it more than anything else, and began to wave it
aloft; but at the first flourish the sword broke in half. Then
he said that he must rightly blame the thing which he had


prized most in the world, because it had failed him in his —


great need.

“Then he replaced the pieces of the sword on the bed, and
springing forth from the ship, he attacked the giant and killed
him. Then he returned to the ship. And when the wind struck
the sail, he journeyed across the sea until he met another ship
belonging to King Mordrain, who had been fiercely attacked
and assailed by the enemy at the rock of the Port Perilous.
When they beheld each other, they were very glad like nen who
loved each other with a great affection. Each asked the other
how he was and what adventures had befallen him. Finally
Nascien said: ‘Sire, I do not know what you will think of the
adventures I have had. But since you saw me last, I say that
one of the most marvellous adventures has befallen me, such
as I believe never happened to any man before.’ Then he told
him about the. precious sword, how it had broken in time of
need when he was about to kill the giant with it. ‘Upon my
word,’ he replied, ‘this is a strange story you tell. What-did
you do with this sword?’ ‘ Sire,’ said Nascien, ‘I left 1t where


I found it. You can see it for yourself if you please, for it is —
here within.’ Then King Mordrain left his ship and came aboard
Nascien’s ship and approachéd the couch. And wher he ‘saw
the pieces of the broken sword, he esteemed it more highly
than anything he had ever seen. He said that it had not broken
because of any weakness or flaw in the sword, but because of
some significance, or because of some fault in Nascien. Then
he took the two pieces and fitted them together. And as soon
as the two pieces of steel were joined, he welded the sword


together as readily as it had been broken. And when he saw


this, he began to smile and said: ‘By God, marvellous is the
virtue of Jesus Christ, who welds and breaks more quickly
than one could suppose!’ Then he replaced the sword in its
scabbard and laid it there where you see it now. Then straight-
way they heard_a voice which said to them: ‘Now leave this
hip and enter the other one, for however little you may fall
into sin, if so be that you are discovered in sin while you are
here, you cannot escape without peril.’ Thereupon they left


that ship and entered the other. But as Nascien was passing .


from one to the other, he was struck so severely on the shoulder
‘by a thrown sword that he fell back into the ship. As he fell,
he cried: ‘Ah! God, how.am I wounded!’ Then he heard a
voice which said to him: ‘This is because of the crime you
committed in drawing the sword, when you had no right to
fo so, not being worthy. Now take better care next time not
to go against your Creator.’

“Thus, as I have told you, was realised the prophecy here
written: ‘He who will prize me most will find greater cause to
blame me in time of need.’ For he who most prized this sword
was Nascien, and it failed him in his greatest need, as I have
told you.” | .

“In God’s name,” said Galahad, “you have made this thing
very clear to us. Now tell us how the other part turned out.”

“Willingly,” the damsel replied.

“True it is,” said she, “that King Parlan, who is called the

Cripple King, so long as he was able to ride as a knight did much
to exalt holy Christianity, and honoured the poor more than
did anyone else known, and was of such an excellent character
that his equal could not be found in Christendom. But one day
he was hunting in a forest of his which stretched away to the
sea, when he lost his dogs and huntsmen and all his knights
save one who was his own cousin. When he saw that he had
lost all his company, he knew not what to do; for he saw he was so

M
Tats ets


ae -


ae eee ere,


170 THE QUEST OF THE HOLY GRAIL


deep in the forest that he did not know how to get out of it,
not having learned the way. So he with his knight followed the
road until he came to the shore of the sea toward Illande. And
when he reached there, he found this ship in which we are; and
he went on board and found the inscription that you have seen.
When he saw it, he was not afraid, feeling that he had fallen
short of none of the service which an earthly knight could render
to Jesus Christ. Then he entered the ship all alone, for the
knight his companion was-1n6t ‘bold enough to enter. When he
had found this sword, he drew it as. far from the scabbard as
you can see, for previously none of the blade had shown. He
would presently have drawn it forth completely; but all at once
there entered there a lance which smote him through the two
thighs\so grievously that he still remains wounded with it, as


“it appears, and has never been able to be cured, nor ever will
ms be until yo come to him. Thus he was injured as a result of


his own boldness. And because of this vengeance they say that
the sword was a curse to him which ought to have been a
blessing: for he was the best knight and the most worthy man


' who was then alive.”


“In God’s name, damsel,” they said, “you have told us enough
to enable us to see that because of these words no one need fail
to grasp this swor

Then they looked and saw that the bed was made of wood |
and was not a couch of cushions. In the middle of the front
was’a post standing straight up and fastened into the piece of
wood which ran the length of the bed in front. Opposite to this
post was another standing straight up and fixed to the other_,
side of the bed. Between these two posts was the width of the
“bed, and over them and fastened to each of them was.a.smaller
piece of wood cut square. The post standing in front was whiter
than fallen snow; the one on the far side was as red as drops of .
blood ; while the cross-bar was as green as an emerald. The three
pieces "of wood were of these three colours; and you must know
that the colours were natural and not painted, for they had not
been laid on by hand of any mortal man or woman. Now,
because people might hear this and think it was a lie, if they
were not made to understand how it could come about, the
story will turn aside a little from its course and subject to describe
how these three pieces of wood came to be of three colours.


Google >


CHAPTER XI
Now the story of the Holy Grail tells at this point how it befell
that the sinful Eve, who was the first woman, took counsel


with the mortal enemy, that is the devil, who from that time
“began with his wiles to beguile the human race; and he incited


her to mortal sin, namely covetousness, for which sin he had ¢-


himself been cast forth from paradise and ‘had been hurled down
from the high glory of heaven, and he so stirred her disloyal
desire that he made her pick the mortal fruit from the tree, and
with the fruit a branch of the tree itself, as it often happens
that the branch is detached with the fruit when picked. As soon
as she had carried it to her husband Adam, he being urged and
encouraged by her, seized it in such a way that he broke the


fruit from the branch and ate it to his sorrow and to our great’


‘woe. And when he had broken it from the branch as you have
heard, it happened that the branch remained in his wife’s hand,
as one happens sometimes to hold something in one’s hands
without noticing it. And as soon as they had eaten of the mortal
fruit, which indeed ought to be called mortal since by it came
death first to these two and later to us all, all the qualities
changed which they had previously possessed, and they realised
that they were of flesh and naked, who were before only crea-
tures of the spirit, though they possessed bodies. The story,


however, does not assert that they were completely spiritual; -,


for anything formed of such vile matter as clay cannot be of
such great purity. But they were spiritual in that they. were
created to live forever if they had refrained always from. sin.


When they looked at each other, they saw that they were.


naked and were aware of their uncomely parts; and they were
ashamed in the presence of one another, so conscious were they


already of their sin. Then they covered their uncomely parts .
with their two hands. Eve still had in her hand the branch \
which had been attached to the fruit, nor did she ever let go /


of this branch either before or afterward.
When He who knows all the thoughts and intents of the heart
knew that they had thus sinned, He came to them and called
171
\
J


172 THE QUEST OF THE HOLY GRAIL


' first to Adam. It was just that he should be held responsible
rather than his wife, for she was of a weaker character, having
been formed from the rib of the man; and it was fitting that she
should be obedient to him and not he to her; therefore He
summoned Adam first. And when He had said to him His woeful
words: “In the sweat of thy face thou shalt eat thy bread,”
He did not intend that the woman should go free and not be
a partaker in the punishment as she had been in the crime;
and He said to her: “In sorrow thou shalt bring forth children.”’
Then He drove them.both out from paradise, which the Scrip-
tures call the paradise of delight. And when they were outside,
Eve still held the branch in her hand unconsciously. But when
she noticed the branch, she saw that it was still green as if it
had just been picked. Then, knowing that the tree from which
the branch had been plucked was the cause of her exile and woe,
she said that, in memory of the great loss she had sustained
through that tree, she would keep the branch as long as she
could, so that she might see it often as a reminder of her
great "misfortune. .
‘Then Eve bethought herself that she had no pot or box in
which she could plant it, for in those days there were no such
things. So she planted it in the earth, so that it stood up straight,
and said that thus she could often see it. And the branch which
was planted in the earth, by the will of the Creator whom all
things obey, grew and thrived in the earth and took root.
_ This branch which the first sinful woman carried out of
paradise was full of great significance. For in that she-carrted”
it in her hand, it signified great joy, as if she were speaking to
her offspring who were to come after her, for as yet she was a
_virgin. The significance of the branch was as if she said to them:. .
“Be not dismayed that we are cast out of our heritage: we have
. not lost it forever; behold here a sign that we shall some day
\ be restored to ft.” And if anyone should wish to ask of the
_ pook why the man did not carry the branch from paradise
rather than the woman, because the man is above the woman,
it replies that the carrying of the branch did not belong to the
man but to the woman. For inasmuch as the woman carried it it;
it signified that by woman life was lost and by woman it would
be restored. And further, it was an indication that the heri-
“tage which was lost for the time would be recovered by the


Virgin Mary.
Now the story reverts to the branch planted in the earth,


bad
and says that it grew and multiplied so much that it was a

eat tree in a short time. And when if was tall and cast.a shade,
it was all white as snow on the trunk and the branches and the
Jeaves. Now this was an emblem of virginity; for virginity is a.\ ,
vurtue whereby the body is kept pyre and the squl white. The fact } ~
that it was completely white signifies that she who had planted
it was still a virgin at the time she planted it: for when Eve and


Adam were cast out of paradise they were still pure and virgin


oA AT


‘men and women who have had no carnal association. But
-virginity is a much higher and more virtuous quality: for no
,one can have it, whether man or woman, who has felt any lust
ifor sexual union. This was the virginity possessed by Eve when
\she was cast out of paradise and the great delights that were
there; and when she planted the branch, she had not yet, lost
virginity. But later Cod commanded Adam to know his wife,
that is to lie with her, as nature requires that the man should
lie with his wife and the wife with her husband. Then Eve
lost her virginity and from that time forward their bodies
were united. ~

Some time after he had known her as you have heard, it
happened that they were sitting together beneath this tree.
And Adam began to look at her and to pity her sorrow and
exile, Then each began to weep for the other’s sake. Eve said
it was not strange that in that spot they should remember their
grief and sorrow; for the tree possessed that quality that no -
one could sit beneath it, however happy he might be, without
going away sorrowful ; and with good reason they were sorrowful,
for this was the Tree of Death. As soon as she had said this, a
voice. was heard saying to them: “Ah! unhappy ones, why do
you thus predict and foretell death to each other? Foretell
nothing in despair, but comfort one another, for life avails more °
than death.* Thus spake the voice to the two wretched crea- ~
tures; and they were greatly comforted, and from that time
forward they called it the Tree of Life, and because of the great
joy which they found in it they planted many others which were
all scions of this one. As soon as they broke off a branch, they
stuck it“in the ground where it took root of itself, and always
retained the colour of the parent tree.


*
174 THE QUEST OF THE HOLY GRAIL


The original tree continued to grow and develop. So it came
to pass that Adam and Eve sat under it more gladly than they
used to do. They were sitting there one day, which according
to the story happened to be a Friday, When they had been there
for some time together, they heard a voice speaking to them and

- a, commanding them to. consummate their union. But at this ~
‘they were both so full of shame that their eyes could not endure
’ the sight of themselves so indecently employed, for the man
was as much embarrassed as the woman. Yet they knew not
how to dare to disobey Our Lord’s command, being still mindful
of their punishment for their earlier disobedience. So they
began to regard each other shamefacedly. Then Our Lord saw
their confusion, and took pity on them. But since His command-
ment could not be disregarded, and since it was His wish to
- re-establisly from these two the human line and thus restore,
».the tenthYlegion of angels which had been cast down from |
‘“ heaven through pride, therefore He comforted them in their
/ share. For He set between them so great a darkness that neither
\ of them could see the other. They were greatly astonished that
- such obscurity could come between them so suddenly. Then
they called each other and blindly squght each other out. And
because all things must be done as Our Lord commands, there-
fore they must needs join their bodies in intercourse as the true
Father had commanded them. And when they had lain together,
they planted new seed whereby their great sin was somewhat _
relieved; for Adam had begotten and Eve had conceived Abel
the just, who first served his Creator acceptably by loyally
rendering Him his tithes. |

Thus was Abel the just begotten beneath the Tree of Life

, on a Friday, as you have heard. And when the darkness dis-
appeared, they saw each other as before. Then they perceived
that Our Lord had done this in order to spare their shame,
and they were very glad. And at once there happened a mar-
vellous thing, for the tree which before had been completely
white, became as green as the grass of the field; and all those

‘branches which were planted after they had lain together
pecame green in the wood and the leaves and the bark.

Thus the tree was changed from white to green; but the.
earlier scions of the parent tree did not change their original ..
colour, nor were they in any way affected. Onfy the tree itself.
was covered with green from top to bottom, and from that
time it began to flower and to bear fruit, though it had never Ss
done so previously. When it lost its white colour and turned
a green, it signified that virginity was gone from her who had
atited dit, and the green.colaur which it took on and the flower /
“the fruit, signified the seed which had been sown beneath
Jt, and that this seed would always be green in Our Lord, that _
is, would always be well and lovingly inclined toward its Creator.”
The Blossom signified that the creature who had been begotten
beneath this tree would be chaste and clean and pure Body.
And the fruit signified that “this creature would vigorously
carry out and exemplify the cause of religion and goodness in
all his earthly affairs.
Thus was this tree for a long time green as well as all those


descended from it after the union of Adam and Eve. And after.


a while Abel had grown up and was so devoted and well-disposed
to his Creator that he gave to Him his tithes and the first-fruits
Of all the best he had. But Cain his brother did not so, taking
the most vilé and despicable things he had and offering them to
his Creator. Therefore Our Lord gave such a blessing to him
who rendered to Him his fairest tithes that when he had ascended
up to the hill where he was accustomed to burn his sacrifices
as Our Lord had commanded him, the smoke of them rose
straight to heaven. But the smoke. of his brother Cain.did.not


rise in like manner, but spread over the fields, ugly, black and , |


foul; while the smoke which rose from Abel’s sacrifice was
white and of a pleasant odour. When Cain saw that his brother
Abel was more blessed in his sacrifice than he, and that Our
Lord received it more gladly than his, he was much displeased,
and came to hate his brother beyond measure. Then he began
to think how he could take vengeance upon him, and he said
within himself that he would slay him: for he did not see any
other way by which he could be avenged on him.

Thus Cain carried for a long time this hate in his heart,
never betraying in his face or appearance anything by which
his guileless brother might feel suspicious. So this hate was
concealed until one day when Abel had gone some distance
from his father’s house which stood at a distance from this


tree, and near the tree were his flocks which he was watching.


Now the day was warm and the sun was hot, so that Abel


‘could not stand the heat, and he went to sit "down beneath’


the tree. And feeling the desire to sleep, he lay down beneath
‘the tree and began to doze. Then his brother, who had long
planned this treachery, spied upon him and followed him until
We.


176 THE QUEST OF THE HOLY GRAIL


he saw him reclining beneath the tree. So he came up and
thought to kill him before he should be discovered. But Abel
heard him approach; and seeing that it was his brother, he rose
to greet him, for he loved him dearly in his heart. And he said
to him: “Welcome, fair brother!” And Cain returned his
greeting and bade him sit down; but first he took a curved
knife which he had with him, and thrust it into his breast.
vi ~~Thus Abel was done to death by the hand of his disloyal
brother on the very spot where he had been begotten. And just |
‘ashe was begotten on a Friday, as the day is truly called, so
he came to his death on a Friday by the same token. The death
“which Abel received by treason at a time when there were as __
"yet only three men on earth signified the death of the true
. Crucified One, for by Abel was He signified, and by Cain was |
_ Judas signified, through whom He received His death. Just
\'as Cain saluted Abel his brother and then slew him, so Judas
saluted his Lord, even when he had planned His death. Thus
_the two deaths agreed, not in importance, but in significance.
For just as Cain slew Abel on a Friday, so Judas killéd “his
\ Lord on a Friday, not by his own hand to be sure, but by hits
betrayal. And Judas was signified by Cain in several respects,
for he could find no occasion in Jesus Christ for which he should
hate Him; but he found an unjust reason, for he hated Him.
not for any evil which he had found in Him, but just because
he found nothmg in Him but good. For it is common for all
wicked men to regard good people with envy_and hostility.
‘And if Judas, who was so disloyal and treacherous, had found
as much disloyalty and wickedness in Jesus Christ as he did in
himself, he would not have hated Him, but he would have loved
Him the more because he would have seen Him to be as he knew
himself to be. Now concerning this treachery which Cain com-
mitted toward his brother Abel, Our Lord speaks in the Psalms
_by the mouth of King David who, though unconsciously, spoke
a cruel word; for he spoke thus, as if he were saying to Cain:
“Thou hast plotted and spoken wickedness against thy brother,
.and against the son of thy mother thou hast set thy
. treachery and thy traps. This thou didst, and I kept silence.
\ And therefore thou thoughtest that I was like unto thee,
because I said nothing. But I am not so, rather will I chastise
thee and reprove thee sorely.”’
This vengeance had been executed before David ever con-
ceived of it, in that Our Lord came to Cain and said to him:
“Cain, where is thy brother?” And he replied as one who knew
that he was guilty of the treason he had worked and who had
already covered his brother with the leaves of the tree in
order that he might not be found. So when Our Lord asked
him where his brother was, he replied: “Lord, I know not.
Am I my brother’s keeper? ” And Our Lord said to him: “What
hast thou done? The voice of thy brother’s blood crieth_ unto
Me from the round-Bid Beans oF what thou hast done,
thou shalt be cursed~upon the earth; and the earth shall be
cursed in all the labour thou shalt perform, because it received
thy brother’s blood, which thou didst treacherously spill upon it.”

Thus Our Lord cursed the earth, but He did not curse the tree
under which Abet-had~been -kitled;-ror~-the-other-trees-witietr”
sprung from fv; r were créatéd by His wif!
“In connection with this tree a great marvel came to pass, for
as soon as Abel had come to his death beneath the tree, it lost
its green colour and became red all over; this was in memory of
the blood which had been shed there. But in the future all the
\ shoots of it which they planted would ‘not grow, but died and
came to nothing. But the tree itself grew and flourished so
[tnd de ms that it became the finest tree that ever was seen


t


and the most beautiful to look upon.
} This tree continued for a long time with the colour and the
| beauty you have heard me describe, without ever growing old
‘or withering or deteriorating in any way, except only that it
bore no blossom or fruit from the hour that Abel’s blood was
Shed; but the others which had previously been cut from it
flowered and bore fruit as trees usually do. So it remained as
the years passed by and multiplied. And the descendants of
Eve and Adam held it in great honour, and from one generation
,to another they told how the first mother had planted it. So
‘old and young alike found solace under it, and came thither to
‘be comforted when they were in any distress; wherefore it was
called the Tree of Life, and served them as a joyful reminder.
' And if this tree grew and flourished, so did all the others derived.
from it, both those which were altogether white and those which
. were altogether green ; and no one alive was so bold as to remove
,: from it a branch or a leaf.
There was yet another el connected with this tree. For
_ when Our Lord sent thé flood|upon the earth, by which the
world perished in its wickedness, and the fruits of the earth and
the forests and the fields had suffered so heavily that they
178 THE QUEST OF THE HOLY GRAIL


could not henceforth have such a sweet savour as before, all
things were then turned to bitterness. But as regards those
trees which were descended from the Tree of Life, no one could
observe that they had lost any savour or fruit or changed the
colour whreh-they had before.
__ These trees lasted in such fashion until Solomon, the son of
David, reigned in succession to his father. This Solornon was so
wise that he was furnished with all the goodly knowledge that
the heart of a mortal man could compass, and he. knew, the
strength of all precious stones and the virtues of all herbs, and
the course of the heavens and the stars so thoroughly that
‘hone but God could know them better. Yet all his wisdom could

- not withstand the scheming of his wife,. for she deceived him _
often whenever she tried to do so. But this ought to cause no
‘surprise; for doubtless, when a woman sets her heart and her
intention upon a scheme, no wisdom of mortal man can thwart

. her; and this is no new thing in our time, but began with our

\ first mother.

When Solomon perceived that he could not cope with his
wife’s wiles, he was greatly astonished that it should be so,
and was much incensed. But he dared not take any further
action: wherefore he said in his book called Proverbs: “I have
searched the whole world through as thoroughly as a mortal
man can search, and 1 in wall the journey I have not been able to
find one good woman.” These words Solomon spoké “in anger
‘that he could not cope witli his wife. And he tried in various
ways to change her attitude of mind, but without success.
Seeing this, he began to ask himself why woman liked to be |
such a trial to man. As he was pondering upon this question, a |


if
t


voice replied to his query: “Solomon, Solomon, if man sorrows ,

ecause of woman, let not that worry thee. F or by" a woman |
there shall come to man a hundred times greater joy than this
_sorrow ; and this woman shall spring from thy line.”

Upon hearing this, Solomon saw his folly in blaming his wife.
Then he began to ponder those. things that appeared to him
when he was awake or asleep to see if he might discover the true
end of ‘hts-kne:-~Afid hé pomdeted and considered so long that
the Holy Spirit revealed to him the coming of the glorious
Virgin, and a voice declared to him a portion of what was to
happen in the future. When he heard this news, he asked if
she was to be the end of his line. “Nay,” said the voice; “a
virgin man shall be the end of it, and he shall be as much finer
a knight than thy brother-in-law Joshua as this Virgin shall be
better than thy wile. Now Thavepivert thee assurance concerning
what had caused thee doubt.”

When Solomon heard these words, he said that he was very
happy that the extreme limit of his line was to rest upon such
an example of goodness and of illustrious knighthood. Then he
thought how he could communicate to that last man of his
ine the fact that Sélomon; who had lived so long before him, ©
had had Knowlédge of his coming. Upon this he thought and
pondered long: for he did not see how he could inform a man,
who was to come so long after him, that he had known anything
about him. Then his wife perceived that he was thinking about
something which he could not decide. Now she loved him well
‘enough, thougtr not so much as many women love their hus-’
bands, and she was very shrewd. So she did not wish to ask’
him suddenly, but bided her time until she saw one evening
that he was happy and glad and’in 4 good humour. Then she
begged him to answer her a question which she would ask;
ad. he, not thinking of what she had in mind, said that he
would gladly do so. Then she said to him straightway: ‘“‘Sire,
you have been much engaged in thought this week and last
and for a long time, so-that you have not ceased to be pensive.
I can easily tell that you have been pondering about something
which you have not been able to decide. Now I should be very
glad to know what it is. For there is nothing in the world which
I think we could not settle with your great wisdom and my

great cunning.” |

Thereupon Solomon thought that, if mortal heart could
reach any decision on this matter, she would be the one to do
it; for he had found her to be so shrewd that he did not believe
there was any soul in the world capable of equalling her shrewd-
ness, Therefore he was disposed to tell her his thoughts, and he

told her the truth in full. And when he had told her, she thought
a little and then replied at once: “So you are puzzled as to how
you can inform this knight that you have known the truth about,
him?” “Yes,” said he, “but I do not see how it can be done.
_For it is such a long interval from now until his time that I am
completely at a loss.” “Upon my word,” said she, “since you do
not know how to do it, I shall show you. But tell me first how
long you think it will be before his time.” And he replied that
he thought it would be two thousand has and more. “Now I will
tell you what to do,” said she: “build ‘a ship of the finest and
180 THE QUEST OF THE HOLY GRAIL


most durable wood you can find, and such as neither water
nor anything else will rot.” And he réplied-that-he would’ d6
so. The next day Solomon sent for all the workers in wood in
his land, and commanded them to make the most marvellous
ship that ever was seen, and of such wood_as.would not rot.
And when they had selected the wood and the timbers, and
had begun the construction, his wife said to Solomon: “Sire,
since you say that this knight is destined to excel in chivalry
all those who have been before him or who shall come after
him, it would be a great honour for you to prepare for him
some armour which would surpass in excéllénce all other
armour just aS he is to surpass all other knights in goodness.”
But he said that he did not know where to find such armour
as she indicated. “I will show you,” said she: “in the temple
which you have built in honour of your Lord is your father
David’s sword, the keenest and most marvellous sword that
was ever handled by a knight. Take it and remove the pommel
and the hilt, so that we may have the bladé remaining alone,
‘Then you, who know the virtue of precious stones and the
strength of the herbs and the properties of everything on earth,
make a4 portmielof precious stones so skilfully joined together
that no one on earth can tell where one is separated from
another, but everyone who sees it will think that it is all one
stone. Then make a hilt so marvellous that there shall be none
‘in the world so excellent or wonderful: Then make a scabbard
as remarkable in its turn as the sword is itself. And when you
have done all this, I will attach the belt in accordance with
my own ideas,” ee eee

And he did all that she said, except in regard to the pommel,
where he set only one stone, but it was of all the colours one could
mention; and he made a marvellous hilt which is described in
another place.

When the ship was finished and launched, the lady had a
large and wonderful bed placed in it, with many cushions, so
that the bed was elegant and comfortable. At the head of the


d the king put his crown, and covered-it-with-a..white silk
cloth. Hé ven the sword to his wife in order that she


might attach the belt, and said to her: ‘“‘ Bring back the sword,
and I will put it at the foot of the bed.” So she brought it;
and he looked at it, and saw that she had attached to it a belt
gh this he was very angry, but she said to him: “Sire,
know that I have nothing fine enough to be worthy to hold


viatized by GOOgle


aR


we
such a sword as this.” “Then what can be done about it?” he
asked. “Leave it the way it is,” she answered, “for it is not
our busin 0, s some damsel
o that eventually, but I know not when.” Thereupon the
king left the sword as it was. Then they had the ship enveloped
in silken cloth which would not rot from water Se anyenne ee |
en they had done this, the lady Tooked at the bed and said


that it still lacked one thing.

Then she and two carpenters went out to the tree under
which Abel had béén slain. And when she had comé to it;*she
said to thé carpenters: “Cut enough wood from this tree to
make a plank.” “ Ah! lady,” they said, “we do not dare. Know
you not that this is the tree which our first mother planted?”
“You must do it,” she replied, “or I shall have you put to death.”
Then they said that they would do it since they were forced to
do so, for they would rather do wrong than be put to death.
So they began at once to cut into the tree; but they had not
made much progress when they were filled with terror; for they
saw clearly that from the tree there issued drops of blood as
red as_a rose, So they wished fo stop cutting: but she made
them continue, whether they wished to do so or not. Finally,
they cut away enough to make a plank. Next, she made them
take one of the green-coloured trees which were sprung from the
Others, and then one of the others which were completely white.

When théy were furnished with these three kinds of wood
of different colours, they returned to the ship. Then she entered
it, and making the others follow her, she said to them: “I wish
you to make of this lumber three planks, one for this side of
the bed, arid one Tor the other, and the third to reach over
from one to the other and to be fastened to each.” And they
made them as she had commanded and fastened the planks, and
none of them has ever changed its colour so long as the ship
has endured. When they had done this, Solomon surveyed the
ship, and said to his wife: “Thou hast accomplished marvels,”
he said, “for if all the people in the world were here, they could
not guess the meaning of this ship unless Our Lord revealed
it to them, and even thou, who hast made it, dost not know
its significance. Yet, not from anything that thou hast made
can the knight learn that I have had tidings of him, unless


‘Our Lord makes some other provision.” “Well, let that be


.now,’ said she, “for in time you will hear news about that |


pther than you now expect.” Ts
182 THE QUEST OF THE HOLY GRAIL


That night Solomon lay with a small company in his tent
beside the ship. And when he had gone to sleep, it seemed to
him that from heaven there came a man with a great number
of angels who came down into the ship. When he had gone in,
he took the water which one of the angels carried in a silver
vessel, and sprinkled all the ship with it; then he came to the
sword and wrote letters on the pommel ‘and the hilt; then he
went to the side of the ship and also traced some letters there.
When he had done this, he went and lay down upon the bed,
after which Solomon never knew what became of him, for he
‘vanished with all his company.

At dawn next day, as soon as Solomon was awake, he came
to the ship and found an inscription on the side which said:
“Hear, thou man, who wouldst enter me, see that thou enter
not unless thou art full of faith, for I am nothing if not faith
and belief. And as soon as thou desert thy faith, I will desert
thee so that thou shalt receive no comfort or aid from me;
rather will I let thee go the moment thou art tainted with
unbelief.”

When Solomon saw these words, he was so abashed that he
dared not go on board, but instead drew back; and the ship
was straightway put. out to sea and it sailed away SO swiftly
that in a little while it was out of sight. And he sat down upon
the seashore and began to think about this. Then a voice
came down and spoke to him: “Solomon, the. lastkni ht of
thy race shall lie upon this bed which.thou hast made, 1a
receive tidings of thee.” At this Solomon was very glad, and he
awoke his wife and those who were with him and told them
what had happened; and he gave his friends and strangers to
know how his wife had accomplished what he had not known


_ how to undertake. And for the same reason as the book has V


explained to you, the story also tells why the ship was con-
structed, and ee and how the planks came naturally to be


he


Enia else.
CHAPTER XII


Now the story tells that the three companions looked for a
long time at the bed and the planks untilthey were sure that
the planks were of natural colour and not painted; at which
they marvelled greatly, for they did not understand how such
a thing could have happened. And when they had sufficiently
gazed at them, they lifted the cloth and saw beneath it the
crown of gold, and beneath the crown a very handsome wallet.
Rerceval took it and opened it and found within a letter. When

e othérs saw it, they said that if God willed, this letter would
assure them regarding the ship, whence it came and who built
it originally. Then Perceval began to read what was in the
letter and explained to them the nature of the planks and of
_the ship.as told in the story. All present wept as they listened,
for it called to their mind matters of great importance connected
with people of high lineage.

When Perceval had read to them concerning the nature of
the ship and of the planks, Galahad said: “Fair lords, now_it
behoves us to seek the damsel who is to remove this belt and
fasten a different one; for until that is done no one must move
this sword from here.” But they said that they knew not where
to find her. ‘‘ However,” said they, “we will gladly look for her,
since so it must be done.”’ When the damsel who was Perceval’s
sister heard them discussing thus, she said to them: “My lords, -
be not dismayed, for if it please God, before we go hence, the .
cords of the belt shall be attached, as handsome and rich as
they ought to be.” Then the damsel opened a casket which she ,
had and drew out some cords richly woven of gold, of silk and
of hair. The hair was so fair and bright that it could hardly be
“distinguished from the threads of gold. And in them were set
rich precious stones, together -witlr two golden buckles so fine
that their equals could scarce be found. “Fair lords,” said
she, “behold the belt which is to. be.fastened here. You must! '
know that I made it of the most precious thing that belonged
to me, that is, of my hair. And if I valued it, it is not strange,
for on the day of Pentecost when you were made a knight,

183


—_—
x
") can see.”


/


184 THE QUEST OF THE HOLY GRAIL


sire,” said she to Galahad, “I had the finest head of hair of
any woman in the world. But as soon as I knew that this
adventure was assigned to me and that I must execute it,
I quickly had my head shorn, and I made these tresses as you


“In God’s name, damsel,’”’ said Bors, “you are indeed wel-
come! For you have delivered us from the great difficulty in
which we were, if it had not been for what you say.” Then she
went to the sword and removed the cords of tow and attached
those others as skilfully as if she had done it all her life. When
~she~hart finished, She said to the companions: “Do you know
the name of this sword?” “Nay, damsel,” they replied, “you
it is who must give it a name, in accordance with what the
inscription says.” “Know then,” said she, “that the sword is


_named ‘the Sword with the strange belt,’ and the scabbard is


| \ named ‘Memory of blood.’ For no one with intelligence can see
\j ‘the part of the scabbard which was formed from the Tree of.


Lifé but should be reminded of Abel’s blood.”
When they heard this, they said ta Galahad: “Now we pray
you in the name of Our Lord Jesus Christ, and in order that


all chivalry may be dignified, gird on the Sword with the strange
belt, which has been so earnestly desired in the kingdom o


Logres that riot even thé apostles ever longed so for Our Lord.”
For because of this sword they felt sure the marvels of -
the Holy Grail would terminate as well as the perilous adven-_.
ttires which befell them each day. “Then let me first,” said -
Gatahradt, “perform the rite connected with the sword. For no
one should have it who cannot seize the pommel. In this way
you can easily see that if is not for me, if I fail in the attempt.”
And they said that that was right._So he put his hand upoes
the hilt; and it came to pass that when he grasped it his fingers
more than encompassed it. When they saw this, his companions
said to Galahad: “Sire, now we know that it is yours ; there can


se wae


be no. further objection to your girding it on.” Then he drew.


it from the scabbard and saw that it was so bright and fair
' that one could behold himself in it as in a mirror; and he prized _,


it more than anything in the world_Then Galahad returned it


~ to the scabbard. And the damsel loosed his own sword for him,


and girded on this one by the belt. And when she had hung it


at hi¢side, she said: “Certainly, sire, I hen I die
for I consider myself he: 1 as the most favouré :


in the world, in having knighte the worthiest man of the age.


~ a
For know that you were not propery a knight when on carried thigh. «
the sword which p_ you. wore when you entered this Jand-” Wu “


replied. “vou have done so mucl


shall be ight forevermore. tor. all.yau.
have smd? No can leave here,’ she said, “and go to


“attend to-our- Other’ affairs.” And they left the shi and _went_
to the rock. Then Perceval said to Galahad: ™ Sindy sire, NO.
day shall ever pass “Without my thanking Our Lord that it
pleased Him to give me a part in accomplishing su
adventure as this has been: for it is the most wonderful I have
ever seen.


e rock. And when ee night fell, they began to wonder if
they were near land. And each one had to say that he did not
know. That night they spent at sea, and neither ate nor drank,
for they were wi! food. But the next day they arrived at.
a town calle 1
gone ashoré and had thanked Our Lord who had enabled
them safely to accomplish the adventure of the sword, they
entered the town. When they had passed through the gate, t the
damsel said to them: “My lords, we have come to a bad ort:

_for if it is known that we are of King Arthur’s househ shold, we
shall be at once attacked, for he is hated here n more than an
man.” “Now, damsel, do not be dismayed,” said Bors, “for He
who delivered us from the rock will deliver us from here when ‘
it is His will.”

While they were speaking thus, a.yalet.came to meet them
who inquired: “Sir knights, who are your” And they replied:
“We belong to King Arthur’s household.” “Then in truth,” |
said he, “upon my word you have come to a bad place.” With }
that, he returned toward the main fortress; and it was not long
before they heard a horn which fhight BE Heard all over the town.

Then a damsel apbronched and asked them whence they came.

And they told her. “ Ah! my lords,” said she, “return now if you
can! For, so help me God, you are come to your death; a 1
would honestly advisé you to return before the people here can
surprise you within their walls.” But they said that they would
not turn back. ~ Then do you wish to die?” she asked. “Now

0 not be dismayed,” they : said. “For He in whose service we are

engaged will conduct us.’ ’ Thereupon | they saw approaching
them down the main street ten armed knights who told them to

; ciate tiebatences Rael)


} ‘
186 THE QUEST OF THE HOLY GRAIL


surrender or they would kill them. But they replied that they
had no thought of surrendering. “Then you are done for,” the
others said. With that, they chargetf-upon their steeds. But
though they were numerous and were mounted instead of on
foot, yet our knights feared them not and drew their swords.
Perceval struck one and knocked him from his horse; then he
took the horse himself and mounted, as Galahad had already
done. As soon as they were mounted, they began to beat down
and kill the others, and they secured a horse for Bors. When the
others saw that they were being so roughly handled, they turned
to flight, and were pursued as far as the citadel where they
took refuge.

When they went up into the great hall, they met other knights
and men-at-arms who were arming themselves because of the
cry they had heard in the town. When the three companions,
who had pressed after the others on horseback, saw all these
men taking their arms, they ran at them with swords drawn,


killing them and heating them down like dumb cattle. They


forced to turn and run. For Galahad did such wonders and
slew so many of them that they thought it could not be a mortal
man, but some devil who had rushed in to destroy them.
At last, when they saw that they could not hold out, those who
could escaped through the doors, and others broke their necks,
legs and arms by leaping from the windows.

When the three companions saw that the palace was cleared,
they surveyed the bodies of those whom they had killed and
felt guilty for the havoc they had wrought, saying that they had
done wrong to kill so many folk. “To be sure,” said Bors, “I

* cannot think that Our Lord cared much for them, that they
‘ should have been so punished. Perchance they have been.some
faithless_and renegade pee le, who have sinned so grievously
‘against Our Lord that He did not wish them to live any longer,
and sent us here to destroy them.” “That js not enough to say,”
Galahad replied, “for if they have wronged Our Lord, vengeance
-was_not ours to take, but His who waits until thesinner_
recognises the evil of his ways. So, for my part, I shall never be
at peace until, if it be Our Lord’s pleasure, I know the true
significance of what we have done here.”

While they were speaking thus, a wo n came out of
one of the adjoining rooms. He was a priest and garbed in white,
and was carrying the Eucharist in a chalice. When he saw all the
dead bodies in the hall, he was aghast. So he drew back, not
knowing what to do at the sight of so many men lying dead.
Then Galahad, who had seen what he was carrying, doffed his
helmet in his presence, knowing well that the priest was afraid.
Then he checked his companions and, approaching the good
man, he said: “Sire, why do you draw back? You need have no
fear of us.” “Who are your” the worthy man inquired, to which
they replied that they were of King Arthur’s household. When
the worthy man heard this, he quickly recovered from his fear and,
being at ease in his mind again, he asked Galahad to tell him
how these knights had been killed. Then he told him how they
three, companions in the Quest, had made their way in thither,
and how there they had been attacked; but their opponents
had been discomfited, as could readily be seen. When he had
heard this, he said: “Sire, be sure that you have done the best
job that ever knights performed. If you should live as Jong as
the world endures, I-do-not thik that you could render again
such a service as this. J am persuaded that Our Lord sent you
ae to perform this task. For there were no people in the world _
who hated Our Lord’so tituch as did the three brothers who held
this town. In their great disloyalty they had brought the people
of this town to a state in which they were worse than Saracens
and did nothing but what was against God and Holy Church.”
“Sire,” said Galahad, “I was very regretful that I had killed
them, supposing them to be Christians.” “Never regret what‘
you have done,” sata the worthy man, “but rejoice in it. For I
tell you truly that Our Lord is grateful to you for killing them;
for they were no Christians, but the most disloyal folk I have
ever seen; and | will tell you how I know that. ie
“A year ago the lord of this town where we are was Count
Hernolx. He had three sons, who were quite good knights-at-
arms, and the most beautiful daughter in the country-side.
ese three brothers loved their sister with such an insane love
that in their Just for her they lay with her and violated her; and
when shé dared to bewail her fate to her father, they killed her,
When the count learned of this treachery, he tried to drive them
from his presence; but not allowing that, they took their father
and cast him into prison and wounded him severely and would
have put him to qe had not a brother of his rescued him.
When they had done all this, they began to commit every kind
of treachery, for they slew clerks and priests and monks and
abbots and destroyed two chapels which used to be here. Since
188 THE QUEST OF THE HOLY GRAIL


then they have committed so many crimes that it is a wonder
that they have not been destroyed long ago. But this very
morning it happened that their father, who was lying ill or
rather, as I think, on his death-bed, sent for me to come bearing
the sacrament as you saw. And I was glad to go to him, as he had
formerly held me dear. But as soon as I had entered here, they
treated me so shamefully that if the Saracens had held me they
could not have used me worse. All this I willingly endured, for
the love of that Lord in whose despite they were acting thus.
When I came to the prison where the count was, and told him
the shameful way they had treated me, he said: ‘Never mind;
your shame as well as mine will be avenged by three servants
of Jesus Christ: for this the High Master has announced to me.’
From this you can judge that Our Lord will not be angry a
what you have done; on the contrary, you may be sure that He
sent you hither precisely to slay and discomfit them. And before
the day is over you shall see a still clearer proof that this is true.”
Then Galahad called his other companions and told them what
the good man had said to him, how the people of the place, whom
they had put to death, were the most wicked people in the
world; and he told them about the father of the three knights,
whom they held in prison, and why they did so. When Bors
heard this news, he said: “My lord Galahad, did I not telf you
that Our Lord had sent us here to take vengeance on them for
their outrageous conduct? Surely, had it not pleased Our Lord,
we three could never have killed so many men in such a short
time.” Then they had Count Hernolx brought out from his
prison ; and when they had brought him into the palace and had
placed him in the great hall, they found that he was at the point
of death. Nevertheless, as soon as he perceived Galahad, he
knew him, not because he had ever seen him before, but Our
Lord’s power enabled him. Then the count began to weep softly,
and he said: “Sire, we have long awaited your coming, Wnt
d_me upon


Woe mee


complied with his request. And as he held him in his‘bosom, the
count drooped over like one who was in the death-agony and
said: ‘Fair Father in heaven, into Thy hand I commend my
soul and spirit!’’ Then he bent over altogether and so remained
until they supposed he was dead. Yet after a while he spoke
again, and said: “Galahad, the High Master sends you word


— a o


»y Google


0 Ey
that you have so well avenged Him of His adversaries to-day
“that the company in heaven is rejoicing over it. Now you must
_betake yourself to the Cripple King as quickly as you can in ~~ |; ©
mi he may receive the cure for which he has so long ~~~ |°
waited: for he is to receive it when you arrive. So start as soon
as you have an opportunity.”

Thereupon he ceased speaking and at once the soul left his
body When those in the town who Were Still alive saw that the
count was dead, they madé a great lament, for they had loved
him dearly, And when the body was prepared with all the honour ~
Owing to Sich a high personage, they gave out the news of his
death. Then all the monks in the neighbourhood came and
buried the body in a hermitage.

Next day the three companions left there and set out upon ,
their road, Perceval’s sister still accompanying them. And they
rode until they came to the Forest Gaste. And when they had
entered the forest, they looked and saw approaching the White ,
Stag escorted by the four lions whith Perceval had ‘seen Once ¥ /
before. “Galahad,” said Perceval, “here is a wondrous sight: —
for upon my word, I have never seen a Stranger thing. I really
believe that these lions are protecting the Stag; I shall never be
Satished until [know the éxplanation of it.” “In God’s name,”
said Galahad, “I too should like to know. Let us follow him
until we know where he has his retreat. For I believe that this
adventure comes from God.” To this they willingly agreed.

Then they followed the Stag until they came into a valley,
There they looked about them and in a little thicket espied a
hermitage where an excellent old man dwelt. The Stag and the
lions having gone in, the knights who were following dismounted
upon reaching the hermitage. Turning toward the chapel, they
saw the worthy man dressed in his vestments, about to begin
the mass of the Holy Spirit. When the companions saw this,
they said that they had arrived at a fortunate moment, and
they tarried to hear the mass which the old man celebrated.
When they came to the moment when the Host was elevated,
the three companions had reason to marvel even more than
before. For, as it seemed to them, they saw the Stag become a
‘very man, seated above the altar on a beautiful rich seat, and

| they saw the lions were also changed—one into the form of a

‘tan, the Sécond into the form of an eagle, the third into the |
form of a lion, and the fourth into the form of an ox. Thus the

lions were transformed, and they had wings, so that they could


Digitized by Go gle UNIVERSITY OF VIRGINIA


190 THE QUEST OF THE HOLY GRAIL


have flown, had it pleased Our Lord. Then they seized the seat
in which the Sta was seated, two in front and two behind, and
they passed out rough a glass window which was there, though
thé window was not in the least broken or injured. When they
hhad ‘gone and those left behind saw nothing more of them, a
voice descended to them which said: “In like fashion the Son of
God entered the blessed Virgin Mary without harming or injuring
her virginity.”
When they heard these words, they fell prostrate. upon the
ground. For the voice had come upon them like a bolt of lightning
‘and a crash of thunder, and it seemed to them that the chapel
had fallen down. When they regained their strength, they saw
the worthy man was removing his vestments, having finished
the mass. So they came and asked him to tell them the meaning
of what they had witnessed. “ What have you seén?” he inquired.
“We saw,” they replied, “a stag changed into the form of a
man, and also the lions changed into something else.” When
the hermit heard this, he said to them: “ Ah! my lords, you are
welcome. Now I know by what you tell me that you are worthy
_ men and true knights, who will accomplish the Quest of the
‘Holy Grail, and who will endure great pains and labours. For
you are they to whom Our Lord (has\ revealed His secrets an
/ His mysteries. He has already shown you a part of these; Tor
in showing you the stag transformed into aicebstal aaah!
is not mortal, He has revealed to you the transformation which.
He underwent upon the cross: in that He was clothed with an
“earthly garment; that is with mortal flesh, in dying He conquered
death and secured eternal life, And it is fitting that He should.
be represented by the stag. For just as the stag is rejuvenated
by shedding its skin and a part of its coat, so was Our Lord
reborn from death to life when He parted with His tenement
_Of clay, namely, the mortal flesh which He had assumed in the
blessed Virgin’s womb. And because in the blessed Virgin there ---
was no taint of human sin, He appeared in the guise of a white —
- Stag without blemish: By those who were with Him you must,
' ‘understand the four evangelists, blessed persons who. set dawn,
‘In writing apart of the acts of Jesus Christ which He performed
‘while among us as mortal man. Learh now that never before
has any knight been able to know the truth of what this canbe.
¥et the Blessed One, the High Lord, has in this and in many
lands appeared to good men and knights in the form of a stag _
| actompanied by for ions; in order that they seeing Him might


~~
., learn a lesson thereby. But be very sure that henceforth no one
_ Shall ever see Him again in such wise.”

Upon hearing this, they wept withjoy and thanked Qur-Lard
that He had revealed this to them openly. All that day they
tarried with the hermit. And when they heard mass next
morning and were_compelled to leave, Perceval took the sword
which c zalahad had left, and said that he would carry it Hierice--
forth, leaving his own behind with the hermit.

When they had gone away and had ridden until after midday,
they drew near to a strong and well-situated castle. But they
did not enter, for their road lay in another dvection. And when
they were some distance from the principal gate, they saw
coming after them a Sl who said: “‘ My lords, is that damsel
whom you have with you a virgin?” “Upon my. word,” Bors
replied, “you may be sure she is.” When he heard that, he put
out his hand and seized the damsel’s bridle, and said: “By the
holy Cross, you shall not escape me until you have observed
the custom of this castle.” When Perceval saw that the knight
had arrested his sister in this fashion, he was much displeased
and said: “Sir knight, you are not justified in speaking thus.


* bap AP ae


whom you escort that she comply with the custom of this
castle.” Then Galahad inquired what the custom was. “Sire,”
_ one of the knights replied, “every virgin who passes here must
\ fill this basin with blood from her rig Re arm, and none may pass |
, without fulfilling this requirement.” A curse upon the false
knight,” said Galahad, “who establishéf Sich a vile and wicked”
custom! So help me God! in the case of this damsel you are in
error; for so long as I have strength and she trusts in me, she
shall not give you what you require.” “So help me God!”’ said
Perceval, “I too would sooner die!” ‘And I too,” said Bors.
“Upon my word,” the knight réplied, then’ you shall all three
die; for you could not withstand us, were you the best knights
“in the whole world.”
Then they attacked each other. And it came to pass that
before their lances were splintered, the three companions
defeated the ten knights. Then they took their swords in hand


Go gle


192 THE QUEST OF THE HOLY GRAIL


and went about slaying and cutting them down like cattle. And
they would easily have killed them all, had not sixty armed


of your own death; that would certainly be too bad, for you are
worthy men and good knights. Therefore, we would request you
to perform what we ask of you.” “Surely,” said Galahad, “you
speak in vain; for it shall never be done while she trusts in me.”
“What,” said the other, “do you wish to die?” “We have not
reached that point yet,” said Galahad, “but certainly we would
rather die than suffer such an indignity as you require.’’ Then
the great and marvellous struggle began afresh on both sides,
and the companions were attacked from évéry quarter, But
Galahad, who wielded the Sword with the strange belt, struck
out to right and left, killing all whom he reached, and performed
such wonders that all who saw him thought he could not be a
“mortal man, but rather some monster. He advanced steadily, \/
without ever turning back, and @aining ground from his enemies.
His companions aided him valiantly to right and left, so that
none could approach him except directly in front.

Thus the battle lasted until after the noon hour without the
three companions feeling any fear or losing any ground. Indeed,
they maintained themselves until dark night came on, compelling
them to separate, when those from the castle said that the
struggle would have to be given up. Then the good man, who
had before addressed the three companions, approached them
again and said: “My lords, we beseech you in love and courtesy
to bide to-night with us, promising loyally to restore you to-
morrow in as good condition as you are now. And do you know
why I say this? I am sure that as you know the facts in the case,
you will permit the damsel to do what we request of her.” “My
lords,” said the damsel, “go, since he invites you.” So they
agreed at once. Then they made a truce and all entered the
castle together. Never was such a joyful reception given to
anyone as the inhabitants gave to the three companions. They
made them dismount and remove their arms. And when they
had eaten their meal, they asked them about the custom of the
castle and how and why it had been established. Then one of
the inhabitants promptly said: “That we can easily explain
to you. = |

“The fact is that there is here a damsel to whom we and all


i


Digitized by Go gle UNIVERSITY OF VIRGINIA
the people of the country belong, as well as of this and many
another castle. Now it cameé t0 pass two years ago that she fell


ill by Our Lord’s desire. And when she had languished long,
we studied to see what illness she had. And we perceived that
she was full of the disease called leprosy. Then we sent for all


the physicians from near and far, but none of them could
enlighten us regarding her malady. At last ‘a wise man informed


us that if we could get.a_basin full of blood from a damsel who


a_virgin both in spirit and in fact, provided she were the


daughter of a king and queen and a sister to the chaste Perceval,
and then if we should bathe her with this blood, she would be _
promptly cured. When we heard this, we made it a rule that no


damsel should pass by here, provided she were a virgin, without
our getting a basin of her blood. So we set guards at the castle
gates to stop all those damsels who passed this way. Now you
have heard how the custom of the castle was established as
you have encountered it. And now you may do about it what
you please.”

Then the damsel summoned the three companions and said
to them: “My lords, you see that this damsel is ill; and that
her illness or recovery depends upon me. Now tell me what to
do.” Tit God’s name,” Said Galahad, “if you who are so young
and tender do this thing, you cannot avoid death yourself.”
“Tn faith,” she replied, “were I to die for the sake of this cure,


It would be a gréat honotir to mé and to all my kin. And I ought.


to do it, partly for your sake and partly for theirs. For if you
fight again to-morrow as you have done to-day; greater damage
will inevitably result than from my death. So I tell you that
I shall comply with their desire, and the strife will cease. So I
pray you for God’s sake to grant me your permission.” Then
they grew very sad.
~ Then the damsel summoned the people of the place and said
to them: “Rejoice and be glad. For there will be no battle
to-morrow: I promise you that to-morrow I shall carry out the
obligation to you as damsels are required to do.” When the
people heard this, they thanked her very heartily, and began
to rejoice and make merry more than they had done before.
They served the companions to the extent of their power and
gave them the richest beds they could. That night the three
companions were well received, and they would have been still
more so, had they been willing to take all that was offered them.
Next morning, when they had heard mass, the damsel came


Original from


Digitized by Gor gle UNIVERSITY OF VIRGINIA


LL


194 THE QUEST OF THE HOLY GRAIL


to the palace and ordered them to bring in the damsel who was
ill and who was to be cured by her blood. And they said that
they would bring her gladly. Then they went to get her in the
room where she was. When the companions beheld her, they


she could live in such distress. When they saw her enter, they
arose and made her sit down with them. Then at once she bade
the damsel make the sacrifice which she had promised _her,
And she said she was ready to do so. Then the di

a basin to be brought. When it was brought, she bared her arm


and had one of her veins punctured with a little blade as sharp.


as a razor~ Thé blood spurted out at once, and she crosse


amsel ordered


herself and commended herself into Our Lord’s keeping, adding
to the lady: “Lady, I have submitted to death that you might
be healed. For oie ay ‘Yor my soul, “for Tam at_.


death's door”

Upon speaking thus, she fainted from loss of blood, for the
basin was already full. The companions ran to support her
and to stanch the flow of blood. When she had lain in a swoon
for some time and was able to speak again, she said to Perceval:
“Ah! fair brother, Perceval, I am dying that this damsel may
be healed. [_pray you not to bury my. body in this country,
but as soon as I shall have passed away, place mé in‘a little
boat jn the nearest port, and set me adrift
carry me. And I tell you that you cannot so quickly reach the


city of Garraz))whither you must go after the Holy Graj], but
you will find ‘me already arrived at the f f the
My“honour have my body buried in the hurl Do you know
why I require this of you? Because Ga


lie there too.”


’
_ When Perceval heard this, he wept and willingly promised


'to_do what she had said. Then she added: “Start to-morrow,
-and let each one go his own way until fortune shall unite you
‘at the Cripple King’s. For this is the will of the High Master,
‘ who issues the command through me in order that you ma
ohey.” And they said that they would do so. Then she requeste
‘to have her Saviour brought in. So they sent for a worthy
hermit who dwelt in a grove quite near the castle. He did not
elay his coming, for he saw that the need was urgent. So he
came to the damsel, and when she saw him approach, she
stretched out her hands toward her Saviour, and very devoutly


—= a
whither chance may


‘


ad and you shall:


if
eived Him. Then she died, andthe companions .were. so.
h coul


overcome with grief that they thought they d never


e comiorted.


That v the lady was cured. For as soon as she had
ashed in the(blood pf the holy damsel, she was cleansed and
ed of her Ieprosy, and her flesh was restored to beauty,


which before was dark and horrible to behold. The three com-
ions and all the people there were overjoyed at this. Then
ey did for the damset-what she had requ , removing from
the body all that was necessary and emb ing it as richly as
if it had been the hody of an em eror. [hen they took a baat
covered it with a rich silken cloth and set up a handsome
ban Whe they had furnished the boat as handsomely
as they could, they laid the damsel’s body in it, and then
launched. the boat. uponthé sea. Then Bors said to Perceval
that he regretted that there was no _paner with the body by
which the damsel might be identified and the manner of her
[have placed by the pillow a paper which tells of her family,
anc oa she met hey death: and of alfthe adventures which
she had helped us to accomplish, So that if she should be found
in some foreign country, her identity will be known.” And
Galahad said that he had done well. “For someone may find
‘the body,” sated hé; “who-witt-render it greater honour for
knowing the truth about her station and her life.”

So long as the people of the castle could see the ship, they
stood on the shore, most of them weeping softly, for the damsel
had done a very generous. act in. sacrificing her life to heal a
lady Of a strange country, and they remarked that never had
a dame done such a thing before. And when they could no
longer see the ship, they went back into the castle. But the
companions said that they would not enter it again, for love of
the damsel whom they had lost there. So they stayed outside
and asked the inhabitants to bring out their arms to them,
which they promptly did.

When the three companions had mounted and were about
to start on their way, they saw that the sky was darkened and
the clouds were full of rain; so they betook themselves to a
Grape’ beside the road. Putting their horses outside in a shed,
they went in, seeing that a heavy storm was imminent. Then
it began to thunder and lighten and the bolts fell as thick_as
rain upon the castle. All day the storm raged so wildly over the
St ear


196 THE QUEST OF THE HOLY GRAIL


castle that fully halt ofthe walle w were overthrown and cast
to earth, at which they were filled with consternation. For


they would not have supposed that in a year’s time the castle
could be destroyed by such a storm, as they beheld it from outside.

When the weather had cleared after vespers, the companions,
saw_a knight fleeing before them; he was grievously wounded
in the body, and he kept saying g frequently: “Ah! God, help
me, for now am I in need.” After him followed_another knight
and a dwarf, who both cried to him from afar: “You are dead,
‘there is no 5 “hetp for you.” But he raised his hands to heaven
and cried: “Fair Lord God, help me and let me not die now,
so that my life may not desert me in such great trouble as this
seems to be!”’

When the companions saw the knight who was thus lamenting
to Our Lord, they were filled with pity, and Galahad said that
he was going to help him. “TI wish to do so, sire,’ said Bors;
“you need not bestir yourself on behalf of a single knight. ”
So he said that he would stand aside, since he so desired. Where-
upon, Bors mounted his horse, saying: “Fair lords, if I do not
return, do not give up your quest on my account, but resume
your journey in the morning, each going his own way, and
continue your wanderings until Our Lord unites us all three
at the Cripple King’s.” And they told him to set out in Our
Lord’s safe-keeping, and they two would start the next morning.
So he left at once and followed the knight to help him who was
thus lamenting to Our Lord. But now the story ceases to speak
of him, and returns to the two companions who tarried in
the chapel.
Ah hy cee! |g
CHAPTER XIII


Now the story tells how Galahad and Perceval lay in the chapel
all that night, beseeching Our Lord to guard and gui
wherever he might go. The next morning, when the day was
bright and clear, and the storm was over, and the weather had
turned fair, they mounted. their steeds.and rode toward_the
castle to see how it had fared with those inside. And when they
came to the gate, they found everything burned and the walls |
threw down. Upon going inside, they marvelled still more
at man or. woman who. was not dead. Up and down
they searched, exclaiming over the great damage done and the
great loss of life. When they came to the principal palace, they
found the walls overthrown, and the partitions co apsed , and
the knights lying dead here and there, just as Our Lord had
blasted and smitten them for the sinful life they had led. When
the companions saw all this, they said that it was caused by
Heaven’s vengeance. “It would never have happened thus,”
said they, “had it not been to appease the wrath of the Creator
af the world.” While they were conversing thus, they heard a
ygice which said to them: “This is revenge. fax.the.blood of the
virtuous maiden, which has been shed here for the earthly cure
of a wicked sinner.” When they heard these words, they said —
‘that Qur Lord’s vengeance is a marvellous thing, and that any
man is mad who transgresses His will either for death or life.
When the two companions had gone about the castle for some
time, looking at the devastation caused by death, they found
beside a chapel a cemetery full of trees in bloom and of green
grass, and in it were many handsome sepulchres—perhaps as
many as sixty. It was so beautiful and peaceful that it did not
seem that any storm had visited it. Such, indeed, was the case,
for there lay the bodies of the maidens who had died for the
lady’s sake. When they had entered the cemetery, mounted
“as they were, they came upon the tombs, and found on each
the name of her who lay within. So they went about reading
the inscriptions until they discovered that there were buried
there twelve damsels, all daughters of kings and sprung from
ee ee ne 4 197, ere
1988 THE QUEST OF THE HOLY GRAIL


high lineage. At the sight of this, they said that it was indeed
an evil and wicked custom which had been maintained in the
castle, and that the people of the couritry had suffered it too
long, for many a rich family had been cast down and brought
to naught through the death of these maidens.

When the two companions had tarried there until the hour
of prime and had seen enough, they left and rode until they
came to a forest. Being about to enter it, Perceval said to
Galahad: “To-day we must separate and each go his own way.
So IT commend you to Our Lord’s keeping, and may He grant
that we soon meet again. For I have never found a man whose
company seemed so sweet and agreeable as yours; so this part-
ing grieves me much more than you may suppose. Yet it must
be so, since it pleases Our Lord.” When he removed his helmet,
Galahad did the same, and-they kissed at parting, for great was
their love for one another: this gaa clearly in their death,
for one barely survived the other. Thus the companions separated
on the edge of the forest, called by the people of the country
Aube, and each one went his way. Now the story ceases to
speak of them, and returns to Lancelot, of whom nothing has
been said for a long time.
Jan Uk ol
CHAPTER XIV


Now the story tells how, when Lancelot had come to the_river
Marcoise, he saw himself shut in by~three things that caused
him great anxiety. On one side lay the great pathless forest;
on either hand were two lofty ancient rocks; and in front of
him was the river deep and dark. These three things inclined
him not to move from where he was, but to await God’s mercy:
so he tarried there until night fell. ‘When night had taken the
place of day, Lancelot removed his arms and lay down beside
them, commending himself into Our Lord’s keeping and praying
the best he knew that Our Lord would not forget him but would
send him the help of which his soul and body stood in need.
-Having.said this, he fell asleep and his heart thought no more
of Our-Lord_than_of purely earthly things, And when he was
asleep, there came a_ voice which spoke to him: “Lancelot,
arise, take thy arms, and enter the first boat thou shalt find. 9
When he heard this, he ‘re all all-over.an nd opened his eyes’ \/
_and saw all about him such a great light that he thought it
Inust | be day; but presently it duappéared so that he did not
‘know what became of it. Then he raised his hand and crossed
himself and, commending himself to Our Lord, he arme
self. When he was completely armed with his sword girt on, he
looked toward the river bank and saw a boat without any ‘sail
or oar; so he went toward it afid entered in. As soon as he was
on board, it seemed to him that he smelt all the sweet. odours
in the world, and that he was nourished with all the good things .
ever tasted by mortal man. Then he was a hundred times more |
contented than before, for he appeared to have all that he
_ever desired in his life: wherefore he gave thanks to Our Lord.
Then he knelt in his boat and said: “Fair Father Jésus Christ,
I know not whence all this comes, unless it be from Thee. For
I now see that my heart is possessed by such joy and comfort
that I cannot tell whether Iam on earth or in the terrestrial
paradise se.” Then Hé léanéd upon the edge of the boat and fell
asleep in great happiness,
~All that night Lancelot slumbered in such peace that it


199


la ina rom
one Go gle UNIVERSITY OF VIRGINIA


200 THE QUEST OF THE HOLY GRAIL


seemed to him that he was not the same man as before, but
ed. In the morning when he awoke, he looked about him
and saw in the middle of the boat a very beautiful rich bed.
And in the middle of the bed lay a lifeless maiden, whose face.
alone was uncovered. At the sight of her, he stood up and
crossed himself and thanked Our Lord for affording him such
company. Then he drew near, seeking to learn who she was and
of what lineage. He looked at her up and down until he espied
a_letter beneath her head. He put out his hand to take it, and
on unfolding it, found writing in it which said: “This damsel
was the sister of Perceval le Gallois, and_was always a virgin
in thought and in deéd. It-was she who changed the belt on the
Sword with the strange belt which Galahad, son of Lancelot of
the Lake, now carries.” Farther on in the létter he found the
story of her life and the manner of her death, and how the three
companions, Galahad, Bors and Perceval, had wrapped her
thus in-a-shroud and placed her on the ship at the bidding of
the divine voice.) When he had learned the truth of all this, he
was much happier than before; for he was delighted to know
that™Bors and Galahad were together. So he put the letter
back in its place, and coming to the edge of the boat, he prayed
Our Lord that before the conclusion of the Quest he might
encounter-Galahad his son, and see him and talk and rejoice
with him. : en
While Lancelot was engaged in prayer on this account, he
looked and saw that the ship had arrived at an ancient rock
near a little chapel, before whose door sat an old white-haired—
man. As‘s60n as he was néar enough to make him hear, he calléd
out a greeting to him. And the worthy man replied to his saluta-
tion more vigorously than Lancelot expected he could do. Then
he arose from where he was sitting and came to the edge of the
boat, sat down on a mound of earth, and asked Lancelot what
chance had brought him there. So he told him the facts about
himself and how fortune had brought him where he thought
he had never been before. Then the old man asked him who
he was, and he told him his name. When he heard that he was
Lancelot of the Lake, he marvelled greatly how he happened
to be in this ship. So he inquired who was with him. “Sire,”
said Lancelot, “come and see, if you please.” Then he went on
board and found the damsel and the fetter. When he had read
it through and had learned of the Sword with the strange belt, _
he said: “Ah! Lancelot, I did not expect to live to learn the


Original fror


ST eee en oe ' | ei a
= aaa Gos gle UNIVERSITY OF VIRGINIA


ee ae os Fe og .


THE QUEST OF THE HOLY GRAIL 2or


e of this sword. Now you may call yourself unfortunate,
since you were not on hand to achieve this noble adventure in
which these three worthy men have been engaged, who were
sometime reckoned to be less valiant than you. But now
it is clearly shown that they are more worthy and better
knights toward God than you have been, Yet, whatever you
may have done in the past, I am sure that if you would keep

“henceforth from mortal sin and opposition to your Creator,
you could still find pity and mercy in Him in whom all pi
dwells, ‘who - has calle tot

me now how you came to enter this ship.”” When he had told

him, the ortrwianrr replied tr tears: “Lancelot, know that Our
Lord has shown you. great. fayour.when He brought you into

é company of this noble and sainted maid. See now that you
be lienceforth chaste in thought and in deed, so that your
chastity may accord with hers. Thus your companionship may
endure.”’ And he promised him truly with heart unfeigned that
he would never do aught which he thought displeasing in his
Creator’s eyes. ‘“‘Go now, for you must not longer delay. For,
if God will, you shall reach the dwelling where you wish so
much to be.” “And you, sire,” said Lancelot, “do you stay
here?” “Yes,” he replied, “for so it must be.”

While they were speaking thus, the wind struck the ship and
carried it away from the rock. And when they saw that ‘they
were being separated from each other, they commended each
other to God, and the_old man yeturned to his chapel. But
before he left the rock, he called out: “Ah! Lancelot, servant


af Jesus Christ, for God’s sake do not forget me, but. ask Galahad,


the true knight, whom you will soon have in your company, to
ray to Our Lord in His gentle pity to have mercy_on me!”
hus the good man shoute after Lancelot who was very glad
to hear what he said, that Galahad was soon to be his companion.
So he came to the edge of the boat and prostrated himself upon


his elbows and knees, and addressed his prayers.and orisons. to


\


d you back t6 the way of truth, But teil”


Our Lord that He would lead him where he might do what was _


pleasing to Him’


Thus was Lancelot a month and more in the ship without once
leaving it. And if anyone should ask upon what he lived all that


time, having found nothing in the boat to eat, the story answers

that the High Lord who fed the people of Israel on manna in

the desert, and who caused water to issue from the rock to slake

their thirst, sustained this man too; thus, each morning as soon
m |
try oc


5 ; ‘ . = rt '


202 THE QUEST OF THE HOLY GRAIL


as he had finished his prayer and had supplicated the High
Master and requested Him not to forget him, but to send him
his bread as the father ought to do for his son, every time that
Lancelot made this prayer, he found himself so replete and]
furnished with the grace of the Holy Spirit that it seemed to
“him that he had tasted of all the pleasant meats in the world.
"When he had gone thus a long time without once leaving the
ship, it happened one night that he came to land by the edge of

a forest. Then he listened and heard a knight approaching on _
horseback and making a noise crashing through the woods. When
he came to the edge of the forest and saw the boat, he dismounted
and, after removing the saddle and bridle, let the horse go where

it wished. Then he came to the ship and crassed_hi

came on board completely armed.

When Lancelot saw the knight draw near, he did not run to
take his arms, thinking of the promise which the hermit had
made about Galahad who would be with him and bear him
company a while. So he arose and said: “‘ Welcome, sir knight.”
But the other was amazed to hear him speak, thinking there
was no living soul aboard; so he answered in his astonishment:
“Good fortune to you, sire, and in God’s name, if it may be,
tell me who you are, for I greatly desire to know.”’ So he told
“his name, and said he was Lancelot of the Lake. “Then truly
be welcome, sire,” said he; “it is God’s truth that I desired to
see you and have you as a companion above all others in the
world. And so it is natural, for 1t is from you that I am sprung.”
Then the knight removed his helmet and set it mrthe middte of
the boat. And Lancelot asked of him: “ Ah! Galahad, is it you?”
“Yes, sire,” said he, “it is truly I.” When he heard that, he ran
to him with outstretched arms, and they began to embrace
each other and rejoice in a way I could not describe. —

Then each asked the other how he was. Then each told of the
adventures which had befallen him since they had left the court.:
They continued thus in conversation until day dawned_and the
sun rose next morning. When the day was bright and clear, they
could see and recognise each other, and they began to be ex- |
ceeding glad. When Galahad beheld the damsel who. lay. in.the
boat, he recognised her as the one whom he had seen before, So
he asked Lancelot if he knew who she was. “Yes,” he answered,
“T know full well. For the letter by her head clearly reveals the
truth. But for God’s sake tell me whether you have achieved the
adventure of the Sword with the strange belt.” “ Yes, sire,”’ said


_———~
é¢


Vv een the Sw hold it here.” When,
Lancelot looked at it, he knew at once that this was it; and he
‘seized it by the hilt and began to kiss the pommel and the
scabbard and the blade. Then he asked Galahad to tell him how ©
and where he had found it. And he told him all about the ship -
which Solomon’s wife had had made, and the three planks, and
how Eve, _the.first mother, had planted the first tree,whose
“shoots were by nature coloured white and green and_red. And
‘when he had told him all about the ship and the inscriptions
they had found in it, Lancelot confessed that never_had such
a high adventure come to any knight as had befallen him.
ncelot and Galahad abode in this ship for half a year and '1
more, attentive to serve “Mer Creator heartily Mai “a time
they came to strange islands far from human kind, where nothing
but wild beasts dwelt, where they encountered and achieved
marvellous adventures, partly by their awn. prowess and partly
by the grace of the Holy Spirit which always aided them. But
ot these things the story of the Holy Grail makes no mention,
for it would take too long to tell all that befell them.

After Easter, in the spring when all things turn green and
the birds sing in the woods their sweet songs in welcome of the
pleasant season, and everything turns more to joy than at any
other season—about that time it happened one day at noon
that they came to land at the edge of a forest in front of a cross.
Then they saw a kniglit come forth from the forest armed in
wept pomous, fh ; he was richly mounted himself and led another
white horse by the bridle. When he saw the ship come fo land,
he came to the place as fast as he could, saluted the two knights
in the name of the High Master, and said to Galahad: “Sir
knight, you have been with your father long enough. Leave the *
ship and mount this fair white horse and go whither chance

. may lead You, stéking and accomplishing the adventures of the
kingdom of Logres.% . eg) ee


~ ~When he heard this, he ran to his father, kissed him tenderly,
and said to him weeping: “Fair gentle sire, I know not if I sha
ever see you again. I commend you to Jesus Christ Himself, and
may He preserve you in His service.” Then they both began to
_weep- When Galahad had left the ship and had mounted, there
came a voice between them which said to them: “Now let each
one think of doing right, for you shall not see each other again
-before the great and terrible day when Our Lord will render to
every man according to his deserts: that will be on the day of
204 THE QUEST OF THE HOLY GRAIL


ae aaa When Lancelot heard these words, he said in tears
to Galahad: “Son, since I must os from you forever, pray
the Shah ad that He may not let me quit His service, but
that He may keep me as His servant both on earth and in
heaven.” Then Galahad replied: ‘Sire, no prayer-a


er. 15-26-petent.
as your own. So do not forget yourself.”” Then they parted, and
Galahad entered the fortst—tomte-preat, and wonderful] |


‘Jin Ca O bfritg-him where he might see something)of the
oly Grail. = aia
One evening it chanced that he came to land in front of a
fair rich,town well situated; and in the rear of the town there —
“was a gate which opened toward the water, and which was
always open day and night. No one who dwelt there stood on |
guard, for there were always two lions. opposite each other f ©’.
guarding the entrance, so that anyone wishing to pass through
that gate could do so only by passing between them. When the
ship came to land there, the moon was shining so brightly that
one could see far and near. And straightway he heard a.yoice v
which said: “‘ Lancelot, leave the ship and enter this town, where
thou shalt find much of what thou seekest and hast yearned so.
ardently to behold.” Upon hearing this, he ran at once and
seized his arms, leaving behind nothing which he had brought
with him. And when he was on shore, he came to the gate and
found the two lions; then he thought that he could not escape
without a fight, so he drew his sword and prepared to defend
himself. But as soon as he had drawn his sword, he looked up
ai ed a burning’ hand which struck him so forcibly on the
arm that his sword few from his hand. ‘Then he heard a voice
“Saying: “ AhT man poor in faith and trust, why dost thou Trust
more in thy hand than in thy Creator? Thou art very ged


{
fe,


not to believe that He in whose seryice thou-art-engaged can
avail more than thy arms!”

"Lancelot was so abashed by these words and by the hand that
had struck him that he fell to the ground stunned, and was so
overcome that he did not know whether it was day or night.
But after a while he stood up and said: “Ah! fair Father Jesus
Christ, I thank you and adore you for deigning to reprove
me for my misdeeds. Now I see clearly that you regard me


_/


Go gle
our servant, since you have shown me this token of m
lack of faith.” ~ z j |
Then Lancelot. took.his sword and replaced it in the srabberd, \" oo
saying he would never draw it out again, but would trust.in the.) 4°, |
mercy of Our Lord. “And if it please Him that I die, it will be
the salvation of my soul. And if it so be that I escape death, it
will redound to my greater honour.’”’ Then he crossed himself
upon his forehead and, commending himself to Our Lord,
approached the Jions. When they saw him drawing near, they
remained passive and gave no evidence of intending to do him
harm. Ga he passed between them without their touching him.
And he came to the main thoroughfare and walked up through
the town until he reached the citadél. Everyone had retired
throughout the town, for it might have been midnight by now.
He went up the steps until he found himself*in the main hall,
alarmed as he was. And when he was upstairs, he looked
everywhere, but saw no man or woman, which greatly surprised
him, for he could not believe that such a fine palace and such
handsome apartments should be deserted. So he passed on and
decided he would continue until he found someone who wa
tell him where he was, for he did not even know what country
he was in. | :
o Lancelot kept on until he reached a chamber of which
the door was closed and locked. He put his hand on the door
and tried to open it, but in vain; he even made a great effort,
but he could do nothing to effect an entrance. Then he listened,
and heard a vaice, chanting so sweetly that it seemed to be the
voice rather of some heavenly than of a mortal creature. And
the voice seemed to be saying: “Glory, praise and honour to.
Thee, Father in heaven!” When Lancelot heard what the voice
was saying, his heart was melted; and he knelt beside the cham-
_ ber door, for he thought the Holy Grail Tight be inside. So he
r Sweet sus Christ, if I ever did
aught which pleased Thee, fair Lord, in Thy pity do not bear_


ME any grudge, but show ‘me some revelation of what Iam.
\ “Seeking. :
‘As soon as Lancelot had said this, he looked in front of him


and saw the door of the chamber open, and through it there |
shone as bright a light as if the sun were lodged therein. Because /
of the bright light which issued forth, the whole building was _
illuminated*as if all the candles in the world were lighted. When .


he saw this, he was very happy:and felt such a desire to see
206 THE QUEST OF THE HOLY GRAIL


-came. that he forgot all else. So he
approached the chamber door and was about to enter in, when
a voice said to him: “Flee, Lancelot, do not enter, for you must_

| not do so. If you go in despite this prohibition, you shall repent
of it.” When Lancelot heard this, he drew back sorrowfully,.
like one who would fain go in but yet refrained because of the
prohibition he had heard.

Yet he looked into the room and saw the Holy Vessel covered.
.with a red silk cloth. And all around he saw angels serving the
Holy_Vessel, some holding silver censers and lighted candles,
others holding crosses ane altar vessels, and there was none_
who wa not doing his part.“In front of the Holy Vessel there
sat an old man dressed. like a priest, and it appeared that he
was assisting at the sacrament of the mass. When he was about
to elevate the body of Oiir Lord; it seemed to Lancelot that
above the good man’s hands there appeared the figures of three”
men in the air, two of whom placed the youngest of them in
the priest’s hands ; and-ttius‘he raised him on high and appeared -
to manifest him to the people. aki

' There Lancelot,-who beheld these things, was not a little
astonished: for he saw that the priest was so burdened with the
re he held up, that it seemed he must succumb beneath the
weight. When he saw this, he wished to go to aid him, for he
thought that none of the others present had any intention to
lend a hand. Then his desire to come forward was so great that


——


he forgot the prohibition which had been laid upon him not to


ee a ey:


seize him and carry hirraway.And when they had roughly
picked timr-up,; thty cast him out of the room and _deserte
him there. a :

_The next morning, when the day appeared bright and clear,


“th he place aros Lancelot lying Qelore
the chamber door and they marvelled greatly what the cause
could be. When they bade him rise, he showed no sign of hearing
them and did not stir. Thereupon, they supposed that he was
dead. So they quickly removed his arms and examined him
er to find out if he was alive. And they found that he was
ot dead, but full of life; but he had no power to speak or to
utter a word, but lay hké a Clod of arth. So they picked him
up bodily in their arms and carried him into one of the rooms,
where they laid him upon a very rich bed, far from the crowd,
that he might not be disturbed by any~noise. And they took
the best care of him they could, remaining beside him all day,
and often speaking to him to see if he would reply. But he
answered never a word and gave the appearance of never having
been able to speak. They examined his pulse and his veins, and
thought it very strange That a knight who was fully alive could
not speak to them; but some said that they could not explain
the cause for this unless it was some vengeance or manifestation
of Our Lord. ee eer es - ~
~~Alt that day the people stayed with Lancelot, as well as the
third and fourth, some saying that he was dead, and others
that he was alive. “In God’s name,” said an old man who was
present and who knew something of medicine, “T tell you truly
that he is not dead, but as full of life as the healthiest of us all;
so my advice 1s that he be cared for well and richly until Our
Lord restores him to his customary health; then we shall know
the truth about bim, who he is and from what land. And truly,
if I ever knew anything aright, I believe that_he has. been one.
of the good knights in the world, and shall be so yet again, if
Our Lord wills: he need not yet be afraid of death, it seems to —
me, though ¥ do not say that he may not languish for some
time in his present state.’”’ Thus spake the old man of Lancelot,
as one who was very wise. And every word he said turned out
to be true. For they cared for Lancelot for twenty-four days
and nights, and in all that time he neither drank nor ate, nor
did a word come from his mouth, nor did he stir foot or hand’ :
or any other member, nor did he give any evidence of being alive.
Yet every time they examined him, they concluded that he
was alive. So all the men and women pitied him, saying: “God!
what a pity it is about this knight, who appears to have been
so valiant and excellent and handsome, and now God has
reduced him to this state of confinement!” Thus they often
spoke of Lancelot and wept for him; yet, with all their inquiries,


~


they did not recognisé him as Lancelot.“Nevertheless, many
208 THE QUEST OF THE HOLY GRAIL


_ knights were there who had often seen him and ought to have
| recognised him. |

Thus Lancelot lay for twenty-four days while the people

of the place awaited his death. But on the twenty-fourth day

‘' about noon he opened his~eyes. And when he saw the people,

he began to lament bitterly, and said: “Ah! God, why have.


-


“you awakened me so soon? be now I was more comfortable
ant -stratt-ever be again! Ah! fair Father_Jesus Chns }
could ever be so favoured ex_so worthy as to behold‘ clearly


gaze and my sight befouled by worldly lusts were. blinded?”
‘Wherrthose Who surrounded Lancelot heard these words, they
were very joyful and asked him what he had seen. “I have
seen,” said he, “sych great- wontlers and . blessings. that ny.
tongue could not reveal them to you, nor could my heart itself
conceive of them, so great are they. For they are not earthl


sin and thisfortune, I should have.

sight of my eyes and the strength of my body because of the
great disloyalty which God saw in me.”

en Lancelot said to those who were present: “Fair lords, I

marvel greatly how I happen to be here. For I do not recollect

how or in what manner I got here.” Then they told him all

they had seen of him, and how he had been with them twenty-

four days without their knowing whether he was dead or alive.

When he heard this, he began to consider the meaning of his

( having continued so long in that state. And finally he reflected


Te gee errr etn


that he had served the devil for twenty-four years, wherefore
- Our Lord had punished him by depriving him of the strength
of his body and members for twenty-four days. Then Lancelot \
looked beside him and espied the_hair_ shirt which he had worn
for nearly half a year, but of which he was now deprived. He
grieved sorely about this, for he thought that he had violated
his vow in this respect. Then they asked him how he felt, and |
he replied that he felt sound and healthy, thank God. “But
for God’s sake tell me where I am,” he said. And they told him '
that he was in the castle of Corbenyc. |
Then there came a damsel carrying’ to Lancelot a fresh Beye
_linen robe; but he would not put it on, preferring the hair |
shirt, Whe those who were about him saw this, they ae
r “Sir knight, you may well give up the hair shirt, for your |
' quest is at an end; there is no use of your striving further in |


/
° r , .
oa
\


THE QUEST OF THE HOLY GRAIL 209 | i


sure that you shall see no
_seen, Now may


search of the Holy Grail ;


1S
us those who are destined to see more of it!” But Lancelot


would not be persuaded to give it up, but took the hair shirt
and put it on, and over it the linen robe, and then 4

robe which was] brouglit’ to him.” When he was dressed and
apparelled, all the people came to see him and considered
marvellous what God had done with him. Then as soon as they
looked at him, they recognised him and said: “Ah! my lord
aOR io is it you?” And he said that it was. Then great and


rous joy was felt. And the news spread until King Pellés


Ae ine


heard of it; for a knight said to him: “Sire, I can tell you
ma ng . ondertull ” About what?” the king inquired.
‘“Upon my word, this knight who has lain here so long like a
dead man has just now got up sound and healthy; well, know
that he is my Jord Lancelot of the Lake,” When the. king
heard that, he was very glad and went to visit him. And when
Lancelot saw him approaching, he rose’ to meet him and
welcomed him, and received him joyfully. The king told bim
about his fair daughter who was dead, and who was the
f Galahad. Lancelot was much distressed, because she
was such a gentlé’ woman and was descended from such a
noble line.

Four days more Lancelot tarried there, which caused the king
great joy, for he had long desired to have him with him. But on
the fifth day when they were seated at dinner it befell that the
Holy Grail had filled the tables so marvelloisly that no one
could imagine a more bounteous provision. While they were
eating, something happened which they regarded as a great


ea:


‘marvel. For they saw plainly that the doors of the palace closed _-


of themselves without anyone touching them: at which they


were greatly amazed. Then a knight fully armed, and mounted |


on & mighty steed, appeared before the main door and began
to shout: “Open, open!™"But those within would not open for
him, Still he continued to shout, and he annoyed them so that
the king himself left the table and. went to one of the palace
windows lookiig” out on the place ‘where the knight was. He
looked at him, and seeing him stationed before the door, he


said to him: “Sir knight, you shall not enter here; no one who \


is seated so high’as you shall enter so long as the Holy Grail


As here. But begont to aon own country, for you do not belong |


to the companions of the Quest, but are one of those who have
210 THE QUEST OF THE HOLY GRAIL


erted i l d have enlisted in‘ the.

evil’s service.” .. -

When the knight heard that, he was greatly distressed, and
was so sorrowful that he knew not what to do. So he turned away;
but the king called him back and said to him: “Sir knight,
since you have come thus far, I pray you to tell me who you
are.” “Sire,” he replied, “I am from_the ki
my name is Hector des Mares, and I am brother to my lord
“Lancelot of the Lake.” “In God’s name,” said the king, “now
I know you well, and am more sorry than before; I did not care
much before, but now I care indeed because of my affection for
your brother who is here within.” |

When Hector heard that his brother was inside, the man in
the world whom he respected most because of he love he bore
him, he exclaimed: “Ah! God, now my shame is doubled an
increases more and more! Never again shall I be so bold as to
come into my brother’s presence, since I have proved derelict
where the worthy and true knights will never be found wanting.
Truly spake the good man on the hill who expounded to me and}
my lord Gawain the meaning of our dreams!”’

Thereupon Hector left the courtyard and rode away through
the town as fast as his horse could carry him. And when the

_ townspeople saw him flee, they cried after him, taunting him
_and cursing the hour he was born, and calling him a bad and
faithless knight; and this made his heart so sore that he wished
“he were dead. He fled away out of the town and struck into
the forest where it appeared to be thickest. Then King Pellés
came back to Lancelot and told him about his brother, which
grieved Lancelot so deeply that he did not know what he
ought to do. The others present could not fail to mark his
feelings, when they saw the tears running down his cheeks, So
the king regretted having spokefi to him about his brother;
for he would not have done it for anything had he thought

that Lancelot would have taken it so to heart.

When they had eaten, Lancelot requested of the king that
his arms might be brought to him, for he would fain journey
to the kingdom of Logres where he had not béén for ‘over a _.
year. “Sire>*-satd the king, “I beg of you tot God's sake to
pardon me for telling you about your brother.” And he said
that he pardoned him willingly. Then the king ordered his
arms to be brought, and when they were brought, he took
them. When he was equipped and ready to mount, the king
THE QUEST OF THE HOLY GRAIL arr


had brought into the middle of the courtyard a strong swift
horse, which he mounted at the king’s request. Then, when

e had mounted and had bidden farewell to the people of the
place, he departed and rode far through strange lands.

One night it happened that Lancelot was lodged in an abbey
of White Fnars, who Showed” him sréat honour because he
was a knight-errant. In the morning, when he had heard mass
and was about to leave the monastery, he looked to the right
and saw a rich fair tomb which had been recently constructed,
as he thought. So he turned in that direction to see what it
was. And when he drew near, he saw that it:was so handsome
that he knew that some rich prince must lie beneath it. When
he looked at the head, he saw an inscription which said: “Here
lies King Bademagus of Gorre, whom Gawain, King Arthur’s
nephew, killed,” When he learned this, he sorrowed not a
little, for he loved with a great love King Bademagus. If it had
been any other than my lord Gawain who had killed him, he
could not have escaped paying the penalty of death. As it was,
he wept tenderly and made lament, saying that this was indeed
a heavy blow to those of King Arthur’s household as well as
to many another worthy man. |

That day Lancelot tarried there grieving much and in distress
for love of the good man who had shown him many an honour.
The next morning, when he was armed, he mounted his steed
and, commending the friars to God’s keeping, he resumed his
journey. And in his wanderings he came by chance to the tombs
where the swords were set up. As soon as he beheld this strange
sight, he rode inside on his horse and examined the tombs.
Then he left there and rode until he came to King Arthur’s
court where all gave him a joyous welcome as soon as they
caught sight of him; for greatly had they desired his return
and that of the other companions, very few of whom had as
yet come back. And those who had returned were ashamed
of having accomplished nothing in the Quest. Now the story
ceases to speak of them all, and returns to Galahad, the son
of Lancelot of the Lake.


riginal fron
Digitized by Go gle UNIVERSITY OF VIRGINIA


i


CHAPTER XV


Now the story tells how Galahad, after he had separated from
Lancelot, rode for many a day as chance led him, one hour
forward ‘and another hour back again, until he came to an
abbey where King Mordrain was; and when he heard that the
_king was waiting for the Good Knight, he thought he. would
go to see him. So the next day, as soon as he had heard mass,
he went where the king was. As soon as he got. inside, the king,
who for a long time had lost his sight and the strength of his
body by Our Lord’s will, immediately regained his sight when
he drew near him. And at once he sat up straight and said to
Galahad: “Galahad, servant of God, true knight whose azrival
IT have so long awaited, embrace me ‘and allow me to rest upon.
thy breast, in order that I may pass away in. thy arms; for thou
art pure and chaste above all other knights, as the fleur-de-lys,
which is the emblem of »irginity, is whiter ee all other
flowers. Thou art like the lily in purity, anc e the |
for perfect virtue and faming he; for the flame of the Hol y
Spirit is so kindled and warm in thee that my flesh, which
was all dead and worn out, 1s now all rejuvenated and healthy.”
When Galahad heard these ‘words, he sat down by the head
of the king’s bed, and took him in his arms upon his lap, because
the good man wished to rest there. Then the king reclined upon
him and, putting his arms about him, began to embrace him,
and said: “Fair Father Jesus Christ, now I have my desire
fulfilled! Now I beseech Thee to come to fetch me where I am,
for there could be no easier and more appropriate place for me
to die than this. There is nothing but lilies and roses in this


—_— ree


-* sweet contentment I have so long craved.” As soon as he had


‘addressed this ‘Tequest to Our Lord, it became clear that Our
Lord had heard his prayer, for he promptly returned his soul
to Him whom he had served so long, and died in the arms of


Galahad. When the others in the abbey learned of this; they __


‘came and found that the wounds which he had so long borne
on his body were wholly healed: and this they regarded as a
212
!
miracle. Then they rendered to the body the rites due to a king,
and buried it there. ia.
' Galahad tarried there two days. On the third he went away,
and rodé until he camé to the Perilous Forest, where hé found ~
| the boiling spring, of which the ‘story spoke some distance
' back. But as soon as he put his hand in it, the heat left the
water, because in him there had never been any heat of lust.
The people of the country considered this a marvellous thing,


as soon as they heard that the water had turned cool. So the «


spring lost the name it had borne before, and was henceforth
known as Galahad’s Spring.

When he had completed this adventure, he came by chance
to the entrance of the, country of Gore, where he found an
abbey once visited by Lancelot, where the latter had come
upon the tomb of Galahad King of Hoselice, son of Joseph of /
Arimathea, and the tomb of Simeon. where he had failed.
“Having arrived there, he looked down into the crypt which was.
beneath the monastery, and” when he saw the tomb burning.
so marvellously, he asked the friars what it was. “Sire,” said
they, “this is a strange adventure which can be achieved only
by him who shall surpass in goodness and chivalry all the
companions of the Round Table.” “TI should like,” said he, “if
it pleased you, to have you take me to the entrance of the
crypt,” which they said they would gladly do. So they took
him to the entrance of the crypt, and he went down the steps.
As soon as he drew near, the tomb of fire, which for many a
day had burned bright and strong, subsided and the flame
“flickered because Of ihe arnival of him in. whom was no sinful

‘When he came to the tomb, he raised it. up and saw
within the body of Simeon who had ‘died; and as soon as tht ~
Theat had ceased, he heard a voice which said: “Galahad,
Galahad, you ought to render profound thanks to Our Lord
for granting you such a favour: for because of your good life, |

ou can retrieve souls from punishment on earth and set them ,”
in the joys of paradise. I am your relative Simeon who for three —


hundred and fifty-four Yours have anelE here in this burnin
heat to-expiate a sin which IT once committed against Joseph
“of Atimathea."T shottf have been lost and damned with the
punishment which I have endured. But the grace of the Holy
Spirit, which in you avails more than earthly chivalry, has
‘Tookecd-upon mé with pity because of the great humility in you,


1 There is no mention of this episode in the preceding narrative.
214 THE QUEST OF THE HOLY GRAIL


and in its mercy has delivered me from earthly woe and set
me in the joy of heaven through the favour afforded by your
arrival.” The others present, who had come down as soon as
the flame was extinguished, heard these words, and considered
it a great marvel and miracle. Then Galahad took. the body
and removed it fram the tomb where it had so long been, and
carried it into the middle of the church. Then the fnars took it
and buried it as befitted a knight, for such he had been, and
held a suitable service with interment in front of the high altar.
Then they came to Galahad and showed him the greatest
honour in their power, and asked him whence he came and to
whom he belonged. And he told them the truth about it all.
The next morning, when Galahad had heard mass, he left
there, commending the friars to God, and rode five full |
( before coming to the residence of the Cripple King. And ree
alt these five years Perceval bore him company wherever he
“went, Within that time they had-sq completely achieved the |
adventures of the kingdom of{Logres)tha few were ever seen
there afterward except some mitaeuleds revelation of Our Lord.
And wherever they passed, and whatever the number of their
foes, they could never be discomfited or dismayed or frightened.
Qne day it happened that they came forth from a great and
marvellous forest. And there they met at a cross-road Bors who
was riding alone. When they recognised him, do not ask whether
they were glad and happy, for they had long been without his
company and greatly desired to see him. So they made much >
of each other, celebrating the honour and good fortune of |
the’ meeting. Then they asked him how he was, and he told |
them the truth and how he had fared: and he said that full five |
years had passed without his lying four times in a or
"in any house where people lived; but he had slept in lonely
“woods and distant mountains, where he would have died more
than a Hundred times, had it not been for the grace of the
Holy Spirit which had comforted and cheered him in his distress. ;
“And did you find what we are looking for?” asked Perceval.
“Certainly not,” said he, “yet I believe that we shall not
separate before we have finished that for which we started upon
this Quest.” “God grant us that!” said Galahad, “for so help
me God, I know of nothing which could make me so happy as
your arrival which delights me and satisfies my desire.”
Thus chance brought the three companions together as
chance had previously separated them. They journeyed together _


t
t
1
for a long time until one day they came to the castle of Corbenyc. _.
y were inside and the king recognised them, the joy
was great and marvellous, for it was_ generally known that™
with their arrival the adventures of the castle would end, which —
had so long éxfsted; Atid thé héws travelted far and wide, until
all the inhabitants came to see them. King Pellés wept over __
Galahad, his nee, and soi Whe others ‘who had seen him ’” *
as a little child.


“When they had re ix arms, Elyezer, the son of King
Peliés, een se to them the B Sword, of which the sto y
has already 1 which Joseph had been smitten


told, and with :

through the thigh And when he had drawn it from the scabbard~
and had told thém yoda biiee brokep, Bors took it to
see if he could join it again, but without success. When he saw
that he was not equal to the task, he handed it to Perceval,
saying: “Sire, see whether you can achieve this adventure.”
“Willingly,” he replied. So he took the sword just as it was
and fitted the two pieces together, but could by no means join
them. Seeing this, he said to Galahad: “Sire, we have failed in
this adventure. Now you must try, and if you fail, I think it

- will never be achieved by mortal map,” Then Galahad took the |
two pieces of the sword and fitted them together. And at once the
pieces became joined so marvellously that no one in the world
could detect the break or know that it had ever been broken.

When the companions beheld this, they said that God had
granted them a good beginning, and that they believed that
they would easily accomplish the other adventures, since this
one had now been achieved. When the others present saw that
the adventure of the sword had been concluded, they were
very happy. They presented it to Bors, saying that it could not
be in better hands, for he was such a wonderfully fine knight
and worthy man.

When the vesper hour arrived, the weather changed, the sk
grew dark, and a great and marvellous wind arose which fairly
struck the palace; and the heat of the wind was so fierce that
many. of them expected to be burned, and some fainted with
fear. Then they heard a voice saying: “‘Let those who are not
entitled to sit at the table of Jesus Christ withdraw; forthe ©

“true knights are about to be fed with food from_heayen.”

Upon hearing this, all went out without delay, except King

Pellés, who was a wort Elyezer_and
a damsel who was the king’s niece, the most holy and religious


oe
—


216 THE QUEST OF THE HOLY GRAIL


creature known in those days in any land. Wjth these three the
three companions remained to see what revelation Our Lord
Sanlithe oleae to grant them. After waiting a little while,
they saw coming through the door nine armed knights, who
took off their helmets and armour; then approaching Galahad,
they bowed to him and said: “Sire, we have come in haste to
be presént with you at the table when the precious food is ‘to
‘be broken.” Then he replied that they had arrived in time, for
Tthéy too had just got there. Then they all sat down in the
\ midst of the palace, and Galahad asked them whence they came.
Thrte of“them said they came from Gaul, and thrée trom
Ireland, and the other three from Denmark. —
le they were conversing thus, they saw come out from one
of the adjoining chambers a wooden bed borne by four damsels.
Upon the bed there lay a worthy man apparently in gréat
distréss; and he had agelden pate upon tis head. WHE te”
damsels had carried him into the middle of the hall, they set
him down and withdrew. Then he lifted his head and said to
Galahad: “Welcome, sire! I have long desiréd to see you afid
have long waited for you to come, being in such pain and
anguish the while that any other could not have endured the


trial. But now, if it please God, has come the hour when m
grief is to be relieved, and I shall depart from tits iife as it was


‘long ago promised me.”

While they were speaking thus, they heard a voice saying:
“Anyone who has not been a companion of the Quest of the
Holy Grail should now withdraw: for he may not longer remain
here.” As soon as these words were uttered, King Pellés and his |
son Elyezer and the damsel withdrew. When the palace was
emptied of all except those. who knew themselvés to_be-rom-
‘panions of the Quest, it seemed at once to those who had
remained that there cathe from heaven a man dressed in the
garb of a bishop, with a crozier in his hand and a mitre upon
his head; and ur angels Carried him upon a. rich seat_and.
_seated him at the table on which was the Holy Grail. He who
had been carried in like a bishop-had-werds-on_his brow which

4 said: “Behold Josephe, the first Christian bigfop, whom Our |
- } Lord anointed iri the city of Sarraz, in the te ;_ there.”
the knights seeing this understood the words, but marvelled
Mow iecould be wae: tor tiie [oceans to whom the words ees
had been dead more than three hundred_years. But the spoke
to them at once, and said: “Ah! knights of God, servants of


—_— =
THE 5 QUEST OF THE HOLY GRAIL 217


pon


noes this, he drew near the silver table and prostrated
himself on his elbows and knees before the altar. And when he
had continued thus for some space, he listened and heard the
chamber door open and slam loudly. So he looked_in that
direction, as did all the others. And they saw the angels )come
in_who had carried Josephe, two of them bearing two tapers,
and the third a red silk cloth, and the fourth a lance which
dripped blood so freely that the drops fell down into a box in
his other hand, Then the two set the tapers upon the table, and
the third laid the cloth beside the Holy Vessel, and the fourth
held the lance straight up over the Holy Vessel so that the blood
‘which was flowing down the lance dropped into it. As soon as
they “had done all this, Josephe arose and removed the lance a
_little from the Holy Vessel and covered the latter with the cloth.

Then Josephe prepared to celebrate the sacrament of the
mass. And after waiting a little, he took in the sacred Vessel a
wafer apparently of bread. And at the elevation there came
_ down from heaven a figure as of a child with a face as red as if
it were aflame with fire; and He entefed into the bread so that
those present saw clearly that the’bread)had assumed the form
of carnal man. When Josephe had held it thus a while, he put
it back in the Holy Vessel.

When Josephe had performed the priest’s part in the service
of the mass, he came up to Galahad and kissed him, and told
him in like manner to kiss all-his- brothers. And so he did. When
this ceremony was over, he said to them: “Servants of Jesus
Christ, who have striven and toiled to behold a part of the
" wonders of the Holy Grail, sit down now at this table, and you
shall be filled with the best and most precious food) that ever
knights tasted, and this from the very hand of your Saviour.
And you can say that you have toiled to good purpose, for
you shall receiveto-day the highest reward that ever knights
received.”’ Having said this, Josephe vanished from their midst,
so that they never knew what had become of him. Then they
sat down at once at the table in great fear, and wept so tenderly
that their faces were all wet. with tears.

Then the companions looked and saw come forth from the
Holy Vessela man as ‘it were quite naked, and His hands and
~ feet and body were bleeding; and He said to them: “My knights

P


» Google


a Ae


218 THE QUEST OF THE HOLY GRAIL


and servants and My loyal sons, who while yet in this mortal
Jife have become spiritual, who have sought for Me so long that,
I can no longer conceal Myself from you, it,is fitting that you.
should behold a part of My mystéries and sevfets, for you have
proved yourselves worthy to sit at My table, where no knight
ever ate since the time of Joseph of Arimathza. Some of the
others have partaken as faithful servants: that is, some of the
knights here and many others have been satisfied with the
grace of the Holy Vessel; but they have never been in the same |
position which you now occupy. Now take and receive the
precious food which you have so long desired, and for which
you have endured such toil.” a
Then He Himself took the Holy Vessel and came to Galahad,
to whom when he had kneeled, He gave to partake of his Saviour.
And he received Him joyfully with folded hands. So did each
of the others, and there was none to whom it did not seem that
something like bread was placed in his mouth. When they had
all received of this precious food} which seemed to them_so..
marvellously sweet that they thought that all the savours
they could imagine were entering their bodies, He who had
regaled them thus said to Galahad; “Son, so pure and clean as
mortal man can be, dost thou know what I am holding in My
hands?” Nay. he replied, “unless you tell me.” He replied:
“Tt is the ‘bowl) from which Jesus Christ ate of the ‘lamb


this is the bowl which no faithless man ever beheld without
suffering for it. And because it has thus served all manner of
——— ‘people acceptably, it is properly called the Holy Grail. Now
thou hast seen what thou hast so desired to see and what thou
‘hast coveted. But thou hast not yet beheld it so clearly as thou |
shalt yet see it. And knowest thou where It is to be? In thee (< '
temple in the city of Sarraz, and thefefore if béhovés thee to V ~. -
proceed thither and bear this holy Vessel company, which
to-night will leave the kingdom of Logres\so that it shall Hever
~be seen there again, nor shall it Cause any more adventures.
‘there. And knowest thou why it is going away? Because its
claims are no more served or honoured by the people of this


\ land. For they have turned to a lower worldly life, in spite of /~

‘ having been nourished with grace HOM this Holy Vessel, And
because they have so ill repaid the favour, I divest them of the
honour which I had done them. Therefore I wish thée to go


'


Digitized by (GO gle UNIVERSITY OF VIRGINIA
ee ge


:with me?” “Because I will not have it so,” He said, “but I
wish to do it after the manner of My disciples, For just'a


tas they
so you have eaten now with


‘|


said Galahad, “why will you not permit all the others to come.


_ ate with me at the Last supper, so y
' mé at the table of the Holy Grail’ And you are tabi just as),
the disciples were, I being over you as the thirteenth, »who am | ~-


' tobe your Master and Shepherd. Just as I separated them and
sent them over the world to preach the true gospel, so I send
you, one here and another there. And you shall all die in this


_service, except drie Of you.’ Then He gave them His blessing


and_yanished, so that they knew not what became of Him,
except that they saw Him ascend toward heaven.

_And Galahad came to the lance which was lying on the table
_and touched the, blood; then he went to the Cripple King and
_anointed his legs; with it where he had been (wounded, Then

the king clothed himse

nd he thanked Our Lord for having so promptly regarded

him with His’ favour. He lived a long time yet, but not ‘iff the
world, tor he withdrew at once into a community of White


Friars. And Our Lord performed many a fine miracle for love —


of him, of which the story does not tell in this place, as there
is no need of it.
About midnight, when they had prayed for a long time to
Our Lord that in His mercy He would conduct them with safety
- for their souls whithersoever they might go, a voice, descended
in their midst which said: “Ye who are My true sons and not
My step-sons, My friends and not My enemies, be gone from
here and go where you think you will fare best, as chance may
Jead you.” When they heard this, they all answered with one
voice: “Father in heaven, blessed be Thou who hast deigned
to call us Thy sons and Thy friends! Now we see clearly that
we have not wasted our efforts.”
Thereupon they left the palace and came down into the
courtyard where they found arms and horses. Then they equipped
themselves and mounted at once. And when they were mounted,
} 4


himself and left the bed healthy-and whole. -


220 THE QUEST OF THE HOLY GRAIL


they rode out from the castle and asked each other where they
came from, in order that they might recognise each other. Thus
they discovered that among the three who came from Gaul was
Claudin, the son. of Glaudas, and that the others, from whatever
land they came, were gentlemen of high lineage. When the
time came to separate, they embraced each other like brothers
and wept very tenderly, and“they all said to Galahad: “Sire,
you must know that we were never so happy as when we knew
that we should be in your company, nor was grief ever so bitter
as ours now that we must depart from you so soon. But we see
that this separation is pleasing to Our Lord; and therefore we
must part without grieving.” “Fair gentlemen,” said. Galahad,
“if you liked my company, I liked yours just as much, But you
see that we Tnust not remain together. Therefore I commend _
you to God, and pray you, if you come to King Arthur’s court,
té satute my father, my tord Lancefot, and those of the Round.

Table.” And they ‘said that, if they passed that way, they
‘would not forget the commission.

' Then they separated. Then Gafahad with his two companions
~fode until they came to the sea in less than four da ae |
wo iched-it’sooner, but they did not trave “iiectly, |
not being acquainted with ithe roads. /

Upon reaching the sea, they found on the shore the shi
hich the Sword with the strange belt had been ne ett
they saw the inscription-on the side of the ship whic forbade |
anyone to enter unless he believed firmly in Jesus Christ. When
_they came to the side and looked in, they_saw in_the middle of '

\ oe .the bed, which was in the ship, the silver table which they had

left at the Cripple King’s, And the Holy Grail was upon it, covered

.,. with a red silk cloth like a napkin. When the companions s beheld

this strange thing, they-showed it to one another, and said that

they were fortunate indeed to-have what they most loved and__
cherished bear them company where they were to dwell. Then
they crossed themselves and, commending themselves to Our

, Lord, they entered the ship. And as soon as they were on board,

the. wind, which before had been quiet and calm, struck the sail

so violently that it drove the ship from the shore and out to
sea. Then it = to sail very swiftly, as the wind drove it more
and more. pad
; Thus they over the sea for a long time without knowi
i whither God was leading them. Every time that Galahad lay :
down or rose up, he prayed to Our Lord that whensoever He
THE QUEST OF THE HOLY GRAIL ar


should require of him his translation from this world, He would
send for him. He prayed this prayer so often at morning and
evening that the divine voice said to him: “Fear not, Galahad,
for Our Lord will Dérform thy desire concerning this: whenéver
thiou shalt request the death of thy body, thou shalt have thy
réquest, and shalt receive the life of thy soul with etérnal bliss.”
This request, which Galahad had ‘so often preferred, was heard
by Perceval; and he wondered greatly why he made it; so he
begged him in the name of the comradeship and the faith which
united them, to tell him why he sought such a favour. “T will
tell hae »’ Galahad replied. “ At that time when we saw a part
or t


yf the marvels of the Holy Grail which Our Lord revealed to us
|} in Ffistoly mercy, as I beheld the mysteries which are not
[ee erro but only to the ministers of Jesus


“Christ—at that moment when I saw these things which the /
' Heart of mortartiam could not conceive nor tongue describe,
‘my heart was enthralled in such sweet bliss that if Thad passéd
“at once from this life, I believe that no man ever died in such
contentment as I would then have done. For there stood then
‘Before me such a ompan angejs and such a host of
heavenly powers that I should have been then translated from
“the earthly to the heavenly life in the satisfaction of the glorious
martyrs and the friends of Our Lord. And because I believe that
I Shall be sometime again in as favourable a position, or mayhap
_in a better one than I was in then, to behold this great joy, I
prefer this request that you have heard..Thus I expect to leave
‘this world, in accordance with Our Lord’s will, while beholding |
ithe marvels of the Holy.Grail.” ,

Thus Galahad announced to Perceval the approach of his 4
death, as “it had been revealed to him by the divine message. «" —
In this manner, as I have told you, the people of the country of
Logres because of their sins lost the Holy Grail, which so often
had fed and nourished them. Just as Our Lord sent it to Galahad} :
to Joseph, and to’ their posterity because of their virtues; so-He !
cut the wicked heirs off fori it because of their wickedness and _
the evil He found in them. Thus one can see clearly that the
wicked lost through their perversity what the good preserved
through their virtue.

The companions continued _a long time at sea, until one day
they said to Galahad: “Sire, you have never Tain upon this bed
which, according to the inscription, was-prepared for you. You

“ought to do so, for the letters state that you shall lie upon it.”’
222 THE QUEST OF THE HOLY GRAIL


So he said that he would do so. And he lay down and(slept pot
a long time. When he awoke, he looked about him an éld_
thé city of(Satraz- ‘there came to them a voice which said:
“Leave the ship, knights of Jesus Christ, take this silver table
between you three;-and-carry it just as it is into the ci ty, no
setting-it-tewn- tefore you enter the temple’where Our Lord
first consecrated Josephe as bishop.” ~* ~~

When they were about to remove the table from the ship,
they looked across the water and saw approaching the vessel,
in which ‘they had Tong before laid the sister of Perceval. At the
sight of it, they exclaimed to each other: “In God’s name, this
damsel has kept the promise to ts in following us-here..’. Then
they took the silver table and removed it from the ship, Bors _
and Perceval carrying it in front, and Galahad behind. Then
they started to enter the city. But when they came to the gate,

Galahad was exhausted by the weight of the table which was

ey And he saw a man with crutches sitting under the,

who was awaiting alms from the passers-by, who often
him something out of love for Jesus Christ. As Galahad ap-

/ proached him, he called him, saying: “Good man, come here
! and help me carry this table up inta the. templ Ah! sir, in


' God's ‘name; "Said he, “what are you saying? It is more than _


ten mare since I have ‘been able to move without-help.” “Never
Galahad replied, ‘“‘but_rise and have no hesitation, for
thaw ‘art-oused.” When Galahad had said this, he tried to see
if he could get up; and as soon as he made the effort, he found
himself as well and healthy as if he had never had any infirmity
in his life. Then he ran to the table and took hold of it o eae
to Galahad. And when he was within the city, he told all those
whom he met of the miracle which God had wrought in him.
When they had come up into the temple, they saw the seat
which Our Lord had formerly prepared for “Josephs. to. occupy.
And at once all the people of the city ran together to see the
maimed man who had recently been made whole. When the-
companions had done what was commanded them, they retu turned.
to the water-side and entered the ship in which Perceval’s 's sister
lay. Then they carried her body upon the bed into the temple,
and buried her with hono fitting a king’s daughter. .
_ When the king of the’ city) named Escorant, saw the three
companions, he asked thiém Whence they'ca CAMe aM what they had
carried in on the silver table. And they answered his inquiries
truthfully, and told him of the marvel of the Holy Grail and the
i“
power which God had conferred on it. But he was treacherous
and cruel, being-a-member-of-the~ciirsed pagan line. So he /
‘hettevetnothing of what they~totd--him; ‘but said they were
faithless deceivers. Waiting until he saw them remove their
arms, he had them seized by his men and thrown into prison;
and he héld them closely in confinement for a year without
allowing them any freedom. But this turned out well for them;

for as soon as they were cast into prison, Our Lord, who was not
forgetful of them, sent the Holy Grail to bear th em_company, S :


by whose favour they were daily nourished so long as they were t ae


confined. [i .


At the end of the year Galahad complained to Our Lord one.
day saying "Sire, Tt seems to me that I have survived in this
world Ion; enough : Fit please you, release me from ‘Tt sodffi—
"Now that day it happened that King Escorant lay sick unto
death. So he sent for them and begged their forgiveness for
having wrongfully treated them so ill. They willingly. par
him, and he died at once. 7

When he was interred, those of the city were greatly dismayed,
for they knew not whom they could make their king. So they
took lengthy counsel together ; and while they were thus engaged,
they heard a voice which said to them: “Take the youngest of
the three companions, and he will take care of you and be your

, “counsellor so long as he remains with you.” So they obeyed the

! command of the voice, and took Galahad, making him their

: unwilling master, and put the crown upon hid head. All this he
regretted much; but seeing that it must needs be so, he permitted

it Tor otherwise they would have killed him.


When. Galahad had a lord of the land, he constructed
ark o


$


on the silver table ian‘: GoKteod precious stones to cover
' the sacred“Vessel. And every morning, as soon as he arose, he
| and hiscompanions came to the sacred Vessel to make their
bs and orisons.
en the end of the year came around, on the anniversary of
the day when he had first won the crown, he and his compani
arose early in the morning. And when they came into thé te minle
they looked at the sacred Vessel; and there they saw a handsome
man garbed like a bishop, and he was on his knees before the
table making ‘his confession; and about him there was such a
reat company of angels as if he were Jesus Christ Himself. After
remaining upon his knees for a long time, he got up and beggn _
the mass of the glorious Mother of God. And when he came to
224 THE QUEST OF THE HOLY GRAIL


‘ the mystery of the mass and had removed the platter from the
sacred Vessel, he called Galahad, and said to him: “Come
forward, servant of Jesus Christ, and thou shalt behold what
thou hast so desired to see.” Then he stepped forward and_
looked within the sacred Vessel. And when he had looked in, he
began to tremble violently, as soon as mortal flesh began ta
gaze upon things of the spirit. Then Galahad stretched forth
‘his “harids toward heaven, and said: “Lord, I adore Thee and
thank Thee that Thou hast brought my desire to pass, for now


T see clearly oe could not tell nor heart conceive, Here
( J behold the motfve of courage and the inspHfation of prowess;
here I see thE Marvel oF Rha etsT Ana sinc Tt Tf so, fair gentle
Lord, that you have accomplished my desire and allowed me
to see what I have always longed to see, now I pray you, just.
as I am and in this great bliss, to permit me to pass from this
earthly life to that in heaven. ee
As soon as Galahad had addressed this request to Our Lord,
the good man who stood before the altar, dressed like a priest,
‘ took the Body of Our Lord from the table and offered it to
Galahad. Humbly and devoutly he received it. And when he
Had partaken of it, the good man said to him: “Knowest thou
who I am?” “Nay, lord, unless you tell me.” “ Know, then,” said
he, “that I am Josephe, son of Joseph of Arimathea, whom
Our Lord has sent to bear thee company. And knowest thou
fi why He has sent me rather than another? Because thou hast
resembled me in two respects: in that thou hast beheld the.
, Marvels of the Holy Grail as I have done, and in that thou
- hast been virgin as I am too; and it is nght that one pure man
‘: should bear another company.”

When he heard this, Galahad came up to Perceval and kissed
him ; then he did the same to Bors, saying to him: “Bors, salute |
my father, my lord Lancelot, as soon as you see him.” Then;

_ Galahad prostrated_ himself on his elbows and knees before the
table; but he had not been there long before he fell forward upon
his face on the temple floor, for the soul was already pone Tom

, his body. And the angels bore him away with jubilation, blessing
Our Lord” ~~~ oe
As soon as Galahad had passed away, a great miracle happened
‘there. For the two companions saw plainly that a hand came
down from heaven; but they saw no body to which the hand
belonged. Coming straight to the Holy Vessel, it seized it and
. the lance as well, and carried-it up toward heaven, so that since
Pa


¢.’
eae
then no man has been bold dnvuah to assert that he had seen
thé Holy Grail.

When Perceval and Bors saw that Galahad was dead, never
were men so sorrowful; and had they not been such good men
of virtuous life, they might readily have fallen into despair for
the great love they bore him. The people of the country mourned ~
him sorely too, and were in deep distress, His grave was dug
there where he died; and as soon as he was interred, Percevat
withdrew to a hermitage without the city and assumed the
Teligious garb; Bors accompanied him, but “Without laying
aside his worldly dress, because he was desirous of returning
“to King Arthur’s court. Perceval lived a year and three days

. In the hermitage, and then died; and Bors had him buried with
his sister and with Galahad ig the temple.. ams
When Bors’saw that he was Sil aloné in-auch a distant land

as in these regions of Babylon, he left Sarraz all armed, and
coming to the sea entered a ship. And he had such good fortune
that in a very short time he arrived in the kingdom of Logres.
When once in the country, he rode until he came to Camelot,
where King Arthur was. Never was such joy made over anyorit
as over him; for they thought they had lost him forever, seeing
that he had been so long absent from the country.

When they had finished their meal, the king sent for the
clerks who used to set down in writing the adventures of the
“knights of the court. So when Bors had related the adventures
of the Holy Grail just as he had beheld them, they were com:
mitted to writing and kept among the rolls at Salisbury, Master

alter.Map yot them from there to make his book of the Holy
Grail for the love of his lord King Henry, who ordered the story

fe ‘fo be translated from Latin into French, Here the story con-
_ cludes, without further mention of the Adventures of the
‘. Holy Grail.


FINIS
Mape Ar Tre


TemPce] Presse
A Descriptive List of Books on
the Life and Teaching of Saint
Francis of Assisi, and of Works


of Franciscan Interest


J. M. DENT & SONS LTD.
SAINT FRANCIS BOOKS
In the Temple Classics


Saint Francis ts represented in this famous series of Classics by
four volumes which provide an unrivalled collection of most of
the principal authorities for his life and precepts. The four
volumes are untform in format. They are pocket size, bound in
blue cloth with gilt designs on back, top edges gilt, and with red
ribbon bookmark. Each has a photogravure frontispiece, designed
title-page in red and black, and the volumes are most tastefully
printed with wide margins.
Cloth, 2s. net per volume


THE LITTLE FLOWERS OF


SAINT FRANCIS


Specially translated for the series from the Italian
Fioretti di San Francesco by PRoFressor Sir T. W.
ARNOLD, M.A.


‘In this book ave found certain little Flowers, Miracles
and devout ensamples of the glorious Poor Little One of
Christ, Saint Francis, and certain of his holy Com-


pantons, to the pratse of Jesu Christ.


q This edition of the “‘most exquisite expression of the religious
life of the Middle Ages” is a favourite one. First printed in 1898,
it is now in its sixteenth edition. A note is included outlining the
sources, history and authorship of the Fioret#s.


THE MIRROR OF PERFECTION


Specially translated for the series from the Cottonian
NS. by RoBrrt STEELE.


‘This book was compiled as a legend from certain ancient
ones which the fellows of Blessed Francis wrote and
caused to be written in diverse places.”


q The Mirror of Perfectton—Speculum Perfectionis—remains the
most intimate authority for the last years of the life of St.
Francis. It lies at the root of the popular idea of the saint. The
photogravure frontispiece is from an unpublished drawing by
C. S. Ricketts, “St. Francis and the Wolf of Gubbio.”

2
THE LEGEND OF SAINT FRANCIS
BY THE THREE COMPANIONS


Here first translated into English by Emma GuRNEY
SALTER.


“‘These be certain things written by Three Companions
of the Blessed Francis concerning his life and his con-
versation in the worldly state, and of his marvellous
and perfect conversion.”


q A translation of the Latin text of The Legend of the Three Com-
panions as it stands in Sancti Francisci Legenda Trium Sociorum
ex. cod. Fulg. (1898). There is an epilogue by Miss Salter summing
up the known facts concerning the work. The frontispiece is from
a bas-relief in Sta. Maria degli Angeli, Assisi.


SACRUM COMMERCIUM: Tue Con-
VERSE OF FRANCIS AND His Sons wITH


Hoty Poverty
Translated by the Rev. CANON RAWNSLEY, with an
Introduction by Paut SABATIER.
q This volume gives the original Latin of the Sacrum Commercium
in addition to the translation by the Rev. Canon Rawnsley, who
has also added a chapter on ‘‘ The Lady Poverty and how St. Francis
came to love her.’’ The Latin text was collated with the Codex
Casanatensis by M. Sabatier, and he also supplied the portrait of
St. Francis which forms the frontispiece.


€


An Edition-de-luxe of |
THE LITTLE FLOWERS OF
SAINT FRANCIS


Being a translation of I Fioretti di S. Francesco by
Tomas OKEy, Professor of Italian at Cambridge
University. With thirty plates in full-colour from
drawings by EUGENE BURNAND. Royal 4to. £2 12s. 6d.
net.
q Since the appearance of Paul Sabatier’s Vie de St. Francois
d’ Asstse, the starting-point of the Neo-Franciscan movement,
there has been no edition of equal importance and taste. Of this
limited edition only very few copies remain.


3
A SAINT FRANCIS VOLUME
In Everyman's Library


THE LITTLE FLOWERS anp THE
LIFE OF SAINT FRANCIS wiru THE
MIRROR OF PERFECTION


In one volume, obtainable in three styles of binding.
Cloth 2s. net; library binding, 3s. net; leather, 3s. 6d. net.


THe Lirt_z FLowers has here been translated anew by

Thomas Okey, Professor of Italian at Cambridge University,
and there is an Introduction by him to the whole volume. The
M1RROR OF PERFECTION is in the translation of Robert Steele.
The Lirz oF SAINT FRANCIs is a translation by Miss Emma Gurney
Salter of the official biography by Saint Bonaventura.


This typical ‘‘ Everyman’s Library” volume contains four hundred
pages, giving to the student and reader the utmost possible at a
small price. ‘‘The three works are printed in the inverse order of
their composition, although not of their charm and interest. The
Little Flowers (Ftoretts) is a free and amplified Italian translation
of a Latin original, Actus B. Franciscs et soctorum ejus, compiled
some time after 1322. The Mirvoy of Perfection (Speculum Per-
fectionis), according to Boehmer, is a compilation, edited by one of
the Spirttuals of the Portiuncula, and based chiefly on documents
ard memoirs left by Friar Leo, and completed about 1318. Of the
date and authorship of the Life of St. Francis by St. Bonaventura
there is no question. It was written by command of the Chapter-
General of Narbonne in 1260, and was intended to be the definite
and authoritative Life, and to supersede the great variety of
fragmentary Lives then in circulation. Bonaventura went to Assisi
for the purpose of consulting documents and to interrogate the
surviving companions of St. Francis. . . . So satisfied were the
authorities with the result, that at the Chapter-General at Paris in
1266, under the | akeoaaieene of Bonaventura, it was commanded
that the whole of the existing Lives in the friaries of the Order
should be destroyed.”


THE LITTLE POOR MAN


(“It PoveRELLo ”’)
The Life Drama of Saint Francis of Assisi. A Play in
Four Acts. By Harry LErE. Small Crown 8vo. 5s. net.


q ‘‘One of the most beautiful contributions to Franciscan liter-
ature.””—ARCHBISHOP HAYES. —


4
THE COMING OF THE FRIARS
MINOR TO ENGLAND AND
GERMANY


Being the Chronicles of THomas of EccLEeston and
JoRDAN OF GIANo. Translated by Emma Gurney Salter.
With two reproductions of MSS. and three Drawings.
Crown 8vo. 5s. net.


Of all the Orders, that of the Grey Friars or Minorites was always

by far the most numerous and in miany respects the most inter-
esting. Founded by St. Francis in 1209 or 1210, the Friars bound
themselves to follow as far as possible the daily public life of Christ
—especially His poverty. They came to Germany in 1223, to
England in 1224, and made foundations at Canterbury, London,
Oxford, etc.; and it is of these early years that Thomas of Eccleston
and Jordan of Giano tell.


SAINT ANTHONY OF PADUA


By E. Giuurat-SMITH. Large Crown 8vo. 6s. net.


Of all the followers of St. Francis, St. Anthony of Padua is the

most celebrated; and perhaps more apocryphal stories have
been written about him than about any other saint. He was a con-
temporary of St. Francis, whom he actually met; he entered the
Franciscan Order in 1220, four years before the Friars came to
England; and he became famous as a preacher, and a teacher of
theology, especially at Padua, which town has regarded him as its
patron Saint since his canonisation in 1232. Mr. Gilliat-Smith tells
the story of his life and work in a style of great simplicity and
charm, avoiding the extravagances which are to be found in many
of the older chronicles. Imprimatur: F. Carp. BOURNE: Archtepus.
Westmonasterien.

“To all interested in Franciscan traditions this book will come
as a welcome addition to a subject which has ever about it the
freshness of a Tuscan spring.”—British Weekly.


THE STORY OF ASSISI


By Lina Durr Gorpon. Illustrated by NELLY ERICHSEN
and HELEN M., James. Fcap. 8vo. 5s. 6d. net.


q This volume in Dent’s Medieval Towns Series is necessarily
important to the student of Franciscan literature in that it sums
up all the data concerning St. Francis and his followers in relation
to the town which is inseparable from his name. Of the profuse
illustrations in line and half-tone, many are reproductions of famous
Franciscan pictures. Folding Maps are included, as well as an
Appendix, giving notes of walks for visitors.


5
SAINT CLARE OF ASSISI:
Her Lire anv LEGISLATION


By Ernest Gruiat-SMiTH. Square Demy 8vo. 12s. 6d. net.


In this volume Mr. Gilliat-Smith has gathered together all the

available evidence, both of contemporary witnesses and the
later medizval writers, and presents a vivid record of the life and
work of St. Clare, the ‘‘Little plant of the most blessed father
Francis.” The book has the ‘‘imprimatur” of the Vicar-General
of the Arch-diocese of Westminster. The frontispiece is a photo-
gravure reproduction of ‘‘The Seraphic Mother,” from a fourteenthb-
century fresco in her church at Assisi. |


A SIENESE PAINTER OF THE
FRANCISCAN LEGEND


By BERNARD BERENSON. With twenty Reproductions
in Collotype. Square Demy 8vo. 7s. 6d. net.


q This work offers a critical appreciation of the work of Stefano
Sassetta, the Sienese painter of the Franciscan Legend, who,
Mr. Berenson judges, ‘‘has left us the most adequate rendering of
the Franciscan soul that we possess in the entire range of painting.”
Sassetta’s paintings are examined, as works of art and more parti-
cularly as expressions of the Franciscan ideal, in comparison with
those of Giotto. The reproductions are from pictures by Giotto and
_ his school as well as by Sassetta.


FRANCISCAN LEGENDS IN
ITALIAN ART


By Emma Gurney SALTER. With twenty Reproductions
of Pictures. Large Crown 8vo. 6s. net.


q This volume is the first attempt to bring into convenient compass
and in English an account of the Franciscan Saints and Legends
in Italian art. Mainly it is confined to Italian pictures in Italy,
and the location of pictures in churches, etc., is given.
a me =— fda


Digitized by Google


Original from


UNIVERSITY OF VIRGINIA


ALDERMAN LIBRARY


The return of this book is due on the date
indicated below


DUE


7 he


Usually books are
there are exceptiong 2
note carefully the dat
are charged for over-due
five cents a day; foy ress
special rates and regulat
presented .at the deék


Original


Digitized by Google UNIVERSITY ©


UX 000 377? 90? Zs


ly ¢
wo ‘ . Pa ¥ ?
7 a oe {
4 4 (
f
Nar . a P aw C
L


_—
fa

Y

as
‘e


TVINED Chere | 3 oe
\


\
\
r
bp
' |
lA. C v4 w ein eh \ + |
“4 \
le
' 63 7
Beak Ayes
\

| J 5 Se


Original from


Zed by (506 gle UNIVERSITY OF VIRGINIA


ALDERMAN LIBRARY


The return of this book is due on the date
indicated below


DUE DUE


4 as: =
ag
4 — '


\\


Usually books are
there are exceptiong 2
note carefully the dat
are charged for over-due bo
five cents a day; foy reserve
special rates and regulatisns/ B
presented.at the deék if reffewal is da&si


Original t


Digitized by Google UNIVERSITY O


lewels


(IS, WO Ondedo-s -


UX 000 377 907 “


¥ a
TULNeO Chee 15 Fi%
| !
' , ;
ni “ o\ \ . ’
mn ay |
fs \ (Si ¥ ACS ;
| “=


Original from


Ad by Goc gle UNIVERSITY OF VIRGINIA


— i


ALDERMAN LIBRARY


The return of this book is due on the date
indicated below


DUE DUE


Usually books are \lé
there are exceptions

note carefully the
are charged for over
five cents a day; aCr


f “¢ AY ~ AAN Ane,
P45 ~Ordgurns


ae ee ae Te oe 4
4 on _. ’ o . iA eae Pes i
is :
helt ~ 2 o f ; co ae
we e
ys
ae
¢
as
\
©. Fad : > : \ .
ruiLWed Caria me
\
4
Coe :
nN |


ry eo gle


Lea


+ 1 }
4 x p , oa i oo. ‘
yn A. Se et. Seek I nie ee Ve
: t 7 ; x 8 : fe Ve *s ! ie Fy : ' } ©


. . PS - a . - Ms —
- > 1 ee Chae Os


202 THE QUEST OF THE HOLY GRAIL


as he had finished his prayer and had supplicated the High
Master and requested Him not to forget him, but to send him
his bread as the father ought to do for his son, every time that
Lancelot made this prayer, he found himself so replete and
furnished with the grace of the Holy. Spirit. that it seemed to
“him that he had tasted of all the pleasant meats in thé wof

When he had gone thus a long time without once leaving the
ship, it. happened one night that he came to land by the edge of
a forest. Then he listened and heard a knight approaching on _
horseback and making a noise crashing through the woods. When
he came to the edge of the forest and saw the boat, he dismounted
and, after removing the saddle and bridle, let the horse go where
it wished. Then_he came to the ship_ and crossed. himself and
came on board completely armed...

When Lancelot saw the knight draw near, he did not run to
take his arms, thinking of the promise which the hermit had
made about Galahad who would be with him and bear him
company a while. So he arose and said: “‘ Welcome, sir knight.”
But the other was amazed to hear him “speak, thinking there
was no living soul aboard ; so he answered in his astonishment:
“Good fortune to_you, sire, and in God’s name, if it may be,
tell me who you are “for T greatly, desire to know.” So he told

his name, and said e was Lancelot of the Lake. “Then truly
be welcome, sire,” said he; “ft is God’s truth that I desired to
see you and have you as a companion above all others in the
world. And so it is natural, for it is from you that I am sprung.”
Then the knight removed his helmet unc seria the middte of
the boat. And Lancelot asked of him: “ Ah! Galahad, is it you?”

“Yes, sire,” said he, “it is truly I.” When he heard that, he ran
to him with outstretched arms, and they began to embrace
each other and rejoice in a way I could not describe.

” Then each asked the other how he was. Then each tald of the
adventures which had befallen him since they had left the court.

They continued thus in conversation until day dawned_and the
sun rose next morning. When the day was bright and clear, they:
could see and recognise each other, and they began to be ex- .
ceeding glad. When Galahad beheld the damsel who lay inthe
boat, he recognised her as the one whom he had seen before. So

“he asked Lancelot if he knew who she was. “Yes,” he answered,
“T know full well. For the letter by her head clearly reveals the .
truth. But for God’s sake tell me whether you have achieved the:
adventure of the Sword with the strange belt. ” “Ves, sire,” said


oe ee
he, “and if you have never seen the Sword, behold it herg,”” When,
Lancelot looked at it, he knew at once that this was it; and he
seized it by the hilt and’ began to kiss the pommel and the
‘scabbard and the blade. Then he asked Galahad to tell him how
and where he had found it. And he told him all about the shi
which Solomon’s wife had had made, and the three planks, “aiid
how Eve,_the first mother, had planted the first tree,.whose
shoots were by nature coloured white and green and red. And
when he had told him all about ‘the ship and the inscriptions
they had found in it, Lancelot confessed that never had such
a high adventure come to any knight as had befallen him.
celot and Galahad abode in this ship for half a L year and ':
more, attentive to serve “ENeHe-Creator heartily Mai a time
They came to strange islands far from human kind, where nothing
but wild beasts dwelt, where they encountered and achieved
marvellous adventares ery by their own. prowess and partly |
ane: grace of the Holy Spirit which always aided them. But —
of these things the oe of the Holy Grail makes no mention,
for it would take too long to tell all that befell them.

After Easter, in the spring when all things turn green and
the birds sing in the woods their sweet songs in welcome of the
pleasant season, and everything turns more to joy than at any
other season—about that time it happened one day at noon
that they came to land at the edge of a forest in front of a cross.
Then they saw a knight come forth from the forest armed in
pls prmout, he ; he was 5 tichly mounted himself and led another
white horse by the bridle. When he saw the ship come to land,
he came to the place as fast as he could, saluted the two knights
in the name of the High Master, and “said to Galahad: “Sir

knight, you have been with your father long eno ugt Leave the *
ship and mount this fair white horse and go whither chance


| nee lead You, seeking and accomplishing the adventures of the
kingdom of Logres.


en he heard this, Bia renee Re kissed him tenderly,
and said to him weeping: " Fair gentle sire I know not if T shall
ever see you again. I commend you to. Jesus Christ Himself, and
my He preserve you in His service.” Then they both began to

~ When Galahad had left the ship and had mounted, there
ane a voice between them which said to them: “Now let each
one think of doing right, for you shall not see each other again
- before the great and terrible day when Our Lord will render to
every man according to his deserts: that will be on the day of
204 THE QUEST OF THE HOLY GRAIL


ti alah 2 When Lancelot heard these words, he said in tears
ahad: “Son, since I must depart from you forever, pray_-
the Maste “that He ‘iay not let me quit His service, but
that He may keep me as His servant both on earth and in
heaven.” Then Galahad. replied: “Sire, no prayer.

as your own. So do not forget yourself.” Then they parted, and
Galahad entered the forest. tr eat_and wonderful wind
.Struck the ship and soon carried Lancelot from the shore.


f of the ‘damsel. And he was “cartied fora mont about the sea
sleoin littléand in vi mune praying Our Lord tenderly.


oe fin ag 0) eheieck e might see something)of the


| Grail. ee
Dae evening it chanced that he came to land in front of a
fair rich town, well situated; and in the rear of the town there

“was a gate which opened toward the water, and which was
always open day and night. No one who dwelt there stood on
guard, for there were always two lions opposite each other'f °:
guarding the entrance, so that anyone wishing to pass through
that gate could do so only by passing between them. When the
ship came to land there, the moon was shining so brightly that
one could see far and near. And straightway he heard a.vaice wv
which said: “ Lancelot, leave the ship and enter this town, where

L/ thou shalt find much of what thou seekest and hast yearned sO
ardently to behold.” Upon hearing this, he ran at once and
seized his arms, leaving behind nothing which he had brought
with him. And when he was on shore, he came to the gate and
found the two lions; then he thought that he could not escape
without a fight, so he drew his sword and prepared to defend
himself. But as soon as he had drawn his sword, he looked up
and/saw a burning’ hand which struck him so forcibly on the

that his swor rom his hand. ‘Then he heard a voice

“Saying: “ART man poor in faith and trust, why dost thou Trust
more in thy hand than in thy Creator? Thou art very wretched}
not to believe that He in W whose service thou-art engaged an
avail more than thy arms!”

"~~ [ancelot was so abashed by these words and by the hand that
had struck him that he fell to the ground stunned, and was so
overcome that he did not know whether it was day or night.
But after a while he stood up and said: “Ah! fair Father Jesus
Christ, I thank you and adore you for deigning Ao reprove
me for my misdeeds. Now I see clearly that you regard me |
our servant, since you have shown me this token of my
lack of faith’”~
Then Lancelot. took his sword and replaced it in the soabbard, \ Ath
faying he would never draw it out again, but would trustin the.) 4°, |
mercy, of Our Lord. “‘And if it please Him that I die, it will be
the salvation of my soul. And if it so be that I escape death, it
will redound to my greater honour.” Then he crossed_ himself
upon his forehead and, commending himself to Our Lord,
approached the fions. When they saw him drawing near, they
remained passive and gave no evidence of intending to do him
harm. Sabo paced between them without their touching him.
And he game to the_main thoroughfare and walked up through
the town until he reached ‘thé Gtadel. Everyone had retired
throtighiout the town, for it might have been midnight by now.
He went up the steps until he found himselfin the main hall,
all armed as he was. And when he was upstairs, he looked
everywhere, but saw no man or woman, which greatly surprised
him, for he could not believe that such a fine palace and such
handsome apartments should be deserted. So he passed on and
decided he would continue until he found someone who wo
tell him where he was, for he did not even know what country
lie was in. ~ 7 ii ;
~So Lancelot kept on until he reached a chamber of which
the door was closed and locked. He put his hand on the door
and tried to open it, but in vain; he even made a great effort,
but he could do nothing to effect an entrance. Then he listened,
and heard a voice chanting so sweetly that it seemed to be the
voice rather of some heavenly than of a mortal creature. And
the voice seemed to be saying: “Glory, praise and honour to..
Thee, Father in heaven!” When Lancelot heard what the voice
was saying, his heart was melted ; and he knelt beside the cham-
_ ber door, for he thought the Holy Grail Might be inside. So he
said weeping: “Fair sweet Father Jesus Christ, if I ever did_
_ aught which pleased Thee, fair Lord, in Thy pity do not bear_
“me “any grudge, but show ‘me some revelation of what Lam.
seeking.
As a as Lancelot had said this, he looked in front of him
_ and saw the door of the chamber open, and through it there |
shone as bright a light as if thé sun were lodged therein. Because |
of the bright light which issued forth, the whole building was _
illuminatéd as if all the candles in the world were lighted. When ~
he saw this, he was very happy: and felt such a desire to see


Go gle


206 THE QUEST OF THE HOLY GRAIL


came. that he forgot all else. So he

approached the chamber door and was about to enter in, when

a voice said to him: “ Flee, Lancelot, do not enter, for you must.

| not do so. If you go in despite this prohibition, you shall repent

of it.” When Lancelot heard this, he drew back sorrowfully,

like one who would fain go in but yet refrained because of the
prohibition he had heard.

_Yet he looked into the room, and saw the Holy Vessel covered_,
with a red silk cloth. And all around he saw angels serving the
Holy Vessel, some holding silver censers and ghted candles,
others holding crosses anit altar vessels, and there was none
‘who was not doing his part. Infront of the Holy Vessel there
sat an old man dressed like a priest, and it appeared that he
was assisting at the sacrament of the mass. When he was about
to elevate the body of Olir Tord, it“stemed to Lancelot that
above the good man’s hands there appeared the figures of three”
men in the air, two of whom placed the youngest of them in
the priest’s hands ; and thus hé raised him on high and appeared .
to manifest him to the people. Pe

' Ther Lancelot,-who beheld these things, was not a little
astonished: for he saw that the priest was so burdened with the

re he held up, that it seemed he-must succumb beneath the
weight. When he saw this, he wished to go to aid him, for he
thought that none of the others present had any intention to
lend a hand. Then his desire to come forward was so great that
he forgot the prohibition which had been laid upon him not to
set foot within the room. Then he advanced quickly to the door,
saying: “Ah! fair Father Jesus Christ, may it not bring me to
punishment and loss if I wish to help this worthy man in his
necessity.” Then he went~ti and walked toward the silver
table. And when he approached it, he felt a breath of air, as it
seemed to him, as hot as if it were mixed with flame, which
ish him in the face so fiercely that he felt as if. his face were
blasted with the heat. Then his strength failed him, like one
whose power of body afi of"hearing and seting is affected,
and_all his limbs were powerless. Then he felt several hands
seize him and carry hi away.-And when they had roughly
picked himrup; they cast him out of the room and _deserte
him there. a :


ee ee ne
could be, When they bade him rise, he showed no sign of hearing
them and did not stir. Thereupon, they supposed. that he was
dead. So they quickly removed his arms and examined him
alt over to find out if he was alive. And they found that he was

ot dead, but full of life; but he had no power to speak or to
utter a word, but lay liké aClod of earth. So they picked him”
up bodily in their arms and carried him into one of the rooms,
where they laid him upon a very rich bed, far from the crowd,


te ae


answered never a word and gave the appearance of never having
been able to speak. They examined his pulse and his veins, and
thought it very strange that a knight aie was fully alive could
not speak to them; but some said that they could not explain
the cause for this unless it was some vengeance or manifestation
of Our Lord. Remo ea tt te ee _
“Alf'that day the people stayed with Lancelot, as well as the
third and fourth, some saying that he was dead, and others
that he was alive. “In God’s name,” said an old man who was
present and who knew something of medicine, “T tell you truly
that he is not dead, but as full of life as the healthiest of us all;
so-my advice 1s that he be cared for well and richly until Our
Lord restores him to his customary health; then _we shall know
the truth about him, who he is and from what land. And truly,
if I ever knew anything aright, I_believe that he has. been one.
of the good knights in the world, and shall be so yet again, if
Our Lord wills: he need not yet be afraid of death, it seems to
me, though Ido not say that he may not languish for some
time in his present state.’’ Thus spake the old man of Lancelot,
as one who was very wise. And every word he said turned out
to be true. For they cared for Lancelot for twenty-four days
and nights, ‘and in all that time he neither drank nor ate, nor
did % : word come from his mouth, nor did he stir foot or hand.”
"or any other member, nor did he give any evidence of being alive.
Yet every time they examined him, they concluded that he
was alive. So all the men and women pitied him, saying: “God!
what a pity it is about this knight, who appears to have been
so valiant and excellent and handsome, and now God has
reduced him to this state of confinement!” Thus they often
spoke of Lancelot and wept for him; yet, with all their inquiries,
they did not recognise him as Lancelot. Nevertheless, many
208 THE QUEST OF THE HOLY GRAIL


knights were there who had often seen him and ought to have
| recognised him.
Thus Lancelot lay for twenty-four days while the people
of the place awaited his death. But on the twenty-fourth day
' about noon he opened-tis-eyes. And when he saw the people,
he began to lament. bitterly, and said! “Ah! God, why have.
“you awakened me so soon? [ust now I was more comfortable
~stratfever “be dgain! fair Father Jesus. Chris
could ever Be so favoured ‘o: worthy as to behold: ‘dearly
the great r ae 2 your eceeNn that place where my sift’
gaze and 1 Se efouled by worldly lusts were blinded?”
0 ae ionded Lancelot heard these words, they
were very Biles Raabe and asked him what he had seen. “I have
seen,” said he, “sych’ great-wonlers. and . blessings. that “my.
tongue ‘could not reveal them to you, nor could my heart itself
conceive of them, so great are they. For they are not earthly
things, but things, of.the spirit. And were it not for my great '
Sin-and thisfortune, I should have.seen-still more ; but I lost the
sight of my eyes and the strength of my body because of the
great disloyalty which God saw in me.”
en Lancelot said to those who were present: “Fair lords, I
marvel greatly how I happen to be here. For I do not recollect
how or in what manner I got here.” Then they told him all
they had seen of him, and how he had been with them twenty-
four days without their knowing whether he was dead or alive.
When he heard this, he began to consider the meaning of his
( th having continued so — in that state. And finally he reflected


ete


looked beside him and espied the_hair shirt which he had worn |
for nearly half a year, but of which he was now deprived. He
grieved sorely about this, for he thought that he had violated
his vow in this respect. Then they asked him how he felt, and |
he replied that he felt sound and healthy, thank God. “ a
for God’s sake tell me where I am,” he said. And they told him
that he was in the castle of Corbenyc.

Then there came @ damsel carrying to Lancelot a fresh “new
linen robe; but he would not put it on, preferring the hair |
_shirt, When “those -wiio ‘were about him’ saw’ this, ids

r Sir knight, you may well give up the hair shirt, for your !
quest. is at an end; there is no use of your striving ‘further in


i
a in So |
oe
THE QUEST OF THE HOLY GRAIL 209 ;


search of the Holy Grail ; for be very sure Wat Yon bene s
_Mmore_of it than you have already seen. Now may God bring .....


us those who are destined to see more of it!” But Lancelot


would not be persuaded to give it up, but took the hair shirt (/


and put it on, and over it the linen robe, and then a
robe which was brought to “him, When he was dressed and
apparelled, all the people came to see him and considered
marvellous what God had done with him. Then as soon as they
looked at him, they recognised him and said: “Ah! my lord
hancelot, is it you?” And he said that it was. Then great and
won rous joy was felt. And the news spread until King Pellés__
heard of it; for a knight said to him: “Sire, I can tell you
something wonderful.” ‘“ About what?’ the king inquired.
‘“Upon my word, this knight who has lain here so long like a
dead man has just now got up sound and healthy; well, know
that he is my Jord Lancelot of the Lake,” When the king
heard that, he was very glad and went to visit him. And when
Lancelot saw him approaching, he rose to meet him and
welcomed him, and received him joyfully. The king told him 2
about his fair daughter who was dead,.and who was the ‘, —
Mother of Galahad Lancelot was much distressed, because she
was such a gentlé’woman and was descended from such a ©
noble line. a
Four days more Lancelot tarried there, which caused the king «'
great joy, for he had long desiréd to have him with him. But on
the fifth day when they were seated at dinner it befell that the
Holy Grail had filled the tables so marvellously that no one
could imagine a more bounteous provision. While they were
eating, something happened which they regarded as a great
‘marvel. For they saw plainly that the doors of the palace closed _ ~~
of. themselves without anyone touching them: at which they
were greatly amazed. Then a knight fully armed, and mounted __
on a.mighty steed, appeared before the main door and began
to shout: “Opén, open!” But those within would not open for
him. Still he continued to shout, and he annoyed them so that
the king himself left the table and went to one of the palace
windows looking’ out on the place where the knight was. He
looked at him, and seeing him stationed before the door, he
said to him: “Sir knight, you shall not enter here; no one who <
is seated so high as you shall enter so Jong as the Holy Grail \
is here. Bit begone’to qu own country, for you do not belong /
t


“to the companions of the Quest, but are one of those who have
210 THE QUEST OF THE HOLY GRAIL
ert ist_ and have enlisted in‘ the.


e 9g = 3) a.

When the knight heard that, he was greatly distressed, and
was So sorrowful that he knew not what to do. So he turned away ;
but the king called him back and said to him: “Sir knight,
since you have come thus far, I pray you to tell me who you
are.” “Sire,” he replied, “I am fromthe kir :
my name is Hector des Mares, and I am brother to my_ lord
“Lancelot of the Lake.”**In God’s name,” said the king, “now
I know you well, and am more sorry than before; I did not care
much before, but now I care indeed because of my affection for
your brother who is here within.” :

When Hector heard that his brother was inside, the man in


the world whom he respected most because of the love he bore
him, he exclaimed: “Ah! God, now my shame is doubled and
mcreases more and more! Never again shall I be so bold as to
come into my brother’s presence, since I have proved derelict
where the worthy and true knights will never be found wanting.
Truly spake the good man on the hill who expounded to me and
my lord Gawain the meaning of our dreams!” |
Thereupon Hector left the courtyard and rode away through
the town as fast as his horse could carry him. And when the
_ townspeople saw him flee, they cried after him, taunting him
_and cursing the hour he was born, and calling him a bad and
faithless knight; and this made his heaft so sore that he wished
“he were dead. He fled away out of the town and struck into
the forest where it appeared to be thickest. Then King Pellés
came back to Lancelot and told him about his brother, which
grieved Lancelot so deeply that he did not know what he
ought to do. The others present could not fail to mark his
feelings, when they saw the tears running down his cheeks. So
the king regretted having spoken to him about his brother;
for he would not have done it for anything had he thought
that Lancelot would have taken it so to heart.
When they had eaten, Lancelot requested of the king that
his arms might be brought to him, for he would fain journey


to the kingdom of Logres where he had not been for over w_.
yaar“ Sire-"-said the ing, beg of you for God’s sake to

pardon me for telling you about your brother.” And he said
that he pardoned him willingly. Then the king ordered his
arms to be brought, and when they were brought, he took


them. When he was equipped and ready to mount, the king
q s


THE QUEST OF THE HOLY GRAIL arr


had brought into the middle of the courtyard a strong swift
horse, which he mounted at the king’s request. Then, when
he had mounted and had bidden farewell to the people of the


place, he departed and rode far through strange lands.

‘One night 1 happened that Lancelot was lodged in an abbey |
of White Fnars, who Showed him great honour because =
was a knight-errant. In the morning, when he had heard mass
and was about to leave the monastery, he looked to the nght
and saw a rich fair tomb which had been recently constructed,
as he thought. So he turned in that direction to see what it
was. And when he drew near, he saw that it.was so handsome
that he knew that some rich prince must lie beneath it. When
he looked at the head, he saw an inscription which said: “ Here
lies King Bademagus of Gorre, whom Gawain, King Arthur’s
nephew, killed,” When he learned this, he sorrowed not a
little, for he loved with a great love King Bademagus. If it had
been any other than my lord Gawain who had killed him, he
could not have escaped paying the penalty of death. As it was,
he wept tenderly and made lament, saying that this was indeed
a heavy blow to those of King Arthur’s household as well as
to many another worthy man. |

That day Lancelot tarried there grieving much and in distress
for love of the good man who had shown him many an honour.
The next morning, when he was armed, he mounted his steed
and, commending the friars to God’s keeping, he resumed his
journey. And in his wanderings he came by chance to the tombs
where the swords were set up. As soon as he beheld this strange
sight, he rode inside on his horse and examined the tombs.
Then he left there and rode until he came to King Arthur’s
court where all gave him a joyous welcome as soon as they
catight sight of him; for greatly had they desired his return
and that of the other companions, very few of whom had as
yet come back. And those who had returned were ashamed
of having accomplished nothing in the Quest. Now the story
ceases to speak of them all, and returns to Galahad, the son
of Lancelot of the Lake.


yr] wna


vigized by (SO gle UNIVERSITY OF VIRGINIA


CHAPTER XV


Now the story tells how Galahad, after he had separated from
Lancelot, rode for many a day as chance led him, one hour
forward and another hour back again, until he came to an,
abbey where King Mordrain was; and when he heard that the.


king was waiting for the Good Knight, he thought he would


ee ~~


go to see him. So the next day, as soon as he had heard mass,
he went where the king was. As_soon as he got inside, the lang,
who for a long time had lost his sight and the strength of his
body by Our. Lord’s will, immediately regained his sight when
he drew near him. And at once he sat up straight and said to
Galahad: “Galahad, servant of God, true knight, whose arrival
I have so long awaited, embrace me and allow me to rest upon.
thy breast, in order that I may pass away in thy arms; for thou
art pure and chaste above all other knights, as the fleur-de-lys,
which is the emblem of ,arginity, is whiter than all other
flowers. Thou art like the, lily in purity, and_also like the ie
for perfect virtue and flaming hue; for the flame of the Holy
Spint is so kindled and warm in thee that my flesh, which
was all dead and worn out, is now all rejuvenated and healthy.”
When Galahad heard these words; he sat down by the head
of the king’s bed, and took him in his arms upon his lap, because
the good man wished to rest there. Then the king reclined upon
him and, putting his arms about him, began to embrace him,
and said: “Fair Father Jesus Christ, now I have my desire
fulfilled! Now I beseech Thee to come to fetch me where I am,
for there could be no easier and more appropriate place for me
to die than this. There is nothing but lilies and roses in this


oe ee


sweet contentment I have so long craved.” As soon as he had


addressed this request-to Our Lord, it became clear that Our

Lord had heard his prayer, for he promptly returned his soul

to Him whom he had served so long, and died in the arms of

Galahad. When the others in the abbey learned of this; they __

‘came and found that the wounds which he had so long borne ~

on his body were wholly healed: and this they regarded as a
212
miracle. Then they rendered to the body the rites due to a king,
and buried it there.
Galahad tarried there two days. On the third he went away,
and rode until he came to the Perilous Forest, where he found ©
) the boiling spring, of which” the story spoke some distance
' back.! But as soon as he put his hand in it, the heat left the
“water, because in him there had never ‘been. any heat of lust.
The people of the country considered this a marvellous thing,
as soon as they heard that the water had turned cool. So the
spring lost the name it had borne before, and was henceforth
known as Galahad’s Spring.
When he had completed this adventure, he came by chance
ee the entrance of the country of Gorre, where he found an
ey once visited by Lancelot, where the latter had come
pion the tomb of Galahad King of Hoselice, son of Joseph of /
_Arimathea, and the tomb at ites where he had failed.
“Having arrived there, he looked down into the crypt which was
beneath the monastery, and when he saw the tomb bu
so marvellously, he asked the friars what it was. “Sire,” said
they, “this is a strange adventure which can be achieved only
by him who shall surpass in goodness and chivalry all the
companions of the Round Table.” “I should like,” said he, “if
it pleased you, to have you take me to the entrance of the
crypt,” which they said they would gladly do. So they took
him to the entrance of the crypt, and he went down the steps.
_As soon as he drew near, the tomb of fire, which for many a
day had burned bright ‘and stron “subsided and the flame
“flickered “because of the arrival of. in whom was_no sinful
heat. When he came to the tomb, he raised it up and saw
“within the body of Simeon who had’ died; and as soon as the ~
‘Theat had ceased, he heard a_ voice which said: “ Galahad,
Galahad, you ought to render profound thanks to Our Lord
for granting you such a favour: for because of your good life,
_you can retrieve souls from punishment on earth and set them_/
in the joys of paradise. I am your relative Simeon who for three.
hundred and fifty-four -years-have-dwelt here in this burning
heatto-exptate a sin which I once committed against Josey f
“of Arimathea-T shotild have been lost and damned with the
punishment which I have endured. But the grace of the Holy
Spirit, which in you avails more than earthly chivalry, has
looked-upon mé with pity because of the great humility in you,


{ 1 There is no mention of this episode in the preceding narrative.


» Google


214 THE QUEST OF THE HOLY GRAIL


and in its mercy has delivered me from earthly woe and set
me in the joy of heaven through the favour afforded by your
arrival.” The others present, who had come down as soon as
the flame was extinguished, heard these words, and considered
it a great marvel and miracle. Then Galahad took. the body
and removed.it fram the tomb where it had so long been, . and
carried it into the middle of the church. Then the friars took it
and buried it as befitted a knight, for such he had been, and
held a suitable service with interment in front of the high altar.
Then they came to Galahad and showed him the greatest
honour in their power, and asked him whence he came and to
whom he belonged. And he told them the truth about it all.
The next morning, when Galahad had heard mass, he left
there, commending the friars to God, and rode five full eats /
(» before coming to the residence of the Cripple King. And.
these five years Perceval oe him company a pens he
eae Within that time they completely achieved ied
adventures of the kingdom o that few Were ever eat
‘There afterward except some mifaeuleds revelation of Our Lord.
And wherever they passed, and whatever the number of their
foes, they could never be discomfited or dismayed or frightened.
Qne day it happened that they came forth from a great and
marvellous forest. And there they met at a cross-road Bors who
was riding atone. When they recognised him, do not ask whether
they were glad and happy, for they had long been without his
company and greatly desired to see him. So they made much >
of each other, celebrating the honour and good fortune of :
‘the’ meeting. Then they asked him how he was, and he told |
them the truth and how he had fared: and he : said that full five | |
_ years had passed without his lying four times in any bed or
“im any house where people lived; hit he had slept in lonely
“woods and distant mountains, “where he would have died more
than a hundred times, had it not been for the grace of the
Holy Spirit which had comforted and cheered him in his distress. ;
‘And did you find what we are looking for?” asked Perceval.
“Certainly not,” said he, “yet I believe that we shall not
separate before we have finished that for which we started upon
this Quest.” “God grant us that!” said Galahad, “for so help
me God, I know of nothing which could make me so happy as
your arrival which delights me and satisfies my desire.”
Thus chance brought the three companions together as
chance had previously separated them. They journeyed together _
_for a long time until one day they came to the castle of Corbenyc. _


‘When they were inside and the king recognised them, the joy
was great and marvellous, for it _was_ generally known that
with their arrival the adventures of the castle would end, which
had so long existed’ And thé néws travelled far and wide, until
all the inhabitants came to see them. King Pellés wept over
Galahad, his nephew, and so did the others who had seen him
as a little child.

When they had removed their arms, Elyezer, the son of King
Pellés, brought to them the Br of which the story
has already been told, and with which Joseph had been smitten
through the (thigh. And when he had drawn it from the scabbard
and had told-thém how it came to be broken, Bors took it to
see if he could join it again, but without success. When he saw
that he was not equal to the task, he handed it to Perceval,
saying: “Sire, see whether you can achieve this adventure.”
“Willingly,”’ he replied. So he took the sword just as it was
and fitted the two pieces together, but could by no means join
them. Seeing this, he said to Galahad: “Sire, we have failed in
this adventure. Now you must try, and if you fail, I think it


will never be achieved by mortal man.” Then Galahad took the |


_two pieces of the sword and fitted them together. And at once the
pieces became joined so marvellously that no one in the world
could detect the break or know that it had ever been broken.


When the companions beheld this, they said that God had |


granted them a good beginning, and that they believed that
they would easily accomplish the other adventures, since this
one had now been achieved. When the others present ‘saw that
the adyenture of the sword had been concluded, they were
very happy. They presented it to Bors, saying that it could not
be in better hands, for he was such a wonderfully fine knight
and worthy man.
When the vesper hour arrived, the weather changed, t

grew dark, and a great and marvellous wind arose amnich alr oe
struck the palace; and the heat of the wind was so fierce that
many of them expected to be burned, and some fainted with
fear. Then they heard a voice saying: “Let those who are not
entitled to sit at the table of Jesus Christ » cog for. the


Uridina rom


tized by (SOO gle UNIVERSITY OF VIRGINIA


216 THE QUEST OF THE HOLY GRAIL


creature known in those days in any land. With these three the
three companions remained to see what revelation. Our Lord
moult he plewe! cp grant them. After waiting a little while,
they saw coming through the door nine armed knights, who
took off their helmets and armour; then approaching Galahad,
they bowed to him and said: “Sire, we have come in haste to
be present with you at the table when the precious food is to

‘be broken Then he replied that they had arrived in time, for

Tthéy too had just got there. Then they all sat down in the
\ midst of the palace, and Galahad asked them whence they came.

hreé of them said they came from Gaul, and three from
Ireland, and the other three from Denmark. pane

le they were conversing thus, they sAw come out from one
of the adjoining chambers a wooden bed borne by four damsels.
Upon the bed there lay a worthy man apparently in’ gréat
distress; and he had a golden crown upon his head. When thre
daméels had carried him into the middle of the hall, they set
him down and withdrew. Then he lifted his head and said to
Galahad: “Welcome, sire! I have long desired to see you and
havé long waited for you to come, being in such pain and
anguish the while that any other could not have endured the
trial. But now, if it please God, has come the hour when m
grief is to be relieved, and I shall depart from thts tite a5 Te was
long ago promised me.”

While they were speaking thus, they heard a voice saying:
“Anyone who has not been a companion of the Quest of the
Holy Grail should now withdraw: for he may not longer remain
here.” As soon as these words were uttered, King Pellés and his |
son Elyezer and the damsel withdrew. When the palace was
eniptied of all except those who knew themselves. tobe com-
‘panions of the Quest, it seemed at once to those who had
remained that there cathe from heaven a man dressed in the
garb of a bishop, with a crozier in his hand and a mitre upon
his head; and four angels Carried him upon a nich seat. and.
_seated him at the table on which was the Holy Grail. He who
had been carried in like a bishop-had-werds.on his brow which
. -» said: “Behold Josephe, the first Christian bigfop, whom Our |

- | Lord anointed ffi‘the city of Sarraz,in the tentple there.”

the knights seeing this understood the words, but marvelled
_how it could be true; for this Josephe to whom the words referred
had been dead more than three hundred_years. But “he spoke
to them at once, and said: “Ah! knights of God, servants of
Jesus Christ, marvel not to see me before you as I am in the
presence of this Holy Vessel; for just.as I served it in the flesh,
so. I serve it being a spirit.” ~
Saying this, he drew near the silver table and prostrated
himself on his elbows and Knees before the altar. And when he
had continued thus for some space, he listened and heard the
Ghamber door open and slam loudly. So he looked_in that
direction, as did all the others. And they saw tha angels )come
ig_ who had carried Josephe, two of them bearing two tapers,
and the third a red silk cloth, and the fourth a lance which
dripped blood so freely that the drops fell down into a box in °
his other hand, Then the two set the tapers upon the table, and
the third laid the cloth beside the Holy Vessel, and the fourth
held the lance straight up over the Holy Vessel so that the blood |
"which was flowing down the lance dropped into it. As soon as
“they ‘had done alt this, Josephe arose and removed the lance a
_little from the Holy Vessel and covered the latter with the cloth.
Then Josephe prepared to celebrate the sacrament of the
qnass, And after waiting a little, he took in the sacred Vessel ‘a
wafer apparently of bread. And at elevation there came :
_ down from heaven a figure as of 4 child With a face as red as if |
it were aflame with fire; and He enteted into the bread so that .
those present saw cledrly that the’bread\had assumed the form _
of carnal man, When Josephe had held it thus a while, he put
it back in the Holy Vessel.
When Josephe had performed the priest’s part in the service
of the mass, he came up to Galahad and kissed him, and told »: .
him in like manner to kiss alt his brothers Anaso he did. When
‘this ceremony was over, he said to them: “Servants of Jesus
_Christ, who have striven and toiled to behold a. part of the
wonders of the Holy Grail, sit down now at this ae and you
shall be filled with the best and most precious food\that ever
“knights tasted, and this from the very hand of -yeur Saviour.
And you can say that you have toiled to good purpose, for
you shall receive to-day the highest reward that ever knights
received.” Having said this, Josephe vanished from their midst,
so that they never knew what had become of him. Then they
sat down at once at the table in great fear, and wept so tenderly
that their faces were all wet. with tears.
Then the companions looked and saw come forth from the
Hoty Vessera man as it were quite naked, arid His hands and
- ~ feet and body were bleeding; and He said to them: “ My knights
= ,
218 THE QUEST OF THE HOLY GRAIL


and servants,and My loyal sons, who while yet in this mortal
Jife have become spiritual, who have sought for Me so long that,
I can no longer conceal Myself from you itsis fitting that you.
should behold a part of My mysb€ries and sevfets, for you have
proved yourselves worthy to sit at My table, where no knight
ever ate since the fime of Joseph of Arimathzea. Some of the
others have partaken as faithfut servants: that is, some of the
knights here and many others have been satisfied with the
grace of the Holy Vessel; but they have never been in the same '
position which you now occupy. Now take and receive the
precious food which you have so long desired, and for which
you have eadured such toil.” Sian
Then He Himself took the Holy Vessel and came to Galahad,
to whom when he had kneeled, He gave to partake of his Saviour.
And he received Him joyfully with folded hands. So did each
of the others, and there was none to whom it did not seem that
something like bread Was placed_in his mouth. When they had
all received of ‘this precious ‘food, which seemed to them_sa..
_marvellously sweet that they thought that all the savours
they could imagine were entering their bodies, He who had
“regaled them thus said to Galahad; “Son, so pure and clean as
‘mortal man can be, dost thou know what I am holding in My
hands?” “ ** he replied, “unless you tell me.” He replied:
. “Tt is the bowl} from which Jesus Christ ate of the lamb
. on Easter Day with His disciples. This is the bowl which
has served acceptably all those whom I have found serving Me;
this is the bowl which no faithless man ever beheld without
suffering for it. And because it has thus served all manner of
—— ‘people acceptably, it is properly called the Holy Grail. Now
cic hast on what ition hast i desired to see and what thou
' hast coveted. But thow hast not yet beheld it so clearly as thou |
pbalt yet see it. And knowest thou where it is to be? In the. « -
‘temple int the city of Sarra2, and thefefore 1 ovés thee to V
proceed thither and bear this holy.Yessel company, which
‘to-night will leave the kingdom of Logres\so that it shall Hever
“be seen there again, nor shall it Tause any more adventures.
ee And knowest thou why it is going away? Because its
claims are no more served OF honoured by the people of this
. Jand: For they have turned to a lower worldly life, in spite of
‘ having been nourished with grace Irom this Holy Vessel. And
because they have so ill repaid the favour, J divest them of the_
honour which I had done them. Therefore I wish thée to go
to-morrow to the sea, and there thou shalt find the ship in
which thou didst find the Sword with the strange belt. In order
that thou mayst not go alone, I wish thee to take with thee
Perceval and Bors. However, since I do not wish thee to leave
this country without curing the Cripple King, I wish thee to
take some blood from this lance and anoint his legs)with it;
for by this shall he be cured, and by nothing else.” “Ah! Sire,”
said Galahad, ‘why will you not permit all the others to come
with me?” “Because I will not have it so,” He said, “but I
wish to do it after the manner of My disciples, For just as they
ate with THC at The Last SUpHENT Se you have eaten now with
me at the table of the Holy Grail. And you are ei just as
the disciples were, I being over you as the thirteenth;»who am


to be your Master and Shepherd. Just as I separated them and ,


sent them over the world to preach the true gospel, so I send
you, one here and another there. And you shall all die in this


service, except dnie Of you.”? Then He gave them His blessing /


and vanished, so that they knew not what became of Him,
except that they saw Him ascend toward heaven.

And Galahad came to the lance which was lying on the table
and touched the blood; then he went to the Cripple King and
anointed his legs\with it where he had been (woundét, Then
the king clothed himself and left the bed_healttty-and whole.
And he thanked Our Lord for having so promptly regarded
him with His favour. He lived a long time yet, but not ift the
world, for he withdrew at once into a community of White
Friars. And Our Lord performed many a fine miracle for love
of him, of which the story does not tell in this place, as there
is no need of it.

About midnight, when they had prayed for a long time to
Our Lord that in His mercy He would conduct them with safety
- for their souls whithersoever they might go, a voice. descended
in their midst which said: “Ye who are My true sons and not
My step-sons, My friends and not My enemies, be gone from
here and go where you think you will fare best, as chance may
lead you.” When they heard this, they all answered with one
voice: “Father in heaven, blessed be Thou who hast deigned
to call us Thy sons and Thy friends! Now we see clearly that
we have not wasted our efforts.”

Thereupon they left the palace and came down into the
courtyard where they found arms and horses. Then they equipped
themselves and mounted at once. And when they were mounted,


Digitized by (40 gle UNIVERSITY OF VIRGINIA


atl


—


220 THE QUEST OF THE HOLY GRAIL


they rode out from the castle and asked each other where they
came from, in order that they might recognise each other. Thus
they discovered that among the three who came from Gaul was
Claudin, the son of Claudas, and that the others, from whatever
land they came, were gentlemen of high lineage. When the
time came to separate, they embraced each other like brothers
and wept very tenderly, and~they all said to Galahad: “Sire,
you must know that we’ were never so happy as when we knew
that we should be in your company, nor was grief ever so bitter
as ours now that we must depart from you so soon. But we see
that this separation is pleasing to Our Lord; and therefore we
must part without grieving.” “Fair gentlemen,” said Galahad,
“if you liked my company, I liked yours just as much, But you
see that we Must not remain together. Therefore I commend
you to God, and pray you, if you come to King Arthur’s court,
to salute my father, my ford Lancetot, and those of the Round
Table.” And they ‘said that, if they passed that way, they
‘would not forget the commission.
' Then they separated. Then Gatahad with his two co mpanions |
rode until they came to the sea in less than four days. They ,
woltd-have-reached it sooner, but they did not travel directly, :
not being acquainted with the roads.

Upon reaching the sea, they found on the shore the shi
which the Sword with the strange belt had been discovered, an
they saw the inscription on the side of the ship whicl forbade |
anyone to enter unless he believed firmly in Jesus Christ. When
_they came to the side and looked in, they_saw in the middle of '

\,, ¥.the bed, which was in the ship, the silver table which they had
Ne Jeft at the Cripple King’s, And the Holy Grail was upon i it, covered —
-,. with a red silk cloth like a napkin. When the companions beheld
this strange thing, they-showed it to one another, and said that
they were fortunate indeed to have what they most loved and.
cherished bear them company where they were to dwell. Then
they crossed themselves and, commending themselves to Our
| Lord, they entered the ship. And as soon as they were on board,
the.wind, which before-had been quiet and calm, struck the sail
so violently that it drove the ship from the shore and out to
sea. Then it began to sail very swiftly, as the wind drove it more
and more. i Stes .
; Thus they ver the sea for a long time without kno
/ whither ea ete them. Every time that Gane ee .
down or rose up, he paved to Our Lord that whensoever He
THE QUEST OF THE HOLY GRAIL 22x


should require of him his translation from this world, He would
send for him. He prayed this prayer so often at morning and
evening that the divine voice said to him: “Fear not, Galahad,
for Our Lord will Pérform thy desire concerning this: whenéver
thou shalt request the death of thy body, thou shalt have thy
réquest, and shalt receive the life of thy soul with étérnal bliss.”
This request, which Galahad had so often preferred, was heard
by Perceval; and he wondered greatly why he made it; so he
begged him in the name of the comradeship and the faith which
united them, to tell him why he sought such a favour. “T will
tell you,” Galahad replied. “At that time when we saw a part
of the marvels of the Holy Grail which Our Lord revealed to us
in Fis" Holy mercy, as I beheld the mysteries which are not
discovered“ to everyone, but only to the ministers of Jesus
“Christ—at that moment when I saw these things which the /
Réart of mo could not conceive nor tongue describe,
‘my heart was enthralled in such sweet bliss that if I had’ passed
“at once from this life, I believe that no man ever died in such
contentment as I would then have done. For there stood then
“Before me such a om f. angels and such a host of
heavenly powers that I should have been then translated from
“the earthly to the heavenly life in the satisfaction of the glorious
martyrs and the friends of Our Lord. And because I believe that
I shall be sometime again in as favourable a position, or mayhap
_in a better one than I was in then, to behold this great joy, I
_prefer this request that you have heard. Thus I expect to leave
ithis world, in accordance with Our Lord’s will, while beholding |
ithe marvels of the Holy Grail.” 7
Thus Galahad announced to Perceval the approach of his
death, as “it Had been revealed to hini by the divine message. <«
In this manner, as I have told you, the people of the country of
Logres because of their.sins. lost the Holy Grail, which so often
had fed and nourished them. Just as Our Lord sent it to Galahad} :
to Joseph, and to their posterity because of their virtues; so-He
cut the wicked heirs off ffoni it because of their wickedness and _
the evil He found in them. Thus one can see clearly that the
wicked lost through their perversity what the good preserved
through their virtue. }

The companions continued a long time at sea, until one day
they said to Galahad: “Sire, you have never Tain upon this bed
which, according to the inscription, was prepared for you. You

“ought to do so, for the letters state that you shall lie upon it.”’
222 THE QUEST OF THE HOLY GRAIL


So he said that he would do so. And he lay down and(lept for |
a long time. When he awoke, he looked about him ant-beheld_ |


the city of Gatraz-When there came to them a voice which said:


When they were about to remove the table from the ship,
they looked across the water and saw approaching the vessel.
in which they had tong before laid the sister of Perceval. At the

sight of it, they exclaimed to each other: “In God’s name, this

‘ damsel has kept the promise tots in following us here.’’.Then
they took the silver table and removed it from the ship, Bors_
and Perceval carrying it in front, and Galahad behind. Then | '

* they started to enter the city. But when they came to the gate,

| Galahad was exhausted by the weight of the table which was

a arate And he saw a man with crutches sitting under thegate)

| _—who was awaiting alms from the passers-by, who often ave

| him something out of love for Jesus Christ. As Galahad ap-

j proached him, he called him, saying: “Good man, come here

/ and help me carry this table up intq the temple;” “ Ah! sir, in

God’s ‘nanié,” Said he, “what are you saying? It is more than .

ten years since I have been able ta move without help.” “ Never

ning,” Galahad replied, “but_rise and have no hesitation, for
thou. art.-cused.”” en Galahad had said this, he tried to see
if he could get up; and as soon as he made the effort, he found
himself as well and healthy as if he had never had any infirmity
in his life. Then he ran to the table and took hold of it opposite
to Galahad. And when he was within the city, he told all those
whom he met of the miracle which God had wrought in him.

When they had come up into the temple, they saw the seat
which Our Lord had formerly prepared for Josephe to occupy.
And at once all the people of the city ran together to see the
maimed man who had recently been made whole. When the.
companions had done what was commanded them, they retumed.
to the water-side and entered the ship in which Perceval’s sister
Jay. Then they carried her body upon the bed into the temple,
and buried her with hono fitting a king’s daughter..

When the king of the’ city) named Escorant, saw the three
companions, he asked thei whence they camieand what they had
carried in on the silver table. And they answered his inquiries
truthfully, and told him of the marvel of the Haly Grail and the
power which God had conferred on it. But he was treacherous

‘and cruel, being a-member-of-the" cirsed pagan line. So he /
“belfevert-nothine of what they -totthim; ‘but said they were
faithless deceivers. Waiting until he saw them remove their

arms, he had them seized by his men and thrown into prison;

and he held them closely in confinement for a year without /,
allowing’them any freedom. But this turned out well for them;

for as soon as they were cast into prison, Our Lord, who was not...
forgetful of them, sent the Holy Grail to bear th em._company, ee
by whose favour they were daily nourished so long as they were ‘' |
confined. eo hoa


At the end of the year Galahad complained to Our Lord one.
diy—saying? "Sire, Tt seems fo me that I have survived in this
world long enough : IF it please you, release me from ‘it’soofi”~
Now that day it happened that King Escorant lay sick unto
death. So he sent for them and begged their forgiveness for
having wrongfully treated them so ill. They willingly.
him, and he died at once.

When he was interred, those of the city were greatly dismayed,
for they knew not whom they could make their king. So they

took lengthy counsel together ; and while they were thus engaged,

they heard a voice which said to them: “Take the youngest of

the three companions, and he will take care of you and be your
“courisellor so long as he remains with you.” So they obeyed the
' command of the voice, and took Galahad, making him their
. unwilling master, and put the crown upon hid head. All this he.

regretted much; but seeing that it must needs be so, he permitted
ie toe otherwise they would have killed him.

When_Galahad_had e lord of the land, he constructed

on aig table an‘ark o eoktend precious stones to cover
' “the sacted“Vessel. And every morning, as soon as he arose, he
' and his companions came to the sacred Vessel to make their
pear and orisons.


kT en
224 THE QUEST OF THE HOLY GRAIL


_ ' the mystery of the mass and had removed the platter from the
sacred Vessel, he called Galahad, and said to him: “Come
forward, servant of Jesus Christ, and thou shalt behold what
thou hast so desired to see.” Then he stepped forward and_
looked within the sacred Vessel. And when he had looked in, he
began to tremble violently, as soon ‘as mortal flesh began ta
.gaze upon things of the spirit. Then Galahad stretched forth
‘his “trands-to6ward Heaven, and said: “Lord, I adore Thee and
thank Thee that Thou hast brought my desire to pass, for now
I see clearly what fongue could not tell nor heat conceive, Here
J bettold the motfve of courage and the inspifation of prowess;
here I see th Marvel of fitarvets! And since it Ts so, fair gentle
‘Lord, that you have accomplished my desire and allowed me
to see what I have always longed to see, now I pray you, just
‘as I am and in this great bliss, to permit me to pass from this
,earthly life to that in heaven.” ~ =e

As soon as Galahad had addressed this request to Our Lord,
the good man who stood before the altar, dressed like a priest,

‘ took the Body of Our Lord from the table and offered it to
Galshad.: Humbly and devoutly he received it. And when he
had partaken of it, the good man said to him: “Knowest thou
who I am?” “Nay, lord, unless you tell me.” “Know, then,” said
he, “that I am Josephe, son of Joseph of Arimathea, whom
‘Our Lord has sent to bear thee company. And knowest thou

' why He has sent me rather than another? Because thou hast

' resembled me in two respects: in that thou hast beheld the

, marvels of the Holy Grail as I have done, and in that thou

_ + hast been virgin as I am too; and it is nght that one pure man

\t should bear another company.”

When he heard this, Galahad came up to Perceval and kissed
him ; then he did the same to Bors, saying to him: “Bors, salute |
my father, my lord Lancelof, as soon as you see him.” Then;

_ Galahad prostrated_himself on his elbows and knees before the
table; but he had not been there long before he fell forward upon
his face on the temple floor, for the soul was already gone from

. his body. And the angels bore him away with jubilation, blessing
Our Lord” ~~~ reese a
As soon as Galahad had passed away, a great miracle happened
there. For the two companions saw plainly that a hand came
down from heaven; but they saw no body to which the hand
belonged: Coming straight to the Holy Vessel, it seized it and
the lance as well, and carried it-up toward heaven, so that since
\ | od |
| a ce
THE QUEST OF THE HOLY GRAIL 225 ~~
then no man has been bold énough to assert that he had seen
thé, Holy Grail.

When Perceval and Bors saw that Galahad was dead, never
were men so sorrowful; and had they not been such good men
of virtuous life, they might readily have fallen into despair for
the great love they bore him. The people of the country mourned —
him sorely too, and were in deep distress, His grave was du
there where he died; and as soon as he was interred, Percevat
withdrew to a hermitage without the city and assumed the
JTeligious garb Bots accompanied him,. but “Without laying
aside his worldly dress, because he was desirous of returming
“to King Arthur’s court. Perceval lived a year and three days

_ in the hermitage, and then died; and Bors had hint buried with
his sister and with Galahad ip the temple.
When Bors’saw that he wag SIT'SIORS in-such a distant land

as in these regions of Babylon, he left Sarraz all armed, and
coming to the sea entered a ship, And he had such good fortune
that in a very short time he arrived in the kingdom of Logres.

When once in the country, he rode until he came to Camelot,

where King Arthur was. Never was such joy made over anyorie
as over him; for they thought they had lost him forever, seeing

that he had been so long absent from the country.
When they had finished their meal, the king sent for the
clerks who used to set down in writing the adventures of the
“knights of the court. So when Bors had related the adventures
“of the Holy Grail just as he had beheld them, they were com:
mitted to writing and kept among the rolls at Salisbury, Master
Map yot them from there to make his book of the Holy

Ves rail for the love of his lord King Henry, who ordered the story

f to be translated from Lgtin into French, Here the story con-

_ cludes, without further mention of the Adventures of the

. Holy Grail.
