A Treatise on Man and the Development of His Faculties (Adolphe Quetelet, 1835)
==========================================================
The founding work of social statistics: the 'average man' and the discovery of statistical regularity in human behavior. Translated from the French, 1842. Public domain. Sourced from Internet Archive (https://archive.org/details/treatiseonmandev00quet).

A    TREATISE    ON    MAN 

AND    THE    DEVELOPMENT    OF    HIS    FACULTIES. 

By  M.  a.  QUETELET, 

rERI'lCTL  AL  SECRKIARY  OK  THE  UOVAL  ACADEMY  OE  BRfSSEL.-;,  CORKK^rO.NDlXO 
MEMBER  OF  THE  l.NSTITUIE  OF  FRANCE,  ETC 

NOW  FinST  TRANSLATKU  INTO  ENGLISIL 

EDINBURGH: 
PUBLISHED    BY    WILLIAM    AND    ROBERT    CHAMBERS. 

1842. 

EDINBURGH  : 
W.  AND  E.  CHAMBERS. 

-HS5' 

PUBLISHERS'    NOTICE, 

The  present  work  was  first  printed  and  issued  in  Paris  in  1835,  with  the  title,  "  Sur  L'Homme,  et  le 
Developpement  de  ses  Facultes,  par  M.  A.  Quetelet,  Secretaire  Perpetuel  de  TAcademie  Eoyale  de 
Bnixelles,"  &c.  &c.  (2  volumes  8vo.)  Previous  to  its  appearance,  the  author  had  attained  a  high  reputa- 
tion among  men  of  science,  being  distinguished  peculiarly  by  the  cautious,  accurate,  and  comprehensive 
character  of  all  his  researches,  and  by  his  skill  and  acumen  in  applying  the  important  science  of  numbers 
to  every  subject  which  he  investigated.  The  treatise  "  Sur  L'Homnic"  brought  him  a  large  accession  of 
well-merited  fame.  It  was  the  first  attempt  made  to  apply  the  art  of  calculation  to  the  social  movements 
of  the  liuman  being,  and  to  examine  by  it  his  moral  anatomy,  with  the  view  of  detecting  the  real  sources 
and  amount  of  the  evils  under  which  he  labours,  and,  ulteriorly,  of  remedying  them  when  known.  Of  the 
nature  of  the  remarkable  truths  developed  by  M.  Quetelet,  it  would  not  be  proper  here  to  speak ;  nor  is  it 
necessary,  as  the  work  itself  will  sufficiently  indicate  and  explain  them.  Suffice  it  to  state,  that  the  impres- 
sion made  by  the  treatise  over  the  whole  of  continental  Europe,  through  criticisms,  republications,  and 
translations,  has  been  very  great.  Fully  convinced  of  its  value,  Messrs  Chambers  gladly  embraced  a 
proposal  which  was  made  to  them  to  publish  an  English  translation,  and  to  present  it  in  such  a  form  and 
at  such  a  price  as  might  be  most  calculated  to  promote  its  diffusion  throughout  all  sections  of  the 
community. 

On  learning  that  a  British  edition  was  in  progress,  M.  Quetelet  came  forward  in  the  most  handsome 
manner,  and  proffered  a  new  preface,  which  accordingly  is  presented  here  in  a  translated  form.  In  this 
composition,  the  object  of  the  author  has  been,  at  once  to  defend  his  treatise  from  objections  brought 
against  it  subsequently  to  the  issue  of  the  original  Parisian  edition,  and  also  to  point  out  in  what  manner 
he  intended,  in  his  projected  continuations  of  the  work,  to  follow  up  and  elucidate  the  principles  already 
laid  down  by  him.  It  will  probably  be  admitted  by  the  majority  of  readers,  that  he  has  most  ably  defended 
his  views  and  estimate  of  the  physical,  moral,  and  intellectual  qualities  of  man,  with  their  results  upon  his 
position  in  society.  He  has  refuted  the  objections  brought  against  his  mode  of  reasoning  ;  and  has  cleared 
himself  of  the  charge  of  being  either  a  materialist  or  a  fatalist.  He  shows,  also,  that  he  is  no  theorist  or  system- 
maker,  but  simply  wishes  to  arrive  at  truth  by  the  only  legitimate  way,  namely,  the  examination  of  facts 
— the  incontrovertible  facts  fuxnished  by  statistical  data.  Lastly,  he  conveys  the  important  information, 
that  the  experiencer  of  every  additional  year,  since  the  first  publication  of  his  treatise,  proves,  in  the  most 
remarkable  manner,  the  accuracy  both  of  his  statistical  tables  and  the  inferences  founded  upon  them. 
His  section  on  crime,  in  particular,  however  startling  it  may  have  appeared  to  the  world,  has  been 
shown,  by  fresh  statistical  information,  to  merit  credit  in  every  particular.  On  these  accounts,  the  pub- 
lishers are  confident  that  the  prefatory  matter  with  which  they  have  been  favoured  by  the  distinguished 
Belgian  philosopher,  will  be  felt  by  the  public  greatly  to  enhance  the  value  of  the  present  edition. 

It  seems  only  necessary  to  add,  that  the  present  translatioA  has  been  effected  under  the  able  superin- 
tendence of  Dr  R.  Knox,  F.R.S.E.,  Corresponding  Member  of  the  French  Academy  of  Medicine,  and 
Lecturer  on  Anatomy  in  Edinburgh ;  and  that  the  work,  in  its  passage  through  the  press,  has  been  indebted 
to  the  editorial  care  of  Mr  Thojias  Smibert,  who  has  also  translated  the  manuscript  preface  of  M.  Que- 
telet. Considering  its  native  value,  and  these  acquired  advantages,  the  publishers  present  it  with  the 
confident  hope  that  it  wiU  form  a  valuable  addition  to  the  philosophical  literature  of  their  country. 

Edinburgh,  Aoye/H^er  5,  18-11. 

786697 

CONTENTS. 

Page 

PREFACE  TO  THE  PRESENT  EDITION,  BY  JI.  QUETELET,       --  -  -  -  -  -V 

INTRODUCTORY,                                             -.---..-.  5 

BOOK  FIRST. DEVELOPMENT  OF  THE  PHYSICAL  QUALITIES  OF  WAN,                          -                  -                  «                  -  9 

CHAPTER  I. — OF  BIRTHS  IN  GENERAL,  AND  OF  FECUNDITY,       -----  IQ 

CHAPTER  II. OF  THE  INFLUENCE  OF  NATURAL  CAUSES  ON  THE  NUMBER  OF  BIRTHS,             -                  -  11 

CHAPTER  III. OF  THE  INFLUENCE  OF  DISTURBING  CAUSES  ON  THE  NUMBER  OF  BIRTHS,             -  21 

CHAPTER  IV. OF  STILL-BORN  CHILDREN,  -  -  -  -  --  -24 

CHAPTER  V. OF  THE  INFLUENCE  OF  NATURAL  CAUSES  ON  MORTALITY,                -                  .                  .  26 

CHAPTER  VI. OF  THE  INFLUENCE  OF  DISTURBING  CAUSES  ON  MORTALITY,                  -                  -                  -  37 

CHAPTER  VIL — RELATIONS  OF  POPULATION  TO  SOCIAL  PROSPERITY,                        -                  .                  .  48 

BOOK  SECOND. — DEVELOPMENT  OF  STATURE,  VTEIGHT,  STRENGTH,  &C.,                   -                  -                  -                  -  57 

CHAPTER  L OF  THE  DEVELOPMENT  OF  THE  HEIGHT,                   -                  .                  .                  .                  .  53 

CHAPTER  II. OF  THE    DEVELOPMENT  OF  THE  AVEIGHT,  AND  OF  ITS   RELATIONS  TO  THE  DEVELOP- 
MENT OF  THE  HEIGHT  OF  THE  BODY,  -  -  -  -  -  --63 

CHAPTER  HI. OF  THE  DEVELOPMENT  OF  STRENGTH  OR  POWER,             -                  .                  .                   _  67 

CHAPTER  IV. — INSPIRATION,  PULSATION,  SWIFTNESS,  &C.,                   -                  -                  -                  -                  -  70 

BOOK  THIRD. DEVELOPiMENT  OF  THE  MORAL  AND  INTELLECTUAL  QUALITIES  OF  MAN,         .                  -  72 

CHAPTER  I. DEVELOPMENT  OF  THE  INTELLECTUAL  FACULTIES,                        -                  -                  -                  -  74 

CHAPTER  IT. DEVELOPMENT  OF  MORAL  QUALITIES,                        -                  -                  .                  .                  .  78 

CHAPTER  III. OF  THE  DEVELOPMENT  OF  THE  PROPENSITY  TO  CRIJIE,         -                  -                  -                  -  82 

BOOK  FOURTH. OF    THE    PROPERTIES    OF  .THE    AVERAGE   MA^N,    OF   THE    SOCIAL   SYSTEM,    AND   OF   THE 

FINAL  ADVANCEMENT  OF  THIS  STUDY,       -------  96 

CHAPTER  I. PROPERTIES  OF  THE  AVERAGE  MAN,                    ------  96 

CHAPTER  II. —  OF  THE    ULTIMATE   PROGRESS  OF  OUR  KNOWLEDGE  OF  THE  1.AW     OF  HUMAN  DEVE- 
LOPMENT,                ----------  103 

author's  APPENDIX,                       ..........  109 

translator's  APPENDIX,                    -                  -                  -                  -                  -                  -                  -                  --  119 

PREFACE   OF   M.   QUETELET, 

DUA^^^s-  up  expressly  por  the  people's!  edition  op  his  avork  on  man. 

TuE  plan  which  has  been  pursued  by  me  in  the  com- 
position of  this  work,  is  a  vast  and  comprehensive 
one.  It  was  tlierefore  natural,  that,  before  drawing 
up  a  sequel  to  it,  I  should  endeavour  to  learn  the 
opinions  of  competent  persons  respecting  the  charac- 
ter of  my  researclies,  and  the  mode  of  execution  whidi 
had  been  adopted  in  my  treatise.*  ]5ut  in  presenting?, 
as  it  were,  only  the  vestibule  of  the  edifice,  I  might 
justly  entertain  fears  lesi  sufficient  light  had  not  been 
cast  on  the  matter,  and  lest  I  should  not  have  been 
able  to  make  it  clear  how  all  the  portions  of  tlie  vast 
whole  were  to  arrive  at  agreement  and  consistency 
among  tliemselves.  In  this  state  of  things,  it  struck 
me  tliat  I  could  not  do  better  tiian  show,  by  particu- 
lar examples,  in  wliat  manner  it  is  expedient  in  gene- 
ral to  proceed  in  tliis  line  of  inquiry,  and  in  what 
light  I  viewed  tlie  analysis  of  man,  under  tlie  triple 
relations  of  his  pbysicid,  moral,  and  intellectual  quali- 
ties. 

Tlie  development  of  the  tlirce  examples  which  I 
have  chosen,  will  themselves  give  birth  to  as  many 
works,  the  materials  of  which  1  am  collecting  with  all 
tlie  activity  and  speed  that  otlier  engagements  inci- 
dent;d  to  my  position  will  permit.  Whilst  waiting  till 
I  can  terminate  these  hibours,  I  have  deemed  it  right 
to  give  here  an  indication  of  them,  and  this  will  afford 
me,  at  the  same  time,  an  opportunity  of  clearing  up 
some  points  in  my  published  treatise,  which  may  liave 
been  imperfectly  understood. 

As  regards  the  plii/sujue  of  man,  subjects  of  research 
are  not  wanting  ;  but,  besides  that  many  of  these  sub- 
jects— as,  for  example,  that  of  population — have  fre- 
quently been  discussed,  and  l)y  men  of  great  ability, 
tliej'  do  not  appear  to  me  to  be  all  equally  suited  to 
the  end  which  I  propose  to  attain  ;  some  are  even 
complicated  by  their  intimate  dependence  on  moral 
phenomen;u  and  these  I  wish  to  steer  clear  of  as  far  as 
possible.  The  interest  excited  b}'  the  first  researches 
into  the  growth  of  the  human  being,  and  the  happy 
applications  made  of  them  in  England,  determined  my 
choice  of  a  subject,  leading  me  to  direct  attention  to 
the  proportions  of  the  human  frame  at  different  ages, 
and  the  causes  which  modify  them.  The  subject  ap- 
pertains at  once  to  science  and  the  fine  arts  ;  and  my 
relations  in  society  permitted  me  to  count  upon  the 
assistance  of  men  of  enlightenment,  who  promised  to 
co-operate  with  me  in  my  inquiries. 

The  study  of  the  proportions  of  the  human  frame 
was  carried  very  far  by  the  Grecian  artists,  but  they 
have  left  us  no  other  monuments  of  their  knowledge 
than  those  admirable  works  of  sculpture,  which  the 
moderns  regard  to  this  day  as  models,  and  to  which 
they  resort  for  their  finest  inspirations.  The  principal 
artists  of  the  era  of  the  revival  of  letters,  such  as  Leon 
Baptista  Albert!,  ilichael  Angelo,  Leonai'do  da  Vinci, 
Albert  Durer,  with  many  others  who  comprehended 
what  art  ought  to  borrow  from  science,  felt  the  neces- 

*  The  work  upon  M.in  was  published  at  Paris  in  18;15.  In  tlie 
year  following,  a  copy  of  it  was  printed  at  Brussels  ;  and,  in  1SJ8, 
Ur  Uiccke  gave  a  German  translation  of  the  work,  enriched  with 
notes.  The  Brussels  copy  was  published  without  my  participa- 
tion, and  indeed  ai;ainst  my  will ;  such  was  not  the  case  witli  the 
Gerniiui  version,  conoji-ning  which  I  had  commurucations  with 
Dr  Riocke. 

sity  of  resorting  to  observation,  in  order  to  rebuild  in 
some  sort  the  ruined  monument  of  ancient  artistical 
skill.  They  studied  nature  in  a  philosophical  manner ; 
sought  to  strike  out  the  limits  withm  which  they 
ought  to  confine  themselves  in  order  to  be  truthlike, 
without  taking  away  from  each  age,  and  one  ma}- 
say  from  any  passion,  its  individual  character ;  and 
from  those  profound  studies  which  kept  them  ever 
before  the  foce  of  nature,  they  deduced  original  views 
and  new  models,  destined  to  distinguish  for  ever 
that  celebrated  age.  The  proportions  of  the  human 
body  did  not  alone  attract  their  attention  :  anatomj', 
perspectiAT,  and  chemistry,  formed  parts  of  their 
studies  ;  nothing  was  neglected ;  and  some  of  these 
great  artists  even  gained  for  tliemselves  a  first  place 
among  the  geometers  of  their  day.  Their  successors 
have  not  devoted  themselves  to  such  serious  studies, 
and  hence  it  so  frequently  happens  that  they  are  re- 
duced to  content  themselves,  either  with  copying  front 
those  who  went  before  them,  or  with  working  after 
individual  models,  whose  proportions  they  modify 
according  to  mere  caprice,  without  having  any  just 
or  iiroper  ideas  of  the  beautiful. 

It  would  bo  an  error,  doubtless,  to  suppose  that 
science  mti/ws  the  artist ;  yet  it  lends  to  him  the  most 
l)0werful  assistance.  In  general,  it  is  difficult  to  keep 
it  within  due  limits ;  and  I  shall  even  freely  admit, 
that  Albert  Durer,  in  his  work  upon  tlie  proportions  of 
the  human  frame,  has  imparted  to  it  a  certain  scien- 
tific dryness,  which  lessens  its  utility.  One  finds 
there  more  of  the  geometer  than  the  artist,  and  the 
geometer,  moreover,  such  as  he  was  at  a  time  when 
it  had  not  yet  been  discovered  how  much  the  rules  of 
style  enhance  the  value  of  scientific  works,  and,  above 
all,  of  those  which  appertain  at  the  same  time  to  the 
domain  of  the  fine  arts. 

After  the  example  of  Leon  Baptista  Albert!,  whom 
he  followed  closely  in  the  order  of  time,  Alljurt  Durer 
commences  by  stating  the  divisions  of  tlie  body,  in 
parts  or  proportions  of  the  total  height  taken  by  him 
as  unit]/.  Changing  afterwards  his  measure  of  pro- 
portions, he  takes  as  unity  the  size  of  the  head,  and 
assigns  successively  the  proportions  of  several  in- 
dividuals, giving  them  seven,  eight,  nine,  and  even 
ten  heads  of  height  [or,  in  other  words,  a  body  cor- 
responding to  the  measurement  of  so  many  heads]. 
The  scale  thus  formed  by  him  has  been  received  into 
all  studios  ;  and,  without  reverting  very  often  to  the 
measurements  which  their  predecessors  had  taken 
from  nature  or  from  the  works  of  the  Greeks,  artists 
have,  for  the  most  part,  bound  themselves  down  to 
follow  a  blind  routine.  Xoble  exceptions,  however, 
have  presented  themselves.  Nicholas  Poussin,  one  of 
the  most  profound  thinkers  whom  the  arts  have  pro- 
duced, took  care  to  correct  and  regulate  by  the  antique 
the  proportions  which  Leon  Baptista  Alberti  and 
Albert  Durer  had  given  from  the  living  model.  At 
a  later  period,  also,  some  labours  have  been  under- 
taken on  this  subject;  and  I  may  mention,  in  particu- 
lar, those  of  the  sculptor.  Shadow  of  Berlin. 

Jly  aim  has  been,  not  only  to  go  once  more  through 
the  task  of  Albert  Durer,  but  to  execute  it  also  on  an 
extended  scale.  The  German  artist  had  Ids  art  ex- 
clusively in  view,  and  confined  himself  to  the  obser- 

PREFACE. 

vation  and  exhibition  of  man  when  fully  developed, 
and  at  an  age  Avhen  he  presents  himself  under  the 
most  advantageous  forms.  In  order  to  keep  faithfully 
by  the  plan  which  I  had  chalked  out,  I  have  viewed 
the  individual  from  the  hour  of  his  birth  ;  I  have 
sought  to  determine,  for  that  epoch,  the  different  rela- 
tions of  bulk,  subsisting  between  the  various  parts  of 
his  frame ;  and  to  ascertain  how  far  these  relations 
become  modified  during  his  development,  what  they 
are  in  the  flower  of  his  age,  and  in  what  position  they 
remain  up  to  the  instant  of  decay.  It  is  only  by  long 
and  laborious  stud}',  and  by  the  comparison  of  a  vast 
number  of  individuals,  that  it  will  be  possible  to  suc- 
ceed in  establishing  correct  average  proportions  for 
each  age,  and  in  settling  the  limits  betwixt  whicli 
they  can  be  made  to  vary,  without  ceasing  to  be 
accurate  and  faithful  to  nature — our  first  and  great 
guide  in  this  diflScult  study. 

If  the  inquiry  into  the  average  bodily  proportions 
be  of  high  importance,  in  order  to  attain  to  the  type 
of  beauty  in  the  arts,  not  less  great  is  the  interest 
attached  to  the  subject  of  the  limits  within  Avhich 
variations  of  them  must  be  kei)t,  in  order  not  to  shock 
the  taste,  and  in  order  to  retain  the  means  of  giving 
character  to  individual  forms,  of  shadowing  forth 
strength,  grace,  and  dignity  of  figure,  and  of  preserv- 
ing to  art  that  variety  which  constitutes  its  principal 
charm.  Although  artistical  limits  A^'ill  always  be  less 
extended  than  the  natural  limits,  yet  it  is  to  be  ob- 
served that,  by  the  term  natural  limits,  I  understand 
those  within  which  the  human  proportions  may  vary, 
not  only  without  constituting  deformities  and  mon- 
strous aberrations  from  nature,  but  also  without 
wounding  the  eye  by  a  Avant  of  harmony. 

In  order  that  the  taste  may  be  satisfied,  it  is  necessary 
to  present  to  it  a  Avhole  of  which  it  can  seize  readily  all 
the  parts,  and  mark  their  relations  of  bulk.  But  what 
are  the  natural  limits  spoken  of?  They  are  doubtless 
difficult  to  establish  ;  nevertheless,  every  one  has  an 
idea  of  them,  more  or  Ifess  exact,  which  he  carries  with 
him  in  his  decisions.  It  is  to  determine  these  in  a 
more  precise  manner  that  our  endeavours  ought  to  be 
directed.  "  This  statue  is  beautiful,"  people  will  sa}' ; 
but  they  will  agree  in  finding  that  the  arms  are  too 
long.  Without  such  a  defect,  it  would  have  possessed 
more  grace.  The  defect,  at  the  same  time,  does  not 
constitute  a  monstrosity,  not  even  an  anomaly ;  it  may 
be  conceived  to  exist  in  nature,  and  even  without  dis- 
pleasing the  taste ;  but  it  wounds  the  eye  in  a  work  of 
art,  open  to  more  severe  rules  of  judgment. 

In  order  to  discover  to  what  extent  tastes  and  forms 
might  vary  in  different  countries,  I  have  endeavoured 
to  compare  the  proportions  of  the  models,  which,  in  the 
opinion  of  the  artists  of  Paris,  Rome,  Belgium,  and 
other  places,  united  the  most  perfect  graces  of  form ; 
and  I  have  been  surprised  to  find  how  little  variety  of 
opinion  exists,  in  different  places,  regarding  what  they 
concurred  in  terming  the  beautiful.  Changes  of  bodily 
proportions  characterise  nations  to  a  much  smaller 
degree  than  differences  in  physiognomical  expression, 
in  delicacy  and  suppleness  of  members,  and  in  ease, 
greater  or  lesser,  of  gait — all  of  them  qualities  modified 
singularly  by  education,  climate,  and  habitudes. 

Nor  am  I  to  confine  myself,  in  my  extended  inquiry, 
to  the  comparison  of  actual  models,  estimated  as  types 
of  the  beautiful ;  I  propose  also  to  unite  my  results  to 
those  which  artists  left  to  us  at  the  revival  of  the  arts, 
and,  above  all,  to  Avhat  we  can  gather  of  the  knowledge 
of  the  ancients  on  this  jioint,  from  a  study  of  their 
works.  These  comparisons,  I  conceive,  will  present 
hints  interesting  to  liistory  and  art ;  they  will  prove 
of  not  less  importance  to  the  natural  history  of  man. 
Analogous  Labours,  undertaken  in  different  quarters 
of  the  globe,  woiUd  enable  us  to  appreciate  all  that 
distinguishes  race  from  race,  and  to  discover  the  rela- 
tive points  of  bulk  most  liable  to  variation ;  they 
would  also  furnish  for  the  future  valuable  elements  of 
comparison,  not  yet  possessed  by  science. 

All  the  sciences  tend  necessarily  to  the  acquirement 
of  greater  precision  in  their  appreciations.  The  study 
of  diseases,  and  of  the  deformities  to  which  they  give 
place,  has  shown  the  benefit  derivable  from  corporeal 
measurements,  effected  under  enlightened  views ;  but 
in  order  to  recognise  whatever  is  an  anomaly,  it  is 
essentially  necessary  to  have  established  the  type  con- 
stituting the  normal  or  healthy  condition.  In  order 
to  be  of  use  to  science,  I  have  deemed  it  necessary 
to  direct  my  researches  in  a  particular  manner  to 
the  dimensions  of  the  chest,  which  seem  most  fre- 
quently to  merit  consideration  in  the  state  of  illness ; 
and  the  same  region  is  the  one  where  the  greatest 
malformations  are  most  often  to  be  observed. 

The  relative  proportions  of  the  human  head  merit 
equally  oiu"  serious  attention,  serving,  as  they  do  at 
this  da}^  for  a  basis,  so  to  speak,  of  a  new  science. 
One  of  the  individuals  whose  writings  have  spread 
the  greatest  interest  respecting  the  study  of  phreno- 
logy, Mr  George  Combe,  addressed  to  me,  on  the  sub- 
ject of  the  work  on  Man,  the  following  words,  which 
I  shall  beg  leave  to  transcribe  here,  on  account  of  the 
ingenious  hints  Avhich  they  convey  on  the  subject 
under  consideration  : — "  Allow  me  to  observe,  that  I 
desire  much  to  see  the  ph}^siology  of  the  brain  made 
the  basis  of  such  investigations,  because  I  am  con- 
vinced that  the  size,  quantity,  and  proportions  of  the 
brain  in  individuals,  have  an  influence  over  the  de- 
velopment of  their  fticulties,  which  is  fundamental — 
that  is  to  say,  the  brain  determines  the  strength  and 
the  bent  of  the  natural  dispositions,  and  also  the  kind 
and  degree  of  the  intellectual  capacity  ;  and  all  exter- 
nal influences  merely  direct  these  to  certain  objects 
in  preference  to  others,  excite  them  to  action,  or  im- 
pede their  manifestations,  but  without  changing  the 
primitive  character.  Criminals,  for  instance,  have 
the  animal  organs  largely  developed,  and  those  of  the 
moral  and  intellectual  faculties,  or  at  least  the  moral, 
deficient;  and  the  causes  of  the  regularity  in  the 
number  of  crimes  will  be  found  in  the  causes  which 
produce  a  given  number  of  defective  brains  annually  ; 
and  crimes  must  be  diminished  by  lessening  the  pro- 
duction of  imperfect  brains,  or  by  treating  those  who 
have  them  as  moral  patients,  and  preventing  them 
from  abusing  their  propensities.  Your  researches  are 
exceedingly  interesting  and  useful,  and  all  that  I 
mean  to  say  is,  that  this  elempnt  is  Avanting  to  render 
them  complete." 

Nothing,  doubtless,  could  be  more  interesting,  above 
all  in  studying  the  moral  development  of  man,  than 
to  be  able  to  follow  simultaneoiisly  the  development 
of  the  organs  Avhich  seem  most  directly  connected 
with  our  actions,  and  to  estimate  to  what  extent  the 
instrument  is  in  concord  Avith  the  effects  produced  by 
it.  But  for  that  purpose,  it  Avould  be  necessary  that 
the  science  should  be  farther  advanced  than  it  really 
is  ;  and  that  Ave  should  knoAv  the  modifications  which 
tlie  head  and  brain  of  man  undergo,  from  birth  to  the 
period  of  complete  development,  as  avcU  as  the  epochs 
at  Avhich  the  diA^ers  organs,  regarded  as  the  seats  of 
such  and  such  passions  and  propensities,  manifest 
themselves,  and  Avhat  are  their  degrees  of  increase, 
actual  and  proportionate.  This  science,  it  seems  to 
me,  leaves  as  yet  much  to  desire,  and  for  the  mere 
reason  that  it  is  yet  in  its  infancy.  I  conceive  that, 
in  its  actual  condition,  time  Avould  be  more  profitably 
expended  in  separating  two  kinds  of  studies  Avhich, 
in  their  results,  might  respectively  control  each  other, 
than  in  seeking  to  amalgamate  them,  by  Avhich  miglit 
be  incurred  the  risk  of  falling  into  theoretic  ideas,  and 
quitting  the  path  to  truth.  I  shall  explain  myself  by 
an  example.  Observation  shows,  that,  in  our  state  of 
society,  it  is  about  the  age  of  twenty-five  Avhen  the 
propensity  to  crime  is  at  the  maximum,  especially  as 
far  as  murder  is  concerned ;  this  is  a  fact  fidly  esta- 
blished, and  of  Avhich  ncAv  evidence  is  given  every 
year  by  the  statistical  records  of  France.  Now,  sup- 
posing that  phrenology  had  made  sufficient  inquiries 

PREFACE. 

into  the  development  of  the  organs,  it  might  be  pos- 
sible to  determine  whether  or  not  the  age  of  twenty- 
five  is  really  that  at  which  the  destructive  organs 
have  reached  their  greatest  development,  and  if  they 
sustain  a  progressive  diminution  afterwards,  or  are 
repressed  by  other  and  more  powerful  organs. 

In  considering  matters  under  this  point  of  view,  it 
would  be  necessary  first  to  study  the  progressive  and 
proportionate  growth  of  the  brain  and  its  several  parts, 
and  the  development  also  of  our  moral  and  intellec- 
tual qualities.  Compai'isons  might  then  be  established 
to  determine  if  the  development  of  the  faculties,  and 
of  the  cerebral  organs  regarded  as  specially  connected 
with  them,  takes  place  in  a  simultaneous  manner. 
But  to  explain  the  actions  by  the  organs,  to  render 
the  one  subordinate  to  the  exercise  of  the  other,  would 
be  to  ramble  widely  from  the  course  I  have  followed ; 
for  I  am  less  desirous  to  explain  phenomena  than  to 
establish  their  existence. 

^  I  have  always  comprehended  with  difficulty,  more- 
over, how  persons,  pre-occupied  doubtless  by  other 
ideas,  have  seen  any  tendency  to  materialism  in  the 
exposition  of  a  series  ot  facts  deduced  from  statistical 
documents.  In  giving  to  my  work  the  title  of  Social 
Pliysics,  I  have  had  no  other  aim  than  to  collect,  in  a 
uniform  order,  the  phenomena  affecting  man,  nearly  as 
physical  science  brings  together  the  phenomena  apper- 
taining to  the  material  world.  If  certain  deplorable 
facts  present  themselves  Avith  an  alarming  regularity, 
to  whom  is  blame  to  be  ascribed  ?  Ought  charges  of 
materialism  to  be  brought  against  him  who  points  out 
that  regularity  ?  What  I  have  read  and  heard  on  the 
subject  of  my  work,  proves  to  me  that  I  have  not 
carried  conviction  to  every  mind,  and  that  I  have 
frequently  been  judged  with  prejudice.  Judgments 
upon  books  are  formed  with  even  more  haste  and 
levity  than  judgments  upon  men.  Writings  are  tjilked 
of  without Jbeing  known;  and  people  take  up  an  opi- 
nion for  or  against,  in  consequence  of  decisions  of 
which  it  would  cost  them  some  trouble  to  determine 
the  source.  These  are  evils  which  must  be  borne  with 
patience,  and  the  more  so  because  they  are  common. 
"  There  are  few  works  on  i)olitical  econoni}',"  said 
Malthus  to  me,  "which  have  been  more  spoken  of 
and  less  read  than  mine."  All  the  absurdities  which 
have  been  spoken  and  written  respecting  the  illus- 
trious English  author,  are  well  known.  Certainly,  by 
an  appeal  against  such  decisions,  he  would  have  all 
to  gain,  and  nothing  to  lose,  before  a  less  prejudiced 
tribunal. 

One  of  the  facts  which  appears  to  have  excited  the 
greatest  alarm,  out  of  all  pointed  to  in  my  work,  is 
naturally  that  relating  to  the  constancy  with  which 
crime  is  committed.  From  the  examination  of  num- 
bers, I  behoved  myself  justified  in  inferring,  as  anatural 
consequence,  that,  in  given  circumstances,  and  under 
the  influence  of  the  same  causes,  we  may  reckon 
upon  witnessing  the  repetition  of  the  same  effects,  the 
reproduction  of  the  same  crimes,  and  the  same  convic- 
tions. What  has  resulted  from  this  exposition  ?  Timo- 
rous persons  have  raised  the  cry  of  fatalism.  If,  how- 
ever, some  one  said,  "  Man  is  born  free ;  nothing  can 
force  his  free-will;  he  underlies  the  influence  of  no 
external  causes ;  cease  to  assimilate  him  to  a  machme, 
or  to  pretend  to  modify  his  actions.  Therefore,  ye 
legislators,  repeal  your  laws  ;  overturn  your  prisons ; 
break  j'our  chains  in  pieces ;  your  convictions  and 
penalties  are  of  no  avail ;  they  are  so  many  acts  of 
barbarous  revenge.  Ye  philosophers  and  priests, 
speak  no  more  of  ameliorations,  social  or  rehgioiis ; 
you  are  materialists,  because  you  assume  to  mould 
society  like  a  piece  of  gross  clay ;  j'ou  are  fatalists, 
because  you  believe  yourselves  predestined  to  influ- 
ence man  in  the  exercise  of  his  free-will,  and  to  direct 
the  course  of  his  actions."  If,  I  say,  any  one  held 
such  language  to  us,  we  should  be  disgusted  with  its 
excessive  folly.  And  wherefore?  Because  we  are 
thoroughly  convinced  that  laws,  education,  and  reli- 

gion, exercise  a  salutary  influence  on  society,  and  that 
moral  causes  have  their  certain  eiMfcts.  Am  I  a  fata- 
list, then,  when  I  declare  that  you  have  greater  reason 
for  so  thinking  than  you  had  imagined  ?  That  is  the 
real  state  of  the  question  ;  we  differ  only  about  de- 
grees. Which  of  us  is  in  error  ?  To  determine  this, 
it  is  necessary  to  examine  our  motives  for  conviction. 
Mine,  like  yours,  rest  first  of  all  on  observation.  We 
both  caU  in  experience  to  the  support  of  our  opinions  ; 
but,  in  your  case,  the  experience  is  based  on  vague 
uncertainties,  whilst  I,  more  circumspect,  strive  never 
to  lose  sight  of  those  scientific  principles  which  ought 
to  guide  the  obsei'ver  in  all  his  investigations.  My 
aim  is  not  to  defend  systems,  or  bolster  up  theories ; 
I  confine  myself  to  the  citation  of  facts,  such  as  society 
presents  to  our  view.  If  these  facts  be  legitimately 
established,  it  follows  that  we  must  accept  of  and 
acpommodate  our  reason  to  them.." 

SNow,  what  do  these  facts  teach  us  ?  I  repeat,  that 
in  a  given  state  of  society,  resting  under  the  influence 
of  certain  causes,  regular  effects  are  produced,  which 
oscillate,  as  it  were,  around  a  fixed  mean  point,  with- 
out undergoing  any  sensible  alterations.  Observe, 
that  I  have  said  under  the  influence  of  the  same  causes; 
if  the  causes  were  changed,  the  effects  also  would 
necessarily  be  modified.  As  laws  and  the  principles 
of  religion  and  morality  are  influencing  causes,  I  have 
then  not  only  the  hope,  but,  what  you  have  not,  the 
positive  conviction,  that  society  may  be  ameliorated 
and  reformed.  Expect  not,  however,  that  efforts  for 
the  moral  regeneration  of  man  can  be  immediately 
crowned  with  success ;  operations  upon  masses  are 
ever  slow  in  progress,  and  their  effects  necessarily 
distant. 

But,  it  may  be  again  asked,  what  becomes  of  human 
free-will  and  agency  ?  In  the  face  of  facts,  I  have  not 
to  occupy  myself  with  that  question,  so  often  debated. 
I  cannot  altogether  pass  it  by,  nevertheless,  in  silence, 
because  it  .seems  to  me  to  involve  one  of  the  most 
admirable  laws  of  conservation  in  nature — a  law  M'hich 
presents  a  new  proof  of  the  wisdom  of  the  Creator, 
and  of  M'hich  you  have  not  caught  even  a  glimpse  in 
your  narrow  views  of  the  moral  organisation  of  man. 
It  is  necessary,  then,  to  admit  that  free-will  exer- 
cises itself  within  indefinite  limits,  if  one  wishes  not 
to  incur  the  reproach  of  denying  it  altogether.  But, 
with  all  the  follies  which  have  passed  through  the 
head  of  man,  with  all  the  perverse  inclinations  which 
have  desolated  society,  what  would  have  become  of 
our  race  during  so  many  past  ages  ?  All  these  scourges 
have  passed  by,  and  neither  man  nor  his  faculties 
have  undergone  sensible  alterations,  as  far  at  least  as 
our  observations  can  determine.  This  is  because  the 
same  finger  which  has  fixed  limits  to  the  sea,  has  set 
similar  bounds  to  the  passions  of  men — because  the 
same  voice  has  said  to  both,  "  Hitherto  shalt  thou 
come,  and  no  farther ! " 

What!  when  it  is  necessary  to  take  the  most  simple 
resolve,  we  are  under  the  domination  of  our  habitudes, 
our  wants,  our  social  relations,  and  a  host  of  causes 
which,  all  of  them,  draw  us  about  in  a  hnndred  diffe- 
rent ways.  These  infiuences  are  so  powerful,  that  we 
have  no  difficulty  in  telling,  even  when  referring  to 
persons  whom  we  are  scarcely  acquainted  with,  or 
even  know  not  at  all,  what  is  the  resolution  to  which 
they  will  lead  such  parties.  Whence,  then,  this  cer- 
tainty of  foresight,  exemplified  by  you  daily,  if  you 
were  not  convinced,  at  the  outset,  that  it  is  ex- 
tremely probable  the  empire  of  causes  will  carry  it 
over  free-will.  In  considering  the  moral  world  a  priori, 
you  give  to  this  free-will  the  most  entire  latitude ;  and 
when  you  come  to  practice,  when  you  speak  of  what 
passes  around  you,  you  constantly  fall  into  contradic- 
tion with  yourselves.  You  foretell  the  conduct  of 
individuals,  in  whose  case  oscillations  may  take  place 
within  limits  so  large,  that  it  woidd  be  contrary  to 
all  the  principles  of  the  theory  of  probabilities  to  take 
them  for  the  types  of  calculations,  or  to  foimd  upon 

PREFACE. 

lliem  the  most  petty  iiifereuces.     Be  uiorc  consistent 
witli  yourselves. 

Coiild  you  possibly  be  afraid  of  applying  the  calcu- 
lation of  cliances  to  moral  phenomena,  and  of  the 
afflicting  consequences  which  may  be  inferred  from 
that  inquiry,  when  it  is  extended  to  crimes  and  to 
quarters  the  most  disgraceful  to  society  ?  "  I  should 
guard  myself,"  said  a  scientific  friend,  whose  philan- 
thropic views  I  otherwise  respect — "  I  shoidd  guard 
myself,  had  I  arrived  at  the  afflicting  results  of  which 
you  speak,  against  grieving  others  with  the  relation 
of  thein.  Draw  a  veil  over  the  hideous  spectacle ; 
and  if  you  believe  that  you  jjossess  the  truth,  imitate 
with  resj^ect  to  it  the  sage  circumspection  of  Fonte- 
)U!lle."  But  is  the  anatomy  of  man  not  a  more  pain- 
ful science  still? — that  science  wliich  leads  us  to  dip 
our  hands  into  the  blood  of  our  fellow-beings,  to  pry 
^vith  impassible  curiosity  into  parts  and  organs  which 
once  palpitated  with  life?  And  yet  who  dreams  at 
this  day  of  raising  liis  voice  against  the  study  ?  Who 
does  not  applaud,  on  the  contrary,  the  numerous  ad- 
vantages which  it  lias  conferred  on  humanity?  Tlie 
time  is  come  for  studying  the  moral  anatomy  of  man 
also,  and  for  uncovering  its  most  afflicting  aspects, 
with  the  view  of  jiroviding  remedies. 
CThis  study  is  a  difficult  one.  Speculative  philoso- 
phy has  long  been  occupied  with  it ;  but  there  are 
questions  not  to  be  resolved  by  such  means ;  specula- 
tion has  its  limits,  as  observation  also  has.  Every 
propensity  and  every  passion,  develops  itself  in  a  man- 
ner more  or  less  rapid,  attains  a  degree  of  maximum 
intensity,  and  declines  in  general  by  shades  not  yet 
fully  recognised.  It  is  with  the  intellectual  as  with  the 
moral  faculties  of  man  ;  they  both  have  their  laws  of 
development.  With  regard  to  some  of  them,  these  laws 
march  in  a  parallel  relation ;  others  are  interwoven 
in  their  growth,  or  stand  in  manifest  opposition.  ISTow, 
these  ai-e  the  laws  which  it  is  necessary  to  ascertain 
and  comprehend,  not  in  a  vague  manner,  but  with 
such  precision  as  to  enable  us  to  establish  numerically 
tlie  degree  of  intensity  for  each  age.  There  lay,  if  I 
do  not  deceive  myself,  the  novel  feature  of  my  labours  ; 
thence  sprung,  at  least,  the  chief  meed  of  praise,  and 
the  criticisms  which  I  have  received ;  and  it  is  this 
principle  which  I  muat  strive  to  justify  by  my  ulterior 
labours,  because  I  was  compelled  to  limit  myself,  in  a 
first  essay,  to  simple  indications^ 

^The  analysis  of  the  moral  man  through  his  actions, 
and  of  the  intellectual  man  through  his  productions, 
seems  to  me  calculated  to  form  one  of  the  most  inte- 
resting parts  of  the  sciences  of  observation,  applied  to 
anthropology.  It  may  be  seen,  in  my  v.ork,  tliat  the 
course  Mdiich  I  have  adopted  is  that  followed  by  the 
natural  philosopher,  in  order  to  grasp  the  laws  that 
regulate  tl»e  material  world.  By  the  seizure  of  focts, 
I  seek  to  rise  to  an  appreciation  of  the  causes  Mhence 
they  spring.*  As  I  could  only  indicate  this  course 
summai'ilj^  and  the  difficulties  embarrassing  it,  I  have 
been  desirous  to  show,  by  two  examples,  selected  and 

\*  This  appreciation  is  in  general  vci-j'  difficult,  and  has  given 
rise  to  grave  errors.  One  of  the  chief  causes  of  these  errors  seems 
to  me  to  spring  from  the  incomplete  enumerntioiu,  made  when  it 
ij  sought  to  give  an  iiccount  of  the  causes  which  have  led  to  any 
result.  Thus,  it  is  recognised  that  in  some  locality  crimes  are 
very  numerous,  .ind  an  attempt  is  made  to  explain  that  un- 
favourable state  of  tilings.  IIow  do  most  writers  and  even  sta- 
tisticians proceed  in  such  a  case  ?  In  ph)ce  of  passing  in  review 
all  the  cau.<;es  which  can  lead  to  crime,  of  weighing  their  in- 
fluences, .and  of  inquiring  into  those,  above  all,  which  have 
there  acted  with  the  greatest  energy,  they  only  attend,  in  the 
prejudiced  state  of  their  minds,  to  one  alone,  often  the  Iciii-t 
influential  of  all,  to  v^hich  they  ascribe  the  cfVects  produced  by 
the  wliole.  They  have  been  led  in  this  manner  to  conclude  that 
popular  instruction  produces  crime,  because,  in  such  and  such 
a  liingdoui,  the  provinces  wliere  it  chieny  aboiuids  send  the 
greatest  numberof  children  to  schools  ;  as  if  the  degree  of  instruc- 
tion, and  the  Icind  of  instruction,  and  other  elements,  did  not 
ail  enter  equally  into  the  question.  The  true  talent  of  the  ob- 
server, it  seems  to  me,  whatever  be  the  phenomen.i  of  wliich  he 

treated  in  a  searching  manner,  liow  the  course  in 
question  should  be  followed.  The  one  has  for  its  ob- 
ject the  examination  of  works  of  literature,  philosophy, 
science,  the  fine  arts,  &c.,  and  of  the  ages  at  which 
they  have  been  produced,  with  the  results  to  be  de- 
duced from  the  whole.  The  other  example  concerns 
the  development  of  the  propensity  to  crime,  upon  a 
scale  more  extended  than  I  had  yet  had  an  opportunity 
of  forming.  After  these  last  new  researches,  I  con- 
ceive I  may  now  confidently  say,  that  the  tables  of 
criminality  for  different  ages,  given  in  my  published 
treatise,  merit  at  least  as  much  faith  as  the  tables 
of  mortality,  and  verify  themselves  within  perhaps 
even  narrower  limits  ;  so  that  crime  pursues  its  path 
with  even  more  constancy  than  death.  Twelve  3'ears 
have  elapsed  since  the  data  furnished  by  the  tri- 
bunals of  justice  in  France  were  collected  with  great 
care  and  exactitude,  and  since  the  ages  of  criminals 
Avere  first  marked ;  and,  in  each  succeeding  year, 
they  have  reckoned  from  about  7000  to  8000  indivi- 
duals accused  before  the  courts  of  assize ;  and  it  is 
still  betwixt  the  ages  of  twenty-one  and  twenty-five, 
that,  all  things  being  equal,  the  greatest  number  of  per- 
sons are  to  be  found  in  that  position.  I  have  taken,  for 
the  same  years,  and  for  the  city  of  Paris,  the  morta- 
lity of  a  period  of  ten  years,  and  have  found,  that, 
thougli  my  observations  included  a  much  larger  num- 
ber of  persons,  and  these  pertaining  to  a  much  more 
homogeneous  population,  the  mortality  of  the  capital 
proceeded  with  less  regularity  than  the  crimes  of  tlie 
kingdom,  and  that  each  age  paid  a  more  uniform  and 
constant  tribute  to  the  jail  than  to  the  tomb.'^ 

An  objection  has  been  made  to  my  views,  whic-h 
appears  somewhat  valid  at  a  first  glance.  It  has  been 
forcibly  reproduced  by  a  writer  of  merit,  who,  while 
treating  my  work  with  liberality,  has  drawn  together 
all  the  gravest  objections  brought  forward  against  it. 
I  shall  take  leave  to  cite  his  words.  "  We  now  reach 
the  most  delicate  portion  of  M.  Quetelet's  work — tlie 
development  of  the  intellectual  and  moral  qualities, 
the  social  system.  Here  the  field  is  not  the  same ; 
we  have  no  longer  to  do  ^^'ith  phenomena  vital  and 
regidar,  or  witli  those  laws  to  which  man  is  sub- 
jected along  with  the  brutes,  and  -which  operate  con- 
tinually without  his  intervention,  or  constitute  in- 
stincts in  him  too  powerful  to  be  resisted.  We  have 
to  consider  things  which  he  is  at  liberty  to  do  or  not 
to  do — acts  which  he  may  consummate  or  not  consum- 
mate at  choice.  We  enter  into  the  domain  of  the 
human  will — free,  bold,  and  independent.  Can  science 
follow  man  in  this  new  route  ?  Will  it  be  able  to  ap- 
preciate, in  a  manner  at  once  comiarehensive  and  exact, 
the  results  of  the  physiological  and  moral  constitution 
of  the  mind  and  soul  which  distinguish  him  from 
other  animals  ?  Contented  to  follow,  up  to  this  point, 
the  material  phenomena  revealed  by  evident  facts, 
can  science  sound  the  heart  of  man,  dive  into  the 
mysteries  of  spiritual  being,  and  tear  away  for  the 
human  race  the  veil  which  the  morahst  can  with 

sccUs  to  estimate  the  causes,  consists  in  a  complete  enumeration 
of  these,  and  in  distinguishing  between  such  as  arc  entitled  to 
weight,  and  such  as  may  be  overlooked  without  inconvenience. 
It  is  tliis  fine  insight,  this  delicate  tact,  principal  attributes  of 
superior  intelli.ficuces,  which  constitute  the  great  observer,  the 
true  philosopher.  To  wander  from  this  course  is  to  step  into 
error,  and  to  become  entangled  in  those  interminable  disputes 
which  afflict  the  sciences,  and,  above  .ill,  those  whose  phenomena 
are  most  complex.  The  medical  sciences  offer  sad  examples  of 
tliis  evil.  Blaladics  are  in  general  the  result  of  an  infinity  of 
causes  ;  and  wherefore  attribute  them,  llien,  to  one  of  these  more 
than  to  another?  It  may  be  conceived  that  two  physicians,  in 
citing  each  a  diflerent  cause  as  the  origin  of  one  disease,  may  be 
both  in  the  right,  since  each  may  have  found  the  cause  stated  by 
him  to  h.ave  predominated  in  the  cise  under  his  notice;  they 
only  err  in  neglecting  the  other  influential  causes  which  they 
have  not  had  the  chance  of  observing,  because  the  number  of 
their  observations  w.as  too  limited.  This  is  the  history  of  many 
of  the  tl\eorie3  and  systems,  alternately  adopted  and  rejected  in 
mcd 

le  tl\er 
icinev 

PREFACE. 

difficulty  raise  in  order  to  judge  one  iiulividaal? 
Kisks  she  not  being  stranded  in  the  conllict  Avitli 
these  supreme  mysteries  of  intelligence  ?  Upon  what 
constant  facts,  upon  what  fundamental  points,  can  she 
lean  for  support?  The  facts  of  birth,  growth,  and 
decay,  are  the  same  for  all  men ;  but  what  are  held 
by  one  people  to  be  intelligence,  genius,  morality,  and 
ci'ime,  will  these  not  be  deemed  by  another  people 
error,  poverty  of  intellect,  immorality,  and  lawful 
actions  ?  Finally,  will  not  the  free-will  and  agency 
of  man  disconcert  all  calculations  ?  Or,  at  least,  will 
not  the  errors  in  such  calculations  be  too  considerable 
in  number  and  extent  to  leave  them  any  real  value  ?  "* 
I  have  already  spoken  of  free-will,  and  have  shown 
how  little  it  influences  the  number  of  crimes,  and  the 
ages  of  criminals ;  I  shall  not  retm-n,  therefore,  to  that 
subject.  The  next  most  serious  objection  M-hich  seems 
to  present  itself  here  is,  that  the  facts  upon  Avhich 
one  is  compelled  to  rest  have  not  the  same  identical 
value,  as  in  the  case  of  birth,  death,  and  marriage, 
when  the  population  is  treated  of;  but  that  these  facts 
may  vary  through  many  different  shades,  and  may 
even  be  qualified  amongst  different  nations,  in  conse- 
quence of  what  is  crime  with  one  being  viewed  as 
something  lawful  with  another. 

MVe  must  here  understand  ourselves  fidh'.  I  can 
admit  that  a  certain  act,  whicli  is  punislied  before 
the  French  tribunals,  may  not  be  so  in  other  places, 
or  have  been  so  in  other  times.  This  is,  then,  an  error 
of  denomination  which  should  be  corrected,  and  which 
would  but  prove  at  most  that  virtues  and  crimes,  esti- 
mated in  relation  to  different  times,  have  a  contingent 
value  merely,  not  an  absolute  one.  The  essential  point 
here  is,  that  the  fact,  qualified  in  one  manner  or  another, 
should  be  the  same.  But  it  will  be  said,  that  it  is  not 
identically  the  same,  and  that  even  where  the  laws  take 
care  to  specify  and  define  different  crimes,  those  which 
are  ranged  under  the  same  head  may  still  vary  within 
pretty  extensive  limits,  tfhis  is  equivalent  to  saying, 
that  the  observations  have  not  all  the  precision  neces- 
sary, and  that  tlie  estimate  cannot  be  perfect.  Xow, 
this  is  a  fact  which  I  myself  readily  admit  and  regret ; 
for,  if  the  observations  were  precise,  I  should  march 
on,  in  the  new  path  which  I  have  sought  to  open  up, 
Avith  as  much  assurance  as  in  other  quarters  of  the 
vast  field  of  the  sciences  of  observation.  In  every 
instance,  it  is  not  my  method  tlmt  is  defective ;  projjer 
observations  alone  fail  me.  But  will  it  be  ever  impos- 
sible to  have  theni  perfectly  i^rccise  .•"  I  believe  tliat 
even  at  present  we  have  them  sufficiently  so  to  enter, 
at  least,  on  the  great  problem  under  consideration. 
Name  them  as  you  will,  tlie  actions  which  society 
stamps  as  crimes,  and  of  Avhich  it  punishes  the 
authors,  are  reproduced  every  year,  in  almost  exactly 
the  same  numbers ;  examined  more  closely,  they  are 
found  to  divide  themselves  into  almost  exactly  the 
same  categories  ;  and,  if  their  number  were  sufficiently 
large,  we  might  carry  farther  our  distinctions  and 
subdivisions,  and  should  always  fiud  there  the  same 
regularity.  It  will  then  remain  correct  to  say,  that  a 
given  species  of  actions  is  more  common  at  one  given 
age  than  at  any  other  given  age.^; 

Is  it  really  true,  moreover,  that  the  designation  of 
crime  may  be  so  very  arbitrary,  and  that  that  which 
lias  been  set  down  as  poisoning  or  assassination,  for 
example,  may  testify  to  no  evil  inclination  ?  Although 
we  are  here  in  a  new  field,  where  facts  cannot  be 
estimated  mechanically,  as  in  the  physical  sciences, 
tlie  difference,  nevertheless,  is  not  to  be  held  so  great 
as  it  may  appear  at  first  sight.  Even  the  physical 
sciences  sometimes  rest  on  facts  which  are  not  iden- 
tically the  same,  as  deaths  and  births  should  be  ;  and 
which  may  lead  to  appreciations  and  conclusions 
more  or  less  great.  "With  the  use  even  of  an  instru- 
ment, when  one  wishes  to  discover  a  temperatm'e,  a 
magnetic  declination,  or  the  force  and  direction  of  a 

*  Bibliotheque  Univcr-ellc  de  Genfevc,  -Tuly  IPA"),  p.  .3in.  Ar- 
ticle of  M.  E.  Mallet. 

wind,  does  one  really  find  the  quantities  wliich  are 
sought?  When  one  measures  an  individual,  is  the 
real  height  positively  discovered  ?  Errors,  greater  or 
lesser,  may  be  committed ;  and  observation  alone  can 
recognise  the  limits  within  which  they  range.  Has 
the  consideration  of  the  average  life  of  man  been  re- 
jected, because  that  average  rests  upon  numbers  which 
vary,  without  doubt,  within  Umits  as  extended  as  can 
be  conceived  ? 

But,  to  reply  by  the  same  argument  brought  against 
myself,  if,  in  place  of  reckoning  diseases,  one  wished 
to  specify  their  nature,  andtoindicate,  as  statisticians 
do,  the  number  of  voluntary,  violent,  and  accidental 
deaths,  as  well  as  those  produced  by  natm'al  maladies, 
without  entering  at  all  into  the  classifications  which 
might  be  formed  of  these,  woidd  not  one  lie  open  to  the 
same  objections?  » Must  we  refrain  from  making  up 
a  list  of  suicides,  because  death  may  there  have  been 
caused  by  unknown  hands,  or  by  accidents  of  which  no 
one  is  cognisant,  or  by  some  natural  means  which  have 
operated  instantaneousljs  and  left  no  visible  traces 
behind?  And  how  often  does  it  happen  that  the 
author  of  a  suicide  only  lends  his  hands  involuntarily 
to  a  crime  of  which  another  has  guiltily  reduced  him 
to  become  the  victim  ?  One  Avould  require  to  re- 
nounce entirely  the  sciences  of  observation,  if  every 
such  difficulty  in  the  waj'  were  to  be  admitted  as  a  let 
and  barrier  ;  and  tliese  are  only  more  apparent  in  my 
researches,  becaiise  we  are  less  ftimiliarised  with  their 
characterr! 

The  same  writer  whom  I  have  cited,  combats  me 
on  another  point.  I  have  attempted  to  give  an  ex- 
ample of  tlie  analysis  of  the  development  of  the 
passions,  ■which  tends  to  show  that  their  maximum 
energy  is  reached  about  the  age  of  twenty-five  years. 
"  So  that,"  said  I,  "  if  there  existed  an  art  which,  in 
its  exercise,  developed  itself  in  a  ratio  with  the  pas- 
sions, and  without  requiring  preliminary  studies,  its 
maximum  of  development  would  occur  about  the  age 
of  twenty -five."  *  "  To  this  reasoning  let  us  oppose  an 
example,"  says  the  Genevese  philosopher.  "  If  there 
has  been  a  writer  who  has  shone  brilliantly,  and  deeply 
impressed  the  public,  by  reason,  not  of  his  works  and 
learning,  but  of  the  impidses  of  the  passions,  certainly 
Jean  Jacques  Eousseau  is  that  man.  Now,  it  was  not 
before  the  age  of  forty,  fifteen  A-ears  later  than  the 
period  signalised  as  the  maximum  one  of  his  passions, 
that  Rousseau  commenced  to  Avrite."  What  would  be 
the  reply  of  the  autlior  now  quoted,  whose  writings 
on  population  arc  justly  esteemed,  if  I  were  to  say  to 
him  in  my  turn,  that  the  death  of  J.  J.  Rousseau  did 
not  take  place  till  after  the  age  of  G.5  j-ears  ;  tliat  is  to 
sny,  a  long  period  after  the  epoch  signalised  by  the 
law  of  mortality  calculated  for  Geneva,  and  after  he 
had  long  passed  the  average  life  of  man.  Must  Ave 
then  conclude  that  the  tables  of  mortality  for  Geneva 
sliould  be  rejected?  What  does  one  individual  ex- 
ample prove  in  such  matters  ? 

I  Avould  remark,  besides,  that  the  words  cited  from 
my  work,  when  viewed  isolatedly,  are  far  from  ex- 
pressing the  idea  Avhich  I  wished  to  attach  to  them. 
The  works  of  genius  upon  which  our  judgments  bear 
are  in  general  complex ;  for  there  is  no  work,  con- 
structed by  genius,  which  does  not  suppose  the  exer- 
cise of  various  of  its  faculties.  A  skilful  analysis 
could  alone  make  out  the  part  of  each  of  them ;  I 
would  suggest  for  this  purpose  the  idea  of  a  work 
Avhich  should  have  for  its  object  the  analytic  exami- 
nation of  the  development  of  our  intellectual  faculties 
for  each  age.  Now,  I  have  aimed  to  present,  in  the 
work  here  reproduced,  only  an  essaj%  only  a  particu- 
lar example,  of  such  an  anah^sis,  "  which  tends  to  show 
that  the  maximum  of  energy  of  the  passions  occurs 
about  the  age  of  twenty-five."  The  minimum  is  not 
then  determined ;  and  even  when  it  shall  be,  by  a  suffi- 
cient number  of  observations,  one  will  no  more  be  able 
to  apply  it  to  anj'  given  individual  in  particular,  than 
*  '•  On  ^r.in,"  vol.  ii.  pnrre  110,  r.nissels  ofliti"ii. 

PREFACE. 

one  could  make  iise  of  a  table  of  mortality  to  determine 
the  period  of  his  decease.  It  shoidd  he  well  understood 
that  social  physics  never  can  pretend  to  discover  laws 
which  will  verify  themselves  in  every  particular,  in 
the  case  of  isolated  individuals.  The  science  will 
have  rendered  a  service  sufficiently  vast,  in  giving 
more  precise  views  upon  a  host  of  points,  of  which 
vague  ghmpses  only  were  before  possessed.'^  Thus, 
men  speak  generally  of  the  age  of  the  passions ;  they 
admit,  then,  that  there  is  an  epoch  of  the  life  at  which 
the  passions  act  with  greater  energy?  How  knoAv 
they  this?  Doubtless,  by  the  observation  of  man. 
"Well,  it  is  observation  which  the  science  of  social 
physics  wiU  employ,  but  observation  conducted  in  a 
more  certain  manner,  after  scientific  principles,  and 
not  resting  on  fugitive  glances  of  wliich  one  can  pre- 
serve no  durable  traces. 

I  trust  I  may  be  permitted  to  notice  here  another 
objection  which  has  been  made,  on  the  subject  of  the 
value  which  I  believed  it  proper  to  attribute  to  ave- 
rage qualities.  "  You  believe,  then,"  it  lias  been  said 
to  me,  "  that  the  type  of  health  would  be  a  mean  be- 
twixt all  the  constitutions  existing— all  the  states  of 
health  ?  But  then  you  must  grant  at  least  that  your 
type  would  be  more  perfect  if  the  aA^erage  were  struck 
upon  those  alone  who  were  in  health."  This  argu- 
ment may  appear  at  first  sight  an  embarrassing  one  ; 
but,  when  examined  more  closely,  it  may  easily  be 
shown  to  rest  upon  no  solid  foundations.  I  believe  I 
might  even  say,  retorting  in  some  measure  the  argu- 
ment, that,  if  the  average  were  taken  upon  all  men, 
the  healthy  excepted,  it  would  remain  still  the  same. 
This  only  would  result,  that,  in  order  to  obtain  that 
average  with  an  equal  degi-ee  of  precision,  it  Avould  be 
necessary  to  draw  it  from  an  infinitely  greater  num- 
ber of  individuals.  We  may  consider  maladies  like 
deviations  from  the  normal  state,  be  it  more  or  be  it 
less  ;  and  it  is  betwixt  these  contrary  conditions  that 
the  state  of  health  would  be  found. 

We  aim  at  a  target — an  end — marked  by  a  point. 
The  arrows  go  to  right  and  left,  high  or  low,  accord- 
ing to  the  address  of  the  shooters.  In  the  mean  time, 
after  a  considerable  number  of  trials,  the  butt,  which 
has  not  yet  been  touched,  perhaps,  a  single  time,  be- 
comes so  well  pointed  out  by  the  marks  around  it, 
that  they  would  aid  at  once  in  rediscovering  it,  if  it 
should  chance  to  be  lost  sight  of  Nay,  more  than 
this ;  even  aims  the  most  unfortunate  may  be  made 
to  conduce  to  this  end ;  commencing  with  those  marks 
which  are  farthest  away,  if  they  be  sufficiently  nume- 
rous, one  may  learn  from  them  the  real  position  of  the 
point  they  surround. 

This  figurative  reasoning  is  applicable,  it  may  easih' 
be  conceived,  to  all  inqiiiries  into  the  physical  sciences, 
and  even  the  moral  also,  Avhere  the  point  in  view  is 

to  arrive  at  means  or  averages.  As  stated  in  the  con- 
siderations presented  at  the  close  of  my  work,  every 
quality,  taken  -vvithin  suitable  limits,  is  essentially 
good  ;  it  is  only  in  its  extreme  deviations  from  the 
mean  that  it  becomes  bad.  The  study  of  these  devia- 
tions or  anomalies  may  serve  to  aid  in  the  determi- 
nation of  the  normal  state,  if  it  cannot  be  established 
in  a  direct  manner.  This  presimies,  it  is  true,  that 
human  nature,  in  its  aberrations,  has  not  a  tendency 
to  deviate  from  the  mean  in  one  sense  in  preference 
to  another,  as  those  who  aim  at  a  mark  might  have  a 
tendency  to  shoot  always  too  high  or  too  low,  Now, 
nothing  proves  the  existence  of  any  such  tendency, 
i  It  may  be  imagined,  after  the  preceding  remarks, 
how  much  importance  I  attach  to  the  consideration 
of  limits,  which  seem  to  me  of  two  kinds,  ordinary  or 
natural,  and  extraordinary  or  beyond  the  natural.  The 
first  limits  comprise  within  them  the  qualities  which 
deviate  more  or  less  from  the  mean,  without  attract- 
ing attention  by  excess  on  one  side  or  the  other. 
When  the  deviations  become  greater,  they  constitute 
the  extraordinarj'  class,  having  itself  its  limits,  on 
the  outer  verge  of  which  are  things  preternatural,  or 
monstrosities.  Thus,  the  men  who  fall,  in  respect  of 
height,  outside  of  the  ordinary  limits,  are  giants  or 
dwarfs  ;  and  if  the  excess  or  the  deficiency  of  height 
surpasses  the  extraordinary  limits,  they  may  be  re- 
garded as  monstrosities.  From  the  view  of  the  human 
constitution,  also,  we  may  find  the  state  of  health  and 
of  sickness,  and  also  a  condition  to  be  called  exti-aor- 
dinary  or  preternatural.  We  must  conceive  the  same 
distinctions  in  the  moral  world."' 

Narrow  as  may  be  the  natural  limits,  they  are  yet 
too  extended,  as  I  have  pointed  out,  Avhen  we  wish  to 
approach  the  beautiful  in  the  arts.  Artistical  limits 
do  not  tolerate  certain  proportions,  which  nevertheless 
constitute  neither  physical  defects  nor  infirmities. 

The  consideration  of  limits,  upon  Avhich  I  insist, 
has  convinced  me  more  an*&  more  of  the  important 
part  which  they  play  in  the  social  order.  One  of 
the  most  interesting  observations  which  I  have  had 
occasion  to  make,  is,  that  thej'-  narrow  themselves 
through  the  infiuence  of  civilisation,  which  affords,  in 
my  eyes,  the  most  convincing  proof  of  human  perfec- 
tibility. On  the  one  side  Ave  approach  more  closely 
to  Avhat  is  good  and  beautiful ;  on  the  other,  vice  and 
suffering  are  shut  up  within  narrower  limits ;  and  Ave 
have  to  dread  less  the  monstrosities,  physical  and 
moral,  Avhich  have  the  power  to  throAV  perturbation 
into  the  social  fraiucAvork.  The  distinctions  Avhich  I 
had  already  established  Avitli  care  in  my  Avork,  ought 
to  have  proA'cd,  metliinks,  to  some  less  prejudiced 
judges,  hoAv  far  I  am  from  a  blind  fatalism,  Avhich 
Avould  regard  man  as  unfit  to  exercise  free-Avill,  or 
meliorate  the  future  condition  of  his  race. 

ON    MAN. 

INTRODUCTORY. 

Man  is  born,  grows  up,  and  dies,  according  to  certain 
laws  wliich  have  never  been  properly  investigated, 
either  as  a  whole  or  in  the  mode  of  their  mutual 
reactions.  Hitherto,  the  science  of  Man  has  been 
limited  to  researches,  more  or  less  complete,  respect- 
ing some  of  its  laws,  to  results  deduced  from  single  or 
insulated  observations,  and  to  theories  often  based  on 
mere  glimpses ;  and  these  constitute  pretty  nearly  all 
tlie  materials  it  possesses.  It  must  be  admitted,  how- 
ever, that  for  nearly  two  centuries  various  distinguished 
men  have  studiously  inquired  into  the  rate  of  repro- 
duction and  mortality  of  mankind ;  the  differences 
which  age,  sex,  profession,  climate,  and  seasons,  pro- 
duce in  regard  of  births  and  deaths,  have  been  assidu- 
ously studied.  But  they  have  neglected  to  put  forward, 
with  sufficient  prominence,  tlie  study  of  his  physical 
development  (bodily  gmvtii),  <and  thej'  haA'e  neglected 
to  mark  by  numbers  how  individual  man  increases 
with  respect  to  weight  and  height — how,  in  short,  his 
forces  are  developed,  the  sensibility  of  his  organs,  and 
his  other  physical  facidties.  They  have  not  determined 
the  age  at  which  his  faculties  reach  then*  maximum  or 
highest  energy,  nor  the  time  when  they  commence 
to  decline.  Neither  have  they  determined  the  relative 
value  of  his  faculties  at  different  epochs  or  periods  of 
his  life,  nor  the  mode  according  to  which  they  mu- 
tually influence  each  other,  nor  the  modifying  causes. 
In  like  manner,  the  progressive  development  of  moral 
and  intellectual  man  has  scarcely  occupied  their  at- 
tention ;  nor  have  they  noted  how  the  faculties  of  his 
mind  are  at  every  age  influenced  by  those  of  the  body, 
nor  hoAv  his  facilities  mutually  react. 

It  will  be  evident  that  I  do  not  speak  here  of  the 
speculatiA^e  sciences,  which,  for  a  long  time,  have 
unravelled  with  great  acuteness  the  greater  part  of 
the  questions  within  theu*  scope,  and  which  they  could 
attempt  directly,  avoiding,  however,  all  numerical 
appreciation  of  the  facts.  The  void  resulting  from 
this  neglect  must  be  filled  up  by  the  sciences  of 
observation ;  for,  either  from  a  distrust  in  their  own 
strength,  or  a  repugnance  in  supposing  it  possible  to 
reduce  to  fixed  laws  what  seemed  to  flow  from  the 
most  capricious  of  causes,  it  has  liitherto  been  deemed 
expedient  by  learned  men  to  abandon  the  line  of 
inquiry  employed  in  the  investigation  of  the  other 
laws  of  nature,  so  soon  as  the  moral  phenomena  of 
mankind  became  the  object  of  research.  It  must 
also  be  admitted,  in  explanation,  that  observations 
having  for  their  object  the  Sciejice  of  Man,  present 
difficulties  exceedingly  great,  and,  to  merit  confidence, 
must  be  collected  upon  a  scale  far  too  extended  to 
be  attempted  by  an  individual  philosopher.  Thus, 
Are  need  not  be  at  all  surprised  if  facts  respect- 
ing the  increase  of  human  weight  and  height  from 
birth,  be  not  readily  found — if  even  the  development 
of  man's  bodily  strength  be  not  exactly  known ;  and 
it  ought  to  excite  no  surprise,  if,  on  these  interesting 
points,  the  results  be  confined  to  mere  sketches. 
The  study  of  the  development  of  the  intellectual 

qualities  present,  perhaps,  still  greater  difficulties  ;  but 
the  result  wiU  show  that  these  difficulties  are  more 
apparent  than  real. 

With  respect  to  the  physical  or  animal  forces,  it 
is  readily  enough  admitted  that  their  development 
depends  on  the  action  of  nature,  and  is  thus  regulated 
by  laws  which  in  certain  cases  admit  of  being  deter- 
mined by  numbers ;  but  it  is  asserted,  that  in  respect 
of  the  moral  or  intellectual  faculties,  over  which  our 
volition  exercises  an  influence,  it  would  seem  to  ap- 
proach an  absurdity,  to  inquire  into  laws  influenced 
by  a  cause  at  once  so  capricious  and  so  anomalous  as 
the  human  will.  Hence  it  has  happened  that,  in  the 
study  of  man,  a  difficulty,  seemingly  insurmountable, 
was  encountered  at  the  very  first  step ;  but  this  diffi- 
culty is  connected  principally  with  the  solution  of  a 
question  which  we  shall  now  examine. 

Are  Human  Actions  regulated  by  Fixed  Laws  ? 

Experience  alone  can  with  certainty  solve  a  jiro- 
blem  which  no  a  priori  reasoning  could  determine. 
It  is  of  primary  importance  to  keep  out  of  view  man 
as  he  exists  m  an  insulated,  separate,  or  in  an  indi- 
vidual state,  and  to  regard  him  only  as  a  fraction  of 
the  species.  In  thus  setting  aside  his  individual  nature, 
Ave  get  quit  of  all  Avhich  is  accidental,  and  the  indi- 
vidual peculiarities,  Avhich  exercise  scarcely  any  influ- 
ence oA'er  the  mass,  become  effaced  of  their  own  accord, 
aUoAving  tlie  observer  to  seize  the  general  results. 

Thus,  to  explain  our  meaning  by  an  example — Ave 
may  instance  the  case  of  a  person  examining  too 
nearly  a  small  portion  of  a  very  large  circle,  and  who, 
consequentl}^  would  see  in  this  detached  portion 
merely  a  certain  quantity  of  ph3'sical  points,  grouped 
in  a  more  or  less  irregular  manner,  and  so,  indeed,  as 
to  seem  as  if  they  had  been  arranged  by  cliance,  not- 
withstanding the  care  Avith  Avhicli  the  original  figure 
may  have  been  traced.  But,  placing  himself  at  a 
greater  distance,  the  eye  embraces  of  necessity  a 
gi'eater  number  of  points,  and  ah'cady  a  degree  of 
regularity  is  obserA'able  over  a  certain  extent  of  the 
segment  of  the  ckcle ;  and,  by  removing  still  farther 
from  the  object,  the  observer  loses  sight  of  tlie  indi- 
vidual points,  no  longer  observes  any  accidental  or 
odd  arrangements  amongst  them,  but  discovers  at 
once  the  law  presiding  OA'cr  their  general  arrange- 
ments, and  the  precise  nature  of  the  circle  so  traced. 
But  let  us  suppose,  as  might  happen,  that  the  different 
points  of  the  arch,  mstead  of  being  material  points, 
Avere  small  animated  beings,  free  to  act  according  to 
their  will,  in  a  A'ery  circumscribed  sphere,  yet  these 
spontaneous  motions  Avould  not  be  perceived  by  the 
eve  j»laced  at  a  suitable  distance. 

•It  is  in  this  Avay  that  we  propose  studying  the  laAvs 
which  relate  to  the  human  species ;  for,  by  examining 
them  too  closely,  it  becomes  impossible  to  apprehend 
them  correctly,  and  the  observer  sees  only  individual 
peculiarities,  Avhich  are  infinite.  Even  in  those  cases 
Avhere  the  individuals  exactly  resemble  each  other,  it 
might  still  happen  that,  by  examining  them  separately, 
some  of  the  most  singular  laAvs  to  Avhich  thev  are 

ON  MAN. 

subject,  iiiuIlt  certain  influences,  might  escape  for 
ever  the  notice  of  the  observer.  To  liini,  for  example, 
who  had  examined  the  laAvs  of  light  merely  in  a  single 
drop  of  Avater,  the  brilliant  phenomenon  of  the  rain- 
bow would  be  totally  unintelhgible — it  might  even 
happen  that  the  idea  of  the  possible  existence  of  such 
an  appearance  would  never  have  occurred  to  him 
unless  accidentally  placed  in  favourable  circumstances 
to  observe  it*^ 

^YhB.t  idea  should  we  have  of  the  mortality  of  man- 
kind by  observing  only  individuals  ?  Instead  of  the 
admirable  laws  to  which  it  is  subject,  our  knowledge 
would  be  limited  to  a  series  of  incoherent  facts,  lead- 
ing to  a  total  misapprehension  of  the  laws  of  nature. 

The  remarks  we  make  respecting  human  mortality, 
may  be  equally  extended  to  man's  physical  and  moral 
faculties,  i  To  attain  a  knowledge  of  the  general  laws 
regulating  these  latter  (moral)  faculties,  a  sufficient 
number  of  observations  must  be  collected,  in  order  to 
bring  out  what  is  constant,  and  to  set  aside  wliat  is 
purely  accidental.  If,  in  order  to  focilitate  this  study, 
all  human  actions  could  be  registered,  it  might  be 
supposed  that  their  numbers  would  vary  from  year  to 
year  as  widely  as  human  caprice.  But  this  is  not 
what  we  in  reality  observe,  at  least  for  that  class  of 
actions  of  which  we  have  succeeded  in  obtaining  a 
registry.^  I  shall  qiiote  but  a  single  example ;  but  it 
merits  the  attention  of  all  philosophic  minds.  In 
every  thing  which  relates  to  crimes,  the  same  num- 
bers are  reproduced  so  constantly,  that  it  becomes 
impossible  to  misapprehend  it  —  even  in  respect  to 
those  crimes  which  seem  perfectly  beyond  human 
foresight,  such  as  murders  committed  in  general  at 
the  close  of  quarrels,  arising  Avithout  a  motive,  and 
under  other  circumstances  to  all  appearance  the 
most  fortuitous  or  accidental:  nevertheless,  experi- 
ence proves  that  murders  are  committed  annuall,y, 
not  only  pretty  nearly  to  the  same  extent,  but  even 
that  the  instruments  emploj^ed  are  in  the  same  pro- 
portions. Now,  if  this  occurs  in  the  case  of  crimes 
whose  origin  seems  to  be  purely  accidental,  what 
shall  Ave  say  of  those  admitted  to  be  the  result  of 
reflection  ?  * 

This  remarkable  constancy  Avith  Avhich  the  same 
crimes  appear  annuaUy  in  tlie  same  order,  draAving 
doAvn  on  their  perpetrators  the  same  punishments,  in 
the  same  proportions,  is  a  singular  fact,  which  AA^e  owe 
to  the  statistics  of  the  tribunals.  In  various  Avritings, 
I  liaA'e  done  ray  utmost  to  put  this  evidence  clearly 
before  the  public  rf  I  have  never  t;iiled  annually  to  re- 

*  The  following  is  the  result  of  the  reports  of  criminal  justice 
ill  France,  &c. : — 

1826. 

1827. 

1828. 

1829. 

1830. 

1031. 

Murders  in  general,      - 

241 

2.34 

227 

231 

20.1 

266 

Gun  and  pistol,      -    - 

r.0 

64 

60 

61 

57 

88 

Sabre,   sword,  stiletto, 

poniard,  dagger,  &c., 

15 

7 

« 

7 

12 

SO 

Knife, 

30 

4(1 

34 

46 

44 

34 

Cudgels,  cane,  &c.,     - 

S3 

28 

31 

24 

12 

21 

Stones,    -----    - 

21) 

20 

21 

21 

11 

9 

Cutting,  stabbing,   and 

bruising  instruments, 

3J 

40 

42 

4.) 

46 

4!) 

Strangulations,  -    -    - 

2 

5 

2 

2 

2 

4 

By    precipitating    and 

drowning,    -    -    -    - 

6 

IG 

C 

1 

4 

3 

Kicks  and  blows  with 

^ 

the  fist, 

20 

12 

21 

23 

17 

26 

Fire, 

1 

1 

Unknown,     -    -    -    - 

17 

1 

2 

2 

2 

t  t  Seepage  43  of  the  Reelierches  SlaiMiqiie,  &c.,  1809;  page  178 
of  tlie  fifth  volume  of  the  Corrcsp.  Mathenwtiqiu ;  p.age  214  of  the 
.same  collection,  in  the  observations  on  the  constancy  observed 
in  the  number  of  crimes  committed  ;  page  80  of  the  Jiechoxhes 
siir  le  PcHchanl  au  Crime,  &c.  [Inquiries  into  the  Propensity  to 
Crime,  &c.]  After  having  repented  positively  the  same  state- 
ment so  many  times,  1  read  the  following  words  1  confess  with 
surprise,  in  1&38,  in  an  Kssiiy  on  the  Moral  Statistics  of  France 
iSlatistique  Morale  dc  la  France),  the  author  of  which  honours  me 
with  his  correspondence,  and  i-^  acquainted  with  my  writings  :— 

IJeat,  that  there  is  a  Ludycl  which  avc  pay  with  frightful 
regularity — it  is  that  of  prisons,  dungeons,  and  scaf- 
folds. NoAv,  it  is  this  budget  which,  above  all,  Ave  ought 
to  endeavour  to  reduce  ;  and  every  year,  the  numbers 
haA'e  confirmed  my  previous  statements  to  such  a  de- 
gree, that  I  might  haA'e  said,  perhaps  Avith  more  pre- 
cision, "  there  is  a  tribute  Avhich  man  pays  Avith  more 
regularity  than  that  Avhich  he  OAves  to  nature,  or  to 
the  treasure  of  the  state,  namely,  that  Avliich  he  pays 
to  crime."  Sad  condition  of  humanity !  We  might 
even  predict  annuaUy  hoAv  many  individuals  Avill  stain 
their  hands  Avith  the  blood  of  their  felloA\'-men,  hoAV 
many  Avill  be  forgers,  hoAv  many  will  deal  in  poison, 
pretty  nearly  in  the  same  Avay  as  Ave  may  foretell  the 
iumual  births  and  deaths. 

V  Society  includes  Avithin  itself  the  germs  of  all  the 
crimes  committed,  and  at  the  same  time  the  necessary 
facihties  for  their  development.  It  is  the  social  state, 
in  some  measure,  Avhich  prepares  these  crimes,  and 
the  criminal  is  merely  the  instritment  to  execute  them. 
;g3rgry^sociaJ^state  supposes,  then,  a.  certain.  aiuuilK-r 
and  a  certain  order  of  crimes,  these  bein^  nierej.v_thc! 
yecessin-y  consequences  of  its  organi,sation,''Tliis  obser- 
A'atioii,  so  discouraging  at  first  sight,  becomes,  on  the 
contrarj',  consolatory,  Avhen  examined  more  nearly, 
by  shoAving  the  possibility  of  ameliorating  the  human 
race,  by  modifying  their  institutions,  their  habits,  the 
amomit  of  their  information,  and,  generally,  all  which 
influences  their  mode  of  existence.  In  fact,  this  ob- 
servation is  merely  the  extension  of  a  laAv  ;dready 
AveU  knoAvn  to  all  Avho  have  studied  the  physical 
condition  of  society  in  a  philosophic  manner :  it  is, 
that  so  long  as  the  same  causes  exist,  we  must  expect 
a  repetition  of  the  same  effects.  What  has  induced 
some  to  beUeve  that  moral  phenomena  did  not  obey 
this  law,  has  been  the  too  great  influence  ascribed  at 
all  times  to  man  himself  over  liis  actions  :  it  is  a  re- 
markable fact  in  the  history  of  science,  that  the  more 
extended  human  knowledge  has  become,  the  more 
limited  huiuan  poAver,  in  that  respect,  has  constantly' 
appeared.  This  globe,  of  Avhich  man  imagines  himself 
the  haughty  possessor,  becomes,  in  the  ca'CS  of  the 
astronomer,  merely  a  grain  of  dost  floating  in  the 
immensity  of  space :  an  earthquake,  a  tempest,  an 
inundation,  may  destroy  in  an  instant  an  entire  people, 
or  ruin  the  labours  of  twenty  ages.  On  the  other  hand, 
Avhen  man  appears  most  influenced  by  his  oaa'u  actions, 
Ave  see  paid  an  annual  tribute  to  nature  of  births  and 
deaths,  as  regular  as  may  be.  In  the  regular  repro- 
duction of  crime,  Ave  see  again  reproduced  another 
proof  of  the  narrow  field  in  AA'hich  he  exercises  his 
individual  activity.  But  if  each  step  in  the  career 
of  science  thus  gradually  chminishas  his  imjjortance, 
his  pride  has  a  compensation  in  the  greater  idea  of 
his  intellectual  power,  by  Avhich  he  has  been  enaWed 
to  perceive  those  laAvs  Avhich  seem  to  be,  by  their  na- 
ture, placed  for  ever  beyond  his  grasp. 

v'ltwoidd  appear,  then,  that  moral  phenomena,  Avhen 
observed  on  a  great  scale,  are  found  to  resemble  phy- 
sical phenomena ;  and  Ave  thus  arrive,  in  inquiries  of 
this  kind,  at  the  fundamental  principle,  that  the 
(greater  the  mnnher  of  individuals  observed,  the  more  do 
individual  pecidiarities,  ivhether  ph/sical  or  moral,  become 
effaced,  and  leave  in  a  prominent  point  of  vieiv  the  gene- 
ral facts,  by  virtue  of  which  society  exists  and  is  pre- 
served.y^lt  belongs  only  to  a  fcA^  men,  gifted  Avith 
superior  genius,  to  alter  sensibly  the  social  state ;  and 

"  Each  j-ear  reproduces  the  same  number  of  crimes,  in  the  same 
order,  in  the  same  regions.  Each  class  of  crimes  has  its  peculiar 
and  invariable  distribution,  according  to  the  sex,  age,  season  ;  all 
are  accompanied,  in  equal  proportions,  Avith  accessoi'y  facts,  imim- 
portant  in  appearance,  and,  but  for  their  return,  inexplicable. 
It  becomes  necessary  to  give  examples  of  this  fixity  in  this  con- 
stancy in  the  reproduction  of  facts  hitherto  consiih'red  as  inexpli- 
r,ib!e  (insaisissables  dans  leur  ensemble),  ami  as  bei»p  .'subject  to  no 
laic."  I  shall  make  only  one  observation,  which  is,  that  I  never 
considered  the  number  of  crimes  invariable.  I  bdievc,  on  the 
contrary,  in  the  perfc.-tibility  of  the  human  speci-.^s.' 

ON  MAN. 

even  this  alteration,  or  action,  rcajMres  a  consiJerable 
time  to  transmit  fully  its  eflfects.  Tlf  the  poAver  which 
man  possesses  of  modifying  his  actions,  was  commu- 
nicated immediately  to  the  social  system,  every  kind 
of  prevision  or  prejudgment  would  become  impossible, 
and  we  shoidd  expect  in  vain  to  find  in  the  past  les- 
sons for  the  future.*/  Eut  it  is  not  so  :  Avhen  active 
causes  have  once  established  themselves,  they  display 
an  evident  action,  even  for  a  long  time  after  efforts  have 
been  made  to  oppose  and  destroy  them ;  and  too  much 
care,  therefore,  cannot  be  bestowed  in  pointing  them 
out,  and  in  suggesting  the  most  efficacious  means  to 
modify  them  in  a  useful  manner.  This  reaction  of 
man  upon  himself,  is  one  of  his  noblest  attributes ;  it 
offers,  indeed,  the  finest  field  for  the  display  of  his 
activity.  As  a  member  of  the  social  body,  he  is  sub- 
jected every  instant  to  the  necessity  of  these  causes, 
and  pays  them  a  regular  tribute ;  but  as  a  man,  em- 
ploying all  the  energy  of  his  intellectual  tixculties,  he 
in  some  measure  masters  these  causes,  and  modifies 
their  effects,  thus  constantly  endeavouring  to  improve 
his  condition. 

How  the  Laws  relative  to  Jran  otiglit  to  be  Studied 
and  Interpreted. 

Wc  have  just  seen  that  man  is  placed  under  the 
influence  of  regular  and  periodic  causes,  affecting  not 
merely  his  physical  qualities,  but  likewise  his  actions ; 
and  that  these  lead  to  effects  equallj^  regular  and 
periodic.  Now,  these  causes,  and  their  mode  of  action, 
or  the  laws  to  which  they  give  rise,  may  be  determined 
by  a  close  inquiry ;  but,  as  has  been  already  said,  in 
order  to  succeed,  we  must  study  the  masses,  with  the 
view  of  separating  from  our  observations  all  that  is 
fortuitous  or  individual.  Every  thing  being  equid, 
the  calculation  of  probabilities  shows,  that  in  the  direct 
ratio  to  the  mmiber  of  individuals  observed,  we  ap- 
proach the  nearer  to  the  truth. 

By  the  manner,  then,  in  which  these  laws  have  been 
determined,  they  present  no  longer  any  thing  indi- 
vidual ;  and,  consequently,  can  be  applied  to  indivi- 
duals only  within  certain  limits.  Every  apiilication 
which  one  might  attempt  to  make  to  a  man  in  par- 
ticular, must  be  essentially  false,  in  the  same  way  as 
if  we  were  to  pretend  to  determine  the  precise  period 
of  a  person's  death  by  looking  into  the  tables  of  mor- 
tality. 

Such  tables,  in  respect  to  particular  cases,  can  give 
only  approximations ;  and  the  doctrine  of  probabilities 
shows  here  also  that  the  results  deduced  from  them, 
and  the  results  observed,  agree  always  the  better  the 
greater  the  number  of  the  individuals  to  whom  they 
refer.  Thus,  although  the  tables  of  mortality  teach  us  no 
direct  apiilication  to  an  individual,  3'et  they  offer  very 
certain  results  when  applied  to  a  great  number  of  per- 
sons ;  and  upon  these  general  results,  assurance  socie- 
ties calcidate  their  annual  profits.  We  endeavour  here 
to  be  well  miderstood  respecting  the  natiire  and  value 
of  the  laws  we  propose  inquiring  into.  It  is  the  social 
body  which  fonns  the  object  of  om*  researches,  and 
not  the  peculiarities  distinguishing  the  individuals 
composing  it.  This  study  interests,  in  an  especial 
manner,  the  philosopher  and  the  legislator :  the  lite- 
rary man  and  the  artist,  on  the  contrary,  will  endea- 
vour to  miderstand,  in  preference,  those  pecuharities 
which  we  endeavour  to  separate  from  our  resvdts,  and 
which  constitute,  as  it  were,  the  physiognomical  and 
pictorial  aspect  of  society. 

jMoreover,  the  laws  which  relate  to  the  social  body 
are  not  essentially  invariable ;  they  change  Avith  the 
nature  of  the  causes  producing  them.  The  progress  of 
civiUsation,  for  examjjle,  has  changed  the  laws  respect- 
ing mortality,  and  must  have  exercised  an  influence 
over  the  physical  and  moral  condition  of  man.  Tables 
constructed  to  show  the  intensity  of  the  disposition 

*  [The  supposed  civilisation  of  Russia  by  Peter  the  Great,  and 
of  Prussia  by  Frederick  II.,  fonn  no  real  exceptions  to  the  state- 
ments of  M.  Quetelet.] 

to  crime  at  different  ages,  althoilgh  fv.i'  several  years 
they  may  have  offered  pi-etty  nearly  the  same  result:?; 
may  yet  become  gradually  modified  :  it  is  to  efiect  this 
modification  that  the  friends  of  humanity  ought  to 
turn  their  attention.  The  study  of  the  social  body, 
Avhich  Ave  haA'c  in  vicAv,  has  for  its  object  to  leave 
this  important  subject  no  longer  to  a  kind  of  empi- 
ricism, but  to  offer  the  means  of  recognising  directly 
the  causes  Avhicli  influence  society,  and  to  measure 
even  that  influence  itself. 

These  causes,  once  knoAvn,  present  no  sudden 
changes,  but  are  modified  graduallj*.  Future  events 
may  be  foreseen  by  a  knoAvledge  of  the  past,  or  con- 
jectures may  even  comprise  a  period  of  scA'eral  years, 
Avithout  fear  of  experience  producing  results  uncon- 
fined  by  the  limits  previously  assigned  them.  Now, 
these  limits  are  proportionally  widened  as  our  conjec- 
tures embrace  a  Avider  series  of  years. 

Of  the  Causes  which  Influence  JIan- 

The  laws  presiding  over  the  development  of  man, 
and  modifj^ing  his  actions,  are  hi  general  the  result  of 
his  organisation,  of  his  education  or  knoAvledge,  means 
or  Avealth,  institutions,  local  influences,  and  an  endless 
variety  of  other  causes,  ahvays  very  difficult  to  dis- 
cover, and  some  of  Avhich  may  probably  never  be 
made  out. 

Of  all  these  influencing  causes,  some  arc  purely 
physical,  others  iiilierent  in  our  natiu-e.  Man,  in 
fact,  possesses  in  himself  a  moral  force  scciuring  to 
him  the  empire  over  all  living  beings  on  this  globe ; 
but  their  destination  forms  a  mysterious  problem, 
Avhose  solution  Avill  probably  escape  us  for  ever.  By 
means  of  those  moral  forces,  man  is  distinguished 
from  other  animals.  By  means  of  tliem,  also,  he  pos- 
sesses the  poAver  of  modifying,  at  least  to  appearance, 
the  laAvs  of  nature  affecting  him,  and  perhaps  by 
causing  a  i>rogressiA'e  movement,  tends  to  approach 
a  happier  physical  condition.* 

^he  forces  Avhich  characterise  man,  are  living  forces 
in  their  nature ;  but  do  they  act  iu  a  constant  man- 
ner, and  has  man,  at  all  epochs,  possessed  the  same 
quantity — in  a  Avord,  does  there  exist  any  thing  ana- 
logous to  the  active  or  living  forces  in  nature  ?  What, 
moreoA'er,  is  their  destination?  Can  they  influence 
the  progress  of  the  svstem.  or  compromise  its  exist- 
ence? or,  perhaps,  like  the  internal  forces  of  a  system, 
may  they  not  modifj'  in  something  its  progress,  or 
the  conditions  of  its  stability  ?  Analogy  leads  us  to 
believe,  that  in  the  social  state  avc  may  expect  to  find 
in  general  all  the  principles  of  conservation  observed 
in  the  natural  phenomena?? 

Plants  and  animals  appear  to  obej',  like  the  planets, 
the  eternal  laAvs  of  nature,  and  Avere  it  not  for  the 
intervention  of  man,  these  laAvs  could  be  verified  just 
as  easUy  in  the  one  case  as  in  the  other ;  but  man 
exercises,  both  on  himself  and  on  aU  around,  a  dis- 
turbing action,  the  intensity  of  which  takes  a  develop- 
ment in  in-oportion  to  his  intellect,  and  the  effects  of 
which  are  such,  that  society  does  not  resemble  itself 
at  any  tAvo  different  epochs. 

It  Avould  be  important  to  detennine,  in  all  the  laAvs 
affecting  the  human  species,  Avhat  belongs  to  nature 
and  Avhat  belongs  to  the  distmrbing  force  of  man  ;  it 
appears  at  least  certain,  that  the  effects  of  this  force 
are  sIoav,  and  might  almost  be  called  sectilai-  pertur- 
bations.    HoAvever  this  may  be,  if  they  really  Avere 

*  Buflfon  explains  verj'  well  the  power  possessed  by  man  in 
modifying  nature's  Avorks :—"  All  these  modern  and  recent  ex- 
amples prove,  that  man  has  but  recently  known  the  extent  of  his 
power,  and  that  even  yet  he  does  not  Icnow  it  sufficiently  ;  it  de- 
pends entirely  on  the  exercise  of  his  intellect :  thus,  the  more 
he  observes,  the  more  he  will  cultivate  nature,  and  the  more 
extensive  will  be  his  means  to  subject  nature's  works  to  himself. 
And  what  might  he  not  eft'ect  upon  himself — I  mean  on  his  own 
species — if  the  will  were  ahvays  governed  by  the  judgment  ?  A\lic> 
could  predict  limits  to  the  moral  and  physical  perfectibility  of 
human  nature?"  liC.—Epoques  ilc  la  Nature. 

ON  MAN. 

developed  with  inucli  rapidity,  we  coiild  not,  with  the 
few  elements  Ave  possess  in  respect  to  the  past,  draw 
important  conclusions  in  regard  to  the  future. 

Wc  must  then  do  as  astronomers  have  done  in  the 
theory  of  arbitrary  constants — and  as  the  early  statis- 
ticians did  in  calcidating  the  laws  of  human  mortality 
—make  an  abstraction  at  first  of  the  effects  of  the  dis- 
turbing force,  and  return  to  it  afterwards  when  a  long 
series  of  documents  permits  us  to  do  so. 

Thus,  to  bring  out  my  meaning,  in  calculating  the 
different  tables  of  mortaUty,  the  medium  duration  of 
human  hfe  has  been  shown  to  vary  for  different  coun- 
tries, and  even  for  difierent  provinces,  though  these 
may  be  quite  contiguous.  But  these  differences  might 
depend  as  much  on  the  natiu:e  of  the  cUmate  as  on  man 
himself ;  and  hence  the  necessity  of  determining  what 
belonged  to  the  one,  what  to  the  other.  Tor  this  pur- 
pose, one  might  select  an  assemblage  of  circumstances 
proving  that  the  forces  of  nature  remam  the  same ; 
and  if  the  results  obtained  at  different  epochs  were  also 
identical,  then  foUows  the  natural  conclusion  that  the 
disturbmg  force  of  man  amounted  to  nothing.  Now, 
this  attempt  has  been  made,  and  at  Geneva,  for  ex- 
ample, it  has  been  found  that  the  average  duration  of 
life,  or  the  medium  life,  has  successively  become  longer. 
Now,  Ave  are  at  least  entitled  to  conclude  from  this  the 
existence  of  the  disturbing  force  of  man,  and  to  form 
the  first  idea  of  the  energy  of  its  effects  on  this  point 
of  the  globe,  so  long  as  it  is  not  proved  that  causes 
foreign  to  man  may  have  altered  the  fertility  of  the 
soil,  the  state  of  the  atmosphere,  temperature,  or 
given  rise  to  some  other  alteration  in  the  chmate. 
But  hitherto  Ave  know  only  the  result  of  different 
forces,  which  it  Avould  be  impossible  to  estimate  indi- 
vidually, and  of  Avhich  Ave  cannot  even  furnish  a  com- 
plete list.  Thus  Avc  are  disposed  to  beUeve  that  the 
forces  Avhich  haA^e  prolonged  at  Geneva  the  duration 
of  the  average  life  of  man,  have  arisen  from  the  cir- 
cumstances of  his  having  improved  his  habitations, 
rendering  them  more  healthy  and  more  commodious ; 
of  his  having  ameliorated  his  pecuniary  circumstances, 
his  food,  and  institutions  ;  of  his  liaAdng  been  able  to 
Avithdraw  himself  from  the  influence  of  certain  dis- 
eases, &c. ;  and  it  might  even  have  happened  that  the 
disturbing  force  of  man  may  have  altered  for  the  bet- 
ter the  nature  of  the  climate,  by  drainage,  clearing 
the  forests,  or  by  other  changes. 

Of  the  Object  of  this  Work. 
The  purpose  of  this  Avork  is  to  study  in  their  effects 
the  causes,  Avhether  natural  or  disturbing,  Avhich  in- 
fluence human  development ;  to  endeavour  to  measure 
the  influence  of  these  causes,  and  the  mode  according 
tawhich  they  mutually  modify  each  other. 
\  \  It  is  not  at  aU  my  intention  to  propose  a  Theory  of 
Jlan,  but  merely  to  ascertain  by  proof  the  facts  and 
.^  the  phenomena  which  affect  him,  and  to  endeavoiu-, 
by  observation,  to  discover  the  laAvs  forming  the  con- 
nectmg  links  of  these  phenomena.  The  social  man, 
Avhom  I  here  consider,  resembles  the  centre  of  gravity 
in  bodies  :  he  is  the  centre  around  which  oscillate 
the  social  elements — in  fact,  so  to  speak,  he  is  a 
fictitious  being,  for  whom  every  thing  proceeds  con- 
formably to  the  medium  results  obtained  for  society 
in  general.  It  is  this  being  whom  avc  must  consider 
in  estabhshing  the  basis  of  social  physics,  throAving 
out  of  vicAv  peculiar  or  anomalous  cases,  and  disre- 
garding any  inquiry  tending  to  show  that  such  or 
such  an  individual  may  attain  a  greater  or  less  de- 
velopment in  one  of  Ids  facultiesT?  •^ 

Let  us  suppose,  for  example,  that  Ave  endeavoured 
to  discover  the  chstiu'bing  influence  of  man  in  modify- 
ing his  physical  strength.  By  means  of  the  dynamo- 
meter (measurer  of  strength),  we  may  first  estimate 
the  strength  of  the  hands,  or  of  the  loins,  in  a  great 
number  of  persons  of  different  ages,  from  infancy  to 
extreme  old  age,  and  the  results  obtained  in  this  way 
for  a  country  Avill  give  tAvo  scales  of  forces  deserving 

of  our  confidence  in  the  direct  proportion  of  the  num- 
ber of  observations  made,  and  in  the  care  Avitli  which 
they  have  been  made.  By  comparing  at  a  later  period 
these  scales,  obtained  by  the  same  means  and  under 
the  same  influences,  but  at  different  periods  of  time, 
Ave  shall  discover  Avhether  the  disturbing  action  or 
influence  of  man  has  diminished  or  augmented  the 
quantity  of  this  strength.  Now,  it  is  this  variation 
Avhich  the  whole  system  undergoes,  that  it  is  impor- 
tant to  point  out  in  social  physics.  We  may  even  m 
this  way  determine  changes  happening  m  the  different 
classes  of  societj'',  but  Avithout  descending  to  indivi- 
duals. A  man,  in  consequence  of  gigantic  height,  or 
by  herculean  strength,  may  attract  the  attention  of 
the  naturaUst  or  the  i^hysiologist ;  but  in  social  phy- 
sics his  importance  would  disappear  before  that  of 
another  individual,  who,  after  having  ascertained  ex- 
perimentally the  means  of  developing  advantageously 
the  height  and  strength,  may  succeed  in  putting  them 
in  practice,  thus  producing  results  either  affecting 
the  Avhole  system  or  one  of  its  parts.  After  having 
considered  man  at  different  epochs,  and  as  belonging 
to  different  nations — after  having  successively  ascer- 
tained the  several  elements  of  his  physical  and  moral 
condition,  and  pointed  out,  at  the  same  time,  the  varia- 
tions in  the  quantity  of  materials  which  he  produces 
and  which  he  consumes,  in  the. increase  or  decrease  of 
his  wealth,  and  the  changes  occurring  in  lus  position 
with  respect  toother  nations — we  must  next  determine 
the  laws  to  which  man  has  been  subject  in  the  differ- 
ent races,  fi'om  their  origin  ;  that  is  to  say,  we  must 
follow  the  progress  of  the  centres  of  gravity  in  each 
part  of  the  system,  just  as  Ave  determined  the  laAvs 
relating  to  man  in  each  nation,  by  the  entire  mass  of 
the  observations  made  upon  the  individuals  composing 
that  nation.  Under  this  point  of  vicAV,  nations  Avould 
be,  in  respect  to  the  social  system,  what  individuals 
are  in  respect  to  nations  ;  each  woidd  have  their  laAvs 
of  increase  and  decrease,  and  have  a  sliare,  more  or 
less  important,  in  the  pertui-bations  of  the  system. 
NoAV,  it  is  only  fi'om  the  whole  of  the  laws  which 
relate  to  different  races,  that  we  can  afterwards  decide 
on  what  belongs,  whether  to  the  equUibriura  or  to 
the  movement  of  the  system;  for  we  do  not  know 
at  ijresent  which  of  these  tAvo  states  actually  exists. 
What  we  see  daily  proves  to  us  sufficiently  the  effects 
of  internal  actions  and  forces  reacting  on  each  other ; 
but  the  centre  of  gravity  of  the  system,  if  avc  may 
so  say,  and  the  direction  of  the  movement,  are  un- 
knoAvn  ;  it  may  even  happen,  that  Avhilst  the  motion 
of  all  the  parts  of  the  sj^stem  is  progressive  or  retro- 
grade, the  centre  may  remain  unvaryingly  in  equili- 
brio. 

Perhaps  we  may  be  asked,  how  it  can  be  possible  to 
determine  absolutely  the  value  of  the  disturbing  power 
of  man — that  is  to  say,  the  differences,  more  or  less 
great,  which  the  social  system  produces,  from  that  state 
or  condition  in  Avhich  he  would  be  jilaced  if  left  to 
the  forces  of  nature  alone  ?  Such  a  problem,  if  it  could 
be  solved,  Avould  unquestionably  bo  interesting,  but 
scarcely  useful,  since  such  a  condition  does  not  exist 
in  nature,  seeing  that  man  has  at  all  times  been  in 
possession  of  an  intellectual  force,  and  has  ncA'er  been 
reduced  to  live  merely  as  animals  do.  It  is  of  more 
consequence,  indeed,  to  determine  if  the  effects  of  his 
disturbing  power  vaiy  in  a  manner  more  or  less  ad- 
vantageous. 

Fi-oni  Avhat  we  have  said,  the  object  of  scientific 
research,  then,  should  be  to  inquire — 
M,  What  ar^!  the  hiAvs  of  human  reproduction, 
growth,  and  physical  force — growth  of  his  intellec- 
tual poAvers,  and  of  his  disposition,  more  or  less  great, 
to  good  or  evil ;  the  laAvs  regulating  the  development 
of  his  passions  and  tastes  ;  the  mode  of  succession  of 
tlie  materials  he  produces  or  consumes ;  the  laAvs  of 
human  mortality,  &c. 

2.  AVhat  uifluence  has  nature  over  man ;  Avliat  is 
the  measure  of  its  influence,  and  of  its  disturbing 

ON  MAN. 

9 

forces ;  what  have  been  theu*  eflects  for  such  and  such 
a  period ;  and  what  the  social  elements  cliiefly  affected 
by  them. 

3.  Finally,  can  hmnan  forces  compromise  the  sta- 
bihty  of  the  jocial  system  ?  I  am  not  siure  if  these 
questions  may  ever  be  answered ;  but  to  me  it  seems 
that  their  solution  would  form  some  of  the  noblest  and 
most  interesting  results  of  human  research.  Con- 
vinced of  tliis  truth,  I  have  already  made  some  efforts 
to  reply  to  the  first  series  of  these  questions ;  and 
still  more,  to  make  my  ideas  understood,  and  to  point 
out  the  route  which  ought  to  be  followed,  I  have 
endeavoured  also  to  demonstrate  how  to  detect  the 
influencmg  causes,  and  to  determine  the  degree  of 
their  respective  actions.  Whatever  idea  may  be 
formed  of  these  researclies,  I  trust  it  will  still  be  ad- 
mitted, that  in  respect  to  the  development  of  the 
human  faculties,  a  great  number  of  observations  and 
results  have  been  accumulated  wliich  science  did  not 
previously  possess^ 

I  wish  it  also  to  be  understood,  that  I  consider  this 
work  as  but  a  sketch  of  a  vast  plan,  to  be  completed 
only  by  infinite  care  and  immense  researches.  I  have 
room,  therefore,  for  hope  that  the  leading  idea,  as  to 
the  composition  of  the  work,  may  be  alone  criticised ; 
and  that,  in  respect  to  the  filUng  up  of  the  details, 
necessarily  very  incomplete  in  some  parts,  from  want 
of  materials,  a  lenient  criticism  may  also  be  vouch- 
safed. I  have  thought  it  my  duty,  however,  in  the 
suitable  place,  to  point  out  these  deficiencies. 

On  the  Importance  or  Dignity  of  the  Inquiries  Relative 
to  Man. 

The  nature  of  the  researches  in  this  work,  and  the 
view  which  I  have  taken  of  the  social  system,  have  in 
them  a  something  i^ositive,  which  at  first  sight  may 
startle  some  minds.  Some  may  be  disposed  to  see  in  it 
a  tendency  to  materialism  ;  others,  misunderstanding 
my  ideas,  may  view  them  as  an  attempt  to  exagge- 
rate the  field  of  the  exact  sciences,  and  to  place  the 
geometrician  upon  ground  which  does  not  belong  to 
hira ;  they  may  reproach  me  for  engaging  in  absurd 
speculations,  and  with  inquiring  into  measures  where 
things  do  not  admit  of  being  measured. 

In  respect  to  the  charge  of  materialism,  it  has  been 
reproduced  so  often  and  so  regailarly  on  every  occasion 
when  science  attempted  to  make  a  new  step,  and  -when 
the  spirit  of  philosophy,  breaking  through  its  ancient 
barriers,  attempted  a  new  road,  that  it  seems  almost 
superfluous  at  the  present  day  to  reply  to  it,  the  more 
especially  that  the  fanatical  sphit  is  no  longer  backed 
with  chains  and  tortures.  It  can  scarcely  now  be 
esteemed  an  insult  to  the  Divinity,  that  man  exercises 
^he  noblest  of  his  faculties  by  directing  his  medita- 
tions towards  the  sublimest  laws  of  the  universe,  by 
endeaA'^ouring  to  explain  the  admu-able  economy  and 
the  infinite  wisdom  which  presided  at  its  formation. 
Who  would  ventine  to  accuse  of  dryness  those  philo- 
sophic minds,  which  have  substituted  for  the  narrow 
and  paltry  world,  as  known  to  the  ancients,  the  knoAv- 
ledge  of  our  magnificent  solar  system,  and  have  so 
vastly  removed  the  limits  of  our  starry  heaven,  that 
genius  can  no  longer  guess  its  extent  but  with  reli- 
gious awe?  Certainly,  the  knowledge  of  the  won- 
derful laws  which  regulate  the  system  of  the  world, 
gives  us  a  nmch  nobler  idea  of  the  power  of  the  Divi- 
nity, than  that  of  the  world  which  sublime  supersti- 
tion wished  to  impose  upon  us.  If  the  animal  pride 
of  man  be  lowered,  on  observing  how  small  the  spot 
is  which  he  occupies  upon  the  grain  of  dust  of  which 
he  at  one  time  made  his  universe,  how  much,  on  the 
other  hand,  ought  his  intelligence  to  be  pleased  at  the 
extent  of  its  power,  shown  in  investigating  so  deeply 
the  secrets  of  the  heavens ! 

Having  thus  observed  the  progress  made  by  astro- 
nomical science  in  regard  to  worlds,  why  should  not 
we  endeavour  to  follow  the  same  course  in  respect  to 
man  ?   Would  it  not  be  an  absurdity  to  suppose,  that,  | 

whilst  all  is  regulated  by  such  admirable  laws,  man's 
existence  alone  should  be  capricious,  and  possessed  of 
no  conservative  principle  ?  We  need  not  hesitate  in 
asserting,  that  such  a  supposition,  and  not  the  re- 
searches we  propose  making,  would  be  injustice  to 
the  Creative  Power. 

In  respect  to  the  second  objection,  I  shall  endeavour 
to  answer  it  when  estimating  the  moral  and  intellec- 
tual faculties  of  man. 

BOOK  "FIRST. 

DEVELOPMENT  OP  THE  PHYSICAL  QUALITIES 
OP  MAN. 

1.  The  Determination  of  the  Average  Sliin  in  General. 

Wk  have  said  that,  in  the  course  of  our  researches, 
the  first  step  to  be  made  would  be  to  determine  the 
average  man,  amongst  different  nations,  both  physical 
and  moral.  Perhaps  the  possibility  of  such  an  appre- 
ciation of  physical  quaUties,  which  admit  of  direct 
measurement,  will  be  granted  us :  but  Avhat  is  the 
course  to  be  pursued  in  regard  of  the  moral  qualities  ? 
How  can  we  ever  maintain,  without  absurdity,  that  the 
courage  of  one  man  is  to  that  of  another  as  five  is  to 
six,  for  example,  almost  as  we  shoidd  speak  of  their 
stature  ?  Should  we  not  laugh  at  the  pretension  of  a 
geometrician,  who  seriously  maintained  that  he  had 
calculated  that  the  genius  of  Homer  is  to  that  of 
Virgil  as  three  to  two  ?  Certainlj^  such  pretensions 
would  be  absurd  and  ridiculous.  It  is  proper,  then, 
first  of  all,  to  agree  upon  the  meaning  of  words,  and 
to  examine  if  that  wliich  Ave  aim  at  is  i^ossible,  not 
in  the  actual  state  of  science,  but  in  such  a  state  as 
science  Avill  some  day  arrive  at.  We  cannot,  indeed, 
demand  from  those  Avho  employ  themselves  Avith  social 
physics,  more  than  Ave  should  haA'e  done  from  those 
who  foresaAV  the  possibihty  of  forming  an  astronomical 
theory,  at  a  i}eriod  Avhen  defective  astronomical  obser- 
vations and  false  theories,  or  their  total  absence,  Avith 
insufficient  means  of  calculation,  only  existed.  It  Avas 
especially  necessary  to  be  certain  of  the  means  of 
performing  such  a  task ;  it  Avas  afterAvards  necessary 
to  collect  i^recise  observations  Avith  zeal  and  perseve- 
rance, to  create  and  render  pei-fect  the  methods  for 
using  them,  and  thus  to  prepare  all  the  necessary  ele- 
ments of  the  edifice  to  be  erected.  Now,  this  is  the 
course  Avhich  I  think  it  proper  to  pm'sue  in  forming  a 
system  of  social  physics.  I  hold  that  Ave  should  ex- 
amine if  it  is  possible  to  obtain  the  means  of  per- 
forming the  desired  task,  and,  firstly,  if  it  is  possible 
to  determine  the  average  man. 

This  determination  will  be  the  subject  of  the  three 
first  books  of  this  Avork.  We  shall,  first  of  all,  con- 
sider man  in  a  phj'sical  relation ;  then  Ave  shall  con- 
sider him  with  respect  to  his  moral  and  mtellectual 
quahties. 

2.  Of  the  Determination  of  the  Physical  Qualities  of  the 
Average  Man. 

Amongst  the  elements  pertaining  to  man,  some  are 
susceptible  of  a  direct  appreciation,  and  the  numbers 
Avhich  represent  them  are  true  mathematical  quan- 
tities :  such  are,  in  general,  the  physical  qualities. 
Thus  the  Aveight  and  stature  of  a  man  may  be  mea- 
sm-ed  directly,  and  we  may  aft^rAvards  compare  them 
with  the  Aveight  and  stature  of  another  man.  In  com- 
paring the  different  men  of  a  nation  in  this  manner, 
we  arrive  at  average  values,  Avhich  are  the  weight 
and  stature  proper  to  be  assigned  to  the  average  man 
of  this  nation :  as  a  sequel  to  such  an  inquiry,  we 
might  then  say  that  the  Englishman  is  of  greater 
height  and  larger  size  than  the  Frenchman  or  Italian. 
This  mode  of  proceeding  is  analogous  to  that  pursued 

10 

ON  MAN. 

in  physics,*  in  tletermining  the  temperature  of  dif- 
ferent countries,  and  comparing  them  with  each 
other :  tlius,  we  say  justly,  that  at  Paris,  the  mean 
temperature  of  the  summer  is  18  degrees  cent.,  al- 
though the  thermometer  has  almost  always  been 
either  higher  or  lower  than  tliis  point.  We  conceive, 
raoi'cover,  that  the  ratio  which  exists  between  the 
A\-eight  or  stature  of  the  average  man  peculiar  to  one 
of  the  three  mentioned  countries,  may  vary  in  course 
of  time. 

In  certain  cases,  we  employ  non-material  measures, 
as  when  we  attempt  to  appreciate  the  average  dura- 
tion of  life  for  any  particular  nation,  or  to  estimate  at 
what  age  the  average  man  of  that  nation  ceases  to 
exist.  Life  is  measured  by  duration,  and  this  mea- 
surement admits  of  quite  as  much  precision  as  we 
employ  in  physics. 

Lastly,  we  may  employ  conventional  measurements, 
as  Avhen  Ave  estimate  the  riches,  productions,  and  con- 
sumption of  one  country,  and  compare  them  with 
those  of  another.  All  these  calculations  have  already 
been  made  by  economists,  with  greater  or  less  accu- 
racy ;  therefore  they  cannot  appear  strange  to  us. 

There  are  elements  iDcrtaining  to  man,  Avhich  can- 
not be  measured  directly,  and  which  are  only  appre- 
ciable hy  their  effects :  of  this  number  is  the  ;?trength 
of  man.  "We  are  of  opinion  that  it  is  not  absurd  to 
say  that  such  a  man  is  twice  as  strong  as  another 
when  pressing  with  his  hands,  if  this  pressure,  ap- 
plied against  an  obstacle,  produces  efiects  which  are 
as  two  to  one.  Only,  it  then  becomes  necessary  to 
admit  that  causes  arc  pi'oportionate  to  effects ;  and  it 
is  necessary  to  take  great  care,  in  estimating  the 
effects,  to  place  the  individuals  in  similar  circum- 
stances. Thus,  for  example,  we  might  make  serious 
errors  in  employing  the  dynamometer  of  Rcgnier  in- 
discriminately for  all  persons,  because  the  size  of  tlie 
hands,  or  the  height  of  the  stature,  may  have  some 
influence,  so  that  one  handles  the  instrument  with 
a  greater  or  less  degree  of  facility. 

It  results  from  what  has  preceded,  that,  in  the 
determination  of  the  average  man,  considered  with 
respect  to  physical  qualities,  the  greatest  difficulty 
consists  in  collecting  exact  observations  in  sufficient 
number  to  arrive  at  results  Avhich  deserve  some  de- 
gree of  confidence. 

In  the  first  book,  avc  shall  examine  all  Avhich  relates 
to  the  life  of  man,  liis  reproduction,  and  mortality ;  in 
the  second,  we  shall  be  occupied  with  the  development 
of  ills  stature,  weight,  strength,  and  his  physical  qua- 
lities in  general. 

CHAPTER  I. 

OF    ISIRTHS  IN  GENERAL,  AND  OF  FECUNDITY. 

1.  Of  Births. 

The  act  of  birth  is  connected  with  conception,  in  the 
same  manner  as  the  effect  is  connected  with  the  cause 
which  prodvices  it:  to  the  first  we  attach  tlic  idea  of 
necessity,  and  to  the  second  tliat  of  free  will.f  As  in 
other  subjects,  Ave  generally  lose  sight  of  causes  Avhicli 
have  acted  long  anterior  to  the  effects  Ave  observe ;  our 
attention  is  not  attracted  to  the  regularity  Avith  winch 
births  are  produced — Ave  arc  accustomed  to  regard 
them  as  natural  phenomena,  Avith  Avhich  the  Avill  of 
man  is  but  feebly  concerned.  If  Ave  observe  the  influ- 
ence of  seasons,  places,  years  of  abundance  or  scarcity, 
&c.,  it  is  rather  as  acting  on  our  physical  than  on 
our  moral  qualities — it  is  as  modifying  the  facility 
and  not  the  volition  Avhich  avc  have  in  reproduction. 

*  [The  term  physics,  as  here  used,  is  synonynious  vvitli  the  terms 
nntural  or  experimental  philohophy,  as  used  in  tiiis  country.] 

f  We  generally  consider  tlic  duration  of  pregnane}'  to  be  nine 
months.  1  do  not  know  whetlier  researches  liave  been  made  to 
ascertain  if  any  causes  exist  influencing  this  duration,  and  if 
their  influence  luas  been  calculated. 

IMoreover,  Ave  have  a  very  natural  dislike  to  consider 
our  Avill  as  influenced  by  physical  causes. 

Whatever  be  the  nature  <^f  the  causes  Avhich  produce 
births  in  greater  or  less  number,  Avith  more  or  less 
regularity,  the  thing  most  important  to  be  knoAvn  is 
the  result  Avhich  folloAvs  ;  Ave  shall  afterwards  be  able 
to  inquire  Avhat  nature  performs,  and  Avhat  belongs  to 
the  disturbing  action  of  man.  In  order  to  facilitate 
this  inquiry,  Ave  shall  first  examine  successively  hoAV 
births  are  produced,  taking  into  consideration  the 
times,  places,  sexes,  seasons,  hours  of  the  day,  and 
other  causes  Avhich  are  external  to  the  man ;  and 
thereby  Ave  shall  be  more  able  to  compare  the  influ- 
ence of  these  causes  Avith  those  Avhich  man  exercises, 
in  virtue  of  his  mode  of  existence  and  of  his  political 
and  religious  institutions. 

2.  Of  Fecundity. 

Taken  in  an  absolute  sense,  the  annual  number  of 
births  of  a  country  has  only  an  indifferent  degree  of 
importanc'c,  but  it  acquires  a  very  great  value  when  Ave 
compare  it  Avith  the  other  elements  of  population  of 
this  country.  We  may  first  employ  it  to  measure  the 
fecundity,  by  comparing  it  Avitli  the  actual  number  of 
the  population  or  Avith  the  annual  number  of  mar- 
riages. In  the  first  case,  Ave  obtain  a  measure  of  the 
fecundity  of  the  population,  and  in  the  second  case  of 
that  of  the  fecundity  of  marriages.  Statisticians  avail 
themselves  of  both  these  measures  or  data,  Avhich 
nevertheless  require  to  be  used  Avith  great  care. 

When  Ave  compare  two  countries  Avith  respect  to 
the  fecunditj'  of  marriages,  Ave  must  be  veiy  cautious 
only  to  compare  the  numl^er  of  legitimate  births  with 
the  nimiber  of  marriages.  We  conceive,  indeed,  that 
in  a  country  Avhere  all  the  births  Avere  indiscriminately 
reported,  Avith  the  number  of  registered  marriages,  the 
fecundity  would  appear  too  great,  and  the  error  Avould 
be  more  considerable,  according  as  there  Avere  more 
illegitimate  births  and  fewer  marriages  regularly  con- 
firmed. The  opposite  error  Avould  take  place  in  a 
country  Avhere  more  importance  Avas  giA'en  to  esta- 
blishing the  annual  number  of  marriages  than  tliat  of 
births.  In  general,  it  is  necessary  to  distrust  the  num- 
ber expressing  the  fecundity  of  the  marriages  of  a 
country,  Avhen  the  civil  records  are  cai-elessly  kept,  or 
Avhen  the  registrations  are  not  made  imiformly.  I 
think  England  may  be  especially  pointed  out  as  pre- 
senting luimbers  Avhich  have  often  led  those  inquirers 
into  error  Avho  have  availed  themselves  of  them.* 

JMalthus  observes,  that  the  ratio  of  births  to  mar- 
riages, taken  as  a  measure  of  fecundity,  supposes  a 
stationary  population :  if  the  popidation  Avere  increas- 
ing, for  example,  its  increase  would  be  more  rapid, 
and  the  real  fecundity  of  marriages  Avould  the  more 
exceed  the  proportion  of  births  to  marriages.f  This 
able  economist  points  out  several  otlier  circinnstances 
wliich  it  is  proper  to  consider  in  estimating  fecundity', 
such  as  marriages  for  the  second  or  third  time,  late 
marriages  sanctioned  by  local  customs,  and  frequent 
emigrations  or  immigrations.  J 

As  it  respects  political  economy,  the  number  Avhicli 
expresses  the  fecundity  of  a  population  is  perhaps 
more  important  than  that  Avhich  expresses  the  fecun- 
chty  of  marriages.  Indeed,  the  economist  is  generally 
more  concerned  Avith  the  increase  which  the  popula- 
tion receiA'cs  tlian  Avith  tlic  manner  in  Avhich  this 
increase  takes  i)]ace.  The  fecundity  of  marriages 
miglit  be  exactly  the  same  in  t\\  o  diflerent  countries, 
Avitiiout  the  popttlation  being  tlie  same.  In  countries, 
for  example,  Avhere  prudent  foresight  renders  mar- 
riages less  numerous,  there  AviU  be  fcAver  births  ;   ou 

*  Jlaltlnis— Essjii  sur  le  Trincipc  dc  Population,  tome  ii.  p.  212. 
(Jeneva  Edition :  ll).'iO. 

•!  The  words  of  Mr  Malthus  arc  (Md  cd.,  vol.  ii.  p.  G)— "  The 
more  rapid  is  the  increase  of  population,  the  more  will  the  real 
prolificncss  of  marriiiges  exceed  the  proportion  of  births  to  mar- 
riages in  the  registers." 

%  Ibid.,  tome  ii.  p.  219.    English  Kditicm,  book  ii.  cU.  9. 

ON  MAN. 

11 

the  contrary,  in  countries  wliose  inhabitants  are  im- 
provident and  careless,  and  in  new  countries,  where  the 
immigrations  are  numerous  and  wliere  tlie  settlements 
are  formed  by  persons  generally  at  a  reproductive  age, 
we  find  a  great  fecundity  in  the  population.  These 
are  important  distinctions  to  be  made,  to  avoid  all 
kinds  of  error,  either  in  making  estimates  or  in  the 
approximating  of  numbers. 

Another  very  common  error  in  statistical  Avorks 
proceeds  from  an  erroneous  estimate  of  the  population : 
scarcely  sufficient  attention  has  been  hitherto  paid  to 
this  subject.  Wlien  census  are  not  accurately  made, 
we  generally  obtain  too  small  a  number  as  the  amount 
of  the  populjition,  and  the  fecundity,  calculated  from 
it,  must  appear  too  great.  This  is  an  error  which  I 
point  out  here,  because  I  have  committed  it  myself  in 
my  first  essays  on  statistics  and  in  speaking  of  the 
fecundity  of  the  ancient  kingdom  of  tlie  Netherlands : 
it  resulted  from  this  circumstance  that  certain  pro- 
vinces were  found  in  a  very  unfiivourable  state  com- 
pared with  others ;  but  a  deeper  examination  has 
shown  me  what  caused  my  mistakes,  and  has  led  me 
to  solicit  the  government,  with  active  entreaty,  for 
a  census,  henceforth  become  necessary ;  which  was 
effectually  accomplished  in  1829. 

There  is  one  particular  case  in  M-hich  the  ratio  be- 
tween the  fecundity  of  one  country  and  that  of  another 
remains  exactly  the  same,  whether  we  estimate  it  ac- 
cording to  the  population  or  according  to  the  annual 
number  of  marriages ;  this  is  Avhen  the  populations  of 
the  countries  which  we  compare  are  homogeneous  or 
composed  of  the  same  elements — when,  on  both  sides, 
we  annually  count  the  same  number  of  marriages  to 
the  same  number  of  inhabitants.* 

I  thought  I  ought  to  present  the  prcceiling  obser- 
vations on  the  calculation  of  fecundity,  before  examin- 
ing all  wliich  relates  to  births.  We  shall  now  proceed 
more  safely  in  endeavouring  successively  to  appreciate 
the  influence  which  natural  and  dialurbiiig  cnus<:s  exer- 
cise over  births. 

CHAPTER   11. 

OF  TUE  LM'LUENCE  OF  NATURAL  CAUSES  ON  THE  NUJIBER 
OF  BIRTHS. 

1.  Influence  of  the  Sexes. 

TuERE  is  a  very  remarkable  fact,  which  has  been 
long  ago  observed,  although  we  do  not  yet  know  the 
true  causes  of  it.  It  is  this  —  that  more  boys  are 
born  annually  than  girls.  Now,  since  the  proportion 
of  male  to  female  births  does  not  differ  much  from 
unity,  or  is  almost  the  same  for  the  different  comitries 
for  which  it  has  been  calculated,  it  has  been  necessary 
to  have  recourse  to  numerous  obsei'vations  to  deter- 
mine it  •with  some  precision.  After  more  than  four- 
teen  and   a  half  millions   of  observations   made  in 

*  Some  calculations  which  I  shall  advance  will  make  tliis  easily 
understood.  Let  /  be  the  fecundity  of  a  coimtry,  )i  the  annual 
number  of  births,  m  that  of  marriages,  c  the  remainder  of  the 
population,  and./'',  «',  m',  and  c',  respectively,  the  same  numbers 
for  another  country ;  we  shall  have  for  the  feemidity  of  marriages 
the  proportion 

/:/'::^:4. 
m      III 

Xow,  if  the  populations  be  homogeneous,  as  in  the  case  which  wo 
are  supposing,  wc  shall  also  have 

111  m' 

c  +  in       C  +  111'' 
Now,  if  we  multiply  both  terms  of  the  latter  ratio  of  the  propor- 
tion by  this  equality,  we  shall  have 

■^   •'        c  +  m    c'  +  m" 
— a  result  agreeable  to  what  is  advanced  in  the  text,  since  the 
tci-ms  of  the  latter  ratio  represent  the  fecimdity  of  the  popula- 
tion. 

li 

France,  from  1817  to  1831,  the  value  of  this  ratio  If  as- 
been  as  106-38  to  100  ;  and  its  average  value  has 
varied  but  little,  taking  one  year  with  another.* 

To  know  whether  climate  influences  the  ratio  in 
question,  thirty  of  the  most  southern  departments  of 
France  have  been  considered  separately.  The  births 
in  these  departments,  from  1817  to  1831,  have  been 
2,119,162  males,  and  1,990,720  females ;  the  ratio  of 
the  first  number  to  the  second  is  as  105-95  to  100 — 
nearly  the  same  as  for  the  Avhole  of  France.  This 
result  would  lead  us  to  conclude,  that  the  superior 
number  of  male  to  female  births  does  not  depend,  in 
any  sensible  degree,  on  climate.f 

However,  in  order  to  ascertain  more  decidedly  the 
influence  exercised  by  climate,  it  will  be  proper  to 
extend  our  researches  beyond  the  limits  of  France. 
Taking  our  data  from  the  principal  European  states, 
we  find  the  following  results,  according  to  M.  Bickes, 
who  has  collected  more  than  seventy  millions  of 
observations  :  % — 

Males  to 
States  and  Provinces.  lOO 

Females. 

Itussia,      ......  108-91 

The  province  of  Milan,  ....  107-61 

Mecklenburg,        -  -  .  .  .  107-07 

France,  -.-...  l06-55 

Belgium  and  Holland,      ....  106-44 

IJrandenburgand  Pomerania,  ...  106-27 

Kingdom  of  tlie  Two  Sicilies,       -  -  -    ,  106-18 

Austrian  Monarchy,  .....  106-10 

Silesia  and  Saxony,  ....  10605 

Prussian  States  («i  »?!(?.«<;),     ....  105'94 

Westphalia  and  Grand  Dutcliy  of  the  Rhine,      -  105-86 

Kingdom  of  Wurteniburg,      ....  105-60 

Fastern  Prussia  and  Dutchy  of  Posen,        -         -  105-66 

Kingdom  of  Bohemia,  ....  105-38 

Great  Britain,       .....  104-75 

Sweden,  -  -  -  -  -  -  104-62 

-\verage  for  Em'ope,  -  106. 

Some  travellers  have  thought  that  hot  climates  are 
more  favourable  to  feniale  births  ;  but  numbers  have 
not  confirmed  this  opinion,  at  least  from  what  we 
have  just  seen  in  Europe.  However,  more  observa- 
tions than  we  possess  are  necessary,  and  especially 
observations  collected  near  the  efiuator,  Ijefore  we  can 
affirnr  that  the  influence  of  climates  is  absolutely  in- 
sensible. The  following  are  the  observations  made  at 
the  Cape  of  Good  Hope,  on  the  white  population  § 
residing  there,  and  also  on  the  slave  population :  || — 

Free 

Births. 

Slave 

Births. 

1  ears. 

Males. 

Females. 

Males. 

Females. 

1813, 

686 

70(j 

1118 

234 

1814,    -     "  - 

802 

025 

230 

183 

1815, 

888 

894 

221 

193 

1810,     - 

8(15 

892 

325 

294 

1817, 

918 

927 

487 

467 

,1818,     - 

814 

H-!2 

516 

482 

1819, 

810 

815 

506 

509 

18:20,     - 

881 

898 

463 

464 

Total, 

66(14 

6789 

2936 

2826 

Thus,  among  the  free  births,  the  females  numeri- 
cally exceed  those  of  the  males ;  and  this  result  is 
reproduced  every  year.^ 

*  Annuaire  du  Bureau  des  Longitudes,  1034.  f  Ibid. 

t  Jlemorial  Encycl.  Mai  1832. 

§  Journal  Asiatiquc,  Juillet  1826  ;  and  Sadler,  tome  ii.  p.  371. 

II  Elements  of  Medical  Statistics,  by  Hawkins,  p.  51. 

^  [It  appears  to  the  translator,  that  the  predominance  of  female 
over  male  births,  amongst  the  white  race  of  the  Cape  of  Good 
Hope,  is  not  so  much  owing  to  climate  as  to  the  peculiarity  of 
race  :  the  free  white  population  of  the  Cape  are,  as  near  as  may 
be,  purely  Saxon,  descended  from  the  old  Dutch  families,  who 
originally  settled  there  about  two  hundred  and  seventy  years  ago. 
They  have  preserved  the  purity  of  their  blood  with  great  care. 

12 

ON  MAN. 

It  appears  that  residence  in  town  or  country  is  not 
without  its  influence  on  the  ratio  of  births  of  tlie  two 
sexes,  as  we  may  judge  fi'om  the  Belgic  documents: — 

Years. 

Births  in  the  Towns. 

Births  in  the  Country. 

Boys. 

Girls. 

Ratio. 

Boys. 

Girls. 

Ratio. 

1815  to  1824, 
1825  to  1829, 

164,376 
87,516 

164,110 
83,122 

106-66 
105-29 

472,221 
256,751 

441,502 
241,989 

106-96 
106-10 

The  number  of  boys,  compared  with  that  of  girls, 
has  then  been  smaller  in  town  than  in  the  country : 
it  is  to  be  observed,  that  both  ratios  have  sensibly 
diminished  during  the  latter  period. 

This  influence  of  town  residence,  tending  to  diminish 
the  proportional  number  of  births,  is  also  observed 
in  other  countries.  This  is  seen  in  the  following  table, 
in  which  M.  Bickes  has  found  another  kind  of  in- 
fluence, namely,  legitimacy  of  birth  :  * — 

States  and  Provinces. 

Boj'S  to  100  Girls. 
Legitimate.    Illegitimate. 

France, 

106-69 

104-78 

Austrian  monarchy,  - 

-      106-15 

104-32 

Prussian  monarchy. 

106-17 

102-89 

Sweden, 

-      104-73 

103-12 

"VVurtembxu-g, 

105-97 

103-54 

Bohemia,        -            -            . 

-      105-65 

100-44 

Province  of  Milan, 

107-79 

102-30 

Eastern  Prussia  and  Posen ,    - 

-      105-81 

103-60 

Brandenburg  and  Pomerania, 

106-65 

102-42 

Silesia  and  Saxony,     - 

-      106-30 

103-27 

Westphalia  .and  the  Dutchy  of  the 

Lower  Rhine, 

106-07 

101-55 

Cities. 

Paris, 

10.'i-82 

103-42 

Amsterdam,         ... 

105-00 

108-83 

Xeghorn, 

104-68 

93-21 

Frankfort-on-the  Maine, 

102-83 

107-84 

leipsic,         .           .           .           . 

106-16 

105-94 

Thus  all  the  documents  relative  to  states  agree  in 
giving  a  larger  proportional  number  of  boys  for  legi- 
timate than  for  illegitimate  births.  This  difference 
is  much  less  conspicuous  for  towns.  M.  Bickes  has 
extended  his  researches  concerning  legitimate  births 
to  a  great  number  of  cities ;  and  the  average  of  the 
ratios,  which  I  have  calculated,  gives  104'74,  a  value 
which  is  very  sensibly  inferior  to  that  which  all  the 
European  states  give. 

M.  Poisson,  some  years  ago,  made  researches  into 
this  singular  circumstance,  that  the  ratio  of  male  to 
female  births,  for  natural  children,  differs  sensibly 
from  the  general  ratio  of  Prance  taken  altogether ; 
and  he  has  obtained,  from  the  documents  of  1817  to 
1826  inclusively,  21-20ths  instead  of  16-15ths.  M. 
Mathieu  also  had  arrived  at  a  similar  result.f 

With  the  view  of  throwing  more  light  on  this 
interesting  subject,  Mr  Babbage  has  also  carefully 
collected  the  numbers  of  several  different  countries, 
and  presented  them,  with  all  the  desirable  details,  in^ 
a  letter,  which  is  inserted  in  Brewster's  Journal  of 
Sciences,  new  series.  No.  I.  I  have  extracted  the 
principal  results. 

intermingling  as  little  as  possible  with  the  dark  races,  whether 
CafTre  or  Hottentot.  Generally  speaking,  they  hold  the  mulatto 
in  great  dislike  and  contempt ;  so  that,  amongst  the  pure  Dutch  of 
the  Cape,  a  mulatto,  however  slightly  tinged,  has  hitherto  had 
little  chance  of  acquiring  a  proper  status  in  society.  AVith 
respect  to  M.  Quetelet's  table  of  births,  it  seems  prob.ablo  that 
an  excess  of  boys  over  girls  is  a  law  chiefly  with  the  Celtic  and 
Sarmatian  races,  and  that  in  respect  to  the  pure  S.axon  race,  there 
exists  cither  an  opposite  law,  namely,  the  excess  of  females  over 
males,  or,  perhaps,  as  near  as  may  be,  an  equality;  but  the 
translator  inclines  to  the  opinion  that  the  excess  will  be  in  the 
females  with  respect  to  the  S.axon  race.] 

*  Zeitung  fur  das  Gesammte  Medicinal  wesen.  Also,  An.  dc 
Hygiene,  Oct.  1832. 

t  Annuaire  et  lo  tome  ix.  dcs  M(!moirc3  dc  I'Acadcmie  des 
Sciences,  p.  239. 

Legitimate 
Births. 

Number 
of  Births 
observed. 

Illegitimate 
Births. 

Number 
of  Births 

Female. 

Male. 

Female. 

Male. 

observed. 

France, 

Naples, 

Prussia, 

Westphalia, 

Montpellier, 

10,000 
10,000 
10,000 
10,000 
10,000 

10,657 
10,452 
10,609 
10,471 
10,707 

9,656,135 

1,059,055 

3,672,251 

151,169 

25,064 

10,000 
10,000 
10,000 
10,000 
10,000 

10,484 
10,367 
10,278 
10,039 
10,081 

673,047 
51,.-i09 

212,804 
19,950 
2,735 

Averages, 

10,000 

10,575 

10,000 

10,250 

In  quoting  these  numbers,  M.  Prevost  observes, 
that,  independently  of  the  physiological  cause  which 
gives  a  greater  facility  to  male  births,  there  exists  an 
accessory  cause  in  legitimate  births  especially,  which 
stni  further  increases  this  facility,  and  which  he  at- 
tributes to  a  sort  of  preference  generally  given  to 
children  of  the  male  sex.  "Is  not  the  end  of  this 
preference,"  says  he,  "  to  prevent,  after  male  births, 
the  increase  of  the  family,  and  consequently  to  in- 
crease the  proportional  ratio  of  the  latter  ?  Parents 
have  one  son  :  if  different  causes  impede  the  increase 
of  their  family,  they  will  perhaps  be  less  uneasy  at 
this  privation,  when  their  first  wish  is  accomplished, 
than  they  would  liaA^e  been  if  they  had  not  had  male 
children.  Would  not  this  diminution  of  births,  after 
one  or  two  sons,  tend  to  increase  the  ratio  of  male 
births  ?"  *  Without  denying  the  influence  which  this 
moral  restraint  may  exercise  in  certain  cases,  I  think 
it  altogether  insufiicent  to  explain  the  results  which 
I  shall  soon  advance. 

M.  Giron  dc  Buzareignes  has  also  commmiicated 
to  the  Parisian  Academy  of  Sciences  some  researches 
made  in  Prance,  on  the  births  of  children  of  both 
sexes.f  He  divides  society  into  three  classes :  the  first 
is  composed  of  persons  whose  occupations  tend  to 
develop  the  physical  qualities  ;  the  second,  of  persons 
Avhose  occupations  tend  to  weaken  tliese  powers ;  and, 
lastly,  the  third,  of  persons  whose  occupations  are  of 
a  mixed  kind.  According  to  this  observer,  the  pro- 
portional number  of  male  births  in  the  first  class  will 
1)0  greater  than  that  which  Prance  furnishes  in  gene- 
ral ;  in  the  second  class,  it  will  be  the  contrary  ;  and 
in  the  third,  both  numbers  will  be  equal.  Thus,  agri- 
cultural occupations  are  favourable  to  the  develop- 
ment of  male  births,  whilst  commerce  and  manufac- 
tiu'cs  produce  an  opposite  effect.  This  observation 
agi'ees  very  well  with  the  results  which  have  been 
previously  pointed  out  for  town  and  country,  but  it 
does  not  sustain  an  equal  examination  when  applied 
to  the  different  states  of  Europe. 

M.  Bickes,  who  is  much  inclined  to  question  the 
opinion  advanced  by  M.  Giron  de  Buzareignes,  has 
presented  a  new  explanation  of  the  causes  which 
occasion  the  ratio  of  tlie  sexes  to  vary.  According  to 
him,  "  It  is  in  the  blood  (the  constitution,  the  race) 
of  people  or  nations,  who  differ  more  or  less  from  each 
other  in  this  respect,  that  the  powers  or  causes  reside, 
whatever  they  may  be,  Avhich  determine  the  produc- 
tion of  many  boys.  Political  and  civil  institutions, 
customs,  habitual  occupations,  mode  of  life,  wealtli, 
indigence,  &c. — all  these  things  liavc  no  influence  on 
the  respective  ratio  according  to  which  the  two  sexes 
come  into  the  world."  We  should  liave  much  difli- 
culty  to  explain  by  this  means  hoAv,  in  tlie  same 
people,  the  ratio  of  births  of  the  two  sexes  presents 
such  sensible  differences  in  town  and  country.  As  to 
the  effect  of  legitimacy  on  tlie  preponderance  of 
female  births,  M.  Bickes  thinks  that  the  first  cause 
of  it  cannot  be  demonstrated.^  We  shall  soon  find 
other  obstacles  to  his  hyiiothesis.  Professor  Hofiicker 
has  made  some  researches  in  Germany,  on  the  influ- 
ence of  the  age  of  parents  on  male  and  female  births, 
whence  it  results,  that  in  general,  when  the  mother 
is  older  than  the  father,  fewer  boys  than  girls  are 

*  Bibliothfeque  ITniverscUe  de  Genfcve.  Oct.  1829,  p.  140,  eiseq. 
■\  Bulletin  de  M.  Fc^-rassac,  tomexii.  p.  3. 
:]:  Annales  de  Hygiene,  Oct.  1832,  p.  4.59. 

ON  MAN. 

13 

born ;  the  same  is  the  case  when  the  parents  are  of 
equal  ages  ;  but  the  more  the  father's  age  exceeds  that 
of  the  mother,  so  is  the  ratio  of  boys  greater. 

The  different  results  of  M.  Hofacker  are  brought 
together  in  the  following  table  : — 

observe  any  difference  of  facility  in  producing  infants 
^of  one  sex  rather  than  of  another.  This  facility,  accord- 
ing to  liim,  only  depends  on  the  relative  ages  of  the 
parents  :  tliis  he  deduces  from  the  following  numbers, 
extracted  from  registers  of  marriages  : — 

Ages  of  the  Man  and  Woman'. 

The  man  being  younger  than  the  woniEin, 

as  old  as  the  woman,        ... 
older  from  3  to  6  years,         ... 
•  •    from  6  to  9  years,     - 

from  9  to  18  years, 

by  18  years  and  upwards. 

The  man  from  24  to  36 — the  woman  from  16  to  £6  years, 

36to46    •• 

•  ■     30  to  48  years, 

48  to  CO  years. 

young, 

middle-aged,    - 
older,  - 

middle-aged,    - 
older,  - 

Boys  to 

100 

Girls. 

90-6 

-  900 
103-4 

-  124-7 
143-7 

-  200'0 
116-6 

-  95-4 
176-9 

-  114-3 
109-2 

-  190-0 
164-3 

If  these  results  were  deduced  from  sufficiently 
numerous  observations,  and  so  accurate  as  to  deserve 
enth-e  confidence,  and  if  they  were  verified  iia  other 
countries,  they  would  present  a  very  powerful  argu- 
ment in  favour  of  the  hypothesis,  that  the  births  of 
one  or  the  other  sex  can  be  made  to  predominate  at 
will.  We  must  regret  that  there  are  still  so  few 
proper  documents  to  elucidate  this  delicate  question ; 
the  only  ones  which  I  have  succeeded  in  procuring 
are  found  in  the  work  of  IMr  Sadler  on  the  "  Law  of 
Population."  I  shaU  first  present  a  table  extracted 
from  the  registers  of  the  peers  of  England,  and  let  it 
be  observed  that  it  only  includes  first  marriages  :— 

Difference 
of  Ages :  the 

Number 

of 
MaiTiages. 

Eirths. 

Ratio  of  Births. 

being — 

Male. 

Female. 

Male. 

Female. 

Younger, 
As  old,    - 
Older  from 

I  to  6  years, 
6  to  11,-    - 

II  to  16,    - 
16  and   iip- 

wai-ds,   - 

54 
18 

126 
107 
43 

33 

122 
64 

.166 
327 
143 

93 

141 
57 

353 

258 

97 

67 

865 
948 

1037 
1267 
1474 

1632 

lOO 
100 

100 
100 
100 

100 

Total, 

381 

1105 

963 

Children 
by  each 
Marriage. 

4-87 
617 

5-71 
5-47 
5-58 

These  results  agree  perfectly  with  those  of  M. 
Hofacker.  I  have  calculated  in  the  latter  column 
the  fecundity  of  the  marriages,  which  has  likewise 
a  value  depending  on  the  respective  ages  of  the 
espoused. 

Li  examining  the  influence  of  the  age  of  the  parents 
on  births,  Mr  Sadler  has  been  led  to  the  following 
conclusions  : — The  ratio  in  which  the  sexes  are  born 
is  regulated  by  the  difference  of  age  of  the  parents, 
in  such  a  manner  that  the  sex  of  the  father  or  the 
mother  will  preponderate  beyond  the  average  of  the 
total  number  of  births,  according  to  the  party  which 
has  the  excess  of  age.  On  the  other  hand,  the  sex 
which  is  in  excess  Avill  have  a  mortality  depending 
on  the  period  which  separates  tlie  age  of  the  parents, 
so  that  the  sexes  will  be  balanced  in  numbers,  towards 
the  ordinary  period  of  marriage. 

It  is  thus  that  jNIr  Sadler  explains  how  the  propor- 
tional nmnber  of  male  births  is  not  so  great  in  the 
manufacturing  towns  of  England  as  in  the  country, 
where  men  marry  later,  and  present  a  greater  diffe- 
rence of  age  to  the  women  whom  they  espouse.*  He 
also  extends  his  exiilanation  to  the  difference  which 
is  observed  between  legitimate  and  illegitimate  births. 

Mr  Sadler,  moreover,  finds,  that  m  considering  the 
age  of  the  father  or  the  mother  separately,  we  do  not 

*  It  is  a  fact  which  appcai-s  well  established  by  several  statis- 
ticians, and  by  Mr  Jlilne  in  particular  (Traitd  des  Annuit<;s, 
vol  ii.  p.  493),  that  precocious  marriages  generally  produce  a 
greater  munbcr  of  daughters. 

Age  of  the 
Couples  at 

Number 

of 
Marriages. 

Births. 

Ratio  of  Births. 

the  time  of 

Marriage.* 

Male. 

Female. 

Male. 

Female. 

Under  21, 

54 

143 

124 

1153 

1000 

21  to  26, 

307 

668 

712 

938 

1000 

26  to  31, 

284 

696 

609 

1143 

1000 

31  to  3G, 

137 

298 

263 

1133 

1000 

36  to  41, 

80 

149 

151 

987 

1000 

41  to  46, 

58 

93 

83 

1120 

1000 

46  to  51, 

51 

79 

83 

952 

1000 

51  to  61, 

30 

27 

17 

1588 

1000 

61  and  up- 

wards. 

16 

" 

8 

625 

ICOO 

Total, 

1027 

2158 

2050 

1052 

1000 

Fecundity. 

4-94 
4-50 
4-59 
4-10 
3-33 
3-04 
317 
1.47 

0-81 

Ages  of 

the  Wives 

of  the 

Couples. 

Under  16, 
16  to  21, 
21  to  26, 
26  to  31, 
31  to  36, 
36  and  up- 
wards. 

Total, 

Number 

of 
Marriages. 

13 
177 
191 
60 
21 

471 

Male.  Female 

37 
502 
512 
115 

40 

33 

387 

485 

92 

36 

Ratio  of  Births. 

Male.  Female. 

1121 
1299 
1055 
1250 
1110 

1000 

lOOO 
1000 
1000 
1000 
1000 

1000 

Fecvmdity. 

5-38 
5-02 
5-22 
3-43 
3-62 

2-89 

Since  these  numbers  aire  generally  small,  it  would 
perhaps  have  been  better  had  they  been  arranged 
imder  fewer  heads.  It  appears  to  me  that  we  might 
reduce  them  to  the  three  following:  under  26  years, 
from  26  to  36  years,  and  upAvards  of  36  years.  We 
then  obtain  respectively  970,  1140,  1032  male  births 
for  1000  female  ones,  when  taking  the  couples ;  and 
1161,  1211,  1000,  Avhen  taking  the  wives.  We  see 
that  the  period  between  26  and  36  years  gives  a  few 
more  male  births. 

Lastly,  in  extending  his  researches  to  widows  and 
widowers,  Mr  Sadler  further  finds,  from  the  registers 
of  English  couples,  that  the  widowers  tend  to  produce 
more  female  children. 

Age  of  the 
Widowers 
or  Widows 
at  the  time 
of  Slarriage. 

Number 
of  2d  &  3d 
Wedlocks. 

22  to  27,  - 
27  to  32,    - 
32  to  37,  - 
37  to  42,     - 
42  to  47,  - 
47  to  52,     - 
52   and  up- 
wards,  - 

Total, 

Births. 

Ratio  of  the 
Births. 

107 

Male.  Female. 

33 
39 
66 
32 
38 
43 

Male.  Female. 

91-3 
84-6 
77-3 
90-6 
790 
69-9 

66-7 

79-7 

100 
100 
100 
100 
100 
100 

Children 

by 
Marriage. 

4-00 
4-87 
3-58 
4-25 
4-87 

2-08 

The  ratio  is  so  marked,  that  we  find  it  almost  corre- 
sponds to  the  different  ages. 

It  results  from  the  examination  of  the  probable 
causes  which  may  produce  the  inequality  between 
the  births  of  male  and  female  children  which  has  just 
been  pointed  out,  that  the  most  influential,  if  we  may 
trust  to  the  few  documents  Avhicli  science  at  present 
possesses,  is  evidently  that  which  the  difference  of 
age  of  the  parents  produces:  Ave  might  even  think 
that  the  other  causes  which  have  been  pomted  out, 
are  in  some  manner  the  effects  of  it.     Lideed,  it  ge- 

*  All  the  numbers  of  this  and  the  following  tabic  have  been 
t.ilien  from  fruitful  first  marriages. 

14 

ON  MAN. 

nerally  liappeus  tlirougliout  Europe,  tliat  men,  ■when 
they  marry,  are  five  or  six  years  older  than  Avoraen, 
f!d  that  tiie  preponderance  of  male  births  Avill  be 
almost  the  same,  as  is  established  by  the  researches 
of  Hofacker  and  Sadler,  Avho  give,  as  the  ratio  of 
births  of  both  sexes,  the  number  103-5  nearly,  when 
the  father  is  from  1  to  6  years  older  than  the  mother. 
Now,  Ave  think  that  this  ratio  Avill  be  larger  or  smaller, 
according  as  the  difference  of  age  of  the  parents  is 
greater  or  less  in  the  different  nations,  in  town  or 
country,  among  the  persons  whose  connexions  are 
legitimate  or  illegitimate ;  and,  lastly,  according  to  all 
the  circumstances  which  may  cause  the  ages  to  vary 
at  which  production  takes  i^lace ;  so  that  the  age  of 
the  parents  Avill  be  the  principal  regulator  which 
determines  the  magnitude  of  the  ratio  between  tiie 
births  of  the  two  sexes.  Hence  we  see  how  impor- 
tant it  is  to  direct  our  researches  to  the  age  at  Avhich 
marriage  takes  place,  especially  since  the  greater  or 
less  mortality  of  childi-en  depends  on  these  ages.* 

2.  Influence  of  Age  on  the  Fecundity  of  Jlarriages. 

"VVe  have  .iust  seen  that  the  relative  age  of  the 
parties  exercises  a  sensible  influence  on  tlie  ratio  of 
male  births  :  it  is  natural  to  suppose,  that  it  will  have 
still  more  influence  with  regard  to  the  number  of 
births,  or  the  fecundity.  I  am  not  acquainted  with 
much  on  this  subject  besides  the  researches  of  Mr 
Sadler,  which  were  undertaken  Avith  tlie  design  of 
shoAving  that  the  age  of  parents,  considered  apart, 
has  no  influence  on  the  ratio  of  male  to  female  births. 
I  liaA^e  introduced  them  above,  taking  care  to  calcu- 
late the  number  expressing  the  fecundity  in  the  last 
column.  HoAvever,  since  the  numbers  of  Mr  Sadler 
are  generaUy  small,  I  have  thought  proper  to  receive 
fcAver  divisions  of  ages,  which  will  give  a  greater  pro- 
bability to  my  particular  results  :  Ave  may  sum  up  all 
these  results  in  the  following  table  : — 

According  to  tlie 
Registers  of  English 

Number  of  Children 

procreated  by  one  Individual ;  being  at 

tlie  time  of  Marriage — ■ 

Couples. 

Under  26 
years. 

Between 
20  and  SO. 

Jlore  than  .3G 
years. 

Husbands, 

Wives, 

Widowers  &  Widows. 

511 

r,\3 

8  no  t 

4-4.3 
3-49 
4 -.50 

2-84 
2-8;) 
3(i() 

We  see  that  the  fecmidity  of  marriages,  all  things 
being  equal,  diminishes  in  proportion  to  the  increas- 

*  [Assuming  as  a,  fact,  an  assertion  Avhich  has  been  often  made, 
that  thoughtless  and  premature  marriages,  that  is,  Avhcn  both 
sexes  are  very  joung,  take  place  to  a  much  greater  extent  in 
Ireland  than  in  most  otlier  countries,  records  of  such  marriages 
Avould  go  far  to  solve  the  difficult  question  proposed  above  by  J\I. 
Quotelet :  such  records,  if  they  exist,  might  be  compared  Avith 
tliose  of  Holland,  where  it  is  presmned  that  a  moral  condition  of 
the  people  exists,  which  is  the  antithesis  to  the  Irish  character. 
A  comparison  of  these  records  Avitli  eacli  other  avouM  go  far  to 
solve  the  question.  Sliould  it  bo  found  that  the  male  sex  still 
predominates  in  births  in  Ireland,  it  would  then  be  clear  tliat  the 
theory  of  age  proposed  by  M.  Buzarcigiios,  and  supported  by  I\I. 
Quetelet,  would  be  at  fault,  whilst  that  of  Bickes,  or  the  theory 
of  race,  Avhich  is  the  view  supported  by  tlic  translator,  Avould  be 
the  true  one. 

It  is  quite  possible,  however,  that  both  causes  may  have  their 
influence ;  but  a  glance  at  the  table,  page  12,  proves  indisputably, 
as  far  as  such  records  go,  that,  commencing  in  Eastern  Europe 
Avith  the  Sclavonic  race,  amongst  whom  we  find  the  dispropor- 
tion of  boys  to  girls  greatest,  and  passing  through  the  mixed 
Sclavonic  and  Saxon  races  of  Prussia,  and  through  the  Celtic 
nations  of  France  and  the  north  of  Italy,  to  Westphalia,  Great 
Britain,  and  Sweden,  where  the  Saxon  rilce  exists  in  its  greatest 
purity,  Ave  find  the  disproportion  between  boys  and  girls  constantly 
decreasing,  and  are  entitled,  therefore,  to  conclude,  that  whatever 
other  causes  may  be  in  operation,  blood  or  race  comes  in  for  at 
least  a  considerable  share  in  the  efl'ccts.] 

t  This  number  being  founded  on  five  mari'iages  only,  which 
pvoduced  44  children,  cannot  be  entitled  to  much  conftdoncc. 

ing  age  of  the  parties.  To  observe  the  influence  of 
age  itself  on  the  fecundity  of  individuals,  it  woifld  be 
necessary  to  compute  the  probability  of  life  in  mar- 
rying; for  it  is  very  evident  that  he  who  has  yet 
twice  as  long  to  live  as  another  person,  may  hope,  all 
things  being  equal,  to  procreate  more  children.  It  is 
very  true,  on  the  other  hand,  that  tliose  Avho  marry 
young  have  some  fear  lest  they  should  have  too 
numerous  a  ttimily  ;  Avhich  is  not  the  case  Avhen  per- 
sons marry  at  a  more  advanced  age.  In  supposing, 
as  a  kind  of  limit,  that,  all  things  being  equal,  the 
fecundity  depends  on  the  probability  of  life,  it  Avould 
be  necessary  for  each  age  to  divide  each  of  the  ratios 
previously  found  by  the  corresponding  number  Avliich 
expresses  the  length  of  the  probable  life.  Now,  in 
admitting  approximatively  36,  32,  and  21  years,  as 
the  probability  of  life  of  the  individuals  of  the  first 
class ;  afterwards,  for  the  women,  40,  34,  and  23  years ; 
and,  lastly,  for  the  widows,  38,  33,  and  22  years,  Ave 
shall  have,  as  the  relative  values  of  fecundity — 

According  to  the 
Registers  of  English 

Number  of  Children 

procreated  by  one  Individual ;  being  at 

the  time  of  IMarriage — 

Couples. 

Under  26 
years. 

Between 
26  and  36. 

More  than  36 
years. 

Husbands, 

Wives, 

AVidowers  &  Widows, 

0-142 
0-128 
0-131 

0-130 
0103 
0-136 

0-1.35 
0-125 
0-166 

These  numbers,  Avhich  only  express  the  relative 
fecundity,  serve,  moreover,  to  shoAv  that  the  greatest 
aptitude  for  reproduction  is  evidently,  among  the  in- 
dividuals whom  Ave  are  considering,  before  the  age  of 
26  years ;  moreover,  Ave  see  tliat  it  is  not  sensibly 
diminished  in  men  until  the  36th  year.  The  data 
for  females  are  too  fcAv  to  be  relied  on,  since  they 
only  include  nine  Avonien  more  than  36  years  of  age. 

When  Ave  consider  the  respective  ages  of  the  hus- 
bands, Ave  find,  stUl  availing  ourselves  of  the  numbers 
furnished  by  Mr  Sadler,  and  which  we  have  quoted 
above,  that  the  fecundity  of  marriages  reaches  its 
greatest  value  Avhen  the  ages  of  the  married  persons 
are  the  same,  or  Avhen  the  man  is  from  1  to  6  years 
older  than  the  woman  :  it  does  laot  sensibly  diminish, 
if  the  difference  of  age  does  not  exceed  16  years;  but 
Avhen  it  is  greater,  or  Avhcn  the  man  is  younger  than 
the  woman,  the  fecundity  seems  to  be  at  its  minimum. 
These  are  resiflts  Avhich  it  is  in  some  measirre  easy  to 
foresee.  Moreover,  I  only  proposed  to  point  out  these 
researches,  Avithout  pretending  to  go  deeply  into  them, 
since  adequate  data  are  stUl  Avanting. 

]\Ir  Sadler,  in  another  part  of  his  work,  has  ascer- 
tained the  nmnber  of  children  produced  by  the  Avives 
of  those  couples  in  England  Avhose  ages  at  the  time 
of  marriage  he  has  been  able  to  determine :  putting 
down  all  the  marriages  this  time,  Avhether  they  Avere 
fruitful  or  not,  or  were  born  during  the  first  or  second 
time  of  Avedlock ;  and  these  are  his  results  : — 

Age  at 
the  time  of 
Marriage. 

Number 

of 
Marriages. 

Number 

of 
Children. 

Mortality  of 
Children  be- 
fore the  Mar- 
riageable Age. 

Births  by 
Mai-riagc. 

Deaths 
for  one 
Birth. 

12  to  15, 
16  to  19, 
20  to  23, 
24  to  27, 

32 
172 
198 

86 

141 

797 

10.3.3 
467 

40 
166 
195 
180 

4-40 
4-63 
5-21 
S-43 

0-283 
0-208 
0-188 
0-171 

We  see  here  that,  from  12  to  27  j'ears,  the  fecun- 
dity of  Avomen  continues  to  increase.  At  first  view, 
this  result  appears  contrary  to  those  Avhich  have  been 
previously  obtained  ;  but  it  is  proper  to  observe,  that 
he  is  considering  marriages  in  general,  and  not,  as  Ave 
have  previously  supposed,  fruitful  marriages  in  par- 
ticular. We  have  seen  that,  on  this  latter  hypothesis, 
the  fecundity  of  women  does  not  perceptibly  vary 
under  the  age  of  26  years.     We  can  then  only  attri- 

ON  MAN. 

16 

liute  the  diflcronce  to  this,  that  many  women,  married 
hite  in  Hfe,  continue  barren.  Moreover,  it  results 
from  the  calculations  of  i\Ir  Sadler,  that  the  children 
procreated  by  too  premature  marriages  are  more  sub- 
ject to  mortality  than  others.  It  is,  besides,  very  odd, 
that  the  statistician,  who  has  calculated  the  preceding 
tables  witli  a  definite  object,  has  not  extended  their 
application  beyond  the  age  of  27  years.  It  is  also 
nuich  to  be  desired  that  he  had  ascertained  the  ratio 
of  fruitful  to  barren  women,  for  the  different  ages  at 
which  marriages  have  taken  place. 

Not  to  choose  the  individuals  Avliom  he  examines 
from  a  privileged  class,  Mr  Sadler  has  also  given  a 
table  from  2860  cases  of  child-birth,  attended  by  Dr 
Granville  in  several  of  the  principal  benevolent  esta- 
blishments in  London :  we  shall  quote  it  here. 

to 

o  tc 

o  C  h 

O   a5 

£  t^  o. 

a 

|3 

lire 

^1 

S   ■■   3 

:3  "^  o 

3  " 

U 

O  o 

i« 

l.-JtolC, 

74 

376 

209 

lfi7 

0-44 

0-46 

508 

17  to  20, 

354 

1307 

751 

55G 

0-43 

0-.W 

3.70 

21  to  24, 

2ai 

823 

474 

.•wg 

0-42 

0-52 

2-91 

25  to  28, 

J 10 

2»7 

170 

117 

0-41 

0  55 

2-61 

29  to  32,* 

38 

G7 

Hi 

31 

0-31 

0-59 

2-03 

This  table  deserves  to  be  carefully  examined.  We 
first  observe  that  the  mortality  of  children  is  some- 
what less,  in  proportion  as  the  marriages  are  less 
precocious ;  afterwards,  the  numbers  of  the  seventh 
column,  which  Islr  Sadler  gives  as  having  been  cal- 
culated by  'Mr  Finlayson  from  accounts  taken  of  the 
ages  of  the  delivei'cd  women,  whom  he  does  not  know 
or  of  whom  he  takes  no  account,  would  tend  to  show 
that  fecundity  is  greater  as  the  woman  is  younger, 
and  on  this  side  of  the  term  of  ."52  years.  Never- 
theless, from  the  last  column,  which  I  have  added, 
and  which  I  have  made  from  the  numbers  of  the 
table,  it  is  easy  to  see  that,  if  the  annual  fecundity  be 
less,  the  fruitful  women  Avho  \\n\c  married  early,  all 
tilings  being  equal,  have  produced  more  children; 
wliich  brings  us  l3ack  to  the  observation  already  made 
on  the  wives  of  peers.  It  is  singular  that  ^Ir  Sadler 
should  not  have  examined  the  fecundity  in  both  these 
cases  :  it  seems  to  me,  that  he  would  have  found  less 
solid  arguments  in  favour  of  the  law  of  population 
which  he  endeavours  to  establish. 

"We  certainly  sec,  from  the  numbers  of  ^Mr  Finlay- 
son,  that  there  is  a  somewhat  greater  annual  fecun- 
dity for  women  married  late ;  but  it  does  not  compen- 
sate for  the  excess  of  absolute  fecundity  of  those  who 
have  married  early.  Generally,  when  a  man  marries 
a  woman  verj'  young,  he  endeavours  to  take  care  of 
her,  and  her  family  may  become  numerous  without 
his  object  being  to  make  it  so :  on  the  contrarj',  if  he 
marry  a  person  groM-n  up,  he  no  longer  thinks  care 
so  necessary ;  and,  on  the  other  hand,  if  he  wishes  to 
have  a  family,  the  time  becomes  more  precious  to 
him,  as  the  age  of  his  wife  is  advanced.f 

It  seems  to  me  that  the  following  consequences 
naturally  follow  from  what  has  been  said : — 

1.  Too  premature  marriages  bring  on  sterility,  and 
I)roduce  children  who  have  less  likelihood  of  living. 

2.  A  marriage,  if  it  be  not  barren,  produces  the 
same  number  of  births,  at  whatever  period  it  takes 
place,  provided  that  the  man's  age  does  not  exceed 
.■J3,  or  that  of  the  woman  26  years.  After  these  ages, 
the  number  of  children  produced  diminishes. 

3.  From  the  preceding  result,  and  from  a  conside- 
ration of  the  probability  of  life,  we  may  infer  that  it 

*  It  is  evident  that  there  are  errors  in  this  line,  wliieh  we 
thought  necessarj'  to  copy  exactly. 

t  The  table  of  Jlr  Finlayson,  wliieh  is  more  extended  than  that 
of  Mr  Sadler,  gives  0-78  as  the  annual  fecundity  of  a  woman  from 
33  to  30  years  of  age,  and  M2  for  one  from  37  to  39  years  of  nge. 

is  before  the  age  of  3.1  years  of  the  man,  and  26  of  the 
woman,  that  we  observe  the  greatest  fecundity. 

4.  If  we  may  reckon  the  respective  ages  of  married 
persons,  we  find  that,  all  things  being  equal,  the  mar- 
riages most  productive  are  those  in  which  the  man  is 
at  least  as  old  as  the  woman,  or  older,  yet  not  much 
exceeding  her  time  of  life. 

After  these  observations,  it  becomes  interesting  to 
examine  if  man,  in  our  climate,  conforms  to  the  laws 
which  natm-e  appears  to  have  attached  to  fecundity, 
and  if  he  reproduces  at  the  most  appropriate  period 
of  life.  To  establish  this  period,  it  would  be  necessary 
to  know  the  age  of  parents  at  the  time  of  the  birth 
of  their  children.  From  the  want  of  these  documents, 
we  may  recur  to  the  ages  at  which  marriages  take 
place,  and  admit,  with  sufficient  probability,  as  an 
average  term,  that  the  birth  of  the  first-born  takes 
place  within  the  first  year  which  follows  marriage. 

In  this  lu'pothesis,  it  will  be  necessary  to  recm'  to 
tables  of  population  ;  and  some  calculations,  foimded 
on  the  probability  of  life,  will  assist  us  in  determining 
the  marriage  ages.  The  following  table  will  explain 
the  course  which  we  have  followed.  The  second  and 
the  fourth  columns,  from  the  Belgic  population  table, 
inform  us  of  the  number  of  men  and  women  who  are 
married,  and  who  are  of  the  age  stated  in  the  first 
column ;  moreover,  also,  whether  they  are  yet  mar- 
ried, or  in  the  state  of  widoM'hood.  The  third  and 
fifth  columns  point  out  what  becomes  of  the  same 
individuals  in  the  period  which  follows,  taking  their 
mortality  into  account.  The  calculations  have  not 
been  extended  beyond  56  j'ears,  since  the  results  after 
that  period  could  only  be  very  doubtful. 

Slarried  Jlen  or 

INIarried  Women 

Widowers. 

or  AVidows. 

Age. 

Number 

Number 

Number 

Number 

of 

when 

of 

when 

tlie  Tables. 

Reduced. 

the  Tables. 

Reduced. 

From  14  to  16,  - 

0 

0 

4 

4 

.  •     10  to  20,     - 

BO 

91 

403 

987 

•  •     20  to  25,  - 

3,278 

3,029 

5,981 

5,594 

• .     25  to  30,     - 

14,025 

13,175 

16,256 

15,204 

•  •     30  to  35,  - 

20,879 

19,628 

21,928 

20,552 

•  •     .35  to  40,      - 

19,374 

18,140 

22,660 

21,143 

•  •     40  to  45,    - 

18,951 

17,512 

22,138 

20,566 

•  •     45  to  SO,      - 

18,a50 

10,583 

19,950 

18,312 

•  •     50  to  53,    - 

11,708 

10,804 

12,453 

11,607 

•  •     53  to  56,      - 

9,925 

9,087 

10,130 

9,432 

Now,  to  arrive  at  the  number  of  marriages  which 
have  taken  place  between  20  and  25  years  among  the 
men,  it  will  be  sufficient  to  take  from  the  number  of 
married  individuals  of  this  age  the  number  of  those 
who  -were  so  before  arriving  at  the  age  of  20  xexrs : 
it  will  be  necessary,  moreover,  to  take  into  conside- 
ration the  mortality  of  the  latter ;  so  that  from  3278 
we  take  away  91:  the  remainder,  3187,  gives  the 
number  of  marriages  which  have  been  made.  In  the 
same  manner,  the  nmnber  of  marriages  which  have 
been  made  between  25  and  30  j-ears,  will  be  calculated 
by  taking  3029  from  14,025.  We  proceed  in  the  same 
manner  with  the  succeeding  numbers ;  for  the  two 
classes  which  exceed  fifty  years,  we  must  remember 
that  they  only  include  three  years.  To  avoid  any  con- 
fusion in  the  calculation,  we  have,  in  the  following 
results,  employed  the  numbers  of  an  average  year 
of  each  period. 

Age. 

From  14  to  16  years, 

..  16  to  20  ••  - 

• .  20  to  25  •  • 

..  25  to  30  ••  - 

•  •  30  to  35  ■  • 

. .  35  to  40  ■  ■  - 

•  •  40  to  45  •  • 

.  •  45  to  50  •  •  - 

. .  50  to  53  . . 

..  53  to  56  ••   - 

Marriages  which  have 

taken  place. 

Men. 

Women. 

0 

2 

-      24 

80 

6.17 

1118 

-  2190 

2132 

1541 

l.-HS 

-      51 

422 

102 

209 

-    169 

123 

586 

489 

-    313 

522 

16 

ON  MAN. 

Some  negative  quantities  are  presented  among  tliese 
numbers,  which  may  arise  from  a  greater  mortality 
than  that  which  we  have  supposed ;  or  from  this  ck- 
cumstance,  that  at  certain  times  there  are  lacuna,  or 
voids,  in  the  population ;  or  stUl  more  from  the  decla- 
rations of  married  persons  having  heen  made  falsely, 
to  conceal  their  age,  or  from  other  motives.  We 
observe,  indeed,  that  of  the  four  negative  numbers, 
three  of  them  fall  near  the  period  of  50  years,  which 
is  overrated.  Several  persons,  to  give  a  round  num- 
ber, as  is  observed  in  other  population-tables,  will  pro- 
bably have  declared  themselves  to  be  50  years  old, 
when  they  had  not  attained  that  term  by  some  months, 
or  even  A^hen  they  had  already  passed  it  by  some 
years.  As  to  the  negative  number  between  35  and 
40  years  for  the  men,  it  corresponds  to  tlie  du'eful 
period  of  the  French  wars,  in  which  the  Belgians  took 
part :  the  men  of  this  age  entered  on  their  19th  year 
some  time  between  1808  and  1813. 

Considering  what  has  just  been  said,  we  see  that 
men  in  Belgium  do  not  marry  before  16,  and  probably 
not  before  18  years  of  age :  some  Avomen  have  mar- 
ried between  14  and  16  years  of  age.  The  greatest 
number  of  marriages,  both  of  men  and  loomen,  take  place 
between  their  2Qth  and  30th  years :  women,  however, 
reach  the  adult  period  earlier  tlian  men ;  the  maximum 
would  seem  to  fall  about  the  29th  year  for  men,  and 
after  the  27th  for  women. 

The  number  of  marriages  diminishes  very  sensibly 
after  the  35th  year ;  and  it  may  be  considered  as  almost 
nothing,  for  females  at  least,  after  the  40th  j-ear. 
Indeed,  the  total,  between  40  and  56  years,  is  only  53. 
The  number  53  is  only  relative  to  tlie  numbers  of  the 
table,  and  not  to  what  really  takes  place.  Of  the 
men,  there  is  a  certain  number  who  marry  at  even 
more  advanced  ages  :  thus,  the  preceding  table  gives 
162  from  40  to  45  years,  169  from  45  to  50,  and  273 
from  50  to  53  years. 

From  this  research,  it  would  result  that  a  man's 
first  child  Avould  be  born  to  him  when  he  was  about 
30  years  of  age,  and  the  woman  bemg  about  the  age 
of  28  :  this  Avoiild  give  the  duration  of  a  generation 
in  Belgium;  it  is  also  the  average  duration  of  life 
nearly.  We  shall  especially  insist  on  this  coinci- 
dence. 

It  is  also  very  remarkable,  that  marriages  only  be- 
come frequent  when  men  have  passed  the  stormy 
period  of  the  passions,  and  of  the  greatest  tendency 
to  crime,  which  happens  aboiit  the  24th  j^ear :  this  is 
also  the  time  when  the  development  of  the  physical 
qualities  has  terminated,  and  the  intellectual  ones 
attain  a  greater  energy. 

According  to  M.  Friedlauder,  to  Avliom  we  are  in- 
debted for  the  article  MortuUtd  in  the  Dictionnaire 
des  Scioiccs  Medicales,  it  would  be  about  the  30th 
year  that  the  greatest  number  of  accouchements  take 
place  in  Sweden  and  Finland.  The  following  are  the 
results  Avhich  he  has  presented,  from  sixteen  years' 
observation,  made  prior  to  1795  : — 

Age  of  the 

Average 

Annual 

Number  of 

Ratio  of 

Women 

Number  of 

Number 

Women  to 

AVomen  to 

Delivered. 

Women  alive. 

of  Births. 

10  Births. 

1000  Births. 

]S  to  20  years, 

134,548 

3,298 

408 

33- 

20  to  25    •• 

129,748 

10,507 

78 

165- 

2.'-.  to  30    •• 

121,707 

20,329 

40 

263- 

30  to  35     •  • 

111,373 

25,618 

43 

250- 

35  to  40     •• 

97,543 

18,093 

54 

181- 

40  to  45     . . 

90,852 

8,618 

\m 

05- 

45  to  50    . . 

78,897 

1,694 

405 

17- 

TTpwards  of 

50  years, 

G9,2G8 

39 

17,760 

0-4 

1000-4 

It  is  to  be  desired  that  such  observations  as  these, 
which  may  be  obtained  Avith  sufficient  accuracy  from 
the  registers  of  the  civil  state,  were  more  numerous  ; 
and  that  all  which  relates  to  the  age  of  the  parents, 

and  to  the  period  of  the  conception  or  bu'th  of  their 
children,  might  be  stated  more  carefully  for  the 
futm'e. 

3.  Influence  of  Places. 

One  of  the  first  subjects  of  investigation  presented 
to  the  mind,  when  studying  the  circumstances  con- 
nected with  births,  is  the  determination  of  the  influ- 
ence of  cUmate  on  fecundity.  Unfortunately,  the  data 
which  Ave  possess  on  this  important  subject  are  so 
incomplete,  and  modified  by  so  many  accessory  causes, 
that  it  is  almost  impossible  to  separate  them  from 
matter  foreign  to  the  question,  and  lay  hold  of  results 
deserA'ing  of  confidence.  Opinions,  also,  vary  much 
on  tills  subject;  and  we  are  still  ignorant  whether, 
all  things  being  equal,  the  north  or  the  south  is  most 
faA^ourable  to  fecundity. 

If  it  be  the  fecundity  of  the  population  Avhich  we 
compare,  Ave  find,  CA^en  in  neighbouring  countries,  the 
most  striking  discordances ;  because,  errors  of  numbers 
being  taken  away,  the  accessory  causes  are  almost 
ahvays  more  active  than  the  influence  of  climate. 
To  give  an  exami)le  of  this,  I  shall  quote  the  ratio  of 
the  births  to  the  population  of  different  countries, 
from  the  medical  statistics  of  Mr  Hawkins.* 

States  and  Colonies. 

Iceland,  1819,  - 

England,  -  -  - 

Cape  of  Good  Hope,  1820, 

France,     .  -  - 

Sweden, 

Isle  of  Bourbon,    - 

The  Two  Sicilies, 

Prussia,     ... 

Venice, 

United  States, 

Number 
of  Inhabitants 
to  one  Birth. 
37-0 
350 
33-7 
31-6 
270 
24  5 
240 
23-3 
22-0 
20-0 

It  would  be  impossible  to  find  any  agreement  be- 
tween these  numbers  and  the  degrees  of  latitude  to 
which  they  refer,  which  might  indicate  the  influence 
of  climate.  Even  without  going  beyond  France,  Ave 
find  very  great  discordances  for  some  selected  depart- 
ments. Thus,  the  ratio  for  that  kingdom  is  one  birth 
to  32  inhabitants ;  whilst  the  ratio  for  the  departments 
of  Orne  and  Finisterre  has  been  one  to  44'83,  and 
25'97  respectively,  for  the  five  years  1826-30.  On 
the  other  hand,  taking  the  most  southern  departments 
of  France  indiscriminately,  we  do  not  find  any  sensible 
difference  from  those  of  the  north.  There  is  a  pro- 
A'ince  in  America,  called  Guanaxuato,  Avhich  in  1825 
had  one  birth  to  16'08  inhabitants :  f  this  ratio,  and 
that  of  the  department  of  Orne,  may  almost  be  con- 
sidered as  forming  the  limit  of  the  known  ratios  of 
different  countries. 

Since  the  examination  of  the  influence  of  climate 
on  the  fecundity  of  the  population  is  rendered  per- 
plexing by  the  existence  of  powerful  influences  of 
other  kinds,  Ave  ouglit  first  to  endeavour  to  ascertain 
the  latter,  in  order  to  be  able  to  judge  what  Avould  be 
the  fecundity  of  the  same  population,  placed  in  tAvo 
different  climates.  Moreover,  the  difiiculty  of  obtain- 
ing an  exact  enumeration  of  the  population,  adds  to 
the  singular  complexity  of  this  research. 

By  taking  the  fecundity  of  marriages  into  account 
in  considering  the  hypotliesis  of  a  homogeneous  popu- 
lation, and  only  making  use  of  the  ascertained  num- 
ber of  marriages  and  legitimate  births,  Ave  may  hope 
to  arrive  at  more  conclusive  results  on  the  influence 
of  climate.  ]M.  Benoiston  de  Chateauneuf  considered 
this  interesting  question  in  a  notice  "  On  the  Intensity 
of  the  Fecundity  of  Europe  at  the  Commencement  of 

*  Elements  of  Medical  Statistics,  by  E.  Bisset  Hawkins.  Lon- 
don :  1029. 

t  Bibliothdqne  UniverseUe,  1833,  On  the  Proportional  Morta- 
lity of  Norman  Populations,  by  Sir  F.  PTvernnis. 

ON  MAN. 

17 

the  Nineteenth  Century."  *  We  shall  take  this  phi- 
losopher as  oxti  guide  iu  our  remarks  on  the  fecundity 
of  marriages. 

"  If  we  divide  Europe  into  two  climates  only — one 
of  which,  commencing  at  Portugal  and  terminating 
at  the  Low  Countries,  will  tlius  extend  from  the  40th 
to  the  50th  degree  of  north  latitude,  and  represent 
the  southern  di^dsion  ;  whilst  the  other,  going  from 
Brussels  to  Stockholm,  or  from  the  .50th  to  the  67th 
degree,  will  represent  the  northern  division — we  shall 
find  that,  in  the  former,  100  marriages  give  457  births  ; 
and  in  the  latter,  the  same  number  of  unions  only 
produces  430. 

The  difference  becomes  still  greater,  if  we  merely 
compare  the  two  extreme  temperatures  with  each 
other.  In  Portugal,  5' 10  children  are  born  to  each 
marriage ;  in  Sweden,  3-62  only 

Finally,  ^vithout  going  out  of  France,  we  may  find 
new  proofs  of  tliis  observation.  '  The  fecundity,'  says 
Moheau,  'increases  from  the  north  to  the  south  of 
France.  There,  the  average  number  of  births  by 
marriage  is  annually  5"03,  and  in  the  provinces  of 
the  north  it  is  only  4"64/ 

What  was  true  in  our  case,  fifty  years  ago,  is  also 
true  now.  The  average  of  births,  taken  for  five  years 
(1821-25),  is  4'34  by  marriage  in  our  provinces  in  the 
south  (Dauphiny,  Languedoc,  Provence),  and  in  Flan- 
ders and  Picardy  it  is  only  4'OO.f 

These  facts  sufiice  to  show  that  we  ought  not  to 
accuse  those  writers  of  inaccuracy  who  first  affirmed 
that  fecundity  was  greater  in  warm  than  in  cold  cli- 
mates :  they  were  in  the  right. 

But  if  we  extend  these  researches — and  if,  in  extend- 
ing them  to  many  coimtries,  we  generalise  still  more 
— then  the  differences  of  climate,  temperature,  and 
position  disappear,  their  influence  ceases  to  be  mani- 
fested, and  nature  obeys  other  laws." 

According  to  M.  Benoiston,  there  are  born,  each 
j'car,  by  marriage — 

States  an'd  Provinces. 

Children  to  one 

Marriage. 

In  Portugal,          .... 

-     5-14 

•  •  the  provinco  of  Bergiutiasco  (Italy), 

C-24 

•  •  the  government  of  Venice, 

-      5-45 

•  ■  Savoy,        .... 

5-65 

•  •  Roussillon  (Eastern  Pyrenees), 

-      5-17 

■  •  a  part  of  Dauphiny, 

5-39 

Lyonnais, 

-      5-68 

Anjou, 

509 

Poitou, 

5-4G 

Brittany, 

5-52 

Franche-Comti.', 

-      501 

Alsace,     - 

6-03 

•  •  the  canton  of  Friboiirg, 

-      5-35 

•  •  a  part  of  Scotland, 

513 

•  •  Bohemia,          .            -            .            - 

-      5-27 

•  •  Muscovy,    -           -            -            - 

5-25 

•  •  Eastern  and  Western  Flanders, 

-      5-27 

"  These  dilit^rcnt  countries  present  a  vei'y  great 
fecundity,  and  we  may  observe  that  eight  of  them  are 
mountainous  (Brittany,  Franche-Comte,  Roussillon, 
Comte  de  Nice,  Savoy,  Fribom-g,  Bohemia,  Berga- 
masco) :  we  also  see  that  these  are  in  general  fertile 
comitries,  where  the  produce  of  the  ground  is  adequate 
to  the  necessities  of  the  people. 

It  appears  that  in  maritime  countries  the  births  are 
also  more  numerous  than  in  inland  states ;  and  the 
same  is  successively  the  case  for  wine,  pasturage,  corn, 
and  forest  countries." 

The  following  table  for  Belgium  presents  some  in- 
teresting details : — 

*  Annalcs  des  Sciences  Naturelles,  Dec.  1826. 

t  M.  Benoiston  de  Chateauneuf  informs  us  that  he  has  de- 
ducted a  cei-tain  number  for  natui-al  children,  hut  he  does  not 
say  whether  the  same  Las  been  done  for  the  rest  of  Europe, 

Provinces. 

lo 

■3" 
§•■3 

Births: 
1825-29. 

1^ 

Inhabitants 

III 

To  one 

1 
To  one 

33S 

(2 

S 

Birth. 

Mar. 

O      g 

Antwerp,     - 

354,974 

11,018 

2,392 

32 

149 

4-48* 

Brabant,  - 

556,146 

18,803 

4,035 

29 

137 

4-68 

Flanders,  East 

733,938 

24,148 

4,246 

30 

173 

519 

. .    West, 

601,678 

20,315 

4,145 

30 

169 

4-90 

Liege,     -      - 

369,937 

11,837 

2,382 

31 

155 

4-72 

Hainan,    - 

604,957 

20,016 

4,323 

30 

140 

4-51 

Limbourg,    - 

337,703 

10,589 

2,422 

32 

139 

4-37 

Namur,    - 

212,725 

11,018 

1,378 

32 

154 

4-57 

Luxembourg.t 

292,151 

10,477 

2,278 

28 

128 

4-67 

Kingdom,    - 

4,064,209 

135,140 

28,076 

30 

144 

4-72 

We  see  at  first  that  the  fecundity,  estimated  either 
in  the  ratio  of  the  population  or  of  the  marriages, 
presents  little  difference,  which  is  an  evidence  that 
the  population  is  so  far  homogeneous ;  and  we  shaU 
truly  find  this  to  be  the  case  a  little  farther  on. 
Luxembourg  and  Brabant,  which  have  produced  the 
greatest  number  of  births  in  proportion  to  the  popu- 
lation, are  also  the  two  provinces  which,  all  things 
being  equal,  present  the  greatest  number  of  mar- 
riages. The  Flemings  have  fewer  marriages,  but  the 
marriages  are  more  fruitful  there  than  in  the  rest  of 
the  kingdom,  which  explains  why  the  ratio  of  births 
is  exactly  equal  to  that  of  the  whole  of  Belgium. 
Moreover,  it  becomes  difl[icult,  from  the  small  extent 
of  this  country,  to  recognise  the  effects  of  some  of  the 
influential  causes  which  have  been  pointed  out  above, 
and  especially  difference  of  climate. 

It  is  here  necessary  to  make  an  essential  remark, 
which  is,  that  generally,  in  estimating  the  fecundity 
of  marriages  iu  Belgium,  the  total  number  of  births 
has  been  compared  with  the  total  number  of  marriages, 
without  making  any  deduction  for  illegitimate  chil- 
dren ;  and  I  myself  confess  that,  owing  to  the  want 
of  documents,  I  have  not  made  this  deduction  in  my 
works.  I  have  reason  to  think,  from  some  partial 
data,  that  the  proportion  of  illegitimate  to  legitimate 
births  would  differ  very  little  from  that  of  France, 
where  100  marriages  produce  408  births,  taking  them 
indiscriminately,  and  of  these  only  379  are  legitimate 
births,  that  is  to  say,  29  less.  In  supposing,  then,  that 
legitimate  and  illegitimate  children  are  in  the  same 
ratio  to  each  other  in  Belgium  as  in  France,  the  figure 
expressing  the  fecvmdity  of  marriages  woiild  not  be 
more  than  about  4*4,  which  still  gives  it  a  very  high 
value  compared  with  other  countries. 

The  distinction  of  first,  second,  and  third  times  of 
wedlock,  becomes  equally  important  to  enable  us  to 
work  out  the  share  of  each  of  the  influential  causes 
Avith  precision.  In  countries,  indeed,  Avhere  successive 
marriages  are  easily  accomphshed,  the  figure  express- 
ing the  fecundity  of  marriages  should  be  very  small, 
for  the  fecundity  of  -woman  is  not  without  limits ; 
and  the  ratio  of  births  to  marriages  should  neces- 
sarily change,  if  the  marriages  become  more  nu- 
merous, while  the  number  of  bu-ths  yet  remains  the 
same. 

Among  the  causes  influencing  the  number  which 
expresses  the  fecundity,  we  ought  to  rank  the  cir- 
cumstance of  a  town  or  coimtry  residence.  During  the 
decennial  period  of  1803  to  1813,  the  only  one  for 
which  Ave  may  form  calculations  in  Belgium,  Ave  find 
that  100  marriages  have  produced  484  births  in  the 
town,  and  450  in  the  country  ;$  but  we  might  still 
reasonably  object,  that,  legitimate  not  liaA'iug  been 

*  The  fecundity  of  marriages  has  been  calculated  for  the  years 
between  1803  and  1829 :  the  numbers  of  this  province  are  not  very 
accurate,  since  the  population  is  not  exactly  knoAvn. 

t  The  population  of  Luxembourg  is  that  of  1825  :  the  average  of 
the  marriages  for  this  province  and  for  Limbourg  has  only  been 
taken  for  three  instead  of  five  years ;  the  same  also  for  the  king- 
dom. 

t  Recherches  sur  la  Reproduction  et  la  Mertalitc. 

18 

ON  MAN. 

distinguished  from  illegitimate  births,  this  difference 
can  only  be  deceptive. 

If  we  seek  to  establish  the  ratio  of  the  energy  of 
fecundation  to  the  population,  Are  generally  find, 
taking  only  the  figure  of  the  fecundity  of  the  great 
cities  of  Europe,  that  it  lias  a  superior  value  to  that 
of  the  adjacent  country  districts.  We  may  see,  in  the 
JBuUetin  des  Sciences  Geographiques  for  April  1831,  a 
table  of  the  changes  of  the  population  of  the  princi- 
pal cities  of  Europe,  which,  if  the  elements  of  it  are 
exact,  gives  one  birth  for  22-4  inhabitants,  as  the 
average  of  78  cities  there  noted.  Tlie  cities  which 
present  the  extremes  of  the  series  are — Utrecht,  19"0 ; 
Liverpool,  18-0;  Oporto,  19-6;  London,  40-8 ;  St  Pe- 
tersburg, 467.* 

'Wlien  we  make  the  distinction  between  city  and 
country  for  Belgium,  we  also  find  that  the  number  of 
births,  compared  to  the  population,  is  greater  in  the 
cities:  it  has  been  1  to  29"1  between  the  years  1825 
and  1829.  In  the  country,  its  value  has  been  1  to 
30"4 :  and  hence  it  Avould  really  appear,  that  there  is 
a  more  active  cause  of  fecundity  in  cities  than  in  the 
country. 

M.  Villerme,  in  his  work  on  Monthly  Births,f  has 
shown  that  unhealthy  periods,  principally  those  of 
epidemics  produced  by  marsh  miasmata,  are  unfa- 
voiirable  to  fecundity.  This  philosopher  has  found 
a  direct  proof  of  it  in  the  number  of  conceptions, 
which  diminishes  at  those  periods  of  the  year  when 
marshy  emanations  are  most  intense. 

Mr  Sadler,  in  his  Avork  on  the  Law  of  Population, 
has  examined  the  relation  which  exists  between  the 
number  of  marriages,  of  births,  and  of  deaths  :  in  ex- 
tending his  comparisons  to  the  numbers  of  different 
countries,  and  especially  to  those  of  England,  Prance, 
and  the  old  kingdom  of  the  Low  Countries,  he  has 
generally  found,  that  places  ivhich  annually  produce  the 
greatest  number  of  marriages  are  those  ivhere  the  fecun- 
dity of  marriages  is  the  smallest,  being,  as  it  were,  a 
sort  of  compensation  which  prevents  the  population 
of  a  country  making  too  rapid  an  advance.  The  same 
author  finds,  tliat  the  countries  where  marriages  are 
i^ery  numerous,  are  also  those  which  have  a  greater  mor- 
taliti/.  We  may  form  some  idea  of  his  results  from 
the  following  table,  which  is  a  summary  of  the  values 
obtained  for  France  : — 

Table  showing  that  the  rreventive  Obstacle  diminislies  the 
Fecundity  of  Marriages,  and  that  the  Fecundity  is  regulated 
by  the  amount  of  Blortalitj'. 

Proportion  of 
Marriages. 

1  to  no  to  120  Inha- 
bitants, 

•  •  120  to  130 

■  •  130  to  140   •  • 

•  •  140  to  LW 

•  •  150  to  1«0 

•  •  16f)  to  170 

■  •  170  and  more. 

,,       ,         ,       Legitimate 
>  umber  of     Births  to  one 
Departments,     j^i^rriage. 

3-70 
,-!-7!> 
4-17 
4-30 
4-43 
4-48 
4-84 

Inhabitants 
to  one  Death. 

3.r4 
3IJ-2 
3;)-0 
400 
40-3 
42-7 
4G-4 

These  facts,  established  by  Mr  Sadler,  are  verified 
by  the  numbers  which  the  difft-rent  parts  of  England 
furnish.  Mr  Sadler  lias  also  availed  himself  of  the 
documents  which  I  had  given  for  the  ancient  king- 
dom of  the  Low  Countries,  and  found  a  new  confir- 
mation of  his  results.  I  shall  also  present  this  table, 
which  is  instructive  on  many  points. 

In  comparing  countries  with  each  othei%  after  hav- 
ing compared  the  parts  of  which  they  are  composeil, 
and  in  making  use  of  the  data  whicli  would  seem  to 
deserve  most  confidence,  we  find  : — 

*  The  sniallness  of  this  ratio  for  St  Petersburg,  is  owing  to  the 
peculiar  state  of  the  population,  wliich  contains  a  much  greater 
number  of  men  than  of  women. 

t  Annalcs  de  Hygiene,  Janvier  1831. 

Inhabitants 

Kingdoms. 

For  one 
JIarriage. 

For  one 
Birth. 

For  one 
Death. 

Fecundity. 

Prussia,* 
England,  t    - 
France, f 
Belgium,  §    ■. 

102- 
128- 
131-4 
144- 

231 
34-0 
32-2 
30-0 

.36-2 
49-0 
39-7 
430 

4-23 
3-77 
3-79 
472 

These  results  do  not  so  well  agree  with  the  prin- 
ciples which  Mr  Sadler  has  deduced  from  his  parti- 
cidar  observations. 

Limbourg, 

One  marriage  for  less 
than  100  inhabitants 

Holland,  Northern, 
Southern, 
Zealand, 
Utrecht,      - 

One  marriage  for  100  to 
120  inhabitants, 

Overyssel,    - 
Friesland, 
Dreut, 

Guelderliind,    - 
Hainan , 
Flanders,  'VA'estern, 

One  mairiage  for  120 
to  140  inhabitants. 

104-4 
113-3 
113-7 
118-2 

121-9 
128-7 
130-3 
131-1 
136-5 

137-7 

Brabant,  Southoni, 
Antwerp, 
Groningen, 
Luxembourg,  - 
Brabant,  Northern, 
Liege, 

One  marriage  for  140 
to  IGO  inhaljitants, 

Flanders,  Eastern,  - 

One  marriage  for  IGO  or 
more  inhabitants, 

142-2 
142-9 
149-3 
149-9 
150-0 
1541 

2  o  •- 

4-50 
4-74 
5-49 
4-8G 

4 -CO 
5-75 
4-69 
4-75 
4-98 
501 

29-78 

5-45 
4-65 
.517 
5-37 
514 
5-33 

Average 

4-75 

4-75 

34-5 
35-5 
31-4 
36-3 

137- 

48-5 
4(i-l 
55-0 
53-7 
51-1 
40-7 

38-2 
48-8 
493 
53-8 
51-4 
46-2 

287-7 

.\verage. 

47-9 

After  considering  all  the  documents  produced  by  ]\Ir 
Sadler  in  support  of  his  observation,  it  seems  to  me  that 
we  might  truly  admit  as  very  probable,  that  a  great 
mortality  induces  many  marriages,  and  that  marriages 
are  less  productive  in  proportion  as  they  are  more 
numerous.  But  I  think  that  the  author  is  too  eager  to 
draw  arguments  from  them  against  the  anti-popula- 
tionist,  whom  he  strives  to  defeat  when  attempting  to 
make  particular  theories  prevail.  It  seems  to  me  that 
the  facts  which  he  cites,  in  order  to  acquire  all  the  im- 
portance which  he  is  desirous  of  giving  them,  should 
be  supported  by  another  statistical  document,  namely, 
the  number  of  marriages  of  the  first,  second,  and  third 
wedlocks.  It  is  said  that  deaths  make  way  for  mar- 
riages; this  is  what  the  researches  of  Mr  Sadler  prove  : 
it  is  also  said  that  mortality  increases  fecundity ;  and 
Mr  Sadler  opposes  the  i-esults  at  which  lie  has  arrived 
to  this  assertion.     It  is  here,  I  think,  that  the  error 

*  Babbage  in  Brewster's  .Toum.al  of  Sciences,  No.  I.,  new  series, 
t  Bickman — Preface  to  the  Abstract  of  the  Population,  1821, 
%  Annuaire  du  Bureau  des  Longitudes  de  Paris. 
§  Annuaire  de  I'Observatoire  dc  Bruxelles. 

ON  MAN. 

19 

Avill  be  found.  Firstly,  it  is  necessary  not  to  confound 
the  fecundity  of  the  marriages  with  the  feciuidity  of 
the  population :  then,  on  the  other  hand,  in  a  coun- 
try where  the  mortality  would  be  very  great,  espe- 
cially among  adult  persons,  the  marriages  of  second 
and  thu'd  wedlocks  would  be  more  numerous,  and 
each  marriage  would  thus  produce,  diu'ing  its  conti- 
nuance, a  fewer  number  of  children ;  although,  in 
point  of  fact,  the  fecundity  of  the  population  were 
very  great.  For  example,  in  the  provinces  of  France 
which  have  the  least  mortality,  and,  as  Mr  Sadler 
observes,  the  fewest  marriages,  we  find  the  greatest 
mmiber  of  children  to  each  marriage.  This  latter 
observation  appears  to  me  to  be  a  necessary  conse- 
quence of  the  former :  a  woman,  who  has  five  children 
by  one  marriage,  might,  the  mortality  being  greater, 
have  these  five  children  by  two  successive  marriages, 
or  even  by  a  greater  number.  It  would  be  very  na- 
tural, then,  that  the  fecundity  of  marriages  should 
appear  to  have  diminished.  It  is  even  evident,  ac- 
cording to  the  mode  of  reasoning  I  have  just  employed, 
that  it  would  be  necessary  to  admit  that,  all  things 
being  equal,  in  a  country  where  mortality  becomes  greater, 
marriages  should  become  more  numerous,  and  the  fecun- 
dity of  marriages,  on  the  contrary,  decrease.  This  result, 
which  I  deduce  from  purely  rational  considerations,  is 
found  to  be  supported  by  the  facts  brought  forward 
by  Mr  Sadler ;  but  it  does  not  follow  that  the  absolute 
fecundity  of  this  country  should  decrease,  or  that  the 
country  shoiild  have  a  smaller  annual  number  of  births. 
I  think  the  contrary,  and  believe  that  I  can  prove  it 
a-little  farther  on. 

I  What  so  often  renders  statistical  results  difficult  of 
\  interpretation  is,  that  facts  are  assumed  as  simple 
|which  in  their  nature  are  complex.  Thus,  it  appears 
to  me  impossible  to  determine  any  thing  concerning 
tlie  fecundity  of  the  women  of  a  country  merely  from 
the  ratio  of  marriages  to  legitimate  births  :  we  neces- 
sarily ought  to  consider  the  mortality  of  the  country 
we  are  examining,  and  take  the  marriages  of  second 
or  third  M'edlocks  into  acco\mt.  I  regret  that  INI. 
Benoiston  de  Chateamieuf,  in  his  interesting  Avork  on 
the  Fecundity  of  Europe,  has  not  paid  attention  to 
this  element :  I  think  he  might  have  overcome  se- 
veral difficulties  which  his  subject  presented  to  him, 
(which  was  extremely  complex),  and  have  cxplabied 
some  apparent  anomalies. 

It  will  also  be  necessary  henceforth,  in  all  researches 
on  fccmidity,  to  consider  the  age  of  marriage  in  the 
different  localities.  For  examiile,  it  is  evident,  if 
persons  do  not  marry  at  the  same  age  in  the  country 
as  in  citie*,  that,  all  things  being  equal,  we  ought  to 
expect  to  find  different  numbers  for  the  fecundity  of 
marriages.  The  same  will  be  the  case  when  we  com- 
pare certain  northern  states,  M'here  marriage  takes 
place  very  late,  with  southern  countries,  where  it  oc- 
curs very  early.  I  repeat  again,  that  the  more  Ave 
study  the  phenomena  of  population,  the  more  com- 
plexity Ave  find  in  them ;  but,  at  the  same  time,  Ave 
have  the  hope  of  succeeding,  by  an  analysis  conducted 
Avith  sagacity,  and  by  using  good  materials,  in  ascer- 
taining the  causes  on  Avhich  they  depend,  and  in  esti- 
mating the  degree  of  influence  of  each  of  these  causes. 

4.  Influence  of  Years. 

We  possess  different  documents,  Avliich  inform  us 
of  the  fecundity  of  marriages  of  the  same  country  at 
different  periods,  and  Avhich  thus  allow  us  to  judge 
.  whether,  all  things  being  eqiial,  this  fecundity  has 
undergone  variations  independent  of  the  annual  changes 
resulting  from  a  more  or  less  prosperous  state  of  things, 
such  as  those  Avhich  would  arise  from  changes  in  the 
nature  of  the  climate,  or  from  the  progressive  advance- 
ment of  civilisation.  In  making  use  of  the  Prussian 
documents  furnished  by  Sl'issmilch,  and  retaining  the 
periods  of  this  jiliilosopher,  Ave  find  at  first : 

Average  Number 

^ 

Baptisms. 

Periods. 

r 

■> 

to  one 

of 

of 

of 

Marriage. 

Marriages. 

Baptisms. 

Deaths. 

l(i!)3  to  1007,      - 

5,747 

19,715 

14,802 

3-43 

1698  to  1702,  - 

9.070 

24,112 

14,474 

3-97 

1703  to  1708,      - 

6,082 

26,896 

16,430 

4-42 

170!)  to  1711,  - 

5,835 

18,833 

85,955 

3-23 

1712  to  17I6,      - 

4,965 

21,603 

11,948 

4-35 

1717  to  1721,  - 

4,324 

21, ,396 

12,039 

4-95 

1722  to  172G,      - 

4,719 

21,452 

12,863 

4-55 

1727  to  1731,  - 

4,808 

20,559 

12,825 

4 '28 

1732  to  1735,      - 

5,424- 

22,692 

15,475 

4-18 

1736  to  1737,  - 

5,522 

20,394 

25,425 

3-69 

1738  to  1742,      - 

5,582 

22,099 

15,255 

3-96 

1743  to  1746,  - 

5,469 

25,275 

15,117 

4-62 

1747  to  1761,      - 

6,423 

28,235 

17,272 

4-40 

1752  to  17.'i6,  - 

5,599 

28,392 

19,154 

5-07 

1816  to  1823,      - 

109,237 

480,632 

307,113 

5-40* 

1827, 

106,270 

524,062 

368,578 

4-93  t 

The  numbers  belonging  to  the  commencement  of 
this  century  are  births  in  general,  Avhilst  those  of 
Sussmilch  only  include  baptisms  ;  Avhich  may  cause  a 
difference,  the  amount  of  Avhich  I  do  not  knoAv  hoAv 
to  obtain.  In  order  to  arrive  at  the  accidental  causes, 
I  have  taken  periods  somewhat  more  extended  than 
the  preceding. 

From  1693  to  1708,  •• 

••  1709  to  1721, 

• .  1722  to  1735,  - 

•  ■  1736  to  1746, 

• •  1747  to  1756,  - 

• •  1816  to  1823, 

••  1827, 

Average, 

3-94  baptisms  to  one  marriage. 

4'18 

A-m 

4-09 

4-73 

4  -40  births  to  one  marriage. 

4-93 

4-37 

For  England,  Ave  find,  according  to  Messrs  Eickman 
and  Sadler,  vol.  ii.  p.  478— 

1700, 
1770, 
1780, 
1785, 

1790, 
1795, 

1800, 
1805, 
1810, 

Average, 

30G  baptisms  to  one  marriage. 

3  61        .. 

3-56 

366 

3-59 

3.53 

3-40 

3-50 

3-60 

3-57 

j\Tr  Sadler  giAX'S,  for  the  fecundity  of  the  ye.ars  1680 
to  17.30,  the  numbers  4*65  and  4'25,  Avhich  Avould  seem 
to  prove  that  the  fecundity  has  diminished ;  but  it 
might  also  happen  that  this  apparent  increase  de- 
pended on  the  manner  in  Avliich  the  numbers  have 
been  collected. J 

SAveden  gives  the  foUoAving  results  :§ — 

From  1749  to  1758, 
.  .  1759  to  1764, 
.  .     1821  to  1826, 

4-20  births  to  one  marriage. 

4-05     .  . 
4-03    .. 

Average,     -     4.009 
And  I  have  found  for  the  ancient  kingdom  of  the 
TjOav  Countries — 

From  1803  to  1812, 
. .  1815  to  1824, 
.  .     1825  to  1830, 

460  births  to  one  marriage. 
4-74     . . 
4-831    .  . 

Average,     -     4-72 

It  would  result  from  the  examples  Avhich  have  been 

presented,  that  the  fecundity  of  marriages  does  not 

sensibly  vary  in  the  same  country  and  in  the  course 

of  a  century,  Avhen  we  include  periods  of  time  suffi- 

*  Babbage,  in  Brewster's  .Journal  of  Sciences,  No.  I.,  new 
series. 

t  Bulletin  des  Sciences,  Janvier  1830. 

ij:  AVe  might  also  attribute  it  to  greater  prudence  and  circum- 
spection. It  has  also  been  observed,  that  the  proportional  num- 
ber of  marriages,  for  the  last  half  century,  has  progressively 
diminished  in  England. —  (Say  —  Cotirs  d'Econoinie  Politique, 
p.  7,  ch.  2. 

§  Sadler,  vol.  ii.  pp.  258,  2G3, 

20 

ON  MAN. 

ciently  great  to  remove  the  accidental  causes  attending 
years  of  greater  or  less  prosperity. 

It  is  remarkable  that  epidemics,  periods  of  great 
scarcity,  and  all  severe  scourges,  do  not  merely  exer- 
cise a  sensible  influence  on  the  number  of  deaths,  but 
also  on  the  amount  of  marriages  and  Ijirths.  It  does 
not  certainly  follow  that,  because  provisions  are  rather 
dearer  one  year,  that  there  should  necessarily  be  fewer 
births  and  marriages,  because  the  influence  of  this 
increase  of  price  may  he  masked  by  some  other  cause ; 
but  when  the  dearness  of  provisions  is  very  decided, 
and  when  there  is  truly  a  scarcity',  we  have  the  great- 
est likehhood  of  finding  it  manifested  in  the  books  of 
marriages  and  births.  This  is  what  we  shall  easily 
find  on  inspecting  the  foUo-\ving  table  for  the  kingdom 
of  the  Netherlands : — 

Birtlis. 

Deaths. 

Mar- 

Price 

Half  a 
Hecto- 

"iears. 

riages. 

of 
\Mieat. 

litre 

Town. 

Country. 

ToM-n. 

Country. 

of  Rye. 

florins. 

florins. 

J815,    - 

59,737 

135,625 

49,007 

88,592 

48,854 

4-90 

3-50 

]81G,  - 

68,095 

138,507 

47,327 

88,796 

40,801 

9'56 

7-17 

1817,    ■ 

55,207 

122,348 

55,240 

97,368 

33,881 

6-79 

4-28 

1818,  - 

55,665 

128,041 

49,169 

91,247 

39,218 

5-18 

3-82 

]8!9,    - 

61,788 

143,504 

49,738 

98,659 

42,401 

3-72 

2-52 

1030,  - 

61,263 

133,685 

50,001 

94,496 

43,258 

3-74 

208 

1821,    - 

65,356 

145,003 

49,706 

88,414 

44,796 

3-71 

1-87 

1822,  - 

67,794 

151,747 

52,078 

95,475 

40,949 

3-30 

2-46 

1823,    - 

65,318 

148,299 

48,815 

91,877 

45,424 

2-95 

1-96 

1BV4,  - 

67,030 

151,636 

47,662 

87,253 

44,665 

2-48 

1-51 

1825,    - 

68,078 

153,813 

60,689 

95,449 

47,097 

3-12 

2-08 

1826,  - 

67,919 

153,970 

58,749 

110,155 

48,054 

4-02 

2-96 

Total, 

753,250 

1,706,178 

608,861 

1,127,781 

525,398 

Aver., 

62,770 

142,182 

50,739 

93,981 

43,783 

4-48 

3-03 

The  year  1817  presents  a  much  greater  number  of 
deaths,  "for  the  cities  and  country,  than  the  preceding 
years,  Avhilst  the  births  and  marriages,  on  the  contrary, 
have  been  much  fewer :  this  year  was  really  a  year 
of  scarcity,  as  was  also  the  preceding  one.  We  may 
observe  that,  during  the  period  from  1709  to  1711, 
the  same  effect  took  place  in  Prussia,  according  to 
the  numbers  of  Siissmilch,  which  have  been  quoted 
above,  but  from  another  cause — the  pestilence  which 
ravaged  that  country  in  1710.  The  increase  of  morta- 
lity, also,  has  been  accompanied  by  a  falling  oif  in  the 
number  of  baptisms,  and  that  of  marriages  has  like- 
wise fallen,  but  more  particularly  in  the  succeeding 
years,  wliich  has  undoubtedly  been  owing  to  the  va- 
cuity which  Avas  formed  in  the  class  of  adult  persons. 
A  singular  mistake  in  figm-es,  led  one  of  the  first 
economists  of  this  century  to  conclude  that  the  births 
were  multiplied,  as  if  to  make  up  for  the  void  left  by 
the  pestilence :  indeed,  after  such  scourges,  it  is  not 
imusual  to  see  the  population  regain  its  relation  to 
the  means  of  subsistence  by  an  increase  of  births. 

In  general,  privations  are  not  only  mortal  to  the 
human  species,  but  even  arrest  its  development :  their 
influence  is  not  always  felt  immediately — we  often 
perceive  that  a  long  time  after  the  cause  has  ceased 
to  operate.  In  1826,  the  price  of  bread  rose  again  in 
Belgium,  and  we  also  see  that  the  mortality  became 
greater,  and  the  number  of  marriages  and  birtlis  which 
the  preceding  year  presented,  imderwent  a  sensible 
diminution.*  However,  these  latter  elements,  espe- 
cially the  figure  of  births,  are,  from  their  nature,  less 
subject  to  variation  than  the  number  of  deaths. 

On  the  contrary,  in  the  years  1821  and  1824,  the 
price  of  grain  was  at  the  lowest,  and  these  are  the 
years  which,  with  respect  to  the  increase  of  the  popu- 
lation, have  presented  the  least  degree  of  mortality ; 
they  are  also  followed  by  years  which  present  more 
marriages  and  births.  The  changes  in  the  price  of 
bread  have  also  as  marked  an  influence  in  the  country 
as  in  town  :  it  is  perhaps  less  observable  iu  the  births. 

*  We  have  for  the  following  years : — 

Years.  Births  in  Town.    Births  in  Countrj'.  Marriages. 

1827,  -         -    64,liKl  143,288  45,632 

182I!,         .         .         68,674  153.166  47,400 

5.  Influence  of  Seasons. 

The  seasons  have  a  marked  influence  on  all  the 
relations  of  man ;  they  operate  on  his  physical  as  well 
as  his  moral  nature.  Thus,  the  vehemence  of  his 
jmssions,  and  the  intensity  of  his  inclination  to  crime, 
are  modified  according  to  temperature  and  chmate; 
and  the  same  also  holds  in  respect  to  his  reproductive 
faculty  and  mortality.  Physiologists  have  already 
observed  the  influence  of  the  seasons  on  the  births 
and  deaths  of  mankind ;  biit  their  results,  in  general, 
do  not  agree  much  with  each  other,  because  they  are 
modifled  by  the  locality,  the  period,  and  the  habits  of 
the  people  to  whom  they  applied.  In  1824,  I  published 
some  particitlar  researches  on  tliis  interesting  subject, 
in  the  Nouveaitx  Memoires  de  VAcademie  de  Biux- 
eJles*  The  result  of  these  researches  Avas,  that  the 
number  of  births  and  deaths  increases  and  decreases 
alternately ;  and  that  these  numbers  reach  their  maxi- 
mum towards  the  month  of  January  for  deaths,  and 
towards  the  month  of  Pebruary  for  bu'ths ;  and  their 
minimum  about  six  months  after,  in  July.f  These 
conclusions  were  afterwards  confirmed  by  the  prin- 
cipal cities  of  the  Low  Countries ;  and  the  general 
results  of  the  kingdom  were  found  to  agree  with  the 
numbers  first  obtained  for  Brussels.  These  researches 
became  the  subject  of  several  interesting  letters  from 
M.  VniermtsJ  who,  in  the  Annales  de  Hygiene,  has 
since  treated  the  same  subject  to  its  fullest  extent, 
and  has  shown  that  the  periods  of  maximum  and 
minimum  approach  or  recede  according  to  the  climate 
and  habits  of  the  people. 

We  shall  commence  by  stating  the  number  of  births 
in  the  cities  and  country  of  the  ancient  kingdom  of 
the  Low  Countries,  during  the  twelve  years  from  1815 
to  1826  inclusive.  Por  the  better  understanding  of 
these  numbers,  we  have  taken  into  account  the  un- 
equal length  of  the  months,  and  have  taken  quantities 
corresponding  to  months  of  31  days :  we  have  also 
assumed  as  miity,  m  the  two  last  columns,  the  ave- 
rage of  the  total  number  of  births,  both  for  town  and 
coimtry. 

JNIonths — 
1815  to  1826. 

January, 

February, 

March, 

April, 

JLay,      - 

June, 

July,      - 

August, 

September, 

October, 

November, 

December, 

Births. 

Town.     Country 

68,255 
71,820 
69,267 
66,225 
62,102 
58,730 
57,151 
59,620 
62,731 
62,500 
64,273 
65,120 

159,787 
1/0,699 
164.851 
147,118 
134,446 
125,026 
121,512 
131,657 
144,389 
146,362 
146,285 
148,186 

Births. 

To>vn.     Country. 

1-067 
1122 
1083 
1035 
0-971 
0-918 
0-ffi)3 
0932 
0-980 
0-977 
1-005 
1-018 

1-102 
1-177 
1137 
1  0J4 
0-927 
0-8G2 
0-a38 
0-908 
0-995 
1-009 
1-009 
1-022 

Let  us  first  observe,  that  the  influence  of  the  seasons 
is  much  more  apparent  in  the  country  than  in  town  ; 
which  appears  natural,  since,  in  the  latter  case,  there 
are  fewer  means  of  maintaining  an  equality  of  tempe- 
rature. The  maximum  of  births  in  Pcbruary  sup- 
poses the  maximum  of  conceptions  to  happen  in  the 
month  of  May,  when  the  vital  powers  regain  all  tlieir 
activity,  after  the  rigours  of  winter. 

*  Sur  Us  Lois  des  Naissances  ct  (Je  la  MortalHif  a  Bruxclles,  tome 
iii.  p.  501.  See  also  the  Correspondance  Mathematiquc  et  Physique, 
tomes  i.  and  ii. 

t  The  thirty-fourth  volume  of  the  Memoires  de  VAcademie 
Royalede  Turin,  published  in  1830,  contains  two  letters  of  Pro- 
fessor Vanswindcn  on  the  same  subject,  which  inform  us  that 
this  philosopher  had  already  arrived  at  the  same  result  as  early 
as  1798.  It  is  to  be  regretted  that  we  were  not  sooner  acqiiainted 
T\ith  these,  as  also  with  the  researches  of  M.  Balbo,  Sur  Vlnjlmnce 
des  Saisons.  It  would  appear  from  these  researches  that  deaths 
have  not  so  regular  a  coiu-se  as  with  us. 

i  See  the  letters  addressed  to  me  by  M.  Villerm^  in  the  Corres- 
pondance Mathematiqucel  Physique,  tome  ii.,  and  in  the  Rccherches 
sur  la  Population,  ks  Naissances,^c.,  dms  le  Roi/aHmc  des  Pays 
Bos,  p.  13. 

ON  MAN. 

21 

Should  vre  not  be  correct  in  concluding,  from  the 
preceding  results,  that  climates  most  favourable  to 
fecundity  are  those  which  enjoy  a  mUd  temperature, 
and  that  excess  of  cold  or  heat  should  prove  unfavour- 
able to  human  procreation.  This  induction  is  in  ac- 
cordance with  the  results  which  have  been  made  known 
above,  on  the  influence  of  climates. 

Now,  if  we  wish  to  estimate  the  different  causes 
which  may  modify  the  influence  of  seasons,  we  cannot 
follow  a  better  guide  than  M.  ViUerme ;  and,  not  to 
modify  the  conclusions  which  he  has  deduced  from 
his  laborious  researches  concerning  climates,  we  shall 
copy  them  verbatim,  referring  for  them  to  the  work 
of  this  savant,  De  la  Distribution  par  Mois  des  Con- 
ceptions et  des  Naissances  de  I'Homme.  {Ann.  de  Hy- 
qiene.) 

"  The  direct  or  indirect  influence  of  the  annual 
revolution  of  the  earth  around  the  sun,  of  the  great 
changes  of  temperature  which  this  revolution  causes, 
and  of  certain  meteorological  conditions,  on  concep- 
tion, and  consequently  on  the  births  of  the  human 
race,  appears,  then,  very  evident.  But  this  induction, 
well  fomided  as  it  may  be,  can  only  l)e  really  proved 
when,  at  the  other  side  of  the  equatorial  line,  where 
the  seasons  succeed  each  other  in  the  same  order  as 
on  this  side,  but  at  contrary  times,  we  see  the  periodic 
return  of  similar  results  occurring  at  similar  seasons. 

Well,  in  the  republic  of  Buenos  Ayres,  the  only 
coimtry  of  the  southern  hemisphere  of  which  I  have 
been  able  to  procure  monthly  results  of  births,  the 
latter  are  so  distributed  that  the  greatest  monthly 
numbers  occur  in  July,  August,  and  September,  that 
is  to  say,  in  Avinter ;  and  the  fewest  numbers  in  Ja- 
nuary and  May,  or  in  simimer.  The  alternation  of 
maximum  and  minimum  foUows  that  of  the  seasons 
precisely. 

The  influence  of  the  different  positions  of  the  sun 
with  respect  to  the  earth,  on  the  monthly  distribution 
of  conceptions,  and  consequently  of  births,  is  therefore 
very  certain. 

There  is  another  consequence :  the  maximum  and 
minimum  periods  of  conception  approach  each  other 
in  hot  countries,  and  recede  from  each  other  in  cold 
ones,  especially  the  period  of  minimum. 

Finally,  it  results  from  aU  the  facts  which  have 
been  cited,  that  in  our  state  of  civilisation  we  are,  at 
least  in  some  measure,  subjected  to  the  different  pe- 
riodic influences  of  the  kind  we  are  considering,  which 
are  manifested  by  plants  and  animals." 

6.  Influence  of  the  Hours  of  the  Day. 

Curiosity  led  me  to  investigate,  if  there  existed  any 
relation  between  the  different  hours  of  the  day  and 
the  moments  of  births  :*  I  have  been  assisted  in  this 
department  by  the  data  which  M.  Guiette,  then  con- 
nected with  the  Lying-in  Hospital,  Brussels,  commu- 
nicated to  me ;  these  data  are  the  result  of  eleven 
years'  observations,  from  1811  to  1822.  I  have  since 
communicated  them  to  M.  Villerme,  who  has  found 
them  perfectly  analogous  to  the  results  obtained  at 
the  Lying-in  Hospital  of  Paris,  but  which  are  still 
unpublished,  so  far  as  I  know. 

With  these  observations,  which,  up  to  the  present 
time,  are  very  few,  I  present  the  indications  of  still- 
born children,  at  periods  of  six  hours,  according  to 
the  mmibers  observed  by  JI.  Guiette  in  1827-28. 

After  midnight,     - 
Before  mid-day, 
After  mid-day. 
Before  midniglit, 

Total,    - 

Births : 
18U-1822. 

798 
614 
574 
G94 

StiUhom: 
1811-1022. 

Buths : 
1827-182R. 

143 
110 
11!) 
148 

"We  see,  from  these  data,  that  births  are  more 
numerous  during  the  night  than  in  the  day-time: 
the  ratio  for  the  years  between  1811  and  1822  is 
1492  to  1188,  or  1-26  to  1 ;  and  for  the  two  years  of 
the  observations  of  M.  Guiette,  293  to  238,  or  1-23 
to  1 :  therefore,  about  five  children  are  born  during 
the  night  to  every  four  born  during  the  day. 

These  observations  have  given  rise  to  similar  ones : 
Dr  Buek  of  Hamburg,  treating  the  same  subject,  has 
arrived  at  the  following  results :  *  the  numbers  are 
reduced  to  1000  : — 

Births. 

Winter. 

Spring. 

Summer. 

Autumn. 

Average. 

After  midnight, 
Before  mid-day, 
After  mid-day, 
Before  midniglit. 

325 
270 
190 
215 

320 
252 
13G 
292 

291 
256 
189 
264 

312 
216 
225 

247 

312 
249 
183 
256 

These  numbers  give  the  ratio  of  night  to  day,  as 
1 '31  to  1.  It  would  appear  from  these  particular  data, 
that  births  are  generally  most  numerous  towards  the 
hours  of  midnight  and  mid-day. 

As  to  still-born  children,  the  hourly  difference  is  not 
appreciable,  from  the  small  number  of  observations 
which  have  been  collected. 

*  Correspondance  Mathematique  et  Physique,  1827.  tome  iii. 
p.  42 ;  and  Recherches  8\ir  la  Population,  p.  21. 

CHAPTER  in. 

or  THE  IXFLUENCE  OF  DISTURBING  CAUSES  O.V  THE  NUMBER 
OF  BIRTHS. 

1.  Influence  of  Professions,  Food,  &c. 

If  it  be  true  that  every  thing  which  has  a  direct 
influence  on  the  physical  constitution  of  man,  either 
weakening  or  strengthening  it,  has  also  an  influence 
on  his  reproductive  tendency,  and  causes  the  num- 
ber and  kind  of  births,  and  also  the  times  at  which 
they  take  place,  to  vary,  we  cannot  doubt  the  influ- 
ence of  professions,  trades,  and  modes  of  life,  minor 
causes  necessarily  included  in  the  preceding  general 
ones. 

It  is  to  be  regretted,  however,  that  we  have  no 
particidar  researches  on  this  interesting  point.  M. 
Benoiston,  in  his  M^moire  snr  VIntensit6  de  la  F£con- 
dite  en  Europe,  has  felt  the  importance  of  it,  and  has 
laboured  to  verify  one  particular  fact,  which  seems 
to  require  further  examination.  We  generally  think 
that  the  fecundity  of  marriage  is  low  among  fisher- 
men, and  ascribe  it  to  the  phosphorus  contained  in 
the  fish  on  Avhich  they  live.  But  deeper  researches 
have  shown,  that  the  alleged  fact  is  at  least  doubtful ; 
for  it  is  found  that  the  maritime  departments  of 
France,  inhabited  by  fishermen,  have  almost  exactl}' 
the  same  fecundity  as  the  rest  of  the  kingdom. 

M.  Yillerme,  in  his  work  Sur  les  Naissances  par 
Mois,  has  endeavoiu*ed  to  ascertain  if  the  usual  severe 
labour  of  the  coimtry  diminishes  fecundity,  or  changes 
the  periods  of  conception  ;  but  he  has  not  been  able 
to  obtain  any  conclusive  results. 

It  appears  that  the  influence  of  professions  is  gene- 
rally masked  by  other  modifying  causes,  which  act 
so  powerfully',  that,  considering  the  statistical  elements 
which  we  possess,  we  cannot  appreciate  the  influence 
of  profes5)ions  in  a  satisfactory  manner.  All  that  we 
can  decide,  from  researches  which  have  hitherto  been 
made,  is,  that  it  is  weak,  and  especiallj'  depends  on 
the  quantit}^  and  nature  of  the  food,  and  the  develop- 
ment of  the  physical  powers.  "  There  is  no  principle 
of  political  economy  on  which  authors  are  more  fully 
agreed,"  M.  Benoistonf  says,  "  than  that  the  ijopula- 
tion  of  a  state  is  always  in  proportion  to  the  amount 
of  its  produce.    It  is  by  virtue  of  tliis  law,  which  has 

*  Xachrieht  von  dera  Gesundheits— Zutan^e  der  Stadt  Ilara- 
hurg,  von  N.  H.  Julius.    Hamburg  :  1829. 
t  f?ur  rinfluence  de  la  FOcondltc;'  en  Eumiip, 

22 

ON  MAN. 

few  exceptions,  that  we  do  not  see  a  great  number  of 
births  among  a  poor  and  oppressed  peoiile,  Avho  have 
neither  agriculture,  industry,  nor  liberty.  So  far  is 
such  from  being  the  case,  that  slave  populations  de- 
cline instead  of  increase.  It  is  an  acknowledged  fact, 
that  in  St  Domingo,  in  1788,  three  marriages  among 
the  blacks  only  produced  two  childi-en,  whilst  each 
marriage  of  the^  white  people  produced  three."  * 

I  do  not  know  whether  it  is  an  unfounded  prejudice, 
that  in  Protestant  states,  clergymen  have  generally 
a  larger  family  than  the  other  professions — at  least, 
this  opinion  was  generally  believed  in  the  ancient 
kingdom  of  the  Low  Countries.  But  the  fact  may 
be  explained,  not  onl}'  from  the  nature  of  the  profes- 
sion, but  also  because  the  income  of  clergymen  often 
increases  with  the  number  of  their  children. 

2.  The  Influence  of  Morality. 

When  speaking  of  legitimate  and  illegitimate  births, 
we  showed  that  a  state  of  concubinage  tends  to  pro- 
duce fewer  male  children :  tlie  same  would  be  the 
effect  of  aU  habits  which  enervate  the  powers — they 
also  diminish  the  number  of  conceptions.  It  also 
seems  to  be  well  established,  that  i)rostitutes  either 
produce  fewer  children  or  are  barren.  The  too  early 
approximation  of  tlie  sexes  induces  similar  effects, 
and  produces  children  wliich  have  a  less  ijrobability 
of  life. 

Habits  of  order  and  foresight  ought  also  to  exercise 
a  considerable  influence  on  the  number  of  marriages, 
and  consequently  of  births.  The  man  whose  condi- 
tion is  unsettled,  if  he  allow  himself  to  be  governed 
by  reason,  dreads  to  divide  with  a  family  the  vicissi- 
tudes of  fortune  to  wliich  he  is  exposed ;  many  econo- 
mists have  also  maintained,  and  with  reason,  that  the 
most  eflicacious  mode  of  preventing  an  excess  of  popu- 
lation in  a  country,  is  to  diffuse  knowledge  and  senti- 
ments ,of  order  and  foresight.  It  is  evident  that  the 
people  of  a  country  would  not  seek  so  much  to  con- 
tract alliances  and  load  tlie  future  with  trouble,  if 
each  individual  found  a  difficulty  in  providing  for  his 
own  subsistence.  The  great  fecimdity  of  Ireland  has 
been  cited  as  an  example  of  the  influence  which  de- 
pression and  improvidence  may  exercise  over  produc- 
tiveness.f  When  man  no  longer  reasons,  when  he  is 
demoralised  by  misery,  and  just  lives  from  day  to 
day,  tlie  cares  of  a  family  no  more  affect  him  then 
than  the  care  of  his  own  existence ;  and,  impelled  by 
momentary  gratification,  he  begets  children,  careless 
of  the  future,  and,  if  we  may  use  the  expression,  re- 
signs to  that  Ti-ovidence  who  has  supported  him,  all 
the  care  of  the  progeny  to  which  he  has  given  exist- 
ence. 

Foresight  may  also  render  marriages  less  fruitful, 
because  a  man  is  less  eager  in  reproduction  if  he  fears 
that  his  family,  becoming  too  numerous,  may  one  day 
feel  the  finger  of  distress,  or  be  under  the  necessity 
of  undergoing  privations  arid  renouncing  a  certain 
degree  of  ease  to  which  they  have  been  accustomed. 
I  do  not  doubt  but  that  particular  researches,  imder- 
takcn  with  the  design  of  elucidating  this  interesting 
point,  will  some  daj^  confirm  these  conjectures :  they 
would  be  of  the  greatest  utility  in  pointing  out  the 
course  to  be  pursued  in  the  instruction  which  it  is 
proper  to  give  to  the  people. 

One  of  the  most  striking  examples  of  the  effects  of 
the  indolence,  poverty,  and  demoralisation  of  a  people, 
is  given  by  the  province  of  Guanaxato  in  Mexico, 
where  100  births  take  place  annually  for  everj'  1G08 
inhabitants,  and  100  deaths  for  every  1970.  "  Some 
traveller,"  says  'M.  DTvernois,  "  who  lias  observed 
the  sad  concurrence  of  excessive  mortality,  fecundity, 
and  poverty,  in  Mexico,  attributes  it  to  the  banana, 
which  almost  ensures  them  an  adequate  quantity  of 

*  Ti-aite  du  Commerce  <les  Colonies,  p.  210. 
t  .See  an  article  by  M.  D'lvcmois,  inserterl  by  the  BibUothefjUC 
Vniversdle  de  Ccnci'C,  Mars  IttSU, 

food ;  others  charge  the  raging  heat  of  tlic  climate, 
which  begets  an  insurmountable  aversion  to  labour, 
and  leaves  the  inhabitants  of  this  indolent  region  in 
a  manner  insensible  to  every  other  desire  but  that 
which  impels  the  sexes  towards  each  other.  Hence 
the  myriads  of  children,  the  greater  part  of  whom  do 
not  live  to  be  weaned,  or  only  appear  on  the  registers 
to  give  place  immediately  to  others ;  and  the  surviv- 
ing ones  commence  the  inert  and  brief  existence  of 
their  predecessors,  like  them  the  victims  of  the  indo- 
lence, apathy,  and  perpetual  misery  to  which  they 
are  habituated,  Adthout  experiencing  the  necessity  of 
extricating  themselves,  any  more  than  their  parents 
had  done.  To  form  an  idea  of  what  takes  place  iu 
this  republic,  we  must  read  the  report  of  a  Swiss  who 
visited  it  in  18-30.  Kothing  can  equal  the  amount  of 
physical,  moral,  and  political  evil,  with  which  he  has 
supplied  his  hideous  account.  Although  he  neglected 
to  ascertain  the  number  of  births,  he  has  guessed  it, 
since  he  calls  Mexico  a  barbarous  China." 

The  criminal  documents  of  France  inform  us  of  an 
equally  curious  circumstance,  namely,  that  the  period 
of  the  maximum  of  conceptions  nearly  coincides  with 
that  of  the  gi'eatest  number  of  rapes.  LI.  ViUerme 
rationally  remarks,  that  this  coincidence  may  lead  us 
to  think  that  tliose  who  are  guilty,  are  sometimes 
obliged  in  an  irresistible  manner,  not  having  the  free 
command  of  the  will.  This  conjecture"  acquires  the 
greatest  degree  of  probability  from  the  researches 
which  I  shall  explain  farther  on,  when  considering 
the  tendency  to  crime :  we  shall  there  see  how  worthy 
this  subject  is  of  the  attention  of  philosophers  and 
legislators. 

The  production  of  illegitimate  children  deserves  an 
attentive  consideration  for  many  reasons :  in  a  poli- 
tical view,  especially,  it  ought  to  become  the  subject 
of  the  most  serious  researches,  smce  its  tendency  is 
to  diffuse  through  society  a  continually  increasing 
mmiber  of  individuals  deprived  of  the  means  of  ex- 
istence, and  who  become  a  burden  to  the  state.  On 
the  other  hand,  these  individuals,  generally  possess- 
ing a  feeble  organisation,*  as  we  shall  soon  see,  rarely 
arrive  at  maturity ;  so  that  they  do  not  even  afford 
the  hope  of  comijensating  some  day  for  the  sacrifices 
which  have  been  made  for  them.  According  to  Mr 
Babbage  (Letter  to  the  Eight  Hon.  T.  P.  Courtenay), 
we  reckon — 

For  1000  Legitimate      For  1  Illegitim.itc 

In  France, 

Kingdom  of  Naples, 

Prussia,    - 

"Westphalia, 

Cities  of  Westphalia, 

Montpellier, 

48-4 
7C-4 
8S-1 
217-4 
OIG 

Children- 
'•7  illegitimate. 

Child— 
14-3  legitimate. 
20G 
1.31 
11-4 
40 
10-9 

We  see  that,  in  the  cities  of  Westphalia,  the  number 
of  illegitimate  children  is  exceedingly  great.  About 
fifty  years  ago,  at  Stockholm,  Gottingen,  and  Leipsic, 
one-sixth  of  the  births  were  illegitimate ;  OTie-fourth 
at  Cassel ;  and  one-seventh  at  Jena.f  From  Berlin, 
we  obtain  the  following  results  : — 

From  1780  to  1703,  2G..572  births,  of  whom  2,824  illegitimate,  or9  to  1 
■•     1794  to  1708,  .30,105  ■■  3.0(Kj  ■■  9tol 

■•     1799  to  1803,  31, «38  ••  3,800  ••  8tol 

..     1804  to  18(»8,  30,4.')9  ••  4,941  ••  6tol 

..     1819  to  1822,  26,971  ••  4,.319  •■  6tol 

1789  to  1832, 145,7iiJ 

18,890 

7tol 

The  number  of  illegitimate  births  has  therefore 
been  increasing.  The  following  are  the  numbers  for 
Paris,  for  the  last  few  years,  according  to  the  Anuu- 
aires  du  Bureau  des  Longitudes: — 

*  [It  is  curious  to  observe  how  precisely  opposite  to  the  truth, 
as  established  by  statistics,  the  generally  received  opinions  of 
mankind  have  been  on  most  points. — See  Sh.ilispeare's  Historical 
Plaj'S — A'(V?<jr  Lear  and  Kiui;  John.'] 

t  Casper,  Beitrage,  &c. 

ON  MAN. 

23 

Births. 

Legitimate 

Births  to  1 
Illegitimate. 

Legitimate. 

Illegitimate. 

ia.'.3,  - 

27,0/0 

f).mi 

2-76 

1824, 

28,012 

10,2>1 

282 

1825,  - 

29,253 

10,03!) 

2-<)l 

1826,        - 

29,970 

10,5U2 

2-05 

1827,  - 

29,81  K5 

10,392 

2-8G 

1828, 

29,G01 

10,475 

2-81 

1829,  - 

28.721 

9,953 

2-88 

law, 

28,587 

10,0(17 

2-85 

ia»,*  -     - 

£9,530 

10,378 

2-83 

1832,*     - 

26,283 

9,237 

2-8t 

Averafre,  - 

287,fi.33 

101,010 

204 

Tims,  for  28  births  there  have  been  almost  exactly 
10  illegitimate  children  :  I  think  this  ratio  is  the  most 
unfavourable  of  any  which  has  hitherto  been  made 
known.f 

*  In  these  numbers,  1099  and  10G5  children,  acknowledge;!  and 
Icffitimatised  subsequent  to  birth,  are  not  included. 

t  [The  views  of  JI.  Quetelet  on  this  subject  do  not  appear  to 
embrace  all  the  causes  of  illegitimacy.  It  may  happen  that  in 
countries  where  the  means  of  subsistence  are  of  diflicult  attain- 
ment, parties,  from  prudential  considerations,  will  not  enter  the 
married  state.  This  is  visibly  the  case  in  Scotland,  where  the 
illegitimate  births  are  very  nimierous,  but,  from  the  want  of 
national  registers,  cannot  be  stated.  The  ratio  of  illegitimates, 
we  have  reason  to  believe,  is  nmch  greater  in  Scotland  than  in 
Ireland,  where  matrimony  is  entered  upon  with  little  regard  for 
the  future.  Thus,  e.\treme  prudence  may  be  said  to  lead  to 
immorality.  The  possibility  of  effecting  retrospective  marriage 
(that  is,  dating  it  from  before  the  birth  of  the  illegitimate  chil- 
dren),  is  another  frequent  cause  of  illegitimacy  in  Scotland;  and 
it  may  bo  added,  that  tlic  demand  for  wet-nurses  by  the  higher 
class  of  mothers  for  their  infants,  forms  another  prevailing  cause 
of  illegitimacy,  at  least  in  large  towns. 

For  the  purpose  of  throwing  light  on  this  important  subject  in 
social  statistics,  we  beg  to  subjoin  the  following  passages  from  the 
Sixth  Annual  Ueportof  the  Poor-Law  C'onmiissionersof  Kngland, 
for  1840 :  they  occur  in  the  report  handed  in  from  Sir  ICdmund 
Head  on  the  Law  of  Bastardy : — "  MrLaing,  in  his  recent  Tour  in 
Sweden,  gives  most  instructive  evidence  as  to  the  number  and 
causes  of  illegitimate  births  in  that  country.  It  appears  that 
the  proportion  of  illegitimate  to  legitimate  births  in  all  Sweden, 
from  1820  to  1)W,  is  as  1  in  U'O,  and  in  Stockholm  as  high  as 
1  to  2  3.  5Ir  Laing  goes  on  to  remark — '  There  are  two  minor 
causes,  both,  however,  showing  a  degraded  moral  feeling,  which 
were  stated  to  me  as  contributing  mucli  to  this  lax  stiiteof  female 
morals.  One  is,  that  no  woman  in  the  middle  or  higher  ranks,  or 
who  can  afford  to  do  otherwise,  ever  nurses  her  own  child.  A 
girl  who  has  got  a  child  is  not  therefore  in  a  woi-se,  but  in  a  better 
situation,  as  she  is  pretty  sure  of  getting  a  place  for  two  years, 
which  is  the  ordinary  time  of  nursing.  The  illegitimacy  of  the 
child  is  in  this  community  rather  a  recommendation  of  the 
mother,  as  the  family  is  not  troubled  with  the  father  or  friends. 
As  to  the  girl's  own  child,  there  is  a  foundling  hospital,  the  second 
minor  cause;  in  that  it  can  be  reared  at  a  trifling  expense,  dur- 
ing the  time  the  mother  is  out  nursing.  The  imchasteare,  there- 
fore, in  point  of  fact,  better  off  than  the  chaste  of  the  female  sc.x; 
in  this  town.'^Laiiit/'s  Swokn,  pp.  115,  117.  It  is  well  known 
that  the  results  of  the  unrestricted  reception  of  bastard  children 
into  the  foundling  hospitals  in  Belgium  made  it  necessary  for  the 
government  to  take  steps,  in  lit.34,  for  discouraging  the  operation 
of,  if  not  for  repealing,  the  law  under  which  it  took  place.  I  do 
not  know  what  the  present  state  of  this  question  in  that  coimtry 
is.— (See  Senior,  Forciijn  Poor-Lairs,  p.  1.37.)  The  legislation  of 
the  French  Republic,  by  the  laws  of  27th  Frimaire  year  5,  and 
3()th  VentOse  year  5,  explamed  by  an  edict  of  19th  January  1811, 
was  most  favourable  to  the  mothers  of  bastards,  and  relieved  them 
from  all  care  of  their  own  offspring.  5L  de  Beaumont  says— 
'  On  sait  qu'une  loi  de  la  revolution  r^compcnsait  les  filles  m^res 
d'enfanti  naturels.' — {L'lrlaii'lr,  ii.  122,  note  2.) 

Under  the  influence  of  these  laws,  which  only  carried  out  the 
principle  involved  in  our  foraier  practice,  the  illegitimate  children 
increased  from  l-47th  (which  they  were,  on  an  average  of  seven 
years,  in  1780)  to  l-14th,  in  1825.  (See  Senior,  Foreign  Poor-Laws, 
p.  120;  M'Culloch,  notes  to  Adam  Smith,  p.  102,  n.) — Malthus 
(voL  i.  p.  .375)  reckoned  the  illegitimate  bu:ths  in  France,  at  the 
time  he  was  writing,  as  1-llth  of  the  whole. 

Since  writing  the  above,  I  have  received  the  Aiiniiaire  du 
Bureau  (leg  Lono'ihides.  for  1840,  which  gives  the  most  recent 
iuformation  on  French  statistic?. 

3.  The  Influence  of  Political  and  Religious  Institutions. 

Nothing  appears  more  adapted  to  multiply  the 
population  of  a  state,  -without  inducing  injury,  than 
miiltiplying  the  products  of  agriculture  and  iiidustry, 
and,  at  tlie  same  time,  ensuring  a  prudent  de.Srree  of 
liberty,  -which  may  be  a  guarantee  for  tlie  public  con-- 
fidcnce.  The  absence  of  liberal  institutions,  which 
excite  the  activity  of  man,  and  at  the  same  time 
increase  his  energy  and  coiufort,  must  produce  the 
effects  which  are  observed  in  the  East,  Avhere  popula- 
tion languishes  and  decreases.  On  the  contrary,  in 
the  United  States,  population  increases  Avith  a  rapidity 
which  has  no  parallel  in  Europe.  M.  Villermc*  ob- 
serves, that  at  the  period  of  the  French  revolution, 
"  when  the  tithes,  duties  on  wine,  salt,  feudal  tenures, 
&c.,  and  corporations  and  wardenships,  had  just  been 
abolished  (that  is  to  say,  when  petty  workmen  and 
cultivators,  in  a  word,  the  persons  of  no  property, 
bj'  far  the  most  numerous  class  in  the  nation,  found 
themselves  all  at  once  in  a  state  of  unaccustomed 
case  and  competency,  which  they  cclebi-ated  through 
the  greatest  i)art  of  the  territory  by  feasts,  and  re- 
joicings, and  more  abundant  food),  the  number  of 
births  increased,  to  diminish  gradually  afterwards." 

Years  of  war  and  peace  have  likewise  a  marked 
influence  on  the  population  :  we  shall  only  quote  one 
example  at  present.  Erom  the  date  of  the  wars  of 
the  empire,  it  was  insimuited  that  tiic  French  popu- 
lation, far  from  being  reduced,  only  made  greater 
increases.  ^I.  DTverneis,  who  has  succeeded  in  pro- 
curing the  number  of  births  and  deaths  for  this  period, 
has  endeavoured  to  verify  this  assertion,  so  often  re- 
peated, and  he  has  found  that  it  was  essentially  in- 
correct :  he  has,  moreover,  established  two  remarkable 
facts,  t    "  Whoever  investigates  births,  learns  that, 

It  appears  that  in  1838  the  number  of  births  in  Paris  was 
pf.  »,„  (2tl,4.")4  legitimate. 
"''       I  9,20'J  illegitimate. 
The  illegitimate  were  therefore  31-2  per  cent.,  or,  to  the  legiti- 
mate, as  1  to  2-2— a  proportion  larger  thiin  that  existing  at  Stock- 
holm. 
In  the  whole  of  France,  in  1(137, 

The  total  number  of  births  was  913,319i^;'!'f?2  !fP'!'l''i*<; 
'      I  69,829  illegitimate. 

That  is,  74  per  cent.,  or  as  1  to  12-5. 

The  '  niouvenient  moyen'  of  the  population,  calcuLited  on  the 
twenty-one  years  from  1817  to  1837,  gives,  as  the  annual  number 
of  births, 

n,:o  -..,j0!)9,451  legitimate, 
''t  69,301  illegitimate. 
That  is,  the  illegitimate  to  the  legitimate  as  1  to  12-;»79. 

It  thusappears  that  the  proportion  of  illegitimate  births  is  greater 
in  France  than  in  Sweden,  the  former  being  as  1  to  12-979,  and 
the  latter  as  1  in  14-6,  according  to  Jlr  Laing  (p.  115),  while  the 
morality  of  France  would  seem  to  have  deteriorated  since  the 
calculation  of  Pcuchet.  I  fear  thatthere  are  rural  districts  in  this 
country  in  which  the  proportion  of  illegitimate  to  legitimate 
births  is  far  more  unfavourable  than  that  existing  in  the  French 
empire.  The  population  of  the  county  of  Radnor,  in  1831,  was 
24,«jl.  According  to  Mr  Rickman,  the  number  of  baptisms  re- 
gistered in  1830  was 

(M9 
'26  add  for  unentered  births  and  baptisms. 

675  total. 

The  number  of  illegitimate  children  born  in  103<i  is  stated,  on 
the  same  authority,  to  be  100  ;  that  is  to  say,  1  in  6-75,  or  more 
than  twice  as  many  in  proportion  as  in  Franco.  This  will  not 
seem  incredible,  when  we  find  from  the  table  published  in  the 
appendix  to  the  Second  Annual  Report  of  the  Poor-Law  Commis- 
sioners, that  the  average  annual  number  of  bastards  chargeable 
to  the  parishes  of  the  county  of  Radnor,  in  1835  and  1836,  was  417, 
or  l-59th  of  the  whole  population  of  the  county,  according  to  the 
census  of  1831 ;  and  it  is  not  to  be  wondered  at  that  there  are  at 
present  fifteen  women  with  bastard  children  inmates  of  the 
workhouse  of  the  Knighton  Union,  of  which  the  population  is 
only  8719 — census  1831."]— i\'o?c  by  the  PuOlifhers. 

*  Sur  la  Distribution  par  5Iois,  &c. 

t  Bibliotheque  Universello  de  Geneve. 

24 

ON  MAN. 

since  the  return  of  peace,  the  mhabitauts  of  Normandy 
have  been  attemptuig  to  repair  as  soon  as  possible 
the  breaches  caused  by  the  war.  We  are  likewise  in- 
formed, that,  as  soon  as  the  breaches  were  filled  up, 
the  births  have  so  exactly  regained  what  maybe  con- 
sidered as  their  former  ratio  of  increase,  that  in  1830, 
the  last  year  of  which  the  returns  are  kno-mi.the 
births  do  not  exceed  the  deaths  by  5000,  which,  in  a 
popidation  of  2,645,798  inhabitants,  is  the  slowest 
rate  of  increase  we  know  of  The  slight  variations 
of  the  Norman  registers  for  the  third  of  a  century, 
and  their  stationary  condition  during  the  year  1819, 
authorise  us  in  regarding  this  movement  of  the  popu- 
lation as  the  law  which  had  for  a  long  time  regulated, 
and  probably  will  long  continue  to  regulate,  the  re- 
newal of  generations.  The  second  fact,  relative  to 
deaths,  informs  us  also,  that  far  from  being  diminished, 
they  have  undergone  a  slight  increase  during  the 
peace.  But  not  to  exaggerate  the  latter,  we  should 
always  remember  that,  during  the  time  of  Napoleon, 
the  soldiers  who  died  abroad,  or  in  the  hospitals  at 
home,  were  never  put  on  the  state  registers ;  whilst, 
from  the  period  of  the  restoration,  the  bureau  of  the 
civil  state  has  inserted  all  mihtary  deaths,  except, 
perhaps,  those  who  have  perished  in  the  short  expe- 
ditions to  Spain  and  Algiers." 

Political  and  religious  prejudices  appear  to  have 
been  at  all  times  favourable  to  the  multiplication  of 
the  species  -,  and  great  productiveness  was  considered 
as  an  unequivocal  proof  of  celestial  benediction  and 
a  prosperous  state,  without  considering  whether  the 
births  were  in  proportion  to  the  means  of  subsist- 
ence.* It  is  astonishing  that  learned  economists  have 
fallen  into  the  same  notion.  Have  they  not,  in  many 
instances,  confounded  the  effect  with  the  cause  ?  How- 
ever this  may  be,  when  a  nation,  after  having  been 
in  a  languishing  state,  regains  its  prosperity,  we  gene- 
rally see  an  increase  of  fruitfulness  ;  but  we  should 
err  if  we  were  to  conclude  that  this  increased  fertility, 
which  is  only  an  effect  of  the  better  condition  of  the 
people,  is,  on  the  contrary,  the  source  of  it. 

We  cannot  doubt  that  the  overthrow  of  powerful 
religious  bodies  in  several  countries,  the  suppression 
of  a  great  number  of  festivals  formerly  held  sacred  by 
the  church,  such  as  a  less  rigorous  observance  of  Lent, 
and  other  similar  causes,  may  not  in  our  time  have 
modified  the  degree  of  fecundity.  From  the  re- 
searches of  M.  Villerme,  it  appears  that  in  almost  all 
Cathohc  countries.  Lent,  observed  as  it  now  is,  and 
especially  as  it  used  to  be,  seems  evidently  to  diminish 
the  number  of  conceptions,  at  least  during  its  con- 
tmuance. 

We  have  already  seen  that  the  time  of  marriage 
influences  both  the  number  and  kind  of  births  which 
the  marriage  produces.  M.  Villerme  has  endeavoured 
to  ascertain  if  the  number  of  marriages  which  are 
contracted  during  the  different  months  of  the  year, 
has  a  direct  ratio  to  the  number  of  conceptions,  and 
he  has  come  to  the  following  conclusions : — 1st,  that 
this  ratio  is  scarcely  perceptible  ;  2d,  that,  neverthe- 
less, marriages  appear  to  be  rather  more  fruitful  dur- 
ing the  early  months  than  afterwards ;  and,  3d,  that 
it  is  not  proved,  probable  as  it  may  seem,  that  a  woman 
is  more  likely  to  become  pregnant  within  the  first 
week  or  two  of  her  marriage,  if  she  marry  in  April, 
May,  June,  or  July,  than  if  she  wedded  at  any  other 
time  of  the  year. 

CHAPTER  IV. 

OF  STIIX-BORN  CHILDIIEN'. 

In  concluding  what  we  have  to  say  concernmg  births, 
and  before  examining  the  subject  of  deaths,  I  thought 
*When  a  seventh  son  was  born,  it  was  customary  for  the 
prince  to  hold  it  at  the  baptismal  font.  This  practice  has  not 
become  obsolete  in  Belgium ,  and  we  might  quote  several  examples 
jn  which  the  m.igistrate  or  one  of  liis  officers  has  been  the  re- 
presentative of  the  monarch  in  such  cases. 

it  necessary  to  say  something  on  still-births,  whose 
equivocal  existence  seems  to  belong  as  much  to  the 
aimals  of  life  as  of  death. 

To  take  a  general  idea  of  the  subject  at  first,  it 
vnll  be  proper  to  state  the  ratio  of  stiU  to  Uve  births, 
in  the  different  coimtries  of  Europe,  according  to  the 
calculations  of  the  principal  statisticians.* 

Places. 

Bu-ths  to  1 
Still-Birth. 

Authors. 

Strasbm'g, 

U 

Friedlander 

Hamburg,     - 

-      15 

Casper. 

Dresden, 

17 

Rambach. 

Paris, 

-      19 

Baumann. 

Berlin,    - 

20 

Casper. 

^  ienna, 

-      24 

London,  - 

27 

Black. 

Brunswick,    • 

-      33 

Rambach. 

Stockhobn, 

36 

AVargentin. 

The  average  of  this  table  would  give  about  1  still- 
birth to  22  living  ones  :  this  ratio  differs  slightly  from 
that  of  Berlin,  which  has  continued  almost  the  same 
for  the  last  sixty  years.  The  following  are  the  values 
wliich  have  been  obtained,  taking  periods  of  several 
years : — 

Births  to  1 

StiU-Birth. 

23-5 

Periods. 

From  1758  to  1763, 

. .  1764  to  1769, 

.  ■  1770  to  1774, 

•  ■  1785  to  1792, 
■  ■  1793  to  1800, 

•  ■  1801  to  1808, 
• .  1812  to  1821, 

Average, 

20-2 
17-7 
18-6 
200 
18-6 
19-7 

19-8 

Few  statistical  docimients  are  more  liable  to  be 
faulty  than  those  which  belong  to  still-births ;  Iio'nv- 
ever,  when  the  same  ratio  is  so  nearly  maintained 
throughout,  and  within  periods  so  close  to  each  other, 
and  when  the  data  have  been  collected  under  different 
administrations,  we  have  strong  reason  to  believe 
that  it  is  not  far  from  the  truth. 

Casper  thinks  that  the  number  of  still-births,  com- 
pared with  live-births,  is  greater  in  town  than  in 
country ;  but  he  does  not  quote  any  results  in  proof 
of  this  assertion,  which,  however,  is  quite  justified  by 
the  numbers  Avhich  I  have  found  for  Western  Flan- 
ders (^Recherches  sur  la  Reproduction  et  la  Mortalitf). 
The  following  are  the  values  obtained  for  the  years 
from  1827  to  1830  inclusive:— 

Average  Number  of 

Ratio. 

Live-Births. 

Stm-Bii-ths. 

Town,    -        -        -        • 

Comitry,  -        -        -        - 

5,424 
14,037 

266 
383 

20-4 
38-2 

The  ratio  of  stiU-births  to  live-births  in  town,  is 
almost  exactly  the  same  as  at  Berlin ;  but  it  differs 
very  much  from  that  of  the  country,  indeed  it  is 
alinost  double.  It  is  natural,  then,  to  inquire,  whence 
arises  the  gi'cat  danger  which  in  town  threatens  the 
life  of  the  child  before  it  is  born  ?  May  we  not  attri- 
bute it,  in  some  measure,  to  the  use  of  corsets  and 
the  habit  of  tight-lacing  ? 

What  is  still  more  remarkable  is,  that  the  morta- 
lity is  greater  among  boys  than  girls :  thus,  of  2597 
still-births  which  have  been  counted  for  Western 
Flanders,  1517  were  male  and  1080  female  cluldren, 
which  gives  a  ratio  of  14  to  10  nearly.  This  difference 
is  considerable,  and  since  it  is  nearly  the  same  for  tlic 
tables  of  each  particular  j'ear,  we  must  ascribe  it  to 
a  special  cause.  At  Berlin,  from  1785  to  1794,  tlie 
computation  is  1518  still-births  of  the  male  and  1210 
of  the  female  sex:  also,  from  1819  to  1822,  771  boys 

*  Dr  Casper,  in  his  Jlemoir  on  the  Mortality  of  Children  at 
Berlin,  has  presented  some  interesting  researches  on  stiU-births, 
of  the  principal  results  of  which  I  have  availed  myself.— U6«>'  die 
SlerbUchlieit  dcr  Kinder  in  Bcrliit^Bietracie  zur  Medicinischen  Ste- 
tistiek,  SfC.  8vo.    Berlin :  1825. 

ON  MAN. 

25 

and  533  girls  came  into  the  world  without  life.  M. 
Casper  says  the  ratio  appears  to  be  28  to  20 ;  it  is, 
then,  exactly  the  same  as  for  Western  Flanders.  This 
new  identity  of  results  is  very  remarkable ;  and  it 
will  be  interesting  to  inrestigate  the  causes  of  a  cir- 
cumstance which  is  so  imfavourable  to  the  male  sex. 
If  we  were  desirous  of  guessing  at  this  point,  we  might 
say,  with  those  who  suppose  that  a  male  conception 
requires  a  certain  excess  of  energy  iu  the  woman,  that 
this  excess  of  energy  was  absent  or  wanting  during 
the  growth  of  the  foetus,  and  that  energy  failing,  the 
child  would  suffer  more  from  it,  if  a  boy,  than  a  girl. 
Hence  the  disproportion  of  dead  births  between  the 
two  sexes ;  hence,  also,  the  greater  mortality  of  boys 
immediately  after  birth,  and  during  the  period  of 
suckling,  at  which  time  they  are  still  in  some  mea- 
sure connected  Avith  the  mother.  It  is  also  evident 
that  women  in  town,  wlio  are  more  deUcate  than  those 
in  the  country',  will  be  more  liable  to  bring  forth 
still  children,  and  especially  when  they  are  pregnant 
of  boys. 

We  possess  statistical  documents  of  still-births  for 
the  city  of  Amsterdam,*  which  it  will  be  interesting 
to  compare  with  the  preceding.  The  following  are 
the  original  numbers  furnished  for  the  years  from 
1821  to  1832  :— 

Number  of  Still-Births  and  of  Births  for  Amsterdam. 

Still-Births. 

Births. 

Boys. 

Girls. 

Total. 

Boys. 

Girls. 

Total. 

1821,    - 

288 

SAG 

634 

3,742 

3,600 

7,342 

1822,  - 

280 

222 

.'-.02 

3,887 

3,713 

7,600 

1823,    - 

268 

198 

466 

3,734 

3,448 

7,182 

1824,  - 

266 

216 

482 

4,011 

3,849 

7,860 

1825,     - 

207 

128 

335 

3,802 

3,550 

7,352 

1826,  - 

231 

173 

404 

3,803 

3,635 

7,«a 

1827,    - 

■  • 

3,524 

3,366 

6,890 

1828,  - 

3,079 

3,529 

7,208 

1829,    ■ 

3,7a5 

3,018 

7,403 

1830,  - 

241 

lao 

410 

3,727 

3,579 

7,306 

1831,    - 

208 

108 

376 

3,843 

3,499 

7,342 

1832,  - 

210 

151 

361 

3,351 

3,101 

6,452 

Average, 

244 

186 

430 

3,741 

3,541 

7,283 

We  therefore  calculate  1  still-birth  for  16"9  births, 
which  is  a  very  unfavourable  proportion  from  Avhat 
we  have  seen  above.  The  number  of  still-births  of 
the  male  sex  likewise  here  exceeds  that  of  still-births 
of  the  other  sex ;  and  this  would  appear  to  be  a  gene- 
ral law,  since  none  of  the  papers  which  have  been 
quoted  are  contrary  to  it,  and  in  all  cases  the  diffe- 
rence is  very  considerable,  and  nearly  about  the  same. 
Here  the  average  numbers  are  in  the  ratio  of  244  to 
186,  or  13  to  10  nearly. 

The  Annuaires  du  Bureau  des  Longitudes  give  the 
following  data  for  Paris : — 

StiU-Birth 

s. 

Births. 

Boys. 

Girls. 

Total. 

Boys. 

Girls. 

Total. 

1823,    - 

847 

662 

1,509 

13,752 

13,318 

27,070 

1824,  - 

810 

C77 

1,487 

14,647 

14,165 

28,812 

1825,     - 

846 

675 

1,521 

14,989 

14,264 

29,253 

1826,  - 

810 

737 

1,547 

15,187 

14,783 

29,970 

1827,     - 

904 

727 

1,631 

15,074 

14,732 

29,806 

1828,  - 

883 

743 

1.026 

15,117 

14,484 

29,601 

1829,     - 

925 

788 

1,713 

14,760 

13,961 

28,721 

1830,  - 

943 

784 

1,727 

14,488 

14,099 

28,587 

1831,     - 

954 

755 

1,709 

15,110 

14,414 

29,530 f 

1832,  - 

9!)4 

726 

1,720 

13,494 

12,789 

26,283 

Average, 

8,910 

7,274 

16,190 

146,624 

141,009 

2fJ7,639 

*  .Taarboekje  par  Lobatto.  See  also  a  memoir  by  M.  Engeltrum, 

a  prize-essay  at  Utrecht,  and  printed  in  1830.  The  author  counts, 

for  the  hospital  at  Amsterdam,  from  1821  to  1826 — 

Births— Legitimate,       488        Dcid  births,    28       Ratio,  17  to  1 

Illegitimate,    1770  ••       ••         151  ••       12  to  1 

t  In  these  numbers,  1099  and  1005  children,  who  were  acknow- 
ledged and  legitimatised  after  birth,  are  not  included. 

From  this  table,  we  calculate  the  still-births  to 
births,  in  Paris,  as  1  to  177 — almost  the  same  as  for 
Amsterdam  and  Berlin.  Tliis  ratio  does  not  seem  to 
differ  much  fi'om  that  of  large  towns,  which  may  be 
generally  considered  as  1  to  18.  We  see  here,  also, 
that  the  dead  births  of  the  male  are  more  numerous 
than  those  of  the  female  sex :  the  ratio  is  12  "2  to  10. 

The  official  tables  for  the  Prussian  monarchy  in 
1827,  and  for  Denmark  iu  1828,  furnish  the  following 
results  :* — 

Prussian  Monarch  v, 
Demnark-{Bo>-;      " 

These  numbers,  also,  are  similar  to  those  which 
have  been  already  given. 

K  we  regard  the  influence  of  the  seasons  on  still- 
births, the  following  are  the  data  of  Berlin,  and  for 
Western  Flanders,  durhig  the  five  years  from  1827  tu 
1831  inclusive: — 

Births. 

StiUBu-ths. 

Ratio. 

490,660 
19,954 
18,840 

16,720 
882 
690 

29tol 
23tol 
27tol 

Still-Births 

Still  Births  in  Flanders. 

at  Berlin. 

To^vn. 

Country. 

Total. 

Januarj-, 

117 

140 

225 

365 

Februarv,  - 

123 

141 

V)7 

338 

March,  - 

120 

115 

205 

310 

April, 

112 

100 

160 

200 

May,      - 

110 

102 

162 

264 

June, 

98 

104 

162 

266 

July,      - 

92 

117 

153 

270 

August, 

108 

108 

136 

244 

September,    • 

89 

100 

139 

247 

October,     - 

104 

110 

152 

262 

November,    - 

124 

90 

143 

233 

December,  - 

121 

100 

179 

285 

1,305 

1,341 

2,013 

3,354 

These  data  tend  to  show  that  the  number  of  still- 
births is  greater  during  winter,  and  at  the  end  of 
winter,  than  in  summer. 

M.  Casper  has  examined  some  particular  circum- 
stances wliich  may  influence  the  number  of  still-births, 
such  as  illegitimate  conceptions,  venereal  diseases, 
the  abuse  of  strong  drinks,  &c.  Thus,  at  Gottingen, 
in  100  births,  there  are  3  dead  births  of  legitimate 
children,  and  15  of  illegitimate  children.  At  Berlin, 
the  dead  births  in  100  illegitimate  births  have  been, 
for  half  the  last  century,  three  times  as  numerous  as 
the  dead  births  among  100  legitimate  children :  and 
this  state  of  things  has  not  improved ;  for,  during  the 
four  years  fi-om  1819  to  1822,  it  is  computed  there 
were — 

Living  Children.    Dead  Childi-en.    Ratio. 
Legitimate  births,  -    22,643  937  25 

Illegitimate  births,     -  4,002  317  12  f 

Lideed,  a  woman  generally  takes  less  care  to  pre- 
serve the  child  which  she  carries  in  her  bosom,  when 
it  is  illegitimate.  Moreover,  it  is  necessary  to  add, 
that  those  children,  who  are  almost  always  the  fruit 
of  misconduct,  presuppose  less  vigour  and  soundness 
in  the  parents.  M.  Duges  says,  that  at  the  Venereal 
Hospital  in  Paris,  he  has  found  two  premature  births 
to  six  or  seven  accouchements.  J  At  Hamburg,  during 
the  year  1820,  in  one  house  which  contained  scarcely 
any  but  public  women  affected  with  the  venereal  dis- 
ease, of  18  illegitimate  births,  6  were  dead  births ; 
and  in  another  house  in  the  same  city,  hkewise  partly 
occupied  by  public  women,  the  still-births  were  1 1 
out  of  93. 

These  different  examples  prove  too  well  the  great 
influence  which  the  condition  of  mothers  exercises 
over  the  children  of  which  they  are  pregnant,  and 

*  Bulletin  de  M.  Fenissac,  Janv.  and  Mai  1830. 

t  The  official  tables  of  the  whole  Prussian  monarchy  for  1827 
gave  IBiiUetin  de  M.  Fenissac,  Janv.  1830,  p.  118)  490,660  births, 
of  which  16,726  were  still-births,  a  ratio  of  29  to  1. 

t  Rccherches  sur  les  Maladies  des  Nouveaux  Ncs.  Paris:  1824. 

26 

ON  MAN. 

convince  us  of  the  utility  of  researches  into  still-births, 
and  the  causes  -which  may  multiply  the  number  of 
them. 

Wliile  considering  the  mortaUty  of  new  born  chil- 
dren, it  is  proper  also  to  examine  the  fate  of  the 
mothers.  According  to  "Willan,  the  mortality  in  the 
great  L}dng-in  Hospital  of  London,  into  which  about 
5000  women  were  annually  admitted,  was — 

Of  the  Mothers.  Of  the  Children. 
From  1749  to  1758,    -    -  1  in  42  1  in  15 

•  •  1759  to  1768,  -    -    1  in  50  1  in  20 

•  •  1769  to  1778,    -    -  1  in  55  1  in  42 
■  •  1779  to  1788,  -    -    1  in  60  1  in  44 

•  •  1789  to  1798,    -    -  1  in  288  1  in  77  * 

Mr  Hawkins  observed  the  mortality  in  the  London 
Hos{)ital  in  1826,  to  be  1  in  70.  According  to  the 
same  statistician,  in  the  Lying-in  Hospital  of  Dublin, 
from  the  time  of  its  foundation  in  1757  to  1825 — 

The  loss  of  children  has  been, 
still-birtlis, 
mothers, 

1  in  19 
linl7 
1  in  89 

At  the  same  hospital,  also,  twin  cases  have  occurred 
in  the  proportion  of  1  to  60  accouchements ;  and  three 
or  more  childi'en  in  the  proportion  of  1  to  4000. 

According  to  Tenon,  at  the  end  of  the  last  century 
the  mortality  at  the  Hotel-Dieu  of  Paris,  was  I  woman 
in  15,  and  1  still-born  child  to  13  births ;  but  in  1822, 
the  mortality  at  La  ISIaternitc  was  not  more  than  1 
woman  in  .30.  At  the  same  time,  in  the  INIaternite  of 
Stockholm,  the  proportion  was  almost  the  same  as  at 
Paris,  or  1  woman  in  29. 

At  the  Lying-in  Hospital  of  Edinburgh,  during  the 
years  1826,  27,  and  28,  the  loss  was  only  I  woman  in 
100. 

According  to  Casper,t  the  mortality  of  confined 
Avomen  at  Berlin,  has  been — 

I^rom  17.58  to  1703, 

•  ■  1/64  to  1774, 

•  •  1785  to  1794, 

•  •  1819  to  1822, 

1  in  95 

-  1  in  82 
1  in  141 

-  1  in  152 

Here,  again,  we  see  how  much  the  mortality  de- 
])ends  on  the  care  taken  of  the  woman  and  child  at  the 
time  of  confinement.  The  greatest  mortality  wliich 
lias  been  noticed,  was  that  of  the  Hotel-Dieu  of  Paris 
at  the  end  of  the  last  century:  it  was  1  woman  in  15 
for  the  mothers,  whilst  in  London  it  was  reduced  to  1 
in  238,  or  nineteen  times  less. 

CHAPTER  V. 

O.N  TItE  INFLUENCE  OF  NATURAL  CAUSES  ON  MORTALITY. 

1.  Influence  of  Locality. 

We  possess,  in  general,  fewer  documents  respecting 
births  than  respecting  deaths ;  for  this  reason,  per- 
haps, that  man  takes  less  interest  in  wliat  regards  his 
entry  into  life  than  his  exit  from  it.  The  laws  re- 
giUating  births  he  views  more  as  an  object  of  ciurio- 
sity,  wiiilst  it  is  of  the  highest  moment  for  him  to 
know  all  his  chances  of  life  and  death.  Nevertheless, 
in  inquiring  into  the  mortality,  it  behoves  us  to  pro- 
ceed with  the  greatest  caution,  and  not  to  hold,  as 
many  authors  have  done,  all  numerical  statements  to 
be  of  the  same  importance. 

The  mortality  is  generally  estimated  by  the  ratio 
of  deaths  to  the  population.  Now,  if  it  be  in  general 
difficult  to  ascertain,  by  the  registers  of  a  countr3'-, 
the  precise  number  of  deaths,  it  is  still  more  difficult 
to  determine  exactly  the  total  numbers  of  the  i)opu- 
lation.  A  census  is  a  very  delicate  operation,  wliicli 
can  be  executed  only  from  time  to  time,  and  will  be 
found  productive  of  very  different  results,  according 

*  From  Elements  of  Medical  Statistics,  by  Mr  Hawkins, 
t  Bcitrage,  p.  180, 

to  the  care  bestowed  in  its  execution.  In  places,  for 
example,  where  there  may  exist  an  interest  for  con- 
cealment of  numbers,  we  should  naturally  expect  to 
find  a  low  estimate  of  tlie  peoi:)le,  and  in  consequence 
too  high  an  estimate  of  the  mortality  ;  hence  tlie  ne- 
cessity for  extreme  caution  in  comparing  one  country 
with  another,  or  the  same  coimtry  with  itself  at  difie- 
rent  periods. 

The  influence  which  climate  exercises  over  the 
mortality  of  the  human  species,  deserves  to  be  first 
considered.  But  climatology^  taking  the  word  in  its 
most  extended  sense,  is  a  science  still  too  little  ad- 
vanced to  engage  our  attention  here  :*  ive  absolutely 
want  data,  and  particidarly  comparative  data,  with 
respect  to  countries  out  of  Europe,  and  even  some 
European  countries  themselves,  where  pohtical  sciences 
have  not  been  sufficiently  cultivated.  It  becomes  thus 
impossible  to  appreciate  at  all  correctly  the  effects  of 
temperature,  and  its  relations  to  moisture  and  dryness, 
the  direction  of  the  winds,  of  running  streams,  &c. 
We  ought,  therefore,  in  our  first  view,  to  leave  out 
these  latter  circumstances,  and  busy  ourselves  only 
with  the  most  general  results. 

If  we,  in  the  first  place,  consider  only  Europe,  and 
if  we  divide  this  part  of  the  globe  into  three  principal 
regions,  with  a  view  of  setting  aside  as  far  as  jjossible 
accidental  causes,  we  may  arrive  at  means  to  solve 
the  problem  wliich  now  occupies  us.  It  would  be 
better,  also,  to  adopt  the  resiilts  of  late  years,  thus 
giving  a  more  extended  comparison. 

Countries. 

Periods. 

1  Death  in 

Authorities. 

Jiorth  of  Europe. 

Sweden  &  Norway, 

1820 

4M 

jMarshall. 

Denmark, 

1019 

45-0 

Moreau  de  Jonnes.  t 

Russia, 

about  1829 

27-0 

Sir  F.  D"Ivernois4 

England, 

1821  to  1831 

51-0 

Potter  &  Eickmiin. 

Central  Europe. 

Prussia,    - 

1816  to  1823 

36-2 

Babbagc. 

Poland, 

1829 

44-0 

Moreau  de  Jonnes. 

Germany, 

1825  to  1828 

45-0 

Belgium, 

1825  to  1829 

431 

An.dcl'Ob.deBrux. 

France,     - 

1817  to  1831 

39-7 

An.  du  B.  de  Long. 

IlolUind,       - 

1815  to  1825 

380 

(Rech.  Statistique 
1  sur  les  Pajs  Bas. 

Austrian  Empire, 

1828 

400 

iloreau  de  Jomies. 

Switzerland,     - 

1827  to  1820 

400 

South  of  Europe. 

Portugal,  - 

1815  to  1819 

400 

Spain,  - 

1801  to  1826 

40-0 

Italy, 

1822  to  1828 

300 

Greece, 

1828 

30-0 

Turkey  in  Europe, 

1828 

30-0 

Naples  and  .Sicily, 

1822  to  1824 

32-0 

Bisset  Hawkins. 

As  several  of  the  authors  just  quoted  have  merely 
given  ratios,  without  tlie  numbers  from  which  these 
were  deduced,  I  have  been  forced  to  take  the  averages 
from  the  ratios  themselves,  and  not  from  the  numbers, 
which  would  have  been  more  exact.  Upon  the  whole, 
wc  sliall  probably  approach  the  truth  in  statmg  the 
mortality  in  Europe  to  be  as  follows : — 

In  the  North  of  Europe, 
Central  Europe,  - 
Southern  Eui-opc, 

1  Death  for  41-1  Inhabitants. 
40-8 
3;j7 

Whatever  distrust  the  numbers  relating  to  morta- 
lity may  excite  in  us,  I  beUeve  it  may  be  admitted, 
that  upon  the  whole  the  mortality  is  greater  in  the 

*  See  the  Researches  of  Sir  J.  Clarke  in  England  on  the  Influ- 
ence of  Climate  on  Clironic  Diseases — (Annates  d'Hyfjicne,  Avril 
ia30.)  Sec  also  La  Fliilosopliic  de  la  Statistique,  par  Melchoir 
Gioja,  2  vols.  4to,  1826. 

t  The  numbers  of  M.  Moreau  de  Jonnes  are  taken  from  a 
notice  on  the  Mortidity  of  the  Difierent  Countries  of  Europe  :  it 
is  to  be  regretted  that  the  author  has  not  stated  the  somces  of  his 
information. 

±  Dibliothc>]ue  Universcllc,  Oct.  1833,  p.  154. 

ON  MAN. 

27 

south  of  Eiu'ope  than  in  the  north  or  centre,  without 
anticipating  the  cause  of  this  difference,  and  whether 
it  depends  on  tlie  political  institutions  or  on  the 
nature  of  the  climate  itself.  It  is  England  which 
turns  the  balance  in  favour  of  the  north  of  Europe ; 
and  were  it  left  out,  the  centre  of  Em-ope  would  pre- 
sent the  least  mortality.  If  we  now  quit  the  limits 
of  Europe  to  consider  those  localities  nearer  the  equi- 
noctial hne,  and  more  exposed  to  extreme  temperature, 
we  have,  according  to  51.  IMoreau  de  Jonues* — 

Under  the  Latitude      Places. 

G"  W 

Batavia, 

1  Deatli  for  2C  Inhabitants 

10=  ](»' 

Trinidad, 

27 

i3=  54' 

St  Lucia, 

27 

14°  44' 

Martinique, 

28 

15°  oy 

fluadaloui)e. 

27 

18°  3(5' 

Bombay, 

20 

23=11' 

Havaim^h, 

3.1 

This  last  table  seems  to  pi'ove  that  the  mortality 
increases  as  Ave  approach  the  equinoctial  line.  Still, 
these  numbers  must  Ije  received  with  distrust,  because 
amongst  the  places  referred  to  there  are  several  cities, 
and  the  mortality  in  cities,  as  we  shall  shortly  see,  is 
generally  greater  than  in  the  country.  We  must  also 
regret  that  we  have  so  few  data  in  respect  to  places 
stiU  nearer  the  equinoctial  line.  According  to  M. 
Thomas,  the  mortality  of  Avhites  in  the  island  of 
Bourbon  is  only  1  in  44'8  ;  and  from  documents  pub- 
lished in  England  in  1826,  b}-  order  of  the  House  of 
Commons,  the  mortality  at  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope 
is  still  less.f 

Amongst  the  local  causes  which  influence  mortality, 
I  have  mentioned  that  of  a  town  or  country  residence  ; 
this  influence  is  sufficiently  well  marked.  In  Belgium, 
for  example,  the  following  have  been  the  results  of 
late  years : — 

Cities,     - 
Country, 

Population. 

998,118 
3,066,091 

Average  Number 
of  Deaths. 
27,026 
65,265- 

1  Death  to 

3(!-0  Inhabitants. 
46-9 

We  see  that  the  ratios  of  mortality  are  almost  as 
4  to  3.  This  difference  will  be  particularly  apparent, 
if  we  examine  the  mortality  of  the  principal  cities  of 
Europe. 

*  In  Iceland,  from  1825  to  1831,  it  has  been  computed  that  there 
ia  1  death  for  30-0  inhabitants,  which  would  tend  to  show  that 
excess  of  cold  is  as  injurious  to  man  as  excess  of  heat. — Bihlio- 
thique  Vniversclle,  Oct.  1833,  p.  177- 

t  Elements  of  Medical  Statistics,  p.  51. 

[The  reader  will  be  pleased  to  observe,  that  the  question  of 
the  influence  of  climate  on  mortality  is  a  more  intricate  one 
than  perhaps  our  distin^iished  author  was  fully  aware  of.  Firstly, 
it  involves  the  simple  question  as  to  the  influence  of  climate  over 
the  mortality  of  any  particular  race  of  men,  who  have  been  known 
to  inhabit  that  countrj'  from  time  immemorial,  or  at  least  be3'ond 
the  usual  historic  periods  ;  secondly,  it  involves  the  question  of 
the  influence  of  climate  over  the  mortality  of  another  race  foreign 
to  the  country,  or  wlio  have  migrated  to  it  within  liistoric  periods. 
The  numbers,  for  example,  in  the  above  table,  placed  opposite 
Batavia,  have  nothing  whatever  to  do  with  the  eSects  of  climate 
over  the  native  Javanese,  but  express  merely  the  fearful  morta- 
lity wliich  sweeps  off  the  Saxon  foreigners  migrating  to  a  climate 
which  nature  never  intended  they  should  inhabit.  On  the  other 
hand,  the  climate  at  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope,  the  healthiest  per- 
haps in  the  world,  seems  equally  favourable  to  all  the  three  races 
inhabiting  the  colony  and  its  frontier,  namely,  the  aboriginal 
Hottentot  and  the  invading  Caffre  and  Saxon.  "We  shall  after- 
wards endeavour  to  show,  that  by  putting  the  above  table  in 
comparison  with  the  preceding  one,  a  great  and  important  ele- 
ment of  statistics  has  been  left  out,  and  Quetelet  has  given  us 
the  statistics  of  .Java  and  Bombay,  as  if  the  native  inhabitants 
had  ceased  to  exist ;  whereas  it  is  manifest  that  the  effects  of  cli- 
mate over  the  migi-atory  part  of  the  human  race,  the  Celt  and 
Saxon,  should  be  stated  apart,  and  not  mingled  up  with,  or  rather 
substituted  for,  the  natural  statistics  of  countries  wliich  pi-o- 
bably  they  can  never  retain  possession  of,  v.hatever  be  the  extent 
of  their  cmigi-ations.] 

C 

Inhabitants  to  1  Death, 

Inhabitants  to  1  Birth . 

Cities. 

according  to 

according  to 

Czoeming. 

B.  Hawkins. 

/ — 
Czoeming. 

1 
B.  Hawkins. 

Sarth  if  Europe. 

London, 

51-9 

40-0 

40G 

29-5* 

Glasgow,     - 

46-8 

27-7 

St  Petersburg, 

34-9 

37-0 

467 

Moscow,     - 

.■«•(» 

28-5 

Copenhagen,  - 

30-3 

30-0 

Stockholm,  - 

24-3 

24-9 

27- 0 

24-8 

Central  Europe. 

Lyons,  - 

.32-3 

320 

27-5 

Amsterdam,    - 

31-0 

24-0 

26-0 

Paris,    - 

30-6 

32-5 

270 

Bordeaux, 

29  0 

240 

Hambiu-g,     - 

.300 

25-5 

Dresden,  - 

27-7 

23-0 

Brussels, 

25-5 

96'0 

21-0 

Berlin,     - 

25-0 

.34  0 

21-0 

Prague, 

24-5 

24-4 

23-3 

Vienna,   - 

22-5 

22-5 

200 

i 

SouthernEurope. 

r 

Madrid, 

36-0 

35-0 

26-0 

Leghorn,     - 

350 

310 

•  25-5 

Palermo, 

33  0 

24  0 

Lisbon, 

31  1 

28-2 

23-3 

52-5 

Naples. 

29'0 

520 

24-0 

250 

Barcelona, 

27-0 

24-8 

27-0 

Rome,        • 

24-1 

31-0 

23-6 

Venice, 

19-4 

26-5 

Bergamo,    - 

18-0 

20-0 

30-2 

Comparing  this  table  with  the  preceding  one,  it  is 
easy  to  observe  that  the  mortality  of  cities  is  generally 
much  greater  than  that  of  those  countries  to  which 
they  belong.  I  tliink  this  fact  established,  not^vith- 
standing  the  inaccuracies  inherent  in  such  calcula- 
tions. 

We  venture  to  conclude,  then,  with  a  high  degree 
of  probability,  that  in  the  actual  state  of  things  the 
mortality  is  less  in  temperate  climates  than  in  the 
north  or  south,  and  that  it  is  greater  in  cities  than  in 
the  country.f 

If  we  consider  each  country  in  pai'ticular,  we  shall 
afterwards  find,  according  to  the  localities,  very  great 
differences.  Thus  in  France,  in  the  department  of 
the  Orme,  there  is  1  death  for  52-4,  and  in  that  of 
Finisterre,  there  is  1  for  30-4  inhabitants — a  remark- 
able difference  for  places  so  near  each  other.  In  the 
foi-mer  kingdom  of  the  Low  Countries,  and  during 
the  period  from  1 8 1 5  to  1 834,  in  the  province  of  Zea- 
land, there  was  1  death  for  28-5  inhabitants,  and  in 
the  province  of  Namur,  1  for  51-8  inhabitants.  We 
must  here  remark,  that  a  great  mortahtj'  keeps  pace 
with  the  great  fecundity.  In  the  localities  just  quoted, 
for  example,  there  were — 

Countries. 

Inhabitants 

r 
for  one 
Birth. 

for  one 
JIaiTiage. 

for  one 
Death. 

Department  of  Oi-nie,    - 

Finisterre, 
Province  of  Namur, 
Zealand, 

44-8 
260 
30-1 
21-9 

147-5 
11 3-9 
141-0 
113-2 

52-4 
30-4 
51-8 
28-5 

*  Topographisch-Historich  Besehreibung  von  Reichenberg. 
See  Bulletin  des  Sciences  Geographiqucs,  Avril  3833. 

t  SI.  Villerm(5  informs  me  that  he  has  arrived  at  the  same 
conclusion,  in  an  unpublished  work,  On  the  Laics  of  Population, 
or  the  Relation  of  Medicine  to  Political  Economy. 

[  There  is  an  inherent  inexactness  in  these  calculations  which 
it  is  extremely  difficult  to  get  rid  of.  Norway,  for  example,  and 
Sweden,  and  even  the  northern  parts  of  Russia  in  Europe,  are 
each  of  them  inhabited  by  two  races  of  men ,  of  whom  it  is  impos- 
sible to  say,  from  a  want  of  historic  evidence,  which  foi-med  the 
primitive  race.  The  Fins,  inhabiting  the  north  of  Sweden  and 
Norway,  and  even  of  Russia,  and  perhiips  also  the  Laplanders, 
are  perfectly  distinct  races  froni  their  Scandinavian  and  Sarma- 
tian  masters,  and  of  course  their  statistics  ought  to  be  considered 
apart.] 

28 

ON  MAN. 

Thus  Zealand  and  the  department  of  Fmisterre 
had  more  marriages,  births,  and  deaths,  than  the  de- 
partment of  Orme  and  the  province  of  Namur.  I 
declare  that  I  have  often  been  tempted  to  attribute 
these  discrepancies  to  a  faulty  census  of  the  popula- 
tion ;  but  more  attentive  researches  have  induced  me 
to  believe  that  tliis  state  of  things  is  dependent  on 
local  causes.  In  the  province  of  Zealand,  for  example, 
continually  buried  in  a  humid  atmosphere,  there  pre- 
vail fevers  and  other  diseases  causing  this  excess  in 
the  mortality ;  and  this,  reacting  on  the  amount  of 
subsistence,  naturally  increases  the  marriages  and 
births. 

What  -we  have  observed  in  these  provinces  may 
also  be  noticed  in  other  coimtries,  where  we  equally 
observe  a  great  mortality  and  a  great  fecundity.  Of 
this  truth,  England  and  the  republic  of  Guanasuato 
offer  striking  examples :— 

States. 

Inhabitants 

c 

to  one 
Marriage. 

to  one 
Birth. 

1 
to  one 
Death. 

England,  .        -        -        - 
Guanaxuato,* 

134-00 
6976 

35-00 
16-08 

50-00 
19-70 

These  are,  so  to  speak,  the  two  extreme  limits  in  the 
scale  of  population,  and,  we  may  also  add,  in  the  scale 
of  civilisation. 

It  may  be  said,  that  a  country  proceeds  onwards 
to  a  more  prosperous  condition,  when  fewer  citizens 
are  produced,  and  when  those  existing  are  better  pre- 
served. The  increase  then  is  entirely  to  its  advan- 
tage ;  for,  if  the  fecundity  be  less,  the  useful  men  are 
more  numerous,  and  generations  are  not  renewed  with 
such  rapidit}^  to  the  great  detriment  of  the  nation. 

Man,  during  his  early  years,  lives  at  the  expense 
of  society ;  he  contracts  a  debt  which  ought  one  day 
to  be  paid ;  and  if  he  dies  before  having  been  enabled 
to  do  so,  his  existence  has  rather  been  a  loss,  or  cost, 
to  his  fellow-citizens  than  an  advantage.  Is  it  desired 
to  know  what  he  costs  ?  Let  us  take  the  lowest  price : 
from  birth  to  the  age  of  twelve  or  sLxteen,  the  expenses 
attending  the  support  of  a  child  in  the  hospitals  of 
this  kingdom  (the  Low  Countries)  amounted  to  about 
1110  francs,  say  1000  only,  and  this  rate  is  certainly 
not  too  high,  even  for  France.f  Every  person,  then, 
who  escapes  from  infancy,  has  contracted  a  kind  of  debt, 
of  which  the  minimum  is  1000  francs,  which  society 
pays  for  the  support  of  a  child  abandoned  to  its  cha- 
rity. Now,  there  are  born  in  France  annually  more 
than  960,000  children,  of  whom  9-20ths  are  cut  off 
previous  to  tlieir  having  become  of  the  smallest  uti- 
lity to  the  state ;  these  432,000  unfortunate  persons 
may  be  viewed  as  so  many  friendless  strangers,  who, 
without  fortune  and  without  industry,  have  come  to 
take  part  in  the  consumption  of  the  general  produce, 
and  have  then  \vithdrawn  themselves,  leaving  only, 
as  traces  of  their  existence,  sorrowful  adieus  and 
eternal  regrets.  The  expense  they  have  caused,  with- 
out reckoning  the  time  devoted  to  them,  amounts  to 
the  enormous  sum  of  432,000,000  of  francs.  And  if 
we  consider,  on  the  other  hand,  the  griefs  caused  by 
their  departure,  griefs  which  no  human  sacrifices  can 
compensate,  it  is  easy  to  see  how  worthy  this  subject 
is  of  tlie  attention  of  the  statesman  and  of  the  true 
philosopher.  We  cannot  too  often  repeat,  that  the 
prosperity  of  states  consists  less  in  tlie  multiplica- 
tion than  in  the  conservation  of  the  individuals  com- 
posing it. 

The  assertion  that  a  great  mortality  unhappily 
coexists  with  a  great  fecundity,  seems  opposed  to  the 

*  According  to  M.  D'lvDmois  {BibliotMque  Vniverselle  de 
Geneve,  1833.) 

t  [In  this  countn,',  the  cost  of  bringing  up  a  child  to  the  age  of 
twelve,  on  the  lowest  calculation,  could  scarcely  be  considered 
as  lower  than  £'144.  We  of  course  mean  that  he  shall  be  brought 
up  with  due  regard  to  his  future  health  and  strength.] 

observations  of  Mr  Sadler;  but,  as  I  liaA'e  already 
remarked,  the  fecundity  of  marriages  must  not  be 
confounded  with  the  fecundity  of  the  population ;  I 
have  even  shown,  that,  all  things  being  equal,  a  great 
mortality  is  rather  productive  of  a  less  fecimdity  of 
marriages,  because  second  and  third  marriages  are 
more  multiplied,  and  the  duration  of  marriages  be- 
comes then  less. 

To  examine  the  question  which  now  occupies  us, 
the  absolute  number  of  births  and  of  deaths  must  be 
compared  with  that  of  the  population. 

The  following  table  contains  some  results  in  respect 
to  the  different  countries  already  quoted : — 

States. 

England, 

Sweden, 

Belgium, 

France, 

Holland, 

Prussia, 

Sicily  and  Naples, 

Guanaxuato, 

Inhabitants 

For  one  Death.     For  one  Birth. 

51-0 
47-0  > 

431 ; 

39-7 
330 
36-2 
32-0 
19-7 

51-0 
45-0 

197 

35-0 

27-0) 

30-0/ 

31-6 

27-0 

23-3 

24-0 

16-1 

35-0 
28-5 

I  regret  that  the  actual  state  of  statistics  does  not 
allow  me  to  present  the  observations  of  a  greater 
number  of  countries.  Still  I  think  that  these  data 
prove  an  intimate  ratio  to  exist  between  the  morta- 
lity and  the  fecundity.  And  this  ratio  exists  also 
between  the  different  provinces  of  the  same  country. 

In  classing  the  cities  according  to  their  mortahty, 
we  find,  according  to  the  medium  value  of  the  num- 
bers given  above,  leaving  out  St  Petersbm'g,  in  re- 
spect to  which  there  is  evidently  some  error  : — 

Cities. 

Inhabitants 

Inhabitants 

to  one  Death. 

to  one  Birth. 

London,   - 

46-0  1      ^c  1 

40-8  1     ,^  -, 

Glasgow, 

46-8) 

^ 

29-5  i 

- 

Madrid,   -            -            - 

36-0^ 

26-0^ 

Leghorn, 

35-0 

25-5 

Moscow,  - 

33-0 

28-5 

Lyons, 

32-2 

27-5 

Palermo, 

320 

)■    32-3 

24-5 

I    27-0 

Paris, 

31-4 

27-0 

Lisbon,     - 

31-1 

28-3 

Copenhagen,  - 

30-3 

30-0 

Hamburg, 

30-oJ 

25-5J 

Barcelona, 

29-5~ 

27-0~ 

Berlin,      - 

29-0 

210 

Bordeaux, 

29-0 

24-0 

Naples,     ... 

28-6 

23-8 

Dresden, 

27-7 

23-0 

Amsterdam, 

27-5 

I    26-6 

26-0 

I    24-2 

Brussels, 

25-8 

21-0 

Stockholm, 

24-6 

27-0 

Prague, 

24-5 

23-3 

Rome, 

24-4 

306 

Vienna, 

22-5^ 

20-0 

A''cnice,    -            -            - 
Bergamo, 

19-4 
18-0 

18-7 

26-5, 
20-0 

23-2 

The  numbers  thus  cited  tend,  then,  to  show,  that 
there  exists  a  direct  relation  between  the  intensity  of 
the  mortaUty  and  that  of  the  fecimdity,  or,  in  other 
terms,  that  the  number  of  births  is  regulated  by  tlie 
number  of  deaths.  This  confirms  fully  the  ideas  of 
the  economists  who  admit  that  the  population  tends 
alwaj's  to  a  certain  level,  regulated  by  the  quantity 
of  the  products.  And  in  those  localities  where  there 
exist  particular  causes  of  a  greater  mortality,  it  must 
liappen  that  the  generations  arc  shorter,  and  succeed 
each  other  more  rapidly. 

AVe  may  remark,  moreover,  that  in  the  countrie.s 
we  have  just  compared,  the  number  of  deaths  is  less 
than  that  of  births;  and  this  happens  also  in  respect 
to  the  cities,  with  the  exception  of  Stockholm,  Eome, 
Venice,  and  Bergamo.  It  may,  moreover,  be  ob- 
served, that  these  numbers  have  a  greater  tendency 
to  become  equal  in  proportion  to  the  direct  extent  of 

ON  MAN. 

29 

the  mortality,  with  the  exception  of  England  and  its 
cities ;  we  have,  in  fact,  for  the 

Localities. 

Ratio  of  Births 
to  Deaths. 

England,         -            -            -            -            -  1-46 

Sweden  and  Belgium,       -            -            -  1'58 

France,  Holland,  Prussia,  Naples  and  Sicily,  1-37 

The  republic  of  Guanaxuato,             -            -  1-23 

Cities  having  more  than  40  inhabitants  to  1  death,  1'15 

30  to  40                         ..             ..  1-20 

20  to  30                         •  •             •  •  1-10 

less  than  20                ■  ■            •  •  0-!)l 

In  studying  the  influence  of  localities  on  a  less 
extensive  scale,  and  in  comparing  the  different  parts 
of  the  same  province,  we  frequently  arrive  at  very 
dissimilar  results :  thus,  as  the  country  is  level  or 
mountainous,  intersected  with  forests  or  marshes,  the 
numbers  which  the  mortality  maj'-  offer  will  be  found 
to  differ  very  sensibly.  M.  Bossi,  in  the  Statistique 
du  Department  dc  I'Ain,  gives  a  striking  example : 
with  a  view  to  study  the  influences  of  localities,  he 
divided  the  department  into  four  portions,  and  from 
documents  collected  during  the  years  1812,  1813,  and 
1814,  he  obtained  the  following  results  : — 

Inhabitants       Inhabitants        Inhabitants 

to  one  Death    to  one  Marriage   to  one  Birth 

annually.  annually.  annually. 

In  mountain  parishes,    38-3  179  34-8 

On  the  sea-side,      ■        36  6  145  28-8 

In  corn  districts,         -    24-6  135  27-5 
In  stagnant  and  marshy 

districts,-        -        20-0  U>7  261 

These  remarkable  results  offer  a  new  confirmation 
of  the  direct  ratio  which  exists  generally  between 
deaths,  marriages,  and  births.  It  may  be  seen,  also, 
how  the  neighbourhood  of  marshes  and  stagnant 
waters  may  become  fatal.  M.  ViUermc  cites  a  re- 
markable example  of  the  influence  of  marshes. 

"  At  Vareggio,"  observes  M.  Villerme,*  "  in  the 
principality  of  Lucca,  the  inhabitants,  few  in  num- 
ber, barbarous,  and  miserable,  were  annually,  from 
time  immemorial,  attacked  about  the  same  period 
with  agues ;  but  in  1741,  floodgates  were  constructed, 
which  permitted  the  escape  into  the  sea  of  the 
waters  from  the  marshes,  preventmg  at  the  same 
time  the  ingress  of  the  ocean  to  these  marshes,  both 
from  tides  and  storms.  This  contrivance,  Avhich 
permanently  suppressed  the  marsh,  also  expelled  the 
fevers.  In  brief,  the  canton  of  Vareggio  is  at  the 
present  day  one  of  the  healthiest,  most  industrious, 
and  richest  on  the  coast  of  Tuscany ;  and  a  part  of 
those  famihes  whose  boorish  ancestors  sunk  under 
the  epidemics  of  the  arria  cativa,  without  knowledge 
to  protect  themselves,  enjoy  a  health,  a  vigour,  a 
longevity,  and  a  moral  character,  imknown  to  their 
ancestors." 

Similar  epidemics  prevail  at  fixed  epochs  on  the 
borders  of  the  Escaut,  producing  what  are  there  called 
the  fevers  of  the  polders :  these  fevers  foUow  great 
heat,  and  cause  Zealand  to  approach  the  condition  of 
Vareggio,  and  of  the  marshy  comitries  quoted  by 
M.  Bossi. 

M.  Villerme  pointed  out  to  me  a  new  example  of 
the  increase  of  mortality  caused  by  the  influence  of 
marshes.  In  the  Isle  of  Ely,  from  1813  to  1830  in- 
clusive, in  10,000  deaths,  from  birth  to  the  most 
advanced  age,  there  were  4732  before  the  age  of  10, 
whilst  in  all  the  other  agricultural  districts  of  Eng- 
land together  there  were  but  3505  deaths.  In  the 
Isle  of  Ely,  also,  there  were  3712  deaths  from  10  to 
40  years  in  10,000  deaths,  which  took  place  from  10 
years  to  extreme  old  age ;  and  only  3142  in  the  other 
agricultural  districts  which  were  not  marshy.f 

*  Des  Epidemics  (An.  d'Hj-giene,  Janv.  1833,  p.  9.) 
t  See  the  letter  of  M.  Villerm^  inserted  in  the  Bulklin  dc 
V Academic  de  BruxcUcs,  No.  23,  for  June  1834. 

We  owe,  also,  to  M.  Villerme  a  very  curious  memoir 
on  the  mortality  of  Paris  and  other  large  cities,* 
showmg  that  wealth,  independent  circumstances,  and 
misery,  constitute,  in  the  actual  state  of  things,  in 
respect  to  the  inhabitants  of  the  different  quarters  of 
Paris,  the  principal  causes  to  whicli  must  be  attri- 
buted the  striking  differences  observed  m  the  rate  of 
mortality.  The  distance  or  proximity  of  the  Seine, 
the  nature  of  the  soil,  its  depression  to  the  east  or 
west,  the  elevated  grounds  shutting  in  Paris  to  the 
north  or  south,  the  pecuHar  exposure  of  certain  quar- 
ters, tlie  different  kinds  of  water  made  use  of— are  all 
circumstances  modifying  in  some  measure  the  general 
climate  of  the  city ;  yet  they  do  not  seem  to  produce 
sensible  differences  in  respect  to  the  mortality.  To 
make  this  more  apparent,  I  have  collected  in  a 
single  table  the  principal  results  arrived  at  by  M. 
VUlermo  :  the  numbers  refer  to  the  periods  from  1822 
to  1826. 

;fU.S 

c3  flJ  ir 

1 

« 

0-75 
0-55 
0-57 
0-46 
0-59 
0-.55 
0-82 
0-62 
0  60 
0-53 
0-46 
0-64 

metres. 
26 
15 
65 
19  ■ 
7 

22 
11 
13 
16 
■  46 
47 
37 

«-H- 

0-11 
007 
0-11 
0-22 
015 
0-19 
0-22 
0-21 
0-31 
0-23 
0-32 
0-38 

^1 

francs. 
605 
426 
498 
226 
328 
258 
217 
242 
172 
285 
173 
148 

Taxed  Localities. 

Personal 
Contri- 
bution. 

0-40 
0-38 
0-49 
0-28 
0-23 
0'30 
0'29 
0-20 
0-26 
0-46 
0-25 
0-19 

By  a  patent 
of  more 
than  30 
francs. 

0-47 
0-44 
0-35 
0-36 
0-49 
0-32 
0-3.5 
0-45 
0-30 
0-24 
0-31 
0-29 

2.  Influence  of  Sexes. 

The  influence  of  the  sexes  is  extremely  evident  in 
every  thing  which  pertains  to  death  ;  it  has  already 
])een  shown  to  be  so  before  the  birth  of  the  chUd. 
Dm'ing  the  four  years  from  1827  to  1830,  there  have 
been  in  Western  Flanders  2597  stiU-born  children, 
1517  of  which  were  males  and  1080  females,  which 
gives  a  ratio  of  about  3  to  2.  This  difference  is  con- 
siderable, and  as  we  find  it  appear  annually,  it  must 
have  a  special  cause. 

Again,  this  mortality  affects  male  children  not  only 
before  their  birth,  but  pretty  nearly  during  the  ten 
or  twelve  months  which  follow  that  event ;  that  is  to 
say,  pretty  nearly  during  the  period  of  lactation,  as 
may  be  seen  from  the  following  documents  respecting 
Western  Flanders : — 

*  An.  d'Hygi6ne,  July  1830. 

t  The  2d  arrondissement  comprises  the  following  quarters : — 
Chauss<5e  d'Antin,  Palais-Royal,  Feydeau,  and  Faubourg  Mont- 
martre ;  the  3d,  Montmartre,  Faubourg  Poissonnifere,  St  Eus- 
tache,  and  Mail ;  the  1st,  Roule,  ChampsElys^es,  Place-Ven- 
d6me,  and  Tuileries ;  the  4th,  St  Honors,  Louvre,  Marches,  and 
Banque  ;  the  5th,  Faubourg  St  Denis,  Porte  St  Martin,  Bonnc- 
Nouvelle,  and  Mont-Orgueil ;  the  llth,  Luxembourg,  Ecole  de 
Bledicine,  Sorbonne,  and  Palais-de-Justice ;  the  7th,  St  Avoie, 
Mont-de-Pi6t^,  March^  St  Jean,  and  Arcis ;  the  6th,  Porte 
St  Denis,  St  Martin-dcs-Champs,  Lombard,  and  Temple;  the 
9th,  He  St  Louis,  Hotcl-de-Ville,  Cit(J,  and  Arsenal ;  the  10th, 
Monnaie,  St  Thomas  d'Aquin,  Invalides,  and  Faubourg  St  Ger- 
main; the  8th,  St  Antoine,  Quinze-Vingts,  Marais,  and  Popin- 
court ;  the  12th,  Jardin  du  Roi,  St  Marcel,  St  Jaques,  and 
L'Observatoire. 

:j:  All  the  locations  of  each  quarter  have  been  reduced  to  100,  so 
as  to  show  how  many  of  that  number  there  are  who  pay  no  tax, 
how  many  are  taxed  by  personal  contribution,  and  how  many  by 
patent.    The  untaxed  localities  represent  the  poor. 

30 

ON  MAN. 

Ages. 

Cities. 

6 

Country. 

.2 

Boys. 

Girls. 

Boys. 

Girls. 

« 

0  to  1  month, 
lto2      .. 

2  to  3     .V 

3  to  4      . . 

4  to  S      . . 
StoB      .. 
6  to  8      .  . 
8  to  12    .  . 

1  to  2  yeais, 
2to3      .. 

3  to  4      '■: 
*to5       .. 

3,717 

830 

607 

532 

403 

34G 

569 

1,148 

2,563 

1,383 

908 

556 

2,786 

682 

500 

382 

322 

329 

508 

1,030 

2.409 

1,337 

908 

683 

1-33 
1-3G 
1-21 
1-39 
1-25 
1-05 
112 
Ml 
1-06 
1-03 
1-00 
1'96 

8,180 
2,012 
1,480 
1,192 
908 
831 
1,331 
2,505 
4,994 
2,927 
1,600 
1,200 

5,769 

1,609 

1,161 

984 

774 

707 

1,117 

2,453 
4,920 
2,879 
1,748 
1,184 

1-42 
1-25 

1-27 

1-22 
1-25 
1-18 
1-20 
1-02 
1-02 
1-02 
0-92 
0-99 

It  appears,  then,  beyond  doubt,  that  there  is  a  par- 
tici/hr  cause  ofmortalitij  ivhich  attacks  male  children,  by 
■preference,  before  a7id  immediately  after  their  birth.  The 
effects  are  such,  that  the  ratio  of"  deaths  before  birth 
is  as  3  to  2  ;  during  the  two  first  months  after  birth 
the  ratio  is  4  to  3  ;  during  the  third,  foui-th,  and  fifth 
months,  5  to  4;  and  after  the  eighth  or  the  tenth 
month,  a  difference  scarcely  exists. 

The  inequaUty  in  the  number  of  deaths  for  childi-en 
of  both  sexes,  towards  the  period  of  birth,  is  a  remark- 
able fact  in  the  natural  history  of  man,  and  merits 
the  attention  of  physiologists.  It  cannot  be  attributed 
to  the  excess  of  male  births  over  female  bh'ths,  seeing 
that  the  ratio  of  these  last  numbers  is  scarcely  from 
20  to  19  ;  this  ratio  could,  at  the  most,  explain  the 
difference  of  mortaUty  in  ages  beyond  the  first  year. 

The  influence  of  sex  shows  itself  at  different  ages 
in  a  manner  more  or  less  curious :  an  idea  may  be 
formed  of  this  by  an  inspection  of  the  following  table, 
constructed  from  numbers  collected  in  the  different 
provinces  of  Belgiiun  : — 

Age. 

StiU-bom, 

From  0  to 

.  .   1  to 

.  .   2  to 

ai 

ale  Deaths 

to  one 

Female  Death. 

City. 

Country 

1-33 

1-70 

1-33 

1-37 

1-37 

1-20 

1-22 

1-21 

1-24 

116 

l-0(i 

103 

1-06 

0-97 

l-(ll) 

0'94 

0-9-.) 

0-93 

002 

0-75 

0-98 

0-92 

1-24 

Ml 

1-00 

0-86 

0-88 

0-63 

r02 

0-83 

1-07 

M8 

0-96 

1-05 

0-77 

1-00 

0()8 

052 

1  month, 

2  . . 

3  .. 
.  .  3  to  C  . . 
.  .   6  to  12  .  . 

1  to  2  years, 

.  .   2  to  5  .  . 

.  .   5  to  14  .  . 

..  14  to  18  . . 

.  .  18  to  21  .  . 

..  21  to  26  .  . 

.  .  26  to  30  . . 

.  .  ,30  to  40  .  . 

.  .  40  to  50  .  . 

.  .  50  to  60  .  . 

. .  60  to  70  .  . 

.  .  70  to  80  .  . 
..  SOtolOO   ..     -    ■ 

This  table  gives  the  ratio  between  the  deaths  of  the 
two  sexes  for  eacli  year,  without  regard  to  population. 
The  numbers  for  the  country  may,  moreover,  be  con- 
sidered as  representing  faithfully  the  amount  of  the 
relative  mortality,  because  at  each  age  tlie  individuals 
of  both  sexes  are  nearly  equal  in  number,  Avhich  is 
not  the  case  in  cities,  at  least  with  respect  to  aged  men. 
The  ratioof  cities  in  respect  to  the  population  is  in  gene- 
ral very  great  for  those  of  advanced  years ;  there  exist, 
nevertheless,  the  same  alternations  of  increase  and  of 
decrease  as  in  the  ratio  calculated  for  the  country. 

Thus,  about  the  period  of  l)irth,  tliere  die  more 
males  than  females  ;  about  the  age  of  two  years,  the 
mortality  of  both  sexes  becomes  pretty  nearly  equal ; 
that  of  women  thereafter  increases,  and  becomes  sen- 
sibly greater  between  the  ages  of  14  and  18  years,  that 
is  to  say,  after  puberty;  between  21  and  20,  \\\c  most 
active  epoch  of  the  passions,  the  mortality  of  the  male 
exceeds  that  of  the  female  i  from  2G  to  30,  epoch  of 
marriage,  the  mortality  is  once  more  equalised,  but 
becomes  sensibly  greater  for  women  during  the  whole 
period  of  fecundity :  when  that  period  ceases,  the 
mortality  diminishes,  and  this  condition  or  ratio  con- 
timies  until  the  final  iieriod  of  existence  for  both. 

The  great  mortality  of  the  female  peasantry  (femmes 
de  la  campatine)  during  the  period  of  child-bearing, 
may  be  owing  to  the  laborious  duties  of  their  station, 
which  the}'  are  thus  called  on  to  perform  at  a  period 
requiring  the  greatest  care.*  These  laborious  agri- 
cultural emploj^ments  are,  on  the  contrary,  from  their 
regularity,  very  far  from  being  equalh^  jirejudicial  to 
man.  The  male  inhabitants  of  towns  suffer  much  at 
this  period  of  life  from  irregular  conduct,  and  the 
facilities  offered  for  following  the  dictates  of  passion. 

3.  Influence  of  Age. 

Of  aU  the  causes  Avhich  modify  the  mortality  of 
man,  none  exercises  a  greater  influence  than  age. 
This  influence  is  universally  acknowledged,  and  its 
appreciation  is  one  of  the  first  objects  to  which  the 
doctrine  of  the  calculation  of  probabiUties  was  directed. 
The  first  table  of  mortality  appears  to  be  dated  in 
1693;  it  was  composed  by  the  astronomer  Hallej^ 
who  constructed  it  from  documents  of  the  city  of 
Breslaw.  Similar  tables  have  been  constructed  since 
that  time  for  the  principal  European  comitries ;  yet 
there  are  few  in  which  the  distinction  of  the  sexes 
has  been  observed.  Even  France  does  not  possess  a 
general  mortaUty  table  keeping  in  view  this  distinc- 
tion ;  and  all  the  assurance  societies  continue  to  base 
their  calcidations  on  the  hypothesis  that  the  morta- 
lity is  the  same  for  both  sexes.  Nevertheless,  the 
English  have  observed  the  necessity  for  modifying 
their  rates  of  insurance ;  and  Mr  Pinlaysou,  secretary 
for  the  national  debt,  has  perfectly  shown  that  the 
greater  mortality  of  men  ought  to  be  kept  in  view. 

The  tables  which  I  give  here  for  Belgium,  keep  in 
view  not  only  the  distmction  of  the  sexes,  but  notice, 
for  the  first  time,  the  differences  caused  by  a  town  or 
country  residence.  I  have  taken  care,  also,  to  indi- 
cate the  mortality  during  the  early  months  folloAving 
birth.  The  data  emploj^ed  in  the  construction  of 
these  tables  have  been  collected  with  care  for  a  period 
of  three  years,  from  the  registries  of  the  ciAal  state 
in  Belgium.  To  enable  the  reader  to  compare  these 
results,  I  have  taken  the  same  basis,  and  calculated 
the  mortality,  assuming  10,000  births  for  each  of  the 
sexes  in  town  and  country.  A  fifth  table  shows  the 
mortality  of  the  kingdom,  without  regard  to  the  dif- 
ferences just  alluded  to. 

Table  of  Mortality 

General 

of  Bel 

gium. 

Table : 
Town  and 
Countrj- ; 

Age. 

Town. 

Country. 

Men  and 
AVomen. 

Men. 

Women. 

Nen. 

Women. 

Birth, 

10,000 

10,000 

10,000 

10,(XiO 

100,000 

1  month, 

8840 

9129 

8926 

9209 

90,a96 

2      ■• 

8.550 

8916 

8664 

8988 

87,936 

3      ■■ 

83<jl 

8760 

8470 

8029 

86,173 

4 

8195 

8641 

8314 

Sim 

84,720 

5      .. 

8fK)9 

8.540 

8187 

a587 

83,571 

6      •• 

7961 

8437 

8078 

8490 

82,526 

1  year. 

7426 

7932 

7.575 

8(Kll 

77,528 

18  months, 

6854 

7500 

7173 

7603 

73,.367 

2  years. 

(me 

717!) 

6920 

7326 

70,5,36 

3      •• 

6194 

6761 

65.37 

6931 

66,531 

4      .. 

.5911 

6477 

6326 

6691 

64,102 

5 

.57.38 

6295 

6169 

6.528 

62,448 

6       ■• 

r>(m 

6176 

60.38 

6395 

61,166 

7     •• 

5547 

60,05 

.5939 

6299 

60,249 

8       •■ 

.5481 

6(^26 

5862 

6215 

59,487 

9       •• 

.5424 

mm 

6792 

6147 

58,829 

111       .. 

5:m 

.5916 

57.14 

6082 

58,258 

11       •• 

.5.-i52 

5i!73 

mH3 

6018 

57,749 

12       •• 

5.i23 

5838 

SCM 

59(i0 

57,289 

13       •• 

.5298 

6807 

5509 

5908 

66,871 

14       •• 

5271 

5/71 

6546 

5862 

.56,467 

15       •  • 

.5241 

6732 

5603 

67.96 

56,028 

*  [Tlie  reader  will  be  pleased  to  observe  that  M.  Qtietelet 
•alludes  here  to  the  whole  period  of  child  bearing  in  the  female 
peasantry,  as  contrasted  with  the  habits  of  to^\-ns  ;  on  the  other 
hand,  it  is  a  fact  generally  admitted,  although  we  know  not  the 
precise  data  on  which  the  opinion  is  founded,  tliat  the  indivi- 
dual accouchements  are  not  only  safer  but  much  easier  in  the 
country  than  in  towns.] 

ON  MAN. 

31 

Age. 

IG  years, 
17 

Table  of  Mortality 
of  Belgium — ( Contintiol.) 

Men. 

5209 

5171 

5131 

.W87 

5(138 

4,978 

4908 

4827 

4740 

4()G2 

4590 

4523 

4459 

4397 

4335 

4275 

4214 

4154 

4094 

4034 

3976 

3918 

3860 

38(>2 

3744 

3078 

^ni 
^77 

3411 

a?52 

3293 
3233 
3174 
3115 
3040 
2962 
2881 
2810 
2/39 
2667 
2583 
2499 
2415 
2329 
2239 
2146 
2051 
1956 
1859 
1754 
1649 
1556 
1466 
1372 
1279 

im 

108/ 
989 
891 
806 
721 
631 
541 
463 
394 
332 
273 
225 
184 
150 
120 

93 

69 

49 

37 

28 

18 

11 
9 

Women 

SC89 

5645 

560O 

5551 

.5500 

5445 

5387 

5326 

52G4 

5201 

5138 

5074 

5010 

4946 

4881 

4816 

4751 

4680 

4622 

4558 

4490 

4418 

4347 

4277 

4208 

4148 

4088 

4027 

3967 

3907 

3846 

3783 

3720 

3656 

3592 

3520 

»t48 

.^375 

a300 

3225 

3150 

3080 

3010 

2939 

28(a 

27:9 

2689 

2595 

2498 

23;;7 

2292 
2187 
2085 
1983 
1864 
1741 
1627 
1514 
1389 
1261 
11»4 
101 1 

900 

789 

682 

585 

495 

411 

ai6 

289 

2.39 

192 

150 

116 

86 

65 

47 

33 

24 

18 

12 

8 

4 

2 

1 

Country. 

Men.   Women. 

5456 

5408 

5357 

53(>2 

5242 

5178 

5109 

5036 

4958 

4881 

4805 

4734 

4673 

4620 

4572 

4525 

4478 

4431 

4384 

4337 

4296 

4255 

4215 

4174 

41.34 

4090 

4044 

3995 

3!M3 

3;J87 

3(J27 

3767 

37f»7 

3fA7 

3588 

3512 

34.35 

3358 

3276 

3194 

,3111 

3(86 

29.39 

2U51 

2767 
2677 
2587 
2495 
2387 
2277 
2163 
2049 
1942 
I»15 
1713 
1587 
1474 
1358 
1236 
1114 

996 

882 

770 

664 

566 

4a> 

414 

353 

294 

239 

191 

152 

117 
88 
67 
48 
.38 
27 

20 
14 
10 

7 

4 
2 

5668 
5608 
5546 
5484 
5421 
5.356 
5289 
5222 
5153 
5085 
5016 
4948 
4880 
4812 
4744 
4677 
4609 
4542 
4474 
4401 
4329 
4257 
4185 
4112 
4041 

mi 

3901 
.3831 
3761 
3701 
3G40 
3579 
3519 
.'J458 
;i392 
3323 
3256 
3187 
3118 
.3049 
2982 
2912 
2840 

27(i2 

2677 

2586 

2495 

2405 

2310 

2-2IX) 

2086 

1983 

1875 

17.58 

1()42 

1530 

1420 

13(J0 

1182 

1061 
940 
832 
723 
619 
5.35 
460 
390 
323 
262 
211 
168 
1.32 
!)7 
71 
54 
40 
.32 
24 
18 
12 

General 
Table : 
Town  and 
Country ; 
Men  and 
AVomen. 

55,570 
55,087 
54,575 
54,030 
53,450 
.52,810 
52,172 
51,465 
50,732 
49,995 
49,298 
48,602 
47,965 
47,350 
46,758 
46,1/0 
45,584 
44,996 
44,409 
43,823 
43,2.36 
42,650 
42,064 
41,476 
40,889 
40,.300 

3.'»,(;!i7 
39,io(; 

.38,504 

■37,900 

37,295 

3(),690 

.36,084 

35.477 

34.789 

.•U,153 

a3,418 

.32.676 

.31,9.30 

31,179 

3f),42i 

29,656 

28,875 

28,081 

27,242 

26,.356 

25,423 

24,465 

23,478 

22,462 

21,362 

20,263 

19,219 

18,175 

17,017 

15,860 

14,749 

13,638 

12,461 

11,273 

10,120 

9014 

7910 

68.53 

5867 

5031 

4299 

3627 

3016 

2464 

1989 

158^ 

12X3 

'.m 

6*2 
510 
387 
282 
2(»7 
1.53 
105 

7 
4 

67 

39 

2 

20 

10 

■     5 

2 

0 

An  inspection  of  tliis  tabic  shows  that  the  probable 
value  or  duration  of  life  after  birth  is  in  general  about 
25  years,  that  is  to  say,  that  at  the  age  of  25,  the 
number  of  children  born  at  the  same  time  is  reduced 
to  one-half.  Keeping  in  view  the  distinction  of  the 
sexes,  Ave  find  that  the  probable  life  of  girls  (filles, 
unmarried  females)  is  longer  than  that  of  boys  (un- 
married males) ;  in  fact,  it  is  27  years  in  the  country, 
and  more  tlian  28  in  cities,  whilst  for  unmarried  males 
it  is  less  than  24  years  in  the  country,  and  less  than 
21  in  cities. 

Towards  the  age  of  five  years,  the  chances  of  pro- 
longed life  are  the  greatest,  whatever  be  the  sex  or 
place  of  abode ;  at  this  epocli,  the  probable  duration 
of  life  of  women  in  city,  and  men  in  the  country,  is 
50  years,  and  of  48  years  for  Avomen  in  the  country 
and  men  in  the  city.  ' ' 

This  age  of  five  years,  Avhen  the  more  urgent  dan- 
gers of  infancy  have  ceased,  is  very  remarkable  in  the 
natural  history  of  man :  in  proportion  as  we  recede 
from  it,  the  probable  duration  of  life  becomes  sliorter 
and  shorter ;  thus,  at  the  age  of  40,  it  is  only  27  years 
for  the  inhabitants  of  the  country,  and  for  Avomen  in- 
habiting towns,  and  of  25  years  only  for  men  inha- 
biting tOAvns ;  for  tiiose  Avho  haA-e  reached  60  years, 
the  probable  duration  of  life  is  from  12  to  13  A^earsj 
and  Avith  the  octogenarian  it  is  reduced  to  four  years! 
In  general,  the  mortality  is  greater  for  man  inha- 
biting t0A\Tis,  oAving,  Avithout  doubt,  to  the  irregu- 
larities and  excesses  to  Avhich  he  is  exposed. 

The  value,  then,  of  the  average  life  in  Belgium  is 
32-15  years;  for  men  inhabiting  cities,  29-24,  and  for 
the  male  agricultural  population,  31-97;  for  women 
inhabiting  cities,  33-28,  and  32-95  in  the  country. 
According  to  Mr  Eickman's  last  Avork,  the  average 
life  in  England  Avould  be  33  years,  32  for  the  men 
and  34  for  the  Avomen.*  In  France,  it  is  estimated 
at  32-2,  calculated  from  the  numbers  of  birtlis.  f 
Finally,  these  calculations  presume  the  population  to 
be  stationary,  and  Ave  shall  afterAvards  have  occasion 
to  see  that  they  lead  to  serious  errors. 

I  shall  next  make  a  more  attentive  examination  of 
the  different  critical  periods  of  man  and  woman,  as 
well  as  of  the  degrees  of  duration  of  life  (viability, 
existibiliti/)  at  different  ages. 

What  first  occupies  our  attention,  is  tlie  great  mor- 
tality of  children  after  birth  :  to  have  an  accurate  idea 
of  this,  it  is  sufficient  to  consider  that,  in  toAvn  as  well 
as  country,  four  times  as  many  children  die  Avithin 
the  first  month  after  birtli  as  in  the  second ;  and 
almost  as  many  as  during  the  second  and  third  years, 
although  tlie  mortahty  then  is  very  great.  Indeed' 
the  table  of  mortahty  shows,  that  one-tenth  die  Avithin 
the  first  month  after  birth.  TJiis  number  is  equal 
to  tlie  aggregate  number  of  deaths  of  tlie  survivors 
between  7  and  24  years  of  age,  or  betAveen  24  and  40 
years ;  or,  still  further,  it  is  equal  to  the  number  of 
surA-ivors  Avho  reach  the  age  of  76  years.  MM. 
Milne  Edwards  and  Villerme  have  made  some  inte- 
resting researches  on  the  mortality  of  new-born  chil- 
dren ;  Toaldo,  in  Italy,  attributes  it  chiefly  to  the 
custom  of  taking  the  infants  to  church  immediately 
after  birth,  Avhere  they  often  endure  the  severest  cold, 
and  are  exposed  naked  to  the  waters  of  baptism. 

The  mortality  is  so  great,  especially  for  male  chil- 
dren, that,  from  the  first  year  after  bu-th,  the  number 
is  already  reduced  one-fourth.  The  loss  of  boys  in 
toAvns  is  such,  that  at  tlie  fifth  year,  out  of  10,000,  there 
are  only  5738  remaining. 

The  age  of  five  years  is  very  remarkable,  because 
the  mortahty,  wliicli  until  that  time  is  very  great,  is 
suddenly  reduced,  and  becomes  extremely  small  until 
the  age  of  puberty.  At  tlie  age  of  fiA-e  years,  the 
probability  of  hfe  attains  its  maximum,  that  is  to  say, 
man  may  reckon  upon  a  longer  existence. 

The   epoch   Avhich   precedes  puberty,   and   Avhicli 
*  Preface  to  tbe  Abstract,  &c.,  p.  46. 
+  Anniiaire  du  Bureau  des  Longitudes  for  1H.34,  p.  102. 

32 

ON  MAN. 

commences  at  13  in  town  and  14  in  tlie  country, 
is  equally  deserving  of  attention :  it  also  presents  a 
maximum  of  a  peculiar  kind — it  might  be  called  the 
maximum  of  viability ;  it  is  the  period  when  man  can 
most  depend  upon  his  actual  existence,  and  when  he 
can  wager  with  most  probability  that  he  will  not  die 
the  moment  after. 

After  the  age  of  puberty,  the  mortality  becomes 
greater,  especially  among  women :  tliis  increase  is 
even  perceptible  among  women  in  the  country. 

Towards  the  age  of  24,  there  is  a  peculiar  circimi- 
stance  connected  with  men ;  namely,  a  maximum 
which  is  not  observed  in  the  curve  of  the  mortality 
of  women.  (See  the  table  of  curves  at  the  end  of  the 
volume).  The  period  of  this  maximum  coincides  with 
that  when  man  shows  the  greatest  inclination  to 
crime;*  it  is  the  stormy  age  of  passion,  which  occu- 
pies a  most  conspicuous  place  in  the  moral  life  of  man. 
The  mortality  afterwards  diminishes  insensibly,  and 
reaches  for  men  in  town  and  covmtry  a  new  minimum 
about  the  age  of  30. 

The  reason  why  these  periods  of  maximum  and 
minimum  are  not  observed  in  the  curve  of  female 
mortahty,  proceeds  undoubtedly  from  the  circum- 
stance, that  the  effect  which  the  development  of  the 
passions  in  woman  might  have  over  the  deaths  is 
combined  with  the  effect  resulting  from  the  dangers 
of  childbearing ;  for,  after  the  age  of  24  years,  the 
deaths  of  women  continue  to  increase,  and,  taken  from 
28  to  45  years,  exceed  the  number  of  deaths  of  men. 
The  difference  is  very  apparent  between  30  and  40 
years.f 

From  60  to  6.5  j^ears,  also  a  remarkable  period, 
viability  loses  much  of  its  energy,  that  is  to  say,  the 
probability  of  life  becomes  very  small. 

Lastly,  the  length  of  one  century  appears  to  be  the 
limit  of  man's  existence.  Very  few  exceed  this  bound. 
On  the  1st  of  January  1831,  of  sixteen  centenarians 
found  in  Belgium,  fourteen  of  them  lived  in  the  three 
provinces  of  Hainault,  Namur,  and  Luxembourg.  Lim- 
bourg  and  Eastern  Flanders  had  each  one,  and  none 
were  found  in  the  provinces  of  Brabant,  Anvers, 
Western  Flanders,  and  Liege.  The  three  oldest  in- 
dividuals were  104,  110,  and  111  years— they  belonged 
to  the  province  of  Luxembourg ;  the  others  did  not 
exceed  102  years. 

Of  the  sixteen  centenarians,  nine  belonged  to  the 
male  sex ;  none  of  them  liad  been  soldiers :  it  is  re- 
markable that  all  these  persons  had  been,  or  still  were 
married,  and  generally  were  living  in  very  ordinary  cir- 
cumstances. It  is  generally  thought  that  the  greater 
number  of  centenarians  are  males,  although  the  ave- 
rage life  of  females  is  longer. 

A  German  physiologist,  M.  Biu'dach,  has  pubhshed 
some  very  singular  approximative  comparisons  of 
human  mortality  and  the  periods  of  human  life.  J  This 
philosopher  divides  hfe  into  10  periods  of  400  weeks 
each  ;  and  thus  makes  an  age  of  the  first  dentition,  of 
adolescence,  of  youth,  &c. ;  in  the  first  period  is  found 
a  secondary  one  of  40  weeks,  the  age  of  lactation. 

To  complete  the  documents  relative  to  mortality 
at  different  ages,  it  would  be  necessary  to  consider 
the  dangers  to  which  man  is  exposed  every  moment. 
Indeed,  when  we  say  that  the  infant  at  birth  has  a 
probable  life  of  25  years,  we  know  nothing  of  the 
dangers  to  which  he  may  be  exposed  durmg  this 
period.  It  is  for  the  purpose  of  considering  these 
dangers  that  I  have  constructed  the  following  table, 
which  points  out  the  actual  degree  of  mortality  of 

*  Recherchcs  sur  le  Penchant  au  Crime  au.\  differens  Ages. 
See  also  the  third  book  of  this  work. 

t  It  haa  long  been  thought  that  the  time  of  cessation  of  the 
monthly  period  was  more  fatal  to  women  than  the  other  periods 
of  life.  M.  Benoiston  de  Chateaimeuf  has  shown  that  this  opi- 
nion is  groimdless,  in  a  Memolre  sur  la  MorlaliU  cles  Femines  de 
rAgedei0d50Aiis.    Paris:  1822. 

t  Die  Zeitrecbnnng  des  Menschliehcn-rebens.    Licpsic :  1820. 

each  age,  that  is  to  say,  the  probability  of  dying 
within  a  very  limited  period.  This  table  is  calcu- 
lated from  the  one  on  mortality :  the  inverse  ratio 
of  each  number,  placed  opposite,  may  be  considered 
as  the  relative  degree  of  the  duration  of  the  life  of 
man  at  different  ages,  or  the  relative  probability  of 
living : — 

Age. 

Degrees. 

Age. 

Degrees. 

< 

1 

! 

1 

of 

of 

of 

of 

Mortality. 

Viability. 

Mortality. 

Viability. 

1  month, 

960 

1 

23 

12 

85 

2      •• 

273 

4 

24 

12 

82 

3      •• 

200 

5 

25 

12 

83 

4      ■• 

168 

6 

30 

11 

95 

5 

135 

7 

35 

11 

90 

6      •• 

127 

8 

40 

12 

83 

1  year. 

115 

9 

45 

13 

77 

0 

77 

13 

50 

15 

67 

3      ■• 

60 

17 

55 

20 

50 

4      •• 

27 

37 

60 

27 

37 

5       ■• 

21 

48 

65 

39 

26. 

6       •• 

15 

67 

70 

57 

18 

7     •• 

12 

83 

75 

187 

11 

8      •• 

10 

100 

80 

29 

8 

10      ■• 

8 

131 

85 

174 

6 

14      ■• 

6 

161 

90 

250 

4 

15      •• 

7 

155 

95 

283 

3 

20      •• 

10 

100 

100 

4217 

2 

I  have  endeavoured  to  render  these  numbers  sen- 
sible to  the  eye  by  the  construction  of  a  curve  abode. 
(See  Plate  2,  placed  at  the  end  of  the  volume).  The 
greater  or  less  divergence  from  the  axis  A  B,  indicates 
the  greater  or  less  degree  of  viability.  Thus  we  see 
that,  about  the  age  of  14,  viability  is  greatest :  it  after- 
wards presents  an  anomaly  between  the  15th  and 
30th  years.  This  curve  lias  been  constructed  for  men 
and  women  mdiscriminately :  the  dotted  line  serves 
for  females.  Its  form  is  more  regular  than  that  of 
males  alone :  it  descends  in  a  continuous  manner  from 
the  point  m,  which  corresponds  to  the  13th  year,  to 
the  point  7i,  corresponding  to  the  50th,  where  it  is 
confounded  with  the  other  curve.  We  see  that  viabi- 
lity after  puberty  dimmishes  more  rapidly  in  females 
than  males ;  it  is  also  less  during  the  time  of  child- 
bearing,  from  the  27th  to  the  45th  year,  but  greatest 
at  the  age  of  the  passions,  about  the  24th  year.  The 
curve  of  viability  has  a  striking  similarity  to  that  of 
the  propensity  to  crune,  and  a  still  greater  similarity 
to  that  showing  the  development  of  the  physical 
powers. 

The  age  of  shortest  viability  would  be  then  imme- 
diately after  birth,  and  the  age  of  longest  viability 
immediately  before  puberty :  the  viability  of  the  child 
after  the  first  month  of  life  is  gi'eater  than  that  of  the 
man  near  100  years  old. 

Towards  the  75  th  year,  it  is  scarcely  greater  than 
for  the  infant  about  the  sixth  month  after  birth. 

We  shall  add  to  what  has  already  been  said,  the 
law  of  the  duration  of  diseases,  expressed  in  weeks 
and  fractions  of  a  week,  as  M.  VUlerme  has  given  it 
in  the  Annalcs  d'Hi/giene  for  January  1830,  according 
to  the  documents  of  the  philanthropic  Highland  So- 
ciety of  Scotland. 

Age. 

Weeks  of  sickness 

Age. 

Weeks  of  sickness 

for  one  Person. 

for  one  Person. 

21st  year, 

•■    0-575 

65th  year, 

-    1-821 

25th    •  • 

0-585 

57th     •  • 

2-018 

30th    •  • 

-    0-621 

60th     •  • 

-    2-246 

35th    •• 

0-6/5 

63d       •• 

3100 

40th    .. 

-    0-758 

65th    .  • 

-    4-400 

45th    .. 

0-962 

67th    •• 

6-000 

50th    .. 

-    1-361 

70th    .. 

-        -    10-701 

The  committee  of  the  Scotch  Society  which  has 
collected  these  data,  thinks  that  below  the  age  of  20 
the  average  annual  duration  of  diseases  ought  to  be 
estimated  at  three  days,  or  nearly ;   and  above  70 

ON  MAN. 

S3 

years,  also,  for  the  working  class,  about  4  montlis,  or 
16i  weeks.  These  researches  coincide  very  well  with 
the  measures  of  viabilit}'  given  above. 

M.  Villerme  has  also  been  investigating  the  law  of 
mortality  of  each  age  during  epidemics,*  and  he  has 
been  led  to  conclude  that  it  seems  to  agree  Avith  the 
general  law  of  mortality  according  to  age,  that  is  to 
say,  that  those  who,  all  things  being  equal,  have  the 
least  probability  of  life,  are  those  who  fall  most  readily, 
■when  attacked  by  epidemics :  f  thus,  one  epidemic 
attacks  more  particularly  children,  another  old  per- 
sons. Well,  of  an  equal  number  of  diseases  at  each 
age,  the  mortality  of  children  is  greater  the  younger 
they  are,  and  when  old  persons  are  attacked,  the 
older  they  are. 

This  observation  is  confirmed  by  the  researches  of 
DuviUard  on  death  caused  by  the  small-pox ;  by  those 
which  have  been  collected  after  the  sweating  miliary 
fever,  which  was  epidemic  in  1821  in  the  department 
of  Oise ;  and  by  several  others  quoted  by  M.  Villerme. 

"  According  to  the  unanimous  accounts  from  diffe- 
rent parts  of  Germany,"  says  this  philosopher,  "  ac- 
counts which  fully  confirm  the  official  report  on  the 
ravages  of  cholera-morbus  in  the  city  of  Paris  and 
department  of  the  Seine,  the  children  rmder  four 
or  five  years,  and  the  old  persons  of  advanced  age, 
attacked  by  this  malady,  almost  always  die,  wliilst 
young  people  less  frequently  fall  under  it. 

Indeed,  some  researches  Avhich  I  have  made  on  the 
influence  of  marshes,  show  that  the  same  circimistance 
attends  the  fevers  or  epidemic  maladies  resulting  from 
them  (marshes)  ;  for  of  an  equal  number  of  sick  per- 
sons, more  young  children  died  than  of  all  the  others, 
and  after  these  the  old  persons. 

The  influenza,  or  catarrhal  fever,  Avhich  prevailed 
through  a  great  part  of  France  during  the  spring  and 
summer  of  1831,  and  which  especially  attacked  adults 
and  old  persons,  at  least  in  Paris,  has  principally  been 
fatal  to  the  latter  Avlien  very  old. 

All  these  facts  concerning  diseases  so  different, 
render  it  extremely  probable  that  the  mortality  occa- 
sioned by  epidemics  commonly  follows,  as  has  been 
already  stated,  for  the  sick  persons  Avho  are  attacked 
by  them,  the  general  law  of  the  mortality  according 
to  age. 

Hence  the  inference,  that  epidemics  which  attack 
the  two  extremes  of  Ufe,  are,  every  tiring  considered, 
the  most  fatal  and  deadly." 

4.  Influence  of  Years. 

It  has  been  observed  that  the  annual  number  of 
deaths  may,  in  certain  circumstances,  be  considerably 
modified  by  scarcity,  wars,  and  other  scourges. 

The  influence  of  famine  had  been  confirmed  long 
ago;  nevertheless,  an  English  statistician,  Mr  Sad- 
ler, recently  thought  he  perceived  in  the  relative 
numbers  of  England  almost  the  opposite  of  what  his 
predecessors  found.  Similar  discordances  between 
the  results  of  observers  have  often  been  quoted  by 
superficial  persons  to  establish  the  small  importance 
of  statistical  inquiries,  instead  of  seeMng  for  the  true 
cause  of  them. 

Now,  to  explain  the  difficulty  which  here  presents 
itself,  it  is  necessary  to  observe,  in  the  first  place,  that 
mortality  does  not  increase  just  at  the  moment  when 
bread  becomes  dearer — the  excess  of  mortality  is  only 
induced  by  the  diseases  and  privations  which  poor 
people  are  obliged  to  endure  at  periods  of  distress ;  so 
that,  diu-ing  the  greater  part  of  the  time,  the  influence 
of  the  scourge  on  the  registers  of  mortality  only  be- 
comes visible  several  months,  and  sometimes  a  year, 
after  its  commencement.  The  consequences,  more- 
over, do  not  stop  suddenly :  the  price  of  bread  may 

*  An.  d'Hygifene,  Janv.  1833,  p.  31. 

t  [Typhus  fever,  which  occasionally  spreads  epidemically, 
seems  to  form  an  exception  to  this  law.] 

have  resumed  its  ordinary  course,  or  even  become 
lower,  and  yet  the  excess  of  deaths  may  be  stiU  very 
sensible. 

AVe  sliould  be  wrong  in  admitting,  also,  that  the 
smallest  fluctuations  ki  the  prices  of  bread  ought 
proportionally  to  show  themselves  in  the  number  of 
deaths :  in  the  midst  of  so  many  causes  modifying 
mortality,  a  single  one,  in  order  to  leave  manifest 
traces,  must  be  strongly  marked.  We  must  not,  then, 
ascribe,  as  Mr  Sadler  has  done,  the  same  importance 
to  every  year  from  the  time  that  the  price  of  grain 
had  somewhat  exceeded  the  average— we  must  keep 
to  those  years  in  which  there  was  a  positive  scarcity; 
and,  above  all,  we  must  not  suppose  the  mortality 
to  proceed  equall}^  with  the  price  of  provisions.  An 
examination  of  the  tables  showing  the  movement  of 
the  popiilation  in  Belgium  from  1815  to  1826  inclu- 
sive, will  point  this  out.  We  may  there  observe,  that 
the  price  of  wheat  and  rj'e  reached  their  maximum 
in  1816  ;  but  the  effects  of  the  scarcity  over  the  deaths 
and  births  became  apparent  only  the  year  following. 
Were  we  to  follo\v  Mr  Sadler's  plan,  the  calamitous 
year  of  1816  would  be  arranged  among  the  happy 
ones,  since,  comparatively  to  the  other  years,  there 
were  fcAver  deaths.  To  proceed  as  Mr  Sadler  has 
done,  we  ought  to  compare  the  deaths  of  the  four 
years  from  1815  to  1818,  during  which  the  prices  of 
grain  exceeded  the  average,  with  those  of  the  four 
following  years,  and  Are  have  as  a  medium  of  each 
period — 

Average  of  Deaths — 
In  To^vn.        In  Country. 

Tcirs  of  famine,    - 
plenty, 

50,186 
-    51,015 

91,501 
95,222 

Observe  how  this  conclusive  table  would  lead  to  re- 
sults entirely  opposed  to  those  we  have  obtained. 

We  cannot  be  too  much  on  our  guard  against  con- 
clusions drawn  from  statistical  documents,  and  espe- 
cially against  the  methods  of  reasoning  which  may 
be  employed.  The  greatest  sagacity  is  necessary  to 
distinguish  the  degree  of  importance  to  be  attached 
to  each  influencing  element;  and  we  have  frequent 
proofs  that  even  clever  men  have  been  led  into  ab- 
surdities by  ascribing  to  certain  causes  influences  pro- 
duced by  other  causes  which  they  had  neglected  to 
take  into  consideration. 

The  fatal  influence  of  the  years  1816  and  1817 
shows  itself  not  only  in  the  general  results  of  deaths 
for  all  Belgium,  but  also,  as  has  been  remarked,*  in 
the  particular  resiilts  in  the  foundling  hospitals,  and 
in  houses  of  refuge.  This  may  be  judged  of  by  the 
following  numbers : — 

Years. 

1815,  - 
1816, 
1817,  - 
1818, 
1819,  - 

Foundling  Hospitals. 

Population.         Deaths. 

10,739 
11,176 
11,829 
12,813 
13,248 

1,597 
1,459 
1,793 
1,290 
1,346 

Mendicity 

Houses : 

Inhabitants  to 

one  Death. 

8'25 
1015 
5-49 
6  79 
9-29 

We  ought  to  attribute  this  greater  mortality  to  the 
individuals  admitted  into  the  hospitals  and  mendicity 
houses  having  been  already  sufferers  from  the  famine, 
and  not  to  the  privations  which  they  had  to  undergo 
in  these  establishments.  The  number  of  admissions 
of  foundlings,  which,  one  year  with  another,  never  ex- 
ceeded .3000,  reached  to  3945  in  1817:  it  is  this  which 
has  rendered  the  mortality  greater,  because  the  in- 

*  Page  35  of  Recherches  sur  la  Poptilation,  les  Naissances,  <feo., 
dans  le  Royaume  des  Pays  Bas.  See  also,  on  the  Mortality  of  1817f 
the  Statistiaue  Nationale  of  M.  Ed.  Smita, 

34 

ON  MAN. 

fants  exposed  at  this  critical  time  had  within  tliem 
the  germs  of  death  already.* 

Another  observation  whicli  may  he  made  on  the 
preceding  numbers,  is  the  dreadful  mortality  of  men- 
dicity houses,  which  was  about  4  or  5  times  as  gi-eat 
as  in  the  least  healtliy  provinces  of  Belgium :  we  may 
say  the  same  for  the  houses  for  foundlings.  This 
confirms  the  very  judicious  remarks  which  have  been 
made  by  MM.  Villerme  and  Benoiston  de  Chateauneuf, 
in  the  Armales  d  Hygiene,  on  tiie  unequal  mortaUty 
of  the  rich  and  poor.  The  deaths  in  the  prisons  of 
Belgium  were  incomparably  less  numerous  than  in 
the  houses  of  mendicity.  At  Vilvorde,  in  1824,  1825, 
and  1826,  there  was  1  to  28  inhabitants;  at  Saint- 
Bernard,  1  to  22  in  the  year  1826 ;  and  at  Ghent,  about 
the  same  period,  1  to  44  only :  this  ratio  is  somewhat 
less  than  that  for  the  whole  kingdom.  We  ought  to 
make  a  distinction  between  the  prisons  and  houses  of 
mendicity,  because  the  individuals  who  enter  these 
latter  establishments  rarely  make  a  stay  of  7  or  8 
months,  and  generally  arrive  there,  as  has  been 
already  stated,  with  a  constitution  undermined  by 
privation  and  disease;  on  the  contrary,  those  who 
enter  prison  after  having  undergone  sentence,  ai'e 
generally  in  a  less  unfavourable  state  of  health,  and 
the  a^'erage  duration  of  their  confinement  is  not  less 
than  5  years,  f 

In  investigating  the  influence  of  j'ears  of  peace  or 

war,  it  seems  to  me  that  in  general  the  same  degree 
of  confusion  has  been  made.  A  country  in  time  of 
war  suffers,  indeed,  because  its  male  population  f\ills, 
on  the  one  hand,  either  in  engagements,  or  in  conse- 
quence of  fatigue  and  privation ;  and,  on  the  other  hand, 
the  chances  of  reproduction  become  fewer ;  the  coun- 
try, moreover,  siifFers,  because  its  industry  and  acti- 
vity are  impeded,  or  because  importations  of  all  kinds, 
especially  of  grain,  are  diminished:  but  a  nation  might 
be  engaged  in  war  without  any  of  these  causes  under- 
going a  very  sensible  alteration.  It  would  be  then 
deceptive  to  look  for  the  effects  of  it  in  the  tables  of 
mortality.  It  is  in  this  manner  that  Mr  Sadler*  also 
denies  the  influence  of  years  of  war,  when  making 
use  of  English  da,ta ;  and  without  inquiring  Avhether 
tlie  means  of  subsistence,  the  imports,  and  tlie  ex- 
ports, had  undergone  any  change,  or  whether  the 
nation  had  been  deprived  of  a  i^art  of  the  male  popu- 
lation more  than  at  another  time.  I  think  that  we 
might  more  accurately  appreciate  this  influence  in 
sucli  a  country  as  Holland  or  Belgium,  several  pro- 
vinces of  which  have  a  great  maritime  trade,  and  the 
ports  of  which  have  long  been  closed.  Thus  I  sliall 
collect  the  numbers  given  during  the  two  decennial 
periods  which  have  preceded  and  followed  1814:  the 
one  includes  the  years  from  1804  to  181.3  inclusive,  and 
we  shall  take  it  as  a  period  of  war  ;  the  other  extends 
from  1815  to  1824,  and  forms  a  time  of  peace  :t — 

Deaths. 

Births. 

Marriages.              | 

Provinces. 

1st  Period. 

2d  Period. 

1st  Period. 

2d  Period. 

1st  Period. 

2d  Period. 

Brabant,  Nortliein,    - 

75,771 

69,507 

89,488 

]00,8';3 

21,210 

20,300 

Southern, 

1:8,3.%' 

119,109 

145,255 

169,181 

30,862 

36,423 

Limbourg, 

75,679 

70,.549 

91,. 397 

101,781 

20,453 

22,960 

Gueldres,     - 

53,764 

59,818 

67,300 

90,862 

15,627 

19,337 

Liege,       -        .        .        . 

74,683 

82,698 

102,949 

113,633 

22,671 

24,387 

Flanders,  East,    - 

169,966 

162,834 

207,334 

218,830 

42,549 

43,120 

West, 

144,726 

141,310 

179,099 

191,1.39 

37,668 

.37,882 

Hainault,     -        .        . 

110,344 

118,289 

158,762 

183,198 

37,093 

39,591 

Holland,  Northern, 

143,1(18 

121,735 

132,275 

145,744 

33,.533 

34,789 

Southern, 

1.3'J,457 

123,850 

135,703 

165,741 

32,498 

.34,942 

Zealand,  -       -        -        . 

46,237 

42,436 

45,805 

55,331 

10,731 

10,645 

Namur, 

30,519 

34,134 

48,557 

.58,690 

11,40!) 

12,592 

Antwerp, 

({7,126 

70,623 

96,058 

101,471 

21,579 

23,075 

Utrecht, 

31,150 

29,.')28 

36.0.J5 

41,03i! 

8.674 

8,982 

Friesland,         ... 

45,387 

38,219 

49,354 

65,  Wi5 

14.186 

15,327 

Overyssel,     - 

.3I,4a3 

37,479 

43,114 

51,951 

9,960 

11,629 

Groningen,        ... 

.37,026 

30„5.39 

41,592 

51,673 

11,940 

11,492 

Drenthe, 

9,418 

9,859 

13,254 

16,723 

3,691 

3,954 

Luxembourg,  ... 

66,406 

58,695 

91,809 

92,242 

20,412 

18,740 

Total, 

1,487,606 

1,421,600 

1,765,179 

2,015,646 

406,743 

430,247 

*  Gioja,  in  his  Filosqfia  deUa  Statislica,  has  taken  the  same 
years,  1815,  1816,  and  1817,  as  examples  of  the  influence  of  famine 
on  mortality.    The  following  are  the  results  at  which  he  has 
arrived  ;  they  do  not  require  any  comment : — 
Number  of  Children  exposed  at  the  Luogopio  de  Sainte-Catherine, 

at  Milan,  and  of  the  sick  persons  in  the  large  hospital  of  that 

city. 

rn 

■« 

ce 

i-i   o   (1 

g 

n,    i- 

o 

Years. 

s « s 

(2 
1 

lit 

o  '2  S 

o 

ill 

1815, 

2280 

1750 

17,974 

14,010 

59  liv. 

25  \i\: 

1816, 

2625 

(from  1818 

20,993 

(from  1818 

75   .. 

(from  1818 

1817, 

3082 

to  1825). 

23,350 

to  1825). 

63   .. 

to  l!^25^ 

Mortality  in  the  private  houses  and  hospitals  of  Milan. 

<u 

. 

0) 

Years. 

m 

Ill 

3  M  .a 

*o5 

1° 

c  S  a 

181.5, 

3n24 

X'M 

arm 

2028 

(;304 

5333 

1816, 

39(K 

(from  1818 

.3085 

(from  1818 

7051 

(from  1818 

1817, 

3806 

to  1825). 

4620 

to  1825). 

8426 

to  1825). 

t  Annales  d'llygifene. 

This  table  shows  us  at  first  that  in  all  the  pro- 
vinces, without  exception,  the  muuber  of  births  has 
been  greater  during  the  decennial  period  of  peace  than 
during  that  of  war ;  the  number  of  deaths,  on  the 
contrary,  has  been  smaUer,  except  in  some  provinces 
in  the  interior,  such  as  Gueldres,  Overyssel,  Drenthe, 
Brabant  (Southern),  Hainault,  Liege,  and  Namur;  yet 
the  difference  in  several  of  them  may  be  owing  to  the 
increase  of  population,  and  it  must  be  observed  that 
these  provinces  are  chiefly  agricultural,  and  that 
Hainault,  Namur,  and  Liege,  were  actively  engaged  in 
tlie  clearing  of  lands  and  toil  of  arms.  Tlie  number 
of  marriages  has  varied  very  little  durmg  the  two 
periods. 

The  provinces  wliicli  have  very  sensibly  sufieredby 
mortality  were  those  especially  which  are  maritime, 
and  whose  ports  were  closed  for  a  considerable  time. 
Thus  the  two  J  loUands  and  Zealand  had  more  deatlis 
than  birtlis.  This  state  of  things  ceased  at  the  peace. 
It  seems  to  me  that  the  results  contained  in  this  table 

*  [Mr  Sadler  seems  to  liave  been  anxious  to  maintain  the 
accur.icy  of  the  old  saw,  "  few  die  of  want,  thousands  of  sur- 
feit." Like  most  ancient  adages,  the  truth  will  be  found  by  as 
near  as  may  be  reversing  it.] 

t  See,  on  the  influence  of  the  wars  of  the  French  Empire,  the 
observations  of  M.  F.  D'lvernois,  the  results  of  which  liave  been 
given  at  page  2.3. 

ON  MAN. 

35 

are  as  conclusive  as  can  he  desired,  and  show  to  Avliat 
extent  wars  influence  mortalitj',  by  impeding  the  acti- 
vity of  the  people  and  injuring  their  industry. 

We  may  here  find  an  apparent  contradiction  to 
what  has  been  stated  elsewhere.  I  have  observed  that 
the  deaths  generally,  in  becoming  more  numerous, 
likewise  increase  the  number  of  marriages  and  births ; 
but  the  obstacle  to  the  multiplication  of  marriages 
was  that  very  state  of  war,  the  influence  of  which  I 
have  just  been  showing — a  state  which  removed  the 
major  part  of  the  young  men  from  society/.  Never- 
theless, we  observe  that  the  number  of  marriages  has 
been  almost  the  same  during  the  two  periods  ;  and  I 
find  a  new  confirmation  of  my  conjectures.  The  great 
mortality  ought  to  have  shortened  the  duration  of 
marriages,  and  brought  on  more  marriages  of  second 
and  third  unions,  which  have,  by  that  cause,  been  less 
fruitful,  and  produced  fewer  births.  I  particularly 
insist  on  this  fact,  whi''h  appears  to  me  very  remark- 
able, namelj%  that  the  fecundity  of  marriages  has  been 
incomparably  less  during  the  first  period. 

Remarks  somewhat  similar  sliovdd  be  made  for  the 
influence  of  years  of  famine.  Here  the  contradiction 
appears  greater.  A  great  mmiber  of  deaths  has  fre- 
quently been  accompanied  by  fewer  marriages ;  this 
was  owing  to  tlie  want  which  momentarily  induced 
the  death  exciting  a  fear  to  undertake  new  establish- 
ments, so  that  persons  did  not  pass  rapidly  from  the 
state  of  widowhood.  What  has  been  observed  con- 
cerning the  deaths,  whicli,  by  multiplying,  multiply 
the  man-iages  and  births,  ought  only  then  to  be  gene- 
rally understood  for  those  countries  whicli  are  not 
imder  the  influence  of  accidental  causes,  such  as  Avars, 
epidemics,  famines,  &c. 

5.  Influence  of  Seasons.* 
The  number  of  deaths,  like  that  of  births,  under- 
goes A'ery  sensible  variations  according  to  the  ditferent 
months  of  the  year.  Numerous  researches  have  al- 
ready been  presented  on  this  subject,  and  it  has  been 
acknowledged  that,  in  our  climate,  the  rigours  of 
Avinter  are  in  general  mortal  to  the  human  species.f 
The  following  table,  prepared  from  the  documents  of 
Belgium,  and  according  to  the  same  principles  as  that 
Avhich  has  been  given  for  births,  Avill  present  a  first 
example  of  the  influence  of  seasons  on  mortality: — 

months : 

Deaths. 

Ratio. 

1815  to  182G. 

To^vn. 

Country. 

Town. 

Country. 

.January,     - 

59,892 

116,129 

1-1.58 

1-212 

February, 

56,267 

114,758 

1'088 

1-198 

March, 

54,277 

114,244 

1-050 

1-192 

April,      - 

51,818 

107,264 

1-002 

1-120 

IMay,  - 

48,911 

93,714 

0-946 

0-978 

•fune. 

46,6(17 

84,464 

0-901 

0-882 

July,  - 

45,212 

77,5.55 

0-874 

0-809 

August,  - 

47,032 

78,8(t2 

0-910 

0-822 

September, 

50,191 

85.131 

0-971 

0-888 

October, 

51,649 

89,514 

0-999 

0-934 

November, 

52,908 

89,585 

1-024 

0-935 

Pecember,  - 

.55,631      ■ 

98,705 

1076 

1-030 

Average, 

51,700 

95,822 

1-000 

1-000 

*  The"gi-eater  part  of  -what  follo-ws  has  been  extracted  from  a 
memoir  Siir  rh\fucnce  cUs  Saisons  et  clcs  Apes  sur  la  Mortality, 
which  I  presented  to  the  Royal  Academy  of  Sciences  of  the  Insti- 
tute in  1833.  I  had  .already  published  some  observations  on  this 
subject  in  the  first  volumes  of  my  Correspondance  Maihematiquc 
el  Physique. 

t  [Another  old  saw,  and  as  like  the  preceding  as  possible  in 
its  almost  inconceivable  want  of  any  foundation  in  truth,  was, 
that  "  an  open  winter,  or  a  gi-eeu  C'liristmas,  make  a  fat  church- 
yard : "  like  the  former  sa^msupported  by  Mr  Sadler,  it  may 
readily  be  shown  that  a  precisely  reverse  statement  -ivill  approach 
tlie  truth  as  near  as  possible :  this  had  been  long  suspected  by 
Dr  Heberden.  In  the  climate  and  locality  of  Edinburgh,  for  ex- 
ample, the  first  setting-in  of  frost  is  annually  accompanied  by  a 
great  increase  of  mortality  ;  it  also  aggravates  both  the  number 
of  cases  of  typhus  fever  and  the  deaths  therefrom,  occasionally 
to  an  alarming  extent.] 

Let  us  here  again  remark  that  the  influence  of  the 
seasons  is  more  evident  in  the  country  than  in  town, 
where  there  is  a  greater  combination  of  means  to 
Avithstand  the  inequality  of  temperatures. 

The  terms  of  maximum  and  minimum  do  not  take 
place  at  the  same  time  in  all  climates  ;  in  some,  they 
even  appear  to  have  been  shifted  by  civilisation,  which 
has  caused  local  causes  of  epidemics  to  disappear. 
These  epidemics  were  especially  caused  by  high  tem- 
peratures in  marshy  places  or  the  interior  of  cities. 
M.  Villerme  has  jjointed  out  a  very  striking  example 
for  the  city  of  Paris  {An.  d' Hygiene),  in  the  following 
table  of  the  months,  arranged  in  the  order  of  the  de- 
creasing mnriber  of  deaths  of  an  average  day: — 

.§5 

0)  .a  3 

ears  up  to  1722, 
uding  the  13th 
the  preceding 
Column. 

2  o 

h 

u  a 

2"" 

s  . 

lii 
g.S  c 

S§-2 

i 

Q)    O 

Si 

'"2  — 

(H 

tx 

!^ 

03  a  '^ 

<u  '■' 

o.S  ° 

p 

^ 

g 

h|2 

H 

Sept. 

Feb. 

April. 

April. 

April. 

April. 

April. 

Dee. 

Sept. 

March. 

March. 

March. 

March. 

March. 

Jan. 

April. 

May. 

Feb. 

Feb. 

Feb. 

May. 

Nov. 

Jan. 

Feb. 

May. 

J.an. 

Jan. 

Jan. 

JIarch. 

March. 

Jan. 

Jan. 

May. 

May. 

Feb. 

May. 

May. 

Dec. 

Jime. 

Dec. 

Dec. 

June. 

A\ig. 

Oct. 

.Jime. 

Dee. 

June. 

June. 

Sept. 

Feb. 

Nov. 

Sept. 

Nov. 

Oct. 

Sept. 

Dec. 

Oct. 

Dec. 

Aug. 

Oct. 

Sept. 

Nov. 

Aug. 

April. 

Aug. 

Oct. 

Sept. 

Nov. 

Oct. 

Oct. 

June. 

.June. 

Nov.    • 

July. 

July. 

Aug. 

Nov. 

July. 

July. 

July. 

Aug. 

Aug. 

July. 

Jvily. 

This  table  is  foimded  on  tAvo  millions  of  deaths :  it 
resiflts  from  this  (says  M.  Villerme),  that  from  the  pro- 
gressive dimintition  of  the  epidemics  Avhich  so  often 
desolated  Paris  formerly,  at  the  end  of  summer,  the 
annual  period  of  the  maximum  of  mortality  in  this  city 
has  been  shifted.  During  the  years  of  the  17th  cen- 
tury of  Avhich  we  have  accoimts,  this  maximum  took 
place  in  autumn,  but  now  it  is  in  spring.  Formerly 
the  minimum  was  observed  at  the  beginning  of  sum- 
mer, but  in  the  present  age  it  is  a  little  later.  This 
proof  of  the  ameliorations  Avhich  have  been  made  in 
Paris,  since  the  end  of  the  reign  of  Louis  XIV.  (con- 
tinues ]\r.  Villerme),  either  in  the  health}^  state  of  the 
city  itself,  or  in  the  lot  and  condition  of  the  inhabi- 
tants, is  decisive;  for  we  may  affirm  that  the  changes 
which  we  have  just  confirmed,  belong,  not  to  an  in- 
crease of  mortality  during  the  season  wliich  at  present 
gives  the  maximum,  but  to  a  diminution  during  the 
season  Avhich  formerly  contained  the  greatest  nimiber 
of  deaths. 

M.  Villerme  makes  the  observation,  that  the  epide- 
mics Avhich  result  from  famine  ahvays  exercise  their 
ravages  at  annual  periods,  Avhen  food  is  most  scarce, 
difficult  to  obtain,  or  the  diseases  Avhich  induce  pain- 
ful conditions  of  life,  for  a  great  number  of  men,  are 
more  numerous  or  much  more  aggravated  ;  and  they 
cease  after  harvest,  which  brings  back  abmidance. 
For  example,  in  the  ancient  kingdom  of  Holland  and 
the  Netherlands,  at  the  end  of  the  bad  harvest  of 
1816,  the  excess  of  deaths  became  very  sensible  dur- 
ing the  foUoAving  year,  and  particularly  durmg  the 
months  which  preceded  the  ncAv  harvest. 

With  respect  to  epidemics,  independent  of  famine, 
they  seem  to  be  generally  combined  with  summer 
or  hot  Aveather,  and  tlie  first  months  of  autumn,  at 
least  in  our  climate.  This  seems  to  be  especiaUy  the 
case  from  the  researches  of  M.  Friedlander  for  Lon- 
don, Dantzic,  Malta,  Lavalette,  and  Aleppo.* 

According  to  Wargentin,  the  maximum  of  morta- 
lity for  Stockholm  Avould  take  place  in  the  month  of 
August ;  and  according  to  M.  Mourgue,  it  is  the  same 
for  Montpellier.  The  displacement  of  the  maximum 
in  these  cities  may  be  owing  to  local  causes.  It  ap- 
*  Des  Epidemics,  &c.,  An.  d'Hygii'ne,  p.  27. 

36 

ON  MAN. 

pears,  at  least  in  most  European  countries,  that  the 
maximum  of  deaths  generally  takes  place  at  the  end  of 
winter,  and  the  minimum  about  the  middle  of  summer. 

But  this  observation  was  so  complex  that  we  sought 
to  analyse  the  particular  facts  which  it  sums  up.  It 
was  interesting  to  see  if  the  rigours  of  winter  were 
equally  fatal  at  aU  ages,  and  if  the  maxima  and 
minima  of  deaths  invariably  took  place  in  the  same 
months,  at  ditFerent  periods  of  life,  or  whether  they 
varied  according  to  these  periods. 

I  have  examined  this  thorny  question  vnih  care, 
notwithstanding  the  long  and  irksome  calculations 
which  I  was  obliged  to  undertake.  To  perfect  my 
researches  as  mucli  as  possible,  I  have  taken  into  ac- 
count town  or  country  residence,  and  the  distinction 
of  sexes,  so  that  the  tables  which  I  have  formed  are 
at  the  same  time  tables  of  mortaUty  for  the  different 
months,  for  men  and  women,  for  town  and  country.* 
I  do  not  think  that  this  subject  has  ever  been  consi- 
dered in  a  sufficiently  comprehensive  manner ;  there 
were,  however,  some  special  works,  particidarly  on 
the  mortality  of  new-born  children.  ilM.  VUlerme 
and  Milne  Edwards  had  observed  that  the  mortality 
of  new-born  children  increases  during  the  heat  of 
summer,  and  stUl  more  during  the  cold  of  winter  ;f 
but  their  numbers,  belonging  to  the  three  months 
which  follow  birth,  do  not  establish  distinctions  for 
each  particular  month,  nor  for  the  more  advanced 
months. 

According  to  the  researches  made  in  Belgium,  the 
maximum  of  deaths  in  summer  was  not  sensible  dur- 
ing the  first  month  after  birth  :  but,  setting  out  from 
this  period,  it  takes  place  in  August,  and  is  most  con- 
spicuous towards  the  middle  of  the  first  year;  the 
two  minima,  wliich  were  confounded  during  the  first 
month,  afterwards  diverge  more  and  more  until  the 
fifth  and  sixth  months,  and  are  placed  the  on$  in 
April  the  other  in  iS'^ovember :  they  afterwards  approxi- 
mate again,  to  be  again  confoimded,  after  the  first  year, 
and  to  form  a  single  minimum  in  September.  This 
singular  result  is  found  again  when  we  consider  the 
tables  for  the  mortality  of  the  sexes  separately ;  it  is 
found  again,  in  making  the  distinction  of  town  and 
country ;  but  the  maximum  of  summer  is  manifest 
in  town  from  the  first  month  after  birth. 

^Vhen  we  consider  the  number  of  deaths  which 
take  place  soon  after  birth,  it  becomes  necessary  to 
take  into  accoimt  the  excess  of  births  which  takes 

place  after  the  winter:  now,  in  taking  an  account 
of  this  excess,  we  find  that  it  does  not  sensibly  influ- 
ence the  results  previously  announced.  It  is  always 
correct,  then,  to  say,  that  the  greatest  mortaUty, 
in  the  first  year  which  succeeds  birth,  is  observed 
during  winter,  that  it  diminishes  in  spring,  increases 
a  little  durmg  the  heat  of  summer,  and  afterwards 
undergoes  a  new  diminution  on  the  near  approach  of 
winter ;  so  that  a  mUd  temperature  is  most  fitly 
adapted  to  tender  infancy,  whUe  excess  of  heat  and 
excess  of  cold  are  prejudicial  to  it,  either  because 
tliese  excesses  directly  influence  an  organisation  which 
is  stiU  very  delicate,  or  because  they  act  through  the 
intermediiun  of  the  mother  who  supports  it. 

After  the  first  year,  the  mortality  of  children  is 
entirely  altered ;  we  only  observe  one  maximum  and 
one  minimum ;  the  maximum  appears  after  winter, 
and  the  minimum  in  simimer.  From  the  age  of  eight 
to  twelve,  these  terms  are  sUghtly  altered,  and  advance 
in  the  order  of  the  months,  untU  near  the  epoch  of 
puberty,  in  such  a  manner  that  the  maximum  of  deaths 
is  observed  in  May  and  the  minimum  in  October. 
Near  puberty,  the  maximmn  recedes  imtil  the  25  th 
year,  and  is  invariably  placed  in  the  month  of  February, 
until  the  most  remote  age.  As  to  the  minimum,  it 
does  not  again  leave  the  month  of  October,  but  it 
establishes  a  second  in  the  month  of  July,  which  re- 
mains there  till  the  end  of  the  mortal  career ;  so  that 
between  these  two  minima,  placed  three  months  dis- 
tant from  each  other,  we  observe  a  secondary  maxi- 
mum, scarcely  apparent  indeed,  during  the  month  of 
September. 

Thus,  when  man  and  woman  have  attained  their 
physical  development  (about  the  age  of  25  years), 
they  are  like  children  during  the  first  year,  most 
subject  to  mortaUty  after  the  heat  of  summer  and 
the  rigours  of  Avinter. 

The  table  which  foUows  will  assist  the  reader  to 
understand  these  results,  and  their  numerical  appre- 
ciation. It  is  well  to  be  aware,  that  in  the  calcula- 
tions I  have  taken  account  of  the  unequal  lengths  of 
the  months.  On  the  other  hand,  that  we  may  per- 
ceive at  one  glance  the  law  of  mortality  with  respect 
to  seasons  and  ages,  I  have  constructed  a  series  of 
Unes,  which,  by  their  greater  or  less  divergence  from 
the  horizontal  line,  indicate  the  greater  or  less  diver- 
gence from  the  average  mortaUty.  (See  the  figured 
table,  plate  1). 

Table  Showing  the  Influence  of  Seasons  and  Age  on  Mortality. 

Ages. 

Jan. 

Feb. 

March. 

April. 

May. 

June. 

July. 

Aug. 

Sept. 

Oct. 

Nov. 

Dec. 

From   0  to    1  month, 

1-39 

1-28 

1-21 

1-02 

0-93 

0-82 

0-78 

0-79 

0-86 

0-91 

0-93 

1-07 

-     1  to   3      „ 

1-39 

1-18 

M5 

0-95 

0-89 

0-fB 

0-a3 

0-94 

0-83 

0-92 

0-97 

113 

~     3  to   6      ~ 

1-24 

1-06 

1-02 

0-90 

0-95 

0-95 

0-99 

1-og 

0-99 

0-94 

0-86 

1-02 

-     6  to  12      - 

128 

1-21 

1-27 

118 

1-06 

0-84 

076 

0-87 

0-81 

0-82 

0-8G 

1-03 

„    12  to  18      ~ 

1-10 

Ml 

1-24 

1-30 

1-25 

1-03 

0-88 

0-81 

0-74 

0-77 

0-78 

0-.98 

-    18  to  24      „ 

1-23 

M8 

1-21 

118 

1-03 

0-84 

0-80 

0-7G 

0-75 

081 

1-01 

118 

—     2  to   3  years, 

1-22 

M3 

1-30 

1-27 

M2 

0-94 

0-82 

0-73 

0-76 

0-78 

0-91 

101 

-     3  to   5      - 

1-23 

M6 

1-26 

1-29 

113 

0-94 

0-78 

0-74 

0-73 

0-79 

0-89 

1-05 

-     5  to    8      ,- 

1-20 

1-17 

1-32 

1-24 

1-20 

0-96 

0-78 

0-74 

0-76  ■ 

0-75 

0*5 

1-02 

-     8  to  12      - 

1-08 

1-06 

1-27 

1-34 

1-21 

0-99 

0-88 

0-82 

0-81 

0-76 

0-80 

0-96 

-    12  to  16      ~ 

0-95 

0-95 

114 

M4 

M9 

104 

0-97 

0-95 

0-96 

0  81 

0-86 

1-04 

-    16  to  20      -, 

0-93 

0-94 

l-i)7 

118 

115 

103 

1-00 

0-99 

0-89 

0-87 

0-95     , 

1-01 

-    20  to  25      - 

0-97 

1-00 

I  09 

102 

109 

0-96 

0-90 

0-92 

0-96 

0-95 

1-03 

111 

-,   25  to  30      - 

105 

104 

Ml 

106 

1-02 

1-02 

0-91 

0-96 

0-95 

0-93 

0'97 

0-97 

„   30  to  40      - 

Ml 

113 

Ml 

1-04 

0-99 

0-92 

0-85 

0  94 

0-99 

0-95 

0-94 

1-03 

-    40  to  50      „ 

M7 

115 

113 

1-05 

0-99 

0-86 

0-8G 

0-94 

0-93 

0-87 

0-95 

111 

-   50  to  65      - 

1-30 

1-22 

Ml 

1-02 

0-93 

0-85 

0-77 

0-85 

0-89 

0-90 

1-00 

1-15 

,.   65  to  75      ~ 

l-)3 

1-32 

M8 

0-99 

0-91 

0-77 

0-71 

0-80 

0-38 

0-86 

098 

M7 

-   75  to  90      - 

1-47 

1-39 

M6 

I -01 

0-87 

0-77 

0-67 

0-75 

0-84 

0-84 

1-00 

1-21 

—   90  &  upwards, 

1-.58 

1-48 

1-25 

0-96 

0-84 

0-7o 

0-64 

0G6 

0-76 

0-74 

1-03 

1-29 

Average,      -    - 

1-26 

1-20 

M7 

108 

1-00 

0-88 

0-80 

0-84 

0-80 

0-86 

0-94 

109 

*  These  researches  are  founded  on  the  official  documents  in- 
trusted to  me  bj'  the  Bureau  de  Statistique  established  by  the 
minister  of  the  interior.  Tliey  comprise  about  400,000  of  different 
ages,  and  apply  to  all  Belgium  for  the  years  1827  to  1831.  How- 
ever, tlie  occupation  of  Maestricht  and  Luxembourg,  has  left 
some  vacancies  ia  the  tables  prepared  for  the  eastern  part  of  the 
kingdom.  t  Au.  d'Hygi^ne,  1829. 

We  may  see,  from  the  preceding  table,  that  at  no 
period  of  Ufe  is  the  influence  of  the  seasons  on  mor- 
tality more  perceptible  than  in  old  age ;  and  at  no  age 
less  than  between  20  and  25,  when  the  physical  man, 
fuUy  developed,  enjoys  the  plenitude  of  his  power. 

The  absolute  maxima  and  minima  are  very  e^adent 
between  1  and  12  years,  and  after  the  age  of  50,  since 

ON  MAN. 

37 

they  afford  numbers  ■which,  especially  in  the  latter 
period,  are  as  1  to  2  and  2^.  It  is  not  so  with  the 
secondary  maxima  of  summer :  the  numbers  which 
they  present  differ  so  little  from  those  of  the  minima 
between  which  they  fall,  that  we  may,  for  some  pe- 
riods, attribute  the  difference  to  the  almost  inevitable 
errors  in  this  species  of  observations,  if  they  did  not 
manifest  themselves  in  the  same  manner  for  several 
successive  years,  and  even  in  the  partial  tables,  mak- 
ing a  distinction  of  sexes. 

Now,  if  we  establish  this  latter  distinction,  we  shall 
find  that,  for  the  different  epochs  of  life  taken  sepa- 
rately, the  numbers  minima  and  maxima,  both  abso- 
lute and  secondary,  fall  almost  exactly  on  the  same 
months,  and  that  their  ratios  have  almost  the  same 
A'alues  ;  but  it  is  not  so  with  the  absolute  number  of 
deaths  for  each  sex.  Thus,  as  we  have  already  seen, 
during  the  first  year  after  birth,  more  boys  die  than 
girls,  and  the  ratio  of  deaths  for  the  two  sexes  is 
almost  the  same  for  each  month.  Besides,  we  may 
judge  better  by  comparmgthe  deaths  which  have  taken 
place  at  the  same  epochs  and  in  the  same  localities. 
I  am  contented  to  compare  the  principal  ages  with 
each  other,  and  I  have  assumed  as  imity  the  number 
of  male  deaths. 

.a 

. 

m 

^ 

i 

Months. 

§ 

2 

O 

■^ 

O 

■<r 

.January, 

0  75 

0-95 

1-32 

1-M 

0-83 

1-21 

February, 

0-70 

0-91 

1-42 

1-08 

0-83 

1-22 

March,  - 

0-79 

090 

111 

M7 

0-78 

118 

April,  - 

0-73 

094 

1-23 

1-18 

0-80 

1-21 

May, 

0-75 

0-96 

1-45 

0-97 

0-80 

1-30 

Juno,  - 

067 

0-97 

1-28 

1-16 

0-73 

M8 

July,      - 

0-70 

1-(10 

1-32 

1-08 

0-78 

1-17  . 

August, 

0-79 

0-92 

1-20 

0-98 

0-77 

1-08 

September, 

0-79 

09a 

1-31 

1-01 

0-73 

1(W 

October, 

0-67 

0-99 

1-22 

l-Ol 

0-68 

Ml 

November, 

0-76 

105 

1-20 

e-99 

0-64 

1-11 

December, 

076 

105 

l-2() 

&<X, 

0-64 

M8 

1-18 
1-30 
1-50 
1-44 
1-40 
1-20 
1-42 
1-08 
1-47 
1-50 
1-08 
1-48 

Li  making  the  distinction  of  town  and  country,  I 
have  not  found  any  essential  difference  in  the  results 
concerning  the  influence  of  seasons  on  mortidity.  I 
was  also  equally  occupied  in  investigating  the  influ- 
ence which  the  seasons  might  have  on  the  number 
of  still-born  infants ;  but  the  results  which  I  have 
obtained  have  already  been  quoted  at  page  2.5. 

Since  my  first  researches  on  the  relations  which 
exist  at  different  ages,  between  the  seasons  and  tlie 
mortality,  a  similar  work,  by  M.  Lombard  of  Geneva,* 
has  appeared.  I  have  had  the  satisfaction  to  see  that 
the  conclusions  of  this  philosopher  almost  exactly  coin- 
cide with  my  own ;  although  they  only  include  17,623 
deaths,  it  is  easy  to  perceive  that  they  establish 
nearly  the  same  facts  as  those  observed  in  Belgiiim. 
Some  displacements  of  the  maxima  may  proceed 
from  the  combined  influence  of  different  causes, 
which  must  nattxrally  vary  with  the  localities.  Thus 
the  tables  of  Geneva  give  for  the  first  month  after 
birth  results  conformable  to  those  of  Belgium,  and  we 
do  not  perceive  any  secondary  maxinnun  in  summer, 
except  for  infants  between  one  month  and  two  years 
old  —  though  this  secondary  maximiun  is  evidently 
later  than  in  Belgium,  and  appears  in  the  months  of 
September  and  October.  It  is  to  be  regretted  that  the 
numbers  for  Geneva  do  not  make  the  distinction  of 
children  of  early  age,  since  their  mortality  differs  so 
much,  according  to  my  observations.  M.  Lombard 
does  not  admit  that  this  secondary  maximum  of 
deaths,  which  he  finds  in  September  and  October,  for 
children  of  one  or  two  years  old,  may  be  caused  by  the 
continuance  of  heat,  to  which  cause  MM.  Villerme  and 
Edwards  attribute  it :  he  thinks  that  it  might  be  attri- 

*  De  Ilnfluence  des  Saisons  sur  la  Mortality  a  differens  Ages. 

buted  "  to  the  difference  of  temperature  betiveen  day 
and  night,  which  is  never  greater  than  at  this  time  of 
the  year."  This  difference,  according  to  him,  princi- 
pally affects  the  digestive  tube,  an  organ  which,  in 
the  child,  is  very  hable  to  contract  serious  disease. 
The  secondary  maximum  of  September,  for  the  most 
advanced  years,  which  I  also  find  in  his  numbers,  still 
remains  to  be  explained;  moreover,  the  two  causes 
assumed  are  both  probable. 

6.  Influence  of  the  Hours  or  Time  of  Day. 

The  different  parts  of  the  day  (day  and  night)  seem 
to  exercise  an  uifluence  over  the  number  of  deaths 
similar  to  that  by  the  same  cause  over  births  ;  but  to 
arrive  at  satisfactory  conclusions  respecting  this  point, 
more  numerous  observations  are  required.  The  only 
data  I  have  been  able  to  obtain  ai'e  drawn  from  the 
records  of  the  Hospital  Saint-Pierre  at  Brussels  for 
a  period  of  30  years  :* — 

Hours.  Deaths. 

After  midnight,  12  to  6  o'clock,  -  -  -  1397 
Before  mid-day,  6  to  12  noon,  ...  -  1321 
After  mid-day,  12  to  6  P.M.,  -  -  .  -  1458 
Before  midnight,  6  to  12, 1074 

5250 

The  difference  of  day  and  night  is  not  so  well 
marked  for  the  births ;  and,  contrary  to  what  we  ob- 
served in  regard  to  the  births,  most  deaths  take  place 
in  the  day  time.  The  two  first  parts  of  the  day  pre- 
sent nearly  the  same  number  of  deaths,  the  difference 
affecting  chiefly  the  6  hours  following  mid-day  and  the 
6  hours  preceding  midnight. 

The  inquiries  of  Dr  Buck  of  Hamburg  do  not 
agree  so  well  with  ours  on  this  point  as  they  did  in 
regard  to  the  births.  The  following  table  contains 
the  results,  as  he  has  given  them,  the  seasons  having 
been  taken  into  consideration,  and  their  sum  reduced 
to  1000. 

Deaths,  t 

Winter. 

Spring. 

Summer. 

Autumn. 

Medium 

or 
Average. 

After  midnight. 
Before  noon, 
Afternoon,     -    - 
Before  midnight. 

315 

243 
194 
248 

321 

260 
211 

207 

292 
236 
220 
252 

281 
220 

227 
272 

306 
242 
211 
241 

These  numbers  agree  with  the  preceding  only  in 
this  respect,  that  the  number  for  the  first  part  of  the 
day  exceeds  that  for  the  second.  The  ratio  in  respect 
to  Hamburg  is  548  to  4.52,  and  for  Brussels  2718  to 
2532 ;  and  this  is  also  what  we  observe  with  respect 
to  births.  But  I  repeat,  in  order  to  entitle  them  to 
confidence,  these  researches  ought  to  be  very  consi- 
derably extended. 

CHAPTER  VL 

ON  THE  INFLUENCE  OF  DISTURBING  CAUSES  ON  THE   NUMBER 
OF  DEATHS. 

1.  Influence  of  Professions,  Degree  of  AflBuence,  &c. 

It  is  scarcely  possible,  in  the  actual  state  of  science,  to 
determine  precisely  the  different  chances  of  mortaUty 
to  which  man  is  exposed  in  different  social  condi- 
tions :  the  elements  which  we  have  been  able  to  coL 
lect,  to  determine  this  point,  are  at  present  too  scanty; 
however,  they  enable  us  to  prove  that  the  influence  of 
professions,  for  instance,  may  cause  a  considerable 
variation  in  the  degree  of  mortality.  It  is  the  same 
with  the  affluence  and  mode  of  subsistence  of  a  people. 
To  obtain  conclusive  ideas  on  these  important  points, 
I  am  going  to  bring  forward  the  principal  results 
which  have  been  arrived  at. 

Statisticians  at  the  present  day  appear  to  acknow- 

*  For  the  details,  see  Correspondance  Mathematique,  1827,  vol.  iii. 
page  42,  and  the  Recherchcs  sur  la  Reproduction,  Sfc. 

t  [Although  the  word  Naissance  is  found  here  in  the  original 
work,  it  is  quite  evident  that  the  author  means  Deces,  or  Deatlis.l 

38 

ON  MAN. 

ledge  that  the  chances  of  mortaUty  are  much  more 
numerous  in  manufacturing  than  in  agricultural  coun- 
tries, and  in  the  interior  of  cities  than  in  the  middle 
of  the  country.  We  have  already  had  several  proofs 
in  Avhat  has  gone  before,  and  Ave  can  produce  some 
fresh  ones— I  do  not  say  for  toAvn  and  comitry,  for  Ave 
have  seen  that  the  difference  of  mortality  is  too  appa- 
rent to  require  us  to  return  to  it  again — but  for  manu- 
facturing provinces. 

Jfvre  first  look  at  England,  Ave  shall  there  find  very 
evident  differences  betAveen  the  manufacturing  and 
agricultiu-al  provinces.  The  foUoAving  are  some  re- 
sults Avhich  have  been  communicated  to  me  by  M. 
VUlerme,  Avho  has  deduced  them  from  the  ncAv  docu- 
ments pubhshed  in  England  by  Mr  Rickman,  for  the 
years  1813  to  1830  inclusive: — 

In  the  whole  of  the  agricultu-  i 
ral  districts,      .         -         -      ) 

In  the  whole  of  the  districts  ^ 
partlyagriculturaland partly  r 
manufacturing,    -        -         3 

In  the  whole  of  the  manufac-  | 
luring  districts,         -         -      ' 

Of  10,000  Deaths  which  have 
taken  place 

From  Birth  to 
the  most  ad- 
vanced Age, 
before  the  Age 
of  10  Years  had 
been  com- 
pleted, there 

3,50J 
3,828 
4,355 

From  the  Age 
of  10  Years  to 
the  greatest 
degree  of  lon- 
gevity, from 
the  10th  to 
the  40th,  there 
were — 

3,142 
3,310 
3,7^7 

We  here  see  very  evidently  that  aU  the  advantages 
are  on  the  side  of  the  agricultural  districts. 

In  the  Netherlands,  the  most  agricultural  province  is 
Gueldres :  tlie  mortality  there  is  only  1  in  537  indi- 
viduals, Avhilst  in  the  commercial  provinces  of  Hol- 
land it  is  1  in  35. 

In  Belgium,  the  provmces  generally  displaying  the 
fcAvest  deaths  are  those  of  Luxembovirg,  Namur,  and 
Hainault ;  these  are  also  essentiaUy  agricultm-al  pro- 
vinces, although  the  tAvo  latter  have  some  manufac- 
turing toAvns. 

France  presents  similar  results,  but  Avhich  will  appear 
less  conclusive,  because  the  departments  most  exposed 
to  mortality  are  certainly  the  manufacturing  depart- 
ments in  general;  but  since  these  are  also  those  Avhich 
include  the  greatest  cities  in  the  kingdom,  Ave  cannot 
exactly  discern  Avhether  it  is  reaUy  the  professions  of 
the  inhabitants  or  their  dense  croAvding  Avhich  causes 
the  excess  of  mortahty. 

It  would  appear  evident  that  the  most  favourable 
state  for  man  is  a  regular  life,  Avhich  produces  a  suffi- 
ciency for  his  Avants,  and  which  is  not  agitated  by  the 
passions  or  irregularities  of  town  life.  In  the  agri- 
cultural state,  man  generally  attains  a  state  of  com- 
parative affluence:  he  does  not  undergo,  as  in  the 
manufacturing  districts,  the  alternate  changes  of  su- 
perfluity and  Avant — he  is  less  acquainted  with  these 
tAvo  extremes  Avhich  subject  him  to  privations  or 
drive  him  to  excesses. 

Misery,  Avith  the  privations  Avhich  it  brings  in  its 
train,  is  one  of  the  most  poAverful  causes  of  mortahty. 
Several  statisticians  haA'e  endeavoured  to  demonstrate 
this  obserA\ation ;  and  again,  very  recently,  M.  Benois- 
ton  de  Chateauneuf  has  given  a  ncAv  confirmation  of 
it  in  a  paper  entitled  "On  the  Dm-ation  of  Life  in  the 
Rich  and  in  the  Poor."*  The  author,  to  Avhom  Ave 
are  indebted  for  a  valuable  collection  of  researches  on 
the  mortahty  of  man  in  his  different  social  conditions, 
has  made,  on  the  one  hand,  an  abstract  of  the  deaths 
of  1600  persons  of  the  highest  rank,  among  Avhich  are 
157  sovereigns  or  princes;  on  the  other  hand,  he  has 
taken  from  the  civil  registers  of  the  state  the  deaths 
of  2000  persons  in  the  l'2th  arrondissement  of  Paris, 
*  Sec  the  Monitcur  for  3Iay  11,  lai'J. 

Avhich  contains  a  population  of  Avorkmen  of  all  kind^, 
ragmen,  sAveepers,  delvers,  day-labourers,  &c.,  a  class 
subjected  to  pain,  anxiety,  and  hard  labour,  who  live 
in  Avant,  and  die  in  hospitals.  These  researches, 
Avhich  bring  together  the  extremes  of  wealth  and  po- 
verty, have  given  the  folloAving  results  : — 

Age. 

25  to  30  years, 

30  to  35  „ 

35  to  40  -, 

40  to  45  „ 

45  to  50  -, 

50  to  55  „ 

55  to  60  ~ 

60  to  65  „ 

C5  to  70  - 

70  to  75  ~ 

75  to  80  « 

80  to  85  ~ 

85  to  90  „ 

90  to  95  - 

Jlortality 

of  the  Com-       ,  ,,     _ .  , 
monrank.*     of  the  Rich. 

1-41 
1-5G 
1-71 
1-91 
2-21 
2-68 
3-39 
4-41 
5-85 
7-80 
10-32 
13-15 
13  55 
14-05 

0-00 
0-85 
1-20 
0-85 
1-59 
1-81 
1-68 
3-06 
4-31 
6-80 
809 
11-58 
16-29 

of  the  Poor. 

2-22 
1-43 
1-85 
1-87 
2-39 
2-.58 
4-GO 
5-76 
9-25 
14-14 
14-59 

The  registers  of  insurance  societies  likcAvise  tend 
to  point  out  the  greater  mortality  of  the  poor.  The 
Equitable  Society  had  ahvays  employed  the  tables  of 
mortality  of  Northampton ;  but  the  secretary,  Mr 
Morgan,  shoAved,  in  1810,  that  the  deaths  of  83,000 
insured  persons,  Avhich  had  taken  place  in  the  space 
of  30  j-ears,  Avere  in  the  ratio  of  2  to  3  compared  Avith 
those  glA'en  in  the  tables.  Among  these  select  per- 
sons, the  mortality  of  females  is  stiU  lower  than  that 
of  males,  because,  in  the  middle  class,  Avomen  are 
more  exempt  from  anxiety  and  fatigue,  as  Avell  as  the 
fatal  eftects  of  passion  and  irregularities  of  conduct. 
In  general,  among  the  persons  insured  by  the  Equi- 
table Society,  the  average  death  annually  Avas  only 
1  in  81-5  from  the  year  1800  to  1820.t 

On  .the  other  hand,  to  take  an  extreme  limit  also,  if 
Ave  consider  man  in  the  state  of  greatest  miserj'  and 
deepest  degradation,  it  is  calculated  that  one  negTo 
slave  dies  annually  out  of  5  or  6,  AvhUst  the  free 
Africans  who  served  in  the  English  troops  only  lost  1 
man  in  33-3.J 

It  is  likcAvise  proper  that  Ave  should  duly  under- 
stand the  Avord  riches,  Avhen  speaking  of  population : 
a  great  abundance  of  goods  is  often  only  a  ready  means 
of  gratifying  the  passions  and  giving  Avay  to  excesses 
of  every  kind.  The  most  favourable  state  of  a  people 
is  that  in  which  they  liaA-^e  the  means  of  providing  for 
every  real  want,  Avithout  exceeding  the  boimds  of  tem- 
perance, and  Avithout  creating  artificial  wants.  It  is 
to  be  observed,  as  M.  de  Tracey  very  judiciously  re- 
marks, that  the  people  are  almost  always  richer  in 
nations  caUed  poor  than  in  those  cahed  rick.  Thus, 
there  is  no  nation  possessed  of  more  Avealth  than 
England,  yet  a  great  part  of  the  popiilation  subsist  on 
pubhc  money.§  The  rich  proAince  of  Flanders  cer- 
tainly contains  more  poor  than  Luxembourg,  Avliere 
great  fortunes  are  rare  ;  but  here  the  population  live 
in  a  state  of  general  afiluence,  and  find  tlie  means  of 
procuring  moderate  incomes,  and  Avhich  never  vary 
from  day  to  day,  as  in  the  manufacturing  districts. 
The  same  may  be  said  of  Switzerland,  and  agricul- 
tural countries  generally. 

According  to  Mr  Hawkins,  the  mortality  of  the 
Avhole  marine  of  England,  in  the  different  parts  of  the 
Avorld,  without  excepting  the  popiUation  in  hospitals, 
was  in  1813  1  in  42.     The  same  author  thinks  that 

*  According  to  the  table  of  JI.  Diivillard- 

t  M.  D'Xvemois  has  quoted  several  striking  examples  of  longe- 
vity among  insured  and  select  persons  in  the  affluent  classes  of 
Geneva. — (Bib.  Universelle). 

±  l^.lements  of  Medical  Statistics,  p.  208,  et  seq. 

§  [M.  Quetelet  here  refers  to  the  exorbitant  sums  levied  in 
England  in  the  form  of  poor-rates,  and  which  amounted  to 
£4,123,6i>4  in  the  year  1838.  No  alteration  of  consequence  has 
since  taken  place  in  the  annual  expenditure  on  this  score.] 

ON  MAN. 

39 

the  troops  on  land  have  a  still  smaller  mortality  than 
tlie  seamen. 

M.  Benoiston  de  Chateaunenf  has  also  been  occupied 
with  investigations  on  the  mortality  of  the  French 
army  compared  with  that  of  the  rest  of  the  popula- 
tion, and  lie  has  been  led  to  several  curious  results, 
which  I  shall  endeavour  to  state  succinctly.* 

M.  de  Chateauneuf  here  likewise  finds  that  the  pri- 
vileged class  is  that  which  is  the  best  fed,  and  under- 
goes the  least  fatigue :  thus,  according  to  the  docu- 
ments of  France,  the  mortality  of  the  soldier  was  a 
little  greater  than  that  of  the  mass  of  the  people ;  the 
guard  has  fewer  deaths  than  the  army  ;  and  the  sub- 
ofEcer  dies  more  rarely  than  the  soldier,  both  in  the 
guard  and  army. 

If  we  investigate  the  influence  of  seasons  on  the 
mortahty  of  soldiers,  the  following  are  the  results 
wliich  we  obtain  for  the  deaths  of  the  infantry  from 
1820  to  1826:— 

Seasons.  Blonths. 

Winter.  January,  February,  March, 

Spring.  April,  May,  June,     -         -         - 

Summer.  July,  August,  September, 

Autmnn.         October,  November,  December, 

The  maximum  of  deaths  falls  in  summer.  But 
without  taking  notice  of  the  astronomic  calculation 
which  fixes  the  period  of  the  seasons,  if  we  determine 
the  seasons  by  their  influence  on  the  atmosphere  alone, 
after  the  manner  of  several  German  and  Italian  phy- 
sicians, Ave  have  a  new  division  as  follows  : — 

Seasons.  Jlontlis.  Deaths. 

Winter.  Df'ccmber,  .January,  February,  -        3-09r, 

Spring.  Starch,  April,  Blay,      -         -         .         -    4-;So7 

Summer.  .June,  July,  August,  .         -  -         4-143 

Autumn.  September,  October,  November,  -        -    4'.")!)(j 

The  maximum  of  deaths  is  no  longer  in  sunnner, 
but  takes  place  in  autumn.  Thus,  in  whatever  way  we 
divide  the  year,  whether  into  half-years,  quarters,  or 
seasons,  the  intensity  of  mortality  reaches  its  minimum 
in  Avinter.  Taking  the  numbers  of  each  month,  we 
find  two  minima  and  two  maxima :  these  results  differ 
less  from  those  of  civil  life  than  IM.  de  Chateauneuf 
thinks,  who,  moreover,  when  he  composed  his  memoir, 
was  not  acquainted  with  the  influence  of  seasons  on 
different  ages.  We  may  form  an  opinion  of  it  by 
bringing  together  the  numbers  of  France,  and  those 
which  I  have  found  for  Belgium. 

Deaths  in  France 
from 

Deaths  in  Bclgimn 

18^0  to  1820. 

From  16  to  20 

From  20  to  25 

Years. 

Years. 

Januarv,  - 

1-4(12 

0-93 

0-97 

February, 

i-a34 

0-94 

1-00 

JMarcb,     - 

1-432 

1-07 

1-09 

April,    -    - 

1-475 

1-18 

1-02 

May,   -    - 

1-450 

1-15 

1-09 

•June,     -    - 

1-257 

1-03 

0-96 

July,  -    - 

1-279 

1-00 

0-90 

August, 

l-fi07 

0-99 

0-92 

September, 

1-577 

0-89 

0-96 

October,  - 

1-C38 

0-87 

0-95 

November, 

1-381 

0-95 

1-03 

December, 

1-ifiO 

1-01 

Ml 

Total,     - 

17-092 

12-00 

12-00 

We  see,  however,  that  after  the  great  heats  of  sum- 
mer, the  soldier  is  exposed  to  a  degree  of  mortality 
which  is  not  observed  in  civil  life. 

If  we  consider  the  different  regions  of  France,  Ave 
shall  find  that  the  inhabitants  of  the  provinces  in  the 

♦  Essai  sur  la  Jlortalitd  de  I'lnfanterie  Franyaiso  {An.  d'lli/- 
yiine,  tome  x.  2d  part.)  See  also  a  memoir  by  M.  le  Comte 
Jlorozo,  Sur  la  Mortality  dcs  Troupes  Pidmontaises,  in  the  IMc- 
moires  de  VAcailcmk  tie  Turin. 

north  are  more  capable  of  bearing  the  fatigues  of  ser- 
vice than  those  of  the  soiith ;  but  none  appear  less 
fitted  for  service  than  tliose  of  the  centre. 

M.  de  Chateauneuf  has  also  endeavoured  to  inves- 
tigate Avhat  causes  the  increase  of  mortality  of  the 
soldier,  and  he  has  examined  the  influence  of  several 
causes,  such  as  duels,  A'enereal  diseases,  suicides,  nos- 
talgia, phthisis,  &c.  This  able  statistician  had  already 
examined  in  another  work  the  influence  of  certain 
professions  on  the  development  of  pulmonary  plitliisis,* 
and  he  had  arrived  at  several  interesting  conclusions. 
M.  Lombard  of  Geneva  has  since  been  occupied  with 
the  same  subject  of  reseavch,f  and  has  collected  a 
great  number  of  facts,  of  the  principal  results  of  Avhich 
Ave  ought  not  to  be  ignorant. 

After  having  discussed  the  data  afforded  him  by 
five  different  lists,  formed  for  Paris,  Hamburg,  Vienna, 
and  Geneva,  M.  Lombard  has  put  them  together,  and 
divided  the  professions  into  three  classes,  according 
as  they  are  favourable,  indifierent,  or  unfavourable  to 
the  development  of  phthisis,  or,  in  other  terms,  accord- 
ing as  they  have  a  greater,  equal,  or  smaller  number, 
than  the  general  average. 

The  folloAving  is  the  general  list : — 

I. — PROFESSIONS  PLACED  ABOVE  THE  AVERAGE, 
A. — Among  Men. 

1.  In  all  the  lists. — Sculptors,  printers,  hatters,  jjo- 
lishers,  gendarmes,  brushmakers,  soldiers,  jeAvellers, 
tailors,  millers,  mattress-makers,  lacemen  or  embroi- 
derers, lemonade-makers,  domestics,  and  hairdress- 
ers. 

2.  In  the  mcijority  of  the  lists. — Copy -writers,  cooks, 
turners,  joiners,  barbers,  shoemakers,  and  coopers. 

3.  Jii  one  list  only.  —  Ironmongers,  vinedressers, J 
commissioners,  old  -  clothesmen,  tinmen,  porteurs  de 
lessive,  pavicrs,  engravers,  mechanics,  calico-printers, 
doorkeepers,  shoAvmen,  springmakers,  enamellers, 
design-painters,  street-sweepers,  pastry-cooks,  show- 
makers,  instructors,  carters,  brokers,  sundial-makers, 
showpillar-makers,  upholsterers,  Protestant  minis- 
tcrs,§  iron-merchants,  lime-makers,  basket-makers, 
shepherds,  teachers  of  arithmetic,  police-officers,  ser- 
vants in  place,  feather-sellers,  crystal-cutters,  gauze- 
Aveavers,  sportsmen,  and  ribbon-makers. 

B. — Among  Women. 

1 .  In  all  the  lists. — Seamstresses,  shoemakers,  glovers, 
and  embroiderers. 

2.  In  the  majority  of  the  lists. — Polishers. 

3.  In  one  list  only. — Makers  of  Avatch -needles,  clock- 
makers,  milliners,  teachers,  laundi'csses,  old-elothes- 
women,  toilet  and  niercer-Avomen,  hatters,  bookbind- 
ers, knitters,  jewel-makers  or  dealers,  feather-makers 
or  dealei's,  florists,  brushmakers,  and  lacemakers. 

II. — PROFESSIONS  AVITIIIN  THE  LISTS,  SOMETIMES  ABOVE 
THE  AVERAGE,  SOMETIMES  BELOAV  IT. 
A. — Among  Men. 
Students,  plasterers,  stone-cutters,  saddlers,  delvers, 
clockmakers,    waggoners,     cellarmen,  |1     goldsmiths, 
stocking  -  makers,    charcoal-makers,    gilders,    musi- 
cians, saAvyers,  and  glaziers.^ 

*  An.  d'llygidnc,  tome  vi.  partic  1,  July  1831. 

t  Idem,  tome  xi.  partie  1,  Jan.  l&Sl. 

:(:  This  result  is  founded  solely  on  six  deaths,  and  requii-es  con- 
finiiation. — Note  by  31.  Lombard. 

§  The  number  of  consumptive  persons  is  increased  by  the  deaths 
of  several  English  ecclesiastics,  who  arrived  out  of  health  at  Ge- 
neva.— M.  Lombard. 

II  The  first  eight  may  be  considered  as  belonging  to  the  first 
class,  that  is  to  say,  to  those  among  whom  the  niiraber  of  phthi- 
sical persons  is  above  the  average ;  in  fact,  they  are  so  placed  in 
the  Geneva  list,  Avliich  may  be  considered  more  exact  than  the 
other. — M.  Lombard. 

f  The  remark  made  in  the  preceding  note  Avill  apply  to  the  last 
seven  professions,  which,  in  tlie  Geneva  list,  arc  placed  below  the 
avcnigc. — M.  Lombard. 

40 

ON  MAN. 

B. — Among  Women. 
Housekeepers,    day-labourers,    spinners,  weavers, 
gauzemakers,  gilders,  stocking-menders,  and  mantua- 
makers. 

III. PROFESSIONS  BELOW  THE  AVERAGE. 

A. — Among  Men. 

1.  In  all  the  lists, — Coachmen,  quarrymen,  carpen- 
ters, tavern-keepers,  butchers,  porters  at  the  market 
and  message-boys,  porters,  tanners,  bleachers,  barge- 
men, confectioners,  slaters,  foundry -men,  and  order- 
lies. 

2.  In  the  majority  of  the  lists. — Bakers,  smiths,  far- 
riers, locksmiths,  masons,  and  weavers. 

3.  In  one  list  only. — Surgeons,  braziers,  cutlers,  dif- 
ferent merchants,  woodcutters,  advocates,  sedan-car- 
riers, chamois-leather-dressers,  agriculturists,  men  of 
letters,  negotiators,  grocers,  persons  employed  under 
government,  bookbinders,  governors  of  colleges,  com- 
missioners, loaders,  clogmakers,  merchant -drapers, 
druggists,  annuitants,  veteran  officers,  grooms,  mes- 
sengers, bankers,  magistrates,  dyers,  physicians,  coal- 
measurers,  notaries,  carvers,  lawyers,  money-changers, 
breeches-makers,  candle-makers,  tobacco-merchants, 
librarians,  harness-makers,  blanket-weavers,  furbish- 
ers,  plumbers,  wood-merchants,  professors,  chocolate- 
makers,  funeral  assistants,  landlords,  cheesemongers, 
skin-dealers,  furriers,  chimney-sweepers,  agents,  ar- 
chitects, gunsmiths,  packers,  pinmakers,  assizers  of 
wood,  vermiceUi-makers,  teachers  of  foreign  languages, 
needle-makers,  spinners,  cotton-weavers,  marble-cut- 
ters, starch  -  manufacturers,  ragmen,  water-carriers, 
tojTuen,  stuff-manufacturers,  shop-boys,  miners,  mer- 
chant-mercers, and  combmakers. 

B. — Among  Women. 

1 .  In  all  the  lists. — Carders  of  mattresses,  sicknurses, 
retailers,  bleachers,  gardeners. 

2.  In  the  majority  of  the  lists, — Women  employed  in 
doing  tailor- work. 

3.  In  one  list  only. — Fringe-makers,  embroiderers, 
winders,  gauzemakers,  ragwomen,  cotton-spinners, 
Avatch-chainmakers,  calico-printers,  cooks,  domestics, 
annuitants,  washerwomen,  merchant-grocers,  coimter- 
pane-makers,  butchers,  midwives,  bakers,  female  por- 
ters, and  leech-appliers. 

Next,  passing  to  the  causes  which  may  influence 
the  frequency  of  phthisis  in  the  dilferent  professions, 
M.  Lombard  arrives  at  tlie  following  conclusions : — 

1.  The  circumstances  which  multiply  phthisis,  are 
misery,  sedentary  life  and  absence  of  muscular  exer- 
cise, shocks  sustained  in  workshops,  a  curved  posture, 
the  impure  air  of  shops,  the  inhalation  of  certain 
mineral  or  vegetable  vapours,  and,  lastly,  air  loaded 
with  thick  or  impalpable  dust,  or  light,  elastic,  fila- 
mentous bodies. 

2.  The  circumstances  which  exercise  a  preservative 
influence,  are  riches,  active  life,  and  fresh  air,  regular 
exercise  of  all  parts  of  the  body,  inhalation  of  watery 
vapour,*  or  animal  and  vegetable  emanations. 

If  we  want  to  ascertain  the  degree  of  influence  of 
each  of  these  causes,  in  tlie  production  of  phthisis, 
among  the  workmen  who  are  found  exposed  to  them, 
it  may  be  considered  as  being  as  follows : — 

Average  number  of  phthisical  persons,  114  in  1000. 
I. — Noxious  Influences. 

1.  Mineral  and  vegetable  emanations,  -  -  O-l/G 

2.  Dust  of  different  kinds,  -  -  -  0-145 
.%  Sedentary  life,  .  -  -  .  .  0-140 
4.  Life  passed  in  workshops,  -  -  -  0-138 
.5.  Dr>-  hot  air,               ......  0-127 

6.  Bent  posture,     -  -  -  -  -  01 22 

7.  Movement  of  the  arm,  sti-iking  the  chest,  -     0-116 

*  [The  theory  evidently  alluded  to  in  the  text,  that  the  inha- 
bitants of  marshy  countries  were  less  liable  to  pulmonarj-  phthisis 
than  others,  was  supported  for  a  while  by  a  few  medical  men, 
but  aftei-wards  entirely  abandoned.] 

II.— Preservative  Influences. 

1.  Active  life,  muscular  exercise, 

2.  Exercise  of  the  voice, 

3.  Life  passed  in  the  open  air, 

4.  Animal  emanations,  .  .  . 

5.  Watery  vapours, 

0-089 
0-075 
0-073 
0-060 
0-053 

There  are,  then,  many  other  researches  which  have 
for  their  object  the  determination  of  the  influence  of 
professions  on  mortaUty:*  it  Avould  be  difficult  to 
present  a  siunmary  here,  since  the  facts  at  present 
collected  are  very  few  ;  however,  I  cannot  pass  over 
in  total  silence  the  researches  of  Casper  of  Berhn,  who, 
by  his  labours  in  medical  statistics,  has  taken  a  dis- 
tinguished rank  in  science.f  Casper  finds  that  the 
profession  of  medicine  is  perhaps  more  exposed  to 
mortality  than  any  other,  contrary  to  the  prejudices 
so  generally  received ;  and  he  has  observed  that  theo- 
logians occupy  the  other  extreme  in  the  scale  of  mor- 
tahty.  Undoubtedly,  we  must  here  include  under 
the  name  of  theologians,  the  clergjTuen  and  not  the 
learned  men  who  descend  into  theological  studies ; 
Avhich  may  make  a  great  difference,  for  the  activity 
of  mind,  carried  to  a  certain  degree,  may  become  as 
prejudicial,  as  a  regular  and  quiet  life  is  advantageous, 
to  the  preservation  of  man.  The  following  table,  pre- 
sented by  Casper,  points  this  out  clearly  : — 

Of  100  theologians,  there  have  attained  the  age  of  70 

and  upwards,  --------  i2 

Agriculturists  and  foresters, 40 

Superintendants, 35 

Commercial  and  industrious  men,       -        -        -        -  35 

Military  men,         ....---..  32 

Subalterns, 32 

Advocates,      - 29 

Artists, 28 

Teachers,  professors,       -..---.  27 
Physicians,          ...--..-24 

It  would  seem  to  follow  from  this  table,  that  mental 
labour  is  more  injurious  to  man  than  bodily,  but  that 
the  most  injurious  state  is  that  where  fatigue  of  body 
is  joined  to  that  of  the  mind.  A  sedentary  life,  which 
is  not  exposed  to  any  kind  of  excess,  appears,  on  the 
contrary,  to  be  most  favourable.  The  summary  which 
foUows  will  suffice  to  point  out  the  extremes. 

Of  1000  deaths,  there  were  as  follows  : — 

Age. 

Phj-sicians. 

Theologians. 

Ratio 

From  23  to  32  years, 

82 

43 

1-91 

•  •     33  to  43     •  • 

149 

58 

2-57 

•  •     43  to  52     •  • 

160 

64 

2-50 

••     53  to  62    •• 

210 

180 

M7 

•■      63to72    •• 

228 

328 

0-70 

..     73  to  82    .. 

141 

257 

0-55 

•  •     83  to  92     . . 

30 

70 

0-43 

I  do  not  know  whether  we  have  any  precise  re- 
searches on  the  influence  wMch  study  in  general  has 
on  the  constitution  of  chUdren  and  young  persons. 
This  subject  deserves  a  serious  examination  at  the 
present  day,  especially  since  many  parents,  by  im- 
proper attention,  and  sometimes  from  motives  of  self- 
love  or  very  censiu-able  cupidity,  bring  up  their  chil- 
dren as  we  should  grow  plants  in  a  hot-house,  to  enjoy 
their  flowers  and  fruits  the  sooner.  Numerous  ex- 
amples have  shown  hoAv  short  these  fruits  endure, 
and  how  subject  those  are  who  produce  them  to  pre- 
mature decay :  we  have  seen  few  of  these  prodigies 
preserve  their  reputation  beyond  the  period  of  infancy, 
or  withstand  the  excessive  efforts  of  an  organisation 
too  feeble  for  the  labours  imposed  upon  it.  "We  shall 
also  have  occasion  to  examine,  when  speaking  of 
mental  alienation,  to  what  extent  excessive  studies, 
especiallj'  in  the  exact  sciences,  may  predispose  to 
this  dreadful  malady,  or  even  entirely  rum  the  most 
happy  organisation. 

*  See  especially,  in  the  AnnaUs  d'Hyglenc,  different  memoirs 
by  MINI.  Parent  Duchatelet,  D'Arcet,  Leuret,  Marc,  Villermi, 
Benoiston  de  Chateaimeuf,  &c. 

t  Gazette  JMedicale  Hebdomadaire  de  Berlin,  .3d  January  1834  ; 
and  An.  d'Hygitnc,  April  1834. 

ON  MAN. 

41 

There  are  diseases,  of  more  or  less  danger,  inherent 
in  the  habits  of  individuals,  and  the  quality  of  the 
food  and  drink  which  they  use.  Of  tliis  number  ap- 
pears to  be  stone  in  the  bladder,  which  especially 
afflicts  certain  locahties.  I  am  under  obhgations  to 
M.  Civiale,  for  different  data  on  this  cruel  scourge, 
which  is  now  combated  with  so  much  success  ;  and  I 
thought  that  those  respecting  age  were  not  without 
interest  in  a  work  the  object  of  which  is  the  study  of 
the  development  of  man.  Although  the  observations 
are  at  present  scanty,  it  appears  certam  that  the  dis- 
position to  this  disease  is  the  greatest  in  childhood : 
we  may  judge  from  the  following  table : — 

Patients  affected  with  Stone. 

Ages. 

Norwich 

Lun^ville. 

Bristol. 

and 
Norfolk. 

Leeds. 

From   0  to  10  years. 

943 

46 

255 

83 

-     10  to  20     - 

377 

05 

99 

21 

„     20  to  30     - 

lOG 

41 

47 

21 

~     30  to  40     ~ 

38 

34 

46 

12 

-     40  to  50      „ 

23 

37 

41 

28 

~     SO  to  60     - 

18 

28 

92 

21 

~     60  to  70     - 

16 

18 

63 

9 

—     70  &  upwards, 

^ 

2 

6 

2 

Total, 

1526 

371 

649 

197 

It  is  about  the  age  of  five  years  especially,  that  the 
number  of  calculous  patients  appears  to  be  the  great- 
est. Indeed,  at  Lmieville,  the  following  numbers  have 
been  observed  from  year  to  j'ear,  commencing  at  in- 
fancy and  reaching  to  the  10th  year: — 0,  17,  79,  131, 
145,  143,  116,  119,  84,  and  75. 

It  would  appear  that  after  puberty  age  had  no 
great  influence  on  the  predisposition  to  this  disease, 
especially  taking  into  account  the  number  of  indivi- 
duals of  each  age  which  a  population  contains. 

The  difference  of  the  sexes  has  a  marked  influence  : 
it  is  generally  supposed  that  about  21  men  are  af- 
fected with  the  disease  to  one  woman ;  this  would  be 
inferred  from  the  following  table  : — 

Stone  Cases. 

riaecs. 

Men. 

Women. 

Men  to 
1  Woman. 

Lun^ville, 

1463 

63 

23 

Bristol, 

■348 

7 

49 

Paris,        .... 

423 

16 

26 

Ulm,     .... 

123 

4 

31 

Leeds,       .... 

188 

9 

21 

Norwich  and  Norfolk,  - 

618 

31 

20 

Lombardj',         ... 

758 

36 

41 

Diction,  de  Medicine,    - 

312 

44 

7 

Practice  of  M.  Civiale, 

419 

10 

42 

Total,      - 

4652 

220 

21-14 

Women,  like  men,  have  a  greater  disposition  to 
stone  in  infancy  than  at  a  more  advanced  age ;  as  to 
the  danger  of  death  from  it,  we  may  calculate  on  about 
1  death  to  5'3  cases  nearly,  in  different  coimtries,  when 
lithotomy  is  had  recourse  to.  The  danger  of  opera- 
tion is  least  during  infancy. 

2.  Influence  of  Morals. 

Up  to  the  present  time,  we  possess  few  researches 
on  the  influence  which  morals  may  have  on  the  num- 
ber of  deaths  in  a  nation,  excepting  in  the  case  of 
violent  deaths.  This  is  a  vast  field  open  to  the  in- 
vestigations of  statisticians,  who  might  arrive  at 
results  no  less  interesting  for  the  preservation  of  so- 
ciety than  for  moral  and  political  philosophy. 

We  have  already  seen,  from  the  preceding  researches, 
what  advantage  ^n  industrious  and  prudent  people 
has,  with  respect  to  mortality,  over  a  depraved  and 
indolent  one.  In  establishing  a  parallel  between  Eng- 
land and  the  unfortunate  republic  of  Guanaxuato,  I 

have  shown  that,  proportion  stiU  being  kept  in  view, 
the  deaths  were  almost  three  times  as  numerous  in 
the  latter  as  in  the  foi-mer  country.  We  have  like- 
wise seen  that  the  mortality  was  much  less  in  the 
higher  classes  of  society  than  in  the  lower ;  and  this 
state  of  things  is  not  merely  owing  to  abundance  on 
the  one  hand  and  privations  on  the  other,  but  also 
to  rational  and  temperate  habits,  more  regidated 
passions,  and  less  rapid  transitions  in  their  mode  of 
livmg. 

The  violence  of  the  passions  seems  to  have  consi- 
derable influence  in  shortening  the  duration  of  human 
life.  Thus,  when  the  physical  man  is  fully  developed, 
about  the  age  of  twenty,  it  woidd  be  supposed  that  he 
ought  to  resist  all  the  destructive  tendencies  of  his 
nature ;  but  the  contrary  is  the  case.  This  excess  of 
mortality,  which  is  not  observed  in  females,  continues 
in  man  until  very  near  the  age  of  thirty,  a  period  at 
which  the  fire  of  the  passions  is  somewhat  deadened. 
We  shall  be  better  enabled  to  understand  this  critical 
period  in  the  life  of  the  male,  when  we  have  exammed 
the  development  of  his  moral  nature. 

It  is  particularly  in  epidemics  that  we  are  enabled 
to  recognise  the  influence  of  morals  on  the  number 
of  deaths.  We  have  been  enabled  to  judge,  especially 
during  the  ravages  of  cholera  in  Europe,  how  much 
intemperance  has  been  fatal  to  those  who  gave  them- 
selves up  to  it.  Opinions  have  been  greatly  at  vari- 
ance on  the  nature  and  curative  means  of  this  scourge, 
but  all  agree  in  establishing  the  fact  which  I  have 
stated.* 

From  numerous  observations,  it  appears  that  theN 
fear  of  a  disease  may  singularly  predispose  to  an  at- 
tack of  it :  the  moral  influences  here  exercise  a  re- 
markable action  over  the  physical,  and  one  which 
deserves  the  greatest  attention  from  philosophers. 
This  interesting  subject  has  already  been  made  the 
object  of  many  researches  -,  but  it  has  scarcely  been 
examined  by  that  rigorous  method  of  analysis  which 
has  for  some  time  been  appUed  to  science.  Persons 
have  been  seen  to  fall  down  dead,  through  the  violent 
excitement  of  a  passion ;  others  have  been  seen,  la- 
bouring imder  a  presentiment  of  death,  really  to  die, 
when  their  excited  imagination  had  made  them  dread 
death.  It  would  be  extremely  mteresting  to  determine 
what  are  the  i^assions  most  dangerous  to  excite  inor- 
dinately, and  at  what  point  fear  may  cause  death. 
These  researches  would  induce  essential  modifications 
in  our  habits  _  and  institutions.  Thus,  the  custom  of 
attending  with  religious  forms  on  the  patient  whose 
condition  is  hopeless,  may  cause  death  in  many  cases  ; 
and  we  cannot  but  applaud  the  precautions  taken  in 
certain  countries,  of  discharging  these  forms  from  the 
commencement  of  the  disease,  when  it  only  presents 
symptoms  of  slight  danger.  ReUgious  ceremonies  then 
appear  less  hke  the  signal  of  a  passage  to  another 
state  of  existence. 

I  shall  also  class  among  the  disturbing  causes  which 
increase  mortalitj',  man's  tendency  to  self-destruction, 
or  to  destroy  his  species,  although  he  shares  it  in 
common  with  animals,  who  are  obedient  only  to  the 
laws  of  nature.  But  here  the  tendency  is  manifested 
under  entirely  diflTerent  forms ;  thus,  destruction  of 
man  by  man  is  a  crime  or  a  virtue,  according  to  the 
manner  in  which  it  takes  place :  and  it  would  be  very 
difficidt  to  assign  the  limits  of  two  siich  opposite  con- 
ditions, especially  if  we  regard  the  difference  of  times 
and  places.  An  historical  account  of  the  displacement 
of  this  limit  in  different  nations,  would  of  itself  be  a 
work  of  the  highest  interest,  and  would  show  us  under 
what  phases  humanity  has  been  fated  to  appear. 

*  [The  translator's  experience  in  respect  to  cholera  has  a  ten- 
dency to  modify  M.  Quetelet's  opinion.  So  far  as  he  ohserved,  the 
temperate  and  the  intemperate  fell  equally  under  this  temble 
scom-ge ;  in  fact,  its  origin,  progress,  and  disappearance,  are  quite 
a  mysterj'.  It  can  scarcely  now  be  said  that  a  single  well-esta- 
blished fact  respecting  this  disease  was  made  out  by  the  medical 
profession  in  Eiu-ope.] 

42 

ON  MAN. 

An  examination  of  sucli  questions  as  these,  liow- 
ever,  vnR  more  naturally  find  a  place  when  I  consider 
the  development  of  the  moral  qualities  of  man,  and 
have  to  speak  of  duelling  and  homicide.  This  will 
also  be  the  place  to  treat  of  the  destruction  of  man  by 
his  fellow-man,  when  on  a  larger  scale,  and  in  modes 
consecrated  by  our  manners  and  institutions ;  for  our 
ideas  of  war  belong  also  to  moral  statistics. 

I  have  just  shown,  by  different  examples,  how  much 
mortaUty  is  influenced  by  morals:  another  no  less 
striking  example  of  this  influence  is  that  Avhich  still- 
births afford,  when  we  have  made  the  distinction 
between  legitimate  and  illegitimate  ones.  The  fatal 
heritage  of  vice  does  not  affect  the  child  before  its 
birth  onlv,  it  pursues  it  still,  for  a  long  tune  after  it 
has  escaped  this  first  danger,  and  misery  often  aggi-a- 
vates  the  evil.  Thus,  it  follows  from  the  researches 
of  Baumann  and  Siissmilch,  that  the  mortality  pre- 
sents the  following  ratio,  aU  things  being  equal  :— 

Stm-births, 

1st  month  after  birth, 

2d  aud  3(1  month, 

4th,  5th,  and  Gth  month, 

Remainder  of  the  year, 

2d  year,         ... 

3d  and  4th  year. 

1  legitimate, 

-  1 
1 
1 

-  1 
1 

-  1 

2- (I  illegitimate. 

2-4 

2-0 

1-7 

1-5 

1-4 

13 

The  difference  continues  very  evident  until  the  se- 
venth vear;  so  that,  according  to  Baumann,  only 
one-tenth  of  illegitimate  children  will  arrive  at  ma- 
turity. This  result  just  explains  what  is  observed  in 
the  republic  of  Guanaxuato,  "  where  nothing  can 
equal  the  mass  of  i)hysical,  moral,  and  political  pollu- 
tion." * 

Casper  gives  a  table  of  the  mortality  of  children  at 
Berlin,!  from  which  it  appears  that  of  28,705  children 
who  died  before  the  age  of  1.5  years,  during  the  decen- 
nial period  from  181.3  to  1822,  there  were  5598  ille- 
gitimate, wliich  gave  annually  2.311  deaths  of  illegi- 
timate, and  160  of  legitimate  children,  before  the  age 
of  15.  But  according  to  this  savant,  about  the  same 
period,  5663  legituuate  children  were  born,  and  1080 
illegitimate  ones.  The  ratio  of  deaths,  therefore,  was 
1  to  2'5  for  the  first,  and  1  to  1'9  for  the  second. 

"What  especially  tends  to  increase  the  mortality  of 
illegitimate  children  is,  that  the  greater  number  of 
them  are  abandoned  to  public  charity.  The  absence 
of  the  cares  of  a  mother,  at  a  time  Avhen  they  are 
most  needed,  and  the  other  privations  of  every  kind, 
which  are  the  necessary  consequences  of  such  an  aban- 
donment, sufficiently  e.vplain  the  great  mortality  which 
generally  exists  in  foundling  hospitals. 

To  understand  this  mortaUty,  ISI.  Benoiston  de 
Chateauneuf,  in  his  Considerations  sur  les  Enfans 
Trouves,X  thus  estimates  the  mortality  of  infancy  in 
Europe  during  the  century  which  has  just  elapsed : — 

Minimum. 
From  0  to    1  year,       19  in  the  hundred. 
•  •    0  to  3  years,     2()g 
. .    0  to   4    •  •  .•*» 

.  ■     0  to  10    •  •  35 

IMaxhnum. 
45i  in  the  hundred. 
50 
53 
55  6-7ths  ■  ■ 

According  to  this  savant,  the  mortality  of  foundlings 
in  several  cities  of  Europe  was,  from  birth  to  the  end 
of  the  first  year — 

At  Petersburg,  in  1788, 

•  ■  Florence,  ditto, 

•  ■  Barcelona,  in  1780,  - 
.  ■  Paris,  in  178!l,      - 

•  •  Dublin,  in  1791, 

40  per  cent. 
40      •• 
CO     .. 
«0      .. 
f)l      •■ 

"  From  birth  to  four  years  old,  at  Eome,  ]\Iadrid, 
Dublin,  and  Paris,  we  find  50,  62,  76,  and  98  in  the 
hundred.  § 

*  Sir  F.  D'lvemnis,  S«)-  la  Mortalili!  ProporlionncUc. 
t  Beitrage,  p.  1/3. 
$  Paris,  1824,  1  vol.  8vo. 

§  M.  de  G6rando,  in  his  excellent  work  Lc  Viflteur  dit  Paiivre, 
makes  the  mortaUty  1  in  7  of  the  children  which  the  civil  hob- 

Lastly,  at  the  end  of  20  years,  of  19,420  children 
received  into  the  house  at  Dublin,  only  2000  remained 
aUve,  and  7000  at  Moscow  out  of  37,600.  What  an 
awful  destruction !  "War  and  epidemics  are  less  ter- 
rible to  the  human  race.  And  let  no  one  suppose 
that  modern  times  have  produced  more  happy  results, 
or  that  this  dismal  catalogue,  which  we  might  still 
extend,  at  the  present  day  presents  fewer  numbers. 
According  to  the  authentic  accounts  which  M-e  have 
before  us,  at  Madrid,  in  1817,  there  died,  either  in 
hospital  or  country,  67  children  out  of  100  ;  at  Vienna, 
in  1811,  92 ;  at  Brussels,  fi-om  1812  to  1817,  79.  At 
this  period,  the  hospital,  which  was  small,  imhealthy, 
and  badly  ventilated,  was  removed  to  another  quarter 
of  the  city,  and  from  that  time  there  has  been  a  con- 
siderable decrease  of  the  average  number  of  deaths, 
which  is  not  more  than  56  in  the  100."* 

"\'Vliat  has  preceded,  sufficiently  shows  what  influ- 
ence well-directed  conduct  may  exercise  over  the  life 
and  death  of  foundlings.  This  is  not  the  place  to 
examine  how  far  these  institutions  should  be  approved 
of,  where  unfortunates  are  collected  together ;  but  it 
may  be  interesting  to  know  how  much  the  number  of 
foundlings  and  deserted  children  has  increased  smce 
these  institutions  arose.  At  Paris,  for  example,  the 
ratio  of  their  number  to  that  of  births,  in  one  century, 
makes  the  following  progress  : — 

"i'ears. 

Ratio  in  100. 

From  1710  to  1720,  - 

■  •      1720  to  1730,    - 

•  ■      17.'^0  to  1740,  - 

•  •      1740  to  1750, 

•  •      1750  to  1760,  - 

■  •     1760  to  1770,    - 

9-73 
11-37 
14-48 
18-21 
23-71 
30-75 

Years.  Ratio  in  100. 

From  1770  to  1/80,     -    -     33-(X) 

■  •     I780toi79fi,  -   -    -  2370 

■  ■      l/W  to  1800,    -    -      17-69 
• .      IbOO  to  1810,  -    -    -  20-95 

■  ■       1810  to  18-20,     -     -      22-88 

We  see  that  the  proportion  rises  rapidly  during 
the  latter  years  of  the  reign  of  Louis  XV. ;  it  dimi- 
nishes more  than  two-thirds  under  the  Convention  ;  it 
increases  again  under  the  imperial  government ;  and 
has  been  stationary  since  the  revolution. 

IM.  de  Chateauneuf,  from  whom  I  borrow  the  greater 
number  of  the  preceding  data,  gives  the  following 
ratios  for  some  of  the  principal  cities  of  Europe  : — 

Foundlings. 

Lisbon,  from  1815  to  1819, 

£6-2fi  in 

100  births 

Madrid,    ~     ~          .-       - 

25-58 

„ 

Rome,      ~    1801  to  I8O7, 

27-90 

„ 

Paris,       ~    1815  to  1821,   - 

20-91 

„ 

Brussels,-    1816  to  1821, 

14-68 

„ 

Vienna,    -    1815  to  1821,   - 

23-43 

„ 

Petersburg,          1820, 

45-00 

,- 

Moscow,      ... 

27-94 

-, 

County  of  Nice, 

6-OG 

„ 

Savoy,           ... 

5-83 

~ 

Thus,  in  the  greater  number  of  the  cities  quoted 
pre\-iouslyj  nearly  one-fourth  of  the  children  arc  ex- 
posed. This  state  of  things  is  very  apt  to  give  rise 
to  reflections  on  the  misery  and  immorality  of  great 
cities.  Paris  annuallj'  produces  about  21  foundlings 
to  100  births,  whilst  the  rest  of  France  only  produces 
3"52.  It  is  true  that  this  disproportion  would  be 
much  less,  if  throughout  France  there  were  tlie  same 
facility  as  at  Paris  of  sending  children  to  the  hospi- 
tals ;  and  it  is  also  just  to  remark,  that  many  chil- 
dren are  sent  to  Paris,  who  do  not  belong  to  the  city. 
In  Belgium  the  following  values  have  been  obtained, 
according  to  the  results  of  the  ten  years  i^receding 
1833  :t— 

pitals  in  Paris  send  out  to  be  supported  (p.  293) ;  but  we  must 
observe,  that  these  children  vary  from  1  day  to  12  years  of  age  : 
and  in  tliis  the  numbers  agi-ee  with  those  of  M.  Benoiston,  at 
p.  76  of  his  Considerations,  &c. 

*  I  have  found,  from  tlie  average  results  of  the  eight  years  from 
1815  to  1822,  that  the  mortality  of  the  hospital  at  Brussels  was 
66-30  in  the  100  :  at  this  period,  it  had  a  gicater  mortality  than 
any  of  the  nineteen  hospitals  in  the  kingdom  ;  the  average 
mortality  has  been  45-07  in  UK).— See  Reckavlics  sur  ks  Nais- 
sniices,  S^c. 

t  .See  Correspondance  Mathematiquc  et  Physique,  tome  viii. 
livraison  2,  p.  135. 

ON  MAN. 

43 

Births : 

Foundlings 

Foundlings 

Provinces. 

Annual 

and 

to 

Average. 

Deserted. 

100  Births. 

Antwerp, 

11,018 

2156-.5 

19-6 

Brabant, 

18,893 

2.307-4 

12-2 

Flanders,  AVest 

20,315 

480-5 

2-3 

East,     - 

24,148 

693-8 

2-9 

Hainault, 

20,016 

1830-2 

9-1 

Liege, 

11,837 

212-2 

1-9 

Namur,     .        -        -        . 

0,399 

844-9 

13-2 

Tlie  kingdom,* 

112,626 

8525-5 

7-e 

It  is  very  difficult  to  explain  the  differences  which  are 
presented  by  the  several  provinces  of  such  a  country 
as  Belgium,  unless  as  regards  the  facility  which  mothers 
find,  in  certain  localities,  of  exposing  their  childi'en. 
On  this  subject,  we  ought  to  read  the  observations  of 
M.  Gouroff,  one  of  the  persons  who  has  paid  most 
attention  to  all  that  concerns  foundlings.f  "  The 
city  of  London,  the  population  of  which  is  1,250,000, 
in  the  space  of  five  years  from  1819  to  1823,  has  only 
liad  151  children  exposed;  and  the  number  of  illegi- 
timate children  received  into  eighty-four  workhouses, 
durmg  the  same  period,  only  reaches  to  4668  ;  and, 
moreover,  about  one-fifth  of  these  children  are  sup- 
ported at  the  expense  of  the  father.  Wliat  a  striking 
contrast  is  Paris,  which,  having  only  two-thii'ds  the 
population  of  London,  has  had,  within  the  same  years, 
25,277  children,  all  maintained  at  the  expense  of  the 
state ! 

Do  we  stiU  ask  for  a  more  certain  proof  of  the  in- 
fluence which  foundling  hospitals  have  in  multiplying 
the  abandonments  of  infants  ?  Mayence  had  no  esta- 
bhshment  of  this  kind;  and  from  1799  to  1811,  there 
were  30  children  exposed.  Napoleon  ordered  a  '  tour' 
to  be  established  in  this  city.  It  was  opened  on  the 
7  th  November  1811,  and  existed  until  the  month  of 
March  1815,  when  tlie  Grand-Duke  of  Hesse-Darm- 
stadt caused  it  to  be  suppressed.  During  these  three 
years  and  four  months,  the  house  received  516  found- 
lings. When  it  Avas  once  suppressed,  as  the  habit 
of  exposing  the  children  had  not  taken  root  in  the 
people,  all  things  retm-ned  to  their  former  order :  in 
the  course  of  the  nine  following  j'ears,  only  seven 
children  were  exposed." 

Wlien  proposing  the  reform  of  foundling  hospitals, 
M.  de  Gouroff  does  not  desire  it  to  be  done  precipi- 
tately. "  On  the  contrary,  it  requires  reflection,  time, 
and  patience,  to  prepare  and  gradually  execute  the 
measures  which  ought  to  precede  it,  and  to  avoid  the 
error  committed  in  some  of  the  cities  of  Belgium, 
which,  in  1823,  that  they  might  not  be  burdened  ivith 
the  expense  of  the  children  left  out  of  doors,  suppressed 
the  '  tours'  Immediately  the  lives  of  several  new-born 
infants  were  sacrificed,  and  public  opinion  obliged  the 
government  to  order  tlieir  re-establishment." 

The  principal  conclusions  of  the  work  of  IM.  de 
Gouroff  are : — 

1.  That  in  Catholic  countries,  or  rather  in  those 
where  asylums  have  been  opened  to  all  children  in- 
discriminately who  are  abandoned  at  the  time  of  birth, 
these  little  imfortunates  are  much  more  common, 
much  more  numerous,  than  elsewhere. 

2.  That  in  these  asylums  there  is  a  frightful  mor- 
tality, and  quite  bej'ond  the  proportion  of  the  greatest 
mortality  which  cuts  off  other  children,  even  in  the 
most  indigent  classes. 

3.  That  infanticide  is  scarcely  prevented  by  found- 
ling hospitals ;  or  rather,  that,  in  order  to  prevent  a 
few  infanticides,  whether  direct  or  indirect,  through 
the  effect  of  unrelieved  exposure,  these  houses  do 
themselves  destroy  an  incomparably  greater  number 
of  children.  J 

*  Except  the  provinces  of  Liege  and  Lnxembom-g. 
1  Essai  sur  I'Uistoire  des  Enfans  Trouves.    8vo.     Paris :  1829. 
%  [Perhaps  the  question  is  not  very  fairly  stated  by  M.  de  Gou- 
roff. Infanticide,  when  direct,  is  a  horrible  crime,  in  fact,  mur- 

3.  Influence  of  Ivaowledge  and  of  Political  and  Religious 
Institutions. 

Civilisation,  which  sweetens  the  existence  of  man, 
has  also  prolonged  it :  the  progress  of  knowledge  has 
contributed  to  the  health  of  the  individual  houses  and 
interior  of  cities,  and  has  gradually  caused  marshy 
lands  and  the  other  sources  of  the  epidemics  which 
habitually  harassed  our  ancestors,  to  disappear.  Know* 
ledge,  by  multiplying  the  commercial  relations  of  na- 
tions, has  also  rendered  famines  less  frequent  and  for- 
midable ;  the  chances  of  which,  on  the  one  hand,  have 
been  diminished  by  bettering  the  culture  of  the  earth, 
and  varying  the  means  of  subsistence  :  medical  science 
and  public  hygiene  have  likewise  found  out  valuable 
means  for  resisting  mortality ;  whilst  the  development 
of  industry,  and  the  securities  which  society  received 
from  more  hberal  institutions,  have  contributed  to 
diffuse  afiluence  and  the  most  active  means  of  preser-» 
vation. 

At  the  present  day,  it  appears  clearly  established, 
that  in  countries  where  civilisation  makes  the  greatest 
progress,  we  may  also  observe  the  greatest  diminution 
of  mortality.  However,  Ave  must  not  exaggerate  these 
advantages,  as  has  been  done  in  respect  to  some  coun- 
tries :  the  greater  accuracy  statistical  documents  ac- 
quire, the  more  numerous  appear  the  prejudices  which 
have  been  entertained  on  this  subject.  England  is 
placed  in  an  advantageous  position,  which  has  always 
fixed  the  attention  of  savants  Avhen  studying  the 
theory  of  population ;  but  it  is  perhaps  to  this  king- 
dom tliat  my  remark  is  most  applicable.  K  we  examine 
Avhat  has  been  the  mortality  from  the  commencement 
of  the  eighteenth  century,  we  shall  find,  according  to 
two  of  her  most  eminent  statisticians  :* — 

Years. 

1700,      - 

1750, 

1776  to  1800  inclusive, 

1806  to  1810 

1816  to  1820 

1826  to  1830 

Inhabitants 

to  one  Death. 

43 

-  42 
48 

•      49 
55 

-  51 

According  to  these  numbers,  there  would  be  a  very 
sensible  decrease  of  mortality;  but  we  know  that 
very  numerous  omissions  have  taken  place  in  the 
figures  of  mortality.  Mr  Rickman  himself  thinks 
that,  in  consequence  of  these  omissions,  we  ought  to 
reckon  1  death  in  49  inhabitants,  instead  of  1  in  51, 
for  the  five  last  years ;  whilst,  according  to  Mr  Haw- 
kins, the  mortality  for  1822  would  have  been  1  in  60.f 
On  the  other  hand,  the  census  may  likewise  have  been 
faulty.  Moreover,  it  might  be  objected,  that  these 
inaccuracies,  if  they  could  be  corrected,  would  pro- 
bably only  place  in  a  clearer  light  a  still  greater  dif- 
ference of  mortality,  since  the  figure  of  mortality  is 
generally  smaller  in  proportion  as  there  is  more  negU- 
gence  in  collecting  it.  That  would  suppose  always 
that  the  census  of  the  population  is  correct. 

The  changes  which  have  taken  place  in  great  towns 
should  especially  receive  our  attention.  For  example, 
in  1697,  the  total  number  of  deaths  in  London  rose 
to  21,000;  however,  a  century  after,  in  1797,  the 
number  Avas  only  17,000,  notwithstanding  the  increase 
of  tlie  population.^      These   advantages   have  been 

der ;  but  the  exposirre  of  a  child  is  a  misdemeanour ;  so  that 
foundling  hospitals  were  established  in  Catholic  countries  without 
doubt  with  a  view  to  prevent  crime,  and  it  is  astonishing  and 
almost  incredible  that  they  have  not  succeeded  in  effecting  even 
this :  in  other  respects,  they  themselves  are  an  evil  of  the  first 
magnitude.] 

*  Jlr  Marshall  gives  5,475,000  and  6,467,000  as  the  population  of 
England  and  AVales  in  I7OO  and  1750  ;  and  the  deaths  132,728  and 
154,686.  The  other  ratios  are  drawn  from  the  last  work  of  Mr 
Rickman. 

t  El<!ments  of  Medical  Statistics,  by  F.  Bissct  Hawkins. 

%  Ibid.,  p.  18. 

44 

ON  MAN. 

obtained  especially  between  50  to  60  years  ago,  since 
which  time  the  city  has  increased  with  great  rapidity 
in  extent  and  population.  In  the  middle  of  the  last 
century,  the  annual  mortality  was  still  1  in  20 ;  at 
present,  it  is  only  1  in  40,  according  to  the  census  of 
1821 ;  so  that  it  has  exactly  diminished  one-half.  It 
is  then  correct  to  say,  that  the  mortality,  towards  the 
end  of  the  last  century,  had  undergone  an  increase, 
which  may  he  attributed  to  the  excessive  abuse  of 
spirituous  liquors  Avhich  then  prevailed. 

The  towns  of  IManchester,  Liverpool,  and  Birming- 
ham, have  presented  almost  the  same  decrease  of 
mortality  as  London.  It  is  very  difficult  to  believe 
that  some  error  may  not  have  crept  into  such  esti- 
mates. 

France,  like  England,  has  experienced  a  diminution 
of  mortality,  if  we  may  refer  to  ancient  documents.* 
According  to  M.  Villerme,  it  was  computed  in  1781, 
that  1  death  took  place  to  29  inhabitants  ;  in  1802, 
1  in  30  ;  and  now,  1  in  40.t 

In  Sweden,  from  1755  to  1775,  1  death  took  place 
to  35  inhabitants;  in  1775  to  1795,  1  to  37 ;  and  in 
1823,  1  to  48. 

Likewise,  at  Berlin,  from  1747  to  1755,  the  annual 
mortahty  was  1  to  28 ;  and  from  1816  to  1822,  the 
ratio  was  less  than  1  to  34. 

M.  Moreau  de  Jonnes,  in  a  notice  on  the  mortality 
of  Europe,  has  presented  the  following  table,  which 
likewise  tends  to  prove  the  influence  of  civilisation 
on  the  number  of  deaths,  in  periods  of  Avhich  the  in- 
tervals have  been  marked  by  social  ameliorations.J 

One 

One 

Countries. 

Years. 

Death  to 

1  ears. 

Death  to 

Sweden, 

mi  to  1768 

34-0 

1821  to  1825 

45-0 

Denmark, 

1751  to  1754 

320 

1819 

45-0 

Germany,    - 

1788 

32-0 

1825 

45-0 

Prussia, 

1717 

30'0 

1821  to  1824 

39-0 

AVurtemburg, 

1749  to  1754 

31-0 

1825 

45-0 

Austria, 

18-22 

40-0 

1825  to  1830 

43-0 

Holland,      ■• 

1800 

26-0 

1824 

400 

England, 

16.00 

33-0 

1821 

58-0 

Great  Britain,     - 

1785  to  1789 

430 

1800  to  1804 

47-0 

France, 

1776 

25-5 

1825  to  1827 

39-5 

Canton  de  Vaud, 

1756  to  1766 

35-0 

1824 

47-0 

Lombardy, 

1767  to  1774 

27-5 

1827  to  1828 

31-0 

States  of  the  Church, 

1707 

215 

1839 

28-0 

Scotland,      - 

1801 

44-0 

1821 

50-0 

111,883  females.     The  following  table  will  show  the 
number  of  deaths,  year  by  year  :* — 

Deaths  in  the  City  of  Amsterdam. -f 

I  repeat,  that  I  am  far  from  giving  my  belief  to 
the  pros^Dcrous  state  Avliich  these  figures  seem  to 
point  out.  However,  we  cannot  but  be  inclined  to 
admit  that  deaths  have  diminished  with  the  develop- 
ment of  civilisation  and  affluence.  Some  countries 
have  afterwards  lost  their  population,  or  at  least  it 
has  remained  stationary,  ^vhen  those  advantages  were 
lost  which  they  previously  enjoyed.  Thus,  the  opu- 
lent city  of  Amsterdam,  which,  by  its  activity,  has 
for  some  time  been  unrivalled  in  Europe,  is  affected 
by  the  diminution  of  its  commerce.  In  1727,  the 
mortality  there  was  1  to  27,  and  it  still  preserved  the 
same  value,  according  to  the  average  results  of  tlie 
12  years  Avhich  preceded  1832.  The  deaths  really 
rose  to  the  number  of  7336  ;  and  on  the  1st  of  January 
1830,  of  202,175   persons,   90,292  were   males,    and 

*  Mr  Finlayson  ha,s  succeeded  in  ohtaininp;  the  registers  of 
tontine-holders,  botli  in  France  under  Louis  XIV.  and  in  Eng- 
land under  Willuim  III.,  .ind  lie  is  convinced  that  the  life  of  the 
French  tontine-holder  at  that  time  was  longer  than  the  English 
one.  —  See  on  the  question  the  observations  of  M.  D'lvernois, 
BiblioihUqHe  Universelle,  Oct.  1053,  p.  146. 

t  It  is  well  to  premise,  that  the  mortality  calculated  for  the 
beginning  of  the  present  century  is  extremely  imcertain. — See  the 
judicious  remarks  of  Sir  F.  D'lvernois  in  the  Bihliothcque  Unircr- 
selle  de  Geneve,  1833. 

i  It  is  to  be  regretted  that  the  author  has  not  pointed  out  the 
sources  of  his  information :  his  results  would  have  had  much 
more  value.  Several  numbers  of  this  table  must  certainly  appear 
very  doubtful. 

Deaths. 

Years. 

Births. 

Male. 

Female. 

Total. 

Total. 

1821,    - 

3,618 

3,507 

7,125 

7.342 

1022, 

4,041 

3,957 

7,998 

7,6CO 

1823,    - 

3,279 

3,355 

6,634 

7,182 

1824, 

3,082 

2,994 

6,076 

7,860 

1825,     - 

3,184 

3,118 

6,302 

7,3.52 

18264       - 

4,351 

4,457 

8,808 

7,438 

1827,     - 

4,133 

4,107 

8,240 

6,890 

1828, 

3,562 

3,516 

7,078 

7,208 

1829,     - 

4,056 

3,942 

7,998 

7,403 

1830, 

3,387 

3,427 

6,814 

7,306 

1831,     - 

3,479 

3,659 

7,138 

7,342 

1832, §       - 

4,057 

3,765 

7,822 

6,452 

Average,    • 

3.686 

3,650 

7,336 

7,282 

In  comparing  the  births  with  the  deaths  which 
have  taken  place  during  the  years  pointed  out  in  the 
table  above,  we  see  that  they  have  been  in  average 
value  numerically  inferior  to  the  number  of  deaths ;  in 
fiict,  there  have  been  annually  7282  births,  and  7336 
deaths.  It  is  true  that  Amsterdam  has  been  troubled 
by  several  scourges ;  nevertheless,  it  constantly  ap- 
pears that  its  population  is  not  on  the  increase,  which 
is  an  almost  infallible  index  of  the  loss  of  prosperity, 
when  the  average  life  does  not  attain  a  high  value. 

If  we  consider  the  ages  on  which  the  mortality  falls, 
we  shall  have  a  new  proof  of  the  influence  which  our 
institutions  and  habits  have  in  modifying  it.  In  speak- 
ing of  still-births,  Ave  have  shown  how  much  their 
number  may  be  increased  in  the  interior  of  cities, 
and  especially  in  the  midst  of  excesses  of  every  kind, 
which  give  rise  to  demoralisation ;  we  have,  more- 
over, seen  that  the  children  who  are  born  under  these 
unfortunate  circumstances,  have  fewer  chances  of  liv- 
ing, especially  if  the  parents  are  in  misery.  Different 
dangers  gather  round  their  early  years,  and  wait 
upon  the  whole  course  of  their  career :  thus,  without 
speaking  of  those  to  which,  by  our  nature,  Ave  are 
exposed,  some  belong  to  our  manners,  others  to  our 
religious  institutions,  and  lastly'',  others  to  our  politi- 
cal institutions.  As  to  those  Avhich  belong  to  our 
manners,  I  have  already  attempted  to  point  them  out ; 
I  have  also  shoAvn  the  influence  Avhich  certain  reli- 
gious institutions  may  have- — baptism,  for  example — 
on  tender  infancy ;  the  Lent  and  fasts  on  our  repi'o- 
ductive  powers,  and  probably  on  our  vitality;  and 
religious  ceremonies  and  the  preparatives  for  death 
on  the  minds  of  the  sick.  Moreover,  we  may  join 
to  these  active  causes,  which  modify  the  amount  of 
population,  the  state  of  celibacy  which  is  imposed  on 
a  class  of  persons,  Avhose  number,  during  the  SAvay  of 
Catholicism,  Avas  much  greater  than  it  is  in  our  OAvn 
day. 

Amongst  political  institutions,  the  IcA'ying  of  sol- 
diers, and  Avars,  are  likewise,  notwithstanding  all  that 
has  been  said  on  the  point,  ever  recurring  causes  of 
mortality,  and  causes  so  much  the  more  afflicting, 
because  they  fall  on  the  healthiest  and  most  valuable 
part  of  the  population — on  the  man  Avho  has  just  at- 
tained his  full  physical  development,  and  is  prepared 
to  repay  to  society  the  debt  which  the  infinite  cares  of 

*  Jaarbockje,  by  Lobatto,  different  years. 

t  The  five  years  from  1816  to  1820  have  given — 

1816, 6,333  6,615 

1817, 8,416  («)  7,040 

1818,  ....        0,300  6,888 

1819, 6,557  7,154 

1820,  .....        7,066  6,850 

Average,      ....  6,914 
(a)  This  was  a  year  of  scarcity. 

t  Period  of  the  epidemic  of  Groningen. 
§  Year  of  the  cholera. 

6,909 

ON  MAN. 

45 

his  infancy  have  contracted.  In  some  countries  even, 
by  too  extensive  an  enlistment  into  tlie  army  of  men 
before  tliey  had  time  to  become  fuHj'  developed,  they 
are  exposed  to  neiv  chances  of  death;  or,  by  the 
fatigues  of  war,  the  vigour  of  the  new  generation  is 
prematurely  undermined. 

Governments  dispose,  in  some  sort,  of  the  lives  of 
the  men  whom  they  have  constantly  under  their  in- 
fluence, from  the  moment  of  birth  to  the  day  of  their 
death.  I  sliall  not  here  speak  of  the  kind  of  govern- 
ments :  we  know  too  well  that  those  which  are  favour- 
able to  despotism  arrest  tlie  development  of  the  spe- 
cies ;  and,  on  the  other  hand,  liow  much  a  prudent 
degree  of  liberty,  by  seconding  every  individual  in- 
dustry and  exertion,  gives  to  man  the  means  of  pro- 
viding for  his  preservation.  I  shall  not  speak  of  the 
immense  distance  which  exists  between  the  degree  of 
mortality  of  the  slave  and  his  master,  notwithstand- 
ing aU  the  excesses  to  which  the  latter  class  give 
themselves  up  ;*  but  i  cannot  omit  taking  a  rapid 
view  of  the  mortality  in  institutions  created  by  man 
for  tlie  protection  of  society,  and  giving  a  glance  at 
the  influences  of  vaccination,  hospitals,  asylums,  pri- 
sons, &c.  My  design  is  not  so  much  to  treat  this  sub- 
ject deeply,  as  to  show  to  Av'hat  extent  the  numbers 
may  vary,  according  to  the  locality. 

In  most  civilised  covmtries,  there  are  enactments 
on  vaccination,  of  greater  or  less  severitj',  which  are 
enforced  with  proportionate  rigour.  According  to 
Casper,  and  several  other  savants  who  liave  written 
on  the  ravages  caused  by  small-pox,  it  would  appear 
that  formerly  generations  were  decimated  by  this 
scourge,  that  is  to  sa}',  one-tenth  of  the  human  race 
died  from  it.  Duvillardf  has  found — 1st,  that  in  the 
natural  state,  of  100  individuals  of  30  years  of  age, 
scarcely  four  individuals  haA'e  escaped  an  attack  of 
smaU-pox ;  2d,  that  two-thirds  of  all  infants  are  at- 
tacked by  it  sooner  or  later ;  3d,  that  small-pox,  in 
the  early  3-ears  after  birth,  destroys,  on  the  greatest 
average,  one  out  of  every  three  who  are  afiected  with 
it ;  4th,  and  one  dies  out  of  every  seven  or  eight 
affected,  at  whatever  age  it  may  be.  Such  was  the 
state  of  things  before  the  discovery  of  vaccmation ;  it 
has  since  been  much  ameliorated.  However,  in  1817, 
745  persons  died  in  Paris  of  small-pox ;  in  1818,  993  ; 
and  m  1822,  the  number  was  as  many  as  1084.  Also, 
at  St  Petersburg,  in  1821,  408  deaths  took  place  from 
it;  and  at  Vienna,  238  in  1822;  Avhilst  in  London, 
during  that  year,  there  were  712.  Prussia  has  been 
much  better  dealt  with  than  other  countries  ;  during 
the  two  years  1820  and  1821,  taken  together,  only 
1  in  7204  persons  died  from  it,  whilst  Prance  lost 
1  m  4218  the  last  two  years.  The  following  are  the 
data  of  Berhn,  for  almost  half  a  century : — 

From  1782  to  1791  inclusive, 
• .     1792  to  1801 
•  •     1802  to  1811 
••     1812  to  1822 

4,453  deaths. 

4. Of  19       •  ■ 

2,955       •  • 

555      ■• 

The  number  of  deaths  for  the  last  period,  wliich  is 

*  The  mortality  of  Europeans  at  Batavia  appears  to  he  as  gi'eat 
us  that  of  the  slave  population ;  but  it  would  seem  that  the  chances 
of  mortality  are  increased  for  the  adult  man  who  is  transported 
to  a  climate  very  different  to  that  in  which  he  was  developed. 
This  is  confirmed  by  the  following  table,  given  by  M.  Moreau  de 
Jonnes,  imfortunately  without  mentioning  his  sources : — 

Batavia,  1805,      -        -        Em-opeans,  1  death  to  1 1-0  persons. 

~  -            Slaves,  ~  130  ~ 

~          -         -         Chinese,  -  290  - 

■~            —  -             Javanese,  ~  400  — 

Bombay,  1815,      -        -        Europeans,  —  18-5  - 

~.           ~  -           Mussulmans,  ~  17'5  — 

~            „          -         -        Parsees,  —  24-0  — 

Guadaloupe,  1811  to  1824,     "NVhites,  ..  23-5  „ 

-,               „                  Free  Blacks,  -  35-0  ~ 

Martinico,  1815,    -        -        Whites,  -  24-0  ~ 

-,            ^  -            Free  Blacks,  -.•  33-0  - 

Grenada,      -        -        -        Slaves,  ,.  22-0  - 

St  Lucia,           ...    Slaves,  —  20-0  ,. 

t  Analyse  et  Tableaux  de  I'Infiuence  de  la  Petite-Vt^role. 

extremely  small  m  comparison  with  the  preceding 
years,  would  be  still  less  if  the  deaths  for  1814  and 
1815  were  subtracted,  during  Avhich  time  vaccination 
was  neglected.  Indeed,  these  two  years  had  411  deaths 
from  it,  so  that  during  the  remaining  there  was  only 
114.  Moreover,  we  should  fall  into  a  serious  error, 
as  M.  ViUerme  *  has  said,  if  we  counted  as  gain  to  the 
population  all  those  individuals  who  had  been  vacci- 
nated, and  not  carried  off  by  the  smaU-pox.  "  An 
epidemic,  or  any  other  malady  against  which  we  en- 
deavour to  secure  ourselves,"  says  M.  ViUerme,  "  in- 
deed suppresses  one  cause  of  death,  but  from  that 
circumstance  the  probability  of  dying  from  other  dis- 
eases becomes  greater.  In  other  words,  by  closing 
one  of  the  gates  of  death,  we  open  the  others  wider, 
so  that  more  persons  pass  through  these  latter,  which 
is  not  saying  that  mortality  should  be  equally  rapid- 
Consequently,  vaccination,  and  every  preservative 
against  epidemic  disease,  or  any  disease  whatever, 
does  not  increase  the  population  of  old  Europe  directly; 
but,  what  is  still  better,  it  aUeviates  the  lot  of  those 
whom  it  snatches  from  the  chances  of  sraall-pox,  it 
diminishes  the  number  of  the  blind,  it  preserves  the 
native  beauty  of  the  person,  and  increases  the  ave- 
rage duration  of  life." 

We  may,  then,  regard  the  valuable  discovery  of 
Jenner  as  a  real  conquest  of  knowledge.  "We  espe- 
cially recognise  the  progress  of  civilisation,  in  all  that 
which  was  hideous  and  miserable  being  removed  from 
society:  perhaps  a  feebly  enlightened  philanthropy 
has  been  too  zealous,  and  in  seeking  to  avoid  certain 
evils,  given  rise  to  others.  Notliing  can  more  excite 
our  compassion,  than  the  feeble  infant  which  a  mother 
in  her  distress  abandons  to  public  charity ;  notwith- 
standing, an  excess  of  pity  may  become  an  encourage- 
ment to  vice,  and  a  real  burden  always  increasing  on 
society.f 

It  appears  that  it  is  this  dread  which  has  prevented 
the  formation  of  a  foundling  hospital  in  Edinburgh.^ 
Moreover,  it  has  been  shown  how  dreadful  the  mor- 
tality is  in  the  greater  number  of  these  establishments, 
notwithstanding  all  the  efforts  of  art,  which  has  com- 
bated them  with  some  success.  INIr  Hawkins,  in  his 
Elements  of  Medical  Statistics,^  says  that  the  morta- 
lity in  tlie  foimdling  hospital  in  Dublin  was  so  great, 
that  it  became  the  object  of  parliamentary  inquiry : 
of  10,272  sick  children  sent  to  the  infirmary  attached 
to  the  hospital,  during  21  years  ending  in  1796,  only 

*  Des  Epidemics,  Jan.  1833. 

t  [No  one  now  disputes  that  the  poor  ought  to  he  the  objects 
of  national  and  legislative  care ;  but  great  differences  exist  as  to 
the  amoimt  of  provision  which  ought  to  be  made  for  them.  One 
party  contend,  that  not  only  the  infirm  and  aged  poor,  but  the 
able-bodied  also,  when  out  of  work,  are  entitled  to  an  ample  sup- 
port. Another,  in  which  Dr  Chalmers  takes  the  lead,  would 
only  extend  a  limited  public  provision,  in  very  necessitous  cases, 
and  that  only  after  aid  from  relations  and  neighbours  of  the  par. 
ties  had  been  found  to  fail.  The  principle  of  the  modern  English 
poor-law  appears  a  fair  medium  between  the  two  extremes :  it 
affords  out-of-door  relief  to  the  infirm,  the  aged,  and  the  help. 
lessly  young,  and  to  the  able-bodied  in  necessity  holds  out  accom- 
modation in  work-houses,  where  the  provision  is  a  little  inferior 
to  that  usually  enjoyed  bj'  the  independent  labourer,  so  that  it 
may  act  as  a  test  of  real  necessity,  and  not  be  an  attraction  to 
sloth.  It  has  long  been  a  favourite  doctrine  with  the  second  of 
the  extreme  parties,  that  provision  of  every  kind  vitiates  a  popu- 
lation, by  taking  away  motives  for  self-dependence ;  but  it  has 
been  sho^vn  more  satisfactorily,  on  the  other  hand,  that  wheli  a 
population  is  allowed  to  sink  below  a  certain  point  of  comfort,  it 
tends  to  become  excessive,  in  consequence  of  the  recklessness 
which  attends  a  state  of  great  miserj-.  Unquestionably,  the  inte- 
rest, as  well  as  humanity,  of  every  civilised  nation,  is  concerned 
in  making  provisions  to  prevent  any  portion  of  the  population 
sinking  into  very  abject  circumstances. — Publishers'  Note.] 

i.  In  Edinburgh,  an  attempt  has  occasionally  been  made  to  form 
a  foundling  hospital,  but  has  failed,  from  the  opinion  of  its  in- 
jury to  morality. — Hawkins,  Elements  o/Med.  Stat.,  p.  132. 
§  Page  130; 

46 

ON  MAN. 

45  were  preserved ! — 10,201  of  these  unfortunate  cliil- 
dren  were  aflFected  with  syphilitic  symptoms,  whilst 
of  late  there  has  only  been  1  in  30.  We  have  also 
shown  how  much  art  and  good  management  have 
diminished  the  mortality  of  lying-in  institutions.  My 
object  in  speaking  of  these  establishments  was  not, 
of  course,  to  present  a  complete  table ;  but  to  show 
how  political  institutions  and  philanthropic  establish- 
ments may  cause  the  degree  of  mortality  to  vary, 
whatever  other  causes  of  variation  there  may  be.  It 
is  with  the  same  object  that  I  think  I  ought  to  take 
a  view  of  the  mortality  of  hospitals  in  diiferent  coun- 
tries. This  difficult  subject  may  give  rise  to  serious 
errors,  because  all  hospitals  do  not  receive  patients 
affected  with  disease  of  equal  severity  or  advance- 
ment. It  is  requisite,  therefore,  to  use  much  reserve, 
and  especially  only  to  compare  those  hospitals  with 
each  other  which  admit  the  same  kind  of  patients. 
In  this  I  shall  folloAv  Mr  F.  B.  Hawkins  as  my  guide, 
and  borrow  the  numbers  which  he  gives  in  his  Ele- 
ments. 

In  1685,  in  the  Hospitals  of  St  Bartholomew  and 

St  Thomas,  the  Mortality  was        -        -  1  in   7 

-  1689— St  Thomas, 1  in  10 

~  1741            ~ 1  in  10 

From  1773  to  1783, 1  in  14 

„   1783  to  1793,      1  in  15 

~  1803  to  1813, 1  in  16 

According  to  the  first  report  of  St  George  s  Hospi- 
tal, for  1734,  the  mortahty  was  1  in  8 ;  from  1825 
to  1827,  it  was  1  in  9. 

The  mortahty  in  the  Royal  Infirmary  of  Edinburgh, 
for  the  decennial  period  which  terminated  1818,  Avas 
1  in  16,  or  the  same  as  St  Thomas's.* 

M.  Casper,  in  his  researches  on  the  state  of  the 
poor  in  Paris,  f  has  presented  a  table,  including  the 
proportion  of  deaths  and  duration  of  stay  in  the  hos- 
pitals and  asylums  of  Paris.  Since  these  data  deserve 
confidence,  from  the  sources  from  which  they  have 
been  drawn,  and  from  the  care  which  the  author  has 
taken  to  test  them,  I  have  thought  proper  to  extract 
the  following  numbers  : — 

Average 
Hospitals  of  Paris— 1822.  Mortality.         duration 

of  Stay. 

Hotel-Dieu,         -        -        -        -       1  in  6-8  25-2  days. 

Piti6, ~  8-2  280  ~ 

Charity, ~  5-5  306  ~ 

StAntoine, -  6-7  31-6  ~ 

Necker,      .        -        .        .        -          «  5'6  33'6  ~ 

Cochin, ~  8.3  25-8  ~ 

Beaujon, ~  6-2  30-8  ~ 

St  Louis, ~  14-4  60-3  ~ 

Veneriens,           ....          „  33-2  66'4  — 

Enfans  Malades, -  4-4  51-3  ~ 

Maison  d'Accouchemens,    -        -          ~  28-0  21'1  ~ 

Foundling  Hospital— indoor  patients,  ~  4-3  12-2  „ 

—               «        outdoor  patients,  ~  6-2 

Maison  Royale  de  Sant^,         -        -      „  5-8  24-7  ~ 

MaisondeSant6  (Veneriens),      -          ~  113-0  410  - 

Asylums  of  Paris— 1822. 

Salp^triere,     .        .        -        . 

Institute  de  St  Ferine, 

Bicfitre,  .        .        .        . 

Incurables — men, 
„  women, 

Hospice  des  Menages, 
—     des  Orphelins,    - 
~     de  la  Rochefoucauld, 

8-4 
91 
7-6 
6-7 
111 
11-8 
75-3 
8-4 

64  0 
31-5 

It  appears  that  the  mortality  of  hospitals,  in  the 
remainder  of  France,  is  not  so  great  as  at  Paris.  Thus, 

*  [The  mortality  of  the  Royal  Infirmary  of  Edinburgh  has 
f^ince  that  period,  namely  in  1838-.39,  risen  to  1  in  6,  chiefly,  as 
is  supposed,  from  the  frightful  mortality  caiiscd  by  typhus  fever.] 

1  Beitrage — Das  Annen-und  Armen  Kranken-wegen  in  Paris. 

at  the  Hotel-Dieu  of  Lyons,  it  is  only  1  in  II  ;  at  IMont- 
pellier  1  in  10,  for  the  average  of  all  the  hospitals. 
The  following  is  a  summary  of  the  mortality  in  the 
principal  hospitals  of  Europe,  *  which  may  be  com- 
pared with  the  preceding  data  : — 

Mortality. 
Berlin— La  Charite,  from  1796  to  1817,      -  1  in  6  nearly. 

Vienna — Large  Hospital,  -  -  -      .  .    6     .  . 

Pesth  in  Hungary — Civil  Hospital,  1826,  -  .  .    6     .  . 

Dresden— City  Hospital,  1816,  -  -      .  .   7     . . 

Munich— New  Hospital,  1819,        -  -  . .    9     . . 

Petersburg — Imperial  Hospital,  1817, t  -      . .    4-5 
Geneva— Hospital,  1823,     -           -            -  .  .  11     . . 

Brussels— St  Peter's,  1823,        -  -  -      . .   9     .  . 

Amsterdam-St  Peter's,  1798  to  1817,        -  . .   8     . . 

Turin  and  Genoa,  1821,  -  .  -      ..   7     .• 

Milan — Large  Hospital,  1812  to  1814,         -  .  .   6     .  . 

Pavia— San-Matheo  della  Pieta,  1823,  t  -      . .  10  7 
Bologna— Clinic  of  Tommasini,  1816  to  1819,         . .   7-7 

Leghorn,  1818  to  1825,  -  -  -      . .   7-3 

Palermo — Large  Hospital,  1823,    -  -  . .   8*2 

It  would  appear,  from  these  documents,  that  the 
mortality  in  the  principal  hospitals  on  the  continent 
is  generally  greater  than  in  those  of  England.  We 
may  be  astonished,  moreover,  in  comparing  the  prin- 
cipal states  of  Europe,  that  we  do  not  find  great 
differences,  especially  when  we  consider  the  influence 
which  the  local  position  and  resources  may  have, 
without  speaking  of  the  different  plans  of  medical 
treatment  which  may  be  pursued.  Mr  Hawkins  has 
made  a  very  curious  remark  on  the  latter  subject. 
"  We  rarehi  ought  to  attribute  mortality  to  bad  treat- 
ment, which  probably  seldom  destroys  the  patient. 
A  friend  took  particular  notes  on  the  comparative 
mortality  under  three  physicians,  in  one  hospital. 
The  practice  of  the  one  was  eclectic,  the  second  expec- 
tant, and  the  third  tonic.  The  mortality  was  the  same, 
but  the  duration  of  indisposition,  the  character  of  the 
convalescence,  and  the  chances  of  relapse,  Avere  very 
different."  § 

This  is  not  the  place  to  speak  of  hospitals  for  men- 
tal infirmity,  on  the  mortality  of  which  Ave  stUl  have 
little  accurate  information.  I  shall  have  occasion  to 
speak  of  them  when  considering  the  development  of 
the  moral  and  intellectual  faculties,  and  the  diseases 
to  which  they  are  subject.  Neither  shall  I  stay  to 
consider  the  mortality  of  mendicity  houses,  these 
establishments  being  very  few  in  Europe,  and  based 
on  plans  so  different  as  not  to  admit  of  comparison. 
But  I  ought  not  to  omit  mentioning  the  great  mor- 
tality observed  in  those  of  the  old  kingdom  of  the 
Low  Countries.  In  the  seven  depots  which  Avere 
formed  at  different  places  in  the  kingdom,  and  be- 
tween the  years  1811  and  1822,  there  annually  died 
of  the  average  population  1  in  8  "9 ;  that  is  to  say, 
as  many  as  in  hospitals,  whilst  the  mortality  of  the 
whole  kingdom  Avas  1  in  43"8.  "  The  mortality  in  the 
mendicity  houses  is  indeed  more  dreadful,  since  the 
population  of  these  establishments  does  not  include 
persons  of  tender  years.  We  must  not  forget  that  a 
great  number  of  old  and  infirm  persons  of  both  sexes 
occupy  these  abodes,  and  that  tlie  state  of  extreme 
emaciation  m  which  they  are  found  in  general,  Avhen 
they  arrive,  brings  with  it  the  developed  seed  of  a 
speedy  dissolution,  and  should  undoubtedly  be  classed 
Avith  the  causes  to  which  we  must  attribute  this  fatal 
result.  This  latter  circumstance  Avas  made  especially 
remarkable  in  the  disastrous  year  1816.   A  multitude 

*  Elements  of  Med.  Stat. 

t  AVitli  respect  to  the  hospitals  of  Russia  in  1811,  the  mortality 
in  establishments  containing  more  than  30  patients  Avas  1  in  9, 
and  1  in  10  in  those  which  had  fewer  than  30  patients. 

X  AA'omen  are  received  there  during  labour. 

§  [In  fevers  of  all  descriptions,  and  epidemics,  as  the  plague, 
cholera,  &c.,  there  seems  much  reason  to  fear  that  medical  at- 
tendance is  generally  of  little  avail.  On  this  subject,  the  trans- 
lator  will  be  found  to  treat  in  the  appendix.] 

ON  MAN. 

47 

of  unfortunate  persons  then  only  entered  these  houses 
to  die  in  a  few  days  after  their  arrival,  and  the  greater 
number  of  the  remainder  expired,  in  the  following 
years,  from  weakness.  On  the  other  hand,  it  is  not 
impossible  that  the  sudden  transition  from  the  most 
dreadful  privation  to  a  diet  which  comparatively 
may  appear  superabundant,  here  exercised  a  more 
deplorable  influence  than  with  a  little  more  precau- 
tion it  could  have  done.  A  third  observation,  which 
ought  not  to  be  passed  over  in  silence,  is,  that  in 
order  to  find  the  laws  of  mortality  in  an  establish- 
ment whose  population  is  moveable,  it  is  not  sufficient 
to  compare  the  number  of  deaths  with  the  daily 
entries,  but  it  is  also  necessary  to  attend  to  the  num- 
ber of  individuals  to  whom  this  number  of  entries 
have  a  reference.  The  greater  this  latter  number, 
especially  in  asylums  of  human  misery  and  infirmity, 
the  more  chances  are  there  for  the  mortality  to  ajjpear 
great."  * 

The  mortality  which  has  just  been  pointed  out  is 
no  doubt  very  considerable ;  but  I  do  not  think  that 
it  has  ever  fallen  in  any  of  the  mendicity  houses  of 
Belgium  lower  than  it  was  towards  the  commence 
ment  of  this  century  in  the  mendicity  houses  of 
France.  Indeed,  according  to  ^I.  Villerme.f  the  mor- 
tality at  Laon,  during  a  period  of  thirteen  years  end- 
ing in  1826,  was  1  person  in  4-32 ;  at  Nancy  in  1789, 
1  in  5,  and  in  1801  it  was  1  in  3'22  ;  at  Audi,  diu-ing 
a  period  of  five  years,  at  least  1  in  3 ;  at  Metz  1  in 
8-13  in  1789,  and  1  in  222  in  1801.  This  dreadful 
mortality  cannot  be  compared  to  any  thing  except 
what  took  place,  also  about  the  commencement  of  the 
century,  in  one  of  the  principal  prisons  of  Belgium : 
it  is  scarcely  credible  that,  in  the  prison  of  Vilvorde, 
there  died 

In  1802,  1  prisoner  in    \-27  of  the  average  population. 

1803, 

„ 

107 

1804, 

„ 

1-91 

1805, 

„ 

7-77 

1806, 

„ 

20-31 

1807, 

-. 

30-3C 

Deaths  on 

the  Average  Population. 

Years. 

At  Vilvorde 

St  Bernard 

Ghent 

House  of 

House  of 

House  of 

Confinement. 

Correction. 

Confinement. 

1825, 

2900 

18-71 

31-60 

1826,      - 

29  00 

22-08 

45-80 

1827.           -         - 

29-62 

17-81 

77-53 

1828,      - 

48-14 

17-99 

51-35 

1829, 

29-74 

15-06 

101-67 

1830,      •• 

36,66 

11-93 

101-08 

1831, 

39,78 

30-51 

57-90 

In  1801,  the  evil  had  not  begun  to  exist ;  it  was  in 
1802  when  it  attained  its  greatest  intensity.  In  1805, 
M.  Chaban,  prefect  of  the  ancient  department  of  Dyle, 
and  JI.  Rouppe,  inspector-general  of  the  prison,  began 
some  improvements,  which  coiUd  not  be  completed 
until  I8O74  J^I-  Villerme,  who  has  also  taken  care  to 
register  this  remarkable  mortality,  in  his  work  on  the 
Mortality  of  Prisons,  adds  the  following  reflections  : — 
"  After  these  last  facts,  what  need  be  said  to  show  the 
power  of  the  government  ?  I  do  not  think  that  im- 
prisonment should  always  be  barbarously  severe,  but 
I  think  the  bad  discipline  almost  always  renders  it 
so.  Those  who  are  intrusted  with  the  care  of  priso- 
ners, having  never  made  researches  of  the  present 
kind,  what  they  have  said  of  them  has  often  appeared 
as  clamorous  sympathy  merelj'.  But  when  we  take 
the  numbers  of  the  men,  and  determine  the  annual 
proportion  of  their  deaths,  every  thing  is  reduced  to 
a  simple  calculation,  the  elements  of  which  may  be 
verified.  If  it  be  correct,  all  the  evil  or  all  the  good 
which  the  figure  expresses  is  real." 

To  understand  to  what  extent  the  evil  reached  in 
the  prison  of  Vilvorde,  and  how  defective  the  disci- 
pline of  it  was,  it  is  sutRcient  to  quote  the  mortaUty 
since  this  period.  At  the  same  time,  I  shall  give  the 
mortality  of  two  other  large  prisons  in  Belgiiun.§ 

*  These  judicious  observations  are  extracted  from  the  notes 
with  which  M.  Ic  Baron  Reverberg  has  enriched  my  'Rtchtrcha 
sur  let  Poptilatioii.1,  les  Xaissanccs,  ifc. 

t  JMortalit^  dans  les  Prisons,  An.  d'Hi/yicne,  tome  i.  p.  9. 

%  Tableau  Statistique  de  la  Maison  de  Detention  de  Vilvorde, 
par  M.  Rouppe. 

§  Rapport  sur  VEtat  Actuel  des  Prisons  en  Belgique,  &e.,  par 
Kd.  Diicpetiaux. 

"We  may  now  be  enabled  to  judge  if  the  mortality 
of  men  left  to  themselves,  and  giving  themselves  up 
to  the  greatest  excesses,  may  not  be  aggravated  rather 
than  otherwise,  by  a  negUgent  and  mienlightened 
administration  :  men  during  the  most  dreadful  pesti- 
lences, and  soldiers  during  the  most  destructive  wars, 
have  not  been  exposed  to  such  a  mortahty  as  the  pri- 
soners of  Vilvorde,  during  the  early  years  of  the  pre- 
sent century. 

The  evil  was  far  from  being  so  great  during  the 
same  period  in  the  prison-house  of  Ghent ;  indeed,  there 
was  only  1  death  to  20*4  prisoners  in  1801  ;  in  1789 
there  was  only  1  death  to  25'8  prisoners.  According 
to  M.  Villerme,  the  annual  mortality  in  the  prisons  of 
the  department  of  the  Seine  has  been,  during  the 
years  1815,  1816,  1817,  and  1818,  as  follows: — 

At  la  Grande  Force, 
.  .  the  Madelonnettes, 
. .  the  Conciergerie, 
. .  la  Petite  Force, 
.  .  Sainte-P^lagie, 
. .  the  Bicetre,     ... 
.  .  the  Sainte-Lazare, 
. .  the  Mendicity  House  at  St  Denis, 

1  in  40-88  prisoners. 

..  38-03 

. .  32-06 

. .  26-63 

.  .  24-48 

.  .  18-75 

..  17-92 

.  .  3-97 

We  see  that  in  the  department  of  the  Seine  the 
mortaUty  of  the  depot  of  mendicity  is  also  much 
greater  than  that  of  the  prisons,  and  appears  fre- 
quently to  result  from  the  injured  constitutions  of  the 
poor,  and  their  privations  and  miseries  before  enter- 
ing prison  [the  depots?],  and  from  the  impossibility 
they  found  of  procuring  the  necessaries  of  life.* 

The  prisons  in  the  departments  of  France  are  gene- 
rally far  from  presenting  as  favourable  results  as  those 
of  the  department  of  the  Seine ;  indeed,  the  mortality 
in  the  central  houses  (maisons  centrales')  and  of  those  of 
justice  and  correction,  were — 

At  Montpellier,  1822, 

1  in   9-33  prisoners. 

. .  Riom,  1821  to  1827,      -  -  .  .     9-87 

. .  Baulieu  near  Caen,  1814  to  1825,  -        . .  11-59 

.  .  Melun,  1817  to  1825,     -  -  .  .  14-81 

.  .  Gaillon,  1817  to  1825,  -  -         .  .  11-86 

.  .  Metz,  1801,       -  -  -  .  .  18-43 

.  .  Toulouse,  1822  to  1824,         -  -         . .  35-07 1     •  • 

.  .  Lyons,  1820  to  1826,      -  -  .  .  .43-00 1      .  . 

. .  Saint- Flour,  1813  to  1826,    -  -        . .  47-00 

.  .  Rouen,  1815tol826—Maisonde  Justice,  . .  51-18  § 

. .       .  .       1820  to  1825— Bicetre,  -         .  .  59-07 II      •  • 

It  is  calculated  that,  for  the  average  period  of  con- 
finement in  1827,  there  was  1  death  to  22  sentenced, 
in  the  central  houses  of  imprisonment  of  France ;  and 
the  average  ratio  was  1  in  1 6  for  the  men,  and  1  in 
26  for  the  women.     ]M.  Villerme,  from  whom  I  bor- 

*  Mortality  dans  les  Prisons,  p.  5. 

t  In  1814,  a  year  of  misery,  with  a  crowded  prison,  1  prisoner 
died  out  of  7-95. 

^  One  in  19,  from  1800  to  1805  inclusive  ;  1  in  31,  from  1806  to 
1812  ;  1  in  34,  from  1813  to  1819. 

§  The  infirmaries  have  been  better  organised,  and  the  nursing 
better  conducted.  The  mortality  In  1812,  1813,  and  1814,  was  1 
in  406 ! 

n  The  mortality  was  1  in  8-46  from  1811  to  1814 ;  1  in  20-70  from 
1816  to  1820;  after  this  period,  those  condemned  to  one  year  of 
confinement  and  more  were  withdrawn. 

48 

ON  MAN. 

row  the  preceding  data,  estimates  the  mortality  of  the 
galley-slaves'  prison  as  follows  : — 

At  Rochefort,  from  1816  to  1828, 
.  .  ToiUon, 
. .  Brest, 
.  L'Orient, 

1  in  11-51 
.  .  20-55 
.  .  27-06 
.  .  3917 

We  have  often  taken  the  prisons  of  Switzerland  and 
the  United  States  as  patterns  ;  it  may  be  interesting, 
therefore,  to  know  the  mortality  there* 

Penitentiary  of  Berne,            -           -           -  1  in  25-00 
Lausanne,  from  1803  to  1825, 

old  method,  -       ..  21-40 

from  1826  to  1829, 

new  method,          -  . .  12-25 

from  1830  to  1831,  -       . .  36-00 

Geneva,  1826  to  1831,              -  .  .  49-00 

I'risonof  Philadelphia  (Pennsylvania),     -  -       ••  16-66 

..      of  Newgate  (New  York),          -            -  ..18-80 

Penitentiary  of  Singsing  (New  York),  12  years,  .  .  36-58 

Wethersfield  (Connecticut),  -       . .  44-40 

Baltimore  (Maryland),            -  .  .  48-57 

Auburn  (New  York),       -  -       ..56-95 

Charlestown  (Massachusetts),  . .  58-40 

It  is  to  be  regretted  that  census  of  the  mortahty 
of  prisons  in  England  are  wanting ;  it  only  appears 
that  it  is  very  smaU.  This  subject  is  perhaps  more 
entitled  to  the  attention  of  statisticians  than  any 
other,  for  there  are  few  which  present  values  so  liable 
to  change,  and  consequently  the  discipline  should  be 
more  enlightened.  Indeed,  Ave  have  seen  that,  accord- 
ing to  the  negligence  or  zeal  of  the  governors  of  pri- 
sons, the  mortality  of  the  establishment  need  not 
exceed  what  it  is  in  ordinary  society,  or  may  become 
more  dreadful  than  the  most  destructive  scourges. 
The  loss  of  liberty,  and  the  humiliation  connected 
with  the  condemned  state,  are  punishments  so  great, 
that  we  need  not  aggravate  them  by  a  mortality  un- 
equalled by  aU  the  other  scourges  to  which  the  species 
is  exposed.  The  mortality  of  prisons  has  diminished 
in  almost  aU  estabUshments  without  exception  ;  it  is 
a  fresh  benefit  resulting  from  the  diffusion  of  know- 
ledge, and  I  dare  say  from  the  care  with  which  statis- 
ticians have  brought  forward  results  on  which  Ave  did 
not  possess  any  precise  data,  and  which  consequently 
produced  less  impression,  because  Ave  readily  deceived 
ourselves  as  to  the  natm-e  of  the  evil.f  I  cannot 
better  conclude  this  chapter  than  by  quoting  the 
principal  conclusions  to  which  M.  Villerme  has  been 
led — one  of  the  men  who  has  thrown  most  light  on 
this  important  subject :  % — 

1st,  The  mortality  of  prisoners  is  generally  much 
greater  than  that  of  free  people. 

2d,  It  is  in  the  direct  ratio  of  the  bad  management 
of  prisons,  the  state  of  misery  and  nakedness  of  those 
detained  therein,  and  the  privations  and  sufferings 
Avhich  they  passed  through  before  imprisonment. 

3d,  If  the  management  or  discipline  is  almost 
powerless  in  correcting  these  latter  causes,  it  may 
always,  by  care  and  understanding,  prevent  or  very 
much  extenuate  the  former. 

4th,  If,  taking  aAvay  the  difference  owing  to  locality 
and  good  or  bad  treatment,  Ave  arrange  the  prisoners 
in  the  order  of  their  mortality,  they  stand  as  fol- 

lOAVS  : — 

Accused. 

Condemned. 

Detained  in  mendicity  houses. 

*  Rapport  sur  I'Etat  Actuel  des  Prisons  en  Belgique. 

t  Mortality  des  Prisons,  &c. 

±  One  of  the  most  remarkable  works  which  has  been  written  on 
the  amelioration  of  prisons,  and  the  moral  reformation  of  the 
inmates,  is  that  of  Dr  Julius  of  Berlin — Vorle-suitffen  ilber  die 
Gefangniss  Kxmde,  8vo.  Berlin,  1823.  This  work  has  been  trans- 
lated into  French.  The  autlior,  Avho  has  investigated  tlie  state 
of  prisons  with  the  most  remarkable  zeal,  has  been  called  to 
Berlin  by  the  I'russian  government,  to  give  public  lectures  on 
the  objects  of  his  researches,  lie  has  published  a  collection  called 
Jahrbtlcherder  Straf-und  Besserungs-AnstaUen,  Erziehungshauser, 
ifC,  more' especially  containing  information  on  crimes  and  pri- 
sons.   See  also  the  Avorks  of  Mr  Lucas. 

5th,  To  appreciate  the  effects  of  the  salubrity  or 
insalubrity,  of  the  good  or  bad  management  of  each 
prison,  and  the  different  chances  of  life  of  each  class 
of  prisoners,  the  best  means  Avill  be  to  determine  the 
annual  proportion  of  deaths,  not  by  comparing  the 
latter  to  the  total  number  of  the  inmates,  but  to  their 
average  annual  population. 

6th,  Ignorance  of  the  lot  of  prisoners,  of  their  wants, 
especially  of  the  wants  and  the  fate  of  the  poorest  of 
them,  is  the  first  cause  to  which  may  be  attributed 
the  excessive  mortality  shoAvn  by  the  numbers  Ave 
have  quoted. 

CHAPTER    VII. 

RELATIONS  OF  POPULATION  TO  SOCIAL  PROSPERITY. 

1.  Of  Population  and  its  Increase. 

Until  now  I  have  been  considering  the  principal  facts 
which  relate  to  the  birth,  life,  reproduction,  and  mor- 
tality of  man,  but  without  examining  his  condition 
in  the  social  mass.  This  research,  however,  is  the 
philosophical  end  towards  which  all  our  efforts  should 
lead :  Ave  cannot  dissemble  as  to  the  great  difficulties 
Avhich  it  at  present  presents,  notAvithstanding  it  has 
exercised  the  sagacity  of  several  writers  of  the  highest 
merit ;  and  it  is  with  the  greatest  deference  that  I 
present  some  ncAv  observations,  Avhich  I  think  capable 
of  receiving  useful  application. 

Populations  arise  imperceptibly;  it  is  only  when 
they  have  reached  a  certain  degree  of  development 
that  Ave  begin  to  think  of  their  existence.  This  in- 
crease is  more  or  less  rapid,  and  it  proceeds  either 
from  an  excess  of  births  over  deaths,  or  from  immi- 
grations, or  both.  In  general,  it  is  a  mark  of  well- 
being,  and  of  the  means  of  existence  being  superior 
to  the  Avants  of  the  actual  population.  If  Ave  approach 
or  exceed  this  limit,  the  state  of  increase  soon  stops, 
or  a  contrary  condition  may  take  place.  It  is  then 
interesting  to  examine  hoAV  different  countries  are 
populated,  what  are  the  means  of  subsistence  and  the 
rate  of  increase  of  the  people,  and  to  assign  the  limit 
Avhich  they  may  reach  without  danger.  After  that, 
the  consideration  is,  to  knoAv  the  composition  of  the 
population,  and  if  the  constituent  elements  are  advan- 
tageously distributed,  and  contribute,  in  a  more  or 
less  efficient  manner,  to  the  AveU-being  of  the  Avhole. 
But  it  Avould  be  proper  first  to  take  the  questions  of 
highest  moment,  and  to  establish,  in  a  summary  and 
clear  manner,  tlie  ideas  on  population  promulgated 
by  the  most  distinguished  economists. 

It  appears  incontestible,  that  population  would  in- 
crease in  a  geometrical  ratio,  if  no  obstacle  were  pre- 
sented to  its  development. 

The  means  of  subsistence  are  not  developed  so 
rapidly ;  and,  according  to  Malthus,  in  the  most  fa- 
vourable circumstances  for  industry,  they  can  never 
increase  quicker  than  in  an  arithmetical  ratio.* 

*  Essay  on  (he  Principle  of  Population,  vol.  i.  p.  15.  (Transla- 
tion of  MM.  Prdvost,  Geneva,  1830).  This  law  of  the  increase  of 
subsistence  may  appear  doubtful,  and  the  ideas  of  economists  are 
very  different  on  this  subject.  Mr  Senior  thinks  that  there  is  a 
tendency  in  the  means  of  subsistence  to  increase  faster  than  the 
population.  —  See  Ttvo  Lectures  on  Population,  p.  49.  On  this 
subject  we  may  also  consult  the  coi-respondence  between  this 
gentleman  and  ]\Ir  Malthus.  Mr  M'Culloch,  in  tlie  notes  on 
Dr  Smith's  fp'calth  of  Nations,  \-ol.  iv.  p.  133,  thinks,  on  tlie 
contrary,  that  the  progression  established  by  Mr  Malthus  is  too 
higli  for  the  countries  Avhere  the  best  lands  are  already  under 
cultivation.  Since  these  tilings  cannot  be  decided  until  all  parts 
of  the  globe  are  under  culture,  it  Avould  be  difficult  to  establish 
any  thing  experimentally,  of  a  positive  nature,  on  this  head  ;  for 
if  a  population  consume  all  the  products  of  the  land  Avhich  they 
inhabit,  they  may  still,  by  the  exchange  of  otlier  produce,  sup- 
ply themselves  Avith  what  before  Avas  Avanted,  and  in  this  case 
they  Avill  receiA'e  new  accessions:  thus  the  multiplication  of 
machinery,  by  seconding  himian  labour  in  England,  has  allOAved 
the  means  of  subsistence  to  undergo  an  increase  since  the  com- 

ON  MAN. 

49 

Tlie  obstacle  to  popiilation,  then,  is  the  want  of 
food,  proceeding  from  the  difference  of  ratio  which 
these  two  quantities  follow  in  their  resi>ective  in- 
creases. When  a  population,  in  its  development,  has 
arrived  at  the  level  of  its  means  of  subsistence,  it 
ought  to  stop  at  this  limit,  from  human  foresight ;  or 
if  it  have  the  misfortune  to  overleap  this  limit,  it  must 
be  forcibly  brought  back  by  an  excess  of  mortahty. 

The  obstacles  to  population,  therefore,  may  be  ar- 
ranged under  tAvo  heads — the  one  acts  by  preventing 
the  growth  of  population,  and  the  other  by  destroying 
it  in  proportion  as  it  is  formed.  The  sum  of  the  first 
forms  what  may  be  called  the  privative  obstacle,  that 
of  the  second  the  destructive  obstacle.* 

Mr  Malthus  has  analysed,  with  great  sagacity,  the 
principal  obstacles  to  its  increase  which  population 
has  met  with ;  he  has  determined,  with  no  less  credit, 
the  limit  which  it  cannut  pass  Avitliout  being  exposed 
to  the  greatest  danger.  However,  it  may  be  necessary 
to  remark,  notwithstanding  the  researches  of  the 
English  philosopher,  and  of  the  economists  who  have 
followed  in  his  track,  that  the  modus  operandi  of  the 
obstacles  has  not  been  clearly  made  out.  The  law 
has  not  been  established  by  virtue  of  Avhich  they 
operate :  in  a  word,  they  have  not  afforded  the  means 
of  carrying  the  theory  of  population  into  the  domains 
of  mathematical  science,  to  which  it  seems  particu- 
larly to  belong.f  Hence  it  results,  that  the  discussion 
of  this  delicate  point  has  not  been  completed  at  the 
present  day,  and  the  dangers  attending  society  have 
perhaps  been  exaggerated,  from  not  finding  sufficient 
security  in  tlie  action  of  the  obstacles  against  an  evil, 
the  dreadful  rapidity  of  which  followed  a  geometrical 
progression. 

To  endeavour  to  fill  up  so  important  a  lacuna,  I 
have  made  numerous  researches,  the  details  of  which 
it  will  be  superfluous  here  to  present ;  and  an  atten- 
tive examination  of  the  state  of  the  question  has 
proved  to  me,  that  the  theory  of  population  may  be 
reduced  to  the  two  foUov.ing  principles,  which  I  con- 
sider will  hereafter  serve  as  fundamental  principles 
in  the  analysis  of  the  development  of  population,  and 
of  the  causes  which  influence  it. 

Population  tends  to  increase  in  a  geometrical  ratio. 
The  resistance,  or  sum  of  the  obstacles  to  its  develop- 
ment, is,  all  things  being  equal,  as  the  square  of  the  rapi- 
dity with  which  it  tends  to  increase. 

The  obstacles  to  rapidity  of  increase  of  a  population, 
really  operate,  then,  like  the  resistance  which  the  media 
oppose  to  the  passage  of  bodies  through  them.  This 
extension  of  one  of  the  laws  of  physics,  which  is  most 
happily  confirmed  Avhen  we  apply  it  to  the  documents 
which  society  supplies,  presents  a  new  example  of  the 
analogies  which  are  found  in  many  cases  between  the 
laws  regulating  material  phenomena  and  those  which 
apply  to  man.  So  that,  of  the  two  principles  Avhich  I 
take  as  the  basis  of  the  mathematical  theory  of  popu- 
lation, the  one  is  generally  admitted  by  all  economists, 
and  scarcely  appears  contestible,  and  the  other  has 
been  verified  in  all  the  applications  where  we  had  to 

niencement  of  the  present  century,  which  appears  to  me  to  be 
greater  than  an  arithmetical  ratio.  We  cannot  but  continue  to 
look  upon  the  products  of  industry  as  equal  to  the  products  of 
agriculture,  until  the  exchange  of  money  for  food  becomes  im- 
possible by  too  great  a  development  of  the  population  on  the  sur- 
face of  the  globe. 

*  Malthus — Essay,  &c.  p.  20,  tome  i.  In  the  view  which  I  have 
adopted,  the  destructive  obstacle  acts  generally  by  natural  powers, 
and  the  privative  obstacle  by  the  disturbing  powers  of  man. 

t  May  I  be  allowed  to  recall  the  ideas  on  this  point  which  I 
expressed  in  1827,  at  the  opening  of  a  public  course  on  the  his- 
tory of  the  sciences? — "  It  is  to  be  observed,"  I  said,  "  that  the 
more  progress  the  physical  sciences  have  made,  accordingly  have 
they  tended  to  enter  within  the  boimds  of  mathematical  science, 
which  is  a  sort  of  centre  to  which  they  converge.  We  might  even 
judge  of  the  degree  of  perfection  to  which  a  science  is  capable  of 
being  carried,  by  the  greater  or  less  facility  with  which  it  admits 
of  calcuLition." 

consider  the  movements  and  the  obstacles  in  a  con- 
tinuous manner. 

However,  notwithstanding  the  prejudices  we  might 
have  in  favour  of  them,  it  would  undoubtedly  be  ne- 
cessary to  reject  them,  if,  by  submitting  them  to 
analysis,  they  could  not  support  this  proof  to  the  ex- 
tremest  detail. 

I  thought,  therefore,  that  I  ought  to  examine,  first 
of  all,  the  consequences  which  the  theory  involved, 
and  I  have  had  the  satisfaction  to  find  them  entirely 
conformable  to  the  results  of  experience.  Thus,  when 
population  can  develop  itself  freely  and  without  im- 
pediment, it  increases  in  a  geometrical  ratio ;  if  it  be 
developed  in  the  midst  of  obstacles  of  every  kind, 
which  tend  to  arrest  it,  and  which  operate  in  an  uni- 
form manner,  that  is  to  say,  if  the  social  state  does  not 
change,  the  population  does  not  increase  in  an  inde- 
finite manner,  but  tends  more  and  more  to  become 
stationary.  Hence  it  results,  that  population  finds, 
in  its  very  tendency  to  increase,  those  causes  which 
ought  to  prevent  the  fatal  catastrophes  which  might 
be  feared  from  too  great  fullness,  if  I  may  so  express 
myself,  brought  on  in  a  sudden  manner,  and  before 
which  all  human  prudence  would  fail.  The  experience 
of  our  old  Europe  proves  very  fully,  that  population 
arrives  at  its  state  of  equilibrium,  increases,  or  re- 
cedes, by  generally  following  one  law  of  continuity. 
The  bound  which  it  cannot  pass  is  variable,  and  de- 
pends on  the  quantity  of  food :  population  can  never 
be  developed  so  rapidly  as  to  strike  suddenly  against 
this  bound ;  the  obstacles  which  previously  arise,  hav- 
ing the  same  tendency,  are  too  numerous  to  render  a 
violent  shock  possible.  Nature  does  not  raise  a  smaller 
tribute  of  deaths ;  but  since  we  pay  this  tribute  in 
detail,  it  is  less  sensible  to  us  than  if  we  required  sud- 
denly to  discharge  it. 

It  is  thus  that  the  greater  part  of  our  population 
has  progressively  arrived  at  the  level  of  the  means  of 
subsistence,  by  continually  preserving  a  tendency  to 
develop,  and  consequently  to  reproduce  an  excess  of 
mortality,  nearly  in  the  same  manner  as  the  cloud  sus- 
pended in  the  air  has  a  continual  tendency  to  descend 
and  diffuse  the  fullness  which  it  holds.  In  the  midst 
of  the  causes  innumerable  which  may  disturb  this 
state  of  equilibrium,  population  advances  or  recedes 
almost  in  the  same  manner  as  we  see  the  cloud  as- 
cend or  descend  according  to  the  temperature,  direc- 
tion of  the  winds,  and  a  crowd  of  other  atmospherical 
circumstances,  which,  however,  does  not  prevent  its 
always  reaching  a  certain  average  height,  depending 
on  its  constitution  and  the  obstacle  which  the  resist- 
ance of  the  air  opposes  to  its  descent. 

When  the  social  si/stem  undergoes  any  changes,  the 
obstacles  always  preserve  the  same  mode  of  action ; 
but  their  intensity  may  vary  in  an  infinite  manner,  so 
that  the  development  of  population  may  be  infinitely 
modified  like^vise.  If  we  possessed  exact  census  for 
different  periods,  the  analysis  would  show  the  inten- 
sity of  the  causes  which  have  been  able  to  accelerate 
or  oppose  the  development  of  population,  and  the  cir- 
cumstances which  have  given  origin  to  them.  Sup- 
posing, for  example,  that  a  population  which  increases 
continually  in  an  arithmetical  progression,  the  con- 
stant difference  of  which  is  also  known,  we  might  de- 
termine, by  means  of  the  two  laws  announced  above, 
what  energy  the  obstacles  have  successively  opposed 
to  the  development  of  the  population  ;  in  other  terms, 
the  law  according  to  which  these  obstacles  have  been 
enabled  to  manifest  themselves.  It  will  sufiice  to 
know  the  law  according  to  which  a  population  is  de- 
veloped, to  deduce,  at  least  approximatively,  the  law 
according  to  which  the  obstacles  have  developed  them- 
selves, and  vice  versa.  But  such  problems  as  these 
belong  exclusively  to  analysis  ;  I  can  only  point  them 
out  here,  reserving  a  return  to  them  in  a  special  work. 
I  have  said  that,  when  the  state  of  equiUbrium  has 
been  once  attained,  population  would  become  station- 
ary, or  at  least  vould  oscillate  around  a  fixed  state, 

50 

ON  MAN. 

in  consequence  of  corresponding  variations  produced 
by  climate  and  amount  of  food ;  but  since  it  is  essen- 
tial to  the  nature  of  man  to  endeavour  to  increase  the 
quantity  of  his  produce  by  a  greater  degree  of  manual 
and  intellectual  labour,  population  may  be  enabled  to 
find  the  means  of  development ;  in  such  a  manner  that, 
if  all  the  physical  circumstances  were  the  same  in  the 
different  countries  of  Europe,  there  could  not  be  a 
better  measure  of  produce  and  industry  than  the  den- 
sity of  the  population  found  there.  The  specific  popu- 
lation is  indeed  the  result  of  all  the  influential  ele- 
ments of  a  country,  and  should  be  found  carried  to  a 
limit  which  is  in  relation  to  all  the  facilities  which  a 
country  could  present  for  its  development  during  the 
preceding  periods. 

In  adopting  the  measure  of  productive  power,  in 
a  first  approximation,  it  may  be  interesting  to  know 
the  specific  population  of  each  country,  that  is  to  say, 
the  number  of  inhabitants  on  a  square  league  of 
ground :  for  this  purpose  I  shall  adopt  the  numbers 
given  by  M.  Balbi  in  the  Precis  de  la  Geographic 
Universelle  de  Malte-Brun,  liv.  16.  I  thought  it  ne- 
cessary to  omit  the  small  states  having  fewer  than 
one  million  of  souls. 

Inhabitants  to  a 
Square  League 
(of  25  to  the  Degree.) 
Low  Countries,        ...  -        1829 

Lomhardo-Venetian  kingdom,  -  1711 

AVurtemburg,  -  -  .  .         1502 

England  (properly  so  called),  -  1457 

Kingdom  of  Saxony,  ...        1252 

States  of  Sardinia,         -  -  -  1122 

France,        .  .  -  .  -         1062 

States  of  the  Church,    -  -  -  1043 

Bavai-ia, 968 

Prussian  monarchy,      .  .  -  792 

Switzerland,  ....  783 

Hungary,  ....  750 

Kingdom  of  Naples  and  Sicily,       .  -         747 

Spain,    -  -  .  .  -  641 

Denmark,     .....  616 

Portugal,  -  .  .  -  446 

Turkey,       .....  324 

Kussia,  ....  161 

Sweden  and  Norway,  -  .  -  82 

The  Low  Countries,  Lorabardy,  Wurtemburg,  and 
England,  are,  then,  the  coimtries  which  really  support 
the  densest  populations  in  Europe,  and  consequently 
those  which,  aU  things  being  equal,  should  produce 
the  most  for  their  suitable  support.  Portugal,  Tur. 
key,  Russia,  Sweden,  and  Denmark,  on  the  contrary, 
have  populations  of  less  density.  Now,  since  the 
people  of  these  countries  have  been  increasing  for 
many  centuries  back,  with  all  the  facilities  which  their 
locality  and  institutions  allowed,  it  is  to  be  presumed 
that  if  they  are  not  the  same  in  the  different  countries 
of  Europe,  there  have  been  some  obstacles  to  their 
propagation,  either  in  the  lands  not  being  equally 
fertile,  or  because  it  has  been  more  difficult  to  deve- 
lop the  trade  and  industry  of  man,  or  because  there 
was  not  a  secure  basis  for  social  institutions,  or,  lastly, 
owing  to  moral  causes,  and  the  other  motives,  the  in- 
fluence of  which  on  the  number  of  births  and  deaths 
I  have  examined. 

There  is  also  an  important  distinction  to  be  esta- 
blished, and  which,  because  it  has  not  been  observed, 
has  often  thrown  strange  confusion  into  all  questions 
on  population ;  namely,  that  it  is  necessary  to  know 
not  only  of  how  many  individuals  a  people  is  composed, 
but  also  in  what  manner  each  individual  obtains  the 
means  necessary  for  his  own  existence.  There  is  an  in- 
finity of  shades  among  the  people  :  some  have  a  more 
cultivated  mind,  more  industry,  and  more  wants ;  one 
individual  alone  consumes  by  himself  what  otherwise 
might  support  three  persons,  or  even  more ;  but  these 
three  men  would  live  miserably,  and  propagate  a 
people  as  miserable  as  themselves.  It  would  then  be 
inaccurate  to  say  that,  because  the  last  nation  has  a 
population  three  times  as  dense  as  the  first,  that  it 
produced  three  times  as  much.  In  order  tliat  the 
figures  of  the  preceding  table  may  be  compared  with 

each  otiier,  it  is  necessary  to  multiply  them  indivi- 
dually by  a  constant  coefficient,  being  what  is  necessary 
for  one  individual  of  each  nation  to  supply  his  wants. 

We  should  also  be  Avrong  in  judging  that,  because 
one  nation  had  a  stationary  population,  it  made 
no  progress.  The  state  of  industry  and  knowledge 
may  ameliorate  the  condition  of  the  population  very 
much,  without  any  traces  of  it  being  discernible 
(namely,  the  ameUoration).  This  increase  of  well- 
being,  all  things  being  equal,  is  measured  by  the 
quantity  of  things  which  one  individual  consumes, 
and  in  an  equitable  division  of  the  matter  which  is 
consumed.  This  constant  coefficient  is  destined  to 
play  an  important  part  in  the  theory  of  population. 
It  is  this  which  defines  the  limit  towards  which  popu- 
lation tends  in  its  successive  growth,  almost  in  the 
same  manner  as  the  point  at  which  a  body  remains 
in  cquilibrio  in  any  medium,  is  regulated  by  its  density. 
In  general,  when  a  population  is  stationary,  according 
as  the  consumption  of  the  inhabitant  increases  or 
diminishes,  in  such  proportion  may  the  people  be  said 
to  be  made  richer  or  poorer. 

Because  a  population  is  increasing,  we  must  not 
conclude  any  longer  that  its  prosperity  increases.  It 
is  necessary,  first,  to  consider  the  constant  coefficient, 
which  is  the  measure  of  the  degree  of  comfort  of  the 
individual,  just  as,  on  the  other  hand,  the  specific 
population  is  the  measure  of  the  degree  of  affluence  or 
comfort  of  any  country.  When  we  wish  to  establish 
comparisons  between  the  people,  it  is  of  the  greatest 
importance  to  consult  the  quality,  if  I  may  so  express 
myself,  as  well  as  the  quantity. 

In  general,  statisticians  continue  to  employ  the 
annual  increase  of  the  population,  to  calculate  in  what 
time  it  would  double  itself,  although  experience  almost 
constantly  falsifies  the  results  of  their  calculations. 
This  inquiry,  which  leads  us  into  the  hypothesis  that 
there  is  no  obstacle  to  the  development  of  a  people, 
can  scarcely  be  directly  applied  to  old  Europe,  any 
more  than  we  should  expect  to  see  the  results  of 
experience  accord  with  those  of  the  theory  of  the  fall 
of  bodies  through  a  vacuum.  These  calculations,  for 
the  most  part,  are  only  suited  to  satisfy  curiositj', 
since  they  belong  to  an  hypothesis  which  cannot  be 
realised,  or  at  least  is  available  only  within  very  nar- 
row limits. 

If  a  country,  by  virtue  of  its  increasing  civilisation, 
takes  a  new  impulse,  and  from  the  increase  of  its  pro- 
duce carries  onwards  the  boundary  which  limits  the 
extent  of  its  population,  it  would  be  in  the  most 
favourable  circumstances,  by  a  geometrical  progres- 
sion, that  it  would  first  tend  to  reach  that  boundary ; 
but  this  rapidity  of  increase  would  soon  abate,  from 
the  effect  of  obstacles,  and  would  soon  be  extinguished. 
The  same  applies  to  a  decreasing  population ;  but  the 
motion  takes  place  in  the  opposite  direction.  Analysis 
suppUes  us  Avith  some  formula,  which  very  accurately 
express  these  different  states. 

Comitries  most  happily  divided,  scarcely  present  a 
population  increasing  in  a  geometrical  ratio.  England, 
however,  is  a  striking  example,  which  ought  to  occupy 
the  highest  degree  of  attention.  After  havmg  been 
stationary,  or  even  retrograde,  at  the  commencement 
of  the  last  century,  its  population  then  began  to  in- 
crease progressively,  undergoing  various  oscillations 
mitil  the  middle  of  the  century,  when,  receiving  a 
second  impulse,  it  began  to  take  an  arithmetical  ratio. 
A  fresh  and  more  energetic  impulse  was  given  to  it 
at  the  commencement  of  the  present  century,  and  it 
has  not  since  ceased  to  increase  in  a  geometrical  ratio  ; 
so  that  it  has  passed  through  states  contrary  to  those 
of  a  population  which  tends  to  its  limit,  and  where 
the  obstacles  go  on  increasing.  Here  the  obstacles 
have  been  diminishing  in  consequence  of  the  immense 
progress  of  industry,  and  the  introduction  of  such 
an  incredible  quantity  of  machinery,  the  products  of 
which  represent  a  population  which  England  is  far 
from  jiossessing. 

ON  MAN. 

51 

Years. 

Population.* 

Decennial 
Increase. 

Annual 
Increase 
per  cent. 

Period  required 
tor  the  Popula- 
tion to  double 
itself. 

17(1(1,    - 

5,1,34,.')16 

—  68,179 

— ()-13 

—  500  years. 

171(1, 

5,06e,ai7 

+279,014 

+  0-.')4 

+  129      .. 

1720,    - 

5,.'M5,."?51 

342,642 

{)(i-2 

112      .. 

173(1, 

.5,087.993 

141,712 

0-25 

278      .. 

1740,     - 

5,829,705 

209,979 

0-35 

197      •• 

l7r.o. 

0,0.39,684 

440,046 

0-70 

ion     . . 

17C0,    - 

0,479,730 

747,856 

1-09 

63      .. 

1770, 

7,227,586 

587,241 

0-78 

89      •• 

i7«o,    - 

7,814,827 

725,911 

0-89 

77     ■• 

1790, 

8,540,738 

646,438 

0-73 

9G      ■■ 

1800,     - 

9,187,176 

1,220,380 

1-25 

50      •• 

1810, 

10,407,.';50 

1,550,(H)5 

1-39 

49      •■ 

1820,    - 

11,957,565 

1,883,186 

1-46 

48      •• 

1830, 

13,840,751 

The  same  ratio  of  increase  does  not  take  place 
twice  successiA'ely  during  the  period  inchided  in  this 
table,  except  for  late  years,  when  a  geometrical  pro- 
gression is  very  marked,  the  value  of  Avhich  is  1-38. 
From  1760  to  1800,  the  progression  was  arithmetical, 
and  the  constant  difference  had  an  annual  value  of 
67686'1.  Availing  myself  of  these  numbers,  I  have 
calculated  the  successive  values  of  the  poiJulation, 
placing  by  the  side  of  my  results  the  observed  values. 

Periods. 

1760, 
1770,  - 
1780, 
1790,  - 
1800, 
1810,  - 
1820, 
1830,  - 

Population. 

Observed.        Calculated.       Difference. 

6,479,7.30 
7,227,580 
7,814,827 
8,540,7.38 
9,187.170 
10,407,556 
ll,»57,ai5 
13,!t40,751 

0,479,7:10 
7,15«,.5!»1 
7,8Ti,45.3 
8,510,314 
9,187,176 
10,531,900 
12,073,400 
13,840,751 

0 

—  70,995 
+     18,6.36 

—  30,424 

0 
+  124,.'144 
+  115,835 

0 

These  differences  between  the  calculated  and  ob- 
served results  do  not  exceed  the  limits  of  the  fluctua- 
tions Avhich  attend  the  results  of  different  years ;  the 
greatest  difference  of  one  period  of  ten  years  does  not 
amount  to  125,000  inhabitants  ;  this  inequality  does 
not  amount  to  l-80tli  of  the  population. 

We  are  about  to  find  a  second  very  instructive 
example,  and  a  much  less  complicated  one,  in  what 
takes  place  in  the  United  States  of  America,  a  new 
country  which  rose  to  liberty  by  one  effort,  proud  of 
the  industry  of  its  inhabitants  and  the  fertility  of  its 
soil.  Popvdation  immediately  developed  itself  there 
with  a  rapidity  most  astonishing,  and  unknown  alto- 
gether in  this  old  Europe ;  immigration  also  added  still 
fui'ther  to  the  excess  of  births  over  deaths.  But  this 
rapid  increase  was  soon  met  by  obstacles  which  mul- 
tiplied, and  the  rapidity  of  increase,  great  as  it  was, 
became  uniform.  It  is  an  arithmetical  and  not  a 
geometrical  progression  which  is  observed.  Such  are 
the  facts  presented  by  the  popiilation  of  the  United 
States,  which  has  been  so  often  quoted  as  an  example, 
and  wlvich  has  not  been  attended  to  with  sufficient 
scrutiny.  I  quote  the  printed  numbers  of  Professor 
Rau.f  Tliey  are,  moreover,  conformable  to  those 
which  have  been  given  by  other  statisticians. 

Years.  Inhabitants.       Annual  Increase. 

1780,      -  .  .  2,051,(KX(  6-2  in  100 

1790,  -  -  3,929,326  30     •• 

1800,       -  .  -  5,306,035  3-1     ■• 

1810,  .  .  7,239,703  2-87  •• 

1820,        .  .  .  9,654,415  1-9     •• 

182.'),  -  .  10,438,000  19     •■ 

*  The  value  of  the  population  is  given  according  to  the  numbers 
of  Mr  nickman.  Pre/are  to  the  Abstract,  ^c,  1831,  p.  45.  Mr 
Rickman,  at  p.-ige  24,  gives  as  the  annual  increase  for  the  periods 
1801,  1811,  1821, 1831,  the  values  1-41, 1-57,  and  1-54;  the  difference 
of  my  results  may  be  occasioned  by  the  method  of  calculation 
employed.  I  thought  proper  to  compare  the  annual  increase,  not 
to  the  population  of  the  first  year  of  each  period,  but  to  that  of 
an  average  year  of  this  period. 

t  BulMin  lie  M.  Fenusac,  Fdv.  1831.  See  also  the  numbers  given 
by  M.  Warden  in  the  Biillttins  <lf  In  Sochi<.'  VhUoiinith'ijxie,  1832.      , 

Inhabitants. 

Annual  Increase. 

2,051,000 

6-3  in  100 

3,959,220 

3-7    •• 

5,867,440 

2-8     •• 

7,775,660 

2-2    •• 

9,683,880 

1-9    .. 

10,037,990 

I  shall  first  observe,  that  the  population  has  made 
almost  regular  increases  from  year  to  year,  so  that 
its  successive  values  form  an  increasing  arithmetical 
progression,  of  which  the  difference  between  one  year 
and  another  may  be  considered  as  of  the  value  of 
190,822.*  Proceeding  with  this  hypothesis,  we  shall 
have — 

Y'ears. 
1780, 
1790, 
1800, 
1810, 
1820, 
1825, 

Thus,  although  in  fact  population  has  received  con- 
siderable increases,  things  are  still  in  the  same  state 
as  in  1780;  there  is  as  much  room  and  food  for  new 
comers,  because,  nearly  every  year,  about  190,822 
individuals  come  to  occupy  the  wastes  Avhich  remain 
to  be  inhabited.  These  increases  are  less  sensible 
when  we  calculate  them,  as  is  generally  done,  by  com- 
paring them  to  the  population.  The  population  is, 
indeed,  less  prolific,  because  the  care  taken  to  fill  the 
places  which  remain  vacant,  is  divided  amongst  a 
greater  number  of  persons.f 

In  the  greater  number  of  the  countries  of  Europe, 
population  is  increasing,  and  it  is  according  to  the 
value  of  the  annual  increase  that  statisticians  have 
established  their  calculations  to  determine  the  period 
at  which  each  of  the  populations  would  be  found  to 
have  doubled.  I  here  quote  the  results  obtained  by 
two  gentlemen  whose  names  are  esteemed  in  science. 

Countries. 

Ireland, 

Hungary, 

Spain, 

England, 

Prussia, 

Prussia  on  the) 

Rhine,  i 

Austria, 
Uavaria, 
Low  Countries, 
Kingdom  of) 

Naples,      ) 
France, 
Sweden,  - 
Kingdom  of » 

Lombardy,} 
Russia, 

According  to 
Professor  Rau. 

Annual 
Increase. 

2.45 
2-4 
1(» 
l(i5 

1-3 
108 
0-94 

0-83 
0-63 
0-.58 

0-45 

Period 
requu-ed 
in  which 
to  Double. 

28  0  years. 
20-2     ~ 
41-9     ~ 
42-3     „ 

530 
64-6 
74-8 

83-5 
110-3 
118  0 

152  8 

According  to 
M.  Ch.  Dupin. 

Increase. 

107 
2.70 

101 

1-24 
Ml 

005 

1-05 

Period 
required 
in  which 
to  Double. 

42-0  years. 
26-0     - 

690 

03-0 
1050 

060     -, 

♦  Representing  this  difference  by  d,  and  P  standing  for  the  popu- 
lation in  1700,  and  x  for  the  number  of  years  which  have  elapsed, 
we  have  for  the  population  of  this  x\.\\  year  Vx  =  P  +  rf.r  :  it  is 
according  to  this  formula  that  the  numbers  of  the  following  table 
have  been  calculated.  It  also  follows  that  the  increase  a  relative 
to  the  population,  had,  as  a  general  value,  or  for  a  period  of  n  years 
after  the  rth , 

2(f 

"  ~  Px  +  P.i-  +  n 

It  is  according  to  this  formula  that  the  successive  increases  of 
the  population  have  been  calculated.  If  by  means  of  lines  we 
represented  the  degree  of  increase  of  the  population  in  proportion 
to  the  years,  we  shall  have  on  one  hand  a  straight  line,  and  on 
the  other  an  hj-perbola.  The  asymptote  marks  the  limit  towards 
which  the  increases  tend. 

t  The  theoj-y  would,  moreover,  prove,  that  at  first  the  pojiula- 
tion  has  been  smaller  than  the  table  indicates,  for  at  the  end  of 
the  last  century  it  should  have  been  more  numerous.  I  hear, 
indeed,  from  ]M.  Warden,  that  the  United  States,  from  poIitic;»l 
nititivcs,  and  in  order  to  acquire  niore  importance,  have,  during 
the  time  of  war,  exaggei-ated  the  amount  of  the  population, 
especially  in  the  interior  of  the  country,  where  strangeis  can 
exercise  less  inquisitive  control. 

52 

ON  MAN. 

If  the  doubling  of  the  population  were  indeed  to 
take  place  according  to  this  table,  we  should  certainly 
have  to  fear  a  dreadful  catastrophe,  owing  to  the 
means  of  subsistence  not  being  able  to  follow  so  rapid 
a  development ;  but  we  have  already  seen  that  it  is 
only  in  very  rare  cases  that  a  continued  and  rapid 
increase  can  take  place.  If  such  catastrophes  could 
happen,  we  should  already  have  seen  them  long  ago 
in  Europe.  No  doubt,  the  mortality  may  be  acci- 
dentally increased  by  famines,  pestilence,  and  other 
plagues ;  but  these  evils,  the  mfluence  of  which  civi- 
lisation tends  to  diminish,  may  take  place  in  countries 
which  have  not  yet  reached  their  bound. 

The  calculation  of  the  annual  increase  of  the 
population  is  not  the  only  source  of  deception  in 
estimating  the  doublmg  of  populations.  The  subject 
is  still  open  to  great  errors  in  other  respects.  It  will 
almost  always  be  impossible  to  agree  upon  these  mat- 
ters, unless  we  quote  the  years  and  the  numbers  ac- 
cording to  which  the  increases  take  place.  Many 
authors  only  estimate  the  mcrease  of  population  from 
one  or  two  years  of  observation,  and  are  thus  exposed 
to  the  greatest  errors.  This  is  mixing  the  influences 
which  we  wish  to  determine,  with  those  resulting  from 
an  infinity  of  causes,  which  may  often  cause  the  former 
to  be  entirely  misunderstood.  It  appears  to  me,  that, 
in  order  to  pronoimce  with  any  degree  of  certainty 
on  the  state  of  a  country,  we  must  at  least  employ 
the  results  of  ten  years'  observation ;  that  is  to  say, 
of  periods  dm-ing  which  institutions  have  remained 
the  same,  and  no  remarkable  events  have  taken  place. 
Thus  we  might  hope  to  find  out  the  influence  of  acci- 
dental causes,  and  only  retain  what  results  from  the 
nature  of  the  country,  its  institutions,  and  the  indus- 
try of  the  people.  It  is  especially  necessai-y  to  avoid 
taking  any  numbers  of  critical  years,  and  those  years 
immediately  succeeding  them.  At  the  present  day, 
Europe  is  enjoying  a  respite  after  long  and  bloody 
wars — after  more  or  less  stagnation  of  commerce; 
and,  under  the  influence  of  more  liberal  institutions, 
it  is  easy  to  understand  that  produce  should  become 
more  abundant,  and  population  increase;  but  does 
this  give  any  reason  to  suppose  that  the  increase 
shall  continue  the  same?  It  appears  to  me,  that 
tliis  would  be  a  great  error,  and  I  do  not  fear  to 
appeal  tlie  point  to  experience. 

It  is  very  remarkable  that  a  population  is  more 
numerous,  if  it  have  been  constantly  stationary  dur- 
ing a  certain  number  of  years,  than  if,  during  the 
same  period,  it  has  been  alternately  increasing  and 
decreasing,  when  the  ratio  of  the  increase  itself  lias 
been  equal  to  the  ratio  of  the  decrease,  the  efiect  of 
one  -j^ear  not  compensating  that  of  another.  This 
seems,  at  the  first  view,  to  be  a  paradox;  we  may 
nevertheless  be  assured  of  its  truth.  If  we  seek  to 
find  what  becomes  of  a  given  number  of  individuals 
after  m  +  n  years  (m  indicating  the  years  during  which 
the  population  has  been  stationary,  and  n  those  dur- 
ing which  it  has  received  an  increase  or  decrease 
of  a  determinate  quantity),  we  find  that  the  num- 
ber of  survivors  continues  the  same,  in  whatever 
manner  the  years  m  +  n  have  succeeded  each  other. 
Thus,  whether  a  population  increases  regularly  dur- 
ing ten  years,  and  then  is  stationary  for  twenty  more 
— whether  these  two  periods  succeed  each  other  in 
an  inverse  order,  or  are  intermixed — a  given  number 
of  individuals  who  shall  be  born,  will  present  the 
same  number  of  sm'vivors  when  the  thirty  years  have 
passed  over.* 

2.  Of  Tables  of  Population. 
Populations  present  very  great  differences,  accord- 
ing to  the  manner  in  which  the  individuals  who  com- 
pose them  are  grouped,  either  by  families  or  houses  ; 
however,  when  considering  only  one  country,  these 

*  Recherches  Statistique  siu-  le  Royaume  des  PaysBas,  p.  Cl, 
el  scq. 

differences  are  less  apparent.  In  the  country  of  Bel- 
gium, for  example,  we  have  about  five  individuals  to 
one  family,  and  this  number  is  a  little  smaller  in  town. 
"We  also  calculate,  almost  exactly,  in  each  province 
and  in  the  country,  106  famihes  to  100  houses,  whilst 
we  find  125  to  174  in  towns. 

We  observe,  also,  that  in  the  country  of  Belgium 
the  individuals  of  both  sexes  are  nearly  balanced.  It 
is  not  so  in  towns ;  the  number  of  men  is  every  where 
smaller  than  that  of  women.  This  difference  may  be 
owing  to  the  greater  mortality  of  men,  as  well  as  to 
the  more  frequent  employment  of  female  domestic 
servants.  In  the  country,  on  the  contrary,  male  ser- 
vants are  most  sought  after  for  cultivating  lands. 

If  we  divide  the  population  of  the  two  sexes  into 
three  classes,  namely,  unmarried,  married,  and  wi- 
dowers, we  shall  have,  still  preserving  the  distinction 
of  town  and  coimtry — 

In  1000  Men. 

In  1000  Women. 

111   TOWTI- 

% 

2 

1 

I 

i 

s 

o 

I 

Flanders,  East, 

G52 

311 

37 

643 

281 

76 

West, 

C46 

317 

37 

638 

278 

84 

Brabant,     - 

629 

332 

39 

625 

2a4 

91 

llainault. 

642 

3IG 

42 

604 

307 

89 

Liege, 

035 

323 

42 

624 

293 

83 

Anvers, 

tX>5 

312 

33 

646 

276 

78 

Namur, 

063 

2!)7 

40 

622 

291 

87 

In  the  Country. 

Flanders,  East, 

687 

27G 

.36 

661 

272 

67 

"West, 

671 

293 

.-«> 

645 

288 

67 

Brabant,     - 

652 

313 

35 

623 

311 

66 

Hainault, 

647 

317 

36 

611 

318 

71 

Liege, 

646 

312 

42 

618 

305 

77 

Anvers, 

672 

289 

39 

639 

289 

72 

Namur, 

634 

331 

.35 

596 

332 

72 

Whence  we  see  that, 

1.  In  general,  two-thirds  of  the  population  are  un- 
married ;  the  other  third  is  composed  of  married  per- 
sons or  widowed. 

2.  Taking  1000  individuals  of  each  sex,  the  unmar- 
ried males  are  rather  more  numerous  than  the  un- 
married females:  it  is  the  same  with  the  married 
men. 

3.  The  unmarried  are  still  more  numerous  in 
country  than  in  toAvn ;  so  that  we  find  the  greatest 
number  of  unmarried  persons  out  of  1000  in  the 
country,  who  are  also  males. 

4.  The  number  of  widows  is  almost  double  the 
number  of  widowers. 

This  latter  result,  which  is  very  remarkable,  be- 
comes more  striking  when  we  compare  the  number 
of  widowers  with  that  of  widows. 

AVidowers  to  100  Widows. 

Provinces. 

City. 

Rural  Districts. 

Flanders,  East, 

44 

53 

AVest, 

39 

.TS 

Anvers, 

38 

55 

Brabant, 

37 

53 

Hainault,       ... 

46 

60 

Namur,    .            -            - 

45 

47 

Liege, 

46 

52 

Thus  the  number  of  widowers,  compared  with  the 
number  of  widows,  is  incontrovertibly  more  numerous 
in  tOAvn  than  in  country,  and  especially  in  the  pro- 
vinces of  Brabant,  Anvers,  and  Western  Elanders. 

This  circumstance  may  be  owing  to  men  marrying 
later  in  to%vn  than  in  country.  Indeed,  Are  shall  ob- 
serve that  the  three  provinces  which  haA-e  just  been 
pomted  out,  are  those  which,  all  things  being  equal, 

ON  MAN. 

53 

have  the  greatest  part  of  their  population  shut  up  in 
the  cities.  Men  have  also  more  facihty  of  passing 
from  the  state  of  widowhood  tlian  women. 

The  distribution  of  the  population  accoi'ding  to  age, 
has  long  occupied  the  attention  of  statisticians  more 
than  any  other  element.  Tables  of  population  are 
of  two  kinds — the  one  kind  are  obtained  directly  by 
a  census,  the  other  are  deduced  from  tables  of  morta- 
lity. When  we  may  rely  on  the  accuracy  of  the  cen- 

sus, the  former  are  always  preferable  to  the  latter, 
and  more  faithfully  represent  the  actual  state  of  the 
population. 

The  table  which  I  here  present  is  the  result  of  a 
great  census  made  in  Belgium  about  the  end  of  1829  ; 
it  has  been  calculated  from  original  documents,  and 
I  think  I  can  guiirantee  its  accuracy.  In  the  lie- 
clierchcs  siir  la  Reproduction  et  la  Mortalite,  all  the 
documents  belonging  to  it  may  be  seen. 

TABLE   OP   THE   POPULATION   FOR   BELGIUM. 
1  ,^10,000  Persous  are  taken  aa  a  basis,  and  classed  according  to  the  indications  of  the  Table. 

>Ien 

Women. 

At, 

Age. 

Uniuurriel. 

.Married. 

Widowers, 

Total. 

Unnuirricd. 

Married. 

Widows. 

Total. 

0  years. 

.317.202 

14f>,lG4 

17.M9 

481,315 

o> 

cars. 

,^^5,930 

146,053 

36,702 

518,685 

1      .. 

3li3.l>S8 

lUi.IW 

I7,!M9 

467.171 

1 

— 

322,212 

146,053 

36,702 

504,967 

2      - 

288,!)!I7 

146,1(4 

17.949 

453,110 

2 

„ 

.108.695 

14(;,033 

36,702 

491,;i30 

.t      -- 

276,3(» 

14(>,1(>4 

17.949 

440,482 

3 

„ 

290.379 

146,053 

36,702 

479,1.M 

4      ~ 

2li;i,U15 

146,1(M 

17,949 

427.!e8 

4 

„ 

284.201 

146,053 

3(i,7(e 

4(«.!l'.!t 

2jl,3a9 

14(i,164 

17.fM9 

415,502 

.■J 

„ 

272.087 

146,053 

36,702 

454,1!42 

f,      ~ 

230,160 

146. 1G4 

17.949 

4U1,279 

0 

„ 

200,449 

146,053 

3<;,702 

443.2(14 

8      - 

216.910 

146,104 

17,!M9 

381,<23 

8 

„ 

238.803 

14<;,053 

36,718 

421,618 

10      „ 

193,861 

146.164 

17.949 

330,974 

10 

„ 

218,646 

146,053 

36,7te 

401,401 

12      ~ 

176,439 

14(;,1(M 

17,!>49 

»10,532 

12 

„ 

199,828 

146,a'-.3 

36.702 

382,583 

14      " 

IM.irjJ 

146,1('4 

17,!H9 

.t>>,1.16 

14 

„ 

181,6!13 

146,033 

36,702 

364,4;« 

Ifi      - 

137,837 

146,  KH 

17.949 

301  ,'XM 

16 

-. 

102, .164 

146,049 

36.702 

343.115 

2(1      - 

ll4.tiU8 

146,1(72 

17.915 

2<»<,llO 

20 

„ 

128,083 

145,634 

36,6f>4 

310,431 

(ii.s-io 

142,847 

17.f02 

220,979 

25 

^ 

89,884 

139,707 

36,600 

266,231 

.10      " 

39,nia 

12<),fi77 

I7,6.a7 

1U6,.'5.-B 

30 

„ 

63,823 

123,892 

26,219 

22,i,!);U 

aa    ~ 

23,4C.3 

l<«.onrt 

17.1.T9 

151  ,.100 

3j 

.. 

47,243 

102,702 

35,421 

lHJ,42li 

4U      -' 

18,187 

89,973 

16,488 

124.040 

40 

„ 

36.216 

81,499 

34,<I24 

13I,7:!9 

4.'.      " 

ia,7.« 

71.931' 

15,371 

101.240 

43 

„ 

28,249 

01,419 

31,916 

121,. '584 

2(1 

10,311 

54,7<t) 

14,-I60 

79.471 

60 

^ 

21,837 

44,218 

29,1(j7 

y.';,242 

53      - 

U,4I4 

44,(120 

13,4(12 

63.856 

53 

„ 

18,089 

34,223 

26,7tl9 

7.'>,(  21 

.VI      - 

fi,!»;2 

35,531 

12,296 

M.4fl9 

3(J 

„ 

15,095 

2(i,417 

24,;«i5 

03,((!»7 

.w    - 

5,I04 

i?7.7«7 

11,164 

44,645 

59 

„ 

12,5.13 

20.090 

21,719 

54, .114 

til     .. 

4,430 

20,764 

9,693 

34.887 

02 

„ 

9.948 

14,6?2 

18.608 

43,228 

ta 

3,434 

15,120 

8,242 

20.?J6 

65 

„ 

7.749 

10,301 

15,683 

.■)3,783 

07      - 

2,(117 

11, .WO 

7.112 

21.528 

07 

^ 

6.IM!) 

7.685 

13,410 

27,130 

tfl      -- 

2,317 

9,(>20 

0.113 

17,430 

09 

„ 

4,940 

5,732 

11, .11(7 

22,l'.'>n 

71 

1,772 

0.540 

5,liiO 

13.412 

71 

^ 

3.773 

4,034 

9,175 

17.002 

7a     - 

1.3B1 

4,976 

40U6 

10.053 

73 

„ 

2,994 

2,963. 

7,571 

13,528 

75      " 

1,U27 

3.375 

3,31iJ 

7.991 

75 

„ 

2,234 

2,030 

6,930 

10,214 

7U> 

2,3IU^ 

2,5,10 

5,618 

77 

^ 

1,589 

1,300 

4,309 

7,238 

7'j 

4«L> 

1,517 

l,iM3 

3.B44 

70 

„ 

1,'|R5 

814 

3,102 

5.001 

Ul      ~ 

,au5 

(131 

1,191 

2.327 

81 

„ 

680 

451 

1.908 

3,09;) 

ai    ,. 

lOU 

516 

801 

1,518 

83 

„ 

454 

259 

1.350 

2,063 

tu 

123 

313 

510 

935 

85 

^ 

27fi 

144 

864 

1,284 

V,      .. 

70 

ICl 

300 

637 

87 

^ 

154 

78 

5(e 

734 

«i     - 

30 

80 

17a 

291 

CD 

^ 

08 

41 

299 

428 

!M) 

26 

48 

123 

1!>7 

90 

^ 

00 

27 

210 

303 

S/1      -. 

17 

3i 

79 

128 

91 

„ 

39 

17 

143 

199 

Vtl      ~ 

14 

26 

57 

97 

92 

^ 

29 

14 

109 

152 

aa 

11 

19 

41 

71 

93 

^ 

18 

13 

70 

107 

IM      ~ 

/ 

15 

31 

53 

94 

^ 

12 

10 

'A 

70 

•I.';     ~ 

11 

22 

.'W 

95 

^ 

10 

6 

38 

M 

u; 

4 

8 

16 

20 

90 

^ 

6 

6 

24 

36 

vj    .. 

1 

_>; 

10 

16 

97 

^ 

3 

3 

18 

24 

98     - 

1 

4 

0 

11 

98 

_ 

2 

2 

10 

14 

09     » 

0 

1 

5 

C 

99 

^ 

1 

1 

5 

7 

Uu      ~  and  ) 
upwards,  ' 

0 

0 

3 

3 

100 

~  and  I 
jwnrds,  ' 

1 

1 

2 

4 

u 

Without  staying,  for  the  present,  to  bring  forward 

.  ine  results  which  may  be  deduced  from  this  table, 

1  shall  examine  how  far  two  tables  of  population,  ob- 

tnined  by  a  census  and  from  the  list  of  mortality,  can 

agree  with  each  other.* 

When  a  population  is  stationary,  that  is  to  say, 
when  we  have  annually  as  many  deaths  as  births,  the 
tables  of  mortality  are  considered  as  the  true  tables 
of  population.  Thus,  according  to  the  general  table 
given  above,  of  100,000  births,  we  found  77,.528  chil- 
dren of  one  year,  70,536  of  two  years,  06,531  of  three 

*  WeiT>.iy  consult  some  writings  on  census,  recently  published, 
,  ■  •      ■  — c<vi,Tuj(j/"Wi«  Pop«/<Tfion,  by  Mr  Babbage.  Etfin. 

J  l^lU-r  lo  hit  Grace  the  Duke  nf  Hamilton  and 

I:  riing  th<  Parochial  Regittert  nf  Scotland,  by  Mr  J. 

Cleliind  :  tiUogow.  1834, 8vn.  NoU-s  by  M.  le  Baron  do  Keverbcrg. 
liclng  the  Appendix  to  the  Rechfrcht$  $»r  la  Population,  let  Xuis- 
vncft,  le$  liecf.  IfC,  e>\  Ufl(>i<i>ii: 

years,  and  so  on  ;  and  the  sum  of  all  these  individuals 
formed  the  whole  population,  which,  according  to  the 
same  table,  had  raised  itself  to  3,261,073  souls.  If 
we  then  successively  cut  off  from  this  simi  the  num- 
ber of  births,  the  number  of  individuals  of  one  year 
old,  of  two  years,  &c.,  the  remainder  will  express  the 
number  of  survivors  at  these  different  ages.  In  this 
manner,  we  should  form  a  table  of  population ;  but 
to  render  it  comparable  to  that  which  lias  been  ob- 
tained directly  by  the  census,  we  should  also  require 
to  take  100,000  as  the  b.isis,  instead  of  3,264,073,  and 
reduce  all  the  other  numbers  to  a  proportion  Avith  it. 
The  following  table  has  been  obtained  in  this  indirect 
manner  from  the  table  of  mortality,  supposing  the 
population  stationarj-.  It  is  found  to  correspond  with 
the  table  of  population  obtaincrl  by  the  census,  and 
such  as  hits  Ix'cn  given  above,  but  without  preserving 
the  distinction  of  places  and  sex.  We  may  judge  of 
the  errors  wliich  these  tables  present. 

54 

ON  MAl^f. 

Table  of  the  Population  of  Belgium. 

Deduced 

Obtained 

Deduced 

Obtained 

Age. 

from  the 

Directly 

Ago. 

from  the 

Directly 

Table  of 

by  the 

Table  of 

by  the 

Mortality. 

Census. 

Mortality. 

Census. 

Birth, 

100,000 

100,000 

67  years, 

6,404 

4,868 

1  year, 

96,937 

97,214 

69      ■• 

5,194 

3,951 

2  years, 

94,562 

94,446 

71      •■ 

4,116 

3,041 

3     .. 

92,401 

91,962 

73     .. 

3,179 

2,418 

4     •• 

90,361 

89,489 

75     .. 

2, .379 

1,820 

5     •. 

88,400 

87,034 

77     •• 

1,724 

1,2€8 

6     •• 

86,487 

84,648 

79     •. 

1,205 

884 

8     .. 

82,768 

80,274 

81      •• 

316 

543 

10     •• 

79,143 

76,138 

83      •• 

630 

358 

12     .. 

75,590 

72,314 

85      .. 

327 

222 

14     •■ 

72,094 

68,657 

87      ■• 

190 

127 

16     •• 

68,648 

64,707 

89      ■■ 

104 

72 

20     •• 

61,932 

57,854 

90      •• 

76 

50 

25     •• 

53,952 

49,323 

91      •• 

65 

33 

30     •• 

46,506 

41,047 

92      .. 

39 

25 

35     .. 

39,624 

33,673 

93      •■ 

27 

18 

40     •• 

32,992 

27,639 

94      .. 

19 

13 

45     .. 

26,908 

22,283 

95      .. 

12 

9 

60     .. 

21,289 

17,471 

96      •• 

8 

6 

63     .. 

18,154 

14,488 

97      •• 

4 

4 

SO     •■ 

15,220 

12,039 

98      .. 

2 

2 

.VJ     . . 

12,495 

9,899 

99      .. 

1 

I 

62     .. 

9,9.03 

7,811 

100  &  up- 

65    •• 

7.746 

0,058 

wards, 

1 

1 

The  table  of  population  deduced  from  the  table  of 
mortality  gives  results  which  are  generally  greater 
than  those  of  the  table  obtained  directly  by  the  cen- 
sus. Thus,  it  indicates  that  in  a  population  of  100,000 
souls,  there  were  5.3,952  individuals  who  wei'e  more 
than  25  years  old,  and  the  other  table  gives  only 
49,.32.3  individuals  having  more  than  this  age.  How 
does  this  difference  arise,  and  how  may  it  be  ex- 
plained ? 

According  to  several  distinguished  authors  who 
have  written  on  this  subject,  it  would  be  sufficient 
(as  we  said  above,  if  tlie  population  were  stationary, 
that  is,  the  number  of  births  annually  being  constantly 
nearly  equal  to  that  of  deaths)*  to  calculate  the  table 
of  population  from  that  of  mortality.  We  shall  here 
remark,  that  it  would  undoubtedly  suffice,  in  the 
greater  number  of  cases,  where  the  population  is  sta- 
tionary ;  but  this  single  condition  is  not  enough :  it 
is  also  necessary  that  the  same  number  of  deaths  cor- 
respond annually  also,  in  order  that  the  proportion 
of  the  survivors  may  remain  nearly  the  same  at  the 
diffi^rent  periods  of  life,  and  that  the  numbers  entered 
on  the  tables  of  mortality  for  each  year  may  be  re- 
produced almost  identically.  To  perceive  the  neces- 
sity of  this  condition,  let  us  suppose  that  we  form  a 
table  of  mortality  for  a  triennial  period,  during  which 
the  population  shall  have  been  stationary ;  and  let  us 
suppose,  moreover,  from  some  cause,  that  the  mor- 
tality during  this  period  affijcted  individuals  of  fifty 
years  in  preference,  and,  as  a  compensation,  sparing 
those  newly  born,  that  afterwards  all  may  be  re-esta- 
blished in  the  usual  order.  It  would  happen,  that  the 
population  table  which  we  deduce  from  this  table  of 
mortality,  will  not  truly  represent  the  actual  state  of 
things :  it  will  indicate  too  great  a  population  for  the 
fiftieth  year,  and  too  small  a  one  for  the  children. 

We  may  begin  to  see  that  a  population  may  be 
stationary,  without  our  being  able  to  deduce  from  its 
bills  of  mortalitj',  calculated  for  a  certain  number  of 
years,  a  table  of  the  population.  We  see,  on  the  con- 
trary, that  this  calculation  may  be  made  without  in- 
convenience, in  the  case  where  the  population  was 
not  stationary.  Indeed,  let  us  suppose  a  stationary 
population,  and  also  admit  that  the  tables  of  mortality 
may  annually  present  numbers  identically  the  same ; 
it  is  evident  that,  by  multiplying  each  of  these  num- 
bers by  a  constant  ratio,  greater  or  less  than  unity, 
that  these  multiplications  wiU  have  no  other  effijct 
than  to  make  an  increase  or  decrease,  in  the  same 

*  Lacroix  —  Traits  El^mentaire  du  Calcul  des  Probabilit(Js, 
p.  210 :  1833. 

ratio,  of  all  the  numbers  of  the  table  of  mortality, 
and  consequently  those  of  the  table  of  population.* 

In  this  manner,  the  bases  merely  of  the  tables  will 
have  varied  :  now,  the  base  which  we  employ  is  quite 
arbitrary ;  we  have  adopted  100,000,  so  that  we  might 
have  numbers  which  we  could  compare  with  each 
other,  and  with  those  of  other  tables.  Thus,  all  has 
been  done  as  if  we  had  multiplied  by  a  constant  ratio 
each  one  of  the  numbers  which  are  placed  in  the  tables, 
whilst  really  the  population  was  increasing  or  de- 
creasing. 

After  what  has  been  said,  we  see  that  the  necessary 
conditions  to  enable  us  from  a  table  of  mortality  to  deduce 
a  table  of  population,  are,  that  the  deaths  at  each  age 
preserve  annually  the  same  proportion  to  each  other,  whe- 
ther the  population  be  stationary,  increasing,  or  decreasing. 

Applying  the  preceding  to  the  tables  of  population 
given  above,  we  conceiA^e  that  the  differences  which 
they  present  do  not  simply  arise  from  the  circum- 
stance that  in  Belgium  the  population  is  in  a  state  of 
increase,  but  because  the  mortality  has  not  each  year 
struck  the  same  ages  in  the  same  proportions ;  and 
no  doubt  also  owing  to  the  years  having  not  been 
equally  fruitful.  It  is  necessary  to  observe,  on  the 
other  hand,  that,  under  the  French  government,  cer- 
tain parts  of  the  population  were  decimated  by  wars, 
and  consequently  must  present  vacuities. 

3.  Can  Data  on  Population  Furnish  any  Marks  of  the 
Prosperity  of  a  People  ? 
In  seeking  to  measui'e  the  prosperity  of  a  people, 
the  movements  of  the  population  have  often  been 
made  use  of.  The  possibility  of  arriving  at  satisfac- 
tory results,  by  following  such  a  course,  would  un- 
doubtedly deserve  to  be  deeply  examined.  It  is  a 
question  of  great  interest ;  but  I  confess  the  data 
alone  of  the  population  do  not  appear  to  me  to  be  - 
sufficient  to  resolve  the  question.  Local  influences, 
climate,  customs,  institutions,  &c.,  are  elements  which 
we  can  scarcely  neglect,  Avhen  comparing  one  people 
with  another :  perhaps  there  would  be  less  danger 
when  comparing  a  people  with  itself  at  different  pe- 
riods, during  which  these  elements  have  not  under- 
gone any  sensible  variation.f 

*  Some  lines  of  calculation  will  better  enable  us  to  comprehend 
this  mode  of  reasoning.    Let  us  designate  by  the  letters 

a^,  a",  a^,  a*,  a^.  Sac, 
the  deaths  observed  from  0  to  1  year,  from  1  to  2  years,  from  2  to 
3  years,  &c.    Moreover,  let  us  designate  by  A,  A',  A^,  &c.,  the 
numbers  written  in  the  table  of  mortality  opposite  0  year,  1  year, 
2  years,  3  years,  &c.,  so  that 

A   =  n  +  ai  +  a2  +  a3  +  «<  +  &:c. 
Ai  =  ai  +  a2  +  a3  +  a*  +  &c. 

A2  =  a2  +  a3  +  a*  +  &c. 

A3  =  a3  +  rt*  +  &c. 

&c. 
We  shall  have,  for  the  corresponding  ages  of  the  table  of  popu- 
lation— 

2  A  =  A  -t-  Ai  +  A2  +  A3  -(-  A*  +  &c. 

2  Ai  =     Ai  -f  A2  4-  A3  -h  A*  -1-  &o. 

2  A2  =         A^  -h  A3  +  A4  -h  &c. 

2  A3  =  A3  -f-  A-4  +  &c. 

&c. 

If  we  now  multiply  by  n  each  of  the  numbers  of  the  deaths,  we 

shall  have,  for  the  numbers  of  the  tables  of  mortality — 

«A,  mA',  n\.-,  jiA3,  nA^,  &c. ; 
and  for  the  numbers  of  the  table  of  population — 

Ji2  A,  m2  Ai,  n2  A2,  »i  2  A3,  &c. 
But  in  certain  cases  we  may  have  jjP='  1,  =  1,  -=^1,  with  an  in- 
creasing population,  stationary  or  decreasing ;  in  both  these  eases, 
the  table  of  population  and  the  table  of  mortality  will  continue 
to  present  the  same  numbers  for  the  same  ages,  if  we  take  the 
same  base  as  the  starting-point. 

1 1  shall  here  bring  forward,  in  a  great  measure,  an  article  whicli 
I  inserted  in  the  Revue  Encyclopcdique  for  August  1830. 

The  Academy  of  Moral  and  Political  Sciences,  during  the 
Session  June  7,  1834,  put  the  following  question  to  the  meet- 
ing:— To  determine  in  what  the  misery  of  different  countries  con- 
sists, and  by  ichat  signs  it  is  nMnifested ;  to  examine  the  causes 
tvhich  produce  it. 

ON  MAN. 

55 

We  might  be  exposed  to  serious  errors  in  not  taking 
notice  of  the  number  of  marriages  and  births  of  a 
nation ;  for  if  it  be  true  that  disheartening  circum- 
stances sometimes  add  evil  to  evil,  as  in  Ireland, 
and  since  moral  degradation  is  a  great  stimiilus  to 
precocious  marriage,*  it  may  still  happen  that  mor- 
tality only  makes  greater  ravages ;  and  one  of  the 
most  fatal  scourges  of  a  people  is  to  see  its  genera- 
tions renewed  with  a  degree  of  rapidity'  which  does 
not  allow  it  to  preserve  iiseful  men.  Now,  it  generally 
happens  that  the  births  are  regulated  by  the  number 
of  deaths  ;  that  is  to  sa_v,  the  countries  which  produce 
the  greatest  number  of  children,  are  precisely  those 
in  which  the  mortality  is  the  greatest.  When  repro- 
duction is  greater  than  the  limits  of  prudence,  it 
appears  that  tlie  weakest  part  of  tlie  population  is 
the  first  to  feel  the  consequences,  the  excess  of  the 
population  passing  rapidly  from  the  cradle  to  the 
tomb.  If,  therefore,  tlie  number  of  births  could  be 
useful  to  show  the  degree  of  prosperity  of  a  people,  it 
would  be  more  particularly  in  considering  it  in  rela- 
tion to  the  mortality.  But,  as  I  have  said,  the  mere 
number  of  births  appears  to  me  absolutely  insuffi- 
cient. 

I  should  have  more  distinct  confidence  in  the  num- 
ber of  deaths,  if  it  only  established  a  measure  by 
which  we  might  be  assured  of  a  population  having 
attained  or  exceeded  the  limits  Mliich  it  could  not 
cross  witliout  condenming  itself  to  pauperism.  M. 
D'lvernois  has  very  clearly  sliownf  the  iitility  of  it 
on  tills  he.id ;  and  the  publication  of  the  work  which 
he  announces  under  the  following  title  is  nnich  to  be 
desired  —  On  the  Averayc  Moiltditi/  Considered  as  a 
Measure  of  the  Comfort  and  Cirilisation  of  a  Nation. 
This  universal  measure,  says  the  autlior,  I  ilatter 
myself  I  have  found  in  the  mortuanj  uumher  of  the 
people,  by  which  I  understand  that  which  indicates 
whether  the  proportion  of  deaths  aniuiidly,  compared 
with  the  total  number  of  living  persons,  increases  or 
diminishes.  Perhaps  we  mjiy  be  wrong  in  precal- 
culating  the  results ;  but  if  we  observe  that  this  mea- 
sure does  not  change  when  the  total  amount  of  those 
alive  remains  the  same,  as  well  as  that  of  deaths,  we 
may  have  some  fear  of  its  precision.  A  population 
may  remain  numerically  the  same  from  different 
causes,  and  present  a  greater  or  less  numl)er  of  use- 
ful men,  without  our  being  able  to  say,  for  that  reason 
merely,  that  its  comfort  also  remains  the  same.  If 
so,  we  should  estimate  a  child  as  equid  to  a  useful 
man. 

To  take  one  example  only.  If,  from  any  cause 
whatever,  the  mortality  in  a  nourishing  coimtry  were 
to  attack  useful  men  more  particularly,  and  spare  the 
children,  the  number  of  deaths  and  that  of  births 
remaining  otherwise  the  same,  it  would  infallibly 
happen,  after  some  years,  that  this  population  would 
be  deteriorated,  and  would  have  lost  many  of  the 
elements  of  prosperity ;  and  yet  the  loss  which  it  had 
experienced  would  not  in  any  manner  be  detected  by 
the  measure  employed.  The  mortuary  figure  would 
remain  the  same ;  and  a  considerable  number  of  use- 
ful and  productive  men  would  be  replaced  by  unpro- 
ductive children. 

Certainly  we  cannot  deny  that  verj-  strict  relations 
exist  between  the  happiness  of  a  country  and  the 
movements  of  its  population ;  the  thing  is,  to  ascer- 
tain how  to  express  them.  It  seems  to  me  that  on 
this  head  we  ought  to  make  an  important  distinction. 
We  may  consider  the  question  in  two  points  of  view. 
We  may  propose,  when  considering  a  people,  to  ex- 
amine which  are  the  disastrous  years — those  during 
which  it  has  suffered  more  or  less ;  or,  on  the  other 
hand,  we  may  examine,  in  an  absolute  manner,  what 
is  the  number  of  useful  men  at  disposal — in  a  word, 
what  is  its  strength,  which  is  also  one  of  the  principal 

*  Soe  an  article  by  yi.  D'lvernois  inserted  in  the  Bibliotheque 
I'nivrrtelle  (te  Genere,  March  lfi.Ti>. 
t  UjhUothcque  Universclle,  1«3',. 

elements  of  its  prosperity.  In  the  first  case,  the  num- 
ber of  deaths  would  almost  alwajs  be  employed  with 
considerable  success ;  for  a  disastroiis  year  is  generally 
accompanied  and  followed  by  numerous  privations, 
even  amongst  the  most  highly  favoured  people,  and 
privations  are  mortal  to  the  human  species.  Thus, 
if  we  only  knew  that  1817  was  a  year  of  famine  for 
Belgium  and  a  great  number  of  coimtries,  we  should 
attain  our  end  without  trouble,  because  the  number 
of  deaths  was  greater  than  for  the  years  which  pre- 
ceded or  followed.  This  increased  mortalitj-  was  also 
felt  in  the  mendicity  houses,  in  which  it  was  almost 
double  wliat  it  had  been  heretofore,  as  also  in  the 
liospitals  and  asylums  for  foundlings. 

As  to  the  second  manner  of  considering  the  ques- 
tion, I  have  endeavoured  to  show  why  the  number 
of  deaths  merely  appeared  to  me  insufficient.  It  is 
important,  indeed,  to  know  not  only  how  many  deaths 
take  place  in  the  population,  but  also  at  what  age 
these  deaths  occur.  Some  writers  have  employed,  in 
such  estimates,  the  duration  of  the  average  life,  others 
the  duration  of  the  probable  life  ;  and  they  have 
sought  to  establish  their  valuation  according  to  the 
changes  which  the  one  or  the  other  of  these  values 
imdergoes.  But  here  we  meet  with  an  obstacle  nearly 
similar  to  the  one  I  have  before  pointed  out ;  namely, 
that  the  duration  of  the  probable  life,  as  also  that  of 
the  average  life,  may  have  a  value  of  different  kinds. 
This  inconvenience  is  especially  felt,  when  we  employ 
the  number  which  expresses  the  i)robable  life,  since, 
in  fact,  we  only  consider  the  period  at  which  a  cer- 
tain number  of  individuals  of  the  same  age  arc  re- 
duced to  one-half;  and  we  do  not  express  whether 
those  who  died  first  were  able  to  make  themselves 
useful  during  a  longer  or  a  shorter  time,  neither  does 
it  establish  any  thing  with  respect  to  those  who  sur- 
vive. 

Taking  the  figure  which  expresses  the  average 
duration  of  life,  or  the  average  of  the  ages  to  which 
a  certain  nuinlx-r  of  individuals  have  attained,  whom 
we  suppose  to  have  l)een  born  at  the  same  time,  we 
also  give  the  same  value  to  one  year  of  the  life  of  an 
infant  as  to  that  of  a  man  whose  labours  have  been 
profitable  to  society. 

There  is  one  difficidty  to  which  the  preceding 
questions  are  liable,  and  which  deserves  particular 
attention,  because  very  important  and  interesting 
considerations  are  connected  with  its  solution — consi- 
derations of  high  moment  to  statistics  and  political 
economy.  M.  D'lvernois,  whose  labours  have  been 
so  beneficiid  to  these  sciences,  has  kindly  called  my 
attention  to  this  difficulty,  and  asked  my  advice  on 
this  delicate  point :  he  was  desirous  of  knowing  if 
two  nations,  who,  as  regarded  the  ratios  of  births  and 
deaths,  might  stand  at  precisely  the  same  numbers, 
might  not  have  two  averages  of  life,  by  virtue  of  the 
eventual  difference  in  the  order  of  mortality  for  the 
age  of  their  dead.* 

For  the  sake  of  simplicity,  let  us  suppose  a  people 
who  have  each  year  the  same  number  of  births  and 
deaths,  and  let  us  examine  if  the  average  duration  of 
life  may  not  vary  from  year  to  year ;  this  question 
returns,  in  fact,  to  the  same  point  as  that  which  was 
proposed  above.  If  we  formed  a  table  of  mortality 
after  the  deaths  of  one  year,  and  deduced  the  average 
duration  of  life  from  it,  I  suppose  that  we  should  find 
it  30  years  exactly.  The  year  following,  if  the  mor- 
tality took  place  in  the  same  manner  and  in  tlie  same 
proportion,  the  duration  of  average  life  would  still  be 
.30  j-ears.  But  if,  in  the  lists  of  deaths  of  this  second 
year,  we  substitute  an  infant  of  one  year  for  a  man 
of  forty,  which  will  not  afiect  the  proportional  num- 
ber of  births  or  deaths,  we  shall  find,  however,  when 
taking  account  of  the  infant  substituted  for  the  fuU- 
*  In  insertinR  my  answer  in  the  Bibliolheqim  Vniversclle  de 
Omciv,  March  IR'H,  M.  IJ'Ivernois  announces  that  he  had  como 
to  the  same  conchisions  as  myself,  and  that  he  received  similar 
results  from  M.  Villcrme. 

56 

ON  MAN. 

grovm  man,  that  the  average  duration  of  life  became 
rather  shorter,  since  the  sum  of  years  which  had  been 
lived  would  be  reduced  by  39  years.  "We  see  already, 
that  if  the  tables  of  mortality  and  the  duration  of 
average  life  were  only  calculated  according  to  the 
observations  of  this  year,  they  could  not  present  the 
same  identical  results  as  for  the  first  year.  Average 
life  would  be  shorter ;  but  it  is  evident  that  society 
would  have  gained,  since  it  preserved  an  useful  man 
instead  of  an  infant. 

We  conceive  that,  if  instead  of  one  such  substi- 
tution, a  greater  number  were  made,  average  life, 
calculated  according  to  the  deaths  of  this  year,  Avould 
be  found  diminished  in  a  very  sensible  manner ;  and 
nevertheless  we  should  have  cause  to  be  glad  at  Avhat 
at  first  appears  a  paradox.  In  fact,  we  should  have 
preserved  useful  years  to  the  state,  in  exchange  for 
some  years  which  are  expensive  to  it. 

But  it  may  be  objected  that  these  39  years  are  not 
lost  to  the  sum  of  the  years  lived,  and  that  the  indi- 
vidual of  40,  Avho  has  been  replaced,  will  lengthen  the 
average  duration  of  life,  when  he  dies,  by  the  whole 
period  which  he  has  gained  by  the  substitution ;  and, 
indeed,  if  the  period  of  time  according  to  which  we  cal- 
culate the  average  duration  of  life  is  also  extended,  so 
as  to  comprise  the  death  of  the  individual  in  question, 
it  is  evident-  that  this  debt  of  39  years  has  only  been 
deferred,  and  that  the  sum  of  years  lived  is  not  found 
affected.  Thus,  the  average  life  remains  the  same  ; 
but  it  is  always  correct  to  say,  that  even  then  society 
has  been  benefited,  since,  for  a  longer  or  a  shorter 
time,  useful  years  have  been  substituted  for  expensive 
ones. 

If,  by  a  concurrence  of  circumstances  which  civi- 
lisation ought  to  produce,  such  substitutions  are  made 
as  those  we  have  just  been  considering,  not  for  one 
year  only  but  for  several,  and  if  this  state  of  things 
should  continue  increasing,  we  conceive  that  it  would 
become  impossible,  still  pi-eserving  the  same  propor- 
tional numbers  of  births  and  deaths,  to  preserve  the 
same  average  life  :  it  must  begin  to  diminish.  How- 
ever, how  is  it  that  siich  extraordinary  results  are 
not  met  Avith  ?  It  is,  I  think,  because  the  substitutes 
are  never  sufiiciently  numerous,  nor  their  duration 
long  enough,  to  leave  sensible  traces  amidst  the  other 
influencing  elements. 

However,  this  teaches  us  hoAV  necessary  it  is  to 
guard  against  the  inductions  which  we  might  draw 
from  the  average  duration  of  life,  calculated  from  few 
years  of  observation,  and  among  a  people  in  progress 

or  decay.    By  extending  the  preceding  reasoning,  Ave 
readily  arrive  at  the  foUoAving  conclusions  : — 

1.  A  people  may  annually  have  figures  of  exactly 
the  same  A'alue,  as  proportional  numbers  of  birtlis 
and  deaths,  without  the  average  life  continumg  the 
same. 

2.  When,  all  things  being  equal,  the  mortahty 
spares  the  perfect  men  and  takes  off  the  children, 
the  duration  of  the  average  life  diminishes,  and  vice 
versa :  it  being  understood  that  we  calculate  the  ave- 
rage life  from  the  number  of  deaths. 

3.  The  number  of  births,  deaths,  and  of  the  average 
life,  may  preserve  the  same  value,  Avhilst,  indeed,  the 
population  experiences  great  losses,  or  receives  great 
benefits,  Avhich  remain  unobserved. 

4.  To  estimate  suitably  Avhat  a  population  gains  or 
loses,  it  is  necessary,  when  making  tlie  division  of 
years,  to  establish  the  average  life,  to  take  into  ac- 
count the  quality  of  these  years,  and  to  examine  whe- 
ther they  are  productive  or  not. 

Wlien,  for  example,  it  is  intended  to  estimate  the 
fbrces  which  a  state  can  command,  in  considering  the 
problem  in  a  purely  physical  point  of  vicAv,  as  has 
been  done,  it  appears  to  me  that  the  most  certain  Avay 
Avould  be,  to  compare  the  number  of  useful  men  Avith 
those  who  are  not  so.  The  elements  of  comparison, 
in  this  case,  Avould  require  to  be  extracted  from  the 
tables  of  mortality,  or  rather  from  accurately  con- 
structed tables  of  population ;  and  it  Avould  be  neces- 
sary to  inquire  hoAv  many  children  there  are,  not  in  a 
condition  to  be  iiseful,  in  a  given  number  of  indivi- 
duals, and  how  many  of  the  old  men  conti'ibute  to 
the  benefit  of  society  :  we  might  divide  a  population 
into  tAvo  parts,  the  one  being  less,  and  the  other  more 
than  15  years  of  age.  I  alloAV  that  I  here  suppose 
that  a  man  cannot  render  himself  more  useful  at  30 
or  40  than  at  16  or  80  ;  but  this  is  an  inconvenience 
Avhich  Ave  also  find  in  other  methods  of  \'aluation,  and 
which,  moreover,  we  might  caiise  to  disappear,  by 
attributing  more  importance  to  certain  years  of  life 
tlian  to  others,  if  extreme  accuracy  did  not  become 
illusory  in  such  a  case.  To  give  us  a  somcAvhat 
accurate  idea  at  first,  of  the  manner  in  which  the 
population  is  composed,  I  have  here  collected  the 
most  accurate  data  from  some  of  the  principal  coun- 
tries previously  considered.  We  shall  find  the  num- 
bers classed  separately  belonging  to  the  two  cate- 
gories Avhich  I  have  established  between  productive 
individuals  and  those  whose  maintenance  may  be 
considered  as  a  charge  to  society. 

Engl.ond 

Great  Britain : 

Ireland  : 

England : 

and  part  of 

France : 

Belgium : 

Sweden : 

United  States : 

Ages. 

1821. 

1821. 

1821. 

AVales  : 

before  1789. 

1829. 

1820. 

i&m 

Marshall. 

JMarshall. 

Marshall. 

1813  to  1830. 
Rickman. 

Annuaire. 

Annuaire. 

Marshall 

Marshall. 

Below  5  years, 

1647 

1535 

1472 

1487 

1201 

1297 

1307 

1800 

5  to    10     •  • 

1385 

1355 

13(10 

1307 

981 

1089 

1010 

145.5 

10  to    15     ■• 

1209 

1218 

1119 

1114 

939 

946 

894 

1243 

15  to   20     •• 

1046 

1219 

1000 

992 

897 

883 

899 

1112 

20  to    30     ■• 

1558 

17G0 

1583 

1574 

1638 

1680 

1711 

1781 

30  to    40     •• 

1180 

1150 

1176 

1181 

1404 

1341 

1362 

1091 

40  to    50     •  • 

878 

771 

931 

934 

1161 

1017 

1087 

688 

50  to    60     •■ 

545 

6U0 

663 

659 

893 

7.93 

fi55 

430 

60  to    70     ■• 

348 

273 

460 

456 

577 

604 

686 

253 

70  to    80     •• 

160 

96 

227 

226 

255 

279 

240 

110 

80  to    90     •• 

40 

23 

62 

63 

.50 

66 

41 

31 

90  to  100     •  • 

3-4 

3 

5-5 

5 

4-3 

4-9 

1 

4 

Above  100  •  • 

0-1 

0-5 

0-3 

0-2 

0-2 

0-1 

0 

0-2 

Below  15  years, 

4241 

4108 

3891 

.3908 

3121 

3332 

3211 

4498 

Above 

5758-5 

5895-5 

6105-8 

6092-2 

6879 

6668 

6782 

5500-2 

Ratio,    - 

1-36 

1.43 

1-57 

1-56 

2-20 

2-00 

211 

1-22 

The  results  of  this  table,  although  in  some  degree 
foreseen,  surprised  me  very  much.  I  confess  I  did 
not  expect  to  find  so  great  a  difference  between  the 
numbers  of  France,  Belgium,  Sweden,  and  those  of 

England  and  the  United  States.  In  the  former  coun- 
tries, the  adult  population  is  double  the  other,  Avhilst 
in  the  latter  it  is  only  one-fourth  or  one-third  more. 
The  United  States,  especially,  appear  to  be  in  an 

ON  MAN. 

57 

extremely  unfavourable  condition,  since  they,  of  all 
countries  we  have  been  considering,  present  the  fewest 
adults  in  the  population. 

The  great  disproportion  -which  has  been  pointed 
out,  is  more  especially  owing  to  the  rapid  increase 
of  population  in  England  and  the  United  States  of 
late  j-ears :  the  greater  number  of  the  individuals 
proceeding  from  this  great  development  of  fecundity, 
are  still  little  advanced  in  the  career  of  life  ;  so  that 
there  will  be  a  greater  numlx^r  of  persons  not  adults. 
The  prodigious  increase  of  population  which  has  been 
observed  in  the  United  States,  has  taken  place  within 
little  more  than  30  years ;  we  also  see  that  the  num- 
ber of  individuals  imder  this  age  is  comparatively 
superior  to  that  of  other  countries.  It  is  the  same  in 
England  and  Ireland  in  ascending  from  20  to  30  years : 
Sweden,  France,  and  Beiguim,  on  the  contrary,  pre- 
sent populations  which  have  slowly  increased,  and 
wliich  may  tiius  pretty  well  represent  the  usual  pro- 
jwrtion  of  adults  in  ordinary  times. 
I  do  not  think  that,  up  to  the  present  time,  suffl- 
iont  attention  has  been  i)aid  to  the  great  number  of 
cliildren  which  too  rapiil  an  increase  of  popidation 
throws  into  a  country,  and  the  smaller  intrinsic  value 
wliich  this  population  momentarily  receives  from  it, 
which  must  be  a  very  powerful  obstacle  to  ulterior 
development. 

In  France,  Belgium,  and  Sweden,  for  example,  of 
three  inhabitants,  two  at  least  iu-e  in  a  state  lor  re- 
production, whilst  in  the  United  States  only  one  in 
two,  or  more  accurately,  six  out  of  eleven. 

In  conclusion,  it  is  i)roduction  wliich  regulates  the 
jio.isi6le  limit  of  the  inhabitants  of  a  country.  Civi- 
lisation narrows  this  limit,  and  tends  to  increase  the 
produce  which  belongs  to  each  individual,  so  as  to 
increase  his  well-Wing,  and  secure  him  the  means  of 
existence.  As  to  medicine,  it  is  limite<l  to  close  cer- 
tain passages  to  the  tomb,  but  only  l)y  enlarging  others; 
for  it  cannot  increase  the  list  of  the  living,  except  in 
causing  the  supernumeraries  to  live  at  the  expense 
of  society.  *'  Esculapius  himself  could  not,  by  his  art, 
confer  inmiortality  on  one-half  of  men,  except  by  con- 
demning them  to  abstain  froni  reproduction,  unless 
by  doubling  the  mortality  of  the  other  half,  or  by 
pushing  production  to  the  point  of  supplying  the 
new  wants  which  wouKl  arise."  *  Yet  it  woulil  be  also 
misrepresenting  the  immense  benefits  which  have 
accrued  to  humanity  from  medicine,  to  deny  its  power 
in  lengthening  the  average  life  of  man  ;  but  this  grand 
conquest,  due  to  the  progress  of  knowledge,  can  oidy 
]>e  maintained  by  the  knowledge  and  foresight  of  men, 
who  prevent,  by  celibacy,  new  births  and  new  food 
for  death.f  When  there  takes  place  no  sudden  change, 
nature  annually  levies  upon  us  the  same  tribute  of 
deaths,  from  which  each  of  lis  seeks  as  much  as  pos- 
sible to  withdraw :  each  is  desirous  to  belong  to  the 
privileged  class ;  but  the  effect  of  this  kind  of  fraud 
is  not  so  much  to  diminish  the  amount  of  tribute,  as 
to  transfer  it  to  those  of  our  neighliours  who  are  less 
favourably  placed  in  their  social  position. J 

The  average  diu-ation  of  life,  could  it  be  ascertained 
exactly,  would  furnish  us  with  a  measure  of  the  pru- 
dence and  hygienic  state  of  a  countrj- :  the  consump- 
« 
*  ["  Esculapo  lui-m6nie  ne  pourrait,  par  son  art,  donncr  rim- 
mortality  a  la  moitiddes  hommos,  qu'enlescondamnant  k  ne  point 
se  rcproduire,  k  moins  do  doublcr  la  niortalitd  de  I'autre  moitid, 
ou  de  porter  la  production  an  point  de  foumir  auz  oouvcaux  be- 
Boin3  qu'il  aurait  fait  naltre."] 

t  By  prolonging  the  average  duration  of  life,  the  medical 
Rciences  substitute  useful  years  for  unproductive  ones.  Tlie  adult 
man  has  a  lont;er  career,  produces  more,  and  society  has  fewer 
infants  to  feed ;  so  that,  in  tliis  point  of  view,  medical  sciences 
really  increa.se  production  and  render  a  new  service.  This  re- 
mark w.Ts  made  to  me  by  a  friend,  and  I  mention  it  here  because 
I  believe  it  to  be  true. 

t  M.  Villennd  has  observed  to  me,  %vhilst  this  work  was  in  the 
press,  that  he  has  advanced  the  same  idea,  but  under  another 
form,  in  his  work  on  epidemics. 

tion  of  the  inhabitant  would  give  the  state  of  civi- 
lisation and  the  exigencies  of  cHmate  ;  and  the  pro- 
portional number  of  inhabitants,  keeping  in  view  this 
latter  measure,  would  give  that  number  which  repre- 
sents its  production.* 

BOOK    SECOND. 

DEVELOPMENT  OF  STATURE,  AVEIOHT, 
STRENGTU,  Ac. 

Apparentlt  but  little  interest  is  attached  to  the 
determination  of  the  stature  and  weight  of  man,  or 
to  his  physical  development  at  different  ages;  nor, 
until  the  present  time,  has  any  one  particularly  at- 
tended to  this  subject.  ^Man  has  only  been  studied  in 
his  most  conspicuous  relations ;  the  correlative  study 
of  his  qualities,  and  the  numerical  determination  of 
the  modifications  which  are  consequent  upon  age, 
have  been  neglected.  This  state  of  things  leaves  im- 
mense voids  in  science,  and  the  result  is  that  we  gene- 
rally want  the  necessary  means  for  solving  a  great 
number  of  interesting  questions,  especially  relating 
to  the  natural  history  of  man.  For  example,  we  are 
almost  totally  ignorant  of  the  ratios  which  may  exist 
between  tlie  laws  of  development  of  his  different  fa- 
culties, and  what  are  the  elements  which  predominate 
at  such  or  such  an  age  :  hence  the  critical  periods  of 
life  can  only  be  determined  in  a  very  indefinite 
manner. 

The  researches  which  have  been  made  to  measure 
the  height  and  weight  of  man,  especially  relate  either 
to  the  period  of  birth  or  to  the  period  of  complete 
development ;  but  the  intermediate  ages  have  scarcely 
been  attended  to.  Physiologists  have  connected  the 
first  of  these  determinations  with  a  question  in  legal 
medicine  ;  they  have  even  anticipated  the  period  of 
birth,  and  sought  to  value  the  size  and  weight  of  the 
firtus.  Natural  philosophers,  who  studied  man  as  a 
mechanical  agent,  have  rather  lieen  occupied  with  the 
determination  of  his  weight  when  he  has  acquired 
complete  development.  La  Hire  has  made  some  very 
remarkable  researches  of  this  kind,  which  prove  that 
the  subject  now  occupying  us  has  a  much  deeper 
interest  than  that  resulting  from  mere  curiosity. 

To  show  how  little  advanced  is  the  state  of  the 
study  of  the  progressive  development  of  man,  let  us 
suppose  that  we  want  to  establish  the  age  of  an  indi- 
vidual, from  the  aggregate  of  his  physical  qualities: 
we  may  be  allowed  to  say,  that  we  shall  not  find  in 
science  any  assistance  for  the  determination  of  this 
question — we  shall  be  reduced  to  mere  empirical 
conjecture.  However,  legal  medicine  presents  nu- 
merous examples  where  such  determinations  become 
necessary.  We  may  ask,  no  doubt,  if  it  will  ever 
be  possible  to  obtain  them,  especially  for  advanced 
ages?  This  fear,  well  founded  as  it  may  appear, 
ought  not,  however,  to  lead  us  to  reject  such  re- 
searches :  that  would  not  be  very  philosophic.  If  to 
the  data  furnished  by  the  habit  of  observation,  and 
the  tact  resulting  therefrom,  we  can  join  physical 
qualities  susceptible  of  measurement,  prudence  bids 
us  not  neglect  them.  When  a  physician  is  called 
to  examine  the  body  of  an  infant  found  Ufeless,  and 
when,  in  a  legal  inquiry,  he,  from  simple  inspection, 
establishes  the  presumed  age  of  this  child,  it  is  evi- 
dent that  he  cannot  but  impose  his  judgiiient  on  those 
who  read  the  inquiry,  however  erroneous  it  may  other- 

♦  M.  Cliitti.  who  makes  social  econnmij  consist  in  obtaining  the 
greatest  poisiblo  utility,  with  the  least  possible  labour,  has  given 
the  following  mea-sure  of  riches  : — "  The  degree  of  the  riches  of  a 
people,  as  well  as  those  of  an  individual,  is  indicated  by  the  ratio 
between  the  sum  of  the  wants  and  the  sum  of  the  available  funds 
which  he  possesses  to  satisfy  them."— Caur*  d'Economic  Socialc 
nil  Mutic  (Ic  Sruxclles,  3d  Lixliirc. 

58 

ON  MAN. 

wise  be,  since  there  are  no  elements  existing  for  the 
verification  of  it.  If,  on  the  contrary,  to  the  assist- 
ance of  the  estimate  which  has  been  made  of  the  age, 
ig  joined  the  height  and  weight  of  the  child,  and  some 
other  physical  qualities  susceptible  of  computation ; 
and  if,  moreover,  there  were  exact  tables  which  might 
enable  one  to  ascertain,  at  different  ages,  the  values 
of  these  physical  qualities,  and  the  limits  within  which 
they  are  foimd  connected  in  individuals  regularly 
formed,  the  judgment  given  of  the  age  would  be 
capable  of  verification — it  would  even  become  use- 
less, if  the  elements  of  verification  admitted  of  great 
accuracy.  Such  appreciations,  then,  ought  not  to 
be  neglected  by  legal  medicine,  since  they  tend  to 
substitute  precise  characters  and  exact  data  for  con- 
jectural estimates,  which  are  always  vague  and  often 
fatdty. 

Thus,  apart  from  the  interest  which  is  presented 
by  tlie  determination  of  man  at  different  ages,  and  in 
researches  relating  to  the  average  man,  it  may  present 
another  important  element,  as  we  shall  see  more  per- 
fectly farther  on,  for  the  solution  of  the  following  pro- 
blem of  legal  medicine :  To  determine  the  age  of  an 
individual  after  death,  from  the  aggregate  of  his  physical 
qualities.  In  this  sense,  weight  Avould  be  one  of  the 
elements  which  it  would  be  necessary  to  connect  with 
the  distinguishing  of  individuals ;  and  this  physical 
character  naturally  takes  a  place  near  that  of  the 
stature. 

Researches  on  the  height  of  man,  and  on  his  deve- 
lopment, may  have  another  useful  end,  that  of  en- 
liglitening  governments  on  many  points ;  as,  for  ex- 
ample, as  regards  the  fixing  of  the  age  of  recruits. 

There  is  another  element,  the  determination  of 
which  is  equally  important,  and  which,  also,  is  but 
little  known,  namely,  the  strength.  I  do  not  flatter 
myself  that  I  have  fiUed  up  the  voids  which  science 
presented  on  this  subject,  but  I  shall  think  myself 
happy  if  my  researches  may  induce  other  persons  to 
attempt  it. 

CHAPTER  I. 

OF  THE  DEVELOPMENT  OF  THE  HEIGHT, 

I  DO  not  think  that,  before  Buffon,  any  inquiries  had 
been  made  to  determine  the  rate  of  human  growth 
successively  from  birth  to  maturity ;  and  even  this 
celebrated  naturalist  cites  only  a  single  particidar 
example ;  neither  has  he  examined  the  modifying 
influences  which  age  exerts  on  height.  The  only 
researches  at  all  precise  which  science  possesses,  refer 
to  the  length  of  the  child  before  birth,  and  to  that 
of  the  fully  developed  man.* 

Chaussier,  Avho  invented  the  mecometre,  an  in- 
strument adapted  to  measure  the  length  of  cliildren, 
thought  that  we  might  view  as  regular  the  increase 
in  length  of  the  child  for  six  months  before  its  birth ; 
and  he  estimated  this  increase  at  two  inches  per 
tnonth.  In  the  Dictionnaire  des  Sciences  Medicales, 
the  length  of  the  foetus  is  estimated  by  the  following 
numbers : — 

Metres. 
At  birth,        ....  0-487  to  0-541 

One  month  before  birth,  .  -     0-433  to  0-487 

Two  months  ■■  -  -  0  379  to  0-433 

Three  months       ...  -  .     o-3(Xj  to  0-379 

Four  months         •  •  -  •  0-216  to  0-300 

Five  months         ...  -  -     0-162  to  0-216 1 

The  medium  length  of  the  child  at  birth  would  then 
be  0-.5 14  metres :  this  estimate  differs  but  slightly  from 
that  obtained  at  the  Foundling  Hospital  in  Brussels, 
by  means,  also,  of  Chaussier's  mecometre.  On  mea- 
suring the  length  of  fifty  male  and  as  many  female 

*  See  on  this  latter  subject  an  excellent  memoir  of  M.  Villerme, 
inserted  in  the  first  volume  of  the  Annates  d'Hygiene. 

\  [The  French  metre  is  equal  to  3  feet  English  and  -28118  of  a 
decimal ;  or  3  feet  and  2-lOths.] 

children  immediately  at  birth,  the  following  numbers 
were  obtained  :* — 

Length. 

Boys. 

Girls. 

Total 

From  16  to  17  inches  Fi-ench, 

2 

4 

6 

..    17  to  18 

.      8 

19 

27 

•  •     18  to  19 

28 

18 

Mi 

•  •     19  to  20 

•    12 

8 

20 

..     20  to  21 

1 

1 

With  regard  to  the  mediums  or  averages  and  the 
limits,  they  have  given  the  following  values  for  the 
two  sexes : — 

Value.  Boj's.  Girls. 

Minimum,  16  inches  2  lines. t  16  inches  2  lines. 

Medium,      -  18  6  ••     nearly.  18      ••     15  ••    nearly. 

Maximum,  19      -  ■      8  -  •  20      •  •     C    •  • 

From  these  results  it  follows,  that,  from  the  period 
of  birth,  the  height  or  length  of  one  sex  is  sui>erior  to 
the  other ;  being,  for  boys,  0-4999  ;  for  girls,  0-4896  ; 
giAang  thus  in  favour  of  boys  a  trifle  less  than  half  an 
inch. 

By  uniting  these  numbers  to  those  which  have  been 
obtained  in  the  junior  schools  of  Brussels,  the  Orphan 
Hospital,  boarding-houses,  and  in  public  life,  in  respect 
to  j'oung  persons  of  different  classes,  I  have  been  able 
to  construct  the  following  table,  comprising  the  rate 
of  groAvth  from  birth  to  20  years :  the  height  of  the 
shoe  is  not  included : — 

Table  showing  the  rate  of  Growth  in  the  two  Sexes. 

Ages. 

Boys. 

Gills. 

Difference. 

metres. 

metres. 

metres. 

Birth, 

0-5f»0 

0-490 

0-010 

1  year, 

0-698 

2  years,      ... 

0-796 

0-780 

0-016 

3     •■                -            - 

0-8(i7 

0-853 

0-014 

4      ..          . 

0-930 

0-913 

0017 

5      ■•                .             . 

0-986 

0-978 

0-008 

6 

1-045 

1-035 

0-010 

7     ..             .           . 

1091 

8 

1-160 

1-154 

o-oo;; 

9      ••                 .             - 

1-221 

1-205 

O-Olf) 

10 

1-280 

1-256 

0-(h24 

11      .. 

1-334 

1-286 

0-048 

12 

1-384 

1-340 

0-044 

13      .. 

1-431 

1-417 

0014 

14      .. 

1-489 

1-475 

0014 

15      .. 

1-549 

1-496 

0-053 

16 

1-600 

1-518 

0-082 

17     .. 

1-640 

1-553 

0-087 

18 

1-564 

19     .. 

1-665 

1-570 

0  095 

20 

1-574 

Growth  terminated, 

1-684 

1-579 

0-105 

"VVe  observe  by  this  table  that,  towards  the  age  of 
16  to  17,  the  growth  of  girls  is  already,  relativeli/, 
almost  as  much  advanced  as  that  of  boys  from  18  to 
19.  J  Moreover,  the  annual  growth  for  boys  is  about 
56  miUimetres  [somewhat  more  than  two  inches] 
between  5  and  1 5  years  of  age ;  whilst  for  girls  it  is 
only  about  52  miUimetres  [or  rather  less  than  two 
inches.]  In  the  Dictionnaire  des  Sciences  Medicales,  in 
the  article  Giants,  M.  Virey  attributes  the  lower  sta- 
tiu-e  of  woman  to  the  circumstajjice  of  her  ai-riving 
sooner  at  tlie  age  of  puberty,  or  having  reached  per- 
fection, and  also  to  her  having  less  vital  energ}'. 
We  may  add,  that  her  animal  growth,  up  to  the  age 
of  puberty,  is  also  less  rapid  than  that  of  man. 

*  I  have  been  greatly  aided  in  numerous  researches  into  the 
height,  weight,  strength,  and  other  phj-sical  qualities  of  man, 
by  Messrs  Guietto  and  Van  Esschen,  Professors  in  the  School  of 
Medicine  at  Brussels,  as  well  as  by  M.  Plataw.  Without  their 
assistance,  it  would  have  been  impossible  for  me  to  have  obtained 
all  the  measurements  in  the  various  charities,  hospitals,  public 
schools,  Prison  of  Vilvorde,  &c. 
t  [The  French  line  is  equal  to  the  12th  part  of  an  inch.] 
i  [The  proposition  may  be  easier  understood  by  stating  it  in 
this  way  :  A  girl  is  relatively  as  tall  at  16  as  a  boy  is  at  18,  the 
sex  and  full  growth  of  each  being  taken  into  account.^ 

ON  MAN. 

After  having  spoken  of  what  reUites  to  the  sexes, 
it  must  be  interesting  to  consider  the  influence  of  a 
town  or  a  country  residence  upon  liuniau  growtli. 
Already  Dr  Villernic,  in  tlie  second  part  of  the  Annales 
d'Hi/yitne,  had  proved,  contrary  to  tlie  generally  re- 
ceived notion,  that  the  inhabitants  of  towns  are  tidier 

than  those  of  the  country.  I  have  arrived  at  the 
same  conclusion  in  respect  to  the  inhabitants  of  Bra- 
bant. E.xtracts  from  the  government  militia  registers, 
which  I  communicated  at  that  time  to  Dr  Villerme, 
were  published  in  the  fifth  number  of  the  Annales 
d'Hijgiinc ;  they  gave  the  following  numbers :  — 

A  rrond  issetncnts. 

1823. 

1824. 

1825. 

182C. 

1827. 

Average. 

metres. 

metres. 

metres. 

metres. 

metres. 

metres. 

1  jTtnissels,          .... 

1-0719 

i-«;j|i 

l-(i(ai 

1-6647 

1-6528 

l-6(i33 

IKural  Communes, 

H).J25 

1-6317 

1-6343 

l-r>35.3 

1C2<)6 

1-6325 

2  (Louvain,         .... 
'Iltural  Communes, 

1-6424 

1  ■(»!!) 

i-raao 

1-W60 

i-6.3;m 

1-6303 

1-62<J(! 

1-622;) 

untn 

1-614.'. 

1-6127 

1-6177 

3^fNivelles,          .... 
•  Rural  Communes,      ... 

u<as.m 

l-()4-16 

l-(w81 

1-6.184 

i-6;m 

16428 

1-C2(i4 

■l-62(i<) 

1-6409 

1-64.")1 

l-6(»53 

l-(323 

Annual     (Cities,          ... 
Averages.*  11  ural  Communes,  - 

l-fi514 

l-<;478 

l-(»37 

l-64!»7 

HreiB 

1-6485 

i-Cias 

l-iiMi 

1-6280 

1-6309 

1-62-25 

1-6275 

General  Average, 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

1-G380 

The  averages  of  each  year  were  taken  from  400 
individuals  for  Brussels,  and  from  150  for  Louvain 
and  Nivelles.  Those  of  the  rural  parishes  were  de- 
duced from  400  individuals  for  each  district.  Thus, 
the  general  average  for  the  whole  province  was  drawn 
from  ;3.">00  individuals  living  in  towns,  and  from  (iuoo 
living  in  the  country. 

By  these  numl)crs,  we  sec  that  the  inliabitant  of 
towns  is  taller  than  the  inhabitant  of  the  country; 
and  in  arranging  the  cities  ami  rural  district.s  ac-cord- 
ing  to  the  resixrtive  height  which  man  attains  in  them 
i;i  his  nineteenth  i/ear,  the  order  would  be  as  follows : — 
Brussels,  Nivelles,  Louvain  ;  and  the  same  order  for 
the  rural  districts  around  these  towns.  In  spite  of 
the  ditferences  we  have  thus  remarked  as  taking  place 
at  the  age  of  Hi,  it  might  still  haiijien  that  the  inha- 
bitant of  the  country  might  attain  a  greater  height 
than  the  inhabitant  of  the  town  previous  to  the  com- 
pletion of  his  full  growth,  in  such  a  way  that  the 
growtli  of  man  in  cities  might  Ix;  at  first  more  rajjid  up 
to  a  certain  point  than  in  the  country,  and  might  even 
be  nearly  terminated  in  cities,  whilst  in  the  country 
the  growth  would  be  very  far  from  having  attained 
its  complete  development.  Ami  these  remarks  coin- 
cide pretty  nearly  with  the  de<luctions  of  Dr  ^'illcrnle, 
in  resiHJct  to  the  height  of  man  in  France.  The  doctor 
remarks,  that  "  human  height  becomes  greater,  and 
the  growth  takes  3)lace  more  rapidly,  other  circum- 
stances being  equal,  in  projHjrtion  as  the  country  is 
richer,  the  comfort  more  general,  houses,  clothes,  ;ind 
nourishment  better,  and  labour,  fatigue,  and  priva- 
tions during  infancy  and  youth  less;  or,  in  other 
words,  the  circumstances  accompanying  misery  put 
ofi'  the  period  of  the  complete  development  of  the  body, 
and  stint  human  stature." 

It  becomes,  then,  important  to  determine  the  epoch 
at  which  human  growth  terminates  ;  and  the  govern- 
ment registers  for  Brussels,  being  examined  with  this 
view,  gave  the  following  results.  These  registers 
refer  to  a  great  levy  made  about  eighteen  years  ago ; 
I  have  divided  them  into  three  series,  each  compris- 
ing 300  individuals : — 

13  Years.  * 

25  Years. 

.10  Years. 

1-6630  metre. 

liaaj  metre. 

1 -(KM  metre. 

l-C(Si5     ~ 

Ui-Xi    ,. 

1W!73      - 

1-66-20     _ 

l-iiim    ~ 

1-6817      ~ 

1-6648     ~ 

1-6750    „ 

1-(»M1      ~ 

SleUium, 

Thus  we  see  that  human  g^o^^'th,*  as  regards  height, 
does  not  terminate  at  19,  or  even  invariably  at  25.    I 

*  [The  transLitor  had  observed  some  years  ago,  that  the  male 
human  height  had  evidently  not  att.iined  its  maximum  previous 
to  at  least  .TO  years  of  age,  and  probably  not  even  then.  This  he 
was  led  to  remark  by  observing  large  numbers  of  students,  who, 
leaving  college  at  the  age  of  20,  21,  or  22,  have  retume<l  seven  or 
eight  years  aftcrw-ards.  Kxamination  pi-oved  that  these  persons 
had  grown  very  considerably,  not  only  in  breadth  but  also  in 
height.] 

li 

have  to  regret  exceedmgly  that  the  state  of  the  govern- 
ment registers  does  not  allow  of  my  making  similar 
researches  in  regard  to  the  inhabitants  of  the  country  ; 
we  might  then  have  known  if  the  growth  in  townis 
terminates  more  rapidly-  than  in  the  country,  and  also 
if  man,  when  fully  developed,  is  tallest  in  the  country. 
When  we  class  the  Ooo  individuals  of  whom  I  have 
spoken  above,  in  the  order  of  their  height,  we  come 
to  the  following  results  : — 

Heights. 

Number  of  Individuals 

of  19 
Years. 

of  25 
Years. 

of  30 
Years. 

From  15  to  16  decimetres, 

•  •      16  to  17. 

•  •     17  to  18, 

18  to  l!l, 
■  •     19  to  211, 

32 

17.3 

92 

3 

17 
174 
103 

1 

15 
163 
lf»9 

12 
1 

300 

.TOO 

300* 

Thus,  at  19,  .3  individuals  only  were  more  than  18 
decimetres  [above  5  feet  10  inches]  high ;  at  the  age 
of  2"),  there  were  G ;  and  at  the  age  of  .30  tliere  were 
13.f  It  seems  to  me  that  we  are  entitled  to  conclude, 
from  the  whole  of  these  results,  that  human  growth,  in 
respect  to  height,  does  not  terminate  in  Brussels  even 
at  the  age  of  25,  which  is  very  much  opposed  to  the 
generally  received  opinion. 

According  to  M.  IIargenvilliers,J  the  average  height 
of  conscripts  of  20  years,  taken  for  all  France,  is  1615 

*  [The  value  of  the  decimetre  in  English  measures  is  3  inches 
and  ■'Xf}  decimal  parts,  or  nearly  4  Knglisli  inches.] 

t  In  the  preceding  numbers  were  eonipri-scd  the  men  who  were 
rejected,  or  had  le-ave  to  withdraw  from  the  corps,  as  of  midcr 
size. 

X  Inquiries  find  Connderations  on  the  Formation  and  Recruit- 
ment of  the  French  Army :  I8I7.  M.  A'illermd,  in  his  Memoir  on 
the  Height  of  Man  in  France,  quotes  the  opinion  of  Tenon  and 
also  some  facts,  which  show  that,  during  the  time  of  the  Empli-c, 
coiTtinual  wars  had  lowered  the  human  stature. 

[A  question  naturally  arises  here,  whether  the  stature  was 
actu.illy  lowered,  or  the  ynung  conscripts  merely  called  on  before 
their  time  of  full  development ;  but  the  remark  of  Dr  Villerm^ 
suggests  other  considerations,  well  worthy  the  attention  of  st.itis- 
ticians— such,  for  example,  as  the  effects  produced  in  Prussia, 
by  the  maintaining  of  a  standing  army  of  somewhat  more  than 
2<X),000  men  in  tinio  of  peace,  it  being  admitted  that  these  are 
the  finest  and  best  proportioned  men  in  the  kingdom.  For  we 
have  first  the  witlulniwal  of  the  very  choicest  of  the  m:ile  popu- 
Uition  from  the  exercise  of  the  arts  and  the  cultivation  of  science, 
at  precisely  that  period  of  life  when  they  are  best  fitted  for  such 
pursuits ;  and,  secondly,  the  effects  uixm  the  population  in  respect 
to  the  restraints  upon  marriage,  and  the  preference  given  by  the 
soldier  to  a  debauched  and  irregular  life.  The  same  rctn.irks, 
modified,  apply  to  all  other  European  nations,  none  of  them  being 
without  standing  armies  of  greater  or  less  magnitude.] 

60 

ON  MAN. 

metre  [4  feet  10  inches  nearly]  ;  and  of  100,000  there 
were  as  follows : — 

Under   1'.570  metre, 

1-570  to  1-598  •  • 

1-598  to  1-C24  ••      - 

1-C24  to  1-651  •■ 

1-G51  to  1-678  ••      - 

1-678  to  1-705  •  • 

1-705  to  1-732  ••      - 

1-732  to  1-759  •• 

Above  1-759  ••     - 

28,G20 
11,580 
13,990 
14,410 
11,410 
8,780 
5,530 
3,190 
2,490 

100,000 

We  might  consider  the  inhabitants  of  the  ancient 
department  of  Bouches-de-la-Mcusc,  Avhich  Avas  partly 
formed  of  Holland,  and  of  Avliich  the  Hague  was  the 
chief  place,  as  affording  the  limits  of  the  statm-es  ob- 
served in  France  from  the  time  of  the  Empire.  The 
average  height  of  conscripts  for  the  years  1808,  1809, 
and  1810,  raised  before  the  age  of  20,  was  1-677  metre.* 
On  the  other  hand,  in  the  ancient  department  of  the 
Apennines,  of  which  Chiavari  was  the  chief  place, 
the  country  mountainous,  without  industrious  occu- 
pations, extremely  poor,  and  where  the  men  toil  from 
a  very  early  age  and  are  ill  fed,  the  average  stature 
of  the  conscripts  for  the  same  three  years,  was  1'560 
metre.  "  The  diflference  of  these  residts,"  says  IM.  Vil- 
lerme,  "  is  striking.  In  the  former  place,  where  the 
stature  is  highest,  there  were  but  few  excused  or  re- 
jected even  for  diseases  ;  on  the  contraiy,  in  the  latter 
place,  where  the  stature  is  very  low,  there  are  many 
excused  even  for  this  latter  cause ;  so  that  aU  the 
advantages  are  in  favour  of  men  of  liigh  stature."  f 

It  is  remarkable  that  the  inequality  of  statures  is 
not  merely  observed  between  the  inhabitants  of  town 
and  country,  but  is  also  felt  in  the  interior  of  towns 
between  individuals  of  ditFerent  professions,  and  hav- 
ing different  degrees  of  affluence,  as  M.  Villerme  has 
shown  for  the  dilFerent  arrondissements  of  Paris,  where 
tlie  stature  of  men  seems  to  be,  all  other  things  being 
equal,  in  proportion  to  the  good  fortune,  or  at  least 
in  inverse  propoi'tion  to  the  difficulties,  toils,  and 
privations  experienced  in  infancy  and  j-outh.:J:  Of  41 
young  persons  between  17  and  20  years  of  age,  mea- 
sured at  the  Athenffium  of  Brussels,  13  were  found 
between  16  and  17  decimetres,  26  between  17  and  18 
decimetres,  and  2  between  18  and  19  decimetres ;  so 
that  the  j^oung  persons  between  17  and  18  Avere 
double  the  number  of  those  between  16  and  17  deci- 
metres ;  whilst,  in  the  interior  of  the  town,  the  num- 
ber of  the  former  is  not  equal  to  the  latter,  even  at 
the  age  of  30  years. 

The  young  girls  measured  in  the  Female  Orphan 
Hospital  of  Brussels,  and  Avho,  during  their  infancy, 
have  been  brought  up  in  the  country,  are  generally 
smaUer  than  girls  of  the  same  age,  in  easy  circum- 
stances, who  have  been  measured  in  town. 

In  the  Prison  {Maison  de  Detention)  of  Vilvorde, 
by  forming  three  groups,  each  of  23  individuals  for 
each  sex,  the  average  results  have  been — 

For  Women. 
1-572  met. 
1-581    •  •      . 
1-585    ■• 

General  average,       -    1-664 

1-579 

*  Sur  la  Taille,  &c. 

t  [The  translator  is  firmly  persuaded  that  Dr  Villermd  and 
51.  Q,uetelet,  have  failed  to  detect  the  real  cause  of  difference  of 
statiu-e  in  those  two  departments  :  it  is  a  question  purely  of  race, 
and  not  of  feeding  or  locality.  The  taller  conscripts  were  Saxons, 
drawn  from  the  departments  of  Holland  and  the  Mouths  of  the 
Mouse ;  the  shorter  conscripts,  foimd  in  the  Apennines  and 
around  Chiavari,  were  the  descendants  of  the  ancient  Celtic 
population  of  that  country.  The  difference  in  stature,  then, 
depends,  in  this  instance,  in  a  great  measure  on  the  diflference 
in  blood,  or  on  the  race  of  men  :  it  has  existed  for  thousands  of 
years,  and  wiU  continue  so,  altogether  independent  of  locality, 
feeding,  or  government.] 

i  Annalcs  d'Hygifene,  No.  2,  p.  3/0. 

J.Icn. 

Women. 

1 

3 

-    (5 

X 

42 

27 

-  19 

3 

1 

Classing  them  according  to  size,  we  find— 

Sizes. 
From  14  to  15  decimetres, 

•  •  15  to  10 

•  •  10  to  17 
■  17  to  18 

•  ■  18  to  19 

These  results  show  that  the  prisoners  Avcre  gcne- 
rallj''  shorter  than  fully  developed  uidividuals  mea- 
siu'ed  in  Brussels ;  their  average  stature  being  nearly 
equal  to  that  of  yomig  persons  of  19  years  of  age,  and 
it  m.ay  correspond  witli  the  average  stature  of  the 
inhabitants  of  the  province. 

With  the  view  of  appreciating  the  modifications 
which  painful  toil  in  manufactories  may  produce  on 
the  development  of  children,  ;Mr  J.  W.  Cowell  has 
made  different  observations  at  Manchester  and  Stock- 
port ;  he  has  inserted  the  details  in  tlie  first  volume  of 
Factory  Reports,  and  has  kindly  assisted  me  in  obtain- 
ing the  results,  which  I  have  reduced  to  the  metrical 
measure.  The  girls  and  bo3-s  have  been  measyrcd 
Avith  their  shoes  on ;  no  deduction  has  been  made  for 
this  circumstance :  hut,  as  the  observations  were  made 
on  the  Sunda)',  the  thickness  of  the  soles  for  boys 
AA'ould  probably  be  from  one-half  to  one-third  of  an 
inch  (English),  and  for  girls  from  one-eighth  to  one- 
sixth  of  an  inch.  This  being  laid  doAvn,  the  folloAving 
are  the  values  obtained  :* — 

Average  Stature  of  Children  of  the  Lower  Orders, 
at  Manchester  and  Stockport.f 

Boys 

Girls 

Ages. 

Working  in 

1 
not  AVorking 

^^'orlving  in 

not  Working 

Factories. 

in  Factories. 

Factories. 

in  Factories. 

metres. 

metres. 

metres. 

metres. 

9  years. 

1-222 

l-2:« 

1-218 

1-230 

10     ■ . 

1-270 

1-286 

1-20U 

l-2.-)4 

11 

1-302 

1-296 

1-299 

1-323 

12      ■• 

1-355 

1-345 

1-304 

1-303 

13      •• 

1-383 

1-396 

1-413 

i-ao.o 

14 

1-437 

1-440 

1-467 

1-479 

15      ■• 

1-515 

1-474 

1-480 

1-502 

16     •• 

1-565 

1-605 

1-521 

1-473 

17      •- 

1-592 

1-027 

1-535 

1-542 

18     ■• 

1-008 

1-775 

1-593 

1-645 

It  appears,  from  these  numbers,  that  the  statures 
of  male  and  female  children  do  not  differ  much  in 
Belgium  and  England :  Ave  also  see  that,  until  the  age 
of  puberty,  there  is  no  great  difference  in  size  of  the 
children  of  the  loAver  orders,  Avliether  they  Avork  in 
factories  or  not.  But  for  the  latter  years  of  the  table, 
there  is  a  A'cry  sensible  difference.  Will  it  be  found 
that  the  groAvth  in  factories,  after  puberty,  is  dimi- 
nished, or  only  retarded?  or,  which  seems  more  pro- 
bable, does  not  the  ameUoration  remarked  for  the 
loAver  ages  proceed  from  the  usefid  changes  Avhich 
have  already  been  made,  from  the  apprehension  of 
parliamentary  inquiries  ?  % 

When,  in  England,  Ave  chose  the  terms  of  compa- 
rison from  rather  higher  classes  of  society,  Ave  find 
the  stature  of  men  higher  than  in  France  or  the  Loav 

*  [It  has  been  suggested  to  the  translator,  by  a  gentleman  Avell 
acquainted  with  the  manufacturing  districts  of  Yorkshire  and 
Lancashire,  that  Avooden  clogs,  and  not  shoes,  seemed  almost 
universally  worn  by  the  manufacturing  population  of  these 
counties,  more  especially  of  Lancashire.  Now,  the  soles  and 
heels  of  these  clogs  are  of  great  thickness :  a  question  then  arises 
with  respect  to  Mr  Cowell's  measurements.  If  this  class  of  the 
population  wear  clogs  on  Sundays,  this  circumstance  may  par- 
tially affect  the  value  of  Mr  Cowell's  statements.] 

t  The  number  of  children  measured  Avas— factory  boys,  410 ; 
others,  227 :  female  factory  children,  6.52 ;  others,  201.  Very  few 
non-factory  children,  of  the  ages  of  16,  17,  and  18,  have  been 
measured. 

%  It  has  been  found,  by  this  inquiry,  that  in  some  districts  tho 
children  were  forced  to  work  standing  upright,  Avith  the  legs 
fastened  in  tin  pipes. 

ON  MAN. 

61 

Countries,  at  least  for  youiig  persons  between  18  and 
23  years  of  age.  The  following  arc  the  results  of  80 
measurements  made  on  students  of  the  University  of 
Cambridge,  in  groups  of  10  each  :* — 

Ten  indhnduals, 

Average,     - 

Height  of  one  person,    - 

58  feet  3i  tnchcs. 

50  ~  6J  ~ 

58  ~  9 

57  ~  74  ~ 

3C  -  94  ~ 

57  ~  »i  ~ 

58  ~  3 

58 
5  feet  9  3-5th  incbes. 

Table  of  the  Growth  of  Man. 

Ages. 

I  have  enumerated  different  causes  which  influ- 
ence the  growth  of  man  in  town,  but  their  num- 
ber increases  when  the  researches  embrace  a  large 
extent  of  territory ;  thus,  the  complete  development 
of  stature  stops  more  suddenly  in  very  hot  or  vcrj' 
cold  countries  than  in  those  of  a  moderate  tempera- 
ture ;  more  euddenly  in  low  i)lains  than  on  moun- 
tainous heights,  where  the  climate  is  severe.  The 
kind  iif  food  and  drink  fartlier  influence  growth  ;  and 
individuals  have  been  known  to  grow  considerably 
by  changing  their  mode  of  life,  and  making  use  of 
moist  food  calculated  to  distend  and  increase  their 
organisation.  Some  diseases,  and  particularly  fevers, 
may  also  excite  rapid  and  extraordinary  growth.  The 
case  of  a  young  girl  is  related,  who,  Ixjcoining  unwell 
{ftcnilant  ses  nienslrue.i)  by  an  attack  of  fever  which 
she  had,  actjuired  a  gigantic  stature.f  Lastly,  it  lias 
also  been  remarked  that  lying  in  bed  is  favourable 
to  growth,  and  that  a  man  in  the  morning  is  some- 
what taller  than  in  the  evening ;  during  the  day,  he 
undcrg(X'6  a  degree  of  depression.  J 

I  shall  now  pass  to  a  more  particular  examination 
of  the  law  of  growth  of  man,  from  birtli  to  complete 
development.  The  numl)ers  on  which  my  results  are 
basetl,  have  lx<n  collected  at  Brussels,  and  as  nmeh 
as  possible  from  individuals  of  different  classes :  by 
the  side  of  the  observed  values,  I  have  written  down 
the  calculated  ones,  according  to  an  empirical  for- 
mula, which  I  shall  e.\i)lain  subsequently. 

*  It  Is  A  rufitom  at  C'ambridf:<>  to  mcasnre  and  nvigh  the  young 
persons  coming  to  the  university,  with  great  accuracy,  at  a 
mcrc-honfi)  wureliouso,  where  a  book  is  kejit  for  tlie  purpose 
of  entering  the  dntu.  It  is  from  tliia  book  that,  tlirough  the 
kindness  of  Mr  AVhewcU,  the  accomjuuiying  numbers  have  been 
taken. 

t  ^eo  Diiiiimiuiire  ff(  Mfiliciiif,  article  Gcant,  by  Virey. 

t  [M.  Quetelet  bus  unaccountably  omitted,  in  tlie  above  para- 
pniph,  tlie  great  cause  productive  of  differences  in  stature  of 
men  and  animals — to  wit,  difference  in  race  or  blood.  The 
diminutive  Bosjeman  of  Southern  Africa,  the  athletic  Caffre, 
rea<  Iiinii  the  full  Kumpean  stature,  and  the  gigantic  Boor,  the 
descendant  of  the  Saxon  race,  are  as  nearly  alike  in  respect 
to  foixl  and  climate  as  may  be ;  the  extraordinary  differences, 
therefor*,  whiih  these  men  present,  are  asoribable  to  one  cause 
alone — a  difference  of  blood  or  origin  ;  and  the  historic  evidence 
derived  from  ancient  Rome,  and  fr.m  the  equally  authentic 
figures  depicted  in  the  tombs  of  f:gjptian  Thebes,  prove  that 
these  differences  caused  by  blood  or  race  are  now  neither  greater 
nor  less  than  they  were  at  least  40fK>  jears  ago,  thus,  as  it  were, 
setting  at  defiance  all  minor  causes,  such  as  food,  climate,  loca- 
lities, 4c.  ^^*llether  the  Hun  resides  in  the  fertile  plains  of  Hun- 
gary, the  shores  of  the  Caspian,  or  the  frozen  regions  of  fkamdi- 
navia  or  of  Lapland,  the  general  stature  of  the  race  remains  per- 
fectly unaltered. 

In  respect  to  what  M.  Quetelet  observes  regarding  the  influence 
of  rest  and  horizontal  position  on  the  stature,  it  is  a  fact  well 
C8tablishe<l  that,  by  such  a  position,  in  bed  for  example,  the 
clastic  fibro-cartilaRcs  connecting  the  spinal  bones  together,  seem 
to  recover  their  full  depth,  and  the  stature  may  gain  an  inch  or 
more  thereby.  Recruits  for  the  army  and  deserters  avail  them- 
selves of  a  knowledge  of  this  fact,  and  occasionally  succeed  in 
milking  their  identity  difficult  to  be  tstablLnhed.] 

Birth, 

1  year, 

2  _ 

3  „ 

4  ~ 

(i  „ 

7  ~ 

«  - 

9  ~ 

10  .. 

11  ~ 

12  ~ 

13  ~ 
U  ~ 
13  ~ 

16  .. 

17  ~ 

18  ~ 

19  « 
25  ~ 
31)  - 

Statiu^ 

Stature  from 

Difference. 

Observed. 

Calculation. 

metres. 

metres. 

metres. 

(1-500 

0-5<10 

0000 

0G98 

0-698 

0-000 

0-796 

0791 

-f  0005 

0-8G7 

0-WM 

-t-  0-003 

0-930 

0-928 

-f- 0-002 

0-986 

0-988 

—  0-002 

1-045 

1-047 

—  0-002 

^ 

1-105 

^ 

1-100 

1-162 

—  0-002 

1-221 

1-219 

-J-  0-002 

1-280 

1-275 

-f  0-005 

i-3;h 

1-330 

-1-  0004 

1-3M 

1-385 

—  0001 

1-4.11 

1-439 

—  0-ooe 

l-4lt!» 

1-493 

—  0-004 

1-549 

li>46 

-4-0-003 

1-COO 

1-5!U 

-f- 0-006 

1-640 

UM 

-f  0-006 

^ 

H»8 

„ 

1-66.-. 

1-660 

—  ooot 

H!75 

1-680 

—  0-005 

1-684 

1-QW 

o-ooo 

I  have  endeavoured  to  render  the  preceding  results 
sensible  by  the  construction  of  a  line,  which  indicates 
the  growth  at  different  ages,  but  in  one-tenth  of  the 
real  proportions. 

Tims,  supposing  that  the  new-born  infant  sets  out 
from  the  point  o,  and  proceeds  along  the  axis  oA, 
reaching  in  succession  the  points  I.,  II.,  III.,  IV.,  &c., 
at  the  age  of  1,  2,  3,  4,  &c.,  years,  his  head  will  always 
l)c  at  the  height  of  the  curve  oB,  at  the  different  points 
1,  2,  3,  4,  &c.     We  see  that— 

1.  The  most  rapid  growth  takes  place  immediately 
after  birth  :  the  cliild  in  the  course  of  one  year  grows 
2  decimetres  [7  8- loth  inches]  nearly. 

2.  The  growth  of  a  child  diminishes  as  its  age  in- 
creases, until  towards  the  age  of  four  or  five  years,  the 
period  at  which  it  reaches  the  maximum  of  probable 
life.  Thus,  during  the  second  year  after  birth,  the 
growtli  is  only  one-half  of  what  it  was  during  the 
first;  and  during  the  third  year,  only  about  one-third. 

3.  Proceeding  from  the  fourth  or  fifth  year,  the 
increase  of  stature  becomes  almost  exactly  regular 
until  about  the  sixteenth  year,  that  is  to  say,  until 
the  age  of  puberty,  and  the  annual  increase  is  56 
millimetres  [2  2-lOth  inches]  nearly. 

4.  After  the  age  of  puberty,  the  stature  still  conti- 
nues to  increase,  but  only  inconsiderably :  from  the 
sixteenth  to  the  seventeentli  year,  it  increases  4  cen- 
timetres [1  5-lOth  inches];' in  the  two  succeeding 
years,  it  only  increases  24  centimetres  [or  a  little  less 
than  1  inch  ;  in  exact  numbers,  0984]. 

5.  Tlie  full  growtli  of  man  does  not  appear  to  be 
attained  at  iiis  twenty-fifth  year. 

In  what  has  just  been  said,  I  have  only  spoken  of 
absolute  growth :  if  we  compare  the  annual  growth 
with  the  stature  already  acquired,  we  shall  find  that 
the  child  increa.ses  in  size  two-fifths  from  birth  to  the 
end  of  the  first  year;  during  the  second  year,  one- 
seventh  ;  during  the  third  year,  one-eleventh  ;  during 
the  fourth  year,  one-fourteenth  ;  during  the  fifth  year, 
one-fifteenth  ;  during  the  sixth  year,  one-eighteenth, 
&c. ;  so  that  the  relative  growth  is  continually  de- 
creasing from  the  time  of  birth. 

The  curve  representing  the  growth  of  females,  would 
be  a  little  under  that  of  males,  and  would  be  nearly 
equidistant  from  it,  until  the  age  of  eleven  or  twelve 
years,  when  it  temls  more  rapidly  to  become  parallel 
to  tiie  axis  oA. 

It  remains  for  me  to  speak  of  the  formula  by  which 
I  have  calculated  the  numljers  shown  in  the  table 
given  above.  Ix;tting  the  co-ordinates ;/  and  2  repre- 
sent the  stature  and  the  age  corresponding  to  it,  we 
have  the  following  equation  : — 

y  __  .       '  +  ^' 

y"*"  1000  (T—y) 

=:  a.T  + 

I     +    t  X 

62 

ON  MAN. 

i  and  T  are  two  constants  which  indicate  the  stature 
of  the  child  at  birth,  and  that  of  the  fullj^  developed 
individual:  their  values  for  Brussels  are  0-500  and 
1-684  metre.  The  coefficient  a  of  the  first  term  in 
the  second  number,  will  be  calculated  according  to 
the  different  locahties,  from  the  regular  growth  wluch 
annually  takes  place  between  the  fourth  and  fifth,  to 
the  fifteenth  or  sixteenth  year :  for  Brussels,  its  value 
has  been  made  equal  to  0-0545  metre.  I  think  that, 
in  giving  these  three  constants,  we  may  use  this  for- 
mula vnth  considerable  advantage  for  other  locidi- 
ties. 

If  we  make  t  =  0-49  metre,  T  =  1-579  metre, 
a  =  0-052  metre,  agreeably  to  the  observations  above 
quoted  for  calcidating  the  law  of  the  growth  of  women 
for  Brussels,  we  shall  have-»- 

!/  + 

y 

1000  (1-579  —  ?/) 

0-0521  X  + 

0-49  +  J.- 

By  using  this  formula,  I  have  calculated  the  nmu- 
bers  which  appear  in  the  third  column  of  the  follow- 
ing table  -. — 

Law  of  the  Growth  of  \\^oman. 

Ages. 

Birth, 

1  year, 

2  ..    - 

3  .. 

4  ..    - 

5  .. 

6  ..    - 

7  .. 

8  ..    - 

9  .. 

10  .. 

11  .  . 

12  .. 

13  .. 

14  .  . 

15  .  . 

16  .  . 

17  .. 

IS  .. 

19  .. 

20  .  . 

Growth  terminated, 

Stature 
Obser\'ed. 

metres. 
0-400 

0-780 
0-853 
0-.013 
0-078 
1-035 
1-091 
1-154 
1-205 
1-256 
1-286 
1-340 
1-417 
1-475 
1-496 
1-518 
1-553 
1-564 
1-570 
1-574 
1-579 

Stature 
Calculated. 

metres. 
0  490 
0-0.90 
0-731 
0-852 
0-915 
0-974 
1-031 
1-086 
1-141 
1-195 
1-248 
1-299 
1-353 
1-403 
1-453 
1499 

i-sai 

1-555 
1-564 
1-569 
1-572 
1-579 

Difference. 

metres. 
0-000 

—  O-OOI 
+  0-001 

—  0-002 
+  0-004 
+  0  004 
+  0-005 
+  0-013 
-1-  0-010 
-t-  O-OfiS 

—  0-013 

—  0-013 
•+  0-014 
+  0022 

—  0-003 

—  0-017 

—  0-002 
0-000 

+  0-001 

+  0-002 

0-000 

The  differences  between  the  observed  numbers  and 
the  calcvdated  ones,  are  greater  than  in  the  table 
(already  given)  of  the  groAvth  of  man.  It  may  be 
owing  to  the  circumstance,  that  the  observations  have 
been  less  numerous,  and  made  on  fewer  of  the  diffe- 
rent classes  of  society,  for  the  one  se.x  than  for  the 
other.  What  appears  to  give  additional  support  to 
my  conjecture  is,  the  manner  in  Avhich  the  loositive 
and  negative  signs  succeed  each  other  in  the  diffe- 
rences of  the  observed  and  calculated  numbers.  More- 
over, it  is  remarkable  that  the  formula  may  be  entirely 
determined,  when  we  have  been  enabled  to  give  the 
statures  of  an  individual  corresponding  to  three  diffe- 
rent ages,  sufficiently  distant  from  each  other. 

Although  the  equation  of  which  I  liave  availed 
myself  in  the  calculations,  is  of  the  third  order,  it 
resolves  itself,  like  those  of  the  second,  into  an  un- 
known one,  when  we  give  the  successive  values  of 
the  other.  Considered  as  belonging  to  a  curve,  it 
points  out  to  us  that  there  still  exists  another  branch 
than  the  one  we  are  occupied  with ;  for  to  each  value 
of  the  abscissa  x,  there  are  two  values  of?/. 

The  curve  of  growths  oB  has  an  asymptote  parallel 
to  the  axes  of  the  abscissfe,  situate  at  a  distance  from 
this  axis  equal  to  T,  which  is  the  height  of  man  fully 
developed ;  moreover,  this  curve,  proceeding  from  tlie 
point  0,  which  corresponds  to  birth,  towards  the  thir- 
teenth or  fourteenth  years,  is  sensibly  confounded  with 
an  hyperbola ;  for  in  these  limits,  the  second  term  of 

the  first  order  is  so  small  as  to  be  considered  nothing, 
so  that  we  shall  have — 

1/  =  ax  + 

t  +  x 
T+Tx' 

The  curA'e  oB  does  not  merely  indicate  the  growth 
of  man  from  birth  to  complete  maturity,  but  also  those 
of  the  other  side  of  tlie  axis  Oo ;  that  is  to  say,  for  the 
months  which  precede  birth,  the  results  which  it  pre- 
sents are  conformable  to  those  observed  with  regard  to 
the  foetus.  This  concordance  is  not  always  manifested 
until  towards  the  fifth  or  sixth  month  before  birth, 
which  is  the  age  at  which  the  embryo  becomes  a  foetus. 
It  is,  moreover,  true,  that  before  this  period  the  child 
is  in  a  state  which  hardly  yet  appears  to  belong  to 
human  nature.  The  curve  singularly  represents  this 
state,  if  we  give  any  significance  to  it ;  for  between 
five  and  six  months  before  birth,  it  suddenly  passes 
under  the  axis  oA,  and  the  values  of  statures,  positive 
as  they  were,  become  negative  :  the  curve  in  the 
negative  region  is  lost  in  infinity,  approaching  an 
asymptote  which  corresponds  to  a  value  of  x  =  — | ; 
or,  in  other  words,  at  nine  months  before  birth,  the 
period  of  conception.  Without  occupying  ourselves 
with  the  statm-e  of  the  infant  while  it  is  still  an 
embryo,  or  altogether  imformed,  if  av&  confine  our  cal- 
ciUations  to  the  growth  of  the  foetus  about  five  months 
before  birth,  we  shall  find  the  following  results,  by 
the  side  of  which  are  written  the  results  of  measure- 
ments given  in  the  Dictionnairc  des  Sciaices  Medi- 
cales : — 

Age  of  the  Infant. 

Stature 
Calculated. 

Stature 
Observed. 

Birth, 

1  month  before  birth, 

4 

metres. 
0-50O 
0-404 
0-419 
0-.361 
0-281 
0-165 

metres. 
From  0-487  to  0-541 

-  0-4a3  to  0-487 
~     0-379  to  0-433 
-,    o-»xt  to  0-379 

-  0-216  to  0-3110 

-  0-162  to  0-216 

The  calculated  values  fall,  for  each  montli,  between 
the  limits  of  the  results  of  the  observations.  IMore- 
ovcr,  it  is  well  to  observe  that  these  results  do  not 
carry  the  same  degree  of  exactness  as  those  obtained 
after  birth,  because  of  the  uncertainty  of  the  period 
of  conception,  as  Avell  as  the  varying  duration  of  preg- 
nancy. What  is  most  important  for  us  to  observe 
here,  in  my  opinion,  is  the  law  of  continuity  which 
exists  for  the  groAvth  of  the  child  immediately  l^efore 
and  after  birth.  Admitting  the  appro.ximative  cal- 
culations of  M.  Chaussier,  it  will  l)e  found  that  the 
Joetus  increases  almost  as  much  in  length  in  one  month,  as 
a  child  between  six  and  sixteen  years  does  in  one  year. 

In  Avhat  has  preceded,  I  have  endeavoured  to  point 
out  how  the  development  of  the  stature  of  man  and 
woman  takes  place :  it  now  remains  for  me  to  say 
some  words  on  the  diminution  whicii  this  element 
undergoes  by  age.  From  a  great  number  of  obser- 
vations, of  which  we  shall  make  greater  use  when 
speaking  of  the  corresponding  diminution  of  weight, 
it  appears  that  it  is  chiefly  towards  the  fiftieth  year 
that  the  decrease  becomes  most  apparent,  and  tOAvards 
the  end  of  life  it  amounts  to  about  6  or  7  centimetres 
[2  3-lOth  inches,  or  2  6-lOth  inches].  From  the 
number  of  individuals  who  have  been  measured,  those 
have  been  carefully  excluded  who  were  much  round- 
shouldered,  or  who  could  not  make  themselves  straight 
during  the  observation. 

Ages. 

Stature  of  IMen. 

Stature  of  'Women 

40  years,    - 

1-684  metre. 

1-579  metre. 

50    .  . 

-      1-674     . . 

1-536     .. 

GO    .  . 

1-639     .  . 

1-516     . . 

70    .. 

-      1623     .. 

1-.514     . . 

80    .. 

1-613      .  . 

1-506     .. 

90    .. 

-      1-C13     .  . 

1-505     . . 

ON  MAN. 

G3 

It  may  \->c  asked  if  the  diminution  of  stature  towards 
tlie  end  of  life  is  not  rather  apparent  tlian  real,  and  if 
it  be  not  owing  to  the  circumstance  that  longevity  is 
general]}'  shorter  for  individuals  of  great  stature.  At 
least,  it  would  be  interesting  to  examine  if  the  size 
of  man  has  any  influence  on  the  duration  of  his  life. 

I  shiUl  endeavour,  in  a  few  words,  to  present  such 
of  the  rcsidts  of  my  researches  as  appear  to  me  most 
interesting :  it  is  almost  unnecessary  to  observe  that 
these  results  only  apply  to  Brussels  and  the  province 
of  Brabant. 

1.  The  limits  of  growth  in  the  two  sexes  are  un- 
equal :  tirst,  Iwcausc  woman  is  born  smaller  than 
man ;  second,  because  she  sooner  finishes  her  com- 
plete development ;  third,  because  tlie  annual  increase 
which  she  receives  is  smaller  than  that  of  man. 

2.  The  stature  of  tlie  inhabitant  of  towns,  at  the 
age  of  19,  is  greater  than  that  of  the  country  person 
by  2  to  3  centimetres  [7-lOths  to  1  inch  nearly]. 

."J.  It  does  not  appear  that  tlie  growth  of  man  is 
entirely  completed  at  2')  years  of  age. 

4.  Individuals  who  live  in  allluencc  generally  ex- 
ceed the  average  heigiit :  misery  and  hard  lalxjur,  on 
tlie  contrary,  appear  to  l>e  obstacles  to  growth. 

.').  The  growth  of  the  child,  even  from  several 
months  before  birth  until  complete  development,  fol- 
lows such  a  law  of  continuity,  that  the  increase  dimi- 
nishes successively  witii  age. 

(i.  Iktween  the  oth  and  ICth  years  nearly,  the 
animal  growth  is  pretty  regular,  and  it  is  one-twelftii 
of  the  growth  of  the  foetus  during  the  months  before 
birth. 

7.  Subsequently  to  the  .^Oth  year,  man  and  woman 
undergo  a  diminution  of  stature  which  becomes  more 
and  more  marked,  and  may  amotmt  to  from  6  to  7 
centimetres  [2  .'{-lOths  or  2  u-loth  inches]  nearly, 
about  the  age  of  80  years. 

CHAPTER    II. 

OF  TOE  DEVELOPMKNT  OF  THE  WEIGHT,  AND  OF  ITS  RELATIONS 
TO  THE  DEVELOPMENT  OF  THE  HEIGHT  OF  THE  IIODY. 

1.  AVclght  anil  Iloiglit  at  Different  Ages. 

Uesearches  on  the  height  and  weight  of  new-born 
infants  have  been  made  at  the  Foundling  Hospital 
of  Brussels.  To  ascertain  the  weight,  tiie  ordinary 
biJance  has  been  used ;  but  in  the  different  observa- 
tions, the  weight  of  the  swaddling  clothes  has  Ixeii 
taken.  The  average  values  obtained  for  03  male  and 
.06  female  children,  arc  as  follows : — 

Male  chiKlron, 
Female  children, 

Weight. 
3-20  kilogramnies. 
2-91 

Height. 
0-4f«;  metre.* 
0-4aT    .  .t 

Tims,  from  the  time  of  hirtli,  there  is  an  inequality  in 
the  weight  and  height  of  children  of  the  two  sexes,  and 
this  ine(/ualiti/  is  in  favour  of  males.  The  height  cor- 
responds nearly  with  what  I  have  found  from  other 
observations. 

By  classing  the  infants  who  furnished  the  preced- 
ing average  values  according  to  their  total  weight, 
we  find — 

Infants  Weighing 
From  H)  to  1-5  kilog. 
..  1-5  to  20  .. 
.  .  2  (» to  2-5  . . 
.  .  2-5  to  .30  .  . 
.  .  30  to  3-5  . . 
.  .  3-5  to  4-0  .  . 
..    40  to  4-5    .. 

Hovs.       Oirls.    Total. 

.» 

1 

1 
7 

1 
1 

10 

-  13 

14 

27 

28 

Zi 

.■il 

-  14 

7 

21 

r> 

3 

« 

G3 

56 

119 

♦  Here  those  cliililrcn  only  have  l>cen  nieastired  whose  weiglit 
hart  t)ccn  nscertaincil.  The  number  of  observntion.s  is  greater  than 
I  could  avail  myself  of  in  my  former  researches. 

t  [The  kilogramme  is,  as  nearly  as  powible,  2  l-5th  lbs.  Eng- 
lUi.] 

The  extremes  were  as  follows : — 
Boys. 
Minimum,        -  -    2-34  kilog. 

Maximum, 

4-50 

Girls. 
M2  kUog. 
4-25  .. 

Professor  Richter  has  made  researches  similar  to 
the  preceding  at  the  Foundling  Hospital  of  Moscow  ;* 
and,  according  to  his  observations,  of  44  new-born 
children,  the  sexes  of  whom  are  not  stated,  the  ave- 
rage value  was  9  1-1 5th  pounds  in  weight,  and  18^ 
inches  (Paris)  in  length.  I  regret  that  I  do  not  know 
the  value  of  the  weight  which  he  employed.  The 
height,  which  is  0"501  metres,  new  measure,  is  almost 
precisely  the  same  as  we  have  found  for  boys.  The 
extremes  obtained  by  M.  Richter  were  as  follows : — 

Weight. 

Height. 

Minimum, 

.0  pounds. 

15  inches 

Maximum, 

-  11      .. 

21     .. 

Thus,  the  weight  of  boys  varies  as  1  to  2,  as  I  have 
found  at  Brussels.  The  extremes  of  length  do  not 
differ  so  much,  and  ])resent  v;Uues  which  diflTer  very 
little  from  those  which  we  have  obtained. 

Moreover,  the  extremes,  at  least  of  weight,  may  differ 
as  much  as  the  averages.  We  read  in  the  Dictionnaire 
des  Sciences  Medicates,  article  Fcttus — "  The  researches 
made  at  the  Foundling  IluspitiU,  on  more  than  20,000 
infants,  prove  that  one  infant,  born  at  the  full  period 
and  well-formed,  general!}'  weighs  Cr}  pounds.  Only  a 
very  small  number  of  infants  have  Ix-'en  seen  at  this 
hospital  weighing  lOi  pounds,  or  others  weighing  only 
3  pounds,  or  2  pounds  and  some  ounces."  This  value 
of  Gj  pounds,  or  3*059  kilogrammes,  obtained  from  so 
great  a  number  of  observations,  agrees  verj'  nearly 
witli  the  value  —  3()55  kilogrammes  —  obtained  for 
Brussels,  leaving  out  of  consideration  the  distinction 
of  the  sexes :  the  extreme  values  likewise  present  very 
little  difference. 

It  is  remarkable  that  learned  men  who  have  made 
observations  on  the  weight  and  height  of  new-bom 
infants,  should  have  attended  so  little  to  the  distinc- 
tion of  the  sexes.  Although  our  results  arc  not  de- 
duced from  so  large  a  number  of  observations  as  could 
be  desired,  yet  we  think  we  may  conclude,  with  suffi- 
cient probability,  that  the  average  values  of  the -weight 
and  height  of  children  of  the  two  sexes  present  a  very 
sensible  difference. 

From  all  the  researches  which  have  been  made  on 
the  relations  existing  between  the  Aveight  and  the  age 
of  the  fatus,  it  apjMiars  that  the  ratios  preseut  so  much 
uncertainty,  that  we  can  scarcely  make  any  use  of 
them. 

It  is  M.  Chaussier,  if  I  am  not  mistaken,  who  has 
made  the  remark,  that  an  infant  diminishes  a  little  in 
weight  immediately  after  birth.  This  curious  remark 
deserves  to  be  carefully  verified :  unfortunately,  I  have 
only  Ijeen  able  to  procure  seven  series  of  observations, 
which  do  not  extend  beyond  the  seventh  day  after 
birtli.  The  average  calculations  for  each  day  present 
the  following  values : — 

Afterbirth, 
On  the  2d  <Liy, 

. .      M    .. 

..  4tb  . . 
.5th  .  . 

. .      fith  . . 

. .      7th  . . 

Weight  of  the  Infant. 
3126  kilog. 

3-057  .. 

3017  .  . 

30.35  .  . 

SiOf)  .  . 

3-035  .  . 

3-OCO  .  . 

It  really  appears,  then,  from  these  numbers,  that 
the  weight  of  the  child  diminishes  a  little  immediately  after 
birth,  and"tliat  it  does  not  Ijegin  to  increase  in  a  sen- 
sible manner  until  after  the  first  week. 

*  Synnps,  Pr.oxis  Medico  Obstctriciir :  1810. 

64 

ON  MAN. 

Thus  we  see  that,  from  birth,  there  is  an  mequality 
in  the  weight  of  children  of  the  two  sexes :  hoAv- 
ever,  we  shall  examine  if  this  inequality  is  pro- 
duced again  at  different  ages,  and  examine  the 
modifications  which  it  undergoes.  I  have  already 
stated  the  analogous  results  for  height ;  nevertheless, 
I  thought  it  would  be  useful  to  state  again  the  new 
numbers  which  have  been  obtained  from  the  indi- 
viduals of  both  sexes,  on  whom  observations  Avere 
made  to  determine  the  weight.  It  Avas  interesting 
to  place  these  tAvo  elements,  during  their  progi-es- 
sive  development  in  the  same  individual,  opposite 
each  other. 

In  estimating  the  weight,  I  have  generally  used  the 
balance  of  Sanctorius.  Since  this  balance  is  not  so 
sensible  when  slightly  charged,  and  also  since  great 
care  is  required  in  placing  the  bodies  to  be  weighed 
by  it,  children  of  tender  age  haA'e  been  almost  con- 
stantly Aveighed  in  the  arms  of  persons  whose  weight 
had  previously  been  taken. 

Tlie  observations  on  children  from  4  to  12  years  of 
age,  have  for  the  most  part  been  made  in  the  schools 
of  Brussels  and  at  the  Orphan  Hospital.  The  weights 
of  young  persons  have  been  taken  more  especially  in 
the  colleges  and  at  the  Medical  School  of  Brussels. 
For  more  advanced  ages,  indiAiduals  of  different  classes 

have  been  taken,  though  those  of  the  loAver  orders 
liaA'e  been  least  numerous. 

For  old  men,  the  Aveights  have  chiefly  been  taken 
in  the  large  and  magnificent  hospital  recently  erected 
at  Brussels.  The  tAvo  folloAving  tables  point  out  the 
results,  such  as  they  are,  for  men  and  women. 

The  first  column  gives  the  ages;  the  second  and 
third  point  out  the  average  A-^alues  of  the  height  and 
Aveight  Avhich  correspond  to  these  different  ages.  The 
values  of  the  height  are  almost  the  same  as  those 
previously  giA'en,  except  for  individuals  Avho  are  more 
than  16  or  17  years  of  age;  which  no  doubt  arises 
from  indiA'iduals  of  the  loAver  class  having  been  less 
numerous  in  these  than  in  the  former  observations. 
Indeed,  I  haA'e  already  shoAvn  that  young  persons  who 
apply  themselves  to  study,  and  persons  in  the  aflluent 
classes  generally,  are  taUer  than  others.  In  the  third 
column,  the  ratios  of  Aveight  and  size  for  different 
ages  are  calculated,  their  A-alues  being  considered  as 
abstract  numbers.  Tliese  ratios  are  not  deduced  im- 
mediately from  the  numbers  contained  in  the  two 
preceding  columns,  but  are  the  average  of  the  ratios 
calculated  for  each  individual.  In  the  last  place,  the 
four  last  columns  point  out  the  maximum  and  mini- 
mum of  height  and  weight  at  each  age,  for  individuals 
Avho  are  Avell-formed. 

Table  of  the  Size  and  "Weight  of  Man  at  Different  Ages. 

Table  of  the  Size  and  Weight  of  Woman  at  Different  Ages. 

Ratio  of 

Size 
Observed. 

AVeight 
Observed. 

Ratio  of 

Size 
Observed- 

AVeight 
Observed. 

Ages. 

Size. 

AVeight. 

AA'eight 
to  Size. 

Ages. 

Size. 

AVeight. 

AA'^eight 
to  Size. 

Max. 

Min. 

Max. 

Min. 

Max. 

Min. 

Mas. 

Min. 

met. 

kilog. 

met. 

met. 

kilog. 

kilfig. 

met. 

kilog. 

met. 

met. 

kilog. 

kilog. 

Birth, 

0-496 

3-20 

6-19 

0-532 

0-433 

4-50 

2-34 

Birth, 

0-483 

2-91 

G-15 

0-655 

0-438 

4-25 

1-12 

1  year, 

0-696 

1000 

14-20 

0-750 

0-682 

]i-no 

.0-00 

1  year, 

0-690 

9-30 

13-50 

0-704 

0-660 

10-5 

8-3 

2      .. 

0-797 

1200 

15-00 

0-824 

0-730 

13-50 

10-50 

2      .. 

0-780 

11-40 

14-50 

0-798 

0-720 

12-0 

8-3 

3      .. 

0-860 

13-21 

15-.'36 

0-875 

0-840 

13-fjO 

12-10 

3      .. 

0-850 

12 -45 

14-70 

0-895 

0-795 

15-8 

10-5 

4      .. 

0-932 

15-(I7 

16-32 

0-965 

0-840 

18-20 

12-50 

4      ..  - 

0-910 

14-18 

15-10 

0-.050 

0-810 

15-8 

11-5 

6      .. 

0-990 

16-70 

16-98 

1-080 

0-915 

18-50 

14-00 

5 

0-974 

15-50 

15-70 

1-1185 

0-876 

17-5 

13-3 

6      .. 

1-046 

18-04 

17-44 

1-115 

0-9G0 

20-40 

15-80 

6      .. 

1032 

16-74 

10-24 

1-085 

0-956 

20-3 

13-3 

7     .. 

1-112 

20-16 

18-31 

1.162 

1-109 

24-50 

17-20 

7     .. 

1-096 

18-45 

16-85 

1-177 

1-050 

23-4 

16-0 

8      .. 

1-170 

22-26 

18-92 

1-260 

1-120 

28-50 

19-00 

8      .. 

1-139 

19-82 

17-45 

1-380 

1-050 

23-4 

16-0 

9      .. 

1-227 

24-09 

19-68 

1-325 

1-1.50 

29-00 

22-20 

9      .. 

1-200 

22-44 

18-65 

1-.380 

1-110 

25-7 

18-3 

10      .. 

1-282 

2612 

20-37 

1-325* 

1-163 

32-00 

22-70 

10      .. 

1-248 

24-24 

19-45 

1-380 

1-160 

28-3 

20-3 

11      .. 

1-327 

27-85 

21-58 

1-405 

1-215 

33-80 

25-00 

11      .. 

1-275 

26-25 

20-60 

1-385 

1-160 

39-8 

21-6 

12      .. 

V359 

3100 

22-80 

1-450 

1-270 

36-30 

25-00 

12      .. 

1-327 

30-54 

23-00 

1-4/6 

1-160 

42-3 

21-6 

13      .  . 

1-403 

35-32 

25-30 

1-490 

1-300 

39-50 

34-60 

13      .. 

1-386 

34-65 

24-50 

1-580 

1-160 

42-8 

21-6 

14      .. 

1-487 

40-50 

27-49 

1-030 

1-.330 

45-00 

37-00 

14      .  . 

1-447 

38-10 

25-35 

1-580 

1160 

51-0 

32-0 

15      .. 

1-5.59 

46-41 

29-88 

1-658 

1-380 

61-50 

37-00 

15      .. 

1-475 

41-30 

28-10 

1-638 

1-160 

55-2 

.32-0 

16      .. 

1-610 

63-39 

33-00 

1-730 

1-430 

61-50 

40-00 

16      .. 

1-600 

44-44 

29-62 

1-638 

1-160 

57-6 

320 

17     .. 

1-670 

57-40 

34-25 

1-790 

1-407 

65-50 

45-00 

17     .. 

1-544 

49-08 

31-75 

1-688 

1-284 

61-6 

18      .. 

1-700 

61-26 

35-67 

1-7.00 

67-00 

45-00 

18      .. 

1-5G2 

.53-10 

34-05 

1-740 

79-9 

19      .. 

1-706 

63-32 

37-00 

1-800 

70-00 

48-20 

20      .. 

1-570 

54-46 

34-70 

20      .. 

1-711 

65-00 

37-99 

1-838 

72-70 

25      .. 

1-577 

55-08 

35-26 

25      .. 

1722 

68-29 

39-66 

1-890 

98-50 

, , 

30      .  . 

1-579 

55-14 

35-90 

30      .. 

1-722 

68-90 

40-02 

40      .  . 

1-555 

50-65 

36-50 

40      .. 

1-713 

68-81 

40-03 

50      .  . 

1-536 

.58-45 

38-15 

1-4-14 

90-5 

.39-8 

50      .. 

1-674 

67-45 

40-14 

00      .  . 

1-516 

56-73 

37-28 

1-436 

60      .. 

1-639 

65-50 

40-01 

70      .. 

1-514 

63-72 

35-49 

1-431 

93-8 

70      .. 

1-623 

63-03 

38-83 

49-i 

80      .. 

1-506 

51-52 

34-21 

iVoi 

1-408 

72-5 

38-0 

80      .. 

1-613 

61-22 

37-96 

1-820 

1-467 

8300 

49-7 

The  numbers  in  the  preceding  tables  arc  such  as 
have  been  obtamed  from  direct  observation ;  but  thcj' 
must  be  subjected  to  tAvo  corrections — in  the  first 
place,  because  the  persons  have  always  been  Aveighed 
in  their  dresses ;  and,  secondly,  because  observations 
have  not  been  made  on  all  classes  of  society. 

The  first  cause  of  error  Avhich  has  been  pointed 
out,  may  be  removed,  or  at  least  diminished  to  some 
extent.  The  aA'erage  Aveight  of  the  clothes  at  different 
ages  may  be  determined  very  precisely,  and  then  it  is 
only  necessary  to  subtract  its  value  from  each  of  the 
corresponding  numbers  of  the  table  of  Aveights.  Erora 
different  experiments,  I  think  Ave  may  admit,  as  near 
the  truth,  that  the  average  Aveight  of  tlie  clothes  at 
different  ages  is  one-eighteenth  of  the  total  weight 

*  When  a  number  is  repeated,  it  ie  because  the  maximmn  of 
this  year  was  less  tlian  that  of  the  preceding.  The  inverse  takes 
place  in  the  cohimn  of  the  minima. 

of  the  male  body,  and  a  twenty-fourth  jiart  of  the 
total  weight  of  the  female.  With  this  value,  I  have 
corrected  the  numbers  of  the  preceding  table,  except 
for  ncAv-born  infants,  because  the  numbers  had  already 
undergone  this  correction,  from  direct  experiment, 
immediately  after  weighing  them  [the  infants]. 

The  second  cause  of  error  raaj'^  also  be  remoA'ed : 
indeed,  Ave  shall  soon  see,  that  of  individuals  of  the 
same  age,  the  Aveight  may  be  considered  as  having  a 
pretty  constant  relation  to  the  size  of  the  body.  It 
Avill  be  sufiicient,  then,  to  knoAv  the  ratios  inserted  in 
the  fourth  colunm  of  the  preceding  tables,  and  to  have 
a  good  general  table  of  the  groAvths,  to  deduce  the 
corresponding  table  of  the  Aveight.  It  is  in  making 
use  of  the  tabic  of  growths  given  above,  and  constructed 
Avith  elements  collected  from  all  classes  of  society, 
that  I  have  calculated  the  following  table,  in  which 
I  have  also  made  the  necessary  correction  for  cloth- 
ing :— 

ON  MAN. 

G5 

Tublc  of  the  Development  of  the  Ileight  and  Weight. 

iWen. 

Women. 

Ages. 

Height. 

Weight. 

Height. 

AVeight. 

metres. 

kilog. 

metres. 

kilog. 

Birth, 

0-500 

3-20 

0-490 

2-91 

1  year,    - 

0-698 

9-45 

0-690 

8-79 

2    « 

0-791 

11-34 

0-781 

10-67 

3    - 

0-864 

12-47 

0-852 

11-79 

4    ~ 

0-928 

14-23  ■ 

0-915 

13-00 

5    ~         - 

0-988 

15-77 

0-974 

14-36 

6    - 

1-047 

17-24 

1-031 

1600 

7    ~       -       - 

1-105 

19-10 

1-086 

17-54 

8    ~ 

1162 

20-76 

1-141 

19-08 

9    ~         - 

1-219 

22-65 

1-195 

21-36 

10    ~ 

1-275 

24-52 

1-248 

23-52 

11    -         -         - 

1-330 

27-10 

1-299 

25-65 

12    ~ 

laas 

29-82 

1-353 

29-82 

13    -         - 

1-4.39 

34-38 

1-403 

32-94 

14    - 

1-493 

38-76 

1-453 

36-70 

15    ~ 

1-546 

43-62 

1-499 

40-37 

16    - 

1-594 

49-67 

1-535 

43-57 

17    -- 

1-634 

52-85 

1-555 

47-31 

18    ~ 

1-658 

57-85 

1-564 

51-03 

20    ~         - 

1G74 

60-oe 

1-572 

52-28 

1-680 

62-93 

1.577 

53-28 

30    -         -         -* 

1-684 

63-65 

1-579 

54-33 

40    ~ 

1-C84 

C3-67 

1-579 

55-23 

50    ~ 

1-674 

63-46 

1-536 

56-16 

60    ~ 

1-639 

61-94 

1-516 

54-30 

70    ~         -         - 

1-G23 

59-52 

1-514 

51-51 

80    „ 

1-613 

57-83 

1-506 

49-.37 

90    -         - 

1-613 

57-83 

1-505 

49-34 

To  render  the  preceding  results  more  apparent,  I 
liave  constructed  two  lines,  -which  represent  the  increase 
of  weight  which  men  and  women  undergo  at  different 
ages :  these  Unes  have,  for  abscissae,  the  ages,  and  for 
ordinates,  the  corresponding  Aveiglits.  We  perceive, 
at  the  first  glance,  that,  at  equal  ages,  man  is  generallu 
heavier  than  woman ;  about  the  age  of  twelve  years  only 
are  individuals  of  both  sexes  nearly  of  the  same  weight. 
This  circumstance  is  owing  to  the  development  of  tlie 
weight  being  inconsiderable  in  both  sexes,  until  the 
time  of  puberty,  when,  on  the  contrary,  it  becomes 
very  apparent.  I^ow,  since  puberty  takes  place  sooner 
in  woman,  this  acceleration  causes  a  temporary  dis- 
appearance of  the  inequality  of  weight  which  existed 
between  children  of  both  sexes,  and  which  is,  for  chil- 
dren between  one  and  eleven  years  of  age,  from  one 
kilogramme  to  one  and  a  half.  The  ditference  of 
weight  of  the  sexes  is  more  considerable  in  adult  per- 
sons ;  it  is  about  five  kilogrammes  between  the  six- 
teenth and  twentieth  years,  and  more  than  seven  after 
this  period. 

3Ian  reaches  his  maximum  of  tveight  about  the  age  of 
40,  and  he  begins  to  waste  in  a  sensible  manner  about 
the  age  of  60  ;  at  the  age  of  80  he  has  lost  about  six  kilo- 
grammes [16  lbs.  troy].  His  height  has  also  diminished, 
and  this  diminution  is  about  seven  centimetres  [2  7-lOths 
inches]. 

The  same  observation  applies  to  women:  in  old 
age,  they  generally  lose  from  six  to  seven  kilogrammes 
in  weight,  and  seven  centimetres  in  stature.  I  have 
taken  care  not  to  include  ricketty  indi\'iduals  in  these 
valuations,  or  badly  formed  persons,  or  even  those 
who  were  round-shouldered,  and  unable  to  stand  up- 
right for  many  minutes. 

Woman  attains  her  maximum  of  tveight  later  than 
man;  she  weighs  the  most  about  the  age  of  50  years: 
setting  out  from  about  the  age  of  19,  the  development 
of  her  Aveight  is  nearly  stationary,  until  the  period  of 
procreation  is  passed. 

The  extreme  limits  of  the  weight  of  weU-formed 
individuals  have  been  49*1  and  98-5  kilogrammes  for 
men ;  and  for  women  .39*8  and  93'8  kilogrammes. 

The  limits  of  height  have  been  1-467  and  1-890 
metres  for  men;  and  1-444  and  1-740  metres  for 
women. 

The  average  weight  at  19  years,  is  nearly  tliat  of 
old  persons  of  the  two  sexes; 

When  man  and  woman  have  attained  their  complete 

development,  they  weigh  nearly  exactly  twenty  times  as 
nmch  as  at  birth;  whilst  the  height  is  only  about 
three  and  one-fourth  times  what  it  was  at  the  same 
period. 

One  year  after  birth,  children  of  both  sexes  have 
tripled  their  weight ;  boys  weigh  9-45  kilogrammes, 
and  girls  8-79  kilogrammes.  At  6  years,  they  have 
doubled  this  latter  weight,  and  at  13,  they  have  quad- 
rupled it. 

Immediately  before  puberty,  man  and  woman  have 
one-half  the  weight  wliich  they  have  after  their  com- 
plete development. 

I  am  indebted  to  the  kindness  of  M.  Villerme  for 
tlie  communication  of  the  unpublished  researches  of 
Tenon  on  tlie  weight  of  man,  which  appear  to  have 
been  made  in  1783.  Tliey  were  made  in  a  village  in 
the  environs  of  Paris— the  village  of  Massy — where 
Tenon  had  his  country  house.  These  researches,  which 
comprise  observations  on  60  men  between  25  and  40 
years  of  age,  and  as  many  women  of  the  same  ages, 
give  the  foUowuig  results : — 

JMaximmn. 

Jlinimum. 

Average. 

kilog. 

kilog. 

kilog. 

Weight  of  man, 

83-307 

51-398 

62-071 

woman, 

-     7-i-038 

36-805 

54-916 

In  all  these  observations,  the  weight  of  the  clothes 
has  been  subtracted,  and  care  has  been  taken  not  to 
include  any  female  Avho  was  pregnant. 

If  we  now  compare  these  numbers  Avith  tliose  I 
obtained  at  Cambridge,  made  on  men  from  18  to  23 
years  of  age,  weighed  with  clothes,  we  shall  find, 
dividing  into  series  of  tens  the  80  individuals  whose 
weights  were  obtained — ■ 

1st  series, 

2d  - 

3d  ~ 

4th  ~ 

6th  ~ 

6th  ~ 

7th  - 

8th  ~ 

Stones. 

Poimd 

108 

9 

111 

^2i 

114 

6S 

101 

Oi 

102 

5 

107 

12i 

103 

6i 

112 

2i 

Average, 

107 

Wliicli  gives,  for  the  weight  of  one  individual,  about 
151  pounds,  or  68-465  kilogrammes,  which  is  nearly 
the  weight  of  a  man  of  30  in  Brabant,  when  weighed 
with  his  clothes  on. 

If,  on  the  other  hand,  we  compare  the  weight  of 
children  of  the  lower  classes  in  England,  we  shall  find 
the  following  results,  which  have  been  communicated 
to  me  by  Mr  J.  W.  Cowell,  taken  on  420  boys  work- 
ing in  the  factories,  and  223  not  Avorking  in  fac- 
tories ;  and  651  girls  working  ia  factories,  and  201  not 
working  in  those  places. 

Average  Weight  of  Children  of  the  Lower  Orders. 

Boys 

Gu-ls 

Ages. 

Working  in 

-1 
notAVorking 

( 
AVorking  in 

1 
notAVorking 

Factories. 

in  Factories. 

Factories. 

in  Factories. 

kilog. 

kilog. 

kilog. 

kilog. 

9  years, 

23-47 

24-15 

23-18 

22-87 

10     -, 

25-84 

27-33 

24-85 

24-68 

11     - 

2804 

26-46 

27-06 

27-72 

12     - 

29-91 

30-49 

29-96 

29-!W 

13     - 

32-69 

34-17 

33-21 

32-97 

14     « 

34-.95 

,35-67 

37-83 

37-83 

Ip     - 

4(1-06 

39-37 

a9-84 

42-44 

16     ~ 

44-43 

50-01 

43-62 

41-33 

17     - 

47-3<i 

53-41 

45-44 

46-45 

18     - 

4812 

57-27 

48-22 

55-32 

These  numbers  Avere  collected  at  Manchester  and 
Stockport ;  the  children  were  Aveighed  in  summer, 
and  consequently  were  lightly  clothed,  and  they  had 
nothing  in  their  pockets.    We  see  here  again,  as  in 

66 

ON  MAN. 

the  height,  that  it  is  only  after  puberty  that,  at  equal 
ages,  we  observe  a  ditference  in  weight.  The  com- 
parison of  Aveights  seems  to  be  rather  in  favour  of 
Belgic  children ;  it  is  true  that  those  of  England  Avere 
taken  from  the  lower  orders. 

2.  Relations  between  the  Weight  and  Height. 

If  man  increased  equally  in  aU  his  dimensions,  his 
weight  at  different  ages  would  be  as  the  cube  of  his 
height.  Now,  this  is  not  what  we  really  observe. 
The  increase  of  weight  is  slower,  except  during  the 
first  year  after  birth ;  then  the  proportion  Avhich  we 
have  just  pointed  out  is  pretty  regularly  observed. 
But  after  this  period,  and  until  near  the  age  of 
puberty,  the  weight  increases  nearly  as  the  square  of 
the  height.  The  development  of  the  weight  again 
becomes  very  rapid  at  the  time  of  puberty,  and  almost 
stops  at  the  twenty-fifth  year.  In  general,  we  do  not 
err  much  when  we  assume  that,  durhig  development, 
the  squares  of  the  iveight  at  different  ages  are  as  the  fifth 
powers  of  the  height;  which  naturally  leads  to  this 
conclusion,  in  supposing  the  specific  gravity  constant, 
that  the  transverse  growth  of  man  is  less  than  the 
A'ertical. 

However,  if  we  compare  two  individuals  who  are 
fully  developed  and  well-formed  with  each  other,  to 
ascertain  the  relations  existing  between  the  weight 
and  stature,  we  shall  find  that  the  u-eight  of  developed 
persons,  of  different  heights,  is  nearly  as  the  square 
of  the  stature^  Whence  it  naturally  follows,  that  a 
transverse  section,  giving  both  the  breadth  and  thickness, 
is  just  proportioned  to  the  height  of  the  individual.  "We 
furthermore  conclude  that,  proportion  still  being  at- 
tended to  width  predominates  in  individuals  of  small 
stature. 

Taking  twelve  of  the  smallest  individuals  of  both 
sexes,  and  twelve  of  the  largest,  of  those  who  have 
been  submitted  to  our  observations,  we  have  obtained 
the  following  values  as  the  average  of  stature,  and 
the  ratio  of  weight  to  the  stature : — 

Uelation  of  Stature  to  AVeight. 

Men. 

The  smallest, 
The  largest, 

"Women. 
The  smallest, 
The  largest, 

1.511  metre. 
1-822     .  . 

1-456 
1-672 

Ratio  of  AVeight 
to  Stature. 
36-7  kUog. 
41-4    . . 

35-6 
,38-0 

Thus,  the  stature  of  men  and  women,  fully  deve- 
loped and  weU-formed,  varied  in  the  proportion  of 
five  to  six  nearly:  it  is  almost  the  same  with  the 
ratios  of  the  weight  to  the  stature  of  the  two  sexes  ; 
whence  it  naturally  follows,  as  we  have  already  said 
above,  that  the  weight  is  in  proportion  to  the  square 
of  the  stature.* 

Now,  let  us  suppose  that  we  have  tlie  individuals 
gi'ouped,  not  according  to  age,  but  to  stature,  and 
that  we  have  taken  the  average  of  the  weight  of  each 
group,  for  example,  and  that  we  proceed  by  ten  cen- 
timetres at  a  time :  avc  shall  have  groups  of  children 
at  first,  then  groups  of  children  witli  whoiu  some 
adult  persons  are  classed,  which  will  be  the  case  with 
men  commencing  at  1"47  metres  nearlj%  and  women 
at  1'41  metres.  If  we  afterwards  reduce  these  num- 
bers to  a  tabular  form,  we  shall  arrive  at  the  follow- 
ing results,  the  weight  of  the  clotlas  having  been 
subtracted : — 

*  Calling  t  and  T  the  statures,  and  p  and  P  the  con-esponding 
weights  of  the  smallest  and  the  largest  individuals,  we  have,  in 
fact,  almost  exactly,  <  :  T  ; :  5:6,  by  the  numbers  of  the  first 

p    V 
column,  belonging  to  men,  and  .  •  ^•-  5  :  6  for  those  of  the 

},    i> 

second ;  from  which  we  find  that  t  :  T  : :  -i-  :  —  ,    ci-,   in   other 

T' 

words,  <2  :  T- : :  p:  V.  It  is  the  same  with  the  numbers  belonging 
to  females. 

Men. 

Women. 

Stature. 

Weight. 

Ratio. 

Weight. 

Ratio. 

At  Birth,      - 

3-20 

6-19 

2-91 

6-03 

(J-GO  metre, 

6-20 

10-33 

„ 

„ 

0-70      ~ 

9-30 

13-27 

9-06 

12-94 

0-80      ~. 

11-36 

14-20 

11 -21 

14-01 

0-yil      -, 

13-50 

15-00 

13-42 

14-91 

1-00       ~ 

15-90 

15-90 

15-82 

15-82 

1-10       ~ 

18-50 

16-82 

18-30 

16-64 

1-20       ~ 

21-72 

18-10 

21-51 

17-82 

1-30       « 

26-63 

20-04 

26-83 

20-64 

1--10        ~ 

34-48 

24-63 

37-28 

26-63 

1-50       - 

46-29 

30-86 

48-00 

32-00 

i-(;o     „ 

57-15 

35-72 

56-73 

35-45 

1-70     - 

63-28 

37-22 

65-20 

33-35 

l-iiO       - 

70-61 

39-23 

„ 

„ 

l-f|0       - 

75-56 

39-77 

~ 

-- 

We  see  that,  statures  being  equal,  woman  weighs 
a  little  less  than  man  until  she  attains  the  height  of 
1  metre  3  decimetres,  which  nearly  corresponds  to 
the  period  of  puberty,  and  that  she  weighs  a  little 
more  for  higher  statures.  This  difference,  for  the 
most  part,  proceeds  from  aged  females  being  mingled 
with  groups  of  a  moderate  stature  sooner  than  males 
are ;  and,  at  equal  statures,  as  we  have  already  stated, 
aged  persons  weigh  more  than  young  ones. 

To  apply  the  preceding  to  determine  the  age  of  a 
noii-adult  person,  from  a  knowledge  of  the  weight  and 
stature  onl}^  let  us  suppose  the  height  of  the  person 
to  be  1"23  metre,  and  the  weight  24  kilogrammes,  he 
being,  moreover,  of  the  male  sex.  We  shall  imme- 
diately see,  from  the  preceding  table,  that  he  is  heavy 
in  proportion  to  his  stature ;  the  table  before  informs 
lis  that,  by  taking  the  height  alone,  he  ought  to  be  a 
Uttle  more  than  nine  years  of  age,  and  considering 
the  weight  alone,  he  should  be  under  ten ;  so  that  we 
may  pronounce,  with  great  probability  of  truth,  that 
the  individual  in  question  must  be  between  nine  and 
ten. 

3.  Weiglit  of  a  Population. — Weight  of  the  Human  Skeleton. 

The  following  table  may  serve  to  determii:e  the 
weight  of  a  population  composed  of  men,  women,  and 
children,  or  of  a  population  composed  of  individuals 
of  certain  limited  ages :  it  has  been  formed  by  taking 
the  numbers  belonging  to  eacli  age  from  a  population 
table,  and  multiplying  them  by  the  weight  of  indi- 
viduals of  this  age.* 

Table  of  tlie  Weight  of  a  Population  of  10,000  Souls. 

Ages. 

Jlen. 

Women. 

Tot.-il. 

kilog. 

kilog. 

kilog. 

0  to    1  year, 

0-894 

0-803 

1-697 

1  to    2 

1-462 

1-324 

2-786 

2to    3    ~ 

l-5ft4 

1-372 

2-876 

3  to   4 

1-676 

1-485 

3-161 

4  to    5    ~- 

1-864 

1-658 

3-522 

5  to   6    « 

2-017 

1-765 

3-782 

6to    8    ~ 

4.251 

3-786 

8-037 

8  to  10    - 

4-768 

4-318 

9-086 

10  to  12    - 

5263 

4-827 

10-090 

12  to  14    « 

6-332 

5-977 

12-.309 

14  to  16    ~ 

8-805 

7-801 

16-606 

16  to  20    - 

18-902 

17-700 

36-602 

20  to  25     - 

25-292 

23-.308 

48-600 

25  to  30    „ 

25-603 

22-770 

48-373 

30  to  40    - 

.39-396 

39-.548 

78-944 

40  to  50     -          .        .  - 

28-720 

31-470 

60-190      , 

.50  to  60    " 

24122 

24-634 

48-756 

60  to  70    -         -         -         - 

23-620 

16-458 

40-118 

70  to  80    ~ 

9-620 

7-808 

17-428 

80  and  upwards, 

2-320 

1-998 

4-318 

Total,     - 

236-471 

220-810 

4.)7-281 

*  Tlie  population  table  made  use  of  in  these  calculations  is  one 
which  will  be  found  above,  taken  from  the  Recherdies  sur  la 
MortalUi  ct  la  Ufprodiuiion.   nnixclles :  18.32. 

ON  MAN. 

67 

Tims,  taking  at  once  a  population  of  10,000  souls, 
without  distinction  of  age  or  sex,  the  weight  will  be 
457,000  kilogrammes  nearly,  236,000  being  that  of 
the  male  portion.  Thus  we  see  that  the  average  vwight 
of  an  individual,  without  reference  to  age  or  sex,  is  45'7 
kilogrammes  nearly ;  and,  considering  the  sexes,  47  kih- 
gramvies  for  a  man  [125  9-lOths  lbs.  troy],  ajid  42^ 
kilogrammes  for  a  ivoman  [74  lbs.  troy].  The  whole 
population  of  Brussels,  which  amounts  to  100,000, 
would  weigh  4,572,810  kilogrammes  ;  or  nearly  four 
and  a  half  times  as  much  as  a  cube  of  water  10 
metres  square :  and  the  whole  human  race,  computed 
at  737,000,000,  would  not  weigh  as  much  as  33  cubes 
of  water  100  metres  square :  a  value  Avhieh  at  first 
sight  appears  small,  since  such  a  volume  of  water 
might  be  contained  in  a  basin  having  a  surface  of 
less  than  one-third  of  an  acre  [hectare'],  and  a  depth 
of  100  metres. 

To  the  preceding  data,  I  shall  add  some  measure- 
ments of  the  human  skeleton,  which  have  been  com- 
municated to  me  by  MM.  Van  Esschen  and  Guiette. 
They  Avill  throw  additional  light  on  our  present  sub- 
ject. 

Dimensions. 

Numher  of  Slceletons. 

No.  1.* 

No.  2.t 

No.  3.% 

No.4.§ 

No.  5.  II 

kilog. 

Idlog. 

kilog. 

kilog. 

kilog. 

AVeights,      - 

4-2 

4-4 

5-7 

5-2 

3-0 

met. 

met. 

met. 

met. 

met. 

Statures, 

1-685 

1-640 

1-067 

1-7.55 

1-500 

Height  of  head,    - 

0-13U 

0-134 

0-136 

0-135 

0-135 

~.     of  spinal  column, 

0-590 

0-560 

0-563 

0-550 

0-470 

^     of  pelvis. 

0-210 

0-1G6 

0-182 

0-225 

0-152 

Length  of  the  upper) 
extremities,       i 

0-779 

0-735 

0-754 

0-790 

0-662 

Length  of  the  lower) 
extremities,       > 

0-917 

0-870 

0-885 

0-970 

0-800 

The  two  last  skeletons,  belonging  to  females,  did 
not  present  any  essential  difference  from  the  three 
first,  which  were  males. 

We  see,  from  the  preceding  table,  that  tlie  weight 
of  a  skeleton  prepared  some  years,  scarcely  exceeds 
the  weight  of  a  child  at  birth. 

From  tlie  foregoing,  we  deduce  the  following  con- 
clusions : — 

1.  From  birth  there  is  an  inequality,  both  in  weight 
and  stature,  between  children  of  the  two  sexes ;  the 
average  weight  of  a  boy  being  3-20  kilogrammes 
[8  5-lOths  lbs.  troy],  that  of  a  girl  2-91  kilogrammes 
[7  7-lOths  lbs.  troy]  ;  the  stature  of  a  boy  is  0-496 
metres,  and  that  of  a  girl  0*483  metres. 

2.  The  weight  of  a  child  diminishes  a  little  towards 
the  third  day  after  birth,  and  does  not  begin  to  in- 
crease sensibly  until  after  the  first  week. 

3.  At  equal  ages,  man  is  generally  heavier  than 
woman  :  about  the  age  of  12  years  only  are  the  indi- 
viduals of  both  sexes  of  about  the  same  weight.  Be- 
tween 1  and  1 1  years,  the  difference  in  weight  is  from 
one  kilogranmie  to  one  and  a  half;  between  16  and 
20,  it  is  six  kilogrammes  nearly ;  and  after  this  period 
eight  to  nine  kilogrammes. 

4.  When  man  and  woman  have  attained  their  full 
development,  they  weigh  almost  exactly  twenty  times 
as  much  as  at  birth ;  and  their  stature  is  about  three 
and  one- fourth  times  greater  than  it  was  at  the  same 
period, 

*  No.  1.  Natiu-al  skeleton  of  a  man  of  about  thirty-five  years 
of  age,  prepared  seven  years. 

t  No.  2.  Skeleton  of  a  man  about  twenty -five  years  of  age,  pre- 
pared six  years. 

t  No.  3.  Skeleton  of  a  man.  Age  and  date  of  the  preparation 
unlmown. 

§  No.  4.  Skeleton  of  a  woman.  Age  and  date  of  the  preparation 
imknown. 

I!  No.  5.  Skeleton  of  a  woman  aged  fifteen  years,  prepared  one 
ye.ir. 

5.  In  old  age,  man  and  woman  lose  about  six  or 
seven  kilogrammes  in  weight,  and  seven  centimetres 
in  stature. 

6.  During  the  development  of  individuals  of  both 
sexes,  we  may  consider  the  square  of  the  weight,  at 
different  ages,  as  proportioned  to  the  fifth  power  of 
their  stature. 

7.  After  the  full  development  of  individuals  of  both 
sexes,  the  weight  is  almost  as  the  square  of  the  sta- 
ture. 

From  the  two  preceding  relations,  we  infer,  that 
increase  in  height  is  greater  than  the  transverse  in- 
crease, including  breadth  and  thickness. 

8.  Man  attains  the  maxinmm  of  his  weight  at  about 
40,  and  begins  to  waste  in  a  sensible  degree  about  the 
60th  year. 

9.  Woman  attains  the  maximum  of  her  weight 
about  the  age  of  50.  During  the  period  of  reproduc- 
tion, namely,  from  the  18th  to  the  40th  year,  her 
weight  scarcely  increases  in  a  perceptible  degree. 

10.  The  weight  of  individuals  who  have  been  mea- 
sured, aud  who  were  fully  developed  and  well-formed, 
varies  within  extremes  which  are  nearly  as  1  to  2 ; 
whilst  the  stature  only  varies  within  limits  which,  at 
the  most,  are  a,s  1  to  1^.  This  is  inferred  from  the 
following  values,  furnished  by  observation  : — 

Maximum. 
AVcight  of  man,         98-5  kilog. 

woman,    93-8    ~ 
Statm-eof  man,       1-890  met. 
~  woman,  1-740    ™ 

49-1  kilog. 
39-8    - 
1-407  met. 

03-7  kilog. 

55-2    ~ 
1-084  met. 
1-57.9    ~ 

1 1.  At  equal  statures,  woman  weighs  a  little  less 
than  man  before  reaching  the  height  of  1"3  metres, 
which  almost  corresponds  to  the  period  of  puberty ; 
and  she  weighs  a  little  more  for  higher  statures. 

12.  The  average  weight  of  an  individual,  without 
reference  to  age  or  sex,  is  45*7  kilogrammes ;  and, 
taking  sex  into  account,  47  kilogrammes  for  man,  and 
42  "5  kilogrammes  for  woman. 

CHAPTER  III. 

OF  THE  DEVELOPMENT  OF  STRENGTH  OR  POWER. 

The  measure  of  strength  is  one  of  the  elements  which 
we  are  most  anxious  to  ascertain  with  some  degree 
of  precision;  not  merely  because  this  subject  of  in- 
vestigation has  occupied  the  attention  of  many  ob- 
servers ;  but  since  their  principal  object  was  to  ascer- 
tain the  useful  effect  of  power,  what  they  have  done 
has  a  characteristic  nature,  which  distinguishes  their 
results  from  those  which  I  propose  to  determine  with 
a  scientific  purpose.  Thus,  Desaguiliers,  De  la  Hire, 
Gueuyveau,  Coulomb,  Schulze,  &c.,  have  chiefly  in- 
vestigated the  relations  which  exist  between  the  speed 
and  the  burden  carried,  in  respect  to  a  man  employed 
either  in  carrying  burdens  or  drawing  them.  I  shall 
not  enter  into  the  details  of  the  results  which  they 
have  obtained,  since  they  can  be  found  in  the  prin- 
cipal treatises  on  practical  mechanics.  What  is  of 
most  importance  for  us  to  know  here  is,  I  think,  what 
relation  the  intensity  of  power  which  man  can  dis- 
play (either  with  his  hands  or  loins,  without  subject- 
ing him  to  a  day's  labour),  Ijears,  in  its  development-, 
to  the  age  of  the  person :  this  latter  question  is  com- 
posed of  more  complex  elements. 

To  determine  the  different  degi-ees  of  our  physical 
power,  different  instruments  have  been  proposed,  the 
least  imperfect  of  which  is  undoubtedly  the  dyna- 
mometer of  Eegnier.*     However,  this  instrument  still 

*  [The  dynamometer  cannot  well  be  described  in  mere  words. 
All  that  can  be  said  of  it  is,  that  it  is  an  instrument  so  contrived 
as  to  exhibit,  on  a  dial-plate,  the  measure  of  strength  resident  in 
the  arms  and  loins  of  the  parties  subjected  to  trial.  51.  Quetelet's 
observations  may  make  tliis  point  more  clear.] 

G8 

ON  MAN. 

leaves  much  to  be  desired ;  and,  fiilly  perceiving  its 
defects  when  I  commenced  the  experiments  which  I 
am  now  about  to  state,  I  was  far  from  supposing  they 
were  so  great  as  they  really  are.  The  most  consi- 
derable results  from  its  form ;  indeed,  the  dynamo- 
meter is  managed  with  varying  degrees  of  facility, 
and  estimates  of  power,  varying  in  accurac}^  are  given, 
according  to  the  size  of  the  hand  and  length  of  the 
fingers.  This  defect  is  especially  apparent  Avith  chil- 
dren :  it  is  almost  necessary  to  employ  different  instru- 
ments for  different  ages.  These  inconveniences  led 
me  to  think  of  a  dynamometer,  in  which  the  two  steel 
plates  to  be  brought  into  apposition  should,  with  a 
maximum  of  power,  assume  that  position  in  the  hand 
which  was  most  favourable  to  its  development :  un- 
fortunately, other  labours  have  prevented  me  from 
prosecuting  these  attempts,  and  undertaking  a  new 
series  of  observations.  Therefore,  I  must  confine 
mj'self  to  giving  the  results  obtained  with  the  dyna- 
mometer of  Eegnier,  premising  that  they  do  not  pre- 
sent that  degree  of  accuracy  which  I  was  anxious  to 
give  them. 

I  think  ^ve  may  even  already  suspect  the  imper- 
fection of  the  dynamometer,  from  the  discordant  re- 
sults obtained  by  different  experimenters  who  have 
used  it. 

According  to  Eegnier,  a  man  from  25  to  30,  is  in 
possession  of  his  greatest  strength,  and  by  pressing 
strongly  with  both  hands,  makes  an  effort  equal  to  50 
kilogrammes  [134  lbs.  ti'oy],  and  raises  a  weight  of 
13  myriagrammes  [260  lbs.  troy,  nearly].  He  retains 
this  power  until  nearly  50,  Avhen  it  begins  to  decrease.* 
The  strength  of  woman  has  been  considered  as  equal 
to  that  of  a  man  of  15  or  IG,  or  to  two-thirds  of  the 
power  of  an  ordinary  man. 

Eegnier  has  also  found  that,  b}'-  trying  first  one 
hand  and  then  the  other,  that  the  right  hand  is  gene- 
rally stronger  than  the  left ;  and  the  sum  of  these  is 
commonly  equal  to  the  power  of  both  hands  acting 
together. 

Other  experiments  have  since  been  made  by  Peron, 
who  has  stated  the  results  in  the  accomat  of  his  voyage 
to  Australasia.  Eansonnet  has  also  made  dynamo- 
metric  experiments  in  the  roadstead  of  Havre,  on  345 
individuals  belonging  to  the  companies  of  two  frigates 
and  a  brig  which  lie  commanded.  Collecting  the  values 
obtained  by  these  different  observers,  we  have  the 
following  table : — 

Persons  experimented  on. 

French,  from  25  to  30  years, 
••    25  to  45     •■ 

Natives  of  New  Holland, 
Jliilays  of  tlic  Island  of  Timor, 

Observers. 

Regiiicv, 
Ran  sonnet, 
Viron, 

Strength. 

JIanual.    Lnnibar. 

liilog. 
500 
40-3 
CO-2 
61-8 
597 

Average. 
130 
14-2 
221 
14-0 

ie-2 

The  degrees  of  strength  of  the  French,  according 
to  these  observations,  Ave  sec  differ  very  much :  the 
results  of  Pcron  differing  especially  from  those  of 
Eansonnet  and  Eegnier.f  It  would  appear  that  Peron 
has  made  a  mistake  in  reading  the  degrees  of  the 
dynamometer ;  at  least  this  seems  to  be  the  case,  from 
the  correction  which  has  subsequently  been  made  by 
Frcycinet  and  Eailly,  who  were  of  the  number  of 
persons  experimented  on  by  Peron,  and  Avho  are  found 
to  have  a  lumbar  power  sensibly  smaller  than  that 
placed  opposite  tiieir  names  in  the  table.    According 

*  Dklionnaire  des  Sciences  Mcdicalcs,  article  liynammnelre,  et 
description  et  Usar/edu  Dynamomclre.  (Journal  deVEcolcVolytech- 
tiiqiie,  Prairial,  an  G.) 

■f  M.  Ransonnct  has  kindly  favoured  me  with  some  accounts 
of  the  observations  which  were  required  of  him,  and  made  witli 
an  instrument  tlie  accuracy  of  whicli  he  cannot  wai'rant,  not 
having  had  an  opportunity  of  testing  it  himself. 

to  M.  Frcycinet,  instead  of  the  lumbar  powers  stated 
by  Pcron,  Ave  must  read  as  folloAvs : — 

15'2  myriagr.  instead  of  22-1 ,  for  the  French. 
10-1        .  .  . .  14-8,   .  .  TSlew  Hollanders. 

11-3        . .  . .  16'2,  . .  Malaj's  of  Timor. 

However  the  case  may  be,  by  considering  the  values 
of  Peron  as  relative,  it  Avould  appear  that  the  strength 
of  the  French  sailors  was  greater  than  that  of  savages ; 
and  this  result  agrees  with  the  accomrts  of  many 
voyagers. 

Dynamometric  experiments  require  the  greatest 
precaution.  I  have  seen  the  same  persons  obtain 
exceedingly  different  results  from  successive  efforts. 
A  cause  of  frequent  error,  when  sufficient  precaution 
is  not  taken  in  using  the  instrument  of  Eegnier  to 
measure  the  lumbar  poAver,  is,  that  the  needle  is  made 
to  move  as  much  by  pressing  the  instrument  between 
the  knees,  as  by  pulling.  Indeed,  it  is  difficult  to 
pull  Avithout  bringing  the  knees  toAvards  each  other, 
and  thus  pressing  the  elUptic  spring  in  the  direction 
of  its  small  axis,  where  it  yields  most  readily :  the 
position  in  which  we  are  placed  to  pull,  and  the  height 
of  the  statm'e,  have  likewise  some  influence.  It  is 
also  necessary  to  keep  trying  the  accuracy  of  the  in- 
strument, especially  toAvards  the  bottom  of  the  scale, 
because  it  is  generally  not  so  sensible  for  small 
Aveights. 

I  regret  that  I  could  not  increase  my  observations 
to  the  extent  I  desired ;  and  I  bring  forward  my  re- 
sidts  Avith  diffidence.  The  number  of  individuals  of 
each  age  experimented  upon  was  at  least  10 :  these 
persons  generally  belonged  to  the  better  class ;  and 
those  below  25,  of  the  young  men,  were  generally 
taken  in  the  colleges,  and  at  the  Medical  School  of 
Brussels :  the  young  Avomen,  also,  were  taken  from 
the  schools  and  the  Orphan  Hospital. 

It  is  Avell,  in  measuring  the  power  of  a  person,  to 
take  the  average  of  several  successive  observations, 
because  avc  find  the  results  vary  slightly ;  and  gene- 
rally the  first  effort  is  more  poAverful  than  the  second, 
the  second  than  the  third,  and  so  on,  until  avc  arrive 
at  a  certain  limit ;  but  the  difference  is  not  very  great 
after  the  first  few  trials.*  We  may  find  a  difference 
of  one  or  tAvo  degrees,  or  more,  betAveen  the  first  efibrt 
and  the  extreme ;  consequently,  these  observations 
admit  of  great  chance  of  error. 

Observations  on  the  Lumbar  Power,  estimated  by  means  of 
the  Dyuamometex'. 

Ages. 

G  years, 

7  •• 

B  .. 

9  •• 

10  .. 

11  •■ 

12  •• 

13  . . 

14  .. 

15  •  ■ 
k;  • . 
1/  .. 
IH  •• 
1!)  •• 
2(»  .. 
21  ■• 
25  .. 
.30  .  . 
40  .. 
50  . . 
CO  .  . 

Lumbar  Power. 

Men. 

mynag. 
2-0 
2-7 

4-0 
4-6 
4-8 
.VI 

c-y 

H-1 

(18 
10-2 
12-G 
13-0 
13-2 
13-8 
140' 
15-5 
15-4 
12-2 
10-1 

0-3 

Women. 

2-4 
30 
.3-1 

3-7 

4-0 
4-4 
5-0 
5-3 
5-9 
G-4 
G7 
6-4 
G-8 
7-2 
77 

Ratio  of  the 

Strengtli  of 

Men  and 

Women. 

1-.3.3 
1-48 
1-30 
1-28 
1-57 
1-62 
1-Gfi 
172 
l-!)7 
]'94 
20G 
203 
2-05 
2-01 

In  this  table,  I  haA'e  not  included  boys  under  six, 
and  girls  imder  eight  years  of  age,  because  of  the 
difficidty  of  teaching  them  how  to  handle  the  dyna- 

*  M.  Edwards  has  told  me,  that  after  dinner  he  has  generally 
observed  the  contrary  with  strong  persons,  the  first  eflTort  being 
somcAvhat  less  inten.se  than  the  succeeding  ones. 

ON  MAN. 

C9 

mometer,  and  the  errors  which  would  have  resulted 
therefrom.  It  is  necessary  to  aU  the  preceding  ralues, 
to  add  the  weight  of  the  dynamometer,  which  is 
certainly  a  part  of  the  resistance  to  overcome :  this 
amounts  to  one  kilogramme. 

If  we  had  extremely  sensible  and  suitable  instru- 
ments for  measuring  the  lumbar  power  of  children,  it 
is  evident  that  we  could  not  begin  to  make  use  of 
them  before  the  age  of  two  years,  since  before  this 
period  the  child  cannot  stand  upright  alone,  nor  carry 
an  additional  weight.  It  is  to  be  observed  that,  of  all 
the  individuals  figured  in  the  table,  the  lumbar  power 
is  sufficient  to  raise  a  load  or  overcome  an  obstacle 
exceeding  the  weight  of  the  individual.  Tlie  load  a 
man  can  carry  relatively  to  his  weight,  increases  with 
his  growth  \mtil  maturity,  and  the  perfect  man  can 
raise  more  than  double  his  own  weight. 

The  lumbar  power  of  females  differs  less  fi'om  that 
of  males  during  childhood  than  after  complete  deve- 
lopment. During  childhood,  the  lumbar  strength  of 
boys  is  about  one-third  more  than  tliat  of  girls ;  to- 
wards the  age  of  puberty,  one-half;  and  the  strength 
of  a  developed  man  is  double  that  of  a  woman. 

Professions  produce  a  very  sensible  difference.  I 
have  seen  labouring  masons  and  carpenters  move  the 
d3Tiamometer  20  degrees  or  more.  The  average  of 
several  servants,  between  20  and  40  years  of  age,  has 
given  me  a  value  of  10  or  11  degrees. 

To  measure  the  poAver  of  the  hands  presents  the 
greatest  obstacles.  It  seems  to  me  that  it  is  almost 
impossible  to  rely  on  the  accuracy  of  the  results,  im- 
less  the  observations  have  been  made  with  the  greatest 
care,  and  by  one  and  the  same  person.  The  first  and 
greatest  obstacle  proceeds  from  the  uneqiud  size  ot 
the  hands,  and  the  difficulty  of  grasping  the  instru- 
ment. From  all  the  corrections  which  I  have  made, 
I  think  I  may  rely  on  the  accuracy  of  my  own  results ; 
and,  nevertheless,  they  differ  so  much  from  those  ob- 
tained bj'  the  observers  quoted,  that  I  dehberated  some 
time  in  using  them,  the  more  so  since  they  are,  like 
all  the  measures  taken  with  Kegnier's  dynamometer, 
subject  to  undergo  a  previous  correction,  owing  to  the 
unequal  size  of  the  hands.  To  show  how  important 
this  correction  is,  I  made  difierent  trials  with  the 
dynamometers,  placing  my  hands  in  different  positions, 
and  I  have  obtained  extremely  dissimilar  A'alues.  We 
may  judge  better  from  the  following : — 

The  dynamometer  I  have  used  is  made,  like  all 
others,  of  a  spring  almost  of  an  elliptic  form :  the 
lengths  of  the  greater  and  lesser  axis  are  30  and  5"5 
,  centimetres  respectively ;  the  dial  and  the  index  are 
so  placed  that  the  hands,  when  most  approximated, 
are  still  2 '5  centimetres  distant  from  each  other;  and 
pressure  is  made  at  a  certain  distance  from  the  small 
axis,  where  the  maximum  of  eflect  is  produced.  We 
obtain,  therefore,  only  a  part  of  the  action  which  might 
be  produced  by  pressing  both  extremities  of  the  smaU 
axis.  IMoreover,  it  appears  that  the  dynamometer  I 
have  used  has  been  graduated,  taking  this  distance 
into  account.  I  was  then  desirous  to  know  what 
would  be  tlie  effect  produced  by  increasing  the  dis- 
tance between  the  hands,  and  I  have  obtained  these 
values : — 

Distance  of  the 
Hands. 
25  mill. 

ar,    •. 

45    .. 

65    .. 

75     ..       - 

85     ■■ 

Degrees  of  the 
Dynamometer. 

80-5 

640 

54-5 

49-5 

44-0 

380 

Thus,  by  placing  the  hands  so  that  they  were  each, 
when  least  distant,  one  centimetre  from  the  dial,  and 
consequently  45  millimetres  from  each  other,  I  only 
produced  an  effort  of  54-5  instead  of  80'5 — a  difference 
of  20  degrees.      Now,  many  per?ons,   trying  their 

manual  strength  by  the  dynamometer,  generally  place 
their  hands  in  the  manner  I  have  stated ;  they  must 
then  give  very  erroneous  results.  Women  and  chil- 
dren, especially,  have  another  disadvantage  in  using 
the  dynamometer,  for  the  opening  which  they  are 
obliged  to  allow  their  hands  does  not  permit  them  to 
press  -with  the  power  they  are  capable  of.  Also,  I 
think  the  values  I  have  obtained  for  them  are  gene- 
rally too  low. 

Observations  on  the  Power  of  the  Hands,  from  Experiments 
with  the  Dynamometer. 

Power  of  Men 

Power  of  AVomen 

Ages. 

\vith 

with  the 

with  the 

with 

with  the 

with  the 

both 

Right 

Left 

both 

Right 

Left 

Hands. 

Hand. 

Hand. 

Hands. 

Hand. 

Hand. 

kilog. 

kilog. 

liilog. 

kUog. 

Idlog. 

kilog. 

6  years, 

10-3 

4-0 

20 

7     •• 

140 

70 

40 

8     •• 

11-8 

36 

2-8 

9     •• 

20-0 

8-5 

5-0 

15-5 

4-7 

4-0 

10     •• 

26-0 

9-8 

8-4 

16-2 

5-6 

4-8 

n    •• 

29-2 

10-7 

9-2 

19-5 

8-2 

6-7 

12      .. 

336 

13-9 

11-7 

230 

lO-l 

7-0 

13      .. 

390 

16-6 

150 

26-7 

11-0 

81 

14      -. 

47-9 

21-4 

18-8 

33-4 

13-6 

11-3 

15      .. 

57-1 

27-8 

22-6 

35-6 

15-0 

14-1 

16      .. 

63-9 

32-3 

26-8 

37-7 

17-3 

16-6 

17     •• 

71'0 

362 

31-9 

40-9 

20-7 

18-2 

18      •• 

79-2 

386 

35-0 

43-6 

20-7 

19-0 

1!)      •• 

79-4 

35-4 

35-0 

44-9 

21  G 

19-7 

;>o    ■. 

84-3 

39-3 

37-2 

45-2 

22-0 

19-4 

21      .. 

86-4 

430 

38-0 

47-0 

23-5 

20-5 

25      • . 

88-7 

44-1 

400 

eo-0 

24-5 

21 '6 

30      •  • 

89-0 

44-7 

41-3 

40      •. 

87-0 

41-2 

38-3 

50      •• 

740 

36-4 

330 

47-0 

23-2 

20-0 

«()      . . 

56-0 

30-5 

260 

From  this  table  we  may  infer,  that  the  manual 
power  of  men,  at  different  ages,  is  greater  than  that 
of  women.  The  difference  is  generally  smaller  at  earlj^ 
periods  than  afterwards :  thus,  before  puberty,  the 
ratio  is  3  to  2,  and  it  afterwards  becomes  9  to  5.  We 
also  see  that  the  hands,  acting  together,  produce  a 
greater  effect  than  the  sum  of  the  effects  they  produce 
acting  separately ;  this  appears  to  be  partly  owing  to 
the  weight  of  tlie  instrument,  which  is  carried  twice, 
and  in  an  inconvenient  manner,  when  the  hands  are 
used  in  succession.  Lastly,  the  strongest  hand  is  that 
one  we  use  habitually,  at  least  considering  masses  of 
people.  The  right  hand  is  about  one-sixth  stronger 
than  the  left. 

Now,  if  we  compare  the  power  of  pressing,  which  I 
have  observed,  Mith  that  of  IVIM.  Regnier,  Eansonnet, 
and  Peron,  we  shall  find  the  greatest  differences,  and 
which  I  can  only  attribute  to  the  manner  in  which 
the  hands  were  placed  on  the  instrument,  and  the 
consequent  space  betwLxt  them.  I  have  tried  the  in- 
strument in  different  ways,  and  I  think  I  may  be  cer- 
tain that  the  indications  are  accurate,  especially  those 
for  the  average  power  of  man.  Those  values  which  I 
ought  to  mistrust  are  those  obtained  for  women  and 
children ;  they  appear  to  me  to  be  less  than  they 
ought  to  be,  for  the  reasons  above  stated. 

According  to  the  researches  of  MM.  Regnier  and 
Eansonnet,  the  average  strength  of  man  is  not  more 
than  46"3  or  50  kilogrammes  [184  lbs.  troy]  ;  that  is 
to  say,  that  it  does  not  come  up  to  his  weight; 
whence  it  follows,  that  a  man  could  not  lift  himself 
by  the  pressure  he  can  exercise  with  his  hands.  Now, 
experience  evidently  disproves  such  a  residt.  Among 
the  sailors  experimented  upon,  there  was  probably 
not  one  who  could  not  hold  himself  suspended,  for 
some  minutes  at  least,  at  tlie  end  of  a  cord  firmly 
fixed  at  the  other  end.  According  to  Pcron,  the 
manual  force  would  be  69'2  kilogrammes  :  this  value 
approaches  nearer  the  truth.  What  I  liave  found 
for  a  developed  man  is  89  kOogrammes  [238  lbs.  troy], 
nearly  19  kilogranmies  more  than  the  weight  of  a  man 

70 

ON  MAN. 

ill  his  dress ;  so  that  a  man  may  hold  at  the  end  of  a 
cord,  and  bear  at  tlie  same  time  a  weight  as  heavy ; 
moreover,  the  thickness  of  the  cord,  or  the  form  of 
the  object  which  he  holds,  will  necessarily  influence 
the  result  of  the  experiment.* 

We  also  see,  from  the  values  which  I  have  obtained, 
that  it  is  about  the  age  of  9  or  10  years  tliat  a  man 
begins  to  acquire  sufficient  power  in  his  hands  to  hold 
himself  suspended  for  a  time.  Woman,  at  any  age, 
does  not  appear  capable  of  exercising  a  power  equiva- 
lent to  her  weight ;  yet  many  women,  from  exercise 
and  habits  of  "labour,  at  length  exceed  this  limit. 
Thus  we  see  yoimg  girls,  by  practising  gymnastic 
exercises,  acquire  the  power  of  raising  themselves 
by  means  of  cords  to  different  heights.  It  would 
appear,  then,  although  my  values  are  very  superior 
to  those  of  the  observers  quoted,  that  they  are  rather 
below  than  above  the  truth,  at  least  for  children  and 
women. 

'V^^len  the  power  of  the  hands  is  tried  several  times 
in  succession,  it  happens,  just  as  with  the  lumbar 
strength,  that,  all  things  being  equal,  the  subsequent 
efforts  are  never  so  energetic  as  the  first  ones.  Thus 
the  degrees  of  poAver  diminish  successively,  and  tend 
to  a  limit.  The  second  effort  is  generally  weaker  by 
4  or  5  degrees  than  the  first ;  the  difference  is  not  so 
great  afterwards. 

Trying  my  strength  at  different  periods  of  the  day, 
I  have  not  observed  any  very  great  differences.  The 
greatest  effect  I  have  been  able  to  produce  was  observed 
on  coming  from  a  public  lecture,  at  a  time  when  I  was 
slightly  indisposed  by  an  accession  of  fever.  I  was 
able  to  bring  the  needle  of  the  djTiamometer  nearly 
1 0  degrees  beyond  the  point  it  haljitually  reached.  In 
general,  the  strength  was  greater  after  dinner  than 
before  -,  it  appears  to  vary  Avith  different  times  of  the 
day,  and  especially  Avith  the  hours  of  refreshment. 
IVIy  experiments  are  not  so  numerous  as  to  enable  me 
here  to  bring  forward  numerical  results  of  sufficient 
accuracy ;  and,  for  the  same  reason,  I  have  been 
obliged  to  defer  establishing  the  ratios  betAveen  tlie 
stature,  weight,  and  strength  of  men  at  different  ages. 
But  it  appears  to  me  that  affluence,  abundance  of  food, 
and  moderate  exercise,  favourablj'  assist  the  develop- 
ment of  the  physical  powers ;  Avhilst  misery,  Avant, 
and  excess  of  labour,  produce  the  contrary  effect. 
Therefore,  the  man  Avho  finds  himself  in  affluent  cir- 
cumstances, not  merely  possesses  the  advantages  of 
fortune,  as  well  as  longer  life  and  less  liability  to  dis- 
ea.se ;  he  has  also  better  opportimities  for  the  proper 
development  of  his  physical  qualities. 

CHAPTER   IV. 

l.NSPIRATIOX,  PULSATION,  SWIFTNESS,  &C. 
1.  Inspiration  and  Pulsation. 

In  individuals  Avho  are  Avell-formed  and  enjoying  good 
health,  the  number  of  inspirations  and  beats  of  the 
heart  are  generally  confined  Avithin  certain  limits, 
Avhich  it  may  be  interesting  to  know,  as  aa'cII  as  the 
average  value  Avhich  they  have  at  dillerent  ages.  The 
authors  Avho  have  Avritten  on  this  subject  generally 
give  results  Avliich  are  A'cry  discordant,  for  early  ages 
especially.  Kepler  appears  to  have  been  the  first 
Avho  thought  of  determining  the  number  of  pulsa- 
tions in  a  given  time;  and  Ave  may  be  astonished 
that,  in  our  own  time,  avc  have  not  more  accurate 
results  than  those  found  m  the  most  eminent  physio- 
logical Avorks. 

The  following  are  the  numbers  which  different 
authors  have  given  for  the  beats  of  the  heart  in  one 
minute : — 

*  It  Avould  be  curious  to  examine  how  long  an  individual  could 
continue  suspended  by  the  pressure  of  his  hands  only. 

Kumber  of  Beats  of  the  Heart, 

according  to 

Ages. 

c 

1 

Diet,  df 

-Magendie.* 

Rochoux.  t 

Adelon-t 

md. 

vol.  21. 

Birth,  - 

130  to  140 

140 

1.30  to  140 

140 

I  year, 

120  to  130 

120 

2     „     - 

100  to  110 

100 

110 

U)0 

3     „         -        - 

90  to  100 

90 

Puberty, 

80 

80  to  00 

Manhood, 

70 

Old  age, 

60 

"  The  number  of  pulsations  of  the  foetal  heart,  in  a 
given  time,"  says  M.  Paul  Dubois,§  "  cannot  always 
be  easily  determined ;  but  Avhen  it  can,  as  is  usually 
the  case,  Ave  find  tlie  number  from  140  to  1 50  a-minute, 
and  very  frequently  144 ;  it  is  very  natural  to  think 
that  the  number  of  pulsations  should  be  quick,  in- 
versely as  the  age  of  the  foetus,  and  yet  our  researches 
do  not  confirm  such  an  opinion.  Indeed,  we  may 
affirm,  that,  from  the  end  of  the  fifth  month,  at  which 
period  the  pulsations  of  the  heart  may  be  readily 
counted,  until  the  end  of  gestation,  the  rhythm  [mea- 
sure] of  the  double  beats  has  appeared  exactly  the 
same  to  us." 

M.  Billard  has  given  results  which  generally  do  not 
much  agree  Avith  those  Avhich  have  been  quoted.  Ac- 
cording to  this  observer,  of  41  children,  between  1  and 
10  days  old,  and  apparently  enjoying  good  health,  he 
has  found — 

18  having  fewer  than  80  pulsations  per  minute. 

2 

,, 

80 

1 

,, 

89 

4 

^, 

100 

10 

„ 

~  110  to  129 

1 

„ 

130 

2 

„ 

„       145 

2 

„ 

150 

1 

„ 

~       180 

Thus,  in  one-half  of  the  infants,  the  pidse  Avas  al- 
most the  same  number  as  of  adults ;  and  there  were 
others,  the  beats  of  whose  heart  exceeded  in  number 
those  of  individuals  of  a  more  advanced  age.  These 
children  presented  no  appearance  of  disease. 

Of  36  children  from  1  to  2  months  old — 
14  presented  80  to  85  pulsations. 

1  -.   60  to  62 

2  ~     90 

2    -    94  to  95 

5    -   110  to  112   - 

2  -     114 

7    „   125  to  130   ~ 

3  ~  140-147  to  150  ~ 

Of  20  children  from  2  to  3  months  old— 
14  presented  more  than  90  pulsations. 
2  -  „  100         « 

2  ~  -  70        - 

2  „  ~        70  to  80   ~ 

It  Avoiild  be  Avrong  to  affirm  that  children  uniformly 
present  a  more  frequent  pulse  than  adults. || 

It  does  not  appear  that  the  number  of  inspirations 
per  minute  has  been  examined  with  as  much  care  as 
the  pulsations.  Authors,  in  general,  have  not  and 
cannot  agree  on  this  point.  Ilaller  said  he  made  20 
inspirations  per  minute ;  Menzics  says  14  ;  Davy  ob- 
served on  himself  2G  ;  Thomson,  also  on  liimself,  19  ; 
Magendie,  15.  But  we  generally  say  that  there  are  20, 
and  that  every  fifth  inspiration  is  deeper  than  the 
others.^ 

*  Physiologic.    Ed.  1825. 

t  Diet,  de  IMedicinc,  1827. 

t  Pliysiologie,  vol.  iii.  p.  417. 

§  Rapport  sur  1' Application  de  I'AuseuItation  a  la  Grossesse. 

II  [Notwitlistanding  these  observations,  there  can  be  no  doubt 
whatever  that  the  pulsations  of  the  heart,  counted  at  the  wrist, 
are  uniformly  much  more  numerous  in  children  under  six  years 
of  age  than  in  adults.] 

t  Dictionnaire  des  Sciences  Mcdicales,  Art.  Respiration. 

ON  MAN. 

71 

I  sIihII  noAV  present  the  results  of  experiments  made 
at  Brussels,  both  on  inspurations  and  the  heating  of 
the  heart  simultaneously. 

And  first,  according  to  the  observations  made  on 
18  male  and  as  many  female  children,  immediately 
after  birth,  the  following  results  were  obtained : — 

Pulsations. 

Inspirations. 

Aver. 

Max. 

Win. 

Aver. 

Max. 

Jlin. 

Bi)\s,      - 
GUIs,  -    - 

136 
135 

165 
163 

104 
108 

44 
44 

70 
68 

23 

27 

Therefore,  it  appears  that  difference  of  sex  does  not 
influence  these  phenomena,  at  any  rate  at  birth. 

The  following  is  a  classification  of  the  preceding 
numbers : — 

Inspirations. 

25  to  30,         - 

30  to  40, 

40  to  50, 

50  to  60, 

60  to  70, 
Pulsations. 
104  to  115, 
116  to  125,   - 

126  to  135,      ... 
136  to  145, 

145  to  155,      ... 
155  to  165, 

I  think  these  results  susceptible  of  greater  accuracy. 
Considering  the  number  of  inspirations  and  pulsations 
in  men,  at  difi'erent  ages,  I  have  found,  per  minute, 
for  the  average  and  extreme  values,  in  nearly  300  indi- 
viduals, as  follows  : — 

Boys. 

Girls 

3 

1 

3 

5 

5 

8 

5 

3 

2 

1 

2 

1 

0 

0 

6 

7 

6 

5 

0 

1 

2 

1 

Ages. 

Pulsations. 

Inspirations. 

Aver. 

Mnx. 

Min. 

Aver. 

Max. 

Min. 

Birth, 
5  years, 
10  to  15, 
15  to  20, 
20  to  25, 
25  to  30, 
30  to  50, 

136 
88 
78 
69-5 
69-7 
71-0 
700 

165 
100 
98 
90 
98 
90 
112 

104 
73 
60 
57 
61 
59 
56 

44 
26 

20 
18-7 
16-0 
18-1 

70 

32 

24 
24 
21 
23 

23 

16 
14 
15 
11 

Isations. 

Inspirations 

135 

44 

78 

19 

77 

17 

74-5 

It  does  not  appear  that  there  is  a  determinate  ratio 
between  the  pulsations  and  inspirations ;  however,  in 
many  individuals,  and  I  am  of  the  number,  it  is  as 
4  to  1. 

The  observations  made  on  women  have  been  less 
immerous  than  those  made  on  men.  Moreover,  it 
does  not  appear  that  the  difference  of  sexes  is  at  any 
period  more  marked  than  about  the  time  of  birth ; 
perhaps  there  is  a  slight  acceleration  in  females,  at 
least  this  appears  from  the  following  numbers  : — 

Ages. 
Birth, 

15  to  20  years, 
£0to25      ~    - 
25  to  30      - 
30  to  50      -    - 

The  temperament,  the  state  of  the  health,  and  a 
crowd  of  other  circumstances,  must  cause  the  number 
of  inspirations  and  pulsations  to  vary  considerably  in 
different  individuals.  Wakefuhiess  and  sleep  have 
also  great  influence.*    From  a  considerable  number  of 

*  [It  is  sufficiently  singular  that  the  cliief  eause  modifying  the 
number  of  pulsations  of  the  heart,  during  the  twenty-four  hours, 
escaped  tlie  notice  of  M.  Quetelet.  He  takes  no  account  of  the 
singular  influence  exercised  in  accelerating  the  pulsations  hy  the 
slightest  muscular  exertion.  The  condition  of  sleeping  or  waking, 
to  which  he  ascribes  considerable  effect,  has  little  influence  on 
the  pulse,  further  than  as  regards  a  quiescent  or  non-quiescent 
state  of  the  body.  He  seems  also  inclined  to  ascribe  to  sleep 
those  effects  which  have  long  ago  been  proved  to  be  solely  attri- 
butable to  another  cause,  viz.,  a  diurnal  revolution  in  the  num- 
ber of  pulsations  of  the  human  heart. — See  Edinburgh  Medical 
and  Surgical  Journal  for  181'.] 

observations  made  carefully  on  a  male  child  betAveen 
4  and  5  years  of  age,  I  have  found  that,  when  awake, 
the  number  of  pulsations  was  93-4,  and  the  number  of 
inspirations  29-3;  whilst  for  the  same  child,  during 
sleep,  I  counted  77*3  pulsations,  and  21-5  inspirations, 
on  an  average.*  The  ratio  of  these  numbers  is  1  to 
1-21  for  the  pulsations,  and  1  to  1-36  for  the  inspira- 
tions. Similar  observations  have  been  made  on  a  young 
girl  between  3  and  4  years  old,  and  on  a  woman  of  26 
years.  All  these  observations  have  presented  the  fol- 
lowing average  values : — 

Pulsations. 

Inspirations. 

Ages. 

6 
< 

8 
■a 
< 

Ratio. 

6 

1 
< 

Ratio. 

Girl,  3  to  4  years, 
Boy,  4  to  5     - 
Woman,  26  to  27, 

102.3 
93-4 

77-5 

92-0 

77-3 
C7-0 

Ml 
1-21 
116 

30-2 
29-3 
27-0 

24-8 
21-5 
20-3 

1-22 
1-36 
1-30 

It  results  from  these  observations,  that  sleep  causes 
a  more  sensible  modification  of  the  number  of  inspira- 
tions than  of  the  beats  of  the  heart.  In  general,  it 
diminishes  both  numbers,  the  first  in  a  ratio  which 
may  be  considered  as  7  to  6,  and  the  second  in  the 
ratio  of  4  to  3  nearly.  It  is  very  important  to  con- 
sider the  state  of  tlie  individual  in  these  researches, 
and  not  to  make  the  observations  wlien  the  person  is 
excited  by  walking  quickly,  or  by  passions  and  emo- 
tions of  the  mind,  and  still  more  if  the  person  is  not 
well  in  health.  To  observe  accurately  the  number  of 
inspirations  is  very  difiicult,  and  particularly  if  the 
individual  knows  that  he  is  the  object  of  observation. 
I  have  seen  many  jiersons  unable  to  make  sucli  obser- 
vations on  themselves.  We  must  also  consider  the 
time  of  tlie  day :  for  instance,  in  the  evening  we  are 
generally  more  excited  than  in  the  morning,  and  the 
beats  of  the  heart,  as  well  as  the  inspirations,  are  more 
rapid.f  Neither  is  it  indifferent  whether  we  observe 
tlie  person  before  or  after  a  meal.  Observing  myself 
at  quiet  moments,  but  at  different  times  of  the  day,  I 
have  found  the  average  number  of  the  beats  of  the  heart 
to  be  66"2,  and  the  average  number  of  inspirations  15'8. 
The  first  number  lias  varied  between  the  extremes  of 
74  and  56  :  this  latter  value  has  been  observed  imme- 
diately before  dinner,  and  the  former  after  a  public 
lecture,  about  one  hour  after  reaching  home.  The 
mmiber  of  inspirations  has  varied  between  17  and  14'.5. 

MM.  Leuret  and  ^litivie,  avIio  have  recently  jjub- 
lished  an  interesting -work  on  i\\e  frequency  of  the  pulse 
in  the  insane,^  have  sought  to  determine  the  influence 
of  temperature  and  changes  of  the  moon  on  tliis  fre- 
quency ;  but  their  observations  Avere  not  sufficiently 
numerous  to  deduce  a  numerical  appreciation  of  so 
feeble  an  element.  On  the  other  hand,  comparing 
young  people  and  old  persons,  they  have  found  that, 
contrary  to  the  generally  received  opinion,  the  pulse 
of  the  first  is  slower  than  the  second :  thus  they  have 
comited  in  one  minute, 

In  young  persons, 
—  old  persons, 
~  insane  women. 

65  pulsations. 
74       ~ 
77       ~ 

The  observations  were  made  in  the  morning,  whilst 
the  persons  Avere  stiU  in  bed,  and  the  pulse  conse- 
quently beating  slower  than  durmg  the  .day.  MM. 
Leuret  and  Mitivio  have  also  thought  that  the  average 
number  of  pulsations  was  fewer  in  winter  than  in 

*  [These  observations  of  M.  Quetelet  are  of  little  comparative 
value,  from  his  having  neglected  to  state  the  iwsition  of  the  child 
during  the  waking  state,  and  the  time  of  day  or  night.] 

t  [The  reader  is  requested  to  suspend  his  judgment  in  respect 
to  these  observations  imtil  he  has  perused  the  documents  in  the 
appendix.  Certain  important  elements  in  these  observations  have, 
as  we  have  already  said,  been  overlooked  by  M.  Quetelet.] 

I  Paris,  Crdchard  :  1832.    8vo. 

n 

ON  MAN. 

summer,  and  that  the  variations  do  not  correspond  to 
changes  of  temperature.* 

2.  On  Swiftness,  and  the  Activity  of  some  other  Physical 
Qualities  of  Man. 

There  are  several  other  physical  qualities  of  man 
besides  tliose  I  have  just  considered,  which  are  like- 
wise susceptible  of  measurement,  and  which  have  been 
little  attended  to  hitherto.  What  is  generally  the 
best  known  is  the  swiftness  and  the  length  of  the  stride 
of  man ;  but  at  present,  the  data  for  different  ages  are 
wanting,  and  especially  when  consideration  is  had  to 
the  weight  and  size  of  individuals. 

A  foot  traveller  can  pass  over  six  kilometres  [7158 
yards]  an  hour,  and  continue  a  long  distance,  which 
IS  at  the  rate  of  100  metres  [119  yards]  a-minute.  We 
calculate  the  length  of  the  step  at  eight  decimetres 
[31-496  inches]  :  thus  the  traveller  makes  125  steps 
per  minute,  and  7500  ste^js  in  an  hour.  He  can  walk 
at  this  rate  8h  hours  a-day,  and  continue  as  long  as 
he  likes,  without  injuring  his  health  or  strength. 
Then,  as  a  fact,  we  suppose  51  kilometres  [55,743 
yards]  the  average  distance  which  a  traveller  can  walk 
each  day,  without  overstretching  his  powers.  The 
average  weight  of  a  man  in  his  ordinary  clothes  is  70 
kilogrammes  [187  lbs.  troy].  Thus,  the  pedestrian 
carries  each  day  70  kilogrammes  a  distance  of  51 
Icilometres ;  or,  which  amounts  to  the  same  thing, 
.'5570  kilogrammes  the  distance  of  one  kilometre. 

According  to  M.  Ch.  Dupin,  from  whom  I  borrow 
the  preceding  details,f  the  mihtary  step  is  computed 
to  be  as  foUows  : — 

Length. 

The  Soldier  makes 
jier  minute — ■ 

Common  step,"     - 

6o  cent.i 

76 

Quick  march, 

05    ~ 

100 

Charging, 

- 

125 

1  regret  that  my  own  observations  do  not  allow  me 
to  treat  this  subject  at  present  in  more  detail,  or  to 
present  a  summary  of  the  results  obtained  by  observers 
who  have  endeavoured  to  ascertain  the  i>ractical  effect 
of  speed  combined  with  strength.  We  find,  in  general, 
that  Avherever  the  energy  of  man  can  be  excited,  em- 
ployed as  a  machine,  the  physical  qualities  he  can 
put  in  force  have  been  measured  with  more  precision. 
His  other  qualities  have  been  less  studied:  thus,  we 
know  little  of  the  average  speed  of  man  in  running ; 
we  also  know  very  little  of  the  height  and  length  of  his 
leap,  Avith  the  exception  of  the  cases  of  those  men  who 
possessed  those  qualities  in  aia  extraordinary  degree. 

I  have  been  endeavouring  to  sum  up  Avhat  relates 
to  the  height  and  extent  of  the  leap,  in  some  results 
which  it  may  be  useful  to  know.  However,  I  ought  to 
premise,  that  since  these  results  for  young  ages  have 
been  obtained  from  individuals,  several  of  whom  were 
studying  gymnastic  exercises,  the  values  may  be 
greater  than  they  otherwise  would  be.  The  leaps 
Avere  made  without  taking  a  run,  and  on  a  plane  and 
horizontal  surface.  The  length  Avas  estimated  by 
measuring  the  distance  from  the  toes. 

^  Length  Height 

°    '  of  the  Leap.  of  the  Leap, 

metres.  metres. 

11  years,  •  -  -        1-52 

12  ,-         -  -  -  1-60 

13  -  ...        1.66  o-(i4 
U     -         -            -            •               1-77                       0-70 

15  -  -  -  -  IW  O-OO 

16  ~  -  -  -  2-OC  0-83 

17  ~  ...  2-fi4  0'81 

18  ~  -  -  -  2-14  1-00 

19  to  .TO,  -  -  -        2-18  093 
."5010  40,       -            -            -              1-78  0-88 

*  [The  observations  of  MM.  Leuret  and  Mitivi^  have  been 
refuted  in  this  coimtry— first  by  Dr  Knox,  in  1014,  and  aftor>vards 
by  Dr  Guy,  in  1836. — See  Anatomical  and  Physiological  Memoirs 
and  Medical  Gazette,  likewise  Guy's  Hospital  Reports.'] 

t  G^om^trie  et  Mdchaiuque  dcs  Arts  et  Metiers,  tome  iii. 
p.  75 :  1836. 

i  [26  5-lOths  inches.] 

The  height  of  the  leap  was  estimated  by  the  height 
of  an  obstacle  over  which  the  person  could  leap,  with 
his  feet  close  together,  and  without  taking  any  run. 

Estimatmg  the  length  of  the  leap  at  two  metres, 
[6  5-lOths  feet]  we  see  that  it  is  about  triple  that  of 
the  ordinary  or  quick  step  of  soldiers. 

I  ought,  according  to  the  plan  I  have  laid  down,  to 
present  a  great -number  of  other  data  here,  which  are 
capable  of  being  measured,  and  which  vary  according 
to  the  ages  of  the  persons.  I  ought,  in  some  manner, 
to  meet  those  views  relative  to  man  which  have  been 
put  forth  by  Mr  Babbage,  with  whom  I  have  fre- 
quently had  the  honour  to  meet  during  my  experi- 
ments. Mr  Babbage,  in  wishing  for  a  table  of  constants, 
had  in  view  a  measurement  of  every  thing  in  the 
different  kingdoms  of  nature  which  is  capable  of 
measurement.  This  gigantic  plan  has  not  deterred 
his  countrymen,  who  are  not  accustomed  to  shrink 
from  difficidties,  when,  by  surmounting  them,  they 
can  enrich  science :  thus,  the  British  Association,  at 
the  meeting  which  took  place  in  Cambridge  in  1833, 
set  aside  a  certain  sum  to  encourage  the  efforts  of 
those  Avho  seek  to  realise,  in  some  measure,  the  ideas 
of  Mr  Babbage.  I  have  not  laboured  on  so  grand  a 
scale  as  my  erudite  friend ;  I  have  only  been  consi- 
dering man :  but  in  another  view  I  have  rendered  the 
problem  more  comiireliensive,  by  seeking  to  determine 
the  modifications  which  age  induces  on  physical  quali- 
ties, Avhich  cannot  be  considered  as  constant  until  man 
is  fidly  developed,  and  Avhen  he  has  not  approached 
the  iJeriod  of  decay. 

I  recollect  that  Mr  Babbage,  in  a  conversation  which 
we  had  together  on  the  subject  of  his  constants,  told 
me  that  he  had  been  investigating  how  many  times  a 
man  could  do  certain  things  in  one  minute  of  time : 
for  example,  how  many  steps  he  coidd  make,  how 
many  strokes  of  the  oar  the  rower  makes,  how  many 
blows  the  smith  gives  with  his  hammer,  how  many 
stitches  the  tailor  makes,  &c. ;  and  that  he  had  ob- 
served that  these  numbers  do  not  vary  much  in  the 
different  countries  which  he  had  visited.  These  con- 
stants partly  depend  on  our  organisation,  and  more 
especially  on  some  of  the  fiiculties,  as  inspirations, 
pulsations,  stature,  &c.  It  would  be  interesting  to 
determme  the  ratios  Avhich  exist  between  the  different 
constants,  and  see  if  they  obey  simple  laws. 

Gretry  remarks  somewhere  in  his  memoirs,  that 
the  step  of  man  is  easily  regulated  by  an  air  he  sings, 
the  measure  being  quicker  or  sloAver.  Pythagoras 
long  ago  perceived  a  certain  harmony  in  the  number 
of  blows  struck  by  the  forger;  this  harmony  was 
undoubtedly  purely  numerical,  like  that  which  he 
guessed  at"  concerning  the  motions  of  worlds,  and 
which,  indeed,  has  been  acknowledged  by  Kepler, 
who  was  impressed  with  the  same  ideas  of  harmony 
as  the  founder  of  the  ItaUan  school.  I  again  repeat, 
that  to  judge  of  the  mutual  dependencies  of  each 
of  our  facidties,  and  to  determine  to  what  extent  they 
are  influenced  by  each  other,  it  is  necessary  to  have 
studied  them  successively  with  care,  before  establish- 
ing relations  Avhich  require  subsequent  impartiaUty 
and  discernment.  Not  until  then  shall  we  be  able  to 
know  man,  and  the  effects  of  all  the  causes  by  Avhich 
he  is  influenced,  Avhether  these  causes  be  extrinsic  to 
him,  or  whether  they  depend  merely  upon  his  will 
and  his  organisation.  , 

BOOK  THIRD. 

DEVELOPMENT  OP  TUB  MORAL  AND  INTELLEC- 
TUAL QUALITIES  OP  MAN. 

1.  Of  the  Determination  of  the  Average  Man  with  Regard  to 
Moral  and  Intellectual  Qualities. 

We  have  been  enabled  to  perceive,  in  the  two  preced- 
ing books,  that  an  appreciation  of  the  physical  qua- 

ON  MAN. 

73 

lities  of  tlio  average  man  does  not  present  any  real 
difficulty,  Avhether  we  can  measure  them  directly,  or 
whether  they  only  become  appreciable  by  their  effects. 
It  is  not  so  with  the  moral  and  intellectual  qualities. 
Indeed,  I  do  not  know  that  any  person  had  thought 
of  measuring  them,  before  the  essay  I  wrote  on  the 
development  of  the  inclination  to  crime  at  different 
ages.  At  the  same  time,  I  endeavoured  to  mark  out 
the  course  which  it  is  proper  to  foUow  in  such  re- 
searches, and  the  real  difficulties  which  present  them- 
selves, wlien  we  attempt  to  arrive  at  each  particular 
result.  Perhaps  it  wiU  be  useful  to  give  a  summary 
recapitulation  of  my  ideas  on  the  subject,  before  pass- 
ing to  the  application  of  them. 

Certain  moral  qualities  are  A'ery  analogous  to  phj'- 
sical  ones ;  and  we  may  value  them,  by  admitting 
that  they  are  proportioned  to  the  effects  Avhich  they 
produce.  Thus,  we  cannot  hesitate  to  say  that  one 
operative  has  twice  or  thrice  the  activity  of  another, 
if,  all  things  being  equal,  he  performs  double  or  triple 
the  amount  of  labour  which  the  other  one  does.  Here 
the  effects  are  purely  phj'sical,  and  like  the  compres- 
sion of  the  spring  in  the  estimation  of  mechanical 
forces :  we  have  only  to  admit  the  hypothesis  that 
causes  are  proportioned  to  the  effects  i^roduced  by 
them.  Bixt  in  a  great  nimiber  of  cases,  this  apprecia- 
tion becomes  impracticable.  pVhen  the  activity  of  man 
is  exerted  on  immaterial  labours,  for  example,  what 
standard  can  wc  adopt,  except  the  works,  such  as 
books,  statues,  or  paintings,  produced?  for  how  can 
we  obtain  tlie  value  of  the  researches  and  thought 
which  these  works  have  required  ?  The  number  of 
the  works  can  alone  give  an  idea  of  the  productive 
power  of  the  author,  as  the  number  of  children 
brought  into  the  world  gives  us  the  fecundity  of  a 
female,  without  taking  into  account  the  value  of  the 
•work  produced. 

If,  like  the  fecundity  of  females,  the  different  qua- 
lities of  men  were  manifested  by  deeds  to  Avhich  we 
could  assign  a  value,  we  conceive  that  these  qualities 
might  be  appreciated  and  compared  with  each  other. 
Thus,  we  shoidd  not  be  astounded  at  hearing,  that 
one  man  has  twice  the  courage  of  another,  but  only 
one-thii'd  tlie  genius ;  but,  since  such  an  appreciation 
has  nothing  definite  and  exact,  Ave  confine  om'selves 
to  saying  that  a  certain  individual  has  courage,  or  has 
not  courage,  or  is  even  a  coward ;  which  in  mathe- 
matical language  would  be  expressed  by  saying  that 
his  courage  is  positive,  zero,  or  negative.  We  say 
that  one  man  has  more  courage  than  another.  This 
opinion  is  formed,  when,  after  having  seen  both  the 
individuals  in  question  in  action,  we  think  one  infe- 
rior to  the  other,  without  being  able  to  form  an  exact 
estimate  of  their  degi'ee  of  courage.  Here  we  see  how 
arbitrary  this  is,  and  how  much  such  estimates  are 
matters  of  debate.  It  might  also  be  considered  absurd 
in  any  one  to  attempt  to  express  by  numbers  the 
relative  courage,  genius,  prudence,  or  evil  propensities 
of  two  individuals.  Yet,  let  us  examine  such  an  im- 
pression more  narrowly ;  let  us  try  to  find  out  why  it  is 
absurd ;  and  see  if  the  ratio  for  which  we  contend 
may  not  be  laid  down  in  some  cases. 

Let  us  suppose  that  two  individuals  are  every  day 
placed  in  circumstances  inciting  to  acts  of  bravery, 
and  that  each  one  has  the  same  readiness  to  seize 
them:  moreover,  let  us  suppose  that  each  year  we 
enumerate,  pretty  constantly,  500  acts  of  the  one,  and 
300  of  the  other  :  moreover,  these  acts,  though  more 
or  less  remarkable,  may  be  considered  collectively,  as 
having  each  the  same  value,  because  they  are  gene- 
rally produced  under  similar  ch-cum stances.  This 
being  admitted,  and  considering  causes  as  propor- 
tioned to  their  effects,  we  should  have  no  difficulty  in 
saying  that  the  bravery  of  these  two  individuals  is 
as  500  to  300,  or  5  to  3.  Such  an  appreciation  woidd 
have  more  truth,  according  as  the  observations  on 
which  it  was  founded  extended  over  a  greater  number 
of  years,  and  varied  little  from  one  other.    Here, 

then,  the  absurdity  only  proceeds  from  the  impossi- 
bilitij,  in  the  first  place,  of  i3lacing  two  men  in  equally 
favourable  circumstances  to  display  their  bravery  and 
courage ;  in  the  second  place,  of  emmierating  each  of 
these  acts  ;  and,  lastly,  of  collecting  a  sufficient  num- 
ber of  them,  in  order  that  the  conclusion  we  form  may 
be  as  little  removed  from  truth  as  possible.  Conse- 
quently, the  ratio  is  only  considered  as  being  absurd, 
from  the  supposed  impossibility  of  determining  it. 
However,  let  \is  suppose  the  two  individuals  just 
spoken  of  are  Frenchmen,  and  that  one  of  them  repre- 
sents the  generality  of  men  between  21  and  25  years 
of  age,  and  the  other  the  generality  between  35  and 
40  :  moreover,  instead  of  courageous  acts,  let  us  sub- 
stitute thefts,  of  such  a  nature  as  come  under  the 
power  of  the  criminal  tribunals,  and  all  the  rest  will 
be  realised,  in  such  a  manner  that  we  may  consider 
it  as  very  probable  that  in  France  the  inclination  to 
theft  is  almost  as  five  to  three,  in  men  between  21 
and  25,  and  35  and  40.  Indeed,  we  may  admit  that 
men  between  21  and  25,  Avho,  according  to  the  French 
tables  of  popiUation,  are  as  numerous  as  those  between 
35  and  40,  have  the  same  facility  to  commit  theft  as 
the  latter ;  and,  moreover,  that  the  tliefts  coming 
under  the  judgment  of  the  criminal  tribvmals,  have 
circumstances  of  equal  aggravation  in  each.  If  it  be 
objected,  that  we  can,  in  this  consideration,  only  take 
in  the  thefts  which  come  before  the  tribunals,  I  shall 
say  that,  when  we  calculate  the  mortality  or  fecun- 
dity of  a  nation,  we  are  only  acquainted  with  the 
births  and  deaths  noted  in  the  civil  records,  and  that 
a  great  number  may  be  omitted.  Moreover,  the  pro- 
bability of  omissions  is  as  great  for  individuals  between 
21  and  25,  as  for  those  between  35  and  40  j'ears  of  age. 

Thus  we  may  say,  first,  that  the  individuals  wo 
compare  are  almost  exactly  in  the  same  circum- 
stances; second,  that  if  we  do  not  know  the  abso- 
lute number  of  thefts  which  they  have  committed, 
at  least  we  know  the  probable  ratio ;  third,  that  this 
ratio  must  be  entitled  to  more  confidence,  since  it  is 
founded  on  the  observations  of  several  years,  and 
varies  within  narrow  limits  merely.  Indeed,  the  ratio 
of  5  to  3  has  been  calcidated  from  the  results  of  four 
j-ears :  for  two  years,  it  was  exactly  as  5  to  3 ;  one 
time  rather  more,  the  other  rather  less.  These  dif- 
ferences are  such,  that  if  we  measure  for  four  daj^s 
in  succession,  the  ratio  of  the  power  of  two  indivi- 
duals by  Eegnier's  dynamometer,  the  differences  be- 
tween these  four  ratios  and  the  general  average  will 
undoubtedly  be  greater  than  those  which  we  have 
observed.  Thus  Ave  may  consider  it  as  very  probable, 
that  the  degrees  of  inclination  to  theft,  for  France  in 
her  present  state,  are  such  as  avc  have  established. 

Now,  let  us  suppose  that  society,  in  a  more  perfect 
state  than  its  present  and  real  one,  takes  the  oppor- 
tunity some  day  to  register  and  appreciate  courageous 
and  Airtuous  actions,  as  crimes  are  noAv  done,  will 
there  not  be  some  means  of  measuring  the  relative 
degrees  of  courage  or  virtue  at  different  ages  ?  There- 
fore the  absm-dity  Avhich  is  now  attached  to  an  endea- 
\-om'  to  appreciate  this  ratio  for  the  average  man,  is 
more  apparent  than  real,  and  is  OAving  to  the  impos- 
sibility Avhich  still  exists,  in  the  actual  state  of  society, 
of  procuring  the  necessary  elements  of  the  calculation. 

It  appears  to  me  that  it  Avill  always  be  impossible 
to  estimate  the  absolute  degree  of  courage,  &c.,  of  any 
one  particular  indiAddual :  for  Avhat  must  be  adopted 
as  unity  ? — shall  Ave  be  able  to  observe  this  individual 
long  enough,  and  with  sufficient  closeness,  to  have  a 
record  of  all  his  actions,  Avhereby  to  estimate  the  value 
of  the  courageous  ones ;  and  will  these  actions  be 
numerous  enough  to  deduce  any  satisfactory  conclu- 
sion from  them  ?  Wlio  Avill  guarantee  that  the  dis- 
positions of  this  individual  may  not  be  altered  during 
the  course  of  the  observations  ?  When  we  operate  on 
a  great  number  of  individuals,  these  difficulties  almost 
entirely  disappear,  especially  if  Ave  only  Avant  to  deter- 
mine the  ratios,  and  not  the  absolute  values. 

74 

ON  MAN. 

Thus  we  might  estimate  the  tendency  to  certain 
vices  or  virtues,  either  for  men  at  difl'erent  ages  or 
for  both  sexes,  when  we  are  only  taking  one  nation 
into  consideration :  but  the  difficulties  increase  when 
we  compare  different  nations,  because  many  circmn- 
stances  which  iu  the  two  former  cases  were  the  same, 
become  very  dissimilar  in  the  latter. 

To  make  a  summary  of  what  has  been  said  on  the 
possibility  of  measuring  qualities  of  men  which  are 
only  appreciable  by  their  effects,  I  think  we  may 
emjploy  numbers  in  the  following  cases,  without  any 
imputation  of  absurdity : — 

1.  When  the  eflects  may  be  estimated  by  means  of 
a  direct  measm-e,  which  gives  their  degree  of  energy, 
such  as  those  produced  by  strength,  speed,  and  acti- 
vity, apphed  to  material  works  of  the  same  nature.* 

2.  When  the  qualities  are  such  that  the  effects  are 
almost  the  same,  and  in  a  ratio  with  the  frequency  of 
these  effects,  such  as  the  fecundity  of  females,  drunken- 
ness, &c.  If  two  men,  placed  in  similar  circumstances, 
became  intoxicated  regularly,  the  one  every  week, 
and  the  other  twice  a-week,  we  should  say  that  their 
propensity  to  intoxication  was  as  1  to  2. 

3.  Lastly,  we  may  also  employ  numbers,  when  the 
causes  are  such  that  it  is  necessary  to  pay  as  much 
attention  to  the  frequency  of  the  effects  as  to  their 
energy,  although  the  ditRculties  then  become  very 
great,  and  indeed  sometimes  insoluble,  owing  to  the 
few  data  at  present  possessed  by  us.  This  is  what  we 
observe  especially  in  regard  to  the  moral  and  intel- 
lectual qualities,  such  as  courage,  prudence,  imagi- 
nation, &c.  The  question  generally  becomes  simpli- 
fied, Avhen  the  effects  really  vary  in  energy  ;  but  these, 
nevertheless,  under  their  different  modifications,  are 
in  almost  similar  proportions.  We  may,  then,  leave 
energy  out  of  the  calculation,  and  only  attend  to  fre- 
quency. Thus,  comparing  the  state  of  man  at  25  and 
at  45  years  of  age,  in  his  tendency  to  commit  theft, 
we  may,  without  erring  greatly,  attend  only  to  the 
frequency  of  the  thefts  at  these  different  ages,  because 
the  different  degrees  of  aggravation  of  these  offences 
may  be  supposed  the  same  in  both  cases.  In  such 
appreciations  as  these,  the  values  we  obtain  have  the 
greater  likelihood  of  approaching  the  true  values  wliich 
are  wanting,  according  as,  all  things  being  equal, 
they  are  more  numerous — just  as  when  we  put  two 
individuals  to  the  proof,  to  form  an  idea  of  their 
knowledge,  veracit}-,  memory,  &c.,  we  mark  the  num- 
ber of  mistakes  they  make.  Moreover,  as  I  have 
already  remarked,  these  modes  of  appreciation  are 
almost  impracticable,  when  tM'o  individuals  are  con- 

*  Perhaps  we  might  reduce  to  the  same  class  the  effects  of 
memory,  whether  considered  in  its  readiness  to  apprehend  or 
its  power  of  retention.  Fur  example,  two  persons,  the  mind  of 
each  being  equally  calm,  and  constituted  alike  favourably  for  the 
experiment,  will  commit  some  pages  of  a  book  to  memory,  the 
one  in  two  hours,  the  other  in  four  hours  :  but  the  first  person, 
after  a  :nonth,  will  not  be  able  to  repeat  the  passage  in  question 
without  stopping,  whilst  the  second  finds  no  defect  of  his  memory 
until  two  months  have  elapsed.  After  such  an  experiment,  the 
facility  to  apprehend  (in  the  two  individu;Us)  is  as  1  to  2,  and 
the  facility  to  retain  in  the  inverse  ratio :  the  time  here  serves 
as  a  measure.  We  should  siy,  undoubtedly,  that  it  is  impossible 
to  note  the  precise  moment  when  we  have  committed  the  passage 
entirely  to  memory,  as  well  as  when  the  memory  begins  to  be 
defective.  But  here  we  may  act  as  is  done  in  physical  pheno- 
mena, which  present  the  same  inconvenience,  when  calculating 
the  duration  of  the  sensation  of  sight  or  lie:u'ing,  or  the  loss  of 
electricity  by  a  moist  medium,  or  the  cooling  of  bodies.  Memory 
seizes  and  loses  in  a  gradual  manner,  and  according  to  a  certain 
law ;  but  there  is  a  ratio  between  the  facility  of  seizing  and  re- 
taining in  different  persons,  independently  of  this  law.  Tliis  ratio 
must  vary  very  much  acconling  to  the  ago  of  persons.  I  think 
these  variations  may  be  ascertained  by  increasing  the  number  of 
experiments,  to  correct  what  may  have  been  defective  in  other 
observations.  I  do  not  think  that  the  changes  which  age  produces 
on  sensations  of  sight  and  hearing  have  yet  been  studied  :  I  do  not 
speak  of  the  other  senses,  the  mode  of  operation  of  which  is  but 
little  imdcrstood. 

cerned,  because  the  facts  are  not  sufficiently  nume- 
rous to  draw  any  satisfactory  conclusion  from  them  ; 
and,  moreover,  the  individuals  may  alter  during  the 
course  of  the  observations.  It  is  not  so  with  the  ave- 
rage man  :  indeed,  we  can  obtain  a  great  number  of 
observations  in  a  short  time.  It  Avould  be  impossible, 
when  comparing  two  men,  tlie  one  between  21  and 
25,  and  the  other  between  35  and  40,  to  determine, 
all  things  being  equal,  their  degree  of  proneness  to 
theft,  or  any  other  crime,  for  this  proneness  may  not 
have  been  disclosed,  even  in  one  single  action,  in  the 
course  of  the  observations ;  Avhich  is  no  longer  the 
case  when  we  take  all  men,  collectively,  of  the  same 
age  :  the  number  of  acts  or  effects  is  then  great  enough 
to  allow  us,  without  anj^  serious  error,  to  neglect  the 
different  degrees  of  energy  of  these  acts.  Again,  if 
we  find  that  the  number  of  crimes  remains  nearly 
exactly  the  same,  from  year  to  year,  it  is  very  pro- 
bable that  the  result  obtained  AviU  not  be  far  from  the 
truth. 

I  think  all  the  qualities  of  man  which  are  only 
appreciable  by  their  effects,  may  be  referred  to  the 
three  heads  I  have  laid  down  above :  I  also  think  it 
will  be  perceived  tliat  the  impossibility  of  emi>loying 
numbers  at  present,  in  such  appreciations,  is  rather 
OAving  to  the  insiifficiency  of  the  data  than  to  the 
inaccuracy  of  the  methods. 

If  the  law  established  for  the  average  man  is  liable 
to  some  exceptions,  as  all  the  laws  of  nature  are, 
j'et  this  will  be  what  expresses  most  nearly  what  the 
state  of  society  has  been ;  and  nothing  can  be  more 
important.  At  birth,  man  is  possessed  of  the  germs 
of  all  the  qualities  which  are  developed  successively 
and  in  different  degi'ees ;  prudence  predominates  in 
one,  avarice  in  another,  imagination  in  a  third :  we 
also  find  some  tall  in  proportion  to  their  age,  others 
liaA-ing  a  precocious  imagination,  and  possessed  of 
actiA^ty  and  vigour  in  old  age.  The  single  fact  that 
Ave  remark  tlie  existence  of  these  differences,  proves 
that  Ave  have  some  notion  of  a  general  laAv  of  deve- 
lopment, and  reason  accordingly.  Therefore,  I  am 
not  aiming  at  something  unheard  of,  but  onl}'  to  give 
more  precision  to  these  commonly  A'ague  apprecia- 
tions, because  they  rest  on  incomplete  or  defective 
observations,  and  are  almost  ahvays  fcAV  in  number. 

After  all  Avhicli  has  been  said,  I  think  it  not  only 
not  absurd,  Ijut  even  possible,  to  determine  the  average 
man  of  a  nation,  or  of  the  human  race ;  the  apparent 
absurdity  of  such  a  research  only  proceeds  from  the 
Avant  of  a  sufficient  number  of  accurate  observations, 
so  that  the  conclusions  may  present  the  greatest  pos- 
sible probability  of  truth.  In  the  preceding  book,  I 
have  already  attempted  to  determine  the  laAvs  of  the 
development  of  tlie  physical  poAvers  of  the  average 
man :  I  am  noAv  going  to  continue  my  researches,  and 
extend  them  to  the  moral  and  mtellectual  qualities. 

CHAPTER  I. 

DEVELOr?.IENT  OF  THE  INTELLECTUAL  FACULTIES. 
1.  Development  of  the  Intellect. 

The  field  avc  aire  going  to  traverse  is  immense ;  in 
the  actual  state  of  science,  Ave  must  confine  ourselves 
to  simple  indications,  A\'hich  avlII  serve  as  posts  to 
denote  the  first  attempts  made  Avith  a  design  of  taking 
in  and  observing  the  Avhole  field.  It  Avill  first  be 
necessary  to  determine  the  period  at  Avhicli  meiucry, 
imagination,  and  judgment,  commence,  and  the  stages 
through  Avhich  they  successiA-cly  pass  in  their  pro- 
gress to  maturity ;  then,  having  established  the  maxi- 
mum point,  Ave  "may  extend  our  inquiries  to  the  Uiat 
of  tlieir  decline.  I  have  already  stated  the  mode  in 
Avhich  memory  is  to  be  estimated,  and  I  shall  here 
endeavour  to  shoAV  hoAV  Ave  ought  to  proceed  with 
reason  and  imagination. 
We  can  only  appreciate  faculties  by  their  effects ; 

ON  MAN. 

75 

ill  other  Avords,  by  the  actions  or  works  which  they 
produce.  Now,  in  attributing  to  a  nation,  as  we  should 
to  an  individual,  all  the  works  which  it  has  pro- 
duced, we  may  form  an  opinion  both  of  the  fecundity 
and  the  power  of  intellect  of  that  nation,  compared 
with  others,  making  allowance  for  the  influence  of 
causes  impeding  their  production.  Afterwards,  by 
bearing  in  mind  the  ages  at  which  the  authors  have 
produced  their  works,  we  possess  the  necessary  ele- 
ments to  follow  the  development  of  the  mind,  or  its 
productive  power.  In  such  an  examination,  it  will 
be  necessary  to  separate  the  different  kinds  of  works  ; 
placing  together  Avorks  of  art  or  design,  music,  mathe- 
matics, literature,  philosophy,  &c.,  so  as  to  perceive 
immediately  the  different  shades  of  development  of 
the  different  foculties. 

This  research  should  he  repeated  in  passing  from 
one  nation  to  another,  to  see  if  the  laws  of  develop- 
ment vary  by  locality  more  than  by  the  nature  of  the 
works.  It  will  also  be  necessary  that  these  examina- 
tions be  most  accurate  and  impartial ;  we  should  not 
select,  but  take  the  works  promiscuously,  without 
classing  them.  This  might  be  tedious  and  irksome ; 
but  would  present  curious  and  very  unexpected  re- 
sidts. 

I  shall  now  give  an  example  of  such  an  analysis  of 
dramatic  works  only,  and  I  shall  take  France  and 
England  as  the  subject  of  observation.  To  exclude 
all  idea  of  system,  I  shall  only  consider  those  works 
truly  deserving  of  mention  which  are  given  in  the 
Repertory  of  Picard  for  France,  and  the  British  Theatre 
for  England.  I  know  that,  in  attributing  as  much 
merit  to  the  Misanthrope  as  to  the  Sicilian,  and  as 
much  to  Don  Sancho  of  Arragon  as  to  Cinna,  there  can 
be  no  similarity ;  but  here,  as  well  as  in  tlie  researches 
into  crime,  it  happens  that  the  greater  number  of  the 
obstacles  disappear,  and  the  ratio  of  works  of  the  first 
order  to  those  of  the  second  may  be  considered  as 
being  essentially  the  same,  in  the  groups  we  have 
formed.  Besides,  when  examining  the  degrees  of  merit 
of  the  different  works  in  detail,  we  may  still  in  some 
measure  meet  and  parry  this  inconvenience  and  diffi- 
culty. We  may  still  deceive  ourselves  in  such  an 
estimate,  but  generally  tlie  probability  of  error  will 
be  lessened  as  the  observations  are  more  numerous. 
We  have,  moreover,  the  valuable  advantage  of  being 
able  to  prove  the  law  of  development,  by  passing  from 
one  nation  to  another,  and  seeing  how  the  maximum 
is  influenced  by  locality. 

In  the  review  I  have  made  of  dramatic  works,  I 
have  thought  proper  to  take,  not  the  period  at  which 
the  works  were  written,  which  is  generally  impossible, 
but  the  time  when  they  were  represented,  which,  on 
an  average,  will  generally  be  two  or  three  years 
later. 

French  Theatre. 

English  Theatre. 

o'S 

•?  ^,  "O 

o  ^ 

.a     -d 

Ages. 

£  p  S 

i  j"| 

li 

2°E 

CO 

2  £.2 

2  -  § 

"§1  = 

1^" 

3   g'" 

Ill 

^^ 

?-| 

^J 

^.S 

20  &  under, 

0 

47 

0 

1 

24 

1 

20  to  25,      - 

5 

47 

5 

6 

24 

6 

25  to  30,   -    - 

15 

47 

15 

8 

24 

8 

30  to  35,      - 

26 

47 

26 

9 

23 

9 

35  to  40,   -    - 

26 

46 

27 

7 

22 

8 

40  to  45,      - 

25 

45 

20 

7 

22 

8 

45  to  50,   -    - 

28 

43 

30 

6 

19 

8 

iJO  to  55,     - 

23 

41 

26 

0 

15 

0 

55  to  60,   -    - 

5 

a3 

7 

1 

12 

2 

60  to  65,      - 

G 

28 

10 

1 

11 

2 

65  to  70,   -     - 

4 

23 

8 

0 

7 

0 

70  &  upwards. 

2 

18 

5 

1 

7 

3 

The  first  column  for  each  country  indicates  the 
number  of  principal  dramatic  works  ;  the  second  the 
V 

number  of  authors  who  composed  them,  and  who 
survived  to  the  ages  pointed  out ;  and  the  third  column 
informs  us  how  many  works  might  have  been  pro- 
duced, all  things  being  equal,  if  the  number  of  authors 
had  not  been  reduced  by  death.  Thus,  between  their 
65th  and  70th  years,  23  authors  have  produced  four 
works  ;  and  I  have  supposed  that  if  the  24  others  had 
continued  to  live,  they  would  have  been  able  to  pro- 
duce other  four,  which  would  give  a  total  of  8  drama- 
tic works.  Admitting,  then,  that  each  had  the  same 
opportunity  to  produce,  at  a  given  age,  I  have  multi- 
plied each  number  of  the  first  column,  which  gives 

47 
the  principal   dramatic  works,  by  the   ratio  — ,  in 

a 
which  a  stands  for  the  number  of  surviving  authors. 

Now,  if  we  proceed  to  examine  the  results  which 
the  table  presents,  we  shall  perceive  that,  both  in 
England  and  France,  dramatic  talent  scarcely  begins 
to  be  developed  before  the  21st  year ;  between  25  and 
30,  it  manifests  itself  very  decidedly ;  it  continues  to 
increase,  and  continues  vigorous,  until  towards  the 
50th  or  55th  year ;  then  it  gradually  declines,  espe- 
cially if  we  consider  the  value  of  the  works  pro- 
duced. 

Moreover,  it  would  appear  that  authors  were  rather 
more  precocious  in  England  than  m  France :  this  may 
be  owing  to  the  manner  in  Avhich  the  numbers  have 
been  collected,  and  to  the  difficulty  which  French 
authors  experience  before  they  procure  the  represen- 
tation of  their  pieces. 

It  would  be  interesting  to  compare  these  results 
with  those  which  have  been  obtained  bj'  considering 
the  number  and  relative  merit  of  the  different  woi'ks. 
This  I  have  endeavoured  to  do  in  the  following  table, 
which  I  only  bring  forward  as  an  essay,  not  pretend- 
ing that  the  classification  of  French  works  is  accord- 
ing to  their  real  merit.  I  have  thought  proper  only 
to  make  three  degrees  of  comparison  of  the  works 
given  by  Picard  as  forming  the  French  stage ;  and 
I  have  quoted  a  small  number  of  those  which  I  con- 
ceive to  belong  to  the  first  rank : — 

Order  of  the 

?-2 

Ages. 

Works. 

1^ 

1st. 

2d. 

3d. 

20  and  under, 

0 

0 

0 

0 

20  to  25, 

1 

0 

4 

7 

25  to  30,     -    - 

3 

3 

9 

24 

30  to  33, 

4 

8 

14 

42 

35  to  40,     -    - 

4 

8 

14 

42 

40  to  45,       - 

2 

9 

14 

38 

45  to  50,    -    - 

6 

10 

12 

50 

50  to  55,       - 

3 

8 

12 

37 

55for;o,    -    - 

0 

3 

2 

8 

60  to  65, 

0 

2 

4 

8 

65  to  70,     -    - 

0 

1 

3 

5 

70  &  upwards, 

0 

1 

1 

3 

Name  of  the  Works  of 
the  First  Order. 

(Edipe. 
f  Le  Cid,  Androm.nquc, 
I  Britannicus. 
I  Les  Horaces,  Cinna, 
I  Polyeucte.lphig^nie. 
/  Phedre,  Le  Joueur, 
I  Zaire,  Le  Mechant. 

Le  Distrait,  Alzire. 
C  Le   Misanthrope,    Le 
N  TartufFe,    L'Avare, 
i  Mahomet,    Merope, 
C  La  M^tromanie. 
t  Les  Femmes   Savan- 
■J  tes,  Athalie,  Le  Glo- 
I  rieux. 

In  the  approximative  estimate  I  have  made  of  the 
relative  degrees  of  merit  of  works  of  the  first,  second, 
and  third  orders,  I  have  taken  the  numbers  3,  2,  and 
1 ;  and  from  them  I  have  deduced  the  values  of  the 
last  column,  which  entirely  confirm  those  given  by 
the  former  table.  It  is  also  easy  to  see,  Avhatever 
numbers  we  may  employ  to  express  the  relative  de- 
grees of  merit  of  works,  that  the  general  results  still 
remain  the  same. 

Another  very  curious  result  which  the  tables  I  have 
formed  show,  although  the  details  are  here  suppressed, 
is,  that  tragic  talent  is  developed  more  rapidl}'  than 
comic.  The  chefs-d'oeuvre  Avhich  enrich  French  comedy, 

76 

ON  MAN. 

V'crc  not  begun  until  the  38th  or  40th  year ;  and  we 
scarcely  find  any  works  belonging  to  elevated  comedy 
before  the  30th  year ;  though  I  am  only  speaking  of 
the  French  authors  included  in  the  Kepertory  of  Picard. 
But  I  leave  this  discussion  to  more  competent  judges ; 
here  I  confine  myself  to  just  poiiating  out  the  plan  to 
be  adopted.  Others  are  more  able  to  ascertain  if  the 
talent  of  the  tragic  autlior  really  arrives  at  maturity 
earlier  than  the  condc  author ;  and  if  this  maximum 
is  more  precocious  because  it  is  naturally  connected 
with  the  time  of  life  when  the  passions  are  in  the 
highest  state  of  exaltation.  The  best  mode  of  ana- 
lysing this  question  will  be,  to  ascertain  the  law  of 
development  of  musical  talent  and  the  art  of  design, 
and  things  generally  which  excite  the  passions  ;  and, 
on  the  otlierhand,  to  study  our  fticulties,  the  develop- 
ment of  which  does  not  so  much  require  the  conjunc- 
tion of  the  passions  and  an  exalted  imagination,  as 
observation  and  reflection.  I  shall  soon  present  a  re- 
markable example  of  analysis  of  the  development  of 
the  passions,  which  tends  to  show  that  their  maxi- 
mum of  energy  takes  place  about  the  25  th  year ;  so 
that,  if  an  art  existed,  the  exercise  of  which  would 
follow  a  ratio  proportional  to  the  development  of  the 
passions,  and  where  previous  studies  were  dispensed 
with,  its  maximum  of  development  would  also  take 
place  about  the  25th  year :  this  maximum  AvUl  after- 
\\'ards  draw  near  to  that  which  reason  attains,  accord- 
ing as  the  intervention  of  this  faculty  becomes  more 
necessary.  It  wiU  also  be  necessary  to  take  into  ac- 
count the  time  required  for  the  studies  which  are 
indispensable  in  the  production  of  works. 

Our  intellectual  faculties  arise,  increase,  and  decay : 
each  one  attains  its  energy  towards  a  certain  period 
of  life.  It  Avould  be  of  the  highest  interest  to  ascer- 
tain those  which  occupy  the  two  extreme  limits  of 
the  human  scale ;  that  is  to  say,  those  which  are  the 
first  and  those  Avhich  are  the  last  in  arriving  at  ma- 
turity :  because  they  have  the  property  of  being  simple, 
and  not  resulting  from  combination :  thus,  for  example, 
dramatic  talent  is  a  combination  of  several  other  fa- 
culties, such  as  imagination,  reason,  &c. ;  but,  I  again 
repeat,  such  an  analysis  requires  infinite  care,  nume- 
rous researches,  and  great  shrewdness  of  observation. 

After  liaving  rapidly  sketched  the  course  to  be 
pursued  in  studying  the  development  of  the  intellec- 
tual faculties,  I  think  it  will  be  proper  to  speak  of 
their  diseases,  which  are  dreadful  affections,  the  in- 
tensity and  nmnber  of  which  seem  to  keep  pace  with 
the  development  of  the  mind. 

2.  Of  Mental  Alienation. 

"  Sloth  and  misconduct  give  birth  to  poverty ; 
innnorality  and  intemperate  passions  lead  to  crime ; 
insanity  may  attack  the  most  honourable,  and  does 
not  always  spare  the  wisest  men."*  This  opinion, 
put  forth  by  a  man  whose  name  has  great  weight  in 
science,  will  be  sufficient  to  convey  an  idea  of  the 
importance  I  attach  to  any  thing  bearing  on  the  sta- 
tistics of  the  deranged.  If  it  be  true  that  diseases  of 
the  mind  increase  in  proportion  to  the  development 
of  this  faculty,  we  shall  have  a  new  measure  or  stan- 
dard, which  may  regulate  what  I  have  previously 
attempted  to  establish.  However,  it  is  well  to  be 
aware  that,  by  taking  all  insane  persons  indiscrimi- 
nately, we  may  be  led  to  very  inaccurate  results. 
Moreover,  it  is  right  to  distinguish  the  two  classes  of 
insane  persons  carefully :  for,  according  to  M.  Esqui- 
rol,  it  is  insanity,  properly  so  called,  witli  which  idiocy 
has  been  confounded,  that  is  in  a  direct  ratio  with 
civilisation.  Idiocy  is  a  state  depending  on  soil  and 
material  influences,  whilst  insanity  is  the  product  of 
society  and  of  moral  and  intellectual  influences.  In 
idiocy,  these  causes  have  prevented  the  development 
of  the  organ,  and,  consequently,  the  manifestation  of 
intelligence.     In  the  production  of  insanity,  the  brain 

*  Remarques  sur  la  Siaiisiique  dcs  Alknet,  iiC,  par  M.  Ksfiuirol 
(Annales  d'lli/gime,  Dcccnibic  1C30). 

is  over-excited,  and  goes  beyond  its  physiological 
power.* 

To  form  an  idea  of  the  influence  of  this  fatal  malady, 
we  shall  commence  by  a  glance  at  some  of  the  principal 
countries  where  its  mfluence  has  been  most  decided. 

Population 

Countries. 

Population. 

Deranged 
Persons. 

to  one 
Deranged 

Person. 

Norway, 

1,051,318 

1,900 

551 

England,    - 

12,700,000 

16,222 

7a'i 

Wales,   - 

817,148 

896 

911 

Scotland,  1825,  - 

2,01)3,454 

3,652 

573 

New  York,  1821, 

1,616,458 

2,240 

721 

France, t 

30,000,000 

30,000 

KNIO 

In  Norway,  idiots  form  one-third  of  the  total  num- 
ber of  deranged  persons,  and  one-half  in  Scotland  and 
Wales  :  it  is  tlie  great  number  of  idiots  which  makes 
the  proportion  of  deranged  persons  in  Scotland  so 
much  greater  than  it  is  in  England.  In  general,  we 
observe  that  in  mountainous  countries  there  are  many 
more  idiots  than  in  level  ones ;  and  in  plains  where 
agriculture  is  solely  pursued,  we  find  more  idiots  than 
in  towns.  In  France  and  New  York,  the  number  of 
idiots  is  very  small. 

From  numerous  researches  into  the  ratio  in  Avhich 
the  sexes  are  affected,  collected  from  several  countries, 
having  great  differences  in  temperature,  customs,  and 
laws,  M.  Esquirol  has  enumerated  37,825  males  to 
38,701  females ;  from  which  it  appears  that  difference 
of  sex  has  not  much  influence  on  mental  derangement. 
But  this  is  not  the  case  with  the  seasons ;  their  influ- 
ence is  very  marked ;  at  least  we  may  infer  this  from 
the  following  returns  of  insane  j)ersons  admitted  at 
Charenton : — 

Admissions : 

Months. 

1828-1829. 

Admissions 
before  1829. 

Cures. 

Deatlis. 

]Men. 

Women. 

January,   - 

42 

21 

37 

11 

21 

February, 

40 

33 

49 

10 

24 

March,     - 

49 

25 

53 

10 

16 

April,    -    - 

50 

38 

58 

Ki 

22 

May,    -    - 

58 

.36 

44 

15 

18 

Juno,     -    - 

55 

34 

70 

19 

18 

July,    -    - 

52 

.36 

61 

23 

18 

August, 

45 

24 

64 

22 

13 

September, 

48 

26 

47 

22 

11 

October,  - 

44 

47 

49 

24 

30 

November, 

47 

22 

35 

22 

22 

December, 

35 

28 

52 

15 

8 

Total, i:   - 

565 

370 

G19 

200 

221 

Thus,  the  summer  months  have  produced  the  great- 
est number  of  cases :  the  cures  have  also  been  most 
numerous  in  summer  and  autumn.  We  may  conceive 
that,  from  cases  of  acute  insanity  breaking  out  during 
tlie  hot  season,  and  being  more  readily  cured,  also, 
than  chronic  ones,  the  three  months  of  autumn  ought 
to  furnish  the  greatest  number  of  cures. 

If  Ave  examine  Avhat  influence  age  has  on  the  deve- 
lopment of  mental  alienation,  Ave  shaU  again  find  very 
curious  results.  It  would  appear  that  mental  aliena- 
tion may  be  divided,  according  to  ages,  into  imbecility 
in  infancy,  mania  in  youth,  melancholy  in  mature  age, 
and  madness  in  advanced  age.§ 

The  following  table  Avill  shoAV  us  the  degree  of  fre- 
quency of  this  disease  at  different  ages.  It  is  con- 
structed from  the  data  given  by  M.  Esquirol  in  the 

*  M.  Esq\iirol.  The  data  of  this  chapter  are  extracted  princi- 
pally from  articles  inserted  by  this  philosopher  in  the  AnnaUs 
d'Hyfl'tine. 

t  Tlicse  mmibers  relating  to  France  arc  from  casual  not  statis- 
tical observation.  See  also  the  Memorial  Encydopedique,  May  18.33. 

X  Tlic  numbers  for  the  five  years  from  1829  to  1833,  given  in 
this  and  tlie  following  table,  have  been  kindly  furnished  me  by 
M.  Ksquirol,  from  an  unpublished  work. 

§  Sec  the  article  Folic  of  the  Diet,  des  Sciences  Mddicalcs. 

ON  MAN. 

77 

Annalcs  d'Hi/glcne  for  April  1829.  To  estimate  the 
degree  of  frequency  of  mental  alienation,  I  have 
thought  it  necessary  to  count  the  number  of  indivi- 
duals between  15  and  20,  20  and  25,  &c.,  years  of  age. 
In  this  table  I  have  also  included  the  number  of  cures, 
and  tlieir  ratio  to  the  number  of  patients.*  Lastly, 
the  numbers  of  both  the  last  columns  are  those  which 
M.  Esq\iirol  has  kmdly  permitted  me  to  take  from 
liis  work  about  to  be  iiublished. 

At  Charenton 

en         8 

At  Charenton : 

before  1829. 

1829  to  1833. 

Ages. 

Ratio. 

s  ©"a 

Admis- 

Cures. 

h1       o 

Men. 

AVomen. 

15  to  20  years, 

22 

11 

2-0 

24 

24 

11 

20  to  25     -, 

07 

30 

2-2 

79 

65 

23 

25  to  .TO     „ 

86 

40 

2-2 

109 

78 

31 

30  to  35     -,    - 

90 

36 

2-7 

134 

79 

47 

35  to  40     - 

81 

25 

3-3 

125 

65 

64 

40  to  45     -    - 

79 

21 

3-8 

129 

64 

59 

45  to  50     „ 

72 

14 

5-1 

131 

52 

44 

50  to  55     ~    - 

52 

12 

4-3 

108 

54 

37 

55  to  60     ~ 

21 

6 

3-5 

51 

32 

20 

eoto65    ~   - 

21 

9 

2-3 

63 

33 

18 

(is  to  70     ~ 

6 

1 

6-0 

24 

14 

9 

70  &  upwards, 

14 

4 

3-5 

45 

6 

7 

We  have  already  seen  that,  all  things  being  equal, 
it  is  between  the  30th  and  50th  years  that  the  great- 
est number  of  standard  dramatic  works  have  been 
produced  in  France — that  is,  the  period  when  imagi- 
nation and  reason  are  most  productive ;  and,  by  a 
singular  contrast,  it  is  also  about  the  same  age  that 
mental  alienation  is  most  frequent,  and  the  cure  of 
it  most  difficult.  The  intellectual  life  of  man,  and  the 
diseases  of  Jiis  mind,  especially  develop  themselves 
about  the  age  of  25  years,  when  physical  development 
has  almost  ceased :  man,  indeed,  at  this  age,  is  almost 
entirely  developed  in  stature,  weight,  and  strength ; 
and  it  is  at  this  time  that  the  greatest  tendency  to 
crime  is  manifested.  Again,  it  is  remarkable  from 
another  comparison,  namely,  that  the  period  of  repro- 
duction falls  between  the  25th  and  30th  years.  Thus, 
the  average  man,  between  25  and  30  years  of  age,  has 
completed  his  physical  development,  and  this  is  also 
about  the  period  Avhen  his  intellectual  life  is  most 
vigorous,  f 

M.  Esquirol,  in  a  work  published  in  1830,  in  the 
Annales  d'Hygime,  has  given  the  following  munbers, 
which  establish  a  difference  between  sexes  and  ages : — 

Paris. 

Norway 

Ages. 

Men. 

Women. 

Total. 

IWen. 

Women. 

Total. 

rSofore  20  years, 

436 

348 

784 

188 

141 

329 

From  20  to  25, 

624 

563 

1,187 

101 

83 

184 

„    25  to  30, 

635 

727 

1,362 

97 

88 

185 

-    30  to  40, 

1441 

1607 

3,048 

214 

173 

387 

~    40  to  50, 

1298 

1479 

2,777 

150 

155 

305 

-    50  to  60, 

847 

954 

1,801 

128 

115 

243 

-    60  and       -i 
upwards,      -    / 

875 

1035 

1,910 

117 

140 

257 

Tot.al,     -    - 

6156 

6713 

12,869 

995 

895 

1890 

*  According  to  a  work  by  M.  Klotz,  De  Vesania  Prognosi,  the 
annual  ratio  of  admissions  to  dismissions  in  the  principal  lunatic 
hospitals  of  Europe,  would  fall  within  the  limits  0-330  and  0-590. 
In  tlie  generality  of  the  establishments  in  Belgimn,  the  entries 
are  to  the  exits  as  390  to  1000. — Traite  sur  VAlienation  Mentale, 
&c.,  par  J.  Gitislain,  2  vols.  8vo.     1826. 

t  M.  Pierquin,  in  his  Ariilimetique  Politique  de  la  Folie,  find^ 
as  the  principal  conclusion  of  his  researches,  that  "crimes  are 
always,  from  being  proportionate  to  the  population,  also  in  a  rela- 
tive proportion  to  the  degi-ee  of  insanity,"  and  seeks  to  refute  the 
assertion  of  M.  Esquirol,  that  insanity  is  a  disease  of  civilisation. 
I  certainly  think,  with  him,  that  in  general,  the  causes  which 
tend  to  produce  alienation,  also  influence  the  number  of  crimes, 
and  especially  crimes  against  persons,  but  without  there  being  a 
direct  and  necessary  ratio  between  tlie  number  of  insane  and  tliat 
of  criminals,  because  all  crimes  havo  not  their  source  necessarily 
in  mental  alienation. 

We  may  first  observe,  that  at  Paris  insane  men, 
up  to  the  age  of  25  years,  are  rather  more  numerous 
than  women ;  after  this  age,  the  contrary  takes  place. 
In  Norway,  the  number  of  insane  women  only  exceeds 
that  of  men  towards  the  end  of  hfe.  In  the  latter 
coimtry,  the  number  of  insane  under  20  years  is  329, 
which  is  one-sixth  of  the  total  number  existing  in  the 
kingdom  ;  whilst  at  Paris,  the  number  of  insane  under 
20  years  of  age,  is  only  784,  or  one-fourteenth.  This 
difference  arises,  no  doubt,  from  the  great  number 
of  idiots  entered  in  the  returns  of  Norwegian  statis- 
tics. If  in  Norway  there  are  more  imbecile  persons 
from  the  time  of  infancy  or  early  youth,  the  contrary 
takes  place  for  the  periods  beyond  60  years  of  age. 
In  Norway,  scarcely  one-eighth  of  the  insane  are 
more  than  60  years  old;  whilst  in  Paris  one-sixth 
exceed  that  age. 

To  form  a  better  opinion  of  the  influence  of  age,  I 
have  reduced  the  preceding  numbers  to  1000,  and  I 
liave  compared  them  with  the  corresponding  numbers 
of  the  same  ages,  given  ui  the  tables  of  population  in 
the  Annuaire  du  Bureau  des  Longitudes  of  France,  and 
those  of  Sweden  for  1820  : — 

Ages. 

Piu-is. 

Norway. 

Popu- 
lation. 

Ins.ane. 

Ratio. 

Popu- 
lation. 

Insane. 

Ratio. 

Before  20  years, 

20  to  25 

25  to  30 

311  to  40 

40  to  .50         - 

50  to  60 

00  &  upwards, 

0-402 
0-084 
0-080 
0-140 
0-114 
0-091 
0-089 

0061 
0-092 
0-1(16 
0-237 
0-216 
0-140 
0-148 

0-15 
1-09 
1-.32 
1-69 
1-90 
1-54 
1-G6 

0-411 
0-087 
0-084 
0-136 
0-109 
0-086 
0-087 

0-174 
0-097 
0-098 
0-205 
0-161 
0-129 
0-136 

0-42 
1-11 
1-17 
1-51 
1-48 
1-50 
1-56 

Total.    - 

1-000 

1-000 

1-00 

1-000 

1-000 

1-00 

The  numbers  for  France  also  concur  to  shoAV  that 
mental  aUcnation  is  most  frequent  between  the  40th 
and  50th  years.  In  Norwaj^  its  frequency  becomes 
great  between  the  30th  and  40th  years,  and  preserves 
the  same  value  almost  to  the  end  of  life. 

These  results  agree  well  with  the  observation  of 
M.  Esquirol,  that  insanity  is  a  disease  which  attends 
and  increases  with  civilisation.  The  fortress  of  the 
miderstanding  is  attacked,  either  by  too  much  mental 
labom-,  or  by  passions  and  disappointments  which  are 
too  acutely  felt. 

We  cannot  collect  too  many  documents  to  verify, 
A\ath  still  greater  accuracy,  the  results  of  the  tables 
which  I  have  just  given.  It  is  with  this  object  that 
I  now  bring  forward  some  new  documents  taken  from 
a  Rapport  Statistique  sur  la  Maison  d'Alienes  de  Bon- 
Sauveur  a  Caen,  during  the  years  1829  and  1830,  by 
jM.  Vastel.*  The  author  classes  the  insane  in  the  fol- 
lowing manner,  according  to  age.  In  the  last  column, 
the  total  numbers  are  reduced  to  100: — 

Ages. 

Insane. 

Jlen. 

Women. 

Insane. 

From  15  to  20  years, 

10 

7 

3 

0-03 

-V.    20  to  30     - 

54 

33 

16 

0-17 

„    30  to  40      «    - 

94 

44 

50 

0-29 

„    40  to  50      ~ 

82 

32 

SO 

0-25 

-    50  to  60      -    - 

57 

18 

39 

0-17 

,-    60  to  70      - 

25 

6 

19 

0-08 

-    70  to  80      ~.     - 

3 

1 

2 

0-01 

Total, 

325 

146 

179 

1-00 

Here,  again,  we  find  the  same  analogies,  the  same 
laws  of  development,  proceeding,  as  it  were,  in  a 
parallel  maimer. 

M.  Falret  has  written  a  work  on  insanity,  suicide, 
and  sudden  death,  of  which  at  present  we  only  know 
the  general  contents,  from  a  report  made  by  M.  Serres 
to  the  Institute.f    The  prmcipal  conclusions  of  this 

*  Annales  d'Hygifene,  Oct.  1832. 

t  The  work  of  M.  Falret  has  gained  the  prize  for  Statistics, 
founded  by  JI.  de  Monthyon. 

'78 

ON  MAN. 

work,  on  the  influence  of  season,  sex,  and  age,  are 
the  following  :— "  Of  the  total  number  of  the  insane, 
women  form  one-third  more  than  men.  Women  are 
most  subject  to  tlie  attack  of  insanity  in  July;  but 
for  men  this  montli  is  in  the  third  rank;  with  a  re- 
ference to  civil  statistics,  we  tind  that  more  than  one- 
fourth  of  the  men  are  bachelors :  as  to  age,  we  find 
mental  diseases  develop  themselves  in  men  between 
the  30th  and  39  th  years,  and  in  Avomen  between  the 
40th  and  49th  years ;  as  to  tlie  nature  of  the  afiec- 
tions,  melancholy  predominates  in  women,  and  the 
tendency  to  homicide  in  men.  The  same  contrast  is 
found  in  the  cures,  deaths,  and  relapses." 

CHAPTER   IL 

DEVELOPMENT  OF  JIORAL  QUALITIES. 
1.  Of  Foresight,  Temperance,  Activity,  &c. 

1  HAVE  already  observed,  that  it  is  not  so  much  a 
method  which  we  want,  when  endeavouring  to  appre- 
ciate the  development  of  moral  qualities,  as  sufficient 
and  trustworthy  data.  For  example,  if  we  are  consi- 
dering the  virtues  most  essential  to  the  social  state,  we 
have  scarcely  any  data,  and  those  which  exist,  having 
been  collected  Avith  intentions  very  different  from  our 
own,  are  either  unfit  for  purposes  of  comparison,  or 
utterly  incomplete.  For  example,  let  us  suppose  tliat 
Ave  Avant  to  ascertain  the  degree  of  foresight  at  diffe- 
rent periods  of  life,  as  well  as  the  modifications  of  this 
virtue  by  the  differences  of  sex,  locality,  profession,  &c. 
We  are  obliged  to  recur  to  actions  by  Avhich  this  fore- 
sight has  been  manifested;  and  if  Ave  cannot  collect 
them  all,  it  is  at  least  necessary  to  unite  as  great  a 
number  as  possible,  and  to  take  care  that  the  classes 
of  individuals  Avho  are  the  subject  of  comparison  are 
in  the  same  circumstances.  It  is  in  choosing,  class- 
ing, and  reflecting  upon  the  materials,  that  discern- 
ment and  unjirejudiced  reasoning  are  so  essentially 
necessary,  since  the  examples  to  be  followed  have  not 
yet  been  laid  doA\Ti.  Those  Avho  first  enter  upon  this 
field  of  research,  Avill  no  doubt  often  go  astray;  but 
their  efforts  Avill  be  A-aluable  and  useful,  if  they  are 
conducted  Avith  candour  and  impartiality.  Nothing 
is  more  injurious  to  the  interests  of  science,  than  to 
undertake  such  researches  Avith  notions  previously 
formed. 

If  Avc  had  authentic  documents  respecting  savings' 
banks,  assurance  societies,  and  the  different  institu- 
tions Avhicli  encourage  foresight — if  these  documents 
gave  the  age,  sex,  profession,  and  everj-  other  requisite 
information  concerning  the  individuals  Avho  take  part 
in  the  operations  of  these  establishments — it  is  evident 
that  Ave  should  already  haA'e  very  satisfactory  ele- 
ments to  enable  us  to  obtain  an  approximation  to  the 
values  Ave  are  seeking.  We  may  conceive,  moreover, 
hoAv  much  discernment  is  necessary,  in  placing  the 
IndiAiduals  concerned  in  similar  circumstances,  and 
distinguishing  those  among  Avhom  it  is  impossible  to 
establish  any  comparison ;  not  to  mention  other  data 
necessary  to  enable  us,  from  the  time  at  Avhicli  they 
Avere  taken,  to  render  all  chances  equal  on  both 
sides.  ^Vc  should  be  able,  Avith  due  precautions,  to 
make  other  documents,  furnished  by  establishments 
of  another  nature,  available  for  the  same  purpose,  and 
which  would  serve  in  this  manjier  to  verify  the  former 
conclusions.  Thus,  the  number  and  value  of  the  objects 
placed  in  paAvnbrokers'  hands,  Avill  better  exemplify 
the  Avant  of  foresight  of  a  community  than  any  misery 
in  its  condition.  For,  if  it  be  true  that  accidents  and 
reverses  of  fortune  sometimes  compel  men,  even  tlie 
most  prudent,  to  have  recourse  to  such  establishments, 
it  much  more  frequently  happens  that  the  deposits 
are  placed  there  from  want  of  due  care  and  economy. 
The  passion  for  gambling,  tlie  numljcr  of  failures,  the 
frequenting  of  coffee-houses  and  low  haunts,  drunken- 
ness, and  many  other  circumstances,  Avould  furnish 

iiseful  elements  for  our  purpose  in  appreciating  the 
Avant  of  order  and  foresight.  On  most  of  the  subjects 
of  inquiry  Avhich  I  have  just  mentioned,  there  exist 
evidences  Avhich  are  more  or  less  complete,  but  Avhich 
are  little  understood  in  general,  as  I  have  already 
obserA'ed. 

Drunkenness  is  a  A'ice  of  Avliich  Are  ought  to  have 
exact  records  in  countries  Avhere  the  police  are  ac- 
tive ;  yet  it  is  to  be  regretted  that  they  are  altogether 
unknoA^^l  to  those  Avho  have  the  greatest  interest  in 
making  use  of  them.  As  drunkenness  is  a  common 
source  of  many  other  vices,  and  also  of  crimes — 
tending  to  demoralise  and  to  deteriorate  the  species — 
gOA'ernments  ought  to  favour  the  researches  of  learned 
men,  Avho  seek  to  ascertain  the  condition  of  the  people, 
and  Avho  try  to  improve  them.  Drunkenness  is  influ- 
enced by  a  great  number  of  causes  Avhich  are  easily 
estimated,  because  the  necessary  data  require  less 
investigation  than  those  relating  to  other  analogous 
estimates.  I  am  persuaded  that  a  Avork,  well  Avritten, 
Avhich  would  endeavour  to  make  knoAvn  the  injiuries 
this  pestilence  inflicts  on  society,  Avould  be  of  the 
greatest  utility,  and  would  furnish  an  explanation  of 
a  great  number  of  isolated  facts  which  depend  upon 
it,  and  Avhich  Ave  are  in  the  habit  of  considering  as 
purely  accidental. 

In  England,  about  half  a  century  ago,  strong  drinks 
and  liquors  Avere  used  in  excess ;  and  authors  Avere 
not  long  in  finding  out  to  what  extent  this  Aice 
led  to  thoughtlessness  and  injury  in  tlie  nation,  hoAV 
much  the  health  of  man  suffered,  and  hoAv  much  tlie 
mortality  increased  Avith  the  demoralisation  of  the 
people.  Their  obserA^ations  liave  not  been  lost ;  and 
a  progi-essive  reformation  took  place,  commencing 
Avitli  the  better  classes.  This  defect,  formerly  so  com- 
mon, and  of  which  they  Avere  almost  proud,  is  not  to 
be  seen  noAv,  except  in  the  lower  orders,  from  among 
Avhom  it  Avill  gradually  disappear,  as  much  as  the  na- 
ture of  a  moist  climate  will  alloAv,  Avhere  cordials, 
taken  moderately,  are  calculated  to  produce  a  useful 
effect.  When  climate  creates  a  necessity,  it  is  very 
difficult  to  prcA'ent  the  public  from  abusing  it.  I  am 
obliged  to  j\Ir  Babbage  for  tlie  communication  of  some 
curious  documents,  containing  a  list  of  all  the  drunken 
persons  who  have  been  arrested  by  the  London  police 
in  the  year  1832,  and  AvhoAvere  immediately  released, 
because  no  charge  Avas  brought  against  them.  Al- 
tliough  the  residts  of  one  year  cannot  be  A'ery  useful, 
I  have  thought  proper  not  to  omit  them.  If  avc  pos- 
sessed an  extensive  series  of  similar  documents,  we 
should  find  in  them  the  most  precious  memorials  of 
the  manners  of  the  English  people,  and,  in  particular, 
all  Avhich  relates  to  changes  in  the  condition  of  the 
population. 

Number  of  Drunken  Persons  taken  up  by  tlio 
London  Police  in  1832. 

Months. 

Januarj', 

February, 

IMarch,    - 

April, 

May,        - 

June,   - 

July, 

August, 

September, 

October, 

November, 

December, 

Total, 

1,190 

i,m 

1,190 
1,150 

1 ,2(K) 

i.2-2r, 
i,;«5 
i,.m5 

1,198 
1,560 

i,.T(;o 

1,425 

15,.'i33 

825 

740 

710 

690 
730 

780 

n<)0 

9.« 
975 
1,UH) 
880 
9a5 

10,290 

1-44 
1-59 
1-67 
1-67 
1-64 
1-57 
1-37 
1-39 
1-23 
1-42 
1-.55 
1-52 

1-49 

The  number  of  drunken  people  taken  up  by  tlie 
police  Avas  then  25,623  ;  to  Avhich  Ave  ought  to  add 
3505  individuals  brought  before  the  magistrates,  and 
compelled  to  pay  a  fine,  as  Avell  as  3429  others,  Avho 
have  likewise  been  conducted  before  the  magistrates, 
but  without  undergoing  condemnation ;  so  that  the 
total  amounts  to  32,557.     Wc  must  remark,  that  we 

ON  MAN. 

79 

only  know  those  cases  of  drunkenness  which  were  so 
great  as  to  disturb  the  pubhc  tranquilUty.  Also,  in 
comparisons  which  we  shordd  like  to  establish  between 
other  towns,  it  Avould  be  necessary  to  be  extremely 
circumspect,  and  consider  the  degree  to  which  its  sup- 
pression was  carried ;  or,  rather,  in  comparing  one 
town  with  itself  at  dilferent  times,  it  would  be  neces- 
sary to  take  into  account  the  effect  of  the  police,  and 
the  changes  they  may  have  produced. 

One  would  require  to  have  long  inhabited  London, 
and  to  know  perfectly  the  pecidiarities  which  it  pre- 
sented in  1832,  to  draw  all  the  conclusions  inferable 
from  the  preceding  numbers  ;  still  there  are  some  re- 
sults which  it  may  be  very  interesting  to  point  out. 
And,  firstly,  we  have  to  notice  the  great  number  of 
women,  compared  with  the  number  of  men,  Avhich  is 
-  at  least  as  2  to  3.  This  disproportion  is  great,  and 
must  make  us  think  unfavourably  of  the  moral  re- 
straint of  M'omen  in  the  lower  class,  especially  in  a 
country  where  the  sex  is  so  well  conducted  in  the 
ranks  of  society  a  little  higher.  This  ratio  varies 
according  to  the  different  months,  and  in  a  manner 
which  would  make  us  think  that  the  variation  is  not 
purely  accidental.  Towards  the  end  of  winter,  and 
at  the  commencement  of  spring,  the  men  are  compa- 
ratively the  most  numerous  :  the  contrary  takes  place 
in  simimer. 

If  we  take  the  nimibers  in  their  absolute  value,  we 
find,  for  men,  that  they  sensibly  increase  from  the 
commencement  to  the  end  of  the  year ;  for  women, 
the  smallest  nvunber  is  in  spring,  and 'the  largest  in 
summer  and  the  commencement  of  autumn.  Classing 
them  according  to  the  seasons,  we  find — 

For  January,  Februaiy,  and  March, 

•  •    April,  May,  and  June, 

•  •    July,  August,  and  September, 

•  •    October,  November,  and  December, 

JNlen.  AVomen. 
3:>.Y,  2275 

,T.7.5  2200 

aHM  2!)(X) 

4345  2915 

It  must  be  remarked,  that  this  is  during  the  latter 
months  of  the  year,  when  the  feasts  of  Christmas  and 
St  Andrew  take  place,  which  are  not  always  celebrated 
by  the  people  with  the  greatest  degree  of  temperance. 
If  we  seek  to  form  an  idea  of  the  activity  of  a 
people,  of  the  state  of  its  industry,  and  of  its  produc- 
tive faculties,  in  the  absence  of  direct  data,  we  have, 
for  the  means  of  appreciating  its  revenue,  the  value 
of  that  which  it  is  able  to  pay  to  government,  the 
nature  of  its  contribution,  the  quantity  of  imports  or 
exports,  the  price  of  ground,  of  hand  work,  &c.,  but 
particularly  the  state  of  the  population,  because,  as 
we  have  been  able  to  see,  the  population  is  regtdated 
by  the  number  of  things  produced.  I  shall  present 
an  example  of  such  a  valuation,  a  verj'  poor  one,  no 
doubt,  but  one  which  will  explain  my  idea  :* — 

Countries. 

British  Isles, 
France,    - 
Low  Countries, 
Prussian  monarchy, 
Austrian  empire, 
Spain,   ... 

Countries. 

British  Isles, 

France, 

Low  Coiuitries, 

Pnissian  monarcliy, 

Austrian  empire, 

Russian  empire,     - 

United  States,   - 

Quantity  of 
1  asturage. 

h  of  territory 

One 
Horse  to 

12inhab, 
1!)  •  • 
13  •• 
10  •• 
27  ■• 
75      .. 

One  L,  ,  , 
head  of  N"mt,er  of 
Cattle  to      S^ecp. 

2  inhab. 
5     •• 

3  •■ 
3  •• 
8     •• 

U      •• 

2  to!  inhab. 
ltd  •• 
lto3  ■• 
lto6  •• 
lto3  •• 
Itol     •■ 

Population. 

23,400,000 
32,000,0(10 
6,118,000 
12,464,000 
.32,(100,000 
56,500,000 
11,800,000 

Inhabitants 

to  one 
square  mile. 

257 
208 
339 
155 
105 
37 

Ratio  of  the 
Army  to  the 
Population. 

229 
138 
142 

80 
118 

.^7 
1977 

*  Tlie  first  table  is  taten  from  the  Revue  de  Paris  of  M.  Moreau 
de  Jonnes ;  the  numljers  of  the  second  and  third  tables  are  from 
the  works  of  M.  Balbi — La  Monarchie  Franfaisc  Comparce  aux 
rrincqiuux  Elats,  and  L'AUn'ye  de  Gcoyraphic. 

Countries. 

a  -" 

Part  of  the  Popu- 
lation employed 

lis 

!..! 

in  Manu- 

faetiu-es. 

in  Agri- 
culture. 

^"1 

British  Isles, 

0-50 

0-15 

0-34 

francs. 
65-2 

francs. 
869 

France,    - 
Low  Countries, 

0-33 

0'29 

0-36 

9 

0-44 

9 

30-9 
26-3 

145 
635 

Prussian  monarchy, 
Austrian  empire, 

0-27 
0-23 

0-18 
0-09 

0-C6 
0-C9 

17-2 
10-9 

29-3 
45-6 

Russian  empire,    - 
United  States,   - 

0-12 

9 

0-06 

079 

9 

6-6 
121 

21-4 
34-8 

If,  in  the  beginning,  we  compare  France  to  England, 
we  shall  find  the  first  kingdom  proportionally  less 
peopled  than  the  latter :  there  are  fewer  inhabitants 
in  town,  and  also  fewer  employed  in  manufactures : 
the  Englishman  pays  into  the  treasury  twice  as  much 
as  the  Frenchman,  and  his  exports  are  much  more 
considerable :  the  proportion,  as  regards  the  two  coun- 
tries, according  to  M.  Ad.  Balbi,  is  nearly  as  3  to  1. 

Tlie  Prussian  monarchy  bears  almost  the  same  pro- 
portion to  France  which  France  does  to  England.  It 
is  remarkable,  according  to  our  table,  thatthe  coun- 
tries which  have  the  largest  population,  are  gene- 
rally those  which  have  the  most  town  inhabitants,  the 
greatest  number  of  hands  employed  in  manufacture, 
and  proportionally  the  fewest  in  agriculture  ;  they  have 
fewer  men  in  the  army,,  pay  most  taxes  to  the  state, 
and  have  the  largest  debt.*  Land  armies  appear  to 
be  numerically  in  inverse  ratio  to  maritime  ones :  the 
latter  require  fewer  men,  but  more  expense. 

In  Europe,  with  the  exception  of  Russia,  nearly 
the  same  number  of  hands  are  employed  in  agricul- 
ture, and  the  surplus  population  turn  to  manufac- 
tures (industrie).  It  then  becomes  necessary  to  change 
the  nature  of  the  products  by  exportation ;  and  the 
country  which  has  the  most  manufocturcs  is  gene- 
rally that  which  has  the  most  exports.  Manufac- 
tures are  alwaj's  and  every  where  of  more  importance 
than  agriculture,  and  those  Avho  pursue  them  ijossess 
the  greatest  riches  and  pay  the  most  to  the  state ;  but 
since  the  revenues  from  manufivctures  are  more  uncer- 
tain, their  wealth  is  less  secure :  we  also  see  that  the 
public  debt  rises  immensely  in  value,  and  every  thing 
which  tends  to  confine  the  scope  of  trade,  and  to  dimi- 
nish the  exchange  of  produce,  will  cause  a  consider- 
able mortality. 

It  is  to  be  regretted  that,  at  the  present  time,  we 
do  not  possess,  for  different  countries,  exact  accounts 
of  the  prices  of  manual  labour,  of  ground,  of  lodgings, 
of  the  food  necessary  to  the  life  of  an  individual,  of 
the  carriage  of  letters,  and  the  means  of  communica- 
tion for  travellers  and  merchandise ;  these  accounts 
would  give  data  for  comparing  the  activity  of  the 
inhabitants  and  the  price  of  time — valuable  elements, 
but  of  which  some  people  do  not  yet  appear  to  under- 
stand the  importance. 

I  had  pro^iosed,  at  this  place,  to  compare  the  dona- 
tions made  for  the  use  of  the  poor,  of  hospitals,  and 
benevolent  institutions  in  general ;  but  I  must  omit 
this  investigation,  from  want  of  exact  documents :  I 
particularly  regret  that  M.  Guerry,  when  considering 
this  subject  in  France,  has  only  given  ratios,  and  no 
absolute  numbers,  nor  any  of  the  sources  whence  he 
has  extracted  them. 

It  appears  to  be  still  more  diflicult  to  speak  on  the 
influence  of  religious  ideas,  and  the  condition  of  people 
in  this  respect. 

A  very  useful  addition  to  moral  statistics,  would 
be  to  point  out  the  dates  at  wliich  certain  practices 
and  customs  existed,  and  also  the  time  when  they 
commenced,  and  when  they  ceased.  For  example,  at 
what  period  prosecutions  for  witchcraft  were  most 
*  According  to  M.  le  Baron  de  Slorogues,  states  in  which  the 
people  are  most  given  to  agriculture,  are  those  which  are  the  least 
loaded  with  pauperism. — Recherche  des  Causes  de  la  Richcsse  et 
de  la  Miscre  des  Peuples  Cicilises,  p.  385. 

80 

ON  MAN. 

numerous,  when  they  began  to  take  place,  and  when 
they  -were  discontinued ;  in  what  countries  men  were 
tortured  and  put  to  death  for  religious  opinions,  ^nth- 
out  having  disturbed  the  public  peace,  at  the  same 
time  what  were  the  extreme  limits  of  the  period, 
and  the  epochs  of  greatest  severity ;  what  kind  of 
fanaticism,  either  poUtical,  religious,  or  otherwise,  has 
prevailed  at  any  period,  in  any  country ;  what  gave 
rise  to  it,  and  what  caused  its  decline ;  what  was  its 
nature,  intensity,  and  results,  &c.  I  shall  not  stay 
longer  to  make  such  enumerations ;  these  are  re- 
searches which  henceforth  must  necessarily  be  con- 
sidered as  pertaming  to  the  history  of  nations,  and 
will  assist  us  in  determining  their  laws  of  develop- 
ment. However,  I  do  not  think  we  ought  to  aban- 
don this  subject  without  giving  an  example  of  a 
particular  kind  of  mania  or  fanaticism,  so  to  term 
it,  which  appears  to  be  making  sensible  advances 
every  day. 

2.  Of  Suicides  and  Duels. 

The  destruction  of  man  by  his  own  hands,  although 
generally  repugnant  to  the  notions  of  modern  society, 
has  nevertheless  found  panegyrists,  and  those  who 
have  proclaimed  its  advantages.  Suicide,  among  some 
nations,  continues  to  be  branded  with  infamy  by  the 
public.  The  ancients  were  not  entirely  of  this  opinion : 
it  was  often  practised  by  the  most  illustrious  men,  and 
has  been  mentioned  with  admiration  by  their  gravest 
historians.  We  are  naturally  excited  by  the  death 
of  Cato,  who  wished  not  to  survive  the  liberty  of  his 
country ;  by  the  death  of  Lucretia,  who  wished  not 
to  survive  her  dishonour ;  or  even  by  the  death  of  the 
criminal,  who  seeks  to  spare  liis  family  the  shame  of 
seeing  his  head  fall  on  the  scaffold. 

The  destruction  of  one  man  by  another,  excites 
horror ;  yet  this  dreadful  crime  may  also,  in  our 
manners  and  modern  institutions,  present  the  appear- 
ance of  a  virtue  under  certain  circumstances.  We  can 
only  comprehend  these  apparent  contradictions,  by 
admitting  that  the  crime  consists,  not  in  the  action, 
but  in  the  intention  of  him  who  commits  it ;  so  that, 
if  the  intention  was  noble  or  generous,  the  action  may 
also  be  considered  of  the  same  character.  This  is  the 
only  manner  in  which  Ave  can  explain  the  diversity 
of  opinions  on  duelling  especially,  which  was  unknown 
to  the  ancients,  and  which  had  its  rise  in  the  middle 
ages. 

We  possess  few  data  on  the  number  of  suicides  ; 
and  what  information  we  have  on  the  number  of  duels, 
is  so  incomplete  or  inaccurate,  that  we  cannot  make 
use  of  it.  From  the  table  of  M.  Balbi,  entitled  La 
Monarchic  Franfaise  Comparic  aux  Principaux  Etats 
(lu  Globe,  suicides  appear  to  take  place  in  the  follow- 
ing proportions : — ■ 

France  (1827),       - 

1  suicide  to  20,740  inhal 

itants. 

Prussian  monarchy,  - 

14,404 

Austrian  empire, 

20,900 

Russian  empire, 

4.'),182 

United  Stotes— New  York, 

7,707 

Boston, 

12,500 

Baltimore, 

13,(J50 

Philadelphia, 

15,875 

According  to  Casper,  who  has  paid  much  attention 
to  this  subject,*  the  number  of  suicides  is  particularly 
great  in  towns;  indeed,  we  annually  enumerate  as 
follows : — 

To  100,00f)  Inhabitants        1  Suicide  to 

At  Copenhagen,        -        100  suicides  lOOO  inhabitants. 

-  •  Paris,       -         -         -      49       ■  •  2040 

•  ■  Hamburg,  -  45       •  •  2222 

•  •  Berlin,  -  .  M  •■  2941 
• .  London,  -  -  20  •  •  SfKXl 
• .  Elberfeld,        -        -      20      •  •  500O 

The   General   Records  of  tlie   criminal  courts  of 
Trance,  present,  from  1827,  annual  accounts,  not  only 
of  suicides  but  also  of  accidental  deatlis  and  duels 
*  Bcitrage,  &c.,  1  vol.  12mo.    Berlin :  1025. 

wliich  have  come  to  the  Icnowledge  of  the  public  ma- 
gistrate.    Accorduig  to  these  accounts,  we  find — 

Years. 

1827, 
1028, 
1829, 
1830, 
1831, 

Total, 

Accidental 
Deaths. 

4,744 
4,855 
5,048 
4,478 
5,045 

24,170 

Suicides. 

1542 
1754 

1904 
1756 
2084 

9040 

followed 
by  Death. 

not 
followed 
by  Death. 

This  table  gives  4834  accidental  deaths,  and  1808 
suicides,  as  the  annual  average ;  which,  to  a  popula- 
tion of  32,000,000  souls,  gives  one  accidental  deatli  to 
7000,  and  1  suicide  to  18,000  inhabitants ;  as  to  the 
number  of  duels,  it  may  be  supposed  that  the  values 
in  the  table  are  too  low. 

A  very  great  number  of  suicides  takes  place  in  the 
department  of  the  Seine.  They  have  been  committed 
in  the  following  manner,  during  the  years  from  1817 
to  1825  inclusive : — 

Years. 

3 

a 

o 

1 

i 

Si 

ll 

to 

s 

a 

a 

■^ 

> 

M 

'o 

P4 

1017,     •  - 

352 

160 

46 

35 

39 

36 

23 

13 

1818,     - 

330 

131 

48 

35 

40 

27 

28 

21 

1819, 

370" 

148 

59 

46 

39 

44 

20 

21) 

1820,     - 

325 

129 

46 

39 

37 

32 

28 

14 

1821, 

348 

127 

60 

42 

33 

38 

25 

23 

1822,    - 

317 

120 

48 

49 

33 

21 

31 

15 

1023, 

390 

114 

56 

61 

43 

48 

47 

21 

1824,     - 

371 

115 

42 

61 

47 

38 

40 

23 

1825, 

396 

134 

56 

59 

49 

40 

38 

20 

Total, 

320.-) 

1178 

461 

427 

360 

324 

280 

17.^ 

The  average  number  of  suicides,  therefore,  in  the 
department  of  the  Seine,  annually  reaches  356  ;  which, 
for  a  population  of  860,000  soiils,  gives  1  suicide  to 
2400  inhabitants ;  Geneva  gives  the  ratio  of  1  to  3900, 
for  the  years  between  1820  and  1826  inclusive.*  Tlio 
following  are  the  modes  of  destruction,  according  to 
95  observations  : — 36  individuals  perished  in  water  ; 
34  blew  out  their  brains  ;  6  hanged  themselves ;  5  were 
poisoned ;  2  died  from  wounds ;  2  cast  themselves  from 
an  eminence.  Tlius,  with  regard  to  the  preference 
shown  for  particular  modes,  these  numbers  are  almost 
the  same  as  at  Paris, 

The  means  of  destruction  are  not  every  where  the 
same :  thus,  at  Berlin,  according  to  Casper,  535  sui- 
cides have  taken  place  in  the  following  manner: — 
234  by  strangulation,  163  by  fire-arms,  60  by  sub- 
mersion, 27  by  cutting  the  throat,  20  by  cutting  in- 
struments, &c.,  19byvolimtaryfalls,  10  by  poisoning, 
and  2  by  opening  veius.f 

In  all  the  preceding  numbers,  one  may  perceive  an 
alarming  concordance  between  the  results  of  the  diffe- 
rent years,  as  they  succeed  each  other.  This  regu- 
larity, in  an  act  which  appears  so  intimately  connected 
witli  volition,  will  soon  appear  before  us  again  in  a 
striking  manner,  as  connected  with  crime.  However, 
society  in  a  country  may  undergo  modifications,  and 

*  Ilertha,  August  1820 ;  and  Bulletin  de  M.  de  Fdrussac,  May 
1829. 

t  Studying  the  circiunstances  connected  with  suicides,  duels, 
and  certain  kinds  of  crimes,  we  may  be  disposed  to  think  that 
man  is  frequently  actuated  by  a  propensity  to  imitation.  M.  Chev- 
reul,  in  a  letter  addressed  to  HI.  Amp6re  [Sitr  une  Classc  Parti- 
culiere  de  Mouveincns  Muscidaires) ,  has  brought  forward  some  phi- 
losophical considerations  of  great  interest,  and  which  show  how 
much  human  n."iturc  deserves  to  be  studied  more  deeply,  in  some 
relations  which  have  been  perh.ips  too  much  neglected. 

ON  MAN. 

81 

thus  produce  an  alteration  in  what  at  first  presented 
a  remarkable  constancy  for  a  short  time.  According 
to  Casper,*  at  Berhu,  between  1788  and  1797,  only  62 
suicides  took  place ;  and  128  between  1797  and  1808, 
and  546  between  1813  and  1822.  It  has  been  re- 
marked, tliat  suicides  have  become  more  numerous ; 
this  conjecture  would  be  very  probable,  if  it  be  true 
that  they  are  a  result  of  civilisation,  and  if  we 
consider  that  legislation  endeavours  to  repress  them 
in  some  countries.  It  is  to  be  doubted,  however, 
whether  there  are  not  some  errors  in  the  numbers, 
depending  on  the  circumstance  that  statistical  re- 
searches were  made  with  much  less  care  formerly 
than  at  present. 

M.  Casper,  in  his  researches  on  the  subject,  has  at- 
tentively discussed  the  i.ifluence  of  states  of  the  atmo- 
sphere on  suicide,  and  also  the  influence  of  seasons, 
which,  despite  the  few  observations  we  possess,  is 
manifested  in  a  remarkable  manner,  as  may  be  seen 
in  the  following  table,  where  the  suicides  occurring 
during  each  season  are  noted : — 

Montlis. 

J.an.,  Feb.,  &  Ularch, 
April,  May,  &  .Tune, 
July,  Aug.,  &  Sept., 
Oct.,  Nov.,  &  Dec, 

nam- 

West- 

1812-1«22. 

burg :  t 

minster::): 

1810-1822. 

1812-1821. 

ino 

39 

G7 

ir..5 

31 

55 

173 

41 

60 

145 

38 

46 

Paris :  § 

Si.x 
Years. 

Here,  again,  summer  appears  to  exercise  a  greater 
influence  on  the  number  of  suicides  than  the  otlier 
seasons,  as  weU  as  on  the  number  of  those  afiected 
with  insanity,  and,  as  we  shaU  soon  perceive,  also  on 
tlie  number  of  crimes  against  person. 

M.  Casper  also  finds  that,  all  things  being  equal, 
suicides  in  town  and  country  have  been  numerically 
as  14  to  4.  With  respect  to  difference  of  sex,  he  has 
observed,  for  Berlin,  that,  of  727  suicides,  606  were 
committed  by  men,  and  121  by  women,  which  gives 
a  ratio  of  5  to  1.  According  to  the  liecherches  Statis- 
tiqries  stir  Paris,  the  ratio  for  this  city  would  be  2  to  1 
nearly.  At  Geneva,  the  ratio  has  been  4  to  1  for  the 
seven  years  from  1820  to  1826. 

We  scarcely  possess  any  researches  on  the  ages  at 
which  suicide  takes  place.  I  only  know  of  those 
published  by  Casper  for  Berlin,  ||  and  those  published 
for  Geneva.^  M.  Guerry  has  given  the  number  of 
suicides  for  Paris  ;**  but  only  those  of  men,  and  which 
have  taken  place  by  suspension  or  fire-arms.  The 
following  table  presents  a  summary  of  the  documents 
for  Berlin  and  Geneva : — 

Ages. 

Berlin : 

Geneva : 

1818-1824. 

1820-1826. 

Below  10  years, 

^> 

From  10  to  15  years. 

-     I7f 

5 

..     15to20    ■• 

32) 

..    20to25    •• 

-      30-) 

..    25to30    •• 

25  ( 

24 

.•    30to35    -• 

-      12  C 

••    35to40    •• 

9J 

..    40to50    •• 

32  J 

45 

..    50to60    .. 

..    60to70    •• 

-     I7j 

•  •    70to80    •• 

9f 

21 

•  •    80  and  upwards. 

-        23 

Total,  -  -  220  95 

To  have  a  better  idea  of  these  nimibers,  it  will  be 
preferable  to  class  them  in  periods,  each  of  10  years' 
duration,  and  to  reduce  the  number  to  1000.  At  the 
same  time,  we  may  compare  them  with  those  of  Paris, 

♦  Beitrage  zurMedictnischenStatistik,  &c.  8vo.  Berlin:  1825. 
Sec  also  the  researches  of  Dr  Heyfelder,  entitled  Der  Selbsmord, 
&c.    8vo.    Berlin:  1028. 

t  Grohmann  in  Hufel,  Journal,  1  c.  i  Falret,  1  c. 

§  Esquirol,  1  c.  II  Beitragc,  p.  53. 

H  Beitrage,  and  Bulletin  de  M.  de  Fcrussac,  Mai  1829. 
**  Annalcs  d'llygiiine,  -Janvier  18;)1, 

and  with  a  population  of  1000  individuals  arranged 
according  to  their  respective  ages. 

Ages. 

10  to  20  years, 
20  to  30  •  • 
30  to  40  •  • 
40  to  50  • . 
50  to  GO  •  • 
CO  to  70  •  ■ 
70  to  80  •  • 
80  and  upwards, 

Total, 

224 
251 
96 
156 
146 

77 
41 

9 

Suicides  at  Paris 

by 

Shooting. 

61 
283 
182 
150 
161 
126 

35 
2 

by  Sus- 
pension. 

68 
511 
94  ' 
188  1 
256  I 
2.T5^ 
Ulfl  [ 
03 

inoo 

■30 

474 

c«  12  to 
■3.S.S 

g-a'S 
fri     S 

312 
188 
160 
136 
100 
68 
30 
G 

The  number  of  suicides  between  10  and  30  years 
of  age,  is  extremely  high  at  Berlin ;  it  would  further 
appear,  that  between  30  and  40  years  of  age,  the  mi- 
nimum number  occurs,  or  at  least  that  the  number  of 
suicides,  which  was  very  great  between  the  10th  and 
30th  years,  then  diminishes,  to  regain  fresh  intensity 
towards  the  end  of  life.  Will  not  the  circumstance 
have  some  influence,  that  a  father  separates  himself 
from  his  family  with  more  difficulty  when  his  chil- 
dren are  young  than  when  they  can  already  provide 
for  their  ovm  necessities  ?  It  M^ould  be  very  interest- 
ing to  have  more  documents  on  the  motives  which 
lead  to  the  commission  of  suicide. 

It  is  sufficiently  evident,  that  some  particular  cause 
exists  at  BerUn,  which  induces  such  a  great  number 
of  young  persons  between  16  and  20  to  destroy  them- 
selves. Removing  the  effects  of  this  agency,  the  re- 
sults agree  sufficiently  with  those  of  Paris  and  Geneva, 
and  tend  to  show  that  the  number  of  suicides  increases 
with  age,  though  we  must  take  care  to  bear  in  mind 
the  number  of  individuals  of  each  age  who  are  found 
in  a  population.*  This  tendency,  in  its  first  develop- 
ment, almost  progresses  in  the  same  ratio  as  the  deve- 
lopment of  intelligence  and  mental  alienation. 

It  would  also  appear  that  the  hours  of  tlie  day  have 
some  influence  on  suicide  by  suspension.  M.  Guerry 
has  given  the  following  numbers  in  the  Annales  d'Hij- 
gihie  for  January  1831 : — 

Suicides. 

From  midnight  to  2  in 

the  morning, 

-       77 

-      2to   4o 

'clock. 

... 

45 

-      4  to   6 

™ 

.           .           . 

58 

-     6  to   8 

-. 

. 

135 

„      8  to  10 

^ 

. 

-       110 

-    10  to  12 

^ 

. 

123 

-    12  to   2 

„ 

. 

32 

.,      2  to    4 

„ 

- 

84 

„      4  to   6 

„ 

. 

-      104 

-      6  to   8 

— 

.           .           . 

77 

„      8  to  10 

— 

. 

-       84 

-    10  to  12 

~ 

- 

71 

1000 

MM.  Benzenberg  and  Casper  have  compared  the 
number  of  suicides  with  the  number  of  homicides  and 
mortal  blows,  to  infer  thence  the  probability  that  an 
individual  found  dead  has  perished  by  one  or  the 
other.f  The  towns  of  Prussia  give  the  following 
numbers : — 

Suicides.    Homicides. 

1818,  ....  339  27 

1819,  ....         453  24 
182ft,          ....               475                   40 

1821,  .  .  .  .         45C  40 

1822,  ....  442  45 

2164 

176 

*  In  the  An.  d'Hygime,  Oct.  1829,  there  are  two  very  remark- 
able Memoirs  by  M.  Devergie,  one  on  the  mode  of  ascertaining 
how  long  a  person  has  been  lU'o^vned,  the  other  containing  soma 
researches  on  those  who  have  been  hanged. 

t  Beitrage,  &c.,  p.  94. 

82 

ON  MAN. 

This  ratio  is  aLout  1  honiicide  to  12  suicides.  M. 
Hermann  has  found  that,  in  Russia,  the  number  of 
suicides  is  almost  equal  to  that  of  homicides,  and 
that  this  ratio  does  not  vary  much  in  the  different 
parts  of  the  empire,  although  the  nimiher  of  suicides 
and  homicides  are  far  from  preserving  the  same  com- 
parative value  to  the  population.*  In  France,  the 
suicides  are  to  the  population  as  1  to  20,000  nearly, 
and  the  homicides  as  1  to  48,000 :  this  ratio  of  sui- 
cides to  homicides  is  therefore  nearly  as  5  to  3. 

In  concluding  this  chapter,  I  shall  lay  before  the 
reader  the  principal  conclusions  contained  in  the  work 
of  M.  Falret  on  suicides,  from  the  report  of  M.  Serres 
to  the  Institute  of  France,  which  gives  the  only  re- 
sults hitherto  published.  "  Suicides  present,  in  both 
sexes,  a  very  remarkable  contrariety,  according  to  the 
results  furnished  by  tables.  Thus,  the  month  of  April, 
attended  with  the  greatest  number  of  suicides  among 
men,  is  only  so  in  the  fifth  degree  among  women ; 
with  the  latter,  the  month  of  August  occupies  the 
same  rank  as  April  does  for  men. 

The  social  position  of  the  parties  presents  a  no  less 
remarkable  contrast.  Of  the  men,  it  is  bachelors  who 
form  the  largest  number ;  and  of  the  women,  Ave  find 
the  greatest  number  among  those  engaged  in  the  bonds 
of  matrimony.  We  cannot  omit  to  observe  here  the 
difFei'cnce  between  women  and  men,  as  respects  the 
influence  of  concubinage  on  the  production  of  volun- 
tary death  :  this  influence,  for  women,  is  almost  treble. 

We  observe  still  more  striking  differences,  if  such 
can  be,  between  the  two  sexes,  as  respects  the  influ- 
ence of  age.  In  men,  it  is  from  35  to  45  that  the 
greatest  number  of  suicides  take  place ;  in  women  it 
is  from  25  to  35.  The  next  period  for  men  is  45  to 
55  ;  whilst  in  women  this  only  holds  tlie  fifth  rank : 
but,  by  a  singular  compensation,  we  observe  twice  as 
many  suicides  among  young  girls  as  among  boys  who 
have  not  reached  their  fifteenth  year. 

If  we  inquire  into  the  mode  of  self-destruction  which 
is  practised,  we  shall  see  that  men  give  a  decided 
preference  to  cutting  instruments  and  fire-arms,  while 
women  destroy  themselves  by  poison,  falls  from  a 
great  height,  or  asphyxiate  themselves  by  means  of 
burning  charcoal." 

CHAPTER  III. 

OF  TUE  DEVELOPME.NT  OF  THE  PROPENSITY  TO  CRIME. 
J.  Of  Crimes  in  General,  and  of  the  Repression  of  them. 
Supposing  men  to  be  placed  in  similar  circumstances, 
I  call  the  greater  or  less  probability  of  committing 
crime,  the  propensiti/  to  crime.  My  object  is  more 
especially  to  investigate  the  influence  of  season,  cli- 
mate, sex,  and  age,  on  this  propensity. 

I  have  said  that  the  circmnstanccs  in  which  men 
are  placed  ought  to  be  similar,  that  is  to  say,  equally 
favourable,  both  in  the  existence  of  objects  likely  to 
excite  the  propensity  and  in  the  facility  of  commit- 
ting the  crime.  It  is  not  enough  that  a  man  may 
merely  have  the  intention  to  do  evil,  he  must  also 
liave  the  opportunity  and  the  means.  Thus  the  pro- 
pensity to  crime  may  be  the  same  in  France  as  in 
England,  wittiout,  on  that  account,  the  ?«om//<// of  the 
nations  being  the  same.  I  think  this  distinction  of 
importance.f 

*  Mcimoires  (le  rAcademie  de  Piitcrsbourg,  18.30;  and  Bulletin 
de  M.  dc  Fdnissac,  Nov.  18.11. 

I  This  has  been  very  clearly  established  by  M.  Alphonse  de 
CandoUe,  in  an  article  entitled  ConnUleralions  sur  la  Staiisliiiue 
lies  Delils,  inserted  in  the  Bibliothe<jue  Unifcrsclle  de  Genive,  Feb. 
18.3().  The  author  regards  the  propensity  of  individuals  to  crime 
as  depending  on  their  morality,  the  temptation  to  which  they 
are  exposed,  ami  the  greater  or  less  facility  they  may  find  to  com- 
mit ofJ'enccs.  Of  these  three  causes,  the  first  belongs  more  espe- 
cially to  the  man  ;  the  other  two  are,  properly  speaking,  external 
to  him.  As  it  is  with  man  that  I  am  occupied,  I  have  endeavoured, 
in  the  com'se  of  my  researches,  that  the  causes  external  to  hin^ 
might  be  constantly  nearly  equal,  so  that  they  might  be  left  out 

There  is  still  another  important  distinction  to  be 
made ;  namely,  that  two  individuals  may  have  the 
same  propensity  to  crime,  without  being  equally  cri- 
minal, if  one,  for  example,  were  inclined  to  theft,  and 
the  other  to  assassination.* 

Lastly,  this  is  also  the  place  to  examine  a  difficulty 
which  has  not  escaped  M.  Alphonse  de  CandoUe  in 
the  work  above  mentioned:  it  is  this,  that  our  ob- 
servations can  only  refer  to  a  certain  number  of  known 
and  tried  offences,  out  of  the  unknown  sum  total  of  crimes 
committed.     Since  this  sum  total  of  crimes  committed 
will  probably  ever  continue  unknown,  all  the  rea- 
soning of  which  it  is  the  basis  will  be  more  or  less 
defective.    I  do  not  hesitate  to  say,  that  aU  the  know- 
ledge wliich  we  possess  on  the  statistics  of  crimes 
and  offences  will  be  of  no  utility  whatever,  unless 
we  admit  without  question  that  there  is  a  ratio,  nearly 
invariably  the  same,  between  known  and  tried  offences 
and  the  unknown  sum  total  of  crimes  committed.     This 
ratio  is  necessary,  and  if  it  did  not  really  exist,  every 
thing  Avhich,  until  the  present  time,  has  been  said  ou 
the  statistical  documents  of  crime,  would  be  false  and 
absurd.     We  are  aware,  then,  how  important  it  is  to 
legitimate  such  a  ratio,  and  we  may  be  astonished 
that  this  has  not  been  done  before  now.    The  ratio  of 
which  we  speak  necessarily  varies  according  to  tlie 
nature  and  seriousness  of  the  crimes :  in  a  well-orga- 
nised society,  where  the  police  is  active  and  justice 
is  rightly  administered,  this  ratio,  for  murders  and 
assassinations,  will  be  nearly  equal  to  unity ;  that  is 
to  say,  no  individual  will  disappear  from  the  society 
by  murder  or  assg.ssination,  Avithout  its  being  known : 
this  will  not  be  precisely  the  case  Avith  poisonings. 
When  Ave  look  to  thefts  and  offences  of  smaller  im- 
portance, the  ratio  AviU  become  very  small,  and  a  great 
number  of  offences  Avill  remain  unknown,  either  be- 
cause those  against  whom  they  are  committed  do  not 
perceiA'e  them,  or  do  not  Avish  to  prosecute  the  perpe- 
trators, or  because  justice  itself  has  not  sufficient  evi- 
dence to  act  upon.     Thus,  the  greatness  of  this  ratio, 
Avhich  wiU  generally  be  different  for  different  crimes 
and  offences,  will  chiefly  depend  on  the  activity  of 
justice  in  reaching  the  guilty,  on  the  care  with  Avhicli 
the  latter  conceal  themselves,  on  the  repugnance  Avliich 
the  individuals  injured  may  have  to  complain,  or  per- 
haps on  their  not  knowing  that  any  injury  has  been 
committed  against  them.  Now,  if  all  the  causes  which 
influence  the  magnitude  of  the  ratio  remain  the  same, 
Ave  may  also  assert  that  the  effects  will  remain  inva- 
riable.    This  result  is  confirmed  in  a  curious  manner 
by  induction,  and  observing  the  surprising  constancy 
Avith  which  the  numbers  of  the  statistics  of  crime  are 
reproduced  annually — a  constancy  which,  no  doubt, 
Avill  be  also  reproduced  in  the  nvimbers  at  Avhich  we 
cannot  arrive :  thus,  although  we  do  not  know  tlie  cri- 
minals Avho  escape  justice,  Ave  very  well  know  that 
every  year  between  7000  and  7300  persons  are  brought 
before  the  criminal  courts,  and  that  6 1  are  regularly 
condemned  out  of  every  100;  that  170,000  nearly  are 
brought  before  courts  of  correction,  and  that  85  out 
of  100  are  condemned ;  and  that,  if  we  pass  to  details, 
Ave  find  a  no  less  alarming  regularity ;  thus  Ave  find 
that  between  100  and  150  individuals  are  annually 

of  the  computation.  I  have  necessarily  been  obliged  to  take  into 
account  natural  influencing  causes,  such  as  climate,  seasons,  sex, 
and  age. 

*  In  an  article  on  Hyyiene  Morale,  AI.  Villermc^  has  fullj- shown 
how  fatal  the  rtyime  of  prisons  may  become  to  the  unfortunate 
person  who  is  often  confined  for  slight  offences,  and  cast  into  the 
midst  of  a  collection  of  wicked  Avretches,  who  corrupt  him.  "  I 
have  been  told,"  says  he,  "  by  a  person  Avho  accompanied  Napo- 
leon to  the  Isle  of  Elba,  that,  in  the  particular  and  at  that  time 
philosophical  conversations  of  the  ex-emperor,  he  has  several 
times  been  hoard  to  say,  that  under  whatever  relation  we  may 
view  man,  he  is  as  much  the  result  of  his  physical  and  moral  atmo~ 
sphere  as  of  his  oim  organisation.  And  the  idea,  now  advanced 
by  many  others,  which  is  contained  in  this  phrase,  is  the  most 
general  as  well  as  the  most  just  that  can  be  formed  on  the  subject 
before  us. — Aunales  d'Hygi&ue  Publiquc,  Oct.  1830. 

ON  MAN. 

83 

condemned  to  death,*  280  condemned  to  perpetual 
hard  labour,  1050  to  hard  labour  for  a  time,  1220  to 
solitary  confinement  (a  hi  reclusioii),  &c. ;  so  that  this 
budget  of  the  scaffold  and  the  prisons  is  discharged 
by  the  French  nation,  with  much  greater  regularity, 
no  doubt,  than  the  financial  budget ;  and  we  might 
say,  that  what  annually  escapes  the  minister  of  jus- 
tice is  a  more  regular  sum  than  the  deficiency  of 
revenue  to  the  treasury. 

I  shall  commence  by  considering,  in  a  general 
manner,  the  propensity  to  crime  in  France,  availing 
myself  of  the  excellent  documents  contained  in  the 
Cvmptes  Gencruux  de  V Administration  de  la  Justice  of 
this  comitry  ;  I  shall  afterwards  endeavour  to  establish 
some  comparisons  with  other  countries,  but  with  all 
the  care  and  reserve  which  such  comparisons  require. 

During  the  four  years  preceding  1830,  28,686  ac- 
cused persons  were  set  down  as  appearing  before  the 
courts  of  assize,  that  is  to  say,  7171  individuals 
annually  nearly ;  which  gives  1  accused  person  to 
4463  inhabitants,  taking  the  population  at  32,000,000 
souls.  Moreover,  of  100  accused,  61  persons  have 
been  condemned  to  punishments  of  greater  or  less 
severity.  From  the  remarks  made  above  with  respect 
to  the  crimes  which  remain  unknown  or  unpunished, 
and  from  mistakes  which  justice  may  make,  we  con- 
ceive that  these  mmibers,  although  they  furnisli  us 
with  curious  data  for  the  past,  do  not  give  us  any  thing 
exact  on  the  propensity  to  crime.  However,  if  we  con- 
sider that  the  two  ratios  which  we  have  calculated  have 
not  sensibly  varied  from  year  to  year,  we  shall  be 
led  to  believe  that  they  wUl  not  vary  in  a  sensible 
manner  for  the  succeeding  years  ;  and  the  probability 
that  this  variation  will  not  take  place  is  so  much  the 
greater,  according  as,  all  things  being  equal,  the  mean 
results  of  each  year  do  not  differ  much  from  the  gene- 
ral average,  and  these  results  have  been  taken  from  a 
great  number  of  years.  After  these  remarks,  it  becomes 
very  probable  that,  for  a  Frenchman,  there  is  1  against 
4462  chances  that  he  will  be  an  accused  person  during 
the  course  of  the  year  ;  moreover,  there  are  61  to  39 
chances,  very  nearly,  that  he  Avill  be  condemned  at 
the  time  that  he  is  accused.  These  results  are  justi- 
fied by  the  numbers  of  the  following  table : — 

Vears. 

Si  "S 

u 

o 

c  3  a 

C   3   C 

ESS 

0)  c3  r; 

Accused  of 
Crimes  agaiust 

between 
umbers 
le  two 
ofCrinie. 

Per- 
sons. 

Pro- 
perty. 

Ratio 

tlle^ 

oft 

kinds 

18-2C,, 
1827, 
1828, 
1829, 

fi,988 
6,929 
7,396 
7,373 

4,348 
4,236 
4,551 

4,475 

4,557 
4,593 
4,307 
4,321 

62 
61 
61 
61 

1,907 
1,911 
1,844 
1,791 

5,081 
5,018 
5,552 
5,582 

2-7 
2-6 
3-0 
3-1 

Total, 

28,686 

17.610 

4,463 

61 

7,453 

21,233 

2'8 

Thus,  although  we  do  not  yet  know  the  statistical 
documents  for  1830,  it  is  very  probable  that  we  shall 
again  have  1  accused  person  in  4463  very  nearly,  and 
61  condemned  in  100  accused  persons ;  this  probabi- 
lity is  somewhat  diminished  for  the  year  1831,  and 
still  more  for  the  succeeding  years.  We  may,  there- 
fore, by  the  results  of  the  past,  estunate  Avhat  will  be 
realised  in  the  future.  This  possibility  of  assigning 
beforehand  the  number  of  accused  and  condemned 

*  The  number  of  persons  condemned  to  death  has,  however, 
diminished  from  year  to  year  ;  is  this  owing  to  the  increasing  re- 
pugnance which  tribunals  feel  to  apply  this  punishment,  for  the 
abolition  of  which  we  have  so  many  petitioners  at  the  present 
day? 

t  The  number  of  accused  persons  absent  was — 

In  1826,  1827,  1828,  1829, 

603  845  77C  746 

I  have  taken  tlie  documents  of  1826,  27,  28,  and  29  only,  because 
the  volume  for  1825  did  not  contain  the  distinction  of  age  or  sex, 
of  which  I  make  use  further  on.  Moreover,  in  1825  tlie  number 
of  accused  was  1  to  42U  iuhabitants,  and  61  in  100  were  con- 
demned. 

persons  which  any  country  Avill  present,  must  give 
rise  to  serious  reflections,  since  it  concerns  the  fate  of 
several  thousand  men,  who  are  driven,  as  it  were,  in 
an  irresistible  manner,  towards  the  tribunals,  and  the 
condemnations  Avhich  await  tliem. 

These  conclusions  are  deduced  from  the  principle, 
already  caUed  in  so  frequently  in  this  work,  that 
effects  are  proportionate  to  their  causes,  and  that  the 
effects  remain  tlie  same,  if  the  causes  which  have 
produced  them  do  not  vary.  If  France,  then,  in  the 
year  1830,  had  not  undergone  any  apparent  change, 
and  if,  contrary  to  my  expectation,  I  found  a  sensible 
difference  between  the  two  ratios  calculated  before- 
hand for  this  year  and  the  real  ratios  observed,  I 
should  conclude  that  some  alteration  had  taken  place 
in  the  causes,  which  had  escaped  my  attention.  On 
the  other  hand,  if  the  state  of  France  has  changed,  and 
if,  consequent!)',  the  causes  -which  influence  the  pro- 
pensity to  crime  have  also  undergone  some  change,  I 
ought  to  expect  to  find  an  alteration  in  the  two  ratios 
whicli  until  that  time  remained  nearly  the  same.* 

It  is  proper  to  observe,  that  the  preceding  numbers 
only  show,  strictly  speaking,  the  probability  of  being 
accused  and  afterwards  condemned,  Avithout  rendering 
us  able  to  determine  any  thing  very  precise  on  the 
degree  of  the  propensity  to  crime ;  at  least  unless  we 
admit,  what  is  very  likely,  that  justice  preserves  the 
same  activity,  and  the  number  of  guilty  persons  who 
escape  it  preserves  the  same  proportion  from  year  to 
year.f 

In  the  latter  columns  orthe  preceding  table,  is  first 
made  the  distinction  between  crimes  against  persons 

*  After  tlie  preceding  paragraphs  were  written,  two  new 
volumes  of  the  Complcs  Rendvs  have  appeared.  As  the  results 
which  tliey  contain  show  how  far  my  anticipations  were  just,  I 
thought  it  unnecessary  to  change  tlie  text,  and  shall  merely  give 
in  a  note  the  numbers  corresponding  to  those  I  availed  myself  of 
before. 

Years. 

^1 

s  g 

is 

o 

C   3   C 

5SS 

IS  =*  o 

c 

c  ==  n 

"^  On'' 

Accused  of 
Crimes  against 

Per- 
sons. 

Pro- 
perty. 

1830, 
1831, 

6,962 

7,607 

4,130 
4,098 

4,576 
4,281 

59 
54 

1,666 
2,046 

5,296 
5,560 

Aver. 

7,284 

4,114 

4,392 

56 

1,856 

5,428 

P  i"  a  '^ 

•°  3  g-P 

3-2 

2-7 

2-9 

Thus,  notwithstanding  the  changes  of  government,  and  the 
alterations  in  consequence  of  it,  the  number  of  accused  persons 
has  not  sensibly  varied:  "the  slight  increase  observed  in  1831, 
may  principally  be  attributed  to  the  circumstance,  that  in  conse- 
quence of  renovations  in  the  criminal  court  arrangements,  the 
operation  of  the  judiciary  police  was  necessarily  abated  in  the 
latter  months  of  1830 ;  so  that  many  cases  belonging  to  this  period 
were  not  tried  until  1831,  which  has  increased  the  figure  for  this 
year." — Report  to  the  kinp.  The  number  of  acquittals  is  rather 
greater  than  in  the  preceding  years ;  and  the  same  remark  will 
be  made  further  on  in  the  case  of  Belgium,  the  government  of 
which  country  was  also  changed. 

The  number  of  accused  persons  absent  in  1830  was  787,  and  in 
1831,  672 ;  thus,  the  results  of  this  year  again  agree  with  tliose  of 
the  preceding  years. 

t  If  the  letters  A,  A',  A2,  &c.,  represent  the  nximbcrs  of  indi- 
viduals annually  committed  for  crimes,  and  a,  a',  a^,  &c.,  tlie 
corresponding  nimibers  of  individuals  annually  condemned ;  if  we 

A     Ai    A2 
suppose,  also,  that  the  ratios  ~  '  ~\'  ~.2'  '^c.,  are  sensibly  equal 

A      A^ 
to  each  other,  that  is  to  say,  if  —  =  —   >  we  shall  also  have 

annually  nearly  the  same,  it  wiU  be  the  same  with  the  number 
of  those  who  are  guilty  ;  that  is  to  say,  tlie  propensity  to  crime 
will  preserve  the  same  value.  It  is  thus  that  the  almost  unchange- 
ableness  of  the  annual  ratio  of  the  accused  to  the  condemned, 
allows  us  to  substitute  for  the  ratio  of  the  condemned  of  any  two 
years  the  ratio  of  the  accused  for  the  same  two  years. 

84 

ON  MAN. 

and  crimes  against  property :  it  ■will  be  remarked,  no 
doubt,  that  the  number  of  the  former  has  diminished, 
wlulst  the  latter  has  increased ;  however,  these  raria- 
tions  are  so  small,  that  they  do  not  sensibly  affect  the 
anmial  ratio;  and  we  see  that  we  ought  to  reckon 
that  three  persons  are  accused  of  crimes  against  pro- 
perty to  one  for  crimes  against  person. 

Beside  the  preceding  numbers  I  shall  place  those 
■which  correspond  to  them  in  the  Low  Countries,  whilst 
the  French  code  was  still  in  force. 

"V'ears. 

is 

11 

It 

o 

i  s  o 

lis 

111 

i  S  £ 

Accused  of 
Crimes  against 

Ratio. 

t 

Per- 
sons. 

1 
Pro- 
perty. 

1826, 
1827, 

138<) 
1488 

1166 
1264 

4302 
4100 

84 
85 

3f4 
314 

1085 
1174 

3o 
3-7 

Thus,  the  probability  of  being  before  a  court  of 
justice  was  almost  the  same  for  France  and  for  the 
inhabitants  of  the  Low  Countries  ;  at  the  same  time 
the  number  of  crimes  against  persons  was  fewer  among 
the  latter,  but  the  repression  of  them  was  also  greater, 
since  85  individuals  were  condemned  out  of  100  ac- 
cused, which  may  be  owing  to  the  absence  of  a  jury, 
tlieir  duties  being  fulfilled  by  the  judges.  This  modi- 
fication made  in  the  French  code  should  be  taken  into 
consideration.  Indeed,  it  causes  a  very  notable  diffe- 
rence in  the  degree  of  repression ;  for  when  once  ac- 
cused, the  Belgian  had  only  16  chances  against  84,  or 
1  to  5,  of  bemg  acquitted ;  whilst  the  Frenchman,  in 
the  same  circumstances,  had  39  chances  to  61,  or 
nearly  3  to  5,  that  is  to  say,  thrice  as  many.  This 
unfavourable  position  in  which  tbe  accused  person 
was  placed  with  us,  might  be  cwing  to  the  circum- 
stance, that  the  judges  before  whom  he  appeared  were 
indeed  more  severe  than  a  jury,  or  perhaps  that  they 
were  more  circumspect  in  acquitting  a  person  in  the 
Low  Countries.  I  shall  not  determine  which  of  these 
was  the  case,  but  simply  observe,  that  in  courts  of 
correction  the  French  judges  are  even  more  severe 
than  ours,  and  the  same  is  the  case  in  courts  of  police. 

Thus,  during  the  four  years  before  1830,  in  France, 
the  reports  gave  679,413  an-aigned  persons,  or  1  to  188 
inhabitants.  Sloreover,  of  this  number,  103,032  indi- 
viduals only  were  acquitted,  or  15  in  the  100  of  tliose 
arraigned.  There  was  then  1  chance  against  187  that 
the  Frenchman  Avoidd  be  brought  before  a  court  of 
correction  in  the  course  of  one  year,  and  85  chances  to 
15  tliat  when  there  he  would  be  condemned. 

During  the  years  1826  and  1827,  there  were  01,670 
persons  arraigned,  in  tlie  Low  Countries,  before  courts 
of  correction,  of  wliom  13,499  were  acquitted ;  and 
there  was  one  arraigned  person  to  198  inhabitants. 
Therefore,  the  probability  of  a  Frenchman  being  before 
a  court  is  rather  greater  than  for  an  inhabitant  of  the 
Low  Countries,  as  also  is  the  probability  of  his  being 
subsequently  condemned. 

Setting  aside  the  northern  provinces  of  the  ancient 
kingdom  of  tlie  Low  Comitries  from  those  which  at 
the  present  time  fonn  the  kingdom  of  Belgium,  and 
which  are  more  intimately  connected  with  France,  we 
find,  for  the  latter  provinces,  during  the  years  previous 
to  1831 :— 

ki 

V.  . 

ill 

Accused  of 

Years. 

11 

Crimes  against 

Ratio. 

Per- 
sons. 

1 
Pro- 
perty. 

1826, 

72.'. 

611 

r,2u 

84 

189 

636 

2-8 

1827, 

800 

682 

4776 

m 

220 

580 

2-6 

1828, 

814 

677 

4741 

(S3 

2.10 

584 

2-5 

1829, 

75.3 

612 

6187 

81 

203 

550 

2-7 

1830, 

741 

541 

5274 

73 

160 

681 

3-8 

Aver., 

7C7 

625 

.5031 

82 

2m 

566 

2-8 

Each  year,  then,  in  Belgium,  we  have  had,  as  an 
average,  1  person  accused  to  5031  inhabitants ;  and  in 
France,  1  to  4400  inhabitants  nearly.  It  is  remark- 
able, that  although  these  numbers  do  not  differ  much, 
yet  the  particular  values  for  each  year  have  not  once 
given  as  great  a  number  of  accused  persons  for  Bel- 
gium as  for  France. 

We  may  observe,  that  in  Belgium,  as  in  France, 
there  was  a  sUght  diminution  in  the  number  of  ac- 
cused persons  in  1830,  which  originated  in  the  same 
cause,  namely,  the  closing  of  the  tribunals  for  a  cer- 
tain period,  in  consequence  of  the  revolution. 

We  see  also  that  the  repression  of  crime  has  sensibly 
diminished.  This,  no  doubt,  is  thus  accounted  for : 
after  revolutions  men  are  more  circumspect  in  their 
condemnations,  since  they  are  not  always  screened 
from  personal  danger,  even  in  the  judgments  which 
they  pronounce. 

The  jmy  has  been  established  in  Belgium  since 
1831 ;  we  shaU  soon  be  enabled  to  judge  what  influ- 
ence this  has  had  on  the  repression  of  crime,  and  wliat 
are  its  most  remarkable  consequences. 

2.  Of  the  Influence  of  Knowledge,  of  Professions,  and  of  CUmatc, 
on  the  Propensity  to  Crime. 

It  may  be  interesting  to  examine  the  influence  of 
the  intellectual  state  of  the  accused  on  the  nature  of 
crimes :  the  French  documents  on  this  subject  are 
such,  that  I  am  enabled  to  form  the  following  table 
for  the  years  1828  and  1829;*  to  this  table  I  have 
annexed  the  results  of  the  years  1830  and  1831,  which 
were  not  known  when  the  reflections  which  succeed 
were  written  down. 

1820-1829 : 

00  >>-g 

1830-1831 : 

^  '^'m 

Accused 

s  s-a 

Accused 

B  jj.S 

Intellectual 

of  Crimes 

atio  of  Cri 

linst  Prop 

Crimes  agr 

Persons. 

of  Crimes 

dtio  of  Cn 

ainst  Prop 

Crimes  aga 

Persons 

state  of  the 
Persons 

against 

against 

Accused. 

r 
Per- 

Pro- 

Per- 

Pro- 

sons. 

perty. 

«  ^3 

sons. 

perty. 

K^2 

Could  not  read  1 
or  write,     -    f 

2072 

6,617 

3-2 

2134 

G,7a5 

31 

Could  read  and  ^ 

■\vrite  but  im-  ^ 

1001 

2,804 

2-8 

1033 

2,840 

2-8 

perfectly,   -   i 

Could  re;id  and  i 
^vrite  well,      i 

400 

1,109 

2-8 

408 

1,047 

a^j 

Had  received  a  -s 

superior  edu-  / 
cation  to  this  r 

80 

206 

2-6 

135 1 

m 

1-4 

1st  degi-ee,      3 

3553 

10,736 

SOaver. 

3710 

10.856 

2-9  aver. 

Thus,  all  tlihigs  bemg  equal,  the  number  of  crimes 
against  persons,  compared  ivith  the  number  of  crimes 
acjainst  property,  during  the  years  1828  and  1829,  was 
greater  according  as  the  intellectual  state  of  the  ac- 
cused was  more  higldy  developed  ;  and  tliis  difference 
bore  especially  on  murders,  rapes,  assassinations, 
blows,  wounds,  and  other  severe  crimes.  Must  we 
thence  conclude  that  knowledge  is  injurious  to  society? 
I  am  far  from  thinking  so.  To  establish  such  an  as- 
sertion, it  would  be  necessary  to  commence  by  ascer- 
taining how  many  individuals  of  the  French  nation 
belong  to  each  of  the  four  divisions  which  we  have 
made  above,t  and  to  find  out  if,  proportion  being  con- 
sidered, the  individuals  of  that  one  of  the  divisions 
commit  as  mauj"^  crimes  as  those  of  the  others.  If 
this  were  really  the  case,  I  should  not  hesitate  to  say 

*  The  intellectual  state  of  474  accused  persons  for  the  year  1828 
h.is  not  been  noted,  as  also  4  for  the  year  1829,  and  2  for  1831. 

t  The  number  of  the  accused  of  this  class  is  increased  in  con- 
sequence of  political  events,  and  crimes  against  the  safety  of  the 
state. 

i  See  the  Tableaux  Sommaires  faisant  connaitre  I'Etat  el  les 
Sfsoins  dc  I'lnsfruclion  Primaire  dans  le  Dcparlcmenl  de  la  Seine. 
Paris;  L.  Colas;  a  pamphlet  in  8vo,  1828,  anonymous,  but  pro- 
bably by  SI.  Jomard.  .See  also  the  Rapport  General  sur  la  Sitiia- 
tion  el  les  Frogres  dc  VEnseignement  Primaire  en  Franee  el  d 
I'Etranger,  by  the  same  person.    8vo.    Paris ;  L.  Colas.    1832. 

ON  MAN. 

that,  since  the  most  enlightened  individnals  commit 
as  many  crimes  as  those  wlio  have  liad  less  education, 
and  since  their  crimes  are  more  serious,  they  are  ne- 
cessarily more  criminal ;  but  from  the  little  we  know 
of  the  difiusion  of  knowledge  in  France,  we  cannot 
state  any  thing  decisively  on  this  point.  Indeed,  it 
may  so  happen,  that  individuals  of  tlie  enlightened 
part  of  society,  while  committing  fewer  murders, 
assassinations,  and  other  severe  crimes,  than  indivi- 
duals who  have  received  no  education,  also  commit 
much  fewer  crimes  against  property,  and  this  wovdd 
explain  what  we  have  remarked  in  the  preceding 
numbers.  This  conjecture  even  becomes  probable, 
■when  we  consider  tliat  the  enlightened  classes  are 
liresupposed  to  possess  more  affluence,  and  conse- 
quently are  less  frequently  under  the  necessity  of  hav- 
ing recoiirse  to  the  different  modes  of  theft,  of  which 
crimes  against  property  almost  entirely  consist ;  wliUst 
affluence  and  knowledge  have  not  an  equal  power  in 
subduing  the  fire  of  the  passions  and  sentiments  of 
hatred  and  vengeance.  It  must  be  remarked,  on  the 
otlier  hand,  that  the  results  contauied  in  the  preced- 
ing table  only  belong  to  two  years,  and  consequently 
present  a  smaller  probability  of  expressing  what  really 
is  the  case,  especially  those  results  connected  witli 
the  most  enlightened  class,  and  which  are  based  on 
very  small  numbers.  It  seems  to  me,  then,  that  at 
the  most  we  can  only  say  that  the  ratio  of  the  mmi- 
ber  of  crimes  against  persons  to  the  number  of  crimes 
against  property  varies  with  the  degree  of  knowledge ; 
and  generally,  for  100  crimes  against  persons,  we  may 
reckon  fewer  crimes  against  property,  accorduig  as 
tlie  individuals  belong  to  a  class  of  greater  or  less 
enlightenment.  In  seeking  the  relative  annual  pro- 
portion, we  find  the  following  numbers  for  France, 
to  which  I  annex  those  furnished  by  the  prisons  in 
Belgium  in  1 833,  according  to  the  report  of  the  in- 
spector-general of  prisons : — 

85 
uphol- 

Intellectiial 

state  of  t)io 

Accused. 

'} 

Could  not  read 
or  write,  - 

Could  read  and 
%vrite  imper 
fectly, 

Could  read  and 
^vl•ite  well,     I 

Had  received  a  -\ 
superior  edu-  / 
cation  to  the  f 
1st  degree,     j 

Total,    - 

Absolute  Number. 

Accused  in 
France : 

8,fi89 

1,509 

14,289 

8,919 

3,873 

1,455- 

a  ^ 

1972 

472 

776 

Relative  Number. 

Accused  in 
France : 

1828-29.    1830-31. 

14,566      3220 

a  n 

CM 

On 

Thus,  the  results  of  the  years  1828  and  1829  are 
again  reproduced  identically  in  1830  and  1831,  in 
France.  Sixty-one  out  of  one  hundred  persons  accused 
could  neither  read  nor  write,  which  is  exactly  the 
sa)ne  ratio  as  the  Belgic  prisons  presented.  The  other 
numbers  would  also  be  probably  the  same,  if  the 
second  class  in  Belgium  took  in,  with  the  individuals 
able  to  read  only,  those  who  could  write  imperfectly. 

The  following  details,  which  I  extract  from  the 
liapport  cm  Roi  for  the  year  1829,  will  serve  to  illus- 
trate what  I  advance : — 

"  The  new  table,  which  points  out  the  professions  of 
the  accused,  divides  them  into  nine  principal  classes, 
comprising. 

The  first,  individuals  who  work  on  the  land,  in 
vineyards,  forests,  mines,  &c.,  2453. 

The  second,  workmen  engaged  with  wood,  leather, 
iron,  cotton,  &c.,  1932. 

The  third,  bakers,  butchers,  brewers,  millers,  &c., 
253. 

The  fourth,  hatters,  hairdressers,  tailors, 
sterers,  &c.,  327. 

The  fifth,  bankers,  agents,  wholesale  and  retail  mer- 
chants, hawkers,  &c.,  467. 

The  sixth,  contractors,  porters,  seamen,  waggoners, 
&c.,  289. 

The  seventh,  innkeepers,  lemonade-sellers,  servants, 
&c.,  830. 

The  eighth,  artists,  students,  clerks,  bailifis,  nota- 
ries, advocates,  priests,  physicians,  soldiers,  amiui- 
tauts,  &c.,  449. 

Tlie  7iinth,  beggars,  smugglers,  strumpets,  &c.,  373. 
Women  who  had  no  profession  have  been  classed 
in  those  which  their  husbands  pursued. 

Comparing  those  who  are  included  in  each  class 
with  the  total  number  of  the  accused,  we  see  that  the 
first  furnishes  33  out  of  100 ;  the  second,  26 ;  the 
third,  4 ;  the  fourth,  5  ;  the  fifth,  6  ;  the  sixth,  4  ;  the 
seventh,  1 1  ;  the  eighth,  6  ;  the  ninth,  5. 

If,  after  that,  we  point  out  the  accused  in  each  class, 
according  to  the  nature  of  their  imputed  crimes,  and 
compare  them  with  each  other,  Ave  find  the  following 
proportions : — 

In  the  first  class,  32  of  the  100  accused  Avere  tried 
for  crimes  against  persons,  and  68  for  crimes  against 
property.  These  numbers  are  21  and  79  for  the  second 
class;  22  and  78  for  the  third;  15  and  85  for  the 
fourth  and  fifth  ;  26  and  74  for  the  sixth  ;  16  and  84 
for  tlie  seventh ;  37  and  63  for  the  eighth ;  13  and  87 
for  the  ninth. 

Thus,  the  accused  of  the  eighth  class,  who  all  ex- 
ercised liberal  professions,  or  enjoyed  a  fortune  which 
presupposes  some  education,  are  those  who,  relatively, 
have  committed  the  greatest  number  of  crimes  against 
persons ;  whilst  87-hundredths  of  the  accused  of  the 
ninth  class,  composed  of  people  without  character,  have 
scarcely  attacked  any  thing  but  property."  * 

Tliese  results,  which  confirm  the  remark  made  be- 
fore, deserve  to  be  taken  into  consideration.  I  shall 
observe  that,  when  we  divide  individuals  into  two 
classes,  the  one  of  liberal  professions,  and  the  other 
composed  of  journeymen,  workmen,  and  servants,  the 
difference  is  rendered  still  more  conspicuous. 

The  following  table  will  assist  us  in  arriving  at  the 
influence  of  climate  on  the  propensity  to  crime  ;f  it  is 
*  See  the  Comptes  Generalise,  p.  9,  1830.  The  Comples  Genermix 
for  1830  and  1831  present  the  following  results  for  each  of  the 
classes  given  in  the  text ;  here  again  we  find  the  same  constancy 
of  numbers  :— 

For  1829. 
1st,     -  -  -        2453 

2d,  -  -  1932 

3d,      -  -  -  253 

4th,  -  -  327 

5tli,    -  -  -  467 

Cth,  -  -  289 

7th,    -  -  -  830 

8th,  -  -  447 

9th,    -  -  -  373 

Total,  -  -  7373 

t  It  has  seemed  to  me  that  these  numbers  might  give  us  a  satis- 
factory idea  of  the  state  of  knowledge  in  each  department,  espe- 
cially of  the  lower  classes,  among  whom  the  greatest  number  of 
crimes  take  place.  Tliis  method,  by  which  we  take  for  each  de- 
partment some  hundred  individuals  wliose  intellectual  state  we 
can  determine,  appears  to  me  to  be  more  certain  than  that  of  M. 
Dupin,  which  is,  to  judge  of  the  education  of  the  province  by  the 
number  of  children  sent  to  school.  It  may  be  that  there  is  gene- 
rally very  little  knowledge  in  those  places  where  schools  have 
been  but  recently  established,  and  have  not  as  yet  been  able  to 
produce  any  appreciable  effects.  In  order  to  render  tlio  results 
obtained  by  this  method  more  comprehensible,  I  have  constructed 
a  small  map  of  France  (Plate  5),  which,  by  the  varying  depths 
of  shade,  points  out  the  intellectual  state  of  tlie  different  parts  of 
this  kingdom.  Allowing  that  this  map  differs  a  little  from  that 
which  M.  Dupin  has  given,  we  shall,  however,  easily  sec  from 
both  maps,  that  Northern  France,  especially  near  Belgium  and 
tlic  Rhine,  is  the  most  enlightened,  whilst  we  find  the  greatest 
darkness  along  a  line  which  traverses  France  diagonally  from 
Cape  Finisterre  to  the  department  of  the  Var.  With  this  dark  line 
is  connected  a  second  one,  which  leaves  the  centre  of  France, 
passing  to  the  base  of  tlie  Pyrenees.    Thus,  the  results,  obtained 

For  1830. 

For  1831 

2240 

2517 

1813 

1985 

225 

272 

309 

300 

455 

425 

310 

327 

848 

320 

374 

391 

388 

469 

69C2 

700(5 

86 

ON  MAN. 

formed  from  the  documents  of  the  Comptes  Gmeraux 
de  V Administration  de  la  Justice  in  Trance,  for  the  five 
years  previous  to  1830.  Tlie  second  and  the  third 
columns  give  the  numbers  of  those  condemned  for 
crimes  against  persons  and  property ;  the  two  follow- 
ing columns  show  the  ratio  of  these  numbers  to  the 
respective  population  of  each  department  in  1827  ;  a 
sixth  column  gives  the  ratio  of  crimes  against  pro- 
perty to  crimes  against  persons ;  and  the  last  column 
shows  how  many  in  100  accused  were  unable  to  read 
or  write ;  the  numbers  which  are  given  there  only 
relate  to  the  years  1828  and  1829. 

1 

>. 

(D 

Condemned 

Inhabitants 
to  one  Person 

11 

5  3 
2  c  ^ 

for  Of' 

mes 

Condemned  for 

l-S^ 

Departments. 

againsi,        1 

Crime  against 

c  S  S 
"3  '1^  oj 

■«  2  "o 

A 

s§ 

S  &.S 

r 

1 

f 

1 

^      C^ 

Per- 

Pro- 

Per- 

Pro- 

.S o 

88 

sons. 

perty. 

sons. 

perty, 

0 

<  " 

Corse, 

287 

107 

3224 

8649 

0-.30 

50 

Haut-Rhin,     - 

144 

295 

14,192 

6928 

2-05 

a3 

Lot, 

98 

110 

14,312 

12,751 

112 

80 

Ari^ge, 

82 

78 

15,118 

15,893 

0.95 

83 

Ardeohe,  - 

108 

99 

15,205 

16,587 

0-92 

67 

AvejTon, 

99 

160 

17,677 

10,938 

1-02 

69 

Pyrenees-Orient, 

41 

55 

18,460 

13,761 

1-34 

76 

Seine-et-Oise, 

112 

377 

20,034 

5953 

3-36 

56 

Vaucluse, 

58 

118 

20,09t» 

9875 

203 

65 

Moselle,     - 

95 

274 

21,534 

7466 

2-88 

49 

Lozere, 

.■51 

53 

22,384 

13,092 

1-71 

47 

Var, 

67 

117 

23,216 

13,2.95 

1-75 

71 

Bas-Rhin, 

111 

341 

24,120 

7851 

3-07 

31 

Seine, 

197 

2496 

25,720 

2030 

12-67 

34 

Bouches-du-Rliin, 

m 

208 

25,897 

7844 

3-25 

56 

Eure, 

80 

296 

26,354 

7123 

370 

63 

Doubs, 

48 

146 

26,491 

8909 

3-04 

35 

Marne, 

61 

244 

26,643 

6661 

4-00 

54 

Tarne, 

59 

169 

27,767 

9694 

2-86 

75 

Seine-Inferieure, 

123 

850 

27,980 

4049 

6-91 

59 

Dr6me, 

49 

133 

29,163 

10,744 

2-71 

71 

Calvados,  - 

84 

3.()4 

29,819 

6357 

4  ■69 

52 

liautes-Alpes, 

21 

47 

29,840 

13,333 

2-24 

42 

Landes, 

44 

153 

30,149 

8690 

3-48 

86 

Tiasses-Alpes,  - 

25 

62 

30,613 

12,344 

2-48 

60 

Vosges, 

C2 

132 

30,632 

14,388 

2-13 

45 

Card. 

53 

129 

32,788 

13,471 

2-43 

67 

Loiret, 

46 

215 

a3,068 

7075 

4-07 

70 

Vienne, 

40 

170 

33,459 

7873 

4-25 

81 

Ille-et-Vilaine, 

82 

318 

33,747 

87l>2 

3-88 

m 

Hdrault, 

50 

92 

.33,956 

18,454 

1-84 

02 

Aude, 

39 

75 

,34,102 

17,7.33 

2-42 

72 

Rhone, 

61 

302 

.•U,14G 

(i8<)5 

4-95 

51 

France,  - 

41)62 

17,543 

»t,108 

i»080 

3-76 

60 

Pny-de-Domc, 

82 

1.-.7 

,34,.547 

18,044 

1-91 

75 

Loire-Inferienre, 

m 

160 

34,628 

14,284 

2-42 

76 

Aube, 

34 

206 

.35,5.53 

5W;8 

6-ik; 

54 

Isfere, 

73 

220 

;i6,026 

11,9,58 

3-01 

62 

Dordogne, 

64 

149 

,3(J,25C 

15,573 

2,33 

76 

Jura, 

3;} 

123 

.37,'t44 

12,613 

2!ii3 

,50 

Ilautc-SIarne, 

3Z 

94 

.38,254 

13,023 

2!)3 

40 

Indre-et-Loire, 

37 

1.31 

.39,211 

11,075 

3,54 

79 

Charente, 

45 

!^2 

3i),295 

19,220 

2-05 

60 

Haute-Loire, 

.36 

35 

39,677 

40,810 

o-!>7 

75 

AUier, 

35 

124 

40,757 

11„504 

3-.54 

91 

Pas-de-Calais, 

76 

rm 

41,751 

.WOO 

7-,38 

(« 

IJasses- Pyrenees, 

47 

142 

43,880 

14,.524 

3-(l2 

73 

Gers, 

35 

91 

43,943 

10,!)01 

2-00 

70 

Corrize, 

32 

56 

44,513 

25,4.30 

1-75 

77 

Orne, 

48 

183 

45,248 

11, Wilt 

3-81 

00 

Seine-et-Mame, 

.35 

167 

45,4.59 

9.527 

4-77 

58 

Maine-et-Loire, 

50 

1!)7 

45,lKi7 

11,041 

3!)4 

81 

Haute  Vienne, 

30 

120 

46,058 

11,515 

4'(M) 

79 

ITautes  •  Pyrenees, 

24 

64 

40,26.3 

17,,'M9 

207 

71 

Eure-et-Loire, 

,30 

231 

4(i,.5!)2 

«I13 

770 

0.3 

Ain,     - 

.36 

84 

47,448 

20,,3^5 

2;i3 

00 

Deux-S6vres, 

.30 

124 

48,043]  11,623 

413 

61 

by  two  different  modes,  nevertheless  agree  with  eacli  other  in  a 
very  satisfactory  manner.  We  may  say  that  we  find  the  greatest 
enlightenment  where  there  is  the  greatest  freedom  of  eommimi- 
cation,  and  in  the  course  of  large  rivers,  sucli  as  the  Rhine,  the 
Seine,  the  Meuse,  &c.  In  Southern  Fnince,  the  trading  sea- 
coasts,  and  the  banks  of  the  Khone,  are  also  less  obscure,  whilst 
the  absence  of  enlightenment  is  perceived  chiefly  in  those  parts 
of  France  which  are  not  traversed  by  great  conniiercial  roads. 
We  natuniUy  look  for  instniction  in  those  places  wliere  the  need 
T>f  it  is  greatest. 

{Table  continued.) 

Departments. 

Charente-Inf^-, 
rieure,  / 

Bleurtlie, 
Sarthe, 

Haute-Garonne, 
Haute-Saone, 
Mayenne, 
Morbihan, 
Cantal, 
Loir-et-Cher, 
Nord, 
Loire, 
COte-d'Or, 
Nievre, 

Saone-et-Loire, 
Vendue,     - 
Lot-et-Garonne, 
Meuse, 
Yonne, 
Cher, 
Finistfere, 
Manclie,    - 
Tarn-et-Garonne, 
C6tes-du-Nord, 
Gironde, 
Aisne, 

Oise.  '   - 

Somnie, 
Ardennes, 
Indre, 
Creiise, 

Condemned 

for  Crimes 

against 

Per- 

Pro- 

sons. 

perty. 

44 

257 

52 

249 

45 

177 

41 

190 

33 

134 

35 

146 

41 

183 

25 

75 

22 

142 

91 

548 

.34 

104 

35 

160 

24 

109 

45 

168 

28 

106 

29 

111 

26 

105 

29 

140 

21 

98 

42 

252 

51 

247 

20 

89 

47 

2.02 

41 

207 

.36 

259 

23 

163 

31 

257 

15 

92 

12 

96 

6 

40 

i? 

Inhabitants 

|.g 

to  one  Person 

&<  a 

Condemnedfor 

■"  «  C 

Crime  against 

sag 

^«<2 

Is 

r 
Per- 

Pro- 

sons. 

perty. 

u 

48,199 

8252 

5-84 

48,788 

10,189 

479 

49,613 

12,614 

3-93 

49,636 

10,711 

4-63 

49,643 

12,225 

406 

50,591 

12,128 

4-17 

52,129 

11,679 

4-46 

52,403 

17.468 

3-00 

52,424 

8122 

6-45 

52,893 

8783 

6  02 

55,252 

18,063 

3()6 

55,992 

11,592 

4-57 

56,620 

12.467 

4-54 

57,308 

15,350 

373 

57,648 

15,228 

3  62 

58,084 

15,181 

3-83 

58,911 

14,588 

4-04 

58,986 

12,219 

4-83 

59,188 

12,683 

4-67 

59,863 

9977 

6-00 

59,922 

12,373 

4-84 

60,397 

13,572 

4-45 

61,881 

9900 

6-21 

65,628 

12,999 

5-05 

67,995 

9451 

7-20 

83,723 

11,814 

7-09 

84,884 

10,230 

8-29 

93,875 

15,306 

6-13 

99,012 

12,.377 

8-00 

210,777 

31,617 

0-67 

t-"  3  Ui 

<u  o  o 

To  the  preceding  documents  I  shall  join  those  con- 
cerning the  ancient  kingdom  of  the  Low  Countries* 
and  the  dutchy  of  the  Lower  Rhine,  where  the  Frencli 
code  is  still  in  force,  and  allows  comparisons  to  be  still 
established : — 

Brabant,  Southern, 
Flanders,  Eastern, 
Limbourg, 
Overyssel, 
Brabant,  Northern, 
An  vers, 
Groningen  and 

Drenthe, 
Liege,    -         -         - 
Flanders,  Western, 
Naniur, 
Gucldres, 

Holland,  Southern, 
Holland,  Northern, 

and  Utrecht, 
Lu.xembourg, 
Hainault,  - 
Zenl.ind, 
FriesliUid, 

Lotv  Countries, 

Low  Countries  (crimes), 

liutchy  of  the  Lower 

Rhine, 
France, 

Condemned 

for  Crimes 

against 

Pro- 
perty. 

474 
424 

296 
7160 

1956 
1691 

994 

20„308 

Inhabitants  to 

gs  . 

one  Person 

i-Hr 

Condemned 

t^U  g 

^  for  Crimes 

.S  ■»  £ 

against 

^?^ 

^ 

( 
Per- 

-1 
Pro- 

sons. 

perty. 

16.. 330 

5932 

275 

17,100 

9104 

1-88 

20,384 

5430 

375 

20,385 

7760 

2-02 

22,031 

10,014 

2-20 

22,562 

5!i(K> 

3-90 

23,611 

4296 

5-44 

25,107 

7961 

315 

25,222 

8I7I 

3-09 

27,433 

5819 

471 

27.6.33 

5f)!i0 

2-20 

32,0(KI 

4148 

7-71 

37,500 

400(1 

9-42 

42.208 

12,.572 

3-34 

52,712 

14,565 

3-02 

.53,450 

3108 

17-20 

1,32,248 

3852 

34-33 

25,747 

62a9 

4-13 

28,783 

7217 

4-00 

a3,784 

10,060 

3-36 

21,648 

7632 

2-84 

*  The  numbers  for  the  Low  Coim  tries  embrace  the  years  1826-27, 
and  for  the  dutcliy  of  the  Lower  Rhine  the  years  from  1822  to 
1820,  according  to  the  lU'vue  Encydopedique  for  the  month  of  Au- 
gust 1830.  .Since  this  summary  gives  us  the  number  of  crimes 
and  not  of  the  condemned,  I  h.ive  thought  proper  to  give  the 
numljcr  of  crimes  for  Fr.ance  and  tlie  Low  Countries,  in  order  to 
render  the  results  comjiarable. 

ON  MAN. 

87 

As  it  would  be  very  difficult  to  form  an  idea  of  the 
whole  of  the  results  contained  in  the  preceding  tables, 
and  as  at  the  same  time  it  M'ould  be  impossible  to 
embrace  the  whole  at  one  glance,  I  have  endeavoured 
to  render  them  perceptible  by  shades  of  greater  or  less 
depth,  placed  on  a  map  of  France  and  the  Low  Coun- 
tries, according  to  the  greater  or  less  number  of  crimes 
against  persons  or  property,  in  proportion  to  the  po- 
pidation  {See  plate  6).  Tlie  first  figurative  map  be- 
longs to  crimes  against  persons  ;  it  shows  us  at  first,  by 
the  darkness  of  the  shades,  that  the  greatest  number 
of  crimes  are  committed  in  Corsica,  in  the  South  of 
France,  and  particularly  in  Languedoc  and  Provence, 
as  well  as  Alsace  and  tlie  Valley  of  the  Seine.  The 
southern  part  of  the  Low  Countries,  with  the  excep- 
tion of  Hainault  and  Luxembourg,  present  also  rather 
deep  tints.  However,  it  is  proper  to  observe,  that  the 
shades  are  perhaps  more  obscure  than  they  ought  to 
be,  if  we  consider  that  they  represent  the  number  of 
condemned  people,  and  that  in  general,  in  the  Low 
Countries,  the  repression  has  been  much  stronger  than 
in  France,  since  in  the  latter  country  only  61  indivi- 
duals are  condemned  in  every  100  accused,  whilst  in 
the  Low  Countries,  85  is  the  proportion.  On  the  con- 
trary. Central  France,  Brittany,  Maine,  Picardj^,  as 
well  as  Zealand  and  Friesland,  present  much  more 
satisfactory  shades.  If  we  compare  this  map  with 
that  which  indicates  the  state  of  instruction,  we  shall 
be  disposed  to  bclie^■e,  at  first,  that  crimes  are  in  a 
measure  in  inverse  ratio  to  the  degree  of  knowledge. 
The  figurative  map  of  crimes  against  persons  and 
those  of  crimes  against  property  presents  more  ana- 
logy. In  like  manner,  the  departments  which  show 
themselves  advantageously  or  disadvantageously  on 
cither  side,  may  be  arranged  in  the  following  manner, 
making  three  principal  classes  : — 

First  Class. — Departments  ivhere  the  number  of  those 
condemned  for  crimes  against  persons  and  property 
exceeds  the  average  of  France. 

Corse,  Landes,  Rhone,  Bouchcs-du-Rhone,  Doubs, 
Ilaut-Rhin,  Bas-Rhin,  Moselle,  Seine  -  Inferieure, 
Calvados,  Eure,  Seine-et-Oise,  Seine,  Marne,  Loiret, 
Vienne,  lUe-et-Vilaine — 17  departments. 

Second  Class. — Departments  where  the  number  of  those 
condemned  for  crimes  against  property  and  persons 
has  been  less  than  the  average  of  France. 

Creuse,  Indre,  Cher,  Nicvre,  Saone  -  et  -  Loire, 
Jura,  Ain,  Isore,  Loire,  Haut-Loire,  Cantal,  Puy-de- 
Dome,  Allier,  Correze,  Haut- Vienne,  Basses-Pyronces, 
Ilautes  -  Pyrenees,  Haute  -  Garonne,  Gers,  Tarn-et- 
Garonne,  Lot-et- Garonne,  Gironde,  Dordogne,  Cha- 
rente,  Deux-Sevres,  Vendee,  Loire-Inferieure,  ]\Iaine- 
et-Loire,  Sarthe,  Orne,  Mayenne,  Manche,  Finistere, 
Morbihan,  C6tes-du-Nord,  Somme,  Oise,  Aisne,  Ar- 
dennes, Meuse,  Meurthe,  Haute-Saone,  Haute-Marne, 
Cote- d'Or,  Yonne,  Seine-et-Marne — 47  departments. 

Third  Class. — Departments  where  the  number  of  those 
condemjied  for  crimes  against  persons  only,  or  against 
property  only,  has  been  less  than  the  average  of  France. 

Var,  Hautes-Alpes,  Basses-Alpes,  Drome,  Vaucluse, 
Gard,  Ardcche,  Lozere,  Aveyron,  Lot,  Tarn,  Hcrault, 
Aude,  Pyrenees-Orientales,  Ariege,  Charente-Inferi- 
cure,  Loir-et-Cher,  Eure-et-Loii-e,  Nord,  Pas-de-Calais, 
Aube,  Vosges — 22  departments. 

In  making  the  same  distinction  with  regard  to  the 
provinces  of  the  Low  Countries,*  we  find — 

First  Class— Southern  Brabant,  Anvers,  Lim- 
bourg,  Groningen,  and  Drenthe — 5  provinces. 

Second  Class — Hainault,  Luxembourg — 2  pro- 
vinces. 

*  See,  for  the  most  ample  accoimtg,  Im  Statistiquc  (Jcs  Tri- 
hvnaux  de  la  Bflr/irixc,  pendant  h-.i  Annt^es  1820,  1827,  1828, 1829,  and 
1830,  published  "by  MM.  Quotclot  and  Smits.   4to.   Brussels:  1832. 

Third  Class — Namur,  Liege,  "Western  Flanders, 
Eastern  Flanders,  Zealand,  Northern  Brabant,  South- 
ern Holland,  Northern  Holland,  Utrecht,  Guelder- 
land,  Overyssel,  Friesland — 12  provinces. 

Before  endeavouring  to  deduce  conclusions  from  the 
preceding  calculations,  I  shall  remark  that  certain  ra- 
tios cannot  be  rigorously  compared,  on  account  of  the 
defective  valuation  (or  census)  of  the  population,  or 
from  an  unequal  degree  of  repression  in  the  different 
courts  of  justice.  It  will  be  difficult  enough  to  find 
out  the  errors  arising  from  the  first  cause,  as  we  have 
only,  for  the  elements  of  verification,  the  relative  num- 
bers of  births  and  deaths ;  as  to  the  unequal  degree  of 
repression,  such  is  not  exactly  the  case,  for,  besides 
that  we  are  led  to  believe  that  the  activity  of  justice 
in  finding  out  the  authors  of  crimes  is  not  every  where 
the  same,  Ave  see  that  acquittals  are  not  always  in  the 
same  ratio.  Thus,  according  to  the  documents  from 
1825  to  1829,  61  individuals  out  of  every  100  accused 
have  been  condemned  in  France,  yet  the  degree  of 
repression  has  generally  been  stronger  in  the  nor- 
thern than  in  the  southern  part  of  the  country. 
The  Court  of  Justice  of  Rouen  has  condemned  the 
greatest  number,  and  it  has  condemned  71  indivi- 
duals out  of  100  accused  at  the  least ;  the  coiirts  of 
Dijon,  Anjou,  Douai,  Nanci,  Orleans,  Caen,  Paris, 
Rennes,  have  also  exceeded  the  average ;  the  courts 
of  Metz,  Colmar,  Amiens,  Bordeaux,  Bourges,  Be- 
sancon,  Grenoble,  Lyons,  and  La  Corse,  have  presented 
nearly  the  same  average  as  France  ;  whilst  the  acquit- 
tals have  been  more  numerous  in  the  southern  courts, 
such  as  Toulouse,  Poitiers,  Nismes,  Aix,  Riom,  Pau, 
Argen,  Limoges,  and  Montpellier — the  two  last  courts 
having  condemned,  at  an  average,  only  52  individuals 
of  100  accused.  It  yet  remains  for  examination,  whe- 
ther these  decisive  inequalities  in  the  number  of  ac- 
quittals in  the  north  and  south  of  France  are  owing  to  a 
greater  facility  in  bringing  forward  accusations,  or  to 
indulgence  to  the  accused.  It  appears  to  me  probable, 
that  it  may  be  in  part  owing  to  crimes  against  persons 
being  more  common,  all  things  being  equal,  in  the 
south,  and  crimes  against  property  in  the  north ;  we 
know,  also,  that  more  acquittals  take  place  in  the  first 
class  of  crimes  than  in  the  second.  However  the  case 
may  be,  I  think  it  will  be  proper  not  to  lose  sight  of 
this  double  cause  of  error  which  I  have  just  pointed 
out. 

If  we  now  cast  our  eyes  over  the  departments  of 
France  Avhich  have  exceeded  the  average  of  crimes 
against  persons  as  well  as  of  crimes  against  property, 
we  shall  first  find  Corsica  and  Landes  to  be,  from 
their  manners  and  customs,  in  peculiar  circumstances, 
and  which  will  scarcely  permit  of  their  being  com- 
pared with  the  rest  of  France. 

The  Corsicans,  indeed,  impelled  by  cruel  prejudices, 
and  warmly  embracing  feelings  of  revenge,  which  are 
frequently  transmitted  from  generation  to  generation, 
almost  make  a  virtue  of  homicide,  and  commit  the 
crime  to  excess.  Offences  against  property  are  not 
frequent,  and  yet  their  number  exceeds  the  average 
of  France.  We  cannot  attribute  this  state  of  things 
to  want  of  instruction,  since  the  number  of  accused 
who  could  neither  read  nor  write  was  comparatively 
less  than  in  France.  This  is  not  the  case  in  Landes, 
where  almost  nine-tenths  of  the  accused  were  in  a  state 
of  complete  ignorance.  This  department,  where  a 
poor  and  weak  population  live  dispersed,  as  it  were, 
in  the  midst  of  fogs,  is  one  where  civilisation  has  made 
the  least  progress.  Although  Landes  is  found  in  the 
most  unfavourable  class  as  regards  crimes,  it  is  never- 
theless proper  to  say  that  it  does  not  differ  much  from 
the  average  of  France :  we  may  make  the  same  obser- 
vations on  the  departments  of  Vienne  and  lUe-et-Vi- 
laine.  As  to  the  other  departments,  we  may  observe 
that  they  are  generally  the  most  populous  in  France,  in 
which  we  find  four  of  the  most  important  cities,  Paris, 
Lyons,  Marseilles,  and  Rouen  ;  and  that  they  also  are 
the  most  industi'ious — those  which  present  the  great- 

ON  MAN. 

est  changes  and  intercourse  with  strangers.  We  may 
be  surprised' not  to  find  with  them  the  departments 
of  the  Gironde  and  Loire-Inferieure,  which  seem  to  be 
ahnost  in  the  same  circumstances  as  the  departments 
of  Bouches-du-Khone  and  Seine-Inferieure,  especially 
if  we  consider  that,  with  respect  to  knowledge,  they 
seem  less  favoured  than  these  last,  and  the  repression 
of  crime  also  has  generally  been  effective.  This  remark 
is  particularly  applicable  to  the  department  of  the 
Gironde,  for  the  Loii'e-Inferieure  does  not  differ  so 
much  from  the  average  of  France.  I  shall  not  hesitate 
to  attribute  these  differences  to  a  greater  morality  in 
one  part  than  the  other.  And  this  conjecture  becomes 
more  probable,  if  we  observe  that  the  whole  of  the 
departments  of  the  south  of  France,  which  are  on  the 
shores  of  the  sea  from  the  Basses-Pyrcnces  to  La 
Manche,  except  Landes  and  Ille-et-Vilaine  Avhich 
have  ah'cady  been  mentioned,  fall  below  the  average 
of  France  for  crimes  against  persons ;  and  that,  on 
the  contrary,  all  the  departments,  without  exception, 
which  are  on  the  shores  of  the  Mediterranean,  as  well 
as  the  ones  adjacent  to  them,  exceed  this  average. 
We  may  also  remark,  that  the  shores  of  the  Atlantic, 
from  Basses-Pyrenees  to  La  Manche,  generally  fall 
below  the  average  for  crime  against  property. 

The  third  class  presents  us  Avith  fifteen  depart- 
ments, on  the  border  of  the  Mediterranean,  and  Avhich 
all  exceed  the  average  of  France  m  crimes  against 
persons  and  are  beloAv  the  average  in  crimes  against 
liroperty.  The  districts  on  the  Mediterranean  appear, 
then,  to  have  a  A'ery  strong  propensity  to  the  first 
kind  of  crimes.  Of  seven  other  departments  of  the 
same  class,  one  only  exceeds  the  average  for  crimes 
against  person,  and  that  is  Vosges  m  Alsace ;  the 
others  exceed  the  average  of  crimes  against  propertj^ 

The  "departments  of  the  second  class,  where  the 
fewest  condemnations  for  crimes  against  persons  and 
property  take  place,  are  generally  situated  in  the  centre 
of  France,  on  the  shores  of  the  Atlantic,  from  the 
Basses-Pyrenees  to  La  Manche,  and  in  the  A'alleys 
watered  by  the  Somme,  the  Oise,  and  the  Meuse. 

The  following  is  a  simamary  of  what  has  been 
said : — 

1.  The  greatest  number  of  crimes  against  persons 
and  property  take  place  in  the  departments  which 
arc  crossed  by  or  near  to  thfe  Rhone,  the  Ehine,  and 
the  Seine,  at  least  in  their  navigable  portions. 

2.  The  fewest  crimes  against  persons  and  property 
are  committed  in  the  departments  in  the  centre  of 
France,  in  those  which  arc  situated  in  the  west  to- 
wards the  Atlantic,  from  the  Basses-Pyrenees  to  La 
Manche,  and  in  those  toAvards  the  north,  wliich  are 
traversed  by  the  Somme,  the  Oise,  and  the  Meuse. 

3.  The  shores  of  the  Mediterranean  and  the  adja- 
cent departments  shoAv,  all  things  being  equal,  a 
stronger  jiropcnsity  to  crimes  against  persons,  and 
the  northern  parts  of  France  to  crimes  against  pro- 
perty. 

After  having  established  these  facts,  if  we  seek  to 
go  back  to  the  causes  which  produce  them,  Ave  are 
immediately  stopped  by  numerous  obstacles.  And, 
indeed,  the  causes  influencing  crimes  are  so  numerous 
and  different,  that  it  becomes  almost  impossible  to 
assign  to  each  its  degree  of  importance.  It  also  fre- 
quently happens,  that  causes  AA'hich  appear  A^ery  in- 
fluential, disappear  before  otliers  of  Avhich  Ave  had 
scarcelj'^  thought  at  first,  and  this  is  Avliat  I  liaA-e 
especially  found  in  actual  researches :  and  I  confess 
that  I  have  been  probably  too  much  occupied  Avith 
the  influence  Avhich  Ave  assign  to  education  in  abating 
the  propensity  to  crime ;  it  seems  to  me  that  this 
common  error  especially  proceeds  from  our  expecting 
to  find  feAver  crimes  in  a  country,  because  Ave  find 
more  children  in  it  avIio  attend  school,  and  because 
there  is  in  general  a  greater  number  of  persons  able 
to  read  and  Avrite.  We  ought  rather  to  take  notice 
of  the  degree  of  moral  instruction  ;  for  A^ery  often  tho 
education  received  at  school  only  facilitates  the  com- 

mission of  crime.*  We  also  consider  poverty  as  ge- 
nerally conducing  to  crime ;  yet  the  department  of 
Creuse,  one  of  the  poorest  in  France,  is  that  Avhieh 
in  every  respect  presents  the  greatest  morality.  Like- 
Avise,  in  the  Low  Countries,  the  most  moral  province 
is  Luxembourg,  where  there  is  the  greatest  degree  of 
poA'crty.  It  is  proper,  hoAvcA'cr,  that  Ave  come  to  a 
right  understanding  of  the  meaning  of  the  Avord  po- 
AX-rty,  Avhich  is  here  employed  in  an  acceptation  which 
may  be  considered  improper.  A  province,  indeed,  is 
not  poor  because  it  possesses  fcAver  riches  than  an- 
other, if  its  inhabitants,  as  in  Luxembourg,  ai'C  sober 
and  active ;  if,  by  their  labour,  they  can  certainly  ob- 
tain the  means  of  relieAdng  their  wants,  and  grati- 
fying tastes  Avhich  are  proportionally  moderate ;  ac- 
cording as  the  inequality  of  fortune  is  less  felt, 
and  does  not  so  much  excite  temptation :  we  should 
say,  with  more  reason,  that  this  province  enjoys  a 
moderate  affluence.  Poverty  is  felt  the  most  in  pro- 
vinces where  great  riches  haA'c  been  amassed,  as  in 
Flanders,  Holland,  the  department  of  the  Seine,  &c., 
and  above  all,  in  the  manufacturing  countries,  Avhere, 
by  the  least  political  commotion,  by  the  least  obstruc- 
tion to  the  outlets  of  merchandise,  thousands  of  indi- 
A'iduals  pass  suddenly  from  a  state  of  comfort  to  one 
of  misery.  These  rapid  changes  from  one  state  to 
another  giA'e  rise  to  crime,  particularly  if  those  who 
suflFer  are  smTounded  by  materials  of  temptation, 
and  are  irritated  by  the  continual  aspect  of  luxurj"-  and 
of  the  inequahty  of  fortmie,  which  renders  them  des- 
perate. 

It  seems  to  me  that  one  of  the  first  distinctions  to 
be  made  in  our  present  mquiry,  regards  the  different 
races  of  mankmd  Avho  inhabit  the  countries  Avhich  Ave 
are  considering;  as  Ave  shall  shortly  see,  this  point  is 
of  the  greatest  importance,  although  not  the  first  AN'hich 
presents  itself  to  the  mind.  ""The  population  of  France 
belongs  to  three  different  races — the  Celtic  race,  Avhich 
forms  nearly  three-fifths  of  its  inhabitants ;  the  Ger- 
man race,  Avhieh  comprehends  those  of  the  late  pro- 
Auuces  of  Flanders,  Alsace,  and  part  of  Lorraine ;  and 
the  Pelasgian  race,  scattered  along  the  shores  of  the 
Mediterranean  and  in  Corsica.  The  changes  of  man- 
ners," adds  Malte-Brun,  "  to  which  this  division  is 
exposed,  may  alter  the  character  of  a  people,  but 
cannot  change  it  entirely."  f  If  Ave  cast  our  eyes  over 
the  figiuratiA'c  map  of  crimes  against  persons,  this  dis- 
tinction of  people  is  perceived  in  a  remarkable  man- 
ner. We  shall  see  that  the  Pelasgian  race,  scattered 
over  the  shores  of  the  Mediterranean  and  in  Corsica,  is 
particularly  addicted  to  crimes  against  persons  ;  among 
the  Germanic  race,  Avhich  extends  over  Alsace,  the. 
dutchy  of  the  LoAver  Ehine,  a  part  of  Lorraine,  and 
the  Low  Countries,  Avhere  the  greater  proportion  of 
persons  and  of  property  gives  rise  to  more  occasions 
of  committing  crime,  and  where  the  frequent  use  of 
strong  drinks  leads  more  often  to  excesses,  Ave  have 
generaUy  a  great  many  crimes  against  property  and 
persons.  The  Batavians  and  Frieslanders,  Avho  also 
belong  to  the  Germanic  race,  are  more  especially  prone 
to  crimes  against  property.  Lastly,  the  Celtic  race 
appears  the  most  moral  of  the  three  wliich  we  have 
considered,  especially  as  regards  crimes  against  per- 
sons ;  they  occupy  the  greatest  part  of  France  and 
the  Wallone  of  Belgium  (e<  Ja  partie  Wallone  de  la 
Bclgique).  It  Avould  appear,  moreover,  that  frontier 
countries,  Avhere  the  races  are  most  crossed  with  each 
other,  and  where  there  is  generaUy  the  most  disturb- 
ance, and  Avhere  the  customhouses  are  established,  arc 
the  most  exposed  to  demoralisation. 

After  having  admitted  this  distmction,  based  upon 

*  M.  Guen-y  lias  aiTivecl  at  conclusions  similar  to  mine,  and 
almost  at  the  same  time,  in  his  Essai  sur  la  Slatislique  Morale 
(le  la  France,  p.  51,  and  has  expressed  them  almost  in  the  same 
terms ;  the  same  results  have  also  been  obtained  in  England, 
Germany,  and  the  United  States. 

t  Precis  de  la  Gcographie  ITnivcrsellc,  livre  15?. 

ON  MAN. 

89 

the  differences  of  races,  it  remains  to  be  examined 
what  are  the  local  anomalies  which  influence  the  mo- 
rality of  the  people  and  modify  their  character. 

The  most  remarkable  anomaly  whicli  the  Celtic 
race  seems  to  present,  is  observed  in  the  department 
of  the  valley  of  the  Seine,  especially  below  Paris  ;  many 
causes  contribute  to  this.  We  first  observe  that  these 
departments,  from  their  extent,  contain  the  greatest 
proportion  of  persons  and  property,  and  consequently 
present  more  occasions  for  committing  crimes ;  it  is 
there  that  there  are  the  greatest  changes  in  the  people, 
and  the  greatest  influx  of  people  from  all  countries 
without  character,  in  a  manner  which  must  even  have 
altered  the  primitive  race  more  than  any  where  else ; 
lastly,  it  is  there  also  where  the  greatest  nmnber  of 
industrial  establishments  are  found ;  and,  as  we  have 
already  had  occasion  to  observe,  these  establishments 
maintain  a  dense  population,  whose  means  of  subsist- 
ence are  more  precarious  than  in  any  other  profession. 
The  same  remark  is  applicable  to  the  valley  of  the 
IHione,  and  with  the  more  reason,  as  the  Pelagian 
race  has  been  able,  in  ascending  this  river,  to  pene- 
trate farther  into  the  interior  of  the  country  than  any 
where  else. 

The  commercial  and  industrious  provinces  of  the 
Low  Countries  are  likewise  those  in  which  the  greatest 
number  of  crimes  are  committed. 

As  to  the  greater  number  of  crimes  against  pro- 
perty to  be  observed  as  we  advance  towards  the  north, 
I  think  Ave  may  attribute  it,  in  a  great  measure,  to 
the  inequality  between  riches  and  wants.  The  great 
cities,  and  the  capitals  esiiecially,  present  an  unfa- 
vourable subject,  because  they  possess  more  allure- 
ments to  passions  of  every  kind,  and  because  they 
attract  people  of  bad  character,  who  hope  to  mingle 
with  impunitj'  in  the  crowd. 

It  is  remarkable  that  several  of  the  poorest  depart- 
ments of  France,  and  at  the  same  time  the  least 
educated,  such  as  Creuse,  Indre,  Cher,  Haute-Vienne, 
Allier,  &c.,  are  at  the  same  time  the  most  moral, 
whilst  the  contrary  is  the  case  in  most  of  the  depart- 
ments which  have  the  greatest  wealtli  and  instruction. 
'J'hese  apparent  singularities  are,  I  think,  explained 
by  the  observations  which  have  been  made  above. 
^Morality  increases  with  the  degree  of  education  in  the 
late  kingdom  of  the  Low  Countries,  which  would  lead 
us  to  believe  that  the  course  of  education  was  better. 

The  influence  of  climate  is  not  very  sensible  here, 
as  we  may  see  by  comparing  Guienne  and  Gascoigne 
with  Provence  and  Lauguedoe,  and  the  inhabitants  of 
the  Hautes  and  Basses  Pyrenees  to  the  inhabitants  of 
the  Hautes  and  Basses  Alpes,  which,  notwithstanding, 
are  mider  the  same  latitudes.  TVe  may  also  say  that 
tlie  influence  of  kno\vledge  and  of  climate  partly  dis- 
appears before  more  energetic  influences;  and  that 
tliey  are  moreover  far  from  effacing  tlie  moral  cha- 
racter of  the  three  races  of  men  who  inhabit  the 
country  which  we  are  considering.  Nevertheless,  we 
cannot  but  allow,  when  bringing  the  ratios  of  the 
sixth  column  of  our  table  together,  that  the  number 
of  crimes  against  property,  in  proportion  to  the  num- 
ber of  crimes  against  persons,  is  increased  considerably 
in  advancing  towards  the  north. 

It  is  to  be  regretted  that  the  documents  of  the 
courts  of  justice  of  other  countries  cannot  be  com- 
pared with  those  of  France  and  the  Low  Coimtries. 
The  difference  in  laws  and  the  classifications  of  crime 
render  direct  comparisons  impossible.  Yet  the  coun- 
tries of  some  extent,  and  which  give  the  distinction 
of  crimes  against  persons  and  crimes  against  pro- 
perty, allow  at  least  of  our  drawing  a  comparison 
between  their  different  provinces  under  this  head. 
It  perhaps  will  not  be  without  some  interest  to  our 
inquiry  to  compare  the  different  parts  of  Prussia  and 
Austria  with  one  another.  The  data  of  criminal  jus- 
tice in  Austria  are  extracted  from  the  BuUetin  des 
Sciences  of  M.  de  Fcrussac,  for  November  1829,  and 
relate  to  the  five  years  from  1819  to  1823;  those  of 

Prussia  are  extracted  from  the  Revue  Encyclopedique 
for  August  1830,  and  relate  to  the  three  years  from 
1824  to  1826  inclusive.  I  have  followed  the  same 
form  of  table  as  the  above :  nevertheless,  I  regret  that 
I  could  not  give  the  number  of  children  in  the  schools 
of  the  different  parts  of  Austria.  For  Prussia,  I  have 
taken  the  number  of  children  in  1000  of  those  who 
attend  the  schools,  according  to  the  statement  of  the 
Revue  Encyclopedique. 

Inhabitants 

P  s 

Crimes 
against 

to  one  Crime 
against 

■so  g 

.S  "  o 

1^ 

AiTondissements. 

I!? 

>- 

>- 

3  to 

( 

^ 

f 

2  <» 

Per 

sons. 

Pro- 
perty. 

Per- 
sons. 

Pro- 
perty. 

ill 

•2  a 
5° 

AusTniA. 

Dalmatia, 

2986 

2,540 

535 

625 

oa5 

7 

GaUicia  k  BulvO-  j 
Vina,         -            / 

TjTOl,     - 

5294 

14,105 

3,955 

1470 

2-70 

7 

(558 

2,516 

5,707 

1492 

3-82 

•> 

Moravia  &  Silesia, 

753 

3,545 

12,002 

2689 

4-71 

13 

Gratz-Leibacli  &  t 
Trietz,  or  Inter-  > 
nal  Austria,        J 

580 

*2,479 

13,311 

3188 

4-21 

10 

Lower  Austria  (or,  » 
Cotes  de  I'Ens),   / 

673 

7,099 

17.130 

1382 

12-37 

10 

Bohemia, 

737 

♦'7.221 

18,437 

1881 

9-80 

9 

Scholars 
in  1000 

Pni-ssiA. 

Children. 

PiTjssia,     - 

249 

0,875 

22,741 

G39 

35-65 

451 

Saxony, 

147 

5,815 

27,588 

697 

39-5<j 

491 

Poscn, 

'■fl 

3,481 

31,440 

875 

35-88 

490 

Silesia, 

228 

7.077 

33,714 

1086 

31-04 

584 

Westphalia, 

92 

3.383|38,43<; 

1045 

36-77 

.525 

Brandenburg, 

112 

5,431  39,4Wi 

688 

57-42 

468 

Pomerania, 

27 

l,r)22l92,131 

1.5,3;) 

60-11 

940 

It  would  be  very  difficult  to  point  out  the  various 
races  of  men  who  have  peopled  the  comitries  mentioned 
in  the  preceding  table,  because  they  are  so  much  mixed 
in  certain  parts,  that  their  primitive  character  is  almost 
lost.  The  German  race  predominates  in  the  Prussian 
states,  and  is  mixed  with  the  northern  Sclavonians, 
particularly  along  the  shores  of  the  Baltic  and  ancient 
Prussia,  and  with  the  western  Sclavonians  in  the  Grand- 
Dutchy  of  Posen  and  Silesia.  In  the  Austrian  states, 
and  especially  in  the  northern  and  eastern  parts,  the 
Sclavonian  race  is  again  mixed  with  the  German  ; 
^Slalte-Brun  even  thinks  that  in  IMoravia  the  Sclavo- 
nians are  three  times  as  numerous  as  the  Germans  :t 
they  are  divided  into  several  tribes,  of  which  the  most 
remarkable  is  the  Wallachians ;  "  they  are  brave  in 
war,  tolerant  in  religion,  and  scrupulously  honest  in 
their  habits."  The  Tyrolese,  formed  of  the  ancient 
Ehccti,  would  be,  according  to  Pliny  (book  iii.  chap. 
19),  originally  from  Etruria;  the  Dalmatians,  of  Scla- 
vonic origin,  are  also  mingled  with  Italians. 

It  will  appear,  then,  also,  from  the  table  Avliich  has 
just  been  given,  that  crimes  are  more  numerous  in 
Dalmatia,  where  the  blood  of  the  south  is  mixed  with 
the  blood  of  the  people  of  the  north.  Among  the 
Tyrolese,  we  find  also  tlie  traces  of  more  energetic 
passions  than  among  the  other  people  under  the  Aus- 
trian dominion,  excepting,  however,  the  inhabitants 
of  GaUicia,  descendants  of  the  Rosniacks,  who  pro- 
ceeded, together  with  the  Croatians  and  Dalmatians, 
from  the  Eastern  Sclavonians.J  Classing  the  people 
according  to  the  degree  of  crime,  it  would  appear  that 
they  are  in  the  folloAving  order : — Etruscans  or  Itahans, 
Sclavonians,  and  Germans. §     It  would  also  appear 

*  The  numbers  for  Bohemia  and  Internal  Austria  only  relate 
to  the  four  years  1819,  1820,  1822,  and  1823. 

t  Precis  de  G^ograpliie  UniverseUe,  livre  145.         %  Ibid.  1.  116. 

§  The  western  Sclavonians  are  composed,  according  to  Maltc- 
Bnin,  of  Poles,  Bohemians  or  Tcheches,  of  the  Slovaqiies  of  Hun- 
gary, the  Serbcs  in  Lueatia. — hivre   110.     "  The  distinctions 

90 

ON  MAN, 

that  the  eastern  Sclavonians  have  a  greater  propen- 
sity to  crime  than  the  nortliern  and  western  ones, 
who  are  more  mixed  with  the  Germans,  and  are  in  a 
more  advanced  state  of  civilisation.  We  see  from  the 
precedins?  table,  that  the  state  of  instruction  in  Prussia 
is  in  a  direct  ratio  to  the  number  of  crimes ;  it  appears 
to  be  nearly  the  same  in  the  countries  under  the  Aus- 
trian dominion. 

3.  On  tlie  Influence  of  Seasons  on  the  Propensity  to  Crime. 

The  seasons  have  a  Avell-marked  influence  in  aug- 
menting and  diminishing  the  number  of  crimes.  We 
may  form  some  idea  from  the  following  table,  Avhicli 
contains  the  number  of  crimes  committed  in  France 
against  persons  and  property,  during  each  month,  for 
three  years,  as  well  as  the  ratio  of  these  numbers.  We 
can  also  compare  the  numbers  of  this  table  with  those 
which  I  have  given  to  show  the  influence  of  seasons 
on  the  development  of  mental  alienation,  and  we  shall 
find  the  most  remarkable  coincidences,  especially  for 
crimes  against  persons,  which  would  appear  to  be 
most  usually  dependent  on  failures  of  the  reasoning 
powers  :* — 

Crimes 

against 

Ratio: 

Crimes 

against 

Ratio : 

Months. 

Per- 

Pro- 

1827-28. 

Per- 

Pro- 

1830-31. 

sons. 

perty. 

sons. 

perty. 

January,   -    - 

282 

1,005 

3-89 

189 

666 

3-52 

February,    -    - 

272 

910 

3a5 

194 

563 

2-90 

March,      -    - 

335 

968 

2-89 

205 

602 

2-94 

April,      -    -    - 

314 

841 

2-68 

197 

548 

2-78 

May,      -    -    - 

381 

844 

2-22 

213 

569 

2-67 

June,      -    -    - 

414 

850 

2-05 

208 

602 

2-90 

July,     -    -    - 

379 

828 

2-18 

188 

501 

2-66 

August,  -    -    - 

382 

934 

2-44 

247 

596 

2-41 

September,    - 

355 

89G 

2-52 

176 

584 

3-32 

October,       -    - 

285 

926 

3-25 

207 

506 

2-83 

November,     - 

301 

961 

3-20 

223 

651 

2-95 

December,  -    - 

347 

1,152 

3-33 

181 

691 

3  82 

Total,  -    -    - 

3847 

11,205 

2-77 

2428 

7159 

2-94 

First,  the  epoch  of  maximum  (June)  in  respect  to 
the  number  of  crimes  against  persons,  coincides  pretty 
nearly  with  the  epoch  of  minimum  in  respect  to 
crimes  against  property,  and  this  takes  place  in  sum- 
mer ;  whilst,  on  the  contrary,  the  minimum  of  the 
number  of  crimes  against  persons,  and  the  maximum 
of  the  number  of  crimes  against  property,  takes  place 
in  winter.  Comparing  these  two  kinds  of  crimes,  avc 
find  that  in  the  month  of  January  nearly  four  crimes 
take  place  against  property  to  one  against  persons, 
and  in  the  month  f)f  Juno  only  two  to  three.  These 
differences  are  readily  explained  by  considering  that 
during  winter  misery  and  want  are  more  especially 
felt,  and  cause  an  increase  of  the  number  of  crime? 
against  property,  whilst  the  violence  of  the  passions 

between  tlie  Sclave  (Sclavonian)  and  the  German  are,  tlie  care 
which  the  former  takes  of  liis  property,  and  his  constant  desire 
to  acquire  more ;  he  is  not  so  industrious,  not  so  capable  of 
attachment  and  fidelity  in  his  affections,  and  more  disposed  to 
seek  for  society  and  dissipation.  He  prides  himself  on  greater 
prudence,  and  is  generally  distrustful,  especially  in  his  deal- 
ings with  Germans,  whom  he  always  regards  as  a  kind  of  enemy." 
— Livrc  114.  Jtalte-Brun  .also  makes  a  distinction  of  Germans 
of  the*orth  and  Germans  of  the  south.  "  The  Thuringerwald 
divides  Germany  into  two  regioris— the  north  and  the  south. 
The  German  of  the  north,  living  on  potatoes,  butter,  and  cheese, 
deprived  of  beer  and  spirits,  is  the  most  robust,  frugal,  and  intel- 
ligent :  it  is  also  with  liim  that  Protestantism  has  the  most 
proselytes.  Delicate  in  his  mode  of  life,  accustomed  to  wine, 
sometimes  even  given  to  dnmkcnness,  the  Gcnnan  of  the  south 
is  more  sprightly  but  also  more  superstitious." — hivrc  14!!. 

*  The  observations  which  we  possess  are  neither  so  nimierous 
nor  so  carefully  compiled  as  to  enable  us  to  affirm  that  any  direct 
ratio  exists  between  the  propensity  to  crimes  against  persons  and 
the  tendency  to  mental  alienation  ;  yet  the  existence  of  this  ratio 
becomes  more  probable  if  we  consider  that  we  find  again  the  same 
coincidence  regarding  the  influence  of  age. 

predominating  in  summer,  excites  to  more  frequent 
personal  collisions. 

The  periods  of  maxima  and  minima  also  coincide 
with  those  of  the  maxima  and  minima  of  births  and 
deaths,  as  we  have  already  shown. 

The  Comptes  Generaux  of  France  also  contain  data 
on  the  hours  at  which  crimes  have  been  committed, 
but  only  for  thefts  in  Paris  and  the  neighbourhood. 
These  data  are  hitherto  too  few  to  draw  any  satisfac- 
tory conclusions  froni  them. 

4.  On  the  Influence  of  Sex  on  the  Propensity  to  Crime. 

We  have  already  been  considering  the  influence 
Avhich  climate,  the  degree  of  education,  differences  of 
the  human  race,  seasons,  &c.,  have  on  the  propensity 
to  crime ;  we  shall  now  investigate  the  influence  of 
sex. 

At  the  commencement,  we  may  observe  that,  out  of 
28,686  accused,  who  have  appeared  before  the  coiu"ts 
in  France,  during  the  four  years  before  1830,  there 
were  found  5416  women,  and  2.3,270  men,  that  is  to 
say,  23  women  to  100  men.  Thus,  the  propensity  to 
crime  in  general  gives  the  ratio  of  23  to  100  for  the 
sexes.  This  estimate  supjjoses  that  justice  exercises 
its  duties  as  actively  with  regard  to  women  as  to  men ; 
and  this  is  rendered  probable  by  the  fact,  that  the 
severity  of  repression  is  nearly  the  same  in  the  case 
of  both  sexes  ;  in  other  words,  that  women  are  treated 
with  much  the  same  severity  as  men. 

We  have  just  seen  that,  in  general,  the  propensity 
to  crime  in  men  is  about  four  times  as  great  as  in 
women,  in  France ;  but  it  will  be  important  to  ex- 
amine further,  if  men  are  four  times  as  criminal,  which 
will  be  supposing  that  the  crimes  committed  by  the 
sexes  are  equally  serious.  We  shall  commence  by 
making  a  distinction  between  crimes  against  property 
and  crimes  against  persons.  At  the  same  time,  we 
shall  take  the  numbers  obtained  for  each  year,  that 
we  may  see  the  limits  in  which  they  are  comprised : — 

1826,  - 

1827,  -  - 
1828, 
1829,  -  - 

Averages, 

18.30, 
1831, 

Averages,        1612 

Crimes  against  Persons. 

Men.     Women.    Ratio, 

16.39 
1637 
l.'>76 
1552 

1601 

1412 
1813 

268 
274 
270 
239 

254 
233 

0-16 

0-17 
0-17 
015 

0-16 

0-18 
0-13 

Crimes  against  Property. 

Men.     Women.    Ratio, 

4073 
4020 
4306 
4379 

4217 

4196 
4567 

1008 
998 
1156 

1203 

1091 

1100 
993 

0-25 
0-25 
0-26 
0-27 

0-26 

0-26 
0-22 

Although  the  number  of  crimes  against  persons 
may  have  diminished  slightly,  whilst  crimes  against 
property  have  become  rather  more  numerous,  yet  we 
see  that  the  variations  are  not  very  great ;  they  have 
but  littlemodified  the  ratios  between  the  numbers  of  the 
accused  of  the  two  sexes.  AVe  have  26  women  to  100 
men  in  the  accusations  for  crimes  against  propert^^-, 
and  for  crimes  against  persons  the  ratio  has  been  only 
16  to  100.*  In  general,  crimes  against  persons  are  of 
a  more  serious  nature  than  those  against  property,  so 
that  our  distinction  is  favourable  to  the  women,  and 
we  may  afiirm  that  men,  in  France,  are  four  times  as 
criminal  as  women.  It  must  be  observed,  that  the 
ratio  16  to  26  is  nearly  the  same  as  that  of  the  strength 
of  the  two  sexes.  However,  it  is  proper  to  examine 
things  more  narrowlj',  and  especially  to  take  notice  of 
individual  crimes,  at  least  of  those  Avhicli  are  com- 
mitted in  so  great  a  number,  that  the  inferences  drawn 
from  them  may  possess  some  degree  of  probability. 
For  this  purpose,  in  the  following  table  I  have  col- 

*  These  conclusions  only  refer  to  the  results  of  the  four  years 
before  18.30.  The  numbers  of  the  following  ye.ars,  which  have 
been  since  added  to  the  table,  give  almost  the  same  ratios. 

ON  MAN. 

91 

lected  the  mimbers  relating  to  the  four  years  before 
1830,  and  calculated  the  different  ratios ;  the  crimes 
are  classed  according  to  the  degree  of  magnitude  of 
this  ratio.  I  have  also  groiiped  crimes  nearly  of  the 
same  nature  together,  such  as  issuing  false  money, 
counterfeits,  falsehoods  in  statements  or  in  commercial 
transactions,  &c. 

Women 

Nature  of  Crimes. 

Jlcn. 

Women. 

to  100 
Men. 

Infanticide, 

,?0 

426 

1.320 

Jliscarriage, 

15 

.39 

£60 

Poisoning, 

77 

73 

91 

] louse  robbery  {vol  domesliquc\. 

2648 

16()2 

60 

Parrii.'ide,           -             -             . 

44 

22 

50 

Incendiarism  of  buildings  and  other  1 
things,      -            .            -               / 

27!) 

94 

34 

Robber}'  of  churches, 

17G 

47 

27 

Wounding  of  parents  (bh'ssures  en-  ■, 
vers  ascendans) ,               •               j 

292 

63 

22 

Theft, 

10,677 

2249 

21 

False  evidence  and  suborning, 

307 

51 

17 

Fraudulent  bankruptcy. 

.■J53 

57 

16 

Assassination,         -            -            . 

947 

HI 

12 

False    coining    Ifatisse    monnak),^ 

counterfeit  making,  false  affirma-  >■ 

16G9 

177 

11 

tions  in  deeds,  &c.     -            -         ' 

Rebellion,                ... 

(512 

60 

111 

Highway  robbery. 

048 

54 

8 

AVounds  and  blows. 

1447 

78 

5 

Murder, 

1112 

44 

4 

Violation  and  seduction,     - 

685 

7 

1 

Violation  on  persons  under  15  j'cars  i 
of  age,             -            -            -         I 

585 

5 

1 

As  we  have  already  observed,  to  the  commission  of 
crime  the  three  following  conditions  are  essential — 
tl:e  will,  which  depends  on  the  person's  morality,  the 
opportunity,  and  the  facility  of  effecting  it.  Now, 
the  reason  why  females  have  less  propensitj-  to  crime 
than  males,  is  accounted  for  by  their  being  more  under 
the  influence  of  sentiments  of  shame  and  modestj',  as 
far  as  morals  are  concerned;  their  dependent  state, 
and  retired  habits,  as  far  as  occa.sion  or  opportunity 
is  concerned ;  and  their  physical  Aveakness,  so  far  as 
the  facility  of  acting  is  concerned.  I  think  we  may 
attribute  the  differences  observed  in  the  degree  of 
criminality  to  these  three  principal  causes.  Home- 
times  the  whole  three  concur  at  the  same  time :  we 
ought,  on  such  occasions,  to  expect  to  find  their  in- 
fluence very  marked,  as  in  rapes  and  seductions ; 
thus,  we  have  only  1  woman  to  100  men  in  crimes  of 
tliis  nature.  In  poisoning,  on  the  contrary,  the  num- 
ber of  accusations  for  either  sex  is  nearly  equal.  When 
force  becomes  necessary  for  the  destruction  of  a  per- 
son, the  number  of  women  who  are  accused  becomes 
much  fewer ;  and  their  numbers  diminish  in  propor- 
tion, according  to  the  necessity  of  the  greater  publi- 
city before  the  crime  can  be  perpetrated :  the  following 
crimes  also  take  place  in  the  order  in  which  they  are 
stated — infanticide,  miscarriage,  parricide,  woimding 
of  parents,  assassinations,  woimds  and  blows,  murder. 

With  respect  to  infanticide,  woman  has  not  only 
many  more  opportunities  of  committing  it  than  man, 
but  she  is  in  some  measure  impelled  to  it,  frequently 
by  misery,  and  almost  always  from  the  desire  of  con- 
cealing a  liiult,  and  avoiding  tlie  shame  or  scorn  of 
society,  which,  in  such  cases,  thinks  less  unfavourably 
of  man.  Such  is  not  the  case  with  other  crimes  in- 
volving the  destruction  of  an  individual :  it  is  not  the 
degree  of  the  crime  which  keeps  a  Avoman  back,  since, 
in  the  series  Avbich  we  have  given,  parricides  and 
Avounding  of  parents  are  more  numerous  than  assas- 
sinations, which  again  are  more  frequent  than  mur- 
der, and  Avounds  and  blows  generally  ;  it  is  not  simply 
Areakness,  for  then  the  ratio  for  parricide  and  Avound- 
ing  of  parents  should  be  the  same  as  for  murder 
and  wounding  of  strangers.  These  differences  are 
more  especially  OAving  to  the  habits  and  sedentary 
life  of  females  ;  they  can  only  conceive  and  execute 
guilty  projects  on  individuals  Avith  whom  they  are  in 
G 

the  greatest  intimacy :  thus,  compared  witli  man,  her 
assassinations  are  more  often  in  her  family  than  out 
of  it ;  and  in  society  she  commits  assassination  rather 
than  murder,  Avhich  often  takes  place  after  excess  of 
drink,  and  the  quarrels  to  Avhich  Avomen  are  less  ex- 
posed. 

If  Ave  now  consider  the  different  kinds  of  theft,  we 
shall  find  that  the  ratios  of  the  propensity  to  crime 
are  arranged  in  a  similar  scries :  thus,  Ave  haA^e  suc- 
cessively house  robbery,  robbery  in  churches,  rob- 
beries in  general,  and,  lastly,  highway  robbery,  for 
which  strength  and  audacity  are  necessary.  The  less 
conspicuous  propensity  to  cheating  in  general,  and 
to  fraudulent  bankruptcy,  again  depend  on  the  more 
secluded  life  of  females,  their  separation  from  trade, 
and  that,  in  some  cases,  they  are  less  capable  than 
men — for  example,  in  coining  false  money  and  issu- 
ing coimterfeits. 

If  Ave  attempt  to  analyse  facts,  it  seems  to  me  that 
the  difference  of  morality  in  man  and  Avoman  is  not 
so  great  as  is  generally  supposed,  excepting  only  as 
regards  modesty ;  I  do  not  speak  of  the  timidity  aris- 
ing from  this  last  sentiment,  in  hke  manner  as  it  does 
from  the  physical  Aveakness  and  seclusion  of  females. 
As  to  these  habits  themselves,  I  think  Ave  may  form 
a  tolerable  estimate  of  their  influence  by  the  ratios 
which  exist  betAveen  the  sexes  in  crimes  of  different 
kinds,  Avhere  neither  strength  has  to  be  taken  into 
consideration,  nor  modesty — as  in  theft,  false  Avit- 
nessing,  fraudident  bankruptcy,  &c. ;  these  ratios  are 
about  100  to  21  or  17,  that  is  to  saj%  about  5  or  6  to 
1.  As  to  other  modes  of  cheating,  the  difference  is 
a  little  greater,  from  the  reasons  already  stated.  If 
Ave  try  to  giA-e  a  numerical  expression  of  the  inten- 
sity of  the  causes  by  which  Avomen  are  influenced,  as, 
for  example,  the  influence  of  strength,  avc  may  esti  • 
mate  it  as  being  in  proportion  to  the  degree  of  strength 
itself,  or  as  1  to  2  nearly;  and  this  is  the  ratio  of  the 
number  of  parricides  for  each  sex.  For  crimes  Avhere 
both  physical  Aveakness  and  the  retired  life  of  females 
must  be'  taken  into  account,  as  in  assassinations  and 
highAvay  robberies,  folloAving  the  same  plan  in  our 
calculations,  it  Avill  be  necessary  to  multiply  the  ratio 
of  poAver  or  strength  ^  by  the  degree  of  dependence 
1-5,  Avhicli  giA-es  1-10,'  a  quantity  which  really  falls 
betAveen  the  values  12-100  and  8-100,  the  ratios  given 
in  the  table.  With  respect  to  murder,  and  bloAvs  and 
wounds,  these  crimes  depend  not  merely  on  strength  and 
a  more  or  less  sedentary  life,  but  still  more  on  being  in 
the  habit  of  using  strong  drinks  and  quarrelling.  The 
influence  of  this  latter  cause  might  almost  be  consi- 
dered as  1  to  3  for  the  sexes.  It  may  be  thought  that 
the  estimates  Avhich  I  have  here  pointed  out,  cannot 
be  of  an  exact  nature,  from  the  impossibility  of  assign- 
ing the  share  of  influence  Avhich  the  greater  modesty 
of  Avoman,  her  physical  Aveakness,  her  dependence,  or 
rather  her  more  retired  life,  and  her  feebler  passions, 
Avliich  are  also  less  frequently  excited  by  liquors,  may 
have  respectiA'ely  on  any  crime  in  particular.  Yet, 
if  such  Avere  the  characters  in  Avhich  the  sexes  more 
particidarly  differ  from  each  other,  Ave  might,  by  ana- 
lyses like  those  noAV  given,  assign  their  respectiA^e 
influence  Avith  some  probability  of  truth,  especially  if 
the  observations  Avere  very  numerous.  I  do  not  speak 
of  modes  of  justice,  of  legislation  in  general,  of  the 
state  of  knowledge,  of  means  of  providing  for  physical 
Avants,  &c.,  Avhich  may  poAverfully  contribute  to  in- 
crease or  diminish  the  number  of  crimes,  but  Avhose 
influence  is  generally  not  very  evident  as  regards  the 
ratio  of  the  accused  of  each  sex. 

Perhaps  it  maj-  be  said,  that  if  it  be  true  that  the 
morality  of  woman  is  not  greater  than  tliat  of  man, 
house  robbery  should  be  as  frequent  for  the  one  as  for 
the  other.  This  observation  Avould  be  just,  if  it  Avere 
proved  that  the  class  of  individuals  by  Avhom  house 
robberies  are  committed,  Avere  equally  composed  of 
men  and  women  ;  but  there  are  no  data  on  this  sub- 
ject.    All  that  can  be  laid  doAvn  is,  that  men  and 

93 

ON  MAN. 

women  wlio  live  in  a  domestic  state,  rather  commit 
crimes  against  property  tlian  against  persons,  wliicli 
very  materially  confirms  the  observations  made  above, 
on  the  influence  of  retired  life  and  sedentary  habits. 
The  Compte  Gendral  de  V Administration  de  la  Justice 
in  1829,  for  the  first  time,  gives  the  professions  of  the 
accused;  and  in  the  article  Domestiqiies,  M-e  find  318 
men  and  147  -women  employed  as  farm-servants ;  and 
149  men  and  175  women  as  personal  domestics :  the 
total  number  of  men  is  greater  than  that  of  women. 
Now,  of  these  numbers,  there  were  99  accused  of  crimes 
against  persons,  and  590  of  crimes  against  property : 
the  ratio  of  these  numbers  is  1  to  6  nearly,  and  it  has 
preserved  exactly  the  same  value  in  the  years  1830 
and  1831.  But  we  have  had  occasion  to  see  that  this 
ratio  for  the  mass  of  society  is  1  to  3,  when  particular 
circumstances  are  not  taken  into  consideration ;  and 
it  would  be  only  as  263  to  1091,  or  1  to  4  nearly,  if 
society  were  composed  of  Avomen  alone :  thus,  in  all 
the  cases,  I  think  it  has  been  sufiiciently  shown  that 
men  and  women,  Avhen  in  the  state  of  servants,  com- 
mit crimes  against  property  in  preference  to  others. 

As  to  capital  crimes,  Ave  may  arrange  them  in  the 
following  manner : — 

Apparent  Motives : 
1826-13-29  inclusive. 

Cupidity,  theft, 
Adultery, 
Domestic  dissen-    . 

sions, 
Debauchery,  jea-  ■ 

lousy,       -     - 
Hatred,  revenge,  & 

divers  motives, 

Total, 

Accused  for 

Poison- 
ing. 

liO 
58 
903 

Assassi- 
nation. 

237 
7() 
131 

115 

460 

Incen- 
diarism. 

Total. 

362 
13.3 

333 

220 
1615 

2663 

Adultery,  domestic  quarrels,  and  jealousy,  cause 
almost  an  equal  number  of  poisonings  in  both  sexes ; 
but  the  number  of  assassinations,  and  especially  of 
murders,  of  women  by  their  husbands,  is  greater  than 
that  of  husbands  by  their  Avives.  The  circumstances 
bearing  on  this  subject  have  been  stated  already. 

Of  903  murders  Avhich  have  taken  place  from  hatred, 
revenge,  and  other  motives,  44G  have  been  committed 
in  consequence  of  quarrels  and  contentions  at  taverns ; 
thus,  more  than  one-third  of  the  total  number  of  mur- 
ders have  taken  place  under  circumstances  in  Avhich 
women  are  not  usually  involved. 

The  four  last  volumes  of  the  Comptes  Gdneranx, 
contain  some  interesting  details  on  the  intellectual 
state  of  the  accused  of  both  sexes :  they  may  be  stated 
as  foUoAvs : — 

Intellectual 
State. 

Men. 

Women. 

.2  Si 

Men. 

Women. 

.2  c? 

Big 

Unable    to    read, 
or  write,   -    -     } 

Able  to  read  and  ^ 
Avrite    imper-    ^ 
fectly,      -    -     J 

Could  read  and    \ 
Avrite  well,    -    ' 

Had  received  an  ^ 
excellent   edu-  ( 
cation  to  the  1st  f 
degi'ee,     -    -     ) 

Intellectual  state  ^ 
not  mentioned,  ( 

6,537 
3,308 
1,399 

203 

374 

2152 
497 

no 

104 

3-0 
6-6 
12-7 
.56-6 
3-6 

6.877 
3,422 
1,3/3 

314 

2 

2042 
451 
112 

3-3 
7-6 
16-7 
62-8 

11,901 

2868 

4-2 

ll,9f«t 

2.><!0 

4-6 

These  numbers  give  us  no  information  on  the  popu- 
lation, since  avc  do  not  know  Avhat  is  the  degree  of 
knoAvledge  diffused  in  France ;  but  Ave  see,  at  least, 
that  there  is  a  great  difl'erence  in  the  sexes.  I  think 
Are  might  explain  these  results  by  saying,  that  in 
the  lower  orders,  Avhere  there  is  scarcely  any  edu- 

cation, the  habits  of  the  women  approach  those  of  the 
men  ;  and  the  more  Ave  ascend  in  the  classes  of  society, 
and  consequently  in  the  degrees  of  education,  the  life 
of  Avoman  becomes  more  and  more  priA^ate,  and  she 
has  less  opportunity  of  committing  crime,  all  other 
things  being  equal.  These  ratios  differ  so  much  from 
each  other,  that  Ave  cannot  but  feel  how  much  influ- 
ence our  habits  and  social  position  have  on  crime. 

It  is  to  be  regretted  that  the  documents  of  justice 
for  the  Low  Countries  do  not  contain  any  thing  on 
the  distinction  of  the  sexes ;  we  only  see  (according 
to  the  returns  of  the  prisons  and  the  houses  of  cor- 
rection and  detention,  in  the  Recueil  Official),  that  on 
the  1st  of  January  1827,  the  number  of  men  Avas  51G2, 
that  of  Avomen  1193,  which  gives  100  Avomen  to  433 
men.  Making  use  of  the  documents  which  have  been 
disclosed  to  me  by  INI.  le  Baron  de  Keverberg,  I  found 
that  in  1825  this  ratio  Avas  100  to  314. 

According  to  the  report  of  M.  Ducpetiaux,  on  the 
state  of  prisons  in  Belgium,  Ave  enumerated  2231  men 
and  550  Avonien,  as  prisoners  on  the  1st  of  January 
1833,  Avhich  gives  a  ratio  of  405  to  100  :  among  those 
prisoners  Avere  found  1364  men  and  326  Avomen  Avho 
could  not  read  or  Avrite ;  so  that  the  intellectual  state 
of  the  prisoners  of  both  sexes  Avas  nearly  the  same ;  the 
ratio  of  the  Avhole  population  to  those  Avho  could  neither 
read  nor  write,  was  as  100  to  61  among  the  men, 
and  100  to  60  among  tlie  Avomen.  To  the  number  of 
prisoners  just  mentioned,  may  be  added  419  indivi- 
duals confined  in  the  central  military  prison,  of  Avhom 
282  could  neither  read  nor  Avrite ;  this  gives  a  ratio 
of  67  in  100.* 

If  Ave  examine  the  accounts  of  the  correctional 
(or  minor)  tribunals  of  France,  Ave  find  the  ratio 
betAveen  the  accused  of  both  sexes  to  be  529,848  to 
149,565,  or  28  females  to  100  males.  Thus,  Avith  re- 
spect to  less  serious  offences,  Avhich  are  judged  by  the 
correctional  tribunals,  the  Avomen  have  there  been 
rather  more  numerous  compared  Avith  the  men  than 
in  the  case  of  weightier  crimes. 

5.  Of  the  Influence  of  Age  on  the  Propensity  to  Crime. 

Of  all  the  causes  Avliich  influence  the  development 
of  the  propensity  to  crime,  or  Avhich  diminish  that 
propensity,  age  is  unquestionably  the  most  energetic. 
Indeed,  it  is  through  age  that  the  physical  poAvers 
and  passions  of  man  are  developed,  and  their  energy 
afterAvards  decreases  Avith  age.  lleason  is  developed 
Avith  age,  and  continues  to  acquire  power  even  Avheii 
strengtli  and  passion  have  passed  their  greatest  A^gour. 
Considering  only  these  three  elements,  strength,  pas- 
sion, and  judgment f  (or  reason),  Ave  may  almost  say, 
«  priori,  Avhat  Avill  be  the  degree  of  the  propensity  to 
crime  at  different  ages.  Indeed,  the  propensity  must 
be  almost  nothing  at  the  two  extremes  of  life  ;  since, 
on  the  one  hand,  strength  and  passion,  tAvo  poAverful 
instruments  of  crime,  have  scarcely  begun  to  exist, 
and,  on  the  other  hand,  their  energy,  neai'Iy  extin- 
guished, is  still  further  deadened  by  the  influence  of 
reason.  On  the  contrary,  the  propensity  to  crime 
should  be  at  its  maximum  at  the  age  Avhen  strength 
and  passion  have  attained  their  maximum,  and  Avhen 
reason  has  not  acqiured  sufficient  poAver  to  govern 
their  combined  influence.  Therefore,  considering  only 
physical  causes,  the  propensity  to  crime  at  different 
ages  Avill  be  a  property  and  sequence   of  the  three 

*  According  to  the  statistical  tables  of  France,  of  ymmg  persons 
inscribed  for  military  service  in  1827,  wo  enumerate  (Bulletin  do 
M.  F^russac,  Nov.  1829,  p.  271)— 

Absolute  No.     Relative  No. 
Voung  persons  able  to  read,       -        -       13,794  5 

read  and  write,      100,787  37 

not  able  to  read  or  write,     1.57,510  58 

272,091  100 

Tliis  ratio  of  58  in  100  is  a  little  less  unfavourable  than  that  of 
l)risons,  which  is  60  in  UK). 

t  I  am  not  speaking  of  the  intellectual  state,  of  religious  senti- 
ments, of  fear,  shame,  pimisjhment,  &c.,  because  these  qualities 
depend  more  or  less  directly  on  reason. 

ON  MAN. 

93 

quantities  Ave  hare  ju.st  named,  and  might  be  deter- 
mined by  them,  if  they  -K-ere  sufficiently  known.* 
But  since  these  elements  are  not  yet  determined,  we 
must  confine  ourselves  to  seeking  for  the  degrees  of 
the  propensity  to  crime  in  an  experimental  manner ; 
■we  shall  find  the  means  of  so  doing  in  the  Comptes 
Generaux  de  la  Justice.  The  following  table  vfiU. 
show  the  number  of  crimes  against  persons  and 
against  property,  whicli  have  been  committed  in 
Prance  by  each  sex  during  the  years  1826,  27,  28,  and 
29,  as  well  as  the  ratio  of  these  numbers ;  the  fourth 
column  points  out  how  a  population  of  10,000  souls 
is  divided  in  France,  according  to  age  -,  and  the  last 
column  gives  the  ratio  of  the  total  number  of  crimes 
to  the  coiTcsponding  rumber  of  the  preceding  column ; 
thus  there  is  no  longer  an  inequality  of  number  of  the 
individuals  of  different  ages. 

Individuals' 
Age. 

Less  than  IG  yeais, 
16  to  21  years, 
21  to  25    ~   -    -    - 
25  to  SI)    „      -    - 
at  to  35    ,-   -    -    - 
35  to  40    ~      -    - 
40  to  45    „  -    -     - 
45  to  50    ~      -    - 
50  to  55    -   -    -    - 
55  to  (JO    -       -     - 
60  to  05    „   -     -     - 
65  to  70    ~      -    - 
70  to  80    „  -    -    - 
30  and  upwards,  - 

Crimes  against 

Per- 
sons. 

00 
!)04 
1278 
15/5 

u-,:i 

650 
575 
445 
288 
168 
157 
91 
64 
5 

440 

3723 

3329 

3702 

2883 

2076 

1724 

1275 

811 

500 

385 

184 

1.37 

14 

It"  • 

S  2 

o 

3304 
8«7 
673 
791 
732 
672 
612 
549 
482 
410 
330 
247 
255 
55 

161 
5217 
6846 
6671 
5514 
4057 
3757 
3133 
2280 
1629 
1642 
1113 
788 
345 

This  table  gives  us  results  conformable  to  those  wliich 
I  have  given  in  my  Recherclies  Statistique  for  the  years 
1826  and  1827.  Since  the  value  obtained  for  80  5-ears 
of  age  and  upwards  is  based  on  very  small  numbers, 
it  is  not  entitled  to  much  confidence.  Moreover,  we 
see  that  man  begins  to  exercise  his  propensity  to  crimes 
against  property  at  a  period  antecedent  to  his  pursuit 
of  other  crimes.  Between  his  25th  and  30th  year, 
when  his  powers  are  developed,  he  inclines  more  to 
crimes  against  persons.  It  is  near  the  age  of  25  years 
that  the  propensity  to  crime  reaches  its  maximum ; 
but  before  passing  to  other  considerations,  let  us  exa- 
mine what  difference  there  is  between  the  sexes.  The 
latter  columns  of  the  following  table  show  the  degrees 
of  propensity  to  crime.f  reference  being  had  to  popu- 

*  Here  we  are  more  especially  considering  crimes  against  per- 
sons; for  crimes  against  property,  it  will  be  necessary  to  talce  no- 
tice of  the  wants  and  privations  of  man. 

t  To  give  a  new  proof  of  the  almost  identity  of  results  of  each 
year,  I  have  thought  proper  to  present  here  the  numbers  collected 
between  1830  and  1831 ;  we  may  compare  tUem  with  those  of  the 
preceding  tables,  which  are  nearly  exactly  double,  because  they 
refer  to  four  years : — 

Crimes 

against 

14 

Accused. 

0 
0 

0 

Individuals' 
Age. 

III 

5  -s 

r 

[ 

Per- 
sons. 

Pro- 
perty. 

Men. 

Women. 

Under  16  j'ears, 

27 

214 

88 

211 

30 

14 

16  to  21 

394 

1,888 

83 

1,911 

371 

19 

21  to  25        „    - 

643 

1 ,708 

72 

1,913 

438 

23 

25  to  30 

758 

1,872 

70 

2,185 

445 

20 

30  to  35        -    - 

662 

1,741 

72 

2,004 

399 

20 

a5  to  40 

3/6 

1,088 

74 

1,167 

297 

26 

40  to  45        „    - 

279 

725 

72 

800 

204 

25 

45  to  50 

200 

643 

70 

692 

151 

21 

60  to  .5,5         „    - 

161 

426 

73 

487 

100 

21 

55  to  60 

91 

245 

73 

270 

66 

24 

60  to  65        -,    - 

55 

147 

73 

162 

40 

25 

65  to  70 

31 

100 

77 

113 

18 

16 

70  to  00        -    - 

29 

58 

66 

67 

20 

30 

80  and  upwards, 
All  ages,      -    -    - 

6 
3712 

1 
10.856 

14 

74 

6 
11,988 

1 
2580 

16 
22 

lation,  and  the  greatest  number  of  each  column  being 
taken  as  unity : — 

Individuals' 
Age. 

Under  16  years. 

16  to  21 

21  to  25       ~ 

25  to  30       ~ 

30  to  35 

35  to  40 

40  to  45       „ 

45  to  50       ~ 

50  to  55 

55  to  60 

00  to  65 

65  to  70 

70  to  80 

80  &  upwards, 

All  ages, 

Accused. 

438 

3,901 

3,762 

4,260 

3,254 

2,105 

1,831 

1,357 

896 

555 

445 

230 

163 

18 

23,270 

Wo- 
men. 

82 

726 

845 

1017 

782 

621 

468 

3(J3 

203 

113 

97 

45 

38 

1 

5416 

J 

Degrees  of  the  Propensity 
to  Crime. 

In 
Gene- 
ral. 

0-02 
0-76 
1-00 
0-97 
0-81 
0-59 
0-55 
0-46 
0-33 
0-24 
0-24 
016 
0-12 
005 
0-41 

002 
0-79 
1(J0 
0-96 
0-80 
0-50 
0-54 
0-44 
0-33 
0-24 
0-24 
017 
012 
006 

AVo- 
men. 

0-02 
0-64 
0-98 
1-00 
0-83 
0-75 
0-CO 
0-51 
0-33 
0-22 
0-23 
0-14 
0-12 
0-01 

Calcu- 
lated. 

002 
0-6S 
1-00 
0-92 
0-81 
071 
0-60 
0-51 
0-42 
034 
027 
0-21 
0-12 
004 

Women,  compared  to  men,  are  rather  later  in  enter- 
ing on  the  career  of  crime,  and  also  sooner  come  to 
the  close  of  it.  The  maximum  for  men  takes  place 
about  the  25th  year,  and  about  the  30th  for  women ; 
the  numbers  on  Avhich  our  conclusions  are  founded  ai-e 
still  very  few ;  yet  we  see  that  the  two  lines  which 
represent  the  relative  value  for  each  sex  are  almost 
parallel.  The  latter  column  contains  results  calcu- 
lated by  the  following  very  simple  formula : — 

y  =  (1  —  sin.  X)  Yl~^,  supposmg  m  =  ^^  _  ,3- 

In  this  manner  the  degree  of  the  propensity  to 
crime  is  expressed  according  to  age  {en  fonction  de 
rage)  X.  We  must  take,  as  we  see,  for  the  axis  of  the 
abscissae,  one-fourth  of  the  corrected  circumference 
(circonference  recti/jee),  and  divided  into  decimal  parts. 
The  results  of  this  formula  generally  agree  better  with 
the  results  obtained  for  women.  I  have  endeavoured 
to  render  them  sensible  by  the  construction  of  a  curve, 
the  greater  or  less  divergences  of  which  from  the  axis 
AB  (see  plate  4)  indicates  the  degree  of  the  propensity 
to  crime.     The  equation  becomes  a  sinusoide — 

y  =  I  —  sin.  X, 
for  ages  above  30  j-ears,  because  m  evidently  is  equal 
to  unity.    It  is  not  to  be  expected  that  we  should  find 
mathematical  precision,  for  several  reasons,  of  which 
the  principal  are — 

1.  Tlie  numbers  obtained  for  four  years  are  not  so 
great  that  we  may  adopt  their  results  with  perfect 
confidence. 

2.  To  calculate  the  propensity  to  crime,  Ave  must 
combine  these  numbers  with  those  Avhich  the  tables  of 
population  have  furnished ;  and  it  is  pretty  generally 
agreed  that  the  table  of  the  Annuaire  does  not  give  the 
state  of  the  population  of  France  with  sufficient  accu- 
racy. 

3.  The  propensity  to  crime  can  only  be  calculated 
from  the  Avhole  of  the  individuals  Avho  compose  the 
popidation ;  and  as  those  Avho  occupy  the  prisons  are 
generally  persons  of  more  than  25  years  of  age,  and 
who,  from  their  state  of  captivity,  cannot  enter  into 
the  ratio  for  persons  above  25  years  of  age,  there 
must  necessarily  be  a  void  (lacune).  If,  instead  of 
taking  crimes  collectively,  we  examine  each  in  par- 
ticular in  proportion  to  age,  we  shall  have  a  ncAv  proof 
that  the  maximum"  of  crimes  of  different  kinds  takes 
place  between  tlie  20th  and  30th  j^cars,  and  that  it  is 
really  about  that  period  that  the  most  vicious  dispo- 
sition is  manifested.  Only  the  period  of  maximum 
will  be  hastened  or  retarded  some  years  for  some 
crimes,  according  to  the  quicker  or  slower  develop- 
ment of  certain  qualities  of  man  Avhich  are  propor- 
tioned to  those  crimes.  These  results  are  too  curious 
to  be  omitted  here ;  I  ha\'e  presented  them  in  the  fol- 
loAving  table,  according  to  the  documents  of  France, 
from  1826  to  1829  inclusiA-ely,  classing  them  according 

d4 

ON  MAN. 

to  the  periods  of  maxima,  and  taking  into  account  the  I  wliich  are  committed  in  smallest  nimiher,  because  the 
population  of  different  ages.   I  have  omitted  the  crimes  I  results  from  that  alone  would  have  been  very  doubtful. 

Under 

16 

21 

25 

30 

35 

40 

45 

50 

65 

00 

65 

70 

80  and 

Nature  of  the  Crimes. 

Years. 

to  21. 

to  25. 

to  30. 

to  35. 

to  40. 

to  45. 

to  50. 

to  55. 

to  60. 

to  65. 

to  70. 

to  80. 

up- 
wards. 

Violations  on  children  under  15  j-eai-s, 

4 

120 

71 

96 

73 

39 

34 

45 

22 

18 

26 

17 

21 

2 

House  robbery,         -        -         -         - 

54 

965 

845 

766 

528 

351 

249 

207 

112 

50 

61 

34 

14 

„ 

Other  thefts,       .        .        .        - 

332 

247') 

2050 

2292 

1716 

1249 

1016 

707 

433 

263 

190 

98 

65 

10 

Violation  and  seduction, 

.0 

155 

156 

148 

99 

38 

40 

27 

9 

5 

3 

1 

0 

- 

Parricide,    -         -         -         -         - 

6 

13 

12 

13 

6 

3 

2 

1 

4 

2 

— 

~ 

— 

~ 

6 

180 

300 

359 

219 

129 

101 

95 

55 

35 

23 

10 

7 

1 

15 

139 

198 

275 

172 

103 

84 

49 

48 

30 

25 

17 

9 

„ 

Infanticide, 

1 

40 

99 

134 

76 

44 

30 

8 

7 

1 

8 

4 

2 

„ 

Rebellion,            .        -        -        . 

5 

67 

129 

156 

115 

51 

51 

35 

29 

16 

16 

5 

5 

,- 

Highway  robbery, 

21 

80 

HI 

149 

107 

60 

62 

46 

22 

21 

8 

6 

4 

~ 

Assassination, 

10 

90 

144 

203 

183 

lOO 

104 

89 

53 

32 

24 

13 

15 

1 

Wounding  parents,           ... 

2 

47 

64 

73 

72 

40 

30 

16 

8 

2 

1 

- 

~ 

~ 

Poisoning,            .... 

5 

6 

IV 

30 

27 

15 

20 

12 

6 

2 

5 

4 

1 

~ 

False  witnessing  and  suborning, 

2 

23 

46 

48 

44 

42 

42 

35 

23 

15 

15 

11 

7 

~ 

Various  misdemeanours,      - 

8 

86 

202 

276 

312 

244 

207 

185 

129 

78 

75 

28 

28 

2 

Thus  the  propensity  to  theft,  one  of  the  first  to 
show  itself,  prevails  in  some  measure  throughout  our 
whole  existence ;  Ave  might  be  led  to  believe  it  to  be 
inherent  to  the  weakness  of  man,  who  falls  into  it  as  if 
by  instinct.  It  is  first  exercised  by  the  indulgence  of 
confidence  which  exists  in  the  interior  of  families,  then 
it  manifests  itself  out  of  them,  and  finally  on  the  public 
highway,  where  it  terminates  by  having  recourse  to 
violence,  when  the  man  has  then  made  the  sad  essay 
of  the  fullness  of  his  strength  by  committing  all  the 
different  kinds  of  homicide.  This  fatal  propensity, 
however,  is  not  so  precocious  as  thatAvhich,  near  ado- 
lescence, arises  with  the  fire  of  the  passions  and  the 
disorders  which  accompany  it,  and  which  drives  man 
to  violation  and  seduction,  seeking  its  first  victims 
among  beings  whose  Aveakness  opposes  the  least  re- 
sistance. To  these  first  excesses  of  the  passions,  of 
cupidity,  and  of  strength,  is  soon  joined  reflection, 
plotting  crime ;  and  man,  become  more  self-possessed 
and  hardened,  chooses  to  destroy  his  victim  by  assas- 
sination or  poisoning.  Finally,  his  last  stages  in  the 
career  of  crime  are  marked  by  address  in  deception, 
which  in  some  measure  supplies  the  place  of  strength. 
It  is  in  his  decline  that  the  vicious  man  presents  the 
most  hideous  spectacle ;  his  cupidity,  Avhich  nothing 
can  extinguish,  is  rekindled  with  fresh  ardoui%  and 
assumes  the  mask  of  swindling ;  if  he  still  uses  the 
little  strength  Avliich  nature  has  left  to  him,  it  is 
rather  to  strike  his  enemy  in  the  shade ;  finally,  if 
his  depraved  passions  have  not  been  deadened  by  age, 
he  prefers  to  gratify  them  on  feeble  cliildren.  Thus, 
his  first  and  his  last  stages  in  the  career  of  crime 
have  the  same  character  in  this  last  respect :  but  Avhat 
a  difference !  That  Avhlcli  was  somewhat  excusable 
in  the  young  man,  because  of  his  inexperience,  of  the 
violence  of  his  passions,  and  the  similarity  of  ages,  in 
the  old  man  is  the  result  of  tlie  deepest  immorality 
and  the  most  accumulated  load  of  depravity. 

From  the  data  of  the  preceding  tables,  it  is  scarcely 
possible  not  to  perceive  the  great  influence  which  age 
exercises  over  the  propensity  to  crime,  since  each  of 
the  individual  results  tend  to  prove  it.  I  shall  not 
hesitate  to  consider  the  scale  of  the  different  degrees 
of  the  propensity  to  crime,  at  different  .ages,  deserving 
of  as  nmch  confidence  as  tliose  which  I  have  given  for 
the  stature,  weiglit,  and  strength  of  man,  or,  finally, 
those  for  mortality. 

Account  has  also  been  taken  of  the  ages  of  accused 
persons,  Avho  have  appeared  before  the  minor  or  cor- 
rectional courts  of  France,  but  only  i)reserving  tlie 
three  following  heads,  which  refer  but  to  the  four 
years  preceding  18.30 : — 

Ages. 

Criminal  Courts. 

Correctional  Courts. 

Men. 

■\Vonicn. 

Men. 

Women. 

Under  16  years. 
From  16  to  21, 
Jlore  than  21 , 

2 
17 
81 

2 
13 
85 

5 
14 
81 

1011 

6 
16 
78 

1(11)             1           llH) 

KHI 

Thus,  the  correctional  cases  are,  in  early  age,  all 
things  being  equal,  more  frequent  than  criminal  cases  ; 
they  are  the  first  steps  of  crime,  and  consequently 
those  most  easily  ascended.  In  Belgium,  only  four 
heads  of  ages  have  been  made,  and  the  results  of  cor- 
rectional and  criminal  courts  have  been  united,  Avhich 
renders  our  comparisons  more  difficult,  since,  as  we 
have  just  seen,  the  numbers  in  each  are  not  the  same ; 
it  is  also  to  be  regretted  that  care  has  not  been  taken 
to  distinguish  the  sexes.  Be  this  as  it  may,  by  taking 
the  total  number  of  the  accused  and  suspected  {jpre- 
venus)  as  unity,  Ave  obtain  the  foUoAving  results  : — 

Suspected  (or  Committed)  and  Accused. 

Ages. 

1826. 

1327. 

1828. 

1829. 

Average 
Number. 

Under  16  years, 

From  16  to  21, 

~     21  to  70, 

Above  711  years. 

4 
13 
81 

2 

5 
11 
82 

5 
12 
81 

2 

5 
11 
82 

2 

5 
12 
81 

2 

KXI 

100 

100 

100 

100 

These  results  are  very  similar  to  those  of  the  cor- 
rectional courts  of  France,  and  the  latter  elements 
ought  certainly  to  predominate,  Avhen  Ave  make  no 
distinction  betAvcen  the  accused  and  those  merely 
committed,  since  the  latter  are  always  more  numerous 
than  the  accused.  Yet  it  Avould  seem  that  Avith  us 
there  are  fcAver  offences  betAveen  the  ages  of  16  and 
2 1  than  in  France. 

We  do  not  find  that  the  number  of  children  brought 
annually  before  the  courts  of  Belgium  has  dimini.shed, 
citlier  in  an  absolute  sense,  or  compared  Avith  the 
numbers  of  other  accused  and  committed  persons. 
The  same  is  nearly  the  case  with  France,  as  we  sec 
by  the  folloAving  table,  in  Avhich  I  have  preferred 
giving  the  absolute  numbers : — 

Tears. 

Under 
16  Years. 

10  to  21. 

More 
than  21. 

Total. 

Accused. 

1826, 

124 

1,101 

5,763 

6,988 

1827,  - 

136 

1,022 

5.771 

6,939 

1828, 

143 

1,278 

5,!)75 

7,aO() 

1829,   - 

117 

1 ,226 

6.0.30 

7,373 

KWO, 

114 

1,101 

5,687 

6,962 

1831,    - 

127 

1,121 

6,358 

7,600 

Committed. 

1826, 

5,042 

12,7.09 

80,19() 

104,0,37 

1827,    - 

5,2.33 

13,291 

73,588 

92,112 

1828, 

5,228 

14,902 

71,022 

91,752 

1829,   - 

5,306 

14,431 

79,4,38 

99,175 

law,*    . 

2,iir,-2 

6,452 

47,812 

57,116 

1831,    - 

5,051 

17,0.59 

84,4.33 

107,743 

We  must  not,  hoAvever,  conclude  from  these  results 
that  education,  which  for  some  time  has  been  diffused 

*  Those  committed  for  different  kinds  of  offences  are  not  in- 
cluded in  these  numbers. 

ON  MAN. 

95 

Vritli  such  activity,  has  heen  of  no  effect  in  diminish- 
ing the  number  of  crimes  committed  by  young  per- 
sons ;  several  years  more  are  necessary  before  its 
influence  can  become  apparent,  and  before  it  can 
carry  its  effects  into  tlie  bosom  of  famihes. 

It  is  a  matter  of  regret,  that  as  yet  we  possess  so 
few  accounts  of  the  ages  of  criminals,  calculated  to 
render  appreciable  the  influence  of  places  and  the  cus- 
toms of  different  nations.  In  general,  we  remark,  that 
the  number  of  children  in  prisons  in  England  is  much 
greater  than  with  us ;  this  would  appear  to  be  owing, 
especially  in  the  metropolis,  to  children  being  trained 
in  a  manner  to  theft,  Avliile  the  really  guilty  act  througli 
their  intermediation.  In  the  penitentiary  of  Millbank, 
in  the  year  1827,  125f'  individuals  wei'e  registered  as 
under  21  years  of  age  out  of  a  total  number  of  3020, 
which  gives  a  ratio  of  41  to  100,  being  more  than 
double  that  of  France  and  the  Low  Countries.* 

The  condemned  persons  in  the  jail  of  Philadelphia 
in  1822,  1823,  and  1824,  were  proportioned  as  fol- 
lows :  f — 

Ages. 

1822. 

1823. 

1824. 

Totals. 

Under  21  years, 
From  21  to  30  years,  - 

~  30  to  40  ~  - 
Above  40  years,  - 

52 
1,')1 
72 
.55 

72 

143 

07 

49 

58 

122 

'  79 

28 

182 
416 
218 
132 

The  total  for  the  three  years  Avas  948.  Taking  the 
ratio  of  this  sum  to  1000,  we  find  the  following  A^alues, 
opposite  to  which  I  have  placed  those  of  France : — 

Under  21  years, 
From  21  to  30, 
-     30  to  40, 
Above  40  years. 

Philadelphia.  France. 
19  19 

44  35 

23  23 

14  23 

100 

100 

Thus  the  prisons  of  Philadelphia  present  exactly 
the  same  number  of  criminals  as  those  of  France  for 
individuals  imder  1 9  and  for  those  between  30  and  40 
years  of  age ;  they  have  fewer  old  men,  but  more 
men  between  21  and  30,  Avhich  may  be  owing  to  the 
nature  of  the  population  of  the  two  countries. 

France,  Belgium,  and  Philadelphia,  agree  then 
pretty  nearly  as  to  the  number  of  criminals  in  pro- 
portion to  the  ages ;  but  England  differs  very  sensibly 
from  the  average  values  presented  by  these  countries, 
and  that  is  owing,  no  doubt,  as  I  observed  before,  not 
so  much  to  the  character  of  the  English  people  as  to 
the  modes  of  eluding  the  rigour  of  the  laws  which  the 
malefactors  make  use  of,  acting  through  the  inter- 
medium of  children  whom  they  have  trained  up  as 
instruments  of  crime. 

Conclusions. 

In  making  a  summary  of  the  i^rincipal  observations 
contained  in  this  chapter,  we  are  led  to  the  following 
conclusions : — 

1st,  Age  (or  the  term  of  life)  is  undoubtedly  the 
cause  Avhich  operates  with  most  energy  in  developing 
or  subduing  the  propensity  to  crime. 

2d,  This  fatal  propensity  appears  to  be  developed  in 
proportion  to  the  intensity  of  the  physical  power  and 
passions  of  man :  it  attains  its  maximum  about  the 
age  of  25  years,  the  period  at  which  the  physical  de- 
velopment has  almost  ceased.  The  intellectual  and 
moral  development,  which  operates  more  slowly,  sub- 
sequently weakens  the  propensity  to  crime,  which,  still 
later,  diminishes  fi'om  the  feeble  state  of  the  physical 
powers  and  passions. 

3d,  Although  it  is  near  the  age  of  25  that  the 
maximum  in  number  of  crimes  of  different  kinds 
takes  place,  j'et  this  maximum  advances  or  recedes 
some  years  for  certain  crimes,  according  to  the  quicker 

*  Bulletin  do  M.  de  Ferussac,  Blai  1828. 

*  American  Review,  1827,  No.  12. 

or  slower  development  of  certain  qualities  which  have 
a  bearing  on  those  crimes.  Thus,  man,  driven  by  the 
violence  of  his  passions,  at  first  commits  violation  and 
seduction  ;  almost  at  the  same  time  lie  enters  on  the 
career  of  theft,  which  he  seems  to  follow  as  if  by 
instinct  till  the  end  of  life;  the  development  of  his 
strength  subsequently  leads  him  to  commit  every  act 
of  violence — homicide,  rebellion,  highway  robbery 
still  later,  reflection  converts  murder  into  assassination 
and  poisoning.  Lastly,  man,  advancing  in  the  career 
of  crime,  substitutes  a  greater  degree  of  cunning  for 
violence,  and  becomes  more  of  a  forger  than  at  any 
other  period  of  life. 

4th,  The  difference  of  sexes  has  also  a  great  influence 
on  the  propensity  to  crime  :  in  general,  there  is  only 
1  woman  before  the  courts  to  4  men. 

5th,  The  propensity  to  crime  increases  and  decreases 
nearly  in  the  same  degrees  in  each  sex ;  yet  the  period 
of  maximum  takes  place  rather  later  in  women,  and 
is  near  the  30th  year. 

6th,  Woman,  undoubtedly  from  her  feeling  of  weak- 
ness, rather  commits  crimes  against  property  than 
persons ;  and  when  she  seeks  to  destroy  her  kind,  she 
prefers  poison.  Sloreover,  when  she  commits  homi- 
cide, she  does  not  appear  to  be  proportionaUy  arrested 
by  tlie  enormity  of  crimes  which,  in  point  of  frequency, 
take  jilace  in  the  following  order : — infanticide,  mis- 
carriage, parricide,  wounding  of  parents,  assassination, 
wounds  and  blows,  murder  :  so  that  we  may  affirm  that 
the  number  of  the  guilty  diminishes  in  proportion  as 
they  have  to  seek  their  victim  more  openly.  These 
differences  are  no  doubt  owing  to  the  habits  and  seden- 
tary life  of  woman ;  she  can  only  conceive  and  execute 
guilty  projects  on  individuals  with  whom  she  is  in 
constant  relation. 

7  th,  The  seasons,  in  their  course,  exercise  a  very 
marked  influence  on  crime  :  thus,  during  summer,  the 
greatest  number  of  crimes  against  persons  are  com- 
mitted, and  the  fewest  against  property ;  the  contrary 
takes  place  during  winter. 

8th,  It  must  be  observed  that  age  and  the  seasons 
have  almost  the  same  influence  in  increasing  or  dimi- 
nishing the  number  of  mental  disorders  and  crimes 
against  persons. 

9  th,  Climate  appears  to  have  some  influence,  espe- 
cially on  the  propensity  to  crimes  against  persons : 
this  observation  is  confirmed  at  least  among  the  races 
of  southern  climates,  such  as  the  Pelasgian  race,  scat- 
tered over  the  shores  of  the  Mediterranean  and  Corsica, 
on  the  one  hand ;  and  the  Italians,  mixed  with  Dalma- 
tians and  Tyrolese,  on  the  other.  We  observe,  also, 
that  severe  climates,  which  give  rise  to  the  greatest 
number  of  wants,  also  give  rise  to  the  greatest  num- 
ber of  crimes  against  property. 

10th,  The  countries  whei-e  frequent  mixture  of  the 
people  takes  place ;  those  in  which  industry  and  trade 
collect  many  persons  and  thmgs  together,  and  possess 
the  greatest  activity ;  finally,  those  where  the  inequa- 
lity of  fortime  is  most  felt,  all  things  being  equal,  are 
those  Avhich  give  rise  to  the  greatest  nmnber  of 
crimes. 

1 1th,  Professions  have  great  influence  on  the  nature 
of  crimes.  Individuals  of  more  independent  profes- 
sions are  rather  given  to  ci-imes  agamst  persons ;  and 
the  labouring  and  domestic  classes  to  crimes  against 
property.  Habits  of  dependence,  sedentary  life,  and 
also  physical  weakness  in  Avomen,  produce  the  same 
results. 

12th,  Education  is  far  from  having  so  much  influ- 
ence on  the  propensity  to  crime  as  is  generally  sup- 
posed. IMoreover,  moral  instruction  is  very  often 
confounded  Avith  instruction  in  reading  and  writing 
alone,  and  Avhich  is  most  frequently  an  accessory  in- 
strument to  crime. 

13th,  It  is  the  same  Avith  poverty,  several  of  the 
departments  of  France,  considered  to  be  the  poorest, 
are  at  the  same  time  the  most  moral.  INIan  is  not 
driven  to  crime  because  he  is  poor,  but  more  generally 

96 

ON  MAN. 

because  he  passes  rapidly  from  a  state  of  comfort  to 
one  of  misery,  and  an  inadequacy  to  supply  the  arti- 
ficial wants  which  he  has  created. 

14th,  The  higher  we  go  in  the  ranks  of  society,  and 
consequently  in  the  degrees  of  education,  Ave  fold  a 
smaller  and  smaller  proportion  of  guilty  women  to 
men ;  descending  to  the  lowest  orders,  the  habits  of 
both  sexes  resemble  each  other  more  and  more. 

15th,  Of  1129  murders  committed  in  France,  during 
the  space  of  four  years,  446  have  been  in  consequence 
of  quarrels  and  contentions  in  taverns ;  which  would 
tend  to  show  the  fatal  influence  of  the  use  of  strotig 
drin/is. 

16th,  In  France,  as  in  the  Low  Countries,  we  enu- 
merate annually  1  accused  person  to  4300  inhabitants 
nearly;  but  in  "the  former  country,  39  in  100  are  ac- 
quitted, and  in  the  second  only  1.5  ;  yet  the  same  code 
was  used  in  both  countries,  but  in  the  Low  Countries 
the  judges  performed  the  duty  of  the  jury.  Before 
correctional  courts  and  simple  police  courts,  where 
the  committed  were  tried  by  judges  only,  the  results 
were  nearly  the  same  for  both  countries. 

17th,  In  Finance,  crimes  against  persons  were  about 
one-third  of  the  number  of  crimes  against  property, 
but  in  the  Low  Countries  they  were  about  one-fourth 
only.  It  must  be  remarked,  that  the  first  kind  of 
crimes  lead  to  fe^ver  condemnations  than  the  second, 
perhaps  because  there  is  a  greater  repugnance  to  apply 
punishment  as  the  punishment  increases  in  severity. 

I  cannot  conclude  this  chapter  without  again  ex- 
pressing my  astonishment  at  the  constancy  observed 
in  the  results  which  the  documents  connected  with 
the  administration  of  justice  present  each  year. 

"  Thus,  as  I  have  already  had  occasion  to  repeat 
several  times,  we  pass  from  one  year  to  another,  with 
the  sad  perspective  of  seeing  the  same  crimes  repro- 
duced in  the  same  order,  and  bringing  with  them  the 
same  punishments  in  the  same  proportions."  All  ob- 
servations tend  likewise  to  confirm  the  truth  of  this 
proposition,  which  I  long  ago  announced,  that  everi; 
thing  which  pertains  to  the  human  species  considered  as  a 
whole,  belongs  to  the  order  of  physical  facts :  the  greater 
the  number  of  individuals,  the  more  does  the  influence 
of  individual  Avill  disappear,  leaving  predominance  to 
a  series  of  general  facts,  dependent  on  causes  by  which 
society  exists  and  is  preserved.  These  causes  we  now 
want  to  ascertain,  and  as  soon  as  we  are  acquainted 
with  them,  we  shall  determine  their  influence  on  so- 
ciety, just  in  the  same  way  as  we  determine  effects  by 
their  causes  in  physical  sciences.*  It  must  be  confessed, 
that,  distressing  as  the  truth  at  first  appears,  if  Ave 
submit  to  a  well  followed  out  scries  of  observations  the 
physical  world  and  the  social  sj-stem,  it  would  be  diffi- 
cult to  decide  in  respect  to  which  of  the  two  the  acting 
causes  produce  their  effects  with  most  regularity.  I 
am,  however,  ftir  from  concluding  that  man  can  do 
nothing  for  man's  amelioration.  I  think,  as  I  said  at 
the  commencement  of  this  work,  that  he  possesses  a 
moral  power  capable  of  modifying  the  laws  which  affect 
him  ;  but  this  power  only  acts  in  the  slowest  manner, 
so  that  the  causes  influencuig  the  social  system  cannot 
undergo  any  sudden  alteration ;  as  they  have  acted 
for  a  series  of  years,  so  will  they  continue  to  act  in 
time  to  come,  until  they  can  be  modified.     Also,  I 

*  >I.  Guerry  comes  to  the  same  conclusions  from  his  researches 
on  crimes,  Essai  mr  la  Statistiqiic  Morale,  p.  69: — "  One  of  the 
most  gcner.al  conclusions  wc  can  make  is,  tliat  they  all  concur  to 
prove  tliat  the  greater  number  of  facts  of  a  moral  nature,  con- 
sidered in  tlie  mass,  and  not  individually,  are  determined  by  re- 
gular causes,  the  variations  of  which  take  place  within  narrow 
limits,  and  which  may  be  submitted,  like  those  of  a  material 
nature,  to  direct  and  numerical  observation."  As  this  idea  has 
continually  presented  itself  to  me  in  all  my  researches  on  man, 
and  as  I  have  exactly  expressed  it  in  the  same  terms  as  those  of 
the  text,  in  my  conclusions  on  the  Rcchcrches  sur  le  Penchant  au 
Crime,  a  work  which  appeared  a  year  before  that  of  M.  Guerry, 
i  have  thought  it  necessary  to  mention  the  point  here,  to  prevent 
misunderstanding. 

cannot  repeat  too  often,  to  all  men  who  sincerely  desire 
the  well-being  and  honour  of  their  kind,  and  who  would 
blush  to  consider  a  few  francs  more  or  less  paid  to  the 
treasury  as  equivalent  to  a  few  heads  more  or  less 
submitted  to  the  axe  of  the  executioner,  that  there 
is  a  budget  Avhich  we  pay  with  a  frightftd  regvdarity 
— it  is  that  of  prisons,  chains,  and  the  scaffold :  it  is 
that  which,  above  all,  we  ought  to  endeavour  to  abate. 

BOOK   FOURTH. 

OP  THE  PROPERTIES  OP  THE  AVERAGE  MAN,  OP 
THE  SOCIAL  SYSTEM,  AND  OP  THE  FINAL  AD- 
VANCEMENT OF  THIS  STUDY. 

CHAPTER  I. 

PROPERTIES  OF  THE  AVERAGE  MAN. 

In  the  three  preceding  books  I  have  presented  the 
results  of  my  inquiries  on  the  development  of  the 
physical  and  moral  system  of  the  average  man,  and 
on  the  modifications  which  he  undergoes  from  diffe- 
rent influences.  ^  These  results  can  only  be  considered 
as  the  first  essay  towards  an  immense  Avork,  which, 
to  be  completed,  would  require  long  and  painful  re- 
searches, and  which  would  only  be  really  useful  by 
being  extremely  exact. 

This  determination  of  the  average  man  is  not  merely 
a  matter  of  speculative  curiosity ;  it  may  be  of  the  most 
important  service  to  the  science  of  man  and  the  social 
system.  It  ought  necessarily  to  precede  every  other 
inquiry  into  social  physics,  since  it  is,  as  it  were,  the 
basis.  The  average  man,  indeed,  is  in  a  nation  Avhat 
the  centre  of  gravity  is  in  a  body ;  it  is  by  having 
that  central  point  in  vicAV  that  Ave  arrive  at  the  ap- 
prehension of  all  the  phenomena  of  equilibrium  and 
motion ;  moreover,  Avhen  considered  abstractly,  it  pre- 
sents some  remarkable  properties,  Avhich  I  am  noAV 
going  to  state  succinctl3^ 

1.  Of  the  Average  Man  considered  with  reference  to 
Literature  and  the  Fine  Arts. 

The  necessity  of  veracity  in  faithfully  representing 
the  physiognomy,  the  habits,  and  the  manners  of  people 
at  different  epochs,  has  at  all  times  led  artists  and 
literary  men  to  seize,  among  the  individuals  Avhora 
they  observed,  the  characteristic  traits  of  the  period 
in  Avhich  they  lived ;  or,  in  other  words,  to  come  as 
near  the  average  as  possible.  I  do  not  Avish  to  be 
understood  as  implying  that  it  is  necessary  to  give 
the  same  traits,  the  same  tastes,  and  the  same  passions, 
to  CA^ery  individual,  Avhatever  may  be  his  age,  rank, 
countrj^  or  the  period  at  Avhich  he  hves ;  but  that  the 
most  characteristic  marks  must  be  studied,  still  keep- 
ing in  view  these  differences.  Thus  Ave  should  inves- 
tigate Avhat  are  the  predominating  elements  in  any 
people  or  in  any  age  ;  for  example,  Avhether  fiinaticism, 
piety,  or  irreligion — a  spirit  of  servility,  independence, 
or  anarchy.  No  one  Avill  hesitate  to  alloAV  to  me 
that  man  is  more  courageous  at  20  than  at  60,  and 
more  prudent  at  60  than  at  20 ;  or  that  persons  of  the 
south  have  more  liveliness  of  thought  and  feature  than 
tile  inhabitants  of  the  north :  these  are  common  obser- 
vations, whicli  every  one  admits,  and  Avhich  Ave  should 
be  shocked  to  find  unattended  to  in  Avorks  of  imagi- 
nation. But  can  it  be  thought  Avrong  to  give  more 
precision  to  these  A'ague  ideas  ? — is  it  altogether  con- 
formable to  the  actual  state  of  our  knoAvledge,  to  re- 
ceive relations  Avhich  have  only  been  slightly  observed, 
Avhen  they  may  be  determined  Avith  certain  precision  ? 
If  it  had  been  demanded  some  years  ago  at  Avhat  age 
a  man  has  the  greatest  propensity  to  crime,  aa'c  should 
no  doubt  have  been  much  embarrassed  to  find  the  true 
answer ;  and  perha^js  the  most  erroneotis  opinions 
Avould  have  been  put  forth,  especially  on  the  influence 

ON  MAN. 

97 

of  sexes  and  the  intellectual  state.  Yet  who  would 
assert  that  these  researches  are  useless  to  philoso- 
phers and  men  of  letters,  or  even  to  the  artist,  who 
only  truly  deserves  this  name  according  as  he  has 
studied  the  human  heart  deeply  ?  The  time  is  passing 
away  Avhen  men  were  contented  with  indistinct  ideas, 
and  relations  determined  at  a  glance  ;  when  numeri- 
cal determinations  hecome  applicable,  thej'  are  espe- 
ciaUy  consulted  by  the  observer  and  lover  of  truth. 

I  am  far  from  pretending,  however,  that  even  a  pro- 
found knowledge  of  the  different  faculties  of  man  will 
be  sufficient  to  obtain  success  in  the  fine  arts  and  hte- 
rature;  but  I  think  that,  to  produce  a  work  truly 
capable  of  moving  and  agitating  the  passions,  we  must 
be  acquainted  with  man .  and  especially  man  as  it  is  de- 
sired to  represent  him.  Thus,  to  take  but  one  example, 
the  artist  who  has  only  studied  the  type  of  the  Grecian 
physiognomies,  however  admirable  this  type  may  ap- 
pear to  us,  if  he  reproduces  it  in  modern  subjects,  will 
produce  but  a  chilling  effect  on  the  spectator,  who, 
though  he  admires  the  art  and  composition,  will  never 
be  deeply  excited.  Grecian  figures,  however  varied 
they  may  be  according  to  age,  passion,  and  sex,  have 
notwithstanding  a  general  likeness,  which  carries  us, 
in  spite  of  ourselves,  back  to  antiquity,  and  distracts 
our  attention  from  the  subject  sought  to  be  represented 
before  us.  If  such  figures  are  represented  in  action, 
the  anachronism  only  becomes  more  sensible.  Artists, 
at  the  revival  of  the  fine  arts,  fully  comprehended  the 
necessity  of  painting  what  they  had  before  their  eyes, 
and  on  that  account  they  produced  such  astonishing 
effects.  The  noble  and  severe  figure  of  Christ  has 
nothing  in  common  with  those  of  the  Apollo  or  the 
Jupiter  of  ancient  mythology ;  a  Jladonna  of  Raphael 
has  an  enchanting  grace,  which  is  not  surpassed  by 
the  finest  forms  of  the  antique ;  and  these  beauties 
have  a  greater  influence  on  the  imagination,  because 
they  are  more  similar  to  the  natures  around  us,  and 
act  more  directly  upon  us.  Even  we  ourselves,  in 
more  remote  situations  and  circumstances,  feel  the 
necessity,  when  retracing  our  national  facts,  of  not 
bringing  forward  Grecian  or  Italian  figures:  in  the 
midst  of  a  battle,  where  men  are  found,  all  nearly  of 
the  same  age,  and  all  alike  dressed  in  the  same  kind 
of  armour,  our  eye  seeks  to  recognise,  by  the  phy- 
siognomic traits  and  expressions,  the  Frenchman  or 
the  Englishman,  the  German  or  the  Kussian.  In  the 
French  army  itself,  the  soldier  of  the  old  guard  had 
an  expression  which  has  become  classical,  and  is  iden- 
tified in  some  measure  with  the  remembrances  of  the 
empire. 

If  the  arts  have  already  admitted  such  imperceptible 
shades,  and  have  the  j)Ower  of  awakening  the  remem- 
brance of  an  era  by  recalling  the  physiognomic  traits 
which  seem  to  belong  to  it,  what  value  ought  we  not 
to  affix  to  an  accurate  determination  of  these  traits, 
if  they  are  capable  of  being  appreciated  ?  Some  men 
of  genius  have  penetrated  very  far  in  these  researches, 
and  their  ideas,  which  at  first  were  rejected,  have  since 
been  more  fa vom-ably  judged  of,  when  experience  came 
to  their  support.  Lavater  has  not  hesitated  to  analyse 
the  human  passions  by  the  inspection  of  the  features, 
and  Gall  has  endeavoured  to  prove  that  we  may  arrive 
at  similar  results  by  inspecting  the  cranial  protuber- 
ances. There  is  an  intimate  relation  between  the 
physical  and  the  moral  of  man,  and  the  passions  leave 
sensible  traces  on  the  instruments  they  put  in  con- 
tinual action ;  but  what  are  these  traces  ?  It  is  agi-eed 
that  they  do  exist;  the  artist  studies  and  seeks  to 
seize  them ;  yet,  by  a  singular  prepossession,  we  re- 
ject the  possibility  of  this  being  determined  with  any 
degree  of  accurac\%  or  the  utiUty  of  the  determination. 
But  how  comes  it  that  such  artist  or  such  j)oet  labours 
to  no  purpose,  and  presents  constantly  to  us  the  Greek 
or  Italian  type,  according  as  he  had  more  especially 
studied  the  antique  or  the  Italian  school  ? — how  is  it 
that  Rubens,  despite  his  genius,  when  painting  the 
divinities  of  ancient  mythology,  gives  forms  which 

antiquity  would  have  disavowed  ?  It  is  because 
Rubens  had  also  a  tj^pe,  and  this  type  had  been  chosen 
from  among  the  moderns. 

It  is  imdoubtedly  owing  to  the  want  of  care  taken 
ill  studying  the  shades  of  the  moral  and  phj-sical 
qualities  of  man  among  different  people  and  in  diffe- 
rent ages,  that  the  greater  munber  of  works  of  imagi- 
nation have  been  so  monotonous  and  lifeless.  The 
necessity  of  studying  natm'e  and  truth  has  indeed 
been  felt ;  but  the  fact  has  not  been  sufficiently  at- 
tended to,  I  think,  that  nature  is  not  uivariable.  The 
ancients  have  represented  the  physical  and  moral  man 
with  infinite  art,  such  as  he  then  was  ;  and  the  greater 
number  of  the  moderns,  struck  with  the  perfection  of 
their  works,  have  thought  they  had  nothing  to  do  but 
servilely  to  imitate  them  ;  they  have  not  understood 
that  the  type  has  been  changed ;  and  that,  when  imi- 
tating them  for  the  perfection  of  art,  they  had  another 
nature  to  study.  Hence  the  universal  cry,  "  Who 
shall  deliver  us  from  the  Greeks  and  Romans?" 
Hence  the  violent  dispute  between  the  classics  and 
romanticists  ;  hence,  lastly,  the  necessity  of  having  a 
literature  which  was  truly  the  expression  of  society. 
This  great  revolution  was  accomplished,  and  furnishes 
the  most  irrefragable  proof  of  the  variability  of  the 
liuman  type,  or  of  the  average  man,  in  different  men 
and  in  different  ages. 

As  for  ancient  subjects,  the  artist  or  the  poet  who 
wished  to  reproduce  them  might  constrain  us  to  ad- 
mire his  art ;  but  we  should  always  feel  that  he  placed 
a  natm'e  before  oiur  eyes,  which,  so  to  speak,  was  dead 
— a  type  which  is  extinct.  We  must  undoubtedly  make 
concessions  to  the  fine  arts,  and  give  ourselves  to  their 
illusions ;  but  we  must  not  let  the  sacrifices  demanded 
exceed  certain  limits.  We  cannot,  for  a  moment,  go 
back  several  centuries,  forget  our  religion,  social  insti- 
tutions, and  habits,  and  feel  sympathy  for  men  not 
having  our  tastes,  manners,  or  the  same  traits  which 
Ave  are  accustomed  to  see  around  us.  The  ancients 
themselves  never  required  such  sacrifices  on  the  part 
of  the  public ;  and  such  men  as  Euripides  and  Sopho- 
cles took  good  care  not  to  introduce  on  the  stage  an 
Osiris,  and  the  mysterious  feasts  of  the  Egyptians, 
who,  nevertheless,  had  been  their  patterns. 

A  few  ages  are  of  little  moment  in  the  annals  of  the 
human  race ;  and  Ave  cannot  assure  ourselves  that 
man  AA'iU  not  undergo  any  modifications — in  form,  for 
example — and  that  a  type  Avhich  once  existed  may 
not  be  completely  lost  some  A&y.  This  supposition 
may  appear  extraordinary ;  yet  Ave  see  that  all  the 
elements  relating  generally  to  man  undergo  changes ; 
who,  therefore,  can  assure  himself  that  the  type  of 
the  Grecian  figure  shall  not  be  lost,  either  in  the  flight 
of  time,  or  in  some  great  catastrophe  involving  the 
destruction  of  the  Caucasian  race  ?  Such  overthrows 
are  in  the  nature  of  possible  things.  The  consequences 
of  such  an  event  might  be,  that  another  race— the 
IMongolian,  for  instance— Avhich,  after  much  difficulty, 
might  people  the  earth,  and  find  the  remains  of  the 
fine  arts,  Avould  only  see  in  aU  these  fine  Grecian 
figures,  Avhich  we  are  accustomed  to  admire,  things 
entirely  artificial  and  conventional,  such  as  the  Egyp- 
tian forms  appear  at  present  to  us.  They  might  ad- 
mire these  antiques  as  specimens  of  art ;  but  I  doubt 
if  they  would  prefer  the  ancient  form  to  their  own, 
if  they  had  to  represent  their  divinity  in  a  human 
shape.  What  has  just  been  said,  will  no  doubt  be 
rejected  by  those  who  have  pre-estabhshed  ideas  re- 
garding a  fixed  standard  of  beauty.  I  shall  not  dis- 
cuss that  question  here ;  I  only  publish  my  vicAvs  Avith 
diffidence,  not  seeking  to  impose  them  on  any  one. 

I  think  I  have  sufficiently  shoAvn,  in  Avhat  has  pre- 
ceded, that  the  determination  of  the  average  man  is 
not  useless,  even  to  the  tine  arts  and  literature ;  and 
that  he  Avho  shaU  arrive  at  this  determination,  Avill 
have  no  difficulty  in  obtaining  the  attention  of  artists 
and  men  of  literature.  It  Avovdd  inform  them  more 
precisely  of  things  Avhich  they  noAV  know  but  vaguely  ; 

98 

ON  MAN. 

it  would  discover  others  to  them  of  which  they  are 
ignorant,  or  at  least  clear  their  minds  of  a  mass  of 
prejudices.  They  would  receive  these  notions  as  a 
painter  learns  perspective,  which,  in  geometrical  out- 
line, is  not  very  pittoresque  either.  Moreover,  artists 
have  received  the  researches  of  Gall  and  Lavater  pro- 
bably with  greater  eagerness  than  savants :  indeed, 
it  is  to  their  care  that  painters  are  indebted  in  a  great 
measure  for  the  knowledge  of  the  proportions  of  dif- 
ferent parts  of  the  human  body,  in  each  sex,  at  differ- 
ent ages.  This  knowledge  was  so  important  to  them, 
that  it  was  an  object  of  study  of  the  greatest  painters 
at  the  revival  of  the  arts :  we  may  see,  especially, 
what  care  the  celebrated  Albert  Durer  took  in  regard 
to  it  in  his  works. 

At  the  same  time,  I  admit  that  the  artist  and  the 
literary  man  can,  and  even  ought,  to  search  out  the 
prominent  traits,  exaggerate  rather  than  diminish 
them,  and  contrast  the  most  diiferent  physiognomies 
and  characters ;  but  the  truth  must  always  lie  be- 
tween the  extremes  Avhich  they  present  to  our  view, 
and  these  extremes  themselves  lie  within  limits  defined 
by  nature.  Going  beyond,  Ave  only  create  fantastic 
beings  and  monstrosities ;  these  reveries  of  a  disor- 
dered imagination  may  astonish,  and  even  amuse,  but 
they  can  never  produce  those  deep  sensations  and 
lively  emotions  which  we  only  feel  for  beings  of  our 
own  caste. 

To  conclude  the  exposition  of  my  views  of  the 
average  man,  I  remark,  that  it  Avill  first  be  necessary 
to  study,  in  the  most  complete  manner,  the  develop- 
ment of  his  different  faculties,  and  every  thing  which 
may  influence  their  development,  every  other  consi- 
deration being  laid  aside.  The  artist,  the  man  of 
literature,  and  the  savant,  will  afterwards  choose  froni 
among  these  materials  those  which  are  best  suited  to 
the  subject  of  their  studies,  as  the  painter  borrows 
from  optics  the  few  principles  bearing  on  his  art. 

2.  Of  tlie  Average  Blan  considered  in  reference  to  the  Natural 
and  Medical  Sciences. 

It  will  not  be  necessary  to  insist  forcibly,  to  natu- 
ral philosophers,  on  the  importance  of  the  investigation 
of  the  different  laws  of  the  development  of  man ;  in- 
deed, without  the  knowledge  of  these  laws,  the  science 
of  man  cannot  be  complete  or  philosophic.  I  think 
the  utility  of  the  methods  of  determining  them,  which 
I  propose,  needs  not  to  be  explained  to  tlicra  again ; 
several  of  these  have  been  familiar  to  them  for  a  long 
time,  and  others  form  a  part  of  their  usual  modes  of 
proceeding  in  fathoming  the  secrets  of  nature. 

In  the  eyes  of  the  naturalist,  the  average  man  is 
only  the  type  of  a  people ;  numerous  observations 
have  shown  that  this  type  is  not  unique,  and  conse- 
quently that  there  are  different  races  of  men.  But 
the  characters  on  which  these  distiuctions  are  esta- 
blished have  not  been  sufficiently  defined;  indeed, 
how  can  we  study  the  modifications  which  the  elements 
relative  to  man,  as  well  as  their  laws  of  development, 
undergo  in  the  different  races,  when  we  have  not 
settled  the  point  of  commencement  ? 

Hence,  also,  proceeds  the  difficulty  of  surmounting 
the  greater  number  of  the  most  interesting  and  philo- 
sophical questions  of  natural  history.  It  is  frequently 
asked  if  tlie  human  species  has  deteriorated,  or  if  it  is 
capable  of  deteriorating  at  any  time ;  but  this  problem, 
for  want  of  the  elements  for  its  solution,  remains  with- 
out a  satisfactory  answer. 

It  is  also  asked  if  there  is  a  type  or  standard  of  the 
beautiful  for  the  human  species,  which  is  proportionate 
to  the  development  of  intelligence.  Comparative  ana- 
tomy has  been  thought  to  find  an  affirmative  solu- 
tion of  this  question,  in  tlie  magnitude  of  the  brain 
and  the  size  of  the  facial  angle,  which,  according  to  the 
delicate  researches  which  have  been  made,  diminislies 
in  proportion  to  the  lowering  of  intelligence  in  men 
and  animals ;  and  it  has  been  inferred  from  this,  that 

the  maximum  of  intelligence  will  be  found  in  the 
species  which  have  the  facial  angle  most  nearly  ap- 
proaching to  a  right  angle ;  which  would  give  the 
pre-eminence  to  the  Caucasian.  I  do  not  know  if  any 
observations  have  been  made  on  a  somewhat  larger 
scale,  having  in  view  the  measurement  of  the  degrees 
of  size  of  the  facial  angle  at  different  ages,  in  order  to 
determine  if  these  are  at  all  proportionate  to  the  de- 
grees of  the  development  of  intelligence. 

Naturalists  are  also  occupied  in  determining  care- 
fully Avhat  are  the  limits  of  the  extent  of  the  different 
elements  belonging  to  man ;  these  limit  values  have 
alwa3's  been  objects  of  attention,  and  ought  to  be  care- 
fully registered  in  the  natural  history  of  man,  so  that 
we  might  know,  not  only  what  is,  but  also  what  is 
possible. 

The  anatomical  researches  of  Gall  on  the  brain 
tend  to  show  that  the  development  of  its  different 
parts  is  jiroportionate  to  the  development  of  certain 
corresponding  faculties,  which  appear  to  have  their 
seat  tliere.  Without  entering  into  an  examination  of 
the  doctrine  of  this  learned  physiologist,  one  must 
regret  that  his  principles  have  not  yet  been  sub- 
mitted to  more  direct  observations,  and  that  it  has 
not  been  examined  whether  the  law  of  development 
of  our  faculties  at  different  ages  corresponds  to  the 
law  of  development  of  the  presumed  corresponding 
parts  of  the  brain  ;*  indeed,  so  fiir  from  knowing  the 
relative  projiortions  on  these  different  points,  it  ap- 
pears tliat,  up  to  the  present  time,  we  have  but  very 
few  data  on  the  law  of  development  of  the  brain  itself, 
or  upon  its  size  and  weight  at  diflTerent  ages,  either  as 
regards  average  value  or  extreme  limits. f 

*  Since  the  above  was  written,  I\I.  Broussais,  to  whom  science 
is  indebted  for  so  many  useful  woi-lcs,  has  read  a  memoir  to  tho 
Academy  of  Moral  and  Political  Sciences,  on  the  influence  of  the 
physical  on  the  moral,  and,  in  particular,  on  the  actual  state  of 
our  knowledge  on  phrenology.  M.  Edwards  has  presented  some 
considerations  in  support  of  this  work,  agi-eeing  with  it,  also,  in 
requiring  scientific  experiments  on  this  new  science.  The  prin- 
cipal conclusions  of  this  learned  physiologist  are  contained  in 
the  following  note,  for  which  I  am  indebted  to  his  friendship  .-^ 

"  The  proofs  on  which  we  found  our  convictions  are  referred 
to  two  principal  classes  ;  the  first  includes  proofs  whicli  m.iy  be 
called  individual,  and  the  second  those  which  we  shall  call  scien- 
tific. 

In  the  first  case,  we  cannot  be  convinced  of  the  truth  of  certain 
relations  without  verifying  them  ourselves.  Thus  it  is  necessary 
that  every  individual  who  wants  to  form  an  opinion,  must  him- 
self make  the  proof  which  others  liave  done.  In  the  second  case, 
on  the  contrary,  when  we  are  considering  a  scientific  proof,  if  it 
lias  been  properly  obtained,  it  is  enough  to  receive  the  knowledge 
to  be  convinced  of  the  trutli.  Thus  we  dispense  with  the  neces- 
sity of  personally  making  the  proof  again. 

In  general,  tlie  Ivind  of  proofs  on  which  phrenology  rests  belong 
to  the  first  class,  or  those  here  called  individual ,-  because  it  is 
always  necessary  that  each  individual  who  wishes  to  know  what 
to  maintain  should  repeat  tlie  proof. 

This  is  the  condition  in  wliicli  phrenology  stands.  It  is  evident 
that,  if  the  relations  pointed  out  are  generally  true,  any  one 
who  has  sufficient  knowledge  may  convince  himself  by  a  suffi- 
cient number  of  observations  ;  but  he  could  not  transmit  to  an- 
other his  conviction,  imlcss  one  could  know  the  extent  and  mea- 
sure of  his  experience. 

Is'ow,  if  that  could  be  expressed  in  a  determinate  manner,  tlie 
proof  would  be  no  longer  individual  but  scientific  ;  and  not  only 
he  who  had  acquired  could  communicate  his  conviction,  but  the 
latter  would  also  be  able  to  impress  it  on  others;  for  it  is  the 
peculiarity  of  scientific  proof  that  it  forces  general  conviction  on 
those  who  can  understand  it.  Other  persons  are  obliged  to  admit 
on  hearsay,  that  is,  on  the  authority  of  the  first  class.  No«',  phre- 
nology, if  true,  is  really  capable  of  scientific  proof. 

It  is  by  forming  a  sort  of  statistics,  the  plan  of  which  might  be 
readily  designed,  that  the  scientific  proof  of  this  doctrine  is  prac- 
ticable. It  is  greatly  to  be  desired  that  phrenologists  would  do 
this." 

t  M.  Guerry  wrote  to  me  in  1831 — "  I  am  now  occupied,  along 
with  JI.  le  Docteur  Esquirol  and  M.  le  Docteur  Leuret,  witli  the 
statistics  of  insanity.  We  measure  the  head,  in  every  direction,  of 
every  person  at  Cliarenton,  the  Bieetre,  and  the  Salp6tri6re.  Wo 

ON  MAN. 

99 

We  ought  also  to  state  with  more  care  than  has 
yet  been  done,  the  capacity  of  our  organs,  and  the 
limits  they  can  attain. 

If  the  average  man  were  completely  determined,  we 
might,  as  I  have  already  observed,  consider  him  as 
the  type  of  perfection ;  and  every  thing  differing  from 
his  proportions  or  condition,  would  constitute  defor- 
mity and  disease ;  eveiy  thing  found  dissimilar,  not 
only  as  regarded  proportion  and  form,  but  as  exceeding 
the  observed  hmits,  would  constitute  a  monstrositj^ 

The  consideration  of  the  average  man  is  so  impor- 
tant in  medical  science,  that  it  is  almost  impossible 
to  judge  of  the  state  of  an  individual  without  com- 
paring it  to  that  of  another  imagined  person,  regarded 
as  being  in  a  normal  condition,  and  who  is  intrinsically 
no  other  than  the  individual  we  are  considering.  A 
physician  is  called  to  a  sick  person,  and,  having 
examined  him,  finds  his  pulse  too  quick,  and  his  res- 
jnration  immoderately  frequent,  &c.  It  is  very  evi- 
dent, that  to  form  such  a  decision,  we  must  be  aware 
that  the  characters  observed  not  only  differ  from  those 
of  an  average  man,  or  one  in  a  normal  state,  but  that 
they  even  exceed  the  limits  of  safety.  Every  physi- 
cian, in  forming  such  calculations,  refers  to  the  exist- 
ing documents  on  the  science,  or  to  his  own  expe- 
rience ;  which  is  only  a  similar  estimate  to  that  which 
we  wish  to  make  on  a  greater  scale  and  with  more 
accuracy. 

Moreover,  the  data  which  the  average  man  presents, 
can  themselves  only  serve  to  furnish  others  more  im- 
portant, and  which  relate  to  the  individual  observed. 
To  explain  my  idea,  I  shall  suppose  that  every  man 
has  the  knowledge  and  prudence  necessary  to  exa- 
mine himself  carefully,  and  to  determine  all  the  ele- 
ments which  compose  him,  and  the  limits  within 
which  they  may  var3%  in  a  state  of  health :  he  will 
form  a  table  differing  more  or  less  from  that  of  the 
average  man,  and  which  will  assist  him  in  recognising 
whatever  is  more  or  less  anomalous  in  his  own  case, 
and  whatever  imperiously  demands  attention.  It 
would  be  this  table  which  the  physician  should  con- 
sult in  the  case  of  illness,  in  order  to  estimate  the 
extent  of  the  divergences  from  the  normal  state,  and 
Avhat  are  the  organs  more  especially  affected.  But  as, 
in  the  greater  number  of  cases,  the  sick  person  can 
make  no  satisfactory  observations  on  his  own  person, 
nor  any  elements  which  are  peculiar  to  him,  the  phy- 
sician is  obliged  to  have  recourse  to  the  common  stand- 
ard, and  compare  his  patient  with  the  average  man ; 
a  course  Avhich,  in  fact,  seems  to  present  less  difficulty 
and  inconvenience,  but  may  also  cause  serious  mis- 
takes in  some  circumstances.  For  here,  again,  we 
must  observe  that  general  laws  referring  to  masses 
are  essentially  imperfect  when  applied  to  individuals  ; 
but  we  do  not  mean  to  say  that  they  can  never  be 
consulted  with  advantage,  or  that  the  divergences  are 
alwaj's  considerable. 

A  prudent  inan,  who  studies  and  observes  his  con- 
also  measure  the  cerebrum  and  cerebellum  of  those  who  die.  I 
have  thus  been  led  to  undertake  the  Histoire  du  Developpement  dc 
la  Tele  Humaine  Moycnne.  I  have  been  led  to  it  entirely  from 
having  read  your  excellent  Memoir  on  the  Stature  of  Man.  Fif- 
teen days  ago,  we  noted  the  state  of  the  pulse  of  ninety  maniacal 
persons,  between  five  and  seven  o'clock  in  the  morning,  and 
whilst  they  were  at  breakfast.  'W'e  already  have  fo\md  certain 
periodic  returns  in  the  number  of  the  pulsations  ;  these  observa- 
tions will  be  continued  to  the  end  of  the  month. 

I  hope  to  be  able  to  measure  the  angles  of  tlie  head  verj-  exactly, 
80  as  to  obtain  the  proportions  and  form  of  an  average  maniacal 
head,  of  one  hallucinated,  of  an  idiotic,  imbecile,  and  epileptic 
one,  i!>:c." — (Notes  on  my  Rechcrches  tur  le  Paichanl,  &c.)  It 
is  to  be  regretted  that  this  announced  work  has  not  yet  appeared. 

At  the  end,  however,  of  the  work.  He  la  Frequence  du  Pauls  chez 
les  Alienis,  MJI.  Leuret  and  Mitivie  give  the  result  of  their  re- 
searches on  the  specific  weight  of  the  brain  of  the  insane,  which 
prove  that  there  is  no  marked  difference  in  this  respect  between 
insane  and  healthy  persons.  The  specific  weight  has  an  average 
value,  represented  by  1'031,  water  at  15°  of  temperature  being  con- 
sidered as  unity. 

stitution,  may  prevent  many  diseases,  and  scarcely 
needs  to  have  recourse  to  professional  men,  except  in 
severe  and  extraordinary  cases.  His  habit  of  observ- 
ing himself,  and  the  knowledge  Avhich  he  has  thus 
obtained,  form,  in  some  measure,  a  kind  of  table  giv- 
ing him  the  elements  of  his  constitution.  In  general, 
we  only  call  in  the  physician  when  indisposed :  I 
think  it  would  be  useful  were  he  also  to  see  us  when 
in  a  state  of  health,  so  that  he  might  obtain  a  better 
knowledge  of  our  normal  state,  and  procure  elements 
of  comparison  necessary  for  cases  of  anomaly  and  in- 
disposition. It  is  very  evident  that  a  physician,  called 
to  a  patient  whom  he  sees  for  the  first  time,  and  of 
whose  constitution  he  is  absolutely  ignorant,  will,  in 
certain  circumstances,  commit  errors  by  submitting 
him  to  the  common  rule. 

I  shall  not  pursue  these  remarks,  the  truth  of 
wliich,  I  venture  to  think,  will  be  appreciated.  The 
constitution  of  the  average  man  serves  as  a  type  to 
our  kind.  Every  race  has  its  peculiar  constitution, 
which  differs  from  this  more  or  less,  and  which  is  de- 
termined by  the  influence  of  climate,  and  the  habits 
which  characterise  the  average  man  of  that  peculiar 
country.  Every  individual,  again,  has  his  particular 
constitution,  which  depends  also  on  his  organisation 
and  his  mode  of  existence.  It  is  consequently  inter- 
esting to  know  each  of  the  elements  which  concern 
us  individually,  and  we  have  a  general  interest  in 
knowing  each  of  the  elements  which  bear  on  the 
average  man,  who  is  the  type  to  which  we  should 
incessantly  have  recourse. 

a  Of  the  Average  Man  considered  with  respect  to  Philosophy 
and  Morals  (la  Morale). 

Human  nature  (Jmmanite)  is  modified  by  necessities 
of  time  and  place.  The  development  of  the  different 
f:\culties  of  the  average  man  ought  to  be  closely  pro- 
portionate to  these  necessities :  this  is  a  condition  essen- 
tial to  his  existence  and  continuance.  If  the  average 
man,  at  different  epochs,  had  been  determined  care-- 
fidly,  we  might  at  this  day  perceive  what  laws  of 
development  have  undergone  the  greatest  change : 
we  should  possess  the  most  valuable  means  of  analysis ; 
and  we  should  also  learn  what  have  been  the  qualities 
which  have  successively  predominated  and  exercised 
the  greatest  influence  on  our  social  system. 

The  laws  of  development  of  the  avei'age  man,  at 
such  or  such  a  period,  must  not  be  confounded  with 
the  laws  of  the  development  of  human  nature*  (hu- 
manite).  There  is  but  little  general  conformity  bet\vixt 
them  :  thus,  I  should  be  much  disposed  to  believe  that 
the  laws  of  development  of  the  average  man  continue 
almost  the  same  through  successive  centuries,  and 
that  they  only  vary  in  the  magnitude  of  maxima. 
Now,  it  is  really  these  maxima,  relating  to  the  deve- 
loped man,  which  give  the  measure  of  the  development 
of  human  nature  in  each  century.  We  do  not  possess 
any  exact  documents  to  guide  us  in  such  a  research, 
but  it  would  appear  that,  physically  considered,  col- 
lective man  is  scarcely  progressing ;  yet  it  has  been 
observed  that  a  civilised  man  is  generally  stronger 
than  a  savage.  As  to  intelligence,  his  progress  can- 
not be  questioned,  and  his  existing  state  of  develop- 

*  To  render  my  idea  sensible  by  a  figure  (see  plate  4),  I  sup- 
pose that  we  construct  the  line  indicating  the  development  of  the 
strength  of  man  at  any  given  period ;  and  that  on  the  same  axis  of 
the  abscissas  we  also  construct  the  corresponding  similar  lines  for 
other  periods,  so  that  these  lines  succeed  each  other  at  the  distance 
of  a  century,  for  example,  proceeding  from  points  whose  distance 
from  each  other  increase  as  the  time;  it  will  happen  that  the 
maxima  of  the  ordinates  will  not  correspond  to  the  same  ages  or 
have  the  same  magnitude.  Now,  connecting  all  the  points  of 
maxima  by  a  line,  which  will  evidently  be  the  container  (I'en- 
veloppe)  of  all  the  curves  representing  the  law  of  individual  de- 
velopment in  all  tlie  modifications  which  it  has  undergone  in  the 
course  of  time,  we  shall  have  the  curve  which  represents  tlie 
general  law  of  the  development  of  human  nature  (humanite).  By 
similar  processes,  we  may  render  equally  apparent  all  the  laws  of 
development  of  the  different  faculties  of  the  human  species. 

100 

ON  MAN. 

ment  undoubtedly  exceeds  what  it  has  been  at  any 
other  time.  Also  following,  with  history  in  our  hands, 
the  average  type  of  human  nature  through  different 
centuries,  we  see  man,  at  first,  in  possession  of  all 
his  strength,  blindly  taking  advantage  of  it,  and  at- 
taching to  the  world  of  matter  a  po^ver  and  a  range 
altogether  Hmitless  :  the  king  of  nature,  he  has  plants, 
animals,  and  even  the  stars,  as  tributaries.  But,  as 
his  reason  becomes  developed,  a  new  world  is  unroUed 
before  his  eyes,  contracting  the  limits  of  the  former 
one ;  the  intellectual  man  gradually  supplants  the  phy- 
sical one ;  and  it  is  this  continually  increasing  triumph 
of  the  intellectual  man,  which  the  history  of  the  arts 
and  sciences  presents  to  us  at  every  page. 

I  have  said  that,  although  the  laws  of  the  develop- 
ment of  human  nature  were  not  generally  the  same  as 
those  of  the  average  man  of  any  one  period,  yet  these 
laws  might,  in  certain  circumstances,  be  identically 
the  same ;  and  that  human  nature,  under  certain  re- 
lations, might  be  developed  in  a  manner  similar  to  a 
single  individual.  I  should  be  much  disposed  to 
believe  that  this  is  the  case  Avith  the  collective  human 
mind ;  indeed,  following  it  in  its  uncertain  and  irre- 
gular course,  we  see  it  endeavour  to  strengthen  itself 
from  the  very  beginning,  reach  in  due  time  the  highest 
conceptions,  and  present  almost  the  same  phases  as 
the  intellect  of  the  individual  man  from  infancy  to 
maturity.  The  human  mind  is  at  first  astonished  at 
the  sight  of  any  thing  beyond  the  ordinary  course  of 
things,  and  attributes  the  most  simple  occurrences  to 
the  caprice  of  supernatural  beings,  instead  of  de- 
ducing them  from  immutable  laAvs,  which  are  alone 
worthy  of  a  divine  intervention.  We  see  it  after- 
wards pursuing  a  course  which  is  more  certain  and 
conformable  to  reason,  observing  facts,  isolated  at  first, 
then  classing  them,  and  inferring  the  consequences. 
Still  later,  the  mind  learns  to  interrogate  nature  by 
experiment,  and  to  reproduce  transitory  phenomena 
at  will,  under  the  most  favoiirable  circumstances  for 
observing  them.  And  when  its  reasoning  powers 
have  reached  full  maturity,  then  it  studies  the  nature 
of  causes,  seeks  to  value  their  reciprocal  intensities, 
and  thus  raise  itself  to  a  knowledge  of  the  attendant 
phenomena  which  they  must  produce.  Such  is  the 
development  Avhich  we  see  the  human  mind  under- 
going when  we  study  its  progress  in  the  history  of  the 
sciences  ;  such,  also,  is  the  course  which  the  intellect 
of  man  pursues  from  infancy  to  maturity. 

I  have  said  before,  that  the  average  man  of  any  one 
period  represents  the  type  of  development  of  human 
nature  for  that  period  ;  I  have  also  said  that  the  ave- 
rage man  was  always  such  as  was  conformable  to  and 
necessitated  by  time  and  place ;  that  his  qualities  were 
developed  in  due  proportion,  in  perfect  harmony,  alike 
removed  from  excess  or  defect  of  every  kind,  so  that, 
in  the  circumstances  in  which  he  is  found,  he  should 
be  considered  as  the  type  of  all  which  is  beautiful — 
of  all  which  is  good. 

If  human  nature  were  stationary  and  not  suscep- 
tible of  amelioration,  it  is  evident  that  the  average 
man  would  also  continue  invariable;  and  his  different 
qualities,  instead  of  presenting  the  type  of  the  beau- 
tiful and  excellent  of  the  period  at  which  he  lives, 
would  present  the  type  of  the  absolutely  beautiful  and 
excellent  in  the  most  general  sense.  Thus,  when  we 
say  that  the  type  of  the  beautiful,  as  to  the  form  of 
man,  is  absolute,  we  mean  that  the  average  man  ought 
not  to  differ  from  this  proportion,  and  that  Inunan 
nature  cannot  advance  further.  It  is  not  so  with  rea- 
son :  the  vast  conquests  of  science,  by  giving  more 
accurate  notions  of  an  infinite  multitude  of  things, 
and  by  destroying  errors  and  prejudices,  have  neces- 
sarily furnished  our  reason  Avith  the  means  of  rising 
to  a  still  greater  height,  and  arriving  at  a  relative 
degree  of  perfection,  the  idea  of  Avhich  could  not  so 
mucli  as  be  conceived  some  ages  ago. 

Such  slioidd  also  be  our  criterion  as  to  morals. 
Human  qualities  become  virtues,  when  they  arc  equally 

removed  from  all  the  excesses  into  wliich  they  may  be 
disposed  to  fall,  and  confined  within  due  limits,  be- 
yond which  every  thing  is  vice.*  If  these  limits  do 
not  vary  in  the  com'se  of  time  and  among  different 
people,  we  have  strong  probabilities  for  believing  that 
this  virtue  ^has  an  absolute  value.  Now,  this  is  what 
we  remark  generally  concerning  most  moral  qualities : 
they  admit  a  type  which  we  may  Avith  great  proba- 
bility consider  as  absolute,  so  that  human  nature, 
considered  in  reference  to  these  qualities,  Avill  not  be 
progressive.  Yet  there  are  qualities  the  importance 
of  which  has  varied  in  the  course  of  time,  and  which 
has  increased  or  diminished  with  the  development  of 
reason,  on  which  they  depend,  at  the  same  time  that 
the  physical  has  yielded  preponderance  to  the  intel- 
lectual man.  Thus  courage,  which,  in  the  earliest 
ages,  raised  a  man  to  the  first  rank,  and,  in  some 
manner,  assigned  to  him  a  place  near  to  divinity,  has 
diminished  in  importance  beside  other  qualities  more 
in  harmony  with  our  manners  and  present  actual  ne- 
cessities. The  qualities  of  a  contingent  value,  if  I  may 
so  express  myself,  are  in  a  measure  subordinate  to 
the  law  of  development  of  human  nature,  and  to  the 
different  jDrinciples  of  conservation ;  they  generally 
produce  more  renoAvn  than  the  others,  because  men 
have  a  more  direct  influence  in  encouraging  them. 

The  natural  consequence  of  the  ideas  which  I  have 
just  stated,  is,  that  an  individual  who  should  comprise 
in  himself  (in  his  own  person),  at  a  given  period,  all 
the  qualities  of  the  average  man,  Avould  at  the  same 
time  represent  all  which  is  grand,  beautiful,  and  ex- 
cellent. But  such  an  identity  can  scarcely  be  realised, 
and  it  is  rarely  granted  to  individual  men  to  resemble 
this  type  of  perfection,  except  in  a  greater  or  less  num- 
ber of  points.  M.  Cousin,  setting  out  from  very  differ- 
ent considerations  to  those  which  are  the  object  of  this 
work,  has  nevertheless  been  in  some  measure  led  to 
conclusions  similar  to  those  I  have  just  deduced  from 
the  theory  of  the  average  man.  Speaking  of  the  cha- 
racter peculiar  to  great  men,  he  finds  that  this  cha- 
racter consists  in  comprising  people,  periods,  all  human 
nature,  nature,  and  universal  order.f  "  Thus,"  says 
this  learned  academician,  "  all  the  individuals  of  which 
a  people  is  composed,  represent  the  whole  mind  of 
this  people.  But  how  do  they  represent  it?  One 
peoi^le  is  one  in  mind ;  but  this  is  a  multitude  in  its 
external  composition,  that  is  to  say,  a  great  multipli- 
city. Now,  what  is  the  law  of  all  multiplicity  ?  It 
is,  to  have  differences  (<i'e?/-ef//wer5e),  and,  consequently, 
to  be  capable  of  more  and  less.  Apart  from  abso- 
lute unity,  every  thing  comes  within  the  sphere  of 
difference  (and  has  degrees)  of  greater  and  of  lesser. 
It  is  impossible  but  that,  in  a  given  multitude,  such 
as  a  people,  which,  as  has  been  shown,  has  a  common 
type,  there  should  be  individuals  who  represent  this 
type  more  or  less.  As  there  are  those  who  represent  it 
less  clearly,  more  confusedly  and  imperfectly,  so  there 
are  also  those  who  represent  it  more  clearly  and  per- 
fectly, and  less  confusedly.  Hence  a  line  of  demar- 
cation between  all  the  individuals  of  one  and  the  same 
people.  But  those  who  are  on  the  first  plane,  and 
represent  the  entire  mind  of  their  people  more  com- 
pletely, are  nevertheless  a  multitude,  a  great  number, 
and  are  still  subject  to  shades  of  difference :  whence, 
again,  a  new  selection  of  individuals  who  eminently 
represent  the  mind  of  their  people.  It  is  impossible 
for  the  case  to  be  otherwise.  From  this  Ave  infer  two 
things:  first,  the  necessity  of  great  men  ;  second,  their 
peculiar  character  {caracthe  propre).  The  great  man 
is  not  an  arbitrary  creature,  Avho  may  be  or  may  not  be. 
He  is  not  simply  one  individual,  but  he  has  reference 
to  a  general  idea,  AA'hich  communicates  a  superior 
power  to  him,  at  the  same  time  that  it  gives  him  the 
determinate  and  real  form  of  individuality.  Too  much 
and  too  little  individuaUty  equally  destroy  the  great 

*  This  is  Avhat  the  ancients  thought  generaUy,  and  in  particu- 
lar, Aristotle — Eth.  ad  Nic  2,  ch.  2. 
t  Cours  (Ic  Philosophic,  le^on  10. 

ON  MAN. 

101 

man.  In  the  one  case,  the  individuality  in  itself  is 
an  element  of  misery  and  littleness ;  for  the  particu- 
larity, the  contingent,  the  finite,  incessantly  tend  to 
division,  to  dissolution,  to  notliingness.  On  the  other 
hand,  every  generality  being  connected  to  univer- 
sality and  to  infinity,  tends  to  unity,  and  absolute 
unity :  it  possesses  greatness,  but  runs  a  chance  of 
losing  itself  in  chimei'ical  abstraction.  The  great 
man  is  the  harmonious  union  of  particularity  and 
generality :  it  is  the  possession  of  this  character  alone 
which  makes  him  great — this  added  representation  of 
the  general  mind  of  his  people  ;  and  it  is  his  relation 
to  this  generality  which  makes  him  great ;  and,  at  the 
same  time,  to  represent  this  generality  which  confers 
his  greatness  on  him,  in  person  and  in  a  real  form, 
that  is  to  say,  in  a  finite,  positive,  visible,  and  deter- 
minate form ;  so  that  the  generality  does  not  encum- 
ber tlic  particularity,  and  the  particularity  does  not 
destroy  generality ;  so  that  particularity  and  gene- 
rality, infinite  and  finite,  are  imited  in  this  measure 
or  standard,  which  is  true  human  greatness. 

This  measure,  which  constitutes  true  greatness, 
also  constitutes  true  beauty,"  &c. 

The  passage  which  has  just  been  quoted,  expresses 
my  ideas  better  than  I  could  have  succeeded  in  doing 
myself.  A  man  can  have  no  real  influence  on  masses 
— he  cannot  comprehend  them  and  put  tliem  in  action 
— except  in  proportion  as  he  is  infused  with  the  spirit 
which  animates  them,  and  shares  their  passions,  sen- 
timents, and  necessities,  and  finally  sympathises  com- 
pletely with  them.  It  is  in  this  manner  that  he  is  a 
great  man,  a  great  poet,  a  great  artist.  It  is  because 
he  is  the  best  representative  of  his  age,  that  he  is  pro- 
claimed to  be  the  greatest  genius. 

It  is  never  sufficient  for  a  man  merely  to  resemble 
the  average  man  in  many  things  as  much  as  possible, 
to  enable  him  to  pi'oduce  great  things  himself;  it  is 
moreover  n.ccessary  that  he  has  occasion  and  possibi- 
lities for  action.  Newton,  for  example,  deprived  of  all 
the  resources  of  science,  would  always  have  had  the 
same  strength  of  intellect ;  he  would  always  have  been 
a  type  of  several  eminent  qualities,  and,  in  particular, 
of  correctness  of  judgment  and  imagination ;  but  if 
only  a  greater  or  smaller  amount  of  science  had  been 
laid  within  his  reach,  he  would  have  been  Pythagoras, 
Archimedes,  or  Kepler ;  with  all  the  resources  which 
his  period  possessed,  he  has,  and  must  have  been  a 
Newton.  This  appears  to  me  incontestil)le :  in  the 
favourable  position  in  Avhich  he  found  himself,  it  was 
a  matter  of  necessity  for  him  to  put  his  eminent  facid- 
ties  in  action,  and  to  advance  as  far  as  circumstances 
permitted  him.  Now,  the  sciences  had  arrived  at  such 
a  point,  as  to  render  it  necessary  that  the  theory  of 
the  motion  of  the  celestial  bodies  shoidd  be  reduced 
to  correct  principles ;  and  Newton  was  then  the  only 
man  who  combined  the  necessary  conditions  to  accom- 
plish tliis  work. 

It  appears  to  me  that  science  only  is  tridy  progres- 
sive, and  I  use  this  word  in  its  widest  sense.  All  the 
faculties  of  man  which  are  not  based  on  science  are 
essentially  stationary,  and  their  laws  of  development 
are  constant.  As  to  the  other  faculties,  their  laws  of 
development,  as  has  already  been  observed,  probably 
remain  the  same  also,  or  at  least  each  only  undergoes 
changes  in  the  degree  of  its  maximum,  which  depend 
on  the  development  which  science  has  attained.  The 
development  of  science  would  therefore  give  the  mea- 
siu-e  of  the  development  of  human  nature. 

Consequently,  I  participate  in  the  following  opinion 
of  il.  Cousin,  that  "entire  history,  not  that  of  one 
people  or  one  epoch  onlj^  but  that  of  all  epochs  and 
all  human  nature,  is  represented  by  the  great  men. 
Thus,  give  me  the  series  of  all  the  known  great  men, 
and  I  will  give  you  the  known  history  of  the  hiunan 
race."  * 
And,  indeed,  from  what  we  have  seen,  the  gi'cat 

*  Coiirs  fie  Philosophie— Introduction  h  I'lTistoirc  do  la  Pliilo- 
goiiliie,  le^'on  in. 

man,  in  his  individuality,  is  the  best  representative 
of  the  degree  of  development  to  which  human  nature 
has  attained  in  his  times,  and  his  Avorks  show  the 
extent  m  which  he  himself  has  aided  that  develop- 
ment. 

"We  are  more  convinced  of  the  necessity  of  great 
men,  and  the  error  we  commit  in  supposing  that  thej'^ 
spring  up  accidentally,  when  we  consider  the  immense 
time  required  for  a  great  truth,  after  it  has  been 
shadowed  forth,  to  diifuse  itself,  and  descend  to  the 
mass  of  people,  and  produce  its  effects ;  in  general, 
it  is  not  until  centuries  after,  that  we  see  the  man 
come  forward  who  developes  or  personifies  it  and 
secures  its  triumph.  Thus,  the  germ  of  the  great 
revolution,  which  has  marked  the  close  of  the  last 
century,  was  brought  forward  long  ago,  and  was  slowly 
developed,  descending  from  high  intellects  to  the  lower 
ranks  of  society ;  but  its  course  had  not  escaped  the 
sagacious  observer.  Great  events  are,  like  great  men, 
necessitated;  and  how  can  we  be  surprised  at  this, 
when  we  have  seen  that  even  the  actions  of  ordinary 
individuals  are  necessitated,  and  when  we  have  seen 
that  a  given  social  organisation  induces  a  certain  num- 
ber of  virtues  and  crimes  as  a  necessary  consequence, 
and  that  these  ciumes  are  of  such  or  such  a  kind,  and 
are  performed  by  such  and  such  means?  This  neces- 
sity is  found  both  in  good  and  evil — in  the  production 
of  good  things  as  well  as  of  evil — in  the  production  of 
chefs-tVceuvre  and  noble  actions  which  are  an  honour 
to  a  country,  as  well  as  in  the  appearances  of  scourges 
wliich  desolate  it. 

4.  Of  the  Average  Man  considered  with  reference  to  Politics. 

"Whatever  may  be  the  difference  of  opinion  observed 
in  the  same  people,  there  must  exist,  even  in  the  most 
opposite  minds,  some  common  ideas,  which  in  moments 
of  excitement  of  the  passions  are  unobserved,  but 
which  would  soon  show  themselves  spontaneously  if 
any  one  attempted  to  do  violence  to  them.  There  are 
also  common  necessities  ;  and  even  between  opinions 
which  seem  utterly  opposed  to  each  other,  we  some- 
times find  more  relations  than  at  first  sight  we  should 
suppose. 

It  is  evident  that,  of  all  the  political  systems  which 
any  people  would  incline  to  adopt,  there  must  be  one 
which  would  suit  best  with  the  ideas  and  ordinary 
requirements,  and  which  M'otild  most  advantageously 
reconcile  the  interests  of  different  parties ;  it  is  also 
evident  that  such  a  system  could  not  be  established 
by  unanimous  consent,  since,  even  supposing  that  it 
is  meditated  upon  most  rationally  and  calmly,  it  must 
necessarily  jar  against  certain  passions,  and  meet 
opinions  which  are  unfavourable  to  it.  This  system 
must  not  be  confounded  with  that  which  would  con- 
sist in  taking  a  sort  of  average  between  two  dominant 
ideas,  and  which  must  always  be  essentially  defective 
in  principle,  since  it  is  always  impossible  to  concihate 
minds,  by  placing  between  their  opposed  opinions 
another  opinion  which  they  equally  repel.  On  the 
contrary,  that  which  Are  have  in  view  is  based  on 
elements  common  to  all,  and  on  ideas,  which,  though 
differed  from  by  some,  are  still  those  of  the  majority. 

It  wUl  perhaps  be  objected  that,  if  the  generality 
of  men  desired  unjust  or  absm-d  things,  it  would  be 
unreasonable  to  apply  a  political  system  to  them 
equally  unjust  or  absurd.  I  begin  by  declaring,  that 
1  do  not  think  such  a  desire  can  exist  in  the  gene- 
rality of  men  ;  and,  that,  in  the  second  place,  if  this 
wish  could  exist,  it  would  even  be  necessary  to  gratify 
it,  from  the  fear  of  being  compelled  to  do  so  by  some 
violent  crisis.*  This  naturally  leads  me  to  considei'a- 
tions  more  or  less  connected  with  my  subject,  and 
which  appertain  to  my  mode  of  viewing  the  social 
system. 

*  See,  on  the  s.imo  subject,  the  work  of  Sir  T.  C.  Jlorgan, 
Sketches  of  the  Philosophy  o/Momls,  p.  244.  1  vol.  8vo.  London  : 
1012.  AVc  find  some  very  judicious  ohservations  in  it,  and  which 
are  deserving  of  more  attention. 

102 

ON  MAN. 

Kevolutions,  even  those  which  have  tlie  most  happy- 
effects  on  the  future,  are  never  accompHshed  -without 
certain  actual  sacrifices;  as  sudden  changes,  in  a 
corporeal  system,  never  take  place  without  a  certain 
loss  of  vital  power.  Independently  of  the  real  losses 
which  brmg  no  advantage  to  any  body,  changes  of 
fortune,  more  or  less  manifest,  take  place ;  and  it  is 
in  this  case  almost  the  same  as  in  gaming,  where  the 
moral  chances  are  not  tlie  same,  that  is  to  say,  what 
is  lost  on  the  one  side  is  not  compensated  by  what 
is  gained  on  the  other.  The  great  art  of  those  wlio 
conduct  revolutions  should  especially  consist  in  mak- 
ing the  transition  with  the  least  possible  degree  of 
violent  change ;  and  in  this  respect  governments  them- 
selves are  in  the  position  best  calculated  to  effect 
reforms.  As  for  myself,  I  think  that  the  measure  of 
the  state  of  cioilisation  at  which  a  nation  has  arrived 
is  found  in  the  mode  in  which  its  revolutions  are  e fleeted. 
This  principle  presupposes  another,  which  is  always 
true  Avhere  states  of  equilibrium  and  motion  are  pos- 
sible, in  physical  phenomena  as  well  as  in  political 
facts ;  it  is  this — the  action  is  equal  to  the  reaction. 

This  wants  some  explanation :  it  will  perhaps  be 
asked,  how  I  understand  the  application  of  this  prin- 
ciple to  morals  and  politics.  An  example  taken  from 
the  material  world  will  render  this  more  manifest. 
When  a  force  acts  against  a  flexible  body  which  yields 
and  bends,  each  pai'tiele  of  tliis  body  successively 
leaves  its  primitive  position  and  takes  a  new  one ;  with 
respect  to  the  compressing  force,  it  is  extinguished  by 
successive  and  partial  reactions,  so  that  the  action 
may  be  very  energetic,  without  producing  any  appa- 
rent reaction ;  the  only  effect  produced  is  a  change  in 
the  flexible  body,  which  is  more  or  less  sensible.  If,  on 
the  contrary,  the  power  acts  against  an  elastic  body, 
each  particle  of  this  body  momentarily  leaves  its  pri- 
mitive state,  but  with  a  tendency  to  return  to  it  im- 
mediately ;  the  reaction  is  then  general  and  instanta- 
neous, it  is  also  very  evidently  equal  to  the  action. 
These  examples  are  applicable  to  a  social  body.  If 
each  one  is  fully  imbued  with  a  knowledge  of  his 
rights  and  duties — if  he  invariably  desires  to  do  that 
which  is  just— if  he  energetically  strives  to  re-enter 
the  course  he  has  traced  out  as  soon  as  any  one  at- 
tempts to  make  him  swerve  from  it — and  if  the  reac- 
tion be  allowed  to  manifest  itself  immediately  after 
the  action,  both  will  be  very  evidently  equal.  But  this 
state  of  irritability,  so  to  say,  presents  itself  with  very 
different  degrees  of  energy  in  diflcrent  people,  and  we 
may  say  that  the  reaction,  in  its  visible  results,  is 
generally  less  than  the  action.* 

Eevolutions  are  only  reactions  exercised  by  the 
people,  or  a  part  of  the  people,  to  correct  abuses,  real 
or  supposed.  They  cannot  be  of  a  serious  character  if 
the  apparent  provocation  has  not  been  so  also.  Now, 
among  an  enlightened  people,  where  the  government 
is  necessarily  supposed  to  be  wise  and  far-sighted, 
abuses  cannot  accumulate  to  such  a  degree  as  to  take 
an  alarming  aspect ;  tlie  more  they  are  seen  to  in- 
crease, the  more  -vvoidd  the  government  be  accused  of 
want  of  foresight  or  evil,  and  the  peoxtle  who  tolerate 
them  of  baseness  and  apathy  ;  possessed  of  a  feeling 
of  their  own  dignity,  they  -would  have  reacted  against 
each  of  the  abuses  in  proportion  as  they  Avere  mani- 
fested. When  the  degree  of  irritability  is  less,  they 
yield  to  abuses,  or  only  react  when  the  number  of  tliem 

*  It  is  remarkable  that  the  principle  of  the  equality  of  action 
and  reaction  is  also  applicable  to  morals.  AVithout  being  entirely 
destitute  of  sentiment,  we  cannot,  in  fact,  withdraw  ourselves 
from  the  consequences  of  this  principle.  The  calmest  and  most 
moderate  man,  having  made  the  fimiest  resolution  not  to  depart 
from  his  habitual  condition,  will  forget  all  his  intentions  on 
beholding  a  feeble  person  imjustly  and  brutally  oppressed  by  a 
stronger  one.  In  proportion  to  his  degree  of  sensibility,  so  will 
he  react  with  greater  or  less  energy  according  as  the  offending 
person  conmiits  excesses.  However,  in  similar  circumstances  he 
would  have  protected  the  aggressing  party  against  the  oppressed, 
if  both  had  ehangca  their  relative  poiitions. 

has  become  too  great  to  be  endured  any  longer.  The 
explosion  is  tlien  the  more  terrible,  because  the  power 
has  been  accumulating.  Now,  it  is  this  extent  or 
degree  of  accumulation  whicli  gives  us,  as  I  said  pre- 
viously, the  measure  of  the  state  of  civilisation  of  a 
people. 

Frequently  the  reaction  is  manifested  with  symp- 
toms apparently  more  serious  than  the  action ;  but 
this  is  owing  to  the  real  reaction  being  conjoined 
with  irrelevant  causes.  Thus  in  revolutions,  amongst 
those  wlio  react  under  the  influence  of  real  abuses 
Avhich  are  deeply  felt,  Ave  almost  always  find  turbu- 
lent men  mixed  Avith  them,  Avho  delight  themselves 
Avith  the  disorder,  or  are  actuated  by  interested  vicAvs. 
Such  a  state  of  things  renders  the  position  of  a  go- 
vernment very  critical,  and  requires  so  much  the  more 
circumspection,  in  jiroportion  as  there  is  less  good 
faith  in  the  parties  Avho  oppose  it.  Enlightened  and 
conscientious  men,  Avho  have  thoroughly  acquainted 
themselves  Avith  causes — and  their  number  is  always 
very  small — Avill  certainly  support  the  government  by 
their  authority ;  but,  in  the  midst  of  a  general  conflict, 
such  auxiliaries  are  in  general  of  little  use,  because 
they  rarely  act  in  person,  and  only  on  very  serious  occa- 
sions ;  they  confine  themselves  to  the  development  of 
the  moral  causes,  Avhich  have  ahvays  a  very  remote 
bearing  on  action,  so  that  tlie  effects  which  they  pro- 
duce do  not  manifest  themselves  until  toAvards  the  end 
of  revolutions,  and  only  lead  to  an  ultimate  apprecia- 
tion of  morality,  and  to  an  insensible  return  to  a  state 
of  equilibrium.  This  was  manifested  in  the  first  French 
revolution,  Avhen  abuses  of  every  kind  had  accumulated 
to  a  deplorable  extent,  and  the  reaction  was  perhaps 
still  more  deplorable.  The  succeeding  revolutions  have 
been  less  serious,  because  more  enlightened  and  pro- 
vident governments  took  greater  pains  to  prevent  the 
causes  of  reaction,  and  make  them  disapjiear  as  soon 
as  they  assumed  an  alarming  character.  In  this  re- 
spect, England  is  placed  in  a  very  happy  position  ; 
lier  reforms  are  accomphshed  successiA^ely  and  Avith- 
out  sudden  changes,  and  yet  we  cannot  look  without 
fear  on  reactions  A\'hich  may  arise  in  consequence 
of  the  inequality  of  fortunes,  and  the  state  of  the 
finances  of  this  kingdom. 

Despotism  requires  to  be  very  poAverful,  and  very  able 
to  depend  upon  its  resources,  to  maintam  itself  Avhere 
the  people  are  irritable  and  prompt  to  react ;  it  can- 
not long  endure,  Avliatever  may  be  its  poAver,  in  coun- 
tries such  as  ours,  where  action,  Avhen  at  all  serious, 
is  spread  Avith  the  greatest  rapidity.  In  this  respect, 
the  liberty  of  the  press  has  been  of  essential  service — 
a  service  Avhicli  perliaps  has  not  been  duly  appreciated 
— namely,  in  having  singularly  contributed  to  facilitate 
reaction,  and  consequently  to  render  great  revolutions 
almost  impossible ;  it  jiossesses  this  immense  advan- 
tage, that  it  does  not  alloAv  force  to  accumulate  to 
an  alarming  degree,  causing  reaction  to  manifest  itself 
almost  immediately  after  action,  and  sometimes  even 
before  action  has  had  time  to  propagate  itself.  Tliis 
has  been  observed  during  the  late  revolution  in  France, 
which  Avas  purely  local,  and  the  effects  of  Avhich  Avere 
confined  Avitliin  the  Avails  of  Paris.  Among  a  people 
easily  acted  upon,  and  Avliere  action  is  readily  trans- 
mitted, the  greatest  revolutions  take  place  in  parts, 
and  reaction  is  extinguished  by  successive  efforts,  or 
at  least  overturns  the  cause  Avhicli  gave  rise  to  it, 
Avithout  a  violent  shock. 

Governments,  like  things,  have  also  their  states  of 
equilibrium  ;  and  tliis  equilibrium  may  be  stable  or 
unstable.  This  is  an  important  distinction,  and  one 
easily'-  understood.  The  stable  equilibrium  exists, 
Avlien,  in  consequence  of  action  and  reaction  of  every 
kind,  a  government  constantly  regains  its  normal 
state ;  if,  on  the  contrarj%  imder  the  action  of  slight 
causes,  a  government  tends  to  diverge  more  and  more 
from  its  normal  state,  and  if,  each  year,  it  change  its 
form  and  institutions  Avithout  adequate  motives,  its 
downfall  is  at  hand,  and  it  Avill  infallibly  sink,  unless 

ON  MAN. 

103 

it  finds  assistance  in  the  adjacent  govermnents  ;  but 
even  then  its  fall  cannot  be  long  retarded.  Examples 
are  not  wanting  to  support  the  distinction  I  have  just 
made. 

I  have  said  above  that  civilisation  tends  to  render 
the  shocks  which  political  revolutions  cause  in  the 
social  sj'stera  both  less  violent  and  less  frequent;  I 
ought  to  add,  that  it  also  tends  to  make  wars  be- 
tween nations  less  frequent.  We  no  longer  have  the 
idea  that  these  scourges  are  necessary  things,  from 
Avhich  we  can  never  extricate  ourselves,  but  regard 
them  as  an  evil  inevitable,  in  the  absence  of  those  laws 
which  ought  to  regulate  the  rights  of  nations,  and  of 
sufficient  power  to  secui-e  the  execution  of  tliem.  In 
the  beginning  of  coniL^.unities,  the  strongest  threw 
himself  on  the  weakest,  to  w^rest  from  liim  privileges 
and  wreak  vengeance ;  we  find  them  renewing  inces- 
santly the  most  unjust  and  bloody  contentions,  until 
the  time  when  equitable  laws  finally  regulated  the 
rights  of  every  one,  and  put  a  period  to  such  violences. 
Alas !  this  deplorable  state  of  early  times  is  still  o\ir 
own,  if  we  look  to  nations  instead  of  individuals.  In- 
deed, without  going  tar  back,  have  we  not  seen  nations 
cast  themselves  on  nations,  and  tear  each  other  for  the 
most  frivolous  reasons  ? — the  feeble  or  the  least  active 
fell  in  these  cruel  struggles,  and  the  injury  is  still  so 
recent,  that  we  are  yet  scarcely  aware  of  the  extent 
of  it.  Far  am  I  from  wishing  to  cast  odium  on  the 
warrior  who  exposes  himself  in  defence  of  his  country. 
His  noble  zeal  deserves  all  oiu*  admiration,  and  has 
supplied  the  place  of  those  protecting  laws  which 
ought  to  have  defended  him  and  his.  But  Avhilst 
groaning  under  a  necessary  evil,  human  nature  should 
show  the  path  of  justice,  in  which  it  ought  henceforth 
to  go.  Let  us  allow  the  same  rights  to  nations  which 
we  grant  to  individuals — let  there  be  laws  for  one  as 
for  the  other — and  let  there  be  some  power  great 
enough  and  sufficiently  cnliglitened  to  execute  them. 
We  have  lately  seen  a  judgment  given  by  neutral 
nations  in  the  case  of  a  recent  difierence  between  two 
others  which  had  arms  in  their  hands.  This  judgment 
has  been  carried  into  execution ;  notification,  citation, 
bodily  restraint,  none  of  the  ordinary  forms  of  justice, 
have  been  neglected.  This  event,  which  has  not  been 
sufficiently  observed,  and  which  has  probably  saved 
Europe  from  another  struggle,  indeed  presents  itself 
under  appearances  which  are  not  very  poetic  to  our 
imaginations,  still  warmed  by  the  recitation  of  great 
deeds  of  arms,  but  it  is  not  the  less  a  real  progress  in 
the  career  of  civilisation. 

CHAPTER    IT. 

ON  THE  ULTIJIATE  PROGRESS  OF  OUR  KNOWLEDGE  OF  THE 
LAWS  OF  HUMAN  DEVELOPMENT. 

In  this  work  I  have  only  been  able  to  present  an 
incomplete  sketch  of  the  vast  labour  which  still  re- 
mains to  be  done ;  but  the  difficulties  were  too  nume- 
rous, and  the  materials  which  I  had  to  work  up  too 
defective,  for  me  to  venture  any  farther  into  a  terri- 
tory almost  entirely  new.  This  stud}',  however,  has 
too  many  attractions — it  is  connected  on  too  manj^ 
sides  with  every  branch  of  science,  and  all  the  most 
interesting  questions  in  philosophj^ — to  be  long  without 
zealous  observers,  who  will  endeavour  to  cai-ry  it  far- 
ther and  farther,  and  bring  it  more  and  more  to  the 
appearance  of  a  science.  At  the  same  time,  it  will 
be  very  difficult  to  proceed  on  a  safe  course,  before 
more  information  and  more  exact  observations  than 
we  now  possess,  have  been  collected.  The  solidity  of 
the  edifice  must  depend  on  the  soundness  of  the  ma- 
terial. 

In  researches  of  this  nature,  it  will  be  necessary 
always  to  produce  original  doctunents  with  caution, 
point  out  their  sources,  and  give  all  the  data  whi<;h 
may  lead  us  to  appreciate  their  value.     These  docu- 

ments ought  to  be  of  such  a  nature,  that  v/c  can  rigor- 
ously deduce  the  averages  and  limits  between  which  the 
particular  values  lie.  I  have  myself  been  more  than 
once  obliged  to  deviate  from  the  course  which  I  wish 
to  see  pursued  by  others,  because,  in  order  to  render 
my  ideas  plain,  I  have  been  obliged  to  take  the  assist- 
ance of  examples. 

It  will  be  equally  desirable,  whenever  numbers  are 
used,  and  results  deduced  from  them,  that  we  cal- 
culate the  probable  degree  of  error  carefully.  It  is 
not  enough  to  possess  materials ;  it  is  also  necessary 
to  know  the  full  value  of  them.  One  of  the  greatest 
defects  of  actual  statistics  is,  that  in  the  same  line 
they  present  all  the  numbers  indistinctly  which  can 
be  collected,  and  make  them  concur  to  one  result, 
without  taking  their  importance  or  probable  value 
into  account.  This  confusion  must  necessarily  pro- 
duce great  obstacles  to  the  progress  of  science,  and 
cause  dangerous  errors  to  prevail  for  a  long  time. 

There  is  another  research  which  deserves  no  less 
attention.  It  is  not  sufficient  to  perceive  that  an 
effect  depends  on  several  causes ;  it  is  extremely  im- 
portant that  we  be  able  to  assign  the  proper  degree  of 
influence  of  each  of  these  causes :  in  bringing  this 
work  to  a  conclusion,  I  shall  noAV  employ  myself  in 
demonstrating  the  possibility  of  finding  a  suitable 
measure  for  such  an  appreciation. 

In  the  first  place,  it  is  necessary  to  admit,  as  a 
princi]>le,  that  where  variable  causes  do  not  exist, 
the  eflects  produced  will  constantly  be  the  same ;  and 
that  the  more  variable  the  causes  are,  the  effects  will 
also  generally  vary  within  wide  limits.  Thus,  sup- 
posing that  human  volition  acts  independently  of  all 
fixed  laws,  and  in  the  most  varied  and  irregular 
manner,  we  must  necessarily  find  the  effects  produced 
presenting  the  greatest  anomalies  also,  and  difTerences 
varying  within  the  widest  limits.  Now,  it  is  tliese 
differences  which  it  is  desirable  to  examine  and  mea- 
sure. 

To  define  our  ideas,  let  it  be  supposed  that  we  want 
to  examine  if  any  general  causes  exist  which  modify 
the  repression  of  crime;  in  other  Avords,  which  modify 
the  severity  witli  which  the  guilty  are  punished.  We 
must  necessarily  have  recourse  to  observations  which 
have  been  very  carefully  collected ;  and,  if  the  annual 
results  are  not  constantly  the  same,  we  shall  be  obliged 
to  admit  that  the  variations  proceed  either  from  errors 
of  observation,  from  the  influence  of  local  causes,  or 
from  the  influence  of  moral  causes  inherent  in  man. 
Going  deeply  into  these  researches,  we  really  find  that 
these  elements  vary  according  to  time  and  place.  Now, 
since  the  number  of  probable  influential  causes  may 
be  extremely  great,  it  is  proper  to  investigate  them 
individually :  it  is  in  this  manner  that  we  are  (at) 
first  enabled  to  separate  from  our  results  the  influ- 
ential causes  depending  on  locality,  all  our  observa- 
tions being  taken  in  the  same  country  ;  and  that  we 
may  also  eliminate  the  influential  causes  depending 
on  periodicity  of  season,  by  carrying  our  researches 
over  the  whole  year,  whence  we  return  to  the  appre- 
ciation of  all  the  influential  causes,  taken  sepa- 
ratel3\ 

Uniting  the  statistical  documents  of  the  courts  of 
assize  in  France  for  the  six  years  before  1831,  we 
find :— 

Years. 

Accused. 

Conclenined. 

Repression. 

1825, 
182(),       - 
1827, 
1828, 
18-29, 

laso,     - 

7,234 
(i,988 
fi,!)2!) 
7..3!« 
7.373 
U,!)()2 

4594 
43)8 
■  4236 
4551 
4475 
4131) 

0-635 
0-G22 
0-(ilO 
0-615 
0-607 
0-593 

Average,    - 

7.147 

4380 

0-6137 

This  table  shows  us  that  the  repression  of  crimes 

104 

ON  MAN. 

ia  general,  has  been  annually  decreasing,  certainly 
not  very  much,  but  3'et  manifestly.  Now,  of  the 
causes  influencing  repression,  some  act  in  a  constant 
and  others  in  a  variable  manner.  By  virtue  of  the 
former,  the  number  0-61.37,  which  expresses  the  re- 
pression of  crimes  in  general,  should  have  a  constant 
value  from  one  year  to  another ;  by  virtue  of  the  ac- 
tion of  the  variable  causes,  the  same  number  would 
undergo  greater  or  less  modifications.  I  shall  first  be 
occupied  with  the  measurement  of  the  influence  of  the 
constant  causes. 

To  give  a  better  conception  of  my  idea,  I  suppose 
an  individual  labouring  imder  an  accusation ;  as  we 
have  just  seen,  the  chance  of  being  condemned  will  be 
as  614  to  1000  ;  this  probability  should  be  understood 
in  the  most  general  sense,  admitting  that  as  yet  we 
know  nothing  of  the  nature  of  the  crime,  the  age,  or 
the  sex,  of  the  accused,  or  of  the  state  of  education, 
or  auv  of  the  constant  causes  modifying  the  repres- 
sion of  crime.  But  if  we  learn  the  fact,  that  the  accusa- 
tion is  for  a  crime  against  persons,  the  probability  of 
being  condemned  is  altered ;  indeed,  experience  proves 
that  the  repression  of  crimes  against  persons  is  less 
than  that  of  crimes  against  property.  In  France,  the 
average  values  have  been  from  0-477  to  0"665,  for  the 
sLx  years  previous  to  1831.  Thus  the  chances  are 
only  477  in  1000  that  the  individual  will  be  condemned 
when  accused  of  crime  against  persons;  655,  when 
the  crime  is  one  against  property.  The  principal 
cause  of  this  inequality  appears  to  be,  as  has  been 
frequently  remarked,  that  we  are  averse  to  apply 
punishment  when  it  has  a  certain  degree  of  severity, 
or  appears  severe  in  proportion  to  the  crime ;  this  is 
especially  the  case  -with  crimes  against  persons.* 

The  sex  of  the  accused  has,  moreover,  a  marked 
influence  over  the  repression  of  crime  :  the  severity  is 
not  so  great  towards  females.  AU  these  shades  Avill 
be  more  evident  on  inspecting  the  following  table, 
which  points  out  the  different  degrees  of  probability 
which  exist  of  an  accused  person  being  condemned, 
according  as  the  causes  are  favourable  or  the  con- 
trary : — 

Probability 
State  of  the  Accused  Person.  of  being 

Condemned. 
Possessing  a  superior  education,  •  -        0'400 

Condemned  who  has  pleaded  guilty,  -  0*476 

Accused  of  crime  against  person,  -  -        0-477 

Being  able  to  read  and  write  weU,    -  -  0-543 

Being  a  female,   -----        0-57G 
Being  more  than  30  years  old,  -  -  0-586 

Being  able  to  read  and  write  imperfectly,  -        0-COO 

IVUIioiU  any  diskinaiion,       -  -  -  0-614 

Being  a  male,      ,.-.--        0-622 
Not  being  able  to  read  or  WTite,        -  -  0-627 

Being  under  30  years  of  age,        ...        0-630 
Accused  of  crime  against  property,  -  ■•  0-055 

Condemned  in  absence,  or  for  non-appearance  {con- 

tumax], 0-960 

Experience,  therefore,  proves  that  the  most  influ- 
ential cause  diminishing  the  repression  of  crime  con- 
sists in  the  appearance  of  the  criminal  before  the  judge 
with  the  advantage  of  a  superior  education,  Avhich 
supposes  a  certain  degree  of  affluence,  and  the  ready 
means  of  making  a  defence.  The  most  advantageous 
position  an  accused  person  can  possibly  be  in,  is  to  be 
more  than  30  years  of  age,  a  female,  to  have  received 
a  superior  education,  to  appear  under  an  accusation 
of  a  crime  against  person,  and  to  come  when  cited, 
prev-iously  to  being  taken  into  custody  ;  on  the  con- 
trary, the  most  disadvantageous  state  is  to  be  under 
SO  years  of  age,  unable  to  read  or  write,  to  be  a  man, 
and  accused  of  crime  against  property,  and  not  to  be 

*  [Here,  as  in  other  places,  M.  Quetelet  gives  his  important 
sanction  to  the  principle  upon  which  the  amenders  of  the  crimi- 
nal laws  of  England  cliiefly  found  their  arguments  for  reform. 
The  severity  of  the  punishment  leads  to  the  escape  of  the  crimi- 
nal.] 

able,  as  refusing  to  appear  when  cited,  to  produce  the 
means  of  defence. 

The  causes  which  modify  the  probability  of  being 
condemned,  according  to  the  state  of  the  accused  per- 
son, appear  to  me  so  evident,  as  to  render  it  super- 
fluous to  insist  on  them.  Such  is  not  the  case  witli  the 
degree  of  influence  of  these  causes  -,  this  estimation  is 
attended  with  difficulties.  Reflecting  upon  it,  it  has 
appeared  to  me  that,  of  all  the  numerical  elements 
subject  to  variation,  we  might  very  easily  estimate  the 
importance  of  the  deviations  from  the  average,  or  the  iih- 
portance  of  the  causes  which  produce  them,  by  comparing 
these  deviations  with  the  magnitude  of  the  average.  It  is 
almost  in  this  manner  that  the  first  geometricians 
who  studied  the  theory  of  probabilities  as  applied  to 
facts  bearing  upon  man  (and  BufFon,  in  particular), 
have  estimated  the  importance  of  a  whole,  for  one 
individual,  by  comparing  it  with  what  this  individual 
possessed. 

According  to  this  estimation,  it  will  be  necessary 
to  take  the  deviations  from  each  of  the  ratios  calculated 
above,  and  compare  these  witli  the  number  0'614,  the 
measure  of  the  repression  in  France,  when  v/e  do  not 
I)ay  attention  to  any  modifying  cause ;  the  respective 
magnitude  of  the  deviations  Avill  give  this  measure  of 
their  importance,  and  consequently  that  of  the  causes 
which  produce  them,  effects  being  considered  as  pro- 
portional to  their  causes.  Let  us  suppose,  for  example, 
that  we  seek  to  ascertain  the  value  of  the  respective 
influences  which  are  exercised  on  the  repression  of 
crime  in  France,  by  possessing  the  advantage  of  a 
superior  education,  and  being  a  female ;  we  find  the 
values  of  the  repression  are  0'400  and  0*576,  and  the 
diSerences  between  these  numbers  and  the  general 
average,  0"6I4,  are  0*2 14  and  0*038.  From  what  has 
been  said,  the  importance  of  these  differences,  or  of 

214  38 

the  causes  which  produce  them,  will  be  -^  a,nd  ^ 

or  otherwise,  0*348  and  0*062.  From  this  we  perceive 
that  a  superior  education  has  five  times  the  influence 
which  being  a  woman  has,  in  diminishing  tlie  repres-^ 
sion  of  crime  before  the  tribunals.  Tlie  following  table 
presents  the  degrees  of  influence  of  the  different  causes 
modifying  the  repression  of  crime,  and  has  been  cal- 
culated upon  the  same  bases : — 

Stite  of  the  Accuscl. 

Relative  degr-ee 
of  the  influence 

of  the  state  of 
the  Accused  on 

the  Repression 
of  Crime. 

Possessing  a  superior  education,  -  -  0-348 

Appeared  to  plead  after  having  been  declared 

absent  or  contumacious,  -  -  0224 
Accused  of  crime  against  persons,  -  -  0-223 
Being  able  to  read  and  WTite  well,  -  0-115 
Being  a  female,  ....  0-062 
Being  more  than  30  years  of  age,  -  -  0-045 
Being  able  to  read  and  write  imperfectly,  -  0-023 
Without  a»i/ designation,  ...  0-000 
Being  a  man,  -  .  .  .  .  0-013 
Being  imable  to  read  or  write,  -  -  0022 
Being  under  30  years  of  age,  ...  0-026 
Accused  of  crime  against  property,  -  0-067 
llaving  withdrawn  from  justice,  or  for  non- 
appearance when  cited  (coHfionoa-),          -  0*563 

Thus,  as  I  have  alrcadj'  observed,  there  is  not  any 
cause  Avhich  lias  more  influence  in  varying  the  repres- 
sion of  crime,  than  the  reluctance  or  non-appearance 
of  the  accused  to  answer  charges.  The  preceding  table 
does  not  merely  possess  the  advantage  of  showing  this 
clearly,  but  also  shows  the  degree  of  influence  of  the 
cause  producing  it. 

And  here  there  is  a  question  of  another  kind,  viz., 
how  far  those  causes  may  be  regarded  as  constant 
Avhich  have  now  been  pointed  out.  For,  before  one 
can  say  that  they  are  absolutely  constant,  it  must  be 
shown  that  the  results  which  they  produce  continue 
the  same  from  year  to  year.     Now,  this  is  what  does 

ON  MAN. 

105 

not  take  place:  the  deviations  from  the  average, 
■which  we  have  taken  as  constant  quantities,  annually 
undergo  shglit  modifications,  which  Ave  have  attri- 
buted to  variable  causes:  these  modifications  are  in 
general  very  small,  when  we  only  take  a  small  num- 
ber of  jcars  into  account ;  but  still  it  is  necessary  to 
notice  them.  The  repression  of  crime  in  general,  for 
example,  has  not  been  constantly  of  the  value  0'614 
during  the  six  years  which  have  furnished  the  ele- 
ments of  our  calculations ;  small  annual  differences 
have  been  observed,  and  the  repression,  in  its  great- 
est deviations  from  the  average,  more  and  less,  has 
been  0-635  and  0-.593  ;  the  deviations  are  consequently 
0  (J21   and  0-021  ;   and  consequently  their  ordinary 

value  is 

or  0-034.      Thus  the  variable  causes 

which  have  produced  alterations  of  the  degree  of  re- 
pression, have  had,  in  their  maximum  and  minimum 
of  energy,  influences  which  have  equalled  or  even  sur- 
passed the  influences  of  some  causes  which  we  have 
been  considering  as  constant.  To  have  a  juster  idea 
of  the  variable  causes,  it  will  be  proper  to  examine 
tiie  elfccts  which  they  have  annually  produced  on 
each  of  the  elements  considered  above.  The  follow- 
ing tables  will  supply  us  with  data  on  this  subject : — 

Repression  of  Crimes 

Repression. 

against 
Pcrsfins. 

1 
against 
Properly. 

Jlcn. 

Women. 

l«2.->, 
1820.      - 
18-27, 
1828,      - 
1829, 
1830,      - 

(fir, 
0.51 
0-M 
0-47 
0-46 
0-4(; 

0-66 
0-67 
0-65 
0C6 
0-03 
0-04 

0-63 
0-62 
(Hi-J 
0-62 
0-61 

0-60 
060 
0-57 
0  57 
0-54 

AveraRe, 

0-477 

0-655 

0-722 

0-576 

Ycirs. 

Repression  in 
Individuals 

Roprc 

Fsion. 

under 
30  Veai-s. 

above 
30  Years. 

Not 
Appearing. 

Appeared 

to  stand 

Trial. 

1826, 
1827,      - 
1828, 
1829,      - 
1830, 

0-Gi 
0-64 

0-w 

0-62 
061 

0-60 
0-.58 

0-59 
0-58 

0!»3 
0-97 
0-97 
0-97 
0-9fJ 

0-49 
0-45 
0--)G 
0-50 
0-48 

Average,    - 

0C3 

0-,oC6 

('•!K1 

0-479 

Repression  ii 

1  Individua 

3 

Years. 

c 
unable 
to  Read 

or  Write. 

able  to 
Read  and 
Write  im- 
perfectly. 

able  to 
Read  and 
Write  well 

1 

who  had  a 
Superior 
Education. 

1828, 
1829,     - 
1830, 

O-f.3 
0-63 
0-62 

062 
0-60 
0-58 

0-56 
0.55 
0-52 

0-.T5 
0-48 
0-37 

Average,    - 

0-627 

0-60 

0-543 

0-40 

Causes  -which  Modify  Repression. 

These  different  tables  teach  us  that  the  greatest 
variations  which  any  of  the  constant  causes  modify- 
ing the  repression  of  crime  have  undergone,  have 
scarcely  exceeded  the  value  of  the  intensity  even  of 
these  causes :  or,  in  other  terms,  that  in  the  very 
circumstances  most  unfavourable  to  observation,  the 
effects  of  constant  causes  have  been  but  little  effaced 
by  the  effects  of  variable  and  accidental  causes.  "We 
shall  be  enabled  to  judge  better  on  this  point  by  the 
following  table,  which  discriminates  for  us  the  im- 
portance of  the  greatest  deviations  which  the  causes 
modifying  repression  have  presented  in  each  of  the 
cases  above  enumerated : — 

The  accused  has  a  superior  education,  - 
appears  to  answer  charge, 
is  prosecuted  for  crime  against) 

person,  -        -        -        -    j 
is  able  to  read  and  write  well, 
is  a  female,        -        -        .        .. 
is  upwards  of  30  years  of  age, 
is  able  to  read  and  write  imper-^ 

fectly,    -        -        -        -    / 
is  without  any  designation, 
is  a  male,      -        ,        .        . 
is  unable  to  read  or  WTite, 
is  under  30  years  of  age, 
is  prosecuted  for  crime  againsti 

property,    -        -        -         / 
does  not  appear  when  cited,  - 

Difference  from 
the  Average. 

Less. 

Greater. 

0-200 
0-050 

0-125 
0-056 

0-069 

0-035 

0-031 
0-042 
0-024 

0-042 
0-062 
0-027 

0033 

0-033 

0-034 
0-013 
0-005 
0-016 

0-034 
0-019 
OOU 
0-032 

0-039 

0018 

0010 

0-031 

I  have  always  reasoned  on  the  hypothesis  that  our 
results  were  founded  on  so  great  a  number  of  obser- 
vations, that  nothing  fortuitous  could  affect  the  value 
of  the  averages  :  but  this  is  not  the  case  here.  Some 
results  are  deduced  from  observations  which  are  yet 
small  in  number,  and  we  know  that,  all  things  being 
cfiual,  the  precision  of  results  increases  as  the  square  root  of 
the  number  of  observations.  This  is  especially  applicable 
to  any  thing  concerning  the  repression  (punishment) 
of  the  accused  persons  who  have  received  a  superior 
education.  The  values  obtained  are  deduced  from  a 
small  number  of  observations,  and  the  deviations  front 
the  average  of  them  have  consequently  been  greater : 
now,  by  employing  the  method  of  the  smallest  squares, 
I  liave  found  that  the  accuracy  of  the  numbers  0-400 
and  0-6137,  previously  obtained  for  repression  in  ge- 
neral, and  for  repression  exercised  in  particular  against 
the  accused  who  have  received  a  superior  education, 
is  in  the  ratio  of  0-0870  to  0-0075,  or  as  11  to  1. 

In  separating,  pursuant  to  the  preceding  observa- 
tions, what  is  purely  fortuitous  in  the  deviations 
from  the  averages,  so  that  we  may  only  consider 
the  causes  which  have  had  a  greater  or  lesser  regu- 
larity of  influence  on  the  repression  of  crime,  I  think 
that"  we  may  pretty  nearly  represent  their  influence 
by  0-034.  These  deviations  are  such  that  it  is  easy 
to  perceive  that  the  repression  of  crime  has  gradually 
diminished.  Kow,  this  progressive  diminution  must 
have  its  causes ;  and  one  of  them,  undoubtedly  the 
most  influential,  is  pointed  out  in  the  Compte  General 
de  V Administration  de  la  Justice  Criminelle  en  France 
pendant  I'Ann^e  1830 : — "  Six  years  have  passed  away 
since  the  Cumptes  Gcn&aux  of  the  administration  of 
criminal  justice  have  been  published.  During  the 
former  half  of  this  period  (1825,  1826,  and  1827), 
the  lists  of  the  jury  were  formed  according  to  the 
rules  laid  down  in  the  code  of  criminal  instruction 
(instruction  criminelle);  during  the  second  half  (1828, 
1829,  and  1830),  these  lists  have  been  made  according 
to  the  law  of  the  2d  of  May  1827,  which  has  changed 
the  basis  of  juries,  and  called  a  greater  number  of 
citizens  to  fulfil  its  duties.  By  taking  the  totality  of 
the  results  of  the  accusations  during  the  entire  period 
of  six  years,  as  weU  as  during  each  part  of  it,  and  by 
comparing  these  different  results,  we  find  that  the 
only  difference  betwixt  juries  formed  according  to  the 
code  of  criminal  advice,  and  those  which  the  legis- 
lature has  subsequently  made,  is  this,  that  the  latter 
class  appear  to  have  a  slight  tendency  to  look  upon 
accusations  less  severely.  The  proof  of  this  assertion 
is  found  in  the  following  table : — 

Years. 

Iffi5,182(i,  1827,llf28,j 

1829,  and  ISJO,       ' 

1825,  18-26,  and  1827, 

1828,  1829,  and  im). 

Totality  of  Accusations. 

Acquitted. 

0-38 
n-;!9 

Condemned  to  Punishments. 

Ignominious.  Correctional 

0-38 

0-41 

O-.Ki 

0-23 

0-21 

0-26 

106 

ON  MAN. 

In  a  few  years  we  shall  be  enabled  to  compare  these 
conclusions  with  those  resulting  from  the  declarations 
of  the  present  juries,  whose  constituent  elements  have 
been  further  enlarged  by  the  reduction  of  the  electoral 
franchise,  and  who  at  present  only  pronounce  con- 
demnation with  a  majority  of  seven  voices." 

Thus  the  preceding  table  shows  us  that  not  only 
the  number  of  acquittals  has  diminislied,  but  even  the 
punishments  awarded  have  been  less  severe :  there 
have  been  fewer  ignominious  and  more  correctional 
ones. 

This  observation  on  the  tendency  to  value  accusa- 
tions more  leniently,  presents  itself  with  a  still  greater 
degree  of  probability  when  we  examine  the  nature  of 
the  crimes  in  detail :  it  is  there,  especially,  tliat  we 
can  see  if  they  have  recoiled  more  readily  from  the 
application  of  punishments,  on  account  of  their  seve- 
rity. We  find,  in  effect,  that  condemnations  to  death 
have  diminished  very  manifestly.  The  same  obser- 
vations recur  ivhen  we  make  the  distinction  between 
crimes  against  persons  and  property  ;  a  proof  of  which, 
also,  is  found  in  the  following  table  : — 

Accused  of  Crimes  against 
Persons. 

Accused 

of  Crimes  against 
Property. 

Years. 

< 

Condemned  to 
Punishment. 

1 

Condemned  to 
Punishment. 

Ignomi- 
nious. 

Correc- 
tional. 

Ignomi- 
nious. 

Correc- 
tional. 

I!i25,  2(J,  27,| 
C8,  29,  30,  (• 
1825,20,27, 
I82ii,29,30, 

0-52 

0-50 
0-53 

0-28 

0-30 
0'2() 

0-20 

0-20 
0-21 

0-34 

0-33 
0-.35 

0-42 

0-45 
0-.39 

0-24 

0-22 
0-2G 

On  both  hands  we  see  fewer  condemnations,  and 
tlie  condemnations  are  less  severe.*  It  appears,  there- 
fore, to  be  probable,  that  some  causes  exist,  whatever 
niay  be  their  nature,  M-hich  haA'c  had  an  influence 
in  France  in  slightly  diminishing  the  repression  of 
crime :  time  will  sliow  us  better  if  we  are  to  seek  for 
one  of  the  causes  of  tliis  in  the  introduction  of  that 
law  which  has  changed  the  constitution  of  tiie  jury, 
and  also  if  this  cause  is  single.  However  the  case 
may  be,  it  is  very  evident  that  the  causes  which  from 
year  to  j'car  have  modified  the  repression  of  crime  in 
general,  have  had  a  weaker  influence  than  the  con- 
stant causes  which  modify  it  according  to  the  nature 
of  the  crimes :  for,  still  preserving  the  two  established 
periods,  we  find  that  the  first-mentioned  causes  have 
had  tlie  effect  of  producing,  on  an  average,  only  two 
or  three  additional  acquittals  out  of  100  accusations, 
taken  promiscuously ;  while  the  second  causes  have 
almost  invariably  produced  eighteen  acquittals  more 
for  accusations  of  crimes  against  persons  tlian  for 
those  against  property.  This  indeed  has  been  already 
seen,  when  comparing  the  two  tables  given  above. 

I  liave  hinted  tliat  the  change  introduced  in  the  for- 
mation of  juries  was  perhaps  not  the  sole  cause  M-hich 
had  modified  tlie  repression  of  crime  :  and,  indeed,  I 
think  that  the  events  of  1 830  have  not  been  without 
some  influence  on  this  matter.  The  repression,  for 
crime  in  general,  is  at  that  period  much  less  than  dur- 
ing the  otlier  years,  and  this  conjecture  gains  still  more 
weight  wlien  we  enter  into  the  consideration  of  de- 
tails. Thus,  out  of  the  twelve  modifying  causes  which 
iiave  been  pointed  out,  the  repression  for  this  year 
lias  presented  nine  minima,  and  the  three  otlicr  values 
approach  their  minima  very  nearly.  Indeed,  it  is  na- 
tural to  suppose,  that,  to  those  causes  wliicli  miglit 
then  predispose  to  indulgence,  there  would  also^be 
added  apprehensions  of  individual  safety,  fears  of  re- 
action, and  other  causes  which  are  developed  in  the 
heart  of  man  in  the  midst  of  political  agitation.  Gene- 
rally speaking,  a  revolution  ought  to  produce  a  greater 

*  See  Oie  Compks  Gencraux,  for  the  repression  of  each  crime  in 
piirticiilar. 

or  less  modification  of  each  element  of  tlic  social  sys- 
tem, and  especially  in  what  relates  to  crime. 

I  shall  here  observe,  that  analogous  ettccts  have  also 
been  observed  in  Belgium,  where  a  revolution  took 
place  at  the  same  period.  The  residts  of  the  repres- 
sion of  crime  for  this  country  are  sufRcienth'  interest- 
ing to  find  a  place  here. 

Crimes  in  General. 

Accused. 

Condemned. 

Repression. 

182(i, 
1827,       - 
1828, 
182!),      - 
1830, 

725 
8(0 
814 
753 
6-13 

611 
6!e 
677 
612 
4S) 

0-843 
0-852 
0-R32 
0-811 
0-759 

Average.    - 

747 

613 

0-821 

This  table  shows  us  that  the  degi'cc  of  repression  in 
1830  was  weaker  than  during  the  other  years;  the 
difference  is  here  even  more  sensible,  for  the  measure 
of  its  importance  is  0*075,  whilst  in  France  it  was 
0"034  ;  but  our  revolution  was  also  less  local  than  that 
ofFrance,  and  the  provisional  government  lasted  longer. 

Another  observation  which  nmst  strike  us  on  exa- 
mining this  table  is,  that  the  repression  has  in  general 
been  much  higher  in  Belgium  than  in  France ;  the 
respective  values  liave  been  on  an  average  0*82 1  and 
0'614,  nearly  as  -i  to  3.  This  great  disproportion  is 
owing  to  the  circumstance,  that,  up  to  that  time,  the 
jury  had  not  been  instituted  in  Belgium,  although  the 
people  were  governed  by  similar  criminal  la-\vs ;  and 
these  numbers  maj",  to  a  certain  degree,  give  us  the 
mcasm-e  of  the  influence  exercised  on  the  late  of  an 
accused  person,  in  case  of  his  appearing  before  judges 
or  before  a  jiny.  Now  that  the  institution  of  jury  is 
established  in  Belgium,  we  shall  be  still  better  enabled 
to  appreciate  its  influence,  from  the  modifications  which 
it  may  produce  in  the  repression  of  crime. 

I  have  inx'sented  the  circumstances  bearing  on  re- 
pression with  some  detail,  that  I  may  give  a  better 
idea  of  the  light  in  which  I  view  tlie  possibility  of 
measuring  the  influence  of  causes.  I  shall  now  offer 
the  rcsidts  of  the  calculations  which  I  have  obtained 
for  other  elements  of  the  social  system,  and  their  ap- 
proximation will  lead  us  to  very  remarkable  conclu- 
sions. I  have  been  careful  to  point  out  the  years  in 
wliich  the  maxima  and  minima  of  the  deviations  have 
occurred,  by  the  side  of  the  degree  of  importance  of 
these  deviations. 

Importance 

of  the 

Epochs. 

Belgium. 

Difference. 

.More. 

Less. 

Of  Max. 

Of  Min. 

Stature  of  the  JMilitia — Town,     - 

0003 

0-005 

1825 

1827 

~        ~         ~           Country, 

0-001 

0-003 

1826 

1827 

Repression  of  crime  in  general, 

0-038 

0-075 

1827 

18.30 

Condemnations  in  general,*  - 

0112 

0-212 

1827 

1830 

Births  in  town,  -         -         .         . 

0-084 

0-120 

1825 

1817 

—     in  country. 

0-083 

0-139 

1826 

I8I7 

Deaths  in  town,  -        -         ■.         . 

0-158 

0-047 

1826 

1816 

—      in  country, 

0-170 

0-071 

1826 

1824 

Marri.iges.t        -         .        .        .. 

0-135 

0-212 

1815 

I8I7 

Receipts  of  the  trc.isury, 

0-188 

0-08(J 

18-26 

1820 

E.xpenditure  of  the  treasury. 

0-143 

o-i;o 

1826 

1820 

Price  of  wlieat,       ... 

1134 

0-447 

1816 

1824 

—    of  rye,        -         -         .         . 

1-374 

0-500 

1816 

1824 

*  The  importance  of  tlie  deviations,  and  especially  of  the  maxi- 
mum deviation  of  the  lesser,  is  sensibly  greater  for  Belgium  than 
for  France  :  this  arises  from  tlie  circumstance  that,  during  the 
Tear  1830,  there  were  much  fewer  condemnations  tlian  in  the 
preceding  years,  the  operation  of  tlie  tribunals  having  been  sus- 
pended during  a  longer  or  shorter  time.  This  year  is  a  com- 
plete anomaly,  and  perhaps  ought  not  to  have  been  included  in 
our  calculations,  except  we  took  the  time  only  durmg  which  the 
courts  were  open. 

\  These  ratios  have  been  taken  from  the  numbers  found  in  the 
^vIu)le  of  the  ancient  kingdom  of  the  Low  Cotmtrics. 

ON  MAN. 

107 

ITiibU  continued.'^ 

Fba.vce.  ♦ 

Importance 

of  the 
Difference. 

Epochs. 

More. 

Less. 

Of  Max. 

Of  Min. 

Repression  of  crime  in  general, 
Condemnations  in  Renenil, 
Condemnations  for  crimes  against  > 

property,          •        -         -      / 
Condemnations  for  crimes  against) 

person,     .        .        .         .      1 

Births, 

Deaths,           .... 
^larriageR,          .... 

OfVM 
0-047 

0-056 

0153 

0-0-21 
0-071 
0117 

0-034 
0-057 

0O56 
0-144 

0.0.M 
0-04<l 
0-125 

1825 
18-25 

1828 

1825 

IHlit 
1H2K 
III-'3 

1830 

18-27 

1830 

1818 
1823 
1817 

The  two  ])rc(cding  tables  demonstrate  clearly  diffe- 
rent facts,  whicli  I  shall  successively  examine. 

In  the  first  place,  by  only  re{,'arding  the  facts  them- 
selves, and  without  havint?  regard  to  the  inttucncc  of 
causes  taken  individually,  we  sec  that,  among  tl>e 
elements  observed,  the  least  variable  are  the  stature 
of  man  and  the  repression  of  crime  (or  the  severity 
whidi  the  tribunals  display  in  i)unishments);  we  after- 
wards see,  in  the  adjoining  lines,  the  facility  which 
man  shows  to  commit  crime,  and  the  facility  with 
which  he  repro<luces  his  kind,  or  dies.  Thus,  whatever 
be  the  determining  motives  of  his  actions,  in  point  of 
fact,  they  modify  no  more  the  numl>er  of  deaths  than 
the  numl)er  of  births,  or  even  tlie  number  of  crimes 
which  annually  scourge  so<-iety.t  Marriages  also  take 
place  with  regularity,  but  their  numbc-r  varies  at  the 
name  time  within  wider  limits  than  the  preceding 
elements ;  the  same  has  been  the  case  with  the  receipts 
and  expenses  of  the  Iklgic  treiLsury  ;  but  no  element 
has  undergone  greater  variations  than  the  price  of 
rye  and  wheat. 

In  passing,  we  shall  observe,  that  the  prices  of  grain 
have  a  very  close  {Hroite)  relation  to  every  thing  bear- 
ing on  the  other  elements.  Thus,  in  the  years  1816 
and  1817,  the  prices  of  grain  were  very  high,  and  mar- 
riages numerous  ;  on  the  other  hand,  it  was  the  same 
Avith  births.  It  would  appear  a3  if  the  maxinmm  of 
deaths  should  also  have  taken  jjlace  in  this  year,  in 
place  of  the  minimum,  which  we  observe  in  the  towns, 
in  1816.  Kxamining  the  numbers  for  1817  attentively, 
we  really  find  that  they  will  form  maxima  for  town 
and  country,  if  we  consider  the  increase  of  the  popu- 
lation, another  influential  cause,  which  it  is  easy  to 
calculate.  The  minimum  would  then  be  carried  to 
1824,  whicli  is  the  period  when  grains  were  at  the 
lowest  price,  and  which  year  was  followed  by  a  year 
of  very  great  fruitfulness  of  women  both  in  town  and 
countr>'. 

Taking  notice  of  the  annual  increase  of  the  popula- 
tion, which  has  been  considerable  in  Belgium,  we  find 
values  which  closely  resemble  those  furnished  by 
France;  we  find,  moreover,  that  the  year  1817  pre- 
sents the  minimum  of  marriages  and  births,  both  for 
town  and  country,  and,  at  the  same  time,  the  maxi- 
mum of  deaths,  both  for  town  and  country. 

It  is  to  be  observetl,  that  the  maximum  of  the 
number  of  marriages  has  taken  place  in  181.'),  not- 
withstanding tlie  increase  of  the  population  in  subse- 
quent years.  This  year,  which  brought  the  wars  and 
disasters  of  the  empire  to  a  close,  allowed  a  great 
mnnber  of  young  men  to  return  home ;  and,  being 
attenilcd  by  peace,  gave  rise  to  many  new  establish- 
ments in  life. 

*  See  the  Compta  G<!ntranx,  Sfc.,  and  the  Annuairc  ilii  Bureau 
det  Longitudts  de  France,  18.32,  for  what  relates  to  the  movement 
of  the  population  from  1817  to  1829. 

t  It  may  be  objct.te<l,  that  the  obser\-ations  on  crime  only  refer 
to  five  years,  whilst  those  on  births  and  deaths  extend  to  twelve 
years ;  and  that  we  ought,  in  the  same  manner,  to  expect  to  find 
smaller  differences  between  the  extreme  values  of  the  effects  pro- 
duced by  variable  causes  :  but  I  shall  reply,  on  the  other  hand, 
that  births  and  deaths  being  annually  much  more  numerous  than 
rrimes,  whkt  is  casual  leavca  fewer  traces  behind  it,  and  must 
have  a  less  sensible  influence  in  modifying  regular  causes. 
II 

We  may  further  see,  from  the  preceding  number?, 
that  a  residence  in  town  or  country  has  not  manifested 
a  well-marked  influence  in  varying  the  elements  we 
have  now  been  considering. 

Until  now,  I  have  omitted  the  influence  of  season 
and  time  of  the  day ;  yet  it  may  be  interesting  to 
know  the  respective  influences  of  annual  and  diurnal 
periods,  which  I  have  eliminated  to  the  extent  of  my 
present  materials,  carrying  my  observations  to  annual 
average  results. 

To  ascertain  the  influence  of  an  annual  period,  I 
shall  compare  the  average  results  obtained  for  each 
montii,  and,  as  hitherto,  I  shall  value  the  importance 
of  the  maximum  deviation  from  the  average,  whether 
on  the  side  of  surplus  or  the  reverse.  This  calculation 
gives  the  following  results.  Those  for  births  and 
(leaths  relate  to  Belgium,  the  others  are  calculated  for 
France : — 

Births  In  town,* 
_        country,  - 

Deaths  in  town,  - 
—        country,  - 

Crimes  against  projierty 
~        ~       person, 

Mental  alienation. 

July, 

January, 

Feb. 
Januarv 

Deo. 
June, 

Importance  of  the 
Difference. 

Min. 

0-107 

OI(,-2 
0-1 2«i 
OI'U 
0113 
0121 
0  2H8 

Max. 

0122 

0177 
oi.w 

0212 
ii-2.il 
0  2IH 
0-.34fi 

What  must  strike  us  at  first  is,  that  the  influence 
of  season  only  has  more  eflTect  in  causing  the  elements 
relating  to  man  to  vary  (those  at  least  which  I  have 
considered),  than  all  the  united  influences  of  nature 
and  of  men  have  had  in  causing  variations  of  the  ave- 
rage annual  results  during  the  same  period.  These 
monthly  variations  take  place,  moreover,  in  the  most 
regular  manner,  as  I  have  elsewhere  shown.  To  form 
an  idea  of  the  influence  of  the  seasons,  compared  with 
the  combined  influences  of  all  the  causes  operating  to 
modify  the  annual  results,  I  shall  take  the  same  ele- 
ments and  compare  the  extremes  within  whicli  the 
greatest  deviations  to  one  side  or  another  have  been 
comprised,  and  I  shall  assume  as  unity  the  sum  of 
the  differences  of  each  annual  average.  It  will  be 
understoo<l  that  here  the  conclusions  are  deduced  from 
the  same  observations,  classed  either  according  to 
years  or  months  : — 

Sums  r.f  the  Differences 

of  Max. 

ind  Min. 

Ratio. 

Annual. 

Monthly. 

Births  in  town. 

0-204 

0-229 

113 

~       country, 
Deaths  in  town , 

0-222 
02<'5 

0-.339 
0284 

1-53 
l-.3f) 

~       countrv, 

0-241 

0-403 

1-67 

Crimes  against  proi>erty,    - 

~        ~       person,  - 
Mental  alienation. 

0  112 
0-297 

0-346 
0-410 
0-634 

3-09 
1.38 

9 

Thus,  the  results  taking  place  in  different  years 
I  have  varied  less  than  those  produced  by  seasons,  and 
the  respective  influences  of  the  cau.ses  which  give  rise 
to  them,  as  concerns  the  movement  of  population,  are 
more  dissimilar  in  the  country  than  in  town.  We  may 
remark,  in  general,  that  the  country  is,  pliysically 
speaking,  more  easily  acted  upon  than  towns,  and  that 
the  deviations  from' the  average  there  have  greater 
values,  undoubtedly  l)ecause  more  hold  is  given  to 
UKxlifying  causes  of  different  kinds. 

The  epochs  at  which  the  maxima  and  minima  take 
place  have  also  very  singular  relations.  Thus,  deaths 
and  crimes  against  property  are  more  numerous  in 

♦  M.  I/Avocat  Ouerry  has  given,  in  the  Annfilfs  'flli/yifne  for 
April  1H29,  some  drawings  iiicttim)  representing  the  influence  of 
the  seasons  on  physiolngit-nl  phenomena  :  it  is  to  bo  greatly  re- 
gretted tliat  these  doiigns  are  not  accompanied  by  the  numbers 
according  to  which  they  have  been  made. 

108 

ON  MAN. 

winter,  in  consequence  of  the  rigours  of  the  season 
and  the  privations  to  which  man  is  subjected.  Crimes 
against  person  are  more  frequent  at  periods  when  the 
passions  are  most  in  force,  and  when  mental  aliena- 
tion manifests  itself  with  the  greatest  intensity. 

As  to  the  diurnal  period,  it  is  to  be  regretted  that 
calculations  are  still  wanting  to  enable  us  to  appre- 
ciate its  decided  influence  on  the  human  species. 
From  the  numbers  which  I  have  obtained  for  Brus- 
sels, births  appear  to  be  more  numerous  durmg  night 
than  in  the  day  time.  The  deviation  from  the  average 
both  on  the  side  of  surplus  and  the  reverse,  amounts 
to  0-114.*  M.  Buck  has  since  arrived  at  the  same 
results  for  the  city  of  Hamburg,  and  found  the  ratio 
to  be  0-136.  M.  ViUerme  himself,  at  the  Hospice  de 
la  Maternite  in  Paris,  has  obtained  similar  results. 
The  deviations  are  more  important  when  Ave  compare 
the  diflerent  hours  of  the  day  separately.  M.  Guerry, 
in  the  Annates  d' Hygiene  for  January  1831,  has  pre- 
sented some  researches  on  the  influence  of  the  differ- 
ent parts  of  the  day  on  suicide  by  suspension ;  and  he 
has  found,  during  a  period  of  14  years,  that  the  greatest 
number  of  cases  have  taken  place  between  the  hours 
of  6  and  8  o'clock  in  the  morning,  and  the  fewest  num- 
ber between  12  at  noon  and  2  in  the  afternoon.  The 
deviations,  more  and  less,  have  been  in  relative  impor- 
tance as  the  numbers  0-625  and  0-614:  these  devia- 
tions are  considerable,  compared  Avitli  those  hitherto 
observed. 

It  is  sufficiently  apparent,  that  the  smallest  period, 
that  of  the  day,  has  still  greater  influence  than  the 
monthly  period  (which  depends  on  the  succession  of 
seasons),  and  consequently  more  influence  than  the 
totality  of  the  causes,  which  produce  variations  betwLxt 
the  average  results  of  one  year  and  another — always 
supposing  it  to  be  understood,  that  these  average 
results  are  not  deduced  from  too  large  a  number  of 
years,  during  which  the  men  observed  may  have  com- 
pletely changed,  so  as  in  a  manner  to  present  a  dif- 
ferent social  condition. 

If  we  now  sum  up  what  has  been  said,  we  may  de- 
duce the  following  conclusions : — 

1st,  The  regular  and  periodic  causes,  which  depend 
either  on  the  annual  or  diurnal  period,  produce  effects 
on  society  which  are  more  sensible,  and  which  vary 
within  wider  limits,  than  the  combined  non-periodic 
effects  annually  produced  by  the  concurrence  of  all 
the  other  causes  operating  on  society ;  in  other  terms, 
the  social  system,  in  its  present  state,  appears  to  be 
more  dissimilar  to  itself  in  the  course  of  one  year, 
or  even  in  the  space  of  one  day,  than  during  two 
consecutive  years,  if  ym  have  reference  to  the  increase 
of  the  population, 

2d,  The  diurnal  period  seems  to  exercise  a  some- 
what stronger  influence  than  the  annual  period,  at 
least  so  far  as  births  are  concerned. 

3d,  The  annual  period  produces  more  sensible  effects 
in  the  country  than  in  town ;  and  this  appears  to  be 
the  case  with  those  causes  in  general  Avhich  tend  to 
modify  the  facts  relating  to  man. 

4th,  The  price  of  grain  has  a  very  marked  influence 
on  the  elements  of  the  social  system ;  and  althougli 
we  still  want  sufficient  data  to  appreciate  the  compa- 
rative values  of  this  influence,  yet  we  may  A-ery  safely 
range  it  among  the  causes  operating  most  energetically. 

5th,  If  we  wished  to  class,  according  to  our  obser- 
vations, the  elements  relating  to  man  in  an  order  which 
should  indicate  the  degree  of  variation  to  which  they 
are  subject,  we  should  find  the  succession  as  foUoM's, 
commencing  witli  the  least  variable  : — The  stature  of 
man  ;  the  repression  of  crime,  or  the  degree  of  severity 
with  which  it  is  punished ;  the  births  ;  the  propensity 
to  crime,  or  the  facility  Avith  Avhich  it  is  committed ; 
deaths ;  marriages ;  receipts  and  expenses  of  the  trea- 
sury ;  and,  finally,  the  prices  of  grain. 

*  Sec  my  RecJierclies  sur  la  Population,  ^c.,  dans  IcRnyaumc  dcs 
Pa>/s-Bas,  p.  21. 

Thus  man  commits  crime  with  at  least  as  much 
regularity  as  is  observed  in  births,  deatlis,  or  mar- 
riages, and  with  more  regularity  than  the  receipts 
and  expenses  of  the  treasury  take  jdace.  But  none 
of  the  elements  which  concei'n  him,  and  which  have 
been  calculated  in  our  table,  vary  within  wider  limits 
than  the  prices  of  grain. 

From  what  has  been  said,  we  may  draw  the  two 
folloAving  principal  conclusions  : — 

Since  the  price  of  grain  is  one  of  the  most  influen- 
tial causes  operating  on  the  mortality  and  reproduc- 
tion of  the  human  species,  and  since,  at  the  present 
day,  this  price  may  vary  Avithin  the  Avidest  limits,  it 
is  the  province  of  the  foresight  of  governments  to 
diminish  as  much  as  possible  aU  the  causes  which  in- 
duce these  great  variations  in  prices,  and  consequently 
in  the  elements  of  the  social  system. 

On  the  other  hand,  since  the  crimes  which  are  an- 
nually committed  seem  to  be  a  necessary  result  of  our 
social  organisation,  and  since  the  number  of  them 
cannot  diminish  without  the  causes  which  induce 
them  undergoing  previous  modification,  it  is  the  pro- 
vince of  legislators  to  ascertain  these  causes,  and  to 
remove  them  as  far  as  possible  :  they  have  the  poAver 
of  determining  the  budget  of  crime,  as  Avell  as  the  re- 
ceipts and  expenses  of  the  treasury.  Indeed,  experience 
proves  as  clearly  as  possible  the  truth  of  this  opinion, 
Avhich  at  first  may  appear  paradoxical,  viz.,  that  so- 
ciety  prepares  crime,  and  the  guilty  are  only  the  instru- 
ments by  ivhich  it  is  executed.  Hence  it  happens  that 
the  unfortunate  person  Avho  loses  his  head  on  the 
scaffold,  or  who  ends  his  life  in  prison,  is  in  some 
manner  an  expiatory  victim  for  society.  His  crime 
is  the  result  of  the  circumstances  in  which  he  is  found 
placed :  the  severity  of  his  chastisement  is  perhaps 
another  result  of  it.  HoAvever,  when  matters  have 
come  to  this  point,  the  punishment  is  no  less  a  neces- 
sary evil,  were  it  only  as  a  preventive  mean :  it  Avould 
only  be  desirable  that  the  other  means  of  prevention 
might  afterwards  become  sufficiently  efficacious  for 
us  not  to  be  obliged  to  have  recourse  to  the  former 
severe  means. 

I  shall  conclude  this  chapter  by  a  final  observation, 
Avliich  is  as  it  Avere  a  consequence  of  all  the  preced- 
ing, viz.,  that  one  of  the  principal  facts  of  civilisation  is, 
that  it  more  and  more  contracts  the  limits  ivithin  which 
the  different  elements  relating  to  man  oscillate.  The  more 
knowledge  is  diffused,  so  much  the  more  do  the  devia- 
tions from  the  average  disappear ;  and  the  more,  con- 
sequently, do  Ave  tend  to  approach  tliat  which  is  beau- 
tiful, that  Avhich  is  good.  The  perfectibility  of  the 
human  species  results  as  a  necessary  consequence  from 
all  our  researches.  Defects  and  monstrosities  disap- 
pear more  and  more  from  the  physical  world  ;  the  fre- 
quency and  the  severity  of  diseases  are  combated  Avith 
more  advantage  by  the  progress  of  medical  science ; 
the  moral  qualities  of  man  experience  not  less  sensible 
improvements ;  and  the  farther  Ave  advance,  the  less 
are  great  politic  OA'erthroAvs  and  Avars  (the  scourges 
of  Immanity)  to  be  feared,  either  in  their  immediate 
effects  or  in  their  ultimate  consequences. 

It  Avould  seem  at  first  sight  that  the  fine  arts  and 
literature  must  suffer  from  this  state  of  things.  For  if 
it  be  true  that  individual  peculiarities  tend  to  disap- 
pear more  and  more,  and  that  nations  assume  a 
greater  resemblance  to  each  otlier,  whatever  is  most 
picturesque  in  society  and  in  the  aspect  of  different 
parts  of  the  globe,  ought  insensibly  to  disappear.  Even 
during  the  last  half  century,  and  Avithin  the  limits  of 
Europe  alone,  Ave  see  hoAv  great  the  tendency  is  for 
people  to  lose  their  national  character  and  be  amalga- 
mated in  one  common  type :  yet  nature  Avill  always 
be  so  prodigiously  varied,  that  the  talented  man  Avill 
never  have  to  fear  lest  the  source  of  the  pictm-esque 
be  exhausted  ;  on  the  contrary,  he  every  day  finds 
for  liimself  neAv  sources  from  which  his  imagination 
may  take  the  noblest  and  most  elevated  inspiration, 
and  bring  out  treasures  imknown  to  his  predecessors. 

APPENDICES. 

APPENDIX— CONTAINING  THE  ADDITIONS  MADE  BY  THE  AUTHOR  (M.  QUETELET)  TO  THE  GERMAN 
TRANSLATION  OF  HIS  WORK,  PUBLISHED  AT  STUTTGART  IN  1838,  BY  DR  V.  A.  RIECKE. 

No.  I. 

ADDITION  TO  THE  INTRODUCTION. 

Extracts  from  the  Bulletin  de  V Academie  Hot/ale  des 
Sciences  et  Belles  Lettres  de  Bruxelles :  1835.    No.  8. 

M.  QuETELET  communicated  the  other  day  to  the 
academy  several  statistical  notices  published  by  tlie 
French  government,  confirming  more  and  more  the 
ideas  expressed  by  him  regarding  the  constant  return 
of  the  same  phenomena  in  every  thing  having  a  re- 
ference to  the  physical  and  moral  man,  provided  so- 
ciety undergoes  no  violent  change : — First,  It  may  be 
seen  from  documents  which  refer  to  the  recruiting  of 
the  French  army,  that  annually  nearly  the  same  num- 
ber of  young  men  liable  to  serve  as  conscripts  must  be 
exempted  on  accoimt  of  a  deficiency  m  fingers  and  in 
teeth ;  on  account  of  deafness,  goitres,  lameness,  dis- 
eases of  the  bones,  weak  constitution,  insufficient  size 
of  body ;  or  on  account  of  being  the  first-born,  or 
of  being  orphans,  or  sons  of  widows,  blind  people,  &c. 
Just  as  constant  appear  the  numbers  of  young  people 
who  are  able  to  read  and  write,  and  those  who  have 
received  no  instruction ;  the  number  of  those  self- 
mutilated  in  order  to  avoid  military  service,  &c.  From 
tlie  following  table,  it  will  be  more  evident  in  what 
degree  conditions  which  appear  to  depend  on  entirely 
accidental  causes  have  a  constant  recurrence.  It  is 
an  accurate  extract  from  a  Report  to  the  King,  lately 
pubUshed  in  France,  regarding  the  recruitment  of  the 
army  :* — 

Number  of  Young  Men  in  France  who  have  been  excused   , 
Military  Service  on  account  of  Bodily  Infirmities. 

Causes  of  Unfitness. 

1831. 

1832. 

1833. 

Wanting  fingers,    ... 

752 

647 

743 

teeth. 

1,304 

1,243 

1,.392 

Deafness  and  dumbness,    - 

830 

736 

725 

Loss  of  other  limbs  or  organs,  - 

1,605 

1,530 

1,580 

Goitres,      -            .            .            . 

1,125 

1,231 

1,298 

Lameness, 

949 

912 

1,049 

Other  deformities. 

8,007 

7,630 

8,494 

Diseases  of  bones, 

782 

617 

(W7 

Short  sighted. 

948 

891 

920 

Other  aflfections  of  the  eyes,     - 

1,726 

1,714 

1,839 

Itch,  (?)      - 

11 

10 

10 

Scald  head. 

749 

800 

794 

Leprosy,      .... 

57 

19 

29 

Other  cutaneous  diseases. 

937 

983 

895 

Scrofulous  aftections, 

1,730 

1,539 

1,272 

Afifections  of  chest. 

561 

423 

359 

Hernia,      .... 

4,044 

3,579 

4,222 

Epilepsy  (falling  sickness), 

463 

367 

342 

Different  other  diseases,    - 

9,168 

9,058 

10,286 

Weakness  of  constitution, 

11,783 

9,979 

11,259 

Insufficient  size  of  body,    - 

15,935 

14,962 

15,078 

Amount  of  whole  class  of  certain  age, 

295,978 

277,477 

285,805 

M.  Quetelet  further  mentions,  that  he  knows,  from 
sources  to  be  depended  on,  that  not  only  the  number 
of  letters  delivered  at  the  post-office  of  Paris  remains 

*  Compte  rendu  au  Roi,  p.  128  and  129.  Similar  examinations 
take  place  in  the  kingdom  of  Wirtembui-g,  and,  as  in  the  above 
case,  the  results  form  a  source  of  valuable  materials  for  medical 
statistics. 

nearly  the  same  every  year,  but  that  also  every  year 
nearly  the  same  number  of  letters  are  found,  which 
have  been  forgotten  to  be  sealed,  or  whicli  could  not 
be  delivered  in  consequence  of  illegible  handwriting, 
or  insufficient  addresses,  &c.  &c.  For  a  long  time 
he  had  endeavoured  to  prove,  that  society  pays  a 
fcarfid  budget  to  crime,  which  perhaps  shows  a  greater 
regularity  than  the  financial  budget :  and  in  a  work 
which  he  lately  published — "  An  Attempt  at  the 
Natural  Philosophy  of  Society" — he  felt  himself  en- 
titled to  say,  that  if  the  statistical  details  published 
by  the  government  were  also  to  make  mention  of 
those  crimes  the  perpetrators  of  which  have  re- 
mained unknoAvn,  their  occurrence  would  not  be  less 
regular.  Tliis  supposition  has  actually  found  a  com- 
plete confirmation  in  our  country,  in  the  reports 
made  to  the  minister  of  justice,  and  which  will  be 
published  forthwith.  There  exists  too  strict  a  con- 
nexion between  the  phenomena  presented  by  society, 
and  between  the  causes  of  which  they  are  the  effects, 
to  be  neglected  any  longer  by  the  philosopher  and 
statesman;  and,  without  doubt,  the  science  which 
has  this  study  for  its  object,  will  occupy,  in  course 
of  time,  a  high  rank  in  the  scale  of  human  know- 
ledge. 

No.  II. 

ADDITION  TO  THE  SECOND  DIVISION  OF  THE  FIRST  BOOK. 

Influence  of  the  Seasons  upon  Births. 

M.  Ramon  de  la  Sagra,  in  his  History  of  the  Island 
of  Cuba,*  has  given  a  comparative  view  of  the  number 
of  births  of  the  white  and  coloured  population  in 
Havanna,  according  to  the  months  of  the  year.  From 
the  ciphers  we  reprint  here,  it  Avill  be  seen  how  much 
geographical  latitude  modifies  the  results  which  we 
have  observed  in  our  climates,  although  the  place 
mentioned  is  situated  in  the  northern  hemisphere. 
The  following  ciphers  include  the  observations  of  five 
years,  from  1825  to  1829  :— 

January, 

Februarj', 

March, 

April, 

May, 

June,    - 

July, 

August, 

September, 

October, 

November, 

December, 

Total, 

Births. 

Among 
the  White 
Population. 

624 
573 
60<J 
6.36 
634 
659 
661 
694 
736 
772 
713 

700 

Coloured 
Population. 

703 
596 
627 
638 
651 
620 
698 
741 
760 
736 
706 
774 

1,327 
1,169 
1,227 
1,274 
1,285 
1,279 
1,359 
1,435 
1,496 
1,508 
1,419 
1,474 

16,252 

*  Historia  Economico-Politica  y  Estadistica  de  la  Isla  de  Cuba, 
p.  35.    Havanna :    1831.    4to. 

no 

ON  MAN. 

According  to  this  table,  the  greatest  number  of 
births  in  Havannah  occurs  in  October,  and  the  fewest 
between  February  and  May.  This  is  nearly  the 
opposite  of  that  distribution  of  births  for  the  seasons 
observed  in  Europe. 

No.  III. 

ADDITION  TO  THE  THIRD  SECTION  OF  THE  FIBST  BOOK. 

Mortality  of  Lying-in  Women. 

M.  Casper  communicates,  in  his  excellent  work  on 
the  Relations  of  Mortality  {Die  Wahrsckeinliche  Le- 
bensdauer  des  Menschen,  ^c),  "  The  probable  Duration 
of  Human  Life,"  p.  51,  the  following  results  relative 
to  the  mortality  of  women  at  child-birth  in  the  Prus- 
sian monarchy.     There  were — 

Bom. 

Died  in 
ChUd-Bed. 

In  the  years  1817  tiU  1826  (inclusive),      4,955,672  44,772 

1826  ~    1828  -  499,507  4,539 

1828  ~    1829  ~  495,483  4,615 

^  1829  ~   1830  ~  497,241  4,441 

1830  ~    1831  ~  490,524  4,710 

1831  -,    1832  ~  481,959  4,677 

ToUl, 

7,420,386  67,754 

If  from  this  number  of  births  the  regular  recurring 
number  of  twins  and  triplets,  amounting  to  about 
94,000,  are  deducted,  it  follows  that  of  108  women  in 
chUd-bed,  one  died.  According  to  Lubbock,  there 
died  in  the  ten  years,  from  1818  to  1827,  only  one 
woman  in  child-bed  of  117. 

No.  IV. 

ADDITION  TO  THE  FIFTH  SECTION  OF  THE  FIRST  BOOK. 

Extract  from  the  Bulletin  de  VAcademie  Royale  des 
Sciences  de  Bruxelles :  1835.    No.  1,  p.  129. 

M.  Quetelet  commmiicated,  in  consequence  of  a 
paper  transmitted  by  M.  Villerme  on  the  population 
of  Great  Britain,  the  following  accounts  regarding  the 
mortality  in  Belgium : — "  Science  has  of  late  been 
enriched  by  several  important  works  *  on  the  statis- 
tics of  Britain,  especially  on  the  relations  of  mortahty 
in  that  country.  The  different  docimients  they  con- 
tain have  confirmed  most  distinctly  a  fact  which  I 
have  for  some  time  believed  to  exist,  and  which  ought 
to  have  been  pointed  out  by  MM.  Villerme  and  Fran- 
(,'ois  d'lvernois — the  fact,  namely,  that  tlie  population 
of  Britain  has  not  so  great  a  claim  as  commonly  sup- 
posed to  a  much  smtiUer  mortality  than  the  other 
states  of  Europe. 

I  have  already  observed,  in  a  paper  which  was  read 
to  the  Royal  Academy  of  Sciences  at  Paris,t  that  in 
Britain,  for  every  two  children  there  arc  only  to  be 
found  three  individuals  above  fifteen  years  of  age, 
and  in  the  United  States  even  fewer ;  whilst  in  France, 
Sweden,  and  Belgium,  at  least  four  are  to  be  found. 
Indeed,  this  disproportion  principally  arises  from  the 
rapid  increase  of  population,  as  it  subsisted  of  late  in 
Britain  and  the  United  States.  Most  of  the  children 
who  are  the  fruit  of  this  great  development  of  ferti- 
lity not  yet  being  far  advanced  in  the  career  of  life, 
the  number  of  adult  individuals  resulting  from  them 

*  Tlie  principal  works  are : — 

Abstracts  of  the  Answers  and  Returns,  &c.  By  Kickman. 
3  vols.  4to.   1831. 

Tables  of  the  Revenue,  PopiUation,  Commerce,  &c.  By  Porter. 
2  vols,  folio.    1K«. 

A  Digest  of  all  the  Accounts,  &e.    By  Marshall.   1833. 

On  the  Natural  and  Mathematical  Laws  concerning  Popula- 
tion, &c.    By  Francis  Corbaux.    1  vol.  8vo.    183.1. 

t  8th  September  1R34.  Sec  the  journal  L'Institut,  No.  71,  20th 
September  1834 ;  and  Le  Tempt,  18th  September  1834. 

must  be  proportionally  small.  M.  Villerme,  our  cor- 
respondent, as  member  of  the  French  Institute,  has 
considered  the  question  under  another  point  of  view. 
This  gentleman  has,  in  a  paper  on  the  population  of 
Great  Britain,*  compared  Rickman's  tables  of  morta- 
lity for  England,  those  of  Duvillard  for  France,  and 
those  I  have  pubhshed  for  Belgium  (the  one  in  my 
Annnaire  de  VObservatoire,  the  other  in  a  manuscript 
paper  read  at  a  meeting  of  the  Academy  for  Moral 
and  Political  Science  at  Paris) :  it  results  from  this 
comparison,  that  the  '  probable  duration  of  the  life  of 
children  at  their  birth,  is  in  Great  Britain  about  two 
years  longer  than  in  Belgium.'  With  individuals  of 
1  to  30  years  of  age,  the  case  is  the  reverse.  AVe  may 
wager  100  to  100  that  a  person  may  Hve  in  Belgium 
from  1  to  3  years  longer  than  individuals  of  the  same 
age  born  and  brought  up  in  Britain.  Further,  the 
probability  of  the  duration  of  life  with  indiAdduals  from 
30  to  40  years  of  age  is  in  both  countries  precisely 
the  same ;  and  only  at  the  age  of  45  the  probable 
duration  of  life  is  somewhat  more  in  favour  of  the 
English  than  of  the  Belgians ;  but  the  difference 
amounts  at  most  to  only  one  year.  In  the  face  of  these 
facts,  from  which  it  is  evident  that  the  mortality  in 
Britain  is  not  lower  than  in  Belgium,  it  appears  very 
probable  that  life,  at  the  moment  of  birth,  in  the  for- 
mer is  the  safer  possession  than  in  the  latter,  where, 
with  the  child  of  one  year  old,  the  probable  duration 
of  life  is  at  least  for  a  year  and  a  half  longer  than  in 
England ;  and  that  on  the  other  side  of  the  channel 
there  dies  every  3'ear  1  in  49,  whilst  in  Belgium,  ac- 
cording to  the  results  of  the  j'ears  from  1825  to  1829, 
the  proportion  of  deaths  in  relation  to  the  population 
is  about  1  to  43  years,  because  every  where,  one 
annual  death  for  40  or  41  inhabitants  is  a  low  morta- 
lity, at  least  when  the  country  in  question  is  of  a 
pretty  large  size.  Herein,  also,  are  to  be  found  new 
reasons  to  consider  the  list  of  mortality  for  England, 
more  especially  regarding  those  for  young  children 
as  incomplete. 

To  facilitate  forming  an  opinion  on  this  subject, 
M.  Villerme  has  compared  the  tables  of  population 
for  England  and  Belgium,f  concluding  from  his  table 
that  there  is  a  marked  advantage  in  favour  of  Bel- 
gium, which  proportionally  has  fcAver  children,  but 
keeps  them  better,  and  has  proportionally  more  grown- 
up individuals.  It  will  be,  moreover,  advisable,  as  I 
have  already  observed,  to  pay  attention  to  the  rapidly 
increasing  population  in  England,  which  contributes 
to  place  that  country  in  a  less  favourable  position  than 
ours.  According  to  Duvillard,  the  ciphers  of  France 
are  on  the  whole  less  favourable  than  those  of  Bel- 
gium and  England. 

MM.  Hayer  and  Lombard  have  of  late  also  com- 
pared the  mortality  of  Geneva  with  that  of  Belgium 
and  France :  %  it  results  from  their  investigations  that 
in  the  two  latter  countries  the  number  of  deaths  in 
the  first  year  of  life  are  far  more  numerous  than  in 
Geneva.  The  following  are  the  principal  results  of 
the  comparison  which  they  have  made  regarding  the 
probable  duration  of  life  between  the  three  countries, 
proceeding  on  the  base  of  their  tables  of  mortality, 
and  on  those  of  Duvillard  and  mv  own  for  cities : — 

Probable  Duration  of  Life. 

In  France. 

In  Belgium. 

In  Geneva. 

At  Birth, 

At   5  years  of  age, 

-  30 

„  50 

204  years. 
453     '- 
29f      ~ 
16*      ~ 

25  years. 
50      ~ 
34      - 

m   ~ 

47s  years. 
52f     „ 
34       „ 
18J     - 

From  this  comparison,  the  advantage  in  the  early 
period  of  life  is  on  the  side  of  Geneva ;  but  at  the  age 
of  30,  the  probable  duration  of  life  is  not  longer  than 

♦  Annalcs  d'llygicne,  tome  xii.  partie  2. 
t  Annuaire  de  VObservatoire  de  Bruxelles. 
:t  Recherches  Statistiques  surlaMortalite  dela  Ville  de  Genfeve, 
and  Bibljotheque  Universelle.    August  1834. 

ON  MAN. 

Ill 

in  Belgium,  and  it  even  then  diminishes.  The  scien- 
tific men  of  Geneva  observed,  that  if  90  years  were 
to  be  taken  as  the  extreme  old  age,  the  proportion  of 
individuals  of  this  age  to  the  number  of  births  would 
be  the  standard  for  longevity.  Thus,  we  shall  find — 
in  Geneva,  0-0063  for  males,  0-0113  for  females ;  ave- 
rage, 0-0089  :  in  Belgimii,  0-0068  :  in  England,  from 
the  official  tables  from  1813  to  1830,  only  0-0065.  It 
follows,  from  the  preceding  comparisons,  that  Belgium, 
with  regard  to  its  mortality,  does  not  labour  under 
any  disadvantage  when  compared  with  England  and 
Geneva — two  countries  which  have  hitherto  been 
considered  the  most  favoured — excepting,  perhaps,  in 
regard  to  the  mortality  of  children. 

No.  V. 

ON  THE  MORTALITY  (NATURAL  AND  ACCTDENTAL  DEATHS  IN- 
CLUDED) OF  THE  EUROPEAN  TROOPS  OF  THE  ENGLISH  ARMY 
IN  THE  EAST  INDIES,  IN  A  PERIOD  OF  FIVE  YEARS,  FROM 
1826  TO  1830. 

On  the  whole,  we  possess  few  notices  on  the  mor- 
tality of  Europeans  Avho  have  lived  Avithin  degrees 
of  latitude  differing  much  from  their  natural  cUmate. 
The  following  documents,  therefore,  which  I  owe  to 
the  kindness  of  A.  M'Culloch,  Esq.,  of  the  War-Office, 
must  be  acceptable  to  the  reader.  This  able  statis- 
tician, to  whom  we  owe  very  interesting  investiga- 
tions, observes,  that  hitherto  it  has  been  possible  to 
arrive  at  results  only  somewhat  correct  regarding 
children  and  females : — 

PRESIDENCY  OF  BOMBAY. 

Number  of  troops, 

Cases  of  death, 

Usual  number  of  patients, 

PRESIDENCY  OP   BENGAI,. 

Number  of  troops, 

Cases  of  death, 

Usual  number  of  patients, 

PRESIDENCY  OP  MADRAS. 

Number  of  troops. 
Cases  of  death, 
Usual  number  of  patients 
not  given  under  this  head 

1826. 

1827. 

1828. 

1829. 

1830. 

279.3 

3135 

3175 

3632 

3876 

3(15 

162 

2(>4 

1«7 

147 

481 

347 

368 

358 

383 

797C 

8761 

8916 

8C80 

9520 

774 

522 

549 

575 

362 

846 

888 

882 

879 

721 

6626 

6686 

7986 

8064 

8774 

614 

509 

386 

266 

199 

3322 
185 
387 

8770 
556 
843 

7630 
305 

From  these   ciphers, 
suit : — 

the  following  proportions  re- 

Per  1000  Men. 

Bombay. 

Bengal. 

Madras. 

Cases  of  deaths. 

Sick,      .... 

55 
116 

63 

96 

52 

(?) 

This  gives  an  average  of  about  57  cases  of  deaths  per 
1000  men,  or  1  death  for  17-5. 

In  respect  to  the  kinds  of  diseases  producing  these 
deaths,  they  may  be  arranged  as  follows : — 

Cases  of  Deaths. 

Annual  Number 
per  1000. 

Names  of  Diseases. 

?? 

^ 

£ 

^ 

i 

1 

g 

1 

M 

a 
a 

s 

■§ 

s 

Fever,         ... 

267 

735 

405 

15-9 

16-8 

11-0 

Affections  of  the  limgs,    - 
~.        of  the  liver,  - 

43 
80 

100 
180 

82 
170 

2-5 
4-2 

2-2 
41 

2-2 
4-5 

~        of  the  stomach! 
and  bowels,         -        -    ' 

272 

872 

819 

16-2 

19-7 

21-2 

Cholera  morbus. 

173 

623 

306 

100 

14-2 

80 

Affections  of  the  brain. 

21 

98 

27 

1-2 

21 

0-6 

Dropsy,   .        .         -        . 
Other  cases  of  deaths,  - 

12 
57 

25 
149 

28 
141 

0-7 

4-3 

0-5 
3-4 

0-7 

3-8 

Total, 

925 

2782 

1978 

55-0 

63-0 

52-0 

The  mean  mortality  (expressed  in  per  cents.),  shows, 
amongst  the  European  officers  of  the  Indian  army, 
the  following  results : — 

Rank. 

Bombay. 

Bengal. 

Madras. 

Colonels, 

Lieutenant-colonels, 
Majors, 
Captains,  - 
Lieutenants,    - 
Ensigns,    . 

5-74 
5-45 

3-77 
3-78 
3-96 
3-15 

5-94 
4-84 
4-10 
3-45 
2-75 
2-34 

5-40 
611 
5-42 
5-02 
4-17 
3-80 

The  general  mean  of  all  ranks,  including  surgeons 
and  assistant-surgeons,  was  3-85. 

During  the  last  20  years,  there  died  of  the  army  of 
Bengal  1184  officers,  or  59-2  annually  of  the  average 
number  of  1897  individuals :  this  gives  3-12  per 
cent. 

The  mean  duration  of  life  of  the  deceased  was,  in 
81  Colonels,  -  -  -  -  61  years. 

97  Lieutenant-colonels,  -  .  -51    „ 

78  Majors,  -  .  .  .  40    ~ 

277  Captains,    -  .  -  -  -      36    ~ 

We  add  to  the  comparative  view  another,  pointing 
out  the  mortality  of  civilians  in  the  India  Company's 
service  in  Bengal,  during  the  years  from  1792  to 
1836,  according  to  their  several  ages  and  nmnber  of 
years  of  service : — 

Number  of 
Years  of 
Service. 

1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 

7 

8 

9 
10 
11 
12 
13 
14 
15 
IC 
17 
18 
19 
20 
21 
22 
23 
24 
25 
26 
27 
28 
29 
30 
30  to  45 

Age. 

20 
21 
22 
23 
24 
25 
26 
27 
28 
29 
30 
31 
32 
33 
34 
35 
36 
37 
38 
39 
40 
41 
42 
43 
44 
45 
46 
47 
48 
49 

50  toe 

Number  of 
Civilians. 

975 
933J 
906h 
87-4  i 
835J 

7m 

754 

694J 

638 

577i 

545 

519J 

489 

468 

448 

424 

403 

376i 

351 

324i 

293i 

270 

239 

216 

196 

167i 

148 

129 

114^ 

101^ 

Cases  of 
Deaths. 

Retired 

from  the 
Service. 

If  we  put  together  these  ciphers  in  periods,  we 
arrive  at  the  following  comparative  view : — 

Number  of 

Years  of 

Age. 

Service. 

1  to  5 

20  to  24 

6  to  10 

25  to  29 

11  to  1.5* 

30  to  34 

16  to  20 

35  to  39 

21  to  25t 

40  to  44 

26  to  30 

45  to  49 

,30  to  43 

50  to  64 

Number  of 
Civilians. 

4525 
*154i 
2469| 
1879 
1214i 
660i 

Cases  of 
Deaths. 

of  Deaths 
per  10,000. 

199 
208 
166 
204 
354 
364 
486 

Retired 
from  the 
Service. 

In  the  United  Service  Journal,  we  find  several  no- 
tices by  Mr  M'Culloch  on  the  mortality  of  officers  of 
the  British  armj'. 

*  After  ten  years  of  service  in  India,  every  oflScer  may  return 
for  three  years  to  England.  Many  avail  themselves  of  this  per- 
mission, which  evidently  contributes  to  the  decrease  of  morta- 
lity. 

t  After  twenty  years'  service,  many  oflScers  return  to  Britain, 
which  likewise  contributes  to  the  decrease  of  the  mortality. 

112 

ON  MAN. 

No.  VI. 

EXTRACT  FROM  THE  "  BULLETIN  DE  l'aCADEMIE  ROYALE 
DBS  SCIENCES  DE  BRUXELLES"  :  1835.  No.  10.  CON- 
CERNING THE  MORTALITY  AT  BRUSSELS. 

M.  Quetelet  communicated  to  the  academy  the  re- 
sults of  the  late  census,  according  to  which  the  num- 
ber of  inhabitants  of  Brussels  amounts  to  102,702,  the 
garrison  not  included,  which  consists  of  from  2000 
to  3000  men.  According  to  the  tables  of  population, 
there  took  place  in  the  year  1834 — 

4230  Births, 
3862  Deaths,  - 
1092  Marriages, 
8  Divorces. 

Consequently,  1  to  26  inhabitants 
1  to   29 
1  to  100 

Before  the  census,  the  number  of  inhabitants  for 
Brussels  was  calculated  at  94,000.  M.  Quetelet  thinks 
that  even  the  present  cipher  is  still  too  low ;  and,  in 
the  preceding  calculation,  he  believes  he  is  entitled 
to  estimate  it  at  1 10,000,  the  garrison  included.  He 
supports  his  supposition,  by  considering  the  number 
of  births,  deaths,  and  marriages,  according  to  which, 
Brussels  would  present  less  favourable  conditions  than 
most  of  the  great  cities  of  Europe,  as  he  has  already 
shown  in  hi^  Essay  on  the  Natural  Philosophy  of  So- 
ciety. However,  we  must  not  lose  sight  of  the  circum- 
stance, that  the  number  of  deaths  in  a  great  city  is 
always  augmented  hy  the  number  of  diseased  strangers 
who  swell  up  the  tables  of  mortality  in  the  hospitals, 
or  by  those  who  go  there  to  receive  efficient  assist- 
ance in  their  sufiFerings. 

No.  vn. 

REMARKS  ON  THE  JIORTALITY  IN  EPIDEMICS. 

Epidemics  modify  the  mortality  in  a  very  remark- 
able manner,  and  the  importance  of  the  phenomena 
of  disease  in  individuals  bears  by  no  means  a  proper 
ratio  to  the  general  result  of  the  tables  of  mortality. 
If  the  study  of  epidemics  had  been  properly  followed, 
we  should  have  tables  as  interesting  for  science  as 
useful  to  mankind.  Several  instances  might  be  ad- 
duced to  prove  this.  I  shall  here  content  myself  with 
citing  one :  the  cholera  morbus  and  influenza  are  dis- 
eases Avhich  differ  greatly  from  each  other ;  the  one 
is  a  dreadful  scourge,  which  manifests  itself  in  the 
most  fearful  manner ;  the  other,  in  its  ordinary  exter- 
nal appearance,  resembles  a  catarrh  or  common  cold ; 
and  yet  the  tables  of  mortality  prove  that,  although 
the  latter  disease  is  not  so  deadly,  it  nevertheless,  in 
consequence  of  its  universality,  and  in  consequence  of 
the  sufferings  it  causes,  produces  results  nearly  as 
extensively  fatal  as  cholera.  Facts,  serving  to  confirm 
this  opinion,  may  be  found  in  the  excellent  work  pub- 
lished by  Dr  Gluge  on  the  History  of  Influenza.*  They 
show,  moreover,  that  mortality  in  epidemics  is  prin- 
cipally confined  to  childhood  and  to  old  age — those 
periods  which,  in  the  common  course  of  things,  have 
the  smaller  probabihty  of  life. 

No.  VIII. 

INFLUENCE  OF  SEASONS  UPON  MORTALITY. 

In  the  work  of  M.  Ramond  de  la  Sagra,  may  be 
found  several  interesting  notices  regarding  the  mor- 
tality in  Havannah.  The  following  ciphers  are  the 
results  of  five  years,  namely,  from  1825  to  1829  : — 

*  Die  Influenza  Oder  Grippe  u.  s.  w.  Minden :  1837.    8vo. 

Months. 

Cases  of  Deaths. 

White 

Coloured 

Total. 

Population. 

Population. 

January, 

545 

938 

1483 

February,  - 

536 

831 

1367 

March,   ■• 

597 

900 

1497 

April, 

487 

760 

1247 

May, 

535 

731 

1266 

June, 

501 

668 

1169 

July,       - 

589 

793 

1382 

August , 

550 

736 

1286 

September,     - 

492 

689 

1181 

October,     - 

548 

752 

1300 

November,     - 

416 

709 

1125 

December, 

508 

756 

1264 

Total,    - 

6304 

9263 

15,567 

The  mortality  in  the  hospital,  amongst  strangers,  does 
not  exhibit  quite  the  same  proportion.  The  following 
table  gives  a  view  of  the  mortality  in  the  Hospitals  of 
San  Ambrosio  and  San  Juan  de  Dios,  in  the  years 
1825  to  1829,  and  the  mortality  of  strangers  during 
the  years  1820  to  1824  :— 

Months. 

San  Ambrosio. 

San  Juan. 

Strangers. 

January, 

76 

162 

44 

February,  - 

65 

133 

65 

March,    - 

92 

184 

91 

April, 

103 

145 

84 

May,       - 

146 

149 

169 

June, 

167 

195 

170 

July,       - 

158 

203 

169 

August, 

132 

198 

140 

September,     - 

128 

247 

118 

October,     - 

123 

240 

73 

November,     - 

.93 

196 

50 

December,  - 

97 

277 

56 

Total, 

1830 

2329 

1229 

As  far  as  the  first  ciphers  are  concerned,  it  will  be 
seen  that  the  winter  months,  and  the  months  of  July, 
August,  and  October,  exhibit  the  greatest  mortality ; 
but  the  unfortunate  individuals  received  into  the 
hospitals,  and  the  strangers,  are  especially  subject  to 
the  deleterious  influence  of  the  summer  heat.  If  we 
compare,  in  respect  to  strangers,  the  mortaUty  of  the 
month  of  December  with  that  of  June  and  July,  we 
find  an  increase  in  the  latter  nearly  fourfold.  How- 
ever, we  ought  to  know,  in  order  to  arrive  at  a  correct 
opinion,  what  the  average  number  of  strangers  may 
be  in  Havannah  during  the  seasons  thus  contrasted. 

We  owe  to  the  kindness  of  Mr  M'Culloch,  informa- 
tion regarding  the  mortahty  in  the  island  of  Malta, 
during  14  years,  in  a  population  osciUating  between 
96,000  and  103,000  inhabitants ;  thus  giving  an  ave- 
rage of  100,000  souls.     They  are  as  follows : — 

Months.  Cases  of  Deaths. 

January,  -  -  -  -  -      2920 

February,        ....  -  2773 

March, 2786 

April,  -  .  .  -  .  2404 

May,  ......      2292 

June, 2568 

July,  ......      3075 

August,  ....  2919 

September,  .....      2675 

October,  .....  3081 

November,  .....     3013 

December,       ......  2995 

Months  unknown,  ...  802 

Total,    .....        31,303 

Wc  observe  here  again,  as  in  the  ciphers  of  Havan- 
nah, a  tendency  to  a  maximum  of  deaths  during  sum- 
mer, as  a  consequence  of  heat. 

Here  follow  a  few  notices  regarding  the  mortality 
of  tropical  climates,  to  be  found  in  the  work  of  Mr  A. 
S.  Thomson,  on  the  influence  of  climate  on  heiilth.* 

*  Ohservations  on  the  Influence  of  Climate  on  Health  and  Morta- 
lity. 8vo.  Edinburgh  :  1837.  See  .also  the  work  by  Dr  Annesley, 
On  the  Climate  of  India.  London:  1825.  Also  the  Medicul 
Almanac,  by  Farre,  for  1837. 

ON  MAN. 

113 

The  first  numbers  inform  us  of  the  relative  niontlily 
mortahty  of  the  Englisli  troops  in  the  Windward  and 
Lcewai'd  Islands.  The  others  refer  to  3149  individuals 
of  the  native  troops  in  the  Presidency  of  Madras,  and 
3017  of  the  English  troops,  who  were  received  during 
1815  into  the  hospitals. 

Mortality 

Presidency  of  Madras — Sick. 

in  the 
"Windward 

Months. 

and  Leeward 

Native 

English 

Islands. 

Troops. 

Troops. 

January,  - 

65 

125 

74 

Februarj',     - 

48 

63 

64 

3March, 

42 

60 

70 

April,  - 

57 

48 

74 

May, 

59 

54 

84 

June,    - 

69 

85 

87 

July, 

87 

104 

109 

August, 

119 

93 

81 

September, 

114 

74 

73 

October, 

133 

113 

105 

November, 

109 

94 

82 

December,    - 

97 

07 

97 

Total, 

1000 

ICXIO 

1000 

Also  here  we  observe,  in  the  time  of  the  great  sum- 
mer heat,  and  in  consequence  of  it,  a  greater  mortality 
and  more  numerous  cases  of  sickness.  We  may  there- 
fore be  well  assured,  that  extremes  of  cold  and  heat 
are  equally  deleterious  to  our  species. 

No.  IX. 

ADDITION  TO  THE  SEVENTH  SECTION  OF  THE  FIRST  BOOK. 

On  the  Law  of  the  Increase  of  Population. 

Since  the  publication  of  my  work,  M.  Verhulst,  of 
the  Military  Academy  of  Brussels,  has  submitted  to 
analysis  my  hypothesis  on  the  law  of  the  increase  of 
population.  This  hypothesis  rests  on  the  supposition 
of  an  analogy  between  the  movement  of  the  popula- 
tion, mider  the  difficulties  which  oppose  the  increase, 
and  between  a  moveable  body  which  falls  tlu-ough  a 
resisting  medium.  The  results  of  this  comparison 
agree  very  well  with  the  data  furnished  by  statistics, 
and  witli  those  derived  from  calculation,  if  we  sup- 
pose an  infinitely  increasing  density  in  the  different 
layers  of  the  resisting  medium.  The  fornndas  on 
which  the  calculations  and  the  results  regarding  the 
population  of  Belgium,  France,  and  Prussia,  are  based, 
may  be  found  in  the  second  part  of  the  series  of 
the  Correspondance  Mathematique  de  V Observatoire  de 
BruxeUes.  (See  p.  113,  and  following.)  We  may  say 
that  the  statistical  data  have  not  yet  been  collected 
in  so  comprehensive  a  manner  as  accurately  to  per- 
mit us  to  reduce  from  our  hypothesis,  by  calculation, 
aU  the  consequences  to  be  derived  from  it  regarding 
the  intensity  of  tlie  difllculties  met  M-ith  by  the  popu- 
lation in  its  increase. 

No.  X. 

ADDITIONS  TO  THE  THREE  FIRST  SECTIONS  OF  THE 
SECOND  DOOK. 

On  the  Results  of  Experiments  niade  on  the  Weight, 
Height,  and  Strength  of  above  800  individuals.  By 
James  D.  Forbes,  Esq.,  F.B.SS.  L.  Sf  E.,  Pro- 
fessor of  Natural  Philosophy  in  the  University  of 
Edinburgh.* 

The  interesting  and  remarkable  experiments  pub- 
Ushed  by  M.  Quetelet,  of  Brussels,  on  various  points 
of  physical  development  in  man,  under  a  variety  of 
circumstances,  as  to  climate,  station,  age,  and  sex, 
induced  me  to  take  the  opportunity  which  my  pro- 

*  Read  to  tlie  Royal  Society  of  Edinburgh,  and  communicated 
by  the  author. 

fessional  position  presented  of  obtaining  the  measure 
of  physical  development  as  to  the  weight,  height,  and 
strength  of  natives  of  Scotland,  between  the  ages  of 
14  and  25,  students  in  our  university. 

In  the  prosecution  of  this  plan,  separate  lists  Tvere 
kept  of  persons  not  born  in  Scotland,  and  of  these  the 
English  and  Irish  lists  have  likewise  been  subjected 
to  calculation.  Though  of  these  the  numbers  are 
comparatively  small,  the  results  present  some  pretty 
decisive  characters.  These  experiments  Avere  conti- 
nued during  two  winters  (1834-5,  1835-6) :  every 
experiment  was  made  by  myself,  and  noted  doAvn  by 
myself.  The  weights  were  ascertained  by  Marriot's 
spring-balance,  which  was  verified  from  time  to  time, 
and  found  to  have  undergone  no  change  in  its  elasticity. 
The  weight  of  clothes  is  included.*  The  heights  are 
in  EngUsh  inches,  shoes  included.  For  the  measiu-e 
of  strength,  Kegnier's  dynamometer  was  employed, 
and  these  experiments  were  somewhat  less  satisfac- 
tory than  the  others.  The  error  of  the  instrument 
had  been  ascertained  before  the  commencement  of  the 
experiments,  and  was  found  to  be  pretty  constant 
throughout  the  scale.  But  after  the  experiments  were 
finished,  this  was  by  no  means  the  case,  the  error 
having  become  variable,  owing  to  the  interfering  ac- 
tion of  a  small  spring  emploj^ed  to  bring  the  index  to 
zero.  As  this,  however,  only  affects  the  absolute  re- 
sults (or,  at  least,  its  relative  influence  is  trifling),  I 
have  contented  myself  with  applying  an  interpolated 
correction  deduced  from  the  mean  of  the  errors  before 
and  after,  which  cannot  differ  much  from  the  truth. 
But  the  instrumental  errors  are  not  the  only  ones  to 
be  contended  with.  To  avoid  errors  in  the  use  of  the 
djTiamometer,  requires  vigilant  superintendence  on 
the  part  of  the  observer ;  and  as  the  first  pull  is  gene- 
rally (though  not  always)  greater  than  the  second  or 
third,  this  also  must  be  allowed  for.  I  have  inva- 
riably repeated  the  experiment  three  times,  and  often 
much  more  frequently.  When  extraordinary  cases 
have  occurred,  I  have  taken  the  precaution  of  observ- 
ing at  distinct  intervals  of  time. 

In  ascertaining  the  mean  results,  the  following 
method  has  been  adopted :  —  The  natives  of  each 
country  were  separated,  and  each  class  divided,  ac- 
cording to  age,  into  twelve  sets,  from  14  to  25,  the 
greatest  number  being  of  the  age  of  18  years.  The 
mean  weiglit,  height,  and  strength  for  each  year  was 
computed,  and  the  result  projected  upon  ruled  paper. 
Curves  were  drawn  through  the  points  thus  projected, 
in  such  a  way  as  to  represent  most  satisfactorily  the 
whole  observations.  These  curves,  with  the  deter- 
mining points,  are  now  exhibited  to  the  society.  It 
is  proper  to  add,  that  the  ages  registered  being  the 
ages  at  last  birthday,  the  weight,  &c.,  registered,  is 
not  that  due  to  the  age  noted,  but  at  a  mean  to  an 
age  half  a  year  later.  Thus,  all  the  persons  who  were 
20  last  birthday,  are  between  the  ages  of  20  and  21, 
or  20^  at  a  mean.  This  has  been  attended  to  in 
making  the  projections. 

Besides  the  EngUsh,  Scotch,  and  Irish  curves,  I 
have  exhibited  those  of  the  Belgian  development,  from 
M.  Quetelet's  experiments,  reduced  to  English  mea- 
sures. The  thickness  of  the  shoes  not  being  included 
in  these  experiments,  half  an  inch  (perhaps  too  little) 
has  been  added  to  make  them  comparable  with  the 
others.  It  is  important  to  add,  that  M.  Quetelet's 
experiments  here  quoted,  as  well  as  my  own,  were 
made  upon  persons  in  the  higher  ranks  of  life — in  both 
cases,  in  fact,  upon  persons  having  the  benefit  of  aca- 
demical instruction. 

The  number  of  persons  examined  by  me  in  the  two 
winters  before  stated,  was  thus  divided : —  Scotchmen, 
523;  Englishmen,  178;  Irishmen,  72;  from  the  colo- 
nies, &c.,  56 ;  total,  829,  I  was  careful  to  obtain  a 
fair  average  of  persons  of  all  degi-ees  of  height  and 

*  According  to  Quetelet,  this  amounts  to  one-eighteenth  of  the 
weight. 

114 

ON  MAN. 

btrength,  iu  which  respect  the  Scotch  average  is  more 
linexceptioiiable  than  the  others.  There  is  always  a 
tendency  in  such  cases  to  get  too  high  a  development, 
because  duninutive  persons  are  the  least  likely  Tolun- 
tarily  to  come  forward.  An  example  of  this  is  found 
in  the  mean  height  obtained  by  M.  Quetelet,  from  a 
register  of  80  individuals  at  Cambridge,  between  the 
ages  of  18  and  23,  giving  a  mean  of  69'6  inches,  in- 
stead of  687,  as  my  experiments  indicate. 

The  numerical  results  derived  from  the  graphical 
process  before  described,  are  given  at  the  close  of  the 
paper,  and  seem  to  warrant  the  following  conclu- 
sions : — 

1.  That  in  respect  of  weight,  height,  and  strength, 
there  is  a  general  coincidence  in  the  form  of  the 
curves  with  those  of  M.  Quetelet. 

2.  The  British  curves  seem  to  have  more  curva- 
ture for  the  earlier  years  (14  to  17),  or  the  progress 
to  maturity  is  then  more  rapid,  and  somewhat  slower 
afterwards.  If  we  may  depend  upon  the  Enghsh 
curves,  this  is  more  strikingly  the  case  in  natives  of 
that  country  than  of  Scotland,  at  least  in  point  of 
weight  and  strength. 

3.  The  tables  incontestibly  prove  the  superior  deve- 
lopment of  natives  of  this  country  over  the  Belgians. 
The  difference  is  greatest  in  strength  (one-fifth  of  the 
whole),  and  least  in  weight. 

4.  In  comparing  natives  of  England,  Scotland,  and 
Ireland,  more  doubt  arises,  owing  to  the  difference  in 
the  number  of  experiments ;  those  for  Ireland  are 
confessedly  most  imperfect.  Yet  I  conceive  that  the 
coincident  results  in  the  three  tables,  entitle  us  to 
conclude  that  the  Irish  are  more  developed  than  the 
Scotch  at  a  given  age,  and  the  English  less.  Some 
qualification  is,  however,  due,  in  consequence  of  the 
remark  (2) ;  for  in  the  earlier  years  (14-17),  it  would 
even  appear  that  the  English  so  far  get  the  start  of 
the  Scotch,  as  not  only  relatively,  but  also  absolutely, 
to  surpass  them  (in  strength  and  weight)  ;  but  between 
17  and  19  they  lose  this  advantage.  I  am  disposed  to 
think  that  this  appearance  of  a  result  is  not  accidental. 

5.  The  maximum  height  seems  scarcely  to  be  at- 
tained even  at  the  age  of  25.  This  agrees  with  M. 
Quetelet's  observations.  Both  strength  and  weight 
are  rapidly  increasing  at  that  age. 

6.  In  the  given  period  of  hfe  (14-26)  aU  the  deve- 
lopments continue  to  increase ;  and  all  move  slowly 
from  the  commencement  to  the  end  of  that  period. 
Hence  the  curves  are  convex  upwards.  [This  is  not 
the  case  below  the  age  of  14,  for  weight  and  strength. 
— Quetelet.'] 

AVeights  in  Pounds  (including  clothes). 

Age. 

15  years, 

16  ~ 

17  -   - 

18  ~ 

19  ~   - 

20  ~ 

21  ~   - 

22  ~ 

23  ~   - 

24  - 

25  „   - 

English. 

Scotch. 

Irish. 

114-5 

112 

127 

125-5 

129 

133-5 

131-5 

136 

138 

139 

141-5 

141 

143 

14.5-5 

144 

146-5 

148 

140 

148-5 

151 

147-5 

15f) 

153 

149 

151 

154 

1.50 

152 

155 

151 

152-5 

155 

Belgians. 

102 

117-5 

127 

134 

139-5 

143 

145-5 

147 

148-5 

149-5 

150 

Heights  in  Inches.    Full  Dimensions  (with  shoes). 

Age. 

English. 

Scotch. 

Irish. 

Belgians. 

15  years, 

64  4 

04-7 

61-8 

16     ~       - 

665 

60-8 

64-2 

17     ~   -        - 

C7-5 

07-0 

66-1 

18     -       - 

081 

68-5 

68-7 

67-2 

19     „    - 

68-5 

68-9 

69-4 

67-7 

20     .,       -        - 

08-7 

69-1 

69-8 

67-9 

21     -    - 

68-8 

09-2 

70-0 

680 

22     ~        - 

08-9 

69-2 

70-1 

68-1 

23     -    - 

68-9 

69-3 

70-2 

68-2 

24     ~        -         - 

68-9 

09-3 

70-2 

68-2 

25     ~    - 

68-9 

69-3 

70-2 

68-3 

Strength  in  Pounds. 

Age. 

English. 

Scotch. 

Irish. 

Belgians. 

15  years, 

280 

204 

10     «        - 

a36 

314 

236 

17     ~   -        - 

352 

340 

369 

260 

18     ~       -        - 

364 

360 

389 

280 

19 

.378 

378 

404 

296 

20     ~        - 

385 

3^ 

416 

310 

21     „    -         - 

392 

402 

423 

322 

22     ~        - 

397 

410 

427 

aio 

23     ~    - 

401 

417 

4.30 

335 

24     ~        - 

402 

421 

431 

337 

25     ~    - 

403 

423 

432 

339 

No.  XL 

Extract /rom  the  Correspondance  Mathimatique  et  Phy- 
sique, 1st  Series,  vol.  11.  part  1.     January  1838. 

M.  Horner's  Investigation  into  the  Development  of  the  Growth  of 
Boys  and  Girls. 

Several  years  ago  we  published  tables  to  show  tlie 
degi'ce  of  growth  in  both  sexes  at  different  ages. 
These  tables,  which  at  first  sight  might  seem  merely 
curious,  became  afterwards  of  real  utility,  especially 
in  England.  Their  importance,  indeed,  was  so  much 
felt,  that  it  was  deemed  advisable  to  repeat  our  expe- 
riments in  several  places,  in  order  to  find  a  measure  of 
the  modifications  likely  to  be  produced  in  our  results 
by  circumstances  to  which  we  could  pay  no  attention. 
Thus,  Mr  Eorbes  of  Edinburgh  has  measured  a  great 
number  of  young  Englishmen,  Scotchmen,  and  Irish- 
men, and  a  comparison  of  his  results  with  ours  has 
shown  a  remarkable  correspondence  in  respect  to  the 
gradual  development ;  at  the  same  time,  however,  it 
has,  notwithstanding,  exhibited  a  real  difference  be- 
tween the  mean  height  of  individuals  belonging  to 
different  nations.* 

In  order  to  find  out  the  influence  produced  on  the 
development  of  the  growth  by  working  in  manufac- 
tories, ]Mr  J.  "W.  Cowell  has  made  different  interesting 
observations  at  Manchester  and  Stockport.  The  re- 
sult of  these  has  been  published  in  the  first  volume 
of  the  Factory  Reports,  and  in  an  essay  On  the  Philo- 
sophy of  Society. 

Hitherto  we  have  only  seen,  from  No.  339  of  the 
Penny  Magazine,  July  1837,  that  the  same  experi- 
ments have  also  been  repeated  by  Mr  Horner,  another 
Enghsli  factory  inspector.  Mr  Horner  thought  that 
he  had  observed  that  the  people,  iu  order  to  evade  the 
law  excluding  young  children  from  the  lieavy  work 
in  the  factories,  had  hit  on  the  plan  of  using  false  cer- 
tificates of  age,  and  Mr  Horner,  to  discover  the  fraud, 
resorted  to  a  direct  test.  He  made  use  of  a  table 
similar  to  ours,  and  in  order  to  arrive  at  a  nearer  ap- 
proximation of  the  trutli,  he  resolved  to  institute 
collateral  observations.  ]Mr  Horner,  therefore,  pro- 
cured from  twenty-seven  surgeons,  tlie  measure  of 
16,402  individuals,  of  whom  8469  were  boys,  and  7933 
girls,  of  the  age  from  8  to  14  inclusive,  and  from 
the  following  places — Manchester,  Bolton,  Stockport, 
Preston,  Leeds,  Halifax,  Roclidale,  Huddersfield,  and 
Skipton,  and  the  neighbouring  rural  districts.  The 
following  table  is  an  extract  from  one  of  greater  dimen- 
sions, in  which  the  distinction  has  been  noted  between 
towns  of  first  and  second  rate  magnitude  and  the 
country : — 

*  See  the  Correspondance  MaMmatiqnc,  volume  ix.  page  205 
and  foUowing;  and  Transactions  of  the  Royal  Society,  Edin- 
biirah. 

ON  MAN. 

115 

Age. 

From  8  to  Si  years, 

From  8i  &  below  9  years, 

~      9 

" 

9i     ~ 

~      9^ 

" 

10       ~ 

~     10 

" 

1(%     ~ 

~  m 

~ 

11 

~  11 

" 

\\\      ~ 

~     Ui 

~ 

12       ~ 

-     12 

" 

12J     ~ 

~     12i 

" 

13       ,- 

-,     13 

~ 

\^  ~ 

~  m 

~ 

14 

Number 

of 
Children 

Measured 

327 
267 
339 
272 
527 
438 
418 
375 
574 
506 
550 
421 
664 
577 
559 
478 

767 
712 
660 
618 
1269 
1260 
864 
980 
951 
1029 

boys, 
girls, 
boys, 
girls, 
boys, 
girls, 
boys, 
girls, 
boys, 
girls, 
boys, 
girls, 
boys, 
girls, 
boys, 
girls, 
boys, 
girls, 
boys, 
girls, 
boys, 
girls, 
boys, 
girls, 
boys, 
girls. 

Mean 
Height. 

foot. 
3 
3 
3 
3 
3 
3 
4 
4 
4 
4 
4 
4 
4 
4 
4 
4 
4 
4 
4 
4 
4 
4 
4 
4 
4 

inch. 

94  I 
8ii' 

log  / 
11«  \ 
\\i  ' 
Oi  ) 

0     J 

1 1 
in 

2i  \ 

2i  f 
3^1 
3h  > 
33  \ 
3J  < 

4i  / 

5i  1 

54  / 

6i  ) 

6^  I 

7J  I 

8  / 

Average 

Height  of 

Boys  &  Girls 

taken 

Together. 

foot.   inch. 
3         9i 

3        lOi 

3 

4 

4 

4 

4 

4 

4 

4 

4 

4 

4 

0 
1 

IS 

2i 

3i 

0 

4S 

5i 

Ci 

7J 

The  average,  or  the  mean  heiglit  of  the  young 
people  between  14  and  18  years,  has  been  ascertained 
according  to  the  particular  accounts  given  by  Mr 
Harrison,  surgeon  at  Preston. 

Number  of 

Total  of 

Age. 

Young 

Average 

Mean  Height 

Persons 

Height. 

ni 

Measured. 

both  Sexes. 

foot.  inch. 

foot.  inch. 

From  14  to  15ye.irs, 

117  male  sex. 

4         8i, 
4         9  ) 

4        8i 

^         «.          ~ 

140  fern.    « 

„    15  to  16      ™ 

82  male   - 

4        lOi) 

^     loil 

4       105 

^         *0           -* 

106  fern.    „ 

~  letoiT    ~ 

43  male   - 

5         Oil 
4        11^1 

5         Oh 

~      ~        ~ 

90fem.    ~ 

~    17  to  18     ~ 

47  male   ~ 

5         0  1 
5          0  ) 

5         0 

„        „          ~ 

112  fem.    ~ 

In  order  to  compare  the  height  at  similar  ages  in 

England  and  in  Belgium,  we  have  expressed,  in  the 
following  table,  the  ciphers  given  in  the  Penny  Maga- 
zine in  metres  ;  and  in  order  to  get,  for  instance,  the 
lieight  of  a  child  of  nine  years  of  age,  we  have  taken 
the  mean  of  the  child's  height  in  the  age  between  8  J 
and  9  years,  and  the  height  of  the  age  of  9  and 
9A,  &c.  &c. 

Age. 

English. 

Belgians.  ' 

Boys. 

Girls. 

Boys. 

Girls. 

metres. 

metres. 

metres. 

metres. 

9  years, 

1-202 

1-191 

1-219 

1-195 

10       <- 

1-234 

1-2.32 

1-275 

1-248 

11-    „    - 

1-273 

1-267 

1-330 

1-299 

12     ~ 

1-306 

1-310 

1-385 

1-353 

13      ~     - 

1-338 

1-347 

1-439 

1-403 

14      - 

1-400 

1-403 

1-493 

1-453 

15      „     - 

1-457 

1-420 

1-546 

1-499 

16      ~ 

1-511 

1-502 

1-594 

1-535 

17      ~     - 

1-.530 

1-518 

1-6.34 

15.'i5 

Of  measurements  which  have  been  made  in  Cam- 
bridge, we  have  seen  that,  in  general.  Englishmen  at 
the  time  of  their  complete  bodily  development  are 
taller  than  the  Belgians ;  yet  we  drew  our  conclu- 
sions also  from  the  measurement  of  students.  The 
results  we  communicate  here  are  derived  from  young 
labourers. 

From  this  it  may  be  seen  that  the  heavy  work  in 
manufactories  forms  an  obstacle  to  the  bodily  deve- 
lopment of  men.  We  have  already  obtained  analogous 
results  from  the  nximbers  communicated  by  Mr  Cowell, 
which  refer  to  the  youth  employed  in  manufactories, 
and  from  others  who  were  not  so  employed.  In  the 
following  table  we  have  placed  together  notices 
which,  up  to  the  present  moment,  we  have  procured 
on  this  matter ;  they  may  thus  be  compared  with 
the  preceding  observations,  and  it  is  to  be  desired 
that  in  other  covmtries  similar  observations  should 
be  made. 

[Aote.] — We  have  also  inquired  into  the  law  of 
growth  of  plants,  and  in  several  animals  ;  and  al- 
though we  have  not  as  yet  had  time  to  pursue 
them  with  the  requisite  care  and  to  the  necessary 
extent,  they  have  already  afforded  very  interest- 
ing results,  and  some  remarkable  points  of  compa- 
rison. 

Mean  Height  of  Youth  from  9  to  25  Years. 

Age. 

Boys.* 

Girls.* 

English.t 

Scotch. t 

Irish.f 

Belgium.:}: 

Working 

Working 

in  Manu- 
factories. 

Employed. 

in  Manu- 
factories. 

Employed. 

Boys. 

Girls. 

metres. 

metres. 

metres. 

metres. 

metres. 

metres. 

metres. 

metres. 

metres. 

9  years, 

1-222 

1-233 

1-218 

2.'iO 

10     _             -        - 

1-270 

1-286 

1-260 

254 

1-227 

1-200 

11      _         -        - 

1-302 

1-296 

1-299 

323 

1-282 

1-248 

12     „              -        - 

1-355 

1-345 

l-.'i64 

.363 

1-327 

1-275 

13      -          -         - 

1-.383 

1-396 

1-413 

399 

1-359 

1-327 

14      ™              -         - 

1-437 

1-440 

1-467 

479 

1-403 

1-386 

15      ,           -         - 

1-515 

1-474 

1-486 

1 

502 

1-6.35 

1-643 

1-487 

1-447 

16      ~              -        - 

1-565 

1-605 

1-521 

475 

1-689 

1-696 

1-559 

1-475 

17     "        -       - 

1-5.92 

1-627 

1-5,35 

542 

1-714 

1-724 

1-610 

1-500 

18      ~              -        - 

1-608 

1-775 

1-593 

1-645 

1-729 

1-739 

1-744 

1-670 

1-.544 

19      ~          -         - 

1-740 

1-750 

1-762 

1-700 

1-562 

20      ~              -        - 

1-744 

1-754 

1-772 

I-7O6 

21       ~          -         - 

1-747 

1-757 

1-777 

1-711 

1-570 

22      ~               -         - 

1-750 

1-757 

1-779 

23      ~          -         - 

1-750 

1-76(J 

1.784 

24      „               -         - 

1-750 

1-760 

1-784 

25      ~           -         - 

1-750 

1-760 

1-784 

1-722 

1-577 

*  These  results  were  ascertained  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Manchester. 

t  These  by  Jlr  Forbes  of  Edfnburgh.  t  These  by  measurement  of  the  wenltliy  class. 

116 

ON  MAN. 

No.  XII. 

ADDITION  TO  THE  FOURTH  SECTION  OF  THE  SECOND  BOOK. 

Remarks  on  the  Quality  of  the  Blood,  according  to  the  Age 
and  Sex. 

We  are  of  opinion  that  all  the  relations  which  may 
vary  in  different  individuals,  either  according  to  age  or 
to  sex,  ought  to  be  subjected  to  investigations  such  as 
the  preceding.  In  this  respect  the  quality  of  the  blood 
merits  our  attention,  for  it  undergoes  very  remark- 
able changes.  The  investigations  of  MM.  Lecanu  and 
Denis  have  furnished,  in  respect  to  these  variations, 
the  following  results  :* — 

We  observe,  in  the  blood  of  the  foetus,  which  is  ne- 
cessarily the  same  as  that  of  the  placenta,  compara- 
tively little  serum  and  much  cruor ;  this  quality  of 
the  blood  also  continues  for  some  time  after  birth,  and 
seems  to  remain  the  same  so  long  as  the  new-born 
child  preserves  the  peculiar  rosy  colouring,  that  is, 
for  two  or  three  weeks. 

Prom  this  period  to  about  the  fifth  month,  the 
quantity  of  serum  increases  and  that  of  the  cruor 
decreases. 

From  the  fifth  month  to  the  fortieth  year,  the  quan- 
tity of  cruor  increases  and  that  of  the  serum  decreases. 

Trom  the  fortieth  to  the  fiftieth  year,  again,  the 
serum  increases  and  the  cruor  decreases. 

The  following  are  the  mean  proportions  obtamed  by 
a  comparison  of  the  blood  of  individuals  of  different 
ages : — 

7  persons  from  5  months  to  10  j'ears, 
13  • •  •  ■  10  years  •  •  20  • ■ 

11  . .  •  •  20    ■ .  . .  30  • . 

12  . .  •  •  30    •  •  .  ■  40  .  • 
6  • •  . .  40    •  •  . .  50  •  • 

8  • .  . .  50    ■  •  . .  GO  •  • 
2  . .  . .  66    •  ■  ■  •  70  •  • 

Proportions. 
830  Serum,  11  Cruor. 
800  ••  14  •■ 
7C0  ••  17  •• 
700  ..  17  •• 
760  ..  16  .. 
780  ..  15  •■ 
790     ••       14      .. 

These  are  the  results  at  different  periods  of  life. 

As  to  the  different  quality  of  the  blood  in  the  male 
and  female  sex,  M.  Lecami  has  found  that  in  the  male 
there  exists  comparatively  less  serum  in  the  blood 
than  in  the  female.     He  found,  in  the 

Maximum, 
Minimum, 
Mean, 

Blood  of  the 
Male. 
805-263  Seriun. 
778-625     ■ . 
791-944     . . 

Blood  of  the 
Female. 
853-135  Serum. 
790-394 
821-764 

The  blood  of  the  male  has  consequently  29'820  less 
serum  than  that  of  the  female. 

On  the  other  hand,  the  proportion  of  cruor  is  greater 
in  the  male,  as  may  be  seen  by  the  following  table: — 

Maximum, 
Minimum, 
Mean, 

Blood  of  the  Blood  of  the 

Male.  Female. 

148-450  Cruor.  129-999  Cruor. 

115-850      ••  68-349      •• 

132-150     ••  99-169     •• 

Thus  the  blood  of  the  male  sex  contains  32-981  more 
cruor  than  that  of  the  female. 

No.  XIII. 

ADDITION  TO  THE  FIRST  AND  THIRD  SECTIONS  OF  THE 
THIRD  BOOK. 

Remarks  concerning  the  Highest  Development  of  Ihe 
Passions. 

The  author  of  a  kind  notice  of  our  work,  published 
in  a  periodical,  considers  the  opinion  very  bold  that 
the  passions  of  men  attain  their  highest  energy  at  the 
twenty-fifth  year,  and  that,  consequently,  those  talents 
which  presuppose  the  development  of  the  passions, 
and  especially  imagination,  ought  to  produce  at  this 

*  S.  Lecanu — Etudes  sur  le  Sane/  Humain.  Paris :  1837.  4to.  And 
"Denis— Recherches  Expirimentales  sur  le  Sanff  Humain,  p.  287. 

period  of  life  the  most  distinguished  works.  With 
the  view  of  opposing  our  opinion,  the  critic  cites  the 
instance  of  J.  J.  Eousseau,  who  began  to  write  his 
best  works  when  about  forty.  Even  if  this  instance 
were  completely  applicable  to  the  question,  it  proves 
nothing :  as  we  see  that  even  the  most  accomplished 
scientific  men  commit  such  mistakes,  it  cannot  be  often 
enough  repeated,  that  the  result  of  calculations  of 
probability  can  only  apply  to  masses,  and  cannot  be 
applied  to  individual  cases.  J.  J.  Rousseau  did  not 
die  at  that  age  which  is  usually  reckoned  the  mean 
duration  of  the  life  of  man ;  and  yet  no  one  would  think 
of  doubting  on  that  account  the  correctness  and  the 
real  value  of  the  bills  of  mortality. 

No.  XIV. 

Extract  from   the   Bulletin   de  VAcademie  JRoyale  des 
Sciences  de  Bruxelles.     1836.     No.  5. 

Remarks  on  the  Influence  of  Age  on  Insanity,  and  on  the  Dispo- 
sition for  Crime,  hy  M.  Quetelet. 

In  ray  work  on  Man,  and  on  the  development  of  his 
faculties,  I  have  endeavoured  to  lay  before  the  public 
the  few  documents  which  science  possesses  concerning 
the  age  most  liable  to  mental  disease.  The  accounts 
of  Paris,  Caen,  and  Norway,  the  only  ones  I  could 
procure,  all  agreed  in  showing  that  most  diseases  of 
the  mind  occur  between  thirty  and  forty.  In  order  to 
be  able  to  compare  the  results,  I  took  the  total  of  the 
insane  as  unity,  and  thus  I  deduced  for  the  different 
periods  of  life  the  following  proportions  : — 

Paris. 

Caen. 

Norway 

Below  20  years, 

0-06 

003 

0-17 

From  20  to  30  years,     - 

-    0-20 

0-17 

0-19 

••     30to40    -• 

0-24 

0-29 

0-21 

..     40to50    •• 

-    0-22 

0-25 

0-16 

--     50to60    •• 

0-14 

0-17 

0-13 

Above  60  years, 

-    0-14 

0-09 

0-14 

Since  the  publication  of  the  work  containing  these 
investigations,  I  have  received,  through  the  kindness 
of  Sir  Charles  Morgan,  some  interesting  communica- 
tions regarding  the  statistics  of  the  lunatic  asylums 
in  Ireland,  collected  by  Mr  Radcliffe.  Amongst  these 
notices,  there  is  a  tabular  view  of  5021  insane,  whose 
age  was  extracted  from  tlie  tables  of  tlie  institutions. 
Besides  this,  I  found  in  the  work  of  Mr  Porter — Tables 
of  the  Revenue,  Population,  &c.,  1834— a  view  of  the 
insane  in  bedlam,  which  likewise  contains  information 
regarding  the  age  of  the  insane  who  were  received 
into  this  institution  and  not  considered  incurable. 
According  to  this  -view,  there  were,  in  the  years — 

Insane.  Mean  Age  of  the 

Insane. 

1830,  -        -        -        201  37  years. 

1831,  -        -        -        -    212  35    •- 

1832,  -        -         -         1C3  37    •- 

1833,  ...         -    184  26    .. 

1834,  "         -         -         217  36     •■ 

They  remained  in  the  institution  an  average  jieriod 
of  204  days.  The  age  of  977  of  these  insane  will  be 
found  in  the  following  table,  in  which  also  the  notices 
concerning  Ireland  have  been  entered. 

Age. 

Bethlem  Hospital. 

Irish  Lunatic  Asylums. 

Insane. 

Pro- 
portion. 

Insane. 

Pro- 
portion. 

Below  20  years,     - 

From  20  to  30  years, 

■  ■     30  to  40     .  • 

•  •     40  to  50     .  - 

•  •     50  to  60     ■ . 
Above  60  years,     - 

61 
261 
292 
203 

107 

53 

0-06 
0-27 
0-30 
0-21 
0-11 
0-05 

500 
1551 
1284 
939 
609 
136 

010 
0-31 
0-25 
0-19 
0-12 
0-03 

Total, 

077 

1-00 

5021 

1-00 

It  may  be  seen  that  the  numbers  of  the  Bethlem 
Hospital  agree  pretty  well  with  those  of  France  and 

ON  MAN. 

117 

Norway,  according  to  which  most  insane  exist  between 
the  years  of  thirty  and  forty ;  as  far  as  Ireland  is  con- 
cerned, the  maximum  in  this  country  appears  some- 
what earlier.  However,  we  must  not  conclude  from 
the  circumstance  tliat  "  in  general  the  greatest  num- 
ber of  insane  are  to  be  found  between  thirty  and 
forty  years  of  age,"  that  also  at  this  age  the  greatest 
number  of  outbreaks  of  this  disease  occur.  In  order 
to  ascertain  the  critical  age,  we  must  take  into  ac- 
count the  population  and  the  number  of  individuals 
from  the  different  classes  given  in  our  table.  If  we 
then  take  the  average  number  of  the  ciphers  for  those 
coimtries  of  which  we  now  speak,  we  find — 

Mean  of  the         Distribution    Proportion 

Insane  in 

the 

of  the 

of  the 

above  5  Tables. 

Population. 

Population. 

Below  20  years, 

0-08 

0-40 

0-20 

From  20  to  30  years, 

-    0-23 

0-17 

1-25 

•  •     30  to  40     •  • 

0-26 

0-14 

1-8C 

•■     40  to  50     -.  - 

-    0-21 

Oil 

1-91 

•  •     50  to  CO      ■  • 

0-13 

0-09 

1-44 

Above  60  years, 

-    0-09 

0.09 

1-00 

Thus  it  appears,  that  if  we  have  regard  to  the  popu- 
lation, and  if  we  may  be  allowed  to  generalise  the  pre- 
ceding results,  that  the  age  between  forty  and  fifty,  or 
rather  the  fortieth  year,  is  the  period  of  life  most  subject 
to  insanity.  In  my  essaj^  on  the  Natural  Philosophy 
of  Society,  I  have  shown  that  it  is  the  same  age  in 
•ft'hich  most  masterpieces  of  dramatic  literature  are 
produced  in  England  and  France,  with  this  only  dif- 
ference, that  England  has  in  that  respect  a  slight 
advantage  over  Erance.  May  Ave  draw  from  this  the 
conclusion,  that  the  human  mind  is  affected  by  dis- 
eases which  are  in  proportion  to  its  energy  or  exer- 
cise ?  This  is  still  a  problem,  the  solution  of  which  is 
of  great  importance  to  society,  and  which  unquestion- 
ably will  be  elucidated  by  the  theory  of  probabilities 
which  is  founded  on  correct  observation. 

To  the  preceding  question  another  may  be  added, 
which  perhaps  is  even  of  more  direct  importance  to 
society,  the  question,  namely.  What  influence  does  age 
exercise  over  the  disposition  to  crime  ?  Several  years 
ago  I  had  shoAvn,  what  the  residts  of  the  following 
years  have  confirmed,  that  in  France  not  only  the 
number  of  crimes  committed  by  individuals  at  certain 
periods  of  life  almost  always  recur  in  the  same  pro- 
portions, but  also  that  the  proportions,  notwithstand- 
ing their  difference,  are  equally  regular,  if  we  draw  a 
distinction  between  the  different  kinds  of  crimes  on 
account  of  the  sex  of  the  criminals. 

Heretofore,  the  docimients  which  have  been  afforded 
by  the  administration  of  justice  in  Belgium  have 
shown  that  the  same  regularity  is  also  to  be  found 
with  us ;  further,  that  in  like  manner  the  proportion 
of  the  sexes  in  criminals  of  different  ages  is  in  both 
countries  nearly  the  same.  From  this  correspondence 
of  the  results,  we  must  therefore  conclude  that  they 
are  either  reproduced  5'ear  after  year  by  a  kind  of 
miracle,  or  that  they  arise  in  a  very  great  similarity 
of  the  social  organisation  in  the  two  countries,  in  so 
far  at  least  as  regards  those  relations  which  influence 
crime.  I  have  even  observed  that  this  phenomenon  of 
moral  life  shows  a  greater  regularity  of  occurrence 
than  many  phenomena  of  the  material  world. 

A  short  time  ago,  documents  have  been  published 
regarding  the  admuaistration  of  cruninal  law  in  the 
grand-dutchy  of  Baden,  which  likewise  furnish  infor- 
mation respecting  the  age  of  the  accused  individuals  ;* 

*  Uebersicht  der  Slrafrechtespjlege  it.  s.  ic.  Karlsruhe :  1834.  4to. 
(Account  of  the  Administration  of  Criminal  Justice,  &c.)  The 
celebrated  jurist,  Jlittermaier,  in  commimicating  this  remark- 
able work  to  me,  had  the  kindness  to  express  his  opinion  regard- 
ing the  investigations  in  which  I  was  engaged,  in  tlie  following 
terms  : — "  I  am  convinced  that  the  manner  in  which  you  view 
things,  proceeding,  as  you  do,  by  combining  facts,  is  the  only 
way  in  which  we  may  hope  to  penetrate  the  mysteries  of  nature. 

and  here  again  we  meet  with  a  remarkable  correspon- 
dence of  numbers,  as  may  be  seen  from  the  following 
table  : — 

Age  of  the 

Grand-dutchy  of  Baden : 
1833. 

France 

Accused. 

Nimiber  of 
the  Accused. 

Proportion. 

1826-18£9. 

14  to  18  years,     - 

18  to  30 

30  to  40     .. 
40to50    ..    - 
50  to  GO     . . 
60  to  70    ■•    - 
70  years  and  above, 

93 
784 
381 
211 
106 

33 
1 

0-48/''* 
0'24 
0-13 
0-07 

0-02 
0-00 

0-53* 

0-23 
0-14 
0-06 
0-03 
0-01 

1009 

1-00 

1-00 

At  what  conclusion  must  Ave  then  arrive  from  so 
many  documents  Avhich  show  so  surprising  a  corre- 
spondence, although  the  ciphers  are  not  very  large  ? 
Must  we  entirely  deny  the  free  will  of  individuals,  or 
must  Ave  suppose  that  it  is  without  influence  if  we 
consider  the  phenomena  of  society  on  a  large  scale — as 
happens  with  the  phenomena  of  the  material  Avorld, 
where  the  internal  action  and  reaction  of  a  system 
do  not  disturb  the  equilibrium  ?  This  at  least  seems 
to  be  deducible  from  observation,  if  Ave  do  not  perhaps 
prefer  blindly  to  reject  what  it  teaches  us. 

That  Avhich  in  my  opinion  modifies  the  results  of 
different  years,  is  not  the  influence  of  free  will,  as  far 
as  it  can  in  fact  be  active,  but  rather  the  changes 
Avhich  society  undergoes  by  degrees,  through  the  gra- 
dual reform  of  its  institutions — as  through  the  oscilla- 
tions of  its  habits  and  Avants — changes  Avhich  fortu- 
nately take  an  extremely  sIoav  course.  If  the  social 
organisation  could  experience  sudden  changes,  the 
influence  of  free  Avill  would  continually  defy  our  fore- 
sight, which  is  of  course  based  on  a  knoAvledge  of  past 
ages.  Of  Avhat  use  Avoidd  it  be  then  to  introduce  wise 
institutions,  or  to  think  of  a  reform  in  our  legislation  ? 
Experience  convinces  us  more  and  more  that,  Avith 
the  same  social  organisation,  we  may  be  prepared  year 
after  year  for  the  return  of  the  same  moral  pheno- 
mena. Violent  changes  or  revolutions  may  indeed 
take  place,  Avhich,  for  the  moment,  disturb  the  common 
course  of  things,  the  influence  of  which  may  even  pro- 
dace  lasting  modifications ;  but  there  is  the  same  rela- 
tion to  be  here  observed  as  in  epidemics  and  famines 
Avith  regard  to  mortality.  Do  Ave  reject  the  tables  of 
the  mean  duration  of  life,  upon  Avhich  insurance  com- 
panies found  their  speculations,  on  account  of  the  dis- 
turbances their  operations  may  experience  from  the 
occurrence  of  an  epidemic'  We  may  even  foresee 
a  revolution,  or  any  other  important  shock  society 
receives,  at  least  to  a  certain  extent ;  whilst  this  is  not 
the  case  as  regards  an  epidemic,  and  most  other  cala- 
mities which  devastate  mankind.  Every  country  has 
its  table  of  mortality,  as  every  country  must  have  its 
table  of  disposition  to  crime ;  therefore,  we  cannot 
conclude  that,  if  we  had  found  regarding  the  influence 
of  age  upon  crime  in  France,  Belgium,  and  the  grand- 
dutchy  of  Baden,  the  same  restdts,  we  necessarily  also 
should  arriA^e  at  the  same  results  in  England.  We 
juay,  perhaps,  find  others,  but  I  do  not  hesitate  affirm- 
ing that  the  ciphers  of  1835  Avill  also  recur  in  1836, 
as  the  same  ciphers  have  occiirred  year  after  year 
in  France,  always  under  the  supposition  that  the  state 
of  society  undergoes  no  remarkable  change. 

All  my  investigations  regarding  the  nature  of  crime  lead  me  to 
the  same  results  as  yours,  and  the  inferences  which  the  legisla- 
ture might  di-aw  from  them  are  of  the  highest  importance.  It 
is  a  sad  truth  which  you  profess  in  your  work,  that  it  is  society 
which  prepares  the  crime.  This  truth  is  especially  confirmed  by 
the  statistics  of  recidive  cases  (relapses.) 

*  The  French  tables  do  not  follow  the  same  divisions  according 
to  the  age. 

118 

ON  MAN. 

Mr  Porter,  to  whom  we  owe  very  interesting  sta- 
tistic contributions,  lias,  sometime  ago,  published  the 
first  accurate  tables  respecting  the  age  of  the  accused 
throughout  the  whole  of  England,  for  the  year  1834  ;* 
and  his  results  agree  with  those  of  France,  Belgium, 
and  the  grand-dutchy  of  Baden,  in  so  far  as  the  maxi- 
mum of  the  number  of  criminals  belongs  to  the  same 

Age  of  the 
Accused. 

England:  1834. 

France : 

Accused. 

Proportion. 

1826-1829. 

Below  16  years,     - 
From  16  to  21  years, 
..    21  to  30     •• 
. .    30  to  40     •  • 
• .    40  to  50     •  • 
■  •    50  to  60     •  • 
Above  60  years. 

2,604 
6,473 
7,069 
3,146 
1,525 
686 
303 

0-12 
0-29 
0-32 
0-15 
0-07 
0-03 
0-02 

0-02 
016 
0-35 
0-23 
0-14 
0-(»6 
0-04 

21,806 

1-00 

1-00 

A  remarkable  diflFerence  between  the  tables  of 
England  and  those  of  France  is  to  be  found  in  the 
circumstance,  that  in  the  former  country  there  is  com- 
paratively a  much  greater  number  of  juvenile  accused 
than  in  the  latter.  This  is  partly  owing  to  the  cir- 
cumstance, that  the  English  assizes  have  also  to 
decide  on  most  of  those  crimes  which  in  France  are 
brought  before  the  correctional  police.  Before  the 
bar  of  the  latter  there  appear,  however,  far  more 
juvenile  accused  than  before  the  assize  or  criminal 
courts.  On  the  other  hand,  there  is  in  England  a 
class  of  criminals  who  train  up  children  as  implements 
for  theft  and  all  kinds  of  petty  larceny.f  But  if  we 
set  aside  these  two  causes,  and  other  deviations  which 
render  difficult  tlie  comparison  between  two  countries 
whose  institutions  and  laws  are  so  different,  I  think 
I  require  to  yield  nothing  of  the  views  with  which  I 
concluded  several  years  ago  a  paper  on  the  disposition 
to  crime,  which  the  academy  directed  to  be  inserted 
in  tlie  seventh  volume  of  its  Transactions,  namely, 
that  this  afflicting  condition  seems  to  be  developed  in 
proportion  to  the  intensity  of  the  bodily  strength  and 
the  passions  of  men,  attaining  their  maximum  about 
the  twenty-fifth  year,  the  period  when  the  body  has 
nearly  reached  its  full  development. 

Afterwards  the  intellectual  and  moral  development, 
which  follows  a  slower  course,  contribute  to  the  de- 
crease of  this  disposition  to  crime,  which  in  after  life 
becomes  still  more  striking  in  consequence  of  the  de- 
crease of  the  bodily  strength  and  of  the  passions. 

No.  XV. 

Extract  from   the  Bulletin   de   VAcademie  Boyale  des 
Sciences  de  Bruxelles :  1836.     No.  6. 

Influence  of  Age  upon  the  Disposition  to  Crime. 

Addition  to  the  foregoing  remark  : — "  Every  country 
has  its  table  of  mortality,  as  every  country  must  have 
its  table  of  the  disposition  to  crime,"  &c.  &c. 

When  I  communicated,  about  a  month  ago,  the 
preceding  remarks  to  the  academy,  I  did  not  imagine 
that  so  soon  thereafter  facts  would  confirm,  in  the 
most  decided  manner,  my  opinions.  I  was  then  citing 
the  proportional  number  of  criminals  of  different  ages, 
as  the  result  from  the  statistical  documents  regarding 
England  for  1834;  and  observing  that  they  agreed 
with  those  of  Belgium,  France,  and  the  grand-dutchy 

*  Tables  showing  the  Number  of  Criminals  Offenders  in  the 
Year  1834,  &c. 

t  The  cause  which  likewise  must  influence  the  results  respect- 
ing the  number  of  juvenile  criminals,  is,  that  the  population  of 
England  has  proportionally  more  children  than  that  of  France. 
From  the  tables  of  populatio7i  for  the  two  countries,  it  results, 
that  in  England,  for  100  below  M  years,  there  are  only  150  adults, 
whilst  in  France  there  are  more  tli.in  -ioo. 

of  Baden  only  in  so  far  as  the  age  of  23  years  ap- 
pears as  that  when  most  crimes  are  committed,  I  had 
no  hesitation  in  saying,  that  the  differences  which 
are  exhibited  in  other  respects  are  by  no  means  acci- 
dental, but  must  be  the  result  of  the  social  organisa- 
tion of  England;  so  that,  as  their  organisation  has 
been  the  same  in  1834  and  1835,  the  ciphers  observed 
during  the  former  year  ought  also  to  occur,  without 
change,  in  the  latter.  The  documents  of  the  Enghsh 
tribunals  for  the  year  1835,  which  Mr  Porter  kindly 
communicated  to  me  a  few  days  ago,  have  just  now 
decided  the  question.  The  following  is  an  extract 
from  the  two  reports  : — 

Age  of  the  Criminals. 

12  years  and  less, 
12  to  16  years, 
16  to  21     . . 
21  to  30    •  • 
30  to  40     •  • 
40  to  50     •  • 
50  to  60    •  • 
60  and  above, 
Age  unknown , 

Total, 

Proportion  for  each  Age. 

1-78 

1-67 

9-82 

9-70 

28-83 

29-65 

31-49 

31-92 

14-01 

14-01 

6-79 

6-60 

3-(l6 

3-24 

l-a5 

1-30 

2-87 

1-91 

These  results,  which  differ  considerably  from  those 
of  France,  agree,  as  we  see,  with  each  other  in  a  re- 
markable manner ;  especially  if  Ave  take  into  account 
that  we  have  not  to  refer  to  Poisson's  Law  of  great 
numbers.  These  were,  in  fact,  during  the  two  years 
the  documents  of  which  Ave  haA-e  compared,  founded 
on  22,451  and  20,731  criminals:  this  makes,  accord- 
ing to  Mr  Porter — 

In  WU, 
..  1835,   - 

1  criminal  to  619  inhabitants. 
-    1      .  .        . .  631 

ISM. 

1835. 

10-94 

-  6-50 
73-97 

0-72 

-  1-92 

9-72 
6.53 
74-66 
075 
1-78 

5-95 

6-56 

-    100-00 

100-00 

The  same  regularity  appears,  also,  in  respect  to  the 
sex  of  criminals  ;  for  of  100  criminals,  there  Avere 

84  men  and  16  women  in  1834. 

83   .  .     . .    17       .  .      . .  1835. 

The  same  regularity  is  also  observed  in  other  relations 
Avhich  come  under  our  view.  Thus  we  find,  for  in- 
stance, if  Ave  distinguish  between  the  different  crimes, 

Crimes  against  person,      .... 
property,  with  violence, 

without  violence. 

Injury  to  property,    -        -        -        -        - 

Forgeries,  &c.,      .        .        .        -        . 

Crimes  not  included  under  the  preceding 

categories,  .        .        .        .        . 

Total,      - 

This  regularity  is  certainly  as  great  as  that  which 
has  been  observed  in  the  annual  number  of  births  and 
deaths,  and  still  greater  than  that  which  has  been 
observed  in  the  recurrence  of  certain  phenomena  con- 
sidered as  purely  physical.  England,  then,  forms  no 
exception  to  the  folloAving  thesis :  "  There  is  a  budget 
which  is  paid  with  frightfxd  regularity — a  budget,  namely, 
of  prisons  and  scaffolds."  I  repeat  once  more,  because 
i  attribute  a  great  importance  to  this  observation, 
that  "Human  society,  considered  on  a  large  scale, 
exhibits  laAvs  similar  to  those  which  regulate  the 
material  A\-orld ;"  that  the  greater  the  number  of  ob- 
served individuals  may  be,  the  more  avUI  disappear  all 
bodily  and  intellectual  peculiarities ;  and  the  series  of 
general  phenomena,  by  means  of  Avhich  society  erects 
and  maintains  itself,  predominates  Avith  remarkable 
regularity  in  their  recurrence.  Thus  the  possibiUty 
may  be  explained  of  analysing  the  different  fiiculties 
of  men  in  an  inductive  manner ;  and  what  in  future 
will  be  Avanting  to  us  are,  not  methods  of  observation, 
but  observations  made  in  sufficient  number  and  Avith 
sufficient  care  to  claim  full  confidence  for  the  deduced 
results. 

[     119    3 

TRANSLATOR'S  APPENDIX.— PHYSIOLOGICAL  AND  PATHOLOGICAL 

STATISTICS. 

It  was  originally  my  intention  to  have  added  exten- 
sively to  the  admirable  work  of  M.  Quetelet,  novr  sub- 
mitted for  the  first  time  to  the  criticism  of  the  British 
public ;  but  two  considerations  have  induced  me  to  lay 
aside  this  idea,  at  least  for  the  present.  The  first  is, 
that  accurate  and  official  details,  upon  either  general 
or  national  statistics,  are  not  yet  procurable,  to  a  pro- 
per extent,  in  Great  Britain.  Secondly,  the  additional 
matt«r,  even  admitting  it  to  be  perfectly  accurate, 
which  could  scarcely  have  happened,  must  to  a  cer- 
tain extent  have  led  the  attention  of  the  reader  from 
the  main  object — the  leading  idea,  if  I  may  so  speak, 
of  the  work — tliat  bright  and  original  conception  of  a 
great  mind,  which  those  who  have  perused  the  pre- 
ceding pages  must  now  fully  understand. 

Hitherto  the  attempts  to  apply  to  hiunan  physio- 
logy and  pathology  the  science  of  numbers  and  weight, 
have  neither  been  very  numerous  nor  very  successful. 
I  shall  merely  select  a  few  instances  as  illustrative  of 
the  principles  advocated  by  M.  Quetelet. 

L— PULSATIONS  OF  THE  HEART. 

The  left  ventricle  or  cavity  of  the  heart  acts  as  a 
powerful  piston,  and  by  its  contractions  discharges 
into  the  great  artery  of  the  body  a  certain  quantity 
of  arterial  blood  at  each  contraction.  These  contrac- 
tions constitute,  in  fact,  the  pulse  of  the  heart ;  but 
as  the  blood  so  discharged  passes  rapidly  along  the 
arteries  to  every  part  of  the  body,  it  is  usual  for  the 
physiologist,  and  more  especially  the  medical  man,  to 
reckon  the  number  of  these  contractions  at  some  of 
the  more  remote  arteries,  and  the  radial  artery  at  the 
wrist  is  for  many  reasons  the  vessel  usually  selected. 
The  phenomenon  called  the  pulse,  is  erroneously  sup- 
posed by  many  to  reside  in  the  arteries ;  but  it  is,  in 
man  at  least,  dependent  solely  on  the  heart's  action 
and  on  the  pressure  of  the  observer's  finger.  It  will 
now  be  understood,  then,  that  by  the  number  of  the 
"pulsations"  is  meant  the  number  of  contractions 
which  the  left  ventricle  of  the  human  heart  performs 
in  a  given  time. 

The  statistics  of  these  pulsations,  also  of  the  num- 
ber of  respirations,  had  not  escaped  the  observation  of 
medical  men.  The  reader  is  by  this  time  aware  of  the 
extent  of  the  valuable  researches  of  M.  Quetelet  on 
these  points — correct  so  far  as  they  go,  but  requiring 
modification  in  consequence  of  an  important  element 
or  two  having  been  overlooked  in  the  inquiry. 

About  one  hundred  years  ago,  Dr  Bryan  Robinson* 
made  many  accurate  observations  respecting  the  hu- 
man pulse.  If  Kepler  was  the  first  to  endeavour  to 
arrive  at  the  "  constants"  of  the  human  pulse,  yet  he 
probably  failed  to  discover  that  remarkable  law,  so 
clearly  stated  by  Dr  Robinson,  which  rests  on  the  in- 
fluence of  posture  (and  muscular  action  generally)  over 
the  number  of  the  human  pulsations.  "  I  took,"  says  he, 
"  the  pulses  in  a  minute,  and  measured  the  lengths  of  a 

*  A  Treatise  on  the  Animal  Economy.    Dublin  :  1733. 

great  number  of  bodies.  I  took  the  pulses  when  the 
bodies  were  sitting,  that  they  all  might  be  situated 
alike  with  respect  to  the  horizon ;  and  in  the  morning 
before  breakfast,  that  their  hearts  might  be  as  free  as 
possible  from  the  influences  of  all  disturbing  causes  ; 
and  when  I  had  got  a  very  large  stock  of  observations, 
I  took  the  means  of  the  pulses."  Unfortunately,  he 
has  not  published  the  tables  of  observations  on  this 
point — a  great  neglect  in  an  original  observer,  render- 
ing it  impossible  for  future  experimenters  to  verify  his 
observations.  Instead  of  this,  he  says  that  he  found 
those  means  "  to  be  nearly  as  tlie  biquadrate  roots 
of  the  cubes  of  the  lengths  of  the  bodies  inversely." 
Language  of  this  kind  has  happily  disappeared  from 
most  modern  physiological  works. 

In  the  following  table  he  lays  down  two  other  laws 
of  the  human  pulse,  tending  to  prove  that  the  quick- 
ness of  the  pulse  is,  to  a  certain  extent,  inversely  as 

Pulse  from 

Ages 

Length  in 

Observation 

Pulse 

in  Years. 

Inches. 

before  Breakfast, 

by  Theory. 

and  Sitting. 

72 

65 

65 

ti8 

(>7 

68 

GO 

72 

74 

14 

55 

77 

79 

12 

51 

«2 

84 

9 

id 

90 

91 

i; 

42 

97 

97 

3 

.33 

113 

111 

2 

.32 

120 

119 

1 

2« 

126 

132 

i 

25 

137 

144 

(1 

18 

150 

184 

the  age  and  height.  Having  exemplified  these  laws 
of  the  pulse  by  a  variety  of  observations  and  remarks, 
he  next  attempted  to  measure  the  effects  of  diet  and 
stimulants,  and  of  the  time  of  day ;  but  in  this  he  failed, 
as  was  shown  in  1812-14  by  Dr  Knox,  whose  in- 
quiries and  experiments  led  to  the  following  conclu- 
sions : — 

"  1.  That  Dr  Bryan  Robinson  was  the  discoverer  of 
the  '  differential  pulse  in  man ;'  that  he  described  it 
perfectly,  and  ascribed  it  to  its  real  cause. 

2.  That  he  appreciated  correctly  enough  the  influ- 
ence of  food,  and  other  disturbing  causes  of  the  heart's 
action,  but  that  he  knew  nothing  of  the  precise  nature 
of  the  laws  regulating  these  actions,  not  having  sub- 
mitted them  to  any  statistical  inquiry. 

3.  He  first  proved  indisputably,  that  from  birth  to 
adult  age,  the  rapidity  of  the  pulse  constantly  declines, 
and  he  has  given  an  accurate  statistical  table  to  prove 
this. 

4.  He  endeavoured  to  show,  by  the  same  numerical 
method,  that  the  rapidity  of  the  pulse  was  inversely 
as  the  height  of  the  person :  or,  to  give  an  example, 
let  A  be  five  feet,  and  let  B  be  six  feet,  then  the  pulse 
of  A  is  to  that  of  B  as  72  to  65.  But  this  table  is 
not  carefully  drawn  up,  and  the  actual  conclusions 
are  not  legitimate,  though  the  law  may  be  a  correct 
one. 

120 

ON  MAN. 

5.  He  suspected  a  diurnal  movement  in  the  rapi- 
dity of  the  pulse ;  namely,  that  it  decreased  during 
sleep,  and  increased  from  morning  until  night.  With 
several  of  his  conclusions  I  do  not  agree. 

Lastly,  He  attempted  to  ascertain,  statistically,  the 
effects  of  muscular  motion  on  the  pulse  in  health ;  the 
ratio  of  the  pulsations  to  the  inspirations ;  and  the 
immediate  result  on  the  heart's  action,  of  a  temporary 
deprivation  of  air." 

The  true  nature  of  the  fourth  law,  regulating  the 
human  pulse,  was  discovered  by  Dr  Knox  in  1812-13  -. 
he  calls  it  "  the  diurnal  revolutioyi  of  the  pulse,"  and  he 
proA^ed  that  there  was  not  only  a  natural,  numerical, 
diurnal  revolution  in  the  hearths  action,  but  that  there 
existed  a  fifth  law,  namely,  "  a  diurnal  revolution  in 
the  excitability  of  the  heart  to  stimulants  of  all  kinds." 
These  remarkable  laws  being  opposed  to  the  received 
medical  notions  and  physiological  theories  of  the  day, 
were  much  disputed  ;  but  they  have  been  completely 
proved  by  subsequent  observers.  The  following  re- 
marks, quoted  from  his  Memoirs,  will  readily  explain 
these  laws  to  the  general  reader : — 

"  The  question  of  an  average  pulse  for  any  parti- 
cular age  can  only  be  put,  at  least  in  this  form,  by 
those  ignorant  to  a  great  extent  of  the  physiology  of 
the  pulse.  Systematic  writers  on  physiology,  by 
stating  such  questions  and  replying  to  them,  display 
a  desire  to  satisfy  the  general  reader  at  the  expense 
of  truth.  The  pulse  varies  every  hour  of  the  day 
and  night,  and  after  every  meal ;  it  is  extensively 
influenced  by  merely  rising  from  the  sitting  to  the 
erect  i^osture ;  and  how,  without  a  special  attention 
to  these  cu'cumstances,  any  one  can  arrive  at  an 
average  pulse,  it  is  somewhat  difficult  to  imagine. 
Nothing  can  be  more  vague  and  more  unsatisfactory 
than  the  following  table : — 

Average  of  the  Human  Pulse  at  Different  Ages,  according  to 
Bryan  Robinson. 

Age. 

Length  in 
Inches. 

Pulse. 

At  birth, 

... 

18 

150 

~  ^  year,    - 

- 

25 

137 

-,  I    -. 

... 

28 

126 

~  2    ~ 

. 

32 

120 

.-  3    - 

. 

35 

113 

~  6    ~ 

. 

42 

97 

^  9    ~ 

... 

46 

90 

«12    ~        - 

. 

51 

82 

^14    ~ 

. 

55 

77 

60 

72 

68 

67 

72 

65 

Magendie. 

Elmotson 

Mayo. 

(last  Edition.) 

Before  birth,      128 

At  birth, 

130  to  140 

At  birth,        -    140 

~    1  year. 

120  to  130 

At  1  year,       -    124 

At  1  year,    -       120 

«.    2    ~ 

100  to  110 

-2     „      -        110 

~  2    „    100  to  110 

~   3     ~ 

90  to  100 

AMien  the  first 

~    7    ~ 

85  to   90 

teeth  drop  out,  86 

-  14     ~ 

80  to    m 

At  puberty,           8(i 

At  puberty,     -    80 

Adiilt  age, 

75  to    HO 

At  manhood,        75 

Adult  from  70  to  75 

First  old  nge, 

65  to    75 

Old  age,      about  Gd 

Old  age,       -        611 

Confirmed  do. 

60  to    65 

Scarcely  found  it 
twice  alike. 

Here  the  oldest  writer  is  not  only  more  minute, 
but  approaches  perhaps  nearest  to  the  truth. 

Such  tables  as  the  above,  are,  for  the  most  part, 
slightly  varied  copies  of  each  other,  and  in  respect  to 
them  I  would  make  the  following  remarks  : — 

No  mention  is  made  how  the  averages  of  these 
three  last  tables  were  struck.  "We  are  left  to  guess, 
1  st,  at  what  time  of  tl\e  day  the  pulse  was  noted,  and 
if  in  all  the  individuals  at  tlie  same  time  of  day ;  2dly, 
in  male  or  female ;  3dly,  sitting,  lying,  or  standing ; 

4thly,  before  or  after  meals ;  5thly,  morning,  noon,  or 
night ;  6thly,  whether  sleeping  or  waking. 

A  little  reflection  clearly  shows  that  there  can  be 
no  such  thing  as  an  average  pulse,  unless  counted 
under  circumstances  precisely  similar  in  aU  the  indi- 
viduals experimented  on  ;  and  even  then  we  should 
only  obtain  the  average  for  that  particular  hour  and 
time  of  day.  This  would  be  an  average  pulse  in  a 
certain  sense.  In  the  absence,  however,  of  such  data, 
the  practical  utility  even  of  which  I  question,  there 
still  are  some,  imperfect  as  they  are,  which  merit 
attention. 

In  order  to  arrive  at  even  an  attempt  at  a  fair 
average,  we  are  forced  to  go  back  to  Dr  Robinson's 
Treatise,  written  nearly  a  hundred  years  ago,  and 
find  it  to  contain  the  only  approach  at  an  analysis  of 
this  subject.  He  gives,  in  Table  II.,  the  average  pulse 
of  two  men  at  every  hour  of  the  day  (whilst  sitting), 
from  8  A.M.  until  11  p.m.,  taken  for  several  weeks : 
the  mean  of  these  waking  hours  was — for  A,  76  ;  for 
B,  78.  But  still  there  is  a  meagreness  of  detail,  and  a 
narrowness  of  observation,  rendering  it  impossible  to 
base,  on  such  observations,  any  important  conclusion. 

The  mid-day  pulse  of  25  yomig  gentlemen,  taken 
between  the  hours  of  12  and  2,  in  July  1836,  was  as 
folloAVS  :— 

No. 

1.  H. 

2.  11.      - 

3.  R. 

4.  H.      - 

5.  G. 

6.  M'G. 
7.S. 

8.  AV.     - 

9.  T. 

10.  E.       - 

11.  H. 

12.  W.     - 

13.  AV. 

14.  S. 

15.  D. 

16.  F.      - 

17.  AV. 

18.  C.       ■ 

19.  K. 

20.  B.       - 

21.  T. 

22.  D.      ■ 

23.  S. 

24.  M'D. 
25.0. 

Mean,  ■ 

Age. 

5  feet  5i  inch. 

„    7      " 

6  ~    li     - 
5-6      ~ 

~    0      - 
5    ~    5       „ 

Height. 

/5 
10 
6-0 

5J 
0 

5-5 
5-8 
5-6 
5-8 
5 

3J 
6 

9 
11 
11 
11* 
7" 
5-10 
5-8 
10* 

Pulse 
Sitting. 

72-4 

Pulse 
Standing. 

72 

75-4 

This  table,  which  was  drawn  up  with  the  greatest 
attention  to  accuracy,  discloses  some  curious  facts  in 
the  history  of  the  pulse.  So  far  as  could  be  determined, 
all  these  young  gentlemen  were  m  good  health,  with 
one  exception ;  and  yet  we  find  two,  in  whom  the  pulse 
constantly  decreased  on  rising  from  their  seat,  and 
became  accelerated  on  sitting  down ;  being  the  very 
reverse  of  a  law  which  all  physiologists  had  thought 
to  be  universal. 

Besides  these  two,  in  whom  the  pulse  showed  so 
singular  a  character,  there  Avere  six  others  Avho  had 
no  differential  pulse,  that  is,  in  whom  the  muscular 
action  required  to  maintam  the  body  erect  did  not 
accelerate  tlie  pulse  a  single  beat. 

Is  there,  or  is  there  not,  a  "  diurnal  revolution  "  of 
the  pulse  in  respect  merely  to  numbers,  independent 
of  stimulation  by  food  or  exercise  ?  Now,  I  fancy  that 
this  has  been  completely  proved  in  my  first  memoir, 
published  more  than  twenty  years  ago.  But  some 
liave  asserted  that  this  morning  acceleration  and 
evening  retardation  depends  altogether  on  the  use  of 
food  and  other  stimulants,  and  that,  were  it  not  for 
these,  the  pulse  would  not  rise  early  in  the  morning 
and  fall  towards  evening,  but  would  smk  constantly. 
This  opinion  is  incorrect,  as  the  following  table,  given 
as  a  specimen  of  the  experiments  by  which  the  exist- 

ON  MAN. 

121 

ence  of  a  differential  pulse  was  established,  -will  tend 
to  show : — 

Table  showing  the  differential  pulse,  observed  in  Mr  S.,  aged  20, 
morning  and  evening ;  proving  a  diurnal  revolution,  both  as  to 
numbers  and  as  to  excitability,  altogether  independent  of  food 
or  exercise,  and  proving  the  morning  pulse  to  be  quicker  than 
the  evening  one. 

Date. 

Hour. 

Horizontal. 

Sitting. 

standing. 

Differential. 

April  5, 

10  P.M. 

53 

64 

78 

25 

~    6, 

7  A.M. 

60 

75 

SW 

30 

~    7, 

7  A.M. 

65 

80 

90 

25 

-    8, 

10  P.M. 

57 

66 

78 

21 

_    9, 

7  A.M. 

65 

80 

90 

25 

~  10, 

rlO  A.M. 

60 

82 

95 

35 

XU)  P.M. 

58 

70 

76 

18 

Average  Differential  Pulse. 
Morning,    -    28-7         Evening,    -    21-3 

Horizontal.    Sitting.    Standing. 
Average  morning  pulse,         -   62               78'3  90 

Average  evening  pulse,      -        56 67 77 

The  apartments  occupied  by  Mr  S.  (a  gentleman 
of  the  most  regular  habits  and  in  excellent  health) 
seemed  to  me  cold,  and  exposed  to  the  boisterous 
westerly  Avinds  of  this  cUmate.  I  have  no  doubt  that 
tlie  temperature  of  the  room  had  fallen  greatly  during 
the  night,  otherwise  the  difference  between  the  morn- 
ing and  evening  pulse  would  have  been  still  more 
marked. 

The  morning  pidse  was  of  course  noted  before 
breakfast. 

AVithout  doubt,  were  we  to  continue  long  without 
food,  the  pulse  Avovdd  first  sink,  and  then  become  ex- 
ceedingly quick  on  the  sUghtest  excitement.  No  one 
doubts  this ;  but  that  tlie  morning  pulse  is  quicker 
than  the  evening  one,  altogether  independent  of  anj' 
stimulants,  is  proved,  I  think,  beyond  a  doubt  by  this 
and  other  tables. 

The  next  question,  which  is  a  more  important  one 
in  many  respects,  is  as  to  the  existence  of  a  diurnal 
revolution  in  the  excitabihty  of  the  heart ;  by  this  I 
mean  a  varying  susceptibility,  according  to  the  time 
of  day,  for  a  healthy  powerful  action  of  the  heart,  when 
influenced  by  food,  exercise,  &c. 

The  numerous  observations  detailed  throughout  this 
paper,  and  in  my  former  memoir,  published  in  1814-15, 
may,  it  is  hoped,  settle  this  question  with  mipreju- 
diced  i)ersons.  The  excitability  of  the  heart  dimi- 
nishes regularly  from  an  early  hour  until  late  in  the 
evening.  Indeed,  I  have  reason  to  think  that,  since 
the  publication  of  my  first  memoir  in  181.5,  few  have 
doubted  this  fact ;  and  I  beg  leave,  therefore,  to  refer 
at  once  to  that  memoir." 

The  following  observations  will  explain  to  the  reader 
the  nature  of  the  "  elements"  omitted  by  M.  Quete- 
let:— 

"  I  can  nowhere  find  in  the  valuable  woi'ks  of  M. 
Quetelet,  that  he  was  aware  of  the  effects  of  position 
on  the  pulse,  or  of  its  diurnal  revolution,  or  of  the 
diurnal  change  in  its  excitabihtj- ;  and  this  lessens,  I 
regret  to  say,  the  otherwise  entire  confidence  I  and 
all  others  woidd  be  disposed  to  place  in  the  results 
arrived  at  b}'  this  profound  and  ingenious  philosopher. 
In  the  tables,  for  example,  constructed  to  determine 
the  influence  of  sleep  on  the  pulse  and  respiration, 
compared  with  the  waking  state,  no  mention  is  made 
of  the  time  of  day  or  night,  nor  of  the  position  of  the 
person  whilst  awake,  Avhether  horizontal,  sitting,  or 
standing  upright.  The  piUsation  of  the  person  sleep- 
ing woidd,  in  aU  probability,  be  reckoned  in  the  even- 
ing, at  a  time  when  the  pulse  sinks  naturally,  altoge- 
ther independent  of  sleep. 

Again,  he  found  that  in  a  male  child  from  four  to 
five  years  old,  the  pulsations  and  inspirations  were — 

In  the  construction  of  these  tables,  two  great  data 
have  been  neglected,  namely,  the  position  of  the  per- 
son and  the  time  of  the  day. 

If  the  pulsations  and  inspirations  were  reckoned 
during  the  night,  as  an  index  of  the  effects  of  sleep, 
then  the  effects  of  the  time  of  day  are  mistaken  for 
the  effects  of  sleep ;  for  at  midnight  the  pulse  nume- 
rically is  low  in  a  healthy  and  stout  person,  whether 
asleep  or  not,  and  the  excitability  of  the  heart  is  nearly 
at  its  zero.  Again,  the  pidse  would  be  counted  at  one 
time  whilst  the  person  was  in  a  horizontal  position, 
and  at  another  time  whilst  sitting,  or  even  standing. 
This  would  also  make  a  difference  of  10  or  12  beats, 
which  M.  Quetelet  has  not  taken  into  account.  I 
question  much  if  any  effects  arise  from  sleep,  except- 
ing of  a  very  trivial  nature ;  but  restlessness  and 
watchfulness,  arising  from  any  cause,  when  the  body 
ought  to  sleep  and  requires  it,  would  produce  a  highly 
excited  pulse,  the  result  of  weakness  and  temporary 
ailment. 

In  this  climate,  the  temperatiu-e  of  our  rooms  often 
sinks  very  much  during  winter,  and  especially  towards 
the  morning  ;*  with  the  temperature  the  pulse  sinks, 
and  this  may  be  one  cause  why,  as  I  have  just  re- 
marked, some  have  doubted  the  fact  of  the  pulse  being 
quicker  in  the  morning  than  towards  evening. 

The  effects  of  a  cold  room  in  depressing  the  pulse, 
is  such,  that  even  the  active  exercise  of  writing  fails 
to  counteract  it. 

The  folloAving  table  shows  that  the  pulse  remained 
much  depressed  under  circumstances  in  which  it  ought 
to  have  risen  very  much : — 

1st  December. 

2  A.  M. — In  bed,  -        - 

5  A.  .M.— Sitting  and  writing  for  some  hours, 

(There  was  no  fire  in  the  room). 

6  a.m. — Still  writing,  ... 

7  A.  M. — Ditto,     .... 

Asleep. 

Awake 

Pulsations,    - 

-       77-3 

Pulsations,    - 

93-4 

Inspirations,     - 

-    24-5 

Inspirations,     - 

-    29-3 

Here  the  pulse  ought,  but  for  the  cold  room,  to 
have  risen  very  much,  for  the  action  of  writing  raises 
the  j)ulse  considerably ;  that  of  composition  still  more. 
Those  whose  minds  are  much  occupied  with  business, 
are  not/a(>  subjects  for  experiments  on  the  pulse. 

The  use  or  abuse  of  Avine  and  spirituous  liquors, 
renders  all  observations  on  the  pulse  inaccurate.  These 
liquors,  in  my  opinion,  are  purely  medicinal.  Their 
daily,  or  even  frequent  use  in  any  cUmate,  or  in  any 
quantity,  I  apprehend  to  be  a  great  error  in  regimen, 
and  can  never  be  required.  I  think  them  directly 
opposed  to  the  enjoyment  of  perfect  health  and 
strength." 

I  shall  conclude  these  remarks  by  adding  the  gene- 
ral residts : — 

"  1.  The  velocity  of  the  heart's  action  is  in  the  direct 
ratio  of  the  age  of  the  individual,  being  quickest  in 
3'oung  persons,  slowest  in  the  aged.  There  may  be 
exceptions  to  this,  but  they  do  not  affect  the  general 
law. 

2.  The  question  of  an  average  pulse  for  all  ages  has 
hitherto  been  determined  upon  insufficient  data. 

.3.  There  is  a  morning  acceleration  and  an  evening 
retardation  in  the  number  of  the  pulsations  of  the 
heart,  independent  of  any  stimulation  by  food,  &c. 

*  The  thermometer  being  seldom  above  61  or  62  degrees  of  Fah- 
renheit, even  with  a  strong  fire  in  the  room.  It  is  unnecessary 
to  remark  to  any  medical  person  that,  if  he  sits  before  a  strong 
fire,  his  pulse  will  rise  almost  at  any  time,  and  that  if  he  sits  still 
in  a  cold  room  imtil  his  feet  feel  chilled,  his  pulse  will  sink  pro- 
portionally;  hence,  if  possible,  all  observations  on  the  pulse  ought 
to  be  made  in  summer.  I  attribute  to  an  inattention  to  the  fact 
of  the  coldness  of  apartments  in  this  country  generally  during  the 
night  and  towards  morning,  why  some  have  thought  that  there 
is  no  diiuTial  revolution  of  the  pulse  as  to  its  numbers,  inde- 
pendent of  stimulation  by  food  and  otherwise ;  or,  in  other 
words,  that  the  pulse  will  not  accelerate  towards  morning  spon- 
taneously. 

122 

ON  MAN. 

4.  The  excitability  of  the  heart  undergoes  a  daily 
revolution,  that  is,  food  and  exercise  most  affect  the 
heart's  action  in  the  morning  and  during  the  forenoon, 
least  in  the  afternoon,  and  least  of  all  in  the  evening. 
Hence  Ave  should  infer  that  the  pernicious  use  of  spiri- 
tuous liquors  must  be  greatly  aggravated  in  those  who 
drink  before  dinner, 

5.  Sleep  does  not  farther  affect  the  heart's  action 
than  by  a  cessation  of  all  voluntary  motion,  and  by  a 
recumbent  position. 

6.  In  weak  persons,  muscular  action  excites  the  ac- 
tion of  the  heart  more  powerfully  than  in  strong  and 
healthy  individuals ;  but  this  does  not  apply  to  other 
stimulants — to  wine,  for  example,  or  to  spirituous 
liquors. 

7.  The  effects  of  the  position  of  the  body  in  increas- 
ing or  diminishing  the  number  of  pulsations,  is  solely 
attributable  to  the  muscular  exertion  required  to 
maintain  the  body  in  the  sitting  or  erect  position ;  the 
debility  may  be  measured  by  altering  the  position  of 
the  person  from  a  recumbent  to  the  sitting  or  to  the 
erect  position. 

9.  The  law  of  the  differential  pulse  is  not  universal. 
There  are  exceptions  to  be  found  even  in  those  in  per- 
fect health.  It  is  also  possible  that  there  may  be  some 
in  whom  the  diurnal  revolutions  of  the  pulse  takes 
place  only  in  consequence  of  the  use  of  stimulants. 
But  this  has  not  been  proved  satisfactorily. 

10.  The  most  powerful  stimulant  to  the  heart's  ac- 
tion is  muscular  exertion.  The  febrile  pulse  never 
equals  this. 

11.  The  law  of  relation  between  the  inspiration  and 
pulsation  of  the  heart  lias  been  stated  by  M.  Quetelet." 

II.— CLIMATE. 

Since  the  publication  of  M.  Quetelet's  work,  the 
different  effects  of  various  climates  on  tlie  sickness, 
mortality,  and  invaliding  of  British  troops,  have  been 
carefully  and  admirably  investigated  by  Major  Tul- 
loch.*  Tliese  researches  are  not  confined  exclusively 
to  British  troops,  as  they  include  an  inquiry  into  the 
effects  of  climate  on  the  Negro  or  black  troops  in  the 
British  service,  when  removed  from  the  tropical  to 
colder  but  yet  comparatively  warm,  or  at  least  mild, 
regions  of  the  earth.  Previous  to  laying  before  the 
reader  some  of  the  more  important  results  deduced  by 
Major  Tulloch,  from  the  data  placed  in  his  hands  by 
the  unwearied  exertions  of  Sir  James  Macgrigor  (to 
whom  the  chief  merit  of  these  reports  is  due),  I  shall 
take  the  liberty  of  making  the  following  observa- 
tions. 

The  various  cUmates  of  the  globe  may  practically  be 
arranged  under  two  zones  or  belts — inter-tropical  and 
extra-tropical,  north  and  south  of  the  equator.  The 
extra-tropical  regions  may  again  be  subdivided  into 
two  or  three  regions,  whicli  may  be  designated  as 
warm,  temperate,  and  cold  or  frozen.  These  respective 
regions  differ  much  in  climate,  and,  to  a  great  extent, 
in  their  botanical  and  zoological  sections,  including 
man  himself;  for,  whilst  the  tropical  regions  of  the 
Old  World  liave  been  inhabited  from  the  earliest  his- 
toric period  by  the  Negro  and  other  dark-coloured 
races,  the  warm  chmates  have  equally  been  held  by 
the  Pelasgic,  Copt,  Syrian,  Arab,  and  Jewish  (on  the 
supposition  that  these  are  distinct  races  of  men)  ;  the 
temperate  by  the  Celtic  and  Saxon ;  and  probably  (for 
the  fact  is  not  certain)  the  cold  or  frozen  by  a  race, 
the  Fin  and  Laplander,  differing  from  all  the  others. 
The  following  observations  may  conveniently  form  an 
introduction  to  the  subject  of  emigration,  which  I 
shall  discuss  in  the  next  section. 

*  See  Statistical  Reports  ordered  to  be  printed  by  the  House  of 
Commons. 

The  influence  of  climate  over  the  health  of  Euro- 
peans of  the  Saxon  and  Celtic  races,  in  tropical  regions 
possessing  no  countervailing  advantages,  such,  more 
especially,  as  great  elevation  (this  being  seemingly  the 
only  security),  had  been  ascertained,  at  least  practi- 
cally, and  on  a  great  scale,  long  prior  to  Major  Tul- 
loch's  researches.  The  first  report  of  that  gentleman 
referred  to  the  West  Indies.  "  The  main  object  kept 
in  view,"  says  the  major,  "  lias  been  merely  to  deter- 
mine the  extent  of  sickness  and  mortality  at  each  sta- 
tion, the  diseases  by  which  it  has  been  induced,  and 
such  causes  of  these  diseases  as  appear  sufficiently  obvi- 
ous or  tangible  to  admit  of  remedy."  This  report  was 
followed  by  a  second  on  the  sickness,  mortality,  and 
invaliding  among  the  troops  in  the  United  King- 
dom, the  Mediterranean,  and  British  America ;  and 
this  by  a  third  on  Western  Africa,  St  Helena,  the 
Cape  of  Good  Hope,  and  the  Mauritius. 

It  would  appear,  from  these  documents,  that  neither 
the  Saxon,  nor  Celtic,  nor  mixed  race,  composing  the 
troops  of  Great  Britain,  can  withstand,  even  imder 
the  most  favourable  circumstances,  the  deleterious 
influence  of  a  tropical  climate.  Disposed  at  one  time 
to  ascribe  this  sad  result  to  the  deplorable  habits  of 
intemperance,  the  besetting  vice  of  all  soldiers,  I  am 
now,  though  most  reluctantly,  compelled  to  admit  that 
even  temperance,  however  it  may  diminish  the  effects 
of  the  climate,  and  add  to  the  chances  in  favour  of 
the  European,  is  by  no  means  a  permanent  security. 
So  far  as  regards  the  vast  regions  of  the  earth — the 
most  fertile,  the  richest — the  question  as  to  their  per- 
manent occupancy  by  the  Saxon  and  Celt — I  mean  as 
Britain  and  France  are  now  occupied,  or  any  other 
country,  by  its  native  inhabitants — will  be  regarded 
as  settled  by  almost  all  who  peruse  these  reports. 
The  Anglo-Saxon  is  now  pushing  himself  towards 
the  tropical  countries ;  Mexico  has  been  invaded  and 
partitioned ;  another  battle  of  San  Jacinto  wiU  shortly 
decide  the  fate  of  California ;  Central  Mexico  may 
follow,  and  Peru :  but  can  the  Saxon  maintain  him- 
self in  these  countries — in  Brazil,  Columbia  ? — It  is 
to  be  feared  not.  Experience  seems  to  indicate  that 
neither  the  Saxon  nor  Celtic  races  can  maintain  them- 
selves, in  the  strict  sense  of  the  word,  within  tropi- 
cal countries.  To  enable  them  to  do  so  they  require 
a  slave  population  of  native  labourers,  or  of  coloured 
men  at  least,  and,  in  addition,  a  constant  draught  from 
the  parent  country.  The  instances  of  Cuba,  Brazil, 
Mexico,  Columbia,  &c.,  where  the  Spanish  and  Por- 
tuguese seem  to  be  able  to  maintain  their  ground,  do 
not  bear  so  directly  on  the  question  as  many  may 
suppose  :  for,  in  the  first  place,  we  know  not  precisely 
the  extent  to  which  these  have  mingled  with  the 
dark  and  native  races ;  and,  secondly,  the  emigrants 
from  Spain  and  Portugal  partook,  in  all  probability, 
more  of  the  Moor,  Pelasgic,  and  even  Arab  blood,  than 
of  the  Celt  or  Saxon. 

But  can  these  latter  maintain  their  ground  in  the 
warm  but  extra-tropical  regions  of  the  earth  ?  This 
question  has  not  yet  been  fully  answered.  The  Dutch 
have  held  possession  of  the  Cape  for  nearly  two  hun- 
dred and  fifty  years,  and  have  thriven  well ;  have 
been  free  of  disease,  and  multipUed  exceedingly ;  but — 
and  here  comes  the  trying  part  of  the  question — they 
have  never  laboured.  So  with  Algeria,  which  the  Celt 
now  attempts  to  colonise.  Can  he  stand  labour  in  the 
field  ?  I  doubt  it  exceedingly.  Time  alone  can  satis- 
factorily offer  a  solution  of  this  question.  Yet  in  many 
parts  of  Southern  Australia,  the  Saxon  and  Celtic 
races  can  withstand  labour  in  the  field ;  but  the  ex- 
periment has  been  made  on  too  limited  a  scale  to 
warrant  important  deductions.  But  the  cold  and 
frozen  regions  they  tolerate  easily ;  it  seems,  indeed, 
to  have  been  their  congenial  soil.  Yet  even  here, 
fever,  that  scourge  of  the  human  race  in  aU  climates, 
commits  sad  ravages,  and  consumption  of  the  lungs, 
by  its  numerous  victims,  causes  many  ever-recurring 
woes.    But  the  reproductive  principle  is  equal  and 

ON  MAN. 

123 

even  much  superior  to  all  the  diseases  incident  to 
these  climates  when  inhabited  by  their  indigenous 
races ;  not  so,  however,  when  the  natives  of  tropical 
countries  attempt  to  settle  in  them.  IMajor  Tulloch 
has  proved  that  to  them  such  climates  are  at  least  as 
disastrous  as  the  tropical  regions  have  proved  to  Eu- 
ropeans. 

Before  concludmg  these  general  remarks,  I  take  the 
liberty  of  adding  a  single  one  in  respect  to  acclimata- 
tion.  When  our  troops  occupied  Walcheren  and  Flush- 
ing, during  the  deplorable  scheme  of  invading  Europe, 
the  mortality  assumed  a  most  alarming  character  :  it 
more  than  decimated  the  British  troops,  as  it  seems 
always  to  have  similarly  affected  the  French,  the 
Dutch  or  Saxon  inhabitants  suffering,  as  was  said,  in 
no  shape  from  fever,  wondering  at  the  mortality 
amongst  the  British,  and  asserting  the  climate  to  be 
as  good  as  any  other.  Now  all  this,  if  true,  must  arise 
from  acclimatation,  seeing  that  both  races,  English 
and  Dutch,  arise  from  one  parent  stock  ;  and  it  seems 
probable,  therefore,  that  in  progress  of  time  the  de- 
scendants of  those  very  men  who  fell  in  the  prime  of 
life  at  Flushing,  cut  off  by  fever,  might  experience  no 
ill  effects  from  a  climate  to  which  they  and  their  fore- 
fathers, for  several  generations,  had  become  inured. 
This  is  merely  thro^vn  out  as  a  hint  for  future  in- 
quirers. In  the  mean  time,  it  has  been  proved  tlvat 
the  mortality  of  our  troops  increased  with  length  of 
residence  in  the  West  Indies  and  in  all  tropical  coun- 
tries, so  that  acclimatation  is  the  reverse  of  salutarj', 
at  least  in  so  far  as  regards  the  first  emigrants.  This 
law  holds  even  in  cold  climates,  such  as  Britain,  at 
least  in  regard  to  large  towns,  a  residence  in  which, 
by  persons  who  have  come  to  reside  in  them  from  the 
country,  is  constantly  injurious  to  health ;  the  longer 
always  the  worse.  So  much  for  the  theories  of  medi- 
cal men  in  respect  to  acclimatation ;  on  careful  in- 
quiry they  have  proved  (a  not  unusual  occurrence) 
the  reverse  of  truth. 

Upon  the  whole,  every  reliance  may  be  placed  in 
the  following  deductions  by  Major  Tulloch,  the  result 
of  the  first  series  of  his  inquiries. 

"  It  has  been  supposed  by  many,  that  the  diseases 
which  prove  so  fatal  to  Europeans  in  these  latitudes, 
especially  fevers,  are,  if  not  a  neccssarj',  at  least  a 
very  general,  consequence  of  continued  exposure  to  a 
high  temperature.  The  suificiency  of  this,  however, 
as  a  uniform  cause  of  sickness  and  mortahty,  is  con- 
tradicted by  the  fact,  that  these  vary  considerably  in 
different  stations,  the  mean  temperature  of  whicla  is 
nearly  alike.  The  range  of  the  thermometer,  for  in- 
stance, in  Antigua  and  Barbadoes,  is  rather  higher 
than  in  Dominica,  Tobago,  Jamaica,  or  the  Bahamas  ; 
yet  we  find  that  the  troops  in  the  latter  stations  suif'er 
nearly  three  times  as  much  as  those  in  the  former. 
There  are  also  several  instances  in  which  epidemic 
fever  made  its  appearance,  and  raged  with  the  utmost 
virulence  during  the  winter  months — a  circumstance 
not  likely  to  have  taken  place  if  that  disease  had 
originated  in  increased  temperature. 

If  elevated  temperature  was  an  essential  cause  of 
the  mortality  to  which  Europeans  are  liable  in  this 
climate,  we  might  expect  it  in  every  year  to  produce 
similar  effects ;  whereas,  on  the  contrary,  it  appears, 
from  the  tabular  statements  in  the  preceding  report, 
that  the  mortahty  in  one  year  is  sometimes  twenty 
times  as  high  as  in  another,  without  any  perceptible 
difference  in  the  range  of  temperature.  This  fiict  has 
already  attracted  the  notice  of  some  medical  authors, 
Avho,  in  treating  of  yellow  fever,  adduce  instances  of 
various  epidemics  both  within  and  beyond  the  tropics, 
during  which  the  temperature  was  not  above  the 
average,  and  was  sometimes  even  a  Uttle  below 
it,  and  inversely  where  the  existence  of  a  high  tem- 
perature was  not  attended  with  the  prevalence  of 
fever.* 

♦  Craigie— Prac<«c«  if  Phytic,  pp.  224,  iX,  2rj. 
I 

In  accounting  for  the  unhealthiness  of  these  colonies, 
great  influence  has  been  ascribed  to  excess  of  mois- 
ture. 

That  neither  heat  nor  moisture  can  be  the  prknary 
causes  which  influence  the  health  of  troops  in  the 
West  Indies,  is  at  once  established  by  referring  to  the 
comparative  view  of  the  ratio  of  mortahty  in  each 
year  at  every  station,  in  which  there  are  numerous 
instances  of  two  adjacent  islands,  or  even  of  two  con- 
tiguous stations  in  the  same  island,  being  subject  in 
an  equal  degree  to  the  operation  of  these  agencies ; 
and  yet,  while  the  one  has  been  desolated  by  the 
ravages  of  fever,  the  other  has  been  enjoying  a  de- 
gree of  salubrity  equal  to  that  of  Great  Britain. 

Though  heat  and  moisture  are  not  the  primary 
causes  of  fever,  however,  it  is  highly  probable  their 
operation  tends  in  some  measure  to  increase  its  in- 
tensity. The  tables  illustrating  the  influence  of  the 
seasons  on  the  health  of  the  troops  in  each  station, 
show,  that  the  greatest  number  of  admissions  into 
hospital,  and  deaths,  has,  on  the  average  of  a  series 
of  years  (though  not  uniformly  or  equally  in  each 
year),  taken  place  in  those  months  Avhen  the  greatest 
degree  of  heat  Avas  combined  with  the  greatest  mois- 
ture ;  and  it  may  be  observed,  as  a  striking  exempUfi- 
cation  of  this  fact,  that  as  the  sun  proceeds  northward 
in  the  ecliptic,  carrying  heat  and  moisture  in  his 
train,  the  period  generally  termed  the  unhealthy  season 
is  later  in  the  northern  colonies  than  in  those  to  the 
south. 

The  unhealthy  character  of  that  period  of  the  year 
in  whicl)  the  greatest  degree  of  heat  and  moisture  is 
combined,  is  not,  however,  confined  to  the  West  Indies, 
but  extends  also  to  the  East,  as  well  as  over  a  large 
portion  of  the  northern  temperate  zone."  Hence 
(Major  Tulloch  continues)  these  causes  cannot  spe- 
cially render  the  AVest  Indies  so  unhealthy.  He  also 
shows,  by  a  comparison  of  stations,  that  neither  can 
tlie  rank  vegetation  of  marsh  or  savannah  be  held  the 
primary  cause  of  West  Indian  maladies,  and  concludes 
with  the  following  suggestion,  which  chimes  in  with 
an  idea  gradually  acquiring  more  and  more  importance 
in  medical  statistics  : — 

"  We  are  too  sensible  of  the  diflSculty  of  the  subject 
to  venture  on  any  theory  of  our  own,  which  might  on 
subsequent  examination  prove  as  futile  as  those  which 
preceded  it ;  but  we  merely  wish  to  call  the  attention 
of  such  persons  as  may  be  disposed  for  further  inquiry, 
to  the  circumstance  tliat  as  j^et  no  experiments  have 
been  made  on  the  electrical  condition  of  the  atmo- 
sphere in  the  West  Indies,  diu-ing  periods  of  epidemic ; 
and  as  it  is  possible  either  an  excess  or  deficiency  of 
that  powerful  thougli  miseen  agent,  may  exercise  an 
important  influence  on  the  vital  functions,  the  subject 
seems  worthy  of  attention.  Heat  and  moistiire  are 
Avcll  known  to  be  intimately  connected  with  the  deve- 
lopment of  electrical  phenomena,  and  its  influence  on 
vegetation  has  also  recently  been  estabUshed  by  ex- 
periment ;  consequently,  if  the  prevalence  of  disease 
could  be  satisfactorily  traced  to  that  source,  the  rea- 
son why  heat,  moisture,  and  vegetation  should  have 
been  mistaken  as  the  causes,  when  acting  oiUy  as 
auxiharies,  would  be  readily  accounted  for ;  and  even 
should  the  results  leave  the  cause  of  disease  as  unde- 
termined as  before,  science  will  at  least  be  benefited 
by  the  inquiry."  The  main  practical  result  accruing 
from  the  researches  of  IMajor  TuUoch,  has  reference  to 
the  effect  of  an  elevated  site  on  the  he;dth  of  a  resi- 
dent population  within  the  tropics. 

This  is  a  point  deeplj^  affecting  all  such  colonisa- 
tion schemes  as  that  proposed  for  the  Darien  isthmus, 
and  other  tropical  locahties.  The  report  demon- 
strates, beyond  a  doubt,  as  regards  remittent  fever, 
"  that,  at  an  elevation  of  from  2000  to  2.500  feet,  set- 
tlers or  troops  are  likely  to  be  either  wholly  exempt 
from  that  disease,  or  to  encounter  it  in  so  very  mo- 
dified a  form,  that  the  mortality  from  all  causes  will 
not,  on  the  average  of  a  series  of  years,  materially 

124 

ON  MAN. 

exceed  that  to  Avliich  an  equal  number  of  European 
troops  would  be  subject  in  the  capital  of  their  native 
country.  The  diseases  of  the  tropics  seem,  like  the 
vegetable  productions  of  the  same  regions,  to  be  re- 
stricted to  certain  altitudes  and  particular  degrees  of 
temperature.  The  researches  of  Humboldt  on  this 
subject  haA'e  tended  to  establish  that  yeUow  fever  is 
never  known  beyond  the  height  of  2500  feet,  so  that 
the  nearer  this  boundarj'  can  be  approached  the  more 
likely  is  the  health  of  the  troops  to  be  secured." 

In  the  second  report  by  the  same  able  statistician, 
^ve  find  the  following  deductions.  Tliey  refer  chiefly 
to  the  comparative  salubrity  of  the  lilediterrauean 
stations,  and  those  occiipied  by  our  soldiery  in  North 
America.  After  showing  that  the  Mediterranean 
troops,  from  many  causes  independent  of  climate,  are 
less  exposed  to  the  influences  producing  pulmonary 
disease;  Major  TuUoch  proceeds  thus  : — 

"  When  M'e  find,  notwithstanding  all  these  circiun- 
stances  apparently  so  favourable  to  the  greater  deve- 
lopment of  these  diseases  in  Canada  and  Nova  Scotia, 
that  the  troops  there  do  not  suffer  fi'om  them  to  a 
greater  extent  than  in  the  Mediterranean,  it  would 
manifestly  be  incorrect  to  attribute  their  prevalence 
in  North  America  to  the  reduced  temperature,  and 
sudden  atmospherical  vicissitudes,  incident  to  that 
quarter  of  the  globe,  seeing  that  the  sufferings  of  the 
troops  from  these  diseases  are  equally  gi-eat  in  other 
climates  Avhere  no  such  causes  are  in  operation  to 
induce  them. 

The  caution  necessary  to  be  exercised  in  attribut- 
ing to  certain  pecuUarities  of  climate  the  prevalence 
of  any  class  of  diseases,  is  so  strikmgly  exhibited  by 
the  proportion  of  rheumatic  affections  ascertained  to 
have  occurred  among  the  troops  in  different  colonies, 
that  the  following  abstract  wiU  best  serve  to  illustrate 
our  observations  on  this  head : — 

Admissions  from 

Rheumatic 

Affections  annually 

per  1000  of  mean 

Strength. 

Jamaica,      .            .            -            - 

29 

Nova  Scotia  and  New  Brunswick, 

30 

Bermudas,    -            -            -            - 

33 

Malta,      .... 

34 

Ionian  Islands, 

3ii 

Gibraltar,            ... 

38 

Canada,         .... 

40 

Mauritius,            ... 

46 

AVindward  and  Leeward  Command, 

49 

United  Kingdom, 

60 

Cape  of  Good  Hope, 

-        67 

Thus  we  find  that  in  the  mild  and  equable  climate 
of  the  Mediterranean,  or  the  Mauritius,  tlie  proportion 
of  rheumatic  affections  is  even  greater  than  in  the 
inclement  regions  of  Nova  Scotia  and  Canada,  and 
that,  though  some  of  the  provinces  of  the  Cape  of 
Good  Hope  have  occasionally  been  without  rain  for 
several  years,  these  diseases  are  more  frequent  in  the 
dry  climate  of  that  command  than  in  the  West  Indies, 
where  the  condition  of  the  atmosphere  is  as  remark- 
ably the  reverse ;  yet  have  extreme  cold  and  atmo- 
spheric vicissitudes,  coupled  with  excess  of  moisture, 
been  assigned  as  satisfactory  causes  for  their  preva- 
lence. 

Considering  that  medical  officers  have  hitherto  pos- 
sessed no  means  of  comparing  the  influence  of  sucli 
diseases  in  different  climates,  any  erroneous  impres- 
sions which  may  be  entertained  on  that  subject,  need 
not  excite  surprise.  The  information  now  collected, 
in  regard  to  those  prevalent  among  troops  in  every 
colony,  will  best  serve  to  counteract  such  impressions, 
and  afford  a  surer  basis  for  future  theories  on  that 
subject. 

The  results  of  this  report,  in  regard  to  the  relative 
prevalence,  at  different  stations  in  British  America, 
of  remittent  and  intermittent  fevers,  add  still  further 

to  the  difficulty  of  establishing  any  uniform  connexion 
between  the  presence  of  marshj^  ground  and  the  ex- 
istence of  those  febrile  diseases  to  Avhich  the  exhala- 
tions from  it  are  supposed  to  give  rise. 

When,  in  subsequent  reports,  we  come  to  investi- 
gate the  operation  of  these  diseases  on  the  west  coast 
of  Africa  and  other  colonies,  Ave  shaU  be  able  to  ad- 
duce stiU  more  satisfactory  evidence  on  this  subject ; 
in  the  mean  tune,  we  have  felt  it  our  duty  to  place 
the  preceding  facts  in  a  prominent  point  of  view,  not 
for  the  purpose  of  establishing  any  particular  theory, 
but  to  show  how  inadequate,  in  many  instances,  is 
the  supposed  influence  of  emanations  from  a  marshy 
sod  to  account  for  the  origin  of  these  diseases.  AU 
the  evidence  obtained  seems  only  to  A^arrant  the  in- 
ference, that  a  morbific  agency  of  some  kind  is  occa- 
sionally present  in  the  atmosphere,  which,  under  cer- 
tain circumstances,  gives  rise  to  fevers  of  tlie  remit- 
tent and  intermittent  type;  and  that,  though  the 
vicinity  of  marshy  and  swampy  ground  appears  to 
favoiir  the  development  of  that  agenc}^  it  does  not 
necessai'Uy  prevail  in  such  locahties,  nor  are  they  by 
any  means  essential  either  to  its  existence  or  opera- 
tion. 

Notwithstanding  the  doubt  in  which  this  branch  of 
the  investigation  is  still  involved,  we  may  venture, 
from  the  facts  adduced  in  all  the  reports  hitherto  sub- 
mitted, also  to  draw  the  conclusion,  that  when  this 
morbific  agency  manifests  itself  in  the  epidemic  form, 
its  influence  is  frequently  confined  to  so  limited  a 
space,  as  to  afford  a  fair  prospect  of  securing  the 
troops  from  its  ravages,  by  removal  to  a  short  dis- 
tance from  the  locality  where  it  originated.  The 
history  of  the  epidemic  fevers  at  Gibraltar  furnishes 
several  remarkable  instances  of  this  kind ;  and  we 
liave  also  shoAvn  that,  both  in  the  West  Indies  and 
Ionian  Islands,  one  station  has  frequently  suffered  to 
a  great  extent  from  yellow  fevei%  while  others,  Avithui 
the  distance  of  a  few  miles,  have  been  entirely  exempt. 
In  the  epidemic  cholera  at  Montreal  and  Hahfax, 
which  seems  to  have  been  in  this  respect  somewhat 
analogous  in  its  operation,  we  have  also  had  occasion 
to  remark  the  sudden  cessation  of  the  disease  imme- 
diately on  the  removal  of  the  troops,  even  to  a  short 
distance. 

Instead  of  entering,  therefore,  into  any  discussion 
as  to  the  causes  which  seem  thus  to  limit  the  range 
of  these  epidemics  to  particular  localities,  we  shall 
merely  call  the  attention  of  medical  officers  to  the 
fact,  that  on  the  outbreak  of  any  serious  disease  of 
that  nature,  they  may  forthwith  take  into  considera- 
tion the  expediency  of  removing  the  troops  from  the 
locality  where  it  originated — a  measure  which,  when- 
ever camp  eqvupage  can  readily  be  procured,  or  the 
necessary  accommodation  obtained  for  them,  is  likely 
to  be  attended  with  but  little  temporary  inconve- 
nience, and  may  probably  lead  to  the  happiest  results. 
^Ve  are  aware  that  this  suggestion  is  by  no  means  a 
new  one,  having  already  been  made  and  acted  upon 
in  various  colonies,  and  we  only  advert  to  it  now,  for 
the  ijurpose  of  bearing  testimony  to  its  apparent  effi- 
cacy, and  encouraging  the  adoption  of  it  Avhenever 
circumstances  will  permit." 

It  may  be  interesting  to  many  of  our  readers  to 
have  placed  before  them  the  following  section  on  the 
"  Influence  of  the  Seasons  in  producing  Sickness  and 
Mortality  among  the  Trooi)s  serving  in  North  Ame- 
rica" : — 

"  The  following  table,  illustrative  of  this  subject, 
has  been  prepared  from  the  retiu-ns  of  the  Canada 
command.  In  Bermuda,  Nova  Scotia,  &c.,  the  dates 
of  the  admissions  and  deaths  have  not  been  recorded 
Avith  sufficient  regularity  to  admit  of  similar  results 
being  exhibited  on  as  extensiA^e  a  scale,  and  avc  have 
therefore  confined  our  calculations  to  Canada,  Avhere, 
on  account  of  its  severity,  Ave  might  expect  to  find 
the  influence  of  Avinter  on  the  health  of  the  troops 
very  strongly  manifested .- — 

ON  MAN, 

125 

Table  showing  the  Influence  of  the  Seasons  on  the  Sickness  and  Mortality  of  Troops  in  British  America. 

IMonths. 

Admissions  into  Hospital  in  20  Years  of 
Troops  in  Canada. 

Deaths  in  20  Years  of  Troops  in  Canada. 

By  Acute 
Diseases. 

By  Chronic 
Diseases. 

By  Surgical 
Diseases. 

Total  by  aU 
Diseases. 

By  Acute 
Diseases. 

By  Chronic 
Diseases. 

By  Surgical 
Diseases. 

Total  by  aU 
Diseases. 

January, 

Februaiv, 

JIarch, 

April,          -         -         - 

Jlay,        - 

Juue, 

July,       - 

Augxist, 

September, 

October,      - 

November, 

December, 

2,142 
1,918 
l,f»oO 
2,551 
2,820 

4,183 
5.144 
4,440 
3,055 
2,708 
2,252 

273 
227 
206 
294 
303 
298 
353 
354 
.•)32 
241 
229 
197 

2,270 
2,026 
1,910 
2,038 
2,216 
2,479 
2,570 
2,678 
2,436 
2,280 
2,241 
2,072 

4,085 
4,171 
4,126 
4,883 
5,339 
5,840 
7,105 
8,176 
7,208 
5,576 
5,268 
4,521 

3(J 
31 
31 
33 
28 
58 
53 
103 
54 
38 
32 
35 

35 
23 
41 
39 
34 
37 
29 
21 
24 
27 
27 
23 

5 
3 
3 
1 

9 
8 
4 
4 
0 
3 
3 

76 
57 
75 
73 
64 
104 
9<J 
28 
82 
71 
62 
01 

Total, 

36.310 

33C(J 

27,216 

66,898 

532 

360 

51 

943 

Thus,  so  far  from  the  extreme  severity  of  the  winter 
in  Canada  operating  very  prejudicially  to  the  health 
of  the  troops,  we  find,  that  in  January,  February,  and 
March,  wlien  the  minimmn  of  tlie  thermometer  is 
many  degrees  below  zero,  the  admissions  from  acute 
diseases,  in  which  the  influence  of  the  seasons  is  most 
likely  to  l)e  manifested,  are  not  half  so  numerous  as 
in  July,  August,  and  September,  while  those  from 
chronic  and  surgical  diseases  are  also  lower,  though 
not  in  the  same  proportion.  In  fact,  so  rare  are  the 
cases  of  sickness  during  winter,  that  not  more  than 
five  and  a  half  per  cent,  of  the  force  come  imder  treat- 
ment monthly ;  whereas,  during  July,  August,  and 
September,  the  monthly  admissions  average  more  tluin 
ten  per  cent,  of  the  force.  The  ratio  of  deaths  follows 
the  same  law,  though  the  influence  of  the  cholera 
during  the  summer  and  autumn  of  1832  and  1834 
increased  the  relative  mortality  at  that  period  in  a 
still  greater  proportion  than  the  admissions. 

The  numbers  reported  sick  on  each  muster-day, 
establish  the  same  results  in  regard  to  the  compara- 
tive salubrity  of  the  winter  season,  not  in  Canada 
alone,  butjilso  in  Nova  Scotia,  New  Brunswick,  and 
Bermuda. 

Mean  Sick. 

Nova  Scotia 

Canada. 

and  New 

Bermuda. 

Brunswick. 

January, 

124 

72 

28 

February, 

125 

73 

27 

March, 

124 

72 

30 

April, 

127 

69 

31 

May, 

123 

78 

30 

June,    -        -        - 

1.35 

81 

30 

July, 

144 

82 

32 

August, 

161 

89 

35 

September, 

162 

84 

33 

October, 

136 

80 

34 

November, 

124 

67 

32 

December,    - 

116 

67 

.30 

The  general  prevalence  of  febrile  afiections  in  Upper 
Canada  during  summer,  might  be  supposed  to  account 
for  the  preponderance  of  sickness  there  at  that  season  ; 
but  the  same  peculiarity  extends  also  to  the  lower 
province,  where  febrile  diseases  are  more  rare.  The 
same  feature  is  observable  among  the  civil  inhabi- 
tants, as  will  be  seen  from  the  following  abstract  of 
the  deaths  in  each  month  among  the  population  of 
the  several  districts  in  the  lower  province,  made  up 
pursuant  to  an  order  of  the  House  of  Commons,  dated 
6th  December  1832. 

Deaths  in  each  Month,  from  1829  to  1831  inclusive,  in  the 
following  Districts  of  Lower  Canada : — ■ 

Total 

Months. 

Quebec. 

Mon- 
treal. 

Three 
Rivers. 

Caspar. 

St 
Francis. 

in  whole 
Pro- 
vince. 

Januarv, 

974 

1186 

194 

10 

1 

2365 

Februarj', 

986 

1241 

244 

16 

2 

24!» 

March,    - 

1005 

1.325 

292 

10 

3 

2735 

April,     - 

1012 

1293 

318 

0 

2629 

May,   -    - 

978 

1382 

392 

14 

6 

2772 

June,     - 

1129 

1496 

307 

10 

1 

2943 

July,  -    - 

1464 

2221 

3(J8 

13 

0 

4068 

August, 

1395 

2178 

358 

9 

5 

3945 

September, 

1147 

1502 

240 

11 

1 

2961 

October, 

956 

1.392 

215 

15 

„ 

2578 

November, 

950 

1130 

186 

11 

2 

2279 

December, 

1070 

1236 

170 

14 

2 

2498 

Thus,  even  in  the  lower  province,  where  intermit- 
tents  are  comparatively  rare,  June,  July,  August,  and 
Septenaber,  prove  much  more  fatal  to  the  civil  inhabi- 
tants than  the  most  severe  of  the  winter  months.  The 
preponderance  of  mortality  during  that  period  may 
in  a  slight  degree  be  accounted  for  by  the  influx  of 
emigrants  in  summer,  but  is  by  far  too  great  to  be 
entirely  attributable  to  that  source  ;  especially  as  the 
preceding  abstract  shows  that  it  commenced  prior  to 
the  month  of  April,  while  the  ports  Avere  closed,  and 
again  fell  to  its  former  level  in  November,  though 
many  of  the  emigrants  must  have  been  still  in  the 
province. 

In  the  state  of  New  York,  the  seasons  are  found  to 
exercise  a  corresponding  influence  on  mortalitj^  even 
when  no  visitation  of  3'ellow  fever  is  experienced. 
From  1816  to  1826,  the  dates  of  decease  of  24,852  per- 
sons were  carefully  recorded,  and  of  every  thousand 
of  these  deaths  the  relative  proportion  in  each  month 
was  found  to  have  been  as  follows  : — 

January, 

- 

75 

July,       - 

-      95i 

February, 

75i 

August, 

108i 

March,     - 

- 

74 

September, 

-    109J 

April, 

- 

73 

October, 

97 

May, 

- 

72 

November, 

-      79^ 

June, 

Total, 

65 

December, 

10<J0 

75i 

From  aU  these  facts,  then,  we  are  forced  to  arrive 
at  the  conclusion,  that  the  constitution  of  the  soldier, 
serving  in  these  commands,  is  not  affected  in  any 
material  degree  either  by  the  extreme  severity  of  a 
North  American  winter,  or  the  sudden  transitions  he 
undergoes  at  that  season,  in  passing  from  a  heated 
guard-room,  with  the  thermometer  at  80  degrees,  to 
his  sentinel  duties  in  the  open  air,  under  a  tempera- 
ture of  25  or  30  degrees  below  zero.  On  the  contrary, 
the  degree  of  health  enjoyed  by  the  troops  during 
winter  is  not  exceeded  in  any  quarter  of  the  globe. 

126 

ON  MAN. 

The  extreme  rarity  of  sickness  and  mortality  among 
the  crews  of  vessels  employed  in  the  arctic  regions, 
when  exposed  to  a  lower  temperature,  and  still  more 
sudden  vicissitudes  than  any  Ave  have  had  to  record, 
affords  a  striking  illustration  how  little  the  constitu- 
tion of  our  countrymen  is  likely  to  be  affected  even  by 
the  severest  climate  to  which  they  are  exposed. 

While  febrile  affections  of  the  intermittent  and  re- 
mittent types  prevail  during  sprmg  and  autumn,  bowel 
complaints  during  summer,  catarrhs  and  all  the  train 

of  pulmonary  affections  during  spring  and  the  com- 
mencement of  the  winter,  there  are  comparatively  few 
diseases  of  any  kind  during  the  severest  part  of  the 
season,  except  those  of  the  eyes,  induced  by  the  re- 
tiection  of  the  snow,  frost-bites  from  exposure,  and  a 
few  cases  of  acute  rheumatism  and  pneumonia,  which, 
however,  may  be  said  to  prevail  with  equal  severity 
at  other  periods  of  the  year." 

The  following  table  is  also  curious  and  interesting, 
as  contrasting  the  soldier  and  the  civilian. 

Ages. 

By  Tables  of 

Scotch  Benefit 

Societies. 

By  Tables  of 

English  Benefit 

Societies. 

Returns  of  East 

India  Company's 

Labourers  in 

London. 

Returns  of 
Portsmouth 

Dock 
Labourers. 

Returns 
of  Woolwich 

Dock 
Laboiurers. 

Constantly  Sick  per  1000, 

Average  number  of  Days  1 
Sick  in  each  Year,      -    > 

Average  Duration  of  each  i 
Attack  of  Sickness,     -    J 

.20  to  30 
\30  to  40 

20  to  30 
30  to  40 
20  to  30 
30  to  40 

11-4 
13-2 

Days. 
4-1 
4-8 

15-4 
18-3 
Days. 
5-6 
6-6 

13-6  1 

13-8 ; 

Days. 
4-021 
5'06> 

18-7  I 
22-6  < 

19-9 

Days. 

7-3 

13-2 

23-4 

Days. 

8-5 

In  the  third  report  by  IMajor  Tulloch,  the  two  ex- 
tremes are  happily  contrasted,  viz..  Western  Africa 
and  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope ;  the  latter,  perhaps— 
nay,  almost  certainly — ^the  healthiest  climate  in  the 
world,  the  former  proverbial  for  being  a  grave  to 
Europeans.  His  details  fully  bear  out  the  general 
character  of  the  stations.  In  conclusion,  it  may  be 
remarked,  that,  independent  of  all  other  important 
results,  these  reports  are  peculiarly  valuable  from  the 
ample  refutation  they  afford,  to  all  minds  open  to 
conviction,  of  the  more  generally  received  medical 
theories  in  respect  to  the  causes  of  many  fatal  and 
harassing  diseases.  They  may  also  prove  of  much 
practical  benefit,  in  freeing  the  minds  of  emigrants 
from  those  terrors  which  the  very  thought  of  particu- 
lar localities  has  long  been  apt  to  induce.   Rheumatism 

and  ague  rise  to  the  mind,  whenever  men  think  of  a 
Caniidian  winter ;  but  we  find  that,  in  reality,  the 
soldiery  in  the  Mauritius  suffer  more  severely  from 
that  disease  than  they  do  in  British  America.  In 
short,  jMajor  TuUoch's  elaborate  researches  lead  to  the 
conclusion,  that  atmospheric  causes,  operating  on  all 
climes  in  common,  and  modified  only  to  a  compara- 
tively slight  degree  by  local  circumstances,  form  the 
great  source  of  the  morbific  influences  affecting  man 
kind.  When  this  point  is  more  fully  investigated,  and 
fitting  remedial  means  discovered,  emigration  will  be 
stripped  of  half  its  difficulties,  and  a  new  lease  given 
to  civilised  man,  as  it  were,  of  a  large  portion  of  the 
globe,  of  which  at  this  moment  he  can  scarcely  be 
called  the  occupant. 

END  OF  TREATISE  ON  MAN. 

Kdinbit.om  : 
Tbintbd  by  W.  and  R.  Chambkhs, 

Jarv.     Feb.      Jfardv.     Jpra.     Mmj.       .w_/aZ^.        J^.       Sept.       Oct..       J^gr.     JPe^ 

PiATE  1. 

JoJv.      Feb. 

Joji..      Feb.       Ifardv.    ^ril.    May. 

Jime,. 

Jubj.      Jv^.        Sept.        Oct.       Tov.       Decern..    J^.       'M 
^^^^^^caXin^^^Mormiyofeo.ch.Mon&vforcarcreM.ages.  p,2^e  36. 

XtZ^MaOuSamT. 

rricsland 

Fl.uiclor 

s  ■ 

^t-M 

■V^T1.I« 

ilsacp 

IVaiK'lic  (VuuiG 

Bordeaux 

Lande> 

Pvi  euros 

xX    N:\-^^ 

^.  '^^' 

Ma^  Elustrattvc    of  the    comparative     araowil    of  Iiisivnctioa 
in  Franir,  IJu  Low  Coii/itries.c^tAf  Pnc/iy  o/thf  flower  Rhine. 

Corsica      N|^ 

X 

Ti  u'sldiid 

HoIbiKJ 

AmI.im.I 

I 

."r?  ^ 

Gi'oiunsen 

#■ 

1 
^     (.in  Mres 

DiuliY 

ofllic 

Lo"'tl  IvJiilii 

-i 

^ 

f 

hanrlu'  CouiTi' 

Veudi'i 

Bordeaux 

'''^^^^ 

r  Co. 

^^^kv^.' 

Alps 

landes     ^\^ 

rncnees 

*1 

"Ssss^--^- 

Corsicj    I 

Jlap  IHustratiyc  of  the  Crim/^  against  property. 

,J  Gellatlr 

Fricsland 

PtATE/. 

Xotjuandy 

UoDand 

Rcardv 

Ddchy 
of  tlic 

-lis.'K'O 

Veadet 

J'l'aiicho  CdiiiU'' 

£  ordcaux 

Laades 

# 

Geneva 

^ps 

Map,  IlUistratiye  of  the  Crcmes  against  persons. 

Corsica    I 

J.&cJlakx 

UNIVERSITY  OF  CALIFORNIA  LIBRARY 

Los  Angeles 

This  book  is  DUE  on  the  last  date  stamped  below. 

m'f^u 

SEP  2  ^ 

•••OCf 

NlftY  0  9  1991 
RECEIVED 

At 

4I^W  JMH  U^'!'-' 

j5 

i^mm^ 

SEP,^, 

m 

w 

NOV  0 1  im 

M  W 

2003 

f^XOZ  -R|EC'DYRL 

REC'DYRL..;2O2003 

315 

University  of  California,  Los  Angeles 

L  005  962  252  2
