================================================================================
Institutio Oratoria, Vol. IV (Books 9-12)
Quintilian | With an English translation by H. E. Butler (Loeb Classical Library, 1920)
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Source: Internet Archive: Loeb Classical Library, Quintilian Institutio Oratoria vol. 4 (1920)
Source URL: https://archive.org/details/institutioorator04quinuoft
Rights: Public Domain (U.S.)
Staged: 2026-10-09 | Tower of Babel Library, Batch 09a (classical-literature lane)
================================================================================

THE  LOEB  CLASSICAL  LIBRARY

rOUNOED BY JAMES LOEB,  LL.D.
EDITED BY

E.  H.  WARMINGTON,  m.a.,  f.r.hist.soc.

FORMER EDITORS

fT.  E.  PAGE,  c.H,,  LiTT.D.  fE.  CAPPS,  ph.d.,  ix.d.

tW.  H.  D.  ROUSE,  LITT.D.  L.  A.  POST,  l.h.d.


QUINTILIAN
IV


127


k


THE INSTITUTIO ORATORIA  OF

QUINTILIAN

WITH  AN  ENGLISH  TRANSLATION  BY
H. E. BUTLER, M.A.,

PROFESSOR  or LATIS IN LONDON DNITERSITT


IN  FOUR  VOLUMES
IV


CAMBRIDGE, MASSACHUSETTS

HARVARD UNIVERSITY PRESS

LONDON

WILLIAM HEINEMANN LTD

MOMLXVm


Coc>.  2-


First  printed  1922
Reprinted  1936, 1953,  1958,  1961,  1968


fO-l>9^S


Printed  in  Great  Britain


TABLE OF CONTENTS

PAOX
BOOK  X 1

Ch.  1  :  Value  of  reading;  autboi's  to  be  studied;
poeta  ;  historians  ;  orators  ;  philosophers  ;  brief
review  of  Greek  and  Roman  literature  considered
from  standpoint  of  rhetoric. — Ch.  2  :  Imitation. —
Ch.  3:  Writing. — Ch.  4:  Correction. — Ch.  5:
Various  forma  of  composition ;  translation  ;  para-
phrase, theses,  commonplaces,  declamations. — Ch.
6 :  Thought  and  premeditation. — Ch.  7  :  Speaking
extempore.

BOOK  XI 153

Ch.  1  :  The  necessity  of  speaking  appropriately  to
the  circumstances. — Ch.  2:  Memory  and  memory
systems. — Ch.  3  :  Delivery  gesture  and  dress.

BOOK  XII 351

Preface. — Ch.  1 :  A  great  orator  must  be  a  good
man. — Ch.  2  :  How  to  strengthen  character  ;  study
of  philosophy. — Ch.  3  :  Necessity  of  study  of  civil
law. — Ch.  4:  The  orator  must  be  well  equipped
with  examples  and  precedents. — Ch.  5  :  Necessity
of  firmness  and  presence  of  mind  ;  cultivation  of
natural  advantages. — Ch.  6  :  Age  at  which  the
orator  should  begin  to  plead. — Ch.  7  :  Causes  which
he  should  undertake  ;  remuneration  for  services. —
Ch,  8  :  Necessity  of  careful  stutly  of  each  case.
— Ch.  9 :  The  orator  must  not  make  applause
his  predominant  aim ;  sparing  use  of  invective  ;
relative  importance  of  preparation  in  writing  and
speaking  extempore. — Ch.  10:  The  dififerent  styles
of  oratory  ;  analogy  of  the  arts  of  sculpture  and
painting ;  Greek  and  Roman  oratory  compared. —
Ch.  11 :  At  what  age  to  retire  from  speaking  in
public  and  how  to  spend  one's  retirement ;  possi-
bilities of  the  successful  training  of  an  orator ;
advantages  to  be  drawn  therefrom ;  exhortation
to  diligence  ;  conclusion.

IKDEX or NAMKS ..  51?

INDKX  Of W0KD8 533

T


SIGLA
A  =  Codex  Ambrosiauus,  11th  century.

B  =  Agreement  of  Codicea Bernensis,  Bambergensis  and
Nostradamensis,  10th  century.

G  =  Codex Bambergensis  in  those passages  where  gaps
have  been  supplied  by  a  Liter  lltli-century  hand.


QUINTILIAN
BOOK X


M. FABII QUINTILIANI
INSTITUTIONIS ORATORIAE

LIBER X

I.  Sed  haec  eloquendi  praecepta,  sicut  cogitationi
sunt  necessaria,  ita  non  satis  ad  vim  dicendi  valent,
nisi  illis  firma  quaedam  facilitas,  quae  apud  Graecos
l^is  nominatur,  accesserit :  ad  quam  scribendo  plus
an  legendo  an  dicendo  conferatur,  solere  quaeri  scio.
Quod  esset  diligentius  nobis  examinandum,  si  quali-

2  bet  earum  rerum  possemus  una  esse  contenti.  Verum
ita  sunt  inter  se  conexa  et  indiscreta  omnia  ut,  si
quid  ex  his  defuerit,  frustra  sit  in  ceteris  laboratum.
Nam  neque  solida  atque  robusta  fuerit  unquam
eloquentia  nisi  niulto  stilo  vires  acceperit,  et  citra
lectionis  exemplum  labor  ille  carens  rectore  fluita-
bit ;  et  qui  ^  sciet  quae  quoque  sint  modo  dicenda,
nisi  tamen  in  procinctu  paratamque  ad  omnes
casus  habuerit eloquentiam,  velut  clausis  thesauris

3  incubabit. Non  autem  ut  quidquid  praecipue  neces-

^  fluitabit  et  qui,  Halm  i  fluvit  autem  qui,  O,
2


THE  INSTITUTIO ORATORIA
OF  QUINTILIAN

BOOK X

I.  But  these  rules  of  style,  while  part  of  the
student's  theoretical  knowledge,  are  not  in  them-
selves sufficient  to  give  him  oratorical  power.  In
addition  he  will  require  that  assured  facility  which
the  Greeks  call  t^is.  I  know  that  many  have  raised
the  question  as  to  whether  this  is  best  acquired  by
writing,  reading  or  speaking,  and  it  would  indeed
be  a  question  calling  for  serious  consideration,  if  we
could  rest  content  with  any  one  of  the  three.  But  2
they  are  so  intimately  and  inseparably  connected,
that  if  one  of  them  be  neglected,  we  shall  but  waste
the  labour  which  we  have  devoted  to  the  others.
For  eloquence  will  never  attain  to  its  full  develop-
ment or  robust  health,  unless  it  acquires  strength
by  frequent  practice  in  writing,  while  such  practice
without  the  models  supplied  by  reading  will  be  like
a  ship  drifting  aimlessly  without  a  steersman.
Again,  he  who  knows  what  he  ought  to  say  and
how  he  should  say  it,  will  be  like  a  miser  brooding
over  his  hoarded  treasure,  unless  he  has  the  weapons
of  his  eloquence  ready  for  battle  and  prepared  to
deal  with  every  emergency. But  the  degree in  3


QUINTILIAN

sarium  est,  sic  ad  efficiendum  oratorem  maximi
protinus  erit  momenti.  Nam  certe,  cum  sit  in
eloquendo  positum  oratoris  officium,  dicere  ante
omnia  est,  atque  hinc  initium  eius  artis  fuisse  mani-
festum  est ;  proximam  deinde  imitationem,  novissi-

4  mam  scribendi  quoque  diligentiam.  Sed  ut  perveniri
ad  surama  nisi  ex  principiis  non  potest,  ita  pro-
cedente  iam  opere  etiam  ^  minima  incipiunt  esse
quae  prima  sunt.  Verum  nos  non,  quomodo  insti-
tuendus  orator,  hoc  loco  dicimus ;  nam  id  quidem
aut  satis  aut  certe  uti  potuimus  dictum  est ;  sed
athleta,  qui  omnes  iam  perdidicerit  a  praeceptore
numeros,  quo  genere  exercitationis  ad  certamina
praeparandus  sit.  Igilur  eum,  qui  res  invenire  et
disponere  sciet,  verba  quoque  et  eligendi  et  collocandi
rationem  perceperit,  instruamus,  qua  ratione  quod
didicerit  ^  facere  quam  optime,  quam  facillime  possit.

5  Num  ergo  dubium  est,  quin  ei  velut  opes  sint
quaedam  parandae,  quibus  uti,  ubicunque  desidera-
tum erit, possit.'' Eae constant copia rerum ac

6  verborum.  Sed  res  propriae  sunt  cuiusque  causae
aut  paucis  communes,  verba  in  universas  paranda ;
quae  si  in  rebus  singulis essent  singula, minorem

*  etiam,  Osann:  iam,  AfSS,

*  qua ratione, ed. Col. 1527 : qua  oratione, 3fSS.
ditlicerit,  Zumpt :  dicere,  G.


BOOK X.  I.  3-6

which  a  thing  is  essential  does  not  necessarily  make
it  of  immediate  and  supreme  importance  for  the
formation  of  the  ideal  orator.  For  obviously  the
power  of  speech  is  the  first  essential,  since  therein
lies  the  primary  task  of  the  orator,  and  it  is  obvious
that  it  was  with  this  that  the  art  of  oratory  began,
and  that  the  power  of  imitation  comes  next,  and
third  and  last  diligent  practice  in  writing.  But  as  4
perfection  cannot  be  attained  without  starting  at
the  very  beginning,  the  points  which  come  first  in
time  will,  as  our  training  proceeds,  become  of  quite
trivial  importance.  Now  we  have  reached  a  stage  in
our  enquiry  where  we  are  no  longer  considering  the
jireliminary  training  of  our  orator ;  for  I  think  the
instructions  already  given  should  suffice  for  that ;
they  are  in  any  case  as  good  as  I  could  make  them.
Our  present  task  is  to  consider  how  our  athlete  who
has  learnt  all  the  technique  of  his  art  from  his
trainer,  is  to  be  prepared  by  actual  practice  for  the
contests  in  which  he  will  have  to  engage.  Con-
sequently, we  must  assume  that  our  student  has
learned  how  to  conceive  and  dispose  his  subject
matter  and  understands  how  to  choose  and  arrange
his  words,  and  must  proceed  to  instruct  him  how  to
make  the  best  and  readiest  use  of  the  knowledge
which  he  has  acquired.

There  can  then  be  no  doubt  that  he  must  accumu-  5
late  a  certain  store  of  resources,  to  be  employed
whenever  they  may  be  required.  The  resources  of
which  I  speak  consist  in  a  copious  supply  of  words
and  matter.  But  while  the  matter  is  necessarily  6
either  peculiar  to  the  individual  case,  or  at  best
common  to  only  a  fcAV,  words  must  be  acquired  to
suit  all  and  every  case. Now,  if  there  were  special


QUINTILIAN

curam  postularent,  nam  cuncta  sese  cum  ipsis  pro-
tinus  rebus  offerrent.  Sed  cum  sint  aliis  alia  aut
magis  propria  aut  magis  ornata  aut  plus  efficientia
aut  melius  sonantia,  debent  esse  non  solum  nota
omnia  sed  in  promptu  atque,  ut  ita  dicam,  in  con-
spectu,  ut,  cum  se  iudicio  dicentis  ostenderint,  facilis

7  ex  his  optimorum  sit  electio.  Et  quae  idem  signifi-
carent  solitos  scio  ediscere,  quo  facilius  et  occurreret
unum  ex  pluribus  et,  cum  essent  usi  aliquo,  si  breve
intra  spatium  rursus  desideraretur,  efFugiendae  re-
petitionis  gratia  sumerent  aliud  quod  idem  intelligi
posset.  Quod  cum  est  puerile  et  cuiusdam  infelicis
operae  turn  etiam  utile  parum ;  turbam  tantum
modo  1  congregat,  ex  qua  sine  discrimine  occupet
proximum  quodque.

8  Nobis  autem  copia  cum  iudicio  paranda  est  vim
orandi  non  circulatoriam  volubilitatem  spectantibus.
Id  autem  consequemur  optima  legendo  atque
audiendo ;  non  enim  solum  nomina  ipsa  rerum
cognoscemus hac cura,  sed quod  quoque loco sit

9  aptissimum.  Omnibus  enim  fere  verbis  ^  praeter
pauca,  quae  sunt  parum  verecunda,  in  oratione  locus
est.  Nam  scriptores  quidem  iamborum  veterisque
conioediae  etiam  in  illis  saepe  laudantur,  sed  nobis

*  turbam tantum modo, Halm: turbafntum modo, 0 '.
turbam  enim  tantum,  vulgo.

•  fere  verbis,  cod  Harl.  4995  :  ferebis  vel,  O.

1  See  §§  59  and  96.


BOOK X.  I.  6-9

words  adapted  to  each  individual  thing,  they  would
require  less  care,  since  they  would  automatically  be
suggested  by  the  matter  in  hand.  But  since  some
words  are  more  literal,  more  ornate,  more  significant
or  euphonious  than  others,  our  orator  must  not
merely  be  acquainted  with  all  of  them,  but  must
have  them  at  his  fingers'  ends  and  before  his  very
eyes,  so  that  when  they  present  themselves  for  his
critical  selection,  he  will  find  it  easy  to  make  the
appropriate  choice.  I  know  that  some  speakers  7
make  a  practice  of  learning  lists  of  synonyms  by
heart,  in  order  that  one  word  out  of  the  several
available  may  at  once  present  itself  to  them,  and
that  if,  after  using  one  word,  they  find  that  it  is
wanted  again  after  a  brief  interval,  they  may  be
able  to  select  another  word  with  the  same  meaning
and  so  avoid  the  necessity  of  repetition.  But  this
practice  is  childish  and  involves  thankless  labour,
while  it  is  really  of  very  little  use,  as  it  merely
results  in  the  assembly  of  a  disorderly  crowd  of
words,  for  the  speaker  to  snatch  the  first  that  comes
to  hand.

On  the  contrary,  discrimination  is  necessary  in  8
the  acquisition  of  our  stock  of  words ;  for  we  are
aiming  at  true  oratory,  not  at  the  fluency  of  a
cheapjack.  And  we  shall  attain  our  aim  by  reading
and  listening  to  the  best  writers  and  orators,  since
we  shall  thus  learn  not  merely  the  words  by  which
things  are  to  be  called,  but  when  each  particular
word  is  most  appropriate.  For  there  is  a  place  in  9
oratory  for  almost  every  word,  with  the  exception
only  of  a  very  few,  which  are  not  sufficiently  seemly.
Such  words  are  indeed  often  praised  when  they
occur  in  writers  of  iambics  ^  or  of  the  old  comedy.


QUINTILIAN

nostrum  opus  intueri  sat  est.  Omnia  verba,  ex-
ceptis  de  quibus  dixi,  sunt  alicubi  optima ;  nam  et
humilibus  interim  et  vulgaribus  est  opus,  et  quae
nitidiore  in  parte  videntur  sordida,  ubi  res  poscit,

10  proprie  dicuntur.  Haec  ut  sciamus  atque  eorum
non  significationem  modo  sed  formas  etiam  men-
surasque  norimus,  ut,  ubicunque  erunt  posita,  con-
veniant,  nisi  multa  lectione  atque  auditione  assequi
nuUo  modo  possumus,  cum  omnem  sermonem  auribus
primum  accipiamus.  Propter  quod  infantes  a  mutis
nutricibus  iussu  regum  in  solitudine  educati,  etiamsi

11  verba  quaedam  emisisse  traduntur,  tamen  loquendi
facultate  caruerunt.  Sunt  autem  alia  huius  naturae,
ut  idem  pluribus  vocibus  declarent,  ita  ut  nihil
significationis,  quo  potius  utaris,  intersit,  ut  ensis  et
gladius ;  alia  vero,^  etiamsi  propria  rerum  aliqua-
rum  sint  nomina,  Tpo-rnKw^  quasi  tamen  ^  ad  eundem

12  intelleetum  feruntur,  utferrum  et  macro.  Nam  per
abusionem  sicatios  etiam  omnes  vocamus,  qui  caedem
telo  quocunque  commiserint.  Alia  circuitu  verborum
plurium  ostendimus,  quale  est  Et  pressi  copia  lactis.

*  alia  vero,  Frotscher :  aliave,  G.

2  quasi  tamen,  edd. :  quare  tam,  G :  quare  tamen,  later  MSS.

^  See  Herodot.  ii.  2. The  children  were  alleged  to  have
cried  "  bekos,"  Phrygian  for  bread.

*  or  catachresis. See  viii.  ii.  5  and  vL  34.

3  Ed,  i.  81.

8


BOOK X.  I.  9-12

but  we  need  do  no  more  than  consider  our  own
special  task.  All  words,  with  these  exceptions,
may  be  admirably  employed  in  some  place  or
other.  For  sometimes  we  shall  even  require  low
and  common  words,  while  those  which  would
seem  coarse  if  introduced  in  the  more  elegant
portions  of  our  speech  may,  under  certain  circum-
stances, be  appropriate  enough.  Now  to  acquire  a  10
knowledge  of  these  words  and  to  be  acquainted  not
merely  with  their  meaning,  but  with  their  forms  and
rhythmical  values,  so  that  they  may  seem  appropriate
wherever  employed,  we  shall  need  to  read  and  listen
diligently,  since  all  language  is  received  first  through
the  ear.  It  was  owing  to  this  fact  that  the  children
who,  by  order  of  a  king,  were  brought  up  by  a  dumb
nurse  in  a  desert  place,  although  they  are  said  to
have  uttered  certain  words,  lacked  the  power  of
speech.^  There  are,  however,  some  words  of  such  11
a  nature  that  they  express  the  same  sense  by
different  sounds,  so  that  it  makes  no  difference  to
the  meaning  which  we  use,  as,  for  instance,  gladius
and  ensis,  which  may  be  used  indifferently  when  we
have  to  speak  of  a  sword.  Others,  again,  although
properly  applied  to  specific  objects,  are  used  by
means  of  a  trope  to  express  the  same  sense,  as,  for
example,  /er7TZ7«  (steel)  and  mucro  (point),  which  are
both  used  in  the  sense  of  sword.  Thus,  by  the  12
figure  known  as  ahuse,^  we  call  all  those  who  commit
a  murder  with  any  weapon  whatsoever  sicarii  (poni-
arders).  In  other  cases  we  express  our  meaning
periphrastically,  as,  for  instance,  when  Virgil  "*
describes  cheese  as

"  Abundance  of  pressed  milk."


QUINTILIAN

Plurima  vero  mutatione  figuramus :  Scio  Non  ignore
et  Nov  me  Jiigit  et  Non  me  praeterit  et  Quis  nescit  ?

13  et  Nemini  duhium  est.  Sed  etiam  ex  proximo  mutuari
libet.  Nam  et  inteUigo  et  sentio  et  xideo  saepe  idem
valent  quod  scio.  Quorum  nobis  ubertatem  ac  divitias
dabit  lectio,  ut  non  solum  quomodo  occurrent  sed

14  etiam  quomodo  oportet  utamur.  Non  semper  enim
haec  inter  se  idem  faciunt ;  nee  sicut  de  intellectu
animi  recte  dixerim  video  ita  de  visu  oculorum  in-
teUigo, nee  ut  mucro  gladium  sic  mucronem  gladius

15  ostendit.  Sed  ut  copia  verborum  sic  paratur,  ita
non  verborum  tantum  gratia  legendum  vel  audiendum
est.  Nam  omnium,  quaecunque  docemus,  hoc  ^  sunt
exempla  potentiora  etiam  ipsis  quae  traduntur  arti-
bus,  cum  eo  qui  discit  perductus  est,  ut  intelligere
ea  sine  demonstrante  et  sequi  iam  suis  viribus  possit,
quia,  quae  doctor  praecepit,  orator  ostendit.

16  Alia  vero  audientes,  alia  legentes  magis  adiuvant.
Excitat  qui  dicit  spiritu  ipso,  nee  imagine  et  ambitu

*  hoc,  Begins :  haec,  MSS.

1  See  I.  viii.  16;  ix.  i.  11.
10


BOOK X.  I.  12-16

On  the  other  hand,  in  a  number  of  instances  we
employ  figures^  and  substitute  one  expression  for
another.  Instead  of  "  I  know,"  we  say  "  I  am  not
ignorant,"  or  "the  fact  does  not  escape  me,"  or  "I
have  not  forgotten,"  or  "  who  does  not  know  ?  "  or
"  it  can  be  doubted  by  none."  But  we  may  also  13
borrow  from  a  word  of  cognate  meaning.  For  "  I
understand,"  or  "I  feel"  or  "I  see"  are  often
equivalent  to  "I  know."  Reading  will  provide  us
with  a  rich  store  of  expressions  such  as  these,
and  will  enable  us  not  merely  to  use  them  when
they  occur  to  us,  but  also  in  the  appropriate  manner.
For  they  are  not  always  interchangeable :  for  14
example,  though  I  may  be  perfectly  correct  in
saying,  "  I  see "  for  "  I  understand,"  it  does  not
follow  that  I  can  say  "I  understand  "  for  "my  eyes
have  seen,"  and  though  mucro  may  be  employed  to
describe  a  sword,  a  sword  does  not  necessarily  mean
the  same  as  mucro  (point).  But,  although  a  store  15
of  words  may  be  acquired  by  these  means,  we  must
not  read  or  listen  to  orators  merely  for  the  sake  of
acquiring  words.  For  in  everything  which  we  teach
examples  are  more  effective  even  than  the  rules
which  are  taught  in  the  schools,  so  long  as  the
student  has  reached  a  stage  when  he  can  appreciate
such  examples  without  the  assistance  of  a  teacher,
and  can  rely  on  his  own  powers  to  imitate  them.
And  the  reason  is  this,  that  the  professor  of  rhetoric
lays  down  rules,  while  the  orator  gives  a  practical
demonstration.

But the advantages conferred by reading and  16
listening  are  not  identical. The  speaker  stimulates
us  by  the  animation  of  his  delivery,  and  kindles  the
imagination,  not  by  presenting  us  with  an  elaborate


QUINTILIAN

rerum  sed  rebus  incendit.  Vivunt  omnia  enim  et
moventur,  excipimusque  nova  ilia  velut  nascentia
cum  favore  ac  sollicitudine.  Nee  fortuna  modo
iudicii  sed  etiam  ipsorum  qui  orant  periculo  adficimur.

17  Praeter  haec  vox,  actio  decora,  accommodata/  ut
quisque  locus  postulabit,  pronuntiandi  vel  poten-
tissima  in  dicendo  ratio  et,  ut  semel  dicam,  pariter
omnia  docent.  In  lectione  certius  iudicium,  quod
audienti  frequenter  aut  suus  cuique favor  aut  ille

18  laudantium  clamor  extorquet.  Pudet  enim  dissentire,
et  velut  tacita  quadam  verecundia  inhibemur  plus
nobis  credere,  cum  interim  et  vitiosa  pluribus  placent,
et  a  conrogatis  laudantur  etiam  quae  non  placent.

19  Sed  e  contrario  quoque  accidit,  ut  optime  dictis
gratiam  prava  iudicia  non  referant.  Lectio  libera  est
nee  actionis  impetu  transcurrit ;  sed  repetere  saepius
licet,  sive  dubites  sive  memoriae  penitus  adfigere
velis.  Repetamus  autem  et  retractemus,^  et  ut  cibos
mansos  ac  prope  liquefactos  demittimus,  quo  facilius
digerantur,  ita  lectio  non  cruda,  sed  multaiteratione^
mollita  et  velut  confecta,  memoriae  imitationique
tradatur.

*  accommodata ut, ed. Col. 1527 : commoda aut, G :
conimodata  ut,  Halm.

^  retracteinus,  Spalding :  tractemus,  G.

'  iteratione,  soiac  late  MSS. :  altercatione,  G  and  others.

12


BOOK X.  I.  16-19

picture,  but  by  bringing  us  into  actual  touch  with
the  things  themselves.  Then  all  is  life  and  move-
ment, and  we  receive  the  new-born  offspring  of  his
imagination  with  enthusiastic  approval.  We  are
moved  not  merely  by  the  actual  issue  of  the  trial,
but  by  all  that  the  orator  himself  has  at  stake.  More-  17
over  his  voice,  the  grace  of  his  gestures,  the  adapta-
tion of  his  delivery  (which  is  of  supreme  importance
in  oratory),  and,  in  a  word,  all  his  excellences  in
combination,  have  their  educative  effect.  In  reading,
on  the  other  hand,  the  critical  faculty  is  a  surer
guide,  inasmuch  as  the  listener's  judgment  is  often
swept  away  by  his  preference  for  a  particular  speaker,
or  by  the  applause  of  an  enthusiastic  audience.  For  18
we  are  ashamed  to  disagree  with  them,  and  an  un-
conscious modesty  prevents  us  from  ranking  our  own
opinion  above  theirs,  though  all  the  time  the  taste
of  the  majority  is  vicious,  and  the  claque  may
praise  even  what  does  not  really  deserve  approval.
On  the  other  hand,  it  will  sometimes  also  happen  19
that  an  audience  whose  taste  is  bad  will  fail  to  award
the  praise  which  is  due  to  the  most  admirable  utter-
ances. Reading,  however,  is  free,  and  does  not  hurry
jmst  us  with  the  speed  of  oral  delivery ;  we  can  re-
read a  passage  again  and  again  if  we  are  in  doubt
about  it  or  wish  to  fix  it  in  the  memory.  We  must
return  to  what  we  have  read  and  reconsider  it  with
care,  wliile,  just  as  we  do  not  swallow  our  food  till
we  have  chewed  it  and  reduced  it  almost  to  a  state
of  liquefaction  to  assist  the  process  of  digestion,  so
what  we  read  must  not  be  committed  to  the  memory
for  subsequent  imitation  while  it  is  still  in  a  crude
state,  but  must  be  softened  and,  if  I  may  use  the
phrase,  reduced  to  a  pulp  by  frequent  re-perusal.

13


QUINTILIAN

20  Ac  diu  non  nisi  optimus  quisque  et  qui  credentem
sibi  minime  fallat  legendus  est,  sed  diligenter  ac
paene  ad  scribendi  sollicitudinem ;  nee  per  partes
modo  scrutanda  omnia,  sed  perlectus  liber  utique
ex  integro  resumendus,  praecipueque  oratio,  cuius
virtutes  frequenter  ex  industria  quoque  occultantur.

21  Saepe  enim  praeparat,  dissimulat,  insidiatur  orator,
eaque  in  prima  parte  actionis  dicit,  quae  sunt  in  summa
profutura.  Itaque  sue  loco  minus  placent,  adhuc
nobis  quare  dicta  sint  ignorantibus,  ideoque  erunt

22  cognitis  omnibus  repetenda.  Illud  vero  utilissimum
nosse  eas  causas,  quarum  orationes  in  man  us  sump-
serimus  et,  quotiens  continget,  utrinque  habitas
legere  actiones :  ut  Demosthenis  atque  Aeschinis
inter  se  contrarias,  et  Servii  Sulpicii  atque  Messalae,
quorum  alter  pro  Aufidia,  contra  dixit  alter,  et
Pollionis  et  Cassii  reo  Asprenate  aliasque  plurimas.

23  Quinetiam  si  minus  pares  videbuntur  aliquae,  tamen
ad  cognoscendam  litium  quaestionem  recte  requiren-
tur,  ut  contra  Ciceronis  orationes  Tuberonis  in
Ligarium  et  Hortensii  pro  Verre.  Quinetiam,
easdem causas ut  quisque  egerit  utile  ^  erit  scire.

*  utile,  edd.  Aid.  wnd  Col. :  utrisque,  O  and  most  MSS.


1  See  IV.  ii.  106  and  vi.  i.  20.
«  See  §  113.  »  See  §  116.

*  0.  Nonius  Asprenas,  a  fi-ieud  of  Augustus,  accused  by
Cassius  and  defended  by  Pollio  on  a  charge  of  poisoning.

14


BOOK X.  I.  20-23

For  a  long  time  also  we  should  read  none  save  the  20
best  authors  and  such  as  are  least  likely  to  betray  our
trust  in  them,  wliile  our  reading  must  be  almost  as
thorough  as  if  we  were  actually  transcribing  what  we
read.  Nor  must  we  study  it  merely  in  parts,  but
must  read  through  the  whole  work  from  cover  to
cover  and  then  read  it  afresh,  a  precept  which  applies
more  especially  to  speeches,  whose  merits  are  often
deliberately  disguised.  For  the  orator  frequently  21
prepares  his  audience  for  what  is  to  come,  dissembles
and  sets  a  trap  for  them  and  makes  remarks  at  the
opening  of  his  speech  which  will  not  have  their  full
force  till  the  conclusion.  Consequently  what  he
says  will  often  seem  comparatively  ineffective  where
it  actually  occurs,  since  we  do  not  realise  his  motive
and  it  will  be  necessary  to  re-read  the  speech  after
we  have  acquainted  ourselves  with  all  that  it  con-
tains. Above  all,  it  is  most  desirable  that  we  should  22
familiarise  ourselves  with  the  facts  of  the  case  with
which  the  speech  deals,  and  it  will  be  well  also,
wherever  possible,  to  read  the  speeches  delivered  on
both  sides,  such  as  those  of  Aeschines  and  Demos-
thenes in  the  case  of  Ctesiphon,  of  Servius  Sulpicius
and  Messala  for  and  against  Aufidia,^  of  Pollio  ^  and
Cassius  **  in  the  case  of  Asprenas,*  and  many  others.
And  even  if  such  speeches  seem  unequal  in  point  of  23
merit,  we  shall  still  do  well  to  study  them  carefully
with  a  view  to  understanding  the  problems  raised  by
the  cases  with  which  they  deal  :  for  example,  we.
should  compare  the  speeches  delivered  by  Tubero
against  Ligarius  and  by  Hortensius  in  defence  of
Verres  with  those  of  Cicero  for  the  opposite  side,
while  it  will  also  be  useful  to  know  how  different
orators pleaded the same case. For example,

15


QUINTILIAN

Nam  de  domo  Ciceronis  dixit  Calidius,  et  pro  Milone
orationem  Brutus  exercitationis  gratia  scripsit,etiamsi
egisse  eum  Cornelius  Celsus  falso  existimat ;  et
Pollio  et  Messala  defenderunt  eosdem,  et  nobis
pueris  insignes  pro  Voluseno  Catulo  Domitii  Afri,
Crispi  Passieni,  Decimi  Laelii  orationes  ferebantur.

24  Neque  id  statim  legenti  persuasum  sit  omnia
quae  optimi  auctores  dixerint  utique  esse  perfecta.
Nam  et  labuntur  aliquando  et  oneri  cedunt  et  in-
dulgent ingeniorum  suoruni  voluptati,  nee  semper
intendunt  animum ;  nonnunquam  fatigantur,  cum
Ciceroni dormitare  interim Demosthenes, Horatio

25  vero  etiam  Homerus  ipse  videatur.  Summi  enim
sunt,  homines  tamen,  acciditque  his  qui,  quidquid
apud  illos  repererunt,  dicendi  legem  putant,  ut
deteriora  imitentur,  (id  enim  est  facilius)  ac  se
abunde  similes  putent,  si  vitia  magnorum  consequan-

26  tur.  Modesto  tamen  et  circumspecto  iudicio  de
tantis  viris  pronuntiandum  est,  ne,  quod  plerisque
accidit,  damnent  quae  non  intelligunt,  Ac  si  necesse
est  in  alteram  errare  partem  :  omnia  eorum  legenti-
bus  placere  quam  multa  displicere  maluerim.

27  Plurimum  dicit  oratori  conferre  Theophrastus
lectionem  poetarum,  multique  eius  iudicium  sequun-
tur ; neque immerito. Namque ab his in i*ebus

^  Probably  before  some  other  tribunal.  Cicero's  de  Domo
Sua  was  delivered  before  the  pontifices.

^  cp.  III.  vi.  93.  Cornelius  Celsus  was  an  encyclopaedic
writer  of  the  early  empire,  whose  treatise  on  medicine  has
survived.

3  Liburnia. See  ix.  ii.  34.  *  See  §  118.

5  Stepfather  of  Nero. See  vi.  i.  50.

•  Probably  the  Laelius  Balbus  of  Tac.  Ann.  vi.  47,  48.
'  In  a  lost  letter  :  cp.  Plut.  Cic.  24.  »  A.  P.  359.

•  In  one  of  his  lost  rhetorical  treatises.

i6


BOOK X.  I.  23-27

Calidius^  spoke  on  the  subject  of  Cicero's  house,
Brutus  wrote  a  declamation  in  defence  of  Milo,  which
Cornelius  Celsus  wrongly  believes  to  have  been
actually  delivered  in  court,^  and  PoUio  and  Messalla
defended  the  same  clients,^  while  in  my  boyhood
remarkable  speeches  delivered  by  Domitius  Afer,*
Crispus  Passienus^  and  Decimus  Laelius^  in  de-
fence of  Volusenus  were  in  circulation.

The  reader  must  not,  however,  jump  to  the  conclu-  24
sion  that  all  that  was  uttered  by  the  best  authors  is
necessarily  perfect.  At  times  they  lapse  and  stagger
beneath  the  weight  of  their  task,  indulge  their  bent
or  relax  their  efforts.  Sometimes,  again,  they  give
the  impression  of  weariness :  for  example,  Cicero '
thinks  that  Demosthenes  sometimes  nods,  and  Horace  *
says  the  same  of  Homer  himself.  For  despite  their  25
greatness  they  are  still  but  mortal  men,  and  it  will
sometimes  happen  that  their  reader  assumes  that
anything  which  he  finds  in  them  may  be  taken  as  a
canon  of  style,  with  the  result  that  he  imitates  their
defects  (and  it  is  always  easier  to  do  this  than  to
imitate  their  excellences)  and  thinks  himself  a
perfect  replica  if  he  succeeds  in  copying  the
blemishes  of  great  men.  But  modesty  and  circura-  26
spection  are  required  in  pronouncing  judgment  on
such  great  men,  since  there  is  always  the  risk  of
falling  into  the  common  fault  of  condemning  what
one  does  not  understand.  And,  if  it  is  necessary  to
err  on  one  side  or  the  other,  I  should  prefer  that
the  reader  should  approve  of  everything  than  that
he  should  disapprove  of  much.

Theophrastus  ^  says  that  the  reading  of  poets  is  27
of  great  service  to  the  orator,  and  has  rightly  been
followed  in  this  view  by  many. For  the  poets  will

17


QUINTILIAN

spiritus  et  in  verbis  sublimitas  et  in  adfectibus
motus  omnis  et  in  personis  decor  petitur,  praecipue-
que  velut  attrita  cotidiano  actu  forensi  ingenia
optime  rerum  talium  blanditia  reparantur. Ideoque

28  in  hac  lectione  Cicero  requiescendum  putat.  Memi-
nerimus  tamen,  non  per  omnia  poetas  esse  oratori
sequendos  nee  libertate  verborum  nee  licentia
figurarum  ;  genus  ostentationi  comparatum  et  praeter
id,  quod  solam  petit  voluptatem  eamque  etiam
fingendo non  falsa modo sed etiam quaedam in-

29  credibilia  sectatur,  patrocinio  quoque  aliquo  iuvari,
quod  alligata  ad  certam  pedum  necessitatem  non
semper  uti  propriis  possit,  sed  depulsa  recta  via
necessario  ad  eloquendi  quaedam  deverticula  con-
fugiat,  nee  mutare  quaedam  modo  verba,  sed  ex-
tendere,  corripere,  convertere,  dividere  cogatur ;
nos  vero  armatos  stare  in  acie  et  summis  de  rebus

30  decernere  et  ad  victoriam  niti.  Neque  ergo  arma
squalere  situ  ac  rubigine  velim,  sed  fulgorem  inesse
qui  terreat,  qualis  est  ferri,  quo  mens  simul  visusque
praestringitur,  non  qualis  auri  argentique,  imbellis
et  potius  habenti  periculosus.

31  Historia  quoque  alere  oratorem  quodam  uberi  ^
iucundoque suco potest; verum et ipsa sic est

*  uberi,  Spalding :  moveri,  O.

»  Pro  Arch.  12.
i8


BOOK X.  I.  27-31

give  us  inspiration  as  regards  the  matter,  sublimity
of  language,  the  power  to  excite  every  kind  of
emotion,  and  the  appropriate  treatment  of  character,
while  minds  that  have  become  jaded  owing  to  the
daily  wear  and  tear  of  the  courts  will  find  refresh-
ment in  such  agreeable  study.  Consequently  Cicero  ^
recommends  the  relaxation  provided  by  the  reading
of  poetry.  We  should,  however,  remember  that  the  28
orator  must  not  follow  the  poets  in  everything,  more
especially  in  their  freedom  of  language  and  their
license  in  the  use  of  figures.  Poetry  has  been  com-
pared to  the  oratory  of  display,  and  further,  aims
solely  at  giving  pleasure,  which  it  seeks  to  secure  by
inventing  what  is  not  merely  untrue,  but  sometimes
even  incredible.  Further,  we  must  bear  in  mind  29
that  it  can  be  defended  on  the  ground  that  it  is  tied
by  certain  metrical  necessities  and  consequently  can-
not always  use  straightforward  and  literal  language,
but  is  driven  from  the  direct  road  to  take  refuge  in
certain  by-ways  of  expression ;  and  compelled  not
merely  to  change  certain  words,  but  to  lengthen,
contract,  transpose  or  divide  them,  whereas  the
orator  stands  armed  in  the  forefront  of  the  battle,
fights  for  a  high  stake  and  devotes  all  his  effort  to
winning  the  victory.  And  yet  I  would  not  have  his  30
weapons  defaced  by  mould  and  rust,  but  would  liave
them  shine  with  a  splendour  that  shall  strike  terror
to  the  heart  of  the  foe,  like  the  flashing  steel  that
dazzles  heart  and  eye  at  once,  not  like  the  gleam  of
gold  or  silver,  which  has  no  warlike  efficacy  and  is
even  a  positive  peril  to  its  wearer.

History,  also,  may  provide  the  orator  with  a  nutri-  31
ment which we may compare to some rich  and
pleasant  juice. But when we read it, we  must

19


QUINTILIAN

legenda,  ut  sciamus,  plerasque  eius  virtiites  oratori
esse  vitandas.  Est  enim  proxima  poetis  et  quodam-
modo  carmen  solutum,  et  scribitur  ad  narrandum
non  ad  probandum,  totumque  opus  non  ad  actum  rei
pugnamque  praesentem,  sed  ad  memoriam  posteri-
tatis  et  ingenii  famam  componitur  ;  ideoque  et  verbis
remotioribus  et  liberioribus  figuris  narrandi  taedium

32  evitat.  Itaque,  utdixi,  neque  ilia  Sallustiana  brevitas,
qua  nihil  apud  aures  vacuas  atque  eruditas  potest
esse  perfectius,  apud  occupatum  variis  cogitationibus
iudicem  et  saepius  ineruditum  captanda  nobis  est;
neque  ilia  Livii  lactea  ubertas  satis  docebit  eum,  qui

33  non  speciem  expositionis,  sed  fidem  quaerit,  Adde
quod*  M.  Tullius  ne  Thucydidem  quidem  aut
Xenophontem  utiles  oratori  putat,  quanquam  ilium
hellicum  canere,  huius  ore  Musas  esse  locutas  existimet.
Licet  tamen  nobis  in  digressionibus  uti  vel  historico
nonnunquam  nitore,  dum  in  his,  de  quibus  erit
quaestio,  meminerimus,  non  athletarum  toris,  sed
militum  lacertis  opus  ^  esse  ;  nee  versicolorem  illam,
qua  Demetrius  Phalereus  dicebatur  uti,  vestem  bene

34  ad forensem pulverem facere. Est et alius ex

*  adfle  quod,  Regius  :  audeo  quia,  G.
'  opus,  added  by  ed.  Col.  1527.

^  IV.  ii.  45.  »  Or.  30  sq.

"cp.  §80.  i

20


BOOK X.  I.  31-34

remember  that  many  of  the  excellences  of  the  historian
require  to  be  shunned  by  the  orator.  For  history
has  a  certain  affinity  to  poetry  and  may  be  regarded
as  a  kind  of  prose  poem,  while  it  is  written  for  the
purpose  of  narrative,  not  of  proof,  and  designed  from
beginning  to  end  not  for  immediate  effect  or  the
instant  necessities  of  forensic  strife,  but  to  record
events  for  the  benefit  of  posterity  and  to  win  glory
for  its  author.  Consequently,  to  avoid  monotony  of
narrative,  it  employs  unusual  words  and  indulges  in
a  freer  use  of  figures.  Therefore,  as  1  have  already  32
said,^  the  famous  brevity  of  Sallust,  than  which
nothing  can  be  more  pleasing  to  the  leisured  ear  of
the  scholar,  is  a  style  to  be  avoided  by  the  orator  in
view  of  the  fact  that  his  words  are  addressed  to  a
judge  who  has  his  mind  occupied  by  a  number  of
thoughts  and  is  also  frequently  uneducated,  while,
on  the  other  hand,  the  milky  fullness  of  Livy  is
hardly  of  a  kind  to  instruct  a  listener  who  looks  not  i
for  beauty  of  exposition,  but  for  truth  and  ci-edibility.
We  must  also  remember  that  Cicero  ^  thinks  that  not  33
even  Thucydides  or  Xenophon  will  be  of  much  ser-
vice to  an  orator,  although  he  regards  the  style  of
the  former  as  a  veritable  call  to  arms  and  considers
that  the  latter  was  the  mouthpiece  of  the  Muses.
It  is,  however,  occasionally  permissible  to  borrow  the
graces  of  history  to  embellish  our  digressions,  pro-
vided always  that  we  remember  that  in  those  portions
of  our  speech  which  deal  with  the  actual  question
at  issue  we  require  not  the  swelling  thews  of  the
athlete,  but  the  wiry  sinews  of  the  soldier,  and  that
the  cloak  of  many  colours  which  Demetrius  of
Phalerum  ^  was  said  to  wear  is  but  little  suited  to
the  dust  and  heat  of  the  forum. There  is,  it  is  true,  34


QUINTILIAN

historiis  usus  et  is  quidem  maximus,  sed  non  ad
praesentem  pertinens  locum,  ex  cognitione  rerutn
exemplorumque,  quibus  inprimis  instructus  esse
debet  orator,  ne  omnia  testimonia  exspectet  a
litigatore,  sed  pleraque  ex  vetustate  diligenter  sibi
cognita  sumat,  hoc  potentiora,  quod  ea  sola  crimini-
bus  odii  et  gratiae  vacant.

35  A  philosophorum  vero  lectione  ut  essent  multa
nobis  petenda,  vitio  factum  est  oratorum,  qui  quidem
illis  optima  sui  operis  parte  cesserunt.  Nam  et  de
iustis,  honestis,  utilibus,  iisque  quae  sint  istis  con-
traria,  et  de  rebus  divinis  maxime  dicunt  et  argu-
mentantur  acriter  Stoici,^  et  altercationibus  atque
interrogationibus  oratorem  futurum  optime  Socratici

36  praeparant.  Sed  his  quoque  adhibendum  est  simile
iudicium,  ut  etiam  cum  in  rebus  versemur  iisdem,
non  tamen  eandem  esse  condicionem  sciamus  litium
ac  disputationum,  fori  et  auditorii,  praeceptorum  et
periculorum.

37  Credo  exacturos  plerosque,  cum  tantum  esse
utilitatis  in  legendo  iudicemus,  ut  id  quoque  adiun-
gamus operi, qui sint legendi,^ quae in auctore

'  Stoici  added  bp  Meister.

*  legendi  inserted  by  ed.  Col.  1527.

*  cp.  I  Pref.  11.


BOOK X.  I.  34-37

another  advantage  which  we  may  derive  from  the
historians,  which,  however,  despite  its  great  import-
ance, has  no  bearing  on  our  present  topic  ;  I  refer  to
the  advantage  derived  from'the  knowledge  of  histori-
cal facts  and  precedents,  with  which  it  is  most  desir-
able that  our  orator  should  be  acquainted  ;  for  such
knowledge  will  save  him  from  having  to  acquire  all
his  evidence  from  his  client  and  Mrill  enable  him  to
draw  much  that  is  germane  to  his  case  from  the
careful  study  of  antiquity.  And  such  arguments  will
be  all  the  more  effective,  since  they  alone  will  be
above  suspicion  of  prejudice  or  partiality.

The  fact  that  there  is  so  much  for  which  we  must  35
have  recourse  to  the  study  of  the  philosophers  is
the  fault  of  orators  who  have  abandoned  ^  to  them
the  fullest  portion  of  their  own  task.  The  Stoics
more  especially  discourse  and  argue  with  great
keenness  on  what  is  just,  honourable,  expedient
and  the  reverse,  as  well  as  on  the  problems  of
theologj',  while  the  Socratics  give  the  future  orator
a  first-rate  preparation  for  forensic  debates  and
the  examination  of  witnesses.  But  we  must  use  the  36
same  critical  caution  in  studying  the  philosophers
that  we  require  in  reading  history  or  poetry  ;  that
is  to  say,  we  must  bear  in  mind  that,  even  when  we
are  dealing  with  the  same  subjects,  there  is  a  wide
difference  between  forensic  disputes  and  philosophical
discussions,  between  the  law-courts  and  the  lecture-
room,  between  the  precepts  of  theory  and  the  perils
of  the  bar.

Most  of  my  readers  will,  I  think,  demand  that,  37
since I attach so much  importance  to  reading,  I
should  include  in  this  work  some  instructions  as  to
what  authors  should  be  read  and  what  their  special

23


QUINTILIAN

quoque praecipiia virtus. Sed persequi singulos

38  infiniti  fuerit  operis.  Quippe  cum  in  Bruto  M.
Tullius  tot  milibus  versuum  de  Romanis  tantum
oratoribus  loquatur  et  tamen  de  omnibus  aetatis  suae,
quibuscum  vivebat,  exceptis  Caesare  atque  Marcello,
silentium  egerit,  quis  erit  modus,  si  et  illos  et  qui

39  postea  fuerunt  et  Graecos  omnes?  ^  Fuit  igitur
brevitas  ilia  tutissima,  quae  est  apud  Livium  in
epistola  ad  filium  scripta,  legendos  Demosthenem
atque Ciceronem,  turn ita, ut quisque esset De-

40  mostheni  et  Ciceroni  simillimus.  Non  est  tamen
dissimulanda  nostri  quoque  iudicii  sumnia.  Paucos
enim  vel  potius  vix  ulluni  ex  his  qui  vetiistatem
pertuleriint  existimo  posse  reperiri,  quin  iudicium
adhibentibus  adlaturus  sit  utilitatis  aliquid,  cum  se
Cicero  ab  illis  quoque  vetustissimis  auctoribus,  in-
geniosis quidem, sed arte carentibus, plurimum

41  f'ateatur  adiutum.  Nee  multo  aliud  de  novis  sentio.
Quotus  enim  quisque  inveniri  tarn  demens  potest,
qui  ne  minima  quidem  alicuius  certe  fiducia  partis
memoriam  posteritatis  speraverit?  Qui  si  quis  est,
intra  primos  statim  versus  deprehendetur  et  citius
nos  dimittet,  quam  ut  eius  nobis  magno  temporis

42  detrimento  constet  experimentum.  Sed  non  quid-
quid  ad  aliquam  partem  scientiae  pertinet,  protinus
ad  phrasin,  de  qua  loquimur,  accommodatum.

Verum  antequam  de  singulis,  pauca  in  universum

*  Graecos  is  followed  in  the  MSS.  by  et  philosophos,  which
is  expurged  by  Schmidt.

24


BOOK X.  I.  37-42

excellences  may  be.  To  do  this  in  detail  would  be
an  endless  task.  Remember  that  Cicero  in  his  38
Brutus,  after  writing  pages  and  pages  on  the  subject
of  Roman  orators  alone,  says  nothing  of  his  own  con-
temporaries with  the  exception  of  Caesar  and  Mar-
cell  us.  What  limit,  then,  would  there  be  to  my
labours  if  1  were  to  attempt  to  deal  with  them  and
with  their  successors  and  all  the  orators  of  Greece  as
well .''  No,  it  was  a  safer  course  that  Livy  adopted  39
in  his  letter  to  his  son,  where  he  writes  that  he  should
read  Cicero  and  Demosthenes  and  then  such  orators
as  most  resembled  them.  Still,  1  must  not  conceal  40
my  own  personal  convictions  on  this  subject.  I  believe
that  there  are  few,  indeed  scarcely  a  single  one  of
those  authors  who  have  stood  the  test  of  time  who  will
not  be  of  some  use  or  other  to  judicious  students,  since
even  Cicero  himself  admits  that  he  owes  a  great  debt
even  to  the  earliest  writers,  who  for  all  their  talent
were  totally  devoid  of  art.  And  my  opinion  about  41
the  modems  is  much  the  same.  For  how  few  of  them
are  so  utterly  crazy  as  not  to  have  the  least  shadow
of  hope  that  some  portion  or  other  of  their  work  may
have  claims  upon  the  memory  of  posterity  ?  If  there
is  such  an  one,  he  will  be  detected  before  we  have
perused  many  lines  of  his  writings,  and  we  shall
escape  from  him  before  the  experiment  of  reading
him  has  cost  us  any  serious  loss  of  time.  On  the  42
other  hand,  not  everything  that  has  some  bearing  on
some  department  of  knowledge  will  necessarily  be  of
service  for  the  formation  of  style,  with  which  we  are
for  the  moment  concerned.

Before,  however,  I  begin  to  speak  of  individual
authors,  I  must  make  a  few  general  remarks  about
the  variety  of  judgments  which  have  been  passed

vol.  IV.  B ^5


QUINTILIAN

43  de  varietate  opinionum  dicenda  sunt.  Nam  quidam
solos  veteres  legendos  putant  neque  in  ullis  aliis
esse  naturalem  eloquentiam  et  robur  viris  dignum
arbitrantur ;  alios  recens  haec  lascivia  deliciaeque  et
omnia  ad  voluptatem multitudinis  imperitae  com-

-i  4  posita  delectant.  Ipsorum  etiam  qui  rectum  dicendi
genus  sequi  volunt,  alii  pressa  demum  et  tenuia  et
quae  minimum  ab  usu  cotidiano  recedant,  sana  et
vere  Attica  putant ;  quosdam  elatior  ingenii  vis
et  magis  concitata  et  plena  spiritus  capit ;  sunt
etiam  lenis  et  nitidi  et  compositi  generis  non  pauci
amatores.  De  qua  differentia  disseram  diligentius,
cum  de  genere  dicendi  quaerendum  erit.  Interim
summatim,  quid  et  ^  a  qua  lectione  petere  possint,
qui  confirmare  facultatem  dicendi  volent,  attingam.
Paucos  enim  qui  ^  sunt  eminentissimi  excerpere  in
5  animo  est.  Facile  est  autem  studiosis,  qui  sint  his
simillimi,  iudicare ;  ne  quisquam  queratur  omissos
forte  quos  ipse  valde  probet.  Fateor  enim  plures  ^
legendos  esse  quam  qui  a  me  nominabuntur.  Sed
nunc  genera  ipsa  lectionum,  quae  praecipue  con-
venire  intendentibus  ut  oratores  fiant,  existimem,
persequar.

46 Igitur,  ut  Aratus  ab  love  incipiendum  putat,  ita  nos

*  sumniatim  quid  et  a  qua,  vulgo  :  sumat  et  a  qua,  G  (quia
et  a  qua  2nd  hand).

■■'  qui  added  by  ed.  Col.  1527.
'  plures,  vulgo :  plurimis,  G.

'  XII.  X.  63  sqq.  '

a6


BOOK  X.  I.  42-46

upon  them.  For  there  are  some  who  think  that  only  43
the  ancients  should  be  read  and  hold  that  they  are
the  sole  possessors  of  natural  eloquence  and  manly
vigour ;  while  others  revel  in  the  voluptuous  and
affected  style  of  to-day,  in  which  everj^thing  is  de-
signed to  charm  the  ears  of  the  uneducated  majority.
And  even  if  we  turn  to  those  who  desire  to  follow  44
the  correct  methods  of  style,  we  shall  find  that  some
think  that  the  only  healthy  and  genuinely  Attic  style
is  to  be  found  in  language  which  is  restrained  and
simple  and  as  little  removed  as  possible  from  the
speech  of  every  day,  while  others  are  attracted  by  a
style  which  is  more  elevated  and  full  of  energy  and
animation.  There  are,  too,  not  a  few  who  are  de-
voted to  a  gentle,  elegant  and  harmonious  style.  Of
these  different  ideals  I  shall  speak  in  greater  detail,
when  I  come  to  discuss  the  question  of  the  particular
styles  best  suited  to  oratory.^  For  the  moment  I
shall  restrict  myself  to  touching  briefly  on  what  the
student  who  desires  to  consolidate  his  powers  of
speaking  should  seek  in  his  reading  and  to  what  kind
of  reading  he  should  devote  his  attention.  My  de-
sign is  merely  to  select  a  few  of  the  most  eminent
authors  for  consideration.  It  will  be  easy  for  the  45
student  to  decide  for  himself  what  authors  most
nearly  resemble  these  :  consequently,  no  one  will
have  any  right  to  complain  if  I  pass  over  some  of  his
favourites.  For  I  will  readily  admit  that  there  are
more  authors  worth  reading  than  those  whom  I  pro-
pose to  mention.  But  I  will  now  proceed  to  deal
with  the  various  classes  of  reading  which  I  consider
most  suitable  for  those  who  are  ambitious  of  becoming
orators,

I  shall,  I  think,  be  right  in  following  the  principle  46

27


QUINTILIAN

rite  coepturi  ab  Homero  videmur.  Hie  enim,  quem-
admodum  ex  Oceano  dicit  ipse  omnium  ^  amnium
fontiumque  cursus  initium  capere,  omnibus  eloquen-
tiae  partibus  exemplum  et  ortum  dedit.  Hunc  nemo
in  magnis  rebus  sublimitate,  in  parvis  proprietate
superaverit.  Idem  laetus  ac  pressus,  iucundus  et
gravis,  turn  copia  tum  brevitate  mirabilis,  nee  poetica

47  modo  sed  oratoria  virtute  eminentissimus.  Nam  ut
de  laudibus,  exhortationibus,  consolationibus  taceam,
nonne  vel  nonus  liber,  quo  missa  ad  Achillem  legatio
continetur,  vel  in  primo  inter  duces  ilia  contentio  vel
dictae  in  secundo  sententiae  omnes  litium  ac  consili-

48  orum  explicant  artes?  Adfectus  quidem  vel  illos
mites  vel  hos  concitatos,  nemo  erit  tam  indoctus,  qui
non  in  sua  potestate  hunc  auctorem  habuisse  fateatur.
Age  vero,  non  utriusque  operis  sui  ingressu  in  paucis-
simis  versibus  legem  prooemiorum  non  dico  servavit
sed  constituit?  Nam  benevolum  auditorem  invocatione
dearum,  quas  praesidere  vatibus  creditum  est,  et
intentum proposita  rerum  magnitudine  et  docilem

49  summa  celeriter  comprehensa  facit.  Narrare  vero
quis  brevius  quam  qui  mortem  nuntiat  Patrocli,  quis
significantius  potest  quam  qui  Curetum  Aetolorumque
proelium  exponit  ? lam  similitudines,  amplificationes,

*  omnium  added  by  Osann.

1  Arat.  Phaen.  1.  *  II.  xxi.  196.

»  Antilochus,  II.  xviii.  18.  *  Phoenix,  H.  ix.  529.

38


BOOK  X.  I.  46-49

laid  down  by  Aratus  ^  in  the  line,  "  With  Jove  let
us  begin,"  and  in  beginning  with  Homer. He  is  like
his  own  conception  of  Ocean,^  which  he  describes  as
the  source  of  every  stream  and  river;  for  he  has
given us a model and an inspiration for every
department  of  eloquence. It  will  be  generally  ad-
mitted that  no  one  has  ever  surpassed  him  in  the
sublimity  with  which  he  invests  great  themes  or  the
propriety  with  which  he  handles  small. He  is  at
once  luxuriant  and  concise, sprightly  and  serious,
remarkable  at  once  for  his  fullness  and  his  brevity,
and  supreme  not  merely  for  poetic,  but  for  oratorical
power  as  well. For,  to  say  nothing  of  his  eloquence,  47
which  he  shows  in  praise,  exhortation  and  consola-
tion, do  not  the  ninth  book  containing  the  embassy
to  Achilles,  the  first  describing  the  quarrel  between
the  chiefs,  or  the  speeches  delivered  by  the  coun-
sellors in  the  second,  display  all  the  rules  of  art
to  be  followed  in  forensic  or  deliberative  oratory.-*
As  regards  the  emotions,  there  can  be  no  one  so  ill-  48
educated  as  to  deny  that  the  poet  was  the  master  of  all,
tender  and  vehement  alike. Again,  in  the  few  lines
with  which  he  introduces  both  of  his  epics,  has  he
not,  I  >vill  not  say  observed,  but  actually  established
the  law  which  should  govern  the  composition  of  the
exordium  ? For,  by  his  invocation  of  the  goddesses
believed  to  preside  over  poetry  he  wins  the  goodwill
of  his  audience,  by  his  statement  of  the  greatness
of  his  themes  he  excites  their  attention  and  renders
them  receptive  by  the  briefness of  his summary.
Who  can  narrate  more  briefly  than  the  hero' who  49
brings  the  news  of  Patroclus'  death,  or  more  vividly
than  he  *  who  describes the battle between the
Curetes  and the Aetolians  ? Then consider his

»9


QUINTILIAN

exempla,  digressus,  signa  rerum  et  argumenta  cetera-
que  genera  ^  proband!  ac  refutandi  sunt  ita  multa,  ut
etiam  qui  de  artibus  scripserunt  plurimi  harum  rerum

50  testimonium  ab  hoc  poeta  petant.  Nam  epilogus
quidem  quis  unquam  poterit  illis  Priami  rogantis
Achillem  precibus  aequari?  Quid?  in  verbis,  sen-
tentiis,  figuris,  dispositione  totius  operis  nonne
humani  ingenii  modum  excedit  ?  ut  magni  sit  virtutes
eius  non aemulatione,  quod fieri non potest,  sed

51  intellectu  sequi.  Verum  hie  omnes  sine  dubio  et  in
omni  genere  eloquentiae  proeul  a  se  reliquit,  epicos
tamen  praecipue,  videlicet  quia  clarissima  ^  in  materia

52  simili  comparatio  est.  Rare  assurgit  Hesiodus,
magnaque  pars  eius  in  nominibus  est  occupata ;
tamen  utiles  circa  praecepta  sententiae  levitasque
verborum et  compositionis probabilis, daturque ei

63  palma  in  illo  medio  genere  dicendi.  Contra  in
Antimacho  vis  et  gravitas  et  minima  vulgare  elo-
quendi  genus  habet  laudem.  Sed  quamvis  ei  se-
cundas  fere  grammaticorum  consensus  deferat,  et
adfectibus  et  iucunditate  et  dispositione  et  omnino
arte  deficitur,  ut  plane  manifesto  appai'eat,  quanto

54  sit  aliud  proximum  esse  aliud  secundum.' Panyasin

*  genera,  Caesar :  quae,  G.

*  clarissima,  most  MSS.  :  durissima,  0.

*  secundum,  various  late  MSS.  omitted  by  G.

*  II.  xxiv.  486  sqq.  *  Especially  the  Thcogony.

*  Antimachu3  of  Colophon  (JUrr.  circ.  405  B.C.),  author  of
a  Thcbaid.

*  Uncle  of  Herodotus,  author  of  a  Heracleia.

30


BOOK X.  I.  49-54

similes^  his  amplifications,  his  illustrations,  digres-
sions, indications  of  fact,  inferences,  and  all  the
other  methods  of  proof  and  refutation  which  he
employs.  They  are  so  numerous  that  the  majority
of  writers  on  the  principles  of  rhetoric  have  gone  to
his  works  for  examples  of  all  these  things.  And  as  50
for  perorations,  what  can  ever  be  equal  to  the  prayers
which  Priam  addresses  to  Achilles  ^  when  he  comes
to  beg  for  the  body  of  his  son  ?  Again,  does  he  not
transcend  the  limits  of  human  genius  in  his  choice
of  words,  his  reflexions,  figures,  and  the  arrangement
of  his  whole  work,  with  the  result  that  it  requires  a
powerful  mind,  I  will  not  say  to  imitate,  for  that  is
impossible,  but  even  to  appreciate  his  excellences  ?
But  he  has  in  truth  outdistanced  all  that  have  come  51
after  him  in  every  department  of  eloquence,  above
all,  he  has  outstripped  all  other  writers  of  epic,  the
contrast  in  their  case  being  especially  striking  owing
to  the  similarity  of  the  material  with  which  they
deal.  Hesiod  rarely  rises  to  any  height,  while  a  5-
great  part  of  his  works  is  filled  almost  entirely  with
names  -  :  none  the  less,  his  maxims  of  moral  wisdom
provide  a  useful  model,  the  smooth  flow  of  his
words  and  structure  merit  Sour  approval,  and  he
is  assigned  the  first  place"  among  writers  of  the
intermediate  style.  On  the  other  hand,  Antimachus'  53
deserves  praise  for  the  vigour,  dignity  and  eleva-
tion of  his  language.  But  although  practically  all
teachers  of  literature  rank  him  second  among  epic
poets,  he  is  deficient  in  emotional  power,  charm,  and
arrangement  of  matter,  and  totally  devoid  of  real
art.  No  better  example  can  be  found  to  show  what
a  vast  difference  there  is  to  being  near  another
writer and being second to him. Panyasis* is  54

31


QUINTILIAN

ex  utroque  mixtum  putant  in  eloquendo  neutrius-
que  aequare  virtutes,  alterum  tamen  ab  eo  materia
alterum  disponendi  ratione  supei'ari.  ApoUonius  in
ordinem  a  grammaticis  datum  non  venit,  quia
Aristarchus  atque  Aristophanes,  poetarum  iudices,
neminem  sui  temporis  in  numerum  redegerunt ;  non
tamen  contemnendum  reddidit  opus  aequali  quadam
65  mediocritate.  Arati  materia  motu  caret,  ut  in  qua
nulla  varietas,  nullus  adfectus,  nulla  persona,  nulla
cuiusquam  sit  oratio ;  sufficit  tamen  operi,  cui  se
parem  credidit.  Admirabilis  in  suo  genere  Theo-
critus, sed  musa  ilia  rustica  et  pastoralis  non  forum

56  modo,  verum  ipsam  etiam  urbem  reformidat.  Audire
videor  undique  congerentes  nomina  plurimorum
poetarum.  Quid  ?  Herculis  acta  non  bene  Pisandros  ?
Nicandrum  frustra  secuti  Macer  atque  Vergilius?
Quid  ?  Euphorionem  transibimus  ?  quem  nisi  pro-
basset  Vergilius,  idem  nunquam  certe  conditorum
Chalcidico  versu  canninum  fecisset  in  Bucolicis  menti-
onem. Quid  ? Horatius  frusti'a  Tyrtaeum  Homero

57  subiungit  .'*  Nee  sane  quisquam  est  tarn  procul  a
cognitione  eorum  remotus,  ut  non  indicem  certe  ex

^  Apollonius  of  Rhodes,  author  of  the  Argonautica.  The
list  to  which  reference  is  made  consisted  of  the  four  poets
just  mentioned,  with  the  addition  of  Pisandros,  for  whom
see  §  56.

*  Aristophanes  of  Bj'zantium.

'  A  Rhodian  poet  of  the  seventh  century  B.C.

*  Nicander  of  Colophon  (second  century  B.C.),  author  of
didactic  poems,  Theriaca  and  Alexipharmaca  and  Meta-
morphoses [krepoiovixiva^.  Virgil  imitated  him  in  the  Georgics,
Aemilius  Macer,  the  friend  of  Ovid,  in  his  Theriaca.

'  Euphorion  of  Chalcis  (220  B.C.)  wrote  elaborate  short
epics.  See  Ed.  x.  50.  The  words  are,  however,  put  into
the  mouth  of  Gallus  with  reference  to  his  own  imitations  of
Euphorion.

32


BOOK X.  I.  54-57

regarded  as  combining  the  qualities  of  the  last  two
poets,  being  their  inferior  in  point  of  style,  but
surpassing  Hesiod  in  the  choice  of  his  subject  and
Antimachus  in  its  arrangement.  Apollonius  ^  is  not
admitted  to  the  lists  drawn  up  by  the  professors
of  literature,  because  the  critics,  Aristarchus  and
Aristophanes,^  included  no  contemporary  poets.
None  the  less,  his  work  is  by  no  means  to  be
despised,  being  distinguished  by  the  consistency
with  which  he  maintains  his  level  as  a  repre-
sentative of  the  intermediate  type.  The  subject  55
chosen  by  Aratus  is  lifeless  and  monotonous,  afford-
ing no  scope  for  pathos,  description  of  character,
or  eloquent  speeches.  However,  he  is  adequate  for
the  task  to  which  he  felt  himself  equal.  Theocritus
is  admirable  in  his  own  way,  but  the  rustic  and
pastoral  muse  shrinks  not  merely  from  the  forum,
but  from  town-life  of  every  kind.  I  think  I  hear  56
my  readers  on  all  sides  suggesting  the  names  of
hosts  of  other  poets.  What.''  Did  not  Pisandros^
tell  the  story  of  Hercules  in  admirable  style?
Were  there  not  good  reasons  for  Virgil  and  Macer
taking  Nicander*  as  a  model.-*  Are  we  to  ignore
Euphorion  ?  ^  Unless  Virgil  had  admired  him,  he
would  never  have  mentioned

"  verses  written  in  Chalcidic  strain  "

in  the  Eclogues. Again,  had  Horace  no  justification
for  coupling  the  name of  Tyrtaeus  * with  that  of
Homer  .f* To  which  I  reply,  that  there  is  no  one  so  57
ignorant  of  poetic  literature  that  he  could  not,  if  he
chose,  copy  a  catalogue of  such  poets  from  some

•  See  Hor.  A.  P.  401. Tyrtaeus, writer  of  war  songs
(seventh  century  B.a).

33


QUINTILIAN

bibliotheca  sumptum  transferre  in  libros  suos  possit.
Nee  ignore  igitur  quos  transeo  nee  utique  damno,  ut

58  qui  dixerim  esse  in  omnibus  utilitatis  aliquid.  Sed
ad  illos  iam  perfeetis  eonstitutisque  viribus  reverte-
mur ;  quod  in  eenis  grandibus  saepe  facimus  ut,  eum
optimis  satiati  sumus,  varietas  tamen  nobis  ex  vilio-
ribus  grata  sit.  Tune  et  elegiam  vacabit  in  manus
sumere,  cuius  princeps  habetur  Callimachus,  secundas

59  confessione  plurimorum  Philetas  occupavit.  Sed
dum  adsequamur  ^  illam  firmam,  ut  dixi,  facilitatem,
optimis  adsuescendum  est  et  multa  magis  quam  multo-
rum  lectione  formanda  mens  et  ducendus  color.
Itaque  ex  tribus  receptis  Aristarchi  iudicio  scriptori-
bus  iamborum  ad  eiiv  maxime  pertinebit  unus  Arehi-

60  loehus.  Summa  in  hoe  vis  elocutionis,  eum  validae
turn  breves  vibrantesque  sententiae,  plurimum  san-
guinis atque  nervorum,  adeo  ut  videatur  quibusdam,
quod  quoquam  minor  est,  materiae  esse  non  ingenii

61  vitium.  Novem  vero  Lyricorum  longe  Pindarus
princeps  spiritus  magnificentia,  sententiis,  figuris,
beatissima  rerum  verborumqiie  copia  et  velut  quodam
eloquentiae flumine ; propter quae Horatius eum

*  adsequamur,  Halm  :  adsequimur,  G  and  most  3ISS.  :
adsequatur,  a  few  late  MSS.

1  §  45.  *  Philetas  of  Cos  (290  B.C.).  «  x.  i.  1.

*  i.e.  invective.  The  other  two  writers  are  Simonides  of
Amorgos  and  Hipponax  of  Ephesus.  Ai'chilochus  (Jl.
686  B.C.).

'  The  five  not  mentioned  here  are  Alcman,  Sappho,  Ibyoua,
Anacreon  and  Bacchylides.  •  Od.  TV.  ii.  1.

34


BOOK X.  r.  5  7-6 1

library  for  insertion  in  his  own  treatises.  I  can
therefore  assure  my  readers  that  1  am  well  aware
of  the  existence  of  the  poets  whom  1  pass  over  in
silence,  and  am  far  from  condemning  them,  since  I
have  already  said  that  some  profit  may  be  derived
from  every  author.^  But  we  must  wait  till  our  58
powers  have  been  developed  and  established  to  the
full  before  we  turn  to  these  poets,  just  as  at  banquets
we  take  our  fill  of  the  best  fare  and  then  turn
to  other  food  which,  in  spite  of  its  compnrative
inferiority,  is  still  attractive  owing  to  its  variety.
Not  until  our  taste  is  formed  shall  we  have  leisure
to  study  the  elegiac  poets  as  well.  Of  these,  Calli-
machus  is  regarded  as  the  best,  the  second  place
being,  according  to  the  verdict  of  most  critics,
occupied  by  Philetas.^  But  until  we  have  acquired  59
that  assured  facility  of  which  I  spoke,^  we  must
familiarise  ourselves  with  the  best  writers  only  and
must  form  our  minds  and  develop  an  appropriate  tone
by  reading  that  is  deep  ratlier  than  wide.  Conse-
quently, of  the  three  writers  of  iambics  *  approved  by
the  judgment  of  Aristarchus,  Archilochus  will  be  far
the  most  useful  for  the  formation  of  the  facility  in
question.  For  he  has  a  most  forcible  style,  is  full  of  60
vigorous,  terse  and  pungent  reflexions,  and  over-
flowing with  life  and  energy :  indeed,  some  critics
think  that  it  is  due  solely  to  the  nature  of  his
subjects,  and  not  to  his  genius,  that  any  poets  are  to
be  ranked  above  him.  Of  the  nine  lyric  poets  ^  61
Pindar  is  by  far  the  greatest,  in  virtue  of  his  inspired
magnificence,  the  beauty  of  his  thoughts  and  figures,
the  rich  exuberance  of  his  language  and  matter,
and  his  rolling  flood  of  eloquence,  characteristics
which,  as Horace  * rightly held,  make him in-

35


QUINTILIAN

62  merito  credidit  nemini  imitabilem.  Stesichorus  quam
sit  ingenio  validus,  materiae  quoque  ostendunt,
maxima  bella  et  clarissimos  caiientem  duces  et  epici
carminis  onera  lyra  sustinentem.  Reddit  enim
personis  in  agendo  simul  loquendoque  debitam
dignitatem,  ae  si  tenuisset  modum,  videtur  aemulari
proximus  Homerum  potuisse ;  sed  redundat  atque
eflunditur,  quod  ut  est  reprehendendum,  ita  copiae

63  vitiura  est.  Alcaeus  in  parte  operis  am-eo  pleciro
merito  donatur,  qua  tyrannos  insectatus  multum
etiam  moribus  confert  in  eloquendo  quoque  brevis
et  magnificus  et  dicendi  vi^  plerumque  oratori  similis  ;
sed  et  lusit^  et  in  amores  descendit,  maioribustamen

64  aptior.  Simonides,  tenuis  alioqui,  sermone  proprio
et  iucunditate  quadam  commendari  potest ;  praecipua
tamen  eius  in  commovenda  miseratione  virtus,  ut
quidam  in  hac  eum  parte  omnibus  eius  operis
auctoribus  praeferant.

65  Antiqua  comoedia  cum  sinceram  illam  sermonis
Attici  gratiam  prope  sola  retinet,  turn  facundissimae
libertatis  est  et  in  *  insectandis  vitiis  praecipua,  pluri-
mum  tamen  virium  etiam  in  ceteris  partibus  habet.
Nam  et  grandis  et  elegans  et  venusta,  et  nescio  an
ulla, post Homerum tamen, quem ut Achillem

^  dicendi  vi,  Halm :  dicendi  et,  G.

*  sed  et  lusit,  several  late  MSS.  :  et  eius  sit,  0.

'  est  et  in,  G.  A.  B.  IVolff :  etsi  est,  MSS.

^  Stesichorus  of  Himera  in  Sicily  {flor.  circ.  600  B.C.),
wrote  in  lyric  verse  on  many  legends,  more  especially  on
themes  connected  with  the  Trojan  war.

*  Hor. Od.  II.  xiii.  26. Alcaeus  of  Mitylene  (circa  600

B.C.).

'  Simonides  of  Ceos,  556—468  B.C.,  famous  for  all  forms  of
lyric  poetry,  especially  funeral  odes.

36


BOOK  X.  I.  61-65

imitable.  The  greatness  of  the  genius  of  Stesichorus  *  62
is  shown  by  his  choice  of  subject :  for  he  sings  of  the
greatest  wars  and  the  most  glorious  of  chieftains,
and  the  music  of  his  lyre  is  equal  to  the  weighty
themes  of  epic  poetry.  For  both  in  speech  and
action  he  invests  his  characters  with  the  dignity
which  is  their  due,  and  if  he  had  only  been  capable
of  exercising  a  little  more  restraint,  he  might,
perhaps,  have  proved  a  serious  rival  to  Homer.
But  he  is  redundant  and  diffuse,  a  fault  which,
while  deserving  of  censure,  is  nevertheless  a  defect
springing  from  the  very  fullness  of  his  genius.
Alcaeus  has  deserved  the  compliment  of  being  said  63
to  make  music  with  qmll  of  gold  ^  in  that  jx)rtion
of  his  works  in  which  he  attacks  the  tyrants  of  his
day  and  shows  himself  a  real  moral  force.  He  is,
moreover,  terse  and  magnificent  in  style,  whde  the
vigour  of  his  diction  resembles  that  of  oratory.  But
he  also  wrote  poetry  of  a  more  sportive  nature  and
stooped  to  erotic  poetry,  despite  his  aptitude  for
loftier  themes.  Simonides'  wrote  in  a  simple  style,  64
but  may  be  recommended  for  the  propriety  and
charm  of  his  language.  His  chief  merit,  however,
lies  in  his  power  to  excite  pity,  so  much  so,  in  fact,
that  some  rank  him  in  this  respect  above  all  writers
of  this  class  of  jwetry.

The  old  comedy  is  almost  the  only  form  of  poetry  65
which  preserves  intact  the  true  grace  of  Attic
diction,  while  it  is  characterised  by  the  most  elo-
quent freedom  of  speech,  and  shows  especial  power
in  the  denunciation  of  vice ;  but  it  reveals  great
force  in  other  departments  as  well.  For  its  style
is  at  once  lofty,  elegant  and  graceful,  and  if  we
except Homer,  who,  like  Achilles  among  warriors,

37


QUINTILIAN

semper excipi par est, aut similior sit  oratoribus

66  aut  ad  oratores  faeiendos  aptior.  Plures  eius
auctores ;  Aristophanes  tamen  et  Eupolis  Crati-
nusque  praecipui.  Tragoedias  primus  in  lucem
Aeschylus  protulit,  sublimis  et  gravis  et  grandiloquus
saepe  usque  ad  vitium,  sed  rudis  in  plerisque  et
incompositus  ;  propter  quod  correctas  eius  fabulas  in
certamen deferre posterioribus  poetis Athenienses

67  permiserunt,  suntque  eo  mode  multi  coronati.  Sed
longe  clarius  illustraverunt  hoc  opus  Sophocles  atque
Euripides,  quorum  in  dispari  dicendi  via  uter  sit
poeta  melior,  inter  plurimos  quaeritur;  idque  ego
sane,  quoniam  ad  praesentem  materiam  nihil  pertinet,
iniudicatum  relinquo.  Illud  quidem  nemo  non  fate-
atur  necesse  est,  iis  qui  se  ad  agendum  comparant

68  utiliorem  longe  fore  Euripiden.  Namque  is  et
sermone  (quod  ipsum  reprehendunt,  quibus  gravitas
et  cothurnus  et sonus  Sophocli  videtur  esse  subli-

I  mior)  magis  accedit  oratorio  generi  et  sententiis
densus  et  in  iis  quae  a  sapientibus  tradita  sunt
paene  ipsis  par,  et  dicendo  ac  respondendo  cuilibet
eorum  qui  fuerunt  in  foro  diserti  comparandus ;  in
adfectibus  vero  cum  omnibus  mirus  turn  in  iis  qui

69  miseratione  constant  facile  praecipuus.  Hunc  ^  admi-
ratus  maxime  est,  ut  saepe  testatur,  et  secutus,  quan-
quam  in  opere  diverso,  Menander,  qui  vel  unus,  meo

*  hunc,  several  late  MSS.  :  et,  G.

1  Contemporaries  :  Cratinus  (519-422),  Aristophanes  (448-
380),  Eupolis  (446-410).

38


BOOK X.  I.  65-69

is  beyond  all  comparison,  I  am  not  sure  that  there
is  any  style  which  bears a  closer resemblance  to
oratory  or  is  better  adapted  for  forming  the  orator.
There  are  a  number  of  writers  of  the  old  comedy,  66
but  the  best  are  Aristophanes,  Eupolis  and  Crati-
nus.i Aeschylus  was  the  first  to  bring  tragedy  into
prominence: he  is lofty, dignified, grandiloquent
often  to  a  fault,  but  frequently uncouth and in-
harmonious. Consequently,  the  Athenians  allowed
later  poets  to  revise  his  tragedies  and  to  produce
them  in  the  dramatic  contests,  and  many  succeeded
in  winning the prize by such means. Sophocles  67
and Euripides, however, brought tragedy to far
greater  perfection: they  differ  in  style,  but it is
much  disputed  as  to  which  should  be  awarded  the
supremacy,  a  question  which,  as  it  has  no  bearing
on  my  present  theme,  I  shall  make  no  attempt  to
decide. But  this  much  is  certain  and  incontrovert-
ible, that  Euripides  will  be  found  of  far  greater  service
to  those  who  are  training  themselves  for  pleading  in
court. For  his  language,  although  actually  censured  C8
by those who regard the dignity, the stately
stride  and  sonorous  utterance  of  Sophocles  as  being
more  sublime,  has  a  closer  affinity  to  that  of  oratory,
while he is  full of  striking reflexions, in which,
indeed, in their special sphere, he rivals the
philosophers  themselves,  and  for  defence and at-
tack may  be  compared  with any  orator  that has
won  renown  in  the  courts. Finally,  although  ad-
mirable in every  kind  of  emotional  appeal,  he is
easily supreme in the power to excite pity.
Menander,  as  he  often  testifies  in  his  works,  had  69
a  profound  admiration for  Euripides,  and  imitated
him,  although  in  a  different  type  of  work. Now,

39


QUINTILIAN

quidem  iudicio,  diligenter  lectus  ad  cuncta^  quae
praecipimus,  effingenda  sufficiat;  ita  omnem  vitae
imagineni  expressit,  tanta  in  eo  inveniendi  copia  et
eloquendi  facultas,  ita  est  omnibus  rebus,  personis,

70  adfectibus  accommodatus.  Nee  nihil  profecto  vide-
runt,  qui  orationes,  quae  Charisii  nomini  addicuntur,^
a  Menandro  scriptas  putant.  Sed  mihi  longe  magis
orator  probari  in  opere  suo  videtur,  nisi  forte  aut  illa^
iudicia,  quae  Epitrepontes,  Epicleros,  Locroe  habent,
aut  meditationes  in  Psophodee,  Nomothete,  Hypo-
bolimaeo  non  omnibus  oi*atoriis  numeris  sunt  abso-

71  lutae.  Ego  tamen  plus  adhuc  quiddam  collaturum
eum  declamatoribus  puto,  quoniam  his  necesse  est
secundum  condicionem  controversiarum  plures  subire
personas,  patrum,  filiorum,  militum,  rusticorum,
divitum,  pauperum,  irascentium,  deprecantium,  mi-
tium,  asperorum. In  quibus  omnibus  mire  custoditur

72  ab  hoe  poeta  decor.  Atque  ille  quidem  omnibus
eiusdem  operis  auctoribus  abstulit  nomen  et  fulgore
quodam suae claritatis  tenebras obduxit. Tamen

.  habent  alii  quoque  Comici,  si  cum  venia  leguntur,
quaedam  quae  possis  decerpere ;  et  praecipue  Phile-

*  Charisii  nomini  addicuntur,  a,  Frotscheri  charis  in
homine  adductura,  G.  :  Charisii  nomine  eduntur,  vuJgo.

^  a^ler  ilia  O  and  a  number  of  later  MSS.  read  mala,
which  is,  however,  omitted  in  a  few  MSS.  and  is  expunged  by
Andresen.


*  A  contemporary  of  Demosthenes  ;  his  speeches  have  not
survived,  but  were  considered  to  resemble  those  of  Lysias.

'  The  greater  portion  of  the  Epitrepontes  has  been  re-
covered from  a  papyrus.  The  other  plays  are  lost.  The
names  may  be  translated:  "The  Arbitrators,"  "  The  Heiress,"
"The  Loeri,"  "  The  Timid  Man,"  "The  Lawgiver,"  "The
Changeling."


4^.


BOOK X.  I.  69-72

the  careful  study  of  Menander  alone  would,  in  mj
opinion,  be  sufficient  to  develop  all  those  qualities
with  the  production  of  which  my  present  work
is  concerned ;  so  perfect  is  his  representation  of
actual  life,  so  rich  is  his  power  of  invention  and
his  gift  of  style,  so  perfectly  does  he  adapt  himself
to  every  kind  of  circumstance,  character  and  emo-
tion. Indeed,  those  critics  are  no  fools  who  think  70
the  speeches  attributed  to  Charisius  ^  were  in  reality
written  by  Menander.  But  I  consider  that  he  shows
his  power  as  an  orator  far  more  clearly  in  his
comedies ;  since  assuredly  we  can  find  no  more
perfect  models  of  every  oratorical  quality  than  the
judicial  pleadings  of  his  Epitrepontes,^  Epicleros
and  Locri,  or  the  declamatory  speeches  in  the  Pso-
phodes,  Nomothetes,  and  Hypobolimaeus.  Still,  for  71
my  own  part,  I  think  that  he  will  be  found  even  more
useful  by  declaimers,  in  view  of  the  fact  that  they
have,  according  to  the  nature  of  the  various  contro-
versial themes,  to  undertake  a  number  of  different
roles  and  to  impersonate  fathers,  sons,  soldiers,
peasants,  rich  men  and  poor,  the  angry  man  and
the  suppliant,  the  gentle  and  the  harsh.  And  all
these  characters  are  treated  by  this  poet  with
consummate  appropriateness.  Indeed,  such  is  his  72
supremacy  that  he  has  scarce  left  a  name  to  other
writers  of  the  new  comedy,  and  has  cast  them  into
darkness  by  the  splendour  of  his  own  renown.
Still,  you  will  find  something  of  value  in  the  other
comic  poets  as  well,  if  you  read  them  in  not  too
critical  a  spirit ;  above  all,  profit  may  be  derived
from  the  study  of  Philemon,'  who,  although  it  was

•  Philemon  of  Soli  (360-262) ;  Menander  of  Athens  (342-
290).

4«


QUINTILIAN

mon,  qui  ut  prave  sui  temporis  iudiciis  Menandro
saepe  praelatus  est,  ita  consensu  tamen  omnium
meruit  credi  secundus.

73  Historiara  multi  scripsere  praeclare,  sed  nemo
dubitat  longe  duos  ceteris  praeferendos,  quorum
diversa  virtus  laudem  paene  est  parem  consecuta.
Densus  et  brevis  et  semper  instans  sibi  Thucydides,
dulcis  et  candidus  et  fusus  Herodotus  ;  ille  concitatis
hie  remissis  adfectibus  melior,  ille  contionibus  hie

74  sermonibus,  ille  vi  hie  voluptate.  Theopompus  his
proximus  ut  in  historia  praedictis  minor,  ita  oratori
magis  similis,  ut  qui,  antequam  est  ad  hoc  opus
sollicitatuSj  diu  fuerit  orator.  Philistus  quoque  me-
retur,  qui  turbae  quamvis  bonorum  post  eos  auctorum
eximatur,  imitator  Thucj'^didis  et  ut  multo  infirmior
ita  aliquatenus  lucidior, Ephorus^  ut  Isocrati  visum,

76  calcaribus  eget.  Clitarchi  probatur  ingenium,  fides
infamatur.  Longo  post  intervallo  temporis  natus
Timagenes  vel  hoc  est  ipso  probabilis,  quod  inter-
missam  historias  scribendi  industriam  nova  laude
reparavit.  Xenophon  non  excidit  mihi,  sed  inter
philosophos  reddendus  est.

^  Theopompus  of  Chios,  born  about  378  B.C.,  wrote  a
history  of  Greece  {HelUnica)  from  close  of  Peloponnesian  war
to  394  B.C.,  and  a  historj'  of  Greece  in  relation  to  Philip  of
Macedon  {PMlippica).  His  master,  Isocrates,  urged  him  to
write  history.

*  Philistus  of  Syracuse,  born  about  430  B.C.,  wrote  a
history  of  Sicily.

*  Ephorus  of  Cumae,  ^r.  circ.  340  B.C.,  wrote  a  universal
history. He  was  a  pupil  of  Isocrates. Cp.  ii.  viii.  11.

4a


BOOK X.  I.  72-75

a  depraved  taste  which  caused  his  contemporaries
often  to  prefer  him  to  Menander,  has  none  the
less  deserved  the  second  place  which  posterity  has
been  unanimous  in  awarding  him.

If  we  turn  to  history,  we  shall  find  a  number  of  73
distinguished  writers ;  but  there  are  two  who  must
undoubtedly  be  set  far  above  all  their  rivals :  their
excellences  are  different  in  kind,  but  have  won
almost  equal  praise.  Thucydides  is  compact  in
texture,  terse  and  ever  eager  to  press  forward  :  Hero-
dotus is  pleasant,  lucid  and  diffuse :  the  former
excels  in  vigour,  speeches  and  the  expression  of  the
stronger  passions  ;  the  latter  in  charm,  conversations
and  the  delineation  of  the  gentler  emotions.  Theo-  74
pompus  ^  comes  next,  and  though  as  a  historian  he
is  inferior  to  the  authors  just  mentioned,  his  style
has  a  greater  resemblance  to  oratory,  which  is  not
surprising,  as  he  was  an  orator  before  he  was  urged
to  turn  to  history.  Philistus  ^  also  deserves  special
distinction  among  the  crowd  of  later  historians,  good
though  they  may  have  been :  he  was  an  imitator  of
Thucydides,  and  though  far  his  inferior,  was  some-
what more  lucid.  Ephorus,'  according  to  Isocrates,
needed  the  spur.  Clitarchus  *  has  won  approval  by  75
his  talent,  but  his  accuracy  has  been  impugned.
Timagenes  ^  was  bom  long  after  these  authors,  but
deserves  our  praise  for  the  very  fact  that  he  revived
the  credit  of  history,  the  writing  of  which  had  fallen
into  neglect.  I  have  not  forgotten  Xenophon,  but
he  will  find  his  place  among  the  philosophers.

*  Clitarchus  of  Megara  wrote  a  history  of  Persia  and  of
Alexander,  whose  contemporary  he  was.

*  Timagenes, a Syrian of  the Augustan age, wrote a
history  of  Alexander  and  iiis  successors.

43


QUINTILIAN

76  Sequitur  oratorum  ingens  manus,  ut  cum  decern
simul  Athenis  aetas  una  tulerit.  Quorum  longe
princeps  Demosthenes  ac  paene  lex  orandi  fuit ;
tanta  vis  in  eo,  tarn  densa  omnia,  ita  quibusdam
nervis  intenta  sunt,  tam  nihil  otiosum,  is  dicendi
modus,  ut  nee  quod  desit  in  eo  nee  quod  redundet

77  invenias.  Plenior  Aeschines  et  magis  fusus  et  grandi-
ori  similis,  quo  minus  strictus  est ;  carnis  tamen  plus
habet,  minus  lacertorum.  Dulcis  in  primis  et  acutus
Hyperides, sed minoribus causis,  ut non dixerim

78  utilior,  magis  par.  His  aetate  Lysias  maior,  subtilis
atque  elegans  et  quo  nihil,  si  oratori  satis  est  docere,
quaeras  perfectius.  Nihil  enim  est  inane,  nihil  arces-
situm  ;  puro  tamen  fonti  quam  magno  flumini  propior.

79  Isocrates  in  diverso  genere  dicendi  nitidus  et  comptus
et  palaestrae  quam  pugnae  magis  accommodatus
omnes  dicendi  veneres  sectatus  est,  nee  immerito ;
auditoriis  enim  se,  non  iudiciis  compararat ;  in  in-
ventione facilis,  honesti studiosus,  in  compositione

80  adeo  diligens,  ut  cura  eius  reprehendatur.  Neque
ego  in  his,  de  quibus  sum  locutus,  has  solas  virtutes,
sed  has  praecipuas  puto,  nee  ceteros  parum  fuisse

*  Antiphon,  Andocides,  Lysias  (flor.  4.03-380),  Isocrates
(435-338),  Isaeus,  Demosthenes,  Aeschines,  Lycurgus,
Hyperides  and  Dinarchus,

44


BOOK X.  I.  76-80

There  follows  a  vast  army  of  orators,  Athens  alone  76
having  produced  ten  remarkable  orators  ^  in  the
same  generation.  Of  these  Demosthenes  is  far  the
greatest :  indeed  he  came  to  be  regarded  almost  as
the  sole  pattern  of  oratory.  Such  is  the  force  and
compactness  of  his  language,  so  muscular  his  style,
so  free  from  tameness  and  so  self-controlled,  that
vou  will  find  nothing  in  him  that  is  either  too  much
or  too  little.  The  style  of  Aeschines  is  fuller  and  77
more  diffuse,  while  his  lack  of  restraint  gives  an
appearance  of  grandeur.  But  he  has  more  flesh  and
less  muscle.  Hyperides  has  extraordinary  charm  and
point,  but  is  better  qualified,  not  to  say  more  useful,
for  cases  of  minor  importance.  Lysias  belongs  to  an  78
earlier  generation  than  those  whom  I  have  just
mentioned.  He  has  subtlety  and  elegance  and,  if
the  orator's  sole  duty  were  merely  to  instruct,  it
would  be  impossible  to  conceive  greater  perfection.
For  there  is  nothing  irrelevant  or  far-fetched  in  his
speeches.  None  the  less  I  would  compare  him  to  a
clear  spring  rather  than  to  a  mighty  river.  Isocrates  79
was  an  exponent  of  a  different  style  of  oratorv  :  he  is
neat  and  polished  and  better  suited  to  the  fencing-
school  than  to  the  battlefield.  He  elaborated  all  the
graces  of  style,  nor  was  he  without  justification.  For
he  had  trained  himself  for  the  lecture-room  and  not
the  law-courts.  He  is  ready  in  invention,  his  moral
ideals  are  high  and  the  care  which  he  bestows  upon
his  rhythm  is  such  as  to  be  a  positive  fault.  I  do  80
not  regai-d  these  as  the  sole  merits  of  the  orators  of
whom  I  have  spoken,  but  have  selected  what  seemed
to  me  their  chief  excellences,  while  those  whom  I
have  passed  over  in  silence  were  far  from  being
indifferent. In  fact,  I  will  readily  admit  that  the

45


QUINTILIAN

magnos.  Quin  etiam  Phalerea  ilium  Demetrium,
quanquam  is  primus  inclinasse  eloquentiam  dicitur,
multum  ingenii  habuisse  et  facundiae  fateor,  vel  ob
hoc  memoria  dignum,  quod  ultimus  est  fere  ex
Atticis,  qui  dici  possit  orator ;  quem  tamen  in  illo
medio  genere  dicendi  praefert  omnibus  Cicero,

81  Philosophorum,  ex  quibus  plurimum  se  traxisse  elo-
quentiae  M.  Tullius  confitetur,  quis  dubitet  Platonem
esse  praecipuum  sive  acumine  dissei*endi  sive  elo-
quendi  facultate  divina  quadam  et  Homerica?  Mul-
tum enim  supra  prosam  orationem  et  quam  pedestrem
Graeei  vocant  surgit,  ut  mihi  non  hominis  ingenio
sed  quodam  Delphicivideatur  oraculo  dei  instinctus.^

82  Quid  ego  commemorem  Xenophontis  illam  iucundi-
tatem  inadfectatam,  sed  quam  nulla  consequi  adfec-
tatio  possit?  ut  ipsae  sermonera  finxisse  Gratiae
videantur  et,  quod  de  Pericle  veteris  comoediae
testimonium  est,  in  hunc  transferri  iustissime  possit,
in  labris  eius  sedisse  quandam  persuadendi deam.

83  Quid  reliquorum  Socraticorum  elegantiam  ?  Quid
Aristotelem  ?  quem  dubito  scientia  rerum  an  scrip-
torum  copia  an  eloquendi  ^  suavitate  an  inventionum
acumine  an  varietate  operum  clariorem  putem. Nam

*  quodam  Delphici .  .  .  dei  instinctus,  Frotscher  :  quaedam
Delphico  .  .  .  de  instrictus,  G  :  quodam  Delphico  .  .  .  in-
etinctus,  vulgo.

*  eloquendi,  cod.  JTarl.  4950,  cod.  Dorv.  :  eloquendi  usus,
0  aiid  nearly  all  M8S.  :  eloquendi  vi  ac,  Geel.

*  Governed  Athens  as  Cassander's  vicegerent  317-307  :
then  fled  to  Egypt,  where  he  died  in  283.

*  de  Or.  ii.  95.  Orat.  92.  The  "intermediate"  style  is
that  which  lies  between  the  "grand"  and  the  "plain"
styles.

'  Eupolis,  iruOd)  Tts  firfKidi^ev  iiri  rots  x*^^*<''"'»


BOOK X.  1.  80-83

famous  Demetrius  of  Phalerum,^  who  is  said  to
have  been  the  first  to  set  oratory  on  the  down-
ward path,  was  a  man  of  great  talent  and  eloquence
and  deserves  to  be  remembered,  if  only  for  the
fact  that  he  is  almost  the  last  of  the  Attic
school  who  can  be  called  an  orator  :  indeed  Cicero  *
prefers  him  to  all  other  orators  of  the  intermediate
school.

Proceeding  to  the  philosophers,  from  whom  Cicero  81
acknowledges  that  he  derived  such  a  large  portion
of  his  eloquence,  we  shall  all  admit  that  Plato  is
supreme  whether  in  acuteness  ot  perception  or  in
virtue  of  his  divine  gift  of  style,  which  is  worthy  of
Homer.  For  he  soars  high  above  the  levels  of
ordinary  prose  or,  as  the  Greeks  call  it,  pedestrian
language,  and  seems  to  me  to  be  inspired  not  by
mere  human  genius,  but,  as  it  were,  by  the  oracles
of  the  god  of  Delphi.  Why  should  I  speak  of  the  82
unaffected  charm  of  Xenophon,  so  far  beyond  the
power  of  affectation  to  attain .''  The  Graces  them-
selves seem  to  have  moulded  his  style,  and  we  may
with  the  utmost  justice  say  of  him,  what  the  writer
of  the  old  comedy^  said  of  Pericles,  that  the  goddess
of  persuasion  sat  enthroned  upon  his  lips.  Why  83
should  I  dwell  on  the  elegance  of  the  rest  of  the
Socratics  ?  or  on  Aristotle,*  with  regard  to  whom  I
hesitate  whether  to  praise  him  more  for  his  know-
ledge, for  the  multitude  of  his  writings,  the  sweet-
ness of  his  style,  the  penetration  revealed  by  his
discoveries  or  the  variety  of  the  tasks  which he

*  "Sweet"  is  the  last  epithet  to  be  applied  to  the
surviving  works  of  Aristotle.  But  Dionysius  of  Halicamassus
and  Cicero  praise  him  no  less  warmly,  referring,  no  doubt,
to  works  that  are  lost.

47


QUINTILIAN

in  Theophrasto  tam  est  loquendi  nitor  ille  divinus,

84  ut  ex  eo  nomen  quoque  traxisse  dicatur.  Minus
indulsere  eloquentiae  Stoici  veteres ;  sed  cum  lionesta
suaserunt  turn  in  colligendo  probandoque  quae  insti-
tuerant  plurimum  valuerunt,  rebus  tamen  acuti  magis
quam,  id  quod  sane  non  adfectaverunt,  oratione
magnifici.

85  Idem  nobis  per  Romanos  quoque  auctores  ordo
ducendus  est.  Itaque  ut  apud  illos  Homerus  sic
apud  nos  Vergilius  auspicatissimiim  dederit  exordium,
omnium eius  generis  poetarum  Graecorum  nostro-

86  rumque  baud  dubie  proximus.  Utar  enim  verbis
iisdem,  quae  ex  Afro  Domitio  iuvenis  excepi ;  qui
mihi  interroganti,  quern  Homero  crederet  maxime
accedere,  Seamdus,  inquit,  est  Vergilius,  propior  tamen
primo  quam  tertio.  Et  hercule  ut^  illi  naturae  caelesti
atque  immortali  cesserimus,  ita  curae  et  diligentiae
vel  ideo  in  hoc  plus  est,  quod  ei  fuit  magis  labor-
andum,  et  quantum  eminentibus  vincimur,  fortasse

87  aequalitate  pensamus.  Ceteri  omnes  longe  sequ-
entur.  Nam  Macer  et  Lucretius  legendi  quidem,
sed  non  ut  phrasin,  id  est,  corpus  eloquentiae  faciant,
elegantes  in  sua  quisque  materia  sed  alter  humilis,
alter  difficilis.  Atacinus  Varro  in  iis,  per  quae  nomen
est  adsecutus,  interpres  operis  alieni,non  spernendus

*  ut,  several  late  M88.  :  cum,  O  and  majority  oj  MSS.

^  Theophrastus,  Aristotle's  successor  as  head  of  his  school
(322-287).  Diogenes  Laertius  (v.  38)  says  that  his  real  name
was  Tyrtamus,  but  that  Aristotle  called  him  Theophrastus
because  of  the  "  divine  qualities  of  his  style  "  {<pp6.(ri<,).

•  Varro  of  Atax  in  Gaul  (82-37  B.C.)  was  specially  famous
for  his  translation  of  the  Argonautica  of  Apollonius  Rhodius.
He  also  wrote  didactic  poetry  and  historical  epic.

4«


BOOK X.  I.  83-87

essayed  ?  In  Theophrastus  ^  we  find  such  a  super-
human brilliance  of  style  that  his  name  is  said  to  be
derived  therefrom.  The  ancient  Stoics  indulged  84
their  eloquence  comparatively  little.  Still,  they
pleaded  the  cause  of  virtue,  and  the  rules  which
they  laid  down  for  argument  and  proof  have  been  of
the  utmost  value.  But  they  showed  themselves
shrewd  thinkers  rather  than  striking  orators,  which
indeed  they  never  aimed  at  being.

I  now  come  to  Roman  authors,  and  shall  follow  86
the  same  order  in  dealing  with  them.  As  among
Greek  authors  Homer  provided  us  with  the  most
auspicious  opening,  so  will  Virgil  among  our  own.
For  of  all  epic  poets,  Greek  or  Roman,  he,  without
doubt,  most  nearly  approaches  to  Homer.  I  will  86
repeat  the  words  which  I  heard  Domitius  Afer  use
in  my  young  days.  I  asked  what  poet  in  his  opinion
came  nearest  to  Homer,  and  he  replied,  "  Virgil
comes  second,  but  is  nearer  first  than  third."  And
in  truth,  although  we  must  needs  bow  before  the
immortal  and  superhuman  genius  of  Homer,  there
is  greater  diligence  and  exactness  in  the  work
of  Virgil  just  because  his  task  was  harder.  And
perhaps  the  superior  uniformity  of  the  Roman's  ex-
cellence balances  Homer's  pre-eminence  in  his  out-
standing passages.  All  our  other  poets  follow  a  long  87
way  in  the  rear.  Macer  and  Lucretius  are,  it  is  true,
worth  reading,  but  not  for  the  purpose  of  forming
style,  that  is  to  say,  the  body  of  eloquence :  both
deal  elegantly  with  their  themes,  but  the  former  is
tame  and  the  latter  difficult.  The  poems  by  which
Varro  of  Atax  ^  gained  his  reputation  were  transla-
tions, but  he  is  by  no  means  to  be  despised,  although
his  diction  is  not  sufficiently  rich  to  be of  much

49


QUINTILIAN

quidem,verum  ad  augendam  facultatem  dicendi  parum

88  locuples.  Ennium  sicut  sacros  vetustate  lucos  ador-
emus,  in  quibus  grandia  et  antiqua  robora  iam  non
tantam  habent  speciem  quantam  religionem.  Pro-
piores  alii  atque  ad  hoc,  de  quo  loquimur,  magis
utiles.  Lascivus  quidem  in  herois  quoque  Ovidius
et  nimium  amator  ingenii  sui,  laudandus  tamen  in

89  partibus.  Cornelius  autem  Severus,  etiam  si  sit  ^
versificator  quam  poeta  melior,  si  tamen,  ut  est
dictum,  ad  exemplar  primi  libri  bellum  Siculum
perscripsisset,  vindicaret  sibi  iure  secundum  locum,
Serranum  ^  consummari  mors  immatura  non  passa
est ;  puerilia  tamen  eius  opera  et  maximam  indolem
ostendunt  et  admirabilem praecipue  in  aetate  ilia

90  recti  generis  voluntatem.  Multum  in  Valerio  Flacco
nuper  amisimus.  Vehemens  et  poeticum  ingenium
Saleii  Bassi  fuit,  nee  ipsum  senectute  maturuit.
Rabirius  ac  Pedo  non  indigni  coguitione,  si  vacet.
Lucanus  ardens  et  concitatus  et  sententiisclarissimus
et,  ut  dicam  quod  sentio,  magis  oratoribus  quam  poetis

91  imitandus. Hos nominavimus, quia Germanicum

'  si  sit,  Spalding :  M88.  vanj  between  si,  sit  and  sic.
'  Serranum,  Lange :  ferrenum,  G.

^  Friend  and  contemporary  of  Ovid.  A  considerable  frag-
ment is  preserved  by  Sen.  Sims.  vi.  26.  The  Sicilian  War
was  the  war  with  Sextus  Pompeius  (38-36)  and  perhaps
formed  a  portion  of  a  larger  work  on  the  Civil  War.  The
surviving  fragment  deals  with  the  death  of  Cicero.  The
primiis  liber  may  therefore  perhaps  be  the  first  book  of  this
larger  work.

'  Nothing  is  knowTi  of  this  poet  except  the  name.

*  Nothing  is  known  of  this  poet  save  that  he  is  highly
praised  by  Tacitus  in  his  Dialogues,  and  was  patronised  by
Vespasian.  The  unfinished  Argonautica  of  Valerius  Flaccus
survives.

&0


BOOK  X.  I.  87-91

service  in  developing  the  resources  of  eloquence.
Ennius  deserves  our  reverence,  but  only  as  those  88
groves  whose  age  has  made  them  sacred,  but  whose
huge  and  ancient  trunks  inspire  us  with  religious
awe  rather  than  with  admiration  for  their  beauty.
There  are  other  poets  who  are  nearer  in  point  of
time  and  more  useful  for  our  present  purpose.  Ovid
has  a  lack  of  seriousness  even  when  he  writes  epic
and  is  unduly  enamoured  of  his  own  gifts,  but
portions  of  his  work  merit  our  praise.  On  the  other  89
hand,  although  Gjrnelius  Severus  ^  is  a  better  versifier
than  poet,  yet  if,  as  has  been  said,  he  had  written  his
poem  on  the  Sicilian  war  in  the  same  style  throughout
as  his  first  book,  he  would  have  had  a  just  claim  to  the
second  place.  A  premature  death  prevented  the
powers  of  Serranus  ^  from  ripening  to  perfection,  but
his  youthful  works  reveal  the  highest  talent  and  a
devotion  to  the  true  ideal  of  poetry,  which  is  remark-
able in  one  so  young.  We  have  suflfered  serious  loss  90
in  the  recent  death  of  Valerius  Flaccus.  Saleius
Bassus^  showed  an  ardent  and  genuinely  poetic
genius,  but,  like  that  of  Serranus,  it  was  not
mellowed  by  years.  Rabirius  *  and  Pedo  ^  deserve
to  be  studied  by  those  who  have  the  time.  Lucan
is  fiery  and  passionate  and  remarkable  for  the
grandeur  of  his  general  refle.xions,  but,  to  be  frank,
I  consider  that  he  is  more  suitable  for  imitation  by
the  orator  than  by  the  poet.  I  have  restricted  my  91
list  of  poets  to  these  names,  because  Germanicus

*  A  contemporary  of  Ovid,  believed  to  be  the  author  of  a
fragment  on  the  battle  of  Actium,  found  at  Herculaneum.

*  C.  Albinovanus  Pedo  wrote  a  poem  on  the  voyage  of
Germanicus  to  the  north  of  Germany.  A  fragment  is  pre-
served by  Sen.  Svms.  i.  14.

51


QUINTILIAN

Augustum  ab  institutis  studiis  deflexit  cura  terrarum,
parumque  dis  visum  est  esse  eum  maximum  poet-
arum.  Quid  tamen  his  ipsis  eius  operibus,  in  quae
donato  imperio  iuvenis  secesserat,  sublimius,  doctius,
omnibus  denique  numeris  praestantius  ?  Quis  enim
caneret  bella  melius,  quam  qui  sic  gerit?  Quern
pi'aesidentes  studiis  deae  propius  audirent?  Cui
magis  suas  artes  aperiret  familiare  numen  Minerva  ?

92  Dicent  haec  plenius  futura  saecula,  nunc  enim
ceterarum  fulgore  virtutum  laus  ista  praestringitur.
Nos  tamen  sacra  litterarum  colentes  feres,  Caesar,  si
non  tacitum  hoc  praeterimus  et  Vergiliano  certe
versu  testamur.

Inter  victrices  hederam  tibi  serpere  laurus.

93  Elegia  quoque  Graecos  provocamus,  cuius  mihi
tersus  atque  elegans  maxime  videtur  auctor  Tibullus.
Sunt  qui  Propertium  mahnt.  Ovidius  utroque  lasci-
vior,  sicut  durior  Gallus.  Satira  quidem  tota  nostra
est,  in  qua  primus  insignem  laudem  adeptus  Lucilius
quosdam  ita  deditos  sibi  adhuc  habet  amatores,  ut
eum non eiusdem modo operis auctoribus, sed

94  omnibus  poetis  praeferre  non  dubitent.  Ego  quan-
tum ab  illis  tantum  ab  Horatio  dissentio,  qui  Luci-

*  Domitian.

*  He  claimed  to  be  the  son  of  Minerva.  It  is  doubtful  if
he  ever  wrote  any  poetry.  Cp.  Tac.  Hist.  iv.  86,  Suet.  Dom.
2  and  20.  »  Ed.  viii.  13.

*  Corneliua  Gallus,  the  friend  of  Virgil,  and  the  first  dis-
tinguished writer  of  elegy  at  Rome. '  Sat.  I.  iv.  11.

5?


BOOK X.  1.  91-94

Augustus  ^  has  been  distracted  from  the  study  of
poetry  on  which  he  had  embarked  by  his  care  for
the  governance  of  the  world,  and  the  gods  have
thought  it  scarce  worthy  of  his  powers  that  he
should  be  the  greatest  of  poets.  But  what  can  be
more  sublime,  more  learned,  more  perfect  in  every
detail  than  those  works  to  which  he  devoted  himself
in  the  seclusion  to  which  he  retired  after  conferring
the  supreme  power  upon  his  father  and  his  brother?
Who  could  sing  of  war  better  than  he  who  wages  it
with  such  skill?  To  whom  would  the  goddesses
that  preside  over  literature  sooner  lend  an  ear  ?  To
whom  would  Minerva,  his  familiar  deity,^  more
readily  reveal  her  secrets?  Future  ages  shall  tell  of  92
these  things  more  fully ;  to-day  his  glory  as  a  poet
is  dimmed  by  the  splendour  of  his  other  virtues.
But  you  will  forgive  us,  Caesar,  who  worship  at  the
shrine  of  literature,  if  we  refuse  to  pass  by  your
achievements  in  silence  and  insist  on  testifying  at
least  that,  as  Virgil  sings,

"  The  ivy  creeps  amid  your  victor  bays."  *

We  also  challenge  the  supremacy  of  the  Greeks  in  93
elegy.  Of  our  elegiac  poets  TibuUus  seems  to  me
to  be  the  most  terse  and  elegant.  There  are,  how-
ever, some  who  prefer  Propertius.  Ovid  is  more
sportive  than  either,  while  Gallus  *  is  more  severe.
Satire,  on  the  other  hand,  is  all  our  own.  The  first
of  our  poets  to  win  renown  in  this  connexion  was
Lucilius,  some  of  whose  devotees  are  so  enthusiastic
that  they  do  not  hesitate  to  prefer  him  not  merely
to  all  other  satirists,  but  even  to  all  other  poets.
I  disagree  with  them  as  much  as  I  do  with  Horace,^  94
who  holds  that  Lucilius'  verse  has  a  "  muddy  flow,

53


QUINTILIAN

Hum  fluere  lutulentum  et  esse  aliquid,  quod  tollere
possis,  putat.  Nam  eruditio  in  eo  mira  et  libertas
atque  inde  acerbitas  et  abunde  salis.  Multum
est  tersior  ac  purus  magis  Horatius  et,  nisi  labor
eius  amore,  praecipuus.  Multum  et  verae  gloriae
quamvis uno libro Persius meruit. Sunt clari

96  hodieque  et  qui  olim  nominabuntur.  Alteram  illud
etiam  prius  satirae  genus,  sed  non  sola  carminum
varietate  mixtum  condidit  Terentius  Varro,  vir  Roma-
norum  eruditissimus.  Plurimos  hie  libros  et  doctis-
simos  composuit,  peritissimus  linguae  Latinae  et
omnis  antiquitatis  et  rerum  Graecarum  nostrarum-
que,  plus  tamen  scientiae  collaturus  quam  eloquen-

96  tiae.  Iambus  non  sane  a  Romanis  celebratus  est  ut
proprium  opus,  sed  aliis  ^  quibusdam  interpositus ;
cuius  acerbitas  in  Catullo,  Bibaculo,  Horatio,  quan-
quam  illi  epodos  interveniat,  reperietur.  At  Lyri-
corum  idem  Horatius  fere  solus  legi  dignus.  Nam
et  insurgit  aliquando  et  plenus  est  iucunditatis
et  gratiae  et  varius  figuris  et  verbis  felicissime
audax. Si quem adiicere velis, is erit Caesius

*  Bed  aliis,  inserted  by  Christ.


*  His  Menippean  Satires,  of  which  only  fragments  survive.
Although  ostensibly  an  imitation  of  the  work  of  the  Greek
Menippus  of  Gadara,  they  can  still  be  said  to  belong  to  the
older  type  of  satire,  the  "medley"  or  "hotch-potch."

•  The  meaning  is  not  clear.  The  words  may  mean  (i)  that
these  writers  did  not  confine  themselves  to  the  iamhus,  or
(ii)  that  the  iambus  alternates  with  other  metres,  cp.  epodos
below.

•  M.  Furius  Bibaculus,  contemporary  of  Catullus,  and
writer  of  similar  invective  against  the  Caesareans.

*  i.  e.  the  short  iambic  line  interposed  between  the  tri-
meters.

54


BOOK X.  I.  94-96

and  that  there  is  always  something  in  him  that
might  well  be  dispensed  with."  For  his  learning  is
as  remarkable  as  his  freedom  of  speech,  and  it  is
this  latter  quality  that  gives  so  sharp  an  edge  and
such  abundance  of  wit  to  his  satire.  Horace  is  far
terser  and  purer  in  style,  and  must  be  awarded  the
first  place,  unless  my  judgment  is  led  astray  by  my
affection  for  his  work.  Persius  also,  although  he
wrote  but  one  book,  has  acquired  a  high  and
well-deserved  reputation,  while  there  are  other
distinguished  satirists  still  living  whose  praises  will
be  sung  by  posterity.  There  is,  however,  another  95
and  even  older  type  of  satire  which  derives  its
variety  not  merely  from  verse,  but  from  an  ad-
mixture of  prose  as  well.  Such  were  the  satires
composed  by  Terentius  Varro,^  the  most  learned
of  all  Romans.  He  composed  a  vast  number  of
erudite  works,  and  possessed  an  extraordinary  know-
ledge of  the  Latin  language,  of  all  antiquity  and
of  the  history  of  Greece  and  Rome.  But  he  is
an  author  likely  to  contribute  more  to  the  know-
ledge of  the  student  than  to  his  eloquence.  The  96
iambic  has  not  been  popular  with  Roman  poets  as  a
separate  form  of  composition,  but  is  found  mixed  up
with  other  forms  of  verse.^  It  may  be  found  in  all
its  bitterness  in  Catullus,  Bibaculus  ^  and  Horace,
although  in  the  last-named  the  iambic  is  interrupted
by  the  epode.*  Of  our  lyric  writers  Horace  is  almost
the  sole  poet  worth  reading :  for  he  rises  at  times  to
a  lofty  grandeur  and  is  full  of  sprightliness  and
charm,  while  there  is  great  variety  in  his  figures,  and
his  boldness  in  the  choice  of  words  is  only  equalled
by  his  felicity.  If  any  other  lyric  poet  is  to  be
mentioned,  it  will  be  Caesius  Bassus,  who  has  but

55


QUINTILIAN

BassuSj  quem  nuper  vidimus ;  sed  eum  longe  prae-
cedunt  ingenia  viventium.

97  Tragoediae  scriptores  veterum  Accius  atque  Pacu-
vius  clarissimi^  gravitate  sententiarum,  verborum
pondere,  auctoritate  personaruna.  Ceterum  nitor  et
summa  in  excolendis  operibus  manus  magis  videri
potest  temporibus  quam  ipsis  defuisse.  Virium  tamen
Accio  plus  tribuitur ;  Pacuvium  videri  doctiorem  qui

98  esse  docti  adfectant  volunt.  lam  Varii  Thyestes
cuilibet  Graecarum  comparari  potest.  Ovidii  Medea
videtur  mihi  ostendere,  quantam  ille  vir  praestare
potuerit,  si  ingenio  sue  imperare  quam  indulgere
maluisset.  Eorum  quos  viderim  longe  princeps  Pom-
ponius  SecunduSj  quem  senes  quidem  parum  tragicum
putabant, erudition  e ac nitore praestare confite-

99  bantur.  In  comoedia  maxime  claudicamus.  Licet
Varro  Musas,  Aelii  Stilonis  sententia,  Plautino  dicat
sermone  locuturas  fuisse,  si  Latine  loqui  vellent,
licet  Caecilium  veteres  laudibus  ferant,  licet  Terentii
scripta  ad  Scipionem  Africanum  referantur  (quae
tamen  sunt  in  hoc  genere  elegantissima  et  plus  adhuc
habitura  gratiae  si  intra  versus  trimetros  stetissent),

1 00  vix  levem  consequimur  umbram,  adeo  ut  mihi  sermo
ipse  Romanus  non  recipere  videatur  illam  solis  con-
cessam  Atticis  venerem,  cum  earn  ne  Graeci  quidem

'  clarissimi,  several  late  M8S.  :  gravissima,  G:  gravissimus,
other  late  MSS. :  grandissimus,  cod.  Monac.  :  grandissimi,
Halm.

'  Accius  (170-90),  Pacuvius  (220-132).

•  L.  Varius  Rufua,  friend  of  Virgil  and  Horace,  editor  of
the  Aeneid  ;  wrote  epic  and  a  single  tragedy.

•  Pomponius  Secundus,  died  60  a.d.  ;  wrote  a  tragedy
entitled  Aeneas.

•  The  first  Roman  philologist  (144-70  B.a).

5^


BOOK X I.  96-100

lately  passed  from  us. But  he  is  far  surpassed  in
talent  by  poets  still  living.

Among  writers  of  tragedy  Accius  and  Pacuvius  *  97
are  most  remarkable  for  the  force  of  their  general
reflexions,  the  weight  of  their  words  and  the  dignity
of  their  characters.  But  they  lack  polish,  and  failed
to  put  the  finishing  touches  on  their  works,  although
the  fault  was  perhaps  rather  that  of  the  times  in
which  they  lived  than  of  themselves.  Accius  is
generally  regarded  as  the  most  vigorous,  while  those
who  lay  claim  to  learning  regard  Pacuvius  as  the
more  learned  of  the  two.  The  Thyestes  of  Varius  2  98
is  a  match  for  any  Greek  tragedy,  and  the  Medea
of  Ovid  shows,  in  my  opinion,  to  what  heights  that
poet  might  have  risen  if  he  had  been  ready  to  curb
his  talents  instead  of  indulging  them.  Of  the
tragic  writers  whom  I  myself  have  seen,  Pomponius
Secundus^  is  by  far  the  best :  his  older  critics  thought
him  insufficiently  tragic,  but  admitted  his  eminence  as
far  as  learning  and  polish  were  concerned.  Comedy  99
is  our  weakest  point.  Although  Varro  quotes  Aelius
Stilo*  as  saying  that  if  the  Muses  wished  to  speak
Latin,  they  would  use  the  language  of  Plautus,
although  the  ancients  extol  Caecilius,^  and  although
Scipio  Africanus  is  credited  with  the  works  of
Terence  (which  are  the  most  elegant  of  their  kind,
and  would  be  still  more  graceful  if  the  poet  had
confined  himself  to  the  iambic  trimeter),  we  still  100
scarcely  succeed  in  reproducing  even  a  faint  shadow
of  the  charm  of  Greek  comedy.  Indeed,  it  seems
to  me  as  though  the  language  of  Rome  were  in-
capable of  reproducing  that  graceful  wit  which  was

•  Caecilius  (219-166), Terence  (194-159),  Afranius  (flor.
circ.  150). Only  fragments  of  Caecilius  and  Afraniua  remain.

VOL. IV.  r 57


QUINTILIAN

in  alio  genere  linguae  suae  ^  obtiuuerint.  Togatis
excellit  Afranius ;  utinam  non  inquinasset  argumenta
puerorum  foedis  amoribus  mores  suos  fassus.

101  At  non  historia  cesserit  Graecis,  nee  opponere
Thucydidi  Sallustium  verear,  neque  indignetur  sibi
Herodotus  aequari  T.  Livium,  cum  in  narrando
mirae  iucunditatis  clarissimique  candoris,  turn  in
contionibus  supra  quam  enarrari  potest  eloquentem  ;
ita  quae  dicuntur  omnia  cum  rebus  turn  personis
accommodata  sunt ;  adfectus  quidem,  praecipueque
eos  qui  sunt dulciores,  ut  parcissime  dicam,  nemo

102  historicorum  commendavit  magis.  Ideoque  im-
mortalem  illam  Sallustii  velocitatem  diversis  virtu-
tibus  consecutus  est.  Nam  mihi  egregie  dixisse
videtur  Servilius  Nonianus,  pares  eos  magis  quam
similes ;  qui  et  ipse  a  nobis  auditus  est,  clarus  vi  ^
ingenii  et  sententiis  creber,  sed  minus  pressus  quam

103  historiae  auctoritas  postulat.  Quam  paulum  aetate
praecedens  eum  Bassus  Aufidius  egregie,  utique  in
libris  belli  Germanici,  praestitit  genere  ipso,  pro-
babilis  in  omnibus,  sed  in  quibusdam  suis  ipse  viribus

104  minor.  Superest  adhuc  et  exornat  aetatis  nostrae
glori&m  vir  saeculorum  memoria  dignus,  qui  olim
nominabitur,  nunc  intelligitur. Habet  amatores  nee

1  suae,  Kohler  :  quae,  G.

*  clarus  vi,  KiderUn  :  clarius,  O :  clari  vir,  vuhjo.

,  >.  J  Caeciliua  (219-166),  Terence  (194-159),  Afranius  (flor.
circ.  150) Only  fragments  of  Caecilius  and  Afranius  survive.

2  Friend  of  Persius,  and  famous  as  orator,  reciter  and
historian  ;  died  60  a.d.

3  He  wrote  a  history  of  the  empire  down  to  the  death  of
Claudius.  The  work  on  the  German  war  was  probably  a
separate  work.

*  Probably  Fabius  Rusticus.  Tacitus  would  have  been  too
young  at  this  time  to  be  mentioned  in  such  terms.

58


BOOK X.  I.  100-104

granted  to  Athens  alone,  and  was  beyond  the  reach
of  other  Greek  dialects  to  achieve.  Afranius  ^  excels
in  the  purely  Roman  comedy,  but  it  is  to  be  regretted
that  he  revealed  his  own  character  by  defiling  his
plots  with  the  introduction  of  indecent  paederastic
intrigues.

In  history,  however,  we  hold  our  own  with  the  101
Greeks.  I  should  not  hesitate  to  match  Sallust
against  Thucydides,  nor  would  Herodotus  resent
Titus  Livius  being  placed  on  the  same  level  as  him-
self. For  the  latter  has  a  wonderful  charm  and
transparency  in  narrative,  while  his  speeches  are
eloquent  beyond  description  ;  so  admirably  adapted
is  all  that  is  said  both  to  the  circumstances  and  the
speaker;  and  as  regards  the  emotions,  especially
the  more  pleasing  of  them,  I  may  sum  him  up  by
saying  that  no  historian  has  ever  depicted  tliem  to
greater  perfection.  Thus  it  is  that,  although  by  102
different  means,  he  has  acquired  no  less  fame  than
has  been  awarded  to  the  immortal  rapidity  of  Sallust.
For  I  strongly  approve  of  the  saying  of  Servilius
Nonianus,^  that  these  historians  were  equal  rather
than  alike.  Servilius,  whom  I  myself  have  heard,
is  himself  remarkable  for  the  force  of  his  intellect,
and  is  full  of  general  reflexions,  but  he  is  less  re-
strained than  the  dignity  of  history  demands.  But  103
that  dignity  is  admirably  maintained,  thanks  to  his
style,  by  Aufidius  Bassus,^  a  slightly  earlier  writer,
especially  in  his  work  on  the  German  war :  he  is
always  praiseworthy,  though  at  times  he  fails  to  do
his  powers  full  justice.  But  there  still  survives  to  104
add  lustre  to  this  glorious  age  a  man  *  worthy  to  be
remembered  through  all  time  :  he  is  appreciated  to-
day, but  after  generations shall  declare  his  name

59


QUINTILIAN

immerito  Cremuti*  libertas,  quanquam  circumcisis
quae  dixisse  ei  nocuerat.  Sed  datum  abunde  spiri-
tum  et  audaces  sententias  deprehendas  etiam  in  his
quae  manent.  Sunt  et  alii  scriptores  boni,  sed  nos
genera  degustamus,  non  bibliothecas  excutiraus.
106  Oratores  vero  vel  praecipue  Latinam  eloquentiam
parem  facere  Graecae  possint.  Nam  Ciceronem
cuicunque  eoruin  fortiter  opposuerim.  Nee  ignore
quantam  mihi  concitem  pugnam,  cum  praesertim
non  sit  id  propositi,  ut  eum  Demostheni  comparem
hoc  tempore ;  neque  enim  attinet,  cum  Demos-
thenem  in  primis  legendum  vel  ediscendum  potius

106  putem.  Quorum  ego  virtutes  plerasque  arbitror
similes,  consilium,  ordinem,  dividendi,^  praeparandi,
probandi  rationem,  omnia  denique  quae  sunt  in-
ventionis.  In  eloquendo  est  aliqua  diversitas ;  den-
sior  ille  hie  copiosior,  ille  concludit  adstrictius  hie
latius,  pugnat  ille  acumine  semper  hie  frequenter
et  pondere,  illi  nihil  detrahi  potest  huic  nihil  adiici,

107  curae  plus  in  illo  in  hoc  naturae.  Salibus  certe  et
commiseratione, qui duo plurimum in adfectibus

*  immerito  Cremuti,  Nipperdey:  immerito  rem  *  *  »
uti,  G :  later  MSS.  vary  between  immerito  reinitti  and
imita tores  uti.

•  dividendi,  Aldine  ed. :  videndi,  Q  and  nearly  all  MSS.


1  Cremutius  Cordus  wrote  a  history  of  the  Civil  wars
and  reign  of  Augustus.  He  was  accused  for  his  praise  of
Brutus  and  Cassius,  and  committed  suicide  in  a.d.  25.  It
was  he  who  called  Cassius  "the  last  of  all  the  Romans."

•  See  XII.  i.  14  sqq.,  also  xn.  x.  12  sqq.


P?


BOOK  X.  1.  104-107

aloud.  The  bold  utterances  of  Cremutius  ^  also  have
their  admirers,  and  deserve  their  fame,  though  the
passages  which  brought  him  to  his  ruin  have  been
expurgated ;  still  that  which  is  left  reveals  a  rich
store  of  lofty  animation  and  fearless  reflexions  upon
life.  There  are  other  good  writers  as  well,  but  I  am
merely  selecting  from  the  different  departments  of
literature,  not  reviewing  complete  libraries.

But  it  is  our  orators,  above  all,  who  enable  us  to  106
match  our  Roman  eloquence  against  that  of  Greece.
For  I  would  set  Cicero  against  any  one  of  their
orators  without  fear  ot  refutation.  I  know  well
enough  what  a  storm  I  shall  raise  by  this  assertion,
more  especially  since  I  do  not  propose  for  the
moment  ^  to  compare  him  with  Demosthenes ;  for
there  would  be  no  point  in  such  a  comparison,  as  I
consider  that  Demosthenes  should  be  the  object  of
special  study,  and  not  merely  studied,  but  even  com-
mitted to  memory.  I  regard  the  excellences  of  these  106
two  orators  as  being  for  the  most  part  similar,  that
is  to  say,  their  judgment,  their  gift  of  arrangement,
their  methods  of  division,  preparation  and  proof,  as
well  as  everything  conceraed  with  invention.  In
their  actual  style  there  is  some  difference.  Demos-
thenes is  more  concentrated,  Cicero  more  diffuse ;
Demosthenes  makes  his  periods  shorter  than  Cicero,
and  his  weapon  is  the  rapier,  whereas  Cicero's  periods
are  longer,  and  at  times  he  employs  the  bludgeon  as
well :  nothing  can  be  taken  from  the  former,  nor
added  to  the  latter ;  the  Greek  reveals  a  more
studied,  the  Roman  a  more  natural  art.  As  regards  107
wit  and  the  power  of  exciting  pity,  the  two  most
powerful  instruments  where  the  feelings  are  con-
cerned, we  have  the  advantage. Again,  it  is  possible

61


QUINTILIAN

valent,  vincimus.  Et  fortasse  epilogos  illi  mos  civitatis
abstulerit ;  sed  et  nobis  ilia,  quae  Attici  mirantur,
diversa  Latini  sermonis  ratio  minus  permiserit.  In
epistolis quidem,  quanquam  sunt utriusque,  dialo-

108  gisve,  quibus  nihil  ille,  nulla  contentio  est.  Ceden-
dum  vero  in  hoc,  quod  et  prior  fuit  et  ex  magna
parte  Ciceronem,  quantus  est,  fecit.  Nam  mihi
videtur  M.  TuUius,  cum  se  totum  ad  imitationem
Graecorum  contulisset,  effinxisse  vim  Demosthenis,

109  copiam  Platonis,  iucunditatem  Isocratis.  Nee  vero
quod  in  quoque  optimum  fuit,  studio  consecutus  est
tantum ;  sed  plurimas  vel  potius  omnes  ex  se  ipso
virtutes  extulit  immortalis  ingenii  beatissima  ubertas.
Non  enim  pluvias,  ut  ait  Pindar  us,  aquas  colligit,
sed  vivo  gurgite  exundat,  dono  quodam  providentiae
genitus,  in  quo  totas  vires  suas eloquentia  experi-

110  retur.  Nam  quis  docere  diligentius,  movere  vehe-
mentius  potest.''  Cui  tanta  unquam  iucunditas
adfuit?  ut  ipsa  ilia  quae  extorquet  impetrare  eum
credas,  et cum transversum  vi sua  iudicem ferat

111  tamen  ille  non  rapi  videatur,  sed sequi. lam  in

^  cp.  II.  xvi.  4 ;  VI.  i 7. Quintilian  refers  to  an  alleged
law  at  Athens  forbidding  appeals  to  the  emotion.
•  The  quotation  is  not  found  in  Pindar's  extant  works.

6s


BOOK  X.  I.  107-1 1 1

that  Demosthenes  was  deprived  by  national  custom  ^
of  the  opportunity  of  producing  powerful  perora-
tions, but  against  this  may  be  set  the  fact  that  the
different  character  of  the  Latin  language  debars  us
from  the  attainment  of  those  qualities  which  are
so  much  admired  by  the  adherents  of  the  Attic
school.  As  regards  their  letters,  which  have  in
both  cases  survived,  and  dialogues,  which  Demos-
thenes never  attempted,  there  can  be  no  comparison
between  the  two.  But,  on  the  other  hand,  there  is  108
one  point  in  which  the  Greek  has  the  undoubted
superiority :  he  comes  first  in  point  of  time,  and  it
was  largely  due  to  him  that  Cicero  was  able  to  attain
greatness.  For  it  seems  to  me  that  Cicero,  who
devoted  himself  heart  and  soul  to  the  imitation  of
the  Greeks,  succeeded  in  reproducing  the  force  of
Demosthenes,  the  copious  flow  of  Plato,  and  the
charm  of  Isocrates.  But  he  did  something  more  109
than  reproduce  the  best  elements  in  each  of  these
authors  by  dint  of  careful  study ;  it  was  to  himself
that  he  owed  most  of,  or  rather  all  his  excellences,
which  spring  from  the  extraordinary  fertility  of  his
immortal  genius.  For  he  does  not,  as  Pindar  2  says,
"  collect  the  rain  from  heaven,  but  wells  forth  with
living  water,"  since  Providence  at  his  birth  conferred
this  special  privilege  upon  him,  that  eloquence  should
make  trial  of  all  her  powers  in  him.  For  who  can  110
instruct  with  greater  thoroughness,  or  more  deeply
stir  the  emotions  ?  Who  has  ever  possessed  such  a
gift  of  charm .''  He  seems  to  obtain  as  a  boon  what
in  reality  he  extorts  by  force,  and  when  he  wrests
the  judge  from  the  path  of  his  own  judgment,  the
latter  seems  not  to  be  swept  away,  but  merely  to
follow. Further,  there  is  such  weight  in  all  that  he  1 1 1

63


QUINTILIAN

omnibus  quae  dicit  tanta  auctoritas  inest,  ut  dis-
sentire  pudeat,  nee  advocati  studium  sed  testis  aut
iudicis  adferat  fidem,  cum  interim  haec  omnia,  quae
vix  singula  quisquam  intentissima  cura  consequi
posset,  fluunt  illaborata,  et  ilia,  qua  nihil  pulehrius
auditum  est,  oratio  prae  se  fert  tamen  felicissimam

112  facilitatem.  Quare  non  immerito  ab  hominibus^
aetatis  suae  regnare  in  iudiciis  dictus  est,  apud
posteros  vero  id  consecutus,  ut  Cicero  iam  non
hominis  nomen,  sed  eloquentiae  habeatur.  Hunc
igitur  spectemus,  hoc  propositum  nobis  sit  ex-
emplum,  ille se profecisse sciat,  cui Cicero valde

113  placebit.  Multa  in  Asinio  Pollione  inventio,  summa
diligentia,  adeo  ut  quibusdam  etiam  nimia  videatur,
et  consilii  et  animi  satis ;  a  nitore  et  iucunditate
Ciceronis  ita  longe  abest,  ut  videri  possit  saeculo
prior.  At  Messala  nitidus  et  candidus  et  quadam
modo  praeferens  in  dicendo  nobilitatem  suam,  viri-

1 14  bus  minor.  C.  vero  Caesar  si  foro  tantum  vacasset,
non  alius  ex  nostris  contra  Ciceronem  nominaretur.
Tanta  in  eo  vis  est,  id  acumen,  ea  concitatio,  ut
ilium  eodem  animo  dixisse,  quo  bellavit,  appareat;

, exornat tamen haec omnia mira sermonis, cuius

^  ab  hominibus,  Halm  :  ab  omnibus,  B  :  hominibus,  a  few
late  MSS.


^  Asinius  PoUio (75  B.C. -ad. 4), the friend  of  Virgil,
distinguished  as  poet,  historian  and  orator.
*  M. Valerius  Corvinus (64  b.c.-a.d. 8), the  friend of
1 1  -  Tibullus  and  distinguished  as  an  orator.

64


BOOK X.  1.  1 1 1-1 14

says  that  his  audience  feel  ashamed  to  disagree  with
him,  and  the  zeal  of  the  advocate  is  so  transfigured
that  it  has  the  effect  of  the  sworn  evidence  of  a
witness,  or  the  verdict  of  a  judge.  And  at  the  same
time  all  these  excellences,  of  which  scarce  one  could
be  attained  by  the  ordinary  man  even  by  the  most
concentrated  effort,  flow  from  him  with  every  appear-
ance of  spontaneity,  and  his  style,  although  no  fairer
has  ever  fallen  on  the  ears  of  men,  none  the  less
displays  the  utmost  felicity  and  ease.  It  was  not,  112
therefore,  without  good  reason  that  his  own  contem-
poraries spoke  of  his  "  sovereignty  "  at  the  bar,  and
that  for  posterity  the  name  of  Cicero  has  come  to  be
regarded  not  as  the  name  of  a  man,  but  as  the  name
of  eloquence  itself.  Let  us,  therefore,  fix  our  eyes  on
him, take  him  as  our  pattern,  and  let  the  student  realise
that  he  has  made  real  progress  if  he  is  a  passionate
admirer  of  Cicero.  Asinius  Pollio^  had  great  gifts  of  113
invention  and  great  precision  of  language  (indeed,
some  think  him  too  precise),  while  his  judgment
and  spirit  were  fully  adequate.  But  he  is  so  far  from
equalling  the  polish  and  charm  of  Cicero  that  he
might  have  been  born  a  generation  before  him.
Messala,^  on  the  other  hand,  is  polished  and  trans-
parent and  displays  his  nobility  in  his  utterance,
but  he  fails  to  do  his  powers  full  justice.  As  114
for  Gains  Caesar,  if  he  had  had  leisure  to  devote
himself  to  the  courts,  he  would  have  been  the  one
orator  who  could  have  been  considered  a  serious  rival
to  Cicero.  Such  are  his  force,  his  penetration  and
his  energy  that  we  realise  that  he  was  as  vigorous  in
speech  as  in  his  conduct  of  war.  And  yet  all  these
qualities  are  enhanced  by  a  marvellous  elegance  of
language,  of  which  he  was  an  exceptionally  zealous

65


QUINTILIAN

115  proprie  studiosus  fuit,  elegantia.  Multum  ingenii
in  Caelio  et  praecipue  in  accusando  multa  urbanitas,
dignusque  vir  cui  et  mens  melior  et  vita  longior
contigisset.  Inveni  qui  Calvum  praeferrent  omnibus,
inveni  qui  Ciceroni  crederent,  eum  nimia  contra  se
cilumnia  verum  sanguinem  perdidisse ;  sed  est  et
sancta  et  gravis  oratio  et  castigata  et  frequenter
vehemens  quoque.  Imitator  autem  est  Atticorum,
fecitque  illi  properata  mors  iniuriam,  si  quid  adiec-

116  turus  fuit.^  Et  Servius  Sulpicius  insignem  non
immerito  famam  tribus  orationibus  meruit.  Multa,
si  cum  iudicio  legatur,  dabit  imitatione  digna  Cassius
Severus,  qui  si  ceteris  virtutibus  colorem  et  gravitatem
orationis  adiecisset,  ponendus  inter  praecipuos  foret.

117  Nam  et  ingenii  plurimum  est  in  eo  et  acerbitas  mira,
et  urbanitas  et  fervor ;  ^  sed  plus  stomacho  quam  con-
silio  dedit. Praeterea  ut  amari  sales,  ita  frequenter

118  amaritudo  ipsa  ridicula  est.  Sunt  alii  multidiserti,quos
persequi  longum  est.  Eorum  quos  viderim  Domitius
Afer  et  lulius  Africanus  longe  praestantissimi.  Arte
ille  et  to  to  genere  dicendi  praeferendus  et  quem  in
numero  veterum  habere  non  timeas ;  hie  concitatior,

^  adiecturus  fuit,  B:  most  later  MSS.  add  non  si  quid
detracturus  with  slight  variations.
'  et  fervor,  Bursian :  et  sermo,  B,

'  M.  Rufus  Caelius,  defended  by  Cicero  in  the  pro  Caelio.
Killed  in  48  B.C. Cp.  iv.  ii.  123.  ;  viii.  vi.  53.

*  Calvus  (Gains  Licinius),  a  distinguished  poet  and,  with
Brutus,  the  leading  orator  of  the  Attic  School.  He  died
at  the  age  of  34  in  48  B.C.

'  Servius  Sulpicius  Rufus,  the  greatest  jurist  of  the
Ciceronian  age.

*  Cassius  Severus  [d.  a.d  34)  banished  by  Augustus  on
account  of  his  scurrilous  lampoons.

66


BOOK X.  I.  1 14-118

student.  Caelius  ^  has  much  natural  talent  and  much  116
wit,  more  especially  when  speaking  for  the  prosecu-
tion, and  deserved  a  wiser  mind  and  a  longer  life.
I  have  come  across  some  critics  who  preferred
Calvus^  to  all  other  orators,  and  others  again  who
agreed  with  Cicero  that  too  severe  self-criticism  had
robbed  him  of  his  natural  vigour.  But  he  was  the
possessor  of  a  solemn,  weighty  and  chastened  style,
which  was  also  capable  at  times  of  genuine  vehem-
ence. He  was  an  adherent  of  the  Attic  school  and
an  untimely  death  deprived  him  of  his  full  meed  of
honour,  at  least  if  we  regard  him  as  likely  to  have
acquired  fresh  qualities.  Servius  Sulpicius^  acquired  116
a  great  and  well -deserved  reputation  by  his  three
speeches.  Cassius  Severus,*  if  read  with  discrimina-
tion, will  provide  much  that  is  worthy  of  imitation :
if  to  his  other  merits  he  had  added  appropriateness
of  tone  and  dignity  of  style,  he  would  deserve  a  117
place  among  the  greatest.  For  his  natural  talents
are  great,  his  gift  of  bitterness,  wit  and  passion
remarkable,  but  he  allowed  the  sharpness  of  his
temper  to  prevail  over  his  judgment.  Moreover,
though  his  jests  are  pungent  enough,  this  very
pungency  often  turned  the  laugh  against  himself.
There  are  many  other  clever  speakers,  but  it  118
would  be  a  long  task  to  deal  with  them  all.  Domitius
Afer^  and  Julius  Africanus®  are  by  far  the  most  dis-
tinguished. The  former  is  superior  in  art  and  in
every  department  of  oratory,  indeed  he  may  be
ranked  with  the  old  orators  without  fear  of  contra-

•  Domitius  Afer (d-  59  a  d.),  the  leading  orator  of  the
reigns  of  Tiberius  and  his  successors.

*  lulius  Africanus,  a  Gaul,  who  flourished  in  the  reign  of
Nero.

67


QUINTILIAN

sed  in  cura  verborum  nimius  et  compositione  non-
nunquam  longior  et  translationibus  parum  modicus.

119  Erantclara  et  nuper  ingenia.  Nam  et  Trachalus  ple-
rumque  sublimis  et  satis  apertus  fuit  et  quem  velle
optima  crederes,  auditus  tamen  maior ;  nam  et  vocis.
quantam  in  nullo  cognovi,  felicitas  et  pronuntiatio  vel
scenis  sufFectura  et  decor,  omnia  denique  ei,  quae  sunt
extra,  superfuerunt ;  et  Vibius  Crispus  compositus  et
iucundus  et  delectationi  natus,  privatis  tamen  eausis

120  quam  publicis  melior.  lulio  Secundo,  si  longior
contigisset  aetas,  clarissimum  profecto  nomen  ora-
toris  apud  posteros  foret.  Adiecisset  enim  atque
adiiciebat  ceteris  virtutibus  suis  quod  desiderari
potest;  id  est  autem,  ut  esset  multo  magis  pugnax
et  saepius  ad  curam  rerum  ab  elocutione  respiceret.

121  Ceterum  interceptus  quoque  magnum  sibi  vindicat
locum ;  ea  est  facundia,  tanta  in  explicando  quod
velit  gratia,  tam  candidum  et  leve  et  speciosum  di-
cendi  genus,  tanta  verborum  etiam  quae  adsumpta
sunt proprietas, tanta in quibusdam ex periculo

122  petitis  significantia.  Habebunt,  qui  post  nos  de
oratoribus  scribent,  magnam  eos,  qui  nunc  vigent,
materiam  vere  laudandi.  Sunt  enim  summa  hodie,
quibus  illustratur  forum,  ingenia.  Namque  et  con-
summati  iam  patroni  veteribus  aemulantur  et  eos

^  M.  Galerius  Trachalus  (cos.  68  a.d.) Cp  xii.  v.  5.

'  Vibius  Crispus,  a  delator  under  Nero,  died  about  A.D.
90,  after  acquiring  great  wealth. Cp.  Juv.  iv.  81  -93.

'  Julius  Secundus,  a  distinguished  orator  of  the  reign  of
Vespasian. One  of  the  characters  in  the  Dialogus  of  Tacitus.

68


BOOK X.  I.  1 18-122

diction.  The  latter  shows  greater  energy,  but  is  too
great  a  precisian  in  the  choice  of  words,  prone  to
tediously  long  periods  and  somewhat  extravagant  in
his  metaphors.  There  have  been  distinguished
talents  even  of  more  recent  date.  For  example,  119
Trachalus^  was,  as  a  rule,  elevated  and  sufficiently
clear  in  his  language :  one  realised  that  his  aims
were  high,  but  he  was  better  to  listen  to  than  to
read.  For  his  voice  was,  in  my  experience,  unique
in  its  beauty  of  tone,  while  his  delivery  would  have
done  credit  to  an  actor,  his  action  was  full  of  grace
and  he  f>ossessed  every  external  advantage  in  pro-
fusion. Vibius  Crispus,^  *igahi,  was  well-balanced,
agreeable  and  born  to  charm,  though  he  was  better
in  private  than  in  public  cases.  Julius  Secundus,^  120
had  he  lived  longer,  would  undoubtedly  have  attained
a  great  and  enduring  reputation.  For  he  would  have
acquired,  as  he  was  actually  acquiring,  all  that  was
lacking  to  his  qualities,  namely,  a  far  greater
pugnacity  and  a  closer  attention  to  substance  as  well
as  form.  But,  in  spite  of  the  untimeliness  of  his  end,  121
he  occupies  a  high  place,  thanks  to  his  fluency,  the
grace  with  which  he  set  forth  whatever  he  desired,
the  lucidity,  smoothness  and  beauty  of  his  speech,
the  propriety  revealed  in  the  use  of  words,  even
when  employed  figuratively,  and  the  point  which
characterises  even  his  most  hazardous  expressions.
Subsequent  wTiters  on  the  history  of  oratory  will  122
find  abundant  material  for  praise  among  the  orators
who  flourish  to-day  :  for  the  law  courts  can  boast
a  glorious  wealth  of  talent.  Indeed,  the  con-
summate advocates  of  the  present  day  are  serious
rivals  of  the  ancients,  while  enthusiastic  effort
and lofty ideals lead many a young student

69


QUINTILIAN

iuvenum  ad optima tendentium imitatur ac se-
quitur  industria.

123  Supersunt  qui  de  philosophia  scripserint,  quo
in  genere  paucissimos  adhuc  eloquentes  litterae
Romanae  tulerunt.  Idem  igitur  M.  TuUius,  qui
ubique,  etiam  in  hoc  opere  Platonis  aemulus  exstitit.
Egregius  vero  multoque  quam  in  orationibus  prae-
stantior  Brutus  sufFecit  ponderi  rerum ; scias  eum

124  sentire  quae  dicit.  Scripsit  non  parum  multa
Cornelius  Celsus,  Sextios  secutus,  non  sine  cultu  ac
nitore.  Plautus  in  Stoicis  rerum  cognitioni  utilis.
In  Epicureis  levis  quidem,  sed  non  iniucundus  tamen

125  auctor  est  Catius.  Ex  industria  Senecam  in  omni
genere  eloquentiae  distuli  propter  vulgatam  falso  de
me  opinionem,  qua  damnare  eum  et  invisum  quoque
habere  sum  creditus.  Quod  accidit  mihi,  dum  corrup-
tum  et  omnibus  vitiis  fractum  dicendi  genus  revocare

126  ad  severiora  iudicia  contendo.  Turn  autem  solus
hie  fere  in  manibus  adolescentium  fuit.  Quem  non
equidem  omnino  conabar  excutere,  sed  potioribus
praeferri  non  sinebam,  quos  ille  non  destiterat  inces-
sere,  cum  diversi  sibi  conscius  generis  placere  se  in
dicendo  posse  iis,  quibus  illi  placent,  diffideret. Ama-


^  Brutus,  omitted  from  Qaintilian's  list  of  orators,  was  a
follower  of  the  Stoic  and  Academic  schools.  He  is  kuown
to  have  written  treatises  on  Virtue,  Duty  and  Patience.

*  An  encyclopsedic  writer  under  Augustus  and  Tiberius.
His  medical  treatises  have  survived.  He  wrote  on  oratory
also,  and  is  not  infrequently  quoted  by  Quintilian.

*  The  Sextii,  father  and  son,  were  Pythagorean  philoso-
phers of  the  Augustan  age,  with  something  of  a  Stoic
tendency  as  well.

*  Nothing  is  known  of  this  writer,  save  what  is  told  us
in  III.  xiv.  2,  and  iii.  vi,  23.

70


BOOK X.  I.  122-126

to tread in their footsteps and imitate their
excellence.

I  have  still  to  deal  with  writers  on  philosophy,  123
of  whom  Rome  has  so  far  produced  but  few  who  are
distinguished  for  their  style.  But  Cicero,  who  is
great  in  every  department  of  literature,  stands  out
as  the  rival  of  Plato  in  this  department  as  well.
Brutus  1  was  an  admirable  writer  on  such  themes,  in
which  he  distinguished  himself  far  more  than  in  his
speeches :  he  is  equal  to  the  serious  nature  of  his
subject,  and  the  reader  realises  that  he  feels  what
he  says.  Cornelius  Celsus,^  a  follower  of  the  Sextii,^  124
wrote  a  number  of  philosophical  works,  which  have
considerable  grace  and  polish.  Among  the  Stoics
Plautus*  is  useful  as  giving  a  knowledge  of  the
subject.  Among  the  Epicureans  Catius  ^  is  agree-
able to  read,  though  lacking  in  weight.  I  have  125
deliberately  postponed  the  discussion  of  Seneca  in
connexion  with  the  various  departments  of  literature
owing  to  the  fact  that  there  is  a  general,  though
false,  impression  that  I  condemn  and  even  detest
him.  It  is  true  that  I  had  occasion  to  pass  cen-
sure upon  him  when  I  was  endeavouring  to  recall
students  from  a  depraved  style,  weakened  by  every
kind  of  error,  to  a  severer  standard  of  taste.  But  126
at  that  time  Seneca's  works  were  in  the  hands
of  every  young  man,  and  my  aim  was  not  to  ban  his
reading  altogether,  but  to  prevent  his  being  pre-
ferred to  authors  superior  to  himself,  but  whom  he
was  never  tired  of  disparaging ;  for,  being  conscious
of  the  fact  that  his  O'vvn style  was very different

*  A  contemporary  of  Cicero,  who  speaks  of  him  somewhat
contemptuously.  He  wrote  four  books  de  rerum  natura  et
de  summo  bono.

71


QUINTILIAN

bant  autem  eum  magis  quam  imitabantur  tantumque
ab  eo  defluebant,  quantum  ille  ab  antiquis  descend-

1 27  erat.  Foret  enim  optandum  pares  ac  saltern  proximos
illi  viro  fieri.  Sed  placebat  propter  sola  vitia  et  ad
ea  se  quisque  dirigebat  effingenda  quae  poterat;
deinde  cum  se  iactaret  eodem  modo  dicere,  Senecam

128  infamabat.  Cuius  et  multae  alioqui  et  magnae  vir-
tutes  fuerunt,  ingenium  facile  et  copiosum,  plurimum
studii,  multa  rerum  cognitio ;  in  qua  tamen  ali-
quando  ab  his,  quibus  inquirenda  quaedam  mandabat,

129  deceptus  est.  Tractavit  etiam  omnem  fere  studiorum
materiam.  Nam  et  orationes  eius  et  poemata  et
epistolae  et  dialogi  feruntur.  In  philosophia  parum
diligens,  egregius  tamen  vitiorum  insectator  fuit.
Multae  in  eo  claraeque  sententiae,  multa  etiam
morum  gratia  legenda ;  sed  in  eloquendo  corrupta
pleraque  atque eo  perniciosissima,  quod abundant

130  dulcibus vitiis. Velles eum suo ingenio dixisse,

alieno  iudicio. Nam  si  obliqua  ^ contempsisset,  si

parum recta  ^ non concupisset,  si non  omnia sua

aniasset,  si rerum pondera  minutissimis sententiis

non fregisset, consensu potius eruditorum quam

*  obliqua, E. Wofflin  :  simile  quam,  B : si  aliqua, 2nd
hand.  *  recta,  added  by  Peterson.


BOOK X.  I.  126-130

from theirs,  he  was  afraid that he  would  fail to
please  those who  admired  them. But the  young
men  loved  him  rather  than  imitated  him,  and  fell
as  far  below  him  as  he  fell  below  the  ancients. For  127
I  only  wish  they  had  equalled  or  at  least  approached
his  level. But  he  pleased  them  for  his  faults  alone,
and  each  individual  sought  to  imitate  such  of  those
faults  as  lay  within  his  capacity  to  reproduce  :  and
then  brought  reproach  on  his  master  by  boasting
that he spoke in the genuine  Senecan manner.
Seneca  had  many  excellent  qualities,  a  quick  and  128
fertile intelligence  with great industry and  wide
knowledge,  though  as  regards  the last  quality  he
was  often  led  into error  by  those  whom he had
entrusted with the task of  investigating certain
subjects  on  his  behalf. He  dealt  with  almost  every 129
department of  knowledge ; for speeches, poems,
letters  and  dialogues  all  circulate  under  his  name.
In  philosophy  he  showed  a  lack  of  critical  power,
but was none the less quite admirable in his
denunciations  of  vice. His  works  contain  a  number
of striking general reflexions and much that is
worth  reading  for  edification ;  but  his  style  is  for
the  most  part  corrupt  and  exceedingly  dangerous,
for  the  very  reason  that  its  vices  are  so  many  and
attractive. One  could  wish  that,  while  he  relied  on  130
his  own  intelligence,  he  had  allowed  himself  to  be
guided  by  the  taste  of  others. For  if  he  had  only
despised  all  unnatural  expressions  and  had  not  been
so  passionately  fond  of  all  that  was  incorrect,  if  he
had  not  felt  such  affection  for  all  that  was  his  own,
and  had  not  impaired  the  solidity  of  his  matter  by
striving  after  epigrammatic  brevity,  he  would  have
won  the  approval of  the learned instead of  the

73


QUINTILIAN

131  puerorum  amore  comprobaretur.  Verum  sic  quoque
iam  robustis  et  severiore  genere  satis  firmatis
legendus  vel  ideo  quod  exercere  potest  utrinque
iudicium,  Multa  enim,  ut  dixi,  probanda  in  eo,
multa  etiam  admiranda  sunt,  eligere  modo  curae
sit ;  quod  utinam  ipse  fecisset.  Digna  enim  fuit
ilia  natura,  quae  meliora  vellet ;  quod  voluit
efFecit.

II.  Ex  his  ceterisque  lectione  dignis  auctoribus  et
verborum  sumenda  copia  est  et  varietas  figurarum  et
componendi  ratio,  turn  ad  exemplum  virtutum  omnium
mens  dirigenda.  Neque  enim  dubitari  potest,  quin
artis  pars  magna  contineatur  imitatione.  Nam  ut
invenire  primum  fuit  estque  praecipuum,  sic  ea,  quae

2  bene  inventa  sunt^  utile  sequi.  Atque  omnis  vitae
ratio  sic  constat,  ut  quae  probamus  in  aliis  facere
ipsi  velimus.  Sic  litterarum  ductus,  ut  scribendi  fiat
usus,  pueri  sequuntur,  sic  musici  vocem  docentium,
pictores  opera  priorum,  rustici  probatam  experimento
culturam  in  exemplum  intuentur;  omnis  denique
disciplinae initia ad propositum sibi praescriptum

3  formari  videmus.  Et  hercule  necesse  est  aut  similes
aut  dissimiles  bonis  simus.  Similem  raro  natura
praestat,  frequenter  imitatio. Sed  hoe  ipsum,  quod

74


BOOK X.  I.  1 30-11.  3

enthusiasm  of  boys. But  even  as  it  is,  he  deserves  131

to  be  read  by  those  whose  powers  have  been  formed

and firmly  moulded  on  the  standards  of  a  severer

taste,  if  only  because  he  will  exercise  their  critical

faculties  in  distinguishing  between  his  merits  and

his  defects. For,  as  I  have  said,  there  is  much  in

him  which  we  may  approve,  much  even  that  we  may

admire. Only  we  must  be  careful  in  our  selection :

would he had been as careful himself. For  his

genius  deserved  to  be  devoted  to  better  aims,  since

wlmt  it  does  actually  aim  at,  it  succeeds  in  achieving.

II.  It  is  from  these  and  other  authors  worthy  of

our  study  that  we  must  draw  our  stock  of  words,  the

variety  of  our  figures  and  our  methods  of  composition,

while  we  must  form  our  minds  on  the  model  of  every

excellence. For  there  can  be  no  doubt  that  in  art

no  small  portion  of  our  task  lies  in  imitation,  since,

although  invention  came  first  and  is  all-important,  it

is  expedient  to  imitate  whatever  has  been  invented

with  success. And  it  is  a  universal  rule  of  life  that  2

we  should  wish  to  copy  what  we  approve  in  others.

It  is  for  this  reason  that  boys  copy  the  shapes  of

letters that they may learn to write, and that

musicians  take  the  voices  of  their  teachers,  painters

the  works  of  their  predecessors,  and  peasants  the

principles  of  agriculture  which  have  been  proved  in

practice,  as  models  for  their  imitation. In  fact,  we

may  note  that  the  elementary  study  of  every  branch

of  learning  is  directed  by  reference  to  some  definite

standard that  is  placed before the learner. We  3

must,  in  fact,  either  be  like  or  unlike those who

have  proved  their  excellence. It  is  rare  for  nature

to  produce  such  resemblance,  which  is  more  often

the  result  of  imitation. But  the  very  fact  that  in

75


QUINTILIAN

tanto  faciliorem  nobis  rationem  rerum  omnium  facit
quam  fuit  iis,  qui  nihil  quod  sequerentur  habuerunt,
nisi  caute  et  cum  iudicio  apprehenditur,  laocet.

4  Ante  omnia  igitur  imitatio  per  se  ipsa  non  sufficit,
vel  quia  pigri  est  ingenii  contentum  esse  iis,  quae
sint  ab  aliis  inventa.  Quid  enim  futurum  erat
temporibus  illis,  quae  sine  exemplo  fuerunt,  si
homines  nihil,  nisi  quod  iam  cognovissent,  faciendum
sibi  aut  cogitandum  putassent  ? Nempe  nihil  fuisset

5  inventum.  Cur  igitur  nefas  est  reperiri  aliquid  a
nobis,  quod  ante  non  fuerit?  An  illi  rudes  sola
mentis  natura  ducti  sunt  in  hoc  ut  tam  multa  gene-
rarent,  nos  ad  quaerendum  non  eo  ipso  concitemur,

6  quod  certe  scimus  invenisse  eos  qui  quaesierunt?  Et
cum  illi,  qui  nullum  cuiusquam  rei  habuerunt  magis-
trum,  plurima  in  posteros  tradiderunt,  nobis  usus
aliarum  rerum  ad  eruendas  alias  non  proderit,  sed
nihil  habebimus  nisi  beneficii  alieni  ?  Quemadmo-
dum  quidam  pictores  in  id  solum  student,  ut  de-

1  scribere  tabulas  mensuris  ac  lineis  sciant.  Turpe
etiam  illud  est,  contentum  esse  id  consequi  quod
imiteris.  Nam  rursus  quid  erat  futurum,  si  nemo
plus  effecisset  eo  quem  sequebatur?  Nihil  in  poetis
supra  Livium  Andronicum,  nihil  in  historiis  supra
Pontificum  annales  haberemus ;  ratibus  adhuc  navi-

*  The  reference  is  to  copying  by  dividing  the  surface  of
the  picture  to  be  copied,  and  of  the  material  on  which  the
copy  is  to  be  made,  into  a  number  of  equal  squares.

*  Livius  Andronicus,  a  slave  from  Tarentum,  was  the
founder  of  Latin  poetry.  He  translated  the  Odyssey,  and
produced  the  first  Latin  comedy  and  tragedy  composed  in
Greek  metres  (240  b.c  )

^  The  Annales  Maximi  kept  by  the  Pontifex  Maximus,
containing  the  list  of  the  consuls  and  giving  a  curt  summary
of  the  events  of  each  consulate.

|6


BOOK X.  II.  3-7

every  subject  the  procedure  to  be  followed  is  so
much  more  easy  for  us  than  it  was  for  those  who
had  no  model  to  guide  them,  is  a  positive  drawback,
unless  we  use  this  dubious  advantage  with  caution
and  judgment.

The  first  point,  then,  that  we  must  realise  is  that  4
imitation  alone  is  not  sufficient,  if  only  for  the  reason
that  a  sluggish  nature  is  only  too  ready  to  rest
content  with  the  inventions  of  others.  For  what
would  have  happened  in  the  days  when  models  were
not,  if  men  had  decided  to  do  and  think  of  nothing
that  they  did  not  know  already?  The  answer  is
obvious :  nothing  would  ever  have  been  discovered.
Why,  then,  is  it  a  crime  for  us  to  discover  something  5
new  ?  Were  primitive  men  led  to  make  so  many
discoveries  simply  by  the  natural  force  of  their
imagination,  and  shall  we  not  then  be  spurred  on  to
search  for  novelty  by  the  very  knowledge  that  those
who  sought  of  old  were  rewarded  by  success  ?  And  6
seeing  that  they,  who  had  none  to  teach  them  any-
thing, have  handed  down  such  store  of  knowledge
to  posterity,  shall  we  refuse  to  employ  the  experience
which  we  possess  of  some  things,  to  discover  yet
other  things,  and  possess  nought  that  is  not  owed  to
the  beneficent  activity  of  others  ?  Shall  we  follow
the  example  of  those  painters  whose  sole  aim  is  to
be  able  to  copy  pictures  by  using  the  ruler  and  the
measuring  rod  ?  ^  It  is  a  positive  disgrace  to  be  7
content  to  owe  all  our  achievement  to  imitation.
For  what,  I  ask  again,  would  have  been  the  result
if  no  one  had  done  more  than  his  predecessors  ?
Livius  Andronicus  *  would  mark  our  supreme
achievement  in  poetry  and  the  annals  of  the  Ponti-
Jices^  would  be  our  ue  plus  ultra in history. We

77


QUINTILIAN

garemus ;  non  esset  pictura,  nisi  quae  lineas  modo
extremas umbrae, quam  corpora  in sole  fecissent,

8  circumscriberet.  Ac  si  omnia  percenseas,  nulla  man-
sit  ^  ars,  qualis  inventa  est,  nee  intra  initium  stetit,
nisi  forte  nostra  potissimum  tempora  damnamus
huius infelicitatis, ut nunc demum nihil crescat.

9  Nihil  autem  crescit  sola  imitatione.  Quodsi  priori-
bus  adiicere  fas  non  est,  quomodo  sperare  possumus
ilium  oratorem  perfectum  :  cum  in  his,  quos  maximos
adhuc  novimus,  nemo  sit  inventus,  in  quo  nihil  aut
desideretur  aut  reprehendatur.  Sed  etiam  qui  summa
non  appetent,  contendere  potius  quam  sequi  debent.

10  Nam  qui  hoc  agit^  ut  prior  sit,  forsitan,  etiamsi
non  transierit,  aequabit.  Eum  vero  nemo  potest
aequare,  cuius  vestigiis  sibi  utique  insistendum  putat;
necesse  est  enim  semper  sit  posterior  qui  sequitur.
Adde  quod  plerumque  facilius  est  plus  facere  quam
idem.  Tantam  enim  difficultatem  habet  similitudo,
ut  ne  ipsa  quidem  natura  in  hoc  ita  evaluerit,  ut  non
res  quae  simillimae,  quaeque  pares  maxime  videantur,

11  utique  discrimine  aliquo  discernantur,  Adde  quod,
quidquid  alteri  simile  est,  necesse  est  minus  sit  eo,
quod  imitatur,  ut  umbra  corpore  et  imago  facie et


1  mansit,  Meister  :  sit,  MSS.

*  hoc  &git.  Malm,  om.  B  :  agit,  later  MSS.


rk


BOOK X.  II.  7-1 1

should  still  be  sailing  on  rafts,  and  the  art  of  painting
would  be  restricted  to  tracing  a  line  round  a  shadow
thrown  in  the  sunlight.  Cast  your  eyes  over  the  8
whole  of  history ;  you  will  find  that  no  art  has
remained  just  as  it  was  when  it  was  discovered,  nor
come  to  a  standstill  at  its  very  birth,  unless  indeed
we  are  ready  to  pass  special  condemnation  on  our
own  generation  on  the  ground  that  it  is  so  barren  of
invention  that  no  further  development  is  possible ;
and  it  is  undoubtedly  true  that  no  development  is
possible  for  those  who  restrict  themselves  to  imi-
tation. But  if  we  are  forbidden  to  add  anything  to  9
the  existing  stock  of  knowledge,  how  can  we  ever
hope  for  the  birth  of  our  ideal  orator  ?  For  of  all
the  greatest  orators  with  whom  we  are  as  yet  ac-
quainted, there  is  not  one  who  has  not  some
deficiency  or  blemish.  And  even  those  who  do
not  aim  at  supreme  excellence,  ought  to  press
toward  the  mark  rather  than  be  content  to  follow
in  the  tracks  of  others.  For  the  man  whose  aim  10
is  to  prove  himself  better  than  another,  even  if  he
does  not  surpass  him,  may  hope  to  equal  him.  But
he  can  never  hope  to  equal  him,  if  he  thinks  it  his
duty  merely  to  tread  in  his  footsteps  :  for  the  mere
follower  must  always  Jag  behind.  Further,  it  is
generally  easier  to  make  some  advance  than  to
repeat  what  has  been  done  by  others,  since  there
is  nothing  harder  than  to  produce  an  exact  likeness,
and  nature  herself  has  so  far  failed  in  this  endeavour
that  there  is  always  some  difference  which  enables
us  to  distinguish  even  the  things  which  seem  most
like  and  most  equal  to  one  another.  Again,  what-  11
ever  is  like  another  object,  must  necessarily  be
inferior  to  the  object  of  its  imitation,  just  as  the

79


QUINTILIAN

actus  histrionum  veris  adfectibus.  Quod  in  orationi-
bus  quoque  evenit.  Namque  eis,  quae  in  exemplum
adsumimus,  subest  natura  et  vera  vis ;  contra  omnis
imitatio  ficta  est  et  ad  alienum  propositum  accommo-

12  datur.i  Quod  facit,  ut  minus  sanguinis  ac  virium
declamationes  habeant  quam  orationes,  quod  in  illis
vera,  in  his  adsimilata  materia  est.  Adde  quod  ea,
quae  in  oratore  maxima  sunt,  imitabilia  non  sunt,
ingenium,  inventio,  vis,  facilitas  et  quidquid  arte  non

13  traditur.  Ideoque  plerique,  cum  verba  quaedam  ex
orationibus  excerpserunt  aut  aliquos  compositionis
certos  pedes,  mire  a  se,  quae  legerunt,  effingi  arbi-
trantur;  cum  et  verba  intercidant  invalescantque
temporibus,  ut  quorum  certissima  sit  regula  in
consuetudine,  eaque  non  sua  natura  sint  bona  aut
mala  (nam  per  se  soni  tantum  sunt),  sed  prout
opportune  proprieque  aut  secus  collocata  sunt,  et
compositio  cum  rebus  accommodata  sit,  tum  ipsa
varietate  gratissima.

14  Quapropter  exactissimo  iudicio  circa  banc  partem

studiorum  examinanda  sunt  omnia. Primum,  quos

imitemur ;  nam  sunt  plurimi,  qui  similitudinem  pes-

simi  cuiusque  et  corruptissimi  concupierunt ;  tum  in

^  accommodatur,  StuI  hand  of  B  and  later  MSS. :  commo-
datur,  B,

8o


BOOK X.  II.  11-14

shadow  is  inferior  to  the  substance,  the  portrait  to
the  features  which  it  portrays,  and  the  acting  of  the
player  to  the  feelings  which  he  endeavours  to  repro-
duce. The  same  is  true  of  oratory.  For  the  models
which  we  select  for  imitation  have  a  genuine  and
natural  force,  whereas  all  imitation  is  artificial  and
moulded  to  a  purpose  which  was  not  that  of  the
original  orator.  This  is  the  reason  why  declamations  12
have  less  life  and  vigour  than  actual  speeches,  since
the  subject  is  fictitious  in  the  one  and  real  in  the
other.  Again,  the  greatest  qualities  of  the  orator
are  beyond  all  imitation,  by  which  I  mean,  talent,
invention,  force,  facility  and  all  the  qualities  which
are  independent  of  art.  Consequently,  there  are  13
many  who,  after  excerpting  certain  words  from
published  speeches  or  borrowing  certain  particular
rhythms,  think  that  they  have  produced  a  perfect
copy  of  the  works  which  they  have  read,  despite
the  fact  that  words  become  obsolete  or  current
with  the  lapse  of  years,  the  one  sure  standard  being
contemporary  usage ;  and  they  are  not  good  or
bad  in  virtue  of  their  inherent  nature  (for  in  them-
selves they  are  no  more  than  mere  sounds),  but
solely  in  virtue  of  the  aptitude  and  propriety  (or
the  reverse)  with  which  they  are  arranged,  while
rhythmical  composition  must  be  adapted  to  the
theme  in  hand  and  will  derive  its  main  charm  from
its  variety.

Consequently  the  nicest  judgment  is  required  in  14
the  examination  of  everything  connected  with  this
department  of  study.  First  we  must  consider  whom
to  imitate.  For  there  are  many  who  have  shown  a
passionate  desire  to  imitate  the  worst  and  most
decadent  authors. Secondly,  we  must  consider  what

81


QUINTILIAN

ipsis,  quos  elegerimus,  quid  sit,  ad  quod  nos  effici-

15  endum  comparemus.  Nam  in  magnis  quoque  auc-
toribus  incidunt  aliqua  vitiosa  et  a  doctis,  inter  ipsos
etiam  mutuo  reprehensa;  atque  utinam  tam  bona
imitantes  dicerent  melius  quam  mala  peius  dicunt.
Nee  vero  saltern  iis,  quibus  ad  evitanda  vitia  iudicii
satis  fuit,  sufficiat  imaginem  virtutis  efGngere  et
solam,  ut  sic  dixerim,  cutem  vel  potius  illas  Epicuri

16  figuras,  quas  e  summis  corporibus  dicit  effluere.  Hoc
autem  his  accidit,  qui  non  introspectis  penitus  virtu-
tibus  ad  primum  se  velut  aspeetum  orationis  aptarunt ;
et  cum  lis  felicissime  cessit  imitatio,  verbis  atque
numeris  sunt  non  multum  differentes,  vim  dicendi
atque  inventionis  non  adsequuntur,  sed  plerumque
declinant  in  peius  et  proxima  virtutibus  vitia  compre-
hendunt  fiuntque  pro  grandibus  tumidi,  pressis  exiles,
fortibus  temerarii,  laetis  corrupti,  compositis  exult-

17  antes,  simplicibus  negligentes.  Ideoque  qui  horride
atque  incomposite  quidlibet  illud  frigidum  et  inane
extulerunt,  antiquis  se  pares  credunt ;  qui  carent
cultu  atque  sententiis,  Attici  scilicet;  qui  praecisis
conclusionibus  obscuri,  Sallustium  atque  Thucydidem

*  Epicurus  held  that  all  sense-perception  was  caused  by
the  impact  of  such  atomic  sloughs  :  cp.  Lucret.  iv.  42  sqq.

82


BOOK X.  II.  14-17

it  is  that  we  should  set  ourselves  to  imitate  in  the
authors  thus  chosen.  For  even  great  authors  have  15
their  blemishes,  for  which  they  have  been  censured
by  competent  critics  and  have  even  reproached  each
other.  I  only  wish  that  imitators  were  more  likely
to  improve  on  the  good  things  than  to  exaggerate
the  blemishes  of  the  authors  whom  they  seek  to
copy.  And  even  those  who  have  sufficient  critical
acumen  to  avoid  the  faults  of  their  models  will  not
find  it  sufficient  to  produce  a  copy  of  their  merits,
amounting  to  no  more  than  a  superficial  resemblance,
or  rather  recalling  those  sloughs  which,  according  to
Epicurus,  are  continually  given  off  by  material  things.^
But  this  is  just  what  happens  to  those  who  mould  16
themselves  on  the  first  impressions  derived  from  the
style  of  their  model,  without  devoting  themselves  to
a  thorough  investigation  of  its  good  qualities,  and,
despite  the  brilliance  of  their  imitation  and  the  close
resemblance  of  their  language  and  rhythm,  not  only
fail  absolutely  to  attain  the  force  of  style  and  invention
possessed  by  the  original,  but  as  a  rule  degenerate
into  something  worse,  and  achieve  merelv  those  faults
which  are  hardest  to  distinguish  from  virtues :  they
are  turgid  instead  of  grand,  bald  instead  of  concise,
and  rash  instead  of  courageous,  while  extravagance
takes  the  place  of  wealth,  over-emphasis  the  place  of
harmony  and  negligence  of  simplicity.  As  a  result,  17
;  those  who  flaunt  tasteless  and  insipid  thoughts,
couched  in  an  uncouth  and  inharmonious  form,  think
that  they  are  the  equals  of  the  ancients ;  those  who
lack  ornament  and  epigram,  pose  as  Attic ;  those
who  darken  their  meaning  by  the  abruptness  with
which  they  close  their  periods,  count  themselves  the
superiors  of  Sallust  and  Thucydides ;  those  who  are

83


QUINTILIAN

superant ;  tristes  ac ieiimi PoUionem  aemulantur :
otiosi  et  supini,  si  quid  modo  longius  circumduxerunt,

18  iurant  ita  Ciceronem  locuturum  fuisse.  Noveram
quosdam,  qui  se  pulchre  expressisse  genus  illud
caelestis  huius  in  dicendo  viri  sibi  viderenturj  si  in
clausula  posuissent  Esse  videatur.  Ergo  primum  est,
ut  quod  imitaturus  est  quisque  intelligat  et  quare
bonum  sit  sciat.

19  Turn  in  suscipiendo  onere  consulat  suas  vires.  Nam
quaedam  sunt  imitabilia,  quibus  aut  infirmitas  naturae
non  sufficiat  aut  diversitas  repugnet.  Ne,  cui  tenue
ingenium  erit,  sola  velit  fortia  et  abrupta ;  cui  forte
quidem,  sed  indomitum,  amore  subtilitatis  et  vim
suam  perdat  et  elegantiam  quam  cupit  non  perse-
quatur; nihil est  enim  tam indecens, quam cum

20  mollia  dure  fiunt.  Atque  ego  illi  praeceptori,  quem
institueram  in  libro  secundo,  credidi  non  ea  sola
docenda  esse,  ad  quae  quemque  discipulorum  natura
compositum  videret ;  nam  is  et  adiuvare  debet,  quae
in  quoque  eorum  invenit  bona,  et,  quantum  fieri
potest,  adiicere  quae  desunt  et  emendare  quaedam  et
mutare ;  rector  enim  est  alienorum  ingeniorum  atque

21  formator. Difficilius  est  naturam  suam  fingere. Sed

1  cp.  rx.  iv.  73. Tac.  Dial  23.  »  Ch.  8.


BOOK X.  II.  17-21

dreary  and  jejune,  think  that  they  are  serious  rivals
to  Pollio,  while  those  who  are  tame  and  listless,  if
only  they  can  produce  long  enough  periods,  swear
that  this  is  just  the  manner  in  which  Cicero  would
have  spoken.  I  have  known  some  who  thought  that  18
they  had  produced  a  brilliant  imitation  of  the  style
of  that  divine  orator,  by  ending  their  periods  with
the  phrase  esse  videalur.^  Consequently  it  is  of  the
first  importance  that  every  student  should  realise
what  it  is  that  he  is  to  imitate,  and  should  know
why  it  is  good.

The  next  step  is  for  each  student  to  consult  his  19
own  powers  when  he  shoulders  his  burden.  For
there  are  some  things  which,  though  capable  of
imitation,  may  be  beyond  the  capacity  of  any  given
individual,  either  because  his  natural  gifts  are  in-
sufficient or  of  a  different  character.  The  man  whose
talent  is  for  the  plain  style  should  not  seek  only
what  is  bold  and  rugged,  nor  yet  should  he  who  has
vigour  without  control  suffer  himself  through  love  of
subtlety  at  once  to  waste  his  natural  energy  and
fail  to  attain  the  elegance  at  which  he  aims :  for
there  is  nothing  so  unbecoming  as  delicacy  wedded
to  ruggedness.  True,  I  did  express  the  opinion  20
that  the  instructor  whose  portrait  I  painted  in  my
second  book,^  should  not  confine  himself  to  teaching
those  things  for  which  he  perceived  his  individual
pupils  to  have  most  aptitude.  For  it  is  his  further
duty  to  foster  whatever  good  qualities  he  may  per-
ceive in  his  pupils,  to  make  good  their  deficiencies
as  far  as  may  be,  to  correct  their  faults  and  turn
them  to  better  things.  For  he  is  the  guide  and
director  of  the  minds  of  others.  It  is  a  harder  task
to mould one's  own nature. But not even our  21

«5


QUINTILIAN

ne  ille  quidem  doctor,  quanquam  omnia  quae  recta
sunt  velit  esse  in  suis  auditoribus  quam  plenissima,
in  eo  tamen,  cui  naturam  obstare  viderit,  laborabit.

Id  quoque  vitandum,  in  quo  magna  pars  errat,  ne
in  oratione  poetas  nobis  et  historicos,  in  illis  operibus

22  oratores  aut  declamatores  imitandos  putemus.  Sua
cuique  proposita*  lex,  suus  cuique  decor  est.  Nam
nee  comoedia  in  cothurnos  adsurgit,  nee  contra  trag-
oediasocco  ingreditur.  Habet  tamenomnis  eloquentia
aliquid  commune  ;  id  imitemur  quod  commune  est.

'/3  Etiam  hoc  solet  incommodi  accidcre  iis,  qui  se  uni
alicui  generi  dediderunt,  ut,  si  asperitas  iis  placuit
alicuius,  banc  etiam  in  leni  ac  remisso  causarum
genere  non  exuant ;  si  tenuitas  ac  iucunditas,  in
asperis  gravibusque  causis  ponderi  rerum  parum  re-
spondeant :  cum  sit  diversa  non  causarum  modo  inter
ipsas  condicio,  sed  in  singulis  etiam  causis  partium,
sintque  alia  leniter  alia  aspere,  alia  concitate  alia
remisse,  alia  docendi  alia  movendi  gratia  dicenda ;
quorum  omnium  dissimilis atque diversa inter se

24  ratio  est. Itaque  ne  hoc  quidem  suaserim,  uni  se

^  proposita,  most  later  MS8.  : propositio,  B; proposito,
Oertz.

86


BOOK  X.  II.  21-24

ideal  teacher,  however  much  he  may  desire  that
everything  that  is  correct  should  prevail  in  his
school  to  the  fullest  extent,  will  waste  his  labour  in
attempting  to  develop  qualities  to  the  attainment  of
which  he  perceives  nature's  gilts  to  be  opposed.

It  is  also  necessary  to  avoid  the  fault  to  which  the
majority  of  students  are  so  prone,  namely,  the  idea
that  in  composing  speeches  we  should  imitate  the
poets  and  historians,  and  in  writing  history  or  poetry
should  copy  orators  and  declaimers.  Each  branch  22
of  literature  has  its  own  laws  and  its  own  appropriate
character.  Comedy  does  not  seek  to  increase  its
height  by  the  buskin  and  tragedy  does  not  wear
the  slipper  of  comedy.  But  all  forms  of  eloquence
have  something  in  common,  and  it  is  to  the  imitation
of  this  common  element  that  our  efforts  should  be
confined.

There  is  a  further  fault  to  which  those  persons  2b
are  liable  who  devote  themselves  entirely  to  the
imitation  of  one  particular  style  :  if  the  rude  vigour
of  some  {^articular  author  takes  their  fancy,  they
cling  to  it  even  when  the  case  on  which  thev  are
engaged  calls  for  an  easy  and  flowing  style ;  if,  on
the  other  hand,  it  is  a  simple  or  agreeable  style  that
claims  their  devotion,  they  fail  to  meet  the  heavy
demands  of  severe  and  weighty  cases.  For  not  only
do  cases  differ  in  their  general  aspect,  but  one  part
of  a  case  may  differ  from  another,  and  some  things
require  a  gentle  and  others  a  violent  style,  some
require  an  impetuous  and  others  a  calm  diction,  while
in  some  cases  it  is  necessary  to  instruct  and  in  others
to  move  the  audience,  in  all  these  instances  dis-
similar and  different  methods  being  necessary.  Con-  24
sequently  I  should  be  reluctant  even  to  advise  a

87


QUINTILIAN

alicui  propria,  quem  per  omnia  sequatur,  addicere.
Longe  perfectissimus  Graecorum  Demosthenes,
aliquid  tamen  aliquo  in  loco  melius  alii,  plurima  ille.
Sed  non  qui  maxime  imitandus,  et  solus  imitandus

25  est.  Quid  ergo  ?  non  est  satis  omnia  sic  dicere,  quo-
modo  M.  TuUius  dixit?  Mihi  quidem  satis  esset,  si
omnia  consequi  possem.  Quid  tamen  noceret  vim
Giesaris,  asperitatem Caelii, diligentiam Pollionis,

26  iudicium  Calvi  quibusdam  in  locis  adsumere  ?  Nam
praeter  id  quod  prudentis  est,  quod  in  quoque  opti-
mum est,  si  possit,  suum  facere,  tum  in  tanta  rei
difficultate  unum  intuentes  vix  aliqua  pars  sequitur.
Ideoque  cum  totum  exprimere  quem  elegeris  paene
sit  homini  inconcessum,  plurium  bona  ponamus  ante
oculos,  ut  aliud  ex  alio  haereat,  et  quod  cuique  loco
conveniat  aptemus.

27  Imitatio  autem  (nam  saepius  idem  dicam)  non  sit

tantum  in  verbis. Illuc  intendenda  mens,  quantum

fuerit  illis  viris  decoris  in  rebus  atque  personis,  quod

consilium,  quae  dispositio,  quam  omnia,  etiam  quae
88


BOOK X.  II.  24-27

student  to  select  one  particular  author  to  follow
through  thick  and  thin.  Demosthenes  is  by  far  the
most  perfect  of  Greek  orators,  yet  there  are  some
things  which  others  have  said  better  in  some  contexts
as  against  the  many  things  which  he  has  said  better
than  others.  But  it  does  not  follow  that  because  we
should  select  one  author  for  special  imitation,  he
should  be  our  only  model.  What  then  ?  Is  it  not  25
sufficient  to  model  our  every  utterance  on  Cicero?
For  my  own  part,  I  should  consider  it  sufficient,  if
I  could  always  imitate  him  successfully.  But  what
harm  is  there  in  occasionally  borrowing  the  vigour  of
t^esar,  the  vehemence  of  Caelius,  the  precision  of
Pollio  or  the  sound  judgment  of  Calvus .''  For  quite  26
apart  from  the  fact  that  a  wise  man  should  always,
if  possible,  make  whatever  is  best  in  each  individual
author  his  own,  we  shall  find  that,  in  view  of  the
extreme  difficulty  of  our  subject,  those  who  fix  their
eyes  on  one  model  only  will  always  find  some  one
quality  which  it  is  almost  impossible  to  acquire  there-
from. Consequently,  since  it  is  practically  impossible
for  mortal  powers  to  produce  a  perfect  and  complete
copy  of  any  one  chosen  author,  we  shall  do  well  to
keep  a  number  of  different  excellences  before  our
eyes,  so  that  different  qualities  from  different  authors
may  impress  themselves  on  our  minds,  to  be  adopted
for  use  in  the  place  that  becomes  them  best.

But  imitation  (for  I  must  repeat  this  point  again  27
and  again)  should  not  be  confined  merely  to  words.
We  must  consider  the  appropriateness  with  which
those  orators  handle  the  circumstances  and  persons
involved  in  the  various  cases  in  which  they  were
engaged,  and  observe  the  judgment  and  powers  of
arrangement  which  they reveal, and the manner

VOL.  IV.  u ^9


QUINTILIAN

delectationi  videantur  data^  ad  victoriam  spectent ;
quid  agatur  prooemio,  quae  ratio  et  quam  varia  nar-
randi,  quae  vis  probandi  ac  refellendi,  quanta  in
adfectibus  omnis  generis  movendis  scientia^  quamque
laus  ipsa  popularis  utilitatis  gratia  adsumpta,  quae
turn  est  pulcherrima,  cum  sequitur,  non  cum  arcessi-
tur.  Haec  si  perviderimus,  turn  vere  imitabimur.
28  Qui  vero  etiam  propria  his  bona  adiecerit,  ut  sup-
pleat  quae  deerant,  circumcidat,  si  quid  redundabit,
is  erit,  quem  quaerimus,  perfectus  orator;  quem
nunc  consummari  potissimum  oporteat^  cum  tanto
plura  exempla  bene  dicendi  supersint  quam  illis,  qui
adhuc  summi  sunt,  contigerunt.  Nam  erit  haec
quoque  laus  eorum,  ut  priores  superasse,  posteros
docuisse  dicantur.

III.  Et  haec  quidem  auxilia  extrinsecus  adhiben-
tur ;  in  iis  autem  quae  nobis  ipsis  paranda  sunt,  ut
laboris  sic  utilitatis  etiam  longe  plurimum  adfert  stilus.
Nee  immerito  M.  TuUius  hunc  optimum  effectorem  ac
magislrum  dicendi  vocat ;  cui  sententiae  personam  L.
Crassi  in  disputationibus  quae  sunt  de  oratore  adsig-
nando,  iudicium  suum  cum  illius  auctoritate  coniunxit.
2  Scribendum  ergo  quam  diligentissime  et  quam  pluri-

»  I)t  Or.  i.  160.
90


BOOK X.  II.  27-111.  2

in  which  everything  they  say,  not  excepting  those
portions  of  their  speeches  which  seem  designed
merely  to  delight  their  audience,  is  concentrated  on
securing  the  victory  over  their  opponents.  We  must
note  their  procedure  in  the  exordium,  the  method
and  variety  of  their  statement  of  facts,  the  power
displayed  in  proof  and  refutation,  the  skill  revealed
in  their  appeal  to  every  kind  of  emotion,  and  the
manner  in  which  they  make  use  of  popular  applause
to  serve  their  case,  applause  which  is  most  honour-
able when  it  is  spontaneous  and  not  deliberately
courted.  If  we  have  thoroughly  appreciated  all  these
points,  we  shall  be  able  to  imitate  our  models  with
accuracy.  But  the  man  who  to  these  good  qualities  28
adds  his  own,  that  is  to  say,  who  makes  good  defici-
encies and  cuts  down  whatever  is  redundant,  will
be  the  perfect  orator  of  our  search  ;  and  it  is  now
above  all  times  that  such  perfection  should  be
attained  when  there  are  before  us  so  many  more
models  of  oratorical  excellence  than  were  available
for  those  who  have  thus  far  achieved  the  highest
success.  For  this  glory  also  shall  be  theirs,  that
men  shall  say  of  them  that  while  they  surpassed
their  predecessors,  they  also  taught  those  who  came
after.

III.  Such  are  the  aids  which  we  may  derive  from
external  sources ;  as  regards  those  which  we  must
supply  for  ourselves,  it  is  the  pen  which  brings  at
once  the  most  labour  and  the  most  profit.  Cicero  is
fully  justified  in  describing  it  as  the  best  producer
and  teacher  of  eloquence,  and  it  may  be  noted
that  in  the  de  Oraiore^  he  supports  his  own
judgment  by  the  authority  of  Lucius  Crassus,  in
whose  mouth he places this remark. We must 2

91


QUINTILIAN

mum.  Nam  ut  terra  alte  refossa  generandis  alendisque
seminibus  fecundior  fit,  sic  profectus  non  a  summo
petitus  studiorum  fructus  efFundit  uberius  et  fidelius
continet.  Nam  sine  hac  quidem  conscientia  ipsa  ilia
ex  tempore  dicendi  facultas  inanem  modo  loquacita-

3  tem  dabit  et  verba  in  labris  nascentia.  lUic  radices,
illic  fundamenta  sunt,  illic  opes  velut  sanctiore  quo-
dam  aerario  conditae,  unde  ad  subitos  quoque  casus,
cum  res  exiget,  proferantur.  Vires  faciamus  ante
omnia,  quae  sufficiant  labori  certaminum  et  usu  non

4  exhauriantur.  Nihil  enim  rerum  ipsa  natura  voluit
magnum  effici  cito  praeposuitque  pulcherrimo  cuique
operi  difficultatem  ;  quae  nascendi  quoque  banc  fece-
rit  legem,  ut  maiora  animalia  diutius  visceribus
parentis  continerentur.

Sed  cum  sit  duplex  quaestio,  quoraodo  et  quae
maxime  scribi  oporteat,  iam  hinc  ordinem  sequar.
6  Sit  primo  vel  tardus  dum  diligens  stilus,  quaeramus
optima  nee  protinus  ofFerentibus  se  gaudeamus,  adhi-
beatur  iudicium  inventis,  dispositio  probatis.  De-
lectus  enim rerum verborumque agendus est et

92


BOOK X.  III.  2-5

therefore  write  as  much  as  possible  and  with  the
utmost  care.  For  as  deep  ploughing  makes  the  soil
more  fertile  for  the  production  and  support  of  crops,
so,  if  we  improve  our  minds  by  something  more  than
mere  superHcial  study,  we  shall  produce  a  richer
growth  of  knowledge  and  shall  retain  it  with  greater
accuracy.  For  without  the  consciousness  of  such
preliminary  study  our  powers  of  speaking  extempore
will  give  us  nothing  but  an  empty  flow  of  words,
springing  from  the  lips  and  not  from  the  brain.  It
is  in  writing  that  eloquence  has  its  roots  and  founda-
tions, it  is  writing  tliat  provides  that  holy  of  holies
where  the  wealth  of  oratory  is  stored,  and  whence  it
is  produced  to  meet  the  demands  of  sudden  emerg-
encies. It  is  of  the  first  importance  that  we  should
develop  such  strength  as  will  not  faint  under  the
toil  of  forensic  strife  nor  be  exhausted  by  continual
use.  For  it  is  an  ordinance  of  nature  that  nothing
great  can  be  achieved  in  a  moment,  and  that  all  the
fairest  tasks  are  attended  with  difficulty,  while  on
births  as  well  she  has  imposed  this  law,  that  the
larger  the  animal,  the  longer  should  be  the  period  of
gestation.

There  are,  however,  two  questions  which  present
themselves  in  this  connexion,  namely,  what  should
be  our  method  and  what  the  subjects  on  which
we  write,  and  I  propose  to  treat  them  in  this
order.  At  first,  our  pen  must  be  slow  yet  sure  :  we
must  search  for  what  is  best  and  refuse  to  give  a
joyful  welcome  to  every  thought  the  moment  that
it  presents  itself;  we  must  first  criticise  the  fruits  of
our  imagination,  and  then,  once  approved,  arrange
them  with  care.  For  we  must  select  both  thoughts
and  words  and  weigh  them  one  by  one. This  done,

93


QUINTILIAN

pondera  singulorum  examinanda. Post  subeat  ratio
collocandi  versenturque  omni  modo  numeri,  non  ut

6  quodque  se  proferet  verbum  occupet  locum.  Quae
quidetn  ut  diligentius  exsequamur,  repetenda  saepius
erunt  scriptorum  proxima.  Nam  praeter  id  quod  sic
melius  iunguntur  prioribus  sequentia,  calor  quoque
ille  cogitationis,  qui  scribendi  mora  refrixit,  recipit
ex  integro  vires  et  velut  repetito  spatio  sumit  impe-
tum ;  quod  in  certamine  saliendi  fieri  videmus,  ut
conatum  longius  petant  et  ad  illud,  quo  contenditur,
spatium  cursu  ferantur;  utque  in  iaculando  brachia
reducimus  et  expulsuri  tela  nervos  retro  tendimus.

7  Interim  tamen,  si  feret  flatus,  danda  sunt  vela,  dum
nos  indulgentia  ilia  non  fallat.  Omnia  enim  nostra,
dum  nascuntur,  placent ;  alioqui  nee  scriberentur.
Sed  redeamus  ad  iudicium  et  retractemus  suspectam

8  facilitatem.  Sic  scripsisse  Sallustium  accepimus,  et
sane  manifestus  est  etiam  ex  opere  ipso  labor.  Ver-
gilium  quoque  paucissimos  die  composuisse  versus
auctor est Varius. Oratoris quidem  alia condicio

9  est ;  itaque  banc  moram  et  sollicitudinem  initiis
impero. Nam  primum  hoc  constituendum,  hoc  obti-

94


I


BOOK  X.  III.  5-9

we  must  consider  the  order  in  which  they  should  be
placed,  and  must  examine  all  the  possible  varieties
of  rhythm,  refusing  necessarily  to  place  each  word  in
the  order  in  which  it  occurs  to  us. In  order  to  do  6
this  with  the  utmost  care,  we  must  frequently  revise
what  we  have  just  written. For  beside  the  fact  that
thus  we secure  a  better connexion  between  what
follows  and  what  precedes,  the  warmth  of  thought
which has cooled down  while  we  were  writing  is
revived  anew,  and  gathers  fresh  impetus  from  going
over  the  ground  again. We  may  compare  this  pro-
cess with  what occurs  in  jumping matches. The
competitors  take  a  longer  run  and  go  at  full  speed
to  clear  the  distance  which  they  aim  at  covering;
similarly,  in  throwing  the  javelin,  we  draw  back  our
arms,  and  in  archery  pull back  the  bow-string  to
propel the shaft. At times, however, we may  7
spread  our  sails  before  the  favouring  breeze,  but  we
must  beware  that  this  indulgence  does  not  lead  us
into  error. For  we  love all the  offspring  of  our
thought  at  the  moment  of  their  birth  ; were  that
not  so,  we  should  never  commit  them  to  writing.
But  we  must  give  them  a  critical  revision,  and  go
carefully  over  any  passage  where  we  have  reason  to
regard  our  fluency  with  suspicion. It  is  thus,  we  8
are  told,  that  Sallust  wrote,  and  certainly  his  M'orks
give  clear  evidence  of  the  labour  which  he  expended
on  them. Again,  we  learn  from  Varius  that  Virgil
composed  but  a  very  small  number  of  verses  every
day. It  is  true  that  with  orators  the  case  is  some-  9
what different, and it is for this reason that I
enjoin  such  slowness  of  speed  and  such  anxious  care
at  the  outset. For  the  first  aim  which  we  must  fix
in  our  minds  and  insist  on  carrying  into  execution

95


QUINTILIAN

nendum  est,  ut  quam  optime  scribamus ;  celeritatem
dabit  consuetude.  Paulatim  res  facilius  se  ostendent,
verba  respondebunt,  compositio  sequetur,  cuncta
denique  ut  in  familia  bene  instituta  in  officio  erunt.

10  Summa  haec  est  rei :  cito  scribendo  non  fit,  ut  bene
scribatur;  bene  scribendo  fit,  ut  cito.  Sed  turn
maxime,  cum  facultas  ilia  contigerit,  resistamus  ut
provideamus  et  efFerentes  equos  frenis  quibusdam
coerceamus  ;  quod  non  tarn  moram  faciet  quam  novos
impetus  dabit.  Neque  enim  rursus  eos,  qui  robur
aliquod  in  stilo  fecerint,  ad  infelicem  calumniandi

1 1  se  poenam  alligandos  puto.  Nam  quomodo  sufficere
officiis  civilibus  possit,  qui  singulis  actionum  partibus
insenescat  ?  Sunt  autem  quibus  nihil  sit  satis  ;  omnia
mutare,  omnia  aliter  dicere  quam  occurrit  velint;
increduli  quidam  et  de  ingenio  suo  pessime  meriti,
qui diligentiam putant facere sibi scribendi diffi-

12  cultatem.  Nee  promptum  est  dicere,  utros  peccare
validius  putem,  quibus  omnia  sua  placent  an  quibus
nihil.  Accidit  enim  etiam  ingeniosis  adolescentibus
frequenter,  ut  labore  consumantur  et  in  silentium
usque  descendant  nimia  bene  dicendi  cupiditate.
Qua  de  re  memini  narrasse  mihi  lulium  Secundum
ilium,  aequalem  meum  atque  a  me,  ut  notum  est,
familiariter  araatum,  mirae  facundiae  virum,  infinitae

9^


BOOK X.  III.  9-12

is  to  write  as  well  as  possible ;  speed  will  come  with
practice.  Gradually  thoughts  will  suggest  them-
selves with  increasing  readiness,  the  words  will
answer  to  our  call  and  rhythmical  arrangement  will
follow,  till  everything  will  be  found  fulfilling  its
proper  function  as  in  a  well-ordered  household.
The  sum  of  the  whole  matter  is  this  :  write  quickly  10
and  you  will  never  write  well,  write  well  and  you
will  soon  write  quickly.  But  it  is  just  when  we
have  acquired  this  facility  that  we  must  pause  awhile
to  look  ahead  and,  if  I  may  use  the  metaphor,  curb
the  horses  that  would  run  away  with  us.  This  will
not  delay  our  progress  so  much  as  lend  us  fresh
vigour.  For  I  do  not  think  that  those  who  have
acquired  a  certain  power  in  writing  should  be  con-
demned to  the  barren  pains  of  false  self-criticism.
How  can  anyone  fulfil  his  duties  as  an  advocate  if  he  11
wastes  his  time  in  putting  unnecessary  finish  on  each
portion  of  his  pleadings  ?  There  are  some  who  are
never  satisfied.  They  wish  to  change  everything
they  have  written  and  to  put  it  in  other  words.
They  are  a  diffident  folk,  and  deserve  but  ill  of  their
own  talents,  who  think  it  a  mark  of  precision  to  cast
obstacles  in  the  way  of  their  own  writing.  Nor  is  it  12
easy  to  say  which  are  the  most  serious  offenders,  those
who  are  satisfied  with  everything  or  those  who  are
satisfied  with  nothing  that  they  write.  For  it  is
of  common  occurrence  with  young  men,  however
talented  they  may  be,  to  waste  their  gifts  by  super-
fluous elaboration,  and  to  sink  into  silence  through
an  excessive  desire  to  speak  well.  I  remember  in
this  connexion  a  story  that  Julius  Secundus,  my  con-
temporary, and,  as  is  well  known,  my  very  dear  friend,
a  man  with  remarkable  powers  of  eloquence,  but

97


QUINTILIAN

13  tamen  curae,  quid  esset  sibi  a  patruo  suo  dictum.  Is
fuit  lulius  Florus,  in  eloquentia  Galliarum,  quoniam
ibi  demum  exercuit  earn,  princeps,  alioqui  inter  pau-
cos  disertus  et  dignus  ilia  propinquitate.  Is  cum
Secundum,  scholae  adhuc  operatum,  tristem  forte
vidisset,  interrogavit,  quae  causa  frontis tam ad-

14  ductae.  Nee  dissimulavit  adolescens,  tertium  iam
diem  esse,  quod  omni  labore  materiae  ad  scribendum
destinatae  non  inveniret  exordium ;  quo  sibi  non
praesens  tantum  dolor,  sed  etiam  desperatio  in  pos-
terum  fieret. Tum  Florus  arridens,  Numquid  tu,  in-

15  quit,  melius  dicere  vis  quam  poles  ?  Ita  se  res  habet.
Curandum  est  ut  quam  optime  dicamus  ;  dicendum
tamen  pro  facultate.  Ad  profectum  enim  opus  est
studio  non  indignatione.  Ut  possimus  autem  scribere
etiam  plura  et  celerius,  non  exercitatio  modo  prae-
stabit,  in  qua  sine  dubio  multum  est,  sed  etiam  ratio ;
si  non  resupini  spectantesque  tectum  et  cogitationem
murmure  agitantes  exspectaverimus  quid  obveniat;
sed  quid  res  poscat,  quid  personam  deceat,  quod  sit
tempus,  qui  iudicis  animus  intuiti,  humano  quodam
modo  ad  scribendum  accesserimus.  Sic  nobis  et
initia et quae sequuntur natura ipsa praescribit.

16  Certa  sunt  enim  pleraque  et,  nisi  conniveamus,  in
98


BOOK X.  III.  12-16

with  an  infinite  passion  for  precision,  told  me  of  the
words  once  used  to  him  by  his  uncle,  Julius  Florus,  13
the  leading  orator  of  Gaul,  for  it  was  there  that  he
practised,  a  man  eloquent  as  but  few  have  ever
been,  and  worthy  of  his  nephew.  He  once  noticed
that  Secundus,  who  was  still  a  student,  was  looking
depressed,  and  asked  him  the  meaning  of  his  frowns.
The  youth  made  no  concealment  of  the  reason :  he  14
had  been  working  for  three  days,  and  had  been  un-
able, in  spite  of  all  his  efforts,  to  devise  an  exordium
for  the  theme  which  he  had  been  given  to  write,
with  the  result  that  he  was  not  only  vexed  over
his  immediate  difficulty,  but  had  lost  all  hope  of
future  success.  Florus  smiled  and  said,  "Do  you
really  want  to  speak  better  than  you  can.''"  There  15
lies  the  truth  of  the  whole  matter.  We  must  aim
at  speaking  as  well  as  we  can,  but  must  not  try  to
speak  better  than  our  nature  will  permit.  For  to
make  any  real  advance  we  need  study,  not  self-
accusation.  And  it  is  not  merely  practice  that  will
enable  us  to  -write  at  greater  length  and  with
increased  fluency,  although  doubtless  practice  is
most  important.  We  need  judgement  as  well.  So
long  as  we  do  not  lie  back  with  eyes  turned  up  to  the
ceiling,  trying  to  fire  our  imagination  by  muttering
to  ourselves,  in  the  hope  that  something  will  present
itself,  but  turn  our  thoughts  to  consider  what  the
circumstances  of  the  case  demand,  what  suits  the
characters  involved,  what  is  the  nature  of  the  occa-
sion and  the  temper  of  the  judge,  we  shall  acquire
the  power  of  writing  by  rational  means.  It  is  thus
that  nature  herself  bids  us  begin  and  pursue  our
studies  once  well  begun.  For  most  points  are  of  a  16
definite  character  and,  if  we  keep  our  eyes  open,

99


QUINTILIAN

oculos  incurrunt ;  ideoque  nee  indocti  nee  rustiei  diu
quaerunt,  unde  incipiant ;  quo  pudendum  est  magis,
si  difficultatem  facit  doctrina.  Non  ergo  semper
putemus  optimum  esse  quod  latet;  immutescamus
alioqui, si  nihil  dicendum videatur,  nisi  quod  non

17  invenimus.  Diversum  est  huic  eorum  vitium,  qui
primo  decurrere  per  materiam  stilo  quam  velocissimo
volunt  et  sequentes  calorem  atque  impetum  ex  tem-
pore scribunt ;  hanc  silvam  vocant.  Repetunt  deinde
et  componunt  quae  efFuderant ;  sed  verba  emendan-
tur  et  numeri,  manet  in  rebus  temere  eongestis  quae

18  fuit  levitas.  Protinus  ergo  adhibere  curam  rectius
erit  atque  ab  initio  sic  opus  ducere,  ut  caelandum,
non  ex  integro  fabricandum  sit,  Aliquando  tamen
adfectus  sequemur,  in  quibus  fere  plus  calor  quam
diligentia  valet.

Satis  apparet  ex  eo,  quod  hanc  scribentium  negli-
gentiam  damno,  quid  de  illis  dictandi  deliciis  sentiam.

19  Nam  in  stilo  quidem  quamlibet  properato  dat  ali-
quam  cogitationi  moram  non  consequens  celeritatem
eius  manus; ille  cui  dictamus  urgetj  atque  interim

ICO


BOOK X.  III.  16-19

will  spontaneously  present  themselves.  That  is  the
reason  why  peasants  and  uneducated  persons  do  not
beat  about  the  bush  to  discover  with  what  they
should  begin,  and  our  hesitation  is  all  the  more
shameful  if  it  is  simply  the  result  of  education.
We  must  not,  therefore,  persist  in  thinking  that
what  is  hard  to  find  is  necessarily  best ;  for,  if  it
seems  to  us  that  there  is  nothing  to  be  said  except
that  which  we  are  unable  to  find,  we  must  say
nothing  at  all.  On  the  other  hand,  there  is  a  fault  17
which  is  precisely  the  opposite  of  this,  into  which
those  fall  who  insist  on  first  making  a  rapid  draft
of  their  subject  with  the  utmost  speed  of  which
their  pen  is  capable,  and  write  in  the  heat  and
impulse  of  the  moment.  They  call  this  their  rough
copy.  They  then  revise  what  they  have  written,
and  arrange  their  hasty  outpourings.  But  wliile
the  words  and  the  rhythm  may  be  corrected,  the
matter  is  still  marked  by  the  superficiality  resulting
from  the  speed  with  which  it  was  thrown  together.
The  more  correct  method  is,  therefore,  to  exercise  18
care  from  the  very  beginning,  and  to  form  the
work  from  the  outset  in  such  a  manner  that  it
merely  requires  to  be  chiselled  into  shape,  not
fashioned  anew.  Sometimes,  however,  we  must
follow  the  stream  of  our  emotions,  since  their
warmth  will  give  us  more  than  any  diligence  can
secure.

The  condemnation  which  I  have  passed  on  such  19
carelessness  in  writing  will  make  it  pretty  clear  what
my  views  are  on  the  luxury  of  dictation  which
is  now  so  fashionable.  For,  when  we  write,  however
great  our  speed,  the  fact  that  the  hand  cannot  follow
the  rapidity  of  our  thoughts  gives  us  time  to  think,

lOI


QUINTILIAN

pudet  etiam  dubitare  aut  resistere  aut  mutare  quasi

20  conscium  infirmitatis  nostrae  timentes.  Quo  fit,  ut
non  rudia  tantum  et  fortuita,  sed  impropria  interim,
dum  sola  est  connectendi  sermonis  cupiditas,  effluant,
quae  nee  scribentium  curam  nee  dieentium  impetum
consequantur.  At  idem  ille,  qui  excipit,  si  tardior  in
scribendo  aut  incertior  in  intellegendo  ^  velut  ofFen-
sator  fuit,  inhibetur  cursus,  atque  omnis  quae  erat
concepta mentis intentio mora et interdum ira-

21  cundia  excutitur.  Tum  ilia,  quae  altiorem^  animi
motum  sequuntur  quaeque  ipsa  animum  quodam-
modo  concitant,  quorum  est  iactare  manum,  torquere
vultum,  frontem  et  latus  ^  interim  obiurgare,  quae-
que Persius  notat,  cum  leviter  dicendi  genus
significat.

Nee  pluteum,  inquit,  caedit  nee  demorsos  sapit  U7igues,

22  etiam  ridicula  sunt,  nisi  cum  soli  sumus.  Denique
ut  semel  quod  est  potentissimum  dicam,  secretum
in  *  dictando  perit.  Atque  liberum  arbitris  locum  et
quam  altissimum  silentium  scribentibus  maxime  con-
venire  nemo  dubitaverit.  Non  tamen  protinus  audi-
endi,  qui  credunt  aptissima  in  hoc  nemora  silvasque,
quod  ilia  caeli  libertas  locorumque  amoenitas  subli-

23  mem  animum  et  beatiorem  spiritum  parent.  Mihi  certe

'  intellegendo,  Milller :  legendo,  B.

*  altiorem,  later  MSS.  :  aptiorem,  B.

'  frontem  et  latus, Peterson  :  sintielatus, B  (Snd  hand) :
simul  et,  almost  all  MSS!.

*  in,  several  later  MSS.  :  quod,  B.

1  L  106.

I02


BOOK X.  in.  19-23

whereas  the  presence  of  our  amanuensis  hurries  us
on,  and  at  times  we  feel  ashamed  to  hesitate  or
pause,  or  make  some  alteration,  as  though  we  were
afraid  to  display  such  weakness  before  a  witness.
As  a  result  our  language  tends  not  merely  to  be  20
haphazard  and  formless,  but  in  our  desire  to  produce
a  continuous  flow  we  let  slip  positive  improprieties
of  diction,  which  show  neither  the  precision  of  the
writer  nor  the  impetuosity  of  the  speaker.  Again,  if
the  amanuensis  is  a  slow  writer,  or  lacking  in  intelli-
gence, he  becomes  a  stumbling-block,  our  speed  is
checked,  and  the  thread  of  our  ideas  is  interrupted
by  the  delay  or  even  perhaps  by  the  loss  of
temper  to  which  it  gives  rise.  Moreover,  the  21
gestures  which  accompany  strong  feeling,  and  some-
times even  serve  to  stimulate  the  mind,  the  waving
of  the  hand,  the  contraction  of  the  brow,  the
occasional  striking  of  forehead  or  side,  and  those
which  Persius^  notes  when  he  describes  a  trivial
style  as  one  that

"  Thumps  not  the  desk  nor  smacks  of  bitten  nails,"

all  these  become  ridiculous,  unless  we  are  alone.
Finally,  we  come  to  the  most  important  considera-  22
tion  of  all,  that  the  advantages  of  privacy  are  lost
when  we  dictate.  Everyone,  however,  will  agree
that  the  absence  of  company  and  deep  silence  are
most  conducive  to  writing,  though  I  would  not  go
so  far  as  to  concur  in  the  opinion  of  those  who  think
woods  and  groves  the  most  suitable  localities  for
the  purpose,  on  the  ground  that  the  freedom  of
the  sky  and  the  charm  of  the  surroundings  produce
sublimity  of  thought  and  wealth  of  inspiration.
Personally I regard such an environment as a  23

'03


QUINTILIAN

iucundus  hie  magis  quam  studiorum  hortator  videtur
esse  secessus.  Nanique  ilia,  quae  ipsa  delectant,
necesse  est  avocent  ab  intentione  operis  destinati.
Neque  enim  se  bona  fide  in  multa  simul  intendere
animus  totum  potest,  et  quocunque  respexit,  desinit

24  intueri  quod  propositum  erat.  Quare  silvarum  amoe-
nitas  et  praeterlabentia  flumina  et  inspirantes  ramis
arborum  aurae  volucrumque  cantus  et  ipsa  late  cir-
cunispiciendi  libertas  ad  se  trahunt,  ut  mihi  remittere
potius  voluptas  ista  videatur  cogitationem  quam  in-

25  tendere.  Demosthenes  melius,  qui  se  in  locum,  ex
quo  nulla  exaudiri  vox  et  ex  quo  nihil  prospici  posset,
recondebat  ne  aliud  agere  mentem  cogerent  oculi.
Ideoque  lucubrantes  silentium  noctis  et  clausum
cubiculum et lumen unum velut  tectos  ^ maxime

28  teneat.  Sed  cum  in  omni  studiorum  genere  tum  in
hoc  praecipue  bona  valetudo,  quaeque  eam  maxime
praestat,  frugalitas,  necessaria  est,  cum  terapora  ab
ipsa  rerum  natura  ad  quietem  refection emque  nobis
data  in  acerrimum  laborem  convertimus.  Cui  tamen
non  plus  irrogandum  est  quam  quod  somno  supererit,

27  haud  deerit.  Obstat  enimdiligentiae  scribendi  etiam
fatigatfo,  et  abunde,  si  vacet,  lucis  spatia  sufliciunt ;
occupatos  in  noctem  necessitas  agit.  Est  tamen  lu-
cubratio,  quotiens  ad  eam  integri  ac  refecti  venimus,
optimum  secreti  genus.

^  tectos,  ed.  Leid. :  rectos,  MSS.

*  An  underground  room. See  Plut.  Dem.  vii.
104


BOOK  X.  III.  23  -27

pleasant  luxury  rather  than  a  stimulus  to  study.
For  whatever  causes  us  delight,  must  necessarily
distract  us  from  the  concentration  due  to  our  work.
The  mind  cannot  devote  its  undivided  and  sincere
attention  to  a  number  of  things  at  the  same  time,
and  wherever  it  turns  its  gaze  it  must  cease  to
contemplate  its  appointed  task.  Therefore,  the  24
charm  of  the  woods,  the  gliding  of  the  stream,  the
breeze  that  murmurs  in  the  branches,  the  song  of
birds,  and  the  very  freedom  with  which  our  eyes
may  range,  are  mere  distractions,  and  in  my  opinion
the  pleasure  which  they  excite  is  more  likely  to
relax  than  to  concentrate  our  attention.  Demos-  25
thenes  took  a  wiser  view ;  for  he  would  retire  to
a  place  ^  where  no  voice  was  to  be  heard,  and  no
prospect  greeted  the  sight,  for  fear  that  his  eyes
might  force  his  mind  to  neglect  its  duty.  There-
fore, let  the  burner  of  the  midnight  oil  seclude
himself  in  the  silence  of  night,  within  closed  doors,
with  but  a  solitary  lamp  to  light  his  labours.  But  2b
for  every  kind  of  study,  and  more  especially  for
night  work,  good  health  and  its  chief  source,  simple
living,  are  essential ;  for  we  have  fallen  into  the
habit  of  devoting  to  relentless  labour  the  hour  which
nature  has  appointed  for  rest  and  relaxation.  From
those  hours  we  must  take  only  such  time  as  is  super-
fluous for  sleep,  and  will  not  be  missed.  For  fatigue  27
will  make  us  careless  in  writing,  and  the  hours  of
daylight  are  amply  sufficient  for  one  who  has  no
other  distractions.  It  is  only  the  busy  man  who
is  driven  to  encroach  on  the  hours  of  darkness.
Nevertheless,  night  work,  so  long  as  we  come  to  it
fresh  and  untired,  provides  by  far  the  best  form  of
privacy.

105


QUINTILIAN

28  Sed  silentium  et  secessus  et  undique  liber
animus  ut  sunt  maxime  optanda,  ita  non  semper
possunt  contingere,  ideoque  non  statim,  si  quid
obstrepet,  abiiciendi  codices  erunt  et  deplorandus
dies ;  verum  incommodis  repugnandum  et  hie  fa-
ciendus  usus,  ut  omnia  quae  impedient  vincat
intentio ;  quam  si  tota  mente  in  opus  ipsum  di-
rexeris, nihil eorum, quae oculis vel auribus in-

29  cursant,  ad  animum  perveniet.  An  vero  frequenter
etiam  fortuita  hoc  cogitatio  praestat,  ut  obvios  non
videamus  et  itinere  deerremus :  non  consequemur
idem,  si  et  voluerimus?  Non  est  indulgendum
causis  desidiae.  Nam  si  non  nisi  refecti,  non  nisi
hilares,  non  nisi  omnibus  aliis  curis  vacantes  stu-
dendum  existimarimus, semper erit propter quod

30  nobis  ignoscamus.  Quare  in  turba,  itinere,  con-
viviis  etiam  faciat  sibi  cogitatio  ipsa  secretum
Quid  alioqui  fiet,  cum  in  medio  foro,  tot  circum
stantibus  iudiciis,  iurgiis,  fortuitis  etiam  clamoribus,
erit  subito  continua  oratione  dicendum,  si  particulas
quas  ceris  mandamus  nisi  in  solitudine  reperire  non
possumus  ?  Propter  quae  idem  ille  tantus  amator
secreti  Demosthenes  in  litore,  in  quo  se  maximo
cum  sono  fluctus  illideret,  meditans  consuescebat
contionum  fremitus  non  expavescere.

31  Ilia  quoque  minora  (sed  nihil  in  studiis  parvum
io6


BOOK X.  III.  28-31

But  although  silence  and  seclusion  and  absolute  28
freedom  of  mind  are  devoutly  to  be  desired,  they
are  not  always  within  our  power  to  attain. Con-
sequently we  must  not  fling  aside  our  book  at  once,
if disturbed  by  some noise, and lament that  we
have  lost  a  day: on  the  contrary,  we  must  make
a  firm  stand  against  such  inconveniences,  and  train
ourselves  so  to  concentrate  our  thoughts  as  to  rise
superior  to  all  impediments  to  study. If  only  you
direct  all your attention  to  the  work  which you
have  in  hand,  no  sight  or  sound  will  ever  penetrate
to  your  mind. If  even  casual  thoughts  often  occupy  29
us  to  such  an  extent  that  we  do  not  see  passers-by,
or  even  stray  from  our  path,  surely  we  can  obtain
the same  result  by  the  exercise  of  our  will. We
must  not  give  way  to  pretexts  for  sloth. For  unless
we  make  up  our  mind  that  we  must  be  fresh,  cheer-
ful and  free  from  all  other  care  when  we  approach  our
studies,  we  shall  always  find  some  excuse  for  idleness.
Therefore,  whether  we  be  in  a  crowd,  on  a  journey,  30
or  even  at  some  festive  gathering,  our  thoughts  should
always  have  some  inner  sanctuary  of  their  own  to
which  they  may  retire. Otherwise  what shall  we
do  when  we  are suddenly  called  upon to deliver
a  set  speech  in  the  midst  of  the  forum,  with  law-
suits in  progress  on  ever}'  side,  and  with  the  sound
of  quarrels  and  even  casual  outcries  in  our  ears,  if
we  need  absolute  privacy  to  discover  the  thoughts
which  we  jot  down  upon  our  tablets  ? It  was  for
this  reason  that  Demosthenes,  the  passionate  lover
of  seclusion,  used  to  study  on  the  seashore  amid  the
roar  of  the  breakers  that  they  might  teach  him  not
to  be  unnerved  by  the  uproar  of  the  public  assembly.
There  are  also  certain  minor  details  which  deserve  31

107


QUINTILIAN

est)  non  sunt  transeunda :  scribi  optime  ceris,  in
quibus  facillima  est  ratio  delendi,  nisi  forte  visus
infirmior  membranarum  potius  usum  exiget,  quae
ut  iuvant  aciem,  ita  crebra  relatione,  quoad  intin-
guuntur,  calami morantur manum et cogitationis

32  impetum  frangunt.  Relinquendae  autem  in  utro-
libet  genere  contra  erunt  vacuae  tabellae,  in  quibus
libera  adiiciendo  sit  excursio.  Nam  interim  pi-
gritiam  emendandi  augustiae  faciunt  aut  certe
novorum  interpositione  priora  confundant.  Ne  latas
quidem  ultra  modum  esse  ceras  velim,  expertus
iuvenem  studiosum  alioqui  praelongos  habuisse  ser-
mones,  quia  illos  numero  versuum  metiebatur,  idque
vitium, quod frequenti admonitione corrigi non

33  potuerat,  mutatis  codicibus  esse  sublatum.  Debet
vacare  etiam  locus,  in  quo  notentur  quae  scri-
bentibus  solent  extra  ordinem,  id  est  ex  aliis,  quam
qui  sunt  in  manibus  loci,  occurrere.  Irrumpunt
enim  optimi  nonnunquam  sensus,  quos  neque
inserere  oportet  neque  differre  tutum  est,  quia
interim  elabuntur,  interim  memoriae  suae  intentos
ab  alia  inventione  declinant  ideoque  optime  sunt  in
deposito.

IV.  Sequitur emendatio, pars studiorum longe
utilissima. Neque enim sine causa creditum est
stilum  non  minus  agere, cum  delet Huius  autem
08


BOOK  X.  III.  31-1V.  I

our  attention,  for  there  is  nothing  too  minute  for  the
student.  It  is  best  to  write  on  wax  owing  to  the
facility  which  it  offers  for  erasure,  though  weak
sight  may  make  it  desirable  to  employ  parchment
by  preference.  The  latter,  however,  although  of
assistance  to  the  eye,  delays  the  hand  and  interrupts
the  stream  of  thought  owing  to  the  frequency  with
which  the  pen  has  to  be  supplied  with  ink.  But  32
whichever  we  employ,  we  must  leave  blank  pages
that  we  may  be  free  to  make  additions  when  we
will.  For  lack  of  space  at  times  gives  rise  to  a
reluctance  to  make  corrections,  or,  at  any  rate,  is
liable  to  cause  confusion  when  new  matter  is
inserted.  The  wax  tablets  should  not  be  unduly
wide ;  for  1  have  known  a  young  and  over-zealous
student  write  his  comjwsitions  at  undue  length,
because  he  measured  them  by  the  number  of  lines,
a  fault  which  persisted,  in  spite  of  frequent  ad-
monition, until  his  tablets  were  changed,  when  it
disappeared.  Space  must  a'lso  be  left  for  jotting  33
down  the  thoughts  which  occur  to  the  writer  out
of  due  order,  that  is  to  say,  which  refer  to  subjects
other  than  those  in  hand.  For  sometimes  the  most
admirable  thoughts  break  in  upon  us  which  cannot
be  inserted  in  what  we  are  writing,  but  which,  on
the  other  hand,  it  is  unsafe  to  put  by,  since  they  are
at  times  forgotten,  and  at  times  cling  to  the  memory
so  persistently  as  to  divert  us  from  some  other  line
of  thought.  They  are,  therefore,  best  kept  in
store.

IV.  The  next  point  which  we  have  to  consider  is
the  correction  of  our  work,  which  is  by  far  the  most
useful  portion  of  our  study  :  for  there  is  good  reason
for  the  view  that  erasure  is  quite  as  important  a

10^


QUINTILIAN

operis  est  adiicere,  detrahere,  mutare.  Sed  facilius
in  iis  simpliciusque  iudicium^  quae  replenda  vel
deiicienda  sunt;  premere  vero  tumentia,  humilia
extollere,  luxuriantia  adstringere,  inordinata  di-
gerere,  soluta  componere,  exultantia  coercere,
duplicis  operae. Nam  et  damnanda  sunt  quae  pla-

2  cuerunt  et  invenienda  quae  fugerant.  Nee  dubium
est  optimum  esse  emendandi  genus,  si  scripta  in
aliquod  tempus  reponantur,  ut  ad  ea  post  intervallum
velut  nova  atque  aliena  redeamus,  ne  nobis  scripta

3  nostra  tanquam  recentes  fetus  blandiantur.  Sed
neque  hoc  contingere  semper  potest  praesertim
oratori,  cui  saepius  scribere  ad  praesentes  usus
necesse  est ;  et  ipsa  emendatio  finem  habeat.  Sunt
enim  qui  ad  omnia  scripta  tanquam  vitiosa  redeant
et,  quasi  nihil  fas  sit  rectum  esse  quod  primum  est,
melius  existiment  quidquid  est  aliud,  idque  faciant,
quotiens  librum  in  manus  resumpserunt,  similes
medicis etiam Integra secantibus. Accidit itaque

4  ut  cicatricosa  sint  et  exsanguis  et  cura  peiora.  Sit
ergo  aliquando  quod  placeat  aut  certe  quod  sufficiat,
ut  opus  poliat  lima,  non  exterat.  Temporis  quoque
no


BOOK X.  IV.  1-4

function  of  the  pen  as  actual  writing.  Correction
takes  the  form  of  addition,  excision  and  alteration.
But  it  is  a  comparatively  simple  and  easy  task  to
decide  what  is  to  be  added  or  excised.  On  the
other  hand,  to  prune  what  is  turgid,  to  elevate
what  is  mean,  to  repress  exuberance,  arrange  what
is  disorderly,  introduce  rhythm  where  it  is  lacking,
and  modify  it  where  it  is  too  emphatic,  involves  a
twofold  labour.  For  we  have  to  condemn  what  had
previously  satisfied  us  and  discover  what  had  escaped
our  notice.  There  can  be  no  doubt  that  the  best  2
method  of  correction  is  to  put  aside  what  we  have
written  for  a  certain  time,  so  that  when  we  return
to  it  after  an  interval  it  will  have  the  air  of  novelty
and  of  being  another's  handiwork  ;  for  thus  we  may
prevent  ourselves  from  regarding  our  writings  with
all  the  affection  that  we  lavish  on  a  newborn  child.
But  this  is  not  always  possible,  especially  in  the  case  3
of  an  orator  who  most  frequently  has  to  write  for
immediate  use,  while  some  limit,  after  all,  must  be
set  to  correction.  For  there  are  some  who  return
to  everything  they  write  with  the  presumption  that
it  is  full  of  faults  and,  assuming  that  a  first  draft
must  necessarily  be  incorrect,  think  every  change
an  improvement  and  make  some  alteration  as  often
as  they  have  the  manuscript  in  their  hands :  they
are,  in  fact,  like  doctors  who  use  the  knife  even
where  the  flesh  is  perfectly  healthy.  The  result  of
their  critical  activities  is  that  the  finished  work  is
full  of  scars,  bloodless,  and  all  the  worse  for  their
anxious  care.  No !  let  there  be  something  in  all  4
our  writing  which,  if  it  does  not  actually  please  us,
at  least  passes  muster,  so  that  the  file  may  only
polish our work, not  wear  it  away. There must

III


QUINTILIAN  }

esse  debet  modus.  Nam  quod  Cinnae  Zmyrnam
novem  annis  accepimus  scriptam,  et  Panegyricum
Isocratis,  qui  parcissime,  decern  annis  dicunt  elabo-
ratium,  ad  oratorem  nihil  pertinet,  cuius  nullum
erit,  si  tam  tardum  fuerit,  auxilium.

V.  Proximum  est,  ut  dicamus,  quae  praecipue
scribenda  sint  e$iv  parantibus.  Non  est  huius  ^
quidem  operis,  ut  explicemus  quae  sint  materiae,
quae  prima  aut  secunda  aut  deinceps  tractanda  sint
(nam  id  factum  est  etiam  primo  libro,  quo  puerorum,
et  secundo,  quo  iam  robustorum  studiis  ordinem
dedimus)  sed  de  quo  nunc  agitur,  unde  copia  ac
facilitas  maxime  veniat.

2  Vertere  Graeca  in  Latinum  veteres  nostri  oratores
optimum  iudicabant.  Id  se  L,  Crassus  in  illis
Ciceronis  de  Oratore  libris  dicit  factitasse.  Id
Cicero  sua  ipse  persona  frequentissime  praecipit,
quin  etiam  libros  Platonis  atque  Xenophontis  edidit
hoc  genere  translatos.  Id  Messalae  placuit,  mul-
taeque  sunt  ab  eo  scriptae  ad  liunc  modum  orationes,
adeo ut etiam cum ilia Hyperidis pro Phryne

3  difficillima  Romanis  subtilitate  contenderet.  Et
manifesta  est  exercitationis  huiusce  ratio.  Nam  et
rerum  copia  Graeci  auctores  abundant  et  plurimum
artis  in  eloquentiam  intulerunt,  et  hos  transfe-
rentibus verbis uti optimis licet, omnibus enim

*  non  est  huius,  added  by  Biirsian.

*  C.  Helvius  Cinna,  the  friend  of  Catullus.  The  Smyrna
was  a  short  but  exceptionally  obscure  and  learned  epic.

»  See  X.  i.  1.  »  Ch.  ix.

*  Ch.  iv.  »  i.  155.

*  The  (Eccmomicus  of  Xenophon,  the  Protagorus  and  Timaeus
of  I'lato.


I


BOOK X.  IV.  4-v.  3

also  be  a  limit  to  the  time  which  we  spend  on  its
revision.  For  the  fact  that  Cinna  i  took  nine  years
to  write  his  Smyrna,  and  that  Isocrates  required
ten  years,  at  the  lowest  estimate,  to  complete  his
Panegyric  does  not  concern  the  orator,  whose
assistance  will  be  of  no  use,  if  it  is  so  long
delayed.

V.  My  next  task  is  to  indicate  what  those  should
write  whose  aim  is  to  acquire  facility.'  At  this  part
of  my  work  there  is  no  necessity  for  me  to  set  forth
the  subjects  which  should  be  selected  for  writing,
or  the  order  in  which  they  should  be  approached,
since  I  have  already  done  this  in  the  first  book,^
where  I  prescribed  the  sequence  of  studies  for  boys,
and  in  the  second  book,*  where  I  did  the  same  for
young  men.  The  point  which  concerns  me  now  is
to  show  from  what  sources  copiousness  and  facility
may  most  easily  be  derived.

Our  earlier  orators  thought  highly  of  translation
from  Greek  into  Latin.  In  the  de  Oratore  ^  of  2
Cicero,  Lucius  Crassus  says  that  he  practised  this
continually,  while  Cicero  himself  advocates  it  again
and  again,  nay,  he  actually  published  translations
of  Xenophon  and  Plato,^  which  were  the  result  of
this  form  of  exercise.  Messala  likewise  gave  it  his
approval,  and  we  have  a  number  of  translations  of
speeches  from  his  hand ;  he  even  succeeded  in
coping  with  the  delicacy  of  Hyperides'  speech  in
defence  of  Phryne,  a  task  of  exceeding  difficulty  for
a  Roman.  The  purpose  of  this  form  of  exercise  is  3
obvious.  For  Greek  authors  are  conspicuous  for  the
variety  of  their  matter,  and  there  is  much  art  in
all  their  eloquence,  while,  when  we  translate  them,
we  are  at  liberty  to  use  the  best  words  available,

i>3


QUINTILIAN

utimur  nostris.  Figuras  vero,  quibus  maxim e  orna-
tur  oratio,  multas  ac  varias  excogitandi  etiam  ne-
cessitas  quaedam  est,  quia  plerumque  a  Graecis
Romana  dissentiunt.

4  Sed  et  ilia  ex  Latinis  eonversio  multum  et  ipsa
contulerit.  Ac  de  carminibus  quidem  neminem
credo  dubitare,  quo  solo  genere  exercitationis  dicitur
usus  esse  Sulpicius.  Nam  et  sublimis  spiritus  attol-
lere  orationem  potest,  et  verba  poetica  libertate
audaciora  non  praesumunt  eadem  proprie  dicendi
facultatem.  Sed  et  ipsis  sententiis  adiicere  licet
oratorium robur et omissa supplere, efFusa sub-

5  stringere.  Neque  ego  paraphrasim  esse  interpre-
tationem  tantum  volo,  sed  circa  eosdem  sensus
certamen  atque  aemulationem.  Ideoque  ab  illis
dissentio,  qui  vertere  orationes  Latinas  vetant,  quia
optimis  occupatis,  quidquid  aliter  dixerimus,  necesse
sit  esse  deterius.  Nam  neque  semper  est  desperan-
dum,  aliquid  illis,  quae  dicta  sunt,  melius  posse
reperiri ;  neque  adeo  ieiunam  ac  pauperem  natura
eloquentiam  fecit,  ut  una  de  re  bene  dici  nisi  semel

6  non  possit.  Nisi  forte  histrionum  multa  circa  voces
easdem  variare  gestus  potest,  orandi  minor  vis,  ut


^  7.  e.  we  shall  not  borrow  from  our  models,  as  we  do  in
paraphrasing  Latin.

*  Lit.  "forestall  the  power  of  using  the  language  of
ordinary  prose."

114


BOOK X.  V.  3-6

since  all  that  we  use  are  our  very  own.* As  regards

figures,  too,  which  are  the  chief  ornament  of  oratory,
it  is  necessary  to  think  out  a  great  number  and  variety
for  ourselves,  since  in  this  respect  the  Roman  idiom
differs  largely  from  the  Greek.

But  paraphrase  from  the  Latin  will  also  be  of  4
much  assistance,  while  I  think  we  shall  all  agree  that
this  is  specially  valuable  with  regard  to  poetry ;
indeed,  it  is  said  that  the  paraphrase  of  poetry  was
the  sole  form  of  exercise  employed  by  Sulpicius.
For  the  lofty  inspiration  of  verse  serves  to  elevate
the  orator's  style  and  the  bold  license  of  poetic
language  does  not  preclude  ^  our  attempting  to
render  the  same  words  in  the  language  natural  to
prose.  Nay,  we  may  add  the  \igour  of  oratory
to  the  thoughts  expressed  by  the  poet,  make  good
his  omissions,  and  prune  his  diffuseness.  But  I  6
would  not  have  paraphrase  restrict  itself  to  the
bare  interpretation  of  the  original :  its  duty  is
rather  to  rival  and  vie  with  the  original  in  the
expression  of  the  same  thoughts.  Consequently,
I  disagree  with  those  who  forbid  the  student  to
paraphrase  speeches  of  our  own  orators,  on  the
ground  that,  since  all  the  best  expressions  have
already  been  appropriated,  whatever  we  express
differently  must  necessarily  be  a  change  for  the
worse.  For  it  is  always  possible  that  we  may  dis-
cover expressions  which  are  an  improvement  on
those  which  have  already  been  used,  and  nature
did  not  make  eloquence  such  a  j>oor  and  starveling
thing,  that  there  should  be  only  one  adequate
expression  for  any  one  theme.  It  can  hardly  be  6
argued  that,  while  the  gestures  of  the  actor  are
capable  of  imparting  a  wealth  of  varied  meaning


QUINTILIAN
dicatur  aliquid,  post  quod  in  eadem  materia  nihil
dicendum  sit. Sed  esto  neque  melius  quod  inveni-

7  mus  esse  neque  par :  est  certe  proximis  locus.  An
vero  ipsi  non  bis  ac  saepius  de  eadem  re  dicimus  et
quidem  continuas  nonnunquam  sententias  ?  Nisi
forte  contendere  nobiscum  possumus,  cum  aliis  non
possumus.  Nam  si  uno  genere  bene  diceretur,  fas
erat  existimari  praeclusam  nobis  a  prioribus  viam  ;
nunc vero innumerabiles sunt modi plurimaeque

8  eodem  viae  ducunt.  Sua  brevitati  gratia,  sua  copiae,
alia  translatis  virtus  alia  propriis,  hoc  oratio  recta
illud  figura  declinata  commendat.  Ipsa  denique
utilissima  est  exercitationi  difficultas.  Quid,  quod
auctores  maximi  sic  diligentius  cognoscuntur  ?  Non
enim  scripta  lectione  secura  transcurrimus,  sed
tractamus  singula  et  necessario  introspicimus  et,
quantum  virtutis  habeant,  vel  hoc  ipso  cognoscimus,
quod  imitari  non  possumus.

9  Nee  aliena  tantum  transferre  sed  etiam  nostra
pluribus  modis  tractare  proderit,  ut  ex  industria
ii6


BOOK X.  V.  6-9

to  the  same  words,  the  power  of  oratory  is  restricted
to  a  narrower  scope,  so  that  when  a  thing  has  once
been  said,  it  is  impossible  to  say  anything  else  on
the  same  theme.  Why,  even  if  it  be  granted  that
no  new  expression  we  discover  can  be  better  than
or  even  equal  to  the  old,  it  may,  at  any  rate,  be
a  good  second.  Do  we  not  often  speak  twice,  or  7
even  more  frequently,  on  the  same  subject,  some-
times even  to  the  extent  of  a  number  of  sentences
in  succession  ?  It  will  scarce  be  asserted  that  we
must  not  match  ourselves  against  others  when
we  are  permitted  to  match  ourselves  against  our-
selves. For  if  there  were  only  one  way  in  which
anything  could  be  satisfactorily  expressed,  we
should  be  justified  in  thinking  that  the  path  to
success  had  been  sealed  to  us  by  our  predecessors.
But,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  the  methods  of  expression
still  left  us  are  innumerable,  and  many  roads  lead
us  to  the  same  goal.  Brevity  and  copiousness  each  8
have  their  own  peculiar  grace,  the  merits  of  meta-
phor are  one  thing  and  of  literalness  another,  and,
while  direct  expression  is  most  effective  in  one  case,
in  another  the  best  result  is  gained  by  a  use  of
figures.  Further,  the  exercise  is  valuable  in  virtue
of  its  difficulty  ;  and  again,  there  is  no  better  way  of
acquiring  a  thorough  understanding  of  the  greatest
authors.  For,  instead  of  hurriedly  running  a  careless
eye  over  their  writings,  we  handle  each  separate
phrase  and  are  forced  to  give  it  close  examination,
and  we  come  to  realise  the  greatness  of  their  excel-
lence from  the  very  fact  that  we  cannot  imitate
them.

Nor  is  it  only the paraphrase  of  the  works of  9
others  that  we  shall  find  of  advantage :  much  may

117


QUINTILIAN

sumamus  sententias  quasdam  easque  versemus  quam
numerosissime, velut eadem cera aliae aliaeque

10  formaeduci  solent.  Plurimum  autem  parari  facultatis
existimo  ex  simplicissima  quaque  materia.  Nam  ilia
multiplici  personarum,  causarum,  temporum,  loco-
rum,  dictorum^  factorum  diversitate  facile  delitescet
infirmitas,  tot  se  undique  rebus,  ex  quibus  aliquam

11  apprehendas,  offerentibus.  Illud  virtutis  indicium
est  fundere  quae  natura  contracta  sunt,  augere  parva,
varietatem  similibus,  voluptatem  expositis  dare  et
bene  dicere  multa  de  paucis.

In  hoc  optime  facient  infinitae  quaestiones,  quas
vocari  Ofaeis  diximus,  quibus  Cicero  iam  princeps  in

12  re  publica  exerceri  solebat.  His  confinis  est  de-
structio  et  confirmatio  sententiarum.  ■  Nam  cum
sit  sententia  decretum  quoddam  atque  praeceptumj
quod  de  re  idem  de  iudicio  rei  quaeri  potest.  Turn
loci  communes,  quos  etiam  scriptos  ab  oratoribus
scimus.  Nam  qui  haec  recta  tantum  et  in  nullos
flexus  recedentia  copiose  tractaverit, utique  in  illis


*  See  III.  V.  5  sqq.  *  Ad  AU.  ix.  iv.  1.

»  Sean.  i.  9-11  and  iv.  22.


1x8


BOOK X.  V.  9-ia

be  gained  from  paraphrasing  our  own  words  in  a
number  of  different  ways :  for  instance,  we  may
specially  select  certain  thoughts  and  recast  them
in  the  greatest  variety  of  forms,  just  as  a  sculptor
will  fashion  a  number  of  different  images  from  the
same  piece  of  wax.  But  it  is  the  simplest  subjects  10
which,  in  my  opinion,  will  serve  us  best  in  our
attempt  to  acquire  facility.  For  our  lack  of  talent
may  easily  shelter  itself  behind  the  complicated
mass  of  detail  presented  by  persons,  cases,  circum-
stances of  time  and  place,  words  and  deeds,  since
the  subjects  which  present  themselves  on  all  sides
are  so  many  that  it  will  always  be  possible  to  lay
hold  of  some  one  or  other.  True  merit  is  revealed  11
by  the  power  to  expand  what  is  naturally  com-
pressed, to  amplify  what  is  small,  to  lend  variety
to  sameness,  charm  to  the  commonplace,  and  to
say  a  quantity  of  good  things  about  a  very  limited
number  of  subjects.

For  this  purpose  indefinite  questioris,^  of  the  kind
we  call  theses,  will  be  found  of  the  utmost  service :
in  fact,  Cicero '  still  exercised  himself  upon  such
themes  after  he  had  become  the  leading  man  in
the  state.  Akin  to  these  are  the  proof  or  refuta-  12
tion  of  general  statements.  For  such  statements
are  a  kind  of  decree  or  rule,  and  Avhatever  problem
may  arise  from  the  thing,  may  equally  arise  from  the
decision  passed  upon  the  thing.  Then  there  are
commonplaces,^  which,  as  we  know,  have  often  been
written  by  orators  as  a  form  of  exercise.  The  man
who  has  practised  himself  in  giving  full  treatment
to  such  simple  and  uncomplicated  themes,  will
assuredly  find  his  fluency  increased  in  those  subjects
which  admit  of  varied  digression,  and  will  be  pre-

iig


QUINTILIAN

plures  excursus  recipientibus  magis  abundabit  eritque
in  omnes  causas  paratus. Omnes  enim  generalibus

13  quaestionibus  constant.  Nam  quid  interest,  Cor-
nelius tribunus  plebis  quod  codicem  legerit,  reus  sitj
an  quaeramus,  violeturne  maiestas,  si  magistratus
rogationem  suam  populo  ipse  recitaverit ;  Milo  Clo-
dium  rectene  occiderit,  veniat  in  iudicium,  an,
oporteatne  insidiatorem  interfici  vel  perniciosum  rei
publicae  civem,  etiamsi  non  insidietur ;  Cato  Mar-
ciam  honestene  tradiderit  Hortensio,  an,  conveniatne
res  talis  bono  viro  ? De  personis  iudicatur,  sed  de

14  rebus  contenditur.  Declamationes  vero,  quales  in
scholis  rhetorum  dicuntur,  si  modo  sunt  ad  veritatem
accommodatae  et  orationibus  similes,  non  tantum
dum  adolescit  profectus  sunt  utilissimae,  quia  in-
ventionem  et  dispositionem  pariter  exercent,  sed
etiam  cum  est  consummatus  ac  iam  in  foro  clarus.
Alitur  enim  atque  enitescit  velut  pabulo  laetiore
facundia  et  adsidua contentionum asperitate fati-

16  gata  renovatur. Quapropter  historiae  nonnunquam


*  See  IV.  iv.  8  ; v.  xiii.  26  ; vi,  v.  10  ; vii.  ill.  3,  35.

*  profectus,  lit.  "progress,"  abstract  for  concrete.

I20


BOOK X.  V.  12-15

pared  to  deal  with  any  case  that  may  confront  him,
since  all  eases  ultimately  turn  upon  general  ques-
tions. For  what  difference  is  there  between  the  13
special  case  where  Cornelius,^  the  tribune  of  the
people,  is  charged  with  reading  the  text  of  a  pro-
posed law,  and  the  general  question  whether  it  is
lese-majeste  for  a  magistrate  himself  to  read  the
law  which  he  proposes  to  the  people ;  what  does  it
matter  whether  we  have  to  decide  whether  Milo  was
justified  in  killing  Clodius,  or  whether  it  is  justifi-
able to  kill  a  man  who  has  set  an  ambush  for  his
slayer,  or  a  citizen  whose  existence  is  a  danger  to
the  state,  even  though  he  has  set  no  such  ambush  ?
What  difference  is  there  between  the  question
whether  it  was  an  honourable  act  on  the  part  of
Cato  to  make  over  Marcia  to  Hortensius,  or  whether
such  an  action  is  becoming  to  a  virtuous  man  ?  It  is
on  the  guilt  or  innocence  of  specific  persons  that
judgement  is  given,  but  it  is  on  general  principles
that  the  case  ultimately  rests.  As  for  declamations  14
of  the  kind  delivered  in  the  schools  of  the  rheto-
ricians, so  long  as  they  are  in  keeping  with  actual
life  and  resemble  speeches,  they  are  most  profitable
to  the  student,  not  merely  while  he  ^  is  still  immature,
for  the  reason  that  they  simultaneously  exercise  the
powers  both  of  invention  and  arrangement,  but  even
when  he  has  finished  his  education  and  acquired  a
reputation  in  the  courts.  For  they  provide  a  richer
diet  from  which  eloquence  derives  nourishment  and
brilliance  of  complexion,  and  at  the  same  time  afford
a  refreshing  variety  after  the  continuous  fatigues
of  forensic  disputes.  For  the  same  reason,  the  wealth  16
of  language  that  marks  the  historian  should  be  from
time  to  time  imported  into  portions  of  our  written


▼OL.  IV.


121


QUINTILIAN

ubertas  in  aliqua  exercendi  stili  parte  ponenda  et
dialogorum  libertate  gestiendum.  Ne  carmine  qui-
dem  ludere  contrarium  fuerit,  sicut  athletae,  remissa
quibusdam  temporibus  ciborum  atque  exercitationum
certa  necessitate,  otio  et  iucundioribus  epulis  refi-

16  ciuntur.  Ideoque  mihi  videtur  M.  TuUius  tantum
intulisse  eloquentiae  lumen,  quod  in  hos  quoque
studiorum  secessus  excurrit.  Nam  si  nobis  sola
materia  fuerit  ex  litibus,  necesse  est  deteratur
fulgor  et  durescat  articulus  et  ijjse  ille  macro  ingenii
cotidiana  pugna  retundatur.

17  Sed  quemadmodum  forensibus  certaminibus  exer-
citatos  et  quasi  militantes  reficit  ac  reparat  haec
velut  sagina  dicendi,  sic  adolescentes  non  debent
nimium  in  falsa  rerum  imagine  detineri  et  inanibus
simulacris  usque  adeo,  ut  difficilis  ab  his  digressus
sit,  assuescere,^  ne  ab  ilia,  in  qua  prope  con-
senuerunt,  umbra vera discrimina velut quendam

18  solem  reformident.  Quod  accidisse  etiam  M.  Porcio
Latroni,  qui  primus  clari  nominis  professor  fuit,
traditur,  ut,  cum  ei  summam  in  9cholis  opinionem
obtinenti  causa  in  foro  esset  oranda,  impense  pe-
tierit,  uti  subsellia  in  basilicam  transferrentur.  Ita
illi caelum novum fuit, ut  omnis  eius eloquentia

*  assuescere,  Zumpt :  assuefacere,  MSS.
132


BOOK X.  V.  15-18

exercises,  and  we  should  indulge  in  the  easy  free-
dom of  dialogue.  Nay,  it  may  even  be  advantageous
to  amuse  ourselves  with  the  writing  of  verse,  just  as
athletes  occasionally  drop  the  severe  regime  of  diet
and  exercise  to  which  they  are  subjected  and  refresh
themselves  by  taking  a  rest  and  indulging  in  more
dainty  and  agreeable  viands.  Indeed,  in  my  opinion,  16
one  of  the  reasons  why  Cicero  was  enabled  to  shed
such  glory  upon  the  art  of  speaking  is  to  be  found
in  his  excursions  to  such  bypaths  of  study.  For  if
all  our  material  was  drawn  solely  from  actions  at
law,  our  eloquence  must  needs  lose  its  gloss,  our
limbs  grow  stiff,  and  the  keen  edge  of  the  intellect
be  blunted  by  its  daily  combats.

But  although  those  who  find  their  practice  in  the  17
contests  of  forensic  warfare  derive  fresh  strength
and  repair  their  forces  by  means  of  this  rich  fare  of
eloquence,  the  young  should  not  be  kept  too  long  at
these  false  semblances  of  reality,  nor  should  they  be
allowed  to  become  so  familiar  with  these  empty
shadows  that  it  is  difficult  for  them  to  leave  them  :
otherwise  there  is  always  the  danger  that,  owing  to
the  seclusion  in  which  they  have  almost  grown
old,  they  will  shrink  in  terror  from  the  real  perils
of  public  life,  like  men  dazzled  by  the  unfamiliar
sunlight.  Indeed  it  is  recorded  that  this  fate  18
actually  befell  Marcus  Porcius  Latro,  the  first  pro-
fessor of  rhetoric  to  make  a  name  for  himself ;  for
when,  at  the  height  of  his  fame  in  the  schools,  he  was
called  upon  to  plead  a  case  in  the  forum,  he  put
forward  the  most  earnest  request  that  the  court
should  be  transferred  to  some  public  hall.  He  was
so  unaccustomed  to  speak  in  the  open  air  that  all  his
eloquence  seemed  to  reside  within  the  compass  of  a

123


QUINTILIAN

19  contineri  tecto  ac  parietibus  videretur.  Quare
iuvenis,  qui  rationem  inveniendi  eloquendique  a
praeceptoribus  diligenter  acceperit  (quod  iion  est
infiniti  operis,  si  docere  sciant  et  velint),  exerci-
tationem  quoque  modicam  fueritconsecutuSj  oratorem
sibi  aliquem,  quod  apud  maiores  fieri  solebat^  deligat,
quern  sequatur,  quern  imitetur;  iudiciis  intersit
quam plurimis et sit certaminis, cui destinatur,

20  frequens  spectator.  Turn  causas  vel  easdem,  quas
agi  audierit,  stilo  et  ipse  eomponat,  vel  etiam  alias
veras  modo  et  utrinque  tractet,  et,  quod  in  gla-
diatoribus  fieri  videmus,  decretoriis  exerceatur,  ut
fecisse  Brutum  diximus  pro  Milone.  Melius  hoc
quam  rescribere  veteribus  orationibus,  ut  fecit
Cestius  contra  Ciceronis  actionem  habitam  pro
eodem,  cum  alteram  partem  satis  nosse  non  posset
ex  sola  defensione.

21  Citius  autem  idoneus  erit  iuvenis,  quern  praeceptor
coegerit  in  declamando  quam  simillimum  esse  veritati
et  per  totas  ire  materias,  quarum  nunc  facillima  et
maxime  favorabilia  decerpunt.  Obstant  huic,  quod
secundo  loco  posui,  fere  turba  discipulorum  et  con-
suetudo  classium  certis  diebus  audiendarum,  nonnihil

*  See  III.  vi.  93  ;  x.  i.  23. *  I.e.  "per  totas  ice  materias."
"4


BOOK X.  V.  18-21

roof  and  four  walls.  For  this  reason  a  young  man  19
who  has  acquired  a  thorough  knowledge  from  his
instructors  of  the  methods  of  invention  and  style
(which  is  not  by  any  means  an  endless  task,  if  those
instructors  have  the  knowledge  and  the  will  to
teach),  and  who  has  also  managed  to  obtain  a
reasonable  amount  of  practice  in  the  art,  should
follow  the  custom  in  vogue  with  our  ancestors,  and
select  some  one  orator  to  follow  and  imitate.  He
should  attend  as  many  trials  as  possible  and  be  a
frequent  spectator  of  the  conflicts  in  which  he  is
destined  to  take  part.  Next  he  should  write  out  20
speeches  of  his  own  dealing  either  with  the  cases
which  he  has  actually  heard  pleaded  or  with  others,
provided  always  they  be  actual  cases,  and  should
argue  them  from  both  sides,  training  himself  with
the  real  weapons  of  his  warfare,  just  as,  gladiators  do
or  as  Brutus  did  in  that  speech  in  defence  of  Milo
which  I  have  already  mentioned.^  This  is  better
than  writing  replies  to  old  speeches,  as  Cestius  did
to  Cicero's  defence  of  Milo  in  spite  of  the  fact  that,
his  knowledge  being  confined  to  what  was  said  for
the  defence,  he  could  not  have  possessed  sufficient
acquaintance  with  the  other  side  of  the  case.

The  young  man,  however,  whom  his  instructor  has  21
compelled  to  be  as  realistic  as  possible  in  declamation,
and  to  deal  with  every  class  of  subject,  instead  of
merely  selecting  the  easiest  and  most  attractive  cases,
as  is  done  at  present,  will  thus  qualify  himself  much
more  rapidly  for  actual  forensic  practice.  Under  exist-
ing circumstances  the  practice  of  the  principle  -  which
I  mentioned  second  is,  as  a  rule,  hampered  by  the
large  size  of  the  classes  and  the  practice  of  allotting
certain  days  for  recitation,  to  which  must  be  added

"5


QUINTILIAN

etiam  persuasio  patrum  numerantium  [jotius  decla-

22  mationes  quam  aestimantium.  Sed,  quod  dixi  primo,
ut  arbitror,  libro,  nee  ille  se  bonus  praeceptor  maiore
numero  quam  sustinere  possit  onerabit  et  inanem
loquacitatem  recidet,  ut  omnia  quae  sunt  in  con-
troversial non,  ut  quidem  volunt,  quae  in  rerum
natura,  dicantur;  et  vel  longiore  potius  dierum
spatio laxabit dicendi necessitatem vel materias

23  dividere  permittet.  Una  enim  diligenter  effecta
plus  proderit  quam  plures  inchoatae  et  quasi  de-
gustatae.  Propter  quod  accidit,  ut  nee  suo  loco
quidque  ponatur,  nee  ilia  quae  prima  sunt  servent
suam  legem,  iuvenibus  flosculos  omnium  partium  in
ca  quae  sunt  dicturi  congerentibus ;  quo  fit,  ut
timentes,  ne  sequentia  perdant,  priora  confundant.

VI.  Proxima  stilo  cogitatio  est,  quae  et  ipsa  vires
ab  hoc  accipit,  estque  inter  scribendi  laborem  ex-
temporalemque  fortunam  media  quaedam  et  nescio
an  usus  frequentissimi.  Nam  scribere  non  ubique
nee  semper  possumus ;  cogitationi  temporis  ac  loci
plurimum  est. Haec  paucis  admodum  horis  magnas

*  I.  ii.  15.
126


BOOK X.  V.  ai-Ti.  I

the  contributory  circumstance  that  the  boys'  parents
are  more  interested  in  the  number  of  their  sons'
recitations  than  their  quality.  But,  as  I  think  I  said  22
in  the  first  book,i  the  really  good  teacher  will  not
burden  himself  with  a  larger  number  of  pupils  than
he  can  manage,  and  will  prune  any  tendency  to
excessive  loquacity,  limiting  their  remarks  to  the
actual  points  involved  by  the  subject  of  the  declama-
tion and  forbidding  them  to  range,  as  some  would
have  them  do,  over  every  subject  in  heaven  and
earth :  further,  he  will  either  extend  the  period
within  which  he  insists  on  their  speaking,  or  will
permit  them  to  divide  their  themes  into  several
portions.  The  thorough  treatment  of  one  theme  23
will  be  more  profitable  than  the  sketchy  and  super-
ficial treatment  of  a  number  of  subjects.  For  the
latter  practice  has  the  result  that  nothing  is  put  in
its  proper  place  and  that  the  opening  of  the  decla-
mation exceeds  all  reasonable  bounds,  since  the
young  orator  crams  all  the  flowers  of  eloquence
which  belong  to  all  the  different  portions  of  the
theme  into  that  portion  which  he  has  to  deliver,
and  fearing  to  lose  what  should  naturally  come  later,
introduces  wild  confusion  into  the  earlier  portions
of  his  speech.

VI.  Having  dealt  with  writing,  the  next  point
which  claims  our  attention  is  premeditation,  which
itself  derives  force  from  the  practice  of  writing  and
forms  an  intermediate  stage  between  the  labours  of
the  pen  and  the  more  precarious  fortunes  of  impro-
visation ;  indeed  I  am  not  sure  that  it  is  not  more
frequently  of  use  than  either.  For  there  are  places
and  occasions  where  writing  is  impossible,  while  both
are  available  in  abundance  for  premeditation. For

127


QUINTILIAN

etiam  causas  complectitur ;  haec,  quotiens  inter-
missus  est  somnus,  ipsis  noctis  tenebris  adiuvatur ;
haec  inter  medios  rerum  actus  aliquid  invenit  vacui

2  nee  otium  patitur.  Neque  vero  rerum  ordinem
modo,  quod  ipsum  satis  erat,  intra  se  ipsa  disponit,
sed  verba  etiam  copulat  totamque  ita  contexit
orationem,  ut  ei  nihil  praeter  manum  desit.  Nam
memoriae  quoque  plerumque  inhaerent  fidelius,
quae  nulla  scribendi  securitate  laxantur.

Sed  ne  ad  hanc  quidem  vim  cogitandi  perveniri

3  potest  aut  subito  aut  cito.  Nam  primum  facienda
multo  stilo  forma  est,  quae  nos  etiam  cogitantes
sequatur ;  turn  adsumendus  usus  paulatim,  ut  pauca
primum  complectamur  animo,  quae  reddi  fideliter
possint ;  mox  per  incrementa  tam  modica,  ut  onerari
se  labor  ille  non  sentiat,  augenda  vis  et  exercitatione
multa  continenda  est,  quae  quidem  maxima  ex  parte
memoria constat. Ideoque aliqua mihi in ilium

4  locum  differenda  sunt.  Eo  tandem  ^  pervenit,  ut  is,
cui  non refragetur ingenium, acri studio adiutus

*  tandem,  Madvig :  tamen,  MSS.

1  XI.  ii.  1  sqq.
128


BOOK X.  VI. 1-4

but  a  few  hours'  thought  will  suffice  to  cover  all  the
points  even  of  cases  of  importance ;  if  we  wake  at
night,  the  veiy  darkness  will  assist  us,  while  even  in
the  midst  of  legal  proceedings  our  mind  will  find
some  vacant  space  for  meditation,  and  will  refuse  to
remain  inactive.  Again,  this  practice  will  not  merely  2
secure  the  proper  arrangement  of  our  matter  without
any  recourse  to  writing,  which  in  itself  is  no  small
achievement,  but  will  also  set  the  words  which  we
are  going  to  use  in  their  proper  order,  and  bring  the
general  texture  of  our  speech  to  such  a  stage  of
completion  that  nothing  further  is  required  beyond
the  finishing  touches.  And  as  a  rule  the  memory  is
more  retentive  of  thoughts  when  the  attention  has
not  been  relaxed  by  the  fancied  security  which
results  from  committing  them  to  writing.

But  the  concentration  which  this  requires  cannot
be  attained  in  a  moment  or  even  quickly.  For,  in  3
the  first  place,  we  must  write  much  before  we  can
form  that  ideal  of  style  which  must  always  be
present  to  our  minds  even  when  engaged  in  pre-
meditation. Secondly,  we  must  gradually  acquire
the  habit  of  thought :  to  begin  with,  we  shall  con-
tent ourselves  with  covering  but  a  few  details,  which
our  minds  are  capable  of  reproducing  with  accuracy ;
then  by  advances  so  gradual  that  our  labour  is  not
sensibly  increased  we  must  develop  our  powers  and
confirm  them  by  frequent  practice,  a  task  in  which
the  most  important  part  is  played  by  the  memory.
For  this  reason  I  must  postpone  some  of  my  remarks  4
to  the  portion  of  this  work  reserved  for  the  treat-
ment of  that  topic. ^  At  length,  however,  our  powers
will  have  developed  so  far  that  the  man  who  is  not
hampered  by  lack  of  natural  ability  will  by  dint  of

129


QUINTILIAN

tantum  consequatur,  ut  ei  tarn  quae  cogitarit  quam
quae  scripserit  atque  edidicerit  in  dicendo  fidem
servent.  Cicero  certe  Graecorum  Metrodorum
Scepsium  et  Einpylum  Rhodium  nostrorumque
Hortensium  tradidit,  quae  cogitaverant,  ad  verbum
in  agendo  retulisse.
6  Sed  si  forte  aliquis  inter  dicendum  efFulserit
extemporalis  color,  non  superstitiose  cogitatis  de-
mum  est  inhaerendum.  Neque  enim  tantum  habent
curae,  ut  non  sit  dandus  et  fortunae  locus,  cum  saepe
etiam  scriptis  ea  quae  subito  nata  sunt  inserantur.
Ideoque  totum  hoc  exercitationis  genus  ita  institu-
endum  est,  ut  et  digredi  ex  eo  et  redire  in  id  facile

6  possimus.  Nam  ut  primum  est  domo  adferre  paratam
dicendi  copiam  et  certam,  ita  refutare  temporis
munera  longe  stultissimum  est.  Quare  cogitatio  in
hoc  praeparetur,  ut  nos  fortuna  decipere  non  possit,
adiuvare  possit.  Id  autem  fiet  memoriae  viribus,  ut
ilia,  quae  eomplexi  animo  sumus,  fluant  secura,  non
sollicitos  et  respicientes  et  una  spe  suspensos  recor-
dationis  non  sinant  providere.  Alioqui  vel  extem-
poralem  temeritatem  malo  quam  male  cohaerentem

7  cogitationem.  Peius  enim  quaeritur  retrorsus,  quia,
dum ilia desideramus, ab aliis avertimur, et ex

*  A philosopher  of  the  Academic school, contemporary
with  Cicero,  cp.  de  Or.  ii.  360.

*  Empylus  is  not  mentioned  elsewhere.
»  Cp.  Brut.  301.

130


BOOK X.  VI.  4-7

persistent  study  be  enabled,  when  it  comes  to  speak-
ing, to  rely  no  less  on  what  he  has  thought  out  than
what  he  has  written  out  and  learnt  by  heart.  At
any  rate,  Cicero  records  that  Metrodorus  of  Scepsis,^
Empylus  of  Rhodes,^  and  our  own  Hortensius  ^  were
able  to  reproduce  what  they  had  thought  out  word
for  word  when  it  came  to  actual  pleading.

If,  however,  some  brilliant  improvisation  should  6
occur  to  us  while  speaking,  we  must  not  cling  super-
stitiously  to  our  premeditated  scheme.  For  pre-
meditation is  not  so  accurate  as  to  leave  no  room
for  happy  inspiration :  even  when  writing  we  often
insert  thoughts  which  occur  to  us  on  the  spur  of  the
moment.  Consequently  this  form  of  preparation
must  be  conceived  on  such  lines  that  we  shall  find
no  difficulty  either  in  departing  from  it  or  returning
to  it  at  will.  For,  although  it  is  essential  to  bring  6
with  us  into  court  a  supply  of  eloquence  which  has
been  prepared  in  advance  in  the  study  and  on  which
we  can  confidently  rely,  there  is  no  greater  folly
than  the  rejection  of  the  gifts  of  the  moment.
Therefore  our  premeditation  should  be  such  that
fortune  may  never  be  able  to  fool  us,  but  may,  on
the  contrary,  be  able  to  assist  us.  This  end  will  be
obtained  by  developing  the  power  of  memory  so
that  our  conceptions  may  flow  from  us  without  fear
of  disaster,  and  that  we  may  be  enabled  to  look
ahead  without  anxious  backward  glances  or  the
feeling  that  we  are  absolutely  dependent  on  what
we  can  call  to  mind.  Otherwise  I  prefer  the  rash-
ness of  improvisation  to  the  coherence  given  by
premeditation.  For  such  backward  glances  place  us  7
at  a  disadvantage,  because  our  search  for  our  pre-
meditated ideas  makes  us  miss  others,  and  we  draw

»3»


QUINTILIAN

memoria  potius  res  petimus  quam  ex  materia.  Plura
sunt  autem,  si  utrimque  ^  quaerendum  est,  quae
inveniri  possunt  quam  quae  inventa  sunt.

Vll.  Maximus  vero  studiorum  fructus  est  et  velut
praemium  quoddam^  amplissimum  longi  laboris  ex
tempore  dicendi  facultas,  quam  qui  non  erit  con-
secutus,  mea  quidem  sententia  civilibus  officiis  renun-
tiabit  et  solam  scribendi  facultatem  potius  ad  alia
opera  convertet.  Vix  enim  bonae  fidei  viro  convenit
auxilium  in  publicum  polliceri,  quod  praesentissimis
quibusque  periculis  desit,  intrare  ^  portum  ad  quem
navis  accedere  nisi  lenibus  ventis  vecta  non  possit,

2  siquidem  innumerabiles  accidunt  subitae  necessitates
vel  apud  magistratus  vel  repraesentatis  iudiciis  con-
tinue agendi.  Quarum  si  qua,  non  dico  cuicunque
innocentium  civium  sed  amicorum  ac  propinquorum
alicui  evenerit,  stabitne  mutus  et  salutarem  pe-
tentibus  vocem  statimque,  si  non  succurratur,  peri-
turis,  moras  et  secessum  et  silentium  quaeret,  dum
ilia  verba  fabricentur  et  memoriae  insidant  et  vox

3  ac  latus  praeparetur  ?  Quae  vero  patitur  hoc  ratio,*
ut  quisquam  possit  orator  omittere  aliquando  casus  ?
Quid,  cum  adversario  respondendum  erit,  fiet  ?  Nam
saepe  ea,  quae  opinati  sumus  et  contra  quae  scrip-

*  utrimque,  Bonnell :  utrumque,  MSS.

*  praemium  quoddam,  cod.  Earl.  4995  :  primus  quid,  B,
'  intrare  portum,  MSS :  instar  portus,  Meister.

*  ratio,  cod.  Harl.  4995:  oratio,  B.  possit,  Frotseher,
Bonnell :  sit,  MSS.  omittere,  Bonnell :  mittere,  B.

132


I


r


BOOK X.  VI.  7-vii.  3


our  matter  from  our  memory  rather  than  from  the
subject  on  which  we  are  speaking.  And  even  if  we
are  to  rely  on  our  memory  and  our  subject  alike,
there  are  more  things  that  may  be  discovered  than
ever  yet  have  been.

VII,  But  the  crown  of  all  our  study  and  the
highest  reward  of  our  long  labours  is  the  power  of
improvisation.  The  man  who  fails  to  acquire  this
had  better,  in  my  opinion,  abandon  the  task  of
advocacy  and  devote  his  powers  of  writing  to  other
branches  of  literature.  For  it  is  scarcely  decent  for
an  honourable  man  to  promise  assistance  to  the
public  at  large  which  he  may  be  unable  to  provide  in
the  most  serious  emergencies,  or  to  attempt  to  enter
a  harbour  which  his  ship  cannot  hope  to  make  save
when  sailing  before  a  gentle  breeze.  For  there  are  2
countless  occasions  when  the  sudden  necessity  may  be
imposed  upon  him  of  speaking  without  preparation
before  the  magistrates  or  in  a  trial  which  comes  on
unexpectedly.  And  if  any  such  sudden  emergency
befalls,  I  will  not  say  any  innocent  citizen,  but  some
one  of  the  orator's  friends  or  connexions,  is  he  to
stand  tongue-tied  and,  in  answer  to  those  who  seek
salvation  in  his  eloquence  and  are  doomed,  unless
they  secure  assistance,  to  ask  for  delay  of  proceed-
iiigs  and  time  for  silent  and  secluded  study,  till  such
moment  as  he  can  piece  together  the  words  that  fail
him,  commit  them  to  memory  and  prepare  his  voice
and  lungs  for  the  effort }  What  theory  of  the  duties  3
of  an  orator  is  there  which  permits  him  to  ignore
such  sudden  issues?  What  will  happen  when  he
has  to  reply  to  his  opponent?  For  often  the  ex-
pected arguments  to  which  we  have  written  a  reply
fail  us  and  the  whole  aspect  of  the  case  undergoes

133


QUINTILIAN

simus,  fallunt,  ac  tota  subito  causa  mutatur ;  atque
ut  gubernatori  ad  incursus  tempestatum,  sic  agenti

4  ad  varietatem  causarum  ratio  mutando  est.  Quid
porro  multus  stilus  et  adsidua  lectio  et  longa  studi-
orum  aetas  facit,  si  manet  eadem  quae  fuit  incipien-
tibus  difficultas  ?  Perisse  profecto  confitendum  est
praeteritum  laborem,  cui  semper  idem  laborandum
est.  Neque  ego  hoc  ago  ut  ex  tempore  dicere
malit,  sed  ut  possit.  Id  autem  maxime  hoc  modo
consequemur,

5  Nota  sit  primum  dicendi  via.  Neque  enim  prius
contingere  cursus  potest  quam  scierimus,  quo  sit  et
qua  perveniendum.  Nee  satis  est  non  ignorare  quae
sunt  causarum  iudicialium  partes,  aut  quaestionum
ordinem  recte  disponere,  quanquam  ista  sunt  prae-
cipua,  sed  quid  quoque  loco  primum  sit  ac  secundum
et  deinceps ;  quae  ita  sunt  natura  copulata,  ut
mutari  aut  intervelli  sine confusione non possint.

6  Quisquis  autem  via  dicet,  ducetur  ^  ante  omnia  rerum
ipsa  serie  velut  duce ;  propter  quod  homines  etiam
modice  exercitati  facillime  tenorem  in  narrationibus
servant.  Deinde,  quid  quoque  loco  quaerant,  scient.
nee  circumspectabunt  nee  ofFerentibus  se  aliunde
sensibus turbabuutur nee confundent ex diversis

*  ducetur  dicet,  Eussner.

^  See  III.  ii.  1.
134


BOOK X.  VII.  3-6

a  sudden  change ;  consequently  the  variation  to
which  cases  are  liable  makes  it  as  necessary  for  us
to  change  our  methods  as  it  is  for  a  pilot  to  change
his  course  before  the  oncoming  storm.  Again,  what  4
use  is  much  writing,  assiduous  reading  and  long
vears  of  study,  if  the  difficulty  is  to  remain  as  great
as  it  was  in  the  beginning  ?  The  man  who  is  always
faced  with  the  same  labour  can  only  confess  that  his
past  labour  has  been  spent  in  vain.  I  do  not  ask
him  to  prefer  to  speak  extempore,  but  merely  that
he  should  be  able  to  do  so.  And  this  capacity  is
best  acquired  by  the  following  method.

In  the  first  place,  we  must  note  the  direction  which  5
tlie  argument  is  likely  to  take,  since  we  cannot  run
our  race  unless  we  know  the  goal  and  the  course.
It  is  not  enough  to  know  what  are  the  parts  ^  into
which  forensic  pleadings  are  divided  or  the  prin-
ciples determining  the  order  of  the  various  questions,
important  though  these  points  are.  We  must  realise
what  should  come  first,  second,  and  so  on,  in  the
several  parts ;  for  these  points  are  so  closely  linked
together  by  the  very  nature  of  things  that  they
cannot  be  separated,  nor  their  order  changed,  with-
out giving  rise  to  confusion.  The  orator,  who  speaks  6
methodically,  will  above  all  take  the  actual  sequence
of  the  various  points  as  his  guide,  and  it  is  for  this
reason  that  even  but  moderately  trained  speakers
find  it  easiest  to  keep  the  natural  order  in  the  state-
vient  of  facts.  Secondly,  the  orator  must  know
what  to  look  for  in  each  portion  of  his  case :  he
must  not  beat  about  the  bush  or  allow  himself  to  be
thrown  off  the  track  by  thoughts  which  suggest
themselves  from  irrelevant  quarters,  or  produce  a
speech  which  is  a  confused  mass  of  incongruities,

135


QUINTILIAN

orationem  velut  salientes  hue  illuc  nee  usquam  in-

7  sistentes.  Postremo  habebunt  modum  et  finem,
qui  esse  eitra  divisionem  nullus  potest.  Expletis
pro  facultate  omnibus  quae  proposuerint,  pervenisse
se  ad  ultimum  sentient.

Et  haec  quidem  ex  arte,  ilia  vero  ex  studio :  ut
copiam  sermonis  optimi,  quemadmodum  praeceptum
est,  comparemus :  multo  ac  fideli  stilo  sic  formetur
oratio,  ut  scriptorum  colorem  etiam  quae  subito
effusa sint reddant, ut, cum niulta scripserimus,

8  etiam  multa  dicamus.  Nam  consuetude  et  exerci-
tatio  facilitatem  maxime  parit;  quae  si  paulum
intermissa  fuerit,  non  velocitas  ilia  modo  tardatur,
sed  ipsum  os  ^  coit  atque  concurrit.  Quanquam  enim
opus  est  naturali  quadam  mobilitate  animi  ut,  dura
proxima  dicimus,  struere  ulteriora  possimus  semper-
que nostram vocem provisa et formata cogitatio

9  excipiat,  vix  tamen  aut  natura  aut  ratio  in  tarn
multiplex  officium  diducere  animum  queat,  ut  in-
ventioni,  dispositioni,  elocutioni,  ordini  rerum  ver-
borumque,  turn  iis,  quae  dicit,  quae  subiuneturus  est,
quae  ultra  spectanda  sunt,  adhibita  vocis,  pronuntia-

*  OS,  added  by  Halm.


BOOK X.  VII.  6-9

owing  to  his  habit  of  leaping  this  way  and  that,  and
never  sticking  to  any  one  point.  Finally,  he  must  7
confine  himself  to  certain  definite  bounds,  and  for
this  division  is  absolutely  necessary.  When  to  the
best  of  his  ability  he  has  dealt  fully  with  all  the
points  which  he  has  advanced,  he  will  know  that  he
has  reached  his  goal.

The  precepts  just  given  are  dependent  on  theory.
Those  to  which  I  now  come  depend  on  individual
study.  We  must  acquire  a  store  of  the  best  words
and  phrases  on  lines  that  I  have  already  laid  down,
while  our  style  must  be  formed  by  continuous  and
conscientious  practice  in  writing,  so  that  even  our
improvisations  may  reproduce  the  tone  of  our  writing,
and  after  writing  much,  we  must  give  ourselves
frequent  practice  in  speaking.  For  facility  is  mainly  8
the  result  of  habit  and  exercise  and,  if  it  be
lost  only  for  a  brief  time,  the  result  will  be
not  merely  that  we  fall  short  of  the  requisite
rapidity,  but  that  our  lips  will  become  clogged
and  slow  to  open.  For  although  we  need  to
possess  a  certain  natural  nimbleness  of  mind  to
enable  us,  while  we  are  saying  what  the  instant
demands,  to  build  up  what  is  to  follow  and  to
secure  that  there  will  always  be  some  thouglit  formed
and  conceived  in  advance  readv  to  serve  our  voice,
none  the  less,  it  is  scarcely  possible  either  for  natural  9
gifts  or  for  methodic  art  to  enable  the  mind  to
grapple  simultaneously  with  such  manifold  duties,
and  to  be  equal  at  one  and  the  same  time  to  the
tasks  of  invention,  arrangement,  and  style,  together
with  what  we  are  uttering  at  the  moment,  what  we
have  got  to  say  next  and  what  we  have  to  look  to
still  further  on,  not to  mention the fact  that  it

137


QUINTILIAN

10  tionis,  gestus  observatione,  una  sufficiat.  Longe
enim  praecedat  oportet  intentio  ac  prae  se  res  agat,
quantumque  dicendo  consumitur,  tantum  ex  ultimo
prorogetur;  ut,  donee  perveniamus  ad  finem,  non
minus  prospectu  procedamus  quam  gradu,  si  non
intersistentes  ofFensantesque  brevia  ilia  atque  con-
cisa  singultantium  mode  eiecturi  sumus.

11  Est  igitur  usus  quidam  irrationalis,  quem  Graeci
aXnyov  rpi^rji/  vocant,  qua  manus  in  scribendo  de-
currit,  qua  oculi  totos  simul  in  lectione  versus  flexus-
que  eorum  et  transitus  intuentur,  et  ante  sequentia
vident  quam  priora  dixerunt.  Quo  constant  miracula
ilia  in  scenis  pilariorura  ac  ventilatorum,  ut  ea  quae
emiserint  ultro  venire  in  manus  credas  et  qua  iuben-

12  tur  decurrere.  Sed  hie  usus  ita  proderit,  si  ea  de
qua  locuti  sumus  ars  antecesserit,  ut  ipsum  illud,
quod  in  se  rationem  non  habet,  in  ratione  versetur.
Nam  mihi  ne  dicere quidem  videtur  nisi qui  dis-

13  posite,  ornate,  copiose  dicit,  sed  tumultuari.  Nee
fortuiti  sermonis  contextum  mirabor  unquam,  quem
iui'gantibus  etiam  mulierculis  superfluere  video,  cum

^  §§  5-7.
138


BOOK X.  VII.  9-13

is  necessary  all  the  time  to  give  close  attention  to
voice,  delivery  and  gesture.  For  our  mental  activities  10
must  range  far  ahead  and  pursue  the  ideas  which
are  still  in  front,  and  in  proportion  as  the  speaker
pays  out  what  he  has  in  hand,  he  must  make  advances
to  himself  from  his  reserve  funds,  in  order  that,  until
we  reach  our  conclusion,  our  mind's  eye  may  urge
its  gaze  forward,  keeping  time  with  our  advance :
otherwise  we  shall  halt  and  stumble,  and  pour  forth
short  and  broken  phrases,  like  persons  who  can  only
gasp  out  what  they  have  to  say.

There  is,  therefore,  a  certain  mechanical  knack,  11
which  the  Greeks  call  oXoyos  rpifir],  which  enables
the  hand  to  go  on  scribbling,  while  the  eye  takes
in  whole  lines  at  once  as  it  reads,  observes  the  in-
tonations and  the  stops,  and  sees  what  is  coming
before  the  reader  has  articulated  to  himself  what
precedes.  It  is  a  similar  knack  which  makes  possible
those  miraculous  tricks  which  we  see  jugglers  and
masters  of  sleight  of  hand  perform  upon  the  stage,
in  such  a  manner  that  the  spectator  can  scarcely
help  believing  that  the  objects  which  they  throw
into  the  air  come  to  hand  of  their  own  accord,  and
run  where  they  are  bidden.  But  this  knack  will  12
only  be  of  real  service  if  it  be  preceded  by  the  art
of  which  we  have  spoken,^  so  that  what  is  irrational
in  itself  will  nevertheless  be  founded  on  reason.  For
unless  a  man  speaks  in  an  orderly,  ornate  and  fluent
manner,  I  refuse  to  dignify  his  utterance  with  the
name  of  speech,  but  consider  it  the  merest  rant.
Nor  again  shall  I  ever  be  induced  to  admire  a  con-  13
tinuous  flow  of  random  talk,  such  as  I  note  streams  in
torrents  even  from  the  lips  of  women  when  they
quarrel,  although,  if  a  speaker is swept  away  by

139


QUINTILIAN

eo  quod,  si  calor  ac  spiritus  tulit,  frequenter  accidit
ut successum extemporalem consequi cura non

14  possit.  Deum  tunc  adfuisse,  cum  id  evenisset,
veteres  oratores,  ut  Cicero,  dictitabant.  Sed  ratio
manifesta  est.  Nam  bene  concepti  adfectus  et
recentes  rerum  imagines  continue  impetu  feruntur,
quae  nonnunquam  mora  stili  refrigescunt  et  dilatae
non  revertuntur.  Utique  vero,  cum  infelix  ilia
verborum  cavillatio  accessit  et  cursus  ad  singula
vestigia  restitit,  non  potest  ferri  contorta  vis,  sed,
ut  optime  vocum  singularum  cedat  electio,  non  con-
tinua,  sed  composita  est.

15  Quare  capiendae  sunt  illae,  de  quibus  dixi,  rerum
imagines,  quas  vocari  <^avTacrias  indicavimus,  omnia-
que,  de  quibus  dicturi  erimus,  personae,  quaestiones,
spes,  metus  habenda  in  oculis,  in  adfectus  recipienda.
Pectus  est  enim,  quod  disertos  facit,  et  vis  mentis.
Ideoque  imperitis  quoque,  si  modo  sint  aliquo  adfectu

16  concitati,  verba  non  desunt.  Tum  intendendus
animus,  non  in  aliquam  rem  unam,  sed  in  plures
simul  continuas ;  ut,  si  per  aliquam  rectam  viam
mittamus  oculos,  simul  omnia  quae  sunt  in  ea
circaque  intuemur,  non  ultimum  tantum  videmus
sed  usque  ad  ultimum.  Addit  ad  dicendum  etiam
pudor  stimulos,^  mirumque  videri  potest,  quod,  cum

*  after  habet  cod.  Monac.  gives  et  dicendorum  exspectata
laus.


^  No  such  saying  is  found  in  Cicero's  extant  works.
«  VI.  ii.  29.


140


BOOK X.  vii.  13-16

warmth  of  feeling  and  genuine  inspiration,  it  fre-
quently happens  that  he  attains  a  success  from  im-
provisation which  would  have  been  beyond  the  reach  of
the  most  careful  preparation.  When  this  occurred,  the  14
old  orators,  such  as  Cicero,^  used  to  say  that  some  god
had  inspired  the  speaker.  But  the  reason  is  obvious.
For  profound  emotion  and  vivid  imagination  sweep
on  with  unbroken  force,  whereas,  if  retarded  by  the
slowness  of  the  pen,  they  are  liable  to  grow  cold  and,
if  put  off  for  the  moment,  may  never  return.  Above
all,  if  we  add  to  these  obstacles  an  unhealthy  tendency
to  quibble  over  the  choice  of  words,  and  check  our
advance  at  each  step,  the  vehemence  of  our  onset
loses  its  impetus ;  while  even  though  our  choice  of
individual  words  may  be  of  the  happiest,  the  style
will  be  a  mere  patchwork  with  no  regular  pattern.

Consequently  those  vivid  conceptions  of  which  I  15
spoke  2  and  which,  as  I  remarked,  are  called  c^avrao-tai,
together  with  everything  that  we  intend  to  say,
the  persons  and  questions  involved,  and  the  hopes
and  fears  to  which  they  give  rise,  must  be  kept
clearly  before  our  eyes  and  admitted  to  our  hearts :
for  it  is  feeling  and  force  of  imagination  that  make
us  eloquent.  It  is  for  this  reason  that  even  the  un-
educated have  no  difficulty  in  finding  words  to  express
their  meaning,  if  only  they  are  stirred  by  some  strong
emotion.  Further  the  attention  of  the  mind  must  be  16
directed  not  to  some  one  thing,  but  simultaneously  to
a  number  of  things  in  continuous  sequence.  The
result  will  be  the  same  as  when  we  cast  our  eyes
along  some  straight  road  and  see  at  once  all  that  is  on
and  near  it,  obtaining  a  view  not  merely  of  its  end,
but  of  the  whole  way  there.  Dread  of  the  shame
of  failure  is  also  a  powerful  stimulant  to  oratory,

141


QUINTILIAN

stilus  secreto  gaudeat  atque  omnes  arbitros  reformi-
det,  extemporalis  actio  auditorum  freqiientia,  ut  miles

17  congestu  signorum,  excitatur.  Namque  et  difficili-
orem  cogitationem  exprimit  et  expellit  dicendi
necessitas,  et  secundos  impetus  auget  placendi
cupido.  Adeo  pretium  omnia  spectant^  ut  elo-
quentia  quoque,  quanquam  plurimum  habeat  in  se
voluptatis, maxime tamen praesenti fructu  laudis

18  opinionisque  ducatur.  Nee  quisquam  tantum  fidat
ingenio,  ut  id  sibi  speret  incipienti  statim  posse
contingere,  sed,  sicut  in  cogitatione  praecipimus,
ita  facilitatem  quoque  extemporalem  a  parvis  initiis
paulatim  perducemus  ad  summam,  quae  neque  perfici
neque  contineri  nisi  usu  potest.

19  Ceterum  pervenire  eo  debet,  ut  cogitatio  non  uti-
que  melior  sit  ea  sed  tutior,  cum  banc  facilitatem  non
prosa  modo  multi  sint  consecuti,  sed  etiam  carmine,
ut  Antipater  Sidonius  et  Licinius  Arcbias  (credendum
enim  Ciceroni  est),  non  quia  nostris  quoque  tempori-
bus  non  et  fecerint  quidam  hoc  et  faciant.  Quod
tamen  non  ipsum  tam  probabile  puto,  (neque  enim
habet  aut  usum  res  aut  necessitatem)  quam  exhor-


^  Ch.  vi.  3.

»  De  Or.  iii.  194 ;  Pro  Arch.  viii.  18.


142


BOOK X.  VII.  16-19

and  it  may  be  regarded  as  a  matter  for  wonder  that,
whereas  when  writing  we  delight  in  privacy  and
shrink  from  the  presence  of  witnesses^  in  extempore
pleading  a  large  audience  has  an  encouraging  effect,
like  that  which  the  sight  of  the  massed  standards
has  on  the  soldier.  For  the  sheer  necessity  of  speak-  17
ing  thrusts  forward  and  forces  out  our  labouring
thought,  and  the  desire  to  win  approbation  kindles
and  fosters  our  efforts.  So  true  is  it  that  there  is
nothing  which  does  not  look  for  some  reward,  that
eloquence,  despite  the  fact  that  its  activity  is  in  itself
productive  of  a  strong  feeling  of  pleasure,  is  influenced
by  nothing  so  much  as  the  immediate  acquisition  of
praise  and  renown.  Nor  should  any  man  put  such  18
trust  in  his  native  ability  as  to  hope  that  this  power
will  present  itself  to  him  at  the  outset  of  his  career
as  an  orator ;  for  the  precepts  which  I  laid  down  for
premeditation  ^  apply  to  improvisation  also ;  we
must  develop  it  by  gradual  stages  from  small  begin-
nings, until  we  have  reached  that  perfection  which
can  only  be  produced  and  maintained  by  practice.

Moreover,  the  orator  should  reach  such  a  pitch  of  19
excellence  that,  while  premeditation  may  still  be  the
safer  method,  it  will  not  necessarily  be  the  better,
since  many  have  acquired  the  gift  of  improvisation  not
merely  in  prose,  but  in  verse  as  well,  as,  for  example,
Antipater  of  Sidon  and  Licinius  Archias  (for  whose
powers  we  have  the  unquestionable  authority  of
Cicero  2),  not  to  mention  the  fact  that  there  are
many,  even  in  our  own  day,  who  have  done  this  and
are  still  doing  it.  I  do  not,  however,  regard  this
accomplishment  as  being  particularly  valuable  in
itself,  for  it  is  both  unpractical  and  unnecessary,  but
mention  it  as  a  useful  example  to  encourage  students

M3


QUINTILIAN

tandis in hanc spem,  qui  toro  praeparantur,  utile

20  exemplum.  Neque  vero  tanta  esse  unquam  debet  ^
fiducia  facilitatis,  ut  non  breve  saltern  tempus,  quod
nusquam  fere  deerit,  ad  ea  quae  dicturi  simus
dispicienda  sumamuSj  quod  quidem  in  iudiciis  ac  foro
datur  semper. Neque  enim  quisquam  est,  qui  causam

21  quam  non  didicerit  agat.  Declamatores  quosdam
perversa  ducit  ambitio,  ut  exposita  controversia
protinus  dicere  velint ;  quin  etiam,  quod  est  in
primis  frivolum  ac  scenicum,  verbum  petant,  quo
incipiant.  Sed  tam  contumeliosos  in  se  ridet  invi-
cem  eloquentia,  et  qui  stultis  videri  eruditi  volunt,

22  stulti  eruditis  videntur.  Si  qua  tamen  fortuna
tam  subitam  fecerit  agendi  necessitatem,  mobiliore
quodam  opus  erit  ingenio,  et  vis  omnis  intendenda
rebus,  et  in  praesentia  remittendum  aliquid  ex  cura
verborum,  si  consequi  ^  utrumque  non  dabitur.  Turn
et  tardior  pronuntiatio  moras  habet  et  suspensa  ac
velut dubitans oratio, ut tamen deliberare, non

23  haesitare  videamur.  Hoc,  dum  egredimur  e  portu,
si  nos  nondum  aptatis  satis  armamentis  aget  ventus ;
deinde  paulatim  simul  euntes  ajjtabimus  vela  et
disponemus rudentes et impleri sinus  optabimus.

^  debet,  add'-d  by  fferzog.  .

*  consequi,  added  by  Spalding: non  seqiii,  2nd  hand  of
cod.  Bamb,

144


BOOK X.  VII.  19-23

training  for  the  bar,  in  the  hope  that  they  may  be
able  to  acquire  this  accomplishment. Still  our  con-  20
fidence  in  our  power  of  speaking  extempore  should
never  be  so  great  that  we  should  neglect  to  devote
a  few  minutes  to  the  consideration  of  what  we  are
going  to  say. There  will  but  rarely  be  occasions
when  this  is  impossible,  while  in  the  lawsuits of
the  courts  there  is  always  some  time  allowed  for  the
purpose. For  no  one  can  plead  a  cause  with  the
facts  of  which  he  is  unacquainted. Some  declaimers,  21
it  is  true,  are  led  by  a  perverse  ambition  to  attempt
to  speak  the  moment  their  theme  has  been  given
them,  and  even  ask  for  a  word  with  which  to  start,
an affectation which is in the worst and most
theatrical taste. But  eloquence  has,  in  her  turn,
nothing  but  derision  for  those  that  insult  her  thus,
and  speakers  who  wish  to  seem  learned  to  fools  are
merely  regarded  as  fools  by  the  learned. If,  how-  22
ever,  chance  should  impose  the  necessity  upon  us  of
pleading  a  case  at  such  short  notice,  we  shall  require
to  develop  special  mental  agility,  to  give  all our
attention  to  the  subject,  and  to  make  a  temporary
sacrifice  of  our  care  for  the  niceties  of  language,  if
we find it impossible to secure  both. On such
occasions  a  slower  delivery  and  a  style  of  speak-
ing suggestive  of  a  certain  indecision  and  doubt  will
secure  us  time  to  think,  but  we  must  be  careful  to
do  this  in  such  a  way  as  to  give  the  impression  of
thought,  not  of  hesitation. This  precaution  may  be  23
employed  while  we  are  clearing  harbour,  if  the  wind
drive us forward before all our tackle is ready.
Afterwards,  as  we  proceed  upon  our  course,  we  shall
trim  our  sails,  arrange  our ropes,  and pray that
the  breeze  may  fill  our  sails. Such  a  procedure  is

MS


QUINTILIAN

Id potius  quam se inani verborum torrenti dare
quasi  tempestatibus  quo  volent  auferendum.

24  Sed  non  minore  studio  continetur  haec  facultas
quam  paratur.  Ars  enim  semel  percepta  non  labitur,!
stilus  quoque  intermissione  paulum  admodum  de
celeritate  deperdit;  promptum  hoc  et  in  expedito
positum  exercitatione  sola  continetur.  Hac  uti  sic
optimum  est,  ut  cotidie  dicamus  audientibus  pluribus,
maxime  de  quorum  simus  iudicio  atque  opinione
solliciti ;  rarum  est  enim  ut  satis  se  quisque  vereatur.

25  Vel  soli  tamen  dicamus  potius  quam  omnino  non
dicamus.  Est  et  ^  ilia  exercitatio  cogitandi  totasque
materias  vel  silentio  (dum  tamen  quasi  dicat  intra  se
ipsum)  persequendi,  quae  nuUo  non  et  tempore  et
loco,  quando  non  aliud  agimus,  explicari  potest,  et

26  est  in  parte  utilior  ^  quam  haec  proxima.  Diligentius
enim  componitur  quam  ilia,  in  qua  contextum  di-
cendi  intermittere  veremur.  Rursus  in  alia  plus
prior  confert,  vocis  firmitatem,  oris  facilitatem,  motum
corporis,  qui  et  ipse,  ut  dixi,  excitat  oratorem  et
iactatione  manus,  pedis  supplosione,  sicut  cauda
leones  facere  dicuntur,  hortatur. Studendum  vero

27  semper  et  ubique.  Neque  enim  fere  tam  est  uUus
dies  occupatus,  ut  nihil  lucrativae,  ut  Cicero  Brutum

^  labitur,  ed.  Gryph :  capitur,  MSS.

*  et,  added  by  Spalding.

^  utilior,  early  edd.  :  utilitatis,  B.


1  Ch.  iii.  21.
•  Or.  34.


146


BOOK X.  vii.  23-27

preferable  to  yielding  ourselves  to  an  empty  torrent
of  words,  that  the  storm  may  sweep  us  Avhere  it  will.

But  it  requires  no  less  careful  study  to  maintain  24
than  to  acquire  this  facility.  Theory  once  mastered
is  not  forgotten,  and  the  pen  loses  but  little  of  its
speed  by  disuse  :  but  this  promptitude  and  readiness
for  action  can  be  maintained  by  practice  only.  The
best  form  of  exercise  is  to  speak  daily  before  an
audience  of  several  persons,  who  should,  as  far  as
possible,  be  selected  from  those  whose  judgement
and  good  opinion  we  value,  since  it  is  rare  for  any-
one to  be  sufficiently  critical  of  himself.  It  is  even
better  to  speak  alone  than  not  at  all.  There  is  yet  25
another  method  of  exercising  this  faculty :  it  consists
in  going  over  our  subjects  in  their  entirety  in  silent
thought,  although  we  must  all  the  time  formulate
the  words  to  ourselves :  such  practice  is  possible  at
any  moment  or  place  that  finds  us  unoccupied,  and
is,  in  some  respects,  more  useful  than  that  which  I
have  just  mentioned  ;  for  we  are  more  careful  about  26
our  composition  than  when  we  are  actually  speaking
and  in  momentary  fear  of  interrupting  the  continuous
flow  of  our  language.  On  the  other  hand,  the  first
method  is  more  valuable  for  certain  purposes,  as  it
gives  strength  to  our  voice,  fluency  to  our  tongue
and  vigour  to  our  gesture  ;  and  the  latter,  as  I  have
already  remarked,^  in  itself  excites  the  orator  and
spurs  him  on,  as  he  waves  his  hand  or  stamps  his
foot :  he  is,  in  fact,  like  the  lion,  that  is  said  to  lash
himself  to  fury  Avith  his  tail.  But  we  must  study
always  and  everywhere.  For  there  is  scarce  a  single  27
day  in  our  lives  that  is  so  full  of  occupations  that  we
may  not,  at  some  moment  or  other,  snatch  a  few
precious  minutes,  as  Cicero  ^  records  that  Brutus  was

147


QUINTILIAN

facere  tradit,  operae  ad  scribendum  aut  legendum  ^
aut  dicendum  rapi  aliquo  momento  temporis  possit;
siquidem  C.  Carbo  etiam  in  tabernaculo  solebat  hac

28  uti  exercitatione  dicendi.  Ne  id  quidera  tacendum,
quod  eidem  Ciceroni  placet,  nullum  nostrum  usquam
negligentem  esse  sermonem ;  quidquid  loquemur
ubicuuque,  sit  pro  sua  scilicet  portione  pertectum.
Scribendum  certe  nunquam  est  magis,  quam  cum
multa  dicemus  ex  tempore.  Ita  enim  servabitur
pondus,  et  innatans  ^  ilia  verborum  facilitas  in  altum
reducetur;  sicut  rustici  proximas  vitis  radices  ampu-
tant,  quae  illam  in  summum  solum  ducunt,  ut  inferi-

29  ores  penitus  descendendo  firmentur.  Ac  nescio  an,
si '  utrumque  cum  cura  et  studio  fecerimus,  invicem
prosit,  ut  scribendo  dicamus  diligentius,  dicendo
scribamus  facilius.  Scribendum  ergo,  quotiens  lice-
bit  ;  si  id  non  dabitur,  cogitandum;  ab  utroque
exclusi  debent  tamen  sic  dicere,^  ut  neque  depre-
hensus  orator  neque  litigator  destitutus  esse  videatur.

30  Plerumque  autem  multa  agentibus  accidit,  ut
maxime  necessaria  et  utique  ipitia  scribant,  cetera
quae  domo  adferunt  cogitatione  complectantur,  subi-
tis  ex  tempore  occurrant;  quod  fecisse  M.  Tullium
commentariis  ipsius  apparet.  Sed  feruntur  aliorum
quoque et inventi forte,  ut eos dicturus  quisque

*  aut  legendum,  2nd  hand  of  cod.  Bamh.  :  omitted  by  B.

*  innatana,  Steer:  unatraiis,  B.

*  si  added  by  ed.  Camp.

*  sic  dicere,  Peterson  :  inicere,  B.

^  A  supporter  of  Tib.  Gracchus,  who  went  over  to  the
senatorial  party  and  was  consul  120  B.C.  Committed  suicide
in  the  following  year.  Cicero  praises  his  eloquence  and
industry  ;  op.  Brut.  103-5,  de  Or.  I.  §  154.

*  There  is  no  trace  of  thia.

148


BOOK  X.  vu.  27-30

wont  to  do,  either  for  writing  or  reading  or  speaking ;
Gaius  Carbo,^  for  example,  was  in  the  habit  of  indulg-
ing in  such  exercises  even  in  his  tent.  I  must  also  28
mention  the  precept  (which  again  has  the  approval
of  Cicero  2)  that  we  should  never  be  careless  about
our  language.  Whatever  we  say,  under  whatever
circumstances,  should  be  perfect  in  its  way.  As  re-
gards writing,  this  is  certainly  never  more  necessary
than  when  we  have  frequently  to  speak  extempore.
For  it  maintains  the  solidity  of  our  speech  and  gives
depth  to  superficial  facility.  We  may  compare  the
practice  of  husbandmen  who  cut  away  the  uppermost
roots  of  their  vines,  which  run  close  to  the  surface  of
the  soil,  that  the  taproots  may  strike  deeper  and  gain
in  strength.  Indeed  I  am  not  sure  that,  if  we  prac-  29
tise  both  with  care  and  assiduity,  mutual  profit  will
not  result,  and  writing  will  give  us  greater  precision
of  speech,  while  speaking  will  make  us  write  with
greater  facility.  We  must  write,  therefore,  when-
ever possible  ;  if  we  cannot  write,  we  must  meditate  :
if  both  are  out  of  the  question,  we  must  still  speak  in
such  a  manner  that  we  shall  not  seem  to  be  taken
unawares  nor  our  client  to  be  left  in  the  lurch.

It  is,  however,  a  common  practice  with  those  who  30
have  many  cases  to  plead  to  write  out  the  most
necessary  portions,  more  especially  the  beginnings  of
their  speeches,  to  cover  the  remainder  of  that  which
they  are  able  to  prepare  by  careful  premeditation
and  to  trust  to  improvisation  in  emergency,  a  prac-
tice regularly  adopted  by  Cicero,  as  is  clear  from  liis
note-books.  But  the  notes  of  other  orators  are  also
in  circulation ;  some  have  been  discovered  by
chance,  just  as  they  were  jotted  down  previous  to  a
speech,  while  others  have  been  edited  in  book  form,

149


QUINTILIAN

composuerat,  et  in  libros  digesti,  ut  causarum  quae
sunt  actae  a  Ser.  Sulpicio,  cuius  tres  orationes  extant ;
sed  hi  de  quibus  loquor  commentarii  ita  sunt  exacti,
ut  ab  ipso  mi  hi  in  memoriam  posteritatis  videantur

31  esse  compositi.  Nam  Ciceronis  ad  praesens  modo
tempus  aptatos  libertus  Tiro  contraxit ;  quos  non
ideo  excuso,  quia  non  probem,  sed  ut  sint  magis
admirabiles.  In  hoc  genere  prorsus  recipio  hanc
brevem  adnotationem  libellosque,  qui  vel  manu  tene-

32  antur,  et  ad  quos  interim  respicere  fas  sit.  Illud  quod
Laenas  praecipit  displicet  mihi,  vel  in  his  quae
scripserimusvelut^  summas  in  commentarium  etcapita
conferre.  Facit  enim  ediscendi  negligentiam  haec
ipsa  fiducia  et  lacerat  ac  deformat  orationem.  Ego
autem  ne  scribendum  quidem  puto,  quod  non  ^  simus
niemoria  persecuturi.  Nam  hie  quoque  accidit,  ut
revocet nos cogitatio ad ilia elaborata nee sinat

33  praesentem  fortunam  experiri.  Sic  anceps  inter
utrumque  animus  aestuat,  cum  et  scripta  perdidit  et
non  quaerit  nova.  Sed  de  memoria  destinatus  est
libro  proximo  locus  nee  huic  parti  subiungendus,  quia
sunt  alia  prius  nobis  dicenda.


'  vel  in  his,  Boniiell :  ne  in  his,  B. velut,  Halm :  vel  in,  B.
•  non,  added  by  Eeguis.


*  Or  perhaps  "  abbreviated." Tiro  was  Cicero's  friend,
freedmaa  and  secretary.


ISO


BOOK  X.  VII.  30-33

as  in  the  case  of  the  speeches  delivered  in  the  courts
by  Servius  Sulpicius,  of  whose  works  only  three
speeches  survive.  Tliese  memoranda,  however,  of
which  I  am  speaking  are  so  carefully  drawn  up  that
they  seem  to  me  to  have  been  composed  by  himself
for  the  benefit  of  posterity.  But  Cicero's  notes  were  31
originally  intended  merely  to  meet  the  requirements
of  the  moment,  and  were  afterwards  collected  ^  by
Tiro.  In  making  this  apology  I  do  not  mean  to
imply  that  I  disapprove  of  them,  but  merely  wish
to  make  them  more  worthy  of  admiration.  And  in
this  connexion  I  must  state  that  I  admit  the  use  of
brief  memoranda  and  note-books,  which  may  even  be
held  in  the  hand  and  referred  to  from  time  to  time.
But  I  disapprove  of  the  advice  given  by  Laenas,  that  32
we  should  set  down  in  our  note-books,  duly  t;ibu-
lated  under  the  appropriate  headings,  summaries  of
what  we  propose  to  say,  even  in  cases  where  we
have  already  written  it  out  in  full.  For  reliance  on
such  notes  as  these  makes  us  careless  in  learning
what  we  have  written  and  mutilates  and  deforms  our
style.  For  my  own  part  I  think  that  we  sliould
never  write  out  anything  which  we  do  not  intend  to
commit  to  memory.  For  if  we  do,  our  thoughts  will
run  back  to  what  we  have  elaborated  in  writing  and
will  not  permit  us  to  try  the  fortune  of  the  moment.
Consequently,  the  mind  will  waver  in  doubt  between  33
the  two  alternatives,  having  forgotten  what  was
committed  to  writing  and  being  unable  to  think  of
anything  fresh  to  say.  However,  as  the  topic  of
memory  will  be  discussed  in  the  next  book,  1  will
not  introduce  it  here,  as  there  are  other  points
which  require  to  be  dealt  with  first.


«5»


BOOK  XI


VOL. IV.


LIBER XI

I.  Parata,  sicut  superiore  libro  continetur, facultate
scribendi  cogitandique  et  ex  tempore  etiam,  cum  res
poscet,  orandi,  proxima  est  cura,  ut  dicamus  apte ;
quam  virtutem  quartam  elocutionis  Cicero  demon-
strat, quaeque est meo quidem iudicio maxime

2  necessaria.  Nam  cum  sit  ornatus  orationis  varius  et
multiplex  conveniatque  alius  alii,  nisi  fuerit  accom-
modatus  rebus  atque  persouis,  non  modo  non  illu-
strabit  cam,  sed  etiam  destruet  et  vim  rerum  in
contrarium  vertet.  Quid  enim  prodest,  esse  verba
et  Latina  et  significantia  et  nitida,  figuris  etiam
numerisque  elaborata,  nisi  cum  iis,  in  quae  iudicem

3  duci  formarique  volumus,  consentiant,  si  genus
sublime  dicendi  parvis  in  causis,  parvum  limatumque
grandibus,  laetum  tristibus,  lene  asperis,  minax  sup-
plicibus,  summissum  concitatis,  trux  atque  violentum
iucundis  adhibeamus  ?  ut  monilibus  et  margaritis  ac
veste  longa,  quae  sunt  ornamenta  feminarum,  de-
formentur  viri,  nee  habitus  triumphalis,  quo  nihil

»  De  Or.  III.  X.  37.


BOOK XI

I.  After  acquiring  the  power  of  writing  and  think-
ing, as  described  in  the  preceding  book,  and  also  of
pleading  extempore,  if  occasion  demand,  our  next
task  will  be  to  ensure  that  appropriateness  of  speech,
which  Cicero^  shows  to  be  the  fourth  department  of
style,  and  which  is,  in  my  opinion,  highly  necessary.
For  since  the  ornaments  of  style  are  varied  and  2
manifold  and  suited  for  different  purposes,  they  will,
unless  adapted  to  the  matter  and  the  persons  con-
cerned, not  merely  fail  to  give  our  style  distinction,
but  will  even  destroy  its  effect  and  produce  a  result
quite  the  reverse  of  that  which  our  matter  should
produce.  For  what  profit  is  it  that  our  words  should
be  Latin,  significant  and  graceful,  and  be  further
embellished  with  elaborate  figures  and  rhythms,
unless  all  these  qualities  are  in  harmony  with  the
views  to  which  we  seek  to  lead  the  judge  and  mould
his  opinions .''  What  use  is  it  if  we  employ  a  lofty  3
tone  in  cases  of  trivial  import,  a  slight  and  refined
style  in  cases  of  great  moment,  a  cheerful  tone  when
our  matter  calls  for  sadness,  a  gentle  tone  when  it
demands  vehemence,  threatening  language  when
supplication,  and  submissive  when  energy  is  re-
quired, or  fierceness  and  violence  when  our  theme  is
one  that  asks  for  charm  ?  Such  incongruities  are  as
unbecoming  as  it  is  for  men  to  wear  necklaces  and
pearls  and  flowing  raiment  which  are  the  natural
adornments  of  women,  or  for  women  to  robe  them-

155


QUINTILIAN

4  excogitari  potest  augustius,  feminas  deceat.  Hunc
locum  Cicero  breviter  in  tertio  de  Oratore  libro
perstringit,  rieque  tamen  videri  potest  quidquam
omisisse  dicendo,  non  omni  causae  neque  audiiori  neqne
personae  neque  tempori  congniere  orationis  umim  genus.
Nee  fere  pluribus  in  Oratore  eadem.  Sed  illic  L.
Crassus,  cum  apud  summos  oratores  hominesque
eruditissimos  dicat,  satis  liabet  partem banc  velut

6  notare  inter  agnoscentes ;  et  hie  Cicero  adloquens
Brutum  testatur  esse  haec  ei  nota  ideoque  brevius  a
se  dici,  quanquam  sit  fusus  locus  tracteturque  a
philosophis  latius.  Nos  institutionem  professi  non
solum  scientibus  ista,  sed  etiam  discentibus  tradimus,
ideoque  paulo  pluribus  verbis  debet  haberi  venia.

6  Quare  notum  sit  nobis  ante  omnia^  quid  concili-
andOj  docendo,  movendo  iudici  conveniat,  quid  quaque
parte  orationis  petamus.  Ita  nee  Vetera  aut  translata
aut  ficta  verba  in  inci})iendo,  narrando,  argumentando
tractabimus  neque  decurrentes  contexto  nitore  circui-
tus,  ubi  dividenda  erit  causa  et  in  partes  suas  dige-
renda,  neque  humile  atque  cotidianum  sermonis
genus  et  compositione  ipsa  dissolutum  epilogis  dabi-

1  III.  Iv.  210.
*  Ch.  xxi.  sqq,

iS6


BOOK XI.  I.  3-6

selves  in  the  garb  of  triumph,  than  which  there  can
be  conceived  no  more  majestic  raiment.  This  topic  4
is  discussed  by  Cicero  in  the  third  book  of  the  de
Oratore,^  and,  although  he  touches  on  it  but  lightly,
he  really  covers  the  whole  subject  when  he  says.
One  single  style  of  oratory  is  not  suited  to  every  case,  nor
to  every  audience,  nor  every  speaker,  nor  every  occasion.
And  he  says  the  same  at  scarcely  greater  length  in
the  Orator:^  But  in  the  first  of  these  works  Lucius
Crassus,  since  he  is  speaking  in  the  presence  of  men
distinguished  alike  for  their  learning  and  their  elo-
quence, thinks  it  sufficient  merely  to  indicate  this  topic
to  his  audience  for  their  recognition ;  while  in  the  5
latter  work  Cicero  asserts  that,  as  these  facts  are
familiar  to  Brutus,  to  whom  that  treatise  is  addressed,
they  will  be  given  briefer  ti-eatment,  despite  the  fact
that  the  subject  is  a  wide  one  and  is  discussed  at
greater  length  by  the  philosophers.  I,  on  the  other
hand,  have  undertaken  the  education  of  an  orator,
and,  consequently,  am  speaking  not  merely  to  those
that  know,  but  also  to  learners ;  I  shall,  therefore,
have  some  claim  to  forgiveness  if  I  discuss  the  topic
in  greater  detail.

For  this  reason,  it  is  of  the  first  importance  that  6
we  should  know  what  style  is  most  suitable  for  con-
ciliating, instructing  or  moving  the  judge,  and  what
effects  we  should  aim  at  in  different  parts  of  our
speech.  Thus  we  shall  eschew  antique,  metaphori-
cal and  newly-coined  words  in  our  exordium,  state-
ment of  facts  and  arguments,  as  we  shall  avoid  flowing
periods  woven  with  elaborate  grace,  when  the  case
has  to  be  divided  and  distinguished  under  its  various
heads,  while,  on  the  other  hand,  we  shall  not  employ
mean  or  colloquial language,  devoid  of  all  artistic

157


QUINTILIAN

mus,  nee  iocis  lacrimas,  ubi  opus  erit  miseratione,

7  siccabimus.  Nam  ornatus  omnis  non  tarn  sua  quam
rei,  cui  adhibetur,  condicione  constat;  nee  plus
refert,  quid  dicas  quam  quo  loco.  Sed  totum  hoc
apte  dicere  non  elocutionis  tantum  genere  constat,
sed  est  cum  inventione  commune.  Nam  si  tantum
liabeht  etiam  verba  momentum,  quanto  res  ipsae
magis?  Quarum  quae  esset  observatio,  suis  Iocis
subinde  subiecimus.

8  Illud  est  diligentius  docendum,  eum  demum  dicere
apte,  qui  non  solum  quid  expediat,  sed  etiam  quid
deceat  inspexerit.  Nee  me  fugit,  plerumque  haec
esse  coniuncta.  Nam  quod  decet,  fere  prodest,  neque
alio  magis  animi iudicum  conciliari aut,  si res  in

9  contrarium  tulit,  alienari  solent.  Aliquando  tamen
et  haec  dissentiunt.  Quotiens  autem  pugnabunt,
ipsam  utilitatem  vincet  quod  decet.  Nam  quia  nescit,
nihil  magis  profuturum  ad  absolutionem  Socrati  fuisse,
quam  si  esset  usus  illo  iudiciali  genere  defensionis
et  oratione  summissa  conciliasset  iudicum  animos  sibi

10  crimenque  ipsum  sollicite  redarguisset  ?  Verum  id
eum  minime  decebat ;  ideoque  sic  egit,  ut  qui  poenam
158


BOOK XI.  I.  6-IO

structure,  in  the  peroration,  nor,  when  the  theme  calls
for  compassion,  attempt  to  dry  the  tears  of  our  audi-
ence with  jests.  For  all  ornament  derives  its  effect  7
not  from  its  own  qualities  so  much  as  from  the
circumstances  in  which  it  is  applied,  and  the  occasion
chosen  for  saying  anything  is  .it  least  as  important  a
consideration  as  what  is  actually  said.  But  the  whole
of  this  question  of  appropriate  language  turns  on
something  more  than  our  choice  of  style,  for  it  has
much  in  common  with  invention.  For  if  words  can
produce  such  an  impression,  how  much  greater  must
that  be  which  is  created  by  the  facts  themselves.
But  I  have  already  laid  down  rules  for  the  treatment
of  the  latter  in  various  portions  of  this  work.

Too  much  insistence  cannot  be  laid  upon  the  point  8
that  no  one  can  be  said  to  speak  appropriately  who
has  not  considered  not  merely  what  it  is  expedient,
but  also  what  it  is  becoming  to  say.  I  am  well
aware  that  these  two  considerations  generally  go
hand  in  hand.  For  whatever  is  becoming  is,  as  a
rule,  useful,  and  there  is  nothing  that  does  more  to
conciliate  the  good-will  of  the  judge  than  the
observance  or  to  alienate  it  than  the  disregard  of
these  considerations.  Sometimes,  however,  the  two  9
are  at  variance.  Now,  whenever  this  occurs,  expe-
diency must  jield  to  the  demands  of  what  is
becoming.  Who  is  there  who  does  not  realise  that
nothing  would  have  contributed  more  to  secure  the
acquittal  of  Socrates  than  if  he  had  employed  the
ordinary  forensic  methods  of  defence  and  had
conciliated  the  minds  of  his  judges  by  adopting  a
submissive  tone  and  had  devoted  his  attention  to
refuting  the  actual  charge  against  him  ?  But  such  10
a  course  would  have  been  unworthy  of  his  character,

159


QUINTILIAN

suam  honoribus  summis  esset  aestimaturus.  Maluit
enim  vir  sapientissimus,  quod  superesset  ex  vita,  sibi
perire,  quam  quod  praeterisset.  Et  quando  ab
hominibus  sui  temporis  parum  intelligebatur,  poste-
riorum  se  iudiciis  reservavit,  brevi  detrimeiito  iam
ultimae  senectutis  aevum  saeculorum  omnium  con-

11  secutus.  Itaque  quamvis  Lysias,  qui  turn  in  dicendo
praestantissimus  habebatur,  defensionem  illi  scriptam
obtulisset,  uti  ea  noluit,  cum  bonam  quid  em,  sed
parum  sibi  convenientem  iudicavisset.  Quo  vel  solo
patet  non  persuadendi  sed  bene  dicendi  finem  in
oratore  servandum,  cum  interim  persuadere  deforme
sit. Non fuit  lioc  utile  absolutioni,  sed,  quod est

12  mains,  homini  fuit.  Et  nos  secundum  communem
potius  loquendi  consuetudinem  quam  ipsam  veritatis
regulam  divisione  hac  utimur,  ut  ab  eo,  quod  deceat,
utilitatem  separemus ;  nisi  forte  prior  ille  Africanus,
qui  patria  cedere  quam  cum  tribuno  plebis  humillimo
contendere  de  innocentia  sua  maluit,  inutiliter  sibi
videtur  consuluisse ;  aut  P.  Rutilius,  vel  cum  illo
paene  Socratico  genera  defensionis  est  usus,  vel  cum
revocante  eum  P.  Sulla  manere  in  exilio  maluit,  quid

13  sibi  maxime  conduceret,  nesciebat.  Hi  vero  parva
ilia,  quae  abiectissimus  quisque  animus  utilia  credit,  si

^  Falsely accused of  having  taken a  bribe  from King
Antiochus. See  Livy, xxxviii. 11. 56.
*  See  de  Or.  I.  liii.  227  sqq.

i6o


BOOK XI.  I.  10-13

and,  thereforCj  he  pleaded  as  one  who  would  account
the  penalty  to  which  he  might  be  sentenced  as  the
highest  of  honours.  The  wisest  of  men  preferred  to
sacrifice  the  remnant  of  his  days  rather  than  to  cancel
all  his  past  life.  And  since  he  was  but  ill  under-
stood bv  the  men  of  his  own  day,  he  reserved  his
case  for  the  approval  of  posterity  and  at  the  cost  of
a  few  last  declining  years  achieved  through  all  the
ages  life  everlasting.  And  so  although  Lysias,  who  11
was  accounted  the  first  orator  of  that  time,  offered
him  a  written  defence,  he  refused  to  make  use  of
it,  since,  though  he  recognised  its  excellence,  he
regarded  it  as  unbecoming  to  himself.  This  in-
stance alone  shows  that  the  end  which  the  orator
must  keep  in  view  is  not  persuasion,  but  speaking
well,  since  there  are  occasions  when  to  persuade
would  be  a  blot  upon  his  honour.  The  line  adopted
by  Socrates  was  useless  to  secure  his  acquittal,  but
was  of  real  service  to  him  as  a  man ;  and  that  is  by
far  the  greater  consideration.  In  drawing  this  dis-  12
tinction  between  what  is  expedient  and  what  is
becoming,  I  have  followed  rather  the  usage  of  com-
mon speech  than  the  strict  law  of  truth ;  unless,
indeed,  the  elder  Africanus  ^  is  to  be  regarded  as
having  failed  to  consult  his  true  interests,  when  he
retired  into  exile  sooner  than  wrangle  over  his  own
innocence  with  a  contemptible  tribune  of  the  people,
or  unless  it  be  alleged  that  Publius  Rutilius^  was
ignorant  of  his  true  advantage  both  on  the  occasion
when  he  adopted  a  defence  which  may  almost  be
compared  with  that  of  Socrates,  and  when  he  pre-
ferred to  remain  in  exile  rather  than  return  at  Sulla's
bidding.  No,  these  great  men  regarded  all  those  13
trifles  that  the  most  abject  natures  regard  as  advan-

161


QUINTILIAN

cum  virtute  conferantur  despicienda  iudicaverunt,
ideoque  perpetua  saeculoruinadmiratione  celebrantur.
Neque nos  simus  tam humiles,  ut  quae  laudamus

14  inutilia  credamus.  Sed  hoc  qualecunque  discrimen
raro  admodum  eveniet :  idem  fere,  ut  dixi,  in  omni
genere  causarum  et  proderit  et  decebit.  Est  autem,
quod  omnes  et  semper  et  ubique  deceat,  facere  ac  ^
dicere  honeste,  contraque  neminem  unquam  ullo  in
loco  turpiter.  Minora  vero  quaeque  sunt  ex  mediis
plerumque  sunt  talia,  ut  aliis  sint  concedenda,  aliis
non  sint,  aut  pro  persona,  tempore,  loco,  causa  magis
ac minus vel excusata debeant  videri  vel repre-

15  hendenda.  Cum  dicamus  autem  de  rebus  aut  alienis
aut  nostris,  dividenda  ratio  est  eorum,  dum  sciamus
pleraque  neutro  loco  convenire.

In  primis  igitur  omnis  vitiosa  iactatio  est,  elo-
quentiae  tamen  in  oratore  praecipue,  adfertque
audientibus non fastidium modo, sed plerumque

16  etiam  odium.  Habet  enim  mens  nostra  sublime
quiddam  et  erectum  et  impatiens  superioris  ;  ideoque
abiectos  aut  summittentes  se  libenter  allevamus,  quia

*  deceat  facere  ac,  27id  hand  oj  cod.  Bamb.  :  persuadere
ac,  B :  deceat  ao,  cod.  Hon.

i6a


BOOK  XI.  I.  13-16

tageous,  as  being  contemptible  if  weighed  in  the
balance  with  virtue,  and  for  this  reason  they  have
their  reward  in  the  deathless  praise  of  all  genera-
tions. Let  not  us,  then,  be  so  poor  spirited  as  to
regard  the  acts,  which  we  extol,  as  being  inexpedient.
However,  it  is  but  rarely  that  this  distinction,  such  14
as  it  is,  is  called  into  play.  As  I  have  said,  the
expedient  and  the  becoming  will,  as  a  rule,  be
identical  in  every  kind  of  case.  Still,  there  are  two
things  which  will  be  becoming  to  all  men  at  all  times
and  in  all  places,  namely,  to  act  and  speak  as  befits  a
man  of  honour,  and  it  will  never  at  any  time  beseem
any  man  to  speak  or  act  dishonourably.  On  the
other  hand,  things  of  minor  importance  and  occupy-
ing something  like  a  middle  position  between  the
two  are  generally  of  such  a  nature  that  they  may  be
conceded  to  some,  but  not  to  others,  while  it  will
depend  on  the  character  of  the  speaker  and  the
circumstances  of  time,  place  and  motive  whether  we
regard  them  as  more  or  less  excusable  or  repre-
hensible. When,  however,  we  are  speaking  of  our  15
own  affairs  or  those  of  others,  we  must  distinguish
between  the  expedient  and  the  becoming,  while
recognising  that  the  majority  of  the  points  which
we  have  to  consider  will  fall  under  neither  head.

In  the  first  place,  then,  all  kinds  of  boasting  are  a
mistake,  above  all,  it  is  an  error  for  an  orator  to  praise
his  own  eloquence,  and,  further,  not  merely  wearies,
but  in  the  majority  of  cases  disgusts  the  audience.
For  there  is  ever  in  the  mind  of  man  a  certain  18
element  of  lofty  and  unbending  pride  that  will  not
brook  superiority :  and  for  this  reason  we  take  de-
light in  raising  the  humble  and  submissive  to  their
feet,  since  such  an  act  gives  us  a  consciousness  of  our

163


QUINTILIAN

hoc  facere  tanquam  maiores  videmur;  et  quotiens
discessit  aemulatio,  succedit  humanitas.  At  qui  se
supra  modum  extollit,  premere  ac  despicere  creditur,
nee  tam  se  maiorem  quam  minores  ceteros  facere.

17  Inde  invident  humiliores,  (hoc  vitium  est  eorum,  qui
nee  cedere  volunt  nee  possunt  contendere)  rident
superiores,  improbant  boni.  Plerumque  vere  depre-
hendas  arrogantium  falsum  de  se  opinionem ;  sed  in
veris  quoque  sufficit  conscientia.

Reprehensus  est  in  hac  parte  non  mediocriter
Cicero,  quanquam  is  quidem  reruin  a  se  gestarum
iriaior  quani  eloquentiae fuit  in  orationibus utique

18  iactator.  Et  plerumque  illud  quoque  non  sine  aliqua
ratione  fecit.  Aut  enini  tuebatur  eos,  quibus  erat
adiutoribus  usus  in  opprimenda  coniuratione,  aut
respondebat  invidiae  (cui  tamen  non  fuit  par,  servatae
patriae  poenam  passus  exilium),  ut  illorum,  quae
egerat  in  consulatu,  frequens  commemoratio  possit
videri non gloriae magis quam defensioni data.

19  Eloquentiam  quidem,  cum  plenissimam  diversae  partis
advocatis  concederet,  sibi  nunquam  in  agendo  im-
modice  arrogavit.  lUius  sunt  enim :  Si  quid  est  ingenii
in  me,  quod  sentio  quam  sit  exiguum,  et.  Quo  ingenio
164


BOOK XI.  I.  16-19

superiority,  and  as  soon  as  all  sense  of  rivalry  dis-
appears, its  place  is  taken  by  a  feeling  of  humanity.
But  the  man  who  exalts  himself  beyond  reason  is
looked  upon  as  depreciating  and  showing  a  contempt
for  others  and  as  making  them  seem  small  rather
than  himself  seem  great.  As  a  result,  those  who  are  17
beneath  him  feel  a  grudge  against  him  (for  those  who
are  unwilling  to  yield  and  yet  have  not  the  strength
to  hold  their  own  are  always  liable  to  this  failing),
while  his  superiors  laugh  at  him  and  the  good
disapprove.  Indeed,  as  a  rule,  you  will  find  that
arrogance  implies  a  false  self-esteem,  whereas  those
who  possess  true  merit  find  satisfaction  enough  in
the  consciousness  of  possession.

Cicero  has  been  severely  censured  in  this  con-
nexion, although  he  was  far  more  given  to  boasting
of  his  political  achievements  than  of  his  eloquence,
at  any  rate,  in  his  speeches.  And  as  a  rule  he  had  18
some  sound  reason  for  his  self-praise.  For  he  was
either  defending  those  who  had  assisted  him  to  crush
the  conspiracy  of  Catiline,  or  was  replying  to  attacks
made  upon  him  by  those  who  envied  his  position ;
attacks  which  he  was  so  far  unable  to  withstand
that  he  suffered  exile  as  the  penalty  for  having
saved  his  country.  Consequently,  we  may  regard
his  frequent  reference  to  the  deeds  accomplished
in  his  consulship  as  being  due  quite  as  much  to  the
necessities  of  defence  as  to  the  promptings  of  vain-
glory. As  regards  his  own  eloquence,  he  never  19
made  immoderate  claims  for  it  in  his  pleading,  while
he  always  paid  a  handsome  tribute  to  the  eloquence
of  the  advocate,  who  opposed  him.  For  example,
there  are  passages  such  as  the  following :  "  If  there
be  aught  of  talent  in  me,  and  I  am  only  too  conscious

165


QUINTILIAN

20  minus  possum,  subsidium  mihi  diligentia  comparavi.  Quin
etiam  contra  Q.  Caecilium  de  accusatore  in  Verrem
constituendo^  quamvis  multum  esset  in  hoc  quoque
momenti,  uter  ad  agendum  magis  idoneus  veniret,
dicendi  tamen  facultatem  magis  illi  detraxit  quam
arrogavit sibi, seque non consecutum, sed omnia

2\  fedsse,  ut  posset  earn  consequi,  dixit.  In  epistolis
a]iquando  familiariter  apud  amicos,  nonnunquam  in
dialogis  aliena  tamen  persona  verum  de  eloquentia
sua  dicit.  Et  aperte  tamen  gloriari  nescio  an  sit
magis  tolerabile  vel  ipsa  vitii  huius  simplicitate,  quam
ilia  iaetatio  perversa^  si  abundans  opibus  pauperem
se  neget,  nobilis  obscurum  et  potens  infirmum  et

22  disertus  imperitum  plane  et  infantem  vocet,  Ambi-
tiosissimum  gloriandi  genus  est  etiam  deridere.  Ab
aliis  ergo  laudemur ;  nam  ipsos,  ut  Demosthenes  ait,
erubescere,  etiam  cum  ab  aliis  laudabimur,  decet.  Neque
hoc  dico,  non  aliquando  de  rebus  a  se  gestis  oratori
esse  dicendum,  sicut  eidem  Demostheni  pro  Ctesi-
phonte ;  quod  tamen  ita  emendavit,  ut  necessitatem
id  faciendi  ostenderet  invidiamque  omnem  in  eum

23  regereret,  qui  hoc  se  coegisset.  Et  M.  Tullius  saepe
dicit  de  oppressa  coniuratione  Catilinae;  sed  modo


*  Pro  Arch.  i.  1.  '  Pro  Quiiit.  i.  4.

»  Div.  in  Caec.  xii.  4a  *  De  Cor.  128.


1 66


BOOK XI.  I.  19-23

how  little  it  is,"  ^  and,  "  In  default  ot  talent,  I  turned
to  industry  for  aid."  2  Again,  in  his  speech  against  20
Caecilius  on  the  selection  of  an  accuser  for  Verres,
despite  the  fact  that  the  question  as  to  which  was
the  most  capable  pleader,  was  a  factor  of  great
importance,  he  rather  depreciated  his  opponent's
eloquence  than  exalted  his  own,  and  asserted  that
he  had  done  all  in  his  power  to  make  himself  an
orator,'  though  he  knew  he  had  not  succeeded.  In  21
his  letters  to  intimate  friends,  it  is  true,  and  occasion-
ally in  his  dialogues,  he  tells  the  truth  of  his  own
eloquence,  though  in  the  latter  case  he  is  careful
always  to  place  the  remarks  in  question  in  the
mouth  of  some  other  character.  And  yet  I  am  not
sure  that  open  boasting  is  not  more  tolerable,  owing
to  its  sheer  straiglitforwardness,  than  that  perverted
form  of  self-praise,  which  makes  the  millionaire  say
that  he  is  not  a  poor  man,  the  man  of  mark  describe
himself  as  obscure,  the  powerful  pose  as  weak,
and  the  eloquent  as  unskilled  and  even  inarticulate.
But  the  most  ostentatious  kind  of  boasting  takes  22
the  form  of  actual  self-derision.  Let  us  therefore
leave  it  to  others  to  praise  us.  For  it  beseems  us,
as  Demosthenes  says,  to  blush  even  when  we  are
praised  by  others.  I  do  not  mean  to  deny  that
there  are  occasions  when  an  orator  may  speak  of
his  own  achievements,  as  Demosthenes  himself  does
in  his  defence  of  Ctesiphon.*  But  on  that  occasion
he  qualified  his  statements  in  such  a  way  as  to  show
that  he  was  compelled  by  necessity  to  do  so,  and  to
throw  the  odium  attaching  to  such  a  proceeding  on
the  man  who  had  forced  him  to  it.  Again,  Cicero  23
often  speaks  of  his  suppression  of  the  Catilinarian
conspiracy,  but  either  attributes  his  success  to  the

167


QUINTILIAN

id  virtuti  senatus,  modo  providentiae  deorum  im-
mortalium  adsignat.  Plerumque  contra  inimicos
atque  obtrectatores  plus  vindicat  sibi. Erant  enim

24  ilia  tuenda,!  cum  obiicerentur.  In  carminibus  utinam
pepercisset,  quae  non  desierunt  carpere  maligni :

Cedant  arma  togae,  concedat  laurea  lifiguae  ;  '
et

0  fortunatam  natam  me  consule  Romam  ;

et  lovem  ilium,  a  quo  in  concilium  deorum  advocatur ;
et  Minervam,  quae  aites  eum  edocuit ;  quae  sibi  ille
secutus  quaedam  Graecorum  exempla  perraiserat.

25  Verum  eloquentiae  ut  indecora  iactatio,  ita  non-
nunquam  concedenda  fiducia  est.  Nam  quis  repre-
hendat  haec  :  Quid  putem  ?  contemptumne  me  ?  Non
video  nee  in  vita  nee  in  gi-atia  nee  in  rebus  gestis  nee  in
hoc mea mediocritate ingenii, quid despicere possit

26  Antoniiis  ?  Et  paulo  post  apertius :  An  decertare
viecum  voluit  contentione  dicendi  ?  Hoc  quidem  est
benejiciu7n.  Quid  enim  plenius,  quid  uberius  quam  milii
et  pro  me  et  contra  Antofiium  dicer e  ?

27  Arrogantes  et illi,  qui  se  iudicasse  de  causa  nee

'  ilia  tuenda,  Halm:  intuenda,  B.
*  linguae,  B :  laudi,  vulgo.


*  From  the  poem  on  his  consulship.
«  Phil.  II.  i.  2.


BOOK XI.  I.  23-27

courage  shown  by  the  senate  or  to  the  providence  of
the  immortal  gods.  If  he  puts  forward  stronger  claims
to  merit,  it  is  generally  when  speaking  against  his
enemies  and  detractors;  for  he  was  bound  todefend
his  actions  when  they  were  denounced  as  discredit-
able. One  could  only  wish  that  he  had  shown  24
greater  restraint  in  his  poems,  which  those  who  love
him  not  are  never  weary  of  criticising.  I  refer  to
passages  such  as  :  ^

*'  Let  arms  before  the  peaceful  toga  yield.
Laurels  to  eloquence  resign  the  field,"
or

"  O  happy  Rome,  bom  in  my  consulship  ! "

together  with  that  "  Jupiter,  by  whom  he  is
summoned  to  the  assembly  of  the  gods,"  and  the
"  Minerva  that  taught  him  her  accomplishments  "  ;
extravagances  which  he  permitted  himself  in  imita-
tion of  certain  precedents  in  Greek  literature.

But  while  it  is  unseemly  to  make  a  boast  of  one's  25
eloquence,  it  is,  however,  at  times  permissible  to
express  confidence  in  it.  Who,  for  instance,  can
blame  the  following  ?  2  "  What,  then,  am  I  to  think  ?
That  I  am  held  in  contempt .''  I  see  nothing  either
in  my  past  life,  or  my  position,  or  such  poor  talents
as  I  may  possess,  that  Antony  can  afford  to  despise."
And  a  little  later  he  speaks  yet  more  openly :  28
"Or  did  he  wish  to  challenge  me  to  a  contest  of
eloquence?  I  could  wish  for  nothing  better.  For
what  ampler  or  richer  theme  could  I  hope  to  find
than  to  speak  at  once  for  myself  and  against
Antony  ?  "

Another  form  of  arrogance  is  displayed  by  those  who  27
declare  that  they  have  come  to  a  clear  conviction  of

169


QUINTILIAN

aliter  adfuturos  fuipse  proponunt.  Nam  et  inyiti
iudices  audiunt  praesumentem  partes  suas,  nee  hoc
oratori  contingere  inter  adversaries  quod  Pytha-
gorae  inter  discipulos  potest  Ipse  dixit.  Sed  istud
magis  minusve  vitiosum  est  pro  personis  dicentiuni.

28  Defenditur  enim  aliquatenus  aetate,  dignitate^
auctoritate ;  quae  tamen  vix  in  ullo  tanta  fuerint,
ut  non  hoc  adfirmationis  genus  temperandum  sit
aliqua  moderatione  sicut  omnia,  in  quibus  patronus
argumentum  ex  se  ipso  petet.  Quid  fuisset  tumidius,
si  accipiendum  criminis  loco  negasset  Cicero  equitis
Romani  esse  filium,  se  defendente  ?  At  ille  fecit
hoc  etiam  favorabile  coniungendo  cum  iudicibus
dignitatem  suam :  Equitis  autem  Romani  esse  Jilium,
criminis  loco  poni  ah  accusalorihus,  neque  vobis  iudi-
cantibus  oporiuit  neque  defendentihtis  nobis.

29  Impudens,  tumultuosa,  iracunda  actio  omnibus
indecora,  sed  ut  quisque  aetate,  dignitate,  usu  prae-
cedit,  magis  in  ea  reprehendendus.  Videas  autem
rixatores  quosdam  neque  iudicum  reverentia  neque
agendi more ac modo  contineri,  quo  ipso mentis

<i  ■■■  \  Pro  Cael.  ii.  4.

q3i


BOOK XI.  I.  27-29

the  justice  of  their  cause,  which  they  would  not
otherwise  have  undertaken.  For  the  judges  give
but  a  reluctant  hearing  to  such  as  presume  to
anticipate  their  verdict,  and  the  orator  cannot  hope
that  his  opponents  will  regard  his  ipse  dixit  with  the
veneration  accorded  by  the  Pythagoreans  to  that  of
their  master.  But  this  fault  will  vary  in  seriousness
according  to  the  character  of  the  orator  who  uses
such  language.  For  such  assertions  may  to  some  28
extent  be  justified  by  the  age,  rank,  and  authority
of  the  speaker.  But  scarcely  any  orator  is  possessed
of  these  advantages  to  such  an  extent  as  to  exempt
him  from  the  duty  of  tempering  such  assertions  by
a  certain  show  of  modesty,  a  remark  which  also
applies  to  all  passages  in  which  the  advocate  draws
any  of  his  arguments  from  his  own  person.  What
could  have  been  more  presumptuous  than  if  Cicero
had  asserted  that  the  fact  that  a  man  was  the  son
of  a  Roman  knight  should  never  be  regarded  as  a
serious  charge,  in  a  case  in  which  he  was  appearing
for  the  defence  ?  But  he  succeeded  in  giving  this
very  argument  a  favourable  turn  by  associating  his
own  rank  with  that  of  the  judges,  and  saying,^
"  The  fact  of  a  man  being  the  son  of  a  Roman  knight
should  never  have  been  put  forward  as  a  charge  by
the  prosecution  when  these  gentlemen  were  in  the
jury-box  and  I  was  appearing  tor  the  defendant."

An  impudent,  disorderly,  or  angry  tone  is  always  29
unseemly,  no  matter  who  it  be  that  assumes  it ;  and
it  becomes  all  the  more  reprehensible  in  proportion
to  the  age,  rank,  and  experience  of  the  speaker.
But  we  are  familiar  with  the  sight  of  certain  brawl-
ing advocates  who  are  restrained  neither  by  respect
for  the  court  nor  by  the  recognised  methods  and

171


QUINTILIAN

habitu  manifestum  sit,  tam  in  suscipiendis  qiiam  in

30  agendis  causis  nihil  pensi  habere.  Profert  enim
mores  plerumque  oratio  et  animi  secreta  detegit.
Nee  sine  causa  Graeci  prodiderunt,  ut  vivat,  quemque
etiam  dicere.  Humiliora  ilia  vitia :  summissa  adulatio,
adfectata  scurrilitas,  in  rebus  ac  verbis  parum  modestis
ac  pudicis  vilis  pudor,  in  omni  negotio  neglecta
auctoritas ;  quae  fere  accidunt  iis,  qui  nimium  aut
blandi  esse  aut  ridiculi  volunt.

31  Ipsum  etiam  eloquentiae  genus  alios  aliud  decet.
Nam  neque  tam  plenum  et  erectum  et  audax  et
praecultum  senibus  convenerit  quam  pressuni  et
mite  et  limatum  et  quale  intelligi  vult  Cicero,  cum
dicit,  orationem  suam  coepisse  caiiescere ;  sicut
vestibus  quoque  non  purpura  coccoque  fulgentibus

32  ilia  aetas  satis  apta  sit.  In  iuvenibus  etiam  ube-
riora  paulo  et  paene  periclitantia  feruntur.  At  in
iisdem  siccum  et  sollicitum  et  contractum  dicendi
propositum  plerumque  adfectatione  ipsa  severitatis
invisum  est,  quando  etiam  morum  senilis  auctoritas
immatura in adolescentibus creditur. Simpliciora

33  militares  decent.  Philosophiam  ex  professo,  ut
quidam  faciunt,  ostentantibus  parum  decori  sunt
plerique  orationis  ornatus  maximeque  ex  adfectibus,
quos  illi  vitia  dicunt. Verba  quoque  exquisitiora  et

34  compositio numerosa tali proposito diversa. Non


^i


*  Bnit.  ii.  8.


BOOK XI.  I.  29-34

manners  of  pleading.  The  obvious  inference  from
this  attitude  of  mind  is  that  they  are  utterly  reckless
both  in  undertaking  cases  and  in  pleading  them.
For  a  man's  character  is  generally  revealed  and  the  30
secrets  of  his  heart  are  laid  bare  by  his  manner  of  speak-
ing, and  there  is  good  ground  for  the  Greek  aphorism
that,  "  as  a  man  lives,  so  will  he  speak."  The  follow-
ing vices  are  of  a  meaner  type :  grovelling  flattery,
affected  buffoonery,  immodesty  in  dealing  with  things
or  words  which  are  unseemly  or  obscene,  and  dis-
regard of  authority  on  all  and  every  occasion.  They
are  faults  which,  as  a  rule,  are  found  in  those  who
are  over-anxious  either  to  please  or  amuse.

Again,  different  kinds  of  eloquence  suit  different  31
speakers.  For  example,  a  full,  haughty,  bold  and
florid  style  would  be  less  becoming  to  an  old  man
than  that  restrained,  mild  and  precise  style  to  which
Cicero  refers,  when  he  says  that  his  style  is  beginning
to  grow  grey-haired.*  It  is  the  same  with  their  style
as  their  clothes ;  purple  and  scarlet  raiment  goes  ill
with  grey  hairs.  In  the  young,  however,  we  can  32
endure  a  rich  and  even,  perhaps,  a  risky  style.  On
the  other  hand,  a  dry,  careful  and  compressed  stvle
is  unpleasing  in  the  young  as  suggesting  the  affecta-
tion of  severity,  since  even  the  authority  of  character
that  goes  with  age  is  considered  as  premature  in
young  men.  Soldiers  are  best  suited  by  a  simple
style.  Those,  again,  who  make  ostentatious  pro-  33
fession,  as  some  do,  of  being  philosophers,  would  do
well  to  avoid  most  of  the  ornaments  of  oratory,  more
especially  those  which  consist  in  appeals  to  the
passions,  which  they  regard  as  moral  blemishes.  So,
too,  the  employment  of  rare  words  and  of  rhythmical
structure  are  incongruous  with  their  profession. For  3-1

173


QUINTILIAN

enim  sola  ilia  laetiora^  qualia  a  Cicerone  dicuntur,
Saxa  atque  solitudines  voci  respondent ;  sed  etiam  ilia,
quanquam  plena  sanguinis,  Vos  enim  iam,  Albani
tumuli  atque  luci,  vos,  inquam,  imploro  atque  testor,
vosque,  Alhanorum  obrutae  aiae,  sacrorum  populi
Romani  sociae  et  aequales,  non  eonveniant  barbae  illi
36  atque  tristitiae.  At  vir  civilis  vereque  sapiens,  qui
se  non  otiosis  disputationibus,  sed  administrationi
rei  publicae  dediderit,  a  qua  longissime  isti,  qui
philosophi  vocantur,  recesserunt,  omnia,  quae  ad
efficiendum  oratione  quod  proposuerit  valent,  libenter
adhibebit,  cum  prius  quid  honestum  sit  efficere  in

36  animo  sue  constituerit.  Est  quod  principes  deceat^
aliis  non  concesseris.  Imperatorum  ac  triumphalium
separata  est  aliqua  ex  parte  ratio  eloquentiae,  sicut
Pompeius  abunde  disei'tus  rerum  suarum  narrator,
et  hie,  qui  belle  civili  se  interfecit,  Cato  eloquens

37  senator  fuit.  Idem  dictum  saepe  in  alio  liberum,  in
alio  furiosum,  in  alio  superbum  est.  Verba  adversus
Agamemnonem  a  Thersite  habita  ridentur;  da  ilia
Diomedi  aliive  cui  pari :  magnum  animum  ferre  prae
se  videbuntur.  Ego  ie  consulem  puiem,  inquit  L.
Crassus Philippo,  cum tu me non  putes senatorem  ?

1  Pro  Arch.  viii.  19.  *  Pro  Mil.  xxxi.  85.

»  n.  ii.  225.  *  De  Or.  iii.  1.

174


BOOK XI.  I.  34-37

their  beards  and  gloomy  bi-ows  are  ill-suited  not
merely  to  luxuriance  of  style,  such  as  we  find  in
Cicero's  "  Rocks  and  solitudes  answer  to  the  voice,"  *
but  even  to  full-blooded  passages  as,  "  For  on  you  I
call,  ye  hills  and  groves  of  Alba  ;  I  call  you  to  bear
me  witness,  and  ye,  too,  fallen  altars  of  the  Albans,
that  were  once  the  peers  and  equals  of  the  holy
places  of  Rome."  ^  But  the  public  man,  who  is  truly  35
wise  and  devotes  himself  not  to  idle  disputations,
but  to  the  administration  of  the  state,  from  which
those  who  call  themselves  philosophers  have  with-
drawn themselves  afar,  will  gladly  employ  every
method  that  may  contribute  to  the  end  M'hich  he
seeks  to  gain  by  his  eloquence,  although  he  will  first
form  a  clear  conception  in  his  mind  as  to  what  aims
are  honourable  and  what  are  not.  There  is  a  form  36
ot  eloquence  which  is  becoming  in  the  greatest
men,  but  inadmissible  in  others.  For  example,  the
methods  of  eloquence  employed  by  commanders  and
conquerors  in  their  hour  of  triumph  are  to  a  great
extent  to  be  regarded  as  in  a  class  apart.  The
comparison  of  the  eloquence  of  Pompey  and  Cato
the  younger,  who  slew  himself  in  the  civil  war,  will
illustrate  my  meaning.  The  former  was  extra-
ordinarily eloquent  in  the  description  of  his  own
exploits,  while  the  latter's  powers  were  displayed
in  debates  in  the  senate.  Again,  the  same  remark  37
will  seem  freedom  of  speech  in  one's  mouth,  madness
in  another's,  and  arrogance  in  a  third.  We  laugh  at
the  words  used  by  Thersites  ^  to  Agamemnon ;  but
put  them  in  the  mouth  of  Diomede  or  some  other
of  his  peers,  and  they  will  seem  the  expression  of  a
great  spirit.  "  Shall  I  regard  you  as  consul,"  said
Lucius  Crassiis  *  to  Philippus,  "  when  you  refuse  to

>75


QUINTILIAN

Vox honestissimae libertatis ; non tamen ferres

38  quemcunque  dicentem.  Negat  se  magni  facere
aliquis  poetarum,  utriim  Caesar  ater  an  albus  homo
sit,  insania ;  verte,  ut  idem  Caesar  de  illo  dixerit,
arrogantia  est.  Maior  in  personis  obsei-vatio  est
apud  tragicos  comicosque,  multis  enim  utuntur  et
variis.  Eadem  et  eorum,  qui  oratioiies  aliis  scribe-
bant;  fuit  ratio  et  declaniantium  est;  non  enim
semper  ut  advocati  sed  plerumque  ut  litigatores
dicimus.

39  Verum  etiam  in  iis  causis,  quibus  advocamur,
eadem  differentia  diligenter  est  custodienda.  Utimur
enim  fictione  personarum  et  velut  ore  alieno  loqui-
mur,  dandique  sunt  iis,  quibus  vocem  accommodamus,
sui  mores.  Aliter  enim  P.  Clodius,  aliter  Appius
Caecus,  aliter  Caecilianus  ille,  aliter  Terentianus
pater fingitur. Quid asperius lietore Verris : Ut

40  adeas,  tantum  dahis  ?  Quid  fortius  illo,  cuius  inter
ipsa  verberum  supplicia  una  vox  audiebatur :  Civis
Romanus  sum  ?  Quam  dignae  Milonis  in  peroratione
ipsa  voces  eo  viro,  qui  pro  re  publica  seditiosum
civem  totiens  compescuisset  quique  insidias  virtute

41  superasset? Denique non modo quot in causa

»  Cat.  93.  *  Cp.  ir.  xv.  30 ;  in.  viii.  51.

•  Clodiua,  the  unscrupulous  enemy  of  Cicero.  Appius
Caecus,  his  ancestor,  the  great  senator,  who  secured  the
rejection  of  the  terms  of  Pyrrhus.

•  See  Pro  Cael.  xvi.

•  I.e.  to  visit  a  relative  in  prison,  Verr.  v.  xlv.  118  ;  cp.
QuitU.  IX.  iv.  71.

•  Verr.  V.  Ixii.  162.  »  Cjp.  iv.  ii.  25  ;  vr.  v.  10. (

176


BOOK XI.  I.  37-41

regard  me  as  a  senator  ?  "  That  was  honourable
freedom  of  speech,  and  yet  we  should  not  tolerate
such  words  from  everybody's  lips.  One  of  the  poets ^  38
says  that  he  does  not  care  whether  Caesar  be  white
or  black.  That  is  madness.  But  reverse  the  case.
Suppose  that  Caesar  said  it  of  the  poet  ?  That
would  be  arrogance.  The  tragic  and  comic  poets
pay  special  attention  to  character,  since  they  intro-
duce a  great  number  and  variety  of  persons.  Those
who  wrote  speeches  ^  for  others  paid  a  like  attention
to  these  points,  and  so  do  the  declaimers ;  for  we  do
not  always  speak  as  advocates,  but  frequently  as
actual  parties  to  the  suit.

But  even  in  these  cases  in  which  we  appear  as  39
advocates,  differences  of  character  require  careful
observation.  For  we  introduce  fictitious  personages
and  speak  through  other's  lips,  and  we  must  therefore
allot  the  appropriate  character  to  those  to  whom
we  lend  a  voice.  For  example,  Publius  Clodius  will
be  represented  in  one  way,  Appius  Caecus'  in
another,  while  Caecilius*  makes  the  father  in  his
comedy  speak  in  quite  a  different  manner  from  the
father  in  the  comedy  of  Terence.  What  can  be  40
more  brutal  than  the  words  of  Verres'  lictor,  "To
see  him  you  will  pay  so  much  "  ?  ^  or  braver  than
those  of  the  man  from  whom  the  scourge  could
wring  but  one  cry,  "  I  am  a  Roman  citizen  ! "  •
Again,  read  the  words  which  Cicero  places  in  the
mouth  of  Milo  in  his  peroration :  are  they  not
worthy  of  the  man  who  to  save  the  state  had  so
oft  repressed  a  seditious  citizen,  and  had  triumi)hed
by  his  valour  over  the  ambush  that  was  laid  for
him  ?  ^  Further,  it  is  not  merely  true  that  the  41
variety required in impersonation will be in

177


QUINTILIAN

tfttidem  in  prosopopoeia  sunt  varietates,  sed  hoc
etiam  plures,  quod  in  his  puerorura,  feminarum,
populorum, mutarum etiam rerum assimulamus

42  adfectus,  quibus  omnibus  debetur  suus  decor.  Eadem
in  iis,  pro  quibus  agemus,  observanda  sunt ;  aliter
enim  pro  alio  saepe  dicendum  est,  ut  quisque
honestus,  humilis,  invidiosus,  favorabilis  erit,  adiecta
propositorum  quoque  et  anteactae  vitae  differentia,
lucundissima  vero  in  oratore  humanitas,  facilitas,
moderatio,  benivolentia.  Sed  ilia  quoque  diversa
bonum  virum  decent :  malos  odisse,  publica  vice
commoveri,  ultum  ire  scelera  et  iniurias,  et  omnia,
ut  initio  dixi,  honesta.

43  Nee  tantum,  quis  et  pro  quo  sed  etiam  apud  quem
dicas,  interest.  Facit  enim  et  fortuna  discrimen  et
potestas,  nee  eadem  apud  principem,  magistratum,
senatorem,  privatum,  tantum  liberum  ratio  est,  nee
eodem  sono  publica  indicia  et  arbitrorum  discepta-

44  tiones  aguntur.  Nam  ut  orantem  pro  capite  sollici-
tudo  deceat  et  cura  et  omnes  ad  amplificandam
orationem quasi machinae, ita in parvis rebus


»  See  §  14.


178


BOOK  XI.  I.  41-44

prof)ortion  to  the  variety  presented  by  the  case,  for
impersonation  demands  even  greater  variety,  since
it  involves  the  portrayal  of  the  emotions  of  children,
women,  nations,  and  even  of  voiceless  things,  all
of  which  require  to  be  represented  in  character.
The  same  points  have  to  be  observed  with  respect  42
to  those  for  whom  we  plead :  for  our  tone  will  vary
with  the  character  of  our  client,  according  as  he  is
distinguished,  or  of  humble  position,  popular  or  the
reverse,  while  we  must  also  take  into  account  the
differences  in  their  principles  and  their  past  life.
As  regards  the  orator  himself,  the  qualities  which
will  most  commend  him  are  courtesy,  kindliness,
moderation  and  benevolence.  But,  on  the  other
hand,  the  opposite  of  these  qualities  will  sometimes
be  becoming  to  a  good  man.  He  may  hate  the  bad,
be  moved  to  passion  in  the  public  interest,  seek  to
avenge  crime  and  wrong,  and,  in  fine,  as  I  said  at
the  beginning,^  may  follow  the  promptings  of  every
honourable  emotion.

The  character  of  the  speaker  and  of  the  person  on  43
whose  behalf  he  speaks  are,  however,  not  the  only
points  which  it  is  important  to  take  into  account :
the  character  of  those  before  whom  we  have  to
speak  calls  for  serious  consideration.  Their  power
and  rank  will  make  no  small  difference ;  we  shall
employ  different  methods  according  as  we  are  speak-
ing before  the  emperor,  a  magistrate,  a  senator,  a
private  citizen,  or  merely  a  free  man,  while  a
different  tone  is  demanded  by  trials  in  the  public
courts,  and  in  cases  submitted  to  arbitration.  For  44
while  a  display  of  care  and  anxiety,  and  the  em-
ployment of  every  device  available  for  the  ampli-
fication  of  our style are becoming  when we are

179


QUINTILIAN

iudiciisque  vana  sint  eadem,  rideaturque  merito,
qui  apud  disceptatorem  de  re  levissima  sedens
dicturus  utatur  ilia  Ciceronis  confessione,  non  modo
se  animo  commoveri,  sed  eliam  corpore  ipso  perhorrescere.

45  Quis  vero  nesciat,  quanto  aliud  dicendi  genus  poscat
gravitas  senatoria,  aliud  aura  popularis?  cum  etiaiii
singulis  iudicantibus  non  idem  apud  graves  viros
quod  leviores,  non  idem  apud  eruditum  quod
militarem  ac  rusticum  deceat,  sitque  nonnunquam
summittenda  et  contrail enda  oratio,  ne  iudex  earn
vel  intelligere  vel  capere  non  possit.

46  Tempus  quoque  ac  locus  egent  observatione
propria.  Nam  et  tempus  turn  triste,  turn  laetum,
tum liberum, turn angustum est, atque ad haec

47  omnia  componendus  orator  ;  et  loco  publico  privatone,
celebri  an  secreto,  aliena  civitate  an  tua,  in  castris
denique  an  foro  dicas,  interest  plurimum,  ac  suam
quidque  formam  et  proprium  quendam  modum  elo-
quentiae  poscit :  cum  etiam  in  ceteris  actibus  vitae
non  idem  in  foro,  curia,  campo,  theatro,  domi  facere

*  Div.  in  Cote.  xiii.  41
i8o


BOOK XI.  I.  44-47

pleading  for  a  client  accused  on  a  capital  charge,
it  would  be  useless  to  employ  the  same  methods  in
cases  and  trials  of  minor  importance,  and  the  speaker
who,  when  speaking  from  his  chair  before  an  arbitrator
on  some  trivial  question,  should  make  an  admission
like  that  made  by  Cicero,  to  the  effect  that  it  was
not  merely  his  soul  that  was  in  a  state  of  com-
motion, but  that  his  whole  body  was  convulsed  with
shuddering,^  would  meet  with  well-deserved  ridicule.
Again,  who  does  not  know  what  different  styles  of  45
eloquence  are  required  when  speaking  before  the
grave  assembly  of  the  senate  and  before  the  fickle
populace,  since  even  when  we  are  pleading  before
single  judges  the  same  style  will  not  be  suitable
for  use  before  one  of  weighty  character  and  another
of  a  more  frivolous  disposition,  while  a  learned  judge
must  not  be  addressed  in  the  same  tone  that  we
should  employ  before  a  soldier  or  a  rustic,  and  our
style  must  at  tinaes  be  lowered  and  simplified,  for
fear  that  he  may  be  unable  to  take  it  in  or  to
understand  it.

Again,  circumstances  of  time  and  place  demand  46
special  consideration.  The  occasion  may  be  one
for  sorrow  or  for  rejoicing,  the  time  at  our  disposal
may  be  ample  or  restricted,  and  the  orator  must
adapt  himself  to  all  these  circumstances.  It,  like-  47
Mrise,  makes  no  small  difference  whether  we  are
speaking  in  public  or  in  private,  before  a  crowded
audience  or  in  comparative  seclusion,  in  another
city  or  our  own,  in  the  camp  or  in  the  forum  :  each
of  these  places  will  require  its  own  style  and  peculiar
form  of  oratory,  since  even  in  other  spheres  of  life
the  same  actions  are  not  equally  suited  to  the  forum,
the  senate-house,  the  Campus  Martins,  the  theatre


QUINTILIAN

conveniat;  et  pleraque,  quae  natura  non  sunt  repre-
hendenda  atque  adeo  ^  interim  sunt  necessaria,  alibi

48  quam  mos  permiserit  turpia  habeantur.  Illud  iam
diximuSj  quanto  plus  nitoris  et  cultus  demonstrativae
materiae,  ut  ad  delectation  em  audientium  compositae,
quam,  quae  sunt  in  actu  et  contentione,  suasoriae
iudieialesque  permittant.

Hoc  adhuc  adiiciendum  aliquas  etiam,  quae  sunt
egregiae  dicendi  virtutes,  quo  minus  deceant,  effici

49  condicione  causarum.  An  quisquam  tulerit  reum  in
discrimine  capitis,  praecipueque  si  apud  victorem  et
principem  pro  se  ipse  dicat,  frequenti  translatione,
fictis  aut  repetitis  ex  vetustate  verbis,  compositione
quae  sit  maxime  a  vulgari  usu  remota,  decurrentibus
periodis,  quam  laetissimis  locis  sententiisque  di-
centem  ?  Non  perdant  haec  omnia  necessarium
periclitanti  sollicitudinis  colorem,  petendumque  etiam

60  innocentibus  misericordiae  auxilium  ?  Moveaturne
quisquam  eius  fortuna,  quem  tumidum  ac  sui  iactan-
tem  et  ambitiosum  institorem  eloquentiae  in  ancipiti
sorte  videat?  Non  immo  oderit  reum  verba  au-
cupantem  et  anxium  de fama  ingenii,  et  cui  esse

61  diserto vacet? Quod mire M. Caelius  in defen-

*  adeo,  Gesner :  ideo,  B,
*  VIII.  iii.  1 1  sqq.


BOOK XI.  I.  47-51

or  one's  own  house,  and  there  is  much  that  is  not
in  itself  reprehensible,  and  may  at  times  be  abso-
lutely necessary,  which  will  be  regarded  as  unseemly
if  done  in  some  place  where  it  is  not  sanctioned  by
custom.  I  have  already  p>ointed  out^  how  much  48
more  elegance  and  ornament  is  allowed  by  the
topics  of  demonstrative  oratory,  whose  main  object
is  the  delectation  of  the  audience,  than  is  permitted
by  deliberative  or  forensic  themes  which  are  con-
cerned with  action  and  argument.

To  this  must  be  added  the  fact  that  certain
qualities,  which  are  in  themselves  merits  of  a  high
order,  may  be  rendered  unbecoming  by  the  special
circumstances  of  the  case.  For  example,  when  a  49
man  is  accused  on  a  capital  charge,  and,  above  all,
if  he  is  defending  himself  before  his  conqueror  or
his  sovereign,  it  would  be  quite  intolerable  for  him
to  indulge  in  frequent  metaphors,  antique  or  newly-
coined  words,  rhythms  as  far  removed  as  possible
from  the  practice  of  every-day  speech,  rounded
periods,  florid  commonplaces  and  ornate  reflexions.
Would  not  all  these  devices  destroy  the  impression
of  anxiety  which  should  be  created  by  a  man  in
such  peril,  and  rob  him  of  the  succour  of  pity,  on
which  even  the  innocent  are  forced  to  rely  ?  Would  60
any  man  be  moved  by  the  sad  plight  of  one  who
revealed  himself  as  a  vainglorious  boaster,  and
ostentatiously  flaunted  the  airs  and  graces  of  his
eloquence  at  a  moment  when  his  fate  hung  in
suspense  ?  Would  he  not  rather  hate  the  man  who,
despite  his  position  as  accused,  hunted  for  fine
words,  showed  himself  concerned  for  his  reputation
as  a  clever  speaker,  and  found  time  at  such  a
moment  to  display  his  eloquence? 1  consider  that  51

183


QUINTILIAN

sione  causae,  qua  reus  de  vi  fuit,  comprehendisse
videtur  mihi :  Ne  cut  vestntm  atque  etiam  omnium,  qui
ad  rem  agendam  adsunf,  metis  ant  vultus  molestior  attt  vox
ifnmoderatior aUqua aut denique, quod minimum est,

62  iactantior  gestus  fuisse  videatur.  Atqui  sunt  quaedam
actiones  in  satisfactione,  deprecatione,  confessione
positae :  sententiolisne  flendum  erit?  epiphonemata
aut  enthymemata  exorabunt  ?  Non,  quidquid  meris
adiicietur  adfectibus,  omnes eorum  diluet  vires  et

63  miserationem  securitate  laxabit  ?  Age,  si  de  morte
filii  sui  vel  iniuria,  quae  morte  sit  gravior,  dicendum
patri  fuerit,  aut  in  narrando  gratiam  illam  exposi-
tionis,  quae  continget  ex  sermone  puro  atque  dilucido,
quaeret,  breviter  ac  significanter  ordinem  rei  protu-
lisse  contentus,  aut  argumenta  diducet  in  digitos  et
propositionum  ac  partitionum  captabit  leporem  et,
ut  plerumque  in  hoc  genere  moris  est,  intentione

64  omni  remissa  loquetur?  Quo  fugerit  interim  dolor
ille  ?  ubi  lacrimae  substiterint  ?  unde  se  in  medium
tam  secura  observatio  artium  miserit?  Non  ab
exordio  usque  ad  ultimam  vocem  continuus  quidam
gemitus  et  idem  tristitiae  vultus  servabitur,  si  quidem
volet  dolorem  suum  etiam  in  audientes  transfundere  ?
quem  si  usquam  remiserit,  in  animum  iudicantium

iii'  A  form  of  Byllogism. See  v.  xiv.  1.

•  See  VIII.  V.  11. "An  exclamation  attached  to  the  close
of  a  statement  or  a  proof  by  way  of  climax."


BOOK  XI.  I.  51-54

Marcus  Caelius,  in  the  speech  in  which  he  defended
himself  against  a  charge  of  breach  of  the  peace,  showed
a  wonderful  grasp  ol  these  facts,  when  he  said :  "  I
trust  that  none  of  you  gentlemen,  or  of  all  those
who  have  come  to  plead  against  me,  will  find  offence
in  my  mien  or  insolence  in  my  voice,  or,  though  that
is  a  comparative  trifle,  any  trace  of  arrogance  in
my  gesture."  But  there  are  some  cases  where  the  62
success  of  the  pleader  depends  on  apology,  entreaties
for  mercy,  or  confession  of  error.  Can  sorrow  be
expressed  in  epigram .''  Or  will  enthymemes  ^  or
epiphonemata  ^  avail  to  win  the  judge's  mercy  ?  Will
not  all  embellishment  of  pure  emotion  merely  im-
pair its  force  and  dispel  compassion  by  such  a  display
of  apparent  unconcern  ?  Or,  suppose  that  a  father  63
has  to  speak  of  his  son's  death,  or  of  some  wrong
that  is  worse  than  death,  will  he,  in  making  his  state-
ment of  facts,  seek  to  achieve  that  grace  in  exposi-
tion which  is  secured  by  purity  and  lucidity  of
language,  and  content  himself  with  setting  forth
his  case  in  due  order  with  brevity  and  meaning.''
Or  will  he  count  over  the  heads  of  his  argument
upon  his  fingers,  aim  at  niceties  of  division  and
proposition,  and  speak  without  the  least  energy  of
feeling  as  is  usual  in  such  portions  of  a  speech?
Whither  will  his  grief  have  fled  while  he  is  thus  54
engaged  }  Where  has  the  fountain  of  his  tears  been
stayed .''  How  came  this  callous  attention  to  the
rules  of  text-books  to  obtrude  itself?  Will  he  not
rather,  from  his  opening  words  to  the  very  last  he
utters,  maintain  a  continuous  voice  of  lamentation
and  a  mien  of  unvaried  woe,  if  he  desires  to  trans-
plant his  grief  to  the  hearts  of  his  audience  ?  For
if  he  once  remits  aught  of  his  passion  of  grief,  he

VOL.  IV.  G '^5


QUINTILIAN

55  non  reducet.  Quod  praecipue  declamantibus  (neque
enim  me  paenitet  ad  hoc  quoque  opus  meum  et
curam  susceptorum  semel  adolescentium  respicere)
custodienduni  est,  quo  plures  in  schola  finguntur
adfectus,  quos  non  ut  advocati,  sed  ut  passi  subimus.

56  Cum  etiam  hoc  genus  simulari  Htium  soleat,  cum  ius
mortis  a  senatu  quidam  ob  aliquam  magnam  infelici-
tatem  vel  etiam  paenitentiam  petunt,  in  quibus  non
solum  cantare,  quod  vitium  pervasit,  aut  lascivire,
sed  ne  argumentari  quidem  nisi  mixtis,  et  quidem
ita  ut  ipsa  probatione  magis  emineant,  adfectibus
decet.  Nam  qui  intermittere  in  agendo  dolorem
potest,  videtur  posse  etiam  deponere.

57  Nescio  tamen  an  huius,  de  quo  loquimur,  decoris
custodia  maxime  circa  eos,  contra  quos  dicimus,
examinanda  sit.  Nam  sine  dubio  in  omnibus  statim
accusationibus  hoc  agendum  est,  ne  ad  eas  libenter
deseendisse  videamur.  Ideoque  mihi  illud  Cassii
$everi,  uon  mediocriter  displicet:  Di  honi,  vivo;  el,


*  VII.  iv.  39.  It  is  said  that  poison  was  provided  by  the
state  of  Massilia  to  serve  the  turn  of  such  unhappy  persons,
8o  soon  as  they  could  convince  the  local  senate  that  their
proposed  suicide  was  justifiable.

^  Cp.  I.  viii.  2.

•  Cp.  X.  i.  22.  In  9  B.C.  he  accused  Nonius  Asprenas,  a
friend  of  Augustus,  of  the  crime  of  poisoning.  Asprenas
was  defended  by  PoUio,  and  supported  by  Augustus  during
his  trial.

i86


BOOK  XI.  1.  54-57

will  never  be  able  to  recall  it  to  the  hearts  of  them
that  hear  him.  This  is  a  point  which  declaimers,  56
above  all,  must  be  careful  to  bear  in  mind :  I
mention  this  because  I  have  no  compunction  in
referring  to  a  branch  of  the  art  which  was  once  also
wy  own,  or  in  reverting  to  the  consideration  of  the
youthful  students  such  as  once  were  in  my  charge :
the  declaim  er,  I  repeat,  must  bear  this  in  mind,
since  in  the  schools  we  often  feign  emotions  that
affect  us  not  as  advocates,  but  as  the  actual  sufferers.
For  example,  we  even  imagine  cases  where  persons,  66
either  because  of  some  overwhelming  misfortune  or
repentance  for  some  sin,  demand  from  the  senate  the
right  to  make  an  end  of  their  lives ;  ^  and  in  these
cases  it  is  obviously  unbecoming  not  merely  to  adopt
a  chanting  intonation,^  a  fault  which  has  also  become
almost  universal,  or  to  use  extravagant  language,
but  even  to  argue  without  an  admixture  of  emotional
appeal,  so  managed  as  to  be  even  more  prominent
than  the  proof  which  is  advanced.  For  the  man
who  can  lay  aside  his  grief  for  a  moment  while  he
is  pleading,  seems  capable  even  of  laj-ing  it  aside
altogether

I  am  not  sure,  however,  that  it  is  not  in  our  67
attitude  towards  our  opponents  that  this  care  for
decorum,  which  we  are  now  discussing,  should  be  ■
most  rigorously  maintained.  For  there  can  be  na
doubt,  that  in  all  accusations  our  first  aim  should
be  to  give  the  impression  that  it  is  only  with  the
greatest  reluctance  that  we  have  consented  to  under-
take the  role  of  accuser.  Consequently,  I  strongly
disapprove  of  such  remarks  as  the  following  which
was  made  by  Cassius  Severus:^  "Thank  Heaven,  I
am  still  alive ;  and  that  I  may  find  some  savour  in

i8y


QUINTILIAN

quo  me  vivere  iuvei,  Asprenatem  reum  video. Non  enim
iusta  ex  causa  vel  necessaria  videri  potest  postulasse

58  eum,  sed  quadam  accusaiidi  voluptate.  Praeter  hoc
tamen,  quod  est  commune,  propriam  moderationem
quaedam  causae  desiderant.  Quapropter  et,  qui
curationem  bonorum  patris  postulabit,  doleat  eius
valetudinem ;  et  quamlibet  gravia  filio  pater  obiec-
tvrrus  miserrimam  sibi  ostendat  esse  banc  ipsam
necessitatem,  nee  hoc  paucis  modo  verbis,  sed  toto
colore  actionis,  ut id eum  non dicere modo,  sed

59  etiam  yere  dicere  appareat.  Nee  causanti  pupil lo
^e  tutor  irascatur  unquam,  ut  non  remaneant  amoris
vestigia  et  sacra  quaedam  patris  eius  memoria.  lam
quomodo  contra  abdicantem  patrem,  querentem
uxorem,  agi  causam  oporteret,  in  libro,  ut  arbitror,
septimo  dixi.  Quando  etiam  ipsos  loqui,  quandb
advocati  voce  uti  deceat,  quartus  liber,  in  quo
prooemii  praecepta  sunt,  continet.

60  Esse  et  in  verbis  quod  deceat  aut  turpe  sit,
liehiini  dubium  est.  Unum  iam  igitur  huic  loco,
quod est sane summae difficultatis, adiiciendum


*  The  imagined  case  would  be  as  follows. The  father  dis-
inherits the  son  for  an  alleged  offence. The  sou  accuses  the
father  of  madness  and  demands  a  curator,  etc.
I*  yjl.^  iv.  24.  •  IV.  i.  46.


BOOK XL  I.  57-60

life,  I  see  Asprenas  arraigned  for  his  crimes."  For,
after  this,  it  is  impossible  to  suppose  that  he  had
just  or  necessary  reasons  for  accusing  Asprenas,  and
we  cannot  help  suspecting  that  his  motive  was  sheer
delight  in  accusation.  But,  beside  this  considera-  68
tion,  which  applies  to  all  cases,  there  is  the  further
point  that  certain  cases  demand  special  moderation.
Therefore,  a  man  who  demands  the  appointment  of
a  curator  for  his  father's  property,  should  express  his
grief  at  his  father's  affliction  ;  and,  however  grave  be
the  charges  that  a  father  may  be  going  to  bring
against  his  son,  he  should  emphasize  the  painful
nature  of  the  necessity  that  is  imposed  upon  him.^
And  this  he  should  do  not  merely  in  a  few  brief  .
words,  but  his  emotion  should  colour  his  whole
speech,  so  that  it  may  be  felt  not  merely  that  he
is  speaking,  but  that  he  is  speaking  the  truth.
Again,  if  a  ward  make  allegations  against  his  59
guardian,  the  latter  must  never  give  way  to  such
anger  that  no  trace  is  left  of  his  former  love  or
of  a  certain  reverent  regard  for  the  memory  of  his
opponent's  father.  I  have  already  spoken,  in  the
seventh  book,  I  think,*  of  the  way  in  which  a  case
should  be  pleaded  against  a  father  who  disinherits
his  son,  or  a  wife  who  brings  a  charge  of  ill-treatr
ment  against  her  husband,  while  the  fourth  book,'
in  which  1  prescribed  certain  rules  for  the  exordium^
contains  my  instructions  as  to  when  it  is  becoming
that  the  parties  should  speak  themselves,  and  when
they  should  employ  an  advocate  to  speak  for  them.

It will be readily admitted by everyone that  60
words  may  be  becoming  or  offensive  in  themselves.
There  is  therefore  a  further  point,  which  presents
the  most  serious  difficulty^  that  requires  notice  in

189


QUINTILIAN

videtur,  quibus  modis  ea,  quae  sunt  natura  parum
speciosa  qiiaeque  non  dicere,  si  utrumlibet  esset
liberum,  maluissemus,  non  tamen  sint  indecora  dicen-

61  tibus.  Quid  asperiorem  habere  frontem  potest  aut
quid  aures  hominum  magis  respuunt,  quam  cum  est
filio  filiive  advocatis  in  matrem  perorandum?  Ali-
quando  tamen  necesse  est,  ut  in  causa  Cluentii
Habiti.  Sed  non  semper  ilia  via,  qua  contra  Sasiam
Cicero  usus  est ;  non  quia  non  ille  optime,  sed  quia
plurimum refert,  qua in re et quo modo laedat.

62  Itaque  ilia,  cum  filii  caput  palam  impugnaret,
fortiter  fuit  repellenda.  Duo  tamen,  quae  sola
supererant,  divine  Cicero  seryavit,  primum,  ne  obli-
visceretur  reverentiae,  quae  parentibus  debetur;
deinde  ut,  repetitis  altius  causis,  diligentissime  osten-
deret,  quam  id,  quod  erat  in  matrem  dicturus,  non
oporteret modo fieri, sed etiam necesse esset.

63  Primaque  haec  expositio  fuit,  quanquam  ad  prae-
sentem  quaestionem  nihil  pertinebat.  Adeo  in  causa
difficili  atque  perplexa  nihil  prius  intuendum  credidit
quam  quid  deceret.  Fecit  itaque  nomen  parentis
non filio  invidiosum,  sed ipsi in quam dicebatur.

64  Potest  tamen  aliquando  mater  et  in  re  leviore  aut

^  See  pro  Clu.  Ixi.  169  sqq. Sasia  was  Chientius'  mother.
*  pro  Clu.  vi.  17.


BOOK XI.  I.  60-64

this  connexion :  we  must  consider  by  what  means
things  which  are  naturally  unseemly  and  which,  had
we  been  given  the  choice,  we  should  have  preferred
not  to  say,  may  be  uttered  without  indecorum.
What  at  first  sight  can  be  more  unpleasing  and  what  61
more  revolting  to  the  ears  of  men  than  a  case  in
which  a  son  or  his  advocate  has  to  speak  against  his
mother  ?  And  yet  sometimes  it  is  absolutely  neces-
sary, as,  for  example, in  the  case  of  Cluentius  Habitus.*
But  it  is  not  always  desirable  to  employ  the  method
adopted  by  Cicero  against  Sasia,not  because  he  did  not
make  most  admirable  use  of  it,  but  because  in  such
cases  it  makes  the  greatest  difference  what  the  point
may  be  and  what  the  manner  in  which  the  mother
seeks  to  injure  her  son.  In  the  case  of  Sasia  she  had  62
openly  sought  to  procure  the  destruction  of  her  son,
and  consequently  vigorous  methods  were  justified
against  her.  But  there  were  two  points,  the  only
points  which  remained  to  be  dealt  with,  that  were
handled  by  Cicero  with  consummate  skill :  in  the
first  place,  he  does  not  forget  the  reverence  that  is
due  to  parents,  and  in  the  second,  after  a  thorough
investigation  of  the  history  of  the  crime,  he  makes
it  clear  that  it  was  not  merely  right,  but  a  positive
necessity  that  he  should  say  what  he  proposed  to
say  against  the  mother.  And  he  placed  this  ex-  63
planation  in  the  forefront  of  his  case,^  although  it
had  really  nothing  to  do  with  the  actual  question  at
issue  ;  a  fact  which  shows  that  his  first  consideration
in  that  difficult  and  complicated  case  was  the  con-
sideration of  what  was  becoming  for  him  to  say.  He
therefore  made  the  name  of  mother  cast  odium  not
on  the  son,  but  on  her  who  was  the  object  of  his
denunciations. It  is,  however,  always  possible  that  a  64

191


QUINTILIAN

minus  infeste  contra  filium  stare ;  turn  lenior  atque
summissior  decebit  oratio.  Nam  et  satisfaciendo  aut
nostram  minuemus  invidiam  aut  etiam  in  diversum
cam  transferemus ;  et  si  graviter  dolere  filium  palam
fuerit,  credetur  abesse  ab  eo  culpam  fietque  ultro

65  miserabilis.  Avertere  quoque  in  alios  crimen  decet,
ut  fraude  aliquorum  concita  credatur,  et  omnia  nos
passuroSj  nihil  aspere  dicturos  testandum,  ut,  etiamsi
non  possumus  non  conviciari,  nolle  videamur.  Etiam,
si  quid  obiiciendum  erit,  officium  est  patroni,  ut  id
filio  invito,  sed  fide cogente  facere  credatur. Ita

66  poterit  uterque  laudari.  Quod  de  matre  dixi,  de
utroque  parente  accipiendum  est ;  nam  inter  patres
etiam  filiosque,  cum  intervenisset  emancipatio,  liti-
gatum  scio.  In  aliis  quoque  propinquitatibus  custo-
diendum  est,  ut  inviti  et  necessario  et  parce  iudicemur
dixisse,  magis  autem  aut  minus,  ut  cuique  personae
debetur  reverentia.  Eadem  pro  libertis  adversus
patronos  observantia. Et  ut  semel  plura  complectar,

*  I.e.  from  the  patria  potestas  by  a  fictitious  form  of  sale.
103


BOOK XI.  I.  64-66

mother  may  be  her  son's  opponent  in  a  case  of  less
serious  import,  or  at  any  rate  in  a  way  which  involves
less  deadly  hostility.  Under  such  circumstances  the
orator  must  adopt  a  gentler  and  more  restrained
tone.  For  example,  we  may  offer  apology  for  the
line  which  we  take,  and  thus  lessen  the  odium
which  we  incur  or  even  transfer  it  to  a  different
quarter,  while  if  it  be  obvious  that  the  son  is  deeply
grieved  by  the  situation,  it  will  be  believed  that  he
is  blameless  in  the  matter  and  he  will  even  become
an  object  of  pity.  It  will  also  be  desirable  to  throw  65
the  blame  on  others,  so  that  it  may  be  believed  that
the  mother's  action  was  instigated  by  their  malice,
and  to  assert  that  we  will  put  up  with  every  form  of
provocation,  and  will  say  nothing  harsh  in  reply,  so
that,  even  although  strong  language  may  be  abso-
lutely necessary  on  our  part,  we  may  seem  to  be
driven  to  use  it  against  our  will.  Nay,  if  some
charge  has  to  be  made  against  the  mother,  it  will  be
the  advocate's  task  to  make  it  seem  that  he  does  so
against  the  desire  of  the  son  and  from  a  sense  of
duty  to  his  client.  Thus  both  son  and  advocate  will
win  legitimate  praise.  What  I  have  said  about  66
mothers  will  apply  to  either  parent;  for  I  have
known  of  litigation  taking  place  between  fathers
and  sons  as  well,  after  the  emancipation  ^  of  the  son.
And  when  other  relationships  are  concerned,  we
must  take  care  to  create  the  impression  that  we
have  spjoken  with  reluctance  and  under  stress  of
necessity  and  that  we  have  been  forbearing  in  our
language  ;  but  the  importance  of  so  doing  will  vary
according  to  the  respect  due  to  the  persons  con-
cerned. The  same  courtesy  should  be  observed  in
speaking  on  behalf  of  freedmen  against  their  patrons.

193


QUINTILIAN

nunquam  decebit  sic  adversus  tales  agere  personas,
quomodo  contra  nos  agi  ab hominibus  condicionis

67  eiusdem  iniquo  animo  tulissemus.  Praestatur  hoc
aliquando  etiam  dignationibus,  ut  libertatis  nostrae
ratio  reddatur,  ne  quis  nos  aut  petulantes  in  lae-
dendis  eis  aut  etiam  ambitiosos  putet.  Itaque
Ciceroj  quanquam  erat  in  Cottam  gravissime  dicturus,
neque  aliter  agi  P.  Oppii  causa  poteratj  longa  tamen

68  praefatione  excusavit  officii  sui  necessitatem.  Ali-
quando etiam  inferioribus  praecipueque  adolescentulis
parcere  aut  videri  decet.  Utitur  hac  moderatione
Cicero  pro  Caelio  contra  Atratinum^  ut  eum  non
inimice  corripere,  sed  paene  patrie  monere  videatur.
Nam  et  nobilis  et  iuvenis  et  non  iniusto  dolore
venerat  ad  accusandum.

Sed  in  his  quidem,  in  quibus  vel  iudici  vel  etiam
adsistentibus  ratio  nostrae  moderationis  probari
debet,  minor  est  labor ; illic  plus  difficultatis,  ubi

69  ipsos,  contra  quos  dicimus,  veremur  ofFendere,  Duae
simul  huiusmodi  personae  Ciceroni  pro  Murena  di-
centi  obstiterunt,  M.  Catonis  Serviique  Sulpicii.
Quam  decenter  tamen  Sulpicio,  cum  omnes  con-
cessisset virtutes, scientiam petendi consulatus

*  Cp.  V.  xiii.  20.  P.  Oppius,  quaestor  to  M.  Aureliua
Cotta  in  Bithynia,  was  charged  by  Cotta  in  a  letter  to  the
Senate  with  misappropriation  of  supplies  for  his  troops  and
with  an  attempt  on  his  life.  The  speech  in  which  Cicera
defended  Oppius  (69  B.C.)  is  lost.

^  See  opening  sections  of  ^ro  Caelio,

m


BOOK XI.  I.  66-69

In  fact,  to  sum  up,  it  will  never  become  us  to  plead
against  such  persons  in  a  tone  which  we  ourselves
should  have  resented  in  the  mouth  of  men  of  like
condition.  The  same  respect  is  on  occasion  due  to  67
persons  of  high  rank,  and  it  may  be  necessary  to
offer  justification  for  our  freedom  of  speech  to  avoid
giving  the  impression  that  we  have  shown  ourselves
insolent  or  ostentatious  in  our  attack  ujK)n  such
persons.  Consequently  Cicero,  although  he  intended
to  speak  against  Cotta  ^  with  the  utmost  vehemence,
and  indeed  the  case  of  Publius  Oppius  was  such  that
he  could  not  do  otherwise,  prefaced  his  attack  by
pleading  at  some  length  the  necessity  imposed  upon
him  by  his  duty  to  his  client.  Sometimes,  again,  it  68
will  beseem  us  to  spare  or  seem  to  spare  our  inferiors,
more  especially  if  they  be  young.  Cicero  ^  gives  an
example  of  such  moderation  in  the  way  in  which  he
deals  with  Atratinus  in  his  defence  of  Caelius :  he
does  not  lash  him  like  an  enemy,  but  admonishes
him  almost  like  a  father.  For  Atratinus  was  of
noble  birth  and  young,  and  the  grievance  which  led
him  to  bring  the  accusation  was  not  unreasonable.

But  the  task  is  comparatively  easy  in  those  cases
in  which  it  is  to  the  judge,  or  even,  it  may  be,  to  our
audience  that  we  have  to  indicate  the  reason  for  our
moderation.  The  real  difficulty  arises  when  we  are
afraid  of  offending  those  against  whom  we  are
speaking.  The  difficulties  of  Cicero  when  defending  69
Murena  were  increased  by  the  fact  that  he  was
opposed  by  two  persons  of  this  character,  namely
Marcus  Cato  and  Servius  Sulpicius.  And  yet  in
what  courteous  language,  after  allowing  Sulpicius  all
the  virtues,  he  refuses  to  admit  that  he  has  any  idea
of  the  way  to  conduct  a  candidature  for  the  consul-

195


QUINTILIAN

ademit  ?  Quid  enim  aliud  esset,  quo  se  victum
homo  nobilis  et  iurls  antistes  magis  ferret  ?  Ut
vero  rationem  defensionis  suae  reddidit,  cum  se
studuisse  petitioni  Sulpicii  contra  honorem  Murenae,

70  non  idem  debere  accusationi  contra  caput  diceret !
Quam  moUi  autem  articulo  tractavit  Catonem  I
Cuius  naturam  summe  admiratus  non  ipsius  vitio,
sed  Stoicae  sectae  quibusdam  in  rebus  factam  du-
riorem  videri  volebat ;  ut  inter  eos  non  forensem
contentionem,  sed  studiosam  disputationem  crederes

71  incidisse.  Haec  est  profecto  ratio  et  certissimum
praeceptorum  genus  lllius  viri  observatio,  ut,  cum
allquid  detrahere  salva  gratia  velis,  concedas  alia
omnia  :  in  hoc  solo  vel  minus  peritum  quam  in
ceteris,  adiecta,  si  poterit  fieri,  etiam  causa,  cur  id
ita sit,  vel paulo pertinaciorem vel  credulum vel

72  iratum^  vel  impulsum  ab  aliis.  Hoc  enim  commune
remedium  est,  si  in  tota  actione  aequaliter  appareat

■v;  non  honof  modo  eius,  sed  etiam  caritas.  Praeterea
causa  sit  nobis  iusta  sic  dicendi,  neque  id  moderate

73  tantum  feciamus,  sed  etiam  necessario. Diversum  ab

*  Pro  Murtn.  vii.  15, .. •  Fro  Muren.  xxix.  60. . .
196


BOOK XI.  I.  69-73

ship.^  What  else  was  there  in  which  a  man  of  high
birth  and  a  distinguislied  lawyer  would  sooner
admit  his  inferiority  ?  With  what  skill  he  sets  forth
his  reasons  for  undertaking  the  defence  of  Murena,
when  he  says  that  he  supported  Sulpicius'  candi-
dature as  opposed  to  that  of  Murena,  but  did  not
regard  that  preference  as  reason  why  he  should
support  him  in  bringing  a  capital  charge  against  his
rival !  And  with  what  a  light  touch  he  deals  with  70
Cato !  2  He  has  the  highest  admiration  for  his
character  and  desires  to  show  that  the  fact  that  in
certain  respects  it  has  become  severe  and  callous  is  due
not  to  any  personal  fault,  but  to  the  influence  of  the
Stoic  school  of  philosophy  ;  in  fact  you  would  imagine
that  they  were  engaged  not  in  a  forensic  dispute,
but  merely  in  some  philosophical  discussion.  This  71
is  undoubtedly  the  right  method,  and  the  safest  rule
in  such  cases  will  be  to  follow  the  practice  of  Cicero,
namely,  that,  when  we  desire  to  disparage  a  man
without  giving  offence,  we  should  allow  him  to  be
the  possessor  of  all  other  virtues  and  point  out  that
it  is  only  in  this  one  respect  that  he  falls  short  of
his  high  standard,  while  we  should,  if  possible,  add
some  reason  why  this  should  be  so,  such,  for  example^
as  his  being  too  obstinate  or  credulous  or  quick  to
anger,  or  acting  under  the  influence  of  others.
(For  we  may  generally  find  a  way  out  of  such  em-  72
barrassments  by  making  it  clear  throughout  our
whole  speech  that  we  not  merely  honour  the  object
of  our  criticism,  but  even  regard  him  with  affection.)
Further,  we  should  have  good  cause  for  speaking  thus
and  must  do  so  not  merely  with  moderation,  but  also
give  the  impression  that  our  action  is  due  to  the
necessities  of  the  case. A  different  situation  arises,  73

197


QUINTILIAN

hoc  sed  facilius,  cum  hominum  aut  alioqui  turpium
aut  nobis  invisorum  quaedam  facta  laudanda  sunt.
Decet  enim  rem  ipsam  probare  in  qualicunque
persona.  Dixit  Cicero  pro  Gabinio  at  P.  Vatiiiio,
inimicissimis  antea  sibi  hominibus  et  in  quos  ora-
tiones  etiam  scripserat,  verum  ait,  ut  sit  iusta  causa
sic  faciendi,^ non  se  de  ingenii lama, sed  de  fide

74  esse  sollicitum.  Difficilior  ei  ratio  in  iudicio  Cluenti-
ano  fuit,  cum  Scamandrum  necesse  haberet  dicere
nocentem,  cuius  egerat  causam.  Verum  id  ele-
gantissime  cum  eorum,  a  quibus  ad  se  perductus
esset,  precibus,  tum  etiam  adolescentia  sua  excusat,
detracturus  alioqui  plurimum  auctoritatis  sibi,^  in
causa  praesertim  suspecta,  si  eum  se  esse,  qui  temere
nocentes  reos  susciperet,  fateretur.

75  Apud  iudicem  vero,  qui  aut  erit  inimicus  aut
propter  aliquod  commodum  a  causa,  quam  nos
siisceperimus,  aversus,  ut  persuadendi  ardua  ratio,
ita  dicendi  expeditissima.  Fiducia  enim  iustitiae
eius  et  nostrae  causae  nihil  nos  timere  simulabimus.

-  Ipse  erit  gloria  inflandus,  ut  tanto  clarior  eius  futura
sit  fides  ac  religio  in pronuntiando,  quanto  minus

*  ait ut sit  .  .  .  sic faciendi, Halm : et iusta sit
faciendi  (and  the  like),  MSS.
•  sibi,  Halm  :  sicut,  6 :  si,  vulgo.

»  Ch.  17  sqq.
198


BOOK XI.  I.  73-75

but  an  easier  one,  when  we  have  to  praise  the  actions
of  men  who  are  otherwise  disreputable  or  hateful  to
ourselves  :  for  it  is  only  right  that  we  should  award
praise  where  it  is  deserved,  whatever  the  character
of  the  person  praised  may  be.  Cicero  spoke  in
defence  of  Gabinius  and  Publius  Vatinius,  both  of
them  his  deadly  enemies  and  men  against  whom
he  had  previously  spoken  and  even  published  his
speeches  :  but  he  justifies  himself  by  declaring  that
he  does  so  not  because  he  is  anxious  for  his  repu-
tation as  an  accomplished  speaker,  but  because  he  is
concerned  for  his  honour.  He  had  a  more  difficult  74
task  in  his  defence  of  Cluentius,^  as  it  was  necessary
for  him  to  denounce  Scamander's  guilt,  although  he
had  previously  appeared  for  him.  But  he  excuses
his  action  with  the  utmost  grace,  alleging  the,
importunity  of  those  persons  who  had  brought
Scamander  to  him,  and  his  own  yoiith  at  the  time,
whereas  it  would  have  been  a  serious,  blot  on  his
reputation,  especially  in  connexion  with  a  case  of  the
most  dubious  character,  if  he  had  admitted  that  he
was  one  who  was  ready  to  undertake  the  defence  of
guilty  persons  without  asking  awkward  questions.

On  the  other  hand,  when  we  are  pleading  before  75
a  judge,  who  has  special  reasons  for  being  hostile  to
us  or  is  for  some  personal  motive  ill-disposed  to  the
cause  which  we  have  undertaken,  although  it  may
be  difficult  to  persuade  him,  the  method  which  we
should  adopt  in  speaking  is  simple  enough  :  we  shall
pretend  that  our  confidence  in  his  integrity  and  in
the  justice  of  our  cause  is  such  that  we  have  no
fears.  We  must  play  upon  his  vanity  by  pointing  out
that  the  less  he  indulges  his  own  personal  enmity
or  interest,  the  greater  will  be  the  reputation  for

199


QUINTILIAN

76  vel  ofFensae  vel  utilitati  suae  indulserit.  Hoc  et
apud  eos,  a  quibus  appellatum  erit,  si  forte  ad
eosdem  remittemur  ;  adiicienda  ratio  vel  necessitatis
alicuius^  si  id  causa  concedit,  vel  erroris  vel  sus-
picionis.  Tutissimum  ergo  paenitentiae  confessio
et satisfactio culpae, perducend usque omni mode

77  iudex  ad  irae  pudorem.  Accidit  etiam  nonnunquam
ut  eadem  de  ^  causa,  de  qua  pronuntiarit,  cognoscat
iterum.  Turn  illud  quidem  commune :  apud  alium
nos  iudicem  disputaturos  de  illius  sententia  non
fuisse,  neque  enim  emendari  ab  alio  quam  ipso  fas
esse  ;  ceterum  ex  causa,  ut  quaeque  permittet,  aut
ignorata  quaedam  aut  defuisse  testes  aut  (quod
timidissime  et,  si  nihil  aliud  plane  fuerit,  dicendum

78  est)  patronos  non  sufFecisse  succurret.  Etiam,  si
apud  alios  iudices  agetur,  ut  in  secunda  adsertione
aut  in  centumviralibus  iudiciis  duplicibus,  parte
victa  decentius  erit,  quotiens  contigerit,  servare
iudicum  pudorem ;  de  qua  re  latius  probationum
loco  dictum  est.

Potest evenire, ut in aliis reprehendenda  sint,

*  ut,  added  by  Regius,  de  by  Halm.


*  /.  e.  apologise  for  refusing  to  accept  his  original  judge-
ment.

*  v.  ii.  1,  where,  as  here,  it  is  indicated  that  different
portions  of  a  case  might  be  tried  by  two  panels  of  centumviri
sitting  separately.  The  centumviral  court  dealt  mainly  with
cases  of  inheritance.

200


BOOK XI.  1.  75-78

conscientious  rectitude  that  will  accrue  to  iiini  trom
his  verdict.  The  same  method  may  be  adopted  if  76
our  case  should  chance  to  be  sent  back  to  the  same
judges  from  whom  we  have  appealed  :  but  we  may
further,  if  the  case  should  permit,  plead  that  we
were  forced  to  take  the  action  which  we  did  or  were
led  to  it  by  error  or  suspicion.^  The  safest  course
will  therefore  be  to  express  our  regret,  apologise  for
our  fault  and  employ  every  means  to  induce  the
judge  to  feel  compunction  for  his  anger.  It  will  77
also  sometimes  happen  that  a  judge  may  have  to  try
the  same  case  on  which  he  has  previously  given
judgment.  In  such  circumstances  the  method
commonly  adopted  is  to  say  that  we  should  not
have  ventured  to  dispute  his  sentence  before  any
other  judge,  since  he  alone  would  be  justified  in
revising  it :  but  (and  in  this  we  must  be  guided  by
the  circumstances  of  the  case)  we  may  allege  that
certain  facts  were  not  known  on  the  previous
occasion  or  certain  witnesses  were  unavailable,  or,
though  this  must  be  advanced  with  the  utmost
caution  and  only  in  the  last  resort,  that  our  clients'
advocates  were  unequal  to  their  task.  And  even  if  78
we  have  to  plead  a  case  afresh  before  different
judges,  as  may  occur  in  a  second  trial  of  a  claim  to
freedom  or  in  cases  in  the  centumviral  courts,  which
are  divided  between  two  different  panels,  it  will  be
most  seemly,  if  we  have  lost  our  case  before  the  first
panel,  to  say  nothing  against  the  judges  who  tried
the  case  on  that  occasion.  But  this  is  a  subject
with  which  I  dealt  at  some  length  in  the  passage
where  I  discussed  proqfs.-

It  may  happen  that  we  have  to  censure  actions  in
others,  of  which we have been guilty  ourselves.


QUINTILIAN

quae  ipsi  fecerimus,  ut  obiicit  Tubero  Ligario,  quod

79  in  Africa  fuerit.  Et  ambitus  quidam  damnati  re-
cuperandae  dignitatis  gratia  reos  eiusdem  criminis
detulerunt,  ut  in  scholis  luxuriantem  patrem  luxu-
riosus  ipse  iuvenis  accusat.  Id  quomodo  decenter
fieri  possit,  equidem  non  invenio,  nisi  aliquid  repe-
ritur,  quod  intersit,  persona,  aetas,  tempus,  causa,

80  locus,  animus.  Tubero,  iuvenem  se  patri  haesisse,
ilium  a  senatu  missum  non  ad  bellum,  sed  ad  fru-
mentum  coemendum  ait,  ut  primum  licuerit,  a
partibus  recessisse ;  Ligarium  et  perseverasse  et  non
pro  Cn.  Pompeio,  inter  quem  et  Caesarem  dignitatis
fuerit  contentio,  cum  salvam  uterque  rem  publicam
vellet,  sed  pro  luba  atque  Afris  inimicissimis  populo

81  Romano  stetisse.  Ceterum  vel  facillimum  est,  ibi
alienam  culpam  incusare,  ubi  fateris  tuam.  Verum
id  iam  indicis  est,  non  actoris.  Quodsi  nulla  con-
tingit  excusatio,  sola  colorem  habet  paenitentia.
Potest  enim  videri  satis  emendatus, qui  in  odium

82  eorum,  in  quibus  erraverat,  ipse  con  versus  est.  Sunt
enim  casus  quidam,  qui  hoc  natui'a  ipsa  rei  non
indecens  faciant :  ut  cum  pater  ex  meretrice  natum,
quod  duxerit  ^  meretricem  in  matrimonium,  abdicat ;

*  meretrice  .  .  .  duxerit,  added  by  ed.  Camp.

*  See  V.  X.  108  note  and  with  reference  to  ^ro  Clu.  xxxvi.
98.

2oa


BOOK  XL  I.  78-82

as,  for  example,  when  Tubero  charges  Ligarius
with  having  been  in  Africa.  Again,  there  have  79
been  cases  where  persons  condemned  for  bribery
have  indicted  others  for  the  same  offence  with  a
view  to  recovering  their  lost  position :  ^  for  this
the  schools  provide  a  parallel  in  the  theme  where
a  luxurious  youth  accuses  his  father  of  the  same
offence.  I  do  not  see  how  this  can  be  done  with
decorum  unless  we  succeed  in  discovering  some
difference  between  the  two  cases,  such  as  character,
age,  motives,  circumstances  of  time  and  place  or
intention.  Tubero,  for  example,  alleges  that  he  80
was  a  young  man  at  the  time  and  went  thither
in  the  company  of  his  father,  who  had  been  sent  by
the  senate  not  to  take  part  in  the  war,  but  to  pur-
chase com,  and  further  that  he  left  the  f)arty  as
soon  as  he  could,  whereas  Ligarius  clung  to  the
party  and  gave  his  support,  not  to  Gnaeus  Pom-
peius,  who  was  engaged  with  Caesar  in  a  struggle
for  the  supreme  power,  though  both  wished  to
preserve  the  state,  but  to  Juba  and  the  Africans
who  were  the  sworn  enemies  of  Rome.  The  easiest  81
course,  however,  is  to  denounce  another's  guilt,  while
admitting  our  own  in  the  same  connexion.  How-
ever, that  is  the  part  of  an  informer,  not  of  a
pleader.  But  if  there  is  no  excuse  available,  peni-
tence is  our  only  hope.  For  the  man  who  is
converted  to  the  hatred  of  his  own  errors,  may
perhaps  be  regarded  as  sufficiently  reformed.  For  82
there  are  occasionally  circumstances  which  from
the  very  nature  of  tfie  case  may  make  such  an
attitude  not  unbecoming,  as,  for  example,  in  the
case  where  the  father  disinherits  a  son  bom  of  a
harlot  because  that  son  has  married  a  harlot,  a  case

203


QUINTILIAN

scholastica  materia  sed  non  quae  in  foro  non  possit
accidere.  Hie  igitur  miilta  non  deformiter  dicet :
vel  quod  omnium  sit  votum  parentum,  ut  honestiores
quam  sint  ipsi  liberos  habeant,  (nam  et  si  filia  nata,
meretrix  earn  mater  pudicam  esse  voluisset)  vel
quod  humilior  ipse  fuerit,  (licet  enim  huic  ducere)  ^

83  vel  quod  non  habuerit  patrem  qui  moneret ;  quin  eo
minus  id  faciendum  filio  fuisse,  ne  renovaret  domus
pudorem  et  exprobraret  patri  nuptias,  matri  prioris
vitae  necessitatem,  ne  denique  legem  quandam  suis
quoque  rursum  ^  liberis  daret.  Credibilis  erit  etiam
propi'ia  quaedam  in  ilia  meretrice  turpitudo,  quam
nunc  hie  pater  ferre  non  possit.  Alia  praetereo ;
neque  enim  nunc  declamamus,  sed  ostendimus
nonnunquam  posse  dicentem  ipsis  incommodis
bene  uti.

84  Illic  maior  aestus,  ubi  quis  pudenda  queritur,  ut
stuprum,  praecipue  in  maribus,  aut  os  profanatum.
Non  dico^  si  loquatur  ipse  ;  nam  quid  aliud  ei  quam
gemitus  ac  fletus  et  exsecratio  vitae  conveniat,  ut
index  intelligat  potius  dolorem  ilium  quam  audiat  ?
Sed  patrono  quoque  per similes adfectus eundum

''^''^  huic  ducere,  Spalding  :  hoc  ducere  or  dicere,  M88.
■  rursum,  J?a^m :  sum,  O:  auhinde,  vulgo.

*  The  lex  lulex  de  maritandis  ordinihus  (18  B.C.)  forbade
the  marriage  of  a  senator  with  a  prostitute.

?e4


BOOK XI.  I.  82-84

which,  although  it  forms  a  scholastic  theme,  might
actually  arise  in  a  court  of  law.  There  are  a  number  '
of  pleas  which  the  father  may  put  forward  with
becoming  effect.  He  will  say  that  it  is  the  prayer  83
of  all  parents  that  their  sons  should  be  better  men
than  themselves  (for  example,  if  a  daughter  also
had  been  born  to  him,  the  harlot,  her  mother,
would  have  wished  her  to  be  chaste),  or  that  he
himself  was  in  a  humbler  position  (for  a  man  in
such  a  position  is  permitted  to  marry  a  harlot),^  or
that  he  had  no  father  to  warn  him  ;  and  further
that  there  was  an  additional  reason  against  his  son's
conduct,  namely,  that  he  should  not  revive  the  old
family  scandal  nor  reproach  his  father  with  his
marriage  and  his  mother  with  the  hard  necessity
of  her  former  life,  nor  give  a  bad  example  to  his
own  children  in  their  turn.  We  may  also  plausibly
suggest  that  there  is  some  particularly  shameful
feature  in  the  character  of  the  harlot  married  by
the  son,  which  the  father  cannot  under  existing
circumstances  tolerate.  There  are  other  possible
arguments  which  I  pass  by :  for  I  am  not  now
engaged  in  declamation,  but  am  merely  pointing
out  that  there  are  occasions  when  the  speaker  may
turn  his  own  drawbacks  to  good  account.

More  arduous  difficulties  confront  us  when  we  have  84
to  deal  with  a  complaint  of  some  shameful  act  such
as  rape,  more  especially  when  this  is  of  an  un-
natural kind.  I  do  not  refer  to  cases  when  the
victim  himself  is  speaking.  For  what  should  he  do
but  groan  and  weep  and  curse  his  existence,  so  that
the  judge  will  understand  his  grief  rather  than  hear
it  articulately  expressed  .''  But  the  victim's  advocate
will have to exhibit similar  emotions, since the

265


QUINTILIAN

erit,  quia  hoc  iniuriae  genus  verecundius  est  fateri  ^

85  passis  quam  ausis.  Mollienda  est  in  plerisque  alio
colore  asperitas  orationis,  ut  Cicero  de  proscriptorum
liberis  fecit.  Quid  enim  crudelius  quam  homines
honestis  parentibus  ac  maioribus  natos  a  re  publica
summoveri?  Itaque  durum  id  esse  summus  ille
tractandorum  aniraorum  artifex  confitetur,  sed  ita
legibus  SuUae  cohaerere  statum  civitatis  adfirmat,  ut
iis  solutis  stare  ipsa  non  possit.  Adsecutus  itaque
est,  ut  aliquid  eorum  quoque  causa  videretur  facere

86  contra  quos  diceret.  Illud  etiam  in  iocis  monui,
quam  turpis  esset  fortunae  insectatio,  et  ne  in  totos
ordiues  aut  gentes  aut  populos  petulantia  incurreret.
Sed  interim  fides  patrocinii  cogit  quaedam  de  uni-
verso  genere  aliquorum  hominum  dicere,  liber-
tinorum  vel  militum  vel  publicanorum  vel  similiter

87  aliorum.  In  quibus  omnibus  commune  remedium
est,  ut  ea,  quae  laedunt,  non  libenter  tractare  vi-
dearis  nee  in  omnia  impetum  facias,  sed  in  id  quod
expugnandum  est,  et  reprehendens  alia  laude  com-

88  penses : si  cupidos  milites  dicas,  -  sed non  mirum,

^  fateri,  added  hy  Hcdm.

•  cupidos  milites  dicas,  sed,  Spalding :  cupidum  dedi-
casset,  G.

^  Now  lost.

'  Cicero  argued  that  it  was  better  that  a  few  should  suffer
unjustly  than  that  the  state  should  be  upset  by  admitting
them  to  oflBce.  But  he  admitted  that  their  case  was  hard
and  suggested  that  it  was  better  for  them  to  live  in  an
orderly  state  than  run  the  risks  in  which  revolution  would
involve  them  as  well  as  others.  '  vi.  iii.  28.

8o6


BOOK XI.  I.  84-88

admission  of  such  wrongs  cause  more  shame  to  tlie
sufferer  than  the  criminal.  In  many  cases  it  is  85
desirable  to  soften  the  harshness  of  our  language
by  the  infusion  of  a  more  conciliatory  tone,  as,  for
example,  Cicero  did  in  his  speech  ^  dealing  with
the  children  of  the  proscribed.  What  fate  could
be  more  cruel  than  that  the  children  of  men  of
good  birth  and  the  descendants  of  distinguished
ancestors  should  be  excluded  from  participation
in  public  life  .'*  For  this  reason  that  supreme  artist
in  playing  on  the  minds  of  men  admits  that  it  is
hard,  but  asserts  that  the  constitution  is  so  essenti-
ally dependent  on  the  laws  of  Sulla,  that  their
repeal  would  inevitably  involve  its  destruction.
Thus  he  succeeded  in  creating  the  impression  that
he  was  doing  something  on  behalf  of  those  very
persons  against  whom  he  spoke.^  I  have  already  ^  86
pointed  out,  in  dealing  with  the  subject  of  jests,
how  unseemly  it  is  to  take  the  position  in  life  of
individuals  as  the  target  for  our  gibes,  and  also
have  urged  that  we  should  refrain  from  insulting
whole  classes,  races  or  communities.  But  at  times
our  duty  toward  our  client  will  force  us  to  say
something  on  the  general  character  of  a  whole
class  of  people,  such  as  freedmen,  soldiers,  tax-
farmers  or  the  like.  In  all  these  cases  the  usual  87
remedy  is  to  create  the  impression  that  it  is  with
reluctance  that  we  introduce  topics  which  must
give  pain,  while  further  we  shall  avoid  attacking
everything,  and  even  while  using  the  language
of  reproof  with  regard  to  the  essential  point  of
attack,  shall  make  up  for  our  censure  by  praising
our  victims  in  some  other  connexion.  For  example,  88
if we charge soldiers with rapacity, we shall

207


QUINTILIAN

quod  periculorum  ac  sanguinis  maiora  sibi  deberi
praemia  putent ;  eosdem  petulantes,  sed  hoc  fieri,
quod  bellis  magis  quam  paci  consuerint.  Libertinis
detrahenda  est  auctoritas  ;  licet  iis  testimonium  red-

89  dere  industriae,  per  quam  exierint  de  servitute.  Quod
ad  nationes  exteras  pertinet,  Cicero  varie :  de-
tracturus  Graecis  testibus  fidem,  doctrinam  iis
concedit  ac  litteras,  seque  eius  gentis  amatorem
esse  profitetur,  Sardos  contemnit,  Allobrogas  ut
hostes  insectatur ;  quorum  nihil  tunc,  cum  di-
ceretur,  parum aptum aut remotum cura decoris

90  fuit,  Verborum  etiam  moderatione  detrahi  solet,
si  qua  est  rei  invidia :  si  asperum  dicas  nimium
severum,  iniustum  persuasione  labi,  pertinacem  ultra
modum  tenacem  esse  propositi ;  plerumque  velut
ipsos  coneris  ratione  vincere,  quod  est  mollissimum.

91  Indecorum  est  super  haec  omne  nimium,  ideoque
etiam  quod  natura  rei  satis  aptum  est,  nisi  modo
quoque temperatur, gratiam perdit. Cuius rei


*  E.g.  pro  Flacco  xxvi.

2  In  a  fragment  of  pro  Scauro.

*  pro  Font.  viii.

208


BOOK XI.  I.  88-91

qualify  our  statement  by  saying  that  the  fact  is  not
surprising,  as  they  think  that  they  are  entitled  to
some  special  reward  for  the  perils  they  have  faced
and  the  wounds  they  have  sustained.  Or,  if  we
censure  them  for  insolence,  we  shall  add  that  this
quality  is  due  to  the  fact  that  they  are  more
accustomed  to  war  than  to  peace.  In  the  case  of
freedmen  we  should  disparage  their  influence :  but
we  may  also  give  them  credit  for  the  industry
which  secured  their  emancipation.  With  regard  89
to  foreign  nations,  Cicero's  practice  varies.  When
he  intends  to  disparage  the  credibility  of  Greek
witnesses  he  admits  their  distinction  in  learning
and  literature  and  professes  his  admiration  for  their
nation.^  On  the  other  hand,  he  has  nothing  but
contempt  for  the  Sardinians  ^  and  attacks  the  Allo-
broges  as  the  enemies  of  Rome.^  In  all  these  cases
none  of  his  remarks,  at  the  time  they  were  made,
were  inconsistent  with  or  adverse  to  the  claims  of
decorum.  If  there  be  anything  offensive  in  the  90
subject  on  which  we  have  to  speak,  it  may  be
toned  down  by  a  studied  moderation  in  our  lan-
guage ;  for  example,  we  may  describe  a  brutal  char-
acter as  being  unduly  severe,  an  unjust  man  as  led
astray  by  prejudice,  an  obstinate  man  as  unreason-
ably tenacious  of  his  opinion.  And  there  are  a
large  number  of  cases  where  we  should  attempt  to
defeat  our  opponents  by  reasoning,  which  forms  the
gentlest  of  all  methods  of  attack.

To  these  remarks  I  would  add  that  all  extra va-  91
^ance  of  any  kind  is  indecorous,  and  consequently
statements  which  are  in  sufficient  harmony  with  the
facts  will  none  the  less  lose  all  their  grace  unless
they  are  modified  by  a  certain  restraint. It  is  hard

209


QUINTILIAN

observatio  iudicio  magis  quodam  sentiri  quam  prae-
ceptis  tradi  potest,  quantum  satis  sit  et  quantum
recipiant  aures.  Non  habet  res  mensuram  et  quasi
pondus,  quia  ut  in  cibis  alia  aliis  magis  complent.

92  Adiiciendum  etiam  breviter  videtur,  quod  fit  ut  ^
dicendi  virtutes  diversissimae  non  solum  suos
amatores  habeant,  sed  ab  eisdem  saepe  laudentur.
Nam  Cicero  quodam  loco  scribit,  id  esse  optimum,
quod,  cum  te  facile  credideris  consequi  imitatione,
non  possis.  Alio  vero,  non  id  egisse,  ut  ita  diceret,
quomodo  se  quilibet  posse  confideret,  sed  quomodo

93  nemo.  Quod  potest  pugnare  inter  se  videri.  Verum
utrumque  ac  merito  laudatur ;  causarum  enim  ^  modo
distat,  quia  simplicitas  ilia  et  velut  securitas  in-
adfectatae  orationis  mire  tenues  causas  decet,  maiori-
bus  illud  admirabile  dicendi  genus  magis  convenit.
In  utroque  eminet  Cicero ;  ex  quibus  alterum
imperiti  se  posse  consequi  credent,  neutrum,  qui
intelligunt.

II.  Memoriam  quidam  naturae  modo  esse  munus
existimaverunt,  estque  in  ea  non  dubie  plurimum,

»  fit  ut,  Halm :  fiat,  M8S.

•  causarum  enim,  Spalding :  causa  enim  enim,  Q,

^  See  Or.  xxiii.  76. In  this  and  the  next  passage  Quin-
tilian  does  not  quote,  but  paraphrases.
'  See  Or.  xxviii.  97.

2IO


BOOK XL  I  91-11.  I

to  give  rules  as  to  the  exact  method  in  which  this
precept  should  be  observed,  but  the  problem  will
easily  be  solved  by  following  the  dictates  of  our  own
judgement,  which  will  tell  us  what  it  is  sufficient  to
say  and  how  much  the  ears  of  our  audience  will
tolerate.  We  cannot  weigh  or  measure  our  words
by  fixed  standards  :  they  are  like  foods,  some  of
which  are  more  satisfying  than  others.

I  think  I  should  also  add  a  few  brief  words  to  the  92
effect  that  not  only  very  different  rhetorical  virtues
have  their  special  admirers,  but  that  they  are  often
praised  by  the  same  persons.  For  instance,  there  is
one  passage  ^  in  Cicero  where  he  writes  that  the
best  style  is  that  which  we  think  we  can  easily
acquire  by  imitation,  but  which  we  find  is  really
beyond  our  powers.  But  in  another  passage  -  he
says  that  his  aim  was  not  to  speak  in  such  a  manner
that  everyone  should  be  confident  that  he  could  do
the  same,  but  rather  in  a  style  that  should  be  the
despair  of  all.  These  two  statements  may  seem  to  93
be  inconsistent,  but  as  a  matter  of  fact  both  alike
deserve  the  praise  which  they  receive.  The  differ-
ence is  due  to  the  fact  that  cases  differ  in  character.
Those  of  minor  importance  are  admirably  suited  by
the  simplicity  and  negligence  of  unaffected  lan-
guage, whereas  cases  of  greater  moment  are  best
suited  by  the  grand  style.  Cicero  is  pre-eminent  in
both.  Now  while  eminence  in  one  of  these  stvles
may  seem  to  the  inexperienced  to  be  within  their
grasp,  those  who  understand  know  that  they  are
capable  of  eminence  in  neither.

II.  Some  regard  memory  as  being  no  more  than
one  of  nature's  gifts ;  and  this  view  is  no  doubt  true
to  a  great  extent ;  but,  like  everything  else,  memory

311


QUINTILIAN

sed  ipsa  excolendo  sicut  alia  omnia  augetur;  et
totus,  de  quo  diximus  adhuc,  inanis  est  labor,  nisi
ceterae  partes  hoc  velut  spiritu  continentur.  Nam
et  omnis  disciplina  memoria  constat,  frustraque
docemur,  si  quidquid  audimus  praeterfluat ;  et  exem-
plorum,  legum,  responsorum,  dictorum  denique
factorumque  velut  quasdam  copias,  quibus  abundare
quasque  in  promptu  semper  habere  debet  orator,
eadem  ilia  vis  praesentat. Neque  immerito  thesaurus

2  hie  eloquentiae  dicitur.  Sed  non  firme  tantum
continere,  verum  etiam  cite  percipere  multa  acturos
oportet,  nee  quae  scripseris  mode  iterata  lectione
complecti,  sed  in  cogitatis  quoque  rerum  ac  verborum
contextum  sequi,  et  quae  sint  ab  adversa  parte  dicta
meminisse,  nee utique  ea,  quo  dicta  sunt ordine,

3  refutare,  sed  opportunis  locis  ponere.  Quid  ?  extem-
poralis  oratio  non  alio  mihi  videtur  mentis  vigore
constare.  Nam  dum  alia  dicimus,  quae  dicturi
sumus  intuenda  sunt.  Ita,  cum  semper  cogitatio
ultra  eat,*  id  quod  est  longius  quaerit,  quidquid
autem  repperit  quodam  modo  apud  memoriam
deponit ; quod ilia quasi media quaedam manus

^  ultra  eat  id.  Halm :  ultre  ad  id,  G :  ultra  id,  codd.  Mon.

Argentorat.

312


BOOK XI.  11.  1-3

may  \ye  improved  by  cultivation.  And  all  the  labour
of  which  I  have  so  far  spoken  will  be  in  vain  unless
all  the  other  departments  be  co-ordinated  by  the
animating  principle  of  memory.  For  our  whole
education  depends  upon  memory,  and  we  shall
receive  instruction  all  in  vain  if  all  we  hear  slips
from  us,  while  it  is  the  power  of  memory  alone
that  brings  before  us  all  the  store  of  precedents,
laws,  rulings,  sayings  and  facts  which  the  orator
must  possess  in  abundance  and  which  he  must
always  hold  ready  for  immediate  use.  Indeed
it  is  not  without  good  reason  that  memory  has
been  called  the  treasure-house  of  eloquence.  But  2
pleaders  need  not  only  to  be  able  to  retain  a  number
of  facts  in  their  minds,  but  also  to  be  quick  to  take
them  in  ;  it  is  not  enough  to  learn  what  you  have
written  by  dint  of  repeated  reading;  it  is  just  as
necessary  to  follow  the  order  both  of  matter  and
words  when  you  have  merely  thought  out  what  you
are  going  to  say,  while  you  must  also  remember
what  has  been  said  by  your  opponents,  and  must
not  be  content  merely  with  refuting  their  arguments
in  the  order  in  which  they  were  advanced,  but  must
be  in  a  position  to  deal  with  each  in  its  appropriate
place.  Nay,  even  extempore  eloquence,  in  my  3
opinion,  depends  on  no  mental  activity  so  much
as  memory.  For  while  we  are  saying  one  thing,  we
must  be  considering  something  else  that  we  are
going  to  say  :  consequently,  since  the  mind  is  always
looking  ahead,  it  is  continually  in  search  of  some-
thing which  is  more  remote :  on  the  other  hand,
whatever  it  discovers,  it  deposits  by  some  mysterious
process  in  the  safe-keeping  of  memory,  which  acts
as  a  transmitting  agent  and  hands  on  to  the  delivery

ai3


QUINTILIAN

4  acceptum  ab  inventione  tradit  elocutioni.  Non
arbitror  aiitem  mihi  in  hoc  immorandum,  quid  sit
quod  memoriam  faciat,  quanquam  plerique  imprimi
quaedam  vestigia  animo,  velut  in  ceris  anulorum
signa  serventur,  existimant.  Neque  ero  tam  credu-
lus,  ut,  qui '  habitu  tardiorem  firmioremque  memoriam
fieri  videam, ei  artem quoque  audeam  impertire.^

5  Magis  admirari  naturam  subit,  tot  res  vetustas  tanto  ex
intervallo  repetitas  reddere  se  et  offerre,  nee  tantum
requirentibus  sed  etiam  sponte  interim,  nee vigil-

6  antibus  sed  etiam  quiete  compositis  :  eo  magis,  quod
ilia  quoque  animal  ia,  quae  carere  intellectu  videntur,
meminerunt  et  agnoscunt  et  quamlibet  longo  itinere
deducta  ad  adsuetas  sibi  sedes  revertuntur.  Quid  ?
non  haec  varietas  mira  est,  excidere  proxima,  Vetera
inhaerere  ? hesternorum  immemores  acta  pueritiae

7  recordari  ?  Quid  quod  quaedam  requisita  se  oc-
cultant  et  cadem  forte  succurrunt?  nee  manet
semper  metiioria,  sed  aliquando  etiam  redit  ?  Nesci-
retur  tamen,  quanta  vis  esset  eius,  quanta  divinitas
ilia,  nisi  in  hoc  lumen  vim  ^  orandi  extulisset. Non

8  enim rerum modo sed etiam verborum ordinem

*  qui  .  .  .  fieri  videam,  Spalding :  quam  .  .  .  fieri,  MSS.

■  ei  artem  quoque  audeam  impertire,  Spalding  t  et  actem
{or  autem)  quoque  ad  animum  pertire  (pertinere  or  partire)
MSS.

■•'  vim,  added  by  Regius.  a

ai4


BOOK  XI.  II.  3-8

what  it  has  received  from  the  imagination. I do  4
not  conceive,  however,  that  I  need  dwell  upon  the
question  of  the  precise  function  of  memory,  although
many  hold  the view that certain  impressions are
made  upon  the  mind,  analogous  to  those  which a
signet-ring  makes  on  wax. Nor,  again,  shall  I  be  so
credulous,  in  view  of  the  fact  that  the  retentiveness
or slowness of the memory depends upon our
physical  condition,  as  to  venture  to  allot  a  special
art  to  memory. My  inclination  is  rather  to  marvel  5
at its powers  of reproducing and presenting a
number  of  remote  facts  after  so  long  an  interval,
and,  what  is  more,  of  so  doing  not  merely  when  we
seek  for  such  facts,  but  even  at  times  of  its own
accord,  and  not  only  in  our  waking  moments,  but
even  when  we  are  sunk  in  sleep. And  my  wonder  is  6
increased  by  the  fact  that  even  beasts,  which  seem  to
be  devoid  of  reason,  yet  remember  and  recognise
things,  and  will  return  to  their  old  home,  however  far
they  have  been  taken  from  it. Again,  is  it  not  an .
extraordinary  inconsistency  that  we  forget  recent  and *
remember  distant  events,  that  we  cannot  recall  what
happened  yesterday  and  yet  retain  a  vivid  impression
of  the  acts  of  our  childhood .'' And  what,  again,  shall  7
we  say  of  the  fact  that  the  things  we  search for
frequently  refuse  to  present themselves and then
occur  to  us  by  chance,  or  that  memory  does  not
always remain with  us, but wUl  even sometimes
return  to  us  after  it  has  been  lost  ? But  we  should
never  have  realised  the  fullness  of  its  power  nor  its
supernatural  capacities,  but  for  the  fact  that  it is
memory  which  has brought  oratory  to  its present
position  of  glory. For  it  provides the  orator  not  8
merely  with  the  order  of  his  thoughts,  but  even  of

215


QUINTILIAN

praestat,  nee  ea  pauea  eontexit,  sed  durat  prope  in
infinitum,  et  in  longissimis  actionibus  prius  audiendi
9  patientia  quam  memoriae  fides  deficit.  Quod  et
ipsum  argumentum  est  subesse  artem  aliquam  iu-
varique  ratione  naturam,  cum  idem  docti  facere
illud,  indocti  inexercitatique  non  possimus.  Quan-
quam  invenio  apud  Platonem  obstare  memoriae  usum
litterarum, videlicet quoniam ilia, quae scriptis

10  reposuimus,  velut  custodire  desinimus  et  ipsa  securi-
tate  dimittimus.  Nee  dubium  est  quin  plurimum
in  hac  pai-te  valeat  mentis  intentio  et  velut  acies
luminum  a  prospectu  rerum,  quas  intuetur,  non
aversa.  Unde  accidit,  ut  quae  per  plures  dies
scribimus  ediscendi  causa,  cogitatione  ^  ipsa  con-
tineamus.2

11  Artem  autem  memoriae  primus  ostendisse  dicitur
Simonides.  Cuius  vulgata  fabula  est :  cum  pugili
coronate  carmen,  quale  componi  victoribus  solet,
mercede  pacta  scripsisset,  abnegatam  ei  pecuniae
partem,  quod  more  poetis  frequentissimo  digressus
in  laudes  Castoris  ac  Pollucis  exierat.  Quapropter
partem  ab  iis  petere,  quorum  facta  celebrasset,  iube-

*  causa,  cogitatione,  early  edd.  :  sint  cogitationes,  M88.
'  coutineamus,  Slothouwer  :  contineat,  MS8.

»  Phacdr.  275  A.  •  See  x.  i.  64.

2l6


BOOK XI.  II.  8-1 1

his  words,  nor  is  its  power  limited  to  stringing
merely  a  few  words  together ;  its  capacity  for  endur-
ance is  inexhaustible,  and  even  in  the  longest
pleadings  the  patience  of  the  audience  flags  long
before  the  memory  of  the  speaker.  This  fact  may  9
even  be  advanced  as  an  argument  that  there  must
be  some  art  of  memory  and  that  the  natural  gift  can
be  helped  by  reason,  since  training  enables  us  to
do  things  which  we  cannot  do  before  we  have  had
any  training  or  practice.  On  the  other  hand,  I  find
that  Plato  ^  asserts  that  the  use  of  written  characters
is  a  hindrance  to  memory,  on  the  ground,  that  is,  that
once  we  have  committed  a  thing  to  writing,  we
cease  to  guard  it  in  our  memory  and  lose  it  out  of
sheer  carelessness.  And  there  can  be  no  doubt  that  10
concentration  of  mind  is  of  the  utmost  imj>ortance  in
this  connexion ;  it  is,  in  fact,  like  the  eyesight,  which
turns  to,  and  not  away  from,  the  objects  which  it
contemplates.  Thus  it  results  that  after  writing
for  several  days  with  a  view  to  acquiring  by  heart
what  we  have  written,  we  find  that  our  mental  effort
has  of  itself  imprinted  it  on  our  memory.

The  first  person  to  discover  an  art  of  memory  is  11
said  to  have  been  Simonides,^  of  whom  the  following
well-known  story  is  told.  He  had  written  an  ode
of  the  kind  usually  composed  in  honour  of  victorious
athletes,  to  celebrate  the  achievement  of  one  who
had  gained  the  crown  for  boxing.  Part  of  the  sum
for  which  he  had  contracted  was  refused  him  on
the  ground  that,  following  the  common  practice  of
poets,  he  had  introduced  a  digression  in  praise  of
Castor  and  Pollux,  and  he  was  told  that,  in  view
of  what  he  had  done,  he  had  best  ask  for  the  rest
of  the  sum  due  from those  whose  deeds  he had

▼oL.  IV.  ij 217


QUINTILIAN

12  batur.  Et  persolverunt,  ut  traditum  est.  Nam  cum
esset  grande  convivium  in  honorem  eiusdem  victoriae
atque  adhibitus  ei  cenae  Simonides,  nuntio  est  ex-
citus,  quod  eum  duo  iuvenes  equis  advecti  desiderare
maiorem  in  modum  dicebantur.  Et  illos  quideni
non  invenit,  fuisse  tamen  gratos  erga  se  deos  exitu

13  comperit.  Nam  vix  eo  ultra  limen  egresso,  triclinium
illud  supra  convivas  corruit  atque  ita  confudit,^  ut
non  era  mode  oppressorum,  sed  membra  etiam  omnia
requirentes  ad  sepulturam  propinqui  nulla  nota
possent  discernere.  Tum  Simonides  dicitur  memor
ordinis,^  quo  quisque  discubuerat,  corpora  suis  reddi-

14  disse.  Est  autem  magna  inter  auctores  dissensio,
Glaucone  Carystio  an  Leocrati  an  Agatharcho  an
Scopae  scriptum  sit  id  carmen ;  et  Pharsali  fuerit
haec  domus,  ut  ipse  quodam  loco  significare  Simonides
videtur  utque  Apollodorus  et  Eratosthenes  et  Eupho-
rion  et  Larissaeus  Eurypylus  tradiderunt,  an  Cran-
none,  ut  Apollas  Callimachus^'  quem  secutus  Cicero

15  banc  famam  latius  fudit.  Scopam  nobilem  Thessalum
periisse  in  eo  convivio  constat ;  adiicitur  sororis  eius
filius ;  putant  et  ortos  plerosque  ab  alio  Scopa,  qui

16  maior  aetate  fuerit.  Quanquam  milii  totum  de
Tyndaridis  fabulosum  videtur,  neque  omnino  huius

^  confudit  lit,  Badiiis  :  confunditur,  M8S.

•  ordinis,  Regius :  ordine,  3JSS.

*  Apollas  Callimachus  being  unknown,  Bentley  conjectured
Apollas  et  Callimachus  {Schneidewin  Calliniachusque).
Apollas  would  then  refer  to  a  philosopher  and  geographer
of  Cyrene.

1  Cio.  de  Or.  n.  Ixxxvi.  352.
2l8


BOOK XI.  I!.  1 1-16

extolled.  And  according  to  the  story  they  paid
their  debt.  For  when  a  great  banquet  was  given  12
in  honour  of  the  boxer's  success,  Simonides  was
summoned  forth  from  the  feast,  to  which  he  had
been  invited,  by  a  message  to  the  effect  that  two
youths  who  had  ridden  to  the  door  urgently  desired
his  presence.  He  found  no  trace  of  them,  but  what
followed  proved  to  him  that  the  gods  had  shown
their  gratitude.  For  he  had  scarcely  crossed  the  13
threshold  on  his  way  out,  Avhen  the  banqueting  hall
fell  in  upon  the  heads  of  the  guests  and  wrought
such  havoc  among  them  that  the  relatives  of  the
dead  who  came  to  seek  the  bodies  for  burial  were
unable  to  distinguish  not  merely  the  faces  but  even
the  limbs  of  the  dead.  Then  it  is  said,  Simonides,
who  remembered  the  order  in  which  the  guests  had
been  sitting,  succeeded  in  restoring  to  each  man  his
own  dead.  There  is,  however,  great  disagreement  14
among  our  authorities  as  to  whether  this  ode  was
written  in  honour  of  Glaucus  of  Carystus,  Leocrates,
Agatharcus  or  Scopas,  and  whether  the  house  was
at  Pharsalus,  as  Simonides  himself  seems  to  indicate
in  a  certain  passage,  and  as  is  recorded  by  Apollo-
dorus,  Eratosthenes,  Euphorion  and  Eurypylus  of
Larissa,  or  at  Crannon,  as  is  stated  by  Apollas
Callimachus,  who  is  followed  by  Cicero,^  to  whom
the  wide  circulation  of  this  story  is  due.  It  is  15
agreed  that  Scopas,  a  Thessalian  noble,  perished  at
this  banquet,  and  it  is  also  said  that  his  sister's  son
perished  with  him,  while  it  is  thought  that  a  number
of  descendants  of  an  elder  Scopas  met  their  death
at  the  same  time.  For  my  own  part,  however,  I  16
regard  the  portion  of  the  story  which  concerns
Castor  and Pollux  as  being  purely  fictitious,  since

219


QUINTILIAN

rei  meminit  usquam  poeta  ipse,  profecto  non  taciturus
de  tanta  sua  gloria.

17  Ex  hoc  Simonidis  facto  notatum  videtur,  iuvari
memoriam  signatis  animo  sedibus,  idque  credere
suo  quisque  experimento  potest.^  Nam  cum  in  loca
aliqua  post  tempus  reversi  sumus,  non  ipsa  agnos-
cimus  tantum,  sed  etiam,  quae  in  his  fecerimus,
reminiscimur  personaeque  subeunt,  nonnunquam
tacitae  quoque  cogitationes  in  mentem  revertuntur.
Nata  est  igitur,  ut  in  plerisque^  ars  ab  experimento.

18  Loca  deligunt  ^  quam  maxime  spatiosa,  multa  varietate
signata,  domum  forte  magnam  et  in  multos  diductam
recessus.  In  ea  quidquid  notabile  est,  animo  dili-
genter  adfigunt,  ut  sine  cunctatione  ac  mora  partes
eius  omnes  cogitatio  possit  percurrere.  Et  primus
hie  labor  est  non  haerere  in  occursu  ;  plus  enim
quam  firma  debet  esse  memoria,  quae  aliam  memoriam

19  adiuvet.  Turn,  quae  scripserunt  vel  cogitatione
complexi  sunt,'  aliquo  signo,  quo  moneantur,  notant ;
quod  esse  vel  ex  re  tota  potest,  ut  de  navigatione,
militia,  vel  ex  verbo  aliquo ;  nam  etiam  excidentes
unius  admonitione  verbi  in  memoriam  reponuntur.

*  potest,  added  by  RoUin.

*  deligunt,  Spalding:  discunt,  MSS.

^  complexi  sunt,  Spalding :  coniplectitur,  O.

320


I


BOOK  XL  II.  16-19

the  ix)et  himself  has  nowhere  mentioned  the  occur-
rence ;  and  he  would  scarcely  have  kept  silence  on
an  affair  which  was  so  much  to  his  credit.

This  achievement  of  Simonides  ajipears  to  have  17
given  rise  to  the  observation  that  it  is  an  assistance
to  the  memory  if  localities  are  sharply  impressed
upon  the  mind,  a  view  the  truth  of  which  everj'one
may  realise  by  practical  experiment.  For  when  we
return  to  a  place  after  considerable  absence,  we  not
merely  recognise  the  place  itself,  but  remember
things  that  we  did  there,  and  recall  the  persons
whom  we  met  and  even  the  unuttered  thoughts
which  passed  through  our  minds  when  we  were
there  before.  Thus,  as  in  most  cases,  art  origin-
ates in  experiment.  Some  place  is  chosen  of  the  18
largest  possible  extent  and  characterised  by  the
utmost  possible  variety,  such  as  a  spacious  house
divided  into  a  number  of  rooms.  Everything  of
note  therein  is  carefully  committed  to  the  memory,
in  order  that  the  thought  may  be  enabled  to  run
through  all  the  details  without  let  or  hindrance.
And  undoubtedly  the  first  task  is  to  secure  that
there  shall  be  no  delay  in  finding  any  single  detail,
since  an  idea  which  is  to  lead  by  association  to
some  other  idea  requires  to  be  fixed  in  the  mind
with  more  than  ordinary  certitude.  The  next  step  19
is  to  distinguish  something  which  has  been  written
down  or  merely  thought  of  by  some  particular
symbol  which  will  serve  to  jog  the  memory ;  this
symbol  may  have  reference  to  the  subject  as  a
whole,  it  may,  for  example,  be  drawn  from  naviga-
tion, warfare,  etc.,  or  it  may,  on  the  other  hand,
be  found  in  some  particular  word.  (For  even  in
cases  of  forgetfulness  one  single  word  will  serve  to


QUINTILIAN

Sit  autem signum  navigationis ut  ancora,  militiae

20  ut  aliquid  ex  armis.  Haec  ita  digerunt.  Primum
sensum  vestibule  quasi  adsignant,  secundum,  puta,
atrio,  turn  impluvia  eircumeunt,  nee  cubiculis  modo
aut  exedris,  sed  statuis  etiam  similibusque  per
ordinem  committunt.  Hoc  facto,  cum  est  repetenda
memoria,  incipiunt  ab  initio  loca  haec  recensere,  et
quod  cuique  crediderunt  reposcunt,  ut  eorum  imagine
admonentur.  Ita,  quamlibet  multa  sint,  quorum
meminisse  oporteat,  fiunt  singula  conexa  quodam
choro,^  nee errant  ^  coniungentes  prioribus  conse-

21  quentia  solo  ediscendi  labore.  Quod  de  domo  dixi,
et  in  operibus  publicis  et  in  itinere  longo  et  urbium
ambitu  et  picturis  fieri  potest.  Etiam  fingere  sibi
has  imagines  licet.  Opus  est  ergo  locis,  quae  vel
finguntur  vel  sumuntur,  et  imaginibus  vel  simulacris,
quae  utique  fingenda  sunt.  Imagines  voces  sunt,
quibus  ea  quae  ediscenda  sunt  notamus,  ut,  quomodo
Cicero  dicit,  locis  pro  cera,  simulacris  pro  litteris

22  utamur.  lUud  quoque  ad  verbum  ponere  optimum
fuerit :  Locis  est  utendum  multis,  illustrihus,  exjjUcatis,
modicis  intervalUs,  imaginibus  autem  agentibiis,  acribus,

*  choro,  early  editors :  coria,  corio,  MSS.
^  nee  errant,  Bonnell :  onerant,  O.

*  The  impluvium  was  the  light-well  in  the  centre  of  the
atrium  with  a  cistern  beneath  it  to  catch  the  rainwater  from
the  roof,  which  sloped  inwards.

*  De  Or.  II.  Ixxxvi.  354.  »  Be  Or.  ii.  Ixxxvii.  358.

322


BOOK XI.  II.  19-22

restore  the  memory.)  However,  let  us  suppose  that
the  symbol  is  drawn  from  navigation,  as,  for  instance,
an  anchor ;  or  from  warfare,  as,  for  example,  some
weapon.  These  symbols  are  then  arranged  as  follows.  20
The  first  thought  is  placed,  as  it  were,  in  the  forecourt ;
the  second,  let  us  say,  in  the  living-room ;  the  re-
mainder are  placed  in  due  order  all  round  the  implu-
vium  1  and  entrusted  not  merely  to  bedrooms  and
parlours,  but  even  to  the  care  of  statues  and  the
like.  This  done,  as  soon  as  the  memory  of  the  facts
requires  to  be  revived,  all  these  places  are  visited  in
turn  and  the  various  deposits  are  demanded  from
their  custodians,  as  the  sight  of  each  recalls  the
respective  details.  Consequently,  however  large  the
number  of  these  which  it  is  required  to  remember,
all  are  linked  one  to  the  other  like  dancers
hand  in  hand,  and  there  can  be  no  mistake  since
they  join  what  precedes  to  what  follows,  no  trouble
being  required  except  the  preliminary  labour  of
committing  the  various  points  to  memory.  What  21
I  have  spoken  of  as  being  done  in  a  house,  can
equally  well  be  done  in  connexion  with  public
buildings,  a  long  journey,  the  ramparts  of  a  city,
or  even  pictures.  Or  we  may  even  imagine  such
places  to  ourselves.  We  require,  therefore,
places,  real  or  imaginary,  and  images  or  symbols,
which  we  must,  of  course,  invent  for  ourselves.  By
images  I  mean  the  words  by  which  we  distinguish
the  things  which  we  have  to  learn  by  heart :  in
fact,  as  Cicero  says,  we  use  "  places  like  wax  tablets
and  symbols  in  lieu  of  letters."*  It  will  be  best  to  22
give  his  words  verbatim  : '  "  We  must  for  this  pur-
pose employ  a  number  of  remarkable  places,  clearly
envisaged  and separated by short intervals : the

223


QUINTILIAN

insignitis,  quae  occurrere  celeriterque  percutere  animum
possint.  Quo  magis  miror,  quomodo  Metrodorus  in
XII  signis,  per  quae  sol  meat,  trecenos  et  sexagenos
invenerit  locos.  Vanitas  nimirum  fuit  atque  iactatio
circa  memoriam  sua  potius  arte  quam  natura
gloriantis.

23  Equidem  haec  ad  quaedam  prodesse  non  negaverim,
ut  si  rerum  nomina  multa  per  ordinem  audita  red-
denda  sint.  Namque  in  iis  quae  didicerunt  locis
ponunt  res  illas :  mensam,  ut  hoc  utar,  in  vestibule
et  pulpitum  ^  in  atrio  et  sic  cetera,  deinde  relegentes

24  inveniunt,  ubi  posuerunt.  Et  forsitan  hoc  sunt
adiuti  qui,  auctione  dimissa,  quid  cuique  vendidissent
testibus  argentariorum  tabulis  reddiderunt ;  quod
praestitisse  Hortensium  dicunt.  Minus  idem  proderit
in  ediscendis,  quae  orationis  perpetuae  erunt.  Nam
et  sensus  non  eandem  imaginem  quam  res  habent,
cum  alterum  fingendum  sit,  et  horum  tamen  utcun-
que  commonet  locus,  sicut  sermonis  alicuius  habiti.
At  ^  verborum  coutextus  eadem  arte  quomodo  com-

25  prehendetur  ? Mitto  quod  quaedam  nullis  simulacris

*  pulpitum,  Bonnell :  populnm,  G :  pulvinnm,  early  editors.
'  At,  added  by  Halm.


*  Of  Scepsis,  the  favourite  of  Mithradates  Eupator.  See
de  Or.  II.  Ixxxviii.  360.  He  used  the  signs  of  the  Zodiac  as
aids  to  the  memorj',  subdividing  each  into  thirty  compart-
ments. Quintilian  wonders  on  what  principle  he  can  have
made  such  a  division,  necessarily  purely  artificial  in  nature.

224


I


BOOK XI.  II.  22-25

images  which  we  use  must  be  active,  sharply-cut  and
distinctive,  such  as  may  occur  to  the  mind  and  strike
it  with  rapidity."  This  makes  me  wonder  all  the
more,  how  Metrodorus  ^  should  have  found  three
hundred  and  sixty  different  localities  in  the  twelve
signs  of  the  Zodiac  through  which  the  sun  passes.
It  was  doubtless  due  to  the  vanity  and  boastfulness
of  a  man  who  was  inclined  to  vaunt  his  memory  as
being  the  result  of  art  rather  than  of  natural  gifts.

I  am  far  from  denying  that  those  devices  may  be  23
useful  for  certain  purposes,  as,  for  example,  if  we
have  to  reproduce  a  number  of  names  in  the  order
in  which  we  heard  them.  For  those  who  use  such
aids  place  the  things  which  have  to  be  remembered
in  localities  which  they  have  previously  fixed  in  the
memory  ;  they  put  a  table,  for  instance,  in  the  fore-
court, a  platform  in  the  hall  and  so  on  with  the
rest,  and  then,  when  they  retrace  their  steps,  they
find  the  objects  where  they  had  placed  them.  Such  24
a  practice  may  perhaps  have  been  of  use  to  those
who,  after  an  auction,  have  succeeded  in  stating
what  object  they  had  sold  to  each  buyer,  their  state-
ments being  checked  by  the  books  of  the  money-
takers  ;  a  feat  which  it  is  alleged  was  performed  by
Hortensius.  It  will,  however,  be  of  less  service  in
leai-ning  the  various  parts  of  a  set  speech.  For
thoughts  do  not  call  up  the  same  images  as  material
things,  and  a  symbol  requires  to  be  specially  invented
for  them,  although  even  here  a  particular  place  may
serve  to  remind  us,  as,  for  example,  of  some  conver-
sation that  may  have  been  held  there.  But  how
can  such  a  method  grasp  a  whole  series  of  con-
nected words  ?  I  pass  by  the  fact  that  there  are  25
certain  things  which  it  is  impossible  to  represent  by

225


QUINTILIAN

significari  possunt^  ut  certe  coniunctiones.  Habea-
mus  enim  sane,  ut  qui  notis  scribunt,  certas  imagines
omnium  et  loca  scilicet  infinita,  per  quae  verba,
quot  sunt  in  quinque  contra  Verrem  secundae  actionis
libris,  explicentur,  meminerimus  etiam  omnium  quasi
depositorum :  nonne impediri quoque  dicendi  cur-

26  sum  ^  necesse  est  duplici  memoriae  cura  ?  Nam
quomodo  poterunt  copulata  fluere,  si  propter  singula
verba  ad  singulas  formas  respiciendum  erit  ?  Quare
et  Charmadas  et  Scepsius,  de  quo  modo  dixi,  Metro-
dorus,  quos  Cicero  dicit  usos  hac  exercitatione,  sibi
habeant  sua  ;  nos  simpliciora  tradamus.

27  Si  longior  complectenda  memoria  fuerit  oratio,
proderit  per  partes  ediscere ;  laborat  enim  maxime
onere ;  et  hae  partes  non  sint  perexiguae,  alioqui
rursus  multae  erunt  et  eam  distinguent  atque  con-
cident.  Nee  utique  certum  imperaverim  modum,
sed  maxime  ut  quisque  finietur  locus,  ni  forte  tam

28  numerosus,  ut  ipse  quoque  dividi  debeat.  Dandi
sunt  certi  quidam  termini,  ut  contextum  verborum,
qui  est  difficillimus,  continua  et  crebra  meditatio,
partes  deinceps  ipsas  repetitus  ordo  coniungat.  Non
est inutile, iis quae difficilius haereant aliquas

*  quoque  dicendi cursum, Spalding: quodque  dicit  di-
cursum,  G.

^  de  Or.  II.  Ixxxvii.  360. Charmadas  or  Charmides, an
elder  contemporary  of  Cicero.

226


BOOK XI.  11.  25-28

symbols,  as,  for  example,  conjunctions.  We  may,  it
is  true,  like  shorthand  writers,  have  definite  symbols
for  everything,  and  may  select  an  infinite  number
of  places  to  recall  all  the  words  contained  in  the
five  books  of  the  second  pleading  against  Verres,
and  we  may  even  remember  them  all  as  if  they
were  deposits  placed  in  safe-keeping.  But  will  not
the  flow  of  our  speech  inevitably  be  impeded  by  the
double  task  imposed  upon  our  memory  ^  For  how  26
can  our  words  be  expected  to  flow  in  connected
speech,  if  we  have  to  look  back  at  separate  symbols
for  each  individual  word  ?  Therefore  the  experts
mentioned  by  Cicero  ^  as  having  trained  their
memory  by  methods  of  this  kind,  namely  Char-
madas,  and  Metrodorus  of  Scepsis,  to  whom  I  have
just  referred,  may  keep  their  systems  for  their  own
use.  My  precepts  on  the  subject  shall  be  of  a
simpler  kind.

If  a  speech  of  some  length  has  to  be  committed  27
to  memory,  it  will  be  well  to  learn  it  piecemeal,
since  there  is  nothing  so  bad  for  the  memory  as  being
overburdened.  But  the  sections  into  which  we  divide
it  for  this  purpose  should  not  be  very  short :  otherwise
they  will  be  too  many  in  number,  and  will  break  up
and  distract  the  memory.  I  am  not,  however,  pre-
pared to  recommend  any  definite  length  ;  it  will  de-
pend on  the  natural  limits  of  the  passage  concerned,
unless,  indeed,  it  be  so  long  as  itself  to  require  sub-
division. But  some  limits  must  be  fixed  to  enable  us,  28
by  dint  of  frequent  and  continuous  practice,  to  connect
the  words  in  their  proper  order,  which  is  a  task  of  no
small  difficulty,  and  subsequently  to  unite  the  various
sections  into  a  whole  when  we  go  over  them  in
order. If  certain  poi-tions  prove  especially  difficult  to

227


QUINTILIAN

apponere notas, qiiarum  recordatio  comruoneat et

29  quasi  excitet  memoriam ;  nemo  etiam  fere  tarn
infelix,  ut,  quod  cuique  loco  signum  destinaverit,
nesciat.  At,  si  tardus^  ad  hoc,  eo  quoque  adhuc
remedio  utetur^  ut  ipsae  notae  (hoc  enim  est  ex  ilia
arte  non  inutile)  aptentur  ^  ad  eos  qui  excidunt
sensus :  ancora  *  ut  supra  pro  posui,  si  de  nave  dicen-

30  dum  est,^  spiculum,  si  de  proelio.  Multum  enim
signa  faciunt,  et  ex  alia  memoria  venit  alia :  ut  cum
translatus  anulus  vel  alligatus  commoneat  nos,  cur
id  fecerimus.  Haec  magis  adhuc  adstringunt,  qui
memoriam  ab  aliquo  simili  transferunt  ad  id  quod
continendum  est :  ut  in  nominibus,  si  Fabius  forte
sit  tenendus,  referamus  ad  ilium  Cunctatorem,  qui
excidere  non potest,  aut ad aliquem  amicum,  qui

31  idem  vocetur.  Quod  est  facilius  in  Apris  et  in  Ursis
et  Nasone  aut  Crispo,  ut  id  memoriae  adfigatur  unde
sunt  nomina.  Origo  quoque  aliquando  declinatorum
tenendi  magis  causa  est,  ut  in  Cicerone,  Verrio,
Aurelio. Sed  hoc  miserim.^

32  Illud  neminem  non  iuvabit, iisdem  quibus  scripserit'
ceris  ediscere. Sequitur  enim  vestigiis  quibusdam

^  at,  Halm  :  ut,  0.  :  tardus,  an  early  emendation  :  trandus,
G :  tradendus,  late  MS^.

*  utetur,  Halm :  utitur,  MSS.

*  aptentur,  Hiecke :  adtentus,  MSS.

*  ancora,  Hiecke  :  ancoram,  MSS.

*  est,  HaZm :  esset,  MSS.

*  miserim,  Halm, :  misceri,  G.

'  scripserit,  early  edd.  i  ceteris,  MSS.

1  Sects.  18-23.

*  Boar,  Bear,  Long-nose,  and  Curly  respectively.

'  Cicero,  a  sower  of  chickpea  (cicer),  according  to  Pliny
(xviii.  10).  Aurelius  =  Auselius,  child  of  the  sun  (a  sole)
according  to  Festus. Verrius  unknown,

228


BOOK  XI.  II.  28-32

remember,  it  Mrill  be  found  advantageous  to  indicate
them  by  certain  marks,  tlie  remembrance  of  which
will  refresh  and  stimulate  the  memory.  For  there  can  29
be  but  few  whose  memory  is  so  barren  that  they  will
fail  to  recognise  the  symbols  with  which  they  have
marked  different  passages.  But  if  anyone  is  slow  to
recognise  his  own  signs,  he  should  employ  the  follow-
ing additional  remedy,  which,  though  drawn  from  the
mnemonic  system  discussed  above,^  is  not  without  its
uses  :  he  will  adapt  his  symbols  to  the  nature  of  the
thoughts  which  tend  to  slip  from  his  memory,  using
an  anchor,  as  I  suggested  above,  if  he  has  to  speak
of  a  ship,  or  a  spear,  if  he  has  to  speak  of  a  battle.
For  symbols  are  highly  efficacious,  and  one  idea  30
suggests  another :  for  example,  if  we  change  a  ring
from  one  finger  to  another  or  tie  a  thread  round  it,
it  will  serve  to  remind  us  of  our  reason  for  so  doing.
Specially  effective  are  those  devices  which  lead  the
memory  from  one  thing  to  another  similar  thing  which
we  have  got  to  remember  ;  for  example,  in  the  case  of
names,  if  we  desire  to  remember  the  name  Fabius,
we  should  think  of  the  famous  Cunctator,  whom  we
are  certain  not  to  forget,  or  of  some  friend  bearing
the  same  name.  This  is  specially  easy  with  names  31
such  as  Aper,  Ursus,  Naso,  or  Crispus,^  since  in
these  cases  we  can  fix  their  origin  in  our  memory.
Origin  again  may  assist  us  to  a  better  remem-
brance of  derivative  names,  such  as  Cicero,  Verrius,
or  Aurelius.'  However,  I  will  say  no  more  on  this
point.

There  is  one  thing  which  will  be  of  assistance  to  32
everyone,  namely,  to  learn  a  passage  by  heart  from
the  same  tablets  on  which  he  has  committed  it  to
writing. For  he  will  have  certain  tracks  to  guide

229


QUINTILIAN

memoriam^  et  velut  oculis  intuetur  non  paginas  modo,
sed  versus  prope  ipsos,  estque  cum^  dicit  similis
legenti.  lam  vero  si  litura  aut  adiectio  aliqua  atque
mutatio  interveniat,  signa  sunt  quaedam,  quae  in-

33  tuentes  deerrare  non  possumus.  Haec  ratio,  ut  est
illi,  de  qua  primum  locutus  sum,  arti  non  dissimilis,
ita,  si  quid  me  experimenta  docuerunt,  et  expeditioi
et  potentior.  Ediscere  tacite  (nam  id  quoque  est
quaesitum)  erat  optimum,  si  non  subirent  velut
otiosum  animum  plerumque  aliae  cogitationes ;  pro-
pter quas  exeitandus  est  voce,  ut  duplici  motu  iuvetur
memoria dicendi et  audiendi. Sed haec vox sit

34  modica  et  magis  murmur.  Qui  autem  legente  alio
ediscit,  in  parte  tardatur,  quod  acrior  est  oculorum
quam  aurium  sensus ;  in  parte  iuvari  potest,  quod,
cum  semel  aut  bis  audierit,  continue  illi  memoriam
suam  experiri  licet  et  cum  legente  contendere.  Nam
et  alioqui  id  maxime  faciendum  est,  ut  nos  subinde
temptemus,  quia  continua  lectio  et  quae  magis  et

35  quae  minus  haerent  aequaliter  transit. In  experiendo

*  estque  cum,  Meister :  quae  cum,  O,
230


BOOK XI.  II.  32-35

him  in  his  pursuit  of  memory,  and  the  mind's  eye
will  be  fixed  not  merely  on  the  pages  on  which  the
words  were  written,  but  on  individual  lines,  and  at
times  he  will  speak  as  though  he  were  reading  aloud.
Further,  if  the  writing  should  be  interrupted  by
some  erasure,  addition  or  alteration,  there  are  certain
symbols  available,  the  sight  of  which  will  prevent  us
from  wandering  from  the  track.  This  device  bears  33
some  resemblance  to  the  mnemonic  system  which
I  mentioned  above,  but  if  my  experience  is  worth
anything,  is  at  once  more  expeditious  and  more
effective.  The  question  has  been  raised  as  to
whether  we  should  learn  by  heart  in  silence ;  it
would  be  best  to  do  so,  save  for  the  fact  that  under
such  circumstances  the  mind  is  apt  to  become  in-
dolent, with  the  result  that  other  thoughts  break  in.
For  this  reason  the  mind  should  be  kept  alert  by  the
sound  of  the  voice,  so  that  the  memory  may  derive
assistance  from  the  double  effort  of  speaking  and
listening.  But  our  voice  should  be  subdued,  rising
scarcely  above  a  murmur.  On  the  other  hand,  if  we  34
attempt  to  learn  by  heart  from  another  reading
aloud,  we  shall  find  that  there  is  both  loss  and  gain ;
on  the  one  hand,  the  process  of  learning  will  be
slower,  because  the  perception  of  the  eye  is  quicker
than  that  of  the  ear,  while,  on  the  other  hand,  when
we  have  heard  a  passage  once  or  twice,  we  shall  be
in  a  position  to  test  our  memory  and  match  it  against
the  voice  of  the  reader.  It  is,  indeed,  important  for
other  reasons  to  test  ourselves  thus  from  time  to  time,
since  continuous  reading  has  this  drawback,  that  it
passes  over  the  passages  which  we  find  hard  to  re-
member at  the  same  speed  as  those  which  we  find  less
difficulty  in  retaining. By  testing  ourselves  to  see  35

231


QUINTILIAN

teneasne,  et  maior  intentio  est  et  nihil  supervacui
temporis  perit,  quo  etiam  quae  tenemus  repeti  solent ;
ita  sola,  quae  exciderunt,  retractantur,  ut  crebra
iteratione  firmentur,  quanquam  solent  hoc  ipso
maxima  haerere,  quod  exciderunt.  lUud  ediscendo
scribendoque  commune  est,  utrique  plurimum  con-
ferre  bonam  valetudinem,  digestum  cibum,  animum

36  cogitationibus  aliis  liberum.  Verum  et  in  lis  quae
scripsimus  complectendis  multum  valent,  et  in  iis
quae  cogitamus  continendis  prope  solae  (excepta,
quae  potentissima  est,  exercitatione)  divisio  et  com-
positio. Nam  qui  recte  diviserit,  nunquam  poteritin

37  rerum  ordine  errare.  Certa  sunt  enim  non  solum  in
digerendis  quaestionibus,  sed  etiam  in  exsequendis,
si  modo  recte  dicimus,  prima  ac  secunda  et  deinceps ;
cohaeretque  omnis  rerum  copulatio,  ut  ei  nihil  neque
subtrahi  sine  manifesto  intellectu  neque  inseri  possit.

38  An  vero  Scaevola  in  lusu  duodecim  scriptorum,  cum
prior  calculum  promovisset  essetque  victus,  dum  rus
tendit,  repetito  totius  certaminis  ordine,  quo  dato
errasset  recordatus,  rediit  ad  eum,  quocum  luserat,
isque  ita  factum  esse  confessus  est?  Minus  idem
232


BOOK XI.  II.  35-38

whether  we  remember  a  passage^  we  develop  greater
concentration  without  waste  of  time  over  the  repe-
tition of  passages  which  we  already  know  by  heart.
Thus,  only  those  passages  which  tend  to  slip  from
the  memory  are  repeated  with  a  view  to  fixing  them
in  the  mind  by  frequent  rehearsal,  although  as  a  rule
the  mere  fact  that  they  once  slipped  our  memory
makes  us  ultimately  remember  them  with  special
accuracy.  Both  learning  by  heart  and  writing  have
this  feature  in  common :  namely,  that  good  health,
sound  digestion,  and  freedom  from  other  preoccupa-
tions of  mind  contribute  largely  to  the  success  of
both.  But  for  the  purpose  of  getting  a  real  grasp  36
of  what  we  have  written  under  the  various  heads,
division  and  artistic  structure  will  be  found  of  great
value,  while,  with  the  exception  of  practice,  which
is  the  most  powerful  aid  of  all,  they  are  practically
the  only  means  of  ensuring  an  accurate  remembrance
of  what  we  have  merely  thought  out.  For  correct
division  will  be  an  absolute  safeguard  against  error  in
the  order  of  our  speech,  since  there  are  certain  points  37
not  merely  in  the  distribution  of  the  various  questions
in  our  speech,  but  also  in  their  development  (pro-
vided we  speak  as  we  ought),  which  naturally  come
first,  second,  and  third,  and  so  on,  while  the  connexion
will  be  so  perfect  that  nothing  can  be  omitted  or
inserted  without  the  fact  of  the  omission  or  in-
sertion being  obvious.  We  are  told  that  Scaevola,  38
after  a  game  of  draughts  in  which  he  made  the  first
move  and  was  defeated,  went  over  the  whole  game
again  in  his  mind  on  his  way  into  the  country,  and
on  recalling  the  move  which  had  cost  him  the  game,
returned  to  tell  the  man  with  whom  he  had  been
playing,  and  the  latter  acknowledged  that  he  was

233


QUINTILIAN

ordo valebit in oratione, praesertim totus nostro
arbitrio  constitutus,  cum  tantum  ille  valeat  alternus  ?

39  Etiam  quae  bene  composita  erunt,  memoriam  serie
sua  ducent.  Nam  sicut  facilius  versus  ediscimus
quam  prosam  orationem,  ita  prosae  vincta  quam
dissoluta.  Sic  contingit,  ut  etiam  quae  ex  tempore
videbantur  effusa,  ad  verbum  repetita  reddantur.
Quod  meae  quoque  memoriae  mediocritatem  seque-
batur^  si  quando  interventus  aliquorum,  qui  hunc
honorem  mererentur^  iterare  declamationis  partem
coegisset.  Nee  est  mendacio  locus,  sal  vis  qui  inter-
fu  erunt.

40  Si  quis  tamen  unam  maximamque  a  me  artem
memoriae  quaerat,  exercitatio  est  et  labor ;  multa
ediscere,  multa  cogitare,  et  si  fieri  potest  cotidie,
potentissimum  est. Nihil  aeque  vel  augetur  cura  vel

41  negligentia  intercidit.  Quare  et  pueri  statim,  ut
praecepi,  quam  plurima  ediscant,  et,  quaecunque
aetas  operam  iuvandae  studio  memoriae  dabit,  de-
voret  initio  taedium  illud  et  scripta  et  lecta  saepius
revolvendi  et  quasi  eundem  cibum  remandendi.
Quod  ipsum  hoc  fieri  potest  levius,  si  pauca  primum
et  quae odium  non adferant  coeperimus  ediscere,

^  See  I.  i.  36  ;  n.  vii.  1  sqq.
234


BOOK XL  11.  38-41

right.  Is  order,  then,  I  ask  you,  to  be  accounted  of
less  importance  in  a  speech,  in  which  it  depends
entirely  on  ourselves,  whereas  in  a  game  our  opponent
has  an  equal  share  in  its  development  ?  Again,  if  39
our  structure  be  what  it  should,  the  artistic  se-
quence will  serve  to  guide  the  memory.  For  just
as  it  is  easier  to  learn  verse  than  prose,  so  it  is
easier  to  learn  prose  when  it  is  artistically  con-
structed than  when  it  has  no  such  organisation.  If
these  points  receive  attention,  it  will  be  possible  to
repeat  verbatim  even  such  psssages  as  gave  the  im-
pression of  being  delivered  extempore.  My  own
memory  is  of  a  very  ordinary  kind,  but  I  found  that
1  could  do  this  with  success  on  occasions  when  the
interruption  of  a  declamation  by  persons  who  had  a
claim  to  such  a  courtesy  forced  me  to  repeat  part  of
what  1  had  said.  There  are  persons  still  living,  who
were  then  present  to  witness  if  I  lie.

However,  if  anyone  asks  me  what  is  the  one  40
supreme  method  of  memory,  I  shall  reply,  practice
and  industry.  The  most  important  thing  is  to  learn
much  by  heart  and  to  think  much,  and,  if  possible,
to  do  this  daily,  since  there  is  nothing  that  is  more
increased  by  practice  or  impaired  by  neglect  than
memor)'.  Therefore  boys  should,  as  I  have  already  41
urged,^  learn  as  much  as  possible  by  heart  at  the
earliest  stage,  while  all  who,  whatever  their  age,
desire  to  cultivate  the  power  of  memory,  should
endeavour  to  swallow  the  initial  tedium  of  reading
and  re-reading  what  they  have  written  or  read,  a
process  which  we  may  compare  to  chewing  the  cud.
This  task  will  be  rendered  less  tiresome  if  we  begin
by  confining  ourselves  to  learning  only  a  little  at  a
time,  in  amounts  not  sufficient  to  create  disgust :  we

«35


QUINTILIAN

turn  cotidie  adiicere  singulos  versus,  quorum  accessio
labori  sensum  increment!  non  adferat,  in  summam
ad  infinitum  usque  perveniat,  et  poetica  prius,  turn
oratorum,  novissime  etiam  solutiora  numeris  et  magis
ab  usu  dicendi  remota,  qualia  sunt  iurisconsultorum.

42  Difficiliora  enim  debent  esse,  quae  exercent,  quo  sit
levius  ipsum  illud,  in  quod  exercent,  ut  athletae
ponderibus  plumbeis  adsuefaciunt  manus,  quibus
vacuis  et  nudis  in  certamine  utendum  est.  Non
oniittam  etiam,  quod  cotidianis  experimentis  depre-
henditur,  minime  fidelem  esse  paulo  tardioribus  in-

43  geniis  recentem  memoriam.  Mirum  dictu  est  nee
in  promptu  ratio,  quantum  nox  interposita  adferat
firmitatis,  sive  requiescit  labor  ille,  cuius  sibi  ipsa
fatigatio  obstabat,  sive  matiiratur  atque  concoquitur,
quae  firmissima  eius  pars  est,  recordatio ;  quae  statim
referri  non  poterant,  contexuntur  postera  die,  con-
firmatque  memoriam  illud  tempus,  quod  esse  in  causa

44  solet  oblivionis.  Etiam  ilia  praevelox  fere  cito  effluit,
et,  velut  praesenti  officio  functa  nihil  in  posterum


BOOK XI.  u.  41-44

may  then  proceed  to  increase  the  amount  by  a  hne  a
day,  an  addition  which  will  not  sensibly  increase  the
labour  of  learning,  until  at  last  the  amount  we  can
attack  will  know  no  limits.  We  should  begin  with
poetry  and  then  go  on  to  oratory,  while  finally  we
may  attempt  passages  still  freer  in  rhythm  and  less
akin  to  ordinary  speech,  such,  for  example,  as
passages  from  legal  writers.  For  passages  intended  42
as  an  exercise  should  be  somewhat  difficult  in  char-
acter if  they  are  to  make  it  easy  to  achieve  the  end
for  which  the  exercise  is  designed;  just  as  athletes
train  the  muscles  of  their  hands  by  carrying  weights  of
lead, although  in  the  actual  contests  their  hands  will
be  empty  and  free.  Further,  I  must  not  omit  the
fact,  the  truth  of  which  our  daily  practice  will  teach
us,  that  in  the  case  of  the  slower  type  of  mind  the
memory  of  recent  events  is  far  from  being  exact.  It  is  43
a  curious  fact,  of  which  the  reason  is  not  obvious,  that
the  interval  of  a  single  night  will  greatly  increase
the  strength  of  the  memory,  whether  this  be  due  to
the  fact  that  it  has  rested  from  the  labour,  the
fatigue  of  which  constituted  the  obstacle  to  success,
or  whether  it  be  that  the  power  of  recollection,
which  is  the  most  im|)ortant  element  of  memory,
undergoes  a  process  of  ripening  and  maturing
during  the  time  which  intervenes.  Whatever  the
cause,  things  which  could  not  be  recalled  on  the
spot  are  easily  co-ordinated  the  next  day,  and  time
itself,  which  is  generally  accounted  one  of  the  causes
of  forgetfulness,  actually  serves  to  strengthen  the
memory.  On  the  other  hand,  the  abnormally  rapid  44
memory  fails  as  a  rule  to  last  and  takes  its  leave  as
though,  its  immediate  task  accomplished,  it  had  no
further  duties to perform. And  indeed  there  is

237


QUINTILIAN

debeat,  tanquam  dimissa  discedit. Nee  est  mirum,
magis  haerere  animo  quae  diutius  adfixa  sint.

Ex  hae  ingeniorum  diversitate  nata  dubitatio  est,
ad  verbum  sit  ediscendum  dicturis,  an  vim  modo  re-
rum  atque  ordinem  complecti  satis  sit ;  de  quo  sine
46  dubio  non  potest  in  universum  pronuntiari.  Nam  si
memoria  sufFragatur,  tempus  non  defuit,  nulla  me
velim  syllaba  efFugiat ;  alioqui  etiam  scribere  sit
supervacuum.  Idque  praecipue  a  pueris  obtinendum,
atque  in  banc  consuetudinem  memoria  exercitatione
redigenda,  ne  nobis  discamus  ignoscere.  Ideoque
et  admoneri  et  ad  libellum  respicere  vitiosum,  quod
libertatem  negligentiae  facit,  nee  quisquam  se  parum
tenere iudieat, quod, ne  sibi excidat, non timet.

46  Inde  interruptus  aetionis  impetus  et  resistens  ac
salebi'osa  oratio  ;  et  qui  dieit  ediscenti  similis,  etiam
omnem  bene  seriptorum  gratiam  perdit  vel  hoc  ipso,
quod  scripsisse  se  confitetur,  Memoria  autem  faeit
etiam  prompti  ingenii  famam,  ut  ilia,  quae  dicimus,
non  domo  attulisse  sed  ibi  protinus  sumpsisse  videa-
niur ;  quod  et  oratori  et  ipsi  eausae  plurimum  eon-

47  fert.  Nam  et  magis  miratur  et  minus  timet  iudex,
238


BOOK XI.  II.  44-47

nothing  surprising  in  the  fact  that  things  which
have  been  implanted  in  the  memory  for  some  time
should  have  a  greater  tendency  to  stay  there.

The  diiFerence  between  the  powers  of  one  mind
and  another,  to  which  I  have  just  referred,  gives  rise
to  the  question  whether  those  who  are  intending  to
speak  should  learn  their  speeches  verbatim  or  whether
it  is  sufficient  to  get  a  good  grasp  of  the  essence  and
the  order  of  what  they  have  got  to  say.  To  this
problem  no  answer  is  possible  that  will  be  of  uni-
versal application.  Give  me  a  reliable  memory  and  45
plenty  of  time,  and  I  should  prefer  not  to  peiTnit
a  single  syllable  to  escape  me :  otherwise  writing
would  be  superfluous.  It  is  specially  important  to
train  the  young  to  such  precision,  and  the  memory
should  be  continually  practised  to  this  end,  that  we
may  never  learn  to  become  indulgent  to  its  failure.
For  this  reason  I  regard  it  as  a  mistake  to  permit  the
student  to  be  prompted  or  to  consult  his  manuscript,
since  such  practices  merely  encourage  carelessness,
and  no  one  will  ever  realise  that  he  has  not  got  his
theme  by  heart,  if  he  has  no  fear  of  forgetting  it.
It  is  this  which  causes  interruptions  in  the  flow  of  46
speech  and  makes  the  orator's  language  halting  and
jerky,  while  he  seems  as  though  he  were  learning
what  he  says  by  heart  and  loses  all  the  grace  that  a
well-written  speech  can  give,  simply  by  the  fact  that
he  makes  it  obvious  that  he  has  written  it.  On  the
other  hand,  a  good  memory  will  give  us  credit  for
quickness  of  wit  as  well,  by  creating  the  impression
that  our  words  have  not  been  prepared  in  the  seclu-
sion of  the  study,  but  are  due  to  the  inspiration
of  the  moment,  an  impression  which  is  of  the  utmost
assistance  both  to  the  orator  and  to  his  cause. For  47

239


QUINTILIAN

quae  non  putat  adversus  se  praeparata.  Idque  in
actionibus  inter  praecipua  servandum  est,  ut  quaedam
etiam,  quae  optime  vinximus,  velut  soluta  enuntiemus
et  cogitantibus  nonnunquam  et  dubitantibus  similes
quaerere  videamur  quae  attulimus.

48  Ergo  quid  sit  optimum,  neminem  fugit.  Si  vero  aut
memoria  natura  durior  erit  aut  non  sufFragabitur  tem-
pus,  etiam  inutile  erit  ad  omnia  se  verba  adligare,  cum
oblivio  unius  eorum  cuiuslibet  aut  defomiem  haesit-
ationemaut  etiam  silentium  inducat,  tutiusque  multo
comprehensis  animo  rebus  ipsis  libertatem  sibi  elo-

49  quendi  relinquere.  Nam  et  invitus  perdit  quisque  id
quod  elegerat  verbum,nec  facile  reponit  aliud,  dum  id,
quod  scripserat,  quaerit.  Sed  ne  hoc  quidem  infirmae
memoriae  remedium  est  nisi  in  iis,  qui  sibi  facultatem
aliquam  dicendi  ex  tempore  paraverunt.  Quodsi  cui
utrumque  defuerit,  huic  omittere  omnino  totum
actioimm  laborem  ac,  si  quid  in  litteris  valet,  ad
scribendum  potius  suadebo  convertere.  Sed  haec
rara  infelicitas  erit.

50  Ceterum  quantum  natura  studioque  valeat  memoria,
vel  Themistocles  testis,  quem  unum  intra  annum
optime  locutum  esse  Persice  constat ;  vel  Mithri-
240


BOOK XL  II.  47-50

the  judge  admires  those  words  more  and  fears  them
less  which  he  does  not  suspect  of  having  been
specially  prepared  beforehand  to  outwit  him.
Further,  we  must  make  it  one  of  our  chief  aims
in  pleading  to  deliver  passages  which  have  been
constructed  with  the  utmost  care,  in  sucli  manner
as  to  make  it  appear  that  they  are  but  casually  strung
together,  and  to  suggest  that  we  are  thinking  out
and  hesitating  over  words  which  we  have,  as  a
matter  of  fact,  carefully  prepared  in  advance.

It  should  now  be  clear  to  all  what  is  the  best  48
course  to  adopt  for  the  cultivation  of  memory.  If,
however,  our  memory  be  naturally  somewhat  dull
or  time  presses,  it  will  be  useless  to  tie  ourselves
down  rigidly  to  ever}'  word,  since  if  we  forget  any
one  of  them,  the  result  may  be  awkward  hesita-
tion or  even  a  tongue-tied  silence.  It  is,  therefore,
far  safer  to  secure  a  good  grasp  of  the  facts  them-
selves and  to  leave  ourselves  free  to  speak  as  we
wUl.  For  the  loss  of  even  a  single  word  that  we  49
liave  chosen  is  always  a  matter  for  regret,  and  it  is
hard  to  supply  a  substitute  when  we  are  searching
for  the  word  that  we  had  written.  But  even  this
is  no  remedy  for  a  weak  memory,  except  for  those
who  have  acquired  the  art  of  speaking  extempore.
But  if  both  memory  and  this  gift  be  lacking,  I
should  advise  the  would-be  orator  to  abandon  the
toil  of  pleading  altogether  and,  if  he  has  any  literary
capacity,  to  betake  himself  by  preference  to  writing.
But  such  a  misfortune  will  be  of  but  rare  occurrence.

For  the  rest  there  are  many  historical  examples  50
of  the  power  to  which  memory  may  be  developed  by
natural aptitude  and  application. Themistocles  is
said  to  have  spoken  excellently  in  Persian  after  a

241


QUINTILIAN

dates^  cui  duas  et  viginti  linguas,  quot  nationibus
imperabat,  traditur  notas  fuisse ;  vel  Crassus  ille
Dives,  qui,  cum  Asiae  praeesset,  quinque  Graeci
sermonis  difFerentias  sic  tenuit  ut,  qua  quisque  apud
eum  lingua  postulasset,  eadem  ius  sibi  redditum
ferret ;  vel  Cyrus,  quem  omnium  militum  tenuisse
51  creditum  est  nomina.  Quin  semel  auditos  quamlibet
multos  versus  protinus  dicitur  reddidisse  Theodectes.
Dicebantur  etiam  nunc  esse,  qui  facerent,  sed  mihi
nunquam,  ut  ipse  interessem,  contigit;  habenda
tamen  fides  est  vel  in  hoc  ut,  qui  crediderit,  et
speret.

III.  Pronuntiatio  a  plerisque  actio  dicitur,  sed
prius  nomen  a  voce,  sequens  a  gestu  videtur  ac-
cipere.  Namque  actionem  Cicero  alias  quasi  sermoneni
alias  eloquentiam  qua)idam  corporis  dicit.  Idem  tamen
duas  eius  partes  facit,  quae  sunt  eaedem  pronuntla-
2  tionis,  vocem  atque  motum.  Qua  propter  utraque
appellatione  indifFerenter  uti  licet.  Habet  autem
res  ipsa  miram  quandam  in  orationibus  vim  ac  potes-
tatem  ;  neque  enim  tarn  refert,  qualia  sint,  quae  intra
nosmet  ipsos  composuimus,  quam  quo  modo  effe-
rantur ;  nam  ita  quisque,  ut  audit,  movetur.  Quare
neque  probatio  ulla,  quae  modo  venit  ab  oratore,
tam  firma  est,  ut  non  perdat  vires  suas,  nisi  adiuvatur

^  King  of  Pontus.

*  Consul, 131  B.C. Commanded  in  the  war  against  Aris-
tonicus  of  Pergamum,  was  defeated  and  killed.

*  Rhetorician  of  first  half  of  fourth  century  B.C.

*  de  Or.  in.  lix.  222.  •  Or.  xvii.  55.

242


BOOK  XI.  II.  50-111.  2

year's  study  ;  Mithridates  is  recorded  to  have  known
twenty-two  languages,  that  being  the  number  of
the  different  nations  included  in  his  empire  ;  ^  Crassus,
sumamed  the  Rich,^  when  commanding  in  Asia  had
such  a  complete  mastery  of  five  different  Greek
dialects,  that  he  would  give  judgement  in  the  dialect
employed  by  the  plaintiff  in  putting  forward  his
suit ;  Cyrus  is  believed  to  have  known  the  name
of  every  soldier  in  his  army,  while  Theodectes  ^  is  5 1
actually  said  to  have  been  able  to  repeat  any  number
of  verses  after  only  a  single  hearing.  I  remember
that  it  used  to  be  alleged  that  there  were  persons
still  living  who  could  do  the  same,  though  I  never
had  the  good  fortune  to  be  present  at  such  a  per-
formance. Still,  we  shall  do  well  to  have  faith  in
such  miracles,  if  only  that  he  who  believes  may  also
hope  to  achieve  the  like.

III.  Delivery  is  often  styled  action.  But  the  first
name  is  derived  from  the  voice,  the  second  from  the
gesture.  For  Cicero  in  one  passage  *  speaks  of  action
as  being  a,  form  oj^  speech,  and  in  another^  as  being
a  kind  of  physical  eloquence.  None  the  less,  he
divides  action  into  two  elements,  which  are  the
same  as  the  elements  of  delivery,  namely,  voice  and
movement.  Therefore,  it  matters  not  which  term
we  employ.  But  the  thing  itself  has  an  extra-  2
ordinarily  powerful  effect  in  oratory.  For  the
nature  of  the  speech  that  we  have  composed  within
our  minds  is  not  so  important  as  the  manner  in
which  we  produce  it,  since  the  emotion  of  each
member  of  our  audience  will  depend  on  the  im-
pression made  upon  his  hearing.  Consequently,  no
proof,  at  least  if  it  be  one  devised  by  the  orator
himself,  will  ever  be  so  secure  as  not  to  lose  its  force

243


QUINTILIAN

adseveratione  dicentis. Adfectus  omnes  languescant
hecesse est,  nisi  voce,  vultu,  totius prope habitu

3  corporis  inardescunt.  Nam  cum  haec  omnia  feceri-
mus,  felices  tamen,  si  nostrum  ilium  ignem  iudex
eonceperit ;  nedum  eum  supini  securique  moveamus,

4  ac  non  et  ipse  nostra  oscitatione  solvatur.  Docu-
mento  sunt  vel  scenici  actores,  qui  et  optimis  poeta-
rum  tantum  adiiciunt  gratiae,  ut  nos  infinito  magis
eadem  ilia  audita  quam  lecta  delectent ;  et  vilissimis
etiam  quibusdam  impetrant  aures,  ut,  quibus  nuUus
est  in  bibliothecis  locus,  sit  etiam  frequensin  theatris.

6  Quodsi  in  rebus,  quas  fictas  esse  scimus  et  inanes,
tantum  pronuntiatio  potest,  ut  iram,  lacrimas,  soUici-
tudinem  adferat,  quanto  plus  valeat  necesse  est,  ubi
et  credimus  ?  Equidem  vel  mediocrem  orationem
commendatam  viribus  actionis  adfirmarim  plus  habitu-
ram  esse  momenti  quam  optimam  eadem  illadestitu-

6  tam.  Siquidem  et  Demosthenes,  quid  esset  in  toto
dicendi  opere  primum,  interrogatus  pronuntiationi
palmam  dedit  eidemque  secundum  ac  tertium  locum,
donee  ab  eo  quaeri  desineret,  ut  earn  videri  posset

7  non  praecipuam,  sed  solam iudicasse;  ideoque  ipse

?44


BOOK XI.  HI.  2-7

if  the  sj>eaker  fails  to  produce  it  in  tones  that  drive
it  home.  All  emotional  appeals  will  inevitably  fall
flat,  unless  they  are  given  the  fire  that  voice,  look,
and  the  whole  carriage  of  the  body  can  give  them.
For  when  we  have  done  all  this,  we  may  still  3
account  ourselves  only  too  fortunate  if  we  have
succeeded  in  communicating  the  fire  of  our  passion
to  the  judge :  consequently,  we  can  have  no  hope
of  moving  him  if  we  speak  with  languor  and  indiffer-
ence, nor  of  preventing  him  from  yielding  to  the
narcotic  influence  of  our  own  yawns.  A  proof  of  this  4
is  given  by  actors  in  the  theatre.  For  they  add  so
much  to  the  charm  even  of  the  greatest  poets,  that
the  verse  moves  us  far  more  when  heard  than  when
read,  while  they  succeed  in  securing  a  hearing  even
for  the  most  worthless  authors,  with  the  result
that  they  repeatedly  win  a  welcome  on  the
stage  that  is  denied  them  in  the  library.  Now  5
if  delivery  can  count  for  so  much  in  themes
which  we  know  to  be  fictitious  and  devoid  of  reality,
as  to  arouse  our  anger,  our  tears  or  our  anxiety,  how
much  greater  must  its  effect  be  when  we  actually
believe  what  we  hear  ?  For  my  own  part  I  would
not  hesitate  to  assert  that  a  mediocre  speech  sup-
ported by  all  the  power  of  delivery  will  be  more
impressive  than  the  best  speech  unaccompanied  by
such  power.  It  was  for  this  reason  that  Demos-  6
thenes,  when  asked  what  was  the  most  important
thing  in  oratorj^,  gave  the  palm  to  delivery  and
assigned  it  second  and  third  place  as  well,  until
his  questioner  ceased  to  trouble  him.  We  are
therefore  almost  justified  in  concluding  that  he
regarded  it  not  merely  as  the  first,  but  as  the  only
virtue of  oratory. This explains why  he  studied  7

245


QUINTILIAN

tarn  diligenter  apud  Andronicum  hypocriten  studuit,
ut  admirantibus  eius  orationem  Rhodiis  non  immerito
Aeschines  dixisse  videatur :  Quid  si  ipsum  audissetis  ?
Et  M. Cicero  unam  in  dicendo  actionem  dominari

8  putat.  Hac  Cn.  Lentulum  plus  opinionis  consecutum
quam  eloquentia  tradit,  eadem  C.  Gracchum  in  de-
flenda  fratris  nece  totius  populi  Romani  lacrimas
eoncitasse,  Antonium  et  Crassum  multum  valuisse,
plurimum  vero  Q.  Hortensium.  Cuius  rei  fides  est,
quod  eius  scripta  tantum  intra  famam  sunt,  qua  diu
princeps  oratorum,  aliquando  aemulus  Ciceronis  existi-
matus  est,  novissime,  quoad  vixit,  secundus,  ut  ap-
pareat  placuisse  aliquid  eo  dicente,  quod  legentes

9  non  invenimus.  Et  hercule  cum  valeant  multum
verba  per  se,  et  vox  propriam  vim  adiiciat  rebus,  et
gestus  motusque  significet  aliquid,  profecto  perfectum
quiddam  fieri,  cum  omnia  coierunt,  necesse  est.

10  Sunt  tamen  qui  rudem  illam,  et  qualem  impetus
cuiusque  animi  tulit,  actionem  iudicent  fortiorem  et
sol  am  viris  dignam,  sed  non  alii  fere  quam  qui  etiam

*  de  Or.  in.  Ivi.  213.  Aeschines  in  exile  at  Rhodes  first
recited  his  own  speech  against  Ctesiphon,  and  then  by  special
request  read  Demosthenes'  reply,  the  famous  De  Corona.

*  Brut.  Ixvi.,  Ixxxix.,  xxxviii.,  xliii.,  Ixxxviii.

946


BOOK XI.  III.  7-IO

under  the  instruction  of  the  actor  Andronicus  with
such  diligence  and  success  as  thoroughly  to  justify
the  remark  made  by  Aeschines  to  the  Rhodians  when
they  expressed  their  admiration  of  the  speech  of
Demosthenes  on  behalf  of  Ctesiphon,  "  What  would
you  have  said  if  you  had  heard  him  yourselves  ?  "  ^
Cicero  likewise  regards  action  as  the  supreme  element
of  oratory.  He  records  that  Gnaeus  Lentulus  ac-  8
quired  a  greater  reputation  by  his  delivery  than
by  his  actual  eloquence,  and  that  Gaius  Gracchus
by  the  same  means  stirred  the  whole  Roman  people
to  tears  when  he  bewailed  his  brother's  death,
while  Antonius  and  Crassus  produced  a  great  im-
pression by  their  command  of  this  quality,  though
the  greatest  of  all  was  that  produced  by  Quintus
Hortensius.-  This  statement  is  strongly  supported
by  the  fact  that  the  latter's  writings  fall  so  far
short  of  the  reputation  which  for  so  long  secured
him  the  first  place  among  orators,  then  for  a
while  caused  him  to  be  regarded  as  Cicero's  rival,
and  finally;,  for  the  remainder  of  his  life  assigned
him  a  position  second  only  to  that  of  Cicero,  that
his  speaking  must  clearly  have  p)Ossessed  some
charm  which  we  fail  to  find  when  we  read  him.
And,  indeed,  since  words  in  themselves  count  for  9
much  and  the  voice  adds  a  force  of  its  own  to  the
matter  of  which  it  speaks,  while  gesture  and  motion
are  full  of  significance,  we  may  be  sure  of  finding
something  like  perfection  when  all  these  qualities
are  combined.

There  are  some,  however,  who  consider  that  de-  10
livery  which  owes  nothing  to  art  and  everything  to
natural  impulse  is  more  forcible,  and  in  fact  the  only
form  of  delivery  which  is  worthy  of  a  manly  speaker.

247


QUINTILIAN

in  dicendo  curam  et  artem  et  nitorenij  et  quidquid
studio  paratur,  ut  adfectata  et  parum  naturalia  solent
improbare,  vel  qui  verborum  atque  ipsius  etiam  soni
rusticitate,  ut  L.  Cottam  dicit  Cicero  fecisse,  imita-

1 1  tionem  antiquitatis  adfectant.  Verum  illi  persua-
sione  sua  fruantur,  qui  hominibus,  ut  sint  oratores,
satis  putant  nasci ;  nostro  labori  dent  veniam,  qui
nihil  credimus  esse  perfectum,  nisi  ubi  natura  cura
iuvetur. In  hoc  igitur  non  contumaciter  consentio

12  primas  partes  esse  naturae.  Nam  certe  bene  pro-
nuntiare  non  poterit,  cui  aut  in  scriptis  memoria  aut
in  iis,  quae  subito  dicenda  erunt,  facilitas  prompta
defuerit,  nee  si  inemendabilia  oris  incommoda  ob-
stabunt. Corporis etiam potest esse aliqua  tanta

J  3  deformitas,  ut  nulla  arte  vincatur.  Sed  ne  vox
quidem  exilis  actionem  habere  optimam  potest.
Bona  enim  firmaque,  ut  volumus,  uti  licet ;  mala
vel  imbecilla  et  inhibet  multa,  ut  insurgere  et  excla-
mare,  et  aliqua  cogit,  ut  intermittere  et  deflectere  et
rasas  fauces  ac  latus  fatigatum  deformi  cantico  re-
ficere.  Sed  nos  de  eo  nunc  loquamur^  cui  non  frustra
praecipitur.

14  Cum  sit  autem  omnis  actio,  ut  dixi,  in  duas  divisa
partes,  vocem  gestumque,  quorum  alter  oculos,  altera

'  de  Or.  III.  xi.  42. Brut.  Ixxiv.  259.
248


BOOK XI.  ni.  10-14

But  these  persons  are  as  a  rule  identical,  either  with
those  who  are  in  the  habit  of  disapproving  of  care,
art,  polish  and  every  form  of  premeditation  in  actual
speaking,  as  being  affected  and  unnatural,  or  else
with  those  who  (like  Lucius  Cotta,  according  to
Cicero)  ^  affect  the  imitation  of  ancient  writers  both
in  their  choice  of  words  and  even  in  the  rudeness  of
their  intonation  and  rhythm.  Those,  however,  who  11
think  it  sufficient  for  men  to  be  born  to  enable  them
to  become  orators,  are  welcome  to  their  opinion,  and
I  must  ask  them  to  be  indulgent  to  the  efforts  to
which  I  am  committed  by  my  belief  that  we  cannot
hope  to  attain  perfection  unless  nature  is  assisted  by
study.  But  I  will  not  be  so  obstinate  as  to  deny
that  to  nature  must  be  assigned  the  first  place.  For  12
a  good  delivery  is  undoubtedly  impossible  for  one
who  cannot  remember  what  he  has  written,  or  lacks
the  quick  facility  of  speech  required  by  sudden
emergencies,  or  is  hampered  by  incurable  impedi-
ments of  speech.  Again,  physical  uncouthness  may
be  such  that  no  art  can  remedy  it,  while  a  weak  13
voice  is  incompatible  with  first-rate  excellence  in
delivery.  For  we  may  employ  a  good,  strong  voice
as  we  will ;  whereas  one  that  is  ugly  or  feeble  not
only  prevents  us  from  producing  a  number  of  effects,
such  as  a  crescendo  or  a  sudden  fortissimo,  but  at
times  forces  faults  upon  us,  making  us  drop  the
voice,  alter  its  pitch  and  refresh  the  hoarseness  of
the  throat  and  fatigue  of  the  lungs  by  a  hideous
chanting  intonation.  However,  let  me  now  turn  to
consider  the  speaker  on  v.-hom  my  precepts  will  not
be  wasted.

.  All  delivery,  as  I  have  already  said,  is  concerned  14
with  two  different  things,  namely,  voice  and  gesture,

VOL.  IV.  J 249


QUINTILIAN

aures  movet,  per  quos  duos  sensus  omnis  ad  animum
penetrat  adfectus,  prius  est  de  voce  dicere,  cui  etiani
gestus  accommodatur.

In  ea  prima  observatio  est,  qualem  habeas  ;  secunda,
quomodo  utaris. Natura  vocis  spectator  quantitate

15  et  qualitate.  Quantitas  simplicior ;  in  summa  enim
grandis  aut  exigua  est,  sed  inter  has  extremitates
mediae  sunt  species,  et  ab  ima  ad  summam  ac  retro
sunt  multi  gradus.  Qualitas  magis  varia.  Nam  est
et  Candida  et  fusca,  et  plena  et  exilis,  et  lenis  et
aspera,  et  contracta  et  fusa,  et  dura  et  flexibilis,
et  clara  et  obtusa. Spiritus  etiam  longior  breviorque.

16  Nee  causas,  cur  quidque  eorum  accidat,  persequi
proposito  operi  necessarium  est :  eorumne  sit  differ-
entia, in  quibus  aura  ilia  concipitur,  an  eorum,  per
quae  velut  organa  meat;  ipsi  propria  natura,  an
prout  movetur ;  lateris  pectorisve  firmitas  an  capitis
etiam  plus  adiuvet.  Nam  opus  est  omnibus  sicut
non  oris  modo  suavitate,  sed  narium  quoque,  per]
quas quod superest vocis egeritur. Dulcis esse

17  tamen  debet  non  exprobrans  sonus.  Utendi  voce
250


BOOK XI,  III.  14-17

of  which  the  one  appeals  to  the  eye  and  the  other
to  the  ear,  the  two  senses  by  which  all  emotion
reaches  the  soul.  But  the  voice  has  the  first  claim
on  our  attention,  since  even  our  gesture  is  adapted
to  suit  it.

The  first  point  which  calls  for  consideration  is  the
nature  of  the  voice,  the  second  the  manner  in  which
it  is  used.  The  nature  of  the  voice  depends  on  its
quantity  and  quality.  The  question  of  quantity  is  15
the  simpler  of  the  two,  since  as  a  rule  it  is  either
strong  or  weak,  although  there  are  certain  kinds  of
voice  which  fall  between  these  extremes,  and  there
are  a  number  of  gradations  from  the  highest  notes  to
the  lowest  and  from  the  lowest  to  the  highest.
Quality,  on  the  other  hand,  presents  more  variations  ;
for  the  voice  may  be  clear  or  husky,  full  or  thin,
smooth  or  harsh,  of  wide  or  narrow  compass,  rigid  or
flexible,  and  sharp  or  flat,  while  lung-power  may  be
great  or  small.  It  is  not  necessary  for  my  purpose  16
to  enquire  into  the  causes  which  give  rise  to  these
peculiarities.  I  need  not  raise  the  question  whether
the  difference  lies  in  those  organs  by  which  the
breath  is  produced,  or  in  those  which  form  the
channels  for  the  voice  itself ;  whether  the  voice  has
a  character  of  its  own  or  depends  on  the  motions
which  produce  it ;  whether  it  be  the  strength  of  the
lungs,  chest  or  the  vocal  organs  themselves  that
affords  it  most  assistance,  since  the  co-operation  of
all  these  organs  is  required.  For  example,  it  is  not
the  mouth  only  that  produces  sweetness  of  tone  ;  it
requires  the  assistance  of  the  nostrils  as  well,  which
tarry  off  what  I  may  describe  as  the  overflow  of  the
voice.  The  important  fact  is  that  the  tone  must  be
agreeable  and  not  harsh. The  methods  of  using  the  17


QUINTILIAN

multiplex  ratio.  Nam  praeter  illam  differentiam,
quae  est  tripertita,  acutae,  gravis,  flexae,  turn  in-
tentis,  turn  remissis,  tuna  elatis,  turn  inferioribus  mo-
dis  opus  est,  spatiis  quoque  lentioribus  aut  citatioribus.

18  Sed  his  ipsis  media  interiacent  multa,  et  ut  facies,
quanquam  ex  paucissimis  constat,  infinitam  habet
differentiam,  ita  vox,  etsi  paucas,  quae  nominari  pos-
sint,  eontinet  species,  propria  cuique  est,  et  non
haec  minus  auribus  quam  oculis  ilia  dinoscitur.

19  Augentur  autem  sicut  omnium,  ita  vocis  quoque
bona  cura,  negligentia  minuuntur.  Sed  cura  non
eadem  oratoribus  quae  phonascis  convenit ;  tamen
multa  sunt  utrisque  communia,  firmitas  corporis,  ne
ad  spadonum  et  mulierum  et  aegrorum  exilitatem
vox  nostra  tenuetur  ;  quod  ambulatio,  unctio,  veneris
abstinentia,  facilis  ciborum  digestio,  id  est  frugal  itas,

20  praestat.  Praeterea  ut  sint  fauces  integrae,  id  est
moUes  ac  leves,  quarum  vitio  et  frangitur  et  obscura-
tur  et  exasperatur  et  scinditur  vox.  Nam  ut  tibiae
eddem  spiritu  accept©  alium  clausis,  alium  apertis
foraminibus,  alium  non  satis  purgatae,  alium  quassae
sonum  reddunt,  ita  fauces  tumentes  strangulant
25a


BOOK XI.  m.  17-20

voice  present  great  variety.  For  in  addition  to  the
triple  division  of  accents  into  sharp,  grave  and  cir-
cumflex, there  are  many  other  forms  of  intonation
which  are  required :  it  may  be  intense  or  relaxed,
high  or  low,  and  may  move  in  slow  or  quick  time.
But  here  again  there  are  many  intermediate  18
gradations  between  the  two  extremes,  and  just  as
the  face,  although  it  consists  of  a  limited  number
of  features,  yet  possesses  infinite  variety  of  expression,
so  it  is  with  the  voice :  for  though  it  possesses  but
few  varieties  to  which  we  can  give  a  name,  yet  every
human  being  possesses  a  distinctive  voice  of  his
own,  which  is  as  easily  distinguished  by  the  ear  as
are  facial  characteristics  by  the  eye.

The  good  qualities  of  the  voice,  like  everything  19
else,  are  improved  by  training  and  impaired  by
neglect.  But  the  training  required  by  the  orator  is
not  the  same  as  that  which  is  practised  by  the  sing-
ing-master, although  the  two  methods  have  many
points  in  common.  In  both  cases  physical  robustness
is  essential  to  save  the  voice  from  dwindling  to  the
feeble  shrillness  that  characterises  the  voices  of
eunuchs,  women  and  invalids,  and  the  means  for
creating  such  robustness  are  to  be  found  in  walking,
rubbing-down  with  oil,  abstinence  from  sexual  inter-
course, an  easy  digestion,  and,  in  a  word,  in  the
simple  life.  Further,  the  throat  must  be  sound,  20
that  is  to  say,  soft  and  smooth  ;  for  if  the  throat  be
unsound,  the  voice  is  broken  or  dulled  or  becomes
harsh  or  squeaky.  For  just  as  the  sound  produced
in  the  pipe  by  the  same  volume  of  breath  varies
according  as  the  stops  are  closed  or  open,  or  the
instrument  is  clogged  or  cracked,  so  the  voice  is
strangled  if  the  throat  be  swollen,  and  muffled  if  it

»53


QUINTILIAN

vocem,  obtusae  obscurant,  rasae  exasperant,  convulsae

21  fractis  sunt  organis  similes.  Finditur  etiam  spiritus
obiectu  aliquo  sicut  lapillo  tenues  aquae,  quai-um
cursus  ^  etiamsi  ultra  paulum  coit,  aliquid  tamen  cavi
relinquit  post  id  ipsum  quod  offenderat.  Humor
quoque  vocem  ut  nimius  impedit,  ita  consumptus
destituit. Nam  fatigatio,  ut  corpora,  non  ad  praesens

22  modo  tempus,  sed  etiam  in  futurum  adficit.  Sed  ut
communiter  et  phonascis  et  oratoribus  necessaria  est
exercitatio,  qua  omnia  convalescunt,  ita  curae  non
idem  genus  est.  Nam  neque  certa  tempora  ad
spatiandum  dari  possunt  tot  civilibus  officiis  occu-
pato,  nee  praeparare  ab  imis  sonis  vocem  ad  summos
nee  semper  a  contentione  condere  licet,  cum  pluribus

23  iudiciis  saepe  dicendum  sit.  Ne  ciborum  quidem  est
eadem  observatio.  Non  enim  tarn  molli  teneraque
voce  quam  forti  ac  durabili  opus  est,  cum  illi  omnes
etiam  altissimos  sonos  leniant  cantu  oris,  nobis  plera-
que  aspere  sint  concitateque  dicenda  et  vigilandae
noctes  et  fuligo  lucubrationum  bibenda  et  in  sudata

24  veste  durandum.  Quare  vocem  deliciis  non  mollia-
mus,  nee  imbuatur  ea  consuetudine,  quam  desidera-
tura  sit ;  sed  exercitatio  eius  talis  sit  qualis  usus,  ne

^  cursus,  Spalding  :  spiritus,  MSS.

254


BOOK XI.  III.  20-24

is  obstructed,  while  it  becomes  rasping  if  the  throat
is  inflamed,  and  may  be  compared  to  an  organ  with
broken  pipes  in  cases  where  the  throat  is  subject  to
spasms.  Again,  the  presence  of  some  obstacle  may  21
divide  the  breath  just  as  a  pebble  will  divide  shallow
waters,  which,  although  their  currents  unite  again
soon  after  the  obstruction  is  past,  still  leave  a  hollow
space  in  rear  of  the  object  struck.  An  excess  of
moisture  also  impedes  the  voice,  while  a  deficiency
weakens  it.  x\s  regards  fatigue,  its  effect  is  the  same
as  upon  the  body  :  it  affects  the  voice  not  merely  at
the  moment  of  speaking,  but  for  some  time  after-
wards. But  while  exercise,  which  gives  strength  in  22
all  cases,  is  equally  necessary  both  for  orators  and
singing-masters,  it  is  a  different  kind  of  exercise
which  they  require.  For  the  orator  is  too  much
occupied  by  civil  affairs  to  be  able  to  allot  fixed
times  for  taking  a  walk,  and  he  cannot  tune  his
voice  through  all  the  notes  of  the  scale  nor  spare
it  exertion,  since  it  is  frequently  necessary  for  him
to  speak  in  several  cases  in  succession.  Nor  is  the  23
same  regime  suitable  as  regards  food  :  for  the  orator
needs  a  strong  and  enduring  voice  rather  than  one
which  is  soft  and  sweet,  while  the  singer  mellows  all
sounds,  even  the  highest,  by  the  modulation  of  his
voice,  whereas  we  have  often  to  speak  in  harsh  and
agitated  tones,  must  pass  wakeful  nights,  swallow
the  soot  that  is  produced  by  the  midnight  oil  and
stick  to  our  work  though  our  clothes  be  dripping
with  sweat.  Consequently,  we  must  not  attempt  to  24
mellow  our  voice  by  coddling  it  nor  accustom  it  to
the  conditions  which  it  would  like  to  enjoy,  but
rather  give  it  exercise  suited  to  the  tasks  on  which
it  will  be  employed,  never  allowing  it  to  be  impaired

255


QUINTILIAN

silentio  subsidatj  sed  firmetur  consuetudine,  qua  diffi-
26  cultas  omnis  levatur.  Ediscere  autem,  quo  exer-
cearis,  erit  optimum  (nam  ex  tempore  dicentes
avocat  a  cura  vocis  ille,  qui  ex  rebus  ipsis  con-
cipitur,  adfectus)  et  ediscere  quam  maxime  varia^
quae  et  clamorem  et  disputationem  et  senmonem  et
flexus  habeant,  ut  simul  in  omnia  paremur. Hoc

26  satis  est ;  alioqui  nitida  ilia  et  curata  vox  insolitum
laborem  recusabit,  ut  assueta  gymnasiis  et  oleo  cor-
pora, quamlibet  sint  in  suis  certaminibus  speciosa
atque  robusta,  si  militare  iter  fascemque  et  vigilias
imperes,  deficiant  et  quaerant  unctores  suos  nudum-

27  que  sudorem.  Ilia  quidem  in  hoc  opere  praecipi
quis  ferat  vitandos  soles  atque  ventos  et  nubila  etiam
ae  siccitates  ?  Ita,  si  dicendum  in  sole  aut  ventoso,
humidOj  calido  die  fuerit,  reos  deseremus?  Nam
crudum  quidem  aut  saturum  aut  ebrium  aut  eiecto
modo  vomitu,  quae  cavenda  quidam  monent,  decla-

28  mare  neminem,  qui  sit  mentis  compos,  puto.  Illud
non  sine  causa  est  ab  omnibus  praeceptum,  ut  parca-
tur  maxime  voci  in  illo  a  pueritia  in  adolescentiam
transitu,  quia  naturaliter  impeditur,  non,  ut  arbitror,
propter  calorem,  quod  quidam  putaverunt  (nam  est
256


BOOK XI.  III.  24-28

by  silence,  but  strengthening  it  by  practice,  which
removes  all  difficulties.  The  best  method  for  secur-  25
ing  such  exercise  is  to  learn  passages  by  heart  (for  if
we  have  to  speak  extempore,  the  passion  inspired  by
our  theme  will  distract  us  from  all  care  for  our  voice),
while  the  passages  selected  for  the  purpose  should
be  as  varied  as  possible,  involving  a  combination
of  loud,  argumentative,  colloquial  and  modulated
utterance,  so  that  we  may  prepare  ourselves  for  all
exigencies  simultaneously.  This  will  be  sufficient.  26
Otherwise  your  delicate,  overtrained  voice  will
succumb  before  any  unusual  exertion,  like  bodies
accustomed  to  the  oil  of  the  training  school,  which
for  all  the  imposing  robustness  which  they  display
in  their  own  contests,  yet,  if  ordered  to  make  a  day's
march  with  the  troops,  to  carry  burdens  and  mount
guard  at  night,  would  faint  beneath  the  task  and
long  for  their  trainers  to  rub  them  down  with  oil  and
for  the  free  perspiration  of  the  naked  limbs.  Who  27
would  tolerate  me  if  in  a  work  such  as  this  I  were
to  prescribe  avoidance  of  exposure  to  sun,  wind,  rain
or  parching  heat .''  If  we  are  called  upon  to  speak
in  the  sun  or  on  a  windy,  wet  or  warm  day,  is  that  a
reason  for  deserting  the  client  whom  we  have  under-
taken to  defend  ?  While  as  for  the  warning  given
by  some  that  the  orator  should  not  speak  when
\  dyspeptic,  replete  or  drunk,  or  immediately  after
vomiting,  I  think  that  no  sane  person  would  dream
of  declaiming  under  such  circumstances.  There  is,  28
however,  good  reason  for  the  rule  prescribed  by  all
authorities,  that  the  voice  should  not  be  overstrained
in  the  years  of  transition  between  boyhood  and  man-
hood, since  at  that  pei-iod  it  is  naturally  weak,  not,  1
think,  on  account  of  heat,  as  some  allege  (for  there

'57


QUINTILIAN

maior  alias),  sed  propter  humorem  potius ;  nam  hoc

29  aetas  ilia  turgescit.  Itaque  nares  etiam  ac  pectus  eo
tempore  tument,  atque  omnia  velut  germinant  eoque
sunt  tenera  et  iniuriae  obnoxia.  Sed,  ut  ad  proposi-
tum  redeam,  iam  confirmatae  constitutaeque  voci
genus  exercitationis  optimum  duco,  quod  est  operi
simillimum,  dicere  cotidie  sicut  agimus.  Namque
hoc  modo  non  vox  tantum  confirmatur  et  latus,  sed
etiam  corporis  decens  et  accommodatus  orationi
motus  componitur.

30  Non  alia  est  autem  ratio  pronuntiationis  quam
ipsius  orationis.  Nam  ut  ilia  emcndata,  dilucida,
ornata,  apta  esse  debet,  ita  haec  quoque  emendata
erit,  id  est,  vitio  carebit,  si  fuerit  os  facile,  explana-
tum,  iucundum,  urbanum,  id  est,  in  quo  nulla  neque

31  rusticitas  neque  peregrinitas  resonet.  Non  enim
sine  causa  dicitur  barharum  Graecumve.  Nam  sonis
homines  ut  aera  tinnitu  dinoscimus.  Ita  fiet  illud,
quod  Ennius  probat,  cum  dicit  suaviloquenti  ore  Cethe-
gum  fuisse,  non  quod  Cicero  in  his  reprehendit,  quos
ait  lalrare  non  agere.  Sunt  enim  multa  vitia,  de
quibus  dixi,  cum  in  quadam  primi  libri  parte  puero-
rum  ora  formarem,  opportunius  ratus,  in  ea  aetate]
facere  illorum  mentionem,  in  qua  emendari  possunt.

32  Itemque  si  ipsa  vox  primum  fuerit,  ut  sic  dicam,  sana,i


1  Ann.  ix.  305  (Vahlen).  *  Brut.  xv.  58.

'  I.  i.  37  ;  V.  32 ;  viii.  1  and  xi.  1  sqq.


258


BOOK XI.  III.  28-32

is  more  heat  in  the  body  at  other  periods),  but  rather
on  account  of  moisture,  of  which  at  that  age  there  is
a  superabundance.  For  this  reason  the  nostrils  and  29
the  breast  swell  at  this  stage,  and  all  the  organs
develop  new  growth,  with  the  result  that  they  are
tender  and  liable  to  injury.  However,  to  return  to
the  point,  the  best  and  most  realistic  foi*m  of  exercise
for  the  voice,  once  it  has  become  firm  and  set,  is,  in
my  opinion,  the  practice  of  speaking  daily  just  as  we
plead  in  the  courts.  For  thus,  not  merely  do  the
voice  and  lungs  gain  in  strength,  but  we  acquire  a
becoming  deportment  of  the  body  and  develop  grace
of  movement  suited  to  our  style  of  speaking.

The  rules  for  delivery  are  identical  with  those  for  the  3fi
language  of  oratory  itself.  For,  as  our  language  must
be  correct,  clear,  ornate  and  appropriate,  so  with  our
delivery ;  it  will  be  correct,  that  is,  free  from  fault,  if
our  utterance  be  fluent,  clear,  pleasant  and  "  urbane,"
that  is  to  say,  free  from  all  traces  of  a  rustic  or  a  foreign
accent.  For  there  is  good  reason  for  the  saying  we  so  3  i
often  hear,  "  He  must  be  a  barbarian  or  a  Greek  "  :
since  we  may  discern  a  man's  nationality  from  the
sound  of  his  voice  as  easily  as  we  test  a  coin  by  its  ring.
If  these  qualities  be  present,  we  shall  have  those  har-
monious accents  of  which  Ennius  ^  expresses  his
approval  when  he  describes  Cethegus  as  one  whose
"words  rang  sweetly,"  and  avoid  the  opposite  effect,
of  which  Cicero  ^  expresses  his  disapproval  by  saying,
"They  bark,  not  plead."  For  there  are  many  faults
of  which  I  spoke  in  the  first  book^  when  I  discussed
the  method  in  which  the  speech  of  children  should
be  formed,  since  I  thought  it  more  appropriate  to
mention  them  in  connexion  with  a  period  of  life
when  it  is  still  possible  to  correct  them. Again,  the  32

»59


QUINTILIAN

id  est,  nullum  eorum,  de  quibus  modo  rettuli,  patietur
incommodum  ;  deinde  non  subsurda,  rudis,  immanis,
dura,  rigida,  rava/  praepinguis,  aut  tenuis,  inanis,
acerba,  pusilla^  mollis,  effeminata,  spiritus  nee  brevis
nee  parum  durabilis  nee  in  receptu  difficilis.

33  Dilucida  vero  erit  pronuntiatio  primum,  si  verba  tota
exierint,  quorum  pars  devorari,  pars  destitui  solet,
plerisque  extremas  syllabas  non  perferentibus,  dum
priorum  sono  indulgent.  Ut  est  autem  necessaria
verborum  explanatio,  ita  omnes  imputare  et  velut

34  adnumerare  litteras  molestum  et  odiosum.  Nam  et
vocales  frequentissime  coeunt,  et  consonantium  quae-
dam  insequente  vocali  dissimulantur.  Utriusque
exemplum  posuimus :

Multum  tile  et  terris — .

35  Vitatur  etiam  duriorum  inter  se  congressus,  unde
pellcxit  et  collegii,  et  quae  alio  loco  dicta  sunt ;  ideoque
laudatur  in  Catulo  suavis  appellatio  litterarum.  Se-
cundum est,  ut  sit  oratio  distincta,  id  est,  qui  dicit,
et  incipiat  ubi  oportet  et  desinat.  Observandum
etiam,  quo  loco  sustinendus  et  quasi  suspendendus
sermo  sit,  quod  Graeci  viroSiacrToXrjv  vel  viroa-Tiyfi^v

36  vocant,  quo  deponendus.  Suspenditur  Arma  virum-
que  cano,  quia  illud  vinim  ad  sequentia  pertinet,  ut

^  rava,  Burman :  vana,  MSS.


1  IX.  iv,  40.  *  Aen.  i.  3.  *  ix.  iv.  37.

*  Brut.  Ixxiv.  259.  "sua vitas  vocis  et  lenis  appellatio
literarum"  ("the  sweetness  of  his  voice  and  the  delicacy
with  which  he  pronounced  the  various  letters.")

•  "  A  slight  stop,"  corresponding  to  our  "comma."

'  Aen.  i.  1.  "■

260


BOOK XI.  m.  32-36

delivery  may  be  described  as  correct  if  the  voice  be
sound,  that  is  to  say,  exempt  from  any  of  the  defects
of  which  I  have  just  spoken,  and  if  it  is  not  dull,
coarse,  exaggerated,  hard,  stiff,  hoarse  or  thick,  or
again,  thin,  hollow,  sharp,  feeble,  soft  or  effeminate,
and  if  the  breath  is  neither  too  short  nor  difficult  to
sustain  or  recover.

The  delivery  will  be  clear  if,  in  the  first  place,  the  33
words  are  uttered  in  their  entirety,  instead  of  being
swallowed  or  clipped,  as  is  so  often  the  case,  since
too  many  people  fail  to  complete  the  final  syllables
through  over-emphasising  the  first.  But  although
words  must  be  given  their  full  phonetic  value,  it  is  a
tiresome  and  offensive  trick  to  pronounce  every  letter
as  if  we  were  entering  them  in  an  inventory.  For  34
vowels  frequently  coalesce  and  some  consonants  dis-
appear when  followed  by  a  vowel.  I  have  already  *
given  an  example  of  both  these  occurrences : —
muUiim  ille  et  terris.^  Further,  we  avoid  placing  two  35
consonants  near  each  other  when  their  juxtaposition
would  cause  a  harsh  sound ;  thus,  we  saj  pellexit  and
collegit  and  employ  other  like  forms  of  which  I  have
spoken  elsewhere.^  It  is  with  this  in  mind  that
Cicero  *  praises  Catulus  for  the  sweetness  with  which
he  pronounced  the  various  letters.  The  second
essential  for  clearness  of  delivery  is  that  our
language  should  be  properly  punctuated,  that  is
to  say,  the  speaker  must  begin  and  end  at  the
proper  place.  It  is  also  necessary  to  note  at  what
point  our  speech  should  pause  and  be  momentarily
suspended  (which  the  Greeks  term  vTroSiao-roX^  and
wrojTiy/i^)^  and  when  it  should  come  to  a  full  stop.
After  the  words  arma  virumque  cano  ®  there  is  a  mo-  36
mentary  suspension,  because  virum  is  connected  with

261


QUINTILIAN

sit  virum  Troiae  qui  primus  ah  oris,  et  hie  iterum.
Nam  etiamsi  aliud  est,  unde  venit  quam  quo  venit,
non  distingueiidum tamen,  quia utrumque eodem

37  verbo  continetur  ve7iil.  Tertio  Italiam,  quia  interiectio
est  fato  pro fugus  et  continuum  sermonem,  quifaciebat
Italiam  Lavinaque,  dividit.  Ob  eandemque  causam
quarto  profugus,  deinde  Lavinaque  venit  litora,  ubi
iam  erit  distinctio,  quia  inde  alius  incipit  sensus.
Sad  in  ipsis  etiam  distinctionibus  tempus  alias
brevius,  alias  longius  dabimus ;  interest  enim,  ser-

38  monem  finiant  an  sensum.  Itaque  illam  distinctionem
Litora  protinus  altero  spiritus  initio  insequar ;  cum
illuc  venero  Atque  altae  moeuia  Romae,  deponam  et

39  morabor  et  novum  rursus  exordium  faciam.  Sunt
aliquando  et  sine  respiratione  quaedam  morae  etiam
in  periodis.  Ut  enim  "^  ilia  In  coetu  vero  populi  Romani,
negotium  publicum  gerens,  magister  equitum,  etc.,  multa
membra  habent  (sensus  enim  sunt  alii  atque  alii),  sed
unam  circumductionem,  ita  paulum  morandum  in  his
intervallis,  non  interrumpendus  est  contextus.  Et  e
contrario  spiritum  interim  recipere  sine  intellectu
morae  necesse  est,  quo  loco  quasi  surripiendus  est ;
alioqui  si  inscite  recipiatur,  non  minus  adferat  ob-
scuritatis  quam  vitiosa  distinctio.  Virtus  autem
distinguendi  fortasse  sit  parva ;  sine  qua  tamen  esse
nulla  alia  in  agendo  potest.

*  enim,  Obrecht :  in,  MSS.

^  Phil.  II.  XXV.  63. See  Quint,  viii.  iv.  8.

•  See  IX.  iv.  22,  67,  123.  The  name  colon  is  applied  to  the
longer  clauses  contained  in  a  period,  as  opposed  to  the  shorter,
which  are  styled  commata,

262


BOOK XI.  III.  36-39

what  follows,  the  full  sense  being  given  by  virum
Troiae  qui  primus  ah  oris,  after  which  there  is  a  simi-
lar suspension.  For  although  the  mention  of  the
hero's  destination  introduces  an  idea  different  from
that  of  the  place  whence  he  came,  the  difference  does
not  call  for  the  insertion  of  a  stop,  since  both  ideas
are  expressed  by  the  same  verb  venit.  After  Italiam  37
comes  a  third  pause,  since  fato  profugus  is  paren-
thetic and  breaks  up  the  continuity  of  the  phrase
Italiam  Lavinaque.  For  the  same  reason  there  is  a
fourth  f>ause  after  profugus.  Then  follows  Lavinaque
venit  litora,  where  a  stop  must  be  placed,  as  at  this
point  a  new  sentence  begins.  But  stops  themselves
vary  in  length,  according  as  they  mark  the  conclusion
of  a  phrase  or  a  sentence.  Thus  after  litora  I  shall  38
pause  and  continue  after  taking  breath.  But  when
I  come  to  atque  allae  inoenia  Romae  I  shall  make  a  full
stop,  halt  and  start  again  witli  the  opening  of  a  fresli
sentence.  There  are  also  occasionally,  even  in  39
periods,  pauses  which  do  not  require  a  fresh  breath.
For  although  the  sentence  in  coetu  vero  populi  Romani,
negotium  publicum  gerens,  magister  equitum}  etc.,  con-
tains a  number  of  different  cola,"^  expressing  a  number
of  different  thoughts,  all  these  cola  are  embraced  by
a  single  period  :  consequently,  although  short  pauses
are  required  at  the  appropriate  intervals,  the  flow  of
the  period  as  a  whole  must  not  be  broken.  On  the
other  hand,  it  is  at  times  necessary  to  take  breath  with-
out any  perceptible  pause  :  in  such  cases  we  must  do
so  surreptitiously,  since  if  we  take  breath  unskilfully,
it  will  cause  as  much  obscurity  as  would  have  resulted
from  faulty  punctuation.  Correctness  of  punctuation
may  seem  to  be  but  a  trivial  merit,  but  without  it
all  the  other  merits  of  oratory  are  nothing  worth.

263


QUINTILIAN

40  Ornata  est  pronuntiatio,  cui  suffragatur  vox  facilis,
magna,  beata,  flexibilis,  firma,  dulcis,  durabilis,  clara,
pura,  secans  aera  et  auribus  sedens  (est  enim  quae-
dam  ad  auditum  accommodata  non  magnitudine,  sed
proprietate),  ad  hoc  velut  tractabilis,  utique  habens
omnes  in  se  qui  desiderantur  sinus  intentionesque  et
toto,  ut  aiunt,  organo  instructa ;  cui  aderit  lateris
firmitas,  spiritus  cum  spatio  pertinax,  tum  labori  non

41  facile  cessurus.  Neque  gravissimus  autem  in  musica
sonus  nee  acutissimus  orationibus  convenit.  Nam  et
hie  parum  clarus  nimiumque  plenus  nullum  adferre
animis  motum  potest,  et  ille  praetenuis  et  immodicae
claritatis,  cum  est  ultra  verum,  tum  neque  pronunti-
atione  flecti  neque  diutius  ferre  intentionem  potest.

42  Nam  vox  ut  nervi,  quo  remissior,  hoc  gravior  et
plenior,  quo  tensior,  hoc  tenuis  et  acuta  magis  est.
Sic  ima  vim  non  liabet,  summa  rumpi  periclitatur.
Mediis  ergo  utendum  sonis,  hique  tum  augenda
intentione  excitandi,  tum  summittenda  sunt
temperandi.

43  Nam  prima  est  observatio  recte  pronuntiandi
aequalitas,  ne  sermo  subsultet  imparibus  spatiis  ac
sonis,  miscens  longa  brevibus,  gravia  acutis,  elata
summissis,  et  inaequalitate  horum  omnium  sicut
264


BOOK XI.  III.  40-43

Delivery  will  be  ornate  when  it  is  supported  by  40
a  voice  that  is  easy,  strong,  rich,  flexible,  firm,  sweet,
enduring,  resonant,  pure,  carrying  far  and  penetrat-
ing the  ear  (for  there  is  a  type  of  voice  which
impresses  the  hearing  not  by  its  volume,  but  by  its
peculiar  quality) :  in  addition,  the  voice  must  be
easily  managed  and  must  possess  all  the  necessary
inflexions  and  modulations,  in  fact  it  must,  as  the
saying  is,  be  a  perfect  instrument,  equipped  with
every  stop :  further,  it  must  have  strong  lungs  to
sustain  it,  and  ample  breathing  power  tliat  will  be
equal  to  all  demands  upon  it,  however  fatiguing.  The  41
deepest  bass  and  the  highest  treble  notes  are  un-
suited  to  oratory  :  for  the  former  lack  clearness  and,
owing  to  their  excessive  fullness,  have  no  emotional
power,  while  the  latter  are  too  thin  and,  owing  to
excess  of  clearness,  give  an  impression  of  extrava-
gance and  are  incompatible  with  the  inflexions
demanded  by  delivery  and  place  too  great  a  strain
upon  the  voice.  For  the  voice  is  like  the  strings  of  42
a  musical  instrument ;  the  slacker  it  is  the  deeper
and  fuller  the  note  produced,  whereas  if  it  be
tightened,  the  sound  becomes  thinner  and  shriller.
Consequently,  the  deepest  notes  lack  force,  and  the
higher  run  the  risk  of  cracking  the  voice.  The  orator
will,  therefore,  employ  the  intermediate  notes,  which
must  be  raised  when  we  speak  with  energy  and
lowered  when  we  adopt  a  more  subdued  tone.

For  the  first  essential  of  a  good  delivery  is  even-  43
ness.  The  voice  must  not  run  joltingly,  with
irregularity  of  rhythm  and  sound,  mLxing  long  and
short  syllables,  grave  accents  and  acute,  tones  loud
and  low,  without  discrimination,  the  result  being  that
this  universal  unevenness  produces  the  impression  of

265


QUINTILIAN

pedum  claudicet ;  secunda  varietas,  quod  solum  est
44  pronuntiatio.  Ac  ne  quis  pugnare  inter  se  putet
aequalitatem  et  varietatem,  cum  illi  virtuti  contra-
rium  vitium  sit  inaequalitas,  huic,  quod  dicitur
fiovotiBtia,  quasi  quidam  unus  aspectus,  Ars  porro
variandi  cum  gratiam  praebet  ac  renovat  aures,  turn
dicentem  ipsa  laboris  mutatione  reficit,  ut  standi,
46  ambulandi,  sedendi,  iacendi  vices  sunt,  nihilque
eorum  pati  unum  diu  possumus.  lUud  vero  maxi-
mum (sed  id  paulo  post  tractabimus),  quod  secundum
rationem  rerum,  de  quibus  dicimus,  animorumque
habitus  conformanda  vox  est,  ne  ab  oratione  dis-
cordet.  Vitemus  igitur  illam,  quae  Graece  /xovorovia
vocatur,  una  quaedam  spiritus  ac  soni  intentio;  non
solum  ne  dicamus  omnia  clamose,  quod  insanum  est,
aut  intra  loquendi  modum,  quod  motu  caret,  aut
summisso  murmure,  quo  etiam  debilitatur  omnis
46  intentio  ;  sed  ut  in  iisdem  partibus  iisdemque  adfecti-
bus  sint  tamen  quaedam  non  ita  magnae  vocis
declinationes,  prout  aut  verborum  dignitas  aut
sententiarum  natura  aut  depositio  aut  inceptio  aut
transitus  postulabit :  ut,  qui  singulis  pinxerunt
coloribus,  alia  tamen  eminentiora  alia  reductiora
266


BOOK XI.  III.  43-46

a  limping  gait.  The  second  essential  is  variety  of
tone,  and  it  is  in  this  alone  that  delivery  really  con-
sists. I  must  warn  my  readers  not  to  fall  into  the  44
error  of  supposing  that  evenness  and  variety  are  in-
compatible with  one  another,  since  the  fault  opposed
to  evenness  is  unevenness,  while  the  opposite  of
variety  is  that  which  the  Greeks  term  fxovoeiSeia,  or
uniformity  of  aspect.  The  art  of  producing  variety
not  merely  charms  and  refreshes  the  ear,  but,  by  the
very  fact  that  it  involves  a  change  of  effort,  revives
the  speaker's  flagging  energies.  It  is  like  the  relief
caused  by  changes  in  position,  such  as  are  involved
by  standing,  walking,  sitting  and  lying,  none  of
which  can  be  endured  for  a  long  time  together.
But  the  most  important  point  (which  I  shall  proceed  45
to  discuss  a  little  later)  is  the  necessity  of  adapting
the  voice  to  suit  the  nature  of  the  various  subjects
on  which  we  are  speaking  and  the  moods  that  they
demand  :  otherwise  our  voice  will  be  at  variance  with
our  language.  We  must,  therefore,  avoid  that  which
the  Greeks  call  monotojiy,  that  is  to  say,  the  unvary-
ing exertion  both  of  lungs  and  voice.  By  this  I  do
not  simply  mean  that  we  must  avoid  saying  every-
thing in  a  loud  tone,  a  fault  which  amounts  to
madness,  or  in  a  colloquial  tone,  which  creates  an
impression  of  lifelessness,  or  in  a  subdued  murmur,
which  is  utterly  destructive  of  all  vigour.  What  I  46
mean  is  this  :  within  the  limits  of  one  passage  and  the
compass  of  one  emotion  we  may  vary  our  tone  to  a
certain,  though  not  a  very  great  extent,  according
as  the  dignity  of  the  language,  the  nature  of  the
thought,  the  conclusion  and  opening  of  our  sen-
tences or  transitions  from  one  point  to  another,  may
demand. Thus,  those who  paint  in monochrome

267


QUINTILIAN

fecerunt,  sine  quo  ne  membris  quidem  suas  lineas

47  dedissent.  Proponamus  enim  nobis  illud  Ciceronis
in  oratione  nobilissima  pro  Milone  principium  ;  nonne
ad  singulas  paene  distinctiones  quamvis  in  eadem
facie  tamen  quasi  vultus  mutandus  est  ?  Etsi  vereor,
indices,  ne  tnrpe  sit,  pro  fortissimo  viro  dicere  incipientem

48  timere.  Etiamsi  est  toto  proposito  contractum  atque
summissum,  quia  et  exordium  est  et  solliciti  exordium,
tamen  fuerit  necesse  est  aliquid  plenius  et  erectius,
dum  dicit  Pro  foiiissimo  t;jVo,  quam  cum  Etsi  vereor  et

49  I'urpe  sit  et  Timere.  lam  secunda  respiratio  increscat
oportet  et  naturali  quodam  conatu,  quo  minus  pavide
dicinms  quae  sequuntur,  et  quod  magnitude  animi
Milonis  ostenditur :  Minivieque  decent,  cum  T.  Annius
ipse  mngis  de  rei  puhlicae  salute  quam  de  sua  perturbetur.
Deinde  quasi  obiurgatio  sui  est :  Me  ad  eius  causam

60  parem  animi  magnitudinem  adferre  non  posse.  Turn
invidiosiora  :  Tamen  haec  novi  iudicii  nova  forma  terret
Qculos.  Ilia  vero  iam  paene  apertis,  ut  aiunt,  tibiis  :
Qiii,  quocunque  inciderunt,  consuetudinem  fori  et  pristinum
morem  iudiciortim  requirunt.  Nam  sequens  latum  etiam
atque  fusum est: Non  enim  corona  consessus  vester

61  cinctiis  est,  ut  solebat.  Quod  notavi,  ut  appareret,  non
solum  in  membris  causae,  sed  etiam  in  articulis  esse

^  pro  Mil.  i.  1  sqq.  "  Although  I  fear,  gentlemen,  that  it
may  be  discreditable  that  I  should  feel  afraid  on  rising  to
defend  the  bravest  of  men,  and  though  it  is  far  from  becoming
that,  whereas  Titus  Annius  is  more  concerned  for  the  safety
of  the  State  than  for  his  own,  I  should  be  unable  to  bring  a
like  degree  of  courage  to  aid  me  in  pleading  his  cause  ;  still,
the  strange  appearance  of  this  novel  tribunal  dismays  my
eyes,  which,  whithersoever  they  turn,  look  in  vain  for  the

268


BOOK XI.  III.  46-51

still  represent  their  objects  in  different  planes,  since
otherwise  it  would  have  been  impossible  to  depict
even  the  limbs  of  tlieir  figures.  Let  us  take  as  an  47
example  the  opening  of  Cicero's  magnificent  speech
in  defence  of  Milo.  Is  it  not  clear  that  the  orator
has  to  change  his  tone  almost  at  every  stop  ?  it  is  the
same  face,  but  the  expression  is  changed.  Etsi  vereor,
indices,  ne  iurpe  sit,  pro  fortissimo  viro  dicere  incipientem  48
timere.^  Although  the  general  tone  of  the  passage  is
restrained  and  subdued,  since  it  is  not  merely  an
exordium,  but  the  exordium  of  a  man  suffering  from.
serious  anxiety,  still  something  fuller  and  bolder  i^
required  in  the  tone,  when  he  says  pro  fortissimo  virOf
than  w^hen  he  says  etsi  cereor  and  turpe  sit  and  timere.
But  his  second  breath  must  be  more  vigorous,  partly  49
owing  to  the  natural  increase  of  effort,  since  we
always  speak  our  second  sentence  with  less  timidity,
and  partly  because  he  indicates  the  high  courage  of
Milo:  minimeque  deceat,  cum  T.  Atmitis  ipse  magis  de.
ret  publicae  salute  quam  de  sua  perturbetur.  Then  ho
proceeds  to  something  like  a  reproof  of  himself:  me
ad  eivs  causam  parem  anitni  magnitudinem  adferre  non
posse.  The  next  clause  suggests  a  reflexion  on  the  50
conduct  of  others  :  tamen  haec  nod  iudicii  nova  forma
terret  oculos.  And  then  in  what  follows  he  opens
every  stop,  as  the  saying  is  :  qm,  quocuTujue  indderunt,  -
consuetudinem  fori  et  pristinum  morem  iudiciorum  requi-
runt :  while  the  next  clause  is  even  fuller  and  freer :
non  enim  corona  consesstcs  tester  cinctus  est,  ut  solebat,'
I  have  called  attention  to  these  points  to  make  it  51
clear  that  there  is  a  certain  variety,  not  merely  in

customary  aspect  of  the  forum  and  the  time-honoured  usage
of  the  courts.  For  your  bench  is  not  sturounded,  as  it  used
to  be,  by  a  ring  of  spectators,"  etc

269


QUINTILIAN

aliquam pronuntiandi varietatem, sine qua nihil
neque  maius  neque  minus  est.

Vox  autem  ultra  vires  urgenda  non  est.  Nam  et
sufFocatur  saepe  et  maiore  nisu  minus  clara  est  et
interim elisa in  ilium sonum erumpit, cui  Graeci

62  nomen  a  gallorum  immaturo  cantu  dederunt.  Nee
volubilitate  nimia  confundenda  quae  dicimus,  qua
et  distinctio  perit  et  adfectus,  et  nonnunquam  etiam
verba  aliqua  sui  parte  fraudantur.  Cui  contrarium
est  vitium  nimiae  tarditatis ;  nam  et  difficultatem
inveniendi  fatetur  et  segnitia  solvit  animos  et,  in
quo  est  aliquid,  temporibus  praefinitis  aquam  perdit.
Promptum  sit  os,  non praeceps, moderatum, non

63  lentum ;  spiritus  quoque  nee  crebro  receptus  con-
cidat  sententiam,  nee  eo  usque  traliatur,  donee
deficiat.  Nam  et  deformis  est  consumpti  illius  sonus
et  respiratio  sub  aqua  diu  pressi  similis  et  receptus
longior  et  non  opportunus,  ut  qui  fiat  non  ubi
volumus,  sed  ubi  necesse  est.  Quare  longiorem
dicturis  period um  colligendus  est  spiritus,  ita  tamen,
ut  id  neque  diu  neque  cum  sono  faciamus,  neque
omnino  ut  manifestum  sit ;  reliquis  partibus  optime

64  inter  iuncturas  sermonis  revocabitur.  Exercendus
autem  est,  ut  sit  quam  longissimus ;  quod  Demosthe-
nes ut  efficeret,  scandens  in  adversum  continuabat

*  What  this  word  was  is  not  known. Perhaps  merely

K0KKVfffJl6s.

*  aqvMjn  perdit.  Lit.  wastes  water.  The  reference  is  to
the  clepsydra  or  water-clock  employed  for  the  measurement
of  time.

370


BOOK XI.  III.  51-54

the  delivery  of  cola,  but  even  in  that  of  phrases  con-
sisting of  one  word,  a  variety  the  lack  of  which
would  make  every  word  seem  of  equal  importance.

The  voice,  however,  must  not  be  pressed  beyond
its  powers,  for  it  is  liable  to  be  choked  and  to  be-
come less  and  less  clear  in  proportion  to  the  increase
of  effort,  while  at  times  it  will  break  altogether  and
produce  the  sound  to  which  the  Greeks  have  given
a  name  derived  from  the  crowing  of  cocks  before  the
voice  is  developed.^  We  must  also  beware  of  con-  52
fusing  our  utterance  by  excessive  volubility,  which
results  in  disregard  of  punctuation,  loss  of  emotional
power,  and  sometimes  in  the  clipping  of  words.  The
opposite  fault  is  excessive  slowness  of  speech,  which
is  a  sign  of  lack  of  readiness  in  invention,  tends  by
its  sluggishness  to  render  our  hearers  inattentive,
and,  further,  wastes  the  time  allotted  to  us  for  speak-
ing,2  a  consideration  which  is  of  some  importance*
Our  speech  must  be  ready,  but  not  precipitate,  under
control,  but  not  slow,  while  we  must  not  take  breath  53
so  often  as  to  break  up  our  sentence,  nor,  on  the
other  hand,  sustain  it  until  it  fails  us  from  exhaustion.
For  the  sound  produced  by  loss  of  breath  is  disagree-
able ;  we  gasp  like  a  drowning  man  and  fill  our  lungs
with  long-drawn  inhalations  at  inappropriatemoments,
giving  the  impression  that  our  action  is  due  not  to
choice,  but  to  compulsion.  Therefore,  in  attacking
a  period  of  abnormal  length,  we  should  collect  our
breath,  but  quickly,  noiselessly  and  imperceptibly.
On  other  occasions  we  shall  be  able  to  take  breath
at  the  natural  breaks  in  the  substance  of  our  speech.
But  we  must  exercise  our  breathing  capacity  to  make  64
it  as  great  as  possible.  To  produce  this  result  De-
mosthenes used  to  recite  as  many  successive  lines  as

271


QUINTILIAN

quam  posset plurimos  versus. Idem^ quo facilius
verba  ore  libero  exprimeret,  calculos  lingua  volvens

65  dicere  domi  solebat.  Est  interim  et  longus  et  plenus
et  clams  satis  spiritus,  non  tamen  firmae  intentionis
ideoque  tremulus,  ut  corpora,  quae  aspectu  integra
nervis  parum  sustinentur ;  id  fipaa-fj-ov  ^  Graeci  vocant.
Sunt  qui  spiritum  cum  stridore  per  raritatem  dentium
non  recipiunt,  sed  resorbent.  Sunt  qui  crebro
anhelitu  et  introrsum  etiam  clare  sonante  imitentur

66  iumenta  onere  et  iugo  laborantia.  Quod  adfectant
quoque,  tanquam  inventionis  copia  urgeantur  maior-
que  vis  eloquentiae  ingruat,  quam  quae  emitti
faucibus  possit.  Est  aliis  concursus  oris  et  cum  verbis
suis  colluctatio.  lam  tussire  et  exspuere  crebro
et  ab  imo  pulmone  pituitam  trochleis  adducere  et
oris  humore  proximos  spargere  et  maiorem  partem
spiritus  in  loquendo  per  nares  effundere,  etiamsi  non
utique  vocis  sunt  vitia,  quia  tamen propter  vocem

67  accidunt,  potissimum  huic  loco  subiiciantur.  Sed
quodcunque  ex  his  vitium  magis  tulerim  quam,  quo
nunc  maxima  laboratur  in  causis  omnibus  scholisque,

*  fipafffxbv,  Butler :  BFAMON,  cod.  Bern, :  BPAMON,  cod,
Bamb. :  fipayxo",  Gesner  and  ed,  Tarvis.

*  Ppdyxos  is  generally  read,  bnt  the  word  is  used  in  the
sense  of  "  hoarseness,"  which  is  not  what  Quintilian  describes.
I  would  read  Bpacrnds,  a  word  meaning  "  effervescence,"
"shaking,"  "shivering." ^ere  =  tremolo.

*  trochlea  is  a  windlass  used  for  raising  water  from  a
well.

372


BOOK XI.  III.  54-57

possible,  while  he  was  climbing  a  hill.  He  also,  with
a  view  to  securing  fluency  free  from  impediment,
used  to  roll  pebbles  under  his  tongue  when  speaking
in  the  privacy  of  his  study.  Sometimes  the  breath,  55
although  capable  of  sustained  effort  and  sufficiently
full  and  clear,  lacks  firmness  when  exerted,  and  for
that  reason  is  liable  to  become  tremulous,  like  bodies
which,  although  to  all  appearances  sound,  receive
insufficient  support  from  the  sinews.  This  the  Greeks
call  ^pacr/xos.^  There  are  some  too  who,  owing  to
the  loss  of  teeth,  do  not  draw  in  the  breath  naturally,
but  suck  it  in  with  a  hissing  sound.  There  are
others  who  pant  incessantly  and  so  loudly  that  it
is  perfectly  audible  within  them :  they  remind  one
of  heavily-laden  beasts  of  burden  straining  against
the  yoke.  Some  indeed  actually  affect  this  man-  56
nerism,  as  though  to  suggest  that  they  are  struggling
with  the  host  of  ideas  that  crowd  themselves  upon
them  and  oppressed  by  a  greater  flood  of  eloquence
than  their  throats  are  capable  of  uttering.  Others,
again,  find  a  difficulty  in  opening  their  mouths,  and
seem  to  struggle  with  their  words ;  and,  further,
although  they  are  not  actually  faults  of  the  voice,
yet  since  they  arise  out  of  the  use  of  the  voice,
I  think  this  is  the  most  appropriate  place  for
referring  to  the  habit  of  coughing  and  spitting  with
frequency  while  speaking,  of  hawking  up  phlegm
from  the  depths  of  the  lungs,  like  water  from  a
well,^  sprinkling  the  nearest  of  the  bystanders  with
saliva,  and  expelling  the  greater  portion  of  the
breath  through  the  nostrils.  But  any  of  these  faults  57
are  tolerable  compared  with  the  practice  of  chanting
instead  of  speaking,  which  is  the  worst  feature  of
our  modem  oratory,  whether  in  the  courts  or  in  the

273


QUINTILIAN

cantandi^  quod  inutilius  sit  an  foedius,  nescio.  Quid
enim  minus  oratori  convenit  quam  modulatio  scenica
et  nonnunquam  ebriorum  aut  comissantium  licentiae
68  similis?  Quid  vero  movendis  adfectibus  contrarium
magis  quam,  cum  dolendum,^  irascendum,  indig-
nandum,  commiserandum  sit,  non  solum  ab  his
adfectibus,  in  quos  inducendus  est  iudex,  recedere,
sed  ipsam  fori  sanctitatem  Lyciorum  et  Carum^
licentia  solvere  ?  Nam  Cicero  illos  ex  Lycia  et  Carta  ^
rhetoras paene canlare  in epilogis  dixit. Nos  etiam

59  cantandi  severiorem  paulo  niodum  excessimus.  Quis-
quamne,  non  dico  de  homicidio,  sacrilegio,  parricidio,
sed  de  calculis  certe  atque  rationibus,  quisquam
denique,  ut  semel  finiam,  in  lite  cantat?  Quod  si
omnino  recipiendum  est,  nihil  causae  est,  cur  non
illam  vocis  modulationem  fidibus  ac  tibiis,  immo  me
hercule,  quod  est  huic  deformitati  propius,  cymbalis

60  adiuvemus.  Facimus  tamen  hoc  libenter ;  nam  nee
cuiquam  sunt  iniucunda  quae  cantant  ipsi,  et  laboris
in  hoc  quam  in  agendo  minus  est.  Et  sunt  quidam,
qui  secundum  alia  vitae  vitia  etiam  hac  ubique
audiendi,  quod  aures  mulceat,  voluptate  ducantur.

^  dolendum,  Regius :  docendum,  B.  avd  lul.  Victor.

*  Lyciorum  et  Carum,  Daniel :  ludorum  talarium,  MSS,

'  Phrygia,  MSS.  of  Cicero.

*  Or.  xviii.  67.
274


BOOK XI,  III.  57-60

schools^  and  of  which  I  can  only  say  that  I  do  not
know  whether  it  is  more  useless  or  more  repugnant
to  good  taste.  For  what  can  be  less  becoming  to
an  orator  than  modulations  that  recall  the  stage  and
a  sing-song  utterance  which  at  times  resembles  the
maudUn  utterance  of  drunken  revellers  .■'  What  can  58
be  more  fatal  to  any  emotional  appeal  than  that  the
speaker  should,  when  the  situation  calls  for  grief,
anger,  indignation  or  pity,  not  merely  avoid  the
expression  of  those  emotions  which  require  to  be
kindled  in  the  judge,  but  outrage  the  dignity  of
the  courts  with  noises  such  as  are  dear  to  the
Lycians  and  Carians  ?  For  Cicero  ^  has  told  us  that
the  rhetoricians  of  Lycia  and  Caria  come  near  to
singing  in  their  perorations.  But,  as  a  matter  of  fact,
we  have  somewhat  overstepped  the  limits  imposed  by
the  more  restrained  style  of  singing.  I  ask  you,  59
does  anyone  sing,  1  will  not  say  when  his  theme  is
murder,  sacrilege  or  parricide,  but  at  any  rate  when
he  deals  with  figures  or  accounts,  or,  to  cut  a  long
story  short,  when  he  is  pleading  in  any  kind  of
lawsuit  whatever  f  And  if  such  a  form  of  intonation
is  to  be  permitted  at  all,  there  is  really  no  reason
why  the  modulations  of  the  voice  should  not  be
accompanied  by  harps  and  flutes,  or  even  by  cymbals,
which  would  be  more  appropriate  to  the  revolting
exhibitions  of  which  I  am  speaking.  And  yet  we  60
show  no  reluctance  in  indulging  this  vicious  practice.
For  no  one  thinks  his  own  singing  hideous,  and  it
involves  less  trouble  than  genuine  pleading.  There
are,  moreover,  some  persons  who,  in  thorough  con-
formity with  their  other  vices,  are  possessed  with  a
perpetual  passion  for  hearing  something  that  will
soothe  their  ears. But,  it  may  be  urged,  does  not

275


QUINTILIAN

Quid  ergo?  non  et  Cicero  elicit  esse  aliquem  in
oratione  canlum  ohscuriorem  ?  et  hoc  quodam  naturali
initio  venit?  Ostendam  non  multo  post,  ubi  et
quatenus  recipiendus  sit  hie  flexus  et  cantus  quidem
sed,  quod  plerique  intelligere  nolunt,  obscurior.

61  lam  enira  tempus  est  dicendi,  quae  sit  apta  pro-
nuntiatio.  Quae  certe  ea  est,  quae  iis,  de  quibus
dicimus,  accommodatur.  Quod  quidem  maxima  ex
parte  praestant  ipsi  motus  animorum,  sonatque  vox,
ut  feritur;  sed  cum  sint  alii  veri  adfectus,  alii  ficti
et  imitati,  veri  naturaliter  erumpunt,  ut  dolentium,
irascentium,  indignantium,  sed  carent  arte,  ideoque

62  sunt  disciplina  et  ratione  formandi.  Contra  qui
effinguntur  imitatione,  artem  habent ;  sed  hi  carent
natura,  ideoque  in  iis  primum  est  bene  adfici  et
concipere  imagines  rerum  et  tanquam  veris  moveri.
Sic  velut  media  vox,  quern  habitum  a  nobis  acceperit,
huDC.  iudicum  animis  dabit. Est  enim  mentis  index

63  ac  totidem,  quot  ilia,  mutationes  habet.  Itaque
laetis  in  rebus  plena  et  simplex  et  ipsa  quodammodo
hilaris  fluit;  at  in  certamine  erecta  totis  viribus  et  velut
omnibus  nervis  intenditur. Atrox  in  ira  et  aspera

*  Or.  xviii.  57.
^76


BOOK XL  III.  60-63

Cicero  ^  himself  say  that  there  is  a  suggestion  of
singing  in  the  utterance  of  an  orator  ?  And  is  not
this  the  outcome  of  a  natural  impulse?  I  shall
shortly  proceed  to  show  to  what  extent  such  musical
modulations  are  permissible :  but  if  we  are  to  call
it  singing,  it  must  be  no  more  than  a  suggestion
of  singing,  a  fact  which  too  many  refuse  to
realise.

But  it  is  now  high  time  for  me  to  explain  what  I  61
mean  by  appropriate  delivery.  Such  appropriateness
obviously  lies  in  the  adaptation  of  the  delivery  to
the  subjects  on  which  we  are  speaking.  This  quality
is,  in  the  main,  supplied  by  the  emotions  themselves,
and  the  voice  will  ring  as  passion  strikes  its  chords.
But  there  is  a  difference  between  true  emotion  on
the  one  hand,  and  false  and  fictitious  emotion  on
the  other.  The  former  breaks  out  naturally,  as  in
the  case  of  grief,  anger  or  indignation,  but  lacks
art,  and  therefore  requires  to  be  formed  by  methodical
training.  The  latter,  on  the  other  hand,  does  imply  62
art,  but  lacks  the  sincerity  of  nature  :  consequently
in  such  cases  the  main  thing  is  to  excite  the  appro-
priate feeling  in  oneself,  to  form  a  mental  picture
of  the  facts,  and  to  exhibit  an  emotion  that  cannot
be  distinguished  from  the  truth.  The  voice,  which
is  the  intermediary  between  ourselves  and  our
hearers,  will  then  produce  precisely  the  same
emotion  in  the  judge  that  we  have  put  into  it.  For
it  is  the  index  of  the  mind,  and  is  capable  of  express-
ing all  its  varieties  of  feeling.  Therefore  when  we  63
deal  with  a  lively  theme,  the  flow  of  the  voice  is
characterised  by  fullness,  simplicity  and  cheerful-
ness ;  but  when  it  is  roused  to  battle,  it  puts  forth
all  its  strength  and  strains  every  nerve. In  anger


QUINTILIAN

ac  densa  et  respiratione  crebra ;  neque  enim  potest
esse  longus  spiritus,  cum  immoderate  effunditur.
Paulum  in  invidia  facienda  lentior,  quia  non  fere  ad
banc  nisi  inferiores  confugiunt ;  at  in  blandiendo,
fatendo,  satisfaciendo,  rogando,  lenis et  summissa.

64  Suadentium  et  monentium  et  pollicentium  et  conso-
lantium  gravis,  in  metu  et  verecundia  contracta,
adbortationibus  fortis,  disputationibus  teres,  misera-
tione  flexa  et  flebilis  et  consulto  quasi  obscurior ;  at
in  egressionibus  fusa  et  securae  claritatis,  in  ex-
positione  ac  sermonibus  recta  et  inter  acutum  sonum

66  et  gravem  media.  AttoUitur  autem  concitatis
adfectibus,  compositis  descendit  pro  utriusque  rei
modo  altius  vel  inferius.

Quid  autem  quisque  in  dicendo  postulet  locus,
paulum  difFeram,  ut  de  gestu  prius  dicam,  qui  et
ipse  voci  consentit  et  animo  cum  ea  simul  paret.  Is
quantum  habeat  in  oratore  momenti,  satis  vel  ex  eo
patet quod pleraque etiam citra  verba significat.

66  Quippe  non  manus  solum,  sed  nutus  etiam  declarant
nostram  voluntatem  et  in  mutis  pro  sermone  sunt,
et  saltatio  frequenter  sine  voce  intelligitur  atque
adficit,  et  ex  vultu  ingressuque  perspicitur  habitus
278


BOOK XI.  III.  63-66

it  is  fierce,  harsh  and  intense,  and  calls  for  frequent
filling  of  the  lungs,  since  the  breath  cannot  be  sus-
tained for  long  when  it  is  poured  forth  without
restraint.  When  it  is  desired  to  throw  odium  upon
our  opponents,  it  will  be  somewhat  slower,  since,
as  a  rule,  it  is  none  save  the  weaker  party  takes
refuge  in  such  tactics.  On  the  other  hand,  in  flatter^',
admission,  apology  or  question  it  will  be  gentle  and
subdued.  If  we  advise,  warn,  promise  or  console,  64
it  will  be  grave  and  dignified,  modest  if  we  express
fear  or  shame,  bold  in  exhortation,  precise  in  argu-
ment, full  of  modulations,  suggestive  of  tears  and
designedly  muffled  in  appeals  for  pity,  whereas  in
digression  it  will  be  full  and  flowing,  and  will  have
all  tlie  resonance  that  is  characteristic  of  confidence  ;
in  exposition  of  facts  or  conversations  it  will  be
even  and  pitched  half-way  betwixt  high  and  low.
But  it  will  be  raised  to  express  violent  emotion,  and  65
sink  when  our  words  are  of  a  calmer  nature,  rising
and  falling  according  to  the  demands  of  its  theme.

However,  for  the  moment  I  will  defer  speaking
of  the  variations  in  tone  required  by  different  topics,
and  will  proceed  first  to  the  discussion  of  gesture
which  conforms  to  the  voice,  and  like  it,  obeys  the
impulse  of  the  mind.  Its  importance  in  oratory  is
sufficiently  clear  from  the  fact  that  there  are  many
things  which  it  can  express  without  the  assistance
of  words.  For  we  can  indicate  our  will  not  merely  66
by  a  gesture  of  the  hands,  but  also  with  a  nod  from
the  head :  signs  take  the  place  of  language  in  the
dumb,  and  the  movements  of  the  dance  are  fre-
quently full  of  meaning,  and  appeal  to  the  emotions
without  any  aid  from  words.  The  temper  of  the
mind can be inferred  from  the glance  and gait,

279


QUINTILIAN

animorum  ;  et  animalium  quoque  sermone  carentium
ira,  laetitia, adulatio et  oculis et  quibusdam  aliis

67  corporis  signis  deprehenditur.  Nee  mirum,  si  ista,
quae  tamen  in  aliquo  posita  sunt  motu,  tantum  in
animis  valent,  cum  pictura,  tacens  opus  et  habitus
semper  eiusdem,  sic  in  intimos  penetret  adfectus,
ut  ipsam  vim  dicendi  nonnunquam  superare  videatur.
Contra  si  gestus  ac  vultus  ab  oratione  dissentiat,
tristia  dicamus  hilares,  adfirmemus  aliqua  renuentes
non  auctoritas  modo  verbis,  sed  etiam fides  desit.

68  Decor  quoque  a  gestu  atque  motu  venit ;  ideoque
Demosthenes  grande  quoddam  intuens  speculum
componere  actionem  solebat ;  adeo,  quamvis  fulgor
ille  sinistras  imagines  reddat,  suis  demum  oculis
credidit,  quod  efficeret.

Praecipuum  vero  in  actione  sicut  in  corpore  ipso
caput  est  cum  ad  ilium,  de  quo  dixi,  decorem,  tum

69  etiam  ad  significationem.  Decoris  ilia  sunt,  ut  sit
primo  rectum  et  secundum  naturam.  Nam  et  de-
iecto  humilitas  et  supino  arrogantia  et  in  latus
inclinato  languor  et  praeduro  ac  rigente  barbaria
quaedam  mentis  ostenditur.  Tum  accipiat  aptos  ex
ipsa actione motus, ut cum gestu concordet  et

70  manibus  ac  lateribus  obsequatur.  Aspectus  enim
semper  eodem  vertitur  quo  gestus,  exceptis  quae  aut
280


BOOK  XL  in.  66-70

and  even  speechless  animals  show  anger,  joy,  or  the
desire  to  please  by  means  of  the  eye  and  other
physical  indications.  Nor  is  it  wonderful  that  ges-  67
ture  which  depends  on  various  forms  of  movement
should  have  such  power,  when  pictures,  which  are
silent  and  motionless,  penetrate  into  our  innermost
feelings  with  such  power  that  at  times  they  seem
more  eloquent  than  language  itself.  On  the  other
hand,  if  gesture  and  the  expression  of  the  face  are
out  of  harmony  with  the  speech,  if  we  look  cheerful
when  our  words  are  sad,  or  shake  our  heads  when
making  a  positive  assertion,  our  words  will  not  only
lack  weight,  but  will  fail  to  carry  conviction.  Ges-  68
ture  and  movement  are  also  productive  of  grace.
It  was  for  this  reason  that  Demosthenes  used  to
practise  his  delivery  in  front  of  a  large  mirror,  since,
in  spite  of  the  fact  that  its  reflexions  are  reversed,
he  trusted  his  eyes  to  enable  him  to  judge  accurately
the  effect  produced.

The  head,  being  the  chief  member  of  the  body,
has  a  corresponding  importance  in  delivery,  serving
not  merely  to  produce  graceful  effect,  but  to  illus-
trate our  meaning  as  well.  To  secure  grace  it  is  69
essential  that  the  head  should  be  carried  naturally
and  erect.  For  a  droop  suggests  humility,  while  if
it  be  thrown  back  it  seems  to  express  arrogance,  if
inclined  to  one  side  it  gives  an  impression  of  languor,
while  if  it  is  held  too  stiffly  and  rigidly  it  appears
to  indicate  a  rude  and  savage  temper.  Further,  it
should  derive  appropriate  motion  from  the  subject
of  our  pleading,  maintaining  hannony  with  the  ges-
ture and  following  the  movement  of  the  hands  and
side.  For  the  eyes  are  always  turned  in  the  same  70
direction  as  the  gesture,  except  when  we  are  called

VOL.  IV.  K 281


QUINTILIAN

damnare  aut  concedere  aut  a  nobis  removere  opor-

tebit,  ut  idem  illud  vultu  videamur  aversari,  manu

repellere :

—  Di  talent  avertite  pesteni.

—  Haud  equidem  tali  me  dignor  honore,

71  Significat  vero  plurimis  modis.  Nam  praeter  adnu-
endi,  renuendi  confirmandique  motus  sunt  et  vere-
cundiae  et  dubitationis  et  admirationis  et  indigna-
tionis  noti  et  communes  omnibus.  Solo  tamen  eo
facere  gestum  scenici  quoque  doctores  vitiosum
putaverunt.  Etiam  frequens  eius  nutus  noii  caret
vitio ;  adeo  iactare  id  et  comas  excutientem  rotare
fanaticum  est.

72  Dominatur  autem  maxime  vultus.  Hoc  supplices,
hoc  minaces,  hoc  blandi^  hoc  tristes,  hoc  hilares,  hoc
erecti,  hoc  summissi  sumus ;  hoc  pendent  homines,
hunc  intuentur,  hie  spectator,  etiam  antequam
dicimus ;  hoc  quosdam  amamus,  hoc  odimus,  hoc
plurima intelligimus, hie est saepe pro omnibus

73  verbis.  Itaque  in  iis,  quae  ad  scenam  componuntur,
fabulis  artifices  pronuntiandi  a  personis  quoque  ad-
fectus  mutuantur,  ut  sit  Aerope  in  tragoedia  tristis,

»  Aen.  in.  620.  *  Aen.  i.  335,

282


BOOK  XI.  Ill 70-73

upon  to  condemn  or  concede  something  or  to  express
abhorrence,  when  we  shall  show  our  aversion  by
turning  away  the  face  and  by  thrusting  out  our
iiands  as  though  to  repel  the  thought,  as  in  the
lines:

•*  Ye  gods,  such  dread  calamity  avert  I "  ^
or

"  Not  for  me
To  claim  such  honour !  "  ^

The  methods  by  which  the  head  may  express  our  71
meaning  are  manifold.  For  in  addition  to  those
movements  which  indicate  consent,  refusal  and
affirmation,  there  are  those  expressive  of  modesty,
hesitation,  wonder  or  indignation,  which  are  well
known  and  common  to  all.  But  to  confine  the
gesture  to  the  movement  of  the  head  alone  is  re-
garded as  a  fault  by  those  who  teach  acting  as  well
as  by  professors  of  rhetoric.  Even  the  frequent
nodding  of  the  head  is  not  free  from  fault,  while
to  toss  or  roll  it  till  our  hair  flies  free  is  suggestive
of  a  fanatic.

By  far  the  greatest  influence  is  exercised  by  the  72
glance.  For  it  is  by  this  that  we  express  suppli-
cation, threats,  flattery,  sorrow,  joy,  pride  or  sub-
mission. It  is  on  this  that  our  audience  hang,  on
this  that  they  rivet  their  attention  and  their  gaze,
even  before  we  begin  to  speak.  It  is  this  that
inspires  the  hearer  with  affection  or  dislike,  this
that  conveys  a  world  of  meaning  and  is  often  more
eloquent  than  all  our  words.  Consequently  in  plays  73
destined  for  the  stage,  the  masters  of  the  art  of
delivery  design  even  their  masks  to  enhance  the
emotional  effect. Thus,  in  tragedy,  Aerope  will  be

283


QUINTILIAN

atrox  Medea,  attonitus  Aiax,  truculentus  Hercules.

74  In  comoediis  vero  praeter  aliam  observationem,  qua
servi,  lenones,  parasiti,  rustici,  milites,  meretriculae,
ancillae,  senes  austeri  ac  mites,  iuvenes  severi  ac
luxuriosi,  matronae,  puellae  inter  se  discernuntur,
pater  ille,  cuius  praecipuae  partes  sunt,  quia  interim
concitatus,  interim  lenis  est,  altero  erecto,  altero
composite  est  supercilio ;  atque  id  ostendere  maxime
latus  actoribus  moris  est,  quod  cum  iis,  quas  agunt,

75  partibus  congruat.  Sed  in  ipso  vultu  plurimum
valent  oculi,  per  quos  maxime  animus  eminet,^  ut
citra  motum  quoque  et  hilaritate  enitescant  et
tristitiae  quoddam  nubilum  ducant.  Quin  etiam
lacrimas  iis  natura  mentis  indices  dedit,  quae  aut
erumpunt  dolore  aut  laetitia  manant.  Motu  vero
intenti,  remissi, superbi,  torvi,  mites, asperi fiunt,

76  quae,  ut  actus  poposcerit,  fingentur.  Rigidi  vero  et
extenti,  aut  languidi  et  torpentes,  aut  stupentes,  aut
lascivi  et  mobiles,  et  natantes  et  quadam  voluptate
suffusi,  aut  limi  et,  ut  sic  dicam,  venerei,  aut  pos-
centes  aliquid  pollicentesve  nunquam  esse  debebunt.
Nam  opertos  compressosve  eos  in  dicendo  quis  nisi

77  plane  rudis  aut  stultus  habeat?  Et  ad  haec  omnia
exprimenda  in  palpebris  etiam  et  in  genis  est  quoddam

78  deserviens  iis  ministerium.  Multum  et  superciliis
agitur. Nam  et  oculos  formant  aliquatenus  et  fronti

*  animus  eminet,  Spalding :  aniina  se  manat,  B,
384


BOOK  XI.  HI.  73-78

sad,  Medea  fierce,  Ajax  bewildered,  Hercules  trucu-
lent. In  comedy,  on  the  other  hand,  over  and  74
above  the  methods  adopted  to  distinguish  between
slaves,  pimps,  parasites,  rustics,  soldiers,  harlots,
maidservants,  old  men  stem  and  mild,  youths  moral
or  luxurious,  married  women  and  girls,  we  have
the  important  role  of  the  father  who,  because  at
times  he  is  excited  and  at  others  calm,  has  one
eyebrow  raised  and  the  other  normal,  the  custom
among  actors  being  to  turn  that  side  of  the  face  to
the  audience  which  best  suits  the  role.  But  of  the  76
various  elements  that  go  to  form  the  expression,
the  eyes  are  the  most  important,  since  they,  more
than  anything  else,  reveal  the  temper  of  the  mind,
and  without  actual  movement  will  twinkle  with
merriment  or  be  clouded  with  grief.  And  further,
nature  has  given  them  tears  to  serve  as  interpreters
of  our  feelings,  tears  that  will  break  forth  for  sorrow
or  stream  for  very  joy.  But,  when  the  eyes  move,
they  become  intent,  indifferent,  proud,  fierce,  mild,
or  angry ;  and  they  will  assume  all  these  characters
according  as  the  pleading  may  demand.  But  they  76
must  never  be  fixed  or  protruding,  languid  or  slug-
gish, lifeless,  lascivious,  restless,  nor  swim  with  a
moist  voluptuous  glance,  nor  look  aslant  nor  leer
in  amorous  fashion,  nor  yet  must  they  seem  to
promise  or  ask  a  boon.  As  for  keeping  them  fully
or  partially  closed  while  speaking,  surely  none  save
an  uneducated  man  or  a  fool  would  dream  of  doing
such  a  thing.  And  in  addition  to  all  these  forms  of  77
expression,  the  upper  and  lower  eyelids  can  render
service  in  support  of  the  eyes.  The  eyebrows  also  78
may  be  used  with  great  effect.  For  to  some  extent
Uiey  mould  the  expression  of  the  eyes  and  deter-

28s


QUINTILIAN

imperant.  His  contrahitur,  attollitur,  remittitur,  ut
una  res  in  ea  plus  valeat,  sanguis  ille,  qui  mentis
habitu  movetur  et,  cum  infirmam  verecundia  cutem
accipit,  efFunditur  in  ruborem,  cum  metu  refugit,
abit  omnis  et  pallore  frigescit;  temperatus  medium

79  quoddam  serenum  efficit.  Vitium  in  superciliis,  si
aut  immota  sunt  omnino  aut  nimium  mobilia  aut
inaequalitate,  ut  modo  de  persona  comica  dixeram,
dissident  aut  contra  id  quod  dicimus  finguntur.
Ira  enim  contractis,  tristitia  deductis,  hilaritas  re-
missis ostenditur. Adnuendi quoque et  renuendi

80  ratione  demittunturautallevantur.  Naribus  labrisque
non  fere  quidquam  decenter  ostendimus,  tametsi
derisus  iis,^  contemptus,  fastidium  significari  solet.
Nam  et  corrugare  nares,  ut  Horatius  ait,  et  inflare  et
movere  et  digito  inquietare  et  impulse  subito  spiritu
excutere  et  diducere  saepius  et  plana  manu  resu-
pinare indecorum est, cum emunctio etiam fre-

81  quentior  non  sine  causa  reprehendatur.  Labra  et
porriguntur  male  et  scinduntur  et  adstringuntur  et
diducuntur  et  dentes  nudant  et  in  latus  ac  paene  ad
aurem  trahuntur  et  velut  quodam  fastidio  replican-
tur  et  pendent  et  vocem  tantum  altera  parte  dimit-

*  derisus  iis,  Obrecht :  derisui,  B.


1  Ep.  I.  V.  23.

^  It  is  hard  to  distinguisli  between  scindere  and  diductre.
I  have  adopted  a  suggestion  of  Spalding's.

a86


BOOK XI.  Ill  78-81

mine  that  of  the  forehead.  It  is  by  means  of  the
eyebrows  that  we  contract,  raise  or  smooth  the
latter :  in  fact,  the  only  thing  whicli  has  greater
influence  over  it  is  the  blood,  which  moves  in  con-
formity with  the  emotions  that  control  the  mind,
causing  a  blush  on  a  skin  that  is  sensitive  to  shame,
and  giving  place  to  an  icy  pallor  under  the  influence
of  fear,  whereas,  when  it  is  under  control,  it  pro-
duces a  peaceful  complexion,  intermediate  between
the  two.  Complete  immobility  in  the  eyebrows  is  79
a  fault,  as  also  is  excess  of  mobility  or  the  tendency
to  raise  one  and  lower  the  other,  as  in  the  comic
mask  which  I  mentioned  just  now  :  while  it  is  a
further  blemish  if  they  express  a  feeling  out  of
keeping  with  the  words  we  utter.  For  they  show
anger  by  contraction,  grief  by  depression  and  cheer-
fulness by  their  expansion.  They  are  also  dropped
or  raised  to  express  consent  or  refusal  respectively.
It  is  not  often  that  the  lips  or  nostrils  can  be  80
becomingly  employed  to  express  our  feelings,  al-
though they  are  often  used  to  indicate  derision,
contempt  or  loathing.  For  to  "  wrinkle  the  nostrils  "
(as  Horace  says),^  or  blow  them  out,  or  twitch  them,
or  fret  them  with  our  finger,  or  snort  through  them
with  a  sudden  expulsion  of  the  breath,  or  stretch
them  wide  or  push  them  up  with  the  flat  of  the
hand  are  all  indecorous,  since  it  is  not  without  reason
that  censure  is  passed  even  on  blowing  the  nose  too
frequently.  It  is  also  an  ugly  habit  to  protrude  the  81
lips,  open  them  with  a  sudden  smack,'  compress
them,  draw  them  apart  and  bare  the  teeth,  or  twist
them  awry  to  one  side  till  they  almost  reach  the
ear,  or  to  curl  them  in  scorn,  or  let  them  droop,  or
allow  the  voice  to  escape  only  on  one  side. It  is

287


QUINTILIAN

tunt.  Lambere  quoque  ea  et  mordere  deforme  est,
cum  etiam  in  efficiendis  verbis  modicus  eorum  esse
debeat  motus ;  ore  enim  magis  quam  labris  loquen-
dum  est.

82  Cervicem  rectam  opoi'tet  esse,  non  rigidam  aut
supinam.  Collum  diversa  quidem,  sed  pari  deformi-
tate  et  contrahitur  et  tenditur,  sed  tenso  subest  et
labor,  tenuaturque  vox  ac  fatigatur ;  adfixum  pectori
mentum  minus  claram  et  quasi  latiorem  presso  gut-

83  ture  facit.  Humerorum  raro  decens  adlevatio  atque
contractio  est ;  breviatur  enim  cervix  et  gestum
quendam  humilem  atque  servilem  et  quasi  fraudu-
lentum  facit,  cum  se  in  habitum  adulationis,  admira-

84  tionis,  metus  fingunt.  Brachii  moderata  proiectio,
remissis  humeris  atque  explicantibus  se  in  proferenda
manu  digitis,  continuos  et  decurrentes  locos  maxime
decet.  At  cum  speciosius  quid  uberiusque  dicendum
est,  ut  illud  Saxa  atque  solitudines  voci  respondent,
cxspatiatur  in  latus et ipsa  quodamraodo se  cum

86  gestu  fundit  oratio.  Manus  vero,  sine  quibus  trunca
asset  actio  ac  debilis,  vix  dici  potest,  quot  motus
habeant,  cum  paene  ipsam  verborum  copiam  conse-
quantur. Nam  ceterae  partes  loquentem  adiuvant,

86  hae,  prope  est  ut  dicam,  ipsae  loquuntur.  Annon
his  poscimus,  pollicemur,  vocamus,  dimittimus,  mina-
mur,  supplicamus,  abominamur,  timemus,  interro-
gamus,  negamus ;  gaudium,  tristitiam,  dubitationem.


*  pro  Arch. viii. 19. See  viii. iii. 75  and ix. iv. 44.
"  Rocks  and  solitude  make  answer  to  the  voice."

288


BOOK XI.  III.  8i-86

also  unbecoming  to  lick  or  bite  them,  since  their
motion  should  be  but  slight  even  when  they  are
employed  in  forming  words.  For  we  must  speak
with  the  mouth  rather  than  the  lips.

The  neck  must  be  straight,  not  stiff  or  bent  82
backward.  As  regards  the  throat,  contraction  and
stretching  are  equally  unbecoming,  though  in  dif-
ferent ways.  If  it  be  stretched,  it  causes  strain
as  well,  and  v.eakens  and  fatigues  the  voice,
while  if  the  chin  be  pressed  down  into  the  chest
it  makes  the  voice  less  distinct  and  coarsens  it,
owing  to  the  pressure  on  the  windpipe.  It  is,  as  a  83
rule,  unbecoming  to  raise  or  contract  the  shoulders.
For  it  shortens  the  neck  and  produces  a  mean  and
servile  gesture,  which  is  even  suggestive  of  dis-
honesty when  men  assume  an  attitude  of  flattery,
admiration  or  fear.  In  continuous  and  flowing  pas-  84
sages  a  most  becoming  gesture  is  slightly  to  extend
the  arm  with  shoulders  well  thrown  back  and  the
fingers  opening  as  the  hand  moves  forward.  But
when  we  have  to  speak  in  specially  rich  or  impres-
sive style,  as,  for  example,  in  the  passage  saxa  atque
soUtudines  voci  respondent,^  the  arm  will  be  thrown  out
in  a  stately  sidelong  sweep  and  the  words  will,  as
it  were,  expand  in  unison  with  the  gesture.  As  85
for  the  hands,  without  which  all  action  would  be
crippled  and  enfeebled,  it  is  scarcely  possible  to
describe  the  variety  of  their  motions,  since  they  are
almost  as  expressive  as  words.  For  other  portions
of  the  body  merely  help  the  speaker,  whereas  the
hands  may  almost  be  said  to  speak.  Do  we  not  86
use  them  to  demand,  promise,  summon,  dismiss,
threaten,  supplicate,  express  aversion  or  fear,  question
or  deny  ? Do  we  not  employ  them  to  indicate  joy,

289


QUINTILIAN

confessionem^ paenitentiam, modum, copiam, nu-

87  merum,  tempus  ostendimus  ?  Non  eaedem  conci-
tant,  inhibent,^  probant,  admirantur,  verecundantur  ?
Non  in  demonstrandis  locis  ac  personis  adverbiorum
atque  pronominum  obtinent  vicem  ?  Ut  in  tanta
per  omnes  gentes  nationesque  linguae  diversitate  hie
mihi  omnium  hominum  communis  sermo  videatur.

88  Et  hi  quidem,  de  quibus  sum  locutus,  cum  ipsis
vocibus  naturaliter  exeunt  gestus ;  alii  sunt,  qui  res
imitatione  significant,  ut  si  aegrum  temptantis  venas
medici  similitudine  aut  citharoedum  formatis  ad
modum  percutientis  nervos  manibus  ostendas  ;  quod
est  genus  quam  longissime in  actione  fugiendum.

89  Abesse  enim  plurimum  a  saltatore  debet  orator,  ut
sit  gestus  ad  sensus  magis  quam  ad  verba  accom-
modatus ;  quod  etiam  histrionibus  paulo  gravioribus
facere  moris  fuit.  Ergo  ut  ad  se  manum  referre,
cum  de  se  ipso  loquatur,  et  in  eum  quem  demonstret
iutendere  et  aliqua  his  similia  permiserim,  ita  non
effingere status  quosdam  et  quidquid  dicet  osten-

90  dere.  Neque  id  in  manibus  solum,  sed  in  omni
gestu  ac  voce  servandum  est.  Non  enim  aut  in  ilia
periodo,  Stelit  soleatus  praetor  populi  Romani,  incli-
iaatio  incumbentis  in  mulierculam  Verris  effingenda
fest  1  aut  in  ilia,  Caedehatur  in  medio  foro  Messanae,

*  After  inhibent  the  MSS.  add  supplicaat,  rightly  deMed  hy

Slothouivcr.


*  There  in  his  slippers  stood  the  praetor  of  the  Roman
people." Verr.  v.  xxxiii.  86 :  see  viii.  iii.  64.

290


BOOK  XI.  III.  86-90

sorrow,  hesitation,  confession,  penitence,  measure,
quantity,  number  and  time  ?  Have  they  not  power  87
to  excite  and  prohibit,  to  express  approval,  wonder
or  shame  ?  Do  they  not  take  the  place  of  adverbs
and  pronouns  when  we  point  at  places  and  things }
In  fact,  though  the  peoples  and  nations  of  the  earth
speak  a  multitude  of  tongues,  they  share  in  common
the  universal  language  of  the  hands.

The  gestures  of  which  I  have  thus  far  spoken  are  88
such  as  naturally  proceed  from  us  simultaneously
with  our  words.  But  there  are  others  which  in-
dicate things  by  means  of  mimicr}^  For  example,
vou  may  suggest  a  sick  man  by  mimicking  the
gesture  of  a  doctor  feeling  the  pulse,  or  a  harpist  by
a  movement  of  the  hands  as  though  they  were
plucking  the  strings.  But  this  is  a  t^-pe  of  gesture
which  should  be  rigorously  avoided  in  pleading.  For  89
the  orator  should  be  as  unlike  a  dancer  as  possible,
and  his  gesture  should  be  adapted  rather  to  his
thought  than  to  his  actual  words,  a  practice  which
was  indeed  once  upon  a  time  even  adopted  by  the
more  dignified  performers  on  the  stage.  I  should,
therefore,  permit  him  to  direct  his  hand  towards  his
body  to  indicate  that  he  is  speaking  of  himself,  or  to
point  it  at  some  one  else  to  whom  he  is  alluding,
together  Avith  other  similar  gestures  which  I  need
not  mention.  But,  on  the  other  hand,  I  would  not
allow  him  to  use  his  hands  to  imitate  attitudes  or  to
illustrate  anything  he  may  chance  to  say.  And  this  90
rule  applies  not  merely  to  the  hands,  but  to  all
gesture  and  to  the  voice  as  well.  For  in  delivering
the  period  stelit  soleaius  praetor  papuli  Romani,^  it
would  be  wrong  to  imitate  Verres  leaning  on  his
mistress,  or  in  uttering  the  phrase  caedebatur  in  medio

291


QUINTILIAN

motus laterum,  qualis esse ad  verbera  solet,  tor-
quendus,  aut  vox,  qualis  dolore  exprimitur,  eruenda ;

91  cum  mihi  comoedi  quoque  pessime  facere  videantuFj
quod,  etiamsi  iuvenem  agant,  cum  tamen  in  expo-
sitione  aut  senis  sermo,  ut  in  Hydriae  prologo,  aut
mulieris,  ut  in  Georgo,  ineidit,  tremula  vel  effeminata
voce  pronuntiant.  Adeo  in  illis  quoque  est  aliqua
vitiosa  imitatio,  quorum  ars  omnis  constat  imitatione.

92  Est  autem  gestus  ille  maxime  communis,  quo
medius  digitus  in  pollicem  contrahitur  explicitis
tribus,  et  principiis  utilis  cum  leni  in  utramque
partem  motu  modice  prolatus,  simul  capite  atque
humeris  sensim  ad  id,  quo  manus  feratur,  obsecun-
dantibus,  et  in  narrando  certus,  sed  turn  paulo  pro-
ductior,  et  in  exprobrando  et  coarguendo  acer  atque
instans,  longius  enim  partibus  his  et  liberius  exeritur.

93  Vitiose  vero  idem  sinistrum  quasi  humerum  patens
in  latus  agi  solet,  quanquam  adhuc  peius  aliqui
transversum  brachium  proferunt  et  cubito  pronunti-
ant. Duo  quoque  medii  sub  pollicem  veniunt,  et
est  hie  adhuc  priore  gestus  instantior,  principio  et


*  Kerr.  v.  Ixii.  162. "He  waa  scourged  in  the  midst  of  the
markec-place  of  Messina."

*  Plays  of  Menander.

293


BOOK  XL  HI.  90-93

foro  Messanae  ^  to  make  the  side  writhe,  as  it  does
when  quivering  beneath  the  lash,  or  to  utter  shrieks,
such  as  are  extorted  by  pain.  For  even  comic  actors  91
seem  to  me  to  commit  a  gross  offence  against  the
canons  of  their  art  when,  if  they  have  in  the  course
of  some  narrative  to  quote  either  the  words  of  an  old
man  (as,  for  example,  in  the  prologue  to  the  Hydria)^
or  of  a  woman  (as  in  the  Georgus  ^),  they  utter  them
in  a  tremulous  or  a  treble  voice,  notwithstanding  the
fact  that  they  are  playing  the  part  of  a  young  man.
So  true  is  it  that  certain  forms  of  imitation  may  be
a  blemish  even  in  those  whose  whole  art  consists  in
imitation.

One  of  the  commonest  of  all  the  gestures  consists  92
in  placing  the  middle  finger  against  the  thumb  and
extending  the  remaining  three  :  it  is  suitable  to  the
exordium,  the  hand  being  moved  forward  with  an
easy  motion  a  little  distance  both  to  right  and  left,
while  the  head  and  shoulders  gradually  follow  the
direction  of  the  gesture.  It  is  also  useful  in  the
statement  of  facts,  but  in  that  case  the  hand  must  be
moved  with  firmness  and  a  little  further  forward,
while,  if  we  are  reproaching  or  refuting  our  adver-
sar}',  the  same  movement  may  be  employed  with
some  vehemence  and  energy,  since  such  passages
permit  of  greater  freedom  of  extension.  On  the  93
other  hand,  this  same  gesture  is  often  directed  side-
ways towards  the  left  shoulder :  this  is  a  mistake,
although  it  is  a  still  worse  fault  to  thrust  the  arm
across  the  chest  and  gesticulate  with  the  elbow.
The  middle  and  third  fingers  are  also  sometimes
turned  under  the  thumb,  producing  a  still  more
forcible  effect  than  the  gesture  previously  described,
but  not  well  adapted  for  use  in  the  exordium  or  state-

293


QUINTILIAN

9t  narrationi  non  commodatus.  At  cum  tres  contracti
pollice  premuntur,  turn  digitus  ille,  quo  usum  optime
Crassum  Cicero  dicit,  explicaii  solet.  Is  in  expro-
brando  et  indicando,  unde  ei  nomen  est,  valet,
et  adlevata  ac  spectante  humerum  manu  paulum
inclinatus  adfirmat,  versus  in  terram  et  quasi  pronus

95  urget ;  et  aliquando  pro  numero  est.  Idem  summo
articulo  utrinque  leviter  apprehenso,  duobus  modice
curvatis,  minus  tamen  minimo,  aptus  ad  disputandum
est.  Acrius  tamen  argumentari  videntur,  qui  me-
dium articulum  potius  tenent,  tanto  contractioribus

96  ultimis  digitis,  quanto  priores  descenderunt.  Est
et  ille  verecundae  orationi  aptissimus,  quo,  quattuor
primis  leviter  in  summum  coeuntibus  digitis,  non
procul  ab  ore  aut  pectore  fertur  ad  nos  manus  et

97  deinde  prona  ac  paulum  prolata  laxatur.  Hoc  modo
coepisse  Demosthenen  credo  in  illo  pro  Ctesiphonte
timido  summissoque  principio,  sic  formatam  Ciceronis
manum,  cum  diceret :  i>i  quid  est  ingenii  in  me,  quod
sentio  quam  sit  exiguum.  Eadem  aliquatenus  liberius
deorsum  spectantibus  digitis  colligitur  in  nos  et
fusius  paulo  in  diversum  resolvitur,  ut  quodammodo

98  sermonen  ipsum  proferre videatur. Binos  interim

»  de  Or.  II.  xlv.  188.  "  pro  Arch.  i.  1.

294


BOOK XI.  III.  93-98

meni  of  facts.  But  when  three  fingers  are  doubled  94
under  the  thumb,  the  finger,  which  Cicero  ^  says
that  Crassus  used  to  such  effect,  is  extended.  It  is
used  in  denunciation  and  in  indication  (whence  its
name  of  index  finger),  while  if  it  be  slightly  drojiped
after  the  hand  has  been  raised  toward  the  shoulder,
it  signifies  affirmation,  and  if  pointed  as  it  were
face  downwards  toward  the  ground,  it  expresses
insistence.  It  is  sometimes  also  used  to  indicate
number.  Again,  if  its  top  joint  is  lightly  gripped  on  95
either  side,  with  the  two  outer  fingers  slightly
curved,  the  little  finger  rather  less  than  the  third,
we  shall  have  a  gesture  well  suited  for  argument.
But  for  this  purpose  the  same  gesture  is  rendered
more  emphatic  by  holding  the  middle  joint  of  the
finger  and  contracting  the  last  two  fingers  still
further  to  match  the  lower  position  of  the  middle
finger  and  thumb.  The  following  gesture  is  admir-  96
ably  adapted  to  accompany  modest  language :  the
thumb  and  the  next  three  fingers  are  gently  con-
verged to  a  point  and  the  hand  is  carried  to  the
neighbourhood  of  the  mouth  or  chest,  then  relaxed
palm  downwards  and  slightly  advanced.  It  was  97
with  this  gesture  that  I  believe  Demosthenes  to
have  commenced  the  timid  and  subdued  exordium
of  his  speech  in  defence  of  Ctesiphon,  and  it  was,
I  think,  in  such  a  position  that  Cicero  ^  held  his
hand,  when  he  said,  "  If  I  have  any  talent,  though
I  am  conscious  how  little  it  is."  Slightly  greater
freedom  may  be  given  to  the  gesture  by  pointing
the  fingers  down  and  drawing  the  hand  in  towards
the  body  and  then  opening  it  somewhat  more  rapidly
in  the  opposite  direction,  so  that  it  seems  as  though
it  were  delivering  our  words  to  the  audience. Some-  98

295


QUINTILIAN

digitos  distinguimus,  sed  non  inserto  pollice,  paulum
tamen  inferioribus  intra  spectantibuSj  sed  ne  illis
99  quidem  tensis,  qui  supra  sunt.  Interim  extremi
palmam  circa  ima  pollicis  premunt,  ipse  prioribus
ad  medios  articulos  iungitur ;  interim  quartus  oblique
reponitur ;  interim  quattuor  remissis  magis  quam
tensis,  poUice  intus  inclinato,  habilem  demonstrando
in  latus  aut  distinguendis,  quae  dicimus,  manum
facimus,cum  supinain  sinistrum  latus,  prona  inalterum

100  fertur.  Sunt  et  illi  breves  gestus,  cum  manus  leviter
pandata,  qualis  voventium  est,  parvis  intervallis  et
subadsentientibus  humeris  movetur,  maxime  apta
parce  et  quasi  timide  loquentibus.  Est  admirationi
conveniens  ille  gestus,  quo  manus  mod  ice  supinata  |j
ac  per  singulos  a  minimo  collecta  digitos  redeunte

101  flexu  simul  explicatur  atque  convertitur.  Nee  uno
modo  interrogantes  gestum  componimus,  plerumque
tamen  vertentes  manum,  utcunque  composita  est.
Pollici  proximus  digitus  mediumque,  qua  dexter  est,
unguem  pollicis  summo  suo  iungens,  remissis  ceteris,
est  et  approbantibus  et  narrantibus  et  distinguentibus

102  decorus.  Cui  non  dissimilis,  sed  complicitis  tribus
296


BOOK  XI.  III.  98-102

times  we  may  hold  the  first  two  fingers  apart  without,
however,  inserting  the  thumb  between  them,  the
remaining  two  pointing  inwards,  while  even  the  two
former  must  not  be  fully  extended.  Sometimes,  99
again,  the  third  and  little  finger  may  be  pressed  in  to
the  palm  near  the  base  of  the  thumb,  which  in  its
turn  is  pressed  against  the  middle  joints  of  the  first
and  middle  fingers ;  at  others  the  little  finger  is
sometimes  drooped  obliquely,  or  the  four  fingers  may
be  relaxed  rather  than  extended  and  the  thumb
slanted  inwards :  this  last  gesture  is  well  adapted  to
pointing  to  one  side  or  marking  the  different  points
which  we  are  making,  the  hand  being  carried  palm-
upwards  to  the  left  and  swept  back  to  the  right
face-downwards.  The  following  short  gestures  are  100
also  employed :  the  hand  may  be  slightly  hollowed
as  it  is  when  persons  are  making  a  vow,  and  then
moved  slightly  to  and  fro,  the  shoulders  swaying
gently  in  unison  :  this  is  adapted  to  passages  where
we  speak  with  restraint  and  almost  with  timidity.
Wonder  is  best  expressed  as  follows  :  the  hand  turns
slightly  upwards  and  the  fingers  are  brought  in  to
the  palm,  one  after  the  other,  beginning  with  the
little  finger ;  the  hand  is  then  opened  and  turned
roimd  by  a  reversal  of  this  motion.  There  are  various  101
methods  of  expressing  interrogation ;  but,  as  a  rule,
we  do  so  by  a  turn  of  the  hand,  the  arrangement  of
the  fingers  being  indifferent.  If  the  first  finger
touch  the  middle  of  the  right-hand  edge  of  the
thumb-nail  with  its  extremity,  the  other  fingers
being  relaxed,  we  shall  have  a  graceful  gesture  well
suited  to  express  approval  or  to  accompany  statemenlg
of  facts,  and  to  mark  the  distinction  between  our
different  points. There  is  another  gesture  not  unlike  102

297


QUINTILIAN

digitis,  quo  nunc  Graeci  plurimum  utuntur,  etiam
utraque  manu,  quotiens  enthymemata  sua  gestu
corrotundant  velut  caesim.  Manus  lenior  promittit
et  adsentatur,  citatior  liortatur,  interim  laudat.  Est
et  ille  urgentis  orationem  gestus  vulgaris  magis
quam  ex  arte,  qui  contrahit  alterno  celerique  motu

103  et  explicat  manum.  Est  et  ilia  cava  et  rara  et  supra
humeri  altitudinem  elata  cum  quodam  motu  velut
hortatrix  manus ;  a  peregrinis  scholis  tamen  prope
recepta  tremula  scenica  est.  Digitos,  cum  summi
coierunt,  ad  os  referre,  cur  quibusdam  displicuerit,
nescio.  Nam  id  et  leviter  admirantes  et  interim
subita  indignatione  velut  pavescentes  et  deprecantes

104  facimus.  Quin  compressam  etiam  manum  in  paeni-
tentia  vel  ira  pectori  admovemus,  ubi  vox  vel  inter
dentes  expressa  non  dedecet :  Quid  nunc  agam  ?
Quid  facias  ? Averso  poUice  demonstrare  aliquid,

105  receptum  magis  puto  quam  oratori  decorum.  Sed
cum  omnis  motus  sex  partes  habeat,  Septimus  sit  ille,
qui  in  se  redit,  orbis.  Vitiosa  est  una  circumversio :
reliqui  ante  nos  et  dextra  laevaque  et  sursum  et
deorsum  aliquid  ostendunt ;  in  posteriora  gestus  non


*  Rhetorical  or  incomplete  syllogisms. But  see  v.  x.  2.
xiv.  1,

298


BOOK XI.  III.  I02-I0S

the  preceding,  in  which  the  remaining  three  fingers
are  folded  :  it  is  much  employed  by  the  Greeks  both
for  the  left  hand  and  the  right,  in  rounding  off  their
enthymemes^  detail  by  detail.  A  gentle  movement  of
the  hand  expresses  promise  or  assent,  a  more  \aolent
movement  suggests  exhortation  or  sometimes  praise.
There  is  also  that  familiar  gesture  by  which  we  drive
home  our  words,  consisting  in  the  rapid  opening
and  shutting  of  the  hand :  but  this  is  a  common
rather  than  an  artistic  gesture.  Again,  there  is  the  103
somewhat  unusual  gesture  in  which  the  hand  is
hollowed  and  raised  well  above  the  shoulder  with  a
motion  suggestive  of  exhortation.  The  tremulous
motion  now  generally  adopted  by  foreign  schools  is,
however,  fit  only  for  the  stage.  I  do  not  know  why
some  persons  disapprove  of  the  movement  of  the
fingers,  with  their  tops  converging,  towards  the
mouth.  For  we  do  this  when  we  are  slightly  sur-
prised, and  at  times  also  employ  it  to  express  fear  or
entreaty  when  we  are  seized  with  sudden  indignation.
Further,  Ave  sometimes  clench  the  hand  and  press  104
it  to  our  breast  when  we  are  expressing  regret  or
anger,  an  occasion  when  it  is  not  unbecoming  even
to  force  the  voice  through  the  teeth  in  phrases  such
as  "  What  shall  I  do  now  ?  "  "  What  would  you  do  ?  "
To  f>oint  at  something  with  the  thumb  turned  back
is  a  gesture  which  is  in  general  use,  but  is  not,  in  my
opinion,  becoming  to  an  orator.  Motion  is  generally  106
divided  into  six  kinds,  but  circular  motion  must  be
regarded  as  a  seventh.  The  latter  alone  is  faulty
when  applied  to  gesture.  The  remaining  motions —
that  is,  forward,  to  right  or  left  and  up  or  down — all
have  their  significance,  but  the  gesture  is  never
directed  to  what  lies  behind  us,  though  we  do  at

199


QUINTILIAN

106  dirigitur.  Interim  tamen  velut  reiici  solet.  Optime
autem  irianus  a  sinistra  parte  incipit,  in  dextra
deponitur,  sed  ut  ponere  non  ut  ferire  videatur ;
quanquam  et  in  fine  interim  cadit,  ut  cito  tamen
redeat,  et  nonnunquam  resilit  vel  negantibus  nobis
vel  admirantibus.

Hie  veteres  artifices  illud  recte  adiecerunt,  ut
manus  cum  sensu  et  inciperet  et  deponeretur.
Alioqui  enim  aut  ante  vocem  erit  gestus  aut  post

107  vocem,  quod  est  utrumque  deforme.  In  illo  lapsi
nimia  subtilitate  sunt,  quod  intervallum  motus  tria
verba  esse  voluerunt ;  quod  neque  observatur  neque
fieri  potest,  sed  illi  quasi  mensuram  tarditatis  celeri-
tatisque  aliquam  esse  voluerunt,  neque  immerito,
ne aut  diu otiosa esset manus aut, quod multi

108  faciunt,  actionem  continuo  motu  concideret.  Aliud
est,  quod  et  fit  frequentius  et  magis  fallit.  Sunt
quaedam  latentes  sermonis  percussiones  et  quasi
aliqui  pedes,  ad  quos  plurimorum  gestus  cadit,  ut
sit  unus  motus  Novtim  crimen,  alter  C.  Caesar,  tertius
et  ante  hanc  diem,  quartus  non  auditum,  deinde  pro-
pinqiius  mens,  et  ad  ie,  et  Quintus  Tubero,  et  detulit.

109  Unde  id  quoque  fluit  vitium,  ut  iuvenes,  cum  scri-


*  jwo  Lig.  1.  1.  "It  is  a  new  charge,  Gal  us  Caesar,  a
charge  hitherto  unheard  of,  that  my  kinsman,  Quintus  Tubero,
has  brought  to  your  notice,"

300


BOOK XI.  III.  105-109

times  throw  the  hand  back.  The  best  effect  is  pro-  106
duced  by  letting  the  motion  of  the  hand  start  from
the  left  and  end  on  the  right,  but  this  must  be  done
gently,  the  hand  sinking  to  rest  and  avoiding  all
appearance  of  giving  a  blow,  although  at  the  end  of
a  sentence  it  may  sometimes  be  allowed  to  drop,  but
must  quickly  be  raised  again  :  or  it  may  occasionally,
when  we  desire  to  express  wonder  or  dissent,  spring
back  with  a  rapid  motion.

In  this  connexion  the  earlier  instructors  in  the  art
of  gesture  rightly  added  that  the  movement  of  the
hand  should  begin  and  end  with  the  thought  that  is
expressed.  Otherwise  the  gesture  will  anticipate  or
lag  behind  the  voice,  both  of  which  produce  an
unpleasing  effect.  Some,  through  excess  of  subtlety,  107
have  erroneously  prescribed  that  there  should  be  an
interval  of  three  words  between  each  movement;
but  this  rule  is  never  observed,  nor  can  it  be.  These
persons,  however,  were  desirous  that  there  should  be
some  standard  of  speed  or  slowness  (a  most  rational
desire),  with  a  view  to  avoid  prolonged  inactivity  on
the  part  of  the  hands  as  well  as  the  opposite  fault,
into  which  so  many  fall,  of  breaking  up  the  natural
flow  of  their  delivery  by  continual  motion.  There  is  108
another  still  more  common  error,  which  is  less  easy
of  detection.  Language  possesses  certain  imper-
ceptible stresses,  indeed  we  might  almost  call  them
feet,  to  which  the  gesture  of  most  speakers  conforms.
Thus  there  will  be  one  movement  at  nowm  crimen,
another  at  Gai  Caesar,  a  third  at  et  ante  hanc  diem,
a  fourth  at  noii  audiium,  a  fifth  at  propitiquus  mens,  a
sixth  at  ad  te  and  others  at  Quintus  Tubero  and
detuUO-  From  this  springs  a  further  error,  namely,  109
that  young  men,  when  writing  out  their  speeches,

301


QUINTILIAN

bunt^  gestum  praemodulati  cogitatione  sic  componant,
quomodo  casura  manus  est.  Inde  et  illud  vitium,  ut
gestus,  qui  in fine  dexter  esse  debet,  in sinistrum

110  frequenter  desinat.  Melius  illud,  cum  sint  in  ser-
nione  omni  brevia  quaedam  membra,  ad  quae,  si  necesse
sit,  recipere  spiritum  liceat,  ad  haec  gestum  dispo-
nere  :  ut  puta  Novum  crimen,  C.  Caesar,  habet  per  se
finem  quendam  suum,  quia  sequitur  coniunctio ;
deinde  et  ante  hanc  diem  non  audilum  satis  circum-
scriptum est. Ad haec commodanda  manus est,

HI  idque  dam  erit  prima  et  composita  actio.  At  ubi
earn  calor  concitaverit ;  etiam  gestus  cum  ipsa
orationis  celeritate  crebrescet.  Aliis  locis  citata,
aliis  pres.sa  conveniet  pi-onuntiatio.  Ilia  transcur-
rimus,  congerimus,^  festinamus ;  hac  instamus,  in-
culcamus,  infigimus.  Plus  autem  adfectus  habent
lentiora  ;  ideoque  Roscius  citatior,  Aesopus  gravior

112  fuit,  quod  ille  comoedias,  hie  tragoedias  egit.  Eadem
niotus  quoque  observatio  est.  Itaque  in  fabulis
iuvenum,  senum,  militum,  matronarum  gravior
ingressus  est;  servi,  ancillulae,  parasiti,  piscatores
citatius  moventur.  Tolli  autem  manum  artifices
supra  oculos,  demitti  infra  pectus vetant; adeo  a

'  After  congeiimua  B.  gives  abundamus,  which  is  omitted  by
one  late  MS.  and  expunged  by  Halm.

302


BOOK XI.  III.  109-112

devise  all  their  gestures  in  advance  and  consider  as
they  compose  how  the  hand  is  to  fall  at  each
particular  point.  A  further  unfortunate  result  is
that  the  movement  of  the  hand,  which  should  end
on  the  right,  frequently  finishes  on  the  left.  It  is  110
therefore  better,  in  view  of  the  fact  that  all  speech
falls  into  a  number  of  brief  clauses,  at  the  end  of
which  we  can  take  breath,  if  necessary,  to  arrange
our  gesture  to  suit  these  sections.  For  example,  the
words  novum  crimen,  Gai  Caesar,  in  a  sense  form  a
phrase  complete  in  itself,  since  they  are  followed  by
a  conjunction,  while  the  next  words,  ei  ante  hanc  diem
non  auditum,  are  also  sufficiently  self-contained.  To
these  phrases  the  motions  of  the  hand  must  be  con-
formed, before  the  speech  has  passed  beyond  the
calmness  of  tone  on  which  it  opens.  But  when  in-  111
creasing  warmth  of  feeling  has  fired  the  orator,  the
gesture  will  become  more  frequent,  in  keeping  with
the  impetus  of  the  speech.  Some  places  are  best
suited  by  a  rapid,  and  others  by  a  restrained  delivery.
In  the  one  case  we  pass  rapidly  on,  fire  a  volley  of
arguments  and  hurry  upon  our  way  ;  in  the  other,  we
drive  home  our  points,  force  them  on  the  hearer  and
implant  them  in  his  mind.  But  the  slower  the
delivery,  the  greater  its  emotional  power :  thus,
Roscius  was  rapid  and  Aesopus  weighty  in  his  delivery,
because  the  former  was  a  comic  and  the  latter  a
tragic  actor.  The  same  rule  applies  to  the  move-  112
ments.  Gsnsequently  on  the  stage  young  men  and
old,  soldiers  and  married  women  all  walk  sedately,
while  slaves,  maidservants,  parasites  and  fishermen
are  more  lively  in  their  movements.  But  instructors
in  the  art  of  gesture  will  not  permit  the  hand  to  be
raised  above  the  level  of  the  eyes  or  lowered  beneath

303


QUINTILIAN

capite  eum  petere  ^  aut  ad  imum  ventrem  deducere,

113  vitiosum  habetur.  In  sinistrum  intra  humerum  pro-
movetur ;  ultra  non  decet.  Sed  cum  aversantes  in
laevam  partem  velut  propellemus  manum,  sinister
humerus proferendus, ut cum capite ad  dextram

114  ferente  consentiat.  Manus  sinistra  nuuquam  sola
gestum  recta  facit ;  dextrae  se  frequenter  accom-
modat,  sive  in  digitos  argumenta  digerimus  sive
aversis  in  sinistrum  palmis  abominamur  sive  obiicimus

115  adversas  sive  in  latus  utramque  distendimus,  sive
satisfacientes  aut  supplicantes  (diversi  autem  sunt
hi  gestus)  summittimus  sive  adorantes  atollimus  sive
aliqua  demonstratione  aut  invocatione  protendimus  :
Fos  Albani  tumuli  atque  luci,  aut  Gracchanum  illud  :
Quo  me  miser  conferam  ? in Capiiolium  ? at  fratris

116  sanguine  madet :  an  domum  ?  Plus  enim  adfectus  in  his
iunctae  exhibent  manus ;  in  rebus  parvis,  mitibus,
tristibus  breves  ;  magnis,  laetis,  atrocibus  exertiores.^

117  Vitia  quoque  earum  subiicienda  sunt,  quae  quidem
accidere  etiam  exercitatis  actoribus  solent.  Nam
gestum  poculum  poscentis  aut  verbera  minantis  aut
numerum  quingentorum  flexo  pollice  efficientis,  quae
sunt  a  quibusdam  scriptoribus  notata,  ne  in  rusticis

^  a  capite  eum  petere  is  almost  certainly  corrupt :  gestum
for  eum  is  the  least  improbable  correction  that  has  been  suggested.

*  exertiores,  Spalding :  exteriorea,  B.

^  The  general  sense  is  clear,  though  the  text  is  unsatis-
factory and  scarcely  translateable.

*  jn-o  Mil.  xxxi.  85.  '  See  Cic.  de  Or.  in.  Ivi.  214.

*  I.e. crooking the thumb against the forefinger  to
represent  the  symbol  D,

304


BOOK  XI.  III.  1 1 2-1 17

that  of  the  breast;  since  it  is  thought  a  grave  blemish
to  lift  it  to  the  top  of  the  head^  or  lower  it  to  the  lower
portions  of  the  belly.  It  may  be  moved  to  the  left  113
within  the  limits  of  the  shoulder^  but  no  further
without  loss  of  decorum.  On  the  other  hand,  when,
to  express  our  aversion,  we  thrust  our  hand  out  to
the  left,  the  left  shoulder  must  be  brought  forward
in  unison  with  the  head,  which  will  incline  to  the
right.  It  is  never  correct  to  employ  the  left  hand  114
alone  in  gesture,  though  it  will  often  conform  its
motion  to  that  of  the  right,  as,  for  example,  when
we  are  counting  our  arguments  on  the  fingers,  or
turn  the  palms  of  the  hands  to  the  left  to  express
our  horror  of  something,  or  thrust  them  out  in  front  116
or  spread  them  out  to  right  and  left,  or  lower  them  in
apology  or  supplication  (though  the  gesture  is  not
the  same  in  these  two  cases),  or  raise  them  in  adora-
tion, or  stretch  them  out  in  demonstration  or  invoca-
tion, as  in  the  passage,  "  Ye  hills  and  groves  of  Alba,*  "
or  in  the  passage  from  Gracchus  ' :  "  Whither,  alas !
shall  I  turn  me?  To  the  Capitol?  Nay,  it  is  wet
with  my  brother's  blood.  To  my  home?  "  etc.  For  116
in  such  passages  greater  emotional  effect  is  pro-
duced if  both  hands  co-operate,  short  gestures  being
best  adapted  to  matters  of  small  importance  and
themes  of  a  gentle  or  melancholy  character,  and
longer  gestures  to  subjects  of  importance  or  themes
calling  for  joy  or  horror.

It  is  desirable  also  that  I  should  mention  the  faults  117
in  the  use  of  the  hands,  into  which  even  experienced
pleaders  are  liable  to  fall.  As  for  the  gesture  of
demanding  a  cup,  threatening  a  flogging,  or  indicating
the  number  500  by  crooking  the  thumb,*  all  of  which
are  recorded  by  writers  on  the  subject,  I  have  never

305


QUINTILIAN

IlSquidem  vidi.  At  ut  brachio  exerto  introspiciatur
latus,  ut  manum  alius  ultra  sinuni  proferre  non
audeat,  alius,  in  quantum  patet  longitude,  protendat
aut  ad  tectum  erigat  aut  repetito  ultra  laevum
humerum  gestu  ita  in  tergum  flagellet,  ut  consistere
post  eum  parum  tutum  sit,  aut  sinistrum  ducat
orbem  aut  temere  sparsa  manu  in  proximos  ofFendat
aut  cubitum utrumque  in diversum  latus  ventilet,

119  saepe  scio  e venire.  Solet  esse  et  pigra  et  trepida  et
secanti  similis  ;  interim  etiam  uncis  digitis,  ut  ^  aut  a
capite  deiiciatur  aut  eadem  manu  supinata  in  superiora
iactetur.  Fit  et  ille  gestus,^  qui,  inclinato  in  hu-
merum dextrum  capite,  brachio  ab  aure  protenso,
manum  infesto  pollice  extendit ;  qui  quidem  maxima
placet iis, qui se dicere sublata manu iactant.

120  Adiicias  licet  eos,  qui  sententias  vibrantes  digitis
iaculantur  aut  manu  sublata  denuntiant  aut,  quod
per  se  interim  recipiendum  est,  quotiens  aliquid
ipsis  placuit,  in  ungues  eriguntur;  sed  vitiosum  id
faciunt,  aut  digito,  quantum  plurimum  possunt,
erecto aut etiam duobus,  aut utraque manu ad

121  modum  aliquid  portantium  composita.  His  accedunt
vitia  non  naturae  sed  trepidationis,  cum ore con-

*  ut  added  by  Spalding.

*  gestus  suggested  by  Halm.  The  second  hand  of  cod.  Bamb.
reads  habitus,  qui  esse  in  statuis  pacificator  solet :  pre-
sumably an  interpolation.

*  I.e.  with  exaggerated  violence. See  ii.  xii.  9.


BOOK XI.  in.  1 17-121

seen  them  employed  even  by  uneducated  rustics.
But  I  know  that  it  is  of  frequent  occurrence  for  a  118
speaker  to  expose  his  side  by  stretching  his  arm  too
far,  to  be  afraid  in  one  case  of  extending  his  hand
beyond  the  folds  of  his  cloak,  and  in  another  to
stretch  it  as  far  as  it  will  go,  to  raise  it  to  the  roof,
or  by  swinging  it  repeatedly  over  his  left  shoulder  to
deliver  such  a  rain  of  blows  to  the  rear  that  it  is
scarcely  safe  to  stand  behind  him,  or  to  make  a  circular
sweep  to  the  left,  or  by  casting  out  his  hand  at
random  to  strike  the  standers-by  or  to  flap  both
elbows  against  his  sides.  There  are  others,  again,  119
whose  hands  are  sluggish  or  tremulous  or  inclined  to
saw  the  air ;  sometimes,  too,  the  fingers  are  crooked
and  brought  down  with  a  run  from  the  top  of  the
head,  or  tossed  up  into  the  air  with  the  hand  turned
palm  upwards.  There  is  also  a  gesture,  which  con-
sists in  inclining  the  head  to  the  right  shoulder,
stretching  out  the  arm  from  the  ear  and  extending
the  hand  with  the  thumb  turned  down.  This  is  a
special  favourite  with  those  who  boast  that  they
speak  "  with  uplifted  hand."  ^  To  these  latter  we  may  120
add  those  speakers  who  hurl  quivering  epigrams
with  their  fingers  or  denounce  with  the  hand  up-
raised, or  rise  on  tiptoe,  whenever  they  say  something
of  which  they  are  specially  proud.  This  last  pro-
ceeding may  at  times  be  adopted  by  itself,  but  they
convert  it  into  a  blemish  by  simultaneously  raising
one  or  even  two  fingers  as  high  as  they  can  reach,  or
heaving  up  both  hands  as  if  they  were  carrying  some-
thing. In  addition  to  these  faults,  there  are  those  121
which  spring  not  from  nature,  but  from  nervousness,
such  as  struggling  desperately  with  our  lips  when
they  refuse  to  open,  making  inarticulate  sounds,  as

307


QUINTILIAN

currente  rixari,  si  memoria  fefellerit  aut  cogitatio
non  suffragetur,  quasi  faucibus  aliquid  obstiterit,
insonare,  in  adversum  tergere  nares,  obambulare
sermone  imperfecto,  resistere  subito  et  laudem
silentio poscere ; quae omnia persequi prope in-

122  finitum  est;  sua  enim  cuique  sunt  vitia.  Pectus
ac  venter  ne  proiiciantur,  observandum ;  pandant
enim  posteriora,  et  est  odiosa  omnis  supinitas.
Latera  cum  gestu  consentiant.  Facit  enim  aliquid
et  totius  corporis  motus,  adeo  ut  Cicero  plus  illo  agi
quam  manibus  ipsis  putet.  Ita  enim  dicit  in
Oratore :  NuUae  argutiae  digitorum,  non  ad  numenim
articulus  cadens,  trunco  magis  toto  se  ipse  moderans  et

123  virili  lalerum  jiexione.  Femur  ferire,  quod  Athenis
primus  fecisse  creditur  Cleon,  et  usitatum  est  et
indignantes  decet  et  excitat  auditorem.  Idque  in
Calidio  Cicero  desiderat ;  Non  frons,  inquit,  percussa,
non  femur.  Quanquam,  si  licet,  de  fronte  dissentio.
Nam  etiam  complodere  manus  scenicum  est  et  pectus

124  caedere.  lUud  quoque  raro  decebit  cava  manu
summis  digitis  pectus  appetere,  si  quando  nosmet
ipsos  alloquimur,  cohortantes,  obiurgantes,  mise-
rantes ;  quod  si  quando  fiet,  togam  quoque  inde
removeri  non dedecebit. In pedibus  observantur

»  iviii.  69.  ■  Brut.  Ixxi.  278.

308


BOOK XI.  iM.  1 21-124

though  sometliing  were  sticking  in  our  throat,  when
our  memory  fails  us,  or  our  thoughts  will  not  come
at  our  call ;  rubbing  the  end  of  our  nose,  walking  up
and  down  in  the  midst  of  an  unfinished  sentence,
stopping  suddenly  and  courting  applause  by  silence,
with  many  other  tricks  which  it  would  take  too  long
to  detail,  since  everybody  has  his  own  particular
faults.  We  must  take  care  not  to  protrude  the  chest  122
or  stomach,  since  such  an  attitude  arches  the  back,
and  all  bending  backwards  is  unsightly.  The  flanks
must  conform  to  the  gesture  ;  for  the  motion  of  the
entire  body  contributes  to  the  effect :  indeed,  Cicero
holds  that  the  body  is  more  expressive  than  even  the
hands.  For  in  the  de  Oralor  1  he  says,  "  There  must
be  no  quick  movements  of  the  fingers,  no  marking
time  with  the  finger-tips,  but  the  orator  should
control  himself  by  the  poise  of  the  whole  trunk  and
by  a  manly  inclination  of  the  side."  Slapping  the  123
thigh,  which  Cleon  is  said  to  have  been  the  first  to
introduce  at  Athens,  is  in  general  use  and  is  becoming
as  a  mark  of  indignation,  while  it  also  excites  the
audience.  Cicero  ^  regrets  its  absence  in  Calidius,
"There  was  no  striking  of  the  forehead,"  he  com-
plains, "nor  of  the  thigh."  With  regard  to  the
forehead  I  must  beg  leave  to  differ  from  him  :  for  it
is  a  purely  theatrical  trick  even  to  clap  the  hands  or
beat  the  breast.  It  is  only  on  rare  occasions,  too,  124
that  it  is  becoming  to  touch  the  breast  with  the
finger-tips  of  the  hollowed  hand,  when,  for  example,
we  address  ourselves  or  speak  words  of  exhortation,
reproach  or  commiseration.  But  if  ever  we  do  employ
this  gesture,  it  will  not  be  unbecoming  to  pull  back
the  toga  at  the  same  time.  As  regards  the  feet,  we
need  to  be  careful  about  our  gait  and  the  attitudes

309


QUINTILIAN

status  et  incessus. Prolate  dextro  stare  et  eandem

125  manum  ac  pedem  proferre,  deforme  est.  In  dextrum
incumbere  interim  datur  sed  aequo  pectore,  qui
tamen  comicus  magis  quam  oratorius  gestus  est.
Male  etiam  in  sinistrum  pedem  insistentium  dexter
aut  tollitur  aut  summis  digitis  suspenditur.  Varicare
supra  modum  et  in  stando  deforme  est  et,  accedente
motu,  prope  obscenum. Procursio  opportuna  brevis,

126  moderata,  rara.  Conveniet  etiam  ambulatio  quaedam
propter  immodicas  laudationum  moras,  quanquam
Cicero  rarum  incessum  neque  ita  longum  probat.
Discursare  vero  et,  quod  Domitius  Afer  de  Sura
Manlio  dixit,  satagere,  ineptissimum,  urbaneque
Flavus  Verginius  interrogavit  de  quodam  suo  anti-

127  sophiste,  quot  milia  passuum  declamasset.  Praecipi
et  illud  scio,  ne  ambulantes  avertamur  a  iudicibus,
sed  sint  obliqui  pedes  ad  consilium  nobis  respici-
entibus.  Id  fieri  iudiciis  privatis  non  potest.  Verum
et  breviora  sunt  spatia,  nee  aversi  diu  sumus.  In-
terim tamen  recedere sensim datur. Quidam et

128  resiliunt,  quod  est  plane  ridiculum.  Pedis  supplosio
ut  loco  est  opportuna,  ut  ait  Cicero,  in  contentionibus
aut  incipiendis  aut  finiendis,  ita  crebra  et  inepti  est

*  Orat.  xviii.  59.  *  See  vi,  iii.  54.

*  The  normal  arrangement  was  for  the  president  of  the
court  and  judges  to  sit  on  a  tribunal  or  dais.  The  advocates
and  patties  to  the  suit  were  on  the  ground  in  front.  When
pleading  before  a  large  jury  the  orator  could  walk  diagonally,
half-facing  the  jury,  without  at  any  rate  turning  his  back  on
too  many  at  a  time.  When,  however,  there  was  but  a  single
judge,  as  in  a  private  trial,  the  feat  would  be  more  difficult,
But  apparently  the  court  took  up  less  room  in  such  cases,
and  the  orator's  peregrinations  would  be  but  sraalL  See
§  134  note.

*  dc  Or.  iii.  lix.  220.

310


BOOK XI.  III.  124-128

in  which: we  stand.  To  stand  with  the  right  foot
advanced  or  to  thrust  forward  the  same  foot  and
hand  are  alike  unsightly.  At  times  we  may  rest  our  125
weight  on  the  right  foot^  but  without  any  corre-
sponding inclination  of  the  chest,  while,  in  any  case,
the  gesture  is  better  suited  to  the  comic  actor  than  to
the  orator.  It  is  also  a  mistake,  when  resting  on  the
left  foot,  to  lift  the  right  or  poise  it  on  tiptoe.  To
straddle  the  feet  is  ugly  if  we  are  standing  still,  and
almost  indecent  if  we  are  actually  moving.  To  start
forward  may  be  effective,  provided  that  we  move  but
a  short  distance  and  do  so  but  rarely  and  without
violence.  It  will  also  at  times  be  found  convenient  126
to  walk  to  and  fro,  owing  to  the  extravagant  pauses
imposed  by  the  plaudits  of  the  audience  ;  Cicero,^
however,  says  that  this  should  be  done  only  on  rare
occasions,  and  that  we  should  take  not  more  than  a
few  steps.  On  the  other  hand,  to  run  up  and  down,
which,  in  the  case  of  Manlius  Sura,^  Domitius  Afer
called  overdoing  it,  is  sheer  folly,  and  there  was  no
little  wit  in  the  question  put  by  Verginius  Flavus  to
a  rival  professor,  when  he  asked  how  many  miles  he
had  declaimed.  I  know,  too,  that  some  authorities  127
warn  us  not  to  walk  with  our  backs  turned  to  the
judges,  but  to  move  diagonally  and  keep  our  eyes
fixed  on  the  panel.  This  cannot  be  done  in  private
trials,  but  in  such  cases  the  space  available  is  sniall
and  the  time  during  which  our  backs  are  turned  is  of
the  briefest.^  On  the  other  hand,  we  are  permitted
at  times  to  walk  backwards  gradually.  Some  even
jump  backwards,  which  is  merely  ludicrous.  Stamp-  128
ing  the  foot  is,  as  Cicero  *  says,  effective  when  done
on  suitable  occasions,  that  is  to  say,  at  the  commence
ment  or  close  of  a  lively  argument,  but  if  it  be

311


QUINTILIAN

hominis  et  desinit  iudicem  in  se  convertere.  Est  et
ilia  indecora  in  dextrum  ac  laevum  latus  vacillatio
alternis  pedibus  insistentium.  Longissime  fugienda
mollis  actio,  qualem  in  Titio  Cicero  dicit  fuisse,  unde
etiam  saltationis  quoddam  genus  Titius  sit  appel-

129  latum.  Reprehendenda  et  ilia  frequens  et  concitata
in  utramque  partem  nutatio,  quam  in  Curione  patre
irrisit  et  lulius,  quaerens,  quis  in  lintre  loqueretur,  et
Sicinius ;  nam  cum,  adsidente  collega,  qui  erat
propter  valetudinem  et  deligatus  et  plurimis  medica-
mentis  delibutus,  multum  se  Curio  ex  more  iactasset,
l\  iinquam,  inquit,  Oclavi,  collegae  tuo  gratiam  re  feres,

130  qui  nisi  fuisset,  hodie  te  istic  muscae  comedissent.  lac-
tantui  et  humeri ;  quod  vitium  Demosthenes  ita
dicitur  emendasse  ut,  cum  in  angusto  quodam  pulpito
stans  diceret,  hasta  humero  dependens  immineret,
ut,  si  calore  dicendi  vitare  id  excidissiet,  ofFen-
satione  ilia  commoneretur.  Ambulantem  loqui  ita
demum  oportet,  si  in  causis  publicis,  in  quibus  j
multi sunt iudices^ quod dicimus quasi singulis 1

131  inculcare  peculiariter  velimus.  Illud  non  ferendum,  \
quod  quidam,  reiecta  in  humerum  toga,  cum  dextra  ]
sinum  usque  ad  lumbos  reduxerunt,  sinistra  gestum

*  Brut.  IxiL  •  cp.  Cio.  Brut,  Ix.

3?*


BOOK XI.  III.  128-131

frequently  indulged  in,  it  brands  the  speaker  as  a
fool  and  ceases  to  attract  the  attention  of  the  judge.
There  is  also  the  unsightly  habit  of  swaying  to  right
and  left,  and  shifting  the  weight  from  one  foot  to
the  other.  Above  all,  we  must  avoid  effeminate
movements,  such  as  Cicero  ^  ascribes  to  Titius,  a  cir-
cumstance which  led  to  a  certain  kind  of  dance  being
nicknamed  Titius.  Another  reprehensible  practice  129
is  that  of  nodding  frequently  and  rapidly  to  either
side,  a  mannerism  for  which  the  elder  Curio  ^  was  de-
rided by  Julius,  who  asked  who  it  was  who  was  speak-
ing in  a  boat,  while  on  another  occasion,  when  Curio
had  been  tossing  himself  about  in  his  usual  manner,
while  Octavius,  his  colleague,  was  sitting  beside  him
bandaged  and  reeking  with  medicaments  on  account
of  ill-health,  Sicinius  remarked,  "  Octavius,  you  can
never  be  sufficiently  grateful  to  your  colleague  :  for
if  he  wasn't  there,  the  flies  would  have  devoured  you
this  very  day  where  you  sit."  The  shoulders  also  130
are  apt  to  be  jerked  to  and  fro,  a  fault  of  which
Demosthenes  is  said  to  have  cured  himself  by
speaking  on  a  narrow  platform  with  a  spear  hanging
immediately  above  his  shoulder,  in  order  that,  if  in
the  heat  of  his  eloquence  he  failed  to  avoid  this
fault,  he  might  have  his  attention  called  to  the
fact  by  a  prick  from  the  spear.  The  only  condition
that  justifies  our  walking  about  while  speaking  is
if  we  are  pleading  in  a  public  trial  before  a  large
number  of  judges  and  desire  specially  to  impress  our
arguments  upon  them  individually.  The  practice  131
adopted  by  some  of  throwing  the  toga  back  over  the
shoulder,  while  they  draw  up  the  fold  to  their  waist
with  the  right  hand,  and  use  the  left  for  gesticulation
as  they  walk  up  and  down  and  discourse,  is  not  to

VOL.  IV.  L 3^3


QUINTILIAN

facientes  spatiantur  et  fabulantur,  cum  etiam  laevam
restringere  prolata  longius  dextra  sit  odiosum.  Unde
moneor,  (ut  ne  id  quidem  transeam)  ineptissime  fieri,
cum  inter  moras  laudationum  aut  in  aurem  alicuius
loquuntur  aut  cum  sodalibus  iocantur  aut  nonnun-
quam  ad  librarios  suos  ita  respiciunt,  ut  sportulam

132  dictare  videantur.  Inclinari  ad  iudicem,  cum  doceas,
utique  si  id  de  quo  loquaris  sit  obscurius,  decet.
Incumbere  advocate  adversis  subselliis  sedenti  con-
tumeliosum.  Reclinari  etiam  ad  suos  et  manibus
sustineri,  nisi  plane  iusta  fatigatio est,  delicatum,

133  sicut  palam  moneri  excidentis  aut  legere.  Namque
in  his  omnibus  et  vis  ilia  dicendi  solvitur  et  frigescit
adfectus  et  iudex  parum  sibi  praestari  reverentiae
credit.  Transire  in  diversa  subsellia  parum  vere-
cundum  est.  Nam  et  Cassius  Severus  urbane
adversus  hoc  facientem  lineas  poposcit.  Et  si
aliquando concitate itur, nunquam non frigide

134  reditur.  Multum  ex  iis,  quae  praecepimus,  mutari
necesse  est  ab  iis,  qui  dicunt  apud  tribunalia. Nam


*  Asconius  (in  a  note  on  the  Divinatio  of  Cicero)  explains
that  in  minor  cases  tried  by  tribuni,  triumviri,  quaestores
and  other  minor  officials,  the  judges  sat  on  ordinary  benches,
not  on  a  raised  tribunal.


314


BOOK XI.  HI.  131-134

be  tolerated ;  for  even  to  draw  back  the  left  hand

while  extending  the  right  is  an  objectionable  habit.
This  reminds  me  of  an  extremely  foolish  trick,  which
I  think  I  ought  to  mention,  that  some  speakers  have
of  employing  the  intervals  when  the  audience  are
applauding  by  whispering  in  someone's  ear  or  jesting
with  their  friends  or  looking  back  at  their  clerks,  as
if  telling  them  to  make  a  note  of  some  gratuity  to
be  dispensed  to  their  supporters.  On  the  other  132
hand,  when  we  are  making  some  explanation  to  the
judge,  more  especially  if  the  point  be  somewhat
obscure,  a  slight  inclination  in  his  direction  will  be
not  unbecoming.  But  to  lean  forward  towards  the
advocate  seated  on  the  benches  of  our  opponent  is
oifensive,  while,  unless  we  are  genuinely  fatigued,  it
is  a  piece  of  affectation  to  lean  back  among  our  own
friends  and  to  be  supported  in  their  arms ;  the  same
remark  also  applies  to  the  practice  of  being  prompted
aloud  or  reading  from  manuscript  as  though  un-
certain of  our  memory.  For  all  these  manner-  133
isms  impair  the  force  of  our  speaking,  chill  the
effect  of  emotional  appeals  and  make  the  judge
think  that  he  is  not  being  treated  with  sufficient
respect.  To  cross  over  to  the  seats  of  our  opponents
borders  on  impudence,  and  Cassius  Severus  showed
a  neat  turn  of  wit  when  he  demanded  that  a  barrier
might  be  erected  between  himself  and  an  opponent
who  behaved  in  this  fashion.  Moreover,  though  to
advance  towards  our  opponent  may  at  times  produce
an  impression  of  passionate  energy,  the  return  to
our  former  position  will  always  prove  correspondingly
tame.  Many  of  the  rules  which  I  have  given  will  134
require  modification  by  those  who  have  to  plead
before judges seated on a dais.^ For in such

315


QUINTILIAN

et  vultus  erectior,  ut  eum,  apud  quern  dieitur,
spectet ;  et  gestus  ut  ad  eundem  tendens  elatior
sitj  necesse  est ;  et  alia,  quae  occurrere  etiam  me
tacente  omnibus  possunt.  Itemque  ab  iis,  qui
sedentes  agent.  Nam  et  fere  fit  hoc  in  rebus  mino-
ribus,  et  iidem impetus  actionis esse  non possunt,

135  et  quaedam  vitia  fiunt  necessaria.  Nam  et  dexter
pes  a  laeva  iudicis  sedenti  proferendus  est,  et  ex
altera  parte  multi  gestus  necesse  est  in  sinistrum
eant,  ut  ad  iudicem  spectent.  Equidem  plerosque
et  ad  singulas  clausulas  sententiarum  video  ad-
surgentes  et  nonnullos  subinde  aliquid  etiam  spati-
antes,  quod  an  deceat,  ipsi  viderint ;  cum  id  faciunt,

136  non  sedentes  agunt.  Bibere  aut  etiam  esse  inter
agendum,  quod  multis  moris  fuit  et  est  quibusdam,
ab  oratore  meo  procul  absit.  Nam  si  quis  aliter
dicendi  onera  perferre  non  possit,  non  ita  miserum
est  non  agere  potiusque  multo  quam  et  operis  et
bominum  contemptum  fateri.

137  Cultus  non  est  proprius  oratoris  aliquis  sed  magis
in  oratore  conspicitur.  Quare  sit,  ut  in  omnibus
honestis  debet  esse,  splendidus  et  vlrilis. Nam  et


*  Cp.  XI.  i.  44,  which  shows  that  the  cases  in  question  are
those  submitted  to  arbitration.

316


BOOK XL  in.  134-137

cases  the  face  must  be  raised  somewhat  higher,  so
that  the  speaker's  eyes  may  be  fixed  on  the  president
of  the  court :  for  the  same  reason  his  gestures  must
also  be  carried  a  little  higher,  while  there  are  other
details  which  will  readily  occur  to  my  reader  without
any  mention  from  me.  Similar  modifications  will
be  likewise  necessarj'  for  those  who  plead  sitting.^
For  this  is  done,  as  a  rule,  only  in  cases  of  minor
importance,  where  delivery  will  necessarily  be  more
restrained,  and  certain  defects  are  ineWtable.  For  135
example,  when  the  speaker  sits  on  the  left  side  of  the
judge,  he  will  have  to  advance  his  right  foot,  while
if  he  be  seated  on  the  right,  many  of  his  gestures
must  be  made  from  right  to  left,  in  order  that  thev
may  be  addressed  to  the  judge.  Personally,  I  note
that  many  speakers  start  up  at  the  conclusion  of
individual  periods,  while  some  proceed  to  walk  to
and  fro  for  a  little  :  it  is  for  them  to  decide  whether
this  is  becoming  or  not :  I  will  merely  remark  that,
when  they  do  this,  they  are  not  pleading  seated.
It  was  a  common  custom,  which  has  not  entirely  136
disappeared,  to  drink  or  even  to  eat  while  pleading ;
but  I  shall  not  permit  my  ideal  orator  to  do  anything
of  the  kind.  For  if  a  man  cannot  endure  the
burdens  imp)osed  by  oratory  without  having  recourse
to  such  remedies,  he  should  not  find  it  a  serious
hardship  to  give  up  pleading  altogether,  a  course
which  is  far  preferable  to  acknowledging  his  contempt
both  for  his  profession  and  his  audience.

With regard to dress, there  is  no  special  garb  137
peculiar  to  the  orator,  but  his  dress comes more
under  the  public  eye  than  that  of  other  men. It
should,  therefore,  be  distinguished  and  manly,  as,
indeed,  it  ought  to  be  with  all  men  of  position. For

317


QUINTILIAN

toga  et  calceus  et  capillus  tam  nimia  cura  quam
negligentia  sunt  reprehendenda.  Est  aliquid  in
amictUj  quod  ipsum  aliquatenus  temporum  con-
dicione  mutatum  est. Nam veteribus nulli sinus^

138  perquam  breves  post  illos  fuerunt.  Itaque  etiam
gestu  necesse  est  usos  esse  in  principiis  eos  alio,
quorum  brachium,  sicut  Graecorum,  veste  con-
tinebatur.  Sed  nos  de  praesentibus  loquimur.  Cui
lati  clavi  ius  non  erit,  ita  cingatur,  ut  tunicae
prioribus  oris  infra  genua  paulum,  posterioribus  ad
medios poplites usque perveniant. Nam infra

139  mulierum  est,  supra  centurionum.  Ut  purpura  recte
descendat,  levis  cura  est ;  notatur  interim  negligentia.
Latum  habentium  clavum  modus  est,  ut  sit  paulum
cinctis  summissior.  Ipsam  togam  rotundam  esse  et  apte
caesam  velim,  aliter  enim  multis  modis  fiet  enormis.
Pars  eius  prior  mediis  cruribus  optime  terminatur.


*  In  putting  on  the  toga,  it  was  thrown  first  over  the  left
shoulder,  so  that  about  6  feet  hung  in  front  and  about  12
behind.  This  longer  portion  was  then  carried  round  under
the  right  arm  and  then  diagonallj'  across  the  chest  (like  a
balteus,  or  belt)  and  over  the  left  shoulder  again.  A  fold  of
this  portion  hanging  in  front  formed  the  sinus.  The  original
6  feet  hanging  in  front  from  the  left  shoulder  now  hung
below  the  rest.  A  portion  was  pulled  up  from  above  and
allowed  to  hang  over  the  edge  of  that  portion  of  the  toga
which  Quintilian  compares  to  a  balteus.  This  was  known
as  the  umbo,  and  is  described  by  Quintilian  as  pars  quae
ultima  imponitur.  He  recommends  that  a  considerable
portion  should  be  thus  pulled  up  and  allowed  to  hang  fairly
low  in  front  over  the  edge  of  the  balteus,  that  the  weight
of  the  hanging  portion  might  balance  the  remainder  of  the
original  6  feet  of  toga  hanging  from  the  left  shoulder,  keep


BOOK XI.  HI.  137-139

excessive  care  with  regard  to  the  cut  of  the  toga,^
the  style  of  the  shoes,  or  the  arrangement  of  the
liair,  is  just  as  reprehensible  as  excessive  careless-
ness. There  are  also  details  of  dress  which  are
altered  to  some  extent  by  successive  changes  in
fashion.  The  ancients,  for  example,  wore  no  folds,
and  their  successors  wore  them  very  short.  Conse-  138
quently  it  follows  that  in  view  of  the  fact  that  their
arms  were,  like  those  of  the  Greeks,  covered  by  the
garment,  they  must  have  employed  a  different  form  of
gesture  in  the  exordium  from  that  which  is  now  in
use.  However,  I  am  speaking  of  our  own  day.  The
speaker  who  has  not  the  right  to  wear  the  broad
stripe,^  will  wear  his  girdle  in  such  a  way  that  the
front  edges  of  the  tunic  fall  a  little  below  his  knees,
while  the  edges  in  rear  reach  to  the  middle  of  his
liams.  For  only  women  draw  them  lower  and  only
centurions  higher.  If  we  wear  the  purple  stripe,  it  139
requires  but  little  care  to  see  that  it  falls  becomingly ;
negligence  in  this  respect  sometimes  excites  criti-
cism. Among  those  who  wear  the  broad  strij)e,  it  is
the  fashion  to  let  it  hang  somewhat  lower  than  in
garments  that  are  retained  by  the  girdle.  The  toga
itself  should,  in  my  opinion,  be  round,  and  cut  to
fit,  otherwise  there  are  a  number  of  ways  in  which  it
may  be  unshapely.  Its  front  edge  should  by  prefer-
ence reach  to  the  middle  of  the  shin,  while  the  back
should  be  higher  in  proportion  as  the  girdle  is  higher

it  in  place  and  prevent  it  from  slipping  back  into  its  original
position.  The  toga  was  very  nearly  semicircular  in  shape,
which  explains  Quintilian's  statement  that  it  should  be
round.  For  further  details  see  Companion  to  Latin  Studies,
Camb.  Univ.  Press,  p.  191.
'  Worn  by  senators.


QUINTILIAN

140  posterior  eadem  portione  altius  qua  cinctura.  Sinus
decentissimus,  si  aliquant©  supra  imam  tunicam  ^
fuerit ;  nunquam  certe  sit  inferior.  Ille,  qui  sub
humero  dextro  ad  sinistrum  oblique  ducitur  velut
balteus,  nee  strangulet  nee  fluat.  Pars  togae,  quae
postea  imponitur,  sit  inferior;  nam  ita  et  sedet
melius  et  continetur.  Subducenda  etiam  pars  aliqua
tunicae,  ne  ad  lacertum  in  aetu  redeat ;  tum  sinus
iniiciendus  humero,  cuius  extremam  oram  reiecisse

141  non  dedecet.  Operiri  autem  humerum  cum  toto
iugulo  non  oportet,  alioqui  amictus  fiet  angustus  et
dignitatem,  quae  est  in  latitudine  pectoris,  perdet.
Sinistrum  brachium  eo  usque  adlevandum  est,  ut
quasi  normalem  ilium  angulum faciat,  super  quod

142  ora  ex  toga  duplex  aequaliter  sedeat.  Manus  non
impleatur  anulis,  praecipue  medios  articulos  non
transeuntibus ;  cuius  erit  habitus  optimus  adlevato
pollice  et  digitis  leviter  inflexis,  nisi  si  libellum
tenebit.  Quod  non  utique  captandum  est;  videtur
enim fateri memoriae diffidentiam et ad multos

143  gestus  est  impediment©,  Togam  veteres  ad  calceos
usque  demittebant  ut  Graeci  pallium  ;  idque  ut  fiat,
qui  de  gestu  scripserunt  circa  tempora  ilia,  Plotius
Nigidiusque praecipiunt. Quo magis  miror Plinii

*  tunicam,  Spalding :  togam,  MS8.


^  Plotius  Gallus,  a  rhetorician,  and  Nigidius  Figulus,  an |
encyclopaedic  writer,  both  contemporaries  of  Cicero.

320


BOOK XI.  ill.  139-143

behind  than  in  front.  The  fold  is  most  becoming,  140
if  it  fall  to  a  point  a  little  above  the  lower  edge  of
the  tunic,  and  should  certainly  never  fall  below  it.
The  other  fold  which  passes  obliquely  like  a  belt
under  the  right  shoulder  and  over  the  left,  should
neither  be  too  tight  nor  too  loose.  The  portion  of
the  toga  which  is  last  to  be  arranged  should  fall
rather  low,  since  it  will  sit  better  thus  and  be
kept  in  its  place.  A  portion  of  the  tunic  also  should
be  drawn  back  in  order  that  it  may  not  fall  over  the
arm  when  we  are  pleading,  and  the  fold  should  be
thrown  over  the  shoulder,  while  it  will  not  be
unbecoming  if  the  edge  be  turned  back.  On  the  141
other  hand,  we  should  not  cover  the  shoulder  and
the  whole  of  the  throat,  otherwise  our  dress  will  be
unduly  narrowed  and  will  lose  the  impressive  effect
produced  by  breadth  at  the  chest.  The  left  arm
should  only  be  raised  so  far  as  to  form  a  right  angle
at  the  elbow,  while  the  edge  of  the  toga  should  fall
in  equal  lengths  on  either  side.  The  hand  should  142
not  be  ovei'loaded  with  rings,  which  should  under  no
circumstances  encroach  upon  the  middle  joint  of
the  finger.  The  most  becoming  attitude  for  the
hand  is  produced  by  raising  the  thumb  and  slightly
curving  the  fingers,  unless  it  is  occupied  with  hold-
ing manuscript.  But  we  should  not  go  out  of  our
way  to  carry  the  latter,  for  it  suggests  an  acknow-
ledgement that  we  do  not  trust  our  memory,  and  is
a  hindrance  to  a  number  of  gestures.  The  ancients  143
used  to  let  the  toga  fall  to  the  heels,  as  the  Greeks
are  in  the  habit  of  doing  with  the  cloak :  Plotius
and  Nigidius  ^  both  recommend  this  in  the  books
which  they  wrote  about  gesture  as  practised  in
their own day. I  am  consequently  all  the  more

321


QUINTILIAN

Secundi  docti  hominis  et  in  hoc  utique  libro  paene
etiam  nimium  curiosi  persuasionem,  qui  solitum  id
facere  Ciceronem  velandorum  varicum  gratia  tradit ;
cum  hoc  amictus  genus  in  statuis  eorum  quoque,  qui

144  post  Ciceronem  fuerunt,  appareat.  Palliolum  sicut
fasciaS;  quibus  crura  vestiuntur,  et  focalia  et  aurium
ligamenta  sola  excusare  potest  valetudo.

Sed  haec  amictus  observatio,  dum  incipimus ;
procedente  vero  actu,  iam  paene  ab  initio  narrationis,
sinus  ab  humero  recte  velut  sponte  delabitur,  et,
cum  ad  argumenta  ac  locos  ventum  est,  reiicere  a
sinistro togam, deiicere etiam, si haereat, sinum

146  conveniet.  Laeva  a  faucibus  ac  summo  pectore
abducere  licet :  ardent  enim  iam  omnia.  Et  ut  vox
vehementior  ac  magis  varia  est,  sic  amictus  quoque

146  habet  actum  quendam  velut  proeliantem.  Itaque
ut  laevam  involvere  toga  et  incingi  paene  furiosum
est,  sinum  vero  in  dextrum  humerum  ab  imo  reiicere
solutum  ac  delicatum,  fiuntque  adhuc  peius  aliqua,
ita  cur  laxiorem  sinum  sinistro  brachio  non  subiici-

^  This  work  of  the  elder  Pliny  was  called  Studiosus.
322


BOOK XI.  in.  143-146

surprised  at  the  view  expressed  by  so  learned  a
man  as  Plinius  Secundus,  especially  since  it  occurs
in  a  book  which  carries  minute  research  almost  to
excess :  ^  for  he  asserts  that  Cicero  was  in  the
habit  of  wearing  his  toga  in  such  a  fashion  to  con-
ceal his  varicose  veins,  despite  the  fact  that  this
fashion  is  to  be  seen  in  the  statues  of  persons  who
lived  after  Cicero's  day.  As  regards  the  short  cloak,  144
bandages  used  to  protect  the  legs,  mufflers  and
coverings  for  the  ears,  nothing  short  of  ill-health
can  excuse  their  use.

But  such  attention  to  our  dress  is  only  possible  at
the  beginning  of  a  speech,  since,  as  the  pleading
develops,  in  fact,  almost  from  the  beginning  of  the
statement  of  facts,  the  fold  will  slip  down  from  the
shoulder  quite  naturally  and  as  it  were  of  its  own
accord,  while  when  we  come  to  arguments  and
commonplaces,  it  will  be  found  convenient  to  throw
back  the  toga  from  the  left  shoulder,  and  even  to
throw  down  the  fold  if  it  should  stick.  The  left  145
hand  may  be  employed  to  pluck  the  toga  from  the
throat  and  the  upper  portion  of  the  chest,  for  by
now  the  whole  body  will  be  hot.  And  just  as  at
this  point  the  voice  becomes  more  vehement  and
more  varied  in  its  utterance,  so  the  clothing  begins
to  assume  something  of  a  combative  pose.  Conse-  146
quently,  although  to  wrap  the  toga  round  the  left
hand  or  to  pull  it  about  us  as  a  girdle  would  be
almost  a  symptom  of  madness,  while  to  throw  back
the  fold  from  its  bottom  over  the  right  shoulder
would  be  a  foppish  and  effeminate  gesture,  and
there  are  yet  worse  effects  than  these,  there  is,  at
any  rate,  no  reason  why  we  should  not  place  the
looser  portions  of  the  fold  under  the  left  arm,  since

323


QUINTILIAN

amus  ? Habet  enim  acre  quiddam  atque  expeditum

147  et  calori  concitationique  non  inhabile.  Cum  vero
magna  pars  est  exhausta  orationis,  utique  adflante
fortuna,  paene  omnia  decent,  sudor  ipse  et  fatigatio
et negligentior amictus et  soluta  ac velut  labens

148  undique  toga.  Quo  magis  miror  hanc  quoque  suc-
currisse  Plinio  curam,  ut  ita  sudario  frontem  siccari
iuberet,  ne  comae  turbarentur,  quas  componi  post
paulum,  sicuti  dignum  erat,  graviter  et  severe
vetuit.  Mihi  vero  illae  quoque  turbatae  prae  se
ferre  aliquid  adfectus  et  ipsa  oblivione  curae  huius

149  commendari  videntur.  At  si  incipientibus  aut
paulum  progressis  decidat  toga,  non  reponere  earn
prorsus  negligentis  aut  pigri  aut  quomodo  debeat
amiciri  nescientis  est.

Haec  sunt  vel  illustramenta  pronuntiationis  vel
vitia,  quibus  propositis  multa  cogitare  debet  orator.

150  Primum,  quis,  apud  quos,  quibus  praesentibus  sit
acturus.  Nam  ut  dicere  alia  aliis  et  apud  alios  magis
concessum  est,  sic  etiam  facere.  Neque  eadem  in
voce,  gestu,  incessu,  apud  principem,  senatum
populum, magistratus, private, publico iudicio,

3H


BOOK XI.  III.  146-150

it  gives  an  air  of  vigour  and  freedom  not  ill-suited
to  the  warmth  and  energy  of  our  action.  When,  147
however,  our  speech  draws  near  its  close,  more
especially  if  fortune  shows  herself  kind,  practically
everything  is  becoming  ;  we  may  stream  with  sweat,
show  signs  of  fatigue,  and  let  our  dress  fall  in  care-
less disorder  and  the  toga  slip  loose  from  us  on
every  side.  This  fact  makes  me  all  the  more  sur-  148
prised  that  Pliny  should  think  it  worth  while  to
enjoin  the  orator  to  dry  his  brow  with  a  hand-
kerchief in  such  a  way  as  not  to  disorder  the  hair,
although  a  little  later  he  most  properly,  and  with  a
certain  gravity  and  sternness  of  language,  forbids
us  to  rearrange  it.  For  my  own  part,  1  feel  that
dishevelled  locks  make  an  additional  appeal  to  the
emotions,  and  that  neglect  of  such  precautions
creates  a  pleasing  impression.  On  the  other  hand,  149
if  the  toga  falls  down  at  the  beginning  of  our
speech,  or  when  we  have  only  proceeded  but  a  little
way,  the  failure  to  replace  it  is  a  sign  of  indifference,
or  sloth,  or  sheer  ignorance  of  the  way  in  which
clothes  should  be  worn.

The  above  are  the  chief  adornments  and  faults
of  delivery.  But  there  are  a  number  of  further
considerations  which  the  orator  must  bear  in  mind.
In  the  first  place  there  is  the  question  as  to  the  160
character  of  speaker,  judges  and  audience.  For
just  as  the  methods  of  speaking  may  justifiably  be
varied  to  suit  the  characteristics  of  different  orators
and  different  judges,  so  it  is  with  delivery.  The
same  characteristics  of  voice,  gesture  and  gait  are
not  equally  becoming  in  the  presence  of  the
emperor,  the  senate,  the  people,  and  magistrates,
or  in  private and public  trials, or in making  a

325


QUINTILIAN
postulatione,  actione  similiter  decent.  Quam
difFerentiam  subiicere  sibi  quisque,  qui  animum
intenderit,  potest ;  tuna  qua  de  re  dicat,  et  efficere
161  quid  velit.  Rei  quadruplex  observatio  est.  Una  in
tota  causa.  Sunt  enim  tristes,  hilares,  sollicitae,
securae,  grandes,  pusillae,  ut  vix  unquam  ita  sol-
licitari  partibus  earum  debeamus,  ut  non  summae

152  meminerimus.  Altera,  quae  est  in  differentia  partium,
ut  in  prooemio,  narratione,  argumentatione,  epilogo.
Tertia  in  sententiis  ipsis,  in  quibus  secundum  res  et
adfectus  variantur  omnia.  Quarta  in  verbis,  quorum
ut  est  vitiosa,  si  efficere  omnia  velimus,  imitatio,  ita
quibusdam nisi sua natura redditur, vis omnis

153  aufertur.  Igitur  in  laudationibus,  nisi  si  funebres
crunt,  gratiarum  actione,  exhortatione,  similibus
laeta  et  magnifica  et  sublimis  est  actio.  Funebres
contiones,  consolationes,  plerumque  causae  reorum
tristes  atque  summissae.  In  senatu  conservanda
auctoritas,  apud  populum  dignitas,  in  privatis  modus.
326


BOOK XL  III,  150-153

request  to  the  praetor  for  the  appointment  of  a  judge
to  hear  our  case,  and  in  actual  pleading.  Anyone
who  will  reflect  upon  the  matter  wUl  realise  the
nature  of  the  differences  involved,  as  he  will  also  be
able  to  realise  the  nature  of  the  subject  on  which
he  is  speaking  and  the  effect  which  he  desires  to
produce.  The  considerations  w^ith  regard  to  the  151
subject  are  four  in  number,  of  which  the  6rst  has
reference  to  the  case  as  a  whole.  For  the  case  may
be  of  a  gloomy  or  a  cheerful  nature,  an  anxious
business,  or  one  that  calls  for  no  alarm,  and  may
involve  issues  of  great  or  trivial  importance.  We
ought,  therefore,  never  to  be  so  preoccupied  over
particular  jx>rtions  of  a  case  as  to  forget  to  consider
the  case  as  a  whole.  The  second  point  is  concerned  152
with  the  different  aspects  of  the  various  portions  of
the  speech,  that  is,  the  exordium,  statement  of  facts,
arguments  and  peroration.  The  third  concerns  the
thoughts,  which  will  vary  according  to  the  subject
matter  and  the  emotions  which  we  require  to
awaken.  The  fourth  has  reference  to  the  words,
which  must  be  given  appropriate  expression,  unless
their  force  is  to  be  entirely  wasted,  although  it  is  an
error  to  attempt  to  make  our  delivery  reproduce  the
sense  of  every  single  word.  Consequently,  in  pane-  153
gyric,  funeral  orations  excepted,  in  returning  thanks,
exhortations  and  the  like,  the  delivery  must  be
luxuriant,  magnificent,  and  grand.  On  the  other
hand,  in  funeral  or  consolatory  speeches,  together
with  most  of  those  in  defence  of  accused  persons,
the  delivery  will  be  melancholy  and  subdued.
When  we  speak  in  the  senate,  it  will  be  authori-
tative, when  we  address  the  people,  dignified,  and
when  we  are  pleading  in  private  cases,  restrained.

327


QUINTILIAN

De  partibus  causae  et  sententiis  verbisque,  quae
sunt  multiplicia,  pluribus  dicendum.

154  Tria  autem  praestare  debet  pronuntiatio  :  conciliet,
persuadeat,  moveat,  quibus  natura  cohaeret,  ut  etiam
delectet.  Conciliatio  fere  aut  commendatione  morum,
qui  nescio  quomodo  ex  voce  etiam  atque  actione
pellucent,  aut  orationis  suavitate  constat ;  per-
suadendi vis  adfirmatione, quae interim  plus  ipsis

166  probationibus  valet.  An  ista,  inquit  Calidio  Cicero,
si  vera  essent,  sic  a  te  dicerenltir  ?  et,  Tanlum  abfuit,
ut  injiammares  nostras  animos ;  somnum  isto  loco  vix
tenehavius. Fiducia igitur appareat  et constantia,

156  utique  si  auctoritas  subest.  Movendi  autem  ratio
aut  in  repraesentandis  est  aut  imitandis  adfectibus.
Ergo  cum  iudex  in  privatis  aut  praeco  in  publicis
dicere  de  causa  iusserit,  leniter  consurgendum ;  turn
in  componenda  toga  vel,  si  necesse  erit,  etiam  ex
integro  iniicienda,  dumtaxat  in  iudiciis  (apud  prin-
cipem  enim  et  magistratus  ac  tribunalia  non  licebit),
paulum  est  commorandum,  ut  et  amictus  sit  decentior

157  et  protinus aliquid spatii ad cogitandum. Etiam

»  Brut.  Ixxx.  278.
328


BOOK  XI.  Ill,  153-157

As  regards  the  respective  portions  of  speeches,
thoughts  and  words,  I  must  speak  at  somewhat
greater  length,  as  the  problems  involved  are  manifold.

There  are  three  qualities  which  delivery  should  154
possess.  It  should  be  conciliatory,  persuasive  and
moving,  and  the  possession  of  these  three  qualities
involves  charm  as  a  further  requisite.  A  conciliatory
effect  may  be  secured  either  by  charm  of  style  or
by  producing  an  impression  of  excellence  of  character,
which  is  in  some  mysterious  way  clearly  revealed
both  by  voice  and  gesture.  A  persuasive  effect,  on
the  other  hand,  is  produced  by  the  power  of  assertion,
which  is  sometimes  more  convincing  even  than  actual
proof.  " Would  those  statements,"  says  Cicero^  to  155
Calidius,  "have  been  delivered  by  you  in  such  a
manner  if  they  had  been  true  ?  "  And  again,  "  You
were  far  from  kindling  our  emotions.  Indeed,  at
that  point  of  your  speech  we  could  scarcely  keep
ourselves  awake."  We  must  therefore  reveal  both
confidence  and  firmness,  above  all,  if  we  have  the
requisite  authority  to  back  them.  The  method  of  156
arousing  the  emotions  depends  on  our  jMJwer  to
represent  or  imitate  the  passions.  Therefore  when
the  judge  in  private,  or  the  usher  in  pubhc  cases,
calls  upon  us  to  speak,  we  must  rise  with  deliberation.
We  shall  then,  to  make  our  garb  the  more  becoming,
and  to  secure  a  moment  for  reflexion,  devote  a  brief
space  to  the  arrangement  of  our  toga  or  even,  if
necessary,  to  throwing  it  on  afresh ;  but  it  must
be  borne  in  mind  that  this  injunction  applies  only
to  cases  in  the  courts ;  for  we  must  not  do  this  if
we  are  speaking  before  the  emperor  or  a  magistrate,
or  in  cases  where  the  judge  sits  in  a  p>osition  of
superior  authority. Even  when  we  turn  to  the  judge,  157

329


QUINTILIAN

cum  ad  iudicem  nos  converterimus,  et  consultus
praetor  permiserit  dicere,  non  protinus  est  erum-
pendum,  sed  danda  brevis  cogitationi  mora.  Mire
enim  auditurum  dicturi  cura  delectat,  et  iudex  se

158  ipse  componit.  Hoc  praecipit  Homerus  Ulixis
exemplo,  quern  stetisse  oculis  in  terram  defixis
immotoque  sceptro,  priusquam  illam  eloquentiae
procellam  effunderet,  dicit.  In  hac  cunctatione
sunt  quaedam  non  indecentes,  ut  appellant  scenici,
morae,  caput  mulcere,  manum  intueri,  infringere
articulos,  simulare  conatum,  suspiratione  sollici-
tudinem  fateri,  aut  quod  quemque  magis  decet,
eaque diutius,  si  iudex  nondum  intendet  animum.

159  Status  sit  rectus,  aequi  et  diducti  paulum  pedes
vel  procedens  minimo  momento  sinister ;  genua
recta,  sic  tamen,  ut  non  extendantur ;  humeri
remissi,  vultus  severus,  non  maestus  nee  stupens
nee  languidus ;  brachia  a  latere  modice  remota ;
manus  sinistra,  qualem  supra  demonstravi ;  dextra,
cum  lam  incipiendum  erit,  paulum  prolata  ultra
sinum gestu quam modestissimo, velut spectans

160  quando  incipiendum  sit.  Vitiosa  enim  sunt  ilia,
intueri  lacunaria,  perfricare  faciem  et  quasi  improbam
facere,  tendere  confidentia  vultum  aut,  quo  sit  magis

»  II.  iii.  217.  •  Sect.  142.

330


BOOK XL  III.  157-160

and  have  requested  and  received  the  praetor's  per-
mission to  address  the  court,  we  must  not  break  forth
at  once  into  speech,  but  should  allow  ourselves  a  few
moments  for  reflexion.  For  the  display  of  such  care
on  the  part  of  one  who  is  about  to  speak  attracts  the
audience  and  gives  the  judge  time  to  settle  down.
Homer  1  inculcates  this  practice  by  placing  before  158
us  the  example  of  Ulysses,  whom  he  describes  as
having  stood  for  a  while  with  eyes  fixed  on  the
ground  and  staff  held  motionless,  before  he  poured
forth  his  whirlwind  of  eloquence.  In  this  preliminary
delay  there  are  certain  pauses,  as  the  actors  call
them,  which  are  not  unbecoming.  We  may  stroke
our  head,  look  at  our  hand,  wring  the  fingers,  pre-
tend to  summon  all  our  energies  for  the  effort,
confess  to  nervousness  by  a  deep  sigh,  or  may  adopt
any  other  method  suited  to  our  individual  character,
while  these  proceedings  may  be  extended  over  some
time,  if  we  find  that  the  judge  is  not  yet  giving  us
his  attention.  Our  attitude  should  be  upright,  our  159
feet  level  and  a  slight  distance  apart,  or  the  left  may
be  very  slightly  advanced.  The  knees  should  be
upright,  but  not  stiff,  the  shoulders  relaxed,  the  face
stem,  but  not  sad,  expressionless  or  languid :  the
arms  should  be  held  slightly  away  from  the  side,
the  left  hand  being  in  the  position  described  above,'^
while  the  right,  at  the  moment  when  our  speech
begins,  should  be  slightly  extended  beyond  the  fold
of  the  toga  with  the  most  modest  of  gestures,  as
though  waiting  for  the  commencement.  For  it  is  160
a  mistake  to  look  at  the  ceiling,  to  rub  the  face  and
give  it  a  flush  of  impudence,  to  crane  it  boldly  for-
ward, to  frown  in  order  to  secure  a  fierce  expression,
or  brush  back  the  hair  from  the  forehead  against  its

331


QUINTILIAN

torvus,  superciliis  adstringerCj  capillos  a  fronte
contra  naturam  retroagere,  ut  sit  horror  ille  ter-
ribilis  ;  turn,  id  quod  Graeci  frequentissime  faciunt,
crebro  digitorum  labiorumque  motu  commentari,
clare  excreare,  pedem  alterum  longe  proferre,
partem  togae  sinistra  tenere,  stare  diductum  vel
rigidum  vel  supinum  vel  incurvum  vel  humeris,  ut
luetaturi  solent^  ad  occipitium  ductis.

161  Prooemio  frequentissime  lenis  convenit  pronunti-
atio.  Nihil  enim  est  ad  conciliandum  gratius  vere-
cundia,  non  tamen  semper ;  neque  enim  uno  mode
dicuntur  exordia,  ut  docui.  Plerumque  tamen  et
vox  temperata  et  gestus  modestus  et  sedens  humero
toga  et  laterum  lenis  in  utramque  partem  motus,

162  eodem  spectantibus  oculis,  decebit.  Narratio  magis
prolatam  manum,  amictum  recidentem,  gestum  dis-
,tinctum4  vocem  sermoni  proximam  et  tantum  acri-
orem,  sonum  simplicem  frequentissime  postulabit  in
his  dumtaxat :  Q.  enim  Ligarius,  cum  esset  in  Afnca
nulla  belli  suspicio,  et  A.  Cluejitius  Habitus  pater  huiusce.
Aliud  in  eadem  poscent  adfectus,  vel  concitati  Nubit


33?


*  IV.  i.  40.  *  pro  Lig.  i.  2.

*  pro  Cluent.  v.  11.  *  pro  Cluent.  v.  14.


BOOK  XI.  III.  160-162

natural  direction  in  order  to  produce  a  terrifying
effect  by  making  it  stand  on  end.  Again,  there  are
other  unseemly  tricks,  such  as  that  so  dear  to  the
Greeks  of  twitching  our  fingers  and  lips  as  though
studying  what  to  say,  clearing  the  throat  with  a
loud  noise,  thrusting  out  one  foot  to  a  considerable
distance,  grasping  a  portion  of  the  toga  in  the  left
hand,  standing  with  feet  wide  apart,  holding  ourselves
stiffly,  leaning  backwards,  stooping,  or  hunching  our
shoulders  toward  the  back  of  the  head^  as  wrestlers
do  when  about  to  engage.

A  gentle  deUvery  is  most  often  best  suited  to  the  161
exordium.  For  there  is  nothing  better  calculated
than  modesty  to  win  the  good-will  of  the  judge,
although  there  are  exceptions  to  the  rule,  since,  as  I
have  already  pointed  out,'  all  exordia  are  not  delivered
in  the  same  manner.  But,  generally  speaking,  a
quiet  voice,  a  modest  gesture,  a  toga  sitting  well
upon  the  shoulder,  and  a  gentle  motion  of  the  sides
to  right  and  left,  accompanied  by  a  corresponding
movement  of  the  eyes,  will  all  be  found  to  produce
a  becoming  effect.  In  the  statement  of  facts  the  hand  162
should  on  most  occasions  be  further  extended,  the
toga  allowed  to  slip  back,  the  gestures  sharply  dis-
tinguished and  the  voice  colloquial,  but  slightly  more
emphatic,  while  there  should  also  be  uniformity  of
tone.  Such,  at  any  rate,  should  be  the  delivery  of
a  passage  such  as  the  following t^  "For  Quintus
Ligarius,  since  there  was  no  hint  of  the  likelihood  of
the  war  in  Africa,"  or^  "Aulus  Cluentius  Habitus,
this  man's  father."  But  different  methods  may  be
called  for  in  this  same  portion  of  the  speech,  in
passionate  utterances  such  as,  "The  mother-in-law
weds  her  son-in-law,"  *  or  in  pathetic  passages  such

335


QUINTILIAN

genero  socrus,  vel  flebiles  Consliiuitur  in  foro  Laodiceae
spectaculum  acerhum  et  miserum  toti  Asiae  provinciae.

163  Maxime  varia  et  multiplex  actio  est  probationum.
Nam  et  proponere,  partiri,  interrogare  sermoni  sunt
proxima,  et  contradictionem  sumere  :  nam  ea  quoque
diversa  propositio  est. Sed  haec  tamen  aliquando

164  irridentes,  aliquando  imitantes  pronuntiamus.  Argu-
mentatio  plerumque  agilior  et  acrior  et  instantior
consentientem  orationi  postulat  etiam  gestum,  id  est
fortem  celeritatem.  Instandum  quibusdam  in  partibus
et  densanda  oratio.  Egressiones  fere  lenes  et  dulces
et  remissae,  raptus  Proserpinae,  Siciliae  description
Cn.  Pompeii  laus. Neque  enim  mirum  minus  habere

165  contentionis  ea  quae  sunt  extra  quaestionem.  Mollior
nonnunquam  cum  reprehensione  diversae  partis  imi-
tatio  :  Videhar  videre  alios  intrantes,  alios  autem  exeunies,
quosdam  ex  vino  vacillantes.  Ubi  non  dissidens  a  voce
permittitur  gestus  quoque,  in  utramque  partem  tenera
quaedam,  sed  intra  manus  tamen  et  sine  motu  laterum

166  translatio. Accendendi  iudicis  plures  sunt  gradus.

' Verr.  i.  xxx.  76 *  cp.  iv.  iii.  13.

*  In  the  lost  pro  Corndio:  cp.  IV.  iii.  13.

*  From  the  lost  pro  Gallio.

334


BOOK XI.  III.  162-166

as,  "  There  in  the  market-place  of  Laodicea  was  dis-
played a  grievous  and  afflicting  spectacle  for  all  the
province  of  Asia  to  behold."^  The  ^roq/j?,  hoveever,  163
require  the  utmost  variety  of  delivery.  For  to  state
them  and  distinguish  between  their  various  points,
and  to  examine  witnesses,  we  employ  something  not
far  removed  from  a  colloquial  tone,  as  is  also  the  case
in  anticipating  objections,  which  is  really  another
form  of  statement.  But  in  all  these  cases  we  some-
times deride,  and  sometimes  mimic  our  opponents.
Argument,  being  as  a  rule  of  a  livelier,  more  energetic  164
and  aggressive  character,  demands  a  type  of  gesture
adapted  to  its  style,  that  is  to  say,  it  should  be  bold
and  rapid.  There  are  certain  portions  of  our  argu-
ments that  require  to  be  pressed  home  with  energy,
and  in  these  our  style  must  be  compact  and  concen-
trated. Digressions,  as  a  rule,  are  characterised  by
gentleness,  calm  and  placidity,  as,  for  example,  in
Cicero's  description  of  the  Rape  of  Proserpine,'^  his
picture  of  Sicily ,2  or  his  panegyric  of  Pompey.^  For
naturally  passages  which  deal  with  subjects  lying
outside  the  main  question  in  dispute  demand  a  less
combative  tone.  There  are  occasions  on  which  we  165
may  adopt  a  gentle  manner  in  depreciating  our
opponents  by  giving  a  picture  of  their  character,  as
in  the  following  passage :  *  "  I  seemed  to  see  some
persons  entering  the  room  and  others  leaving  it,
while  others  were  staggering  to  and  fro  under  the
influence  of  wine."  Under  such  circumstances  we
may  even  allow  the  gesture  to  match  the  voice,  and
may  employ  a  gentle  movement  from  side  to  side :
but  this  motion  should  be  confined  to  the  hands,  and
there  should  be  no  movement  of  the  flanks.  There  166
are  a  number  of  gradations  of  tone  which  may  be

335


QUINTILIAN

Summus  ille  et  quo  nullus  est  in  oratore  acutior :
Suscepto  hello,  Caesar,  gesto  iam  etiam  ex  parte  magna.
Praedixit  enim :  Quantum  potero  voce  contendam,  ut
populus  hoc  Romanus  exaudiat.  Paulum  inferior  et
habens  aliquid  iam  iucunditatis :  Quid  enim  tuns  ille,

167  Tubero,  in  acie  Pharsalica  gladius  agebat  ?  Plenius
adhue  et  lentius  ideoque  dulcius :  In  coetu  vero  populi
Romani  negotium  pubUcum  gerens.  Producenda  omnia
trahendaeque  turn  vocales  aperiendaeque  sunt  fauces.
Pleniore  tamen  haec  canali  fluunt :  Vos,  Albani  tumuli
atque  luci.  Iam  cantici  quiddam  habent  sensimque
resupina  sunt :  Saxa  atque  solitudines  voci  respondent.

168  Tales  sunt  illae  inclinationes  vocis,  quas  invicem
Demosthenes  atque  Aeschines  exprobrant,  non  ideo
improbandae  ;  cum  enim  uterque  alteri  obiiciat,  palam
est  utrumque  fecisse.  Nam  neque  ille  per  Marathonis
et  Plataearum  et  Salaminis  propugnatores  recto  sono

169  iuravit,  nee  ille  Thebas  sermone  deflevit.  Est  his
diversa vox et paene extra organum,  cui Graeci


'  pro  Lig.  iii.  7  and  6.  *  pro  Lig.  iii.  9.

»  rhil.  11.  XXV.  63.  *  pro  Mil.  xxxi.  83.

»  pro  Arch.  viii.  19.  «  de  Cor.  90. '  In  Cles.  72.
•  Dc  Cor.  60.  •  In  Ctes.  49.


336


BOOK  XI.  III.  166-169

employed  to  kindle  the  feeling  of  the  judges.  The
most  vehement  tones  that  an  orator  is  ever  called
upon  to  use  will  be  employed  in  p>assages  such  as
the  following:^  "  When  the  war  was  begun,  Caesar,
and  was,  in  fact,  well  on  its  way  to  a  conclusion."
For  he  has  just  said :  "  I  will  use  my  voice  to  its
fullest  power,  that  all  the  Roman  people  may  hear
me."  On  the  other  hand,  a  lower  tone,  not  devoid
of  a  certain  charm,  should  be  employed  in  passages
such  as :  2  "  What  was  that  sword  of  yours  doing,
Tubero,  that  sword  that  was  drawn  on  the  field  of
Pharsalus?"  But  the  utterance  must  be  fuller,  167
slower,  and  consequently  sweeter,  when  the  orator
says,2  "  But  in  an  assembly  of  the  Roman  people,
and  when  he  was  performing  his  official  functions."
In  this  passage  every  sound  should  be  drawn  out,
we  should  dwell  upon  the  vowel-sounds  and  speak
full-throated.  Still  fuller  should  be  the  stream  of  our
voice  in  the  invocation,*  "  You,  hills  and  groves  of
Alba  " ;  while  a  tone  not  far  removed  from  chanting,
and  dying  away  to  a  cadence,  should  be  employed  in
delivering  the  phrase,^  "  Rocks  and  solitudes  answer
to  the  voice."  These  are  the  modulations  denounced  168
by  Demosthenes  *  and  Aeschines,'  but  they  do  not
necessarily  for  that  reason  merit  our  disapprobation.
For  as  each  of  these  orators  taunts  the  other  with
making  use  of  them,  it  is  clear  that  they  were  employed
by  both.  We  may  be  sure  that  Demosthenes  did  not
restrict  himself  to  his  ordinary  simplicity  of  tone  when
he  swore  by  those  that  fought  for  their  country  at
Marathon,  Plataea  and  Salamis,*  nor  did  Aeschines
employ  a  colloquial  utterance  when  he  lamented  for
the  fate  of  Thebes.'  There  is  also  an  entirely  different  169
tone,  which might  be described  as  lying  almost

337


QUINTILIAN

nomen  amaritudinis  dederunt,  super  modum  ac  paene
naturam  vocis  humanae  acerba  :  Quin  compescitis  vocem
islam,  indicem  stultitiae,  testem  paucitalis  ?  Sed  id,  quod
excedere  modum  dixi,  in  ilia  parte  prima  est :  Qum
compescitis.

170  EpiloguSj  si  enumerationem  rerum  habet,  desiderat
quandam  concisorum  continuationem ;  si  ad  conci-
tandos  iudices  est  accommodatus,  aliquid  ex  iis,  quae
supra  dixi ;  si  placandos,  inclinatam  quandam  leni-
tatem  ;  si  misericordia  commovendos,  flexum  vocis
et  flebilem  suavitatem,  qua  praecipue  franguntur
animi,  quaeque  est  maxime  naturalis.  Nam  etiam
orbos  viduasque  videas  in  ipsis  funeribus  canoro  quo-

171  dam  mode  proclamantes.  Hie  etiam  fusca  ilia  vox,
qualem  Cicero  fuisse  in  Antonio  dicit,  mire  faciet;
habet  enim  in  se,  quod  imitamur.  Duplex  est  tamen
miseratio,  altera  cum  invidia,  qualis  modo  dicta  de
damnatione Philodami, altera cum deprecatione

172  demissior.  Quare,  etiamsi  est  in  illis  quoque  cantus
obscurior.  In  coetu  vero  populi  Romayii  (non  enim  haec

*  pro  Rab,  perd.  vi.  18.  '  Brut,  xzxviii.  141.

»  §  162.


BOOK XI.  III.  169-172

outside  the  range  of  the  instrument.  The  Greeks
call  it  bitterness,  and  it  consists  in  an  extravagant
acerbity  almost  beyond  the  compass  of  the  human
voice.  It  is  employed  in  passages  such  as,^  "  Why
do  you  not  restrain  those  cries,  the  proof  of  your
folly  and  the  evidence  of  your  small  numbers  ^ "
But  the  extravagance  of  which  I  spoke  will  come
in  at  the  opening,  where  the  orator  cries,  "  Why  do
you  not  restrain  ?  "

The  peroration,  if  it  involves  a  recapitulation,  170
requires  an  even  utterance  of  short,  clear-cut
clauses.  If,  on  the  other  hand,  it  is  designed  to
stir  the  emotions  of  the  judges,  it  will  demand
some  of  the  qualities  already  mentioned.  If  it  aims
at  soothing  them,  it  should  flow  softly ;  if  it  is  to
rouse  them  to  pity,  the  voice  must  be  delicately
modulated  to  a  melancholy  sweetness,  which  is  at
once  most  natural  and  specially  adapted  to  touch
the  heart.  For  it  may  be  noted  that  even  orphans
and  widows  have  a  certain  musical  quality  in  the
lamentations  which  they  utter  at  funerals.  A  171
muffled  voice,  such  as  Cicero  2  says  was  possessed
by  Antonius,  will  also  be  exceedingly  effective  under
such  circumstances,  since  it  has  just  the  natural
tone  which  we  seek  to  imitate.  Appeals  to  pity
are,  however,  of  two  kinds :  they  may  be  marked
by  an  admixture  of  indignation,  as  in  the  passage
just  quoted^  describing  the  condemnation  of  Philo-
damus,  or  they  may  be  coupled  with  appeals  for
mercy,  in  which  case  their  tone  will  be  more  sub-
dued. Therefore  although  there  is  a  suggestion  of  172
the  chanting  tone  in  the  delivery  of  such  passages
as  "  In  an  assembly  of  the  Roman  people  "  (for  he  did
not  utter  these  words  in  a  contentious  tone),  or  in

339


QUINTILIAN

rixantis  modo  dixit) ;  et  f^os,  Albani  tumuli  (non  enim,
quasi  inclamaret  aut  testaretur,  locutus  est),  tamen
infinite  magis  ilia  flexa  et  circumducta  sunt :  Me
miserum,  me  infelicem,  et  Quid  respoTidebo  liberis  meis  ?
et  Revocare  tu  me  in  patriam  potuisti,  Milo,  per  hos ;
ego  te  in  eadem  patria  per  eosdem  retinere  non  potero  ?
et  cum  bona  C. Rabirii  nummo  ^  sestertio  addicit :

173  0  meum  miserum  acerbu7nque  praeconium.  Ilia  quoque
mire  facit  in  peroratione  velut  deficientis  dolore  et
fatigatione  confessio,  ut  pro  eodem  Milone,  Sedjinis
sit ;  neque  enim  prae  lacrimis  iam  loqui  possum.  Quae
similem  verbis  habere  debent  etiam  pronuntiationem.

174  Possunt  videri  alia  quoque  huius  partis  atque  officii,
reos  excitare,  pueros  attoUere,  propinquos  producere,
vestes  laniare ;  sed  suo  loco  dicta  sunt.

Et  quia  in  partibus  causae  talis  ^  est  varietas,  satis
apparet,  accommodandam  sententiis  ipsis  pronunti-
ationem, sicut  ostendimus,  sed  verbis  quoque,  quod

175  novissime  dixeram,  non  semper,  sed  aliquando.  An
non  hoc  misellus  et  pauperculus  summissa  atque  con-
trsLcta,  for  lis  et  vehemens  et  latro  erecta  et  concitata

^  nummo,  Bentley  :  uno,  MSS.

'  causa  talis,  ed.  Camp :  causa  et  aliis,  B,

^  pro  Mil.  xxxvii.  102.

"  pro  Rai.  Post,  xvii.  46. addicit,  lit. "  knocks  down  " :
praeconium,  lit.  "the  task  of  the  public  crier."
»  pro  Mil.  xxxviii.  105.  «  vi.  i.  30. »  §  173.

340


BOOK  XI.  III.  172-175

"  Ye  hills  and  groves  of  Alba  "  (for  he  did  not  say  this
as  though  he  were  appealing  to  them  or  calling  them
to  witness),  the  ensuing  phrases^  require  infinitely
greater  modulation  and  longer-drawn  harmonies :
"  Ah,  woe  is  me,  unhappy  that  I  am  !  "  and  "  What
shall  I  reply  to  my  children  ?  "  and  "  You,  Milo,  had
the  power  to  recall  me  to  my  country  with  the  aid  of
these  men,  and  shall  I  be  powerless  by  their  aid  to
keep  you  in  that  same  country,  your  native  land
and  mine  ?  "  or  when  he  offers  to  sell  the  property  of
Gaius  Rabirius  at  one  sesterce,  "  Ah,  what  a  sad  and
bitter  task  my  voice  is  called  on  to  perform  !  "2  Again,  173
it  is  a  most  effective  device  to  confess  in  the  peroration
that  the  strain  of  grief  and  fatigue  is  overpowering,
and  that  our  strength  is  sinking  beneath  them,  as
Cicero  does  in  his  defence  of  Milo  :  '  "  But  here  I  must
make  an  end  :  I  can  no  longer  speak  for  tears."  And
in  such  passages  our  delivery  must  conform  to  our
words.  It  may  be  thought  that  there  are  other  points  174
which  should  be  mentioned  in  connexion  with  the
duties  of  the  orator  in  this  portion  of  his  speech,  such
as  calling  forward  the  accused,  lifting  up  his  children
for  the  court  to  see,  producing  his  kinsfolk,  and
rending  his  garments ;  but  they  have  been  dealt
with  in  their  proper  place.*

Such  being  the  variety  entailed  by  the  different
fjortions  of  our  pleading,  it  is  sufficiently  clear  that
our  delivery  must  be  adapted  to  our  matter,  as  I
have  already  shown,  and  sometimes  also,  though
not  always  conform  to  our  actual  words,  as  I  have
just  remarked.*  For  instance,  must  not  the  words,  175
"This  poor  wretched,  poverty-stricken  man,"  be
uttered  in  a  low,  subdued  tone,  whereas,  "  A  bold
and violent fellow and  a robber," is a phrase

341


QUINTILIAN
voce  dicendum  est  ? Accedit  enim  vis  et  proprietas
rebus  tali  adstipulatione,  quae  nisi  adsit,  aliud  vox,

176  aliud  animus  ostendat.  Quid  ?  quod  eadem  verba
mutata  pronuntiatione  indicant,  adfirmant,  expro-
brant,  negant,  mirantur,  indignantur,  interrogant,
irrident,  elevant  ?  Aliter  enim  dicitur :  Tu  mihi
quodcunque  hoc  regni  et  Cantando  tu  ilium  ?  et  Tune
ille  Aeneas  ?  et  Meque  timoris  Argue  tu,  Draiice.  Et
ne  morei',  intra  se  quisque  vel  hoc  vel  aliud,  quod
volet,  per  omnes  adfectus  verset,  verum  esse  quod
dicimus  sciet.

177  Unum  iam  his  adiiciendum  est,  cum  praecipue  in
actione  spectetur  decorum,  saepe  aliud  alios  decere.
Est  enim  latens  quaedam  in  hoc  ratio  et  inenarra-
bilis;  et  ut  vere  hoc  dictum  est,  caput  esse  artis
decere  quod  facias,  ita  id  neque  sine  arte  esse  neque


»  Aen.  i.  78.  *  Eel.  iii.  25.  »  Aen.  i.  617.

*  Aen.  xi.  383.  •  de  Or.  i.  xxix.  132


34?


BOOK  XI.  III.  175-177

requiring  a  strong  and  energetic  utterance?  For
such  conformity  gives  a  force  and  appropriateness
to  our  matter,  and  without  it  the  expression  of
tlie  voice  will  be  out  of  harmony  with  our  thought.
Again,  what  of  the  fact  that  a  change  of  delivery  176
may  make  precisely  the  same  words  either  demon-
strate or  affirm,  express  reproach,  denial,  wonder  or
indignation,  interrogation,  mockery  or  depreciation  ?
For  the  word  "  thou  "  is  given  a  different  expression
in  each  of  the  following  passages  :

''Thou  this  poor  kingdom  dost  on  me  bestow,"*

and

"Thou  vanquish  him  in  song.^"*


and
and


"  Art  thou,  then,  that  Aeneas  ?  "  *

"  And  of  fear.
Do  thou  accuse  me,  Drances ! "  *


To  cut  a  long  matter  short,  if  my  reader  will  take
this  or  any  other  word  he  chooses  and  run  it  through
the  whole  gamut  of  emotional  expression,  he  will
realise  the  truth  of  what  I  say.

There  is  one  further  remark  which  I  must  add,  177
namely,  that  while  what  is  becoming  is  the  main
consideration  in  delivery,  different  methods  will  often
suit  different  speakers.  For  this  is  determined  by
a  principle  which,  though  it  is  obscure  and  can
hardly  be  expressed  in  words,  none  the  less
exists:  and,  though  it  is  a  true  saying^  that
"the  main  secret  of  artistic  success  is  that  what-
ever we  do  should  become  us  well,"  none  the
less,  despite  the  fact  that  such  success  cannot  be

343


QUINTILIAN

178  totum  arte  tradi  potest.  In  quibusdam  virtutes  non
habent  gratiam^  in  quibusdam  vitia  ipsa  delectant.
Maximos  actores  comoediarum,  Demetrium  et  Strato-
clea,  placere  diversis  virtutibus  vidimus.  Sed  illud
minus  mirum,  quod  alter  deos  et  iuvenes  et  bonos
patres  servosque  et  matronas  et  graves  anus  optima,
alter  acres  senes,  callidos  servos,  parasites,  lenones
et  omnia  agitatiora  melius  :  fuit  enim  natura  diversa.
Nam vox  quoque Demetrii iucundior,  illius  acrior

179  erat.  Adnotandae  magis  proprietates,  quae  trans-
ferri  non  poterant,  manus  iactare  et  dulees  excla-
mationes  theatri  causa  producere  et  ingrediendo
ventum  eoneipere  veste  et  nonnunquam  dextro  latere
faeere  gestus,  quod  neminem  alium  nisi  Demetrium
decuit ;  namque  in  haec  omnia  statura  et  mira  specie

180  adiuvabatur;  ilium  cursus  et  agilitas  et  vel  parum
conveniens  personae  risus,  quern  non  ignarus  rationis
populo  dabatj  et  contracta  etiam  cervicula.  Quid-
quid  horum  alter  fecisset,  foedissimum  videretur.
344


BOOK  XI.  ni.  177-180

attained  without  art,  it  is  impossible  entirely  to  com-
municate the  secret  by  the  rules  of  art.  There  are  178
some  persons  in  whom  positive  excellences  have  no
charm,  while  there  are  others  whose  very  faults  give
pleasure.  We  have  seen  the  greatest  of  comic  actors,
Demetrius  and  Stratocles,  win  their  success  by
entirely  different  merits.  But  that  is  the  less
surprising  owing  to  the  fact  that  the  one  was  at  his
best  in  the  roles  of  gods,  young  men,  good  fathers
and  slaves,  matrons  and  respectable  old  women,
wliile  the  other  excelled  in  the  portrayal  of  sharp>-
tempered  old  men,  cunning  slaves,  parasites,  pimps
and  all  the  more  lively  characters  of  comedy.  For
their  natural  gifts  differed-  For  Demetrius'  voice,
like  his  other  qualities,  had  greater  charm,  while
that  of  Stratooles  was  the  more  powerful.  But  179
yet  more  noticeable  were  the  incommunicable
peculiarities  of  their  action.  Demetrius  showed
unique  gifts  in  the  movements  of  his  hands,  in
his  power  to  charm  his  audience  by  the  long-
dra^vn  sweetness  of  his  exclamations,  the  skill  with
which  he  would  make  his  dress  seem  to  puff  out
with  wind  as  he  walked,  and  the  expressive  move-
ments of  the  right  side  which  he  sometimes  intro-
duced vrith  effect,  in  all  of  which  things  he  was
helped  by  his  stature  and  personal  beauty.  On  the  180
other  hand,  Stratocles*  forte  lay  in  his  nimbleness
and  rapidity  of  movement,  in  his  laugh  (which,
though  not  always  in  keeping  with  the  character
he  represented,  he  deliberately  employed  to  awaken
answering  laughter  in  his  audience),  and  finally,  even
in  the  way  in  which  he  sank  his  neck  into  his
shoulders.  If  either  of  these  actors  had  attempted
any  of  his  rival's  tricks,  he  would  have  produced  a

vou  IV.  M 345


QUiNTILIAN

Quare  norit  se  quisque,  nee  tantum  ex  communibus
praeceptis,  sed  etiam  ex  natura  sua  capiat  consilium

181  formandae  actionis.  Neque  illud  tamen  est  nefas,
ut  aliquem  vel  omnia  vel  plura  deceant.  Huius
quoque  loci  clausula  sit  eadem  necesse  est,  quae
ceterorum  est,  regnare  maxime  modum.  Non  eoim
comoedum  esse,  sed  oratorem  volo.  Quare  neque
in  gestu  persequemur  omnes  argutias  nee  in  loquendo
distinctionibus, temporibus, adfectionibus moleste

182  utemur. Ut  si  sit  in  scena  dicendum:

Quid  igttur  faciam  ?  non  earn,  ne  nunc  qtiidem,
q:  Cum  arcessor  ultro  ?  an  politic  ita  me  comparem.,

Non  perpeti  meretricum  contumelias  ?

Hie  enim  dubitationis  moras,  vocis  flexus,  varias
manus,  diversos  nutus  actor  adhibebit.  Aliud  oratio
sapit  nee  vult  nimium  esse  condita ; actione  enim

183  constat,  non  imitatione.  Quare  non  immerito  repre-
henditur  pronuntiatio  vultuosa  et  gesticulationibus
molesta  et  vocis  mutationibus  resultans.  Nee  inutiliter
ex  Graecis  veteres  transtulerunt,  quod  ab  iis  sumptum
Laenas  Popilius  posuit,  esse  banc  negotiosam  ^  actio-

184  nem. Optime  igitur  idem,  qui  omnia,  Cicero  prae-

*  negotiosam,  Halm:  mocosam,  B.


1  Ter.  Eun.  I.  i.  1.


346


BOOK  XL  III.  180-184

most  unbecoming  effect.  Consequently,  every  man
must  get  to  know  his  own  peculiarities  and  must
consult  not  merely  the  general  rules  of  technique,
but  his  own  nature  as  well  with  a  view  to  forming
his  delivery.  But  there  is  no  law  of  heaven  which  181
prohibits  the  possession  of  all  or  at  any  rate  the
majority  of  styles  by  one  and  the  same  person.  I
must  conclude  this  topic  with  a  remark  which  applies
to  all  my  other  topics  as  well,  that  the  prime  essential
is  a  sense  of  proportion.  For  I  am  not  trying  to
form  a  comic  actor,  but  an  orator.  Consequently,
we  need  not  study  all  the  details  of  gesture  nor,  as
regards  our  speaking,  be  pedantic  in  the  use  we
make  of  the  rules  governing  punctuation,  rhythm
and  appeals  to  the  emotions.  For  example,  if  an  182
actor  has  to  speak  the  following  lines  on  the  stage  :  ^

**  What  shall  I  do  then  ? Not  go,  even  now.
Now  when  she  calls  me  ? Or  shall  I  steel  my  soul
No  longer  to  endure  a  harlot's  insults?"

he  will  hesitate  as  in  doubt,  will  vary  the  modulations
of  his  voice,  together  with  the  movements  of  hand
and  head.  But  oratory  has  a  different  flavour  and
objects  to  elaborate  condiments,  since  it  consists  in
serious  pleading,  not  in  mimicry.  There  is,  there-  183
fore,  good  reason  for  the  condemnation  passed  on  a
delivery  which  entails  the  continual  alteration  of
facial  expression,  annoying  restlessness  of  gesture
and  gusty  changes  of  tone.  And  it  was  a  wise  saying
that  the  ancient  orators  borrowed  from  the  Greeks,
as  is  recorded  by  Popilius  Laenas,  to  the  effect  that
there  is  too  much  "  business  "  in  such  delivery.  The  184
instructions  given  by  Cicero  on  this  subject,  as  on  all
others,  are  quite  admirable  ;  I  allude  to  the  passages

347


QUINTILIAN

ceperat,  quae  supra  ex  Oratore  posui ;  quibus  similia
in  Bruto  de  M.  Antonio  dicit.  Sed  iam  recepta  est
actio  paulo  agitatior  et  exigitur  et  quibusdam  partibus
convenit,  ita  tamen  temperanda,  ne,  dum  actoris
captamus  elegantiam,  perdamus  viri  boni  et  gravis
auctoritatem.


-.*


348


BOOK XI.  III.  184

which  I  have  already  quoted  from  his  Orator,^  while
there  are  similar  observations  in  the  Brutus^  with
reference  to  Marcus  Antonius.  But  to-day  a  rather
more  violent  form  of  delivery  has  come  into  fashion
and  is  demanded  of  our  orators  :  it  is  well  adapted  to
certain  portions  of  a  speech,  but  requires  to  be  kept
under  control.  Otherwise,  in  our  attempt  to  ape
the  elegances  of  the  stage,  we  shall  lose  the  authority
which  should  characterise  the  man  of  dignity  and
virtue.

1  §  122.  «  Brut,  iiiviii,  141.


349


BOOK  XII


LIBER XII

Prooemium
Ventum  est  ad  partem  operis  destinati  longe  gra-
vissimam.  Cuius  equidem  onus  si  tantum  opinione
prima  concipere  potuissem,  quanto  me  premi  ferens
sentio,  maturius  consuluissem  vires  meas.  Sed  initio
pudor  omittendi,  quae  promiseram,  tenuit;  mox,
quanquam  per  singulas  prope  partes  labor  cresceretj
ne perderem,  quae iam efFecta erant,  per omnes

2  difficultates  animo  me  sustentavi.  Quare  nunc  quo-
que,  licet  maior  quam  unquam  moles  premat,  tamen
prospicienti  finem  mihi  constitutum  est  vel  deficere
potius  quam  desperare.  Fefellit  autem  quod  initium
a  parvis  ceperamus.  Mox  velut  aura  sollicitante
provecti  longius,  dum  tamen  nota  ilia  et  plerisque
artium  scriptoribus  tractata  praecipimus,  nee  adhuc
a  litore  procul  videbamur  et  multos  circa  velut  iisdem

3  se  ventis  credere  ausos  habebamus.  Iam  cum  elo-
quendi  rationem  novissime  repertam  paucissimisque

352


BOOK XII

Introduction

I  NOW  come  to  what  is  by  far  the  most  arduous
portion  of  the  task  which  I  have  set  myself  to  per-
form. Indeed  had  I  fully  realised  the  difficulties
when  I  first  designed  this  work,  I  should  have  con-
sidered betimes  whether  my  strength  was  sufficient  to
support  the  load  that  now  weighs  upon  me  so  heavily.
But  to  begin  with,  I  felt  how  shameful  it  would  be
to  faU  to  perform  what  I  had  promised,  and  later,
despite  the  fact  that  my  labour  became  more  and
more  arduous  at  almost  every  stage,  the  fear  of
stultifying  what  I  had  already  written  sustained  my
courage  through  every  difficulty.  Consequently  2
even  now,  though  the  burden  that  oppresses  me  is
greater  than  ever,  the  end  is  in  sight  and  I  am
resolved  to  faint  by  the  wayside  rather  than  despair.
But  the  fact  that  I  began  with  comparatively  trivial
details  deceived  me.  Subsequently  I  was  lured  still
further  on  my  voyage  by  the  temptations  of  the
favouring  breeze  that  filled  my  sails ;  but  the  rules
which  I  was  then  concerned  to  give  were  still  of  a
familiar  kind  and  had  been  already  treated  by  most
writers  of  rhetorical  textbooks  :  thus  far  I  seemed  to
myself  to  be  still  in  sight  of  shore  and  I  had  the
company  of  many  who  had  ventured  to  entrust  them-
selves to  the  self-same  winds.  But  presently  when  3
I  entered  on  the  task  of  setting  forth  a  theory  of

353


QUINTILIAN

temptatam  ingressi  sumus,  rarus,  qui  tam  procul  a
portu  recessisset,  repericbatur.  Postquam  vero  nobis
ille,  quem  instituebamus,  orator  a  dicendi  magistris
dimissus  aut  suo  iam  impetu  fertur  aut  maiora  sibi
auxilia  ex  ipsis  sapientiae  penetralibus  petit,  quam
4  in  altum  simus  ablati  sentire  coepimus.  Nunc  caelum
undique  el  undique  ponlus.  Unum  modo  in  ilia  im-
mensa  vastitate  cernere  videmur  M.  Tullium,  qui
tamen  ipse,  quamvis  tanta  atque  it;i  instructa  nave
hoc  mare  ingressus,  contrahit  vela  inhibetque  remos
et  de  ipso  demum  genere  dicendi,  quo  sit  usurus
perfectus  orator,  satis  habet  dicere.  At  nostra
temeritas  etiam  mores  ei  conabitur  dare  et  adsignabit
officia.  Ita  nee  antecedentem  consequi  possumus,
et  longius  eundum  est,  ut  res  feret.  Probabilis  tamen
cupiditas  honestorum  et  velut  tutioris^  audentiae
est  temptare,  quibus  paratior  venia  est.

I.  Sit  ergo  nobis  orator,  quem  constituimus,  is,
qui  a  M.  Catone  finitur,  vir  bonus  dicendi  peritus ;
verum,  id  quod  et  ille  posuit  prius  et  ipsa  natura
potius  ac  maius  est,  utique  vir  bonus.  Id  non  eo
tantum,  quod,  si  vis  ilia  dicendi  malitiam  instruxerit,
nihil  sit  publicis  privatisque  rebus  perniciosius  elo-

^  velut  tutioris,  Obrecht:  velutioris,  B.

1 Am.  ill.  193.  •  ep.  I.  Pr.  9.

354


BOOK XII.  Intr.  3-1.  I

eloquence  which  had  been  but  newly  discovered  and
rarely  essayed,  I  found  but  few  that  had  ventured  so
far  from  harbour.  And  finally  now  that  the  ideal
orator,  whom  it  was  my  design  to  mould,  has  been
dismissed  by  his  masters  and  is  either  proceeding
on  his  way  borne  onward  by  his  own  impetus,  or
seeking  still  mightier  assistance  from  the  innermost
shrine  of  wisdom,  I  begin  to  feel  how  far  I  have
been  swept  into  the  great  deep. Xow  there  is 4

"  Nothing  before  and  nothing  behind  but  the  sky
and  the  Ocean."  i

One  only  can  I  discern  in  all  the  boundless  waste  of
waters,  Marcus  Tullius  Cicero,  and  even  he,  though
the  ship  in  which  he  entered  these  seas  is  of  such
size  and  so  well  found,  begins  to  lessen  sail  and  to
row  a  slower  stroke,  and  is  content  to  speak  merely
of  the  kind  of  speech  to  be  employed  by  the  perfect
orator.  But  my  temerity  is  such  that  I  shall  essay  to
form  my  orator's  character  and  to  teach  him  his  duties.
Thus  I  have  no  predecessor  to  guide  my  steps  and
must  press  far,  far  on,  as  my  theme  may  demand.
Still  an  honourable  ambition  is  always  deserving  of
approval,  and  it  is  all  the  less  hazardous  to  dare
greatly,  when  forgiveness  is  assured  us  if  we  fail.

I.  The  orator  then,  whom  I  am  concerned  to  form,
shall  be  the  orator  as  defined  by  Marcus  Cato,  "  a  good
man,  skilled  in  speaking."  2  But  above  all  he  must
jwssess  the  quality  which  Cato  places  first  and  which
is  in  the  very  nature  of  things  the  greatest  and  most
important,  that  is,  he  must  be  a  good  man.  This  is
essential  not  merely  on  account  of  the  fact  that,  if
the  powers  of  eloquence  serve  only  to  lend  arms  to
crime,  there  can  be  nothing  more  pernicious  than

355


QUINTILIAN

quentia,  nosque  ipsi,  qui  pro  virili  parte  conferre
aliquid  ad  facultatem  dicendi  conati  sumus,  pessime
mereamur  de  rebus  humanis,  si  latroni  comparamus

2  haec  arma^  non  militi.  Quid  de  nobis  loquor?
Rerum  ipsa  natura  in  eo^  quod  praecipue  indulsisse
liomini  videtur  quoque  nos  a  ceteris  animalibus  se-
parasse,  non  parens,  sed  noverca  fuerit,  si  facultatem
dicendi,  sociam  scelerum,  adversain  innocentiae,
hostem  veritatis  invenit.  Mutos  enim  nasci  et  egere
omni  ratione  satius  fuisset  quam  providentiae  mu-

3  nera  in  mutuam  perniciem  convertere.  Longius
tendit  hoc  iudicium  meum.  Neque  enim  tantum
id  dico,  eum,  qui  sit  orator,  virum  bonum  esse
oportere,  sed  ne  futurum  quidem  oratorem  nisi  virum
bonum.  Nam  certe  neque  intelligentiam  concesseris
iis  qui,  proposita  honestorum  ac  turpium  via,  peiorem
sequi  malent,  neque  prudentiam,  cum  in  gravissimas
frequenter  legum,  semper  vero  malae  conscientiae
poenas  a  semet  ipsis  improviso  rerum  exitu  induantur.

4  Quodsi  neminem  malum  esse  nisi  stultum  eundem
non  modo  a  sapientibus  dicitur,  sed  vulgo  quoque
semper  est  creditum,  certe  non  fiet  unquam  stultus
orator.  Adde  quod  ne  studio  quidem  operis  pulcher-
rimi  vacare  mens  nisi  omnibus  vitiis  libera  potest :
primum  quod  in  eodem  pectore  nullum  est  honesto-
rum turpiumque  consortium,  et  cogitare  optima
simul  ac  deterrima  non  magis  est  unius  animi  quam

356


BOOK Xll.  I.  1-4

eloquence  to  public  and  private  welfare  alike,  while
1  myself,  who  have  laboured  to  the  best  of  my  ability
to  contribute  something  of  value  to  oratory,  shall  have
rendered  the  worst  of  services  to  mankind,  if  I  forge
these  weapons  not  for  a  soldier,  but  for  a  robber.
But  why  speak  of  myself?  Nature  herself  will  have
proved  not  a  mother,  but  a  stepmother  with  regard
-to  what  we  deem  her  greatest  gift  to  man,  the  gift
that  distinguishes  us  from  other  living  things,  if  she
devised  the  power  of  speech  to  be  the  accomplice  of
crime,  the  foe  to  innocency  and  the  enemy  of  truth.
For  it  had  been  better  for  men  to  be  born  dumb  and
devoid  of  reason  than  to  turn  the  gifts  of  providence
to  their  mutual  destruction.  But  this  conviction  of
mine  goes  further.  For  I  do  not  merely  assert  that
the  ideal  orator  should  be  a  good  man,  but  I  affirm
that  no  man  can  be  an  orator  unless  he  is  a  good  man.
For  it  is  impossible  to  regard  those  men  as  gifted
with  intelligence  who  on  being  offered  the  clioice
between  the  two  paths  of  virtue  and  of  vice  choose
the  latter,  nor  can  we  allow  them  prudence,  when
bv  the  unforeseen  issue  of  their  own  actions  they
render  themselves  liable  not  merely  to  the  heaviest
penalties  of  the  laws,  but  to  the  inevitable  torment
of  an  evil  conscience.  But  if  the  view  that  a  bad
man  is  necessarily  a  fool  is  not  merely  held  by  philo-
sophers, but  is  the  universal  belief  of  ordinary  men,
the  fool  will  most  assuredly  never  become  an  orator.
To  this  must  be  added  the  fact  that  the  mind  will
not  find  leisure  even  for  the  study  of  the  noblest  of
tasks,  unless  it  first  be  free  from  vice.  Tlie  reasons  for
this  are,  first,  that  vileness  and  virtue  cannot  jointly
inhabit  in  the  selfsame  heart  and  that  it  is  as  im-
possible for  one  and  the  same  mind  to  harbour  good

357


QUINTILIAN

6  eiusdera  hominis  bonum  esse  ac  malum ;  tum  ilia
quoque  ex  causa,  quod  mentem  tantae  rei  intentam
vacare  omnibus  aliis  etiara  culpa  carentibus  curis
oportet.  Ita  demum  enim  libera  ac  tota,  nulla
distringente  atque  alio  ducente  causa,  spectabit  id

6  solum  ad  quod  accingitur,  Quodsi  agrorum  nimia
cura  et  sollicitior  rei  familiaris  diligentia  et  venandi
voluptas  et  dati  spectaculis  dies  multum  studiis  au-
ferunt  (huic  enim  rei  perit  tempus,  quodcunque  alteri
datur),  quid  putamus  facturas  cupiditatem,  avaritiam,
invidiam,  quarum  impotentissimae  cogitationes  som-
nos  etiam  ipsos  et  ilia  per  quietem  visa  perturbent  ?

7  Nihil  est  enim  tam  occupatum,  tam  multiforme,  tot
ac  tam  vai-iis  adfectibus  concisum  atque  laceratum
quam  mala  mens.  Nam  et  cum  insidiatur,  spe,
curis,  labore  distringitur ;  et  etiam  cum  sceleris
compos  fuit,  sollicitudine,  paenitentia,  poenarum
omnium  exspectatione  torquetur.  Quis  inter  liaec
litteris  aut  ulli  bonae  arti  locus  ?  Non  hercule  magis
quam  frugibus  in  terra  sentibus  ac  rubis  occupata.

8  Age,  non  ad  perferendos  studiorum  labores  necessaria
frugalitas  ?  Quid  ergo  ex  libidine  ac  luxuria  spei  ?
Non  praecipue  acuit  ad  cupiditatem  litterarum  amor
358


BOOK XII.  I.  4-8

and  evil  thoughts  as  it  is  for  one  man  to  be  at  once
both  good  and  evil :  and  secondly,  that  if  the  intelli-  5
gence  is  to  be  concentrated  on  such  a  vast  subject  as
eloquence  it  must  be  free  from  all  other  distractions,
among  which  must  be  included  even  those  preoccu-
pations which  are  free  from  blame.  For  it  is  only
when  it  is  free  and  self-possessed,  with  nothing  to
divert  it  or  lure  it  elsewhere,  t!:at  it  will  fix  its
attention  solely  on  that  goal,  the  attainment  of  which
is  the  object  of  its  preparations.  If  on  the  other  6
hand  inordinate  care  for  the  development  of  our
estates,  excess  of  anxiety  over  household  affairs,
passionate  devotion  to  hunting  or  the  sacrifice  of
whole  days  to  the  shows  of  the  theatre,  rob  our
studies  of  much  of  the  time  tliat  is  their  due  (for
every  moment  that  is  given  to  other  things  involves
a  loss  of  time  for  study),  what,  think  you,  will  be  the
results  of  desire,  avarice,  and  envy,  which  waken  such
violent  thoughts  within  our  souls  that  they  disturb
our  very  slumbers  and  our  dreams  ?  There  is  nothing  7
so  preoccupied,  so  distracted,  so  rent  and  torn  by  so
many  and  such  varied  passions  as  an  evil  mind.  For
when  it  cherishes  some  dark  design,  it  is  tormented
with  hope,  care  and  anguish  of  spirit,  and  even  when
it  has  accomplished  its  criminal  purpose,  it  is  racked
by  anxiety,  remorse  and  the  fear  of  all  manner  of
punishments.  Amid  such  passions  as  these  what
room  is  there  for  literature  or  any  virtuous  pursuit }
You  might  as  well  look  for  fruit  in  land  that  is  choked
with  thorns  and  brambles.  Well  then,  I  ask  you,  is  8
not  simplicity  of  life  essential  if  we  are  to  be  able  to
endure  the  toil  entailed  by  study .''  What  can  we
hope  to  get  from  lust  or  luxury  ?  Is  not  the  desire
to  win  praise  one  of  the  strongest  stimulants  to  a

359


QUINTILIAN

laudis?  Num  igitur  malis  esse  laudem  curae  putamus?
lam  hoc  quis  non  videt,  maximam  partem  orationis
in  tractatu  aequi  bonique  consistere?  Dicetne  de
his  secundum  debitam  rerum  dignitatem  malus  atque
9  iniquus  ?  Denique,  ut  maximam  partem  quaestionis
eximam,  demus,  id  quod  nullo  modo  fieri  potest,
idem  ingenii,  studii,  doctrinae,  pessimo  atque  optimo
viro  :  utermelior  dicetur orator?  Nimirum  qui  homo
quoque  melior. Non igitur unquam malus idem

10  homo  et  perfectus  orator.  Non  enim  perfectum  est
quidquam,  quo  melius  est  aliud.  Sed,  ne  more
Socraticorum  nobismet  ipsi  responsum  finxisse  vide-
amur,  sit  aliquis  adeo  contra  veritatem  obstinatus,
ut  audeat  dicere,  eodem  ingenio,  studio,  doctrina
praeditum  nihilo  deteriorem  futurum  oratorem  malum
virum quam bonum : convincamus  huius quoque

11  amentiam.  Nam  hoc  certe  nemo  dubitabit,  omnem
orationem  id  agere,  ut  iudici,  quae  proposita  fuerint,
vera  et  honesta  videantur.  Utrum  igitur  hoc  facilius
bonus  vir  persuadebit  an  malus? Bonus  quidem  et

12  dicet  saepius  vera  atque  honesta.  Sed  etiam  si
quando  aliquo  ductus  officio  (quod  accidere,  ut  mox
docebimus,  potest)  falso  haec  adfirmare  conabitur,
360


BOOK XII.  I.  8-ia

passion  for  literature  ?  But  does  that  mean  that  we
are  to  suppose  that  praise  is  an  object  of  concern  to
bad  men?  Surely  every  one  of  my  readers  must  by
now  have  realised  that  oratory  is  in  the  main  con-
cerned with  the  treatment  of  what  is  just  and
honourable?  Can  a  bad  and  unjust  man  speak  on
such  themes  as  the  dignity  of  the  subject  demands  ?
Nay,  even  if  we  exclude  the  most  important  aspects  9
of  the  question  now  before  us,  and  make  the  im-
{X)ssible  concession  that  the  best  and  worst  of  men
may  have  the  same  talent,  industry  and  learning,  we
are  still  confronted  by  the  question  as  to  which  of
the  two  is  entitled  to  be  called  the  better  orator.  The
answer  is  surely  clear  enough :  it  will  be  he  who  is
the  better  man.  Consequently,  the  bad  man  and  the
perfect  orator  can  never  be  identical.  For  nothing  10
is  perfect,  if  there  exists  something  else  that  is
better.  However,  as  I  do  not  wish  to  appear  to
adopt  the  practice  dear  to  the  Socratics  of  framing
answers  to  my  own  questions,  let  me  assume  the
existence  of  a  man  so  obstinately  blind  to  the  truth
as  to  venture  to  maintain  that  a  bad  man  equipped
with  the  same  talents,  industry  and  learning  will
be  not  a  whit  inferior  to  the  good  man  as  an
orator ;  and  let  me  show  that  he  too  is  mad.
There  is  one  point  at  any  rate  which  no  one  will  11
question,  namely,  that  the  aim  of  every  speech  is  to
convince  the  judge  that  the  case  which  it  puts  for-
ward is  true  and  honourable.  Well  then,  which  will
do  this  best,  the  good  man  or  the  bad  ?  The  good
man  will  without  doubt  more  often  say  what  is  true
and  honourable.  But  even  supposing  that  his  duty  12
should,  as  I  shall  show  may  sometimes  happen,  lead
him  to  make  statements  which  are  false,  his  words

361


QUINTILIAN

maiore  cum  fide  necesse  est  audiatur.  At  malis
hominibus  ex  eontemptu  opinionis  et  ignorantia  recti
nonnunquam  excidit  ipsa  simulatio. Inde  immodeste

13  proponunt,  sine  pudore  adfirmant.  Sequitur  in  iis,
quae  certum  est  effici  non  posse,  deformis  pertinacia
et  irritus  labor.  Nam  sicut  in  vita,  ita  in  causis
quoque  spes  improbas  habent.  Frequenter  autem
accidit,  ut  iis  etiam  vera  dicentibus  fides  desit,
videaturque  talis  advocatus  malae  causae  argumentum.

14  Nunc  de  iis  dicendum  est,  quae  mihi  quasi  con-
spiratione  quadam  vulgi  reclamari  videntur.  Orator
ergo  Demosthenes  non  fuit  ?  atqui  malum  virum
accepimus.  Non  Cicero  ?  atqui  huius  quoque  mores
multi  reprehenderunt.  Quid  agam  ?  magna  responsi
invidia  subeunda  est,  mitigandae  sunt  prius  r  ures.

15  Mihi  enim  nee  Demosthenes  tam  gravi  morum  dig-
nus  videtur  invidia,  ut  omnia,  quae  in  eum  ab
inimicis  congesta  sunt,  credam,  cum  et  pulcherrima
eius  in  re publica consilia  et finem vitae clarum

16  legam,  nee  Marco  Tullio  defuisse  video  in  uUa  parte
civis  optimi  voluntatem.  Testimonio  est  actus  nobi-
lissime  consulatus,  integerrime  provincia  administrata
et  repudiatus  vigintiviratus,  et  civilibus  bellis,  quae
362


BOOK XII.  I.  12-16

are  still  certain  to  carry  greater  weight  with  his
audience.  On  the  other  hand  bad  men,  in  their
contempt  for  public  opinion  and  their  ignorance  of
what  is  right,  sometimes  drop  their  mask  unawares,
and  are  impudent  in  the  statement  of  their  case  and
shameless  in  their  assertions.  Further,  in  their  I?
attempt  to  achieve  the  impossible  they  display  an
unseemly  persistency  and  unavailing  energy.  For
in  lawsuits  no  less  than  in  the  ordinary  paths  of
life,  they  cherish  depraved  expectations.  But  it
often  happens  that  even  when  they  tell  the  truth
they  fail  to  win  belief,  and  the  mere  fact  that  such
a  man  is  its  advocate  is  regarded  as  an  indication  of
the  badness  of  the  case.

I  must  now  proceed  to  deal  with  the  objections  14
which  common  opinion  is  practically  unanimous  in
bringing  against  this  view.  Was  not  Demosthenes
an  orator  ?  And  yet  we  are  told  that  he  was  a  bad
man.  Was  not  Cicero  an  orator .''  And  yet  there
are  many  who  have  found  fault  with  his  character  as
well.  What  am  I  to  answer?  My  reply  will  be
highly  unpopular  and  I  must  first  attempt  to  con-
ciliate my  audience.  I  do  not  consider  that  16
Demosthenes  deserves  the  serious  reflexions  that
have  been  made  upon  his  character  to  such  an
extent  that  I  am  bound  to  believe  all  the  charges
amassed  against  him  by  his  enemies ;  for  my  reading
tells  me  that  his  public  policy  was  of  the  noblest  and
his  end  most  glorious.  Again,  I  cannot  see  that  the  16
aims  of  Cicero  were  in  any  portion  of  his  career  other
than  such  as  may  become  an  excellent  citizen.  As
evidence  I  would  cite  the  fact  that  his  behaviour  as
consul  was  magnificent  and  his  administration  of  his
province  a  model  of  integrity,  while  he  refused  to

363


QUINTILIAN

in  aetatem  eius gravissima  inciderunt,  neque spe
neque  metii  declinatus  animus,  quo  minus  optimis

17  se  partibus,  id  est  rei  publicae,  iungeret.  Parum
fortis  videtur  quibusdam,  quibus  optime  respondit
ipse,  non  se  timidum  in  suscipiendis,  sed  in  providendis
penculis ; quod  probavit  morte  quoque ipsa,  quam

18  praestantissimo  suscepit  animo.  Quodsi  defuit  his
viris  summa  virtus,  sic  quaerentibus,  an  oratores
fuerint,  respondebo,  quomodo  Stoici,  si  interrogentur
an  sapiens  Zeno,  an  Cleanthes,  an  Chrysippus  ipse,
respondeant,  magnos  quidem  illos  ac  venerabiles,
non  tamen  id,  quod  natura  hominis  summum  habet,

19  consecutos.  Nam  et  Pythagoras  non  sapientem  se,
ut  qui  ante  eum  fuerunt,  sed  studiosum  sapientiae
vocari  voluit.  Ego  tamen  secundum  communem
loquendi  consuetudinem  saepe  dixi  dicamque,  per-
fectum  oratorem  esse  Ciceronem  ;  ut  amicos  et  bonos
viros  et  prudentissimos  dicimus  vulgo,  quorum  nihil
nisi  perfecte  sapienti  datur.  Sed  cum  proprie  et  ad
legem  ipsam  veritatis  loquendum  erit,  eum  quaeram

20  oratorem,  quem  et  ille  quaerebat.  Quanquam  enim
stetisse  ijisum  in  fastigio  eloquentiae  fateor,  ac  vix,
quid adiici potuerit, invenio, fortasse inventurus,

*  For  tlie  distribution  of  the  Campanian  lands.
'  %.  e.  (pi\6(TO(pos, a  term of  which he was reputed the
inventor.

364


BOOK XII.  I.  16-20

become  one  of  the  twenty  commissioners,^  and  in  the
grievous  civil  wars  which  afflicted  his  generation
bevond  all  others,  neither  hope  nor  fear  ever  deterred
him  from  giving  his  support  to  the  better  party,  that
is  to  say,  to  the  interests  of  the  common  weal.
Some,  it  is  true,  regard  him  as  lacking  in  courage.  17
The  best  answer  to  these  critics  is  to  be  found  in  his
own  words,  to  the  effect  that  he  was  timid  not  in
confronting  peril,  but  in  anticipating  it.  And  this
he  proved  also  by  the  manner  of  his  death,  in  meeting
which  he  displayed  a  singular  fortitude.  But  even  18
if  these  two  men  lacked  the  perfection  of  virtue,  I
will  reply  to  those  who  ask  if  they  were  orators,  in
the  manner  in  which  the  Stoics  would  reply,  if  asked
whether  Zeno,  Cleanthes  or  Chrysippus  himself  were
wise  men.  I  shall  say  that  they  were  great  men
deserving  our  veneration,  but  that  they  did  not
attain  to  that  which  is  the  highest  perfection
of  man's  nature.  For  did  not  Pythagoras  desire  19
that  he  should  not  be  called  a  wise  man,  like  the
sages  who  preceded  him,  but  rather  a  student  of
wisdom  ?  2  But  for  my  own  part,  conforming  to  the
language  of  every  day,  I  have  said  time  and  again,
and  shall  continue  to  say,  that  Cicero  was  a  perfect
orator,  just  as  in  ordinary  speech  we  call  our  iViends
good  and  sensible  men,  although  neither  of  these
titles  can  really  be  given  to  any  save  to  him  that
has  attained  to  perfect  wisdom.  But  if  I  am  called
upon  to  speak  strictly  and  in  accordance  with  the
most  rigid  laws  of  truth,  I  shall  proclaim  that  I  seek
to  find  that  same  perfect  orator  whom  Cicero  also
sought  to  discover.  For  while  I  admit  that  he  stood  20
on  the  loftiest  pinnacle  of  eloquence,  and  can  dis-
cover scarcely  a  single  deficiency  in  him,  although  I

365


QUINTILIAN

quod  adliuc  abscisurum  putem  fuisse  (nam  fere
sic  docti  iudicaverunt,  plurimum  in  eo  virtutum,
nonnihil  fuisse  vitiorum,  et  se  ipse  multa  ex  ilia  iuve-
nili  abundantia  coercuisse  testatur),  tamen,  quando
nee  sapientis  sibi  nomen,  minime  sui  contemptor,
asseruit  et  melius  dicere,  certe  data  longiore  vita  et
tempore^  ad  componendum  securiore,  potuisset,  non
maligne  crediderim  defuisse ei  summam  illam,  ad

21  quam  nemo  propius  aceessit.  Et  licebat,  si  aliter
sentirem,  fortius  id  liberiusque  defendere.  An  vero
M.  Antonius  neminem  a  se  visum  eloquentem,  quod
tanto  minus  erat,  professus  est ;  ipse  etiam  M.  Tullius
quaerit  adhuc  eum  et  tantum  imaginatur  ac  fingit,
ego  non  audeam  dicere,  aliquid  in  hac,  quae  super-
est,  aeternitate  inveniri  posse  eo,  quod  fuerit,  per-

22  fectius  ?  Transeo  illos,  qui  Ciceroni  ac  Demostheni
ne  in  eloquentia  quidem  satis  tribuunt ;  quanquam
neque  ipsi  Ciceroni  Demosthenes  videatur  satis  esse
perfectus,  quern  dormitare  interim  dicit,  nee  Cicero
Bruto  Calvoque,  qui  certe  compositionem  illius  etiam
apud  ipsum  reprehendunt,  nee  Asinio  utrique,  qui
vitia  orationis  eius  etiam  inimice  pluribus  locis
insequuntur.

*  tempore,  Burman:  te,  B.


»  Brut.  xci.  316. Oral.  xxx.  107.

*  Quintilian's  reverence  for  Cicero  is  such  that  he  feels
hampered  in  maintaining  his  thesis.
»  See  X.  1.  24.

366


BOOK XII. I.  20-2  2

might  perhaps  discover  certain  superfluities  which  I
think  he  would  have  pruned  away  (for  the  general
view  of  the  learned  is  that  he  possessed  many  virtues
and  a  few  faults,  and  he  himself^  states  that  he  has
succeeded  in  suppressing  much  of  his  youthful
exuberance),  none  the  less,  in  view  of  the  fact  that,
although  he  had  by  no  means  a  low  opinion  of  him-
self, he  never  claimed  to  be  the  perfect  sage,  and,
had  he  been  granted  longer  life  and  less  troubled  con-
ditions for  the  composition  of  his  works,  would  doubt-
less have  spoken  better  still,  I  shall  not  lay  myself
open  to  the  charge  of  ungenerous  criticism,  if  I  say
that  I  believe  that  he  failed  actually  to  achieve  that
perfection  to  the  attainment  of  which  none  have
approached  more  nearly,  and  indeed  had  I  felt  other-  21
wise  in  this  connexion,  I  might  have  defended  my
point  with  greater  boldness  and  freedom.*  Marcus
Antonius  declared  that  he  had  seen  no  man  who  was
genuinely  eloquent  (and  to  be  eloquent  is  a  far  less
achievement  than  to  be  an  orator),  while  Cicero  him-
self has  failed  to  find  his  orator  in  actual  life  and
merely  imagines  and  strives  to  depict  the  ideal.  Shall
I  then  be  afraid  to  say  that  in  the  eternity  of  time
that  is  yet  to  be,  something  more  perfect  may  be  found
than  has  yet  existed  ?  I  say  nothing  of  those  critics  22
who  will  not  allow  sufficient  credit  even  for  eloquence
to  Cicero  and  Demosthenes,  although  Cicero  himself
does  not  regard  Demosthenes  as  flawless,  but  asserts
that  he  sometimes  nods,*  while  even  Cicero  fails  to
satisfy  Brutus  and  Calvus  (at  any  rate  they  criticised
his  style  to  his  face),  or  to  win  the  complete  approval
of  either  of  the  Asinii,  who  in  various  passages  attack
the  faults  of  his  oratory  in  language  which  is  positively
liostile.

367


QUINTILIAN

23  Concedamus  sane,  quod  minime  natura  patitur,
repeitum  esse  aliquem  malum  virum  summe  diser-
tum :  nihilo  tamen  minus  oratorem  eum  negabo.
Nam  nee  omnibus,  qui  fuerint  manu  prompti,  viri
fortis  nomen  concesserim,  quia  sine  virtute  intelligi

24  non  potest  fortitude.  An  ei,  qui  ad  defendendas
causas  advocatur,  non  est  opus  fide,  quam  nee  cupi-
ditas  corrumpat  nee  gratia  avertat  nee  metus  frangat ;
sed  proditorem,  transfugam,  praevaricatorem  dona-
bimus  oratoris  illo  sacro  nomine  ?  Quodsi  medio-
cribus  etiam  patronis  convenit  haec,  quae  vulgo
dicitur,  bonitas,  cur  non  orator  ille,  qui  nondum  fuit,
sed  potest  esse,  tam  sit  moribus  quam  dicendi  virtute

25  perfectus  ?  Non  enim  forensem  quandam  instituimus
operam  nee  mercennariam  vocem  nee,  ut  asperi-
oribus  verbis  parcamus,  non  inutilem  sane  litium
advocatum,  quem  denique  causidicum  vulgo  vocant,
sed  virum  cum  ingenii  natura  praestantem  tum  vero
tot  pulcherrimas  artes  penitus  mente  complexum,
datum  tandem  rebus  humanis,  qualem  nulla  antea
vetustas  cognoverit,  singularem  perfectumque  undi-

26  que,  optima  sentientem  optimeque  dicentem.  In
hoc  quota  pars  erit,  quod  aut  innocentes  tuebitur
aut  improborum  scelera  compescet,  aut  in  pecuni-
ariis  quaestionibus  veritati  contra  calumniam  aderit?
Summus  ille  quidem  in  his  quoque  operibus  fuerit,
sed  maioribus  clarius  elucebit,  cum  regenda  senatus
368


BOOK XII.  I.  23-26

However,  let  us  fly  in  the  face  of  nature  and  23
assume  that  a  bad  man  has  been  discovered  who  is
endowed  with  the  highest  eloquence.  I  shall  none
the  less  deny  that  he  is  an  orator.  For  I  should  not
allow  that  every  man  who  has  shown  himself  ready
with  his  hands  was  necessarily  a  brave  man,  because
true  courage  cannot  be  conceived  of  without  the
accompaniment  of  virtue.  Surely  the  advocate  who  24
is  called  to  defend  the  accused  requires  to  be  a  man
of  honour,  honour  which  greed  cannot  corrupt,  in-
fluence seduce,  or  fear  dismay.  Shall  we  then  dig-
nify the  traitor,  the  deserter,  the  turncoat  with  the
sacred  name  of  orator  ?  But  if  the  quality  which  is
usually  termed  goodness  is  to  be  found  even  in  quite
ordinary  advocates,  why  should  not  the  orator,  who
has  not  yet  existed,  but  may  still  be  bom,  be  no  less
perfect  in  character  than  in  excellence  of  speech  }
It  is  no  hack-advocate,  no  hireling  pleader,  nor  yet,  25
to  use  no  harsher  term,  a  serviceable  attorney  of  the
class  generally  known  as  causidici,  that  I  am  seeking  to
form,  but  rather  a  man  who  to  extraordinary  natural
gifts  has  added  a  thorough  mastery  of  all  the  fairest
branches  of  knowledge,  a  man  sent  by  heaven  to  be
tlie  blessing  of  mankind,  one  to  whom  all  history
can  find  no  pwirallel,  uniquely  perfect  in  every  detail
and  utterly  noble  alike  in  thought  and  speech.  How  26
small  a  portion  of  all  these  abilities  will  be  required
'for  the  defence  of  the  innocent,  the  repression  of
crime  or  the  support  of  truth  against  falsehood  in
suits  involving  questions  of  money  ?  It  is  true  that
our  supreme  orator  will  bear  his  part  in  such  tasks,
but  his  powers  will  be  displayed  with  brighter  splen-
dour in  greater  matters  than  these,  when  he  is
called  upon  to  direct  the  counsels  of  the  senate  and


5^


QUINTILIAN

27  consilia  et  popularis  error  ad  meliora  ducendus.  An
non  talem  quendam  videtur  finxisse  Vergilius,  quem
in  seditione  vulgi  iam  faces  et  saxa  iaculantis  mode-
ratorem  dedit:

Turn  pielate  gravem  ac  mentis  si  forte  virum  quem
Conspexere,  silent  arrectisque  auribus  adstant  ?

Habemus  igitur  ante  omnia  virum  bonum^  post  haec
adiiciet  dicendi  peritum :

Ille  regit  dictis  animos  et  pectora  mulcet.

28  Quid?  non  in  bellis  quoque  idem  ille  vir,  quem
instituimus,  si  sit  ad  proelium  miles  cohortandus^
ex  mediis  sapientiae  praeceptis  orationem  trahet  ?
Nam  quomodo  pugnam  ineuntibus  tot  simul  metus
laboris,  dolorum,  postremo  mortis  ipsius  exciderint,
nisi  in  eorum  locum  pietas  et  fortitudo  et  honesti

29  praesens  imago  successerit?  Quae  certe  melius  per-
suadebit  aliis  qui  prius  persuaserit  sibi.  Prodit  enim
se,  quamlibet  custodiatur,  simulatio,  nee  unquam
tanta  fuerit  loquendi  facultas,  ut  non  titubet  atque
haereat/  quotiens  ab  animo  verba  dissentiunt.  Vir
autem  malus  aliud dicat  necesse est  quam  sentit.

30  Bonos  nunquam  honestus  sermo  deficiet,  nunquam
rerum  optimarum  (nam  iidem  etiam  prudentes  erunt)

^  atque  haereat,  Buttmann :  adhaereat,  B.

*  Aen.  i.  151  sqq,
37°


BOOK XII.  I.  26-30

guide  the  people  from  the  paths  of  error  to  better
things. Was  not  this  the  man  conceived  by  Virgil  27
and  described  as  quelling  a  riot  when  torches  and
stones  have  begun  to  fly  :  ^

"Then,  if  before  their  eyes  some  statesman  grave
Stand  forth,  with  virtue  and  high  service  crowned.
Straight  are  they  dumb  and  stand  intent  to  hear."

Here  then  we  have  one  who  is  before  all  else  a
good  man,  and  it  is  only  after  this  that  the  poet  adds
that  he  is  skilled  in  speaking  :

"His  words  their  minds  control,  their  passions  soothe."

Again,  will  not  this  same  man,  whom  we  are  striving  28
to  form,  if  in  time  of  war  he  be  called  upon  to  inspire
his  soldiers  with  courage  for  the  fray,  draw  for  his
eloquence  on  the  innermost  precepts  of  philosophy  ?
For  how  can  men  who  stand  upon  the  verge  of  battle
banish  all  the  crowding  fears  of  hardship,  pain  and
death  from  their  minds,  unless  those  fears  be  re-
placed by  the  sense  of  the  duty  that  they  owe
their  country,  by  courage  and  the  lively  image  of  a
soldier's  honour  ?  And  assuredly  the  man  who  will  29
best  inspire  such  feelings  in  others  is  he  who  has
first  inspired  tliem  in  himself.  For  however  we  strive
to  conceal  it,  insincerity  will  always  betray  itself,  and
there  was  never  in  any  man  so  great  eloquence  as
would  not  begin  to  stumble  and  hesitate  so  soou  as
his  words  ran  counter  to  his  inmost  thoughts.  NTow  30
a  bad  man  cannot  help  speaking  things  other  than
he  feels.  On  the  other  hand,  the  good  will  never  be
at  a  loss  for  honourable  words  or  fail  to  find  matter
full  of  virtue  for  utterance,  since  among  his  virtues
practical  wisdom  will  be  one. And  even  though  his

37«


QUINTILIAN

inventio ;  quae  etiamsi  lenociniis  destituta  sit,  satis
tamen  natura  sua  ornatur  nee  quidquam  non  diserte,

3 1  quod  honeste,  dicitur.  Quare,  iuventus,  immo  omnes
aetates,  (neque  enim  rectae  voluntati  serum  est
tempus  ullum)  totis  mentibus  hue  tendamus,  in  hoc
elaboremus ;  forsan  et  consummare  contingat.  Nam
si  natura  non  prohibet  et  esse  virum  bonum  et  esse
dicendi  peritum,  cur  non  aliquis  etiam  unus  utrumque
consequi  possit  ? cur  autem  non  se  quisque  speret

32  fore  ilium  aliquem  ?  Ad  quod  si  vires  ingenii  non
suffecerint,  tamen  ad  quern  usque  modura  processe-
rimus,  meliores  erimus  ex  utroque.  Hoc  certe  procul
eximatur  animo,  rerum  ^  pulcherrimam  eloquentiam
cum  vitiis  mentis  posse  misceri.  Facultas  dicendi,
si  in  malos  incidit,  et  ipsa  iudicanda  est  malum ;
peiores  enim  illos  facit,  quibus  contigit.

33  Videor  mihi  audire  quosdam  (neque  enim  deerunt
unquam,  qui  diserti  esse  quam  boni  malint)  ilia
dicentes  :  Quid  ergo  tantum  est  artis  in  eloquentia  ?
cur  tu  de  coloribus  et  difficilium  causarum  defensi-
one,  nonnihil  etiam  de  confessione  locutus  es,  nisi
aliquando  vis  ac  facultas  dicendi  expugnat  ipsam
veritatem  ?  Bonus  enim  vir  non  agit  nisi  bonas
causas,  eas  porro etiam  sine  doctrina  satis  per  se

34  tiietur  Veritas  ipsa. Quibus  ego,  cum  de  meo  pri-

^  rerum,  Regius:  rem,  B.

*  color  is  a  technical  term  for  "  the  particular  aspect  given
to  a  case  by  skilful  manipulation  of  the  facts — the  'gloss'
or  '  varnish '  put  on  them  by  the  accused  or  accuser." — Peter-
son on  Quint,  x.  i.  116.

372


BOOK XII.  I.  30-34

imagination  lacks  artifice  to  lend  it  charm,  its  own
nature  will  be  ornament  enough,  for  if  honour  dictate
the  words,  we  shall  find  eloquence  there  as  well.
Therefore,  let  those  that  are  young,  or  rather  let  all  3 1
of  us,  whatever  our  age,  since  it  is  never  too  late  to
resolve  to  follow  what  is  right,  strive  with  all  our
hearts  and  devote  all  our  efforts  to  the  pursuit  of  virtue
and  eloquence ;  and  perchance  it  may  be  granted  to  us
to  attain  to  the  perfection  that  we  seek.  For  since
nature  does  not  forbid  the  attainment  of  either,  why
should  not  someone  succeed  in  attaining  both  to-
gether ?  And  why  should  not  each  of  us  hope  to  be
that  happy  man  ?  But  if  our  powers  are  inadequate  32
to  such  achievement,  we  shall  still  be  the  better  for
the  double  effort  in  proportion  to  the  distance  which
we  have  advanced  toward  either  goal.  At  any  rate
let  us  banish  from  our  hearts  the  delusion  that
eloquence,  the  fairest  of  all  things,  can  be  combined
with  vice.  The  power  of  speaking  is  even  to  be
accounted  an  evil  when  it  is  found  in  evil  men  ;  for  it
makes  its  possessors  yet  worse  than  they  were  before.

I  think  I  hear  certain  persons  (for  there  will  33
always  be  some  who  had  rather  be  eloquent  than
good)  asking,  "  Why  then  is  there  so  much  art  in  con-
nexion with  eloquence  ?  Why  have  you  talked  so
much  of  '  glosses,'  ^  the  methods  of  defence  to  be
employed  in  difficult  cases,  and  sometimes  even  of
actual  confession  of  guilt,  unless  it  is  the  case  that
the  power  and  force  of  speech  at  times  triumphs  over
truth  itself?  For  a  good  man  will  only  plead  good
cases,  and  those  might  safely  be  left  to  truth  to
support  without  the  aid  of  learning."  Now,  though  34
my  reply  to  these  critics  will  in  the  first  place  be
a  defence  of  my  own  work,  it  will  also  explain  what

373


QUINTILIAN

mum  opere  respondero,  etiam  pro  boni  viri  officio,
si  quando  eum  ad  defensionem  nocentium  ratio
duxerit,  satisfaciam.  Pertractare  enim,  quomodo
aut  pro  falsis  aut  etiam  pro  iniustis  aliquando  dicatur,
non  est  inutile,  vel  propter  hoc  solum,  ut  ea  facilius
et  deprehendamus  et  refellamus ;  quemadmodum
remedia melius adhibebit, cui nota quae nocent

35  fuerint.  Neque  enim  Academici,  cum  in  utramque
disserunt  partem,  non  secundum  alteram  vivunt,  nee
Carneades  ille,  qui  Romae  audiente  Censorio  Catone
non  minoribus  viribus  contra  iustitiam  dicitur  disse-
ruisse  quam  pridie  pro  iustitia  dixerat,  iniustus  ipse
vir  fuit.  Verura  et  virtus  quid  sit,  adversa  ei  malitia
detegit,  et  aequitas  fit  ex  iniqui  contemplatione
manifestior,  et  plurima  contrariis  probantur.  Debent
ergo  oratori  sic  esse  adversariorum  nota  consilia  ut

36  hostium  imperatori.  Verum  et  illud,  quod  prima
propositione  durum  videtur,  potest  adferre  ratio,  ut
vir  bonus  in  defensione  causae  velit  auferre  ali-
quando iudici  veritatem.  Quod  si  quis  a  me  pro-
poni  mirabitur,  (quanquam  non  est  haec  mea  proprie
sententia,  sed  eorum,  quos  gravissimos  sapientiae
magistros  aetas  vetus  credidit)  sic  iudicet,  pleraque
374


BOOK XII.  I.  34-36

I  consider  to  be  the  duty  of  a  good  man  on  occasions
when  circumstances  have  caused  him  to  under-
take the  defence  of  the  guilty.  For  it  is  by  no
means  useless  to  consider  how  at  times  we  should
speak  in  defence  of  falsehood  or  even  of  injustice,  if
only  for  this  reason,  that  such  an  investigation  will
enable  us  to  detect  and  defeat  them  with  the  greater
ease,  just  as  the  physician  who  has  a  thorough
knowledge  of  all  that  can  injure  the  health  will  be
all  the  more  skilful  in  the  prescription  of  remedies.
For  the  Academicians,  although  they  will  argue  on  35
either  side  of  a  question,  do  not  thereby  commit
themselves  to  taking  one  of  these  two  views  as  their
guide  in  life  to  the  exclusion  of  the  other,  while  the
famous  Carneades,  who  is  said  to  have  spoken  at
Rome  in  the  presence  of  Cato  the  Censor,  and  to
have  argued  against  justice  with  no  less  vigour  than
he  had  argued  for  justice  on  the  preceding  day,  was
not  himself  an  unjust  man.  But  the  nature  of  virtue
is  revealed  by  vice,  its  opposite,  justice  becomes  yet
more  manifest  from  the  contemplation  of  injustice,
and  there  are  many  other  things  that  are  proved  by
their  contraries.  Consequently  the  schemes  of  his
adversaries  should  be  no  less  well  known  to  the
orator  than  those  of  the  enemy  to  a  commander  in
the  field.  But  it  is  even  true,  although  at  first  sight  36
it  seems  hard  to  believe,  that  tliere  may  be  sound
reason  why  at  times  a  good  man  who  is  appearing
for  the  defence  should  attempt  to  conceal  the  truth
from  the  judge.  If  any  of  my  readers  is  surprised
at  my  making  such  a  statement  (although  this
opinion  is  not  of  my  own  invention,  but  is  derived
from  those  whom  antiquity  regarded  as  the  greatest
teachers  of  wisdom),  I  would  have  him  reflect  that

375


QUINTILIAN

esse,  quae non  tam  factis  quam  causis  eorum  vel

37  honesta  fiant  vel  turpia.  Nam  si  hominem  occidere
saepe  virtus,  liberos  necare  nonnunquam  pulcherri-
mum  est,  asperiora  quaedam  adhuc  dictu,  si  com-
munis utilitas  exegerit,  facere  conceditur,  ne  hoc
quidem  nudum  est  intuendum,  qualem  causam  vir

38  bonus,  sed  etiam  quare  et  qua  mente  defendat.  Ac
primum  concedant  mihi  omnes  oportet,  quod  Stoi-
corum  quoque  asperrimi  confitentur,  facturum  ali-
quando  virum  bonum  ut  mendacium  dicat,  et  quidem
nonnunquam  levioribus  causis,  ut  in  pueris  aegro-
tantibus utilitatis eorum gratia multa fingimus,

39  multa  non  facturi  promittimus ;  nedum  si  ab  homine
occidendo  grassator  avertendus  sit  aut  hostis  pro
salute  patriae  fallendus ;  ut  hoc,  quod  alias  in  servis
quoque  reprehendendum  est,  sit  alias  in  ipso  sapiente
laudandum.  Id  si  constiterit,  multa  iam  video  posse
evenire,  propter  quae  orator  bene  suscipiat  tale
causae genus, quale remota ratione honesta non

40  recepisset.  Nee  hoc  dico  (quia  severiores  sequi
placet  leges)  pro  patre,  fratre,  amico  periclitantibus,
tametsi  non  mediocris  haesitatio  est,  hinc  iustitiae


BOOK XII.  I.  36-40

there  are  many  things  which  are  made  honourable
or  the  reverse  not  by  the  nature  of  the  facts,  but  by
the  causes  from  which  they  spring.  For  if  to  slay  37
a  man  is  often  a  virtue  and  to  put  one's  own  children
to  death  is  at  times  the  noblest  of  deeds,  and  if  it
is  permissible  in  the  public  interest  to  do  deeds
yet  more  hon-ible  to  relate  than  these,  we  should
assuredly  take  into  consideration  not  solely  and
simply  what  is  the  nature  of  the  case  which  the
good  man  undertakes  to  defend,  but  what  is  his
reason  and  what  his  purpose  in  so  doing.  And  first  38
of  all  everyone  must  allow,  what  even  the  sternest
of  the  Stoics  admit,  that  the  good  man  will  some-
times tell  a  lie,  and  further  that  he  will  sometimes  do
so  for  comparatively  trivial  reasons  ;  for  example  we
tell  countless  lies  to  sick  children  for  their  good  and
make  many  promises  to  them  which  we  do  not  intend
to  perform.  And  there  is  clearly  far  more  justifica-  39
tion  for  lying  when  it  is  a  question  of  diverting
an  assassin  from  his  victim  or  deceiving  an  enemy
to  save  our  country.  Consequently  a  practice  which
is  at  times  reprehensible  even  in  slaves,  may  on
other  occasions  be  praiseworthy  even  in  a  wise  man.
If  this  be  granted,  I  can  see  that  there  will  be  many
possible  emergencies  such  as  to  justify  an  orator  in
undertaking  cases  of  a  kind  which,  in  the  absence  of
any  honourable  reason,  he  would  have  refused  to
touch.  In  saying  this  I  do  not  mean  that  we  should  40
be  ready  under  any  circumstances  to  defend  our
father,  brother  or  friend  when  in  peril  (since  I
hold  that  we  should  be  guided  by  stricter  rules  in
such  matters),  although  such  contingencies  may
well  cause  us  no  little  perplexity,  when  we  have  to
decide  between  the  rival  claims  of  justice  and  natural

VOL.  IV.  N 377


QUINTILIAN

proposita  imagine,  inde  pietatis.  Nihil  dubii  relin-
quamus.  Sit  aliquis  insidiatus  tyranno  atque  ob  id
reus :  utrumne  salvum  eum  nolet  is,  qui  a  nobis
iinitur,  orator  ?  an,  si  tuendum  susceperit,  non  tam
falsis  defendet,  quam  qui  apud  iudices  malam  causam

41  tuetur?  Quid  si  quaedam  bene  facta  damnaturus
est  iudex,  nisi  ea  non  esse  facta  convicerimus,  non
vel  hoc  modo  servabit  orator  non  innocentem  modo,
sed  etiam  laudabilem  civem  ?  Quid  si  quaedam
iusta  natura,  sed  condicione  temporum  inutilia  civi-
tati  sciemus,  nonne  utemur  arte  dicendi  bona  qui-

42  dem,  sed  malis  artibus  simili  ?  Ad  hoc  nemo
dubitabit,  quin,  si  nocentes  mutari  in  bonam  mentem
aliquo  modo  possint,  sicut  posse  conceditur,  salvos
esse  eos  magis  e  re  publica  sit  quam  puniri.  Si
liqueat  igitur  oratori  futurum  bonum  virum,  cui  vera

43  obiicientur,  non  id  aget,  ut  salvus  sit?  Da  nunc,
ut  crimine  manifesto  prematur  dux  bonus  et  sine
quo  vincere  hostera  ^  civitas  non  possit :  nonne  ei
communis  utilitas  oratorem  advocabit?  Certe  Fa-
bricius  Cornelium Rufinum,  et  alioqui  malum  civem

'  hcstem,  Obreeht :  honestem,  B.


BOOK  XII.  I.  40-43

affection.  But  let  us  put  the  problem  beyond  all
question  of  doubt.  Suppose  a  man  to  have  plotted
against  a  tyrant  and  to  be  accused  of  having  done  so.
Which  of  the  two  will  the  orator,  as  defined  by  us,
desire  to  save  ?  And  if  he  undertakes  the  defence
of  the  accused,  will  he  not  employ  falsehood  with
no  less  readiness  than  the  advocate  who  is  defending
a  bad  case  before  a  jury?  Again,  suppose  that  the  41
judge  is  likely  to  condemn  acts  which  were  rightly
done,  unless  we  can  convince  him  that  they  were
never  done.  Is  not  this  another  case  where  the
orator  will  not  shrink  even  from  lies,  if  so  he  may
save  one  who  is  not  merely  innocent,  but  a  praise-
worthy citizen  ?  Again,  suppose  that  we  realise  that
certain  acts  are  just  in  themselves,  though  prejudicial
to  the  state  under  existing  circumstances.  Shall  we
not  then  employ  methods  of  speaking  which,  despite
the  excellence  of  their  intention,  bear  a  close  re-
semblance to  fraud.  Further,  no  one  will  hesitate  42
for  a  moment  to  hold  the  view  that  it  is  in  the
interests  of  the  commonwealth  that  guilty  persons
should  be  acquitted  rather  than  punished,  if  it  be
possible  thereby  to  convert  them  to  a  better  state  ot
mind,  a  possibility  which  is  generally  conceded.  If
then  it  is  clear  to  an  orator  that  a  man  who  is  guilty
of  the  offences  laid  to  his  charge  will  become  a  good
man,  will  he  not  strive  to  secure  his  acquittal  ?
Imagine  for  example  that  a  skilful  commander,  with-  43
out  whose  aid  the  state  cannot  hope  to  crush  its
enemies,  is  labouring  under  a  charge  which  is  obvi-
ously true  :  will  not  the  common  interest  irresistibly
summon  our  orator  to  defend  him?  We  know  at
any  rate  that  Fabricius  publicly  voted  for  and  secured
the  election  to  the  consulate  of  Cornelhis  Rufinus,

379


QUINTILIAN

et  sibi  inimicum,  tamen,  quia  utilem  sciebat  ducem,
imminente  bello,  palam  consul  em  suffragio  suo  fecit
atque  id  mirantibus  quibusdam  respondit,  a  cive  se
spoliari  malle  quam  ab  hoste  venire.  Ita,  si  fuisset
orator,  non  defendisset  eundem  Rufinum  vel  mani-

44  festi  peculatus  reum?  Multa  dici  possunt  similia,
sed  vel  unum  ex  iis  quodlibet  sufficit.  Non  enim
hoc  agimus,  ut  istud  illij  quem  formamus,  viro  saepe
sit  faciendum ;  sed  ut,  si  talis  coegerit  ratio,  sit
tamen  vera  finitio,  oratorem  esse  vintm  bonum  dicendi

45  peritum.  Praecipere  vero  ac  discere,  quomodo  etiam
probatione  difficilia  tractentur,  necessarium  est.
Nam  frequenter  etiam  optimae  causae  similes  sunt
malis,  et  innocens  reus  multis  verisimilibus  pre-
mitur  ;  quo  fit,  ut  eadem  actionis  ratione  defendendus
sit,  qua  si  nocens  asset.  lam  innumerabilia  sunt
bonis  causis  malisque  communia,  testes,  litterae,  sus-
piciones,  opiniones.  Non  alitor  autem  verisimilia
quam  vera  et  confirmantur  et  refelluntur.  Qua-
propter,  ut  res  feret,  flectetur  oratio  manente  honesta
voluntate.

II.  Quando  igitur  orator  est  vir  bonus,  is  autem
citra  virtutem intelligi  non  potest, virtus,  etiamsi

*  The  date  is  uncertain,  but  the  reference  must  be  either  to
the  Samnite  war  of  290  or  the  war  with  Pyrrhus,


BOOK XII.  I.  43-11.  I

despite  the  fact  that  he  was  a  bad  citizen  and  his
personal  enemy,  merely  because  he  knew  that  he
was  a  capable  general  and  the  state  was  threatened
with  war.^  And  when  certain  persons  expressed
their  surprise  at  his  conduct,  he  replied  that  he  had
rather  be  robbed  by  a  fellow-citizen  than  be  sold  as
a  slave  by  the  enemy.  Well  then,  had  Fabricius
been  an  orator,  would  he  not  have  defended  Rufinus
against  a  charge  of  peculation,  even  though  his
guilt  were  as  clear  as  day  ?  I  might  produce  many  44
other  similar  examples,  but  one  of  them  taken  at
random  is  enough.  For  my  purpose  is  not  to
assert  that  such  tasks  will  often  be  incumbent
on  the  orator  whom  I  desire  to  form,  but  merely  to
show  that,  in  the  event  of  his  being  compelled  to
take  such  action,  it  will  not  invalidate  our  definition
of  an  orator  as  a  "good  man,  skilled  in  speaking."
And  it  is  necessary  also  both  to  teach  and  learn  how  45
to  establish  difficult  cases  by  proof.  For  often  even
the  best  cases  have  a  resemblance  to  bad  and,  the
charges  which  tell  heavily  against  an  innocent  per-
son frequently  have  a  strong  resemblance  to  the
truth.  Consequently,  the  same  methods  of  defence
have  to  be  employed  that  would  be  used  if  he  were
guilty.  Further,  there  are  countless  elements  which
are  common  to  both  good  cases  and  bad,  such  as  oral
and  documentary  evidence,  suspicions  and  opinions,
all  of  which  have  to  be  established  or  disposed  of  in
the  same  way,  whether  they  be  true  or  merely  re-
semble the  truth.  Therefore,  while  maintaining  his
integrity  of  purpose,  the  orator  will  modify  his  plead-
ing to  suit  the  circumstances.

II.  Since  then  the  orator  is  a  good  man,  and  such
goodness  cannot  be  conceived  as  existing  apart  from


QUINTILIAN

quosdam  impetus  ex  natura  sumit^  tamen  perficienda
doctrina  est :  mores  ante  omnia  oratori  studiis  erunt
excolendi  atque  omnis  honesti  iustique  disciplina
pertractanda,  sine  qua  nemo  nee  vir  bonus  esse  nee

2  dicendi  peritus  potest.  Nisi  forte  accedemus  iis,  qui
natura  constare  mores  et  nihil  adiuvari  disciplina
putant ;  scilicet  ut  ea  quidem,  quae  manu  fiunt,
atque  eorum  etiam  contemptissima  confiteantur  egere
doctoribuSj  virtutem  vero,  qua  nihil  homini,  quo  ad
deos  immortales  propius  accederet,  datura  est,  obviam
et  illaboratam,  tantum  quia  nati  simus,  habeamus.
Abstinens  erit qui id ipsum,  quid  sit  abstinentia,

3  ignoret  ?  Et  fortis  qui  metus  doloris,  mortis,  super-
stitionis  nulla  ratione  purgaverit  ?  Et  iustus  qui
aequi  bonique  tractatum,  qui  leges,  quaeque  natura
sunt  omnibus  datae  quaeque  propriae  populis  et
gentibus  constitutae,  nunquam  eruditiore  aliquo
sermone  tractarit  ? O  quam  istud  parvum  ^  putant,

4  quibus  tam  facile  videtur  I  Sed  hoc  transeo,  de  quo
neminem,  qui  litteras  vel  primis,  ut  aiunt,  labris
degustarit,  dubitaturum  puto.  Ad  illud  sequens
praevertar,  ne  dicendi  quidem  satis  peritum  fore,
qui  non  et  naturae  vim  omnem  penitus  perspexerit

6  et mores praeceptis ac  ratione formarit. Neque

*  parvum,  Spalding:  parum,  B.
38a


BOOK XII.  II.  1-5

virtue,  virtue,  despite  the  fact  that  it  is  in  part
derived  from  certain  natural  impulses,  will  require  to
be  perfected  by  instruction.  The  orator  must  above
all  things  devote  his  attention  to  the  formation  of
moral  character  and  must  acquire  a  complete  know-
ledge of  all  that  is  just  and  honourable.  For  without
this  knowledge  no  one  can  be  either  a  good  man  or
skilled  in  speaking,  unless  indeed  we  agree  with  2
those  who  regard  morality  as  intuitive  and  as  owing
nothing  to  instruction :  indeed  they  go  so  far  as  to
acknowledge  that  handicrafts,  not  excluding  even
those  which  are  most  despised  among  them,  can
only  be  acquired  by  the  result  of  teaching,  whereas
virtue,  which  of  all  gifts  to  man  is  that  which  makes
him  most  near  akin  to  the  immortal  gods,  comes  to
him  without  search  or  effort,  as  a  natural  concomitant
of  birth.  But  can  the  man  who  does  not  know  what
abstinence  is,  claim  to  be  truly  abstinent  ?  or  brave,  if  3
he  has  never  purged  his  soul  of  the  fears  of  pain,  death
and  superstition  ?  or  just,  if  he  has  never,  in  language
approaching  that  of  philosophy,  discussed  the  nature
of  virtue  and  justice,  or  of  the  laws  that  have  been
given  to  mankind  by  nature  or  established  among
individual  peoples  and  nations  ?  What  a  contempt
it  argues  for  such  themes  to  regard  them  as  being
so  easy  of  comprehension !  However,  I  pass  this  by  ;  4
for  I  am  sure  that  no  one  with  the  least  smattering
of  literary  culture  will  have  the  slightest  hesitation
in  agreeing  with  me.  I  will  proceed  to  my  next
point,  that  no  one  will  achieve  sufficient  skill  even  in
speaking,  unless  he  makes  a  thorough  study  of  all
the  workings  of  nature  and  forms  his  character  on
the  precepts  of  philosophy  and  the  dictates  of  reason.
For  it  is  with  good  cause  that  Lucius  Crassus,  in  the  5

383


QUINTILIAN

enim  frustra  in  tertio  de  Oratore  libro  L.  Crassus
cuncta,  quae  de  aequo,  iusto,  vero,  bono  deque  iis,
quae  sunt  contra  posita,  dicantur,  propria  esse  ora-
toris  adfirmat,  ac  philosophos,  cum  ea  dicendi  viribus
tuentur,  uti  rhetorum  armis,  non  suis.  Idem  tamen
confitetur,  ea  iam  esse  a  philosophia  petenda,  vide-
licet quia  magis  haec  illi  videtur  in  possessione  earum

6  rerum  fuisse.  Hinc  etiam  illud  est,  quod  Cicero
pluribus  libris  et  epistolis  testatur  dicendi  facultatem
ex  intimis  sapientiae  fontibus  fluere,  ideoque  ali-
quamdiu  praeceptores  eosdem  fuisse  morum  atque
dicendi.  Quapropter  haec  exhortatio  mea  non  eo
pertinet  ut  esseoratoremphilosophum  velim,  quando
non  alia  vitae  secta  longius  a  civilibus  officiis  atque

7  ab  omni  munere  oratoris  recessit.  Nam  quis  philoso-
phorum  aut  in  iudiciis  frequens  aut  clarus  in  con-
tionibus  fuit  ?  Quis  denique  in  ipsa,  quam  maxime
plerique  praecipiunt,  rei  publicae  administratione
versatus  est?  Atqui  ego  ilium,  quern  instituo,  Roma-
num  quendam  velim  esse  sapientem,  qui  non  secretis
disputationibus,  sed  rerum  experimentis  atque  operi-

8  bus  vere  civilem  virum  exhibeat.  Sed  quia  deserta
ab  his,  qui  se  ad  eloquentiam  contulerunt,  studia
sapientiae  non  iam  in  actu  suo  atque  in  hac  fori  luce
versantur,  sed  in  porticus  et  in  gj'mnasia  primum,

*  Chs.  XX.  xxvii.  and  xxxi.


BOOK XII.  II.  5-8

third  book  of  the  de  Oratore,^  affirms  that  all  that  is
said  concerning  equity,  justice,  truth  and  the  good,
and  their  opposites,  forms  part  of  the  studies  of  an
orator,  and  that  the  philosophers,  when  they  exert
their  powers  of  speaking  to  defend  these  virtues,  are
using  the  weapons  of  rhetoric,  not  their  own.  But
he  also  confesses  that  the  knowledge  of  these  sub-
jects must  be  sought  from  the  philosophers  for  the
reason  that,  in  his  opinion,  philosophy  has  more
effective  possession  of  them.  And  it  is  for  the  same  6
reason  that  Cicero  in  several  of  his  books  and  letters
proclaims  that  eloquence  has  its  fountain-head  in  the
most  secret  springs  of  wisdom,  and  that  consequently
for  a  considerable  time  the  instructors  of  morals  and
of  eloquence  were  identical.  Accordingly  this  ex-
hortation of  mine  must  not  be  taken  to  mean  that  I
wish  the  orator  to  be  a  philosopher,  since  there  is  no
other  way  of  life  that  is  further  removed  from  the
duties  of  a  statesman  and  the  tasks  of  an  orator.
For  what  philosopher  has  ever  been  a  frequent  7
speaker  in  the  courts  or  won  renown  in  public
assemblies  ?  Nay,  what  philosopher  has  ever  taken  a
prominent  part  in  the  government  of  the  state,  which
forms  the  most  frequent  theme  of  their  instructions  ?
None  the  less  I  desire  that  he,  whose  character  I  am
seeking  to  mould,  should  be  a  "  wise  man  "  in  the
Roman  sense,  that  is,  one  who  reveals  himself  as  a  true
statesman,  not  in  the  discussions  of  the  study,  but
in  the  actual  practice  and  experience  of  life.  But  8
inasmuch  as  the  study  of  philosophy  has  been
deserted  by  those  who  have  turned  to  the  pursuit  of
eloquence,  and  since  philosophy  no  longer  moves  in
its  true  sphere  of  action  and  in  the  broad  daylight  of
the  forum,  but  has  retired  first  to  porches  and  gyra-

385


QUINTILIAN

mox  in  conventus  scholarum  recesserunt:  id,  quod
est  oratori  necessarium  nee  a  dicendi  praeceptoribus
traditur,  ab  iis  petere  nimirum  neeesse  est,  apud
quos  remansit,  evolvendi  penitus  auctores,  qui  de
virtute  praecipiunt,  ut  oratoris  vita  cum  scientia
9  divinarum  rerum  sit  humanarumque  coniuncta.  Quae
ipsae  quanto  maiores  ac  pulchriores  viderentur,  si
illas  ii  docerent,  qui  etiam  eloqui  praestantissime
possent  ?  Utinamque  sit  tempus  unquam,  quo  per-
fectus  aliquis,  qualem  optamus,  orator  hanc  artem
superbo  nomine  et  vitiis  quorundam  bona  eius  cor-
rumpentium invisam  vindicet sibi ae,  velut  rebus

10  repetitis,  in  corpus  eloquentiae  adducat.  Quae
quidem  cum  sit  in  tris  divisa  partes,  naturalem,
moralem,  rationalem,  qua  tandem  non  est  cum
oratoris  opere  coniuncta  ?

Nam  ut  ordinem  retro  agamus,  de  ultima  ilia,
quae  tota  versatur  in  verbis,  nemo  dubitaverit,  si
et  proprietates  vocis  cuiusque  nosse  et  ambigua
aperire  et  perplexa  discernere  et  de  falsis  iudicare
et  colligere ac resolvere  quae velis  oratorum est.

11  Quanquam  ea  non  tam  est  minute  atque  concise
in  actionibus  utendum  quam  in  disputationibus,  quia
386


BOOK XII.  n.  8-1 1

nasia  and  finally  to  the  gatherings  of  the  schools^  all
that  is  essential  for  an  orator,  and  yet  is  not  taught
by  the  professors  of  eloquence,  must  undoubtedly  be
sought  from  those  persons  in  whose  possession  it
has  remained.  The  authors  who  have  discoursed  on
the  nature  of  virtue  must  be  read  through  and
through,  that  the  life  of  the  orator  may  be  wedded
to  the  knowledge  of  things  human  and  divine.  But  9
how  much  greater  and  fairer  would  such  subjects
appear  if  those  who  taught  them  were  also  those
who  could  give  them  most  eloquent  expression !  O
that  the  day  may  dawn  when  the  perfect  orator  of
our  heart's  desire  shall  claim  for  his  own  possession
that  science  that  has  lost  the  affection  of  mankind
through  the  arrogance  of  its  claims  and  the  vices  of
some  that  have  brought  disgrace  upon  its  virtues,
and  shall  restore  it  to  its  place  in  the  domain  of
eloquence,  as  though  he  had  been  victorious  in  a
trial  for  the  restoration  of  stolen  goods  !  And  since  10
philosophy  falls  into  three  divisions,  physics,  ethics
and  dialectic,  which,  I  ask  you,  of  these  depart-
ments is  not  closely  connected  with  the  task  of  the
orator  ?

Let  us  reverse  the  order  just  given  and  deal  first
with  the  third  department  which  is  entirely  con-
cerned with  words.  If  it  be  true  that  to  know  the
properties  of  each  word,  to  clear  away  ambiguities,
to  unravel  perplexities,  to  distinguish  between  truth
and  falsehood,  to  prove  or  to  refute  as  may  be
desired,  all  form  part  of  the  functions  of  an  orator,
who  is  there  that  can  doubt  the  truth  of  my  conten-
tion? I  grant  that  we  shall  not  have  to  employ  11
dialectic  with  such  minute  attention  to  detail  when
we are pleading in the courts as when we are

^87


QUINTILIAN

non  docere  modo,  sed  movere  etiam  ac  delectare
audientes  debet  orator,  ad  quod  impetu  quoque  ac
viribus  et  decore  est  opus ;  ut  vis  amnium  maior  est
altis  ripis  multoque  gurgitis  tractu  fluentium  quam

12  tenuis  aquae  et  obiectu  lapillorum  resultantis.  Et
ut  palaestrici  doctores  illos,  quos  numeros  vocant,
non  idcirco  discentibus  tradunt,  ut  lis  omnibus  ii,  qui
didicerint,  in  ipso  luctandi  certamine  utantur  (plus
enim  pondere  et  firmitate  et  spiritu  agitur),  sed  ut
subsit  copia  ilia,  ex  qua  unum  aut  alterum,  cuius  se

13  occasio  dederit,  efficiant,  ita  haec  pars  dialectica,  sive
illam  dicere  malumus  disputatricem,  ut  est  utilis
saepe  et  finitionibus  et  comprehensionibus  et  se-
parandis  quae  sunt  differentia,  et  resolvenda  ambigui-
tate,  distinguendo,  dividendo,  illiciendo,  implicando,
ita,  si  totum  sibi  vindicaverit  in  foro  certamen,  obstabit
melioribus  et  sectas  ad  tenuitatem  suam  vires  ipsa

14  subtilitate  consumet.  Itaque  reperias  quosdam  in
disputando  mire  callidos,  cum  ab  ilia  cavillatione
discesserint,  non  magis  sufficere  in  aliquo  graviore
actu  quam  parva  quaedam  animalia,  quae  in  angustiis
mobilia  campo  deprehenduntur.

15  lam  quidem  pars  ilia  moralis,  quae  dicitur  Ethice,
certe  tota  oratori  est  accommodata.  Nam  in  tanta
388


BOOK XII.  II.  11-15

engaged  in  philosophical  debate,  since  the  orator's
duty  is  not  merely  to  instruct,  but  also  to  move  and
delight  his  audience ;  and  to  succeed  in  doing  this
he  needs  a  strength,  impetuosity  and  grace  as  well.
For  oratory  is  like  a  river :  the  current  is  stronger
when  it  flows  within  deep  banks  and  with  a  mighty
flood,  than  when  the  waters  are  shallow  and  broken
by  the  pebbles  that  bar  their  way.  And  just  as  12
the  trainers  of  the  wrestling  school  do  not  impart
the  various  throws  to  their  pupils  that  those  who
have  learnt  them  may  make  use  of  all  of  them  in
actual  wrestling  matches  (for  weight  and  strength
and  wind  count  for  more  than  these),  but  that  they
may  have  a  store  from  which  to  draw  one  or  two
of  such  tricks,  as  occasion  may  offer;  even  so  the  13
science  of  dialectic,  or  if  you  prefer  it  of  disputa-
tion, while  it  is  often  useful  in  definition,  inference,
differentiation,  resolution  of  ambiguity,  distinction
and  classification,  as  also  in  luring  on  or  entangling
our  opponents,  yet  if  it  claim  to  assume  the  entire
direction  of  the  struggles  of  the  forum,  will  merely
stand  in  the  way  of  arts  superior  to  itself  and  by  its
very  subtlety  will  exhaust  the  strength  that  has
been  pared  down  to  suit  its  limitations.  As  a  14
result  you  will  find  that  certain  persons  who  show
astonishing  skill  in  philosophical  debate,  as  soon  as
they  quit  the  sphere  of  their  quibbles,  are  as  help-
less in  any  case  that  demands  more  serious  pleading
as  those  small  animals  which,  though  nimble  enough
in  a  confined  space,  are  easily  captured  in  an  open
field.

Proceeding  to  moral  philosophy  or  ethics,  we  may  16
note  that  it  at  any  rate  is entirely  suited  to  the
orator. For  vast  as  is  the  variety  of  cases  (since  in

389


QUINTILIAN

causarum^  sicut  superioribus  libris  diximus,  varietate,
cum  alia  coniectura  quaerantur,  alia  finitionibus  con-
cludantur,  alia  iure  summoveantur  vel  transferantur,
alia  colligantur  vel  ipsa  inter  se  concurrant  vel  in
diversum  ambiguitate  dueantur,  nulla  fere  did  potest,
cuius  non  parte  in  aliqua  tractatus  aequi  ac  boni
reperiatur, plerasque vero esse quis nescit, quae

16  totae  in  sola  qualitate  consistant?  In  consiliis  vero
quae  ratio  suadendi  est  ab  honesti  quaestione  se-
posita?  Quin  ilia  etiam  pars  tertia,  quae  laudandi
ac  vituperandi  officiis  continetur,  nempe  in  tractatu

17  recti  pravique  versatur.  An  de  iustitia,  fortitudine,
abstinentia,  temperantia,  pietate  non  pluritna  dicet
orator?  Sed  ille  vir  bonus,  qui  haec  non  vocibus
tantum  sibi  nota  atque  nominibus  aurium  tenus  in
usum  linguae  perceperit,  sed  qui  virtutes  ipsas  mente
complexus  ita  sentiat,  nee  in  cogitando  ita  laborabit

18  sed,  quod  sciet,  vere  dicet.  Cum  sit  autem  omnis  gene-
ralis  quaestio  speciali  potentior,  quia  universo  pars
continetur,  non  utique  accedit  parti  quod  universum
est,  profecto  nemo  dubitabit,  generales  quaestiones

19  in  illo  maxime  studiorum  more  versa tas.  lam  vero
cum sint multa propriis brevibusque comprehen-


*  See  III.  vi.  45. '  See  iii.  vi.  23. *  See  iii.  vi.  15.

*  Probably  an  allusion  to  contradictory  laws. See  vii,  vii.

*  See  VII.  ix.


39°


BOOK XII.  II.  15  19

them,  as  I  have  pointed  out  in  previous  books,  we  seek
to  discover  certain  points  by  conjecture,^  reach  our
conclusions  in  others  by  means  of  definition,^  dispose
of  others  on  legal  grounds  ^  or  by  raising  the  ques-
tion of  competence,"^  while  other  points  are  estab-
lished by  syllogism  2  and  others  involve  contradic-
tions* or  are  diversely  interpreted  owing  to  some
ambiguity  of  language 5),  there  is  scarcely  a  single
one  which  does  not  at  some  point  or  another  involve
the  discussion  of  equity  and  virtue,  while  there  are
also,  as  everyone  knows,  not  a  few  which  turn
entirely  on  questions  of  quality.  Again  in  delib-  16
erative  assemblies  how  can  we  advise  a  policy  without
raising  the  question  of  what  is  honourable  ?  Nay,
even  the  third  department  of  oratory,  which  is
concerned  with  the  tasks  of  praise  and  denunciation,
must  without  a  doubt  deal  with  questions  of  right
and  wrong.  For  the  orator  will  assuredly  have  17
much  to  say  on  such  topics  as  justice,  fortitude,
abstinence,  self-control  and  piety.  But  the  good
man,  who  has  come  to  the  knowledge  of  these  things
not  by  mere  hearsay,  as  though  they  were  just  words
and  names  for  his  tongue  to  employ,  but  has  grasped
the  meaning  of  virtue  and  acquired  a  true  feeling  for
it,  will  never  be  perplexed  when  he  has  to  think  out
a  problem,  but  will  speak  out  truly  what  he
knows.  Since,  however,  o^enerfl/  questions  are  always  18
more  important  than  special  (for  the  particular  is
contained  in  the  universal,  while  the  universal  is
never  to  be  regarded  as  something  superimposed  on
the  particular),  everyone  will  readily  admit  that  the
studies  of  which  we  are  speaking  are  pre-eminently
concerned  with  general  questions.  Further,  since  19
there are numerous points which require to be

391


QUINTILIAN

sionibus  finienda  (unde  etiam  status  causarum  dicitur
finitivus),  nonne  ad  id  quoque  instrui  ab  iis^  qui  plus
in  hoc  studii  dederunt,  oportet  ?  Quid  ?  non  quae-
stio  iuris  omnis  aut  verborum  proprietate  aut  aequi
disputatione  aut  voluntatis  coniectura  continetur?
quorum  pars  ad  rationalem,  pars  ad  moralem  tracta-

20  turn  redundat.  Ergo  natura  permixta  est  omnibus
istis  oratio,  quae  quidem  oratio  est  vera.  Nam
ignara  quidem  huiusce  doctrinae  loquacitas  erret
necesse  est,  ut  quae  vel  nullos  vel  falsos  duces
habeat.

Pars  vero  naturalis,  cum  est  ad  exercitationem
dicendi  tanto  ceteris  uberior,  quanto  maiore  spiritu
de  divinis  rebus  quam  humanis  eloquendum  est,
turn illam etiam  moralem,  sine  qua  nulla  esse,  ut

21  docuimus,  oratio  potest,  totam  complectitur.  Nam
si  regitur  providentia  mundus,  administranda  certe
bonis  viris  erit  res  publica ;  si  divina  nostris  animis
origo,  tendendum  ad  virtutem  nee  voluptatibus  ter-
reni  corporis  serviendum.  An  haec  non  frequenter
tractabit  orator  ?  lam  de  auguriis,  responsis,  religione
denique  omni,  de  quibus  maxima  saepe  in  senatu
consilia  versata  sunt,  non erit ei disserendum, si


*  See  III.  vi.  31.

*  i  e.  natural  philosophy  in  the  widest  sense,
»  §15.

392


BOOK  XII.  II.  19-21

determined  by  appropriate  and  concise  definitions
(hence  the  definitive  basts^  of  cases),  it  is  surely
desirable  that  the  orator  should  be  instructed  in
such  things  by  those  who  have  devoted  special
attention  to  the  subject.  Again,  does  not  every
question  of  law  turn  either  on  the  precise  meaning
of  words,  the  discussion  of  equity,  or  conjecture  as
to  the  intention — subjects  which  in  part  encroach  on
the  domain  of  dialectic  and  in  part  on  that  of  ethics  ?
Consequently  all  oratory  involves  a  natural  admixture  20
of  all  these  philosophic  elements — at  least,  that  is  to
say,  all  oratory  that  is  worthy  of  the  name.  For
mere  garrulity  that  is  ignorant  of  all  such  learning
must  needs  go  astray,  since  its  guides  are  either
non-existent  or  false.

Physics  2  on  the  other  hand  is  far  richer  than  the
other  branches  of  philosophy,  if  viewed  from  the
standpoint  of  providing  exercise  in  speaking,  in
proportion  as  a  loftier  inspiration  is  required  to
speak  of  things  divine  than  of  things  human;  and
further  it  includes  within  its  scope  the  whole  of
ethics,  which  as  we  have  shown'  are  essential  to  the
very  existence  of  oratory.  For,  if  the  world  is  21
governed  by  providence,  it  will  certainly  be  the
duty  of  all  good  men  to  bear  their  part  in  the
administration  of  the  state.  If  the  origin  of  our
souls  be  divine,  we  must  win  our  way  towards  virtue
and  abjure  the  service  of  the  lusts  of  our  earthly
body.  Are  not  these  themes  which  the  orator  will
frequently  be  called  upon  to  handle  ?  Again  there
are  questions  concerned  with  auguries  and  oracles
or  any  other  religious  topic  (all  of  them  subjects
that  have  often  given  rise  to  the  most  important  de-
bates in  the  senate)  on  which  the  orator  'will  have  to

393


QUINTILIAN

quidem^  ut  nobis  placet,  futurus  est  vir  civilis  idem  ?
Quae denique intelligi saltern potest eloquentia

22  hominis  optima  nescientis  ?  Haec  si  ratione  mani-
festa  non  essent^  exemplis  tamen  crederemus.  Si-
quidem  et  Periclem,  cuius  eloquentiae,  etiamsi  nulla
ad  nos  monumenta  venerunt,  vim  tamen  quandam
incredibilem  cum  historici,  tum  etiam,  liberrimum
hominum  genus,  comici  veteres  tradunt,  Anaxagorae
physici  constat  auditorem  fuisse,  et  Demosthenemj
principem  omnium  Graeciae  oratorum,  dedisse  ope-

23  ram  Platoni.  Nam  M.  Tullius,  non  tantum  se  debere
scholis  rhetorum,  quantum  Academiae  spatiis,  fre-
quenter ipse  testatus  est ;  neque  se  tanta  in  eo
unquam  fudisset  ^  ubertas,  si  ingenium  suum  consepto
fori,  non  ipsius  rerum  naturae  finibus  terminasset.

Verum  ex  hoc  alia  mihi  quaestio  exoritur,  quae
secta  conferre  plurimum  eloquentiae  possit,  quan-
quam ea  non  inter  multas potest esse contentio.

24  Nam  in  primis  nos  Epicurus  a  se  ipse  dimittit,  qui
fugere  omnem  disciplinam  navigatione  quam  velo-
cissima  iubet.  Neque  vero  Aristippus,  summum  in
voluptate  corporis  bonum  ponens,  ad  hunc  nos  laborem
hortetur.  Pyrrhon  quidem  quas  in  hoc  opere  habere
partes  potest?  cui  iudices  esse,  apud  quos  verba
faciat,  et  reum,  pro  quo  loquatur,  et  senatum,  in

*  fudisset,  Badius  :  fuisset,  MSS.


1  Or.  iii-  12.

2  iraiSflav  iraffav  aKdrtov  apdfitvos  <l>evyt.


394


BOOK XII.  II.  21-24

discourse,  if  be  is  also  to  be  the  statesman  we
would  have  him  be.  And  finally,  how  can  we  con-
ceive of  any  real  eloquence  at  all  proceeding  from
a  man  who  is  ignorant  of  all  that  is  best  in  the
world  .'*  If  our  reason  did  not  make  these  facts  22
obvious,  we  should  still  be  led  by  historical  examples
to  believe  their  truth.  For  Pericles,  whose  elo-
quence, despite  the  fact  that  it  has  left  no  visible
record  for  posterity,  was  none  the  less,  if  we  may
believe  the  historians  and  that  free-speaking  tribe,
the  old  comic  poets,  endowed  with  almost  incredible
force,  is  known  to  have  been  a  pupil  of  the  physicist
Anaxagoras,  while  Demosthenes,  greatest  of  all  the
orators  of  Greece,  sat  at  the  feet  of  Plato.  As  for  23
Cicero,  he  has  often  proclaimed  ^  the  fact  that  he
owed  less  to  the  schools  of  rhetoric  than  to  the
walks  of  Academe  :  nor  would  he  ever  have  developed
such  amazing  fertility  of  talent,  had  he  bounded  his
genius  by  the  limits  of  the  forum  and  not  by  the
frontiers  of  nature  herself.

But  this  leads  me  to  another  question  as  to  which
school  of  philosophy  is  like  to  prove  of  most  service
to  oratory,  although  there  are  only  a  few  that  can  be
said  to  contend  for  this  honour.  For  in  the  first  24
place  Epicurus  banishes  us  from  his  presence  without
more  ado,  since  he  bids  all  his  followers  to  fly  from
learning  in  the  swiftest  ship  that  they  can  find.^
Nor  would  Aristippus,  who  regards  the  highest  good
as  consisting  in  physical  pleasure,  be  likely  to  exhort
us  to  the  toils  entailed  by  our  study.  And  what
part  can  Pyrrho  have  in  the  work  that  is  before  us?
For  he  will  have  doubts  as  to  whether  there  exist
judges  to  address,  accused  to  defend,  or  a  senate
where  he  can  be  called  upon  to  speak  his  opinion.

395


QUINTILIAN

26  quo  sit  dicenda  sententia,  non  liquebit.  Academiam
quidam  utilissimam  credunt,  quod  mos  in  utramque
partem  disserendi  ad  exercitationem  forensium  cau-

.L  sarum  proxime  accedat.  Adiiciunt  loco  probationis,
quod  ea  praestantissimos  in  eloquentia  viros  ediderit.
Peripatetici  studio  quoque  se  quodam  oratorio  iactant ;
nam  theses  dicere  exercitationis  gratia  fere  est  ab
lis  institutum.  Stoici,  sicut  copiam  nitoremque  elo-
quentiae  fere  praeceptoribus  suis  defuisse  concedant
necesse  est,  ita  nullos  aut  probare  acrius  aut  con-

26  cludere  subtilius  contendunt.  Sed  haee  inter  ipsos,
qui  velut  Sacramento  rogati  vel  etiam  superstitione
constricti  nefas  ducunt  a  suscepta  semel  persuasione
discedere, Oratori  vero  nihil  est  necesse  in  cuius-

27  quam  iurare  leges.  Maius  enim  est  opus  atque
praestantius,  ad  quod  ipse  tendit,  et  cuius  est  velut
candidatus,  si  quidem  est  futurus  cum  vitae,  turn
etiam  eloquentiae  laude  perfectus.  Quare  in  ex-
emplum  bene  dicendi  facundissimum  quemque  pro-
ponet  sibi  ad  imitandum,  moribus  vero  formandis
quam  honestissima  praecepta  rectissimamque  ad
virtutem  viam  deliget.  Exercitatione  quidem  utetur
omni,  sed  tamen  erit  plurimus  in  maximis  quibusque

28  ac  natura  pulcherrimis. Nam  quae  potest  materia

^  See  II.  i.  9.  in.  v.  5.  and  10.


BOOK XII.  II.  24-28

Some  authorities  hold  that  the  Academy  will  be  the  25
most  useful  school,  on  the  ground  that  its  habit  of
disputing  on  both  sides  of  a  question  approaches
most  nearly  to  the  actual  practice  of  the  courts.
And  by  way  of  proof  they  add  the  fact  that  this
school  has  produced  speakers  highly  renowned  for
their  eloquence.  The  Peripatetics  also  make  it  their
boast  that  they  have  a  form  of  study  which  is  near
akin  to  oratory.  For  it  was  with  them  in  the  main
that  originated  the  practice  of  declaiming  on  general
questions  ^  by  way  of  exercise.  The  Stoics,  though
driven  to  admit  that,  generally  speaking,their  teachers
have  been  deficient  both  in  fullness  and  charm  of
eloquence,  still  contend  that  no  men  can  prove  more
acutely  or  draw  conclusions  with  greater  subtlety
than  themselves.  But  all  these  arguments  take  26
place  within  their  own  circle,  for,  as  though  they
were  tied  by  some  solemn  oath  or  held  fast  in  the
bonds  of  some  superstitious  belief,  they  consider  that
it  is  a  crime  to  abandon  a  conviction  once  formed.
On  the  other  hand,  there  is  no  need  for  an  orator  to
swear  allegiance  to  any  one  philosophic  code.  For  27
he  has  a  greater  and  nobler  aim,  to  which  he  directs
all  his  efforts  with  as  much  zeal  as  if  he  were  a
candidate  for  office,  since  he  is  to  be  made  perfect
not  only  in  the  glory  of  a  virtuous  life,  but  in  that  of
eloquence  as  well.  He  will  consequently  select  as
his  models  of  eloquence  all  the  greatest  masters  of
oratory,  and  will  choose  the  noblest  precepts  and
the  most  direct  road  to  virtue  as  the  means  for
the  formation  of  an  upright  character.  He  will
neglect  no  form  of  exercise,  but  will  devote  special
attention  to  those  which  are  of  the  highest  and
fairest  nature. For  what  subject  can  be  found  more  28

397


QUINTILIAN

reperiri  ad  graviter  copioseque  dicendum  magis
abundans  quam  de  virtute,  de  re  publica,  de  provi-
dential de  origine  animorum,  de  amicitia  ?  Haec
sunt,  quibus  mens  pariter  atque  oratio  insurgat,  quae
vere  bona,  quid  mitiget  metus,  coerceat  cupiditates,
eximat  nos  opinionibus  vulgi  animumque  caelestem
erigat.^

29  Neque  ea  solum,  quae  talibus  disciplinis  conti-
nentur,  sed  magis  etiam,  quae  sunt  tradita  antiquitus
dicta  ac  facta  praeclare,  et  nosse  et  animo  semper
agitare  conveniet.  Quae  profecto  nusquam  plura
maioraque quam in nostrae civitatis monumentis

30  reperientur.  An  fortitudinem,  iustitiam,  fidem,  con-
tinentiam,  frugalitatem,  contemptum  doloris  ac
mortis  melius  alii  docebunt  quam  Fabricii,  Curii,
Reguli,  Decii,  Mucii  aliique  iunumerabiles  ?  Quan-
tum enim  Graeei  praeceptis  valent,  tantum  Romani,

31  quod  est  maius,  exemplis.  Tantum  quod  non  cognitis
ille  rebus  adquieverit,^  qui  non  modo  proximum
tempus  lucemque  praesentem  intueri  satis  credat,
sed  omnem  posteritatis  memoriam  spatium  vitae
honestae  et  curriculum  laudis  existimet.  Hinc  mihi
ille  iustitiae  haustus  bibat,  hinc  sumptam  libertatem
in  causis  atque  consiliis  praestet. Neque  erit  per-

^  erigat  added  by  Meister.

^  cognitis  ille  rebus  adcjuieverit,  HcUm,  Bonnell  i  cognatia

ide  rebus  admoveri,  B,.

^-^-jsi  .:•?',  jsi*  fete »'"

398


BOOK XII.  II.  28-31

fully  adapted  to  a  rich  and  weighty  eloquence  than
the  topics  of  virtue,  politics,  providence,  the  origin
of  the  soul  and  friendship  .''  The  themes  which  tend
to  elevate  mind  and  language  alike  are  questions
such  as  what  things  are  truly  good,  what  means  there
are  of  assuaging  fear,  restraining  the  passions  and
lifting  us  and  the  soul  that  came  from  heaven  clear
of  the  delusions  of  the  common  herd.

But  it  is  desirable  that  we  should  not  restrict  our  29
study  to  the  precepts  of  philosophy  alone.  It  is  still
more  important  that  we  should  know  and  ponder
continually  all  the  noblest  sayings  and  deeds  that  have
been  handed  down  to  us  from  ancient  times.  And
assuredly  we  shall  nowhere  find  a  larger  or  more
remarkable  store  of  these  than  in  the  records  of  our
own  country.  Who  will  teach  courage,  justice,  30
loyalty,  self-control,  simplicity,  and  contempt  of
grief  and  pain  better  than  men  like  Fabricius,  Curius,
Regulus,  Decius,  Mucins  and  countless  others  ?  For
if  the  Greeks  bear  away  the  palm  for  moral  precepts,
Rome  can  produce  more  striking  examples  of  moral
performance,  which  is  a  far  greater  thing.  But  the  31
man  who  does  not  believe  that  it  is  enough  to  fix
his  eyes  merely  on  his  own  age  and  his  own  transitory
life,  but  regards  the  space  allotted  for  an  honourable
life  and  the  course  in  which  glory's  race  is  run  as
conditioned  solely  by  the  memory  of  posterity,  will
not  rest  content  with  a  mere  knowledge  of  the
events  of  history.  No,  it  is  from  the  thought  of
posterity  that  he  must  inspire  his  soul  with  justice
and  derive  that  freedom  of  spirit  which  it  is  his  duty
to  display  when  he  pleads  in  the  courts  or  gives
counsel  in  the  senate.  No  man  will  ever  be  the
consummate  orator  of  whom  we  are  in  quest  unless

399


QUINTILIAN

fectus  orator,  nisi qui honeste  dicere  et  sciet et
audebit.

III.  luris  quoque  civilis  necessaria  huic  viro
scientia  est  et  morum  ac  religionum  eius  rei  publicae,
quam  capesset.  Nam  quails  esse  suasor  in  consiliis
publicis  privatisve  poterit  tot  rerum,  quibus  praecipue
civitas  continetur,  ignarus  ?  Quo  autem  modo  patro-
num  se  causarum  non  falso  dixerit,  qui,  quod  est  in
causis  potentissimum,  sit  ab  altero  petiturus,  paene
non  dissimilis  iis,  qui  poetarum  scripta  pronuntiant?

2  Nam  quodammodo  mandata  perferet,  et  ea,  quae  sibi
a  iudice  credi  postulaturus  est,  aliena  fide  dicet,  et
ipse  litigantium  auxiliator  egebit  auxilio.  Quod  ut
fieri  nonnunquam  minore  incommodo  possit,  cum
domi  praecepta  et  composita  et  sicut  cetera,  quae
in  causa  sunt,  inde^  discendo  cognita  ad  iudicem
perfert,  quid  fiet  in  iis  quaestionibus,  quae  subito
inter  ipsas  actiones  nasci  solent  ?  non  deformiter
respectet et inter subsellia  minores  advocatos  in-

3  terroget  ?  Potest  autem  satis  diligenter  accipere,
quae  turn  audiet,  cum  ei  dicenda  sunt,  aut  fortiter
adfirmare  aut  ingenue  pro  suis  dicere  ?  Possit  in
actionibus :  quid  fiet  in  altercatione,  ubi  occurren-
dum  continuo,  nee  libera  ad  discendum  mora  est?

','  iagrjf) *  inde,  Halm:  in,  MSS.
400


BOOK XII.  11.  31-111.  3

he  has  both  the  knowledge  and  the  courage  to  speak
in  accordance  with  the  promptings  of  honour.

III.  Our  orator  will  also  require  a  knowledge  of
civil  law  and  of  the  custom  and  religion  of  the  state
in  whose  life  he  is  to  bear  his  part.  For  how  will  he
be  able  to  advise  either  in  public  or  in  private,  if  he
is  ignorant  of  all  the  main  elements  that  go  to  make
the  state?  How  can  he  truthfully  call  himself  an
advocate  if  he  has  to  go  to  others  to  acquire  that
knowledge  which  is  all-important  in  the  courts  ?
He  will  be  little  better  than  if  he  were  a  reciter  of
the  poets.  For  he  will  be  a  mere  transmitter  of  the  :
instructions  that  others  have  given  him,  it  will  be  on
the  authority  of  others  that  he  propounds  what  he
asks  the  judge  to  believe,  and  he  whose  duty  it  is  to
succour  the  litigant  will  himself  be  in  need  of  succour.
It  is  true  that  at  times  this  may  be  effected  with  but
little  inconvenience,  if  what  he  advances  for  the
edification  of  the  judge  has  been  taught  him  and
composed  in  the  seclusion  of  his  study  and  learnt  by
heart  there  like  other  elements  of  the  case.  But
what  will  he  do,  when  he  is  confronted  by  unexpected
problems  such  as  frequently  arise  in  the  actual
course  of  pleading?  Will  he  not  disgrace  him-
self by  looking  round  and  asking  the  junior  counsel
who  sit  on  the  benches  behind  him  for  advice  ?  Can  J
he  hope  to  get  a  thorough  grasp  of  such  information
at  the  very  moment  when  he  is  required  to  produce
it  in  his  speech  ?  Can  he  make  his  assertions  with
confidence  or  speak  with  native  simplicity  as  though
his  arguments  were  his  own  ?  Grant  that  he  may  do
so  in  his  actual  speech.  But  what  will  he  do  in  a
debate,  when  he  has  continually  to  meet  fresh  points
raised  by  his  opponent  and  is  given  no  time  to  learn

401


QUINTILIAN

Quid,  si  forte  peritus  iuris  ille  non  aderit?  Quid,
si  quis  non  satis  in  ea  re  doctus  falsum  aliquid  sub-
iecerit  ? Hoc  enim  est  maximum  ignorantiae  malum,

4  quod  credit  eum  scire  qui  moneat.  Neque  ego  sum
nostri  moris  ignarus  oblitusve  eorum,  qui  velut  ad
arculas  sedent  et  tela  agentibus  subministrant,  neque
idem  Graecos  quoque  nescio  factitasse,  unde  nomen
his  pragmaticorura  datum  est.  Sed  loquor  de  ora-
tore,  qui  non  clamorem  modo  suum  causis,  sed  omnia,

5  quae  profutura  sunt,  debet.  Itaque  eum  nee  inu-
tilem,  si  ad  horam  forte  constiterit,  neque  in  testa-
tionibus  faciendis  esse  imperitum  velim.  Quis  enim
potius  praeparabit  ea  quae,  cum  aget,  esse  in  causa
velit?  Nisi  forte  imperatorem  quis  idoneum  credit
in  proeliis  quidem  strenuum  ct  fortem  et  omnium,
quae  pugna  poscit,  artificem,  sed  neque  delectus
agere  nee  copias  contrahere  atque  instruere  nee
prospicere  commeatus  nee  locum  capere  castris  scien-
tem ;  prius  est  enim  certe  parare  bella  quam  gerere.

6  Atqui  simillimus  huic  sit  advocatus,  si  plura,  quae
ad  vincendum  valent,  aliis  reliquerit,  cum  praesertim


*  Ad  horam  constare  appears  to  be  a  technical  term  for
"appearance  at  the  preliminary  hour,"  the  purpose  of  which
is  indicated  in  the  paraphrase  given  above.

402


BOOK XII.  in.  3-6

up  his  case  ?  What  will  he  do,  if  he  has  no  legal
expert  to  advise  him  or  if  his  prompter  through
insufficient  knowledge  of  the  subject  provides  him
with  information  that  is  false  }  It  is  the  most  serious
drawback  of  such  ignorance,  that  he  will  always
believe  that  his  adviser  knows  what  he  is  talking
about.  I  am  not  ignorant  of  the  generally  prevail-  4
ing  custom,  nor  have  I  forgotten  those  who  sit  by
our  store-chests  and  provide  weapons  for  the  pleader  :
I  know  too  that  the  Greeks  did  likewise:  hence
the  name  of  pragmaticus  which  was  bestowed  on
such  persons.  But  I  am  speaking  of  an  orator,  who
owes  it  as  a  duty  to  his  case  to  serve  it  not  merely
bj  the  loudness  of  his  voice,  but  by  all  other  means
that  may  be  of  assistance  to  it.  Consequently  I  do  5
not  wish  my  orator  to  be  helpless,  if  it  so  chance
that  he  puts  in  an  appearance  for  the  preliminary
proceedings  to  which  the  hour  before  the  commence-
ment of  the  trial  ^  is  allotted,  or  to  be  unskilful  in
the  preparation  and  production  of  evidence.  For
who,  sooner  than  himself,  should  prepare  the  points
which  he  wishes  to  be  brought  out  when  he  is
pleading  ?  You  might  as  well  suppose  that  the
qualifications  of  a  successful  general  consist  merely
in  courage  and  energy  in  the  field  of  battle  and  skill
in  meeting  all  the  demands  of  actual  conflict,  while
suffering  him  to  be  ignorant  of  the  methods  of  levy-
ing troops,  mustering  and  equipping  his  forces,
arranging  for  supplies  or  selecting  a  suitable  position
for  his  camp,  despite  the  fact  that  preparation  for
war  is  an  essential  preliminary  for  its  successful
conduct.  And  yet  such  a  general  would  bear  a  6
very  close  resemblance  to  the  advocate  who  leaves
much  of  the  detail  that  is  necessary  for  success  to

403


QUINTILIAN

hoc,  quod  est  maxime  necessarium,  nee  tam  sit
aiduum,  quam  procul  intuentibus  fortasse  videatur.
Namque  omne  ius,  quod  est  certum,  aut  scripto  aut
moribus  constat ; dubium  aequitatis  regula  exami-

7  nandum  est.  Quae  scripta  sunt  aut  posita  in  more
civitatis,  nuUam  habent  difficultatem,  cognitionis
sunt  enim,  non  inventionis ;  at  quae  consultorum
responsis  explicantur,  aut  in  verborum  interpretatione
sunt  posita  aut  in  recti  pravique  discrimine.  Vim
cuiusque  vocis  intelligere  aut  commune  prudentium
est  aut  proprium  oratoris  ; aequitas  optimo  cuique

8  notissima.  Nos  porro  et  bonum  virum  et  prudentem
in  primis  oratorem  putamus,  qui  cum  se  ad  id,  quod
est  optimum  natura,  direxerit,  non  magnopere  com-
movebitur,  si  quis  ab  eo  consultus  dissentiet ;  cum
ipsis  illis  diversas  inter  se  opiniones  tueri  concessum
sit.  Sed  etiam,  si  nosse,  quid  quisque  senserit,  volet,
lectionis  opus est,  qua  nihil est in studiis minus

y  laboriosum.  Quodsi  plerique,  desperata  facultate
agendi,  ad  discendum  ius  declinaverunt,  quam  id
scire  facile  est  oratori,  quod  discunt  qui  sua  quoque
confessione  oratores  esse  non  possunt?  Verum  et
M.  Cato  cum  in  dicendo  praestantissimus,  tum  iuris
idem  fuit  peritissimus,  et  Scaevolae  Servioque  Sul-
404


BOOK XII.  m.  6-9

the  care  of  others,  more  especially  in  view  of  the
fact  that  thiSj  the  most  necessary  element  in  the
management  of  a  case,  is  not  as  difficult  as  it  may
perhaps  seem  to  outside  observers.  For  every  point
of  law,  which  is  certain,  is  based  either  on  written
law  or  accepted  custom  :  if,  on  the  other  hand,  the
point  is  doubtful,  it  must  be  examined  in  the  light
of  equity.  Laws  which  are  either  written  or  founded  7
on  accepted  custom  present  no  difficulty,  since  they
call  merely  for  knowledge  and  make  no  demand  on
the  imagination.  On  the  other  hand,  the  points  ex-
plained in  the  rulings  of  the  legal  experts  turn  either
on  the  interpretation  of  words  or  on  the  distinction
between  right  and  wrong.  To  understand  the  mean-
ing of  each  word  is  either  common  to  all  sensible
men  or  the  special  possession  of  the  orator,  while
the  demands  of  equity  are  known  to  every  good
man.  Now  I  regard  the  orator  above  all  as  being  8
a  man  of  virtue  and  good  sense,  who  will  not  be
seriously  troubled,  after  having  devoted  himself  to
the  study  of  that  which  is  excellent  by  nature,  if
some  legal  expert  disagrees  with  him  ;  for  even  they
are  allowed  to  disagree  among  themselves.  But  if
he  further  wishes  to  know  the  views  of  everyone,
he  will  require  to  read,  and  reading  is  the  least
laborious  of  all  the  tasks  that  fall  to  the  student's
lot.  Moreover,  if  the  class  of  legal  experts  is  as  a  rule  9
drawn  from  those  who,  in  despair  of  making  suc-
cessful pleaders,  have  taken  refuge  with  the  law,
how  easy  it  must  be  for  an  orator  to  know  what
those  succeed  in  learning,  who  by  their  own  con-
fession are  incapable  of  becoming  orators !  But
Marcus  Cato  was  at  once  a  great  orator  and  an
expert  lawyer,  while  Scaevola  and  Servius  Sulpicius

405


QUINTILIAN

10  picio  concessa  est  etiam  facundiae  virtus.  Et  M.
Tullius  non  modo  inter  agendum  nunquam  est  desti-
tutus  scientia  iaris,  sed  etiam  componere  aliqua  de
eo  coeperat,  ut  appareat  posse  oratorem  non  dis-
cendo  tantum  iuri  vacare,  sed  etiam  docendo.

11  Verum  ea,  quae  de  moribus  excolendis  studioque
iuris  praecipimus,  ne  quis  eo  credat  reprehendenda,
quod  multoscognovimus,  quitaedio  laboris,quemferre
tendentibus  ad  eloquentiam  necesse  est,  confugerint
ad  haec  deverticula  desidiae.  Quorum  alii  se  ad
album  ac  rubricas  transtulerunt  et  formularii  vel,  ut
Cicero  ait,  leguleii  quidam  esse  maluerunt,  tanquam
utiliora  eligentes  ea,  quorum  solam  facilitatem  seque-

12  bantur;  alii  pigritiae  arrogantioris,  qui  subito  fronte
conficta  immissaque  barba,  veluti  despexissent  ora-
toria  praecepta,  paulum  aliquid  sederunt  in  scholis
philoso})horum,  ut  deinde  in  publico  tristes,  domi
dissoluti  captarent  auctoritatem  contemptu  cetero-
rum.  Philosophia  enim  simulari  potest,  eloquentia
non  potest.

IV.  In  primis  vero  abundare  debet  orator  exemplo-
rum  copia  cum  veterum,  turn  etiam  novorum,  adeo
ut  non  ea  modo,  quae  conscripta  sunt  historiis  aut
sermonibus  velut  per  manus  tradita,  quaeque  cotidie
aguntur,  debeat  nosse,  verum  ne  ea  quidem,  quae


>  i.  e.  as  well  as  experts  on  the  law.

*  The  praetor's  edicts  were  displayed  on  a  whitened  board
{in  albo),  while  the  headings  of  the  civil  law  were  written  in
red.  •  dt  Or.  i.  Iv.  236.

406


BOOK  XII.  III.  9-iv.  I

were  universally  allowed  to  be  eloquent  as  well.*
And  Cicero  not  merely  possessed  a  sufficient  supply  of  10
legal  knowledge  to  serve  his  needs  when  pleading,
but  actually  began  to  write  on  the  subject,  so  that
it  is  clear  that  an  orator  has  not  merely  time  to
leam,  but  even  to  teach  the  law.

Let  no  one,  however,  regard  the  advice  I  have  11
given  as  to  the  attention  due  to  the  development
of  character  and  the  study  of  the  law  as  being
impugned  by  the  fact  that  we  are  familiar  with
many  who,  because  they  were  weary  of  the  toil
entailed  on  those  who  seek  to  scale  the  heights
of  eloquence,  have  betaken  themselves  to  the  study
of  law  as  a  refuge  for  their  indolence.  Some  of
these  transfer  their  attention  to  the  praetor's  edicts
or  the  civil  law,^  and  have  preferred  to  become
specialists  in  formulae,  or  legalists,  as  Cicero  *  calls
them,  on  the  pretext  of  choosing  a  more  useful
branch  of  study,  whereas  their  real  motive  was  its
comparative  easiness.  Others  are  the  victims  of  a  12
more  arrogant  form  of  sloth ;  they  assume  a  stern
air  and  let  their  beards  grow,  and,  as  though  de-
spising the  precepts  of  oratory,  sit  for  a  while  in
the  schools  of  the  philosophers,  that,  by  an  assum{>-
tion  of  a  severe  mien  before  the  public  gaze  and  by
an  affected  contempt  of  others  tliey  may  assert  their
moral  superiority,  while  leading  a  life  of  debauchery
at  home.  For  philosophy  may  be  counterfeited,  but
eloquence  never.

IV.  Above  all,  our  orator  should  be  equipped
with  a  rich  store  of  examples  both  old  and  new :
and  he  ought  not  merely  to  know  those  which  are
recorded  in  history  or  transmitted  by  oral  tradition
or  occur  from  day  to  day,  but  should not  neglect

407


QUINTILIAN

2  sunt  a  clarioribus  poetis  ficta,  negligere.  Nam  ilia
quidem  priora  aut  testimonioruin  aut  etiam  iudica-
torum  obtinent  locum,  sed  haec  quoque  aut  vetustatis
fide  tuta  sunt  aut  ab  hominibus  magnis  praeceptorum
loco  ficta  creduntur.  Sciat  ergo  quam  plurima ;
unde  etiam  senibus  auctoritas  maior  est,  quod  plura
nosse  et  vidisse  creduntur,  quod  Homerus  frequentis-
sime  testatur.  Sed  non  est  exspectanda  ultima  aetas,
cum  studia  praestent  ut,  quantum  ad  cognitionem
pertinet  rerum,  etiam  praeteritis  saeculis  vixisse
videamur.

V.  Haec  sunt,  quae  me  redditurum  promiseram,
instrumenta  non  artis,  ut  quidam  putaverunt,  sed
ipsius  oratoris.  Haec  arma  habere  ad  manum,
horum  scientia  debet  esse  succinctus,  accedente
verborum  figurarumque  facili  copia  et  inventionis
ratione  et  disponendi  usu  et  memoriae  firmitate  et
actionis  gratia.  Sed  plurimum  ex  his  valet  animi
praestantia,  quam  nee  metus  frangat  nee  adclamatio
terreat nee audientium auctoritas ultra debitam

2  reverentiam  tardet.  Nam  ut  abominanda  sunt  con-
traria  his  vitia  confidentiae,  temeritatis,  improbitatis,
arrogantiae,  ita  citra  constantiam,  fiduciam,  forti-
tudinem  nihil  ars,  nihil  studium,  nihil  profectus  ipse
profuerit,  ut  si  des  arma  timidis  et  imbellibus.  Invi-
tus  mehercule  dico,  quoniam  et  aliter  accipi  potest,

»  I  Pr.  22  and  xii.  Pr.  4.

4o9


BOOK XII.  IV.  i-v.  2

even  those  fictitious  examples  invented  by  the  great
poets.  For  while  the  former  have  the  authority  of  2
evidence  or  even  of  legal  decisions,  the  latter  also
either  have  the  warrant  of  antiquity  or  are  regarded
as  having  been  invented  by  great  men  to  serve  as
lessons  to  the  world.  He  should  therefore  be  ac-
quainted with  as  many  examples  as  possible.  It  is
this  which  gives  old  age  so  much  authority,  since
the  old  are  believed  to  have  a  larger  store  of  know-
ledge and  experience,  as  Homer  so  frequently  bears
witness.  But  we  must  not  wait  till  the  evening  of
our  days,  since  study  has  this  advantage  that,  as  far
as  knowledge  of  facts  is  concerned,  it  is  capable  of
giving  the  impression  that  we  have  lived  in  ages
long  gone  by.

V.  Such  are  the  instruments  of  which  I  promised  *
to  give  account,  the  instruments,  that  is,  not  merely
of  the  art,  as  some  have  held,  but  of  the  orator  him-
self These  are  the  weapons  that  he  should  have
ready  to  his  hand,  this  the  knowledge  with  which  he
must  be  equipped,  while  it  must  be  supplemented  by
a  ready  store  of  words  and  figures,  power  of  imagi-
nation, skill  in  arrangement,  retentiveness  of  memory
and  grace  of  delivery.  But  of  all  these  qualities  the
highest  is  that  loftiness  of  soul  which  fear  cannot
dismay  nor  uproar  terrify  nor  the  authority  of  the
audience  fetter  further  than  the  respect  which  is
their  due.  For  although  the  vices  which  are  its  2
opposites,  such  as  arrogance,  temerity,  impudence
and  presumption,  are  all  positively  obnoxious,  still
without  constancy,  confidence  and  courage,  art,  study
and  proficiency  will  be  of  no  avail.  You  might  as
well  put  weapons  into  the  hands  of  the  unwarlike
and  the  coward. It  is  indeed  with  some  reluctance,

VOL.  IV.  o 409


QUINTILIAN

ipsam  verecundiam,  vitium  quidem,  sed  amabile  et
quae  virtutes  facillime  generet,  esse  interim  adver-
sam,  multisque  in  causa  fuisse,  ut  bona  ingenii
studiique  in  lucem  non  prolata  situ  quodam  secreti

3  consumerentur.  Sciat  autem,  si  quis  haec  forte
minus  adhuc  peritus  distinguendi  vim  cuiusque  verbi
leget,  non  probitatem  a  me  reprehendi,  sed  vere-
cundiam,  quae  est  timor  quidam  reducens  animum
ab  iis  quae  facienda  sunt ;  inde  confusio  et  coepti
paenitentia  et  subitum  silentium.  Quis  porro  dubitet
vitiis adscribere adfectum, propter quem facere

4  honeste  pudet  ?  Neque  ego  rursus  nolo  cum,  qui  sit
dicturus,  et  soUicitum  surgere  et  colore  mutari  et
periculum  intelligere ;  quae  si  non  accident,  etiam
simulanda  erunt.  Sed  intellectus  hie  sit  operis,  non
metus,  moveamurque,  non  concidamus.  Optima  est
autem  emendatio  verecundiae  fiducia,  et  quamlibet
imbecilla  frons  magna  conscientia  sustinetur.

6  Sunt  et  naturalia,  ut  supra  dixi,  quae  tamen  et
cura  iuvantur,  instrumenta,  vox,  latus,  decor;  quae

»  I  Fr.  27.
410


BOOK XII.  V.  2-5

as  it  may  give  rise  to  misunderstanding,  that  I  say
that  even  modesty  (vvrhich,  though  a  fault  in  itself,  is
an  amiable  failing  which  may  easily  be  the  mother  of
virtues)  is  on  occasion  an  impediment  and  has
frequently  caused  the  fruits  of  genius  and  study  to
consume  away  in  the  mildew  of  obscurity  merely
because  they  have  never  been  displayed  to  the  public
day.  But  in  case  any  of  my  readers  should  still  lack  J
skill  to  distinguish  the  precise  meaning  of  each
word,  I  would  have  him  know  that  it  is  not  honest
shame  that  is  the  object  of  my  criticism,  but  that
excess  of  modesty  which  is  really  a  form  of  fear
deterring  the  soul  from  doing  what  is  its  duty  to  do,
and  resulting  in  confusion  of  mind,  regret  that  our
task  was  ever  begun,  and  sudden  silence.  For  who
can  hesitate  to  give  the  name  of  fault  to  a  feeling
that  makes  a  man  ashamed  to  do  what  is  right  ?  On  •
the  other  hand,  I  am  not  unwilling  that  the  man  who
has  got  to  make  a  speech  should  show  signs  of
nervousness  when  he  rises  to  his  feet,  should  change
colour  and  make  it  clear  that  he  feels  the  risks  of  his
position :  indeed,  if  these  symptoms  do  not  occur
naturally,  it  will  be  necessary  to  simulate  them.
But  the  feeling  that  stirs  us  should  be  due  to  the
realisation  of  the  magnitude  of  our  task  and  not  to
fear :  we  should  be  moved,  but  not  to  the  extent  of
collapsing.  But  the  best  remedy  for  such  excess
of  modesty  is  confidence  :  however  great  our  natural
timidity  of  mien,  we  shall  find  strength  and  support
in  the  consciousness  of  the  nobility  of  our  task.

There  are  also  those  natural  instruments  which,  as
I  mentioned  above,^  may  be  further  improved  by
care,  such  as  voice,  lungs  and  grace  of  carriage
and  movement,  all  of  which  are  of  such  importance

411


QUINTILIAN

quidem  tantum  valent,  ut  frequenter  famam  ingenii
faciant.  Habuit  oratores  aetas  nostra  copiosiores,
sed,  cum  diceret,  eminere  inter  aequales  Trachalus
videbatur.  Ea  corporis  sublimitas  erat,  is  ardor
oculorum,  frontis  auctoritas^  gestus  praestantia,  vox
quidem  non,  ut  Cicero  desiderat,  paene  tragoedorum,
sed  super  omnes,  quos  ego  quidem  audierim,  tragoe-

6  dos.  Certe  cum  in  basilica  lulia  diceret  primo
tribunali,  quattuor  autem  iudicia,  ut  moris  est,
cogerentur,  atque  omnia  clamoribus  fremerent,  et
auditum  eum  et  intellectum  et,  quod  agentibus
ceteris  contumeliosissimum  fuit,  laudatum  quoque
ex  quattuor  tribunalibus  memini,  Sed  hoc  votum
est  et  rara  felicitas;  quae  si  non  adsit,  sane  sufficiat
ab  iis,  quibus  quis  dicit,  audiri.  Talis  esse  debet
orator,  haec  scire.

VI.  Agendi  autem  initium  sine  dubio  secundum
vires  cuiusque  sumendum  est.  Neque  ego  annos
definiam,  cum  Demosthenen  puerum  admodum
actiones  pupillares  habuisse  manifestum  sit,  Calvus,
Caesar,  Pollio  multum  ante  quaestoriam  omnes  aeta-
tem  gravissima  iudicia  susceperint,  praetextatos
egisse  quosdam  sit  traditum,  Caesar  Augustus  duo-
decim natus annos aviam pro rostris laudaverit.

2  Modus  mihi  videtur  quidam  tenendus,  ut  neque  prae-

»  de  Or.  I.  xxviii.  128.

•  Of  the  Centumviral  Court.  Four  dififerent  cases  were
being  tried  simultaneously.

*  Demosthenes  was  18,  Crassus  19,  Caesar  21,  Asinius  Pollio
22  and  Calvus  not  much  older. See  Tac.  Dial.  34.

41?


BOOK XII.  V.  5-vi.  2

as  frequently  to  give  a  speaker  the  reputation  for
talent.  Our  own  age  has  had  orators  of  greater
resource  and  power,  but  Trachalus  appeared  to  stand
out  above  all  his  contemporaries,  when  he  was  speak-
ing. Such  was  the  effect  produced  by  his  lofty
stature,  the  fire  of  his  eye,  the  dignity  of  his  brow,
the  excellence  of  his  gesture,  coupled  with  a  voice
which  was  not  almost  a  tragedian's,  as  Cicero^
demands  that  it  should  be,  but  surpassed  the  voice
of  all  tragedians  that  I  have  ever  heard.  At  any  6
rate  I  remember  that,  when  he  was  speaking  in  the
Basilica  Julia  before  the  first  tribunal,  and  the  four
jMinels  of  judges^  were  assembled  as  usual  and  the
whole  building  was  full  of  noise,  he  could  still  be
heard  and  understood  and  applauded  from  all  four
tribunals  at  once,  a  fact  which  was  not  complimentary
to  the  other  pleaders.  But  gifts  like  these  are  such
as  all  may  pray  for  and  few  are  happy  enough  to
attain.  And  if  we  cannot  achieve  such  fortune,  we
must  even  be  content  to  be  heard  by  the  court  which
we  are  addressing.  Such  then  should  the  orator  be,
and  such  are  the  things  which  he  should  know.

VI.  The  age  at  which  the  orator  should  begin  to
plead  will  of  course  depend  on  the  development  of
his  strengtli.  I  shall  not  specify  it  further,  since  it
is  clear  that  Demosthenes  pleaded  against  his
guardians  while  he  was  still  a  mere  boy,  Calvus,
Caesar  and  Pollio^  all  undertook  cases  of  the  first
importance  before  they  were  old  enough  to  be
qualified  for  the  quaestorship,  others  are  said  to  have
pleaded  while  still  wearing  the  garb  of  boyhood,
and  Augustus  Caesar  delivered  a  funeral  oration  over
his  grandmother  from  the  public  rostra  when  he  was
only  twelve  years  old. In  my  opinion  we  should  aim  2

413


QUINTILIAN

propere  destringatur  immatura  frons  nee/  quidquid
est  illud  adhuc  acerbum,  proferatur;  nam  inde  et
contemptus  operis  innascitur  et  fundamenta  iaciuntur
impudentiae  et,  quod  est  ubicunque  pernieiosissimum,

3  praevenit  vires  fiducia.  Nee  rursus  differendum  est
tirocinium  in  senectutem  ;  nam  cotidie  metus  crescit,
maiusque  fit  semper  quod  ausuri  sumus  et,  dum
deliberamus  quando  incipiendum  sit,  incipere  iam
serum  est.  Quare  fructum  studiorum  viridem  et
adhuc  dulcem  promi  decet,  dum  et  veniae  *  spes  est
et  paratus  favor  et  audere  non  dedecet  et,  si  quid
desit operi, supplet aetas, et, si qua sunt dicta

4  iuveniliter,  pro  indole  accipiuntur :  ut  totus  ille
Ciceronis  pro  Sexto  Roscio  locus :  Quid  enim  tarn
commune  quam  spiritus  vivis,  tetra  mortuis,  mare  Jluctu-
aniibus,  litus  eiectis  ?  Quae  cum  sex  et  viginti  natus
annos  summis  audientium  clamoribus  dixerit,  defer-
visse  tempore  et  annis  liquata  iam  senior  idem
fatetur.  Et  hercule  quantumlibet  secreta  studia
contulerint,  est  tamen  proprius  quidam  fori  profectus,

*  nee,  Buttmann:  et,  ifSS.

^  veniae,  Davisius :  venia  et,  MSS.

*  pro  Rose.  Amer.  ixvi.  72.  Oral.  xxx.  107.


BOOK XII.  VI.  2-4

at  a  happy  mean.  The  unripe  brow  of  boyhood
should  not  be  prematurely  robbed  of  its  ingenuous
air  nor  should  the  young  speaker's  powers  be  brought
before  the  public  while  yet  unformed,  since  such  a
practice  leads  to  a  contempt  for  study,  lays  the
foundations  of  impudence  and  induces  a  fault  which
is  pernicious  in  all  departments  of  life,  namely,  a  self-
confidence  that  is  not  justified  by  the  speaker's
resources.  On  the  other  hand,  it  is  undesirable  to  3
postpone  the  apprenticeship  of  the  bar  till  old  age:
for  the  fear  of  appearing  in  public  grows  daily  and
the  magnitude  of  the  task  on  which  we  must  venture
continually  increases  and  we  waste  time  deliberating
when  we  should  begin,  till  we  find  it  is  too  late  to
begin  at  all.  Consequently  it  is  desirable  that  the
fruit  of  our  studies  should  be  brought  before  the
public  eye  while  it  is  still  fresh  and  sweet,  while  it
may  hope  for  indulgence  and  be  secure  of  a  kindly
disposition  in  the  audience,  while  boldness  is  not
unbecoming  and  youth  compensates  for  all  defects
and  boyish  extravagance  is  regarded  as  a  sign  of
natural  vigour.  Take  for  example  the  whole  of  the  4
well-known  passage  from  Cicero's  defence  of  Sextus
Roscius :  ^  "  For  what  is  more  common  than  the  air
to  the  living,  than  the  earth  to  the  dead,  than  the
sea  to  mariners  or  the  shore  to  shipwrecked  men  ?  "
etc.  This  passage  was  delivered  at  the  age  of
twenty-six  amid  loud  applause  from  the  audience,
but  in  later  years  ^  he  acknowledges  that  the  ferment
of  youth  has  died  down  and  his  style  been  clarified
with  age.  And,  indeed,  however  much  private  study
may  contribute  to  success,  there  is  still  a  peculiar
proficiency  that  the  courts  alone  can  give :  for  there
the  atmosphere  is  changed  and  the  reality  of  the

415


QUINTILIAN

alia lux, alia veri discriminis facies, plusque, si
separes,  usus  sine  doctrina  quam  citra  usum  doctrina

5  valet.  Ideoque  nonnulli  senes  in  schola  facti  stupent
novitate,  cum  in  iudicia  venerunt,  et  omnia  suis
exercitationibus  similia  desiderant.  At  illic  et  iudex
tacet  et  adversarius  obstrepit  et  nihil  temere  dictum
perit  et,  si  quid  tibi  ipse  sumas,  probandum  est,  et
laboratam  congestamque  dierum  ac  noctium  studio
actionem  aqua  deficit,  et  omisso  magna  semper
flandi  tumore  in  quibusdam  causis  loquendum  est;

6  quod  illi  diserti  minima  sciunt.  Itaque  nonnullos
reperias,  qui  sibi  eloquentiores  videantur,  quam  ut
causas  agant.  Ceterum  ilium,  quem  iuvenem  tene-
risque  adhuc  viribus  nitentem  in  forum  deduximus,
et  incipere  quam  maxime  facili  ac  favorabili  causa
velim,  ferarum  ut  catuli  moUiore  praeda  saginantur,
et  non  utique  ab  hoc  initio  continuare  operam  et
ingenio  adhuc  alendo  callum  inducere,  sed  iam
scientem,  quid  sit  pugna,  et  in  quam  rem  studendum

7  sit,  refici  atque  renovari.  Sic  et  tirocinii  metum,
dum  facilius  est  audere,  transient,  nee  audendi
4i6


BOOK XII.  VI.  4-7

peril  puts  a  different  complexion  on  things,  while,  if
it  is  impossible  to  combine  the  two,  practice  vrithout
theory  is  more  useful  than  theory  without  practice.
Consequently,  some  who  have  grown  old  in  the  5
schools  lose  their  heads  when  confronted  by  the
novelty  of  the  law  courts  and  wish  that  it  were
possible  to  reproduce  all  the  conditions  under  which
they  delivered  their  exercises.  But  there  sits  the
judge  in  silence,  their  opponent  bellows  at  them,  no
rash  utterance  passes  unnoticed  and  all  assumptions
must  be  proved,  the  clock  cuts  short  the  speech  that
has  been  laboriously  pieced  together  at  the  cost  of
hours  of  study  both  by  day  and  night,  and  there  are
certain  cases  which  require  simplicity  of  language  and
the  abandonment  of  the  perpetual  bombast  of  the
schools,  a  fact  which  these  fluent  fellows  completely
fail  to  realise.  And  so  you  will  find  some  persons  6
who  regard  themselves  as  too  eloquent  to  speak  in
the  courts.  On  the  other  hand,  the  man,  whom  we
conducted  to  the  forum  while  still  young  and  in  the
chann  of  immaturity,  should  begin  with  as  easy  and
favourable  a  case  as  may  be  (just  as  the  cubs  of  wild
beasts  are  brought  up  to  start  with  on  softer
forms  of  prey),  and  should  not  proceed  straight
from  this  commencement  to  plead  case  after  case
without  a  break,  or  cause  his  talents  to  set  and
harden  while  they  still  require  nourishment ;  on  the
contrary,  as  soon  as  he  has  come  to  realise  the  nature
of  the  conflicts  in  which  he  will  have  to  engage  and
the  object  to  which  his  studies  should  be  directed,  he
should  take  an  interval  of  rest  and  refreshment.
Thus,  at  an  age  to  which  boldness  is  still  natural,  he  7
will  find  it  easy  to  get  over  the  timidity  which  invari-
ably accompanies  the  period  of  apprenticeship,  and


QUINTILIAN

facilitatem  usque  ad  contemptum  operis  adduxerit.
Usus  est  hac  ratione  M.  Tullius,  et  cum  iam  clarum
meruisset  inter  patronos,  qui  turn  erant,  nomen,  in
Asiam  navigavit  seque  et  aliis  sine  dubio  eloquentiae
ae  sapientiae  magistris,  sed  praecipue  tamen  ApoUo-
nio  Molonij  quem  Romae  quoque  audierat,  Rhodi
rursus  formandum  ac  velut  recoquendum  dedit.  Turn
dignum  operae  pretium  venit,  cum  inter  se  congruunt
praecepta  et  experimenta.

VII.  Cum  satis  in  omni  certamine  virium  fecerit,
prima  ei  cura  in  suscipiendis  causis  erit ;  in  quibus
defendere  quidem  reos  profecto  quam  facere  vir
bonus  malet,  non  tamen  ita  nomen  ipsum  accusatoris
horrebit,  ut  nullo  neque  publico  neque  privato  duci
possit  officio,  ut  aliquem  ad  reddendam  rationera
vitae  vocet.  Nam  et  leges  ipsae  nihil  valeant,  nisi
actoris  idonea  voce  munitae ;  et  si  poenas  scelerum
expetere  fas  non  est,  prope  est  ut  scelera  ipsa  per-
missa  sint,  et  licentiam  malis  dari  certe  contra
2  bonos  est.  Quare  neque  sociorum  querelas  nee
amici  vel  propinqui  necem  nee  erupturas  in  rem
publicam  conspirationes  inultas  patietur  orator,  non
poenae  nocentium  cupidus,  sed  emendandi  vitia
418


BOOK  XII.  VI.  7-vii.  2

will  not,  on  the  other  hand,  carry  his  boldness  so  far
as  to  lead  him  to  despise  the  difficulties  of  his  task.
This  was  the  method  employed  by  Cicero :  for  when
he  had  already  won  a  distinguished  position  at  the
bar  of  his  day,  he  took  ship  to  Asia  and  there  studied
under  a  number  of  professors  of  philosophy  and
rhetoric,  but  above  all  under  Apollonius  Molon,
whose  lectures  he  had  attended  at  Rome  and  to
whom  he  now  at  Rhodes  entrusted  the  refashioning
and  recasting  of  his  style.  It  is  only  when  theory
and  practice  are  brought  into  a  perfect  harmony
that  the  orator  reaps  the  reward  of  all  his  study.

VII.  When  our  orator  has  developed  his  strength
to  such  a  pitch  that  it  is  equal  to  every  kind  of  con-
flict in  which  he  may  be  called  upon  to  bear  his  part,
his  first  consideration  should  be  to  exercise  care  in
the  choice  of  the  cases  which  he  proposes  to  under-
take. A  good  man  will  undoubtedly  prefer  defence
to  prosecution,  but  he  will  not  have  such  a  rooted
objection  to  the  task  of  accuser  as  to  disregard  his
duty  towards  the  state  or  towards  individuals  and
refuse  to  call  any  man  to  render  an  account  of  his
way  of  life.  For  the  laws  themselves  would  be
powerless  without  the  assistance  of  advocates  equal
to  the  task  of  supporting  them  ;  and  to  regard  it  as  a
sin  to  demand  the  punishment  of  crime  is  almost  equi-
valent to  the  sanctioning  of  crime,  while  it  is  certainly
contrary  to  the  interest  of  the  good  to  give  the
wicked  free  leave  to  work  their  will.  Therefore,  our
orator  will  not  suffer  the  complaints  of  our  allies,  the
death  of  friends  or  kinsmen,  or  conspiracies  that
threaten  the  common  weal  to  go  unavenged,  while
his  conduct  will  be  governed  not  by  a  passion  to
secure  the  punishment  of  the guilty,  but by  the

419


QUINTILIAN

corrigendique  mores. Nam  qui  ratione  traduci  ad

3  meliora  non  possunt,  solo  metu  continentur.  Itaque
ut  accusatoriam  vitam  vivere  et  ad  deferendos  reos
praemio  duci  proximum  latrocinio  est,  ita  pestem
intestinam  propulsare  cum  propugnatoribus  patriae
comparandum.  Ideoque  principes  in  re  publica  viri
non  detrectaverunt  hanc  officii  partem,  creditique
sunt  etiam  clari  iuvenes  obsidem  rei  publicae  dare
malorum  civium  accusationem,  quia  nee  odisse  im-
probos  nee  simultates  provocare  nisi  ex  fiducia  bonae

4  mentis  videbantur ;  idque  cum  ab  Hortensio,  Lucullis,
Sulpicio,  Cicerone,  Caesare,  plurimis  aliis,  turn  ab
utroque  Catone  factum  est,  quorum  alter  appellatus
est  sapiens,  alter  nisi  creditur  fuisse,  vix  scio,  cui
reliquerit  huius  nominis  locum.  Neque^  defendet
omnes  orator  idem,  portumque  ilium  eloquentiae
suae  salutarem  non  etiam  piratis  patefaciet  ducetur-

6  que  in  advocationem  maxime  causa.  Quoniam  tamen
omnes,  qui  non  improbe  litigabunt,  quorum  certe
bona  pars  est,  sustinere  non  potest  unus,  aliquid
et  commendantium  personis dabit  et  ipsorum qui

^  neque,  early  edd. :  namque,  MSS.


»  i.  e.  Cato  the  Elder.

4?^


BOOK XII.  VII.  2-5

desire  to  correct  vice  and  reform  morals.  For  fear
is  the  only  means  of  restraining  those  who  cannot
be  led  to  better  ways  by  the  voice  of  reason.  Conse-  !
quently,  while  to  devote  one's  life  to  the  task  of
accusation,  and  to  be  tempted  by  the  hope  of  reward
to  bring  the  guilty  to  trial  is  little  better  than  making
one's  living  by  highway  robbery,  none  the  less  to  rid
one's  country  of  the  pests  that  gnaw  its  vitals  is
conduct  worthy  of  comparison  with  that  of  heroes,
who  champion  their  country's  cause  in  the  field  of
battle.  For  this  reason  men  who  were  leaders  of  the
state  have  not  refused  to  undertake  this  portion  of
an  orator's  duty,  and  even  young  men  of  high  rank
have  been  regarded  as  giving  their  country  a  pledge
of  their  devotion  by  accusing  bad  citizens,  since  it
was  thought  that  their  hatred  of  evil  and  their
readiness  to  incur  enmity  were  proofs  of  their  confi-
dence in  their  own  rectitude.  Such  action  was
taken  by  Hortensius,  the  LucuUi,  Sulpicius,  Cicero,
Caesar  and  many  others,  among  them  both  the  Catos,
of  whom  one  was  actually  called  the  Wise,^  while  if
the  other  is  not  regarded  as  wise,  I  do  not  know  of
any  that  can  claim  the  title  after  him.  On  the  other
hand,  this  same  orator  of  ours  will  not  defend  all  and
sundry :  that  haven  of  safety  which  his  eloquence
provides  will  never  be  opened  to  pirates  as  it  is  to
others,  and  he  will  be  led  to  undertake  cases  mainly
by  consideration  of  their  nature.  However,  since
one  man  cannot  undertake  the  cases  of  all  litigants
who  are  not,  as  many  undoubtedly  are,  dishonest,  he
will  be  influenced  to  some  extent  by  the  character
of  the  persons  who  recommend  clients  to  his  pro-
tection and  also  by  the  character  of  the  litigants
themselves,  and  will  allow  himself  to  be  moved  by

421


QUINTILIAN

iudicio decernent, ut optimi cuiusque voluntate
moveatur;  namque  hos  et  amicissimos habebit  vir

6  bonus.  Summovendum  vero  est  utrumque  ambitus
genus  vel  potentibus  contra  humiles  venditandi
operam  suam  vel  illud  etiam  iactantius  minores
utique  contra  dignitatem  attollendi.  Non  enim  for-
tuna  causas  vel  iustas  vel  improbas  facit.  Neque
vero  pudor  obstet,  quo  minus  susceptam,  cum  melior
videretur,  litem  cognita  inter  discendum  iniquitate

7  dimittat,  cum  prius  litigatori  dixerit  verum.  Nam  et
in  hoc  maximum,  si  aequi  iudices  sumus,  beneficium
est,  ut  non  fallamus  vana  spe  litigantem.  Neque
est  dignus  opera  patroni,  qui  non  utitur  consilio,
et  certe  non  convenit  ei,  quem  oratorem  esse
volumus,  iniusta  tueri  scientem.  Nam  si  ex  illis,
quas  supra  diximus,  causis  falsum  tuebitur,  erit
tamen  honestum  quod  ipse  faciet.

8  Gratlsne  el  semper  agendum  sit,  tractari  potest.
Quod  ex  prima  statim  fronte  diiudicare  impru-
dentium  est.  Nam  quia  ignorat,  quin  id  longe  sit
honestissimum  ac  liberalibus  disciplinis  et  illo,  quem
exigimus,  animo  dignissimum,  non  vendere  operam
nee  elevare  tanti  beneficii  auctoritatem,  cum  plera-

*  XII.  i.  36.
422


BOOK XII.  VII.  5-8

the  wishes  of  all  virtuous  men ;  for  a  good  man  will
naturally  have  such  for  his  most  intimate  friends.
But  he  must  put  away  from  him  two  kinds  of  6
pretentious  display,  the  one  consisting  in  the
officious  proffering  of  his  services  to  the  powerful
against  those  of  meaner  position,  and  the  other,
which  is  even  more  obtrusive,  in  deliberately  support-
ing inferiors  against  those  of  high  degree.  For  a
case  is  not  rendered  either  just  or  the  reverse  by  the
social  position  of  the  parties  engaged.  Nor,  again,
will  a  sense  of  shame  deter  him  from  throwing  over
a  case  which  he  has  undertaken  in  the  belief  that  it
had  justice  on  its  side,  but  which  his  study  of  the
facts  has  shown  to  be  unjust,  although  before  doing
so  he  should  give  his  client  his  true  opinion  on  the
case.  For,  if  we  judge  aright,  there  is  no  greater  7
benefit  that  we  can  confer  on  our  clients  than  this,
that  we  should  not  cheat  them  by  giving  them  empty
hopes  of  success.  On  the  other  hand,  no  client  that
does  not  take  his  advocate  into  his  counsel  deserves
that  advocate's  assistance,  and  it  is  certainly  unworthy
of  our  ideal  orator  that  he  should  wittingly  defend
injustice.  For  if  he  is  led  to  defend  what  is  false
bv  any  of  the  motives  which  I  mentioned  above,^  his
own  action  will  still  be  honourable.

It  is  an  open  question  whether  he  should  never  8
demand  a  fee  for  his  services.  To  decide  the
question  at  first  sight  would  be  the  act  of  a  fool.
For  we  all  know  that  by  far  the  most  honourable
course,  and  the  one  which  is  most  in  keeping  with  a
liberal  education  and  that  temper  of  mind  which  we
desiderate,  is  not  to  sell  our  services  nor  to  debase
the  value  of  such  a  boon  as  eloquence,  since  there
are  not  a  few  things  which  come  to  be  regarded  as

423


QUINTILIAN

que  hoc  ipso  possint  videri  vilia,  quod  pretium
9  habent  ?  Caecis  hoc,  ut  aiunt,  satis  clarum  est,  nee
quisquam,  qui  sufficientia  sibi  (modica  autem  haec
sunt)  possidebit,  hunc  quaestum  sine  crimine  sordium
fecerit.  At  si  res  familiaris  amplius  aliquid  ad  usus
necessaries  exiget,  secundum  omnium  sapientium
leges  patietur  sibi  gratiam  referri,  cum  et  Socrati
collatum  sit  ad  victum,  et Zeno,  Cleanthes,  Chry-

10  sippus  mercedes  a  discipulis  acceptaverint.  Neque
enim  video,  quae  iustior  acquirendi  ratio  quam  ex
honestissimo  labore  et  ab  iis,  de  quibus  optime
meruerint,  quique,  si  nihil  invicem  praestent,  indigni
fuerint  defensione.  Quod  quidem  non  iustum  modo,
sed  neeessarium  etiam  est,  cum  haec  ipsa  opera
tempusque  omne  alienis  negotiis  datum  facultatem

11  aliter  acquirendi  recidant.  Sed  tum  quoque  ten-
endus  est  modus,  ac  plurimum  refert  et  a  quo
accipiat  et  quantum  et  quousque.  Paciscendi  quidem
ille  piraticus  mos  et  imponentium  periculis  pretia
procul  abominanda  negotiatio  etiam  a  mediocriter
improbis  aberit,  cum  praesertim  bonos  homines
bonasque  causas  tuenti  non  sit  metuendus  ingratus;
424


BOOK XII.  VII.  8-1 1

cheap,  merely  because  they  have  a  price  set  upon
them.  This  much  even  the  blind  can  see,  as  the  9
saying  is,  and  no  one  who  is  the  possessor  of  sufficient
wealth  to  satisfy  his  needs  (and  that  does  not  imply
any  great  opulence)  will  seek  to  secure  an  income
by  such  methods  without  laying  himself  open  to  the
charge  of  meanness.  On  the  other  hand,  if  his
domestic  circumstances  are  such  as  to  require  some
addition  to  his  income  to  enable  him  to  meet  the
necessary  demands  upon  his  purse,  there  is  not  a
philosopher  who  would  forbid  him  to  accept  this  form
of  recompense  for  his  services,  since  collections  were
made  even  on  behalf  of  Socrates,  and  Zeno,  Cleanthes
and  Chrysippus  took  fees  from  their  pupils.  Nor  10
can  I  see  how  we  can  turn  a  more  honest  penny  than
by  performance  of  the  most  honourable  of  tasks  and
by  accepting  money  from  those  to  whom  we  have
rendered  the  most  signal  services  and  who,  if  they
made  no  return  for  what  we  have  done  for  them,
would  show  themselves  undeserving  to  have  been
defended  by  us.  Nay,  it  is  not  only  just,  but
necessary  that  this  should  be  so,  since  the  duties  of
advocacy  and  the  bestowal  of  every  minute  of  our
time  on  the  affairs  of  others  deprive  us  of  all  other
means  of  making  money.  But  we  must  none  the  11
less  observe  the  happy  mean,  and  it  makes  no  small
difference  from  whom  we  take  payment,  what  pay-
ment we  demand,  and  how  long  we  continue  to  do
so.  As  for  the  piratical  practice  of  bargaining  and
the  scandalous  traffic  of  those  who  proportion  their
fees  to  the  peril  in  which  their  would-be  client
stands,  such  a  procedure  will  be  eschewed  even  by
those  who  are  more  than  half  scoundrels,  more
especially  since  the  advocate  who  devotes himself

425


QUINTILIAN

12  quodsi  sit  futurus,  malo  tamen  ille  peccet.  Nihil
ergo  acquirere  volet  orator  ultra  quam  satis  crit ;  ac
ne  pauper  quidem  tanquam  mercedem  accipiet,  sed
mutua  benivolentia  utetur,  cum  sciat  se  tanto  plus
praestitisse.  Non  enim,  quia  venire  hoc  beneficium
non  oportet,  oportet  ^  perire.  Denique  ut  gratus  sit
ad  eum  magis  pertinet  qui  debet.

VIII.  Proxima  discendae  causae  ratio,  quod  est
orationis  fundamentum.  Neque  enim  quisquam
ingenio  tarn  tenui  reperietur,  qui,  cum  omnia  quae
sunt  in  causa  diligenter  cognoverit,  ad  docendum

2  certe  iudicem  non  sufficiat.  Sed  eius  rei  paucissimis
cura  est.  Nam  ut  taceam  de  negligentibus,  quorum
nihil  refert,  ubi  litium  cardo  vertatur,  dum  sint  quae
vel  extra  causam  ex  personis  aut  communi  tractatu
locorum  occasionem  clamandi  largiantur,  aliquos  et
ambitio  pervertit,  qui  partim  tanquam  occupati
semperque  aliud  habentes,  quod  ante  agendum  sit,
pridie  ad  se  venire  litigatorem  aut  eodem  matutino
iubent, nonnunquam etiam inter ipsa subsellia

3  didicisse  se  gloriantur;  partim  iactantia  ingenii,  ut

*  Second  oportet  added  by  Buttmann.
436


BOOK XII.  VII.  I  i-viii.  3

to  the  defence  of  good  men  and  worthy  causes  will
have  nothing  to  fear  from  ingratitude.  And  even  if
a  client  should  prove  ungrateful,  it  is  better  that  he
should  be  the  sinner  and  not  our  orator.  To  con-  12
elude,  then,  the  orator  will  not  seek  to  make  more
money  than  is  sufficient  for  his  needs,  and  even  if  he
is  poor,  he  will  not  regard  his  payment  as  a  fee,  but
rather  as  the  expression  of  the  principle  that  one
good  turn  deserves  another,  since  he  will  be  well
aware  that  he  has  conferred  far  more  than  he  receives.
For  it  does  not  follow  that  because  his  services
ought  not  to  be  sold,  they  should  therefore  be
unremunerated.  Finally,  gratitude  is  primarily  the
business  of  the  debtor.

VIII.  We  have  next  to  consider  how  a  case  should
be  studied,  since  such  study  is  the  foundation  of
oratory.  There  is  no  one  so  destitute  of  all  talent
as,  after  making  himself  thoroughly  familiar  with  all
the  facts  of  his  case,  to  be  unable  at  least  to  commu-
nicate those  facts  to  the  judge.  But  those  who  2
devote  any  serious  attention  to  such  study  are  very
few  indeed.  For,  to  say  nothing  of  those  careless
advocates  who  are  quite  indifferent  as  to  what  the
pivot  of  the  whole  case  may  be,  provided  only  there
are  points  which,  though  irrelevant  to  the  case,  will
give  them  the  opportunity  of  declaiming  in  thunder-
ous tones  on  the  character  of  persons  involved  or
developing  some  commonplace,  there  are  some  who
are  so  perverted  by  vanity  that,  on  the  oft-repeated
pretext  that  they  are  occupied  by  other  business,
they  bid  their  client  come  to  them  on  the  day  pre-
ceding the  trial  or  early  on  the  morning  of  the  day
itself,  and  sometimes  even  boast  that  they  learnt  up
their  case  while  sitting  in  court ;  while  others  by 3

427


QUINTILIAN

res  cito  accepisse  videantur,  tenere  se  et  Intel ligere
prius  paene  quam  audiant  mentiti,  cum  multa  et
diserte  summisque  clamoribus,  quae  neque  ad
iudicem  neque  ad  litigatorem  pertineant,  decanta-
verunt,  bene  sudantes  beneque  comitati  per  forum

4  reducuntur.  Ne  illas  quidem  tulerim  delicias  eorum,
qui  doceri  amicos  suos  iubent,  quanquam  minus  mali
est,  si  illi  saltem  recte  discant  recteque  doceant.
Sed  quis  discet  tam  bene  quam  patronus?  Quomodo
autem  sequester  ille  et  media  litium  manus  et
quidam  interpres  impendet  aequo  animo  laborem
in  alienas  actiones,  cum  dicturis  tanti  suae  non  sint  ?

5  Pessimae  vero  consuetudinis  libellis  esse  contentum,
quos  componit  aut  litigator  qui  confugit  ad  patro-
num,  quia  liti  ipse  non  sufficit,  aut  aliquis  ex  eo
genere  advocatorum,  qui  se  non  posse  agere  con-
fitentur,  deinde  faciunt  id  quod  est  in  agendo  diffi-
cillimum.  Nam  qui  iudicare,  quid  dicendum,  quid
dissiraulandum,  quid  declinandum,  mutandum,  fing-
endum  etiam  sit^  potest,  cur  non  sit  orator,  quando,

*  Advocatus  is  here  used  in  its  original  sense.  By  Quin-
tilian's  time  it  had  come  also  to  mean  "advocate,"  and  is
often  so  used  by  him  elsewhere.

428


BOOK XII.  viii.  3-5

way  of  creating  an  impression  of  extraordinary  talent,
and  to  make  it  seem  that  they  are  quick  in  the  up-
take, pretend  that  they  have  grasped  the  facts  of
the  case  and  understand  the  situation  almost  before
they  have  heard  what  it  is,  and  then  after  chanting
out  some  long  and  fluent  discourse  which  has  nought
to  do  either  with  the  judge  or  their  client,  but
awakens  the  clamorous  applause  of  the  audience,
they  are  escorted  home  through  the  forum,  perspiring
at  every  pore  and  attended  by  flocks  of  enthusiastic
friends.  Further,  I  would  not  even  tolerate  the
affectation  of  those  who  insist  that  their  friends,  and
not  themselves,  should  be  instructed  in  the  facts
of  the  case,  though  this  is  a  less  serious  evil,  if  the
friends  can  be  relied  upon  to  learn  and  supply  the
facts  correctly.  But  who  can  give  such  effective
study  to  the  case  as  the  advocate  himself?  How
can  the  intermediary,  the  go-between  or  interpreter,
devote  himself  whole-heartedly  to  the  study  of  other
men's  cases,  when  those  who  have  got  to  do  the
actual  pleading  do  not  think  it  worth  while  to  get
up  their  own  .''  On  the  other  hand,  it  is  a  most
pernicious  practice  to  rest  content  with  a  written
statement  of  the  case  composed  either  by  the  litigant
who  betakes  himself  to  an  advocate  because  he  finds
that  his  own  powers  are  not  equal  to  the  conduct  of
his  case,  or  by  some  member  of  that  class  of  legal
advisers  ^  who  admit  that  they  are  incapable  of  plead-
ing, and  then  proceed  to  take  upon  themselves  the
most  difficult  of  all  the  tasks  that  confront  the  pleader.
For  if  a  man  is  capable  of  judging  what  should  be
said,  what  concealed,  what  avoided,  altered  or  even
invented,  why  should  he  not  appear  as  orator  himself,
since  he  performs  the  far  more  difficult  feat  of  making

429


QUINTILIAN

6  quod  difficilius  est,  oratorem  facit  ?  Hi  porro  non
tantum  nocerent,  si  omnia  scriberent  uti  gesta  sunt.
Nunc  consilium  et  colores  adiiciunt  et  aliqua  peiora
veris,  quae  plerique  cum  acceperunt,  mutare  nefas
habent  et  velut  tliemata  in  scholis  posita  custodiunt.
Deinde  deprehenduntur  et  causam,  quam  discere  ex
suis  litigatoribus  noluerunt,  ex  adversariis discunt.

7  Liberum  igitur  demus  ante  omnia  iis,  quorum
negotium  erit,  tempus  ac  locum,  exhortemurque
ultro,  ut  omnia  quamlibet  verbose  et  unde  volant
repetita  ex  tempore  exponant.  Non  enim  tam
obest  audire  supervacua  quam  ignorare  necessaria.

8  Frequenter  autem  et  vulnus  et  remedium  in  iis
orator  inveniet,  quae  litigatori  in  neutram  partem
habere  momentum  videbantur.  Nee  tanta  sit  acturo
memoriae  fiducia,  ut  subscribere  audita  pigeat.

Nee  semel  audisse  sit  satis ;  cogendus  eadem
iterum  ac  saepius  dicere  litigator,  non  solum  quia
effugere  aliqua  prima  expositione  potuerunt,  praes-
ertim  hominem  (quod  saepe  evenit)  imperitum,  sed
430


BOOK XII.  vm.  5-8

an  orator  ?  Such  persons  would  not,  liowever,  do  so  6
much  harm  if  they  would  only  put  down  all  the
facts  as  they  occurred.  But  as  it  is,  they  add  sug-
gestions of  their  own,  put  their  own  construction  on
the  facts  and  insert  inventions  which  are  far  more
damaging  than  the  unvarnished  truth.  And  then
the  advocate  as  a  rule,  on  receiving  the  document,
regards  it  as  a  crime  to  make  any  alteration,  and
keeps  to  it  as  faithfully  as  if  it  were  a  theme  set  for
declamation  in  the  schools.  The  sequel  is  that  they
are  tripped  up  and  have  to  learn  from  their  oppo-
nents the  case  which  they  refused  to  learn  from  their
own  clients.  We  should  therefore  above  all  allow  7
the  parties  concerned  ample  time  for  an  interview  in
a  place  free  from  interruption,  and  should  even
exhort  them  to  set  forth  on  the  spot  all  the  facts  in
as  many  words  as  they  may  choose  to  use  and  allow-
ing them  to  go  as  far  back  as  they  please.  For  it  is
less  of  a  drawback  to  listen  to  a  number  of  irrelevant
facts  than  to  be  left  in  ignorance  of  essentials.
Moreover,  the  orator  will  often  detect  both  the  evil  8
and  its  remedy  in  facts  which  the  litigant  regarded
as  devoid  of  all  importance,  one  way  or  the  other.
Further,  the  advocate  who  has  got  to  plead  the  case
should  not  put  such  excessive  confidence  in  his
powers  of  memory  as  to  disdain  to  jot  down  what  he
has  heard.

Nor  should  one  hearing  be  regarded  as  sufficient.
The  litigant  should  be  made  to  repeat  his  statements
at  least  once,  not  merely  because  certain  points  may
have  escaped  him  on  the  occasion  of  his  first  state-
ment, as  is  extremely  likely  to  happen  if,  as  is  often
the  case,  he  is  a  man  of  no  education,  but  also  that
we  may  note  whether  he  sticks  to  what  he  originally

431


QUINTILIAN

9  etiam  ut  sciamus  an  eadem  dicat.  Plurimi  enim
mentiuntur  et,  tanquam  non  doceant  causam,  sed
agant,  non  ut  cum  patrono  sed  ut  cum  iudice
loquuntur.  Quapropter  nunquam  satis  credendum
est,  sed agitandus  omnibus  modis  et  turbandus  at

10  evocandus.  Nam  ut  medicis  non  apparentia  modo
vitia  curanda  sunt  sed  etiam  invenienda  quae  latent,
saepe  ipsis  ea,  qui  sanandi  sunt,  occulentibus,  ita
advocatus  plura  quam  ostenduntur  aspiciat.  Nam
cum  satis  in  audiendo  patientiae  impendent,  in
aliam  rursus  ei  personam  transeundum  est,  agendus-
que  adversarius,  proponendum  quidquid  omnino
excogitari  contra  potest,  quidquid  recipit  in  eiusmodi
disceptatione natura. Interrogandus quam infes-

11  tissime  ac  premendus.  Nam  dum  omnia  quaerimus,
aliquando  ad  verum,  ubi  minime  exspectavimus,
pervenimus.

In  sunima  optimus  est  in  discendo  patronus
incredulus.  Promittit  enim  litigator  omnia,  testem
populum,  paratissimas  consignationes,  ipsum  denique

12  adversarium  quaedam  non  negaturum.  Ideoque
opus  est  intueri  omne  litis  instrumentum ;  quod
videre  non  est  satis,  perlegendum  erit.  Nam  frequen-
tissime  aut  non  sunt  omnino,  quae  promittebantur,
aut  minus  continent  aut  cum  alio  aliquo  nocituro
permixta sunt aut nimia  sunt et fidem hoc ipso

43'


i


BOOK XII.  Yin.  8-12

said. For  a  large  number  of  clients  lie,  and  hold 9

forth,  not  as  if  they  were  instructing  their  advocate
in  the  facts  of  the  case,  but  as  if  they  were  pleading
with  a  judge.  Consequently  we  must  never  be  too
ready  to  believe  them,  but  must  test  them  in  every
way,  try  to  confuse  them  and  draw  them  out.  For  10
just  as  doctors  have  to  do  more  than  treat  the
ailments  which  meet  the  eye,  and  need  also  to
discover  those  which  lie  hid,  since  their  patients
often  conceal  the  truth,  so  the  advocate  must  look
out  for  more  points  than  his  client  discloses  to  him.
After  he  considers  that  he  has  given  a  sufficiently
patient  hearing  to  the  latter's  statements,  he  must
assume  another  character  and  adopt  the  rCle  of  his
opponent,  urging  every  conceivable  objection  that  a
discussion  of  the  kind  which  we  are  considering  may
permit.  The  client  must  be  subjected  to  a  hostile  11
cross-examination  and  given  no  peace :  for  by  en-
quiring into  everything,  we  shall  sometimes  come
upon  the  truth  where  we  least  expect  it.

In  fact,  the  advocate  who  is  most  successful  in
getting  up  his  case  is  he  who  is  incredulous.  For
the  client  promises  everything :  the  people,  he  says,
will  bear  witness  to  the  truth  of  what  he  says,  he  can
produce  documentary  evidence  at  a  moment's  notice
and  there  are  some  points  which  he  says  his  opponent
will  not  deny.  It  is  therefore  necessary  to  look  into  12
every  document  connected  with  the  case,  and  where
the  mere  sight  of  them  is  not  sufficient,  they  must
be  read  through.  For  very  frequently  they  are
either  not  at  all  what  the  client  alleged  them  to  be,
or  contain  less,  or  are  mixed  up  with  elements  that
may  damage  our  case,  or  prove  more  than  is  required
and  are  likely  to  detract  from  their  credibility  just

433


QUINTILIAN

13  detractura  quod  non  habent  modum.  Denique
linum  ruptum  aut  turbatam  ceram  ^  aiit  sine  agnitore
signa  frequenter  invenies  ;  quae,  nisi  domi  excusseris,
in  foro  inopinata  decipient,  plusque  nocebunt  desti-
tuta  quam  non  promissa  nocuissent.  Multa  etiam,
quae  litigator  nihil  ad  causam  pertinere  crediderit,
patronus  eruet,  modo  per  omnes,  quos  tradidimus,

14  argumentorum  locos  eat.  Quos  ut  circumspectare
in  agendo  et  attentare  singulos  minime  convenit,
propter  quas  diximus  causas,  ita  in  discendo  rimari
necessarium  est,  quae  personae,  quae  tempora  et
loca,  instituta,  instrumenta,  cetera,  ex  quibus
non  tantum  illud,  quod  est  artificiale  probationis
genus,  colligi  possit,  sed  qui  metuendi  testes,
quomodo  sint  refellendi.  Nam  plurimum  refert.
invidia  reus  an  odio  an  contemptu  laboret,  quoi-um
fere  pars  prima  superiores,  proxima  pares,  tertia
humiliores  premit.

15  Sic  causam  perscrutatus,  propositis  ante  oculos
omnibus  quae  prosint  noceantve,  tertiam  deinceps
personam induat iudicis, fingatque apud se agi

*  turbatam  ceram,  Salmasius :  turbata  cetera,  B

*  V.  X.  20  sq'i- i.  e.  sources  from  which  arguments  may  be
drawn.

4,^4


BOOK XII.  viii.  12-15

because  they  are  so  extravagant.  Further,  it  will  13
often  be  found  that  the  thread  is  broken  or  the  seal
tampered  with  or  the  signatures  unsupported  by
witnesses.  And  unless  you  discover  such  facts  at
home,  they  will  take  you  by  surprise  in  court  and
trip  you  up,  doing  you  more  harm  by  forcing  you  to
abandon  them  than  they  would  have  done  had  they
never  been  promised  you.  There  are  also  a  number
of  points  which  the  client  regards  as  irrelevant  to
his  case,  which  the  advocate  will  be  able  to  elicit,
provided  he  go  carefully  through  all  the  "  dwelling-
places  "  of  argument  which  I  have  already  described.^
Now  though,  for  reasons  already  mentioned,  it  is  14
most  undesirable  that  he  should  hunt  for  and  try
every  single  one  of  those,  while  actually  engaged  in
pleading  his  case,  it  is  most  necessary  in  the  prelimi-
nary study  of  the  case  to  leave  no  stone  unturned  to
discover  the  character  of  the  persons  involved,  the
circumstances  of  time  and  place,  the  customs  and
documents  concerned,  and  the  rest,  from  which  we
may  not  merely  deduce  the  proofs  known  as  artificial,
but  may  also  discover  which  witnesses  are  most  to  be
feared  and  the  best  method  of  refuting  them.  For
it  makes  a  great  difference  whether  it  be  envy,
hatred  or  contempt  that  forms  the  chief  obstacle  to
the  success  of  the  defence,  since  of  these  obstacles
the  first  tells  most  against  superiors,  the  second
against  equals,  and  the  third  against  those  of  low
degree.

Having thus given a thorough examination  15
to  the  case  and  clearly  envisaged  all  those points
which  will  tell  for  or  against  his  client,  the  orator
must  then  place  himself  in  the  position  of  a  third
person,  namely,  the  judge,  and imagine that  the

435


QUINTILIAN

causam,  et,  quod  ipsum  movisset  de  eadem  re
pronuntiaturum^  id  potentissimum,  apud  quemcunque
agetur,  existimet.  Sic  eum  raro  fallet  eventus,  aut
culpa  iudicis  erit.

IX.  Quae  sint  in  agendo  servanda,  toto  fere  opere
exsecuti  sumus ;  pauca  tamen  propria  huius  loci,
quae  non  tam  dicendi  arte  quam  officiis  agentis  ^
continentur,  attingam.  Ante  omnia  ne,  quod  pleris-
que accidit, ab utilitate eum causae praesentis

2  cupido  laudis  abducat.  Nam  ut  gerentibus  bella
non  semper  exercitus  per  plana  et  amoena  ducendus
est,  sed  adeundi  plerumque  asperi  colles,  expug-
nandae  civitates  quamlibet  praecisis  impositae  rupi-
bus  aut  operum  mole  difHciles,  ita  oratio  gaudebit
quidem  occasione  laetius  decurrendi  et  aequo
congressa  campo  totas  vires  populariter  explicabit;

3  at  si  iuris  anfractus  aut  eruendae  veritatis  latebras
adire  cogetur,  non  obequitabit  nee  illis  vibrantibus
concitatisque  sententiis  velut  missilibus  utetur,  sed
operibus  et  cuniculis  et  insidiis  et  occultis  artibus

4  rem  geret.  Quae  omnia  non  dum  fiunt  laudantur,
sed cum facta sunt; unde etiam cupidissimis

>  agentis,  Obrecht :  agendis,  B.
436


BOOK XII.  vin.  15-1X.  4

case  is  being  pleaded  before  himself,  and  assume
that  the  point  which  would  have  carried  most  weight
with  himself,  had  he  been  trying  the  case,  is  likely
to  have  the  greatest  influence  with  the  actual  judge.
Thus  he  will  rarely  be  deceived  as  to  the  result  of
the  trial,  or,  if  he  is,  it  will  be  the  fault  of  the  judge.
IX.  As  regards  the  points  to  be  observed  in  the
actual  pleading,  I  have  dealt  with  these  in  every
portion  of  this  work,  but  there  still  remain  a  few  on
which  I  must  touch  as  being  specially  appropriate  to
the  present  place,  since  they  are  concerned  not  so
much  with  the  art  of  speaking  as  with  the  duties
of  the  advocate.  Above  all  it  is  important  that  he
should  never,  like  so  many,  be  led  by  a  desire  to  win
applause  to  neglect  the  interest  of  the  actual  case.
It  is  not  always  the  duty  of  generals  in  the  field  to
lead  their  armies  through  flat  and  smiling  country :
it  will  often  be  necessary  to  cross  rugged  mountain
ranges,  to  storm  cities  placed  on  inaccessible  cliffs  or
rendered  diflBcult  of  access  by  elaborate  fortifications.
Similarly  oratory  will  always  be  glad  of  the  oppor-
tunity of  manoeuvring  in  all  its  freedom  and  delight-
ing the  spectator  by  the  deployment  of  its  full
strength  for  conflict  in  the  open  field ;  but  if  it  is
forced  to  enter  the  tortuous  defiles  of  the  law,  or
dark  places  whence  the  truth  has  to  be  dragged
forth,  it  will  not  go  prancing  in  front  of  the  enemy's
lines  nor  launch  its  shafts  of  quivering  and  passionate
epigram  of  the  fashion  that  is  now  so  popular,  but
will  wage  war  by  means  of  sap  and  mine  and  ambush
and  all  the  tactics  of  secrec}*.  None  of  these  •
methods  win  applause  during  their  actual  execution  :
the  reward  comes  after  they  have  been  carried  to  a
successful  termination,  when  even  the  most  ambitious

437


QUINTILIAN
opinionis  plus  fructus  venit. Nam  cum  ilia  dicendi
vitiosa  iactatio  inter  plausores  suos  detonuit,  resurgit
verae  virtutis  fortior  fama,  nee  iudices  a  quo  sint
moti^  dissimulantj  et  doctis  creditur,  nee  est  orationis

6  vera  laus  nisi  cum  finita  est.  Veteribus  quidem
etiam  dissimulare  eloquentiam  fuit  moriSj  idque
M.  Antonius  praecipit,  quo  plus  dicentibus  fidei
minusque  suspectae  advocatorum  insidiae  forent.
Sed  ilia  dissimulari,  quae  turn  erat,  potuit ;  nondum
enim  tantum  dicendi  lumen  accesserat,  ut  etiam
per  obstantia  erumperet.  Quare  artes  quidem  et
consilia  lateant  et  quidquid,  si  deprehenditur,  perit.

6  Hactenus  eloquentia  secretum  habet.  Verborum
quidem  delectus,  gra vitas  sententiarum,  figurarum
elegantia  aut  non  sunt  aut  apparent.  Sed  vel
propter  hoc  ipsum  ostendenda  non  sunt  quod
apparent;  aut  si  unum  sit  ex  duobus  eligendum,
causa  potius  laudetur  quam  patronus.  Finem  tamen
hunc  praestabit  orator,  ut  videatur  optimam  causam
optime egisse. Illud  certum  erit neminem  peius

438


BOOK XII.  IX.  4-6

will  reap  a  richer  recompense  than  they  could  ever
have  secured  by  other  means.  For  so  soon  as  the
thunders  of  applause  awakened  among  their  admirers
by  these  affected  declamatory  displays  have  died
away,  the  glory  of  true  virtue  rises  again  with
renewed  splendour,  the  judges  do  not  conceal  who
it  is  has  moved  them,  the  well-trained  orator  wins
their  belief  and  oratory  receives  its  only  genuine
tribute,  the  praise  accorded  it  when  its  task  is  done.
The  old  orators  indeed  used  to  conceal  their  elo-  6
quence,  a  method  which  is  recommended  by  Marcus
Antonius,  as  a  means  of  securing  that  the  speaker's
words  should  carry  conviction  and  of  masking  the
advocate's  real  designs.  But  tlie  truth  is  that  the
eloquence  of  those  days  was  capable  of  concealment,
for  it  had  not  yet  attained  that  splendour  of  diction
which  makes  it  impossible  to  hide  its  light  under  a
bushel.  Therefore  artifice  and  stratagem  should  be
masked,  since  detection  in  such  cases  spells  failure.
Thus  far,  and  thus  only,  may  eloquence  hope  to  enjoy
the  advantages  of  secrecy.  But  when  we  come  to  6
consider  the  choice  of  words,  the  weight  essential
to  general  reflexions  and  the  elegance  demanded  by
figures,  we  are  confronted  by  elements  which  must
either  strike  the  attention  or  be  condemned  to  non-
existence. But  the  very  fact  that  tliey  strike  the
attention  is  a  reason  why  they  should  not  flaunt
themselves  obtrusively.  And,  if  we  have  to  make
the  choice,  I  should  prefer  that  it  should  be  the
cause,  and  not  the  orator,  to  which  we  award  our
praise.  Nevertheless,  the  true  orator  will  achieve
the  distinction  of  seeming  to  speak  with  all  the
excellence  that  an  excellent  case  deserves.  One
thing  may  be  regarded  as  certain,  that  no  one  can

439


QUINTILIAN

agere  quam  qui  displicente  causa  placet ; necessc

7  est  enim  extra  causam  sit  quod  placet.  Nee  illo
fastidio  laborabit  orator  non  agendi  causas  minores,
tanquam  infra  eum  sint  aut  detractura  sit  opinioni
minus  liberalis  materia.  Nam  et  suscipiendi  ratio
iustissima  est  officium,  et  optandum  etiam  ut  amici
quam  minimas  lites  habeant ;  et  abunde  dixit  bene,
quisquis  rei  satisfecit.

8  At  quidam,  etiamsi  forte  susceperunt  negotia
paulo  ad  dicendum  tenuiora,  extrinsecus  adductis
ea  rebus  circumlinunt  ac,  si  defecerint  alia,  conviciis
implent  vacua  causarum,  si  contingit,  veris,  si  minus,
fictis,  mode  sit  materia  ingenii  mereaturque  clamo-
rem  dum  dicitur.  Quod  ego  adeo  longe  puto  ab
oratore  perfecto,  ut  eum  ne  vera  quidem  obiecturum,

9  nisi  id  causa  exigit,  credam.  Ea  est  enim  prorsus
canina,  ut  ait  Appius,  eloquentia,  cognituram  male
dicendi  subire;  quod  facientibus  etiam  male  audiendi
praesumenda  patientia  est.  Nam  et  in  ipsos  fit
impetus  frequenter,  qui  egerunt,  et  certe  petulan-


*  A  cognitor  is  one  who  represents  another.  The  litigant
may  abuse  his  opponent,  but  that  does  not  justify  his
advocate  in  doing  so.


BOOK XII.  IX,  6-9

plead  worse  than  he  who  wins  applause  despite  the
disapproval  meted  out  to  his  case.  For  the  inevitable
conclusion  is  that  the  applause  must  have  been
evoked  by  something  having  no  connexion  with  the
case.  Further,  the  true  orator  will  not  turn  up  his  7
nose  at  cases  of  minor  importance  on  the  ground  of
their  being  beneath  his  dignity  or  as  being  likely
to  detract  from  his  reputation  because  the  subject
matter  does  not  allow  his  genius  full  scope.  For  the
strongest  reason  for  undertaking  a  case  is  to  be  found
in  our  duty  towards  our  clients  :  nay,  we  should  even
desire  the  suits  in  which  our  friends  are  involved  to
be  as  unimportant  as  possible,  and  remember  that  the
advocate  who  gives  an  adequate  presentment  to  his
case,  has  spoken  exceeding  well.

But  there  are  so  ne  who,  even  although  the  cases  8
which  they  have  undertaken  give  but  small  scope  for
eloquence,  none  the  less  trick  it  out  with  matter
drawn  from  without  and,  if  all  else  fails,  fill  up  the
gaps  in  their  case  with  abuse  of  their  opponents,
true  if  possible,  but  false  if  necessary,  the  sole  con-
sideration that  weighs  with  them  being  that  it  affords
exercise  for  their  talents  and  is  likely  to  win  applause
during  its  delivery.  Such  conduct  seems  to  me  so
unworthy  of  our  perfect  orator  that,  in  my  opinion,
he  will  not  even  bring  true  charges  against  his
opponents  unless  the  case  demand.  For  it  is  a  9
dog's  eloquence,  as  Appius  says,  to  undertake  the
task  of  abusing  one's  opponent,^  and  they  who  do  so
should  steel  themselves  in  advance  to  the  prospect
of  being  targets  for  like  abuse  themselves,  since
those  who  adopt  this  style  of  pleading  are  frequently
attacked  themselves,  and  there  can  at  any  rate  be
no  doubt  that  the  litigant  pays  dearly  for  the  violence


VOL.  IV.


441


QUINTILIAN

.  tiam  patroni  litigator  luit.  Sed  haec  minora  sunt
ipso  illo  vitio  animi,  quod  maledicus  a  malefico  non

10  distat  nisi  occasione.  Turpis  voluptas  et  inhumana
et  nulli  audientium  bona  gratia  a  litigatoribus
quidem  frequenter  exigitur,  qui  ultionem  malunt
quam  defensionem,  Sed  neque  alia  multa  ad  arbi-
trium  eorum  facienda  sunt.  Hoc  quidem  quis
hominum  liberi  modo sanguinis  sustineat  petulans

11  esse  ad  alterius  arbitrium?  Atqui  etiam  in  ad-
vocatos  partis  adversae  libenter  nonnulli  invehuntur;
quod,  nisi  si  forte  meruerunt,  et  inhumanum  est
respectu  communium  officiorum,  et  cum  ipsi  qui
dicit  inutile  (nam  idem  iuris  responsuris  datur),  tum
causae  contrarium,  cui  ^  plane  adversarii  fiunt  et
inimici, et quantulumcunque eis virium est,  con-

12  tumelia  augetur.  Super  omnia  perit  ilia,  quae
plurimum  oratori  et  auctoritatis  et  fidei  adfert,
modestia,  si  a  viro  bono  in  rabulam  latratoremque
convertitur,  compositus  non  ad  animum  iudicis  sed

13  ad  stomachum  litigatoris.  Frequenter  etiam  species
libertatis  deducere  ad  temeritatem  solet  non  causis
modo,  sed  ipsis  quoque,  qui  dixerunt,  periculosam.

*  cui,  Halm :  qui,  B.
442


BOOK XII.  IX.  9-13

of  his  advocate.  But  such  faults  are  less  serious  than
that  which  lies  deep  in  the  soul  itself,  making  the
evil  speaker  to  differ  from  the  evil  doer  only  in
respect  of  opportunity.  It  is  not  uncommon  for  10
the  litigant  to  demand  a  base  and  inhuman  gratifi-
cation of  his  rancour,  such  as  not  a  single  man  among
the  audience  will  approve,  for  it  is  on  revenge  rather
than  on  protection  that  his  heart  is  set.  But  in  this,
as  in  a  number  of  other  p>oints,  it  is  the  duty  of  the
orator  to  refuse  to  comply  with  his  clients'  desires.
For  how  can  a  man  with  the  least  degree  of  gentle-
manly feeling  consent  to  make  a  brutal  attack  merely
because  another  desires  it?  And  yet  there  are  some  11
who  take  pleasure  in  directing  their  onslaughts
against  their  opponents'  counsel  as  well,  a  practice
which,  unless  they  have  deserved  such  attacks,  shows
an  inhuman  disregard  of  the  duties  incumbent  on  the
profession,  and  is  not  merely  useless  to  the  speaker
(since  he  thereby  gives  his  opponent  the  right  to
reply  in  the  same  strain),  but  contrary  to  the
interests  of  his  case,  since  it  creates  a  hostile  and
antagonistic  disposition  in  the  advocates  attacked,
whose  eloquence,  however  feeble  it  may  be,  will  be
redoubled  by  resentment  at  the  insults  to  which
they  have  been  subjected.  Above  all,  it  involves  a  12
complete  waste  of  one  of  the  most  valuable  of  an
orator's  assets,  namely  that  self-restraint  which  gives
weight  and  credit  to  his  words,  if  he  debases  him-
self from  an  honest  man  into  a  snarling  wrangler,
directing  all  his  efforts  not  to  win  the  goodwill  of  the
judge,  but  to  gratify  his  client's  spite.  Often  too  13
the  attractions  of  freedom  of  speech  will  lure  him
into  a  rashness  of  language  perilous  not  merely  to
the  interests  of  the  case,  but  to  those  of  the  speaker

443


QUINTILIAN

Nee  immerito  Pericles  solebat  optare,  ne  quod  sibi
verbum  in  mentem  veniret,  quo  populus  offenderetur.
Sed  quod  ille  de  populo,  id  ego  de  omnibus  sentio,
qui  tantundem  possunt  nocere.  Nam  quae  fortia
dum  dicuntur  videbantur,  stulta  cum  laeserunt
vocantur.

14  Nunc,  quia  varium  fere  propositum  agentium  fuit,
et  quorundam  cura  tarditatis,  quorundam  facilitas  te-
meritatis  crimine  laboravit,  quem  credam  fore  in  hoc

15  oratoris  modum,  tradere  non  alienum  videtur.  Adferet
ad  dicendum  curae  semper  quantum  plurimum  po-
terit.  Neque  enim  hoc  solum  negligentis,  sed  mali
et  in  suscepta  causa  perfidi  ac  proditoris  est,  peius
agere  quam  possit.  Ideoque  ne  suscipiendae  quidem
sunt  causae  plures  quam  quibus  sufTecturum  se  sciat.

16  Dicet  scripta  quam  res  patietur  plurima  et,  ut  De-
mosthenes ait,  si  continget,  et  sculpta.  Sed  hoc  aut
primae  actiones  aut  quae  in  publicis  iudiciis  post
interiectos  dies  dantur  permiserint ;  at  cum  protinus
respondendum  est,  omnia  parari  non  possunt,  adeo
ut  paulo  minus  promptis  etiam  noceat  scripsisse,  si
alia ex  diverso, quam  opinati fuerint, occurrerint.

^  This  passage  is  our  sole  authority  for  the  saying.
444


BOOK XII.  IX.  13-16

himself.  It  was  not  without  good  reason  that  Peri-
cles used  to  pray  that  no  word  might  occur  to  his
mind  that  could  give  offence  to  the  people.  But
what  he  felt  with  regard  to  the  people,  I  feel  with
regard  to  every  audience,  since  they  can  cause  just
as  much  harm  to  the  orator  as  the  people  could
ever  do  to  Pericles.  For  utterances  which  seemed
courageous  at  the  moment  of  speaking,  are  called
foolish  when  it  is  found  that  they  have  given  offence.

In  view  of  the  fact  that  there  is  commonly  a  great  14
variety  in  the  aims  which  pleaders  set  before  them-
selves and  that  the  diligence  shown  by  some  is
branded  as  tedious  caution,  while  the  readiness  of
others  is  criticised  as  rashness,  I  think  that  this  will
be  an  appropriate  place  to  set  forth  my  views  as  to
how  the  orator  may  strike  the  happy  mean.  He  will  15
show  all  the  diligence  of  which  he  is  capable  in  his
pleading.  For  to  plead  worse  than  he  might  have
done,  is  not  merely  an  indication  of  negligence,  but
stamps  him  as  a  bad  man  and  a  traitor,  disloyal  to  the
cause  which  he  has  undertaken.  Consequently  he
must  refuse  to  undertake  more  cases  than  he  feels
he  can  manage.  As  far  as  possible  he  will  deliver  16
only  what  he  has  written,  and,  if  circumstances
permit,  only  what  he  has,  as  Demosthenes  says,^
carved  into  shape.  Such  a  practice  is  possible  in
first  hearings  and  also  in  subsequent  hearings  such  as
are  granted  in  the  public  courts  after  an  interval  of
several  days.  On  the  other  hand,  when  we  have  to
reply  on  the  spot,  it  is  impossible  to  prepare  every-
thing :  in  fact  for  the  less  ready  type  of  speaker,  it
may,  in  the  event  of  his  opponents  putting  forward
arguments  quite  other  than  those  which  they  were
expected  to  advance,  be  a  positive  drawback  to  have

445


QUINTILIAN

17  Inviti  enim  recedunt  a  praeparatis  et  tola  actione  re-
spiciunt  requiruntque,  num  aliquid  ex  illis  intervelli
atque  ex  tempore  dicendis  inseri  possit ;  quod  si  fiat,
non  cohaeret  nee  commissuris  modo,  ut  in  opere
male  iuncto,  hiantibus  sed  ipsa  coloris  inaequalitate

18  detegitur.  Ita  nee  liber  est  impetus  nee  cura  con-
texta,  et  utrumque  alteri  obstat ;  ilia  enim  quae
scripta  sunt  retinent  animum,  non  sequuntur.  Itaque
in  his  actionibus  omni,  ut  agricolae  dicunt,  pede  stan-

19  dum  est.  Nam  cum  in  propositione  ac  refutatione
causa  consistat,  quae  nostrae  partis  sunt  scripta  esse
possunt,  quae  etiam  responsurum  adversarium  certum
est  (est  enim  aliquando  certum)  pari  cura  refelluntur.
Ad  alia  unum  paratum  adferre  possumus,  ut  causam
bene  noverimus,  alterum  ibi  sumere,  ut  dicentem

20  adversarium  diligenter  audiamus.  Licet  tamen
praecogitare  plura  et  animum  ad  omnes  casus  compo-
nere,  idque  est  tutius  stilo,  quo  facilius  et  omittitur
446


BOOK XII.  IX.  16-20

written  anything.  For  it  is  only  with  reluctance  17
that  such  speakers  will  under  such  circumstances
consent  to  abandon  what  they  have  written,  and
throughout  their  pleading  keep  looking  back  and
trying  to  discover  whether  any  portion  of  their
manuscript  can  be  saved  from  the  wreck  and  inter-
polated into  what  they  have  to  improvise.  And  if
they  do  make  such  interpolations,  the  result  is  a  lack
of  cohesion  which  is  betrayed  not  merely  by  the
gaping  of  the  seams  where  the  patch  has  been  un-
skilfully inserted,  but  by  the  differences  of  style.
Consequently,  the  vigour  of  their  eloquence  will  be  18
hampered  and  their  thought  will  lack  connexion,  each
of  which  circumstances  reacts  unfavourably  upon  the
other,  since  what  is  written  trammels  the  mind
instead  of  following  its  lead.  Therefore,  in  such
pleadings  we  must,  as  the  rustic  adage  says,  "  stand
on  all  our  feet."  For  since  the  case  turns  on  the  19
propounding  and  refutation  of  arguments,  it  is
always  possible  to  write  out  what  we  propose  to
advance  on  our  own  behalf,  and  similar  preparation
is  also  possible  with  regard  to  the  refutation  of  such
replies  as  are  absolutely  certain  to  be  made  by  our
adversary :  for  there  are  times  when  we  have  this
certainty.  But  with  regard  to  all  other  portions  of
our  speech,  the  only  preparation  that  is  possible  in
advance  consists  in  a  thorough  knowledge  of  our
case,  while  there  is  a  second  precaution  which  may
be  taken  in  court,  consisting  in  giving  our  best
attention  to  our  opponent's  speech.  On  the  other  20
hand,  there  is  much  that  may  be  thought  out  in
advance  and  we  may  forearm  our  mind  against  all
possible  emergencies,  a  course  which  is  far  safer
than  writing,  since  a  train  of  thought  can  easily  be

447


QUINTILIAN

cogitatio  et  transfertur.  Sed  sive  in  respondendo
fuerit  subito  dicendum,  sive  quae  alia  ita  exegerit
ratio,  non  oppressum  se  ac  deprehensum  credet
orator,  cui  disciplina  et  studium  et  exercitatio  dederit
21  vires  etiam  facilitatis  ;  quem  armatum  semper  ac  velut
in  procinctu  stantem  non  magis  unquam  in  causis
oratio  quam  in  rebus  cotidianis  ac  domesticis  serrao
deficiet,  nee  se  unquam  propter  hoc  oneri  subtrahet,
modo  sit  causae  discendae  tempus;  nam  cetera
semper  sciet.

X.  Superest  ut  dicam  de  genere  orationis.  Hie
erat  propositus  a  nobis  in  divisione  prima  locus  ter-
tius  ;  nam  ita  promiseram  me  de  arte,  de  artifice,  de
opere  dicturum.  Cum  sit  autem  rhetorices  atque
oratoris  opus  oratio  pluresque  eius  formae,  sicut
ostendam,  in  omnibus  his  et  ars  est  et  artifex.  Pluri-
mum  tamen  invicem  differunt ;  nee  solum  specie,  ut
signum  signo  et  tabula  tabulae  et  actio  actioni,  sed
genere  ipso,  ut  Graecis  Tuscanicae  statuae,  ut  Asianus
2  eloquens  Attico.  Suos  autem  haec  operum  genera,
quae  dico,  ut  auctores,  sic  etiam  amatores  habent ;
atque  ideo  nondum  est  perfectus  orator  ac  nescio  an
ars  ulla,  non  solum  quia  aliud  in  alio  magis  eminet,
sed  quod  non una  omnibus  forma  placuit,  partim

*  n.  xiv.  5,
448


BOOK XII.  IX.  2o-.\.  2

abandoned  or  diverted  in  a  new  direction.  But
whether  we  have  to  improvise  a  reply,  or  are  obliged
to  speak  extempore  by  some  other  reason,  the  orator
on  whom  training,  study  and  practice  have  conferred
the  gift  of  facility,  will  never  regard  himself  as  lost
or  taken  at  hopeless  disadvantage.  He  stands  21
armed  for  battle,  ever  ready  for  the  fray,  and  his
eloquence  will  no  more  fail  him  in  the  courts  than
speech  will  fail  him  in  domestic  affairs  and  the  daily
concerns  of  life  :  and  he  will  never  shirk  his  burden
for  fear  of  failing  to  find  words,  provided  he  has  time
to  study  his  case  :  for  all  other  knowledge  will  always
be  his  at  command.

X.  The  question  of  the  "kind  of  style"  to  be
adopted  remains  to  be  discussed.  This  was  described
in  my  original  division  ^  of  my  subject  as  forming  its
third  portion  :  for  I  promised  that  I  would  speak  of
the  art,  the  artist  and  the  work.  But  since  oratory
is  the  work  both  of  rhetoric  and  of  the  orator,  and
since  it  has  many  forms,  as  I  shall  show,  the  art  and
the  artist  are  involved  in  the  consideration  of  all
these  forms.  But  they  differ  greatly  from  one
another,  and  not  merely  in  species,  as  statue  differs
from  statue,  picture  from  picture  and  speech  from
speech,  but  in  genus  as  well,  as,  for  example,
Etruscan  statues  differ  from  Greek  and  Asiatic
orators  from  Attic.  But  these  different  kinds  of  2
work,  of  which  I  speak,  are  not  merely  the  product
of  different  authors,  but  have  each  their  own  follow-
ing of  admirers,  with  the  result  that  the  perfect
orator  has  not  yet  been  found,  a  statement  which
perhaps  may  be  extended  to  all  arts,  not  merely
because  some  qualities  are  more  evident  in  some
artists  than  in  others,  but  because  one  single  form

449


QUINTILIAN

condicione  vel  temporum  vel  locorum,  partim  iudicio
cuiusque  atque  proposito.

3  Primi,  quorum  quidem  opera  non  vetustatis  modo
gratia  visenda  sunt,  clari  pictores  fuisse  diountur
Polygnotus  atque  Aglaopbon,  quorum  simplex  color
tam  sui  studiosos  adhuc  habet,  ut  ilia  prope  rudia
ac  velut  futurae  mox  artis  primordia  maximis,  qui
post  eos  exstiterunt,  auctoribus  praeferant,  proprio
quodam intelligendi, ut mea opinio est, ambitu.

4  Post  Zeuxis  atque  Parrhasius  non  multum  aetate
distantes,  circa  Peloponnesia  ambo  tempora  (nam
cum  Parrhasio  sermo  Socratis  apud  Xenophontem
invenitur)  plurimum  arti  addiderunt.  Quorum  prior
luminum  umbrarumque  invenisse  rationem,  secundus

5  examinasse  subtilius  lineas  traditur.  Nam  Zeuxis
plus  membris  corporis  dedit,  id  amplius  atque
augustius  ratus  atque,  ut  existimant,  Homerum
secutus,  cui  validissima  quaeque  forma  etiam  in
feminis  placet.  I  lie  vero  ita  circumscripsit  omnia,
ut  eum  legum  latorem  vocent,  quia  deorum  atque
heroum  effigies,  quales  ab  eo  sunt  traditae,  ceteri,

6  tanquam  ita  necesse  sit,  sequuntur.  Floruit  autem
circa  Philippum  et  usque  ad  successores  Alexandri


^  Of  the  painters  mentioned  in  this  and  the  following
sections  Polygnotus  of  Thasos,  son  of  Aglaophon,  painted  ab
Athens  in  the  middle  of  the  5th  century  B.C.  Zeuxis  of
Heraclea  and  Parrhasius  of  Ephesus  flourished  420-390,  while
the  remainder  are  painters  of  the  4th  century.  Of  these
Pamphilus  of  Sicyon  was  the  teacher  of  Melanthius  and
Apelles,  the  latter  being  the  most  famous  painter  of  antiquity.

'^  Meinor.  m.  x.  1.

'  I.e.  by  giving  them  roundness  and  solidity  by  his  treat-
ment of  light  and  shade,

45°


BOOK XII.  X.  2-6

will  not  satisfy  all  critics,  a  fact  which  is  due  in
part  to  conditions  of  time  or  place,  in  part  to  the
taste  and  ideals  of  individuals.

The  first  great  painters,  whose  works  deserve  3
inspection  for  something  more  than  their  mere
antiquity,  are  said  to  have  been  Polygnotus  and
Aglaophon,^  whose  simple  colouring  has  still  such
enthusiastic  admirers  that  they  prefer  these  almost
primitive  works,  which  may  be  regarded  as  the  first
foundations  of  the  art  that  was  to  be,  over  the  works
of  the  greatest  of  their  successors,  their  motive
being,  in  my  opinion,  an  ostentatious  desire  to  seem
persons  of  superior  taste.  Later  Zeuxis  and  Par-  4
rhasius  contributed  much  to  the  progress  of  painting.
These  artists  were  sepai-ated  by  no  great  distance  of
time,  since  both  flourished  about  the  period  of  the
Peloponnesian  war :  for  example,  Xenophon  ^  has
preserved  a  conversation  between  Socrates  and
Parrhasius.  The  first-mentioned  seems  to  have
discovered  the  method  of  representing  light  and
shade,  while  the  latter  is  said  to  have  devoted
special  attention  to  the  treatment  of  line.  For  6
Zeuxis  emphasised  the  limbs  of  the  human  body,^
thinking  thereby  to  add  dignity  and  grandeur  to
his  style :  it  is  generally  supposed  that  in  this  he
followed  the  example  of  Homer,  who  likes  to
represent  even  his  female  characters  as  being  of
heroic  mould.  Parrhasius,  on  the  other  hand,  was
so  fine  a  draughtsman  that  he  has  been  styled  the
law-giver  of  his  art,  on  the  ground  that  all  other
artists  take  his  representations  of  gods  and  heroes  as
models,  as  though  no  other  course  were  possible.
It  was,  however,  from  about  the  period  of  the  reign  8
of  Philip  down  to  that  of  the  successors  of  Alexander

451


QUINTILIAN

pictura  praecipue,  sed  diversis  virtutibus.  Nam
cura  Protogenes,  ratione  Pamphilus  ac  Melanthius,
facilitate  Antiphilus,  concipiendis  visionibus,  quas
<f>avTaaias  vocant,  Theon  Samius,  ingenio  et  gratia,
quam  in  se  ipse  maxirne  iactat,  Apelles  est  prae-
stantissimus.  Euphranorem  admirandum  facit,  quod
et  ceteris  optimis  studiis  inter  praecipuos  et  pingendi
fingendique  idem  mirus  artifex  fuit.

7  Similis  in  statuariis  differentia.^  Nam  duriora  et
Tuscanicis  proxima  Gallon  atque  Hegesias,  iam  minus
rigida  Calamis,  molliora  adhuc  supra  dictis  Myron
fecit.  Diligentia  ac  decor  in  Polyclito  supra  ceteros,
cui  quanquam  a  plerisque  tribuitur  palma,  tamen,  ne

8  nihil  detrahatur,  deesse  pondus  putant.  Nam  ut
humanae  formae  decorem  addiderit  supra  verum,  ita
non  explevisse  deorum  auctoritatem  videtur.  Quin
aetatem  quoque  graviorem  dicitur  refugisse  nihil
ausus  ultra  leves  genas. At  quae  Polyclito  defue-

9  runt,  Phidiae  atque  Alcameni  dantur.  Phidias  ta-
men  diis  quam  hominibus  effingendis  ^  melior  artifex
creditur  in  ebore  vero  longe  citra  aemulum,  vel  si

^  statuariis,  Christ :  statuis,  MSS.

*  effingendis,  Dukerus :  efficiendis,  MSS.


*  Gallon  of  Aegina  and  Hegesias  flourished  in  the  latter
years  of  the  6th  century.  Calamis  of  Athens  and  Myron  of
Eleutherae,  first  half  of  5th  centurj'.  Phidias  of  Athens  and
Polyclitus  of  Argos,  the  two  most  famous  sculptors  of  the
second  half  of  5th  century.  Praxiteles,  middle  of  4th
century. Lysippus  and  Demetrius,  last  half  of  4th  century.

45  «


BOOK XII.  X.  6-9

that  painting  flourished  more  especially,  although
the  different  artists  are  distinguished  for  different
excellences.  Protogenes,  for  example,  was  renowned
for  accuracy,  Pamphilus  and  Melanthius  for  sound-
ness of  taste,  Antiphilus  for  facility,  Theon  of  Samos
for  his  depiction  of  imaginary  scenes,  known  as
<fiavT(L(Tiai,  and  Apelles  for  genius  and  grace,  in  the
latter  of  which  qualities  he  took  especial  pride.
Euphranor,  on  the  other  hand,  was  admired  on  the
ground  that,  while  he  ranked  with  the  most  eminent
masters  of  other  arts,  he  at  the  same  time  achieved
marvellous  skill  in  the  arts  of  sculpture  and  painting.

The  same  differences  exist  between  sculptors.  The  7
art  of  Gillon  and  Hegesias  ^  is  somewhat  rude  and
recalls  the  Etruscans,  but  the  work  of  Calamis  has
already  begun  to  be  less  stiff,  while  Myron's  statues
show  a  greater  softness  of  form  than  had  been
achieved  by  the  artists  just  mentioned.  Polyclitus
surpassed  all  others  for  care  and  grace,  but  although
the  majority  of  critics  account  him  as  the  greatest
of  sculptors,  to  avoid  making  him  faultless  they
express  the  opinion  that  his  work  is  lacking  in
grandeur.  For  while  he  gave  the  human  form  an  8
ideal  grace,  he  is  thought  to  have  been  less  success-
ful in  representing  the  dignity  of  the  gods.  He  is
further  alleged  to  have  shrunk  from  representing
persons  of  maturer  years,  and  to  have  ventured  on
nothing  more  difficult  than  a  smooth  and  beardless
face.  But  the  qualities  lacking  in  Polyclitus  are
allowed  to  have  been  possessed  by  Phidias  and
Alcamenes.  On  the  other  hand,  Phidias  is  regarded  9
as  more  gifted  in  his  representation  of  gods  than  of
men,  and  indeed  for  chryselephantine  statues  he  is
without  a  peer,  as  he  would  in  truth  be,  even  if  he

453


QUINTILIAN

nihil  nisi  Minervam  Athenis  aut  Olympium  in  Elide
lovem  fecisset,  cuius  pulchritude  adiecisse  aliquid
etiam  receptae  religioni  videtur ;  adeo  maiestas
operis  deum  aequavit.  Ad  veritatem  Lysippum  ac
Praxitelen  accessisse  optime  adfirmant.  Nam  Deme-
trius tanquam  nimius  in  ea  reprehenditur  et  fuit
similitudinis  quam  pulchritudinis  amantior.

10  In  oratione  vero  si  species  intueri  velis^  totidem
paene  reperias  ingeniorum  quot  corporum  formas.
Sed  fuere  quaedam  genera  dicendi  condicione  tem-
porum  horridiora,  alioqui  magnam  iam  ingenii  vim
prae  se  ferentia.  Hinc  sint  Laelii,  Africani,  Catones
etiam  Gracchique,  quos  tu  licet  Polygnotos  vel
Callonas  appelles. Mediam  illam  formam  teneant  L.

1 1  Crassus,  Q.  Hortensius.  Tum  deinde  efflorescat  non
multum  inter  se  distantium  tempore  oratorum  ingens
proventus.  Hie  vim  Caesaris,  indolem  Caelii,  sub-
tilitatem  Calidii,  diligentiam  Pollionis,  dignitatem
Messalae,  sanctitatem  Calvi,  gravitatem  Bruti,  acu-
men Sulpicii,  acerbitatem  Cassii  reperiemus ;  in  iis
etiam,  quos  ipsi  vidimus,  copiam  Senecae,  vires
Africani, maturitatem Afri, iucunditatem Crispi,

12  sonum  Trachali,  elegantiam  Secundi.  At  M.
454


BOOK XII.  X.  9-i»

had  produced  nothing  in  this  material  beyond  his
Minerva  at  Athens  and  his  Jupiter  at  Olympia  in
Elis,  whose  beauty  is  such  that  it  is  said  to  have
added  something  even  to  the  awe  with  which  the
god  was  already  regarded :  so  perfectly  did  the
majesty  of  the  work  give  the  impression  of  godhead.
Lysippus  and  Praxiteles  are  asserted  to  be  supreme
as  regards  faithfulness  to  nature.  For  Demetrius  is
blamed  for  carrying  realism  too  far,  and  is  less
concerned  about  the  beauty  than  the  truth  of  his
work.

Now,  if  we  turn  our  attention  to  the  various  styles  10
of  oratory,  we  shall  find  almost  as  great  variety  of
talents  as  there  are  of  personal  appearance.  There
were  certain  kinds  of  oratory  which,  owing  to  the
circumstances  of  the  age,  suffered  from  lack  of  polish,
although  in  other  respects  they  displayed  remarkable
genius.  In  this  class  we  may  place  orators  such  as
Laelius,  Africanus,  Cato,  and  even  the  Gracchi,
whom  we  may  call  the  "  Polygnoti "  and  "  Callones  "
of  oratory.  Among  orators  of  the  intermediate  11
type  we  may  rank  Lucius  Crassus  and  Quintus
Hortensius.  Then  let  us  turn  to  a  vast  harvest  of
orators  who  flourished  much  about  the  same  period.
It  is  here  that  we  find  the  vigour  of  Caesar,  the
natural  talent  of  Caelius,  the  subtlety  of  Calidius,
the  accuracy  of  PoUio,  the  dignity  of  Messala,  the
austerity  of  Calvus,  the  gravity  of  Brutus,  the  acumen
of  Sulpicius  and  the  bitterness  of  Cassius,  while
among  those  whom  we  have  seen  ourselves  we
admire  the  fluency  of  Seneca,  the  strength  of  Afri-
canus, the  mellowness  of  Afer,  the  charm  of  Crispus,
the  sonority  of  Trachalus  and  the  elegance  of  Se-
cundus. But  in  Cicero  we have  one  who  is  not,  12

455


QUINTILIAN

Tullium  non  ilium  habemus  Euphranorem  circa  plures
artium  species  praestantem^  sed  in  omnibus,  quae  in
quoque  laudantur,  eminentissimum.  Quem  tamen  et
suorum  homines  temporum  incessere  audebant  ut
tumidiorem  et  Asianum  et  redundantem  et  in  re-
petitionibus  nimium  et  in  salibus  aliquando  frigidum
et  in  compositione fractum,  exultantem  ac  paene,

13  quod  procul  absit,  viro  molliorem ;  postea  vero  quam
triumvirali  proscriptione  consumptus  est,  passim  qui
oderant,  qui  invidebant  qui  aemulabantur,  adulatores
etiam  praesentis  potentiae  non  responsurum  in-
vaserunt.  Ille  tamen,  qui  ieiunus  a  quibusdam  et
aridus  habetur,  non  aliter  ab  ipsis  inimicis  male  audire
quam  nimiis  floribus  et  ingenii  affluentia  potuit.
Falsum  utrumque,  sed  tamen  ilia  mentiendi  propior

14  oceasio.  Praecipue  vero  presserunt  eum,  qui  videri
Atticorum  imitatores  concupierant.  Haec  manus
quasi  quibusdam  sacris  initiata  ut  alienigenam  et
parum  superstitiosum  devinctumque  illis  legibus
insequebatur ;  unde  nunc  quoque  aridi  et  exsuci  et

15  exangues.  Hi  sunt  enim,  qui  suae  imbecillitati  sa-
nitatis  appellationem,  quae  est  maxime  contraria,
obtendant;  qui,  quia  clariorem  vim  eloquentiae
velut  solem  ferre  non  possunt,  umbra  magni  nominis
delitescunt. Quibus quia multa et pluribus  locis

»  Cp.  X.  i.  105  jg-.  •  /.  «.  Attic


BOOK XII.  X.  12-15

like  Euphranorj  merely  distinguished  in  a  number
of  different  forms  of  art,  but  is  supreme  in  all  the
different  qualities  which  are  praised  in  each  individual
orator.i  And  yet  even  his  own  contemporaries
ventured  to  attack  him  on  the  ground  that  he  was
bombastic,  Asiatic,  redundant,  given  to  excessive
repetition,  liable  at  times  to  be  pointless  in  his
witticisms,  sensuous,  extravagant  and  (an  outrageous
accusation  !)  almost  effeminate  in  his  rhythm.  And  13
later,  after  he  had  fallen  a  victim  to  the  proscrip-
tion of  the  second  triumvirate,  those  who  hated
and  envied  him  and  regarded  him  as  their  rival,  nay,
even  those  who  had  flattered  him  in  the  days  of  his
power,  attacked  him  now  that  he  could  no  longer
reply.  But  that  very  man,  who  is  now  regarded
by  some  as  being  too  jejune  and  dry,  was  attacked
by  his  personal  enemies  on  no  other  ground  than
that  his  style  was  too  florid  and  his  talents  too  little
under  control.  Both  charges  are  false,  but  there  is
more  colour  for  the  lie  in  the  latter  case  than  in
the  former.  Those,  however,  who  criticised  him  14
most  severely  were  the  speakers  who  desired  to  be
regarded  as  the  imitators  of  Attic  oratory.  This
coterie,  regarding  themselves  as  the  sole  initiates  in
the  mysteries  of  their  art,  assailed  him  as  an  alien,
indifferent  to  their  superstitions  and  refusing  to  be
bound  by  their  laws.  Their  descendants  are  among
us  to-day,  a  withered,  sapless  and  anaemic  band.
For  it  is  they  that  flaunt  their  weakness  under  the  15
name  of  health,  in  defiance  of  the  actual  truth,  and
because  they  cannot  endure  the  dazzling  rays  of  the
sun  of  eloquence,  hide  themselves  beneath  the
shadow  of  a  mighty  name.^  However,  as  Cicero  him-
self answered  them  at  length  and  in  a  number  of

457


QUINTILIAN

Cicero  ipse  respondit,  tutior  mihi  de  hoc  disserendi
brevitas  erit.

16  Et  antiqua  quidem  ilia  divisio  inter  Atticos  atque
Asianos  fuit,  cum  hi  pressi  et  integri,  contra  inflati
illi  et  inanes  haberentur,  in  his  nihil  superflueret,
illis  iudicium  maxime  ac  modus  deesset.  Quod
quidam,  quorum  et  Santra  est,  hoc  putant  accidisse,
quod,  paulatim  sermone  Graeco  in  proximas  Asiae
civitates  influente,  nondum  satis  periti  loquendi
facundiam  concupierint,  ideoque  ea,  quae  proprie
signari poterant, circuitu coeperint enuntiare ac

17  deinde  in  eo  perse verarint.  Mihi  autem  orationis
differentiam  fecisse  et  dicentium  et  audientium
naturae  videntur,  quod  Attici  limati  quidam  et
emuncti  nihil  inane  aut  redundans  ferebant,  Asiana
gens  tumidior  alioqui  atque  iactantior  vaniore  etiam

18  dicendi  gloria  inflata  est.  Tertium  mox,  qui  haec
dividebant,  adiecerunt  genus  Rhodium,  quod  velut
medium  esse  atque  ex  utroque  mixtum  volunt ;
neque  enim  Attice  pressi  neque  Asiane  sunt  abund-
antes, ut  aliquid habere  videantur  gentis,  aliquid

19  auctoris. Aeschines  enim,  qui  hunc  exilio  delegerat

458


BOOK XII.  X.  15-19

passages,  it  will  be  safer  for  me  to  be  brief  in  my

treatment  of  this  topic.

The  distinction  between  the  Attic  and  the  Asiatic  16
schools  takes  us  back  to  antiquity.  The  former  were
regarded  as  concise  and  healthy,  the  latter  as  empty
and  inflated :  the  former  were  remarkable  for  the
absence  of  all  superfluity,  while  the  latter  were
deficient  alike  in  taste  and  restraint.  The  reason
for  this  division,  according  to  some  authorities,
among  them  Santra,  is  to  be  found  in  the  fact  that,
as  Greek  gradually  extended  its  range  into  the
neighbouring  cities  of  Asia,  there  arose  a  class  of
men  who  desired  to  distinguish  themselves  as  orators
before  they  had  acquired  sufficient  command  of  the
language,  and  who  consequently  began  to  express
by  periphrases  what  could  have  been  expressed
directly,  until  finally  this  practice  became  an  in-
grained habit.  My  o\vn  view,  however,  is  that  the  17
difference  between  the  two  styles  is  attributable  to
the  character  both  of  the  orators  and  the  audiences
whom  they  addressed :  the  Athenians,  with  their
polish  and  refinement,  refused  to  tolerate  emptiness
and  redundance,  while  the  Asiatics,  being  naturally
given  to  bombast  and  ostentation,  were  puffed  up
with  a  passion  for  a  more  vainglorious  style  of
eloquence.  At  a  later  period,  the  critics,  to  whom  18
we  owe  this  classification,  added  a  third  style,  the
Rhodian,  which  they  asserted  to  lie  midway  between
the  two  and  to  be  a  blend  of  both,  since  the  orators
of  this  school  are  neither  so  concise  as  the  Attic  nor
redundant  like  the  Asiatic  school,  but  appear  to
derive  their  style  in  part  from  their  national  char-
acteristics, in  part  from  those  of  their  founder.  For  19
it was  Aeschines who introduced the culture of

459


QUINTILIAN

locum,  intulit  eo  studia  Athenarum,  quae,  velut  sata
quaedam  caelo  terraque  degenerant,  saporem  ilium
Atticum  peregrino  miscuerunt.  Lenti  ergo  quidam
ac  remissi,  non  sine  pondere  tamen  neque  fontibus
puris  neque  torrentibus  turbidis,  sed  lenibus  stagnis
similes  habentur.

20  Nemo  igitur  dubitaverit,  longe  esse  optimum  genus
Atticorum.  In  quo  ut  est  aliquid  inter  ipsos  com-
mune, id  est  iudicium  acre  tersumque,  ita  ingeni-

21  orum  plurimae  formae.  Quapropter  mihi  falli  multum
videntur,  qui  solos  esse  Atticos  credunt  tenues  et
lucidos  et  significantes  sed  quadam  eloquentiae  fru-
galitate  contentos  ac  semper  manum  intra  pallium
continentes.  Nam  quis  erit  hie  Atticus  ?  Sit
Lysias ;  hunc  enim  amplectuntur  amatores  istius
nominis  modum.  Non  igitur  iam  usque  ad  Coccum
et  Andocidem  remittemur. Interrogare  tamen  velim,

22  an  Isocrates  Attice  dixerit.  Nihil  enim  tam  est
Lysiae  diversum.  Negabunt.  At  eius  schola  prin-
cipes  oratorum  dedit.  Quaeratur  similius  aliquid.
Hyperides  Atticus?  Certe,  at  plus  indulsit  volup-
tati. Transeo  plurimos,  Lycurgum,  Aristogitona  et

*  The  only  Coccus  known  to  us  is  stated  by  Suidas  to
have  been  a  pupil  of  Isocrates,  whereas  we  should  here
have  expected  Quintilian  to  refer  to  some  orator  of  the
5th  century  contemporary  with  Andocides  (closing  decades
of  4th  century).

460


BOOK XII.  X.  19-22

Athens  at  Rhodes,  which  he  had  chosen  as  his  place
of  exile  :  and  just  as  certain  plants  degenerate  as  a
result  of  change  of  soil  and  climate,  so  the  fine  Attic
flavour  was  marred  by  the  admixture  of  foreign
ingredients.  Consequently  certain  of  the  orators  of
this  school  are  regarded  as  somewhat  slow  and
lacking  in  energy,  though  not  devoid  of  a  certain
weight,  and  as  resembling  placid  pools  rather  than
the  limpid  springs  of  Athens  or  the  turbid  torrents
of  Asia.

No  one  therefore  should  have  any  hesitation  in  20
pronouncing  Attic  oratory  to  be  by  far  the  best.  But
although  all  Attic  writers  have  something  tn  com-
mon, namely  a  keen  and  exact  judgement,  their
talents  manifest  themselves  in  a  number  of  different
forms.  Consequently  I  regard  those  critics  as  com-  21
mitting  a  serious  error  who  regard  only  those
authors  as  Attic  who,  while  they  are  simple,  lucid
and  expressive,  are  none  the  less  content  with  a
certain  frugality  of  eloquence,  and  keep  their  hands
modestly  within  the  folds  of  their  cloaks.  For  what
author  is  there  who  answers  to  this  conception  ?  I
am  prepared  to  grant  that  there  is  Lysias,  since  he
is  the  favourite  model  of  the  admirers  of  this  school,
and  such  an  admission  will  save  us  from  being
referred  to  Coccus^  and  Andocides.  But  I  should  like  22
to  ask  whether  Isocrates  spoke  in  the  Attic  style.
For  there  is  no  author  less  like  Lysias.  They  will
answer  in  the  negative.  And  yet  it  is  to  the  school
of  Isocrates  that  we  owe  the  greatest  orators.  Let
us  look  for  something  closer.  Is  Hyperides
Attic .''  Yes,  they  reply,  but  of  an  over-sensuous
character.  I  pass  by  a  number  of  orators,  such  as
Lycurgus  and Aristogeiton  and  their  predecessors

461


QUINTILIAN

his  priores  Isaeum, Antiphonta ; quos  ut  homines
inter  se  genera similes, differentes dixeris  specie.

23  Quid  ille,  cuius  modo  fecimus  mentionem,  Aeschines  ?
nonne  his  latior  et  audentior  et  excelsior  ?  Quid
denique  Demosthenes  ?  non  cunctos  illos  tenues  et
circumspectos  vi,  sublimitate,  irapetu,  cultu,  coni-
positione  superavit  ?  non  insurgit  locis  ?  non  figuris
gaudet? non translationibus nitet? non  oratione

24  ficta  dat  tacentibus  vocem  ?  non  illud  iusiurandum
per  caesos  in  Marathone  ac  Salamine  propugnatores
rei  publicae  satis  manifesto  docet  praeceptorem  eius
Platonem  fuisse  ?  quem  ipsum  num  Asianum  appel-
labimus  plerumque  instinctis  divino  spiritu  vatibus
comparandum  ?  Quid  Periclea  ?  similemne  credimus
Lysiacae  gracilitati,  quem  fulminibus  et  caelesti
fragori comparant comici, dum illi conviciantur  ?

25  Quid  est  igitur,  cur  in  iis  demum,  qui  tenui  venula
per  calculos  fluunt,  Atticum  saporem  putent,  ibi
demum  thymum  redolere  dicant  ?  Quos  ego  ex-
istimo,  si  quod  in  iis  finibus  uberius  invenerint  solum
fertilioremve  segetem,  negaturos  Atticam  esse,  quod
plus,  quam  acceperit,  seminis  reddat,  quia  banc  eius

26  terrae  fidem  Menander  eludit.  Ita  nunc,  si  quis  ad
eas  Demosthenis  virtutes,  quas  ille  summus  orator

*  Georg.  35  sqq.  (Koerte) ;  4ire'5wK«i'  hp&Sis koI SiKaiws, ou
vKfov,  I  dAA'  wrh  rh  fifrpoy.

462


BOOK XII.  X.  22-26

Isaeus  and  Antiphon  ;  for  though  they  have  a  certjiin
generic  resemblance,  they  may  be  said  to  differ  in
species.  But  what  of  Aeschines,  whom  I  mentioned  23
just  now  ?  Is  not  his  style  ampler  and  bolder  and
more  lofty  than  theirs  ?  And  what  of  Demosthenes
himself?  Did  not  he  surpass  all  those  simple  and
circumspect  orators  in  force,  loftiness,  energy,  polish
and  rhythm  ?  Does  he  not  rise  to  great  heights  in
his  commonplaces  ?  Does  he  not  rejoice  in  the  employ-
ment of  figures  ?  Does  he  not  make  brilliant  use  of
metaphor?  Does  he  not  lend  a  voice,  a  fictitious
utterance  to  speechless  things  ?  Does  not  his  famous  24
oath  by  the  warriors  who  fell  fighting  for  their  country
at  Salamis  and  Marathon  show  that  Plato  was  his
master?  And  shall  we  call  Plato  an  Asiatic,  Plato
who  as  a  rule  deserves  comparison  with  poets  instinct
with  the  divine  fire  of  inspiration  ?  What  of  Pericles  ?
Can  we  believe  that  his  style  was  like  the  slender
stream  of  Lysias'  eloquence,  when  the  comedians,
even  while  they  revile  him,  compare  his  oratory  to
the  bolts  and  thunder  of  the  skies  ?  What  is  the  25
reason,  then,  why  these  critics  regard  that  style
which  flows  in  a  slender  trickle  and  babbles  among
the  pebbles  as  having  the  true  Attic  flavour  and
the  true  scent  of  Attic  thyme  ?  I  really  think  that,
if  they  were  to  discover  a  soil  of  exceptional  richness
and  a  crop  of  unusual  abundance  within  the  boundaries
of  Attica,  they  would  deny  it  to  be  Attic,  on  the
ground  that  it  has  produced  more  seed  than  it
received :  for  you  will  remember  the  mocking  com-
ments passed  by  Menander^  on  the  exact  fidelity
with  which  the  soil  of  Attica  repays  its  deposits.
Well,  then,  if  any  man  should,  in  addition  to  the  26
actual  virtues  which  the  great  orator  Demosthenes

463


QUINTILIAN

habuit,  tamen  quae  defuisse  ei  sive  ipsius  natura  seu
lege  civitatis  videntufj  adiecei'it,  ut  adfectus  con-
eitatius  moveat,  audiam  dicentem,  Non  fecit  hoc
Demosthenes  ?  et  si  quid  numeris  exierit  aptius  (for-
tasse  non  possit,  sed  tamen  si  quid  exierit)  non  erit
Atticum  ?  Melius  de  hoc  nomine  sentiant  credantque
Attice  dicere  esse  optime  dicere.

27  Atque  in  hae  tamen  opinione  perseverantes
Graecos  magis  tulerim.  Latina  mihi  facundia,  ut
inventionej  dispositione,  consilio,  ceteris  huius  gene-
ris artibus  similis  Graecae  ac  prorsus  discipula  eius
videtur,  ita  circa  rationem  eloquendi  vix  habere
imitationis  locum.  Namque  est  ipsis  statim  sonis
durior,  quando  et  iucundissimas  ex  Graecis  litteras
non  habemus,  vocalem  alteram,  alteram  consonantem,
quibus  nullae  apud  eos  dulcius  spirant ;  quas  mutuari

28  solemus,  quotiens  illorum  nominibus  utimur.  Quod
cum  contingit,  nescio  quomodo  hilarior  protinus
renidet  oratio,  ut  in  Zephyris  et  Zophoris.  Quae  si
nostris  litteris  scribantur,  surdum  quiddam  et  bar-
barum  efficient,  et  velut  in  locum  earum  succedunt

29  tristes  et  horridae,  quibus  Graecia  caret.  Nam  et
ilia,  quae  est  sexta  nostrarum,  paene  non  humana

1  See  n.  xvi.  4.  Qiiintilian  alludes  to  an  alleged  law  for-
bidding Athenian  orators  to  appeal  to  the  emotions  in  the
law  courts.  ^  *  and  T.

'  Friezes.  *  F  and  U  ;  ze/uri  and  zo/ori,

464


BOOK XII.  X.  26-29

possessed,  show  himself  to  be  the  possessor  of  others,
that  either  owing  to  his  own  temperament  or  the
laws  of  Athens  ^  Demosthenes  is  thought  to  have
lacked,  and  should  reveal  in  himself  the  power  of
strongly  stirring  the  emotions,  shall  I  hear  one  of
these  critics  protesting  that  Demosthenes  never  did
this?  And  if  he  produces  something  rhythmically
superior  (an  impossible  feat,  perhaps,  but  let  us
assume  it  to  be  so),  are  we  to  be  told  that  it  is  not
Attic?  These  critics  would  show  finer  feeling  and
better  judgement,  if  they  took  the  view  that  Attic
eloquence  meant  perfect  eloquence.

Still  I  should  find  this  attitude  less  intolerable  if  27
it  were  only  the  Greeks  that  insisted  on  it.  For  Latin
eloquence,  although  in  my  opinion  it  closely  resembles
the  Greek  as  far  as  invention,  arrangement,  judge-
ment and  the  like  are  concerned,  and  may  indeed  be
regarded  as  its  disciple,  cannot  aspire  to  imitate  it
in  point  of  elocution.  For,  in  the  first  place,  it  is
harsher  in  sound,  since  our  alphabet  does  not  contain
the  most  euphonious  of  the  Greek  letters,  one  a
vowel  and  the  other  a  consonant,^  than  which  there
are  none  that  fall  more  sweetly  on  the  ear,  and
which  we  are  forced  to  borrow  whenever  we  use
Greek  words.  The  result  of  such  borrowing  is,  for  28
some  reason  or  other,  the  immediate  accession  to
our  language  of  a  certain  liveliness  and  charm.
Take,  for  example,  words  such  as  zephyri  and  zophori :  *
if  they  were  spelt  according  to  the  Latin  alphabet,
they  would  produce  a  heavy  and  barbarous  sound.
For  we  replace  these  letters  by  others  of  a  harsh
and  unpleasant  character,*  from  which  Greece  is
happily  immune.  For  the  sixth  letter  in  our  alphabet  29
is  represented by  a  sound  which  can  scarcely  be

465


QUINTILIAN

voce  vel  omnino  non  voce  potius  inter  discrimina
dentium  efflanda  est ;  quae,  etiam  cum  vocalem
proxima  accipit,  quassa  quodammodo,  utique  quotiens
aliquam  consonantium  frangit,  ut  in  hoc  ipso  J rangit,
multo  fit  liorridior.  Aeolicae  quoque  litterae,  qua
Servian  cei-viitnque  dicimus,  etiamsi  forma  a  nobis
repudiata est, vis tamen nos ipsa persequitur,

30  Duras  et  ilia  syllabas  facit,  quae  ad  coniungendas
demum  subiectas  sibi  vocales  est  utilis,  alias  super-
vacua,  ut  equos  liao  et  aequum  scribimus ;  cum  etiam
ipsae  hae  vocales  duae  efficiant  sonum,  qualis  apud
Graecos nullus est, ideoque scribi  illorum  litteris

31  non  potest.  Quid  ?  quod  pleraque  nos  ilia  quasi
mugiente  M  ^  litteracludimus  in  quam^  nullum  Graece
verbum  cadit:  at  illi  ny  iucundam  et  in  fine  praecipue
quasi  tinnientem  illius  loco  ponunt,  quae  est  apud

32  nos  rarissima  in  clausulis.  Quid?  quod  syllabae
nostrae  in  B  litteram  et  D  innituntur  adeo  aspere,
ut  plerique  non  antiquissimorum  quidem,  sed  tamen
veterum  mollire  temptaverint  non  solum  aversa  pro
abversis  dicendo,  sed  et  in  praepositione  B  litterae

33  absonam  et  ipsam  S  subiiciendo.  Sed  accentus
quoque,  cum  rigore  quodam,  turn  similitudine  ipsa.


^  M  added  by  Halm.

'  quam,  Halm :  qua,  MSS.


^  cp.  I.  iv.  11.

*  A  sound  approximating  to  our  W.

8  The  sound  of  Q  in  itself  does  not  differ  from  C.  It
would  therefore  be  useless,  save  as  an  indication  that  U  and
another  vowel  are  to  follow.  The  U  in  this  combination
following  Q  was,  as  Donatus  later  pointed  out,  "neither  a
vowel  nor  a  consonant,"  i.e.  it  was  something  between  U
andV.


466


BOOK XII.  X.  29-33

called  human  or  even  articulate,  being  produced  by
forcing  the  air  through  the  interstices  of  the  teeth.
Such  a  sound,  even  when  followed  by  a  vowel,  is
harsh  enough  and,  as  often  as  it  clashes  (^frangit)
with  a  consonant,^  as  it  does  in  this  very  word
frangit,  becomes  harsher  still.  Then  there  is  the
Aeolic  digamma  whose  sound  occurs  in  words  such
as  our  serviis  and  cerviis ;  for  even  though  we  have
rejected  the  actual  form  of  the  letter,  we  cannot
get  rid  of  that  which  it  represents. ^  Similarly  the  30
letter  Q,  which  is  superfluous  and  useless  save  for
the  purpose  of  attaching  to  itself  the  vowels  by
which  it  is  followed,  results  in  the  formation  of
harsh  syllables,  as,  for  example,  when  we  write  eqtios
and  aequum,  more  especially  since  these  two  vowels
together  produce  a  sound  for  which  Greek  has  no
equivalent  and  which  cannot  therefore  be  expressed
in  Greek  letters.^  Again,  we  have  a  number  of  31
words  which  end  with  M,  a  letter  which  suggests
the  mooing  of  a  cow,  and  is  never  the  final  letter
in  any  Greek  word  :  for  in  its  place  they  use  the
letters  ny,  the  sound  of  which  is  naturally  pleasant
and  produces  a  ringing  tone  when  it  occurs  at  the
end  of  a  word,  whereas  in  Latin  this  termination  is
scarcely  ever  found.  Again,  we  have  syllables  which  32
produce  such  a  harsh  effect  by  ending  in  B  and
D,  that  many,  not,  it  is  true,  of  our  most  ancient
writers,  but  still  writers  of  considerable  antiquity,
have  attempted  to  mitigate  the  harshness  not  merely
by  saying  aversa  for  abversa,  but  by  adding  an  S
to  the  preposition  ab,  although  S  is  an  ugly  letter
in  itself.  Our  accents  also  are  less  agreeable  than  33
those  of  the  Greeks.  This  is  due  to  a  certain  rigidity
and monotony of pronunciation, since the final

467


QUINTILIAN

minus  suaves  habemus,  quia  ultima  syllaba  nee  aeuta
unquam  excitatur  nee  flexa  circumdueitur,  sed  in
gravem  vel  duas  graves  cadit  semper.  Itaque  tanto
est  sermo  Graecus  Latino  iueundior,  ut  nostri  poetae,
quotiens dulce carmen esse voluerint, illorum id

34  nominibus  exornent.  His  ilia  potentiora,  quod  res
plurimae  carent  appellationibus,  ut  eas  necesse  sit
transferre  aut  cii'cumire ;  etiam  in  iis,  quae  de-
nominata  sunt^  summa  paupertas  in  eadem  nos
frequentissime  revolvit ;  at  illis  non  verborum  modo,
sed  linguarum  etiam  inter  se  differentium  copia
est.

35  Quare  qui  a  Latinis  exiget  illam  gratiam  sermonis
Attici,  det  mihi  in  eloquendo  eandem  iucunditatem
et  parem  copiam.  Quod  si  negatum  est,  sententias
aptabimus  iis  vocibus  quas  habemus,  nee  rerum
nimiam  tenuitatem,  ut  non  dicam  pinguioribus,
fortioribus  certe  verbis  miscebimus,  ne  virtus  utraque

36  pereat  ipsa  confusione.  Nam  quo  minus  adiuvat
sermo,  rerum  inventione  pugnandum  est.  Sensus
sublimes  variique  eruantur.  Permovendi  omnes
adfectus  erunt,  oratio  translationum  nitore  illumi-
nanda.  Non  possumus  esse  tam  graciles :  simus
fortiores.  Subtilitate  vincimur :  valeamus  pondere.
Proprietas  penes  illos  est  certior : eopia  vincamus.


*  /.  e.  the  last  syllable  and  often  the  last  two  syllables
have  the  grave  accent. See  I.  v.  22  sqq.

*  I.e.  because  the  names are  not  wholly  adequate  and
there  are  no  satisfactory  synonyms.

468


BOOK XII.  X.  33-36

syllable  is  never  marked  by  the  rise  of  the  acute
accent  nor  by  the  rise  and  fall  of  the  circumflex,  but
one  or  even  two  grave  accents  ^  are  regularly  to  be
found  at  the  end.  Consequently  the  Greek  language
is  so  much  more  agreeable  in  sound  than  the  Latin,
that  our  poets,  whenever  they  wish  their  verse  to
be  especially  harmonious,  adorn  it  with  Greek  words.
A  still  stronger  indication  of  the  inferiority  of  Latin  34
is  to  be  found  in  the  fact  that  there  are  many  things
which  have  no  Latin  names,  so  that  it  is  necessary
to  express  them  by  metaphor  or  periphrasis,  while
even  in  the  case  of  things  which  have  names,  the
extreme  poverty  of  the  language  leads  us  to  resort
to  the  same  practice.^  On  the  other  hand,  the
Greeks  have  not  merely  abundance  of  words,  but
they  have  also  a  number  of  different  dialects.

Consequently  he  who  demands  from  Latin  the  35
grace  of  Attic  Greek,  must  first  provide  a  like
charm  of  tone  and  equal  richness  of  vocabulary.  If
this  advantage  is  denied  us,  we  must  adapt  our
thoughts  to  suit  the  words  we  have  and,  where  our
matter  is  unusually  slight  and  delicate,  must  avoid
expressing  it  in  words  which  are,  I  will  not  say  too
gross,  but  at  any  rate  too  strong  for  it,  for  fear  that
the  combination  should  result  in  the  destruction
both  of  delicacy  and  force.  For  the  less  help  we  36
get  from  the  language,  the  more  must  we  rely  on
inventiveness  of  thought  to  bring  us  through  the
conflict.  We  must  discover  sentiments  full  of  lofti-
ness and  variety,  must  stir  all  the  emotions  and
illumine  our  style  by  brilliance  of  metaphor.  Since
we  cannot  be  so  delicate,  let  us  be  stronger.  If
they  beat  us  for  subtlety,  let  us  prevail  by  weight,
and if  they  have greater  precision,  let us  outdo

469


QUINTILIAN

37  Ingenia  Graecorum  etiam  minora  suos  portus  ha-
bent :  nos  plerumque  maioribus  velis  movemur,
validior  spiritus  nostros  sinus  tendat ;  non  tamen
alto  semper  feremur^  nam  et  litora  interim  sequenda
sunt,  nils  facilis  per  quaelibet  vada  accessus ;  ego
aliquid,  non  multo  tamen,  altius,  in  quo  mea  cumba

38  non  sidat,  inveniam.  Neque  enim,  si  tenuiora  haec
ac  pressiora  Graeci  melius,  in  eoque  vincimur  solo  et
ideo  in  comoediis  non  contendimus,  prorsus  tamen
omittenda  pars  haec  orationis,  sed  exigenda  ut
optime  possumus ;  possumus  autem  rerum  et  modo
et  iudicio  esse  similes, verborum gratia,  quam in

39  ipsis  non  habemus,  extrinsecus  condienda  est.  An
non  in  privatis  et  acutus  et  indistinctus  et  non  super
modum  elatus  M.  Tullius?  non  in  M.  Calidio
insignis  haec  virtus  ?  non  Scipio,  Laelius,  Cato  in
eloquendo  velut  Attici  Romanorum  fuerunt?  Cui
porro  non  satis  est,  quo  nihil  esse  melius  potest  ?

40  Adhuc  quidam  nullam  esse  naturalem  putant
eloquentiam,  nisi  quae  sit  cotidiano  sermoni  simil-
lima,  quo  cum  amicis,  coniugibus,  liberis,  servis
loquamur,  contento  promere  animi  voluntatem
nihilque arcessiti et elaborati requirente; quid-

*  Owing  to  the  subtlety  and  delicacy  of  the  Greek
language  even  second-rate  talent  will  be  able  to  win  dis-
tinction in  dealing  with  minor  things.  But  the  coarser  and
more  full-blooded  nature  of  Latin  makes  this  difficult.

470


BOOK XII.  X.  36-40

them  in  fullness  of  expression.  Even  the  lesser  37
orators  of  Greece  have  their  own  havens  where  they
may  ride  in  safety,^  while  we  as  a  rule  carry  more
sail.  Let  stronger  gales  fill  our  canvas,  and  yet  let
us  not  always  keep  the  high  seas ;  for  at  times  we
must  cling  to  shore.  The  Greeks  can  easily  traverse
any  shallows ;  I  must  find  a  deeper,  though  not
much  deeper,  channel,  that  my  bark  may  not  run
aground.  For  even  though  the  Greeks  surpass  us  38
where  circumstances  call  for  delicacy  and  restraint,
though  we  acknowledge  their  superiority  in  this
respect  alone,  and  therefore  do  not  claim  to  rival
them  in  comedy,  that  is  no  justification  for  our
abandonment  of  this  department  of  oratory,  but
rather  a  reason  why  we  should  handle  it  as  best  we
can.  Now  we  can  at  any  rate  resemble  the  Greeks
in  the  method  and  judgement  with  which  we  treat
our  matter,  although  that  grace  of  language,  which
our  words  cannot  provide,  must  be  secured  by  the
admixture  of  foreign  condiments.  For  example,  is  39
not  Cicero  shrewd,  simple  and  not  unduly  exalted
in  tone,  when  he  deals  with  private  cases .''  Is  not
Calidius  also  distinguished  for  the  same  virtue  ?
Were  not  Scipio,  Laelius  and  Cato  the  Attic  orators
of  Rome  ?  Surely  we  ought  to  be  satisfied  with
them,  since  nothing  can  be  better.

There  are  still  some  critics  who  deny  that  any  40
form  of  eloquence  is  purely  natural,  except  that
which  closely  resembles  the  ordinary  speech  of  every-
day life,  which  we  use  to  our  friends,  our  wives,  our
children  and  our  slaves,  a  language,  that  is  to  say,
which  contents  itself  with  expressing  the  purpose
of  the  mind  without  seeking  to  discover  anything
in  the  way  of  elaborate  and  far-fetched  phraseology.

471


QUINTILIAN

quid  hue  sit  adiectum,  id  esse  adfectationis  et
ambitiosae  in  loquendo  iactantiae,  remotum  a  veri-
tate  fictumque  ipsorum  gratia  verborum,  quibus
solum natura sit officium attributum, servire

41  sensibus :  sicut  athletarum  corpora,  etiamsi  validiora
fiant  exercitatione  et  lege  quadam  ciboruni,  non
tamen  esse  naturalia  atque  ab  ilia  specie,  quae  sit
concessa  homiuibus,  abhorrere.  Quid  enim,  inquiunt,
attinet  circuitu  res  ostendere  et  translationibus,  id
est  aut  pluribus  aut  alienis  verbis,  cum  sua  cuique

42  sint  adsignata  nomina  ?  Denique  antiquissimum
quemque  maxime  secundum  naturam  dixisse  con-
tendunt :  mox  poetis  similiores  exstitisse,  etiamsi
parcius,  simili  tamen  ratione,  falsa  et  impropria
virtutes  ducentes.  Qua  in  disputatione  nonnihil
veri  est,  ideoque  non  tam  procul,  quam  fit  a  quibus-

43  dam,  recedendum  a  propriis  atque  communibus.  Si
quis  tamen,  ut  in  loco  dixi  compositionis,  ad  neces-  I
saria,  quibus  nihil  minus  est,  aliquid  melius  adiecerit,
non  erit  hac  calumnia  reprehendendus.  Nam  mihi
aliam  quandam  videtur  habere  naturam  sermo
vulgaris,  aliam  viri  eloquentis  oratio ;  cui  si  res
modo indicare satis esset, nihil ultra verborum

^  XI.  ch.  4.
472


BOOK XIL  X.  40-43

And  they  hold  that  whatever  is  added  to  this
simplicity  lays  the  speaker  open  to  the  charge  of
affectation  and  pretentious  ostentation  of  speech,
void  of  all  sincerity  and  elaborated  merely  for  the
sake  of  the  words,  although  the  sole  duty  assigned
to  words  by  nature  is  to  be  the  servants  of  thought.
Such  language  may  be  compared  to  the  bodies  of  41
athletes,  which  although  they  develop  their  strength
by  exercise  and  diet,  are  of  unnatural  growth  and
abnormal  in  appearance.  For  what,  say  these  critics,
is  the  good  of  expressing  a  thing  by  periphrasis  or
metaphor  (that  is,  either  by  a  number  of  words  or
by  words  which  have  no  connexion  with  the  thing),
when  everything  has  been  allotted  a  name  of  its
own .''  Finally,  they  urge  that  all  the  earliest  orators  42
spoke  according  to  the  dictates  of  nature,  but  that
subsequently  there  arose  a  class  of  speakers  re-
sembling poets  rather  than  orators,  who  regarded
false  and  artificial  methods  of  expression  as  positive
merits ;  they  were,  it  is  true,  more  sparing  than
the  poets  in  their  use  of  such  expressions,  but  none
the  less  worked  on  similar  lines.  There  is  some
truth  in  this  contention,  and  we  should  therefore
be  careful  not  to  depart  from  the  more  exact  usage
of  ordinary  speech  to  the  extent  that  is  done  by
certain  orators.  On  the  other  hand,  that  is  no  43
reason  for  thus  calumniating  the  man  who,  as  I  said
in  dealing  with  the  subject  of  artistic  structure,^
succeeds  in  improving  upon  the  bare  necessaries  ot
style.  For  the  common  language  of  every  day  seems
to  me  to  be  of  a  different  character  from  the  style
of  an  eloquent  speaker.  If  all  that  was  required  of
the  latter  was  merely  to  indicate  the  facts,  he  might
rest  content  with  literalness  of  language,  without

VOL.  IV.  Q 473


QUINTILIAN

proprietatem  elaborarct ;  sed  cum  debeat  delectare,
movere,  in  plurimas  animum  audieutis  species
impellere, utetur  his  quoque adiutoriis,  quae  sunt

44  ab  eadem  nobis  concessa  natura. Nam  et  lacertos
, . exercitatione  constringere  et  augere  vires  et  colorem

trahere  naturale  est.  Ideoque  in  omnibus  gentibus
alius  alio  facundior  habetur  et  eloquendo  dulcis
magis  (quod  si  non  eveniret^  omnes  pares  essent) ;
at  idem  homines  aliter  de  re  alia^  loquuntur  et
servant  personarum  discrimina.  Ita,  quo  quisque
plus  efficit  dicendo,  hoc  magis  secundum  naturam
eloquentiae  dicit.

45  Quapropter  ne  illis  quidem  nimium  repugno,  qui
dandum  putant  nonnihil  etiam  temporibus  atque
auribus  nitidius  aliquid  atque  adfectius  postulantibus.
Itaque  non  solum  ad  priores  Catone  Gracchisque,  sed
ne  ad  hos  quidem  ipsos  oratorem  adligandum  puto.
Atque  id  fecisse  M.  Tullium  video,  ut  cum  plurimum  2
utilitati,  tum  partem  quandam  delectationi  daret ;
cum  et suam se  rem  agere  diceret,  ageret  autem

46  maxime  litigatoris.  Nam  hoc  ipso  proderat,  quod
placet. Ad  cuius voluptates nihil equidem quod

^  at  idem  homines  aliter  de  re  alia  loquuntur,  Balm :  ct
idem  homines  alf  de  re  allocuntur,  0.
*  plurimum,  Christ :  omnium,  G.


BOOK XII.  X.  43-46

further  elaboration.  But  since  it  is  his  duty  to
delight  and  move  his  audience  and  to  play  upon
the  various  feelings,  it  becomes  necessary  for  him
to  employ  those  additional  aids  which  are  granted
to  us  by  that  same  nature  which  gave  us  speech.
It  is,  in  fact,  as  natural  to  do  this  as  to  harden  the  44
muscles,  increase  our  strength  and  improve  our  com-
plexion by  means  of  exercise.  It  is  for  this  reason
that  among  all  nations  one  man  is  regarded  as  more
eloquent  and  more  attractive  in  his  style  than
another  (since  if  this  were  not  the  case,  all  speakers
would  be  equal) ;  but  the  same  men  speak  differ-
ently on  different  subjects  and  observe  distinctions
of  character.  Consequently  the  more  effective  a
man's  speaking,  the  more  in  accordance  with  the
nature  of  eloquence  will  it  be.

I  have,  therefore,  no  strong  objection  even  to  the  45
views  expressed  by  those  who  think  that  some  conces-
sion should  be  made  to  the  circumstances  under  which
we  speak  and  to  the  ears  of  the  audience  which
require  something  more  polished  and  emotional  than
ordinary  speech.  For  this  reason  I  consider  that  it
would  be  absurd  to  restrict  an  orator  to  the  style  of
the  predecessors  of  Cato  and  the  Gracchi,  or  even
of  those  orators  themselves.  And  I  note  that  it  was
the  practice  of  Cicero,  while  devoting  himself  in  the
main  to  the  interests  of  his  case,  to  take  into  account
the  delectation  of  his  audience  as  well,  since,  as  he
pointed  out,  his  own  interests  were  concerned  as
well  as  those  of  his  client,  although  of  course  the
latter  were  of  paramount  importance.  For  his  very
charm  was  a  valuable  asset.  I  do  not  know  what  46
can  be  added  by  way  of  improvement  to  the  charms
of  his style,  except perhaps the introduction ot

475


QUINTILIAN

addi  possit  invenio,  nisi  ut  sensus  nos  quidem  dicamus
plures.  Neque  enim  non  ^  fieri  potest  salva  tracta-
tione  causae  et  dicendi  auctoritate,  si  non  crebra
haec  lumina  etcontinua  fuerint  et  invicem  ofFeceriiit.

47  Sed  me  hactenus  cedentem  nemo  insequatur  ultra.
Do  tempori,  ne  hirta  toga  sit,  non  ut  serica ;  ne
intonsum  caput,  non  ut  in  gradus  atque  anulos  comp-
tum,  cum  eo  quod,  si  non  ad  luxuriam  ac  libidinem
referas,  eadem  speciosiora  quoque  sint,  quae  honesti-

48  ora.  Ceterum  hoc,  quod  vulgo  sententias  vocamus,
quod  veteribus  praecipueque  Graecis  in  usu  non  fuit
(apud  Ciceronem  enim  invenio),  dum  rem  contineant
et  copia  non  redundent  et  ad  victoriam  spectent,
quis  utile  neget  ?  Feriunt  animum  et  uno  ictu  fre-
quenter impellunt  et  ipsa  brevitate  magis  haerent
et  delectatione  persuadent.

49  At  sunt  qui  haec  excitatiora  lumina,  etiamsi  dicere
permittant,  a  componendis  tamen  orationibus  ex-
cludenda  arbitrentur.  Quocirca  mihi  ne  hie  quidem
locus  intactus  est  omittendus;  nam  plurimi'  erudi-

*  non  added  by  Buttmann.

*  nam  plurimi,  Halm :  a  plurimis,  G.

*  For  this  ever-recurring  technical  term  there  is  no
adequate  translation.  It  means  a  "reflexion  couched  in
aphoristic  or  epigrammatic  form."

476


BOOK XII.  X.  46-49

something  more  in  the  way  of  brilHant  reflexions  to
suit  the  taste  of  our  own  times.  For  this  can  be  done
without  injury  to  the  treatment  of  our  case  or  im-
pairing the  authority  of  our  language,  provided  that
such  embellishments  are  not  too  frequent  or  con-
tinuous, and  do  not  mutually  destroy  the  effects
which  they  were  designed  to  produce.  I  am  ready  47
to  go  so  far  along  the  path  of  concession,  but  let  no
man  press  me  further.  I  concur  in  the  fashion  of
the  day  to  the  extent  of  agreeing  that  the  toga
should  not  be  long  in  the  nap,  but  not  to  the  extent
of  insisting  that  it  should  be  of  silk :  I  agree  that
the  hair  should  be  cut,  but  not  that  it  should  be
dressed  in  tiers  and  ringlets,  since  we  must  always
remember  that  ornaments,  unless  they  be  judged
from  the  standpoint  of  the  fop  and  the  debauchee,
are  always  effective  in  proportion  to  their  seemliness.
But  with  regard  to  those  passages  to  which  we  give  48
tlie  name  of  reflexions,^  a  form  of  ornament  which
was  not  employed  by  the  ancients  and,  above  all,
not  by  the  Greeks,  although  I  do  find  it  in  Cicero,
who  can  deny  their  usefulness,  provided  they  are
relevant  to  the  case,  are  not  too  diffuse  and  con-
tribute to  our  success?  For  they  strike  the  mind
and  often  produce  a  decisive  effect  by  one  single
blow,  while  their  very  brevity  makes  them  cling  to
the  memory,  and  the  pleasure  which  they  produce
has  the  force  of  persuasion.

There  are,  however,  some  who,  while  allowing  49
the  actual  delivery  of  such  specially  brilliant  forms
of  ornament,  think  that  they  should  be  excluded
from  the  written  speech.  Consequently  I  must  not
dismiss  even  this  topic  without  a  word  of  dis-
cussion. For a number of learned authorities

477


QUINTILIAN

torutn  aliam  esse  dicendi  rationem,  aliam  scribendi
putaverunt ;  ideoque  in  agendo  clarissimos  quosdam
nihil  posteritati  mansurisque  mox  litteris  reliquisse,
ut  Periclem,  ut  Demaden ;  rursus  alios  ad  compo-
nendum  optimos  actionibus  idoneos  non  fuisse,  ut
60  Isocraten ;  praeterea  in  agendo  plus  impetus  ple-
rumque  et  petitas  vel  paulo  licentius  voluptates,
commovendos  enimesse  ducendosque  animos  imperi-
torum  ;  at  quod  libris  dedicatum  in  exemplum  edatur,
id  ^  tersum  ac  limatum  et  ad  legem  ac  regulam  com-
positum  esse  oportere,  quia  veniat  in  manus  doctorum

51  et  iudices  artis  habeat  artifices.  Quin  illi  subtil es
(ut  sibimet  ac  multis  persuaserunt)  magistrirrapa'Seiy/ia
dicendo,  ivdvfirjfia  scribendo  esse  aptius  tradiderunt.
Mihi  unum  atque  idem  videtur  bene  dicere  ac  bene
scribere,  neque  aliud  esse  oratio  scripta  quam  monu-
mentum  actionis  habitae.  Itaque  nullas  non,  ut
opinor,  debet  habere  virtutes,^  virtutes  dico,  non
vitia. Nam  imperitis  placere  aliquando  quae  vitiosa

52  sint,  scio.  Quo  different  igitur?  Quodsi  mihi  des
consilium  iudicumsapientium,  perquam  multa  recidam
ex  orationibus  non  Ciceronis  modo,  sed  etiam  eius,
qui  est  strictior  multo,  Demosthenis. Neque  enim

*  at  quod  .  .  .  dedicatum  .  .  .  edatur  id,  Halm :  ad  quos
.  .  .  dedicatorum  .  .  .  edantur  et,  G.

*  secoiid  virtutes  added  by  Buttmann.

*  See  V.  xi.  1. Parallels  and  especially  historical  ones.
^  See  V.  xiv.  1  sqq. A  form  of  syllogism.

478


BOOK XII.  X.  49-52

have  held  that  the  written  and  the  spoken  speech
stand  on  different  footings,  and  that  consequently
some  of  the  most  eloquent  of  speakers  have  left
nothing  for  posterity  to  read  in  durable  literary  form,
as,  for  example,  is  the  case  with  Pericles  and  Demades,
Again,  they  urge  that  there  have  been  authors,  like
Isocrates,  who,  while  admirable  writers,  were  not
well-fitted  for  actual  speaking;  and,  further,  that  50
actual  pleading  is  characterised  by  a  greater  energy
and  by  the  employment,  almost  verging  on  license,
of  every  artifice  designed  to  please,  since  the  minds
of  an  uneducated  audience  require  to  be  moved  and
led.  On  the  other  hand,  the  written  speech  which
is  published  as  a  model  of  style  must  be  polished
and  filed  and  brought  into  conformity  with  the
accepted  rules  and  standards  of  artistic  construction,
since  it  will  come  into  the  hands  of  learned  men
and  its  art  will  be  judged  by  artists.  These  subtle  51
teachers  (for  such  they  have  persuaded  themselves
and  others  that  they  are)  have  laid  it  down  that
the  TrapaSciy/xa  ^  is  best  suited  for  actual  speech  and
the  evdvfjirjfjia  ^  for  writing.  My  own  view  is  that
there  is  absolutely  no  difference  between  writing
well  and  speaking  well,  and  that  a  written  speech
is  merely  a  record  of  one  that  has  actually  been
delivered.  Consequently  it  must  in  my  opinion
possess  every  kind  of  merit,  and  note  that  I  say
merit,  not  fault.  For  I  know  that  faults  do  some-
times meet  with  the  approval  of  the  uneducated.
What,  then,  will  be  the  difference  between  what  is  52
written  and  what  is  spoken  ?  If  I  were  given  a  jury
of  wise  men,  I  should  cut  down  a  large  number  of
passages  from  the  speeches  not  only  of  Cicero,  but
even  of  Demosthenes,  who  is  much  more  concise.

479


QUINTILIAN

adfectus  omnino  movendi  erunt,  nee  aures  dele-
ctatione  mulcendae,  cum  etiam  prooemia  supervacua
esse  apud  tales  Aristoteles  existimet ;  non  enim
trahentur  his  illi  sapientes ;  proprie  et  significanter

53  rem  indieare,  probationes  colligere  satis  est.  Cum
vero  iudex  detur  aut  populus  aut  ex  populo,  laturique
sint  seutentiam  indocti  saepius  atque  interim  rustici,
omnia  quae  ad  obtinendum,  quod  intendimus,  pro-
desse  credemus  adhibenda  sunt ;  eaque  et  cum  di-
cimus  promenda  et  cum  scribimus  ostendenda  sunt,
si  modo  ideo  scribimus,  ut  doceamus  quomodo  dici

54  oporteat.  An  Demosthenes  male  sic  egisset,  ut
scripsit,  aut  Cicero  ?  aut  eos  praestantissimos  oratores
aUa  re  quam  scriptis  cognoscimus  ?  Melius  egerunt
igitur  an  peius  ?  Nam  si  peius,  sic  potius  oportuit  dici,
ut  scripserunt ;  si  melius,  sic  potius  oportuit  scribi,

55  ut  dixerunt.  Quid  ergo?  Semper  sic  aget  orator,
ut  scribet  ?  Si  licebit,  semper.  Si  vero  quando  ^
impediant  brevitate  tempora  a  iudice  data,  multum
ex  eo,  quod  oportuit-  dici,  recidetur;  editio  habebit
omnia. Quae  tamen  ^  secundum  naturam  iudicantium

*  Si  vero  quando, Wolfflin :  steterunt  quae,  G.

*  oportuit,  Christ :  potuit,  MSS.

^  quae  tamen,  Halm :  quaedam,  (?.


1  Rhet.  iii.  13.


480


BOOK XII.  X.  52-55

For  with  such  a  jury  there  would  be  no  need  to
appeal  to  the  emotions  nor  to  charm  and  soothe  the
ears,  since  according  to  Aristotle  ^  even  exordia  are
superfluous,  if  addressed  to  such  persons,  as  they
will  have  no  influence  upon  judges  who  are  truly
wise :  it  will  be  sufficient  to  state  the  facts  with
precision  and  significance  and  to  marshal  our  array
of  proofs.  Since,  however,  our  judges  are  the  53
people,  or  drawn  from  the  people,  and  since  those
who  are  appointed  to  give  sentence  are  frequently
ill-educated  and  sometimes  mere  rustics,  it  becomes
necessary  to  employ  every  method  that  we  think
likely  to  assist  our  case,  and  these  artifices  must
not  merely  be  produced  in  speech,  but  exhibited  in
the  written  version  as  well,  at  least  if  in  writing  it
our  design  is  to  show  how  it  should  be  spoken.  If  54
Demosthenes  or  Cicero  had  spoken  the  words  as
they  wrote  them,  would  either  have  spoken  ill.''
And  is  our  acquaintance  with  either  of  those  two
great  orators  based  on  anything  save  their  writings?
Did  they  speak  better,  then,  or  worse  than  they
wrote  ?  If  they  spoke  worse,  all  that  can  be  said
is  that  they  should  have  spoken  as  they  wrote,
while,  if  they  spoke  better,  they  should  have
written  as  they  spoke.  Well,  you  ask,  is  an  orator  55
then  always  to  speak  as  he  writes .''  If  iK)ssible,
always.  If,  however,  the  time  allowed  by  the
judge  is  too  short  for  this  to  be  possible,  he  will
have  to  cut  out  much  that  he  should  have  said,
but  the  published  speech  will  contain  the  omitted
passages.  On  the  other  hand,  such  passages  as
were  uttered  merely  to  suit  the  character  of  the
judges  will  not  be  published  for  the  benefit  of
posterity,  for  fear  that  they  should  seem  to  indicate

481


QUINTILIAN

dicta  sunt,  non  ita  posteris  tradentiir,  ne  videantur

56  propositi  fuisse,  non  temporis.  Nam  id  quoque
plurimum  refert,  quomodo  audire  iudex  velit,  atque
eius  vultus  saepe  ipse  rector  est  dicentis,  ut  Cicero
praecipit.  Ideoque  instandum  iis  quae  placere  in-
tellexeris,  resiliendum  ab  iis  quae  non  recipientur.
Sernio  ipse,  qui  facillirae  iudicem  doceat,  aptandus.
Nee  id  mirum  sit,  cum  etiam  testium  personis  aliqua

57  mutentur.  Prudenter  enim,  qui  cum  interrogasset
rusticum  testem,  an  Amphionem  nosset,  negante  eo,
detraxit  aspirationem  breviavitque  secundam  eius
nominis  syllabam,  et  ille  eum  sic  optime  norat.
Huiusmodi  casus  efficient,  ut  aliquando  dicatur  aliter
quam  scribitur,  cum  dicere,  quomodo  scribendum  est,
non  licet.

58  Altera  est  divisio,  quae  in  tres  partes  et  ipsa
discedit,  qua  discerni  posse  etiam  recte  dicendi
genera  inter  se  videntur.  Namque  unum  subtile,
quod  Icrxi'ov  vocant,  alterum  grande  atque  robustum,
quod  dSpbv  dicunt,  constituunt ;  tertium  alii,  medium
ex duobus, alii floridum (namque id avOrjpbv ap-

59  pellant)  addiderunt.  Quorum  tamen  ea  fere  ratio
est,  ut  primum  docendi,  secundum  movendi,
tertium  illud,  utrocumque  est^  nomine,  delectandi
sive,  ut  alii  dicunt,  conciliandi  praestare  videa-
tur officium ; in docendo  autem acumen,  in  con-

^  utrocumque  est,  ffalm  :  est  ultrorumque,  G.

*  Not  in  any  extant  work.

*  The  witness  did  not  recognise  the  name  correctly
pronounced  Amphlon,  but  recognised  it  when  pronounced
Amplon.

»  suhtilis  {lit.  —  finely  woven)  applied  to  style  has  three
meanings  :  (a)  refined,  {b)  precise,  (c)  plain.  See  Sandys  on
Cic.  Or.  vi.  20.

482


BOOK  XII.  X.  55-59

the  author's  deliberate  judgement  instead  of  being
a  mere  concession  to  the  needs  of  the  moment.
For  it  is  most  important  that  we  should  know  how  56
the  judge  is  disposed  to  listen,  and  his  face  will
often  (as  Cicero^  reminds  us)  serve  as  a  guide  to
the  speaker.  Consequently  we  must  press  the  points
that  we  see  commend  themselves  to  him,  and  draw
back  from  those  which  are  ill-received,  while  our
actual  language  must  be  so  modified  that  he  will
find  our  arguments  as  intelligible  as  possible.  That
this  should  be  necessary  is  scarcely  surprising,  when
we  consider  the  alterations  that  are  frequently
necessary  to  suit  the  characters  of  the  different
witnesses.  He  was  a  shrewd  man  who,  when  he  57
asked  a  rustic  witness  whether  he  knew  Amphion,
and  the  witness  replied  that  he  did  not,  dropped
the  aspirate  and  shortened  the  second  syllable,*
whereupon  the  witness  recognised  him  at  once.
Such  situations,  when  it  is  impossible  to  speak  as
we  write,  will  sometimes  make  it  necessary  to  speak
in  language  other  than  that  which  we  use  in
writing.

There  is  another  threefold  division,  whereby,  68
it  is  held,  we  may  differentiate  three  styles  of
speaking,  all  of  them  correct.  The  first  is  termed
the  plain'  (or  taxvov),  the  second  grand  and
forcible  (or  dSpov),  and  the  third  either  inter-
mediate or  florid,  the  latter  being  a  translation
of  av$Tjp6v.  The  nature  of  these  three  styles  is,  59
broadly  speaking,  as  follows.  The  first  would  seem
best  adapted  for  instructing,  the  second  for  moving,
and  the  third  (by  whichever  name  we  call  it)  for
charming  or,  as  others  would  have  it,  conciliating
the audience ; for instruction the quality most

483


QUINTILIAN

ciliando  lenitas,  in  movendo  vis  exigi  videatur.
Itaque  illo  subtili  praecipue  ratio  narrandi  proban-
dique  consistet,  sed  saepe  id  ^  etiam  detractis  ceteris

60  virtutibus  suo  genere  plenum.  Medius  hie  modus
et  translationibus  crebrior  et  figuris  erit  iucundior,
egressionibus  amoenus,  compositione  aptus,  sententiis
dulcis,  lenior  tamen ut  amnis  lucidus  quidem  sed

61  virentibus  utrinque  ripis-  inumbratus.  At  ille,  qui
saxa  devolvat  et  pontem  indignetur  et  ripas  sibi  faciat,
multus  et  torrens  iudicem  vel  nitentem  contra  feret
cogetque  ire,  qua  rapiet.  Hie  orator  et  defunctos
excitabit  ut  Appium  Caecum,  apud  hunc  et  patria
ipsa  exclamabit,  aliquandoque  ut  Ciceronem  in  ora-

62  tione  contra  Catilinam  in  senatu  alloquetur.  Hie  et
amplificationibus  extollet  orationem,  et  in  superla-
tionem  quoque  erigetur.  Quae  Charybdis  tarn  vorax  t^
et  Oceanus  medius  Jidius  ipse.  Nota  sunt  enim  iam
studiosis  haec  lumina.  Hie  deos  ipsos  in  congressum
prope  suum  sermonemque  deducet:  Vos  enim  Albani
tumuli  atque  luci  ;  vos,  inquam,  Albanorum  obrutae  arae,

*  saepe  id,  Halm  :  que  id,  G.

*  ripis  inumbratus,  Meyer  :  sipisim  umbratus  and  the  like,
MSS.

*  Verg.  Aen.  viii.  728.

*  See  m.  viii.  54.  ' '  Cicero  in  the  pro  Caelio  makes  both
Appius  Caecus  and  her  brother  Clodius  address  Clodia,  the
former  rebuking  her  for  her  immorality,  the  latter  exhorting
her  thereto."

'  Phil.  n.  xxvii,  67.  The  passage  continues :  "  could
scarce,  methinks,  have  swallowed  with  such  speed  so  many
things,  scattered  in  so  many  places."

484


BOOK  XII.  X.  59-62

needed  is  acumen,  for  conciliation  gentleness,  and
for  stirring  the  emotions  force.  Consequently  it  is
mainly  in  the  plain  style  that  we  shall  state  our
facts  and  advance  our  proofs,  though  it  should  be
borne  in  mind  that  this  style  will  often  be  sufficiently
full  in  itself  without  any  assistance  whatever  from
the  other  two.  The  intermediate  style  will  have  60
more  frequent  recourse  to  metaphor  and  will  make
a  more  attractive  use  of  figures,  while  it  will  intro-
duce alluring  digressions,  will  be  neat  in  rhythm
and  pleasing  in  its  reflexions  :  its  flow,  however,  will
be  gentle,  like  that  of  a  river  whose  waters  are  clear,
but  overshadowed  by  the  green  banks  on  either  side.
But  he  whose  eloquence  is  like  to  some  great  torrent  61
that  rolls  down  rocks  and  "  disdains  a  bridge  "  ^  and
carves  out  its  own  banks  for  itself,  will  sweep  the
judge  from  his  feet,  struggle  as  he  may,  and  force
him  to  go  whither  he  bears  him.  This  is  the  orator
that  will  call  the  dead  to  life  (as,  for  example,  Cicero
calls  upon  Appius  Caecus  ^) ;  it  is  in  his  pages
that  his  native  land  itself  will  cry  aloud  and  at
times  address  the  orator  himself,  as  it  addresses
Cicero  in  the  speech  delivered  against  Catiline  in
the  senate.  Such  an  orator  will  also  exalt  his  style  62
by  amplification  and  rise  even  to  hyperhole,  as  when
Cicero'  cries,  "What  Charybdis  was  ever  so  vora-
cious ! "  or  "  By  the  god  of  truth,  even  Ocean's
self,"  etc.  (I  choose  these  fine  passages  as  being
familiar  to  the  student).  It  is  such  an  one  that
will  bring  down  the  Gods  to  form  part  of  his
audience  or  even  to  speak  with  him,  as  in  the
following,  "  For  on  you  I  call,  ye  hills  and  groves
of  Alba,  on  you,  I  say,  ye  fallen  altars  of  the
Albans,  altars  that  were  once  the  peers  and  equals

485


QUINTILIAN

sacronnn  populi  Romani  sociae  et  aequales.  Hie  iram,
hie  misericordiam  inspirabit,  hoc  dicente  iudex  deos  ^
ap{)ellabit  et  flebit  et  per  omnes  adfectus  tractatus
hue atque illuc sequetur nee doeeri desiderabit.

63  Quare  si  ex  tribus  his  generibus  necessario  sit
eligendum  unum,  quis  dubitet  hoc  praeferre  omnibus
et  validissimum  aHoqui  et  maxiinis  quibusque  causis

64  accommodatissimum  ?  Nam  et  Homerus  brevem
quidem  eum  iucunditate  et  propriam,  id  enim  est
non  deerrare  verbis,  et  carentem  supervacuis  eloquen-
tiam  Menelao  dedit,  quae  sunt  virtutes  generis  iilius
primi,  et  ex  ore  Nestoris  dixit  dulciorem  melle
prqfluere  sermonem,  qua  certe  delectatione  nihil  fingi
maius  potest;  sed  summam  expressurus^  in  Ulixe
facundiam  et  magnitudinem  ilU  vocis  et  vim  orationis
nivibus  hibernis '  et  copia  verborum  atque  impetu

65  parem  tribuit.  Cum  hoc  igitur  nemo  mortalium  con-
tendet ;  hmic  ut  deum  homines  intuebunlur.  Hanc  vim
et  celeritatem  in  Pericle  miratur  Eupolis,  hanc
fulminibus  Aristophanes  comparat,  liaec  est  vere
dicendi  faeultas.

66  Sed  neque  his  tribus  quasi  formis  inclusa  eloquentia
est.  Nam  ut  inter  gracile  validumque  tertium  aliquid
constitutum  est,  ita  horum  inter  se  intervalla  sunt,

*  hoc  dicente  iudex  deos  apellabit  et  flebit,  Madrig :  hoc
dicente  iudet  appellavit  et  flevit,  G.

2  expressurus,  M.  Seyffert :  regressurus  est,  O.

'  vocis  .  .  .  hibernis,  Seyffert :  vicisset  cum  orationi
similibus,  O.


^  pro  Mil.  xxxi.  85.

•  II.  iii.  214.  The  words  which  Quintilian  translates  by
71071  deerrare  verbis  are  oh^"  afafiaprofir-fis,  "no  stumbler  in
speech,"  rather  than  "correct  in  speech."

486


BOOK XII.  X.  62-66

of  the  holy  places  of  Rome."  ^  This  is  he  that  will
inspire  anger  or  pity,  and  while  he  speaks  the  judge
will  call  upon  the  gods  and  weep,  following  him
wherever  he  sweeps  him  from  one  emotion  to
another,  and  no  longer  asking  merely  for  instruction.
Wherefore  if  one  of  these  three  styles  has  to  be  63
selected  to  the  exclusion  of  the  others,  who  will
hesitate  to  prefer  this  style  to  all  others,  since  it
is  by  far  the  strongest  and  the  best  adapted  to  the
most  important  cases  ?  For  Homer  himself  assigns  64
to  Menelaus  *  an  eloquence,  terse  and  pleasing,  exact
(for  that  is  what  is  meant  by  "  making  no  errors  in
words  ")  and  devoid  of  all  redundance,  which  qualities
are  virtues  of  the  first  type  :  and  he  says  that  from
the  lips  of  Nestor  '  flowed  speech  sweeter  than  honey,
than  which  assuredly  we  can  conceive  no  greater
delight :  but  when  he  seeks  to  express  the  supreme
gift  of  eloquence  possessed  by  Ulysses*  he  gives  a
mighty  voice  and  a  vehemence  of  oratory  equal  to
the  snows  of  winter  in  the  abundance  and  the  vigour
of  its  words.  "  With  him  then,"  he  says,  "no  mortal  65
will  contend,  and  men  shall  look  upon  him  as  on  a
god."^  It  is  this  force  and  impetuosity  that  Eupolis
admires  in  Pericles,  this  that  Aristophanes  ^  compares
to  the  thunderbolt,  this  that  is  the  power  of  true
eloquence.

But  eloquence  cannot  be  confined  even  to  these  66
three  forms  of  style. For  just  as  the  third  style  is
intermediate  between  the  grand  and  the  plain  style,
so  each  of  these  three  are  separated  by  interspaces

^  n.  i.  249.  «  //.  iii.  221.

*  A  blend  of  Fl.  iii.  223  and  Od.  viii.  173.

•  Ach.  530. "Then  in  his  wrath  Pericles  the  Olympian
lightened  and  thundered  and  threw  all  Greece  into  confusion."

487


QUINTILIAN

atque  inter  haec  ipsa  mixtum  quiddam  ex  duobus

67  medium  est  eorum.  Nam  et  subtili  plenius  aliquid
atque  subtilius  et  vehementi  remissius  atque  ve-
hementius  invenitur,  ut  illud  lene  aut  ascendit  ad
fortiora  aut  ad  tenuiora  summittitur.  Ac  sic  prope
innumerabiles  species  reperiuntur^  quae  utique  aliquo
momento  inter  se  difFerant :  sicut  quattuor  ventos
generaliter  a  totidem  mundi  cardinibus  accepimus
flare,  cum  interim  plurimi  medii  et  eorum  varia
nomina et quidam etiam regionum ac fluminum

68  proprii  deprehenduntur,  Eademque  musicis  ratio
est,  qui,  cum  in  cithara  quinque  constituerunt  sonos,
plurima  deinde  varietate  complent  spatia  ilia  ner-
vorum, atque  his,  quos  interposuerunt,  inserunt
alios,  ut  pauci  illi  transitus  multos  gradus  habeant.

69  Plures  igitur  etiam  eloquentiae  facies,  sed  stultissi-
mum  quaerere,  ad  quam  se  recturus  sit  orator,  cum
omnis  species,  quae  modo  recta  est,  habeat  usum,
atque  id  ipsum  non  sit  oratoris,  quod  vulgo  genus
dicendi  vocant.  Utetur  enim,  ut  res  exiget,  omni-
bus, nee  pro  causa  modo,  sed  pro  partibus  causae.

70  Nam  ut  non  eodem  modo  pro  reo  capitis  et  in
certamine hereditatis et de interdictis ac spon-


*  cp.  n.  X.  5  and  iv.  ii.  61.  Spcmsio  (=  wager)  was  a  form
of  lawsuit  in  which  the  litigant  promised  to  pay  a  certain
sum  of  money  if  he  lost  his  case.  The  interdict  was  an  order
issued  by  the  praetor  commanding  or  prohibiting  certain
action.

488


BOOK XII.  X.  66-70

which  are  occupied  by  intermediate  styles  com-
pounded of  the  two  which  lie  on  either  side.  For  67
there  are  styles  fuller  or  plainer  than  the  plain,  and
gentler  or  more  vehement  than  the  vehement,  while
the  gentler  style  itself  may  either  rise  to  greater
force  or  sink  to  milder  tones.  Thus  we  may  discover
almost  countless  species  of  styles,  each  differing  from
the  other  by  some  fine  shade  of  difference.  We  may
draw  a  pai*allel  from  the  winds.  It  is  generally  ac-
cepted that  there  are  four  blowing  from  the  four
quarters  of  the  globe,  but  we  find  there  are  also
a  large  number  of  winds  which  lie  between  these,
called  by  a  variety  of  names,  and  in  certain  cases
confined  to  certain  districts  and  river  valleys.  The  68
same  thing  may  be  noted  in  music.  For  after  assign-
ing five  notes  to  the  lyre,  musicians  fill  up  the
intervals  between  the  strings  by  a  variety  of  notes,
and  between  these  again  they  interpose  yet  others,
so  that  the  original  divisions  admit  of  a  number  of
gradations.

Eloquence  has,  therefore,  a  quantity  of  different  69
aspects,  but  it  is  sheer  folly  to  inquire  which  of  these
the  orator  should  take  as  his  model,  since  every
species  that  is  in  itself  correct  has  its  use,  and  what
is  commonly  called  style  of  speaking  does  not  depend
on  the  orator.  For  he  will  use  all  styles,  as  cir-
cumstances may  demand,  and  the  choice  will  be
determined  not  only  by  the  case  as  a  whole,  but  by
the  demands  of  the  different  portions  of  the  case.
For  just  as  he  will  not  speak  in  the  same  way  when  70
he  is  defending  a  client  on  a  capital  charge  and
when  he  is  speaking  in  a  lawsuit  concerned  with  an
inheritance,  or  discussing  interdicts  and  suits  taking
the  form  of  a  wager,^  or  claims  in  connexion  with

489


QUINTILIAN

sionibus  et  de  certa  credita  dicet,  sententiarum
quoque  in  senatu  et  contionum  et  privatorum  con-
siliorum  servabit  discrimina,  multa  ex  differentia
personarum,  locorum  temporumque  mutabit,  ita  in
eadem  oratione  aliter  concitabit/  aliter  coneiliabit,
non  ex  iisdem  haustibus  iram  et  misericordiam  petet,
alias ad docendum  alias ad movendum adhibebit

71  artes.  Non  unus  color  prooemii,  narrationis,  argu-
mentorum,  egressionis,  perorationis  servabitur.  Dicet
idem  graviter,  severe,  acriter,  vehementer,  concitate,
copiose,  amare,  comiter,  remisse,  subtiliter,  blande,
leniter,  dulciter,  breviter,  urbane,  non  ubique  similis,

72  sed  ubique  par  sibi.  Sic  fiet  cum  id,  propter  quod
maxime  repertus  est  usus  orationis,  ut  dicat  utiliter
et  ad  efficiendum  quod  intendit  potenter,  turn
laudem  quoque  nee  doctorum  modo  sed  etiam  vulgi
consequatur.

73  Falluntur  enim  plurimum,  qui  vitiosum  et  cor-
ruptum  dicendi  genus,  quod  aut  verborum  licentia
exultat  aut  puerilibus  sententiolis  lascivit  aut  immo-
dico  tumore  turgescit  aut  inanibus  locis  bacchatur
aut  casuris,  si  leviter  excutiantur,  flosculis  nitet  aut
praecipitia  pro  sublimibus  habet  aut  specie  libertatis
insanit,  magis  existimant  populare  atque  plausibile.

74  Quod  quidem  placere  multis  nee  infitior  nee  miror.

*  aliter  concitabit,  added  by  Halm.
499


BOOK XII.  X.  70-74

loans,  so  too  he  will  preserve  a  due  distinction
between  the  speeches  which  he  makes  in  the  senate,
before  the  people  and  in  private  consultations,  while
he  will  also  introduce  numerous  modifications  to
suit  the  different  persons  and  circumstances  of  time
and  place.  Thus  in  one  and  the  same  speech  he
will  use  one  style  for  stirring  the  emotions,  and
another  to  conciliate  his  hearers  ;  it  is  from  difl^erent
sources  that  he  will  derive  anger  or  pity,  and  the
art  which  he  employs  in  instructing  the  judge  will
be  other  than  that  which  he  employs  to  move  him.
He  will  not  maintain  the  same  tone  throughout  his  71
exordium,  siatevienl  of  fact,  arguments,  diyression  and
peroration.  He  will  speak  gravely,  severely,  sharply,
with  vehemence,  energy,  fullness,  bitterness,  or
geniality,  quietly,  simply,  flatteringly,  gently,  sweetly,
briefly  or  wittily ;  he  will  not  always  be  like  him-
self, but  he  will  never  be  unworthy  of  himself.
Thus  the  purpose  for  which  oratory  was  above  all  72
designed  will  be  secured,  that  is  to  say,  he  will
speak  with  profit  and  with  power  to  effect  his  aim,
while  he  will  also  win  the  praise  not  merely  of  the
learned,  but  of  the  multitude  as  well.

They  make  the  gravest  mistake  who  consider  that  73
the  style  which  is  best  adapted  to  win  popularity
and  applause  is  a  faulty  and  corrupt  style  of  speaking
which  revels  in  license  of  diction  or  wantons  in
childish  epigram  or  swells  with  stilted  bombast  or
riots  in  empty  commonplace  or  adorns  itself  with
blossoms  of  eloquence  which  will  fall  to  earth  if
but  lightly  shaken,  or  regards  extravagance  as
sublime  or  raves  wildly  under  the  pretext  of  free
speech.  I  am  ready  to  admit  that  such  qualities  74
please  many,  and  I  feel  no  surprise  that  this  should

491


QUINTILIAN

Est  enim  iuciinda  auribus  ac  favorabilis  qualiscunque
eloqiientia  et  ducit  animos  naturali  voluptate  vox
omnis,  neque  aliunde  illi  per  fora  atque  aggerem
circuli ; quo minus mirum est, quod nulli non

75  agentium  parata  vulgi  corona  est.  Ubi  vero  quid
exquisitius  dictum  accidit  auribus  imperitorum,
qualecunque  id  est,  quod  modo  se  ipsi  posse  de-
sperent,  habet  admirationem,  neque  immerito ;  nam
ne  illud  quidem  facile  est.  Sed  evanescunt  haec
atque  emoriuntur  comparatione  meliorum,  ut  lana
tincta  fuco  citra  purpuras  placet ;  at  si  contuleris
Tyriae  eam^  lacernae,  conspectu  melioris  obruatur,

76  ut  Ovidius  ait.  Si  vero  iudicium  his  corruptis  acrius
adhibeas  ut  fucinis  ^  sulfura,  iam  ilium,  quo  fefellerant,
exuant'  mentitum  colorem  et  quadam  vix  enarrabili
foeditate  pallescant.  Lucent  igitur  haec  citra  solem,
ut  quaedam  exigua  animalia  igniculi  videntur  in
tenebris.  Denique  mala  multi  probant,  nemo  im-
probat  bona.

77  Neque  vero  omnia  ista,  de  quibus  locuti  sumus,
orator  optime  tantum  sed  etiam  facillime  faciet.
Neque  enim  vim  summam  dicendi et  os  *  admira-

^  Tyriae  earn,  ffalm:  etiam,  MSS.

*  fucinis,  BuUmann  :  fucinus,  G.

'  ilium  quo  fefellerant  exuant,  Bvitmann:  illud  quod
fefellerat  exuat,  G.  *  os,  Halm :  eos,  G.

*  The  agger  of  Servius  TuUius,  which  served  as  a  promenade.
The  nearest  modern  parallel  may  be  found  in  the  "  Hyde
Park  orator."  '  Hem.  Am.  707  sqq.

492


BOOK XII.  X.  74-77

be  the  case.  For  any  kind  of  eloquence  is  pleasing
and  attractive  to  the  ear,  and  every  effort  of  the
voice  inspires  a  natural  pleasure  in  the  soul  of  man ;
indeed  this  is  the  sole  cause  of  those  familiar  gather-
ings in  the  Forum  or  on  the  Old  Wall,^  so  that  there
is  small  reason  for  wonder  if  any  pleader  is  safe  to
draw  a  ring  of  listeners  from  the  crowd.  And  when  75
any  unusually  precious  phrase  strikes  the  ears  of  an
uneducated  audience,  whatever  its  true  merits,  it
wakens  their  admiration  just  for  the  very  reason
that  they  feel  they  could  never  have  produced  it
themselves.  And  it  deserves  their  admiration,  since
even  such  success  is  hard  to  attain.  On  the  other
hand,  when  such  displays  are  compared  with  their
betters,  they  sink  into  insignificance  and  fade  out
of  sight,  for  they  are  like  wool  dyed  red  that
pleases  in  the  absence  of  purple,  but,  as  Ovid  ^  says,
if  compared  with  a  cloak  of  Tyrian  dye,  pales  in  the
presence  of  the  fairer  hue.  If,  however,  we  test  76
such  corrupt  eloquence  by  the  touchstone  of  a  critical
tiiste,  as,  for  example,  we  test  inferior  dyes  with
sulphur,  it  will  lay  aside  the  false  brilliance  that
deceived  the  eye  and  fade  to  a  pallor  almost  too
repulsive  to  describe.  Such  passages  shine  only  in
the  absence  of  the  sunlight,  just  as  certain  tiny
insects  seem  transformed  in  the  darkness  to  little
flames  of  fire.  Finally,  while  many  approve  of  things
that  are  bad,  no  one  disapproves  of  that  which  is
good.

But  the  true  orator  will  not  merely  be  able  to  77
achieve  all  the  feats  of  which  I  have  spoken  with
supreme  excellence, but  with the utmost  ease as
well. For  the  sovereign  power of  eloquence  and
the  voice  that  awakens  well-deserved  applause  will

493


QUINTILIAN

tione  dignum  infelix  usque  ad  ultimum  sollicitudo
persequitur,  quae  ^  oratorem  macerat  et  coquit  aegre
verba  vertentem  et  perpendendis  coagmentandisque

78  eis  intabescentem.  Nitidus  ille  et  sublimis  et  lo-
cuples  circumfluentibus  undique  eloquentiae  copiis
imperat.  Desinit  enim  in  adversa  niti,  qui  pervenit
in  summum.  Scandenti  circa  ima  labor  est ;  ceterum
quantum  processeris,  mollior  elivus  ac  laetius  solum.

79  Et  si  haec  quoque  iam  lenius  supina  perseverantibus
studiis  evaseris,  inde  fructus  illaborati  offerunt  sese
et  omnia  sponte  proveniunt ;  quae  tamen  cotidie
nisi  decerpautur,  arescunt.  Sed  et  copia  liabeat^
modum,  sine  quo  nihil  nee  laudabile  nee  salutare
est,  et  nitor  ille  cultum  virilem  et  inventio  indicium.

80  Sic  erunt  magna  non  nimia,  sublimia  non  abrupta,
fortia  non  temeraria,  severa  non  tristia,  gravia  non
tarda,  laeta  non  luxuriosa,  iucunda  non  dissoluta,
grandia  non  tumida.  Similis  in  ceteris  ratio  est
ac  tutissima  fere  per  medium  via,  quia  utriusque
ultimum  vitium  est.

XI.  His  dicendi  virtutibus  usus  orator  in  iudiciis,
consiliis,  contionibus,  senatu,  in  omni  denique  officio
boni  civis  finem  quoque  dignum  et  optimo  viro  et
opere  sanctissimo  faciet,  non  quia  prodesse  unquam


1  quae,  Halm :  nee,  MSS.

»  liabeat,  Heiiidorf :  habet,  MSS.


m^


BOOK XII.  X.  77-xi.  I

be  free  from  the  perpetual  distress  of  harassing
anxiety  wljich  wastes  and  fevers  the  orator  who
painfully  corrects  himself  and  pines  away  over  the
laborious  weighing  and  piecing  together  of  his
words.  No,  our  orator,  brilliant,  sublime  and  78
opulent  of  speech,  is  lord  and  master  of  all  the
resources  of  eloquence,  whose  affluence  surrounds
him.  For  he  that  has  reached  the  summit  has  no
more  weary  hills  to  scale.  At  first  the  climber's  toil
is  hard,  but  the  higher  he  mounts  the  easier  be-
comes the  gradient  and  the  richer  the  soil.  And  79
if  by  perseverance  of  study  he  pass  even  beyond
these  gentler  slopes,  fruits  for  which  none  have
toiled  thrust  themselves  upon  him,  and  all  things
spring  forth  unbidden ;  and  yet  if  they  be  not
gathered  daily,  they  will  wither  away.  But  even
such  wealth  must  observe  the  mean,  without  which
nothing  is  either  praiseworthy  or  beneficial,  while
brilliance  must  be  attended  by  manliness,  and  im-
agination by  soundness  of  taste.  Thus  the  works  80
of  the  orator  will  be  great  not  extravagant,  sublime
not  bombastic,  bold  not  rash,  severe  but  not  gloomy,
grave  but  not  slow,  rich  but  not  luxuriant,  pleasing
but  not  effeminate,  grand  but  not  grandiose.  It  is
the  same  with  other  qualities :  the  mean  is  safest,
for  the  worst  of  all  faults  is  to  fly  to  extremes.

XI.  After  employing  these  gifts  of  eloquence  in
the  courts,  in  councils,  in  public  assemblies  and  the
debates  of  the  senate,  and,  in  a  word,  in  the  per-
formance of  all  the  duties  of  a  good  citizen,  the
orator  will  bring  his  activities  to  a  close  in  a  manner
worthy  of  a  blameless  life  spent  in  the  pursuit  of
the  noblest  of  professions.  And  he  will  do  this,
not  because  he  can  ever  have  enough  of  doing  good,

495


QUINTILIAN

satis  sit  et  ilia  mente  atque  ilia  facultate  praedito
non  optandum  operis  pulcherrimi  quam  longissimum
tempus,  sed  quia  decet  hoc  quoque  prospicere,  ne

2  quid  peius,  quam  fecerit,  faciat.  Neque  enim
scientia  modo  constat  orator,  quae  augetur  annis,
sed  voce,  latere,  firmitate ;  quibus  fractis  aut  im-
minutis  aetate  seu  valetudine  cavendum  est,  ne  quid
in  oratore  summo  desideretur,  ne  intersistat  fati-
gatus,  ne quae dicet parum  audiri  sentiat,  ne  se

3  quaerat  priorem.  Vidi  ego  longe  omnium,  quos
mihi  cognoscere  contigit,  summum  oratorem,  Domi-
tium  Afrum  valde  senem,  cotidie  aljquid  ex  ea
quam  meruerat  auctoritate  perdentem,  cum  agente
illo,  quem  principem  fuisse  quondam  fori  non  erat
dubium,  alii,  quod  indignum  videatur,  riderent,  alii
erubescerent ; quae occasio fait de  ^ illo dicendi,

4  inalle  eum  deficere  quam  dexinere.  Neque  erant  ilia
qualiacunque  mala  sed  minora.

Quare  antequam  in  has  aetatis  veniat  insidias,
receptui  canet  et  in  portum  integra  nave  perveniet.
Neque  enim  minores  eum,  cum  id  fecerit,  studiorum
fructus  prosequentur.  Aut  ille  monumenta  rerum
posteris  aut,  ut  L.  Crassus  in  libris  Ciceronis  destinat,

*  de  added  by  Halm.


*  By  "finish"  is  meant  "retire  from  pleading."


BOOK XII.  XI.  1-4

or  because  one  endowed  with  intellect  and  talents
such  as  his  would  not  be  justified  in  praying  that
such  glorious  labours  may  be  prolonged  to  their
utmost  span,  but  for  this  reason^  that  it  is  his  duty
to  look  to  the  future,  for  fear  that  his  work  may  be
less  effective  than  it  has  been  in  the  past.  For  the  2
orator  depends  not  merely  on  his  knowledge,  which
increases  with  the  years,  but  on  his  voice,  lungs  and
powers  of  endurance.  And  if  these  be  broken  or
impaired  by  age  or  health,  he  must  beware  that  he
does  not  fall  short  in  something  of  his  high  reputa-
tion as  a  master  of  oratory,  that  fatigue  does  not
interrupt  his  eloquence,  that  he  is  not  brought  to
realise  that  some  of  his  words  are  inaudible,  or  to
mourn  that  he  is  not  what  once  he  was.  Domitius  3
Afer  was  by  far  the  greatest  of  all  the  orators  whom
it  has  been  my  good  fortune  to  know,  and  I  saw
him,  when  far  advanced  in  years,  daily  losing  some-
thing of  that  authority  which  his  merits  had  won
for  him  ;  he  whose  supremacy  in  the  courts  had  once
been  universally  acknowledged,  now  pleaded  amid
the  unworthy  laughter  of  some,  and  the  silent
blushes  of  others,  giving  occasion  to  the  malicious
saying  that  he  had  rather  '•  faint  than  finish."  ^  And  4
yet  even  then,  whatever  his  deficiencies,  he  spoke
not  badly,  but  merely  less  well.

Therefore  before  ever  he  fall  a  prey  to  the  ambush
where  time  lies  in  wait  for  him,  the  orator  should
sound  the  retreat  and  seek  harbour  while  his  ship
is  yet  intact.  For  the  fruits  of  his  studies  will
not  be  lessened  by  retirement.  Either  he  will  be-
queath the  history  of  his  own  times  for  the  delight
of  after  ages,  or  will  interpret  the  law  to  those
who  seek his  counsels,  as  Lucius  Crassus  proposes

497


QUINTILIAN

iura  quaerentibus  reddet  aut  eloquentiae  componet
artem  aut  pulcherrimis  vitae  praeceptis  dignum  os

5  dabit.  Frequentabunt  vero  eius  domum  optimi
iuvenes  more  veterum  et  vere  dicendi  viam  velut  ex
oraculo  petent.  Hos  ille  formabit  quasi  eloquentiae
parens,  et  ut  vetus  gubernator  litora  et  portus  et
quae  tempestatum  signa,  quid  secundis  flatibus,  quid
adversis  ratio  poscat,  docebit,  non  hunianitatis  solum
communi  ductus  officio,  sed  amore  quodam  operis.

6  Nemo  enim  minui  velit  id,  in  quo  maximus  fuit.  Quid
porro  est  honestius  quam  docere  quod  optime  scias  ?
Sic  ad  se  Caelium  deductum  a  patre  Cicero  pro-
fitetur ;  sic  Pansam,  Hirtium,  Dolabellam  in  morem

7  praeceptoris  exercuit  cotidie  dicens  audiensque.  Ac
nescio  an  eum  tunc  beatissimum  credi  oporteat  fore,
cum  iam  secretus  et  consecratus,  liber  invidia,  procul
contentionibus  famam  in  tuto  collocarit  et  sentiet^
vivus  earn,  quae  post  fata  praestari  magis  solet,
venerationem  et,  quid  apud  posteros  futurus  sit,
videbit.

8  Conscius sum  mihi,  quantum  mediocritate  valui,

^  sentiet,  Ohrecht :  sententia  et,  G.

1  de  Or.  I.  xlii.  190.  *  pro  Cael.  iv.  10.

498


BOOK XII.  XI.  4-8

to  do  in  the  de  Oratore'^  of  Cicero,  or  compose  some
treatise  on  the  art  of  oratory,  or  give  worthy  utterance
to  the  sublimest  ideals  of  conduct.  His  house  6
will,  as  in  the  days  of  old,  be  thronged  by  all
the  best  of  the  rising  generation,  who  will  seek  to
learn  from  him  as  from  an  oracle  how  they  may  find
the  path  to  true  eloquence.  And  he  as  their  father
in  the  art  will  mould  them  to  all  excellence,  and
like  some  old  pilot  will  teach  them  of  the  shores
whereby  their  ships  must  sail,  of  the  harbours  where
they  may  shelter,  and  the  signs  of  the  weather,  and
will  expound  to  them  what  they  shall  do  when  the
breeze  is  fair  or  the  tempest  blows.  Whereto  he
will  be  inclined  not  only  by  the  common  duty  of
humanity,  but  by  a  certain  passion  for  the  task  that
once  was  his,  since  no  man  desires  that  the  art
wherein  he  was  once  supreme  should  suffer  decay
or  diminution.  And  what  can  be  more  honourable  6
than  to  teach  that  which  you  know  surpassing  well  ?
It  was  for  this  that  the  elder  Caelius  brought  his  son
to  Cicero,  as  the  latter  ^  tells  us,  and  it  was  with  this
intent  that  the  same  great  orator  took  upon  himself
the  duties  of  instructor,  and  trained  Pansa,  Hirtius
and  Dolabella  by  declaiming  daily  before  them  or
hearing  them  declaim.  And  I  know  not  whether  7
we  should  not  deem  it  the  happiest  moment  in  an
orator's  life,  when  he  has  retired  from  the  public
gaze,  the  consecrated  priest  of  eloquence,  free  from
envy  and  far  from  strife,  when  he  has  set  his  glory
on  a  pinnacle  beyond  the  reach  of  detraction,  enjoys,
while  still  living,  that  veneration  which  most  men
win  but  after  death,  and  sees  how  great  shall  be  his
renown  amid  generations  yet  unborn.

I  can  say  with  a  good  conscience  that,  as  far  as  8

499


QUINTILIAN

quaeque  antea  scierim,  quaeque  operis  buiusce  gratia
potuerim  inquirere,  candide  me  atque  simpliciter  in
notitiam  eorum,  si  qui  forte  cognoseere  voluissent,
protulisse.  Atque  id  viro  bono  satis  est,  docuisse
9  quod  scierit.  Vereor  tainen,  ne  aut  magna  nimium
videar  exigere,  qui  eundem  virum  bonum  esse  et
dicendi  peritum  velim,  aut  multa,  qui  tot  artibus  in
pueritia  diseendis  morum  quoque  praecepta  et
scientiam  iuris  civilis  praeter  ea,  quae  de  eloquentia
tradebantur,  adiecerim,  quique  haec  operi  nostro
necessaria esse crediderint,  velut  moram rei per-

10  horrescant  et  desperent  ante  experimentum.  Qui
primum  renuntient  sibi,  quanta  sit  humani  ingenii
vis,  quam  potens  efficiendi  quae  velit,  cum  maria
transire,  siderum  cursus  numerosque  cognoseere,
mundum  ipsum  paene  dimetiri,  minores,  sed  diffi-
ciliores  artes  potuerint.  Turn  cogitent,  quantam
rem  petant,  quamque  nullus  sit  hoc  proposito  prae-

11  mio  labor  recusandus.  Quod  si  mente  conceperint,
huic  quoque  parti  facilius  accedent,  ut  ipsum  iter
neque  impervium  neque  saltern  durum  putent.  Nam
id,  quod  prius  quodque  maius  est,  ut  boni  viri  simus,
500


BOOK XII.  XI.  8-1 1

my  poor  powers  have  permitted,  I  have  published
frankly  and  disinterestedly,  for  the  benefit  of  such
as  might  wish  to  learn,  all  that  my  previous  know-
ledge and  the  researches  made  for  the  purpose  of
this  work  might  supply.  And  to  have  taught  what
he  knows  is  satisfaction  enough  for  any  good  man.
I  fear,  however,  that  I  may  be  regarded  as  settmg  9
too  lofty  an  ideal  for  the  orator  by  insisting  that  he
should  be  a  good  man  skilled  in  speaking,  or  as
imposing  too  many  subjects  of  study  on  the  learner.
For  in  addition  to  the  many  branches  of  knowledge
which  have  to  be  studied  in  boyhood  and  the  tradi-
tional rules  of  eloquence,  I  have  enjoined  the  study
of  morals  and  of  civil  law,  so  that  I  am  afraid  that
even  those  who  have  regarded  these  things  as
essential  to  my  theme,  may  be  appalled  at  the  delay
which  they  impose  and  abandon  all  hope  of  achieve-
ment before  they  have  put  my  precepts  to  the  test.
I  would  ask  them  to  consider  how  great  are  the  10
f)owers  of  the  mind  of  man  and  how  astonishing  its
capacity  for  carrying  its  desires  into  execution :  for
has  not  man  succeeded  in  crossing  the  high  seas,  in
learning  the  number  and  the  courses  of  the  stars,
and  almost  measuring  the  universe  itself,  all  of  them
accomplishments  of  less  importance  than  oratory,  but
of  far  greater  difficulty  ?  And  then  let  them  reflect
on  the  greatness  of  their  aims  and  on  the  fact  that
no  labour  should  be  too  huge  for  those  that  are
beckoned  by  the  hope  of  such  reward.  If  they  can  11
only  rise  to  the  height  of  this  conception,  they  will
find  it  easier  to  enter  on  this  portion  of  their  task,
and  will  cease  to  regard  the  road  as  impassable  or
even  hard.  For  the  first  and  greatest  of  the  aims
we set before  us,  namely  that  we  shall  be  good

SOI


QUINTILIAN

voluntate maxime constat ; quam qui vera fide
indueritj facile eas, quae virtutem decent, artv'is

12  accipiet.  Neque  enim  aut  tam  perplexa  aut  tam
numerosa  sunt  quae  praecipiuntur,*  ut  non  paucorum
admodum  annorum  intentione  discantur.  Longam
enim  facit  operam  quod  repugnamus ;  brevis  est
institutio  vitae  honestae  beataeque,  si  credas.  Natura
enim  nos  ad  mentem  optimam  genuit,  adeoque  discere
meliora  volentibus  promptum  est,  ut  vere  intuenti

13  mirum  sit  illud  magis  malos  esse  tam  multos.  Nam
ut  aqua  piscibus,  ut  sicca  terrenis,  circumfusus  nobis
spiritus  volucribus  convenit,  ita  certe  facilius  esse
oportebat  secundum  naturam  quam  contra  eam  vivere.
Cetera  vero,  etiamsi  aetatem  nostram  non  spatio
senectutis  sed  tempore  ^  adolescentiae  metiamur,
abunde  multos  ad  discendum  annos  habent. Omnia

14  enim  breviora  reddet  ordo  et  ratio  et  modus.  Sed
culpa  est  in  praeceptoribus  prima,  qui  libenter  de-
tinent  quos  occupaverunt,  partim  cupiditate  diutius
exigendi  mercedulas,  partim  ambitione,  quo  difficilius
videatur'  esse  quod  pollicentur,  partim  etiam  in-
scientia  tradendi  vel  negligentia.  Proxima  in  nobis,
qui  morari  in  eo  quod  novimus,  quam  discere  quae

I  praecipiuntur,  Buttviann :  praemiintur,  O,
*  tempore,  early  edd.  :  corpore,  G,
»  videatur  esse,  added  by  Balm.


BOOK XII.  XI.  11-14

men,  depends  for  its  achievement  mainly  on  the
will  to  succeed :  and  he  that  truly  and  sincerely
forms  such  resolve,  will  easily  acquire  those  forms
of  knowledge  that  teach  the  way  to  virtue.  For  12
the  precepts  that  are  enjoined  upon  us  are  not
so  complex  or  so  numerous  that  they  may  be
acquired  by  little  more  than  a  few  years'  study.  It
is  repugnance  to  learn  that  makes  such  labour  long.
For  if  you  will  only  believe  it,  you  will  quickly  learn
the  principles  that  shall  lead  you  to  a  life  of  virtue
and  happiness.  For  nature  brought  us  into  the  world
that  we  might  attain  to  all  excellence  of  mind,  and
so  easy  is  it  for  those  to  learn  who  seek  for  better
things,  that  he  who  directs  his  gaze  aright  will
rather  marvel  that  the  bad  should  be  so  many.  For  13
as  water  is  the  natural  element  of  fish,  dry  land
for  creatures  of  the  earth  and  the  circumambient
atmosphere  for  winged  things,  even  so  it  should
be  easier  to  live  according  to  nature  than  counter
to  her  will.  As  regards  other  accomplishments,
there  are  plenty  of  years  available  for  their  acquisi-
tion, even  though  we  measure  the  life  of  man  not
by  the  span  of  age,  but  by  the  period  of  youth.  For
in  every  case  order  and  method  and  a  sense  of  pro-
portion will  shorten  our  labour.  But  the  chief  fault  14
lies  with  our  teachers,  in  that  they  love  to  keep  back
the  pupils  they  have  managed  to  lay  their  hands  on,
partly  from  the  desire  to  draw  their  miserable  fees
for  as  long  as  possible,  partly  out  of  ostentation,  to
enhance  the  difficulty  of  acquiring  the  knowledge
which  they  promise  to  impart,  and  to  some  extent
owing  to  their  ignorance  or  carelessness  in  teaching.
The  next  most  serious  fault  lies  in  ourselves,  who
think  it  better  to  linger  over  what  we  have  learned

503


QUINTILIAN

15  nondnm  scimus^  melius  putamus.  Nam  ut  de  nostris
potissimum  studiis  dicam^  quid  attinet  tam  multis
annis  quam  in  more  est  plurimorum  (ut  de  his,  a
quibus  magna  in  hoc  pars  aetatis  absumitur,  taceam)
declamitare  in  schola  et  tantum  laboris  in  rebus
falsis  eonsumere,  cum  satis  sit  modico  tempore  im-
aginem  veri  discriminis  et  dicendi  leges  comperisse  ?

16  Quod  non  eo  dico,  quasi  ^  sit  unquam  omittenda
dicendi  exercitatio,  sed  quia  non  in  una  sit  eius
specie  consenescendum. Res  varias  ^  cognoscere  et

;,  praecepta  vivendi  perdiscere  et  in  foro  nos  experiri
potuimus,  dum  scholastici  sumus.  Discendi  ratio
talis,  ut  non  multos  poscat  annos.  Quaelibet  enim
ex  iis  artibus,  quarum  habui  mentionem,  in  paucos
libros  contrahi  solet ;  adeo  non  est  infinito  spatio
ad  traditionem  opus. Reliqua  est  exercitatio,'  quae

17  vires  cito  facit,  cum  fecit,  tuetur.  Rerum  cognitio
cotidie  crescit,  et  tamen  quam  multorum  ad  earn
librorum  necessaria  lectio  est,  quibus  aut  rerum
exempla  ab  historicis  aut  dicendi  ab  oratoribus
petuntur,  philosophorum  quoque  consultorumque
opiniones,  si  utilia  velimus  legere  non,  quod  ne  fieri

'  quasi,  Halm :  qua,  Q.

*  Res  varias,  added  by  Halm.

•  ad  traditionem.  Halm :  ac  traditione,  G. : exercitatio
added  by  Halm.  • '  o '  '


BOOK XII.  XI.  14-17

than  to  learn  what  we  do  not  yet  know.  For  ex-  15
ample,  to  restrict  my  remarks  mainly  to  the  study
of  rhetoric,  what  is  the  use  of  spending  so  many
years,  after  the  fashion  now  so  prevalent  (for  I  will
say  nothing  of  those  who  spend  almost  their  whole
lives),  in  declaiming  in  the  schools  and  devoting  so
much  labour  to  the  treatment  of  fictitious  themes,
when  it  would  be  possible  with  but  slight  expenditure
of  time  to  form  some  idea  of  what  the  true  conflicts
are  in  which  the  orator  must  engage,  and  of  the
laws  of  speaking  which  he  ought  to  follow  ?  In  16
saj'ing  this,  I  do  not  for  a  moment  mean  to  suggest
that  we  should  ever  omit  to  exercise  ourselves  in
speaking.  1  merely  urge  that  we  should  not  grow  old
over  one  special  form  of  exercise.  We  have  been  in  a
position  to  acquire  varied  knowledge,  to  familiarise
ourselves  with  the  principles  that  should  guide  our
life,  and  to  try  our  strength  in  the  courts,  while  wc
were  still  attending  the  schools.  Thetheory  of  speak-
ing is  of  such  a  nature  that  it  does  not  demand
many  years  for  its  acquisition.  For  any  one  of  the
various  branches  of  knowledge  which  I  have  men-
tioned will,  as  a  rule,  be  found  to  be  comprised  in
a  few  volumes,  a  fact  which  shows  that  instruction
does  not  require  an  indefinite  amount  of  time  to  be
devoted  to  it.  The  rest  depends  entirely  on  practice,
which  at  once  develops  our  powers  and  maintains
them,  once  developed.  Knowledge  increases  day  17
by  day,  and  yet  how  many  books  is  it  absolutely
necessary  to  read  in  our  search  for  its  attainment,  for
examples  of  facts  from  the  historians  or  of  eloquence
from  the  orators,  or,  again,  for  the  opinions  of  the
philosophers  and  the  lawyers,  that  is  to  say,  if  we
are  content  to  read  merely  what  is  useful  without

VOL.  IV.  R 505


QUINTILIAN

quidem  ^  potest,  omnia  ? Sed  breve  nobis  tempus

18  nos  facimus.  Quantulum  enim  studiis  partimur?
Alias  horas  vanus  salutandi  labor,  alias  datum  fabulis
otium,  alias  spectacula,  alias  convivia  trahunt.  Adiice
tot  genera  ludendi  et  insanam  corporis  curam,  pere-
grinatio,  rura,  calculorum  anxiam  sollicitudinem,
invitamenta  libidinum  et  vinum  et  flagrantibus  omni
genere  voluptatum  animis  ^  ne  ea  quidem  tempora

19  idonea,  quae  supersunt.  Quae  si  omnia  studiis  im-
penderentur,  iam  nobis  longa  aetas  et  abunde  satis
ad  discendum  spatii  viderentur  vel  ^  diurna  tantum
computantibus  tempora  ut  nihil  noctes,  quarum  bona
pars  omni  somno  longior  est,  adiuvarent.  Nunccom-
putamus  annos,  non quibus  studuimus,  sed  quibus

20  viximus.  Nee  vero  si  geometrae  et  musici  *  et  gram-
matici  ceterarumque  artium  professores  omnem  suam
vitani,  quamlibet  longa  fuerit,  in  singulis  artibus
consumpserunt,  sequitur  ut  plures  quasdam  vitas  ad
plura  discenda  desideremus.  Neque  enim  illi  didi-
cerunt  haec  usque  in  senectutem,  sed  ea  sola  didicisse
contenti  fuerunt  ac  tot  annos  non  in  percipiendo
exhauserunt,  sed  in  praecipiendo."

21  Ceterum,  ut  de  Homero  taceam,  in  quo  nullius
non  artis aut  opera  perfecta  aut  certe  non  dubia

^  si  utilia,  Christ :  sicuti  alia,  MSS.:  quod  ne  fieri  quidem,
Halm  :  quod  quidem,  MSS.

*  The  text  is  as  corrected  by  Halm.  The  MSS.  give  a  variety
of  readings.  The  chief  alteratioiis  involved  by  Halm's  correction
are  invitamenta  for  multae  causae,  multae  earn,  etc.,  and
flagrantibus /or  flagitiis,  I'he  other  chaiiges  are  of  the  simplest
and  most  ordinary  character.

*  vel,  Buttmann :  ut,  MSS.

*  et  musici,  added  by  Halm  {erasure  in  G).

*  sed  in  praecipiendo.  Halm  :  #**  p**  p**#do  0.

506


BOOK XII.  XI.  17-21

attempting  the  impossible  task  of  reading  every-
thing? But  it  is  ourselves  that  make  the  time  for  18
study  short:  for  how  little  time  we  allot  to  it!
Some  hours  are  passed  in  the  futile  labour  of  cere-
monial calls,  others  in  idle  chatter,  others  in  staring
at  the  shows  of  the  theatre,  and  others  again  in
feasting.  To  this  add  all  the  various  forms  of  amuse-
ment, the  insane  attention  devoted  to  the  cultivation
of  the  body,  journeys  abroad,  visits  to  the  country,
anxious  calculation  of  loss  and  gain,  the  allurements
of  lust,  wine-bibbing  and  those  remaining  hours
which  are  all  too  few  to  gratify  our  souls  on  fire
with  passion  for  every  kind  of  pleasure.  If  all  this  19
time  were  spent  on  study,  life  would  seem  long
enough  and  there  would  be  plenty  of  time  for  learn-
ing, even  though  we  should  take  the  hours  of  day-
light only  into  our  account,  without  asking  any
assistance  from  the  night,  of  which  no  little  space
is  superfluous  even  for  the  heaviest  sleeper.  As  it
is,  we  count  not  the  years  which  we  have  given  to
study,  but  the  years  we  have  lived.  And  indeed  20
even  although  geometricians,  musicians  and  gram-
marians, together  with  the  professors  of  every  other
branch  of  knowledge,  spend  all  their  lives,  however
long,  in  the  study  of  one  single  science,  it  does  not
therefore  follow  that  we  require  several  lives  more
if  we  are  to  learn  more.  For  they  do  not  spend  all
their  days  even  to  old  age  in  learning  these  things,
but  being  content  to  have  learned  these  things  and
nothing  more,  exhaust  their  length  of  years  not  in
acquiring,  but  in  imparting  knowledge.

However,  to  say  nothing  of  Homer,  in  whom  we  21
may find either  the perfect achievements,  or at
any  rate  clear  signs  of  the  knowledge  of  every  art,

507


QUINTILIAN

vestigia  reperiunt.ur,  (ut  Eleum  Hippiam  transeam,
qui  non  liberalium  modo  disciplinarum  prae  se
scientiam  tulit,  sed  vestem  et  anulum  crepidasque,
quae  omnia  manu  sua  fecerat,  in  usu  habuit,  atque
ita  se  praeparavit,  ne  cuius  alterius  opere  egeret,)
illusisse  tot  malis,  quot^  summa  senectus  habet,
universae  Graeciae  credimus  Gorgian,  qui  quaerere

22  auditores  de  quo  quisque  vellet  iubebat.  Quae
tandem  ars  digna  litteris  Platoni  defuit?  Quot
saeculis  Aristoteles  didicit,  ut  non  solum,  quae  ad
philosophos  atque  oratores  pertinent,  scientia  com-
plecteretur,  sed  animaliuni  satorumque  naturas  o\iines
perquireret  ?  Illis  haec  invenienda  fuerunt,  nobis
cognoscenda  sunt.  Tot  nos  praeceptoribus,  tot  ex-
emplis  instruxit  antiquitas,  ut  possit  videri  nulla
sorte  nascendi  aetas  felicior  quam  nostra,  cui do-

23  cendae  priores  elaborarunt.  M.  igitur  Cato  idem
summus  imperator,  idem  sapiens,  idem  orator,  idem
historiae  conditor,  idem  iuris,  idem  rerum  rusticarum
peritissimus  fuit  inter  tot  operas  militiae,  tantas
domi  eontentiones,  rudi  saeculo,  litteras  Graecas
aetate  iam  declinata  didicit,  ut  esset  hominibus
documento  ea  quoque  percipi  posse  quae  senes  con-

24  cupissent.  Quam  multa,  paene  omnia,  tradidit  Varro !
Quod  instrumentum  dicendi  M.  Tullio  defuit  ? Quid

*  tot  malis  quot,  Bonnell:  tot  ####s  quod,  O,
^o8


BOOK XII.  XI.  21-24

and  to  pass  by  Hippias  of  Elis,  who  not  merely
boasted  his  knowledge  of  the  liberal  arts,  but  wore
a  robe,  a  ring  and  shoes,  all  of  which  he  had  made
with  his  own  hands,  and  had  trained  himself  to  be
independent  of  external  assistance,  we  accept  the
universal  tradition  of  Greece  to  the  effect  that
Gorgias,  triumphant  over  all  the  countless  ills  in-
cident to  extreme  old  age,  would  bid  his  hearers
propound  any  questions  they  pleased  for  him  to
answer.  Again  in  what  branch  of  knowledge  22
worthy  of  literary  expression  was  Plato  deficient  ?
How  many  generations'  study  did  Aristotle  re-
quire to  embrace  not  merely  the  whole  range  of
philosophical  and  rhetorical  knowledge,  but  to
investigate  the  nature  of  every  beast  and  plant.
And  yet  they  had  to  discover  all  these  things  which
we  only  have  to  learn.  Antiquity  has  given  us  all
these  teachers  and  all  these  patterns  for  our  imitation,
that  there  might  be  no  greater  happiness  conceivable
than  to  be  born  in  this  age  above  all  others,  since
all  previous  ages  have  toiled  that  we  might  reap  the
fruit  of  their  wisdom.  Marcus  Cato  was  at  once  a  23
great  general,  a  philosopher,  orator,  historian,  and
an  expert  both  in  law  and  agriculture,  and  despite
his  military  labours  abroad  and  the  distractions  of
political  struggles  at  home,  and  despite  the  rudeness
of  the  age  in  which  he  lived,  he  none  the  less
learned  Greek,  when  far  advanced  in  years,  that  he
might  prove  to  mankind  that  even  old  men  are
capable  of  learning  that  on  which  they  have  set
their  hearts.  How  wide,  almost  universal,  was  the  24
knowledge  that  Varro  communicated  to  the  world !
What  of  all  that  goes  to  make  up  the  equipment  of
an  orator  was  lacking  to  Cicero  ? Why  should  I  say

R2 509


QUINTILIAN

plura?  cum  etiam  Cornelius  Celsus,  mediocri  vir
ingenio,  non  solum  de  his  omnibus  conscripserit
artibus,  sed  amplius  rei  militaris  et  rusticae  et  medi-
cinae  praecepta  reliquerit,  dignus  vel  ipso  proposito,
ut  eum  scisse  omnia  ilia  credamus.
26  At  perficere  tantum  opus  arduum  et  nemo  perfecit.
Ante  omnia  sufficit  ad  exhortationem  studiorum,
capere  id  rerum  naturam  nec,^  quidquid  non  est
factum,  ne  fieri  quidem  }>osse ;  turn  omnia,  quae
magna  sunt  atque  admirabilia,  tempus  aliquod  quo

26  primum  efficerentur  habuisse.  Nam  et  poesis  ab
Homero  et  Vergilio  tantum  fastigium  accepit  et
eloquentia  a  Demosthene  atque  Cicerone.  Denique
quidquid  est  optimum,  ante  non  fuerat.  Verum
etiam  si  quis  summa  desperet  (quod  cur  faciat,  cui
ingenium,  valetudo,  facultas,  praeceptores  non  de-
erunt?), tamen est, ut Cicero ait, pulchrum in

27  secundis  tertiisque  consistere.  Neque  enim,  si  quis
Achillis  gloriam  in  bellicis  consequi  non  potest,
Aiacis  aut  Diomedis  laudem  aspernabitur,  nee  qui
Homeri  non  fuerunt,  Tyrtaei.^  Quin  immo  si  hanc
cogitationem  homines  habuissent,  ut  nemo  se  meli-
orem  fore  eo  qui  optimus  fuisset,  arbitraretur,  ii  ipsi,
qui  sunt  optimi,  non  fuissent,  neque  post  Lucretium

*  nee,  Zumpt :  eo,  AO.

'  non  fuerunt,  G  :  non  tyrthei,  second  hamd  of  A,  written


tn  over  an  erasure.


5»o


1  Or.  i.  4.


BOOK XII.  XI.  24-27

more,  since  even  Cornelius  Celsus,  a  man  of  very
ordinary  ability,  not  merely  wrote  about  rhetoric  in
all  its  departments,  but  left  treatises  on  the  art  of
war,  agriculture  and  medicine  as  well.  Indeed  the
high  ambition  revealed  by  his  design  gives  him  the
right  to  ask  us  to  believe  that  he  was  acquainted
Mith  all  these  subjects.

But,  it  will  be  urged,  to  carry  out  such  a  task  is  25
difficult  and  has  never  been  accomplished.  To
which  I  reply  that  sufficient  encouragement  for
study  may  be  found  in  the  fact,  firstly,  that  nature
does  not  forbid  such  achievement  and  it  does  not
follow  that,  because  a  thing  never  has  been  done,  it
therefore  never  can  be  done,  and  secondly,  that  all
great  achievements  have  required  time  for  their  first
accomplishment.  Poetry  has  risen  to  the  heights  26
of  glory,  thanks  to  the  efforts  of  poets  so  far  apart
as  Homer  and  Virgil,  and  oratory  owes  its  position
to  the  genius  of  Demosthenes  and  Cicero.  Finally,
whatever  is  best  in  its  own  sphere  must  at  some
previous  time  have  been  non-existent.  But  even  if
a  man  despair  of  reaching  supreme  excellence  (and
why  should  he  despair,  if  he  have  talents,  health,
capacity  and  teachers  to  aid  him  ?),  it  is  none  the
less  a  fine  achievement,  as  Cicero  ^  says,  to  win  the
rank  of  second  or  even  third.  For  even  if  a  soldier  27
cannot  achieve  the  glory  of  Achilles  in  war,  he  will
not  despise  fame  such  as  fell  to  the  lot  of  Ajax  and
Diomede,  while  those  who  cannot  be  Homers  may
be  content  to  reach  the  level  of  Tyrtaeus.  Nay,  if
men  had  been  obsessed  by  the  conviction  that  it  was
impossible  to  surpass  the  man  who  had  so  far  shown
himself  best,  those  whom  we  now  regard  as  best
would  never  have  reached  such  distinction,  Lucretius

5»'


QUINTILIAN

ac  Macrum  Vergilius  nee  post  Crassum  et  Hortensium

28  Cicero,  sed  nee  illi,  qui  post  eos  fuerunt.  Verum
ut  transeundi  spes  non  sit,  magna  tamen  est  dignitas
subsequendi.  An  PoUioet  Messala,  qui  lam  Cicerone
arcem  tenente  eloquentiae  agere  coeperunt,  parum
in  vita  dignitatis  habuerunt,  parum  ad  posteros
gloriae  tradiderunt?  Alioqui  pessime  de  rebus
humanis  perductae  in  summum artes mererentur,

29  si,  quod  optimum,  idem  ultimum^  fuisset.  Adde
quod  magnosmodica  quoque  eloquentia  parit  fructus
ac,  si  quis  haec  studia  utilitate  sola  metiatur,  paene
illi  perfectae  par  est.  Neque  erat  difficile  vel  vete-
ribus  vel  novis  exemplis  palam  facere,  non  aliunde
maiores  opes,  honores,  amicitias,  laudem  praesentem,
futuram  hominibus  contigisse,  nisi  indignum  litteris
esset,  ab  opere  pulcherrimo,  cuius  tractatus  atque
ipsa  possessio  plenissimam  studiis  gratiam  refert,
banc  minorem  exigere  mercedem,  more  eorum,  qui
a  se  non  virtutes  sed  voluptatem,  quae  fit  ex  virtu-

30  tibus,  peti  dicunt.  Ipsam  igitur  orandi  maiestatem,
qua  nihil  dii  immortales  melius  homini  dederunt  et
qua  remota  muta  sunt  omnia  et  luce  praesenti  ac
memoria  posteritatis  carent,  toto  animo  petamus
nitaniurque  semper  ad  optima,  quod  facientes  aut
evademus  in  summum  aut  certe  multos  infra  nos
videbimus.

1  idem  ultimum,  added  by  Buttmann,


BOOK XII.  XI.  27-30

and  Macer  would  never  have  been  succeeded  by
Virgil,  nor  Crassus  and  Hortensius  by  Cicero^  nor
they  in  their  turn  by  those  who  flourished  after
them.  But  even  though  we  cannot  hope  to  surpass  28
the  great,  it  is  still  a  high  honour  to  follow  in  their
footsteps.  Did  Pollio  and  Messala,  who  began  to
plead  when  Cicero  held  the  citadel  of  eloquence,
fail  to  obtain  sufficient  honour  in  their  lifetime  or
to  hand  down  a  fair  name  to  posterity .''  The  arts
which  have  been  developed  to  the  highest  pitch
of  excellence  would  deserve  but  ill  of  mankind  if
that  which  was  best  had  also  been  the  last  of  its
line.  Add  to  this  the  further  consideration  that  29
even  moderate  eloquence  is  often  productive  of
great  results  and,  if  such  studies  are  to  be  measured
solely  by  their  utility,  is  almost  equal  to  the  perfect
eloquence  for  which  we  seek.  Nor  would  it  be  difficult
to  produce  either  ancient  or  recent  examples  to  show
that  there  is  no  other  source  from  which  men  have
reaped  such  a  harvest  of  wealth,  honour,  friendship
and  glory,  both  present  and  to  come.  But  it  would
be  a  disgrace  to  learning  to  follow  the  fashion  of  those
who  say  that  they  pursue  not  virtue,  but  only  the
pleasure  derived  from  virtue,  and  to  demand  this
meaner  recompense  from  the  noblest  of  all  arts,  whose
practice  and  even  whose  possession  is  ample  reward
for  all  our  labours.  Wherefore  let  us  seek  with  all  30
our  hearts  that  true  majesty  of  oratory,  the  fairest
gift  of  god  to  man,  without  which  all  things  are
stricken  dumb  and  robbed  alike  of  present  glory  and
the  immortal  record  of  posterity ;  and  let  us  press
forward  to  whatsoever  is  best,  since,  if  we  do  this,
we  shall  either  reach  the  summit  or  at  least  see
many  others  far  beneath  us.

513


QUINTILIAN

31  Haec  erant,  Marcelle  Victori,  quibus  praecepta
dicendi  pro  virili  parte  adiuvari  posse  per  nos  vide-
bantur,  quorum  cognitio  studiosis  iuvenibus  si  non
magnam  utilitatem  adferet,  at  certe,  quod  magis
petimus,  bonam  voluntatem.


SM


BOOK XII.  XI.  3t

Such,  Marcellus  Victorius,  were  the  views  by  31
the  expression  of  which  it  seemed  to  me  that  I
might,  as  far  as  in  me  lay,  help  to  advance  the
teaching  of  oratory.  If  the  knowledge  of  these
principles  proves  to  be  of  small  practical  utility  to
the  young  student,  it  should  at  least  produce  what
I  value  more, — the  will  to  do  welL


515


INDEX OF NAMES


Academia,  Academici,  in.  i.  35 ;  xn.

ii.  23  and  25.
A.ccias,  I.  vii.  14;  I.  riii.  11;  v.  x.

«4;  V.  xiil.  43.
Accasator  Cossntiani  Capitonis, Ti.

i.  14.
Achilles,  I.  x.  30 ; n.  xrii.  8 ; m.  rii,

11 tgq.; TO.  Tiii.  53; vn.  ii. 7;

vn.  ix.  8;  vm.  iv.  24;  i.  i.  47,

50,  65;  xn.  li.  27.
Aciscnlas,  VI.  iii.  63.
Aegyptus,  L  xii.  60 ;  m.  viii.  33.
Aeli'us  Catus,  Tin.  vi.  37,
Aelins  Stilo,  X.  i.  99.
Aemilins  Scaurus,  V.  xii.  10.
Aenobarbos,  vi.  i.  50.
Aeolis,  L  iv.  16.
Aeoliis,  vm.  iv.  18.
Aerope,  H.  iii.  73.
Aesctunes, n, xvii. 12; rv. It. 5;

X.  I.  77; XL  iii.  7  and  168; xn.

X.  19  and  23. In  Ctesiph.,  v.  xiii.

42;  VI.  i.  20; vn.  i. 2;  X. i.  22

(S206)nx.  vi.  3.
Aeschines  Socraticns,  T.  xi.  27.
Aeschylus,  X.  i.  66.
Aesopus,  fabulist,  I.  Ix.  2;  T.  xl.  19,

•JO.
Aesopus,  tragic  actor,  XI.  iii.  111.
Aetoli,  X  i.  49.
Aier,  see  Domitios.
Airanios,  X.  i.  100.
Afri,  XI.  i.  80.
Airica,  m.  viii.  17  and  33 ;  vn.  ii.  6 ;

H.  I.  73.
Alricanns,  V.  xl.  IS; XL  i.  12. Se«

Inlius  and  Scipio.
Agamemnon,  m.  vi!.  12; in.  xi.  5;

IX.  iii.  57 ;  XI.  I.  37.
Agatharchns,  XI.  ii.  14.
Aglaophon,  xn.  x.  3.
Agnon,  n.  xvii.  15.
Abala,  v.  xiu.  24,


Aiax.  IV.  ii.  13 ;  V.  x.  41 ;  ▼.  xl.  40 ;

vn.  ix.  2 ;  vm.  iv.  24 ;  n.  iii.  73 :

xn.  xi.  27.
Albinovanns.  see  Pedo.
AJbutius,  n.  XT.  36; m.  IL  4;  m.

vi.  62.
Alcaens,  X.  i.  63.
Alcamenes,  xn.  x.  8.
AJcibiades,  vra.  iv.  23.
Alcidamas  Elaites,  m.  i.  10.
Alexander,  I.  i.  23; n.  xx.  3; m.

viii.  16;  v.  x.  42  and  111;  vra.

V.  24;  xn.  X.  6.
Alexandrinns,  I.  ii.  7.
Allobroges,  XI.  i.  89.
Amphictjones,  V.  i.  111.
Ampbion,  xn.  x.  57.
T.  Ampins,  m.  viii.  50.
Anaxagoras,  xn.  ii.  2'2.
Anaxtmenes,  m  iv  9
Anchariana  famllia,  IV.  i.  74 ; vn.  ii.

10;  IX.  ii.  56.
Andocides,  xn.  x.  21.
Andromache,  VI.  ii.  23.
Andronlcns,  XI.  iii.  7.
Annalis,  Sext.,  VI.  iii.  58.
Antigonns,  n.  xiii.  r.>.
Antimachos,  X.  i.  53.
Antipater  of  Sidon,  X.  vii.  19,
Antiphilos,  xn.  x.  6.
Antiphon,  m.  i.  11 ;  xn.  x.  22.
C.  Antonins,  IX.  iii.  94,
M.  Antonios,  orator,  n. xr. 7; n.

xvii.  6; nLi.  19; m.  vi.  45; vn.

iii.  16 ;  vm.  Pr.  13  sq. ; xi.  iii.  8

and  171 ;  xn.  i.  21 ;  xn.  ix.  5.
H.  Antonins,  triomvir,  vn.  iii.  18;

vm.  iv.  25.
Antonius  Gnipho,  1.  vi.  23.
Antonins  Rofus,  I.  v.  43.
Apelles,  n.  xiii.  12;  xn.  x.  6.
Aper,  XL  ii.  31.
Apollas  Callimachas,  XI.  ii.  14.


INDEX OF NAMES


Apollo,  in.  yii.  8

ApoUodorus  of  Pergamum,  n.  xv.  12 ;

in.  i.  1,  17,  18;  m.  v.  17;  in.  vi.

35  sqg. ; UI.  xi.  3 ; IV.  i.  50 ; IV.  ii.

31; V.  xiii.  59; vn.  ii.  20; IX.  i.

12 ;  XI.  ii.  14.
ApoUodorei,  n.  xi.  2;  in.  i.  18; IV.

i.  50.
ApoUonia,  m.  i.  17.
ApoUonius  Molon,  rhetorician,  m.  i.

16;  xn.  vi.  7.
ApoUonius  Kliodius,  poet,  X.  i.  54.
ApoUonius  of  Drepanum,  IX.  ii.  52.
Appius  Oaecus,  n.  xvi.  7; III.  viii,

64; V,  xiii.  35; XI.  i.  39; xn.  ii.

9 ;  xn.  X.  61,
M'Aquilins,  n.  xr.  7.
Aratus,  X.  i.  46  and  55  (Phaenom.  (1),

X.  i.  46.
Archedemus,  m.  vi.  31  and  33.
Archias,  X.  vii.  19.
Archilochus,  X.  i.  59.
Archjrtas,  I.  x.  17.
Aieopagitae,  v.  ix.  13.
Areus,  n.  xv.  36;  ni.  i.  16.
Aristarchus,  I.  iv.  20 ;  X.  i.  54  and  59.
Aristippus,  xn.  ii.  24.
Aristogeiton,  xn.  x.  22.
Ariston,  n.  xv.  19.
Aristophanes,  grammarian,  I.  I.  15;

X.  i.  54.
Aristophanes,  poet,  I.  x.  18 ; X.  i.  65 ;

xn.  X.  65.
Aristophon,  V.  xii.  10.
Aristoteles,  I.  i.  23;  I.  iv.  18;  n.  xv.

10; n.  xxi.  23; m.  i.  13  and  14;

in.  iv.  1; in.  vi.  23,  49,  60; m.

vii.  1;  X.  1.  83;  xn.  x.  52;  xn.

xi.  22 ;  wepl  ep/i.  (2),  I.  vi.28 ;  Oryllus,

n.  xvii.  14 ;  Rfiet.,  n.  xvii.  14 ;  ra.  i.

14;  V.  X.  17; (i.  2)  n.  xv.  13  and

16;  n.  xvii.  14;  V.  i.  1; v.  xii.  9;

(i.  3)  n.  xxi.  23 ;  (i.  9)  in.  vii.  23

and 25;  (i. 13) in. vi. 49;  (ii.

1  sqq.)  V.  X.  17;  (ii.  23)  V.  x.  78;

V.  xii.  10 ;  (ii.  26)  in.  ix.  5 ;  (iii.  2)

vm.  iii.  6;  (iii.  7)  vin.  iii.  37;

(iii.  8)  K.  iv.  87  sqq. ;  (iii.  12)  m.

viil.  63 ;  (iii.  13)  m.  ix.  5 ; xn.  x.

52;  (iii.  14)  m.  viii.  8; IV.  i.  72;

(iii.  16)  IV.  ii.  32 ; Soph.  El.  (i.  4),

vn.  ix.  8.
Aristoxenus,  I.  x.  22.
Arruntius,  III.  xi.  14.
0.  Artorius  Proculus,  IX.  1.  2.

5x8


Asconlus,  see  Pedianua.

Asia,  XI.  ii.  50 ; xn.  vi.  7 ; xn.  x.  16.

Asiani, vm. Pr. 17; IX. iv. 103;

xn.  X.  1,  12,  16  sqq.
Asinius  PoUio,  I.  v.  8; I.  vi.  42; I.

viii.  11; IV.  i.  11; vi.  i.  21;  vi.

iii.  110 ;  vn.  ii.  5  and  26 ;  vm.  i.  3 ;

vm.  iii.  32; IX.  ii.  9  and  24; IX.

iii.  13  and  34; IX.  iv.  76  and  132

(fragm.); X.  i.  22,  24,  113; X.  ii.

17  and  25; xn.  i.  22; xn.  vi.  1;

xn.  X.  11 ;  xn.  xi.  28.
Aspasia,  7.  xi.  27.
Asprenas,  X.  I.  22  ;  XI.  i.  57.
Atalanta,  V.  ix.  12.
Atellani,  vi.iii.  47.
Athenae,  I.  xii.  15 ;  n.  xvi.  4;  in.  vii.

24;  v.  ix.  5; vi.  i.  7; VI.  iii.  107

vn.  ii.  4;  X.  i.  76; XI.  iii.  123

xn.  X.  9;  xn.  x.  19.
Athenaeus,  n.  xv.  23;  m.  i.  16;  m.

iii.  13 ;  in.  v.  5 ;  ra.  vi.  47.
Atbenienses,  I.  x.  48; V.  xi.  38  and

40;  VI.  V.  7;  ix.  ii.  92;  X.  i.  66.
Athenodorus  of  Khodes,  n.  xvii.  15. .'
Atratinus,  XI.  i.  68.  '

Atreus,  ni.  viii.  45.
Atridae,  vn.  ii.  3.
Attici.vi.  i.  7; Vi.iii.  18; VI.  Pr.  13

vra.  i.  2 ;  Vin.  iii.  28  and  59 ;  rx.  iv.

145; X.i.44,  65,  80,100,  107,  115

xn.  ii.  17;  xn.  x.  1, 14, 19,  20  sqq.,

25,  26,  35,  39.
Atticus,  rhetorician,  m.  1. 18.
T.  Attius,  v.  xiii.  42.
Auctor  ad  Herenn. See  Comiflciua.
Aufidia,  IV.  ii.  106 ;  VI.  i.  20 ;  X.  i.  22.
Aofidius  Bassus,  X.  i.  103.
Augustus  Caesar,  I.  vi.  19; I.  vii.  22;

ra.  i.  17; VI.  iii.  52,  59,  63-5,  74,

75, 77,  79,  95;  vm.  iii.  34; xn.

vi.  1.
Aurelius,  XL  i.  31.

Babylon,  vm.  v.  24.
Bagoas,  V.  xii.  21.

Bassus,  see  Aufidius,  lonins,  Saleina.
Berenice,  IV.  i.  19.
M.  Bibaculus,  X.  i.  96.
P.  Blessius,  VI.  iii.  58.
Bostar,  vn.  ii.  10.
Britannia,  vn.  iv.  2.
Brutus,  v.  xi.  7.

M. Brutus,  accuser  of  Cn.  Plancai,
Vi.iii.  44.


INDEX OF NAMES


U.  Bmtos,  orator,  m.  vi.  93;  IX  iii
95;  IX.  iv.  75;  X.  i.  23  and  123;
I.  T.  20;  X.vji.  27;  S3,  i.  5;  in.
i.  22;  xn.  X.  11.

Bulbus,iv,ii.  107,

Barrus,  I.  iv.  15.

Busiris  II.  xviL  4.

Caecilianas,  XI.  i.  39.

Caecilius,  comic  poet,  L  Tiii.  11; X.  I.

99;  XLi.  39.
Caecilius,  rhetorician,  m.  i.  16; m.

vi.48;  V.  X.  7;  vin.  iii.  35;  EX.  i.

12;  K.iii.  38,  46,  89,  91,  97.
Q. Caecilius, would-be accuser of

Verres,V.xiii.l8;  VII.ii.2;  XI.i.20.
M.  Caelius,  I.  v.  61 ; I.  vi.  29  and  42 ;

IV.  ii.  27  and  123  sqq.;  VI.  iii.  25,

39,41; vm.  Ti.  53; IX.  iii.  58; X.

i.  115 ;  X.  ii.  25 ;  XI.  i.  51 ;  xn.  x.

11 ;  XIL  xi.  6.
Caepasins,  VL  i.  41 ;  VL  iii.  39.
Caerellia,  VL  iii.  12.
C. Caesar, I. v. 63; L  vii.  21  and

34; in.  vii.  28; m.  viii.  19,  47,

55; IV.  i.  39; V.  xiii.5; Vl.  i.  31 ;

VLiii.  61,  75,  91,  109,  112; vn.  ii.

6;  vn.  iv.  2;  vm.  iv.  20;  x.  i.

38  and  114; X.ii.  25; xi.  i.  38  and

80; xn.  X.  11. See also under

lulius  Caesar  Strabo.
C.  Caesar,  vn.  ii.  6.
Calamis,  xn.  X.  7.
Calchas,  n.  xiii.  13 ;  vn.  iv.  2 ; vm.

ii.  9 ;  vm.  iv.  20.
M.  Calidius,  orator,  X.  i.  23 ; XL  iii.

123  and  155;  xn.  x.  11.
Callicles,  n.  xv.  28.
Callimaciias,  Z.  i.  58.
Callon,  xn.  X.  7  and  10.
C.  Calvus,  I.  vi.  42 ; VI.  i.  13; VI.  iii.

60;  IX.  ii. 25; IX.  iii.  56; X. i.

115;  X.  ii.  25;  xn.  i.  22;  in.  vi,

1 ;  xn.  X.  11.
Campatins,  VL  iii.  71.
Cannae,  vm.  vi.  26.
C.  Carbo,  IX.  iv.  103 ;  X.  viL  27.
Caria,  XI.  iii.  58.
Cameades,  xn.  i.  35.
Cascellius,  VL  iii.  87.
Cassias  Parmensis,  V.  xi.  34.
C.  Cassias  Severus,  VL  i.  43; VL  iii.

27,  78,  79,  90;  vm.  ii.  2;  vm.  iii.

89; X.  i.  22; i  i.  116; XL  i.  57;

XL  iii.  133;  xn.  x.  11.


Castor,  XL  ii.  11.

Catilina,  V.  ii.  4 ;  XL  i.  2S.

Catius,  X.  i.  124.

M.  Cato  the  censor,  L  vi.  42;  L  vii,

23;  n.  V.  21; n.  xv.  8; m.  i.  19;

m.  vi.  97; V.  xi.  39; VI.  iii.  105;

vm.  iii.  29; VIILV..33; vnLvi.  9;

IX.  ii.  21 :  n.  iv.  39 ;  xn.  i.  1  and

35;  xn.  iii. 9; xn. vii.  4; in.

xi.  23.
Cato  Uticensis,  HL  v.  8  and  11 ;  m.

viii.  37  and  49;  v.  xi.  10;  VLiii.

112;  vm.  ii.  9;  rx.  iv.  75;  I.  v.

13;  iLi.  69;  in.  vii.  4.
Catullus,  X.  i.  96 ;  (xxix.  1)  EX.  iv.

141;  (Ixii.  45)  ES.  iii.  16;  (IxxiL)

L  V.  20;  (lixivi.)  VLiii.  18;  (xciii.)

XI.  i.  38 ;  (icvii.  6)  L  v.  8.
Catulus,  VL  iii.  81 ;  n.  iii.  35.
Caudinum  iu^um,  m.  viii.  3.
Celsina,  VL  iii.  85.
Celsos,  see  Cornelius.
Ceres,  Lvi.l4;  nLvii.  8;  vm.  vi,  34,
Cestius,  I.  V.  20.
M.  Cethegus,  n.  xv.  4;  XI.  iii.  31.
Chaeronea,  EX.  ii.  62.
Chaos,  m.  vii.  8.
Charisins,  X.  i.  70.
Channadas,  XL  ii.  26,
Chiron,  L  x,  30 ;  vm.  vi.  37.
Cbiysippus,  philosopher,  L  i.  4  and

16;  L  iii.  14;  L  x.  32;  L  xi.  17;

n.  XV.  34;  in.  i.  28;  xn.  vii,  9.
Chrvsippus  (Vettius),  VL  iii.  61.
Chrvsogonus,  IV.  ii.  3  and  19.
M.  Cicero,  L  iv.  11 ;  L  v.  13,  and  60

sqq.;  L  vi.  18;  L  vii.  20  and  34;

L  viii.  11 ;  n.  v.  16  and  20;  EL  xvi,

7;  m.  i.  20; m.  viii.  4€,  50,  65;

IV.  i.  19;  IV.  V.  24; V.  x.  31; v.

xi.  17 ;  V.  xiii.  2  and  62 ; VL  iiL  1,

2,  4,  5,  47-9,  51,  65,  67-9,  76-7,

84,  88,  98; vn.  i.  10; vn.  ii.  39;

vn.  iii.  28;  vn.  ii.  12;  vm.  ii.  4;

vm.  iii.  32,  64,  64,  66; vm.  v.  33;

IX.  i.  25 ;  H.  ii.  96 ;  IX.  iii.  1  and  74 ;

EX.  iv.  1,  16,  36,  53,  66  *w-,  79.

146; X.  i.  24,  33,  39,  40,  80,  81,

92  sgq.,  105  tqq.,  112,  113  tgq. ; X.

ii.  17,  18,  24; X.  v.  2,  11,  16; X,

vii.  14,  19,  37,  28; XL  i.  17,  24;

XL  iii.  8,  10,  85, 141, 171,  184; HL

Pr.  4; xn.  i.  14, 16, 19,  20,  21  sqq.;

ULii.  6,  23; ULvi.  4,  7; xn.  vii.

4; in.  X.  12  sqq.,  39,  45,  48,  53,


INDEX OF NAMES


64,  06;  XU.  xJ.  6,  26,  28;  Riteto-
rica;  Brut.,  {ii.  8)  XI.  i.  31;  (vii.
27)  III.  i.  12;  (iv.  58)  XI.  iii.  31;
(xxi.  sqg.)  n.  i.  4;  (xivi.  101)  Til.
li.  12;  (xxxviii.  141)  XI.  iii.  171,
184;  (Li.  216  sq.)  XI.  iii.  129;  (Ixii.
225)  XI.  iii.  128;  (Ixxiv.  259)  XI.
iii.  10,  35;  Qxxx.  278)  XI.  iii.  123,
155;  (Lxxxii.  283)  X.  i.  115;
(Ixxxviii.  301)  X.  tI.  4;  (xci.  314
sg.)  xn.  vi.  7;  (xci.  316)  xn.  i.  20;
Se  Inv.,  see  Rhetorica ;  Orator,  (i.
1)  IX.  iv.  101;  (i.  4)  xn.  xi.  26;
(iii.  12)  xn.  ii.  23;  (x.  34)  X.  vii.
27;  (xii.  39)  X.  i.  33 ;  (xiv.  sqg.)  m.
iii.  7;  (xiv.  44)  vm.  Pr.  14;  (xir.
46)  m.  V.  15;  m.  vi.  44;  (xvii.
55)  XI.  iii.  1;  (xviii.  57)  XI.  iii.
68,  60 ;  (xviii.  59)  XI.  iii.  122,  126 ;
(lix.  62)  X.  i.  33;  (xx.  67)  IX.  iv.
54;  (xxi.sgq.)  XI.  i.  4;  (x2iii.)XI.  i.
92 ;  (xxiii.  77)  IX.  iv.  37 ;  (xxv.  85)
a.  ii.  29;  (xxvi.  87)  VL  iii.  42;
(xxvi.  90)  VI.  iii.  18;  (xivii.  93)
vm.  vi.  23 ;  (xxviii.)  XI.  i.  92 ;  (xxii.
104)  X.  i.  24;  (xxx.  107)  xu.  i.  20;
xn.  vi.  4 ;  (xxxix.  sqg.)  IX.  i.  36  sgg. ;
(xlv.  154)  I.  V.  66;  (xlvi.  155)  I.  vi.
18;  (xJvii.  157)  I.  v.  44;  (xlviii.
161)IX.  iv.  38;  Qi- 171)  ix.  iv.  115;
(Ixi.  204)  rx.  iv.  124;  (Ixiii.  214)
IX.  iv.  103;  (Ixiv,  sgg.)  IX.  iv.  79;
(Irv.  219)  IX.  iv.  109; (Ixvi.  223)

IX.  iv.  101;  (Ixvii.  223  sgg.)  ix.  ii.
15;  K.  iv,  122;  (Lsx.  232)  IX.  iv.
14;  Qxx.  234)  DC.  iv.  55;  (Ixxl.
235)  IX.  iii,  39;  De  Oratore  m.  vi.
69;  IX.  iii.  90;  X.  iii.  1 ;  (I.  iii.  12)
vm.  Pr.  25;  (vi.  20)  n.  xxi.  14;
(vi.  21)  n.  xxi.  6;  (xxi.  94)  vm.
Pr.  13;  (xxviii.  128)  xn.  v.  5;
(xxix.  132)  XI.  iii.  177 ;  (xxxi.  138)
n.  XV.  5;  (xxxi.  141)  lU.  iii.  16;
(xxxi.  142)  ra.  iii.  7;  (xxxiii.  150)

X.  iii.  1;  (xxxiv.  155)  X.  v.  2;
(xlii.  190)  xn.  xi.  4;  Qv.  236)  xn.
iii.  11;  (II.  vii.  30)  n.  xvii.  36;
{sgq.)  m.  iv.  2;  (xxi.  88)  n.  iv,
8 ;  (xxv.  108  sqg.)  vn.  iii.  16 ;  (xlv.
188)Xi.iii.94;  (liv.  220)  VI. iii.  81;
(Iv.  223)  VI.  iii.  43;  G^ii.  232)  n.
xvii.  5;  (l^iii-  236)  VI.  iii.  8;  (Ixi.
248)  VI.  iii.  50;  Qxvi.  266)  VI.  iii.
38;  Qxvi.  267)  VI.  iii.  67;  (Lsvii.
»74)  I.  V.  66 ;  (Ixviii.  376)  VI.  iii.

520


87;  (Ixix.  278)  VI.  iii.  88;  (Ixx.
281)  VI.  iii.  84;  Qxxi.  289)  VI.  iii.
23;  (Ixxxii.)  m.  viii.  14;  (Ixxxii.
334)  m.  viii.  1 ;  (Ixxxvi.  352)  XL
ii.  14;  Qxxxvi.  354)  XI.  ii.  21;
(Ixxxvii.  358)  XI.  ii.  22;  (Ixxiviii.
360)  XI.  ii.  26;  (m.  x.  37)  XI.  i.  1 ;
(xi.  42)  XI.  iii.  10;  (xiv.  54)  (11.
xxi .  6 ;  (xiv.  66)  n.  xx.  9 ;  (xv.  sgg.)
I.  Pr.  13;  (xxiv.  93)  n.  iv.  42;
(xxvi.  101)  n.  xii.  7;  (xxx.)  m.  v.
15;  (xxxi.)  xn.  ii.  6;  (xii.  164)
vm.  vi.  16;  (1.  194)  X.  vii.  19;
(Iii.  sgq.)  IX.  i,  26  sgq.;  (liii.  202)

IX.  ii.  40;  (Iv.  210)  XI.  i.  4;  (Ivi.
213)xi.iii.7;  Qvi. 214)  XI. iii.  115;
(lix.  220)  1.  xi.  18;  XI.  iii.  128;
(lix.  222)  XI.  iii.  1 ;  Pari.  Or.,  (i.  3)
m.  iii.  7;  (v.  16)  vm.  iii.  36;  (vi.
19  sgg.)  vm.  iii.  42  sqg.;  (ix.  31)

IV.  ii.  107;  (xviii.  62)  m.  v.  6;
(xxvii.97)ra.  viii.65;  (xxviii.103)
m.  xi.  19;  (xxx.  104)  m.  xi.  10;
(xxx.  105)  vn.  iii.  35;  (xxxi.  and
xxxviii.)  in.  vi.  50 ;  Rhetorica  (alias
i/e  Inventione),  n.  xv.  6 ;  m.  i.  20 ;
m.iii.6;  ni.vi.68*g. and  64;  (i.  2)
m.  ii.  4;  (i.  5  sgg.)  U.  xxi.  4;  (I.  v.
6)  n.  XV.  5  and  33 ;  II.  xvii.  2 ;  (i.  6)
III.  V.  14;  (I.  viii.  10)  ra.  vi.  50;
(I.  xi.  14)  m.  vi.  68 ;  (I.  xiv.  19)  m.
xi.  9,  10,  12 ;  (I.  xxx.  46  sqg.)  V.  x.
78;  (I.  xxx.  49)  V.  xi.  2  and  23;
(I.  xxxi.  51)  V.  X.  6,  73 ; V.  xi.  2 ;

V.  xi.  28 ;  (I.  xxxiv.  67)  V.  x.  6 ;  (L
xxxiv.  58  sgg.)  V.  xiv.  7 ;  (I.  xxxvii.
67)  v.  xiv,  6;  (I.  Ivi.)  VI.  i.  27;
Topica,  (iii.  12)  v.  x.  85;  (iii.  13)
V.  X.  62 ;  v.  xi.  33 ;  (iii.  15)  V.  xi.
32;  (v)  V.  X.  63;  (vii.  32)  V.  xiv.
34;  (viii.  35)  I.  vi.  28; (x.  42)  V.

X.  73;  (xxi.)  in.  v.  15;  (xxi.  79)
m.  V.  5;  vn.  i.  4;  (xxi.  80)  m.
V.  18;  (xxi.  81)  m.  v.  6;  (xxii.
85  and  87)  VU.  iii.  8;  (xxiii.  88)
vn.  iii.  28;  (xxiv.  91)  m.  iii.  15;
(xxv.  93)  ra.  vi.  13;  (xxv.  94)  in.
vii.  28;  (xxv.  95)  ra.  xi.  18;  (xxvi,
97)  IV.  ii.  64;  Loci  communes,  n.  i.
11;  Fragmenta  rhetorica,  VI.  ii.  32;
Oraliones ;  Pro  Archia  (i.  1),  XI.  i.
19;  XI.  iii.  97;  (viii.  19)  V.  xi.  25;
vm.  iii.  75;  rx.  iv.  44;  xi.  i.  34;
n. iii.  84  and  167 ;  In  Q.  Caecilium,
see  Verriues;  Pro Caecina  (L l\


INDEX OF NAMES


Dt.  iii.  80;  (ir.  11)  IT.  ii.  49;  (vlii.
23)  IV.  ii.  132;  (x.  27)  VL  iii.  56;
(xii.  34)  V.  li.  33 ;  (xiii.  37)  V.  x.
68 ;  (iIt.  sqq.)  vn.  vi.  7 ;  (iv.  42)
vn.  iii.  17;  (it.  43)  V.  x.  92;  vn.
iii.  29;  (xv.  44)  TIL  iii.  29;  (ivi.
45)  T.  I.  93;  (six.  55)  T.  x.  98;
(xxix.  82)  rx.  iii.  22;  Pro  Caelio,
IT.  i.  31  and  39;  IT.  ii.  27;  IX.  ii.
39; XI.  i.  68;  (ii.  4)  XL  i.  28 ;  (iv.

10)  xn.  xl.  6 ;  (liii.  31)  T.  xiii.  30 ;
EC.  IT.  98;  (xiii.  32)  IX.  ii.  99;
(xiT.  tqq.)  m.  Tiii.  54;  (liT.  33)
EC  IT.  102;  m.  X.  61;  (xiv.  34)
IX.  iT.  104;  (XT.  35)  rx.  ii.  60;
(XT.  36)  TIILiii.  22;  (xri.  38)  vm.
iv.  1;  (xrii.  39)  IX.  ii.  15;  (xiii.
53)  rx.  ii.  47 ;  (ixTi.  62)  rx.  iv.  64 ;
(xxix.  69)  VL  iii.  25;  In  CoUili-
nam  I.,  xn.  x.  61 ;  (i.  1)  it.  i.  68 ;
rx.  ii.  7;  IX.  iii.  30;  (i.  2)  (EX.  ii.
26;  IX.  iii.  44;  (i.  3)  vm.  iT.  13;
(ii.  4)  IX.  iii.  29 ;  (ii.  5)  IX.  iii.  19 ;
(T.  10)  K.  iii.  45;  (t.  12)  Tm.  Ti.
15;  (Tii.  17)  Tm.  iT.  10; (Tii.  18)

IX.  ii.  32;  (viii.  19)  EX.  ii.  45;  (ix.
22)  IX.  iii.  62;  (x.  25)  Tm.  t1.  41 ;
(xi.  27)  IX.  ii.  32; rx.  iii.  71; xn.

X.  61;  (xii.  30)  rx.  iii.  71;  In
Catilinam  II.  (i.  1),  rx.  iii.  46  and
77;  In  Catilinam  III.  (ix.  21),  v.
xi.  42;  In  Catilinam  IV.  (ii.  3),
TI.iii.  109 ;  In  Clodium  et  Curionem,
in.  vii.  2;  fr.  T.  x.  92;  Tm.  iii.
81;  Tm.  Ti.  56;  rx.  ii.  96;  Pro
Cluentio,  U.  XTii.  21;  IT.  i.  69;
IT.  ii.  19  and  85;  T.  Til.  37(?);
T.  xi.  13;  V.  xiii.  42;  TL  v.  9;
XL  i.  61  and  74;  (i.  1)  IT.  i.  36;
TL  T.  9 ;  vm.  Ti.  65 ;  EX.  iT.  68,  92,
101,  133;  (i.  4)  EX.  ii.  19;  EX.  iii.
75  and  81;  IX.  It.  75;  (ii.  5)  rx.
ii.  61;  IX.  iii.  81  and  85;  (iv.  9)
IT.  T.  11;  (iT.  11)  IT.  i.  79; (v.

11)  IT.  ii.  16  and  130 ;  XI.  iii.  162  ;
(T.  14)  IT.  ii.  121;  XL  iii.  162;
(Ti.l5)r7.ii.l05;  ES. iii.  62, 77,  81 ;
(xi.  32)  Tm.  iT,  11;  (xiT.  41)  rx.
iii.  38;  (xTii.  tqg.)  T.  ii.  1;  n.  i.
74;  (n.  »qq.)  IT.  ii.  19;  TL  i.  41 ;
(xii.)  TI.  iii.  39;  (xxi.  68)  TL  iii.
40;  (xxiH.63)rx.ii.  51;  (xxiii.64)
T.  X.68;  (xxvi.)rr.  ii.l07;  (xxrii.
75)  T.  xi.  22 ;  (xxix.  80)  IX.  iii.  82 ;
(xTTJii.  91)  Tm.  Ti.  55;  (xxxr.  96)


Tm.  iii.  51 ;  (xxxri.  98)  T.  x.  108;
(xxiTii.l03)IX.ii.8;  (xxxTlii.106)
EX.  ii.  16;  (xl.  Ill)  T.  xiii.  39;
(xiii.)  IT.  i.  75;  (xlTlii.  134)  T.  xi.
13;  (xlTiii.  135)  T.  xiii.  33;  QiL)
IT.  T.  20 ;  T.  xiii.  42 ;  (Iii- 143)  T.
liii.  47;  Giii-  146)  T.  li.  25;  (Ix.
166)  IX.  ii.  48;  (be  167)  a.  iii.
37;  Qx.  168)  T.  liii.  15;  (lii.  169)
EX.  ii.  60;  In  competitores,  m.  Til.
2 ;  Pro  Comelio,  IT.  iii.  13 ;  T.  xiii.
18 ;  TL  T.  10 ;  TH.  iii.  36 ;  Tm.  iii.
3;  H.  iii.  164;  fr.  IT.  It.  8;  T.  xi.
25 ;  T.  xiii.  26 ;  EX.  ii.  55 ;  IX.  iT.
122  sqq.;  Pro  Deiotaro,  IT.  i.  31;
Pro  Flaceo,  XI.  i.  89 ;  Pro  Fonteio,
XI.  i.  89 ;  fr.  TI.iii.51 ;  Pro Fundanio,
I.  iT.  14;  Pro  Gobinio,  XL  i.  73;
Pro  Q.  Oallio,  Tm.  iii.  66;  XL  iii.
155  and  165;  De  lege  agraria,  n.
xri.  7;  (n.  t.  13)  T.  xiii.  38;  Tin.
iT.  28 ;  Pro  lege  Manilia,  n.  It.  40 ;
Oe  proscriptorum  liberis,  XI.  i.  85 ;
Pro  Ligario,  IT.  i.  39,  66,  70;  Vf.
ii.  108 ;  T.  xiii.  20 ;  TI.  t.  10 ;  n.
ii.  50;  X.  i.  23;  XI.  i.  78;  (i.  4)
IX.  IT.  73,  75,  92,  105 ;  XL  iii.  108
tqq.;  (i.  2)  IT.  i,  67;  IT.  ii.  109
and  131;  Tm.  t.  13;  EC  ii.  51;
nc.  iT.  133;  XL  iii.  162;  (i.  3)  it.
ii.  110;  (ii.  4)  n.  ii.  51,  lOS,  lU);
(iii.  6  sqq.)  XL  iii.  166 ;  (iii.  7)  IX.
ii.  14  and  28;  (iiL  8)  T.  x.  93;
(iii.  9)  T.  xiii.  31;  Tm,  iT.  27;
Tm.  Ti.  12;  EX.  ii.  7,  33,  57;  EX.
iT.  99 ;  XL  iii.  166 ;  (It.  10)  T.  xiii.
5;  Tm.  T.  10;  IX.  ii.  29;  ix.  It.
102 ;  (T.  15)  TUL  iii.  85 ;  (vi.  19)
T.  xl.  42;  T.  xiT.  1;  ex.  iii.  36;
(X.  30)  Tn.  iT.  17 ;  (x.  31)  v.  x.  93 ;
(xii.  35)  TL  iii.  108 ;  (iii.  37)  Tm.
T.  3;  (xii.  38)  Tm.  t.  7;  EX.  iT.
107;  Contra  ami  MetHli,  IX.  iiL
40,  43,  45,  49,  50 ;  Pro  Milone,  n.
XI.  8;  m.  Ti.  12  and  93;  m.  xi.
15 ;  IT.  i.  20  and  31 ;  it.  ii.  25  and
57;  IT.  iii.  17;  IT.  t.  15;  t.  xIt,
22;  TL  T.  10;  vn.  Ii.  43;  EX.  IL
41;  EX.  It.  133;  X.  t.  20;  XL  1.
40 ;  XI.  iii.  47 ;  (i>  1)  IX.  It.  74  and
93;  XI. iii.  47  tqq.;  (ii.  5)  Tm.  Ti.
48;  IX.  iii.  77;  (iii.  7)  T.  xi.  12;
(iii.  8)  T.  xi.  16  and  18;  (iii.  9)  T.
liT.  18  »qq.;  (iT.  9)  T.  xi.  15;
Tm.  T.  11;  (iT.  10)  T.  xiT.  17  and

521


INDEX OF NAMES


19;  IX.iii.  83;  (iv.  11)  v.  xiv.  17;
(v.)  V.  ii.  1;  (vii.  17)  v.  i.  41;
(x.  28)  IV.  ii.  57;  (i.  29)  TV.  ii.  121 ;
▼.  X.  50;  vn.  i.  37;  (xi.  30)  iv.
iv.  2;  (xii.  33)  rx.  ii.  54  and  56;
(xiii.  33)  IX.  iii.  6;  (xiii.  34  sgq.)

VIII.  vi.  7;  (xvi.  41)  v.  xiv.  3;
(xviii.47)IX.  ii.  26;  (xi.)V.  x.  37;
(XI.  53)  vni.  vi.  41 ;  (xxii.  59)  ix.
iii.30;(xiii  60)Vin.iii.  22;(xxvii.

72)  v.  li.  12 ;  IX.iii.  28 ;  (xxix.  79)  v.
xiv.  2 ;  (xxxi.  85)  IX.  ii.  38 ;  XI.  i.  34 ;
H.  iii.  115  and  167;  xn.  x.  62;
(xxxiii.)  IX.  ii.  41 ;  (xxxiv.  94)  VI.  i.
27 ;  IX.  iii.  23 ;  (xxxvii.  102)  VI.  i.  24 ;
XI.  iii.  172;  (xxxviii.  105)  XI.  iii.
173;  Pro  Murena,  n.  iv.  2i;  XI.  i.
69;  (i.  1)  IX.  iv.  107;  (ii.  4)  V.  xi.
23;  (iii.)  rv.  i.  75;  (v.  11)  IV.  v.
12;  (vi.  14)  IX.  ii.  36;  (viii.  17)
V.  xi.  11;  (ix.  22)  V.  xiii.  27;  (ix.
22)  IX.  ii.  100;  IX.  iii.  32 ;  (xi.  25)
vni.  iii.  22;  (xii.  26)  vn.  i.  51;
(xiii.  29)  vra.  iii.  79;  IX.  iii.  36;
(xvii.  35)  vin.  vi.  49;  (ivii.  36)
vm.  iii.  80;  (xxix.  60)  vm.  vi.  30;
(ixxv.  73)  vn.  iii.  16; (xxxvi.  76)

IX.  iii.  82;  (xxivji.  79)  VI.  i.  35;
(xxxvii.  80)  IX.  ii.  18;  (xxxix.  83)

V.  X.  99;  (fragm.?)  IX.  iii.  21;
Pro  Oppio,  v.  xiii.  17  and  20  sg.;

VI.  V.  10;  XI.  i.  67;  V.  x.  69  and
76 ;  V.  xiii.  21  and  30 ;  IX.  ii.  51 ;
Philippic  II.,  (i.  2)  XI.  i.  25  sg.;
(ii.  4)  V.  xiii.  38;  (xvii.)  v.  xiii.
38;  (XXV.  62)  rx,  ii.  47;  (xxv.  63)
V.  X.  99;  vm.  Iv.  8,  10,  16;  vm.
vi.  68;  K.  iv.  23,  29,  44,  107;
XI.  iii.  39,  167,  172;  (xxvi.  64)  IX.
ii.  26;  IX.  iii.  29;  (xxvii.  67)  vm.
iv.  26;  vra.  vi.  70;  xn.  x.  62;
Phil.  ra.  (iv.)  V.  xiii.  38 ;  (ix.  22)  ix.
iii.  13  and  72;  PAt7.IV.(iii.8)IX.iii.
86 ;  Phil.  vra.  (i.  2)  m.  viii.  5 ;  (i,
3)  vn.  iii.25;  Phil.  IX.  m.  viii.  5;
(iii.  7)  vn.iii.  18;  Phil.  XI.  (vi.  14)
vm.iii.  29;  Phil.  xra.  (19)  V.  xiii.
38;  In  Pisonem,  ra.  vii.  2;  (i.  1)  V.
xiii.  38;  (xiii.  20)  IX.  iii.  67;  (xxx.

73)  V.  xiii.  38 ;  In  Pisonem,  fragm.,
IX.  iv.  47  and  76;  vm.  iii.  21;
vra.  V.  18(?);  Pro  Quinctio  (i.  4),
XI.  i.  19;  (xxv.  78)  IX.  iii.  86;
Pro  RcMrio  perdtiell.  reo.,  V.  xiii.
20;  vn.  i.  9  and  16;  (vi.  18)  XI.

522


iii.  169 ;  (ix.)  VI.  i.  49;  Pro  Rabirio
Postumo,  ra.  vi.  11 ;  rv.  i.  46  and
49;  IV.  ii.  10;  IX.  ii.  17;  (iii.  7)
IX.  iii.  6;  (x.  28)  IV.  ii.  18;  (xvii.
46)  XI.  iii.  172;  De  Rege  Alex.  (7),
L  V.  13 ; De  haruspicum  respomis,

V.  xi.  42;  Pro  Roscio  Amerino,  IV.
ii.  19;  vn.  ii.  23;  (xxii.)  IV.  ii.  3
and  19;  rx.  ii.  53;  (xxvi.  72)  xn.
vi.  4;  Pro  Scauro  ambitus  reo.,  iv.
i.  69;  Pro  Scauro  repel,  reo,  I.  v.
8;  r?.  i.  69;  v.  xiii.  28  and  40;

VI.  i.  21;  vn.  ii.  10;  xi.  i.  89;
Pro  Sestio  (liv.  115),  vm.  iii.  34;
Pro  Tullio  (vii.  14),  IV.  ii.  131;
(xxiv.  56)  V.  xiii.  21 ;  Pro  Vareno,
VI.  i.  49;  vn.  i.  9  and  12;  vn.  ii.
10,  22,  36 ;  fr.  rV.  i.  74;  V.  x.  69 ;  V.
xiii.  28;  vm.  iii.  22;  IX.  ii.  56;
In  Vatinium  testem,  v.  vii.  6 ;  XI.
i.  73 ;  Pro  Vatinio,  XI.  i.  73 ;  Ver-
rinae,  IV.  i.  20  and  31;  IV.  iii.  13;
VI.  i.  54;  VI.  iii.  4;  VI.  v.  4;  X.  i.
23;  XI.  ii.  25;  Div.  in  Caecilium,
V.  xiii.  18;  (i.  1)  IV.  i.  49;  IX.  ii.
17;  (ii.  4">  IX.  ii.  59;  (xii.  40)  XI.
i.  20;  (xiii.  41)  XI.  i.  44;  (xiv.  45)
IV.  V.  24;  Act.  I.,  (XV.  sg.)  TV.  i.
20;  VI.  i.  13;  Act.  II.  (I.  i.  1),  IX.
iv.  119;  (I.  iii.  9)  vra.  iv.  2;  (I.
xxiv.  63)  IV.  ii.  2;  (I.  xx.)  iv.  ii.
114;  VI.  i.  54;  (I.  xxx.  76)  XI.  iii.
162;  (I.  xxx.  77)  IX.  i.  16;  (I.  xiii.
109)  V.  X.  76;  (I.  xlvi.  121)  vi.  iii.
55;  (n.  i. )  m.  vii.  27;  (n.  xxx.
73)  IV.  ii.  67;  (IV.  iii.  5)  rv.  v.  4;
rx.  ii.  61 ;  (IV.  xvii.  37)  ix.  ii.  52 ;
(IV.  XX.  43)  IX.  ii.  60;  (IV.  xxv.
Ivii.)  VI.  iii.  55;  (IV.  xxvi.  57)  IX
ii.  61;  (IV.  xliii.  95)  VI.  iii.  55;
(iv.  48)  m.  vii.  27;  IV.  ii.  19;  K.
iv.  127 ;  (IV.  Iv.  123)  V.  xi.  7 ;  (V.
ii.  4)rx.ii.  47;  (V.  iii.)  iv.  ii.  17;
(V.  V.  10)  rx.  ii.  22 ;  (V.  x.)  IV.  iii.
18;  (V.  xvii.  44)  IX.  iii.  34;  (v.
xxvii.  70)  rx.  iv.  64;  (V.  xxxiii.
86)  vm.  iii.  64;  IX.  iv.  104;  XI.
iii.  90;  (V.  xii.  107)  rx.  iii.  43;
(V.  xliv.  116)  IX.  ii.  57;  IX.  iii.  11;
(V.  xliv.  117)  vm.  iv.  19;  IX.  ii,
51;  IX.  iv.  70;  (V.  xiv.  118)  IV.  ii.
106;  vm.  iv.  27;  rx.  iv.  71,  108.
124;  XI.  i.  40;  (V.  xiv.  119)  IX.  iii.
34;  (V.  Iii.  136)  VI.  i.  3;  (V.  Ivi.
145 vra.  vi.  72;  (v.  62  tq.)  IV.  il.


INDEX OF  NAMES


113;  (V.  liii.  161)  IX.  ii.  40;  (V.
Ixii.  162)  IX.  iv.  103;  XI.  i.  40;
XL  iii.  90 ;  (V.  bdii.  163)  ix.  ii.  38 ;
(V.  Lrvi.  170)  Tin.  iv.  4 ;  (V.  Ixxii.)
VI.  i.  3 ;  Fraqmenia  ineerta,  VUL
Ti.  47;  n.  ii.  18,  41,  47,  60;  DC.
iii.  21,  42,  48,  87;  XI.  iii.  155;
Commentarii  causarum,  rv.  i.  69;
X.  Tii.  30  *q. ;  Epistulae,  L  vii.  34;
DC.  iv.  41;  X.  i.  107;  XL  I.  21;
xn.  ii.  6;  Ad  Appium  Pulchrum,
in.  Tiii.3;  VIII.iii.35;  Ad  Atiicum,
(V.  IV.  3),  V.  xi.  21 ;  (vm.  vii.  2)
VL  iii.  109;  vm.  v.  18;  (IX.  x.  6)
vm.  iii.  32 :  Ad  Bruium,  n.  xi.  10 ;
m.  viii.  42;  V.  i.  9;  VL  iii.  20;
vm.  iii.  6  and  34;  vm.  vi.  20  and
55;  ix.iii.4lBnd58;  lX.iv.41(?);
Ad  Catrelliam,  VLiii.112 ;  Adfilium,
I.  vii.  34;  Ad  ineertum,  ix.  iii.  61 ;
Dialogi,  XL  i.  20;  Cato  maior  (iii.
7),  V.  X.  9 ;  V.  xi.  41 ;  Catultu,  HL
vi.  64;  Laeliui  (xxiv.  89),  vm.  iii.
55;  Lueulliu,  m.  vi.  64;  De  not.
deorum  (I.  xxxiv.  95),  L  v.  72;
vm.  iii.  32;  De  republiea,  IX.  iii.
75;  Tusculanae  (L  ii.  4),  L  x.  19;
(I.  xxiv.  59  (  ?))  X.  vi.  4 ;  Carmina,
vm.  vi.  73;  IT.  iv.  41;  XL  i.  24;
lAbri  de  iure,  xn.  iii.  10;  Libri
Platonit  el  Xenophontu  Translati,
V.  xi.  28;  X.  V.  2;  Fragmenta  in-
certa,  vm.  iii.  21;  DC.  iv.  100(?);
xn.  i.  17.

Cimber,  vm.  iii.  29.

Cimbricum  scutum,  VL  iii.  38.

Ctona,  see  Helvius.

Caandins,  I.  vii.  26 ;  VL  iii.  81 ;  vm.
V.  16.

Cleanthes,  n.  xv.  34;  n.  xvii.  41;
xn.  i.  18;  xn.  vii.  9,

Cleon,  XL  iii.  123.

Clitarehus,  X.  i.  75.

aoatilla,  vm.  V.  16;  IX.  ii.  20;  IX.
iii.  66;  IX.  iv.  31.

Clodia,  in.  viii.  54 ;  V.  xiii.  30.

P.  Clodius,  n.  iv.  35 ;  m.  v.  10 ;  m.
vii.  2;  ra.  viii.  54:  m.  xi.  15  and
17;  rv.  ii.  25,  67,  88;  V.  ii.  4;  VI.
iii.  49;  vn.  i.  34  ««.;  vn.  ii.  45;
X.  V.  13 ;  XL  i.  39.

Sex.  Clodius  Phonnio,  VI.  iii.  56.

Cluentianum  iudicium,  XL  i.  74.

Clusiaios  Figolus,  TIL  ii.  5  and
26.


ClTtaemnestra, n. xvii. 4;  m. xL

4  sqq.  and  20 ;  VUL  vl.  53.
Coccus,  xn.  X.  21.
Colotes  of  Tecs,  n.  xiii.  13.
Comic  poets,  anonymous,  TL  iii.  97;

IX.  iii.  16.
Corax,  n.  xvii.  7;  m.  i,  8.
Cornelia,  l.  i.  6.
Comelii  tres,  V.  x.  30.
Cornelius  Celsus,  rbetorician,  n.  xv.

22 and  32; m.  i. 21; m. v. 3;

m.  xvi.  13 and  38; m. vii.  25;

IV.  i.  12;  IV.  ii.  9  tq.;  vn.  i.  10;

vn.  ii.  19; vm.  iii.  35  and  47 ;  IX,

i.  18;  rr.  ii.  22,  40,  54,  101  sq..

104,  107;  IX.  iv.  132  and  137; X,

i.  23  and  124;  xn.  xi.  24.
C.  Ciomelius  trib.  pleb.,  X.  v.  13.
Cornelius  Qallus,  poet,  I.  v.  8 ;  I.  i.  93.
Cornelias  Hufinus,  xn.  i.  43.
Cornelius  Severus,  poet,  X.  i.  89.
Comificins,  m.  i.  21 ;  EX.  iii.  89;  (iv.

14)  EX.  iii.  31  and  70;  (iv.  15  sqq.)

EX.  iii.  98 ;  (iv.  18)  V.  x.  2 ;  (iv.  22)

EX.  iii.  72;  (iv.  25)  EX.  iii.  55  sq.

and  91 ;  (iv.  29)  IX.  iii.  88 ;  (iv.  36)

EX.  ii.  27 ;  (iv.  43  and  52)  EX.  ii.  31.
Cios,  vm.  vi.  71.
Coesatianns  Capito,  VI.  i.  14.
L.  Cotta,  V.  xiii.  20  and  30;  VL  v.

10;  XLi.  67;  XL  iii.  10.
Cranon,  XI.  ii.  14.
L.  Crassus,  orator,  I.  xi.  18; n.  iv.

42; n.  XX.  9; VL  iii.  43  sq.; vn.

vi.  9;  vnLPr.  14:  vnLiii.  89;  x.

iii.  1; X.V.  2; XI.  i.  4  and  37; XI.

iii.  8  and  94; xiLii.  5;  xn.  z.  10;

xn.  xi.  4  and  27.
Crassus  Dives,  XL  ii.  60.
Oates,  L  ix.  6.
Cratinns,  X.  i.  63.
Cremutius,  X.  i.  104.
Crispus  Passienus,  VI.  i.  60; X.  i.  24;

XI.  i.  31.
Critolaus,  n.  xv.  19  and  23 ;  n.  xvii.

15.
Cupido,  n.  iv.  26.
Curetes,  X.  i.  49.
Curjanum  indicium,  vn.  vi.  9.
Curii,xn.  ii.  30.
C.  CJurio  (the  elder),  XI.  iii.  129.
C.  Curio  (  ?  the  younger),  VI.  iii.  7«.
M'.  Curius,  VI.  iii.  72 ;  vn.  ii.  38.
Curins  Vibius,  VL  iii.  73.
Qyctops,  vm.  iii.  84;  vm.  iv.  24.


INDEX OF NAMES


Oynicas,  IV.  II.  80.
C^TUs,  XI.  ii.  50.
C^hnius,  II.  xiii.  13.

Daedalns,  "vm.  vi.  18.

Declaimer,  fragment  of  unknown,  vm.

ill.  22.
Delphicum  oracalum,  x.  1.  81.
Demades,  n.  xvii.  13 ;  xn.  x.  49.
Demeas,  vn.  ix.  10;  vm.  ii.  16.
Demetrius,  comic  actor,  XI.  iii.  178.
Demetrius  Phalereus, orator,  II.  iv.

41  sq.; IX.  iii.  84; X.  i.  33  and  80.
Demetrius,  sculptor,  Xll.  x.  9.
Demoleos,  vm.  iv.  25.
Demosthenes,  L  xi.  5; n.  v.  16;  m.

vi.  3 ;  V.  xiii.  42 ;  V.  xiv.  32 ;  VI.

i.  20;  VI.  ii.  24;  VI.  iii.  2; vm.  v.

33; IX.  ii.  40  and  98;  IX.  iv.  17,

36,  47,  55,  146;  X.  i.  24,  39,  76, 105

sqq.; X.  ii.  24; X.  iii.  25  and  30;

n.  iii.  6  sq.,  54,  68,  130,  168; xn.

i.  14  sq.  and  22 ;  xn.  ii.  22 ;  XII.  ix.

16;  xn.  I.  23,  24,  26,  52,  54;  xn.  xi.

26 ;  Action  against  hisguardiani,  xn.

vl.  1 ; In  Androtionem  (7),  V.  xiv.

4; Pro  Ctesiphonte,  IV.  i.  32,  66,

68; IX.  ii.  54; X.  i.  22; XI.  i.  22;

XI.  iii.  97; (1)  IX.  iv.  63  sq.  and

73; (18)IV.ii.  131; (128)  XI.  i.  22 ;

(179)  IX.  iii.  55; (208)  IX.  ii.  62

and  168; Ve  Haloneso,  in.  viii.  5;

In  Midiam  (72),  VI.  i.  17; Philip-

picae,  ni.  viii.  65 ;  (i.  2)  VI.  v.  7 ;

(iii.  17)  IX.  iv.  63  >q. ; Epistulae,  X.

i.  105.
Diana,  m.  vii.  8.
Didius  Gallus,  VI.  iii.  88.
Dido,  IX.  ii.  64.
Didymus,  I.  viii.  20.
Diogenes  of  Babylon,  I.  i.  9.
Diomedes,  XI.  i.  37;  xn.  xi.  27.
Dion,  I.  X.  48;  m.  iii.  8.
Dionysius,  I.  x.  48 ;  V.  xi.  8 ;  vm.  vi.

62.
Dionysius  of  Halicamassus,  m.  i.  16 ;

IX.iii.  89;  IX.  iv.  88.
Dolabella,  vi.  iii.  79  and  99; vm.  ii.

4;  ix.i.  16;  xn.  xi.  6.
Domitia  Passieni,  VI.  i.  50 ;  vn.  iii.  74.
Domitianus,  IV.  Pr.  2  sq.;  X.  i.  91.
Domitius  Afer,  V.  vii.  7;  V.  x.  79;

VI.  iii.  29,  42,  54,  68,  81,  84  sq.,

92-4; vm.  V.  3  and  16;  IX.  ii.  20;

IX.  iiL  66  and  79; lX.iv.  31;  X.  i.

$24,


24,  86, 118; n.  iii.  12S; xn. x.

11 ;  xn.  xi.  3.
Domitius  Marsus,  VI.  iii.  102  igq.,  108,

111.
L,  Domitius,  IV.  ii.  17.
Dorica,  vm.  iii.  59.
Duilius,  I.  vii.  12.

Egeria,  n.  iv.  19.

Effnatius,  v.  xiii.  33.

Elis,  xn.  X.  9.

Empedocles,  I.  iv.  4;  ra.  1.  8.

Empylns  of  Ehiodes,  rhetorician,  X.
vi.  4.

Ennius,  I.  v.  12;  I.  vi.  12;  I.  viii.
11;  vra.iii.  31;  ix.  ii.  36;  IX.  iv.
115;  X.i.  88;  4nn.  (160)  (Vahlon),
vm.  vi.  9;  (178)  VI.  iii.  86;  (186)
vn.  ix.  6;  (222)  IX.  iv.  115;  (305)
XI.  iii.  31;  (309)  n.  xv.  4;  (472)
n.  xvii.  24 ;  Medea,  v.  i.  84.

Ephorus,  n.  viii.  11;  IX.  iv.  87;  X.
i.  75.

Epicurus,  H.  xvii.  15;  vn.  iii.  5;  X.
ii.  15;  xn.  ii.  24.

Epicurei,  V.  vii.  35 ;  X.  i.  124.

Eratosttienes,  L  i.  16 ;  xi.  ii.  14.

Euathlus,  m.  i.  10.

Buenus,  I.  x.  17.

Euphorion,  x.  i.  66 ;  XI.  ii.  14.

Euphranor,  xn.  x.  6  and  12.

Eupolis,  1.  X.  18 ; X.  i.  65 ; xn.  x.  65.

Euripides,  m.  i.  14;  v.  x.  31  {Phoe-
niss.,  636  sq.);  X.  i.  67  sq.

Eurypylus  of  Iiaxissa,  XI.  ii.  14.

Fabia  Dolabellae,  VI.  iii.  73.

Fabius,  m.  viii.  19  and  37;  (Cunc-

tator)ii.  xvii.  19; VI.  iii.  61;  vra.

ii.  11;  XL  11.80.
Fabius  Pictor,  L  vL  12.
Fabricius,  vn.  ii.  88 ;  xn.  i.  43 ; xn.

ii.  30.
Fama,  IX.  11.  36.
C.  Fannius,  vn.  ix.  12.
Fidenates,  m.  viii.  37.
Figulus  Clusinius,  vn.  ii.  4  sq.  and  26.
Flaccus,  see  Valerius.
Flaminius,  n.  xvi.  6.
On.  Flavins,  vntiii.  22.
Flavus,  see  Sei^ius  «uid  Verginiua.
Florus,  see  Julius.
Fontcius,  VI.  iii.  61.
Fulvius,  VL  iii.  100.
Furiua,  see  Bibaculua.


INDEX OF NAMES


Gabinins,  XI.  i.  73.

A.  Galba,  wit,  VI.  iii.  27,  62,  64,  66,

80,  90.
Servius  Galba,  n.  !▼.  8.
Galliae,  vui.  r.  15:  X.  iii.  13.
Gallio,  ra.  i.  21;  IX.  ii.  9).
Gallua,  see  C!omelias  and  Sulpicios.
Gallus,  ni.  Tiii.l9; n.  iii.  38  and  79;

Tin.  Jv.  20.
Gavius,  I.  vi.  36.
Germani,  vm.  iv.  20;  vm.  ▼.  24.
Gennania,  ra.  viii.19.
Qennanicam  belliim,  X.  i.  103,
Germanirus,  see  Domitianus.
GeU,  I.  Pr.  6.
Glaucia,  11.  xvi.  5.
Glaucus  of  Carystas,  XI.  ii.  14.
Glyco  Spjridion,  VI.  i.  41.
Gnipho,  see  Antonius.
Gorgias  of  Leoiitini,  n.  xxi.  21 ; m.

i.  8,  9,  12,  13,  18  tq.;  ni.  viii.  9;

IX.  ii.  102;  ES-iii.  74;  .\II.  xi.  21.
Gracchi,  I.  i.  6; n.  v.  21 ; II.  xri.  -5;

in.  vii.  21; T.  xi.  6; Vin.  v.  33;

xn.  z.  10  and  45.
C.  Graccbas,  I.  x.  27; II.  iv.  15; XL

iii.  8  and  115.
Tib.  Gracchus,  V.  xiii.  24; vn.  iv.

13.
Qraecia, m. iv.  14;  XlLii.  22;  xn.  x.

28.
Graeci,  I.  i.  12  and  13 ; I.  v.  32  and

60  sqq.;  I.  I.  21; v.  xiv.  32; X.  i.

22; XI.  i.  89; XI.  ii.  51; XL  iii.

102,123,138;  XILii.30;  xn.x.33;

xn.xi.23.
Oraii,Vin.  iv.  21.
Gratiae,  X.  i.  82.

Hannibal,  n.  xvii.  19; m.  viii.  17;

V.  X.  48 ;  Vin.  iv,  20,
Heius,  vn.  iv.  36.
Helena,  in.  viii.  9;  vm.  iv.  21.
Hegesias,  sculptor,  xn.  x.  7.
C.  Helvius  Cinna,  poet,  X.  iv.  4,
Helvins  Mancia,  vi.  iii.  38.
Hercules,  ni- vii.  6; VL  i.  36; vn.

ii.  17;  X.  i.  56;  Xl.iii.  73.
Hermagoras,  rhetorician,  n.  xv. 14;

n.  xxi.  21; in.  i. 16; ill.  iii.  9;

ra.  V.  4  and  14; m.  vi.  3,  21,  53,

56,  59  »q.\ m.  xi.  1  and IS;  m.

xviii.  22;  V.  Ix.  12;  IX.  ii.  106.
Hermagoras,  pupil  of  Ibeodorus  of

Gadara,  in.  i.  18.


Hermagorei,  m.  1.  1  and  16; ra.  v.

4 ;  vn.  iv.  4.
Hennocreon,  V.  x.  78.
Herodotus,  IX.  iv.  18  and  46; X.  1.

73  and  101.
Hesiodus,  L  i.  15 ;  v.  xi.  19 ;  X.  i.  52.
Hippiae  nuptLie,  wa.  iv.  16.
Hippias  of  Elis,  ra.  i.  10  and  12;  XII

xi.  21.
Hippocrates,  VI.  iii.  34.
Hirtins,  vm.  iii.  54;  xn.  xi.  6.
Hispania,  I.  v.  57.
Hlspo,  VL  iii.  100.
Homems,  I.  viii.  5 ;  n.  iii.  12 ;  n.  xvii.

Sand  18;  v.  xii.  14;  vn.  x.  11;  vra.

V  9 ;  vm.  vi.  18 ;  X.  i.  24,  46  tqq.,

57,  62.  65,  81,  85 ;  xn.  iv.  2 ;  XIL  x.

5  and  64 ;  xn.  xi.  21  and  26. Iliad

(i. 249), xn. I. 64;  (ii.  180)  ra.

vii.  12; (ii.  201)  IX.  iii.  57; (ii.

255  sqq.)  XL  i.  37;  (ii.  477)  m.  vii.

12;  (ii.558)v.  xi.40;  (iii.  156  «99.)

vra.  iv.  21;  (iii.  214  and  221  tqq.)

xn.  X.  64;  (iii.  217)  XI.  iii.  158;

(iv.  125)  1.  V.  72 ;  (iv.  299)  V.  xii.

14; (V.  801)  ra.  vii.  12;  (vii.  S19)

vm.  iv.  24;  (xvi.  140)  vm.  iv.  24;

(xxi.  196)  X.  i.  46; Odyssey  (viii.

173)  XU.  X.  65;  (ix.  394)  L  v.  72;

(xi.  130)  I.  V.  67;  (xi.  523)  vm.  iii.

84;  (XV.  299)  vra.  vi.  37.
Horatius,  one  of  three  Horatii,  ra.  vi.

76; rv.  ii.  7; V.  xi.  10;  vn  iv.  8.
Horatins,  L  viii.  6; I.  i.  94  and  96;

Odes  (L  iv. 13) vra.  vi. 27; (L

xii.  1)  vra.  ii.  9; (L  xii.  40)  IX.

iii.  18;  (i.  14)  vm.  vi.  44;  (L  xv.

24)  EX.  iii.  10;  (n.  xiii.  26)  X.  i.  63 ;

(ra.  vi.  36)  vm.  ii.  9;  (iv.  ii.)  x.  i.

61;  (IV.  ii.  11)  rx.  iv.  54;  Epistle*

(L  i.  41),  IX.  iii.  10;  (L  i.  73)  V.  xi.

20 ; (L  V.  23)  XL  iii.  80 ; Ars  Poet

(1),  vra.  iii.  60;  (25)  IX.  iii.  65;

(63)  vra.  vi.  23;  (139)  vnL  iii.  20;

(311)  L  V.  2; (359)  X.  i.  24; (388)

Introd.  2; (402)  X.  i.  56; Satire*.

(L  i.  100)  IX.  iv.  65;  (L  iv.  11)  i.

i.  94; (L  vi.  104)  L  v.  67; (L  x

44)  VI.  iii.  20; (n.  v.  41)  vm.  vi.

17;  (n.  vi.  83)IX  'ii.l7.
Q.  Hortensius,  L  v.  12; IL  i.  11;  m.

V.  11; rv.  V.  24; VI.  iii.  98; vm.

iii.  35; X.  i.  23;  X.  v.  13;  I.  vi.

4; XLii.  24;  XL  iii.  8;  xn.  vii.  4;

xn.  X.  11  and  27.


INDEX OF  NAMES


Hortensins,  daughter  of,  I.  i.  6.
Hyperbolus,  I.  x.  18.
Hyperides,  II.  xv.  9; X.  i.  77; X.  v.
2 ;  xn.  I.  22.

Dium,  V.  X.  42.

Interamna,  IV.  ii.  88.

lopas,  I.  X.  10.

Ipiucrates,  V.  xii.lO.

Ipliigcnia,  n.  xiii.13.

Irus,  III.  vii.  19.

Isaeus,  xn.  X.  22.

Isauricus,  VI.  in.  25  and  48.

Isocrates,  n.  viii.  11 ;  n.  iv.  4  and  33
m.i.  13-16;  m.  iv.  11;  HI.  v.  18
ni.  vi.  3;  m.  viii.  9;  iv.  ii.  31
IX.  iii.  74 ;  IX.  iv.  4  and  35 ;  X.  i.  74
and  108 ;  xn.  x.  22  and  50.

Isthmos,  III.  viii.  16.

Italia,  I.  vi.  31 ;  I.  xii.  15;  vn.  ii.  26.

luba,  VI.  iii.  90;  XI.  i.  80.

ludaicae  superstitionis  auctor,  III.  vii.
21.

lulia  basilica,  XII.  v.  6.

lulius  Airicanus,  Till.  V.  15 ;  X.  i.  118;
xn.  X.  11.

O.  lulius  Caesar  Strabo,  VI.  iii.  38;
IX.  i.  28;  XI.  iii.  129.

lulius  Floras,  X.  iii.  13.

lulius  Secundus,  X.  i.  120  sq.;  X.  iii.
12  sqq.;  xn.  X.  11.

Junius  Bassus,  vi.  iii.  27,  57,  74.

liuio,  I.  vi.  25;  vm.  iv.  18.

luppiter,  I.  vi.  25; n.  iii.  6; m.  vii.
4  and  8;  X.i.  46;  xn.  x.  19.

Labienus  (i),  V.  liii.  20.

Labienus  (ii),  L  v.  8; IV.  1.  11 ; IX.

iii.  13.
Lacedaemon,  III.  vii.  24.
Lacedaemonii,  I.  x.  14;  I.  xi.  IS;  n.

xvi.  4;  vn.  ii.  4.
Laches,  vn.  ix.  10.
Laelia,  I.  i.  6;  IX.  iv.  32.
D.  Laelius  Balbus,  X.  i.  24;  xn.  x.

10  and  39.
Laenas  Popilius,  HI.  i.  21 ; X.  vii.  32 ;

XI.  iii.  183.
Latium,  I.  vi.  31.
Latona,  in.  vii.  8.
Latro,  see  Porcius.
Lentulus (Catilinarian), V. x. 30;

(Spinther),  vi.iii.57.
On.  Lentulus  (orator),  XI.  iii.  8.
Lentuli,  VI.  iii.  67.


Leocrates,  XI.  ii.  14.

Leonidas,  I.  i.  9.

Liber,  Ul.  vii.  8 ;  VIU.  vl.  24.

Liburnia,  ix.  ii.  34.

Licinius,  see  Archias,

Ligarius,  vn.  ii.  6.

Linus,  I.  X.  9.

Livius  Andronicus,  X.  ii.  7.

T.  Livius,  I.  V.  66; I.  vii.  24; n.  v.

19; vm.  i.  3; vni.  iii.  63;  X.  i.

101; Praef.  (1),  ix.  iv.  74;  (i.  9)

IX.  ii.  37;  (i.  12)  I.  v.  44;  (ii.  27)
vm.  vi.  20;  (xxxviii.  54)  vni.  vi.
9;  Epist.  adfllium,  n,  v.  20;  X.  1.
39;  (?)  vm.  ii.  18.

Lotophagi,  V.  viii.  1.

Lucanus,  X.  i.  90.

Lucilius,  I.  V.  66;  I.  vi.  8;  I.  vii.  15

and  19; I.  viii.  11; rx.  iv.  38  and

113;  X.  i.  94.
Lucretia,  V.  xi.  10.
Lucretius, I. iv.  4 ;  X.i.  87;  xn.  xi.27;

(i.  936)  ui.  i.  4;  (iv.  1)  vm.  vi.  45;

(iv.  ll)in.  i.  4.
LucuUi,  xn.  vii.  4.
Lupercalia,  I.  v.  66.
Lupus,  see  Rutiliua.
Luranius,  IX.  iv.  38.
0.  Lusius,  in.  xi.  14.
Lycurgus  (lawgiver),  i.  x.  IB.
Lycurgus  (orator),  XII.  x.  22.
Lydia,  ni.  vii.  6.
Lysias,  II.  xvii.  6; m.  viii.  51;  IX.

iv. 16  and  17;  X.  i.  78;  xn.  i.

21  sqq.
Lysippus,  xn.  i.  9.

Macer,  VI.  iii.  96;  X.  i.  56; X.  i.  87;

xn.  xi.  27.
Maecenas,  I.  vi.  62 ;  IX.  iv.  28.
Sp.  Maelius,  in.  vii.  20 ; V.  ix.  13 ; V.

xiii.24.
Magnus,  V.  x.  30.
Mancia,  see  Helvins.
Manctnus,  VU.  iv.  21.
M.  Manlius,  V.  ix.  13; V.  xi,  7; Vil.

ii.  2 ;  cp.  also  m.  vii.  20.
Manlius  Sura,  VI.  iii.  64;  XI. iii.  126.
Maratlion,  IX.  ii.  62 ; XI.  iii.  168;  Xll.

X.  24.

M.  Marcellus,  V.  xi.  7;  X.  i.  38.
Marcellus  Victorius,  see  Victoriua.
Marcia,  m.  v.  11 ;  X.  v.  13.
Marcianus,  VI.  iii.  95.
Maricas  I.  x.  IS.


526


INDEX OF  NAMES


Marius,  m.  viii.  37.

ifarrucini,  vn.  ii.  26.

Mars,  ni.  vii.  5,  8 ;  vni.  vi.  24.

Marsus,  see  Domitius.

Matius,  m.  i.  18.

Medea,  VUL  v.  6; IX  ii.  8; X.  i.  98;

XI.  iii.  71.
Megabyzus,  V.  lii.  21.
Megarii.y.  xi.  40.
Melanthius,  HI.  x.  6.
Menalcas,  vm.  vi.  47.

Menander,  I.  viii.  7 ; I.  x.  18 ; m.  vii.

18;  in. xi.  27; IX.  iii.  89; X.  i.

69,  70 ;  XI.  iii.  91 ;  xn.  x.  25.
Meneiaus,  u.  xiii.  13;  vin.  iii.  84;

XII.  X.  64.
Mercurius,  m.  vii.  8.
Meropes,  \'II1.  vi.  71.

Messaia,  I.  v.  15  and  61 ;  I.  vi.  42 ;

I.  vii.  23  and  34; rv.  i.  8; vni.  iii.

34; IX.  iv.  38; X.  i.  22,  24,  113;

X.  V.  2 ;  xn.  X.  11 ;  xn.  xi.  28.
Metellus,  IX.  iii.  50.
Metrodorus  of  Scepsis,  X.  vi.  4 ; XI.  ii

22  and  26.
Milo  of  Croton,  I.  ix.  5.
T.  Milo,  in.  V.  10; m.  xi.  15  and  17;

IV.  ii.  25  and  27; V.  ii.  1; vi.  iii.

59; VI.  V.  10; vn.  i.  34  sgq.:  vil.

ii.  45;  VII.  iv.  8;  X.  v.  13;  Xl.  i.  40.
Minerva,  ni.  vii.  8; Z.  i.  91 ; XI.  i

24;  xn.  X.  9.
MisericorUia,  v.  xi.  38.
Mitliridates,  vni. iii.  82;  XLii.  50.
Modestus,  I.  vi.  30.
Uors,  IX.  ii.  3C.
Mucii,xn.  iii.  30.
L.  Morena,  vi.  i.  35.
Musa,  IV.  Pr.  4;  X.  i.  55.
Myron,  n.  xiii.  10;  xn.  i.  7.

Xaevius  of  Arpinnm,  vu.  ii.  24.
Xarbonensis,  vi.  iii.  44.
Niisica,  V.  xiii.  24.
Naucrates,  m.  vi.  3.
Neptunua,  in.  vii.  8.
C.  Nero  (Claudius),  vi.  iii.  50.
Nero  Imp.,  vm.  v.  15  and  18.
Nestor,  xu.  i.  64.
Nicander,  X.  i.  56.
Nicias,  I.  x.  48.
Nicostratus,  U.  viii.  14.
Nigidias,  XI.  iii.  143.
Nireus,  I.  x.  48.
Nonianus,  see  Serviliu&


Nov&nios  Gallic,  P.,  n.  il.  35.
Nnma,  I.  x.  20 ;  m.  vii.  18 ;  vn.  1.  24.
Nomantia,  vm.  vi.  30.
Numantinus,  m.  viii.  3;  vn.  iv.  12.

Oceanns,  m.  viii.  16;  vn.  iv.  2;  X.  L

46.
Oedipus,  IX.  iii.  89.
Opitergini,  ra.  viii.  23  and  30.
Oppianicus,  V.  ii.  1.
P.  Oppius,  VI.  iii.  67 ;  XI.  i.  67.
Orators,  frcigments  of  unknown,  V.  x.

71; vra. ii. 3; vm. v. 20 sgg.;

vm.  vi.  14; n.  ii.  17  and  50; IX.

iii.  15,  48,  87.
Orestes,  m.  xi.  4  sgq.,  11,  20;  m.  t.

11 ;  vn.  iv.  8.
Orphena,  I.  x.  9.
Ostiensis  portus,  n.  ixi.  18;  ra.  viii.

16.
Ovidius  Naso,  VI.  iii.  96; X.  i.  88,  93

98; J/<rt<2mor7'/i.,  IV.  i.  77 ;  (i.  502)

Vin.  iii.  47; (v.  17)  IX.  iii.  48:  (x.

422)  IX.  ii.  64; (xi.  456)  IX.  iv.  65 ;

(xiii.  1)  I.  V.  43; (xiii.  5)  V.  x.  41 ;

Rem.  Am.  (707),  Xll.  x.  74 ; Medea,

vm.  V.  6; X.  i.  98; Epigrams,  ix.

iii.  70.

Pacuvius,  L  V.  67;  I.  viii.  11;  L  xii.

18;  vm.  vi.  35;  X.  i.  97.
Padus,  I.  V.  8.

Palaemo,  I.  iv.  20 ;  L  vi.  35.
Palamedes,  ra.  i.  10.
Palla,  IV.  ii.  27.
Pallas,  VI.  ii.  33.
Pampiiilus,  painter,  xn.  x.  6.
Pampbilus,  rhetorician,  m.  vi.  34.
Pansa,  XII.  xi.  6.
Panya.sis,  X.  i.  54.
Paris,  ra.  vii.  19; V.  x.  84; VUI.  iv.

21.
Parius,  n.  lix.  3.
Parrhasius.  xn.  x.  4  «9.
Parthi,m.  viii.  33.
Passienus,  see  Oispos.
Patrocles,  rhetorician,  n.  xv.  16;  in.

vi.  44.
Patroclus,  I.  i.  49.
Paulus,  L.,  L  X.  47.
Pedianus  Asconia«,  I.  vii.  24;  v.  x.  9.
Pedo  Albinovanus,  vi.  iii.  61 ;  x.  i.  90.
Pelides,  vm.  vi.  29.
Peloponoesius,  vn.  ii.  7;  in.  x.  4.
Pelops,  IX  iv.  140.


INDEX  OF  NAMES


Pericles,  I.  x.  47;  n.  xvl,  19;  in.  i.

12; X.  i.  82;  xn.  ii.  22;  xn.  li.

3;  xn.  T.  24,  49,  65.
Peripatetici,  n.  xv.  20;  n.  xvii.  2;

ni.  i.  15;  xn.  ii.  25.
Perses,  HI.  vii.  21,
Persius,  X.  i.  94; Sat.  (i.  9),  IX.  iii.  9;

(i.  2C)  I.\.  iii.  42;  (i.  95)  IX.  iv.  65;

(i.  106)  X.  iii.  21;  (v.  71)1.  v.  8.
Pharsalus,  XI.  ii.  14.
Phidias,  II.  iii.  6 ;  XU.  x.  8  sqq,
Philemon,  X.  i.  72.
Philetas,  X.  i.  68.
Philippus,  consul,  XI.  i.  37.
Philippus,  L.  Marcius,  \1.  iii.  81.
Philippus  of  Macedon,  I.  i.  23; xn.

X.  6.
Philistus,  X.  i.  74.
Philocteta,  V.  x.  84,
Philodamus,  iv.  ii.  114;  XI.  iii.  171
Phoenix,  lI.  iii.  12 ;  ll.  xvii.  8.
Phormio,  VI.  iii.  6G.
Phryne,  II.  xv.  9 ;  X.  v.  2.
Picens,  IV.  ii.  2.

Pindaras,  vin.  vi.  71 ;  X.  i.  69  and  109
Piraeus,  viii.  vi.  04.
Pisandros,  X.  i.  56.
Pisaurum,  VII.  ii.  26.
Plsistratus,  V.  xi.  8.
Piso,  0.,  ix.iii.22.
Piso,  IX.  ii.  01.
Placentinus,  I.  v.  12.
Placidus,  VI.  iii.  53.
Planous,  Cn.,  \1.  iii.  44.
Plataeae,  XI.  iii.  168.
Plato,  I.  X.  13,  15,  17;  I.  xi.  17;  I.

xii.  15; u.  XV.  24,  26,  29; v.  vii.

28; VUI.  vi.  04; IX.  iv.  77  sg.;  X.

i.  81  and  108; X.  v.  2; xn.  ii.  22;

XII. X. 24; XII. xi. 22; Oorg.,

(419  E)  n. xxi. 1 and 4; (452  E)

n.  XV.  10 ; (453  A)  II.  XV.  5 ; (454  B)

n. XV. 18; (460  C) II. xv. 27;

(462  n)  n.  XV,  24; (463  D)  lI.  xv.

25 ; (464  B)  n.  XT,  25 ; (466  A)  II.

IT.  25; (500  C)  II.  xv.  27; (508  C)

II.  XV.  28 ; P/tafdr.  C261  A),  n.  xv

19; n. xxi.  4; (201  D)  III. i. 10;

(266  E)  in.  i.  11 ; (267  A)  Tl.  xv.  31  ;

(273  E)  II.  XV.  29; (275  A)  xi.  ii.  9;

Reipubl.  I.  init.,  VUI.  vi.  64 ;  Soph.

(222  C),  III.  iv.  10; Symp.  (21  8  b),

vni.  iv.  23 ; Tim.  inic,  IX.  iv.  77 ;

(47)  I.  X,  13.
Plautialex,  IX.iii.  5&

528


Plautps,  comic  poet,  X.  i.  99.
Plautus,  Stoic,  X.  i.  124; cp.  II.  xiv.

2;  in.  vi.  23.
Pletorius,  vi.  iii.  51.
Plinius  (the  elder),  in.  i.  21 ; XI. ii.

143  and  148.
Plisthenes,  ni.  vii.  19.
Plotius,  II.  iv.  42;  XI.  iii.  143.
Poeni,  I.  V.  57.
PoUio,  see  Asinius.
Pollux,  XI.  ii.  11.
Polus,  n.  XV.  28.
Polycletus,  xn.  i.  7.
Polycrates,  II.  xvii.  4; ni.  i.  11.
Polygnotus,  XII.  x.  3  and  10.
Polynices,  V.  x.  31.
Polyxena,  VI.  ii.  23.
Pompeius,  CM.,  in.  viii.  33,  50,  56  sgii. ;

IV.  ii.  25; IV.  iii.  13; VI.  iii.  Ill;

vn.  ii.  6; Vin.  iii.  21; ix.  ii.  55;

IX.  iii.  95 ;  XI.  i.  80 ;  XI.  iii.  164.
Pompeius,  S.,  m.  viii.  44.
Pompoaius  Secundus,  VIII.  iii.  31 ;  X.

i.  98.
Pomponius,  VI.  iii.  75.
Pomptina  palus,  ni.  viii.  16.
Popilius,  see  Laenas.
Porcius  Latro,  IX.  ii.  91;  X.  v.  18.
Posidonius,  lU.  vi.  37.
Praxiteles,  n.  xix.  3 ;  xn.  x.  9.
Priamus,  in.  viii.  53 ; vni.  iv.  21  sqq. ;

X.  i.  50.

Priuemas  ager,  VI.  iii.  44.

Proculeius,  VI.  iii.  79 ;  IX.  iii.  68.

Prodamus,  I.  x.  18.

Prodicus,  III.  I.  10  and  12;  ni.  iv.  10.

Propertius,  X.  i.  93.

Proserpina,  IV.  ii.  9;  IV.  iii.  13;  XL

iii.  164.
Protagoras,  m.  i.  10  and  12 ;  III.  iv.  10.
Protogenes,  xn.  x.  6.
Ptolomaeus,  vn.  ii.  6.
Publilia  Ciceronis,  VI.  iii.  75.
Punicum  bellum,  ni.  viii.  30.
Pyrrhus,  n.  xvi.  7; V.  x.  10; VI.  iii,

10;  vn.  il.  6.
Pyrron,  xn.  ii.  24.
Pythagoras,  I.  x.  12  and  32; XI.  i.

27;  xn.  i.  19.
Pythagorei,  I.  xii.  15;  IX.  iv.  12

Quintilianus  pater,  IX.  iii.  37.

Quintilianus  filius,  I.  Pr.  1  tqq.;  II.
xii.  12;  in.  i.  22;  HI.  vi.  08;  IV
Pr.  2  *qq.;  IT.  i.  19;  IT.  ii.  86;  T.


INDEX OF NAMES


L  8;  T.  xli.  16;  ▼.  tU.  7;  vi  Pr.

1  and  3; VL  il.  25;  vn.  i.  3,  22,

29,54; vn.ii.24; vm.  vi.  76 ;  IX.

ii.  73;  X.  i.  91; XL  i.  5; XI.  ii.

39;  xn.  li.  8.
Quintius,  V.  liii.  39.
Quirinos,  I.  vli.  12.

Rabirius  Postomus,  TIL  I.  9.

Rabirius,  poet,  X.  i.  90.

Reguli,  xn.  ii.  30.

Rhodii,Xl.iii.  7.

Rhodus,  m.  i.  17 ;  xn.  vi.  7.

Roma,  V.  ix.  5.

Romani  veteres,  1. 1.  20 ;  ni.  vii.  24.

Romulns,  IL  iv.  19 ;  m.  vii.  5.

Roscius  Amerinas,  S.,  vn.  ii.  2  and  23.

Roscius,  Q.,  actor,  XL  iii.  111.

Ruins,  see  Antonins.

Rullua,  Tm.  iv.  28.

Rutilins  Lupna,  IX.  ii.  99,  101  *qq.;

IX.  iii.  36  and  89;  (i.  4)  IX  iii.  65;

(i.  5)  IX.  iii.  68;  (i.  10)  IX.  iii.  36;

(ii.  2)  IX.  iii.  92 ;  (ii.  6)  IX.  iii.  89 ;

(ii.  12)  IX.  iii.  75;  (ii.  16)  H.  iii.

84,91;  (ii.  19)  IX.  iii.  93.
Eutilius,  P.,  V.  ii.  4 ;  XI.  i.  12.

Sacerdos,  TI.  iii.  55.

Sagontini,  m.  viii.  23.

Salamis,  T.  xi.  40; IX  ii.  62; ZI.  iii.

168;  xn.  X.  24.
Salarius,  vn.  i.  9.
Saleius  Bassus,  X.  i.  90.
Saliorum  cannina,  I.  vi.  40 ;  I.  x.  20.
Sallostius  C!rispu3,  n.  iv.  9; ly.  ii.

45; vin. iii. 29; X. i. 32, 101,

102  $q.;  X.  li.  27; X.  iii.  8; Cat.

(17),  vm.  iii.  44;  (20)  m.  viii.  45;

lug.  (1),  rx  iv.  77;  (x.  1)  rx.  iii.

12;  (X.  7)  vm.  V.  4;  (xix.)  n.  xiii,

14;  (xx.)  m.  viii.  45; (xxi.)  vm.

iii.  44 ;  (xxiv.(  ?))  rx  iii.  17 ;  (xxxviii.)

vm.  iii. 44;  Hist.  Jr.,  IV. ii. 2;

vm.  iii.  82;  vm.  vi.  59;  ix  iii.

12;  xn.  ix.  9; Ded.  in  Cic.,  rv.  i.

68 ;  IX  iii.  89.
Samnites,  m.  viii.  17.
Santra,  xn.  x.  16.
Sardus,  L  v.  8 ;  XI.  i.  89.
Sarmentos,  VI.  iii.  58.
Satuminus,  n.  xvi.  5; V.  xi.  6; VI.  i.

49;  VU.  i.  9.
Satomos,  I.  vi.  36.
Scaevola,  Q.,  vn.  vi.  9 ;  zn.  iii.  9


Scaevola,  XI.  ii.  38.

Scamander,  XI.  i.  74.

Scaurus,  M.  Aemilius,  V.  xli.  10;  T.

xiii. 40  and  55.
Scipio  Africa  nus  Maior,  m.  viii.  17;

V.  X.  48; vm.  iv.  20; vm.  vi.  9;

XI.  i.  12;  xn.  I.  10.
Scipio  Africanns  Minor,  l.  vii.  25 ;  vm.

vi.  30  and  43 ;  X  i.  99 ;  xn.  x.  10

and  39.
Scipio,  Metellus,  v.  xi.  10.
Scipio.  see  also  Serapio  and  Nasica.
Scopa,  XL  ii.  14  sqq.
Seneca,  philosopher,  vm.  t.  18;  IX

ii.  8;  X  i.  125  sqq.;  xn.  x.  11.
Seneca,  rhetorician,  vm.  iii.  31 ;  IX

ii.  48  sq.,  98.
Septimius,  IT.  i.  19.
Serapio,  VLiii.67.
Serranus,  X.  i.  89.
Servilia  lex,  vi.  iii.  44.
Servilius  Nonianus,  X.  i.  102.
Servins,  IX.  iv.  38.
Severos,  see  Cassius,  Cornelius.
Sextii.X.  i.  124.
Sibyllinilibri.V.  x.  30.
Sicilia,  L  vi.  30;  L  x.  48;  m.  vJI.

27;  IV.  iii.  13,  21;  VI.  iii.  80;  n.

iii.  164.
Sicinius,  C,  XI.  iii.  129.
Siculus,  VI.  iii.  41 ;  X.  i.  89.
Simonides,  X  i.  64 ;  XI.  ii.  11.
Sinon,  IX  ii.  9.
Sirenes,  V.  viii.  1.
Sisenna,  I.  v.  13 ;  vm.  iii.  35.
Socrates,  L  x.  13;  L  xi.  17; n.  xr.

26,  30;  n.  xvi.  3;  n.  xxi.  4;  m.

i.  9; IV.  iv.  6; V.  xi.  3,  27,  42;

Vin.  iv.  23; IX  ii.  46,  85; XL  i.

9  *q. ;  xn.  vii.  9 ;  xn.  x.  4.
Socratici,  V.  vii.  28;  T.  xi.  27;  X  i.

35,  81  sq.;  xn.  i.  10.
Sol,  L  vii.  12.
Sophocles,  X.  i.  67.
Sophron,  L  x.  17.
Sosipater,  Tn.  ii.  4.
Spatale,  Tm.  v.  17  and  19.
Sphinx,  TLiii.  98.
Spiridioo,  see  Glyco.
Staienos,  IV.  ii.  107.
Stertinins,  m.  i.  21.
Stesichoms,  X  i.  62.
Stilo,  see  Aelius.
Stoici,  L  iv.  19; L  x  15;  n.  rv.  20|

IL  xvii.  2;  m.  i.  15;  y.  vii.  36:


INDEX OF NAMES


Vl.Iii.  78; X.  1.84,  124;  XT.  1.  70;

Xn.  i.  18  and  38;  XII.  ii.  24.
Stratocles,  XI.  iii.  178  tqq.
Suelius,  VI.  iii.  78.
Suetonii  Caesar  (53),  vni.  ii.  9.
Sulla,  m.  viii.  53;  V.  x.  30  and  71;

XI.  i.  12  and  85.
Sulpicianus,  VI.  iii.  75.
Sulpicius  Gallus,  I.  x.  47 ;  n.  iv.  8.
Sulpicius,  Serving,  III.  viii.  5; IV.  ii.

106; VI.  i.  2U; vn.  iii.  18; IX.  iii.

21; X.  1.  22  and  116; X.  v.  4; X.

vii.  30;  XI.  1.  69;  xn.  iii.  9; XII.

vii.  4;  XD.  X.  11.
Sulpicius  Longus,  VI.  iii.  32.
Sura,  see  Maulius.
Sybaritae,  in.  vii.  24.
Syri  sententia  (480),  vni.  v.  6;  IX.  iii.

64.
Syracusae,  I.  x.  48.
Syracusani,  V.  xi.  7.

Tabulae  XU,  I.  vi.  11;  ni.  vi.  84;

V.  xiv.  18.
Tarentini,  VI.  iii.lO.
Tarentum,  VII.  viii.  4.
Terentianus  pater,  XI.  i.  39.
Terentius,  I.  viii.  11 ;  VI.  iii.  56 ;  Viil.

iii.  35; X.  i.  99; XI.  i.  39; Andr.

(I.  i.  41)  vni.  V.  4; Eun.  (I.  i.  1),

IX.  ii.  11; IX.  ill.  16; IX.  iv.  141;

XI.  iii.  182; (I.  ii.  5)  IX.  iii.  18;

(I.  ii.  75)  IX.  ii.  58 ; Phorm.  (i.  i.  2),

I.  vii.  22.
Terentius  Varro,  M.,  I.  iv.  4; I.  vi.  12

and  37;  X.  i.  95  and  99;  XII.  xi.  24.
Terraconenses,  VI.  iii.  77
Thebae,  V.  i.  Ill ;  xi.  iii.  1C8
Thebani,  V.  x.  Ill  sqq.
Themistocles,  I.  i.  19;  IX.  ii.  92;  XI.

ii.  50.
Theocritus,  X.  i.  55.
Theodectes.  1.  iv.  19;  n.  xv.  10;  m.

i.  14;  iv.ii.63;  IX.iv.  88;  XI.ii.51.
Theodores  of  Byzantium,  in.  i.  11.
Theodores  of  Gadara,  U.  3cv.  16  and

21; in.  i.  17  iqq.\ ni.  vi.  2,  36,

61; in.  xi.  3; iv.  i.  23; V.  xiii.59.
Theodorei,  n.  xi.  2 ; in.  i.  18 ; m.  iii.

8;  ui.  xi.  27;  iv.  ii.  32.
Theodotus,  in.  viii.  55  sqq.
Theon.  in.  vi.  48;  IX.  iii.  76.
Theophrastus,  m.  i.  15; ni.  vii.  1;

ni.  viii.  62; IV.  i.  32; vm.  i.  2;

IX.  iii.  76;  IX.  iv.  88;  X.  1.  27.


Theopompns,  historian,  n.  viii.  11 ;

IX.  iv.  35;  X.  i.  74.
Theopompus  of  Sparta,  II.  xvli.  20.
Thelites,  ni.  vii.  19;  XI.  i.  37.
Thessali,v.  x.  Ill  sqq.
Thetis,  m.  vii.  11.
Thrasybulus,  m.  vi.  26;  vn.  iv.  44.
Thrasymachus,  m.iii.  4  and  12.
Thucydides,  IX.  iv.  16 ; X.  i.  33,  73  sq.,

101;  X.  ii.  17;  (i.  8)IX.  iv.  78.
Tiberius  Caesar,  m.  i.  17.
Tibullus,  X.  i.  93.
Tiburs,  VI.  iii.  44.
Timagenes,  I.  x.  10;  X.  1.  76.
Timanthes,  n.  xiii.  12.
Timotheus,  U.  iii.  3.
Tinga  of  Placentia,  L  v.  12.
Tiro,  VI.  iii.  5 ;  x.  vii.  31.
Tisias,  n.  xvi.  3 ;  n.  xvii.  7 ;  m.  i.  8.
Titius  Maximus,  VI.  iii.  71.
Titius,  XI.  iii.  128.
Torquatus,  V.  xi.  10.
Trachalus,  VI.  iii.  78; vni.  v.  19; X,

i.  119;  xn.  V.  5  sq.;  xn.  i.  11.
Tragic  poets,  anonymous,  quoted,  VI.

iii.  96; vin.iii.  31  and  48; vni.  vi.

10,  14,  35;  IX.  iii.  57  and  77; rx.

iv.  140.
Trebatius,  m.  xi.  18;  V.  x.  64.
Triarius,  v.  xiii.  40.
Troia,  vn.  ii.  3.

Troianus,  vn.il.  7;  vni.  iv.  21.
Troilus,  vn.  ix.  7.
Tryphon  1,  Introd.  letter.
Tubero,  V.  xiii.  20  and  31 ; X.  1.  23 ;

XI.  i.  78  and  80.
TuUius,  Vl.iii.  63.
Tuscanicae  statuae,  XU.  x.  1  and  7.
Tutilius,  in.  i.  21.
Tydeus,  in.  vii.12.
O^dides,  Vlll.  vi.  29.
T^ndaridae,  XI.ii.l6.
^rtaeus,  X.  i.  66.

Valerius  Corvus,  n.  iv.  18.
Valerius  Flaccus,  X.  i.  90.
Valgius,  0.,  m.  i.  18;  in.  v.  17;  v.

1.4.
Varenus,  C,  VII.  i.  9.
Varenus,  On.,  vn.  i.  9.
Varius,  HI.  viii.  45;  X.  i.  98;  X.  iii.  8.
Varius  of  Suero,  v.  xii.  10.
Varro,  see  Terentius.
Varro,  P.,  of  Atax,  I.  v.  17 ;  1. 1.  87.
Vams,  L.,  TLiii.  78.


INDEX OF  NAMES


Vatinius,  V.  vii.  6;  «.  iii.  60,  68,  77,

84;  XL  1.73.
Venns,  n.  iv.  26;  vm.  vi.  24;  I.  1.

79  and  100.
Vergilius  Maro,  L  vii.  8,  18,  20; 1.

viii.  5; L  i.  10; VI.  ii.  32; VL  iii.

20; vm.  iii. 20, 24, 47, 63, 79,

vni.  iv.  24; H.  iii.  14; X.  i.  56.

85  sqq.;  X.  iii.  8; xn.  xi.  26  sq.;

Am.  (i.  1),  L  ▼.  27;  IX.  iii.  62;

XL  iii.  36;  (i.  3)  XL  iii.  34;  (i.  6)

L  T.  18;  (i.  19)  IX.  iii.  14;  (i.  33)

vm.  T.  11;  (i.  45)  L  v.  18;  (i.  48)

IX.  ii.  10;  (i.  65)  vm.  vi.  29;  (i.

67)  IX.  iii.  17;  (i.  78)  XI.  iii.  176;

(i.  81)  vm.  iv.  18;  (i.  109)  vm.  ii.

14;  (i.  135)  rx.  ii.  54;  (i.  151)  XIL

i.  27;  (i.  162)  vm.  vi.  68;  (i.  177)

\TIL  vi.  23;  (i.  335)  XL  iii.  70;  (i.

369)  L  V.  43; K.  ii.  7; (i.  399)

IX.  iii.  75;  (i.  477)  vn.  Ix.  7;  (i.

617)  XL  iii.  176;  (i.  742)  L  x.  10;

(ii.  1)  L  V.  43;  (ii.  15)  vm.  vi.  34;

(ii.  29)  IX.  ii.  37;  (ii.  69)  EC  ii.  9;

(ii.  104)  rx.  iii.  11 ;  (ii.  262)  vm.

iii.  84;  (ii.  268)  VUL vi.  60;  (ii.

307)  vm.  vi.  10;  (ii.  311)  vm.  vi.

25;  (ii.  355)  vm.  iii.  72  and  78;

(ii.  435)  K.  iii.  35;  (ii.  640)  V.  xi.

14;  (iii.  29)  vm.  iii.  70;  (iii.  55)

IX.  iii.  25;  (iii.  56)  IX.  ii.  10;  (iii.

193)XILPr.  4;  (iii. 234)  IX.  iii.  64;

(iii.  321)  VL  ii.  22 ;  (iii.  436)  n.  xiii.

8;  (iii.  475)  vm.  vi.  42;  (iii.  517)

IX.  iv. 65;  (iii.  620) XI.  iii.  70;

(iii.  631)  vm.  iii.  84;  (iii.  659)  vm.

iv.  24;  (iv.  143)  vm.  iii.  73;  (iv.

174)  rx.  ii.  36;  (iv.  254)  L  v.  25;

VHL  iii.  72;  (iv.  359)  vnL  iii.  54;

(iv.  379)  rx.  ii.  50;  (iv.  381)  n.  ii.

48;  (iv.  419)  vm.  ii.  3;  (iv.  425)

IX.  ii.  39;  (iv. 495)  vm.  vi.  29;

(iv.  550)  H.  ii.  64;  (iv.  592)  IX.  ii.

11 ;  (iv.  695)  H.  iii.  25; (v.  9)  xn.

Pr.  4;  (V.  212)  vn.  ix.  10; (v.  248)

H.  iii.  9;  (v.  264)  vm.  iv.  25; (v.

319)  vm.  vi.  69;  (v.  426)  vra.  iii.

63 ;  (vi.  1)  vm.  vi.  10 ;  (vi.  16  and

19)  vra.  vi.  18;  (vi.  179)  L  iv.  28;

(vi.  275)  vm.  vi.  27  and  41;  (vi.

276)  vm.  vi.  41 ;  (vii.  464)  L  vii.

18;  (vii.  618)  vra. iii.  70;  (vii. 649)

vra.  iv. 6;  (vii.  759)  IX.  iii.  34;

(vii.  787)  IX.  iii.  15 ;  (vii.  791)  V.  x.

10;  {vii.808)Vin.vi.69;  (viii  .641)


vm.  iii.  19;  (vlli.  «42)  rr.  ill.  26;

(viii.  691)  vra.  vi.  68;  (viii.  728)

vm.  vi.  11; in.  x.  61;  (ix.  26">  L

vii.  18;  (ix.  474)  VL  ii.  32;  (ix.

773)  vra.  vi.  12;  (x.  1)  L  Iv.  28;

rx.  iv.  49;  (I.  92)  rx.  ii.  49;  (x.

782)  VL  ii.  33 ; (xl.  40)  VL  ii.  32 ;

(li.  89)  VL  ii.  32 ;  (xi.  142)  VHL  vi.

21;  (xi.383)IX.ii.  49; XL  iii.  176;

(xi.  406)  rx.  iii.  14;  (xi.  681)  vm.

ii.  10; vnLvi.  40;  (xn.  208)  L  vi.

2;  (xii.  638)  EC  iii.  46;  (xli.  646)

vra.  V.  6;  Eel.  (i.  2),  rx.  iv.  86;

(i.  11)  L  iv.  28;  (i.  15)  L  vi.  2;  (i.

23)  V.  xi.  30;  (i.  43)  IX.  iii.  63;

(i.  81)  X.  i.  12 ;  (ii.  66)  vra.  vi.  22 ;

(ii.  69)  rx.  iii.  28 ;  (iii.  8)  rx.  iii.  69 ;

(iii.  17  and  21)  rx.  ii.  13;  (iii.  26)

XL  iii.  176;  (iii.  69)  L  vi.  2;  (iii.

103)  vra.  vi.  73 ;  (iii.  104)  vra.  vi.

62;  (iv.  62)  EC  iii.  8;  (vi.  5)  vm.

li.  9; (vi.  62)  L  v.  35;  (viii.  13)

X.  i.  92 ;  (viii.  28)  rx.  iii.  6 ; ;  (ix.  7)

vm.  vi.  46;  (ix.  45)  IX.  iv.  54;  (x.

11)  IX.  iii.  18;  (x. 50)  X.  i. 66;

(X.  72)  IX.  iii.  44; Georg.  (i.  43)  IV.

ii.  2;  (i.  54)  rx.  iii.  39;  (i.  86)  rx.

iii.  96;  (i.  181)  vm.  iii.  20 ;  (i.  183)

rx.  iii.  6;  (1.  295)  vm.  ii.  10;  (i.

367)  vm.  iii.  47;  (i.  388)  V.  ix.  15;

(i.  422)  V.  ix.  16 ;  (i.  431)  T.  ix.  15 ;

(i.  612)  vm.  iii.  78 ;  (ii.  74)  L  v.  36 ;

(ii.  169)  rx.  iii.  24;  (ii.  272)  i.  iii.

13;  (ii.  298)  EC  iii.  21;  (ii.  541)

vra.  vi.  45;  rx.  iii.  20;  (iii.  79)

vra.  ii.  15;  (iii.  83)  vra.  li.  15;

(iii.  135)  vra.  vi.  8;  (iii.  243)  L  v.

28;  (iii.  344)  EC  ill.  51;  (iii.  346)

EC  ill.  20;  (iii.  364)  vm.  vi.  40;

(iii.  381)  VHL  vi.  66;  (ui.  435)  IX.

iii.  21;  (iv.  59)  vra.  vi.  18;  (iv.

445)  rx.  iii,  15 ; Catal.  (2),  vm.  Hi.

27.
Veiginlns  Flavns,  m.  1.  21;  m.  vl.

45;  rv.  1.  23; vn.  iv.  24; vm.  Hi.

33;  XI.  iii.  126.
Verres,  vm.  vi.  37.
Venius,  XL  i.  31.
Vestinns,  VL  ill.  64.
Vettius  of  Pracneste,  i.  v.  56.
Vibius  Crispns,  v.  xiii.  48 ;  vm.  v.  IS

and  17 ;  x.  i.  119 ;  xn.  x.  11.
Vlctoriie,  EC  ii.  92.
Victorins  MaicellDS Introd.  letter,  u

Pr.  6;4Pr.  1;  TLPr.l;  xn.  xi.  31.

531


INDEX  OF  NAMES


ViUius,  A.,  VI.  iii.C9.

Virtus,  IX-  ii.  36.

Visellius,  EX.  ii.  101  and  107;  EL  iii.

89
Vite,'  IX.  ii.  36.
Vlixes,  I.  iv.  16;  n.  xiil.  13;  rv.  ii.

13;  VI.  iii.  96;  XI.  iii.  168;  xn.  x.

64.
Voluptas,  rx.  ii.  36.
Volusenus  Catulns,  X.  i.  24.
Vrbinia,  IV.  i.  11 ;  vn.  ii.  4  sg.  and  20.
Vrba,  VtilL  17  and  103;  vm.  ii.  5;

VIILT.  ».


Vulcanua,  vm.  yi.  23.

Xenophon,  V.  xi.  27 ;  X.  1.  33,  75,  82 ;
X.  V.  2;  Mem.  (ii.  1),  IX.  ii.  36;
(iii.  X.  1)  xn.  2.  4.

Zeno.n.  XX.  7;  iv.li.  117;  xn.1.  28;

xn.  vii.  9.
Zeuxis,  xn.  x.  4  sq.
Zmyrua,  IX.  ii.  64.
Zoiius,  IX.  i.  14.
Zopyrus  of  Clazomenae,  ni.  Ti.  3.


53*


INDEX OF WORDS


oft,  L  Ti.69;  xn.  X.  32.

abdicatio,  m.  vi.  76; vn.  iy.  10,  25,

27,  29.
ablatiros  casos,  L  i.  26; I. t. 59;

vn.  ii.  10.
absolnta  defensio,  vn.  ir.  4  and  9.
abttemiui,  i.  vii.  9.
abstulit,  I.  vi.  69.
abrersa,  XH.  x.  32.
abusio,  vnL  vi.  34  $q. ;  vm.  ii.  5.
accentns,  I.  v.  22 ;  UL  x.  33.
accosatio  matna,  m.  x.  4; m.  1.  3;

vn.  ii.  9  and  23 :  XI.  i.  57.
acerratio,  IZ.  iii.  53.
acetabulum,  vm.  ti.  35.
Aehaii,  L  T.  63.
actos  «■  irpofi?,  m.  vi.  26.
ad,  at,  I.  vii.  5.
ad  aliqnid,  L  Ti.  13; m.  ri.  23, 36  *35.,

51,  90.
adfectns,  VI.  it.  passim,
adfirmatio,  V.  xii.  12;  D.  i.  28;  Ii.

iii.  154.
adgressio  —  inx'^pvf^ T.  x.  4; T.

sir.  27.
adhaerens  t«mpns,  T.  z.  46.

aiiatfOTfTa,  VUL  ii.  20.

adiectio,  I.  v.  6;  L  v.  38;  I.  t.  40;

IX.  iii.  18,  27  *qq.,  55.
aditmcta,  v.  x.  74.
adianctio,  IZ.  i.  33.
adnominatio  —  vapovoiiM<rCa, IZ.  iii.

66.
iSo(ov,  rv.  i.  40.
adposita  argumenta,  V.  x.  87.
adposittun  =  itrCOfrov,  a.  xiv.  3 ;  vin.

ii.  10 ;  vm.  vi.  40, 43 ;  DL  iv.  24.
aipov,  m.  X.  58.

adseniio,  adsentior,  L  t.  13 ;  IZ.  ill.  7.
adsereratio,  L  IT.  20.
adsomptio,  T.  xiv.  5  tqg.
adstunptiva  cansa,  vn.  iv.  7.
advarbia,  L  iv.  19  and  29 ;  ZL  ill.  87.


aduUiri,  IZ.  iii.  1.

ae,  ai  l.  vii.  18.

aedificare  etfuum,  vm.  t1.  34.

ofdus,  haedus,  l  t.  20.

Aegyptc  venio,  I.  v.  38.

Amea,  L  v.  61.

aenigma,  TL  iii.  61;  vm.  vi.  14  and

52  tqq.
aeolica  litteia,  I.  iv.  8;  L  Tli,  26;

xn.  X.  29.
aerumna,  vm.  iii.  26.
a^er,  I.  vi.  37.
Agrippa,  L  iv.  25.
otto,  L  iv.  11.
a'vo«,  T.  xi.  20.
At<7u>ircu>i  X.6ryoi,  7.  xl.  30.
atrt'a,  m.  xl.  5.
aX-nokcrfiiL,  IX.  iii.  93.
aiTioi',  m.  xi.  4,  6.
aKoKovSa,  V.  X.  75.

a.KV(tov,  vm.  ii.  3.

al,  vm.  ii.  3.

Alba,  Albanut,  Albetuu,  L  vL  15.

Albanns,  VI.  iii.  44.

albenti  caelo,  vra.iii.  35.

albi  denies,  vm.  ii.  20.

albom  ac  rnbricae,  zn.  iii.  11.

Aleianter,l.ix.  16.

allegoria,  v.  xi.  21; vi.  iii.  69;  vm.

vi.  14,  44  sq.,  57  «j.;  IZ.  i.  5; H.

ii.  46.
dAAoiw<rc$,  IZ.  iii.  92.
altercatio,  U.  iv.  28;  TL  Iii.  4  and

46 ; VI.  ir.  1  and  21 ; Z.  L  35;  zn.

iii.  3.
ambitus  ••  periodos,  EX.  iv.  23 and

124;  =  periphrasis,  Z.  i.  16.
ambulo  Ham,  I.  iv.  38.
amisit,  L  vi.  69.
<1m*'PoAio,  m.  vi.  46  and  88;  TL  lil.

47  and  62 ;  vn.  ix.  1  sqg.
amphibrachTS  iz.  iv.  83  and  i06.
•^i^Uof Of,  IT.  L  10.

533


INDEX OF WORDS


amphiraacer,  ix.  iv.  81.
amplificatio,  viii.  iv.  1  tqq.,  17.
an,  aut,  I.  v.  50.
Anacreonticon  colon,  IX.  iv.  78.
avayKolov,  IX.  ii.  106;  IX.  iii.  99.
a>>aKC<^aXai<o(ri;,  VI.  i.  1  and  8.
(ivaitXaiTts,  IX.  iii.  97.

analogia,  i.  v.  13;  I.  vi.  1,  3  sqq.,  15;
V.  li.  34.

(iva/oii'Tjcris,  IX.  ii.  106.
anapaestus,  IX.  iv.  48,  81,  110.
ava.crKtVTj,  II.  iv.  18.
nvoDTTpo^-fi,  I.  V.  40 ;  vni.  vi.  65.
Anchisa,  I.  v.  61.
av(iri<j>aTOS,  actio,  IV.  i.  60.
<ivoi.Kov6fi.r)Tov,  VIII.  iii.  59.
avTava.K\aaLi,  IX.  iii.  68.
ofTajTufioo-it,  VIII.  iii.  77  and  79.
antegerio,  I.  vi.  40 ;  VIII.  iii.  25.
(ii'TcyKA.Tj/xa,  VII.  iv.  8.
anteoccupatio,  IX.  i.  31  and  44.
dvOripov,  X.  iii.  58.
<ii'eurro(f>opo,IX.  ii.  106;  ix.lii.  87.
Anticato,  I.  v.  68.
avTiSoTOL,  I.  X,  6.
avTiKa.Tr}yopia,  HI.  I.  4 ; VH.  ii.  9  sq.,

18,  20,  25  sq.
Kar'  a.vTi\ri\l/i.v,  VII.  iv.  4.
avTi/uTa/3oA>;,  IX.  iii.  85  and  97.
avTivoiiia,  in.  vi.  46;  vn.  i.  15;  vn.

vii.  1 ;  vn.  x.  2.
avTi<t>pa<Ti^,  vni.  vi.  57;  IX.  ii.  47.

avrCppritrK;,  IX.  il.  106.
antisophistes,  XI.  iii.  126.
ai/TiVTa<nv,  Vn.  iv.  12.
KaT  avrCdeaiv,  Vn.  iv.  7.
atniOerov,  IX.  ii.  101 ;  IX.  iii.  81  and

92.
avTovoiJia(Tia,  Vm.  vi.  29  sq.,  43; IX.

i.  6  sq.
airayopevcrii,  IX.  iv.  66.
d7roAac(rToi,  IX.  iv.  56.
aper,  I.  vi.  13.
apex,  I.  iv.  10 ;  I.  vii.  2.

oK^e'Aeio,  VHI.  iii.  87.
a(j>o5os,  IX.  iii.  87.
a(f>opii,ai  ipyiav,  in.  vi.  27.

aTToSeif ei!,  I.  X.  38 ;  V.  X.  1  and  7
apologatio,  V.  xi.  20.
apologus,  VI.  iii.  44. _

07ro<<)SeyjU,aTHCOi',  VI.  iii.  109.

aposiopesis,  vin.  iii.  85 ;  IX.  ii.  54  sq. ;

IX.  iii.  60  «j.
i.iro(TTpoi>ri,  IV.  1.  63;  IX.  ii.  38; IX.

iii.  24  and  26.

554


appellatio,  I.  ir.  19-21 ;  IX.  iii.  9.

Apri,  XI.  ii.  3.

arbitrorum  disceptationes,  H.  i.  43.

arbos,  I.  iv.  13.

argenteei,  I.  vii.  16.

Argiletum,  I.  vi.  31.

argumentatio,  IV.  ii.  79; vni.  Pr.  7;

XI.  iii.  164.
argumentum,  I.  iv.  2 ;  V.  viii.  6 ; v.

X.  passim ; v.  xi.  32  sqq. ; V.  xii.

1;  V.  liv.  33;  vn.  ii.  44;  IX.  iv.

135  and  138.
armamentum,  vn.  ix.  4.
appvSixov,  IX.  iv.  56.
ars,  n.  xvii.  41 ;  n.  xviii.  1 ;  n.  xx.  3.
articuli,  i.  iv.  19 ;  IX.  iii.  98.
articulosa  partitio,  IV.  v.  24.
artiOcialis  probatio,  v.  i.  1 ;  V.  ix.

1  sqq. ;  xn.  viii.  14.
(i<rxT)/iiaTto-Tos,  vm.  iii.  59;  IX.  i,  13.
asper  homo,  vni.  vi.  6.
assiduus,  v.  x.  55.
ao-Teia/xos,  vm.  vi.  57.
astrologia,  n.  xviii.  1.
aaiivScTov,  IX.  iii.  50  sqq. ;  IX.  It.  23.
atabulus,  vm.  ii.  13.

dTex""**  !!•  3^X'  2.

dTex>'oi  probationes,  v.  i.  1.

Atreus,  I.  v.  24.

Attice,  vm.  i.  2 ;  xn.  x.  18  and  20  sqq

■ATTtKio-/u,os,  I.  viii.  8 ;  VI.  iii.  107.

audaciter,  I.  vi.  17.

avere,  I.  vi.  21.

aversio,  IX.  ii.  38.

auftigit,  I.  V.  69.

augurale,  vm.  ii.  8.

avKr)TpCi,  VII.  ix.  4.

aurea  tecta,  vni.  vi.  28.

aureei,  I.  vii.  16.

autem,  l.  v.  39.

aiUumo,  vm.  iii.  26.

ofi'a,  m.  vi.  53.

B,  I.  iv.  15.

bacchius,  IX.  iv.  82  and  101  sqq.

balare,  I.  v.  72.

barbarismus,  I.  v.  5  sqq.

basilica  lulia,  XII.  v.  6.

beatUas,  beatitudo,  vm.  iii.  32.

Belena,  I.  iv.  15.

Belli  for  Duelii,  I.  iv.  15.

belligerare,  IX.  iv.  39.

bellum  from  duellum,  I.  iv.  16.

Beneventum,  n.  vi.  31.

bicUnium  I.  v.  68.


INDEX OF  WORDS


hipennu  from  pinntif,  L  it.  20.

hoselUellas,  v.  xi.21.

Sftaano^,  XI.  iii.  53.

$paxv\oyCa,  TUl.  iii.  82;  II.  iii.  50

and  99.
Hruges,  I.  iv.  15.
Bnai,  I.  vi.  31.
Burn,  I.  iv.  25.

C,  I.  Tii.28;  I.  xi.  5.

caelibes,  I.  Ti.  36.

caesim  dicere,  IX.  ir.  128.

cnMui,  calidus.  I.  vi.  19.

(■alefacern  for  talfacere,  I.  vi.  31.

f^alypsonem,  i.  v.  63.

f^amillus,  I.  v.  32.

canina  eloquentia,  Xll.  ix.  9.

cano.  canto,  dico,  vm.  vi.  38.

'"anobus.  I.  v.  13.

ranon  Alexandrinomni,  I.  iv.  3;  x.  :.

54.
<^anojntae,  I.  v.  13.
cantare,  XL  i.  56 ; XI.  iii.  57  iqq.
canticam,  I.  viii.  2; I.  x.  23; II.  .i.

35;  H.  iii.  167.
rantus,  H.  iii.  23,  60  and  172.
canius  =  tyre  of  wheel,  L  v.  8.
Capilolium,  I.  vi.  31.
capsis,  I.  V.  66.

caput  (how  carried),  XL  iii.  68  sqq.
caput  =  status,  m.  ri.  3,  31,  89;  HI

xi.  3  and  27.
easamo,  I.  v.  8.
Cassantra,  I.  iv.  16.
catsus  for  conM,  I.  vii.  20.
Castor,  XL  ii.  11 ; quantity  of  -o,  L

V.  60.
castrata  respublica,  vm.  vi.  15.
casus,  I.  iv.  26 ; I.  v.  45  and  61 ;  L

vi.  22:  vm.  iii.  20.
Cato,  quantity  of  -o,  vn.  ix.  13.
causa  (a  category),  m.  vi.  27 ;  =aiTto,

m.  xi.  5  and  10:  =t6  trvvex""!  HI.

xi.  24 ;  =  quaestio  finita  or  vTr66e<ri<;,

m.  V.  7;  kinds  of  causae,  m.  iii.

15 ; m.  iv.  1  sqq. ; HL  x.  1  and  3 ;

rv.  i.  40.
causidicns,  HL  i.  25.
caussa,  1.  vii.  20.
centumviri,  in.  x.  3 ; IT.  i.  57 ; rv.  ii.

3;  V.  ii.  1;  v.  x.  115;  vn.  iv.  11

and  20 ;  XI.  i.  78 ;  XL  iii.  138.
cerae,  X.  iii.  30  sqq.
ceratinae,  I.  x.  5.
cemo,  vn.  ix.  2.


cervix,  1.  xi.  9; H.  iii.  82;  (.use  in

the  singular),  vm.  iii.  35.
cerrom,  I.  vii.  26.
Cethegus,  L  v.  23.
XoAjj-ot,  I.  i.  37.
XaXKiVTiKTi,  n.  xxi.  10.
Xap<«mjpi<rfi<k,  IX.  iii.  99.
chenturione*,  I.  v.  20.
cliironomia,  L  xi.  17.
choreus,  IX.  iv.  80  tqq.,  103  sgq.,  140.
choronae,  L  v.  20.
XP*<tt)it?,  I.  ix.  5.
chria,  L  ix.  3  tqq. ;  n.  iv.  26.
Xpovo^,  m.  vi.  25.
cinctnra,  XL  iii.  138  tqq.
circuitus  =  periodus,  H.  iii.  122  and

124; n.  i.  26;  =«  irepti^p<t<ris,  vnL

vi.  59.
circum,  I.  v.  25  tq.
circumducta syUaba  «  irep«rirw/bi»->],

I.  V.  35.
circumductio,  rx.  iv.  118 ;  H.  iii.  39.
circumductum  =  periodus,  H.  iv.  32.
circiunlocutio,  vra.  vi.  61.
circumscriptio  =  periodus, DC. i. 35

and  91 ;  rx.  iv.  124.
circumstantia  =  irept'<r7-a<ris,V.  x.  104.
clamos,  L  iv.  13.
clarigatio,  vn.  iii.  13.
classis,  I.  ii.  23  and  24 ;  L  vi.  33 ;  X.

V.  21.
clausula,  vm.  v.  13 ; IX.  iii.  45 ; EX.

iv.  18,  45,  61  tqq.,  70,  93.
cogitatio,  X.  vi.  1  tqq.
cognatio,  ix.  ii.  105.
collectio,  IX.  ii.  103.
collectiva  quaestio,  vn.  i.  60.
collect,  not  conlegit,  H.  iii.  35.
n)»i  (plural),  L  vi.  42.
coUum  (carriage  of),  n.  i.  82.
color,  IV.  ii.  88,  91,  94  tqq.; vi.  v.  5;

vn.  i.  40,  63;  X.  i.  116;  X.  vi.  5;

XL  i.  85 ;  xn.  i.  33 ;  xn.  viii.  6.
columa  for  columna,  I.  vii.  29; co-

Inmna  rostrata,  I.  vii.  12.
eomam  in  jfradus  franqere,  L  vi.  44.
comici,  L  vii.  22 ;  L  viii.  8 ;  xn.  U.

22.
commentatio  =  (vOviiJiiia,  v.  x.  1.
commentum  =  evOviiriiui, V. x. 1 ;

rx.  ii.  107.
commiseratio,  X.  i.  107.
commissura  verborum,  vn.  x.  16 ;  n.

iv.  37;  xn.  ix.  17.
commoratio,  n.  i.  27 ;  rx.  ii.  4.

535


INDEX OF  WORDS


commune  (exordium),  IT.  i.  71 ;  (argn-

mentum),  v.  liii.  29,  34 ;  vn.  i.  28 ;

(syllabae)  H.  iv.  84 ;  see  locus,
communicatio,  IX.  i.  30;  IX.  ii.  20,

23,  25.
comoedia,  I.  vlii.  7;  X.  i.  9,  65  sqq.,

69,  82,  99;  XI.iii.  74.
comoedus,  I.  xi.  1 ;  VLii.  35;  XI.iii.

91  and  181.
comparatio,  n.  iv.  21 ;  VI.  iii.  66 ;  VII.

ii.  22 ;  vin.  iv.  3,  9 ;  vm.  v.  6 ;  vin.

vi.  9.
comparativus (status), HI. vi. 90;

teenus  causarum)  rn.  x.  3 ;  vn.  iv.

12;  (aigumenta) V. x. 86 sqq.;

(contraposita)  ix.  iii.  32 ;  IX. iii.  19.
complexio  ■=  avvdipetm,  L  v.  6  and

17;  (in  logic)  v.  xiv.  5.
compositio,  vm.  iii.  67;  IX.  iv.  pai

Sim ;  XI.  i.  33.
compositio  verborum,  I.  v.  65  and  70.
comprehendere,  comprendere,  I.  v.  21.
comprehensio  =  periodus,  IX.  iv.  121

and  124.
ooncertativa  accusatio,  vn.  ii.  9.
concessio,  IX.  ii.  61.
conciliatio,  IV.  i.  16;  lX.i.  32;  IX.  ii.

3;  XI.  iii.  154.
conclusio  —  periodus,  IX.  iii.  98 ;  IX.

iv.  22;  X,  ii.  17;  ■»  clausula,  vm.

▼.13.
concursio,  IX.  i.  33.
conexio,  V.  xiv.  6,  12, 17.
confessio,  IX.  ii.  17,  61.
confirmatio,  IV.  iii.  1  iqq. ;  T.  viii.  5 ;

X.  V.  12.
coniectura,  m.  vi.  30;  vn.  Ii.  1,  19,

27;  vn.  iv.  24.
coniecturales  causae,  n.  iv.  26 ;  IV.  ii.

81 ;  IV.  iv.  8 ;  cf.  vn.  i.  63.
coniieit,  I.  iv.  11.
eonire,  coire,  I.  vi.  17.
coniugatum,  V.  x.  85.
coniunctio,  I.  iv.  18.
coniunctum  tempus,  V.  viii.  6 ;  V.  ix.

5;  vn.  ii.  46.
conlatio  =  Trapa^oAij,  V.  xi.  2  and  23.
eon/ejit,  XI.  iii.  35.
consensio,  IX.  ii.  61.
consequens,  V.  viii.  5 ; V.  x.  74  sq. ;

VI.  iii.  76;  Vin.  vi.  40;  IX.  ii.  103.
consonantes,  I.  iv.  6  and  10;  IX.  iv.

37;  XT.  iii.  34,  35.
constitutio  =  status,  m. vi.  2 ; vn.

iv.  5  sqq.


consul,  I.  vi.  32 ;  I.  vii.  29.

consummatio,  IX.  ii.  103.

contentio,  IX.  i.  31;  IX.  ii.  2;  IX.  iii.

81.
continens  •"  <rvvex<"') HI. xi. 1, 9,

18  sq.,  24.
continuatio  =  periodus,  IX.  iv.  22  and

124;  continuatio  sermonis,  vm.  ii.

14;  IX.  iii.  23.
continuatum,  IX.  i.  35.
contrapositum, IX. iii. 81 and 83;

contraposita,  IX.  iii.  32  and  102;

IX.  iv.  18.
contrarium  (figure),  IX.  i.  34;  IX.  iii.

90 ; •■  ev6viJLrjfia,  V.  X.  2.
controversiae,  n.  iv.  33;  IV.  ii.  94,

97; vn.  i.  4;  IX.  i.  14;  ix.  ii.  65

sqq.,  77,  88.
corUumeliam  fecit,  n.  iii.  13.
conversio  =  ai'Tt/oLeTa^oA^,  IX.  i.  33.
convinctiones,  I.  iv.  18  *}.
convivimus,  1.  vi.  44.
coppa,  I.  iv.  9.
cordax,  ix.  iv.  88.
Cordus,  I.  iv.  25.

Corinthi  Dionysium  esse,  vni.  vi.  52.
Corinthia  aera,  IX.  ii.  8; verba,  VUL

iii.  28.
correctio,  IX.  i.  30,  35 ;  ix.  iii.  89.
cortex  amara  and  amarus,  I.  v.  35.
Corvinum,  vn.  ix.  4.
cotidie,  I.  vii.  6.
Cotlae,  I.  iv.  25.
creticus,  IX.  iv.  81  and  107.
Crispus,  XI.  ii.  31.
crocodillinae,  I.  x.  6.
cubare  supra  se,  vm.  ii.  20.
Culcides,  I.  iv.  16.
cum  and  quum,  I.  vii.  5.

D,  I.  iv.  16;  I.  vii.  12 ;  xn.  x.  32.
dactylicus  rhythmus,  IX.  iv.  46  sqq.
dactylus, IX. iv. 49, 81, 85, 104,

136.
damae  timidi,  IX.  iii.  6.
dativus,  L  iv.  26 ;  vn.  ix.  13.
de  eodem  et  alio,  m.  vi.  31,  36;  VII.

Iii.  8.
de  susum,  I.  v.  38.
declamare,  declamatio,  I.  ii.  13;  n.  i.

2 ; n.  X.  1  sqq. ;  n.  xi.  3  sqq.,  15 ;

IV.  ii.  29;  V.  xii.  17;  V.  xiii.  44;

vn.  i.  4  and  38;  X.  ii.  12;  X.  v.

14  sqq.;  XI.  i.  38  and  83;  xn.  zi,

16.


536


INDEX  OF  WORDS


decUmatores,  ni.  viii.  44,  61,  69 ;  IT.

ii.  28;  v.  xiii.42;  vm.  iii.  22 ;  n.

ii.  42;  X.  i.  71;  I.  Tii.  21; XL  i.

55  tqq.
declinatio  (figure),  IX.  i.  32,  34,  42,  44.
declinatio  (grammat.),  L  iv.  13,  21,

27,  29;  L  V.  63; n.  xt,  4; vm.

iii.32.
dederont,  I.  Iv.  16.
defensio  coniimcta,  vn.  i.  15.
definita  qaaestio,  vn.  ii.  1  sqq.
definitio,  m.  tI.  42;  definitiones,  L

vi.29.
ifiviovL^,  vx  ii.  24;  TUL  iii.  88;  IX.

ii.  104.
delatxjres,  m.  x.  3 ;  IX.  ii.  74.
deliberativum  genns  orationis,  IL  i.  2 ;

iLiv.  25;  n.  I.  11;  ULiii.  14;  m.

It.  15, 16 ;  m.  vi.  56 ;  m.  Tiii.  1  sqq.,

6, 10, 12, 22 tqq., 58 iqq., 66;

Tm.  Pr.  6 ;  VUL  iii.  11 ;  XL  i.  48.
demonstrativum  genus  causamm,  11.

X.  11;  n.  ixi.  23;  m.  iv.  9,  12,
14;  m.  Tii.  1  sqq.;  m.  viii.  8,  63;
V.  X.  43 ;  vn.  iv.  3 ;  Tm.  Pr.  8 ;  Tm.
iii.  11 :  DC.  iv.  130;  XL  i.  48.

denies  aliri.  Tin.  vi.  40.
deprecatio,  m.  vi.  13 ;  V.  ilii.  5 ; vn.
IV.  3  and  17 ;  IX.  i.  32 ;  rx.  ii.  3 ;

XI.  1.  52.

deprehendere  and dtprendere,  rx.  iv.

59.
depulsio,  m.  vi.  7  and  16  tqq. ;  ra.

xi.  1 ;  VL  iv.  2 ;  Vin.  Pr.  9.
derivatio  verbonun,  m.  vii.  25;  XL

i.  90.
descriptio,  rv.  iii.  12;  IX.  ii.  44;  ix.

iv.  138.
detractio  (figure),  IX.  il.  37;  H.  iii.

18  tqq.,  27,  58,  62.
detractio  litterarom.  I.  v.  16  and  38;

=  tAAeii/dt,  L  T.  40.
devorari  hominem,  vm.  vi.  25.
dialectice,  L  x.  37; n.  xvii.  14  and

42 ; n.  II.  7 ; n.  ni.  13 ;  V.  xiv.

27;  XiLii.  10*99.
dialectici,  n.  iv.  41 ;  vn.  ill.  14.
SuiAeimK,  I.  v.  29 ;  IX.  iv.  18.
iioMjayri,  IX.  iii.  49.
dialog!,  V.  vii.  28 ;  V.  xiv.  27 ;  n.  Ii.

31 ;  X.  V.  15 ;  XI.  i.  21.
iuumias  trx^^uiTa,  IX.  ii.  107.
iiarvrmvii,  IX.  ii.  41.
dieem  for  dieam,  l  vii.  23.
dichoreus,  IX.  iv.  95  and  103.


dictare,  X.  iii.  18  tqq.

dictu,  L  iv.  29.

Jiffoiot,  IX.  iii.  87.

difierens,  V.  x.  55  and  58.

digammon,  I.  iv.  8 ;  L  vii.  27.

digestio,  ix.  i.  31 ;  rx.  ii.  2.

digiti,XLiii.  92.

diqnu'  locoque,  ix.  iv.  38.

digressio,  rv.  ii.  19;  rx.  i.  28  and  35;

ix.ii.  55*59.;  IX.  iii.  90;  X.  i.  33.
diCTessus,  IV.  iii.  14 ;  X.  i.  40.
diiunctio,  IX.  i.  35;  IX.iii.  45.
SiKoioXoyia,  IX.  iii.  99.
iiKaioXcyiKOs,  XH.  vi.  33.
dinomeratio,  rx.  i.  35:  rx.  iii.  91.
Diovf  Yictore  for  Diovi  Victori,  L  iv.  17.
dispositio,  m.  iii.  1  tqq.;  TL  iv.  1;

vn.  Pr.  1 ;  vn.  i.  1  tqq. ;  vn.  i.

5  tq.  and  11 ;  x.  ii.  27.
disputatrix  =  JioAcimir^, IL XX. 7 ;

xn.  ii.  13.
dissimilia,  v.  x.  73 ;  T.  xi.  5  *99. ;  VL

iii.  63.
dissimnlatio,  rv.  i.  60;  rv.  ii.  117;  vi.

iii.  85;  IX.  i.  29;  IX.  ii.  14  and

(■»  ironia)  44;  Xn.  ix.  5.
dissipatio,  rx.  i.  35 ;  cp.  IX.  iii.  39.
dissolatio,  IX.  iii.  50.
dissolntom,  rx.  i.  34.
distincta  oratio,  XL  iii.  35.
distinctio  (figure),  rx.  i.  33 ;  IX.  ilL  65

and 82 ;  (punctuation)  XI.  iii.  35,

37  tqq.,  47,  62, 181.
distributio,  IX.  i.  30 ;  IX.  ii.  2.
DUit,  L  vi.  34.
diu,  L  iv.  29.
divisio,  V.  X.  63;  vn.  i.  1; vm.  t.

30  sqq.;  IX.  ii.  105.
dirissiones,  L  vii.  20.
dixti,  rx.  iii.  22.
dochinius,  rx.  iv.  79,  97,  99.
ioyiioLTucoi,  sermones,  n.  xv.  26.
dua,  duapondo,  I.  v.  15.
dual  is  numertis,  I.  v.  42.
dubitatio,  IX.  i.  30  and  35;  IX.  ii.  19; .

rx.iU.  88.
duetare  exercHus,  vm.  iii.  44.
Duelii  and  Belli.  I.  iv.  15.
duellum,  l  iv.  15.
jvucof,  L  V.  42.
dum,  IX.  iii.  16.
duplicia  indicia,  XL  i.  78.
tvvaim,  n.  XV.  3 ;  V.  X.  33.
SvvaTov,  m.  viii.  25.
tviTirapaKo\mi0ifrov,  IV.  i.  40.

537


INDEX OF WORDS


E,  I.  Ir.  9  and  17;  I.  vii.  15;  IX.  ir.

34.
ebur,  I.  vi.  22.
ediscere,  I.  1.  36; n.  vii.  1  sqq.; n.

xiii.  15 ;  XI.  ii.  27  sqq.,  44.
effectiva  ars,  n.  xviii.5.
€yKUKAt09  iratfieta,  I.  s,  1.
fyKiaiiiafrTiKOv,  III.  iv.  13.
egressio,  egressus,  in.  ix. 4; IV.  iii.

12  sqq.;  XI.  iii.  64  and  164.
ei  for  i,  I.  vii.  15.
f'lKwi',  V.  xi.  24.
t'lKora,  V.  ix.  8;  V.  x.  15,
elpuiv,  IX.  ii.  46.
^moi,  I.  vi.  36.
*«  ru>v  TTpb?  dAAijXo,  V.  X.  78.
tK^ao-eis,  V.  X.  86.
elegia,  I.  viii.  6 ;  X.  i.  58  and  9.1.
iXeyKTiKoi  sermones  Platonis,  II.  xv.

26.
eliminat  gradus,  vin.  iii.  31.

eAAen/(ts,  I.  V.  40;  VIII.  vl.  21.
elocutio,  n.  V.  21 ;  Book  VIII.  and  IX. ;

vni.  Pr.  17;  XI.  i.  1.
elecutoria,  elocutrix,  II.  xiv.  2.
emendatio  (gen.),  X.  iv.  1  sqq. ;  (figure)

IX.  ii.  17.

emicavit  for  emicuit,  I.  vi.  17.
efi(<)a(ri9,  VI.  iii.  69;  VIII.  ii.  11;  vm.

iii.  83,  86;  vin.  iv.  26;  IX.  ii.  3

and  64;  IX.  iii.  57.
emutatio,  vni.  vi.  51.
ivavTioTT)';,  IX.  ii.  106 ;  IX.  iii.  90.
ivdpyfia,  IV.  ii.  63;  VI.  ii.  32;  vm.

iii.  61.
enarratio,  I.  ii.  14 ;  I.  iv.  2 ;  1.  viii.

18;  n.  V.  1.
cvSo^ov,  IV.  i.  40.
(vepyeia,  Vm.  iii.  89.
enim  hoc  voluit,  I.  v.  39.
enimvero,  IX.  iii.  14.
€vvoi.a.  III.  vi.  35  and  37.
ivpvOfLov,  IX.  iv.  56  and  77.
ensis  and  (tladius,  X.  i.  11.
ivTex''°i-  probationes,  V.  i.  1.
enthymema,  I.  x.  37;  rv.  ii.  107;  v.

X.  1  sqq.;  V.  xiv.  1,  2,  17,  24,  25;
vra.  V.  4  and  9;  IX.  ii.  106;  ix.
iv.  67; XI.  iii.  102; xn.  x.  51.

enumeratio  =  <zi/a)Cf</)oAat«i>cris,  V.  xiv.

11 ;  VI.  i.  1  and  36.
enayiayri,  V.  X.  73  ;  V.  xi.  2.
ejraitoAou07)(Ti?,  IX.  ii.  103.
cTrai/aAjji/zi?,  VIII.  iii.  51.

iirdvoSo';,  IX.  iii.  35  and  97.


»irefepya<Tca,  VIU.  iii.  88.
fne^evytxeuov,  IX.  iii,  62.
(■mx^cprjijia, IV.  iv. 1 ; V. I.  2,  4 ; V.
xi.  2; V.  xiv.  5  and  14; Vin.  v.  4;

IX.  ii.  107.

epici,  X.  i.  46  sqq.,  85  sqq.
epicoena,  I.  iv.  24;  I.  vi.  12.
fTTiSetKTiicos,  n.  X.  13 ;  in.  iv.  13  sqq.

fTTiSirjyrj<rL^,  IT.  ii.  128.
epilogi,  VI.  i.  7,  37,  41,  55; Vll.  ii.
56; vn.  iv.  19; IX.  iv. 137  sqq.;

X.  i.  107;  XI.  iii.  170.
epiphonema,  vin.  v.  11.
epiraedium,  I.  v.  68.
e;riT<x(^tot,  m.  iv.  5.

epitheton,  vm.  ii. 10;  vra.  iii.  20;

vra.  vi.  29  and  40 ;  ix.  i.  6.
epitogium,  I.  v.  68.
erclum  citum,  vn.  iii.  13.
e'<rxi?M<'''''i<r/ie'(Tj  oratio,  IX.  i.  13.
esse  videatur,  IX.  iv.  73.
essentia,  n.  xiv.  2; ra.  vi.  23; Vin.

iii.  33.
est  preceded  by  a  vowel,  IX.  iv.  109.
lieiKr),  II.  xxi.  3 ;  VI.  ii.  8 ;  Xii.  ii.  15.
ethologia,  I.  ix.  3.
■neoTToua,  IX.  ii.  58 ;  IX.  iii.  99.
4^05,  VI.  ii.  8  and  17 ;  vi.  iii.  93.
etymologia,  I.  vi.  1,  28  sqq.,  38; V.

X.  55  and  59;  vn.  iii.  25.
euxwATj.  ni.  iv.  10.
evidentia,  iv.  ii.  63;  VI.  ii.  32; vm.

iii.  61;  IX.  ii.  40.
€v(f>avTaa'CtuTo^,  VI.  ii.  30.
ev^Oivia,  I.  V.  4.
Europai,  I.  v.  17.
evpv9ft.ia,  I.  X.  26.
Eutkia,  I.  V.  61.
e|oAAa-y^,  IX.  iii.  12.

excessus,  cp.  excursio,  egressio,  m.  Ix.

1  and  4.
exclamatio,  IX.  i.  34  and  39;  IX.  ii.

27;  IX.  iii.  97.
excursio,  I.  xi.  3;  n.  xiii.  1;  IV.  ii.

105  sgq.;  IV.  iii.l.
excursus,  IV.  iii.  5  and  12 ;  X.  v.  12.
excusatio,  vn.  iv.  3,  14,  31.
exemplum,  V.  n.  1; V.  xi.  1  sqq.  and

n  sqq.;  IX.  i.  31;  IX.  xxi.  2; XII.

iv.  1.
efepyaeria,  Vm.iii.  88.
efeTaoTtKoi',  ra.  iV.  9.
eihortatio,  IX.  ii.  103.
exhortativus (status), m. vi. 47;

(genus),  V.  X.  82.


MS


INDEX OF  WORDS


ezitaa  •  CK/Saaeit ,  T.  z.  86.
exordium,  iv.  i.  1  iqq.,  5,  7,  11,  16,

28,  30,  42,  68,  62,  71,  72,  76; XI.

iii.161.
expecto  and  exspecto,  L  vii.  4.
expectorat,  vm.  iv.  31.
explanatio  (figure),  IZ.  i.  27;  IX.  ii.  2.
eipositio,  m.  ix.  7 ;  17.  ii.  50;  ViLii.

26;  XI.  i.  53.
exsecratio,  rx.  i.  S2 ;  IX.  ii.  3.
eitemporalis  actio,  X.  vi.  6; X.  vii.

18;  XI.  ii.  3.
extenoatio,  IX.  i.  27;  IX.  ii.  3.

F,  I.  iT.  14;  xn.  X.  29.
fabricari,  rx.  iii.  6.
face  lorfac,  L  vi.  21.
faciem  ioTfaciam,  l  vii.  23.
facere  (categoiy),  m.  vi.  24.
facetum,  VL  iii.  20.
facilUer,  L  vi.  17.
faedus  for  haedus,  L  iv.  14.
fori,  vm.  iii.  27.
fatcialim,  l  iv.  20.
favoTy  vm.  iii.  34.
fcminina  positio,  I.  iv.  24.
femur,  L  vi.  22.
/(fro,  Liv.  29;  L  vi.  26.
femim  for  gladius,  vm.  vi.  20 ;  ferrum

and  mucTO,  x.  i.  11.
fides  =  iri<rTei9,  V.  I-  8  and  10  tqq.
FiguUUum,  \TII.iii.  32.
figrura  =  (TX^Aio,  L  V.  5 ; L  viii.  16 ;

DLxili.  11; vn.  iv.  28;  VI.  iii.  70;

VUL  vi.  67 ;  IX.  passim.
figuratus,  vm.  iii.  59;  tx.  i.  13  and

14;  IX.  ii.  65  sqq.  and  88.
Fimbriaium,  vm.  iii.  32.
finis  =  finitio,  IV.  iv.  3 ;  V.  x.  54,  etc.
finitae  questions,  m.  v.  7 ; vm.  Pr.  8.
finitio,  m.  v.  10 ;  v.  x.  36  and  54  sgg. ;

VL  iv.  4; vn.  iii.  1  sqq.,  19  sqq.\

vn.  X.  1  sqq. ;  IX.  iii.  91.
finitiva  causa,  vn.  iii.  36;  see  also

status,
firmamentnm causae  »  <rvv€xov,  m.

xi.  1,  9,  19.
fletur,  I.  iv.  28.
flexa  littera,  syllaba,  L  v.  23  and  30 ;

xn.  X.  33.
Floralia,  l.  v.  52.
fluctuatur  and  flitctttat,  tx.  iii.  7.
fordeum  for  hordeum,  L  iv.  14.
forma  —  species,  v.  x.  62.
formulae,  m.  vi.  69 ;  vn.  iv.  20.


formularii,  xn.  iii.  11.
fraudaior,  I.  iv,  28.
frugalis,  L  vi.  17.
ftmis,  L  vi.  5.
Furii  for  Fusii,  L  iv.  13.

G,  L  vii.  12.

(Tattu  indicated  by  C,  1.  vii.  28.

Galbae,  V  iv.  25.

galliambi,  IX.  iv.  6.

Gailica  verta,  L  v.  57.

gallus,  vn.  ix.  2.

yeAoior,  VL  iii.  22.

geminatio,  L  iv.  10;  L  vii.  14: vm.
V.  18;  IX.i.  33; H.  iii.  28,  45,  47 ;

IX.  iv.  119.
gemma,  vm.  vi,  6.

generalis  quaestio,  m.  v.  9; m.  vi.

21; vn.  i.  49  and  58 ; VU.  ii.l  tqq.;

I.  V.  13;  xn.  ii.  18.
ytvtm  =  coniectura,  m.  vi.  53.
geometria,  I.  x.  34  sqq.
gestus,  L  xi.  3  and  16 ; JJ.iii.  65  sqq.,

88  sqq.,  102,  109,  117,  125,  181.
gladioUt,  L  vi.  42.
gladius  and  ensis,  X.  i.  11 ;  and  mucro,

X.  i.  11  and  14;  gladia,  i.  v.  6.
y\ui<r<rai,  L  i.  35.
glossemata,  L  viii.  15.
Glycerium,  L  iv.  24.

Gnaeus,  I.  vii.  29.

yfu^Oi,  Tm.  V.  3.

Gracci,  L  v.  20.

graaili,  L  vi.  27.

gradatio  (figure),  tz.  i.  34 ;  IX.  iii.  54.

grammatice,  L  iv.  4,  5,  6; I.  v.  54;

L  viii.  12;  L  X.  17;  IL  i.  1 sqq.

and  4.
grammaticus,  L  ii.  14;  L  iv.  1  ji^. ;

L  viii.  21 ;  n.  xiv.  3 ;  DC  iv.  53 ;  x

i.  64.
gravis  (accent),  I.  v.  22  sqq.
gubemator  for  agitator,  vm.  vL  S.
gurdi,  L  v.  57.
guttur,  L  vi.  23.

H,  L  ▼.  19  sqq.

habere  (category),  ra.  vl.  24.

a£p6v,  xn.  X.  58.

ap^oi'ta,  I.  Z.  12.

haruspex,  l  vii.  9.
have,  L  vi.  21.
Hecoba,  I.  iv.  16.
r^ixtpov,  m.  vl.  28.
bendeca^llabi,  L  viii.  6.

539


INDEX OF WORDS


here  and  heri,  I.  iv.  8;  1.  vii.  22.

Eermagora,  I.  v.  61.

herous  (epic),  I.  viii.5; X.  i.  46  sqq.,

85  sqq. ;  =  dactyl,  IX.  iv.  88  sqq.
CTfpoibxrt;,  IX.  iii.  12.
heu,  I.  iv.  20.

hexameter,  IX.  iv.  74,  75,  78.
«^ts,  X.  i.  1  and  59 ;  X.  v.  1.
hiatus,  IX.  iv.  33  sqq.
Hispanum  nomen,  I.  v.  8  and  57.
historia,  I.  viii.18; II.  Iv.  2;  in.  viii.

67  iqq.;  IX.  iv.  18  and  129;  X.  i.

31,  73  sqq.,  101  sqq.;  X.  v.  15.
historice,  L  ix.  1.
historici,I.  vi.  2;  I.  x.  40;  n.  iv.  19;

IV.  ii.  2;  vm.  vi.  65.
histriones,  VI.  ii.  35;  X.  v.  6;  XI.  iii.

89.
homo,  I.  vi.  34.
o^o(t'£cia,  VIII.  iii.  52.
oiLOLomiorov,  IX.  iii.  78  sqq.
ofxoiOT€\evTov,  IX.  iii.  77  sq,
homonyma,  Vin.  ii.  13.
ofxtdtaffxia,  VII,  ix.  2.
hordea,  I.  v.  16.
v\.r\,  V.  X.  33.

imoKKayri,  Vm.  vi.  23 ;  IX.  iii.  92.
imaKXaKTiKTi  <na.<ri<!.  III.  vi.  47.
hyperbaton,  I.  V.  40 ; \m.y\.G2  sqq.;

Vin.  ii.  14;  IX.  i.  3,  6;  ix.  iii.  23,

91 ;  IX.  iv.  26.
hyperbole,  VI.  iii.  67;  vm.  iv.  29;

vm.  \i.Gl  sqq.;  IX.  i.  5.
VJrefoipeo-is  =  exceptio.  III.  vi.  61.
viroiiaaroA^,  XI.  iii.  35.
viroariyinri,  XI.  iii.  35.
vir6e«<n?,  ni.  V.  7  and  18.
vjronm-aKTis,  IV.  ii.  3 ;  IX.  ii.  40  and  58.

I,  I.  iv.  7  and  11 ;  I.  vii.  17  and  21 ;

nc.  iv.  34.
iaculari,  vm.  ii.  5.
iam,  I.  iv.  10.
iambus,  IX.  iv.  47,  76,  80,  88,  136;

X.  i.  9,  59,  96.
iiioT7/s,  m.  vi.  63.
iecur,  I.  vi.  22.
igituT,  I.  v.  39.
imago  (figure),  IX.  i.  35;  ■=  (^avrao-i'oi,

VI.  iii.  29;  X.  vii.  15.
imitatio,  I.  iii.  1 ;  IX.  i.  30 ;  ix.  ii.  35

and  58; X.  i.  3,  21  sq.,  27; X.  ii.

Itqq.
imminutio  (figure),  IX.  i.  34;  IX.  iii.

90.


mutatio  (solecism),  I.  v.  12  and  41 ;

(figure)  rx.  i.  35.
imperterritus,  I.  v.  65.
inipius  for  parricida,  vm.  vi.  30.
improprium,  I.  v.  46 ; I.  viii.  13 ;  Vlll.

ii.  3  sqq.;  vm.  iii.  15;  XII.  x.  42.
improvisum  (figure),  IX.  i.  35; IX.  iii.

90.
in  changed  to  im  in  composition,  I.

vii.  7.
in  Alexandriam,  1.  v.  38.
inartiflcialis  probatio,  V.  1.  1.
incisa  =  Koiinara,  IX.  iv.  22,  67,  122

sqq.
incompositus,  I.  v.  65.
incrementum,  vm.  iv.  3  and  28.
incumbere  illi,  in  ilium,  ix.  iii.  1.
incurvicervicum  pecus,  I.  v.  67  and  70.
indicium  =  a-rjueiov,  V.  ix.  9.
indifferens  syllaba,  IX.  iv.  93.
inductio  =  eiraycoyj),  V.  X.  73 ; V.  xi

2  sqq.
Infinitae  quaestiones,  m.  v.  6 ;  X.  v.  11.
infitialis  status  =»  coniecturalis,  m.  vi.

15  and  32 ;  IX.  i.  8.
ingenua,  VII.  ix.  4.
ingrati  actio,  VII.  iv.  37.
initium  causae  =  airCa,  in.  xi.  5.
inluslo  =  ironia,  vm.  vi.  54;  ix.  i.  28.
inlustratio  =  evapyfia,  VI.  ii.  32.
inopinatum  ■»  TrapaSoiov,  VL  iii.  84;

IX.  ii.  23.
Inscripta  =  non  scripta,  m.  vi.  37;

vn.  iv.  36.
insequentia,  V.  x.  45  sq.,  75; vn.  ii.

46.
insinuatio,  rv.  i.  42  and  48.
instruments,  n.  xii.  24 ; V. x. 51 ;

VII.  ii.  25  and  45;  XII.  v.  1  sq.
intellego  and  video,  X.  i.  13  sq.
intentio,  ra.  vi.  7  and  13  sqq. ; ill.

ix.  1;  V.  xiv.  6;  vi.  iv.  2; vii.  i.

9,  13,  16; VII.  V.  2; vm.  Pr.  9;

(=p  propositio),  v.  xiv.  6,  12,  16  sq.
intercapedinis,  vni.iii.  46.
intercluslo  (figure),  IX.  iii.  23.
interdicta,  n.  x.  6; IV.  ii.  61; vn.  v.

3 ;  xn.  X.  70.
interfatio,  IV.  ii.  50.
interiectio,  I.  iv. 19 ;  •=  parenthesis,

VIII.  ii.  15.

interpositio  (figure),  IX.  iii.  23.
Interrogatio  (of  witnesses),  V. vi. 3
sqq.,  22,  27;  (figure)  IX.  ii.  6  sqq.,

IX.  iii.  98.


INDEX OF  WORDS


intermptio  —  a»-o<ri<iinj<j-i?,  n.  il.  54.
interraptam  (figare),  IX.  i.  35.
intra  and  intus,  I.  v.  50.
inventio,  m.  iii.  1 ; vm.  Pr.  14;  Vin.

iii.  2 ;  I.  i.  106.
inverslo  =  a.va<TTpo<!>rj,  I.  v.  40 ;  =  al-

legoria,  VUL  vi.  44.
invidere  hanc  rem,  hoe  re,  DL  iii.  1 ;

huitit  rei,  IX  iii.  17.
inridut  and  inridiosus,  TL  ii.  21.
iocus,  VI.  iii.  21.
iiuTOJCiafio?,  I.  V,  32.
iracundia  (figure),  II.  i.  32 ;  n.  ii.  3.
ironia,  IV.  i.  39 ; VI.  ii.  15 ;  VL  iii.  68 ;

vm.  vi.  54;  n.  i.  3  and  7;  n.  ii.

44  and  97;  EE.  iii.  29.
laxvov,  m.  X.  58.
'nrxyoTr^s,  I.  V.  32.
la-oKuXov,  IX.  iii.  80.
iteratio,  IX.  i.  28;  IX.  ii.  68.
itur,  I.  iv.  28.
iudiciales  cansae,  n.  1.  10 ; m.  iv.  16 ;

m. vi.  104; m. viii.  53; m.  ix.

1  sqg.,  3,4,9; VI.  ii.  1 ; viII.  Pr.

6,  9  tgq.,  11 ; vm.  iii.  11 ; IX.  iv.

130 ;  X.  vil.  5.
iugata,  V.  X.  94;  VI.  iii.  6.
iugulum  petere,  vm.  vi.  51.
iugum  Ca^idintim,  m.  viii.  3.
lulia  basilica,  xn.  v.  6.
iunctura,  vm.  iii.  45; tx.  iv.  22,  32,

43;  XI.  iii.  53.
iuridicialis  status,  m.  vi.  32  to.,  45,

47,  57.
larisconsalti,  V.  xiv.  34;  XL  ii.  41.
iusi  for  iuui,  L  vii.  21.
iusiurandum,  V.  i.  2 ;  V.  vi.  1  sqq.

K,  L  iv.  9 ;  I.  vil.  10.

Koipoi,  ra.  vi.  26.

KajceiiifmTov,  vm.  iii.  44  and  47.

Koxo^iJAuL,  n.  iii.  9 ;  vm.  vi.  73.

Koxo^TiAoi',  vm.  iii.  56  tgq.

KOLKOirvv^frov,  vm.  iii.  59.

KojcoTc^via,  n.  rv.  2  ;  n.  XI.  2.

car' cu(r07)<riv,  HI.  vi.  37;  avTiXriifii.v,
vn.  iv.  4 ;  fwoiav,  ra.  vi.  37 ;  prrrov
ecu  iidyotav,  m.  vi.  46;  prfTov  jcat
irwt^aUptaiv,  m.  vl.  61 ;  (rv/i/S^/Srjxof ,
m.  vi.  56 ;  irvodeaiv,  V.  X.  95.

KaTaveir\a<Tti(VOv,  L  Xi.  6.

caravAii^K  (figure),  IX.  iL  103.

xaroo'icrvi},  n.  iv.  IS.

KaTaYpijo-if,  vm.  ii.  6;  vm.  vl.  34
and  36 :  IX.  i.  5.


KoSoKiKo,  n.  xiii.l4;  vm.  v.  7.

KtiaOai.,  in.  vl.  24.

ice(^<iAa(oi'  yiviKutinTOv,  in.  vl.  2  ; ep.

m.  xi.  27.
kAi/xoI,  IX.  iii.  54.
KOiKoiTTOfiia,  L  V.  32.
KOfi^ara,  IX.  iv.  22.
koppa,  I.  iv.  9.
KpLvofitvov,  m.  xi.  4  and  18.
xpiVctt,  V.  xi.  36.
KptTiKij,  V.  xiv.  28.
KuAo,  tx.  iv.  22.

labda,  I.  xi.  5.

Aa/3&ucicr/u.<k,  I.  V.  32.

laborant  fructus,  vm.  vi.  8

labos,  I.  iv.  13.

Laenates,  I.  iv.  25.

Lartius,  VL  iii.  96.

Loses  for  Lares,  I.  iv.  13.

larare,  I.  iv.  13;  I.  vi.  44.

landatio,  n.  iv.  20 ; m.  vii.  2 ; XI.  Hi.

126,  131, 153.
laureati  pastes,  vm.  vi.  32.
Itber,  L  iv.  17.
lectio,  L  I.  31,  32;  I.  viii.  1  sgq.;  t.

viii.  6;  n.  V.  1  sgq.,  18; X.  i.  17,

20  tgq.,  27,  45.
legale  quaestionum  genus,  m.  T.  4;

m.  vi.  87  sgq.
leguleii,  xn.  iii.  11.
Aijicrr^,  I.  vii.  17.

Ae'wf,  vn.  ix.  6.

lepus,  I.  vi.  12  and  33.

lex  Manilla,  n.  iv.  40; Plantla,  tX,

ill.  56; ServUia,  VI.  iii.  44; thea-

tralis,  ni.  vi,  9; leges  contrariaa,

in.  vi.  88;  vn.  vii.  l  sqg.
libera  oratio  =  vapprjiria,  IX.  ii.  27.
.Vt^uKol  A0701,  v.  xi.  20.
licentia  ■=  vappria-ia,  EX.  ii.  27.
lltterae,  I.  i.  24  and  27; I.  iv.  7; L

vii.  11  and  31 ;  n.  xvlii.  4;  VI.  Pr.

14;  IX.  iv.  36;  xn.  i.  27.
titteratoria,  litteratrix,  n.  xiv.  3.
litteratura  —  granuuatice,  n.  i.  4 ;  n.

xiv.  3.
litus,  V.  xiv.  34;  vn.  iii.  13.
locaples,  v.  x.  55.
loci  argumentomm,  V.  vlH.  4; T.  x.

20; VI.  iii.  65.
loci  commones,  n.  1.  1,  9,  11; n.  iv.

22,  27 ;  rv.  vii.  4 ;  V.  I.  3 ; V.  xiil.

67;  I.T.  12;  XL  1.  46.
locatio  recta  —  opdoi-rtui,  I.  vi.  20.


INDEX OF  WORDS


lodicea,  i,  yi.  4j.

\oyiK6v,  genus  quaestionum,  in.  v.  4.

AoyoJaiiaAoi,  HI.  i.  11.

Longi,  I.  iv.  25 ;  I.  vi.  38.

loquendi  genera  =  StoAeicToi,  I.  v.  29.

lucubratjo,  X.  iii.  27.

lucus,  I.  vi.  34.

Indus, I. vi. 34;  ludi Floralia ac

Megalensia,  I.  v.  52.
lupus  femina.  I.  vi.  12.
lurchinabundus,  I.  vi.  42.
Juiun'atur  and  liuuriat,  IX.  iii.  7.
lyrici,  I.  viii.  6 ; IX.  iv.  53 ; X.  i.  61

and  96.

M,  IX.  iv.  39,  40 ;  xn.  i.  31.

HaKpo\oyia,  VIII.  iii.  53.

magester  for  magister,  I.  iv,  17.

Maiia,  1.  iv.  11.

rnaleficus,  I.  v.  66.

malevolus,  I.  v.  68.

malus,  I.  vii.  3.

mappa,  I.  v.  27.

Marcipores,  I.  iv.  26.

marmuT,  I.  vi.  23.

mastruca,  I.  v.  8.

fiaraioTexi"<i>  U.  ^CX.  3.

maximus,  maxumus,  I.  vii.  21.

medidies,  I.  vi.  30.

medium  diceudi  genus,  X.  i.  52  and

80 ;  XII.  X.  58  sq.
Megalensia,  I.  v.  62.
/oieyaAoTrpeTTtio,  IV.  ii.  61.
mehe  for  mf ,  I.  v.  21.
fietaxns,  VIII.  iii.  50.
fxe'Ao;  and  pud/xo;,  I.  x.  22.
membra  =  xwAa,  IX.  iv.  22,  67,  123.
membratim,  IX.  iv-  126,  127.
memoria,  X.  1.  19 ; I.  iii.  1 ; ni.  iii.  1

and  10; XI.  ii.  1  sqq.,  11  sqq.,  36

and  40.
Menerva,  I.  iv.  17.
merere  for  mereris,  I.  v.  42.
meridies  and  medidies,  I.  vi.  30.
fiepiKol  eTTiAoyot,  TI.  i.  56.
mertare,  I.  iv.  14.
merula,  I.  vi.  38.
>teTa^a<ris  (figure),  IX.  iii.  25.
utTafioXri  (figure),  IX.  iii.  38 ;  rhythmi,

IX.  iv.  50.
^teToATji/d?  (causa),  in.  vi.  46;  (figure)

VI. iii. 52 ; IX. ii. 106 ; (trope)

vra.  vi.  37  sq.;  IX.  i.  5.
HiTa<t)opd,  VI.  iii.  68;  VIII.  vi.  4  sqq.,

8;  IX.  i.  6;  ix.ii.  46.


metaplasmus,  I.  viii.  14.

/nerao-Tatrts  =  translatio, ni.  vi.  53 ;

vn.  iv.  14;  (figure)  IX.  ii.  41.
methodice,  IX.  i.  1.
metonymia,  vin.  vi.  23 ;  IX.  1.  5.
ju-eVpa,  IX.  iv.  45-51.
metrici  pedes,  IX.  iv.  48  and  52.
Metloeoque  Fufetioeo,  I.  v.  12.
fiCftrjaii  =  jjSoTToita,  IX.  ii.  58.

mimi  =  pantomimi,  vi.  iii.  8  and  29.
mimi  =  comoediae,  I.  x.  17;  IV.  ii.

53.
minae  =  icaTdjrA))|is,  IX.  Ii.  103.
minuendi  species,  vin.  iv.  1  sqq.  and

28.
miseratio,  VI.  i.  9,  19,  23,  27,  30,  46;

XI.  iii.  171.
modi  verborum,  I.  v.  41 ;  =  tropes,

vm.  V.  35; (musical)  I.  x.  14  and

31.
modulatio  scaenlca,  xi.  iii.  67.
molossus,  IX.  iv.  82,  100,  102.
fiovoeiSeia,  XI.  iii.  44.
monosyllaba,  IX.  iv.  42.
/xovoTovia,  XI,  iii.  46.
morae  =  pauses,  XI.  iii.  39.
moralis  philosophia,  XU.  i.  15.
motus  =  tropes,  IX.  i.  2.
mucTO  for  gladtus,  vm.  vi.  20 ;  X.  i

11  and  14.
mugitus,  vni.  vi.  31.
mulsa,  I.  V.  16.
multiplicatio  =  avvoBpaiaiJ.o'i,  Vin.  iv

27.
munerarius,  Vin.  iii.  34.
murmur,  VIII.  vi.  31.
mus,  VIII.  iii.  20.

musica  ratio  niunerorum,  ix.  iv.  139.
musice,  I.  x.  9  sqq.,  17,  22,  31 ;  I.  iv.  4.
mutatio,  IX.  iii.  27  and  92.
^uKTrjpio'/ios,  vni.  vi.  69.

N,  I.  V.  60 ;  xn.  X.  31.

nam  enim,  I.  v.  38.

narratio,  II.  iv.  2  sqq.,  16 ; m.  vi.  92 ;

in.  ix.  1 ;  IV.  ii.  passim ;  vm.  Pr.  1 ;

IX.  iv.  134  and  138;  XI.  iii.  162.
Naso,  XI.  ii.  31.
naturalis  philosophia,  xn.  ii.  10  and

20  sqq.
narigare  aequor,  IX.  iii.  17.
ne  and  non,  I.  v.  60; ne  hoe  fecit,

I.  V.  38.
negotialis,  n.  xxi.  3 ;  m.  vi.  67 ;  ni.

vii.  1.


INDEX  OF  WORDS


uegotiam,  m.  t.  17.

Nerei,  I.  v.  24.

neutralis  (positio),  I.  It.  24 ;  (nomen)

I.  v.  54.
noctivagus,  I.  y.  68.
yorj/ia,  n.  xi.  1 ;  vm.  v.  12.
I'omicb*'  genus  qnaestionum,  m.  v.  4.
nomina,  l.  iv.  18,  2a-6 ;  I.  iv.  24  tqq.;

1.  v.  60,  61 ;  m.  vi.  36 ;  vm.  vi.  31.
nota  aspirationis,  I.  iv.  9.
iiotatio  =  etymologia,  I.  vi.  28.
uumems (category), HI. vi. 26;

(rhytlim)  IX.  iv.  17,  22,  27,  45  sqq.,

54,  67,  61,  62,  66;  (number)  I.  v.

45;  ix.iii.  8.
nuncupare,  vULiii.  27.

O,  L  iv.  16 ;  L  vi.  8 ;  I.  vii.  11.

ob,  I.  vii.  7.

obiuigatio  (figure),  rx.  i.  32;  IX.  ii.  3.

obliqui  casus,  L  vi.  10,  22; adlocu-

tiones,  IX.  ii.  37;  sententiae,  IX.  ii.

79,  94.
obsequium,  VUL  iii.  35.
obticentia  (figure),  IX.  ii.  54.
occultatio  (figure),  IX.  iii.  98.
octonarius  versus,  ix.  iv.  72  sq.
'OSvaafvi;,  1.  iv.  16.
oeconomia.  I.  viii.  9  and  17;  in.  iii.

9;  cp.  ra.  X.  11.
oiA"),  IT.  i.  2.
oVos,  IV.  i.  3.
olli,  vm.  iii.25.
Olympus,  I.  V.  62.
oi^ptaroirooa,  I. V. 72; Vin. vl. 31;

IX.  1.  3  and  5.
operositas  =  nepiepyia,  vm.  iii.  55.
Opiter,  I.  iv.  25.
oppido,  vm.  iii.  25.
optatio  (figure),  IX.  viii.  32 ;  II.  ii.  3.
optimus  and  oplumiu,  l  iv.  8;  L  vii.

21.
oratores  Graeci,  X.  i.  76 ; Latini,  X.  i

105  sqq.
oratoria,  oratrix,  ll.  xiv.  1.
ordo,  m.  iii.  8 ;  IX.  iii.  91.
originatio  =  crv/xoAoyia,  I.  vi.  28.
omatus,  vm.  iii.  1  sqq. ;  XT.  i.  2  and  7.
op^ocVeia,  L  V.  33 ;  I.  vi.  20.
opOoypaipia,  I.  vii.  1.

paeo,  I.  vi.  11.

paean,  rx.  iv.  47  tq.,  79  sqq.,  96,  106.

110,  136.
paedagcigi,  1. 1.  8.


paenitentia  dicti,  ix.  ii.  60.

paeniiurus,  ix.  iii.  12.

TzaiSona^i,  I.  xii.  9.

palaestrica,  n.  xxi.  11.

palaestrici,  I. xi. 15; L xii. 9; n.

viii.  7; xn.  ii.  12.
palaestritae,  rx.  iv.  56.
palimbacchins,  H.  iv.  82,  102.
palus,  I.  vii.  3.
pan^yrici,  n.  x.  11; m.  iv.  14;  m.

viii. 7.
Pansae,  i.  iv.  25.
Ilai^aAe'wi',  Vn.  ix.  6.
wafKpokij,  V.  xi.  1  and  23;  vx.  iii.  59;

vm.  iii.  77.
vapdSeiyna,  V.  xi.  1 ;  XH.  X.  61.
TTopoSiao-ToAj),  rx.  iii.  65.
vapaSiriyriam,  IX.  ii.  107.
irapdSoiov,  IV.  1.  40 ;  (figure)  n.  il.  33.

jrapaifeTiicoi'  (figure),  IX.  ii.  103.
irapatppaiTK,  I.  ix.  2  ;  X.  V.  5.
7rapa<riai7r)}<xt5,  IX  iii.  99.
jrapauft/o-is  (figure),  IX.  ii.  106.
irape'/t/3a<7i?,  IV.  iii.  12  and  14.
irap€'>iirru)<ri9,  IX.  iii.  23.
napevOea-i^,  IX.  iii.  23  and  26.
vaptT^Ofieva,  V.  X.  75.

pariambus,  rx.  iv.  80.

jTopiaoi'  (figure),  rx.  iii.  76.

irapioSt},  IX.  ii.  35.

vapuSCa,  VLiii.  97.

irapoifiia,  V.  xi.  21 ;  vm.  vi.  57.

jrapoMoAoyia  (figure),  IX.  iii.  99.

vapovofxaaia.,  IX.  iii.  66  <$.  and  30.

irapop/x>)T4icil  OTaffis,  m,  vi.  47.

■nappriaia,  IX.  ii.  27  ;  DC  iii.  99.

parricida,  VUL  vi.  35.

parricidalus,  I.  vi.  42.

participia,  I.  iv.  19  and  27;  L  t.  47;

I.  vi.  26.
participialia  verba,  I.  iv.  29.
partitio,  I.  ii.  13; m.  ix.  1 ;  rv.  v.  1

sqq.,  24,  26 ;  IV.  ii.  49 ;  IV.  v.  1  and

24 ;  VU.  i.  1 ;  IX.  iv.  92  and  131. .
pastor  populi,  vm.  vi.  8.
iraBjiTiKa.1,  probationes,  v.  xii.  9.
ndSoi  Emd  jrdOri,  VL  ii.  7  sq.  and  20  sqq,
pati  (category),  ra.  vi.  24;  (passive)

L  vi.  26 :  IX.  iii.  7.
patrare  bella,  vm.  iii.  44.
peculiolum  magnum,  t,  v.  46.
pecuniosus,  v.  x.  6.
pedem  ronjerrr,  vm.  vi.  61.
pedestris  oratio,  X.  i.  81.
Pelia,  L  T.  61.

543


INDEX  OF  WORDS


mjXiKOTrjs,  VII.  iv.  16.

pellerit,  not  perlexil,  xi.  iii.  35.

pentameter,  rx.  iv.  98  and  109.

TTfvTdaTifioi  percussiones,  VS..  iv.  51.

ircv^/ui/xepe^,  IX.  iv.  78.

penus,  TIL  iii.  13.

pepigi,  I.  vi.  10.

irnroiii/uicVa,  TIEt.  vi.  32.

percontatio,  DC  i.  29 ;  IX.  ii.  6  sgq.

percursio,  IX.  i.  27.

percussiones,  rx.  iv.  61  and  75; XI.

iii.  108.
TTcpi  (vvoCai,  vm.  iii.  35.
TTtpitpyia,  VIII.  iii.  55.
nepCepyof  =  otiosum,  I.  vi.  19.
periodus,  IX.  iv.  22,  124,  125,  128;

XI.  i.  49.
jr£pi'<^pa<ri9,  vm.  Iii.  53; vm.  vi.  69

sgq. ;  IX.  i.  3  and  6 ;  IX.  iii.  97.
irtptao-oAoyia,  IV.  ii.  43;  Vin.  vi.  61.
irepiiTTao-is,  lU.  v.  18;  V.  X.  104.
pennissio  (figure),  IX.  i.  35;  IX.  ii.

25;  IX.  iii.  90.
peroratio,  VI.  i. 1 sgq.,  12  sqq.,  21.

55; VL  ii.  7; vn.  x.  12; vm.  Pr.

11.
perpetualia  praecepta  =  KaBoKixd,  n.

xiii.l4.
perpetua  oratio,  ii.  xx.  7; actio,  VI.

iv.  2.
perpotare  in  balneis,  I.  vi.  44.
persona  (gramm.),  I.  iv.  29 ;  (category)

m. vi.  25; IV.  ii.  129; V. x. 23

sqq. ; VI.  i.  25 ; vn.  ii.  27  sgq. ; IX.

i.  31 ;  IX.  ii.  29,  68,  76 ;  IX.  iii.  89.
pes,  IX.  iv.  45  sqq.,  52  sqq.,  60  sqq.,

79  sqq.
pelorritum,  I.  v.  57.
Phaelbon,  I.  v.  17.
t^OLvraaia,  vm.  iii.  88;  <f>avTaaCai,  VI.

ii.  29;  X.  vii.  16;  xn.  x.  6.
philosophi,I.  Pr.  10; V.  vi.  3; V.  vii.

35; vn.  iii.  16; vn.  ix.  1 ;  X.  i.  35,

81 sqq.,  123 sqq.; XI.  i.  35; xu

ii.  6  sqq. ;  XU.  xi.  17.
piiilosophia,  I.  iv.  4; xn.  ii.  20  and

23;  XILiii.  2.
phonasci,  n.  viii.  15;  XI.  Iii.  19  and

22.
<l>pa.ai<!  =  elocutio,  vm.  i.  1 ;  x.  i.  42

and  87.
Phrygium  canere,  I.  i.  33.
pictai  vestis,  I.  vii.  18.
pinguetudo,  I.  xi.  4.
pirmum,  i.  iv.  12.

544


piratica,  vm.  iii.  S4.
Jri  JTeis,  V.  X.  8.
pituita,  I.  vi.  36.
Fius,  V.  X.  30.
plasma,  I.  viii.  2.

7rAaT6ia(r/x09,  I.  V.  32.

Plato,  I.  V.  60.

Plauti,  I.  iv.  25.

plenus  vino  and  vini,  IX.  iii.  1.

irAeo^acr/xos, I. V. 40; VIII.  iii. 53;

DC.  iii.  46  sq.
vXoKri  =  repetitio,  IX.  iii.  41  and  49.
ploxenum,  I.  v.  8.
pluralia,  pluraliter,  L  v.  16;  II.  iii.

20.
poculum  epotum,  vm.  vi.  24.
poenariae  actiones,  rv.  iii.  9; vn.  iv.

20.
poetae,  I.  Iv.  2;  I.  viii.  14; I.  x.  29;

V.  xi.  39;  X.  i.  27,  41-72,  85-100.
poeticae  narrationes,  n.  iv.  2.
jroiijTiKj),  n.  xviii.  2.
iroAirtKOf,  I.  x.  15.
TroAvirTwroi/,  IX.  i.  34;  IX.  iii.  37.
iroXviTvv&iTov,  IX.  iii.  61.
pomeridies,  IX.  iv.  39.
pondo,  I.  V.  15.
pontificum  commentarii,  vm.  ii.  12;

annates,  X.  ii.  7.
porca  for  porcus,  vm.  iii.  19.
positio  prima,  I.  v.  60  and  65 ;  I.  iv.

24 ;  I.  vi.  10  and  22 ;  =  Seo-is,  IX.

iv.  48  and  55;  nominis,  vm.  vi.

23;  =  materia  declamandi,  n.  x.

15.

7rO(TOT7J5,  vn.  iv.  16.

possessivum  nomen,  I.  v.  45.

possibile,  m.  viii.  25.

Poslumus,  I.  iv.  25.

potus,  1.  iv.  29.

irpaKTiKiq,  ars,  n.  xviii.  1.

praeceps  ira,  vm.  vi.  27.

praechones,  I.  v.  20.

praedictio,  IX.  ii.  17.

praeiudicia,  v.  i.  2 ;  V.  ii.

praelectio,  I.  ii.  15;  I.  v.  11;  I.  viii.

8  and  13;  II.  v.  4.
praemunitio,  IX.  i.  30;  IX.  Ii.  2  and

17.
Praenestina  verba,  I.  v.  56.
praeparatio  (figure),  IX.  ii.  17;  pro-

bationis,  IV.  ii.  65  sqq.
praepositio,  I.  iv.  13  and  19;  IX.  iii.

71.
praescriptio,  m.  vi.  72 ;  vn.  v.  2  sqq.


INDEX OF WORDS


praesomptio  ^  irpoXij^tf, IX. ii. 16

and  18.
praesamptom  —  vpoXrprriKov,  HL vi.

35.
praeteritiun,  L  iv.  29 ;  I.  vi.  26.
praeTaricatio,  vn.  i.  32.
vpaynara,  UL  vi.  28.
iTftayiiaTiicii, m. vi. 57 ; HI. vii. 1 ;
s-pay^arcjcof ,  n.  xxi.  3 ; jrpayfiaTtKOv,

m.  vi.  35.
pragmatici,  ni.  vi.  59 ;  xn.  iii.  4.
praruus,  L  iv.  29.
«-paf  15,  in.  vi.  26.
precula  for  pergula,  I.  v.  12.
principalis  quaestio,  IV.  iv.  1.
principium  =  exordium,  Vf.  i.  1  tqq. ;

IV.  i.  42.
Privemas  ager,  VL  iii.  44.
probabile,  vm.  iii.  42.
probatio,  V.  i.  1 ;  inartificialis,  y.  il.-

vii;  V.  li.  43; artificialis,  V.  viii.-

xiv. ;  (other  reff.)  n.  iv.  4 ;  vn.  ii.  35

sqg. ;  vn.iii.28;  XI.  iii.  163 ;  lineares,

L  X.  49.
probarenmt,  I.  iv.  16.
procoratio,  vn.  iv.  35.
procursio,  IV.  iii.  9 ;  XI.  iii.  126.
prodnctio  (syllabarem),  vn.  ii. 13;

IX.  iii.  69;  (liljerorum,  etc.),  VT.  i.

30.
irpo<ic0e(ri(  (figure),  IX.  ii.  106.
irpoe7riirA>ja'(reif  rj  inrepPoK^,  Vm.  iii.

37.
progenies,  I.  vi.  26.
prognoetica,  v.  ix.  15.
progressio  (figure),  IX.  i.  33.
irpoArj+is,  IT.  i.  49 ;  IX.  ii.  16 ;  IT.  lit

99.
rpo^rfirriicov,  m.  Ti.  35.
proles,  vm.  iii.  26.
promiscua  =  iriicuiva,  I.  iv.  24.
promisyo  (figure),  IX.  i.  32 ;  IX.  ii.  2.
pronomen,  L  iv.  19 ;  L  v.  26  and  47.
pronuntiatio,  I.  xj.  4  sqq.;  n.  i.  13;

n.  xii.  9 ;  XI.  iii.  passim.
prooemium,  m.  ix.  8;  it.  i.  2  sq.,  63,

73 ;  IX.  iv.  132  and  134 ; cp.  exor

dium.

proportio  >=•  avaXoyia,  I.  vi,  3.
proposita»themata,Tn.  i.  4;  «■  9«<rt«,

m.  V.  6.
propositio,  m.  ix.  1  «?. ;  IT  ii.  30;  IT.

iv.  1  sqq., IV. v. 26; TIL  i.  46;

opp.  refutatio,  xn.  ix.  19;  (logic)

V.  liv.  5 ;  (figure)  H.  ii.  105.


proprietas  verbomm,  Tm.  ii.  1  597  ;
status,  m.  vi.  53  and  56.

proprius,  l  v.  3  and  71 ;  T.  x.  55  sqq. ;
Tn.  iii.  24;  Tm.  iL  1  and  7  sqq. ;
xn.  I.  42.

pTosapia,  L  vi.  40 ;  vm.  iii.  26.

irpoo-airococris  (figure),  IX.  iii.  94.

proscripturU,  tul  vi.  32.

vpooiriyopia.,  L  iv.  21.

irpoaaiSiat  =  accentus,  I.  v.  S2.

wpoaofJiiXrjTiKi^,  m.  iv.  10.

apcxruiroiroita,  I.  viii.  3;  m.  viii.  49
mnd  52;  TL  i.  25;  IX.  ii.  29  and
37;  XLi.  41.

vpoTfiCirrtKri  <rra<ris,  m.  vi.  47.

psaltae,  I.  x,  18 ;  cp.  1. 1.  31.

v!'evio7pa<#>tot,  L  X.  39.

psi,  L  iv.  9.

Publicola,  m.  vil.  18 ; Publicolae  L  vi.

31.
Publipores,  I.  iv.  26.
puerei,  I.  vii.  15.
Pulixena,  L  iv.  16.
puUare,  I.  iv.  14.
punior,  IX.  iii.  6.
puppis  for  naiis,  vm.  vi.  20.
purgatio  (figure),  IX.  I.  32 ;  IX.  il.  9.
pyrrliicliius,  IX.  iv.  80,  106,  140
PytMci,  I.  iv.  31.
pyxis,  vm.  vi.  35.

Q,  I.  iv.  9 ;  xn.  X.  30.

quadripes  for  equus,  vm.  vi.  20.

quaeso,  TULiii.  25.

qoaestio,  m.  v.  4,  5,  16; m.  vi.  2,

35,  46,  55-61,  65  sqq.,  83; m.  xi

1  tqq.,  4;  IT.  ii.  8; T.  x.  36,  44;

TL  iv.  4; vn.  i.  6,  7  sqq.,  13,  18.

23, 45,  49 ;  Tn.  ii.  1,  15,  42 ;  Tn.  iii.

13; Tn.  iv.  9,  25; vn.  v.  1; vn.

X.  15; TUL  Pr.  8,  10; X.  v.  11;

xn.  ii.  18,  19; naturales,  I.  iv.  4;

Tn.  ii.  7 ;  servorum,  T.  iv.  1  sqq.
quale,  m.  vi.  36,  S8,  44,  56,  80; T.

X.  53 ;  quale,  I.  v.  26.
quaJitas,  in.  v.  10; m. vi.  10,  SS,

36  sq.;  y.  I.  40;  T.  xiii.  19;  Vi

iv.  4; vn.  ii.  40; vn.  iii.  6; vn.

iv.  1  sqq.;  xn.  Ii.  15;  verboram.

L  iv.  27 ;  L  V.  41.
quam  mnltum,  m.  vi.  90.
quando  (category),  m.  vi.  24.
quantitas,  m.  vi.  23 ;  vn.  iv.  15,  41

sqq.
qoantnm  sit,  m.  vi.  36  and  90.

545


INDEX  OF  WORDS


qtuue  for  quasi,  i.  vii.  24.

queens,  vin.iii.  33.

queentia,  11.  xiv.  2.

quianam,  vui.iii.  25.

quid  sit,  ni.  vi.  3G,  44,  56,  80; V.  x.

63.
Quirinalis,  I.  vi.  31.
quidquid,  not  qtdcquid,  I.  vii.  6.
ywire,  I.  vi.  26.
yMot,  I.  vii.  27.
quoque  ego,  I.  v.  39.
quotidie  for  cotidie,  I.  vii.  6.
9uuni,  I.  vii.  5.

R  and  S,  I.  iv.  13 ;  rho,  I.  xi.  5.
raeda,  I.  v.  67  and  G8.
ratio  =  aiTiop,  ill.  xi.  4  igg'. ;  «=  eTri-
Xe'ipr/na,  V.  X.  6.

ratiocinatio, v. xi. 1;  v. xiv. 5;

=•  eTTixe'ipTj/ia,  V.  X.  6 ;  (figure)  IX.

iii.98.
ratioeinativus  status,  ni.  vi.  43,  4G,

61  sq.;  V.  X.  6;  VII.  viii.3.
rational  is  pars  philosophiae  =  dialec-

tica,  XU.  ii.  10.
reatus,  vm.  iii.,34.
rebus  ageraibus,  IX.  iii.  13.
rectus casus, I. iv. 13;  I. v. 61;

sermo,  n.  v.  11; oratio,  x.  v.  8.
recusans  =  o  </)f'vyaii/,  in.  x.  1.
redditio  contraria  =  a.vTa.v65o<m,  VIII.

iii.  77  and  79  sq.
refutatio,  V.  xiii.l  sqq. ;  vi.iii.  72.
regressio  (figure),  IX.  iii.  35.
reipublicae  laesae  actio,  vn.  iii.  2 ;

VII.  iv.  37.
reiectio  in  alium,  IX.  i.  30.
relatio  (figure),  IX.  i.  25; IX.  ii.  59;

IX.  iii.  97;  causarum,  VI.  iii.  77.
remigare  pennis,  vm.  vi.  18.
remotio,  v.  x.  6(5.
repercutiendi  genera,  vi.  iii.  45  and

78.
repetitio  (figure),  IX.  i.  33 ;  IX.  ii.  4 ;

IX.  iii.  29  sqq.,  47;  =  7rA.oK^,  IX.  iii.

41 ;  =  a.v<XK^(paKaiui(Ti^,  VI.  i.  1.
repetundanim  causae, IV.  ii. 14  sq.

and  86;  V.  vii.  6.
repraesentatio  =  eVapyeia,  vin.  iii.  61.
reprehensio  (figure),  IX.  1.  34; IX.  ii.

18.
repudiiiniusti  actio,  VII.  iv.  38.
respiratio,  XI.  iii.  39  and  49.
responslo  sibi  ipsi,  ix.  i.  35; IX.  ii.

14;  IX.  iii.  90.


resultans,  IX.  iv.  66  and  83 ; xi.  iii.

183.
reticentia  (figure),  ix.  ii.  54  and  67;

IX.  i.  31.
reversio  =  aj'oorpoijb^,  VHI.  vl.  65.
revocatio  verbi,  ix.  i.  33.
prjTov  Kai  Siduoia,  HI.  vi.  46 ;  KaTaprfrov

Koi  vTTf^dipeinv,  III.  vi.  61.
rhetor,  n.  i.  1  sqq.; n.  ii.  1  sqq.;  n.

iii.  1  sqq. ;  II.  iv.  1  sqq.
rhetorice,  II.  xiv.  5; ll.  xiii.  1  sqq.,

15,  38;  n.  xiv.  5; n.  xv.  1  sqq.,  15,

38;  n.  xvi.  1,  11;  n.  xvii.  1  sqq.,

23,25,  26;  n.xviii.2;  II.  ix.  1  sqq.;

II.  xxi.  24;  m.  i.  8; m.  ii.  1;  iii.

iii.  1  sqq.,  13,  15;  V.  x.  54;  vn.  iii.

6  and  12 ;  VUI.  Pr,  6 ;  XII.  x.  1.
Rhodium  genus  dicendi,  xn.  x.  17.
pvP/iioj  and  ^fAos,  I.  X.  22;  ix.  iv.

45 ;  =  numeri,  rx.  iv.  54 ;  ix.  iv.

46  sqq.
ridiculum,  VI.  iii.  22  sqq.,  110  sqq.
risus,  VI.  iii.  1  sqq.,  7,  37  sq.,  105.
robur,  I.  vi.  22.

rogatio  (figure),  IX.  i.  29 ;  IX.  ii.  6.
Romanus  for  Romani,  viii.  vi.  20.
rubricae,  XU.  iii.  11.
mere,  I.  vi.  26.
Rufl,  I.  iv,  25,

S,  I.  iv.  13,  14;  I.  vii.  20,  21;  I.  xi.

6;  IX.  iv.  37;  xn.  x.  32.
Sabina  verba,  I.  v.  66,
saccaria,  vin.  ii.  13.
saeculum  felix,  vm.  vl,  24,
salsura,  VI.  iii.  18  sq.
Sapiens,  V.  x.  30;  sapientes  septem

V.  xi.  39.
<rapi5icrju,ds,  VIII.  vi.  59.
satagere,VJ.  iii.  5^;  XI.iii.l28.
satura,  X.  i.  93.
saucius  pectus,  IX.  iii.  17,
scabillum  from  scamnum,  I.  iv,  12.
scala,  I.  V.  16.
Scauri,  I.  iv.  25.
schema,  I.  v.  52  sqq. ; I.  viii.  14  and

16; II.  xi.  1; VI.  iii.  70; vm.  iii.

50; IX.  i.  11  sqq.  and  25; IX.  ii.

65  and  92 ;  IX.  iii.  2 ;  cp.  figura,
crX>)^'aTi<r/J.os,  I.  viii.  14,
scholae  publicae,  I.  ii,  1  sqq.  and  16.
scholasticae  materiae,  IV.  ii.  SO; vn.

i.  14;  XI.  i.  82,
Scipiones,  1.  iv,  25.
scopa,  1.  V,  16,


546


INDEX OF  WORDS


acribendi  ars,  I.  i.  27,  28,  34  «?. ;  I.

vii.  1,  28,  30; X.  iii.  1  sqq.,  10,  30;

I.  V 1  sqq. ; xn.  ix.  16 ; xn.  x.

49  tqq.
scripsere  and  sc-ipserunt,  I.  v.  44.
scripttun  et  voluntas,  m.  vi.  88 ; vn

i.  49  sqq. ;  vn.  v.  5  sq. ;  vn.  vi.  1  sqq. ;

vn.  vii.  1 ;  vn.  viii.  1 ;  vn.  i.  1  sqq. ;

cp.  also  m.  vi.  37;  vn.  i.  13;  vn.

▼.5.
sedes  argumentorum, v. x. 20 and

100;  V.  xii.l7.
seiunctio,  rx.  i.  23 ;  IX.  ii.  2.
<rqixeiov,  V. Ix. 9 ; oAvtoi', 7.  ix.  3 ;

(in  rhythm),  IX.  iv.  51.
semivocales,  I.  iv.  6 ;  I.  vii.  14.
senarios,  IX.  iv.  72  sq.,  75, 125,  140.
senatus,  I.  vi.  27;  (derivation),  I.  vi.

33.
sensa,  vm.  v.  1.
sensus, vm. v. 1 sq.  =  sententiae

xn.  I.  46.
sententiae,  I.  viii.  9; I.  ix.  3; n.  xi.

3; n.  xii.  7; m.  viii.  65; VI.  iii.

36;  vn.  i.  44;  vm.  iv.  29;  vm.  v.

passim; IX. ii. 107; rx. iii. 76

and  98 ; x.  i.  60 ;  xn.  ix.  3 ;  xn.

X.  48.
sententiolae,  xn.  x.  73.
sequens  =  (irWeroy,  vm.  vi.  40.
Serani,  I.  iv.  25.
sermocinatrix,  m.  iv.  10.
servom,  I.  vii.  26.
tercus,  I.  iv.  8  and  11.
sescuplex  pes,  IX.  iv.  47.
sibt  for  stbi,  I.  vii.  24.
gigna,  V.  viii.  1 ;  V.  ix.  3  sqq. ;  T.  x.  74.
significatio  =«  e^^uurt^,  IX.  i.  27 ;  DC.

ii.  3.
silva,  X.  iii.  17.
similia,  V.  x.  73; V.  xi.  1  sqq.; iX

iii.  75  sqq.
similitndo, V.  x. 1; V.  xi.  22  sqq.;

vm.  iii.  72  sqq.; vm.  vi.  8  and  49;

IX.  i.  31;  rx.  ii.  2.
simolatio  (figure),  IX.  ii.  26.
singTilaria,  I.  v.  16 ;  IX.  iii.  20.
siiiunt  segetes,  vm.  vi.  6.
toleae,  vm.  ii.  8.
tolitaurilia,  l.  v.  67.
Boloecismus,  I.  v.  4,  34  sqq.,  51.
sotadei,  I.  viii.  6;  IX.  iv.  6  and  90.
spartum,  vm.  i.  2.
species,  v.  x.  25  tgq. ;  vn.  i.  23  sq.
spts,  L  vi.  26.


Spinther,  VI.  iii.  51.

spondeus,  IX.  iv.  48  ig.,  80,  88,  97, 101.

sponsiones,  vn.  v.  3.

<rTa(7is  =  status,  m.  vi.  3.

status  =  o-TOO-i;,  m.  vi.  passim ; Vn.

iv. 15; vn. V. 2 and 5; vn.  vi.

1 sqq. ; vn.  vii.  1 sqq. ; vn.  viii.

1  sqq. ;  vn.  x.  1 ;  IX.  1.  8 ;  xn.  ii.  19.
Stella,  I.  vi.  35.
sterols  curiae,  vm.  vl.  15.
stlites  and  stlocus,  I.  iv.  16.
o-TOix»'a.  m.iii.  13.
snasoria,  n.  i.  8; n.  iv.  5; m.  viii.

1  sqq. ;  vn.  iv.  2 ;  Vm.  Pr.  9.
sabiectio  (figure),  IX.  iii.  98.
sublatio,  rx.  iv.  48  and  55.
substantia,  m.  vi.  39 ;  rx.  i.  8.
Subura,  I.  vii.  29.
Sufenas,  I.  v.  62.
snggcstio,  IX.  li.  15.
Suliae,  I.  iv.  25.

sullaturit,  vm.  iii.  32 ;  vm.  vi.  32.
sulpur,  I.  vi.  22.
suotetaurilia,  I.  v.  67.
superiectio  =  hjrperbole,  vnL  vl.  67.
saperiatio,  IX.  i.  29 ;  ix.  ii.  3 ;  zn.  x.

62.
snstentatio,  IX.  ii.  23.
syllaba,  I.  i.  26,  30  sqq.,  37; EC  iv.

84,  85,  92,  93 ; XH.  x.  32,  33.
syUogismus,  ra.  vi.  15  sqq.,  43,  88 ; V

X.  3  and  6 ;  V.  x.  36 ; V.  xiv.  14,

20,  24  sqq.;  VU.  iii.  11; vn.  viii.

1  sqq. ;  vn.  x.  1  sqq. ;  IX.  iv.  57.
syllogisticus  status,  V.  x.  6.
aviiPffiriKOTa,  TH.  vi.  36 ;  Kara  aviifie-

^Tjicds,  m.  vi.  56.
<rvV^oAor,  I.  vi.  28.
(rvratpeffis,  I.  V.  17.
trwoAoci^ij,  L  V.  17;  EX.  Iv. 36  and

109.
(rvvadpoto-fxu;,  Vm.  iv.  27.
(nivSe<r/i09, 1,  iv.  18.
oMvixov,  m.  xi.  1  and  9.
synecdoche,  vm. vi.  19  tqq. ; XX. 1.

8;  rx.  iii.  58  sqq.
irvvoiKfiiaai^,  IX.  iii.  64.
<n)VMwti.ia,  vm.  iii.  16 ;  IX.  iii.  45.
truvreXiicTf  <TTdiTi<;,  rX.  vi.  47.
avvTOiJiO<;,  IV.  ii.  42.
Byntonorum  modi,  IX.  iv.  142.

talpae  oculis  capti,  VS..  tii.6.
TaTreiVoKri?,  Vill.  iii.  48.

tauru*,  vm.  ii.  13.

547


INDEX  OF  WORDS


TawToAoyia,  IV.  H.  43  ;  vm.  iii.  60.

technici,  n.  xiii.  15.

TfKa^pia,  V.  ix.  3.

Telarno,  I.  v.  60.

T<Aos,  U.  XV.  38.

tempus,  m.  vi.  25  sg. ; v.  i.  42  ij?. ;

secundum, v. z. 46; vn. ii. 46;

iunctum,  adhaerens,  insequens, V.

X.  46; VII.  ii.  46;  (rhythm)  IX.  iv.

47,  51,  81,  84  sgq.,  98.
Terei,  I.  v.  24.
testatio,  V.  vii.  32.
testes,  V.  i.  2; v.  vii.  9  sqq.,  25,  32

sqg. ;  see  interrogatio.
testimonia,  V.  vii.  1  tgq.; divina,  V.

vii.  35; V.  xi.  42;  (historical)  X.  i.

34.
TeTpaoTjjiiot,  percussiones,  IX.  iv.  51.
tetrastichon,  VI.  iii.  96.
thema,  n.  x.  5; IV.  ii.  28  and  68;

V.  X.  9;  vn.  i.  4;  vn.  ii.  54;  XII.

vra.  6.

BeuprjTiKri,  II.  xviii.  1.

SeVis,  n. i.  9; n.  iv. 24; m. v.  6

and  11 ;  xii.  ii.  25.
toga,  XI.  iii.  131,  139  sqg.
togatae  fabulae,  X.  i.  100.
Tovdpioi',  I.  X.  27.
tondemur,  I.  vi.  44.
Toj-oi,  I.  V.  22.
tonores  =  tenores,  I.  v.  22.
ToiriKTi,  V.  xiv.  28.
T07ro"j'pa(|)io,  IX.  ii.  44.
topper,  I.  vi.  40.
tractio,  I.  iv.  20.
tractus,  vm.  iii.  32.
traductio  (figure),  IX.  iii.  71.
tragici,I.  viij.8.

tragoedia,  I.  v.  52 ;  X.  i.  66  and  97.
traiectio  =  liyperbaton, vm.  ii. 14;

IX.  i.  29;  IX.  ii.  3.
transgressio  =  hyperbaton, vni. vi.

62  sg.;  IX.  i.  34;  IX.  iii.  91;  rx.

iv.  28.
transitio  (figure),  IX.  iii.  98.
translatio,  ni.  vi.  38,  60,  66; V.  xlv.

34; vn.  iv.  13; VIU.  ii.  6; VIU.  vi.

4  sgq.,  14  sqg.,  49  sg.;  IX.  ii.  41.
translativa  =  /j.e7aAr)i//i?, in. vi.  46;

t.  quaesciones,  in.  vi.  52 ;  t.  status,

ni.  vi.  46,  48,  S3,  56,  60,  68  sgq.,

83
translatus,  I.  v.  71 ;  IV.  1.  71.
transpositiva  =  nieraATnl/is,  m.  vi.  40.
transumptio  (figure),  Vin.  vi.  37.

S4S


transurnptiva  «»  jxeraAjji^is,  m.  vl.  46i

Traswnennus,  I.  v.  13.

trepondn,  I.  v.  15.

Tp./3^,  U.  XV.  23 ;  X.  vii.  11.

tribrachys,  IX.  iv.  82.

trihunale,  I.  vi.  17.

TpUiaka,  n.  XV.  23;  X.  vii.  11.

trimeter,  IX.  iv.  71,  74  sg.,  90.

triguedra,  triguetra,  I.  v.  30.

triunipi,  I.  V.  20.

trochaeus,  IX.  iv.  80,  82,  88,  105  sq.,

135,  140.
TpoTTos,  in.  vi.  27 ;  v.  X.  72.
tropus,  I.  viii.  16;  VI.  iii.  67; vni.

vi.  passim  ;  rx.  i.  1  and  4  sq.
tuburchinabundus,  I.  vi.  42.
tumuUus,  VU.  iii.  25.
tunica,  XI.  iii.  138  sgq.
Tusca  verba,  I.  v.  56.
tutelae  actio,  vn.  iv.  35.
tyranmts,  I.  v.  62.

V,  I.  iv.  8, 11,  16.

Valerius,  Valesius,  I.  iv.  13.

vapos,  I.  iv.  13.

vapulo,  IX.  iii.  7.

ubi  (category),  m.  vi.  24.

vehementer,  veiiieiUer,  I.  v.  21.

velH,  1.  vi.  44.

venales,  Vin.  ii.  8.

venustum,  Vl.  iii.  18.

verba  (grammat.),  I.  iv.  18  and  27  sqq

Vergilius,  Vin.  vi.  28.

versus,  ix.  iv.  72  sqq.

vertex,  vm.  ii.  7.

vesperug,  I.  vii.  12.

vestigium  =  o-jju-eioi',  V.  ix.  9.

video  and  intellego,  X.  i.  13  »q.

vlsio  =  itavraaia,  VI.  ii.  29  and  32;

vm.iii.  88;  xn.  x.  6.
fisurus,  IX.  iii.  12.
vitavisse  and  vitasse,  IX.  iv.  59.
vituperatio,  m.  vii.  1  and  19  sqq.
Vlixi,  I.  V.  63.

vocabulum,  I.  iv.  20,  21 ;  IX.  iv.  24.
vocales,  I.  iv.  6,  10  sgq.;  vm.  iii.  16;

IX.  iv.  33;  XI.  iii.  34.
vocalitas  =  eixbiovia,  L  v.  4.
volucres,  I.  v.  28.
Vopiscus,  I.  iv.  25.
vorstis,  vortices,  I.  vll.  26.
urbanitas,  VI.  iii.  8,  17,  45,  103  sq.,

107 ;  VI.  iv.  10.
urbanum,  VI.  iii.  105  *q.,  110;  Vm.

iii.  34  sq.


INDEX OF WORDS


urbet  bene  moralae,  vm.  vi.  24.

Fftt,  XI.ii.  31.

oixria, in. vi. 23; irfpi ovaia.% Koi

<ruti.fii^r\K6ru>v,  in.  vi.  36.
Vulcanus,  vm.  vi.  23.
rulgus,  L  iv.  8  and  10.
vulpes,  I.  vi.  33.
vultas,  n.  iii.  72  tqq. ;  vultus,  vm,

Ti.28


•YAvcrcj-eu!,  I. v.  16.


tephyri,  XII.  x.  28.
(JjjTTjua,  m.  xi.  4.
tophori,  ill.  I.  28.


Frr/?/ci  in  Greai  Britain  by  Richard  Clay  (The  Chaucer  Press),  Ltd.,
Bungay,  Suffolk


THE  LOEB  CLASSICAL
LIBRARY

VOLUMES  ALREADY PUBLISHED

Latin  Authors

Ahmianus  Makecllinus. Translated  by  J.  C.  Rolfe. 3  Vols.
Apuleius: The  Golden  Ass  (Metamorphoses). W.  Adling-

ton  (1566). Revised  by  S.  Gaselee.
St. Augustine: City of God. 7 Vols. Vol. I. G. E.

McCracken Vol.  II. W.  M.  Green. Vol.  HI. D.  Wiesen.

Vol.  IV. P.  Levine. Vol.  V. E.  M.  Sauford  and  W.  M.

Green. Vol.  VI. W.  C.  Greene.
St.  Augustine,  Coneessions  of. W.  Watts  (1631). 2  Vols.
St.  Augustine,  Select  Letters. J.  H.  Baxter.
AusoNius. H.  G.  Evelyn  White. 2  Vols.
Bede. J.  E.  King. 2  Vols.
Boethius: Tracts and De Consolations Philosophiab.

Rev.  H.  F.  Stewart  and  E.  K.  Rand.
Caesar: Alexandrian,  African  and  Spanish  Wars. A.  G.

Way.
Caesab: Ctvtl  Wars. A.  G.  Peskett.
Caesar:  Gallic  War. H.  J.  Edwards.
Cato:  De  Re  Rustica;  Varro:  De  Re  Rustica. H.  B.  Ash

and  W.  D.  Hoop>er.
Catullus. F.  W.  Cornish;  Tibullus. J.  B.  Postgate; Per-

viGiLiuM  Veneris. J.  W.  Mackail.
Celsus: De  Medicina. W.  G.  Spencer. 3  Vols.
CicEBO:  Brutus,  and  Orator. G.  L.  Hendrickson  and  H.  M.

Hubbell.
[CiCEBO]: Ad  Hebenntum. H.  Caplan.
CiCEBO: De  Obatore,  etc. 2  Vols. Vol.  I. De  Obatobe,

Books  I.  and  II. E.  W.  Sutton  and  H.  Rackham. Vol.  11.

De  Obatore, Book  III. De  Fato; Paradoxa  Stoicorum;

De  Partitione  Oratoria. H.  Rackham.
Cicero: De  Finibus. H.  Rackham.
Cicero  : De  Inventions,  etc. H.  M.  Hubbell.
CicEBO: De  Natuba  Deobum  and  Acadeuica. H.  Rackham.
Cicebo: De  Officiis. Walter  Miller.
CicEBO:  De  Republica  and  De  Leqibus;  Somniuv  Scifionis.

Clinton  W.  Keyes,

1


Cicero: De Senectute, De Amicitia, Db Divinationb.

W.  A.  Falconer.
Cicero  :  In  Catiunam,  Pro  Flacco,  Pro  Murena,  Pro  Sulla.

Louis  E.  Lord.
Cicero: Letters  to  Atticus. E.  O.  Winstedt. 3  Vols.
Cicero: Letters  to  His  Friends. W.  Glynn  Williams. 3

Vols.
Cicero:  Philippics, W.  C.  A.  Ker.
Cicero  : Pro  Archia  Post  Reditum,  De  Domo,  De  Harus-

picuM  Responsis,  Pro  Plancio. N.  H.  Watts.
Cicero: Pro  Caecina,  Pro  Lege  Manilia,  Pro  Cluentio,

Pro  Rabirio. H.  Grose  Hodge.
Cicero: Pro Caelio, De Provinciis Consularibus, Pro

Balbo. R.  Gardner.
Cicero  :  Pro  Milone,  In  Pisonem,  Pro  Scattro,  Pro  Fonteio,

Pro  Rabirio  Postumo,  Pro  Marcello,  Pro  Lioario,  Pro

Rege  Dbiotaho. N.  H.  Watts.
Cicero: Pro  Quinctio,  Pro  Roscio  Amerino,  Peg  Roscio

CoMOEDO,  Contra  Rullum. J.  H.  Freese.
Cicero:  Pro  Sestio,  In  Vatinium. R.  Gardner.
Cicero: Tusculan  Disputations. J.  E.  King.
Cicero: Verrine  Orations. L.  H.  Q.  Greenwood. 2  Vols.
Claudian. M.  Platnauer. 2  Vols.
Columella: Db  Re  Rustica. De  Arboribus. H.  B.  Ash,

E.  S.  Forster  and  E.  Heffner. 3  Vols.
Cubtius,  Q.:  History  or  Alexander. J.  C.  Rolfe. 2  Vols.
Florus. E.  S.  Forster;  and  Cornelius  Nepos. J.  C.  Rolfe.
Fbonttnus  :  Stratagems  and  Aqueducts. C.  E.  Bennett  and

M.  B.  McElwain.
Fronto: Correspondence. C.  R.  Haines. 2  Vols.
Gellius,  J.  C.  Rolfe. 3  Vols.
Horace: Odes  and  Epodes. C.  E.  Bennett.
Horace  :  Satires,  Epistles,  Ars  Pobtica. H.  R.  Fairclough.
Jerome: Selected  Letters. F.  A.  Wright.
Juvenal  and  Pebsius. G.  G.  Ramsay.
Livy. B,  O.  Foster,  F.  G.  Moore,  Evan  T.  Sage,  and  A.  C.

Schlesinger  and  R.  M.  Geer  (General  Index). 14  Vols.
LucAN. J.  D.  Duff.
Lucretius. W.  H.  D.  Rouse.
Martlal. W.  C.  a.  Ker. 2  Vols.
Minor  Latin  Poets: from  Publilius Syrus  to  Rutilius

Namatianus, including Gbattius, Calpurnius Siculus,

Nemesianus,  Avianus,  and  others  with  "  Aetna  "  and  the

"  Phoenix." J.  Wight  Duff  and  Arnold  M.  DufE.
OviD:  The  Art  of  Love  and  Other  Poems. J.  H.  Mozley.
2


Ovid: Fasti. Sir  James  G.  Frazer.

Ovid: Heboid es  and  Amobes. Grant  Showerman.

Ovid: Metamobphoses. F.  J.  Miller. 2  Vols.

Ovid: Tbistia  and  Ex  Poirro. A.  L.  Wheeler.

Pebsius. Cf.  Juvenal.

Petbonius. M. Heseltine; Seneca; ApocoiiOCYNxosis.

VV.  H.  D.  Rouse.
Phaedbus  and  Babeius  (Greek). B.  E.  Perry.
Plautus. Paul  Nixon. 5  Vols.
Puny  : Lettebs. Melmoth's  Translation  revised  by  W.  M.  L.

Hutchinson. 2  Vols.
Puny  :  Natxtral  Histoby.

10  Vols. Vols.  I.-V. and IX. H. Rackham. Vols.  VI.-

VIIL W.  H.  S.  Jones. VoL  X. D.  E.  Eichholz.
Pbopebtius. H.  E.  Butler.
Pbudentixis. H.  J.  Thomson. 2  Vols.
QuiNTiUAK. H.  E.  Butler. 4  Vols.
Remains  op  Old  Latin. E.  H.  Warmington. 4  Vols. Vol.  I.

(Ennius and Caecilius.) Vol. n. (Livnjs, Naevius,

Pacuvius,  Accius.) Vol.  in. (Lucilius  and  Laws  of  XII

Tables.) Vol.  IV. (Aechaic  Inscbiptions.)
Sat.t.ust. J.  C.  Rolfe.

ScBtPTOEES  Histobiak  Augustae. D.  Magie. 3  Vols.
Seneca: Apocolocyntosis. Cf.  Petbontps.
Seneca:  Epistulab  Mobales. R.  M.  Gummere. 3  Vols.
Seneca:  Mobal  Essays. J.  W.  Basore. 3  Vols.
Seneca:  Tbagedies. F.  J.  Miller. 2  Vols.
SiDONius: Poems  and  Lettebs. W.  B.  Andebson. 2  Vols.
Smus  Itaucus. J.  D.  Duff. 2  Vols.
Statius. J.  H.  Mozley. 2  Vols.
Suetonius. J.  C.  Rolfe. 2  Vols.
Tacitus: Dialoous. Sir \Vm. Peterson. Aobicola tind

Gebmania. Maurice  Hutton.
Tacitus:  Histobies  and  Annals. C.  H.  Moore  and  J.  Jackson.

4  Vols.
Tebencb. John  Sargeaunt. 2  Vols.
Tebtullian: Apologia  and  De  Spectaculis. T.  R.  Glover.

MiNUCius  Felix. G.  H.  Rendall.
Valebius  Flaccus. J.  H.  Mozley.
Vabbo: De  Lingua  Latina. R.  G.  Kent. 2  Vols.
Velleius  Pateeculus  and  Res  Gestae  Divi  Augusti. F.  W.

Shipley.
Viboil. H.  R.  Fairclough. 2  Vpls.
ViTBUvius:  De  Abchitectuba. F.  Granger. 2  Vols.
3


Greek  Authors

Achilles  Tatitts. S.  Gaselee.

Aelian: On  the  Nature  op  Animals. A.  F.  Scholfield. 3

Vols.
Aeneas Tacticus, Asclepiodotus and Onasander. The

Illinois  Greek  Club.
Aeschines. C.  D.  Adams.
Aeschylus. H.  Weir  Smyth. 2  Vols.
Alciphron,  Aelian,  Philostbatu& : Letters. A.  II.  Benner

and  F.  H.  Fobes.
Andocides,  Antiphon,  Cf.  Minor  Attio  Orators.
Apollodorus. Sir  James  G.  Frazer, 2  Vols.
Apollonius  Rhodius. R.  C.  Seaton.
The  Apostoijc  Fathers. Kirsopp  Lake. 2  Vols.
Appian: Roman  History. Horace  White. 4  Vols.
Aratus, Cf.  Callimachus.
Aristophanes. Benjamin Bickley Rogers. 3 Vols. Verse

trans.
Abistotlb:  Art  or  Rhetoric. J.  H.  Freese.
Aristotle: Athenian Constitution, Eudemian Ethicb,

Vices  and  Virtues. H.  Rackham.
Aristotle: Generation  of  Animals. A.  L.  Peck.
Aristotle:  Historia  Animalium. A.  L.  Peck. Vol.  I.
Aristotle: Metaphysics. H.  Tredennick. 2  Vols.
Aristotle: Meteobologica. H.  D.  P.  Lee.
Aristotle: Minor  Works. W. S.  Hett. On  Colours, On

Things  Heard,  On  Physiognomies,  On  Plants,  On  Marvellous

Things  Heard,  Mechanical  Problems,  On  Indivisible  Lines,

On  Situations  and  Names  of  Winds,  On  Melissus,  Xenophanes,

and  Gorgias.
Aristotle: Nicomachean  Ethics. H.  Rackham.
Aristotle: Oeconomica  and  Magna  Moralia. G.  C.  Arm-

strong; (with  Metaphysics,  Vol.  II.).
Aristotle: On  the  Heavens. W.  K.  C.  Guthrie.
Aristotle: On  the  Soul. Pabva  Natubalia. On  Breath.

W.  S.  Hett.
Aristotle: Categories, On Interpretation, Priob

Analytics. H.  P.  Cooke  and  H.  Tredennick.
Aristotle: Posterior  Analytics, Topics. H.  Tredennick

and  E.  S.  Forster.
Aristotle: On  Sophistical  Refutations.

On  Coming  to  be  and  Passing  Away,  On  the  Cosmos. E.  S.

Forster  and  D.  J.  Furley.
Aristotle: Parts  of  Animals. A.  L.  Peck; Motion  and

Progression  of  Animals, E.  S.  Forster.
4


Aristotue: Physics. Rev.  P.  VVicksteed  and  F.  M.  Comford.

2  Vols.
Apistotle: Poetics and LoNonnis. W. Hamilton Fyfe;

Dewetkitjs  on  Style. W.  Rhys  Roberte.
Ahistotle: Politics. H.  Rackham.
Aristotle: Problems. W.  S.  Hett. 2  Vols.
Aristoti^: Rhetorica Ad Alexandrttii  (with  Pboblbms.

Vol.  II.) H.  Rackham.
Arriak: History  or  Alexander  and  Indica. Rev.  E.  Hiffo

Robson. 2  Vols.
Athenaetis:  Deipnosophistae. C.  B.  Gulick. 7  Vols.
Babbitts  and  Phaedrus  (Latin). B.  E.  Perry.
St.  Basil: Letters. R.  J.  Deferrari. 4  Vols,
Calumachlts: Fragments. C.  A.  Trypanis.
Callimachus,  Hymns  and  Epigrams,  and  Lycophron. A.  W.

Mair; Abattts. G.  R.  Mair.
Clement  of  Alexandria. Rev.  G.  W.  Butterworth.
Colluthxjs. Cf.  Opplan.
Daphnis and Chloe. Tliomley's Translation revised by

J.  M.  Edmonds; and  Parthenius. S.  Gaselee.
Demosthenes  I.: Olynthiacs,  Philippics  and  Mimob  Ora-
tions. I.-XVII.  AND  XX. J.  H.  Vince.
Demosthenes  II.: De  Corona  and  Db  Falsa  Leoatione.

C.  A.  Vince  and  J.  H.  Vince.
Demosthenes III.: Meidias, Andbotion, Abistocrates,

Timocbates  and  Abistogeiton,  I.  and  II. J.  H.  Vince.
Demosthenes  IV.- VI.: Private  Orations  and  In  Neaebam.

A.  T.  Murray.
Demosthenes  VU.  :  Ftjnebal  Speech,  Ebotic  Essay,  Exobdia

and  Letters. N.  W.  and  N.  J.  DeWitt.
Dio  Cassius: Roman  History. E.  Cary. 9  Vols.
Dig  Chbysostom. J.  W.  Cohoon  and  H.  Lamar  Crosby. 5  Vols.
DiODORUs  SiCTJLUS. 12  Vols. Vols.  I.-VI. C.  H.  Oldfather.

Vol.  VII. C.  L.  Sherman. Vol.  VIII. C.  B.  Welles. Vols.

IX.  and  X. R.  M.  Geer. Vol.  XI. F.  Walton. Vol.  XIL

F.  Walton. General  Index. R.  M.  Geer.
Diogenes  Laertixjs. R.  D.  Hicks. 2  Vols.

DlONYSITJS OF HaLICARNASSUS  : ROMAN ANTlQUlTtES. Spel-

man's  translation  revised  by  E.  Gary. 7  Vols.
Epictettjs. W.  a.  Oldfather. 2  Vols.
EtJBiPiDEs. A.  S.  Way. 4  Vols. Verse  trans.
EtJSEBiTJs: Ecclesiastical Histoby. Kirsopp Lake and

J.  E.  L.  Oulton. 2  Vols.
Galen: On  the  Natubal  Faculties. A.  J.  Brock.
The  Greek  Anthology. W.  R.  Paton. 6  Vols.
6


Greek  Elegy  and  Iambus  with  the  Anacreontea, J.  M.

Edmonds. 2  Vols.
The  Greek  Btjcolio  Poets  (Theocritus,  Bion,  Moschus).

J.  M.  Edmonds.
Greek  Mathematical  Works. Ivor  Thomas. 2  Vols.
Herodes. Cf.  Theophrastus  :  Characters.
Herodotus. A.  D.  Godley. 4  Vols.
Hesiod  and  The  Homeric  Hymns. H.  G.  Evelyn  White,
Hippocrates  and  the  Fragments  of  Heraclbitus. W.  H.  S.

Jones  and  E.  T.  Withington. 4  Vols.
Homer: Iliad. A.  T.  Murray. 2  Vols.
Homer: Odyssey. A.  T.  Murray. 2  Vols.
IsAEUS. E.  W.  Forster.

IsocRATES. George  Norlin  and  LaRue  Van  Hook. 3  Vols.
[St.  John  Damascene]: Barlaam  and  Ioasaph. Rev.  O. R.

Woodward,  Harold  Mattingly  and  D.  M.  Lang.
JosEPHUS. 9  Vols. Vols. I.-IV.; H.  Thackeray. Vol. V.;

H.  Thackeray  and  R.  Marcvis. Vols.  VI.-VII.;'  R.  Marcus.

Vol.  VIII.;  R.  Marcus  and  Allen  Wikgren. Vol.  IX.  L.  H.

Feldman.
Julian. Wilmer  Cave  Wright. 3  Vols.
LuciAN. 8  Vols. Vols.  I.-V. A.  M.  Harmon. Vol.  VI. K.

Kilbum. Vols.  VII.-VTII. M.  D.  Macleod.
Lycophron. Cf.  Callimachus.
Lyra  Graeca. J.  M.  Edmonds, 3  Vols.
Lysias. W.  R.  M.  Lamb.
Manetho. W.  G.  Waddell: Ptolemy: Tetkabiblos. F.  E.

Robbins,
Marcus  Aurelius. C.  R.  Haines,
Menander, F.  G.  Allinson.
Minor  Attic Orators (Antiphon, Andocides, Lycurgus,

Demades,  Dinarchus,  Hyperides), K,  J.  Maidment  and

J.  O.  Burrt. 2  Vols.
NoNNOs: Dionysiaca. W.  H.  D.  Rouse. 3  Vols.
Oppian,  Colluthus,  Tryphiodorus, a.  W.  Mair.
Papyri. Non-Literary  Selections, A.  S.  Hunt  and  C.  C.

Edgar. 2  Vols. Literary  Selections  (Poetry). D.  L,  Page.
Parthenius. Cf.  Daphnis  and  Chlob.
Pausanias: Description  of  Greece. W.  H.  S.  Jones, 4

Vols,  and  Companion  Vol.  arranged  by  R.  E.  Wycherley.
Philo. 10  Vols. Vols.  I.-V.; F.  H.  Colson  and  Rev.  G,  H,

Whitaker. Vols.  VI.-IX.; F.  H.  Colson. Vol,  X, F.  H.

Cokon  and  the  Rev.  J.  W.  Earp.
Philo: two  supplementary  Vols, {Translation  only.) Ralph

Marcus,

6


Philostkatus  : The  Life  of  Apoixokics  ot  Tyama. F.  C.

Conybeare. 2  Vols.
Philostkatus: Imagines;  Caijjsteatus :  Descbiptions. A.

Fairbanks.
Philostbatus  and  ExjNAPnjs :  Lives  o»  the  Sophists. Wilmer

Cave  Wright.
PiKDAB. Sir  J.  E.  Sandys.
Plato: Charmides,  Alciblades,  Hipparchus,  The  Lovebs,

Theaqes,  Mnfos  and  Epinomis. \V.  R.  M.  Lamb.
PuiTO: Cbatytus, Pabmenides,  Gbeatbb  Hippias, Lesseb

HippiAS. H.  N.  Fowler.
Plato: EuTHYPHBe, Apolooy,  Cbtto, Phaedo, Phaedbu3.

H.  N.  Fowler.
Plato:  Laches,  Pbotaoobas,  Meno,  Edthydemus. W.  R.  iL

Lamb.
Plato: Laws. Rev.  R.  G.  Bury. 2  Vols.
Plato: Lysis,  Symposixtm,  Goboxas. W.  R.  M.  Lamb.
Plato: Republic. Paul  Shorey. 2  Vols.
Plato:  Statesman,  Philebus. H.N.  Fowler;  Ion. VV.  R.  M.

Lamb.
Plato: Theaetetus  and  Sophist. H.  N.  Fowler.
Plato:  Timaeus,  Cbitias,  Clitopho,  Menexenus,  Epistxjlak.

Rev.  R.  G.  Bury.
Plotinus: a.  H.  Armstrong. Vols.  I.-III.
Plutabch: Mobalia. 15  Vols. Vols.  I.-V. F.  C,  Babbitt.

Vol.  VI. W.  C.  Helmbold. Vols.  VII.  and  XIV. P.  H.  De

Lacy  and  B.  Einarson. Vol.  IX. £.  L.  Minar,  Jr.,  F.  H.  Sand-
bach,  W.  C.  Helmbold. Vol.  X. H.  X.  Fowler. Vol.  XI.

L.  Pearson  and  F.  H.  Sandbach. Vol.  XII. H.  Chemiss  and

W.  C.  Helmbold.
Plutabch:  The  Parallel  Lives. B.  Perrin. 11  Vols.
PoLYBius. W.  R.  Paton. 6  Vols.

Pbocopius  : HisTOBY  OF  THE  Wabs. H.  B.  Dewing. 7  Vols.
Ptolemy:  Tetbabiblos. Cf.  Manetho.
QuiNTUS  Smybnaeus. a.  S.  Way. Verse  trans.
Sextus  Empibicus. Rev.  R.  G.  Bury. 4  Vols.
Sophocles. F.  Storr. 2  Vols. Verse  trans.
Stbabo: Geography. Horace  L.  Jones. 8  Vols.
Theophrastus  : Characters. J. M. Edmonds. Hebodbs,

etc. A.  D.  Knox.
Theopheastus  : Enquiby into Plants. Sir Arthur Hort^

Bart. 2  Vols,
Thucydides. C.  F.  Smith. 4  Vols.
Tbyphiodobus. Cf.  Oppian.

Xenophon  :  Cybopaedia. Walter  Miller. 2  Vols.
Xknophon:  Hellenica. C.  L.  Brownson. 2  Vols.
7


Xknophon:  Anabasis. C.  L.  Brownson,

Xenophon  :  Memorabilia  and  Oeconomicus. E.  C.  Marchant.

Symposidm  and  Apology.  O.  J.  Todd.
Xenophon: Scbipta Minoka. E. C. Marchant and G. W.

Bowersock.


IN  PREPARATION


Greek  Authors

Aristides  : Orations. C.  A.  Behr.

Hebodianus. C.  R.  Whittaker.

Libanius: Selected  Works. A.F.Norman.

MusAEUs: Hero and Leandeb. T. Gelzer and C. H.

Whitman.
Theophrastus  : De  Causis  Plantarum. G.  K.  K.  Link  and

B.  Einarson.

Latin  Authors

AscoNius: Commentaries  on  Ciceeo's  Orations.

G.  W.  Bowersock.
Benedict: The  Rule. P.  Meyvaert.
Justin-Tbogus. R.  Moss.
Manilius. G.  p.  Goold.
Pliny: Letters. B.  Radice.


DESCRIPTIVE  PROSPECTUS  ON  APPLICATION


London  WILLIAM  HEINEMANN  LTD
