================================================================================
Institutio Oratoria, Vol. II (Books 3-5)
Quintilian | With an English translation by H. E. Butler (Loeb Classical Library, 1921)
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Source: Internet Archive: Loeb Classical Library, Quintilian Institutio Oratoria vol. 2 (1921)
Source URL: https://archive.org/details/institutioorator02quin
Rights: Public Domain (U.S.)
Staged: 2026-10-09 | Tower of Babel Library, Batch 09a (classical-literature lane)
================================================================================

THE  LOEB  CLASSICAL  LIBRARY

FOUNDED  BY  JAMES  LOEB,  IX. D.

EDITED  BY
G.  P.  GOOLD,  PH.D.

FORMER  EDITORS

t  T.  E.  PAGE,  c.h.,  litt.d. f  E-  CAPPS,  ph.d.,  ll.d,
t  W.  H.  D.  ROUSE,  litt.d. t  L-  A.  POST,  l.h.d.
E.  H.  WARMINGTON,  m.a.,  f.r.hist.soc.


QUINTIL1AN

II


125


copy


THE  INSTITUTIO ORATORIA  OF

QUINTILIAN

WITH  AN  ENGLISH  TRANSLATION  BY

H. E. BUTLER,  M.A.,

PROFESSOR OF LATIN IN LONDON UNIVERSITY


IN  FOUR  VOLUMES
II


CAMBRIDGE, MASSACHUSETTS

HARVARD  UNIVERSITY  PRESS

LONDON

WILLIAM  HEINEMANN  LTD

MCMLXXVII


American  ISBN  0-674-99139-7
British  ISBN  0  434  99125  2


First  printed  1921
Reprinted  1939,  1953,  1960,  1966, 1977


Printed  in  Great  Britain


TABLE OF CONTENTS

PAGE
BOOK IV 1

Preface. — Ch.  1 :  The  prooemium  or  exordium. —
Ch.  2  :  The  narratio  or  statement  of  facts. — Ch.  3  :
Digressions. — Ch.  4 :  Propositions  preparatory  to
proof.— Ch.  5  :  Partition.

book  v 153

Preface. — Ch.  1  :  Proofs,  artificial  and  unartificial.
— Ch.  2  :  Previous  decisions. — Ch.  3  :  Public  report
or  opinion. — Ch.  4  :  Evidence  extracted  by  torture.
— Ch.  5  :  Refutation  of  documentary  evidence. —
Ch.  6 :  Reasons  for  and  against  offering  to  take
an  oath. — Ch.  7  :  Documentary  evidence  ;  oral
evidence ;  production  of  witnesses ;  attitude  to  be
adopted  toward  witnesses  ;  examination ;  conflict
between  documentary  and  oral  evidence;  super-
natural evidence. — Ch.  8  :  Artificial  proofs. — Ch.  9 :
Signs,  indications,  circumstantial  evidence,  their
difference  from  proofs ;  appearances  ;  prognostics.
— Ch.  10:  Arguments. — Ch.  11:  Examples  and
instances. — Ch.  12  :  Arguments  again. — Ch.  13  :
Refutation  and  proof. — Ch.  14  :  The  enthymeme,
epicheireme,  and  syllogism.

book  vi 371

Preface;  the  death  of  Quintilian's  son. — Ch.  1:
Peroration.— Ch.  2:  Necessity  of  studying  the
temper  of  the  judges;  pathos,  ethos,  and  emotional
appeal. — Ch.  3 :  Laughter,  wit,  and  humour. —
Ch.  4 :  Altercatio  or  debate. — Ch.  5 :  Judgment
and  sagacity.

NOTES 523

INDEX 527


SIGLA

A  =  Codex  Ambrosianus,  11th  century.

B  =  Agreement  of Codices  Bernensis,  Bambergensis  and
No8tradamensis,  10th  century.

G  =s  Codex  Bambergensis where gaps in B have been
supplied  bjf  an  11th-century  hand.


VI


QUINTILIAN

BOOK IV


M. FABII QUINTILIANI
INSTITUTIONIS ORATORIAE

LIBER IV

Prooemium
Perfecto,  Marcelle  Victori,  operis  tibi  dedicati
tertio  libro  et  iam  quarta  fere  laboris  parte  transacta,
nova  insuper  mihi  diligentiae  causa  et  altior  sollici-
tudo,  quale  iudicium  hominum  emererer,  accessit.
Ad  hue  enim  velut  studia  inter  nos  conferebamus,  et
si  parum  nostra  institutio  probaretur  a  ceteris,
contenti  fore  domestico  usu  videbamur,  ut  tui  meique

2  filii  formare  disciplinam  satis  putaremus.  Cum  vero
mihi  Domitianus  Augustus  sororis  suae  nepotum
delegaverit  curam,  non  satis  honorem  iudiciorum
caelestium intelligam, nisi ex hoc oneris quoque

3  magnitudinem  metiar.  Quis  enim  mihi  aut  mores
excolendi  sit  modus,  ut  eos  non  immerito  probaverit
sanctissimus  censor? aut  studia,  ne  fefellisse  in  iis


THE INSTITUTIO ORATORIA
OF QUINTILIAN

BOOK IV

Preface

I  have  now,  my  dear  Marcellus Victorius, com-
pleted  the  third  book  of the  work  which I  have
dedicated  to  you,  and  have  nearly  finished  a  quarter
of  my  task,  and  am  confronted  with  a  motive  for
renewed  diligence  and  increased  anxiety  as  to  the
judgment  it  may  be  found  to  deserve. For  up  to
this point we were merely discussing rhetoric
between  ourselves  and,  in  the  event  of  our  system
being  regarded  as  inadequate  by  the  world  at  large,
were  prepared  to  content  ourselves  with  putting  it
into  practice  at  home  and  to  confine  ourselves  to  the
education  of  your  son  and  mine. But  now  Domiti-  2
anus  Augustus  has  entrusted  me  with  the  education
of  his sister's grandsons,  and I should  be unde-
serving of  the  honour  conferred  upon  me  by  such
divine appreciation,  if  I were  not  to regard this
distinction  as  the  standard  by  which  the  greatness
of my  undertaking must be judged. For it is  3
clearly my duty to spare no pains in moulding
the  character  of  my  august  pupils,  that  they  may
earn  the  deserved  approval  of  the  most  righteous
of  censors. The  same  applies  to  their  intellectual

3


QUINTILIAN

videar  principem  ut  in  omnibus, ita in eloquentia

4  quoque  eminentissimum  ?  Quodsi  nemo  miratur
poetas  maximos  saepe  fecisse,  ut  non  solum  initiis
operum  suorum  Musas  invocarent,  sed  provecti
quoque  longius,  cum  ad  aliquem  graviorem  venissent
locum, repeterent vota et velut nova precatione

5  uterentur,  mihi  quoque  profecto  poterit  ignosci,  si,
quod  initio,  quo  primum  hanc  materiam  inchoavi,
non  feceram,  nunc  omnes  in  auxilium  deos  ipsumque
in  primis,  quo  neque  praesentius  aliud  nee  studiis
magis  propitium  numen  est,  invocem,  ut,  quantum
nobis  exspectationis  adiecit,  tantum  in  genii  adspiret
dexterque  ac  volens  adsit  et  me  qualem  esse  credidit

6  faciat.  Cuius  mihi  religionis  non  haec  sola  ratio,
quae  maxima  est,  sed  alioqui  sic  procedit  ipsum
opus,  ut  maiora  praeteritis  ac  magis  ardua  sint,
quae  ingredior.  Sequitur  enim,  ut  iudicialium
causarum,  quae  sunt  maxime  variae  ac  multiplices,
ordo  explicetur :  quod  prooemii  sit  officium,  quae
ratio  narrandi,  quae  probationum  fides,  seu  pro-
posita  confirmamus  sive  contra  dicta  dissolvimus,
quanta  vis  in  perorando,  seu  reficienda  brevi  repe-
titione rerum memoria est iudicis sive adfectus

7  (quod  est  longe  potentissimum)  commovendi.  De
quibus  partibus  singulis  quidam  separatim  scribere
maluerunt velut  onus  totius  corporis  veriti,  et  sic


BOOK IV.  Pr.  3-7

training,  for  I  would  not  be  found  to  have  dis-
appointed the  expectations  of  a  prince  pre-eminent
in  eloquence  as  in  all  other  virtues.  But  no  one  4
is  surprised  at  the  frequency  with  which  the
greatest  poets  invoke  the  Muses  not  merely  at  the
commencement  of  their  works,  but  even  further
on  when  they  have  reached  some  important  passage
and  repeat  their  vows  and  utter  fresh  prayers  for
assistance.  Assuredly  therefore  I  may  ask  indulgence  5
for  doing  what  I  omitted  to  do  when  I  first  entered
on  this  task  and  calling  to  my  aid  all  the  gods  and
Himself  before  them  all  (for  his  power  is  unsur-
passed and  there  is  no  deity  that  looks  with  such
favour  upon  learning),  beseeching  him  to  inspire  me
with  genius  in  proportion  to  the  hopes  that  he  has
raised  in  me,  to  lend  me  propitious  and  ready  aid  and
make  me  even  such  as  he  has  believed  me  to  be.
And  this,  though  the  greatest,  is  not  the  only  6
motive  for  this  act  of  religious  devotion,  but  my  work  is
of  such  a  nature  that,  as  it  proceeds,  I  am  confronted
with  greater  and  more  arduous  obstacles  than  have
yet  faced  me.  For  my  next  task  is  to  explain  the
order  to  be  followed  in  forensic  causes,  which
present  the  utmost  complication  and  variety.  I  must
set  forth  the  function  of  the  exordium,  the  method
of  the  statement  of  facts,  the  cogency  of  proofs,  whether
we  are  confirming  our  own  assertions  or  refuting
those  of  our  opponents,  and  the  force  of  the  peroration,
whether  we  have  to  refresh  the  memory  of  the
judge  by  a  brief  recapitulation  of  the  facts,  or  to  do
what  is  far  more  effective,  stir  his  emotions.  Some  7
have  preferred  to  give  each  of  these  points  separate
treatment,  fearing  that  if  they  undertook  them  as
a whole the burden  would  be  greater  than they


QUINTILIAN

quoque  complures  de  unaquaque  earum  libros
ediderunt;  quas  ego  omnes  ausus  contexere  prope
infinitum  laborem  prospicio  et  ipsa  cogitatione
suscepti  muneris  fatigor.  Sed  durandum  est,  quia
coepimus,  et  si  viribus  deficiemur,  animo  tamen
perse  verand  um.

I.  Quod  principium  Latine  vel  exordium  dicitur,
maiore  quad  am  ratione  Graeci  videntur  npooLfuov
nominasse,  quia  a  nostris  initium  modo  significatur,
illi  satis  clare  partem  hanc  esse  ante  ingressum  rei

2  de  qua  dicendum  sit,  ostendunt.  Nam  sive  prop-
terea  quod  ot/xr;  cantus  est  et  citharoedi  pauca  ilia,
quae,  antequam  legitimum  certamen  inchoent,  eme-
rendi  favoris  gratia  canunt,  prooemium  cognomina-
verunt,  oratores  quoque  ea  quae,  priusquam  causam
exordiantur, ad conciliandos sibi iudicum animos

3  praeloquuntur  eadem  appellatione  signarunt ;  sive,
quod  oT/xov  iidem  Graeci  viam  appellant,  id  quod
ante  ingressum  rei  ponitur  sic  vocare  est  institutum :
certe  prooemium  est,  quod  apud  iudicem  dici,  prius-
quam causam  cognoverit,  possit ;  vitioseque  in  scholis
facimus, quod exordio semper sic utimur, quasi

4  causam  iudex  iam  noverit.  Cuius  rei  licentia  ex
hoc  est,  quod  ante  declamationem  ilia  velut  imago
litis  exponitur. Sed  in  foro  quoque  contingere  istud


BOOK IV.  Pr.  7-1.  4

could  bear,  and  consequently  have  published  several
books  on  each  individual  point.  I  have  ventured
to  treat  them  altogether  and  foresee  such  infinite
labour  that  I  feel  weary  at  the  very  thought  of  the
task  I  have  undertaken.  But  I  have  set  my  hand  to
the  plough  and  must  not  look  back.  My  strength
may  fail me, but my courage must not  fail.

I.  The  commencement  or  exordium  as  we  call  it  in
Latin  is  styled  a  proem  by  the  Greeks.  This  seems
to  me  a  more  appropriate  name,  because  whereas  we
merely  indicate  that  we  are  beginning  our  task,  they
clearly  show  that  this  portion  is  designed  as  an  intro-
duction to  the  subject  on  which  the  orator  has  to
speak.  It  may  be  because  otfxrj  means  a  tune,  and
players  on  the  lyre  have  given  the  name  of  proem  to
the  prelude  which  they  perform  to  win  the  favour  of
the  audience  before  entering  upon  the  regular  contest
for  the  prize,  that  orators  before  beginning  to  plead
make  a  few  introductory  remarks  to  win  the  in-
dulgence of  the  judges.  Or  it  may  be  because  ot/uos
in  Greek  means  a  way,  that  the  practice  has  arisen  of
calling  an  introduction  a  proem.  But  in  any  case
there  can  be  no  doubt  that  by  proem  we  mean  the
portion  of  a  speech  addressed  to  the  judge  before  he
has  begun  to  consider  the  actual  case.  And  it  is  a
mistaken  practice  which  we  adopt  in  the  schools  of
always  assuming  in  our  exordia  that  the  judge  is
already  acquainted  with  the  case.  This  form  of
licence  arises  from  the  fact  that  a  sketch  of  the  case
is  always  given  before  actual  declamation.1  Such
kinds  of  exordia  may,  however,  be  employed  in  the

1  i.e.  the  statement  of  the  "hard  case"  with  which  the
declaimer  has  to  deal. cp.  iv.  ii.  98.


QUINTILIAN

principiorum  genus  secundis  actionibus  potest ;
primis  quidem  raro  unquam,  nisi  forte  apud  eum,
cui  res  iam  aliunde  nota  sit,  dicimus.

5  Causa  principii  nulla  alia  est,  quam  ut  auditorem,
quo  sit  nobis  in  ceteris  partibus  accommodatior,  prae-
paremus.  Id  fieri  tribus  maxime  rebus  inter
auctores  plurimos  constat,  si  benevolum,  attentum,
docilem  fecerimus,  non  quia  ista  non  per  totam
actionem  sint  custodienda,  sed  quia  initiis  praecipue
necessaria,  per  quae  in  animum  iudicis,  ut  procedere
ultra  possimus,  admittimur.

6  Benevolentiam  aut  a  personis  ducimus  aut  a  causis
accipimus.  Sed  personarum  non  est,  ut  plerique
crediderunt,  triplex  ratio,  ex  litigatore  et  adversario

7  et  iudice.  Nam  exordium  duci  nonnunquam  etiam
ab  actore  causae  solet.  Quanquam  enim  pauciora
de  se  ipso  dicit  et  parcius,  plurimum  tamen  ad  omnia
momenti  est  in  hoc  positum,  si  vir  bonus  creditur.
Sic  enim  continget,  ut  non  studium  advocati  videa-
tur  adferre  sed  paene  testis  fidem.  Quare  in  primis
existimetur  venisse  ad  agendum  ductus  officio  vel
cognationis  vel  amicitiae  maximeque,  si  fieri  poterit,
reipublicae  aut  alicuius  certe  non  mediocris  exempli.
Quod  sine  dubio  multo  magis  ipsis  litigatoribus
8


BOOK IV.  i.  4-7

courts,  when  a  case  comes  on  for  the  second  time,  but
never  or  rarely  on  the  first  occasion,  unless  we  are
speaking  before  a  judge  who  has  knowledge  of
the  case  from  some  other  source.

The  sole  purpose  of  the  exordium  is  to  prepare  our
audience  in  such  a  way  that  they  will  be  disposed  to
lend  a  ready  ear  to  the  rest  of  our  speech.  The
majority  of  authors  agree  that  this  is  best  effected  in
three  ways,  by  making  the  audience  well-disposed,
attentive  and  ready  to  receive  instruction.  I  need
hardly  say  that  these  aims  have  to  be  kept  in
view  throughout  the  whole  speech,  but  they  are  espe-
cially necessary  at  the  commencement,  when  we
gain  admission  to  the  mind  of  the  judge  in  order
to  penetrate  still  further.

As  regards  good- will,  we  secure  that  either  from
persons  connected  with  the  case  or  from  the  case
itself.  Most  writers  have  divided  these  persons  into
three  classes,  the  plaintiff,  the  defendant  and  the
judge.  This  classification  is  wrong,  for  the  exordium
may  sometimes  derive  its  conciliatory  force  from  the
person  of  the  pleader.  For  although  he  may  be
modest  and  say  little  about  himself,  yet  if  he  is
believed  to  be  a  good  man,  this  consideration  will
exercise  the  strongest  influence  at  every  point  of
the  case.  For  thus  he  will  have  the  good  fortune  to
give  the  impression  not  so  much  that  he  is  a
zealous  advocate  as  that  he  is  an  absolutely  reliable
witness.  It  is  therefore  pre-eminently  desirable
that  he  should  be  believed  to  have  undertaken
the  case  out  of  a  sense  of  duty  to  a  friend  or
relative,  or  even  better,  if  the  point  can  be  made,
by  a  sense  of  patriotism  or  at  any  rate  some  serious
moral consideration. No doubt it is even more


QUINTILIAN

faciendum  est,  ut  ad  agendum  magna  atque  honesta
ratione  aut  etiam necessitate  accessisse  videantur.

8  Sed  ut  praecipua  in  hoc  dicentis  auctoritas,  si  omnis
in  subeundo  negotio  suspicio  sordium  aut  odiorum
aut  ambitionis  afuerit,  ita  quaedam  in  his  quoque
commendatio  tacita,  si  nos  infirmos,  imparatos,  im-
pares agentium contra ingeniis dixerimus, qualia

9  sunt  pleraque  Messalae  prooemia.  Est  enim  naturalis
favor  pro  laborantibus,  et  iudex  religiosus  libentis-
sime  patronum  audit,  quem  iustitiae  suae  minime
timet.  Inde  ilia  veterum  circa  occultandam
eloquentiam simulatio multum ab hac nostrorum

10  temporum  iactatione  di versa.  Vitandum  etiam,  ne
contumeliosi,  maligni,  superbi,  maledici  in  quem-
quam  hominem  ordinemve  videamur  praecipueque
eorum,  qui  laedi  nisi  adversa  iudicum  voluntate  non

11  possunt.  Nam  in  iudicem  ne  quid  dicatur  non
modo  palam  sed  quod  omnino  intelligi  possit,  stul-
tum  erat  monere,  nisi  fieret.  Etiam  partis  adversae
patronus  dabit  exordio  materiam,  interim  cum
honore,  si  eloquentiam  eius  et  gratiam  nos  timere
fingendo,  ut  ea  suspecta  sint  iudici,  fecerimus,
interim  per  contumeliam,  sed  hoc  perquam  raro,  ut
Asinius  pro  Urbiniae1  heredibus  Labienum  adversarii
patronum inter argumenta causae malae posuit.

1  cp.  vii.  ii.  4  and  26.
io


BOOK IV.  i.  7-1 1

necessary  for  the  parties  themselves  to  create  the
impression  that  they  have  been  forced  to  take  legal
action  by  some  weighty  and  honourable  reason  or  even
by  necessity.  But  just  as  the  authority  of  the  speaker  8
carries  greatest  weight,  if  his  undertaking  of  the  case
is  free  from  all  suspicion  of  meanness,  personal  spite
or  ambition,  so  also  we  shall  derive  some  silent  support
from  representing  that  we  are  weak,  unprepared,  and
no  match  for  the  powerful  talents  arrayed  against  us,
a  frequent  trick  in  the  exordia  of  Messala.  For  9
men  have  a  natural  prejudice  in  favour  of  those
who  are  struggling  against  difficulties,  and  a  scrupu-
lous judge  is  always  specially  ready  to  listen  to  an
advocate  whom  he  does  not  suspect  to  have  designs
on  his  integrity.  Hence  arose  the  tendency  of
ancient  orators  to  pretend  to  conceal  their  eloquence,
a  practice  exceedingly  unlike  the  ostentation  of  our
own  times.  It  is  also  important  to  avoid  giving  the  10
impression  that  we  are  abusive,  malignant,  proud
or  slanderous  toward  any  individual  or  body  of
men,  especially  such  as  cannot  be  hurt  without
exciting  the  disapproval  of  the  judges.  As  to  the  11
judge,  it  would  be  folly  for  me  to  warn  speakers
not  to  say  or  even  hint  anything  against  him,  but
for  the  fact  that  such  things  do  occur.  Our  oppo-
nent's advocate  will  sometimes  provide  us  with
material  for  our  exordium :  we  may  speak  of  him
in  honorific  terms,  pretending  to  fear  his  eloquence
and  influence  with  a  view  to  rendering  them  suspect
to  the  judge,  or  occasionally,  though  very  seldom,  we
may  abuse  him,  as  Asinius  did  in  his  speech  on  behalf
of  the  heirs  of  Urbinia,  where  he  includes  among  the
proofs  of  the  weakness  of  the  plaintiffs  case  the  fact
that he has secured Labienus as his advocate.

ii


QUINTILIAN

12  Negat  haec  esse  prooemia  Cornelius  Celsus,  quia
sint  extra  litem.  Sed  ego  cum  auctoritate  sum-
morum  oratorum  magis  ducor,  turn  pertinere  ad
causam  puto  quidquid  ad  dicentem  pertinet,  cum  sit
naturale,  ut  iudices  iis,  quos  libentius  audiunt,  etiam

13  facilius  credant.  Ipsius  autem  litigatoris  persona
tractanda  varie  est.  Nam  turn  dignitas  eius  ad-
legatur,  turn  commendatur  infirmitas.  Nonnunquam
contingit  relatio  meritorum,  de  quibus  verecundius
dicendum  erit  sua  quam  aliena  laudanti.  Multum
agit  sexus,  aetas,  condicio,  ut  in  feminis,  senibus,
pupillis, liberos, parentes, coniuges adlegantibus.

14  Nam  sola  rectum  quoque  iudicem  inclinat  miseratio.
Degustanda  tamen  haec  prooemio,  non  consumenda.
Adversarii  vero  persona  prope  iisdem  omnibus,  sed  e
contrario  ductis  impugnari  solet.  Nam  et  potentes
sequitur  invidia  et  humiles  abiectosque  contemptus
et turpes ac nocentes odium, quae tria sunt  ad

15  alienandos  iudicum  animos  potentissima.  Neque
haec  dicere  sat  est,  quod  datur  etiam  imperitis ;
pleraque  augenda  aut  minuenda,  ut  expediet.  Hoc
enim  oratoris  est,  ilia  causae.

16  Iudicem  conciliabimus  nobis  non  tantum  laudando
eum,  quod  et  fieri  cum modo  debet et  est  tamen


12


BOOK IV.  i.  12-16

Cornelius  Celsus  denies  that  such  remarks  can  be  12
considered  as  belonging  to  the  exordium  on  the
ground  that  they  are  irrelevant  to  the  actual  case.
Personally  I  prefer  to  follow  the  authority  of  the
greatest  orators,  and  hold  that  whatever  concerns  the
pleader  is  relevant  to  the  case,  since  it  is  natural  that
the  judges  should  give  readier  credence  to  those  to
whom  they  find  it  a  pleasure  to  listen.  The  character  13
of  our  client  himself  may,  too,  be  treated  in  various
ways :  we  may  emphasise  his  worth  or  we  may
commend  his  weakness  to  the  protection  of  the
court.  Sometimes  it  is  desirable  to  set  forth  his
merits,  when  the  speaker  will  be  less  hampered  by
modesty  than  if  he  were  praising  his  own.  Sex,  age
and  situation  are  also  important  considerations,  as  for
instance  when  women,  old  men  or  wards  are  pleading
in  the  character  of  wives,  parents  or  children.
For  pity  alone  may  move  even  a  strict  judge.  14
These  points,  however,  should  only  be  lightly  touched
upon  in  the  exordium,  not  run  to  death.  As  regards
our  opponent  he  is  generally  attacked  on  similar
lines,  but  with  the  method  reversed.  For  power  is
generally  attended  by  envy,  abject  meanness  by
contempt,  guilt  and  baseness  by  hatred,  three
emotions  which  are  powerful  factors  to  alienate  the
good-will  of  the  judges.  But  a  simple  statement  will  15
not  suffice,  for  even  the  uneducated  are  capable  of
that :  most  of  the  points  will  require  exaggeration
or  extenuation  as  expediency  may  demand :  the
method  of  treatment  belongs  to  the  orator,  the
points  themselves  belong  to  the  case.

We shall win the good-will of the judge not  16
merely  by  praising  him,  which  must  be  done  with
tact  and  is  an  artifice  common  to  both  parties,  but

13


QUINTILIAN

parti  utrique  commune,  sed  si  laudem  eius  ad
utilitatem  causae  nostrae  coniunxerimus,  ut  adle-
gemus  pro  honestis  dignitatem  ill!  suam,  pro  humi-
libus iustitiam,  pro infelicibus misericordiam, pro

17  laesis  severitatem  et  similiter  cetera.  Mores  quo-
que, si  fieri  potest,  iudicis  velim  nosse.  Nam  prout
asperi,  lenes,  iucundi,  graves,  duri,  remissi  erunt,
aut  adsumere  in  causam  naturas  eorum,  qua  com-
petent,  aut  mitigare, qua repugnabunt,  oportebit.

18  Accidit  autem  interim  hoc  quoque,  ut  aut  nobis
inimicus  aut  adversariis  sit  amicus  qui  iudicat ;  quae
res  utrique  parti  tractanda  est  ac  nescio  an  etiam  ei
magis,  in  quam  videatur  propensior.  Est  enim
nonnunquam  pravis  hie  ambitus  adversus  amicos
aut  pro  iis,  quibuscum  simultates  gerant,  pronun-
tiandi faciendique iniuste, ne fecisse videantur.

19  Fuerunt  etiam  quidam  rerum  suarum  iudices.
Nam  et  in  libris  Observationum  a  Septimio  editis
adfuisse  Ciceronem  tali  causae  invenio,  et  ego  pro
regina  Berenice  apud  ipsam  earn  causam  dixi.
Similis  hie  quoque  superioribus  ratio  est.  Adver-
sarius enim fiduciam partis suae iactat, patronus

M


BOOK IV.  i.  16-19

by  linking  his  praise  to  the  furtherance  of  our  own
case.  For  instance,  in  pleading  for  a  man  of  good
birth  we  shall  appeal  to  his  own  high  rank,  in  speaking
for  the  lowly  we  shall  lay  stress  on  his  sense  of  jus-
tice, on  his  pity  in  pleading  the  cause  of  misfortune,
and  on  his  severity  when  we  champion  the  victims
of  wrong,  and  so  on.  I  should  also  wish,  if  possible,  17
to  be  acquainted  with  the  character  of  the  judge.
For  it  will  be  desirable  to  enlist  their  temperaments
in  the  service  of  our  cause,  where  they  are  such  as
are  like  to  be  useful,  or  to  mollify  them,  if  they  are
like  to  prove  adverse,  just  according  as  they  are
harsh,  gentle,  cheerful,  grave,  stern,  or  easy-going.
It  will,  however,  sometimes  happen  that  the  judge  18
is  hostile  to  us  and  friendly  to  our  adversaries.  Such
cases  demand  the  attention  of  both  parties  and  I  am
not  sure  that  the  party  favoured  by  the  judge  does
not  require  to  handle  the  situation  with  even  more
care  than  his  opponent.  For  perverse  judges  have
sometimes  a  preposterous  tendency  to  give  judg-
ment against  their  friends  or  in  favour  of  those  with
whom  they  have  a  quarrel,  and  of  committing  in-
justice merely  to  avoid  the  appearance  of  partiality.
Again  some  have  been  judges  in  cases  where  their  19
own  interests  were  involved.  I  note,  for  instance,
in  the  books  of  observations  published  by  Septimius
that  Cicero  appeared  in  such  a  case,  while  I  myself,
when  I  appeared  on  behalf  of  Queen  Berenice,
actually  pleaded  before  her.  In  such  cases  we  must
be  guided  by  the  same  principles  that  I  have  laid
down  above.  The  opponent  of  the  judge  will
emphasise  his  confidence  in  the  justice  of  his  client's
cause,  while  the  advocate  of  his  interests  will
express  the  fear  that  the  judge  may  be  influenced

15


QUINTILIAN

20  timet  cognoscentis  verecundiam.  Praeterea  detra-
henda  vel  confirmanda  opinio,  praecipue  si  quam
domo  videbitur  iudex  attulisse.  Metus  etiam  non-
nunquam  est  amovendus,  ut  Cicero  pro  Milone,  ne
arma  Pompeii  disposita  contra  se  putarent,  laboravit ;
nonnunquam  adhibendus,  ut  idem  in  Verrem  facit.

21  Sed  adhibendi  modus  alter  ille  frequens  et  favora-
bilis :  ne  male  sentiat  populus  Romanus,  ne  iudicia
transferantur ;  alter  autem  asper  et  rarus,  quo
minatur  corruptis  accusationem,  et  id  quidem  in
consilio  ampliore  utcunque  tutius ;  nam  et  mali
inhibentur et boni gaudent ; apud singulos vero

22  nunquam  suaserim,  nisi  defecerint  omnia.  Quod
si  necessitas  exigit,  non  erit  iam  ex  arte  oratoria,
non  magis  quam  appellare,  etiamsi  id  quoque  saepe
utile  est,  aut,  antequam  pronuntiet,  reum  facere ;
nam  et  minari  et  deferre  etiam  non  orator  potest.

23  Si  causa  conciliandi  nobis  iudicis  materiam  dabit,
ex  hac  potissimum  aliqua  in  usum  principii,  quae
max  i me favorabilia videbuntur, decerpi oportebit.


1  i.  15.

2  e.g.  in  the  Verrines  Cicero  points  out  to  the  jury,  then
drawn  entirely  from  senators,  that  they  are  on  their  trial.
If  they  fail  in  their  duty,  the  constitution  of  the  panels  will
be  altered  and  the  equites  be  admitted  as  well.


16


BOOK IV.  i.  19-23

by  a  quixotic  delicacy.  Further,  if  the  judge  is  20
thought  to  have  come  into  court  with  a  prejudice
in  favour  of  one  side,  we  must  try  to  remove  or
strengthen  that  prejudice  as  circumstances  may
demand.  Again  occasionally  we  shall  have  to  calm
the  judges'  fears,  as  Cicero  does  in  the  pro  Milone,
where  he  strives  to  persuade  them  not  to  think  that
Pompey's  soldiers  have  been  stationed  in  the  court
as  a  threat  to  themselves.  Or  it  may  be  necessary
to  frighten  them,  as  Cicero  does  in  the  Verrines.1
There  are  two  ways  of  bringing  fear  to  bear  upon  21
the  judges.  The  commonest  and  most  popular  is  to
threaten  them  with  the  displeasure  of  the  Roman
people  or  the  transference  of  the  juries  to  another
class  2  ;  the  second  is  somewhat  brutal  and  is  rarely
employed,  and  consists  in  threatening  them  with  a
prosecution  for  bribery  :  this  is  a  method  which  is
fairly  safe  with  a  large  body  of  judges,  since  it
checks  the  bad  and  pleases  the  good  members  of
the  jury,  but  I  should  never  recommend  its  employ-
ment with  a  single  judge  3  except  in  the  very  last
resort.  But  if  necessity  should  drive  us  to  such  a  22
course,  we  must  remember  that  such  threats  do  not
come  under  the  art  of  oratory,  any  more  than  appeals
from  the  judgment  of  the  court  (though  that  is  often
useful),  or  the  indictment  of  the  judge  before  he
gives  his  decision.  For  even  one  who  is  no  orator
can  threaten  or  lay  an  information.

If  the  case  affords  us  the  means  of  winning  the  23
favour  of  the  judge,  it  is  important  that  the  points
which seem most likely to  serve to  our  purpose
should  be  selected  for  introduction  into  the  exordium,

8  It  must  be  borne  in  mind  that  index  may  be  a  juryman
forming  one  of  a  large  panel,  or  a  single  judge  trying  a  civil
action.

17


QUINTILIAN

Quo  in  loco  Verginius  fallitur,  qui  Theodoro  placere
tradit,  ut  ex singulis quaestionibus singuli  sensus

24  in  prooemium  conferantur.  Nam  ille  non  hoc  dicit,
sed  ad  potentissimas  quaestiones  iudicem  prae-
parandum ;  in  quo  vitii  nihil  erat,  nisi  in  universum
id  praeciperet,  quod  nee  omnis  quaestio  patitur  nee
omnis  causa  desiderat.  Nam  protinus  a  petitore
primo  loco,  dum  ignota  iudici  lis  est,  quomodo  ex
quaestionibus  ducemus  sententias  ?  nimirum  res
erunt  indicandae  prius.  Demus  aliquas  (nam  id
exiget  ratio  nonnunquam) ;  etiamne  potentissimas
omnes,  id  est  totam  causam?  sic  erit  in  prooemio

25  peracta  narratio.  Quid  vero  ?  si,  ut  frequenter
accidit,  paulo  est  durior  causa,  non  benevolentia
iudicis  petenda  ex  aliis  partibus  erit,  sed  non  ante
conciliato  eius  animo  nuda  quaestionum  committetur
asperitas? Quae si recte semper initio dicendi

26  tractarentur,  nihil  prooemio  opus  esset.  Aliqua  ergo
nonnunquam,  quae  erunt  ad  conciliandum  nobis
iudicem  potentissima,  non  inutiliter  interim  ex
quaestionibus in exordio locabuntur. Quae sint

18


BOOK  IV.  i.  23-26

On  this  subject  Verginius  falls  into  error,  for  he
asserts  that  Theodorus  lays  down  that  some  one
reflexion  on  each  individual  question  that  is  involved
by  the  case  should  be  introduced  into  the  exordium.
As  a  matter  of  fact  Theodorus  does  not  say  this,  24
but  merely  that  the  judge  should  be  prepared  for
the  most  important  of  the  questions  that  are  to  be
raised.  There  is  nothing  to  object  to  in  this  rule,
save  that  he  would  make  it  of  universal  application,
whereas  it  is  not  possible  with  every  question  nor
desirable  in  every  case.  For  instance,  seeing  that
the  plaintiffs  advocate  speaks  first,  and  that
till  he  has  spoken  the  judge  is  ignorant  of  the
nature  of  the  dispute,  how  is  it  possible  for  us  to
introduce  reflexions  relating  to  all  the  questions
involved?  The  facts  of  the  case  must  be  stated
before  that  can  be  done.  We  may  grant  that  some
questions  may  be  mentioned,  for  that  will  sometimes
be  absolutely  necessary ;  but  can  we  introduce  all
the  most  important  questions,  or  in  other  words  the
whole  case  ?  If  we  do  we  shall  have  completed  our
statement  of  facts  within  the  limits  of  the  exordium.
Again  if,  as  often  happens,  the  case  is  somewhat  25
difficult,  surely  we  should  seek  to  win  the  good-will
of  the  judge  by  other  portions  of  our  speech  sooner
than  thrust  the  main  questions  upon  him  in  all  their
naked  harshness  before  we  have  done  anything  to
secure  his  favour.  If  the  main  questions  ought
always  to  be  treated  at  the  beginning  of  a  speech,
we  might  dispense  with  the  exordium.  We  shall  26
then  occasionally  introduce  certain  points  from  the
main  questions  into  the  exordium,  which  will  exercise
a  valuable  influence  in  winning  the  judge  to  regard
us  with  favour. It  is  not  necessary  to  enumerate

*9


QUiNTILlAN

porro  in  causis  favorabilia,  enumerare  non  est  ne-
cesse,  quia  et  manifesta  erunt  cognita  cui usque
controversiae  condicione et  omnia  colligi  in tanta

27  litium  varietate  non  possunt.  Ut  autem  haec  in-
venire  et  augere,  ita  quod  laedit  aut  omnino  re-
pel] ere  aut  certe  minuere  ex  causa  est.  Miseratio
quoque  aliquando  ex  eadem  venit,  sive  quid  passi

28  sumus  grave  sive  passuri.  Neque  enim  sum  in  hac
opinione,  qua  quidam,  ut  eo  distare  prooemium  ab
epilogo  credam,  quod  in  hoc  praeterita,  in  illo  futura
dicantur,  sed  quod  in  ingressu  parcius  et  modestius
praetemptanda  sit  iudicis  misericordia,  in  epilogo
vero  liceat  totos  effundere  adfectus  et  fictam  ora-
tionem  induere  personis  et  defunctos  excitare  et
pignora  reorum  producere  ;  quae  minus  in  exordiis

29  sunt  usitata.  Sed  haec,  quae  supra  dixi,  non  movere
tantum,  verum  ex  diverso  amoliri  quoque  prooemio
opus  est.  Ut  autem  nostrum  miserabilem,  si  vin-
camur,  exitum,  ita  adversariorum  superbum,  si
vicerint,  utile  est  credi.

30  Sed  ex  iis  quoque,  quae  non  sunt  personarum  nee
causarum,  verum  adiuncta  personis  et  causis,  duci

20


BOOK IV.  i.  26-30

the  points  which  are  likely  to  gain  us  such  favour,
because  they  will  be  obvious  as  soon  as  we  have
acquainted  ourselves  with  the  circumstances  of  each
dispute,  while  in  view  of  the  infinite  variety  pre-
sented by  cases  it  is  out  of  the  question  to  specify
them  here.  Just,  however,  as  it  is  in  the  interest  27
of  our  case  to  note  and  amplify  these  points,  so  it  is
also  to  rebut  or  at  any  rate  lessen  the  force  of
anything  that  is  damaging  to  our  case.  Again
our  case  may  justify  an  appeal  to  compassion  with
regard  to  what  we  have  suffered  in  the  past  or  are
likely  to  suffer.  For  I  do  not  share  the  opinion  28
held  by  some,  that  the  exordium  and  the  peroration
are  to  be  distinguished  by  the  fact  that  the  latter
deals  with  the  past,  the  former  with  the  future.
Rather  I  hold  that  the  difference  between  them  is
this  :  in  our  opening  any  preliminary  appeal  to  the
compassion  of  the  judge  must  be  made  sparingly
and  with  restraint,  while  in  the  peroration  we  may
give  full  rein  to  our  emotions,  place  fictitious
speeches  in  the  mouths  of  our  characters,  call  the
dead  to  life,  and  produce  the  wife  or  children  of  the
accused  in  court,  practices  which  are  less  usual  in
exordia.  But  it  is  the  function  of  the  exordium  not  29
merely  to  excite  the  feelings  to  which  I  have  alluded,
but  to  do  all  that  is  possible  to  show  that  our
opponent's  case  is  not  deserving  of  them.  It  is
advantageous  to  create  the  impression  not  merely
that  our  fate  will  be  deserving  of  pity,  if  we  lose,  but
that  our  adversary  will  be  swollen  with  outrageous
insolence  if  he  prove  successful.

But  exordia  are  often  drawn  from  matters  which  30
do  not,  strictly  speaking,  concern  either  cases  or  the
persons involved, though  not  unrelated  to  either.

21


QUINTILIAN

prooemia  solent.  Personis  applicantur  non  pignora
modo,  de  quibus  supra  dixi,  sed  propinquitates,
amicitiae,  interim  regiones  etiam  civitatesque,  et  si
quid  aliud  eius  quern  defendimus  casu  laedi  potest.

31  Ad  causam  extra  pertinent  tempus,  unde  principium
pro  Caelio  ;  locus,  unde  pro  Deiotaro ;  habitus,  unde
pro  Milone ;  opinio,  unde  in  Verrem  ;  deinceps,  ne
omnia  enumerem,  infamia  iudiciorum,  exspectatio
vulgi ;  nihil  enim horum  in  causa  est,  ad  causam

32  tamen  pertinent.  Adiicit  Theophrastus  ab  oratione
principium,  quale  videtur  esse  Demosthenis  pro
Ctesiphonte,  ut  sibi  dicere  suo  potius  arbitrio  liceat
rogantis  quam  eo  modo,  quern  actione  accusator
praescripserit.

33  Fiducia  ipsa  solet  opinion e  arrogantiae  laborare.
Faciunt  favorem  et  ilia  paene  communia  non  tamen
omittenda,  vel  ideo  ne  occupentur,  optare,  abominari,
rogare,  sollicitum  agere ;  quia  plerumque  attentum
iudicem  facit,  si  res  agi  videtur  nova,  magna,  atrox,
pertinens  ad  exemplum,  praecipue  tamen,  si  iudex
aut  sua  vice  aut  reipublicae  commovetur,  cuius  animus


x  In  the  pro  Caelio  (c.  1)  Cicero  calls  attention  to  the  fact
that  the  trial  is  taking  place  during  a  festival,  all  other  legal
business  being  suspended.  In  the  pro  Deiotaro  (c.  2)  he
calls  attention  to  the  unusual  surroundings,  the  speech  being
delivered  in  a  private  house.  For  the  pro  Milone  see  §  20
of  this  chapter. In  the  first  Verrine  (c.  1)  he  remarks  that

22


BOOK IV.  i.  30-33

In  such  relation  to  persons  stand  not  only  wives
and  children  of  whom  I  have  just  spoken,  but  also
relations,  friends,  and  at  times  districts  and  states
together  with  anything  else  that  is  like  to  suffer
injury  from  the  fall  of  the  client  whom  we  defend.
As  regards  external  circumstances1  which  have  a  31
bearing  on  the  case,  I  may  mention  time,  which
is  introduced  in  the  exordium  of  the  pro  Caelio,
place  (in  the  pro  Deiotaro),  the  appearance  of  the
court  (in  the  pro  Milone),  public  opinion  (in  the
Verrines),  and  finally,  as  I  cannot  mention  all,
the  ill-repute  of  the  law  courts  and  the  popular
expectation  excited  by  the  case.  None  of  these
actually  belong  to  the  case,  but  all  have  some
bearing  on  it.  Theophrastus  adds  that  the  exordium  32
may  be  drawn  from  the  speech  of  one's  opponent,
as  that  of  the  pro  Ctesiphonte  of  Demosthenes  appears
to  be,  where  he  asks  that  he  may  be  allowed  to
speak  as  he  pleases  and  not  to  be  restricted  to  the
form  laid  down  by  the  accuser  in  his  speech.

Confidence  often  labours  under  the  disadvantage  33
of  being  regarded  as  arrogance.  But  there  are
certain  tricks  for  acquiring  good-will,  which  though
almost  universal,  are  by  no  means  to  be  neglected,  if
only  to  prevent  their  being  first  employed  against
ourselves.  I  refer  to  rhetorical  expressions  of  wish-
ing, detestation,  entreaty,  or  anxiety.  For  it  keeps
the  judge's  attention  on  the  alert,  if  he  is  led  to
think  the  case  novel,  important,  scandalous,  or
likely  to  set  a  precedent,  still  more  if  he  is  excited
by  concern  for  himself  or  the  common  weal,  when

it  is  generally  believed  that  the  corruption  of  the  courts  is
such  that  it  is  practically  impossible  to  secure  the  condemn-
ation of  a  wealthy  man.

23


QUINTILIAN

spe,  metu,  admonitione,  precibus,  vanitate  deniquc,

34  si  id  profuturum  credimus,  agitandus  est.  Sunt  et
ilia  excitandis  ad  audiendum  non  inutilia,  si  nos  neque
diu  moraturos  neque  extra  causam  dicturos  existiment.
Docilem  sine  dubio  et  haec  ipsa  praestat  attentio ;  sed
et  illud,si  breviter  et  dilucide  summam  rei,de  qua  cog-
noscere  debeat,  indicaverimus,  quod  Homerus  atque

35  Vergilius  operum  suorum  principiis  faciunt.  Nam  is
eius  rei  modus  est,  ut  propositioni  similior  sit  quam  ex-
position^ nee  quomodo  quidque  sit  actum,  sed  de  qui-
bus  dicturus  sit  orator  ostendat.  Nee  video,  quod  huius
rei possit  apud oratores  reperiri  melius  exemplum

36  quam  Ciceronis  pro  A.  Cluentio :  Animadverti,  indices,
omnem  accusatoris  orationem  in  duas  divisam  esse  partes  ;
quarum  altera  mihi  inniti  et  magnopere  co?ifidere  videbatur
invidia  iam  inveterata  iudicii  Iuniani,  altera  tantummodo
consuetudinis  causa  timid e  et  diffidenter  attingere  rationem
veneficii  criminum,  qua  de  re  lege  est  haec  quaestio
constituta.  Id  tamen  totum  respondenti  facilius  est
quam  proponents  quia  hie  admonendus  iudex,  illic

37  docendus  est.  Nee  me  quanquam  magni  auctores  in
hoc duxerint,  ut non semper  facere attentum ac

24


BOOK IV.  i.  33-37

his  mind  must  be  stirred  by  hope,  fear,  admonition,
entreaty  and  even  by  falsehood,  if  it  seems  to  us
that  it  is  likely  to  advance  our  case.  We  shall  also  34
find  it  a  useful  device  for  wakening  the  attention  of
our  audience  to  create  the  impression  that  we  shall
not  keep  them  long  and  intend  to  stick  closely  to
the  point.  The  mere  fact  of  such  attention  un-
doubtedly makes  the  judge  ready  to  receive  instruc-
tion from  us,  but  we  shall  contribute  still  more  to
this  effect  if  we  give  a  brief  and  lucid  summary  of
the  case  which  he  has  to  try  ;  in  so  doing  we  shall
be  following  the  method  adopted  by  Homer  and
Virgil  at  the  beginning  of  their  poems.  For  as  regards  35
the  length  of  the  exordium,  it  should  propound  rather
than  expound,  and  should  not  describe  how  each
thing  occurred,  but  simply  indicate  the  points  on
which  the  orator  proposes  to  speak.  I  do  not  think
a  better  example  of  this  can  be  found  than  the
exordium  to  the  pro  Cluentio  of  Cicero.  "  I  have  36
noted,  judges,  that  the  speech  for  the  prosecution
was  divided  into  two  parts  :  of  these,  the  first  seemed
to  rest  and  in  the  main  to  rely  on  the  odium,  now
inveterate,  arising  from  the  trial  before  Junius,
while  the  other  appeared  to  touch,  merely  as  a
matter  of  form,  and  with  a  certain  timidity  and
diffidence,  on  the  question  of  the  charge  of  poison-
ing, though  it  is  to  try  this  point  that  the  present
court  has  been  constituted  in  accordance  with  the
law."  All  this,  however,  is  easier  for  the  defender
than  the  prosecutor,  since  the  latter  has  merely  to  re-
mind the  judge,  while  the  former  has  to  instruct  him.
Nor  shall  any  authority,  however  great,  induce  me  37
to  abandon  my  opinion  that  it  is  always  desirable  to
render the  judge attentive and  ready  to  receive

*5


QUINTILIAN

docilem  iudicem  velim  ;  non  quia  nesciam,  id  quod  ab
illis  dicitur,  esse  pro  mala  causa,  qualis  ea  sit  non  in-
telligi,  verum  quia  istud  non  negligentia  iudicis  con-

38  tingit,  sed  errore.  Dixit  enim  adversarius  et  fortasse
persuasit ;  nobis  opus  est  eius  di versa  opinione,  quae
mutari  non  potest,  nisi  ilium  fecerimus  ad  ea  quae
dicemus  docilem  et  intentum.  Quid  ergo  est  ?
Imminuenda  quaedam  et  levanda  et  quasi  contem-
nenda  esse  consentio  ad  remittendam  intentionem
iudicis,  quam  adversario  praestat,  ut  fecit  pro  Ligario

39  Cicero.  Quid  enim  agebat  aliud  ironia  ilia,  quam  ut
Caesar  minus  se  in  rem  tanquam  non  novam  in-
tenderet?  Quid  pro  Caelio,  quam  ut  res  exspecta-
tione  minor  videretur  ?

Verum ex iis, quae proposuimus, aliud in alio

40  genere  causae  desiderari  palam  est.  Genera  porro
causarum  plurimi  quinque  fecerunt,  honestum,
humile,  dubium  vel  anceps,  admirabile,  obscurum :
id  est  tvho^ov,  a8o£ov,  dfx<f>tSo^ov,  7rapd8o$ov,  $vo"irapa-
koXovOyjtov. Sunt  quibus  recte  videtur  adiici  turpe,

41  quod  alii  humili,  alii  admirabili  subiiciunt.  Admi-
rabile  autem  vocant,  quod  est  praeter  opinionem
hominum  constitutum.  In  ancipiti  maxime  bene-
volum iudicem, in obscuro docilem, in humili

1  pro  Gael  31.
26


BOOK IV.  i.  37-41

instruction.  I  am  well  aware  that  those  who  dis-
agree with  me  urge  that  it  is  to  the  advantage  of  a
bad  case  that  its  nature  should  not  be  understood ;
but  such  lack  of  understanding  arises  not  from
inattention  on  the  part  of  the  judge,  but  from  his
being  deceived.  Our  opponent  has  spoken  and  38
perhaps  convinced  him  ;  we  must  alter  his  opinion,
and  this  we  cannot  do  unless  we  render  him  attentive
to  what  we  have  to  say  and  ready  to  be  instructed.
What  are  we  to  do  then  ?  I  agree  to  the  view  that
we  should  cut  down,  depreciate  and  deride  some  of
our  opponent's  arguments  with  a  view  to  lessening
the  attention  shown  him  by  the  judge,  as  Cicero  did
in  the  pro  Ligario.  For  what  was  the  purpose  of  39
Cicero's  irony  save  that  Caesar  should  be  induced  to
regard  the  case  as  presenting  only  old  familiar
features  and  consequently  to  give  it  less  attention  ?
What  was  his  purpose  in  the  pro  Caelio x  save  to
make  the  case  seem  far  more  trivial  than  had  been
anticipated  ?

It  is,  however,  obvious  that  of  the  rules  which  I
have  laid  down,  some  will  be  applicable  to  one  case
and  some  to  another.  The  majority  of  writers  40
consider  that  there  are  five  kinds  of  causes,  the
honourable,  the  mean,  the  doubtful  or  ambiguous,  the
extraordinary  and  the  obscure,  or  as  they  are  called  in
Greek,  Ivho^ov,  a8o£ov,  a/xtfytSogov,  irapaZo£ov  and
hvcnrapaKoXovG-qrov.  To  these  some  would  add  a  sixth,
the  scandalous,  which  some  again  include  under  the
heading  of  the  mean,  others  under  the  extraordinary.
The  latter  name  is  given  to  cases  which  are  contrary  41
to  ordinary  expectation.  In  ambiguous  cases  it  is
specially  important  to  secure  the  good- will  of  the
judge,  in  the  obscure  to  render  him  ready  to  receive

27


QUINTILIAN

attentum  parare  debemus.  Nam  honestum  quidem
ad  conciliationem  satis  per  se  valet,  admirabili  et
turpi  remediis  opus  est.

42  Eo  quidam  exordium  in  duas  dividunt  partes,
principium  et  insinuationem,  ut  sit  in  principiis  recta
benevolentiae  et  attentionis  postulatio ;  quae  quia
esse  in  turpi  causae  genere  non  possit,  insinuatio
surrepat  animis,  maxime  ubi  frons  causae  non  satis
honesta  est,  vel  quia  res  sit  improba  vel  quia
hominibus  parum  probetur,  aut  si  facie  quoque  ipsa
premitur  vel  invidiosa  consistentis  ex  diverso  patroni

43  aut  patris  vel  miserabili  senis,  caeci,  infantis.  Et
quidem  quibus  adversus  haec  modis  sit  medendum,
verbosius  tradunt  materiasque  sibi  ipsi  fingunt  et  ad
morem  actionum  persequuntur  ;  sed  hae  cum  oriantur
ex  causis,  quarum  species  consequi  omnes  non  possu-
mus,  nisi  generaliter  comprehenduntur,  in  infinitum

44  sunt  extrahendae.  Quare  singulis  consilium  ex
propria  ratione  nascetur.  Illud  in  universum  prae-
ceperim,  ut  ab  his  quae  laedunt  ad  ea  quae  prosunt
refugiamus.  Si  causa  laborabimus,  persona  subveniat ;

28


BOOK IV.  i.  41-44

instruction,  in  the  mean  to  excite  his  attention.  As
regards  the  honourable  the  very  nature  of  the  case  is
sufficient  to  win  the  approval  of  the  judge ;  in  the
scandalous  and  extraordinary  some  kind  of  palliation
is  required.

Some  therefore  divide  the  exordium  into  two  parts,  42
the  introduction  and  the  insinuation,  making  the  former
contain  a  direct  appeal  to  the  good- will  and  attention
of  the  judge.  But  as  this  is  impossible  in  scandalous
cases,  they  would  have  the  orator  on  such  occasions  in-
sinuate himself  little  by  little  into  the  minds  of  his
judges,  especially  when  the  features  of  the  case  which
meet  the  eye  are  discreditable,  or  because  the  subject
is  disgraceful  or  such  as  to  meet  with  popular  disap-
proval, or  again  if  the  outward  circumstances  of  the
case  are  such  as  to  handicap  it  or  excite  odium  (as  for
instance  when  a  patron  appears  against  a  client  or  a
father  against  a  son),  or  pity  (as  when  our  opponent
is  an  old  or  blind  man  or  a  child).  To  save  the  situa-  43
tion  the  rhetoricians  lay  down  a  number  of  rules  at
quite  inordinate  length  :  they  invent  fictitious  cases
and  treat  them  realistically  on  the  lines  which  would
be  followed  in  actual  pleading.  But  these  peculiar
circumstances  arise  from  such  a  variety  of  causes  as
to  render  classification  by  species  impossible,  and
their  enumeration  save  under  the  most  general  heads
would  be  interminable.  The  line  to  be  adopted  will  44
therefore  depend  on  the  individual  nature  of  each
case.  As  a  general  principle,  however,  I  should
advise  the  avoidance  of  points  which  tell  against  us
and  concentrate  on  those  which  are  likely  to  be  of
service.  If  the  case  itself  is  weak,  we  may  derive
help  from  the  character  of  our  client ;  if  his  character
is  doubtful,  we  may  find  salvation  in  the  nature  of

29


QUINTILIAN

si persona,  causa ; si  nihil  quod nos  adiuvet  erit,
quaeramus  quid  adversarium  laedat ;  nam  ut  optabile

45  est  plus  favoris  mereri,  sic  proximum  odii  minus.  In
iis,  quae  negari  non  potuerint,  elaborandum,  ut  aut
minora  quam  dictum  est  aut  alia  mente  facta  aut
nihil  ad  praesentem  quaestionem  pertinere  aut
emendari  posse  paenitentia  aut  satis  iam  punita
videantur.  ldeoque  agere  advocato  quam  litigatori
facilius,  quia  et  laudat  sine  arrogantiae  crimine  et

46  aliquando  utiliter  etiam  reprehendere  potest.  Nam
se  quoque  moveri  interim  finget,  ut  pro  Rabirio
Postumo  Cicero,  dum  aditum  sibi  ad  aures  faciat  et
auctoritatem  induat  vera  sentientis,  quo  magis
credatur  vel  defendenti  eadem  vel  neganti.  ldeoque
hoc  primumintuebimur^litigatoris  an  advocati  persona
sit  utendum,  quotiens  utrumque  fieri  potest ;  nam  id  in
schola  liberum est, in  foro rarum,  ut sit idoneus

47  suae  rei  quisque  defensor.  Declamaturus  autem
maxime  positas  in  adfectibus  causas  propriis  personis
debet induere. Hi sunt enim,  qui mandari non

1  pro  Rab.  i.  1.
SO


BOOK IV.  i.  44-47

the  case.  If  both  are  hopeless,  we  must  look  out  for
something  that  will  damage  our  opponent.  For
though  it  is  desirable  to  secure  as  much  positive
good-will  as  possible,  the  next  best  thing  is  to  incur
the  minimum  of  actual  dislike.  Where  we  cannot  45
deny  the  truth  of  facts  that  are  urged  against  us,  we
must  try  to  show  that  their  significance  has  been
exaggerated  or  that  the  purpose  of  the  act  was  not
what  is  alleged  or  that  the  facts  are  irrelevant  or
that  what  was  done  may  be  atoned  for  by  penitence
or  has  already  been  sufficiently  punished.  It  is
consequently  easier  for  an  advocate  to  put  forward
such  pleas  than  for  his  client,  since  the  former  can
praise  without  laying  himself  open  to  the  charge  of
arrogance  and  may  sometimes  even  reprove  him  with
advantage  to  the  case.  At  times,  like  Cicero  in  his  46
defence  of  Rabirius  Postumus,1  he  will  pretend  that
he  himself  is  strongly  moved,  in  order  to  win  the
ear  of  the  judge  and  to  give  the  impression  of
one  who  is  absolutely  convinced  of  the  truth  of  his
cause,  that  so  his  statements  may  find  all  the  readier
credence  whether  he  defends  or  denies  the  actions
attributed  to  his  client.  Consequently  it  is  of  the  first
importance,  wherever  the  alternative  is  open  to  us,
to  consider  whether  we  are  to  adopt  the  character  of
a  party  to  the  suit  or  of  an  advocate.  In  the  schools,
of  course,  we  have  a  free  choice  in  the  matter,  but  it
is  only  on  rare  occasions  that  a  man  is  capable  of
pleading  his  own  case  in  the  actual  courts.  When  47
we  are  going  to  deliver  a  declamation  on  a  theme
that  turns  largely  on  its  emotional  features,  we
must  give  it  a  dramatic  character  suited  to  the
persons  concerned.  For  emotions  are  not  transfer-
able at  will,  nor  can  we  give  the  same  forcible  ex-

3i


QUINTILIAN

possunt,  nee  eadem  vi  profertur  alieni  animi  qua  sui

48  motus.  His  etiam  de  causis  insinuatione  videtur  opus
esse,  si  adversarii  actio  iudicum  animos  occupavit,  si
dicendum  apud  fatigatos  est ;  quorum  alterum  pro-
mittendo  nostras  probationes  et  adversas  eludendo
vitabimus,  alterum et  spe brevitatis  et  iis,  quibus

49  attentum  fieri  iudicem  docuimus.  Et  urbanitas
opportuna  reficit  animos  et  undecunque  petita
iudicis  voluptas  levat  taedium.  Non  inutilis  etiam
est  ratio  occupandi  quae  videntur  obstare,  ut  Cicero
dicit,  scire  se  mirari  quosdam,  quod  is,  qui  per
tot  annos  defenderit  multos,  laeserit  neminem,
ad  accusandum  Verrem  descenderit ;  deinde  ostendit,
hanc  ipsam  esse  sociorum  defensionem  ;  quod  schema

50  7rp6\r)\l/Ls  dicitur.  Id  cum  sit  utile  aliquando,  nunc  a
declamatoribus  quibusdam  paene  semper  adsumitur,
qui  fas  non  putant  nisi  a  contrario  incipere.

Negant  Apollodorum  secuti  tris  esse,  de  quibus
supra  diximus,  praeparandi  iudicis  partes  ;  sed  multas
species  enumerant,  ut  ex  moribus  iudicis,  ex  opinioni-

1  Div.  in  Caec.  i.  1.
32


BOOK IV.  i.  47-50

pression  to  another  man's  emotions  that  we  should
give  to  our  own.  The  circumstances  which  call  for  48
insinuation  arise  also  in  cases  where  the  pleading  of
our  opponent  has  made  a  powerful  impression  on  the
minds  of  the  judges,  or  where  the  audience  whom
we  have  to  address  are  tired.  The  first  difficulty  we
shall  evade  by  promising  to  produce  our  own  proofs
and  by  eluding  the  arguments  of  our  opponents,  the
second  by  holding  out  hopes  that  we  shall  be  brief
and  by  the  methods  already  mentioned  for  capturing
the  attention  of  the  judges.  Again  an  opportune  49
display  of  wit  will  often  restore  their  flagging  spirits
and  we  may  alleviate  their  boredom  by  the  introduc-
tion of  entertaining  matter  derived  from  any  source
that  may  be  available.  It  will  also  be  found  advan-
tageous to  anticipate  the  objections  that  may  be
raised  by  our  opponent,  as  Cicero1  does  when  he
says  "  I  know  that  some  persons  are  surprised  that
one,  who  for  such  a  number  of  years  has  defended  so
many  and  attacked  none,  should  have  come  forward
as  the  accuser  of  Verres,"  he  then  goes  on  to  show
that  the  accusation  which  he  has  undertaken  is
really  a  defence  of  the  allies,  an  artifice  known  as
7rp6Xrj\l/L<;  or  anticipation.  Although  this  is  at  times  50
a  useful  device,  some  of  our  declaimers  employ  it
on  practically  every  occasion,  on  the  assumption
that  one  should  always  start  with  the  order  thus
reversed.

The  adherents  of  Apollodorus  reject  the  view
stated  above  to  the  effect  that  there  are  only  three
respects  in  which  the  mind  of  the  judge  requires  to
be  prepared,  and  enumerate  many  others,  relating  to
the  character  of  the  judge,  to  opinions  regarding
matters  which  though  outside  the  case  have still

33


QUINTILIAN

bus  ad  causam  extra  pertinentibus,  ex  opinione  de
ipsa  causa,  quae  sunt  prope  infinitae,  turn  iis,  ex
quibus  omnes  controversiae  constant,  personis,  factis,
dictis,  causis,  temporibus,  locis,  occasionibus,  ceteris.

61  Quas  veras  esse  fateor,  sed  in  haec  genera  recidere.
Nam  si  iudicem  benevolum,  attentum,  docilem  habeo,
quid  amplius  debeam  optare,  non  reperio  ;  cum  metus
ipse,  qui  maxime  videtur  esse  extra  haec,  et  attentum
iudicem  faciat  et  ab  adverso  favore  deterreat.

62  Verum  quoniam  non  est  satis  demonstrare  discen-
tibus,  quae  sint  in  ratione  prooemii,  sed  dicendum
etiam,  quomodo  perfici  facillime  possint,  hoc  adiicio,
ut  dicturus  intueatur,  quid,  apud  quem,  pro  quo,
contra  quem,  quo  tempore,  quo  loco,  quo  rerum  statu,
qua  vulgi  fama  dicendum  sit,  quid  iudicem  sentire
credibile  sit,  antequam  incipimus,  turn  quid  aut  de-
sideremus  aut  deprecemur.  Ipsa  ilium  natura  eo  ducet,

63  ut  sciat,  quid  primum  dicendum  sit.  At  nunc  omne,
quo  coeperunt,  prooemium  putant  et,  ut  quidque
succurrit,  utique  si  aliqua  sententia  blandiatur,  exor-
dium. Multa  autem  sine  dubio  sunt  et  aliis  partibus
causae  communia,  nihil  tamen  in  quaque  melius  di-
citur,  quam  quod  aeque  bene  dici  alibi  non  possit.
34


BOOK IV.  i.  so-53

some  bearing  on  it,  to  the  opinion  current  as  to  the
case  itself,  and  so  on  ad  infinitum :  to  these  they  add
others  relating  to  the  elements  of  which  every
dispute  is  composed,  such  as  persons,  deeds,  words,
motives,  time  and  place,  occasions  and  the  like.
Such  views  are,  I  admit,  perfectly  correct,  but  are  51
covered  by  one  or  other  of  the  three  classes  which  I
have  mentioned.  For  if  I  can  secure  good-will,
attention  and  readiness  to  learn  on  the  part  of  my
judge,  I  cannot  see  what  else  I  ought  to  require  ;
even  fear,  which  perhaps  may  be  thought  more  than
anything  else  to  lie  outside  the  considerations  I  have
mentioned,  secures  the  attention  of  the  judge  and
deters  him  from  favouring  our  opponent.

It  is  not,  however,  sufficient  to  explain  the  nature  52
of  the  exordium  to  our  pupils.  We  must  also  indicate
the  easiest  method  of  composing  an  exordium.  I
would  therefore  add  that  he  who  has  a  speech  to
make  should  consider  what  he  has  to  say ;  before
whom,  in  whose  defence,  against  whom,  at  what
time  and  place,  under  what  circumstances  he  has  to
speak ;  what  is  the  popular  opinion  on  the  subject,
and  what  the  prepossessions  of  the  judge  are  likely
to  be  ;  and  finally  of  what  we  should  express  our
deprecation  or  desire.  Nature  herself  will  give  him
the  knowledge  of  what  he  ought  to  say  first.  Now-  53
adays,  however,  speakers  think  that  anything  with
which  they  choose  to  start  is  a  proem  and  that
whatever  occurs  to  them,  especially  if  it  be  a  reflexion
that  catches  their  fancy,  is  an  exordium.  There  are,
no  doubt,  many  points  that  can  be  introduced  into  an
exordium  which  are  common  to  other  parts  of  a  speech,
but  the  best  test  of  the  appropriateness  of  a  point  to
any  part  of  a  speech  is  to  consider  whether  it  would

35


QUINTILIAN

54  Mill  turn  gratiae  exordio  est,  quod  ab  actione  diversae
partis  materiam  trahit,  hoc  ipso,  quod  non  composi-
tum  domi,  sed  ibi  atque  ex  re  natum,  et  facilitate
famam  ingenii  auget  et  facie  simplicis  sumptique  ex
proximo  sermonis  fidem  quoque  adquirit;  adeo  ut,
etiamsi  reliqua  scripta  atque  elaborata  sint,  tamen
plerumque  videatur  tota  extemporalis  oratio,  cuius
initium nihil praeparati habuisse manifestum est.

55  Frequentissime  vero  prooemium  decebit  et  senten-
tiarum  et  compositionis  et  vocis  et  vultus  modestia,
adeo  ut  in  genere  causae  etiam  indubitabili  fiducia
se  ipsa  nimium  exserere  non  debeat.  Odit  enim  iudex
fere  litigantis  securitatem,  cumque  ius  suum  intelli-

56  gat,  tacitus  reverentiam  postulat.  Nee  minus  dili-
genter  ne  suspecti  simus  ilia  parte  vitandum  est,
propter  quod  minime  ostentari  debet  in  principiis
cura,  quia  videtur  ars  omnis  dicentis  contra  iudicem

57  adhiberi.  Sed  ipsum  istud  evitare  summae  artis  est.
Nam  id  sine  dubio  ab  omnibus  et  quidem  optime
praeceptum  est,  verum  aliquatenus  temporum  con-
dicione  mutatur,  quia  iam  quibusdam  in  iudiciis
maximeque  capitalibus  aut  apud  centumviros  ipsi
iudices  exigunt  sollicitas  et  accuratas  actiones,  con-


1  The  court  of  the  centumviri  was  specially  concerned  with
cases  of  inheritance.

36


BOOK IV.  i.  54-57

lose  effect  by  being  placed  elsewhere.  A  most  attrac-  54
tive  form  of  exordium  is  that  which  draws  its  material
from  the  speech  of  our  opponent,  if  only  for  the
reason  that  the  fact  of  its  not  having  been  composed
at  home,  but  having  been  improvised  on  the  spot  to
meet  the  needs  of  the  case  increases  the  orator's
reputation  for  natural  talent  by  the  readiness  with
which  it  is  produced  and  carries  conviction  owing  to
the  simple  and  ordinary  language  in  which  it  is
clothed.  As  a  result,  even  although  the  rest  of  the
speech  has  been  committed  to  writing  and  carefully
elaborated,  the  whole  of  the  speech  will  often  be
regarded  as  extempore,  simply  because  its  com-
mencement is  clearly  not  the  result  of  previous
study.  Indeed  a  certain  simplicity  in  the  thoughts,  55
style,  voice  and  look  of  the  speaker  will  often
produce  so  pleasing  an  effect  in  the  exordium  that
even  in  a  case  where  there  is  no  room  for  doubt  the
confidence  of  the  speaker  should  not  reveal  itself  too
openly.  For  as  a  rule  the  judge  dislikes  self-
confidence  in  a  pleader,  and  conscious  of  his  rights
tacitly  demands  the  respectful  deference  of  the
orator.  No  less  care  must  be  taken  to  avoid  exciting  56
any  suspicion  in  this  portion  of  our  speech,  and  we
should  therefore  give  no  hint  of  elaboration  in  the
exordium,  since  any  art  that  the  orator  may  employ
at  this  point  seems  to  be  directed  solely  at  the
judge.  But  to  avoid  all  display  of  art  in  itself  67
requires  consummate  art :  this  admirable  canon  has
been  insisted  on  by  all  writers,  though  its  force  has
been  somewhat  impaired  by  present  conditions,  since
in  certain  trials,  more  especially  those  brought  on
capital  charges  or  in  the  centumviral l  court,  the
judges  themselves  demand  the most  finished and

37


QUINTILIAN

temnique  se,  nisi  in  dicendo  etiam  diligentia  appareat,
credunt,  nee  doceri  tantum  sed  etiam  delectari  volunt.

58  Et  est  difficilis  huius  rei  moderatio,  quae  tamen  tem-
perari  ita  potest,  ut  videamur  accurate  non  callide
dicere.  lllud  ex  praeceptis  veteribus  manet,  ne  quod
insolens  verbum,  ne  audacius  translatum,  ne  aut  ab
obsoleta  vetustate  aut  poetica  licentia  sumptum  in

59  principio  deprehendatur.  Nondum  enim  recepti
sumus,  et  custodit  nos  recens  audientium  intentio ;
magis  conciliatis  animis  et  iam  calentibus  haec  libertas
feretur,  maximeque  cum  in  locos  fuerimus  ingressi,
quorum  naturalis  ubertas  licentiam  verbi  notari  cir-

80  cumfuso  nitore  non  patitur.  Nee  argumentis  autem
nee  locis  nee  narrationi  similis  esse  in  prooemio  debet
oratio,  neque  tamen  deducta  semper  atque  circumlita,
sed  saepe  simplici  atque  illaboratae  similis,  nee  verbis
vultuque  nimia  promittens.  Dissimulata  enim  et,
ut  Graeci  dicunt,  av^irifftaros  actio  melius  saepe  sur-
repit.  Sed  haec,  prout  formari  animum  iudicum
expediet.

61  Turbari  memoria  vel  continuandi  verba  facultate
destitui  nusquam  turpius,  cum  vitiosum  prooemium

1  i.e.  unobtrusive.

3»


BOOK IV.  i.  57-61

elaborate  speeches,  think  themselves  insulted,  unless
the  orator  shows  signs  of  having  exercised  the
utmost  diligence  in  the  preparation  of  his  speech,
and  desire  not  merely  to  be  instructed,  but  to  be
charmed.  It  is  difficult  to  preserve  the  happy  mean  58
in  carrying  this  precept  into  effect :  but  by  a  skilful
compromise  it  will  be  possible  to  give  the  impression
of  speaking  with  care  but  without  elaborate  design.
The  old  rule  still  holds  good  that  no  unusual  word,
no  overbold  metaphor,  no  phrase  derived  from  the
lumber-rooms  of  antiquity  or  from  poetic  licence
should  be  detected  in  the  exordium.  For  our  position  59
is  not  yet  established,  the  attention  of  the  audience
is  still  fresh  and  imposes  restraint  upon  us  :  as  soon
as  we  have  won  their  good-will  and  kindled  their
interest,  they  will  tolerate  such  freedom,  more
especially  when  we  have  reached  topics  whose
natural  richness  prevents  any  licence  of  expression
being  noticed  in  the  midst  of  the  prevailing
splendour  of  the  passage.  The  style  of  the  exordium  60
should  not  resemble  that  of  our  purple  patches  nor
that  of  the  argumentative  and  narrative  portions  of
the  speech,  nor  yet  should  it  be  prolix  or  continu-
ously ornate:  it  should  rather  seem  simple  and
unpremeditated,  while  neither  our  words  nor  our
looks  should  promise  too  much.  For  a  method  ot
pleading  which  conceals  its  art  and  makes  no  vain
display,  being  as  the  Greeks  say  dvcTrt^aros,1  will
often  be  best  adapted  to  insinuate  its  way  into  the
minds  of  our  hearers.  But  in  all  this  we  must  be
guided  by  the  extent  to  which  it  is  expedient  to
impress  the  minds  of  the  judges.

There  is  no  point  in  the  whole  speech  where  con-  61
fusion  of  memory  or  loss  of  fluency  has  a  worse  effect,

39


QUINTILIAN

possit  videri cicatricosa fades, et pessimus certe
gubernator  qui navem, dum portu egreditur, im-

62  pegit.  Modus  autem  principii  pro  causa.  Nam
breve  simplices,  longius  perplexae  suspectaeque  et
infames  desiderant.  Ridendi  vero,  qui  velut  legem
prooemiis  omnibus  dederunt,  ut  intra  quattuor  sensus
terminarentur.  Nee  minus  evitanda  est  immodica
eius  longitudo, ne  in  caput  excrevisse  videatur  et

63  quo  praeparare  debet  fatiget.  Sermonem  a  persona
iudicis  aversum,  quae  airoa-Tpo^-q  dicitur,  quidam  in
totum  a  prooemio  summovent,  nonnulla  quidem  in
hanc  persuasionem  ratione  ducti.  Nam  prorsus  esse
hoc  magis  secundum  naturam  confitendum  est,  ut
eos alloquamur potissimum, quos conciliare nobis

64  studemus.  Interim  tamen  et  est  prooemio  neces-
sarius  sensus  aliquis,  et  hie  acrior  fit  atque  vehemen-
tior  ad  personam  derectus  alterius.  Quod  si  accidat,
quo  iure  aut qua  tanta  superstitione prohibeamur

65  dare  per  hanc  figuram  sententiae  vires  ?  Neque
enim  istud  scriptores  artium,  quia  non  liceat,  sed
quia  non  putent  utile,  vetant.  Ita  si  vincet  utilitas,
propter  eandem causam  facere debebimus  propter

66  quam  vetamur.  Et  Demosthenes  autem  ad  Aeschi-
40


BOOK IV.  i.  61-66

for  a  faulty  exordium  is  like  a  face  seamed  with  scars ;
and  he  who  runs  his  ship  ashore  while  leaving  port
is  certainly  the  least  efficient  of  pilots.  The  length  62
of  the  exordium  will  be  determined  by  the  case ;
simple  cases  require  a  short  introduction  only,
longer  exordia  being  best  suited  to  cases  which  are
complicated,  suspect  or  unpopular.  As  for  those
who  have  laid  it  down  as  a  law  applying  to  all
exordia  that  they  should  not  be  more  than  four
sentences  long,  they  are  merely  absurd.  On  the
other  hand  undue  length  is  equally  to  be  avoided,
lest  the  head  should  seem  to  have  grown  out  of  all
proportion  to  the  body  and  the  judge  should  be
wearied  by  that  which  ought  to  prepare  him  for
what  is  to  follow.  The  figure  which  the  Greeks  63
call  apostrophe,  by  which  is  meant  the  diversion  of
our  words  to  address  some  person  other  than  the
judge,  is  entirely  banned  by  some  rhetoricians  as
far  as  the  exordium  is  concerned,  and  for  this  they
have  some  reason,  since  it  would  certainly  seem  to
be  more  natural  that  we  should  specially  address
ourselves  to  those  whose  favour  we  desire  to  win.
Occasionally  however  some  striking  expression  of  64
thought  is  necessary  in  the  exordium  which  can  be
given  greater  point  and  vehemence  if  addressed  to
some  person  other  than  the  judge.  In  such  a  case
what  law  or  what  preposterous  superstition  is  to
prevent  us  from  adding  force  to  such  expression
of  our  thought  by  the  use  of  this  figure  ?  For  the  65
writers  of  text-books  do  not  forbid  it  because  they
regard  it  as  illicit,  but  because  they  think  it  useless.
Consequently  if  its  utility  be  proved,  we  shall  have
to  employ  it  for  the  very  reason  for  which  we  are
now  forbidden  to  do so. Moreover  Demosthenes  66

4*


QUINTILIAN

nen  orationem  in  prooemio  convertit,  et  M.  Tullius,
cum  pro  aliis  quibusdam,  ad  quos  ei  visum  est,  turn

67  pro  Ligario  ad  Tuberonem ;  nam  erat  multo  futura
languidior,  si  esset  aliter  figurata.  Quod  facilius
cognosce^  si  quis  totam  illam  partem  vehementis-
simam,  cuius  haec  forma  est,  Habes  igitur,  Tubero,
quod  est  accusatori  maxime  optandum,  et  cetera  con-
vertat  ad  iudicem ;  turn  enim  vere  aversa  videatur
oratio  et  languescat  vis  omnis,  dicentibus  nobis  Habet
igitur Tubero, quod est  accusatori maxime  opiandum.

68  Illo  enim  modo  pressit  atque  institit,  hoc  tantum
indicasset.  Quod  idem  in  Demosthene,  si  flexum
ilium  mutaveris,  accidit.  Quid  ?  non  Sallustius  de-
recto  ad  Ciceronem,  in  quem  ipsum  dicebat,  usus  est
principio,  et  quidem  protinus?  Graviter  et  iniquo
animo  maledicta  tua  paterer,  Marce  Tulli,  sicut  Cicero

69  fecerat  in  Catilinam  :  Quousque  tandem  abutere  f  Ac,
ne  quis  apostrophen  miretur,  idem  Cicero  pro  Scauro
ambitus  reo,  quae  causa  est  in  commentariis  (nam
bis  eundem  defendit),  prosopopoeia  loquentis  pro  reo
utitur,  pro  Rabirio  vero  Postumo  eoderaque  Scauro

1  dt  Cor.  §  11.  *  i.  2.

3  This  speech  is  lost :  the  existing  speech  in  his  defence  is
on  the  charge  of  extortion.

42


BOOK IV.  i.  66-69

turns  to  address  Aeschines  in  his  exordium,1  while
Cicero  adopts  the  same  device  in  several  of  his
speeches,  but  more  especially  in  the  pro  Ligario,2
where  he  turns  to  address  Tubero.  His  speech  67
would  have  been  much  less  effective,  if  any  other
figure  had  been  used,  as  will  be  all  the  more  clearly
realised,  if  the  whole  of  that  most  vigorous  passage
u  You  are,  then,  in  possession,  Tubero,  of  the  most
valuable  advantage  that  can  fall  to  an  accuser  etc."
be  altered  so  as  to  be  addressed  to  the  judge.  For
it  is  a  real  and  most  unnatural  diversion  of  the
passage,  which  destroys  its  whole  force,  if  we  say
"  Tubero  is  then  in  possession  of  the  most  valuable
advantage  that  can  fall  to  an  accuser."  In  the  68
original  form  Cicero  attacks  his  opponent  and
presses  him  hard,  in  the  passage  as  altered  he
would  merely  have  pointed  out  a  fact.  The  same
thing  results  if  you  alter  the  turn  of  the  passage  in
Demosthenes.  Again  did  not  Sallust  when
speaking  against  Cicero  himself  address  his  exordium
to  him  and  not  to  the  judge  ?  In  fact  he  actually
opens  with  the  words  "  I  should  feel  deeply  injured
by  your  reflexions  on  my  character,  Marcus  Tullius,"
wherein  he  followed  the  precedent  set  by  Cicero
in  his  speech  against  Catiline  where  he  opens  with
the  words  "  How  long  will  you  continue  to  abuse
our  patience  ? "  Finally  to  remove  all  reason  for  69
feeling  surprise  at  the  employment  of  apostrophe,
Cicero  in  his  defence  of  Scaurus,8  on  a  charge  of
bribery  (the  speech  is  to  be  found  in  his  Notebooks ;
for  he  defended  him  twice)  actually  introduces  an
imaginary  person  speaking  on  behalf  of  the  accused,
while  in  his  pro  Rabirio  and  his  speech  in  defence
of  this  same  Scaurus  on  a  charge  of  extortion  he

43


QUINT1LIAN

reo  repetundarum  etiam  exemplis,  pro  Cluentio  (ut

70  modo  ostendi)  partitione.  Non  tarnen  haec,  quia
possunt  bene  aliquando  fieri,  passim  facienda  sunt,
sed  quotiens  praeceptum  vicerit  ratio ;  quomodo  et
similitudine,  dum  brevi,  et  translatione  atque  aliis
tropis  (quae  omnia  cauti  illi  ac  diligentes  prohibent)
utemur  interim,  nisi  cui  divina  ilia  pro  Ligario  ironia,

71  de  qua  paulo  ante  dixeram,  displicet.  Alia  exordio-
rum  vitia  verius  tradiderunt.  Quod  in  plures  causas
accommodari  potest,  vulgare  dicitur ;  id  minus  favo-
rabile  aliquando  tamen  non  inutiliter  adsumimus,
magnis  saepe  oratoribus  non  evitatum.  Quo  et
adversarius  uti  potest,  commune  appellatur;  quod
adversarius  in  suam  utilitatem  deflectere  potest,  com-
mutabile;  quod  causae  non  cohaeret,  separatum;
quod  aliunde  trahitur,  tralatum;  praeterea  quod
longum,  quod  contra  praecepta  est ;  quorum  pleraque
non  principii  modo  sunt  vitia  sed  totius  orationis.

72  Haec  de  prooemio,  quotiens  erit  eius  usus,  non
semper  autem  est;  nam  et  supervacuum  aliquando
est,  si  sit  praeparatus  satis  etiam  sine  hoc  iudex,  aut


BOOK IV.  i.  69-72

employs  illustrations,  and  in  the  pro  Cluentio,  as  I
have  already  pointed  out,  introduces  division  into
heads.  Still  such  artifices,  although  they  may  be  70
employed  at  times  to  good  effect,  are  not  to  be
indulged  in  indiscriminately,  but  only  when  there  is
strong  reason  for  breaking  the  rule.  The  same  remark
applies  to  simile  (which  must  however  be  brief),
metaphor  and  other  tropes,  all  of  which  are  forbidden
by  our  cautious  and  pedantic  teachers  of  rhetoric,  but
which  we  shall  none  the  less  occasionally  employ,
unless  indeed  we  are  to  disapprove  of  the  magnificent
example  of  irony  in  the  pro  Ligario  to  which  I  have
already  referred  a  few  pages  back.  The  rhetoricians  7 1
have  however  been  nearer  the  truth  in  their  censure
of  certain  other  faults  that  may  occur  in  the  exordium.
The  stock  exordium  which  can  be  suited  to  a  number
of  different  cases  they  style  vulgar;  it  is  an  unpopular
form  but  can  sometimes  be  effectively  employed  and
has  often  been  adopted  by  some  of  the  greatest  orators.
The  exordium  which  might  equally  well  be  used  by
our  opponent,  they  style  common.  That  which  our
opponent  can  turn  to  his  own  advantage,  they  call
interchangeable,  that  which  is  irrelevant  to  the  case,
detached,  and  that  which  is  drawn  from  some  other
speech,  transferred.  In  addition  to  these  they
censure  others  as  long  and  others  as  contrary  to  rule.
Most  of  these  faults  are  however  not  peculiar  to  the
exordium,  but  may  be  found  in  any  or  every  portion
of  a  speech.

Such  are  the  rules  for  the  exordium,  wherever  it  72
is  employed. It  may  however  sometimes be dis-
pensed with. For  occasionally  it  is  superfluous,  if
the  judge has been sufficiently  prepared for our
speech  without  it  or  if  the  case  is  such  as  to  render

45


QUINTILIAN

si  res  praeparatione  non  egeat.  Aristoteles  quidem
in  totum  id  necessarium  apud  bonos  iudices  negat.
Aliquando  tamen  uti  nee  si  velimus  eo  licet,  cum
iudex  occupatus,  cum angusta sunt  tempora,  cum

73  maior  potestas  ab  ipsa  re  cogit  incipere.  Contraque
est  interim  prooemii  vis  etiam  non  exordio.  Nam
iudices  et  in  narratione  nonnunquam  et  in  argu-
ments ut  attendant  et  ut  faveant  rogamus,  quo
Prodicus  velut  dormitantes  eos  excitari  putabat,  quale

74  est :  Turn  C.  Varenus,  is  qui  afamilia  Anchariana  occisus
est — hoc,  quaeso,  iudices,  diligenter  attendile.  Utique
si  multiplex  causa  est,  sua  quibusque  partibus  danda
praefatio  est,  ut  Audite  nunc  reliqua,  et  Transeo  nunc

75  illuc.  Sed  in  ipsis  etiam  probationibus  multa  funguntur
prooemii  vice,  ut  facit  Cicero  pro  Cluentio  dicturus
contra  censores,  pro  Murena,  cum  se  Servio  excusat.
Verum  id  frequentius  est,  quam  ut  exemplis  con-
firmandum  sit.

76  Quotiens  autem  prooemio  fuerimus  usi,  turn  sive
ad  expositionem  transibimus  sive  protinus  ad  pro-
bationem,  id  debebit  in  principio  postremum  esse,
cui  commodissime  iungi  initium  sequentium  poterit.

77  Ilia  vero  frigida  et  puerilis  est  in  scholis  adfectatio,


1  Bhet.  iii.  14.  *  Cic.  pro  Var.  fr.  8.

8  xlii.  117.  4  iii.  7.


46


BOOK IV.  i.  72-77

such  preparation  unnecessary.  Aristotle l  indeed
says  that  with  good  judges  the  exordium  is  entirely
unnecessary.  Sometimes  however  it  is  impossible
to  employ  it,  even  if  we  desire  to  do  so,  when,
for  instance,  the  judge  is  much  occupied,  when  time
is  short  or  superior  authority  forces  us  to  embark
upon  the  subject  right  away.  On  the  other  hand  73
it  is  at  times  possible  to  give  the  force  of  an  exordium
to  other  portions  of  the  speech.  For  instance  we
may  ask  the  judges  in  the  course  of  our  statement  of
the  facts  or  of  our  arguments  to  give  us  their  best
attention  and  good- will,  a  proceeding  which  Prodicus
recommended  as  a  means  of  wakening  them  when
they  begin  to  nod.  A  good  example  is  the
following : 2  "  Gaius  Varenus,  he  who  was  killed  74
by  the  slaves  of  Ancharius — I  beg  you,  gentlemen,
to  give  me  your  best  attention  at  this  point."
Further  if  the  case  involves  a  number  of  different
matters,  each  section  must  be  prefaced  with  a  short
introduction,  such  as  "  Listen  now  to  what  follows/'
or  "  I  now  pass  to  the  next  point/'  Even  in  the  75
proof  there  are  many  passages  which  perform  the
same  function  as  an  exordium,  such  as  the  passage  in
the  pro  Cluentio  3  where  Cicero  introduces  an  attack
on  the  censors  and  in  the  pro  Murena*  when  he
apologises  to  Servius.  But  the  practice  is  too
common  to  need  illustration.

However  on  all  occasions  when  we  have  employed  76
the  exordium,  whether  we  intend  to  pass  to  the  statement
of  facts  or  direct  to  the  proof,  our  intention  should
be  mentioned  at  the  conclusion  of  the  introduction,
with  the  result  that  the  transition  to  what  follows
will  be  smooth  and  easy.  There  is  indeed  a  pedantic  77
and  childish  affectation  in  vogue  in  the  schools  of

47


QUINTILIAN

ut  ipse  transitus  efficiat  aliquam  utique  sententiam
et  huius  velut  praestigiae  plausum  petat,  ut  Ovidius
lascivire  in  Metamorphosesin  solet,  quem  tamen  ex-
cusare  necessitas  potest  res  diversissimas  in  speciem

78  unius  corporis  colligentem.  Oratori  vero  quid  est
necesse  surripere  hanc  transgressionem  et  iudicem
fallere,  qui,  ut  ordini  rerum  animum  intendat,  etiam
commonendus  est  ? Peribit  enim  prima  pars  exposi-

79  tionis,  si  iudex  narrari  nondum  sciet.  Quapropter,
ut  non  abrupte  cadere  in  narrationem,  ita  non  obscure
transcendere  est  optimum.  Si  vero  longior  sequetur
ac  perplexa  magis  expositio,  ad  earn  ipsam  praepa-
randus  erit  iudex,  ut  Cicero  saepius,  sed  et  hoc  loco
fecit :  Paulo  longius  exordium  rei  demonstrandae  repetam,
quod,  quaeso,  iudices,  ne  moleste  patiamini ;  principiis
enim  cognitis  multo  facilius  extrema  intelligetis.  Haec
fere  sunt  mihi  de  exordio  comperta.

II.  Maxime  naturale est et fieri frequentissime
debet,  ut  praeparato  per  haec,  quae  supra  dicta  sunt,
iudice  res, de qua pronuntiaturus est, indicetur.
2  Haec  est  narratio. In  qua  sciens  transcurram  sub-
tiles  nimium  divisiones  quorundam  plura  eius  genera

1  pro  Cluent.  iv.  11.

48


BOOK IV.  i.  77-11.  2

marking  the  transition  by  some  epigram  and  seeking
to  win  applause  by  this  feat  of  legerdemain.  Ovid
is  given  to  this  form  of  affectation  in  his  Metamor-
phoses, but  there  is  some  excuse  for  him  owing  to  the
fact  that  he  is  compelled  to  weld  together  subjects
of  the  most  diverse  nature  so  as  to  form  a  continuous
whole.  But  what  necessity  is  there  for  an  orator  to  78
gloss  over  his  transitions  or  to  attempt  to  deceive  the
judge,  who  requires  on  the  contrary  to  be  warned  to
give  his  attention  to  the  sequence  of  the  various
portions  of  the  speech  ?  For  instance  the  first  part
of  our  statement  of  the  facts  will  be  wasted,  if  the
judge  does  not  realise  that  we  have  reached  that
stage.  Therefore,  although  we  should  not  be  too  79
abrupt  in  passing  to  our  statement  of  facts,  it  is  best
to  do  nothing  to  conceal  our  transition.  Indeed,  if
the  statement  of  fact  on  which  we  are  about  to  embark
is  somewhat  long  and  complicated,  we  shall  do  well
to  prepare  the  judge  for  it,  as  Cicero  often  does,
most  notably  in  the  following  passage  : l  "  The  in-
troduction to  my  exposition  of  this  point  will  be
rather  longer  than  usual,  but  I  beg  you,  gentlemen,
not  to  take  it  ill.  For  if  you  get  a  firm  grasp  of  the
beginning,  you  will  find  it  much  easier  to  follow  what
comes  last/'  This  is  practically  all  that  I  can  find
to  say  on  the  subject  of  the  exordium.

II.  It  is  a  most  natural  and  frequently  necessary
proceeding,  that  after  preparing  the  mind  of  the
judge  in  the  manner  described  above  we  should  in-
dicate the  nature  of  the  subject  on  which  he  will  have
to  give  judgment :  that  is  the  statement  of  facts.  In  2
dealing  with  this  question  I  shall  deliberately  pass
over  the  divisions  made  by  certain  writers,  who  make
too  many  classes  and  err  on  the  side  of  subtlety. For

49


QUINTILIAN

facien tium.  Non  enim  solam  volunt  esse  illam
negotii,  de  quo  apud  iudices  quaeritur,  expositionem,
sed  personae,  ut  M.  Lollius  Palicanus,  humili  loco
Picens,  loquax  magis  quam  facundus  ;  loci,  ut  Oppidum
est  in  Hellesponto  Ltampsacum,  iudices;  temporis  ut

Fere  novo,  gelidus  canis  cum  montibus  humor
Liquilur  ;

causarum,  quibus  historici  frequentissime  utuntur,
cum exponunt, unde bellum, seditio, pestilentia.

3  Praeter  haec  alias  perfectas,  alias  imperfectas  vocant ;
quod  quis  ignorat  ?  Adiiciunt  expositionem  et  prae-
teritorum  esse  temporum,  quae  est  frequentissima,
et  praesentium,  qualis  est  Ciceronis  de  discursu
amicorum  Chrysogoni,  postquam  est  nominatus,  et
futurorum, quae solis dari vaticinantibus potest;

4  nam  vTroTviruo-is  non  est  habenda  narratio.  Sed  nos
potioribus  vacemus.

Plerique  semper  narrandum  putaverunt,  quod
faisum  esse  pluribus  coarguitur.  Sunt  enim  ante
omnia  quaedam  tarn  breves  causae,  ut  propositionem

5  potius  habeant  quam  narrationem.  Id  accidit  ali-
quando  utrique parti,  cum vel  nulla  expositio  est,

1  Sail.  Hist.  iv.  25.  2  Cic.  Vcrr.  i.  xxiv.  63.

3  Verg.  O.  i.  43.  4  pro  Rose.  Am.  xxii.  60.

50


BOOK IV.  ii.  2-5

they  demand  an  explanation  dealing  not  only  with  the
facts  of  the  case  which  is  before  the  court,  but  with  the
person  involved  (as  in  the  sentence/  "Marcus  Lollius
Palicanus,  a  Picentine  of  humble  birth,  a  man  gifted
with  loquacity  rather  than  eloquence  "  )  or  of  the
place  where  an  incident  occurred  (as  in  the  sen-
tence 2  "  Lampsacus,  gentlemen,  is  a  town  situated
on  the  Hellespont "),  or  of  the  time  at  which  some-
thing occurred  (as  in  the  verse  3

"  In  early  spring,  when  on  the  mountains  hoar
The  snows  dissolve  "),

or  of  the  causes  of  an  occurrence,  such  as  the
historians  are  so  fond  of  setting  forth,  when  they
explain  the  origin  of  a  war,  a  rebellion  or  a  pestilence.
Further  they  style  some  statements  of  fact  "complete,"
and  others  "  incomplete,"  a  distinction  which  is  self-
evident.  To  this  they  add  that  our  explanation  may
refer  to  the  past  (which  is  of  course  the  commonest
form),  the  present  (for  which  compare  Cicero's 4
remarks  about  the  excitement  caused  among  the
friends  of  Chrysogonus  when  his  name  was  men-
tioned), or  of  the  future  (a  form  permissible  only  to
prophets)  :  for  hypotyposis  or  picturesque  description
cannot  be  regarded  as  a  statement  of  facts.  However
let  us  pass  to  matters  of  more  importance.

The  majority  regard  the  statement  of  facts  as  being
indispensable  :  but  there  are  many  considerations
which  show  that  this  view  is  erroneous.  In  the  first
place  there  are  some  cases  which  are  so  brief,  that
they  require  only  a  brief  summary  rather  than  a  full
statement  of  the  facts.  This  may  apply  to  both
parties  to  a  suit,  as  for  instance  in  cases  where  there
is  no  necessity  for  explanation  or  where  the  facts  are

Si


QUINTILIAN
vel  de  re  constat,  de  iure  quaeritur,  ut  apud  centum-
viros,  filius  an  frater  debeat  esse  intestatae  heres,
pubertas  annis  an  corporis  habitu  aestimetur:  aut
cum  est  quidem  in  re  narrationi  locus,  sed  aut  ante
iudici  nota  sunt  omnia  aut  priore  loco  recte  exposita.

6  Accidit  aliquando  alteri  et  saepius  ab  actore,  vel
quia  satis  est  proponere  vel  quia  sic  magis  expedit.
Satis  est  dixisse,  Certain  creditam  pecuniam  peto  ex
stipulatione ; Legatum  peto ex  testamento. Diversae

7  partis  expositio  est,  cur  ea  non  debeantur.  Et  satis
est  actori  et  magis  expedit  sic  indicare :  Dico  ab
Horatio  sororem  suam  interfectam.  Namque  et  pro-
positione  iudex  crimen  omne  cognoscit,  et  ordo  et

8  causa  facti  pro  adversario  magis  est.  Reus  contra
tunc  narrationem  subtrahet,  cum  id,  quod  obiicitur,
neque  negari  neque  excusari  poterit,  sed  in  sola  iuris
quaestione  consistet;  ut  in  eo,  qui,  cum  pecuniam
privatam  ex  aede  sacra  surripuerit,  sacrilegii  reus  est,
confessio  verecundior  quam  expositio :  Non  negamus
5*


BOOK IV.  ii.  s-S

admitted  and  the  whole  question  turns  on  a  point  of
law,  as  it  so  often  does  in  the  centumviral  court,  as
for  example  when  we  discuss,  whether  the  heir  of  a
woman  who  has  died  intestate  should  be  her  son  or
brother,  or  whether  puberty  is  to  be  reckoned  by  age
or  by  physical  development.  The  same  situation
arises  also  in  cases  where  the  facts  admit  of  full
statement,  but  are  well  known  to  the  judge  or  have
been  correctly  set  forth  by  a  previous  speaker.
Sometimes  again  the  statement  of  facts  can  be  6
dispensed  with  only  by  one  party,  who  is  generally
the  plaintiff,  either  because  it  is  sufficient  for  him  to
make  a  simple  summary  of  his  case  or  because  it  is
more  expedient  for  him  to  do  so.  It  may,  for  in-
stance, suffice  to  say,  "  I  claim  repayment  of  a
certain  sum  of  money  which  was  lent  on  certain
conditions  "  or  t€  I  claim  a  legacy  in  accordance  with
the  terms  of  the  will."  It  is  for  the  other  party  to
explain  why  these  sums  are  not  due  to  the  plaintiff,
i^gain  it  is  sometimes  sufficient  and  expedient  to  7
summarise  a  case  in  one  sentence  such  as  u  I  say
that  Horatius  killed  his  sister."  For  the  judge  will
understand  the  whole  charge  from  this  simple
affirmation  :  the  sequence  of  events  and  the  motive
for  the  deed  will  be  matters  for  the  defence  to  ex-
pound. On  the  other  hand  in  some  cases  the  8
accused  may  dispense  with  the  statement  of  facts,
when  for  instance  the  charge  can  neither  be  denied
nor  palliated,  but  turns  solely  on  some  point  of  law  :
the  following  case  will  illustrate  my  meaning.  A
man  who  has  stolen  from  a  temple  money  belonging
to  a  private  individual  is  accused  of  sacrilege :  in
such  a  case  a  confession  will  be  more  seemly  than
a  full  statement  of  facts  :  "  We  do  not  deny  that  the

53


QUINTILIAN

de  templo  pecuniam  esse  sublatam,  calvmniatur  tamen
accusator  actione  sacrilegii,  cum  privata  fuerit  non
sacra;  vos  autem  de  hoc  cognoscetis,  an  sacrilegium
sit  admissum.
9  Sed  ut  has  aliquando  non  narrandi  causas  puto,  sic
ab  illis  dissentio,  qui  non  existimant  esse  narrationem,
cum  reus  quod  obiicitur  tantum  negat ;  in  qua  est
opinione  Cornelius  Celsus,  qui  condicionis  huius  esse
arbitratur  plerasque  caedis  causas  et  omnes  ambitus

10  ac  repetundarum.  Non  enim  putat  esse  narrationem,
nisi  quae  summam  criminis  de  quo  iudicium  est
eontineat,  deinde  fatetur  ipse  pro  Rabirio  Postumo
narrasse  Ciceronem ;  atque  ille  et  negavit  pervenisse
ad  Rabirium  pecuniam,  qua  de  re  erat  quaestio
constituta,  et  in  hac  narratione  nihil  de  crimine  ex-

11  posuit.  Ego  autem  magnos  alioqui  secutus  auctores,
duas  esse  in  iudiciis  narration  um  species  existimo*
alteram ipsius causae, alteram rerum ad causam

12  pertinentium  expositionem.  Non  occidi  hominem,
nulla  narratio  est ;  convenit ;  sed  erit  aliqua  et  interim
etiam  longa  contra  argumenta  eius  criminis  de  ante-
acta  vita,  de  causis,  propter  quas  innocens  in  peri-
culum deducatur, aliis,  quibus  incredibile  id  quod

13  obiicitur fiat. Neque enim accusator  tantum  hoc

54


BOOK IV.  ii.  8-13

money  was  taken  from  the  temple ;  but  the  accuser
is  bringing  a  false  accusation  in  charging  my  client
with  sacrilege,  since  the  money  was  not  consecrated,
but  private  property :  it  is  for  you  to  decide  whether
under  these  circumstances  sacrilege  has  been
committed/ '

While  however  I  think  that  there  are  occasional  9
cases  where  the  statement  of  facts  may  be  dispensed
with,  I  disagree  with  those  who  say  that  there  is  no
statement  of  facts  when  the  accused  simply  denies  the
charge.  This  opinion  is  shared  by  Cornelius  Celsus
who  holds  that  most  cases  of  murder  and  all  of
bribery  and  extortion  fall  into  this  class.  For  he  10
thinks  that  the  only  statement  of  facts  is  that  which
gives  a  general  account  of  the  charge  before  the
court.  Yet  he  himself  acknowledges  that  Cicero
employed  the  statement  of  facts  in  his  defence  of
Rabirius  Postumus,  in  spite  of  the  fact  that  Cicero
denies  that  any  money  came  into  the  hands  of
Rabirius  (and  this  was  the  question  at  issue)  and
gives  no  explanations  relating  to  the  actual  charge  in
his  statement  of  facts.  For  my  part  I  follow  the  very  11
highest  authorities  in  holding  that  there  are  two
forms  of  statement  of  facts  in  forensic  speeches,  the
one  expounding  the  facts  of  the  case  itself,  the  other
setting  forth  facts  which  have  a  bearing  on  the  case.
1  agree  that  a  sentence  such  as  "  I  did  not  kill  12
the  man"  does  not  amount  to  a  statement  of  facts  :
but  there  will  be  a  statement  of  facts,  occasionally,  too,
a  long  one,  in  answer  to  the  arguments  put  forward
by  the  accuser  :  it  will  deal  with  the  past  life  of  the
accused,  with  the  causes  which  have  brought  an
innocent  man  into  peril,  and  other  circumstances
such  as  show  the  charge  to  be  incredible. For  the 13

S5


QUINTILIAN

dicit,  occidisti ;  sed,  quibus  id  probet  narrat.  Ut  in
tragoediis,  cum  Teucer  Ulixen  reum  facit  Aiacis
occisi  dicens  inventum  eum  in  solitudine  iuxta
exanime  corpus  inimici  cum  gladio  cruento,  non  id
modo  Ulixes  respondet  non  esse  a  se  id  facinus
admissum,  sed  sibi  nullas  cum  Aiace  inimicitias
fuisse,  de  laude  inter  ipsos  certatum ;  deinde  sub-
iungit,  quomodo  in  earn  solitudinem  veneris  iacentem
exanimem  sit  conspicatus,  gladium  e  vulnere  ex-
U  traxerit.  His  subtexitur  argumentatio.  Sed  ne
illud  quidem  sine  narratione  est,  dicente  accusatore,
Fuisti  in  eo  loco,  in  quo  tuus  inimicus  occisus  est :  Non
fui;  dicendum  enim,  ubi  fuerit.  Quare  ambitus
quoque  causae  et  repetundarum  hoc  etiam  plures
huiusmodi  narrationes  habere  poterunt,  quo  plura
crimina;  in  quibus  ipsa  quidem  neganda  sunt,  sed
argumentis expositione contraria resistendum est

15  interdum  singulis  interdum  universis.  An  reus
ambitus  male  narrabit,  quos  parentes  habuerit,  que-
madmodum  ipse  vixerit,  quibus  meritis  fretus  ad  peti-
tionem  descenderit  ?  Aut  qui  repetundarum  crimine
insimulabitur,  non  et  anteactam  vitam,  et  quibus  de
causis provinciam universam vel accusatorem aut

16  testem  offenderit,  non  inutiliter  exponet?  Quae  si
narratio  non  est,  ne  ilia  quidem  Ciceronis  pro  Cluentio
prima,  cuius  est  initium:  A.  Cluentias  Habitus. Nihil

1  v.  11.


BOOK IV.  ii.  13-16

accuser  does  not  merely  say  "  You  killed  him/'  but
sets  forth  the  facts  proving  his  assertion :  tragedy  will
provide  an  example,  where  Teucer  accuses  Ulysses
of  murdering  Ajax,  and  states  that  he  was  found  in  a
lonely  place  near  the  lifeless  body  of  his  enemy  with
a  blood-stained  sword  in  his  hands.  To  this  Ulysses
does  not  merely  reply  that  he  did  not  do  the  deed,
but  adds  that  he  had  no  quarrel  with  Ajax,  the
contest  between  them  having  been  concerned  solely
with  the  winning  of  renown :  he  then  goes  on  to
say  how  he  came  to  be  in  the  lonely  place,  how  he
found  Ajax  lying  lifeless  and  drew  the  sword  from
the  wound.  Then  follow  arguments  based  on  these
facts.  But  even  when  the  accuser  says  "  You  were  14
found  on  the  spot  where  your  enemy  was  killed"
and  the  accused  says  "  I  was  not,"  a  statement  of  facts
is  involved ;  for  he  must  say  where  he  was.  Conse-
quently cases  of  bribery  and  extortion  will  require
as  many  statements  of  this  kind  as  there  are
charges :  the  charges  themselves  will  be  denied,  but
it  will  be  necessary  to  counter  the  arguments  of  the
accuser  either  singly  or  all  together  by  setting  forth
the  facts  in  quite  a  different  light.  Is  it,  I  ask  you,  15
irrelevant  for  one  accused  of  bribery  to  set  forth
his  parentage,  his  past  life  and  the  services  on  which
he  relied  for  success  in  his  candidature  ?  And  if  a
man  is  indicted  for  extortion,  will  it  not  be  to  his
advantage  to  set  forth  not  merely  his  past  record,
but  also  the  reasons  which  have  made  the  whole
province  or  the  accuser  or  a  witness  hostile  to
himself?  If  these  are  not  statements  of  facts,  neither  16
is  the  first  portion  of  Cicero's 1  defence  of  Cluentius,
beginning  with  the  words  "Aulus  Cluentius  Hab-
itus." For  there  he  says  nothing  about  the  charge

57


QUINTILIAN

enim  hie  de  veneficio,  sed  de  causis,  quibus  ei  mater

17  inimica  sit,  dicit.  Illae  quoque  sunt  pertinentes  ad
causam  sed  non  ipsius  causae  narrationes  :  vel  exempli
gratia  ut  in  Verrem  de  L.  Domitio,  qui  pastorem,
quod  is  apruni,  quern  ipsi  muneri  obtulerat,  exceptum
esse  a  se  venabulo  confessus  esset,  in  crucem  sustulit ;

18  vel  discutiendi  alicuius  extrinsecus  criminis,  ut  pro
Rabirio  Postumo :  Nam  ut  ventum  Alexandriam  esty
indices,  haec  una  ratio  a  rege  proposita  Postumo  est
servandae  pecuniae,  si  curationem  et  quasi  dispensationem
regiam  suscepisset ;  vel  augendi,  ut  describitur  iter
Verris.

19  Ficta  interim  narratio  introduci  solet,  vel  ad
concitandos  iudices  ut  pro  Roscio  circa  Chrysogonum,
cuius  paulo  ante  habui  mentionem  ;  vel  ad  resolven-
dos  aliqua  urbanitate,  ut  pro  Cluentio  circa  fratres
Caepasios  ;  interdum  per  digressionem  decoris  gratia,
qualis  rursus  in  Verrem  de  Proserpina,  In  his  quondam
locis  mater  filiam  quaesisse  dicitur.  Quae  omnia  eo
pertinent,  ut  appareat  non  utique  non  narrare  eum
qui  negat,  sed  illud  ipsum  narrare  quod  negat.


1  v.  3.  The  shepherd  was  crucified  because  the  carrying
of  arms  was  forbidden.

2  x.  28.  The  charge  in  question  was  that  Rabirius  had
worn  the  Greek  pallium  instead  of  the  Roman  toga.  But  as
an  official  of  the  king  he  was  forced  to  wear  Greek  dress.

8 Verr.  v,  10.  4  xxii.  60.  6  xx.  57  sqq.

6  iv.  48.  The  words  quoted  do  not  occur  in  our  MSS  of
Cicero.

5»


BOOK IV.  ii.  16-19

of  poisoning,  but  confines  himself  entirely  to  setting
forth  the  reasons  for  the  hostility  of  Cluentius'
mother  to  her  son.  There  are  also  statements  17
which  do  not  set  forth  the  facts  of  the  case  itself,
but  facts  which  are  none  the  less  relevant  to  the
case  :  the  speaker's  purpose  may  be  to  illustrate  the
case  by  some  parallel,  as  in  the  passage  in  the
Verrines l  about  Lucius  Domitius  who  crucified  a
shepherd  because  he  admitted  that  he  had  used  a
hunting  spear  to  kill  the  boar  which  he  had  brought
him  as  a  present ;  or  he  may  desire  to  dispel  some  18
charge  that  is  irrelevant  to  the  case  as  in  the  passage
of  the  speech  for  Rabirius  Postumus,2  which  runs  as
follows  :  "  For  when  he  came  to  Alexandria,  gentle-
men, the  only  means  of  saving  his  money  which  the
king  suggested  to  Postumus  was  that  he  should
take  charge  of  the  royal  household  and  act  as  a  kind
of  steward/'  Or  the  orator  may  desire  to  heighten
the  effect  of  his  charges,  as  Cicero3  does  in  his
description  of  the  journey  of  Verres.

Sometimes  a  fictitious  statement  is  employed  19
either  to  stir  the  emotions  of  the  judges,  as  in  that
passage  of  the  pro  Roscio  Amerino*  dealing  with
Chrysogonus  to  which  I  referred  just  recently,  or  to
entertain  them  with  a  show  of  wit,  as  in  the
passage  of  the  pro  Cluentio  6  describing  the  brothers
Caepasius :  sometimes  again  a  digression  may  be
introduced  to  add  beauty  to  the  speech,  as  in  the
passage  about  Proserpine  in  the  Verrines,*  begin-
ning u  It  was  here  that  a  mother  is  once  said  to  have
sought  her  daughter."  All  these  examples  serve  to
show  that  he  who  denies  a  charge  may  not  necessarily
refrain  from  stating,  but  may  actually  state  that  very
fact  which  he  denies.

59


QUINTILIAN

20  Ne  hoc  quidem  simpliciter  accipiendum,  quod  est
a  me  positum,  esse  supervacuam  narrationem  rei,
quam  iudex  noverit ;  quod  sic  intelligi  volo,  si  non
modo  quid  factum  sit  sciet,  sed  ita  factum  etiam,  ut

21  nobis  expedit,  opinabitur.  Neque  enim  narratio  in
hoc  reperta  est,  ut  tantum  cognoscat  iudex,  sed  ali-
quanto  magis,  ut  consentiat.  Quare,  etiamsi  non
erit  docendus,  sed  aliquo  modo  adficiendus,  nar-
rabimus  cum  praeparatione  quadam:  scire  quidem
eum  in  summam,  quid  acti  sit,  tamen  rationem
quoque facti cuiusque cognoscere ne gravetur.

22  Interim  propter  aliquem  in  consilium  adhibitum  nos
repetere  ilia  simulemus,  interim,  ut  rei,  quae  ex
adverso  proponatur,  iniquitatem  omnes  etiam  circum-
stantes  intelligant.  In  quo  genere  plurimis  figuris
erit  varianda  expositio  ad  effugiendum  taedium  nota
audientis,  sicut  Meministi,  et  Fortasse  supervacuum
fueril  hie  commorari. Sed  quid  ego  diulius,  cum  tu  optime

23  noris  ?  Mud  quale  sit,  tu  scias,  et  his  similia.  Alioqui
si  apud  iudicem,  cui  nota  causa  est,  narratio  semper
videtur  supervacua,  potest  videri  non  semper  esse
etiam  ipsa  actio  necessaria.

24  Alterum  est,  de  quo  frequentius  quaeritur,  an  sit
utique narratio prooemio subiicienda; quod qui


1  i.e.  introduced  to  fill  the  place  of  a  juror  who  had  had
to  leave  the  jury.

6o


BOOK IV.  ii.  20-24

Even  the  assertion  which  I  made  above  to  the  20
effect  that  a  statement  of  facts  familiar  to  the  judge
is  superfluous,  is  not  to  be  taken  too  literally.  My
meaning  is  that  it  may  be  dispensed  with,  if  the
judge  knows  not  merely  what  has  been  done,  but
takes  a  view  of  the  facts  which  is  favourable  to  our
case.  For  the  purpose  of  the  statement  of  facts  is  21
not  merely  to  instruct,  but  rather  to  persuade  the
judge.  Therefore,  when  we  desire  to  influence  him
in  some  way  or  other,  although  he  may  require  no
instruction,  we  shall  preface  our  statement  with
some  such  remarks  as  these  :  "  I  know  that  you  are
aware  of  the  general  nature  of  the  case,  but  I  trust
you  will  not  take  it  ill  if  I  ask  you  to  consider  each
point  in  detail.' '  At  times  again  we  may  pretend  22
that  we  are  repeating  the  facts  for  the  benefit  of
some  new  member  of  the  jury,1  at  times  that  we  do
so  with  a  view  to  letting  every  bystander  as  well  realise
the  gross  unfairness  of  our  opponents'  assertions.
Under  these  circumstances  our  statement  must  be
diversified  by  a  free  use  of  figures  to  avoid  wearying
those  to  whom  the  facts  are  familiar :  we  shall  for
instance  use  phrases  such  as  "  You  remember,"  (i  It
may  perhaps  be  superfluous  to  dwell  on  this  point,"
"But  why  should  I  say  more,  as  you  are  well  acquainted
with  the  fact?,,,  "You  are  not  ignorant  how  this
matter  stands"  and  so  on.  Besides,  if  we  are  always  to  23
regard  as  superfluous  a  statement  of  facts  made  before
a  judge  who  is  familiar  with  the  case,  we  may  even
go  so  far  as  to  regard  it  as  superfluous  at  times  to
plead  the  case  at  all.

There  is  a  further  question  which  is  still  more  24
frequently  raised, as to whether the statement  of
facts should always follow immediately on the

61


QUINTILIAN

opinantur,  non  possunt  videri  nulla  ratione  ducti.
Nam  cum  prooemium  idcirco  comparatum  sit,  ut
iudex  ad  rem  accipiendam  fiat  conciliation  docilior,
intentior,  et  probatio  nisi  causa  prius  cognita  non
possit  adhiberi,  protinus  iudex  notitia  rerum  instruen-

25  dus  videtur.  Sed  hoc  quoque  interim  mutat  condicio
causarum ;  nisi  forte  M.  Tullius  in  oratione  pulcher-
rima,  quam  pro  Milone  scriptam  reliquit,  male  distu-
lisse  narrationem  videtur  tribus  praepositis  quaestion-
ibus;  aut  profuisset  exponere,  quomodo  insidias
Miloni  fecisset  Clodius,  si  reum,  qui  a  se  hominem
occisum  fateretur,  defendi  omnino  fas  non  fuisset,
aut  si  iam  praeiudicio  senatus  damnatus  esset  Milo,
aut  si  Cn.  Pompeius,  qui  praeter  aliam  gratiam
iudicium  etiam  militibus  armatis  clauserat,  tanquam

26  adversus  ei  timeretur.  Ergo  hae  quoque  quaestiones
vim  prooemii  obtinebant,  cum  omnes  iudicem  prae-
pararent.  Sed  pro  Vareno  quoque  postea  narravit
quam  obiecta  diluit.  Quod  fiet  utiliter,  quotiens
non  repellendum  tantum  erit  crimen,  sed  etiam
transferendum,  ut  his  prius  defensis  velut  initium
sit  alium  culpandi  narratio,  ut  in  armorum  ratione
62


BOOK IV.  ii.  24-26

exordium.  Those  who  hold  that  it  should  always  do  so
must  be  admitted  to  have  some  reason  on  their  side.
For  since  the  purpose  of  the  exordium  is  to  make
the  judge  more  favourably  disposed  and  more
attentive  to  our  case  and  more  amenable  to
instruction,  and  since  the  proof  cannot  be  brought
forward  until  the  facts  of  the  case  are  known,  it
seems  right  that  the  judge  should  be  instructed  in
the  facts  without  delay.  But  the  practice  may  be  25
altered  by  circumstances,  unless  it  is  contended  that
Cicero  in  his  magnificent  published  defence  of  Milo
delayed  his  statement  too  long  by  placing  three
questions  before  it ;  or  unless  it  is  argued  that,  if  it
had  been  held  to  be  impermissible  to  defend  a  man
at  all  who  acknowledged  that  he  had  killed  another,
or  if  Milo's  case  had  already  been  prejudged  and
condemnation  passed  by  the  senate,  or  if  Gnaeus
Pompeius,  who  in  addition  to  exerting  his  influence
in  other  ways  had  surrounded  the  court  with  an
armed  guard,  had  been  regarded  with  apprehension
as  hostile  to  the  accused,  it  would  have  served  his
case  to  set  forth  how  Clodius  had  set  an  ambush  for
Milo.  These  three  questions,  then,  served  the  26
purpose  of  an  exordium,  since  they  all  of  them  were
designed  to  prepare  the  minds  of  the  judges.
Again  in  the  pro  Vareno  Cicero  delayed  his
statement  of  facts  until  he  had  first  rebutted
certain  allegations  put  forward  by  the  prosecution.
This  may  be  done  with  advantage  whenever  we
have  not  merely  to  rebut  the  charge,  but  to  turn
the  tables  on  our  opponents  :  thus  after  first
rebutting  the  charge,  we  make  our  statement  of
facts  the  opening  of  an  incrimination  of  the  other
party just as in actual fighting we are most

63


QUINTILIAN

antiquior  cavendi quam ictum  inferendi cura  est.

27  Erunt  quaedam  causae  (neque  id  raro)  crimine
quidem,  de  quo  cognitio  est,  faciles  ad  diluendum
sed  multis  anteactae  vitae  flagitiis  et  gravibus
oneratae ;  quae  prius  amovenda  sunt,  ut  propitius
iudex  defensionem  ipsius  negotii,  cuius  propria
quaestio  est,  audiat:  ut,  si  defendendus  sit  M.
Caelius,  nonne  optime  patronus  occurrat  prius  con-
viciis  luxuriae,  petulantiae,  impudicitiae  quam  vene-
ficii,  in  quibus  solis  omnis  Ciceronis  versatur  oratio ;
turn  deinde  narret  de  bonis  Pallae  totamque  de  vi
explicet causam,  quae est  ipsius  actione  defensa?

28  Sed  nos  ducit  scholarum  consuetudo,  in  quibus  certa
quaedam  ponuntur,  quae  themata  dicimus,  praeter
quae  nihil  est  diluendum,  ideoque  prooemio  narratio
semper  subiungitur.  Inde  libertas  declamatoribus,
ut  etiam  secundo  partis  suae  loco  narrare  videantur.

29  Nam  cum  pro  petitore  dicunt  et  expositione,  tanquam
priores  agant,  uti  solent  et  contradictione,  tanquam
respondeant,  idque  fit  recte.  Nam  cum  sit  declam-
atio forensium actionum meditatio, cur non in

64


BOOK IV.  ii.  26-29

concerned  to  parry  our  adversary's  blows  before
we  strike  him  ourselves.  There  will  also  not  27
infrequently  be  certain  cases,  in  which  it  is  easy  to
rebut  the  charge  that  is  under  trial,  but  the  conduct
of  which  is  hampered  by  the  past  life  of  our  client
and  the  many  and  serious  crimes  which  he  has
committed.  We  must  dispose  of  these  first,  in  order
that  the  judge  may  give  a  favourable  hearing  to  our
defence  of  the  actual  facts  which  form  the  question
at  issue.  For  example,  if  we  have  to  defend
Marcus  Caelius,  the  best  course  for  his  advocate  to
adopt  will  be  to  meet  the  imputations  of  luxury,
wantonness  and  immorality  which  are  made  against
him  before  we  proceed  to  the  actual  charge  of  poison-
ing. It  is  with  these  points  that  the  speech  of  Cicero
in  his  defence  is  entirely  concerned.  Is  he  then  to
go  on  to  make  a  statement  about  the  property  of
Palla  and  explain  the  whole  question  of  rioting,  a
charge  against  which  Caelius  has  already  defended
himself  in  the  speech  which  he  delivered  on  his  own
behalf?  We  however  are  the  victims  of  the  practice  28
of  the  schools  in  accordance  with  which  certain  points
or  themes  as  we  call  them  are  put  forward  for  dis-
cussion, outside  which  our  refutation  must  not  go,
and  consequently  a  statement  of  facts  always  follows
the  exordium.  It  is  this  too  that  leads  declaimers  to
take  the  liberty  of  inserting  a  statement  of  facts  even
when  they  speak  second  for  fcheir  side.  For  when  29
they  speak  for  the  prosecution  they  introduce  both  a
statement  of  facts,  as  if  they  were  speaking  first,  and  a
refutation  of  the  arguments  for  the  defence,  as  if
they  were  replying :  and  they  are  right  in  so  doing.
For  since  declamation  is  merely  an  exercise  in  forensic
pleading,  why  should  they  not  qualify  themselves  to

65


QUINT1LIAN

utrumque  protinus  locum  se  exerceat? Cuius  rationis
ignari  ex  more,  cui  adsueverunt,  niliil  in  foro  putant

30  esse  mutandum.  Sed  in  scholasticis  quoque  nonnun-
quam  evenit,  ut  pro  narratione  sit  propositio.  Nam
quid  exponet,  quae  zelotypum  malae  tractationis
accusat,  aut  qui  Cynicum  apud  censores  reum  de
moribus  facit  ?  cum  totum  crimen  uno  verbo  in  qua-
libet  actionis  parte  posito  satis  indicetur.  Sed  haec
hactenus.

31  Nunc,  quae  sit  narrandi  ratio,  subiungam.  Narratio
est  rei  factae  aut  ut  factae  utilis  ad  persuadendum
expositio,  vel  (ut  Apollodorus  finit)  oratio  docens
auditorem,  quid  in  controversia  sit.  Earn  plerique
scriptores,  maxime  qui  sunt  ab  Isocrate,  volunt  esse
lucidam,  brevem,  verisimilem.  Neque  enim  refert,
an  pro  lucida  perspicuam,  pro  verisimili  probabilem

32  credibilemve  dicamus.  Eadem  nobis  placet  divisio  >
quanquam  et  Aristoteles  ab  Isocrate  parte  in
una  dissenserit  praeceptum  brevitatis  irridens,  tan-
quam  necesse  sit  longam  esse  aut  brevem  expositio-
nem  nee  liceat  ire  per  medium,  Theodorei  quoque
solam  relinquant  ultimam  partem,  quia  nee  breviter

33  utique  nee  dilucide  semper  sit  utile  exponere. Quo

1  See  note  prefixed  to  Index.
8  See  Index,  «.v.  Cynicus.  8  Rhet.  iii. 16.

66


BOOK IV.  ii.  29-33

speak  either  first  or  second  *  ?  Those  however  who
do  not  understand  the  reason  for  such  a  practice,
think  that  when  they  appear  in  the  courts  they
should  stick  to  the  custom  of  the  schools  with  which
they  have  become  familiar.  But  even  scholastic  30
rhetoricians  occasionally  substitute  a  brief  summary
for  the  full  statement  of  the  facts.  For  what  state-
ment of  the  case  can  be  made  when  a  wife  is  accusing
a  jealous  husband  of  maltreating  her,  or  a  father  is
indicting  his  son  turned  Cynic  before  the  censors
for  indecent  behaviour  2  ?  In  both  cases  the  charge
can  be  sufficiently  indicated  by  one  word  placed
in  any  part  of  the  speech.  But  enough  of  these
points.

I  will  now  proceed  to  the  method  to  be  adopted  31
in  making  our  statement  of  facts.  The  statement  of
facts  consists  in  the  persuasive  exposition  of  that
which  either  has  been  done,  or  is  supposed  to
have  been  done,  or,  to  quote  the  definition  given  by
Apollodorus,  is  a  speech  instructing  the  audience  as  to
the  nature  of  the  case  in  dispute.  Most  writers,  more
especially  those  of  the  Isocratean  school,  hold  that
it  should  be  lucid,  brief  and  plausible  (for  it  is  of
no  importance  if  we  substitute  clear  for  lucid,  or
credible  or  probable  for  plausible).  I  agree  with  32
this  classification  of  its  qualities,  although  Aristotle  3
disagrees  with  Isocrates  on  one  point,  and  pours
scorn  on  his  injunction  to  be  brief,  as  though  it
were  necessary  that  a  statement  should  be  either
long  or  short  and  it  were  impossible  to  hit  the  happy
mean.  The  followers  of  Theodorus  on  the  other
hand  recognise  only  plausibility  on  the  ground
that  it  is  not  always  expedient  that  our  exposition
should  be  either  short  or  clear. It  will  be  necessary  33

67


QUINTILIAN

diligentius  distinguenda  sunt  singula, ut  quid  quo-
que  loco  prosit  ostendam.

Narratio  est  aut  tota  pro  nobis  aut  tota  pro  ad-
versariis  aut  mixta  ex  utrisque.  Si  erit  tota  pro
nobis,  contenti  sumus  his  tribus  partibus  per  quas
efficitur, quo facilius iudex intelligat, m eminent,

34  credat.  Nee  quisquam  reprehensione  dignum  putet,
quod  proposuerim  earn,  quae  sit  tota  pro  nobis,  debere
esse  verisimilem,  cum  vera  sit.  Sunt  enim  plurima
vera  quidem,  sed  parum  credibilia,  sicut  falsa  quoque
frequenter  verisimilia.  Quare  non  minus  laborandum
est,  ut  iudex,  quae  vere  dicimus  quam  quae  fingimus,

35  credat.  Sunt  quidem  hae,  quas  supra  retuli,  virtutes
aliarum  quoque  partium.  Nam  et  per  totam  actio-
nem vitanda  est  obscuritas  et  modus  ubique  custodien-
dus,  et  credibilia  esse  omnia  oportet  quae  dicuntur.
Maxime  tamen  haec  in  ea  parte  custodienda  sunt,
quae  prima  iudicem  docet;  in  qua  si  accident,  ut
aut  non  intelligat  aut  non  meminerit  aut  non  credat,
frustra  in  reliquis  laborabimus.

36  Erit  autem  narratio  aperta  atque  dilucida,  si  fuerit

primum  exposita  verbis  propriis  et  significantibus  et

non  sordidis  quidem,  non  tamen  exquisitis  et  ab  usu
68


BOOK IV.  ii.  33-36

therefore  for  me  to  devote  some  care  to  the  differ-
entiation of  the  various  features  of  this  portion  of  a
speech,  in  order  that  I  may  show  under  what
circumstances  each  is  specially  useful.

The  statement  will  be  either  wholly  in  our  favour
or  wholly  in  that  of  our  opponent  or  a  mixture  of
both.  If  it  is  entirely  in  our  own  favour,  we  may
rest  content  with  the  three  qualities  just  mentioned,
the  result  of  which  is  to  make  it  easier  for  the  judge
to  understand,  remember  and  believe  what  we  say.
Now  I  should  regret  that  anyone  should  censure  my  34
conduct  in  suggesting  that  a  statement  which  is
wholly  in  our  favour  should  be  plausible,  when  as
a  matter  of  fact  it  is  true.  There  are  many  things
which  are  true,  but  scarcely  credible,  just  as  there
are  many  things  which  are  plausible  though  false.
It  will  therefore  require  just  as  much  exertion  on
our  part  to  make  the  judge  believe  what  we  say
when  it  is  true  as  it  will  when  it  is  fictitious.  These  36
good  qualities,  which  I  have  mentioned  above,  do
not  indeed  cease  to  be  virtues  in  other  portions  of  the
speech  ;  for  it  is  our  duty  to  avoid  obscurity  in  every
part  of  our  pleading,  to  preserve  due  proportion
throughout  and  to  say  nothing  save  what  is  likely
to  win  belief.  But  they  require  special  observance
in  that  portion  of  the  speech  which  is  the  first
from  which  the  judge  can  learn  the  nature  of  the
case :  if  at  this  stage  of  the  proceedings  he  fails  to
understand,  remember  or  believe  what  we  say,  our
labour  is  but  lost  in  the  remainder  of  the  speech.

We shall  achieve  lucidity  and clearness  in  our  36
statement  of  facts,  first  by  setting  forth  our  story  in
words which  are  appropriate, significant  and  free
from  any  taint  of  meanness,  but  not  on  the  other

69


QUINTILIAN

remotis,  turn  distincta  rebus,  personis,  temporibus,
locis,  causis,  ipsa  etiam  pronuntiatione  in  hoc  ac-
comrnodata,  ut  iudex  quae  dicentur  quam  facillime

37  accipiat.  Quae  quidem  virtus  negligitur  a  plurimis,
qui  ad  clamorem  dispositae  vel  etiam  forte  circum-
fusae  multitudinis  eompositi  non  ferunt  illud  in-
tentionis  silentium  nee  sibi  diserti  videntur,  nisi
omnia  tumultu  et  vociferatione  concusserint ;  rem
indicare  sermonis  cotidiani  et  in  quemcunque  etiam
indoctorum  cadentis  existimant,  cum  interim,  quod
tanquam  facile  contemnunt,  nescias,  praestare  minus

38  velint  an  possint.  Neque  enim  aliud  in  eloquentia,
cuncta  experti,  difficilius  reperient  quam  id,  quod  se
fuisse  dicturos  omnes  putant,  postquam  audierunt,
quia  non  bona  iudicant  esse  ilia,  sed  vera.  Turn
autem  optime  dicit  orator,  cum  videtur  vera  dicere.

39  At  nunc,  velut  campum  nacti  expositionis,  hie  potiss-
mum  et  vocem  nectunt  et  cervicem  reponunt  et
brachium  in  latus  iactant  totoque  et  rerum  et  ver-
borum  et  compositionis  genere  lasciviunt;  deinde,
quod  sit  monstro  simile,  placet  actio,  causa  non
intelligitur.  Verum  haec  omittamus,  ne  minus
70


BOOK IV.  ii.  36-39

hand  farfetched  or  unusual,  and  secondly  by  giving
a  distinct  account  of  facts,  persons,  times,  places  and
causes,  while  our  delivery  must  be  adapted  to  our
matter,  so  that  the  judge  will  take  in  what  we  say
with  the  utmost  readiness. This  latter virtue is  37
disregarded by  the  majority  of  speakers  who  are
used to the  noisy  applause of  a large audience,
whether  it  be  a  chance  gathering  or  an  assembly  of
claqueurs,  and consequently  are unnerved by the
attentive  silence  of  the  courts. They  feel  that  they
have  fallen  short  of  eloquence,  if  they  do  not  make
everything  echo  with  noise  and  clamour ;  they  think
that  to  state  a  matter  simply  is  suited  only  to  every-
day speech  such  as  falls  within  the  capacity  of  any
uneducated  man,  while  all  the  time  it  is  hard  to  say
whether they are less willing or  less  capable of
performing  a  task  which  they  despise  on  account  of
its  supposed  easiness. For  even  when  they have  38
tried  everything,  they  will  never  find  anything  more
difficult  in  the  whole  range  of  oratory than that
which,  once  heard,  all  think  they  would  have  said, —
a  delusion  due  to  the  fact  that  they  regard  what  has
been  said  as  having  no  merit  save  that  of  truth. But
it  is  just  when  an orator  gives  the  impression  of
absolute  truth  that  he  is  speaking  best. As  it  is,  39
when  such  persons  as  these  get  a  fair  field  for  stat-
ing their  case,  they  select  this  as  the  precise  occasion
for  affected  modulations  of  the  voice,  throwing  back
their  heads,  thumping  their  sides  and  indulging  in
every  kind  of  extravagance  of  statement,  language
and  style. As  a  result,  while  the  speech,  from  its
very monstrosity, meets with applause, the case
remains unintelligible. However, let us pass to
another subject ; my aim is to win favour for

7i


QUINTILIAN

gratiae  praecipiendo  recta  quam  offensae  reprehend-
endo  prava  mereamur.

40  Brevis  erit  narratio  ante  omnia,  si  inde  coeperimus
rem  exponere,  unde  ad  iudicem  pertinet ;  deinde,  si
nihil  extra  causam  dixerimus  ;  turn  etiam,  si  recideri-
mus  omnia,  quibus  sublatis  neque  cognitioni  quid-

41  quam  neque  utilitati  detrahatur.  Solet  enim  quae-
dam  esse  partium  brevitas,  quae  longam  tamen  efficit
summam.  In  portum  veni,  navem  prospexi,  quanti  veke-
ret  interrogavi,  de  pretio  convenit,  conscendi,  sublatae
sunt  ancorae,  solvimus  oram,  profecti  sumus.  Nihil  ho-
rum  dici  celerius  potest,  sed  sufficit  dicere  e  portu
navigavi.  Et  quotiens  exitus  rei  satis  ostendit  priora,
debemus  hoc  esse  contenti,  quo  reliqua  intelliguntur.

42  Quare,  cum  dicere  liceat,  Est  mihiJiUus  iuvenis,  omnia
ilia  supervacua:  Cupidus  ego  liberomm  uxorem  duxi,
natum  jUium  sustult,  educavi,  in  adolescentiam  perduxi.
Ideoque  Graecorum  aliqui  aliud  circumcisam  ex-
positionem,  id  est  crvvro/xov,  aliud  brevem  putaverunt,
quod  ilia  supervacuis  careret,  haec  posset  aliquid  ex

43  necessariis  desiderare.  Nos  autem  brevitatem  in
hoc  ponimus,  non  ut  minus,  sed  ne  plus  dicatur  quam
oporteat.  Nam  iterationes  quid  em  et  TavroXoyias  et
7r€pt<rcroXoyia?,  quas  in  narratione  vitandas  quidam
scriptores  artium  tradiderunt, transeo; sunt  enim

72


BOOK IV.  in  39-43

pointing out the right road rather  than  to  give
offence  by  rebuking  such  perversity.

The  statement  of  facts  will  be  brief,  if  in  the  first  40
place  we  start  at  that  point  of  the  case  at  which  it
begins  to  concern  the  judge,  secondly  avoid  irrele-
vance, and  finally  cut  out  everything  the  removal
of  which  neither  hampers  the  activities  of  the  judge
nor  harms  our  own  case.  For  frequently  conciseness  41
of  detail  is  not  inconsistent  with  length  in  the
whole.  Take  for  instance  such  a  statement  as  the
following  :  €t  I  came  to  the  harbour,  I  saw  a  ship,  I
asked  the  cost  of  a  passage,  the  price  was  agreed,  I
went  on  board,  the  anchor  was  weighed,  we  loosed
our  cable  and  set  out."  Nothing  could  be  terser
than  these  assertions,  but  it  would  have  been  quite
sufficient  to  say  "  I  sailed  from  the  harbour."  And
whenever  the  conclusion  gives  a  sufficiently  cleir
idea  of  the  premisses,  we  must  be  content  with
having  given  a  hint  which  will  enable  our  audience
to  understand  what  we  have  left  unsaid.  Con-  42
sequently  when  it  is  possible  to  say  "  I  have  a  young
son,"  it  is  quite  superfluous  to  say,  "  Being  desirous  of
children  I  took  a  wife,  a  son  was  born  whom  I
acknowledged  and  reared  and  brought  up  to  man-
hood." For  this  reason  some  of  the  Greeks  draw  a
distinction  between  a  concise  statement  (the  word
they  use  is  owto/aos)  and  a  brief  statement,  the
former  being  free  from  all  superfluous  matter,  while
the  latter  may  conceivably  omit  something  that
requires  to  be  stated.  Personally,  when  I  use  the  43
word  brevity,  I  mean  not  saying  less,  but  not  saying
more  than  occasion  demands.  As  for  repetitions
and  tautologies  and  dimiseness,  which  some  writers
of  textbooks  tell  us  we  must  avoid,  I  pass  them  by ;

73


QUINTILIAN

haec  vitia  non  tantum  brevitatis  gratia  refugienda.

44  Non  minus  autem  cavenda  erit,  quae  nimium
corripientes  omnia  sequitur,  obscuritas,  satiusque  est
aliquid  narrationi  superesse  quam  deesse.  Nam
supervacua cum taedio dicuntur, necessaria cum

45  periculo  subtrahuntur.  Quare  vitanda  est  etiam  ilia
Sallustiana,  quanquam  in  ipso  virtutis  obtinet  locum,
brevitas  et  abruptum  sermonis  genus,  quod  otiosum
fortasse  lectorem  minus  fallat,  audientem  transvolat
nee  dum  repetatur  exspectat,  cum  praesertim  lector
non  fere  sit  nisi  eruditus,  iudicem  rura  plerumque  in
decurias  mittant  de  eo  pronuntiaturum  quod  intellex-
erit;  ut  fortasse  ubicunque,  in  narratione  tamen
praecipue,  media  haec  tenenda  sit  via  dicendi  quan-

46  turn  opus  est  et  quantum  satis  est.  Quantum  opus  est
autem  non  ita  solum  accipi  volo,  quantum  ad  indican-
dum  sufficit,  quia  non  inornata  debet  esse  brevitas,
alioqui  sit  indocta ;  nam  et  fallit  voluptas  et  minus
longa  quae  delectant  videntur,  ut  amoenum  ac  molle
iter,  etiamsi  est  spatii  amplioris,  minus  fatigat  quam

47  durum  aridumque  compendium.  Neque  mihi  unquam
tanta  fuerit  cura  brevitatis,  ut  nonea,  quaecredibilem
faciunt  expositionem,  inseri  velim.  Simplex  enim
et  undique  praecisa  non  tarn  narratio  vocari  potest
quam  confessio. Sunt  porro  multae  condicione  ipsa

74


BOOK IV.  ii. 43-47

they  are  faults  which  we  should  shun  for  other  reasons
beside  our  desire  for  brevity.  But  we  must  be  44
equally  on  our  guard  against  the  obscurity  which
results  from  excessive  abridgment,  and  it  is  better  to
say  a  little  more  than  is  necessary  than  a  little  less.
For  though  a  diffuse  irrelevance  is  tedious,  the
omission  of  what  is  necessary  is  positively  dangerous.
We  must  therefore  avoid  even  the  famous  terseness  45
of  Sallust  (though  in  his  case  of  course  it  is  a  merit),
and  shun  all  abruptness  of  speech,  since  a  style
which  presents  no  difficulty  to  a  leisurely  reader,
flies  past  a  hearer  and  will  not  stay  to  be
looked  at  again ;  and  whereas  the  reader  is
almost  always  a  man  of  learning,  the  judge  often
comes  to  his  panel  from  the  country  side  and  is
expected  to  give  a  decision  on  what  he  can  under-
stand. Consequently  we  must  aim,  perhaps  every-
where, but  above  all  in  our  statement  of  fads,  at
striking  the  happy  mean  in  our  language,  and  the
happy  mean  may  be  defined  as  saying  just  what
is  necessary  and  just  what  is  sufficient.  By  "just  46
what  is  necessary"  I  mean  not  the  bare  minimum
necessary  to  convey  our  meaning;  for  our  brevity
must  not  be  devoid  of  elegance,  without  which  it
would  be  merely  uncouth :  pleasure  beguiles  the
attention,  and  that  which  delights  us  ever  seems  less
long,  just  as  a  picturesque  and  easy  journey  tires  us
less  for  all  its  length  than  a  difficult  short  cut  through
an  arid  waste.  And  I  would  never  carry  my  desire  47
for  brevity  so  far  as  to  refuse  admission  to  details
which  may  contribute  to  the  plausibility  of  our
narrative.  Simplify  and  curtail  your  statement  of
facts  in  every  direction  and  you  will  turn  it  into
something  more  like  a  confession. Moreover,  the

75


QUINTILIAN

rei  longae  narrationes,  quibus  extrema  (ut  praecepi)
prooemii  parte  ad  intentionem  praeparandus  est
iudex ;  deinde  curandum,  ut  omni  arte  vel  ex  spatio

48  eius  detrahamus  aliquid  vel  ex  taedio.  Ut  minus
longa  sit,  efficiemus  quae  poterimus  differendo,  non
tamen  sine  mentione  eorum,  quae  differemus :  Quas
causas  occidendi  kabuerit,  quos  adsumpserit  conscios,
quemadmodum disposuerit insidias, probationis loco

49  dicam.  Quaedam  vero  ex  ordine  praetermittenda,
quale  est  apud  Ciceronem  :  Moritur  Fulcinius  ;  multa
enim,  quae  sunt  in  re,  quia  remota  sunt  a  causa,  prae-
termittam.  Et  partitio  taedium  levat :  Dicam  quae
acta  sint  ante  ipsum  rei  contractum,  dicam  quae  in  re

50  ipsa,  dicam  quae  postea.  Ita  tres  potius  modicae
narrationes  videbuntur  quam  una  longa.  Interim
expediet  expositiones  brevi  interfatione  distinguere :
Audistis  quae  ante  acta  sunt,  accipite  nunc  quae  inse-
quuntur. Reficietur  enim  iudex  priorum  fine  et  se

51  velut  ad  novum  rursus  initium  praeparabit.  Si  tamen
adhibitis  quoque  his  artibus  in  longum  exierit  ordo
rerum,  erit  non  inutilis  in  extrema  parte  commonitio ;

1  pro  Caec.  iv.  11.

76


BOOK  IV.  ii.  47-51

circumstances  of  the  case  will  often  necessitate  a
long  statement  of  facts,  in  which  case,  as  I  have
already  enjoined,  the  judge  should  be  prepared  for
it  at  the  conclusion  of  the  exordium.  Next  we  must
put  forth  all  our  art  either  to  shorten  it  or  to  render
it  less  tedious.  We  must  do  what  we  can  to  make  48
it  less  long  by  postponing  some  points,  taking  care
however  to  mention  what  it  is  that  we  propose  to
postpone.  Take  the  following  as  an  example.  i€  As
regards  his  motives  for  killing  him,  his  accomplices
and  the  manner  in  which  he  disposed  his  ambush,
I  will  speak  when  I  come  to  the  proof"  Some  49
things  indeed  may  be  omitted  altogether  from  our
marshalling  of  the  facts,  witness  the  following
example  from  Cicero,1  "  Fulcinius  died ;  there  are
many  circumstances  which  attended  that  event,  but
as  they  have  little  bearing  on  this  case,  I  shall  pass
them  by."  Division  of  our  statement  into  its  various
heads  is  another  method  of  avoiding  tedium :  for
example,  "I  will  tell  you  first  what  preceded  this
affair,  then  what  occurred  in  its  actual  development,
and  finally  you  shall  hear  its  sequel."  Such  a  60
division  will  give  the  impression  of  three  short  state-
ments rather  than  of  one  long  one.  At  times  it  will  be
well  to  interrupt  our  narrative  by  interjecting  some
brief  remark  like  the  following :  "  You  have  heard
what  happened  before :  now  learn  what  follows. "  The
judge  will  be  refreshed  by  the  fact  that  we  have
brought  our  previous  remarks  to  a  close  and  will
prepare  himself  for  what  may  be  regarded  as  a  fresh
start.  If  however  after  employing  all  these  artifices  61
our  array  of  facts  is  still  long,  it  will  not  be  without
advantage  to  append  a  summary  at  the  end  of  it  as
a  reminder  :  Cicero  does  this  even  at  the  close  of  a

17


QUINTILIAN

quod  Cicero  etiam  in  brevi  narratione  fecit :  Adhuc,
Caesar,  Q.  Ligarius  omni  culpa  caret ;  domo  est  egressus
non  modo  nullum  ad  helium  sed  ne  ad  minimam  quidem
belli  suspicionem  et  cetera.
62  Credibilis  autem  erit  narratio  ante  omnia,  si  prius
consuluerimus  nostrum  animum,  ne  quid  naturae
dicamus  adversum,  deinde  si  causas  ac  rationes  factis
praeposuerimus,  non  omnibus  sed  de  quibus  quae-
ritur,  si  personas  convenientes  iis,  quae  facta  credi
volemus,  constituerimus,  ut  furti  reum  cupidum,
adulterii  libidinosum,  homicidii  temerarium,  vel  his
contraria,  si  defendemus ; praeterea  loca, tempora

53  et  similia.  Est  autem  quidam  et  ductus  rei  credibilis,
qualis  in  comoediis  etiam  et  in  mimis.  Aliqua  enim
naturaliter  sequuntur  et  cohaerent  ut,  si  priora  bene
narraveris,  iudex ipse quod postea sis narraturus

54  exspectet.  Ne  illud  quidem  fuerit  inutile,  semina
quaedam  probation um  spargere,  verum  sic  ut  narra-
tionem  esse  meminerimus  non  probationem.  Non-
nunquam  tamen  etiam  argumento  aliquo  confirmabi-
mus,  quod  proposuerimus,  sed  simplici  et  brevi,  ut
in  veneficiis :  Sanus  bibit,  statim  concidit, livor  ac  tu-

65  mor  confestim  est  inseculus. Hoc  faciunt  et  illae  prae-


1  pro  Lig.  ii.  4.

78


BOOK IV.  ii.  51-55

brief  statement  of  facts  in  the  pro  Ligario  l :  "  To
this  day,  Caesar,  Quintus  Ligarius  is  free  from  all
blame :  he  left  his  home  not  merely  without  the
least  intention  of  joining  in  any  war,  but  when  there
was  not  the  least  suspicion  of  any  war  etc."

The  statement  of  fact  will  be  credible,  if  in  the  first  52
place  we  take  care  to  say  nothing  contrary  to  nature,
secondly  if  we  assign  reasons  and  motives  for  the
facts  on  which  the  inquiry  turns  (it  is  unnecessary  to
do  so  with  the  subsidiary  facts  as  well),  and  if  we
make  the  characters  of  the  actors  in  keeping  with
the  facts  we  desire  to  be  believed  :  we  shall  for
instance  represent  a  person  accused  of  theft  as
covetous,  accused  of  adultery  as  lustful,  accused  of
homicide  as  rash,  or  attribute  the  opposite  qualities
to  these  persons  if  we  are  defending  them :  further
we  must  do  the  same  with  place,  time  and  the  like.
It  is  also  possible  to  treat  the  subject  in  such  a  way  63
as  to  give  it  an  air  of  credibility,  as  is  done  in
comedy  and  farce.  For  some  things  have  such  natural
sequence  and  coherence  that,  if  only  the  first
portion  of  your  statement  is  satisfactory,  the  judge
will  himself  anticipate  what  you  have  got  to
say  in  the  later  part.  It  will  also  be  useful  to  54
scatter  some  hints  of  our  proofs  here  and  there,  but
in  such  a  way  that  it  is  never  forgotten  that  we  are
making  a  statement  of  facts  and  not  a  proof.  Some-
times, however,  we  must  also  support  our  assertions
by  a  certain  amount  of  argument,  though  this  must
be  short  and  simple  :  for  instance  in  a  case  of
poisoning  we  shall  say,  "  He  was  perfectly  well
when  he  drank,  he  fell  suddenly  to  the  ground,  and
blackness  and  swelling  of  the  body  immediately
supervened." The  same  result  is  produced  by  pre-  65

79


QUINTILIAN

parationes,  cum  reus  dicitur  robustus,  armatus  contra
infirmos,  inermes,  securos.  Omnia  denique,  quae
probatione  tractaturi  sumus,  personam,  causam,
locum,  tempus,  instrumentum,  occasionem,  narratione

56  delibabimus.  Aliquando,  si  destituti  fuerimus  his,
etiam  fatebimur  vix  esse  credibile,  sed  verum  et  hoc
maius  habendum  scelus  ;  nescire  nos  quomodo  factum

57  sit  aut  quare,  mirari  sed  probaturos.  Optimae  vero
praeparationes  erunt  quae  latuerint,  ut  a  Cicerone
sunt  quidem  utilissime  praedicta  omnia,  per  quae
Miloni  Clodius  nonClodio  Milo  insidiatus  esse  videa-
tur  ;  plurimum  tamen  facit  ilia  callidissima  simplici-
tatis  imitatio  :  Milo  autem,  cum  in  senatu  fuisset  eo  die,
quoad  senatus  est  dimissus,  domum  venit,  calceos  et
vestimenta  mutavit,  paulisper,  dum  se  uxor,  utjlt,  comparat,

58  commoratus  est.  Quam  nihil  festinato,  nihil  prae-
parato  fecisse  videtur  Milo  !  Quod  non  solum  rebus
ipsis  vir  eloquentissimus,  quibus  moras  et  lentum
profectionis  ordinem  ducit,  sed  verbis  etiam  vulgari-
bus  et  cotidianis  et  arte  occulta  consecutus  est ;  quae
si  aliter  dicta  essent,  strepitu  ipso  iudicem  ad  custo-

59  diendum  patronum  excitassent.  Frigere  videntur  ista
plerisque,  sed  hoc  ipso  manifestum  est,  quomodo  iudi-

1  pro  Mil.  x.  28.
8o


BOOK IV.  n.  55-59

paratory  remarks  such  as  the  following :  "  The
accused  is  a  strong  man  and  was  fully  armed,  while
his  opponents  were  weak,  unarmed  and  suspecting  no
€¥0.''  We  may  in  fact  touch  on  everything  that  we
propose  to  produce  in  our  proof,  while  making  our
statement  of  facts,  as  for  instance  points  connected
with  persons,  cause,  place,  time,  the  instrument  and
occasion  employed.  Sometimes,  when  this  resource  56
is  unavailable,  we  may  even  confess  that  the  charge,
though  true,  is  scarcely  credible,  and  that  therefore
it  must  be  regarded  as  all  the  more  atrocious ;  that
we  do  not  know  how  the  deed  was  done  or  why,  that
we  are  filled  with  amazement,  but  will  prove  our
case.  The  best  kind  of  preparatory  remarks  are  57
those  which  cannot  be  recognised  as  such :  Cicero,1
for  instance,  is  extraordinarily  happy  in  the  way  he
mentions  in  advance  everything  that  shows  that
Clodius  lay  in  wait  for  Milo  and  not  Milo  for  Clodius.
The  most  effective  stroke  of  all  is  his  cunning  feint
of  simplicity :  "  Milo,  on  the  other  hand,  having
been  in  the  senate  all  day  till  the  house  rose,  went
home,  changed  his  shoes  and  clothes,  and  waited  for
a  short  time,  while  his  wife  was  getting  ready,  as  is
the  way  with  women."  What  an  absence  of  haste  58
and  premeditation  this  gives  to  Milo's  proceedings.
And  the  great  orator  secures  this  effect  not  merely
by  producing  facts  which  indicate  the  slow  and
tardy  nature  of  Milo's  departure,  but  by  the  use  of
the  ordinary  language  of  everyday  speech  and  a
careful  concealment  of  his  art.  Had  he  spoken
otherwise,  his  words  would  by  their  very  sound  have
warned  the  judge  to  keep  an  eye  on  the  advocate.
The  majority  of  readers  regard  this  passage  as  lack-  59
ing  in  distinction,  but  this  very  fact  merely  serves

8i


QUINTILIAN

cem  fefellerit,  quod  vix  a  lectore  deprehenditur.  Haec

60  sunt  quae  credibilem  faciant  expositionem.  Nam
id  quidem,  ne  qua  contraria  aut  sibi  repugnantia  in
narratione  dicamus,  si  cui  praecipiendum  est,  is
reliqua  frustra  docetur,  etiamsi  quidam  scriptores
artium  hoc  quoque  tanquam  occultum  et  a  se
prudenter  erutum  tradunt.

61  His  tribus  narrandi  virtutibus  adiiciunt  quidam
magnificentiam,  quam  ^yaXoirpiir^Lav  vocant,  quae
neque  in  omnes  causas  cadit  (nam  quid  in  plerisque
iudieiis  privatis,  de  certa  credita,  locato  et  conducto,
interdictis  habere  loci  potest  supra  modum  se  tollens
oratio?) neque semper est utilis, velut proximo

62  exemplo  Miloniano  patet.  Et  meminerimus  multas
esse  causas,  in  quibus  confitendum,  excusandum,
summittendum  sit  quod  exponimus  ;  quibus  omni-
bus aliena  est  ilia  magnificentiae  virtus.  Quare  non
magis  proprium  narrationis  est  magnifice  dicere
quam  miserabiliter,  invidiose,  graviter,  dulciter,
urbane ;  quae,  cum  suo  quoque  loco  sint  laudabilia,
non  sunt  huic  parti  proprie  adsignata  et  velut  dedita.

63  Ilia  quoque  ut  narrationi  apta,  ita  ceteris  quoque
partibus  communis  est  virtus,  quam  Theodectes  huic
uni  proprie  dedit ;  non  enim  magnificam  modo  vult
esse, verum etiam  iucundam expositionem. Sunt

82


BOOK IV.  ii.  59-63

to  show  how  the  art  which  is  scarce  detected  by  a
reader  succeeded  in  hoodwinking  the  judge.  It  is
qualities  of  this  kind  that  make  the  statement  of  facts
credible.  If  a  student  requires  to  be  told  that  we  60
must  avoid  contradiction  and  inconsistency  in  our
statement  of  facts,  it  will  be  vain  to  attempt  to  instruct
him  on  the  remaining  points,  although  some  writers
of  text- books  produce  this  precept  as  if  it  were  a
mystery  only  discovered  by  their  own  personal
penetration.

To  these  three  qualities  some  add  magnificence  of  61
diction  or  //,€yaAo7rpe7ma  as  they  call  it  this  quality
is  not,  however,  suitable  to  all  cases.  For  what  place
has  language  that  rises  above  the  ordinary  level  in
the  majority  of  private  suits  dealing  with  loans,
letting  and  hiring  and  interdicts  ?  Nor  yet  is  it
always  expedient,  as  may  be  inferred  from  the
passage  just  cited  from  the  pro  Milone.  We  must  62
remember,  too,  that  there  are  many  cases  in  which
confession,  excuse  or  modification  are  necessary  with
regard  to  our  statements  :  and  magnificence  is  a
quality  wholly  out  of  keeping  with  such  procedure.
Magnificence  of  diction  is  therefore  no  more  specially
appropriate  to  the  statement  of  facts  than  language
calculated  to  excite  pity  or  hatred,  or  characterised
by  dignity,  charm  or  wit.  Each  of  these  qualities
is  admirable  in  its  proper  place,  but  none  can  be
regarded  as  the  peculiar  and  inalienable  property  of
this  portion  of  the  speech.

Theodectes asserts that the statement of  facts  63
should not  merely be magnificent,  but attractive
in  style. But this quality again though suitable
enough  to  the  statement  of  facts,  is  equally  so  in
other  portions of the speech. There are others

83


QUINTILIAN

qui adiiciant  his  evidentiam,  quae  €vdpy€ia  Graece

64  vocatur.  Neque  ego  quemquam  deceperim,  ut
dissimulem  Ciceroni  quoque  plures  partes  placere.
Nam  praeterquam  planam  et  brevem  et  credibilem
vult  esse  evidentem,  moratam  cum  dignitate.  Sed
in  oratione  morata  debent  esse  omnia  cum  dignitate,
quae  poterunt.  Evidentia  in  narratione,  quantum
ego  intelligo,  est  quidem  magna  virtus,  cum  quid
veri  non  dicendum,  sed  quodammodo  etiam  osten-
dendum  est;  sed  subiici  perspicuitati  potest,  quam
quidam  etiam  contrariam  interim  putaverunt,  quia
in  quibusdam  causis  obscuranda  Veritas  esset ;  quod

65  est  ridiculum.  Nam  qui  obscurare  vult,  narrat  falsa
pro  veris,  et  in  iis  quae  narrat  debet  laborare,  ut
videantur  quam  evidentissima.

66  Et  quatenus  etiam  forte  quadam  pervenimus  ad
dimcilius  narrationum  genus,  iam  de  iis  loquamur,
in  quibus  res  contra  nos  erit,  quo  loco  nonnulli  prae-
tereundam  narrationem  putaverunt.  Et  sane  nihil
est  facilius,  nisi  prorsus  totam  causam  omnino  non
agere.  Sed  si  aliqua  iusta  ratione  huiusmodi  susce-
peris  litem,  cuius  artis  est  malam  esse  causam
silentio  confiteri  ?  nisi  forte  tam  hebes  futurus  est
iudex,  ut  secundum  id  pronuntiet,  quod  sciet  narrare

67  te  noluisse.  Neque  infitias  eo  in  narratione,  ut
aliqua neganda,  aliqua  adiicienda,  aliqua  mutanda,


1  Top.  xxvi.  97.
84


BOOK IV.  ii.  63-67

who  add  palpability,  which  the  Greeks  call  ivdpy€ia.
And  I  will  not  conceal  the  fact  that  Cicero1  himself  64
holds  that  more  qualities  are  required.  For  in
addition  to  demanding  that  it  should  be  plain,  brief
and  credible,  he  would  have  it  clear,  characteristic
and  worthy  of  the  occasion.  But  everything  in
a  speech  should  be  characteristic  and  worthy  of  the
occasion  as  far  as  possible.  Palpability,  as  far
as  I  understand  the  term,  is  no  doubt  a  great  virtue,
when  a  truth  requires  not  merely  to  be  told,  but  to
some  extent  obtruded,  still  it  may  be  included  under
lucidity.  Some,  however,  regard  this  quality  as
actually  being  injurious  at  times,  on  the  ground  that
in  certain  cases  it  is  desirable  to  obscure  the  truth.
This  contention  is,  however,  absurd.  For  he  who  65
desires  to  obscure  the  situation,  will  state  what  is
false  in  lieu  of  the  truth,  but  must  still  strive  to
secure  an  appearance  of  palpability  for  the  facts
which  he  narrates.

A  chance  turn  of  the  discussion  has  led  us  to  a  66
difficult  type  of  statement  of  facts.  I  will  therefore
proceed  to  speak  of  those  in  which  the  facts  are
against  us.  Under  such  circumstances  some  have
held  that  we  should  omit  the  statement  of  facts
altogether.  Nothing  can  be  more  easy,  except
perhaps  to  throw  up  the  case  altogether.  But
suppose  you  undertake  a  case  of  this  kind  with
some  good  reason.  It  is  surely  the  worst  art  to
admit  the  badness  of  the  case  by  keeping  silence.
We  can  hardly  hope  that  the  judge  will  be  so
dense  as  to  give  a  decision  in  favour  of  a  case  which
he  knows  we  were  unwilling  to  place  before  him.
I  do  not  of  course  deny  that  just  as  there  may  be  67
some  points  which  you  should  deny  in  your  statement

85


QUINTILIAN

sic  aliqua  etiam  tacenda  ;  sed  tacenda,  quae  tacere
oportebit  et  liberum  erit.  Quod  fit  nonnunquam
brevitatis  quoque  gratia,  quale  illud  est, Respondit

68  quae  ei  visum  est.  Distinguamus  igitur  genera
causarum.  Namque  in  iis,  in  quibus  non  de  culpa
quaeretur  sed  de  actione,  etiamsi  erunt  contra  nos
theniata,  connteri  nobis  licebit :  Pecuniam  de  lemplo
suslulit sed privatum, ideoque sacrilegus non est.

69  Virginem  rapuit,  non  tamen  optio  patri  dabitur.  In-
genuum  stupravit  el  stupratus  se  suspendit,  non  tamen
ideo  siuprator  capite  ut  causa  mortis  punietur,  sed  decern
milia,  quae  poena  stupratori  constiiuta  est,  dabit.  Verum
in  his  quoque  confessionibus  est  aliquid,  quod  de
invidia,  quam  expositio  adversarii  fecit,  detrahi
possit,  cum  etiam  servi  nostri  de  peccatis  suis  mol-

70  lius  loquantur.  Quaedam  enim  quasi  non  narrantes
mitigabimus  :  Non  quidem,  ut  adversarius  dicit,  con-
silium furti  in  templum  attulit  nee  diu  captavit  eius  rei
tempus  ;  sed  occasione  et  absentia  custodum  corruptus  et
pecunia,  quae  nimium  in  animis  kominum  potest,  victus
est. Sed  quid  refert  c4  peccavit  et  fur  est  ;  nihil  attinet

1  The  victim  can  claim  either  that  the  ravisher  should
marry  her  or  he  put  to  death.  Her  father  cannot  however
make  either  ©f  these  demands  on  her  behalf.

86


BOOK IV.  ii.  67-70

of  facts,  others  which  you  should  add,  and  yet  again
others  that  you  should  alter,  so  there  may  be  some
which  you  should  pass  over  in  silence.  But  still
only  those  points  should  be  passed  over  which  we
ought  and  are  at  liberty  to  treat  in  this  way.  This
is  sometimes  done  for  the  sake  of  brevity,  as  in  the
phrase  "  He  replied  as  he  thought  fit."  We  68
must  therefore  distinguish  between  case  and  case.
In  those  where  there  is  no  question  of  guilt  but
only  of  law,  we  may,  even  though  the  facts  be
against  us,  admit  the  truth.  "He  took  money
from  the  temple,  but  it  was  private  property,  and
therefore  he  is  not  guilty  of  sacrilege.  He  abducted
a  maiden,  but  the  father l  can  have  no  option  as  to
his  fate.  He  assaulted  a  freeborn  boy,  and  the  69
latter  hanged  himself,  but  that  is  no  reason  for  the
author  of  the  assault  to  be  awarded  capital  punish-
ment as  having  caused  his  death  ;  he  will  instead
pay  10,000  sesterces,  the  fine  imposed  by  law  for
such  a  crime."  But  even  in  making  these  ad-
missions we  may  to  some  extent  lessen  the  odium
caused  by  the  statement  of  our  opponent.  For  even
our  slaves  extenuate  their  own  faults.  In  some  70
cases,  too,  we  may  mitigate  a  bad  impression  by
words  which  avoid  the  appearance  of  a  statement  of
facts.  We  may  say,  for  instance,  "He  did  not,  as
our  opponent  asserts,  enter  the  temple  with  the
deliberate  intention  of  theft  nor  seek  a  favourable
occasion  for  the  purpose,  but  was  led  astray  by
the  opportunity,  the  absence  of  custodians,  and
the  sight  of  the  money  (and  money  has  always  an
undue  influence  on  the  mind  of  man),  and  so
yielded  to  temptation.  What  does  that  matter?
He  committed the  offence and  is  a thief. It is


QUINTILIAN

71  id  dejendere,  cuius  poenam  non  recusamas.  Interim
quasi  damnemus  ipsi :  Vis  te  dicam  vino  impulsum  f
eirore  lapsum  ?  node  deceptum  ?  vera  sunt  ista  fortasse  ;
tu  tamen  ingenuum  stuprasti,  solve  decern  milia.  Non-
nunquam praepositione praemuniri potest causa,

72  deinde  exponi.  Contraria  sunt  omnia  tribus  filiis,
qui  in  mortem  patris  coniurarant :  sortiti  nocte
singuli  per  ordinem  cum  ferro  cubiculum  intrarunt
patre  dormiente  ;  cum  occidere  eum  nemo  potuisset,

73  excitato  omnia  indicarunt.  Si  tamen  pater,  qui
divisit  patrimonium  et  reos  parricidii  defendit,  sic
agat :  Quod  contra  legem  sufficit,  parricidium  obiicilur
iuvenibusy  quorum  pater  vivit  atque  etiam  liberis  suis
adesL  Ordinem  rei  narrare  quid  necesse  est,  cum  ad
legem  nihil  pertineat  ?  sed  si  confessionem  culpae  meae
exigitis,  Jut  pater  durus  et  patrimonii,  quod  iam  melius

74  ah  his  adminislran  poteiat,  tenax  custos ;  deinde
subiiciat  stimulates  ab  iis,  quorum  indulgentiores
parentes  erant,  semper  tamen  habuisse  eum  aniraum,
qui  sit  eventu  deprehensus,  ut  occidere  patrem  non
88


BOOK IV.  n.  70-74

useless  to  defend  an  act  to  the  punishment  of
which  we  can  raise  no  objection/'  Again  we  may  71
sometimes  go  near  condemning  our  client  our-
selves. "Do  you  wish  me  to  say  that  you  were
under  the  influence  of  wine  ?  that  you  made  a  mis-
take ?  that  the  darkness  deceived  you  ?  That  may
be  true.  But  still  you  committed  an  assault  on  a
freeborn  boy  ;  pay  your  10,000  sesterces."  Some-
times we  may  fortify  our  case  in  advance  by  a
preliminary  summary,  from  which  we  proceed  to  the
full  statement  of  facts.  All  the  evidence  points  to  72
the  guilt  of  three  sons  who  had  conspired  against
their  father.  After  drawing  lots  they  entered
their  father's  bedroom  while  he  slept,  one  following
the  other  in  the  order  predetermined  and  each
armed  with  a  sword.  None  of  them  had  the  heart
to  kill  him,  he  woke  and  they  confessed  all.  If,  73
however,  the  father,  who  has  divided  his  estate
among  them  and  is  defending  them  when  accused
of  parricide,  pleads  as  follows :  "  As  regards  my
defence  against  the  law,  it  suffices  to  point  out,
that  these  young  men  are  charged  with  parricide
in  spite  of  the  fact  that  their  father  still  lives  and  is
actually  appearing  on  behalf  of  his  children.  What
need  is  there  for  me  to  set  forth  the  facts  as  they
occurred  since  the  law  does  not  apply  to  them  ?  But  if
you  desire  me  to  confess  my  own  guilt  in  the  matter,
I  was  a  hard  father  to  them  and  watched  over  my
estate,  which  would  have  been  better  managed  by
them,  with  miserly  tenacity/ '  And  if  he  then  should  74
add,  "they  were  spurred  to  attempt  the  crime  by
others  who  had  more  indulgent  fathers  ;  but  their
real  feelings  towards  their  father  have  been  proved
by  the  result;  they  could  not  bring  themselves  to

89


QUINTILIAN
possent ; neque enim iureiurando  opus fuisse,  si
alioqui  hoc  mentis  habuissent,  nee  sorte,  nisi  quod
se  quisque  eximi  voluerit,  omnia  haec  qualiacunque
placidioribus animis accipientur,  ilia brevi  primae

75  propositionis  defensione  mollita.  At  cum  quaeritur
an  factum  sit  vel  quale  factum  sit,  licet  omnia
contra  nos  sint,  quomodo  tamen  evitare  expositionem
salva  causae  ratione  possumus  ?  Narravit  accusator
neque  ita  ut,  quae  essent  acta,  tantum  indicaret,  sed
adiecit  invidiam,  rem  verbis  exasperavit,  accesserunt
probationes,  peroratio  incendit  et  plenos  irae  reli-

76  quit  Exspectat  naturaliter  iudex,  quid  narretur  a
nobis.  Si  nihil  exponimus,  ilia  esse  quae  adversa-
rius  dixit  et  talia  qualia  dixit  credat  necesse  est.
Quid  ergo  ?  eadem  exponemus  ?  Si  de  qualitate
agitur,  cuius  turn  demum  quaestio  est,  cum  de  re
constat,  eadem  sed  non  eodem  modo ;  alias  causas,

77  aliam  mentem,  aliam  rationem  dabo. Verbis  elevare

quaedam  licebit ;  luxuria  liberalitatis,  avaritia  parsi-
90


BOOK IV.  ii.  74-77

kill  him.  It  would  have  been  quite  unnecessary
for  them  to  take  an  oath  to  kill  him,  if  they  had
really  had  the  heart  to  do  the  deed,  while  the  only
explanation  of  their  drawing  lots  is  that  each  of
them  wished  to  avoid  the  commission  of  the  crime."
If  such  were  his  pleading,  all  these  pleas  would,
such  as  they  are,  find  the  judges  all  the  more
disposed  to  mercy,  since  the  brief  defence  offered
in  the  first  summary  statement  would  have  paved
the  way  for  them.  But  if  the  question  is  whether  75
an  act  has  been  committed  or  what  its  nature  may
be,  even  though  everything  be  against  us,  how  can
we  avoid  a  statement  of  facts  without  gross  neglect
of  our  case  ?  The  accuser  has  made  a  statement  of
facts,  and  has  done  so  not  merely  in  such  a  way  as
to  indicate  what  was  done,  but  has  added  such
comments  as  might  excite  strong  prejudice  against
us  and  made  the  facts  seem  worse  than  they  are
by  the  language  which  he  has  used.  On  the  top
of  this  have  come  the  proofs,  while  the  peroration
has  kindled  the  indignation  of  the  judges  and  left
them  full  of  anger  against  us.  The  judge  naturally  76
waits  to  hear  what  we  can  state  in  our  behalf.  If
we  make  no  statement,  he  cannot  help  believing
that  our  opponent's  assertions  are  correct  and  that
their  tone  represents  the  truth.  What  are  we  to
do  then  ?  Are  we  to  restate  the  same  facts  ?  Yes,
if  the  question  turns  on  the  nature  of  the  act,  as
it  will  if  there  is  no  doubt  about  the  commission,
but  we  must  restate  them  in  a  different  way,
alleging  other  motives  and  another  purpose  and
putting  a  different  complexion  on  the  case.  Some  77
imputations  we  may  mitigate  by  the  use  of  other
words ;  luxury  will  be  softened  down  into  generosity,

9i


QUINTILIAN

moniae,  negligentia  simplicitatis  nomine  lenietur ;
vultu  denique,  voce,  habitu  vel  favoris  aliquid  vel
miserationis  merebor.  Solet  nonnunquam  movere
Ucrimas  ipsa  confessio.  Atque  ego  libenter  interro-
gem, sint ilia defensuri, quae non narraverint,

78  necne?  Nam  si  neque  defenderint  neque  narra-
verint, tota  causa  prodetur;  at  si  defensuri  sunt,
proponere  certe  plerumque  id,  quod  confirmaturi
sumus,  oportet.  Cur  ergo  non  exponamus,  quod  et
dilui  potest  et,  ut  hoc  contingat,  utique  indicandum

79  est?  Aut  quid  inter  probationem  et  narrationem
interest,  nisi  quod  narratio  est  probationis  continua
propositio,  rursus  probatio  narrationi  congruens  con-
firmatio  ?  Videamus  ergo,  num  haec  expositio
longior  demum  debeat  esse  et  paulo  verbosior  prae-
paratione  et  quibusdam  argumentis  (argumentis  dico,
non  argumentatione),  cui  tamen  plurimum  confert
frequens  adfirmatio  effecturos  nos  quod  dicimus ;
non  posse  vim  rerum  ostendi  prima  exposition e ;
exspectent et opiniones suas differant et bene

80  sperent.  Denique  utique  narrandum  est,  quidquid
aliter  quam  adversarius  exposuit  narrari  potest,  aut
etiam  prooemia  sunt  in  his  causis  supervacua ;  quae
quid  magis  agunt,  quam  ut  cognitioni  rerum  accom-

92


BOOK IV.  ii.  77-80

avarice  into  economy,  carelessness  into  simplicity,
and  I  shall  seek  to  win  a  certain  amount  of  favour
or  pity  by  look,  voice  and  attitude.  Sometimes  a
frank  confession  is  of  itself  sufficient  to  move  the
jury  to  tears.  And  I  should  like  to  ask  those  who
differ  from  me  whether  they  are  prepared  to  defend
what  they  have  refused  to  state,  or  no.  For  if  78
they  refuse  either  to  defend  or  to  state  the  facts,
they  will  be  giving  away  their  whole  case.  If,  on
the  other  hand,  they  do  propose  to  put  in  a  defence,
they  must  at  least,  as  a  rule,  set  forth  what  they
intend  to  justify.  Why  then  not  state  fully  facts
which  can  be  got  rid  of  and  must  in  fact  be  pointed
out  to  make  that  possible  ?  Or  again  what  79
difference  is  there  between  a  proof  and  a  statement
of  facts  save  that  the  latter  is  a  proof  put  forward
in  continuous  form,  while  a  proof  is  a  verification
of  the  facts  as  put  forward  in  the  statement  ?  Let
us  consider  therefore  whether  under  such  circum-
stances the  statement  should  not  be  somewhat
longer  and  fuller  than  usual,  since  we  shall  require
to  make  some  preliminary  remarks  and  to  introduce
certain  special  arguments  (note  that  I  say  arguments,
and  not  argumentation),  while  it  will  add  greatly
to  the  force  of  our  defence  if  we  assert  not  once
nor  twice  that  we  shall  prove  what  we  say  is  true
and  that  the  significance  of  the  facts  cannot  be
brought  out  by  one  opening  statement,  bidding  them
wait,  delay  forming  their  opinions  and  hope  for  the
best.  Finally  it  is  important  to  include  in  our  80
statement  anything  that  can  be  given  a  different
complexion  from  that  put  upon  it  by  our  opponent.
Otherwise  even  an  exordium  will  be  superfluous
in  a  case  of  this  kind. For  what  is  its  purpose  if

93


QUINTILIAN

modatioreni  iudicem  faciant  ?  Atque  constabit,  nus-
quam  esse  eorum  maiorem  usum,  quam  ubi  animus
iudicis  ab  aliqua  contra  nos  insita  opinione  flectendus

81  est.  Coniecturales  autem  causae,  in  quibus  de  facto
quaeritur,  non  tarn  saepe  rei,  de  qua  iudicium  est,
quam  eorum,  per  quae  res  colligenda  est,  exposi-
tionem  habent.  Quae  cum  accusator  suspiciose
narret,  reus  levare  suspicionem  debeat,  aliter  ab  hoc

82  atque  ab  illo  ad  iudicem  perferri  oportet.  At  enim
quaedam  argumenta  turba  valent,  diducta  leviora
sunt.  Id  quidem  non  eo  pertinet,  ut  quaeratur  an
narrandum,  sed  quomodo  narrandum  sit.  Nam  et
congerere  plura  in  expositione  quid  prohibet,  si  id
utile  est  causae,  et  promittere,  sed  et  dividere
narrationem et probationes subiungere partibus

83  atque  ita  transire  ad  sequentia  ?  Nam  ne  iis  qui-
dem accedo,  qui  semper  eo  putant  ordine,  quo  quid
actum  sit,  esse  narrandum,  sed  eo  malo  narrare,  quo
expedit.  Quod  fieri  plurimis  figuris  licet.  Nam  et
aliquando nobis excidisse simulamus, cum quid


1  For  this  technical  term  =  cases  turning  on  questions  of
fact,  see  in.  vi.  30  sqq.


94


BOOK IV.  ii.  80-83

not  to  make  the  judge  better  disposed  for  the
investigation  of  the  case?  And  yet  it  will  be
agreed  that  the  exordium  is  never  more  useful  than
when  it  is  necessary  to  divert  the  judge  from  some
prejudice  that  he  has  formed  against  us.  Con-  81
jectural l  cases,  on  the  other  hand — that  is  to  say
questions  of  fact — require  a  statement,  which  will
more  often  deal  with  the  circumstances  from  which
a  knowledge  of  the  point  at  issue  may  be  derived
than  with  the  actual  point  which  is  under  trial.
When  the  accuser  states  these  circumstances  in
such  a  manner  as  to  throw  suspicion  on  the  case  for
the  defence,  and  the  accused  has  consequently  to
dispel  that  suspicion,  the  facts  must  be  presented  to
the  judge  in  quite  a  different  light  by  the  latter.  But,  82
it  may  be  urged,  some  arguments  are  strong  when  put
forward  in  bulk,  but  far  less  effective  when  employed
separately.  My  answer  is  that  this  remark  does  not
affect  the  question  whether  we  ought  to  make  a
statement  of  fact,  but  concerns  the  question  how  it
should  be  made.  For  what  is  there  to  prevent  us
from  amassing  and  producing  a  number  of  arguments
in  the  statement,  if  that  is  likely  to  help  our  cause  ?
Or  from  subdividing  our  statement  of  facts  and
appending  the  proofs  to  their  respective  sections
and  so  passing  on  to  what  remains  to  be  said  ?
Neither  do  I  agree  with  those  who  assert  that  83
the  order  of  our  statement  of  facts  should  always
follow  the  actual  order  of  events,  but  have  a  pre-
ference for  adopting  the  order  which  I  consider
most  suitable.  For  this  purpose  we  can  employ  a
variety  of  figures.  Sometimes,  when  we  bring  up
a  point  in  a  place  better  suited  to  our  purpose,
we  may  pretend  that  it had  escaped our  notice ;

95


QUINTILIAN

utiliore  loco  reducimus,  et  interim  nos  reddituros
reliquum  ordinem  testamur,  quia  sic  futura  sit  causa
lucidior; interim re exposita subiungimus causas

84  quae  antecesserunt.  Neque  enim  est  una  lex  defen-
sionis  certumque  praescriptum ;  pro  re,  pro  tempore
intuenda  quae  prosint,  atque  ut  erit  vulnus,  ita  vel
curandum protinus vel, si curatio differri potest,

85  interim  deligandum.  Nee  saepius  narrare  duxerim
nefas,  quod  Cicero  pro  Cluentio  fecit ;  estque  non
concessum  modo,  sed  aliquando  etiam  necessarium,
ut  in  causis  repetundarum  omnibusque  quae  sim-
plices  non  sunt. Amentis  est  enim  superstitione

86  praeceptorum  contra  rationem  causae  trahi.  Narra-
tionem  ideo  ante  probationes  ponere  est  institutum,
ne  iudex,  qua  de  re  quaeratur,  ignore t.  Cur  igitur,  si
singula  probanda  aut  refellenda  erunt,  non  singula
etiam  narrentur?  Me  certe,  quantacunque  nostris
experimentis  habenda  est  fides,  fecisse  hoc  in  foro,
quotiens  ita  desiderabat  utilitas,  probantibus  et  eru-
ditis  et  iis,  qui  iudicabant,  scio ;  et  (quod  non  arro-
ganter  dixerim,  quia  sunt  plurimi,  quibuscum  egi,
qui  me  refellere  possint,  si  mentiar)  fere  ponendae

87  a  me  causae  officium  exigebatur.  Neque  ideo  tamen
non  id  saepius  facere  oportebit,  ut  rerum  ordinem
sequamur. Quaedam  vero  etiam  turpiter  conver-

96


BOOK IV.  ii.  83-87

occasionally,  too,  we  may  inform  the  judge  that  we
shall  adhere  to  the  natural  order  for  the  remainder
of  our  statement,  since  by  so  doing  we  shall  make
our  case  clearer,  while  at  times  after  stating  a  fact,
we  may  append  the  causes  which  preceded  it.  For  84
there  is  no  single  law  or  fixed  rule  governing  the
method  of  defence.  We  must  consider  what  is
most  advantageous  in  the  circumstances  and  nature
of  the  case,  and  treat  the  wound  as  its  nature
dictates,  dressing  at  once  or,  if  the  dressing  can  be
delayed,  applying  a  temporary  bandage.  Again  I  85
do  not  regard  it  as  a  crime  to  repeat  a  statement  of
a  fact  more  than  once,  as  Cicero  does  in  the  pro
Cluentio.  It  is  not  merely  permissible,  but  some-
times necessary,  as  in  trials  for  extortion  and  all
complicated  cases ;  and  only  a  lunatic  will  allow  a
superstitious  observance  of  rules  to  lead  him  counter
to  the  interests  of  his  case.  The  reason  for  placing  86
the  statement  of  facts  before  the  proof  is  to  prevent
the  judge  from  being  ignorant  of  the  question  at
issue.  Why  then,  if  each  individual  point  has  to  be
proved  or  refuted,  should  not  each  individual  point  be
stated  as  well?  If  my  own  experience  may  be
trusted,  I  know  that  I  have  followed  this  practice  in
the  courts,  whenever  occasion  demanded  it,  and  my
procedure  has  been  approved  both  by  learned  authori-
ties and  the  judges  themselves,  while  the  duty  of
setting  forth  the  case  was  generally  entrusted  to  me.
I  am  not  boasting,  for  there  are  many  with  whom  I
have  been  associated  as  counsel,  who  can  bring  me  to
book  if  I  lie.  On  the  other  hand  this  is  no  reason  87
for  not  following  the  order  of  events  as  a  general  rule.
Indeed  inversion  of  the  order  has  at  times  a  most
unhappy  effect,  as  for  example  if  you  should  mention

97


QUINTILIAN

tuntur,  ut  si  peperisse  narres,  deinde  concepisse;
apertum  testamentum,  deinde  signatum ;  in  quibus
si  id,  quod  posterius  est,  dixeris,  de  priore  tacere
optimum  ;  palam  est  enim  praecessisse.

88  Sunt  quaedam  et  falsae  expositiones,  quarum  in
foro  duplex  genus  est :  alteram,  quod  instrumentis
adiuvatur,  ut  P.  Clodius  fiducia  testium,  qua  nocte
incestum  Romae  commiserat,  Interamnae  se  fuisse
dicebat;  alteram,  quod  est  tuendum  dicentis  in-
genio.  Id  interim  ad  solam  verecundiam  pertinet,
unde  etiam  mihi  videtur  dici  color,  interim  ad  quae-

89  stionem.  Sed  utrumcunque  erit,  prima  sit  curarum,
ut  id  quod  fingemus  fieri  possit ;  deinde,  ut  et  per-
sonae  et  loco  et  tempori  congruat  et  credibilem
rationem  et  ordinem  habeat;  si  continget,  etiam
verae  alicui  rei  cohaereat  aut  argumento,  quod  sit  in
causa,  confirmetur. Nam  quae  tota  extra  rem  petita

90  sunt,  mentiendi  licentiam  produnt.  Curandum  prae-
cipue,  (quod  fingentibus  frequenter  excidit)  ne  qua
inter  se  pugnent;  quaedam  enim  partibus  blandi-
untur,  sed  in  summam  non  consentiunt ;  praeterea,


1  color  is  a  technical  term  for  "the  particular  aspect  given
to  a  case  by  the  skilful  manipulation  of  the  facts — the  'gloss*
or  '  varnish '  put  on  them  by  the  accused  or  accuser." —
Peterson  on  Quint,  x.  i.  116.

98


BOOK IV.  ii.  87-90

first  that  a  woman  has  brought  forth  and  then  that
she  has  conceived,  or  that  a  will  has  been  read  and
then  that  it  has  been  signed.  In  such  cases,  if  you
should  happen  to  have  mentioned  the  later  incident,
it  is  better  to  say  nothing  about  the  former,  which
must  quite  obviously  have  come  first.

Sometimes,  too,  we  get  false  statements  of  facts ;  88
these,  as  far  as  actual  pleading  in  the  courts  is  con-
cerned, fall  into  two  classes.  In  the  first  case  the  state-
ment depends  on  external  support ;  Publius  Clodius,
for  instance,  relied  on  his  witnesses  when  he  stated
that  he  was  at  Interamna  on  the  night  when  he  com-
mitted abominable  sacrilege  at  Rome.  The  other  has
to  be  supported  by  the  speakers  native  talent,  and
sometimes  consists  simply  in  an  assumption  of  modesty,
which  is,  I  imagine,  the  reason  why  it  is  called  a
gloss,1  while  at  other  times  it  will  be  concerned  with
the  question  at  issue.  Whichever  of  these  two  forms  89
we  employ,  we  must  take  care,  first  that  our  fiction
is  within  the  bounds  of  possibility,  secondly  that  it
is  consistent  with  the  persons,  dates  and  places  in-
volved and  thirdly  that  it  presents  a  character  and
sequence  that  are  not  beyond  belief:  if  possible,
it  should  be  connected  with  something  that  is
admittedly  true  and  should  be  supported  by  some
argument  that  forms  part  of  the  actual  case.  For  if
we  draw  our  fictions  entirely  from  circumstances
lying  outside  the  case,  the  liberty  which  we  have
taken  in  resorting  to  falsehood  will  stand  revealed.
Above  all  we  must  see  that  we  do  not  contradict  90
ourselves,  a  slip  which  is  far  from  rare  on  the  part  of
spinners  of  fiction  :  for  some  things  may  put  a  most
favourable  complexion  on  portions  of  our  case,  and
yet  fail  to  agree  as  a  whole. Further,  what  we  say

99


QUINTILIAN

ne  iis,  quae  vera  esse  constabit,  adversa  sint; in
schola etiam, ne color extra themata quaeratur.

91  Utrobique  autem  orator  meminisse  debebit  actione
tota,  quid  finxerit,  quoniam  solent  excidere  quae
falsa  sunt,  verumque  est  illud,  quod  vulgo  dicitur,

92  mendacem  memorem  esse  oportere.  Sciamus  autem,
si  de  nostro  facto  quaeratur,  unum  nobis  aliquid  esse
dicendum  ;  si  de  alieno,  mittere  in  plura  suspiciones
licere.  Est  tamen  quibusdam  scholasticis  contro-
versiis,  in  quibus  ponitur  aliquem  non  respondere
quod  interrogator,  liber tas  omnia  enumerandi,  quae

93  responderi  potuissent.  Fingenda  vero  meminerimus
ea,  quae  non  cadant  in  testem.  Sunt  autem  haec,
quae  a  nostro  dicuntur  animo,  cuius  ipsi  tantum
conscii  sumus  ;  item  quod  a  defunctis,  nee  hoc  enim
est  qui  neget ;  itemque  ab  eo  cui  idem  expediet,  is
enim  non  negabit ;  ab  adversario  quoque,  quia  non

94  est  habiturus  in  negando  fidem.  Somniorum  et
superstitionum  colores  ipsa  iam  facilitate  auctori-
tatem  perdiderunt.  Non  est  autem  satis  in  narra-
tione  uti  coloribus,  nisi  per  totam  actionem  con-
sentiant,  cum praesertim  quorundam probatio  sola

95  sit  in  adseveratione  et  perseverantia  ;  ut  ille  para-
situs,  qui  ter  abdicatum  a  divite  iuvenem  et  abso.


ioo


BOOK IV.  ii.  90-95

must  not  be  at  variance  with  the  admitted  truth.  Even
in  the  schools,  if  we  desire  a  gloss,  we  must  not  look
for  it  outside  the  facts  laid  down  by  our  theme. In  91
either  case  the  orator  should bear  clearly  in  mind
throughout  his  whole  speech  what  the  fiction  is  to
which  he  has  committed  himself,  since  we  are  apt  to
forget  our  falsehoods,  and  there  is  no  doubt  about  the
truth  of  the  proverb  that  a  liar  should  have  a  good
memory. But  whereas,  if  the  question  turns  on  some  92
act  of  our  own,  we  must  make  one  statement  and
stick  to  it,  if  it  turns  on  an  act  committed  by  others,
we may cast suspicion on  a number  of  different
points.  In  certain  controversial  themes  of  the  schools,
however,  in  which  it  is  assumed  that  we  have  put  a
question  and  received  no  reply,  we  are  at  liberty  to
enumerate  all  the  possible  answers  that  might  have
been  given. But  we  must  remember  only  to  invent  93
such  things  as cannot  be  checked  by  evidence  :  I
refer  to  occasions  when  we  make  our  own  minds
speak  (and  we  are  the  only  persons  who  are  in  their
secret)  or  put  words  in  the  mouth  of  the  dead  (for
what they say is not liable to contradiction) or
again  in  the  mouth  of  someone  whose  interests  are
identical  with  ours  (for  he will  not  contradict),  or
finally  in  the  mouth  of  our  opponent  (for  he  will  not
be  believed  if  he  does  deny). Glosses  drawn  from  94
dreams  and  superstitions  have  long  since  lost  their
value,  owing  to  the  very  ease  with  which  they  can
be  invented. But  it  will  avail  us  little  to  use  glosses
in a  statement  of  fact,  unless they are consistent
throughout  the  whole  of  our  speech,  more  especially
as  certain  things  can  only  be  proved  by  persistent
assertion. Take  for  instance  the  case  of  the  parasite  95
who  claims  as  his  son  a  young  man  who  has  been

101


QUINTILIAN

lutum  tanquam  suum  filium  asserit,  habebit  quidem
colorem,  quo  dicat  et  paupertatem  sibi  causam
exponendi  fuisse  et  ideo  a  se  parasiti  personam  esse
susceptam,  quia  in  ilia  domo  filium  haberet ;  et  ideo
ilium  ter  innocentem abdicatum,  quia filius abdi-

96  cantis  non  esset.  Nisi  tamen  in  omnibus  verbis  et
amorem  patrium  atque  hunc  quidem  ardentissimum
ostenderit  et  odium  divitis  et  metum  pro  iuvene,
quem  periculose  mansurum  in  ilia  domo,  in  qua  tam
invisus  sit,  sciat,  suspicione  subiecti  petitoris  non
carebit.

97  Evenit  aliquando  in  scholasticis  controversiis,  quod
in  foro  an  possit  accidere  dubito,  ut  eodem  colore
utraque pars utatur,  deinde eum  pro  se quaeque

98  defendat,  ut  in  ilia  controversia :  Uxor  marito  dixit,
appellatam  se  de  stupro  a  privigno  et  sibi  constitutum
tempus  et  locum;  eadem  contra  filius  detulit  de
noverca,  edito  tantum  alio  tempore  ac  loco ;  pater  in
eo,  quem  uxor  praedixerat,  filium  invenit,  in  eoJ
quem  filius,  uxorem ;  illam  repudiavit,  qua  tacente
filium  abdicat. Nihil  dici  potest  pro  iuvene,  quod

99  non  idem  sit  pro  noverca.  Ponentur  tamen  etiam
communia ;  deinde  ex  personarum  comparatione  et
102


BOOK IV.  ii.  95-99

thrice  disinherited  by  a  wealthy  father  and  thrice
restored  to  his  own.  He  will  be  able  to  put  forward
as  a  gloss  or  plea  that  poverty  was  the  reason  why  he
exposed  the  child,  that  he  assumed  the  role  of  a
parasite  because  his  son  was  in  the  house  in  question
and,  lastly,  that  the  reason  why  the  young  man  was
thrice  disinherited  was  simply  that  he  was  not  the
son  of  the  man  who  disinherited  him.  But  unless  96
every  word  that  he  utters  reveals  an  ardent  paternal
affection,  hatred  for  his  wealthy  opponent  and
anxiety  on  behalf  of  the  youth,  who  will,  he  knows,
be  exposed  to  serious  danger  if  he  remains  in  the
house  where  he  is  the  victim  of  such  dislike,  he  will
be  unable  to  avoid  creating  the  suspicion  that  he
has  been  suborned  to  bring  the  action.

It  sometimes  happens  in  the  controversial  themes  97
of  the  schools,  though  I  doubt  whether  it  could  ever
occur  in  the  courts,  that  both  sides  employ  the  same
gloss  and  support  it  on  their  own  behalf.  An  98
example  of  this  may  be  found  in  the  theme  which
runs  as  follows.  "  A  wife  has  stated  to  her  husband
that  her  stepson  has  attempted  to  seduce  her  and
that  a  time  and  place  have  been  assigned  for  their
meeting :  the  son  has  brought  the  same  charge
against  his  stepmother,  with  the  exception  that  a
different  time  and  place  are  mentioned.  The  father
finds  the  son  in  the  place  mentioned  by  the  wife,
and  the  wife  in  the  place  mentioned  by  the  son.
He  divorces  her,  and  then,  as  she  says  nothing  in
her  own  defence,  disinherits  the  son."  No  defence
can  be  put  forward  for  the  son  which  is  not  also  a
defence  of  the  stepmother.  However,  what  is  com-  99
mon  to  both  sides  of  the  case  will  be  stated,  and
then  arguments  will  be  drawn  from  a  comparison  of

103


QUINTILIAN

indicii ordine et silentio repudiatae argumenta

100  ducentur.  Ne  illud  quidem  ignorare  oportet,  quae-
dam  esse  quae  colorem  non  recipiant,  sed  tantum
defendenda  sint,  qualis  est  ille  dives,  qui  statuam
pauperis  inimici  flagellis  cecidit  et  reus  est  iniuriarum  ;
nam  factum  eius  modestum  esse  nemo  dixerit,  fortasse
ut  sit  tutum  obtinebit.

101  Quodsi  pars  expositionis  pro  nobis,  pars  contra  nos
erit,  miscenda  sit  an  separanda  narratio,  cum  ipsa
condicione  causae  deliberandum  est.  Nam  si  plura
sunt  quae  nocent,  quae  prosunt  obruuntur.  Itaque
tunc  dividere  optimum  erit,  et  iis,  quae  partem
nostram  adiuvabunt,  expositis  et  confirmatis,  adversus
reliqua  uti remediis,  de  quibus supra  dictum est,

102  Si  plura  proderunt,  etiam  coniungere  licebit,  ut  quae
obstant  in  mediis  velut  auxiliis  nostris  posita  minus
habeant  virium.  Quae  tamen  non  erunt  nuda  po-
nenda,  sed  ut  et  nostra  aliqua  argumentatione
firmemus  et  diversa  cur  credibilia  non  sint  adiicia-
mus ;  quia,  nisi  distinxerimus,  verendum  est,  ne  bona
nostra  permixtis  malis  inquinentur.

103  Ilia  quoque  de  narratione  praecipi  sol  en  t,  ne  qua
1 04


BOOK IV.  ii.  99-103

the  characters  of  the  two  parties,  from  the  order  in
which  they  laid  information  against  each  other  and
from  the  silence  of  the  divorced  wife.  Still  we  ICO
must  not  ignore  the  fact  that  there  are  some  cases
which  do  not  admit  of  any  form  of  gloss,  but  must
be  defended  forthright.  An  example  is  provided  by
the  case  of  the  rich  man  who  scourged  the  statue
of  a  poor  man  who  was  his  enemy,  and  was  subse-
quently indicted  for  assault.  Here  no  one  can  deny
that  the  act  was  outrageous,  but  it  may  be  possible
to  maintain  that  it  is  not  punishable  by  law.

If,  however,  part  of  the  statement  of  facts  tells  in  101
our  favour  and  part  against  us,  we  must  consider
whether  in  view  of  the  circumstances  of  the  case
the  parts  in  question  should  be  blent  or  kept
apart.  If  the  points  which  are  damaging  to  our
case  be  in  the  majority,  the  points  which  are  in
its  favour  will  be  swamped.  Under  those  circum-
stances it  will  be  best  to  keep  them  apart  and,  after
setting  forth  and  proving  the  points  which  help  our
case,  to  meet  the  rest  by  employing  the  remedies
mentioned  above.  If,  on  the  other  hand,  it  be  the  102
points  in  our  favour  which  predominate,  we  may
even  blend  them  with  the  others,  since  thus  the
traitors  in  our  camp  will  have  less  force.  None  the
less  these  points,  both  good  and  bad,  must  not  be  set
forth  naked  and  helpless  :  those  in  our  favour  must
be  supported  by  some  argument,  and  then  reasons
must  be  added  why  the  points  which  tell  against
us  should  not  be  believed  ;  since  if  we  do  not  dis-
tinguish clearly  between  the  two,  it  is  to  be  feared
that  those  which  are  favourable  may  suffer  from
their  bad  company.

Further  rules  are  laid  down  with  regard  to  the  103

*°5


QUINTILIAN

ex  ea  fiat  excursio,  ne  avertatur  a  iudice  sermo,  ne
alienae  personae  vocem  demus,  ne  argumentemur ;
adiiciunt  quidam  etiam,  ne  utamur  adfectibus ;
quorum pleraque  sunt  frequentissime custodienda,

104  immo  nunquam,  nisi  ratio  coegerit,  mutanda.  Ut
sit  expositio  perspicua  et  brevis,  nihil  quidem  tarn
raro  poterit  habere  rationem  quam  excursio;  nee
unquam  debebit  esse  nisi  brevis  et  talis,  ut  vi  quadam
videamur  adfectus  velut  recto  itinere  depulsi,  qualis

105  est  Ciceronis  circa  nuptias  Sasiae :  0  mulieris  scelus
incredibile  et  praeter  hanc  ttnam  in  omni  vita  inauditum  I
0  libidinem  effrenatam  et  indomitam  1  0  audaciam
singularem  !  nonne  timuisse,  si  minus  vim  deorum  homi-
numque  fomam,  at  Mam  ipsam  noctem  facesque  illas
nuptiales !  non  limen  cubiculi  I  non  cubile  filiae !  non
parieles denique ipsos, superiorum testes nuptiarum !

106  Sermo  vero  aversus  a  iudice  et  brevius  indicat  in-
terim et  coarguit  magis,  de  qua  re  idem,  quod  in
prooemio  dixeram,  sentio,  sicut  de  prosopopoeia
quoque ;  qua  tamen  non  Servius  modo  Sulpicius
utitur pro Aufidia: Somnone  te  languidum  an  gravi

1  pro  Clu.  vi.  15.
106


BOOK  IV.  ii.  103-106

statement  of  fact,  forbidding  us  to  indulge  in
digression,  apostrophe  or  argumentation  or  to  put
our  words  into  the  mouths  of  others.  Some  even
add  that  we  should  make  no  appeal  to  the  passions.
These  rules  should  for  the  most  part  be  observed,
indeed  they  should  never  be  infringed  unless  the
circumstances  absolutely  demand  it.  If  our  state-  104
ment  is  to  be  clear  and  brief,  almost  anything  can
be  justified  sooner  than  digression.  And  if  we  do
introduce  a  digression,  it  must  always  be  short  and
of  such  a  nature  that  we  give  the  impression  of
having  been  forced  from  our  proper  course  by
some  uncontrollable  emotion.  The  passage  in
Cicero1  about  the  marriage  of  Sasia  is  a  good  ex-
ample of  this.  "What  incredible  wickedness  in  a  105
woman  !  Unheard  of  in  the  history  of  mankind  till
she  dared  the  sin !  What  unbridled  and  un-
restrained lust,  what  amazing  daring !  One  might
have  thought  that,  even  if  she  had  no  regard  for  the
vengeance  of  heaven  and  the  opinion  of  man,  she
would  at  least  have  dreaded  that  night  of  all  nights
and  those  torches  that  lighted  her  to  the  bridal  bed  :
that  she  would  have  shrunk  in  horror  from  the
threshold  of  her  chamber,  from  her  daughter's  room
and  the  very  walls  that  had  witnessed  her  former
marriage."  As  to  addressing  another  in  place  of  106
the  judge,  it  may  be  a  means  of  making  a  point  with
greater  brevity  and  give  it  greater  force.  On  this
subject  I  hold  the  same  view  that  I  expressed  in
dealing  with  the  exordium,  as  I  do  on  the  subject  of
impersonation.  This  artifice  however  is  employed  not
only  by  Servius  Sulpicius  in  his  speech  on  behalf  of
Aufidia,  when  he  cries  "  Am  I  to  suppose  that  you
were  drowsed  with  sleep  or  weighed  down  by  some

107


QUINTILIAN

lethargo putem pressum  f sed M. quoque Tullius
circa  nauarchos,  (nam  ea  quoque  rei  expositio  est)

107  Ut  adeas,  tantum  dabis,  et  reliqua.  Quid?  pro
Cluentio,  Staieni  Bulbique  colloquium  nonne  ad
celeritatem  plurimum  et  ad  fidem  confert?  Quae
ne  fecisse  inobservantia  quadam  videatur,  quanquam
hoc  in  illo  credibile  non  est,  in  Partitionibus  prae-
cepit,  ut  habeat  narratio  suavitatem,  admirationes,
exspectationes,  exitus  inopinatos,  colloquia  persona-

108  rum,  omnes  adfectus.  Argumentabimur,  ut  dixi,
nunquam ;  argumentum  ponemus  aliquando ;  quod
facit  pro  Ligario  Cicero,  cum  dicit  sic  eum  provinciae
praefuisse,  ut  illi  pacem  esse  expediret.  Inseremus
expositioni  et  brevem,  cum  res  poscet,  defensionem

109  et  rationem  factorum.  Neque  enim  narrandum  est
tanquam  testi  sed  tanquam  patrono.  Rei  ordo  per  se
talis  est :  Q.  Ligarius  legatus  cum  C,  Considio  profectus.
Quid  ergo  M.  Tullius  ?  Q.  enim,  inquit,  Ligarius,
cum  esset  nulla  belli  suspicio,  legatus  in  Africam  cum

110  C.  Considio  profectus  est.  Et  alibi:  Non  modo  ad
bellum sed ne ad  minimam quidem  suspicionem belli.


1  Verr.  v.  xlv.  118.  2  pro  Clu.  xxvi.  8  ix.  31.

4  ii.  4.  Ligarius  was  accused  of  having  fought  for  the  Pom-
peians  in  Africa.  Cicero  points  out  that  he  went  out  to  Africa
before  the  outbreak  of  war  was  dreamed  of  and  that  his
whole  attitude  was  discreet.

108


BOOK IV.  ii.  106-110

heavy  lethargy  ?  "  but  by  Cicero1  as  well,  when  in  a
passage  which,  like  the  above,  belongs  to  the  state-
ment of  facts,  in  speaking  of  the  ships'  captains  he
says,  "You  will  give  so  much  to  enter,  etc."  Again  107
in  the  pro  Clueniio 2  does  not  the  conversation
between  Staienus  and  Bulbus  conduce  to  speed  and
enhance  the  credibility  of  the  statements  ?  In
case  it  should  be  thought  that  Cicero  did  this
without  design  (quite  an  incredible  supposition  in
his  case),  I  would  point  out  that  in  the  Partitiones  8
he  lays  it  down  that  the  statement  of  facts  should
be  characterised  by  passages  which  will  charm  and
excite  admiration  or  expectation,  and  marked  by
unexpected  turns,  conversations  between  persons  and
appeals  to  every  kind  of  emotion.  We  shall,  as  I  108
have  already  said,  never  argue  points  in  the  state-
ment of  facts,  but  we  may  sometimes  introduce
arguments,  as  for  example  Cicero  does  in  the  pro
Ligario,4  when  he  says  that  he  ruled  his  province  in
such  a  way  that  it  was  to  his  interest  that  peace
should  continue.  We  shall  sometimes  also,  if
occasion  demand,  insert  a  brief  defence  of  the  facts
in  the  statement  and  trace  the  reasons  that  led  up
to  them.  For  we  must  state  our  facts  like  advocates,  109
not  witnesses.  A  statement  in  its  simplest  form
will  run  as  follows,  "  Quintus  Ligarius  went  out
as  legate  to  C.  Considius."  But  how  will  Cicero5  put
it  ?  "  Quintus  Laganus/'  he  says,  "  set  out  for  Africa
as  legate  to  Gaius  Considius  at  a  time  when  there
was  no  thought  of  war."  And  again  elsewhere6  110
he  says,  "  Not  only  not  to  war,  but  to  a  country
where  there  was  no  thought  of  war."  And  when  the
sense would have been sufficiently  clear had he

5  pro  Lig,  i.  2.  ib.  ii.  4.

109


QUINTILIAN

Et  cum  esset  indicaturo  satis,  Q.  Ligarius  nullo  se
implicari  negotio  passus  est,  adiecit,  domum  spectans,  ad
suos  redire  cupiens.  Ita  quod  exponebat,  et  ratione
fecit  credibile  et  adfectu  quoque  implevit.

111  Quo  magis  miror  eos,  qui  non  putant  utendum  in
narratione  adfectibus.  Qui  si  hoc  dicunt,  non  diu
neque  ut  in  epilogo,  mecum  sentiunt ;  effugiendae  sunt
enim  morae. Ceterum  cur  ego  iudicem  nolim,  dum

112  eum  doceo,  etiam  movere?  Cur,  quod  in  summa
parte  sum  actionis  petiturus,  non  in  primo  statim
rerum  ingressu,  si  fieri  potest,  consequar  ?  cum
praesertim  etiam  in  probationibus  faciliorem  sim
animum  eius  habiturus  occupatum  vel  ira  vel  misera-

113  tione.  An  non  M.  Tullius  circa  verbera  civis  Romani
oinnes  brevissime  movet  adfectu s,  non  solum  con-
dicione  ipsius,  loco  iniuriae,  genere  verberum,  sed
animi  quoque  commendatione  ?  Summum  enim
virum  ostendit  qui,  cum  virgis  caederetur,  non  in-
gemuerit,  non  rogaverit,  sed  tantum  civ  em  Romanum
esse  se  cum  invidia  caedentis  et  fiducia  iuris  clama-

114  verit.  Quid?  Philodami  casum  nonne  cum  per
totam expositionem incendit invidia,  turn in sup-

1  pro  Lig.  i.  3.

2  Verr.  v.  62. A  Roman  citizen  might  not  be  scourged.
cp.  St.  Paul.  8  »6.  i.  30.

no


BOOK IV.  11.  110-114

said  no  more  than  "Quintus  Ligarius  would  not
suffer  himself  to  be  entangled  in  any  transaction," l
he  adds  "for  he  had  his  eyes  fixed  on  home  and
wished  to  return  to  his  own  people."  Thus  he  made
what  he  stated  credible  by  giving  a  reason  for  it
and  at  the  same  time  coloured  it  with  emotion.

I  am  therefore  all  the  more  surprised  at  those  111
who  hold  that  there  should  be  no  appeal  to  the
emotions  in  the  statement  of  facts.  If  they  were  to
say  "  Such  appeals  should  be  brief  and  not  on  the
scale  on  which  they  are  employed  in  the  peroration/9
I  should  agree  with  them ;  for  it  is  important  that
the  statement  should  be  expeditious.  But  why,
while  I  am  instructing  the  judge,  should  I  refuse  to
move  him  as  well?  Why  should  I  not,  if  it  is  112
possible,  obtain  that  effect  at  the  very  opening  of
the  case  which  I  am  anxious  to  secure  at  its  con-
clusion, more  especially  in  view  of  the  fact  that  I
shall  find  the  judge  far  more  amenable  to  the
cogency  of  my  proof,  if  I  have  previously  filled  his
mind  with  anger  or  pity?  Does  not  Cicero,2  in  his  113
description  of  the  scourging  of  a  Roman  citizen,  in  a
few  brief  words  stir  all  the  emotions,  not  merely  by
describing  the  victim's  position,  the  place  where  the
outrage  was  committed  and  the  nature  of  the
punishment,  but  also  by  praising  the  courage  with
which  he  bore  it  ?  For  he  shows  us  a  man  of  the
highest  character  who,  when  beaten  with  rods,
uttered  not  a  moan  nor  an  entreaty,  but  only  cried
that  he  was  a  Roman  citizen,  thereby  bringing
shame  on  his  oppressor  and  showing  his  confidence
in  the  law.  Again  does  he  not  throughout  the  114
whole  of  his  statement  excite  the  wannest  indigna-
tion at  the  misfortunes  of  Philodamus8  and  move

in


QUINTILIAN

plicio  ipso  lacrimis  implevit, cum  flentes  non  tam
narraret  quam  ostenderet  patrem  de  morte  filii,  filium

115  de  patris?  Quid  ulli  epilogi  possunt  magis  habere
miserabile  ?  Serum  est  enim  advocare  iis  rebus
adfectum  in  peroratione,  quas  securus  narraveris ;
adsuevit  illis  iudex  iamque  eas  sine  motu  mentis
accipit,  quibus  commotus  novis  non  est,  et  difficile
est  mutare  animi  habitum  semel  constitutum.

116  Ego  vero  (neque  enim  dissimulabo  iudicium  meum,
quanquam  id,  quod  sum  dicturus,  exemplis  magis
quam  praeceptis  ullis  continetur)  narrationem,  ut  si
ullam  partem  orationis,  omni  qua  potest  gratia  et
venere exornandam puto. Sed plurimum refert,

117  quae  sit  natura  eius  rei  quam  exponemus.  In  parvis
ergo,  quales  sunt  fere  privatae,  sit  ille  pressus  et
velut  applicitus  rei  cultus,  in  verbis  summa  diligentia ;
quae  in  locis  impetu  feruntur  et  circumiectae  oratio-
nis  copia  latent,  hie  expressa  et,  ut  vult  Zeno,  sensu
tincla  esse  debebunt ;  compositio  dissimulata  quidem

118  sed  tamen  quam  iucundissima ;  figurae  non  illae
poeticae  et  contra  rationem  loquendi  auctoritate
veterum  receptae  (nam  debet  esse  quam  purissimus
sermo), sed quae varietate taedium effugiant et


112


BOOK IV.  n.  114-118

us  even  to  tears  when  he  speaks  of  his  punishment
and  describes,  or  rather  shows  us  as  in  a  picture,
the  father  weeping  for  the  death  of  his  son  and  the
son  for  the  death  of  his  father?  What  can  any  115
peroration  present  that  is  more  calculated  to  stir
our  pity  ?  If  you  wait  for  the  peroration  to  stir  your
hearer's  emotions  over  circumstances  which  you
have  recorded  unmoved  in  your  statement  of  facts,
your  appeal  will  come  too  late.  The  judge  is
already  familiar  with  them  and  hears  their  mention
without  turning  a  hair,  since  he  was  unstirred  when
they  were  first  recounted  to  him.  Once  the  habit
of  mind  is  formed,  it  is  hard  to  change  it.

For  my  own  part  (for  I  will  not  conceal  my  116
opinion,  though  it  rests  rather  on  actual  examples
than  on  rules),  I  hold  that  the  statement  of  fact  more
than  any  portion  of  the  speech  should  be  adorned
with  the  utmost  grace  and  charm.  But  much  will
depend  on  the  nature  of  the  subject  which  we  have
to  set  forth.  In  slighter  cases,  such  as  are  the  117
majority  of  private  suits,  the  decoration  must  be
restrained  and  fit  close  to  the  subject,  while  the
utmost  care  must  be  exercised  in  choice  of  words.
The  words  which  in  our  purple  passages  are  swept
along  by  the  force  of  our  eloquence  and  lost  in  the
profusion  of  our  language,  must  in  cases  such  as
these  be  clear  and,  as  Zeno  says,  "steeped  with  mean-
ing." The  rhythm  should  be  unobtrusive,  but  as
attractive  as  possible,  while  the  figures  must  neither  118
be  derived  from  poetry  nor  such  as  are  contrary  to
current  usage,  though  warranted  by  the  authority  of
antiquity  (for  it  is  important  that  our  language  should
be  entirely  normal),  but  should  be  designed  to  relieve
tedium  by  their  variety  and  should be  frequently

"3


QUINTILIAN

mutationibus  animum  levent,  ne  in  eundem  casum
similem compositionem,  pares elocutionum tractus
incidamus. Caret  enim  ceteris  lenociniis  expositio
et,  nisi  commendetur  hac  venustate,  iaceat  necesse

119  est.  Nee  in  ulla  parte  intentior  est  iudex,  eoque
nihil  recte  dictum  perit.  Praeterea  nescio  quomodo
etiam  credit  facilius,  quae  audienti  iucunda  sunt,  et

120  voluptate  ad  fidem  ducitur.  Ubi  vero  maior  res
erit,  et  atrocia  invidiose  et  tristia  miserabiliter  dicere
licebit,  non  ut  consumantur  adfectus,  sed  ut  tamen
velut  primis  lineis  designentur,  ut  plane,  qualis  futura

121  sit  imago  rei,  statim  appareat.  Ne  sententia  quidem
velut  fatigatum  intentione  stomachum  iudicis  reficere
dissuaserim,  maxime  quidem  brevi  interiectione,
qualis  est  ilia,  Fecerunt  servi  Milonis,  quod  suos  quisque
servos  in  tali  re  facere  voluisset,  interim  paulo  liberiore,
qualis  est  ilia,  Nubit  genero  socrus,  nullis  auspicibtis,

122  nullis  auctoribuSy  funestis  ominibus  omnium.  Quod  cum
sit  factum  iis  quoque  temporibus,  quibus  omnis  ad
utilitatem  potius  quam  ad  ostentationem  compone-
batur  oratio,  et  erant  adhuc  severiora  iudicia,  quanto

1  pro  Mil.  x.  29.  a  pro  Clu.  v.  14.

114


BOOK IV.  ii.  1 18-122

changed  to  relax  the  strain  of  attention.  Thus  we
shall  avoid  repeating  the  same  terminations  and
escape  monotony  of  rhythm  and  a  stereotyped  turn
of  phrase.  For  the  statement  of  facts  lacks  all  the
other  allurements  of  style  and,  unless  it  is  charac-
terised by  this  kind  of  charm,  will  necessarily  fall  flat.
Moreover  there  is  no  portion  of  a  speech  at  which  119
the  judge  is  more  attentive,  and  consequently  nothing
that  is  well  said  is  lost.  And  the  judge  is,  for  some
reason  or  other,  all  the  more  ready  to  accept  what
charms  his  ear  and  is  lured  by  pleasure  to  belief.
When  on  the  other  hand  the  subject  is  on  a  larger  120
scale,  we  have  a  chance  to  excite  horror  by  our
narration  of  abominable  wrongs  or  pity  by  a  tale
of  woe :  but  we  must  do  so  in  such  a  way  as  not  to
exhaust  our  stock  of  emotions  on  the  spot,  but
merely  to  indicate  our  harrowing  story  in  outline  so
that  it  may  at  once  be  clear  what  the  completed
picture  is  like  to  be.  Again  I  am  far  from  dis-  121
approving  of  the  introduction  of  some  striking
sentence  designed  to  stimulate  the  judge's  jaded
palate.  The  best  way  of  so  doing  is  the  inter-
position of  a  short  sentence  like  the  following:
"  Milo's  slaves  did  what  everyone  would  have
wished  his  own  slaves  to  do  under  similar  circum-
stances"1: at  times  we  may  even  be  a  little  more
daring  and  produce  something  like  the  following:
"  The  mother-in-law  wedded  her  son-in-law :  there
were  no  witnesses,  none  to  sanction  the  union,  and
the  omens  were  dark  and  sinister."2  If  this  was  122
done  in  days  when  every  speech  was  designed  for
practical  purposes  rather  than  display  and  the  courts
were  far  stricter  than  to-day,  how  much  more  should
we  do  it  now,  when  the  passion for  producing  a

"5


QUINTILIAN

nunc  faciendum  magis,  cum  in  ipsa  capitis  aut  for-
tunarum  pericula  inrupit  voluptas?  cui  hominum
desiderio  quantum  dari  debeat  alio  loco  dicam. In-

123  terim  aliquid  indulgendum  esse  confiteor.  Multum
confert  adiecta  veris  credibilis  rerum  imago,  quae
velut  in  rem  praesentem  perducere  audientes  videtur,
qualis  est  ilia  M.  Caelii  in  Antonium  descriptio :
Namque  if  sum  offendunt  temulento  sopore  prqfligatum,
totis  praecordiis  stertentem,  ructuosos  spiritus  geminare,
praeclarasque contubernales ab  omnibus  spondis trans-

124  versas  incubare  et  reliquas  circumiacere  passim.  Quae
tamen  exanimalae  terrore,  hostium  adventu  percepto,  ex-
citare  Antonium  conabantur,  nomen  inclamabant,  frustra
a  cervicibus  tollebant,  blandius  alia  ad  aurem  invocabat,
vehementius  etiam  nonnulla  feriebat ;  quarum  cum  omnium
vocem  tactumque  noscitaret,  proodmae  cuiusque  collum
amplexu  pelebat,  neque  dormire  excitalus  neque  vigilare
ebrius  poterat,  sed  semisomno  sopore  inter  manus  centuri-
onum  concubinarumque  iactabatur.  Nihil  his  neque
credibilius  fingi  neque  vehementius  exprobrar1
neque  manifestius  ostendi  potest.

125  Neque  illud  quidem  praeteribo,  quantam  adferat
fidem  expositioni  narrantis  auctoritas ;  quam  mereri
debemus ante omnia quidem vita, sed et ipso

ix6


BOOK IV.  ii.  1 22-125

thrill  of  pleasure  has  forced  its  way  even  into  cases
where  a  man's  life  or  fortunes  are  in  peril  ?  1  shall
say  later  to  what  extent  I  think  we  should  indulge
popular  taste  in  this  respect :  in  the  meantime  I
shall  admit  that  some  such  indulgence  is  necessary.
A  powerful  effect  may  be  created  if  to  the  actual  123
facts  of  the  case  we  add  a  plausible  picture  of  what
occurred,  such  as  will  make  our  audience  feel  as  if
they  were  actual  eyewitnesses  of  the  scene.  Such
is  the  description  introduced  by  Marcus  Caelius  in
his  speech  against  Antonius.  "  For  they  found  him
lying  prone  in  a  drunken  slumber,  snoring  with  all
the  force  of  his  lungs,  and  belching  continually,
while  the  most  distinguished  of  his  female  com-
panions sprawled  over  every  couch,  and  the  rest  of
the  seraglio  lay  round  in  all  directions.  They  124
however  perceived  the  approach  of  the  enemy  and,
half-dead  with  terror,  attempted  to  arouse  Antonius,
called  him  by  name,  heaved  up  his  head,  but  all  in
vain,  while  one  whispered  endearing  words  into  his
ear,  and  another  slapped  him  with  some  violence.
At  last  he  recognised  the  voice  and  touch  of  each
and  tried  to  embrace  her  who  happened  to  be
nearest.  Once  wakened  he  could  not  sleep,  but
was  too  drunk  to  keep  awake,  and  so  was  bandied
to  and  fro  between  sleeping  and  waking  in  the
hands  of  his  centurions  and  his  paramours/ '  Could
you  find  anything  more  plausible  in  imagination,  more
vehement  in  censure  or  more  vivid  in  description  ?

There  is  another  point  to  which  I  must  call  at  ten-  125
tion,  namely  the  credit  which  accrues  to  the  statement
of  facts  from  the  authority  of the  speaker. Now
such  authority  should  first  and  foremost  be  the  re-
ward of  our  manner  of  life,  but  may  also  be  conferred

117


QUINTILIAN

genere  orationis, quod quo  fuerit  gravius  ac  sanc-
tius, hoc plus habeat necesse est in adfirmando

126  ponderis.  Effugienda  igitur  in  hac  praecipue  parte
omnis  calliditatis  suspicio,  neque  enim  se  usquam
custodit  magis  iudex ;  nihil  videatur  fictum,  nihil
sollicitum ; omnia  potius a  causa  quam  ab  oratore

127  profecta  credantur.  At  hoc  pati  non  possumus  et
perire  artem  putamus,  nisi  appareat,  cum  desinat  ars
esse,  si  apparet.  Pendemus  ex  laude  atque  hanc
laboris  nostri  ducimus  summam.  Ita,  quae  circum-
stantibus  ostentare  volumus,  iudicibus  prodimus.

128  Est  quaedam  etiam  repetita  narratio,  quae  €71-18117777-
<ris  dicitur,  sane  res  declamatoria  magis  quam  forensis,
ideo  autem  reperta,  ut,  quia  narratio  brevis  esse
debet,  fusius  et  ornatius  res  possit  exponi ;  quod  fit
vel  invidiae  gratia  vel  miserationis.  Id  et  raro
faciendum  iudico  neque  sic  unquam,  ut  totus  ordo
repetatur;  licet  enim  per  partes  idem  consequi.
Ceterum,  qui  uti  hrihvqyqa-tL  volet,  narrationis  loco
rem  stringat  et  contentus  indicare,  quod  factum  sit,
quo  sit  modo  factum  plenius  se  loco  suo  expositurum
esse  promittat.

129  Initium narrationis quidam utique faciendum a
u8


BOOK IV.  ii.  125-129

by  our  style  of  eloquence.  For  the  more  dignified
and  serious  our  style,  the  greater  will  be  the  weight
that  it  will  lend  to  our  assertions.  It  is  therefore  126
specially  important  in  this  part  of  our  speech  to  avoid
anything  suggestive  of  artful  design,  for  the  judge  is
never  more  on  his  guard  than  at  this  stage.  Nothing
must  seem  fictitious,  nought  betray  anxiety ;  every-
thing must  seem  to  spring  from  the  case  itself  rather
than  the  art  of  the  orator.  But  our  modern  orators  127
cannot  endure  this  and  imagine  that  their  art  is
wasted  unless  it  obtrudes  itself,  whereas  as  a  matter
of  fact  the  moment  it  is  detected  it  ceases  to  be  art.
We  are  the  slaves  of  applause  and  think  it  the  goal
of  all  our  effort.  And  so  we  betray  to  the  judges
what  we  wish  to  display  to  the  bystanders.

There  is  also  a  kind  of  repetition  of  the  statement  128
which  the  Greeks  call  cViSn^cris.  It  belongs  to
declamation  rather  than  forensic  oratory,  and  was  in-
vented to  enable  the  speaker  (in  view  of  the  fact  that
the  statement  should  be  brief)  to  set  forth  his  facts
at  greater  length  and  with  more  profusion  of  orna-
ment, as  a  means  of  exciting  indignation  or  pity.  I
think  that  this  should  be  done  but  rarely  and  that
we  should  never  go  to  the  extent  of  repeating  the
statement  in  its  entirety.  For  we  can  attain  the  same
result  by  a  repetition  only  of  parts.  Anyone,  how-
ever, who  desires  to  employ  this  form  of  repetition,
should  touch  but  lightly  on  the  facts  when  making
his  statement  and  should  content  himself  with  merely
indicating  what  was  done,  while  promising  to  set
forth  how  it  was  done  more  fully  when  the  time
comes  for  it.

Some  hold  that  the  statement  of  facts  should  always  129
begin  by  referring  to  some  person,  whom  we  must

119


QUINTILIAN

persona  putant,  eamque,  si  nostra  sit,  ornandam,  si
aliena,  infamandam statim. Hoc  sane frequentis-

130  simum  est,  quia  personae  sunt  inter  quas  litigatur.  Sed
hae  quoque  interim  cum  suis  accidentibus  ponendae,
cum  id  profuturum  est :  ut  A.  Cluentius  Habitus  fuit
pater  huiusce,  indices,  homo  non  solum  municipii  Larinatis,
ex  quo  erat,  sed  regionis  illius  et  vicinitatis  virtute,  existi-
?natione,  nobilitate  princeps  ;  interim  sine  his  ut  Q.  enim

131  Ligarius  cum  esset ;  frequenter  vero  et  a  re,  sicut  pro
Tullio  Cicero  Fundum  habet  in  agro  Thurino  M.  Tullius
paternum;  Demosthenes  pro  Ctesiphonte  Tov  yap
4>o  kikov  avaTOLVTos  TTokepov.

132  De  fine  narrationis  cum  iis  contentio  est,  qui  per-
duci  expositionem  volunt  eo,  unde  quaestio  oritur :
His  rebus  ita  gestis,  P.  Dolabella  praetor  interdixit,  ut
est  consuetudo,  de  vi,  hominibus  armatis,  sine  ulla  excep-
tion e,  lantum  ut  unde  deiecisset  restitueret ;  deinde  resti-
tuisse  se  dixit.  Sponsio  facta  est;  hac  de  sponsione
vobis  indicandum  est.  Id  a  petitore  semper  fieri
potest,  a  defensore non  semper.

III.  Ordine  ipso  narrationem  sequitur  confirmatio.

1  pro  Gluent.  v.  11.  %  pro  Liq.  i.  2.

3  pro  Tull.  vi.  14. 4  §  18. 6  Cic.  pro  Caec.  viii.  23.

I20


BOOK IV.  ii.  129-111.  1

praise  if  he  is  on  our  side,  and  abuse  if  he  is  on  the
side  of  our  opponents.  It  is  true  that  this  is  very
often  done  for  the  good  reason  that  a  law-suit  must
take  place  between  persons.  Persons  may  however  130
also  be  introduced  with  all  their  attendant  circum-
stances, if  such  a  procedure  is  likely  to  prove  useful.
For  instance,  "  The  father  of  my  client,  gentlemen,
was  Aulus  Cluentius  Habitus,  a  man  whose  character,
reputation  and  birth  made  him  the  leading  man  not
only  in  his  native  town  of  Larinum,  but  in  all  the
surrounding  district."1  Or  again  they  may  be  in-  131
troduced  without  such  circumstances,  as  in  the
passage  beginning  "  For  Quintus  Ligarius  etc." 2
Often,  too,  we  may  commence  with  a  fact  as  Cicero
does  in  the  pro  Tullio  3  :  "  Marcus  Tullius  has  a  farm
which  he  inherited  from  his  father  in  the  territory
of  Thurium,"  or  Demosthenes  in  the  speech  in  de-
fence of  Ctesiphon,4— "  On  the  outbreak  of  the
Phocian  war."

As  regards  the  conclusion  of  the  statement  of  facts,  132
there  is  a  controversy  with  those  who  would  have
the  statement  end  where  the  issue  to  be  determined
begins.  Here  is  an  example.  €t  After  these  events
the  praetor  Publius  Dolabella  issued  an  interdict  in
the  usual  form  dealing  with  rioting  and  employment
of  armed  men,  ordering,  without  any  exception,  that
Aebutius  should  restore  the  property  from  which  he
had  ejected  Caecina.  He  stated  that  he  had  done  so.
A  sum  of  money  was  deposited.  It  is  for  you  to
decide  to  whom  this  money  is  to  go."  5  This  rule
can  always  be  observed  by  the  prosecutor,  but  not
always  by  the  defendant.

III. In  the  natural  order  of  things  the state-
ment of  fact  is  followed  by  the  verification. For  it

121


QUINTILIAN

Probanda  sunt  enim  quae  propter  hoc  exposuimus.
Sed  priusquam  ingrediar  hanc  partem,  pauca  mihi
de  quorundam  opinione  dicenda  sunt.  Plerisque
moris  est  prolato  rerum  ordine  protinus  utique  in
aliquem  laetum  ac  plausibilem  locum  quam  maxime

2  possint  favorabiliter  excurrere.  Quod  quidem  natum
ab  ostentatione  declamatoria  iam  in  forum  venit,
postquam  agere  causas  non  ad  utilitatem  litigatorum,
sed  ad  patron  or  um  iactationem  repertum  est,  ne,  si
pressae  illi,  qualis  saepius  desideratur,  narrationis
gracilitati  coniuncta  argumentorum  pugnacitas  fuerit,
dilatis  diutius  dicendi  voluptatibus  oratio  refrigescat

3  In  quo  vitium  illud  est,  quod  sine  discrimine  causarum
atque  utilitatis  hoc,  tanquam  semper  expediat  aut
etiam  necesse  sit,  faciunt,  eoque  sumptas  ex  iis
partibus,  quarum  alius  erat  locus,  sententias  in  hanc
congerunt,  ut  plurima  aut  iterum  dicenda  sint  aut,
quia alieno  loco  dicta  sunt, dici  suo  non possint.

4  Ego  autem  confiteor,  hoc  exspatiandi  genus  non  modo
narrationi  sed  etiam  quaestionibus  vel  universis  vel

122


BOOK IV.  in.  1-4

is  necessary  to  prove  the  points  which  we  stated
with  the  proof  in  view.  But  before  I  enter  on  this
portion,  I  have  a  few  words  to  say  on  the  opinions
held  by  certain  rhetoricians.  Most  of  them  are  in
the  habit,  as  soon  as  they  have  completed  the  state-
ment of  facts,  of  digressing  to  some  pleasant  and
attractive  topic  with  a  view  to  securing  the  utmost
amount  of  favour  from  their  audience.  This  practice
originated  in  the  display  of  the  schools  of  declama-
tion and  thence  extended  to  the  courts  as  soon  as
causes  came  to  be  pleaded,  not  for  the  benefit  of  the
parties  concerned,  but  to  enable  the  advocates  to
flaunt  their  talents.  I  imagine  that  they  feared  that
if  the  slender  stream  of  concise  statement,  such  as  is
generally  required,  were  followed  by  the  pugnacious
tone  inevitable  in  the  arguing  of  the  case,  the  speech
would  fall  flat  owing  to  the  postponement  of  the
pleasures  of  a  more  expansive  eloquence.  The  ob-
jection to  this  practice  lies  in  the  fact  that  they  do
this  without  the  slightest  consideration  of  the
difference  between  case  and  case  or  reflecting
whether  what  they  are  doing  will  in  any  way  assist
them,  on  the  assumption  that  it  is  always  expedient
and  always  necessary.  Consequently  they  transfer
striking  thoughts  from  the  places  which  they  should
have  occupied  elsewhere  and  concentrate  them  in
this  portion  of  the  speech,  a  practice  which  involves
either  the  repetition  of  a  number  of  things  that  they
have  already  said  or  their  omission  from  the  place
which  was  really  theirs  owing  to  the  fact  that  they
have  already  been  said.  I  admit  however  that  this
form  of  digression  can  be  advantageously  appended,
not  merely  to  the  statement  of  facts,  but  to  each  of
the  different  questions  or  to  the  questions  as  a  whole,

123


QUINTILIAN

interim  singulis  opportune  posse  subiungi,  cum  res
postulat  aut  certe  permittit,  atque  eo  vel  maxime
illustrari  ornarique  orationem,  sed  si  cohaeret  et
sequitur,  non  si  per  vim  cuneatur  et  quae natura

5  iuncta  erant  distrahit.  Nihil  enim  tam  est  con-
sequens  quam  narrationi  probatio,  nisi  excursus  ille
vel  quasi  finis  narrationis  vel  quasi  initium  probationis
est.  Erit  ergo  illi  nonnunquam  locus,  ut,  si  expositio
circa finem atrox fuerit, prosequamur earn velut

6  erumpente  protinus  indignatione.  Quod  tamen  ita
fieri  oportebit,  si  res  dubitationem  non  habebit.
Alioqui  prius  est  quod  obiicias  verum  efficere  quam
magnum,  quia  criminum  invidia  pro  reo  est,  prius-
quam probabitur; difficillima est enim gravissimi

7  cuiusque  sceleris  fides.  Item  fieri  non  inutiliter
potest  ut,  si  merita  in  adversarium  aliqua  exposueris,
in  ingratum  inveharis,  aut,  si  varietatem  criminum
narratione  demonstraveris,  quantum  ob  ea  periculum

8  intentetur,  ostendas.  Verum  haec  breviter  omnia.
Iudex  enim  ordine  audito  festinat  ad  probationem
et  quam  primum  certus  esse  sententiae  cupit.
Praeterea  cavendum  est,  ne  ipsa  expositio
124


BOOK IV.  in.  4-8

so  long  as  the  case  demand,  or  at  any  rate  permit  it.
Indeed  such  a  practice  confers  great  distinction  and
adornment  on  a  speech,  but  only  if  the  digression
fits  in  well  with  the  rest  of  the  speech  and  follows
naturally  on  what  has  preceded,  not  if  it  is  thrust  in
like  a  wedge  parting  what  should  naturally  come
together.  For  there  is  no  part  of  a  speech  so  closely  5
connected  with  any  other  as  the  statement  with  the
proof,  though  of  course  such  a  digression  may  be
intended  as  the  conclusion  of  the  statement  and  the
beginning  of  the  proof.  There  will  therefore  some-
times be  room  for  digression  ;  for  example  if  the  end
of  the  statement  has  been  concerned  with  some  speci-
ally horrible  theme,  we  may  embroider  the  theme
as  though  our  indignation  must  find  immediate
vent.  This,  however,  should  only  be  done  if  6
there  is  no  question  about  the  facts.  Other-
wise it  is  more  important  to  verify  your  charge  than
to  heighten  it,  since  the  horrible  nature  of  a  charge
is  in  favour  of  the  accused,  until  the  charge  is
proved.  For  it  is  just  the  most  flagrant  crimes  that
are  the  most  difficult  to  prove.  Again  a  digression  7
may  be  advantageous  if  after  setting  forth  the  services
rendered  by  your  client  to  his  opponent  you  denounce
the  latter  for  his  ingratitude,  or  after  producing  a
variety  of  charges  in  your  statement,  you  point  out
the  serious  danger  in  which  the  advancement  of  such
charges  is  likely  to  involve  you.  But  all  these  di-  8
gressions  should  be  brief.  For  as  soon  as  he  has
heard  the  facts  set  forth  in  order,  the  judge  is  in  a
hurry  to  get  to  the  proof  and  desires  to  satisfy  him-
self of  the  correctness  of  his  impressions  at  the
earliest  possible  moment.  Further,  care  must  be
taken  not  to  nullify  the  effect  of  the  statement  by

1*5


QUINTILIAN

vanescat,  aversis  in  aliud  animis  et  inani  mora
fatigatis.
9  Sed  ut  non  semper  est  necessaria  post  narrationem
ilia  procursio,  ita  frequenter  utilis  ante  quaestionem
praeparatio,  utique  si  prima  specie  minus  erit  favora-
bilis,  si  legem  asperam  ac  poenarias  actiones  tuebimur.
Est  hie  locus  velut  sequentis  exordii1  ad  conciliandum
probationibus  nostris  iudicem,  mitigandum,  conci-
tandum.2 Quod  liberius  hie  et  vehementius fieri

10  potest,  quia  iudici  nota  iam  causa  est.  His  igitur
velut  fomentis,  si  quid  erit  asperum,  praemolliemus,
quo  facilius  aures  iudicum  quae  post  dicturi  erimus
admittant,  ne  ius  nostrum  oderint. Nihil  enim  facile

11  persuadetur  invitis.  Quo  loco  iudicis  quoque  noscenda
natura  est,  iuri  magis  an  aequo  sit  appositus  ;  proinde
enim  magis  aut  minus  erit  hoc  necessarium.

Ceterum  res eadem et  post  quaestionem  perora-

12  tionis  vice  fungitur.  Hanc  partem  irapeK  fiaaiv  vocant
Graeci,  Latini  egressum  vel  egressionem.  Sed  hae
sunt  plures,  ut  dixi,  quae  per  totam  causam  varios
habent  excursus,  ut  laus  hominum  locorumque,  ut
descriptio regionum, expositio quarundam rerum

13  gestarum,  vel  etiam  fabulosarum.  Quo  ex  genere  est
,in  orationibus  contra  Verrem  compositis  Siciliae  laus,


1  exordii,  B :  exordium,  A  and  Victor,

2  mitigandum,  concitandum  omitted  by  B.


126


BOOK IV.  in.  8-13

diverting  the  minds  of  the  court  to  some  other  theme
and  wearying  them  by  useless  delay.

But,  though  such  digressions  are  not  always  neces-  9
sary  at  the  end  of  the  statement,  they  may  form  a  very
useful  preparation  for  the  examination  of  the  main
question,  more  especially  if  at  first  sight  it  presents
an  aspect  unfavourable  to  our  case,  if  we  have  to
support  a  harsh  law  or  demand  severe  punishment.
For  this  is  the  place  for  inserting  what  may  be
regarded  as  a  second  exordium  with  a  view  to
exciting  or  mollifying  the  judge  or  disposing  him
to  lend  a  favouring  ear  to  our  proofs.  More-
over we  can  do  this  with  all  the  greater  freedom
and  vehemence  at  this  stage  of  the  proceedings
since  the  case  is  already  known  to  the  judge.  We  10
shall  therefore  employ  such  utterances  as  emol-
lients to  soften  the  harder  elements  of  our  state-
ment, in  order  that  the  ears  of  the  jury  may  be
more  ready  to  take  in  what  we  have  to  say  in  the
sequel  and  to  grant  us  the  justice  which  we  ask.
For  it  is  hard  to  persuade  a  man  to  do  anything
against  the  grain.  It  is  also  important  on  such  II
occasions  to  know  whether  the  judge  prefers  equity
or  a  strict  interpretation  of  the  law,  since  the  neces-
sity for  such  digression  will  vary  accordingly.

Such  passages  may  also  serve  as  a  kind  of  per-
oration after  the  main  question.  The  Greeks  call  12
this  7rap€#cj3a<ri?,  the  Romans  egressus  or  egressio
(digression).  They  may  however,  as  I  have  said,
be  of  various  kinds  and  may  deal  with  different
themes  in  any  portion  of  the  speech.  For  instance
we  may  extol  persons  or  places,  describe  regions,
record  historical  or  even  legendary  occurrences.  As  13
examples  I  may  cite  the  praise  of  Sicily  and  the  rape

127


QUINTILIAN

Proserpinae  raptus ;  pro  C.  Cornelio  popularis  ilia
virtutum  Cn.  Pompei  commemoratio,  in  quam  ille
divinus  orator,  velut  nomine  ipso  ducis  cursus  dicendi
teneretur,  abrupto  quern  inchoaverat  sermone  devertit

14  actutum.  Ilapc^acris  est,  ut  mea  quidem  fert  opinio,
alicuius  rei,  sed  ad  utilitatem  causae  pertinentis  extra
ordinem  excurrens  tractatio.  Quapropter  non  video
cur  hunc  ei  potissimum  locum  adsignent,  qui  rerum
ordinem  sequitur,  non  magis  quam  illud,  cur  hoc
nomen  ita  demum  proprium  putent,  si  aliquid  in  di-
gressu  sit  exponendum,  cum  tot  modis  a  recto  itinere

16  declinet  oratio.  Nam  quidquid  dicitur  praeter  illas
quinque  quas  fecimus  partes,  egressio  est,  indignatio,
miseratio,  invidia,  convicium,  excusatio,  conciliatio,
maledictorum  refutatio.  Similia  his,  quae  non  sunt
in  quaestione,  omnis  amplification  minutio,  omne  ad-
fectus  genus,  et  quae  1  maxime  iucundam  et  ornatam
faciunt  orationem,  de  luxuria,  de  avaritia,  religione,
officiis ;  quae  cum  sint  argumentis  subiecta  similium

16  rerum,  quia  cohaerent,  egredi  non  videntur. Sed

plurima  sunt,  quae  rebus  nihil  secum  cohaerentibus

inseruntur,  quibus  iudex  reficitur,  admonetur,  pla-

catur,  rogatur,  laudatur. Innumerabilia  sunt  haec,

1  et  quae,  Spalding  :  atque  ea,  MSS.

1  Verr.  I vii.  27. 2  See  note  on  iv.  iv.  8.
128


BOOK IV.  in.  13-16

of  Proserpine1  in  the  Verrines,  or  the  famous  recital  of
the  virtues  of  Gneius  Pompeius  in  the  pro  Cornelio,2
where  the  great  orator  as  though  the  course  of  his
eloquence  had  been  broken  by  the  mere  mention  of
the  general's  name,  interrupts  the  topic  on  which  he
had  already  embarked  and  digresses  forthwith  to  sing
his  praises.  Uap€K/3a<ris  may,  I  think,  be  denned  as  the  14
handling  of  some  theme,  which  must  however  have
some  bearing  on  the  case,  in  a  passage  that  involves
digression  from  the  logical  order  of  our  speech.  I  do
not  see  therefore  why  it  should  be  assigned  a  special
position  immediately  following  on  the  statement  of
facts  any  more  than  I  understand  why  they  think
that  the  name  is  applicable  only  to  a  digression  where
some  statement  has  to  be  made,  when  there  are  so
many  different  ways  in  which  a  speech  may  leave
the  direct  route.  For  whatever  we  say  that  falls  15
outside  the  five  divisions  of  the  speech  already  laid
down  is  a  digression,  whether  it  express  indignation,
pity,  hatred,  rebuke,  excuse,  conciliation  or  be  de-
signed to  rebut  invective.  Other  similar  occasions
for  digression  on  points  not  involved  by  the  question
at  issue  arise  when  we  amplify  or  abridge  a  topic,
make  any  kind  of  emotional  appeal  or  introduce  any
of  those  topics  which  add  such  charm  and  elegance
to  oratory,  topics  that  is  to  say  such  as  luxury,
avarice,  religion,  duty  :  but  these  would  hardly
seem  to  be  digressions  as  they  are  so  closely  attached
to  arguments  on  similar  subjects  that  they  form  part
of  the  texture  of  the  speech.  There  are  however  a  16
number  of  topics  which  are  inserted  in  the  midst  of
matter  which  has  no  connexion  with  them,  when
for  example  we  strive  to  excite,  admonish,  appease,
entreat or praise the  judge. Such passages  are

129


QUINTILIAN

quorum  alia  sic  praeparata  adferimus,  quaedam  ex
occasione  vel  necessitate  ducimus,  si  quid  nobis  agen-
tibus  novi  accidit,  interpellation  interventus  alicuius,
17  tumultus.  Unde  Ciceroni  quoque  in  prooemio,  cum
diceret  pro  Milone,  digredi  fuit  necesse,  ut  ipsa  ora-
tiuncula  qua  usus  est  patet.  Potest  autem  paulo
longius  exire,  qui  praeparat  aliquid  ante  quaestionem
et  qui  finitae  probationi  velut  commendationem  adii-
cit  At  qui  ex  media  erumpit,  cito  ad  id  redire  debet
unde  devertit.

IV.  Sunt  qui  narrationi  propositionem  subiungant
tanquam  partem  iudicialis  materiae,  cui  opinioni
respondimus.  Mihi  autem  propositio  videtur  omnis
confirmationis  initium,  quod  non  modo  in  ostendenda
quaestione  principalis  sed  nonnunquam  etiam  in  sin-
gulis argumentis  poni  solet  maximeque  in  iis  quae
emxeipwa.Ta  vocantur.  Sed  nunc  de  priore  loquimur.
2  Ea  non  semper  uti  necesse  est.  Aliquando  enim  sine
propositione  quoque  satis  manifestum  est  quid  in
quaestione  versetur,  utique  si  narratio  ibi  nnern  habet,
ubi  initium  quaestio,  adeo,  ut  aMquando  subiungatur
expositioni,  quae  solet  in  argumentis  esse  summa  col-
lectio :  Haec,  sicut  exposui,  ita  gesta  sunt,  indices ;  in-


1  The  speech  actually  delivered,  not  the  long  speech  which
has  come  down  to  us,  but  was  never  delivered.

2  in.  ix.  5  ;  xL  27. '  in.  ix.  2. 4  See  v.  xiv.  14,


BOOK IV.  hi.  16-iv.  2

innumerable.  Some  will  have  been  carefully  pre-
pared beforehand,  while  others  will  be  produced  to
suit  the  occasion  or  the  necessity  of  the  moment,  if
anything  extraordinary  should  occur  in  the  course  of
our  pleading,  such  as  an  interruption,  the  interven-
tion of  some  individual  or  a  disturbance.  For  example,  17
this  made  it  necessary  for  Cicero  to  digress  ever  in
the  exordium  when  he  was  defending  Milo,  as  is
clear  from  the  short  speech1  which  he  made  on
that  occasion.  But  the  orator  who  makes  some
preface  to  the  main  question  or  proposes  to
follow  up  his  proofs  with  a  passage  designed  to
commend  them  to  the  jury,  may  digress  at  some
length.  On  the  other  hand,  if  he  breaks  away  in
the  middle  of  his  speech,  he  should  not  be  long  in
returning  to  the  point  from  which  he  departed.

IV.  After  the  statement  of  facts  some  place  the
proposition  2  which  they  regard  as  forming  a  division
of  a  forensic  speech.  I  have  already  expressed
my  opinion  of  this  view.3  But  it  seems  to  me
that  the  beginning  of  every  proof  is  a  proposition,
such  as  often  occurs  in  the  demonstration  of  the
main  question  and  sometimes  even  in  the  enunciation
of  individual  arguments,  more  especially  of  those
which  are  called  lirtyiiprj^ara^  But  for  the  moment
I  shall  speak  of  the  first  kind.  It  is  not  always  ne-
cessary to  employ  it.  The  nature  of  the  main  question  2
is  sometimes  sufficiently  clear  without  any  proposition,
especially  if  the  statement  of  facts  ends  exactly  where
the  question  begins.  Consequently  the  recapitula-
tion generally  employed  in  the  case  of  arguments  is
sometimes  placed  immediately  after  the  statement
of  facts.  "  The  affair  took  place,  as  I  have  described,
gentlemen  :  he  that  laid  the  ambush  was  defeated,

131


QUINTILIAN

sidiator  superatus  est,  vi  victa  vis  vel  potius  oppressa  vir-

3  tute  audacia  est  Nonnunquam  vero  valde  est  utilis,
ubi  res  defendi  non  potest  et  de  fine  quaeritur,  ut
pro  eo,  qui  pecuniam  privatam  de  templo  sustulit,
Sacrilegii  agitur,  de  sacrilegio  cognoscitis,  ut  iudex  in-
telligat  id  unum  esse  officii  sui,  quaerere  an  id  quod

4  obiicitur  sacrilegium  sit.  Item  in  causis  obscuris  aut
multiplicibus,  nee  semper  propter  hoc  solum  ut  sit
causa  lucidior,  sed  aliquando  etiam  ut  magis  moveat.
Movet  autem,  si  protinus  subtexantur  aliqua,  quae
prosint.  Lex  aperte  scripta  est  ut  peregrinus  qui
murum  ascendent  morte  multetur ;  peregrinum  te  esse
cerium  est;  quin  ascenderis  murum,  non  quaeritur ;  quid
superesty  nisi  id  te  puniri  oporteat  ?  Haec  enim  pro-
positi confessionem  adversarii  premit  et  quodam-
modo  iudicandi  moram  tollit,  nee  indicat  quaes-
tionem  sed  adiuvat.

5  Sunt  autem  propositiones  et  simplices  et  duplices
vel  multiplices,  quod  accidit  non  uno  modo.  Nam
et  plura  crimina  iunguntur,  ut  cum  Socrates  accusatus
est,  quod  corrumperet  iuventutem  et  novas  supersti-
tionesintroduceret;  et  singula  expluribus  colliguntur,
ut  cum  legatio  male  gesta  obiicitur  Aeschini,  quod
mentitus  sit,  quod  nihil  ex  mandatis  fecerit,  quod

1  pro  Mil.  xi.  30.
132


BOOK IV.  iv.  2-5

violence  was  conquered  by  violence,  or  rather  I
should  say  audacity  was  crushed  by  valour." *
Sometimes  proposition  is  highly  advantageous,  more  3
especially  when  the  fact  cannot  be  defended  and
the  question  turns  on  the  definition  of  the  fact ;
as  for  example  in  the  case  of  the  man  who  has  taken
the  money  of  a  private  individual  from  a  temple  :  we
shall  say,  u  My  client  is  charged  with  sacrilege.  It
is  for  you  to  decide  whether  it  was  sacrilege/'  so
that  the  judge  may  understand  that  his  sole  duty  is
to  decide  whether  the  charge  is  tantamount  to
sacrilege.  The  same  method  may  be  employed  4
in  obscure  or  complicated  cases,  not  merely  to  make
the  case  clearer,  but  sometimes  also  to  make  it  more
moving.  This  effect  will  be  produced,  if  we  at  once
support  our  pleading  with  some  such  words  as  the
following:  "It  is  expressly  stated  in  the  law  that
for  any  foreigner  who  goes  up  on  to  the  wall  the
penalty  is  death.  You  are  undoubtedly  a  foreigner,
and  there  is  no  question  but  that  you  went  up  on  to
the  wall.  The  conclusion  is  that  you  must  submit
to  the  penal  ty."  For  this  proposition  forces  a  con-
fession upon  our  opponent  and  to  a  certain  extent
accelerates  the  decision  of  the  court.  It  does  more
than  indicate  the  question,  it  contributes  to  its
solution.

Propositions  may  be  single,  double  or  manifold :  5
this  is  due  to  more  than  one  reason.  For  several
charges  may  be  combined,  as  when  Socrates  was
accused  of  corrupting  the  youth  and  of  introducing
new  superstitions ;  while  single  propositions  may  be
made  up  of  a  number  of  arguments,  as  for  instance
when  Aeschines  is  accused  of  misconduct  as  an
ambassador  on  the  ground  that  he  lied,  failed  to

133


QUINTILIAN

6  moratus  sit,  quod  munera  acceperit.  Recusatio
quoque  plures  interim  propositions  habet,  ut  contra
petitionem  pecuniae :  Male  petis,  procuratorem  enim
tibi  esse  non  licuit,  sed  neque  Mi,  cuius  nomine  litigas,
habere  procuratorem; sed  neque  est  heres  eius,  a  quo

7  accepisse  mutuant  dicor  nee  ipsi  debui,  Multiplicari  haec
in  quantum  libet  possunt,  sed  rem  ostendisse  satis
est.  Hae  si  ponantur  singulae  subiectis  probationibus,
plures  sunt  propositiones ;  si  coniungantur,  in  parti-
tionem  cadunt.

8  Est  et  nuda  propositio,  qualis  fere  in  coniectura-
libus,  Caedis  ago,  furtum  obiicio  ;  est  ratione  subiecta,
ut  Maiestatem  minuit  C.  Cornelius;  nam  codicem  tribunus
plebis  ipse  pro  contione  legit.  Praeter  haec  utimur  pro-
position aut  nostra,  ut  Adidterium  obiicio;  aut  ad-
versarii,  ut  Adulterii  mecum  agitur,  aut  communi,  ut
Inter  me  et  adversarmm  quaestio  est,  uter  sit  intestato
propior.  Nonnunquam  diversas  quoque  iungimus  :
Ego  hoc  dico,  adversarius  hoc.


1  The  speech  is  lost.  In  67  B.C.  Cornelius  as  tribune  of
the  plebs  proposed  a  law  enacting  that  no  man  should  be
released  from  the  obligations  of  a  law  save  by  decree  of
the  people.  This  struck  at  a  privilege  usurped  by  the
senate,  and  Servilius  Globulus,  another  tribune,  forbade  the
herald  to  read  out  the  proposal.  Cornelius  then  read  it
himself.  He  was  accused  of  maicstas,  defended  by  Cicero
in  65  B.C.  and  acquitted.

'34


BOOK IV.  iv.  5-8

carry  out  his  instructions,  wasted  time  and  accepted
bribes.  The  defence  may  also  contain  several  pro-  6
positions :  for  instance  against  a  claim  for  money  we
may  urge,  "  Your  claim  is  invalid ;  for  you  had  no
right  to  act  as  agent  nor  had  the  party  whom  you
represent  any  right  to  employ  an  agent :  further,  he
is  not  the  heir  of  the  man  from  whom  it  is  asserted
that  I  borrowed  the  money,  nor  am  I  his  debtor."
These  propositions  can  be  multiplied  at  pleasure,  but  7
it  is  sufficient  to  give  an  indication  of  my  meaning.
If  propositions  are  put  forward  singly  with  the  proofs
appended,  they  will  form  several  distinct  propositions:
if  they  are  combined,  they  fall  under  the  head  of
partition.

A  proposition  may  also  be  put  forward  unsup-  8
ported,  as  is  generally  done  in  conjectural  cases :
"  The  formal  accusation  is  one  of  murder,  but  I  also
charge  the  accused  with  theft."  Or  it  may  be
accompanied  by  a  reason  :  u  Gaius  Cornelius  is  guilty
of  an  offence  against  the  state;  for  when  he  was
tribune  of  the  plebs,  he  himself  read  out  his  bill  to
the  public  assembly."  l  In  addition  to  these  forms  of
proposition  we  can  also  introduce  a  proposition  of  our
own,  such  as  "I  accuse  him  of  adultery,"  or  may
use  the  proposition  of  our  opponent,  such  as  "  The
charge  brought  against  me  is  one  of  adultery,"  or
finally  we  may  employ  a  proposition  which  is  common
to  both  sides,  such  as  "The  question  in  dispute
between  myself  and  my  opponent  is,  which  of  the
two  is  next-of-kin  to  the  deceased  who  died  intes-
tate." Sometimes  we  may  even  couple  contradictory
propositions,  as  for  instance  "  I  say  this,  my  opponent
says  that."

135


QUINTILIAN

9  Habet  interim  vim  propositions,  etiamsi  per  se
non  est  propositio,  cum  exposito  rerum  ordine  subii-
cimus :  De  his  cognosced.?,  ut  sit  haec  commonitio
iudicis,  quo  se  ad  quaestionem  acrius  intendat  et
velut  quodam  tactu  resuscitatus  finem  esse  narrationis
et  initium  probationis  intelligat,  et  nobis  confirma-
tionem  ingredientibus  ipse  quoque  quodammodo
novum  audiendi  sumat  exordium.

V.  Partitio  est  nostrarum  aut  adversarii  propositio-
num  aut  utrarumque  ordine  collocata  enumeratio.
Hac  quidam  utendum  semper  putant,  quod  ea  fiat
causa  lucidior  et  iudex  attentior  ac  docilior,  si  scierit
et  de  quo  dicamus  et  de  quo  dicturi  postea  simus.

2  Rursus  quidam  periculosum  id  oratori  arbitrantur
duabus  ex  causis  :  quod  nonnunquam  et  excidere
soleant  quae  promisimus  et,  si  qua  in  partiendo  prae-
terimus,  occurrere ;  quod  quidem  nemini  accidet,
nisi  qui  plane  vel  nullo  fuerit  ingenio  vel  ad  agendum

3  nihil  cogitati  praemeditatique  detulerit.  Alioqui
quae  tarn  manifesta  et  lucida  est  ratio  quam  rectae
partitionis  ?  Sequitur  enim  naturam  ducem  adeo  ut
memoriae  id  maximum  sit  auxilium  via  dicendi  non
decedere.  Quapropter  ne  illos  quidem  probaverim,
qui  partitionem  vetant  ultra  tres  propositiones  ex-
tendere. Quae  sine  dubio,  si  nimium  sit  multiplex,

136


BOOK IV.  iv.  9-v.  3

We  may  at  times  produce  the  effect  of  a  propo-  9
sition,  even  though  it  is  not  in  itself  a  proposition,  by
adding  after  the  statement  of  facts  some  phrase  such
as  the  following:  "These  are  the  points  on  which
you  will  give  your  decision/ '  thereby  reminding  the
judge  to  give  special  attention  to  the  question  and
giving  him  a  fillip  to  emphasise  the  point  that  we
have  finished  the  statement  of  facts  and  are  beginning
the  proof  so  that  when  we  start  to  verify  our  state-
ments he  may  realise  that  he  has  reached  a  fresh  stage
where  he  must  begin  to  listen  with  renewed  attention.

V.  Partition  may  be  defined  as  the  enumeration  in
order  of  our  own  propositions,  those  of  our  adversary
or  both.  It  is  held  by  some  that  this  is  indispen-
sable on  the  ground  that  it  makes  the  case  clearer
and  the  judge  more  attentive  and  more  ready  to  be
instructed,  if  he  knows  what  we  are  speaking  about
and  what  we  are  going  subsequently  to  speak  about.
Others,  on  the  contrary,  think  that  such  a  course  is  2
dangerous  to  the  speaker  on  two  grounds,  namely
that  sometimes  we  may  forget  to  perform  what  we
have  promised  and  may,  on  the  other  hand,  come
upon  something  which  we  have  omitted  in  the  par-
tition. But  this  will  never  happen  to  anyone  unless
he  is  either  a  fool  or  has  come  into  court  without
thinking  out  his  speech  in  detail  beforehand.  Be-  3
sides,  what  can  be  simpler  or  clearer  than  a  straight-
forward partition  ?  It  follows  nature  as  a  guide  and
the  adhesion  to  a  definite  method  is  actually  of  the
greatest  assistance  to  the  speaker's  memory.  There-
fore I  cannot  approve  the  view  even  of  those  who
lay  down  that  partition  should  not  extend  beyond
the  length  of  three  propositions.  No  doubt  there  is
a  danger,  if  our  partition  is  too  complicated,  that  it

137


QUINTILIAN

fugiet  memoriam  iudicis  et  turbabit  intentionem  ;  hoc
tamen numero velut lege non  est  alliganda,  cum

4  possit  causa  plures  desiderare.  Alia  sunt  magis,
propter  quae  partitione  non  semper  sit  utendum :
primum,  quia  pleraque  gratiora  sunt,  si  inventa  subito
nee  domo  adlata,  sed  inter  dicendum  ex  re  ipsa  nata
videantur,  unde  ilia  non  iniucunda  schemata,  Paene
excidit  mihi,  et  Fugerat  me,  et  Recte  admones.  Propo-
sitis  enim  probationibus  omnis  in  reliquum  gratia  no-

6  vitatis  praecerpitur.  Interim  vero  etiam  fallendus
est  iudex  et  variis  artibus  subeundus,  ut  aliud  agi
quam  quod  petimus  putet.  Nam  est  nonnunquam
dura  propositio,  quod  iudex  si  providit,  non  aliter
praeformidat  quam  qui  ferrum  medici  priusquam
curetur  aspexit ;  at  si  re  non  ante  proposita  securum
ac  nulla  denuntiatione  in  se  conversum  intrarit  oratio,

6  efficiet,  quod  promittenti  non  crederetur.  Interim
refugienda  non  modo  distinctio  quaestionum  est,  sed
omnino  tractatio ;  adfectibus  turbandus  et  ab  inten-
tione  auferendus  auditor. Non  enim  solum  oratoris

«a»


BOOK IV.  v.  3-6

may  slip  the  memory  of  the  judge  and  disturb  his
attention.  But  that  is  no  reason  why  it  should  be
tied  down  to  a  definite  number  of  propositions,  since
the  case  may  quite  conceivably  require  more.  There  4
are  further  reasons  why  we  should  sometimes  dis-
pense with  partition.  In  the  first  place  there  are
many  points  which  can  be  produced  in  a  more
attractive  manner,  if  they  appear  to  be  discovered  on
the  spot  and  not  to  have  been  brought  ready  made
from  our  study,  but  rather  to  have  sprung  from  the
requirements  of  the  case  itself  while  we  were  speak-
ing. Thus  we  get  those  not  unpleasing  figures  such
as  "  It  has  almost  escaped  me,"  "  I  had  forgotten,"
or  u  You  do  well  to  remind  me."  For  if  we  set  forth
all  that  we  propose  to  prove  in  advance,  we  shall
deprive  ourselves  of  the  advantage  springing  from
the  charm  of  novelty.  Sometimes  we  shall  even  5
have  to  hoodwink  the  judge  and  work  upon  him  by
various  artifices  so  that  he  may  think  that  our  aim  is
other  than  what  it  really  is.  For  there  are  cases
when  a  proposition  maj'  be  somewhat  startling :  if  the
judge  foresees  this,  he  will  shrink  from  it  in  advance,
like  a  patient  who  catches  sight  of  the  surgeon's
knife  before  the  operation.  On  the  other  hand,  if
we  have  given  him  no  preliminary  notice  and  our
words  take  him  unawares,  without  his  interest  in
them  having  been  previously  roused  by  any  warning,
we  shall  gain  a  credence  which  we  should  not  have
secured  had  we  stated  that  we  were  going  to  raise
the  point.  At  times  we  must  not  merely  avoid  6
distinguishing  between  the  various  questions,  but  must
omit  them  altogether,  while  our  audience  must  be
distracted  by  appeals  to  the  emotion  and  their  atten-
tion diverted. For  the  duty  of  the  orator  is  not

139


QUINTILIAN

est  docere,  sed  plus  eloquentia  circa  movendum  valet.
Cui  rei  contraria  est  maxime  tenuis  ilia  et  scrupulose
in  partes  secta  divisionis  diligentia  eo  tempore  quo

7  cognoscenti  iudicium  conamur  auferre.  Quid  quod
interim,  quae  per  se  levia  sunt  et  infirma,  turba
valent  ?  Ideoque  congerenda  sunt  potius  et  velut
eruptione  pugnandum  ;  quod  tarn  en  rarum  esse  debet
et  ex  necessitate  demum,  cum  hoc  ipsum  quod  dissi-

8  mile  rationi  est  coegerit  ratio.  Praeter  haec  in  omni
partitione  est  utique  aliquid  potentissimum,  quod
cum  audivit  iudex  cetera  tanquam  supervacua  grayari
solet.  Itaque  si  plura  vel  obiicienda  sunt  vel  diluenda,
et  utilis  et  iucunda  partitio  est  ut,  quid  quaque  de
re  dicturi  simus,  ordine  appareat ;  at  si  unum  crimen

9  varie  defendemus,  supervacua.  Ut  si  ilia  partiamur,
Dicam  non  talent  esse  hunc  quern  iueor  renin,  ut  in  eo
credibile  videri  possit  homicidium  ;  dicam  occidendi  can-
sam  hide  non  fuisse ;  dicam  hunc  eo  tempore  quo  homo
occisus  est  trans  mare  fuisse,  omnia,  quae  ante  id  quod
ultimum  est  exsequeris,  inania videri necesse  est.

10  Festinat  enim  iudex  ad  id  quod  potentissimum  est,

et  velut  obligatum  promisso  patronum,  si  est  pa-
140


BOOK IV.  v.  6-10

merely  to  instruct :  the  power  of  eloquence  is  greatest
in  emotional  appeals. Now  there  is  no  room  for
passion  if  we  devote  our  attention  to  minute  and
microscopic  division  at  a  time  when  we  are  seeking
to  mislead  the  judgment  of  the  person  who  is  trying
the  case. Again,  there  are  certain  arguments  which  7
are  weak  and  trivial  when  they  stand  alone,  but
which  have  great  force  when  produced  in  a  body.
We  must,  therefore,  concentrate such arguments,
and  our  tactics  should  be  those  of  a  sudden  charge
in  mass. This,  however,  is  a  practice  which  should
be  resorted  to  but  rarely  and  only  under  extreme
necessity  when  reason  compels  us  to  take  a  course
which  is  apparently  irrational. In  addition  it  must  8
be  pointed  out  that  in  any  partition  there  is  always
some  one  point  of  such  special  importance,  that  when
the  judge  has  heard  it  he  is  impatient  with  the  re-
mainder, which  he  regards  as  superfluous. Conse-
quently if  we  have  to  prove  or  refute  a  number  of
points  partition  will  be  both  useful  and  attractive,
since  it  will  indicate  in  order  what  we  propose  to  say
on  each  subject. On  the  other  hand,  if  we  are  de-
fending one  point  on  various  grounds  partition  will
be  unnecessary. If  you  were  to  make  a.  partition  such  9
as  the  following,  "  I  will  not  say  that  the  character
of  my  client  is  such  as  to  render  him  incapable  of
murder,  I  will  only  say  that  he  bad  no  motive  for
murder  and  that  at  the  time  when  the  deceased  was
killed  he  was  overseas,"  in  that  case  all  the  proofs
which  you  propose  to  bring  before  this,  the  final
proof,  must  needs  seem  superfluous  to  the  judge.
For  the  judge  is  always  in  a  hurry  to  reach  the  most  10
important  point. If  he  has  a  patient  disposition  he
will  merely  make  a  silent  appeal  to  the  advocate,

141


QUINTILIAN

tientior,  tacitus  appellat; si vel occupatus vel in
aliqua  potestate  vel  etiam  si  moribus  incomppsitus,

11  cum  convicio  efflagitat.  Itaque  non  defuerunt,  qui
Ciceronis  illam  pro  Cluentio  partitionem  improbarent,
qua  se  dicturum  esse  promisit  primum,  neminem
maioribus  criminibus,  gravioribus  testibus,  in  iudicium
vocatum  quam  Oppianicum  ;  deinde  praeiudicia  esse
facta  ab  ipsis  iudicibus,  a  quibus  condemnatus  sit ;
postremo,  iudicium  pecunia  temptatum  non  a  Cluentio,
sed  contra  Cluentium  ;  quia,  si  probari  posset,  quod

12  est  tertium,  nihil  necesse  fuerit  dicere  priora.  Rursus
nemo  tam  erit  iniustus  aut  stultus,  quin  eum  fateatur
optime  pro  Murena  esse  partitum :  Intelligo,  indices,
tris  totius  accusationis  fuisse  partes,  el  earum  unam  in
reprehensione  vitae,  alteram  in  contentione  dignitatis,
tertiam  in  criminibus  ambitus  esse  versatam.  Nam  sic  et
ostendit  lucidissime  causam  et  nihil  fecit  altero  super-
vacuum.

13  De  illo  quoque  genere  defensionis  plerique  du-
bitant:  Si  occidi,  rede  feci;  sed  non  occidi ;  quo  enim
prius  pertinere,  si  sequens  firmum  sit  ?  haec  invicem
obstare,  et  utroque  utentibus  in  neutro  haberi  fidem.
Quod  sane  in  parte  verum  est,  et  illo  sequenti,  si

1  iv.  9.  Oppianicus  had  been  indicted  by  Cluentius  for  an
attempt  upon  his  life  and  condemned.  The  "  previous  judg-
ments "  referred  to  were  condemnations  of  his  accomplices,
which  made  Oppianicus'  condemnation  inevitable.  Oppiani-
cus was  condemned,  and  it  was  alleged  that  this  was  due  to
bribery  by  Cluentius.  Cluentius  was  now  on  his  trial  for
the  alleged  murder  of  various  persons.

14*


BOOK IV.  v.  10-13

whom  he  will  treat  as  bound  by  his  promise.  On
the  other  hand,  if  he  is  busy,  or  holds  exalted
position,  or  is  intolerant  by  nature,  he  will  insist  in
no  very  courteous  manner  on  his  coming  to  the  point.
For  these  reasons  there  are  some  who  disapprove  of  11
the  partition  adopted  by  Cicero  in  the  pro  Cluentio,1
where  he  premises  that  he  is  going  to  show,  first,
"  that  no  man  was  ever  arraigned  for  greater  crimes
or  on  stronger  evidence  than  Oppianicus,"  secondly,
"  that  previous  judgments  had  been  passed  by  those
very  judges  by  whom  he  was  condemned,"  and
finally,  "that  Cluentius  made  no  attempt  to  bribe
the  jury,  but  that  his  opponent  did."  They  argue
that  if  the  third  point  can  be  proved,  there  is  no
need  to  have  urged  the  two  preceding.  On  the  12
other  hand  you  will  find  no  one  so  unreasonable  or  so
foolish  as  to  deny  that  the  partition  in  the  pro  Murena2
is  admirable.  "  I  understand,  gentlemen,  that  the
accusation  falls  into  three  parts,  the  first  aspersing
my  client's  character,  the  second  dealing  with  his
candidature  for  the  magistracy,  and  the  third  with
charges  of  bribery."  These  words  make  the  case  as
clear  as  possible,  and  no  one  division  renders  any
other  superfluous.

There  are  also  a  number  who  are  in  doubt  as  to  13
a  form  of  defence  which  I  may  exemplify  as  follows  :
"  If  I  murdered  him,  I  did  right ;  but  I  did  not
murder  him."  3  What,  they  ask,  is  the  value  of  the
first  part,  if  the  second  can  be  proved,  since  they  are
mutually  inconsistent,  and  if  anyone  employs  both
arguments,  we  should  believe  neither?  This  con-
tention is  partially  justified ;  we  should  employ  the

1  v.  11.  *  See  in.  vi.  10.

143


QUINTILIAN

14  modo  indubitabile  est,  sit  solo  utendum.  At  si  quid
in  eo,  quod  est  fortius,  timebimus,  utraque  proba-
tione  nitemur.  Alius  enim  alio  moveri  solet,  et  qui
factum  putavit,  iustum  credere  potest ;  qui  tanquam
iusto  non  movebitur,  factum  fortasse  non  credet.  Ut
certa  manus  uno  telo  possit  esse  contenta,  incerta

15  plura  spargenda  sunt,  ut  sit  et  fortunae  locus.  Egregie
vero  Cicero  pro  Milone  insidiatorem  primum  Clodium
ostendit,  turn  addidit  ex  abundanti,  etiamsi  id  non
fuisset,  talem  tamen  civem  cum  summa  virtute  inter-

16  fectoris  et  gloria  necari  potuisse.  Neque  ilium  tamen
ordinem,  de  quo  prius  dixi,  damnaverim  ;  quia  quae-
dam,  etiamsi  ipsa  sunt  dura,  in  id  tamen  valent,  ut
ea  molliant  quae  sequuntur.  Nee  omnino  sine  ratione
est  quod  vulgo  dicitur  :  Iniquum  petendum,  ut  aequum

17  feras.  Quod  tamen  nemo  sic  accipiat  ut  omnia  credat
audenda.  Recte  enim  Graeci  praecipiunt,  Non
temptanda,  quae  efflci  omnino  non  possint.  Sed  quotiens
hac,  de  qua  loquor,  duplici  defensione  utemur,  id
laborandum  est,  ut  in  illam  partem  sequentem  fides
ex  priore  ducatur.  Potest  enim  videri,  qui  tuto  etiam
confessurus  fuit,  mentiendi  causam  in  negando  non
habere.

1  §13.  ~~~

2  The  proverb  would  seem  originally  to  refer  to  bargaining
in  the  market :  the  salesman,  knowing  he  will  be  beaten
down,  sets  his  original  price  too  high.  But  it  would  equally
apply  to  claims  for  damages  in  the  courts.

144


BOOK IV.  v.  13-17

second  alone  only  if  the  fact  can  be  proved  without
a  doubt.  But  if  we  have  any  doubts  as  to  being  able  14
to  prove  the  stronger  argument,  we  shall  do  well  to
rely  on  both.  Different  arguments  move  different
people.  He  who  thinks  that  the  act  was  committed
may  regard  it  as  a  just  act,  while  he  who  is  deaf  to
the  plea  that  the  act  was  just  may  perhaps  believe
that  it  was  never  committed :  one  who  is  confident
of  his  powers  as  a  marksman  may  be  content  with  one
shaft,  whereas  he  who  has  no  such  confidence  will  do
well  to  launch  several  and  give  fortune  a  chance  to
come  to  his  assistance.  Cicero  in  the  pro  Milone  15
reveals  the  utmost  skill  in  showing  first  that  Clodius
laid  an  ambush  for  Milo  and  then  in  adding  as  a
supernumerary  argument  that,  even  if  he  had  not
done  so,  he  was  nevertheless  so  bad  a  citizen  that
his  slaying  could  only  have  done  credit  to  the
patriotism  of  the  slayer  and  redounded  to  his  glory.
I  would  not  however  entirely  condemn  the  order  16
mentioned  above,1  since  there  are  certain  arguments
which,  though  hard  in  themselves,  may  serve  to
soften  those  which  come  after.  The  proverb,  "If  you
want  to  get  your  due,  you  must  ask  for  something
more/'  2  is  not  wholly  unreasonable.  Still  no  one  17
should  interpret  it  to  mean  that  you  must  stop  short
of  nothing.  For  the  Greeks  are  right  when  they
lay  it  down  as  a  rule  that  we  should  not  attempt
the  impossible.  But  whenever  the  double-barrelled
defence  of  which  I  am  speaking  is  employed,  we
must  aim  at  making  the  first  argument  support  the
credibility  of  the  second.  For  he  who  might  with-
out danger  to  himself  have  confessed  to  the  com-
mission of  the  act,  can  have  no  motive  for  lying
when  he  denies  the  commission.

M5


QUINTILIAN

18  Et  illud  utique  faciendum  est,  ut,  quotiens  sus-
picabimur  a  iudice  aliam  probationem  desiderari
quam  de  qua  loquimur,  promittamus  nos  plene  et
statim  de  eo  satis  esse  facturos,  praecipueque  si  de

19  pudore  agetur.  Frequenter  autem  accidit,  ut  causa
parum  verecunda  iure  tuta  sit;  de  quo  ne  inviti
iudices  audiant  et  aversi,  frequentius  sunt  admonendi,
secuturam  defensionem  probitatis  et  dignitatis ;  ex-

20  spectent  paulum  et  agi  ordine  sinant.  Quaedam
interim  nos  invitis  litigatoribus  simulandum  est
dicere,  quod  Cicero  pro  Cluentio  facit  circa  iudicia-
riam  legem;  nonnunquam,  quasi  interpellemur  ab
iis,  subsistere;  saepe  convertenda  ad  ipsos  oratio;
hortandi  ut  sinant  nos  uti  nostro  consilio.  Ita  sur-
repetur  animo  iudicis  et,  dum  sperat  probationem

21  pudoris,  asperioribus  illis  minus  repugnabit.  Quae
cum  receperit,  etiam  verecundiae  defensioni  facilior
erit.  Sic  utraque  res  invicem  iuvabit,  eritque  iudex
circa  ius  nostrum  spe  modestiae  attention  circa
modestiam  iuris  probatione  proclivior.

22  Sed  ut  non  semper  necessaria  aut  utilis  est  par-
titio,1 ita opportune adhibita plurimum orationi

1  utilis  est  partitio,  Victor :  utilis  etiam  partitio  est,  A :
etiam  supervacua  partitio  est,  B,

146


BOOK IV.  v.  18-22

Above all  it  is  important,  whenever  we  suspect  18
that  the  judge  desires  a  proof  other  than  that  on
which  we  are  engaged,  to  promise  that  we  will  satisfy
him  on  the  point fully and without delay,  more
especially  if  the question is one of our client's
honour. But  it  will  often  happen  that  a  discredit- 19
able  case  has  the  law  on  its  side,  and  to  prevent
the  judges  giving  us  only  a grudging and  reluct-
ant hearing  on  the  point  of  law,  we  shall  have  to
warn  them  with  some  frequency  that  we  shall  shortly
proceed  to  defend  our  client's  honour  and  integrity,
if  they  will  only  wait  a  little  and  allow  us  to  follow
the order of  our proofs. We may  also  at  times  20
pretend  to  say  certain  things  against  the  wishes  of
our  clients,  as  Cicero  l  does  in  the  pro  Cluenlio  when
he  discusses  the  law  dealing  with  judicial  corruption.
Occasionally  we  may  stop,  as  though  interrupted  by
our  clients,  while  often  we  shall  address  them  and
exhort  them  to  let  us  act  as  we  think  best. Thus
we  shall  make  a  gradual  impression  on  the  mind  of
the  judge,  and,  buoyed  up  by  the  hope  that  we  are
going  to  clear  our  client's  honour,  he  will  be  less  ill-
disposed  toward  the  harder  portions  of  our  proof.
And  when  he  has  accepted  these,  he  will  be  all  the  21
readier to listen to our defence of our client's
character. Thus  the  two  points  will  render  mutual
assistance  to  each  other; the  judge  will  be  more
attentive  to  our  legal  proofs  owing  to  his  hope  that
we  shall  proceed  to  a  vindication  of  character  and
better  disposed  to  accept  that  vindication  because
we  have  proved  our  point  of  law.

But  although  partition  is  neither  always  necessary  22
nor  useful,  it  will,  if  judiciously  employed,  greatly

1  Hi.

147


QUINTILIAN

iucis  et  gratiae  confert.  Neque  enim  solum  id  efficit,
ut  clariora  fiant,  quae  dieuntur,  rebus  velut  ex
turba  extractis  et  in  conspectu  iudicum  positis ;  sed
reficit  quoque  audientem  certo  singularum  partium
fine,  non  aliter  quam  facientibus  iter  multum  detra-
hunt  fatigationis notata inscriptis  lapidibus  spatia.

23  Nam  et  exhausti  laboris  nosse  mensuram  voluptati
est,  et  hortatur  ad  reliqua  fortius  exsequenda  scire
quantum  supersit. Nihil  enim  longum  videri  necesse

24  est,  in  quo,  quid  ultimum  sit,  certum  est.  Nee  im-
merito  multum  ex  diligentia  partiendi  tulit  laudis
Q.  Hortensius,  cuius  tamen  divisionem  in  digitos
diductam  nonnunquam  Cicero  leviter  eludit.  Nam
est  suus  et  in  gestu  modus,  et  vitanda,  utique
maxime,  concisa  nimium  et  velut  articulosa  partitio.

25  Nam  et  auctoritati  plurimum  detrahunt  minuta  ilia
nee  iam  membra  sed  frusta,  et  huius  gloriae  cupidi,
quo  subtilius  et  copiosius  divisisse  videantur,  et  super-
vacua  adsumunt  et  quae  natura  singularia  sunt  secant,
nee  tarn  plura  faciunt  quam  minora ;  deinde  cum
fecerunt  mille  particulas,  in  eandem  incidunt  obscuri-
tatem,  contra  quam  partitio  inventa  est.

148


BOOK IV.  v.  22-25

add  to  the  lucidity  and  grace  of  our  speech. For
it  not  only  makes  our  arguments  clearer  by  isolating
the points from the  crowd in  which  they  would
otherwise be lost and placing them before the
eyes of  the judge, but relieves his  attention  by
assigning  a  definite limit  to  certain parts of  our
speech,  just  as  our  fatigue  upon  a  journey  is  relieved
by  reading  the  distances  on  the  milestones  which  we
pass. For  it  is  a  pleasure  to  be  able  to  measure  how  23
much  of  our  task  has  been  accomplished,  and  the
knowledge  of  what  remains  to  do  stimulates  us  to
fresh  effort  over  the  labour  that  still  awaits  us. For
nothing  need  seem  long,  when  it  is  definitely  known
how far it is to the end. Quintus Hortensius  24
deserves  the  high  praise  which has  been  awarded
him  for  the  care  which  he  took  over  his  partitions,
although  Cicero  more  than  once  indulges  in  kindly
mockery  of  his  habit  of  counting  his  headings  on  his
fingers. For  there  is  a  limit  to  gesture,  and  we  must
be  specially  careful  to  avoid  excessive  minuteness  and
any  suggestion  of  articulated  structure  in  our  partition.
If  our  divisions  are  too  small,  they  cease  to  be  limbs  25
and  become  fragments,  and  consequently  detract  not
a  little  from  the  authority  of  our  speech. Moreover,
those  who  are  ambitious  of  this  sort  of  reputation,
in  order  that  they  may  appear  to  enhance  the  nicety
and  the  exhaustive  nature  of  their  division,  introduce
what is superfluous and subdivide things which
naturally  form  a  single  whole. The  result  of  their
labours  is,  however,  not  so  much to  increase the
number  of  their  divisions  as  to  diminish  their  im-
portance, and  after  all  is  done  and  they  have  split
up  their  argument  into  a  thousand  tiny  compartments,
they  fall  into  that  very  obscurity  which  the  partition
was  designed  to  eliminate.

149


QUINTILIAN

26  Et  divisa  autem  et  simplex  proposition  quotiens
utiliter  adhiberi  potest,  primum  debet  esse  aperta
atque  lucida  (nam  quid  sit  turpius,  quam  id  esse
obscurum  ipsum,  quod  in  eum  solum  adhibetur  usum,
ne  sint  cetera  obscura  ?),  turn  brevis  nee  ullo  super-
vacuo  onerata  verbo. Non  enim,  quid  dicamus,  sed

27  de  quo  dicturi  simus  ostendimus.  Obtinendum  etiam,
ne  quid  in  ea  desit,  ne  quid  supersit.  Superest  autem
sic  fere,  cum  aut  in  species  partimur,  quod  in  genera
partiri  sit  satis,  aut  genere  posito  subiicitur  species,
ut  dicam  de  virtute,  iustitia,  continentia,  cum  iustitia

28  atque  continentia  virtutis  sint  species.  Partitio  prima
est,  quid  sit  de  quo  conveniat,  quid  de  quo  ambiga-
tur.  In  eo,  quod  convenit,  quid  adversarius  fateatur,
quid  nos ;  in  eo,  de  quo  ambigitur,  quae  nostrae  pro-
positiones,  quae  partis  adversae.  Pessimum  vero,
non  eodem  ordine  exsequi,  quo  quidque  proposueris.


*5°


BOOK IV.  v.  26-28

The  proposition,  whether  single  or  multiple,  must,  26
on  every  occasion  when  it  can  be  employed  with
profit,  be  clear  and  lucid  ;  for  what  could  be  more
discreditable  than  that  a  portion  of  the  speech,
whose  sole  purpose  is  to  prevent  obscurity  else-
where, should  itself  be  obscure  ?  Secondly  it  must
be  brief  and  must  not  be  burdened  with  a  single
superfluous  word ;  for  we  are  not  explaining  what
we  are  saying,  but  what  we  are  going  to  say.  We  27
must  also  ensure  that  it  is  free  alike  from  omissions
and  from  redundance.  Redundance  as  a  rule  occurs
through  our  dividing  into  species  when  it  would  be
sufficient  to  divide  into  genera,  or  through  the  addi-
tion of  species  after  stating  the  genus.  The  following
will  serve  as  an  example  :  "  I  will  speak  of  virtue,
justice  and  abstinence."  But  justice  and  abstinence
are  species  of  the  genus  virtue.  Our  first  partition  28
will  be  between  admitted  and  disputed  facts.
Admitted  facts  will  then  be  divided  into  those
acknowledged  by  our  opponent  and  those  acknow-
ledged by  ourselves.  Disputed  facts  will  be  divided
into  those  which  we  and  those  which  our  opponents
allege.  But  the  worst  fault  of  all  is  to  treat  your
points  in  an  order  different  from  that  which  was
assigned  them  in  your  proposition.


*5i


BOOK V


LIBER V


Prooemium


Fuerunt  et  clari  quidem  auctores,  quibus  solum
videretur  oratoris  officium  docere  ;  namque  et  adfectus
duplici  ratione  excludendos  putabant,  primum  quia
vitium  esset  omnis  animi  perturbatio,  deinde  quia
iudicem  a  veritate  depelli  misericordia  gratia  simili-
busque  non  oporteret,  et  voluptatem  audientium
petere,  cum  vincendi  tantum  gratia  diceretur,  non
modo  agenti  supervacuum,  sed  vix  etiam  viro  dignum

2  arbitrabantur  ;  plures  vero,  qui  nee  ab  illis  sine  dubio
partibus  rationem  orandi  summoverent,  hoc  tarn  en
proprium  atque  praecipuum  crederent  opus,  sua  con-
firmare  et  quae  ex  adverso  proponerentur  refutare.

3  Utrumcunque  est  (neque  enhn  hoc  loco  meam  inter-
pono  sententiam),  hie  erit  liber  illorum  opinione
maxime  necessarius,  quia  toto  haec  sola  tractantur;
quibus  sane  et  ea,  quae  de  iudicialibus  causis  iam

4  dicta  sunt,  serviunt.  Nam  neque  prooemii  neque
narrationis  est  alius  usus,  quam  ut  iudicem  hui«
praeparent; et status nosse atque ea, de quibus


1  cp.  Ar.  Rhet.  I.  i.  4 Also  Quint,  iv.  v.  0.

2  See  in.  vi.

154


BOOK  V


Preface

There  have  been  certain  writers  of  no  small
authority1  who  have  held  that  the  sole  duty  of  the
orator  was  to  instruct :  in  their  view  appeals  to  the
emotions  were  to  be  excluded  for  two  reasons,  first
on  the  ground  that  all  disturbance  of  the  mind  was
a  fault,  and  secondly  that  it  was  wrong  to  distract
the  judge  from  the  truth  by  exciting  his  pity,  bring-
ing influence  to  bear,  and  the  like.  Further,  to  seek
to  charm  the  audience,  when  the  aim  of  the  orator
was  merely  to  win  success,  was  in  their  opinion  not
only  superfluous  for  a  pleader,  but  hardly  worthy  of
a  self-respecting  man.  The  majority  however,  while
admitting  that  such  arts  undoubtedly  formed  part  of
oratory,  held  that  its  special  and  peculiar  task  is  to
make  good  the  case  which  it  maintains  and  refute
that  of  its  opponent.  Whichever  of  these  views  is
correct  (for  at  this  point  I  do  not  propose  to  express
my  own  opinion),  they  will  regard  this  book  as
serving  a  very  necessary  purpose,  since  it  will  deal
entirely  with  the  points  on  which  they  lay  such
stress,  although  all  that  I  have  already  said  on  the
subject  of  judicial  causes  is  subservient  to  the  same
end.  For  the  purpose  of  the  exo?*dium  and  the  state-
ment  of  facts  is  merely  to  prepare  the  judge  for  these
points,  while  it  would  be  a  work  of  supererogation  to
know  the  bases2  of  cases  or  to  consider  the  other

155


QUINTILIAN

supra  scripsimus,  intueri  supervacuum  foret,  nisi  ad
6  banc  perveniremus.  Denique  ex  quinque  quas  iudi-
cialis  materiae  fecimus  partibus,  quaecunque  alia
potest  aliquando  necessaria  causae  non  esse ;  lis
nulla  est,  cui  probatione  opus  non  sit.  Eius  prae-
cepta  sic  optime  divisuri  videmur,  ut  prius,  quae  in
commune  ad  omnes  quaestiones  pertinent,  ostenda-
mus ;  deinde,  quae  in  quoque  causae  genere  propria
sint,  exsequamur.

I  Ac  prima  quidem  ilia  partitio  ab  Aristotele
tradita  consensum  fere  omnium  meruit,  alias  esse
probationes,  quas  extra  dicendi  rationem  acciperet
orator,  alias,  quas  ex  causa  traberet  ipse  et  quodam
modo  gigneret.  Ideoque  illas  arixvovs,  id  est  inarti-
ficiales,  has  ivrexvovs,  id  est  artificiales,  vocaverunt.

2  Ex  illo  priore  genere  sunt  praeiudicia,  rumores,  tor-
menta,  tabulae,  iusiurandum,  testes,  in  quibus  pars
maxima  contentionum  forensium  consistit.  Sed  ut
ipsa  per  se  carent  arte,  ita  summis  eloquentiae  viribus
et  adlevanda  sunt  plerumque  et  refellenda.  Quare
mihi  videntur  magnopere  damnandi,  qui  totum  hoc

3  genus  a  praeceptis  remover  unt.  Nee  tarn  en  in  animo
est  omnia,  quae  aut  pro  his  aut  contra  dici  solent,
complecti.  Non  enim  communes  locos  tradere  de-
stinamus,  quod  esset  operis  infiniti,  sed  viam  quandam


1  in.  xi.  2  in.  ix.  1  ;  iv.  hi.  15.

*  Hket.  i.  ii.  2.


156


BOOK V. Pn.  4-1.  3

points  dealt  with  above,1  unless  we  intend  to  proceed
to  the  consideration  of  the  proof.  Finally,  of  the
five  parts  2  into  which  we  divided  judicial  cases,  any
single  one  other  than  the  proof  may  on  occasion  be
dispensed  with.  But  there  can  be  no  suit  in  which
the  proof  is  not  absolutely  necessary.  With  regard
to  the  rules  to  be  observed  in  this  connexion,  we
shall,  I  think,  be  wisest  to  follow  our  previous  method
of  classification  and  show  first  what  is  common  to  all
cases  and  then  proceed  to  point  out  those  which  are
peculiar  to  the  several  kinds  of  cases.

I.  To  begin  with  it  may  be  noted  that  the  divi-
sion laid  down  by  Aristotle  3  has  met  with  almost
universal  approval.  It  is  to  the  effect  that  there  are
some  proofs  adopted  by  the  orator  which  lie  outside
the  art  of  speaking,  and  others  which  he  himself
deduces  or,  if  1  may  use  the  term,  begets  out  of  his
case.  The  former  therefore  have  been  styled  arc^vot
or  inartificial  proofs,  the  latter  ivre^yoi  or  artificial.
To  the  first  class  belong  decisions  of  previous  courts,
rumours,  evidence  extracted  by  torture,  documents,
oaths,  and  witnesses,  for  it  is  with  these  that  the
majority  of  forensic  arguments  are  concerned.  But
though  in  themselves  they  involve  no  art,  all  the
powers  of  eloquence  are  as  a  rule  required  to  disparage
or  refute  them.  Consequently  in  my  opinion  those
who  would  eliminate  the  whole  of  this  class  of  proof
from  their  rules  of  oratory,  deserve  the  strongest
condemnation.  It  is  not,  however,  my  intention  to
embrace  all  that  can  be  said  for  or  against  these  views.
I  do  not  for  instance  propose  to  lay  down  rules  for
commonplaces,  a  task  requiring  infinite  detail,  but
merely  to  sketch  out  the  general  lines  and  method

'57


QUINTILIAN

atquc  rationem.  Quibus  demonstratis,  non  modo  in
exsequendo  suas  quisque  vires  debet  adhibere,  sed
etiam  inveniendo  similia,  ut  quaeque  condicio  litium
poscet.  Neque  enim  de  omnibus  causis  dicere
quisquam  potest  saltern  praeteritis,  ut  taceam  de
futuris.

II.  lam  praeiudiciorum  vis  omnis  tribus  in  gene-
ribus  versatur :  rebus,  quae  aliquando  ex  paribus
causis  sunt  iudicatae,  quae  exempla  rectius  dicuntur,
ut  de  rescissis  patrum  testamentis  vel  contra  filios
confirmatis ;  iudiciis  ad  ipsam  causam  pertinentibus,
unde  etiam  nomen  ductum  est,  qualia  in  Oppianicum
facta  dicuntur  et  a  senatu  adversus  Milonem  ;  aut
cum  de  eadem  causa  pronuntiatum  est,  ut  in  reis
deportatis  et  assertion e  secunda  et  partibus  cen-
2  tumviralium,  quae  in  duas  hastas  divisae  sunt.  Con-
h'rmantur  praecipue  duobus :  auctoritate  eorum,  qui
pronuntiaverunt,  et  similitudine  rerum,  de  quibus
quaeritur ;  refelluntur  autem  raro  per  contumeliam

1  pro  Cluent.  xvii.  sqq.  2  pro  Mil.  v.

s  Banished  persons  who  have  been  accused  afresh  after
their  restoration.

4  When  a  slave  claimed  his  liberty  by  assertio  through  a
representative  known  as  assertor,  his  case  was  not  disposed
of  once  and  for  all  by  a  first  failure,  but  the  claim  might  be
presented  anew.

is»


BOOK V.  i.  3-n.  2

to  be  followed  by  the  orator.  The  method  once
indicated,  it  is  for  the  individual  orator  not  merely  to
employ  his  powers  on  its  application,  but  on  the
invention  of  similar  methods  as  the  circumstances  of
the  case  may  demand.  For  it  is  impossible  to  deal
with  every  kind  of  case,  even  if  we  confine  ourselves
to  those  which  have  actually  occurred  in  the  past
without  considering  those  which  may  occur  in  the
future.

II.  As  regards  decisions  in  previous  courts,  these
fall  under  three  heads.  First,  we  have  matters
on  which  judgment  has  been  given  at  some  time  or
other  in  cases  of  a  similar  nature :  these  are,  how-
ever, more  correctly  termed  precedents,  as  for
instance  where  a  father's  will  has  been  annulled  or
confirmed  in  opposition  to  his  sons.  Secondly,
there  are  judgments  concerned  with  the  case  itself;
it  is  from  these  that  the  name  praeiudicium  is
derived :  as  examples  I  may  cite  those  passed
against  Oppianicus  x  or  by  the  senate  against  Milo.2
Thirdly,  there  are  judgments  passed  on  the  actual
case,  as  for  example  in  cases  where  the  accused  has
been  deported,3  or  where  renewed  application  is
made  for  the  recognition  of  an  individual  as  a  free
man,4  or  in  portions  of  cases  tried  in  the  centumviral
court  which  come  before  two  different  panels  of
judges.5  Such  previous  decisions  are  as  a  rule  2
confirmed  in  two  ways  :  by  the  authority  of  those
who  gave  the  decision  and  by  the  likeness  between  the
two  cases. As  for  their  reversal,  this  can  rarely  be

5  The  meaning  is  not  clear.  The  Latin  suggests  that
portions  of  a  case  might  be  tried  by  two  panels  sitting
separately,  while  the  case  as  a  whole  was  tried  by  the  two
panels  sitting  conjointly.  The  hasta  (spear)  was  the  symbol
of  the  centumviral  court, cp.  xi.  i.  78.

159


QUINTILIAN

iudicum,  nisi  forte  manifesta  in  iis  culpa  erit.  Vult
enim  cognoscentium  quisque  firmam  esse  alterius
sententiam, et ipse pronuntiaturus, nee libenter

3  exemplum,  quod  in  se  fortasse  recidat,  facit.  Con-
fugiendum  ergo  est  in  duobus  superioribus,  si  res
feret,  ad  aliquam  dissimilitudinem  causae ;  vix  autem
ulla  est  per  omnia  alteri  similis.  Si  id  non  continget
aut  eadem  causa  erit,  actionum  incusanda  negligentia
aut  de  infirmitate  personarum  querendum,  contra
quas  erit  iudicatum,  aut  de  gratia,  quae  testes  cor-
ruperit,  aut  de  invidia  aut  de  ignorantia,  aut  viden-

4  dum,  quid x  causae  postea  accesserit.  Quorum  si
nihil  erit,  licet  tamen  dicere  multos  iudiciorum  casus
ad  inique  pronuntiandum  valere  ideoque  damnatum
Rutilium,  absolutos  Clodium  atque  Catilinam.  Ro-
gandi  etiam  iudices,  ut  rem  potius  intueantur  ipsam,

5  quam  iuriiurando  alieno  suum  donent.  Adversus
consulta  autem  senatus  et  decreta  principum  vel
magistratuum  remedium  nullum  est,  nisi  aut  inventa
quantulacunque  causae  differentia  aut  aliqua  vel  eo-
rundem  vel  eiusdem  potestatis  hominum  posterior
constitutio,  quae  sit  priori  contraria  ;  quae  si  deerunt,
lis  non  erit.

1  videndum  quid,  Victor :  inveniendum  quod,  MSB.


1  Publius  Rutilius  Rufus  condemned  for  extortion  while
governor  of  Asia,  owing  to  a  conspiracy  of  the  publicans
against  him.  He  went  into  voluntary  exile  at  Mitylene  and
was  highly  honoured  by  the  people  of  Asia. 91  B.C.

160


BOOK V.  it.  2-5

obtained  by  denouncing  the  judges.,  unless  they  have
been  guilty  of  obvious  error.  For  each  of  those  who
are  trying  the  case  wishes  the  decision  given  by
another  to  stand,  since  he  too  has  to  give  judgment
and  is  reluctant  to  create  a  precedent  that  may
recoil  upon  himself.  Consequently,  as  regards  the
first  two  classes,  we  must,  if  possible,  take  refuge  in
some  dissimilarity  between  the  two  cases,  and  two
cases  are  scarcely  ever  alike  in  all  their  details.
If,  however,  such  a  course  is  impossible  and  the
case  is  the  same  as  that  on  which  the  previous
decision  was  given,  we  must  complain  of  the  negli-
gence shown  in  the  conduct  of  the  previous  case
or  of  the  weakness  of  the  parties  condemned,
or  of  undue  influence  employed  to  corrupt  the
witnesses,  or  again  of  popular  prejudice  or  ignorance
which  reacted  unfavourably  against  our  client;  or
else  we  must  consider  what  has  occurred  since  to
alter  the  aspect  of  the  case.  If  none  of  these  courses
can  be  adopted,  it  will  still  be  possible  to  point  out
that  the  peculiar  circumstances  of  many  trials  have
led  to  unjust  decisions ;  hence  condemnations  such
as  that  of  Rutilius *  and  acquittals  such  as  those  of
Clodius  and  Catiline.  We  must  also  ask  the  judges
to  consider  the  facts  of  the  case  on  their  merits
rather  than  make  their  verdict  the  inevitable  con-
sequence of  a  verdict  given  by  others.  When,  how-
ever, we  are  confronted  by  decrees  of  the  senate,  or
ordinances  of  emperors  or  magistrates,  there  is  no
remedy,  unless  we  can  make  out  that  there  is  some
difference,  however  small,  between  the  cases,  or
that  the  same  persons  or  persons  holding  the  same
powers  have  made  some  subsequent  enactment  re-
versing the  former  decision. Failing  this,  there  will

be  no  case  for  judgment.

161


QUINTILIAN

III.  Famam  atque  rumores  pars  altera  consensum
civitatis  et  velut  publicum  testimonium  vocat,  altera
sermonem  sine  ullo  certo  auctore  dispersum,  cui
malignitas  initium  dederit,  incrementum  credulitas ;
quod  nulli  non  etiam  innocentissimo  possit  accidere
fraude  inimicorum  falsa  vulgantium.  Exempla
utrinque  non  deerunt.

IV.  Sicut  in  tormentis  quoque,  qui  est  locus  fre-
quentissimus,  cum  pars  altera  quaestionem  vera
fatendi  necessitatem  vocet,  altera  saepe  etiam  causam
falsa  dicendi,  quod  aliis  patientia  facile  mendacium
faciat,  aliis  infirmitas  necessarium.  Quid  attinet  de
his  plura? Plenae  sunt  orationes  veterum  ac  novo-

2  rum.  Quaedam  tamen  in  hac  parte  erunt  propria
cuiusque  litis.  Nam  sive  de  habenda  quaestione
agetur,  plurimum  intererit,  quis  et  quern  postulet
aut  offerat  et  in  quern  et  ex  qua  causa ;  sive  iam  erit
habita,  quis  ei  praefuerit,  quis  et  quomodo  sit  tortus,
incredibilia  dixerit  an  inter  se  constantia,  persevera-
verit  in  eo  quod  coeperat,  an  aliquid  dolore  mutarit,
prima parte quaestionis an procedente cruciatu.

162


BOOK V.  ni.-iv.  2

III.  With  regard  to  rumour  and  common  report,
one  party  will  call  them  the  verdict  of  public  opin-
ion and  the  testimony  of  the  world  at  large ;  the
other  will  describe  them  as  vague  talk  based  on  no
sure  authority,  to  which  malignity  has  given  birth
and  credulity  increase,  an  ill  to  which  even  the  most
innocent  of  men  may  be  exposed  by  the  deliberate
dissemination  of  falsehood  on  the  part  of  their
enemies.  It  will  be  easy  for  both  parties  to  produce
precedents  to  support  their  arguments.

IV.  A  like  situation  arises  in  the  case  of  evidence
extracted  by  torture :  one  party  will  style  torture  an
infallible  method  of  discovering  the  truth,  while  the
other  will  allege  that  it  also  often  results  in  false
confessions,  since  with  some  their  capacity  of  en-
durance makes  lying  an  easy  thing,  while  with  others
weakness  makes  it  a  necessity.  It  is  hardly  worth
my  while  to  say  more  on  the  subject,  as  the  speeches
both  of  ancient  and  modern  orators  are  full  of  this
topic.  Individual  cases  may  however  involve  special  2
considerations  in  this  connexion.  For  if  the  point  at
issue  is  whether  torture  should  be  applied,  it  will
make  all  the  difference  who  it  is  who  demands  or
offers  it,  who  it  is  that  is  to  be  subjected  to  torture,
against  whom  the  evidence  thus  sought  will  tell,  and
what  is  the  motive  for  the  demand.  If  on  the  other
hand  torture  has  already  been  applied,  it  will  make
all  the  difference  who  was  in  charge  of  the  proceed-
ings, who  was  the  victim  and  what  the  nature  of  the
torture,  whether  the  confession  was  credible  or  con-
sistent, whether  the  witness  stuck  to  his  first  state-
ment or  changed  it  under  the  influence  of  pain,  and
whether  he  made  it  at  the  beginning  of  the  torture
or only  after it had  continued  some time. The

163


QUiNTILIAN

Quae utrinque tam  infinita  sunt  quam ipsa rerum
varietas.

V.  Contra  tabulas  quoque  saepe  dicendum  est,  cum
eas  non  solum  refelli  sed  etiam  accusari  sciamus  esse
usitatum.  Cum  sit  autem  in  his  aut  scelus  signato-
rum  aut  ignorantia,  tutius  ac  facilius  id,  quod  secundo

2  loco  diximus,  tractatur,  quod  pauciores  rei  fiunt.  Sed
hoc  ipsum  argumenta  ex  causa  trahit,  si  forte  aut
incredibile  est  id  actum  esse,  quod  tabulae  continent,
aut,  ut  frequentius  evenit,  aliis  probationibus  aeque
inartificialibus  solvitur ;  si  aut  is  in  quern  signatum
est,  aut  aliquis  signator  dicitur  afuisse  vel  prius  esse
defunctus ;  si  tempora  non  congruunt ;  si  vel  ante-
cedentia  vel  insequentia  tabulis  repugnant.  Inspectio
etiam  ipsa  saepe  falsum  deprehendit.

VI.  Iusiurandum  litigatores  aut  offerunt  suum  aut
non  recipiunt  oblatum,  aut  ab  adversario  exigunt  aut
recusant,  cum  ab  ipsis  exigatur.  Offerre  suum  sine
ilia  condicione,  ut  vel  adversarius  iuret,  fere  impro-

2  bum  est. Qui  tamen  id  faciet,  aut  vita  se  tuebitur,


1  An  oath  might  be  taken  by  one  of  the  parties  as  an
alternative  to  evidence.  In  court  such  an  oath  might  be
taken  only  on  the  proposal  of  the  adversary  ;  the  litigant
might  not  swear  on  his  own  initiative,  although  an  oath
might  be  taken  voluntarily  before  the  case  came  into  court.
The  matter  of  the  oath  rested  with  the  profferer,  and  the
taking  of  such  a  proffered  oath  meant  victory  for  the
swearer.

164


BOOK V.  iv.  2~vi.  2

variety  of  such  questions  is  as  infinite  as  the  variety
of  actual  cases.

V.  It  is  also  frequently  necessary  to  speak
against  documents,  for  it  is  common  knowledge  that
they  are  often  not  merely  rebutted,  but  even
attacked  as  forgeries.  But  as  this  implies  either
fraud  or  ignorance  on  the  part  of  the  signatories,  it
is  safer  and  easier  to  make  the  charge  one  of  igno-
rance, because  by  so  doing  we  reduce  the  number
of  the  persons  accused.  But  our  proceedings  as  a  2
whole  will  draw  their  arguments  from  the  circum-
stances of  the  case  at  issue.  For  example,  it  may  be
incredible  that  an  incident  occurred  as  stated  in  the
documents,  or,  as  more  often  happens,  the  evidence
of  the  documents  may  be  overthrown  by  other  proofs
which  are  likewise  of  an  inartificial  nature ;  if,  for
example,  it  is  alleged  that  the  person,  whose  in-
terests are  prejudiced  by  the  document,  or  one  of
the  signatories  was  absent  when  the  document  was
signed,  or  deceased  before  its  signature,  or  if  the
dates  disagree,  or  events  preceding  or  following  the
writing  of  the  document  are  inconsistent  with  it.
Even  a  simple  inspection  of  a  document  is  often
sufficient  for  the  detection  of  forgery.

VI.  With  regard  to  oaths,1  parties  either  offer  to
take  an  oath  themselves,  or  refuse  to  accept  the  oath
of  their  opponent,  demand  that  their  opponent
should  take  an  oath  or  refuse  to  comply  with  a
similar  demand  when  proffered  to  themselves.  To
offer  to  take  an  oath  unconditionally  without
demanding  that  one's  opponent  should  likewise  take
an  oath  is  as  a  rule  a  sign  of  bad  faith.  If,  however,  2
anyone  should  take  this  course,  he  will  defend  his
action  by  appealing  to  the  blamelessness  of  his  life

i65


QUINTILIAN
ut  eum  non  sit  credibile  peieraturum ;  aut  ipsa  vi
religionis,  in  qua  plus  fidei  consequetur,  si  id  egerit,
ut  non  cupide  ad  hoc  descendere  sed  ne  hoc  quidem
recusare  videatur ;  aut,  si  causa  patietur,  modo  litis,
propter  quam  devoturus  se  ipse  non  fuerit;  aut
praeter  alia  causae  instruments  adiicit  ex  abundanti

3  hanc  quoque  conscientiae  suae  fiduciam.  Qui  non
recipiet,  et  iniquam  condicionem  et  a  multis  con-
temni  iurisiurandi  metum  dicet,  cum  etiam  philosophi
quidam  sint  reperti,  qui  deos  agere  rerum  humanarum
curam  negarent ;  eum  vero,  qui  nullo  deferente  iurare
sit  paratus,  et  ipsum  velle  de  causa  sua  pronuntiare
et,  quam  id  quod  offert  leve  ac  facile  credat,  osten-

4  dere.  At  is,  qui  defert,  agere  modeste  videtur,  cum
litis  adversarium  iudicem  faciat,  et  eum  cuius  cognitio
est  onere  liberat,  qui  profecto  alieno  iureiurando  stari

5  quam  suo  mavult. Quo  difficilior  recusatio  est,  nisi

forte  res  est  ea,  quam  credibile  sit  notam  ipsi  non

esse. Quae  excusatio  si  deerit,  hoc  unum  relinque-
166


BOOK V.  vi.  2-s

as  rendering  perjury  on  his  part  incredible,  or  by  the
solemn  nature  of  the  oath,  with  regard  to  which  he
will win all the  greater  credence,  if without  the
least  show  of  eagerness  to  take  the  oath  he  makes  it
clear  that  he  does  not  shrink  from  so  solemn  a  duty.
Or  again,  if  the  case  is  such  as  to  make  this  possible,
he  will rely on  the  trivial  nature  of  the  point  in
dispute  to  win  belief,  on  the  ground  that  he  would
not  incur  the  risk  of  the  divine  displeasure  when  so
little  is  at  stake. Or,  finally,  he  may  in  addition  to
the  other  means  which  he  employs  to  win  his  case
offer  to  take  an  oath  as  a  culminating  proof  of  a
clear  conscience. The  man  who  refuses  to  accept  his  3
opponents  offer  to  take  an  oath,  will  allege  that  the
inequality  of  their  respective  conditions  are  not  the
same  for  both  parties  and  will  point  out  that  many
persons  are  not  in  the  least  afraid  of  committing
perjury,  even  philosophers  having  been  found  to  deny
that  the  gods  intervene  in  human  affairs ;  and  further
that  he  who  is  ready  to  take  an  oath  without  being
asked  to  do  so,  is  really  proposing  to  pass  sentence
on  his  own  case  and  to  show  what  an  easy  and  trivial
thing  he  thinks  the  oath  which  he  offers  to  take.
On  the  other  hand  the  man  who  proposes  to  put  4
his  opponent  on  oath  appears  to  act  with  moderation,
since  he  is  making  his  adversary  a  judge  in  his  own
case,  while  he  frees  the  actual  judge  from  the  burden
of  coming to a decision, since the latter would
assuredly  prefer  to  rest  on  another  man's  oath  than
on  his  own. This  fact  makes  the  refusal  to  take  an  5
oath  all  the  more  difficult,  unless  indeed  the  affair
in  question  be  of  such  a  nature  that  it  cannot  be
supposed that the  facts  are  known  to  the  person
asked  to  take  the  oath. Failing  this  excuse,  there

167


QUINTILIAN

tur,  ut  invidiam  sibi  quaeri  ab  adversario  dicat  atquc
id  agi,  ut  in  causa,  in  qua  vincere  non  possit,  queri
possit;  itaque  hominem  quidern  malum  occupatu-
rum  hanc  condicionem  fuisse,  se  autem  probare
malle  quae adfirmet,  quam  dubium  cuiquam  relin-

6  quere,  an  peierarit.  Sed  nobis  adolescentibus  seniores
in  agendo  facti  praecipere  solebant,  ne  temere  un-
quam  iusiurandum  deferremus,  sicut  neque  optio
iudicis  adversario  esset  permittenda  nee  ex  advocatis
partis  adversae  iudex  eligendus ;  nam,  si  dicere
contraria  turpe  advocato  videretur,  certe  turpius
habendum,  facere  quod  noceat.

VII.  Maximus  tamen  patronis  circa  testimonia
sudor  est.  Ea  dicuntur  aut  per  tabulas  aut  a  prae-
sentibus.  Simplicior  contra  tabulas  pugna.  Nam  et
minus  obstitisse  videtur  pudor  inter  paucos  signa-
tores,  et  pro  diffidentia  premitur  absentia.  Si  repre-
hensionem  non  capit  ipsa  persona,  infamare  signatores

2  licet.  Tacita  praeterea  quaedam  cogitatio  refragatur
his  omnibus,  quod  nemo  per  tabulas  dat  testimonium
nisi  sua  voluntate ;  quo  ipso  non  esse  amicum  ei  se,


1  The  choice  of  the  single  iudex  in  civil  cases  rested  with
the  plaintiff,  though  the  defendant  had  the  right  to  refuse
the  person  proposed.

3  Not  an  actual  advocate,  but  a  supporter  and  adviser
on  points  of  law.

168


BOOK V.  vi.  5-vii.  2

is  only  one  course  open  to  him :  he  must  say  that
his  opponent  is  trying  to  excite  a  prejudice  against
him  and  is  endeavouring  to  give  the  impression  that
he  has  real  ground  for  complaint  though  he  is  not  in
a  position  to  win  his  case ;  consequently,  though  a
dishonest  man  would  eagerly  have  availed  himself  of
the  proposal,  he  prefers  to  prove  the  truth  of  his
statements  rather  than  leave  a  doubt  in  anyone's
mind  as  to  whether  he  has  committed  perjury  or  no.
But  in  my  young  days  advocates  grown  old  in  plead-  6
ing  used  to  lay  it  down  as  a  rule  that  we  should
never  be  in  a  hurry  to  propose  that  our  opponent
should  take  an  oath,  just  as  we  should  never  allow
him  the  choice  of  a  judge  x  nor  select  our  judge
from  among  the  supporters  of  the  opposite  side  :  for
if  it  is  regarded  as  a  disgrace  to  such  a  supporter  2
to  say  anything  against  his  client,  it  is  surely  a  still
worse  disgrace  that  he  should  do  anything  that  will
harm  his  client's  case.

VII.  It  is,  however,  the  evidence  that  gives  the
greatest  trouble  to  advocates.  Evidence  may  be
given  either  in  writing  or  orally  by  witnesses  present
in  court.  Documentary  evidence  is  easier  to  dispose
of.  For  it  is  likely  that  the  deponent  was  less
ashamed  of  himself  in  the  presence  of  a  small
number  of  witnesses,  and  his  absence  from  court  is
attacked  as  indicating  a  lack  of  confidence.  If  we
cannot  call  the  character  of  the  deponent  in  question,
we  may  attack  the  witnesses  to  his  signature.
Further  there  is  always  a  certain  tacit  prejudice  2
against  documentary  evidence,  since  no  one  can  be
forced  to  give  such  evidence  save  of  his  own  free  will,
whereby  he  shows  that  he  harbours  unfriendly  feel-
ings towards the person against whom he bears

169


QUINTILIAN

contra  quern  dicit,  fatetur.  Neque  tamen  protinus
cesserit  orator,  quo  minus  et  amicus  pro  amico  ct
inimicus  contra  inimicum  possit  verum,  si  integra  sit
ei  fides,  dicere. Sed  late  locus  uterque  tractatur.

3  Cum  praesentibus  vero  ingens  dimicatio  est,  ideo-
que  velut  duplici  contra  eos  proque  iis  acie  confligitur
actionum  et  interrogationum.  In  actionibus  primum
generaliter  pro  testibus  atque in  testes  dici  solet.

4  Et  hie  communis  locus,  cum  pars  altera  nullam
firmiorem  probationem  esse  contendit,  quam  quae  sit
hominum  scientia  nixa ;  altera  ad  detrahendam  illis
fid  em  omnia,  per  quae  fieri  soleant  falsa  testimonia,

5  enumerat.  Sequens  ratio  est  cum  specialiter  quidem,
sed  tamen  multos  pariter  invadere  patroni  solent.
Nam  et  gentium  simul  universarum  elevata  testimonia
ab  oratoribus  scimus  et  tota  genera  testimoniorum  :
ut  de  auditionibus ;  non  enim  ipsos  esse  testes  sed
iniuratorum  adferre  voces  ;  ut  in  causis  repetundarum,
qui  se  reo  numerasse  pecunias  iurant,  litigatorum  non

6  testium  habendos  loco.  Interim  adversus  singulos
dirigitur  actio ; quod insectationis genus et  per-


1  Inicrrogatio  includes  both  the  examination  in  chief  and
cross-examination.

2  e.g.  in  cases  of  extortion,  where  a  whole  province  might
give  evidence  against  the  accused.

170


BOOK V.  vii.  2-6

witness»  On  the  other  hand  an  advocate  should  be
chary  of  denying  that  a  friend  may  give  true
evidence  against  a  friend  or  an  enemy  against  an
enemy,  provided  they  are  persons  of  unimpeachable
credit.  But  the  subject  admits  of  copious  discus-
sion, from  whichever  side  it  be  regarded.

The  task  of  dealing  with  the  evidence  of  witnesses  3
present  in  court  is,  however,  one  of  great  difficulty,
and  consequently  whether  defending  or  impugning
them  the  orator  employs  a  twofold  armoury  in  the
shape  of  a  set  speech  and  examination.1  In  set
speeches  it  is  usual  to  begin  with  observations  either
on  behalf  of  or  against  witnesses  in  general.  In  so  4
doing  we  introduce  a  commonplace,  since  one  side
will  contend  that  there  can  be  no  stronger  proof  than
that  which  rests  on  human  knowledge,  while  the
other,  in  order  to  detract  from  their  credibility,  will
enumerate  all  the  methods  by  which  false  evidence
is  usually  given.  The  next  procedure  is  the  common  5
practice  of  making  a  special  attack,  which  all  the
same  involves  impugning  the  validity  of  evidence
given  by  large  numbers  of  persons.  We  know,  for
instance,  that  the  evidence  of  entire  nations  2  and
whole  classes  of  evidence  have  been  disposed  of  by
advocates.  For  example,  in  the  case  of  hearsay
evidence,  it  will  be  urged  that  those  who  produce
such  evidence  are  not  really  witnesses,  but  are
merely  reporting  the  words  of  unsworn  persons,  while
in  cases  of  extortion,  those  who  swear  that  they  paid
certain  sums  to  the  accused  are  to  be  regarded  not
as  witnesses,  but  as  parties  to  the  suit.  Sometimes  6
however  the  advocate  will  direct  his  speech  against
single  individuals.  Such  a  form  of  attack  may  be
found  in  many  speeches,  sometimes  embedded in

171


QUINTILIAN

mixtum  defensioni  legimus  in  orationibus  plurimis  et

7  separatim  editum,  sicut  in  Vatinium  testem.  Totum
igitur  excutiamus  locum,  quando  universam  institu-
tionem  aggressi  sumus.  Sufficiebant  alioqui  libri  duo
a  Domitio  Afro  in  hanc  rem  compositi,  quern  adole-
scentulus  senem  colui,  ut  non  lecta  mihi  tantum  ea,
sed  pleraque  ex  ipso  sint  cognita.  Is  verissime  prae-
cepit  primum  esse  in  hac  parte  officium  oratoris,  ut
totam  causam  familiariter  norit ;  quod  sine  dubio  ad

8  omnia  pertinet.  Id  quomodo  contingat,  explicabimus,
cum  ad  destinatum  huic  parti  locum  venerimus.  Ea
res  suggeret  materiam  interrogationi  et  veluti  tela
ad  manum  subministrabit ;  eadem  docebit,  ad  quae
iudicis  animus  actione  sit  praeparandus.  Debet  enim
vel  fieri  vel  detrahi  testibus  fides  oratione  perpetua,
quia  sic  quisque  dictis  movetur,  ut  est  ad  credendum
vel  non  credendum  ante  formatus.

9  Et  quoniam  duo  genera  sunt  testium,  aut  volun-
tariorum  aut  eorum,  quibus  in  iudiciis  publicis  lege
denuntiari  solet,  quorum  altero  pars  utraque  utitur,
alterum  accusatoribus  tantum  concessum  est,  sepa-
remus  officium  dantis  testes  et  refellentis.

10 Qui  voluntarium  producit,  scire quid is  dicturus


1  Vatinius  had  appeared  as  a  witness  against  Sestius,  who
was  defended  by  Cicero.

2  xii.  viii.

3  In  civil  cases  evidence  was  as  a  rule  voluntary  ;  in
criminal  cases  the  accuser  might  subpoena  witnesses,  while
the  defence  was  restricted  to  voluntary  testimony.

172


BOOK V.  vji.  6-10

the  speech  for  the  defence  and  sometimes  published
separately  like  the  speech  against  the  evidence  of
Vatinius.1  The  whole  subject,  therefore,  demands  a  7
thorough  investigation,  as  the  task  which  we  have
in  hand  is  the  complete  education  of  an  orator.
Otherwise  the  two  books  written  on  this  subject  by
Domitius  Afer  would  suffice.  I  attended  his  lectures
when  he  was  old  and  I  was  young,  and  consequently
have  the  advantage  not  merely  of  having  read  his
book,  but  of  having  heard  most  of  his  views  from
his  own  lips.  He  very  justly  lays  down  the  rule  that
in  this  connexion  it  is  the  first  duty  of  an  orator  to
make  himself  thoroughly  acquainted  with  the  case,
a  remark  which  of  course  applies  to  all  portions  of
a  speech.  How  such  knowledge  may  be  acquired  I  8
shall  explain  when  I  come  to  the  appropriate  portion
of  this  work.2  This  knowledge  will  suggest  material
for  the  examination  and  will  supply  weapons  ready
to  the  speaker's  hand:  it  will  also  indicate  to  him
the  points  for  which  the  judge's  mind  must  be
prepared  in  the  set  speech.  For  it  is  by  the  set  speech
that  the  credit  of  witnesses  should  be  established
or  demolished,  since  the  effect  of  evidence  on  the
individual  judge  depends  on  the  extent  to  which  he
has  been  previously  influenced  in  the  direction  of
believing  the  witness  or  the  reverse.

And  since  there  are  two  classes  of  witnesses,3  9
those  who  testify  of  their  own  free  will  and  those
who  are  summoned  to  attend  in  the  public  courts  of
whom  the  former  are  available  to  either  party,  the
latter  solely  to  the  accusers,  we  must  distinguish
between  the  duties  of  the  advocate  who  produces
witnesses  and  the  advocate  who  refutes  them.

He who produces  a voluntary  witness is in a  10

173


QUINTILIAN
sit  potest;  ideoque  faeiliorem  videtur  in  rogando
habere  rationem.  Sed  haec  quoque  pars  acumen  ac
vigilantiam  poscit,  providendumque,  ne  timidus,  ne
i  I  inconstans,  ne  imprudens  testis  sit ;  turbantur  enim
et  a  patronis  diversae  partis  inducuntur  in  laqueos  et
plus  deprehensi  nocent  quam  firmi  et  interriti  pro-
fuissent.  Multum  igitur  domi  ante  versandi,  variis
percontationibus,  quales  haberi  ab  adversario  possint,
explorandi  sunt.  Sic  fit,  ut  aut  constent  sibi  aut,  si
quid  titubaverint,  opportuna  rursus  eius  a  quo  pro-
ducti  sunt  interrogatione  velut  in  gradum  reponantur.

12  In  iis  quoque  adhuc,  qui  constiterint  sibi,  vitandae
insidiae  ;  nam  frequenter  subiici  ab  adversario  so-
lent  et  omnia  profutura  polliciti  diversa  respondent
et  auctoritatem  habent  non  arguentium  ilia,  sed  con

13  fitentium.  Explorandum  igitur,  quas  causas  laedend
adversarium  adferant ;  nee  id  sat  est  inimicos  fuisse
sed  an  desierint,  an  per  hoc  ipsum  reconciliari  velint
ne  corrupti  sint,  ne  poenitentia  propositum  muta
174


BOOK V.  vir.  10-13

position  to  know  what  he  is  likely  to  say  :  con-
sequently the  task  of  examining  him  would  seem  to
be  rendered  easier.  But  even  here  such  cases  make
a  great  demand  on  the  acumen  and  watchfulness  of
the  advocate,  who  must  see  that  his  witness  is  neither
timid,  inconsistent  nor  imprudent.  For  the  opposing  11
counsel  have  a  way  of  making  a  witness  lose  his  head
or  of  leading  him  into  some  trap;  and  once  a  witness
trips,  he  does  more  harm  to  his  own  side  than  he
would  have  done  good,  had  he  retained  his  composure
and  presence  of  mind.  The  advocate  must  therefore
put  his  witnesses  through  their  paces  thoroughly
in  private  before  they  appear  in  court  and  must
test  them  by  a  variety  of  questions  such  as  may
well  be  put  to  them  by  his  opponent.  The  result
will  be  that  they  will  not  contradict  themselves
or,  if  they  do  make  some  slip,  can  be  set  upon
their  feet  again  by  a  timely  question  from  the  advo-
cate who  produces  them.  Still,  even  in  the  case  12
of  witnesses  whose  evidence  is  consistent,  we  must
be  on  our  guard  against  treachery.  For  such
witnesses  are  often  put  up  by  one's  opponent  and,
after  promising  to  say  everything  that  will  help  our
case,  give  answers  of  exactly  the  opposite  character
and  carry  more  weight  by  the  admission  of  facts
which  tell  against  us  than  they  would  have  done  had
they  disproved  them.  We  must  therefore  discover  13
what  motives  they  have  for  doing  our  opponent  a  hurt,
and  the  fact  that  they  were  once  his  enemies  will
not  suffice  our  purpose :  we  must  find  out  whether
they  have  ceased  to  be  ill-disposed  to  him  or  whether
they  desire  by  means  of  their  evidence  to  effect  a
reconciliation  with  him,  in  order  to  assure  our-
selves that  they  have  not  been  bribed  or  repented  of

175


QUINTILIAN

verint.  Quod  cum  in  iis  quoque,  qui  ea,  quae  dicturi
videntur,  re  vera  sciunt,  necessarium  est  praecavere ;
multo  magis  in  iis,  qui  se  dicturos,  quae falsa  sunt,

14  pollicentur.  Nam  et  frequentior  eorum  poenitentia
est  et  promissum  suspectius  et,  si  perseverarint,  re-
prehensio  facilior.

15  Eorum  vero,  quibus  denuntiatur,  pars  testium  est
quae  reum  laedere  velit,  pars  quae  nolit,  idque  in-
terim scit  accusator  interim  nescit.  Fingamus  in
praesentia scire  ;  in  utroque  tamen  genere  summis

16  artibus  interrogantis  opus  est.  Nam  si  habet  testem
cupidum  laedendi,  cavere  debet  hoc  ipsum,  ne  cupi-
ditas  eius  appareat,  nee  statim  de  eo,  quod  in  iudi-
cium  venit,  rogare,  sed  aliquo  circuitu  ad  id  pervenire,
ut  illi,  quod  maxime  dicere  voluit,  videatur  expressum ;
nee  nimium  instare  interrogation^  ne  ad  omnia  respon-
dendo  testis  fidem  suam  minuat,  sed  in  tantum  evo-

17  care  eum,  quantum  sumere  ex  uno  satis  sit.  At  in  eo,
qui  verum  invitus  dicturus  est,  prima  felicitas  interro-
gantis extorquere  quod  is  noluerit.  Hoc  non  alio
modo  fieri  potest  quam  longius  interrogatione  repetita.
Respondebit  enim,  quae  nocere  causae  non  arbitra-

176


BOOK V.  vii.  13-17

their  previous  attitude  and  changed  their  purpose.
Such  precautions  are  necessary  even  with  witnesses
who  know  that  what  they  propose  to  say  is  true ;
but  it  is  still  more  necessary  with  those  who  promise
to  give  false  evidence.  For  experience  shows  that  14
they  are  more  likely  to  repent  of  their  purpose,  their
promises  are  less  to  be  relied  on,  and,  if  they  do  keep
their  promise,  their  evidence  is  easier  to  refute.

Witnesses  appearing  in  answer  to  a  subpoena  may  15
be  divided  into  two  classes  :  those  who  desire  to
harm  the  accused,  and  those  who  do  not.  The
accuser  sometimes  is  aware  of  their  disposition,
sometimes  unaware.  For  the  moment  let  us  assume
that  he  is  aware  of  their  disposition,  although  I  must
point  out  that  in  either  case  the  utmost  skill  is  re-
quired in  their  examination.  For  if  an  advocate  is  16
producing  a  witness  who  is  desirous  of  harming  the
accused,  he  must  avoid  letting  this  desire  become
apparent,  and  must  not  at  once  proceed  to  question
him  on  the  point  at  issue.  On  the  contrary  this
point  must  be  approached  by  a  circuitous  route  in
such  a  manner  as  to  make  it  seem  that  the  state-
ment which  the  witness  is  really  desirous  of  making
has  been  forced  from  him.  Again  he  should  not
press  the  witness  too  much,  for  fear  he  should  impair
his  credit  by  the  glibness  with  which  he  answers
every  question,  but  should  draw  from  him  just  so
much  as  may  seem  reasonable  to  elicit  from  a  single
witness  On  the  other  hand  in  the  case  of  a  witness  17
who  is  reluctant  to  tell  the  truth,  the  essential  for
successful  examination  is  to  extort  the  truth  against
his  will  This  can  only  be  done  by  putting  questions
which  have  all  the  appearance  of  irrelevance.
If  this be done, he will give replies which he

177


QUINTILIAN

bituri  ex  pluribus  deinde,  quae  confessus  erit,  eo
perducetur  ut  quod  dicere  non  vult  negare  non  possit.

18  Nam,  ut  in  oratione  sparsa  plerumque  colligimus  ar-
gumenta,  quae  per  se  nihil  reum  aggravare  videantur,
congregatione  deinde  eorum  factum  convincimus,  ita
huiusmodi  testis  multa  de  anteactis,  multa  de  inse-
cutis,  loco,  tempore,  persona,  ceteris  est  interro-
gandus,  ut  in  aliquod  responsum  incidat,  post  quod
illi  vel  fateri  quae  volumus  necesse  sit  vel  iis  quae

19  iam  dixerit  repugnare.  Id  si  non  contingit,  reliquum
erit,  ut  eum  nolle  dicere  manifestum  sit,  protrahen-
dusque,  ut  in  aliquo,  quod  vel  extra  causam  sit,  de-
prehendatur;  teneudus  etiam  diutius,  ut  omnia  ac
plura  quam  res  desiderat  pro  reo  dicendo  suspectus
iudici  fiat ;  quo  non  minus  nocebit,  quam  si  vera  in

20  reum  dixisset.  At  si  (quod  secundo  loco  diximus)
nesciet  actor,  quid  propositi  testis  attulerit,  paulatim
et,  ut  dicitur,  pedetentim  interrogando  experietur
animum  eius  et  ad  id  responsum quod eliciendum

21  erit  per  gradus  ducet.  Sed,  quia  nonnunquam  sunt
hae  quoque  testium  artes,  ut  primo  ad  voluntatem
respondeant,  quo  maiore  fide  diversa  postea  dicant-»

i78


BOOK V.  vii.  17-21

thinks  can  do  no  harm  to  the  party  which  he
favours,  and  subsequently  will  be  led  on  from  the
admissions  which  he  has  made  to  a  position  which
renders  it  impossible  for  him  to  deny  the  truth  of
the  facts  which  he  is  reluctant  to  state.  For  just  as  18
in  a  set  speech  we  usually  collect  detached  argu-
ments which  in  themselves  seem  innocuous  to  the
accused,  but  taken  together  prove  the  case  against
him,  so  we  must  ask  the  reluctant  witness  a  number
of  questions  relative  to  acts  antecedent  or  subsequent
to  the  case,  places,  dates,  persons,  etcetera,  with  a
view  to  luring  him  into  some  reply  which  will  force
him  to  make  the  admissions  which  we  desire  or  to
contradict  his  previous  evidence.  If  this  fails,  we  19
must  content  ourselves  with  making  it  clear  that  he
is  reluctant  to  tell  what  he  knows,  and  lead  him
with  a  view  to  tripping  him  up  on  some  point  or
other,  even  though  it  be  irrelevant  to  the  case  ;  we
must  also  keep  him  in  the  witness-box  for  an  unusual
length  of  time,  so  that  by  saying  everything  that  can
be  said  and  more  than  is  necessary  on  behalf  of  the
accused,  he  may  be  rendered  suspect  to  the  judge.
Thus  he  will  do  the  accused  no  less  harm  than  if  he
had  told  the  truth  against  him.  But  if  (to  proceed  to  20
our  second  supposition)  the  advocate  does  not  know
what  the  intentions  of  the  witness  may  be,  he  must
advance  gradually  inch  by  inch  and  sound  him  by
examination  and  lead  him  step  by  step  to  the  par-
ticular reply  which  it  is  desired  to  elicit.  But  since  21
these  witnesses  are  sometimes  so  artful  that  their
first  replies  are  designed  to  meet  the  wishes  of  the
questioner,  in  order  to  win  all  the  greater  credit
when  subsequently  they  answer  in  a  very  different
way,  it  will  be  the  duty  of  the  advocate  to  dismiss

179


QUINTILIAN

est actoris  * suspectum testem, dum prodest,
dimittere.

22  Patronorum  in  parte  expeditior,  in  parte  difficilior
interrogatio  est.  Difficilior  hoc,  quod  raro  unquam
possunt  ante  iudicium  scire,  quid  testis  dicturus  sit ;
expedition  quod,  cum  interrogandus  est,  sciunt  quid

23  dixerit.  Itaque,  quod  in  eo  incertum  est,  cura  et
inquisitione  opus  est,  quis  reum  premat,  quas  et
quibus  ex  causis  inimicitias  habeat :  eaque  in  oratione
praedicenda  atque  amolienda  sunt,  sive  odio  con-
fiatos  testes  sive  invidia  sive  gratia  sive  pecunia
videri  volumus.  Et  si  deficietur  numero  pars  di versa,
paucitatem  ;  si  abundabit,  conspiration  em ;  si  humiles
producet,  vilitatem ; si  potentes,  gratiam  oportebit

24  incessere.  Plus  tamen  proderit  causas,  propter  quas
reum  laedant,  exponere ;  quae  sunt  variae  et  pro
condicione  cuiusque  litis  aut  litigatoris.  Nam  contra
ilia,  quae  supra  diximus,  simili  ratione  respond eri
locis  communibus  solet,  quia  ut  in  paucis  atque
humilibus  accusator  simplicitate  gloriari  potest,  quod
neminem  praeter  eos,  qui possint  scire,  quaesierit

1  actoris,  Regius;  oratoris,  MSS.
180


BOOK V.  vii.  21-24

a suspect witness while he can still do  so  with
advantage.

In  the  case  of  advocates  for  the  defence  exam-  22
i  nation  is  in  some  respects  easier,  in  some  more
difficult.  It  is  more  difficult  because  it  is  rarely
possible  for  them  to  have  any  previous  knowledge  of
what  the  witness  is  likely  to  say,  and  easier  because,
when  they  come  to  cross-examine,  they  know  what
he  has  already  said.  Consequently  in  view  of  the  23
uncertainty  involved,  there  is  need  for  careful  in-
quiry with  a  view  to  discovering  the  character  of  the
witness  against  the  accused  and  what  are  his  motives
for  hostility  and  what  its  extent :  and  all  such  points
about  the  witness  should  be  set  forth  in  advance
and  disposed  of,  whether  we  desire  to  represent  the
evidence  against  the  accused  as  instigated  by  hatred,
envy,  bribery  or  influence.  Further,  if  our  opponents
bring  forward  only  a  small  number  of  witnesses,  we
must  attack  them  on  that  head  ;  if  on  the  other
hand  they  produce  an  excessive  number,  we  must
accuse  them  of  conspiracy  :  if  the  witnesses  are
persons  of  inconspicuous  rank,  we  must  minimise
their  importance,  while  if  they  are  powerful,  we  shall
accuse  our  adversaries  of  bringing  undue  influence  to
bear.  It  will,  however,  be  still  more  helpful  if  wre  24
expose  the  motives  which  they  have  for  desiring  to
injure  the  accused,  and  these  will  vary  according  to
the  nature  of  the  case  and  the  parties  concerned.
For  the  other  lines  of  argument  mentioned  above
are  often  answered  by  the  employment  of  common-
places on  similar  lines,  since  the  prosecutor,  if  he
produce  but  few  witnesses  of  inconspicuous  rank,  can
parade  the  simple  honesty  of  his  methods  on  the
ground  that  he  has  produced  none  save  those  who

181


QUINTILIAN

et  multos  atque  honestos  commendare  aliquanto  est

25  facilius.  Verum  interim  et  singulos  ut  exornare,  ita
destruere  contingit,  aut  recitatis  in  actione  testi-
moniis1  aut  testibus  nominatis.  Quod  iis  tempori-
bus,  quibus  testis  non  post  finitas  actiones  rogabatur,
et  facilius  et  frequentius  fuit.  Quid  autem  in  quem-
que  testium  dicendum  sit,  sumi  nisi  ex  ipsorum
personis  non  potest.

26  Reliquae  interrogandi  sunt  partes.  Qua  in  re
priraum  est  nosse  testem.  Nam  timidus  terreri,
stultus  decipi,  iracundus  concitari,  ambitiosus  inflari
potest ;  prudens  vero  et  constans  vel  tanquam  inimi-
cus  et  pervicax  dimittendus  statim  vel  non  interna
gatione,  sed  brevi  interlocutione  patroni  refutandus
est  aut  aliquo,  si  continget,  urbane  dicto  refrigerandus
aut,  si  quid  in  eius  vitam  dici  poterit,  infamia  crimi-

27  num  destruendus.  Probos  quosdam  et  verecundos
non  aspere  incessere  profuit ;  nam  saepe,  qui  adver-
sus  insectantem  pugnassent,  modestia  mitigantur.
Omnis  autem  interrogatio  aut  in  eausa  est  aut  extra
causam. In causa, sicut accusatori praecepimus,

1  testimoniis  added  by  Halm,  some  such  xoord  having  been
omitted  by  the  MSS.

1  It  is  not  clear  to  what  Quintilian  refers.  There  are,  it  is
true,  passages  in  Cicero  where  the  orator  speaks  of  evidence
as  already  given,  but  the  speeches  where  these  references  are
found  are  all  second  pleadings.

182


BOOK V.  vii.  24-27

are  in  a  position  to  know  the  real  facts,  while  if  he
produce  a  number  of  distinguished  witnesses,  it  is
even  easier  to  commend  them  to  the  court.  But  at  25
times,  just  as  we  have  to  praise  individual  witnesses,
so  we  may  have  to  demolish  them,  whether  their
evidence  has  been  given  in  documentary  form  or  they
have  been  summoned  to  appear  in  person.  This  was
easier  and  of  more  frequent  occurrence  in  the  days
when  the  examination  of  the  witnesses  was  not
deferred  till  after  the  conclusion  of  the  pleading.1
With  regard  to  what  we  should  say  against  individual
witnesses,  no  general  rules  can  be  laid  down :  it  will
depend  on  the  personality  of  the  witness.

It  remains  to  consider  the  technique  to  be  followed  26
in  the  examination  of  witnesses.  The  first  essential
is  to  know  your  witness.  For  a  timid  witness  may
be  terrorised,  a  fool  outwitted,  an  irascible  man
provoked,  and  vanity  flattered.  The  shrewd  and
self-possessed  witness,  on  the  other  hand,  must  be
dismissed  at  once  as  being  malicious  and  obstinate ;
or  refuted,  not  by  cross-examination,  but  by  a  brief
speech  from  the  counsel  for  the  defence ;  or  may  be
put  out  of  countenance  by  some  jest,  if  a  favourable
opportunity  presents  itself;  or,  if  his  past  life  admits
of  criticism,  his  credit  may  be  overthrown  by  the
scandalous  charges  which  can  be  brought  against  him.
It  has  been  found  advantageous  at  times  when  con-  27
fronted  with  an  honest  and  respectable  witness  to
refrain  from  pressing  him  hard,  since  it  is  often  the
case  that  those  who  would  have  defended  themselves
manfully  against  attack  are  mollified  by  courtesy.
But  every  question  is  either  concerned  with  the
case  itself  or  with  something  outside  the  case.  As
regards  the first  type  of  question  counsel for  the

183


QUINTILIAN

patronus  quoque  altius  et  unde  nihil  suspecti  sit
repetita  percontatione,  priora  sequentibus  applicando
saepe  eo  perducit  homines,  ut  invitis  quod prosit

28  extorqueat.  Eius  rei  sine  dubio  neque  disciplina
ulla  in  scholis  neque  exercitatio  traditur,  et  naturali
magis  acumine  aut  usu  contingit  haec  virtus.  Si
quod  tamen  exemplum  ad  imitationem  demonstran-
dum sit,  solum  est,  quod  ex  dialogis  Socraticorum
maximeque  Platonis  duci  potest;  in  quibus  adeo
scitae  sunt  interrogation es,  ut,  cum  plerisque  bene
respondeatur,  res  tamen  ad  id  quod  volunt  efficere

29  perveniat.  Illud  fortuna  interim  praestat,  ut  aliquid,
quod  inter  se  parum  consentiat,  a  teste  dicatur ;
interim,  quod  saepius  evenit,  ut  testis  testi  diversa
dicat. Acuta  autem  interrogatio  ad  hoc,  quod  casu

30  fieri  solet,  etiam  ratione  perducet.  Extra  causam
quoque  multa,  quae  prosint,  rogari  solent,  de  vita
testium  aliorum,  de  sua  quisque,  si  turpitudo,  si
humilitas,  si  amicitia  accusatoris,  si  inimicitiae  cum
reo,  in  quibus  aut  dicant  aliquid  quod  prosit,  aut  in


1  Above,  §  17,  18.
184


BOOK V.  vii.  27-30

defence  may,  by  adopting  a  method  which  I  have
already  recommended  for  the  prosecutor,1  namely  by
commencing  his  examination  with  questions  of  an
apparently  irrelevant  and  innocent  character  and
then  by  comparing  previous  with  subsequent  replies,
frequently  lead  witnesses  into  such  a  position  that
it  becomes  possible  to  extort  useful  admissions  from
them  against  their  will.  The  schools,  it  is  true,  give  28
no  instruction  either  as  to  theory  or  practice  in  this
subject,  and  skill  in  examination  comes  rather
from  natural  talent  or  practice.  If,  however,  I  am
asked  to  point  out  a  model  for  imitation,  I  can
recommend  but  one,  namely  that  which  may  be
found  in  the  dialogues  of  the  Socratics  and  more
especially  of  Plato,  in  which  the  questions  put  are
so  shrewd  that  although  individually  as  a  rule  the
answers  are  perfectly  satisfactory  to  the  other  side,
yet  the  questioner  reaches  the  conclusion  at  which
he  is  aiming.  Fortune  sometimes  is  so  kind  that  a  29
witness  gives  an  answer  involving  some  inconsistency,
while  at  times  (and  this  is  a  more  frequent  occurrence)
one  witness  contradicts  another.  But  acute  exam-
ination methodically  conducted  will  generally  reach
the  same  result  which  is  so  often  reached  by  chance.
There  are  also  a  number  of  points  strictly  irrelevant  30
to  the  case  on  which  questions  may  be  put  with
advantage.  We  may  for  example  ask  questions  about
the  past  life  of  other  witnesses  or  about  the  witness*
own  character,  with  a  view  to  discovering  whether
they  can  be  charged  with  some  disgraceful  conduct,
or  degrading  occupation,  with  friendship  with  the
prosecutor  or  hostility  toward  the  accused,  since
in  replying  to  such  questions  they  may  say  some-
thing which  will  help  our  cause  or  may  be  convicted

185


QUINTILIAN

mendacio  vel cupiditatc laedendi deprehendantur.

31  Sed  in  primis  interrogatio  cum  debet  esse  circum-
specta,  quia  multa  contra  patronos  venuste  testis  saepe
responded  eique  praecipue  vulgo  favetur ;  turn  verbis
quam  maxime  ex  medio  sumptis,  ut  qui  rogatur  (is
autem  est  saepius  imperitus)  intelligat  aut  ne  hi-
telligere  se  neget,  quod  interrogantis  non  leve  frigus

32  est.  Illae  vero  pessimae  artes,  testem  subornatum
in  subsellia  adversarii  mittere^  ut  inde  excitatus  plus
noceat  vel  dicendo  contra  reum  cum  quo  sederit,
vel,  cum  adiuvisse  testimonio  videbitur,  faciendo  ex
industria  multa  immodeste  atque  intemperanter,  per
quae  non  a  se  tantum  dictis  detrahat  fidem,  sed
ceteris  quoque,  qui  profuerant,  auferat  auctoritatem  ;
quorum  mentionem  habui,  non  ut  fierent,  sed  ut
vitarentur.

Saepe  inter se collidi solent  inde testatio  hinc
testes ; locus  utrinque ; haec  enim  se  pars  iureiu-

33  rando,  ilia  consensu  signantium  tuetur.  Saepe  inter
testes  et  argumenta  quaesitum  est. Inde  scientiam


1  An  over -statement,  since  in  many  cases  the  signatories
could  only  testify  that  the  statement  was  that  actually
made  by  the  deponent ;  with  its  truth  they  were  not
necessarily  concerned.

1 86


BOOK V.  vii.  30-33

of  falsehood  or  of  a  desire  to  injure  the  accused.
But  above  all  our  examination  must  be  circumspect,  31
since  a  witness  will  often  launch  some  smart  repartee
in  answering  counsel  for  the  defence  and  thereby
win  marked  favour  from  the  audience  in  general.
Secondly,  we  must  put  our  questions  as  far  as  possible
in  the  language  of  everyday  speech  that  the  witness,
who  is  often  an  uneducated  man,  may  understand  our
meaning,  or  at  any  rate  may  have  no  opportunity  of
saying  that  he  does  not  know  what  we  mean,  a
statement  which  is  apt  to  prove  highly  disconcerting
to  the  examiner.  I  must  however  express  the  32
strongest  disapproval  of  the  practice  of  sending  a
suborned  witness  to  sit  on  the  benches  of  the  oppo-
sing party,  in  order  that  on  being  called  into  the
witness-box  from  that  quarter  he  may  thereby  do  all
the  more  damage  to  the  case  for  the  accused  by
speaking  against  the  party  with  whose  adherents  he
was  sitting  or,  while  appearing  to  help  him  by  his
testimony,  deliberately  giving  his  evidence  in  such
an  extravagant  and  exaggerated  manner,  as  not  only
to  detract  from  the  credibility  of  his  own  state-
ments, but  to  annul  the  advantage  derived  from
the  evidence  of  those  who  were  really  helpful.  I
mention  this  practice  not  with  a  view  to  encourage
it,  but  to  secure  its  avoidance.

Documentary  evidence  is  not  frequently  in  conflict
with  oral.  Such  a  circumstance  may  be  turned  to
advantage  by  either  side.  For  one  party  will  rest
its  case  on  the  fact  that  the  witness  is  speaking  on
oath,  the  other  on  the  unanimity  of  the  signatories.1
Again  there  is  often  a  conflict  between  the  evidence  33
and  the  arguments.  One  party  will  argue  that  the
witnesses know the facts  and are bound by  the

187


QUINTILIAN

in  testibus  et  religionem,  ingenia  esse  in  argumentis
dicitur;  hinc  testem  gratia,  nietu,  pecunia,  ira,  odio,
amicitia,  ambitu  fieri ;  argumenta  ex  natura  duci,  in

34  his  iudicem  sibi,  in  illis  alii  credere.  Communia
haec  pluribus  causis,  multurnque  iactata  sunt  et
semper  tamen  iactabuntur.  Aliquando  utrinque  sunt
testes,  et  quaestio  sequitur  ex  ipsis,  utri  meliores
viri ; ex causis,  utri magis  credibilia dixerint ; ex

35  litigatoribus,  utri  gratia  magis  valuerint.  His  adii-
cere  si  qui  volet  ea,  quae  divina  testimonia  vocant,
ex  responsis,  oraculis,  ominibus,  duplicem  sciat  esse
eorum  tractatum ;  generalem  alterum,  in  quo  inter
Stoicos  et  Epicuri  sectam  secutos  pugna  perpetua  est,
regaturne  providentia  mundus ;  specialem  alterum
circa  partes  divinationis,  ut  quaeque  in  quaestionem

36  cadit.  Aliter  enim  oraculorum  aliter  aruspicum,
augurum,  coniectorum,  mathematicorum  fides  con-
firmari  aut  refelli  potest,  cum  sit  rerum  ipsarum
ratio  diversa.  Circa  eiusmodi  quoque  instrumenta
firmanda  vel  destruenda  multum  habet  operis  oratio,
si  quae  sint  voces  per  vinum,  somnum,  dementiam

1 88


BOOK V.  vii.  33-36

sanctity  of  their  oath,  while  the  arguments  are
nought  but  ingenious  juggling  with  the  facts.  The
other  party  will  argue  that  witnesses  are  procured  by
influence,  fear,  money,  anger,  hatred,  friendship,  or
bribery,  whereas  arguments  are  drawn  from  nature ;
in  giving  his  assent  to  the  latter  the  judge  is  believ-
ing the  voice  of  his  own  reason,  in  accepting  the
former  he  is  giving  credence  to  another.  Such  34
problems  are  common  to  a  number  of  cases,  and  are
and  will  always  be  the  subject  of  vehement  debate.
Sometimes  there  are  witnesses  on  both  sides  and  the
question  arises  with  regard  to  themselves  as  to  which
are  the  more  respectable  in  character,  or  with  regard
to  the  case,  which  have  given  the  more  credible  evi-
dence, with  regard  to  the  parties  to  the  case,  which
has  brought  the  greater  influence  to  bear  on  the
witnesses.  If  to  this  kind  of  evidence  anyone  should  35
wish  to  add  evidence  of  the  sort  known  as  super-
natural, based  on  oracles,  prophecies  and  omens,  I
would  remind  him  that  there  are  two  ways  in  which
these  may  be  treated.  There  is  the  general  method,
with  regard  to  which  there  is  an  endless  dispute
between  the  adherents  of  the  Stoics  and  the  Epicu-
reans, as  to  whether  the  world  is  governed  by  provi-
dence. The  other  is  special  and  is  concerned  with
particular  departments  of  the  art  of  divination,  accord-
ing as  they  may  happen  to  affect  the  question  at  issue.
For  the  credibility  of  oracles  may  be  established  36
or  destroyed  in  one  way,  and  that  of  soothsayers,
augurs,  diviners  and  astrologers  in  another,  since
the  two  classes  differ  entirely  in  nature.  Again  the
task  of  establishing  or  demolishing  such  evidence  as
the  following  will  give  the  orator  plenty  to  do ;  as
for  example  if  certain  words  have  been  uttered  under

189


QUINTILIAN

emissae,  vel  excepta  parvulorum  indicia,  quos  pars
altera  nihil  fingere,  altera  nihil  iudicare  dictura  est.
37  Nee  tantum  praestari  hoc  genus  potenter,  sed  etiam,
ubi  non  est,  desiderari  solet :  Pecuniam  dedisti ;  quis
numeravit?  ubi?  unde?  Venerium  arguis ;  ubi  emi?
a  quo  ?  quanti  ?  per  quern  dedi  ?  quo  conscio  ?  Quae
fere  omnia  pro  Cluentio  Cicero  in  crimine  veneficii
excutit.  Haec  de  inartificialibus  quam  brevissime
potui.

VIII.  Pars  altera  probationum,  quae  est  tota  in
arte  constatque  rebus  ad  faciendam  fidem  appositis,
plerumque  aut  omnino  negligitur  aut  levissime  attin-
gitur  ab  iis,  qui  argumenta  velut  horrida  et  confra-
gosa  vitantes  amoenioribus  locis  desident,  neque
aliter  quam  ii,  qui  traduntur  a  poetis  gustu  cuiusdam
apud  Lotophagos  graminis  et  Sirenum  cantu  deleniti
voluptatem  saluti  praetulisse,  dum  laudis  falsam
imaginem  persequuntur,  ipsa,  propter  quam  dicitur,
2  victoria  cedunt.  Atqui  cetera,  quae  continuo  magis
orationis  tractu  decurrunt,  in  auxilium  atque  orna-
mentum  argumentorum  comparantur,  nervisque  illis,
quibus  causa  continetur,  adiiciunt  inducti  super  cor-

1  cp.  lx.  167.
190


BOOK V.  vii.  36-vm.  2

the  influence  of  wine,  in  sleep  or  in  a  fit  of  madness,
or  if  information  has  been  picked  up  from  the  mouths
of  children,  whom  the  one  party  will  assert  to  be  in-
capable of  invention,  while  the  other  will  assert  that
they  do  not  know  what  they  are  saying.  The  follow-  37
ing  method  may  not  merely  be  used  with  great  effect,
but  may  even  be  badly  missed  when  it  is  not  em-
ployed. You  gave  me  the  money.  Who  counted  it  out  ?
Where  did  this  occur  and  from  what  source  did  the  money
come  ?  You  accuse  me  of  poisoning.  Where  did  I  buy
the  poison  and  from  whom  ?  What  did  I  pay  for  it  and
whom  did  I  employ  to  administer  it  ?  Who  was  my
accomplice  f  Practically  all  these  points  are  discussed
by  Cicero  in  dealing  with  the  charge  of  poisoning  in
the  pro  Cluentio.1  This  concludes  my  observations
upon  inartificial  proofs.  I  have  stated  them  as  briefly
as  I  could.

VIII.  The  second  class  of  proofs  are  wholly  the
work  of  art  and  consist  of  matters  specially  adapted
to  produce  belief.  They  are,  however,  as  a  rule  almost
entirely  neglected  or  only  very  lightly  touched  on
by  those  who,  avoiding  arguments  as  rugged  and
repulsive  things,  confine  themselves  to  pleasanter
regions  and,  like  those  who,  as  poets  tell,  were  be-
witched by  tasting  a  magic  herb  in  the  land  of  the
Lotus-eaters  or  by  the  song  of  the  Sirens  into  pre-
ferring pleasure  to  safety,  follow  the  empty  semblance
of  renown  and  are  robbed  of  that  victory  which  is  the
aim  of  eloquence.  And  yet  those  other  forms  of  2
eloquence,  which  have  a  more  continuous  sweep  and
flow,  are  employed  with  a  view  to  assisting  and
embellishing  the  arguments  and  produce  the  appear-
ance of  superinducing  a  body  upon  the  sinews,  on
which  the  whole  case rests  ;  thus  if  it  is  asserted

i9t


QUINTILIAN

poris  speciem  :  ut,  si  forte  quid  factum  ira  vel  metu
vel  cupiditate  dicatur,  latius,  quae  cuiusque  adfectus
natura  sit,  prosequamur.  Iisdem  laudamus,  incusa-
mus,  augemus,  minuimus,  describimus,  deterremus,

3  querimur,  consolamur,  hortamur.  Sed  horum  esse
opera  in  rebus  aut  certis  aut  de  quibus  tanquam
certis  loquimur  potest.  Nee  abnuerim  esse  aliquid
in  delectatione,  multum  vero  in  commovendis  adfecti-
bus;  sed  haec  ipsa  plus  valent,  cum  se  didicisse
iudex  putat,  quod  consequi  nisi  argumentatione  alia-
que  omni  fide  rerum  non  possumus.

4  Quorum  priusquam  partiamur  species,  indicandum
est  esse  quaedam  in  omni  probationum  genere  com-
munia.  Nam  neque  ulla  quaestio  est,  quae  non  sit
aut  in  re  aut  in  persona  ;  neque  esse  argumentorum
loci possunt nisi in iis, quae  rebus  aut personis

6  accidunt,  eaque  aut  per  se  inspici  solent  aut  ad
aliud  referri ;  nee  ulla  confirmatio  nisi  aut  ex  con-
sequentibus  aut  ex  repugnantibus,  et  haec  necesse
est  aut  ex  praeterito  tempore  aut  ex  coniuncto  aut
ex  insequenti  petere ;  nee  ulla  res  probari  nisi  ex  alia
potest,  eaque  sit  oportet  aut  maior  aut  par  aut  minor.

6  Argumenta  vero  reperiuntur  aut  in  quaestionibus,
quae  etiam  separatae  a  complexu  rerum  persona-
rumque  spectari  per  se possint,  aut  in  ipsa  causa,

192


BOOK V.  viii.  2-6

that  some  act  has  been  committed  under  the  in-
fluence of  anger,  fear  or  desire,  we  may  expatiate
at  some  length  on  the  nature  of  each  of  these
passions.  It  is  by  these  same  methods  that  we
praise,  accuse,  exaggerate,  attenuate,  describe,  deter,
complain,  console  or  exhort.  But  such  rhetorical  3
devices  may  be  employed  in  connexion  with  matters
about  which  there  is  no  doubt  or  at  least  which  we
speak  of  as  admitted  facts.  Nor  would  I  deny  that
there  is  some  advantage  to  be  gained  by  pleasing
our  audience  and  a  great  deal  by  stirring  their
emotions.  Still,  all  these  devices  are  more  effective,
when  the  judge  thinks  he  has  gained  a  full  knowledge
of  the  facts  of  the  case,  which  we  can  only  give  him
by  argument  and  by  the  employment  of  every  other
known  means  of  proof.

Before,  however,  I  proceed  to  classify  the  various  4
species  of  artificial  proof,  I  must  point  out  that  there
are  certain  features  common  to  all  kinds  of  proof.
For  there  is  no  question  which  is  not  concerned
either  with  things  or  persons,  nor  can  there  be  any
ground  for  argument  save  in  connexion  with  matters
concerning  things  or  persons,  which  may  be  considered
either  by  themselves  or  with  reference  to  something
else  ;  while  there  can  be  no  proof  except  such  as  is  5
derived  from  things  consequent  or  things  opposite,
which  must  be  sought  for  either  in  the  time  preced-
ing, contemporaneous  with  or  subsequent  to  the
alleged  fact,  nor  can  any  single  thing  be  proved  save
by  reference  to  something  else  which  must  be
greater,  less  than  or  equal  to  it.  As  regards  argu-  6
ments,  they  may  be  found  either  in  the  questions
raised  by  the  case,  which  may  be  considered  by  them-
selves quite  apart  from  any  connexion  with  individual

193


QUINTILIAN

cum  invenitur  aliquid  in  ea  non  ex  communi  ratione
ductum,  sed  eius  iudicii,  de  quo  cognoscitur,  pro-
prium.  Probationum  praeterea  omnium  aliae  sunt
necessariae,  aliae  credibiles,  aliae  non  repugnantes.
7  Et  adhuc  omnium  probationum  quadruplex  ratio  est,
ut  vel  quia  est  aliquid,  aliud  non  sit ;  ut  Dies  est,  nox
non  est ;  vel  quia  est  aliquid,  et  aliud  sit :  Sol  est
supra  terrain,  dies  est ;  vel  quia  aliquid  non  est,  aliud
sit :  Nox  non  est,  dies  est ;  vel  quia  aliquid  non  est,
nee  aliud  sit :  Non  est  rationalis,  nee  homo  est.  His  in
universum  praedictis  partes  subiiciam.

IX.  Omnis  igitur  probatio  artificialis  constat  aut
signis  aut  argumentis  aut  exempli s.  Nee  ignoro
plerisque  videri  signa  partem  argumentorum.  Quae
mihi  separandi  ratio  haec  fuit  prima,  quod  sunt
paene  ex  illis  inartificialibus  ;  cruenta  enim  vestis
et  clamor  et  livor  et  talia  sunt  instrumenta,  qualia
tabulae,  rumores,  testes ;  nee  inveniuntur  ab  oratore,

2  sed  ad  eum  cum  ipsa  causa  deferuntur  ;  altera,  quod
signa,  sive  indubitata  sunt,  non  sunt  argumenta,  quia,
ubi  ilia  sunt,  quaestio  non  est,  argumento  autem  nisi
in  re  controversa  locus  esse  non  potest ;  sive  dubia,
non  sunt  argumenta  sed  ipsa  argumentis  egent.

3  Dividuntur autem in has duas primas species,

194


BOOK V.  vin.  6-ix.  3

things  or  persons,  or  in  the  case  itself,  when  any-
thing is  discovered  in  it  which  cannot  be  arrived  at
by  the  light  of  common  reason,  but  is  peculiar  to  the
subject  on  which  judgment  has  to  be  given.  Further,
all  proofs  fall  into  three  classes,  necessary,  credible,
and  not  impossible.  Again  there  are  four  forms  of  7
proof.  First,  we  may  argue  that,  because  one  thing
is,  another  thing  is  not ;  as  It  is  day  and  therefore  not
night.  Secondly,  we  may  argue  that,  because  one
thing  is,  another  thing  is  ;  as  The  sun  is  risen,  therefore
it  is  day.  Thirdly,  it  may  be  argued  that  because  one
thing  is  not,  another  thing  is  ;  as  It  is  not  night,  there-
fore it  is  day.  Finally,  it  may  be  argued  that,  because
one  thing  is  not,  another  thing  is  not ;  as  He  is  not  a
reasoning  being,  therefore  he  is  not  a  man.  These
general  remarks  will  suffice  by  way  of  introduction
and  I  will  now  proceed  to  details.

IX.  Every  artificial  proof  consists  either  of  indica-
tions, arguments  or  examples.  I  am  well  aware  that
many  consider  indications  to  form  part  of  the  argu-
ments. My  reasons  for  distinguishing  them  are  two-
fold. In  the  first  place  indications  as  a  rule  come
under  the  head  of  inartificial  proofs  :  for  a  blood-
stained garment,  a  shriek,  a  dark  blotch  and  the  like
are  all  evidence  analogous  to  documentary  or  oral
evidence  and  rumours ;  they  are  not  discovered  by
the  orator,  but  are  given  him  with  the  Case  itself.
My  second  reason  was  that  indications,  if  indubitable,  2
are  not  arguments,  since  they  leave  no  room  for
question,  while  arguments  are  only  possible  in
controversial  matters.  If  on  the  other  hand  they
are  doubtful,  they  are  not  arguments,  but  require
arguments  to  support  them.

The  two  first  species  into  which  artificial  proofs  3

J95


QUINTILIAN

quod  eorum  alia  sunt,  ut  dixi,  quae  necessaria  sunt,
alia  quae  non  necessaria.1  Priora  ilia  sunt  quae
aliter  habere  se  non  possunt,  quae  Graeci  vocant
T€Kiir)pia,  quia  sunt  akvra  a-rj/xeLa,  quae  mihi  vix
pertinere  ad  praecepta  artis  videntur;  nam  ubi  est

4  signum  insolubile,  ibi  ne  lis  quidem  est.  Id  autem
accidit,  cum  quid  aut  necesse  est  fieri  factumve  esse
aut  omnino  non  potest  fieri  vel  esse  factum  ;  quo  in
causis  posito  non  est  lis  facti. Hoc  genus  per  omnia

5  tempora  perpendi  solet.  Nam  et  coisse  earn  cum
viro,  quae  peperit,  quod  est  praeteriti,  et  fluctus
esse,  cum  magna  vis  venti  in  mare  incubuit,  quod
coniuncti,  et  eum  mori,  cuius  cor  est  vulneratum,
quod  futuri,  necesse  est.  Nee  fieri  potest,  ut  ibi
messis  sit,  ubi  satum  non  est,  ut  quis  Romae  sit,
cum  est  Athenis, ut  sit  ferro  vulneratus,  qui sine

6  cicatrice  est.  Sed  quaedam  et  retrorsum  idem  valent,
ut  vivere  hominem  qui  spirat,  et  spirare  qui  vivit.
Quaedam  in  contrarium  non  recurrent;  nee  enim,
quia  movetur  qui  ingreditur,  etiam ingreditur qui

7  movetur.  Quare  potest  et  coisse  cum  viro,  quae
non  peperit,  et  non  esse  ventus  in  mari,  cum  est
fluctus,  neque  utique  cor  eius  vulneratum  esse,  qui
perit. Ac similiter  satum fuisse potest, ubi non

1  sunt  .  .  .  non  neceaaaria  added  by  Regius.
iq6


BOOK V.  ix.  3-7

may  be  divided  are,  as  I have already  said,  those
which  involve  a  conclusion  and  those  which  do  not.
The  former  are  those  which  cannot  be  otherwise  and
are  called  rc/c/Arypta  tyy  the  Greeks,  because  they  are
indications  from  wliich  there  is  no getting away.
These  however  see|n  to  me  scarcely  to  come  under
the  rules  of  art. Fpr  where  an  indication  is  irrefut-
able, there can be no dispute as  to  facts. This  4
happens  whenever  there  can  be  no  doubt  that  some-
thing is  being  or  has  been  done,  or  when  it  is  impos-
sible for  it  to  be  or  have  been  done. In  such  cases
there  can  be  no  dispute  as  to  the  fact. This  kind  of
proof  may  be  considered  in  connexion with  past,
present  or  future  time. For  example,  a  woman  who  is  5
delivered  of  a  child  must  have  had  intercourse  with
a  man,  and  the  reference  is  to  the  past. When  there
is  a  high  wind  at  sea,  there  must  be  waves,  and  the
reference  is  to  the  present. When  a  man  has  re-
ceived a  wound  in  the  heart,  he  is  bound  to  die,  and
the  reference  is  to  the  future. Nor  again  can  there
be  a  harvest  where  no  seed  has  been  sown,  nor  can
a  man  be  at  Rome  when  he  is  at  Athens,  nor  have
been  wounded by  a  sword  when  he  has  no  scar.
Some  have  the  same  force  when  reversed :  a  man  6
who  breathes  is  alive,  and  a  man  who  is  alive  breathes.
Some  again  cannot  be  reversed : because  he  who
walks  moves  it  does  not  follow  that  he  who  moves
walks. So  too  a  woman,  who  has  not  been  delivered  7
of  a  child,  may  have  had  intercourse  with a  man,
there  may  be  waves  without  a  high  wind,  and  a  man
may  die  without  having  received  a  wound  in  the
heart. Similarly  seed  may  be  sown  without  a  harvest
resulting,  a  man,  who  was  never at Athens, may


197


QUINTILIAN

fuit  messis,  nee  fuisse Romae,  qui  non  fuit  Athenis,
nee  fuisse  ferro  vulneratus,  qui  habet  cicatricem.

8  Alia  sunt  signa  non  necessaria,  quae  cikoto.  Graeci
vocant ;  quae  etiamsi  ad  tollendam  dubitationem  sola
non  sufficiunt,tamen  adiuncta  ceteris  plurimum  valent.

9  Signum  vocatur,  ut  dixi,  <rqfi€iov,  quanquam  id  qui-
dam  indicium  quidam  vestigium  nominaverunt,  per
quod  alia  res  intclligitur,  ut  per  sanguinem  caedes.
At  sanguis  vel  ex  hostia  respersisse  vestem  potest
vel e naribus profluxisse :  non  utique, qui vestem

10  cruentam  habuerit,  homicidium  fecerit.  Sed  ut
per  se  non  sufficit,  ita  ceteris  adiunctum  testimonii
loco  ducitur,  si  inimicus,  si  minatus  ante,  si  eodem
in loco fuit ; quibus signum cum accessit, efficit

11  ut,  quae  suspecta  erant,  certa  videantur.  Alioqui
sunt  quaedam  signa  utrique  parti  communia,  ut
livores,  tumores  (nam  videri  possunt  et  veneficii  et
cruditatis)  et  vulnus  in  pectore  sua  manu  et  aliena
perisse  dicentibus,  in  quo  est.  Haec  proinde  firma
habentur  atque  extrinsecus  adiuvantur.

12  Eorum  autem,  quae  signa  sunt  quidem,  sed
non  necessaria,  genus  Hermagoras  putat,  non  esse

198


BOOK V.  ix.  7-12

never  have  been  at  Rome,  and  a  man  who  has  a  scar
may  not  have  received  a  sword-wound.

There  are  other  indications  or  eiKora,  that  is  8
probabilities,  as  the  Greeks  call  them,  which  do  not
involve  a  necessary  conclusion.  These  may  not
be  sufficient  in  themselves  to  remove  doubt,  but
may  yet  be  of  the  greatest  value  when  taken  in
conjunction  with  other  indications.  The  Latin  9
equivalent  of  the  Greek  crrjixtiov  is  signum,  a  sign,
though  some  have  called  it  indicium,  an  indication,
or  vestigium,  a  trace.  Such  signs  or  indications
enable  us  to  infer  that  something  else  has  happened  ;
blood  for  instance  may  lead  us  to  infer  that  a
murder  has  taken  place.  But  bloodstains  on  a
garment  may  be  the  result  of  the  slaying  of  a  victim
at  a  sacrifice  or  of  bleeding  at  the  nose.  Everyone
who  has  a  bloodstain  on  his  clothes  is  not  neces-
sarily a  murderer.  But  although  such  an  indication  10
may  not  amount  to  proof  in  itself,  yet  it  may  be
produced  as  evidence  in  conjunction  with  other
indications,  such  for  instance  as  the  fact  that  the
man  with  the  bloodstain  was  the  enemy  of  the
murdered  man,  had  threatened  him  previously  or
was  in  the  same  place  with  him.  Add  the  indication
in  question  to  these,  and  what  was  previously  only  a
suspicion  may  become  a  certainty.  On  the  other  11
hand  there  are  indications  which  may  be  made  to
serve  either  party,  such  as  livid  spots,  swellings
which  may  be  regarded  as  symptoms  either  of
poisoning  or  of  bad  health,  or  a  wound  in  the  breast
which  may  be  treated  as  a  proof  of  murder  or  of
suicide.  The  force  of  such  indications  depends  on  the
amount  of  extraneous  support  which  they  receive.

Hermagoras  would include among such indica-  12
tions  as  do  not  involve  a  necessary  conclusion, an

199


QUINT1L1AN

virginem  Atalantam,  quia  cum  iuvenibus  per  silvas
vagetur.  Quod  si  receperimus,  vereor,  ne  omnia
quae ex facto ducuntur signa faciamus. Eadem

13  tamen  ratione  qua  signa  tractantur.  Nee  mini  vi-
dentur  Areopagitae,  cum  damnaverint  puerum  cotur-
nicum  oculos  eruentem,  aliud  iudicasse  quam  id
signum  esse  perniciosissimae  mentis  multisque  malo
futurae,  si  adolevisset.  Unde  Spurii  Maelii  Marcique
Manlii  popularitas  signum  adfectati  regni  est  existi-

14  matum.  Sed  vereor,  ne  longe  nimium  nos  ducat
haec  via.  Nam  si  est  signum  adulterae  lavari  cum
viris,  erit  et  convivere  cum  adolescentibus,  deinde
etiam  familiariter  alicuius  amicitia  uti ;  fortasse
corpus  vulsum,  fractum  incessum,  vestem  muliebrem
dixerit  mollis  et  parum  viri  signa,  si  cui  (cum  signum
id  proprie  sit,  quod  ex  eo,  de  quo  quaeritur,  natum
sub  oculos  venit)  ut  sanguis  e  caede,  ita  ilia  ex  im-

15  pudicitia  flu  ere  videantur.  Ea  quoque  quae,  quia
plerumque  observata  sunt,  vulgo  signa  creduntur,  ut
prognostica.  Vento  rubet  aurea  Phoebe  et  Cornix
plena  pluviam  vocat  improba  voce,  si  causas  ex  qualitate

1  Verg.  O.  i.  431.  ■  ib.  i.  388.

200


BOOK V.  ix.  12-15

argument  such  as  the  following,  "  Atalanta  cannot
be  a  virgin,  as  she  has  been  roaming  the  woods  in
the  company  of  young  men."  If  we  accept  this
view,  I  fear  that  we  shall  come  to  treat  all  inferences
from  a  fact  as  indications.  None  the  less  such  argu-
ments are  in  practice  treated  exactly  as  if  they  were
indications.  Nor  do  the  Areopagites,  when  they  13
condemned  a  boy  for  plucking  out  the  eyes  of
quails,  seem  to  have  had  anything  else  in  their
mind  than  the  consideration  that  such  conduct
was  an  indication  of  a  perverted  character  which
might  prove  hurtful  to  many,  if  he  had  been
allowed  to  grow  up.  So,  too,  the  popularity  of
Spurius  Maelius  and  Marcus  Manlius  was  regarded
as  an  indication  that  they  were  aiming  at  supreme
power.  However,  I  fear  that  this  line  of  reasoning  14
will  carry  us  too  far.  For  if  it  is  an  indication
of  adultery  that  a  woman  bathes  with  men,  the
fact  that  she  revels  with  young  men  or  even  an
intimate  friendship  will  also  be  indications  of  the
same  offence.  Again  depilation,  a  voluptuous  gait,
or  womanish  attire  may  be  regarded  as  indications  of
effeminacy  and  unmanliness  by  anyone  who  thinks
that  such  symptoms  are  the  result  of  an  immoral
character,  just  as  blood  is  the  result  of  a  wound :  for
anything,  that  springs  from  the  matter  under  in-
vestigation and  comes  to  our  notice,  may  properly
be  called  an  indication.  Similarly  it  is  also  usual  15
to  give  the  names  of  signs  to  frequently  observed
phenomena,  such  as  prognostics  of  the  weather  which
we  may  illustrate  by  the  Vergilian

"  For  wind  turns  Phoebe's  face  to  ruddy  gold  "  x

and

"The  crow

With  full  voice,  good-for-naught,  invites  the  rain."2

20I


QUINTILIAN

16  caeli  trahunt,  sane  ita  appellentur.  Nam  si  vento
rubet  luna,  signum  venti  est  rubor.  Et  si,  ut  idem
poeta  colligit,  densatus  et  laxatus  aer  facit,  ut  sit
inde  ille  avium  concentus,  idem  sentiemus.  Sunt
autem  signa  etiam  parva  magnorum,  ut  vel  haec  ipsa
cornix  ;  nam  maiora  minorum  esse,  nemo  miratur.

X.  Nunc  de  argumentis.  Hoc  enim  nomine  com-
plectimur  omnia,  quae  Graeci  ivOvfxrjfiaTat  €7rt^€tpry-
paTa,  a7roS€t^€ts  vocant,  quanquam  apud  illos  est  aliqua
horum  nominum  differentia,  etiamsi  vis  eodem  fere
tendit.  Nam  enthymema  (quod  nos  commentum
sane  aut  commentationem  interpretemur,  quia  aliter
non  possumus,  Graeco  melius  usuri)  unum  intellec-
tual habet,  quo  omnia  mente  concepta  significat  (sed
nunc  non  de  eo  loquimur) ;  alterum,  quo  sententiam

2  cum  ratione;  tertium,  quo  certam  quandam  argu-
menti  conclusionem  vel  ex  consequentibus  vel  ex
repugnantibus,  quanquam  de  hoc  parum  convenit.
Sunt  enim,  qui  illud  prius  epichirema  dicant,  plu-
resque  invenias  in  ea  opinione,  ut  id  demum,  quod
pugna  constat,  enthymema  accipi  velint,  et  ideo  illud

3  Cornificius  contrarium  appellat.  Hunc  alii  rhetori-
cum  syllogismum,  alii  imperfectum  syllogismum  vo-
caverunt,  quia  nee  distinctis nee totidem partibus

1  Verg.  Q.  i.  422.  a  v.  viii.  5  ;  xiv.  2.  n.

*  See  v.  xiv.  2,  viii.  v.  9.

202


BOOK V.  ix.  15-x.  3

If  these  phenomena  are  caused  by  the  state  of  the
atmosphere,  such  an  appellation  is  correct  enough.
For  if  the  moon  turns  red  owing  to  the  wind,  her  16
hue  is  certainly  a  sign  of  wind.  And  if,  as  the  same
poet  infers,1  the  condensation  and  rarification  of
the  atmosphere  causes  that  "concert  of  bird- voices  "
of  which  he  speaks,  we  may  agree  in  regarding  it  as
a  sign.  We  may  further  note  that  great  things  are
sometimes  indicated  by  trivial  signs,  witness  the
Vergil ian  crow  ;  that  trivial  events  should  be
indicated  by  signs  of  greater  importance  is  of  course
no  matter  for  wonder.

X.  I  now  turn  to  arguments,  the  name  under
which  we  comprise  the  ivQvfjLrjfxara,  €7rixcLprjfxaTa,  and
d7ro8€t£€i9  of  the  Greeks,  terms  which,  in  spite  of
their  difference,  have  much  the  same  meaning.  For
the  enthymeme  (which  we  translate  by  commentum  or
commentaiio,  there  being  no  alternative,  though  we
should  be  wiser  to  use  the  Greek  name)  has  three
meanings :  firstly  it  means  anything  conceived  in
the  mind  (this  is  not  however  the  sense  of  which
I  am  now  speaking) ;  secondly  it  signifies  a  proposi-  2
ftion  with  a  reason,  and  thirdly  a  conclusion  of  an
/argument  drawn  either  from  denial  of  consequents  or
^from  incompatibles  2 ;  although  there  is  some  contro-
versy on  this  point.  For  there  are  some  who  style  a
conclusion  from  consequents  an  epicheireme,  while  it
will  be  found  that  the  majority  hold  the  view  that  an
enthymeme  is  a  conclusion  from  incompatibles3:
wherefore  Cornificius  styles  it  a  contrarium  or  argu-
ment from  contraries.  Some  again  call  it  a  rhetorical  3
syllogism,  others  an  incomplete  syllogism,  because
its  parts  are  not  so  clearly  defined  or  of  the  same
number  as  those  of  the  regular  syllogism,  since  such

203


QUINTILIAN

concluderetur ;  quod  sane  non  utique  ab  oratore  de-

4  sideratur.  Epichirema  Valgius  aggressionem  vocat;
verius  autem  iudico,  non  nostram  administrationem
sed  ipsam  rem  quam  aggredimur,  id  est  argumen-
tum,  quo  aliquid  probaturi  sumus,  etiamsi  nondum
verbis explanatum,  iam tamen mente conceptum,

5  epichirema  dici.  Aliis  videtur  non  destinata  vel  in-
choata,  sed  perfecta  probatio  hoc  nomen  accipere,
ultima  specie ;  ideoque  propria  eius  appellatio  et
maxime  in  usu  est  posita,  qua  significatur  certa
quaedam sententiae comprehension  quae ex tribus

6  minimum  partibus  constat.  Quidam  epichirema
rationem  appellarunt,  Cicero  melius  ratiocinatio-
nem,  quanquam  et  ille  nomen  hoc  duxisse  magis  a
syllogismo  videtur.  Nam  et  statum  syllogisticum
ratiocinativum  appellat,  exemplisque  utitur  philoso-
phorum.  Et  quoniam  est  quaedam  inter  syllogis-
mum  et  epichirema  vicinitas,  potest  videri  hoc  nomine

7  recte  abusus.  'ATrdSei&s  est  evidens  probatio,  ideo-
que apud  Geometras  ypa/x/AiKai  d7roSc^€ts  dicuntur
Hanc  et  ab  epichiremate  Caecilius  putat  differre
solo  genere  conclusionis  et  esse  apodixin  imperfectum
epichirema  eadem  causa,  qua  diximus  enthymema
syllogismo  distare.  Nam  et  epichirema  syllogismi  pars
est. Quidam inesse epichiremati apodixin putant

1  See  in.  i.  18. A  rhetorician  of  the  reign  of  Augustus.

2  The  last  or  lowest  species, cp.  §  56  and  vn.  i.  23.

8  i.e.  the  major  and  minor  premisses  and  the  conclusion.
See  v.  xiv.  6  sqq.

204


BOOK V.  x.  3-7

precision  is  not  specially  required  by  the  orator.
Valgius l  translates  iirix^iprjfia  by  aggressio,  that  is  4
an  attempt.  It  would  however,  in  my  opinion,  be
truer  to  say  that  it  is  not  our  handling  of  the
subject,  but  the  thing  itself  which  we  attempt  which
should  be  called  an  cVi^e/p^a,  that  is  to  say  the
argument  by  which  we  try  to  prove  something  and
which,  even  if  it  has  not  yet  been  stated  in  so  many
words,  has  been  clearly  conceived  by  the  mind.
Others  regard  it  not  as  an  attempted  or  imperfect  5
proof,  but  a  complete  proof,  falling  under  the  most
special2  species  of  proof;  consequently, according  to
its  proper  and  most  generally  received  appellation  it
must  be  understood  in  the  sense  of  a  definite  con-
ception of  some  thought  consisting  of  at  least  three
parts.8  Some  call  an  lirtx^prjpia  a  reason,  but  Cicero 4  6
is  more  correct  in  calling  it  a  reasoning,  although  he
too  seems  to  derive  this  name  from  the  syllogism
rather  than  anything  else  ;  for  he  calls  the
syllogistic  basis 5  a  ratiocinative  basis  and  quotes  phil-
osophers to  support  him.  And  since  there  is  a  cer-
tain kinship  between  a  syllogism  and  an  epicheireme,
it  may  be  thought  that  he  was  justified  in  his  use  of
the  latter  term.  An  d7rd8a£ts  is  a  clear  proof;  hence  7
the  use  of  the  term  ypofxpiKal  airo^u^,  "linear
demonstrations  "  6  by  the  geometricians.  Caecilius
holds  that  it  differs  from  the  epicheireme  solely  in  the
kind  of  conclusion  arrived  at  and  that  an  apodeixis  is
simply  an  incomplete  epicheireme  for  the  same  reason
that  we  said  an  enthymeme  differed  from  a  syllogism.
For  an  epicheireme  is  also  part  of  a  syllogism.  Some
think  that  an  apodeixis  is  portion  of  an  epicheireme,


4  de  Inv.  i.  xxxi.  34.  *  See- in.  vi.  43,  46,  51,

6  See  i.  x.  38.


205


QUrNTILIAN

8  et  esse  partem  eius  eonfirmantem.  Utrumque
autem  quanquam  diversi  auctores  eodem  modo
finiunt,  ut  sit  ratio  per  ea,  quae  certa  sunt,  fidem
dubiis  adferens ;  quae  natura  est  omnium  argu-
mentorum,  neque  enim  certa  incertis  declarantur.
Haec  omnia  generaliter  7rtcrr€ts  appellant,  quod  eti-
amsi  propria  interpretatione  dicere  fidem  possumus,
apertius tamen probationem interpretabimur. Sed

9  argumentum  quoque  plura  significat.  Nam  et  fabulae
ad  actum  scenarum  compositae  argumenta  dicuntur,
et  orationum  Ciceronis  velut  thema  ipse  exponens
Pedianus,  Argumentum,  inquit,  tale  est ;  et  ipse  Cicero
ad  Brutum  ita  scribit :  Veritus  fortasse,  ne  nos  in
Catonem  nostrum  transferremus  Mine  aliquid,  etsi  argu-
mentum  simile non erat. Quo apparet omnem ad

10  scribendum  destinatam  materiam  ita  appellari.  Nee
mirum,  cum  id  inter  opifices  quoque  vulgatum  sit,
unde  Vergilius,  Argumentum  ingens ;  vulgoque  paulo
numerosius  opus  dicitur  argumentosum.  Sed  nunc
de  eo  dicendum  argumento  est,  quod  probationem
praestat.  Celsus  quidem  probationem,1  indicium,
fidem,  aggressionem  eiusdem  rei  nomina  facit,  parum

11  distincte,  ut  arbitror.  Nam  probatio  et  fides  efficitur
non  tantum  per  haec  quae  sunt  rationis,  sed  etiam
per  inartificialia.  Signum  autem,  quod  ille  indicium
vocat,  ab  argumentis iam  separavi. Ergo,  cum  sit

1  praestat  .  .  .  probationem,  added  by  Meister.

1  In  some  letter  now  lost.

2  A  en.  vii.  791,  with  reference  to  the  design  on  the  shield  of
Turnus.  *  v.  ix.  2.

206


BOOK V; x.  7-i  i

namely  the  part  containing  the  proof.  But  all  8
authorities,  however  much  they  may  differ  on  other
points,  define  both  in  the  same  way,  in  so  far  as  they
call  both  a  method  of  proving  what  is  not  certain  by
means  of  what  is  certain.  Indeed  this  is  the  nature
of  all  arguments,  for  what  is  certain  cannot  be
proved  by  what  is  uncertain.  To  all  these  forms  of
argument  the  Greeks  give  the  name  of  iricrreis,  a
term  which,  though  the  literal  translation  is  Jldes  "  a
warrant  of  credibility,"  is  best  translated  by  probatio
"proof."  But  argument  has  several  other  meanings.  9
For  the  plots  of  plays  composed  for  acting  in  the
theatre  are  called  arguments,  while  Pedianus,  when
explaining  the  themes  of  the  speeches  of  Cicero,
says  The  argument  is  as  follows.  Cicero1  himself  in
writing  to  Brutus  says,  Fearing  that  I  might  transfer
something  from  that  source  to  my  Cato,  although  the
argument  is  quite  different  It  is  thus  clear  that  all
subjects  for  writing  are  so  called.  Nor  is  this  to  be  10
wondered  at,  since  the  term  is  also  in  common  use
among  artists ;  hence  the  Vergilian  phrase  A  mighty
argument.2  Again  a  work  which  deals  with  a  number
of  different  themes  is  called  "rich  in  argument."
But  the  sense  with  which  we  are  now  concerned  is
that  which  provides  proof.  Celsus  indeed  treats
the  terms,  proof,  indication,  credibility,  attempt,
simply  as  different  names  for  the  same  things,  in
which,  to  my  thinking,  he  betrays  a  certain  con-
fusion of  thought.  For  proof  and  credibility  are  not  11
merely  the  result  of  logical  processes,  but  may
equally  be  secured  by  inartificial  arguments.  Now
I  have  already  3  distinguished  signs  or,  as  he  prefers
to  call  them,  indications  from  arguments.  Con-
sequently, since  an  argument  is  a  process  of  reasoning

207


QUINTILIAN

argumentum  ratio  probationem  praestans,  qua  colli-
gitur  aliud  per  aliud,  et  quae  quod  est  dubium  per
id  quod  dubium  non  est  confirmat,  necesse  est  esse

12  aliquid  in  causa,  quod  probatione  non  egeat.  Alioqui
nihil  erit  quo  probemus,  nisi  fuerit  quod  aut  sit  verum
aut  videatur,  ex  quo  dubiis  fides  fiat.  Pro  certis
autem  habemus  primum,  quae  sensibus  percipiuntur,
ut  quae  videmus,  audimus,  qualia  sunt  signa ;  deinde
ea,  in  quae  communi  opinione  consensum  est,  deos

13  esse,  praestandam  pietatem  parentibus;  praeterea,
quae  legibus  cauta  sunt,  quae  persuasione  etiamsi
non  omnium  hominum,  eius  tamen  civitatis  aut  gentis,
in  qua  res  agitur,  in  mores  recepta  sunt,  ut  pleraque
in  iure  non  legibus  sed  moribus  constant;  si  quid
inter  utramque  partem  convenit,  si  quid  probatum
est,  denique  cuicunque  adversarius  non  contradicit.

14  Sic  enim  net  argumentum,  Cum  providentia  mundus
regatur,  administranda  respublica  est  *■ ;  sequitur  ut  ad-
ministranda  respublica  sit,  si  liquebit  mundum  providentia

1 5  regi.  Debet  etiam  nota  esse  recte  argumenta  trac tat ur o
vis  et  natura  omnium  reriim,  et  quid  quaeque  earum
plerumque  efficiat; hinc  enim  sunt,  quae  eucdra  di.

16  cuntur.  Credibilium  autem  genera  sunt  tria  :  unum
firmissimum,  quia  fere  accidit,  ut  liberos  a  parentibus

1  est .  .  .  respublica,  added  by  Halm  after  Regius.
108


BOOK V.  x.  11-16

which  provides  proof  and  enables  one  thing  to  be
inferred  from  another  and  confirms  facts  which  are
uncertain  by  reference  to  facts  which  are  certain,
there  must  needs  be  something  in  every  case  which
requires  no  proof.  Otherwise  there  will  be  nothing  12
by  which  we  can  prove  anything;  there  must  be
something  which  either  is  or  is  believed  to  be  true,
by  means  of  which  doubtful  things  may  be  rendered
credible.  We  may  regard  as  certainties,  first,  those
things  which  we  perceive  by  the  senses,  things  for
instance  that  we  hear  or  see,  such  as  signs  or  indica-
tions; secondly,  those  things  about  which  there  is
general  agreement,  such  as  the  existence  of  the  gods
or  the  duty  of  loving  one's  parents;  thirdly,  those  13
things  which  are  established  by  law  or  have  passed
into  current  usage,  if  not  throughout  the  whole
world,  at  any  rate  in  the  nation  or  state  where  the
case  is  being  pleaded — there  are  for  instance  many
rights  which  rest  not  on  law,  but  on  custom ;  finally,
there  are  the  things  which  are  admitted  by  either
party,  and  whatever  has  already  been  proved  or  is
not  disputed  by  our  adversary.  '  Thus  for  instance  it  14
may  be  argued  that  since  the  world  is  governed  by
providence,  the  state  should  similarly  be  governed
by  some  controlling  power :  it  follows  that  the  state
must  be  so  governed,  once  it  is  clear  that  the  world
is  governed  by  providence.  Further,  the  man  who  is  15
to  handle  arguments  correctly  must  know  the  nature
and  meaning  of  everything  and  their  usual  effects.
For  it  is  thus  that  we  arrive  at  probable  arguments
or  elKOTa  as  the  Greeks  call  them.  With  regard  to  16
credibility  there  are  three  degrees.  First,  the
highest,  based  on  what  usually  happens,  as  for  in-
stance the  assumption  that  children  are  loved  by

2C9


QUINTILIAN

amari ;  alteram  velut  propensius,  eum  qui  recte  valeat
in  crastinum  perventurum ;  tertium  tantum  non  re-
pugnans,  in  domo  furtum  factum  ab  eo  qui  domi  fuit.

17  Ideoque  Aristoteles  in  secundo  de  Arte  Rhetorica
libro  diligentissime  est  exsecutus,  quid  cuique  rei  et
quid  cuique  homini  soleret  accidere,  et  quas  res
quosque  homines  quibus  rebus  aut  hominibus  vel
conciliasset  vel  alienasset  ipsa  natura :  ut  divitias
quid  sequatur  aut  ambitum  aut  superstitionem,  quid
boni  probent,  quid  mali  petant,  quid  milites,  quid
rustici,  quo  quaeque  modo  res  vitari  vel  appeti  sol  eat.

18  Verum  hoc  exsequi  mitto  ;  non  enim  longum  tantum,
sed  etiam  impossibile  aut  potius  infinitum  est,  prae-
terea  positum  in  communi  omnium  intellectu.  Si
quis tamen desideraverit, a  quo peteret, ostendi.

19  Omnia  autem  credibilia,  in  quibus  pars  maxima  con-
sistit  argumentations,  ex  huiusmodi  fontibus  fluunt :
an  credibile  sit  a  filio  patrem  occisum,  incestum  cum
filia  commissum ;  et  contra,  veneficium  in  noverca,
adulterium  in  luxurioso ;  ilia  quoque,  an  scelus  palam
factum,  an  falsum  propter  exiguam  summam,  quia
suos  quidque  horum  velut  mores  habet,  plerumque

1  1-17.

210


BOOK V.  x.  16-19

their  parents.  Secondly,  there  is  the  highly
probable,  as  for  instance  the  assumption  that  a  man
in  the  enjoyment  of  good  health  will  probably  live
till  to-morrow.  The  third  degree  is  found  where
there  is  nothing  absolutely  against  an  assumption,
such  as  that  a  theft  committed  in  a  house  was  the
work  of  one  of  the  household.  Consequently  17
Aristotle  in  the  second  book  of  his  Rhetoiic1  has
made  a  careful  examination  of  all  that  commonly
happens  to  things  and  persons,  and  what  things  and
persons  are  naturally  adverse  or  friendly  to  other
things  or  persons,  as  for  instance,  what  is  the
natural  result  of  wealth  or  ambition  or  superstition,
what  meets  with  the  approval  of  good  men,  what  is
the  object  of  a  soldier's  or  a  farmer's  desires,  and  by
what  means  everything  is  sought  or  shunned.  For  18
my  part  I  do  not  propose  to  pursue  this  subject.  It
is  not  merely  a  long,  but  an  impossible  or  rather  an
infinite  task ;  moreover  it  is  within  the  compass  of
the  common  understanding  of  mankind.  If,  how-
ever, anyone  wishes  to  pursue  the  subject,  I  have
indicated  where  he  may  apply.  But  all  credibility,  19
and  it  is  with  credibility  that  the  great  majority  of
arguments  are  concerned,  turns  on  questions  such
as  the  following :  whether  it  is  credible  that  a  father
has  been  killed  by  his  son,  or  that  a  father  has  com-
mitted incest  with  his  daughter,  or  to  take  questions
of  an  opposite  character,  whether  it  is  credible  that
a  stepmother  has  poisoned  her  stepchild,  or  that  a
man  of  luxurious  life  has  committed  adultery ;  or
again  whether  a  crime  has  been  openly  committed,
or  false  evidence  given  for  a  small  bribe,  since  each
of  these  crimes  is  the  result  of  a  special  cast  of
character  as  a  rule,  though  not  always ;  if  it  were

211


QUINTILIAN

tamen,  non  semper;  alioqui  indubitata  essent,  non
argumenta.

20  Excutiamus  nunc  argumentorum  locos ;  quanquam
quibusdam  hi  quoque,  de  quibus  supra  dixi,  videntur.
Locos  appello  non,  ut  vulgo  nunc  intelliguntur,  in
luxuriam  et  adulterium  et  similia ;  sed  sedes  argu-
mentorum, in  quibus  latent,  ex  quibus  sunt  petenda,

21  Nam,  ut  in  terra  non  omni  generantur  omnia,  nee
avem  aut  feram  reperias,  ubi  quaeque  nasci  aut
morari  soleat  ignarus,  et  piscium  quoque  genera  alia
planis  gaudent  alia  saxosis,  regionibus  etiam  litori-
busque  discreta  sunt,  nee  helopem  nostro  mari  aut
scarum  ducas, ita  non  omne  argumentum undique

22  venit  ideoque  non  passim  quaerendum  est.  Multus
alioqui  error  est ;  exhausto  labore,  quod  non  ratione
scrutabimur,  non  poterimus  invenire  nisi  casu.  At
si  scierimus,  ubi  quodque  nascatur,  cum  ad  locum
ventum  erit,  facile  quod  in  eo  est  pervidebimus.

23  In  primis  igitur  argumenta  a  persona  ducenda
sunt ;  cum  sit,  ut  dixi,  divisio,  ut  omnia  in  haec  duo
partiamur,  res  atque  personas,  ut  causa,  tempus,
locus,  occasio,  instrumentum,  modus  et  cetera,  rerum

1  In  previous  chapter.

2  See  ii.  iv.  22,  v.  xii.  6  and  xiii.  57.
'  v.  viii.  4.

212


BOOK V.  x.  19-23

always  so,  there  would  be  no  room  for  doubt,  and
no  argument.

Let  us  now  turn  to  consider  the  "  places  "  of  argu-  20
ments,  although  some  hold  that  they  are  identical
with  the  topics  which  I  have  already  discussed
above.1  But  I  do  not  use  this  term  in  its  usual
acceptance,  namely,  commonplaces  2  directed  against
luxury,  adultery,  and  the  like,  but  in  the  sense  of
the  secret  places  where  arguments  reside,  and  from
which  they  must  be  drawn  forth.  For  just  as  all  21
kinds  of  produce  are  not  provided  by  every  country,
and  as  you  will  not  succeed  in  finding  a  particular  bird
or  beast,  if  you  are  ignorant  of  the  localities  where
it  has  its  usual  haunts  or  birthplace,  as  even  the
various  kinds  of  fish  flourish  in  different  surround-
ings, some  preferring  a  smooth  and  others  a  rocky
bottom,  and  are  found  on  different  shores  and  in
divers  regions  (you  will  for  instance  never  catch
a  sturgeon  or  wrasse  in  Italian  waters),  so  not
every  kind  of  argument  can  be  derived  from  every
circumstance,  and  consequently  our  search  requires
discrimination.  Otherwise  we  shall  fall  into  serious  22
error,  and  after  wasting  our  labour  through  lack  of
method  we  shall  fail  to  discover  the  argument  which
we  desire,  unless  assisted  by  some  happy  chance.
But  if  we  know  the  circumstances  which  give  rise  to
each  kind  of  argument,  we  shall  easily  see,  when
we  come  to  a  particular  "place,"  what  arguments
it  contains.

Firstly, then, arguments may be drawn from  23
persons  ;  for,  as  I  have  already  said,3  all  arguments
fall  into  two  classes,  those  concerned  with  things  and
those concerned  with  persons,  since causes,  time,
place,  occasion,  instruments,  means  and  the  like  are

213


QUINTILIAN

sint  accidentia. Personis  autem  non  quidquid  accidit
exsequendum  mihi  est,  ut  plerique  fecerunt,  sed  unde

24  argumenta  sumi  possunt.  Ea  porro  sunt,  genus,
nam  similes  parentibus  ac  maioribus  suis  plerumque
ereduntur,  et  nonnunquam  ad  honeste  turpiterque
vivendum  inde  causae  fluunt ;  natio,  nam  et  gentibus
proprii  mores  sunt,  nee  idem  in barbaro,  Romano,

25  Graeco  probabile  est;  patria,  quia  similiter  etiam
civitatum  leges,  instituta,  opiniones  habent  diffe-
rentials ;  sexus,  ut  latrocinium  facilius  in  viro,  vene-
ficium  in  femina  eredas ;  aetas,  quia  aliud  aliis  annis
magis  convenit ;  educatio  et  disciplina,  quoniam
refert,  a  quibus  et  quo  quisque  modo  sit  institutus ;

26  habitus  corporis,  ducitur  enim  frequenter  in  argu-
mentum  species  libidinis,  robur  petulantiae,  his
contraria  in  diversum ;  fortuna,  neque  enim  idem
credibile  est  in  divite  ac  paupere,  propinquis  amicis
clientibus  abundante  et  his  omnibus  destituto ;  con-
dicionis  etiam  distantia,  nam  clarus  an  obscurus,
magistratus  an  privatus,  pater  an  filius,  civis  an
peregrinus,  liber  an  servus,  maritus  an  caelebs,
parens liberorum an orbus sit, plurimum distat ;

27  animi  natura,  etenim  avaritia,  iracundia,  misericordia,
crudelitas,  se Veritas  aliaque  his  similia  adferunt  fre-
quenter fidem  aut  dctrahunt,  sicut  victus  luxuriosus

214


BOOK V.  x.  23-27

all  accidents  of  things.  1  have  no  intention  of
tracing  all  the  accidents  of  persons,  as  many  have
done,  but  shall  confine  myself  to  those  from  which
arguments  may  be  drawn.  Such  are  birth,  for  24
persons  are  generally  regarded  as  having  some
resemblance  to  their  parents  and  ancestors,  a  re-
semblance which  sometimes  leads  to  their  living
disgracefully  or  honourably,  as  the  case  may  be  ;
then  there  is  nationality,  for  races  have  their  own
character,  and  the  same  action  is  not  probable  in  the
case  of  a  barbarian,  a  Roman  and  a  Greek  ;  country  25
is  another,  for  there  is  a  like  diversity  in  the  laws,
institutions  and  opinions  of  different  states;  sex,
since  for  example  a  man  is  more  likely  to  commit  a
robbery,  a  woman  to  poison;  age,  since  different
actions  suit  different  ages  ;  education  and  training,
since  it  makes  a  great  difference  who  were  the  in-
structors and  what  the  method  of  instruction  in  each
individual  case ,  bodily  constitution,  for  beauty  is  26
often  introduced  as  an  argument  for  lust,  strength  as
an  argument  for  insolence,  and  their  opposites  for
opposite  conduct7;  fortune,  since  the  same  acts  are
not  to  be  expected  from  rich  and  poor,  or  from  one
who  is  surrounded  by  troops  of  relations,  friends  or
clients  and  one  who  lacks  all  these  advantages;
condition,  too,  is  important,  for  it  makes  a  great
difference  whether  a  man  be  famous  or  obscure,  a
magistrate  or  a  private  individual,  a  father  or  a  son,
a  citizen  or  a  foreigner,  a  free  man  or  a  slave,
married  or  unmarried,  a  father  or  childless.  Nor  27
must  we  pass  by  natural  disposition,  for  avarice,
anger,  pity,  cruelty,  severity  and  the  like  may  often
be  adduced  to  prove  the  credibility  or  the  reverse  of
a  given  act ;  it  is  for  instance  often  asked  whether  a

215


QUINTILIAN

an  frugi  an  sordid  us,  quaeritur ;  studia  quoque,  nam
rusticus,  forensis,  negotiator,  miles,  navigator,  medicus

28  aliud  atque  aliud  efficiunt.  Intuendum  etiam,  quid
adfectet  quisque,  locuples  videri  an  disertus,  iustus
an  potens.  Spectantur  ante  acta  dictaque,  ex  prae-
teritis  enim  aestimari  solent  praesentia.  His  adii-
ciunt  quidam  commotionem ;  hanc  accipi  volunt
temporarium animi mo  turn, sicut iram, pavorem ;

29  consilia  autem  et  praesentis  et  praeteriti  et  futuri
temporis ;  quae  mihi,  etiamsi  personis  accidunt,  per
se  referenda  tamen  ad  illam  partem  argumentorum
videntur,  quam  ex  causis  ducimus;  sicut  habitus
quidam animi, quo tractatur, amicus  an inimicus.

30  Ponunt  in  persona  et  nomen ;  quod  quidem  ei  acci-
dere  necesse  est,  sed  in  argumentum  raro  cadit,  nisi
cum  aut  ex  causa  datum  est,  ut  Sapiens,  Magnus,
Pius;  aut  et  ipsum  alicuius  cogitationis  attulit
causam,  ut  Lentulo  coniurationis,  quod  libris  Sibyl-
linis  aruspicumque  responsis  dominatio  dari  tribus
Corneliis  dicebatur,  seque  eum  tertium  esse  credebat
post  Sullam  Cinnamque,  quia  et  ipse  Cornelius  erat.

31  Nam  et  illud  apud  Euripidem  frigidum  sane,  quod
nomen  Polynicis,  ut  argumentum  morum,  frater  in-
cessit. Iocorum  tamen  ex  eo  frequens  materia,  qua

1  Publius  Cornelius  Lentulus  Sura,  CatiUnarian  con-
spirator, cp.  Sail Gat.  c.  46.

2  PhotniaB.  636.  a\ri6us  y  ovofia  YloXvvtUri  trar^p  €$er6  croi
Beta  ttpopoiq.  v€ik4wv  int&vvfiov,  "  with  truth  did  our  father  call
thee  Polynices  with  divine  foreknowledge  naming  thee  after
«strife.,,,  »  See  vi.  iii.  53.

si6


BOOK V.  x.  *7-3i

man's  way  of  living  be  luxurious,  frugal  or  parsi-
monious. Then  there  is  occupation,  since  a  rustic,  a
lawyer,  a  man  of  business,  a  soldier,  a  sailor,  a  doctor
all  perform  very  different  actions.  We  must  also  28
consider  the  personal  ambitions  of  individuals,  for
instance  whether  they  wish  to  be  thought  rich  or
eloquent,  just  or  powerful.  Past  life  and  previous
utterances  are  also  a  subject  for  investigation,  since
we  are  in  the  habit  of  inferring  the  present  from  the
past.  To  these  some  add  passion,  by  which  they
mean  some  temporary  emotion  such  as  anger  or  fear  ;
they  also  add  design,  which  may  refer  to  the  past,  29
present  or  future.  These  latter,  however,  although
accidents  of  persons,  should  be  referred  to  that  class
of  arguments  which  we  draw  from  causes,  as  also
should  certain  dispositions  of  mind,  for  example
when  we  inquire  whether  one  man  is  the  friend  or
enemy  of  another.  Names  also  are  treated  as  30
accidents  of  persons ;  this  is  perfectly  true,  but  names
are  rarely  food  for  argument,  unless  indeed  they
have  been  given  for  some  special  reasons,  such  as  the
titles  of  Wise,  Great,  Pious,  or  unless  the  name  has
suggested  some  special  thought  to  the  bearer.
Lentulus1  for  instance  had  the  idea  of  conspiracy
suggested  to  him  by  the  fact  that  according  to  the
Sibylline  books  and  the  Responses  of  the  sooth-
sayers the  tyranny  was  promised  to  three  members
of  the  Cornelian  family,  and  he  considered  himself  to
be  the  third  in  succession  to  Sulla  and  Cinna,  since
he  too  bore  the  name  Cornelius.  On  the  other  hand  31
the  conceit  employed  by  Euripides  2  where  he  makes
Eteocles  taunt  his  brother  Polynices  on  the  ground
that  his  name  is  evidence  of  character,  is  feeble  in
the  extreme.  Still  a  name  will  often  provide  the
subject  for  a  jest,3  witness  the frequent jests of

217


QUINTILIAN

Cicero  in  Verrem  non  semel  usus  est.  Haec  fere
circa  personas  sunt  aut  his  similia.  Neque  enim
complecti  omnia  vel  hac  in  parte  vel  in  ceteris
possumus,  contenti  rationem  plura  quaesituris  osten-
dere.

32  Nunc  ad  res  transeo,  in  quibus  maxime  sunt  per-
sonis  iuncta,  quae  agimus,  ideoque  prima  tractanda.
In  omnibus  porro,  quae  fiunt,  quaeritur  aut  Quare?
aut  Ubi  ?  aut  Quando  ?  aut  Quomodo  ?  aut  Per  quae

33  facta  sunt?  Ducuntur  igitur  argumenta  ex  causis
factorum  vel  futurorum ;  quarum  materiam,  quam
quidam  vXrjv,  alii  hvvayav  nominaverunt,  in  duo  genera,
sed  quaternas  utriusque  dividunt  species.  Nam  fere
versatur  ratio  faciendi  circa  bonorum  adeptionem,
incrementum,  conservationem,  usum,  aut  malorum
evitationem, liberationem, imminutionem, toleran-

34  tiam  ;  quae  et  in  deliberando  plurimum  valent.  Sed
honestas1  causas  habent  recta,  prava  contra  ex  falsis
opinionibus  veniunt.  Nam  est  his  initium  ex  iis,
quae  credunt  bona  aut  mala ;  inde  errores  existunt
et  pessimi  adfectus,  in  quibus  sunt  ira,  odium,  invidiam
cupiditas,  spes,  ambitus,  audacia,  metus,  cetera  generis
eiusdem.  Accedunt  aliquando  fortuita,  ebrietas,
ignorantia,  quae  interim  ad  veniam  valent,  interim
ad  probationem  criminis,  ut  si  quis,  dum  alii  insidia-

35  tur,  alium  dicitur  interemisse.  Causae  porro  non  ad
convincendum  modo,  quod  obiicitur,  sed  ad  defen-
dendum quoque excuti solent,  cum  quis se recte

1  honestas  W.  Meyer  :  has  B  :  haec  A

2l8


BOOK V.  x.  31-35

Cicero  on  the  name  of  Verres.  Such,  then,  and  the
like  are  the  accidents  of  persons.  It  is  impossible
to  deal  with  them  all  either  here  or  in  other  portions
of  this  work,  and  I  must  content  myself  with  point-
ing out  the  lines  on  which  further  enquiry  should
proceed.

I  now  pass  to  things  :  of  these  actions  are  the  most  32
nearly  connected  with  persons  and  must  therefore  be
treated  first.  In  regard  to  every  action  the  question
arises  either  Why  or  Where  or  When  or  How  or  By
what  means  the  action  is  performed.  Consequently  33
arguments  are  drawn  from  the  causes  of  past  or  future
actions.  The  matter  of  these  causes,  by  some  called
v\rj,  by  others  SiW/xts,  falls  into  two  genera,  which
are  each  divided  into  four  species.  For  the  motive
for  any  action  is  as  a  rule  concerned  with  the  acquisi-
tion, increase,  preservation  and  use  of  things  that  are
good  or  with  the  avoidance,  diminution,  endurance
of  things  that  are  evil  or  with  escape  therefrom.
All  these  considerations  carry  great  weight  in  de-
liberative oratory  as  well.  But  right  actions  have  34
right  motives,  while  evil  actions  are  the  result  of
false  opinions,  which  originate  in  the  things  which
men  believe  to  be  good  or  evil.  Hence  spring  errors
and  evil  passions  such  as  anger,  hatred,  envy,  desire,
hope,  ambition,  audacity,  fear  and  others  of  a  similar
kind.  To  these  accidental  circumstances  may  often
be  added,  such  as  drunkenness  or  ignorance,  which
serve  sometimes  to  excuse  and  sometimes  to  prove
a  charge,  as  for  instance  when  a  man  is  said  to  have
killed  one  person  while  lying  in  wait  for  another.
Further,  motives  are  often  discussed  not  merely  to  35
convict  the  accused  of  the  offence  with  which  he  is
charged,  but  also  to  defend  him  when  he  contends

219


QUINTILIAN

fecisse,  id  est  honesta  causa,  contendit ; qua  de  re

36  latius  in  tertio  libro  dictum  est.  Finitionis  quoque
quaestiones  ex  causis  interim  pendent.  An  tyran-
nicida,  qui  tyrannum,  a  quo  deprehensus  in  adulterio
fuerat,  occidit? An  saerilegus,  qui,  ut  hostes  urbe

37  expelleret,  arma  templo  adfixa  detraxit  ?  Ducuntur
argumenta  et  ex  loco.  Spectatur  enim  ad  fidem
probationis,  montanus  an  planus,  maritimus  an  medi-
terraneus,  consitus  an  incultus,  frequens  an  desertus,
propinquus  an  remotus,  opportunus  consiliis  an  ad-
versus; quam  partem  videmus  vehementissime  pro

38  Milone  tractasse  Ciceronem.  Et  haec  quidem  ac
similia  ad  coniecturam  frequentius  pertinent,  sed
interim  ad  ius  quoque  :  privatus  an  publicus,  sacer
an  profanus,  noster  an  alienus ;  ut  in  persona,  magi-
stratus,  pater,  peregrinus. Hinc enim  quaestiones

39  oriuntur :  Privatam  pecuniam  sustulisti ;  verum  quia  de
templo,  non  furtum  sed  sacrilegium  est  Occidisti  adul-
terum,  quod  lex  permiltit ;  sed  quia  in  lupanari,  caedes
est. Iniuriam fecisti ;  sed  quia  magistfatui,  maiestatis

40  actio  est.  Vel  contra :  Licuit,  quia  pater  eram,  quia
magistratus.  Sed  circa  facti  controversiam  argumenta
praestant,  circa  iuris  lites  materiam  quaestionum.
Ad qualitatem quoque frequenter pertinet locus,

1  in.  xi.  4-9.  a  pro  Mil.  xx.

220


BOOK V.  x.  35-40

that  his  action  was  right,  that  is  to  say  proceeded
from  an  honourable  motive,  a  theme  of  which  I  have
spoken  more  fully  in  the  third book.1 Questions  36
of  definition  are  also  at  times  intimately  connected
with  motives. Is  a  man  a  tyrannicide  if  he  kills  a
tyrant  by  whom  he  has  been  detected  in  the  act
of  adultery? Or  is  he  guilty  of  sacrilege  who  tore
down  arms  dedicated  in  a  temple  to  enable  him  to
drive  the  enemy  from  the  city  ? Arguments  are  also  37
drawn  from  place. With  a  view  to  proving  our  facts
we  consider  such  questions  as  whether  a  place  is  hilly
or  level,  near  the  coast  or  inland,  planted  or  unculti-
vated, crowded  or  deserted,  near  or  far,  suitable  for
carrying  out  a  given  design  or  the  reverse. This  is  a
topic  which  is  treated  most  carefully  by  Cicero  in  his
pro Milone.2 These points  and  the  like  generally  38
refer to questions of fact, but occasionally to
questions  of  law  as  well. For  we  may  ask  whether
a  place  is  public  or  private,  sacred  or  profane,  our
own  or  another's,  just  as  where  persons  are  concerned
we  ask  whether  a  man  is  a  magistrate,  a  father,  a
foreigner. Hence  arise  such  questions  as  the  follow-  39
ing. "  You  have  stolen  private  money,  but  since  you
stole  it  from  a  temple,  it  is  not  theft  but  sacrilege."
"  You  have  killed  adulterers,  an  act  permitted  by  law,
but  since  the  act  was  done  in  a  brothel,  it  is  murder."
"  You have committed an assault,  but since the
object  of  your  assault  was  a  magistrate,  the  crime  is
lese-majeste. Similarly  it  may  be  urged  in  defence,  40
"The act  was lawful, because I was  a father,  a
magistrate." But such points afford matter for
argument when  there is  a  controversy  as  to  the
facts, and matter for  enquiry when the dispute
turns on a point of  law. Place also frequently

221


QUINTILIAN

neque  enim  idem  ubique  aut  licet  aut  decorum  est;
quin  etiam  in  qua  quidque  civitate  quaeratur  interest,

41  moribus  enim  et  legibus  distant.  Ad  commendatio-
nem  quoque  et  invidiam  valet.  Nam  et  Aiax  apud
Ovidium :  Ante  rates,  inquit,  agi?nus  causam,  et  mecum
confertur  Ulixes  ?  Et  Miloni  inter  cetera  obiectum
est,  quod Clodius  in  monumentis ab eo maiorum

42  suorum  esset  occisus.  Ad  suadendi  momenta  idem
valet,  sicut  tempus,  cuius  tractatum  subiungam.
Eius  autem,  ut  alio  loco  iam  dixi,  duplex  significatio
est;  generaliter  enim  et  specialiter  accipitur.  Prius
illud  est: — nunc,  olim,  sub  Alexandro,  cum  apud  Ilium
pugnatum  est,  denique  praeteritum,  instans,  futurum.
Hoc  sequens  habet  et  constituta  discrimina: — aestate,
hieme,  noctu,  interdiu  ;  et  fortuita  : — in  pestilentia,

43  in  bello,  in  convivio.  Latinorum  quidam  satis  signi-
ficari  putaverunt,  si  illud  generate  tempus,  hoc
speciale  tempora  vocarent.  Quorum  utrorumque
ratio  et  in  consiliis  quidem  et  in  illo  demonstrative
genere  versatur,  sed  in  iudiciis  frequentissima  est.

44  Nam  et  iuris  quaestiones  facit  et  qualitatem  distinguit
et  ad  coniecturam  plurimum  confert :  ut  cum  interim


1  Met.  xiii.  5.  Ajax  had  saved  the  ships  from  being  burned
by  the  Trojans.  The  dispute  as  to  whether  the  arms  of
Achilles  should  be  awarded  to  him  or  to  Ulysses  is  being
tried  there.  Ajax's  argument  is,  "  Can  you  refuse  me  my  due
reward  on  the  very  spot  where  I  saved  you  from  disaster  ?  "

222


HOOK V.  x.  40-44

affects  the  quality  of  an  action,  for  the  same  action
is  not  always  lawful  or  seemly  under  all  circum-
stances, while  it  makes  considerable  difference  in
what  state  the  enquiry  is  taking  place,  for  they  differ
both  in  custom  and  law.  Further  arguments  drawn  41
from  place  may  serve  to  secure  approval  or  the
reverse. Ajax  for  instance  in  Ovid  x  says  : —

"  What !  do  we  plead  our  cause  before  the  ships  ?
And  is  Ulysses  there  preferred  to  me  ?  "

Again  one  of  the  many  charges  brought  against
Milo  was  that  he  killed  Clodius  on  the  monument  of
his  ancestors.2  Such  arguments  may  also  carry  42
weight  in  deliberative  oratory,  as  may  those  drawn
from  time,  which  I  shall  now  proceed  to  discuss.
Time  may,  as  I  have  said  elsewhere,3  be  understood
in  two  different  senses,  general  and  special.  The  first
sense  is  seen  in  words  and  phrases  such  as  "  now,"
"  formerly/'  gt  in  the  reign  of  Alexander,"  "  in  the
days  of  the  siege  of  Troy,"  and  whenever  we  speak
of  past,  present  or  future.  The  second  sense  occurs
when  we  speak  either  of  definite  periods  of  time
such  as  "in  summer,"  "in  winter,"  "by  night,"  "by
day,"  or  of  fortuitous  periods  such  as  "  in  time  of
pestilence,"  "in  time  of  war,"  "during  a  banquet."
Certain  Latin  writers  have  thought  it  a  sufficient  43
distinction  to  call  the  general  sense  "time,"  and  the
special  "times."  In  both  senses  time  is  of  importance
in  advisory  speeches  and  demonstrative  oratory,  but
not  so  frequently  as  in  forensic.  For  questions  of  law  44
turn  on  time,  while  it  also  determines  the  quality  of
actions  and  is  of  great  importance  in  questions  of
fact ;  for  instance,  occasionally  it  provides  irrefragable

*  pro  Mil,  vii.  17. i.e.  on  the  Appian  Way  constructed  by
one  of  Clodius'  ancestors.  *  in.  vi.  25.

223


QUINTILIAN

probationes  inexpugnabiles  adferat,  quales  sunt,  si
dicatur  (ut  supra  posui)  signator,  qui  ante  diem
tabularum  decessit,  aut  commisisse  aliquid,  vel  cum

45  infans  esset  vel  cum  omnino  natus  non  esset ;  praeter
id,  quod  omnia  facile  argumenta  aut  ex  iis,  quae  ante
rem  facta  sunt,  aut  ex  coniunctis  rei  aut  insequenti-
bus  ducuntur.  Ex  antecedentibus :  Mortem  minatus
es9  noctu  existi,  proficiscentem  antecessisti ;  causae  quo-

46  que  factorum  praeteriti  sunt  temporis.  Secundum
tempus  subtilius  quidam,  quam  necesse  erat,  di vise-
runt,  ut  esset  iuncti  Sonus  auditus  est;  adhaerentis
Clamor  suhlatus  est.  Insequentis  sunt  ilia  Latuisti,
profugisti,  livores  et  tumores  apparuerunt.  Iisdem  tern-
porum  gradibus  defensor  utetur  ad  detrahendam  ei

47  quod  obiicitur  fidem.  In  his  omnis  factorum  dicto-
rumque  ratio  versatur,  sed  dupliciter.  Nam  fiunt
quaedam  quia  aliud  postea  futurum  est,  quaedam
quia  aliud  ante  factum  est :  ut,  cum  obiicitur  reo  leno-
cinii,  speciosae  marito,  quod  adulterii  dam na tarn  quon-
dam emerit ;  aut  parricidii  reo  luxurioso,  quod  dixerit
patri,  Non  amplius  me  obiurgabis. Nam  et  ille  non


1  v.  v.  2.

2  Both cases are clearly themes from the  schools of
rhetoric.


224


BOOK V.  x.  44-47

proofs,  which  may  be  illustrated  by  a  case  which  I
have  already  cited,1  when  one  of  the  signatories  to  a
document  has  died  before  the  day  on  which  it  was
signed,  or  when  a  person  is  accused  of  the  com-
mission of  some  crime^  although  he  was  only  an  infant
at  the  time  or  not  yet  born.  Further,  all  kinds  of  45
arguments  may  easily  be  drawn  either  from  facts
previous  to  a  certain  act,  or  contemporary  or  sub-
sequent. As  regards  antecedent  facts  the  following
example  will  illustrate  my  meaning ;  "  You  threat-
ened to  kill  him,  you  went  out  by  night,  you  started
before  him."  Motives  of  actions  may  also  belong  to
past  time.  Some  writers  have  shown  themselves  46
over-subtle  in  their  classification  of  the  second  class
of  circumstances,  making  "  a  sound  was  heard  "  an
example  of  circumstances  combined  with  an  act  and
"  a  shout  was  raised  "  an  instance  of  circumstances
attached  to  an  act.  As  regards  subsequent  circum-
stances I  may  cite  accusations  such  as  "  You  hid
yourself,  you  fled,  livid  spots  and  swellings  appeared
on  the  corpse."  The  counsel  for  the  defence  will
employ  the  same  divisions  of  time  to  discredit  the
charge  which  is  brought  against  him.  In  these  47
considerations  are  included  everything  in  connexion
with  words  and  deeds,  but  in  two  distinct  ways.
For  some  things  are  done  because  something  else  is
like  to  follow,  and  others  because  something  else
has  previously  been  done,  as  for  instance,  when  the
husband  of  a  beautiful  woman  is  accused  of  having
acted  as  a  procurer  on  the  ground  that  he  bought
her  after  she  was  found  guilty  of  adultery,  or
when  a  debauched  character  is  accused  of  parri-
cide on  the  ground  that  he  said  to  his  father
"You  have  rebuked  me  for  the  last  time."2 For

225


QU1NTILIAN

quia  emit  leno  est,  sed  quia  leno  erat  emit ;  nee  hie,
quia  sic  erat  locutus,  occidit,  sed,  quia  erat  occisurus,

48  sic  locutus  est.  Casus  autem,  qui  et  ipse  praestat
argumentis  locum,  sine  dubio  est  ex  insequentibus,
sed  quadam  proprietate  distinguitur,  ut  si  dicam :
Melior  dux  Scipio  quarn  Hannibal ;  vicit  Hannibalem.
Bonus  gubernator ;  nunquam  fecit  naujragium.  Bonus
agricola ;  magnos  sustulil  fructus.  Et  contra:  Sump-
tuosus  fuit; patrimonium exhausit. Turpiler vixit ;

49  omnibus  invisus  est.  Intuendae  sunt  praecipueque
in  coniecturis  et  facultates ;  credibilius  est  enim
occisos  a  pluribus  pauciores,  a  firmioribus  imbecil-
liores,  a  vigilantibus  dormientes,  a  praeparatis  inopi-

60  nantes ;  quorum  contraria  in  diversum  valent.  Haec
et  in  deliberando  intuemur,  et  in  iudiciis  ad  duas
res  solemus  referre,  an  voluerit  quis,  an  potuerit ;
nam  et  voluntatem  spes  facit.  Hinc  ilia  apud  Cice-
ronem  coniectura,  Insidiatus  est  Clodius  Milorri,  non
Milo  Clodio  ;  Me  cum  servis  robustis,  hie  cum  mulierum
comitatu,  Me  equis,  hie  in  raeda,  Me  expeditus,  hie  pae-

51  nula  irretitus. Facultati autem licet  instrumentum

1  pro  Mil.  x.  29.
226


BOOK V.  x.  47-51

in  the  former  case  the  accused  is  not  a  procurer
because  he  bought  the  woman,  but  bought  her
because  he  was  a  procurer,  while  in  the  latter  the
accused  is  not  a  parricide  because  he  used  these
words,  but  used  them  because  he  intended  to  kill  his
father.  With  regard  to  accidental  circumstances,  48
which  also  provide  matter  for  arguments,  these
clearly  belong  to  subsequent  time,  but  are  distin-
guished by  a  certain  special  quality,  as  for  instance  if
I  should  say,  "  Scipio  was  a  better  general  than
Hannibal,  for  he  conquered  Hannibal"  ;  "  He  was  a
good  pilot,  for  he  was  never  shipwrecked";  "He  was
a  good  farmer,  for  he  gathered  in  huge  harvests  ' ' ;
or  referring  to  bad  qualities,  "  He  was  a  prodigal,  for
he  squandered  his  patrimony";  u  His  life  was  dis-
graceful, for  he  was  hated  by  all."  We  must  also  49
consider  the  resources  possessed  by  the  parties
concerned,  more  especially  when  dealing  with  ques-
tions of  fact ;  for  it  is  more  credible  that  a  smaller
number  of  persons  were  killed  by  a  larger,  a  weaker
party  by  a  stronger,  sleepers  by  men  that  were  wide
awake,  the  unsuspecting  by  the  well-prepared,  while
the  converse  arguments  may  be  used  to  prove  the
opposite.  Such  considerations  arise  both  in  deliber-  50
ative  and  forensic  oratory :  in  the  latter  they  occur
in  relation  to  two  questions,  namely,  whether  some
given  person  had  the  will,  and  whether  he  had  the
power  to  do  the  deed;  for  hope  will  often  create
the  will  to  act.  Hence  the  well-known  inference  in
Cicero : l  "Clodius  lay  in  wait  for  Milo,  not  Milo  for
Clodius,  for  Clodius  had  a  retinue  of  sturdy  slaves,
while  Milo  was  with  a  party  of  women  ;  Clodius  was
mounted,  Milo  in  a  carriage,  Clodius  lightly  clad,
Milo  hampered  by  a  cloak." With  resources  we  may  51

227


QUINTILIAN

coniungere ;  sunt  enim  in  parte  facultatis  et  copiae.
Sed  ex  instrumento  aliquando  etiam  signa  nascuntur,
52  ut  spiculum  in  corpore  inventum.  His  adiicitur
modus,  quem  rpoirov  dicunt,  quo  quaeritur,  quemad-
modum  quid  sit  factum.  Idque  turn  ad  qualitatem
scrip tumque  pertinet,  ut  si  negemus  adulterum
veneno  licuisse  occidere,  turn  ad  coniecturas  quoque,
ut  si  dicam  bona  mente  factum,  ideo  palam ;  mala,
ideo  ex  insidiis,  nocte,  in  solitudine.

63  In  rebus  autem  omnibus,  de  quarum  vi  ac  natura
quaeritur,  quasque  etiam  citra  complexum  personarum
ceterorumque  ex  quibus  fit  causa,  per  se  intueri  pos-
sumus,  tria  sine  dubio  rursus  spectanda  sunt,  An  sit,
Quid  sit,  Quale  sit.  Sed,  quia  sunt  quidam  loci
argumentorum  omnibus  communes,  dividi  haec  tria
genera  non  possunt,  ideoque  locis  potius,  ut  in  quos-

64  que  incurrent,  subiicienda  sunt.  Ducuntur  ergo
argumenta  ex  finitione  seu  fine ;  nam  utroque  modo
traditur.  Eius  duplex  ratio  est ;  aut  enim  simpliciter
quaeritur,  sitne  hoc  virtus ;  aut  praecedente  finitione,
quid  sit  virtus.  Id  aut  universum  verbis  complec-
timur,  ut  Rhetorice  est  bene  dicendi  scientia  ;  aut  per
partes,  ut  Rhetorice  est  inveniendi  recte  et  disponendi  et
eloquendi  cum  Jlrma  memoiia  et  cum  dignitate  actionis


1  See  §  40. Also  in.  v.  4,  in.  vi.  55  and  66.
•  See  above  §  20.


228


BOOK V.  x.  5i~54

couple  instruments,  which  form  part  of  resources  and
means.  But  sometimes  instruments  will  provide  us
with  indications  as  well,  as  for  instance  if  we  find
a  javelin  sticking  in  a  dead  body.  To  these  we  may  52
add  manner,  the  Greek  rpo7ros,  in  regard  to  which
we  ask  how  a  thing  was  done.  Manner  is  concerned
sometimes  with  quality  and  the  letter  of  the  law  1
(we  may  for  instance  argue  that  it  was  unlawful  to
kill  an  adulterer  by  poison),  sometimes  with  ques-
tions of  fact,  as  for  example  if  I  argue  that  an  act
was  committed  with  a  good  intent  and  therefore
openly,  or  with  a  bad  intent  and  therefore  treacher-
ously, by  night,  in  a  lonely  place.

In  all  cases,  however,  in  which  we  enquire  into  the  63
nature  and  meaning  of  an  act,  and  which  can  be
considered  by  themselves  apart  from  all  consider-
ations of  persons  and  all  else  that  gives  rise  to  the
actual  cause,  there  are  clearly  three  points  to  which
we  must  give  attention,  namely  Whether  it  is,  What
it  is  and  Of  what  kind  it  is.  But  as  there  are  cer-
tain " places"2  of  argument  which  are  common  to
all  three  questions,  this  triple  division  is  imprac-
ticable and  we  must  therefore  consider  these  ques-
tions rather  in  connexion  with  those  "  places "  in
which  they  most  naturally  arise.  Arguments,  then,  64
may  be  drawn  from  definition,  sometimes  called
/initio  and  sometimes  finis.  Definition  is  of  two
kinds.  We  may  ask  whether  a  particular  quality  is  a
virtue  or  make  a  definition  precede  and  ask  what  is
the  nature  of  a  virtue.  Such  a  definition  is  either
stated  in  general  terms,  such  as  Rhetoric  is  the  science
of  speaking  well,  or  in  detail,  such  as  Rhetoric  is  the
science  of  correct  conception,  arrangement  and  utterance,
coupled  with  a  retentive  memory  and  a  dignified  delivery.

229


QUINTILIAN

55  scieniia.  Praeterea  finimus  aut  vi,  sicut  superiora,
aut  cTv/xoAoyta,  ut  si  assiduum  ab  asse1  dando,  et  locu-
pletem  a  locorum,  pecuniosum  a  pecorum  copia.
Finitioni  subiecta  maxime  videntur  genus,  species,

56  differens,  proprium ;  ex  iis  omnibus  argumenta  du-
cuntur.  Genus  ad  probandam  speciem  minimum
valet,  plurimum  ad  refellendam.  Itaque  non,  quia  est
arbor,  platanus  est,  at  quod  non  est  arbor,  utique
platanus  non  est ;  nee  quod  virtus  est,  utique
iustitia  est,  at  quod  non  est  virtus,  utique  non
potest  esse  iustitia.2  Itaque  a  genere  pervenien-
dum  ad  ultimam  speciem  :  ut  Homo  est  animal  non
est  satis,  id  enim  genus  est ;  mortale,  etiamsi  est
species,  cum  aliis  tamen  communis  finitio ;  rationale,
nihil supererit ad demonstrandum id quod  velis.

57  Contra  species  firmam  probationem  habet  generis,
infirmam  refutationem.  Nam,  quod  iustitia  est,
utique  virtus  est ;  quod  non  est  iustitia,  potest  esse
virtus,  si  est  fortitudo,  constantia,  continentia.  Nun-
quam  itaque  tolletur  a  specie  genus,  nisi  ut  omnes
species,  quae  sunt  generi  subiectae,  removeantur,  hoc
modo,  Quod  nee  rationale  nee  mortale  est  neque  animal,

1  asse,  Regius :  aere,  MSS.

2  quod  virtus  ...  at,  omitted  by  B :  iustitia  est  .  .  .  est
virtus,  om>tted  by  A  :  the  missing  words  are  supplied  by
Victor.


1  Paulus  (exc.  Fest. )  gives  the  following  explanation  of  this
absurd  derivation,  for  which  Cicero  tells  that  Aelius  Stilo
was  responsible  : "Some  think  that  assiduus  was  originally

230


BOOK V.  x.  54-57

Further,  we  may  define  a  word  by  giving  its  content  55
as  in  the  preceding  instances,  or  by  etymology :  we
may  for  instance  explain  assiduus1  by  deriving  it  from
as  and  do,  locuples  2  by  deriving  it  from  copia  locorum,
pectiniosus*  from  copia  pecorum.  Genus,  species,  difference
and  property  seem  more  especially  to  afford  scope  for
definition,  for  we  derive  arguments  from  all  of  these.
Genus  is  of  little  use  when  we  desire  to  prove  a  56
species,  but  of  great  value  for  its  elimination.  A  tree
is  not  necessarily  a  plane  tree,  but  that  which  is  not
a  tree  is  certainly  not  a  plane  tree  ;  again,  a  virtue  is
not  necessarily  the  virtue  of  justice,  but  that  which
is  not  a  virtue  is  certainly  not  justice.  We  must
proceed  from  the  genus  to  the  ultimate  species ; 4  for
example,  to  say  that  man  is  an  animal  will  not
suffice;  for  animal  merely  gives  us  the  genus:  nor
yet  will  the  addition  of  the  words  "subject  to
death  "  be  adequate ;  for  although  this  epithet  gives
us  a  species,  it  is  common  to  other  animals  as  well.
If,  however,  we  define  man  as  a  rational  animal,  we
need  nothing  further  to  make  our  meaning  clear.
On  the  other  hand  species  will  give  us  clear  proof  of  57
genus,  but  is  of  little  service  for  its  elimination.
For  example,  justice  is  always  a  virtue,  but  that
which  is  not  justice  may  still  be  a  virtue,  such  as
fortitude,  constancy  or  self-control.  Genus  therefore
cannot  be  eliminated  by  species  unless  all  the  species
included  in  the  genus  be  eliminated,  as  for  instance
in  the  following  sentence :  That  which  is  neither  rational

the  epithet  applied  to  one  who  served  in  the  army  at  bis  own
expense,  contributing  an  as"  {i.e.  instead  of  receiving  it) !

*  locuples  ("  wealthy")  is  derived  from  locus  =  the  posses
sors  of  many  places.

8  pecuniosus  ("moneyed")  is  derived  from  pecus  =  u  rich
in  herds."  4  cp.  §  5.

231


QUINTIUAN

58  homo  non  est.1  His  adiiciunt  propria  et  differentia.
Propriis  confirmatur  finitio,  differentibus  solvitur
Proprium  autem  est  aut  quod  soli  accidit,  ut  homini
sermo,  risus ;  aut  quidquid  utique  accidit  sed  non
soli,  ut  igni  calfacere.  Et  sunt  eiusdem  rei  plura
propria,  ut  ipsius  ignis  lucere,  calere.  Itaque,  quod-
cunque  proprium  deerit,  solvit  finitionem ;  non  uti-

59  que,  quodcunque  erit,  confirmat.  Saepissime  autem,
quid  sit  proprium  cuiusque,  quaeritur:  ut,  si  per
irvfxoXoyiav  dicatur,  Tyrannicidae  proprium  est  tyran-
num  occidere,  negemus ;  non  enim,  si  traditum  sibi
eum  carnifex occiderit,  tyrannicida  dicatur,  nee  si

60  imprudens  vel  invitus.  Quod  autem  proprium  non
erit,  difFerens  erit,  ut  aliud  est  servum  esse  aliud
servire ;  qualis  esse  in  addictis  quaestio  solet :  Qui
servus est, si manumittatur, fit libertinus, non item

61  addictus  ;  et  plura,  de  quibus  alio  loco.  Illud  quoque
difFerens  vocant,  cum,  genere  in  species  diducto,
species  ipsa  discernitur.  Animal  genus,  mortale
species,  terrenum  vel  bipes  difFerens  ; nondum  enim

1  quod  neque  im mortale  nee  mortale  est  animal  non  est
(and  the  like)  MSS.  :  the  text  gives  the  conjecture  of  Halm.

1  vii.  iii.  26. Also  in.  vi.  25.
232


BOOK V.  x.  57-61

nor  mortal  nor  an  animal  is  not  a  man. To  these  they  58
add  property and difference. Properties serve to
establish  definitions,  differences  to  overthrow  them.
A  property  is  that  which  happens  to  one  particular
object  and that alone; speech and laughter for
instance  are  properties  of  man. Or  it  may  be  some-
thing specially  belonging  to  an  object,  but  not  to  it
alone  ;  heating  for  instance  is  a  property  of  fire. The
same  thing  may  also  have  a  number  of  properties :
light and heat  are both  properties of  fire. Con-
sequently, the  omission  of  any  property  in  a  definition
will impair  it,  but  the  introduction  of  a  property,
whatever  it  may  be,  will  not  necessarily  establish  a
definition. We have,  however,  often  to consider  59
what  is  a  property  of  some  given  object ;  for  example,
if  it  should  be  asserted,  on  the  ground  of  etymology,
that  the  peculiar  property  of  a  tyrannicide  is  to  kill
tyrants,  we  should  deny  it :  for  an  executioner  is  not
ipso  facto  a  tyrannicide,  if  he  executes  a  tyrant  who
has  been  delivered  to  him  for  the  purpose,  nor  again
is  he  a  tyrannicide  who  kills  a  tyrant  unwittingly  or
against  his  will. What  is  not  a  property  will  be  a  60
difference  :  it  is,  for  instance,  one  thing  to  be  a  slave,
and  another  to  be  in  a  state  of  servitude  ;  hence  the
distinction  raised  in  connexion  with  persons  assigned
to  their  creditors  for  debt :  A  slave,  if  he  is  manu-
mitted becomes  a  freedman,  but  this  is  not  Ike  case  with
one  who  is  assigned. There  are  also  other  points  of
difference  which  are  dealt  with  elsewhere.1 Again,  61
the term  difference is  applied  in  cases  when  the
genus  is  divided  into  species  and  one  species  is  sub-
divided. Animal,  for  instance,  is  a  genus,  mortal  a
species,  while  terrestrial  or  biped  is  a  difference:  for
they  are  not  actually  properties,  but  serve  to  show

*33


QUINTILIAN

proprium  est  sed  iam  differt  a  marino  vel  quadripede ;
quod  non tam ad argumentum  pertinet quam  ad

62  diligentem  finitionis  comprehensionem.  Cicero  genus
et  speciem,  quam  eandem  formam  vocat,  a  finitione
deducit  et  iis,  quae  ad  aliquid  sunt,  subiicit :  ut,  si
is,  cui  argentum  omne  legatum  est,  petat  signatum
quoque,  utatur  genere ;  at  si  quis,  cum  legatum  sit
ei,  quae  viro  materfamilias  esset,  neget  deberi  ei,
quae in manum non convenerit,  specie ;  quoniam

63  duae  formae  sint  matrimoniorum.  Divisione  autem
adiuvari  finitionem  docet,  eamque  differre  a  partitione,
quod  haec  sit  totius  in  partes,  ilia  generis  in  formas ;
partes  incertas  esse,  ut  Quibus  constet  respublica;
formas  certas,  ut  Quot  sint  species  rerumpubli-
carum,  quas  tris  accepimus,  quae  populi,  quae  pauco-

64  rum,  quae  unius  potestate  vegerentur.  Et  ille  quidem
non  iis  exemplis  utitur,  quia  scribens  ad  Trebatium
ex  iure  ducere  ea  maluit ;  ego  apertiora  posui.  Pro-
pria vero  ad  coniecturae  quoque  pertinent  partem :
ut,  quia  proprium  est  boni  recte  facere,  iracundi
verbis  aut  manu  male facere,  facta  haec  ab  ipsis l

1  male  facere,  facta  haec  ab  ipsis,  supplied  by  Halm  and
Kayser.


1  Cic.  Top.  iii.  13.

*  There  was  the  formal  marriage  per  coemptionem,  bringing
the  woman  under  the  power  (in  manum)  of  her  husband  and
giving  her  the  title  of  materfamilias,  and  the  informal  marriage
based  on  cohabitation  without  involving  the  wife's  coming  in
manum  mariti.

234


BOOK V.  x.  61-64

the  difference  between  such  animals  and  quadrupeds
or  creatures  of  the  sea.  This  distinction,  however,
comes  under  the  province  not  so  much  of  argument
as  of  exact  definition.  Cicero  1  separates  genus  and  62
species,  which  latter  he  calls  form,  from  definition
and  includes  them  under  relation.  For  example,
if  a  person  to  whom  another  man  has  left  all  his
silver  should  claim  all  his  silver  money  as  well,  he
would  base  his  claim  upon  genus  ;  on  the  other  hand
if  when  a  legacy  has  been  left  to  a  married  woman
holding  the  position  of  materfamilias,  it  should  be
maintained  that  the  legacy  is  not  due  to  a  woman
who  never  came  into  the  power  of  her  husband,  the
argument  is  based  on  species,  since  there  are  two
kinds  of  marriage.2  Cicero3  further  shows  that  63
definition  is  assisted  by  division,  which  he  dis-
tinguishes from  partition,  making  the  latter  the
dissection  of  a  whole  into  its  parts  and  the  former
the  division  of  a  genus  into  its  forms  or  species.  The
number  of  parts  he  regards  as  being  uncertain,  as  for
instance  the  elements  of  which  a  state  consists  ;  the
forms  or  species  are,  however,  certain,  as  for  instance
the  number  of  forms  of  government,  which  we  are
told  are  three,  democracy,  oligarchy,  and  monarchy.
It  is  true  that  he  does  not  use  these  illustrations,  64
since,  as  he  was  writing  to  Trebatius,4  he  preferred
to  draw  his  examples  from  law.  I  have  chosen  my
illustrations  as  being  more  obvious.  Properties  have7
relation  to  questions  of  fact  as  well ;  for  instance,
it  is  the  property  of  a  good  man  to  act  rightly,  of  an
angry  man  to  be  violent  in  speech  or  action,  and
consequently  we  believe  that  such  acts  are  com-
mitted by  persons  of  the  appropriate  character,  or

8  Cic.  Top.  v. 17. *  A  famous  lawyer,  cp.  in.  xi.  18.

235


QUINTILIAN

esse  credantur  aut  contra.  Nam  ut  quaedam  in  qui-
busdam  utique  sunt,  ita  quaedam  in  quibusdam l
utique  non  sunt:  et  ratio,  quamvis  sit  ex  diverso,
eadem  est.

65  Divisio  et  ad  probandum  simili  via  valet  et  ad
refellendum.  Probationi  interim  satis  est  unum
habere,  hoc  modo,  Ut  sit  civis,  aut  natus  sit  oportet  aut
foetus  ;  utrumque  tollendum  est,  Nee  natus  nee  f actus

66  est.  Fit  hoc  et  multiplex,  idque  est  argumentorum
genus  ex  remotione,  quo  modo  efficitur  totum  falsum,
modo  id,  quod  relinquitur,  verum.  Totum  falsum
est  hoc  modo,  Pecuniam  credidisse  te  dicis;  aut  habuisti
ipse  aut  ab  aliquo  accepisii  aut  invenisti  aut  surripuisti.
Si  neque  domi  habuisti  neque  ab  aliquo  accepisti  et  cetera,

67  non  credidisti.  Reliquum  fit  verum  sic,  Hie  servus,
quern  tibi  vindicas,  aut  verna  tuus  est  aut  emptus  aut
donatus  aut  testamento  relictus  aut  ex  koste  captus  aut
alienus ;  deinde  remotis  prioribus  supererit  alienus.
Periculosum  et  cum  cura  intuendum  genus,  quia,  si
in  proponendo  unum  quodlibet  omiserimus,  cum  risu

68  quoque  tota  res  solvitur.  Tutius,  quod  Cicero  pro
Caecina  facit,  cum  interrogat,  Si  haec  actio  non  sit,
quae  sit  ?  simul  enim  removentur  omnia.  Vel  cum
duo  ponentur inter se  contraria,  quorum  tenuisse

1  utique  sunt,  ita  quaedam  in  quibusdam, Iulius  Victor  :
omitted  by  MSS.

1  pro  Gaec.  xiii.  37.
236


BOOK V.  x.  64-68

not  committed  by  persons  of  inappropriate  character.
For  just  as  certain  persons  possess  certain  qualities,
so  certain  others  do  not  possess  certain  qualities,
and  the  argument  is  of  precisely  the  same  nature,
though  from  opposite  premises.'

In  a  similar  way  division  is  valuable  both  for  proof  65
and  refutation.  For  proof,  it  is  sometimes  enough  to
establish  one  thing.  "  To  be  a  citizen,  a  man  must
either  have  been  born  or  made  such."  For  refutation,
both  points  must  be  disproved  :  "  he  was  neither  born
nor  made  a  citizen."  This  may  be  done  in  many  ways,  66
and  constitutes  a  form  of  argument  by  elimination,
whereby  we  show  sometimes  that  the  whole  is  false,
sometimes  that  only  that  which  remains  after  the
process  of  elimination  is  true.  An  example  of  the
first  of  these  two  cases  would  be  :  "  You  say  that  you
lent  him  money.  Either  you  possessed  it  yourself,  re-
ceived it  from  another,  found  it  or  stole  it.  If  you  did
not  possess  it,  receive  it  from  another,  find  or  steal  it,
you  did  not  lend  it  to  him."  The  residue  after  elimin-  67
ation  is  shown  to  be  true  as  follows :  "  This  slave  whom
you  claim  was  either  born  in  your  house  or  bought  or
given  you  or  left  you  by  will  or  captured  from  the
enemy  or  belongs  to  another."  By  the  elimination
of  the  previous  suppositions  he  is  shown  to  belong  to
another.  This  form  of  argument  is  risky  and  must
be  employed  with  care  ;  for  if,  in  setting  forth  the
alternatives,  we  chance  to  omit  one,  our  whole  case
will  fail,  and  our  audience  will  be  moved  to  laughter.
It  is  safer  to  do  what  Cicero1  does  in  the  pro  68
Caecina,  when  he  asks, "  If  this  is  not  the  point  at  issue,
what  is  ?  "  For  thus  all  other  points  are  eliminated  at
one  swoop.  Or  again  two  contrary  propositions  may  be
advanced,  either  of  which  if  established  would  suffice

*S7


QUINTAL!  AN

utrumlibet  sufficiat,  quale  Ciceronis  est,  Unum  quidem
certe,  nemo  erit  tarn  inimicus  Cluentio,  qui  mini  non  con-
cedat ;  si  constet  corruptum  Mud  esse  indicium,  aid  ab
Habito  aut  ab  Oppianico  esse  corruptum;  si  doceo  non
ab  Habito,  vinco  ab  Oppianico  ;  si  ostendo  ab  Oppianico,

69  pur  go  Habitum.  Fit  etiam  ex  duobus,  quorum  necesse
est  alterum  verum,  eligendi  adversario  potestas,
efficiturque,  ut,  utrum  elegerit,  noceat.  Facit  hoc
Cicero  pro  Oppio :  Utrum,  cum  Cottam  appetisset9  an
cum  ipse  sese  conaretur  occidere,  telum  e  manibus  ereptum
est  ?  et  pro  Vareno  :  Optio  vobis  datur,  utrum  velitis
casu  Mo  itinere  Varenum  usum  esse  an  huius  persuasu
et  inductu. Deinde  utraque  facit  accusatori  contraria.

70  Interim  duo  ita  proponuntur,  ut  utrumlibet  electum
idem  efticiat,  quale  est,  Philosophandum  est,  etiamsi
non  est  philosophandum.  Et  illud  vulgatum,  Quo
schema,  si  intelligitur  ?  quo,  si  non  intelligitur  ?  Et,
Mentieiur  in  tormentis,  qui  dolorem  pati  potest ;  mentie-
iur,  qui  non  potest.

71  Ut  sunt  autem  tria  tempora,  ita  ordo  rerum  tribus
momentis  consertus  est ;  habent  enim  omnia  initium,
incrementum,  summam,  ut  iurgium  deinde  pugna,


1  pro  Clutnt.  xxiii.  64.

*  Oppius  was  accused  of  embezzling  public  money  and
plotting  against  the  life  of  M.  Aurelius  Cotta,  governor  of
Bithynia,  where  Oppius  was  serving  as  quaestor.  Cicero's
defence  of  him  is  lost.

238


BOOK V.  x.  68-71

to  prove  the  case.  Take  the  following  example
from  Cicero : l  "  There  can  be  no  one  so  hostile  to
Cluentius  as  not  to  grant  me  one  thing  :  if  it  be  a
fact  that  the  verdict  then  given  was  the  result  of
bribery,  the  bribes  must  have  proceeded  either
from  Habitus  or  Oppianicus  :  if  I  show  that  they
did  not  proceed  from  Habitus  I  prove  that  they
proceeded  from  Oppianicus :  if  I  demonstrate  that
they  were  given  by  Oppianicus,  I  clear  Habitus."  Or  69
we  may  give  our  opponent  the  choice  between  two
alternatives  of  which  one  must  necessarily  be  true,
and  as  a  result,  whichever  he  chooses,  he  will
damage  his  case.  Cicero  does  this  in  the  pro
Oppio :  2  "  Was  the  weapon  snatched  from  his  hands
when  he  had  attacked  Cotta,  or  when  he  was  trying
to  commit  suicide  ?  "  and  in  the  pro  Vareno  : 3  "  You
have  a  choice  between  two  alternatives  :  either  you
must  show  that  the  choice  of  this  route  by  Varenus
was  due  to  chance  or  that  it  was  the  result  of  this
man's  persuasion  and  inducement/ '  He  then  shows
that  either  admission  tells  against  his  opponent.
Sometimes  again,  two  propositions  are  stated  of  such  70
a  character  that  the  admission  of  either  involves
the  same  conclusion,  as  in  the  sentence,  "  We  must
philosophise,  even  though  we  ought  not,"  or  as  in
the  common  dilemma,  "  WThat  is  the  use  of  a  figure,4
if  its  meaning  is  clear  ?  And  what  is  its  use,  if  it
is  unintelligible  ?  "  or,  "  He  who  is  capable  of  endur-
ing pain  will  lie  if  tortured,  and  so  will  he  who
cannot  endure  pain."

As  there  are  three  divisions  of  time,  so  the  order  71
of  events  falls  into  three  stages. For  everything  has  a
beginning,  growth  and  consummation,  as  for  instance

8  See  iv.  ii.  26. 4  See  vix.  iv.  28,  ix.  i.  14,  ix.  ii.  65.

239


QUINTILIAN

turn  x  caedes.  Est  ergo  hie  quoque  argumentorum
locus  invicem  probantium.  Nam  et  ex  initiis  summa
colligitur,  quale  est,  Non  possum  togam  praetextam
sperare,  cum  exordium  pullum  videam ;  et  contra,  non
dominationis  causa  Sullam  arrna  sumpsisse,  argumen-

72  turn  est  dictatura  deposita.  Similiter  ex  incremento
in  utramque  partem  ducitur  rei  ratio  cum  in  con-
iectura  turn  etiam  in  tractatu  aequitatis,  an  ad
initium  summa  referenda  sit,  id  est,  an  ei  caedes
imputanda  sit,  a  quo  iurgium  coepit.

73  Est  argumentorum  locus  ex  similibus  :  Si  continen-
tia  virtus,  utique  et  abstinentia  ;  Sijidem  debet  tutor,  et
procurator.  Hoc  est  ex  eo  gen  ere,  quod  cVaywy^v
Graeci  vocant,  Cicero  inductionem.  Ex  dissimilibus :
Non,  si  laetitia  bonum,  et  voluptas ;  Non,  quod  mulieri,
idem  pupillo.  Ex  contrariis  :  Frugalitas  bonum,  luxuria
enim  malum  ;  Si  malorum  causa  bellum  est,  erit  emenda-
tio  pax  ;  Si  veniam  meretur,  qui  imprudens  nocuit,  non

74  meretur  praemium,  qui  imprudens  profuiU  Ex  pugnan-
tibus  :  Qui  est  sapiens,  stultus  non  est.  Ex  consequenti-
bus  sive  adiunctis  : Si  bonum  iustitia,  est  recte  iudi-

1  pugna,  turn,  supplied  by  Halm.

1  de  Inv.  i.  31.

2  It  is  possible  that  Quintilian  regards  adiuncta  as  =  con-
sequentia.  The  distinction  made  above  is  that  made  by
Cicero,  Top.  xii.

240


BOOK V.  x.  71-74

a  quarrel,  blows,  murder.  Thus  arise  arguments  which
lend  each  other  mutual  support ;  for  the  conclusion
is  inferred  from  the  beginnings,  as  in  the  following
case  :  €t  I  cannot  expect  a  purple-striped  toga,  when
I  see  that  the  beginning  of  the  web  is  black  "  ;  or  the
beginning  may  be  inferred  from  the  conclusion :
for  instance  the  fact  that  Sulla  resigned  the  dictator-
ship is  an  argument  that  Sulla  did  n©t  take  up
arms  with  the  intention  of  establishing  a  tyranny.
Similarly  from  the  growth  of  a  situation  we  may  72
infer  either  its  beginning  or  its  end,  not  only  in
questions  of  fact  but  as  regards  points  of  equity,
such  as  whether  the  conclusion  is  referable  to  the
beginning,  that  is,  "  Should  the  man  that  began  the
quarrel  be  regarded  as  guilty  of  the  bloodshed  with
which  it  ended  ?  "

Arguments  are  also  drawn  from  similarities  :  "  If  73
self-control  is  a  virtue,  abstinence  is  also  a  virtue."
"  If  a  guardian  should  be  required  to  be  faithful  to
his  trust,  so  should  an  agent."  To  this  class  belongs
the  type  of  argument  called  lirayuiyrj  by  the  Greeks,
induction  by  Cicero.1  Or  arguments  may  be  drawn
from  unlikes:  "  It  does  not  follow  that  if  joy  is  a
good  thing,  pleasure  also  is  a  good  thing  "  :  "  It
does  not  follow  that  what  applies  to  the  case  of  a
woman  applies  also  to  the  case  of  a  ward."  Or
from  contraries  :  "  Frugality  is  a  good  thing,  since
luxury  is  an  evil  thing  "  :  "  If  war  is  the  cause  of
ill,  peace  will  prove  a  remedy"  :  "  If  he  who  does
harm  unwittingly  deserves  pardon,  he  who  does
good  unwittingly  does  not  deserve  a  reward."  Or  74
from  contradictions :  "He  who  is  wise  is  not  a
fool."  Or  from  consequences  necessary  or  prob-
able2: "  If  justice is  a  good  thing,  we  must  give

241


QUINTILIAN

candum  ;  Si  malum  perfidia,  non  est  fallendum.  Idem
retro.  Nee  sunt  his  dissimilia  ideoque  huic  loco
subiicienda,  cum  et  ipsa  naturaliter  congruant :  Quod
quis  non  habtiit,  non  perdidit ;  Quern  quis  amat,  sciens
non  laedit ;  Quern  quis  heredem  suum  esse  voluit,  carum
kabuit,  habet,  habebit. Sed  cum  sint  indubitata,  vim

75  habent  paene  signorum  immutabilium.  Sed  haec  con-
sequentia  dico,  aKokovOa ;  est  enim  consequens  sapien-
tiae  bonitas  ;  ilia  insequentia,  7raoc7ro'/x€va,  quae  postea
facta  sunt  aut  futura.  Nee  sum  de  nominibus  anxius ;
vocet  enim,  ut  voluerit  quisque,  dum  vis  rerum
ipsa  manifesta  sit,  appareatque  hoc  temporis,  illud

76  esse  naturae.  Itaque  non  dubito  haec  quoque  vocare  l
consequentia,  quamvis  ex  prioribus  dent  argumentum
ad  ea  quae  sequuntur,  quorum  duas  quidam  species
esse  voluerunt :  actionis,  ut  pro  Oppio,  Quos  educere
invilos  in  provinciam  non  potuit,  eos  invitos  retinere  qui
potuit  ?  temporis,  in  Verrem,  «Si  finem  praetoris  edicto
adferunt  Kalendae  Jan.,  cur  non  initium  quoque  edicti

11  nascatur  a  Kalendis  Ian.? Quod  utrumque  exemplum

1  vocare,  added  by  Spalding.

1  See  ch.  ix.

2  Verr.  I.  xlii.  109.  The  praetor  on  entering  office  on
Jan.  1  issued  an  edict  announcing  the  principles  on  which  his
rulings  would  be  given. This  edict  was  an  interpretation  of

242


BOOK V.  x.  74-77

right  judgment " :  "If  breach  of  faith  is  a  bad
thing,  we  must  not  deceive."  And  such  arguments
may  also  be  reversed.  Similar  to  these  are  the
following  arguments,  which  must  therefore  be
classed  under  this  same  head,  since  it  is  to  this
that  they  naturally  belong :  "  A  man  has  not  lost
what  he  never  had  "  :  "  A  man  does  not  wittingly
injure  him  whom  he  loves  "  :  "  If  one  man  has  ap-
pointed another  as  his  heir,  he  regarded,  still  regards
and  will  continue  to  regard  him  with  affection."
However,  such  arguments,  being  incontrovertible,
are  of  the  nature  of  absolute  indications.1  These,  75
however,  I  call  consequent  or  aKokovOa ;  goodness,  for
instance,  is  consequent  on  wisdom  :  while  in  regard
to  things  which  merely  have  taken  place  afterwards  or
will  take  place  I  use  the  term  insequent  or  irapiiroptva,
though  I  do  not  regard  the  question  of  terminology
as  important.  Give  them  any  name  you  please,  as
long  as  the  meaning  is  clear  and  it  is  shown  that
the  one  depends  on  time,  the  other  on  the
nature  of  things.  I  have  therefore  no  hesitation  in  76
calling  the  following  forms  of  argument  also  con-
sequential, although  they  argue  from  the  past  to  the
future :  some  however  divide  them  into  two  classes,
those  concerned  with  action,  as  in  the  pro  Oppio,
"  How  could  he  detain  against  their  will  those
whom  he  was  unable  to  take  to  the  province  against
their  will?"  and  those  concerned  with  time,  as  in
the  Verrines,2  "  If  the  first  of  January  puts  an  end
to  the  authority  of  the  praetor's  edict,  why  should
the  commencement  of  its  authority  not  likewise
date  from  the  first  of  January  ?  " Both  these  in-  77

the  law  of  Rome,  and  held  good  only  during  the  praetor's
year  of  office.

*43


QUINTILIAN

tale  est,  ut  idem  in  diversum,  si  retro  agas,  valeat.
Consequens enim est, eos, qui inviti duci non

78  potuerint,  invitos  non  potuisse  retineri.  Ilia  quo-
que,  quae  ex  rebus  mutuam  confirmationem  prae-
stantibus  ducuntur  (quae  proprii  generis  videri
quidam  volunt  et  vocant  ck  to>v  irpo?  aWrjka,  Cicero
ex  rebus  sub  eandem  rationem  venientibus)  fortiter
consequentibus  iunxerim :  Si  portorium  Rhodiis
locare honesium est, et Hermocreonti conducere, et

79  Quod  discere  honestum,  et  docere.  Unde  ilia  non  hac
ratione  dicta  sed  efficiens  idem  Domitii  Afri  sen-
tentia  est  pulchra :  Ego  accusant,  vos  damnastis.
Est  invicem  consequens  et  quod  ex  diversis  idem
ostendit ;  ut,  qui  mundum  nasci  dicit,  per  hoc  ipsum
et  deficere  significet,  quia  deficit  omne  quod  nascitur.

80  Simillima  est  his  argumentation  qua  colligi  solent
ex  iis  quae  faciunt  ea  quae  efficiuntur,  aut  contra,
quod  genus  a  causis  vocant.  Haec  interim  neces-
sario  fiunt,  interim  plerumque  sed  non  necessario.
Nam  corpus  in  lumine  utique  umbram  facit,  et  umbra,

81  ubicunque  est,  ibi  esse  corpus  ostendit.  Alia  sunt,
ut  dixi,  non  necessaria,  vel  utrinque  vel  ex  altera
parte  :  Sol  colorat ;  non  utique,  qui  est  coloratus,  a  sole


1  Ar.  Rhet.  n.  xxiii.  3.

s  dt  Inv.  i.  xxx.  46.  8  ib.  47.


«44


BOOK V.  x.  77-81

stances  are  of  such  a  nature  that  the  argument  is
reversible.  For  it  is  a  necessary  consequence  that
those  who  could  not  be  taken  to  the  province
against  their  will  could  not  be  retained  against  their
will.  So  too  I  feel  clear  that  we  should  rank  as  78
consequential  arguments  those  derived  from  facts
which  lend  each  other  mutual  support  and  are  by
some  regarded  as  forming  a  separate  kind  of  argu-
ment, which  they1  call  ck  t^v  7rp6s  aXkrjXa,  arguments
from  things  mutually  related,  while  Cicero2  styles
them  arguments  drawn  from  things  to  which  the
same  line  of  reasoning  applies  ;  take  the  following
example  8 :  "If  it  is  honourable  for  the  Rhodians  to
let  out  their  harbour  dues,  it  is  honourable  likewise
for  Hermocreon  to  take  the  contract/'  or  "  What  it
is  honourable  to  learn,  it  is  also  honourable  to  teach.' '
Such  also  is  the  fine  sentence  of  Domitius  Afer,  79
which  has  the  same  effect,  though  it  is  not  identical
in  form :  "  I  accused,  you  condemned."  Argu-
ments which  prove  the  same  thing  from  opposites
are  also  mutually  consequential ;  for  instance,  we  may
argue  that  he  who  says  that  the  world  was  created
thereby  implies  that  it  is  suffering  decay,  since  this
is  the  property  of  all  created  things.

There  is  another  very  similar  form  of  argument,  80
which  consists  in  the  inference  of  facts  from  their
efficient  causes  or  the  reverse,  a  process  known  as
argument  from  causes.  The  conclusion  is  sometimes
necessary,  sometimes  generally  without  being  neces-
sarily true.  For  instance,  a  body  casts  a  shadow  in
the  light,  and  the  shadow  wherever  it  falls  indicates
the  presence  of  a  body.  There  are  other  conclusions  81
which,  as  I  have  said,  are  not  necessary,  whether  as
regards  both  cause  and  effect  or  only  one  of  the  two.
For  instance,  "the sun  colours  the  skin, but not

245


QUINTILIAN

est.  Iter  pulverulenlum  facit ;  sed  neque  omne  iter  pul-
verern  movet  nee,  quisquis  est  pulverulentus,  ex  itinere
82  est.  Quae  utique  fiunt,  talia  sunt :  Si  sapientia
bonum  virum  facit,  bonus  vir  est  utique  sapiens;  itemque
Boni  est  honeste  facere,  mali  turpiter  ;  et  Qui  honcstc
faciunt,  boni,  qui  turpiter,  mali  iudicanlur ;  recte.  At,
Exercitatio  plerumque  robustum  corpus  facit ;  sed  non
quisquis  est  robustus  exercitatus,  nee  quisquis  exercitatus
robustus  ;  nee,  quia  fortitudo  praestat  ne  mortem  time-
amus,  quisquis  mortem  non  timuerit,  vir  fortis  erit  existi-
mandus  ;  nee,  si  capitis  dolor  em  facit,  inutilis  hominibus

83  sol  est.  Haec  ad  hortativum  maxime  genus  perti-
nent :  Virtus  facit  laudem,  sequenda  igitur  ;  at  voluptas
infamiam,  fugienda  igitur.  Recte  autem  monemur,
causas non utique ab ultimo esse repetendas,  ut

84  Medea,  Utinam  ne  in  nemore  Pelio  ;  quasi  vero  id  earn
fecerit  miseram  aut  noceutem,  quod  illic  ceciderint
abiegnae  ad  terram  trabes ;  et  Philocteta  Paridi,  Si
impar  esses  tibi,  ego  nunc  non  esse?n  miser ;  quo  modo


1  The opening of Ennius' translation of  the Medea of
Euripides.

2  From  the  Philoctetes  of  Accius,  Ribbeck  fr.  178.


246


BOOK V.  x.  81-84

everyone  that  is  coloured  receives  that  colour  from
the  sun ;  a  journey  makes  the  traveller  dusty,  but
every  journey  does  not  produce  dust,  nor  is  everyone
that  is  dusty  just  come  from  a  journey."  As  examples  82
of  necessary  conclusions  on  the  other  hand  I  may
cite  the  following :  "  If  wisdom  makes  a  man  good,
a  good  man  must  needs  be  wise  "  ;  and  again,  "  It  is
the  part  of  a  good  man  to  act  honourably,  of  a  bad
man  to  act  dishonourably/'  or  "Those  who  act
honourably  are  considered  good,  those  who  act  dis-
honourably are  considered  bad  men/'  In  these
cases  the  conclusion  is  correct.  On  the  other  hand,
"  though  exercise  generally  makes  the  body  robust,
not  everyone  who  is  robust  is  given  to  exercise,  nor
is  everyone  that  is  addicted  to  exercise  robust.  Nor
again,  because  courage  prevents  our  fearing  death,  is
every  man  who  has  no  fear  of  death  to  be  regarded
as  a  brave  man  ;  nor  is  the  sun  useless  to  man
because  it  sometimes  gives  him  a  headache."  Argu-  83
ments  such  as  the  following  belong  in  the  main  to
the  hortative  department  of  oratory: — "Virtue
brings  renown,  therefore  it  should  be  pursued  ;  but
the  pursuit  of  pleasure  brings  ill-repute,  therefore
it  should  be  shunned."  But  the  warning  that  we
should  not  necessarily  search  for  the  originating
cause  is  just :  an  example  of  such  error  is  provided
by  the  speech  of  Medea *  beginning

"  Ah  !  would  that  never  there  in  Pelion's  grove,"
as  though  her  misery  or  guilt  were due  to  the  fact  84
that  there

"  The  beams  of  fir  had  fallen  to  the  ground  "  ;
or  I  might  cite  the  words  addressed  by  Philoctetes
to  Paris,2

"  Hadst  thou  been  other  than  thou  art,  then  I
Had  ne'er  been  plunged  in  woe."

247


QUINTILIAN

pervenire quolibet retro causas legentibus licet.

85  Illud  his  adiicere  ridiculum  putarem,  nisi  eo  Cicero
uteretur,  quod  coniugatum  vocant,  ut  eos,  qui  rem
iustam  faciunt,  iuste  facere  (quod  certe  rion  eget
probatione),  quod  compascuum  est,  compascere  licere.

86  Quidam  haec,  quae  vel  ex  causis  vel  ex  efficientibus
diximus,  alieno  nomine  vocant  cK/Jao-cis  id  est  exitus.
Nam  nee  hie  aliud  tractatur  quam  quid  ex  quoque
eveniat.

Adposita  vel comparativa  dicuntur,  quae  minora
ex  maioribus,  maiora  ex  minoribus,  paria  ex  paribus

87  probant.  Confirmatur  coniectura  ex  maiore,  Si  quis
sactilegium  facit,  faciei  et  furium;  ex  minore,  Qui
facile  ac  palam  mentitur,  peierabit ;  ex  pari,  Qui  ob
rem  iudicandam  pecuniam  accepit,  et  ob  dicendum  falsum

88  testimonium  accipicL  Iuris  confirmatio  huiusmodi  est :
ex  maiore,  Si  adulterum  occidere  licet,  et  loris  caedere ;
ex  minore,  Si  furem  nocturnum  occidere  licet,  quid  la-
tronem  ?  ex  pari,  Quae  poena  adversus  interfectorem
patris iusta est, eadem adversus matris ; quorum

89  omnium  tractatus  versatur  in  syllogismis. Ilia  magis

1  Top.  iii.  12. *  See  m.  vi.  15,  43,  88.
248


BOOK V.  x.  84-89

By  tracing  back  causes  on  lines  such  as  these  we
may  arrive  anywhere.  But  for  the  fact  that  Cicero  x  85
has  done  so,  I  should  regard  it  as  absurd  to  add  to
these  what  is  styled  the  conjugate  argument,  such  as
"Those  who  perform  a  just  act,  act  justly/'  a  self-
evident  fact  requiring  no  proof;  or  again,  "Every
man  has  a  common  right  to  send  his  cattle  to  graze
in  a  common  pasture/'  Some  call  these  arguments  86
derived  from  causes  or  efficients  by  the  Greek  name
€*/?ao-€is,  that  is,  results  ;  for  in  such  cases  the  only
point  considered  is  how  one  thing  results  from
another.

Those  arguments  which  prove  the  lesser  from  the
greater  or  the  greater  from  the  less  or  equals  from
equals  are  styled  apposite  or  comparative.  A  con-  87
jecture  as  to  &  fact  is  confirmed  by  argument  from
something  greater  in  the  following  sentence  :  "  If
a  man  commit  sacrilege,  he  will  also  commit  theft  "  ;
from  something  less,  in  a  sentence  such  as  "He  who
lies  easily  and  openly  will  commit  perjury"  ;  from
something  equal  in  a  sentence  such  as  "  He  who
has  taken  a  bribe  to  give  a  false  verdict  will  take  a
bribe  to  give  false  witness."  Points  of  law  may  be  88
proved  in  a  similar  manner ;  from  something  greater,
as  in  the  sentence  "  If  it  is  lawful  to  kill  an
adulterer,  it  is  lawful  to  scourge  him  "  ;  from  some-
thing less,  u  If  it  is  lawful  to  kill  a  man  attempting
theft  by  night,  how  much  more  lawful  is  it  to  kill
one  who  attempts  robbery  with  violence  "  ;  from
something  equal,  *  The  penalty  which  is  just  in  the
case  of  parricide  is  also  just  in  the  case  of  matri-
cide/ '  In  all  these  cases  we  follow  the  syllogistic
method.2  The  following  type  of  argument  on  the  89
other  hand  is  more  serviceable  in  questions  turning

249


QUINTILIAN

finitionibus  aut  qualitatibus  prosunt,  Si  robur  corporis
bus  bonum  est,  non  minus  sanitas  ;  Si  furtum  scelus,  magis
sacrilegium ;  Si  abstinentia  virtus,  et  continentia ;  Si
mundus  providentia  regiiur,  administranda  respublica ;
Si  domus  aedificari  sine  ratione  non  potest,  quid  urbs
universa  ? Si  agenda  est ] navalium  cura,  et  armorum.

90  Ac  mihi  quidem  sufficeret  hoc  genus,  sed  in  species
secatur.  Nam  ex  pluribus  ad  unum  et  ex  uno  ad
plura  (unde  est  Quod  semel,  et  saepius),  et  ex  parte
ad  totum  et  ex  genere  ad  speciem,  et  ex  eo  quod
continet  ad  id  quod  continetur,  aut  ex  difficilioribus
ad  faciliora  et  ex  longe  positis  ad  propiora  et  ad
omnia,  quae  contra  haec  sunt,  eadem  ratione  argu-

91  menta  ducuntur.  Sunt  enim  et  haec  maiora  et
minora  aut  certe  vim  similem  obtinent,  quae  si
persequamur,  nullus  erit  ea  concidendi  modus.
Infinita  est  enim  rerum  comparatio,  iucundiora,
graviora,  magis  necessaria,  honestiora,  utiliora.
Sed  mittamus  plura,  ne  in  earn  ipsam,  quam  vito,

92  loquacitatem  incidam.  Exemplorum  quoque  ad  haec
infinitus  est  numerus,  sed  paucissima  attingam.  Ex
maiore  pro  Caecina,  Quod  exercitus  armatos  movet,  id
advocationem  togatorum  non  videbitur  movisse  ? Ex  fa-

1  urbs  universa  ?  si  agenda  est,  Badtrmacher :  agenda  si,
B  :  agendas,  A.

1  See  iii.  6  passim.  *  xv.  43.

250


BOOK V.  x.  89-92

on  definition  or  quality.1 "If  strength  is  good  for
the  body,  health  is  no  less  good." "If  theft  is  a
crime,  sacrilege  is  a  greater  crime.' ' u  If  abstinence
is  a  virtue,  so  is self-control." "  If  the  world is
governed  by  providence, the  state  also requires  a
government." "  If  a  house  cannot  be  built  without
a  plan,  what  of  a  whole  city  ? " "If  naval  stores
require  careful  supervision,  so  also  do  arms." I  am  90
content  to  treat  this  type  of  argument  as  a  genus
without  going  further ;  others  however  divide  it  into
species. For  we  may  argue  from  several  things  to
one  or  from  one  thing  to  several ; hence  arguments
such  as  "What has happened once may happen
often." We  may  also  argue  from  a  part  to  a  whole,
from  genus  to  species,  from  that  which  contains  to
that  which  is  contained,  from  the  difficult  to the
easy,  from  the  remote  to  the  near,  and similarly
from  the  opposites  of  all  these  to  their  opposites.
Now  all  these  arguments  deal  with  the  greater  or  91
the  less  or  else  with  things  that  are  equal,  and  if  we
follow  up  such  fine  distinctions, there  will  be no
limit  to  our  division into species. For the com-
parison of  things  is  infinite  ; things  may  be  more
pleasant,  more  serious,  more  necessary,  more  honour-
able, more  useful. I  say  no  more  for  fear  of  falling
into  that  very  garrulity  which I deprecate. The  92
number  of  examples  of these  arguments  which I
might  quote  is  likewise  infinite,  but  I  will  only  deal
with  a  very  few. As  an  example  of  argument  from
something  greater  take  the  following  example  from
the  pro Caecina 2 :  u  Shall we suppose that that
which  alarms  whole  armies  caused  no  alarm to a
peaceful  company  of  lawyers  ?  " As  an  instance  of
argument  from  something  easier,  take  this  passage

251


QUINTILIAN

ciliorein  Clodium  et  Curionem,  Ac  vide,  an  facile  Jieri

93  tu  potueris,  cum  is  f actus  non  sit,  cui  tu  concessistu  Ex
difficiliore,  Vide  quaeso,  Tubero,  ut,  qui  de  meo  facto
non  dubitem,  de  Ligarii  audeam  dicere.  Et  ibi,  An
sperandi  Ligario  causa  non  sit,  cum  mihi  apud  te  locus
sit  etiam  pro  alteiv  deprecandi  f  Ex  minore  pro  Caecina,
Itane  scire  esse  armatos  sat  est,  ut  vim  faclam  probes  ;

94  in  manus  eorum  incidere  non  est  satis  ?  Ergo,  ut  breviter
contraham  summani,  ducuntur  argumenta  a  personis,
causis,  locis,  tempore  (cuius  tres  partes  diximus,
praecedens,  coniunctum,  insequens),  facultatibus
(quibus  instrumentum  subiecimus),  modo  (id  est,  ut
quidque  sit  factum),  finitione,  genere,  specie,  diffe-
rentibus,  propriis,  remotione,  divisione,  initio,  incre-
mentis,  summa,  similibus,  dissimilibus,  pugnantibus,
consequentibus,  efficientibus,  efFectis,  eventis,  com-
paratione,  quae  in  plures  diducitur  species.

95  Illud  adiiciendum  videtur,  duci  argumenta  non  a
confessis  tantum  sed  etiam  a  fictione,  quod  Graeci
kolO*  vTToOeaiv  vocant ;  et  quidem  ex  omnibus  iisdem

1  A  lost  speech  of  Cicero,  to  which  reference  is  made  in
in.  vii.  2.

8  pro  Lig.  iii.  8  and  x.  31.  Cicero's  point  is  that  he  has
been  a  much  more  bitter  opponent  of  Caesar  than  Ligarius,
and  yet  he  has  been  pardoned  while  Ligarius  has  not.

3  xvi.  45.  Caecina  had  attempted  to  take  possession  of
lands  left  him  by  will,  but  was  driven  off  by  armed  force.
Cicero  has  just  pointed  out  that  there  were  precedents  for

252


BOOK V.  x.  92-95

from  the  speech  against  Clodius  and  Curio  2  :  "  Con-
sider whether  it  would  have  been  easy  for  you  to
secure  the  praetorship,  when  he  in  whose  favour  you
withdrew  failed  to  secure  election  ? "  The  fol-  93
lowing2  provides  an  example  of  argument  from
something  more  difficult :  "  I  beg  you,  Tubero,  to
remark  that  I,  who  do  not  hesitate  to  speak  of  my
own  deed,  venture  to  speak  of  that  performed  by
Ligarius "  ;  and  again,  "  Has  not  Ligarius  reason
for  hope,  when  I  am  permitted  to  intercede  with
you  for  another?0  For  an  argument  drawn  from
something  less  take  this  passage  from  the  pro
Caecina 3  :  "  Really  !  Is  the  knowledge  that  the
men  were  armed  sufficient  to  prove  that  violence
was  offered,  and  the  fact  that  he  fell  into  their
hands  insufficient  ? "  Well,  then,  to  give  a  brief  94
summary  of  the  whole  question,  arguments  are
drawn  from  persons,  causes,  place  and  time  (which
latter  we  have  divided  into  preceding,  contemporary
and  subsequent),  from  resources  (under  which  we
include  instruments),  from  manner  (that  is,  how  a
thing  has  been  done),  from  definition,  genus,  species,
difference,  property,  elimination,  division,  begin-
nings, increase,  consummation,  likes,  unlikes,  con-
tradictions, consequents,  efficients,  effects,  results,
and  comparison,  which  is  subdivided  into  several
species.

I think I should also  add  that  arguments  are  95
drawn  not merely from admitted  facts,  but  from
fictitious  suppositions,  which  the  Greeks  style  kolO'
vTToOtvw,  and  that  this  latter  type  of  argument  falls
into  all  the  same  divisions  as  those  which  I  have

regarding  the  mere  sight  of  armed  men  in  occupation  of  the
property  claimed  as  sufficient  proof  of  violence.

253


QUINTILIAN

locis,  quibus  superiora,  quia  totidem  species  esse  pos-

96  sunt  fictae  quot  verae.  Nam  fingere  hoc  loco  hoc  est
proponere  aliquid,  quod,  si  verum  sit,  aut  solvat
quaestionem  aut  adiuvet ;  deinde  id,  de  quo  quae-
ritur,  facere  illi  simile.  Id  quo  facilius  accipiant
iuvenes  nondum  scholam  egressi,  primo  familiaribus

97  magis  ei  aetati  exemplis  ostendam.  Lex  :  Qui  paren-
tes  non  aluerit,  vinciatur.  Non  alit  aliquis,  et  vincula
nihilominus  recusat.  Utitur  fictione,  si  miles,  si  in-
fans  sit,  si  reipublicae  causa  absit.  Et  ilia  contra
optio  lem  fortium,  si  tyrannidem  petas,  si  templorum

98  eversionem.  Plurimum  ea  res  virium  habet  contra
scriptum.  Utitur  his  Cicero  pro  Caecina,  unde  tu
aut  familia  aut  procurator  tuus.  Si  me  villicus  tuus
solus  deiecisset — Si  vero  ne  habeas  quidem  servum  prae-
ter  eum,  qui  me  deiecerit,  et  alia  in  eodem  libro  plurima.

99  Verum  eadem  fictio  valet  et  ad  qualitates  :  Si  Catilina


1  cp.  vn.  v.  4.

2  xix.  55.  Quintilian  merely  quotes  fragment»  of  Cicero's
arguments.  The  sense  of  the  passages  omitted  is  supplied  in
brackets.  The  interdict  of  the  praetor  had  ordered  Caecina's
restoration.  His  adversary  is  represented  by  Cicero  as
attempting  to  evade  compliance  by  verbal  quibbles.

*  pro  Mur.  xxxix.  83.  Cicero  argues  that  Murena's
election  as  consul  is  necessary  to  save  the  state  from  Catiline.
If  the  jury  now  condemn  him,  they  will  be  doing  exactly
what  Catiline  and  his  accomplices,  now  in  arms  in  Etruria,
would  do  if  they  could  try  him.

254


BOOK V.  x.  95-99

mentioned  above,  since  there  may  be  as  many
species  of  fictitious  arguments  as  there  are  of  true
arguments.  When  I  speak  of  fictitious  arguments  96
I  mean  the  proposition  of  something  which,  if  true,
would  either  solve  a  problem  or  contribute  to  its
solution,  and  secondly  the  demonstration  of  the
similarity  of  our  hypothesis  to  the  case  under  con-
sideration. To  make  this  the  more  readily  intelli-
gible to  youths  who  have  not  yet  left  school,  I  will
first  of  all  illustrate  it  by  examples  of  a  kind  familiar
to  the  young.  There  is  a  law  to  the  effect  that  "  the  97
man  who  refuses  to  support  his  parents  is  liable  to
imprisonment."  A  certain  man  fails  to  support  his
parents  and  none  the  less  objects  to  going  to  prison.
He  advances  the  hypothesis  that  he  would  be  exempt
from  such  a  penalty  if  he  were  a  soldier,  an  infant,
or  if  he  were  absent  from  home  on  the  service  of
the  state.  Again  in  the  case  where  a  hero  is  allowed
to  choose  his  reward l  we  might  introduce  the
hypotheses  of  his  desiring  to  make  himself  a  tyrant
or  to  overthrow  the  temples  of  the  gods.  Such  98
arguments  are  specially  useful  when  we  are  arguing
against  the  letter  of  the  law,  and  are  thus  employed
by  Cicero  in  the  pro  Caecina  2  :  u  [The  interdict  con-
tains the  words,]  '  whence  you  or  your  household  or
your  agent  had  driven  him/  If  your  steward  alone
had  driven  me  out,  [it  would  not,  I  suppose,  be  your
household  but  a  member  of  your  household  that  had
driven  me  out].  ...  If  indeed  you  owned  no  slave
except  the  one  who  drove  me  out,  [you  would  cry,
1  If  I  possess  a  household  at  all,  I  admit  that  my
household  drove  you  out ']."  Many  other  examples
might  be  quoted  from  the  same  work.  But  fictitious  99
suppositions  are  also  exceedingly  useful  when  we
are concerned with the quality of  an  act3: "If

*55


QUINTILIAN

cum  suo  const lio  nefanorum  hominum,  quos  secum  eduxii,
hoc  de  re  posset  iudicare,  condemnaret  L.  Murenam  ;  et
ad  amplificationem  :  Si  hoc  tibi  inter  cenam  in  illis  im-
manibus  poculis  tuis  accidisseL  Sic  et,  Si  respublica
vocem  haberet

100  Has  fere  sedes  accepimus  probationum  in  univer-
sum,  quas  neque  generatim  tradere  sat  est,  cum  ex
qualibet  earum  innumerabilis  argumentorum  copia
oriatur,  neque  per  singulas  species  exsequi  patitur
natura  rerum,  quod  qui  sunt  facere  conati,  duo  pari-
ter  subierunt  incommoda,  ut  et  nimium  dicerent  nee

101  tamen  totum.  Inde  plurimi,  cum  in  hos  inexpli-
cabiles  laqueos  inciderunt,  omnem,  etiam  quem  ex
ingenio  suo  poterant  habere,  conatum  velut  adstricti
certis legum vinculis perdiderunt, et magistrum

102  respicientes  naturam  ducem  sequi  desierunt.  Nam
ut  per  se  non  sufficiet  scire,  omnes  probationes  aut  a
personis  aut  a  rebus  peti,  quia  utrumque  in  plura
dividitur,  ita  ex  antecedentibus  et  iunctis  et  insequen-
tibus  trahenda  esse  argumenta  qui  acceperit,  num
protinus  in  hoc  sit  instructus  ut,  quid in quaque

103  causa  ducendum  sit  ex  his,  sciat?  praesertim,  cum
plurimae probationes in ipso causarum complexu

1  Phil.  n.  xxv.  63.  "  This "  =  vomiting.  Cicero  con-
tinues "who  would  not  have  thought  it  disgraceful."

1  Probably  an  allusion  to  Cat.  i.  7,  where  Cicero  makes
the  state  reproach  Catiline  for  his  conduct.

256


BOOK V.  x.  99-103

Catiline  could  try  this  case  assisted  by  a  jury  com-
posed of  those  scoundrels  whom  he  led  out  with  him
he  would  condemn  Lucius  Murena."  It  is  useful
also  for  amplification  x  :  "  If  this  had  happened  to  you
during  dinner  in  the  midst  of  your  deep  potations  "  ;
or  again,2  "  If  the  state  could  speak/'

Such  in  the  main  are  the  usual  topics  of  proof  100
as  specified  by  teachers  of  rhetoric,  but  it  is  not
sufficient  to  classify  them  generically  in  our  instruc-
tions, since  from  each  of  them  there  arises  an  infinite
number  of  arguments,  while  it  is  in  the  very  nature
of  things  impossible  to  deal  with  all  their  individual
species.  Those  who  have  attempted  to  perform
this  latter  task  have  exposed  themselves  in  equal
degree  to  two  disadvantages,  saying  too  much  and
yet  failing  to  cover  the  whole  ground.  Consequently  101
the  majority  of  students,  finding  themselves  lost  in
an  inextricable  maze,  have  abandoned  all  individual
effort,  including  even  that  which  their  own  wits
might  have  placed  within  their  power,  as  though
they  were  fettered  by  certain  rigid  laws,  and  keep-
ing their  eyes  fixed  upon  their  master  have  ceased
to  follow  the  guidance  of  nature.  But  as  it  is  not  102
in  itself  sufficient  to  know  that  all  proofs  are  drawn
either  from  persons  or  things,  because  each  of  these
groups  is  subdivided  into  a  number  of  different  heads
so  he  who  has  learned  that  arguments  must  be
drawn  from  antecedent,  contemporary  or  subse-
quent facts  will  not  be  sufficiently  instructed  in
the  knowledge  of  the  method  of  handling  arguments
to  understand  what  arguments  are  to  be  drawn  from
the  circumstances  of  each  particular  case  ;  especially  103
as  the  majority  of  proofs  are  to  be  found  in  the
special  circumstances  of  individual  cases  and  have

257


QUINTILIAN

reperiantur,  ita  ut  sint  cum  alia  lite  nulla  communes,
eaeque  sint  et  potentissimae  et  minime  obviae,  quia
communia  ex  praeceptis  accepimus,  propria  inveni-

104  enda  sunt.  Hoc  genus  argumentorum  sane  dicamus
ex  circumstantia,  quia  irtpivraaiv  dicere  aliter  non
possumus,  vel  ex  iis  quae  cuiusque  causae  propria
sunt :  ut  in  illo  adultero  sacerdote,  qui  lege,  qua
unius  servandi  potestatem  habebat,  se  ipse  servare
voluit,  proprium  controversiae  est  dicere,  Non  unum
nocentem  servabas,  quia  te  dimisso  adulterant  occidere
non  UcebaL Hoc  enim  argumentum  lex  facit,  quae

106  prohibet  adulteram  sine  adultero  occidere.  Et  ilia,
in  qua  lata  lex  est,  ut  argentarii  dimidium  ex  eo
quod  debebant  solverent,  creditum  suum  totum  exi-
gerent.  Argentarius  ab  argentario  solidum  petit.
Proprium  ex  materia  est  argumentum  creditoris,
idcirco  adiectum  esse  in  lege,  ut  argentarius  totum
exigeret ;  adversus  alios  enim  non  opus  fuisse  lege,
cum  omnes  praeterquam  ab  argentariis  totum  exi-

106  gendi  ius  haberent.  Cum  multa  autem  novantur  in
omni  genere  materiae  turn  praecipue  in  iis  quaestio-


1  This law and  those which follow  are  imaginary  law6
invented  for  the  purposes  of  the  schools  of  rhetoric.

2  The  argument  is  far  from  clear.  The  case  assumes  that
by  a  species  of  moratorium  a  banker  maybe  released  from
payment  of  his  debts  in  full  to  ordinary  creditors.  This
moratorium  does  not  however  apparently  apply  to  debts
contracted  between  banker  and  banker.

258


BOOK V.  x.  103-106

no  connexion  with  any  other  dispute,  and  therefore
while  they  are  the  strongest,  are  also  the  least
obvious,  since,  whereas  we  derive  what  is  common
to  all  cases  from  general  rules,  we  have  to  discover
for  ourselves  whatever  is  peculiar  to  the  case  which
we  have  in  hand.  This  type  of  argument  may  104
reasonably  be  described  as  drawn  from  circum-
stances, there  being  no  other  word  to  express  the
Greek  ireplcrTacris,  or  from  those  things  which  are
peculiar  to  any  given  case.  For  instance,  in  the
case  of  the  priest  who  having  committed  adultery
desired  to  save  his  own  life  by  means  of  the  law  1
which  gave  him  the  power  of  saving  one  life,  the
appropriate  argument  to  employ  against  him  would
run  as  follows :  "  You  would  save  more  than  one
guilty  person,  since,  if  you  were  discharged,  it  would
not  be  lawful  to  put  the  adulteress  to  death."  For
such  an  argument  follows  from  the  law  forbidding
the  execution  of  the  adulteress  apart  from  the
adulterer.  Again,  take  the  case  falling  under  the  105
law  which  lays  down  that  bankers  may  pay  only
half  of  what  they  owe,  while  permitted  to  recover
the  whole  of  what  they  are  owed.  One  banker
requires  payment  of  the  whole  sum  owed  him  by
another  banker.  The  appropriate  argument  supplied
by  the  subject  to  the  creditor  is  that  there  was
special  reason  for  the  insertion  of  the  clause 2
sanctioning  the  recovery  of  the  whole  of  a  debt
by  a  banker,  since  there  was  no  need  of  such  a  law
as  against  others,  inasmuch  as  all  have  the  right  to
recover  the  whole  of  a  debt  from  any  save  a  banker.
But  while  some  fresh  considerations  are  bound  to  106
present  themselves  in  every  kind  of  subject,  this  is
more  especially  the case  in questions turning  on

259


QUINT1LIAN

nibus,  quae  scripto  constant,  quia  vocum  est  in  sin-
gulis  ambiguitas frequens  et  adhuc  in coniunctis

107  magis.  Et  haec  ipsa  plurium  legum  aliorumve  scrip-
torum  vel  congruentium  vel  repugnantium  complexu
varientur  necesse  est,  cum  res  rei  aut  ius  iuris  quasi
signum  est.  Non  debui  tibi  pecuniam  ;  nunquam  me
appellasti,  usuram  non  accepisti,  ultro  a  me  mutuatus  es.
Lex  est,  Qui  patri  proditionis  reo  non  adfuerit,  exkeres
sit.  Negat  Alius,1  nisi  si  pater  absolutus  sit.  Quid
signi  ? Lex  altera,  Proditionis  damnatus  cum  advocato

108  exulet.  Cicero  pro  Cluentio  Publium  Popilium  et
Tiberium  Guttam  dicit  non  iudicii  corrupti  sed  am-
bitus esse  damnatos.  Quid  signi  ?  quod  accusatores
eorum,  qui  erant  ipsi  ambitus  damnati,  e  lege  sint

109  post  hanc  victoriam  restituti.  Nee  minus  in  hoc
curae  debet  adhiberi,  quid  proponendum  quam  quo-
modo  sit  quod  proposuerimus  proband um.  Hie
immo  vis  inventionis,  si  non  maior,  certe  prior.
Nam  ut  tela  supervacua  sunt  nescienti,  quid  petat,
sic  argumenta,  nisi  provideris  cui  rei  adhibenda  sint.

110  Hoc  est,  quod  comprehendi  arte  non  possit. Ideo-

1  filius,  Spalding :  fit,  MSS.

1  xxxvi.  98.  The  lex  lulia  de  ambitu  contained  a  provision
that  the  penalty  (loss  of  civil  rights)  incurred  by  convic-
tion for  ambitus  should  be  annulled  if  the  condemned  man
could  secure  the  conviction  of  another  person  for  the  same
offence.

260


BOOK V.  x.  i 06-110

the  letter  of  the  law,  since  not  merely  individual
words,  but  still  more  whole  phrases  are  frequently
ambiguous.  And  these  considerations  must  vary  107
according  to  the  complexity  of  laws  and  other
documents,  whether  they  are  in  agreement  or  con-
tradictory, since  fact  throws  light  on  fact  and  law  on
law  as  in  the  following  argument :  "  I  owed  you  no
money :  you  never  summoned  me  for  debt,  you  took
no  interest  from  me,  nay,  you  actually  borrowed
money  from  me."  It  is  laid  down  by  law  that  he
who  refuses  to  defend  his  father  when  accused  of
treason  thereby  loses  his  right  to  inherit.  A  son
denies  that  he  is  liable  to  this  penalty  unless  his
father  is  acquitted.  How  does  he  support  this  con-
tention ?  There  is  another  law  to  the  effect  that  a
man  found  guilty  of  treason  shall  be  banished  and
his  advocate  with  him.  Cicero  in  the  pro  Cluentio  *  108
says  that  Publius  Popilius  and  Tiberius  Gutta  were
not  condemned  for  receiving  bribes  to  give  a  false
verdict,  but  for  attempting  to  bribe  the  jury.  What
is  his  argument  in  support  of  this  view?  That
their  accusers,  who  were  themselves  found  guilty  of
bribing  the  jury,  were  restored  in  accordance  with
law  after  winning  their  case.  But  the  consideration  109
as  to  what  argument  should  be  put  forward  requires
no  less  care  than  the  consideration  of  the  manner  in
which  we  are  to  prove  that  which  we  have  put
forward.  Indeed  in  this  connexion  invention,  if
not  the  most  important,  is  certainly  the  first  con-
sideration. For,  just  as  weapons  are  superfluous
for  one  who  does  not  know  what  his  target  is,  so
too  arguments  are  useless,  unless  you  see  in  advance
to  what  they  are  to  be  applied.  This  is  a  task  for
which  no  formal  rules  can  be  laid  down. Conse-  110

261


QUINTILIAN

que,  cum  plures  eadem  didicerint,  generibus  argu-
mentorum  similibus  utentur ;  alius  alio  plura,  quibus
r.tatur,  mveniet.  Sit  exempli  gratia  proposita  con-
troversial quae  communes  minime  cum  aliis  quaes-

111  tioneshabet:  Cum  Thehas  evertisset  Alexander,  invenit
tabulas,  quibus  centum  talenta  mutua  Thessalis  dedisse
Thebanos  continebatur.  Has,  quia  erat  usus  commililio
Thessalorum,  donavit  his  ultro ;  postea  restituti  a  Cas-
sandro  Thebani  reposcunt  Tkessalos.  Apud  Amphi-
ctyonas  agitur. Centum  talenta  et  credidisse  eos

112  constat  et  non  recepisse.  Lis  omnis  ex  eo,  quod
Alexander  ea  Thessalis  donasse  dicitur,  pendet.
Constat  illud  quoque,  non  esse  iis  ab  Alexandro
pecuniam datam ; quaeritur ergo, an proinde sit,

113  quod  datum  est,  ac  si  pecuniam  dederit  ?  Quid  pro-
derunt  argumentorum  loci,  nisi  haec  prius  videro,
nihil  eum  egisse  donando,  non  potuisse  donare,  non
donasse?  Et  prima  quidem  actio  facilis  ac  favora-
bilis  repetentium  iure  quod  vi  sit  ablatum ;  sed  hinc
aspera  et  vehemens  quaestio  exoritur  de  iure  belli,
dicentibus  Thessalis,  hoc  regna,  populos,  fines  gen-

114  tium  atque  urbium  contineri.  Inveniendum  contra
262


BOOK V.  x.  110-114

quently,  though  a  number  of  orators,  who  have
studied  the  same  rules,  will  use  similar  kinds  of
arguments,  one  will  discover  a  greater  number  of
arguments  to  suit  his  case  than  another.  Let  us
take  as  an  example  a  controversial  theme  involving
problems  that  have  little  in  common  with  other
cases.  "When  Alexander  destroyed  Thebes,  he  111
found  documents  showing  that  the  Thebans  had
lent  a  hundred  talents  to  the  Thessalians.  These
documents  he  presented  to  the  Thessalians  as  a
reward  for  the  assistance  they  had  given  him  in  the
campaign.  Subsequently  the  Thebans,  after  the
restoration  of  their  city  by  Cassander,  demanded
that  the  Thessalians  should  repay  the  money/ '  The
case  is  tried  before  the  Amphictyonic  council.  It  is
admitted  that  the  Thebans  lent  the  money  and
were  not  repaid.  The  whole  dispute  turns  on  the  112
allegation  that  Alexander  had  excused  the  Thessa-
lians from  payment  of  the  debt.  It  is  also  admitted
that  the  Thessalians  had  received  no  money  from
Alexander.  The  question  is  therefore  whether  his
gift  is  equivalent  to  his  having  given  them  money.
What  use  will  formal  topics  of  argument  be  in  such  113
a  case,  unless  I  first  convince  myself  that  the  gift  of
Alexander  made  no  difference,  that  he  had  not  the
power  to  make  it,  and  that  he  did  not  make  it  ?
The  opening  of  the  Thebans'  plea  presents  no
difficulty  and  is  likely  to  win  the  approval  of  the
judges,  since  they  are  seeking  to  recover  by  right
what  was  taken  from  them  by  force.  But  out  of  this
point  arises  a  violent  controversy  as  to  the  right  of
war,  since  the  Thessalians  urge  that  kingdoms  and
peoples  and  the  frontiers  of  nations  and  cities
depend  upon  these  rights. To  meet  this  argument  114

263


QUINTILIAN

est,  quo  distet  haec  causa  a  ceteris,  quae  in  potesta-
tem  victoris  venirent;  nee  circa  probationem  res
haeret,  sed  circa  propositionem.  Dicamus  inprimis :
in  eo,  quod  in  iudicium  deduci  potest,  nihil  valere
ius  belli  nee  armis  erepta  nisi  armis  posse  retineri ;
itaque,  ubi  ilia  valeant,  non  esse  iudicem ;  ubi  iudex

115  sit,  ilia  nihil  valere.  Hoc  inveniendum  est,  ut  adhi-
beri  possit  argumentum :  ideo  captivos,  si  in  patriam
suam  redierint,  liberos  esse,  quia  bello  parta  nonnisi
eadem  vi  possideantur.  Proprium  est  et  illud  causae,
quod  Arnphictyones  iudicant  (ut  alia  apud  centum-
viros,  alia  apud  privatum  iudicem  in  iisdem  quaes-

116  tionibus  ratio);  turn  secundo  gradu,  non  potuisse
donari  a  victore  ius,  quia  id  demum  sit  eius,  quod
teneat ;  ius,  quod  sit  incorporale,  adprehendi  manu
non  posse.  Hoc  reperire  est  difficilius  quam,  cum
inveneris,  argumentis  adiuvare,  ut  alia  sit  condicio
heredis,  alia  victoris,  quia  ad  ilium  ius,  ad  hunc  res

117  transeat. Proprium deinde materiae, ius publici

1  cp.  §  118.  The  Amphictyonic  Council  of  Delphi  in  the
fourth  century  B.C.  had  come  to  be  an  international  council,
in  which  the  great  majority  of  the  states  of  Greece  were
represented.

2  i.e.  a  right  can  only  be  transferred  by  the  possessor,  not
by  force  or  seizure.

264


BOOK V.  x.  114-117

it  is  necessary  to  discover  in  what  respect  this  case
differs  from  others  which  are  concerned  with  pro-
perty that  has  fallen  into  the  hands  of  the  victor :
the  difficulty  moreover  lies  not  so  much  in  the
proof  as  in  the  way  it  should  be  put  forward.  We
may  begin  by  stating  that  the  rights  of  war  do  not
hold  good  in  any  matter  which  can  be  brought
before  a  court  of  justice,  and  that  what  is  taken
by  force  of  arms  can  only  be  retained  by  force  of
arms,  and  consequently,  wherever  the  rights  of  war
hold  good,  there  is  no  room  for  the  functions  of
a  judge,  while  on  the  contrary  where  the  functions
of  the  judge  come  into  play,  the  rights  of  war  cease
to  have  any  force.  The  reason  why  it  is  necessary  115
to  discover  this  principle  is  to  enable  us  to  bring
the  following  argument  into  play  :  that  prisoners  of
war  are  free  on  returning  to  their  native  land  just
because  the  gains  of  war  cannot  be  retained  except
by  the  exercise  of  the  same  violence  by  which  they
were  acquired.  Another  peculiar  feature  of  the  case
is  that  it  is  tried  before  the  Amphictyonic  council,1
and  you  will  remember  that  we  have  to  employ
different  methods  in  pleading  a  case  before  the
centum  viral  court  and  before  an  arbitrator,  though
the  problems  of  the  cases  may  be  identical.  Secondly  116
we  may  urge  that  the  right  to  refuse  payment  could
not  have  been  conferred  by  the  victor  because  he
possesses  only  what  he  holds,  but  a  right,  being
incorporeal,  cannot  be  grasped  by  the  hand.2  It  is
more  difficult  to  discover  this  principle  than,  once
discovered,  to  defend  it  with  arguments  such  as
that  the  position  of  an  heir  and  a  conqueror  are
fundamentally  different,  since  right  passes  to  the
one and property  to  the  other. It  is  further an  117

265


QUINTILIAN

crediti  transire  ad  victorem  non  potuisse,  quia,  quod
populus  crediderit,  omnibus  debeatur,  et,  quamdiu
quilibet  unus  superfuerit,  esse  eum  totius  summae
creditorem,  Thebanos  autem non omnes  in Alex-

118  andri  manu  fuisse.  Hoc  non  extrinsecus  probatur,
quae  vis  est  argumenti,  sed  ipsum  per  se  valet.
Tertii  loci  pars  prior  magis  vulgaris,  non  in  tabulis
esse  ius ;  itaque  multis  argumentis  defendi  potest.
Mens  quoque  Alexandri  duci  debet  in  dubium,  hono-
rarit  eos  an  deceperit.  Illud  iam  rursus  proprium
materiae  et  velut  novae  controversiae,  quia  restitu-
tione  recepisse  ius,  etiamsi  quod  amiserint,  Thebani
videntur.  Hie  et,  quid  Cassander  velit,  quaeritur;
sed  vel  potentissima  apud  Amphictyonas  aequi  trac-
tatio  est.

119  Haec  non  idcirco  dico,  quod  inutilem  horum  loco-
rum,  ex  quibus  argumenta  ducuntur,  cognitionem
putem,  alioqui  nee  tradidissem ;  sed  ne  se,  qui  cog-
noverint  ista,  si  cetera  negligant,  perfectos  protinus
atque  consummates  putent  et,  nisi  in  ceteris,  quae

1  See  v.  x.  20.
266


BOOK V.  x.  1 1 7-i  1 9

argument  peculiar  to  the  subject  matter  of  the  case
that  the  right  over  a  public  debt  could  not  have
passed  to  the  victor,  because  the  repayment  of  a
sum  of  money  lent  by  a  whole  people  is  due  to  them
all,  and  as  long  as  any  single  one  of  them  survives,
he  is  creditor  for  the  whole  amount :  but  the
Thebans  were  never  all  of  them  to  a  man  in  Alex-
ander's power.  The  force  of  this  argument  resides  118
in  the  fact  that  it  is  not  based  on  any  external
support,  but  holds  good  in  itself.  Proceeding  to
the  third  line  of  argument  we  may  note  that  the
first  portion  of  it  is  of  a  more  ordinary  type,  namely
that  the  right  to  repayment  is  not  based  on  the
actual  document,  a  plea  which  can  be  supported
by  many  arguments.  Doubt  may  also  be  thrown  on
Alexanders  purpose  :  did  he  intend  to  honour  them
or  to  trick  them?  Another  argument  peculiar  to
the  subject  (indeed  it  practically  introduces  a  new
discussion)  is  that  the  Thebans  may  be  regarded  as
having  in  virtue  of  their  restoration  recovered  the
right  even  though  it  be  admitted  that  they  had  lost
it.  Again  Cassander's  purpose  may  be  discussed,
but,  as  the  case  is  being  pleaded  before  the  Amphi-
ctyonic  council,  we  shall  find  that  the  most  powerful
plea  that  can  be  urged  is  that  of  equity.

I  make  these  remarks,  not  because  I  think  that  a  119
knowledge  of  the  "  places  "  1  from  which  arguments
may  be  derived  is  useless  (had  I  thought  so,  I
should  have  passed  them  by)  but  to  prevent  those
who  have  learnt  these  rules  from  neglecting
other  considerations  and  regarding  themselves  as
having  a  perfect  and  absolute  knowledge  ot  the
whole  subject,  and  to  make  them  realise  that,
unless  they  acquire  a  thorough knowledge of  the

267


QUINTILIAN

mox  praecipienda  sunt,  elaboraverint,  mutam  quan-

120  dam  scientiam  consecutos  intelligant.  Neque  enim
artibus  editis  factum  est,  ut  argumenta  inveniremus,
sed  dicta  sunt  omnia,  antequam  praeciperentur,  mox
ea  script-ores  observata  et  collecta  ediderunt.  Cuius
rei  probatio  est,  quod  exemplis  eorum  veteribus
utuntur  et  ab  oratoribus  ilia  repetunt,  ipsi  nullum

121  novum  et  quod  dictum  non  sit  inveniunt.  Artifices
ergo  illi  qui  dixerunt ;  sed  habenda  his  quoque
gratia  est,  per  quos  labor  nobis  est  detractus.  Nam,
quae  priores  beneficio  ingenii  singula  invenerunt,
nobis  et  non  sunt  requirenda  et  notata l  sunt  omnia.
Sed  non  magis  hoc  sat  est  quam  palaestram  didi-
eisse,  nisi  corpus  exercitatione,  continentia,  cibis,
ante  omnia  natura  iuvatur,  sicut  contra  ne  ilia  qui-

122  dem  satis  sine  arte  profuerint.  Illud  quoque  studiosi
eloquentiae  cogitent,  neque  omnibus  in  causis,  quae
demons  tra  vim  us,  cuncta  posse  reperiri ;  neque,  cum
proposita  fuerit  materia  dicendi,  scrutanda  singula
et  velut  ostiatim  pulsandum,2  ut  sciant,  an  ad  proban-
dum  id, quod  intendimus,  forte respondeant,  nisi

123  cum  discunt  et  adhuc  usu  carent. Infinitam  enim

faciat  ista  res  dicendi  tarditatem,  si  semper  necesse

1  notata,  Ouelferbytanus  :  notat,  B  :  notant,  A.
1  pulsandum,  Franctus  :  pulsanda,  MSS.

268


BOOK V.  x.  1 19-123

remaining  points  which  I  am  about  to  discuss,  they
will  be  the  possessors  of  what  I  can  only  call  a  dumb
science.  For  the  discovery  of  arguments  was  not  120
the  result  of  the  publication  of  text-books,  but  every
kind  of  argument  was  put  forward  before  any  rules
were  laid  down,  and  it  was  only  later  that  writers
of  rhetoric  noted  them  and  collected  them  for  pub-
lication. A  proof  of  this  is  the  fact  that  the  ex-
amples which  they  use  are  old  and  quoted  from  the
orators,  while  they  themselves  discover  nothing  new
or  that  has  not  been  said  before.  The  creators  of  121
the  art  were  therefore  the  orators,  though  we  owe
a  debt  of  gratitude  also  to  those  who  have  given  us
a  short  cut  to  knowledge.  For  thanks  to  them  the
arguments  discovered  by  the  genius  of  earlier  orators
have  not  got  to  be  hunted  out  and  noted  down  in
detail.  But  this  does  not  suffice  to  make  an  orator
any  more  than  it  suffices  to  learn  the  art  of  gymnastic
in  school :  the  body  must  be  assisted  by  continual
practice,  self  control,  diet  and  above  all  by  nature ;
on  the  other  hand  none  of  these  are  sufficient  in
themselves  without  the  aid  of  art.  I  would  also  122
have  students  of  oratory  consider  that  all  the  forms
of  argument  which  I  have  just  set  forth  cannot  be
found  in  every  case,  and  that  when  the  subject  on
which  we  have  to  speak  has  been  propounded,  it  is
no  use  considering  each  separate  type  of  argument
and  knocking  at  the  door  of  each  with  a  view  to
discovering  whether  they  may  chance  to  serve  to
prove  our  point,  except  while  we  are  in  the  position
of  mere  learners  without  any  knowledge  of  actual
practice.  Such  a  proceeding  merely  retards  the  123
process  of  speaking  to  an  incalculable  extent,  if
it is always necessary  for us to try  each single

269


QUINTILIAN

sit,  ut  temptantes  unumquodque  eorum,  quod  sit
aptum  atque  conveniens,  experiendo  noscamus ;  ne-
scio  an  etiam  impedimento  futura  sint,  nisi  et  animi
quaedam  ingenita  natura  et  studio  exercitata  velo-
citas  recta  nos  ad  ea,  quae  conveniunt  causae,  ferant.

124  Nam,  ut  cantus  vocis  plurimum  iuvat  sociata  nervo-
rum concordia,  si  tamen  tardior  manus  nisi  inspectis
demensisque  singulis,  quibus  quaeque  vox  fidibus
iungenda  sit,  dubitet,  potius  fuerit  esse  contentum
eo,  quod  simplex  canendi  natura  tulerit,  ita  huius-
modi  praeceptis  debet  quidem  aptata  esse  et  citharae

126  modo  intenta  ratio  doctrinae ;  sed  hoc  exercitatione
multa  consequendum,  ut,  quemadmodum  illorum
artificum,  etiamsi  alio  spectant,  manus  tamen  ipsa  con-
suetudine  ad  graves,  acutos,  medios  nervorum l  sonos
fertur,  sic  oratoris  cognitionem  nihil  moretur  haec
varietas  argumentorum  et  copia,  sed  quasi  offerat  se
et  occurrat,  et,  ut  litterae  syllabaeque  scribentium
cogitationem  non  exigunt,  sic  rationem  sponte  qua-
dam  sequantur.

XI.  Tertium  genus  ex  iis,  quae  extrinsecus  addu-
cuntur  in  causam,  Graeci  vocant  TrapaScty/Aa,  quo
nomine  et  generaliter  usi  sunt  in  omni  similium
adpositione  et  specialiter  in  iis,  quae  rerum  gestarum
auctoritate  nituntur.  Nostri  fere  similitudinem  vo-
cari  maluerunt,  quod  ab  illis  irapa/3o\i]  dicitur,  alterum
exemplum, quanquam et hoc simile est et illud

1  nervorum,  Oertz  :  horum,  MSS.
270


BOOK V.  x.  123-xi.  1

argument  and  thus  learn  by  experiment  what  is  apt
and  suitable  to  our  case.  In  fact  I  am  not  sure  that
it  will  not  be  an  actual  obstacle  to  progress  unless
a  certain  innate  penetration  and  a  power  of  rapid
divination  seconded  by  study  lead  us  straight  to  the
arguments  which  suit  our  case.  For  just  as  the  124
melody  of  the  voice  is  most  pleasing  when  accom-
panied by  the  lyre,  yet  if  the  musician's  hand  be
slow  and,  unless  he  first  look  at  the  strings  and
take  their  measure,  hesitate  as  to  which  strings
match  the  several  notes  of  the  voice,  it  would
be  better  that  he  should  content  himself  with  the
natural  music  of  the  voice  unaccompanied  by  any
instrument ;  even  so  our  theory  of  speaking  must  be
adapted  and,  like  the  lyre,  attuned  to  such  rules  as
these.  But  it  is  only  by  constant  practice  that  we  125
can  secure  that,  just  as  the  hands  of  the  musician,
even  though  his  eyes  be  turned  elsewhere,  produce
bass,  treble  or  intermediate  notes  by  force  of  habit,
so  the  thought  of  the  orator  should  suffer  no  delay
owing  to  the  variety  and  number  of  possible  argu-
ments, but  that  the  latter  should  present  themselves
uncalled  and,  just  as  letters  and  syllables  require  no
thought  on  the  part  of  a  writer,  so  arguments  should
spontaneously  follow  the  thought  of  the  orator.

XI.  The  third  kind  of  proof,  which  is  drawn  into
the  service  of  the  case  from  without,  is  styled  a
irapaSeiytxa  by  the  Greeks,  who  apply  the  term  to  all
comparisons  of  like  with  like,  but  more  especially
to  historical  parallels.  Roman  writers  have  for  the
most  part  preferred  to  give  the  name  of  comparison
to  that  which  the  Greeks  style  7rapa/3o\rj,  while  they
translate  irapaociyfia  by  example,  although  this
latter  involves  comparison,  while  the  former is  of

271


QUINTILIAN

2  exemplum.  Nos,  quo  facilius  propositum  explicemus,
utrumque  TrapaSciy/xa  esse  credamus,  et  ipsi  appelle-
mus  exemplum.  Nee  vereor,  ne  videar  repugnare
Ciceroni,  quanquam  collationem  separat  ab  exemplo.
Nam  idem  omnem  argumentationem  dividit  in  duas
partes,  inductionem  et  ratiocinationem,  ut  plerique
Graecorum  in  irapa^Lyfiara  et  €Tnx€iprjfxara,  dixerunt-

3  que  ?rapao€iy/xa  prjropiKrjv  iiraywyqv.  Nam  ilia,  qua
plurimum  est  Socrates  usus,  banc  babuit  viam,  ut  cum
plura  interrogasset,  quae  fateri  adversario  necesse
esset,  novissime  id,  de  quo  quaerebatur,  inferret
ut  simile  concessis.1  Id  est  inductio.  Hoc  in  ora-
tione  fieri  non  potest ;  sed,  quod  illic  interrogatur,  hie

4  fere  sumitur.  Sit  igitur  ilia  interrogatio  talis  :  Quod
est  pomum  generosissimum  ?  nonne  quod  optimum  ?  con-
cedetur.  Quid  equus  ?  qui  generosissimus  ?  Nonne  qui
optimus  ?  et  plura  in  eundem  modum.  Deinde,  cuius
rei  gratia  rogatum  est,  Quid  homo  ? Nonne  is  genero-

5  sissimus,  qui  optimus  ?  fatendum  erit.  Hoc  in  testium
interrogation  valet  plurimum,  in  oratione  perpetua
dissimile  est;  aut  enim  sibi  ipse  respondet  orator
aut  quod  illic  interrogatur,  hie  fere  sumitur.2 Quod

1  concessis,  Tomebladh :  concessisse,  MSS.

2  aut  quod  .  .  .  sumitur,  supplied  by  Meister.  Some  such
phrase  must  have  been  lost,  but  there  can  be  no  certainty  either
as  regards  the  exact  words  or  their  precise  place.

272


BOOK V.  xi. 1-5

the  nature  of  an  example.  For  my  own  part,  I  2
prefer  with  a  view  to  making  my  purpose  easier  of
apprehension  to  regard  both  as  irapaSuy/jLaTa  and  to
call  them  examples.  Nor  am  I  afraid  of  being
thought  to  disagree  with  Cicero,  although  he  does
separate  comparison  from  example.1  For  he  divides
all  arguments  into  two  classes,  induction  and
ratiocination,  just  as  most  Greeks2  divide  it  into
irapaSeiyfiaTa  and  lTri\dprjfxaTay  explaining  iropdSeiyfia
as  a  rhetorical  induction.  The  method  of  argument  3
chiefly  used  by  Socrates  was  of  this  nature :  when
he  had  asked  a  number  of  questions  to  which  his
adversary  could  only  agree,  he  finally  inferred  the
conclusion  of  the  problem  under  discussion  from  its
resemblance  to  the  points  already  conceded.  This
method  is  known  as  induction,  and  though  it
cannot  be  used  in  a  set  speech,  it  is  usual  in  a
speech  to  assume  that  which  takes  the  form  of  a
question  in  dialogue.  For  instance  take  the  follow-  4
ing  question  :  "  What  is  the  finest  form  of  fruit  ?  Is
it  not  that  which  is  best  ?  "  This  will  be  admitted.
"  What  of  the  horse  ?  What  is  the  finest  ?  Is  it  not
that  which  is  the  best?"  Several  more  questions
of  the  same  kind  follow.  Last  comes  the  question
for  the  sake  of  which  all  the  others  were  put:
"  What  of  man  ?  Is  not  he  the  finest  type  who  is
best  ?  "  The  answer  can  only  be  in  the  affirmative.
Such  a  procedure  is  most  valuable  in  the  examina-  5
tion  of  witnesses,  but  is  differently  employed  in  a  set
speech.  For  there  the  orator  either  answers  his
own  questions  or  makes  an  assumption  of  that  which
in  dialogue  takes  the  form  of  a  question. u  What  is


1  dt  Inv.  i.  xxx.  49.

2  cp.  Ar.  Bh.  i.  ii.  18.


*73


QUINTILIAN

pomum  generosissimum  ?  puto,  quod  optimum  ;  et  equits  ?
qui  velocissimus :  ita  hominum,  non  qui  claritate  nascendi
sed  qui  viriute  maxime  excellet.

Omnia  igitur  ex  hoc  genere  sumpta  necesse  est
aut  similia  esse  aut  dissimilia  aut  contraria.  Simili-
tude- adsumitur  interim  et  ad  orationis  ornatum ;  sed
ilia,  cum  res  exiget,  nunc  ea,  quae  ad  probationem

6  pertinent,  exsequar.  Potentissimum  autem  est  inter
ea  quae  sunt  huius  generis,  quod  proprie  vocamus
exemplum,  id  est  rei  gestae  aut  ut  gestae  utilis  ad
persuadendum  id  quod  intenderis  commemoratio.
Intuendum  igitur  est,  totum  simile  sit  an  ex  parte,
ut  aut  omnia  ex  eo  sumamus  aut  quae  utilia  sunt.
Simile  est, lure  occisus  est  Saturninus  sicut Gracchi.

7  Dissimile,  Brutus  occidit  liber os  proditionem  molientes ;
Manlius  virtutem  filii  morte  multavit.  Contrarium,
Marcellus  ornamenta  Syracusanis  hostibus  restituit ;
Verres  eadem  sociis  abstulit.  Et  probandorum  et  cul-
pandorum  ex  iis  confirmatio  eosdem  gradus habet.

8  Etiam  in  iis,  quae  futura  dicemus,  utilis  similium
admonitio  est,  ut  si  quis  dicens,  Dionysium  idcirco
petere  custodes  salutis  suae,  ut  eorum  adiutus  armis


1  viti.  iii.  72  sqq.

2  Manlius  had  forbidden  all  encounters  with  the  enemy.
His  son  engaged  in  single  combat  and  slew  his  man.  See
Liv.  viii.  vii.  1.  ■  cp.  Verr.  iv.  \v.  123.

274


BOOK V.  xi.  5-8

the  finest  fruit  ?  The  best,  I  should  imagine.  What
is  the  finest  horse  ?  The  swiftest.  So  too  the
finest  type  of  man  is  not  he  that  is  noblest  of  birth,
but  he  that  is  most  excellent  in  virtue."

All  arguments  of  this  kind,  therefore,  must  be
from  things  like  or  unlike  or  contrary.  Similes  are,
it  is  true,  sometimes  employed  for  the  embellish-
ment of  the  speech  as  well,  but  I  will  deal  with
them  in  their  proper  place  1 ;  at  present  I  am  con-
cerned with  the  use  of  similitude  in  proof.  The  most  6
important  of  proofs  of  this  class  is  that  which  is  most
properly  styled  example,  that  is  to  say  the  adducing
of  some  past  action  real  or  assumed  which  may
serve  to  persuade  the  audience  of  the  truth  of  the
point  which  we  are  trying  to  make.  We  must
therefore  consider  whether  the  parallel  is  complete
or  only  partial,  that  we  may  know  whether  to  use  it
in  its  entirety  or  merely  to  select  those  portions
which  are  serviceable.  We  argue  from  the  like
when  we  say,  "  Saturninus  was  justly  killed,  as  were
the  Gracchi "  ;  from  the  unlike  when  we  say,  7
"Brutus  killed  his  sons  for  plotting  against  the
state,  while  Manlius  condemned  his  son  to  death  for
his  valour " ; 2  from  the  contrary  when  we  say,
"  Marcellus  restored  the  works  of  art  which  had
been  taken  from  the  Syracusans  who  were  our
enemies,  while  Verres3  took  the  same  works  of  art
from  our  allies."  The  same  divisions  apply  also  to
such  forms  of  proof  in  panegyric  or  denunciation.
It  will  also  be  found  useful  when  we  are  speaking  of  8
what  is  likely  to  happen  to  refer  to  historical  parallels:
for  instance  if  the  orator  asserts  that  Dionysius  is
asking  for  a  bodyguard  that  with  their  armed  assist-
ance  he  may  establish  himself  as tyrant,  he  may

275


QUINTILIAN

tyrannidem  occupet,  hoc  referat  exemplum,  eadem
ratione  Pisistratum  ad  dominationem  pervenisse.
9  Sed  ut  sunt  exempla  interim  tota  similia  ut  hoc
proximum,  sic  interim  ex  maioribus  ad  minora,  ex
minoribus  ad  maiora  ducuntur.  Urbes  violata  propter
matrimonia  eversae  sunt ;  quid  fieri  adultero  par  est  ?
Tibicines,  cum  ab  urbe  discessissent,  publice  revocati  sunt ;
quanto  magis  principes  civitatis  viri  et  bene  de  republica

10  meriti,  cum  invidiae  cesserint,  ab  eocilio  reducendi  ?  Ad
exhortationem  vero  praecipue  valent  imparia.  Ad-
mirabilior  in  femina  quam  in  viro  virtus.  Quare,  si  ad
fortiter  faciendum  accendatur  aliquis,  non  tantum
adferent  momenti  Horatius  et  Torquatus  quantum
ilia  mulier  cuius  manu  Pyrrhus  est  interfectus,  et
ad  moriendum  non  tarn  Cato  et  Scipio  quam  Lucretia ;

11  quod  ipsum  est  ex  maioribus  ad  minora.  Singula
igitur  horum  generum  ex  Cicerone  (nam  unde  potius  ?)
exempla  ponamus.  Simile  est  hoc  pro  Murena,
Etenim  mihi  ipsi  accidit,  ut  cum  duobus  patriciis,  altero
improbissimo  et  audacissimo  altero  modestissimo  atque
optimo  viro,  peterem  ;  superavi  tamen  dignitate  Catilinam,


1  cp.  Liv.  ix.  30.  The  flute-players  employed  in  public
worship  migrated  to  Tibur  because  deprived  of  an  old-
established  privilege,  but  were  brought  back  by  stratagem,
after  their  hosts  had  made  them  drunk.

2  viii.  17.  Sulpicius,  one  of  Murena's  accusers  and  an
unsuccessful  candidate  for  the  consulship,  had  sought  to
depreciate  Murena's  birth.  Cicero  urges  that  even  if  Sul-
picius' statements  were  true  they  would  be  irrelevant  and
cites  his  own  case  to  support  his  argument.

276


BOOK V.  xi.  8-i  j

adduce  the  parallel  case  of  Pisi stratus  who  secured
the  supreme  power  by  similar  means.

But  while  examples  may  at  times,  as  in  the  last  9
instance,  apply  in  their  entirety,  at  times  we  shall
argue  from  the  greater  to  the  less  or  from  the  less
to  the  greater.  "  Cities  have  been  overthrown  by
the  violation  of  the  marriage  bond.  What  punish-
ment then  will  meet  the  case  of  adultery?'*  "Flute-
players  have  been  recalled  by  the  state  to  the  city
which  they  had  left.  How  much  more  then  is  it
just  that  leading  citizens  who  have  rendered  good
service  to  their  country  should  be  recalled  from
that  exile  to  which  they  have  been  driven  by  envy."1
Arguments  from  unlikes  are  most  useful  in  exhor-  10
tation.  Courage  is  more  remarkable  in  a  woman
than  in  a  man.  Therefore,  if  we  wish  to  kindle
someone's  ambition  to  the  performance  of  heroic
deeds,  we  shall  find  that  parallels  drawn  from
the  cases  of  Horatius  and  Torquatus  will  carry
less  weight  than  that  of  the  woman  by  whose
hand  Pyrrhus  was  slain,  and  if  we  wish  to  urge
a  man  to  meet  death,  the  cases  of  Cato  and
Scipio  will  carry  less  weight  than  that  of
Lucretia.  These  are  however  arguments  from  the
greater  to  the  less.  Let  me  then  give  you  separate  11
examples  of  these  classes  of  argument  from  the
pages  of  Cicero ;  for  where  should  I  find  better  ?
The  following  passage  from  the  pro  Murena  2  is  an
instance  of  argument  from  the  like :  u  For  it
happened  that  I  myself  when  a  candidate  had  two
patricians  as  competitors,  the  one  a  man  of  the  most
unscrupulous  and  reckless  character,  the  other  a
most  excellent  and  respectable  citizen.  Yet  I  de-
feated Catiline  by  force  of  merit  and  Galba  by  my

277


QUINTIL1AN

12  gratia  Galbam.  Maius  minoris,  pro  Milone,  Negant
intueri  lucem  esse  fas  ei  qui  a  se  hominem  occisum  esse
fateatur. In  qua  tandem  urbe  hoc  homines  stultissimi

disputant  ?  nempe  in  ea  quae  primum  indicium  de  capite
vidit  M.  Horatii,  fortissiini  viri,  qui  nondum  libera  civi-
tate  tamen  populi  Romani  comitiis  liberatus  est,  cum  sua
manu  sororem  esse  interfectamfateretur.  Minus  maioris  :
Occidi,  occidi,  non  Spurium  Maelium,  qui  annona  levanda
iacturisque  rei  familiaris}  quia  nimis  amplecti  plebem  vi-
debalur,  in  suspicionem  incidit  regni  adfectandi,  et  cetera,
deinde,  Sed  eum  (auderet  enim  dicere,  cum  patriam  peri-
culo  liberasset)  cuius  nejandum  adulterium  in  pulvinaribus,
et  totus  in  Clodium  locus.

13  Dissimile  plures  causas  habet,  fit  enim  genere,
modo,  tempore,  loco,  ceteris,  per  quae  fere  omnia
Cicero  praeiudicia,  quae  de  Cluentio  videbantur  facta,
subvertit;  contrario  vero  exemplo  censoriam  notam
laudando  censorem  Africanum,  qui  eum,  quem  peie-
rasse  conceptis  verbis  palam  dixisset,  testimonium
etiam  pollicitus, si  quis  contra  diceret,  nullo  accu-


1  iii.  7.  a  pro  Mil.  xxvii.  72.

*  pro  ClutnL  xxxii.  sqq.

4  ib.  xlviii.  134. The  accused  was  a  knight :  the  retention
of  his  horse  implied  that  he  retained  his  status.


278


BOOK V.  xi.  11-13

popularity."  The  pro  Milone1  will  give  us  an  12
example  of  argument  from  the  greater  to  the  less :
"They  say  that  he  who  confesses  to  having  killed  a
man  is  not  fit  to  look  upon  the  light  of  day.  Where
is  the  city  in  which  men  are  such  fools  as  to  argue
thus  ?  It  is  Rome  itself,  the  city  whose  first  trial
on  a  capital  charge  was  that  of  Marcus  Horatius,
the  bravest  of  men,  who,  though  the  city  had  not
yet  attained  its  freedom,  was  none  the  less  acquitted
by  the  assembly  of  the  Roman  people,  in  spite  of
the  fact  that  he  confessed  that  he  had  slain  his
sister  with  his  own  hand."  The  following2  is  an
example  of  argument  from  the  less  to  the  greater :
"  I  killed,  not  Spurius  Maelius,  who  by  lowering  the
price  of  corn  and  sacrificing  his  private  fortune  fell
under  the  suspicion  of  desiring  to  make  himself
king,  because  it  seemed  that  he  was  courting  popu-
larity with  the  common  people  overmuch,"  and  so
on  till  we  come  to,  "  No,  the  man  I  killed  (for  my
client  would  not  shrink  from  the  avowal,  since  his
deed  had  saved  his  country)  was  he  who  committed
abominable  adultery  even  in  the  shrines  of  the  gods  "  ;
then  follows  the  whole  invective  against  Clodius.

Arguments  from  unlikes  present  great  variety,  for  13
they  may  turn  on  kind,  manner,  time,  place,  etcetera,
almost  every  one  of  which  Cicero  employs  to  over-
throw the  previous  decisions  that  seemed  to  apply
to  the  case  of  Cluentius,8  while  he  makes  use  of
argument  from  contraries  when  he  minimises4  the
importance  of  the  censorial  stigma  by  praising  Scipio
Africanus,  who  in  his  capacity  of  censor  allowed  one
whom  he  openly  asserted  to  have  committed  de-
liberate perjury  to  retain  his  horse,  because  no  one
had  appeared  as  evidence  against  him,  though  he

279


QUINTILIAN

sante,  traducere  equum  passus  esset ;  quae,  quia  erant

14  Jongiora,  non  suis  verbis  exposui.  Breve  autem  apud
Vergilium  contrarii  exemplum  est :

At  non  ille,  satum  quo  te  mentiris,  Achilles
Talis  in  hostefuit  Priamo.

15  Quaedam  autem  ex  iis,  quae  gesta  sunt,  tota  narra-
bimus,  ut  Cicero  pro  Milone  :  Pudicitiam  cum  eriperet
militi  trihunus  militaris  in  exercitu  C.  fifarii,  propinquus
eius  imperatoris,  interfectus  ab  eo  est,  cui  vim  adferehaL
Facere  enim  probus  adolescens  periculose  quam  perpeti
turpiter  maluit ;  atque  hunc  ille  summus  vir  scelere  solutum

16  periculo  liberavit.  Quaedam  significare  satis  erit,  ut
idem  ac  pro  eodem :  Neque  enim  posset  Ahala  ille
Servilius  aut  P.  Nasica  aut  L,  Opimius  ant  me  consule
senatus  non  nefarius  hmberi,  si  sceleratos  interjict  nefas
esset.  Haec  ita  dicentur,  prout  nota  erunt  vel  utilitas
causae  aut  decor  postulabit.

17  Eadem  ratio  est  eorum,  quae  ex  poeticis  fabulis
ducuntur,  nisi  quod  iis  minus  adfirmationis  adhibetur ;
cuius  usus  qualis  esse  deberet,  idem  optimus  auctor

18  ac  magister  eloquentiae  ostendit.  Nam  huius  quo-
que  generis  in  eadem  oratione  reperietur  exemplum
Itaque  hoc,  iudices,  non  sine  causa  etiam  %fictis  fabulis


1  Aen.  ii.  540.

2  pro  Mil.  iv.  9.  s  ib.  iii.  8.

*  t'6.  iii.  8.  The  allusion  is  to  Orestes,  acquitted  when
tried  before  the  Areopagus  at  Athens  by  the  casting  vote  of
Pallas  Athene.

280


BOOK V.  xi.  13-18

promised  to  come  forward  himself  to  bear  witness  to
his  guilt,  if  any  should  be  found  to  accuse  him. I
have  paraphrased  this  passage  because  it  is  too  long
to  quote. A  brief  example  of  a  similar  argument  is  14
to  be  found  in  Virgil/

"  But  he,  whom  falsely  thou  dost  call  thy  father,

Even  Achilles,  in  far  other  wise

Dealt  with  old  Priam,  and  Priam  was  his  foe."

Historical  parallels  may  however  sometimes  be  re-  15
lated  in  full,  as  in  the  pro  Milone 3 :  "  When  a
military  tribune  serving  in  the  army  of  Gaius  Marius,
to  whom  he  was  related,  made  an  assault  upon  the
honour  of  a  common  soldier,  the  latter  killed  him ;
for  the  virtuous  youth  preferred  to  risk  his  life  by
slaying  him  to  suffering  such  dishonour.  And  yet
the  great  Marius  acquitted  him  of  all  crime  and  let
him  go  scot  free."  On  the  other  hand  in  certain  16
cases  it  will  be  sufficient  merely  to  allude  to  the
parallel,  as  Cicero  does  in  the  same  speech  3 :  "  For
neither  the  famous  Servilius  Ahala  nor  Publius  Nasica
nor  Lucius  Opimius  nor  the  Senate  during  my  con-
sulship could  be  cleared  of  serious  guilt,  if  it  were  a
crime  to  put  wicked  men  to  death."  Such  parallels
will  be  adduced  at  greater  or  less  length  according
as  they  are  familiar  or  as  the  interests  or  adornment
of  our  case  may  demand.

A  similar  method  is  to  be  pursued  in  quoting  from  17
the  fictions  of  the  poets,  though  we  must  remember
that  they  will  be  of  less  force  as  proofs.  The  same
supreme  authority,  the  great  master  of  eloquence,
shows  us  how  we  should  employ  such  quotations.  For  18
an  example  of  this  type  will  be  found  in  the  same
speech4:  "And  it  is  therefore,  gentlemen  of  the
jury, that  men  of  the  greatest learning have re-

281


QUINTILIAN

doctissimi  homines  memoriae  prodiderunt,  eum,  qui  patris
ulciscendi  causa  matrem  necavisset,  variatis  kominum  sen-
tenuis,  non  solum  divina  sed  sapientissimae  deae  senlentia

19  liberatum.  Illae  quoque  fabellae,  quae,  etiamsi  ori-
ginem  non  ab  Aesopo  acceperunt  (nam  videtur
earum  primus  auctor  Hesiodus),  nomine  tamen  Aesopi
maxime  celebrantur,  ducere  animos  solent  praecipue
rusticorum  et  imperitorum,  qui  et  simplicius,  quae
ficta  sunt,  audiunt,  et  capti  voluptate  facile  iis  quibus
delectantur  consentiunt  :  siquidem  et  Menenius
Agrippa  plebem  cum  patribus  in  gratiam  traditur
reduxisse nota ilia  de membris humanis ad  versus

20  ventrem  discordantibus  fabula.  Et  Horatius  ne  in
poemate  quidem  humilem  generis  huius  usum  putavit
in  illis  versibus,  Quod  dixit  vulpes  aegroto  cauta  leoni.
Alvov  Graeci  vocant  et  aura>7r€iov9,  ut  dixi,  \6yovs  et
XtfivKovs; nostrorum  quidam,  non sane recepto in

21  usum  nomine,  apologationem.  Cui  confine  est
irapoijAtas  genus  illud,  quod  est  velut  fabella  brevior
et  per  allegorian  accipitur  :  Non  nostrum  inquit  onus  ;
bos  cliiellas.

22  Proximas  exempli  vires  habet  similitudo,  praecipue
ilia,  quae  ducitur  citra  ullam  translationum  mixturam
ex  rebus  paene  paribus :  TJt>  qui  accipere  in  Campo
consuerunt,  iis  candidatis,  quorum  nummos  suppressos  esse
putanty  inimicissimi  solent  esse,  sic  eiusmodi  iudices  infesti

1  See  Liv.  ii.  32.  *  Epist.  I.  i.  73.

3  In  the  preceding  section, cp.  Arist,  Bhet.  n.  xx.  3  for
ct  Libyan  stories. "

282


BOOK V.  xi.  18-22

corded  in  their  fictitious  narratives  that  one  who  had
killed  his  mother  to  avenge  his  father  was  acquitted,
when  the  opinion  of  men  was  divided  as  to  his  guilt,
not  merely  by  the  decision  of  a  deity,  but  by  the
vote  of  the  wisest  of  goddesses/'  Again  those  fables  19
which,  although  they  did  not  originate  with  Aesop
(for  Hesiod  seems  to  have  been  the  first  to  write
them),  are  best  known  by  Aesop's  name,  are  specially
attractive  to  rude  and  uneducated  minds,  which  are
less  suspicious  than  others  in  their  reception  of
fictions  and,  when  pleased,  readily  agree  with  the
arguments  from  which  their  pleasure  is  derived.
Thus  Menenius  Agrippa1  is  said  to  have  reconciled
the  plebs  to  the  patricians  by  his  fable  of  the  limbs'
quarrel  with  the  belly.  Horace  2  also  did  not  regard  20
the  employment  of  fables  as  beneath  the  dignity
even  of  poetry ;  witness  his  lines  that  narrate

"  What  the  shrewd  fox  to  the  sick  lion  told."

The  Greeks  call  such  fables  alvot  (tales)  and,  as  I
have  already  3  remarked,  Aesopean  or  Libyan  stories,
while  some  Roman  writers  term  them  "apologues,"
though  the  name  has  not  found  general  acceptance.
Similar  to  these  is  that  class  of  proverb  which  may  21
be  regarded  as  an  abridged  fable  and  is  understood
allegorically  :  "The  burden  is  not  mine  to  carry,"
he  said,  "the  ox  is  carrying  panniers."

Simile  has  a  force  not  unlike  that  of  example,  more  22
especially  when  drawn  from  things  nearly  equal
without  any  admixture  of  metaphor,  as  in  the  follow-
ing case  :  "  Just  as  those  who  have  been  accustomed
to  receive  bribes  in  the  Campus  Martius  are  specially
hostile  to  those  whom  they  suspect  of  having  withheld
the  money,  so  in  the  present  case  the  judges  came
into court with a strong prejudice against the

»83


QUINTILIAN

23  turn  reo  venerunt.  Nam  7rapa/3oAi/,  quam  Cicero  col-
lationem  vocat,  longius  res  quae  comparentur  repe-
tere  solet.  Neque  hominum  modo  inter  se  opera
similia  spectantur,  ut  Cicero  pro  Murena  facit :
Quodsi  e  portu  solventibus,  qui  iam  in  portum  ex  alto  in-
vekuntur,  praecipere  summo  studio  solent  et  tempestatum
rationem  et  praedonum  et  locorum  (quod  natura  adfert,
ut  Us  faveamus,  qui  eadem  pericula,  quibus  nos  per  fundi
swnus,  ingrediantur),  quo  me  tandem  animo  esse  oportet,
prope  iam  ex  magna  iactatione  terram  videntem,  in  hunc,
cui  video  maximas  tempestates  esse  subeundas  f  sed  et  a
mutis atque  etiam  inanimis  interim  simile1  huius-

24  modi  ducitur.  Et  quoniam  similium  alia  facies  in  alia
ratione,  admonendum  est  rarius  esse  in  oratione  il-
lud  genus,  quod  ctKoi/a  Graeci  vocant  (quo  exprimitur
rerum  aut  personarum  imago,  ut  Cassius :  Quis  istam
faciem  lanipedis  senis  torquens  ?)  quam  id,  quo  proba-
bilius  fit  quod  intendimus :  ut,  si  animum  dicas  ex-
colendum,  similitudine  utaris  terrae,  quae  neglecta
spinas  ac  dumos,  culta  fructus  creat ;  aut  si  ad  curam

1  simile,  added  by  Halm.

1  pro  Cluent.  xxvii.  75. 2  de  Inv.  i.  30. 8  ii.  4.

4  Probably  the  epigrammatist  Cassius  of  Parma,  lanipedis
= bandaged  for  the  gout.  Regius  emended  to  planipedis,  a
dancer  who  performed  barefoot.

284


BOOK V.  xi.  22-24

accused/ ' l  For  irapafioXrj,  which  Cicero  2  translates  23
by  "comparison,"  is  often  apt  to  compare  things  whose
resemblance  is  far  less  obvious.  Nor  does  it  merely
compare  the  actions  of  men  as  Cicero  does  in  the
pro  Murena'6  :  "But  if  those  who  have  just  come
into  harbour  from  the  high  seas  are  in  the  habit  of
showing  the  greatest  solicitude  in  warning  those  who
are  on  the  point  of  leaving  port  of  the  state  of  the
weather,  the  likelihood  of  falling  in  with  pirates,  and
the  nature  of  the  coasts  which  they  are  like  to  visit
(for  it  is  a  natural  instinct  that  we  should  take  a
kindly  interest  in  those  who  are  about  to  face  the
dangers  from  which  we  have  just  escaped),  what
think  you  should  be  my  attitude  who  am  now  in
sight  of  land  after  a  mighty  tossing  on  the  sea,
towards  this  man  who,  as  I  clearly  see,  has  to  face
the  wildest  weather?"  On  the  contrary,  similes  of
this  kind  are  sometimes  drawn  from  dumb  animals
and  inanimate  objects.  Further,  since  similar  objects  24
often  take  on  a  different  appearance  when  viewed
from  a  different  angle,  I  feel  that  I  ought  to  point
out  that  the  kind  of  comparison  which  the  Greeks
call  cued»',  and  which  expresses  the  appearance  of
things  and  persons  (as  for  instance  in  the  line  of
Cassius 4 —

"  Who  is  he  yonder  that  doth  writhe  his  face
Like  some  old  man  whose  feet  are  wrapped  in
wool?")

should  be  more  sparingly  used  in  oratory  than  those
comparisons  which  help  to  prove  our  point.  For
instance,  if  you  wish  to  argue  that  the  mind  requires
cultivation,  you  would  use  a  comparison  drawn  from
the  soil,  which  if  neglected  produces  thorns  and
thickets,  but  if  cultivated  will  bear  fruit ;  or  if  you

285


QUINTILIAN

rei  publicae  horteris,  ostendas  apes  etiam  formicasque,
non  modo  muta,  sed  etiam  parva  animalia,  in  commune

25  tamen  laborare.  Ex  hoc  genere  dictum  illud  est
Ciceronis :  Ut  corpora  nostra  sine  mente,  ita  civiias  sine
lege  suis  partibus,  ut  nervis  ac  sanguine  et  membris,  uti
non  potest.  Sed  ut  hac  corporis  humani  pro  Cluentio,
ita  pro  Cornelio  equorum,  pro  Archia  saxorum  quoque

26  usus  est  similitudine.  Ilia  (ut  dixi)  propiora :  ut  re-
miges  sine  gubernatore,  sic  milites  sine  imperatore  nihil
valere.  Solent  tamen  fallere  similitudinum  species,
ideoque  adhibendum  est  iis  iudicium.  Neque  enim,
ut  navis  utilior  nova  quam  vetus,  sic  amicitia ;  vel,  ut
laudanda,  quae  pecuniam  suam  pluribus  largitur,  ita,
quae  formam.  Verba  sunt  in  his  similia  vetustatis  et
largitionis,  vis  quidem  longe  diversa  navis  et  amicitiae,1

27  pecuniae  et  pudicitiae.  Itaque  in  hoc  genere  maxime
quaeritur,  an  simile  sit,  quod  infertur.  Etiam  in  illis
interrogationibus  Socratis,  quarum  paulo  ante  feci
mentionem,  cavendum,  ne  incaute  respondeas ;  ut
apud  Aeschinen  Socraticum  male  respondit  Aspasiae
Xenophontis  uxor,  quod  Cicero  his  verbis  transfert :

28  Die  mihi,  quaeso,  Xenophontis  uxor,  si  vicina  tua  melius

1  navis  et  amicitiae,  added  by  Spalding.

1  pro  Gluent.  liii.  146.  *  See  iv.  iv.  8.

8  pro  Arch.  viii.  19.  *  §  3.

6  de  Inv.  i.  xxxi.  51.

286


BOOK V.  xi.  24-28

are  exhorting  someone  to  enter  the  service  of  the
state,  you  will  point  out  that  bees  and  ants,  though
not  merely  dumb  animals,  but  tiny  insects,  still  toil
for  the  common  weal. Of  this  kind  is  the  saying  25
of  Cicero x  : "As  our  bodies  can  make  no  use  of
their  members  without  a  mind  to  direct  them,  so  the
state  can  make  no  use  of  its  component  parts,  which
may  be  compared  to  the  sinews,  blood  and  limbs,
unless  it  is  directed  by  law." And  just  as  he  draws
this  simile  in  the  pro  Cluentio  from  the analogy  of
the  human  body,  so  in  the  pro  Cornelio 2  he  draws
a  simile  from  horses,  and  in  the  pro  Arckia3  from
stones. As  I  have  already  said,  the  following  type  26
of  simile  comes  more  readily  to  hand  :  "  As  oarsmen
are  useless  without  a  steersman,  so  soldiers  are  use-
less without  a  general/ ' Still  it  is  always  possible
to  be  misled  by  appearances  in  the  use  of  simile,
and  we  must  therefore  use  our  judgment  in  their
employment. For  though  a  new  ship  is  more  useful
than  one  which  is  old,  this  simile  will  not  apply  to
friendship :  and  again,  though  we  praise  one  who  is
liberal  with  her  money,  we  do  not  praise  one  who
is  liberal  with  her  embraces. In  these  cases  there  is
similitude  in  the  epithets  old  and  liberal,  but  their
force  is  different,  when  applied  to  ships  and  friend-
ship, money  and  embraces. Consequently,  it  is  all-  27
important  in  this  connexion  to  consider  whether  the
simile  is  really  applicable. So  in  answering  those
Socratic  questions  which  I mentioned above,4  the
greatest  care  must  be  taken  to  avoid  giving  an  in-
cautious answer,  such  as  those  given  by  the  wife  of
Xenophon  to  Aspasia  in  the  dialogue  of  Aeschines
the  Socratic  :  the  passage  is  translated  by  Cicero5  as
follows : "  Tell  me,  pray,  wife  of  Xenophon,  if  your  28

287


QUINTILIAN

habeat  aurum,  quam  tu  habes :  utrumne  illud  an  tuum
malis?  Illud,  inquit.  Quid  si  vestem  et  celt  rum
ornatum  muliebrem  pretii  maioris  habeat,  quam  tu,
tuumne  an  illius  malts  ?  Respondit,  Illius  vero.  Age  sis,
inquit,  si  virum ilia  meliorem  habeat,  quam tu habes,

29  utrumne  tuum  virum  malis  an  illius  ?  Hie  mulier
erubuit,  merito ;  male  enim  responderat  se  malle
alienum  aurum  quam  suum ;  nam  est  hoc  improbum.
At,  si  respondisset  malle  se  aurum  suum  tale  esse,
quale  illud  esset,  potuisset  pudice  respondere  malle
se  virum  suum  talem  esse,  qualis  melior  esset.

30  Scio  quosdam  inani  diligentia  per  minutissimas  ista
partes  secuisse,  et  esse  aliquid  minus  simile,  ut  simia
homini  et  marmora  deformata  prima  manu,  aliquid
plus,  ut  illud,  Non  ovum  tarn  simile  ovo ;  et  dissimili-
bus  inesse  simile,  ut  formicae  et  elephanto  genus,
quia  sunt  animalia ;  et  similibus  dissimile,  ut  canibus
catulos et malribus haedos, differunt enim aetate  ;

31  contrariorum  quoque  aliter  accipi  opposita,  ut  noctem
luci,  aliter  noxia,  ut  a  quam  frigidam  febri,  aliter
repugnantia,  ut  verum  falso,  aliter  disparata,  ut  dura
non  duris;  sed,  quid  haec  ad  praesens  propositum
magnopere  pertineant,  non  reperio.

1  Verg.  Eel.  i.  23.
288


BOOK V.  xi.  28-31

neighbour  has  finer  gold  ornaments  than  you,  would
you  prefer  hers  or  yours?"  "Hers,"  she  replied.
*  Well,  then,  if  her  dress  and  the  rest  of  her  orna-
ments are  more  valuable  than  yours,  which  would  you
prefer,  hers  or  yours  ?  "  "  Hers,"  she  replied.  "  Come,
then,"  said  she,  "if  her  husband  is  better  than  yours,
would  you  prefer  yours  or  hers  ?  "  At  this  the  wife  of  29
Xenophon  not  unnaturally  blushed ;  for  she  had
answered  ill  in  replying  that  she  would  prefer  her
neighbour's  gold  ornaments  to  her  own,  since  it
would  be  wrong  to  do  so.  If  on  the  other  hand  she
had  replied  that  she  would  prefer  her  ornaments  to
be  of  the  same  quality  as  those  of  her  neighbour,  she
might  have  answered  without  putting  herself  to  the
blush  that  she  would  prefer  her  husband  to  be  like
him  who  was  his  superior  in  virtue.

I  am  aware  that  some  writers  have  shown  pedantic  30
zeal  in  making  a  minute  classification  of  similes,  and
have  pointed  out  that  there  is  lesser  similitude  (such
as  that  of  a  monkey  to  a  man  or  a  statue  when  first
blocked  out  to  its  original),  a  greater  similitude  (for
which  compare  the  proverb  "  As  like  as  egg  to
egg"),  a  similitude  in  things  dissimilar  (an  elephant,
for  instance,  and  an  ant  both  belong  to  the  genus
animal),  and  dissimilitude  in  things  similar  (puppies
and  kids,  for  example,  are  unlike  the  parents,1  for
they  differ  from  them  in  point  of  age).  So  too  they  31
distinguish  between  contraries  :  some  are  opposites,
as  night  to  day,  some  hurtful,  as  cold  water  to  a
fever,  some  contradictory,  as  truth  to  falsehood,  and
some  negative,  as  things  which  are  not  hard  when
contrasted  with  things  which  are  hard.  But  I
cannot  see  that  such  distinctions  have  any  real
bearing  on  the  subject  under  discussion.

289


QUINTILIAN

32  Illud  est  adnotandum  magis,  argumenta  duci  ejt
iure  simili :  ut  Cicero  in  Topicis,  Eum,  cut  domus  ustis
fructus  reliclus  sit,  non  restituturum  keredi,  si  corruerit,
quia  non  restituat  servum,  si  is  decesserit ;  ex  contrario  :
Nihil  obstat  quo  minus  iustum  matrimonium  sit  mente
coeuniium,  etiamsi  tabulae  signatae  non  fuerint.  Nihil
enim  proderit  signasse  tabulas,  si  mentem  matrimonii  non
fuisse  constabit ;  ex  dissimili,  quale  est  Ciceronis  pro

33  Caecina :  Ut,  si  qui  me  exire  domo  coegisset  armis,  ha-
berem  actionem,  si  qui  introire  prohibuisset,  non  haberem  ?
Dissimilia  sic  deprehenduntur,  Non  si,  qui  argentum
omne  legavit,  videri  potest  signatam  quoque  pecuniam
reliquisse,  ideo  etiam,  quod  est  in  nominibus,  dari  voluisse
creditor.

34  'kvakoytav  quidam  a  simili  separaverunt,  nos  earn
subiectam  huic  generi  putamus.  Nam,  ut  unum  ad
decern,  ita l  decern  ad  centum  simile  certe  est ;  et  ut
hostis,  sic  malus  civis.  Quanquam  haec  ulterius  quo-
que procedere solent : si  turpis dominae  consuetudo

1  ita,  Spalding :  et,  MISS.


1  iii.  15.  2  xii.  34.

290


1  iii.  15.  2  xii.  34.

8  cp.  Cic.  Top.  iii.  13  and  16


BOOK V.  xi.  32-34

It  is  more  important  for  our  purpose  to  note  that  32
arguments  may  be  drawn  from  similar,  opposite,  and
dissimilar  points  of  law.  As  an  example  of  the  first,
take  the  following  passage  from  the  Topica  of
Cicero,1  where  he  argues  that  a  man  to  whom  the
usufruct  of  a  house  has  been  left  will  not  restore  it
in  the  interests  of  the  heir  if  it  collapses  ;  just  as
he  would  not  replace  a  slave  if  he  should  die.  The
following  will  provide  an  example  of  an  argument
drawn  from  opposite  points  of  law  :  u  The  absence
of  a  formal  contract  is  no  bar  to  the  legality  of
a  marriage,  provided  the  parties  cohabit  by  mutual
consent,  since  the  signing  of  a  formal  document  will
count  for  nothing  in  the  absence  of  such  mutual
consent."  An  instance  of  an  argument  drawn  from
dissimilar  points  of  law  occurs  in  the  pro  Caecina  of
Cicero  2 :  "If  anyone  had  driven  me  from  my  house  33
by  armed  violence,  I  should  have  ground  for  action
against  him.  Have  I  then  no  ground,  if  he  has
prevented  me  from  entering  my  house  ? "  Dis-
similar points  may  be  illustrated  by  the  following
example  3 :  "  Because  a  man  has  bequeathed  all  his
silver  to  a  given  person  and  this  bequest  is  regarded
as  including  silver  coin  as  well  as  plate,  it  does  not
follow  that  he  intended  all  outstanding  debts  to  be
paid  to  the  legatee."

Some  draw  a  distinction  between  analogy  and  34
similarity,  but  personally  I  regard  the  former  as
included  under  the  latter.  For  the  statement  that
the  relation  of  1  to  10  is  the  same  as  that  of  10  to
100  certainly  involves  similarity,  just  as  does  the
statement  that  a  bad  citizen  may  be  compared  to  an
actual  enemy.  But  arguments  of  this  kind  are
carried still  further : €i  If  connexion with  a  male

291


QUINTILIAN

cum  servo,  turpis  domino  cum  ancilla  ;  si  mutis  animali-

35  busjinis  voluptas,  idem  komini.  Cui  rei  facillime  occur-

rit  ex  dissimilibus  argumentatio :  Non  idem  est  domi-

num  cum  ancilla  coisse,  quod  dominam  cum  servo  ;  nee,

si  mutis  jinis  voluptas,  rationalibus  quoque ; immo  ex

contrario  :  Quia  mutis,  ideo  non  rationalibus.

36  Adhibebitur  extrinsecus  in  causam  et  auctoritas.
Haec  secuti  Graecos,  a  quibus  Kpio-eis  dicuntur,
iudicia  aut  iudicationes  vocant,  non  de  quibus  ex  causa
dicta  sententia  est  (nam  ea  quidem  in  exemplorum
locum  cedunt),  sed  si  quid  ita  visum  gentibus,  populis,
sapientibus viris, claris civibus, illustribus poetis

37  referri  potest.  Ne  haec  quidem  vulgo  dicta  et  recepta
persuasione  populari  sine  usu  fuerint.  Testimonia
sunt  enim  quodammodo  vel  potentiora  etiam,  quod
non  causis  accommodata,  sed  liberis  odio  et  gratia
mentibus  ideo  tantum  dicta  factaque,  quia  aut  hon-

38  estissima  aut  verissima  videbantur.  An  vero  me  de
incommodis  vitae  disserentem  non  adiuvabit  earum
persuasio  nationum^  quae  fletibus  natos,  laetitia  de-
292


BOOK V.  xi.  34-38

slave  is  disgraceful  to  the  mistress  ot  the  house,  so
is  the  connexion  of  the  master  with  a  female  slave.
If  pleasure  is  an  end  sought  by  dumb  animals,  so
also  must  it  be  with  men."  But  these  arguments  35
may  readily  be  met  by  arguments  from  dissimilars :
"  It  is  not  the  same  thing  for  the  master  of  the
house  to  have  intercourse  with  a  female  slave  as  for
the  mistress  to  have  intercourse  with  a  male  slave ;
nor  does  it  follow  that  because  dumb  animals  pursue
pleasure,  reasoning  beings  should  do  likewise."  Or
they  may  even  be  met  by  arguments  from  opposites  ;
as  for  instance,  "  Because  pleasure  is  an  end  sought
by  dumb  animals,  it  should  not  be  sought  by
reasoning  beings."

Authority  also  may  be  drawn  from  external  sources  36
to  support  a  case.  Those  who  follow  the  Greeks,
who  call  such  arguments  K/ot'cms,  style  them  judg-
ments or  adjudications,  thereby  referring  not  to
matters  on  which  judicial  sentence  has  been  pro-
nounced (for  such  decisions  form  examples  or  pre-
cedents), but  to  whatever  may  be  regarded  as
expressing  the  opinion  of  nations,  peoples,  philo-
sophers, distinguished  citizens,  or  illustrious  poets.
Nay,  even  common  sayings  and  popular  beliefs  may  37
be  found  to  be  useful.  For  they  form  a  sort  of
testimony,  which  is  rendered  all  the  more  impressive
by  the  fact  that  it  was  not  given  to  suit  special  cases,
but  was  the  utterance  or  action  of  minds  swayed
neither  by  prejudice  or  influence,  simply  because  it
seemed  the  most  honourable  or  honest  thing  to  say
or  do.  For  instance,  if  I  am  speaking  of  the  mis-  38
fortunes  of  this  mortal  life,  surely  it  will  help  me  to
adduce  the  opinion  of  those  nations  who  hold  that
we  should  weep  over  the  new-born  child  and  rejoice

293


QUINTILIAN

functos  prosequuntur  ?  Aut  si  misericordiam  com-
mendabo  iudici,  nihil  proderit,  quod  prudentissima
ci vitas  Atheniensium  non  earn  pro  adfectu  sed  pro  nu-

39  mine  accepit  ?  lam  ilia  septem  praecepta  sapientium
nonne  quasdam  vitae  leges  existimamus  ?  Si  causam
veneficii  dicat  adultera,  non  M.  Catonis  iudicio  dam-
nata  videatur,  qui  nullam  adulteram  non  eandem  esse
veneficam  dixit?  Nam  sententiis  quidem  poetarum
non  orationes  modo  sunt  refertae  sed  libri  etiam
philosophorum,  qui  quanquam  inferiora  omnia  prae-
ceptis  suis  ac  litteris  credunt,  repetere  tamen  auctor-

40  itatem  a  plurimis  versibus  non  fastidierunt.  Neque
est  ignobile  exemplum,  Megarios  ab  Atheniensibus,
cum  de  Salamine  contenderent,  victos  Homeri  versu,
qui  tamen  ipse  non  in  omni  editione  reperitur,
significans  Aiacem  naves  suas  Atheniensibus  iunxisse.

41  Ea  quoque,  quae  vulgo  recepta  sunt,  hoc  ipso,  quod
incertum  auctorem  habent,  velut  omnium  fiunt :  quale
est,  Ubi  amici,  ibi  opes,  et,  Conscientia  mille  testes,  et
apud  Ciceronem,  Pares  autem  (ut  est  in  vetere  proverbio)
cum  paribus  maxime  congregantur  ;  neque  enim  duras-
sent  haec  in  aetemum,  nisi  vera  omnibus  viderentur.

42  Ponitur  a  quibusdam  et  quidem  in  parte  prima  deo-
rum auctoritas,  quae  est  ex  responsis,  ut,  Socraten

1  11. ii. 558. "  Twelve ships  great  Ajax  brought  from
Salamis,  And  ranged  them  where  the  Athenian  army  stood."
8  Gato  may.  iii  7.

294


BOOK V.  xi.  38-42

over  the  dead.  Or  if  1  am  urging  the  judge  to  shew
pity,  surely  my  argument  may  be  assisted  by  the
fact  that  Athens,  the  wisest  of  all  states,  regarded
pity  not  merely  as  an  emotion,  but  even  as  a  god.
Again,  do  we  not  regard  the  precepts  of  the  Seven  39
Wise  Men  as  so  many  rules  of  life?  If  an  adul-
teress is  on  her  trial  for  poisoning,  is  she  not  already
to  be  regarded  as  condemned  by  the  judgment  of
Marcus  Cato,  who  asserted  that  every  adulteress
was  as  good  as  a  poisoner  ?  As  for  reflexions  drawn
from  the  poets,  not  only  speeches,  but  even  the
works  of  the  philosophers,  are  full  of  them;  for
although  the  philosophers  think  everything  in-
ferior to  their  own  precepts  and  writings,  they
have  not  thought  it  beneath  their  dignity  to
quote  numbers  of  lines  from  the  poets  to  lend
authority  to  their  statements.  Again,  a  remark-  40
able  example  of  the  weight  carried  by  authority
is  provided  by  the  fact  that  when  the  Megarians
disputed  the  possession  of  Salamis  with  the  Athen-
ians, the  latter  prevailed  by  citing  a  line  from
Homer,1  which  is  not  however  found  in  all  editions,
to  the  effect  that  Ajax  united  his  ships  with  those  of
the  Athenians.  Generally  received  sayings  also  be-  41
come  common  property  owing  to  the  very  fact  that
they  are  anonymous,  as,  for  instance,  "  Friends  are  a
treasure,"  or  "  Conscience  is  as  good  as  a  thousand
witnesses/'  or,  to  quote  Cicero,2  "  In  the  words  of
the  old  proverb,  birds  of  a  feather  flock  together."
Sayings  such  as  these  would  not  have  acquired  im-
mortality had  they  not  carried  conviction  of  their
truth  to  all  mankind.  Some  include  under  this  head  42
the  supernatural  authority  that  is  derived  from
oracles,  as  for  instance  the  response  asserting  that
Socrates  was  the  wisest  of  mankind :  indeed,  they

295


QUINTILIAN

esse  sapientissimum.  Id  rarum  est,  non  sine  usu  tamen.
Utitur  eo  Cicero  in  libro  de  aruspicum  responsis  et  in
contione  contra  Catilinam,cum  signum  Iovis  columnae
impositum  populoostendit,  et  pro  Ligario,  cum  causam
C.  Caesaris  meliorem,  quia  hoc  dii  iudicaverint,
confitetur.  Quae  cum  propria  causae  sunt,  divina  testi-
monia  vocantur ;  cum  aliunde  arcessuntur,  argumenta.

43  Nonnunquam  contingit  iudicis  quoque  aut  adversarii
aut  eius,  qui  ex  diverso  agit,  dictum  aliquid  aut  fac-
tum adsumere  ad  eorum,  quae  intendimus,  fidem.
Propter  quod  fuerunt,  qui  exempla  et  has  auctori-
tates  inartificialium  probationum  esse  arbitrarentur,

44  quod  ea  non  inveniret  orator,  sed  acciperet.  Pluri-
mum  autem  refert.  Nam  testis  et  quaestio  et  his
similia  de  ipsa  re,  quae  in  iudicio  est,  pronuntiant ;
extra  petita,  nisi  ad  aliquam  praesentis  discepta-
tionis  utilitatem  ingenio  applicantur,  nihil  per  se
valent.

XII.  Haec  fere  de  probatione  vel  ab  aliis  tradita
vel  usu  percepta  in  hoc  tempus  sciebam.  Neque
mihi  fiducia  est,  ut  ea  sola  esse  contendam,  quin
immo  hortor  ad  quaerendum  et  inveniri  posse  fateor ;
quae tamen adiecta fuerint, non multum ab his


1  de  har.  resp.  passim.  The  soothsayers  consulted  as  to
the  significance  of  certain  prodigies  had  replied  that  they
were  due  to  the  profanation  of  sacred  rites.  Clodius  inter-
preted this  as  referring  to  the  rebuilding  of  Cicero's  house.
Cicero  argued  against  this  in  a  speech  to  the  senate  (56  B.C.).

2  in  Cat.  in.  he.  21.  8  vi.  19.

296


BOOK V.  xi.  42-xii.  1

rank  it  above  all  other  authorities.  Such  authority
is  rare,  but  may  prove  useful.  It  is  employed  by
Cicero  in  his  speech  on  the  Replies  of  the  Sooth-
sayers 1  and  in  the  oration  in  which  he  denounced
Catiline  to  the  people,2  when  he  points  to  the  statue
of  Jupiter  crowning  a  column,  and  again  in  the
pro  Ligario,3  where  he  admits  the  cause  of  Caesar  to
be  the  better  because  the  gods  have  decided  in  his
favour.  When  such  arguments  are  inherent  in  the
case  itself  they  are  called  supernatural  evidence ;
when  they  are  adduced  from  without  they  are  styled
supernatural  arguments.  Sometimes,  again,  it  may  43
be  possible  to  produce  some  saying  or  action  of  the
judge,  of  our  adversary  or  his  advocate  in  order  to
prove  our  point.  There  have  therefore  been  some
writers  who  have  regarded  examples  and  the  use  of
authorities  of  which  I  am  speaking  as  belonging  to
inartificial  proofs,  on  the  ground  that  the  orator
does  not  discover  them,  but  receives  them  ready-
made.  But  the  point  is  of  great  importance.  For  44
witnesses  and  investigation  and  the  like  all  make
some  pronouncement  on  the  actual  matter  under
trial,  whereas  arguments  drawn  from  without  are  in
themselves  useless,  unless  the  pleader  has  the  wit  to
apply  them  in  such  a  manner  as  to  support  the
points  which  he  is  trying  to  make.

XII.  Such  in  the  main  are  the  views  about  proof
which  I  have  either  heard  from  others  or  learned  by
experience.  I  would  not  venture  to  assert  that  this
is  all  there  is  to  be  said  ;  indeed  I  would  exhort
students  to  make  further  researches  on  the  subject,
for  I  admit  the  possibilities  of  making  further
discoveries.  Still  anything  that  may  be  discovered
will  not  differ  greatly  from  what  I  have  said  here.

297


QUINTILIAN

abhorrebunt. Nunc breviter, quemadmodum sit
utendum  iis,  subiungam.

2  Traditum  fere  est  argumentum  oportere  esse
confessum  ;  dubiis  enim  probari  dubia  qui  possunt?
Quaedam  tamen>  quae  in  alterius  rei  probationem
ducimus,  ipsa  probanda  sunt.  Occidisti  virum,  eras
enim  adulter  a.  Prius  de  adulterio  convincendum
est  ut,  cum  id  coeperit  esse  pro  certo,  fiat  incerti
argumentum.  Spiculum  tuum  in  corpore  occisi
inventum est ; negat suum : ut probationi prosit,

3  probandum  est.  Illud  hoc  loco  monere  inter  neces-
saria  est,  nulla  esse  firmiora  quam  quae  ex  dubiis
facta  sunt  certa.  Caedes  a  te  commissa  est,  cruentam
enim  vestem  habuisti ;  non  est  tam  grave  argumentum,
si  fatetur  quam  si  convincitur.  Nam  si  fatetur,  multis
ex  causis  potuit  cruenta  esse  vestis ;  si  negat,  hie
causae  cardinem  ponic,  in  quo  si  victus  fuerit,  etiam
in  sequentibus  ruit.  Non  enim  videtur  in  negando
mentiturus  fuisse,  nisi  desperasset  id  posse  defendi,
si  confiteretur.

4  Firmissimis  argumentorum  singulis  instandum,
infirmiora  congreganda  sunt,  quia  ilia  per  se  fortia
non  oportet  circumstantibus  obscurare,  ut  qualia  sunt

1  cp.  v.  xi.  39.
298


BOOK V.  xii.  i-4

I  will  now  proceed  to  make  a  few  remarks  as  to  how
proofs  should  be  employed.

It  has  generally  been  laid  down  that  an  argument
to  be  effective  must  be  based  on  certainty  ;  for  it  is
obviously  impossible  to  prove  what  is  doubtful  by
what  is  no  less  doubtful.  Still  some  things  which  are
adduced  as  proof  require  proof  themselves.  "  You
killed  your  husband,  for  you  were  an  adulteress.' ' l
Adultery  must  first  be  proved :  once  that  is  certain  it
can  be  used  as  an  argument  to  prove  what  is  uncer-
tain. "  Your  javelin  was  found  in  the  body  of  the
murdered  man/'  He  denies  that  it  was  his.  If  this
point  is  to  serve  as  a  proof,  it  must  itself  be  proved.
It  is,  however,  necessary  in  this  connection  to  point
out  that  there  are  no  stronger  proofs  than  those  in
which  uncertainty  has  been  converted  into  certainty.
"  You  committed  the  murder,  for  your  clothes  were
stained  with  blood."  This  argument  is  not  so
strong  if  the  accused  admits  that  his  clothes  were
bloodstained  as  if  the  fact  is  proved  against  his
denial.  For  if  he  admits  it,  there  are  still  a  number
of  ways  in  which  the  blood  could  have  got  on  to  his
clothes  :  if  on  the  other  hand  he  denies  it,  he  makes
his  whole  case  turn  on  this  point,  and  if  his  con-
tention is  disproved,  he  will  be  unable  to  make  a
stand  on  any  subsequent  ground.  For  it  will  be
thought  that  he  would  never  have  told  a  lie  in
denying  the  allegation,  unless  he  had  felt  it  a  hope-
less task  to  justify  himself  if  he  admitted  it.

In  insisting  on  our  strongest  arguments  we  must
take  them  singly,  whereas  our  weaker  arguments
should  be  massed  together :  for  it  is  undesirable
that  those  arguments  which  are  strong  in  them-
selves  should have their force obscured by the

299


QUINTILIAN

appareant, haec imbecilla natura mutuo auxilio

5  sustinentur.  Ita  quae  non  possunt  valere,  quia
magna  sint,  valebunt,  quia  multa  sunt ;  utique  vero
ad  eiusdem  rei  probationem  omnia  spectant.  Ut,  si
quis  hereditatis  gratia  hominem  occidisse  dicatur:
Hereditatem  sperabas  et  magnam  her  edit  atem,  et  pauper
eras  et  turn  maxime  a  creditorihus  appellabaris ;  et
offenderas  eum,  cuius  eras  heres,  et  mutaturum  tabulas
sciebas.  Singula  levia  sunt  et  communia,  uni versa  vero

nocent  etiamsi  non  ut  fulmine,  tamen  ut  grandine.

6  Quaedam  argumenta  ponere  satis  non  est,  adiu-
vanda  sunt :  cupiditas  causa  sceleris  fuit,  quae  sit  vis
eius  :  ira,  quantum  efficiat  in  animis  hominum  talis
adfectio ;  ita  et  firmiora  erunt  ipsa  et  plus  habebunt
decoris,  si  non  nudos  et  velut  carne  spoliatos  artus

7  ostenderint. Multum etiam refert, si argumento

nitemur  odii,  utrum  hoc  ex  invidia  sit  an  ex  iniuria

an  ex  ambitu,  vetus  an  novum,  adversus  inferiorem,
300


BOOK V.  xii.  4  7

surrounding  matter,  since  it  is  important  to  show
their  true  nature:  on  the  other  hand  arguments
which  are  naturally  weak  will  receive  mutual  support
if  grouped  together.  Consequently  arguments  5
which  have  no  individual  force  on  the  ground
of  strength  will  acquire  force  in  virtue  of  their
number,  since  all  tend  to  prove  the  same  thing.
For  instance,  if  one  man  is  accused  of  having  mur-
dered another  for  the  sake  of  his  property,  it  may
be  argued  as  follows:  "You  had  expectations  of
succeeding  to  the  inheritance,  which  was  moreover
very  large :  you  were  a  poor  man,  and  at  the  time
in  question  were  specially  hard  pressed  by  your
creditors :  you  had  also  offended  him  whose  heir
you  were,  and  knew  that  he  intended  to  alter  his
will."  These  arguments  are  trivial  and  common-
place in  detail,  but  their  cumulative  force  is
damaging.  They  may  not  have  the  overwhelming
force  of  a  thunderbolt,  but  they  will  have  all  the
destructive  force  of  hail.

There are certain arguments, which must  not  6
merely  be  stated,  but  supported  as  well. If  we  say,
"The  motive  for  the  crime  was  greed,"  we  must
show  the  force  of  greed  as  a  motive  :  if  we  say  that
anger  was  the  motive,  we  must  show  the  sway  that
this  passion  has  over  the  minds  of  men. Thus  our
arguments  will  not  only  be  strengthened,  but  will
be  more  ornamental  as well,  since  we  shall have
produced something more than a mere fleshless
skeleton. It  also  makes  an  enormous  difference,  7
supposing  that  we  allege  hatred  as  the  motive  for  a
crime,  whether  such  hatred  was  due  to  envy,  injury
or  unlawful  influence,  whether  it  was  recent  or  of
long  standing,  whether  it  was  directed  against  an

301


QUINTILIAN

parem, superiorem, alienum, propinquum. Suos
habent  omnia  ista  tractatus  et  ad  utilitatem  partis

8  eius  quam  tuemur  referenda  sunt.  Nee  tamen
omnibus  semper,  quae  invenerimus,  argumentis  one-
randus  est  iudex,  quia  et  taedium  adferunt  et  fidem
detrahunt.  Neque  enim  potest  iudex  credere  satis
esse  ea  potentia,  quae  non  putamus  ipsi  sufficere  qui
diximus.  In  rebus  vero  apertis  argumentari  tarn  sit
stultum  quam  in  clarissimum  solem  mortale  lumen
inferre.

9  His  quidam  probationes  adiiciunt,  quas  7ra0t]TiKa<;
vocant,  ductas  ex  adfectibus.  Atque  Aristoteles
quidem  potentissimum  putat  ex  eo,  qui  dicit,  si  sit
vir  bonus ;  quod  ut  optimum  est,  ita  longe  quidem,

10  sed  sequitur  tamen,  videri.  Inde  enim  ilia  nobilis
Scauri  defensio :  Q.  Varius  Sucronensis  ait  Aemilium
Scaurum  rem  publicam  populi  Romani  prodidhse ;
Aemilius  Scaurus  negaL  Cui  simile  quiddam  fecisse
Iphicrates  dicitur,  qui  cum  Aristophontem,  quo
accusante  similis  criminis  reus  erat,  interrogasset,  an
is  accepta  pecunia  rem  publicam  proditurus  esset;
isque  id  negasset :  Quod  igitur,  inquit,  tu  non  fecisses,

1 1  ego  feci  ?  Intuendum  autem  et  qui  sit  apud  quern
dicimus,  et  id  quod  illi  maxime  probabile  videatur
requirendum ;  qua  de  re  locuti  sumus  in  prooemii  et

1  Rhet.  I.  ii.  4.  *  Ar.  Rhet.  n.  xxiii.  7.

302


BOOK V.  xii.  7-i  i

inferior,  an  equal  or  a  superior,  against  a  stranger
or  a  relative.  There  are  special  methods  for  the
treatment  of  all  these  arguments,  and  the  treatment
to  be  selected  will  depend  on  the  interests  of  the
case  which  we  are  defending.  On  the  other  hand  8
we  must  not  always  burden  the  judge  with  all  the
arguments  we  have  discovered,  since  by  so  doing  we
shall  at  once  bore  him  and  render  him  less  inclined
to  believe  us.  For  he  will  hardly  suppose  those
proofs  to  be  valid  which  we  ourselves  who  produce
them  regard  as  insufficient.  On  the  other  hand,
where  the  facts  are  fairly  obvious,  it  would  be
as  foolish  to  argue  about  them  as  to  bring  some
artificial  light  into  broad  sunlight.

To  these  proofs  some  authorities  would  add  those  9
which  they  call  pathetic  or  emotional.  Aristotle x
indeed  holds  that  the  strongest  argument  in  support
of  a  speaker  is  that  he  is  a  good  man.  This  no
doubt  is  the  best  support,  but  to  seem  good  is  also
of  value,  though  the  semblance  is  but  a  bad  second
to  the  reality.  Of  this  nature  is  the  noble  defence  10
ofScaurus.  "  Quintus  Varius  of  Sucro  asserts  that
Aemilius  Scaurus  has  betrayed  the  interests  of  the
Roman  people  :  Aemilius  Scaurus  denies  it."  A
similar  defence  is  said  to  have  been  employed  by
Iphicrates2  :  he  asked  Aristophon  who  was  accusing
him  on  a  similar  charge  of  treason  whether  he
would  consent  to  betray  his  country  for  a  bribe :
when  Aristophon  replied  in  the  negative,  he  con-
tinued, "  Have  I  then  done  what  you  would  have
refused  to  do?"  We  must  however  take  the  11
character  of  the  judge  into  consideration  and  seek
out  such  arguments  as  will  appeal  to  him.  I  have
already  spoken of  this  in the  rules  which I  laid

303


QUINTILIAN

12  suasoriae  praeceptis.  Altera  ex  adfirmatione  pro-
batio  est :  Ego  hoc  feci ;  Tu  mihi  hoc  dixisti ;  et  0
f acinus  indignum  !  et  similia  ;  quae  non  debent  quidem
deesse  orationi  et,  si  desunt,  multum  nocent ;  non
tamen  habenda  sunt  inter  magna  praesidia,  cum  hoc
in  eadem  causa  fieri  ex  utraque  parte  similiter  possit.

13  Illae  firmiores  ex  sua  cuique  persona  probationes,
quae  credibilem  rationem  subiectam  habeant :  ut
vulneratus  aut  filio  orbatus  non  fuerit  alium  accu-
saturus  quam  nocentem,  quando,  si  negotium  in-
nocenti  facit,  liberet  eum  noxa  qui  admiserit.  Hinc
et  patres  adversus  liberos  et  adversus  suos  quisque
necessarios  auctoritatem  petunt.

14  Quaesitum  etiam,  potentissima  argumenta  primone
ponenda  sint  loco,  ut  occupent  animos,  an  summo,
ut  inde  dimittant,  an  partita  primo  summoque,  quod
Homerica  dispositione  in  medio  sint  infirma,  ut  ab
aliis  l  crescant  ?  Quae  prout  ratio  causae  cuiusque
postulabit,  ordinabuntur,  uno,  ut  ego  censeo,  excepto,
ne  a  potentissimis  ad  levissima  decrescat  oratio.

15  Ego  haec  breviter  demonstrasse  contentus  ita
posui,  ut  locos  ipsos  et  genera  quam  possem  apertis-

1  ab  aliis,  Butler :  aut  animis,  MSS.


3°4


1  iv.  i.  17  sq.,  in.  viii.  36  *q.  ■  II.  iv.  299.


ROOK V.  xii.  11-15

down  for  the  exordium  and  for  deliberative  oratory.1
Another  form  of  proof  is  provided  by  asseveration  12
as  in  "I  did  this/'  "You  told  me  this,"  or  «O
outrageous  crime  !  "  and  the  like.  Every  pleading
should  contain  some  such  asseverations ;  if  it  does
not,  the  loss  will  be  considerable.  Still  asseve-
rations must  not  be  regarded  as  supports  of  the  first
importance,  since  they  can  be  produced  by  either
party  in  the  same  case  with  the  same  emphasis.
A  more  forcible  kind  of  proof  is  that  drawn  13
from  character  and  supported  by  some  plausible
reason,  as  for  instance,  "  It  is  not  likely  that  a
wounded  man  or  one  who  has  lost  his  son  would
accuse  anyone  who  is  not  guilty,  since  if  he  accused
an  innocent  man,  he  would  free  the  real  offender
from  all  risk  of  punishment/ '  It  is  from  such
arguments  that  fathers  seek  support  when  pleading
against  their  sons  or  one  relative  against  another.

The  further  question  has  been  raised  as  to  whether  14
the  strongest  arguments  should  be  placed  first,  to
take  possession  of  the  judge's  mind,  or  last,  to  leave
an  impression  on  it ;  or  whether  they  should  be
divided  between  the  commencement  and  close  of  the
proof,  adopting  the  Homeric  disposition  of  placing
the  weakest  in  the  centre  of  the  column,2  so  that
they  may  derive  strength  from  their  neighbours.
But  in  the  disposition  of  our  arguments  we  must  be
guided  by  the  interests  of  the  individual  case  :  there
is  only  one  exception  to  this  general  rule  in  my
opinion,  namely,  that  we  should  avoid  descending
from  the  strongest  proofs  to  the  weakest.

I  have  been  content  to  give  a  brief  outline  of  my  Ifi
views  concerning  these  points,  and  have  put  them
forward  in  such  a  way  as  to  show  as  clearly  as  was  in

30S


QUINTILIAN

sime  ostenderem.  Quidam  exsecuti  sunt  verbosius,
quibus  placuit,  proposita  locorum  communiura  materia,
quo  quaeque  res  modo  dici posset,  ostendere ;  sed

16  mihi  supervacuum  videbatur.  Nam  et  fere  apparet,
quid  in  iniuriam,  quid  in  avaritiam,  quid  in  testem
inimicum,  quid  in  potentes  amicos  dicendum  sit ;  et  de
omnibus  his  omnia  dicere  infinitum  est,  tarn  hercule
quam  si  controversiarum,  quae  sint  quaeque  futurae
sint, quaestiones, argumenta, sententias tradere

17  velim.  Ipsas  autem  argumentorum  velut  sedes  non
me  quidem  omnes  ostendisse  confido,  plurimas  tamen.

Quod  eo  diligentius  faciendum  fuit,  quia  declama-
tiones,  quibus  ad  pugnam  forensem  velut  praepilatis
exerceri  solebamus,  olim  iam  ab  ilia  vera  imagine
orandi  recesserunt  atque  ad  solam  compositae  volup-
tatem  nervis  carent,  non  alio  medius  fidius  vitio
dicentium,  quam  quo  mancipiorum  negotiatores  for-

18  mae  puerorum  virilitate  excisa  lenocinantur.  Nam
ut  illi  robur  ac  lacertos  barbamque  ante  omnia  et
alia,  quae  natura  proprie  maribus  dedit,  parum  existi-
mant  decora,  quaeque  fortia,  si  liceret,  forent  ut  dura
molliunt,  ita  nos  habitum  ipsum  orationis  virilem  et
iHam  vim  stricte  robusteque  dicendi  tenera  quadam
elocutionis cute operimus et, dum levia sint ac

306


BOOK V.  xii.  15-18

my  power  the  various  topics  and  kinds  of  arguments»
Others  have  dealt  with  the  subject  at  greater  length,
preferring  to  deal  with  the  whole  subject  of  common-
places and  to  show  how  each  topic  may  be  treated.
This  seems  to  me  unnecessary,  since  it  is  as  a  rule  16
obvious  what  should  be  said  against  the  injurious
conduct  or  avarice  of  our  opponents,  or  against  a
hostile  witness  or  powerful  friends ;  to  say  every-
thing on  all  these  subjects  is  an  endless  task,  as
endless  in  fact  as  if  I  were  to  attempt  to  lay  down
rules  for  dealing  with  every  dispute  that  can  ever
occur  and  all  the  questions,  arguments  and  opinions
thereby  involved.  I  do  not  venture  to  suppose  that  17
I  have  pointed  out  all  the  circumstances  that  may
give  rise  to  arguments,  but  I  think  that  I  have
done  so  in  the  majority  of  cases.

This  was  a  task  which  required  all  the  more  careful
handling  because  the  declamations,  which  we  used
to  employ  as  foils  wherewith  to  practise  for  the  duels
of  the  forum,  have  long  since  departed  from  the
true  form  of  pleading  and,  owing  to  the  fact  that
they  are  composed  solely  with  the  design  of  giving
pleasure,  have  become  flaccid  and  nerveless  :  indeed,
declaimers  are  guilty  of  exactly  the  same  offence  as
slave-dealers  who  castrate  boys  in  order  to  increase
the  attractions  of  their  beauty.  For  just  as  the  18
slave-dealer  regards  strength  and  muscle,  and  above
all,  the  beard  and  other  natural  characteristics  of
manhood  as  blemishes,  and  softens  down  all  that
would  be  sturdy  if  allowed  to  grow,  on  the  ground
that  it  is  harsh  and  hard,  even  so  we  conceal  the
manly  form  of  eloquence  and  power  of  speaking
closely  and  forcibly  by  giving  it  a  delicate  complexion
of  style  and,  so  long  as  what  we  say  is  smooth  and

3°7


QUINTILIAN

nitida,  quantum  valeant,  nihil  interesse  arbitramur.

19  Sed  mini  naturam  intuenti  nemo  non  vir  spadone
formosior  erit,  nee  tarn  aversa  unquam  videbitur  ab
opere  suo  providentia,  ut  debilitas  inter  optima  in-
venta  sit,  nee  id  ferro  speciosum  fieri  putabo,  quod,
si  nasceretur,  monstrum  erat.  Libidinem  iuvet  ip-
sum  efleminati  sexus  mendacium,  numquam  tamen
hoc continget malis moribus regnum ut, si qua

20  pretiosa  fecit,  fecerit  et  bona.  Quapropter  eloquen-
tiam,  licet  hanc  (ut  sentio  enim,  dicam)  libidinosam
resupina  voluptate  auditoria  probent,  nullam  esse
existimabo,  quae  ne  minimum  quidem  in  se  indicium
masculi  et  incorrupti,  ne  dicam  gravis  et  sancti  viri,

21  ostentet.  An  vero  statuarum  artifices  pictoresque
clarissimi,  cum  corpora  quam  speciosissima  fingendo
pingendove  efficere  cuperent,  numquam  in  hunc  inci-
derunt  errorem,  ut  Bagoam  aut  Megabyzum  aliquem
in  exemplum  operis  sumerent  sibi,  sed  Doryphoron
ilium  aptum  vel  militiae  vel  palaestrae,  aliorum  quo-
que  iuvenum  bellicosorum  et  athletarum  corpora
decora  vere  existimaverunt :  nos,  qui  oratorem  stu-
demus  effingere,  non  arma  sed  tympana  eloquentiae

22  demus  ?  Igitur  et  ille,  quern  instituimus,  adolescens,
quam  maxime  potest,  componat  se  ad  imitationem
veritatis,  initurusque  frequenter  forensium  certami-
num  pugnam  iam  in  schola  victoriam  spectet  et  ferire

1  Eunuchs.

2  The  famous  statue  of  Polycletus,  regarded  as  the  standard
of  manly  beauty  and  proportion.  Many  copies  have  survived.
Doryphorus  =  the  Spearbearer.

308


BOOK V.  xii.  18-22

polished,  are  absolutely  indifferent  as  to  whether  our
words  have  any  power  or  no.  But  I  take  Nature  for  19
my  guide  and  regard  any  man  whatsoever  as  fairer
to  view  than  a  eunuch,  nor  can  I  believe  that
Providence  is  ever  so  indifferent  to  what  itself  has
created  as  to  allow  weakness  to  be  an  excellence,  nor
again  can  I  think  that  the  knife  can  render  beautiful
that  which,  if  produced  in  the  natural  course  of
birth,  would  be  regarded  as  a  monster.  A  false
resemblance  to  the  female  sex  may  in  itself  delight
lust,  if  it  will,  but  depravity  of  morals  will  never
acquire  such  ascendancy  as  to  succeed  in  giving  real
value  to  that  to  which  it  has  succeeded  in  giving  a
high  price.  Consequently,  although  this  debauched  20
eloquence  (for  I  intend  to  speak  with  the  utmost
frankness)  may  please  modern  audiences  by  its
effeminate  and  voluptuous  charms,  I  absolutely  refuse
to  regard  it  as  eloquence  at  all :  for  it  retains  not
the  slightest  trace  of  purity  and  virility  in  itself,  not
to  say  of  these  qualities  in  the  speaker.  When  the  21
masters  of  sculpture  and  painting  desired  to  carve
or  paint  forms  of  ideal  beauty,  they  never  fell  into
the  error  of  taking  some  Bagoas  or  Megabyzus l  as
models,  but  rightly  selected  the  well-known  Dory-
phorus,2  equally  adapted  either  for  the  fields  of  war
or  for  the  wrestling  school,  and  other  warlike  and
athletic  youths  as  types  of  physical  beauty.  Shall
we  then,  who  are  endeavouring  to  mould  the  ideal
orator,  equip  eloquence  not  with  weapons  but  with
timbrels  ?  Consequently,  let  the  youth  whom  we  22
are  training  devote  himself,  as  far  as  in  him  lies,  to
the  imitation  of  truth  and,  in  view  of  the  fact  that
the  battles  of  the  forum  that  await  him  are  not  few,
let  him  strive  for  victory  in  the  schools  and  learn

309


QUINTILIAN

vitalia  ac  tueri  sciat ;  et  praeceptor  id  maxime  exi-
gat,  inventum  praecipue  probet.  Nam,  ut  ad  peiora
iuvenes  laude  ducuntur,  ita  laudari  in  bonis  malent.
23  Nunc  illud  male  est,  quod  necessaria  plerumque
silentio  transeunt,  nee  in  dicendo  videtur  inter  bona
utilitas.  Sed  haec  et  in  alio  nobis  tractata  sunt
opere  et  in  hoc  saepe  repetenda.  Nunc  ad  ordinem
inceptum.

XIII.  Refutatio  dupliciter  accipi  potest.  Nam  et
pars  defensoris  tota  est  posita  in  refutatione,  et  quae
dicta  sunt  ex  diverso  debent  utrinque  dissolvi.  Et
hoc  est  proprie,  cui  in  causis  quartus  adsignatur  locus.
Sed  utriusque  similis  condicio  est.  Neque  vero  ex
aliis  locis  ratio  argumentorum  in  hac  parte  peti
potest  quam  in  confirmatione,  nee  locorum  aut  sen-
tentiarum  aut  verborum  et  ngurarum  alia  condicio
2  est. Adfectus  plerumque  haec  pars  mitiores  habet.

Non  sine  causa  tamen  difficilius  semper  est  credi-
ting quod  Cicero  saepe  testatur,  defendere  quam
accusare.  Primum,  quod  est  res  ilia  simplicior,  pro-
ponitur  enim  uno  modo,  dissolvitur  varie,  cum  accu-
satori  satis  sit  plerumque,  verum  esse  id,  quod  obie-
cerit,  patronus  neget,  defendat,  transferat,  excuset,


1  Perhaps  the  lost  de  causis  corruptee,  eloquentiae.
a (i)  exordium,  (ii)  statement  of  facts,  (hi)  confirmation,
(iv)  refutation,  (v)  peroration.

310


BOOK V. XII. 22-XIII. 2

how  to  strike  the  vitals  of  his  foe  and  protect  his
own  ;  and  let  his  instructor  insist  on  his  doing  this
above  all  else  and  reserve  his  special  approval  for  the
mastery  of  this  art.  For  though  young  men  may  be
lured  to  evil  practices  by  praise,  they  still  prefer  to
be  praised  for  what  is  right.  At  the  present  time  23
the  misfortune  is  that  teachers  more  often  than  not
pass  over  what  is  necessary  in  silence,  and  utility  is
not  accounted  one  of  the  good  qualities  of  eloquence.
But  1  have  dealt  with  these  points  in  another  work,1
and  shall  often  have  to  recur  to  them  in  this.  I  will
now  return  to  my  prescribed  course.

XIII.  Refutation  maybe  understood  in  two  senses.
For  the  duty  of  the  defence  consists  wholly  in
refutation,  while  whatever  is  said  by  our  opponents
must  be  rebutted,  whether  we  are  speaking  for  the
defence  or  the  prosecution.  It  is  in  this  sense  that
refutation  is  assigned  the  fourth  place2  in  pleadings,
but  the  methods  required  in  either  case  are  identical.
For  the  principles  of  argument  in  refutation  can
only  be  drawn  from  the  same  sources  as  those  used
in  proof,  while  topics  and  thoughts,  words  and  figures
will  all  be  on  the  same  lines.  As  a  rule  no  strong  2
appeal  to  the  emotions  is  made  in  refutation.

It  is  not,  however,  without  reason  that,  as  Cicero
so  often  testifies,3  the  task  of  defence  has  always  been
considered  harder  than  that  of  prosecution.  In  the
first  place  accusation  is  a  simpler  task  :  for  the  charge
is  put  forward  in  one  definite  form,  but  its  refutation
may  take  a  number  of  different  forms,  since  as  a  rule
it  is  sufficient  for  the  accuser  that  his  charge  should
be  true,  whereas  counsel  for  the  defence  may  deny

8  It  is  not  clear what  passages  Quintilian has in his
mind.

311


QUINTILIAN

deprecetur,  molliat,  minuat,  avertat,  despiciat,  deri-
deat.  Quare  inde  recta  fere  atque,  ut  sic  dixerim,
clamosa  est  actio ;  hinc  mille  flexus  et  artes  deside-

3  rantur.  Turn  accusator  praemeditata  pleraque  domo
adfert,  patronus  etiam  inopinatis  frequenter  occurrit.
Accusator  dat  testem,  patronus  ex  re  ipsa  refellit.
Accusator  e  criminum  invidia,  etsi  falsa  sit,  mate-
riam  dicendi  trahit,  de  parricidio,  sacrilegio,  maie-
state  ;  quae  patrono  tantum  neganda  sunt.  Ideoque
accusationibus  etiam  mediocres  in  dicendo  suffe-
cerunt ;  bonus  defensor  nemo  nisi  qui  eloquentissi-
mus  fuit.  Quanquam  ut,  quod  sentio,  semel  finiam,
tanto  est  accusare  quam  defendere,  quanto  facere
quam  sanare  vulnera,  facilius.

4  Plurimum  autem  refert,  et  quid  proposuerit l  adver-
sarius  et  quomodo.  Primum  igitur  intuendum  est,
id,  cui  responsuri  sumus,  proprium  sit  eius  iudicii  an
ad  causam  extra  arcessitum.  Nam  si  est  proprium,
aut  negandum  aut  defendendum  aut  transferendum ;

5  extra  haec  in  iudiciis  fere  nihil  est.  Deprecatio
quidem,  quae  est  sine  ulla  specie  defensionis,  rara

1  proposuerit,  Mtister :  profuerit,  AB.

1  See  in.  vi.  23.  No  exact  rendering  of  tramlatio  is
possible.  Literally  it  means  *  *  transference  of  the  charge  "  :
it  would  seem  to  cover  cases  where  the  charge  was  brought
in  the  wrong  court  or  by  the  wrong  person.  It  is  used  gen-
erally to  indicate  a  plea  made  by  defendant  in  bar  of
plaintiffs  action.  2  See  vn.  iv.  17.

312


BOOK V.  xiii.  2-s

or  justify  the  facts,  raise  the  question  of  competence,1
make  excuses,  plead  for  mercy,  soften,  extenuate,
or  divert  the  charge,  express  contempt  or  derision.
The  task  of  the  accuser  is  consequently  straight-
forward and,  if  I  may  use  the  phrase,  vociferous ;  but
the  defence  requires  a  thousand  arts  and  stratagems.
Moreover  the  prosecutor  generally  produces  a  speech  3
which  he  has  prepared  at  home,  while  the  counsel
for  the  defence  has  frequently  to  deal  with  quite
unexpected  points.  The  prosecutor  brings  forward
his  witnesses,  while  counsel  for  the  defence  has  to
refute  the  charge  by  arguments  drawn  from  the  case
itself.  The  prosecutor  draws  his  material  from  the
odium  excited  by  the  charges,  even  though  it  have
no  justification,  denouncing  parricide,  sacrilege,  or
treason,  whereas  counsel  for  the  defence  can  only
deny  them.  Consequently  quite  moderate  speakers
have  proved  adequate  in  prosecution,  while  no  one
can  be  a  good  counsel  for  the  defence  unless  he
possesses  real  eloquence.  In  a  word,  it  is  just  so
much  easier  to  accuse  than  to  defend  as  it  is  easier
to  inflict  than  to  heal  a  wound.

The  nature  of  the  arguments  put  forward  by  our  4
opponent  and  the  manner  in  which  he  produces  them
will,  however,  make  an  enormous  difference  to  our
task.  We  must  therefore  first  consider  what  it  is  to
which  we  have  to  reply,  whether  it  is  part  and  parcel
of  the  actual  case  or  has  been  introduced  from  circum-
stances lying  outside  the  case.  For  in  the  former
case  we  must  deny  or  justify  the  facts  or  raise  the
question  of  competence :  for  these  are  practically
the  sole  methods  of  defence  available  in  the  courts.
Pleas  for  mercy,8  which  are  not  in  any  sense  a  5
method  of  actual  defence,  can  rarely  be  used,  and

3*3


QUINTILIAN

admodum  et  apud  eos  solos  iudices,  qui  nulla  certa
pronuntiandi  forma  tenentur.  Quanquam  illae  quo-
que  apud  C.  Caesarem  et  triumviros  pro  diversarum
partium  hominibus  actiones,  etiamsi  precibus  utun-
tur,  adhibent  tamen  patrocinia ;  nisi  hoc  non  fortis-
sime  defend entis  est  dicere,  Quid  aliud  egimus,  Tubero,

6  nisi  ut,  quod  hie  potest,  nos  posse?nus  ?  Quodsi  quando
apud  principem  aliumve,  cui  utrum  velit  liceat,
dicendum  erit,  dignum  quidem  morte  eum,  pro  quo
loquemur,  element!  tamen  servandum  esse  vel  talem,
primum  omnium  non  erit  res  nobis  cum  adversario
sed  cum  iudice,  deinde  forma  deliberativae  magis
materiae  quam  iudicialis  utemur.  Suadebimus  enim
ut  laudem  humanitatis  potius  quam  voluptatem  ulti-

7  onis  concupiscat.  Apud  iudices  quidem  secundum
legem  dicturos  sententiam  de  confessis  praecipere
ridiculum  est.  Ergo,  quae  neque  negari  neque
transferri  possunt,  utique  defendenda  sunt,  qualia-
cunque  sunt,  aut  causa  cedendum.  Negandi  dupli-
cem  ostendimus  formam,  aut  non  esse  factum  aut
non  hoc  esse,  quod  factum  sit. Quae  neque  defendi

1  e.g.  in  the  emperor's  court  as  opposed  to  the  quaestiones
perpetuae  or  civil  actions.

1  As  in  the  pro  Ligario  and  pro  Deiotaro  pleaded  in
Caesar's  house.  It  is  not  known  what  cases  were  tried
before  the  (2nd)  triumvirate.  *  Cic.  pro  Lig.  iv.  10.

3*4


BOOK  V.  xiii.  5-7

only  before  judges  who  are  not  limited  to  some
precise  form  of  verdict.1  Even  those  speeches  de-
livered before  Gaius  Caesar2  and  the  triumvirs  on
behalf  of  members  of  the  opposite  party,  although
they  do  employ  such  pleas  for  mercy,  also  make  use
of  the  ordinary  methods  of  defence.  For  I  think
you  will  agree  with  me  that  the  following  passage
contains  arguments  of  a  strongly  defensive  char-
acter 3  :  "  What  was  our  object,  Tubero,  save  that
we  might  have  the  power  that  Caesar  has  now  ?  "
But  if,  when  pleading  before  the  emperor  or  any  6
other  person  who  has  power  either  to  acquit  or  con-
demn, it  is  incumbent  on  us  to  urge  that,  while  our
client  has  committed  an  offence  that  deserves  the
death  penalty,  it  is  still  the  duty  of  a  merciful  judge
to  spare  him  despite  his  sins,  it  must  be  noted  in
the  first  place  that  we  have  to  deal,  not  with  our
adversary,  but  with  the  judge,  and  secondly  that  we
shall  have  to  employ  the  deliberative  rather  than  the
forensic  style.  For  we  shall  urge  the  judge  to  fix
his  desire  rather  on  the  glory  that  is  won  by
clemency  than  on  the  pleasure  that  is  given  by
vengeance.  On  the  other  hand,  when  we  are  7
pleading  before  judges  who  have  to  give  their
verdict  in  accordance  with  the  prescriptions  of  law,
it  would  be  absurd  to  give  them  advice  as  to  how
they  should  deal  with  a  criminal  who  admits  his
guilt.  Consequently,  when  it  is  impossible  either  to
deny  the  facts  or  to  raise  the  question  of  com-
petence, we  must  attempt  to  justify  the  facts  as
best  we  can,  or  else  throw  up  the  case.  I  have
pointed  out  that  there  are  two  ways  in  which  a  fact
can  be  denied :  it  can  be  denied  absolutely,  or  it
may  be  denied  that  a  fact  is  of  the  nature  alleged.

3*5


QUINTILIAN

neque  transferri  possunt,  utique  neganda,  nee  solum
si  finitio  potest  esse  pro  nobis,  sed  etiam  si  nuda

8  infitiatio  superest.  Testes  erunt,  multa  in  eos  dicere
licet ;  chirographum,  de  similitudine  litterarum  dis-
sereuius..  Utique  nihil  erit  peius  quam  confessio.
Ultima est actionis controversia,  cum defendendi

9  negandive  non  est  locus,  id  est  translatio.1  Atqui
quaedam  sunt,  quae  neque  negari  neque  defendi
neque  transferri  possunt.  Adulterii  rea  est  quae,  cum
anno  vidua  fuisset,  enixa  est;  lis  non  erit.  Quare
illud  stultissime  praecipitur,  quod  defendi  non  possit,
silentio dissimulandum : siquidem est id,  de  quo

10  iudex  pronuntiaturus  est.  At  si  extra  causam  sit
adductum  et  tantum  coniunctum,  malim  quidem
dicere,  nihil  id  ad  quaestionem  nee  esse  in  iis  mo-
randum  et  minus  esse  quam  adversarius  dicat ;
tamen  velut  huic  simulationi  oblivionis  ignoscam.
Debet  enim  bonus  advocatus  pro  rei  salute  brevem
negligentiae  reprehensionem  non  pertimescere.

11  Videndum  etiam,  simul  nobis  plura  aggredienda

1  translatio,  Regius :  relatio,  MSS.

1  i.e.  if  we  cannot  say  "The  act  was  right"  or  "This
court  is  not  competent  to  try  it"  or  " The  prosecutor  has  no
locus  standi." See  n.  on  §  2.

2  i.e.  suggest  that  it  is  a  forgery.

3l6


BOOK V.  xiii.  7-i  i

When  it  is  impossible  to  plead  justification  or  to
raise  the  question  of  competence,1  we  must  deny  the
facts,  and  that  not  merely  when  a  definition  of  the
facts  will  serve  our  case,  but  even  when  nothing
except  an  absolute  denial  is  left  for  us.  If  wit-  8
nesses  are  produced,  there  is  much  that  may  be  said
to  discredit  them  ;  if  a  document  is  put  forward,
we  may  hold  forth  on  the  similarity  of  the  hand-
writings.2 In  any  case  there  can  be  no  worse  course
than  confession  of  guilt.  When  denial  and  justifi-
cation are  both  impossible,  we  must  as  a  last  resort
base  our  defence  on  the  legal  point  of  competence.
Still,  there  are  some  cases  in  which  none  of  these  9
three  courses  is  possible.  "  She  is  accused  of  adul-
tery on  the  ground  that  after  a  widowhood  of  twelve
months  she  was  delivered  of  a  child."  In  this  case
there  is  no  ground  for  dispute.  Consequently  I  re-
gard as  the  height  of  folly  the  advice  that  is  given
in  such  cases,  that  what  cannot  be  defended  should
be  ignored  and  passed  over  in  silence,  at  any  rate  if
the  point  in  question  is  that  on  which  the  judge  has
to  give  his  decision.  On  the  other  hand,  if  the  10
allegation  is  irrelevant  to  the  actual  case  and  no
more  than  accessory,  I  should  prefer  simply  to  state
that  it  has  nothing  to  do  with  the  question  at  issue,
that  it  is  not  worth  our  attention,  and  that  it  has  not
the  importance  given  to  it  by  our  opponent,  though
in  such  a  case  I  should  be  prepared  to  pardon  a
policy  of  ignoring  the  charge  such  as  1  have  just
mentioned.  For  a  good  advocate  ought  not  to  be
afraid  of  incurring  a  trivial  censure  for  negligence,
if  such  apparent  negligence  is  likely  to  save  his
client.

We must  further  consider whether we should  11

3*7


QUINTILIAN

sint  an  amolienda  singula.  Plura  simul  invadimus,
si  aut  tarn  infirma  sunt,  ut  pariter  impelli  possint,
aut  tarn  molesta,  ut  pedem  conferre  cum  singulis
non  expediat;  turn  enim  toto  corpore  obnitendum
et,  ut  sic  dixerim,  directa  fronte  pugnandum  est.

12  Interim,  si  resolvere  ex  parte  diversa  dicta  difficilius
erit,  nostra  argumenta  cum  adversariorum  argumentis
conferemus,  si  modo  haec  ut  valentiora  videantur
effici  poterit.  Quae  vero  turba  valebunt,  diducenda
erunt,  ut,  quod  paulo  ante  dixi :  Heres  eras  et  pauper
et  magna  pecunia  appellabaris  a  creditoribus  et  offen-

13  deras  et  mutaturum  tabulas  testamenti  sciebas.  Urgent
universa ;  at  si  singula  quaeque  dissolveris,  iam  ilia
flamma,  quae  magna  congerie  convaluerat,  diductis
quibus  alebatur,  concidet,  ut,  si  vel  maxima  flumina
in  rivos  diducantur,  qualibet  transitum  praebent.
Itaque  propositio  quoque  secundum  hanc  utilitatem
accommodabitur,ut  ea  nunc  singula  ostendamus,  nunc

14  complectamur  universa.  Nam  interim  quod  pluribus
collegit  adversarius,  sat  est  semel  proponere ;  ut,  si
multas  causas  faciendi,  quod  arguit,  reo  dicet  accu-
sator  fuisse,  nos,  non  enumeratis  singulis,  semel  hoc
in  totum  x  negemus,  quia  non,  quisquis  causam  faci-

1  hoc  in  totum,  Becher  :  hoc  intuendum,  MSS,

318


BOOK V.  xiii.  1 1-14

attack  our  opponent's  arguments  en  masse  or  dispose
of  them  singly.  We  shall  adopt  the  former  course
if  the  arguments  are  so  weak  that  they  can  be  over-
thrown simultaneously,  or  so  embarrassing  that  it
would  be  inexpedient  to  grapple  with  them  indi-
vidually. For  in  such  a  case  we  must  fight  with  all
the  force  at  our  disposal  and  make  a  frontal  attack.
Sometimes,  if  it  is  difficult  to  refute  the  statements  12
made  by  our  opponents,  we  may  compare  our  argu-
ments with  theirs,  at  least  if  by  such  a  procedure  it
is  possible  to  prove  the  superiority  of  our  own.  On
the  other  hand,  those  arguments  which  rely  on  their
cumulative  force  must  be  analysed  individually,  as
for  example  in  the  case  which  I  cited  above :  "  You
were  the  heir,  you  were  poor  and  were  summoned
by  your  creditors  for  a  large  sum :  you  had  offended
him  and  knew  that  he  intended  to  change  his  will."
The  cumulative  force  of  these  arguments  is  dam-  13
aging.  But  if  you  refute  them  singly,  the  flame
which  derived  its  strength  from  the  mass  of  fuel  will
die  down  as  soon  as  the  material  which  fed  it  is
separated,  just  as  if  we  divert  a  great  stream  into  a
number  of  channels  we  may  cross  it  where  we  will.
We  shall  therefore  adapt  our  method  of  refutation
to  the  exigencies  of  our  case,  now  dealing  with  in-
dividual arguments  and  now  treating  them  in  bulk.
For  at  times  we  may  include  in  a  single  proposition  14
the  refutation  of  an  argument  which  our  opponent
has  constructed  of  a  number  of  different  points.
For  instance,  if  the  accuser  allege  that  the  accused
had  a  number  of  motives  for  committing  a  crime,
we  may  make  a  general  denial  of  the  fact  without
dealing  singly  with  each  alleged  motive,  because  the
fact  that  a  man  has  had  a  motive  for  committing  a

319


QU1NTILIAN

15  endi  sceleris  habuit,  et  fecerit.  Saepius  tamen
accusatori  congerere  argumenta,  reo  dissolvere
expediet.

Id  autem,  quod  erit  ab  adversario  dictum,  quo-
modo  refutari  debeat,  intuendum  est.  Nam  si  erit
palam  falsum,  negare  satis  est,  ut  pro  Cluentio  Cicero
eum,  quern  dixerat  accusator  epoto  poculo  concidisse,

16  negat  eodem  die  mortuum.  Palam  etiam  contraria
et  supervacua  et  stulta  reprehendere  nullius  est  artis,
ideoque  nee  rationes  eorum  nee  exempla  tradere
necesse  est.  Id  quoque  (quod  obscurum  vocant),
quod  secreto  et  sine  teste  aut  argumento  dicitur
factum,  satis  natura  sua  infirmum  est ;  sufficit  enim,
quod  adversarius  non  probat ;  item  si  ad  causam  non

17  pertinet.  Est  tamen  interim  oratoris  efficere,  ut
quid  aut  contrarium  esse  aut  a  causa  diversum  aut
incredibile  aut  supervacuum  aut  nostrae  potius  causae
videatur  esse  coniunctum.  Obiicitur  Oppio,  quod  de
militum  cibariis  detraxerit ;  asperum  crimen,  sed  id
contrarium  ostendit  Cicero,  quia  iidem  accusatores
obiecerint  Oppio,  quod  is  voluerit  exercitum  largi-

18  endo  corrumpere.  Testes  in  Cornelium  accusator
lecti  a  tribuno  codicis  pollicetur ; facit  hoc  Cicero

1  lx.  168. a  cp.  §  21  and  v.  x.  69. *  cp.  iv.  iii.  13.
320


BOOK V.  xiii.  14-18

crime  does  not  prove  that  he  has  actually  committed
it. It  will  however  as  a  rule  be  expedient  for  the  15
prosecution to  employ  massed  arguments,  and  for
the  accused  to  refute  them  in  detail.

We  must,  however,  also  consider  the  manner  in
which  we  should  refute  the  arguments  of  our
opponent.  If  his  statements  be  obviously  false,  it
will  be  sufficient  to  deny  them.  This  is  done  by
Cicero  in  the  pro  Cluentio,1  where  he  denies  that
the  man  alleged  by  the  accuser  to  have  fallen  dead
on  the  spot  after  drinking  the  contents  of  the  cup,
died  on  the  same  day.  Again,  it  requires  no  skill  16
to  rebut  arguments  which  are  obviously  contra-
dictory, superfluous  or  foolish,  and  consequently  I
need  give  no  examples  nor  instructions  as  to  the
method  to  be  employed.  There  is  also  the  type
of  charge  which  is  known  as  obscure,  where  it  is
alleged  that  an  act  was  committed  in  secret  without
witnesses  or  any  evidence  to  prove  it :  this  suffers
from  an  inherent  weakness,  since  the  fact  that  our
opponent  can  produce  no  proof  is  sufficient  for  our
purpose :  the  same  applies  to  arguments  which  are
irrelevant  to  the  case.  It  is,  however,  sometimes  an  17
orator's  duty  to  make  it  appear  that  some  argument
of  his  opponent  is  contradictory  or  irrelevant  or
incredible  or  superfluous  or  really  favourable  to  his
own  client.  Oppius2  is  charged  with  having  em-
bezzled the  supplies  intended  to  feed  the  troops.
It  is  a  serious  charge,  but  Cicero  shows  that  it
contradicts  other  charges,  since  the  same  accusers
also  charged  Oppius  with  desiring  to  corrupt  the
army  by  bribes.  The  accuser  of  Cornelius  offers  to  18
produce  witnesses  to  show  that  he  read  out  the  law
when  tribune  3  :  Cicero  makes  this  argument  super-

321


QUINTILIAN

supervacuum,  quia  ipse  fateatur. Petit  accusationem
in  Verrem  Q.  Caecilius,  quod  fuerat  quaestor  eius ;

19  ipsum  Cicero  ut  pro  se  videretur  effecit.  Cetera,
quae  proponuntur,  communis  locus  habet.  Aut  enim
coniectura  excutiuntur,  an  vera  sint;  aut  finitione,
an  propria ;  aut  qualitate,  an  inhonesta,  iniqua,  im-
proba,  inhumana,  crudelia  et  cetera,  quae  ei  generi

20  accidunt.  Eaque  non  modo  in  propositionibus  et
rationibus  sed  in  toto  genere  actionis  intuenda :  an
sit  crudelis,  ut  Labieni  in  Rabirium  lege  perduellio-
nis ;  inhumana,  ut  Tuberonis  Ligarium  exulem  accu-
sants atque  id  agentis  ne  ei  Caesar  ignoscat ;  superba,

21  ut  in  Oppium  ex  epistola  Cottae  reum  factum.  Per-
inde  praecipites,  insidiosae,  impotentes  deprehen-
duntur.  Ex  quibus  tamen  fortissime  invaseris,  quod
est  aut  omnibus  periculosum,  ut  dicit  Cicero  pro
Tullio :  Quis  hoc  staluit  unquam,  aut  cut  concedi  sine
summo  omnium  periculo  potest,  ut  eum  iure  potuerit  occi-
dere,  a  quo  metuisse  se  dicat,  ne  ipse  posterius  occide-

1  Cicero  argues  that  since  the  relation  between  praetor
and  quaestor  is  almost  that  which  should  exist  between
father  and  son,  a  quaestor  should  not  be  allowed  to  prosecute
his  praetor.

2  Rabirius  was  accused  of  causing  the  death  of  Saturninua
forty  year 8  after  the  event.

8  P.  Oppius,  quaestor  to  M.  Aurelius  Cotta  in  Bithynia,
was  charged  by  Cotta  in  a  letter  to  the  senate  with  mis-
appropriation of  supplies  for  the  troops  and  with  an  attempt
on  his  life.  Cicero  defended  him  in  69  B.C.  The  speech
is  lost.

322


BOOK V.  xiii.  18-2 1

fluous  by  admitting  it. Quintus  Caecilius  demands
to  be  entrusted  with  the  task  of  accusing  Verres  on
the  ground  that  he  had  been  the  latter's  quaestor :
Cicero  actually  makes  this  argument  tell  in  his  own
favour.1 As  regards  other  charges,  they  may  all  be  19
dealt  with  by  very  similar  methods. For  they  may
be  demolished  either  by  conjecture,  when  we  shall
consider  whether  they  are  true,  by  definition,  when
we  shall  examine  whether  they  are  relevant  to  the
case,  by  quality,  when we  shall consider  whether
they  are  dishonourable,  unfair,  scandalous,  inhuman,
cruel,  or  deserve  any  other  epithet  coming  under
the  head  of  quality. Such questions have  to be  20
considered,  not  merely  in  connection  with  the  state-
ment of  the  charges  or  the  reasons  alleged,  but  with
reference  to  the  nature  of  the  case  in  its  entirety.
For  instance,  the  question  of  cruelty  is  considered
with  regard  to  the  charge  of  high  treason  brought
against  Rabirius  2  by  Labienus ;  of  inhumanity  in  the
case  of  Tubero  who  accused  Ligarius  when  he  was
an exile and attempted to prevent Caesar from
pardoning  him ;  of  arrogance  as  in  the  case  of  the
charge  brought  against  Oppius  3  on  the  strength  of
a  letter  of  Cotta. Similarly,  it  may  be  shown  that  21
charges are hasty, insidious or vindictive. The
strongest  argument,  however,  which  can  be  brought
against a charge  is that  it involves peril to the
community  or  to  the  judges  themselves  ;  we  find  an
example of  the  former  in  the  pro Tidlio*  where
Cicero  says  "  Who  ever  laid  down  such  a  principle  as
this,  or  who  could  be  allowed,  without  grave  peril
to  the  community,  to  kill  a  man,  just  because he
asserts  that  he  feared  that he himself  might be
4  cp.  iv.  ii.  131. The  speech  is  lost.

323


QUINTILIAN

retur? aut ipsis iudicibus, ut pro Oppio monet
pluribus,  ne  illud  actionis  genus  in  equestrem  ordi-

22  nem  admittant.  Nonnunquam  tamen  quaedam  bene
et  contemnuntur  vel  tanquam  levia  vel  tanquam
nihil  ad  causam  pertinentia.  Multis  hoc  locis  fecit
Cicero  ;  et  haec  simulatio  interim  hucusque  procedit,
ut,  quae  dicendo  refutare  non  possumus,  quasi  fasti-
diendo  calcemus.

23  Quoniam  vero  maxima  pars  eorum  similibus
constat,  rimandum  erit  diligentissime,  quid  sit  in
quoque,  quod  adsumitur,  dissimile.  In  iure  facile
deprehenditur.  Est  enim  scriptum  de  rebus  utique
diversis,  tantoque  magis  ipsarum  rerum  differentia
potest  esse  manifesta.  Illas  vero  similitudines,  quae
ducuntur  ex  mutis  animalibus  aut  inanimis,  facile  est

24  eludere.  Exempla  rerum  varie  tractanda  sunt,  si
nocebunt ;  quae  si  vetera  erunt,  fabulosa  dicere  lice-
bit  ;  si  indubia,  maxime  quidem  dissimilia.  Neque
enim  fieri  potest,  ut  paria  sint  per  omnia,  ut  si  Nasica
post  occisum  Gracchum  defendatur  exemplo  Ahalae,
a  quo  Maelius  est  interfectus,  Maelium  regni  adfecta-
torem  fuisse,  a  Graccho  leges  modo  latas  esse  popu-
lares,  Ahalam  magistrum  equitum  fuisse,  Nasieam
privatum  esse  dicatur. Si  defecerint  omnia,  viden-


1  A  third  of  the  jury  were  composed  of  equites.
*  cp.  in.  vii  20,  v.  ix.  13.


324


BOOK V.  xni.  21-24

killed  by  him?"  An  instance  of  the  latter  occurs
in  the  pro  Oppio,  where  Cicero  warns  the  judges  at
some  length  not  to  permit  such  an  action  to  be
brought  against  the  equestrian  order.1  On  the  other  22
hand  there  are  certain  arguments  which  at  times
may  best  be  treated  with  contempt,  as  being  trivial
or  irrelevant.  This  course  is  frequently  pursued  by
Cicero,  indeed  this  affectation  of  indifference  is  some-
times carried  so  far  that  we  trample  disdainfully
under  foot  arguments  which  we  should  never  suc-
ceed in  refuting  by  counter-argument.

Since,  however,  the  majority  of  such  arguments  23
are  based  on  similarity,  we  must  make  diligent
search  to  discover  if  any  discrepancy  is  to  be  found
in  what  is  put  forward.  It  is  easy  to  do  this  where
points  of  law  are  concerned.  For  the  law  was  drafted
to  cover  cases  quite  other  than  the  present,  and
consequently  it  is  all  the  easier  to  show  the  difference
between  case  and  case.  As  to  parallels  drawn  from
dumb  animals  or  inanimate  objects,  they  are  easy  to
make  light  of.  Examples  drawn  from  facts,  if  damag-  24
ing  to  our  case,  must  be  treated  in  various  ways :  if
they  are  ancient  history,  we  may  call  them  legendary,
while  if  they  are  undoubted,  we  may  lay  stress  on
their  extreme  dissimilarity.  For  it  is  impossible  for
two  cases  to  be  alike  in  every  detail.  For  instance,
if  the  case  of  Ahala,2  by  whom  Maelius  was  killed,
is  quoted  to  justify  Nasica  for  the  slaying  of  Tiberius
Gracchus,  we  may  argue  that  Maelius  was  endeavour-
ing to  make  himself  king,  while  all  that  Gracchus
had  done  was  to  bring  forward  laws  in  the  interest
of  the  people,  and  that  while  Ahala  was  Master  of
the  Horse,  Nasica  was  a  private  citizen.  In  the  last
resort,  if  all  else  prove  unavailing,  we  must  see  if

325


QUINTILIAN

dum  erit,  an  obtineri  possit,  ne  illud  quidem  recte
factum.  Quod  de  exemplis,  idem  etiam  de  iudicatis
obser  vand  urn.

25  Quod  autem  posui,  referre,  quo  quidque  accusator
modo  dixerit,  hue  pertinet,  ut,  si  est  minus  efficaciter
elocutus,  ipsa  eius  verba  ponantur ;  si  acri  et  vehe-
menti  fuerit  usus  oratione,  eandem  rem  nostris  verbis
mitioribus  proferarnus,  ut  Cicero  de  Cornelio,  Codicem

26  attigit ;  et  protinus  cum  quadam  defensione,  ut,  si  pro
luxurioso  dicendum  sit,  Obiecta  est  paulo  liberalior  vita.
Sic  et  pro  sordido parcum,  pro maledico liberum

27  dicere  lieebit.  Utique  committendum  nunquam  est,
ut  adversariorum  dicta  cum  sua  confirmatione  refera-
mus,  aut  etiam  loci  alicuius  exsecutione  adiuvemus,
nisi  cum  eludenda  erunt :  Apud  exercitum  mihi  fueris,
inquit ;  tot  annis  forum  non  attigeris,  abfueris  tamdiu  et,
cum  tarn  longo  intervallo  veneris,  cum  his,  qui  in  foro

28  habit arunt,  de  dignitate  contendas  ?  Praeterea  in  con-
tradictione  interim  totum  crimen  exponitur,  ut  Cicero
pro  Scauro  circa  Bostarem  facit  veluti  orationem
diversae  partis  imitatus,  aut  pluribus  propositionibus
iunctis,  ut  pro  Vareno,  cum  iter  per  agros  et  loca  sola

1  cp.  iv.  iv.  8. a  cp.  IV.  ii.  77. 3  pro  Mur.  ix.  21.

4  cp.  iv.  i.  69.  Scaurus  was  accused  of  extortion  in
Sardinia,  and  of  having  murdered  a  certain  Bostar  at  a
banquet.  ■  cp.  v.  x.  69.

326


BOOK V.  xiii.  24-28

we  can  show  that  the  action  adduced  as  a  parallel
was  itself  unjustifiable.  These  remarks  as  to  ex-
amples apply  also  to  previous  decisions  in  the  courts.

With  regard  to*  my  statement  that  the  manner  in  25
which  the  accuser  stated  his  charges  was  of  import-
ance, I  would  point  out  in  this  connexion  that  if
he  has  spoken  but  feebly,  we  may  repeat  his  actual
words ;  while,  if  he  has  used  bitter  and  violent
language,  we  may  restate  the  facts  in  milder  terms,
as  Cicero  does  in  the  pro  Cornelio,  where  he  says,
"  He  put  his  hand  to  the  tablet  containing  the
law"1:  and  we  may  do  this  in  such  a  way  as  to  26
defend  our  client ;  for  instance,  if  our  client  is
addicted  to  luxury,  we  may  say,  "  He  has  been
charged  with  living  in  a  somewhat  too  liberal  style."
So,  too,  we  may  call  a  mean  man  thrifty  and  a
slanderous  tongue  free.2  But  we  must  never  under  27
any  circumstances  repeat  our  opponent's  charges
together  with  their  proofs,  nor  emphasise  any  of  his
points  by  amplifying  them,  unless  we  do  so  with  a
view  to  making  light  of  them,  as  for  instance  in  the
following  passage  3  :  "  You  have  been  with  the  army,
he  says,  and  have  not  set  foot  in  the  forum  for  so
many  years,  and  do  you  now  on  returning  after  so
long  an  interval  seek  to  compete  for  a  post  of  high
dignity  with  those  who  have  made  the  forum  their
home  ? "  Again,  when  we  are  replying  to  the  28
accuser  we  may  sometimes  set  forth  the  whole
charge,  as  Cicero  does  in  the  pro  Scauro  with  refer-
ence to  the  death  of  Bostar,4  where  he  virtually
parodies  the  speech  of  his  opponent,  or  we  may  take
a  number  of  points  raised  in  the  course  of  the
accusation  and  put  them  together  as  in  the  pro
Vareno 5 :  "  They  have  asserted  that,  when  he  was

327


QUINTILIAN

faceret  cum  Pompuleno,  in  familiam  Ancharianam  inci-
disse  dixeru?it,  delude  Pompulenum  occisum  esse,  illico
Varenum  vinctum  asservatum,  dum  hie  ostenderet,  quid  de
eo  fieri  velleL  Quod  est  utile,1  si  erit  incredibilis  rei
ordo  et  ipsa  expositione  fidem  perditurus.  Interim
per  partes  dissolvitur,  quod  contextu  nocet ;  et
plerumque  id  est  tutius.  Quaedam  contradictiones
natura  sunt  singulae ;  id  exemplis  non  eget.

29  Communia  bene  apprehend untur  non  tantum,  quia
utriusque  sunt  partis,  sed  quia  plus  prosunt  respon-
dents Neque  enim  pigebit,  quod  saepe  monui,
referre ;  commune  qui  prior  dicit,  contrarium  facit.

30  Est  enim  contrarium,  quo  adversarius  bene  uti  potest :
At  enim  non  verisimile  est,  tantum  scelus  M.  Cottam  esse
commentum.  Quid  ?  hoc  verisimile  est,  tantum  scelus
Oppium  esse  conatum  ?  Artificis  autem  est  in  venire
in  actione  adversarii  quae  contra  semetipsa  pugnent
aut  pugnare  videantur,  quae  aliquando  ex  rebus  ipsis
manifesta  sunt,  ut  in  causa  Caeliana  Clodia  aurum  se
Caelio  commodasse  dicit,  quod  signum  magnae  fami-
liaritatis  est; venenum  sibi  paratum,  quod  summi

1  utile,  Badhis :  utique,  MSS.

1  i.e.  are  easy  to  make  use  of.  ■  pro  Gad.  xiii.

328


BOOK V.  xiii.  28-30

journeying  with  Pompulenus  through  a  lonely  stretch
of  country,  he  fell  in  with  the  slaves  of  Ancharius,  that
Pompulenus  was  then  killed  and  Varenus  imprisoned
on  the  spot  until  such  time  as  this  man  should  indi-
cate what  he  wished  to  be  done  with  him."  Such  a
procedure  is  useful,  if  the  sequence  of  facts  alleged
by  the  prosecution  is  incredible,  and  likely  to  lose
its  force  by  restatement.  Sometimes,  on  the  other
hand,  we  may  destroy  the  cumulative  force  of  a
number  of  statements  by  refuting  them  singly ;  in
fact  this  is  generally  the  safest  course.  Sometimes,
again,  the  different  portions  of  our  reply  will  be
independent  of  one  another,  a  case  which  requires
no  illustration.

Common  arguments l  are  readily  appropriated,  not  29
merely  because  they  can  be  used  by  either  party,
but  because  they  are  of  greater  service  to  the
speaker  who  is  replying ;  for  I  shall  not  scruple  to
repeat  the  warning  which  I  have  often  given  already ;
the  speaker  who  is  first  to  employ  such  an  argu-
ment makes  it  tell  against  himself.  For  an  argument  30
must  needs  tell  against  a  speaker  if  it  be  one  which
his  opponent  can  use  with  effect.  "  But,  you  say,  it
is  not  probable  that  a  crime  of  this  magnitude  was
designed  by  Marcus  Cotta.  Is  it  probable  then  that
a  crime  of  this  magnitude  was  attempted  by
Oppius  ?  "  On  the  other  hand  it  is  a  task  for  a  real
artist  to  discover  inconsistencies,  real  or  apparent,
in  the  speech  of  his  opponent,  though  such  incon-
sistencies are  sometimes  evident  from  the  bare  facts,
as  for  instance  in  the  case  of  Caelius,2  where  Clodia
asserts  on  the  one  hand  that  she  lent  Caelius  money,
which  is  an  indication  of  great  intimacy,  and  on  the
other  hand  that  he  got  poison  to  murder  her,  which

329


QUINTILIAN

31  odii  argumentum  est.  Tubero  Ligarium  accusat,
quod  is  in  Africa  fuerit,  et  queritur,  quod  ab  eo  ipse
in  Africam  non  sit  admissus.  Aliquando  vero  praebet
eius  rei  occasionem  minus  considerata  ex  ad  verso
dicentis  oratio;  quod  accidit  praecipue  cupidis  sen-
tentiarum,  ut  ducti  occasione  dicendi  non  respiciant
quid  dixerint,  dum locum praesentem non totam

32  causam  intuentur.  Quid  tarn  videri  potest  contra
Cluentium  quam  censoria  nota?  Quid  tam  contra
eundem,  quam  filium  ab  Egnatio  corrupti  iudicii,
quo  Cluentius  Oppianicum  circumvenisset, crimine

33  exheredatum?  At  haec  Cicero  pugnare  in-
vicem  ostendit :  Sed  tu,  Atti,  consider es,  censeo,  dili-
genter,  utrum  censorium  indicium  grave  velis  esse  an
Egnatii,  Si  Egnatii,  leve  est,  quod  censores  de  ceteris
subscripserunt.  Ipsum  enim  Egnatium,  quern  tu  gravem
esse  vis,  ex  senatu  eiecerunt.  Sin  autern  censorium,  hunc
Egnatium,  quern  pater  censoria  subscriptione  exkeredavit,
censores  in  senatu,  cum patrem eiecissent, retinuerunt.

34  Ilia  magis  vitiose  dicuntur  quam acute reprehen-

1  pro  Lig.  iii.  a  pro  Cluent.  xlviii.  135.

330


BOOK V.  xiii.  30-34

is  a  sign  of  violent  hatred.  Tubero  similarly l  31
accuses  Ligarius  of  having  been  in  Africa,  and  com-
plains that  Ligarius  refused  to  allow  him  to  land
in  Africa.  At  times,  however,  some  ill-advised
statement  by  our  opponent  will  give  us  an  oppor-
tunity of  demolishing  his  arguments.  This  is
specially  likely  to  occur  with  speakers  who  have  a
passion  for  producing  impressive  thoughts :  for  the
temptation  to  air  their  eloquence  is  such  that  they
take  no  heed  of  what  they  have  said  already,  being
absorbed  by  the  topic  immediately  before  them  to
the  detriment  of  the  interests  of  the  case  as  a
whole.  What  is  there  likely  to  tell  so  heavily  32
against  Cluentius  as  the  stigma  inflicted  by  the
censors  ?  What  can  be  more  damaging  than  the  fact
that  Egnatius  disinherited  his  son  on  the  ground
that  he  had  been  bribed  to  give  a  false  verdict  in
the  trial  in  which  Cluentius  secured  the  condemna-
tion of  Oppianicus  ?  But  Cicero2  shows  that  the  33
two  facts  tell  against  one  another.  "  But,  Attius,  I
would  urge  you  to  give  the  closest  consideration  to
the  following  problem.  Which  do  you  desire  to  carry
the  greater  weight — the  judgment  of  the  censors,  or
of  Egnatius?  If  the  latter,  you  regard  the  judg-
ment of  the  censors  in  other  cases  as  counting  for
little,  since  they  expelled  this  same  Gnaeus  Eg-
natius, on  whose  authority  you  lay  such  stress,  from
his  place  in  the  senate.  On  the  other  hand,  if  you
attach  most  weight  to  the  judgment  of  the  censors,
I  must  point  out  that  the  censors  retained  the
younger  Egnatius,  whom  his  father  disinherited  by
an  act  resembling  a  censorial  decision,  in  his  position
as  senator,  although  they  had  expelled  his  father."
As  regards  errors  such  as  the  following,  the  folly  34

331


QUINTILIAN

duntur,  argumentum  dubium  pro  necessario,  con-
troversum  pro  confesso,  commune  pluribus  pro
proprio,  vulgare,  supervacuum,  constitutum  contra
fidem.  Nam  et  ilia  accidunt  parum  cautis,  ut  crimen
augeant,  quod  probandum  est;  de  facto  disputent,
cum  de  auctore  quaeratur ;  impossibilia  aggrediantur,
pro  effectis  relin quant  vixdum  inchoata,  de  homine

35  dicere  quam  de  causa  malint ;  hominum  vitia  rebus
adsignent,  ut,  si  quis  decemviratum  accuset  non
Appium;  manifestis  repugnent;  dicant,  quod  aliter
accipi  possit;  summam  quaestionis  non  intueantur,
non  ad  proposita  respondeant ;  quod  unum  aliquando
recipi  potest,  cum  mala  causa  adhibitis  extrinsecus
remediis  tuenda  est,  ut  cum  peculatus  reus  Verres
fortiter  et  industrie  tuitus  contra  piratas  Siciliam
dicitur.

36  Eadem  adversus  contradictiones  nobis  oppositas
praecepta  sunt,  hoc  tamen  amplius,  quod  circa  eas
multi  duobus  vitiis  diversis  laborant.  Nam  quidam
etiam  in  foro  tanquam  rem  molestam  et  odiosam
praetereunt,  et  iis  plerumque,  quae  composita  domo

332


BOOK V.  xiii.  34-36

shown  in  their  commission  is  out  of  all  proportion  to
the  skill  required  to  deal  with  them :  I  refer  to
mistakes  such  as  advancing  a  disputable  argument
as  indisputable,  a  controversial  point  as  admitted,  a
point  common  to  a  number  of  cases  as  peculiar  to
the  case  in  hand,  or  the  employment  of  trite,
superfluous,  or  incredible  arguments.  For  careless
speakers  are  liable  to  commit  a  host  of  errors :  they
will  exaggerate  a  charge  which  has  still  got  to  be
proved,  will  argue  about  an  act  when  the  question  is
who  committed  it,  will  attempt  impossibilities,  drop
an  argument  as  if  it  were  complete,  whereas  it  is
scarcely  begun,  speak  of  the  individual  in  preference
to  the  case,  and  attribute  personal  faults  to  circum-  35
stances,  as  for  instance  if  a  speaker  should  attack  the
decemvirate  instead  of  Appius.  They  will  also  con-
tradict what  is  obvious,  speak  ambiguously,  lose
sight  of  the  main  issue  of  the  case,  or  give  replies
which  have  no  relation  to  the  charges  made.  This
latter  procedure  may,  it  is  true,  be  occasionally  em-
ployed when  we  have  a  bad  case  which  requires  to
be  supported  by  arguments  drawn  from  matters
foreign  to  the  case.  The  trial  of  Verres  provides  an
example  ;  when  accused  of  peculation  it  was  alleged
that  he  had  shown  courage  and  energy  in  his  defence
of  Sicily  against  the  pirates.

The  same  rules  apply  to  objections  which  we  may  36
have  to  meet.  But  there  is  one  point  which  requires
special  attention,  since  in  such  cases  many  speakers
fall  into  two  very  different  faults.  For  some  even
in  the  courts  will  pass  by  such  objections  when
raised  by  their  opponents  as  troublesome  and  vexa-
tious details,  and,  contenting  themselves  with  the
arguments which they have brought  ready-made

333


QUINTILIAN

attulerunt,  contenti  sine  adversario  dicunt ;  et  scilicet
multo  magis  in  scholis,  in  quibus  non  solum  contra-
dictiones  omittuntur,  verum  etiam  materiae  ipsae  sic
plerumque  finguntur,  ut  nihil  dici  pro  parte  altera

37  possit.  Alii  diligentia  lapsi  verbis  etiam  vel  senten-
tiolis  omnibus  respondendum  putant,  quod  est  et
infinitum  et  supervacuum ;  non  enim  causa  repre-
henditur  sed  actor ;  quern  ego  semper  videri  malim
disertum,  ut,  si  dixerit  quod  rei  prosit,  ingenii
credatur  laus esse non causae ; si forte laedat,1

38  causae  non  ingenii  culpa.  Itaque  illae  reprehen-
siones  aut  obscuritatis,  qualis  in  Rullum  est,  aut
infantiae  in  dicendo,  qualis  in  Pisonem,  aut  inscitiae
rerum  verborumque  et  insulsitatis  etiam,  qualis  in
Antonium  est,  animo  dantur  et  iustis  odiis,  suntque
utiles  ad  conciliandum  iis,  quos  invisos  facere  volueris,

39  odium.  Alia  respondendi  patronis  ratio  ;  et  aliquando
tamen  eorum  non  oratio  modo,  sed  vita  etiam,  vultus
denique,  incessus,  habitus  recte  incusari  solet;  ut
adversus  Quintium  Cicero  non  haec  solum,  sed  ipsam
etiam  praetextam  demissam  ad  talos  insectatus  est.
Presserat enim turbulentis contionibus Cluentium

1  non  laedat,  MSS. ,  corrected  by  Becker,

1  de  Leg.  Agr.  n.  v.  13.  2  in  Pis.  i.  30,  etc.

3  Phil.  ii.  4,  iii.  4,  xiii.  19,  etc. 4  pro  Cluent.  xl.  111.

334


BOOK V.  xiii.  36-39

from  their  study,  will  speak  as  if  their  opponent  did
not  exist.  This  error  is  of  course  far  more  common
in  the  schools,  for  there  objections  are  not  merely
disregarded,  but  the  subjects  for  declamation  are
generally  framed  in  such  a  way  that  there  is  nothing
to  be  said  on  the  opposite  side.  On  the  other  hand  37
there  are  some  who  suffer  from  excess  of  zeal,
and  think  it  their  duty  to  reply  to  every  word
and  even  every  trifling  reflexion,  a  task  which  is
at  once  endless  and  superfluous.  For  it  is  not  the
case,  but  the  pleader,  whom  they  are  refuting.  Per-
sonally I  should  always  prefer  that  a  speaker  should
reveal  his  eloquence  in  such  a  way  that,  if  what  he
says  advances  his  case,  the  credit  will  be  given  to  his
talent  and  not  to  the  nature  of  his  case,  while  if
what  he  says  damages  his  case  the  blame  will  attach
to  the  case  and  not  to  his  powers.  Consequently  38
when  we  come  across  denunciations  such  as  that
directed  against  Rullus  for  the  obscurity  of  his
language,1  or  against  Piso  for  his  utter  incapacity  as
a  speaker,2  or  against  Antony  3  for  his  lack  of  taste
and  his  complete  ignorance  both  of  words  and
things,  we  shall  give  them  our  sanction  as  reasonable
concessions  to  passion  and  just  resentment,  and  as
useful  in  stirring  up  hatred  against  those  whom  it  is
desired  to  render  unpopular.  The  method  of  reply  39
to  our  opponent's  counsel  should  be  on  different
lines.  Sometimes  however  we  are  justified  in  at-
tacking, not  merely  their  manner  of  speaking,  but
also  their  character,  their  appearance,  their  gait  or
bearing.  Indeed,  in  his  attack  on  Quintius,  Cicero  4
does  not  confine  himself  to  these  topics,  but  even
attacks  his  purple-bordered  toga  that  goes  trailing
to  his  heels  :  for  Quintius  had  caused  Cluentius  grave

335


QUINTILIAN

40  Quintius.  Nonnunquam  elevandae  invidiae  gratia,
quae  asperius  dicta  sunt,  eluduntur,  ut  a  Cicerone
Triarius.  Nam  cum  Scauri  columnas  per  urbem
plaustris  vectas  esse  dixit,  Ego  porro,  inquit,  qui
Albanas  habeo  columnas,  clitellis  eas  apportavi.  Et
magis  hoc  in  accusatores  concessum  est,  quibus  con-

41  viciari  aliquando  patrocinii  fides  cogit.  Ilia  vero
adversus  omnes  et  recepta  et  non  inhumana  con-
questio,  si  callide  quid  tacuisse,  breviasse,  obscurasse

42  distulisse  dicuntur.  Defensionis  quoque  permutatio
reprehenditur  saepe,  ut  Attius  adversus  Cluentium,
Aeschines  adversus  Ctesiphontem  facit,  cum  ille
Ciceronem  lege  usurum  modo,  hie  minime  de  lege
dicturum  Demosthenen  queritur.

Declamatores  vero  inprimis  sunt  admonendi,  ne
contradictiones  eas  ponant,  quibus  facillime  respon-
ded possit,  neu  sibi  stultum  adversarium  fingant.
Facimus  autem  (quod  maxime  uberes  loci  popula-
resque  sententiae  nascuntur  materiam  dicendi  nobis,


1  pro  Scauro  xxii.  46.  2  pro  Cluent.  lii.

3  Aesch.  in  Otes.  §  206. cp.  also  in.  vi.  3.


336


BOOK V.  xiii.  39-42

embarrassment  by  his  turbulent  harangues.  Some-  40
times,  in  order  to  dispel  the  unpopularity  excited  by
bitter  criticism,  the  latter  may  be  disposed  of  by  a
jest,  as  for  example  Cicero  disposes  of  Triarius.
For  to  the  allegation  that  the  pillars  destined  for  the
house  of  Scaurus  were  carried  on  waggons  through
the  city  streets  he  replied,1  "I  got  my  pillars
from  the  quarries  of  Alba,  and  had  them  brought  in
panniers  ! "  Such  tactics  are  more  readily  allowed
against  an  accuser,  for  the  duties  of  counsel  for  the
defence  sometimes  force  him  to  make  such  personal
attacks.  On  the  other  hand  there  is  no  objection  to  41
complaining  of  the  conduct  of  the  advocates  on
either  side,  so  long  as  our  complaint  follows  accepted
practice  and  does  not  overstep  the  limits  imposed  by
good  manners ;  I  refer  to  complaints  such  as  that
our  opponents  have  abridged,  obscured  or  postponed
the  discussion  of  some  point,  or  with  deliberate
cunning  have  avoided  discussing  it  at  all.  A  change  42
in  the  tactics  of  defence  is  also  often  selected  for
censure.  For  example,  Attius  2  in  his  speech  against
Cluentius  complains  that  Cicero  insists  on  the  letter
of  the  law,  and  Aeschines 3  in  his  speech  against
Ctesiphon  complains  that  Demosthenes  refuses  to
consider  the  legal  aspect  of  the  case.

It  is  however  necessary  to  issue  a  special  warning
to  declaimers  that  they  should  not  put  forward
objections  that  can  easily  be  met  or  assume  that
their  opponent  is  a  fool.  As  it  is,  owing  to  our
tendency  to  think  that  the  subject-matter  of  our
speech  may  be  drawn  from  our  own  fancy,  florid
commonplaces  and  epigrams  designed  to  bring  down
the house occur to our minds with the utmost

337


QUINTILIAN

quod volumus,  ducentibus)  ut  non  sit ille  inutilis
versus :

Non  male  respondit,  male  enim  prior  ille  rogarat,

43  Fallet  haec  nos  in  foro  consuetudo,  ubi  adversaries
non  ipsi  nobis  respondebimus.  Aiunt  Accium  inter-
rogatum,  cur  causas  non  ageret,  cum  apud  eum  in
tragoediis  tanta  vis  esset  optime  respondendi,  banc
reddidisse  rationem,  quod  illic  ea  dicerentur  quae  ipse
vel  let,  in  foro  dicturi  adversarii  essent  quae  minime

44  vellet.  Ridiculum  est  ergo  in  exercitationibus,  quae
foro  praeparant,  prius  cogitare  quid  respond  eri
quam  quid  ex  diverso  dici  possit.  Et  bonus  prae-
ceptor  non  minus  laudare  discipulum  debet,  si  quid
pro  diversa  quam  si  quid  pro  sua  parte  acriter  ex-

45  cogitavit.  Rursus  aliud  in  scholis  permittendum
semper,  in  foro  rarum.  Nam  loco  a  petitore  primo
contradictione  uti  qui  possumus,  ubi  vera  res  agitur,

46  cum  adversarius  adhuc  nihil  dixerit  ?  Incidunt  tamen
plerique  in  hoc  vitium  vel  consuetudine  declamatoria
vel  etiam  cupiditate  dicendi,  dantque  de  se  respon-
dentibus  venustissimos  lusus,  cum  modo,  se  vero  nihil
dixisse  neque  tarn  stulte  dicturos ;  modo,  bene  ad-
monitos  ab  adversario  et  agere  gratias,  quod  adiuti

1  Origin  unknown.

338


BOOK V.  xiii.  42-46

readiness,  with  the  result  that  we  should  do  well  to
bear  in  mind  the  lines  :

"  A  shrewd  retort ! Could  it  be  otherwise  ?
A  foolish  question  makes  for  smart  replies."1

But  such  a  practice  will  be  fatal  in  the  courts,  43
where  we  have  to  answer  our  opponent  and  not
ourselves.  It  is  said  that  Accius,  when  asked  why
he  did  not  turn  advocate  in  view  of  the  extraordinary
skill  in  making  apt  replies  which  his  tragedies
revealed,  replied  that  in  his  plays  the  characters  said
what  he  himself  wanted  them  to  say,  whereas  in  the
courts  his  adversaries  would  probably  say  just  what
he  least  wanted  them  to  say.  It  is  therefore  44
ridiculous  in  exercises  which  prepare  the  student
for  the  actual  courts  to  consider  what  answer  can  be
made  before  ever  giving  a  thought  to  what  the
opposing  counsel  is  likely  to  say.  And  a  good  teacher
should  commend  a  pupil  no  less  for  his  skill  in
thinking  out  arguments  that  may  be  put  forward
for  the  opposite  side  than  in  discovering  arguments
to  prove  his  own  case.  Again,  there  is  another  45
practice  which  is  always  permissible  in  the  schools,
but  rarely  in  the  courts.  For  when  we  speak  first
as  claimants  in  a  real  case,  how  can  we  raise  objec-
tions, seeing  that  our  opponent  has  so  far  said
nothing  ?  Still,  many  fall  into  this  error  either  46
because  they  have  acquired  the  habit  in  declamation
or  simply  owing  to  a  passion  for  hearing  their  own
voice,  thereby  affording  fine  sport  to  those  who
reply  :  for  sometimes  the  latter  will  remark  sarcasti-
cally that  they  never  said  anything  of  the  kind  and
have  no  intention  of  saying  anything  so  idiotic,  and
sometimes  that  they  are  grateful  for  the  admirable

339


QUINTILIAN

sint,  iocantur;  frequentissime  vero,  id  quod  firmis-
simum  est,  nunquam  iis  responsurum  adversarium
fuisse,  quae  propositi  non  essent,  nisi  ilia  sciret  vera
esse  et  ad  fatendum  conscientia  esset  impulsus ;  ut

47  pro  Cluentio  Cicero :  Nam  hoc  persaepe  dixisti,  tibi  sic
renwiiiari,  me  habere  in  animo  causam  hanc  praesidio  legis
defenders  Itane  est  ?  ab  amicis  imprudentes  videlicet
prodimur  ?  et  est  nescio  quis  de  iis,  quos  amicos  nobis
arbitramur,  qui  nostra  consilia  ad  adversarium  deferat  ?
Quisnam  hoc  tibi  renuntiavit  ?  quis  tarn  improbus  fuit ;
cui  ego  autem  narravi  ? Nemo,  ut  opinor,  in  culpa  est ;

48  nimirum  tibi  istud  lex  ipsa  renuntiavit.  At  quidam  coii-
tradictione  non  contenti  totos  etiam  locos  explicant :
scire  se  hoc  dicturos  adversarios  et  ita  persecuturos.
Quod  factum  venuste  nostris  temporibus  elusit  Vibius
Crispus,  vir  ingenii  iucundi  et  elegantis  :  Ego  veroy
inquit,  ista  non  dico ; quid  enim  attinet  ilia  bis  did  ?

49  Nonnunquam  tamen  aliquid  simile  contradictioni
poni  potest,  si  quid  ab  adversario  testationibus  com-
prehensum  in  advocationibus  iactatum  sit;  respon-
debimus  enim  rei  ab  illis  dictae,  non  a  nobis  excogi-
tatae; aut,  si  id  genus  erit causae,  ut proponere

1  lii.  143.

2  The  exact  purport  is  not  clear.  The  reference  would
seem  to  be  to  information  as  to  the  line  of  defence  likely  to
be  adopted,  which  has  leaked  out  during  a  discussion  of  the
written  evidence  by  the  advocati  or  legal  advisers  of  the
patronus. But  see  note  prefixed  to  Index.

340


BOOK V.  xiii.  46-49

warnings  so  kindly  given  by  their  opponent :  but
most  often  they  will  say,  and  this  is  the  strongest
line  that  they  can  take,  that  their  opponent  would
never  have  replied  to  objections  which  had  never
been  raised  had  he  not  realised  that  these  objections
were  justified  and  been  driven  to  admit  it  by  his
consciousness  of  the  fact.  We  may  find  an  example  47
of  this  in  the  pro  Cluentio l  of  Cicero :  "  You  have
frequently  asserted  that  you  are  informed  that  I
intend  to  base  my  defence  on  the  letter  of  the  law.
Really  !  I  suppose  that  my  friends  have  secretly  be-
trayed me,  and  that  there  is  one  among  those  whom
I  believe  to  be  my  friends  who  reports  my  designs  to
my  opponent.  Who  gave  you  this  information?
Who  was  the  traitor?  And  to  whom  did  I  ever
reveal  my  design?  No  one,  I  think,  is  to  blame.
It  must  have  been  the  law  itself  that  told  you."
But  there  are  some  who,  not  content  with  raising  48
imaginary  objections,  develop  whole  passages  on  such
themes,  saying  that  they  know  their  opponents  will
say  this  and  will  proceed  to  argue  thus  and  thus.  I
remember  that  Vibius  Crispus  in  our  own  day  dis-
posed of  this  practice  very  neatly,  for  he  was  a
humorous  fellow  with  a  very  pretty  wit :  u  1  do  not
make  those  objections  which  you  attribute  tome,"  he
said, a  for  what  use  would  it  be  to  make  them  twice  ?"
Sometimes  however  it  may  be  possible  to  put  for-  49
ward  something  not  unlike  such  objections,  if  some
point  included  by  our  opponent  in  the  depositions
which  he  produces  has  been  discussed  among  his  advo-
cates 2 :  for  then  we  shall  be  replying  to  something
which  they  have  said  and  not  to  an  objection  which
has  been  invented  by  ourselves ;  or  again,  this  will
be  possible  if  the  case  is  of  such  a  nature  that  we

341


QUINTILIAN

possimus  certa,  extra  quae  dici  nihil  possit :  ut,  cum
res  furtiva  in  domo  deprehensa  sit,  dicat  necesse  est
reus  aut  se  ignorante  illatam  aut  depositam  apud  se
aut  donatam  sibi ;  quibus  omnibus,  etiamsi  proposita

50  non  sunt,  responded  potest.  At  in  scholis  recte  et
propositionibus  *  et  contradictionibus  occurremus,  ut
in  utrumque  locum,  id  est  primum  et  secundum,
siraul  plurimum  exerceamur.  Quod  nisi  fecerimus,
nunquam  utemur  contradictione ;  non  enim  erit,  cui
respondeamus.

51  Est  et  illud  vitium  nimium  sollicite  et  circa  omnia
momenta  luctantis ;  suspectam  enim  facit  iudici
causam,  et  frequenter,  quae  statim  dicta  omnem  du-
bitationem  sustulissent,  dilata  ipsis  praeparationibus
fidem  perdunt,  quia  patronus  et  aliis  crediderit  opus
fuisse.  Fiduciam  igitur  orator  prae  se  ferat  semper-
que  ita  dicat,  tanquam  de  causa  optime  sentiat ;  quod

52  sicut  omnia  in  Cicerone  praecipuum  est. Nam  ilia

summa  cura  securitatis  est  similis,  tantaque  in  oratione

auctoritas,ut  probationis  locum  obtineatdubitare  nobis

non  audentibus. Porro,  qui  scierit,  quid  pars  ad  versa,

quid nostra  habeat  valentissimum,  facile  iudicabit,

1  propositionibus,  added  by  Badius. See  note  prefixed  to
Index,

342


BOOK V.  xin.  49-52

are  in  a  position  to  state  certain  definite  objections
which  are  absolutely  essential  to  our  opponent's  case:
for  instance,  if  stolen  goods  have  been  discovered
in  a  house,  the  accused  must  of  necessity  allege
either  that  they  were  brought  there  without  his
knowledge  or  deposited  with  him  or  given  to  him ;
and  we  may  therefore  answer  all  these  points  even
although  they  have  not  been  put  forward.  On  the  50
other  hand,  in  the  schools  we  are  quite  justified  in
answering  both  statements  and  imaginary  objec-
tions ;  for  by  these  means  we  shall  train  ourselves
at  one  and  the  same  time  for  speaking  either  first  or
second.  Unless  we  do  this,  we  shall  have  no  chance
of  employing  objections,  since  there  is  no  adversary
to  whom  we  can  reply.

There  is  another  serious  fault  into  which  pleaders  51
fall  :  the  anxious  over-elaboration  of  points.  Such
a  procedure  makes  his  case  suspect  to  the  judges,
while  frequently  arguments  which,  if  stated  without
more  ado,  would  have  removed  all  doubt,  lose  their
force  owing  to  the  delay  caused  by  the  elaborate
preparations  made  for  their  introduction,  due  to  the
fact  that  the  advocate  thinks  that  they  require
additional  support.  Our  orator  must  therefore  adopt
a  confident  manner,  and  should  always  speak  as  if  he
thought  his  case  admirable.  This  quality,  like  all
other  good  qualities,  is  particularly  evident  in  Cicero.
For  the  extraordinary  care  which  he  takes  gives  the  52
impression  of  confidence  and  carries  such  weight
when  he  speaks  that  it  does  not  permit  us  to  feel
the  least  doubt  and  has  all  the  force  of  genuine
proof.  Further,  the  advocate  who  knows  what  are
the  strongest  points  in  his  own  and  his  opponent's
case  will easily  be  able  to  decide what points  it

343


QUINTILIAN

quibus maxime rebus vel occurrendum sit vel
instandum.

53  Ofxjo  quidem  in  parte  nulla  minus  adfert  laboris.
Nam  si  agimus,  nostra  confirmanda  sunt  primum,
turn,  quae  nostris  opponuntur  refutanda ;  si  respon-

54  demus,  prius  incipiendum  est  a  refutatione.  Nas-
cuntur  autem  ex  his,  quae  contradictioni  opposuimus,
aliae  contradictiones,  euntque  interim  longius;  ut
gladiatorum  manus,  quae  secundae  vocantur,  fiunt
et  tertiae,  si  prima  ad  evocandum  adversarii  ictum
prolata  erat,  et  quartae,  si  geminata  captatio  est,  ut
bis  cavere,  bis  repetere oportuerit; quae  ratio  et

55  ultra  ducit.  Sed  illam  etiam,  quam  supra  ostendi,
simplicem  ex  adfectibus  atque  ex  adfirmatione  sola
probationem  recipit  refutatio,  qualis  est  ilia  Scauri,
de  qua  supra  dixi ;  quin  nescio  an  etiam  frequentior,
ubi  quid  negatur.  Videndum  praecipue  utrique
parti,  ubi  sit  rei  summa.  Nam  fere  accidit,  ut  in
causis  multa  dicantur,  de  paucis  iudicetur.

56  In  his  probandi  refutandique  ratio  est,  sed  adiu-
vanda  viribus  dicentis  et  ornanda.  Quamlibet  enim
sint  ad  dicendum,  quod  volumus,  accommodate
ieiuna  x  tamen  erunt  et  infirma,  nisi  maiore  quodam

57  oratoris  spiritu  implentur. Quare  et  illi  communes

1  ieiuna,  Bonnell  i  pecunia,  A  i  omitted  by  B.


1  Not  enough  is  known  of  gladiatorial  fighting  to  render
this  passage  fully  intelligible.
*  v.  xii.  12.  8  v.  xii.  10.

344


BOOK V.  xiii.  52-57

will  be  most  necessary  for  him  to  emphasise  or  to
counter.

As  regards  order,  there  is  no  part  of  a  case  which  53
involves  less  trouble.  For,  if  we  are  prosecuting,
our  first  duty  will  be  to  prove  our  own  case,  our
second  to  refute  the  arguments  brought  against  it.
If,  on  the  other  hand,  we  are  defending,  we  must
begin  by  refutation.  But  from  our  answers  to  54
objections  fresh  objections  will  arise,  a  process
which  may  be  carried  to  some  length.  The  strokes l
of  gladiators  provide  a  parallel.  If  the  first  stroke
was  intended  to  provoke  the  adversary  to  strike,  the
second  will  lead  to  the  third,  while  if  the  challenge
be  repeated  it  will  lead  to  the  fourth  stroke,  so  that
there  will  be  two  parries  and  two  attacks.  And  the
process  may  be  prolonged  still  further.  But  refuta-  55
tion  also  includes  that  simple  form  of  proof,  which
I  described  above,2  based  on  an  appeal  to  the
emotions  and  mere  assertion  ;  for  an  example  see
the  words  of  Scaurus  which  I  have  already  quoted.3
Nay,  I  am  not  sure  that  this  form  of  proof  is  not
actually  of  more  frequent  occurrence  when  some-
thing is  denied.  It  is,  however,  specially  important
for  both  parties  that  they  should  see  where  the
main  issue  lies.  For  it  often  happens  that  the  points
raised  in  pleading  are  many,  although  those  on
which  a  decision  is  given  are  few.

Such  are  the  elements  of  the  methods  of  proof  56
and  refutation,  but  they  require  to  be  embellished
arid  supported  by  the  powers  of  the  speaker.  For
although  our  arguments  may  be  admirably  adapted
to  express  what  we  desire,  they  will  none  the  less
be  slight  and  weak  unless  the  orator  makes  a  special
effort  to  give  them  life. Consequently  the  common-  57

345


QUINTILIAN

loci  de  testibus,  de  tabulis,  de  argument! s  aliisque
similibus  magnam  vim  animis  iudicum  adferunt,  et  hi
proprii,  quibus  factum  quodque  laudamus  aut  contra,
iustum  vel  iniustum  docemus,  maius  aut  minus,  aspe-
rius  aut  mitius.  Ex  iis  autem  alii  ad  comparationem
singulorum  argumentorum  faciunt,  alii  ad  plurium,

58  alii  ad  totius  causae  inclinationem.  Ex  quibus  sunt
qui  praeparent  animum  iudicis,  sunt  qui  confirment.
Sed  praeparatio  quoque  aut  confirmatio  aliquando
totius  causae  est,  aliquando  partium,  et  proinde,  ut

59  cuique  conveniunt,  subiicienda.  Ideoque  miror  inter
duos  diversarum  sectarum  velut  duces  non  mediocri
contentione  quaesitum,  singulisne  quaestionibus  sub-
iiciendi  essent  loci,  ut  Theodoro  placet,  an  prius
docendus  iudex  quam  movendus,  ut  praecipit  Apol-
lodorus,  tanquam  perierit  haec  ratio  media,  et
nihil  cum  ipsius  causae  utilitate  sit  deliberandum.
Haec  praecipiunt,  qui  ipsi  non  dicunt  in  foro,
ut  artes  a  securis otiosisque compositae  ipsa  pug-

60  nae  necessitate  turbentur.  Namque  omnes  fere,
qui  legem  dicendi  quasi  quaedam  mysteria  tradide-
runt,  certis  non  inveniendorum  modo  argumentorum

1  cp.  v.  xiv.  27.
346


BOOK V.  xin.  57-60

places  on  the  subject  of  witnesses,  documentary
evidence,  arguments  and  the  like  make  a  great
impression  on  the  minds  of  the  judges,  as  also  do
those  topics  which  are  peculiar  to  the  case,  those  I
mean  in  which  we  praise  or  blame  any  action  or
show  that  it  is  just  or  unjust,  or  make  it  seem  more
or  less  important  or  more  or  less  harsh  than  it
really  is.  Of  these  topics  some  are  adapted  to  the
comparison  of  individual  arguments,  others  to  the
comparison  of  a  number,  while  others  may  serve  to
influence  the  success  or  failure  of  the  whole  case.
Some  again  prepare  the  mind  of  the  judge,  while  58
others  confirm  it  in  opinions  already  formed.  But
such  preparation  or  confirmation  will  sometimes
apply  to  the  whole  case,  sometimes  only  to  par-
ticular portions,  and  must  therefore  be  em-
ployed with  due  regard  to  circumstances.  I  am  59
consequently  surprised  that  there  should  be  a
violent  dispute  between  the  leaders  of  two  opposite
schools  as  to  whether  such  commonplaces  should  be
applied  to  individual  questions  (which  is  the  view  of
Theodorus),  or  whether  the  judge  should  be  in-
structed in  the  facts  before  any  appeal  is  made  to
his  feelings  (the  latter  being  the  view  of  Apollo-
dorus),  as  though  no  middle  course  were  possible  and
no  regard  were  to  be  had  to  the  exigencies  of  the
case  itself.  Those  who  lay  down  such  rules  have  no
experience  of  speaking  in  the  actual  courts,  the
result  being  that  text- books  composed  in  the  calm
leisure  of  the  study  are  sadly  upset  by  the  neces-
sities of  forensic  strife.  For  practically  all  those  60
who  have  set  forth  the  law  of  speaking  as  thougn  it
were  a  profound  mystery,1  have  tied  us  down  not
merely  to  fixed  topics  for  argument,  but  to  definite

347


QUINTILIAN

locis,  sed  concludendorum  quoque  nos  praeceptis
alligaverunt ;  de  quibus  brevissime  praelocutus,  quid
ipse  sentiam,  id  est  quid  clarissimos  oratores  fecisse
videam,  non  tacebo.

XIV.  Igitur  enthymema  et  argumentum  ipsum,  id
est  rem,  quae  probationi  alterius  adhibetur,  appellant
et  argumenti  elocutionem,  earn  vero,  ut  dixi,  dupli-
cem :  ex  consequentibus,  quod  habet  proposition  em
coniunctamque  ei  protinus  probationer^  quale  pro
Ligario,  Causa  turn  dubia,  quod  erat  aliquid  in  utraque
parte,  quod  probari  posset ;  nunc  melior  ea  iudicanda  est,
quam  etiam  dii  adiuverunt ;  habet  enim ration  em  et

2  propositionem,  non  habet  conclusionem.  Ita  est  ille
imperfectus  syllogismus.  Ex  pugnantibus  vero,  quod
etiam  solum  enthymema  quidam  vocant,  fortior  multo
probatio  est.  Tale  est  Ciceronis  pro  Milone :  Eius
igitur  mortis  sedetis  ultores,  cuius  vitam  si  pidetis  per  vos

3  restitui  posse,  nolitis.  Quod  quidem  etiam  aliquando
multiplicari  solet,  ut  est  ab  eodem  et  pro  eodem  reo
factum  :  Quern  igitur  cum  omnium  gratia  noluit,  hum
voluit  cum  aliquorum querela  ? quern  iure,  quern loco,

1  For  this  chapter  see  note  prefixed  to  Index. z  cp.  v.  x.  2.
8  vi.  19. The  cause  helped  by  heaven  is  that  of  Caesar.
cp.  Lucan's  victrix  causa  dtis  placuit,  sed  victa  Catoni.

4  cp.  v.  x.  2.

5  xxix.  79. The  death  is  that  of  Clodius.  6  xvi.  41.

34»


BOOK V.  xni.  60-xiv.  3

rules  as  to  how  we  should  draw  our  conclusions.  1
propose  after  making  a  few  preliminary  remarks  on
the  subject  to  give  a  frank  expression  of  my  own
views,  or  in  other  words  to  set  forth  what  I  perceive
to  have  been  the  practice  of  the  most  distinguished
orators.

XIV.  The  term  enthymeme 1  is  applied  not  merely  to
the  actual  argument,  that  is  to  say,  the  matter  ad-
duced to  prove  something  else,  but  also  to  its  expres-
sion, the  nature  of  which^  as  I  have  already  pointed
out,  is  twofold.2  It  may  be  drawn  from  denial  of
consequents,  when  it  will  consist  of  a  proposition
immediately  followed  by  a  proof,  as  in  the  following
passage  from  the  pro  Ligario  3 ;  ' '  At  that  point  the
justice  of  the  cause  was  doubtful,  since  there  was
something  to  be  said  on  both  sides.  But  now  we  can
only  regard  that  cause  as  superior,  which  even  the
gods  supported."  Here  we  have  a  proposition  and  a
reason,  but  no  formal  conclusion :  it  is  therefore  the
incomplete  syllogism  known  as  an  enthymeme.  It  may
on  the  other  hand  be  drawn  from  incompatibles,  in
which  case  the  proof  will  be  much  stronger  ;  indeed
some  restrict  the  title  of  enthymeme  4  to  this  form  of
argument.  The  following  passage  from  the  pro
Milone 5  of  Cicero  will  provide  a  parallel :  "  You
are  then  sitting  there  to  avenge  the  death  of  a  man
whom  you  would  refuse  to  restore  to  life,  even  if
you  thought  it  within  your  power  to  do  so."  This  form
of  argument  may  even  at  times  consist  of  a  number
of  clauses,  as  in  the  following  passage  from  the  same
speech 6 :  "  Was  he  resolved  then  to  kill  to  the
dissatisfaction  of  some  a  man  whom  he  refused  to
kill  to  the  satisfaction  of  all  ?  Are  we  to  believe
that  he  did  not  hesitate,  in  defiance  of  the  law  and

349


QUINTILIAN

quern  tempore,  quern  impune  non  est  ausus,  hunc  iniuria,
iniquo  loco,  alieno  tempore,  cum periculo capitis non

4  dubitavit  occidere  ?  Optimum  autem  videtur  enthy-
mematis  genus,  cum  propositio  dissimili  vel  con-
traria  ratio  subiungitur,  quale  est  Demosthenis :
Non  enim,  si  quid  unquam  contra  leges  actum  est,  idque
tu  es  imitatus,  idcirco  te  convenit  poena  liberari ;  quin  e
contrario  damnari  multo  magis.  Nam  ut,  si  quis  eorum
damnatus  esset,  tu  haec  non  scripsisses,  ita,  damnatus  tu  si
fueris,  non  scribet  alius.

5  Epichirematos  et  quattuor  et  quinque  et  sex  etiam
factae  sunt  partes  a  quibusdam.  Cicero  maxime
quinque  defendit,  ut  sit  propositio,  deinde  ratio  eius,
turn  adsumptio  et  eius  probatio,  quinta  complexio ;
quia  vero  interim  et  propositio  non  egeat  rationis  et
adsumptio  probationis,  nonnunquam  etiam  complexi-
one  opus  non  sit,  et  quadripertitam  et  tripertitam  et

6  bipertitam  quoque  fieri  posse  ratiocinationem.  Mihi
et  pluribus  nihilominus  auctoribus  tres  summum  vi-
dentur.  Nam  ita  se  habet  ipsa  natura,  ut  sit,  de  quo
quaeratur  et  per  quod  probetur ;  tertium  adiici  potest
velut  ex  consensu  duorum  antecedentium. Ita  erit

1  in  Androt.  §  7  ;  in  Aristocr.  §  99.

2  de  Inv.  i.  xxxvii.  67.

350


BOOK V.  xiv.  3-6

despite  the  unfavourable  circumstances  both  of  time
and  place  and  the  risk  involved  to  his  own  life,  to
kill  one  whom  he  did  not  venture  to  kill  when  he
might  have  done  so  legally,  at  his  own  time  and
place  and  without  the  least  danger  to  himself  ?  "  The  4
most  effective  kind  of  enthymeme  seems  however  to
be  that  in  which  a  reason  is  subjoined  to  a  dissimilar
or  contrary  proposition  as  in  the  following  passage
from  Demosthenes l :  "  For  if  at  any  time  an  act
has  been  committed  contrary  to  law  and  you  have
imitated  it,  it  does  not  therefore  follow  that  you
should  go  scot  free ;  on  the  contrary  it  is  an
additional  reason  why  you  should  be  condemned.
For  if  any  of  those  who  transgressed  the  law  had
been  condemned,  you  would  not  have  proposed  this,
and  further,  if  you  are  condemned,  no  one  else  will
propose  anything  of  the  kind."

As  regards  the  epickeireme,  some  authorities  hold  5
that  it  consists  of  four,  five,  and  even  six  parts.
Cicero 2  urges  that  there  are  not  more  than  five  at
most,  i.e.  the  major  premise  and  its  reason,  the  minor
premise  and  its  proof,  and  fifthly  the  conclusion.
But  since  at  times  the  major  premise  does  not
require  a  reason  nor  the  minor  a  proof,  while
occasionally  even  the  conclusion  is  not  necessary,
he  holds  that  the  epickeireme  may  consist  of  only
four,  three,  or  even  two  parts.  Personally  however  6
I  follow  the  majority  of  authorities  in  holding  that
there  are  not  more  than  three  parts.  For  it  follows
from  the  very  nature  of  reasoning  that  there  must
be  something  to  form  the  subject  of  enquiry  and
something  else  to  provide  the  proof,  while  the  third
element  which  has  to  be  added  may  be  regarded
as  resulting  from  the  agreement  of  the  two  previous

351


QUINTILIAN

prima  intentio,  secunda  adsumptio,  tertia  connexio.
Nam  confirmatio  primae  ac  secundae  partis  et  exor-

7  natio  eisdem  cedere  possunt,  quibus  subiiciuntur.  Su-
mamus  enim  ex  Cicerone  quinque  partium  exemplum :
Melius  gubernantur  ea,  quae  consiUo  reguntur  quam  quae
sine  consilio  administrantur.  Hanc  primam  partem
numerant;  earn  deinceps  rationibus  variis  et  quam
copiosissimis  verbis  approbari  putant  oportere.  Hoc
ego  totum  cum  sua  ratione  unum  puto ;  alioqui  si
ratio  pars  est,  est  autem  varia  ratio,  plures  partes

8  esse  dicantur.  Adsumptionem  deinde  ponit :  Nihil
autem  omnium  rerum  melius  quam  omnis  mundus  admini-
strator. Huius  adsumptionis  quarto  in  loco  iam  porro
inducunt  approbationem ;  de  quo  idem  quod  supra

9  dico.  Quinto  inducunt  loco  complexionem,  quae  aut
id  infert  solum  quod  ex  omnibus  partibus  cogitur,
hoc  modo,  Consilio  igitur  mundus  administrator ;  aut,
unum  in  locum  cum  conduxit  breviter  propositionem
et  adsumptionem,  adiungit  quid  ex  his  conficiatur,  ad
hunc  modum :  Quodsi  melius  geruntur,  quae  consilio
quam  quae  sine  consilio  administrantur,  nihil  autem
omnium  rerum  melius  quam  omnis  mundus  administra-
tor, consilio  igitur  mundus  administrator.  Cui  parti
consentio.

10 In  tribus  autem,  quas  fecimus,  partibus  non  est

1  de  Inv.  i.  xxxiv.  58.
352


BOOK V.  xiv.  6-10

elements.  Thus  the  first  part  will  be  the  major,  the
second  the  minor  premise  and  the  third  the  con-
clusion. For  the  confirmation  and  development  of
both  premises  may  reasonably  be  included  in  the
parts  to  which  they  belong.  Let  us  then  take  7
an  example  from  Cicero l  of  the  epicheireme  consisting
of  five  parts.  "  Those  things  which  are  controlled
by  reason  are  better  governed  than  those  which  are
not/'  This  they  call  the  first  part  and  consider  that
it  requires  to  be  established  by  various  reasons  and
a  copious  display  of  eloquence.  Personally  I  hold
that  the  whole  of  this  together  with  its  reason  forms
but  one  part.  Otherwise,  if  the  reason  is  to  be  treated
as  a  separate  part  and  if  there  are  a  variety  of
reasons,  this  will  involve  an  addition  to  the  number
of  parts.  Next  he  produces  the  minor  premise :  8
"  But  there  is  nothing  better  administered  than  the
universe/'  The  proof  of  this  minor  premise  is
treated  as  the  fourth  part  of  the  epicheireme.  My
criticism  of  this  statement  is  identical  with  my
criticism  of  the  preceding.  The  fifth  place  they  9
assign  to  the  conclusion  which  either  merely  makes
the  necessary  inference  from  the  preceding  parts
(i.e.  "  Therefore  the  universe  is  governed  by  reason  ")
or  after  briefly  bringing  major  and  minor  premise
together  adds  what  is  deduced  from  them  with  the
following  result :  "  But  if  on  the  one  hand  things
that  are  controlled  by  reason  are  better  governed
than  things  which  are  not  and  on  the  other  nothing
is  better  administered  than  the  universe,  then  it
follows  that  the  universe  is  governed  by  reason."
As  regards  this  part  of  the  epicheireme  I  agree.

I  have  said  that  the  epicheireme  consists  of  three 10
parts  :  its  form  is  not  however  invariable. There  is

353


QUINTILIAN

forma  semper  eadem,  sed  una,  in  qua  idem  conclu*
ditur  quod  intenditur :  Anima  immortalis  est.  Nam
quidquid  ex  se  ipso  movetur,  immoriale  est ;  anima  autem
ex  se  ipsa  movetur,  immortalis  igitur  est  anima.  Hoc  fit
non  solum  in  singulis  argumentis  sed  in  totis  causis,

11  quae  sunt  simplices,  et  in  quaestionibus.  Nam  et
hae  primam  habent  propositionem :  Sacrilegium  com-
misisti;  Non,  quisquis  hominem  occidit,  caedis  tenetur,
deinde  rationem;  (sed  haec  est  in  causis  et  quae-
stione  longior  quam  in  singulis  argumentis)  et
plerumque  summa  complexione,  vel  per  enumera-
tionem  vel  per  brevem  conclusionem,  testantur,  quid
effecerint. In  hoc  genere  propositio  dubia  est,  de

12  hac  enim  quaeritur.  Altera  est  complexio  non  par
intentioni  sed  vim  habens  parem :  Mors  nihil  ad  nos,
nam  quod  est  dissolutum,  sensu  caret;  quod  autem  sensu
caret,  nihil  ad  nos.  In  alio  genere  non  eadem  pro-
positio est  quae  connexio :  Omnia  animalia  meliora
sunt  quam  inanima,  nihil  autem  melius  est  mundo,  mundus
igitur  animal.  Hie  potest  videri  deesse  intentio.1
Potuit  enim  sic  constitui  ratiocinatio :  Animal  est
mundus.  omnia  enim  animalia  meliora  sunt  quam  inanima

13  et cetera. Haec propositio aut confessa est ut

1  deesse, Madvig : de re, M88. : intentio, Spalding :
contentio,  MSS.

1  See  in.  vi.  9,  10.
3S4


BOOK V.  xiv.  10-13

firstly  the  form  in  which  the  conclusion  is  identical
with  what  has  already  been  stated  in  the  major
premise.  "The  soul  is  immortal,  since  whatever
derives  its  motion  from  itself  is  immortal.  But  the
soul  derives  its  motion  from  itself.  Therefore  the
soul  is  immortal."  This  process  occurs  not  merely
in  individual  arguments,  but  in  whole  cases,  provided
they  are  of  a  simple  character,  and  also  in  questions.1
For  cases  and  questions  always  have  first  a  major  11
premise,  such  as  "You  have  committed  sacrilege,"
or  "  Not  everyone  who  has  killed  a  man  is  guilty
of  murder."  Second  comes  a  reason,  which  is
stated  at  greater  length  in  cases  and  questions  than
in  separate  arguments,  while  finally  comes  the  con-
clusion in  which  as  a  rule  they  set  forth  the  point
they  have  proved  either  by  enumeration  of  par-
ticulars or  in  the  form  of  a  hasty  conclusion.  In  this
type  of  epicheireme  the  major  premise  is  doubtful,  since
it  is  still  under  investigation.  There  is  another  12
form  of  conclusion  which  is  not  actually  identical
with  the  major  premise,  but  has  the  same  force
"  Death  is  nothing  to  us,  for  that  which  is  dissolved
into  its  elements  is  devoid  of  feeling,  and  that
which  is  devoid  of  feeling  is  nothing  to  us."  There
is  a  third  form  in  which  the  major  premise  and  the
conclusion  are  different.  "  All  animate  things  are
better  than  inanimate,  but  there  is  nothing  better
than  the  universe,  wherefore  the  universe  is  ani-
mate." It  may  be  thought  that  in  this  case  there  is
no  real  major  premise,  since  it  would  be  possible
to  state  the  reasoning  in  the  following  form  :  "  The
universe  is  animate,  for  all  things  animate  are  better
than  inanimate,"  etcetera.  This  major  premise  is  either  13
an  admitted  fact  as  in  the  last  example  or  requires

355


QUINTILIAN

proxima,  aut  probanda  ut,  Qui  beatam  vitam  vivere
volet,  pkilosopketur  oportet,  non  enim  conceditur ;
cetera  sequi  nisi  confirmata  prima  parte  non  possunt.
Item  adsumptio  interim  confessa  est  ut,  Omnes  autem
volunt  beatam  vitam  vivere ;  interim  probanda  ut  ilia,
Quod  est  dissolutum,  sensu  caret;  cum,  soluta  corpore
anima  an  sit  immortalis  vel  ad  tempus  certe  maneat,
sit  in  dubio.  Quam  adsumptionem  alii,  rationem  alii
vocant.

14  Epichirema  autem  nullo  differt  a  syllogismis,  nisi
quod  illi  et  plures  habent  species  et  vera  colligunt
veris,  epichirematis  frequentior  circa  credibilia  est
usus.  Nam  si  contingeret  semper  controversy  con-
fessis  probare,  vix  esset  in  hoc  genere  usus  oratoris.

15  Nam  quo  ingenio  est  opus,  ut  dicas :  Bona  ad  me
pertinent,  solus  enim  sum  Jllius  de fundi,  vel  solus  heres,
cum  iure  bonorum  possessio  testati  secundum  iabulas  tes-

16  tamenti  detur,  ad  me  igitur  pertinet.  Sed  cum  ipsa
ratio  in  quaestionem  venit,  efficiendum  est  certum  id
quo  probaturi  sumus  quod  incertum  est :  ut  si  ipsa
forte  intentione  dicatur  aut  Jllius  non  es  aut  non  es
legitimus  aut  non  es  solus,  itemque  aut  non  es  heres,
aut  non  iustum  testamentum  est,  aut  capere  non  potes,  aut
habes  coheredes,  efficiendum  est  iustum,  propter  quod

356


BOOK V.  xiv.  13-16

to  be  proved  as  in  the  following :  "  He  who  wishes
to  live  a  happy  life,  must  be  a  philosopher  "  :  for
this  is  not  an  acknowledged  truth,  and  the  premises
must  be  established  before  we  can  arrive  at  the
conclusion.  Sometimes  again  the  minor  premise  is
an  admitted  fact,  as  for  instance,  "  But  all  men  wish
to  live  a  happy  life,"  while  sometimes  it  requires  to
be  proved,  as  for  example  the  statement  quoted
above,  u  That  which  is  dissolved  into  its  elements  is
devoid  of  feeling/ '  since  it  is  doubtful  whether  the
soul  is  immortal  after  its  release  from  the  body  or
only  continues  to  exist  for  a  time.  Some  call  this  a
minor  premise,  some  a  reason.

There  is  no  difference  between  the  epicheireme  and  14
the  syllogism,  except  that  the  latter  has  a  number
of  forms  and  infers  truth  from  truth,  whereas  the
epicheireme  is  frequently  concerned  with  statements
that  are  no  more  than  credible.  For  if  it  were
always  possible  to  prove  controversial  points  from
admitted  premises,  the  orator  would  have  little  to
do  in  this  connexion.  For  what  skill  does  it  require  15
to  say,  "  The  property  is  mine,  for  I  am  the  only  son
of  the  deceased/ '  or  ss  I  am  the  sole  heir,  since  pos-
session of  the  testator  s  estate  is  given  by  the  law  of
property  in  accordance  with  the  terms  of  his  will :
the  property  therefore  belongs  to  me  "  ?  But  when  16
the  reason  given  is  itself  disputable,  we  must
establish  the  certainty  of  the  premises  by  which  we
are  proposing  to  prove  what  is  uncertain.  For
example,  if  our  opponent  says  "You  are  not  his
son  "  or  "  You  are  illegitimate"  or  "  You  are  not  his
only  son  "  ;  or,  again,  "  You  are  not  his  heir  "  or  "  The
will  is  invalid  "  or  "  You  are  not  entitled  to  inherit  "
or  "  You  have  co-heirs,"  we  must  prove  the  validity

3S7


QUINTILIAN

17  nobis  bona  adiudicari  debeant.  Sed  turn  est  neces-
saria  ilia  summa  connexio,  cum  intervenit  ratio
longior ;  alioqui  sufficiunt  intentio  ac  ratio :  Silent
enim  leges  inter  arma  nee  se  expectari  iabe?d,  cum
ety  qui  exspectare  velit,  ante  iniusta  poena  luenda  sit  quam
iusta  repetenda.  Ideoque  id  enthymema,  quod  est
ex  consequentibus,  rationi  simile  dixerunt  Sed  et
singula,  interimque  recte,  ponuntur,  ut  ipsum  illud

18  Silent  leges  inter  arma;  et  a  ratione  incipere  fas  est,
deinde  concludere,  ut  ibidem  :  Quodsi  duodecim  tabulae
nocturnum  furem  quoquo  modo,  diurnum  autem,  si  se  telo
defenderet,  interfici  impune  voluerunt,  quis  est  qui,
quoquo  modo  quis  inter fectus  sit,  puniendum  pidet  ?
Variavit  hie  adhuc  et  rursus  rationem  tertio  loco
posuit;  cum videat  aliquando  gladium nobis ab  ipsis

19  porrigi  legibus.  Per  constantem l  partis  duxit  ordinem  :
Insidiatori  vero  et  latroni  quae  potest  inferri  iniusta  nex  ?
hoc  intentio ;  Quid  comitatus  nostri,  quid  gladii  volunt  ?
hoc  ratio ;  Quos  habere  certe  non  liceret,  si  idi  illis  nullo
pacto  licerety  hoc  ex  ratione  et  intentione  connexio.

1  per  constantem,  Radermacher :  prioria  autem,  MSS.

1  pro  Mil.  iv.  10.  2  ib.  ill.  9.  *  ib.  iv.  10.

358


BOOK V.  xiv.  16-19

of  the  reason  on  which  we  base  our  claim  that  the
property  should  be  adjudicated  to  us.  But  when  17
a  reason  of  unusual  length  intervenes,  it  is  neces-
sary to  state  the  final  conclusion,  otherwise  the
major  premise  and  the  reason  would  suffice.  "  Laws
are  silent  in  the  midst  of  arms,  and  do  not  require
us  to  await  their  sanction  when  the  circumstances
are  such  that  he  who  would  await  their  sanction  is
certain  to  be  the  victim  of  an  unjust  penalty  before
ever  the  just  penalty  can  be  claimed/' *  Hence  it
has  been  asserted  that  the  form  of  enthymeme  which  is
based  on  denial  of  consequents  resembles  a  reason.  Bu  t
sometimes,  again,  it  is  sufficient  to  state  a  single
proposition  as  in  the  example  just  quoted, e€  The  laws
are  silent  in  the  midst  of  arms/ '  We  may  also  begin  18
with  the  reason  and  then  proceed  to  the  conclusion
as  in  another  passage  from  the  same  speech  2  :  "  But
if  the  Twelve  Tables  permitted  the  killing  of  a  thief
by  night  under  any  circumstances,  and  by  day  if  he
used  a  weapon  to  defend  himself,  who  is  there  who
will  contend  that  the  slayer  must  be  punished  under
whatever  circumstances  a  man  has  been  killed?"
The  process  is  still  further  varied  by  Cicero,  and  the
reason  placed  third,  as  in  the  phrase,  "  When  he  sees
that  the  sword  is  sometimes  placed  in  our  hands  by
the  laws  themselves/'  On  the  other  hand,  he  19
places  the  various  parts  in  the  regular  order  in  the
following  instance  :  "  How  can  it  be  unjust  to  kill  a
robber  who  lies  in  wait  for  his  victim  ?  "  3  Next  comes
the  reason  :  "  What  is  the  object  of  our  escorts  and
our  swords  ?  "  Last  comes  the  conclusion  resulting
from  the  major  premise  and  the  reason  :  "  Which  we
certainly  should  not  be  permitted  to  have,  if  we
were  absolutely  forbidden  to  use  them."

359


QUINTILIAN

20  Huic  generi  probationis  tribus  occurritur  mod  is,
id  est  per  omnes  partes.  Aut  enim  expugnatur
intentio  aut  adsumptio  aut  conclusio,  nonnunquam
omnia.  Intentio  expugnatur:  lure  occidi  eum,  qui
insidiatus  sit.  Nam  prima  statim  quaestio  pro  Milone
est,  an  ei  fas  sit  lucem  intueri  qui  a  se  hominem  necatum

21  esse  fateatur.  Expugnatur  adsumptio  omnibus  iis
quae  de  refutatione  diximus.  Et  ratio  quidem  non-
nunquam l  est  vera,  cum  eius  propositio  vera  non  sit ;
interim  verae  propositionis  falsa  ratio  est.  Virtus
bonum  est,  verum  est ;  si  quis  rationem  subiiciat,  quod
ea  locupletes  Jaciat,  verae  intentionis  falsa  sit  ratio.

22  Conclusio  autem  aut  vera  negatur,  cum  aliud  colligit
quam  id  quod  ex  prioribus  efficitur,  aut  nihil  ad
quaestionem  dicitur  pertinere.  Non  est  vera  sic :
Insidiator  iure  occiditar ;  nam  cum  vitae  vim  adferat
ut  hostis,  debet  etiam  repelli  ut  hostis  ;  recte  igitur  Clodius
ut  hostis  occisus  est ;  non  utique,  nondum  enim  Clodium
insidiatorem  ostendimus.  Sed  fit  vera  connexio,
Recte  igitur  insidiator  ut  hostis  occiditur ;  nihil  ad  nos,

23  nondum  enim  Clodius  insidiator  apparet.  Sed  ut
potest  vera  esse  intentio et ratio et tamen falsa

1  nonnunquam,  MSS.  :  nunquam,  Victor.

1  In  the  preceding  chapter.
360


BOOK V.  xiv.  20-23

This  form  of  proof  may  be  countered  in  three  20
ways,  that  is  to  say  it  may  be  attacked  in  all  its
parts.  For  either  the  major  premise  or  the  minor  or
the  conclusion  or  occasionally  all  three  are  refuted.
The  major  premise  is  refuted  in  the  following  case :
"I  was  justified  in  killing  him,  as  he  lay  in  wait
for  me."  For  the  very  first  question  in  the  defence
of  Milo  is  "  whether  it  is  right  that  he  who  confesses
that  he  has  killed  a  man  should  look  upon  the  light
of  day."  The  minor  premise  is  refuted  by  all  the  21
methods  which  we  mentioned  in  dealing  with  refuta-
tion.1 As  to  the  reason  it  must  be  pointed  out  that  it
is  sometimes  true  when  the  proposition  to  which  it
is  attached  is  not  true,  but  may  on  the  other  hand
sometimes  be  false  although  the  proposition  is  true.
For  example,  "Virtue  is  a  good  thing  "  is  true,  but
if  the  reason,  "  Because  it  brings  us  wealth,"  be
added,  we  shall  have  an  instance  of  a  true  major
premise  and  a  false  reason.  With  regard  to  the  22
conclusion,  we  may  either  deny  its  truth  when  it
infers  something  which  does  not  logically  result
from  the  premises,  or  we  may  treat  it  as  irrelevant.
The  truth  is  denied  in  the  following  case  :  S€  We
are  justified  in  killing  one  who  lies  in  wait  for  us ;
for  since,  like  an  enemy,  he  threatens  us  with
violence,  we  ought  to  repulse  his  attack  as  though
he  were  an  enemy :  therefore  Milo  was  justified  in
killing  Clodius  as  an  enemy."  The  conclusion  is  not
valid,  since  we  have  not  yet  proved  that  Clodius  lay
in  wait  for  him.  But  the  conclusion  that  we  are
therefore  justified  in  killing  one  who  lies  in  wait
for  us  is  perfectly  true,  though  irrelevant  to  the
case,  for  it  is  not  yet  clear  that  Clodius  lay  in  wait
for  Milo. But  while  the  major  premise  and  the  reason  23

361


QUINTILIAN

connexio,  ita,  si  ilia  falsa  sunt,  nunquam  est vera
connexio.

24  Enthymema  ab  aliis  oratorius  syllogismus,  ab  aliis
pars  dicitur  syllogismi,  propterea  quod  syllogismus
utique  conclusionem  et  propositionem  habet  et  per
omnes partes efficit, quod proposuit, enthymema

25  tantum  intelligi  contentum  sit.  Syllogismus  talis:
Solum  bonum  virtus,  nam  id  demum  bonum  est,  quo  nemo
male  uti  potest;  virtute  nemo  male  uti  potest,  bonum  est
ergo  virtus,  Enthymema  ex  consequentibus  :  Bonum
est  virtus,  qua  nemo  male  uti  potest.  Et  contra,  Non  est
bonum  pecunia;  non  enim  bonum,  quo  quis  male  uti
potest ;  pecunia  potest  quis  male  uti,  non  igitur  bonum  est
pecunia. Enthymema  ex  pugnantibus  :  An  bonum  est

26  pecunia,  qua  quis  male  uti  potest  ? — Si  pecunia,  quae
est  in  argento  signato,  argentum  est,  qui  argentum  omne
legavit,  et  pecuniam,  quae  est  in  argento  signato,  legavit ;
argentum  autem  omne  legavit,  igitur  et  pecuniam,  quae  est
in  argento,  legavit,  habet  formam  syllogismi.  Oratori
satis  est  dicere,  Cum  argentum  legaverit  omne,  pecuniam
quoque  legavit,  quae  est  in  argento.

27  Peregisse  mihi  videor  sacra  tradentium  artes,  sed

consilio  locus  superest. Namque  ego,  ut  in  oratione
362


BOOK V.  xiv.  23-27

may  both  be  true  and  the  conclusion  false,  yet  if
both  are  false,  the  conclusion  can  never  be  true.

Some  call  the  enthymeme  a  rhetorical  syllogism,  while  24
others  regard  it  as  a  part  of  the  syllogism,  because
whereas  the  latter  always  has  its  premises  and
conclusion  and  effects  its  proof  by  the  employment
of  all  its  parts,  the  enthymeme  is  content  to  let  its
proof  be  understood  without  explicit  statement.  The  25
following  is  an  example  of  a  syllogism :  "  Virtue  is
the  only  thing  that  is  good,  for  that  alone  is  good
which  no  one  can  put  to  a  bad  use :  but  no  one  can
make  a  bad  use  of  virtue ;  virtue  therefore  is  good."
The  eftthymeme  draws  its  conclusion  from  denial  of
consequents.  "  Virtue  is  a  good  thing  because  no
one  can  put  it  to  a  bad  use."  On  the  other  hand
take  the  following  syllogism.  "  Money  is  not  a
good  thing  ;  for  that  is  not  good  which  can  be  put
to  a  bad  use :  money  may  be  put  to  a  bad  use  ;
therefore  money  is  not  a  good  thing."  The  enthy-
meme draws  its  conclusion  from  incompatibles.  "Can
money  be  a  good  thing  when  it  is  possible  to  put  it
to  a  bad  use? "  The  following  argument  is  couched  26
in  syllogistic  form  :  "  If  money  in  the  form  of  silver
coin  is  silver,  the  man  who  bequeathes  all  his  silver  to
a  legatee,  includes  all  money  in  the  form  of  coined
silver :  but  he  bequeathed  all  his  silver  :  therefore
he  included  in  the  bequest  all  money  in  the  form  of
coined  silver."  But  for  the  orator  it  will  be  sufficient
to  say,  "  Since  he  bequeathed  all  his  silver,  he  in-
cluded in  his  bequest  all  his  silver  money."

I  think  I  have  now  dealt  with  all  the  precepts  of  27
those  who  treat  oratory  as  a  mystery. But  these  rules
still  leave  scope  for  free  exercise  of  the  judgment.
For  although I consider  that there are occasions

363


QUINTILIAN

syllogismo  quidem  aliquando  uti  nefas  non  duco,  ita
constare  totam  aut  certe  confertam  esse  aggressionum
et  enthymematum  stipatione  minime  velim.  Dialogis
enim  et  dialecticis  disputationibus  erit  similior  quam
nostri  operis  actionibus,  quae  quidem  inter  se  pluri-

28  mum  differunt.  Namquein  illis  homines  docti  et  inter
doctos  verum  quaerentes  minutius  et  scrupulosius
scrutantur  omnia,  et  ad  liquidum  confessumque
perducunt,  ut  qui  sibi  et  inveniendi  et  iudicandi
vindicent partes, quarum alteram ToiriKrjv alteram

29  KpiTiKYjv  vocant.  Nobis  ad  aliorum  iudicia  compon-
enda  est  oratio,  et  saepius  apud  omnino  imperitos
atque  illarum  certe  ignaros  litterarum  loquendum
est,  quos  nisi  et  delectatione  allicimus  et  viribus
trahimus  et  nonnunquam  turbamus  adfectibus,
ipsa,  quae  iusta  ac  vera  sunt,  tenere  non  possumus.

30  Locuples  et  speciosa  et  imperiosa  vult  esse
eloquentia ;  quorum  nihil  consequetur,  si  conclu-
sionibus  certis  et  in  unam  prope  formam  cadentibus
concisa  et  contemptum  ex  humilitate  et  odium  ex
quadam  severitate  et  ex  copia  satietatem  et  ex  simili-

31  tudine  fastidium  attulerit.  Feratur  ergo  non  semitis
sed  campis,  non  uti  fontes  angustis  fistulis  colliguntur
364


BOOK V.  xiv.  27-31

when  the  orator  may  lawfully  employ  the  syllogism,  I
am  far  from  desiring  him  to  make  his  whole  speech
consist  of  or  even  be  crowded  with  a  mass  of
epicheiremes  and  enthymemes.  For  a  speech  of  that
character  would  resemble  dialogues  and  dialectical
controversies  rather  than  pleadings  of  the  kind  with
which  we  are  concerned,  and  there  is  an  enormous
difference  between  the  two.  For  in  the  former  we  28
are  confronted  with  learned  men  seeking  for  truth
among  men  of  learning  ;  consequently  they  subject
everything  to  a  minute  and  scrupulous  inquiry  with
a  view  to  arriving  at  clear  and  convincing  truths,
and  they  claim  for  themselves  the  tasks  of  invention
and  judgment,  calling  the  former  romKy  or  the
art  of  selecting  the  appropriate  material  for  treat-
ment, and  the  latter  kpltlkyj  or  the  art  of  criticism.
We  on  the  other  hand  have  to  compose  our  29
speeches  for  others  to  judge,  and  have  frequently
to  speak  before  an  audience  of  men  who,  if  not
thoroughly  ill-educated,  are  certainly  ignorant  of
such  arts  as  dialectic  :  and  unless  we  attract  them
by  the  charm  of  our  discourse  or  drag  them  by  its
force,  and  occasionally  throw  them  off  their  balance
by  an  appeal  to  their  emotions,  we  shall  be  unable
to  vindicate  the  claims  of  truth  and  justice.  Elo-  30
quence  aims  at  being  rich,  beautiful  and  commanding,
and  will  attain  to  none  of  these  qualities  if  it  be  broken
up  into  conclusive  inferences  which  are  generally
expressed  in  the  same  monotonous  form :  on  the
contrary  its  meanness  will  excite  contempt,  its  se-
verity dislike,  its  elaboration  satiety,  and  its  sameness
boredom.  Eloquence  therefore  must  not  restrict  31
itself  to  narrow  tracks,  but  range  at  large  over  the
open fields. Its streams must not be conveyed

36s


QUINTILIAN

sed  ut  beatissimi  amnes  totis  vallibus  fluunt,  ac  sibi
viam,  si  quando  non  acceperit,  faciat.  Nam  quid  ilia
miserius  lege  velut  praefonnatas  infantibus  litteras
persequentium  et,  ut  Graeci  dicere  solent,  quem
mater  amictum  dedit,  sollicite  custodientium :  pro-
positio  ac  conclusio  ex  consequentibus  et  repugnan-

32  tibus  ?  Non  inspiret  ?  non  augeat  ?  non  mille  figuris
variet  ac  verset  ?  ut  ea  nasci  et  ipsa  provenire  natura,
non  manu  facta  et  arte  suspecta  magistrum  fateri
ubique  videantur?  Quis  unquam  sic  dixit  orator?
Nonne  apud  ipsum  Demosthenen  paucissima  huius
generis x  reperiuntur  ?  Quae  apprehensa  Graeci  magis
(nam  hoc  solum  peius  faciunt)  in  catenas  ligant  et
inexplicabili  serie  connectunt,  et  indubitata  colligunt
et  probant  confessa  et  se  antiquis  per  hoc  similes
yocant,  deinde  interrogati  nunquam  respondebunt,
quem  imitentur. Sed  cfe  figuris  alio  loco.

33  Nunc  illud  adiiciendum,  ne  iis  quidem  consentire
me,  qui  semper  argumenta  sermone  puro  et  dilucido
et  distincto  ceterum  minime  elato  ornatoque  putant
esse  dicenda. Namque  ea  distincta  quidem  ac  per-

1  generis,  Zumpt :  veris,  A  :  veris  vel  artis,  G.

1  The  proverb  which  is  also  found  in  Plutarch  {de  Alex.
Fort.  i.  330  b)  seems  to  refer  to  a  child's  passionate  fondness
for  some  particular  garment.  2  ix.  i.  ii.  iii.

366


BOOK V.  xiv.  31-33

through  narrow  pipes  like  the  water  of  fountains,
but  flow  as  mighty  rivers  flow,  filling  whole  valleys ;
and  if  it  cannot  find  a  channel  it  must  make  one
for  itself.  For  what  can  be  more  distressing  than
to  be  fettered  by  petty  rules,  like  children  who
trace  the  letters  of  the  alphabet  which  others  have
first  written  for  them,  or,  as  the  Greeks  say,  insist
on  keeping  the  coat  their  mother  gave  them.1
Are  we  to  have  nothing  but  premises  and  conclu-
sions from  consequents  and  incompatibles  ?  Must
not  the  orator  breathe  life  into  the  argument  and
develop  it  ?  Must  he  not  vary  and  diversify  it  by  a  32
thousand  figures,  and  do  all  this  in  such  a  way  that
it  seems  to  come  into  being  as  the  very  child  of
nature,  not  to  reveal  an  artificial  manufacture  and  a
suspect  art  nor  at  every  moment  to  show  traces  of
an  instructor's  hand  ?  What  orator  ever  spoke  thus  ?
Even  in  Demosthenes  we  find  but  few  traces  of  such
a  mechanism.  And  yet  the  Greeks  of  to-day  are  even
more  prone  than  we  are  (though  this  is  the  only
point  in  which  their  practice  is  worse  than  ours)  to
bind  their  thoughts  in  fetters  and  to  connect  them
by  an  inexorable  chain  of  argument,  making  infer-
ences where  there  was  never  any  doubt,  proving  ad-
mitted facts  and  asserting  that  in  so  doing  they  are
following  the  orators  of  old,  although  they  always
refuse  to  answer  the  question  who  it  is  that  they  are
imitating.  However  of  figures  I  shall  speak  else-
where.2

For  the  present  I  must  add  that  I  do  not  even  33
agree  with  those  who  hold  that  arguments  should  al-
ways be  expressed  in  language  which  is  not  only  pure,
lucid  and  distinct,  but  also  as  free  as  possible  from
all  elevation  and  ornateness. I  readily  admit  that

367


QUINTILIAN

spicua  debere  esse  confiteor,  in  rebus  vero  minoribus
etiam  sermone  ac  verbis  quam  maxime  propriis  et  ex

34  usu ;  at  si  maior  erit  materia,  nullum  iis  ornatum,
qui  modo  non  obscuret,  subtrahendum  puto.  Nam
et  saepe  plurimum  lucis  adfert  ipsa  translatio,  cum
etiam  iurisconsulti,  quorum  summus  circa  verborum
proprietatem  labor  est,  litus  esse  audeant  dicere,  qua

35  fluctus  eludit.1  Quoque  quid  est  natura  magis  aspe-
rum,  hoc  pluribus  condiendum  est  voluptatibus ;  et
minus  suspecta  argumentatio  dissimulatione,  et  mul-
tum  ad  fidem  adiuvat  audientis  voluptas.  Nisi  forte
existimamus  Ciceronem  haec  ipsa  mala  in  argumen-
tatione  dixisse,  silere  leges  inter  arma,  et  gladium  nobis
interim  ab  ipsis  porrigi  legibus.  Hie  tamen  habendus
istis  modus,  ut  sint  ornamento  non  impedimento.

1  elidit,  Valla.


368


BOOK V.  xiv.  33-35

arguments  should  be  distinct  and  clear,  and  further
that  in  arguments  of  a  minor  character  the  language
and  words  should  be  as  appropriate  and  as  familiar
as  possible.  But  if  the  subject  be  one  of  real  im-  34
portance  every  kind  of  ornament  should  be  employed,
so  long  as  it  does  nothing  to  obscure  our  meaning.
For  metaphor  will  frequently  throw  a  flood  of  light
upon  a  subject :  even  lawyers,  who  spend  so  much
trouble  over  the  appropriateness  of  words,  venture
to  assert  that  the  word  litus  is  derived  from  eludere,
because  the  shore  is  a  place  where  the  waves  break
in  play.  Further,  the  more  unattractive  the  natural  35
appearance  of  anything,  the  more  does  it  require
to  be  seasoned  by  charm  of  style  :  moreover,  an  argu-
ment is  often  less  suspect  when  thus  disguised,  and
the  charm  with  which  it  is  expressed  makes  it  all  the
more  convincing  to  our  audience.  Unless  indeed  we
think  that  Cicero  was  in  error  when  he  introduced
phrases  such  as  the  following  into  an  argumentative
passage  :  "  The  laws  are  silent  in  the  midst  of  arms,"
and  "  A  sword  is  sometimes  placed  in  our  hands  by
the  laws  themselves/ '  However,  we  must  be  careful
to  observe  a  happy  mean  in  the  employment  of  such
embellishments,  so  that  they  may  prove  a  real  orna-
ment and  not  a  hindrance.


3^9


BOOK  VI


LIBER VI

Prooemium
Haec,  Marcelle  Victori,  ex  tua  voluntate  maxime
ingressus,  turn  si  qua  ex  nobis  ad  iuvenes  bonos  per-
venire  posset  utilitas,  novissime  paene  etiam  necessi-
tate quadam  officii  delegati  mihi  sedulo  laborabam ;
respiciens  tamen  illam  curam  meae  voluptatis,  quod
filio,  cuius  eminens  ingenium  sollicitam  quoque
parentis  diligentiam  merebatur,  banc  optimam  par-
tem relicturus  hereditatis  videbar  ut,  si  me,  quod
aequum et  optabile fuit,  fata  intercepissent,  prae-

2  ceptore  tamen  patre  uteretur.  At  me  fortuna  id
agentem  diebus  ac  noctibus  festinantemque  metu
meae  mortalitatis  ita  subito  prostravit,  ut  laboris  mei
fructus  ad  neminem  minus  quam  ad  me  pertineret.
Ilium  enim,  de  quo  summa  conceperam  et  in  quo
spem  unicam  senectutis  reponebam,  repetito  vulnere

3  orbitatis  amisi. Quid  nunc  agam  ? aut  quern  ultra

*cp.  Proem,  Bk.  I.  *  cp.  Proem,  Bk.  IV.

372


BOOK  VI

Preface

I  undertook  my  present  task,  Marcellus  Victorius,
mainly  to  gratify  your  request,1  but  also  with  a  view
to  assist  the  more  earnest  of  our  young  men  as  far
as  lay  in  my  power,  while  latterly  the  energy  with
which  I  have  devoted  myself  to  my  labours  has
been  inspired  by  the  almost  imperative  necessity
imposed  by  the  office  conferred  on  me/2  though
all  the  while  I  have  had  an  eye  to  my  own
personal  pleasure.  For  I  thought  that  this  work
would  be  the  most  precious  part  of  the  inheritance
that  would  fall  to  my  son,  whose  ability  was  so
remarkable  that  it  called  for  the  most  anxious
cultivation  on  the  part  of  his  father.  Thus  if,  as
would  have  been  but  just  and  devoutly  to  be
wished,  the  fates  had  torn  me  from  his  side,  he
would  still  have  been  able  to  enjoy  the  benefit  of
his  father's  instruction.  Night  and  day  I  pursued  2
this  design,  and  strove  to  hasten  its  completion  in
the  fear  that  death  might  cut  me  off  with  my  task
unfinished,  when  misfortune  overwhelmed  me  with
such  suddenness,  that  the  success  of  my  labours  now
interests  no  one  less  than  myself.  A  second  bereave-
ment has  fallen  upon  me,  and  I  have  lost  him  of
whom  I  had  formed  the  highest  expectations,  and
in  whom  1  reposed  all  the  hopes  that  should  solace
my  old  age. What  is  there  left  for  me  to  do  ? Or  3

.373


QUINTILIAN

esse  usum  mei,  diis  repugnantibus,  credam?  Nam
ita  forte  accidit,  ut  eum  quoque  librum,  quem  de
causis  corruptae  eloquentiae  emisi,  iam  scribere
aggressus  ictu  simili  ferirer.  Nonne  igitur  optimum
fuit,  infaustum  opus  et  quidquid  hoc  est  in  me  infe-
licium  litterarum  super  immaturum  funus  consump-
turis  viscera  mea  flammis  iniicere  neque  banc  impiam

4  vivacitatem  novis  insuper  curis  fatigare  ?  Quis  enim
mihi  bonus  parens  ignoscat,  si  studere  amplius  pos-
sum, ac  non  oderit  hanc  animi  mei  firmitatem,  si
quis  in  me  alius  usus  vocis,  quam  ut  incusem  deos
superstes  omnium  meorum,  null  am  in  terras  despi-
cere  providentiam  tester,  si  non  meo  casu,  cui  tamen
nihil  obiici,  nisi  quod  vivam,  potest,  at  illorum  certe,
quos  utique  immeritos  mors  acerba  damnavit,  erepta
priu s  mihi  matre  eorundem,  quae  nondum  expleto
aetatis  undevicesimo  anno  duos  enixa  filios,  quamvis

5  acerbissimis  rapta  fatis,  non  infelix  decessit?  Ego
vel  hoc  uno  malo  sic  eram  adflictus,  ut  me  iam  nulla
fortuna  posset  efficere  felicem.  Nam  cum  omni
virtute,  quae  in  feminas  cadit,  functa  insanabilem
attulit  marito  dolorem,  turn  aetate  tam  puellari,
praesertim  meae  comparata,  potest  et  ipsa  numerari

6  inter  vulnera  orbitatis.  Liberis  tamen  superstitibus
et,  quod  nefas  erat,  sed  optabat  ipsa,  me  salvo  maxi-

374


BOOK VI.  Pr.  3-6

what  further  use  can  I  hope  to  be  on  earth,  when
heaven  thus  frowns  upon  me?  For  it  so  chances
that  just  at  the  moment  when  I  began  my  book  on
the  causes  of  the  decline  of  eloquence,  I  was  stricken
by  a  like  affliction.  Better  had  I  thrown  that  ill-
omened  work  and  all  my  ill-starred  learning  upon
the  flames  of  that  untimely  pyre  that  was  to  consume
the  darling  of  my  heart,  and  had  not  sought  to
burden  my  unnatural  persistence  in  this  wicked
world  with  the  fatigue  of  fresh  labours !  For  what  4
father  with  a  spark  of  proper  feeling  would  pardon
me  for  having  the  heart  to  pursue  my  researches
further,  and  would  not  hate  me  for  my  insensibility,
had  I  other  use  for  my  voice  than  to  rail  against
high  heaven  for  having  suffered  me  to  outlive  all
my  nearest  and  dearest,  and  to  testify  that  provi-
dence deigns  not  at  all  to  watch  over  this  earth  of
ours  ?  If  this  is  not  proved  by  my  own  misfortune
(and  yet  my  only  fault  is  that  I  still  live),  it  is  most
surely  manifest  in  theirs,  who  were  cut  off  thus
untimely ;  their  mother  was  taken  from  me  earlier
still,  she  had  borne  me  two  sons  ere  the  completion  of
her  nineteenth  year  ;  but  for  her,  though  she  too  died
most  untimely,  death  was  a  blessing.  Yet  for  me  her  5
death  alone  was  such  a  blow  that  thereafter  no  good
fortune  could  bring  me  true  happiness.  For  she  had
every  virtue  that  is  given  to  woman  to  possess,  and
left  her  husband  a  prey  to  irremediable  grief;  nay,
so  young  was  she  when  death  took  her,  that  if  her
age  be  compared  with  mine,  her  decease  was  like
the  loss  not  merely  of  a  wife,  but  of  a  daughter.
Still  her  children  survived  her,  and  I,  too,  lived  on  6
by  some  unnatural  ordinance  of  fate,  which  for  all
its  perversity  was  what she  herself  desired  ; and

375


QUINTILIAN

mos  cruciatus  praecipiti  via  effugit. Mihi  filius  minor
quintum  egressus  annum  prior  alterum  ex  duobus

7  emit  lumen.  Non  sum  ambitiosus  in  malis  nee
augere  lacrimarum  causas  volo,  utinamque  esset  ratio
minuendi.  Sed  dissimulare  qui  possum,  quid  ille
gratiae  in  vultu,  quid  iueunditatis  in  sermone,  quos
ingenii  igniculos,  quam  substantiam  placidae  et  (quod
scio  vix  posse  credi)  iam  turn  altae  mentis  ostenderit;
qualis  amorem  quicunque  alienus  infans  mere  ret  ur.

8  Illud  vero  insidiantis,  quo  me  validius  cruciaret,
fortunae  fuit,  ut  ille  mihi  blandissimus  me  suis  nutri-
cibus,  me  aviae  educanti,  me  omnibus,  qui  sollicitare

9  illas  aetates  solent,  anteferret.  Quapropter  illi  do-
lori,  quem  ex  matre  optima  atque  omnem  laudem
supergressa  paucos  ante  menses  ceperam,  gratulor.
Minus  enim  est,  quod  flendum  meo  nomine  quam
quod  illius  gaudendum  est.

Una  post  haec  Quintiliani  mei  spe  ac  voluptate
10  nitebar,  et  poterat  sufficere  solacio.  Non  enim  flos-
culos,  sicut  prior,  sed  iam  decimum  aetatis  ingressus
annum,  certos  ac  deformatos  fructus  ostenderat.
luro  per  mala  mea,  per  infelicem  conscientiam,  per
illos  manes,  numina  mei  doloris,  eas  me  in  illo
vidisse  virtutes  ingenii,  non  modo  ad  percipiendas
disci plinas,  quo  nihil  praestantius  cognovi  plurima
expertus,  studiique  iam  turn  non  coacti  (sciunt  prae-

376


BOOK VI.  Pr.  6-io

thus  by  her  swift  departure  from  this  life  she  escaped
the  worst  of  tortures.  My  youngest  boy  was  barely
five,  when  he  was  the  first  to  leave  me,  robbing  me
as  it  were  of  one  of  my  two  eyes.  I  have  no  desire  7
to  flaunt  my  woes  in  the  public  gaze,  nor  to  exagge-
rate the  cause  I  have  for  tears;  would  that  I  had
some  means  to  make  it  less !  But  how  can  I  forget
the  charm  of  his  face,  the  sweetness  of  his  speech,
his  first  flashes  of  promise,  and  his  actual  possession
of  a  calm  and,  incredible  though  it  may  seem,  a
powerful  mind.  Such  a  child  would  have  captivated
my  affections,  even  had  he  been  another  s.  Nor  was  8
this  all ;  to  enhance  my  agony  the  malignity  of
designing  fortune  had  willed  that  he  should  devote
all  his  love  to  me,  preferring  me  to  his  nurses,  to
his  grandmother  who  brought  him  up,  and  all  those
who,  as  a  rule,  win  the  special  affection  of  infancy.
I  am,  therefore,  grateful  to  the  grief  that  came  to  9
me  some  few  months  before  his  loss  in  the  death
of  his  mother,  the  best  of  women,  whose  virtues
were  beyond  all  praise.  For  I  have  less  reason  to
weep  my  own  fate  than  to  rejoice  at  hers.

After  these  calamities  all  my  hopes,  all  my  delight
were  centred  on  my  little  Quintilian,  and  he  might
have  sufficed  to  console  me.  For  his  gifts  were  not  10
merely  in  the  bud  like  those  of  his  brother :  as
early  as  his  ninth  birthday  he  had  put  forth  sure
and  well-formed  fruit.  By  my  own  sorrows,  by  the
testimony  of  my  own  sad  heart,  by  his  departed
spirit,  the  deity  at  whose  shrine  my  grief  does
worship,  I  swear  that  I  discerned  in  him  such  talent,
not  merely  in  receiving  instruction,  although  in  all
my  wide  experience  I  have  never  seen  his  like,  nor
in  his  power  of  spontaneous  application,  to  which  his

377


QUINTILIAN

ceptores),  sed  probitatis,  pietatis,  humanitatis,  libe-
ral itatis,  ut  prorsus  posset  hinc  esse  tanti  fulminis
metus,  quod  observatum  fere  est  celerius  occidere
festinatam  maturitatem  et  esse  nescio  quam,  quae
spes tantas decerpat, invidiam, ne videlicet  ultra

11  quam  homini  datum  est  nostra  provehantur.  Etiam
ilia  fortuita  aderant  omnia,  vocis  iucunditas  clari-
tasque,  oris  suavitas  et  in  utracunque  lingua,  tan-
quam  ad  earn  demum  natus  esset,  expressa  proprietas
omnium  litterarum.  Sed  hae  spes  ad  hue ;  ilia  ma-
iora,  cons  tan  tia,  gra  vitas,  contra  dolores  etiam  ac
metus  robur.  Nam  quo  ille  animo,  qua  medicorum
admiratione  mensium  octo  valetudinem  tulit !  ut  me
in  supremis  consolatus  est !  quam  etiam  deficiens
iamque non noster ipsum ilium alienatae mentis

12  errorem  circa  scholas  ac  litteras  habuit !  Tuosne  ego,
o  meae  spes  inanes,  labentes  oculos,  tuum  fugientem
spiritum  vidi?  Tuum  corpus  frigidum  exsangue
complexus  animam  recipere  auramque  communem
haurire  amplius  potui,  dignus  his  cruciatibus,  quos

13  fero,  dignus  his  cogitationibus  ?  Tene  consulari  nuper
adoptione  ad  omnium  spes  honorum  prius  admotum,
te  avunculo  praetori  generum  destinatum,  te  [om-
nium spes] avitae eloquentiae candidatum,  super-

1  It  was  customary  for  the  next-of-kin  to  receive  in  the
mouth  the  last  breath  of  the  dying  to  continue  the  existence
of  the  spirit.

378


BOOK VI.  Pr.  10-13

teachers  can  bear  witness,  but  such  upright,  pious,
humane  and  generous  feelings,  as  alone  might  have
sufficed  to  fill  me  with  the  dread  of  the  fearful
thunder-stroke  that  has  smitten  me  down :  for  it
is  a  matter  of  common  observation  that  those  who
ripen  early  die  young,  and  that  there  is  some  malign
influence  that  delights  in  cutting  short  the  greatest
promise  and  refusing  to  permit  our  joys  to  pass
beyond  the  bound  allotted  to  mortal  man.  He  11
possessed  every  incidental  advantage  as  well,  a
pleasing  and  resonant  voice,  a  sweetness  of  speech,
and  a  perfect  correctness  in  pronouncing  every  letter
both  in  Greek  and  Latin,  as  though  either  were  his
native  tongue.  But  all  these  were  but  the  promise
of  greater  things.  He  had  finer  qualities,  courage
and  dignity,  and  the  strength  to  resist  both  fear
and  pain.  What  fortitude  he  showed  during  an  ill-
ness of  eight  months,  till  all  his  physicians  marvelled
at  him !  How  he  consoled  me  during  his  last
moments.  How  even  in  the  wanderings  of  delirium
did  his  thoughts  recur  to  his  lessons  and  his  literary
studies,  even  when  his  strength  was  sinking  and  he
was  no  longer  ours  to  claim !  Child  of  my  vain  12
hopes,  did  I  see  your  eyes  fading  in  death  and  your
breath  take  its  last  flight?  Had  I  the  heart  to
receive  your  fleeting  spirit,1  as  I  embraced  your  cold
pale  body,  and  to  live  on  breathing  the  common  air.
Justly  do  I  endure  the  agony  that  now  is  mine,  and
the  thoughts  that  torment  me.  Have  I  lost  you  at  13
the  moment  when  adoption  by  a  consular  had  given
hope  that  you  would  rise  to  all  the  high  offices  of
state,  when  you  were  destined  to  be  the  son-in-law
of  your  uncle  the  praetor,  and  gave  promise  of
rivalling  the  eloquence  of  your  grandsire?  and  do  I

379


QUINTILIAN

stes  parens  tan  turn  ad  poenas,  amisi1?  Et  si  non
cupido  lucis,  certe  patientia  vindicet  te  reliqua  mea
aetate. Nam  frustra  mala  omnia  ad  crimen  fortunae

14  relegamus.  Nemo  nisi  sua  culpa  diu  dolet.  Sed
vivimus,  et  aliqua  vivendi  ratio  quaerenda  est,  cre-
denduraque  doctissimis  hominibus,  qui  unicum  ad-
versorum  solacium  litteras  putaverunt.  Si  quando
tamen  ita  resederit  praesens  impetus,  ut  aliqua  tot
luctibus  alia  cogitatio  inseri  possit,  non  iniuste  peti-
erim  morae  veniam.  Quis  enim  dilata  studia  mire-
tur,  quae  potius  non  abrupta  esse  mirandum  est?

15  Turn,  si  qua  fuerint  minus  effecta  iis,  quae  levius
adhuc  adflicti  coeperamus,  imperitanti  fortunae  re-
mittantur,  quae,  si  quid  mediocrium  alioqui  in  nostro
ingenio  virium  fuit,  ut  non  exstinxerit,  debilitavit
tamen.  Sed  vel  propter  hoc  nos  contumacius  eri-
gamus,  quod  illam  ut  perferre  nobis  difficile  est,  ita
facile  contemnere.  Nihil  enim  sibi  adversus  me
reliquit  et  infelicem  quidem,  sed  certissimam  tamen

16  attulit  mihi  ex  his  malis  securitatem.  Boni  autem
consulere  nostrum  laborem  vel  propter  hoc  aequum
est,  quod  in  nullum  iam  proprium  usum  perse vera-
mus,  sed  omnis  haec  cura  alienas  utilitates  (si  modo

1  omnium  spes,  bracketed  by  Spalding,  avitae,  Erasmus:
acutis  or  acutae,  MSS. :  ad  poenas  amisi,  Regius :  poenas,
M88.

380


BOOK VI.  Pr.  13-16

your  father  survive  only  to  weep  ?  May  my  endur-
ance (not  my  will  to  live,  for  that  is  gone  from  me)
prove  me  worthy  of  you  through  all  my  remaining
years.  For  it  is  in  vain  that  we  impute  all  our  ills
to  fortune.  No  man  grieves  long  save  through  his
own  fault.  But  I  still  live,  and  must  find  something  14
to  make  life  tolerable,  and  must  needs  put  faith  in
the  verdict  of  the  wise,  who  held  that  literature
alone  can  provide  true  solace  in  adversity.  Yet,  if
ever  the  violence  of  my  present  grief  subside  and
admit  the  intrusion  of  some  other  thought  on  so
many  sorrowful  reflexions,  I  may  with  good  cause
ask  pardon  for  the  delay  in  bringing  my  work  to
completion.  Who  can  wonder  that  my  studies  have
been  interrupted,  when  the  real  marvel  is  that  they
have  not  been  broken  off  altogether?  Should  15
certain  portions  therefore  betray  a  lack  of  finish
compared  with  what  was  begun  in  the  days  when
my  affliction  was  less  profound,  I  would  ask  that  the
imperfections  should  be  regarded  with  indulgence,
as  being  due  to  the  cruel  tyranny  of  fortune,  which,
if  it  has  not  utterly  extinguished,  has  at  any  rate
weakened  such  poor  powers  of  intellect  as  I  once
possessed.  But  for  this  very  reason  I  must  rouse
myself  to  face  my  task  with  greater  spirit,  since  it
is  easy  to  despise  fortune,  though  it  may  be  hard
to  bear  her  blows.  For  there  is  nothing  left  that
she  can  do  to  me,  since  out  of  my  calamities  she
has  wrought  for  me  a  security  which,  full  of  sorrow
though  it  be,  is  such  that  nothing  can  shake  it.
And  the  very  fact  that  I  have  no  personal  interest  16
in  persevering  with  my  present  work,  but  am  moved
solely  by  the  desire  to  serve  others,  if  indeed  any-
thing that  I  write  can  be  of  such  service,  is  a  reason

38'


QUINTILIAN

quid  utile  scribimus)  spectat.  Nos  miseri  sicut  facul-
tates  patrimonii  nostri,  ita  hoc  opus  aliis  praepara-
bamus,  aliis  relinquemus.

I.  Peroratio  sequebatur,  quam  cumulum  quidam,
conclusionem  alii  vocant.  Eius  duplex  ratio  est
posita  aut  in  rebus  aut  in  adfectibus.  Rerum  repe-
titio  et  congregatio,  quae  Graece  dicitur  avaK€<f>a-
XaiiDcns,  a  quibusdam  Latinorum  enumeration  et
memoriam  iudicis  reficit  et  totam  simul  causam  ponit
ante  oculos  et,  etiamsi  per  singula  minus  moverat,

2  turba  valet.  In  hac,  quae  repetemus,  quam  brevis-
sime  dicenda  sunt  et,  quod  Graeco  verbo  patet,
decurrendum  per  capita.  Nam,  si  morabimur,  non
iam  enumeratio  sed  quasi  altera  fiet  oratio.  Quae
autem  enumeranda  videntur,  cum  pondere  aliquo
dicenda  sunt  et  aptis  excitanda  sententiis  et  figuris
utique  varianda ;  alioqui  nihil  est  odiosius  recta  ilia

3  repetitione  velut  memoriae  iudicum  diffidentis.  Sunt
autem  innumerabiles  species,1  optimeque  in  Verrem
Cicero  :  Si  pater  ipse  iudicaret,  quid  diceret}  cum  haec  pro-
barentur?  et  deinde  subiecit  enumerationem;  aut  cum

1  species,  added  by  Halm.

1  v.  lii.  136
382


BOOK VI.  Pr.  i  6-i.  3

for  regarding  my  labours  with  an  indulgent  eye.
Alas!  I  shall  bequeath  it,  like  my  patrimony,  for
others  than  those  to  whom  it  was  my  design  to
leave  it.

I.  The  next  subject  which  I  was  going  to  discuss
was  the  peroration  which  some  call  the  completion
and  others  the  conclusion.  There  are  two  kinds  of
peroration,  for  it  may  deal  either  with  facts  or  with
the  emotional  aspect  of  the  case.  The  repetition
and  grouping  of  the  facts,  which  the  Greeks  call
avaK€<l>a\aiu>(ns  and  some  of  our  own  writers  call  the
enumeration,  serves  both  to  refresh  the  memory  of
the  judge  and  to  place  the  whole  of  the  case  before
his  eyes,  and,  even  although  the  facts  may  have
made  little  impression  on  him  in  detail,  their  cumu-
lative effect  is  considerable.  This  final  recapitu-  2
lation  must  be  as  brief  as  possible  and,  as  the
Greek  term  indicates,  we  must  summarise  the  facts
under  the  appropriate  heads.  For  if  we  devote
too  much  time  thereto,  the  peroration  will  cease
to  be  an  enumeration  and  will  constitute  some-
thing very  like  a  second  speech.  On  the  other
hand  the  points  selected  for  enumeration  must
be  treated  with  weight  and  dignity,  enlivened
by  apt  reflexions  and  diversified  by  suitable  figures ;
for  there  is  nothing  more  tiresome  than  a  dry  re-
petition of  facts,  which  merely  suggests  a  lack  of
confidence  in  the  judges'  memory.  There  are  how-  3
ever  innumerable  ways  in  which  this  may  be  done.
The  finest  example  is  provided  by  Cicero's  prosecu-
tion of  Verres.1  "  If  your  own  father  were  among
your  judges,  what  would  he  say  when  these  facts
were  proved  against  you  ?  "  Then  follows  the  enumer-

383


QUINTILIAN
idem  in  eundem  per  invocationem  deorum  spoliata  a
praetore  templa  dinumerat. Licet  et  dubitare,  num
quid  nos  fugerit,  et  quid  responsurus  sit  adversarius
his  et  his,  aut  quam  spem  accusator  habeat  omnibus

4  ita  defensis.  Ilia  vero  iucundissima,  si  contingat
aliquod  ex  adversario  ducere  argumentum,  ut  si
dicas  :  Reliquit  hanc  partem  causae,  aut  invidia  premere
maluit,  aut  ad  preces  confugit  merito,  cum  sciret  haec  et

6  haec.  Sed  non  sunt  singulae  species  persequendae,
ne  sola  videantur,  quae  forte  nunc  dixero,  cum  occa-
siones  et  ex  causis  et  ex  dictis  adversariorum  et  ex
quibusdam  fortuitis  quoque  oriantur.  Nee  referenda
modo  nostra,  sed  postulandum  etiam  ab  adversariis,

6  ut  ad  quaedam  respondeant.  Id  autem,  si  et  actioni
supererit  locus  et  ea  proposuerimus,  quae  refelli  non
possint. Nam  provocare  quae  inde  sint  fortia,  non

7  arguentis  est,  sed  monentis.  Id  unum  epilogi  genus
visum  est  plerisque  Atticorum  et  philosophis  fere
omnibus,  qui  de  arte  oratoria  scriptum  aliquid  reli-

1  ib.  lxxii.

384


BOOK VI.  i.  3-7

ation.  Another  admirable  example l  may  be  found
in  the  same  speech  where  the  enumeration  of  the
temples  which  the  praetor  had  despoiled  takes  the
form  of  invoking  the  various  deities  concerned.  We
may  also  at  times  pretend  to  be  in  doubt  whether
we  have  not  omitted  something  and  to  wonder  what
the  accused  will  say  in  reply  to  certain  points  or
what  hope  the  accuser  can  have  after  the  manner  in
which  we  have  refuted  all  the  charges  brought  against
us.  But  the  most  attractive  form  of  peroration  is  4
that  which  we  may  use  when  we  have  an  opportun-
ity of  drawing  some  argument  from  our  opponent's
speech,  as  for  instance  when  we  say  u  He  omitted  to
deal  with  this  portion  of  the  case/'  or  "He  preferred
to  crush  us  by  exciting  odium  against  us/'  or  "  He
had  good  reason  for  resorting  to  entreaty,  since  he
knew  certain  facts/ '  But  I  must  refrain  from  deal-  5
ing  with  the  various  methods  individually,  for  fear
that  the  instances  that  I  produce  should  be  regarded
as  exhaustive,  whereas  our  opportunities  spring  from
the  nature  of  the  particular  case,  from  the  statements
of  our  opponents  and  also  from  fortuitous  circum-
stances. Nor  must  we  restrict  ourselves  to  recapitu-
lating the  points  of  our  own  speech,  but  must  call
upon  our  opponent  to  reply  to  certain  questions.
This  however  is  only  possible  if  there  is  time  for  him  6
to  do  so  and  if  the  arguments  which  we  have  put
forward  are  such  as  not  to  admit  of  refutation.  For
to  challenge  points  which  tell  in  our  opponent's
favour  is  not  to  argue  against  him,  but  to  play  the
part  of  prompter  to  him.  The  majority  of  Athenians  7
and  almost  all  philosophers  who  have  left  anything
in  writing  on  the  art  of  oratory  have  held  that  the
recapitulation is the sole form of peroration. I

385


QUINTILIAN

querunt.  Id  sensisse  Atticos  credo,  quia  Athenis
adfectus  movere  etiam  per  praeconem  prohibebatur
orator.  Philosophos  minus  miror,  apud  quos  vitii
loco  est  adfici ;  nee  boni  mores  videntur,  sic  a  vero
iudicem  averti,  nee  convenire  bono  viro  vitiis  uti.
Necessarios  tamen  adfectus  fatebuntur,  si  aliter  ob-
tineri  vera  et  iusta  et  in  commune  profutura  non

8  possint.  Ceterum  illud  constitit  inter  omnes,  etiam
in  aliis  partibus  actionis,  si  multiplex  causa  sit  et
pluribus  argumentis  defensa,  utiliter  avaK€<j)a\aiQ)<riv
fieri  solere,  sicut  nemo  dubitaverit  multas  esse  cau-
sas,  in  quibus  nullo  loco  sit  necessaria,  si  breves  et
simplices  fuerint.  Haec  pars  perorationis  accusatori
patronoque  ex  aequo  communis  est.

9  Adfectibus  quoque  iisdem  fere  utuntur,  sed  aliis
hie,  aliis 1  ille  saepius  ac  magis,  nam  huic  concitare
iudices,  illi  flectere  convenit.  Verum  et  accusator
habet  interim  lacrimas  ex  miseratione  eius  rei  quam
ulciscitur ;  et  reus  de  indignitate  calumniae  aut  con-

1  aliis,  Spalding :  aut,  A  G.

1  Athenaeus  (xiii.  6,  590  e)  states  that  a  law  against
appeals  to  the  emotions  was  passed  at  Athens  after  Hype-
xides'  defence  of  Phryne  (see  n.  xv.  9.).  But  there  is  no  real
evidence  for  the  existence  of  such  a  law  save  in  cases  tried
before  the  Areopagus  (see  Arist.  Bhet.  I.  i.  5).  Appeals  for
pity  were  as  freely  employed  in  the  ordinary  courts  of
Athens  during  the  fourth  century  as  at  Rome.  When  Xeno-
phon  {Mem.  iv.  iv.  4)  says  that  Socrates  refused  to  beg
mercy  of  his  judges  contrary  to  the  law,  he  seems  to  refer
to  the  spirit,  not  the  letter.

386


BOOK VI.  i.  7-9

imagine  that  the  reason  why  the  Athenians  did  so
was  that  appeals  to  the  emotions  were  forbidden  to
Athenian  orators,  a  proclamation  to  this  effect  being
actually  made  by  the  court-usher.1  I  am  less  sur-
prised at  the  philosophers  taking  this  view,  for  they
regard  susceptibility  to  emotion  as  a  vice,  and  think
it  immoral  that  the  judge  should  be  distracted  from
the  truth  by  an  appeal  to  his  emotions  and  that
it  is  unbecoming  for  a  good  man  to  make  use  of
vicious  procedure  to  serve  his  ends.  None  the  less
they  must  admit  that  appeals  to  emotion  are  neces-
sary if  there  are  no  other  means  for  securing  the
victory  of  truth,  justice  and  the  public  interest.  It
is  however  admitted  by  all  that  recapitulation  may
be  profitably  employed  in  other  portions  of  the
speech  as  well,  if  the  case  is  complicated  and  a
number  of  different  arguments  have  been  employed
in  the  defence ;  though  no  one  will  doubt  but  that
there  are  many  cases,  in  which  no  recapitulation  at
all  is  necessary  at  any  point,  assuming,  that  is,  that
the  cases  are  both  brief  and  simple.  This  part  of
the  peroration  is  common  both  to  the  prosecution
and  the  defence.

Both  parties  as  a  general  rule  may  likewise  em-
ploy the  appeal  to  the  emotions,  but  they  will
appeal  to  different  emotions  and  the  defender  will
employ  such  appeals  with  greater  frequency  and
fulness.  For  the  accuser  has  to  rouse  the  judge,
while  the  defender  has  to  soften  him.  Still  even
the  accuser  will  sometimes  make  his  audience  weep
by  the  pity  excited  for  the  man  whose  wrongs  he
seeks  to  avenge,  while  the  defendant  will  at  times
develop  no  small  vehemence  when  he  complains  of
the  injustice  of  the  calumny  or  conspiracy  of  which

387


QUINTILIAN

spirationis  vehementius  interim  queritur.  Dividere
igitur  haec  officia  commodissimum,  quae  plerumque
sunt,  ut  dixi,  in  prooemio  similia,  sed  hie  liberiora  ple-

10  nioraque.  Inclinatio  enim  iudicum  ad  nos  petitur  initio
parcius,  cum  admitti  satis  est  et  oratio  tota  superest ;
in  epilogo  vero  est,  qualem  animum  iudex  in  con-
silium ferat,  et  iam  nihil  amplius  dicturi  sumus  nee

11  restat  quo  reservemus.  Est  igitur  utrisque  com-
mune, conciliare  sibi,  avertere  ab  adversario  iudicem,
concitare  adfectus  et  componere.  Et  brevissimum
quidem  hoc  praeceptum  dari  utrique  parti  potest,  ut
totas  causae  suae  vires  orator  ponat  ante  oculos ;  et
cum  viderit,  quid  invidiosum,  favorabile,  invisum,
miserabile  aut  sit  in  rebus  aut  videri  possit,  ea
dicat,  quibus,  si  iudex  esset,  ipse  maxime  moveretur.

12  Sed  certius  est  ire  per  singula.

Et  quae  concilient  quidem  accusatorem,  in  prae-
ceptis  exordii  iam  diximus.  Quaedam  tamen,  quae
illic  ostendere  sat  est,  in  peroratione  implenda  sunt
magis,  si  contra  impotentem,  invisum,  perniciosum
suscepta  causa  est,  si  iudicibus  ipsis  aut  gloriae  dam-

1  iv.  i.  27,  28.  a  iv.  i.  5  sq.

3»8


BOOK VI.  i.  9-12

he  is  the  victim.  It  will  therefore  be  best  to  treat
these  duties  separately :  as  I  have  already  said,1  they
are  much  the  same  in  the  peroration  as  in  the
exordium,  but  are  freer  and  wider  in  scope  in  the
former.  For  our  attempts  to  sway  the  judges  are  10
made  more  sparingly  at  the  commencement  of  the
speech,  when  it  is  enough  that  such  an  attempt
should  gain  admittance  and  we  have  the  whole
speech  before  us.  On  the  other  hand  in  the  per-
oration we  have  to  consider  what  the  feelings  of  the
judge  will  be  when  he  retires  to  consider  his  verdict,
for  we  shall  have  no  further  opportunity  to  say  any-
thing and  cannot  any  longer  reserve  arguments  to  be
produced  later.  It  is  therefore  the  duty  of  both  parties  1 1
to  seek  to  win  the  judge's  goodwill  and  to  divert  it
from  their  opponent,  as  also  to  excite  or  assuage  his
emotions.  And  the  following  brief  rule  may  be  laid
down  for  the  observation  of  both  parties,  that  the
orator  should  display  the  full  strength  of  his  case
before  the  eyes  of  the  judge,  and,  when  he  has  made
up  his  mind  what  points  in  his  case  actually  deserve
or  may  seem  to  deserve  to  excite  envy,  goodwill,
dislike  or  pity,  should  dwell  on  those  points  by  which
he  himself  would  be  most  moved  were  he  trying  the
case.  But  it  will  be  safer  to  discuss  these  consider-  12
ations  in  detail.

The  points  likely  to  commend  the  accuser  to  the
judge  have  already  been  stated  in  my  remarks  on
the  exordium.2  There  are  however  certain  things
which  require  fuller  treatment  in  the  peroration
than  in  the  exordium,  where  it  is  sufficient  merely  to
outline  them.  This  fuller  treatment  is  specially
required  if  the  accused  be  a  man  of  violent,  un-
popular or  dangerous  character  or  if  the  condemna-

3*9


QUINTILIAN

13  natio  rei  aut  deformitati  futura  absolutio.  Nam
egregie  in  Vatinium  Calvus,  Factum,  inquit,  ambitum
scitis  ornnes  et  hoc  vos  scire  omnes  sciunt.  Cicero  qui-
dem  in  Verrem  etiam  emendari  posse  infamiam  iudi-
ciorum  damnato  reo  dicit ;  quod  est  unum  ex  supra
dictis.  Metus  etiam,  si  est  adhibendus,  ut  faciat
idem,  hunc  habet  locum  fortiorem  quam  in  pro-
oemio. Qua  de re  quid sentirem,  alio  iam libro

14  exposui.  Concitare  quoque  invidiam,  odium,  iram,
liberius  in  peroratione  contingit;  quorum  invidiam
gratia,  odium  turpitudo,  iram  offensio  iudici  facit,  si
contumax,  arrogans,  securus  sit,  quae  non  ex  facto
modo  dictove  aliquo  sed  vultu,  habitu,  aspectu
moveri  solet.  Egregieque  nobis  adolescentibus  dix-
isse  accusator  Cossutiani  Capitonis  videbatur,  Graece
quidem, sed in hunc sensum, Erubescis Caesarem

15  timere.  Summa  tamen  concitandi  adfectus  accusa-
tori  in  hoc  est,  ut  id,  quod  obiecit,  aut  quam  atro-
cissimum  aut  etiam,  si  fieri  potest,  quam  maxime
miserabile  esse  videatur.  Atrocitas  crescit  ex  his,
quid  factum  sit,  a  quo, in quern, quo  animo,  quo

1  I.  xv.  43.  2  iv.  i.  20,  21.

3  See  Tac.  Ann.  xiii.  33. Cossutianus  was  condemned  for
extortion  in  his  province. His  accuser  is  not  known.

390


BOOK VI.  i.  12-15

tion  of  the  accused  is  likely  to  cover  the  judges  with
glory  or  his  acquittal  with  disgrace.  Calvus  for  13
example  in  his  speech  against  Vatinius  makes  an
admirable  remark:  "You  know,  gentlemen,  that
bribery  has  been  committed  and  everybody  knows
that  you  know  it."  Cicero  again  in  the  Verrines1
says  that  the  ill-name  acquired  by  the  courts  may
be  effaced  by  the  condemnation  of  Verves,  a  state-
ment that  comes  under  the  head  of  the  conciliatory
methods  mentioned  above.  The  appeal  to  fear  also,
if  it  is  necessary  to  employ  it  to  produce  a  like  effect,
occupies  a  more  prominent  place  in  the  peroration
than  in  the  exordium,  but  I  have  expressed  my  views
on  this  subject  in  an  earlier  book.2  The  peroration  14
also  provides  freer  opportunities  for  exciting  the
passions  of  jealousy,  hatred  or  anger.  As  regards  the
circumstances  likely  to  excite  such  feelings  in  the
judge,  jealousy  will  be  produced  by  the  influence  of
the  accused,  hatred  by  the  disgraceful  nature  of  his
conduct,  and  anger  by  his  disrespectful  attitude  to
the  court,  if,  for  instance,  he  be  contumacious,
arrogant  or  studiously  indifferent :  such  anger  may  be
aroused  not  merely  by  specific  acts  or  words,  but  by
his  looks,  bearing  and  manner.  In  this  connexion
the  remark  made  by  the  accuser  of  Cossutianus
Capito  3  in  my  young  days  was  regarded  with  great
approval :  the  words  used  were  Greek,  but  may  be
translated  thus: — "You  blush  to  fear  even  Caesar."
The  best  way  however  for  the  accuser  to  excite  the  15
feelings  of  the  judge  is  to  make  the  charge  which  he
brings  against  the  accused  seem  as  atrocious  or,  if
feasible,  as  deplorable  as  possible.  Its  atrocity  may
be  enhanced  by  considerations  of  the  nature  of
the  act,  the  position  of  its  author  or  the  victim,  the

391


QU1NTILIAN
tempore,  quo  loco,  quo  modo ;  quae  omnia  infinitos

16  tractatus  habent.  Pulsatum  querimur:  de  re  pri-
mum  ipsa  dicendum  ;  turn  si  senex,  si  puer,  si  magis-
trates, si  probus,  si  bene  de  re  publica  meritus ;
etiam  si  percussus  sit  a  vili  aliquo  contemptoque  vel
ex  contrario  a  potente  nimium  vel  ab  eo,  quo  minime
oportuit,  et  si  die  forte  sollemni  aut  iis  temporibus,
cum  iudicia  eius  rei  maxime  exercerentur,  aut  in
sollicito  civitatis  statu ;  item  in  theatro,  in  templo,

17  in  contione,  crescit  invidia ;  et  si  non  errore  nee  ira
vel  etiam,  si  forte  ira,  sed  iniqua,  quod  patri  adfuis-
set,  quod  respondisset,  quod  honores  contra  peteret,
et  si  plus  etiam  videri  potest  voluisse  quam  fecit.
Plurimum  tamen  adfert  atrocitatis  modus,  si  graviter,
si  contumeliose :  ut  Demosthenes  ex  parte  percussi
corporis,  ex  vultu  ferientis,  ex  habit u  invidiam  Midiae

IS  quaerit.  Occisus  utrum  ferro  an  igne  an  veneno,
uno vulnere an pluribus,  subito an  exspectatione

1  in  Mid.  72.
392


BOOK VI.  i.  15-18

purpose,  time,  place  and  manner  of  the  act :  all  of
which  may  be  treated  with  infinite  variety.  Suppose  16
that  we  are  complaining  that  our  client  has  been
beaten.  We  must  first  speak  of  the  act  itself;  we
shall  then  proceed  to  point  out  that  the  victim  was
an  old  man,  a  child,  a  magistrate,  an  honest  man  or
a  benefactor  to  the  state ;  we  shall  also  point  out
that  the  assailant  was  a  worthless  and  contemptible
fellow,  or  (to  take  the  opposite  case)  was  in  a
position  of  excessive  power  or  was  the  last  man  who
should  have  given  the  blow,  or  again  that  the
occasion  was  a  solemn  festival,  or  that  the  act  was
committed  at  a  time  when  such  crimes  were
punished  with  special  severity  by  the  courts  or  when
public  order  was  at  a  dangerously  low  ebb.  Again
the  hatred  excited  by  the  act  will  be  enhanced  if  it
was  committed  in  the  theatre,  in  a  temple,  or  at
a  public  assembly,  and  if  the  blow  was  given  not  17
in  mistake  or  in  a  moment  of  passion  or,  if  it
was  the  result  of  passion  which  was  quite  un-
justifiable, being  due  to  the  fact  that  the  victim
had  gone  to  the  assistance  of  his  father  or  had
made  some  reply  or  was  a  candidate  for  the  same
office  as  his  assailant;  or  finally  we  may  hint  that
he  wished  to  inflict  more  serious  injury  than  he
succeeded  in  inflicting.  But  it  is  the  manner  of  the
act  that  contributes  most  to  the  impression  of  its
atrocity,  if,  for  example,  the  blow  was  violent  or  in-
sulting :  thus  Demosthenes  l  seeks  to  excite  hatred
against  Midias  by  emphasising  the  position  of  the
blow,  the  attitude  of  the  assailant  and  the  expression
of  his  face.  It  is  in  this  connexion  that  we  shall  18
have  to  consider  whether  a  man  was  killed  by  sword
or fire or  poison, by  one  wound  or  several,  and

393


QUINTILIAN

tortus,  ad  hanc  partem  maxime  pertinet.  Utitur
frequenter  accusator  et  miseratione,  cum  aut  eius
casum,  quern  ulciscitur,  aut  liberorum  ac  parentium

19  solitudinem  conqueritur.  Etiam  futuri  temporis
imagine  iudices  movet,  quae  maneant  eos,  qui  de  vi
et  iniuria  questi  sunt,  nisi  vindicentur ;  fugiendum
de  civitate,  cedendum  bonis  aut  omnia,  quaecunque

20  inimicus  fecerit,  perferenda.  Sed  saepius  id  est
accusatoris,  avertere  iudicem  a  miseratione,  qua  reus
sit  usurus,  atque  ad  fortiter  iudicandum  concitare.
Cuius  loci  est  etiam  Occupare,  quae  dicturum  factu-
rumve  adversarium  putes.  Nam  et  cautiores  ad
custodiam  suae  religionis  iudices  facit  et  gratiam
responsuris  aufert,  cum  ea  quae  dicta  sunt  ab  accusa-
tore  iam,  si  pro  reo  repetentur,  non  sint  nova :  ut
Servium  Sulpicium  Messala  contra  Aufidiam,  ne  signa-
torum,  ne  ipsius  discrimen  obiiciatur  sibi,  praemonet.
Nee  non  ab  Aeschine,  quali  sit  usurus  Demosthenes
actione,  praedictum  est.  Docendi  quoque  interim
iudices,  quid  rogantibus  respondere  debeant ;  quod
est  unum  repetitionis  genus.

21  Periclitantem  vero  commendat  dignitas  et  studia


1  cp.  iv.  ii.  106. See  note  prefixed  to  Index.

2  in  Cub.  207.


394


BOOK VI.  i.  18-21

whether  he  was  slain  on  the  spot  or  tortured  by
being  kept  in  suspense.  The  accuser  will  also
frequently  attempt  to  excite  pity  by  complaining  of
the  fate  of  the  man  whom  he  is  seeking  to  avenge  or
of  the  desolation  which  has  fallen  upon  his  children
or  parents.  The  judges  may  also  be  moved  by  draw-  19
ing  a  picture  of  the  future,  of  the  fate  which  awaits
those  who  have  complained  of  violence  and  wrong,
if  they  fail  to  secure  justice.  They  must  go  into  exile,
give  up  their  property  or  endure  to  the  end  what-
ever their  enemy  may  choose  to  inflict  upon  them.
But  it  will  more  frequently  be  the  duty  of  the  20
accuser  to  divert  the  judge  from  all  the  temptations
to  pity  which  the  accused  will  place  before  him,  and
to  incite  him  to  give  a  strong  and  dispassionate
verdict.  It  will  also  be  his  duty  in  this  connexion
to  forestall  the  arguments  and  actions  to  which  his
opponent  seems  likely  to  have  recourse.  For  it
makes  the  judge  more  cautious  in  observing  the
sanctity  of  his  oath  and  destroys  the  influence  of
those  who  are  going  to  reply  to  us  when  the  argu-
ments used  by  the  defence  have  already  been  dealt
with  by  the  prosecution,  since  they  lose  their  novelty.
An  instance  of  this  will  be  found  in  the  speech  of
Messala  against  Aufidia,1  where  he  warns  Servius
Sulpicius  not  to  talk  about  the  peril  which
threatens  the  signatories  to  the  document  and  the
defendant  herself.  Again  Aeschines2  foretells  the
line  of  defence  which  Demosthenes  will  pursue.
There  are  also  occasions  when  the  judges  should  be
told  what  answer  they  should  make  to  requests  on
behalf  of  the  accused,  a  proceeding  which  is  a  form
of  recapitulation.

If  we  turn  to  the  defendant,  we  must  note  that  21

395


QUINT1LIAN

fortia  et  susceptae  bello  cicatrices  et  nobilitas  et
merita  maiorum.  Hoc,  quod  proxime  dixi,  Cicero
atque  Asinius  certatim  sunt  usi,  pro  Scauro  patre  hie

22  ille  pro  filio.  Commendat  et  causa  periculi,  si  sus-
cepisse  inimicitias  ob  aliquod  factum  honestum
videtur;  praecipue  bonitas,  humanitas,  misericordia.
Iustius  enim  tunc  petere  ea  quisque  videtur  a  iudice,
quae  aliis  ipse  praestiterit.  Referenda  pars  haec
quoque  ad  utilitatem  rei  publicae,  ad  iudicum  gloriam,

23  ad  exemplum,  ad  memoriam  posteritatis.  Plurimum
tamen  valet  miseratio,  quae  iudicem  non  flecti  tantum
cogit,  sed  motum  quoque  animi  sui  lacrimis  confiteri.
Haec  petentur  aut  ex  iis,  quae  passus  est  reus,  aut  iis
quae  cum  maxime  patitur,  aut  iis  quae  damnatum
manent ;  quae  et  ipsa  duplicantur,  cum  dicimus  ex

24  qua  illi  fortuna  et  in  quam  recidendum  sit.  Adfert
in  his  momentum  et  aetas  et  sexus  et  pignora ;  liberi,
dico,  et  parentes  et  propinqui. Quae  omnia  tractari

1  Sec  iv.  i.  69.
396


BOOK VI.  i.  21-24

his  worth,  nis  manly  pursuits,  the  scars  from  wounds
received  in  battle,  his  rank  and  the  services  rendered
by  his  ancestors,  will  all  commend  him  to  the  good-
will of  the  judges.  Cicero,1  as  I  have  already  pointed
out,  and  Asinius  both  make  use  of  this  form  of
appeal  :  indeed  they  may  almost  be  regarded  as
rivals  in  this  respect,  since  Cicero  employed  it  when
defending  the  elder  Scaurus,  Asinius  when  defend-
ing the  son.  Again,  the  cause  which  has  brought  22
the  accused  into  peril  may  serve  to  produce  the
same  effect,  if,  for  example,  it  appears  that  he  has
incurred  enmity  on  account  of  some  honourable
action  :  above  all  his  goodness,  humanity  or  pity
may  be  emphasised  with  this  end  in  view.  For  it
adds  to  the  apparent  justice  of  his  claim,  if  all  that
he  asks  of  the  judge  is  that  he  should  grant  to  him
what  he  himself  has  granted  to  others.  We  may
also  in  this  connexion  lay  stress  on  the  interests  of
the  state,  the  glory  which  will  accrue  to  the  judges,
the  importance  of  the  precedent  which  their  verdict
will  set  and  the  place  it  will  hold  in  the  memory  of
after  generations.  But  the  appeal  which  will  carry  23
most  weight  is  the  appeal  to  pity,  which  not  merely
forces  the  judge  to  change  his  views,  but  even  to
betray  his  emotion  by  tears.  Such  appeals  to  pity
will  be  based  either  on  the  previous  or  present
sufferings  of  the  accused,  or  on  those  which  await
him  if  condemned.  And  the  force  of  our  appeal  will
be  doubled  if  we  contrast  the  fortune  which  he  now
enjoys  with  that  to  which  he  will  be  reduced,  if  he
fail.  In  this  connexion  great  play  may  be  made  by  24
reference  to  the  age  and  sex  of  the  accused,  or  to
his  nearest  and  dearest,  that  is,  his  children,  parents
and kindred, all of  which topics are treated in

397


QUINTILIAN

varie  solent.  Nonnunquam  etiam  ipse  patronus  has
partes  subit,  ut  Cicero  pro  Mil  one,  0  me  miserum  !  o
ie  infelicem  !  Revocare  me  tu  in  patriam,  Milo,  potuisti
per  hos,  ego  te  in  pairia  per  eosdem  retinere  non  potero  ?
Maximeque,  si,  ut  tunc  accidit,  non  conveniunt  ei  qui

25  accusatur  preces.  Nam  quis  ferret  Milonem  pro
capite  suo  supplicantem,  qui  a  se  virum  nobilem
interfectum,  quia  id  fieri  oportuisset,  fateretur?
Ergo  et  illi  captavit  ex  ipsa  praestantia  animi  favorem
et  in  locum  lacrimarum  eius  ipse  successit.

His  praecipue  locis  utiles  sunt  prosopopoeiae,  id
est  fictae  alienarum  personarum  orationes,  quales
litigatorum  ore  dicit  patronus.  Nudae  tantum  res
movent; at  cum  ipsos  loqui  fingimus,  ex  personis

26  quoque  trahitur  adfectus.  Non  enim  audire  iudex
videtur  aliena  mala  deflentis,  sed  sensum  ac  vocem
auribus  accipere  miserorum,  quorum  etiam  mutus
aspectus  lacrimas  movet ;  quantoque  essent  misera-
biliora,  si  ea  dicerent  ipsi,  tanto  sunt  quadam  portione
ad adficiendum  potentiora,  cum  velut  ipsorum  ore

1  xxxvii.  102.
39»


BOOK VI.  i.  24-26

different  ways.  Sometimes  the  advocate  himself  may
even  assume  the  role  of  close  intimacy  with  his
client,  as  Cicero  does  in  the  pro  Milone,1  where  he
cries  :  "  Alas,  unhappy  that  I  am !  Alas,  my  unfor-
tunate friend !  You  succeeded  by  the  agency  of
those  who  are  now  your  judges  in  recalling  me  to
my  native  land,  and  cannot  I  through  the  same
agency  retain  you  in  yours  ?"  Such  a  method  is
especially  serviceable  when,  as  was  the  case  with
Milo,  entreaty  is  not  in  keeping  with  the  character
of  the  accused.  Who  would  have  endured  to  hear  25
Milo  pleading  for  his  life,  when  he  admitted  that
he  had  killed  a  man  of  noble  birth  because  it  was
his  duty  to  do  so?  Consequently  Cicero  sought  to
win  the  judges'  goodwill  for  Milo  by  emphasising
the  staunchness  of  his  character,  and  himself  assumed
the  role  of  suppliant.

Impersonation  may  also  be  employed  with  profit
in  such  passages,  and  by  impersonations  I  mean
fictitious  speeches  supposed  to  be  uttered,  such  as
an  advocate  puts  into  the  mouth  of  his  client.  The
bare  facts  are  no  doubt  moving  in  themselves ;  but
when  we  pretend  that  the  persons  concerned  them-
selves are  speaking,  the  personal  note  adds  to  the
emotional  effect.  For  then  the  judge  seems  no  26
longer  to  be  listening  to  a  voice  bewailing  another's
ills,  but  to  hear  the  voice  and  feelings  of  the  unhappy
victims,  men  whose  appearance  alone  would  call
forth  his  tears  even  though  they  uttered  never  a
word.  And  as  their  plea  would  awaken  yet  greater
pity  if  they  urged  it  with  their  own  lips,  so  it  is
rendered  to  some  extent  all  the  more  effective  when
it  is,  as  it  were,  put  into  their  mouth  by  their
advocate:  we  may  draw  a  parallel  from  the  stage,

399


QUINTILIAN

dicuntur,  ut  scenicis  actoribus  eadem  vox  eademque
pronuntiatio  plus  ad  movendos  adfectus  sub  persona

27  valet.  Itaque  idem  Cicero,  quanquam  preces  non
dat  Miloni,  eumque  potius  animi  praestantia  com-
mendat,  accommodavit  tamen  ei  verba,  convenientes
etiam  forti  viro  conquestiones :  Frustra,  inquit,  met
suscepti  labores  !  0  spesfallaces!  0  cogitationes  inanes
meas  !

Nunquam  tamen  debet  esse  longa  miseratio,  nee
sine  causa  dictum  est,  nihil  facilius  quam  lacrimas

28  inarescere.  Nam  cum  etiam  veros  dolores  mitiget
tempus,  citius  evanescat  necesse  est  ilia,  quam
dicendo  effinximus,  imago ;  in  qua  si  moramur,  lacri-
mis  fatigatur  auditor  et  requiescit  et  ab  illo,  quern

29  ceperat,  impetu  ad  rationem  redit.  Non  patiamur
igitur  frigescere  hoc  opus,  et  adfectum,  cum  ad  sum.
mum  perduxerimus,  relinquamus  nee  speremus  fore
ut  aliena  quisquam  diu  ploret.  Ideoque  cum  in  aliis
turn  maxime  in  hac  parte  debet  crescere  oratio,  quia,
quidquid  non  adiicit  prioribus,  etiam  detrahere
videtur,  et  facile  deficit  adfectus  qui  descendit.

30  Non  solum  autem  dicendo  sed  etiam  faciendo
quaedam  lacrimas  movemus,  unde  et  producere  ipsos,


1  pro  Mil.  xxxiv.  94.

2  A  quotation  from the  rhetorician Apollonius,  cp.  Cic.
de  Inv.  i.  56.

400


BOOK VI.  i.  26-30

where  the  actors  voice  and  delivery  produce  greater
emotional  effect  when  he  is  speaking  in  an  assumed
role  than  when  he  speaks  in  his  own  character.
Consequently  Cicero,  to  quote  him  once  again,  27
although  he  will  not  put  entreaties  into  Milo's
mouth,  and  prefers  to  commend  him  by  his  staunch-
ness of  character,  still  lends  him  words  in  the  form
of  such  complaint  as  may  become  a  brave  man.1
"Alas!"  he  says,  "my  labours  have  been  in  vain!
Alas  for  my  blighted  hopes !  Alas  for  my  baffled
purpose ! "

Appeals  to  pity  should,  however,  always  be  brief,
and  there  is  good  reason  for  the  saying  that  nothing
dries  so  quickly  as  tears.2  Time  assuages  even  28
genuine  grief,  and  it  is  therefore  inevitable  that  the
semblance  of  grief  portrayed  in  our  speech  should
vanish  yet  more  rapidly.  And  if  we  spend  too  much
time  over  such  portrayal  our  hearer  grows  weary  of
his  tears,  takes  a  breathing  space,  and  returns  once
more  to  the  rational  attitude  from  which  he  has
been  distracted  by  the  impulse  of  the  moment.  We  29
must  not,  therefore,  allow  the  effect  which  we  have
produced  to  fall  flat,  and  must  consequently  abandon
our  appeal  to  the  emotion  just  when  that  emotion
is  at  its  height,  nor  must  we  expect  anyone  to
weep  for  long  over  another's  ills.  For  this  reason
our  eloquence  ought  to  be  pitched  higher  in  this
portion  of  our  speech  than  in  any  other,  since,
wherever  it  fails  to  add  something  to  what  has  pre-
ceded, it  seems  even  to  diminish  its  previous  effect,
while  a  diminuendo  is  merely  a  step  towards  the
rapid  disappearance  of  the  emotion.

Actions  as  well as  words may be employed  to  30
move the court  to tears. Hence the custom of

401


QUINTILIAN

qui  periclitentur,  squalidos  atque  deformes  et  liberos
eorum  ac  parentes  institutum,  et  ab  accusatoribus
cruentum  gladium  ostendi  et  lecta  e  vulneribus  ossa
et vestes sanguine perfusas videmus, et vulnera

31  resolvi,  verberata  corpora  nudari.  Quarum  rerum
ingens  plerumque  vis  est  velut  in  rem  praesentem
animos  hominum  ducentium,  ut  populum  Roman um
egit  in  furorem  praetexta  C.  Caesaris  praelata  in
funere  cruenta.  Sciebat  interfectum  eum,  corpus
denique  ipsum  impositum  lecto  erat,  at  vestis  tamen
ilia  sanguine  madens  ita  repraesentavit  imaginem
seel er is,  ut  non  occisus  esse  Caesar  sed  turn  maxime

32  occidi  videretur.  Sed  non  ideo  probaverim,  quod  fac-
tum et  lego  et  ipse  aliquando  vidi,  depictam  in  tabula
sipariove1  imaginem  rei,  cuius  atrocitate  iudex  erat
commovendus.  Quae  enim  est  actoris  infantia,  qui
mutam  illam  effigiem  magis  quam  orationem  pro  se

33  putet  locuturam?  At  sordes  et  squalorem  et  pro-
pinquorum  quoque  similem  habitum  scio  profuisse,
et  magnum  ad  salutem  momentum  preces  attulisse.
Quare  et  obsecratio  ilia  iudicum  per  carissima  pig-

1  sipariove,  F.  C.  Conradus:  supra  Iovem,  MSS.
402


BOOK VI.  i.  30-33

bringing  accused  persons  into  court  wearing  squalid
and  unkempt  attire,  and  of  introducing  their  children
and  parents,  and  it  is  with  this  in  view  that  we  see
blood-stained  swords,  fragments  of  bone  taken  from
the  wound,  and  garments  spotted  with  blood,  dis-
played by  the  accusers,  wounds  stripped  of  their
dressings,  and  scourged  bodies  bared  to  view.  The  31
impression  produced  by  such  exhibitions  is  generally
enormous,  since  they  seem  to  bring  the  spectators
face  to  face  with  the  cruel  facts.  For  example,  the
sight  of  the  bloodstains  on  the  purple-bordered  toga
of  Gaius  Caesar,  which  was  carried  at  the  head  of
his  funeral  procession,  aroused  the  Roman  people  to
fury.  They  knew  that  he  had  been  killed  ;  they
had  even  seen  his  body  stretched  upon  the  bier :
but  his  garment,  still  wet  with  his  blood,  brought
such  a  vivid  image  of  the  crime  before  their  minds,
that  Caesar  seemed  not  to  have  been  murdered,  but
to  be  being  murdered  before  their  very  eyes.  Still  I  32
would  not  for  this  reason  go  so  far  as  to  approve  a
practice  of  which  I  have  read,  and  which  indeed  I
have  occasionally  witnessed,  of  bringing  into  court
a  picture  of  the  crime  painted  on  wood  or  canvas,
that  the  judge  might  be  stirred  to  fury  by  the
horror  of  the  sight.  For  the  pleader  who  prefers
a  voiceless  picture  to  speak  for  him  in  place  of  his
own  eloquence  must  be  singularly  incompetent.  On  33
the  other  hand,  I  know  that  the  wearing  of  mourn-
ing and  the  presentation  of  an  unkempt  appearance,
and  the  introduction  of  relatives  similarly  arrayed,
has  proved  of  value,  and  that  entreaties  have  been
of  great  service  to  save  the  accused  from  condemna-
tion. The  practice  therefore  of  appealing  to  the
judges  by  all  that  is  near  and  dear  to  them  will  be

403


QUINTILIAN

nora,  utique  si  et  reo  sint  liberi,  coniux,  parentes,

34  utilis  erit ;  et  deorum  etiam  invocatio  velut  ex  bona
conscientia  profecta  videri  solet;  stratum  denique
iacere  et  genua  complecti,  nisi  si  tamen  persona  nos
et  anteacta  vita  et  rei  condicio  prohibebit ;  quaedam
enim  tarn  fortiter  tuenda  quam  facta  sunt.  Verum
sic  habenda  est  auctoritatis  ratio,  ne  sit  invisa  securi-

35  tas.  Fuit  quondam  inter  haec  omnia  potentissimum,
quo  L.  Murenam  Cicero  accusantibus  clarissimis  viris
eripuisse  praecipue  videtur,  persuasitque  nihil  esse
ad  praesentem  rerum  statum  utilius  quam  pridie
Kalendas  Ianuarias  ingredi  consulatum.  Quod  genus
nostris  temporibus  totum  paene  sublatum  est,  cum
omnia  curae  tutelaeque  unius  innixa  periclitari  nullo
iudicii  exitu  possint.

36  De  accusatoribus  et  reis  sum  locutus,  quia  in  peri-
culis  maxime  versatur  adfectus.  Sed  privatae  quoque
causae  utrumque  habent  perorationis  genus,  et  illud
quod  est  ex  enumeratione  probationum,  et  hoc  quod
ex  lacrimis,  si  aut  statu  periclitari  aut  opinione  liti-
gator videtur. Nam  in  parvis  quidem  litibus  has

1  i.e.  although  such  entreaties  are  effective,  they  cannot
always  be  employed.  Thus  they  would  have  been  out  of
place  in  the  case  of  Milo,  whose  character  was  such  that  it
was  necessary  to  defend  him  with  a  boldness  worthy  of  the
boldness  required  to  perform  the  deed  of  which  he  was
accused.  Still  we  must  not  carry  such  methods  (e.g.  such
as  Cicero  employs  on  behalf  of  Milo)  too  far.

404


BOOK VI.  i.  33-36

of  great  service  to  the  accused,  especially  if  he,  too,
has  children,  a  wife  and  parents.  Invocation  of  the  34
gods,  again,  usually  gives  the  impression  that  the
speaker  is  conscious  of  the  justice  of  his  cause,  while
it  may  produce  a  good  effect  if  the  accused  throws
himself  on  the  ground  and  embraces  the  knees  of
the  judges,  unless  his  character,  his  past  life  and
station  prohibit  a  resort  to  this  device  :  for  there  are
some  acts  which  require  to  be  defended  with  no  less
boldness  than  was  required  for  their  commission.  But
we  must  take  care  not  to  carry  matters  with  too
high  a  hand,  for  fear  of  creating  a  bad  impression
by  an  appearance  of  over-confidence.1  The  most  35
effective  of  all  such  methods  was  in  times  past  that
by  which  more  than  anything  else  Cicero  is  con-
sidered to  have  saved  Lucius  Murena2  from  the
attacks  of  his  accusers,  who  were  men  of  the  greatest
distinction.  For  he  persuaded  the  court  that  nothing
was  more  necessary  in  view  of  the  critical  position
of  affairs  than  that  Murena  should  assume  the  consul-
ship on  the  thirty-first  of  December.  This  form  of
appeal  is  now,  however,  almost  entirely  obsolete,
since  the  safety  of  the  state  is  to-day  dependent  on
the  watchful  care  of  a  single  ruler,  and  cannot  con-
ceivably be  imperilled  by  the  result  of  a  trial.

I  have  spoken  of  accusers  and  accused  because  it  36
is  in  situations  involving  danger  that  the  emotional
appeal  is  most  serviceable.  But  private  cases  also
admit  of  both  kinds  of  peroration,  namely,  that  which
consists  in  the  recapitulation  of  the  proofs  and  that
which  takes  the  form  of  an  appeal  for  pity,  the
latter  being  employed  when  the  position  or  reputa-
tion of  the  litigant  seems  to  be  in  danger. For  to

2  pro  Mur.  xxxvii.  79.

4©S


QUINTILIAN

tragoedias  movere  tale  est,  quasi  si  personam  Herculis
et  cothurnos  aptare  infantibus  velis.

37  Ne  illud  quidem  indignum  est  admonitione,  ingens
in  epilogis  meo  iudicio  verti  discrimen,  quomodo  se
dicenti,  qui  excitatur,  accommodet.  Nam  et  irnpe-
ritia  et  rusticitas  et  rigor  et  deformitas  adferunt
interim  frigus,  diligenterque  sunt  haec  actori  provi-

38  denda.  Equidem  repugnantes  eos  patrono  et  nihil
vultu  commotos  et  intempestive  renidentes l  et  facto
aliquo  vel  ipso  vultu  visum  etiam  moventes  saepe  vidi ;
praecipue  vero  cum  aliqua  velut  scenice  fiunt,  alio

39  cadunt.2  Transtulit  aliquando  patronus  puellam,
quae  soror  esse  adversarii  dicebatur  (nam  de  hoc  lis
erat),  in  adversa  subsellia,  tanquam  in  gremio  fratris
relicturus,  at  is  a  nobis  praemonitus  discesserat.
Turn  ille,  alioqui  vir  facundus,  inopinatae  rei  casu
obmutuit  et  infantem  suam  frigidissime  reportavit.

40  Alius  imaginem  mariti  pro  rea  proferre  magni  puta-
vit,  et  ea  saepius  risum  fecit.  Nam  et  ii,  quorum
officium  erat  ut  traderent  earn,  ignari,  qui  esset  tpilo-


1  renidentes,  Spalding  :  residentes,  A  O.
8  alio,  Halm  :  aliam,  alia,  alias,  AfSS


406


BOOK VI.  i.  36-40

embark  on  such  tragic  methods  in  trivial  cases  would
be  like  putting  the  mask  and  buskins  of  Hercules
on  a  small  child.

It  is  also  worth  while  pointing  out  that,  in  my  37
opinion,  the  manner  in  which  the  client  whose
sorrows  we  parade  before  the  court  conforms  his
behaviour  to  the  methods  of  his  advocate  is  of  the
utmost  importance.  For  sometimes  our  appeal  falls
flat  owing  to  the  ignorance,  rusticity,  indifference  or
uncouthness  of  our  client,  and  it  is  consequently
most  important  that  the  advocate  should  take  all
necessary  precautions  in  this  connexion.  I  have  38
often  seen  clients  whose  behaviour  was  wholly  out
of  keeping  with  the  line  adopted  by  their  counsel,
since  their  expression  showed  not  the  slightest
emotion,  while  they  displayed  a  most  unseasonable
cheerfulness  and  even  aroused  laughter  by  their
looks  or  actions ;  such  incongruity  is  especially  fre-
quent when  the  appeal  is  of  a  theatrical  character.
On  one  occasion  an  advocate  produced  a  girl  alleged  39
to  be  the  sister  of  the  opposing  party  (for  it  was  on
this  point  that  the  dispute  turned)  and  led  her
across  to  the  benches  occupied  by  his  opponents  as
though  to  leave  her  in  the  arms  of  her  brother:  1  how-
ever had  given  the  brother  timely  warning  and  he  had
left  his  seat.  The  advocate,  although  as  a  rule  an
eloquent  speaker,  was  struck  dumb  by  the  unexpected
turn  of  events  and  took  his  little  girl  back  again  in
the  tamest  possible  manner.  There  was  another  40
advocate  who  was  defending  a  woman  who  thought
to  secure  a  great  effect  by  producing  the  portrait  of
her  husband,  but  sent  the  court  into  repeated
peals  of  laughter.  For  the  persons  entrusted  with
the  duty of  handing  in  the  portrait had  no  idea

407


QUINTILIAN

gus,  quotiens  respexisset  patronus,  offerebant  palam,
et  prolata  novissime  deformitate  ipsa  (nam  senis
cadaveri  cera  x  erat  infusa)  praeteritam  quoque  ora-

41  tionis  gratiam  perdidit.  Nee  ignotum,  quid  Glyconi,
cui  Spiridion  fuit  cognomen,  acciderit.  Huic  puer,
quem  is  productum  quid  fleret  interrogabat,  a  pae-
dagogo  se  vellicari  respondit.  Sed  nihil  ilia  circa
Cepasios  Cieeronis  fabula  efticacius  ad  pericula  epi-

42  logorum.  Omnia  tamen  haec  tolerabilia  iis,  quibus
actionem  mutare  facile  est ;  at,  qui  a  stilo  non  rece-
dunt,  aut  conticescunt  ad  hos  casus  aut  frequentissime
falsa  dicunt.  Inde  est  enim,  Tendit  ad  genua  vestra
supplices  man  us,  et  Haeret  in  complexu  liberorum  miser,
et  Revocat  ecce  me,  etiamsi  nihil  horum  is,  de  quo

43  dicitur,  faciat.  Ex  scholis  haec  vitia,  in  quibus  omnia
libere  fingimus  et  impune,  quia  pro  facto  est  quidquid
voluimus ;  non  admittit  hoc  idem  Veritas,  egregieque
Cassius  dicenti  adolescentulo :  Quid  me  torvo  vultii
intueris,  Severe  ?  Non  mehercule,  inquit,  faciebam,  sed
si  sic  scripsisti,  ecce  !  et  quam  potuit  truculentissime

44  eum  aspexit. Illud  praecipue  monendum,  ne  quis

1  cadaveri  cera,  Halm:  caduca  veri,  AG.

1  pro  Cluent.  xx.  sqq. cp.  Quint,  vi.  iii.  40.
408


BOOK VI.  i.  40-44

of  the  nature  of  a  peroration  and  displayed  it  when-
ever the  advocate  looked  their  way,  and  when  at  last
it  was  produced  at  the  proper  moment  it  destroyed
all  the  good  effect  of  his  previous  eloquence  by  its
hideousness,  for  it  was  a  wax  cast  taken  from  an  old
man's  corpse.  We  are  also  familiar  with  the  story  41
of  what  happened  to  Glycon,  nicknamed  Spiridion.
He  asked  a  boy  whom  he  produced  in  court  why  he
was  crying ;  to  which  the  boy  replied,  that  his
paedagogus  was  pinching  him.  But  the  most  effective
warning  as  to  the  perils  which  beset  the  peroration
is  the  story  told  by  Cicero1  about  the  Caepasii.
But  all  these  perils  may  be  boldly  faced  by  those  42
who  have  no  difficulty  in  changing  their  line  of
pleading.  Those  however  who  cannot  get  away
from  what  they  have  written,  are  reduced  to  silence
by  such  emergencies  or  else  led  into  making  false
statements,  as  for  instance  if  an  advocate  should  say,
"He  stretches  out  suppliant  hands  to  embrace  your
knees,"  or  "The  unhappy  man  is  locked  in  the
embrace  of  his  children,' '  or  "  See  he  recalls  me  to
the  point/'  although  the  person  in  question  is  doing
none  of  these  things.  Such  faults  are  due  to  the  43
practice  of  the  schools,  where  we  are  free  to  feign
what  we  will  with  impunity,  because  we  are  at
liberty  to  invent  facts.  But  this  is  impossible  when
we  are  confronted  with  realities,  and  it  was  an
excellent  remark  that  Cassius  made  to  a  young
orator  who  said,  "Why  do  you  look  so  fiercely  at
me,  Severus  ?  "  To  which  he  replied,  "  I  was  doing
nothing  of  the  kind,  but  if  it  is  in  your  manuscript,
here  you  are  !  "  And  he  fixed  his  eyes  on  him  with
the  most  ferocious  scowl  that  he  could  muster.
There  is  one  point  which  it  is  specially  important  to  44

409


QUINTILIAN

nisi  summis  ingenii  viribus  ad  movendas  lacrimas
aggredi  audeat ;  nam  ut  est  longe  vehementissimus
hie,  cum  invaluit,  adfectus,  ita,  si  nihil  efficit,  tepet ;
quern  melius  infirmus  actor  tacitis  iudicum  eogitatio-

45  nibus  reliquisset.  Nam  et  vultus  et  vox  et  ipsa  ilia
excitati  rei  facies  ludibrio  etiam  plerumque  sunt
hominibus,  quos  non  permoverunt.  Quare  metiatur
ac  diligenter  aestimet  vires  suas  actor  et  quantum
onus  subiturus  sit  intelligat;  nihil  habet  ista  res
medium,  sed  aut  lacrimas  meretur  aut  risum.

46  Non  autem  commovere  tantum  miserationem  sed
etiam  discutere  epilogi  est  proprium  cum  oratione
continua,  quae  motos  lacrimis  iudices  ad  iustitiam
reducat,  turn  etiam  quibusdam  urbane  dictis,  quale
est  Date  puero  panem,  ne  ploret ;  et  cor pu lento  litiga-
tor^ cuius  adversarius,  item  puer,  circa  iudices  erat
ab  advocato  latus  :  Quid  faciam  ?  ego  te  baiulare  non

47  possum.  Sed  haec  tamen  non  debent  esse  mimica
Itaque  nee  ilium  probaverim,  quanquam  inter  claris-
simos  sui  temporis  oratores  fuit,  qui  pueris  in  epilo-
gum  productis  talos  iecit  in  medium,  quos  illi  diripere
coeperunt;  namque  haec  ipsa  discrirninis  sui  igno-
410


BOOK VI.  i.  44-47

remember,  that  we  should  never  attempt  to  move  our
audience  to  tears  without  drawing  on  all  the  resources
of  our  eloquence.  For  while  this  form  of  emotional
appeal  is  the  most  effective  of  all,  when  successful,
its  failure  results  in  anti-climax,  and  if  the  pleader  is
a  feeble  speaker  he  would  have  been  wiser  to  leave
the  pathos  of  the  situation  to  the  imagination  of  the
judges.  For  look  and  voice  and  even  the  expression  45
on  the  face  of  the  accused  to  which  the  attention  of
the  court  is  drawn  will  generally  awaken  laughter
where  they  fail  to  awaken  compassion.  Therefore
the  pleader  must  measure  and  make  a  careful
estimate  of  his  powers,  and  must  have  a  just  com-
prehension of  the  difficulty  of  the  task  which  he
contemplates.  For  there  is  no  halfway  house  in  such
matters  between  tears  and  laughter.

The  task  of  the  peroration  is  not  however  confined  46
to  exciting  pity  in  the  judges:  it  may  also  be  re-
quired to  dispel  the  pity  which  they  feel,  either  by
a  set  speech  designed  to  recall  them  from  their  tears
to  a  consideration  of  the  justice  of  the  case,  or  by  a
few  witticisms  such  as,  "  Give  the  boy  some  bread  to
stop  him  crying,"  or  the  remark  made  by  counsel
to  a  corpulent  client,  whose  opponent,  a  mere  child,
had  been  carried  round  the  court  by  his  advocate,
"What  am  I  to  do?  I  can't  carry  you!''  Such  47
jests  should  not  however  descend  to  buffoonery.
Consequently  I  cannot  give  my  approval  to  the
orator,  although  he  was  one  of  the  most  distin-
guished speakers  of  his  day,  who,  when  his  opponent
brought  in  some  children  to  enhance  the  effect  of
his  peroration,  threw  some  dice  among  them,  with
the  result  that  they  began  to  scramble  for  them.
For  their  childish  ignorance  of  the  perils  with  which

411


QUINTILIAN

48  rantia  potuit  esse  miserabilis ;  neque  ilium,  qui,  cum
esset  cruentus  gladius  ab  accusatore  prolatus,  quo  is
hominem  probabat  occisum,  subito  ex  subselliis  ut
territus  fugit  et,  capite  ex  parte  velato  cum  ad  agen-
dum ex  turba  prospexisset,  interrogavit,  an  iam  ille
cum  gladio  recessisset. Fecit  enim  risum,  sed  ridi-

49  cuius  fuit.  Discutiendae  tamen  oratione  eiusmodi
scenae,  egregieque  Cicero,  qui  contra  imaginem
Saturnini  pro  Rabirio  graviter  et  contra  iuvenem,
cuius  subinde  vulnus  in  iudicio  resolvebatur,  pro
Vareno  multa  dixit  urbane.

50  Sunt  et  illi  leniores  epilogi,  quibus  adversario
satisfacimus,  si  forte  sit  eius  persona  talis,  ut  illi
debeatur  reverentia,  aut  cum  amice  aliquid  commo-
nemus  et  ad  concordiam  hortamur.  Quod  est  genus
egregie  tractatum  a  Passieno,  cum  Domitiae  uxoris
suae  pecuniaria  lite  adversus  fratrem  eius  Ahenobar-
bum  ageret ;  nam,  cum  de  necessitudine  multa  dix-
isset,  de  fortuna  quoque,  qua  uterque  abundabat,
adiecit :  Nihil  vobis  minus  deest,  quam  de  quo  conten-
ditis.

51  Omnes autem hos adfe.tus, etiamsi quibusdam

1cp.  pro  Rab.  ix.  24.

4T2


BOOK VI.  i.  47-si

they  were  threatened  might  in  itself  have  awakened
compassion.  For  the  same  reason  I  cannot  commend  48
the  advocate  who.  when  his  opponent  the  accuser
produced  a  bloodstained  sword  in  court, fled  suddenly
from  the  benches  as  though  in  an  agony  of  terror,
and  then,  when  his  turn  came  to  plead,  peeped  out
of  the  crowd  with  his  head  half  covered  by  his  robe
and  asked  whether  the  man  with  the  sword  had
gone  away.  For  though  he  caused  a  laugh,  he  made
himself  ridiculous.  Still,  theatrical  effects  of  the  49
kind  we  are  discussing  can  be  dispelled  by  the
power  of  eloquence.  Cicero  provides  most  admirable
examples  of  the  way  in  which  this  may  be  done  both
in  the  pro  liabirio l  where  he  attacks  the  production
in  court  of  the  portrait  of  Saturninus  in  the  most
dignified  language,  and  in  the  pro  Vareno  where  he
launches  a  number  of  witticisms  against  a  youth
whose  wound  had  been  unbound  at  intervals  in  the
course  of  the  trial.

There  are  also  milder  kinds  of  peroration  in  which,  50
if  our  opponent  is  of  such  a  character  that  he  de-
serves to  be  treated  with  respect,  we  strive  to
ingratiate  ourselves  with  him  or  give  him  some
friendly  warning  or  urge  him  to  regard  us  as  his
friends.  This  method  was  admirably  employed  by
Passienus  when  he  pleaded  in  a  suit  brought  by  his
wife  Domitia  against  her  brother  Ahenobarbus  for
the  recovery  of  a  sum  of  money :  he  began  by
making  a  number  of  remarks  about  the  relationship
of  the  two  parties  and  then,  referring  to  their
wealth,  which  was  in  both  cases  enormous,  added,
u  There  is  nothing  either  of  you  need  less  than  the
subject  of  this  dispute."

All  these  appeals  to  emotion,  although  some  hold  51

413


QUINTILIAN

videntur  in  prooemio  atque  in  epilogo  sedem  habere,
in  quibus  sane  sint  frequent issimi,  tamen  aliae  quo-
que  partes  recipiunt,  sed  breviores,  ut  cum  ex  iis
plurima  sint  reservanda.1 At  hie,  si  usquam,  totos

52  eloquentiae  aperire  fontes  licet.  Nam  et,  si  bene
diximus  reliqua,  possidebimus  iam  iudicum  animos,
et  e  confragosis  atque  asperis  evecti  tota  pandere
possumus  vela,  et,  cum  sit  maxima  pars  epilogi
amplificatio,  verbis  atque  sententiis  uti  licet  magni-
ficis  et  ornatis.  Tunc  est  commovendum  theatrum»
cum  ventum  est  ad  ipsum  illud,  quo  veteres  tragoe-
diae  comoediaeque  cluduntur,  Plodite.

53  In  aliis  autem  partibus  tractandus  erit  adfectus,
ut  quisque  nascetur,  nam  neque  exponi  sine  hoc  res
atroces  et  miserabiles  debent ;  cum  de  qualitate
alicuius  rei  quaestio  est,  probationibus  uniuscui usque

54  rei  recte  subiungitur.  Ubi  vero  coniunctam  ex  pluri-
bus  causam  agimus,  etiam  necesse  erit  uti  pluribus
quasi  epilogis,  ut  in  Verrem  Cicero  fecit.  Nam  et
Philodamo  et  nauarchis  et  cruci  civis  Romani  et  aliis

55  -plurimis  suas  lacrimas  dedit. Sunt,  qui  hos  fxepiKovs

c7rt\oyov5  vocent,  quo  partitam  perorationem  signi-

1  sint  reservanda,  Early  editors  :  sit  res  eruenda,  MSS.
414


BOOK VI.  i.  51-55

that  they  should  be  confined  to  the  exordium  and
the  peroration,  which  are,  I  admit,  the  places  where
they  are  most  often  used,  may  be  employed  in  other
portions  of  the  speech  as  well,  but  more  briefly,  since
most  of  them  must  be  reserved  for  the  opening  or
the  close.  But  it  is  in  the  peroration,  if  anywhere,
that  we  must  let  loose  the  whole  torrent  of  our
eloquence.  For,  if  we  have  spoken  well  in  the  rest  52
of  our  speech,  we  shall  now  have  the  judges  on  our
side,  and  shall  be  in  a  position,  now  that  we  have
emerged  from  the  reefs  and  shoals,  to  spread  all  our
canvas,  while  since  the  chief  task  of  the  peroration
consists  of  amplification,  we  may  legitimately  make
free  use  of  words  and  reflexions  that  are  magnificent
and  ornate.  It  is  at  the  close  of  our  drama  that  we
must  really  stir  the  theatre,  when  we  have  reached
the  place  for  the  phrase  with  which  the  old  tragedies
and  comedies  used  to  end,  "Friends,  give  us  your
applause."

In  other  portions  of  the  speech  we  must  appeal  53
to  the  emotions  as  occasion  may  arise. For  it  would
clearly  be  wrong  to  set  forth  facts  calling  for  horror
and pity  without  any such appeal,  while, if  the
question  arises  as  to  the  quality  of  any  fact,  such
an  appeal  may  justifiably  be  subjoined  to  the  proofs
of  the  fact  in  question. When  we  are  pleading  a  54
complicated case  which  is  really  made  up  of  several
cases,  it  will  be  necessary  to  introduce  a  number  of
passages  resembling perorations,  as  Cicero  does  in
the  Verrines,  where  he  laments  over  Philodamus,  the
ships'  captains,  the  crucifixion  of  the  Roman  citizen,
and  a  number  of  other  tragic  incidents. Some  call  55
these  pepiKol  liriXoyoiy  by  which  they  mean  a  perora-
tion distributed  among  different  portions  of  a  speech.

415


QUINTILIAN

ficant.  Mihi  non  tarn  partes  eius  quam  species
videntur,  siquidem  et  epilogi  et  perorationis  nomina
ipsa  aperte  satis  ostendunt,  hanc  esse  consumma-
tionem  orationis.

II.  Quamvis  autem  pars  haec  iudicialium  causarum
summa  praecipueque  constet  adfectibus,  et  aliqua  de
iis  necessario  dixerim,  non  tamen  potui  ac  ne  debui
quidem  istum  locum  in  unam  speciem  concludere.
Quare  adhuc  opus  superest,  cum  ad  obtinenda  quae
volumus  potentissimum,  turn  supradictis  multo  diffi-
cilius,  movendi  iudicum  animos  atque  in  eum  quem
volumus  habitum  formandi  et  velut  transfigurandi.

2  Qua  de  re  pauca,  quae  postulabat  materia,  sic  attigi,
ut  magis  quid  oporteret  fieri  quam  quo  id  modo  con-
sequi  possemus,  ostenderem.  Nunc  altius  omnis  rei
repetenda  ratio  est.

Nam  et  per  totam,  ut  diximus,  causam  locus  est
adfectibus,  et  eorum  non  simplex  natura  nee  in  tran-
situ  tractanda, quo  nihil adferre  maius  vis  orandi

3  potest.  Nam  cetera  forsitan  tenuis  quoque  et  an-
gusta  ingenii  vena,  si  modo  vel  doctrina  vel  usu  sit
adiuta,  generare  atque  ad  frugem  aliquam  perducere
queat; certe  sunt  semperque fuerunt  non parum

1  vi.  i.  51.
416


BOOK VI.  i.  55-n.  3

I  should  regard  them  rather  as  species  than  as  parts
of  the  peroration,  since  the  terms  epilogue  and
peroration  both  clearly  indicate  that  they  form  the
conclusion  of  a  speech.

II.  The  peroration  is  the  most  important  part  of
forensic  pleading,  and  in  the  main  consists  of  appeals
to  the  emotions,  concerning  which  I  have  conse-
quently been  forced  to  say  something.  But  I
have  not  yet  been  able  to  give  the  topic  specific
consideration  as  a  whole,  nor  should  I  have  been
justified  in  doing  so.  We  have  still,  therefore,
to  discuss  a  task  which  forms  the  most  powerful
means  of  obtaining  what  we  desire,  and  is  also
more  difficult  than  any  of  those  which  we  have
previously  considered,  namely  that  of  stirring  the
emotions  of  the  judges,  and  of  moulding  and
transforming  them  to  the  attitude  which  we
desire.  The  few  remarks  which  I  have  already  2
made  on  this  subject  were  only  such  as  were
essential  to  my  theme,  while  my  purpose  was  rather
to  show  what  ought  to  be  done  than  to  set  forth  the
manner  in  which  we  can  secure  our  aim.  I  must
now  review  the  whole  subject  in  a  more  exhaustive
fashion.

There  is  scope  for  an  appeal  to  the  emotions,  as
I  have  already  said,1  in  every  portion  of  a  speech.
Moreover  these  emotions  present  great  variety,  and
demand  more  than  cursory  treatment,  since  it  is  in
their  handling  that  the  power  of  oratory  shews  itself
at  its  highest.  Even  a  slight  and  limited  talent  may,  3
with  the  assistance  of  practice  or  learning,  perhaps
succeed  in  giving  life  to  other  departments  of  oratory,
and  in  developing  them  to  a  serviceable  extent.  At
any  rate  there  are,  and have  always been,  a  con-

417


QUINTILIAN

multi,  qui  satis  perite,  quae  essent  probationibus
utilia,  reperirent ;  quos  equidem  non  contemno,  sed
hactenus  utiles  credo,  ne  quid  per  eos  iudici  sit
ignotum,  atque  (ut  dieam,  quod  sentio)  dignos,  a
quibus  causam  diserti  docerentur.  Qui  vero  iudicem
rapere  et,  in  quern  vellet  habitum  animi,  posset  per-
ducere, quo  dicente 1  flendum  irascendumve  esset,

4  rarus  fuit.  Atqui  hoc  est  quod  dominetur  in  iudi-
ciis,  haec  eloquentia  regnat.2  Namque  argumenta
plerumque  nascuntur  ex  causa,  et  pro  meliore  parte
plura  sunt  semper,  ut,  qui  per  haec  vicit,  tantuni  non

5  defuisse  sibi  advocatum  sciat.  Ubi  vero  animis  iudi-
cum  vis  adferenda  est  et  ab  ipsa  veri  conternplatione
abducenda  mens,  ibi  proprium  oratoris  opus  est.
Hoc  non  docet  litigator,  hoc  causarum  libellis  non
continetur.  Probationes  enim  efficiant  sane  ut  cau-
sam nostram  meliorem  esse  iudices  putent,  adfectus
praestant  ut  etiam  velint ;  sed  id  quod  volunt  cre-

6  dunt  quoque.  Nam  cum  irasci,  favere,  odisse,  mise-
reri  coeperunt,  agi  iam  rem  suam  existimant ;  et,
sicut  amantes  de  forma  iudicare  non  possunt,  quia


1  dicente,  Spalding :  dicto,  MSS.

8  eloquentia  regnat,  Halm  :  eloquentiam  regunt,  MSS.


418


BOOK VI.  n.  3-6

siderable  number  of  pleaders  capable  of  discovering
arguments  adequate  to  prove  their  points.  I  am  far
from  despising  such,  but  I  consider  that  their  utility
is  restricted  to  providing  the  judge  with  such  facts
as  it  is  necessary  for  him  to  know,  and,  to  be  quite
frank,  I  regard  them  merely  as  suitable  persons  to
instruct  pleaders  of  real  eloquence  in  the  facts  of
a  case.  But  few  indeed  are  those  orators  who  can
sweep  the  judge  with  them,  lead  him  to  adopt
that  attitude  of  mind  which  they  desire,  and  compel
him  to  weep  with  them  or  share  their  anger.  And
yet  it  is  this  emotional  power  that  dominates
the  court,  it  is  this  form  of  eloquence  that  is  the
queen  of  all.  For  as  a  rule  arguments  arise  out  of
the  case  itself,  and  the  better  cause  has  always  the
larger  number  to  support  it,  so  that  the  party  who
wins  by  means  of  them  will  have  no  further  satisfac-
tion than  that  of  knowing  that  his  advocate  did  not
fail  him.  But  the  peculiar  task  of  the  orator  arises
when  the  minds  of  the  judges  require  force  to  move
them,  and  their  thoughts  have  actually  to  be  led  away
from  the  contemplation  of  the  truth.  No  instruction
from  the  litigant  can  secure  this,  nor  can  such  power
be  acquired  merely  by  the  study  of  a  brief.  Proofs,  it
is  true,  may  induce  the  judges  to  regard  our  case
as  superior  to  that  of  our  opponent,  but  the  appeal
to  the  emotions  will  do  more,  for  it  will  make  them
wish  our  case  to  be  the  better.  And  what  they
wish,  they  will  also  believe.  For  as  soon  as  they
begin  to  be  angry,  to  feel  favourably  disposed,  to
hate  or  pity,  they  begin  to  take  a  personal  interest
in  the  case,  and  just  as  lovers  are  incapable  of
forming  a  reasoned  judgment  on  the  beauty  of  the
object  of  their  affections,  because  passion  forestalls

419


QUINTILIAN

sensum  oculorum  praecipit  animus,  ita  omnem  veri-
tatis  inquirendae  rationem  iudex  omittit  occupatus
adfectibus ;  aestu  fertur  et  velut  rapido  flumini  obse-

7  quitur.  Ita  argumenta  ac  testes  quid  egerint,  pro-
nuntiatio  ostendit ;  commotus  autem  ab  oratore
iudex,  quid  sentiat,  sedens  adliuc  atque  audiens
confitetur.  An  cum  ille,  qui  plerisque  peroratio-
nibus  petitur,  fletus  erumpit,  non  palam  dicta  sen-
tentia  est?  Hue  igitur  incumbat  orator,  hoc  opus,
hie  labor  est,  sine  quo  cetera  nuda,  ieiuna,  infirma,
ingrata  sint ;  adeo  velut  spiritus  operis  huius  atque
animus  est  in  adfectibus.

8  Horum  autem,  sicut  antiquitus  traditum  accepi-
mus,  duae  sunt  species  :  alteram  Graeci  iraOoq  vocant,
quod  nos  vertentes  recte  ac  proprie  adfectum  dici-
mus,  alteram  rjOos,  cuius  nomine,  ut  ego  quidem
sentio,  caret  sermo  Romanus ;  mores  appellantur,
atque  inde  pars  quoque  ilia  philosophiae  tjOlktj  moralis

9  est  dicta.  Sed  ipsam  rei  naturam  spectanti  mihi
non  tarn  mores  significari  videntur  quam  morum
quaedam  proprietas  ;  nam  ipsis  quidem  omnis  habitus
mentis  continetur.  Cautiores  voluntatem  complecti
quam  nomina  interpretari  maluerunt. Adfectus  igi-

1  Aen.  vi.  128.
420


BOOK VI.  ii.  6-9

the  sense  of  sight,  so  the  judge,  when  overcome  by
his  emotions,  abandons  all  attempt  to  enquire  into
the  truth  of  the  arguments,  is  swept  along  by  the
tide  of  passion,  and  yields  himself  unquestioning  to
the  torrent.  Thus  the  verdict  of  the  court  shows  7
how  much  weight  has  been  carried  by  the  arguments
and  the  evidence;  but  when  the  judge  has  been
really  moved  by  the  orator  he  reveals  his  feelings
while  he  is  still  sitting  and  listening  to  the  case.
When  those  tears,  which  are  the  aim  of  most  perora-
tions, well  forth  from  his  eyes,  is  he  not  giving  his
verdict  for  all  to  see  ?  It  is  to  this,  therefore,  that
the  orator  must  devote  all  his  powers,

«  There  lie  the  task  and  toil !  "  1

Without  this  all  else  is  bare  and  meagre,  weak  and
devoid  of  charm.  For  it  is  in  its  power  over  the
emotions  that  the  life  and  soul  of  oratory  is  to  be
found.

Emotions  however,  as  we  learn  from  ancient  I
authorities,  fall  into  two  classes ;  the  one  is  called
pathos  by  the  Greeks  and  is  rightly  and  correctly  ex-
pressed in  Latin  by  adfectus  (emotion)  :  the  other  is
called  ethos,  a  word  for  which  in  my  opinion  Latin  has
no  equivalent :  it  is  however  rendered  by  mores  (morals)
and  consequently  the  branch  of  philosophy  known  as
ethics  is  styled  moral  philosophy  by  us.  Buc  close  *
consideration  of  the  nature  of  the  subject  leads  me
to  think  that  in  this  connexion  it  is  not  so  much
morals  in  general  that  is  meant  as  certain  peculiar
aspects  ;  for  the  term  morals  includes  every  attitude
of  the  mind.  The  more  cautious  writers  have  pre-
ferred to  give  the  sense  of  the  term  rather  than  to
translate  it  into  Latin. They  therefore  explain  pathos

421


QUINTILIAN

tur  wdOos  concitatos,  rjOos1  mites  atque  compositos  esse
dixerunt ;  in  altero  vehementer  commotos,  in  altero
lenes ;  denique  hos  imperare,  illos  persuadere ;  hos
ad  perturbationem,  illos  ad  benivolentiam  praevalere.

10  Adiiciunt  quidam  rj6os  perpetuum,2  7ru0os  temporale
esse.  Quod  ut  accidere  frequentius  fateor,  ita  non-
nullas  credo  esse  materias,  quae  continuum  desi-
derent  adfectum.  Nee  tamen  minus  artis  aut  usus
hi  leniores  habent,  virium  atque  impetus  non  tan-
tundem  exigunt.  In  causis  vero  etiam  pluribus
versantur,  immo  secundum  quendam  intellectum  in

11  omnibus.  Nam  cum  ex  illo  ethico3  loco  nihil  non
ab  oratore  tractetur,  quidquid  de  honestis  et  utilibus,
denique  faciendis  et  non  faciendis  dicitur,  rjOos  vocari
potest.  Quidam  commendationem  atque  excusatio-
nem  propria  huius  officii  putaverunt,  nee  abnuo  esse
ista  in  hac  parte ; sed  non  concedo ut sola  sint.

12  Quin  illud  ad  hue  adiicio,  ira$o$  atque  rjOos  esse  inte-
rim ex  eadem  natura,  ita  ut  illud  maius  sit,  hoc
minus,  ut  amor  -rrdOos,  caritas  rjOos ;  interdum  diversa
inter  se,  sicut  in  epilogis,  nam  quae  irados  concitavit,
YjOos  solet  mitigare.  Proprie  tamen  mihi  huius  no-
minis  exprimenda  natura  est,  quatenus  appellatione

13  ipsa  non  satis  significari  videtur.  *H0os,  quod  in-
telligimus  quodque  a  dicentibus  desideramus,  id  erit,
quod  ante  omnia  bonitate  commendabitur,  non  solum

1  irddos  .  .  %0os,  excerpts  of  Gassiodorus  with  alight  alter-
ation of  order :  hos  .  .  illos,  MSS.

2  ^ 0o j  perpetuum,  excerpts  of  Cassiodorus  : hoc  pertuum,
A  : aut  pertuum,  G  ;  peritorum,  codd.  dett.

*  ethico,  Halm  :  et  hoc,  MSS.

422


BOOK VI.  ii.  9-13

as  describing  the  more  violent  emotions  and  ethos  as
designating  those  which  are  calm  and  gentle  :  in  the
one  case  the  passions  are  violent,  in  the  other  sub-
dued, the  former  command  and  disturb,  the  latter
persuade  and  induce  a  feeling  of  goodwill.  Some  10
add  that  ethos  is  continuous,  while  pathos  is  momen-
tary. While  admitting  that  this  is  usually  the  case,
I  still  hold  that  there  are  some  subjects  which
demand  that  the  more  violent  emotion  should  be
continuous.  But,  although  the  gentler  emotions
require  less  force  and  impetus,  they  call  for  no  less
art  and  experience  than  the  more  vehement,  and  are
demanded  in  a  greater  number  of  cases,  indeed  in  a
certain  sense  they  are  required  in  all.  For  as  every-  11
thing  treated  by  the  orator  may  be  regarded  from
the  ethical  standpoint,  we  may  apply  the  word  ethos
whenever  he  speaks  of  what  is  honourable  and  ex-
pedient or  of  what  ought  or  ought  not  to  be  done.
Some  regard  commendation  and  excuse  as  the  pecu-
liar spheres  of  ethos,  but  while  I  admit  that  they  do
fall  within  its  sphere,  I  do  not  regard  them  as  being
alone  in  so  doing.  Indeed  I  would  add  that  pathos  12
and  ethos  are  sometimes  of  the  same  nature,  differing
only  in  degree ;  love  for  instance  comes  under  the
head  of  pathos,  affection  of  ethos,  sometimes  however
they  differ,  a  distinction  which  is  important  for  the
peroration,  since  ethos  is  generally  employed  to  calm
the  storm  aroused  by  pathos.  I  ought  however  to
explain  what  is  meant  by  ethos  in  greater  detail,
since  the  term  is  not  in  itself  sufficiently  expressive
of  its  meaning.  The  ethos  which  I  have  in  my  mind  13
and  which  I  desiderate  in  an  orator  is  commended
to  our  approval  by  goodness  more  than  aught  else
and  is  not  merely  calm  and  mild,  but  in  most  cases

423


QUINTILIAN

mite  ac  placidum,  sed  plerumque  blandum  et  huma-
num  et  audientibus  amabile  atque  iucundum,  in  quo
exprimendo  summa  virtus  ea  est,  ut  flu  ere  omnia  ex
natura  rerum  hominumque  videantur  utque  mores
dicentis  ex  oratione  perluceant  et  quodammodo  ag-

14  noscantur.  Quod  est  sine  dubio  inter  coniunctas
maxime  personas,  quotiens  ferimus,  ignoscimus,
satisfacimus,  monemus,  procul  ab  ira,  procul  ab  odio.
Sed  tamen  alia  patris  adversus  filium,  tutoris  ad-
versus  pupillum,  mariti  adversus  uxorem  moderatio
est  (hi  enim  praeferunt  eorum  ipsorum,  a  quibus
laeduntur,  caritatem,  neque  alio  modo  invisos  eos
faciunt  quam  quod  amare  ipsi  videntur),  alia,  cum
senex  adolescentis  alieni  convicium,  honestus  in-
ferioris  fert ;  hie  enim  tantum  concitari,  illic  etiam

15  adfici  debet.  Sunt  et  ilia  ex  eadem  natura,  sed
motus  adhuc  minoris,  veniam  petere  adulescentiae,
defendere  amores.  Nonnunquam  etiam  lenis  caloris
alieni  derisus  ex  hac  forma  venit,  sed  his  non  ex
locis  tantum.  Verum  aliquanto  magis  propria  fuit
virtus  simulationis,  satisfaciendi  rogandi  tlpwvtia,  quae

16  diversum  ei  quod  dicit  intellectum  petit.  Hinc  etiam
424


BOOK VI.  ii.  13-16

ingratiating  and  courteous  and  such  as  to  excite
pleasure  and  affection  in  our  hearers,  while  the  chief
merit  in  its  expression  lies  in  making  it  seem  that
all  that  we  say  derives  directly  from  the  nature  of
the  facts  and  persons  concerned  and  in  the  revela-
tion of  the  character  of  the  orator  in  such  a  way  that
all  may  recognise  it.  This  kind  of  ethos  should  be  14
especially  displayed  in  cases  where  the  persons  con-
cerned are  intimately  connected,  whenever  we
tolerate  or  pardon  any  act  or  offer  satisfaction  or
admonition,  in  all  of  which  cases  there  should  be  no
trace  of  anger  or  hatred.  On  the  other  hand  the
moderation  shown  by  a  father  to  his  son,  a  guardian
to  his  ward  or  a  husband  to  his  wife  will  differ  from
that  which  is  shown  by  an  old  man  to  a  youthful
stranger  who  has  insulted  him  or  by  a  man  of  high
rank  to  his  inferior,  since  in  the  former  cases  they
emphasise  their  affection  for  the  wrongdoer  and
there  is  no  desire  to  do  anything  that  will  excite
dislike  against  them  save  by  the  manifestation  of
the  fact  that  they  still  love  them ;  while  in  the  one
case  the  offended  party  should  be  no  more  than  pro-
voked, in  the  other  he  should  be  really  deeply  moved.
Of  the  same  character,  though  less  violent,  is  the  15
emotion  to  be  shown  when  we  ask  pardon  for  the
errors  of  the  young,  or  apologise  for  some  youthful
amour.  Sometimes  again  gentle  raillery  of  another's
passion  may  derive  its  tone  from  ethos,  though  only
to  a  partial  extent.  More  closely  dependent  on  ethos
are  the  skilful  exercise  of  feigned  emotion  or  the
employment  of  irony  in  making  apologies  or  asking
questions,  irony  being  the  term  which  is  applied  to
words  which  mean  something  other  than  they  seem
to  express. From  the  same  source  springs  also  that  16

425


QUINTILIAN

ille  maior  ad  concitandum  odium  nasci  adfectus  solet,
cum  hoc  ipso,  quod  nos  adversariis  summittimus,  in-
telligitur  tacita  impotentiae  exprobratio.  Namque
eos  graves  et  intolerabiles  id  ipsum  demonstrate  quod
cedimus,  et  ignorant  cupidi  maledicendi  aut  adfecta-
tores  libertatis  plus  invidiam  quam  convicium  posse  ;
nam  invidia  adversarios,  convicium  nos  invisos  facit.

17  Ille  iam  paene  medius  adfectus  est  ex  amoribus  et  ex
desideriis  amicorum  et  necessariorum,  nam  et  hoc
maior  est  et  illo  minor.  Non  parum  significanter
etiam  ilia  in  scholis  rjOrj  dixerimus,  quibus  plerumque
rusticos,  superstitiosos,  avaros,  timidos  secundum
condicionem  propositionum  effingimus.  Nam  si  fjOrj
mores  sunt  cum  hos  imitamur,  ex  his  ducimus
oration  em.

18  Denique  rjOos1  omne  bonum  et  comem  virum
poscit.  Quas  virtutes  cum  etiam  in  litigatore  debeat
orator,  si  fieri  potest,  approbare,  utique  ipse  aut
habeat  aut  habere  credatur.  Sic  proderit  plurimum
causis,  quibus  ex  sua  bonitate  faciet  fidem.  Nam
qui,  dum  dicit,  malus  videtur,  utique  male  dicit ;  non
enim videtur iusta dicere,  alioqui rjOos videretur.

19  Quare  ipsum  etiam  dicendi  genus  in  hoc  placidum
debet  esse  ac  mite; nihil superbum,  nihil elatum

1  ?0os,  Meister :  hoc  MSS.

1  cp.  i.  ix.  3.
426


BOOK VI.  ii.  16-19

more  powerful  method  of  exciting  hatred,  when  by
a  feigned  submission  to  our  opponents  we  pass  silent
censure  on  their  violence.  For  the  very  fact  of  our
yielding  serves  to  demonstrate  their  insupportable
arrogance,  while  orators  who  have  a  passion  for  abuse
or  are  given  to  affect  freedom  of  speech  fail  to  realise
that  it  is  a  far  more  effective  course  to  make  your
antagonist  unpopular  than  to  abuse  him.  For  the
former  course  makes  our  antagonists  disliked,  the
latter  ourselves.  The  emotion  of  love  and  longing  17
for  our  friends  and  connexions  is  perhaps  of  an  inter-
mediate character,  being  stronger  than  ethos  and
weaker  than  pathos.  There  is  also  good  reason  for
giving  the  name  of  ethos  to  those  scholastic  exercises  l
in  which  we  portray  rustics,  misers,  cowards  and
superstitious  persons  according  as  our  theme  may
require.  For  if  ethos  denotes  moral  character,  our
speech  must  necessarily  be  based  on  ethos  when  it  is
engaged  in  portraying  such  character.

Finally  ethos  in  all  its  forms  requires  the  speaker  to  18
be  a  man  of  good  character  and  courtesy.  For  it  is
most  important  that  he  should  himself  possess  or  be
thought  to  possess  those  virtues  for  the  possession  of
which  it  is  his  duty,  if  possible,  to  commend  his  client
as  well,  while  the  excellence  of  his  own  character
will  make  his  pleading  all  the  more  convincing  and
will  be  of  the  utmost  service  to  the  cases  which  he
undertakes.  For  the  orator  who  gives  the  impres-
sion of  being  a  bad  man  while  he  is  speaking,  is
actually  speaking  badly,  since  his  words  seem  to  be
insincere  owing  to  the  absence  of  ethos  which  would
otherwise  have  revealed  itself.  Consequently  the  19
style  of  oratory  employed  in  such  cases  should  be
calm  and  mild  with  no  trace  of  pride,  elevation  or

427


QUINTILIAN

saltern  ac  sablime  desiderat ;  proprie,  iucunde,  cre-
dibiliter  dicere  sat  est,  ideoque  et  medius  ille  orationis
modus  maxime  convenit.

20  Diversum  est  huic,  quod  irdOos  dicitur,  quodque  nos
adfectum  proprie  vocamus ;  et,  ut  proxime  utriusque
difTerentiam  signem,  illud  comoediae,  hoc  tragoediae
magis  simile.  Haec  pars  circa  iram,  odium,  metum,  in-
vidiam, miserationem  fere  tota  versatur.  Quae  quibus
ex  locis  ducenda  sint,  et  manifestum  omnibus  et  a
nobis  in  ratione  prooemii  atque  epilogi  dictum  est.

21  Et  metum  tamen  duplicem  intelligi  volo,  quem  pati-
mur  et  quem  facimus,  et  invidiam ;  namque  altera
invidum,  altera  invidiosum  facit.  Hoc  autem  hominis,
illud  rei  est ;  in  quo  et  plus  habet  operis  oratio.  Nam
quaedam  videntur  gravia  per  se,  parricidium,  caedes,

22  veneficium  ;  quaedam  efficienda  sunt.  Id  autem  con-
tingit,  cum  magnis  alioqui  malis  gravius  esse  id  quod
passi  sumus,  ostenditur  ;  quale  est  apud  Virgilium :

0  felix  una  ante  alias  Priameia  virgo,
Hostilem  ad  lumulwm  Troiae  sub  moenibus  altis
lussa  mori —

(quam  miser  enim  casus  Andromachae,  si  comparata

1  i.e.  the  style  intermediate  between  the  restrained  (Attic)
and  the  grand  (Asiatic)  style.

2  iv.  i  and  vi.  i.  3  A  en.  iii.  321.

428


BOOK VI.  ii.  19-22

sublimity,  all  of  which  would  be  out  of  place.  It  is
enough  to  speak  appropriately,  pleasantly  and  per-
suasively, and  therefore  the  intermediate *  style  of
oratory  is  most  suitable.

The  pathos  of  the  Greeks,  which  we  correctly  20
translate  by  emotion,  is  of  a  different  character,  and
I  cannot  better  indicate  the  nature  of  the  difference
than  by  saying  that  ethos  rather  resembles  comedy
and  pathos  tragedy.  For  pathos  is  almost  entirely
concerned  with  anger,  dislike,  fear,  hatred  and  pity.
It  will  be  obvious  to  all  what  topics  are  appropriate
to  such  appeals  and  I  have  already  spoken  on  the
subject  in  discussing  the  exordium  and  the  perora-
tion.2 I  wish  however  to  point  out  that  fear  is  of  21
two  kinds,  that  which  we  feel  and  that  which  we
cause  in  others.  Similarly  there  are  two  kinds  of
invidia  (hatred,  envy),  to  which  the  two  adjectives
invidus  (envious)  and  invidiosus  (invidious,  hateful)
correspond.  The  first  supplies  an  epithet  for  persons,
the  second  for  things,  and  it  is  in  this  latter  con-
nexion that  the  orator's  task  is  even  more  onerous.
For  though  some  things  are  hateful  in  themselves
such  as  parricide,  murder,  poisoning,  other  things
have  to  be  made  to  seem  hateful.  This  latter  con-  22
tingency  arises  when  we  attempt  to  shew  that  what
we  have  suffered  is  of  a  more  horrible  nature  than
what  are  usually  regarded  as  great  evils.  Vergil  will
provide  an  example  in  the  lines  3  : —

u  O  blest  beyond  all  maidens  Priam's  child,
Beneath  Troy's  lofty  bulwarks  doomed  to  die
Upon  the  tomb  of  him  that  was  thy  foe."

For  how  wretched  was  the  lot  of  Andromache,  if
Polyxena  be  accounted  happy  in  comparison with

429


QUINTILIAN

23  ei  felix  Polyxena)  ;  aut  cum  ita  exaggeramus  iniuriam
nostram,  ut  etiam  quae  multo  minora  sunt  intole-
randa  dicamus  :  Si  pulsasses,  defendi  non  poteras  ;  vul-
nerasti.  Sed  haec  diligentius,  cum  de  amplifi cation e
dicemus.1  Interim  notasse  contentus  sum,  non  id
solum  agere  adfectus,  ut,  quae  sunt,  ostendantur
acerba  ac  luctuosa,  sed  etiam  ut,  quae  toleranda
haberi  solent,  gravia  videantur :  ut  cum  in  maledicto
plus  iniuriae  quam  in  manu,  in  infamia  plus  poenae

24  dicimus  quam  in  morte.  Namque  in  hoc  eloquentiae
vis  est,  ut  iudicem  non  in  id  tantum  compellat,  in
quod  ipsa  rei  natura  ducetur,  sed  aut,  qui  non  est,
aut  maiorem  quam  est,  faciat  adfectum.  Haec  est
ilia,  quae  Savoxm  vocatur,  rebus  indignis,  asperis,
invidiosis  addens  vim  oratio;  qua  virtute  praeter
alias  plurimum  Demosthenes  valuit.

26  Quodsi  tradita  milii  sequi  praecepta  sufficeret  satis-
feceram  huic  parti,  nihil  eorum  quae  legi  vel  didici,
quod  modo  probabile  fuit,  omittendo ;  sed  eruere  in
animo  est  quae  latent,  et  penitus  ipsa  huius  loci
aperire  penetralia,  quae  quidem  non  aliquo  tradente
sed  experimento  meo  ac  natura  ipsa  duce  accepi

26  Summa enim, quantum ego quidem sentio, circa

1  de  amplificatione  dicemus,  Halm :  ad  earn  amplifica
tionem  dicemus,  AG:  ad  earn  amplificationem  venerimus
dicemus,  vulgo.

1  viii.  iv.  9.  *  Lit.  "  making  terrible."

430


BOOK VI.  ii.  22-26

her!  Again  the  same  problem  arises  when  we  en-  23
deavour  to  magnify  our  wrongs  by  saying  that  other
far  lesser  ills  are  intolerable  ;  e.g.  "  If  you  had  merely
struck  him,  your  conduct  would  have  been  inde-
fensible. But  you  did  more,  you  wounded  him."
However  I  will  deal  with  this  subject  more  fully
when  I  come  to  speak  of  amplification.1  Meanwhile
I  will  content  myself  with  the  observation  that  the
aim  of  appeals  to  the  emotion  is  not  merely  to  shew
the  bitter  and  grievous  nature  of  ills  that  actually
are  so,  but  also  to  make  ills  which  are  usually  re-
garded as  tolerable  seem  unendurable,  as  for  instance
when  we  represent  insulting  words  as  inflicting  more
grievous  injury  than  an  actual  blow  or  represent
disgrace  as  being  worse  than  death.  For  the  force  24
of  eloquence  is  such  that  it  not  merely  compels  the
judge  to  the  conclusion  toward  which  the  nature  of
the  facts  lead  him,  but  awakens  emotions  which
either  do  not  naturally  arise  from  the  case  or  are
stronger  than  the  case  would  suggest.  This  is  known
as  deinosisy2  that  is  to  say,  language  giving  additional
force  to  things  unjust,  cruel  or  hateful,  an  accom-
plishment in  which  Demosthenes  created  immense
and  special  effect.

If  I  thought  it  sufficient  to  follow  traditional  rules,  25
I  should  regard  it  as  adequate  treatment  for  this
topic  to  omit  nothing  that  I  have  read  or  been
taught,  provided  that  it  be  reasonably  sound.  But
my  design  is  to  bring  to  light  the  secret  principles
of  this  art,  and  to  open  up  the  inmost  recesses  of
the  subject,  giving  the  result  not  of  teaching  re-
ceived from  others,  but  of  my  own  experience  and
the  guidance  of  nature  herself.  The  prime  essential  26
for  stirring  the  emotions  of  others  is,  in  my  opinion,

431


QUINTILIAN

movendos  adfectus  in  hoc  posita  est,  ut  moveamur
ipsi.  Nam  et  luctus  et  irae  et  indignationis  aliquando
etiam  ridicula  fuerit  imitatio,  si  verba  vultumque
tantum,  non  etiam  animum  accommodarimus.  Quid
enim  aliud  est  causae,  ut  lugentes  utique  in  recenti
dolore  disertissime  quaedam  exclamare  videantur  et
ira  nonnunquam  indoctis  quoque  eloquentiam  faciat,
quam  quod  illis  inest  vis  mentis  et  Veritas  ipsa  morum  ?

27  Quare  in  iis,  quae  esse  verisimilia  volemus,  simus  ipsi
similes  eorum  qui  vere  patiuntur  adfectibus,  et  a  tali
animo  proficiscatur  oratio  qualem  facere  iudicem  volet.
An  ille  dolebit,  qui  audiet  me,  qui  in  hoc  dicam,  non
dolentem  ?  irascetur,  si  nihil  ipse,  qui  in  iram  con-
citat  se  idque  exigit,  similia  patietur?  siccis  agentis

28  oculis  lacrimas  dabit?  Fieri  non  potest.  Nee  in-
cendit  nisi  ignis  nee  madescimus  nisi  humore  nee  res
ulla  dat  alteri  colorem  quern  non  ipsa  habet.  Primum
est  igitur,  ut  apud  nos  valeant  ea  quae  valere  apud
iudicem  volumus,  adficiamurque  antequam adficere

29  conemur.  At  quomodo  net,  ut  adficiamur?  neque
enim  sunt  motus  in  nostra  potestate.  Temptabo
etiam  de  hoc  dicere.  Quas  <£avracrtas  Graeci  vocant,
nos  sane  visiones  appellemus,  per  quas  imagines  rerum
absentium  ita  repraesentantur  animo,  ut  eas  cernere


43*


BOOK VI.  ii.  26-29

first  to  feel  those  emotions  oneself.  It  is  sometimes
positively  ridiculous  to  counterfeit  grief,  anger  and
indignation,  if  we  content  ourselves  with  accommo-
dating our  words  and  looks  and  make  no  attempt
to  adapt  our  own  feelings  to  the  emotions  to  be
expressed.  What  other  reason  is  there  for  the
eloquence  with  which  mourners  express  their  grief,
or  for  the  fluency  which  anger  lends  even  to  the
uneducated,  save  the  fact  that  their  minds  are
stirred  to  power  by  the  depth  and  sincerity  of  their
feelings?  Consequently,  if  we  wish  to  give  our  27
words  the  appearance  of  sincerity,  we  must  assimilate
ourselves  to  the  emotions  of  those  who  are  genuinely
so  affected,  and  our  eloquence  must  spring  from  the
same  feeling  that  we  desire  to  produce  in  the  mind
of  the  judge.  Will  he  grieve  who  can  find  no  trace
of  grief  in  the  words  with  which  I  seek  to  move
him  to  grief?  Will  he  be  angry,  if  the  orator  who
seeks  to  kindle  his  anger  shows  no  sign  of  labouring
under  the  emotion  which  he  demands  from  his
audience?  Will  he  shed  tears  if  the  pleader's  eyes
are  dry?  It  is  utterly  impossible.  Fire  alone  can  28
kindle,  and  moisture  alone  can  wet,  nor  can  one
thing  impart  any  colour  to  another  save  that  which
it  possesses  itself.  Accordingly,  the  first  essential
is  that  those  feelings  should  prevail  with  us  that
we  wish  to  prevail  with  the  judge,  and  that  we
should  be  moved  ourselves  before  we  attempt  to
move  others.  But  how  are  we  to  generate  these  29
emotions  in  ourselves,  since  emotion  is  not  in  our
own  power  ?  I  will  try  to  explain  as  best  I  may.  There
are  certain  experiences  which  the  Greeks  call  <j>av-
rao-iai,  and  the  Romans  visions,  whereby  things  absent
are  presented  to  our  imagination  with  such  extreme

433


QUINTILIAN

30  oculis  ac  praesentes  habere  videamur.  Has  quisquis
bene  conceperit^  is  erit  in  adfectibus  potentissimus.
Hunc  quidam  dicunt  cu^avrao-iWov,  qui  sibi  res,  voces,
actus  secundum  verum  optime  finget ;  quod  quidem
nobis  volentibus  facile  continget.  Nisi1  vero  inter
otia  animorum  et  spes  inanes  et  velut  somnia  quaedam
vigilantium  ita  nos  hae  de  quibus  loquor  imagines
prosequuntur,  ut  peregrinari,  navigare,  proeliari,
populos  alloqui,  divitiarum,  quas  non  habemus,  usum
videamur  disponere,  nee  cogitare sed  facere : hoc

31  animi  vitium  ad  utilitatem  non  transferemus  ?  At
hominem  occisum  queror ;  non  omnia,  quae  in  re
praesenti  accidisse  credibile  est,  in  oculis  habebo?
non  percussor  ille  subitus  erumpet?  non  expavescet
circumventus  ?  exclamabit  vel  rogabit  vel  fugiet?
non  ferientem,  non  concidentem  videbo  ?  non  animo
sanguis  et  pallor  et  gemitus  extremus,  denique
exspirantis  hiatus  insidet  ?

32  Insequitur  ivapyeia,  quae  a  Cicerone  illustratio  et
evidentia  nominator,  quae  non  tarn  dicere  videtur
quam  ostendere ; et  adfectus non aliter, quam si

1  nisi,  Tornebladh:  nihil,  AG.

1  Perhaps  an  allusion  to  Part,  Or.  vi.  20. 4vdpyaa  =  clear-
ness.

434


BOOK VI.  ii.  29-32

vividness  that  they  seem  actually  to  be  before
our  very  eyes.  It  is  the  man  who  is  really  sen-  30
sitive  to  such  impressions  who  will  have  the  greatest
power  over  the  emotions.  Some  writers  describe
the  possessor  of  this  power  of  vivid  imagination,
whereby  things,  words  and  actions  are  presented
in  the  most  realistic  manner,  by  the  Greek  word
€v<f>avTa<rLi0Tos ;  and  it  is  a  power  which  all  may
readily  acquire  if  they  will.  When  the  mind  is  un-
occupied or  is  absorbed  by  fantastic  hopes  or  day-
dreams, we  are  haunted  by  these  visions  of  which
I  am  speaking  to  such  an  extent  that  we  imagine
that  we  are  travelling  abroad,  crossing  the  sea,  fight-
ing, addressing  the  people,  or  enjoying  the  use  of
wealth  that  we  do  not  actually  possess,  and  seem
to  ourselves  not  to  be  dreaming  but  acting.  Surely,
then,  it  may  be  possible  to  turn  this  form  of  halluci-
nation to  some  profit.  I  am  complaining  that  a  man  31
has  been  murdered.  Shall  I  not  bring  before  my
eyes  all  the  circumstances  which  it  is  reasonable  to
imagine  must  have  occurred  in  such  a  connexion?
Shall  I  not  see  the  assassin  burst  suddenly  from  his
hiding-place,  the  victim  tremble,  cry  for  help,  beg
for  mercy,  or  turn  to  run  ?  Shall  I  not  see  the  fatal
blow  delivered  and  the  stricken  body  fall  ?  Will
not  the  blood,  the  deathly  pallor,  the  groan  of
agony,  the  death-rattle,  be  indelibly  impressed  upon
my  mind?

From  such  impressions  arises  that  ivdpyeia  which  32
Cicero1  calls  illumination  and  actuality,  which  makes
us  seem  not  so  much  to  narrate  as  to  exhibit  the
actual  scene,  while  our  emotions will be no less
actively  stirred  than  if  we  were  present  at  the  actual

435


QUINTILIAN

rebus  ipsis  intersimus,  sequentur.  An  non  ex  his
visionibus  ilia  sunt ;  Excussi  manibus  radii,  revolutaque

33  pensa? — Levique  patens  in  pectore  vulnus?  equus  ille
in  funere  Pallantis, — positis  insignibus  ?  Quid  ?  non
idem  poeta  penitus  ultimi  fati  concepit  imaginem,  ut

34  diceret :  Et  dulces  moriens  reminiscitur  Argos?  Ubi
vero  miseratione  opus  erit,  nobis  ea,  de  quibus
queremur,  accidisse  credamus  atque  id  animo  nostro
persuadeamus.  Nos  illi  simus,  quos  gravia,  indigna,
tristia  passosqueremur,necagamus  rem  quasi  alienam,
sed  adsumamus  parumper  ilium  dolorem. Ita  dicemus,

35  quae  in  nostro  simili  casu dicturi  fuissemus.1 Vidi

ego  saepe  histriones  atque  comoedos,  cum  ex  aliquo
graviore  actu  personam  deposuissent,  flentes  adhuc
egredi.  Quodsi  in  alienis  scriptis  sola  pronuntiatio
ita  falsis  accendit  adfectibus,  quid  nos  faciemus,  qui
ilia  cogitare  debemus  ut  moved  periclitantium  vice

36  possimus?  Sed  in  schola  quoque  rebus  ipsis  adfici
convenit  easque  veras  sibi  fingere,  hoc  magis  quod

1  fuissemus,  Halm:  vidissemus,  AQ.


1  Aen.  ix.  474.  2  ib.  xi.  40.

3  t*6.  xi.  89.  *  ib.  x.  78°


436


BOOR VI.  ii.  32-36

occurrence.  Is  it  not  from  visions  such  as  these  that
Vergil  was  inspired  to  write —

"  Sudden  her  fingers  let  the  shuttle  fall
And  all  the  thread  was  spilled/' l
Or,

"  In  his  smooth  breast  the  gaping  wound/'  2 33

or  the  description  of  the  horse  at  the  funeral  of
Pallas,  "  his  trappings  laid  aside  "  ?  3  And  how  vivid
was  the  image  of  death  conceived  by  the  poet  when
he  wrote —

"  And  dying  sees  his  own  dear  Argive  home  "  ?  4

Again,  when  we  desire  to  awaken  pity,  we  must  34
actually  believe  that  the  ills  of  which  we  complain
have  befallen  our  own  selves,  and  must  persuade
our  minds  that  this  is  really  the  case.  We  must
identify  ourselves  with  the  persons  of  whom  we
complain  that  they  have  suffered  grievous,  unmerited
and  bitter  misfortune,  and  must  plead  their  case  and
for  a  brief  space  feel  their  suffering  as  though  it
were  our  own,  while  our  words  must  be  such  as  we
should  use  if  we  stood  in  their  shoes.  I  have  often  35
seen  actors,  both  in  tragedy  and  comedy,  leave  the
theatre  still  drowned  in  tears  after  concluding  the
performance  of  some  moving  role.  But  if  the  mere
delivery  of  words  written  by  another  has  the  power
to  set  our  souls  on  fire  with  fictitious  emotions,  what
will  the  orator  do  whose  duty  it  is  to  picture  to
himself  the  facts  and  who  has  it  in  his  power  to  feel
the  same  emotion  as  his  client  whose  interests  are
at  stake?  Even  in  the  schools  it  is  desirable  that  36
the  student  should  be  moved  by  his  theme,  and
should  imagine  it  to  be  true  ;  indeed,  it  is  all  the
more  desirable then,  since,  as  a  rule  in  scholastic

437


QUINTILIAN

illic  ut  litigatores  loquimur  frequentius  quam  ut
advocati.  Orbum  agimus  et  naufragum  et  pericli-
tantem,  quorum  induere  personas  quid  attinet,  nisi
adfectus  adsumimus  ?  Haec  dissimulanda  mihi  non
fuerunt,  quibus  ipse,  quantuscunque  sum  aut  fui,
pervenisse  me  ad  aliquod  nomen  ingenii  credo ;  fre-
quenter motus  sum,  ut  me  non  lacrimae  solum
deprehenderent,  sed  pallor  et  veri  similis  dolor.

III.  Huic  diversa  virtus,  quae  risum  iudicis  mo-
vendo  et  illos  tristes  solvit  adfectus  et  animum  ab
intentione  rerum  frequenter  avertit  et  aliquando
etiam  reficit  et  a  satietate  vel  a  fatigatione  renovat.
Quanta  sit  autem  in  ea  difficultas,  vel  duo  maxime
oratores, alter Graecae alter Latinae eloquentiae

2  principes,  docent.  Nam  plerique  Demostheni  facul-
tatem  defuisse  huius  rei  credunt,  Ciceroni  modum.
Nee  videri  potest  noluisse  Demosthenes,  cuius  pauca
ad  modum  dicta  nee  sane  ceteris  eius  virtutibus  re-
spondentia palam ostendunt, non displicuisse illi

3  iocos,  sed  non  contigisse.  Noster  vero  non  solum
extra  indicia,  sed  in  ipsis  etiam  orationibus  habitus
est  nimius  risus  adfectator.  Mihi  quidem,  sive  id
recte  iudico  sive  amore  immodico  praecipui  in  elo-
43«


BOOK  VI.  ii.  36-111.  3

declamations,  the  speaker  more  often  appears  as  the
actual  litigant  than  as  his  advocate.  Suppose  we  are
impersonating  an  orphan,  a  shipwrecked  man,  or  one
in  grave  peril.  What  profit  is  there  in  assuming
such  a  role  unless  we  also  assume  the  emotions
which  it  involves  ?  I  have  thought  it  necessary  not
to  conceal  these  considerations  from  my  reader,  since
they  have  contributed  to  the  acquisition  of  such
reputation  for  talent  as  I  possess  or  once  possessed.
I  have  frequently  been  so  much  moved  while  speak-
ing, that  I  have  not  merely  been  wrought  upon  to
tears,  but  have  turned  pale  and  shown  all  the
symptoms  of  genuine  grief.

III.  I  now  turn  to  a  very  different  talent,  namely
that  which  dispels  the  graver  emotions  of  the  judge
by  exciting  his  laughter,  frequently  diverts  his  atten-
tion from  the  facts  of  the  case,  and  sometimes  even
refreshes  him  and  revives  him  when  he  has  begun
to  be  bored  or  wearied  by  the  case.  How  hard  it
is  to  attain  success  in  this  connexion  is  shown  by
the  cases  of  the  two  great  masters  of  Greek  and
Roman  oratory.  For  many  think  that  Demosthenes  2
was  deficient  in  this  faculty,  and  that  Cicero  used
it  without  discrimination.  Indeed,  it  is  impossible
to  suppose  that  Demosthenes  deliberately  avoided
all  display  of  humour,  since  his  few  jests  are  so
unworthy  of  his  other  excellences  that  they  clearly
show  that  he  lacked  the  power,  not  merely  that  he
disliked  to  use  it.  Cicero,  on  the  other  hand,  was  3
regarded  as  being  unduly  addicted  to  jests,  not
merely  outside  the  courts,  but  in  his  actual  speeches
as  well.  Personally  (though  whether  I  am  right  in
this  view,  or  have  been  led  astray  by  an  exaggerated
admiration  for  the  prince  of  orators,  I  cannot  say),

439


QUINTILIAN

quentia  viri  labor,  mira  quaedam  in  eo  videtur  fuisse

4  urbanitas.  Nam  et  in  sermone  cotidiano  multa  et  in
altercationibus  et  interrogandis  testibus  plura  quam
quisquam  dixit  facete,  et  ipsa  ilia,  quae  sunt  in
Verrem  dicta  frigidius,  aliis  adsignavit  et  testimonii
loco  posuit ;  ut,  quo  sunt  magis  vulgaria,  eo  sit  cre-
dibilius ilia  ab  oratore  non ficta  sed passim esse

5  iactata.  Utinamque  libertus  eius  Tiro  aut  alius,
quisquis  fuit,  qui  tris  hac  de  re  libros  edidit,  parcius
dictorum  numero  indulsissent  et  plus  iudicii  in  eli-
gendis  quam  in  congerendis  studii  adhibuissent :
minus  obiectus  calumniantibus  foret,  qui  tamen  nunc
quoque,  ut  in  omni  eius  ingenio,  facilius,  quod  reiici

6  quam  quod  adiici  possit,  invenient.  Adfert  autem
summam  rei  difficultatem  primum,  quod  ridiculum
dictum  plerumque  falsum  est  (hoc  semper  humile),
saepe  ex  indu stria  depravatum,  praeterea  nunquam
honorificum  ;  turn  varia  hominum  iudicia  in  eo,  quod
non  ratione  aliqua  sed  motu  animi  quodam  nescio  an

7  enarrabili  iudicatur.  Neque  enim  ab  ullo  satis  expli-
cari  puto,  licet  multi  temptaverint,  unde  risus,  qui
non  solum  facto  aliquo  dictove,  sed  interdum  quodam
etiam  corporis  tactu  lacessitur.  Praeterea  non  una
ratione  moveri  solet,  neque  enim  acute  tantum  ac
venuste  sed  stulte,  iracunde,  timide  dicta  aut  facta

440


BOOK VI.  in.  3-7

I  regard  him  as  being  the  possessor  of  a  remarkable
turn  of  wit. For  his  daily  speech  was  full  of  humour,  4
while  in  his  disputes  in  court  and  in  his  examination
of  witnesses  he  produced  more  good  jests  than  any
other,  while  the  somewhat  insipid  jokes  which  he
launches  against  Verres  are  always  attributed  by  him
to  others  and  produced  as  evidence :  wherefore,  the
more  vulgar  they  are,  the  more  probable  is  it  that
they  are  not  the  invention  of  the  orator,  but  were
current  as  public  property. I  wish,  however,  that  5
Tiro,  or  whoever  it  may  have  been  that  published
the  three  books  of  Cicero's  jests,  had  restricted  their
number  and  had  shown  more  judgment  in  selecting
than  zeal  in  collecting  them. For  he  would  then
have  been  less  exposed  to  the  censure  of  his  calum-
niators, although  the  latter  will,  in  any  case,  as  in
regard  to  all  the  manifestations  of  his  genius,  find
it easier to  detect superfluities than deficiencies.
The  chief  difficulty  which  confronts  the  orator  in  6
this  connexion  lies  in  the  fact  that  sayings  designed
to  raise  a  laugh  are  generally  untrue  (and  falsehood
always  involves  a  certain  meanness),  and  are  often
deliberately  distorted,  and,  further,  never  complimen-
tary :  while  the  judgments  formed  by  the  audience
on  such  jests  will  necessarily  vary,  since  the  effect  of
a  jest  depends  not  on  the  reason,  but  on  an  emotion
which  it  is  difficult,  if  not  impossible,  to  describe. For  7
I  do  not  think  that  anybody  can  give  an  adequate
explanation,  though  many  have  attempted  to  do  so,  of
the  cause  of  laughter,  which  is  excited  not  merely
by  words  or  deeds,  but  sometimes  even  by  touch.
Moreover,  there  is  great  variety  in  the  things  which
raise  a  laugh,  since  we  laugh  not merely  at  those
words  or  actions  which  are  smart  or  witty,  but  also

441


QUINTILIAN

ridentur ; ideoque  anceps  eius  rei  ratio  est,  quod  a

8  derisu  non  procul  abest  risus.  Habet  enim,  ut  Cicero
dicit,  sedem  in  deformitate  aliqua  et  turpitudine,  quae
cum  in  aliis  demonstrantur,  urbanitas,  cum  in  ipsos
dicentes  recidunt,  stultitia  vocatur.

Cum  videatur  autem  res  levis  et  quae  ab  scurris,
mimis,  insipientibus  denique  saepe  moveatur,  tamen
habet  vim  nescio  an  imperiosissimam  et  cui  repug-

9  nari  minime  potest.  Erumpit  etiam  invitis  saepe,
nee  vultus  modo  ac  vocis  exprimit  confessionem,  sed
totum  corpus  vi  sua  concutit.  Rerum  autem  saepe
(ut  dixi)  maximarum  momenta  vertit,  ut  cum  odium

10  iramque  frequentissime  frangat.  Documento  sunt
iuvenes  Tarentini,  qui  multa  de  rege  Pyrrho  sequius
inter  cenam  locuti,  cum  rationem  facti  reposceren-
tur  et  neque  negari  res  neque  defendi  posset,  risu
sunt  et  opportuno  ioco  elapsi.  Namque  unus  ex  iis,
ImmOy  inquit,  nisi  lagona  defecisset,  occidissemus  te ;
eaque  urbanitate  tota  est  invidia  criminis  dissoluta.

11  Verum  hoc,  quidquid  est,  ut  non  ausim  dicere
carere  omnino  arte,  quia  nonnullam  observationem
habet,  suntque  ad  id  pertinentia  et  a  Graecis  et  a

1  De  Or.  ii.  Iviii.  236.  *  Where?

44«


BOOK VI.  in.  7-1 1

at  those  which  reveal  folly,  anger  or  fear.  Conse-
quently, the  cause  of  laughter  is  uncertain,  since
laughter  is  never  far  removed  from  derision.  For,  8
as  Cicero1  says,  "Laughter  has  its  basis  in  some
kind  or  other  of  deformity  or  ugliness/ '  and  whereas,
when  we  point  to  such  a  blemish  in  others,  the
result  is  known  as  wit,  it  is  called  folly  when  the
same  jest  is  turned  against  ourselves.

Now,  though  laughter  may  be  regarded  as  a  trivial
matter,  and  an  emotion  frequently  awakened  by
buffoons,  actors  or  fools,  it  has  a  certain  imperious
force  of  its  own  which  it  is  very  hard  to  resist.  It  9
often  breaks  out  against  our  will  and  extorts  con-
fession of  its  power,  not  merely  from  our  face  and
voice,  but  convulses  the  whole  body  as  well.  Again,
it  frequently  turns  the  scale  in  matters  of  great
importance,  as  I  have  already  observed  : 2  for  instance,
it  often  dispels  hatred  or  anger.  A  proof  of  this  is  10
given  by  the  story  of  the  young  men  of  Tarentum,
who  had  made  a  number  of  scurrilous  criticisms  of
Pyrrhus  over  the  dinner  table :  they  were  called
upon  to  answer  for  their  statements,  and,  since  the
charge  was  one  that  admitted  neither  of  denial  nor
of  excuse,  they  succeeded  in  escaping,  thanks  to  a
happy  jest  which  made  the  king  laugh ;  for  one  of
the  accused  said,  "Yes,  and  if  the  bottle  hadn't
been  empty,  we  should  have  killed  you ! "  a  jest
which  succeeded  in  dissipating  the  animosity  which
the  charge  had  aroused.

Still,  whatever  the  essence  of  humour  may  be,  and  11
although  I  would  not  venture  to  assert  that  it  is  alto-
gether independent  of  art  (for  it  involves  a  certain
power  of  observation,  and  rules  for  its  employment
have  been  laid  down  by  writers  both  of  Greece  and

443


QUINTILIAN

Latinis  composite  praecepta,  ita  plane  adfirmo,  prae-

12  cipue  positum  esse  in  natura  et  in  occasione.  Porro
natura  non  tantum  in  hoc  valet,  ut  acutior  quis  atque
habilior  sit  ad  inveniendum  (nam  id  sane  doctrina
possit  augeri),  sed  inest  proprius  quibusdam  decor  in
habitu  ac  vultu,  ut  eadem  ilia  minus alio  dicente

13  urbana  esse  videantur.  Occasio  vero  et  in  rebus  est
cuius  est1  tanta  vis,  ut  saepe  adiuti  ea  non  indocti
modo,  sed  etiam  rustici  salse  dicant,  et  in  eo  cum  quis
aliquid  dixerit  prior. Sunt enim longe venustiora

14  omnia  in  respondendo  quam  in  provocando.  Accedit
difficultati,  quod  eius  rei  nulla  exercitatio  est,  nulli
praeceptores.  Itaque  in  conviviis  et  sermonibus
multi  dicaces,  quia  in  hoc  usu  cotidiano  proficimus.
Oratoria  urbanitas  rara  nee  ex  arte  propria  sed  ad

15  hanc  consuetudinem  commodata.  Nihil  autem
vetabat  et  componi  materias  in  hoc  idoneas,  ut
controversiae  permixtis  salibus  fingerentur,  vel  res
proponi  singulas  ad  iuvenum  talem  exercitationem.

16  Quin  illae  ipsae  (dicta  sunt  ac  vocantur),  quas  certis
diebus  festae  licentiae  dicere  solebamus,  si  paulum
adhibita  ratione  fingerentur,  aut  aliquid  in  his  serium

1  cuius  est,  added  by  Halm  following  Spalding,

1  The  meaning  of  this  passage  is  not  clear,  and  no  satis-
factory explanation  or  correction  has  been  suggested.

444


BOOK VI.  in.  11-16

Rome),  I  will  insist  on  this  much,  that  it  depends
mainly  on  nature  and  opportunity.  The  influence  12
of  nature  consists  not  merely  in  the  fact  that  one
man  is  quicker  or  cleverer  than  another  in  the
invention  of  jests  (for  such  a  power  can  be  increased
by  teaching),  but  also  in  the  possession  of  some
peculiar  charm  of  look  or  manner,  the  effect  of  which
is  such  that  the  same  remarks  would  be  less  enter-
taining if  uttered  by  another.  Opportunity,  on  the  13
other  hand,  is  dependent  on  circumstances,  and  is  of
such  importance  that  with  its  assistance  not  merely
the  unlearned,  but  even  mere  country  bumpkins  are
capable  of  producing  effective  witticisms :  while
much  again  may  depend  on  some  previous  remark
made  by  another  which  will  provide  opportunity  for
repartee.  For  wit  always  appears  to  greater  advan-
tage in  reply  than  in  attack.  We  are  also  con-  14
fronted  by  the  additional  difficulty  that  there  are
no  specific  exercises  for  the  development  of  humour
nor  professors  to  teach  it.  Consequently,  while
convivial  gatherings  and  conversation  give  rise  to
frequent  displays  of  wit,  since  daily  practice  develops
the  faculty,  oratorical  wit  is  rare,  for  it  has  no  fixed
rules  to  guide  it,  but  must  adapt  itself  to  the  ways
of  the  world.  There  has,  however,  never  been  any-  15
thing  to  prevent  the  composition  of  themes  such  as
will  afford  scope  for  humour,  so  that  our  contro-
versial declamations  may  have  an  admixture  of  jests,
while  special  topics  may  be  set  which  will  give  the
young  student  practice  in  the  play  of  wit.  Nay,  16
even  those  pleasantries  in  which  we  indulge  on
certain  occasions  of  festive  licence  (and  to  which  we
give  the  name  of  mots,1  as,  indeed,  they  are),  if  only
a  little  more  good sense  were employed in  their

445


QUINTILIAN

quoque  esset  admixtum,  plurimum  poterant  utilitatis
adferre  ;  quae  nunc  iuvenum  vel  sibi  ludentium  exer-
citatio  est.

17  Pluribus  autem  nominibus  in  eadem  re  vulgo  uti-
mur ;  quae  tamen  si  diducas,  suam  quandara  pro-
priam  vim  ostendent.  Nam  et  urbanitas  dicitur,  qua
quidem  significari  video  sermonem  praeferentem  in
verbis  et  sono  et  usu  proprium  quendam  gustum
urbis  et  sumptam  ex  conversatione  doctorum  taci-
tam  eruditionem,  denique  cui  contraria  sit  rusticitas.

18  Venustum  esse,  quod  cum  gratia  quadam  et  venere
dicatur,  apparet.  Salsum  in  consuetudine  pro  ridi-
culo  tantum  accipimus ;  natura  non  utique  hoc  est,
quanquam  et  ridicula  oporteat  esse  salsa.  Nam  et
Cicero  omne,  quod  salsum  sit,  ait  esse  Atticorum,
non  quia  sunt  maxime  ad  risum  compositi ;  et  Ca-
tullus, cum  dicit,  Nulla  est  in  corpore  mica  satis,  non

19  hoc  dicit,  nihil  in  corpore  eius  esse  ridiculum.  Sal-
sum igitur  erit,  quod  non  erit  insulsum,  velut  quod-
dam  simplex  orationis  condimentum,  quod  sentitur
latente  iudicio  velut  palato,  excitatque  et  a  taedio
defendit  orationem.  Sales  enim,1  ut  ille  in  cibis
paulo  liberalius  aspersus,  si  tamen  non  sit  immo-
dicus,  adfert  aliquid  propriae  voluptatis,  ita  hi  quo-
que in  dicendo  habent  quiddam,  quod  nobis  faciat

1  sales  enim,  Spalding:  sane  tamen,  MSS.

1  Orat.  xxvi.  90.  3  Gat.  lxxxvi.  4.

446


BOOK VI.  in.  16-19

invention,  and  they  were  seasoned  by  a  slight  ad-
mixture of  seriousness,  might  afford  a  most  useful
training.  As  it  is,  they  serve  merely  to  divert  the
young  and  merrymakers.

There  are  various  names  by  which  we  describe  17
wit,  but  we  have  only  to  consider  them  separately
to  perceive  their  specific  meaning.  First,  there  is
urbanitas,  which  I  observe  denotes  language  with  a
smack  of  the  city  in  its  words,  accent  and  idiom,
and  further  suggests  a  certain  tincture  of  learning
derived  from  associating  with  well  educated  men ;
in  a  word,  it  represents  the  opposite  of  rusticity.
The  meaning  of  venustus  is  obvious ;  it  means  that  18
which  is  said  with  grace  and  charm.  Salsus  is,  as
a  rule,  applied  only  to  what  is  laughable  :  but  this
is  not  its  natural  application,  although  whatever  is
laughable  should  have  the  salt  of  wit  in  it.  For
Cicero,1  when  he  says  that  whatever  has  the  salt  of
wit  is  Attic,  does  not  say  this  because  persons  of
the  Attic  school  are  specially  given  to  laughter ;
and  again  when  Catullus  says —

In  all  her  body  not  a  grain  of  salt ! 2
he  does  not  mean  that  there  is  nothing  in  her  body  to
give  cause  for  laughter.  When,  therefore,  we  speak  19
of  the  salt  of  wit,  we  refer  to  wit  about  which  there
is  nothing  insipid,  wit,  that  is  to  say,  which  serves
as  a  simple  seasoning  of  language,  a  condiment  which
is  silently  appreciated  by  our  judgment,  as  food  is
appreciated  by  the  palate,  with  the  result  that  it
stimulates  our  taste  and  saves  a  speech  from  be-
coming tedious.  But  just  as  salt,  if  sprinkled  freely
over  food,  gives  a  special  relish  of  its  own,  so  long
as  it  is  not  used  to  excess,  so  in  the  case  of  those
who  have  the  salt  of  wit  there  is  something  about

447


QUINTILIAN

audiendi  sitim. Facetum  quoque  non  tantum  circa

20  ridicula  opinor  consistere.  Neque  enim  diceret
Horatius,  facetum  carminis  genus  natura  concessum
esse  Vergilio.  Decoris  hanc  magis  et  excultae  cuius-
dam  elegantiae  appellationem  puto.  Ideoque  in
epistolis  Cicero  haec  Bruti  refert  verba :  Ne  Mi  sunt
pedes  faceti  ac  delicatius  ingredienti  molles.  Quod  con-
venit  cum  illo  Horatiano,  molle  atque  facetum  Vergilio'

21  locum  vero  accipimus,  quod  est  contrarium  seriov
sed  hoc  nimis  angustum,1  nam  et  fingere  et  terrere
et  promittere  interim  iocus  est.  Dicacitas  sine  dubio
a  dicendo,  quod  est  omni  generi  commune,  ducta
est,  proprie  tamen  significat  sermonem  cum  risu  ali-
quos  incessentem.  Ideo  Demosthenen  urbanum
fuisse  dicunt,  dicacem  negant.

22  Proprium  autem  materiae,  de  qua  nunc  loq.uimur,
est  ridiculum,  ideoque  haec  tota  disputatio  a  Graecis
irepl  ytXoiov  inscribitur.  Eius  prima  divisio  traditur
eadem,  quae  est  omnis  orationis,  ut  sit  positum  in

23  rebus  aut  in  verbis.  Usus  autem  maxime  triplex;
aut  enim  ex  aliis  risum  petimus  aut  ex  nobis  aut  ex
rebus  mediis.  Aliena  aut  reprehendimus  aut  refu-
tamus  aut  elevamus  aut  repercutimus  aut  eludimus.

1  sed  hoc  nimis  angustum,  added  by  Halm.

1  Sat.  i.  x.  44. molle  atque  facetum  /  Vergilio  adnuerunt
gaudentes  rure  Camenae.  2  This  letter  is  lost.

448


BOOK VI.  in.  19-23

their  language  which  arouses  in  us  a  thirst  to  hear.
Again,  I  do  not  regard  the  epithet  facetus  as  applic-
able solely  to  that  which  raises  a  laugh.  If  that  20
were  so  Horace1  would  never  have  said  that  nature
had  granted  Vergil  the  gift  of  being  facetus  in  song.
I  think  that  the  term  is  rather  applied  to  a  certain
grace  and  polished  elegance.  This  is  the  meaning
which  it  bears  in  Cicero's  letters,  where  he  quotes
the  words  of  Brutus,2  "  In  truth  her  feet  are  graceful
and  soft  as  she  goes  delicately  on  her  way."  This
meaning  suits  the  passage  in  Horace,1  to  which  I
have  already  made  reference,  "  To  Vergil  gave  a  soft
and  graceful  wit."  locus  is  usually  taken  to  mean  21
the  opposite  of  seriousness.  This  view  is,  however,
somewhat  too  narrow.  For  to  feign,  to  terrify,  or  to
promise,  are  all  at  times  forms  of  jesting.  Dicacitas
is  no  doubt  derived  from  dico,  and  is  therefore
common  to  all  forms  of  wit,  but  is  specially  applied
to  the  language  of  banter,  which  is  a  humorous  form
of  attack.  Therefore,  while  the  critics  allow  that
Demosthenes  was  urbanus,  they  deny  that  he  was
dicax.

The  essence,  however,  of  the  subject  which  we  22
are  now  discussing  is  the  excitement  of  laughter,
and  consequently  the  whole  of  this  topic  is  entitled
7T€pt  ytXotov  by  the  Greeks.  It  has  the  same  primary
division  as  other  departments  of  oratory,  that  is  to
say,  it  is  concerned  with  things  and  words.  The  23
application  of  humour  to  oratory  may  be  divided
into  three  heads :  for  there  are  three  things  out  of
which  we  may  seek  to  raise  a  laugh,  to  wit,  others,
ourselves,  or  things  intermediate.  In  the  first  case
we  either  reprove  or  refute  or  make  light  of  or
retort  or  deride  the  arguments  of  others. In  the

449


QUINTILIAN

Nostra  ridicule  indicamus  et,  ut  verbo  Ciceronis
utar,  dicimus  aliqua  subabsurda.  Namque  quaedam,
quae, si imprudentibus excidant, stulta sunt, si

24  simulamus,  venusta  creduntur.  Tertium  est  genus,
ut  idem  dicit,  in  decipiendis  exspectationibus,  dictis
aliter  accipiendis  ceterisque,  quae  neutram  personam

25  contingunt  ideoque  a  me  media  dicuntur.  Item
ridicula  aut  facimus  aut  dicimus.  Facto  risus  con-
ciliatur  interim  admixta  gravitate :  ut  M.  Caelius
praetor,  cum  sellam  eius  curulem  consul  Isauricus
fregisset,  alteram  posuit  loris  intentam ;  dicebatur
autem  consul  a  patre  flagris  aliquando  caesus  ;  inte-
rim sine  respectu  pudoris,  ut  in  ilia  pyxide  Caeliana,
quod  neque  oratori  neque  ulli  viro  gravi  eonveniat.

26  Idem  autem  de  vultu  gestuque  ridiculo  dictum  sit ;
in  quibus  est  quidem  summa  gratia,  sed  maior,  cum
captare  risum  non  videntur ;  nihil  enim  est  iis,  quae
sicut  salsa *■  dicuntur,  insulsius.  Quanquam  autem
gratiae  plurimum  dicentis  severitas  adfert,  fitque
ridiculum  id  ipsum,  quod  qui  dicit  ilia  non  ridet,  est
tamen  interim  et  aspectus  et  habitus  oris  et  gestus

1  sicut,  Gesner :  dut,  G :  dicenti,  -4.

1  de  Or.  II.  lxxi.  289.

2  cp.  pro  Cael.  xxix.  69.  There  is  no  jest  in  this  passage
which  lays  itself  open  to  such  censure.  The  jest  must  have
consisted  in  some  action  on  the  part  of  the  orator.

450


BOOK VI.  in.  23-26

second  we  speak  of  things  which  concern  our-
selves in  a  humorous  manner  and,  to  quote  the
words  of  Cicero,1  say  things  which  have  a  sugges-
tion of  absurdity.  For  there  are  certain  sayings
which  are  regarded  as  folly  if  they  slip  from  us
unawares,  but  as  witty  if  uttered  ironically.  The  24
third  kind  consists,  as  Cicero  also  tells  us,  in  cheating
expectations,  in  taking  words  in  a  different  sense
from  what  was  intended,  and  in  other  things  which
affect  neither  party  to  the  suit,  and  which  I  have,
therefore,  styled  intermediate.  Further,  things  de-  25
signed  to  raise  a  laugh  may  either  be  said  or  done.
In  the  latter  case  laughter  is  sometimes  caused  by
an  act  possessing  a  certain  element  of  seriousness
as  well,  as  in  the  case  of  Marcus  Caelius  the  praetor,
who,  when  the  consul  Isauricus  broke  his  curule
chair,  had  another  put  in  its  place,  the  seat  of  which
was  made  of  leather  thongs,  by  way  of  allusion  to
the  story  that  the  consul  had  once  been  scourged
by  his  father :  sometimes,  again,  it  is  aroused  by
an  act  which  passes  the  grounds  of  decency,  as  in
the  case  of  Caelius'  box,2  a  jest  which  was  not  fit
for  an  orator  or  any  respectable  man  to  make.  On  26
the  other  hand  the  joke  may  lie  in  some  remark
about  a  ridiculous  look  or  gesture;  such  jests  are
very  attractive,  more  especially  when  delivered  with
every  appearance  of  seriousness ;  for  there  are  no
jests  so  insipid  as  those  which  parade  the  fact  that
they  are  intended  to  be  witty.  Still,  although  the
gravity  with  which  a  jest  is  uttered  increases  its
attraction,  and  the  mere  fact  that  the  speaker  does
not  laugh  himself  makes  his  words  laughable,  there
is  also  such  a  thing  as  a  humorous  look,  manner  or


451


QUINTILIAN

27  non  inurbanus,  cum  iis  modus  contingit.  Id  porro,
quod  dicitur,  aut  est  lascivum  et  hilare,  qualia  A.
Galbae  pleraque,  aut  contumeliosum,  qualia  nuper
Iunii Bassi,  aut  asperum,  qualia  Cassii  Severi,  aut

28  lene,  qualia  Domitii  Afri.  Refert,  his  ubi  quis
utatur.  Nam  in  convictibus  et  cotidiano  sermone
lasciva  humilibus,  hilaria  omnibus  convenient.  Lae-
dere  nunquam  velimus,  longeque  absit  propositum
illud  potius  amicum  quam  dictum  perdendi.  In
hac  quidem  pugna  forensi  malim  mihi  lenibus  uti
Iicere ;  quanquam  l  et  contumeliose  et  aspere  dicere
in  adversarios  permissum  est,  cum  accusare  etiam
palam  et  caput  alterius  iuste  petere  concessum  sit.
Sed  hie  quoque  tamen  inhumana  videri  solet  for-
tunae  insectatio,  vel  quod  culpa  caret  vel  quod  reci-
dere  etiam  in  ipsos,  qui  obiecerunt,  potest.  Primum
itaque  considerandum  est,  et  quis  et  in  qua  causa  et

29  apud  quern  et  in  quern  et  quid  dicat.  Oratori  minime
convenit  distortus  vultus  gestusque,  quae  in  mimis
rideri  solent.  Dicacitas  etiam  scurrilis  et  scenica
huic  personae  alienissima  est.  Obscenitas  vero  non
a  verbis  tantum  abesse  debet,  sed  etiam  a  signifi-

1  quanquam,  Regius :  nonnunquam,  MSS.
452


BOOK  VI.  hi.  26-29

gesture,  provided  always  that  they  observe  the  happy
mean.  Further,  a  jest  will  either  be  free  and  lively,  27
like  the  majority  of  those  uttered  by  Aulus  Galba,
or  abusive,  like  those  with  which  Junius  Bassus
recently  made  us  familiar,  or  bitter,  like  those  of
Cassius  Severus,  or  gentle,  like  those  of  Domitius
Afer.  Much  depends  on  the  occasion  on  which  a  28
jest  is  uttered.  For  in  social  gatherings  and  the  inter-
course of  every  day  a  certain  freedom  is  not  unseemly
in  persons  of  humble  rank,  while  liveliness  is  be-
coming to  all.  Our  jests  should  never  be  designed
to  wound,  and  we  should  never  make  it  our  ideal
to  lose  a  friend  sooner  than  lose  a  jest.  Where  the
battles  of  the  courts  are  concerned  I  am  always
better  pleased  when  it  is  possible  to  indulge  in
gentle  raillery,  although  it  is,  of  course,  permissible
to  be  abusive  or  bitter  in  the  words  we  use  against
our  opponents,  just  as  it  is  permissible  to  accuse
them  openly  of  crime,  and  to  demand  the  last  penalty
of  the  law.  But  in  the  courts  as  elsewhere  it  is
regarded  as  inhuman  to  hit  a  man  when  he  is  down,
either  because  he  is  the  innocent  victim  of  mis-
fortune or  because  such  attacks  may  recoil  on  those
who  make  them.  Consequently,  the  first  points  to
be  taken  into  consideration  are  who  the  speaker
is,  what  is  the  nature  of  the  case,  who  is  the  judge,
who  is  the  victim,  and  what  is  the  character  of
the  remarks  that  are  made.  It  is  most  unbecoming  29
for  an  orator  to  distort  his  features  or  use  uncouth
gestures,  tricks  that  arouse  such  merriment  in  farce.
No  less  unbecoming  are  ribald  jests,  and  such  as
are  employed  upon  the  stage.  As  for  obscenity,  it
should  not  merely  be  banished  from  his  language,
but  should  not  even  be  suggested. For  even  if  our

453


QUINTILIAN

catione. Nam  si  quando  obiici  potest,  non  in  ioco

30  exprobranda  est.  Oratorem  praeterea  ut  dicere
urbane  volo,  ita  videri  adfectare  id  plane  nolo.
Quapropter  ne  dicet  quidem  salse,  quotiens  poterit,
et dictum potius aliquando perdet quam minuet

31  auctoritatem.  Nee  accusatorem  autem  atroci  in
causa  nee  patronum  in  miserabili  iocantem  feret
quisquam. Sunt etiam iudices quidam tristiores

32  quam  ut  risum  libenter  patiantur.  Solet  interim
accidere,  ut  id  quod  in  adversarium  dicimus  aut  in
iudicem  conveniat  aut  in  nostrum  quoque  litiga-
torem ;  quanquam  aliqui  reperiuntur,  qui  ne  id  qui-
dem, quod  in  ipsos  recidere  possit,  evitent.  Quod
fecit  Longus  Sulpicius,  qui,  cum  ipse  foedissimus
esset,  ait  eum,  contra  quern  iudicio  liberali  aderat,
ne  faciem  quidem  habere  liberi  hominis ;  cui  respon-
dens  Domitius  Afer,  Ex  tut,  inquit,  animi  sententia,

33  Longe,  qui  malam  faciem  habet,  liber  non  est  ?  Vitan-
dum  etiam,  ne  petulans,  ne  superbum,  ne  loco,  ne
tempore  alienum,  ne  praeparatum  et  domo  adlatum
videatur  quod  dicimus.  Nam  ad  versus  miseros,
sicut  supra  dixeram,  inhumanus  est  iocus.  Sed  qui-
dam ita  sunt  receptae  auctoritatis  ac  notae  verecun-
diae,  ut  nocitura  sit  in  eos  dicendi  petulantia. Nam

34  de  amicis  iam  praeceptum  est. I  Hud  non  ad  oratoris l

1  oratoris,  Harster :  orat  fori»,  A  :  ora  fori,  Q.
454


BOOK VI.  in.  29-34

opponent  has  rendered  himself  liable  to  such  a
charge,  our  denunciation  should  not  take  the  form
of  a  jest.  Further,  although  I  want  my  orator  to  30
speak  with  wit,  he  must  not  give  the  impression  of
striving  after  it.  Consequently  he  must  not  display
his  wit  on  every  possible  occasion,  but  must  sacrifice
a  jest  sooner  than  sacrifice  his  dignity.  Again,  no  31
one  will  endure  an  accuser  who  employs  jests  to
season  a  really  horrible  case,  nor  an  advocate  for  the
defence  who  makes  merry  over  one  that  calls  for  pity.
Moreover,  there  is  a  type  of  judge  whose  tempera-
ment is  too  serious  to  allow  him  to  tolerate  laughter.
It  may  also  happen  that  a  jest  directed  against  an  32
opponent  may  apply  to  the  judge  or  to  our  own  client,
although  there  are  some  orators  who  do  not  refrain
even  from  jests  that  may  recoil  upon  themselves.
This  was  the  case  with  Sulpicius  Longus,  who,
despite  the  fact  that  he  was  himself  surpassingly
hideous,  asserted  of  a  man  against  whom  he  was
appearing  in  a  case  involving  his  status  as  a  free
man,  that  even  his  face  was  the  face  of  a  slave.  To
this  Domitius  Afer  replied,  "  Is  it  your  profound
conviction,  Longus,  that  an  ugly  man  must  be  a
slave  ? "  Insolence  and  arrogance  are  likewise  to  33
be  avoided,  nor  must  our  jests  seem  unsuitable  to
the  time  or  place,  or  give  the  appearance  of  studied
premeditation,  or  smell  of  the  lamp,  while  those
directed  against  the  unfortunate  are,  as  I  have
already  said,  inhuman.  Again,  some  advocates  are
men  of  such  established  authority  and  such  known
respectability,  that  any  insolence  shown  them
would  only  hurt  the  assailant.  As  regards  the
way  in  which  we  should  deal  with  friends  I  have
already  given  instructions. It  is  the  duty  not  merely  34

455


QUINTILIAN

consilium  sed  ad  hominis  pertinet;  lacessat  hoc
modo  quern  laedere  sit  periculosum,  ne  aut  inimi-
citiae  graves  insequantur  aut  turpis  satisf'actio.  Male
etiam  dicitur,  quod  in  plures  convenit,  si  aut  nationes
totae  incessantur  aut  ordines  aut  condicio  aut  studia

35  multorum.  Ea  quae  dicet  vir  bonus  omnia  salva
dignitate  ac  verecundia  dicet.  Nimium  enim  risus
pretium  est,  si  probitatis  impendio  constat.

Unde  autem  concilietur  risus  et  quibus  ex  locis
peti  soleat,  difficillimum  dicere.  Nam  si  species
omnes  persequi  velimus,  nee  modum  reperiemus  et

36  frustra  laborabimus.  Neque  enim  minus  numerosi
sunt  loci,  ex  quibus  haec  dicta,  quam  illi,  ex  quibus
eae,  quas  sententias  vocamus,  ducuntur,  neque  alii.
Nam  hie  quoque  est  inventio  et  elocutio,  atque  ipsius

37  elocutionis  vis  alia  in  verbis,  alia  in  figuris.  Risus
igitur  oriuntur  aut  ex  corpore  eius,  in  quern  dicimus,
aut  ex  animo,  qui  factis  ab  eo  dictisque  colligitur,  aut
ex  iis,  quae  sunt  extra  posita.  Intra  haec  enim  est
omnis  vituperatio ;  quae  si  gravius  posita  sit,  severa
est,  si  levius,  ridicula. Haec  aut  ostenduntur  aut

38  narrantur  aut  dicto  notantur.  Rarum  est,  ut  oculis
456


BOOK VI.  in.  34-38

of  an  orator,  but  of  any  reasonable  human  being,
when  attacking  one  whom  it  is  dangerous  to  offend
to  take  care  that  his  remarks  do  not  end  in  exciting
serious  enmity,  or  the  necessity  for  a  grovelling
apology.  Sarcasm  that  applies  to  a  number  of
persons  is  injudicious :  I  refer  to  cases  where  it  is
directed  against  whole  nations  or  classes  of  society,
or  against  rank  and  pursuits  which  are  common  to
many.  A  good  man  will  see  that  everything  he  35
says  is  consistent  with  his  dignity  and  the  respecta-
bility of  his  character ;  for  we  pay  too  dear  for  the
laugh  we  raise  if  it  is  at  the  cost  of  our  own  integrity.
It  is,  however,  a  difficult  task  to  indicate  the
sources  from  which  laughter  may  be  legitimately
derived  or  the  topics  where  it  may  be  naturally  em-
ployed. To  attempt  to  deal  exhaustively  with  the
subject  would  be  an  interminable  task  and  a  waste
of  labour.  For  the  topics  suitable  to  jests  are  no  36
less  numerous  than  those  from  which  we  may  derive
reflexions,  as  they  are  called,  and  are,  moreover,
identical  with  the  latter.  The  powers  of  invention
and  expression  come  into  play  no  less  where  jests
are  concerned,  while  as  regards  expression  its  force
will  depend  in  part  on  the  choice  of  words,  in  part
on  the  figures  employed.  Laughter  then  will  be  37
derived  either  from  the  physical  appearance  of  our
opponent  or  from  his  character  as  revealed  in  his
words  and  actions,  or  from  external  sources ;  for  all
forms  of  raillery  come  under  one  or  other  of  these
heads;  if  the  raillery  is  serious,  we  style  it  as
severe ;  if,  on  the  other  hand,  it  is  of  a  lighter
character,  we  regard  it  as  humorous.  These  themes
for  jest  may  be  pointed  out  to  the  eye  or  described
in  words  or  indicated  by  some  mot. It  is  only  on  38

457


QUINTILIAN

subiicere  eontingat,  ut  fecit  C.  Iulius ;  qui,  cum
Helvio  Manciae  saepius  obstrepenti  sibi  diceret,
Etiam  ostendam,  quails  sis,  isque  plane  instaret  inter-
rogatione,  qualem  se  ostensurus  esset,  digito  demon-
stravit  imaginem  Galli  in  scuto  Cimbrico  pictam,  cui
Mancia  turn  simillimus  est  visus.  Tabernae  autem
erant  circa  forum,  ac  scutum  illud  signi  gratia  positum.

39  Narrare,  quae  salsa  sint,  inprimis  est  subtile  et  ora-
torium,  ut  Cicero  pro  Cluentio  narrat  de  Caepasio
atque  Fabricio  aut  M.  Caelius  de  ilia  D.  Laelii  col-
legaeque  eius  in  provinciam  festinantium  conten-
tione.  Sed  in  his  omnibus  cum  elegans  et  venusta
exigitur  tota  expositio,  turn  id  festivissimum  est
quod adiicit orator. Nam et a Cicerone sic est

40  Fabricii  fuga  ilia  condita :  Itaque  cum  callidissime  se
putaret  dicere,  et  cum  ilia  verba  gravissima  ex  intimo
artificio  deprompsisset,  Respicite,  indices,  kommum  for-
tunas,  respicite  C.  Fabricii  senectutem,  cum  hoc,  Respicite,
ornandue  orationis  causa  saepe  dixisset,  respexit  ipse  ;  at
Fabricius  a  subselliis  demisso  capite  discesserat,  et  cetera,
quae  adiecit  (nam  est  notus  locus),  cum  in  re  hoc


1  Cic.  de,  Or.  n.  lxvi.  266.
8  pro  Gluent.  xxi.  58.


45»


BOOK VI.  hi.  38-40

rare  occasions  that  it  is  possible  to  make  them
visible  to  the  eye,  as  Gaius  Julius1  did  when  Hel-
vius  Mancia  kept  clamouring  against  him.  "  I  will
show  you  what  you're  like  ! "  he  cried,  and  then,  as
Mancia  persisted  in  asking  him  to  do  so,  pointed
with  his  finger  at  the  picture  of  a  Gaul  painted  on
a  Cimbric  shield,  a  figure  to  which  Mancia  bore  a
striking  resemblance.  There  were  shops  round  the
forum  and  the  shield  had  been  hung  up  over  one
of  them  by  way  of  a  sign.  The  narration  of  a  39
humorous  story  may  often  be  used  with  clever  effect
and  is  a  device  eminently  becoming  to  an  orator.
Good  examples  are  the  story  told  of  Caepasius  and
Fabricius,  which  Cicero  tells  in  the  pro  Cluentio,  or
the  story  told  by  Caelius  of  the  dispute  between
Decimus  Laelius  and  his  colleague  when  they  were
both  in  a  hurry  to  reach  their  province  first.  But
in  all  such  cases  the  whole  narrative  must  possess
elegance  and  charm,  while  the  orator's  own  contri-
bution to  the  story  should  be  the  most  humorous
element.  Take  for  instance  the  way  in  which  Cicero
gives  a  special  relish  to  the  flight  of  Fabricius.2
"And  so,  just  at  the  moment  when  he  thought  his  40
speech  was  showing  him  at  his  best  and  he  had
uttered  the  following  solemn  words,  words  designed
to  prove  a  master-stroke  of  art,  'Look  at  the  for-
tunes of  mankind,  gentlemen,  look  at  the  aged  form
of  Gaius  Fabricius/  just  at  that  very  moment,  I
say,  when  he  had  repeated  the  word  'look'  several
times  by  way  of  making  his  words  all  the  more
impressive,  he  looked  himself,  and  found  that  Fabri-
cius had  slunk  out  of  court  with  his  head  hanging
down."  I  will  not  quote  the  rest  of  the  passage,
for  it  is  well  known. But  he  develops  the  theme

459


QUINTILIAN

41  solum  esset,  Fabricium  a  iudicio  recessisse.  Et
Caelius  cum  omnia  venustissime  finxit,  turn  illud
ultimum,  Hie  subsecutus  quomodo  transient,  utrum  rate
an  piscatorio  navigio,  nemo  sciebat,  Siculi  quidem,  ut  sunt
lascivi  et  dicaces,  aiebant  in  delphino  sedisse  et  sic  tan-

42  quam  Ariona  transvectum.  In  narrando  autem  Cicero
consistere  facetias  putat,  dicacitatem  in  iaciendo.
Mire  fuit  in  hoc  genere  venustus  Afer  Domitius,
cuius  orationibus  complures  huiusmodi  narrationes
insertae  reperiuntur,  sei  dictorum  quoque  ab  eodem

43  urbane  sunt  editi  libri.  Illud  quoque  genus  est
positum  non  in  hac  veluti  iaculatione  dictorum  et
inclusa  breviter  urbanitate  sed  in  quodam  longiore
actu,  quod  de  L.  Crasso  contra  Brutum  Cicero  in
secundo  de Oratore libro  et  aliis  quibusdam locis

44  narrat.  Nam,  cum  Brutus  in  accusatione  Cn.  Planci
ex  duobus  lectoribus  ostendi  set,  contraria  L.  Crassum
patronum  eius  in  oratione,  quam  de  Colonia  Narbo-
nensi  habuerat,  suasiss^  iis,  quae  de  lege  Servilia
dixerat,  tris  excitavit  et  ipse  lectores,  hisque  patris
eius  dialogos  dedit  legendos  ;  quorum  cum  in  Priver-
nati  unus,  alter  in  Albano,  tertius  in  Tiburti  sermonem
habitum  complecteretur,  requirebat,  ubi  essent  eae
possessiones.  Omnes  autem  illas  Brutus  vendiderat ;
et  turn  paterna  emancupare  praedia  turpius  habeba-


1  i.e.  D.  Laelius  or  his  colleague  :  see  §  39.
•  Orat.  xxvi.  87.  *  lv.  223.

4  Probably  members  of  his  household,  employed  on  this
occasion  to  read  out  passages  from  Crass  us'  previous  speeches.

460


BOOK VI.  in.  40-44

still  further  although  the  plain  facts  amount  simply
to  this,  that  Fabricius  had  left  the  court.  The  41
whole  of  the  story  told  by  Caelius  is  full  of  wit  and
invention,  but  the  gem  of  the  passage  is  its  con-
clusion. «  He  followed  him,  but  how  he  crossed  the
straits,  whether  it  was  in  a  ship  or  a  fisherman's
boat,  no  one  knew  ;  but  the  Sicilians,  being  of  a
lively  turn  of  wit,  said  that  he  rode  on  a  dolphin  and
effected  his  crossing  like  a  second  Arion."  1  Cicero2  42
thinks  that  humour  belongs  to  narrative  and  wit  to
sallies  against  the  speaker's  antagonist.  Domitius
Afer  showed  remarkable  finish  in  this  department ;
for,  while  narratives  of  the  kind  I  have  described
are  frequent  in  his  speeches,  several  books  have  been
published  of  his  witticisms  as  well.  This  latter  form  43
of  wit  lies  not  merely  in  sallies  and  brief  displays  of
wit,  but  may  be  developed  at  greater  length,  witness
the  story  told  by  Cicero  in  the  second  book  of  his
de  Oratore?  in  which  Lucius  Crassus  dealt  with
Brutus,  against  whom  he  was  appearing  in  court.
Brutus  was  prosecuting  Cnaeus  Plancus  and  had  44
produced  two  readers  4  to  show  that  Lucius  Crassus,
who  was  counsel  for  the  defence,  in  the  speech
which  he  delivered  on  the  subject  of  the  colony  of
Narbo  had  advocated  measures  contrary  to  those
which  he  recommended  in  speaking  of  the  Servilian
law.  Crassus,  in  reply,  called  for  three  readers  and
gave  them  the  dialogues  of  Brutus'  father  to  read
out.  One  of  these  dialogues  was  represented  as
taking  place  on  his  estate  at  Privernum,  the  second
on  his  estate  at  Alba,  and  the  third  on  his  estate  at
Tibur.  Crassus  then  asked  where  these  estates  were.
Now  Brutus  had  sold  them  all,  and  in  those  days  it
was  considered  somewhat  discreditable  to  sell  one's

461


QUINTILIAN

tur. Similis  in  apologis  quoque  et  quibusdam  interim
etiam  historiis  exponendi  gratia  consequi  solet.

45  Sed  acutior  est  ilia  atque  velocior  in  urbanitate
bre vitas.  Cuius  quidem  duplex  forma  est  dicendi  ac
respondendi,  sed  ratio  communis  in  partem ;  nihil
enim  quod  in  lacessendo  dici  potest,  non  etiam  in

46  repercutiendo.  At  quaedam  propria  sunt  respon-
dentium ;  ilia  etiam l  atque  etiam  cogitata  adferri
solent,  haec  plerumque  in  altercatione  aut  in  rogandis
testibus  reperiuntur.2  Cum  sint  autem  loci  plures>
ex  quibus  dicta  ridicula  ducantur,  repetendum  est
mihi  non  omnes  eos  oratoribus  convenire ;  in  primis

47  ex  amphibolia  neque  ilia  obscena,3  quae  Atellani
e  more  captant,  nee  qualia  vulgo  iactantur  a  vilissimo
quoque,  conversa  in  maledictum  fere  ambiguitate ;
ne  ilia  quidem,  quae  Ciceroni  aliquando  sed  non  in
agendo  exciderunt,  ut  dixit,  cum  is  candidatus,  qui
coqui  filius  habebatur,  coram eo  suffragium  ab  alio

48  peteret :  Ego  quoque  tibifavebo.  Non  quia  excludenda
sint  omnino  verba  duos  sensus  significantia,  sed  quia
raro  belle  respondeant,  nisi  cum  prorsus  rebus  ipsis

1  etiam  atque  etiam,  Spalding :  etiam  itaque  or  etiam  ira
MSS,  :  cogitata,  Becker  :  concitati,  MSS.

2  reperiuntur,  Spalding :  requirinntur,  A  :  requirantur,  G.
8  obscena,  Teuffel :  obscura,  MSS.

1  The  pun  is untranslatable, turning  as  it  does  on  the
similarity  of  sound  between  coque  and  quoque,  so  that  the

462


BOOK VI.  in.  44-48

paternal  acres.  Similar  attractive  effects  of  narrative
may  be  produced  by  the  narration  of  fables  or  at
times  even  of  historical  anecdotes.

On  the  other  hand  brevity  in  wit  gives  greater  45
point  and  speed.  It  may  be  employed  in  two  ways,
according  as  we  are  the  aggressors,  or  are  replying
to  our  opponents;  the  method,  however,  in  both
cases  is  to  some  extent  the  same.  For  there  is
nothing  that  can  be  said  in  attack  that  cannot
be  used  in  riposte.  But  there  are  certain  points  46
which  are  peculiar  to  reply.  For  remarks  designed
for  attack  are  usually  brought  ready-made  into
court,  after  long  thought  at  home,  whereas  those
made  in  reply  are  usually  improvised  during  a  dis-
pute or  the  cross-examination  of  witnesses.  But
though  there  are  many  topics  on  which  we  may
draw  for  our  jests,  I  must  repeat  that  not  all  these
topics  are  becoming  to  orators:  above  all  doubles  47
entendres  and  obscenity,  such  as  is  dear  to  the  Atellan
farce,  are  to  be  avoided,  as  also  are  those  coarse
jibes  so  common  on  the  lips  of  the  rabble,  where
the  ambiguity  of  words  is  turned  to  the  service  of
abuse.  I  cannot  even  approve  of  a  similar  form  of
jest,  that  sometimes  slipped  out  even  from  Cicero,
though  not  when  he  was  pleading  in  the  courts:
for  example,  once  when  a  candidate,  alleged  to  be
the  son  of  a  cook,  solicited  someone  else's  vote  in
his  presence,  he  said,  Ego  quoque  tibi  favebo.1  I  say  48
this  not  because  I  object  absolutely  to  all  play  on
words  capable  of  two  different  meanings,  but  because
such  jests  are  rarely  effective,  unless  they  are  helped
out  by  actual  facts  as  well  as  similarity  of  sound.

sentence  might  mean  either  i*  will  support  you,  cook,  or  /  too
will  support  you.

463


QU1NTILIAN

adiuvantur.  Quare  [non  hoc  modo]  *  paene  et  ipsum
scurrile  Ciceronis  est  in  eundem,  de  quo  supra  dixi,
Isauricum :  Miror,  quid  sit,  quod  pater  tuus,  homo  con-

49  stantissimuSy  te  nobis  varium  reliquit.  Sed  illud  ex
eodem  genere  praeclarum ;  cum  obiiceret  Miloni
accusator  in  argumentum  factarum  Clodio  insidia-
rum,  quod  Bovillas  ante  horam  nonam  devertisset,
ut  exspectaret,  dum  Clodius  a  villa  sua  exiret,  et
identidem  interrogaret,  quo  tempore  Clodius  occisus
esset, respondit,  Sero ; quod  vel  solum  sufficit,  ut

50  hoc  genus  non  totum  repudietur.  Nee  plura  modo
significari  solent,  sed  etiam  diversa,  ut  Nero  de  servo
pessimo  dixit  nulli  plus  apud  se  fidei  haberi,  nihil

51  ei  neque  occlusum  neque  signatum  esse.  Pervenit
res  usque  ad  aenigma,  quale  est  Ciceronis  in  Pletorium
Fonteii  accusatorem,  cuius  matrem,  dixit,  dum  vixisset,
ludumy  postquam  mortua  esset,  magistros  habuisse.  Di-
cebantur  autem,  dum  vixit,  infames  feminae  convenire
ad  earn  solitae ;  post  mortem  bona  eius  venierant.
Quanquam  hie ludus  per  translationem  dictus  est,

52  magistri  per  ambiguitatem. In  metalepsin  quoque

1  non  hoc  modo,  bracketed  by  Halm,


1  Here  again  the  pun  is  virtually  untranslatable,  varium
is  used  in  the  double  sense  of  unstable  or  mottled,  with
reference  to  the  story  that  he  had  been  scourged  by  his
father. See  above  §  25.

2  sero  may  mean  at  a  late  hour  or  too  late.

3  Cic.  de  Or.  n. lxi.  248. Probably  C.  Claudius  Nero
victor  of  the  Metaurus.

464


BOOK VI.  in.  48-52

For  example,  I  regard  the  jest  which  Cicero  levelled
against  that  same  Isauricus,  whom  I  mentioned
above,  as  being  little  less  than  sheer  buffoonery.
"  I  wonder,"  he  said,  "  why  your  father,  the  steadiest
of  men,  left  behind  him  such  a  stripy  gentleman
as  yourself."1  On  the  other  hand,  the  following  49
instance  of  the  same  type  of  wit  is  quite  admirable :
when  Milo's  accuser,  by  way  of  proving  that  he  had
lain  in  wait  for  Clodius,  alleged  that  he  had  put  up
at  Bovillae  before  the  ninth  hour  in  order  to  wait
until  Clodius  left  his  villa,  and  kept  repeating  the
question,  "  When  was  Clodius  killed  ?  ",  Cicero  re-
plied, "  Late !  "  2  a  retort  which  in  itself  justifies  us
in  refusing  to  exclude  this  type  of  wit  altogether.
Sometimes,  too,  the  same  word  may  be  used  not  60
merely  in  several  senses,  but  in  absolutely  opposite
senses.  For  example,  Nero3  said  of  a  dishonest
slave,  "  No  one  was  more  trusted  in  my  house  :  there
was  nothing  closed  or  sealed  to  him."  Such  ambi-  51
guity  may  even  go  so  far  as  to  present  all  the
appearance  of  a  riddle,  witness  the  jest  that  Cicero
made  at  the  expense  of  Pletorius,  the  accuser  of
Fonteius :  "  His  mother,"  he  said,  "  kept  a  school
while  she  lived  and  masters  after  she  was  dead."  4
The  explanation  is  that  in  her  lifetime  women
of  infamous  character  used  to  frequent  her
house,  while  after  her  death  her  property  was
sold.  (I  may  note  however  that  Indus,  is  used
metaphorically  in  the  sense  of  school,  while
magistri  is  used ambiguously.) A similar form  of  62

4  magister  may  mean  a  schoolmaster  or  a  receiver  (magister
bonorum)  placed  in  charge  of  the  goods  to  be  sold.  The
phrase  here  has  the  same  suggestion  as  "  having  the  bailifis
in  the  house."  This  passage  does  not  occur  in  the  portions
of  the  pro  Fonteio  which  survive.

46  $


QUINTILIAN

cadit  eadem  ratio  dictorum,  ut  Fabius  Maximus,
incusans  Augusti  congiariorum,  quae  amicis  dabantur,
exiguitatem,  heminaria  esse  dixit ;  nam  congianum
commune liberalitatis  atque mensurae,  a mensura

53  ducta  imminutio  rerum.  Haec  tarn  frigida  quam
est  nominum  fictio  adiectis,  detractis,  mutatis  litteris,
ut  Acisculum,  quia  esset  pactus,  Pacisculum,  et  Placi-
dum  nomine,  quod  is  acerbus  natura  esset,  Acidnm,  et

54  Tullium,  cum  fur  esset,  Tollium  dictos  invenio.  Sed
haec  eadem  genera  commodius  in  rebus  quam  in
nomimbus  respondent.  Afer  enim  venuste  Manlium
Suram,  multum  in  agendo  discursantem,  salientem,
manus  iactantem,  togam  deiicientem  et  reponentem,
non  agere,  dixit,  sed  satagere.  Est  enim  dictum
per  se  urbanum  satagere  etiamsi  nulla  subsit  alterius

55  verbi  similitudo.  Fiunt  et  adiecta  et  detracta  aspi-
ration e  et  divisis  coniunctisque  verbis  similiter  saepius
frigida,  aliquando  tamen  recipienda.  Eademque
condicio  est  in  iis,  quae  a  nominibus  trahuntur.
Multa  ex  hoc  Cicero  in  Verrem,  sed  ut  ab  aliis  dicta,


1  See  viii.  vi.  37. "Substitution"  is  the  nearest  translation.

2  congiarium  is  derived  from  congius  a  measure  equal  to
about  6  pints.  It  was  employed  to  denote  the  largesse  of
wine  or  oil  distributed  to  the  people.  Fabius  coined  the
word  heminarium  from  hemina,  the  twelfth  part  of  the
congius, Fabius  was  consul  in  10  b.  c.  and  a  friend  of  Ovid.

*  From  tollere  to  take  away.

466


BOOK VI.  iir.  52-55

jest  may  be  made  by  use  of  the  figure  known  as
?netalepsis,1  as  when  Fabius  Maximus  complained  of
the  meagreness  of  the  gifts  made  by  Augustus  to
his  friends,  and  said  that  his  congiaria  were  kemi-
naria :  for  congiarium  2  implies  at  once  liberality  and
a  particular  measure,  and  Fabius  put  a  slight  on  the
liberality  of  Augustus  by  a  reference  to  the  measure.
This  form  of  jest  is  as  poor  as  is  the  invention  of  53
punning  names  by  the  addition,  subtraction  or  change
of  letters  :  I  find,  for  instance,  a  case  where  a  certain
Acisculus  was  called  Pacisculus  because  of  some
" compact"  which  he  had  made,  while  one  Placidus
was  nicknamed  Acidus  because  of  his  "  sour  M  temper,
and  one  Tullius  was  dubbed  Tollius  3  because  he  was
a  thief.  Such  puns  are  more  successful  with  things  54
than  names.  It  was,  for  example,  a  neat  hit  of
Afer's  when  he  said  that  Manlius  Sura,  who  kept
rushing  to  and  fro  while  he  was  pleading,  waving
his  hands,  letting  his  toga  fall  and  replacing  it,  was
not  merely  pleading,  but  giving  himself  a  lot  of
needless  trouble.4  For  there  is  a  spice  of  wit  about
the  word  satagere  in  itself,  even  if  there  were  no
resemblance  to  any  other  word.  Similar  jests  may  55
be  produced  by  the  addition  or  removal  of  the
aspirate,  or  by  splitting  up  a  word  or  joining  it  to
another  :  the  effect  is  generally  poor,  but  the  practice
is  occasionally  permissible.  Jests  drawn  from  names
are  of  the  same  type.  Cicero  introduces  a  number
of  such  jests  against  Verres,  but  always  as  quotations

4  This  pun  cannot  be  reproduced.  Watson  attempts  to
express  it  by  "doing  business  in  pleading"  and  "overdoing
it."  But  "  overdoing  it "  has  none  of  the  neatness  oimtaqtrt^
which  is  said  to  have  "a  spice  of  wit  about  it,"  since  it  means
lit,  "to  do  enough,"  an  ironic  way  of  saying  "to  overdo
it."

467


QUINTILIAN

modo  Juturum,  ut  omnia  verreret,  cum  diceretur  Verres,
modo  Herculi,  quem  expilaverat,  molestiorem  apro
Erymanthio  fuisse,  modo  malum  sacerdotem^  qui  tarn
nequam  verrem  reliquisset,  quia  Sacerdoti  Verres  suc-

56  cesserat.  Praebet  tamen  aliquando  occasionem
quaedam  felicitas  hoc  quoque  bene  utendi :  ut  pro
Caecina  Cicero  in  testem  Sex.  Clodium  Phormionem,
Nee  minus  niger,  inquit,  nee  minus  confidens  quam  est
Me  Terentianus  Phormio.

57  Acriora  igitur  sunt  et  elegantiora,  quae  trahuntur
ex  vi  rerum.  In  his  maxime  valet  similitudo,  si
tamen  ad  aliquid  inferius  leviusque  referatur;  quae
iam  veteres  illi  iocabantur,  qui  Lentulum  Spintherem
et  Scipionem  Serapionem  esse  dixerunt.  Sed  ea  non
ab  hominibus  modo  petitur  verum  etiam  ab  animali-
bus,  ut  nobis  pueris  Iunius Bassus,  homo  inprimis

58  dicax,  asinus  albus  vocabatur;  et  Sarmentus  Mes-
sium  Cicirrum  equo  fero  comparavit.  Ducitur  et  ab
inanimis  *  sicut  P.  Blaesius  Iulium,  hominem  nigrum
et  macrum  et  pandum,  fibulam  ferream  dixit. Quod

59  nunc  risus  petendi  genus  frequentissimum  est. Adhi-

1  Messium  .  .  .  inanimis,  an  addition  suggested by  Rader-
macher.


1  verres  is  also  the  second  pers.  sing,  of  the  future  of  verro.

2  verres  means  a  boar  and  here  suggests  a  pig  that  should
have  been  killed  as  a  victim.  For  these  jests  see  Verr.  n.
xxi.  62,  iv.  xliii.  95,  I.  xlvi.  121  respectively.  Compare  also
iv.  xxiv.  53  and  xxv.  57.

3  x.  27.  The  reference  must  be  to  the  make-up  of  Phormio
on  the  stage:  there  is  nothing  in  the  play  to  suggest  the
epithet  "  black."

468


BOOK VI.  hi.  55-59

from  others.  On  one  occasion  he  says  that  he
would  sweep1  everything  away,  for  his  name  was
Verres ;  on  another,  that  he  had  given  more  trouble
to  Hercules,  whose  temple  he  had  pillaged,  than
was  given  by  the  Erymanthine  "boar"  ;  on  another,
that  he  was  a  bad  "  priest "  who  had  left  so  worthless
a  pig  behind  him.2  For  Verres*  predecessor  was
named  Sacerdos.  Sometimes,  however,  a  lucky  56
chance  may  give  us  an  opportunity  of  employing
such  jests  with  effect,  as  for  instance  when  Cicero
in  the  pro  Caecina*  says  of  the  witness  Sextus
Clodius  Phormio,  "He  was  not  less  black  or  less
bold  than  the  Phormio  of  Terence/'

We  may  note  therefore  that  jests  which  turn  on  57
the  meaning  of  things  are  at  once  more  pointed  and
more  elegant.  In  such  cases  resemblances  between
things  produce  the  best  effects,  more  especially
if  we  refer  to  something  of  an  inferior  or  more  trivial
nature,  as  in  the  jests  of  which  our  forefathers  were
so  fond,  when  they  called  Lentulus  Spinther  and
Scipio  Serapio.4  But  such  jests  may  be  drawn  not
merely  from  the  names  of  men,  but  from  animals  as
well ;  for  example  when  I  was  a  boy,  Junius  Bassus,
one  of  the  wittiest  of  men,  was  nicknamed  the  white
ass.  And  Sarmentus5  compared  Messius  Cicirrus  58
to  a  wild  horse.  The  comparison  may  also  be
drawn  from  inanimate  objects  :  for  example  Publius
Blessius  called  a  certain  Julius,  who  was  dark,  lean
and  bent,  the  iron  buckle.  This  method  of  raising
a  laugh  is  much  in  vogue  to-day. Such  resemblances  59

4  From  their  resemblances  to  Spinther,  a  bad  actor,  and  to
Serapio,  a  dealer  in  sacrificial  victims.

6  Sarmentus,  a  favourite  of  Augustus,  cp.  Hor.  Sat.  I.  v.
56,  where  the  story  is  given.

469


QUINTILIAN

betur  autem  similitudo  interim  palam,  interim  inseri
solet  parabolae ;  cuius  est  generis  illud  Augusti,  qui
militi  libellum  timide  porrigenti,  Noli,  inquit,  ianquam

60  assem  elephanio  des.  Sunt  quaedam  vi l  similia ;  unde
Vatinius  dixit  hoc  dictum,  cum  reus,  agente  in  eum
Calvo,  frontem  candido  sudario  tergeret,  idque  ipsum
accusator  in  invidiam  vocaret,  Quamvis  reus  sum,  inquit,

61  et  partem  item  2  candidum  edo.  Adhuc  est  subtilior  ilia
ex  simili  translatio,  cum,  quod  in  alia  re  fieri  solet,  in
aliam  mutuamur.  Ea  dicatur  sane  fictio :  ut  Chry-
sippus,  cum  in  triumpho  Caesaris  eborea  oppida  essent
translata,  et  post  dies  paucos  Fabii  Maxim i  lignea,
thecas  esse  oppidorum  Caesaris  dixit.  Et  Pedo  de
mirmillone,  qui  retiarium  consequebatur  nee  feriebat,

62  Vivurn,  inquit,  capere  vult.  Iungitur  amphiboliae
similitudo,  ut  a  Galba,  qui  pilam  negligenter
petenti,  Sic,  inquit,  petis,  tanquam  Caesaris  candidatus.

1  vi  is  the  reading  of  AG,  but  is  unsatisfactory  as  intro-
ducing nothing  new.  veri  {some  later  MSS.),  vitii  {Halm),
vix  {Radermacher),  do  nothing  to  help  out  the  meaning.

1  panem  item,  Haupt :  parentem,  MSS.

1  The  accused  habitually  wore  mourning.  Calvus  suggested
that  Vatinius  should  not  therefore  have  a  white  handkerchief.
Vatinius  retorts,  You  might  as  well  say  that  1  ought  to  have
dropped  eating  white  bread.

2  Legatus  of  Caesar  in  Spain.  The  wooden  models  were
so  worthless  compared  with  those  of  ivory  that  Chrysippus
said  they  must  be  no  more  than  the  boxes  in  which  Caesar
kept  the  latter.

■  Probably  Chrysippus  Vettius,  a  freedman  and  architect.
4  Presumably  the  poet  Pedo  Albinovanus.

470


BOOK VI.  in.  59-62

may  be  put  to  the  service  of  wit  either  openly  or
allusively.  Of  the  latter  type  is  the  remark  of
Augustus,  made  to  a  soldier  who  showed  signs  of
timidity  in  presenting  a  petition,  "Don't  hold  it  out
as  if  you  were  giving  a  penny  to  an  elephant/'  Some  60
of  these  jests  turn  on  similarity  of  meaning.  Of
this  kind  was  the  witticism  uttered  by  Vatinius  when
he  was  prosecuted  by  Calvus.  Vatinius  was  wiping
his  forehead  with  a  white  handkerchief,  and  his
accuser  called  attention  to  the  unseemliness  of  the
act.  Whereupon  Vatinius  replied,  "Though  I  am
on  my  trial,  I  go  on  eating  white  bread  all  the
same."1  Still  more  ingenious  is  the  application  of  61
one  thing  to  another  on  the  ground  of  some  resem-
blance, that  is  to  say  the  adaptation  to  one  thing  of
a  circumstance  which  usually  applies  to  something
else,  a  type  of  jest  which  we  may  regard  as  being  an
ingenious  form  of  fiction.  For  example,  when  ivory
models  of  captured  towns  were  carried  in  Caesar's
triumphal  procession,  and  a  few  days  later  wooden
models  of  the  same  kind  were  carried  at  the  triumph
of  Fabius  Maximus,2  Chrysippus  3  remarked  that  the
latter  were  the  cases  for  Caesar's  ivory  towns.  And
Pedo4  said  of  a  heavy-armed  gladiator  who  was
pursuing  another  armed  with  a  net  and  failed  to
strike  him,  "He  wants  to  catch  him  alive."  Resem-  62
blance  and  ambiguity  may  be  used  in  conjunction :
Galba  for  example  said  to  a  man  who  stood  very
much  at  his  ease  when  playing  ball,  "You  stand
as  if  you  were  one  of  Caesar's  candidates." 5 The

5  A  candidate  recommended  by  the  emperor  was  auto*
matically  elected.  I  have  borrowed  Watson's  translation  of
the  pun.  Petere  is  the  regular  word  for  "  standing  for
office. "  Petert  pUam  probably  means  "  to  attempt  to  catch
the  ball."

471


QUINTILIAN

Nam illud peiis ambiguum est, securitas si  mills

63  Quod  hactenus  ostendisse  satis  est.  Ceterum  fre-
quentissima  aliorum  generum  cum-aliis  mixtura  est,
eaque  optima,  quae  ex  pluribus  constat.  Eadem
dissimilium  ratio  est.  Hinc  eques  Romanus,  ad
quem  in  spectaculis  bibentem  cum  misisset  Augustus,
qui  ei  diceret,  Ego  si  prandere  volo,  domum  to :  Tu

64  enim,  inquit,  non  times,  ne  locum  perdas.  Ex  contrario
non  una  species.  Neque  enim  eodem  modo  dixit
Augustus  praefecto,  quem  cum  ignominia  mittebat,
subinde  interponenti  precibus,  Quid  respondebo  patri
meo  ?  Die,  me  tibi  displicuisse ;  quo  Galba  penulam
roganti :  Non  possum  commodare,  domi  maneo,  cum
cenaculum  eius  perplueret.  Tertium  adhuc  illud:
(nisi  quod,1  ut  ne  auctorem  ponam,  verecundia  ipsius
facit)  Libidinosior  es  quam  ullus  spado  ;  quo  sine  dubio
et  opinio  decipitur  sed  ex  contrario.  Et  hoc  ex
eodem  loco  est  sed  nulli  priorum  simile,  quod  dixit
M.  Vestinus,  cum  ei  nuntiatum  esset. . .  necatum  esse,2

65  Aliquando  dednel  putere.  Onerabo  librum  exemplis
similemque  iis,  qui  risus  gratia  componuntur,  efficiam,
si  persequi  voluero  singula  veterum.


1  nisi  quod,  Becker  :  si  quod,  AQ.
1  necatum  esse,  supplied  by  Spalding,


472


BOOK VI.  in.  62-65

ambiguity  lies  in  the  word  stand,  while  the  indifference
shewn  by  the  player  supplies  the  resemblance.  I  63
need  say  no  more  on  this  form  of  humour.  But  the
practice  of  combining  different  types  of  jest  is  very
common,  and  those  are  best  which  are  of  this  com-
posite character.  A  like  use  may  be  made  of  dissi-
milarity. Thus  a  Roman  knight  was  once  drinking
at  the  games,  and  Augustus  sent  him  the  following
message,  "  If  I  want  to  dine,  I  go  home."  To  which
the  other  replied,  "  Yes,  but  you  are  not  afraid  of
losing  your  seat."  Contraries  give  rise  to  more  than  64
one  kind  of  jest.  For  instance  the  following  jests
made  by  Augustus  and  Galba  differ  in  form.  Augustus
was  engaged  in  dismissing  an  officer  with  dishonour
from  his  service  :  the  officer  kept  interrupting  him
with  entreaties  and  said,  "  What  shall  I  say  to  my
father?"  Augustus  replied,  "Tell  him  that  I  fell
under  your  displeasure."  Galba,  when  a  friend  asked
him  for  the  loan  of  a  cloak,  said,  "  I  cannot  lend  it
you,  as  I  am  going  to  stay  at  home,"  the  point  being
that  the  rain  was  pouring  through  the  roof  of  his
garret  at  the  time.  I  will  add  a  third  example,
although  out  of  respect  to  its  author  I  withhold  his
name  :  "  You  are  more  lustful  than  a  eunuch,"  where
we  are  surprised  by  the  appearance  of  a  word  which
is  the  very  opposite  of  what  we  should  have  expected.
Under  the  same  heading,  although  it  is  quite
different  from  any  of  the  preceding,  we  must  place
the  remark  made  by  Marcus  Vestinus  when  it  was
reported  to  him  that  a  certain  man  was  dead.  "  Some
day  then  he  will  cease  to  stink,"  was  his  reply.
But  I  shall  overload  this  book  with  illustrations  and  65
turn  it  into  a  common  jest-book,  if  I  continue  to
quote  each  jest  that  was  made  by  our  forefathers.

473


QUINTILIAN

Ex  omnibus  argumentorum  locis  eadem  occasio
est.  Nam  et  finitione  usus  est  Augustus  de  panto  -
mimis  duobus,  qui  alternis  gestibus  contendebant,
cum  eorum  alterum  saliatorem  dixit  alterum  interpella-
tes torem ;  et  partitione  Galba,  cum  paenulam  roganti
respondit,  Non  pluit,  non  opus  est  tibi ;  si  pluit,  ipse
utar.  Proinde  genere,  specie,  propriis,  differentibus,
iugatis,  adiunctis,  consequentibus,  antecedentibus,
repugnantibus,  causis,  effectis,  comparatione  parium,
maiorum,  minorum  similis  materia  praebetur ;  sicut

67  in  tropos  quoque  omnes  cadit.  An  non  plurima  per
hyperbolen1  dicuntur?  quale  refert  Cicero  de  homine
praelongo,  caput  eum  ad  fornicem  Fabium  offendisse ;
et  quod  P.  Oppius  dixit  de  genere  Lentulorum,  cum
assidue minores parentibus liberi essent, nascendo

68  interiturum.  Quid  ironia  ?  nonne  etiam  quae  severis-
sime  fit,  ioci  prope  genus  est  ?  Qua  urbane  usus  est
Afer,  cum  Didio  Gallo,  qui  provinciam  ambitiosis-
sime  petierat,  deinde,  impetrata  ea,  tanquam  coactus
querebatur,  Age,  inquit,  aliquid  et  rei  puhlicae  causa.
Metaphora  2  quoque  Cicero  lusit,  cum,  Vatinii  morte
nuntiata,  cuius  parum  certus  dicebatur  auctor,  Inte-

1  per  hyperbolen,  added  by  Begins.

2  metaphora,  Halm  :  et  abora,  et  labora,  etc. ,  MSS.

1  See  v.  x.  85.  a  See  v.  x.  55  sqq.

3  cp.  de  Orat.  n.  lxvi.  267,  where  the  jest  is  attributed  to
Crassus.

474


BOOK VI.  in.  65-68

All  forms  of  argument  afford  equal  opportunity  for
jests.  Augustus  for  example  employed  definition
when  he  said  of  two  ballet-dancers  who  were  engaged
in  a  contest,  turn  and  turn  about,  as  to  who  could  make
the  most  exquisite  gestures,  that  one  was  a  dancer  and
the  other  merely  interrupted  the  dancing.  Galba  on  66
the  other  hand  made  use  of  partition  when  he  replied
to  a  friend  who  asked  him  for  a  cloak,  "  It  is  not
raining  and  you  don't  need  it ;  if  it  does  rain,  I  shall
wear  it  myself."  Similar  material  for  jests  is  sup-
plied by  genus,  species,  property,  difference,  conju-
gates,1 adjuncts,  antecedents,  consequents,  contraries,
causes,  effects,  and  comparisons  of  things  greater,
equal,  or  less,2  as  it  is  also  by  all  forms  of  trope.  Are  67
not  a  large  number  of  jests  made  by  means  of  hyper-
bole?  Take  for  instance  Cicero's3  remark  about  a
man  who  was  remarkable  for  his  height,  "  He  bumped
his  head  against  the  Fabian  arch/'  or  the  remark
made  by  Publius  Oppius  about  the  family  of  the
Lentuli  to  the  effect,  that  since  the  children  were
always  smaller  than  their  parents,  the  race  would
'"  perish  by  propagation/'  Again,  what  of  irony?  Is  not  68
even  the  most  severe  form  of  irony  a  kind  of  jest  ?
Afer  made  a  witty  use  of  it  when  he  replied  to  Didius
Gall  us,  who,  after  making  the  utmost  efforts  to  secure
a  provincial  government,  complained  on  receiving
the  appointment  that  he  had  been  forced  into  accept-
ing, "  Well,  then,  do  something  for  your  country's
sake." 4  Cicero  also  employed  metaphor  to  serve
his  jest,  when  on  receiving  a  report  of  uncertain
authorship  to  the  effect  that  Vatinius  was  dead,
he remarked, "  Well, for the meantime I shall

4  i.e.  sacrifice  your  own  interests  and  serve  your  country
for  its  own  sake.

475


QUINT1LIAN

69  rim,  inquit,  usura  fruar.  Idem  per  allegorian  M.
Caelium,  melius  obiicientem  crimina  quam  defen-
dentem,  bonam  dextram,  malam  sinistram  habere
dicebat. Emphasi  A. Villius  dixit,  fcrrum  in Tuc-

70  cium  incidisse.  Figuras  quoque  mentis,  quae  o-^/xara
SiaWas  dicuntur,  res  eadem  recipit  omnes,  in  quas
nonnulli  diviserunt  species  dictorum.  Nam  et  in-
terrogamus  et  dubitamus  et  adfirmamus  et  minamur
et  optamus,  quaedam  ut  miserantes,  quaedam  ut
irascentes dicimus. Ridiculum est autem omne,

71  quod  aperte  fingitur.  Stulta  reprehendere  facilli-
mum  est,  nam  per  se  sunt  ridicula  ;  sed  rem  urbanam
facit  aliqua  ex  nobis  adiectio.  Stulte  interrogaverat
exeuntem  de  theatro  Campatium  Titius  Maximus,  an
spectasset?  fecit  Campatius  dubitationem  eius  stulti-
orem  dicendo,  No?i,  sed  in  orchestra  pila  lusi.

72  Refutatio  cum  sit  in  negando,  redarguendo,  defen-
dendo,  elevando,  ridicule  negavit  Manius  Curius ;
nam,  cum  eius  accusator  in  sipario  omnibus  locis  aut
nudum  eum  in  nervo  aut  ab  amicis  redemptum  ex

73  alea  pinxisset :  Ergo  ego,  inquit,  nunquam  vici  ? Re-

1  The  report  may  be  false,  but  I  will  enjoy  the  hope  it
ar'  uses  in  me.  The  capital  on  which  I  receive  a  dividend
may  be  non-existent,  but  I  will  enjoy  the  interest.

2  The  right  being  the  sword  arm,  the  left  carrying  the
shield.

3  Tuccius  was  clearly  a  coward  who  committed  suicide.
Villius  suggested  that  he  would  never  have  had  the  courage

476


BOOK VI.  in.  68-73

make  use  of  the  interest." l  He  also  employed  69
allegory  in  the  witticism  that  he  was  fond  of  making
about  Marcus  Caelius,  who  was  better  at  bringing
charges  than  at  defending  his  client  against  them,  to
the  effect  that  he  had  a  good  right  hand,  but  a  weak
left.2  As  an  example  of  the  use  of  emphasis  I  may
quote  the  jest  of  Aulus  Villius,  that  Tuccius  was
killed  by  his  sword  falling  upon  him.3  Figures  of  70
thought,  which  the  Greeks  call  o^/Liara  oWoi'as,  may
be  similarly  employed,  and  some  writers  have  classi-
fied jests  under  their  various  headings.  For  we  ask
questions,  express  doubts,  make  assertions,  threaten,
wish  and  speak  in  pity  or  in  anger.  And  everything
is  laughable  that  is  obviously  a  pretence.  It  is  easy  71
to  make  fun  of  folly,  for  folly  is  laughable  in  itself;
but  we  may  improve  such  jests  by  adding  something
of  our  own.  Titius  Maximus  put  a  foolish  question
to  Campatius,  who  was  leaving  the  theatre,  when  he
asked  him  if  he  had  been  watching  the  play.  "  No,"
replied  Campatius,  u  I  was  playing  ball  in  the  stalls,"
whereby  he  made  the  question  seem  even  more
foolish  than  it  actually  was.

Refutation  consists  in  denying,  rebutting,  defend-  72
ing  or  making  light  of  a  charge,  and  each  of  these
affords  scope  for  humour.  Manius  Curius,  for  example,
showed  humour  in  the  way  in  which  he  denied  a
charge  that  had  been  brought  against  him.  His
accuser  had  produced  a  canvas,  in  every  scene  of
which  he  was  depicted  either  as  naked  and  in  prison
or  as  being  restored  to  freedom  by  his  friends  paying
off  his  gambling  debts.  His  only  comment  was,
"  Did  I  never  win,  then  ?  " Sometimes  we  rebut  a  73

to  fall  upon  his  sword,  and  that  therefore  the  sword  must
have  fallen  on  him.

477


QUINTILIAN

darguimus  interim  aperte,  ut  Cicero  Vibium  Curium
multum  de  annis  aetatis  suae  mentientem,  Turn  ergo,
cum  una  declamabamus,  non  eras  natus ;  interim  et
simulata  assensione,  ut  idem  Fabia  Dolabellae  di-
cente  triginta  se  annos  habere,  Verum  est,  inquit;  nam

74  hoc  Mam  tarn  viginti  annis  audio.  Belle  interim  subii-
citur  pro  eo,  quod  neges,  aliud  mordacius :  ut  Iunius
Bassus,  querente  Domitia  Passieni,  quod  incusans
eius  sordes  calceos  earn  veteres  diceret  vendere
solere,  Non  mehercules,  inquit,  hoc  unquam  dixi ;  scd
dlvi  emere  te  solere.  Defensionem  imitatus  est  eques
Romanus,  qui  obiicienti  Augusto,  quod  patrimonium

75  comedisset,  Meum,  inquit,  putavi.  Elevandi  ratio  est
duplex,  ut  aut  nimiam  quis  *  iactantiam  minuat :
quemadmodum  C.  Caesar  Pomponio  ostendenti  vul-
nus  ore  exceptum  in  seditione  Sulpiciana,  quod  is  se
passum  pro  Caesare  pugnantem  gloriabatur,  N unquam
fugiens  respexeris,  inquit ; aut  crimen  obiectum,  ut

Cicero  obiurgantibus, quod sexagenarius Publiliam

76  virginem  duxisset,  Cras  mulier  erit,  inquit.  Hoc
genus dicti consequens vocant  quidam,  atque  ill!

1  nimiam  quis,  Deffntr  :  veniam  quis  aut,  MSS.


1  See  vi.  i.  50.

2  A  cousin  of  the  father  of  C.  Julius  Caesar.


473


BOOK VI.  hi.  73-76

charge  openly,  as  Cicero  did  when  he  refuted  the
extravagant  lies  of  Vibius  Curius  about  his  age :
"  Well,  then,"  he  remarked,  "in  the  days  when  you
and  I  used  to  practise  declamation  together,  you
were  not  even  born.,,  At  other  times  we  may  rebut
it  by  pretending  to  agree.  Cicero,  for  example,  when
Fabia  the  wife  of  Dolabella  asserted  that  her  age  was
thirty,  remarked,  "  That  is  true,  for  I  have  heard  it
for  the  last  twenty  years."  Sometimes  too  it  is  74
effective  to  add  something  more  biting  in  place  of
the  charge  which  is  denied,  as  was  done  by  Junius
Bassus  when  Domitia  the  wife  of  Passienus1  com-
plained that  by  way  of  accusing  her  of  meanness  he
had  alleged  that  she  even  sold  old  shoes.  "No,"
he  replied,  "  I  never  said  anything  of  the  sort.  I
said  you  bought  them."  A  witty  travesty  of  defence
was  once  produced  by  a  Roman  knight  who  was
charged  by  Augustus  with  having  squandered  his
patrimony.  "I  thought  it  was  my  own,"  he  an-
swered. As  regards  making  light  of  a  charge,  there  75
are  two  ways  in  which  this  may  be  done.  We  may
throw  cold  water  on  the  excessive  boasts  of  our
opponent,  as  was  done  by  Gaius  Caesar,2  when  Pom-
ponius  displayed  a  wound  in  his  face  which  he  had
received  in  the  rebellion  of  Sulpicius  and  which  he
boasted  he  had  received  while  fighting  for  Caesar :
"  You  should  never  look  round,"  he  retorted,  "when
you  are  running  away."  Or  we  may  do  the  same
with  some  charge  that  is  brought  against  us,  as  was
done  by  Cicero  when  he  remarked  to  those  who
reproached  him  for  marrying  Publilia,  a  young  un-
wedded  girl,  when  he  was  already  over  sixty,  "  Well,
she  will  be  a  woman  to-morrow."  Some  style  this  76
type  of  jest  consequent  and,  on  the  ground  that  both

479


QUINTILIAN

simile,  quod  Gicero  Curionem,  semper  ab  excusatione
aetatis  incipientem,  facilius  cotidie  prooemium  ha-
bere  dixit, quia ista natura sequi et eohaerere

77  videantur.  Sed  elevandi  genus  est  etiam  causarum
relatio,  qua  Cicero  est  usus  in  Vatinium.  Qui  pedi-
bus  aeger,  cum  vellet  videri  commodioris  valetudinis
factus  et  diceret,  se  iam  bina  milia  passu um  ambu-
lare,  Dies  enim,  inquit,  longiores  sunt,  Et  Augustus
nuntiantibus Tarraconensibus  palmam in ara eius

78  enatam,  Apparet,  inquit,  quam  saepe  accendatis.  Trans-
tulit  crimen  Cassius  Sever  us.  Nam  cum  obiurgare-
tur  a  praetore,  quod  advocati  eius  L.  Varo  Epicureo,
Caesaris  amico,  convicium  fecissent,  Nescio,  inquit,
qui  conviciati  sint,  et  puto  Stoicos  Juisse.

Repercutiendi  multa  sunt  genera,  venustissimum,
quod  etiam  sirnilitudine  aliqua  verbi  adiuvatur :  ut
Trachalus  dicenti  Suelio,  "Si  hoc  ita  est,  is  in  exilium"

79  a  Si  non  est  ita,  redis,"  inquit.  Elusit  Cassius  Severus
obiiciente  quodam,  quod  ei  domo  sua  Proculeius  in-
terdixisset,  respondendo,  Numquid  ergo  illuc  accedo  ?
Sic  eluditur  et  ridiculum  ridiculo  :  ut  divus  Augus^
tus,  cum  ei  Galli  torquem  aureum  centum  pondo
dedissent,  et  Dolabella  per  iocum,  temptans  tamen

1  The  point  is  obscure  ; we  have  no  key  to  the  circum-
stances of  the  jest.

480


BOOK VI.  in.  76-79

jests  seem  to  follow  so  naturally  and  inevitably,  class
it  with  the  jest  which  Cicero  levelled  against  Curio,
who  always  began  his  speeches  by  asking  indulgence
for  his  youth :  "  You  will  find  your  exordium  easier
every  day,"  he  said.  Another  method  of  making  77
light  of  a  statement  is  to  suggest  a  reason.  Cicero
employed  this  method  against  Vatinius.  The  latter
was  lame  and,  wishing  to  make  it  seem  that  his  health
was  improved,  said  that  he  could  now  walk  as  much
as  two  miles.  "  Yes,"  said  Cicero,  "for  the  days  are
longer."  Again  Augustus,  when  the  inhabitants  of
Tarraco  reported  that  a  palm  had  sprung  up  on  the
altar  dedicated  to  him,  replied,  "That  shows  how
often  you  kindle  fire  upon  it."  Cassius  Severus  78
showed  his  wit  by  transferring  a  charge  made  against
himself  to  a  different  quarter.  For  when  he  was
reproached  by  the  praetor  on  the  ground  that  his
advocates  had  insulted  Lucius  Varus,  an  Epicurean
and  a  friend  of  Caesaiv  he  replied,  "  I  do  not  know
who  they  were  who  insulted  him,  I  suppose  they
were  Stoics."

Of  retorts  there  are  a  number  of  forms,  the  wittiest
being  that  which  is  helped  out  by  a  certain  verbal
similarity,  as  in  the  retort  made  by  Trachalus  to
Suelius.  The  latter  had  said,  "  If  that  is  the  case,
you  go  into  exile":  to  which  Trachalus  replied,
"And  if  it  is  not  the  case,  you  go  back  into  exile."  1
Cassius  Severus  baffled  an  opponent  who  reproached  79
him  with  the  fact  that  Proculeius  had  forbidden  him
to  enter  his  house  by  replying, "  Do  I  ever  go  there  ?  "
But  one  jest  may  also  be  defeated  by  another :  for
example,  Augustus  of  blessed  memory,  when  the
Gauls  gave  him  a  golden  necklet  weighing  a  hundred
pounds,  and  Dolabella,  speaking  in  jest  but  with  an

481


QUJNTILIAN

ioei  sui  eventum,  dixisset,  "  Imperator,  torque  me  dona,'

80  " Malo,  inquit,  te  civica  donate"  :  mendacium  quoque
mendacio,  ut  Galba,  dicente  quodam,  victoriato  se  uno
in  Sicilia  quinque  pedes  longam  murenam  emisse :
Nihil,  inquit,  mirum  ;  nam  ibi  tarn  longae  nascunlur,  ut

81  Us  piscatores  pro  restibus  cingantur.  Contraria  est  ne-
ganti  confessionis  simulatio,  sed  ipsa  quoque  multum
habet  urbanitatis.  Sic  Afer,  cum  ageret  contra
libertum  Claudii  Caesaris,  et  ex  diverso  quidam  con-
dicionis  eiusdem,  cuius  erat  litigator,  exclamasset,
" Praeterea  tu  semper  in  libertos  Caesaris  diets"  "Nee
mekercule,  inquit,  quicquam  prqficio"  Cui  vicinum
est  non  negare  quod  obiicitur,  cum  et  id  palam
falsum  est  et  inde  materia  bene  respondendi  datur :
ut  Catulus  dicenti  Philippo,  "Quid  latras?  " "Furem

82  video"  inquit.  In  se  dicere  non  fere  est  nisi  scur-
rarum  et  in  oratore  utique  minime  probabile,  quod
fieri  totidem  modis  quot  in  alios  potest. Ideoque  hoc,

83  quamvis  frequens  sit,  transeo.  Illud  vero,  etiamsi
ridiculum  est,  indignum  tamen  est  homine  liberali,1
quod  aut  turpiter  aut  potenter  dicitur;  quod  fecisse

1  liberali,  early  edd.  :  tolerabili,  MSS.

1  The  civic  crown  of  oak  leaves  was  given  as  a  reward  for
saving  the  life  of  a  fellow-citizen  in  war.  The  torquis  was
often  given  as  a  reward  for  valour,  and  Augustus  pretends
to  believe  that  Dolabella  had  asked  for  a  military  decoration.
The  point  lies  in  the  contrast  between  the  intrinsic  value  and

482


BOOK VI.  in.  79-83

eye  to  the  success  of  his  jest,  said,  "  General,  give
me  your  necklet/'  replied,  "  I  had  rather  give  you
the  crown  of  oak  leaves."1 So,  too,  one  lie  may  be  80
defeated by another: Galba, for instance, when
someone  told  him  that  he  once  bought  a  lamprey
five  feet  long  for  half  a  denarius  in  Sicily,  replied,
"  There  is  nothing  extraordinary  in  that :  for  they
grow  to  such  a  length  in  those  seas  that  the  fisher-
men tie  them  round  their  waists  in  lieu  of  ropes ! "
Then  there  is  the  opposite  of  denial,  namely  a  feigned  81
confession,  which  likewise  may  show  no  small  wit.
Thus Afer,  when  pleading  against  a  freedman  of
Claudius  Caesar  and  when  another  freedman  called
out  from  the  opposite  side  of  the  court,  "  You  are
always  speaking  against  Caesar's  freedmen,"  replied,
"Yes, but I make precious little headway." A
similar  trick  is  not  to  deny  a  charge,  though  it  is
obviously  false  and  affords  good  opportunity  for  an
excellent  reply. For  example,  when  Philippus  said
to  Catulus,  "  Why  do  you  bark  so  ?  "  the  latter  replied,2
"  I  see  a  thief." To  make  jokes  against  oneself  is  82
scarcely  fit  for  any  save  professed  buffoons  and  is
strongly  to  be  disapproved  in  an  orator. This  form
of  jest  has  precisely  the  same  varieties  as  those  which
we  make  against  others  and  therefore  I  pass  it  by,
although  it  is  not  infrequently  employed. On  the  83
other  hand  scurrilous  or  brutal  jests,  although  they
may  raise  a  laugh,  are  quite  unworthy  of  a  gentle-
man. I  remember  a  jest  of  this  kind  being  made  by

weight  of  the  two  decorations.  Further,  Augustus  was  very
parsimonious  in  bestowing  military  decorations  and  had  him-
self received  the  crown  of  oak  leaves  from  the  senate  as  the
saviour  of  Rome,  a  fact  which  must  have  rendered  its  be-
stowal on  others  rare,  if  not  non-existent.
2  cp.  Cic.  dt  Or.  11.  liv.  220.

483


QUINTILIAN

quendam  scio,  qui  humiliori  libere  ad  versus  se
loquenti,  Colaphum,  inquit,  tibi  ducam  et  formulam
scribam,1  quod  caput  durum  habeas.  Hie  enim  dubium
est,  utrum  ridere  audientes  an  indignari  debuerint.

84  Superest  genus  decipiendi  opinionem  aut  dicta
alitor  intelligendi,  quae  sunt  in  omni  hac  materia
vel  venustissima.  Inopinatum  et  a  lacessente  poni
solet,  quale  est,  quod  refert  Cicero,  Quid  huic  abest
nisi  res  et  virtus?  aut  illud  Afri,  Homo  in  agendis
causis  optime  vestitus :  et  in  occurrendo,  ut  Cicero,
audita  falsa  Vatinii  morte,  cum  obvium  libertum
eius  interrogasset,  "Rectene  omnia  ?  "  dicenti,  "Recte,'}

85  u Mortuus  est?"  inquit.  Plurimus  autem  circa  simu-
lationem  et  dissimulationem 2  risus  est,  quae  sunt
vicina  et  prope  eadem ;  sed  simulatio  est  certam
opinionem  animi  sui  imitantis,  dissimulatio  aliena  se
parum  intelligere  fingentis.  Simulavit  Afer,  cum  in
causa  subinde  dicentibus  Celsinam  de  re  cognovisse,
quae erat potens femina : Quis est, inquit, iste  ?

86  Celsinam  enim  videri  sibi  virum  finxit.  Dissimu-
lavit  Cicero,  cum  Sex.  Annalis  testis  reum  laesisset,
et  instaret  identidem  accusator  ei,  Die,  M. Tulli,

1  scribam,  Badius  :  scribes,  A  :  scribe,  G.

2  et  dissimulationem,  added  by  Regius.

i  See  ix.  ii.  22. *  de  Or.  n.  lxx.  281.  *  cp.  §68.

484


BOOK VI.  in.  83-86

a  certain  man  against  an  inferior  who  had  spoken
with  some  freedom  against  him  :  "  I  will  smack  your
head,  and  bring  an  action  against  you  for  having  such
a  hard  skull ! "  In  such  cases  it  is  difficult  to  say
whether  the  audience  should  laugh  or  be  angry.

There  remains  the  prettiest  of  all  forms  of  humour,  84
namely  the  jest  which  depends  for  success  on  deceiv-
ing anticipations l  or  taking  another's  words  in  a
sense  other  than  he  intended.  The  unexpected
element  may  be  employed  by  the  attacking  party,
as  in  the  example  cited  by  Cicero,2  "  What  does  this
man  lack  save  wealth  and — virtue  ? "  or  in  the
remark  of  Afer,  "For  pleading  causes  he  is  most
admirably — dressed."  Or  it  may  be  employed  to
meet  a  statement  made  by  another,  as  it  was  by
Cicero3  on  hearing  a  false  report  of  Vatinius'  death  :
he  had  met  one  of  the  latter's  freedmen  and  asked
him, "  Is  all  well  ?  "  The  freedman  answered, "  All  is
well."  To  which  Cicero  replied, "  Is  he  dead,  then  ?  "
But  the  loudest  laughter  of  all  is  produced  by  Simula-  85
tion  and  dissimulation,  proceedings  which  differ  but
little  and  are  almost  identical;  but  whereas  simulation
implies  the  pretence  of  having  a  certain  opinion  of
one's  own,  dissimulation  consists  in  feigning  that
one  does  not  understand  someone  else's  meaning.
Afer  employed  simulation,  when  his  opponents  in  a
certain  case  kept  saying  that  Celsina  (who  was  an
influential  lady)  knew  all  about  the  facts,  and  he,
pretending  to  believe  that  she  was  a  man,  said,  "Who
is  he  ?  "  Cicero  on  the  other  hand  employed  dissimu-  86
lation  when  Sextus  Annalis  gave  evidence  damaging
to  the  client  whom  he  was  defending,  and  the  accuser
kept  pressing  him  with  the  question," Tell  me,  Marcus
Tullius,  what  have  you  to  say  about  Sextus  Annalis  ?  "

4»S


QUINTILIAN

numquid 1  potes  de  Sex.  Annali  ?  versus  enim  dicere
Coepit  de  libro  Ennii  annali  sexto :

Quis  potts  ingenlis  causas  evolvere  belli  ?

87  Cui  sine  dubio  frequentissimam  dat  occasionem  am-
biguitas  :  ut  Cascellio,  qui  consultatori  dicenti,  "Na-
vem  divider e  volof"  "  Perdes,"  inquit.  Sed  averti
intellectus  et  aliter  solet,  cum  ab  asperioribus  ad
leniora  deflectitur  :  ut  qui  interrogatus,  quid  sentiret
de  eo,  qui  in  adulterio  deprehensus  esset, Tardum

88  fuisse  respondit.  Ei  confine  est,  quod  dicitur  per
suspicionem  :  quale  illud  apud  Ciceronem  querenti>
quod  uxor  sua  ex  fico  sese  suspendisset,  Rogo,  des
mihi  surculum  ex  ilia  arbore,  ut  inseram ; intelligitur

89  enim  quod  non  dicitur.  Et  hercule  omnis  salse
dicendi  ratio  in  eo  est,  ut  aliter  quam  est  rectum
verumque  dicatur :  quod  fit  totum  fingendis  aut
nostris  aut  alienis  persuasionibus  aut  dicendo  quod

90  fieri  non  potest.  Alienam  finxit  Iuba,  qui  querenti,
quod  ab  equo  suo  esset  aspersus,  Quid  ?  Tu,  inquit,
me  Hippocentaurum  putas  ?  suam  C.  Cassius,  qui  militi

1  Tulli  numquid,  cod.  Parisinus  7723  :  Tullius  inquid,  AG.

1  Enn.  174  (with  oras  for  causas).  The  question  [numquid,
etc.)  is  treated  by  Cicero  as  meaning  "Can  you  quote  any-
thing from  the  sixth  book  of  the  Annals  ?  "  ingcntis  is  ace.
plural.

'  a  A  famous  lawyer  mentioned  by  Horace,  A.  P.  371.  Cas-
cellius  pretends  to  take  dividere  literally  (i.e.  cut  in  two) ;
his  client  had  meant  *'to  sell  half  his  ship,"  i.e.  take  a
partner  in  the  venture.

486


BOOK VI.  in,  86-90

To  which  he  replied  by  beginning  to  recite  the  Sixth
book  of  the  Annals  of  Ennius,  which  commences  with
the  line,

"  Who  may  the  causes  vast  of  war  unfold  ?  "  l

This  kind  of  jest  finds  its  most  frequent  opportunity  87
in  ambiguity,  as  for  example,  when  Cascellius,2  on
being  consulted  by  a  client  who  said,  "  I  wish  to
divide  my  ship,"  replied, tl  You  will  lose  it  then/'
But  there  are  also  other  ways  of  distorting  the
meaning ;  we  may  for  instance  give  a  serious  state-
ment a  comparatively  trivial  sense,  like  the  man  who,
when  asked  what  he  thought  of  a  man  who  had  been
caught  in  the  act  of  adultery,  replied  that  he  had
been  too  slow  in  his  movements.3  Of  a  similar  nature  88
are  jests  whose  point  lies  in  insinuation.  Such  was
the  reply  which  Cicero  4  quotes  as  given  to  the  man
who  complained  that  his  wife  had  hung  herself  on  a
fig-tree.  "I  wish,"  said  someone,  " you  would  give
me  a  slip  of  that  tree  to  plant."  For  there  the  mean-
ing is  obvious,  though  it  is  not  expressed  in  so  many
words.  Indeed  the  essence  of  all  wit  lies  in  the  89
distortion  of  the  true  and  natural  meaning  of  words  :
a  perfect  instance  of  this  is  when  we  misrepresent
our  own  or  another's  opinions  or  assert  some  im-
possibility. Juba  misrepresented  another  man's  opin-  90
ion,  when  he  replied  to  one  who  complained  of
being  bespattered  by  his  horse,  "What,  do  you
think  I  am  a  Centaur  ?  "  5  Gaius  Cassius  misrepre-
sented his  own,  when  he  said  to  a  soldier  whom  he

3  de  Or.  11.  lxviii.  275.  4  ib.  lxix.  278.

5  The  point  of  the  jest,  such  as  it  is,  is  that  Juba  dis-
claims forming  part  of  his  horse.  The  reference  is  to  Juba,
historian  and  king  of  Mauretania,  captured  by  Julius  Caesar
and  restored  by  Augustus.

487


QUINTILIAN

sine  gladio  decurrenti,  Hens,  commilito,  pugno  bene
uteris,  inquit.  Et  Galba  de  piscibus,  qui  cum  pridie
ex  parte  adesi  et  versati  postera  die  appositi  essent,
Festinemus,  alii  subcenant,  inquit.  Tertium  illud  Cicero,
ut  dixi,  adversus  Curium ;  fieri  enim  certe  non  pote-

91  rat  ut,  cum  declamaret,  natus  non  esset.  Est  et  ilia
ex  ironia  fictio,  qua  usus  est  C.  Caesar.  Nam  cum
testis  diceret  a  reo  femina  sua  ferro  petita,  et  esset
facilis  reprehensio,  cur  illam  potissimum  partem  cor-
poris vulnerare  voluisset :  Quid  enim  faceret,  inquit,

92  cum  tu  galeam  et  loricam  habcres  ?  Vel  optima  est
simulatio  contra  simulantem,  qualis  ilia  Domitii  Afri
fuit :  vetus  habebat  testamentum,  et  unus  ex  amicis
recentioribus,  sperans  aliquid  ex  mutatione  tabu-
larum,  falsam  fabulam  intulerat,  consulens  eum,  an
primipilari  seni  iam  testato  rursus1  suaderet  ordinare
suprema  iudicia. Noli,  inquit,  facere  ;  offendis  ilium.

93  Iucundissima  sunt  autem  ex  his  omnibus  lenia  et,
ut  sic  dixerim,  boni  stomachi :  ut  Afer  idem  ingrato
litigatori  conspectum  eius  in  foro  vitanti  per  nomen-
clatorem  missum  ad  eum,  Amas  me,  inquit,  quod  te
non vidi  ? Et  dispensatori, qui, cum reliqua non

1  primipilari  . . . rursus, Spalding  : primipilaris enim
intestator,  AG.

1  §  73.

2  Lit.  the  slave  employed  to  name  persons  to  his  master.

488


BOOK VI,  in.  90-93

saw  hurrying  into  battle  without  his  sword,  "  Shew
yourself  a  handy  man  with  your  fists,  comrade/'  So
too  did  Galba,  when  served  with  some  fish  that  had
been  partially  eaten  the  day  before  and  had  been
placed  on  the  table  with  the  uneaten  sides  turned
uppermost :  "  We  must  lose  no  time,"  he  said,  u  for
there  are  people  under  the  table  at  work  on  the
other  side/'  Lastly  there  is  the  jibe  that  Cicero
made  against  Curius,  which  I  have  already  cited ; l
for  it  was  clearly  impossible  that  he  should  be  still
unborn  at  a  time  when  he  was  already  declaiming.
There  is  also  a  form  of  misrepresentation  which  has  91
its  basis  in  irony,  of  which  a  saying  of  Gaius  Caesar
will  provide  an  example.  A  witness  asserted  that
the  accused  attempted  to  wound  him  in  the  thighs,
and  although  it  would  have  been  easy  to  ask  him
why  he  attacked  that  portion  of  his  body  above  all
others,  he  merely  remarked,  "  What  else  could  he
have  done,  when  you  had  a  helmet  and  breast-
plate? "  Best  of  all  is  it  when  pretence  is  met  by  92
pretence,  as  was  done  in  the  following  instance  by
Domitius  Afer.  He  had  made  his  will  long  ago,
and  one  of  his  more  recent  friends,  in  the  hopes  of
securing  a  legacy  if  he  could  persuade  him  to  change
it,  produced  a  fictitious  story  and  asked  him  whether
he  should  advise  a  senior  centurion  who,  being  an  old
man,  had  already  made  his  will  to  revise  it ;  to  which
Afer  replied,  "  Don't  do  it :  you  will  offend  him."

But  the  most  agreeable  of  all  jests  are  those  which  93
are  good  humoured  and  easily  digested.  Take
another  example  from  Afer.  Noting  that  an  un-
grateful client  avoided  him  in  the  forum,  he  sent  his
servant2  to  him  to  say,  "I  hope  you  are  obliged  to
me for not having seen you." Again when his

489


QUINTILIAN

responderent,  dicebat  subinde,  a  Non  comedi ;  pane  et
aqua  vivo,' l  "  Passer,  redde  quod  debes." Quae  virb  to

94  rjOos  vocant.  Est  gratus  iocus,  qui  minus  exprobrat
quam  potest,  ut  idem  dicenti  candidate),  Semper  domum
tuam  coluiy  cum  posset  palam  negare,  Credo,  inquit,
et  verum  est.  Interim  de  se  dicere  ridiculum  et  quod
in alium  si  absentem  diceretur  urbanum  non  erat,

96  quoniam  ipsi  palam  exprobratur,  movet  risum  :  quale
Augusti  est,  cum  ab  eo  miles  nescio  quid  improbe
peteret  et  veniret  contra  Marcianus,  quern  suspica-
batur  et  ipsum  aliquid  iniuste  rogaturum :  Non
magis,  inquit,  faciam,  commilito,  quod  petis,  quam  quod
Marcianus  a  me  petiiurus  est

96  Adiuvant  urbanitatem  et  versus  commode  positi,
seu  toti  ut  sunt  (quod  adeo  facile  est,  ut  Ovidius  ex
tetrastichon  Macri  carmine  librum  in  malos  poetas
composuerit),  quod  fit  gratius,  si  qua  etiam  ambi-
guitate  conditur :  ut  Cicero  in  Lartium,  hominem
callidum  et  versutum,  cum  is  in  quadam  causa  sus-

97  pectus  esset,  Nisi  si  qua  Ulixes  intervasit  Lartius ;  seu
verbis  ex  parte  mutatis,  ut  in  eum  qui,  cum  antea

1  responderet  MSS. corr. Salmasius. pane  et  aqua,  A  :
panem  et  aquam,  remaining  MSS. vivo,  Haxvpt :  bibo,  MSS.


1  The  meaning  is  dubious  and  the  phrase  cannot  be  paralleled
and  is  probably  corrupt.

2  Aemilius  Macer,  a  contemporary  of  Virgil  and  Horace.
The  work  presumably  consisted  of  epigrams,  four  lines  long.

3  The author, presumably a tragic poet, is unknown.
Lartius  =  Laertius,  son  of  Laertes.

490


BOOK VI.  in.  93-97

steward,  being  unable  to  account  for  certain  sums
of  money,  kept  saying,  « I  have  not  eaten  it :  I
live  on  bread  and  water/'  he  replied,  "  Master
sparrow,  pay  what  you  owe."  Such  jests  the  Greeks
style  vtto  to  rjOos x  or  adapted  to  character.  It  is  a  94
pleasant  form  of  jest  to  reproach  a  person  with  less
than  would  be  possible,  as  Afer  did  when,  in  answer
to  a  candidate  who  said,  "  I  have  always  shown  my
respect  for  your  family,"  he  replied,  although  he  might
easily  have  denied  the  statement,  "  You  are  right,  it
is  quite  true."  Sometimes  it  may  be  a  good  joke  to
speak  of  oneself,  while  one  may  often  raise  a  laugh
by  reproaching  a  person  to  his  face  with  things  that
it  would  have  been  merely  bad-mannered  to  bring
up  against  him  behind  his  back.  Of  this  kind  was  the  95
remark  made  by  Augustus,  when  a  soldier  was  mak-
ing some  unreasonable  request  and  Marcianus,  whom
he  suspected  of  intending  to  make  some  no  less
unfair  request,  turned  up  at  the  same  moment :  "  I
will  no  more  grant  your  request,  comrade,  than  I
will  that  which  Marcianus  is  just  going  to  make."

Apt  quotation  of  verse  may  add  to  the  effect  of  96
wit.  The  lines  may  be  quoted  in  their  entirety
without  alteration,  which  is  so  easy  a  task  that  Ovid
composed  an  entire  book  against  bad  poets  out  of
lines  taken  from  the  quatrains  of  Macer.2  Such  a
procedure  is  rendered  specially  attractive  if  it  be
seasoned  by  a  spice  of  ambiguity,  as  in  the  line
which  Cicero  quoted  against  Lartius,  a  shrewd  and
cunning  fellow  who  was  suspected  of  unfair  dealing
in  a  certain  case,

"  Had  not  Ulysses  Lartius  intervened."  3
Or  the  words  may  be  slightly  altered,  as  in  the  line  97
quoted  against  the senator  who,  although  he had

491


QUINTILIAN

stultissimus  esset  habitus,  post  acceptam  hereditatem
primus  sententiam  rogabatur,  Hereditas  est,  quam
vocant  sapientiam.,  pro  illo,  facilitas  est ;  seu  ficti  notis

98  versibus  similes,  quae  irapuMa  dicitur.  Et  proverbia
opportune  aptata  :  ut  homini  nequam  lapso  et,  ut
allevaretur,  roganti,  Tollat  te  qui  non  novit.  Ex
historia  etiam  ducere  urbanitatem  eruditum  est :
ut  Cicero  fecit,  cum  ei  testem  in  iudicio  Verris
roganti  dixisset  Hortensius,  "  Non  intelligo  haec
aenigmata."  "  Atqui  debes,  inquit,  cum  Sphingem  domi
habeas " ;  acceperat  autem  ille  a  Verre  Sphingem
aeneam  magnae  pecuniae.

99  Subabsurda  ilia  constant  stulti  simulation e  ;  quae,1
nisi  fingantur,  stulta  sunt :  ut,  qui  mirantibus,
quod  humile  candelabrum  emisset,  Pransorium  erit,
inquit.  Sed  ilia  similia  absurdis  sunt  acria,  quae
tanquam  sine  ratione  dicta  feruntur :  ut  servus
Dolabellae,  cum  inter rogaretur  an  dominus  eius
auctionem proposuisset, Domum, inquit, vendidit.

1  stulti simulatione  ; quae,  Spalding  : stulti ssimi  imita-
tione  et  quae,  M SS.


1  Probably  from  a  lost  comedy.

2  Hor.  Ep,  i.  xvii.  62,  where  the  passers  hy  reply  Quaere
peregrinum  to  an  imposter  who,  having  fallen  down  and
broken  his  leg,  implores  them  to  pick  him  up,  crying  Credite,
non  ludo :  crudeles,  tollite  claudum.

492


BOOK VI.  in.  97-99

always  in  previous  times  been  regarded  as  an  utter
fool,  was,  after  inheriting  an  estate,  asked  to  speak
first  on  a  motion  —

"What  men  call  wisdom  is  a  legacy/'1

where  legacy  is  substituted  for  the  original  faculty.
Or  again  we  may  invent  verses  resembling  well-
known  lines,  a  trick  styled  parody  by  the  Greeks.
A  neat  application  of  proverbs  may  also  be  effective,  98
as  when  one  man  replied  to  another,  a  worthless
fellow,  who  had  fallen  down  and  asked  to  be  helped
to  his  feet,  "  Let  someone  pick  you  up  who  does  not
know  you.,,  2  Or  we  may  shew  our  culture  by  draw-
ing on  legend  for  a  jest,  as  Cicero  did  in  the  trial  of
Verres,  when  Hortensius  said  to  him  as  he  was
examining  a  witness,  "  I  do  not  understand  these
riddles."  "You  ought  to,  then,"  said  Cicero,  "as
you  have  got  the  Sphinx  at  home."  Hortensius  had
received  a  bronze  Sphinx  of  great  value  as  a  present
from  Verres.

Effects  of  mild  absurdity  are  produced  by  the  99
simulation  of  folly  and  would,  indeed,  themselves,
be  foolish  were  they  not  fictitious.  Take  as  an
example  the  remark  of  the  man  who,  when  people
wondered  why  he  had  bought  a  stumpy  candlestick,
said,  "It  will  do  for  lunch."8  There  are  also  say-
ings closely  resembling  absurdities  which  derive
great  point  from  their  sheer  irrelevance,  like  the
reply  of  Dolabella's  slave,  who,  on  being  asked
whether  his  master  had  advertised  a  sale  of  his
property, answered, "He has sold his house."4

3  Lunch  requiring  a  les3  elaborate  service,  but  being  in
broad  daylight.

*  i.e.  how  can  he  ?  he  has  nothing  left  to  sell.

493


QUINTILIAN

100  Deprehensi  interim  pudorem  suum  ridiculo  aliquo
explicant:  ut,  qui  testem  dicentem  se  a  reo  vulner-
atum  interrogaverat  an  cicatricem  haberet,  cum  ille
ingentem  in  femine  ostendisset,  Labis,  inquit,  opor-
tuit.  Contumeliis  quoque  uti  belle  datur :  ut  Hispo
obiicienti  atrociora l  crimina  aceusatori,  Me  ex  te
metiris?  inquit.  Et  Fulvius  Propinquus  legato  in-
terroganti  an  in  tabulis,  quas  proferebat,  chirogra-
phus  esset,  Et  veins,  inquit,  domine.

101  Has  aut  accepi  species  aut  inveni  frequentissimas,
ex  quibus  ridicula  ducerentur ;  sed  repetam  necesse
est,  infinitas  esse  tarn  salse  dicendi  quam  severe,
quas  praestat  persona,  locus,  tempus,  casus  denique,

102  qui  est  maxime  varius.  Itaque  haec,  ne  omisisse
viderer,  attigi ;  ilia  autem,  quae  de  usu  ipso  et  modo
iocandi  complexus  sum,  audeo  confirmare 3  esse
plane  necessaria.

His  adiicit  Domitius  Marsus,  qui  de  urbanitate
diligentissime  scripsit,  quaedam  non  ridicula,  sed
cuilibet  severissimae  orationi  convenientia  eleganter
dicta  et  proprio  quodam  lepore  iucunda ;  quae  sunt

103  quidem  urbana  sed  risum  tamen  non  habent. Neque

1  contumeliis  Badius :  umis  AG  :  atrociora,  Hcdm :  arbore,
MSS.

2  me  ex  te  metiris,  Burmann  :  mentis,  mentiris,  MSS.

8  audeo  confirmare,  Radermachtr :  adeo  infirmare,  infirm-
arem,  infirma  sed,  MSS.


1  *c.  because  then  he  would  have  killed  you.

8  Presumably  the  legatus  had  been  suspected  of  forgery.


494


BOOK VI.  hi.  100-103

Sometimes  you  may  get  out  of  a  tight  corner  by  100
giving  a  humorous  explanation  of  your  embarrass-
ment, as  the  man  did  who  asked  a  witness,  who
alleged  that  he  had  been  wounded  by  the  accused,
whether  he  had  any  scar  to  show  for  it.  The  witness
proceeded  to  show  a  huge  scar  on  his  thigh,  on  which
he  remarked,  "  I  wish  he  had  wounded  you  in  the
side."1  A  happy  use  may  also  be  made  of  insult.
Hispo,  for  example,  when  the  accuser  charged  him
with  scandalous  crimes,  replied,  "You  judge  my
character  by  your  own  "  ;  while  Fulvius  Propinquus,
when  asked  by  the  representative  of  the  emperor
whether  the  documents  which  he  produced  were
autographs,  replied,  U  Yes,  Sir,  and  the  handwriting
is  genuine,  too  !  "  2

Such  I  have  either  learned  from  others  or  dis-  101
covered  from  my  own  experience  to  be  the  com-
monest sources  of  humour.  But  I  must  repeat  that
the  number  of  ways  in  which  one  may  speak  wittily
are  of  no  less  infinite  variety  than  those  in  which  one
may  speak  seriously,  for  they  depend  on  persons,
place,  time  and  chances,  which  are  numberless.  1  102
have,  thereiore,  touched  on  the  topics  of  humour
that  I  may  not  be  taxed  with  having  omitted  them ;
but  with  regard  to  my  remarks  on  the  actual  prac-
tice and  manner  of  jesting,  I  venture  to  assert  that
they  are  absolutely  indispensable.

To  these  Domitius  Marsus,  who  wrote  an  elaborate
treatise  on  Urbanity,  adds  several  types  of  saying,
which  are  not  laughable,  but  rather  elegant  sayings
with  a  certain  charm  and  attraction  of  their  own,
which  are  suitable  even  to  speeches  of  the  most
serious  kind  :  they  are  characterised  by  a  certain
urbane  wit,  but  not  of  a  kind  to  raise  a  laugh. And  103

495


QUINTILIAN

enim  ei  de  risu  sed  de  urbanitate  est  opus  institutum,
quam  propriam  esse*  nostrae  civitatis  et  sero  sic
intelligi  coeptam,  postquam  Urbis  appellatione,
etiamsi nomen proprium non adiiceretur, Romam

104  tamen  accipi  sit  receptum.  Eamque  sic  finit :  Ur-
banitas  est  virtus  quaedam  in  breve  dictum  coacta  et  apta
ad  delectandos  movendosque  homines  in  omnem  adfectum
animi,  maxime  idonea  ad  resistendum  vel  lacessendum,
prout  quaeque  res  aut  persona  desiderat.  Cui  si
brevitatis  exceptionem  detraxeris,  omnes  orationis
virtutes  complexa  sit.  Nam  si  constat  rebus
et  personis,  quod  in  utrisque  oporteat  dicere  per-
fectae eloquentiae est. Cur autem brevem esse

105  earn  voluerit,  nescio,  cum  idem  atque  l  in  eodem
libro  dicat  fuisse  in  multis  narrandi  urbanitatem.
Paulo  post  ita  finit,  Catonis  (ut  ait)  opinionem
secutus,  Vrbanus  homo  erit,  cuius  multa  bene  dicta
responsaque  erunt,  et  qui  in  sermonibus,  circulis,  con-
viviis,  item  in  contionibus,  omni  denique  loco  ridicule
commodeque  diceL Risus  erunt, quicunque  hate  faciei

106  orator.  Quas  si  recipimus  finitiones,  quidquid  bene
dicetur,  et  urbane  dicti  nomen  accipiet.  Ceterum
illi,  qui  hoc  proposuerat,  consentanea  fuit  ilia  divisio,
ut  dictorum  urbanorum alia  seria, alia  iocosa,  alia

1  cum  idem  atque,  Halm:  cum  idem  ad  quern,  A  :  cuidem
ad  quern,  G  ;  quidem  at  quam,  codd.  Hit.

496


BOOK VI.  hi.  103-106

as  a  matter  of  fact  his  work  was  not  designed  to  deal
with  humour,  but  with  urbane  tuit,  a  quality  which
he  regards  as  peculiar  to  this  city,  though  it  was  not
till  a  late  period  that  it  was  understood  in  this  sense,
after  the  word  Urbs  had  come  to  be  accepted  as  indi-
cating Rome  without  the  addition  of  any  proper
noun.  He  defines  it  as  follows :  u  Urbanity  is  a  104
certain  quality  of  language  compressed  into  the  limits
of  a  brief  saying  and  adapted  to  delight  and  move
men  to  every  kind  of  emotion,  but  specially  suitable
to  resistance  or  attack  according  as  the  person  or
circumstances  concerned  may  demand."  But  this
definition,  if  we  except  the  quality  of  brevity,  in-
cludes all  the  virtues  of  oratory.  For  it  is  entirely
concerned  with  persons  and  things  to  deal  with
which  in  appropriate  language  is  nothing  more  nor
less  than  the  task  of  perfect  eloquence.  Why  he
insisted  011  brevity  being  essential  I  do  not  know,
since  in  the  same  book  he  asserts  that  many  speakers  105
have  revealed  their  urbanity  in  narrative.  And  a  little
later  he  gives  the  following  definition,  which  is,  as
he  says,  based  on  the  views  expressed  by  Cato :
"Urbanity  is  the  characteristic  of  a  man  who  has
produced  many  good  sayings  and  replies,  and  who,
whether  in  conversation,  in  social  or  convivial
gatherings,  in  public  speeches,  or  under  any  other
circumstances,  will  speak  with  humour  and  appro-
priateness. If  any  orator  do  this,  he  will  undoubtedly
succeed  in  making  his  audience  laugh."  But  if  we  106
accept  these  definitions,  we  shall  have  to  allow  the
title  of  urbane  to  anything  that  is  well  said.  It  was
natural  therefore  that  the  author  of  this  definition
should  classify  such  sayings  under  three  heads,
serious,  humorous  and  intermediate,  since  all  good

497


QUINTILIAN

media  faceret. Nam  est  eadem  omnium  bene  dic-
torum. Verum  mihi  etiam  iocosa  quaedam  videntur

107  posse  in  non  satis  urbana  referri.  Nam  meo  quidem
radicio  ilia  est  urbanitas,  in  qua  nihil  absonum,  nihil
agreste,  nihil  inconditum,  nihil  peregrinum  neque
sensu  neque  verbis  neque  ore  gestuve  possit  depre-
hendi ;  ut  non  tam  sit  in  singulis  dictis  quam  in  toto
colore dicendi, qualis  apud  Graecos amuo-fibs  ille

108  reddens  Athenarum  proprium  saporem.  Ne  tamen
iudicium  Marsi,  hominis  eruditissimi,  subtraham,
seria  partitur  in  tria  genera,  honorificum,  contume-
liosum,  medium.  Et  honorifici  ponit  exemplum
Ciceronis  pro  Ligario  apud  Caesarem,  Qui  nihil  soles

109  oblivisci  nisi  iniurias ;  et  contumeliosi,  quod  Attico
scripsit  de  Pompeio  et  Caesare,  Habeo,  quern  fugiam  ;
quern  sequar,  non  habeo;  et  medii,  quod  d7ro<£0€y-
fjLaTucbv  vocat  et  est  ita,  cum  dixerit,  Nee  gravem
mortem  accidere  viro  forti  posse  nee  immaturam  consulari
neque  miseram  sapienti.  Quae  omnia  sunt  optime
dicta ;  sed  cur  proprie  nomen  urbanitatis  accipiant,

110  non  video.  Quod  si  non  totius,  ut  mihi  videtur,
orationis  color  meretur,  sed  etiam  singulis  dictis
tribuendum  est,  ilia  potius  urbana  dixerim,  quae  sunt
generis eiusdem, quo ridicula dicuntur et tamen

1  xii.  35.  *  Ad.  AtL  vin.  vii.  2.  »  iv.  ii.  S.

498


BOOK  VI.  in.  106-110

sayings  may  be  thus  classified.  But,  in  my  opinion,
there  are  certain  forms  of  humorous  saying  that  may
be  regarded  as  not  possessing  sufficient  urbanity.  For  107
to  my  thinking  urbanity  involves  the  total  absence  ol
all  that  is  incongruous,  coarse,  unpolished  and  exotic
whether  in  thought,  language,  voice  or  gesture,  and
resides  not  so  much  in  isolated  sayings  as  in  the
whole  complexion  of  our  language,  just  as  for  the
Greeks  Atticism  means  that  elegance  of  taste  which
was  peculiar  to  Athens.  However,  out  of  respect  to  108
the  judgment  of  Marsus,  who  was  a  man  of  the
greatest  learning,  I  will  add  that  he  divides  serious
utterances  into  three  classes,  the  honorific,  the
derogatory  and  the  intermediate.  As  an  example
of  the  honorific  he  quotes  the  words  uttered  by
Cicero  in  the  pro  Ligario l  with  reference  to  Caesar,
"You  who  forget  nothing  save  injuries."  The  109
derogatory  he  illustrates  by  the  words  used  by
Cicero  of  Pompey  and  Caesar  in  a  letter  to  Atticus  : 2
"I  know  whom  to  avoid,  but  whom  to  follow  I
know  not."  Finally,  he  illustrates  the  inter-
mediate, which  he  calls  apophthegmatic  (as  it  is),  by
the  passage  from  Cicero's  speech  against  Catiline3
where  he  says,  u  Death  can  never  be  grievous  to  the
brave  nor  premature  for  one  who  has  been  consul
nor  a  calamity  to  one  that  is  truly  wise."  All  these
are  admirable  sayings,  but  what  special  title  they
have  to  be  called  urbane  I  do  not  see.  If  it  is  110
not  merely,  as  I  think,  the  whole  complexion  of
our  oratory  that  deserves  this  title,  but  if  it  is  to
be  claimed  for  individual  sayings  as  well,  I  should
give  the  name  only  to  those  sayings  that  are  of
the  same  general  character  as  humorous  sayings,
without  actually  being  humorous. I will  give  an

499


QUINTILIAN

ridicula  non  sunt,  ut  de  Pollione  Asinio  seriis  iocisque
pariter  accommodate  dictum  est  esse  eum  omnium

111  horarum;  et  de  actore  facile  dicente  ex  tempore,
ingenium  eum  in  numerato  habere ;  etiam  Pompeii,
quod  refert  Marsus,  in  Ciceronem  diffidentem  parti-
bus,  Transi  ad  Caesarem,  me  timebis.  Erat  enim,
si  de  re  minore  aut  alio  animo  aut  denique  non  ab
ipso  dictum  fuisset,  quod  posset  inter  ridicula  nume-

112  rari.  Etiam  illud,  quod  Cicero  Caerelliae  scripsit
reddens  rationem,  cur  ilia  C.  Caesaris  tempora  tarn
patienter  toleraret,  Haec  aut  animo  Catonis  ferenda
sunt  aut  Ciceronis  stomacho  ;  stomachus  enim  ille  habet
aliquid  ioco  simile.  Haec,  quae  movebant,  dissimu-
landa  mihi  non  fuerunt;  in  quibus  ut  erraverim,
legentes  tamen  non  decepi,  indicata  et  diversa
opinione,  quam  sequi  magis  probantibus  liberum  est.

IV.  Altercationis  praecepta  poterant  videri  tunc
inchoanda,  cum  omnia,  quae  ad  continuam  orationem
pertinent,  peregissem,  nam  est  usus  eius  ordine  ulti-
mus ;  sed,  cum  sit  posita  in  sola  inventione  neque
habere  dispositionem  possit  nee  elocutionis  ornamenta
magnopere  desideret  aut  circa  memoriam  et  pronun-
tiationem  laboret,  prius  quam  secundam  quinque
partium,  hanc  quae  tota  ex  prima  pendet  tractaturus


1  Now  lost. Caerellia  was  a  literary  lady.

2  i.e.  he  must  "stomach "it.

s  The  altercatioy  which  followed  the  set  speeches,  took  the
form  of  a  number  of  brief  arguments  pro  and  con.
4  See  v.  Pr.  5.

5°o


BOOK VI.  hi.  no-iv.  i

illustration  of  what  I  mean.  It  was  said  of  Asinius
Pollio,  who  had  equal  gifts  for  being  grave  or  gay,
that  he  was  "a  man  for  all  hours/'  and  of  a  pleader  11)
who  was  a  fluent  speaker  extempore,  that  "his
ability  was  all  in  ready  money."  Of  the  same  kind,
too,  was  the  remark  recorded  by  Marsus  as  having
been  made  by  Pompey  to  Cicero  when  the  latter
expressed  distrust  of  his  party  :  "  Go  over  to  Caesar
and  you  will  be  afraid  of  me."  Had  this  last  remark
been  uttered  on  a  less  serious  subject  and  with  less
serious  purpose,  or  had  it  not  been  uttered  by  Pompey
himself,  we  might  have  counted  it  among  examples
of  humour.  I  may  also  add  the  words  used  by  112
Cicero  in  a  letter1  to  Caerellia  to  explain  why  he
endured  the  supremacy  of  Caesar  so  patiently:
"  These  ills  must  either  be  endured  with  the  courage
of  Cato  or  the  stomach  2  of  Cicero/'  for  here  again  the
word  "stomach"  has  a  spice  of  humour  in  it.  I  felt
that  I  ought  not  to  conceal  my  feelings  on  this  point.
If  I  am  wrong  in  my  views,  I  shall  not,  at  any  rate,
lead  my  readers  astray,  since  I  have  stated  the  oppo-
site view  as  well,  which  they  are  at  liberty  to  adopt
if  they  prefer  it.

IV.  With  regard  to  the  principles  to  be  observed
in  forensic  debate,8  it  might  seem  that  I  should
delay  such  instructions  until  I  had  finished  dealing
with  all  the  details  of  continuous  speaking,  since
such  debates  come  after  the  set  speeches  are  done.
But  since  the  art  of  debate  turns  on  invention  alone,
does  not  admit  of  arrangement,  has  little  need  for
the  embellishments  of  style,  and  makes  no  large
demand  on  memory  or  delivery,  I  think  that  it  will
not  be  out  of  place  to  deal  with  it  here  before  I
proceed  to  the  second  of  the  five  parts,4  since  it  is

501


QU1NTILIAN

non  alieno  loco  videor ;  quam  scriptores  alii  fortasse
ideo  reliquerunt,  quia  satis  ceteris  praeceptis  in  hanc

2  quoque  videbatur  esse  prospectum.  Constat  enini
ex  intentione  ac  depulsione,  de  quibus  satis  traditum
est;  quia,  quidquid  in  actione  perpetua  circa  proba-
tiones  utile  est,  idem  in  hac  brevi  atque  concisa
prosit  necesse  est.  Neque  alia  dicuntur  in  alterca-
tione,  sed  aliter,  aut  interrogando  aut  respondendo.
Cuius  rei  fere  omnis  observatio  in  i-llo  testium  loco

3  excussa  nobis  est.  Tamen  quia  latius  hoc  opus
aggressi  sumus  neque  perfectus  orator  sine  hac  vir-
tute  dici  potest,  paululum  impendamus  huic  quoque
peculiaris  operae,  quae  quidem  in  quibusdam  causis

4  ad  victoriam  vel  plurimum  valet.  Nam  ut  in  quali-
tate  generali,  in  qua  rectene  factum  quid  an  contra
sit  quaeritur,  perpetua  dominatnr  oratio,  et  quaestio-
nem  finitionis  actiones  plerumque  satis  explicant  et
omnia  paene,  in  quibus  de  facto  constat  aut  coniec-
tura  artificiali  ratione  colligitur,  ita  in  iis  causis,  quae
sunt  frequentissimae,  quae  vel  solis  extra  artem  pro-
bationibus  vel  mixtis  continentur,  asperrima  in  hac
parte  dimicatio  est,  nee  alibi  dixeris  magis  mucrone

5  pugnari.  Nam  et  firmissima  quaeque  memoriae
iudicis  inculcanda  sunt  et  praestandum  quidquid  in


1  See  v.  vii.  2  See  in.  vi.

3  See  v.  i.  4  See  v.  i.


502


BOOK VI.  iv.  1-5

entirely  dependent  on  the  first. Other  writers  have
omitted  to  deal  with  it  on  the  ground  perhaps  that
they  thought  the  subject  had  been  sufficiently  covered
by  their  precepts  on  other  topics. For  debate  con-
sists in  attack  and defence,  on  which  enough  has
already  been  said,  since  whatever  is  useful  in  a  con-
tinuous speech  for  the  purpose  of  proof  must  neces-
sarily be  of  service  in  this  brief  and  discontinuous
form  of  oratory. For  we  say  the  same  things  in
debate,  though  we  say  them  in  a  different  manner,
since  debate  consists  of  questions  and  replies,  a  topic
with which we have dealt fairly  exhaustively  in
connexion  with  the  examination  of  witnesses.1 But
since  this  work  is  designed  on  an  ample  scale  and
since  no  one  can  be  called  a  perfect  orator  unless  he
be  an  expert  debater,  we  must  devote  a  little  special
attention  to  this  accomplishment  as  well,  which  as  a
matter  of  fact  is  not  seldom  the  deciding  factor  in  a
forensic  victory. For  just  as  the  continuous  speech
is  the  predominant  weapon  in  general  questions  of
quality  (where  the  inquiry  is  as  to  whether  an  act
was  right  or  wrong),  and  as  a  rule  is  adequate  to
clear  up  questions  of  definition  and  almost  all  those
in which  the  facts  are  ascertained  or  inferred  by
conjecture 2  from  artificial proof,3  so  on  the  other
hand  those  cases,  which  are  the  most  frequent  of  all
and depend on proofs which  are either entirely
inartificial4 or  of  a  composite  character,  give  rise
to  the  most  violent  debates ;  in  fact  I  should  say
that  there  is  no  occasion  when  the  advocate  has  to
come  to  closer  grips  with  his  adversary. For  all  the
strongest  points  of  the  argument  have  to  be  sharply
impressed  on  the  memory  of  the  judge,  while  we
have  also  to  make  good  all  the promises  we  may

503


QUINTILIAN

action  e  promisimus  et  refellenda  mendacia.  Nus-
quam  est  denique  qui  cognoscit  intentior.  Nee  im-
merito  quidam  quanquam  in  dicendo  mediocres  hac
tamen  altercandi  praestantia  meruerunt  nomen  patro-

6  norum.  At  quidam  litigatoribus  suis  ilium  modo
ambitiosum  declamandi  sudorem  praestitisse  contenti
cum  turba  laudantium  destituunt  subsellia  pugnam-
que  ill  am  decretoriam  imperitis  ac saepe pullatae

7  turbae  relinquunt.  Itaque  videas  alios  plerumque
iudiciis  privatis  ad  actiones  advocari  alios  ad  proba-
tionem.  Quae  si  dividenda  sunt  ofticia,  hoc  certe
magis  necessarium  est,  pudendumque  dictu,  si  plus
litigantibus  prosunt  minores.  In  publicis  certe  iudi-
ciis vox  ilia  praeconis  praeter  patronos  ipsum,  qui
egerit,  citat.

8  Opus  est  igitur  inprimis  ingenio  veloci  ac  mobili,
animo  praesenti  et  acri.  Non  enim  cogitandum,  sed
dicendum  statim  est  et  prope  sub  conatu  adversarii
manus  exigenda.  Quare  cum  in  omni  parte  huiusce
officii  plurimum  facit,  totas  non  diligenter  modo  sed
etiam  familiariter  nosse  causas,  turn  in  altercatione
maxime  necessarium  est,  omnium  personarum,  in-
strumentorum,  temporum,  locorum  habere  notitiam ;


1  The  allusion  is  obscure.  But  Quintilian's  point  seems  to
be  merely  that  the  pleader  is  officially  regarded  as  being
of  at  least  equal  importance  with  the  other  advocates.

504


BOOK VI.  iv.  s-8

have  made  in  the  course  of  our  speech  and  to  refute
the  lies  of  our  opponents.  There  is  no  point  of  a
trial  where  the  judge's  attention  is  keener.  And
even  mediocre  speakers  have  not  without  some  reason
acquired  the  reputation  of  being  good  advocates
simply  by  their  excellence  in  debate.  Some  on  the  6
other  hand  think  they  have  done  their  duty  to  their
clients  by  an  ostentatious  and  fatiguing  display  of
elaborate  declamation  and  straightway  march  out  of
court  attended  by  an  applauding  crowd  and  leave  the
desperate  battle  of  debate  to  uneducated  performers
who  often  are  of  but  humble  origin.  As  a  result  7
in  private  suits  you  will  generally  find  that  different
counsel  are  employed  to  plead  and  to  prove  the  case.
If  the  duties  of  advocacy  are  to  be  thus  divided,  the
latter  duty  must  surely  be  accounted  the  more
important  of  the  two,  and  it  is  a  disgrace  to  oratory
that  inferior  advocates  should  be  regarded  as  adequate
to  render  the  greater  service  to  the  litigants.  In
public  cases  at  any  rate  the  actual  pleader  is  cited
by  the  usher  as  well  as  the  other  advocates.1

For  debate  the  chief  requisites  are  a  quick  and  8
nimble  understanding  and  a  shrewd  and  ready  judg-
ment. For  there  is  no  time  to  think ;  the  advocate
must  speak  at  once  and  return  the  blow  almost
before  it  has  been  dealt  by  his  opponent.  Conse-
quently while  it  is  most  important  for  every  portion
of  the  case  that  the  advocate  should  not  merely  have
given  a  careful  study  to  the  whole  case,  but  that  he
should  have  it  at  his  fingers'  ends,  when  he  comes
to  the  debate  it  is  absolutely  necessary  that  he
should  possess  a  thorough  acquaintance  with  all  the
persons,  instruments  and  circumstances  of  time  and
place  involved  :  otherwise  he  will  often  be  reduced

5^5


QUINTILIAN

aiioqui  et  tacendum  erit  saepe  et  aliis  subiicientibus
(plerumque  autem  studio  loquendi  fatue  modo)  acce-
dendum ;  quo  nonnunquam  accidit,  ut  nostra  creduli-
9  tate  aliena  stultitia  erubescamus.  Neque  tantum  cum
his  ipsis  monitoribus  clam  res  erit l ;  quidam  faciunt
aperte  ut  quoque  rixentur.2  Videas  enim  plerosque
ira  percitos  exclamantes,  ut  iudex  audiat  contrarium
id  esse,  quod admoneatur,  sciatque  ille,  qui  pronun-

10  tiaturus  est  in  causa,  malum  quod  tacetur.  Quare
bonus  altercator  vitio  iracundiae  careat ;  nullus  enim
rationi  magis  obstat  adfectus  et  fert  extra  causam
plerumque  et  deformia  convicia  facere  ac  mereri
cogit  et  in  ipsos  nonnunquam  iudices  incitat.  Melior
moderatio  ac  nonnunquam  etiam  patientia.  Neque
enim  refutanda  tantum  quae  ex  contrario  dicuntur,
sed  contemnenda,  elevanda,  ridenda  sunt;  nee
usquam  plus  loci  recipit  urbanitas.  Hoc,  dum  ordo
est  et  pudor;  contra  turbantes  audendum  et  impu-

11  dentiae  fortiter  resistendum.  Sunt  enim  quidam
praeduri  in  hoc  oris,  ut  obstrepant  ingenti  clamore

1  tantum  .  .  .  clam  res  erit,  Halm  :  tarn  cum  .  .  .  clarescit,
MSS.

2  ut  quoque  rixentur,  Afadvig  :  quod  [or  quae)  rixemur,

MSS.

506


BOOK VI.  iv.  8-i i

to  silence  and  forced  to  give  a  hurried  assent  to
those  who  prompt  him  as  to  what  he  should  say,
suggestions  which  are  often  perfectly  fatuous  owing
to  excess  of  zeal  on  the  part  of  the  prompter.  As  a
result  it  sometimes  happens  that  we  are  put  to  the
blush  by  too  ready  acceptance  of  the  foolish  sugges-
tions of  another.  Moreover,  we  have  to  deal  with  9
others  beside  these  prompters  who  speak  for  our  ear
alone.  Somego  so  faras  to  turn  thedebate  into  an  open
brawl.  For  you  may  sometimes  see  several  persons
shouting  angrily  at  the  judge  and  telling  him  that  the
arguments  thus  suggested  are  contrary  to  the  truth,
and  calling  his  attention  to  the  fact  that  some  point
which  is  prejudicial  to  the  case  has  been  deliberately
passed  over  in  silence.  Consequently  the  skilled  10
debater  must  be  able  to  control  his  tendency  to
anger ;  there  is  no  passion  that  is  a  greater  enemy
to  reason,  while  it  often  leads  an  advocate  right
away  from  the  point  and  forces  him  both  to  use
gross  and  insulting  language  and  to  receive  it  in
return ;  occasionally  it  will  even  excite  him  to  such
an  extent  as  to  attack  the  judges.  Moderation,  and
sometimes  even  longsuffering,  is  the  better  policy,
for  the  statements  of  our  opponents  have  not  merely
to  be  refuted  :  they  are  often  best  treated  with  con-
tempt, made  light  of  or  held  up  to  ridicule,  methods
which  afford  unique  opportunity  for  the  display  of
wit.  This  injunction,  however,  applies  only  so  long
as  the  case  is  conducted  with  order  and  decency :  if,
on  the  other  hand,  our  opponents  adopt  turbulent
methods  we  must  put  on  a  bold  front  and  resist
their  impudence  with  courage.  For  there  are  some  11
advocates  so  brazen-faced  that  they  bluster  and
bellow  at  us,  interrupt  us  in  the  middle  of  a  sentence

So?


QUINTILIAN

et  medios  sermones  intercipiant  et  omnia  tumultu
confundant,  quos  ut  non  imitari  sic  acriter  propulsare
oportebit,  et  ipsorum  improbitatem  retundendo,  et
iudices  vel  praesidentes  magistratus  appelland©  fre
quentius,  ut  loquendi  vices  serventur.  Non  est  res
animi  iacentis  et  mollis  supra  modum  frontis,  fallit-
que  plerumque,  quod  probitas  vocatur,  quae  est  im-

12  becillitas.  Valet  autem  in  altercatione  plurimum
acumen,  quod  sine  dubio  ex  arte  non  venit  (natura

13  enim  non  docetur),  arte  tamen  adiuvatur.  In  qua
praecipuum  est,  semper  id  in  oculis  habere,  de  quo
quaeritur  et  quod  volumus  efficere ;  quod  propositum
tenentes  nee  in  rixam  ibimus  nee  causae  debita  tem-
pora  conviciando  conteremus  gaudebimusque,  si  hoc
adversarius  facit.

14  Omni  tempore  fere  parata  sunt  meditatis  diligen-
ter,  quae  aut  ex  ad  verso  dici  aut  responderi  a  nobis
possunt.  Nonnunquam  tamen  solet  hoc  quoque  esse
artis  genus,  ut  quaedam  in  action e  dissimulata  subito
in  altercando  proferantur;  est  inopinatis  eruptioni-
bus  aut  incursioni  ex  insidiis  factae  simillimum.  Id
autem  turn  faciendum,  cum  est  aliquid,  cui  respon-
deri non  statim  possit,  potuerit  autem,  si  tempus  ad
disponendum  fuisset. Nam  quod  fideliter firmum

508


BOOK VI.  iv.  11-14

and  try  to  throw  everything  into  confusion.  While,
then,  it  would  be  wrong  to  pay  them  the  compli-
ment of  imitation,  we  must  none  the  less  repel  their
onslaughts  with  vigour  by  crushing  their  insolence
and  making  frequent  appeals  to  the  judges  or  pre-
siding magistrates  to  insist  on  the  observance  of  the
proper  order  of  speaking.  The  debater's  task  is
not  one  that  suits  a  meek  temper  or  excessive
modesty,  and  we  are  apt  to  be  misled  because  that
which  is  really  weakness  is  dignified  by  the  name  of
honesty.  But  the  quality  which  is  the  most  service-  12
able  in  debate  is  acumen,  which  while  it  is  not  the
result  of  art  (for  natural  gifts  cannot  be  taught),
may  none  the  less  be  improved  by  art.  In  this  13
connexion  the  chief  essential  is  never  for  a  moment
to  lose  sight  either  of  the  question  at  issue  or  the
end  which  we  have  in  view.  If  we  bear  this  in
mind,  we  shall  never  descend  to  mere  brawling
nor  waste  the  time  allotted  to  the  case  by  indulging
in  abuse,  while  we  shall  rejoice  if  our  adversary
does  so.

Those  who  have  given  a  careful  study  to  the  ar-  14
guments  that  are  likely  to  be  produced  by  their
opponents  or  the  replies  which  may  be  made  by
themselves  are  almost  always  ready  for  the  fray.
There  is,  however,  a  further  device  available  which
consists  in  suddenly  introducing  into  the  debate  ar-
guments which  were  deliberately  concealed  in  our  set
speech :  it  is  a  procedure  which  resembles  a  surprise
attack  or  a  sally  from  an  ambush.  The  occasion  for
its  employment  arises  when  there  is  some  point  to
which  it  is  difficult  to  improvise  an  answer,  though
it  would  not  be  difficult  to  meet  if  time  were
allowed  for  consideration. For  solid  and  irrefutable

5°9


QUINTIL1AN

est  a  primis  statim  actionibus  arripere  optimum  est,

15  quo  saepius  diutiusque  dicatur.  Illud  vix  saltern
praecipiendum  videtur,  ne  turbidus  et  clamosus  tan-
tum  sit  altercator,  et  quales  faceti  sunt,  qui  litteras
nesciunt.  Nam  improbitas,  licet  adversario  molesta
sit,  iudici  invisa  est. Nocet  etiam  diu  pugnare  in

16  iis  quae  obtinere  non  possis.  Nam,  ubi  vinci  necesse
est,  expedit  cedere ;  quia,  sive  plura  sunt  de  quibus
quaeritur,  facilior  erit  in  ceteris  fides,  sive  unum,
mitior  solet  poena  irrogari  verecundiae.  Nam  cul-
pam  praesertim  deprehensam  pertinaciter  tueri
culpa  altera  est.

17  Dum  stat  acies,  multi  res  consilii  atque  artis  est,
ut  errantem  adversarium  trahas  et  ire  quam  longis-
sime  cogas,  ut  vana  interim  spe  exultet.  Ideo  quae-
dam  bene  dissimulantur  instrumenta.  Instant  enim
et  saepe  discrimen  omne  committunt,  quod  deesse
nobis  putant,  et  faciunt  probationibus  nostris  aucto-

18  ritatem  postulando.  Expedit  etiam  dare  aliquid
adversario  quod  pro  se  putet,  quod  apprehendens
maius  aliquid  cogatur  dimittere;  duas  interim  res

510


BOOK VI.  iv.  14-18

arguments  are  best  produced  at  once  in  the  actual
pleading  in  order  that  they  may  be  repeated  and
treated  at  greater  length.  I  think  I  need  hardly  15
insist  on  the  necessity  for  the  avoidance  in  debate  of
mere  violence  and  noise  and  such  forms  of  pleasantry
as  are  dear  to  the  uneducated.  For  unscrupulous
violence,  although  annoying  to  one's  antagonist,
makes  an  unpleasant  impression  on  the  judge.  It  is
also  bad  policy  to  fight  hard  for  points  which  you
cannot  prove.  For  where  defeat  is  inevitable,  it  is  16
wisest  to  yield,  since,  if  there  are  a  number  of  other
points  in  dispute,  we  shall  find  it  easier  to  prove
what  remains,  while  if  there  is  only  one  point  at
issue,  surrender  with  a  good  grace  will  generally
secure  some  mitigation  of  punishment.  For  obstinacy
in  the  defence  of  a  fault,  more  especially  after  de-
tection, is  simply  the  commission  of  a  fresh  fault.

While  the  battle  still  rages,  the  task  of  luring  on  17
our  adversary  when  he  has  once  committed  himself
to  error,  and  of  forcing  him  to  commit  himself  as
deeply  as  possible,  even  to  the  extent  at  times  of
being  puffed  up  with  extravagant  hopes  of  success,
requires  great  prudence  and  skill.  It  is,  therefore,
wise  to  conceal  some  of  our  weapons:  for  our
opponents  will  often  press  their  attack  and  stake
everything  on  some  imagined  weakness  of  our  own,
and  will  give  fresh  weight  to  our  proofs  by  the
instancy  with  which  they  demand  us  to  produce
them.  It  may  even  be  expedient  to  yield  ground  18
which  the  enemy  thinks  advantageous  to  himself:
for  in  grasping  at  the  fancied  advantage  he  may
be  forced  to  surrender  some  greater  advantage :  at
times,  too,  it  may  serve  our  purpose  to  give  him  a
choice  between  two  alternatives,  neither  of  which

511


QUINTILIAN

proponere  quarum  utramlibet  male  sit  electurus ;
quod  in  altercatione  fit  potentius  quam  in  actione,
quia  in  ilia  nobis  ipsi  respondemus,  in  hac  adver-

19  sarium  quasi  confessum  tenemus.  Est  inprimis  acuti
videre,  quo  iudex  dicto  moveatur,  quid  respuat ;  quod
et  vultu  saepissime  et  aliquando  etiam  dicto  aliquo
factove  eius  deprehenditur.  Et  iixstare  proficienti-
bus  et  ab  iis,  quae  non  adiuvent,  quam  mollissime
pedem  oportet  referre.  Faciunt  hoc  medici  quoque,
ut  remedia  proinde  perseverent  adhibere  vel  desinant,

20  ut  ilia  recipi  vel  respui  vident.  Nonnunquam,  si  rem
evolvere  propositam  facile  non  sit,  inferenda  est  alia
quaestio,  atque  in  earn  iudex,  si  fieri  potest,  avocan-
dus.  Quid  enim,  cum  respondere  non  possis,  agen-
dum est, nisi ut aliud invenias, cui adversarius

21  respondere  non  possit?  In  plerisque  idem  est,  ut
dixi,  qui  circa  testes  locus  et  personis  modo  distat,
quod  hie  patronorum  inter  se  certamen,  illic  pugna
inter  testem  et  patronum.

Exercitatio  vero  huius  rei  longe  facilior.  Nam  est
utilissimum,  frequenter  cum  aliquo,  qui  sit  studiorum
eorundem,  sumere  materiam  vel  verae  vel  etiam  fictae
controversiae,  et  diversas  partes  altercationis  modo
tueri ;  quod  idem  etiam  in  simplici  genere  quaestio-

22  num  fieri  potest. Ne  illud  quidem  ignorare  advoca-


1  We  propound  the  dilemma  and  ourselves  point  out  that
whichever  answer  our  opponent  gives  must  tell  against  him.
•  §  2.  *  cp.  n.  i.  9  and  v.  x.  63.

5"


BOOK VI.  iv.  18-22

he  can  select  without  damage  to  his  cause.  Such
a  course  is  more  effective  in  debate  than  in  a  set
speech,  for  the  reason  that  in  the  latter  we  reply
to  ourselves,1  while  in  the  former  our  opponent
replies,  and  thereby  delivers  himself  into  our  hands.
It  is,  above  all,  the  mark  of  a  shrewd  debater  to  19
perceive  what  remarks  impress  the  judge  and  what
he  rejects:  this  may  often  be  detected  from  his
looks,  and  sometimes  from  some  action  or  utterance.
Arguments  which  help  us  must  be  pressed  home,
while  it  will  be  wise  to  withdraw  as  gently  as
possible  from  such  as  are  of  no  service.  We  may
take  a  lesson  from  doctors  who  continue  or  cease
to  administer  remedies  according  as  they  note  that
they  are  received  or  rejected  by  the  stomach.
Sometimes,  if  we  find  difficulty  in  developing  our  20
point,  it  is  desirable  to  raise  another  question  and
to  divert  the  attention  of  the  judge  to  it  if  this  be
feasible.  For  what  can  you  do,  if  you  are  unable
to  answer  an  argument,  save  invent  another  to  which
your  opponent  can  give  no  answer?  In  most  re-  21
spects  the  rules  to  be  observed  in  debate  are,  as  I
have  said,2  identical  with  those  for  the  cross-exami-
nation of  witnesses,  the  only  difference  lying  in  the
fact  that  the  debate  is  a  battle  between  advocates,
whereas  cross-examination  is  a  fight  between  advocate
and  witness.

To  practise  the  art  of  debate  is,  however,  far
easier.  For  it  is  most  profitable  to  agree  with
a  fellow-student  on  some  subject,  real  or  fictitious,
and  to  take  different  sides,  debating  it  as  would
be  done  in  the  courts.  The  same  may  also  be
done  with  the  simpler  class  of  questions.3  I  22
would  further  have  an  advocate  realise  the  order  in

513


QUINTILIAN

turn  volo,  quo  quaeque  ordine  probatio  sit  apud  iu-
dicem  proferenda ;  cuius  rei  eadem  quae  in  argumentis
ratio  est,  ut  potentissima  prima  et  summa  ponantur.
Ilia  enim  ad  credendum  praeparant  iudicem,  haec  ad
pronuntiandum.

V.  His  pro  nostra  facultate  tractatis  non  dubitas-
sem  transire  protinus  ad  dispositionem,  quae  ordine
ipso  sequitur,  nisi  vererer  ne,  quoniam  fuerunt  qui
iudicium  inventioni  subiungerent,  praeterisse  hunc
locum  quibusdam  viderer,  qui  mea  quidem  opinione
adeo  partibus  operis  huius  omnibus  connexus  ac
mixtus  est,  ut  ne  a  sententiis  quidem  aut  verbis
saltern  singulis  possit  separari,  nee  magis  arte  tra-

2  ditur  quam  gustus  aut  odor.  Ideoque  nos,  quid  in
quaque  re  sequendum  cavendumque  sit,  docemus  ac
deinceps  docebimus,  ut  ad  ea  iudicium  dirigatur.
Praecipiam  igitur,  ne,  quod  effici  non  potest,  aggre-
diamur,  ut  contraria  vitemus  et  communia,  ne  quid
in  eloquendo  corruptum,  obscurum  sit?  Referatur
oportet  ad  sensus,  qui  non  docentur.

3  Nee  multum  a  iudicio  credo  distare  consilium,  nisi
quod  illud  ostendentibus  se  rebus  adhibetur,  hoc
latentibus  et  aut  omnino  nondum  repertis  aut  dubiis.
Et  iudicium frequentissime certum est,  consilium

1  See  in.  iii.  5  and  6.
5*4


BOOK VI.  iv.  2  2-v.  3

which  his  proofs  should  be  presented  to  the  judge :
the  method  to  be  followed  is  the  same  as  in  argu-
ments: the  strongest  should  be  placed  first  and
last.  For  those  which  are  presented  first  dispose
the  judge  to  believe  us,  and  those  which  come  last
to  decide  in  our  favour.

V.  Having  dealt  with  these  points  to  the  best  of
my  ability,  I  should  have  had  no  hesitation  in  pro-
ceeding to  discuss  arrangement,  which  is  logically
the  next  consideration,  did  I  not  fear  that,  since
there  are  some  who  include  judgment1  under  the
head  of  invention,  they  might  think  that  I  had
deliberately  omitted  all  discussion  of  judgment,
although  personally  I  regard  it  as  so  inextricably
blent  with  and  involved  in  every  portion  of  this
work,  that  its  influence  extends  even  to  single
sentences  or  words,  and  it  is  no  more  possible  to
teach  it  than  it  is  to  instruct  the  powers  of  taste
and  smell.  Consequently,  all  I  can  do  is  now  and  2
hereafter  to  show  what  should  be  done  or  avoided
in  each  particular  case,  with  a  view  thereby  to  guide
the  judgment.  What  use  then  is  it  for  me  to  lay
down  general  rules  to  the  effect  that  we  should  not
attempt  impossibilities,  that  we  should  avoid  what-
ever contradicts  our  case  or  is  common  to  both,  and
shun  all  incorrectness  or  obscurity  of  style  ?  In  all
these  cases  it  is  common  sense  that  must  decide,
and  common  sense  cannot  be  taught.

There  is  no  great  difference,  in  my  opinion,  3
between  judgment  and  sagacity,  except  that  the
former  deals  with  evident  facts,  while  the  latter  is
concerned  with  hidden  facts  or  such  as  have  not
yet  been  discovered  or  still  remain  in  doubt.  Again
judgment is more often than not a matter of

515


QUINTILIAN

vero est ratio  quaedam  alte petita et plerumque
plura  perpendens  et  comparans  habensque  in  se  et

4  inventionem  et  iudicationem.  Sed  ne  de  hoc  quidem
praecepta  in  universum  exspectanda  sunt.  Nam  ex
re  sumitur  cuius  locus  ante  actionem  est  frequenter ;
nam  Cicero  summo  consilio  videtur  in  Verrem  vel
contrahere  tempora  dicendi  maluisse  quam  in  eum
annum,  quo  erat  Q.  Hortensius  consul  futurus,  in-

5  cidere.  Et  in  ipsis  actionibus  primum  ac  potentis-
simum  obtinet  locum ;  nam,  quid  dicendum,  quid
tacendum,  quid  differendum  sit,  exigere  consilii  est ;
negare  sit  satis  an  defendere,  ubi  prooemio  utendum
et  quali,  narrandumne  et  quomodo,  iure  prius  pug-
nan  d  um  an  aequo,  qui  sit  ordo  utilissimus,  turn
omnes  colores,  aspere  an  leniter  an  etiam  summisse

6  loqui  expediat.  Sed  haec  quoque,  ut  quisque  passus
est  locus,  monuimus,  idemque  in  reliqua  parte  facie-
mus ;  pauca  tarn  en  exempli  gratia  ponam,  quibus
manifestius appareat quid sit, quod demonstrari

7  posse  praeceptis  non  arbitror.  Laudatur  consilium
Demosthenis,  quod,  cum  suaderet  bellum  Athenien-

»  Phil.  i.  2.
5i6


BOOK VI.  v.  3-7

certainty,  while  sagacity  is  a  form  of  reasoning  from
deep-lying  premises,  which  generally  weighs  and
compares  a  number  of  arguments  and  in  itself
involves  both  invention  and  judgment.  But  here  4
again  you  must  not  expect  me  to  lay  down  any
general  rules.  For  sagacity  depends  on  circumstances
and  will  often  find  its  scope  in  something  preceding
the  pleading  of  the  cause.  For  instance  in  the  pro-
secution of  Verres  Cicero  seems  to  have  shown  the
highest  sagacity  in  preferring  to  cut  down  the  time
available  for  his  speech  rather  than  allow  the  trial  to
be  postponed  to  the  following  year  when  Quintus
Hortensius  was  to  be  consul.  And  again  in  the  6
actual  pleading  sagacity  holds  the  first  and  most
important  place.  For  it  is  the  duty  of  sagacity  to
decide  what  we  should  say  and  what  we  should  pass
by  in  silence  or  postpone ;  whether  it  is  better  to
deny  an  act  or  to  defend  it,  when  we  should  employ
an  exordium  and  on  what  lines  it  should  be  designed,
whether  we  should  make  a  statement  of  facts  and  if
so,  how,  whether  we  should  base  our  plea  on  law  or
equity  and  what  is  the  best  order  to  adopt,  while  it
must  also  decide  on  all  the  nuances  of  style,  and
settle  whether  it  is  expedient  to  speak  harshly,
gently  or  even  with  humility.  But  I  have  already  6
given  advice  on  all  these  points  as  far  as  each
occasion  permitted,  and  I  shall  continue  to  do  the
same  in  the  subsequent  portions  of  this  work.  In
the  meantime,  however,  I  will  give  a  few  instances
to  make  my  meaning  clearer,  since  it  is  not  possible,
in  my  opinion,  to  do  so  by  laying  down  general  rules.
We  praise  Demosthenes1  for  his  sagacity  because  7
when  he  urged  a  policy  of  war  upon  the  Athenians
after they  had met  with a series  of  reverses,  he

sn


QUINTILIAN

sibus  parum  id  prospere  expertis,  nihil  adhuc  factum
esse  ratione  monstrat.  Poterat  enim  emendari  neg-
ligentia ;  at,  si  nihil  esset  erratum,  melioris  in  pos-

8  terum  spei  non  erat  ratio.  Idem,  cum  offensam
vereretur,  si  obiurgaret  populi  segnitiam  in  asse-
renda  libertate  rei  publicae,  maiorum  laude  uti
maluit,  qui  rem  publicam  fortissime  administrassent.
Nam  et  faciles  habuit  aures,  et  natura  sequebatur,  ut

9  meliora  probantes  peiorum  poeniteret.  Ciceronis
quid  em  vel  una  pro  Cluentio  quamlibet  multis
exemplis  sufficiet  oratio.  Nam  quod  in  eo  consilium
maxime  mirer?  primamne  expositionem,  qua  matri,
cuius  filium  premebat  auctoritas,  abstulit  (idem?  an
quod  iudicii  corrupti  crimen  transferre  in  adversarium
maluit  quam  negare  propter  inveteratam,  ut  ipse
dicit,  infamiam  ?  an  quod  in  re  invidiosa  legis  auxilio
novissime  est  usus,  quo  genere  defensionis  etiam
offendisset  nondum  praemollitas  iudicum  mentes?
an  quod  se ipsum invito  Cluentio facere testatus

10  est? Quid pro Milone? quod non  ante  narravit,
quam praeiudiciis omnibus reum liberaret? quod


1  Phil.  i.  1. 2  vi.  17. »  i.  4. *  lit  143  sqq.
6  lii.  144,  148,  149.  ■  cp.  Quint,  in.  vi.  93.


5*3


BOOK VI;  v.  7-10

pointed  out  that  so  far  their  action  had  been  entirely
irrational.  For  they  might  still  make  amends  for  their
negligence,  whereas,  if  they  had  made  no  mistakes,
they  would  have  had  no  ground  for  hopes  of  better
success  in  the  future.  Again,1  since  he  feared  to  8
give  offence  if  he  taxed  the  people  with  lack  of
energy  in  defending  the  liberties  of  their  country,
he  preferred  to  praise  their  ancestors  for  their
courageous  policy.  Thus  he  gained  a  ready  hearing,
with  the  natural  result  that  the  pride  which  they
felt  in  the  heroic  past  made  them  repent  of  their
own  degenerate  behaviour.  If  we  turn  to  Cicero,  we  9
shall  find  that  one  speech  alone,  the  pro  Cluentio,
will  suffice  to  provide  a  number  of  examples.  The
difficulty  is  to  know  what  special  exhibition  of  saga-
city to  admire  most  in  this  speech.  His  opening
statement  of  the  case,  by  which  he  discredited  the
mother  whose  authority  pressed  so  hardly  on  her
son  ? 2  The  fact  that  he  preferred  to  throw  the
charge  of  having  bribed  the  jury  back  upon  his
opponents  rather  than  deny  it  on  account  of  what  he
calls  the  notorious  infamy  of  the  verdict  ?  3  Or  his
recourse,  last  of  all,  to  the  support  of  the  law  in  spite
of  the  odious  nature  of  the  affair,  a  method  by  which
he  would  have  set  the  judges  against  him  but  for
the  fact  that  he  had  already  softened  their  feelings
towards  him  ?  4  Or  the  skill  which  he  shows  in  stat-
ing that  he  has  adopted  this  course  in  spite  of  the
protests  of  his  client  ?  6  What  again  am  I  to  select  as  10
an  outstanding  instance  of  his  sagacity  in  the  pro
Milone}  The  fact  that  he  refrains  from  proceeding
to  his  statement  of  facts  until  he  has  cleared  the
ground  by  disposing  of  the  previous  verdicts  against
the  accused  ?  6 The  manner  in  which  he  turns  the

5i9


QUINTILIAN

insidiarum  invidiam  in  Clodium  vertit,  quanquam
revera  fuerat  pugna  fortuita  ?  quod  factum  et  lauda-
vit  et  tamen  voluntate  Milonis  removit?  quod  illi
preces  non  dedit  et  in  earum  locum  ipse  successit  ?
Infinitum  est  enumerare,  ut  Cottae  detraxerit  aucto-
ritatem,  ut  pro  Ligario  se  opposuerit,  Cornelium
11  ipsa  confessionis  fiducia  eripuerit.  Illud  dicere  satis
habeo,  nihil  esse  non  modo  in  orando,  sed  in  omni
vita  prius  consilio,  frustraque  sine  eo  tradi  ceteras
artes,  plusque  vel  sine  doctrina  prudentiam  quam
sine  prudentia  facere  doctrinam.  Aptare  etiam  ora-
tionem  locis,  temporibus,  personis  est  eiusdem  vir-
tutis.  Sed  hie  quia  latius  fusus  est  locus  mixtusque
cum  elocutione,  tractabitur  cum  praecipere  de  apte
dicendo  coeperimus.

1  See  above  i.  25  and  27.

2  cp.  ab^ve  v.  xiii.  30. The  reference  is  to  the  pro  Oppio.
8  See  above  v.  x.  93.  4  See  above  v.  xiii.  18  and  26.

1  In  xi.  i. cp.  I.  v.  1.


520


BOOK VI.  v.  io-ii

odium  of  the  attempted  ambush  against  Clodius,
although  as  a  matter  of  fact  the  encounter  was  a
pure  chance  ?  The  way  in  which  he  at  one  and  the
same  time  praised  the  actual  deed  and  showed  that
it  was  forced  upon  his  client?  Or  the  skill  with
which  he  avoided  making  Milo  plead  for  consider-
ation and  undertook  the  role  of  suppliant  himself? '
It  would  be  an  endless  task  to  quote  all  the  instances
of  his  sagacity,  how  he  discredited  Cotta,2  how  he
put  forward  his  own  case  in  defence  of  Ligarius3  and
saved  Cornelius  4  by  his  bold  admission  of  the  facts.
It  is  enough,  I  think,  to  say  that  there  is  nothing  11
not  merely  in  oratory,  but  in  all  the  tasks  of  life
that  is  more  important  than  sagacity  and  that  with-
out it  all  formal  instruction  is  given  in  vain,  while
prudence  unsupported  by  learning  will  accomplish
more  than  learning  unsupported  by  prudence.  It  is
sagacity  again  that  teaches  us  to  adapt  our  speech  to
circumstances  of  time  and  place  and  to  the  persons
with  whom  we  are  concerned.  But  since  this  topic
covers  a  wide  field  and  is  intimately  connected  with
eloquence  itself,  I  shall  reserve  my  treatment  of  it
till  I  come  to  give  instructions  on  the  subject  of
appropriateness  in  speaking.5


5"


NOTES


IV.  ii.  28,  secundo  parti*  suae  loco.  There  seems  to  have
been  nothing  in  the  schools  of  rhetoric  which  corresponded
with  the  mock  trials  employed  to-day  for  the  training  of  law
students.  It  would  have  needed  little  to  adapt  the  contro-
versial to  this  more  practical  form,  but  it  seems  not  to  have
been  done.  The  declaimer  dealt  both  with  the  case  for  the
prosecution  and  that  for  the  defence,  as  stated  in  section  29.
But  more  than  one  declamation  might  be  made  on  the
same  theme.  The  declamation  which  is  described  as  being
delivered  secundo  loco  would  appear  to  be,  not  a  declamation
for  the  defence,  though  this  is  conceivable,  but  rather  a
second  speech  in  answer  to  the  defence.  The  declaimer
refutes  the  arguments  which  he  alleges  have  been  made  by
the  defence,  but  that  he  may  not  miss  the  opportunity  of
practice  in  making  a  statement  of  facts,  preludes  his  refuta-
tion with  a  statement  of  facts,  inserted  in  the  usual  position
immediately  following  the  exordium.  For  the  whole  of  this
obscure  passage  cp.  v.  xiii.  50.

V.  xiii.  49,  An  alternative  interpretation  is  that  certain
depositions  have  been  communicated  to  the  prosecution  by
the  defence  and  are  used  to  supply  material  for  contra-
dictiones  after  discussion  among  the  prosecutor's  advocati.

V.  xiii.  50.  The  reading  is  uncertain.  Cod.  Bern,  reads
et  #  »  et ;  Cod.  Bamb.  et  et ;  Cod.  Ambr.  enaribus.  It  is
clear  that  something  is  lost,  propositionibus  is  a  harmless
rather  than  a  probable  emendation,  propositionibus  and
contradictionibus  have  been  translated  as  datives.  It  would
also  be  possible  to  treat  them  as  ablatives:  "meet  our
imaginary  opponent's  case  both  by  statements  and  by
objections."

S«3


NOTES

V.  xiv.  1  sqq.  I  am  indebted  for  this  note  to  my  col-
league, Dr.  A.  Wolf,  Reader  in  Logic  and  Ethics  in  the
University  of  London.

§  1.  ex  consequentibus.  If  S  is  M,  it  is  P  ;  S  is  not  P;
therefore  S  is  not  M  (a  Destructive  syllogism).  The
argument  is  :  [If  Caesar's  cause  were  not  superior  the
gods  would  not  support  it ;]  the  gods  have  supported
Caesar's  cause  ;  therefore  our  cause  is  superior.  The  Major
is  omitted,  thereby  converting  the  syllogism  into  an
enthymeme.  The  conclusion  is  stated,  though  it  does
not  follow  the  premise,  as  it  should  do  formally.

§  2.  ex  pugnantibus.  The  usual  form  would  be  :  It  would  be
inconsistent  for  S  to  be  M  and  not  also  to  be  P ;  S  is  M  ;
therefore  S  is  also  P.  Quintilian's  form  of  Minor  and
Conclusion  is :  S  is  not  P  ;  therefore  S  is  not  M.  The
argument  is :  [It  would  be  inconsistent  to  hold  that
someone's  death  should  be  avenged  and  not  also  that  his
life  should  be  restored,  if  possible  ;]  you  hold  that  his
life  was  not  worth  restoring,  even  if  possible ;  therefore
you  cannot  hold  that  his  death  should  be  avenged.  The
Major  is  omitted.

§  3.  The  argument  is  :  [It  would  be  inconsistent  to  hold
that  a  man  would  commit  a  murder  under  unfavourable
circumstances,  and  not  to  hold  that  he  would  do  so
under  favourable  circumstances  ;]  but  you  know  that  he
did  not  commit  murder  under  favourable  circumstances  ;
therefore,  you  cannot  hold  that  he  did  so  under  un-
favourable circumstances.

§  4.  The  original  argument  is  :  If  a  man  is  guilty  of  an
illegality  which  others  have  committed  with  impunity,
he  should  not  be  punished  ;  S  is  guilty  of  such  an
illegality ;  therefore  he  should  not  be  punished.  The
counter-argument  (in  the  text)  uses  the  same  reason
(t.e.  the  fact  that  the  illegality  in  question  has  been
frequently  committed  with  impunity)  to  establish  a
contrary  conclusion  (i.e.  that  special  punishment  should
be  administered).

§  5.  The  epicheireme  is  a  syllogism  in  which  either  premise
is  supported  by  a  reason.  The  reason  is  a  premise  of
another  syllogism,  so  that  the  reason  taken  together
with  the  premise  which  it  supports  is  really  an  enthy-
meme ; e.g.  M is P, because  it  is  Q [and  Q  is  P] ;

5H


NOTES

S is M, because it is R  [and R is  Ml; therefore
S  is  P.

§§  7-9.  The  argument  is  confused.  It  may  be  expressed
thus :  Major.  [If  the  universe  were  not  controlled  by
reason,  something  could  be  found  better  governed  than
it  is.]  Reason.  Because  things  that  are  governed  by
reason  are  better  governed  than  those  which  are  not.
Minor.  But  nothing  is  better  administered  than  the
universe.  Conclusion.  Therefore  the  universe  is  governed
by  reason.  (The  argument  is  at  once  an  enthymeme
{ex  consequential*)  and  an  epicheireme.)

§  10.  The  Conclusion  here  is  not  identical  with  the  Major,  it
is  only  expressed  in  the  same  sentence :  viz.  Major.
Whatever  derives  its  motion  from  itself  is  immortal.
Minor  and  Conclusion.  The  soul  derives  its  motion  from
itself  ;  therefore  the  soul  is  immortal.

§11.  The  proposition  is  doubtful  because  it  is  a  hasty
inference  based  on  mere  enumeration  of  instances.

§  12.  1st  Ex.  The  argument  is :  Major.  That  which  is
devoid  of  feeling  is  nothing  to  us.  Minor  (omitted).
Death  is  a  state  devoid  of  feeling.  Reason.  Because
a  state  of  dissolution  is  a  state  devoid  of  feeling.  Here
we  have  an  epicheireme  with  Reason  substituted  for
Minor,  and  Major  is  misunderstood  as  in  §  10  (q.v.).

2nd  Ex.  Major  (omitted).  If  the  universe  were  not
animate,  there  would  be  something  better.  Reason.
Because  all  animate  things  are  better  than  inanimate.
Minor.  But  there  is  nothing  better  than  the  universe.
Conclusion.  Therefore  the  universe  is  animate.  The
Major  is  really  omitted  as  Quintilian  suspects.

§  13  (last  sentence).  What  he  calls  the  Minor  is  only  its
Reason. "N

§17.  The  argument  is  :  Major.  If  in  the  midst  of  arms  laws
were  not  silent,  then  he  who  would  await  their  sanction
is  certain  to  be  the  victim,  etc.  Minor  (omitted).  But
he  who  awaits  their  sanction  should  not  be  the  victim,
etc.  Conclusion.  Therefore  in  the  midst  of  arms  laws
are  silent.  Here  we  have  an  enthymeme  ex  consequen-
tibus.  There  is  still  no  Reason  for  either  premise.  The
Major  is  the  Reason  for  the  Conclusion,  which  is  a
different  matter.

§  18.  Major  (omitted).  If  the  Twelve  Tables  permit  the
killing  of  a  man  under  certain  circumstances,  it  cannot

525


NOTES

be  maintained  that  a  slayer  must  be  killed  whatever
the  circumstances.  Minor.  The  Twelve  Tables  do
permit  the  killing,  etc.  Conclusion.  Therefore  it  can-
not be  maintained  that  a  slayer,  etc.  Here  also  what  is
given  is  a  Reason  for  the  Conclusion  (i.e.  itself  a  premise)
and  not  for  the  Premise.

§  19.  The  Real  argument  is :  Major.  If  it  were  wrong  to  kill
robbers,  etc.,  we  should  not  be  allowed  escorts  and
swords.  Reason.  For  escorts  and  swords  are  intended
to  enable  us  to  fight  robbers.  Minor.  But  we  are
allowed  escorts  and  swords.  Conclusion.  Therefore  it
is  not  wrong  to  kill  robbers,  etc.

§  20.  Major.  If  a  man  confesses,  etc.,  he  should  be  con-
demned. Objection.  If  a  man  confesses  that  he  has
killed  someone  who  lay  in  wait  for  him  he  should  not
be  condemned.

§  21.  The  Reason  is  one  of  the  premises  for  the  proposition.
If  the  other  Reason  be  false,  the  proposition  will  be
false,  but  the  first  Reason  will  still  be  true.

§  23.  The  doctrine  is  false.  If  both  premises  are  true,  the
conclusion,  if  valid,  is  true,  while  if  both  premises  or
either  be  false,  the  conclusion  may  still  be  true.  Cp.
Ar.  An.  Pr.  ii.  2.

|  25.  Enthymtma  ex  consequentibus  .  .  .  ex  pugnantibus  See
on  §  10.  Both  these  enthymemes  omit  the  major
premise.

VI.  i.  20. Servium  Sulpicium  Messala  is  the  reading  of
Scholl. The  MSS.  give  Servius  Sulpicius-


5*6


INDEX


INDEX


(Only  those  names  are  included  which  seem  to  require  some  explanation  ; a
complete  index  will  be  contained  in  Vol.  IV.)


Accius,  v.  xili.  43.  Famous  tragic
poet,  ft.  140  B.C.

Aeschines,  IV.  i.  66;  IT.  iv.  5.
Attic  orator,  contemporary  and
opponent  of  Demosthenes.

Ahala,  Servilius,  v.  xi.  16;  xiii.  24.
Put  to  death  Sp.  Maelius,  q.v.

Antonius,  C,  IY.  ii.  123.  Colleague
of  Cicero  in  the  consulship,  63b. o.,
and  a  man  of  the  lowest  character

Apollodorus  of  Pergamus,  iv.  i.  50  ;
IT.  ii.  31 ;  v.  xiii.  59.  A  dis-
tinguished rhetorician  of  the
Augustan  age.

Appius  Claudius,  v.  xiii.  34.  The
decemvir,  whose  conduct  in
relation  to  Verginia  caused  the
overthrow  of  the  decern virate,
449  B.O.

Asinius,  see  Pollio.

Aspasia,  v.  xi.  27.  An  Athenian
hetaira,  mistress  of  Pericles.

Atellani,  VI.  iii.  47.  Actors  in  the
Atellan  farce,  an  indigenous  form
of  comedy,  deriving  its  name
from  Atella  in  Campania.

Berenice,  IV.  i.  19.  Daughter  of
Herod  Agrippa,  mistress  of  the
Emperor  Titus.

Bovillae,  vi.  iii.  49.  A  town  on  the
Appian  Way,  not  far  from  Rome.

Brutus  (i),  v.  xi.  6.  The  expeller
of  the  kings  ;  executed  his  sons
for  an  attempt  against  the  newly
established  republic.

Brutus  (ii),  vi.  iii.  44.  An  orator
notorious  as  an  accuser  and  as  a
man  of  scandalous  extravagance,
accused  a  certain  Cn.  Plancius  in
91  B.O.


Brutus  (iii),  v.  x.  9.  The  murderer
of  Caesar,  famous  as  an  orator  of
the  Attic  school.

Caecilius,  v.  x.  7.  Sicilian  rhetori-
cian, who  taught  at  Rome  in  the
reign  of  Augustus.

Caelius  Rufus,  M.,  iv.  i.  31  and
39  ;  IV.  ii.  27  and  123  ;  VI.  iii.  39
and  41.  A  younger  contem-
porary of  Cicero  famous  as  an
orator.  Defended  by  Cicero
on  n  charge  of  attempted  murder
brought  by  Clodia.  The  speech
cited  in  IV.  ii.  123  is  against
C.  Antonius.

Calvus,  vi.  i.  13;  vi.  iii.  60.
Younger  contemporary  of  Cicero,
poet  and  orator,  with  Brutus
chief  representative  of  the  Attic
school.

Cassander,  v.  x.  Ill  and  118.  A
Macedonian,  claimant  to  the
throne  of  Mace  don,  exercised  a
powerful  influence  in  Greek
politics  during  the  years  fol-
lowing the  death  of  Alexander.

Cassius  Severus,  vi.  i.  43  ;  vi.  iii.  27,
78  and  90.  A  distinguished  orator
of  the  reigns  of  Augustus  and
Tiberius.

Cato,  M.,  the  Censor,  v.  xi.  39  ;
VI.  iii.  105.  The  famous  oppo-
nent of  Carthage,  one  of  the  most
distinguished  writers  and  orators
of  his  day. 234-149  B.O.

Cato  Uticensis,  v.  xi.  10  ;  VI.  iii.
112.  Contemporary  of  Cicero,  a
Stoic  and  one  of  the  most
ardent  opponents  of  Caesar.

Catulus, Q. Lutatius,  VI.  iii. 81.


5*9


INDEX


Consul  with  Marius  102  B.o.
and  with  him  victor  over  the
Cimbri  at  Vercellae.  One  of  the
characters  in  Cicero's  de  Oratore.

Celsus,  Cornelius,  iv.  I.  12;  ii.  9.
Writer  on  rhetoric,  medicine  and
many  other  subjects :  flourished
under  Augustus  and  Tiberius.

Chrysogonus,  rv.  ii.  3.  A  powerful
freedman  of  Sulla.

Clodia,  v.  xiii.  30.  Sister  of
Clodius,  mistress  of  Catullus,
Caelius  and  many  others.

Clodius,  IV.  ii.  25,  57,  88  ;  V.  ii.  4  ;
v.  x.  41 ;  y.  xiv.  22.  Demagogue
and  inveterate  enemy  of  Cicero  ;
killed  by  Milo.

Corniflcius,  v.  x.  2.  Rhetorician
contemporary  with  Cicero,  pro-
bably author  of  the  rhetorical
treatise  ad  Herennium.

Crassus,  L.,  V*.  iii.  43,  44.  With
L.  Antonius  the  chief  Roman
orator  prior  to  Cicero  of  whom
he  was  an  eider  contemporary.

Curio,  VI.  iii.  76.  Younger  con-
temporary of  Cicero,  a  turbulent
politician  and  supporter  of  Caesar.

Cynicus,  rv.  ii.  30.  The  reference
seems  to  be  to  a  rhetorical  theme
which  occurs  in  the  declamations
of  the  Pseudo-Quintilian  (283)
where  a  father  disinherits  his
son  for  turning  Cynic  and  de-
nounces the  indecency  of  his
garb.

Deiotarus,  iv.  i.  31.  A  Galatian
King  defended  by  Cicero.

Dionysius,  v.  xi.  8.  Tyrant  of
Syracuse.

Dolabella  (i),  n\  ii.  132.  Praetor
67  B.O.

Dolabella  (ii),  VI.  iii.  73  and  99.
A  disreputable  politician  and
follower  of  Caesar.  Fabia  ap-
pears to  have  been  his  first  wife.
He  later  married  Cicero's
daughter.

Dolabella  (iii),  VI.  iii.  79.  Son  of
(ii) ;  friend  of  Augustus.

Domitius  Afer,  v.  vii.  7  ;  v.  x.  79 ;
VI.  iii.  27  and  91.  A  brilliant
orator  of  the  reigns  of  Tiberius,
Caligula,  Claudius  and  Nero.


Domitius,  L.,  nr.  ii.  17.  Governor
of  Sicily  cite.  97  B.C.

Fontieus,  VI.  iii.  51.  Defended  by
Cicero  on  a  charge  of  extortion
as  governor  of  Gaul  in  69  B.o.

Galba,  A.,  VI.  Iii.  27,  62  and  80.
Unknown  humorist.  The  name
should  perhaps  be  Gabba.

Galba,  P.  Sulpicius,  V.  xi.  11.
Unsuccessful  candidate  for  the
consulship  in  64  b.o.

Glyco,  VI.  i.  41.  A  Greek  rhetori-
cian, fl.  circ.  40  A.D.

Hermagoras,  v.  ix.  12.  Famous
rhetorician  of  the  Rhodian
school,  contemporary  with  Cicero.

Hispo,  vi.  iii.  100.  A  rhetorician
prominent  from  the  time  of
Tiberius  to  that  of  Nero.  No-
torious as  an  informer.

Horatius,  M.  (i),  rv.  ii.  7  :  V.  xi.  12.
The  survivor  of  the  three
Horatii  who  defeated  the  three
Curiatii,  champions  of  Alba.
He  slew  his  sister  for  bewailing
the  death  of  one  of  the  Curiatii
to  whom  she  was  betrothed.

Horatius  (ii),  v.  xi.  10.  Perhaps
Horatius  Codes,  defender  of  the
bridge  against  the  Etruscans;
perhaps  identical  with  (i).

Hortensius,  iv.  v.  24;  VI.  iv.  4.
The  leading  orator  at  Rome  when
Cicero  first  made  his  appearance
at  the  bar,  and  the  latter's  most
serious  rival.

Iphicratcs,  v.  xil.  10.  Athenian
general  prosecuted  for  refusing
to  engage  the  enemy  :  according
to  one  account  the  speech  in
question  was  written  by  Lysias.

Isocrates,  rv.  ii.  31.  Famous  orator
and  founder  of  the  science  and
technique  of  Greek  rhetoric,
436-338  B.O.

Iulius  Caesar  Strabo  Vopiscus,  C,
vi.  iii.  38.  A  distinguished
orator,  one  of  the  characters  of
Cicero  s  dialogue,  the  de  Oratore  ;
was  put  to  death  by  Marius.


530


INDEX


Lablenus  (I),  IV.  i.  11.  Orator  and
historian  under  Augustus.

Labienus  (ii),  v.  xiii.  20.  Accuser
of  Rabirius  on  a  charge  of
treason,  afterwards  served  under
Caesar  in  Gaul  and  Pompey  in
the  Civil  War.

Lucretia,  v.  xl.  11.  Wife  of
Brutus  (i),  whose  rape  by  Sextus
Tarquinius,  and  subsequent  sui-
cide, was  the  immediate  cause
of  the  fall  of  the  monarchy.

Macer,  Aemilius,  vi.  iii.  96.  Augus-
tan didactic  poet.

Maelius,  Spurius,  v.  ix.  13 ;  V.
xiii.  24.  Bought  up  corn  in
time  of  dearth  and  sold  it  cheap
to  the  people  in  440  B.C.  Was
suspected  of  wishing  to  seize
the  supreme  power  and  killed
in  the  following  year.

Manius  Curius,  VI.  iii.  72.  Possibly
the  same  that  betrayed  the
Catilinarian  conspiracy.

Manlius  Capitolinus,  v.  ix.  13;
xi.  7.  Saved  Borne  from  the
Gauls,  but  was  subsequently
suspected  of  aiming  at  supreme
power  and  hurled  from  the
Tarpeian  rock  in  384  B.o.

Marcellus,  v.  xi.  7.  Great  general
of  the  second  Punic  war,  who
conquered  Sicily  for  Rome.

Marsus,  Domitius,  VI.  iii.  102  sqq.
and  111.  Distinguished  man  of
letters  of  the  Augustan  age.

Messala,  IV.  i.  8 ;  VI.  i.  20.  Dis-
tinguished orator  and  man  of
letters,  64  B.0.-8  A.D.

Midias,  VI.  i.  17.  Prosecuted  by
Demosthenes  (348  B.o.)  for
striking  him  in  the  face  on  the
festival  of  Dionysus.  Demos-
thenes demanded  the  extreme
penalty  of  the  law  (death  or
confiscation)  on  the  ground  that
the  act  was  of  the  nature  of
sacrilege.

Nasica,  Scipio,  V.  xi.  16 ;  xiii.  24.
The  slayer  of  Tiberius  Gracchus.

Opimius,  v.  xi.  16.  The  slayer  of
G,  Gracchus.


Passienus  Crispus,  vi.  1.  50;
vi.  iii.  74.  Stepfather  of  the
emperor  Nero  and  a  famous
orator.

Pedianus,  Asconius,  v.  x.  9.
Distinguished  historian  and  critic,
contemporary  with  Quintilian.

Philippus,  L.  Marcius,  vi.  iii.  81.
Consul  91  B.o.  and  a  distin-
guished orator.

Philodamus,  iv.  ii.  114;  vi.  i.  54.
A  citizen  of  Lampsacus,  plun-
dered by  Verres  when  the  latter
was  legatus  of  Dolabella  in  Asia.
On  his  offering  resistance  he  was
tried,  condemned  and  executed.

Pisistratus,  V.  xi.  8.  Tyrant  of
Athens,  6th  cent.  B.O.

Piso,  v.  xiii.  38.  Consul  in  58
and  proconsul  of  Macedonia  in
57,  56  B.o.  On  his  return  he
was  prosecuted  by  Cicero  on  the
charge  of  extortion  in  a  most
violent  speech.

Plancius,  Cn.  Munatius,  VI.  Iii,  44.
See  Brutus  (ii).

Pollio,  Asinius,  iv.  i.  11 ;  vi.  i.  21 ;
iii.  110.  Famous  orator,  poet  and
historian  of  the  Augustan  age.

Polynices,  v.  x.  31.  Son  of
Oedipus,  who  contended  with  his
brother  Eteocles  for  the  throne
of Thebes.

Polyxena,  vi!  ii.  22.  Daughter  of
Priam,  sacrificed  on  the  tomb  of
Achilles.

Proculeius,  VI.  iii.  79.  A  close
friend  of  Augustus.

Prodicus  of  Cos,  iv.  i.  73.  Sophist
of  the  1st  cent.  B.o.

Pyrrhus,  v.  xi.  10 ;  VI.  iii.  10.
King  of  Epirus,  who  waged  war
on  Rome  at  the  beginning  of  the
3rd  cent.  B.o.

Rabirius,  C,  V.  xiii.  20 ;  VI.  i.  49.
Accused  by  Caesar  in  63  for  the
murder  of  the  tribune  Satur-
ninus  in  100  B.C.

Rabirius  Postumus,  IV.  I.  69 ;
IV.  ii.  10.  A  Roman  knight
defended  by  Cicero  in  54  B.O.
when  accused  of  extortion  in
Egypt  while  acting  as  treasurer
to  King  Ptolemy  Auletes.


531


INDEX


Rullus,  Y.  xiii.  38.  Tribune  of  the
plebs  in  63  B.C.  proposed  a  law
for  the  distribution  of  public
lands,  which  was  attacked  by
Cicero  in  his  three  speeches  a$
Lege  Agraria.

Saturninus,  V.  xi.  6 ;  VI.  i.  49.
Tribune  of  the  plebs  and  dema-
gogue, killed  100  B.o.

Scaurus,  M.  Aemilius  (i),  v.  xii.  10  ;
V.  xiii.  55.  Consul  115  and  107
B.O.  A  pillar  of  the  senatorial
party,  famous  for  his  integrity.
In  90  B.C.  he  was  accused  of
inciting  the  Italian  allies  to
revolt  by  Q.  Varius,  q.v.

Scaurus,  M.  Aemilius  (ii),  iv.  1.  69  ;

V.  xiii.  28  and  40  ;  YI.  I  21.  Son
of  (i),  defended  by  Cicero  on  two
occasions,  when  accused  of  (a)  ex-
tortion in  Sardinia,  (b)  bribery  as
candidate  for  the  consulate  in
54  B.C.

Servius Sulpicius, iv. ii. 106 ;

VI.  i.  20.  Distinguished  orator
and  lawyer,  friend  and  con-
temporary of  Cicero.

Suelius  Rufus,  P.,  vi.  iii.  78.
Notorious  informer  in  the  reign
of  Claudius.

Teucer, IV. 11. 13. Brother of

Ajax.
Theodectes,  iv.  ii.  63. Rhetorician

of  first  half  of  4th  cent.  B.C.
Theodorus of Gadara,  iv. i. 23 ;

rv.  ii.  32 ; v.  xiii.  59. Famous

rhetorician  of  the  Augustan  age.
Theophrastus,  iv.  i.  32. Famous

Greek philosopher, pupil of

Aristotle.
Tiro, vi.  iii. 5. Freedman and

friend  of  Cicero,  and  an  accom-

I)lished  man  of  letters.  He  col-
ected  and  edited  Cicero's  works.


Torquatus,  T.  Maniius,  v.  xi.  10.
Consul  347,  344,  340  B.C.  Won
the  title  of  Torquatus  by  en-
gaging a  gigantic  Gaul  in  single
combat  in  361  and  taking  from
his  dead  body  a  necklet  (torqui$).

Trachalus,  vi.  iii.  78.  Famous
orator,  consul  68  a.d.

Trebatius,  V.  x.  64.  Distinguished
lawyer,  junior  contemporary  of
Cicero.

Triarius,  v.  xiii.  40.  Accuser  of
Scaurus  (ii)  on  both  charges.

Tubero,  iv.  i.  66 ;  v.  x.  93 ;  xiii.
5.  Accused  Ligarius  before
Caesar  46  B.C.

Tullius,  rv.  ii.  131;  v.  xiii.  21;
A  landowner  at  Thurii,  defended
by  Cicero  about  71  B.C.  Only
fragments  of  the  speech  remain.

Varenus,  rv.  1.  74 ;  v.  x.  69 ;
xiii.  28;  vi.  i.  49.  Accused  of
murder  and  defended  by  Cicero
eire.  80  B.C. The  speech  is  lost.

Varius  Sucronensis,  v.  xii.  10.
Tribune  of  the  plebs  90  B.C.,  a
native  of  Sucro  in  Spain.
Accuser  of  Scaurus  (i).

Vatinius,  v.  vil.  6;  VI.  i.  13;
vi.  iii.  77  and  84.  An  unscrupu-
lous politician,  and  a  bitter
enemy  of  Cicero.

Verginius  Flavus,  rv.  1.  23.  Famous
rhetorician,  flourished  under
Nero.

Vestinus,  VI.  iii.  64.  Perhaps
Vestinus  Atticus,  consul  under
Nero,  by  whom  he  was  put  to
death.

Vibius  Crispus,  v.  xiii.  48.  An
eminent  orator,  contemporary
with  Quintiiian.

Zeno  of  Citium,  rv.  ii.  117.  Famous
Stoic  philosopher  of  first  half  of
third  cent.  B.C.


Printed  in  Great  Britain  by
Fletcher  &  Son  Ltd,  Norwich


THE  LOEB  CLASSICAL
LIBRARY

VOLUMES  ALREADY  PUBLISHED

Latin  Authors

Ammianus  Marcellinus. Translated  by  J.  C.  Rolfe. 3  Vols.
Apuleius: The  Golden  Ass  (Metamorphoses). W.  Adling-

ton  (1566). Revised  by  S.  Gaselee.
St. Augustine: City of God. 7 Vols. Vol. I. G. E.

McCracken. Vols. II and VII. W. M. Green. Vol. III.

D.  Wiesen. Vol.  IV. P.  Levine. Vol.  V. E.  M.  Sanford

and  W.  M.  Green. Vol.  VI. W.  C.  Greene.
St.  Augustine,  Confessions  of. W.  Watts  (1631). 2  Vols.
St.  Augustine,  Select  Letters. J.  H.  Baxter.
Ausonius. H.  G.  Evelyn  White. 2  Vols.
Bede. J.  E.  King. 2  Vols.
Boethius: Tracts and De Consolatione Philosophiae.

Rev.  H.  F.  Stewart  and  E.  K.  Rand. Revised  by  S.  J.  Tester.
Caesar: Alexandrian,  African  and  Spanish  Wars. A.  G.

Way.
Caesar: Civil  Wars. A.  G.  Peskett.
Caesar: Gallic  War. H.  J.  Edwards.
Cato:  De  Re  Rustica. Varro:  De  Re  Rustica. H.  B.  Ash

and  W.  D.  Hooper.
Catullus. F. W. Cornish. Tibullus. J. B. Postgate.

Pervigilium  Veneris. J.  W.  Mackail.
Celsus: De  Medicina. W.  G.  Spencer. 3  Vols.
Cicero  : Brutus  and  Orator. G.  L.  Hendrickson  and  H.  M.

Hubbell.
[Cicero]: Ad  Herennium. H.  Caplan.
Cicero: De  Oratore,  etc. 2  Vols. Vol.  I. De  Oratore,

Books  I  and  II. E.  W.  Sutton  and  H.  Rackham. Vol.  II.

De  Oratore,  Book  III. De  Fato; Paradoxa  Stoicorum;

De  Partitione  Oratoria. H.  Rackham.
Cicero  : De  Finibus. H.  Rackham.
Cicero: De  Inventione,  etc. H.  M.  Hubbell.
Cicero: De  Natura  Deorum  and  Academica. H.  Rackham.
Cicero: De  Officiis. Walter  Miller.

Cicero: De  Republica  and  De  Legibus. Clinton  W.  Keyes.

1


Cicero: De Senectute, De Amicitia, De Divinatioxe.

W.  A.  Falconer.
Cicero  :  In  Catilinam,  Pro  Flacco,  Pro  Murena,  Pro  Sulla.

New  version  by  C.  Macdonald.
Cicero: Letters  to  Atticus. E.  O.  Winstedt. 3  Vols.
Cicero: Letters to His Friends. W. Glynn Williams,

M.  Cary,  M.  Henderson. 4  Vols.
Cicero: Philippics. W.  C.  A.  Ker.
Cicero: Pro  Archia,  Post  Reditum,  De  Domo,  De  Harus-

picum  Responsis,  Pro  Plancio. N.  H.  Watts.
Cicero: Pro  Caecina,  Pro  Lege  Manilia,  Pro  Cluentio,

Pro  Rabirio. H.  Grose  Hodge.
Cicero: Pro Caelio, De Provinciis Consul aribus, Pro

Balbo. R.  Gardner.
Cicero  :  Pro  Milone,  In  Pisonem,  Pro  Scauro,  Pro  Fonteio,

Pro  Rabirio  Postumo,  Pro  Marcello,  Pro  Ligario,  Pro

Rege  Deiotaro. N.  H.  Watts.
Cicero: Pro  Quinctio,  Pro  Roscio  Amerino,  Pro  Roscio

Comoedo,  Contra  Rullum. J.  H.  Freese.
Cicero: Pro  Sestio,  In  Vatinium. R.  Gardner.
Cicero:  Tusculan  Disputations. J.  E.  King.
Cicero: Verrine  Orations. .L.  H.  G.  Greenwood. 2  Vols.
Claudian. M.  Platnauer. 2  Vols.
Columella: De  Re  Rustica. De  Arboribus. H.  B.  Ash,

E.  S.  Forster  and  E.  Heffner. 3  Vols.
Curtius,  Q.: History  of  Alexander. J.  C.  Rolfe. 2  Vols.
Florus. E.  S.  Forster. Cornelius  Nepos. J.  C.  Rolfe.
Frontinus  : Stratagems  and  Aqueducts. C.  E.  Bennett  and

M.  B.  McElwain.
Fronto: Correspondence. C.  R.  Haines. 2  Vols.
Gellius. J.  C.  Rolfe. 3  Vols.
Horace  : Odes  and  Epodes. C.  E.  Bennett.
Horace  :  Satires,  Epistles,  Ars  Poetica. H.  R.  Fairclough.
Jerome: Selected  Letters. F.  A.  Wright.
Juvenal  and  Persius. G.  G.  Ramsay.
Livy. B.  O.  Foster,  F.  G.  Moore,  Evan  T.  Sage,  and  A.  C.

Schlesinger  and  R.  M.  Geer  (General  Index). 14  Vols.
Lucan. J.  D.  Duff.

Lucretius. W.  H.  D.  House. Revised  by  M.  F.  Smith.
Martial. W.  C.  A.  Ker. 2  Vols.
Minor Latin poets: from Publilius Syrus to Rutilius

Namatianus, including Grattius, Calpurnius Siculus,

Nemesianus,  Avianus  and  others,  with  "  Aetna  "  and  the

"  Phoenix.'* J.  Wight  Duff  and  Arnold  M.  Duff.
Ovid  : The  Art  of  Love  and  Other  Poems. J.  H.  Mozley.
Ovid  : Fasti. Sir  James  G.  Frazer.


Ovid  : Heboid es  and  Amores. Grant  Showerman.

Ovid  :  Metamorphoses. F.  J.  Miller. 2  Vols.

Ovid  :  Tristia  and  Ex  Ponto. A.  L.  Wheeler.

Persius. Cf.  Juvenal.

Petbonius. M.  Heseltine. Seneca: Apocolocyntosis.

W.  H.  D.  Rouse.
Phaedrus  and  Babrius  (Greek). B.  E.  Perry.
Plautus. Paul  Nixon. 5  Vols.

Pliny  : Letters,  Panegyricus. Betty  Radice. 2  Vols.
Pliny:  Natural  History. 10  Vols.  Vols.  I-V  and  IX. H.

Rackham.  VI.-VIII. W.  H.  S.  Jones. X. D.  E.  Eichholz.
Propertius. H.  E.  Butler.
Prudentius. H.  J.  Thomson. 2  Vols.
Quintilian. H.  E.  Butler. 4  Vols.
Remains  of  Old  Latin. E.  H.  Warmington. 4  Vols. Vol.  I.

(Ennius and Caecilius) Vol. II. (Livius, Naevius

Pacuvius,  Accius) Vol.  III. (Lucilius  and  Laws  of  XII

Tables) Vol.  IV. (Archaic  Inscriptions)
Sallust. J.  C.  Rolfe.

Scriptores  Historiae  Augustae. D.  Magie. 3  Vols.
Seneca, The Elder: Controversiae, Suasoriae. M.

Winterbottom. 2  Vols.
Seneca:  Apocolocyntosis. Cf.  Petronius.
Seneca: Epistulae  Morales. R.  M.  Gummere. 3  Vols.
Seneca: Moral  Essays. J.  W.  Basore. 3  Vols.
Seneca:  Tragedies. F.  J.  Miller. 2  Vols.
Seneca: Naturales  Quaestiones. T.  H.  Corcoran. 2  Vols.
Sidonius: Poems  and  Letters. W.  B.  Anderson. 2  Vols.
Silius  Italicus. J.  D.  Duff. 2  Vols.
Statius. J.  H.  Mozley. 2  Vols.
Suetonius. J.  C.  Rolfe. 2  Vols.
Tacitus: Dialogus. Sir Wm. Peterson. Agricola and

Germania. Maurice  Hutton. Revised  by  M.  Winterbottom,

R.  M.  Ogilvie,  E.  H.  Warmington.
Tacitus  :  Histories  and  Annals. C.  H.  Moore  and  J.  Jackson.

4  Vols.
Terence. John  Sargeaunt. 2  Vols.
Tertullian: Apologia  and  De  Spectaculis. T.  R.  Glover.

Minucius  Felix. G.  H.  Rendall.
Valerius  Flaccus. J.  H.  Mozley.
Varro:  De  Lingua  Latina. R.  G.  Kent. 2  Vols.
Velleius  Paterculus  and  Res  Gestae  Divi  Augusti. F.  W.

Shipley.
Virgil. H.  R.  Fairclough. 2  Vols.
Vitruvius  : De  Architectura. F.  Granger. 2  Vols.


Greek  Authors

Achilles  Tatius. S.  Gaselee.

Aelian: On  the  Nature  of  Animals. A.  F.  Scholfield. 3

Vols.
Aeneas Tacticus. Asclepiodotus and Onasander. The

Illinois  Greek  Club.
Aeschines. C.  D.  Adams.
Aeschylus. H.  Weir  Smyth. 2  Vols.
Alciphron,  Aelian,  Philostratus  : Letters. A.  R.  Benner

and  F.  H.  Fobes.
Andocides,  Antiphon. Cf.  Minor  Attic  Orators.
Apollodorus. Sir  James  G.  Frazer. 2  Vols.
Apollonius  Rhodius. R.  C.  Seaton.
The  Apostolic  Fathers. Kirsopp  Lake. 2  Vols.
Appian  : Roman  History. Horace  White. 4  Vols.
Aratus. Cf.  Callimachus.
Aristides: Orations. C.  A.  Behr. Vol.  I.
Aristophanes. Benjamin Bickley Rogers. 3 Vols. Verse

trans.
Aristotle: Art  of  Rhetoric. J.  H.  Freese.
Aristotle: Athenian Constitution, Eudemian Ethics,

Vices  and  Virtues. H.  Rackham.
Aristotle: Generation  of  Animals. A.  L.  Peck.
Aristotle: Historia  Animalium. A.  L.  Peck. Vols.  I.— II.
Aristotle: Metaphysics. H.  Tredennick. 2  Vols.
Aristotle: Meteorologica. H.  D.  P.  Lee.
Aristotle: Minor  Works. W. S. Hett. On Colours, On

Things  Heard,  On  Physiognomies,  On  Plants,  On  Marvellous

Things  Heard,  Mechanical  Problems, On  Indivisible  Lines,

On  Situations  and  Names  of  Winds,  On  Melissus,  Xenophanes,

and  Gorgias.
Aristotle: Nicomachean  Ethics. H.  Rackham.
Aristotle: Oeconomica  and  Magna  Moralia. G.  C.  Arm-
strong (with  Metaphysics,  Vol.  II).
Aristotle: On  the  Heavens. W.  K.  C.  Guthrie.
Aristotle: On  the  Soul,  Parva  Naturalia,  On  Breath.

W.  S.  Hett.
Aristotle: Categories, On Interpretation, Prior

Analytics. H.  P.  Cooke  and  H.  Tredennick.
Aristotle: Posterior  Analytics, Topics. H. Tredennick

and  E.  S.  Forster.
Aristotle: On  Sophistical  Refutations.

On  Coming  to  be  and  Passing  Away,  On  the  Cosmos. E.  S.

Forster  and  D.  J.  Furley.
Aristotle: Parts  of  Animals. A.  L.  Peck; Motion  and

Progression  of  Animals. E.  S.  Forster.

4


Aristotle: Physics. Rev.  P.  Wicksteed  and  F.  M.  Cornford.

2  Vols.
Aristotle: Poetics and Longinus. W. Hamilton Fyfe

Demetrius  on  Style. W.  Rhys  Roberts.
Aristotle:  Politics. H.  Rackham.
Aristotle: Problems. W.  S.  Hett. 2  Vols.
Aristotle: Rhetorica  Ad Alexandrum (with Problems.

Vol.  II). H.  Rackham.
Arrian  :  History  of  Alexander  and  Indica. New  Vol.  I  by

P.  A.  Brunt. Vol.  II  by  E.  Iliffe  Robson.
Athenaeus: Deipnosophistae. C.  B.  Gulick. 7  Vols.
Babrius  and  Phaedrus  (Latin). B.  E.  Perry.
St.  Basil: Letters. R.  J.  Deferrari. 4  Vols.
Callimachus:  Fragments. C.  A.  Trypanis. Musaeus:  Hero

and  Leander. T.  Gelzer  and  C.  Whitman.
Callimachus: Hymns  and  Epigrams. Lycophron. A.  W.

Mair. Aratus. G.  R.  Mair.
Clement  of  Alexandria. Rev.  G.  W.  Butterworth.

COLLUTHUS. Cf.  OPPIAN.

Daphnis and Chloe. Thornley's Translation revised by

J.  M.  Edmonds. Parthenius. S.  Gaselee.
Demosthenes  I: Olynthiacs,  Philippics  and  Minor  Ora-
tions I-XVII  and  XX. J.  H.  Vince.
Demosthenes II: De Corona  and  De Falsa  Legatione.

C.  A.  Vince  and  J.  H.  Vince.
Demosthenes III: Meidias, Androtion, Aristocrates,

Timocrates  and  Aristogeiton  I  and  II. J.  H.  Vince.
Demosthenes  IV- VI: Private  Orations  and  In  Neaeram.

A.  T.  Murray.
Demosthenes  VII :  Funeral  Speech,  Erotic  Essay,  Exordia

and  Letters. N.  W.  and  N.  J.  DeWitt.
Dio  Cassius  : Roman  History. E.  Cary. 9  Vols.
Dio  Chrysostom. J.  W.  Cohoon  and  H.  Lamar  Crosby. 5  Vols.
Diodorus  Siculus. 12  Vols.  Vols. I-VI. C.  H.  Oldfather.

Vol.  VII. C.  L.  Sherman. Vol.  VIII. C.  B.  Welles. Vols.

IX  and  X. R.  M.  Geer. Vol.  XI. F.  Walton. Vol.  XII.

F.  Walton. General  Index. R.  M.  Geer.
Diogenes  Laertius. R.  D.  Hicks. 2  Vols. New  Introduc-
tion by  H.  S.  Long.
Dionysius  of  Halicarnassus  : Roman  Antiquities. Spel-

man's  translation  revised  by  E.  Cary. 7  Vols.
Dionysius  of  Halicarnassus: Critical  Essays. S.  Usher.

2  Vols.
Epictetus. W.  A.  Oldfather. 2  Vols.
Euripides. A.  S.  Way. 4  Vols. Verse  trans.
Eusebius: Ecclesiastical History. Kirsopp Lake and

J.  E.  L.  Oulton. 2  Vols.

5


Galen: On  the  Natural  Faculties. A.  J.  Brock.

The  Greek  Anthology. W.  R.  Paton. 5  Vols.

Greek  Elegy  and  Iambus  with  the  Anacreontea. J.  M.

Edmonds. 2  Vols.
The  Greek  Bucolic  Poets  (Theocritus,  Bion,  Moschus).

J.  M.  Edmonds.
Greek  Mathematical  Works. Ivor  Thomas. 2  Vols.
Herodes. Cf.  Theophrastus  : Characters.
Herodian. C.  R.  Whittaker. 2  Vols.
Herodotus. A.  D.  Godley. 4  Vols.

Hesiqd  and  The  Homeric  Hymns. H.  G.  Evelyn  White.
Hippocrates  and  the  Fragments  of  Heracleitus. W.  H.  S.

Jones  and  E.  T.  Withington. 4  Vols.
Homer: Iliad. A.  T.  Murray. 2  Vols.
Homer: Odyssey. A.  T.  Murray. 2  Vols.
Isaeus. E.  W.  Forster.

Isocrates. George  Norlin  and  LaRue  Van  Hook. 3  Vols.
[St.  John  Damascene]: Barlaam  and  Ioasaph. Rev.  G.  R.

Woodward,  Harold  Mattingly  and  D.  M.  Lang.
Josephus. 9 Vols. Vols. I-IV. H. Thackeray. Vol. V.

H.  Thackeray  and  R.  Marcus. Vols.  VI-VII. R.  Marcus.

Vol.  VIII. R.  Marcus  and  Allen  Wikgren. Vol.  IX. L.  H.

Feldman.
Julian. Wilmer  Cave  Wright. 3  Vols.
Libanius, A.  F.  Norman. Vols.  I-II.
Lucian. 8  Vols. Vols.  I-V. A.  M.  Harmon. Vol.  VI. K.

Kilburn. Vols.  VII-VIII. M.  D.  Macleod.
Lycophron. Cf.  Callimachus.
Lyra  Graeca. J.  M.  Edmonds. 3  Vols.
Lysias. W.  R.  M.  Lamb.
Manetho. W.  G.  Waddell. Ptolemy: Tetrabiblos. F.  E.

Robbins.
Marcus  Aurelius. C.  R.  Haines.
Menander. F.  G.  Allison.
Minor  Attic Orators (Antiphon, Andocides, Lycurgus,

Demades,  Dinarchus,  Hyperides). K.  J.  Maidment  and

J.  O.  Burtt. 2  Vols.
Musaeus  : Hero  and  Leander. Cf.  Callimachus.
Nonnos  : Dionysiaca. W.  H.  D.  Rouse. 3  Vols.
Oppian,  Colluthus,  Tryphiodorus. A.  W.;  Mair.
Papyri. Non-Literary  Selections. A.  S.  Hunt  and  C.  C

Edgar.  2  Vols. Literary  Selections  (Poetry). D.  L.  Page.
Parthenius. Cf.  Daphnis  and  Chloe.
Pausanias: Description  of  Greece. W.  H.  S.  Jones. 4

Vols,  and  Companion  Vol.  arranged  by  R.  E.  Wycherley.

6


Philo.  10  Vols.  Vols.  I-V.  F.  H.  Colson  and  Rev.  G.  H
Whitaker.  Vols.  VI-IX.  F.  H.  Colson.  Vol.  X.  F.  H.
Colson  and  the  Rev.  J.  W.  Earp.

Philo:  two  supplementary  Vols.  (Translation  only,)  Ralph
Marcus.

Philostratus  :  The  Life  of  Apollonius  of  Tyana.  F.  C.
Conybeare. 2  Vols.

Philostratus:  Imagines.  Callistratus :  Descriptions.  A.
Fairbanks.

Philostratus  and  Eunapius  :  Lives  of  the  Sophists. Wilmer

Cave  Wright.
Pindar. Sir  J.  E.  Sandys.
Plato: Charmides,  Alcibiades,  Hipparchus,  The  Lovers,

Theages,  Minos  and  Epinomis. W.  R.  M.  Lamb.
Plato: Cratylus,  Parmenides,  Greater  Hippias,  Lesser

Hippias. H.  N.  Fowler.
Plato: Euthyphro, Apology, Crito, Phaedo, Phaedrus.

H.  N.  Fowler.
Plato:  Laches,  Protagoras,  Meno,  Euthydemus. W.  R.  M.

Lamb.
Plato  : Laws. Rev.  R.  G.  Bury. 2  Vols.
Plato  : Lysis,  Symposium,  Gorgias. W.  R.  M.  Lamb.
Plato: Republic. Paul  Shorey. 2  Vols.
Plato  :  Statesman,  Philebus. H.  N.  Fowler. Ion. W.  R.  M.

Lamb.
Plato:  Theaetetus  and  Sophist. H.  N.  Fowler.
Plato:  Timaeus,  Critias,  Clitopho,  Menexenus,  Epistulae.

Rev.  R.  G.  Bury.
Plotinus. A.  H.  Armstrong. Vols.  I-III.
Plutarch: Moralia. 17  Vols. Vols  I-V. F. C. Babbitt.

Vol.  VI. W.  C.  Helmbold. Vols.  VII  and  XIV. P.  H.  De

Lacy  and  B.  Einarson. Vol.  VIII. P.  A.  Clement  and  H.  B.

Hoffleit. Vol.  IX. E.  L.  Minar,  Jr.,  F.  H.  Sandbach,  W.  C.

Helmbold. Vol.  X. H.N.  Fowler. Vol.  XL L.Pearson  and

F.  H.  Sandbach. Vol .  XII. H.  Cherniss  and  W.  C.  Helmbold.

Vol.  XIII  1-2. H.  Cherniss. Vol.  XV. F.  H.  Sandbach.
Plutarch: The  Parallel  Lives. B.  Perrin. 11  Vols.
Polybius. W.  R.  Paton. 6  Vols.

Procopius:  History  of  the  Wars. H.  B.  Dewing. 7  Vols.
Ptolemy:  Tetrabiblos. Cf.  Manetho.
Quintus  Smyrnaeus. A.  S.  Way. Verse  trans.
Sextus  Empiricus. Rev.  R.  G.  Bury. 4  Vols.
Sophocles. F.  Storr. 2  Vols. Verse  trans.
Strabo  : Geography. Horace  L.  Jones. 8  Vols.
Theophrastus  : Characters. J. M. Edmonds. Herod es,

etc. A.  D.  Knox.

7


Theophrastus  : De Causis Plantarum. B. Einarson  and

G.  K.  K.  Link. Vol.  I.
Theophrastus: Enquiry into Plants. Sir Arthur  Hort,

Bart. 2  Vols.
Thucydides. C.  F.  Smith. 4  Vols.
Tryphiodorus. Cf.  Oppian.

Xenophon  : Cyropaedia. Walter  Miller. 2  Vols.
Xenophon: Hellenica. C.  L.  Brownson. 2  Vols.
Xenophon: Anabasis. C.  L.  Brownson.
Xenophon  :  Memorabilia  and  Oeconomicus. E.  C.  Marchant.

Symposium  and  Apology. O.  J.  Todd.
Xenophon: Scbipta  Minora. E. C.  Marchant  and  G.  W.

Bowersock.


IN  PREPARATION

Latin  Authors

Manilius. G.  P.  Goold.

DESCRIPTIVE  PROSPECTUS  ON  APPLICATION


CAMBRIDGE,  MASS.  HARVARD  UNIVERSITY  PRESS

LONDON  WILLIAM  HEINEMANN  LTD


DATE  DUE


NOV  1  Q  I9fl8


i,OCT  23 19 aa


MAR  1  k  2001


AUG  23-20».


JL16J05
APR  1 1 2006


MAR  1 9  2110»


Brigham  Young  University


BRIGHAM  YOUNG  UNIVERSITY
