Primitive Man as Philosopher (Paul Radin, 1927)
Public domain. Sourced from Internet Archive (archive.org/details/in.ernet.dli.2015.202805). Radin's landmark argument that 'primitive' peoples philosophize - Winnebago thinkers on religion, fate, and the nature of things.
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

tx at 

LU < 

> 9 = 

= go 

OU 164302 

VERS 

RARY 

OSMANIA UNIVERSITY LIBRARY 

Call No. 1 28/R12P Armsion No. 27 ?7 2 

Author Iifj d i T ■ , Paul 

Title Primitive man as philosopher 

This book, should be returned on or beion: the date last mat h- J below. 

Primitive Man 
as Philosopher 

Dr. Radin here essays to describe the 
role of thought among primitive 
peoples the attitude of the thinkers 
among them towards life and society, 
the theories held of the soul, the human 
personality, the nature of the external 
world, etc. Dr. Radin knows how to 
let the aboriginal speak for himself, but 
illuminated always by the proximity of 
the highly sophisticated mind, so that 
the primitive appears always warmer, 
nearer to our time, and more accessible 
to our understanding. The material 
offered holds great fascination and is 
derived largely from the author’s own 
first-hand investigations of the life of 
the Winnebago Indians. 

Primitive Man 
as Philosopher 

by 

Paul Radin, Ph.D. 

Research Fellow of Yale University and sometime Lecturer 
in Ethnology in Cambridge University; editor of “Crashing 
Thunder, the Autobiography of an American Indian” 

with a foreword by 
John Dewey 

Professor of Philosophy in Columbia University 

New York and London 
D. Appleton and Company 
1927 

COPYRIGHT, 1 9 2 7, H'Y 
D. APPLETON AND COMPANY 

PRINTED IN THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA 

TO 

MY WIFE 

PREFACE 

When a modern historian desires to study the civilization 
of any people, he regards it as a necessary preliminary that 
he divest himself, so far as possible, of all prejudice and bias. 
He realizes that differences between cultures exist, but he 
does not feel that it is necessarily a sign of inferiority that a 
people differs in customs from his own. There seems, how- 
ever, to be a limit to what an historian treats as legitimate 
difference, a limit not always easy to determine. On the 
whole it may be said that he very naturally passes the same 
judgments that the majority of his fellow countrymen do. 
Hence, if some of the differences between admittedly civil- 
ized peoples often call forth unfavorable judgments or even 
provoke outbursts of horror, how much more must we expect 
this to be the case where the differences are of so funda- 
mental a nature as those separating us from people whom 
we have been accustomed to call uncivilized. 

The term “uncivilized” is a very vague one, and it is 
spread over a vast medley of peoples, some of whom have 
comparatively simple customs and others extremely com- 
plex ones. Indeed, there can be said to be but two charac- 
teristics possessed in common by all these peoples, the 
absence of a written language and the fact of original posses- 
sion of the soil when the various civilized European and 
Asiatic nations came into contact with them. But among 
all aboriginal races appeared a number of customs which 
undoubtedly seemed exceedingly strange to their European 
and Asiatic conquerors. Some of these customs they had 
never heard of; others they recognized as similar to observ- 

vii 

viii 

PREFACE 

ances and beliefs existing among the more backward mem- 
bers of their own communities. 

Yet the judgments civilized peoples have passed on the 
aborigines, we may be sure, were not initially based on any 
calm evaluation of facts. If the aborigines were regarded 
as innately inferior, this was due in part to the tremendous 
gulf in custom and belief separating them from the con- 
querors, in part to the apparent simplicity of their ways, and 
in no small degree to the fact that they were unable to offer 
any effective resistance. 

Romance soon threw its distorting screen over the whole 
primitive picture. Within one hundred years of the dis- 
covery of America it had already become an ineradicably 
established tradition that all the aborigines encountered by 
Europeans were simple, untutored savages from whom little 
more could be expected than from uncontrolled children, 
individuals who were at all times the slaves of their passions, 
of which the dominant one was hatred. Much of this tradi- 
tion, in various forms, disguised and otherwise, has persisted 
to the present day. 

The evolutionary theory, during its heyday in the 1870’s 
and ’So’s, still further complicated and misrepresented the 
situation, and from the great classic that created modern 
ethnology — Tylor’s Primitive Culture, published in 1870- 
future ethnologists were to imbibe the cardinal and funda- 
mentally misleading doctrine that primitive peoples represent 
an early stage in the history of the evolution of culture. 
What was, perhaps, even more dangerous was the strange 
and uncritical manner in which all primitive peoples were 
lumped together in ethnological discussion — simple Fuegians 
with the highly advanced Aztecs and Mayans, Bushmen with 
the peoples of the Nigerian coast, Australians with Poly- 
nesians, and so on. 

PREFACE 

IX 

For a number of years scholars were apparently content 
with the picture drawn by Tylor and his successors. The 
rebellion against it came in large measure from the Ameri- 
can ethnologists, chiefly under the influence of Prof. Franz 
Boas. Through methods of work foreshadowed by some of 
Boas’ immediate predecessors but more penetratingly and 
systematically developed by him, a large body of authentic 
information has been gathered on the American Indians. 
Add to this the great monographs produced by European 
ethnologists for other parts of the world, and we have, for 
the first time in the history of the science, a moderately 
favorable opportunity for examining anew the nature of 
primitive man’s mentality. 

That it is important to the ethnologist, the historian, the 
sociologist, and the psychologist to understand the true na- 
ture of the mentality of primitive man is, of course, self-evi- 
dent. But practical questions of far more general import 
are also involved. In Asia, Africa, the islands of the Pacific, 
Mexico, and South America there exist to-day millions of so- 
called primitive peoples whose relation to their white and 
Mongolian conquerors is of vital importance both to the 
conquerors and to the conquered, or semi-conquered, aborig- 
ines. Up to the present all attempts that have been made 
to understand them, or to come to any reasonable adjust- 
ment with them, have met with signal failure, and this failure 
is in most instances due to the scientifically accredited 
theories of the innate inferiority of primitive man in men- 
tality and capacity for civilization quite as much as to preju- 
dice and bias. Some governments, notably those of Great 
Britain and France, have already begun to recognize this 
fact. But how can we expect public officials to take an 
unbiased view of primitive mentality when the dominant 
tradition among ethnologists, among those who ostensibly 

X 

PREFACE 

devote their lives to the subject, is still largely based on an 
unjustified, or at least undemonstrated, assumption? 

The most pressing need in ethnology, then, is to examine 
anew the older assumptions which, wittingly or unwittingly, 
ethnologists themselves have harbored for two generations 
and which threaten to become fixed traditions among psy- 
chologists, sociologists, and historians. Among the more 
important of these assumptions is the notion that there is a 
dead level of intelligence among primitive peoples, that the 
individual is completely swamped by and submerged in the 
group, that thinkers and philosophers as such do not exist — 
in short, that there is nothing even remotely comparable to 
an intellectual class among them. 

These conceptions of primitive mentality the writer re- 
gards as wholly unjustified, and it is with the object of 
contraverting them that the following pages have been writ- 
ten. Since the contrary view still holds the field among most 
scholars, including not a few ethnologists, I have been at 
considerable pains to collect my material in as irreproachable 
a manner as possible. 

The first requisite of all proof is, of course, that data be 
accurate and subject to control. To meet this requirement 
I have, in almost all cases, used only data that have been 
obtained at first hand and have been published in the 
original with a translation that could be vouched for. This, 
perhaps, may appear unduly pedantic, and it may possibly 
entail the omission of valuable material; but it cannot be 
too strongly emphasized that if the ethnologist wishes to 
obtain credence among the more skeptically inclined public, 
he must be willing to adopt a method of presentation that 
commends itself to them as meeting every critical test. 

A good deal of the data presented in the following chap- 
ters were obtained by the author himself. Perhaps I should 

PREFACE 

xi 

ask indulgence for using my own published and unpublished 
material so extensively. This is not due to any over-evalua- 
tion of either its accuracy or its importance, but simply to 
the fact that I happened to be interested specifically in a 
question which other ethnologists had touched only in pass- 
ing. In the interests of greater accuracy, and in order to 
substantiate statements that unsupported might seem in- 
credible to the reader accustomed to obtaining his descrip- 
tions of primitive culture from secondary works, native 
sources have been voluminously quoted. If certain tribes 
have been stressed more than others, it is simply because we 
happen to have for them better specific data of the kind de- 
sired. Yet it is my firm conviction that the conclusions 
arrived at on the basis of the study of a necessarily limited 
number of tribes will hold for practically every tribe. 

Perhaps it is not necessary to emphasize the dangers beset- 
ting the path of anyone venturing to describe and character- 
ize the ideas and mental workings of others, particularly 
those of races so different ostensibly from ourselves as are 
primitive peoples. Added to the ordinary risk of misunder- 
standing, ethnologists often find it necessary to give what 
are simply their own impressions and interpretations. But 
to this there can hardly be objection provided the ethnologist 
is fully aware of all pitfalls, for, surely, the impressions and 
interpretations of a person who has spent many years among 
primitive peoples must possess a value in a high degree. Yet 
the layman, on the other hand, is right in demanding that 
the investigator prove that he is not confusing facts with 
impressions. I must confess myself to have had frequent 
recourse to impressions and interpretations, which I have 
then sought to illustrate by appropriate examples. But I 
realize quite clearly how easy it is to obtain appropriate 
examples, and mine, I hope, have been chosen judiciously. 

xii PREFACE 

The following chapters are in no sense a description of all 
the aspects of what properly belongs to a complete account 
of the exceptional man in primitive communities. Art and 
material culture have been completely excluded. To have 
discussed them would have unduly enlarged the size and the 
scope of the book. Besides, these subjects have already been 
well treated in a fair number of works. 

It is fitting that here I should express my gratitude to a 
number of teachers and friends. To two teachers in par- 
ticular, Prof. James Harvey Robinson and Prof. Franz Boas, 
I owe a great deal of my whole conception and approach. 
To the former I owe the initial inspiration for the studies 
underlying this work. It was the influence of his lectures on 
the history of the intellectual class in Western Europe, de- 
livered more than twenty years ago, that subsequently fired 
me with the idea of studying the role and the attitude of the 
intellectual class among primitive peoples. To Professor 
Boas I owe an equal debt. Not only have I obtained numer- 
ous suggestions from his works and his lectures, but a great 
part of my method of approach toward ethnological data is 
due to his influence. To the late Dr. W. H. R. Rivers, like 
all those who came in contact with that remarkable man, I 
owe more than I can adequately express. I wish gratefully 
to mention three other friends, Prof. Edward Sapir of the 
University of Chicago, Mr. P. L. Faye of Berkeley, Cali- 
fornia, and Mr. W. E. Armstrong of Cambridge University, 
England, all of whom in many ways, often unknown to them, 
have been instrumental in stimulating my thought and giving 
me new outlooks. In conclusion, I wish to express my sincere 
thanks to Prof. John Dewey for his kindness in reading the 
proof and consenting to write the foreword. 

Paul Radin 

CONTENTS 

PAGE 

Preface vii 

Foreword by John Dewey xv 

CHAPTER 

I. Introduction i 

PART I 

MAN AND SOCIETY 

II. The Primitive View of Life .... n 

III. The Coercion of the World .... ig 

IV. Conservatism and Plasticity .... 41 

' V. Freedom of Thought 53 

VI. Right and Wrong 63 

VII. The Ideal Man 76 

VIII. The Philosophy of Life: Fate, Death 

and Resignation 97 

IX. Men and Women 115 

X. Aphorisms on Life and Man . . . . 152 

XI. The Tragic Sense of Life 170 

XII. Mysticism and Symbolism 208 

PART II 

THE HIGHER ASPECTS OF PRIMITIVE 
THOUGHT 

XIII. Analysis of Reality and the External 

World 229 

XIV. The Nature of the Ego and of Human 

Personality 257 

xiii 

XIV 

CONTENTS 

CHAPTER PAGE 

XV. Speculation for Its Own Sake . . . 275 

/ XVI. The Systemization of Ideas . . . .292 

^XVII. The Nature of God 329 

XVIII. Monotheistic Tendencies 342 

XIX. Skepticism and Critique 375 

XX. Conclusion 385 

Appendix 389 

Index 395 

FOREWORD 

Dr. Radin’s work opens up an almost new field. It may 
not go contrary to the beliefs which are implicitly current 
among workers in the anthropological field. But even an 
outsider, like the present writer, can see that it surely intro- 
duces a new emphasis, fixing attention upon phases of the 
culture of primitive man which are usually passed over 
lightly, if they are not overtly denied. There are at least 
many premises and many conclusions which have gained 
popular currency which are incompatible with the material 
and interpretations which he presents. From the standpoint 
of the specialist in this intellectual territory, Dr. Radin’s 
work is pioneering in quality; it introduces new perspectives 
in its assertion of the existence of a definite intellectual class, 
proportionate in numbers and influence to the “intellectuals” 
in any civilized group, and one which is possessed of ideas 
upon most of the themes which have formed the staples of 
philosophical discussion. It is easy to imagine his contribu- 
tion becoming the center, almost a storm-center, of animated 
debate and heated controversy among the special students of 
primitive life. 

In that discussion a laymen like myself has no place. 
But no one concerned with the intellectual history of man- 
kind, especially with the background of what has now be- 
come more or less conventionally set apart as philosophy, 
can fail to be intensely interested in the material which he 
has advanced. There are not lacking recent writers on the 

XV 

xvi 

FOREWORD 

origins of philosophy who have dealt with its emergence 
from primitive speculations, especially from the material con- 
nected with religious beliefs and rites, and who have insisted 
upon the influence of the latter upon the formation of early 
philosophic notions. But in the light of Dr. Radin’s mate- 
rial their views need reconsideration. For if he is even 
approximately right, philosophic origins are not to be sought 
for in the cruder and conventionalized forms which religious 
beliefs assumed among the populace at large, but rather in 
the interpretations of the small intellectual class, whose ideas 
may have been crude because of limitations of subject mat- 
ter at their command, but which at least were bold, inde- 
pendent, and free within these limitations. 

It may be worth while, even at the expense of a hasty 
traversing of ground which Dr. Radin has covered in detail, 
to point out some of the matters of the background of 
philosophic origins with respect to which the material of Dr. 
Radin demands either authoritative refutation or else a 
pretty thoroughgoing revision of notions which have become 
current. Among these points is the secondary and auxiliary 
place of supernatural and magical practices and beliefs in 
connection with practical achievement. If we trust the mate- 
rial, primitive man was in fact more “tough-minded,” more 
realistic in facing facts, than is currently believed. The 
student of morals and social philosophy must give serious 
attention to the weighty mass of evidence which is adduced 
to show that early man instead of being enslaved to the 
group to the point of absorption in it was in fact highly 
individualistic, within certain limits more so than modern 
civilized man. The extent to which early ethical judgments 
in the way of social condemnation were limited to special 
occasions instead of being generalized into judgments of 
character at large raises the question whether their moral 

FOREWORD 

xvii 

standpoint was not in so far sounder than that which civil- 
ized “progress” has developed. The prevalent idea that the 
customs of the group provide automatic moral standards and 
rules receives a severe shock when we find that along with 
great freedom of “self-expression” there is equal emphasis 
upon responsibility for personal control of actions so as not 
to harm others. The conception that primitive man attrib- 
utes an independence to the existence of the group com- 
parable to that of the “external world” seems not only to 
do justice to the facts which the upholders of the incorpora- 
tion theory rely upon, without falling into their excesses, but 
to be also a valuable contribution to any sociological theory. 
And those are only a few of the points with respect to which 
the material of the first part of Dr. Radio’s work demands 
serious attention together with reconstruction of current be- 
liefs as to the background and origin of later moral and social 
speculations. 

For the abstract phases of philosophy the second part, 
entitled “The Higher Aspects of Primitive Thought,” is 
equally significant. The titles of the chapters are themselves 
sufficient to indicate the precious nature of the material to 
those interested in the development of metaphysical specula- 
tion. Dr. Radin would doubtless be the first to deny that he 
is breaking entirely new ground in his presentation of the 
actual facts regarding aboriginal man’s notion of what con- 
stitutes reality and human personality. But I do not know 
where one would turn for such a complete and convincing 
picture of the dynamic and qualitative way in which the 
world presented itself to the primitive speculator on exist- 
ence. Under the influence of modern philosophic theories, 
it has been assumed that the object and world were first re- 
garded as collections of sense-data, while the obvious incon- 
sistencies with this notion have been accounted for as 

xvm 

FOREWORD 

animistic and supernatural injections. Dr. Radin explodes 
this traditional notion. He makes it clear that objects and 
nature were conceived dynamically; that change, transition, 
were primary, and transformation into stability something to 
be accounted for. His account makes clear that effects, 
emotional and practical, were the material of the thought 
of real objects, and that thinkers, in their doctrine of an 
inner “form,” stated in rational terms a notion which was 
expressed mythically by the mass, a notion which has marked 
affiliations with a persistent strain in the classic philosophic 
tradition. 

To continue, however, would be merely to summarize what 
the book itself vividly presents. I only hope that the cases 
selected by way of illustration may serve to indicate to those 
interested in the development of philosophic ideas and to 
the larger number interested in the growth of the intellectual 
phase of human culture, the rich and provocative material 
which Dr. Radin has freshly provided. 

John Dewey 

Primitive Man 
as Philosopher 

Primitive Man 
as Philosopher 

CHAPTER I 

INTRODUCTION 

T HE study of primitive peoples is a comparatively 
recent discipline. It can be said to have been 
first definitely and adequately formulated by Edward 
B. Tylor. To-day, after more than two generations 
of development, compared with such older disciplines 
as history it is still barely out of its swaddling clothes. 
There are comparatively few places where its princi- 
ples are taught and as a result it is still, to an appre- 
ciable extent, the happy hunting ground of well- 
meaning amateurs. It would be a gross injustice to 
minimize the services these amateurs have rendered. 
But amateurs are enthusiasts and, as a class, likely to 
be both sentimental and uncritical; and while the 
academic intolerance of them is often unfair and 
ridiculous, it is nevertheless true that no science can 
be said to have attained its full majority until the 
number of amateurs engaged in it, as compared with 
those specially qualified, is reasonably negligible. 

2 PRIMITIVE MAN AS PHILOSOPHER 

Judged by this criterion, ethnology to-day is still in 
its adolescent stage. Yet adolescence has its charms, 
and among these charms is optimism and faith. 
Optimism is, in fact, the keynote of present-day eth- 
nology. How else can we explain the nonchalance 
with which an ethnologist embarks on the task of 
describing, single-handed, the language, mythology, 
religion, material culture, art, music, and social or- 
ganization of a people whose language he very rarely 
can speak and whose mode of thought and life is far 
more remote from his own than is that of an Illinois 
farmer from the mode of life and thought of a Hindu? 

The keepers of the older disciplines, where special- 
ization often reaches its apotheosis of aridity and 
futility, sit back in half-contemptuous bewilderment 
at the boyish pranks of the adventurer-ethnologist who 
sets out to conquer a new world. Perhaps in the end 
the laugh will be on the critics. For the present, 
however, it must be admitted that their bewilderment 
and incredulity are amply justified. Every statement, 
for example, that an historian makes is expected to be 
controlled by a large body of corroborative material. 
Surely, it is contended, the ethnologist does not expect 
us to take his uncorroborated word for everything. 
Unfortunately he does, and there are practical reasons 
why, dangerous as this situation avowedly is, it must 
be accepted and made the best of. 

With very few exceptions, the descriptions of primi- 
tive peoples cannot be controlled in the manner that is 
customary in subjects like history. The observer not 

INTRODUCTION 

3 

only collects the facts, but to him belongs the power to 
fix, often for all time, what precisely those facts shall 
be. It is clearly dangerous to entrust such power to 
any man, yet for practical reasons attendant upon the 
collection of ethnological data, it is somewhat difficult 
to avoid this fundamentally undesirable and unreason- 
able condition. Since, however, his work is so con- 
ditioned, the observer’s emotional and intellectual ap- 
proach, his expressed and his unexpressed assumptions, 
the many intangible trifles that influence even the most 
careful and critical, all these naturally assume a 
greater significance for the ethnologist than for the 
historian. 

It cannot be said that the majority of ethnologists 
are fully aware of the ways in which certain tacit or 
conscious attitudes make themselves felt, and how defi- 
nitely such attitudes are likely to color their records. 
There is only one way of avoiding this danger, and 
that is the old way, the one in vogue in history for 
centuries — to obtain the facts in the original and to 
attempt no manipulations and no rearrangements of 
them whatsoever. Whatever interpretations are neces- 
sary must be completely separated from the original 
data. This rather obvious procedure is only now be- 
coming at all common in ethnology. Some of the most 
famous monographs written by Europeans and Ameri- 
cans, for instance, sin most egregiously against this 
elementary rule. 

But if the historian to-day differs markedly from 
the ethnologist in the degree of trust he is willing to 

4 PRIMITIVE MAN AS PHILOSOPHER 

place in the uncontrolled reports of a single man, no 
matter how qualified he may be, he differs equaHy in 
another even more important regard, namely, the selec- 
tion of the aspect of culture most to be emphasized. 
In all recent treatments history has come to be the 
history of the intellectual class, and at all times it has 
been the history of the exceptional man. In ethnology, 
on the contrary, partly owing to its genesis, partly to 
paucity of material, the emphasis has been quite 
otherwise, and it is the group beliefs as such that are 
described. Ethnologists have not always been con- 
scious of this fact, yet even when they are well aware 
of marked individual differences among primitive men, 
these are dismissed with the summary comment that 
they do not represent the general consensus of opinion. 

On the whole, it can justifiably be claimed that the 
prevalent descriptions of primitive peoples represent 
the beliefs and customs of the non-intellectual class 
among them, or at best a hopeless mixture of the view- 
point of the intellectual and the non-intellectual class 
which no lay reader can possibly disentangle. This 
defect would be in no way mitigated even if it should 
eventually be shown that ninety-nine per cent of all 
primitive peoples belong to the non-intellectual class. 
There would still be one per cent of the aboriginal 
population to be accounted for, and for this one per 
cent our present descriptions would be just as distorted 
and inadequate as if we were to accept Frazer’s The 
Golden Bough as a true picture of the beliefs and cus- 
toms of the intellectual class of Western Europe. 

INTRODUCTION 

5 

Throughout this book I am making one assumption, 
namely, that among primitive peoples there exists the 
same distribution of temperament and ability as 
among us. This I hold to be true in spite of all the 
manifest differences in the configuration and orienta- 
tion of their cultures. In justice to myself I should 
add that the predication of an identical distribution 
of ability and temperament for civilized and primitive 
peoples is not the result of any general theory that I 
happen to hold; it represents a conviction that has 
been slowly forced upon me from my observations and 
contact with a number of aboriginal tribes. 

To repeat, then, my object here is to describe primi- 
tive cultures in terms of their intellectual class, from 
the viewpoint of their thinkers. Thinkers, however, 
are not, and can not be, isolated from life among 
primitive peoples in the same way as this has repeat- 
edly been done among us, nor do they probably exer- 
cise the same degree of influence on their fellows. To 
attempt, therefore, to envisage primitive culture from 
their standpoint is equivalent to looking at it through 
a very restricted lens. I am fully aware of this. The 
result will give only a partial picture, one which will 
necessarily hold true for only a very small number of 
individuals in each group, and it must not be mistaken 
for anything else. That would be as great an error as 
the one committed by those who assume that there 
is no intellectual class in primitive culture. 

The following book is grouped into two parts, the 
first dealing with the relation of man to society and 

6 PRIMITIVE MAN AS PHILOSOPHER 

to his fellow men, and the second with what I have 
called the higher aspects of primitive thought. In this 
way, it is hoped, it will be possible to indicate to what 
extent each thinker shared and participated in the ideas 
of the average man of his group and in what way he 
transcended them. 

Throughout it has been my endeavor to allow the 
natives to talk for themselves, interpreting their 
thoughts only in those cases where explanation seemed 
necessary and of value. Perhaps I shall be criticized 
for quoting too much and for giving the book more 
the appearance of an anthology of the thoughts of 
primitive people than a discussion of them. But, in a 
sense, what I have really tried to do is to be a com- 
mentator. I need not say that this role has at times 
been changed into that of an interpreter. 

Had it been possible, I should have much preferred 
to gather all the sources available to-day into a sepa- 
rate volume and to restrict the present one simply to 
discussion. But the time for such a procedure has not 
yet arrived, although it is clearly not far off. It is 
perhaps better at the present stage, considering the 
ignorance, incredulity, and prejudice still prevalent 
even among otherwise well-informed laymen on the 
whole subject of primitive culture, to carry our proof 
along with us and to substantiate every unusual state- 
ment as soon as it is made. 

Let me repeat, before we begin our study, that in 
the present condition of our knowledge any attempt 
to describe the intellectual view of life of primitive 

INTRODUCTION 

7 

peoples is destined to be tentative, provocative of 
further investigation and interpretation rather than 
permanent and final. I can only say with an unknown 
Hawaiian poet: 

The day of revealing shall see what it sees: 

A seeing of facts, a sifting of rumors. 

PART ONE 

MAN AND SOCIETY 

CHAPTER II 

THE PRIMITIVE VIEW OF LIFE 

P ARADOXICAL as it may seem, it is nevertheless 
a fact that few people are, on the whole, so 
unfitted by temperament to study the simpler aspects 
of the life of primitive people, and by implication their 
emotional and intellectual manifestations, as the aver- 
age cultured scholar and university-trained ethnolo- 
gist. It is really a marvel that they have done so well. 
Both lead a definitely sheltered life and look upon the 
world from a highly specialized point of vantage. 
Being largely dependent upon books for stimulation, 
they are apt, like the generality of historians, to set 
too high a value upon the role of thought in culture. 
This holds particularly true of the English ethnolo- 
gists, and ethnological theorists from Tylor to Frazer, 
Andrew Lang always being excepted. Yet when they 
sense this danger and consciously guard themselves 
against the possible overevaluation of the intellectual 
side, they frequently fall into the opposite error — 
that of reducing most of the spiritual values of primi- 
tive civilizations to those of mere delight in sensa- 
tions, to simple, unintegrated responses to an uncon- 
trollable environment. It is this latter tendency that 
we find not infrequently exhibited in works on abo- 
riginal culture written by the professional ethnologist. 

12 PRIMITIVE MAN AS PHILOSOPHER 

It is conceivably demanding too much of a man 
to whom the pleasures of life are largely bound up 
with the life of contemplation and to whom analysis 
and introspection are the self-understood prerequisites 
for a proper understanding of the world, that he ap- 
preciate corporate and individual expressions which 
are largely non-intellectual — where life seems, pre- 
dominatingly, a discharge of physical vitality, a 
simple and naive release of emotions or an enjoyment 
of sensations for their own sake. Such undiluted 
pleasure in spending long periods of time in doing 
apparently nothing is difficult for a man of intellectual 
interests to understand. It is just as difficult for a 
man of action to comprehend. Ethnologists are defi- 
nitely the one or the other. Yet, in large measure, 
it is just such an absorption in a life of sensations that 
is the outward characteristic of primitive peoples. 

The reaction of the nonprofessional ethnologist and 
the layman when he discovers this to be one of the 
characteristic traits of primitive culture is generally 
one of puzzled irritation, and is coupled with the 
suspicion that primitive peoples are possibly, after all, 
possessed of an inherently lower mentality. Even 
William James, as a passage in one of his letters 
clearly shows, could not, for all his affectionate view 
of life and of man, completely rid himself of this 
feeling. 

This must be expected. Indeed, we indulge in such 
judgments and inferences all the time. Does not the 
popular northern mind look with contemptuous be- 

THE PRIMITIVE VIEW OF LIFE 

13 

wilderment upon the charming ability of so many 
Mediterranean nations to enjoy their dolce jar niente? 
Have we not frequently been told that however pic- 
turesque, spontaneous, and gifted in the arts the 
Latins may be, they are useless for the sterner reali- 
ties of life and inferior in the higher realms of logical 
and integrated thinking? And would it not be correct 
to say that this latter inference has been drawn from 
their unadulterated appreciation of sensations? 

To a considerable extent the cultured ethnologist, 
often unwittingly, makes an analogous judgment in 
his efforts to evaluate primitive cultures. He does not, 
it is true, make so devastating a generalization, but 
he does show a marked inclination to regard all culture 
as made up of two types of activity — the intellectual 
and the practical, setting a higher value upon the 
former than upon the latter. The ordinary man, the 
man of the street, the farm boy who is so predominat- 
ingly a man of action, is quite right when he smiles 
indulgently at the naivete and lack of real under- 
standing of the world shown by the scholar. Yet, in 
the end, it is the scholar who laughs last, for, owing to 
the man of action’s unwillingness and inability to 
write, histories are generally written by the former. 
And the scholar quite naturally makes history a selec- 
tion of facts which interest and seem of most impor- 
tance to him and these are largely intellectual although 
the practical side is by no means neglected. What is 
neglected is the sensational aspect. Indeed, this side 
of life is not merely neglected: it is definitely distorted 

14 PRIMITIVE MAN AS PHILOSOPHER 

and underrated, faring just as badly whether it is a 
professional scholar or a gentleman-traveler who is 
making the evaluation. 

We spoke above of the opposition of the northerner 
and the southerner. To most northerners — and the 
overwhelming majority of ethnologists are northerners 
— the enjoyment of sensations as such is still the sign 
of inferior thinking powers. Now the ethnologist is 
not merely a northerner: he is a specially selected 
northerner, an academically trained man, or a traveler 
— individuals in whom the sensational side is likely 
to be markedly suppressed. To this specially selected 
type of investigator an unkind fate has entrusted the 
task of recording, for all time, the story of civiliza- 
tions that are, to an overwhelming degree, stressed on 
the sensational side. What complicates the situation 
still further and weights the scales still more heavily 
against a correct understanding of primitive peoples, 
is that this sensational view of life is accompanied by 
apparent contradictions of elementary logical thinking 
and of palpable fact. All the elements in the case 
thus conspire to reenforce the ethnologist — there are 
of course noteworthy exceptions — in his belief that the 
mentality of primitive people is essentially inferior to 
our own. 

That the scholar and ethnologist should be bewil- 
dered by the cultures of primitive peoples need elicit 
no wonder. Through unfortunate circumstances con- 
nected with the collection of data, and by too rigid a 
definition of what constitutes practical activity, many 

THE PRIMITIVE VIEW OF LIFE 15 

of the native customs fall into a nonpractical plane. 
On the other hand, through an obvious lack of desire 
for analysts, primitive mentality clearly does not run 
along what we have been accustomed to regard as the 
prescribed channels. Primitive peoples will, for in- 
stance, indulge in magical rites for the attainment of 
purely practical ends — the killing of deer, for instance 
— under circumstances in which they could by no 
conceivable means fail to do so. Yet they will seek 
the most tenuous of religious sanctions for a hazardous 
undertaking such as a warpath. They may tell you, 
if directly interrogated, that a poisoned arrow dis- 
charged for a short distance into a deer trail will cause 
the death of a deer that is to be hunted on the follow- 
ing day. What inference can we very well expect a 
person to draw from such a statement but that a 
magical nonrational rite has achieved a practical 
and all-important result? Must we not insist, then, 
that the mentality of people who accept such a belief 
is different in degree and possibly in kind from our 
own? There seems indeed to be no escape. 

The first error that we here commit is that of ex- 
pecting the answer to a direct question put to a native 
to be either complete or revealing. It is similarly an 
error even to expect that such a question touches the 
core of the real problem involved. Let us take the last 
example given. We are not to imagine that after 
discharging the arrow into the deer trail our native 
returns to his family and informs them that he has 
potentially killed a deer, nor are we to imagine that he 

1 6 PRIMITIVE MAN AS PHILOSOPHER 

tells them he has performed the preliminary part of 
his work. What he has done is one indissoluble whole 
— he discharges the arrow in the proper way, waits 
for the morrow, and then follows the trail until he has 
killed the deer. Any question whereby it is assumed, 
consciously or unconsciously, that one part of this 
series of activities is more important than the other 
or that a causal relation exists between them, is mis- 
leading and entails a misleading answer. So much for 
our initial error. But we have likewise no justification 
for assuming that some general principle underlies the 
native’s activities in this particular instance. He did 
not select any trail at any time of the year, but a 
particular trail at a particular time of the year. We 
must assume that he knows from unlimited practical 
experiences that he is selecting the proper conditions 
for his task. I once asked a Winnebago Indian 
whether the rite of shooting an arrow into a trail of 
which he had no knowledge would be effective and 
received a prompt and amused denial. Similarly it 
was discovered that although in certain tribes a vision 
from a deity was regarded as adequate sanction for 
embarking on a war party, in actual practice certain 
very practical conditions had to be fulfilled before an 
individual was permitted to depart. 

Therefore, when ethnologists contend that a direct 
question should never be put, we mean that its imme- 
diate answer does not reflect any necessarily true or 
complete analysis of the situation. It remains an 
answer of restricted meaning connected with an indi- 

THE PRIMITIVE VIEW OF LIFE 

17 

vidual fact momentarily detached from its proper set- 
ting. But even though we give it full meaning, we 
must be careful to find out whose view it represents. 
Now the two answers given above were given by indi- 
viduals whom I have reason to believe were medicine- 
men or priests — men whose position in the tribe corre- 
sponds roughly to that occupied by our scholars and 
thinkers. In answering my question we may suppose 
that these individuals tried to explain something. But 
many natives, had they been interrogated, would have 
made no reply at all, or if they had answered, their 
answer would have been merely mechanical and would 
have carried practically no significance. 

What, then, does the rite of discharging an arrow 
mean to such people? Intellectually, indeed even 
symbolically, it may mean nothing. To the ordinary 
man it is primarily and essentially one of a series of 
actions that is to culminate in the more or less 
immediate future, in certain practical results. All his 
energies, all his thoughts, are fixed upon this one and 
avowed object. The medicine-man, the thinker, he 
who, in other words, enjoys analysis and possesses an 
intellectual envisaging of life, may indeed tell the 
practical man that his concentration upon the purpose 
in view will enable him to gain his end more definitely 
and more effectively; and this statement may in fact 
be mechanically repeated by the ordinary practical- 
minded man. But it has no real significance for him. 
Action is to him the all-important fact and this it is 
that absorbs all his attentions and energies. As far 

18 PRIMITIVE MAN AS PHILOSOPHER 

as explanations are concerned, any will do. An indi- 
vidual who gives you detail upon detail about the 
proper method of approaching a deer during the 
breeding season will inveigh in the next breath against 
the stupidity of the American game laws that prevent 
you from killing deer whenever you desire. As though 
deer propagated their kind after the fashion of other 
animals and did not, in reality, emerge out of wells I 
We cannot too strongly insist that there is no logical 
contradiction involved here nor are we dealing with 
what the French scholar Levy-Bruhl has called “pre- 
logical mentality.” The matter seems simple enough. 
Something that the medicine-man and thinker has 
formulated in intellectual or symbolical terms is being 
repeated mechanically by a practical-minded man. 
The thinker’s formula stands on its own and the actual 
fact stands on its own. Neither can possibly contradict 
the other for they lie in different planes. 

Now it is exactly by this envisaging of life in terms 
of a series of activities of a practical nature that our 
over-intellectualized modern scholar and ethnologist is 
apt to misunderstand. Perhaps this is why so many 
ethnological monographs so often develop into semi- 
arid tracts containing unconsciously distorted presenta- 
tions of primitive culture, and why, at times, some 
individual totally unqualified from the viewpoint of 
specific training but with a well-developed sensational 
side to his nature, can give an inherently more correct 
picture. 

CHAPTER III 

THE COERCION OF THE WORLD 

I T is one of the salient traits of so-called primitive 
man, we have just seen, that he allows a full and 
appreciative expression to his sensations. He is pre- 
eminently a man of practical common sense just as is 
the average peasant. Now this does not merely mean 
manual dexterity or an exclusive interest in the purely 
material side of life. It has much deeper implications. 
This tough-mindedness leads to a recognition of all 
types of realities, realities which primitive man sees in 
all their directness and ruggedness, stripped of all that 
false and sentimental haze so universal among civilized 
peoples. We cannot dwell upon this point now but will 
return to it later. Here we desire merely to point out 
that primitive man is endowed with an overpowering 
sense of reality and possesses a manner of facing this 
reality, which to a western European implies an almost 
complete lack of sensitiveness. And this is true of 
even the more avowedly intellectual among them, such 
as the medicine-men and the leaders of the ceremonies. 
It is true that the facts of everyday life, in every primi- 
tive community, are clothed in a magical and ritualistic 
dress, yet it is not unfair to say that it is not the 
average native who is beguiled into an erroneous inter- 
pretation of this dress but the ethnologist. 

19 

20 PRIMITIVE MAN AS PHILOSOPHER 

To illustrate what I mean I shall give an example 
that came under my own observation. An American 
Indian, pursued by the enemy, took refuge in a cave 
where he could easily defend himself against direct 
attack but where escape was apparently completely cut 
off. This particular individual was not religious. He 
had during his lifetime had so little interest in getting 
into the proper rapport with the deities of his tribe 
that he knew the conventional methods of addressing 
them but little else. In his dilemma, with death staring 
him in the face, he mechanically offers tobacco to the 
spirits. That much he knew. But he did not know 
what to say nor whom to address. So he prayed — if 
we are inclined to call this a prayer — “To you, O 
spirits, whoever you are, wherever you are, here is 
tobacco. May I be saved!” Through an almost 
miraculous piece of good luck the enemy fled and he 
was saved. “By the will of God,” a devout Christian 
would have ejaculated; in Indian phraseology, “The 
spirits have heard me.” Here, if anywhere, we might 
have expected an almost mystical feeling of heavenly 
intervention and a well-nigh complete obliteration of 
the mere workaday world. Yet nothing of the kind 
occurred to this very hard-minded individual. He 
sought to explain nothing. I can picture him saying 
to himself in his humorous way — for he was the pro- 
fessional humorist in the tribe — “Let the medicine- 
men explain ; they like such things. All I know is that 
I was pursued by the enemy; I took refuge in a cave; 
my attackers withdrew and here I am.” The ritualistic 

THE COERCION OF THE WORLD 

21 

paraphernalia were all there but they did not obscure 
his vision of the nature of a true fact. 

This man was of course an unusual specimen of the 
tough-minded species. So much will have to be granted 
unhesitatingly. Yet this intense realism, this refusal 
to be deluded by the traditional phraseology employed, 
is a salient feature of most primitive communities. 
That there are many individuals who take the phrase- 
ology more seriously we know. The medicine-man, the 
thinker, the poet, these insist upon a less matter-of-fact 
explanation and clearly enjoy the wrappings. Did they 
not in fact devise these explanations and are they not 
continually elaborating them? But in spite of the 
inner necessity that prompts them to prefer a super- 
mundane formula they, too, are deeply rooted in the 
workaday-world conception of reality. 

Nothing, for instance, is more thoroughly ingrained 
in the minds of many American Indians than the fact 
that a supernatural warrant must be obtained for any 
undertaking of importance no matter how practical its 
nature. The Indian will tell you simply enough that 
if a deity has bestowed his power upon an individual 
in a vision and permitted him to go on a warpath, he 
may do so. Yet if one visualizes concretely the hazard- 
ous nature of such an enterprise in a small tribe, it is 
but natural to assume that any community allowing 
a young man to risk his own life and possibly that of 
others on the strength of communication in a dream, 
must be profoundly imbued with a religious spirit. 
Unfortunately this whole picture is wrong. It changes 

22 PRIMITIVE MAN AS PHILOSOPHER 

as soon as we obtain fuller details about the matter. 
Then we discover that no individual is ever allowed to 
proceed on even a private war party unless his dream- 
experience has been communicated to the chief of the 
tribe or else to some highly respected elder. Such men 
are always exceedingly devout. They certainly may be 
expected to take religious sanctions at their face value. 
Yet it was just these custodians of the tribal tradition 
who were most careful to see that the practical aspects 
of the situation did not militate too markedly against 
success. If, in their opinion, the undertaking was un- 
warranted — whether because they thought the leader 
too inexperienced, the possibility for adequate prepara- 
tion unfavorable, the strength of the enemy possibly 
too great, or what not — they refused to give their 
sanction and forbade it. Quite naturally they couched 
this prohibition in a religious phraseology. “The 
spirits have not blessed you with sufficient power” is 
the Winnebago formula, for instance. 

The intense belief in the existence of the spirits and 
of their direct participation in the affairs of man is 
not to be questioned, any more than is the acceptance 
of the magical. But this in no way interferes with 
their full realization of all the facts involved in any 
given situation. In other words, though primitive man 
may describe life in a religious terminology it is not 
to be inferred that in the vast majority of cases he 
regards a purely mundane happening as due to super- 
natural agency. This is indicated clearly by the great 
care taken among many tribes not to demand impos- 

THE COERCION OF THE WORLD 23 

sible tasks from their deities. One does not ask rain 
from a cloudless sky during the dry season, nor security 
against capsizing in a canoe when foolishly setting out 
during a terrific storm. 

Primitive man, in short, does not consider the deities 
or a magical rite as conditioning reality but as an 
accessory to it, as constraining it. Both the deity and 
the rite are aids for the proper functioning of a series 
of habitually connected individual or social events. 
The religious and magical content seems the all- 
important factor to us who are mere spectators; to 
primitive man they are, as we have said, simply aids, 
stimuli for the attainment of a goal. 

Thus viewed the facts of primitive life take on a 
new psychological orientation. The attainment of a 
goal, the clear realization of a specific objective, be- 
comes the main factor. Everything else is either com- 
pletely slurred or regarded as secondary. Even rites, 
beliefs, motor activities, may all become functionless 
and accidental. Primitive man may not in our sense 
of the term provide for the morrow but he attempts 
something perhaps far more important — he bends all 
his energies, inward and outward, toward ensuring the 
success of his objective on the morrow. With this 
determination steadily before him he completely 
identifies himself with the goal to be obtained. He 
prepares for it, previsions it, preenacts it, and pre- 
attains it. Select any example at random — a war party 
among the Winnebago. In a dream communication 
from the spirits he ascertains the necessary number of 

24 PRIMITIVE MAN AS PHILOSOPHER 

moccasins and the necessary amount of food to be con- 
sumed on the expedition; he is told how many men he 
is to take along and how many of the enemy he is to 
kill. His divine certificate is then closely scrutinized 
by experienced elders and if it is accepted, then in the 
ceremony preparatory to his actually starting out he 
previsions his enemy. He destroys his courage, de- 
prives him of his power of running, paralyzes his ac- 
tions, and blunts his weapons. Thus protected and his 
enemy correspondingly weakened and constrained, he 
proceeds to the attack. 

All these facts are admirably and convincingly illus- 
trated by a very unusual document obtained by the 
late Mr. Russell from the Pima Indians of Arizona . 1 
It represents a speech given by the war chief urging 
the people to go on the warpath against the Apache. 
I shall give it in full: 

Yes, my poor brother-in-law, this land was covered with 
herbage. The mountains were covered with clouds. The 
sunlight was not bright and the darkness was not dense. 
All was rolling before our eyes. It was thought that the 
time had come for considering these things in council, my 
brothers. Then wood was gathered and a fire kindled, the 
flames of which burst forth, reaching to the sky and caus- 
ing a portion of the earth to fold over, disclosing the under- 
side where a reddish mountain stood. After these things 
had happened the enterprise was decided upon. 

1 Frank Russell, “The Pima Indians,” 23d Report of the Bureau of 
American Ethnology, p. 357. 

THE COERCION OF THE WORLD 25 

Then my breast was tightened and my loins girded; my 
hunger was appeased; sandals with strings were made for my 
feet; my canteen was made ready. I went about the 
country, from mountain to village, beneath the sheds and 
trees, offering all an opportunity to join me. Returning 
home I thought I saw my brother when I was in a trance. 
I tried to grasp him and my arms embraced nothing but 
myself. I somehow caught in my palm what I thought to 
be this power; turning this over I found it to be but a 
creation of my imagination, and again I was disappointed. 
I was unkempt and rough and my tears moistened the land. 

The plan occurred to me to ask Nasia, the old woman 
magician, for aid. Thinking that I saw her I ran toward the 
eastward and finally reached her. I said, “Yes, you who 
make the bows of the Apache like a kiaha and crush his 
arrowheads, you who paint triangles and curves on the 
kiaha bottoms with the arrow foreshafts of the Apache 
dipped in his blood, you who twist the hair of the Apache 
and tie your kiaha with it.” Thus I addressed her and she 
gave me a bundle of power which I grasped under my 
arm and ran with it to my home. 

I thought of Vikaukam and prayed for his aid. When I 
finally reached him I said, “Yes, your house is built of 
Apache bows and bound with their arrows, you use his 
bowstrings and sinew to tie these withes. You use Apache 
headdresses and moccasins to cover your house. Within it 
you have square piles of Apache hair. At the corners of the 
piles cigarettes give off wreaths of smoke resembling white, 
black, glittering, purple, and yellow blossoms.” Thus I spake 
and he gave me power which I carried away beneath my arm. 

26 PRIMITIVE MAN AS PHILOSOPHER 

I thought of South Doctor and finally prayed to him. I 
said to him, “Yes, you who can make the Apache bow as 
harmless as a rainbow, his arrows like the white tassels of 
grass, his arrow shafts like soft down, his arrowheads like 
thin, dry mud, his arrow poison like the water fern upon 
the pools, his hair like rain clouds.” 

Thus I spake and he gave me power which I grasped 
under my arm and journeyed westward with four slackenings 
of speed. The home magician gave me a seat of honor. The 
cigarette smoked and I took it and, drawing in a cloud of 
smoke, I prayed to Old Woman Magician, saying, “Yes, 
you make the Apache bow like a game ring, you crush 
his arrow shafts and make headbands of them, you split his 
arrow foreshafts, color them with Apache blood, and make 
game sticks of them; his arrowheads you make like pottery 
paddles, you make a girdle of Apache hair.” 

Thus I spake and he gave me his power, which I caught 
under my arm and ran home, with four slackenings of 
speed. The home magician gave me a seat of honor. The 
cigarette smoked and I took it and, drawing in a cloud 
of smoke, breathed it forth in the direction of the enemy. 
The power grew and shone on and on until it slowly dis- 
closed the enemy. The Pima magician desired that the 
earth move, the trees take on their leaves, the land be 
softened and improved, that all be straightened and made 
correct. The place was one where food was increased and 
they were gathered about it. Their springs were made 
larger and they were gathered about them. Their game 
was gathered together. Some of the enemy were in the 
west and they said, “We know that harm may come to us 

THE COERCION OF THE WORLD 27 

if we go to that place, but we will not heed our own mis- 
givings.” They started on their journey and camped on the 
way. In the morning they arose and continued, reaching 
their friends’ camp during the day, where they saluted 
them. In the distant east were other enemies who heard 
that their friends were gathering. When they heard of it 
they said, “We know that harm may come of it if we go 
to that place, but we must go.” They started on their 
journey and camped once before arriving and saluting their 
friends. They took the sun’s rays and painted triangles on 
their blankets. 

While this was happening among them my young men 
were preparing to fight. They rushed upon them like flying 
birds and swept them from the earth. Starting out upon 
my trail I reached the first water, whence I sent my swiftest 
young men to carry the message of victory to the old people 
at home. Before the Magician’s door the earth was swept, 
and there my young men and women danced with head- 
dresses and flowers on their heads. The wind rose and, 
cutting off these ornaments, carried them to the sky and 
hung them there. The rain fell upon the high places, the 
clouds enveloped the mountains, the torrents descended upon 
the springs and fell upon the trees. 

You may think this over, my relatives. The taking of 
life brings serious thoughts of the waste; the celebration 
of victory may become unpleasantly riotous. 

This is a reality at white heat and it is in such a 
heightened atmosphere that primitive man frequently 
lives. Since it is so frequent and accustomed an at- 

28 PRIMITIVE MAN AS PHILOSOPHER 

mosphere, he is generally calm outwardly, although 
this varies from time to time and moments occur where 
pandemonium seems to reign. When, therefore, we 
see his life obviously permeated with religious beliefs 
and with rites and rituals at every step, we assume 
that all this emotional intensity is due to the religious 
and magical background in which he is enveloped. 
And here it is that many observers and investigators 
commit what is a fundamental error of interpretation; 
first, by assuming that there exists, in the minds of 
most natives, a cause and effect relation, and second, 
by stressing the wrong end of what constitutes, in 
each tribe, the habitually determined sequence of acts 
and beliefs. We can easily agree with Professor Levy- 
Bruhl when he contends that any analysis of this se- 
quence is, strictly speaking, nonexistent or, at least, 
rare, without nevertheless following him farther along 
his argument. In his famous work Les Fonctions 
Mentales dans les Soctttes Injericures he implies that 
no primitive people are capable of logical differentia- 
tion or of a logical selection of data. He is certainly 
in error on this point as the subsequent chapters of 
this book will abundantly demonstrate. But he errs 
in an equally fundamental way when he unconsciously 
assumes that every analysis must be the work of the 
rational faculties. 

Levy-Bruhl is by training and nurture too much of 
an intellectual to appreciate how adequately sensations, 
emotions, and intuitions may determine a selection, 
and how such a selection can be on a par with a so- 

THE COERCION OF THE WORLD 29 

called rational analysis. For him any such selection 
implies a prelogical mentality and is not a true or 
correct analysis. Be this as it may, it is this non- 
intellectual analysis that is typical of much of primi- 
tive thought. But another element must not be for- 
gotten, namely, that the selection is in its turn pre- 
determined by being oriented toward a socially and 
individually determined goal. This goal, it may be 
said, is to fix what is to be interpreted as real. It thus 
follows that reality becomes largely pragmatic. What 
happens is true. So markedly developed is this prag- 
matic test for reality that even when the event that 
occurs is more or less definitely contradictory to the 
specific cultural background, it carries conviction. Let 
me illustrate the nature of this pragmatic test of 
reality by two examples. 

An Indian of my acquaintance, in order to be fa- 
vorably received by his relations, made a consciously 
dishonest claim of having been blessed by certain 
deities. By virtue of this blessing, he claimed, he was 
in a position to cure a young cousin who was ill. After 
having been entertained lavishly he left and promptly 
forgot all about the incident. A few months afterward 
his aunt met him accidentally and thanked him pro- 
fusely for all that he had done for them and he dis- 
covered, to his unfeigned surprise, this his false claim 
had worked! Now what was his immediate inference? 
Let me quote his own words: “When I heard this I 
was surprised, not being certain whether I had been 
blessed or not! ” 

30 PRIMITIVE MAN AS PHILOSOPHER 

The second example concerns the same individual. 
He and a friend determined that they must secure the 
coveted war honor of killing an enemy. To embark 
on a war party, however, according to the ideas of his 
tribe, it was necessary to receive some warrant from 
the deities. Such a blessing he had not received. In 
spite of this he and his friends sought out an enemy 
and killed him. When he returned home he told his 
father about his exploit and among other things indi- 
cated that he had really been unqualified to undertake 
such an expedition. It is clear that the young man 
seemed somewhat puzzled about his success. Yet the 
outstanding fact for him was that he had been success- 
ful, that he had killed the enemy and secured the 
coveted war honor. It is this fait accompli that de- 
termines the reality. Not being devout, the young man 
did not trouble himself to state his success in religious 
terms. But the father was devout and, since the young 
man had succeeded, this implied that he had been in 
communion with the deities, if not precisely in the 
orthodox manner, at least to the extent that the deities 
had inspired the deed. 

It may then be correct to say that while, strictly 
speaking, primitive man does not think of a*cause-and- 
effect sequence, he does predicate causes as such and 
effects as such; that the medicine-man and thinker 
deal with causes as such and sometimes with a real 
cause-and-effect relation, whereas the average man 
deals with effects simply. 

If now we turn to the most insistent desire of primi- 

THE COERCION OF THE WORLD 31 

tive man — long life, success, and happiness — this sense 
of an objective world distinct from supernatural causa- 
tion obtrudes itself even more strongly. Deities do 
not control the success or lack of success of the normal 
events and happenings of life. It is only at crises that 
their aid is solicited. We can do no better than to 
quote what an Indian told the writer in an autobi- 
ography which he wrote down and wherein he em- 
bodied the system of instruction current in his tribe: 

“Help yourself as you travel along the path of life. 
The earth has many narrow passages scattered over it. 
Some day you will be journeying on a road filled with 
obstacles. If then you possess the means for strength- 
ening yourself you will be able to pass through these 
passages safely. Indeed if you act properly (i.e. cir- 
cumspectly) in life, you will never be caught off 
guard.” 

Nothing more practical than this can well be im- 
agined. Here we have a viewpoint thoroughly per- 
vaded and saturated by a profound appreciation of 
the realities of life. Nor is the statement quoted above 
that of a practical man. It is, on the contrary, that of 
an eminently religious individual, one who had occu- 
pied a prominent position in all the rituals of the tribe 
and who had been accustomed to frame every act, no 
matter how trivial, in a religious terminology. 

This aspect of primitive man’s perception of the ex- 
ternal reality of life is a very salient feature of his 
outlook. It can be easily accounted for. His envisag- 
ing of life and of the social world is firmly rooted in 

32 PRIMITIVE MAN AS PHILOSOPHER 

two basic facts, in his conception of the relationship of 
the individual to the social group and his truly pro- 
found, all-embracing, and unsentimental knowledge 
and intuition of human nature. His intense realism 
expresses itself in an overwhelming craving for suc- 
cess and in an intense pursuit of every form of social 
prestige, while his intuitive understanding of human 
nature in all its manifold ramifications can be seen in 
the attitude he takes toward the expression of person- 
ality. 

I think every one competent to judge will admit 
that in primitive communities free scope is allowed for 
every conceivable outlet. No moral judgment is passed 
on any aspect of human personality as such. Human 
nature is what it is and each act, emotion, belief, un- 
expressed or expressed, must be allowed to make or 
mar a man. It is each man’s inalienable right — he 
would indeed be unfair to himself if he did not make 
use of it — to seek the approbation and respect of other 
individuals and of the community, even if this right 
be abused and exaggerated. No false modesty should 
be allowed to deter him. But there is an important 
corollary. If by the exaggeration of this craving a 
man comes into conflict with the world and with social 
realities, he will personally suffer and, what is far more 
reprehensible and dangerous, he may involve others in 
the consequences of his personally initiated self-seek- 
ing. If, for example, among the Winnebago Indians, a 
man in his insatiable desire for prestige completely 
overestimates his own powers and loses all sense of 

THE COERCION OF THE WORLD 33 

proportion, he is held strictly accountable for any harm 
that may result to others through his action. Should 
he embark on a warpath that is unauthorized and take 
with him members of the tribe, he is responsible for 
their safety, and if they are killed he is subject to the 
same treatment as if he had murdered them. The 
point of view is this: a man may risk his own life if 
he wishes. It is his own concern if he is willing to 
risk the unpleasantness of ridicule and disapproba- 
tion. He is exceedingly stupid to take such risks but 
that again is his own affair. To involve others in the 
dangers attendant upon an exaggerated prestige hunt- 
ing, however, is a crime. 

This prestige hunting is simply an outgrowth of a 
ruthless realism. It is possibly the fundamental fact 
in primitive life everywhere. The type of prestige 
sought differs, of course, from tribe to tribe. Much is 
sacrificed for its attainment. Playing such a role in 
their lives, it should not strike us as strange that re- 
ligion and magic are found associated with it. In the 
autobiography quoted above we find the following 
passage: “Some people are acquainted with medi- 
cines used when they are in a crowd. If they employ 
it there, people 'will then be enabled to single them 
out and they will be considered great and important.” 
The hunger for glory and for the respect of one’s 
fellow men is literally overpowering. “Act properly,” 
a man is told, “so that when you die your name will 
be held in respect and men will frequently talk of 
you and say, ‘Ah, that man, he indeed possessed great 

34 PRIMITIVE MAN AS PHILOSOPHER 

power!’” Another individual told me that when he 
was young his father used to spur him on to fast by 
telling him that if he did then he would become like 
one of those Indians famous in story. 

Now much of all we have mentioned differs in no 
way from what holds among ourselves. The dis- 
tinction between them and ourselves is that they recog- 
nize this will-to-power — for such it is — as a funda- 
mental element of the human soul and refuse to pass 
any moral judgment upon it. It is neither a virtue 
nor a vice, although it may, in turn, become the one 
or the other. 

I have dwelt upon the desire for glory and prestige 
hunting at such length because we encounter it so 
obtrusively in aboriginal tribes and because its abuses 
are there so patent and lead to so much conflict. If 
these abuses are more rampant and if they are treated 
more leniently there than among us, this is due to the 
insistence upon unhampered self-expression. Every 
man and woman seeks individuation — outer and inner 
individuation — and this is the psychological basis for 
their otherwise bewildering and unintelligible tolerance 
of the fullest expression of personality. Limitations to 
this expression naturally exist but these, we shall sub- 
sequently see, flow directly from an intense and clear- 
cut appreciation of the realities of life and from an 
acute sensitiveness to group reactions. If one were put 
to it to sum up primitive man’s viewpoint in a single 
sentence it would be somewhat as follows: “Express 
yourself completely but know yourself completely and 

THE COERCION OF THE WORLD 35 

accept the consequences of your own personality and 
of your actions.” 

It would be asking too much to expect that the 
majority of people will accept this statement of primi- 
tive man’s attitude toward life without demanding 
very adequate proof. That I hope to be able to give 
in the course of this book. 

Now this whole conception of reality as pragmatic, 
this idea of a free scope for self-assertion, seems to 
belie all that we have always been taught by sociolo- 
gists and numerous ethnologists about the tyranny of 
the group, and about the complete lack of individual- 
ism found in primitive communities. Indeed, accord- 
ing to a theory still largely accepted, the details of a 
religious rite, of a bit of sympathetic magic, etc., do 
not vary appreciably from individual to individual. 
The little change that exists is insignificant and imper- 
ceptible. People who hold this view go even farther. 
They deny that there is any variation in subjective 
attitude. 

There is considerable justification for such a view 
superficially. It appears offhand to be corroborated 
by the apparent absence of any revolt against the type 
of government. Who, it might be contended, ever 
heard of a person attempting to alter the clan organiza- 
tion? Nor can anyone deny the monotony of the 
ritual performances, the ceaseless repetition of actions 
and of words so characteristic of primitive life. Then 
too, at ritual dances, the group seems to be acting as 
a unit and all individual consciousness to be merged 

36 PRIMITIVE MAN AS PHILOSOPHER 

into a vague superconsciousness. Since group activi- 
ties of some kind or another fill so much larger a place 
in their life than among us, what more natural than to 
assume that this reflects a real lack of differentiation? 
And so sociologists have insisted that just as supersti- 
tion and magic hold primitive man in a vise of fear and 
helplessness, so does an inexorable group-tyranny re- 
strict and fetter all individual initiative. But, they 
contend that even were this group-compulsion to relax 
for a moment and allow the indiscriminate and free ex- 
pression of individuality, there would be no individual- 
ity to express. It is with this assumption of the non- 
existence of anything but a corporate consciousness 
that the vast majority of investigators begin. Primitive 
cultures, according to them, represent a stage in the 
evolution of civilization in which only the “group- 
mind” existed. The firm and inflexible chain that at 
such a stage holds people together is fear — fear of the 
unknown, fear of the natural phenomena they have 
not succeeded in controlling, and fear of each other. 
Deviation means ruin and destruction; ruin as punish- 
ment which the group will inflict, and ruin through 
utter inability to cope with a new environment alone. 

Taking the magical religious trappings with which 
everyday life is invested at their face value, taking 
literally even the actual statements of many native in- 
formants and the descriptions given by the generality 
of ethnologists, there is ample ground for the above 
view. Granted our predominating intellectualistic out- 
look — leaving on one side mere prejudice and ignorance 

THE COERCION OF THE WORLD 37 

— what we know of primitive life would superficially 
imply such an interpretation. But this is true only 
superficially and many ethnologists, particularly in 
America, have long known this, though for some inex- 
plicable reason have never embodied it in their mono- 
graphs. 

Wherein does the error lie? It lies in this: in our 
unjustifiably equating the primitive group with the 
group as we know it among ourselves, and in our refus- 
ing first to examine what constitutes social reality for 
primitive man. Social reality is to him something 
unique and definitely distinct from the individual and 
no more emanates from him than does the external 
world. It is coexistent with the individual, both con- 
straining and in its turn being constrained by him. As 
soon as we realize this, and that much of the religious 
and magical background is secondary, at times even 
being an inert accretion that but represents the ex- 
ternal dress of a will-to-action, then the true interaction 
of the group and the individual becomes apparent at 
once. Far from cramping and fettering him — be it on 
the chase, on the warpath, at ceremonial enactments, 
etc. — this background then serves as a means of doub- 
ling the concentration of mind and body, of increasing a 
tenseness of nerve and muscle, of evoking a sense of 
personal power and well-being. It gives him what he 
most desires in life, prestige and a heightened sense of 
existence. 

All that we know of primitive man when we come 
to know him at all intimately and are able to look 

38 PRIMITIVE MAN AS PHILOSOPHER 

below the surface, bears this out. Individualism, what 
might, in fact, be called “personalism,” everywhere 
runs riot. Whether it be in the South Seas, in aborigi- 
nal Asia, Australia, Africa and the two Americas, the 
atmosphere that pervades each community is always 
the same — a ceaseless pitting of man against man, end- 
less bickerings, jealousies, envies, hatreds, a delight in 
the discomfiture of others. This is, of course, the nega- 
tive side, the one generally most clearly perceptible to 
outsiders and for that reason most definitely dwelt on 
by the casual observer. Old books of travel and ad- 
venture are replete with descriptions of the terrible 
atmosphere of hatred, fear, and jealousy which per- 
vades a primitive community. If all they said were 
true life would be unbearable if not unthinkable. 
Wherever we find such a description, whether in some 
old work or in some recent study by a gentleman eth- 
nologist or government administrator, we can be cer- 
tain that it represents only one aspect of life just as it 
does among ourselves. There is a positive side, too, 
expressed in romantic and devoted friendships, in love, 
reverential family affection, in kindness, generosity, 
and pity, in the highest of all virtues, respect for in- 
dividuality. 

Consequently what we must always bear in mind is 
this medley of contacts, this friendly and unfriendly 
impingement of personality upon personality. All of- 
ficial restraint in the free expression of individuality 
is absent. We are here in the presence of that exceed- 
ingly unusual phenomenon, a clear-cut realistic and 

THE COERCION OF THE WORLD 39 

unsentimental perception of life and of the nature of 
human contact. The rapidity in the alternation of 
love, hate, appreciation, and envy seems to bespeak 
an emotionally unintegrated personality. Such is the 
generally accepted view. Even so open-minded an 
observer as Dr. C. K. Jung seems to accept it. Dr. 
Jung quotes with approval, from a source not indi- 
cated, the following example: “A Bushman had a little 
son upon whom he lavished the characteristic doting 
affection of the primitives. . . . One day he came home 
in a rage; he had been fishing and had caught nothing. 
As usual the little fellow ran eagerly to greet him. But 
the father seized him and wrung his neck upon the spot. 
Subsequently of course he mourned for the dead boy 
with the same abandon and lack of comprehension as 
had before made him strangle him.” 2 

No greater distortion of the actual facts could pos- 
sibly be imagined. And yet Dr. Jung obtained this 
example from what purported to be a first-hand ac- 
count, and similar examples often fill reputable de- 
scriptions of a tribe. They all illustrate the uncon- 
scious bias that lies at the bottom of our judgment 
of primitive mentality, the unconscious assumption 
of the lack of differentiation and of integration to be 
found there. 

We know that this lack of stability and integration 
is a basic assumption in all evolutionary theories of 
cultural development. This is, however, emphatically 
not the case with Jung and others who take his atti- 

* Psychological Types, p. 295. 

40 PRIMITIVE MAN AS PHILOSOPHER 

tude toward primitive mentality. Some other explana- 
tion must be sought. What makes for error in our 
interpretation is a certain mistiness of vision due to 
that sentimentality from which the northern European 
finds it so difficult to free himself. Now what saves 
primitive man from emotional anarchy is the fact that 
he is truly envious and jealous, a lover and a hater; 
that he means all he says, but means it for just that 
passing moment or hour, as the case may be, in which 
these feelings actually represent his attitude, and for 
no longer. He may have a theory of conduct but he 
bases no ethical judgments upon his kaleidoscopic 
emotional reactions. He has thus fairly adequately 
solved one of the most difficult and baffling problems in 
the world, of balancing repression with expression of 
personality and, at the same time, attaining to a true 
integration. 

CHAPTER IV 

CONSERVATISM AND PLASTICITY 

I N the preceding chapter our interest was centered 
mainly upon the individual. We were able to 
demonstrate that in the contact of individual with 
individual free scope was permitted for personal ex- 
pression. Is it indeed very plausible then that in 
group activities primitive man should suddenly become 
transformed into an automaton incapable of self-real- 
ization and prohibited from indulging in change? The 
layman and the scholar free from theoretical bias can 
be led to such an interpretation, it seems to me, only 
because he is in large measure dominated by what takes 
place in the enormous centers of population so charac- 
teristic of the great civilizations of Europe, Asia, and 
Africa. Man there has undoubtedly become an au- 
tomaton. 

Many sociologists have been led to make this as- 
sumption for other reasons: first, as a reaction against 
the extreme individualistic interpretations of culture 
still largely current among most people in England and 
America; and second, because of their strong evolution- 
istic bias. This made it necessary for them to suppose 
that primitive peoples have not freed themselves to 
any appreciable extent from the tyranny of the group. 

41 

42 PRIMITIVE MAN AS PHILOSOPHER 

From Tylor to Hobhouse they have consistently con- 
tended that in primitive communities there can be no 
differentiated individualism. In arriving at this con- 
clusion, it must be freely admitted, they have been 
aided and abetted by certain defects, sometimes con- 
scious, sometimes unconscious, in the generality of pub- 
lished ethnological monographs on specific tribes. 

Now we are not primarily concerned with this prob- 
lem at all. What we desire is to discover the nature 
of the attitude of a primitive tribe toward the group 
and group activities and how we are to explain the im- 
pression of uniformity and the absence of variation 
which many experienced ethnologists get. The whole 
question has been somewhat obscured by the rather un- 
critical manner in which investigators have transferred 
to primitive society the theory of the relationship of 
the group to the individual current among ourselves. 
This transference is, I contend, quite misleading; for, 
as pointed out in the previous chapter, the individual 
and the group are in primitive society strictly incom- 
mensurable units, each with a separate and indepen- 
dent existence. We have nothing even remotely com- 
parable to primitive man’s sense of an objective social 
world, a world which is just as real as the external 
world and which is conceived of as being just as inde- 
pendent of the individual as the external world is. 
The social reality he predicates has existed from all 
time and is, in his eyes, as old as the external world 
of the senses. Like the external world it is never static 
but always dynamic, taking on varying forms and 

CONSERVATISM AND PLASTICITY 43 

appearing under different aspects. Yet in spite of this 
dynamic character it is always the same, a unique and 
unalterable social world. An individual may sin 
against varying parts of it without incurring dangerous 
consequences but if he sins against any fundamental 
aspect he must be prepared either to dissociate himself 
entirely from this world or die. 

Possibly we have here one of the reasons for the 
absence of consistent skeptics or unbelievers and for 
the nonexistence of revolts against the real structure of 
society. A consistent skeptic and critic would feel it 
incumbent upon him to withdraw from his tribe either 
to face death in the wilderness or to found a group 
of his own. He would in normal times never think of 
attempting to force the group to his way of thinking, 
because of his feeling that the group and the individual 
are entirely distinct entities, interlocked at certain 
points and constraining each other at others, yet suf- 
ficiently autonomous as units to resist any complete 
submergence of the one by the other. Ample leeway 
is allowed but the essential configuration of either unit 
must not be tampered with. What the real and essen- 
tial nature of this social configuration consists of and 
furthermore what the nature of primitive man’s under- 
standing and intuition of this is, it is well-nigh impos- 
sible to determine; certainly it will for many decades 
elude the abilities of a Western European investigator 
to describe. The best he can hope to do is to describe 
its external details. The interrelations of its com- 
ponent parts are quite beyond him. Yet it is just this, 

44 PRIMITIVE MAN AS PHILOSOPHER 

I feel, that gives the social configuration its true sig- 
nificance for the members of the tribe. 

Let me give a few examples. Among the Winnebago 
a rigid clan organization prevailed until fairly re- 
cently. As far as I could find out, deviations of a 
rather important character have always existed and 
have always been tolerated. But the moment any one 
negated some feature felt to be basic he was forced to 
secede. Secession among the Winnebago, as in fact 
among many tribes, is by no means uncommon. In the 
semi-legendary accounts that have been preserved, the 
causes are generally given as personal ones and they 
often are of a most trivial kind, at least to our way of 
thinking. We will not, I feel certain, be going far 
wrong in discounting these accounts and in assuming 
that in almost all cases a very profound revolt lurked 
at the bottom of the secession. The following very 
illuminating illustration bearing on this point was ob- 
tained from the Winnebago: 

A young man fell in love with a girl belonging to a 
clan into which he was not permitted to marry. Noth- 
ing that his parents or the older people said seemed 
to have any influence upon him. Marry the girl he 
would in defiance of all clan regulations. In despera- 
tion the father resorted to the following very subtle 
plan. Among the Winnebago there exists a very curi- 
ous and interesting custom which forbids a member 
of any other clan to ask for water in the lodge of a 
member of the bear clan. To do so is considered 
an unpardonable affront and an unforgivable breach 

CONSERVATISM AND PLASTICITY 45 

of good manners. Should any one, however, presume to 
ask for water it is refused, but every other demand is 
granted. The father in this case deliberately commit- 
ted this affront and when the water was refused and 
he was asked to make some other request, he asked 
for the hand of the daughter of the owner of this house, 
it so happening that members of the bear clan were 
eligible as mates for his son. The son apparently had 
to consent and the revolt was broken. Now it is quite 
obvious that the first offense is, from our point of view, 
a hundredfold more heinous than the second, the lat- 
ter being to our feeling largely a matter of etiquette. 
I should have assumed offhand, without questioning, 
that the Winnebago attitude would be the same as ours. 
And yet here we have the undoubted and incontrovert- 
able fact that the young man refused to secede in the 
first instance and did in the second. 

The preceding illustration shows how a custom which 
to us appears trivial and unimportant played a funda- 
mental role in this man’s understanding and intuition 
of the social configuration of his tribe and effectively 
prevented his revolt. In sum, he was quite willing to 
break one part of the social structure, such as marry- 
ing within his own phratry, but not another. In the 
second example, we shall see that even where a de- 
parture from what the external observer would regard 
as the fundamental structure of society is more funda- 
mental, the basic break, to the native, consisted in an 
apparently trivial detail. 

My second illustration is again chosen from the 

46 PRIMITIVE MAN AS PHILOSOPHER 

Winnebago. Among them about thirty years ago a 
ceremony was introduced which deviated in many sig- 
nificant ways from the normal Winnebago type. The 
tenets of this new religion were from the very begin- 
ning diametrically opposed to the old Winnebago cul- 
tural background. The new faith naturally encoun- 
tered tremendous antagonism among the older members 
of the tribe and, although understood, was definitely 
disapproved of. Yet what completely placed it outside 
of the pale for certain individuals was not the intro- 
duction of some new belief or rite, nor the denial of 
the efficacy of the older rites and of the whole sacerdo- 
tal system, but the reversal of the customary manner 
of making the ceremonial circuit in entering the cere- 
monial lodge. This constituted, for many, the real 
sin against the social configuration. 

Now all this has a distinct bearing on our under- 
standing of the role played by the group. Many in- 
vestigators have not always taken the trouble to find 
out what primitive peoples themselves implied by the 
group, what it actually meant to them. They have 
equated it with our own ideas, and blandly wiped out 
everything else. 

Take the whole question of the assumed uniformity 
in custom and rite. Yet wherever we obtain detailed 
information about rituals, magical rites, etc., we soon 
discover that much of the predicated stereotyped uni- 
formity and absence of variation completely vanishes, 
just as it does in the case of a myth. And the varia- 
tion in former times must have been much greater than 

CONSERVATISM AND PLASTICITY 47 

it is to-day, for in these unfortunate times investigators 
must perforce content themselves with fragmentary 
information, and a good deal of merging of discordant 
customs and information has taken place and produced 
a fictitious uniformity. Sociologists and ethnologists 
have been aware of this for some time. If it has made 
comparatively little impression upon many of them, the 
reason is to be sought in the fact that there has always 
existed a tacit assumption that there is but one true 
version of a myth, one true version of a rite. Where 
deviations or variants were present this was to be 
ascribed to errors due either to forgetfulness or ignor- 
ance, or to general inert degeneration. Perhaps the fol- 
lowing examples will suffice to illustrate the assump- 
tions which at times underlie the work of even the 
professional ethnologist. One investigator told me that 
in an attempt to obtain what he regarded as an 
ideally accurate account of a certain ceremony he had 
the half dozen or more individuals reputed to know 
most about it hold a conference and come to some 
agreement as to what was the proper manner of giving 
the rite. Many deviations and even contradictions 
were found to exist but these were all ironed out to 
the observer’s satisfaction and the description thus 
obtained published as the one and only correct version. 
In another case it was proposed in all seriousness that 
different versions and fragments of certain myths 
should be combined together into the true version. 

We are justified then in insisting that part of the 
uniformity postulated of a rite or a myth is due to 

48 PRIMITIVE MAN AS PHILOSOPHER 

the utter inadequacy of the ethnological record and 
that this, in turn, is not always or predominatingly due 
to unfortunate circumstances, but to tacit or expressed 
assumptions of the investigator. The most cursory 
glance suffices to show that we are indeed not here 
dealing with an inert degeneration but with the free 
play of participants and story-tellers. In view of 
what has been pointed out in the previous chapter 
this is of course exactly what we might have expected. 
Where a society is so permeated with a thirst for pres- 
tige and naive self-glorification as is that of primitive 
man, it would be quite ridiculous to imagine that these 
traits would not find expression in theoretically un- 
orthodox ways. 

Yet I do not want to seem unfair in my strictures. 
To the outsider the procedure at a ceremony does not 
change; the general tenor of the speeches remains the 
same, the rites retain their prescribed sequence, and 
the tradition within the tribe continues that there is 
no change. Many investigators noticing this have 
rather hastily drawn the inference that there is no 
change and that the individual was merged in the 
group. Now the correct state of affairs, as far as I can 
determine it, is this: change and deviation occur 
abundantly and are recognized, but there also exists, 
among certain very important individuals in each 
tribe, a tacit theory of immutability. This theory has 
been developed, it is safe to say, by the priest and the 
thinker and is only inconsistently shared by the aver- 
age man. It is this theory that ensnares so many ob- 

CONSERVATISM AND PLASTICITY 49 

servers into the belief that there is a correct version 
for every rite and myth and that as soon as this is ob- 
tained we shall have an adequate description of the 
mental and emotional attitude of the whole tribe. 

This theory of immutability to which primitive man 
gives repeated utterance and to which he subscribes, at 
least to the extent of not too insistently or too obvi- 
ously deviating from the path of his fathers, applies 
not only to group but to purely individual activities 
likewise. The most outstanding and familiar of such 
activities are the various rites connected with sympa- 
thetic magic. These all belong intrinsically to a motor 
level and the cultural trappings associated with them 
are for the most part inert and functionless survivals. 
Yet here where we might expect unlimited deviations 
and variations we find the least. We cannot ascribe 
this exclusively to motor inertia or to a vague fear of 
untoward consequences. Part of it is to be explained by 
the fact that primitive man’s theory of immutability 
holds with far greater vigor for these magical rites 
than for any other activities and that it finds a definite 
and clear-cut expression in formulae which, in their 
turn, are supposed to be immutable. When, however, 
we leave the domain of magic, even the theory of im- 
mutability will not suffice to explain the actual uni- 
formity either in group activities or in those personal 
activities that are performed in the presence of others. 
To account for this we shall have to take into considera- 
tion a far more potent and archetypal social reaction — 
the fear and horror of ridicule. 

So PRIMITIVE MAN AS PHILOSOPHER 

In one sense the fear of ridicule is merely the obverse 
side of prestige hunting, and prestige hunting is at 
bottom but a defensive mechanism against ridicule. 
Into the purely psychological aspects and implications 
of this whole question we cannot enter here, for our 
main concern is with the manner of its evocation and 
with primitive man’s sensitiveness to it. Stated 
broadly we may say that every mistake, every devia- 
tion from accepted opinion, every individual and purely 
personal interpretation, every peculiarity and eccen- 
tricity, may call forth ridicule. It is ridicule and not 
indignation and horror that assails a man who at- 
tempts to change a detail in a ceremony, to tell a 
story in some new and original manner, or who acts 
counter to some definitely accepted belief and custom, 
and it is the same fundamentally ill-natured laughter 
that greets him when he becomes unwittingly the vic- 
tim of some untoward accident. To avoid it a man 
will go to any length. He may even commit suicide in 
consequence of it. “If you travel in the road of good 
people,” say the Winnebago, “it will be good and 
others will not consider your life a source of amuse- 
ment.” Even the deities are not exempt from this 
horror of ridicule. Among the Winnebago there exists 
a delightful story of a man who dared to state that he 
disbelieved in the powers of the most terrifying and 
holiest of the Winnebago deities, and who in public 
expressed his contempt for him. A short time later, 
the deity in question appeared to the skeptic and 
pointed his finger at him, an action that was supposed 

CONSERVATISM AND PLASTICITY 51 

to bring immediate death. The man stood his ground 
and did not budge and the deity — Disease-Giver was 
his name — begged the man to die lest people make fun 
of him! 

The fear of ridicule is thus a great positive factor in 
the lives of primitive peoples. It is the preserver of 
the established order of things and more potent and 
tyrannous than the most restrictive and coercive of 
positive injunctions possibly could be. As a conserv- 
ing force it takes its place by the side of primitive 
man’s sense of a social world distinct from the indi- 
vidual, and his theory of the unchangeableness of 
group phenomena. But whereas the latter two are 
specifically group expressions, the fear of ridicule 
appertains exclusively to the individual as such. It is 
every individual’s personal balancing wheel. Though 
we generally see only its superficial repercussions as 
individual impinges upon individual, as a matter of fact 
it really represents each man’s tacit assessment of him- 
self, each man’s sense of inferiority, each man’s pro- 
found discomfort with any happening, whether caused 
by him or not, which disturbs the psychic unity towards 
which he is unconsciously striving. His feelings of per- 
sonal worth and personal dignity are being outraged 
when he is the subject of ridicule and he reacts to it 
instinctively, instantaneously, and with an intuitive 
recognition of its importance. 

Where there are such checks and balances, it is per- 
haps but natural to assume considerable merging of 
the two kinds of social reality always present to the 

52 PRIMITIVE MAN /IS PHILOSOPHER 

consciousness of primitive man — the group and the 
individual. And yet this is precisely what does not 
take place, a fact we cannot too frequently stress. 
The unusual degree of integration found in primitive 
culture — and that there is integration to a much 
greater degree and in a far more complete manner 
than among us no person at all conversant with the 
facts will deny — this integration is not due to any 
identification of the individual with the group or of 
individual with individual, but to the existence of a 
larger configuration in which the individual and the 
group are separate and distinct units. 

CHAPTER V 

FREEDOM OF THOUGHT 

W : have tried to make it clear that the older 
theory, according to which only a group con- 
sciousness existed in primitive communities, is wrong 
and that in the interests of truth and clear thinking it 
had better be consigned to that already impressive 
limbo of rejected ideas which have grown out of the 
uncritical and superficial application of the evolution- 
ary theory to the history of civilization. Individualism 
is present everywhere, we have seen, even to the point 
of degenerating into what I have called “personalism.” 
There is, however, a possible objection to the above 
point of view. It might justifiably be claimed that 
much of the individualism discussed in the preced- 
ing chapters was non-significant and that real individ- 
ualism, real freedom from the shackles of group- 
tyranny and group-thinking, can be demonstrated only 
when it can be clearly proven that freedom of thought 
exists. To this point we must therefore turn. It can 
best be approached by a discussion of the significance 
of variants. 

That far-reaching variants in the manner of giving 
a ceremony or of telling a tale exist we all know, but 
a relatively small number of investigators have ever 

53 

54 PRIMITIVE MAN AS PHILOSOPHER 

taken the trouble to inquire just wherein the full im- 
plication of this variation lay. Explanations like inert 
degeneration or forgetfulness will no longer do. The 
only method of throwing any light on the problem is 
to obtain the same information from different indi- 
viduals with whose temperament one is acquainted. 
With this object in view, I obtained different versions 
of the same myth from three individuals. Two of them 
were brothers and had learned the myth from their 
father. The differences between these versions were 
remarkable, but the significance of the differences lay 
in the fact that they could be explained in terms of 
the temperament, literary ability, and interests of the 
story-teller. But we are interested here not so much 
in accounting for the origin of variants as in discov- 
ering the attitude of the group toward these variants. 
What we would like to know is why they disapprove of 
them, for that the older and more conservative people 
do frequently disapprove of them is beyond discussion. 

Now there can be no question that, to a far more 
marked degree than among us, to be different from 
other people and to have differences of opinion and 
interpretation did in primitive communities call down 
upon an individual sarcasm and ridicule. But it is 
equally true that if one felt strong enough to stand the 
chaff and unpopularity and that the prestige value at- 
tached to the deviations or peculiarities definitely out- 
weighed the disadvantages, then one could be certain 
of one thing, that no prosecution or persecution would 
take place. If a man chose to disbelieve in the efficacy 

FREEDOM OF THOUGHT 

55 

of the spirits, apart from the ridicule to which he would 
unquestionably be subjected, this led to nothing worse 
than a shrug of the shoulders for his idiocy and un- 
called-for bravado. Essentially this was considered a 
matter of private concern although it probably would 
mean worry and concern to friends and relatives. 

In the preceding chapter we gave an instance of a 
daring skeptic questioning the powers of a great deity. 
Ridicule, sarcasm, perhaps even horror, were the re- 
sponse from the community, but no censure was passed 
on his fundamental criticism of the accepted religious 
beliefs of the tribe. We find the same reaction to-day 
in connection with a new religion that is sweeping over 
the Winnebago and which preaches the destruction of 
all that is holy in their past. Scorn, ridicule and abuse 
are hurled against the rebels but no crusade is or- 
ganized against them because of their innovations. 
One of the old conservative members of the tribe who 
hated these innovators with all the intensity of a re- 
actionary summed up their case as follows: “This 
medicine (the new religion) is one of the four spirits 
from below and for that reason it is bad. These spirits 
(from below) have always been longing for human 
beings and now they are getting hold of them. It is 
said that those who use this medicine claim that when 
they die they will only be going on a long journey. 
But I say that this is not the truth, that in fact those 
who eat this medicine destroy their soul and that when 
death comes to them, it will mean extermination. If 
I spit on the floor the saliva will soon dry up and 

56 PRIMITIVE MAN AS PHILOSOPHER 

nothing will remain of it. So will death be for them. 
I might, it is true, go out and preach against this doc- 
trine but it would be of no avail for I certainly would 
not be able to draw more than one or two people away 
from these spirits. Many, indeed, will be swallowed by 
this religion; they will not be able to help themselves 
in any way. The bad spirit will unquestionably seize 
them.” There is not a word here of a forceful suppres- 
sion, of using the agencies of government to persecute 
the innovators, not a word against their right to do and 
think as they chose. It is simply their foolishness that 
is deplored. 

The right, then, to freedom of opinion is never for a 
moment questioned. As further illustrations let us take 
the following. On one occasion I remember a thunder- 
storm coming up from the east, a region which, accord- 
ing to the Winnebago, was not inhabited by those 
mythical birds to whom thunder and lightning are 
attributed. A Winnebago commenting upon this there- 
upon boldly announced that some thunderbirds did 
live in the east, in spite of the conception to the con- 
trary. His belief, I feel quite positive, did not obtain 
general credence. But no one attempted to attack him 
because of his heretical views. He was free to believe 
what he chose and take the consequences. 

The same attitude is shown with regard to divergent 
versions of some of the more important myths of the 
tribe, the sacred ones, those referring to the origin of 
the clans, of death, of future life. In one instance 
when I obtained a very markedly divergent version of 

FREEDOM OF THOUGHT 

57 

the most sacred myth of the tribe, the informant, in 
reply to my question as to why his version differed 
so much from the others, answered rather irritatingly, 
“That is my way of telling the story. Others have 
different ways.” That was all. No judgment was 
passed. 

There are certain investigators who have been con- 
vinced that a multiplicity of variants exists in every 
tribe and who then very cleverly turn the spit around 
and insist that primitive people are not capable of con- 
structing any coherent system of thought, that general 
formulations, for instance, are quite beyond them. It 
has frequently been contended that primitive man was 
unable to give an objective formulation of his culture. 
This, I think, is a quite unjustified and erroneous as- 
sumption. It is true that few coherent systems of 
beliefs have been obtained. But they do exist for those 
who wish to look for them, although they are confined, 
as among ourselves, to a very limited number of people. 
They are not frequent because in the intellectual at- 
mosphere we have just described, where the unhindered 
and free expression of thought was the order of the 
day and was regarded as a purely private concern, 
system-mongering or a systematic theology, for in- 
stance, was quite useless. It could be and was at- 
tempted, but it carried no validity, brought no prestige. 
It remained the expression of a particular man or, at 
best, of a particular group. Take the Winnebago 
again. There a well-formulated system of teaching 
existed. But this system was considered simply a more 

58 PRIMITIVE MAN AS PHILOSOPHER 

emphatic and codified warning of the older people to 
the young not to take unnecessary risks, to be warned 
in time and to go fully clothed and protected upon 
the road of life. This systematic formulation bestowed 
upon the deities no additional efficacy nor did it endow 
them with a more lasting immortality. 

This brings us thus to the very core of the question, 
namely, that among primitive people freedom of 
thought was closely and intimately bound up with the 
whole significance of thought. Now thought among 
primitive people has a function different from that 
which it possesses among us. It gives validity to one 
special kind of reality, the reality of their subjective 
life. “I think, therefore that which I think exists," 
such is the motto of primitive man. True enough, it 
establishes only one kind of reality but it is an impor- 
tant one and one that bears directly on the whole ques- 
tion of his tolerance of complete freedom of expres- 
sion. A man’s personality must not be interfered with. 
If by expressing it he destroys himself, that is his own 
affair. 

But all that we have said above refers to only one 
aspect of the tolerance of difference of opinion. The 
other one is more fundamental and perhaps more diffi- 
cult for us to understand. However real his subjective 
life may be to him, however definitely he may feel that 
thought establishes its own reality, we would be hope- 
lessly wrong in imagining that primitive man believes 
that thoughts, ideas, opinions, etc., bear any relation 
to the facts of social experience. What he practically 

FREEDOM OF THOUGHT 

59 

says is that it makes no difference whether a man 
thinks so or so. The social reality is not altered by it. 
This is clearly what the old man whom I quoted on 
page 31 was trying to express. 

Nor need I add that the freedom of thought en- 
countered here is not due to any secondary emancipa- 
tion from the shackles of traditional dogmatism, as 
among us. It is due to the recognition of personality 
and the right of personality to expression, and due to 
the clear perception of a lack of contact between 
thoughts, ideas, and opinions on the one hand and the 
social realities on the other. The life of thought does 
not dominate and tyrannize over even the most intel- 
lectual of primitive people as it does over some of the 
least intellectual among us. 

This significance of thought in our own civilization 
brings us naturally to the question of the influence of 
the written thought, the word. To Western Europe 
and the peoples of the Mediterranean, accustomed for 
thirty centuries to an alphabet, the written word has as- 
sumed something of a magical charm. In the begin- 
ning was the word, i.e., the written word. In its mani- 
fold repercussions this worship of the written word 
finally included the unwritten word and then extended 
itself till it ended in the deification of thought. Thus 
the word and thought became things in themselves, 
living and real entities, instead of retaining their old 
function of merely giving validity to certain realities. 
In Hebrew mythology the letters of the alphabet dis- 
pute with God as to who is to have the honor of be- 

60 PRIMITIVE MAN 4 S PHILOSOPHER 

ginning the Pentateuch and we need hardly refer to the 
tremendous significance attached to meaningless vo- 
cables in Egyptian and Greek papyri. 

Now this is not at all true for primitive peoples. 
Much if not all of the magical quality and potency 
possessed by the mere word and by thought among us 
is derived from its connection with the written script. 
This is quite intelligible. Granted a dynamic and ever 
changing world, then the written word with its semi- 
permanence and its static character was a much de- 
sired oasis. For the development of the technique of 
thinking it was of the greatest importance. But cultur- 
ally and psychologically it possessed even greater sig- 
nificance, for it completed the victory of the visual- 
minded man over his competitors. From that time 
on, at least for the literate man, the main verities were 
to become visual verities. The word and thought were 
to become either identified with the ultimate and 
unique reality or predicated as its cause, and the world 
was to be conceived of as a projection of the thought 
of the creator. All along this line primitive man takes 
issue with us. 

I would be the last to deny that primitive man at- 
taches importance and power to mere thinking or to 
magical formulae. The fact is patent. All I wish to 
emphasize is that he does not believe that thought does 
more than validate the reality of his subjective life. 
It does not touch the two great realities which apart 
from his personality concern him most: the reality into 
which he is born and the reality with which he is bom. 

FREEDOM OF THOUGHT 

61 

At birth he is ushered into both, the reality of the 
phenomenal world and the social world. Now what 
primitive man seeks is the means for discovering the 
nature of these two realities, and the methods for en- 
suring their normal and adequate functioning. Any- 
thing that will help him in this quest is valuable and 
acceptable. Thoughts, feelings, intuitions, etc., can and 
do enhance and constrain an already existing reality; 
they are, in this role, to be recognized as an important 
adjunct. 

Very frequently, indeed, one finds primitive man 
claiming to have been able to achieve certain results 
through the insistence and perseverence of his thoughts. 
I myself was once informed by an Indian that he had 
always been so successful on the hunt because he used 
his thought. Now concretization of thought is common 
enough among primitive people just as is the con- 
cretization of the emotions. Never, however, did 
thoughts lose their primary character of proofs of 
reality. No such apotheosis of thought and of the 
word was possible as among us, because these were 
at all times regarded as simply one of the various 
mechanisms for appreciating the existence of certain 
things, one of the means, we have seen, for establishing 
their validity. The distortion in our whole psychic 
life and in our whole apperception of the external 
realities produced by the invention of the alphabet, 
the whole tendency of which has been to elevate 
thought and thinking to the rank of the exclusive proof 
of all verities, never occurred among primitive people. 

62 PRIMITIVE MAN AS PHILOSOPHER 

Much was thereby inevitably lost and it is conceivable 
that what many profound thinkers consider the true 
differentiation of the subjective from the objective 
toward which “civilized” man has been laboriously 
and inconsistently striving for the last five thousand 
years, was in consequence rendered impossible for 
them. Yet much also was gained, or better retained, 
for the false overvaluation of the visual sense brought 
in its train a too exclusive preoccupation with the 
purely objective world, on the one hand, and a distor- 
tion of a purely subjective element like thought, on the 
other, by ascribing to it objective validity. Primitive 
man was spared both of these things. Thoughts and 
words were recognized as integral and concomitant 
elements in every act and their import was never 
slurred or forgotten. But that is all. Especially was 
this true in the relations of man to man and of man to 
the social group. In this way he became a much better 
psychologist than we are and was enabled to see the 
social world and the phenomenal world in a much truer 
perspective than we do. How true this is the subse- 
quent chapters will, I hope, demonstrate. 

CHAPTER VI 

RIGHT AND WRONG 

O N no subject connected with primitive people does 
so much confusion exist in the mind of the gen- 
eral public and have so many ill-considered statements 
been made as on the nature of their behavior to one 
another. The prevalent view to-day among laymen is 
that they are at all times the plaything of their pas- 
sions, and that self-control and poise are utterly alien 
to their character, if not, indeed, quite beyond their 
reach. We have seen in fact that even so open-minded 
and sympathetic a scholar as Jung apparently still 
accepts this view (cf. page 39). That an example like 
the one used by Jung should in all good faith be given 
as representative of the normal or even the abnormal 
reaction of a primitive man to a given emotional situa- 
tion, shows the depth of ignorance that still exists on 
this subject. Now quite apart from the manifest ab- 
surdity involved in the belief that any parent in a primi- 
tive group would wreak his rage at his lack of success in 
hunting, in this murderous fashion upon the first object 
that came within his reach, even if it be his innocent 
and beloved child, there are a hundred and one reasons 
that would have deterred him, even had he been the 
uncontrolled animal the illustration assumes him to 

63 

64 PRIMITIVE MAN AS PHILOSOPHER 

have been. However, let that pass. The illustration 
has its uses, for it permits the contrast between the 
generally accepted belief and the true nature of the 
facts to emerge all the more definitely. Actually the 
situation is quite different. 

Briefly stated, the underlying ideal of conduct among 
most primitive tribes is self-discipline, self-control and 
a resolute endeavor to observe a proper measure of 
proportion in all things. I am well aware that in some 
tribes this is more definitely expressed than in others 
and that not infrequently certain excrescences in their 
ceremonial life seem to contradict this assertion. Yet 
I think most field ethnologists would agree with me. 
Since in the face of so formidable a body of opinion 
apparently to the contrary, incontrovertible evidence 
will be demanded of me to substantiate so broad and 
explicit a statement, I shall confine myself in my pres- 
entation of the facts to a tribe which I know personally 
and where the material which I use can be definitely 
controlled. The data upon which I rely come from 
the Winnebago Indians of Wisconsin and Nebraska 
and are to be found in two monographs published by 
me. Only statements made by the Winnebago them- 
selves in accounts either actually written by themselves 
or contained in verbatim descriptions of the rituals 
obtained in the original Winnebago are used in order 
to obviate all inaccuracy. 

I can think of no better method of introducing the 
subject than by quoting appropriate passages from the 
Winnebago texts secured and then discussing them in 

RIGHT AND WRONG 

65 

the light of the knowledge they throw upon the system 
of ethics enunciated and, more specifically, upon the 
type of self-control implied. For facility of reference 
I shall number these passages: 

1. It is always good to be good. 

2. What does life consist of but love? 

3. Of what value is it to kill? 

4. You ought to be of some help to your fellow men. 

5. Do not abuse your wife; women are sacred. 

6. If you cast off your dress for many people, they will 
be benefitted by your deed. 

7. For the good you do every one will love you. 

8. Never do any wrong to children. 

9. It is not good to gamble. 

10. If you see a helpless old man, help him if you have 
anything at all. 

n. If you have a home of your own, see to it that who- 
ever enters it obtains something to eat. Such food 
will be a source of death to you if withheld. 

12. When you are recounting your war deeds on behalf 
of the departed soul, do not try to add to your honor 
by claiming more for yourself than you have actually 
accomplished. If you tell a falsehood then and 
exaggerate your achievements you will die before- 
hand. The telling of truth is sacred. Tell less than 
you did. The old men say it is wiser. 

13. Be on friendly terms with every one and then every 
one will love you. 

14. Marry only one person at a time. 

66 PRIMITIVE MAN AS PHILOSOPHER 

15. Do not be haughty with your husband. Kindness will 
be returned to you and he will treat you in the same 
way in which you treat him. 

16. Do not imagine that you are taking your children’s 
part if you just speak about loving them. Let them 
see it for themselves. 

17. Do not show your love for other people so that people 
notice it. Love them but let your love be different 
from that for your own. 

18. As you travel along life’s road, never harm any one 
or cause any one to feel sad. On the contrary, if at 
any time you can make a person feel happy, do so. If 
at any time you meet a woman away from your 
village and you are both alone and no one can see 
you, do not frighten her or harm her. 

19. If you meet any one on the road, even if it is only a 
child, speak a cheering word before you pass on. 

20. If your husband’s people ever ask their own children 
for something when you are present, assume that they 
had asked it of you. If there is anything to be done, 
do not wait till you are asked to do it but do it 
immediately. 

21. Never think a home is yours until you have made one 
for yourself. 

22. If you have put people in charge of your household, do 
not nevertheless act as though the home were still 
yours. 

23. When visiting your husband’s people, do not act as if 
you were far above them. 1 

‘All these passages, with the exception of 3, 18, 19, and 20, come 

RIGHT AND WRONG 

67 

Obviously we are here in the presence of a fairly 
well elaborated system of conduct. To those who con- 
sistently deny to primitive man any true capacity for 
abstract thinking or objective formulation of an ethical 
code — and their number is very large both among 
scholars and laymen — the injunctions given above 
would probably be interpreted as having a definitely 
concrete significance. That is, they are not to be 
regarded as attempts at generalization in any true 
sense of the word but merely as inherently wise saws 
and precepts of a practical and personal application. 
Now there is sufficient justification for such a view to 
warrant our discussing it before we proceed any fur- 
ther. 

A number of the precepts given avowedly allow a 
concrete practical and personal application. In 5, for 
example, we are told, “If you abuse your wife you will 
die in a short time. Our grandmother Earth is a 
woman and in abusing your wife you will be abusing 
her. Since it is she who takes care of us, by your 
actions you will be practically killing yourself.” To 
precept 10 is added the following: “If you happen 
to possess a home, take him (the old man) there and 
feed him for he may suddenly make uncomplimentary 
remarks about you. You will be strengthened 
thereby.” 

from Crashing Thunder: the Autobiography of an American Indian , 
edited by Paul Radin; 3 conies from the myth given on pages 79 ff. 
of this book, and the others from the 37th Report of the Bureau 
of American Ethnology . 

68 PRIMITIVE MAN PHILOSOPHER 

We thus do indeed seem to obtain the impression 
that a Winnebago in being good to a helpless old man is 
guided by motives secondary to those implied in the 
precept as quoted. And what follows would seem to 
strip our apparently generous precept of whatever 
further altruistic value still attaches to it, for there 
it is stated that perhaps the old man is carrying under 
his arm a box of medicines that he cherishes very much 
and which he will offer to you. Similarly in precept 
ii we find, “If you are stingy about giving food some 
one may kill you.” Indeed I think we shall have to 
admit that in the majority of cases none of the Winne- 
bago virtues or actions are extolled for their own sake, 
and that in every instance they have reference to and 
derive their validity from whatever relation they pos- 
sess to the preponderatingly practical needs of human 
intercourse. “Don’t be a fool,” precept 5 seems to im- 
ply, “and treat your wife badly, because if you do, 
you’ll run the risk of having the woman’s protecting 
deity, the Earth, punish you.” I should not even be 
surprised if, in concrete instances, the moral was fur- 
ther emphasized by giving examples of how men were 
punished who had abused their wives. We are fairly 
obviously told to be guided by the practical side of the 
question, i.e., take no risks and get the most out of 
every good action you perform. 

Now all this sounds extremely cynical and practical. 
But we must be fair and not too hasty in drawing our 
inferences. First of all it should be asked if the 
Winnebago in actual practice give the impression of 

RIGHT AND WRONG 

69 

always being guided by egotistical and ulterior motives, 
and second it should be bome in mind that if we can 
really prove that the ideal of human conduct is on 
a high plane, we need not concern ourselves needlessly 
with the apparent nature of the motives prompting 
individual acts. As a matter of fact primitive people 
are much less guided by consciously selfish and ulterior 
motives than we are, not because of any innate superi- 
ority over ourselves in this regard but because of 
the conditions under which they live. But, quite 
apart from this consideration, ought we in fact to lay 
undue stress on illustrations following what is clearly 
a general principle? Are we not after all, in our illus- 
trations, merely dealing with a statement of what 
happens when some general principle of the ethical 
code is transgressed, and not primarily with an ex- 
planation of the principle? I do not feel, therefore, that 
even those instances which seem superficially to cor- 
roborate the prevalent assumption of primitive man’s 
inability to formulate an abstract ethical creed, ac- 
tually bear out, when more carefully examined, the 
contention of its advocates. 

Now the question of the capacity of the Winnebago 
to formulate an ethical code in a fairly abstract fash- 
ion is of fundamental importance for the thesis of this 
chapter and that is why I am laying so much stress 
on it; for if it were not true our precepts would have 
to be regarded in the nature of mere proverbs and 
practical folk wisdom, as nothing higher indeed than 
crystallized maxims of conduct. 

70 PRIMITIVE MAN AS PHILOSOPHER 

There are, however, in our list certain precepts where 
the abstract formulation is undeniable, where, in fact, 
reference to the particular context in which the pre- 
cepts occur not only shows no secondary concrete 
significance, but, on the contrary, a reenforcement of 
their abstract and general connotation. In precept i 
the full statement is this: “If you hear of a person 
traveling through your country and you want to see 
him, prepare your table and send for him. In this 
manner you will do good and it is always good to do 
good, it is said.” Similarly in precept 2. Here it is in 
the course of a speech delivered at a ceremony that the 
phrase occurs: “what does life consist of but love?” 
“All the members of the clan have given me counsel,” 
the speaker says, “and all the women and children have 
pleaded in my behalf with the spirits. What love 
that was! And of what does life consist but of 
love?” 

Here we have no concrete practical implications. The 
statements are meant to be taken as general propo- 
sitions. They are very remarkable enunciations and 
we may legitimately draw from their existence the 
inference that even in so-called “primitive” tribes, cer- 
tain individuals have apparently felt within themselves 
the same moral truths that are regarded as the glory 
of our great moralists, and that they have formulated 
these truths in general terms. 

So much for the actual formulation. What, how- 
ever, does this Winnebago creed tell us about the ideal 
of conduct itself? Does it teach us that love and for- 

RIGHT AND WRONG 

7i 

bearance are to be practiced for their own sake and 
is the love of which they speak identical with or even 
comparable to our idea of love? 

When a Western European speaks of love, forbear- 
ance, remorse, sorrow, etc., he generally understands 
by these terms some quality belonging to an individual 
and for the possession of which he is to be honored 
and praised. We do not ask whether the love or the 
virtue in question is of an intelligent nature, whether 
it does harm or good, or whether we have any right 
to it. Who among us would speak of an individual 
not being entitled to his remorse or sorrow? We as- 
sume that the mere expression of remorse and sorrow 
is somehow ethically praiseworthy. If we see a man 
of manifestly weak character but of a loving disposi- 
tion, even if his actions are inconsistent with a true love 
for his fellow men, insist that he loves them, while we 
may condemn him, we are inclined to overlook much 
in recognition of his enunciation of . the principle 
that love of mankind is the highest ideal of life. In 
much the same way do we look upon any manifestation 
of sincere remorse or sorrow. We simply regard love, 
remorse, sorrow, etc., as inalienable rights of man, 
quite independent of any right, as it were, he may 
possess to express them. In other words, the Western 
European ethics is frankly egocentric and concerned 
primarily with self-expression. The object toward 
which love, remorse, repentance, sorrow, is directed is 
secondary. Christian theology has elevated them all 
to the rank of virtues as such, and enjoins their ob- 

72 PRIMITIVE MAN AS PHILOSOPHER 

servance upon us because they are manifestations of 
God’s, if not of man’s, way. 

Among primitive people this is emphatically not 
true. Ethics there is based upon behavior. No mere 
enunciation of an ideal of love, no matter how often 
and sincerely repeated, would gain an individual either 
admiration, sympathy, or respect. Every ethical pre- 
cept must be submitted to the touchstone of conduct. 
The Winnebago moralist would insist that we have no 
right to preach an ideal of love or to claim that we 
love, unless we have lived up to its practical implica- 
tions. That is the fundamental basis of all primitive 
education and is unusually well expressed among the 
Winnebago. “When you are bringing up children,” 
runs the injunction to a young mother, “do not imagine 
that you are taking their part if you merely speak of 
loving them. Let them see it for themselves; let them 
know what love is by seeing you give away things to 
the poor. Then they will see your good deeds and then 
they will know whether you have been telling the truth 
or not.” An exactly similar attitude is taken toward 
remorse. “If you have always loved a person, then 
when he dies you will have the right to feel sorrow.” 
No amount of money spent upon the funeral of a 
person with whom you had been quarreling will make 
amends. 

But it is not merely love, remorse, etc., to which 
you have no right as such. You have equally no right 
to the glory attendant upon joining a war party unless 
it is done in the right spirit. In the document from 

RIGHT AND WRONG 

73 

which most of our statements have been taken — the 
autobiography of a Winnebago Indian — a man is rep- 
resented as being about to embark on a war party 
because his wife has run away from him. “Such a 
man,” the author insists, “is simply throwing away 
his life. If you want to go on the warpath, do not 
go because your wife has been taken away from you 
but because you feel courageous enough to go.” 

In consonance with such an attitude is the differen- 
tiation in the degree of love insisted upon. Love 
everybody, it is demanded, but do not love them all 
equally. Above all do not love your neighbor as you 
love those of your own blood. “Only if you are 
wicked,” the injunction says, “will you love other 
people’s children more than your own.” The injunc- 
tion certainly says that we must love everybody, but 
this must be humanly understood, and humanly under- 
stood you cannot, of course, love every one alike. The 
Winnebago would contend that such a statement would 
be untrue and that any attempt to put it into practice 
must manifestly lead to insincerity. It would, more- 
over, be definitely unjust in that it might make for 
the neglect of those whom primarily you ought to love 
most. Here the difference between the attitude of 
primitive man and that of Western Europe is most 
clearly brought out. According to primitive standards 
you deserve neither credit nor discredit, neither praise 
nor condemnation, for giving expression to a normal 
human emotion. It is the manner in which, in your 
relations to the other members of the tribe, you 

74 PRIMITIVE MAN AS PHILOSOPHER 

distribute this emotion and the degree to which it is 
felt by others to be sincere, that calls forth respect and 
admiration. It is wicked to love other people’s chil- 
dren as much as your own; it is wicked to love your 
wife to the detriment of your family and yourself; 
it is wicked to love your enemy while he is your enemy. 
An excellent illustration of this conviction — that it is 
fundamentally wicked and unintelligent to make the 
expression of even a socially commendable emotion like 
love an end in itself — is contained in the following 
passage taken from the autobiography quoted above: 

When you get married do not make an idol of the woman 
you marry; do not worship her. If you worship a woman 
she will insist upon greater and greater worship as time 
goes on. It may be that when you get married you will 
listen to the voice of your wife and you will refuse to 
go on the warpath. Why should you thus run the risk of 
being ridiculed? After a while you will not be allowed to 
go to a feast. In time even your sisters will not think 
anything of you. (You will become jealous) and after your 
jealousy has developed to its highest pitch your wife will 
run away. You have let her know by your actions that you 
worship a woman and one alone. As a result she will run 
away. On account of your incessant annoyance she will 
run away from you. If you think that a woman (your wife) 
is the only person you ought to love, you have humbled 
yourself. You have made the woman suffer and have made 
her feel unhappy. You will be known as a bad man and no 
one will want to marry you again. (Perhaps afterwards) 

RIGHT AND WRONG 

75 

when people go on the warpath you will join them because 
you feel unhappy at your wife’s desertion. You will then, 
however, simply be throwing away your life. 

A complete insight is afforded by this example into 
every phase of Winnebago ethics. You are to love 
your wife, for instance, but it is to be kept within 
personally and socially justifiable limits. If not, the 
whole adjustment of an individual to his environment 
is disturbed and injustice is eventually done to every 
one concerned — to his family, to his wife, and to him- 
self. Marked exaggeration and disproportion would, 
from a practical point of view, be unthinkable in a 
primitive community. The result, in the hypothetical 
case we discussed above, is clear: loss of life and sui- 
cide, and possibly even the dragging of innocent people 
into your calamity — those, for instance, who are going 
on a warpath properly prepared spiritually. 

The psychology expressed here is unimpeachable. 
To have analyzed the situation so completely and so 
profoundly and to have made this analysis the basis 
of social behavior is not a slight achievement, and this 
achievement is to be evaluated all the more highly 
because the Winnebago was predominantly a warrior 
culture. The objectivity displayed is altogether un- 
usual, the husband’s, the wife’s, the tribal viewpoints, 
all are presented fairly and clearly. 

CHAPTER VII 

THE IDEAL MAN 

I N the preceding chapter we were afforded a glimpse 
into primitive man’s idea of right and wrong. We 
saw that it hinged largely on his analysis of and atti- 
tude toward the individual and toward personality, a 
subject which, in my opinion, has been misunderstood 
by most students of primitive life. We pointed out 
that the purely egotistical expression of an emotion or 
an instinct was regarded as ethically and socially rep- 
rehensible. Yet it must not be inferred from this 
that no such expression existed or that, in its minor 
aspects, it was as rigorously condemned as the exam- 
ple, given in the previous chapter, of the dangers 
attendant upon idolizing one’s wife, might lead us to 
suspect. On the contrary the direct expression of 
human frailties was accepted as inevitable, something 
to be regarded as neither admirable nor the reverse. 
The desire for self-assertion, the right to be admired, 
the right to swagger and boast, to glory in one’s 
achievements, these are all definitely to be sought. No 
one is to hide his light under a bushel. This is very 
concretely expressed among all primitive peoples by 
their magical “medicines.” Among the Winnebago 
there is a certain Paint Medicine which makes its 

76 

THE IDEAL MAN 

77 

possessor rich and beloved by all. One enviable medi- 
cine can even be used when its possessor is in a crowd 
in which he would normally be completely submerged, 
and then “people will notice only him and will con- 
sider him a great man.” Such an ambition is not 
considered as in the least culpable. True, you run the 
risk of being laughed at, but that is a risk you take 
under all circumstances. Apart, then, from the fear 
of ridicule, you may indulge in all the normal cravings 
you wish. If a man chooses to begin an account of his 
life — as in the autobiography to which so much refer- 
ence has already been made — by informing the reader 
that just before his birth his mother was told that she 
was about to give birth to a man who would not be an 
ordinary individual, comment upon it is unnecessary. 

You have, in short, a right to indulge in any action 
that does not involve harm or danger to some one else. 
You may accordingly indulge in as much gossiping as 
you desire to and make as many slanderous and sar- 
castic remarks about other people as you dare. Primi- 
tive people are indeed among the most persistent and 
inveterate of gossips. Contestants for the same honors, 
possessors of the sacred rites of the tribe, the author- 
ized narrators of legends, all leave you in little doubt 
as to the character and proficiency of their colleagues. 
“Ignoramus,” “braggart,” and not infrequently “liar” 
are liberally bandied about. 

The first impression an ethnologist receives is likely 
to be quite bewildering. It is not at all to be marveled 
at then that under these conditions some observers 

78 PRIMITIVE MAN AS PHILOSOPHER 

have drawn the conclusion that not love, kindliness, 
and forbearance, but envy, slander, and hate are the 
dominant atmosphere of a primitive community. 

It does not, however, require a long sojourn among 
them to realize that the unkind and slanderous remarks 
so frequently bandied about do not engender feuds and 
that often the principals concerned are on very good 
terms. The explanation of this interesting phenome- 
non is not to be sought in any suppression or sublima- 
tion, but in the unconscious acceptance of a theory of 
freedom of expression for normal human feelings and 
a refusal to regard expression of opinion as implying 
anything beyond the significance it happens to possess 
at a particular moment. Such remarks are, in other 
words, not to be taken as representing final or general- 
ized estimates which are to be implicitly assumed as 
applying whenever one speaks of a colleague or com- 
petitor. What it comes to at bottom is simply this: 
that every individual has the same right to indulge in 
slander, gossipj outbursts of conceit, jealousy, etc., 
that he has to give vent to the more respectable emo- 
tions. Once having given this naive relief to his sensi- 
tiveness, jealousy, or what not, he forgets all about it, 
not, however, in the manner of a child who forgets 
because he can be easily distracted, but because he 
attaches no ethical evaluation to the expression of such 
emotions. 

Primitive people thus accept the expression of all 
human emotions as normal. But they go much far- 
ther; they frankly accept the fact that this expression 

THE IDEAL MAN 

79 

is specifically different in different individuals. Each 
man, woman and child stands by himself. To use 
psychoanalytical terminology, there is no identifica- 
tion. It is this absence of identification that explains 
primitive man’s capacity for seeing human relations 
and understanding human conduct so objectively. 
Now this respect for and acceptance of personality 
brings with it an insistence upon individual respon- 
sibility. 

The respect for personality is shown in a number of 
ways. For instance in the example given on page 74, 
the husband in his increasing love and jealousy for 
his wife is represented as watching her all the time, 
and herein is seen a definite infringement of her indi- 
viduality. Even where the corporate interests of the 
tribe are involved, as in the case of the tribal hunt or 
the tribal warpath among the Dakota Indians, the 
personality of the members of the expedition is still 
respected. On such occasions the interests of the joint 
undertaking demand a definite restriction of personal 
liberty. Were a man to transgress the rules then set 
up, his tent would be burned and his personal property 
destroyed. If, however, he submitted to this treatment 
without resistance, then subsequently he would be 
given a new tent and new property equivalent to, if not 
slightly higher in value than, that which had been 
taken from him. 

This respect for individuality is extended to the chil- 
dren as well. We saw on page 72 that a child was not 
supposed to accept a mother’s professions of love as 

8o PRIMITIVE MAN AS PHILOSOPHER 

having any intrinsic meaning unless her conduct har- 
monized with them. This assumption, that a child has 
a personality and is not simply to be identified with 
its parents, is well illustrated by two incidents wit- 
nessed by the author. On one occasion, wishing to 
purchase a pair of child’s moccasins which he had seen 
in a certain house, he approached the father of the 
child on the matter but was told that the moccasins 
belonged to the child. When pressed, the father 
agreed to ask the child — I believe it was about five 
years old — whether he cared to part with them. The 
whole transaction took place in a perfectly serious 
manner. There was not the slightest flippancy about it. 
The child refused and that ended the matter. 

On another occasion a very small child, about two 
or three years old, managed to creep into a ceremonial 
lodge while a very sacred ceremony was in progress. 
I watched the scene very carefully, inquisitive to see 
what would happen. No excitement ensued nor was 
there any scolding and loss of temper as would have 
inevitably been the case among us. Within a very 
short time and in a manner very difficult to describe — 
so subtle and full of understanding was it — the child 
was removed without any offense to its dignity and 
with no shriekings or commotion. Such examples, I 
feel certain, can be multiplied indefinitely by experi- 
enced and observant ethnologists. I presume that it 
is this same respect for the child’s individuality that 
has led, among the Winnebago at least, to the belief in 
the ineffectualness of corporal punishment, or of ad- 

THE IDEAL MAN 

81 

monition. “If you have a child,” the injunction runs, 
“do not strike it. If you hit a child you will merely 
put more naughtiness into it.” It is also said that 
women should not lecture their children, that they 
nerely make them bad by admonition. 

The respect for individuality has another side and 
this side has led to the doctrine that each man alone 
is responsible for his own conduct. Parents can only 
inculcate an ideal and possibly describe the means for 
its accomplishment. They can do no more. “If you 
do all we have told you,” a Winnebago child is told 
in effect, “you will lead a happy and prosperous life.” 
“When the Indians have a child whom they love very 
much, they preach to him so that he may never become 
acquainted with the things that are not right, and that 
he may never do any wrong. Then if, later in life, he 
does any wrong he will do so with the clear knowledge 
of the consequences of his action.” 

According to the Winnebago ethical ideal, then, a 
person must rely upon himself, and it behooves him 
consequently to prepare himself properly for the battle 
of life. Life, as the Winnebago are always fond of 
putting it, is not a broad, straight path but a road full 
of narrow passages and it is the task of every indi- 
vidual to safely surmount these. Only in this way 
can he hope to obtain the two things that men prize 
most in the world — happiness and prosperity, and the 
esteem of their fellow men. The deities alone can pro- 
vide you with the adequate means for this, and it is 
essential, therefore, to get into rapport with them as 

82 PRIMITIVE MAN 4S PHILOSOPHER 

soon as possible. But — so the Winnebago theory de- 
mands — the deities help you only to help yourself and 
they aid you only upon definite conditions. These 
conditions, we shall soon see, throw a most illuminating 
light upon Winnebago ethics. They are well known 
and frequently discussed by the moralists and devoutly 
religious people in the tribe. The ordinary man may 
very well say that the simple act of prayer by itself 
suffices; the moralists would never subscribe to any 
such doctrine. They insist upon a definite inward 
purification, a reverend and a humble spirit, persistent 
effort, strength of character, the saving grace of a sense 
of life’s realities and, finally, a knowledge of oneself. 

Let us turn to the first point, inward purification. 
How essential it is the following fasting experience of a 
Winnebago will show: 

So that he might know the spirits, grandfather Djoben- 
angiwinxga fasted and thirsted himself to the point of death 
(i.e., refrained from drinking). He made himself pitiable 
in their sight. At first he fasted four nights and the Night- 
Spirits came to him, with mighty sounds they came. Soon 
they stood before him and spoke. “Human being, you 
have thirsted yourself to death and we are going to bless 
you for that reason. We who speak are the Night-Spirits.” 
They blessed him with life and with success on the war- 
path. Then he looked at them and he saw that they were 
small birds and had fooled him. 

Then once again was his heart sore. In despair he said, 
“Well, if I have to, I’ll die fasting!” So he fasted again 

THE IDEAL MAN 

83 

and once again he rubbed charcoal on his face and fasted 
for six nights this time. Then once again, from the east, 
did the Night-Spirits come. Then he looked at them and 
in his heart he wondered whether these were indeed the 
Night-Spirits. But they were not. He was being fooled. 
This time, however, instead of feeling sad, he said, “I don’t 
care what happens: I am willing to die in order to get a 
blessing.” 

Then for the third time they fooled him. 

He had, at first, thought during his fasting that just to 
spite the spirits he would fast again but now (as he pre- 
pared to fast for the fourth time) he rubbed charcoal on his 
face and wept bitterly. Both hands contained tobacco and 
he stood in the direction from which the Night-Spirits had 
come and, weeping, he put himself in the most abject 
condition . 1 

Here we see a man possessed of tremendous am- 
bition, approaching his ordeal in a very matter-of-fact 
manner. After his first rebuff we see him exclaiming, 
“I will die but I shall obtain what I want.” Yet all 
he can think of is to continue the externals — fasting 
and dabbing his face with charcoal. He receives a 
second rebuff but still learns nothing. Only after his 
third rebuff does he realize that his inward approach 
has been all wrong. Only then when “his heart ached 
to its very depths” does he attain the necessary inward 
purification. 

“Paul Radin, 37 th Report of the Bureau of American Ethnology, 
pp. 477-481. 

84 PRIMITIVE MAN AS PHILOSOPHER 

Humility of spirit and seriousness of intention are 
thus regarded as the essential prerequisites in all un- 
dertakings. This is particularly true of all things con- 
nected with religion. Boasting, pride, conceit find no 
place here no matter how great the tolerance extended 
to them on ordinary occasions. Children are continu- 
ally reminded of the importance of humility and it is 
constantly brought home to them by their elders. In 
the autobiography quoted before, there is an excellent 
illustration. The author of that document tells how a 
feast was given ostensibly for him and his brother, 
who were fasting at the time. “That night the feast 
was given. There, however, our pride received a fall, 
for although the feast was supposedly given in our 
honor we were placed on one side of the main partici- 
pants.” This same man himself states that during his 
fasting he had never really tried to render himself 
pitiable in the sight of the spirits, that he had never 
been truly lowly at heart. 

The clearest demonstration of the worth of humility 
is naturally to be found in the prayers uttered at the 
various ceremonies. There humility and modesty have 
practically become ritualistic formulae. “The small 
amount of life you have granted me,” is the modest 
claim. In a similar humble spirit they say, “We shall 
perhaps be able to sing only one song but even if one 
knows only one song and takes great pains about 
singing it, perhaps it will suffice to propitiate the 
spirits.” 

The finest and deepest expression of this humility 

THE IDEAL MAN 

85 

before the deities and the world is, however, to be 
found in the prayer offered up at one of the funeral 
wakes. The ghost of the departed is represented as 
coming into the presence of the arbiter of the dead and 
she — it is a woman — asks him what he had been told 
to demand of her when he left the world. Thereupon 
he responds and says, “O great-grandmother, as I 
listened to my beloved relatives they said very little 
indeed. Four requests I was asked to make and the 
first is this : I was to ask for life, that the flames from 
the lodge fires might go straight upward. Yet they 
would be satisfied if at my departure the flames 
merely swayed to and fro.” 2 

Seriousness of intention has in its turn developed 
into a definite theory of concentration. Frivolity be- 
comes an unpardonable sin. The Winnebago have a 
verb which means “to concentrate one’s mind” and 
this concentration of mind has come to be absolutely 
essential for every prayer and rite — for every under- 
taking, in fact. For the priest and thinker, failure 
simply signifies that this fixation of the mind upon the 
object to be obtained, to the utter exclusion of every- 
thing else, did not take place. A member of one of 
the main ceremonies of the Winnebago thus describes 
what is implied by this “concentration.” “Not once 
did I speak; not once did I move around; not once did 
I change my position. Just as I had been told to sit 
so I remained sitting. Not once did I, by chance, per- 
mit my glances to wander from side to side. This was 

3 Ibid., p. 153. 

86 PRIMITIVE MAN AS PHILOSOPHER 

a holy ceremony and I was bashful in its presence.” 3 
By the deities in turn this concentration is accepted 
as an indication of complete sincerity and of true 
perseverance. 

The strength of character and wisdom which is in- 
sisted upon as the highest ideal of life is even more 
convincingly illustrated by the symbolical interpre- 
tation of the Journey of Life as recounted by this same 
tribe in its principal ceremony, the Medicine Dance. 
The highest ideal of a devout member of this ceremony 
was to lead an upright life, to go through life bravely 
without a whimper, bearing slander and misrepresenta- 
tion without stooping to correct them, and enduring 
loss upon loss without discouragement. The myth in 
question is so beautiful and the symbolism of so re- 
markable and elevated a kind that I shall quote it at 
some length: 

My son, as you travel along this road (the road of life), 
do not doubt it. If you do you will be unhappy and you 
will injure yourself. But if you do everything I tell you 
well, it will benefit you greatly. 

My son, the first thing you come to as you travel along 
this road will be a ravine, extending to the very ends of 
the world, on both sides. It will look as though it could 
not possibly be crossed. When you get there you will 
think to yourself, “Grandfather said that I was, neverthe- 
less, to pass across.” Plunge right through and you will get 
to the other side. 

‘Paul Radin, “Personal Reminiscences of a Winnebago Indian,” 
Journal of American Folklore, XXVI, pp. 293-318. 

THE IDEAL MAN 

87 

Now this ravine means that sometimes in life you will 
lose a child and thoughts of death will come to you. But 
if you pay attention to my teachings you will be able to go 
right on and find the road of the lodge on the other side. 
If you do not try to go beyond, if you get frightened and 
dwell upon your loss too much, this will be your grave. 

After you have crossed the ravine you will see the foot- 
steps of the medicine-men who have gone before you marked 
very plainly in the road. Step into them and you will feel 
good. Then as you go along, you will come to an impene- 
trable wood of stickers, thorns, and weeds. You will not see 
how you can possibly get around them and then you will 
remember that your grandfather said that you would be 
able to penetrate this brushwood too. So this, likewise, you 
will pass. 

The impenetrable brushwood means death. Someone you 
have loved greatly, but not your wife, will die. You must 
try to get through this obstacle, not get frightened, and not 
dwell upon your hardship too much. Otherwise this will 
be your grave. 

As you pass along the road, evil birds will continually 
din into your ears and will cast their excrement upon you. 
It will stick to your body. Now do not brush it off and do 
not pay any attention to it. If you paid attention to it you 
might forget yourself and brush it off. That would not be 
right; life is not to be obtained in this manner. 

The evil birds have the following meaning. The fact that 
you have joined the medicine lodge signifies that you would 
like to lead a good life. Now as soon as you have joined 
the lodge, the work of evil tattlers will begin. They will 

88 PRIMITIVE MAN AS PHILOSOPHER 

say that you have done things contrary to the teachings of 
the lodge. Perhaps a bit of bird’s excrement will fall on 
you. What of it? Don’t brush it off without thought. 
Some people might even claim that you had said that the 
lodge was no good. However even then you must not forget 
yourself and blurt out, “Who said that?” and get angry. 
Keep quiet and hold your peace. 

As you go along, you will come to a great fire encircling 
the earth and practically impossible to cross. It will be so 
near that it will scorch you. Remember then that your 
grandfather hajd said that you would be able to pass it. 
Plunge through it. Soon you will find yourself on the 
other side and nothing will have happened to you. 

Now this great fire means death. Your wife will die. 
Go through this as well as you can and do not get dis- 
couraged. This fire will be the worst thing that you have 
to go through. You will have been living happily and then, 
without warning, your wife will die. There you will re- 
main with your children. Bear in mind, however, what 
your grandfather said and plunge straight through. On 
the other side you will find the footprints of the medecine- 
men. 

After a while you will come to tremendous perpendicular 
bluffs which hardly seem surmountable. Think again what 
your grandfather said and you will then soon find yourself 
on the other side of these bluffs and quite safe. 

These bluffs mean death. As you travel along the road 
of life you will find yourself alone. All your relatives, all 
your loved ones, are dead. You will begin to think to 
yourself, “Why, after all, am I living?” You will want 

THE IDEAL MAN 

89 

to die. Now this, my grandson, is the place where most 
encouragement is given for it is here most needed. This is 
the most difficult of all the places you will come to. Keep 
in the footsteps of the medicine-men and you will be safe. 
The teachings of the lodge are the only road; they alone 
will enable you to pass this point safely.* 

Nothing higher than this can possibly be preached. 
No manlier, more profound, and wiser envisaging of 
life has come from the mouths of the world’s great 
moral teachers. Nor is the influence of these ethical 
principles on character formation to be dismissed too 
lightly on the plea that, after all, they represented an 
ideal only and that they had but little practical bear- 
ing. That we are dealing with an ideal rarely lived 
up to goes without saying; that, however, it had no 
appreciable influence would be manifestly unfair to 
assume. Of one ceremony a Winnebago told me, 
“This ceremony molded me. I paid the most careful 
attention to it. I worshiped it in the best way I knew 
how. I was careful about everything in my life. A 
holy life it was I sought. Most earnestly did I pray 
to be reincarnated. This ceremony was made with 
love.” 5 

But inward purification, a humble and a contrite 
heart, strength of character, etc., these are all, let me 
again stress it, not to be regarded as virtues in them- 
selves. They are evaluated as virtues because they 

4 Crashing Thunder , pp. 105 ff. 

0 ‘‘Personal Reminiscences of a Winnebago Indian,” Journal of 
American Folklore , XXVI, pp. 293-318. 

90 PRIMITIVE MAN AS PHILOSOPHER 

are, literally speaking, the best and most adequate 
preparation for the proper understanding of life’s 
realities and of one’s own powers. Happiness is ob- 
tained by the proper relation of man to the deities and 
to his fellow men, and the first was interpreted, among 
the Winnebago at least, as being simply another way 
of expressing his relation to his personal values. Em- 
braced within these was his understanding of his own 
capacities. 

We have pointed out before that complete freedom 
in the expression of the normal human egotistical emo- 
tions was permitted without hindrance. But, it will be 
justly contended, are not boasting, prestige hunting, 
desire for power as such, conceit, jealousy, etc., in 
direct opposition to the religious-ethical ideal just 
described? Quite definitely so. Indeed, I am fairly 
well convinced that the religious-ethical is meant to 
be a direct challenge and criticism of the purely mun- 
dane ideal. We should be careful not to fall into an 
obvious error here due to our Christian ideals. The 
sage’s and the ordinary man’s viewpoint are opposed, 
not because the one is morally superior to the other, 
not because the one is good and the other is bad, but 
because the one is more likely to help in the attainment 
of that very object so ardently desired — happiness and 
prosperity. This, the Winnebago and probably all 
primitive peoples would contend, the ethical-religious 
ideal is more likely to do because it emphasizes the 
cardinal fact of life, the sense of proportion which 
alone saves man from destruction and misery. 

THE IDEAL MAN 

9i 

It is the sense of proportion that dominates all primi- 
tive life in spite of the superficial impression to the 
contrary. The exaggeration and license apparent in 
many rites, ceremonies, and customs prove to be, when 
more carefully studied, adventitious and do not touch 
the core of the matter. It might even be said that they 
are felt to be in conscious opposition to the guiding 
principles of conduct. Individuals who do not observe 
the proper sense of proportion have very clearly a rec- 
ognized place in the life of the people, particularly in 
their religious life, but such individuals rarely become 
the standards to be followed. I remember very well a 
Winnebago commenting upon the religious frenzy of a 
certain participant in a ceremony, who in his ecstasy 
danced until he fell exhausted to the ground. “It is 
good,” he said, “to have some people like that but it 
would be very bad if most people were like him.” 

It is thus the insistent admonition of the wise men 
and of the experienced elders that man learn the limits 
imposed by nature, and above all that man learn the 
limitations to his own powers. Neglect of this brings 
one into collision with reality, and a collision with 
reality means lack of success and often death. We 
shall, in the subsequent chapter, see how our failure 
properly to understand and sense the limits imposed by 
reality and our failure to intelligently evaluate our 
own capacities are at the bottom of the Winnebago 
conception of tragedy and doom. The methods the 
Winnebago, at least, take to understand both realities 
are effectively depicted in their fasting experiences. 

92 PRIMITIVE MAN AS PHILOSOPHER 

Fasting among them begins at the age of five or six 
and lasts till eleven or thirteen. It is naturally, in 
view of the extreme youth of the faster, entirely con- 
trolled by the parents or grandparents. Many a gift 
of the deities is rejected by a wise and solicitous 
father or grandfather because it is beyond his idea of 
the child’s capacities. He does not, of course, always 
put it that way. The rejection is in fact generally 
couched in a religious phraseology. Sometimes the 
father will say, “It is too sacred”; at other times, “The 
spirits are trying to deceive you.” As an instructive 
example let me give the fasting experience of a young 
girl to whom a very sacred deity had appeared, but a 
deity whose gifts often entailed death. In answer to 
her father’s question she relates how the deity had come 
to her. 

“In four days he told me he would appear to me. ‘The 
day on which I appear to you will be a perfect day. Now 
whatever you wish to make for yourself you may. You 
will never be in want of anything for you can make what- 
ever you wish out of my body. With all this I bless you 
for you have made yourself suffer very much and my heart 
has been torn with pity for you. I bless you with life 
and with the right to transmit this blessing to your 
descendants.’ 

“All this, father, the spirit said to me.” 

“Daughter, it is not good,” answered the father, “the 
spirit is trying to deceive you. Do not accept it. He 
will never bestow upon you what he has promised.” 

THE IDEAL MAN 

93 

“All right, father, but let me at least give him offerings. 
I will not accept his blessings because you forbid it.” 

Then after four days she took her offerings to the place 
where she was to meet the spirit. “(My father) said you 
were not a good spirit,” (the girl said). “He is right,” 
answered the spirit, “for one side of my body is not good; 
yet the other side is. I was created in that manner.” 

Then the woman looked toward the lake and saw a tree 
standing in the water. This the spirit climbed and around 
this he wrapped himself. Then he took a tooth and shot the 
tree and knocked it down. “This is what you would have 
been able to do,” said the spirit to her. “Everyone would 
have respected you greatly and you would have been able to 
cure weak and nervous people. But you would not listen 
to what I promised you. You refused it.” 8 

In another fasting experience, the gift is definitely 
rejected because it is too great. The father tells his 
son, “My son, this is really too great. If you accept 
this blessing you will not leave any human beings 
alive. You will always want to go on the warpath.” 7 

Let us now turn to the formulation of their doctrine 
of man’s relation to his fellow men. This is most 
clearly expressed in the insistence on moderation and 
proportion, inward and outward, in the consideration 
for the comfort of others, and in the refusal to inflict 
one’s own troubles upon one’s neighbors. “Never 
overdo anything,” a father counsels his son. 

•37th Report of the Bureau of American Ethnology, pp. 302-304. 

7 Ibid., pp. 299-300. 

94 PRIMITIVE MAN AS PHILOSOPHER 

Perhaps their ideal, however, is best seen in the 
definition of what constitutes an upright and a virtuous 
man. This same informant in another passage de- 
scribes his brother-in-law in the following fashion: 
“He was a good man; no one did he dislike; never did 
he steal; never did he fight.” In the semi-historical 
account of the origin of the most famous of the Winne- 
bago rituals, the Medicine Dance, the founders are de- 
scribed as looking around for new members to initiate. 
And whom do they select? Good men, i.e., those who 
are righteous, wise, and kind-hearted. And as youth 
is unstable, young people are excluded from the ranks 
of the truly virtuous. As the tale states, the founders 
never selected a young man but one who was slightly 
beyond middle age. * 

This picture of the ideal man would not be complete, 
however, unless one other trait be added, namely that 
of forgetting one’s self in the interest of others. This 
ideal is given in their demands on what the chief of the 
tribe ought to be. “He must be a man of well- 
balanced temper, not easily provoked, of good habits. 
If he sees a man or a woman or a child pass by he is 
to call to them and give them food to eat, for these 
are his brothers and sisters.” 8 
It goes without saying that people who have arrived 
at ethical ideas as elevated as the above would have 
laid particular emphasis upon self-control, particu- 
larly in its bearing on the possible injustice and dis- 
comfort which the lack of it inflicts upon one’s fellow 

8 Ibid., p. 320. 

THE IDEAL MAN 

95 

men. While it is true that every person has a right 
to self-expression, this self-expression must not be such 
as to cause discomfort to other people, and it most 
emphatically must not involve other people in one’s 
misfortune. Even when some one in one’s family has 
died, a situation where one might expect a lenient and 
sympathetic attitude toward any expression of grief, 
restraint is enjoined upon the mourner for two charac- 
teristic reasons; first, because no one has a right to 
inflict his personal sorrows upon others and second, 
because it is so utterly useless. At one of the funeral 
rites of a Winnebago the mourner, a woman, was ad- 
dressed as follows: 

“My sister, it is claimed that it is best for a person 
not to weep, that a widow should not mourn too much, 
for then people will make fun of her, and also for the 
fact that, having children, she must for their sake 
look forward to life. Now there is nothing amusing in 
what I am going to say (although it may sound so) 
that, namely, we should not cry on such an occasion as 
to-day, but, on the contrary, keep up a good spirit. 
I do not mean that I am glad that my brother-in-law 
has died. But if you were to weep, some one might 
come and say to you that it behooves you more to 
show him your teeth than your tears — that you should 
smile. 

“And again it is said that one should not cry, for 
when a body is laid in the ground then there is no more 
hope of its ever returning to this earth again.” 9 

* Ibid., p. iso. 

96 PRIMITIVE MAN AS PHILOSOPHER 

At this same ceremony one man arose and addressed 
the visitors to the following effect: “It is said that we 
should not weep aloud and you will, therefore, not 
hear any of us making any utterings of sorrow. And 
even although we weep silently we shall smile upon all 
those who look at us. We beg of you all, consequently, 
that should you find us happy in mood, not to think 
any the worse of it.” 10 Additional examples are 
hardly needed. 

With this demonstration of intelligent self-control 
the system of ethics is complete. As embodied in the 
precepts and the behavior of the moralists among 
primitive people, it teaches the highest type of conduct 
that man can attain to anywhere — the right of every 
man to happiness and to freedom of expression in con- 
sonance with his particular capacities and tempera- 
ment; the recognition of the limitations imposed upon 
this freedom of personal expression by human rela- 
tionships; and, finally, the full responsibility each man 
must assume for his actions. That such a code, from 
its very nature, was never fully lived up to will be 
manifest to all. Indeed what we witness is the constant 
conflict between the principle of full self-expression 
and the ideal virtues such as self-control, moderation, 
and true self-knowledge. But this conflict, too, was 
recognized and in its turn came to be the basis for a 
very interesting formulation, by the more philosophi- 
cally inclined, of the tragic sense of life. 

“Ibid., p. 151. 

CHAPTER VIII 

THE PHILOSOPHY OF LIFE: FATE, DEATH AND 
RESIGNATION 

I N the two previous chapters we were able not only 
to demonstrate that among primitive people moral- 
ists and moral philosophers were to be encountered 
but we were actually able to see them at work — enun- 
ciating ethical maxims, constructing systems of 
morality, even indulging in the discussions of quasi- 
philosophical niceties for their own sake. General 
principles were formulated in abstract and logical 
terms. The time-honored contention that primitive 
man cannot think abstractly is thus shown to be an- 
other of those superficial generalizations left over by 
the crude evolutionary assumptions of the eighteen- 
seventies. For a final and definitive refutation of 
this hoary contention I refer the reader to Chapters 
XIII and XV. We frankly admit that only a few 
people in each community were capable of abstract 
thinking and that a still smaller number were inter- 
ested in the formulation of ethical creeds. But the 
same holds, of course, for ourselves, only that among 
us the terminology of abstract thought has become 
far more generally disseminated. 

We have thus seen that the higher natures among 
primitive people can have a true moral sense and an 

97 

98 PRIMITIVE MAN AS PHILOSOPHER 

intuitive insight into right and wrong. That they can 
also possess true wisdom, that they can envisage life 
in a critical and half-pessimistic manner, that they can 
face fortune and misfortune objectively and with 
equanimity, that they can in fact accept life in all its 
realities and still enjoy it, for that the reader is not 
prepared any more than is the ethnologist who dis- 
covers it. And yet there is no escaping recognition 
of the fact, for it is borne in upon him in numerous 
songs, speeches, myths, and proverbs and is to be 
encountered in every tribe in the world. It is to prov- 
ing this contention that I shall devote the following 
two chapters. 

In order to disarm all criticism and to make out as 
authentic a case as possible, I shall select my data 
almost exclusively from the direct evidence given by 
natives in their own language and only resort to quo- 
tations given in the words of investigators when that 
is absolutely necessary. In this way I hope to escape 
all those possibilities of error and unwitting misrepre- 
sentation and distortion, favorable and unfavorable, 
which are likely to lurk even in the work of the most 
careful and experienced ethnologist. 

It is the essence of every truly profound attitude 
toward life that it understand, or at least seek to un- 
derstand, the nature and limitations of human demands 
upon God, upon life, upon one’s fellow men, and upon 
one’s self; and that these demands and limitations be 
accepted with equanimity. Strange as it may seem to 
us and irritating as it may be to our pride, we shall 

FATE, DEATH AND RESIGNATION gg 

have to confess that greater progress was made toward 
the attainment of such an ideal among primitive peo- 
ples than among us. Nor was this attitude confined 
simply to a few individuals among them. On the con- 
trary it appears to have had a very extensive dissemi- 
nation. Naturally its formulation in poetry and phi- 
losophy was the work of a few. 

Among us the recognition of the truth of human 
nature drives us into pessimism, cynicism, or sensation- 
alism: the full realization of the limitations of man 
and the insignificant role he plays in the world and the 
universe, drives many, on the other hand, to seek refuge 
in religion. In both cases the problem is not faced. 
Ridiculous as it may seem on a superficial view, it yet 
does remain a fact that primitive peoples do and have 
faced the problem far more frequently and far more 
consistently than the people of Western Europe. That 
they did not always succeed is clear and the existence 
of doctrines like fatalism, particularly in the Malay 
area, represents as definite a failure as our pessimism. 
Fatalism may, however, be an imported attitude in the 
Malay region due to the influence of Mohammedanism. 
Yet even if this interpretation be wrong, this doctrine 
is not common among primitive people. 

What is life? This is naturally the first question 
that every philosopher and moralist, primitive and 
civilized, seeks to answer. Let me give the answer of 
a Ba-ila philosopher as contained in the legend of how 
an old woman sought God in order to find an explana- 
tion for certain bitter aspects of life: 

100 PRIMITIVE MAN AS PHILOSOPHER 

She was an old woman of a family with a long genealogy. 
Leza, “the Besetting-One,” stretched out his hand against 
the family. He slew her mother and father while she was 
yet a child, and in the course of years all connected with 
her perished. She said to herself, “Surely I shall keep 
those who sit on my thighs.” But no, even they, the 
children of her children, were taken from her. She became 
withered with age and it seemed to her that she herself 
was at last to be taken. But no, a change came over her; 
she grew younger. Then came into her heart a desperate 
resolution to find God and to ask the meaning of it all. 
Somewhere up there in the sky must be his dwelling. She 
began to cut down trees, joining them together and so 
planting a structure that would reach heaven. Finally 
she gave up in despair, but not her intention of finding God. 
Somewhere on earth there must be another way to heaven 1 
So she began to travel, going through country after country, 
always with the thought in her mind: “I shall come to 
where the earth ends and there I shall find a road to God 
and I shall ask him: ‘What have I done to thee that thou 
afflictest me in this manner?’ ” She never found where the 
earth ends, but though disappointed she did not give up her 
search, and as she passed through the different countries 
they asked her, “What have you come for, old woman?” 
And the answer would be, “I am seeking Leza.” “Seeking 
Leza! For what?” “My brothers, you ask me! Here in 
the nations is there one who suffers as I have suffered?” 
And they would ask again, “How have you suffered?” “In 
this way. I am alone. As you see me, a solitary old 
woman; that is how I am!” And they answered, “Yes, 

FATE , DEATH AND RESIGNATION ioi 

we see. That is how you are! Bereaved of friends and 
husband? In what do you differ from others? The Be- 
setting-One sits on the back of every one of us and we 
cannot shake him off!” She never obtained her desire: 
she died of a broken heart . 1 

This is a facing of the problem of life. The old 
woman is decisively reprimanded: “Yes, life, the 
Besetting-One, sits on the back of all of us and we 
cannot shake him off. What cause is there for pessi- 
mism, what cause is there for optimism? If you kick 
against the pricks you die.” The old woman did not 
obtain her desire and she died. We shall see later on 
that this also is the essence of primitive man’s idea of 
tragedy — a kicking against the pricks, whether it be 
a failure to recognize the true nature of the world in 
which you live, or your own nature or that of your 
neighbor. 

This then is the Ba-ila answer. It neither blinks 
the problem like Job nor falls into the two extremes 
of Leibnitz and Voltaire. The Ba-ila refuse to believe 
that we are either living in the best possible of worlds 
or in the world of Candide unless it be of the mature 
Candide, when he had begun to cultivate his garden. 

The same idea is voiced by the Ewe of West Africa 
when they say, “The world is stronger than everything 
else and that is why we say that the world is God.” 
The Winnebago, on the other hand, liken life to a road 

*C. W. Smith and A. M. Dale, The Ila-Speakmg Peoples of North- 
ern Rhodesia, II, pp. 197#* 

102 PRIMITIVE MAN AS PHILOSOPHER 

with narrow passages through which no person unaided 
by the deities can pass without running the risk of 
tragedy. Yet a man must recognize the limits to the 
aid the deities can give. To fail to do so, to try to 
force their hand, means ruin. The Winnebago pos- 
sess not a few stories of such attempts to coerce their 
deities into bestowing upon men powers that are in con- 
flict with the world, with ultimate reality. Few are as 
poignant as that given on page 203 ff. where a young 
boy cannot, even in thought, face the idea of death and 
demands of the gods immortality. They grant him a 
happy, prosperous, and long life but he persists in his 
request and so he must die. 

But the critical insight into life, the inexorability of 
fate, and the philosophic acceptance of human nature 
in all its aspects comes out most clearly in the remark- 
able proverbs that form so integral a part of the 
literature of the African Negroes, the Polynesians, 
and the Malays, to a consideration of which we will 
return in Chapter X. 

It has been frequently contended that all primitive 
people assume that no death is ever a natural one and 
that the only kind of speculation they ever indulge in 
is to discover who has caused death. Both these con- 
tentions are quite wrong. The inevitability of death 
and the inexorability of fate are frequently mentioned 
in both song and proverb, at times with courageous 
acquiescence, at times with petulant complaint, at 
times with melancholy sadness. It is the first of these 
notes that runs through the following five poems: 

FA TE, DEA TH AND RESIGN A TION 103 

I 

Sky and earth are everlasting, 

Men must die. 

Old age is a thing of evil, 

Charge, and die! 

Crow, Montana 

II 

I feel no fear 

When the Great River Man 

Death speaks of. 

Ojibuia 

111 

The odor of death, 

I discern the odor of death 
In the front of my body. 

Ojtbwa 

IV 

Sing me a song, a song of death, 

That I may guide it by the hand. 

Sing me a song of the underworld. 

Sing me a song, a song of death, 

That I may walk to the underworld 1 

Thus speaks the underworld to me, 

The underworld speaks thus: 

“O beautiful it feels in the grave, 

“O lovely is the underworld! 

“But yet no palm wine you can drink.” 
Therefore I take you by the hand 
And journey to the underworld. 

Ewe, Western Africa 

104 PRIMITIVE MAN AS PHILOSOPHER 

V 

Farewell to Life 

(Sung by two youths as they were led by their enemies to death.) 

Oh, how love has bound my heart 
And kept me slave on this side of the river 1 
Oh, that a priest would enchantments use 
And rid me of the love I feel! 

How soon the tattoo-lines of Mata-ora 
Would mark my face! But Tu-ki-rau 
Has not left those to drive away 
Those sycophants of northern race. 

My voice annoys my ears 
And grieves my heart; and when 
I, near to my home, stand erect, 

Fast fall the teardrops 
From my weeping eyes. 

Maori, New Zealand 

How completely it can overwhelm them comes out 
clearly in the following: 

I 

O how it strikes us full in the face, 

Death! 

O how completely does it crush us, 

O what pain! 

Ba Ronga, Southern Africa 

II 

Ye he he ya! It deprived me of my mind 
When the moon went down 
At the edge of the waters! 

Ye he he ya! 

FATE, DEATH AND RESIGNATION 105 

Ye he he ya! It deprived me of my breath 
When the mouse-dancer began 
To gnaw on the water! 

Ye he he ya! 

Ye he he ya! It deprived me of my mind 
When Modana the uttering he began, 

Of the cannibal cry 
On the water! 

Kwakiutl, British Columbia 

The theme of the inevitability of death pervades 
the proverbs and poetry of practically every tribe. 
I must content myself with only a few examples here. 

“It will arise as surely as the stomach,” i.e., death 
is inevitable, says the Ba-ila proverb. “Death has no 
heifer,” i.e., it comes to all, the same people say. You 
are warned to be careful, to be circumspect: “Rejoice 
circumspectly, son of my master, the enemy has come,” 
i.e., be moderate in your exultation for Nemesis is 
bound to overtake you. Remember, they insist, that 
the powers of the universe are unconquerable, or, as 
they put it, “When you exult, God sees you.” It is in 
a somewhat similar strain that the Apache warns his 
people after a successful war expedition: “The taking 
of life brings serious thoughts of the waste; the cele- 
bration of victory may become unpleasantly riotous.” 
The Tlingit philosopher says rather sadly, “I always 
think within myself that there is no place where people 
do not die.” The same spirit pervades the following 
philosophic dirge of the Ewe of West Africa: 

io6 PRIMITIVE MAN AS PHILOSOPHER 

Death has been with us from all time; 

The heavy burden long ago began. 

Not I can loose the bonds. 

Water does not refuse to dissolve 
Even a large crystal of salt. 

And so to the world of the dead 
The good too must descend . 2 

In the same tribe there exists a song in which a 
mother is kindly but firmly reprimanded for weeping 
too much over the death of her only child: 

Large is the city of the nether world 
Whither kings too must go 
Nevermore to return. 

Cease then your plaint, O mother of an only child! 
Your plaint O cease, mother of an only child! 

For when did an only child 
Receive the gift of immortality? 

So be it, mother of an only child, 

And cease your wail, and cease your wail! 3 

The whole gamut is run from mild complaint to 
denunciation in the poems here quoted: 

I 

0 deaf son who wouldst not hearken; 

1 spread before thee life and death. 

But thou wouldst bind around thee 
The old used mat of death. 

I alone was left, a solitary one, 

A cast-off plank of the 
House of the god Tane. 

Maori, New Zealand 

* Johann Spieth, Die Religion der Eweer, p. 236, ‘Ibid. 

FATE, DEATH AND RESIGNATION 107 

II 

Alas! this is the turning over, 

The severing of the link of life. 

The turning over that you 
May join the many, 

The multitude, 

The ariki gone before. 

Ascend the road 
To heaven. 

Mangaia, Polynesia 

III 

(The singers approach.) 

A great thing we desire to do, 

A kposu song, an adzoli song, 

To sing we shall begin: 

Awute here lies dead, 

He now lies on his bier. 

Death did announce himself to him. 

0 dead friend, lying on your bier, 
Return once more, your bonds to loose! 

(The deceased appears and speaks.) 

You all now know 

Within my body the word has perished, 
Within Awute speech has died. 

Who was’t destroyed it in my body? 
’Twas death dragged it away; 

A warrior snatched it from my body. 

( Death appears and speaks.) 

Now my turn it is to sing! 

1 came and thundered, 

io8 PRIMITIVE MAN AS PHILOSOPHER 

I had my lightning flash upon the tree 
And threw him down! 

Come let us go! 

Footsteps I hear, people are approaching. 

An evil brother does announce himself; 
Inopportune he comes. 

Ewe, Western Africa 

IV 

Solo 

Alas, Pangewi! The case is hopeless, 
The canoe is lost! 

Chorus 

O god Tane, thou didst fail me! 

Thou didst promise life; 

Thy worshipers were to be as a forest 
To fall only by the axe in battle. 

Had it been the god Turanga — 

That liar! I would not have trusted him. 
Like him, you are a man-eater! 

May thy mouth be covered with dung: 
Slush it over and over! 

This god is a man after all! 

Solo 

Plaster him well, friends. Ha! Ha! 

Chorus 

Dung is fit food for such gods! 

We parents are in deep mourning 
Like that first used by Tiki. 

We mourn for our beloved first-born. 

FATE, DEATH AND RESIGNATION 109 

Oh, that one could stir up the gods, 

And cause the very dead to awake! 

Yonder stands thy weeping mother. 

Thy spirit wanders about, One-makenu-kenu, 
Inquiring the reason 

Why his poor body was devoured by the gods. 
Fairy of the axe! Cleave open 
The secret road to spirit-land; and 
Compel Vatea to give up the dead! 

Solo 

Puff, Tiki, a puff such as only ghosts can! 

Chorus 

Wait a moment. 

Solo 

Puff, puff away! 

Chorus 

A curse upon thee, priest Pangewi, 

Thou hast destroyed my boy. 

Man gala, Polynesia 

At times the attitude may change completely and 
we find a spirit of pure Epicureanism. Thus in a 
strain strangely reminiscent of Omar Khayyam, the 
Tlingit lover sings: 

“If one had control of death, it would be easy to 
die with a wolf woman. It would be pleasant.” Or, 
“We all must die sometime, so of what use is any- 
thing?” 4 Frequently death is faced with a philosophic 

4 J. R. Swanton, “Tlingit Myths and Texts,” 39th Report of the 
Bureau 0} American Ethnology, p. 415. 

no PRIMITIVE MAN AS PHILOSOPHER 

calm and resignation worthy of Socrates. Elsdon Best 
relates how an old Maori is suddenly stricken ill and 
as his aged wife begins to lament he reproves her, 
saying, “Do not lament. It is well. We have trodden 
the path of life together in fair weather and beneath 
clouded skies. There is no cause for grief. I do but 
go forward to explore the path .” 5 

So, too, do the following poems envisage death and, 
what is even more difficult to bear, tribal and cultural 
extinction: 

I 

The tide of life glides swiftly past 

And mingles all in one great eddying foam. 

O heaven now sleeping! Rouse thee, rise to power; 
And thou, O earth, awake, exert thy might for me 
And open wide the door to my last home, 

Where calm and quiet rest awaits me in the sky. 

Maori, New Zealand 

II 

The minor stars now westward troop in majesty; 
The satellites of Rehua go on in drowsy mood 
The path they ever went; 

But Ue-nuku-kopaku the bent, the decrepit god, 
By them shall be sustained. 

But what may it avail since he, Wari-a-hau, 
Rushed reckless to the battle front, 

Nor heeded that the great, the people’s power, 
The guardian and protector had succumbed. 

* “Spiritual and Mental Concepts of the Maori,” Dominion Museum 
Monograph No. 2 (Wellington, New Zealand), p. 13. 

FA TE, DEA TH AND RESIGNATION 1 1 1 

No aid had he to grapple 
With the fierce, the unrelenting Tu, 

Nor rays of light were seen on Wai-tawa peak, 

Where all the mighty men of Ngatitu 
In silence lay, with Rangi-a-te-amo there. 

Seek, seek, the guardian power and rouse it now to act, 
Before our great canoe o’erturn and all is lost. 

I’ll deck me with the white crane’s plume 
As gentle sea breeze wafts the prized young totara 
And near the staff of Hine-tapeke will stand, 

Whilst spray from Rotu-ehu comes and dims the eyes 
Of those your younger brothers in this world. 

Turn ye and look towards the peak on Rangi-toto seen, 

All distant and alone; 

And know the lizard god, the unknown one, 

Has now forever left his home and westward gone, 

On ocean’s foamed white-crested waves. 

And yet we still in silence sit 

Nor ask the aid of those illustrious visitors, 

Who from a distance by propitious gales have come to you; 
Whilst in your presence lie the corpses, the slain, the fish 
of Tu, 

The ancient ancestors of those of Tuku and of Hika-e. 

O, gently blow, ye breezes of the land, 

But rouse to deeds of daring none, O active soul of man! 

I dreamt and in my dream I felt the chill of snow 
Grate through my trembling frame, as in the nights of omen 

ill,— 

Those tamatea nights of dread, — 

The signs of which are seen in the midnight cloud! 

0 thou beloved! 

1 grieve my want of that to cover thee — 

1 12 PRIMITIVE MAN /IS PHILOSOPHER 

The beauteous mat brought from the east 
To hide thy now cold frame. 

O couldst thou once again arise 
And at the day-dawn speak, 

Then wouldst thou chant 

The incantation of Pou-awhi and Wharangi 

Of Awatea-roa, Manuka and Whakatane — 

Tell the power by which thy ancestors and Wai-ra-kewa, 
Learnt the path across the moaning ocean-road 
To this our home. 

Maori, New Zealand 

III 

I silent sit, as throbs my heart 
For my children; 

And those who look on me 
As now I bow my head 
May deem me but a forest tree 
From distant land. 

I bow my head 
As droops the mamaku 
And weep for my children. 

0 my child! So often called, 

“Come, O my child!” 

Gone! Yes, with the mighty flood. 

1 lonely sit ’midst noise and crowd. 

My life ebbs fast. 

My house is swept clean, clean swept, 
Swept for ever. 

The shining sun has nought to gladden now, 
And yonder peak oft gazed upon 
In days of joy, 

Now prompts the sigh to heave 
With feelings chill as coldest air 
Of frosty south. 

FATE, DEATH AND RESIGNATION 113 

But I still bow me in my house 

And ponder in despair. 

My heart shall then forget 
The deeds of man. 

Oh, was it theft that makes the moon to wane? 

Or was it theft that makes the avalanche? 

And was it they who caused my children’s death? 

The hosts of God uplift their power on us, 

And now annihilate us, like the mo a extinct. 

Maori, New Zealand 

Here there is no blinking at death. And this re- 
fusal to be terrified, this warning against undue resent- 
ment or unmeasured wailing, is to be evaluated all the 
higher because, for the thinker at least, there is no 
paradise or happy hunting ground where the difference 
between the living and the dead is wiped out. To the 
philosopher, be he Maori, Winnebago, or what not, the 
land of the dead is a place from which no one returns 
or if he does return, it is never as the same person. 
The Maori definitely call the spirit-land “the realm, 
from which none return to the upper air.” The ordi- 
nary man may identify the life after death with un- 
limited joy and with the fulfillment of all his wishes; 
the thinker apparently refuses to be deceived. As an 
old Maori said in speaking to Elsdon Best of the dead, 
“Never more shall we see them unless when sleep 
comes and our wairua (spirits) go forth to meet them. 
But that is only a spiritual seeing. We cannot touch 
them. The living come and go; they meet and greet 
each other; they weep for dead friends and sympathize 

1 14 PRIMITIVE MAN 4S PHILOSOPHER 

with each other. But the spectres of the dead are silent 
and the spectres of the dead are sullen. They greet 
not those whom they meet; they show neither affection 
nor yet sympathy, no more than does a stump. They 
act not as the folk of the world of life.” And the 
Masai of East Africa give voice to a similar sentiment 
in their proverb, “Life and death are not alike.” 

CHAPTER IX 

MEN AND WOMEN 

I N a preceding chapter we had occasion to speak of 
primitive man’s marked tolerance for every form 
of personal expression no matter what it was. All he 
demanded was that there be no railing against fate or 
society if an exaggerated expression of one’s person- 
ality entailed suffering, misfortune, or even death. 
This being accepted he had both sympathetic forbear- 
ance and respect for every man’s individuality in all 
its multiform and often kaleidoscopic manifestations. 
The comMie humaine possessed an unusual degree of 
fascination for him. He was a past master in the art 
of describing man in all his moods, as lover, hater, 
actor, and what not. Fortunately he has left us in his 
song-poems and myths an unusually good and complete 
record of his accomplishments in this respect. The 
myths are too long to quote and require too specialized 
a knowledge to be of any real value to a layman and I 
shall therefore confine myself entirely to the poems. 
In these poems are found expressed practically every 
human emotion, from the most light-hearted teasing 
and flirtation to inconsolable sorrow and unquenchable 
hatred. Instead of giving my own inference from these 
poems I intend to let the reader draw his, and with that 

”5 

n6 PRIMITIVE MAN AS PHILOSOPHER 

object in view I shall devote the rest of this chapter to 
a fairly extensive and representative number of these 
poems. I have grouped them under various headings, 
hoping in this manner to show both the scope of primi- 
tive man’s interests, his psychological insight and un- 
derstanding of human nature, and the formal excel- 
lence he frequently attained in the expression of this 
insight. 

FLIRTATION 

I 

Your body is at Waitemata 
But your spirit came hither 
And aroused me from my sleep. 

O my companions, detain my huia 
That the cord of my palpitating 
Heart may again be mine. 

Go then, O water of my eyelids, 

To be a messenger to the 
Huia feeding on my life. 

Tawera is the bright star 
Of the morning; 

Not less beautiful is the 
Jewel of my heart. 

The sun is setting in his cave, 
Touching as he descends the land 
Where dwells my mate, 

He who is whirled to 
The southern waves. 

MEN AND WOMEN 

i 

Go to Tuhua, to the wilderness; 

At Wharekura, to carry 
Nothing but the paddle in 
The basket of grass; 

That’s all you’ve got for your pains. 

Maori, New Zealand 

II 

She and He 

Who will marry a man, 

Too lazy to till the ground for food? 

The sun is the food for 
The skin of such a one! 

Who will marry a woman 
Too lazy to weave garments 
Tongarire is the food for 
The skin of such a one! 

Maori, New Zealand 

III 

The Habits of Woman 

I don’t like the habits of woman; 
When she goes out, 

She kuikuis, 

She koakoas, 

She chatters; 

The very ground is terrified 
And the rats run away: 

Just so! 

Maori, New Zealand 

n8 PRIMITIVE MAN AS PHILOSOPHER 

IV 

The wicked little Kukook, hah hayah used to say. 
I am going to leave the country 
In a large ship. 

For that sweet little woman 

I’ll try to get some beads 

Of those that look like boiled ones. 

Then when I’ve gone abroad 
I shall return again. 

My nasty little relatives, 

I’ll call them all to me 

And give them a good thrashing 

With a big rope’s end. 

Then I’ll go to marry 
Taking two at once; 

That darling little creature 

Shall only wear clothes of the spotted sealskins 

And the other little pet 

Shall have clothes of the young hooded seals. 

Eskimo 

LOVE 

I 

Love does not torment forever. 

It came on me like the fire 
Which rages sometimes at Hukanui. 

If this beloved one is near to me, 

Do not suppose, O Kiri, that my sleep is sweet. 

I lie awake the livelong night, 

For love to prey on me in secret. 

It shall never be confessed lest it be heard by all. 
The only evidence shall be seen on my cheeks. 
The plain which extends to Tauwhare: 

MEN AND WOMEN 

119 

That path I trod that I might enter 
The house of Rawhirawhi. 

Don’t be angry with me, 0 madam; I am only a stranger. 
For you there is the body of your husband; 

For me there remains only the shadow of desire. 

Maori, New Zealand 

II 

Fragrant the grasses of high Kane-hoa; 
Bind on the anklets, bindl 
Bind with finger deft as the wind 
That cools the air of the bower. 

Lehua blossoms place at my flower; 

O sweetheart of mine, 

Bud that I’d pluck and wear in my wreath, 

If thou wert but a flower 1 

Hawaii 

III 

The Deserted Husband 

Come back from Toa, O Aitofa, 

O my beautiful erring spouse! 

As the rapid flow of the current at Onoiau, 

And as the swollen torrent from the valley, 

So flows my yearning heart after thee, 

O Aitofa, have compassion on thy lover, lest he diel 

The promontory of Tainau has become beautified by thee. 
The husband will fear, will shrink, will faint at the reap- 
pearance, 

At the return of the love of the cherished wife, 

Of that face so bright and beautiful. 

Look whichever way he will she seems to be down there still. 

120 PRIMITIVE MAN /IS PHILOSOPHER 

The moon sinking into the western shades is the image of the 
husband, 

The image of Moanarai at the moment. 

As a great cloud obscuring the sky is his grief, 

The grief of the husband mourning for his estranged wife, 
And like the sky darkened by its rising is my distress for her. 

Alas for me! Alas for me! my little wife, 

My darling has gone astray! 

My little beautiful wayward spouse, 

My friend who made my heart brave, 

My friend in the storm, has been stolen away. 

A wreath of the jara tree, a garland of pandanus blossoms 
I have gathered for thee, 

0 Aitofa, and lo, thou art flown! 

Ah, woe is me! Is it thus that thou shouldst treat me? 
Lo, thou art drifting away over the ripples in the Aoa 
shallows, 

Thou art passing the fragrant vale of Vavaara, 

And leaving Mt. Rotui, the upper jaw of Hades behind thee. 
Thou hast forsaken thy favorite bathing place with its 
clear water, 

And thy gardenia bush that blossoms without ceasing. 

Alas for thee, Aitofa! Thou art a little toy canoe that 
the wind carries away. 

Alas for my anguish and the rage of my heart! 

Ah me! I despair and think of suicide, 

1 am possessed with frenzy. Alas for us both ! 

The mind of the husband gives back the effort to win hack 
thy love. 

Alas for my darling! Thy fair face is lost to sight; 

There is no benefit from the home. 

MEN AND WOMEN 

121 

A piercing thorn to me, a pretty thorn art thou. 

What is my fault for which thou art vexed, 

For which thou hast disdained me? 

Why hast thou cut the cord of love and deserted me, 

An evil- working woman? 

As a long continued storm is my anger, 

At the throbbing within, within me. 

My bowels yearn, my heart flows out after thee. 

I am chilled with lingering affection for thee; O Aitofa, 
return! 

Here is a bunch of red feathers for thee, 

Here is a wreath of scarlet feathers for thee, 

Here is a necklace of beautiful pearls for thee, 

Here is thy home. 

I am Moanarai thy husband. 

Tonga, Polynesia 

TV 

Thou Hast Deserted Me, My Prince 

Oh, thou my spouse, 

Thou hast deserted me, my prince, 

Me, the lonely one; 

A deserted cow I stand, 

A deserted buffalo 
Without a comrade. 

Now that my husband has deserted me 
Now I am poor who once possessed a spouse. 
My father, 

The great, the illustrious, 

The great, he who walked resplendent, 

The mountain Si Manabun, that easily caves in; 

122 PRIMITIVE MAN AS PHILOSOPHER 

He who arose dext’rously like the sun 
And set with difficulty! 

At night they often summoned him, my father, 

And in the morning, too, they called for him. — 

0 thou bear on the road! 

Thou tiger at the gate! 

And now thou art fallen, fallen! Father, prince, 
Spouse. 

Oh, my father, 

Thou who hadst bones that never grew tired, 

Hands that never rested. 

Never enough can I bewail my spouse, 

My father, to whom the world was friendly. 

Aye, ever must I think of him, whene’er I raise my eyesl 
When I remember how he went to the mart, 

There where the traffic flourishes, 

Oh, then I cannot clearly see the world, 

So plenteously the tears do fall: 

When I recall the misery extreme, 

That racks my frame — 

The thought that I have no spouse! 

Batak, Sumatra 

V 

Anxiety 

Oh, my sweet offspring, 

Oh, do not attempt 
To leave me, a rice pod! 

Let me for thee be buried in the earth. 

My father must continue to live, 

To live in the midst of the world. 

If you were to die, 

Ah, I would be like a hen who has been allowed to fly away, 
Like a horse that is freed. 

MEN AND WOMEN 

123 

My little offspring desires to leave me, 

To leave me, one born out of time, 

Me, who resemble an oft-fired earthen pot, 
Like an iron utensil. 

Oh, yes, indeed, I am pulled from above, 

I am thrown in all directions like a lid 
When I recall to my mind your lips 
That could not yet frame answers 
To its mother’s words, 

She who now stands alone! 

I would drown myself if you died, 

Drown myself in the river Si Tumallam, 

If you were thrust into the depths, 

Into the deep abyss 
That we cannot ascend. 

I shall endeavor 
To make a twisted cord — 

The road to death. 

Batak, Sumatra 

VI 

Farewell Forever 

Oh, the pain now gnawing at my heart 
For loss of thee, my own beloved ! 

How oft along the white seacoast 
With joyous heart I voyaged on 
To our own home, to Ko-iti; 

And saw as Ra, at even, set, the ruddy clouds, 
Those tattoo-marks thy old progenitor 
Pa-wai-tiri on heaven drew! 

But death is nothing new. 

Death is, has ever been, since Mawi died of old. 
The Pata-tai laughed aloud 

124 PRIMITIVE MAN AS PHILOSOPHER 

And woke the goddess dread 

Who severed him and shut him up in gloom. 

So dusk of even came on 

And Ti-wai-waka flew and lighted on the bar 

O’er which is cast all refuse 

From hearth and home of man. 

Then, then, for thee that evil came. 

The priest no meet incantation made 
Nor sacred water laved 
In offerings propitiatory for thee. 

Not so in ancient times thy ancestors would act — 
But now I moan thy loss of power, 

The impotence displayed by Ka-hae, 

The ignorance now shown in all the world. 

Farewell — farewell forever — yes, farewell. 

Maori, New Zealand 

VII 

Farewell to My Native Land 

There far away is the tide of Honipaka (a hill). 

Alas! thou, Honipaka, art divided from me. 

The only tie which connects us 

Is the fleecy cloud drifting hither 

Over the summit of the island 

Which stands clearly in sight. 

Let me send a sigh afar to the tribe, 

Where the tide is now flowing — 

The leaping, the racing, 

Skipping tide. 

Oh! for the breeze, the land breeze, 

The stiff breeze. 

That is my bird, 

A bird that hearkens to the call. 

MEN AND WOMEN 

125 

Though concealed in the cage. 

Oh! for the wind of Matariki! 

Then will Te Whareporutu 
And the great Ati-awa 
Sail swiftly hitherward. 

So ends my song of love. 

Maori, New Zealand 

VIII 

Forever Severed Is Our Love 

Her praise is ever heard — 

’Tis praise of kindness. 

I am shorn of all and live in silence, 

Friendless and alone. 

0 heaven outspread! 

With fortitude inspire my heart, 

That not forever I with tears lament for her, my spouse. 
Stir up my inmost heart to deeds of daring, 

That my calamity may be forgotten. 

Has Merau, goddess of extinction, died, 

That I forever still must weep 

Whilst day on day succeeds and each the other follows? 
Grief on grief? 

Now gathers all my woe and floods my heart with weeping; 
Agony I dread, and now I shrink with fear of even one 
drop of rain. 

At eventide, as rays of twinkling stars shine forth, 

1 weep, and on thee gaze, and on their shining courses. 
But oh 1 for naught in space I float. 

Oh, woe is me! 

Who now like Rangi am, from Papa once divided. 

Now flows at flood the tide of keen regret; 

Arid, severed once, forever severed is our love! 

Maori, New Zealand 

126 PRIMITIVE MAN 4S PHILOSOPHER 

IX 

Tell it to the west, 

Tell it to the south, 

And to the north also; 

Look at the stars above 
And glance at the moon. 

I am as the tattooed tree. 

Say who is thy beloved 
And let the scent of 
The mokimoki plant 
Give forth its sweetness 
And foster those desires, 

That in the midst 
Of waving plumes 
I may a listener be. 

Maori, New Zealand 

X 

Just as the eventide draws near 
My old affection comes 
For him I loved. 

Though severed far from me, 

And now at Hawa-iki 
I hear his voice 
Far distant; and 
Though far beyond 
The distant mountain peak, 

Its echoes speak 
From vale to vale. 

Maori, New Zealand 

XI 

Methinks it is you, leaf plucked from love’s tree, 
You, mayhap, that stirs my affection. 

There’s a tremulous glance of the eye, 

MEN AND WOMEN 

127 

The thought she might chance yet to come: 
But who then would greet her with song? 
Your day has flown, your vision of her — 

A time this for gnawing the heart. 

I’ve plunged just now in deep waters: 

Oh the strife and vexation of soul ! 

No mortal goes scathless of love. 

A wife thou estranged, I a husband estranged, 
Mere husks to be cast to the swine. 

Look, the swarming of fish at the weirl 
Their feeding grounds on the reef 
Are waving with mosses abundant. 

Thou art the woman, that one your man — 

At her coming who’ll greet her with song? 

Her returning, who shall control? 

Hawaii 

XII 

Up to the streams in the wildwood 
Where rush the falls Molo-kama, 
While the rain sweeps past Mala-hoa, 
I had a passion to visit 
The forest of bloom at Koili, 

To give love-caress to Manu’a, 

And her neighbor Maha-moku; 

My hand would quiet their rage, 
Would sidle and touch Lani-huli. 
Grant me but this one entreaty, 

We’ll meet ’neath the omens above. 
Two flowers there are that bloom 
In your garden of being; 

Entwine them into a garland, 

Fit emblem and crown of your love. 
And what the hour of your coming? 
When stands the sun o’er the pali, 

128 PRIMITIVE MAN AS PHILOSOPHER 

When turns the breeze of the land. 
To breathe the perfume of hala, 
While the currents swirl at Wai-pa. 

Hawaii 

X III 

How will the coming July morning be, 

I wonder? 

My mind is very weak at the thought 
Of being unable to see my sweetheart. 

Tlingit, Alaska 

XIV 

If one had control of death, 

It would be very easy to die with a Wolf woman, 

It would be very pleasant. 

Tlingit, Alaska 

XV 

What are you saying to me? 
I am arrayed like the roses 
And beautiful as they. 

Ojibwa 

XVI 

Look where the mist 
Hangs over Pukehina. 
There is the path 
By which went my love. 

Turn back again hither 
That may be poured out 
Tears from 

MEN AND WOMEN 

129 

My eyes. It was not I 
Who first spoke of love. 

You it was who first made advances 
To me when but a little thing. 

Therefore was my heart made wild. 

This is my farewell of love to thee. 

Maori, New Zealand 

XVII 

Set, O sun, in the mists of your cave, 

While the tears flow like water from my eyes. 

I am a forsaken one since you have gone, 

O Tarati. Now is vanishing from the sight 
The point of Waiohipa, 

And the cliff of Mitiwai is fading away like smoke. 
Beneath that cliff is the god of my love. 

Have done, spirit, the work of intrusion. 

Now that you are absent in your native land, 

The day of regret will, perhaps, end. 

Maori, New Zealand 

XVIII 

A loon I thought it was, 

But it was 
My love’s 
Splashing oar. 

To Sault Ste. Marie 
He has departed. 

My love 

Has gone on before me. 

Never again 
Can I see him. 

Ojib wa 

130 

PRIMITIVE MAN AS PHILOSOPHER 

XIX 

Although he said it. 
Still 

I am filled with longing 
When I think of him! 

Ojibwa 

XX 

Come, 

I am going away. 

I pray you 
Let me go. 

I will return again. 

Do not weep for me. 

Behold, 

We will be very glad 
To meet each other 
When I return. 

Do not weep for me. 

Ojibwa 

XXI 

Lullaby 

Here is little Rangi-tumua, reclining with me 
Under the lofty pine tree of Hine-rahi. 

And here am I, my little fellow, 

Seeking, searching sadly through the thoughts that rise. 
In these days, my child, 

For us two no lofty chiefs are left. 

Passed are the times of thy far-famed uncles, 

Who from the storms of war and witchcraft 
Gave shelter to the multitude, the thousands. 

Maori, New Zealand 

MEN AND WOMEN 

13 

XXII 
Old Love 

A storm from the sea strikes Ke-au, 

Ulu-mano sweeping across the barrens; 

It sniffs the fragrance of upland lehua, 

Turns back at Kupa-koili; 

Sawed by the blows of the palm leaves, 

The groves of Pandanus in lava shag; 

Their fruit he would string ’bout his neck; 

Their fruit he finds wilted and crushed, 

Mere rubbish to litter the road — 

Ah, the perfume! Pana-ewa is drunk with the scent; 
The breath of it spreads through the groves. 

Vainly flares the old king’s passion, 

Craving a sauce for his meat and wine. 

The summer has flown; winter has come; 

Ah, that is the head of our troubles. 

Palsied are you and helpless am I; 

You shrink from a plunge in the water; 

Alas, poor me! I’m a coward. 

Hawaii 

XXIII 

A Lament 

Here I sit through summer’s long night, 

My heart is always beating for my beloved. 

Come near me, my daughter, and keep by my side; 
Thou art ever restless when I nurse thee. 

Obstruct not my vision while gazing inland 

At the approaching canoe and the cloud drawing near 

Its edge, as it rises by Haumapu. 

Thy ancestors lived and remained with me; 

But they are driven downwards to Paerau. 

132 PRIMITIVE MAN /IS PHILOSOPHER 

0 Toko and thy party welcome here! 

1 am afflicted with a disease from afar. 

I must haste to hew down 

The thicket of spears at Tahoraparoa; 

That my spirits may be soothed, 

Which are excited for my land. 

Mangaia, Polynesia 

XXIV 

The bright sunbeams 
Shoot down upon 
Tauwara, whose 
Lofty ridge veils thee from 
My sight, O Amo, my beloved. 

Leave me that my eyes 
May grieve, and that 
They may unceasingly mourn, 

For soon must I descend 
To the dark shore — 

To my beloved who has gone before. 

Mangaia, Polynesia 

XXV 

Whither Has She Gone? 

Solo 

Whither has she gone? 

Chorus 

She has sped to Avaiki, 

She disappeared at the edge of the horizon. 
Where the sun drops through. 

We weep for thee! 

MEN AND WOMEN 

133 

Solo 

Yes, I will forever weep 
And ever weep for thee! 

Chorus 

Bitter tears I shed for thee; 

I weep for the lost wife of my bosom. 

Alas, thou wilt not return! 

Solo 

Oh, that thou wouldst return! 

Chorus 

Stay; come back to the world! 

Return to my embrace: 

Thou art as a bough wrenched off by the blast! 

Solo 

Wrenched off and now in Avaiki — 

That distant land to which thou art fled. 

Mmgaia, Polynesia 

XXVI 

Lament for a Child 

Kachila, blood of my blood, let me think of thee! 

Perhaps, thinking of you, the whole world will hear of my 
grief. 

These little hair-ornaments, let them be thrown into the 
river 

That the crocodiles may wear them. 

O dear, my child! 

Ba-ila, Southeastern Africa 

13,4 PRIMITIVE MAN AS PHILOSOPHER 

XXVII 

Love Song of the Dead 

You are hard-hearted against me, 

You are hard-hearted against me, my dear; 

You are cruel against me, 

You are cruel against me, my dear. 

For I am tired waiting for you 
To come here, my dear! 

Different shall now be my cry for your sake, my dear. 

Ah, I shall go down to the lower world, and cry for you 
there, my dear! 

Kwakiutl , British Columbia 

XXVIII 

The Absent One 

I know not whether thou has been absent: 

I lie down with thee, I rise up with thee. 

In my dreams thou art with me. 

If my eardrops tremble in my ears, 

I know it is thou moving within my heart. 

Modern Aztec, Mexico 

XXIX 

We Must Part 

Many are the youths indeed, 

But thou alone art pleasing to me; 
You, O chief, I love. 

But we must part 
And long will be the time! 

Oglala, Sioux 

MEN AND WOMEN 

135 

SATIRE 

I 

The Strife of Savadlak and Pulangitsissok 

Savadlak speaks: 

The south, the south, and the south yonder, 

Where settling on the midland coast I met Pulangitsissok, 
Who had grown stout and fat with eating halibut. 

Those people from the midland coast they don’t know 
spearing, 

Because they are afraid of their speech. 

Stupid they are besides. 

Their speech is not alike, 

Some speak like the northern, some like the southern, 
Therefore we can’t make out their talk. 

Pulangitsissok speaks: 

There was a time when Savadlak wished that I would be a 
good kayaker, 

That I could take a good load on my kayak! 

Many years ago some day he wanted me to put a heavy 
load on my kayak. 

(This happened at the time) when Savadlak had his kayak 
tied to mine (for fear of being capsized). 

Then he could carry plenty upon his kayak, 

When I had to tow him and he did cry most pitifully. 

And then he grew afeared, 

And nearly was upset 

And he had to keep his hold by help of my kayak string! 

Eskimo 

136 PRIMITIVE MAN 4 S PHILOSOPHER 

II 

I behold you, land of Nunarsuit, 

The mountain tops on its south side are wrapped in clouds. 
It slopes toward the south, 

Towards Usuarsuk. 

What couldst thou expect in such a miserable place! 

All its surroundings being shrouded with ice. 

Not before late in spring can people from there go travelling. 

Eskimo 

m 

She 

When I think of you, I am weeping as I go 1 
When I go along the bluffs, I am weeping as I move. 

He 

O Niagiwathe, do you say that to me? 

My grandmother you are: so I feel and am annoyed 1 

Ponka, Nebraska 

IV 

No One Desires You 

Refuse me as much as you wish, my dearl 

The corn you eat at home, why ’tis made of human eyesl 

The goblets that you use, they are of human skulls! 

The manioc roots you eat, they are of human shin bones! 
The potatoes you do use, they are of human hands! 
Refuse me as much as you wish! 

No one desires you! 

Ba-Ronga , Southeastern Africa 

MEN AND WOMEN 

137 

V 

There Are Plenty of Men 

I had a dream last night: 

I dreamt my husband took a second wife; 

So I took my little basket and I said before I left, 
“There are plenty of men.” 

Thus I dreamt. 

Lkungen, British Columbia 

VI 

O messenger, thy words are wind! 

Me, the glorious tree, me thou deceivest, 

For were not these thy words: 

“When thou canst see the pupils of the sun, 

Entwine thy way in secret to the woods?” 

And when I came 

Verily it was mine to scold and to upbraid thee. 

O most deceitful art thou; cobold, frog arboreal, 

So dost thou seem reflected in the pool! 

Barely, indeed, hadst thou begun in growth 
When death almost constrained thee, 

For ever were thy eyes twisted and turned, a flirt, 
Whenever thou didst walk and promenade! 

Thou art become most apt in coquetry! 

Buin, Melanesia 

VII 

Thou art the bird who at the dawn doth walk! 
Did you not to the chief’s enclosure come 
And say to me: 

“Give me glass pearls in quantity 

And then we too will after, sport in love”? 

i 3 8 PRIMITIVE MAN AS PHILOSOPHER 

Well, then, if thus so great your lust for pearls, 

Why cocoanuts do you not smoke for Dick? 

These he would gladly take and give you wares in turn, 
Many the glass pearls he too has for you. 

Truly I am the tree magnificent and you the tree of blood 
Which the dead spirit spies when first he looks. 

When for your son the chief did make a feast, 

Why e’en at that time, standing you howled for pearls 1 
“O give me,” you did say, “that I therewith 
May gird them as a dress upon my limbs 
Whene’er I walk abroad.” 

Btdn, Melanesia 

HATRED 

I 

Go, sir, companionless 

To be set up as a spectre above Waiwetu. 

Yes, laugh on, sir; 

Take care your feet return not quickly. 

I have no blood left for you to drink. 

I am exhausted in celebrating the greatness of your fame. 
Who shall sing your death to the world? 

Shall it be the mist above Tirchanga? 

Shall it be the mist gathering round Kaihinu? 

Yes, better let it be so, sir. 

O that this were your brain! 

This stone that lies by the food-fire! 

So would I devour it with thorough satisfaction. 

Maori, New Zealand 

MEN AND WOMEN 

139 

II 

Portentous lightning flashes on the mount, 

An omen of disaster — and for whom? 

Nay, ’tis the withdrawal in dark death of stately plumes 
Of those our foes, who glut our hungering throat. 

For Pango is my fierce desire, 

That I in full revenge may drink the brains 
From out thy skull, 0 Tuku-uru-rangi! 

Who shall feel the lover’s jewel of pounamu 
Upon the sinuous shores of Wairau? 

May evil take the cooked head, nameless one, Te Roha! 

My precious one was dragged away 

And from the flood withdrawn 

Whilst following heedlessly the weka path, 

The path of war besides the moss-grown trees: 

Yet who would deign to eat that grayhead in this world? 
In vomit would it be cast forth 1 

Away with thee, 0 arikil 

That these my teeth may gnaw thy skull, 

May crush its parasites, 

Whilst I on brains of Wahaka-piko glut — 

0 my food! A parasite am I, an eater too, of brains — 

An eater, too, of thee, 0 Horu! 

Stricken and crushed the fragments fly. 

Maori, New Zealand 

III 

O the saltiness of my mouth 
In drinking the liquid brains of Nuku 
Whence welled up his wrath! 

His ears which heard the deliberations! 

140 PRIMITIVE MAN AS PHILOSOPHER 

Tutepakihirangi shall go headlong 
Into the stomach of Hinewai! 

My teeth shall devour Kaukau! 

The three hundred and forty of Te Kiri-kowhatu 
Shall be huddled in a heap in my trough! 

Te Hika and his multitudes shall boil in my pot! 
Ngaitahu (the whole tribe) shall be 
My sweet morsel to finish with! 

Maori, New Zealand 

LULLABIES 

I 

Why dost thou weep, my child? 

The sky is bright; the sun is shining; 

Why dost thou weep? 

Go to thy father: he loves thee, 

Go tell him why thou weepest. 

What! Thou weepest still? 

Thy father loves thee, I caress thee: 

Yet still thou art sad. 

Tell me, then, my child, why dost thou weep! 

Balengi, Central Africa 

II 

Hush thee, child! 

Mother will bring an antelope 
And the tidbit shall be thine! 

Kiowa, Oklahoma 

III 

Baby swimming down the river: 

Little driftwood legs, 

Little rabbit legs. 

Kiowa, Oklahoma 

MEN AND WOMEN 141 

IV 

Sleep, sleep, sleep 1 

In the trail the beetles 

Carry each other on their back. 

Sleep, sleep, sleep! 

Zuni, New Mexico 

V 

It is hanging 

In the edge of the sunshine. 

It is a pig, I see, 

With its cloven hoofs; 

It is a very fat pig. 

The people who live in a hollow tree 
Are fighting, 

They are fighting bloodily. 

He is rich. 

He will carry a pack toward the great water. 

Rabbit speaks: 

At the end of the point of land, 

I eat the bark off the tree; 

I see the track of a lynx. 

I don’t care; I can get away from him. 
It is a jumping trail — 

Sep! 

Ojibwa 

VI 

Don’t sleep! 

Your paddle fell into the water, and your spear. 
Don’t sleep! 

The ravens and crows are flying about. 

Kwakiutl, British Columbia 

142 PRIMITIVE MAN AS PHILOSOPHER 

VII 

Don’t sleep too much! 

Your digging-stick fell into the water, and your basket. 
Wake up! 

It is nearly low water. 

You will be late down the beach. 

Kwakiutl, British Columbia 

VIII 

On the hillside I was running, 

My knee I skinned, I skinned. 

The red-headed wolf, the red-headed one, 

Farther off he cannot ease himself. 

His face it itches, 

At all times does he kill. 

Yellow with fat he becomes; 

The dog gets full: he smokes. 

Crow, Montana 

IX 

You were given by good fortune to your slave, 

You were given by good fortune to your slave, 

To come and take the place of your slave! 

0 tribes, now hide yourselves! 

1 have come to be a man and my name is Hellebore! 
The cedar withes are twisted even now, that I shall pass 
Through the mouths, through the heads that I obtain in war, 
For I am true Hellebore! 

Princes’ heads in war I’ll take when I come to be a man, 
And then I shall have your names, as my father he has done, 
He who now has your names for his own! 

Kwakiutl, British Columbia 

MEN AND WOMEN 

143 

X 

You need not think that the smoke of your house in the 
middle of Skedans will be as great as when you were 
a woman (in your previous existence). 

You need not think that they will make such a continual 
noise of singing in Skedans Creek as they used to when 
you were a woman (in your previous existence). 

Haida, British Columbia 

XI 

Whence have you fallen, have you fallen? Whence have 
you fallen, have you fallen? 

(i.e., how did you come to us?) 

Did you fall, fall, fall, from the top of the salmonberry 
bushes? 

Haida, British Columbia 

MISCELLANEOUS 

I 

The Old Warrior 

Mighty, mighty, great in war, 

So was I honored; 

Now behold me old and wretched 1 

Oglala, Sioux 

II 

The Sioux women 
Pass to and fro wailing. 

As they gather 
Their wounded men, 

The voice of their wailing comes to us. 
Ojibwa 

144 PRIMITIVE MAN AS PHILOSOPHER 

III 

I do wonder 

If she truly is humiliated — 
The Sioux woman — 

Whose head I have cut off? 

Ojibwa 

IV 

They are talking about me 
Saying, “Come with us.” 

Is there anyone 

Who would weep for me? 

My wife would weep for me. 

Ojibwa 

V 

On the day of my death 
Let it rain in torrents; 

Let everyone become aware 
That a great man has passed. 

Ewe, West Africa 

VI 

The Great Magician 

Know, when the towns did call me, 

I came at their behest — 

They knew they had called me, the magician. 
Indeed they knew the great magician. 

Ewe, West Africa 

MEN AND WOMEN 

145 

VII 

The People Always Call Me 

I have arrived, you see: 

The people always call me. 

Always they desire me, 

Me, the great shaman. 

I have arrived, you see: 

Kings, too, they do call me, 

Always they desire me. 

Ewe, West Africa 

VIII 

Friendship 

Friend, whatever hardships threaten 
If thou call me, 

I’ll befriend thee; 

All-enduring, fearlessly, 

I’ll befriend thee. 

Oglala, Sioux 

IX 

Envy 

No child does one lend me! 

Only a morter will they lend me! 

Ah, if I were an eagle, 

Ah, if I were a hawk, 

Then would I carry one away! 

Ba-Ronga, Southeastern Africa 

146 PRIMITIVE MAN AS PHILOSOPHER 

X 

The Temptress 

Listen ye clans! 

That rottening wood, this woman, scours the path! 
Her many-tongued apron she let fall 
And said to me, “O do thou pick it up 
That I may have oblivion of my husband. 

Happy, thy food will I prepare for thee, 

Yet do thou keep discreet nor wag thy tongue. 
Thy land that will my people plant for thee; 

Your pigs, these too, my people they will feed 
And then within the hall they will prepare them. 
Why, hadst thou then no word of all the wealth 
Which they, my people, garnered?” 

(And thus the man) “Once in another place 
Didst thou speak evil of thy spouse. 

And now dost hunger for the leaves of love, 
Wailing, forever wailing, yearning for me. 
When thou didst weep for me 
Then didst thou say, 'Carry me to thy home, 
Carry me quickly to another town, 

Return we may thereafter.’ ” 

O coco-sap what shall I, Parrot-planter, 
Give thee as gift? 

Upon the road I heard thee: “Follow me 
When to another village we have come 
Rest thou content upon my skirt of love, 
And having rested joyful will we twitter.” 

Buin, Melanesia 

MEN AND WOMEN 

147 

XI 

The Persistent Wooer 

Spite in my soul, I still pursue your trail! 

Aye, when some day you, widowed, shall stand there, 
Willingly will I lead you to my home. 

I was still young 

When by command you went 

To this your spouse. 

Spite in my soul, I still pursue your trail! 

Aye, when within the bath of death he stands, 

Then shall you give me of your apron fringe 
One piece, that I may bind it on my arm. 

Your spouse, stunted in growth, appears. 

Tell him I pray, “Forged is the deadly spear 
Which from another’s hand, shall strike him down.” 

Buin, Melanesia 

XII 

Song Written by a Man Who Was Jilted by a 
Young Woman 

Oh, how, my ladylove, can my thoughts be conveyed to you, 
my ladylove, on account of your deed, my ladylove? 

In vain, my ladylove, did I wish to advise you, my ladylove, 
on account of your deed, my ladylove. 

It is the object of laughter, my ladylove, it is the object of 
laughter, your deed, my ladylove. 

It is the object of contempt, my ladylove, it is the object of 
contempt, your deed, my ladylove. 

Oh, if poor me could go, my ladylove! How can I go to you, 
my ladylove, on account of your deed, my ladylove! 

i 4 8 PRIMITIVE MAN AS PHILOSOPHER 

Now, I will go, my ladylove, go to make you happy, my 
ladylove, on account of your deed, my ladylove. 
Farewell to you, my ladylove I Farewell, mistress, on 
account of your deed, my ladylove 1 

Retort to the Preceding Song 

0 friends 1 I will now ask you about my love. 

Where has my love gone, my love who is singing against me? 

1 ask you, who walks with my love? 

Oh, where is my love, where is the love that I had for 
my love? 

For I feel, really feel, foolish, because I acted foolishly 
against my love. 

For what I did, caused people to laugh at me on account of 
what I did to you, my love. 

For I am despised on account of my love for you, my true 
love, for you, my love. 

For you have said that you will live in Knight Inlet. 

Oh, Knight Inlet is far away, for that is the name of the 
place where my love is going. 

0 Rivers Inlet is far away, for that is the name of the place 

where my love is going. 

For he forgot of my love, my true love. 

For in vain he goes about trying to find some one who will 
love him as I did, my love. 

Don’t try to leave me without turning back to my love, 
my love. 

Oh, my love, turn back to your slave, who preserved your 
life. 

1 am downcast, and I cry for the love of my love. 

But my life is killed by the words of my love. 

Good-by, my love, my past true love! 

Kwakiutl, British Columbia 

MEN AND WOMEN 

149 

XIII 

Love Song of Taskedek Whose Lover Had Gone to 

Japan 

You are hard-hearted, you who say that you love me, you 
are hard-hearted, my dear! 

You are cruel, who say that you are lovesick for me, my 
dear! 

Where are they going to take my love, my dear? 

Where are they going to take my dear, that causes me to lie 
down sick, me, the slave of my dear? 

They will take my dear far away! I shall be left behind, 
my truelove, for whom I pine, who keeps me alive, 
my dear! 

They will take my dear out to sea far away! There the one 
is going for whom I pine, my master, for whom I am 
lovesick, my dear! 

I wish I could go to you, my master, that I might make you 
happy, my dear, for I think you long for me, for my 
love, my dear. 

I wish I could go to you, my dear! I wish I could make 
you dream that you embrace this one whom you love, 
my dear, the one for whom I pine, my dear! 

I wish I could go to be your pillow, my dear! I wish I 
could go to be your feather bed, my dear! the one for 
whom I pine, who keeps me alive, my dear! 

Now farewell, my truelove, for whom I pine, who keeps 
me alive, my master, my dear! 

Song of Menmentleqelas in Answer to the Preceding 

Song 

Stop, friends, and let us listen to the song that my dear sings 
for me, the one whom I am leaving so cruelly. 

150 PRIMITIVE MAN /4S PHILOSOPHER 

Stop, friends, and let us listen to the weeping of my dear, 
my truelove, my dear! 

Whence, 0 friends! comes the sound of the one who is crying 
for me, my truelove, my truelove, my dear. 

O friends! she whom I left behind is crying for me, my true- 
love, my truelove, my dear. 

Don’t long for me! For you I am working, my truelove, 
for whom I pine, my dear, my truelove, my dear. 

Don’t cry for me ! I am working for you, my true mistress, 
my lady, my truelove, my dear. 

Don’t long for me! I am coming back, my dear, my true- 
love, my dear. 

Don’t cry for me! I am paddling toward you, my dear, 
my truelove, my dear. 

Song of Same When Taskedek Had Deserted Him 

You are cruel to me, you are cruel to me, my dear! 

You are hard-hearted against me, you are hard-hearted 
against me, my love! 

You are surpassingly cruel, you are surpassingly cruel 
against me, for whom you pined. 

She pretends to be indifferent, not to love me, my truelove, 
my dear. 

Don’t pretend too much that you are indifferent of the love 
that I hold for you, my dear! 

Else you may be too indifferent of the love that I hold for 
you, my dear! 

My dear, you are indifferent of the love I hold for you, 
my dear! 

My dear, you go too far; your good name is going down, 
my dear! 

Don’t try hereafter to follow me, my dear! 

Don’t hereafter cry for me, my dear! 

Does not this make sick your heart, my dear? 

MEN AND WOMEN 

i5i 

Friends, do not let us listen any longer to love songs that 
are sung by those far away! 

Friends, it might be well if I took a new truelove, a dear 
one. 

Friends, it might be well if I had a new one for whom 
to pine, a dear one. 

I wish she would hear my love song when I cry to my new 
love, my dear one! 

Kwakiutl , British Columbia 

CHAPTER X 

APHORISMS ON LIFE AND MAN 

I N the preceding chapters we found primitive man 
giving expression to a fairly definite philosophy of 
life which was characterized by a very unusual degree 
of objectivity. In the present chapter we shall try to 
show that this same objectivity was applied to the 
analysis and evaluation of character. Much of this 
analysis is best and most adequately expressed in the 
aphorisms and proverbs current among all primitive 
peoples, although they have taken on a more precise 
literary form and assumed greater importance in 
Africa and Polynesia than in other parts of the world. 

Nothing seems to have escaped the discriminating 
and discerning insight of the native philosopher and 
sage. Every comer of the human soul, every angle in 
human relationships is disclosed and illuminated in 
a manner that would have done justice to Stendhal. 
Here as in the poems quoted in the preceding chapter 
we have man in all his aspects, his loves and his hates, 
his arrogance and his pettiness, his affectation and his 
simplicity. If the foibles seem unduly emphasized 
that is, after all, the nature of proverbs and aphorisms. 
Sometimes it is a warning or a moral lesson that is 
conveyed. Generally, however, we are treated to irony 

152 

APHORISMS ON LIFE AND MAN 153 

and sarcasm. But no discussion can better bring 
home to the reader the full implications of all that is 
contained in these aphorisms and what wisdom and 
psychological insight must have gone to their making, 
than an actual perusal of them. I shall, therefore, even 
at the risk of overburdening the reader, quote a repre- 
sentative number from a few regions. 

Ba-ila Proverbs 

1. Wisdom comes out of an ant heap. 

2. A wise man ran on without eating it, a fool coming 
behind ate it (i.e., the wise in their own conceits 
often miss the good things of earth). 

3. O man, don’t try to teach your mother, try others. 

4. Get grown up and then you will know the things of 
the earth. 

5. The pig died in the trap (against which it had been 
warned) . 

6. Annoy your doctors and sicknesses will come laughing. 

7. The prodigal cow threw away her own tail. 

8. It is the prudent hyena that lives long. 

9. A man knows his own woe. 

10. The god that speaks up is the one that gets the meat. 

11. You may cleanse yourself but it is not to say that 
you cease to be a slave. 

12. That which is rotten goes to its owners (i.e., only a 
few remember the dead). 

13. When a chief’s wife steals she puts the blame upon 
the slaves. 

154 PRIMITIVE MAN AS PHILOSOPHER 

14. When a dog barks the fame belongs to the master of 
the village. 

15. They spurn the frog but drink the water (i.e., they 
don’t like to find a frog in their drinking water but 
they will drink it after the frog is removed). 

16. Mr. No-Fault ensnared a snake in the road (and then 
left it to bite passers-by). 

17. There is no chief who eats out of an impande shell 
(i.e., the shell may show his wealth but when it comes 
to eating the chief must eat like ordinary people, 
out of a dish). 

18. An ax shaft is made out of an ordinary piece 
of wood (i.e., an ordinary person can be made 
of great use but, on the other hand, he is not 
essential). 

19. Build rather with a witch than with a false-tongued 
person, for he destroys a community. 

20. A living tortoise is not worn as a charm (i.e., whether 
you see it or not, you must not speak evil of a living 
man). 

21. Better help a fighting man than a hungry man, for 
he has no gratitude. 

22. The old thing pleases him who married her. 

23. What is ugly to other people is fair in the sight of 
the child’s mother. 

24. While you are away from home visiting, your own 
people know all about you (i.e., whatever you do it 
is sure to come out). 

25. The work of a chief doesn’t prevent one from hunting 
out one’s own fleas (i.e., if you are working for a 

APHORISMS ON LIFE AND MAN 155 

chief that does not hinder you from minding your 
own affairs). 

26. The man at home in thought is not to be deceived by 
much porridge (i.e., you can’t retain a homesick man 
by offering him plenty to eat) . 

27. A river that would not be straightened has bends in 
it (i.e., you lie on the bed you make). 

28. You shave me with a blunt razor (i.e., I have been 
deceived by promises). 

29. I threw a stone into an ant heap (i.e., I have done 
something foolish and it is beyond repair). 

30. He has the kindness of a witch (i.e., he is overkind). 1 

While there is clearly what might be called a definite 
family resemblance between all African proverbs, still 
each tribe has its own style and all are at one in the 
light they throw upon the African Negroes’ insight into 
human nature. Thus, for instance, the Baganda of 
Rhodesia and the Masai are as prolific as the Ba-ila in 
their pithy comments, friendly, unfriendly, and neu- 
tral, on that strangest of all things, man. 

Baganda Proverbs 

1. A grumbler does not leave his master, he only stops 
others from coming to him. 

2. The stick which is at your friend’s house will not 
drive away the leopard (i.e., it is of no use in an 
emergency). 

1 E. W. Smith and A. M. Dale, The lla-Speaking Peoples of North- 
ern Rhodesia, II, pp. 311 ff. 

156 PRIMITIVE MAN AS PHILOSOPHER 

3. A borrower only seeks you in order that he may 
borrow and not to repay you. 

4. The god helps you when you put forth your running 
powers. 

5. He who has not suffered does not know how to pity. 

6. He who passes you in the morning, you will pass him 
in the evening. 

7. You have many friends as long as you are prosper- 
ous. 

8. Let me cut the difficult knot, as the wizard did at 
Bubiro (i.e., settle the question). 

9. You appear and pretend to like me, as the orphan 
child is loved while still mourning for its father. 

10. When I remember it I laugh because it is not I 
who am concerned. 

11. When it is not your mother who is in danger of being 
eaten by a wild animal, the matter can wait until the 
morrow. 

12. The beautiful woman is the sister of many (i.e., she 
has many admirers and many who claim to be related 
to her). 

13. The despised person is ever present. 

14. The heart is a market place (i.e., it chooses what it 
likes best, just as we do at a market). 

15. Covered with shame like a child who has stolen from 
its mother. 

16. He who takes by force is not apt to trap (i.e., gentle- 
ness and not force arrives at truth). 

17. I had a number of friends before calamity befell 

me. 

AFHUK 1 SMS UN LIVE AND MAN 157 

18. Risk is never absent from those who seek wealth. 

19. The owner of the pot does not kill the potter. 2 

Masai Proverbs 

1. The mouth which ate fat shall eat excrement and 
that which ate excrement shall eat fat. 

2. The slayer of the enemy has become a coward and 
the poltroon has become a brave man. 

3. Coal laughs at ashes not knowing that the same fate 
which has befallen them will befall it. 

4. The firewood which has been cut ready for burning, 
laughs at that which is being consumed. 

5. It is the same thing when a man is once there, whether 
he has been called or whether he has come of his 
own free will. 

6. Everything has an end. 

7. Events follow one another like days. 

8. Behold the people you are passing. The man is there 
and the male, the woman and the female (i.e., all 
people are not alike and if you watch you will see 
that some of the passers-by are good and some are 
not). 

9. We begin by being foolish and we become wise by 
experience. 

10. A man does not know when he is well off; it is only 
when he is poor that he remembers the days of 
plenty. 

* J. Roscoe, The Baganda, pp. 485-491. 

158 PRIMITIVE MAN AS PHILOSOPHER 

11. When an event occurs only a part of the truth is sent 
abroad, the rest is kept back. 

12. Bravery is not everything and however brave a man 
may be, two brave men are better. 

13. The nose does not precede the rest of the body. 

14. Warriors and cripples remain apart. 

15. Don’t make a cloth for carrying a child in before the 
child is born. 

16. The zebra cannot do away with his stripes. 

17. The bark of one tree will not adhere to another tree. 

18. Persevering to accomplish an end and being able to 
do a thing are not the same thing; it is greater to 
persevere. 

19. Nobody can say he is settled anywhere for ever: it 
is only the mountains which do not move from their 
places. 

20. Broken pieces of a gourd cannot be fastened on to a 
cooking-pot. 

21. Do not repair another man’s fence until you have 
seen to your own. 

22. It is better to be poor and live long than rich and 
die young. 

23. Men may be partners, or may eat from the same 
dish, but they cannot tell what is passing through 
each other’s minds. 8 

Passing now to the Polynesian proverbs we find 
certain marked differences in style although the prob- 
lems are the same. Poetic metaphors and similes are 

'A. C. Hollis, The Masai, pp. 238-251. 

APHORISMS ON LIFE AND MAN 159 

far more common, and, as might have been expected, a 
philosophic coloring pervades the formulation of the 
proverbs. Very frequently, too, the allusions are so 
local and specific that an elaborate explanation is 
necessary before an outsider can understand. I shall 
give selections from the Samoans, the Hawaiians, and 
the Maori. 

Samoan Proverbs 

1. The hurricane and the calm are neighbors. 

2. When the old hen scratches, the chickens eat beetles. 

3. The brightness of the setting sun (is beautiful but 
will soon pass away). 

4. Blessed is the moon which goes and comes again. 

5. To stand on a whale and angle for minnows (i.e., to 
neglect important matters for little ones). 

6. The crying of a dead trumpet (i.e., it makes a lot 
of noise but is dead). 

7. The uju (a fish) is sleeping and the paipai (a crab) 
is at rest (i.e., we have finished and there is no more 
to say). 

8. The aeno (a crab) dies by its own claw (i.e., a man 
suffers the direct consequences of his own actions). 

9. The crab and his legs had no consultation (i.e., to 
disclaim all responsibility). 

10. Until the mountains fall; until the valleys are levelled. 

11. First pluck the breadfruit which is furthest away (i.e., 
do the difficult thing first). 

12. The roots may be in the forest but they will be 

160 PRIMITIVE MAN AS PHILOSOPHER 

exposed in the roads (i.e., though supposed to be 
secret, the story will leak out). 

13. Cleaning away stones because of faint-heartedness 
(i.e., a man who anticipates defeat is not likely to 
conquer). 

14. Beaten by the mallet, beaten by the handle (i.e., to 
be beset by misfortunes on all sides). 

15. The light weight of a burden when first lifted (i.e., 
do not imagine your work, life, etc., are all going to be 
light). 

16. Let the sea determine as to the quality of the canoe. 

17. The fishing may be without fish but doubting and 
suspicion will always have a catch. 

18. The banana is plucked up but the sucker is planted. 
(The king is dead, long live the king!) 

19. The plate of the drill rejoices in vain, for the point 
of the drill is broken. (This is used to express some 
insuperable difficulty. The family rejoices in the birth 
of a child but joy may be premature, for the child 
may die.) 

20. One disease has gone but another has come. 

21. Let the sinnet ring and the stand for the fishing rod 
go together (i.e., let your acts agree with your 
words) . 

22. The sun and the sea are nearing each other (said of 
approaching death). 

23. The hilltops are near but the roads to them are long. 

24. Often warned, the salt has now entered into his 
body (i.e., he is justly punished after many warn- 
ings). 

APHORISMS ON LIFE AND MAN 161 

25. The wisdom of a child but only a child (i.e., he does 
his best). 

26. The many are the chiefs. (God is on the side of the 
strongest battalions.) 

27. Don’t go about thoughtlessly in the off months, be- 
cause good times only last a few days. 

28. The deaf man hears when he is tapped on the 
shoulders. (If you don’t listen to advice, painful 
experience will teach you.) 

29. No hole is made in the body by words. (Never 
heed what men say.) 

30. Stones will rot but words never rot. (Anything may 
be forgiven but offensive words.) 

31. A mouthful fallen from the mouth. (There’s many 
a slip ’twixt the cup and the lip.) 

32. O that all wishes were accomplished in fact! 4 

To the above I would like to add a few where the 
meaning has to be explained to be understood: 

33. It is only the people of Neiafu who disparage the 
to-elau (the N. E. trade wind). 

The explanation is as follows: It is said that two 
cripples in Neiafu grumbled continually against the 
northeast trade winds because they did not cause the 
coconuts to drop immaturely from the trees, as they 
were not able to climb for them. They preferred the 
west wind which caused the nuts to fall even though 

4 George Brown, “Proverbs of the Samoans, 1 ” Proceedings of the 
Australasian Association for the Advancement of Science , 1913. 

1 62 PRIMITIVE MAN AS PHILOSOPHER 

they were not ripe. This proverb is used to describe 
those who despise the good and prefer the bad or who 
prefer to have a worthless article like an immature 
coconut rather than have the trouble of getting a good 
one. 

34. Let the blame be upon Vala. 

Vala was the daughter of the chief Anufetele. The 
chief was standing at the council meeting one day and 
was making a formal speech to the meeting. His 
daughter Vala was seated on the ground quite near 
him. She whispered to him, “Dear elder, remove the 
gummy matter out of your eye.” The old man think- 
ing she was prompting him, repeated her words in his 
speech and the whole audience laughed loudly in de- 
rision. The girl again whispered to her father the 
words, “Wipe your mouth” and the old man repeated 
her words, at which there was again a burst of laughter 
and he sat down overwhelmed with shame. The appli- 
cation is that the blame be put on the guilty person. 
Anufetele was not at fault so much as Vala. 

35. Has come again the offering of Mosopili which was 
too late. 

Mosopili dwelt at Foaluga but his parents lived at 
Foalalo. His sister was very sick and a message was 
sent to inform him of the fact, and that she was likely 
to die, but he did not go to visit her. Again and again 
he was told of her illness but he still deferred his prom- 
ised visit. At length he was told that she was dead, 

APHORISMS ON LIFE AND MAN 163 

when he at once seized a siapo (native cloth) and ran 
down to Foalalo, but his sister was dead. He neglected 
to show his love for his sister while she was living and 
only tried to do so when it was too late. 

36. The feather-blowing of Lavea. 

Lavea was the head of a family at Safotu. Their 
family god was supposed to be present in the fowl and 
so they were, of course, prohibited from eating or in- 
juring that bird. When Lavea and his family became 
professing Christians these customs were not observed 
and as a proof of the sincerity of his conversion, 
Lavea was asked to kill and eat a fowl and this he 
consented to do. He was, however, still very much 
afraid of the family deity and as a compromise he 
blew away the feathers as an offering to the god and ate 
the fowl. 

This proverb is used to illustrate the folly of trying 
to be right with all sides; of a merely pretended alle- 
giance; and that of retaining the best, and offering 
that which is of no value. 

37. The body of Galue was bruised in vain. 

Galue was a man who was very desirous of getting 
the best fine mat at a division of the property. He was 
so anxious for this that in order to show his good will 
and his respect for the family beforehand, he threw 
himself down on the stones and was much bruised. 
After all this, however, the mat in question was given 
to another man. 

1 64 PRIMITIVE MAN ^5 PHILOSOPHER 

This proverb is applied to any one who fails to get 
something for which he has toiled or suffered. 

Hawaiian Proverbs 

1. I will not be taken by an old taro leaf; give me the 
tender bud of the plant. (This is used by a young girl 
in disdain of an elderly suitor or one of low rank.) 

2. Man is like a banana the day it bears fruit. (After 
the banana plant has borne fruit, it dies down and 
another takes its place.) 

3. As the creeping dodder, creeping in Mana, so is love 
misplaced for the tree without foundation. (A para- 
site lover clings like the trunkless dodder.) 

4. The wind of Ulupau woos a red blossom. (The 
fruitless advances of a young man to a maid.) 

5. Gather the pulu below while the rain stays high 
above. (Make hay while the sun shines.) 

6. The hardwood weeps when the smooth pebbles clash. 
(When people fight, the innocent suffer.) 

7. When the wiliwili blooms then the sharks bite. (A 
young girl and her suitors.) 

8. The little hau tree crowds the big one. (This is used 
when a small person crowds in or sits too close to a 
big person.) 

9. Open the sluice gate for the fish to enter. (Advice 
of an elderly person to a boorish youth in order that 
he may correct his habits and gain friends.) 

10. Like an angleworm is the prayer of the priest. (This 
refers to the twists and turns with which the magic 
incantation finds out its victim.) 

APHORISMS ON LIFE AND MAN 165 

11. Even little fishes make the mouth water. 

12. Dead though the taro may be, the maggot lives on. 
(Though a person may think his past acts dead, yet 
they still live on.) 

13. When the pandanus is ripe, the sea eggs are fat. 
(This refers to a parasite growing fat on the riches of 
a young person.) 

14. The akule fish stays in deep water. (The burnt 
child dreads the fire.) 

15. Not all knowledge is contained in your dancing school. 

16. Do not mind if the lower part burns, but watch the 
upper lest it be overdone. (Do not mind the com- 
mon people but watch the upper ranks upon whom 
everything depends.) 

17. Continue to do good and heaven will come down to 
you. 

18. Standing in the doorway of disappointment. (One 
who makes a long face over frustrated hopes.) 

19. The puffed mouth is full of wind. 

20. Blasphemy is a god that devours its own master. 

21. Love is a mist; there is no mountain to which it will 
not cling. 

22. The heads of the gods are hidden in the clouds. 

23. I am a little stone but I can roll far. 

24. A keeper who boasts of his tempestuous snare. (This 
refers to a boastful father whose daughter has dis- 
appointed him.) 

25. Smite the waters with convolvulus, the waves will 
break. (A person who hits another will receive a 
blow in return.) 

166 PRIMITIVE MAN AS PHILOSOPHER 

26. Heap up a pile, you carry the burden. 

27. A fleet of small canoes will dash up the spray. (This 
illustrates wrath over trifles.) 

28. Blow hither, blow hither, O wind of Hilo, put aside 
the little dish, grant me the big one! (This is said 
of an ambitious person.) 

29. Feed men and they will obey. 

30. Careless work with the hands brings unclean food to 
the mouth. 

31. To obey is life, to disobey is death. 

32. Tender are the little sins when the child is creeping; 
transient in childhood; obstinate in youth; hard to 
change in maturity; and fixed in old age. 

33. One day only has the stranger. (He is a guest for 
one day, then he must work.) 

34. It is living together teaches the meaning of love. 

35. Delicious is a bundle of taro tops where there is love. 5 

Maori Proverbs 

1. Though the grub may be a little thing it can cause 
the big tree to fall. 

2. A spear shaft may be parried but not a shaft of 
speech. 

3. The weaving of a garment may be traced but the 
thoughts of man cannot. 

4. Son up and doing, prosperous man ; son sitting, hungry 
man. 

'“Hawaiian Stories and Wise Sayings,” collected by L. S. Green and 
edited by M. W. Beckwith, in Publications of the Folklore Founda- 
tion, Vassar College, No. 3. 

APHORISMS ON LIFE AND MAN 167 

5. Did you come from the village of the liar? 

6. The offspring of rashness died easily. 

7. The women shall be as a cliff for the men to flee over. 

8. Great is the majority of the dead. 

9. The home is permanent, the man flits. 

10. Outwardly eating together, inwardly tearing to pieces. 

11. Man is passing away like the moa. 

12. Will the escaped wood hen return to the snare? 

13. Perhaps you and False-Tongue travelled here to- 
gether? 

14. Well done, the hand that roots up weeds! 

15. A chief dies, another takes his place. 

16. Passing clouds can be seen but passing thoughts can- 
not be seen. 

17. The digger of fern root has abundance of food, but 
the parrot-snarer will go hungry. 

18. Those who escape the sea god will be killed by those 
on shore. 

19. It was not one alone who was awake in the dark ages. 

20. The white heron eats daintily, the duck gobbles up the 
mud (i.e., a man is known by his tastes). 

21. You cannot hew a bird-spear by the way (i.e., prepare 
carefully) . 

22. A raindrop above, a human lip below (i.e., dropping 
water wears away a stone, slander a good name). 

23. The white crane whose flight is seen but once. (Angel 
visits, few and far between.) 

24. Black and red united can do it. (The red-ochred 
chief and the charcoal-smeared slave united can 
do it.) 

1 68 PRIMITIVE MAN AS PHILOSOPHER 

25. Food given by another is only a throat-tickler; but 
food gained by the labor of one's own hands is the 
food which satisfies. 

26. Great is your going forth to war, small your return. 

27. Deep throat, shallow muscle. 

28. He who goes before gathers treasures; he who lags 
behind looks for them in vain. 

29. Sir, bale the water out of your own mouth 1 

30. One day’s beauty, a short-lived pleasure. 

31. Food underdone is your own, fully cooked goes to 
others. (This is a warning against dawdlers.) 

32. He who is a valiant in fight is a valiant apt to 
stumble. But he who is a valiant in cultivating food 
is a valiant who will abide — even to a natural death, 
worn out by old age. 

33. Cold which is only skin deep, stealing warmth, is not 
worth a word of complaint. 

34. The large chips made by Mr. Hardwood fell to the 
share of Mr. Sit-Still. 

35. A crooked part of a stem of toetoe can be seen, but a 
crooked part in the heart cannot be seen. 

36. O slave of two growths, shooting up, sinking down 
(i.e., a child grows up to be a man and afterwards 
descends to a second childhood in old age). 

37. When the seine is worn out with age, the new net 
encircles the fish. (When a man grows old, his son 
succeeds him.) 

38. Let him go on asking, his strength lies in asking 
questions. 6 

Edward Treager, The Maori Race; Edward Shortland, Traditions 

APHORISMS ON LIFE AND MAN 169 

Only a cursory perusal of these proverbs is neces- 
sary to convince even the most skeptical that we are 
not dealing here with any vague group activity or 
folkway — that last refuge of the tired sociologist and 
ethnologist — but the personal envisaging of life by 
those individuals who in any group are concerned with 
and interested in formulating their attitude toward 
God, toward man, and toward society — the philoso- 
phers, the sages, and the moralists. These proverbs 
are merely offshoots of that more consistent and more 
ambitious formulation which we have discussed in 
some of the preceding chapters. 

and Superstitions of the New Zealanders ; and J. W. Stack, “Notes on 
Maori Literature,’ 7 Proceedings of the Australasian Society for the 
Advancement of Science, 1891. 

CHAPTER XI 

THE TRAGIC SENSE OF LIFE 

I N Chapter VIII we quoted the very profound tale of 
the Ba-ila woman who spent her long life seeking 
God so that she might ask him why he had afflicted 
her with so many misfortunes. Her more tough- 
skinned contemporaries assure her that God, fate, life, 
the Besetting-One, sits on the back of every one of 
them and that they cannot shake him off. But she will 
have none of their resignation and realism, and con- 
tinues her search until death. Fate to her was clearly 
not some inevitable, non-personal, and non-discriminat- 
ing force but an unjust personal agency inflicting pain 
and suffering upon her individually. Like so many 
other sensitive natures life was too much for her. 
She could not accept it as the vast majority of people 
do nor could she find any adequate explanation for it. 
Hence arose her terrible perplexity and bitterness. 

But there are some temperaments who make terms 
with life in all its forms and who recognize that tragedy 
flows from the inward strivings and passions of man 
when he comes into conflict with the inevitable and 
irresistible forces of nature and society. As this clash 
of man and the world is often quite beyond the powers 
of any individual to foresee, control, or alter, there 

170 

THE TRAGIC SENSE OF LIFE 

171 

arises a feeling or an attitude toward life which may 
aptly be called the tragic sense of life. For Western 
Europe this has been well if somewhat pedantically 
described by the famous Spanish essayist, Miguel de 
Unamuno, in his work entitled Del Sentimiento 
Trdgico de la Vida. Now this same attitude is also 
to be found among some individuals in primitive com- 
munities. At times it can lead to uncompromising and 
hopeless pessimism, at other times to a general theory 
in which the doom and disaster that so often follow in 
the wake of man are attributed to some human trans- 
gression, to some overstepping, whether it be conscious 
or not, of the limits imposed by each man’s nature. 
In other words man is at fault. 

As an example of the extreme pessimism into which 
it may develop — but a pessimism into which no criti- 
cism and fault-finding with fate enters — let me give 
the following very remarkable Maori poem: 

Bow to earth and bow to heaven, whilst thou, 0 man! 
with craving hunger driven — weary, gaunt and near insan- 
ity, must wander aimless and alone, whilst death creeps 
nearer still, and to one focus draws that path of glory, honor, 
fame, and joy which youth had planned, and blots and blurs 
the whole; whilst, staggering, thou canst scarcely sweep aside 
the grass that grows along the path up to thy home. 

How, coward and servile, gnawing hunger makes the soul- 
less frame to stagger, when at dim eventide the reeling form 
oft seeks to eat the refuse tori, cooked and left by Pare- 
korau. 

172 PRIMITIVE MAN AS PHILOSOPHER 

How, crushed by shame, the once most noble self now 
dies within, as crouching thou drawest near, to see thy boy- 
hood’s home! No welcome greets with uttered words, or calls 
aloud thy name; but thou must onward pass, and in the 
path of Pu-hou go, and thence, yet still a starved one, 
come. 1 

From this unrelieved pessimistic expression of life’s 
tragedy I should like to pass to a discussion of the 
tragic sense of life as it emerges in a number of myths 
of the Winnebago Indians and where doom is conceived 
of as due to human transgression. 

Like the majority of American Indians, the Winne- 
bago distinguish sharply between what might be called 
myths and realistic tales. Under “myth” is included 
everything regarded as having taken place in a distant 
past; under “tale” everything that has occurred within 
comparatively recent times. The word for myth means 
“sacred”; that for tale, “what is told”; i.e., what is 
considered as a real happening. It matters not how 
completely mythical the content of a story may be; as 
long as it is thought of as portraying an actual occur- 
rence it is a tale. Stylistically a very interesting differ- 
ence exists between the two, the former always having 
a happy, the latter, prevailingly if not always, an un- 
happy ending. The Winnebago themselves appear to 
be well aware of this trait of their myths as the fol- 
lowing personal experience indicates. 

While engaged in translating a text I must have un- 

1 J. C. Anderson, Maori Life in Aotea , p. 298. 

THE TRAGIC SENSE OF LIFE 

i73 

consciously given my interpreter the impression of be- 
ing worried about the fate of the hero of the particular 
story. He had been cut up into pieces and was being 
slowly boiled in a cauldron at the particular moment 
that my face apparently attracted the interpreter’s 
attention, for he stopped short and said to me very 
kindly, “Don’t worry. He isn’t dead. They never 
die.” Whether the Winnebago are equally conscious 
of the tragic ending of their realistic tales I had no 
means of determining; that, consciously or not, a defi- 
nite selection of subject matter has taken place is quite 
evident, for otherwise the invariable tragic denouement 
would be inexplicable. The impression conveyed is 
that they regarded life, the contact and pitting of man 
against man, of peoples against peoples, as leading 
inevitably to tragedy, an inference perhaps not so 
strange in a civilization where the highest ambition of 
man was to die on the warpath and where the most 
insistent pursuit of life was prestige. 

Among many peoples has such a conflict, in fact, 
formed the subject matter of heroic myth and epic. 
We encounter it among the Polynesians, the Maya, 
and the Aztec and it underlies the theme of the Iliad, 
the Chanson de Roland, El Cid and the Nibelungenlied. 
In the Iliad, the Nibelungenlied, and the Chanson de 
Roland we know definitely that the conflict represented 
the legendary reflection of a real clash of peoples and 
civilizations and it seems extremely probable that the 
same explanation holds for the great epic tales of the 
Polynesians, the Aztec, and the Maya. Among the 

174 PRIMITIVE MAN AS PHILOSOPHER 

plains tribes of North America, likewise, where there 
has been an incessant and marked contact of different 
tribes and cultures, we find similar stress upon a tragic 
ending so that we may assume a certain degree of cor- 
relation between an epic or prose tale having a tragic 
ending, and definite historical clashes; it was indeed 
in this connection that man first sought and found a 
literary expression for the tragic sense of life. 

In the following pages I shall discuss three Winne- 
bago tales all ending tragically, and in all of which 
there exists from the beginning a definite presentiment 
of impending death. I shall attempt to show that this 
sense of impending misfortune is due to two distinct 
concepts of tragedy and doom, one implicit as in the 
Iliad and Nibelungenlied, the other explicit, embodying 
more or less a theory of how woe and death have come 
into the world. I shall try to demonstrate that in the 
tale of the “Traveller” we are, at bottom, dealing with 
the memory of some historical conflict or change analo- 
gous — although on a much smaller scale — to that which 
the Iliad, the Chanson de Roland and the Nibelungen- 
lied depict; that the tragic denouement reflects this 
cultural clash, exemplifying thus the implicit theory of 
doom, whereas the other two tales, and the secondary 
episode woven into the “Traveller,” illustrate the ex- 
plicit theory of doom. 

The second theory, and with this we shall be prin- 
cipally concerned, ascribes tragedy neither to the in- 
evitable and obvious conflict of individual with indi- 
vidual nor to the struggles of people with people but to 

THE TRAGIC SENSE OF LIFE 

175 

the ceaseless conflict and strife, within each man, of his 
own passions, desires, and ambitions. More particu- 
larly is it ascribed to that irresistible craving which 
exacts from man and the world more than he is en- 
titled to and more than his abilities and powers war- 
rant — more, in fact, than he can adequately hope to 
cope with. The resulting tragedy is the penalty 
imposed by fate for any departure from the basic ideal 
of the Winnebago, that proportion be observed in all 
matters. It represents the price to be paid for any 
deviation from that fundamental sense of reality which 
ordains — as implied in the examples quoted — that an 
old man may not enjoy what is the prerogative of 
youth nor a youth hope to escape death. It is with 
both of these themes that the following Winnebago 
tales deal. As an ethical corollary to the last we 
find the doctrine that power desired for its own sake 
entails destruction not only for one’s self but for others 
as well. 

We have here three sources for a possible develop- 
ment of the sense of tragedy and doom. Now the idea 
of doom, although closely bound up with that of 
tragedy, contains one marked difference. Tragedy may 
and does result from accidental circumstances, whereas 
doom means more specifically the inevitable tragedy 
arising from the expression of certain ambitions, feel- 
ings, and desires which, though easily explicable, bring 
only ruin in their train. This holds true even though 
humanly speaking the situation in which the actions 
are placed allows little liberty of choice. Thus it 

1 76 PRIMITIVE MAN AS PHILOSOPHER 

would be well-nigh impossible for a devout old Winne- 
bago who has suddenly come upon what looks like 
an exceptionally holy lake, not to ponder upon the 
nature and the powers possessed by the spirits pre- 
sumably in control of it; or to expect him not to 
visualize the good fortune of the youth whose happy 
fate it will be to fast there. It is only natural that he 
should thereupon think of his son as that happy youth. 
Yet in thus allowing his son to act as his surrogate 
he has sealed his son’s doom. Similarly it is not to be 
supposed that a boy, goaded on by an overambitious 
and power-seeking father, should know how to observe 
proper and reasonable limits in his demands on life, 
nor can it be supposed that, unaided, he will possess 
sufficient discrimination to separate a pretended from 
a real benefactor. 

Now this is the underlying theme of the tale of the 
“Traveller.” Perhaps it is even too much to ask — this 
is the theme of the third tale — that a youthful faster 
who is filled with the praises of the powers of the 
spirits about to appear to him, should give up his de- 
mand for immortality. An inevitable and inexorable 
chain of events, all of them explicable from a human 
standpoint, impels these people onward and constrains 
them to their doom just as bitterly as in Greek tragedy. 
But here it is not an external crime with its inevitable 
punishment but an inner transgression, flowing from 
the very nature of human cravings followed by an 
inevitable retribution. And the sin committed is one 
difficult for erring man to guard against — that of at- 

THE TRAGIC SENSE OF LIFE 

177 

tempting to attain something which is beyond human 
power. 

I think that I am not lifting simple tales out of their 
proper context in making the above claims. Through- 
out the area inhabited by the woodland tribes of 
Canada and the United States, overfasting entails 
death. The Ojibwa believe that those who fast too long 
either die or are transformed into tenuous apparitions 
so light that the faintest human breath can blow them 
away. Among the Winnebago over fasting is popularly 
supposed to mean death. In the three tales to be dis- 
cussed all that has been added is a motivation and an 
interpretation for this death. That defeat and death 
should be ascribed to some exaggeration, to some par- 
donable yet regrettable human frailty, is a motif ex- 
ceedingly common in Winnebago mythology. Thus in 
one of the versions of the myth of the “Twins,” the 
uncle of the heroes is defeated because he permitted 
himself to lose his temper. “The bad spirit,” it there 
says, “was jealous of your uncle and provoked him 
till he lost his temper and then defeated him.” 

Humility, modesty, and a sense of proportion are the 
cardinal virtues whose practice is repeatedly urged 
upon young people. It should not be regarded as either 
strange or unusual that something in the nature of a 
true sense of the tragedy of life, or of a mystical 
groping for what lies beyond human power, should 
have developed among certain individuals. This it is 
that finds expression in these tales. I do not for a 
moment contend that either all or even a large number 

1 78 PRIMITIVE MAN /IS PHILOSOPHER 

of the Winnebago were capable of so philosophical an 
outlook. For the vast majority death was simply a 
consequence of overfasting and thus may very well 
have been little more than a superstitious bogey; but 
this, of course, in no way excludes the existence of a 
more advanced attitude, shared by the few and found 
definitely inculcated in occasional tales and myths. 

Let us now turn to tales themselves. I have selected 
three, one called “The Traveller,” the second, “The 
Seer,” and the third, “The Faster.” 

The hero of the first is nicknamed “Traveller” in 
satirical allusion to the fact that from his earliest in- 
fancy he never rested. He is the only son of one of 
the four great water spirits created by the supreme 
deity, Earthmaker, to hold the earth in position. To 
distinguish these primal spirits from most others, 
Earthmaker is supposed to have molded them with his 
own hands and it was thus their great boast that they 
were not born of woman. 

From earliest childhood Traveller evinced interest 
only in visiting the remotest corners of the universe. 
While he was thus frittering away his time, a terrible 
fate was being prepared for his people. The thunder- 
birds, the hereditary and implacable foes of the water 
spirits, were planning to annihilate them. When, 
therefore, the young man returns from one of his 
journeys he finds his father utterly disconsolate, sitting 
with bowed head in a corner of the room. When asked 
the cause of his worry the father bursts out into bitter 
reproaches and sarcasm against his good-for-nothing 

THE TRAGIC SENSE OF LIFE 

179 

son and explains to him finally the fate about to over- 
whelm them all. The son is told that although a coun- 
cil of the water spirits is to take place that day it 
seems quite clear that destruction is not to be averted. 
Much to the father’s surprise and indignation the son 
immediately offers to meet the son of the chief of the 
thunderbirds in single combat. At this the father jeers 
but when he realizes how serious is his son’s resolve, 
his anger and sarcasm change to solicitude and he be- 
seeches him that if he must go, he should at least wait 
till his parents are dead so that they will not have to 
bear the sorrow of his death. The young man, how- 
ever, remains obdurate and prepares to put his plan 
into execution. 

The story then continues as follows: 

Near the spot where Traveller stood was the center-pole 
of the lodge. At its base appeared a hole and through this 
he crawled, subsequently emerging on the other side under 
the earth. He was then near his home. There he took what 
he needed and immediately started out again. He again 
crawled down through the base of the center-pole and con- 
tinued travelling under the earth until he finaly came to 
the mouth of the Mississippi. Up this river he proceeded 
until he had passed its source and approached a hardly 
noticeable dried-up spring. All that could be detected of 
it was a moist spot. This spring originally had been the 
door of a lodge standing there in former times. Then he 
repaired it and placed guards at the entrance. The spring 
was very pleasant to behold so he remained there. 

i8o PRIMITIVE MAN AS PHILOSOPHER 

Soon he noticed that a human being was fasting near by. 
When brought into his presence Traveller said, “Grandson, 
I am going to give you a blessing. You are the first one 
to receive one from me. Because you have made yourself 
suffer so much, because you have thirsted yourself to death, 
because you have made yourself so truly a compassion- 
inspiring a spectacle, you shall attain to the full length of 
years. You shall die of old age. Remember that a normal 
life is very short. I was not born of a woman’s womb but 
Earthmaker molded me with his own hands.” 

The young man went away and then told his father of 
the blessing he had received. “My son, it is good. The 
water spirits are the greatest spirits in the world. You 
have had a good dream.” 

The young man fasted again and after four days and 
four nights of fasting the attendants of Traveller came for 
him again. When he was brought before Traveller the 
latter said, “Grandson, I am going to bestow my blessing 
upon you again because you have made yourself a com- 
passion-inspiring object with your weeping. I am one of 
the greatest spirits Earthmaker created and never before 
have I bestowed my gifts upon any one. But now that 
you have received them you must not fast any longer. All 
the spirits know that I have given you these gifts and ne 
one else will say anything to you (i.e., give you similar 
ones). And, indeed, who is my equal? Who could give 
you a greater blessing than mine? So do not fast any 
longer. You shall never be in want of anything. Your 
lodge shall always be supplied with the things you need.” 
Then the young man looked at the lodge and saw that it 

THE TRAGIC SENSE OF LIFE 181 

was filled with everything desirable. “All these,” continued 
Traveller, “I bestow upon you.” 

The young man went away and told his father of what 
he had dreamt, and the father again said, “My son, that 
is a good dream. Fast again.” 

Then the young man fasted again for four nights and for 
four days, and at the end of that time the attendants of 
Traveller came after him again. When, as before, he was 
brought before the Traveller this one said, “Grandson, 
I have bestowed my blessings upon you already. I told you 
before that I had done so and I told you to stop but yet 
you persist. Everything that you can possibly desire I 
have bestowed upon you; all the things that human beings 
possess, all these I have given you.” 

Then the young man went away and told his father. 
“Now then, my son, it is good. I told you to fast again, 
and you have done it. Indeed, it is good. These water 
spirits are very great spirits. So fast, my son, again.” 

So the young man fasted again for four nights and once 
again the Traveller sent for him. “Grandson,” he said, 
“stop fasting. I told you that long ago, but evidently I 
cannot make you understand. I knew, however, all the 
time that you were seeking that which I am now about 
to bestow upon you. Tell me, of what value is it to kill 
a person? Earthmaker did not create me for that purpose 
but I am, nevertheless, in control of great war gifts. The 
first time you go on the warpath you will be the leader. 
You will receive as your victim a man who possesses no 
weapons with which to defend himself. Go, for you will be 
victorious. The second time you go on the warpath, if you 

182 PRIMITIVE MAN /1 5 PHILOSOPHER 

so desire it, you will have two men. The third time you 
will kill three men and the fourth time a whole village. 
And in addition I thought that it would not be necessary 
for you to make use of my body (for medicines), but now 
I have resolved to let you see my body. Tomorrow, at 
noon, you will see me and then may prepare medicines for 
yourself from my ‘bones.’ As long as the human race lasts 
so long will this medicine chest made from my bones endure. 
But remember when I say ‘day’ I mean what I call day and 
you call the middle of summer. And when I say my body 
is there I don’t mean in that precise spot. My body is the 
water and wherever there is water there will you see me. 
When the time for you to come has approached I shall let 
you know. Grandson, I have given you my blessings and I 
want you to bring your relatives with you when you come 
to obtain your medicine chest. I shall see to it that the 
animals you desire shall emerge from the water. I shall 
feed you all. Now, grandson, what more can you want? 
So do not fast again and go home immediately. Remember, 
you must come back in the morning, that is, at noon.” 

The young man went home and told his father what had 
happened. “My son,” said the latter, “this is good. You 
have dreamt for all your people. I thought this was going 
to happen and that is why I asked you to fast again.” 
Then the father thanked the boy again. 

The young man now stopped fasting. The people of the 
village were told of the promise made by the water spirit 
so they all moved to another place. When they got there 
they found many bears, otters, beavers, etc., and had plenty 
of food. 

THE TRAGIC SENSE OF LIFE 183 

Now the summer came and the time mentioned by the 
Traveller was at hand. Then Traveller said to the youth, 
“Come alone and bring your offerings in a boat.” The place 
where he was to go was called Big Lake (Lake Winnebago). 
The next morning at the appointed time the young man 
went there. He put all the necessary offerings into a boat 
and started out. About noon he seemed to notice some- 
thing and as he looked attentively he perceived some driz- 
zling rain. Then he heard a roaring sound and the earth 
shook. The roaring became very loud and there in the 
mist he suddenly saw a man smiling at him. Above the 
place where the man stood the colors of the rainbow were 
visible; eight rainbows, one above the other. Around this 
man’s waist was wrapped four times the tail of a water 
spirit. The water spirit was unconscious. Neither of the 
two combatants (the water spirit and the thunderbird) 
was able to extricate himself from the other’s grasp. 

Suddenly the water spirit said, “Grandson, it is your fault 
that I have come to this. I gave you my blessing and 
I promised to show you my body. This person here, my 
enemy, heard it and came first. Grandson, he has caused 
me to suffer very much, so shoot him for my sake.” 

Then the thunderbird spoke, “Ah my younger brother, 
what this person has just said is untrue. My younger 
brother, he is your enemy, so shoot him for my sake for he 
has caused me to suffer very much.” 

Then Traveller replied, “Grandson, it is he who is telling 
you an untruth. If he is really such a good friend of yours, 
why did he never pay any attention to you? Indeed, he is 
not telling you the truth. He has not done for you what I 

1 84 PRIMITIVE MAN AS PHILOSOPHER 

have done. If he is your brother and is speaking the truth 
you would have known it long ago. So shoot him for me 
for he has caused me to suffer very much.” 

“My younger brother, he is not telling you the truth. He 
has not in reality bestowed any blessing upon you at all 
(i.e., in order to benefit you). He did it because he 
wanted you to come here in order to help him. We are, 
in truth, brothers and this one is your enemy. He never 
would really have given you anything. My younger brother, 
he has caused me to suffer, so shoot him for me.” 

Thus they kept on for a long time. Whenever the water 
spirit spoke the young man believed him and whenever the 
thunderbird spoke the young man believed him in turn. 
Finally he was convinced that the thunderbird was telling 
the truth and was just on the point of shooting the water 
spirit when the latter, realizing his intention, said, “Well 
and good, shoot me. In truth you do not know how to 
appreciate what I have done. This, too, remember, if you 
shoot me, that I am not the only water spirit in existence. 
Remember that water is my body. Never touch water, 
therefore, for it will be the body of a water spirit you are 
then touching and it will be a continual reminder to you of 
me. All the water spirits hear me. But you yourself will 
not escape anyhow.” Frightened at this speech the young 
man shot the thunderbird. 

“0 my! O my! Younger brother! He did not conquer 
me fairly. Indeed, we have not been defeated fairly! Had 
I known that he was going to do this I, too, would have 
bestowed blessings upon you as he did. He has defeated me 
by treachery, younger brother. This, indeed, must have 

THE TRAGIC SENSE OF LIFE 185 

been his intention for he covered his tracks when he came 
here. Younger brother, he lied to you when he told you 
that he was one of the greatest spirits Earthmaker created. 
That is not true. He is only the son of such a one and he 
was born of a woman’s womb. All that he has told you 
is untrue. Younger brother, since you have, however, done 
this you will not live much longer. Even now, on your 
return home, a large war party will come upon you and 
you will be the very first one to be killed. You have 
brought ruin upon all your relatives for they, too, will be 
slain.” 

That was all. The thunderbird was then taken under 
the water. 

The young man’s heart was filled with remorse but it 
was, of course, all of no avail for he had already shot the 
thunderbird. He went home and told his father what had 
happened. The old man talked excitedly, but there was 
nothing to be done about the matter any more. There was 
no help for anything now. Both started home and on 
their way they were attacked by a war party and all those 
who had been occupants of the old man’s lodge were killed. 
Those not related to him escaped unharmed. 

Let us now examine this extraordinary and dramatic 
tale. In the second and fourth paragraphs of the 
story, we have Traveller represented as bestowing upon 
the youth what is the normal blessing, one to which all 
people look forward and one that lay very well within 
the powers of any spirit to give. What first strikes us 
as strange is the manner in which Traveller makes his 

186 PRIMITIVE MAN , 4 S PHILOSOPHER 

boasts and the deliberate falsehood of his claims. He 
here sins against two tenets of Winnebago ethics — 
never to boast and never to lie. At every ceremony 
people who recount their achievements are cautioned 
against exaggeration. “Always say a little less,” the 
older people tell them. It is, indeed, quite obvious that 
the boasting and falsehood are here put into Traveller’s 
mouth for a definite purpose, that purpose being to 
depreciate him. Stylistically, in Winnebago myths, 
such words foreshadow the defeat of the speaker. So, 
for example, in one of the versions of the myth of the 
“Twins,” we have the uncle of the heroes and his 
enemy before they attempt the test which is to decide 
their fate, talking to each other as follows: 

“You are not equal to me,” they said to one another. 
“I am one of the greatest that Earthmaker has cre- 
ated,” both of them said. Finally the uncle got angry 
and took his pipe. “I am one of the greatest that 
Earthmaker has created,” he thought, and that is why 
he was not afraid to get angry. 

Every Winnebago hearing this would assume that 
the man so speaking would be defeated. The same 
holds for the statements of Traveller in the opening 
paragraphs. All the sympathy of the Winnebago audi- 
ence would from the beginning be against Traveller. 
The father, so the Winnebago might feel, should, how- 
ever, have been suspicious from the first. The expla- 
nation of the unusual behavior of the father is to be 
sought in the fact that the depreciation of the Traveller 
is probably a secondary reinterpretation; and secondly 

THE TRAGIC SENSE OF LIFE 

187 

— and this is the important point — in the fact that the 
father is to be represented as a selfish and over- 
ambitious man. 

Thus far all the transgressing has been done by 
Traveller. In paragraph 7 we have, however, the first 
suggestion of a new complication. There, in spite of 
Traveller’s express statement to the youth that he was 
to cease fasting, the father tells him to continue. An 
interesting point is here involved. Up to this point 
Traveller has bestowed upon the youth only such 
powers as he really possessed. His transgression has 
consisted only in his boasting and in his falsehood. 
He apparently does not want to transcend his powers. 
The father, however, forces his hand. The whole bur- 
den of guilt is now transferred to father and son, and 
the Winnebago audience realizes instantly that they 
are dealing with an instance of a youth who has fasted 
too long. From the Winnebago point of view the sin 
which father and son commit is infinitely greater than 
that of Traveller, for the former have allowed them- 
selves to be beguiled into a quest for power as such. 
The father has allowed his craving for power to over- 
whelm him and he is using his son as a surrogate for 
himself. The faster is obviously helpless between a 
dishonest spirit and a selfish, ambitious father. Yet 
something can be said for the father. To realize that 
a water spirit has appeared to his son, and not to desire 
those things almost always associated with the specific 
gifts in their bestowing — the opportunity of seeing the 
spirit himself and preparing medicines from his 

1 88 PRIMITIVE MAN ^5 PHILOSOPHER 

“bones” — that is asking the normal prestige-hunting 
Winnebago to exercise a well-nigh superhuman 
control. 

Thus at the very outset we find an innocent boy 
caught between a cunning deity and the ambitions of 
a father, an old man tempted beyond endurance. Both 
of these facts are preliminary elements in the tragedy 
that is to unfold itself. 

From another point of view, too, the second speech 
of Traveller in the fourth paragraph is interesting, for 
therein is contained the enunciation of the approved 
Winnebago theory of ethics by one of the spirits him- 
self. “What more can a man want than I have be- 
stowed?” he asks in substance. “You have received 
long life and the promise that all your wishes are to be 
gratified.” What the normal, sensible Winnebago 
father would then have said is put into the mouth of 
the spirit: “Stop fasting now.” The author of this 
version of the tale evidently wished to impress upon 
his hearers this important truth. Yet this does not in 
the least detract from the fact that it is put into 
Traveller’s mouth because it is the latter’s definite 
design to throw the guilt on to the human pair. 

The motivation and plot elaboration are unusually 
good. Traveller is depicted as an exceedingly crafty 
and cunning individual. From the very beginning it is 
clear that the water spirits, unaided, cannot win and 
Traveller therefore plans to obtain human aid; so he 
binds son and father to him by catering to their will- 
to-power in such a manner, however, that all initiative 

THE TRAGIC SENSE OF LIFE 189 

ostensibly is placed in their hands. In making his 
claim to be one of the greatest spirits in the world he 
is, of course, throwing out a bait which few Winnebago 
would have refused. 

Once they have taken the initiative, he can safely 
warn the boy to stop fasting, and protest, as he does in 
the eighth paragraph, against being coerced into be- 
stowing upon him specific victory on the warpath, into 
showing himself in person, and in allowing medicines 
to be prepared from his “bones.” By this time father 
and son are hopelessly enmeshed in their destiny. 
Traveller had obtained the one thing he desired, the 
gratitude of the youth, and on this gratitude is to 
depend his victory over the thunderbird. The skill 
of the motivation is particularly manifest in the way 
in which the ulterior purpose of Traveller is made to 
fit into the accepted Winnebago yearnings and ideals 
and into their concept of “sin.” It was rather normal, 
though admittedly dangerous, for a Winnebago to 
attempt to obtain the final blessing of the water spirit; 
namely, the right to use his “bones.” For Traveller 
to insist, therefore, that the faster should stop after 
one or two attempts and after he had received what 
hundreds of spirits could have given him, seems un- 
reasonable. He gives the youth this right because he 
realizes that he would be disobeyed and that, in fact, 
his refusal would act really not as a deterrent but as 
an incentive to further efforts. “Blessings are not to 
be obtained easily,” the Winnebago say. It is Travel- 
ler’s purpose, as we have seen, to compel the young 

igo PRIMITIVE MAN AS PHILOSOPHER 

man to force the spirit’s hand and to make the latter 
bestow upon him what he did not possess — the gift of 
specific victory over the enemy. The essential object 
is to obtain unflinching gratitude, and thus the boy 
receives long life, gratification of all wishes, the 
“bones” of the water spirit, and victory on the war- 
path, the last two gifts drawn, so to speak, from 
Traveller against his will. 

In this whole scene everything is quite normal and 
it is in fact this normality that largely contributes to 
the pathos of the whole situation. 

Reverting again to the narrative, we find nothing of 
real importance until we come to the very dramatic 
scene described in the twelfth paragraph. The water 
spirit and the thunderbird are there represented in 
mortal combat. Traveller, true to his role of the 
crafty deceiver, accuses the youth of having brought 
him into his present predicament because of the prom- 
ise exacted that he would appear to him in person. 
He reminds the youth of the gifts bestowed and calls 
upon him to shoot the thunderbird. In other words, 
the youth is now to show his gratitude, and as payment 
for his culpability in Traveller’s plight, to help the 
latter in his combat against the thunderbird. The 
thunderbird’s answer in the thirteenth paragraph is the 
first intimation that has come to the unfortunate youth 
that deception has been practiced. Traveller’s reply 
is quite unanswerable. In the fifteenth paragraph the 
thunderbird informs the boy that everything Traveller 
has said and pretended is false, that the whole purpose 

THE TRAGIC SENSE OF LIFE igi 

of the latter has been to entice him to the lake so that 
the youth could aid him. The young man is naturally 
in a frightful predicament. His instinct would, of 
course, be to help his supposed benefactor — yet he 
wavers. To those unacquainted with Winnebago be- 
liefs this hesitation must seem unwarranted. It is 
entirely due to the fact that to-day the thunderbird is 
the favorite deity of the Winnebago and his honesty 
and virtues are considered self-evident. 

The end of the story is a double and poignant trag- 
edy, with the defeat of the most popular of Winne- 
bago deities and the death of a youthful and innocent 
faster. 

We must now turn to an entirely different aspect of 
this tale. Although Traveller is manifestly the hero, 
all Winnebago sympathy goes to the thunderbird and, 
were this regarded as a myth and not as a real happen- 
ing, the audience would undoubtedly have expected the 
thunderbird to triumph. Heroes are frequently killed 
but their death is always temporary and they are 
eventually restored to life even if it takes a generation. 
Here no such thing happens. What is manifestly a 
myth in every essential particular, with the exception 
of the fasting experience, is put into the category of a 
tale, interpreted as a real happening, and given an 
unrelieved tragic ending. 

The central facts we have first to elucidate are the 
victory of the water spirit and the transfer of what 
was presumably a myth to the category of a tale. The 
explanation of the victory of this particular water 

192 PRIMITIVE MAN AS PHILOSOPHER 

spirit is comparatively simple. It is a very old and 
still general belief that the oldest spirits in the world 
are those created by the Earthmaker to hold the world 
in position and to keep it from moving. These are four 
water spirits. Equally old was the belief that there are 
five worlds, one above the other, and that the central 
one is ruled over by a water spirit called Traveller. 
Traveller cannot be defeated because this would run 
counter to an accepted fact of Winnebago cosmology. 
His position is so secure that not even the famous hero- 
deities of the Winnebago, the Twins, in their reckless 
wanderings over the universe make an attempt to in- 
terfere with it. 

It is evident, therefore, that Traveller cannot be de- 
picted as being defeated. W T hy, however, is he drawn 
in such unfavorable colors? Why is he not the un- 
blemished hero of the tale? Here, too, the explanation 
is fairly simple. Water spirits to-day are regarded by 
the Winnebago as either definitely evil or dangerous 
because of the twofold nature of the gifts they bestow. 
In some respects their gifts are regarded as the greatest 
within the power of any spirit to grant. A definite 
ambivalent feeling does, nevertheless, attach to every- 
thing concerned with them and on the whole the evil 
side is believed to predominate. But the myths and 
certain folk beliefs indicate quite clearly that this was 
not always so; that at one time the water spirit was as 
moderately benevolent as the thunderbird. The older 
conception of the nature of the spirits among the 
Winnebago also indicates a belief in the twofold classi- 

THE TRAGIC SENSE OF LIFE 

m 

fication of good and bad. The thunderbirds formed 
no exception to this rule and in a number of myths the 
bad thunderbirds are described in a very unfavorable 
light. Under the influence of a marked tendency 
toward systematization this old dual concept has been 
abandoned and most spirits to-day are regarded as 
either good or bad. The water spirits have been 
largely put into the bad and the thunderbirds into the 
good class. Traveller, therefore, as a representative 
of the water spirits, had to be represented as evil. 
This could only be done by so motivating the incidents 
connected with him that they would appear in a most 
unfavorable light. He is consequently depicted as a 
boaster, a liar, and a deceiver. The attainment of the 
position which he occupied and from which he could 
not be displaced had to be attributed to the most 
despicable of maneuvers entailing the death of an un- 
fortunate human being. If he could not be hurled from 
his predominant position in the tale he could at least 
be transformed into the arch-villain of the piece. If 
additional corroboration for this interpretation of his 
role were really wanting it could be furnished by the 
fact that this is the only myth or tale collected among 
the Winnebago where the hero is a villain and yet 
succeeds. 

The villainy of the hero thus reflects a definite 
change in the viewpoint of the Winnebago, a definite 
historical event; namely, the displacement of one cult 
by another. The tale we have before us is then nothing 
more or less than a reinterpretation, in terms of a 

194 PRIMITIVE MAN AS PHILOSOPHER 

predominantly thunderbird civilization, of a Water 
spirit victory. The real hero had to be depreciated and 
the victim, the thunderbird, elevated to the position of 
hero, and it was this readjustment that rendered the 
tragic ending inevitable. 

So much for the fate of the thunderbird. I take it 
that originally the aid of the human faster was legiti- 
mately obtained and that he was depicted as trying to' 
get into rapport with one of the greatest of the spirits. 
With the exception of the specific gift of victory on the 
warpath — which in this form was associated, to my 
knowledge, only with the thunderbirds, the sun, and 
the evening star — the gifts bestowed are those expected 
from a water spirit. It was the change in the cultural 
background that necessitated the youth’s death because 
he helped a water spirit, and it was the new attitude, 
also, that compelled such thoroughgoing changes in the 
motivation of detail upon detail of the actual fasting 
experience that it became transformed into an example 
of the inevitable dangers attendant upon over- 
fasting. The fasting experience, accordingly, takes on 
the appearance of a moral lesson and this explains why 
Traveller finds it necessary to point out to the youth 
that he must not demand more than an ordinary indi- 
vidual is entitled to. This is all secondary here. In 
the tales of the “Seer” and the “Faster,” we shall see 
that these themes form the basic element in the plot. 
Yet, whether the reasons I have advanced for the mo- 
tivation are true or not, the fact remains that in the 
present version the fate of the faster is sealed from 

THE TRAGIC SENSE OF LIFE 

195 

the very beginning; first, because he has been con- 
demned to decide a conflict in which he had no con- 
cern, and, second, because he is coerced into trans- 
gressing certain cardinal elements of the Winnebago 
moral code. 

One point still remains to be answered. What is the 
significance of the human faster? Why was it thought 
necessary to have the time-old struggle between the 
water spirits and the thunderbirds decided by human 
agency? The calling in of a man to decide the conflict 
of deities may be common in classical mythology but 
it is extremely unusual in the mythology of primitive 
peoples. Among the Winnebago the story of Traveller 
is the only instance extant where such a theme, or 
anything even remotely resembling it, occurs, and this 
being so, I cannot but feel that some significance at- 
taches to it. In my opinion the fasting experience was 
not originally connected with the theme of this combat 
of the water spirit with the thunderbird at all. That 
theme is one of the most universal in North America 
and only among the Winnebago and related tribes has 
a faster become associated with it. He may have been 
brought in originally in order to demonstrate the su- 
periority of the water spirits over the thunderbirds, or 
for various other reasons. In our version this episode 
has clearly come to be the direct reflection of the larger 
conflicts of the deities. It is thus the symbolical repre- 
sentation of the struggle for supremacy of two cults, of 
two contending civilizations. The tragic denouement 
has, in this instance, essentially the same origin as that 

196 PRIMITIVE MAN AS PHILOSOPHER 

of the Iliad, the Nibelungenlied, and the Quetzalcoatl 
myth of the ancient Aztec. 

The second of my examples, the tale entitled “The 
Seer,” is psychologically far more subtle than the first. 
As it is very short, I shall quote it in its entirety: 

An old man once came upon what looked like a very 
holy lake. Its shores were steep and extended precipitously 
to the very top. Pine trees abounded everywhere. The old 
man stood watching the lake and then exclaimed, “This lake 
must indeed be very sacred and the various spirits who pre- 
side over it must be extremely powerful. Would that I were 
young again I Here, most assuredly, would I fast!” Thus 
he spoke. But then continuing he said, “But what am I 
saying? Have I not a son? I shall make him fast here !” 
So as soon as he arrived at his home he constructed a place 
for his son to stay and then besought him to fast. 

All winter long the son stayed there and fasted. When- 
ever his father came to see him he told him that as yet 
nothing had taken place. Three years the boy fasted there 
and yet he did not succeed in dreaming of anything. When, 
however, during the fourth year, his father came to him, the 
son addressed him as follows: “Father, at last I have 
received a blessing. The spirit asked for four offerings, 
tobacco, feathers, a dog, and a white deer; for these he 
asked. And then he asked -for a fifth, a human life.” 
When the boy finished the old man expressed his gratitude. 
Then he named the day on which this was to take place 
(i.e., the offerings were to be made). “He who is in control 
of this sacred lake,” continued the youth, “I shall behold, I 

THE TRAGIC SENSE OF LIFE 

197 

was told. To him it is that you are to bring your offerings.” 
The father felt very happy. He went home and it was a 
marked day. 

Then the offerings were taken to the lake. There every- 
thing appeared to be in a turmoil and there was a tremen- 
dous noise. Every few minutes objects would emerge from 
the water. The old man standing there thought to himself, 
“Now, this is the time. Now it is going to appear.” But 
then again he would think to himself, “No, perhaps not.” 
Many things appeared; indeed, everything imaginable, and 
finally out of the lake there rose a burning log, smoking. 
When the disturbance had completely subsided the two saw 
stretched out on the shore a very white water spirit, one of 
the kind that cannot be butchered with an ordinary knife. 
So the old man made himself a knife of red cedar wood 
and with this he proceeded to cut up the water spirit. Out 
of its body he began to make weapons of all kinds. One 
piece of the body he cut off in order to prepare a certain 
kind of drink, another in order to make a war medicine. 
Out of the blood he made a magical paint which would 
enable him to kill an enemy even if the latter were resting 
within his own tent. The Winnebago would love this medi- 
cine (he thought). There was nothing this medicine could 
not accomplish. Then he made a bad medicine which would 
prevent any person from making his (the old man’s) heart 
ache or from making fun of him. The medicine was of a 
kind that if he wished to kill a man he would merely have 
to decide upon the day and then the man in question would 
perish. Indeed if he merely fixed his thoughts upon a par- 
ticular man, that man would suffer. He could, with this 

ig8 PRIMITIVE MAN /IS PHILOSOPHER 

medicine, make a man crazy, or he could deprive him of his 
soul. If a man were very far away and he but uttered his 
name, if he were but to murmur, “Let him die!” that man 
would die. 

These were the medicines he made. No good ones did he 
make; only bad ones. 

Then they made their offerings to the water spirit and 
when these were over the old man said to his son, “My 
dear son, let me myself be the offering.” But the son 
said, “No, father, when you have grown old and death has 
come to you, then you shall live with the water spirit; 
you and he shall be companions.” Thereupon the old man 
replied excitedly, “My dear son, even if this were to happen 
this very minute, indeed I should be satisfied.” “Father, 
when you die, here at this sacred lake you shall live. Here 
forever shall you remain, as long as the earth lasts.” 

Then they went home to their people. The old man im- 
mediately began to use his bad medicines. Wherever a child 
was to be discovered who was especially beloved, wher- 
ever people were to be encountered who were unusually 
popular, the old man killed them. Soon the water spirit 
appeared to the young boy and said, “What is this your 
father is doing? He is killing those who are most beloved, 
men and children. This is not good. Tell him to stop. 
Tell him if he refuses he will be transformed into a rock. 
Earthmaker did not create me for the purpose (to which 
your father is now putting me) and he would be displeased 
if this continued.” 

So the youth went to the father and begged him to stop, 
telling him that if he refused he would be transformed into 

THE TRAGIC SENSE OF LIFE 

199 

a rock. But the old man replied, “My dear son, I have now 
become so accustomed to what I am doing that I cannot 
stop.” 

The next morning the old man did not move and when 
his son looked at him he saw that he had become trans- 
formed into a rock. 

So much for the story. Certain things are quite 
clear. The water spirit has, in addition to the usual 
four offerings, demanded a fifth, a human life, that of 
the faster. To emphasize this demand we see death 
symbolized by the smoking log emerging from the lake 
to which the two men have gone to make their offerings. 
Now this request of the spirits for a human sacrifice 
must not, of course, be taken too literally. Looked at 
from the viewpoint of the spirits, every time a person 
dies from overfasting or during his fast, it is because 
the spirits desired his life. In human terms it simply 
signifies that an individual has attempted something 
which entails death. We are again, as on page 65, 
dealing with an enunciation of the Winnebago ethical 
creed. Here, however, it is enunciated by the deities. 
We know the son to be doomed. From the very be- 
ginning, however, the father has kept the center of 
the stage and he does so again by insisting that he 
become the sacrifice the spirits desire. We see him be- 
fore he has made this unusual request, ostentatiously 
preparing only bad medicines from the body of the 
water spirit, although good ones were also at his dis- 
posal. When the son refuses to accept his offer the 

200 PRIMITIVE MAN AS PHILOSOPHER 

old man deliberately kills all of those most beloved in 
his village and actually forces the water spirit to recog- 
nize him as the stipulated human offering. Why, it 
may be asked, does he insist upon taking his son’s 
place? Why, if he is to die, does not his son die also? 
That the death of the faster may include that of his 
father and all of his relatives, we saw at the conclusion 
of the “Traveller.” 

To explain, let me call attention to the opening of 
the tale. That an old man should stand awe-stricken 
before the prospect of a particularly sacred lake is 
quite natural; that he should ponder over the excep- 
tional gifts possessed by the spirits presiding over such 
a place — that, too, is quite intelligible. Every Winne- 
bago would both understand and sympathize with him. 
His regret that he cannot be young again is hardly a 
transgression against Winnebago ethics unless he draws 
unwarranted corollaries therefrom. But this is exactly 
what he does. In his enthusiasm he uses his son as a 
surrogate for himself, and here, of course, he sins most 
egregiously against a fundamental tenet. To obtain 
something no longer within his reach, he selfishly sacri- 
fices his son and compels him to attempt the propitia- 
tion of one of the most powerful and dangerous of all 
deities, one who frequently inflicts death. Even if the 
father had been represented as wanting his son to fast 
at this particularly sacred lake because of the great 
love he bore him and of a natural excess of ambition for 
the boy he would, according to Winnebago notions, 
have laid himself open to criticism. A loving and 

THE TRAGIC SENSE OF LIFE 

201 

solicitous father is supposed to spur on his child to per- 
sistent effort in the attainment of gifts from the spirits 
but he is, at the same time, supposed to be extremely 
careful that the boy does not overstep the limits of 
discretion in his demands. No such excuse can be 
offered for the father in this instance. There is not 
the slightest trace of solicitude. It is he who plainly 
desires the powers the spirits can bestow. 

The expected takes places and the life of the son is 
demanded. To judge from the insistence with which 
the narrator emphasizes the nature of the medicines' the 
old man prepares, we must assume that as soon as his 
son told him of the demand of the spirits he realized 
the heinousness of his offense. It should be remem- 
bered that the old man is depicted as erring through 
too much piety, that he is not conscious of either his 
will-to-power or extreme selfishness. Once this is 
brought home to him, however, he makes up his mind 
to forestall fate as far as that is possible. He realizes 
that some one has to die and he resolves that he and 
not his innocent son shall be the victim. How is he, 
however, to force the hands of the deities? His 
method is as ruthless as it is thorough. He must so 
behave, commit such crimes, that the spirits will 
slay him. 

This, then, is the obvious interpretation of the tale. 
The doom that befalls the old man is that which over- 
takes all those who, whatever be their motives, be they 
good or bad, sin against that sense of the proportion of 
things which the realities of life impose upon us. The 

202 PRIMITIVE MAN 4 S PHILOSOPHER 

father had fasted as a young boy; he had presumably 
obtained his share of the gifts of the spirits. He had 
no right to demand more, no matter how overpowering 
the situation. Had it been possible to limit the conse- 
quences of his act to himself, little would have been 
said. But that is exactly what life makes impossible. 
Here the practical consequence of his religious en- 
thusiasm, if one were inclined to place the most lenient 
construction upon it, is death for someone else. 

In actual life the Winnebago made definite applica- 
tions of this viewpoint. Any person, for instance, could 
go on the warpath, despite the express prohibitions of 
the chief of the tribe, and any one who desired might 
accompany him. If the individual who thus led an un- 
authorized war party were killed, that was his own 
affair. It was merely interpreted as suicide, and that 
was regarded as unfair and wrong because it inflicted 
pain upon one’s relatives. But if any of the men who 
accompanied him were killed, the leader was guilty 
of murder. In other words, you must not implicate 
others in your unwarranted acts. That is the practical 
statement of the problem. Doom is simply the sym- 
bolical restatement. 

In our tale it is a dreadful punishment that follows a 
humanly intelligible transgression. What seems to us 
an excusable error brings about death, and in order to 
avoid one death, two additional crimes — murder and 
suicide — must be committed. The chain of events is 
inevitable and inexorable. 

One point has still to be considered. Why is the 

THE TRAGIC SENSE OF LIFE 

203 

father transformed into a rock and why does the son 
tell him that when his time has come he will become 
the permanent companion of the water spirit of the sa- 
cred lake? The wish of the father is thus, after all, 
granted, and he has, in a way, fasted and obtained his 
recompense. But he does not obtain it in the antici- 
pated way. Not life but death is to give him the 
happiness he craved. In the form of a rock, something 
that will last as long as the earth endures, he is to 
stand on the shores of the sacred lake and contemplate 
the majesty of the powers who control it. But why 
should he who has wrought so much destruction be 
granted even this boon? The answer seems to be be- 
cause, after his manner, he aimed high. He erred from 
excess of enthusiasm. At least deities and the priests 
of the deities may be presumed to take this tolerant 
view of the case. Die he must, for he has sinned and 
wrought ruin. For his high purpose, however, he is to 
be rewarded and his death mitigated by a measure of 
reincarnation. 

A similar theme recurs in the following tale and it 
is not at all infrequent in Winnebago mythology. It 
is entitled “The Faster” and runs as follows: 

There was once a man who had an only child. One 
day he said, “My child, you must know that you are all 
alone in the world (i.e., without the protection of the 
spirits), with no one from whom to hope for anything. 
Only the spirits can help you.” Thus he spoke to his 
child. 

204 PRIMITIVE MAN AS PHILOSOPHER 

Then the son fasted. After he had been fasting for 
some time his father came to him and said, “My dear son, 
you have now been fasting for a very long period. Surely 
you have obtained some gift from the spirits. You had 
better stop now.” “Father,” answered the boy, “you are 
quite right but still I should like to continue. All that 
you have told me to fast for, all that I have now obtained. 
I have received the gift of killing an enemy at will; I have 
obtained the gift of old age. Indeed, the spirits came to 
me and took me to a doctor’s lodge and there they 
brought me to a person who was dead and told me that I 
could restore him to life again. It was then they told 
me not to fast any longer. Yet in spite of their request I 
continued. Then the spirits from below came, from the 
creation lodge they came, and they bestowed all things upon 
me — victory in war, the ability to cure the sick, success in 
hunting, a long and complete life — all this they gave me. 
Indeed every spirit to whom Earthmaker had given power, 
each one bestowed something upon me. ‘You have fasted 
enough,’ they said. But, father, what I most desire is that 
I shall not die. That is why I do not want to stop. So 
let me continue. Indeed, only when I have obtained that 
gift shall I stop.” 

So the youth continued. The spirits came to him and 
said, “Young man, you have fasted enough. Earthmaker 
has bestowed upon you the gift of living to extreme old 
age, of obtaining everything you wish.” “I am grateful,” 
said the boy, “but what I desire is never to die.” The 
spirits could not dissuade him. “Indeed, I shall never be 
satisfied until I obtain the gift of immortal life,” continued 

THE TRAGIC SENSE OF LIFE 205 

the boy. He was unable to face the thought of death; he 
dreaded it very much. 

In the council lodge of the spirits it was accordingly de- 
cided that he should die. So they looked down upon the 
place where the boy was fasting and there he lay, dead. 
Then the spirits spoke to the father and said, “All that we 
promised your son, you shall have. Do not think about 
this matter (i.e., your son’s death) any more and bury 
him.” 

Then the father dug a grave and buried him. “I wonder 
how it all happened,” he thought to himself. “They told 
me they were unable to dissuade him, and it was for that 
reason that they killed him; they told me not to think of 
the matter any more.” 

Sometime after, when the father went to the grave, he 
noticed a tree growing at its head. That was his son. 
Only a tree lives forever, and that is why the spirits trans- 
formed him into a tree. The father realized it and was 
happy. He lived contented and prosperous thereafter. 

Now this is what the father himself reported and it is 
because of this (i.e., the fate of the youth) that young 
people are told not to fast for too long a period. 

In this tale we have the principal features found in 
the two preceding ones occurring again. But we have 
no treacherous water spirit and no father spurring on 
his child to attempt the impossible or the hazardous 
merely to gratify a parent’s insatiable taste for power. 
On the contrary, both spirits and parents warn and even 
beseech the youth to stop fasting. The spirits are par- 

206 PRIMITIVE MAN AS PHILOSOPHER 

ticularly kind and compassionate. It is the faster him- 
self who is here at fault. The others are definitely 
absolved from all blame. In what way, however, is 
this boy represented as transgressing? In desiring the 
one thing that man cannot have, immortality. The 
spirits are gentle because they realize that the hopeless 
plea of this child is a pardonable one. He does not 
want more power but he wants to possess the normal 
gifts of life forever. They pity him, but he must die 
just as inevitably as the faster in the “Traveller,” as 
the father in the “Seer,” because this youth, too, al- 
though in a different manner, has come into conflict 
with reality. Yet in his case, so excusable is the tragic 
reaching after the unattainable, the spirits grant the 
bewildered father as recompense for the pain they are 
inflicting upon him in destroying his son, the gifts they 
had bestowed upon the boy, and allow him to realize 
that his son has attained the only kind of immortality 
vouchsafed to man, reincarnation in an object whose 
age in comparison to man’s is unlimited. But the 
young man, too, is rewarded by resurrection as a tree. 
Insensate as his request was, he did, in an inexperi- 
enced and groping manner, aim high, for to face the 
perils of long fasting and to persist in prayer through 
discouragement is to aim high and deserve reward. 

That a definite lesson was to be taught by this tale 
would be perfectly apparent even if the narrator had 
not thought fit to add his little epilogue. The proof 
that the main object was to teach young fasters not to 
ask for the impossible is given by the fact that there 

THE TRAGIC SENSE OF LIFE 

207 

was really a method they might have tried in order to 
dissuade the faster from his obsession. He could have 
been told that although he must die there was always 
an excellent chance of his becoming reincarnated. Re- 
incarnation is a fundamental belief of the Winnebago 
and it is something that every Winnebago feels is ob- 
tainable in a number of ways, the principal one being 
that of joining the Medicine Dance. I can well imagine 
a Winnebago father holding out such a hope to a son 
who feared the thought of death. And it is, as a matter 
of fact, reincarnation that he is granted. There was 
not a word about it in the tale because a specific les- 
son was to be taught. 

Thus all of our examples illustrate a specific concep- 
tion of tragedy and doom. In the first, the faster and 
the father are destroyed because they have become en- 
meshed in a battle of the gods in which they had no 
concern; in the second, doom overtakes the father 
because he is seeking something he already possessed, 
and which, from the nature of the case is no longer 
possible for him, because he involves innocent people 
in the consequences of his overreaching; in the third 
instance, finally, doom follows inevitably from the fact 
that what is desired lies beyond human power. In all 
we find the cardinal tenet of Winnebago ethics enun- 
ciated, that death is the lot of all who sin against real- 
ity and the sense of proportion, and who involve others 
in their self-initiated transgression. 

CHAPTER XII 

MYSTICISM AND SYMBOLISM 

A T a very early period of our contact with primitive 
peoples observers had already remarked on the 
strain of mysticism and symbolism found in their 
thought, their rituals, and their art. As we came to 
know them better these mystic and symbolic elements, 
far from decreasing in importance and significance, 
loomed even larger. To-day many investigators would 
probably insist that only when we have fully grasped 
the mystic and symbolic meanings inherent in most of 
the activities of primitive man can we hope to under- 
stand him. There is a very large element of truth in 
this contention, and it is certainly an arresting and 
fundamentally significant fact that whenever we obtain 
descriptions of their own culture from natives, sym- 
bolism and mysticism predominate. All this must be 
unhesitatingly granted. Yet it is a far cry from such 
an admission to the assumption that primitive man is 
inherently a mystic or that his thinking is not rational 
or logical like ours, but consists rather of a succession 
of symbols; or, if you wish, that his ostensible logical 
thinking is affected by all kinds of symbolic adhesions 
and references. Many theorists have made this as- 
sumption and have brought what must seem to many 

208 

MYSTICISM AND SYMBOLISM 209 

incontrovertible evidence for the correctness of their 
thesis. 

Yet I, for one, feel rather definitely that there has 
been something of an overemphasis on this aspect of 
primitive thought for a variety of reasons. It is first of 
all easier to understand mysticism and symbolism than 
many other aspects of primitive culture. Secondly, 
they appeal to our imagination and have a tendency 
to evoke whatever mysticism and symbolism lies em- 
bedded in most of us. This is, indeed, one of the subtle 
dangers we must all guard against. However, I do not 
wish to stress this side of the question. In estimating 
the importance and the role of mysticism and symbol- 
ism we must bear in mind that it is misleading to em- 
phasize unduly their presence in art and ritual. They 
are present in all art and ritual. 

But leaving art and ritual aside I see no evidence 
for their dominating primitive life and thought to any- 
thing like the degree we are accustomed to believe. 
It is undoubtedly true that owing to the attitude as- 
sumed toward the nature of reality and personality, 
much of primitive man’s thought seems eminently 
non-logical and mystical, but our analysis in Chapters 
XIII and XIV has shown that this is really an errone- 
ous impression which disappears as soon as we become 
better acquainted with the facts in the case. It should 
likewise be remembered that a good deal of symbolism, 
at least that of primitive peoples, is stereotyped and 
often of a highly artificial and conscious nature. Take, 
for instance, the symbolical representation in literature 

2io PRIMITIVE MAN AS PHILOSOPHER 

of the four ages of man — a favorite subject in certain 
North American Indian tribes. Wherever among the 
Winnebago these ages are described, the same sym- 
bols are used; symbols that upon investigation turned 
out to be mere literary clicMs. In other words the 
treatment is quite identical with that existing in such 
highly sophisticated and formal literatures as those of 
China and Japan. 

To show how extremely sophisticated and conscious 
such symbolism and mysticism can become, let me 
quote a few examples from a ritual of the Winnebago 
which prides itself upon its twofold significance, a 
literal and a symbolical one. For example, where the 
literal meaning of the text has, “He bit the fish and 
light filled the gap made,” the symbolical mystical 
meaning which has become stereotyped and is handed 
down from one generation to another is, “He imprinted 
daylight (life) upon the middle of the body.” Or 
again, where the text reads, “He lay down on his back 
and pressed the stone to his breast and daylight (life) 
burst forth from his navel,” this turns out to be but a 
stereotyped way, peculiar to this ceremony, of saying 
that “as the water was poured on the heated stone 
clouds of steam arose.” “The tied hair of our grand- 
mother touches the turtle” merely signifies that the 
sprinkler has been placed on the water. 

Of a much higher order is the mystical and quite sec- 
ondary interpretation of an incident in one of the 
myths told in this ritual. Earthmaker, the Winnebago 
creator, is represented as taking a white cloud and a 

MYSTICISM AND SYMBOLISM 211 

«#L 

blue cloud, combining them, and throwing the new sub- 
stance, the nature of which is not specifically men- 
tioned, toward the earth. As it floats downward it 
pushes aside the bad clouds and is finally seized by an 
otter, the last of Earthmaker’s animal creations. The 
mystical meaning of this passage runs as follows: By 
rolling together the white and blue clouds Earthmaker 
created the most important object in the ceremony, the 
shell by whose means death and reincarnation are ob- 
tained. As this shell floats downward towards the 
earth it dissipates all evil and is seized by that animal 
who was of the least consequence and importance, 
the otter. The otter was, in fact, the synonym in 
Winnebago culture for stupidity and simplicity. 
What is referred to here is the bag made of otter 
skin used in the ceremony as a receptacle for the 
sacred shell. 

Now here we have an example of very profound 
mysticism and yet it is, at least to-day, very definitely 
a cliche, quite meaningless to the uninitiated and prob- 
ably meaningless to a large number of the initiated. 
It seems quite justifiable to assume that it was the 
interpretation of a specifically gifted individual. And 
this brings me to the point I wish particularly to men- 
tion, that having once shown the existence of a purely 
secondary, conscious, and somewhat sophisticated type 
of mysticism and symbolism among primitive peoples, 
quite identical with that encountered among ourselves, 
we have no right to assume that mysticism and sym- 
bolism play an inherently more dominant role among 

212 PRIMITIVE MAN AS PHILOSOPHER 

the former than among us. I should not for a moment 
deny that mysticism and symbolism, particularly in its 
formal aspect, are more frequently utilized among them 
than among Western Europeans to-day. I doubt, how- 
ever, whether they are more extensively used among 
primitive peoples than among the Chinese and Japa- 
nese, and yet those who really know the Chinese and 
Japanese would hesitate to characterize their thought 
as more specifically mystical and symbolical than our 
own. 

Whether we shall ultimately, on the basis of authen- 
tic and critically controlled data, be able to prove that 
the prevailing impression — namely, that primitive peo- 
ples are in their thought more mystical or symbolical 
than ourselves — is right or not, I have surely furnished 
enough evidence to show that they have often elabor- 
ated their mysticism and symbolism in a highly con- 
scious manner. To prove that point still further I shall 
devote the rest of this chapter to poems in which this 
symbolism and mysticism have attained a very high 
degree of literary excellence. 

I 

The Water of Kane 

A query, a question, 

I put to you: 

Where is the water of Kane? 

At the Eastern Gate 

Where the Sun conies in at Haehae; 

There is the water of Kane. 

MYSTICISM AND SYMBOLISM 

A question I ask of you: 

Where is the water of Kane? 

Out there with the floating Sun, 

Where cloud-forms rest on Ocean’s breast, 
Uplifting their forms at Nihoa, 

This side the base of Lehua; 

There is the water of Kane. 

One question I put to you: 

Where is the water of Kane? 

Yonder on mountain peak, 

On the ridges steep, 

In the valleys deep, 

Where the rivers sweep; 

There is the water of Kane. 

This question I ask of you: 

Where, pray, is the water of Kane? 

Yonder, at sea, on the ocean, 

In the driving rain, 

In the heavenly bow, 

In the piled-up mist-wraith, 

In the blood-red rainfall, 

In the ghost-pale cloud- form; 

There is the water of Kane. 

One question I put to you: 

Where, where is the water of Kane? 

Up on high is the water of Kane, 

In the heavenly blue, 

In the black piled cloud, 

In the black, black cloud, 

In the black-mottled sacred cloud of the gods; 
There is the water of Kane. 

214 PRIMITIVE MAN AS PHILOSOPHER 

One question I ask of you: 

Where flows the water of Kane? 

Deep in the ground, in the gushing spring, 

In the ducts of Kane and Loa, 

A well-spring of water, to quaff, 

A water of magic power — 

The water of life! 

Life! O give us this life! 

Hawaii 

ii 

I ran into the swamp confused, 

There I heard the tadpoles singing. 

I ran into the swamp confused, 

Where the bark-clothed tadpoles sang. 

In the west the dragonfly wanders, 

Skimming the surfaces of the pools, 

Touching only with his tail. He skims 
With flapping and rustling wings. 

Thence I ran as the darkness gathers, 

Wearing cactus flowers in my hair. 

Thence I ran as the darkness gathers, 

In fluttering darkness to the singing-place. 

Pima , Arizona 

hi 

At the time of the white dawning, 
At the time of the white dawning, 
I arose and went away, 

At Blue Nightfall I went away. 

Pima, Arizona 

MYSTICISM AND SYMBOLISM 215 
IV 

The evening glow yet lingers, 

The evening glow yet lingers: 

And I sit with my gourd rattle 
Engaged in the sacred chant. 

As I wave the eagle feathers 
We hear the magic sounding. 

The strong night is shaking me, 

Just as once before he did 
When in spirit I was taken 
To the great magician’s house. 

Pima , Arizona 

v 

Pitiable harlot though I am, 

My heart glows with the singing 
While the evening yet is young. 

My heart glows with the singing. 

Pima , Arizona 

VI 

Now the swallow begins his singing; 
Now the swallow begins his singing; 
And the women who are with me, 

The poor women commence to sing. 

The swallows met in the standing cliff; 
The swallows met in the standing cliff; 
And the rainbows arched above me, 
There the blue rainbow-arches met. 

Pima, Arizona 

216 PRIMITIVE MAN AS PHILOSOPHER 

VII 

Down from the houses of magic, 

Down from the houses of magic; 

Blow the winds, and from my antlers 
And my ears, they stronger gather. 

Over there I ran trembling, 

Over there I ran trembling, 

For bows and arrows pursued me, 

Many bows were on my trail. 

Pima, Arizona 

VIII 

In the reddish glow of the nightfall, 

In the reddish glow of the nightfall. 

I return to my burrow 
About which the flowers bloom. 

With the four eagle feathers, 

With the four eagle feathers, 

I stir the air. When I turn 
My magic power is crossed. 

Pima, Arizona 

IX 

This my wish, my burning desire, 
That in the season of slumber 
Thy spirit my soul may inspire, 

A star-dweller, 

Heaven-guest, 

Soul-awakener, 

Bird from covert calling, 

Where forest champions stand. 

MYSTICISM AND SYMBOLISM 

217 

There roamed I too with Laka, 

Of Lea and Loa, a wilderness child; 

On ridge, in forest boon companion she 
To the heart that throbbed in me. 

O Laka, 0 Laka, 

Hark to my call I 
You approach, it is well; 

You possess me, I am blessed 1 
Hawaii 

X 

A Prayer To Kane 

Now, Kane, approach, illumine the altar; 
Stoop, and enlighten mortals below; 

Rejoice in the gifts I have brought. 
Wreathed goddess fostered by Kapo — ■ 

Hail Kapo, of beauty resplendent! 

Great Kapo, of sea and land, 

The topmost stay and anchoring line. 

Kapo sits in her darksome covert; 

On the terrace, at Mo-o-he-lala, 

Stands the god-tree of Ku, on Mauna-loa. 
God Kaulana-ula twigs now mine ear, 

His whispered suggestion to me is 
This payment, sacrifice, offering, 

Tribute of praise to thee, O Kapo divine. 
Inspiring spirit in sleep, answer my call. 
Behold, of lehua bloom of Kaana 
The women are stringing enough 
To enwreathe goddess Kapo; 

Kapo, great queen of that island, 

Of the high and the low. 

The day of revealing shall see what it sees: 
A seeing of facts, a sifting of rumors, 

218 PRIMITIVE MAN /IS PHILOSOPHER 

An insight won by the black sacred awa, 

A vision like that of a god! 

O Kapo, return! 

Return and abide in your altar! 

Make it fruitful! 

Lo, here is the water, 

The water of life! 

Hail, now, to thee! 

Hawaii 

XI 

The Chant of the Symbolic Colors 

With what shall the little ones adorn their bodies, as they 
tread the path of life? it has been said, in this house. 

The crimson color of the God of Day who sitteth in the 
heavens, 

They shall make to be their sacred color, as they go forth 
upon life’s journey. 

Verily, the god who reddens the heavens as he approaches, 

They shall make to be their sacred color, as they go forth 
upon life’s journey. 

When they adorn their bodies with the crimson hue shed 
by that God of Day, 

Then shall the little ones make themselves to be free from 
all causes of death, as they go forth upon life’s journey. 

What shall the people use for a symbolic plume? they said 
to one another, it has been said, in this house. 

Verily, the God who always comes out at the beginning of 
day, 

Has at his right side 

A beam of light that stands upright like a plume. 

That beam of light shall the people make to be their sacred 
plume. 

MYSTICISM AND SYMBOLISM 219 

When they make of that beam of light their sacred plume, 
Then their sacred plume shall never droop for want of 
strength as they go forth upon life’s journey. 

What shall they place as a pendant upon his breast? they 
said to one another. 

The shell of the mussel who sitteth upon the earth, 

They shall place as a pendant upon his breast. 

It is as the God of Day who in the heavens, 

Close to their breast they shall verily press this god; 

As a pendant upon his breast they shall place this god. 
Then shall the little ones become free from all causes of 
death, as they go forth upon life’s journey. 

Verily, at that time and place, it has been said, in this 
house, 

They said to one another: What shall the people place 
upon his wrists? 

It is a bond spoken of as the captive’s bond, 

That they shall place upon his wrists. 

Verily, it is not a captive’s bond, 

That is spoken of, 

But it is a soul 

That they shall place upon his wrists. 

Verily at that time and place, it has been said, in this house, 
They said to one another: What is he upon whom a girdle 
is to be placed? 

Verily, it is not a captive that is spoken of, 

It is a spirit upon whom they will place a girdle, they said, 
it has been said, in this house. 

Verily at that time and place, it has been said, in this house, 
They said to one another: What is he upon whose feet these 
moccasins are to be placed? 

220 PRIMITIVE MAN AS PHILOSOPHER 

It is a captive 

Upon whose feet these moccasins are to be placed. 

Verily, it is not a captive that is spoken of, 

It is a spirit 

Upon whose feet these moccasins are to be placed, they 
said, it has been said, in this house. 

Osage, Oklahoma 

XII 

Priest’s Prayer to Pupil About to Be Admitted to 

Instruction 

By the occult powers of the dark, of the light, ages — 
Such powers as thou, O Rongo-marae-roa (god of peace), 
can exert. 

Be fruitful, be plentiful, give the great and enduring power 
to remove all evil — 

The inherent original power, unto me, unto this one. 

Be fruitful thy knowledge as also the love of it, 

Be fruitful as the learned high priests of old, 

Be fruitful thy memory, as the all-knowing gods, 

Be fruitful of all things outside, as far as the thoughts may 
extend, 

Be fruitful of knowledge of the Sacred Heavens — 

Of the Heavens where first arose the priests, 

To the distant Heavens, to those divided from the upper- 
most Heavens, 

O Io-e. 

Disclose thy way with the ancient and erudite, 

The way of the Gods, O Io-the-origin-of-all-things! 

Cause to descend without and beyond — 

To descend within these pupils, these sons; 

(That their memories may acquire the support of the gods) 

MYSTICISM AND SYMBOLISM 

221 

The ancient learning, the occult learning, 

By thee, O Io-e. 

Grow, grow, as young sprouts, shooting up like spreading 
leaves 

The ardent desire towards thee, O Tane-the-life-giving! 
Descend thy spirit into thy offspring, O Tane, O Rua-tau! 
Inform (their minds with the spirit) of Tane-the-all-know- 
ing-of-Heaven, 

With a matured memory, a god’s memory, with thoughts 
of thy ascent. 

(Hold all within) thy god-like memory, 

Be fixed, hold fast, at the back of your strenuous desire — 
Firmly affix to the inception of thought, thy ardent wishes, 
To the ancient origin of thy offspring, O Pail O Tane! 

Enter deeply, enter to the very origins, 

Into the very foundations of all knowledge, 

O Io-the-liidden-face! 

Gather as in a great and lengthy net, in the inner recesses 
of the ears, 

As also in the desire, and perseverance, of these thy off- 
spring, thy sons. 

Descend on them thy memory, thy knowledge, 

Rest within the heart, within the roots of origin; 

O Io-the-learned! O Io-the-determined! 

O lo-the-self-created! 

Maori, New Zealand 

XIII 

As my eyes 
Search 
The prairie 

I feel the summer in the spring. 

Ojibwa 

222 PRIMITIVE MAN AS PHILOSOPHER 

XIV 

Yellow Butterflies 

Yellow butterflies 

Over the blossoming, virgin corn, 

With pollen-spotted faces 

Chase one another in brilliant throng. 

Blue butterflies 

Over the blossoming virgin beans 

With pollen-painted faces 

Chase one another in brilliant throng. 

Over the blossoming corn, 

Over the virgin corn 
Wild bees hum; 

Over the blossoming beans, 

Over the virgin beans 
Wild bees hum. 

Over your field of growing corn, 

All day shall hang the thundercloud, 

Over your field of growing beans 
All day shall come the rushing rain! 

Hopi, Arizona 

XV 

The Land Is on Fire 

A burst of smoke from the pit lifts to the skies; 
Hawaii’s beneath, birth-land of Keawe; 
Malama’s beach looms before Lohiau, 

Where landed the chief from Kahiki, 

From a voyage on the blue sea, the dark sea, 
The foam-mottled sea of Kane, 

MYSTICISM AND SYMBOLISM 

223 

What time curled waves of the king-whelming flood. 
The sea upswells, invading the land — 

Lo Kane, outstretched at his easel 
Smoke and flame o’ershadow the uplands, 
Conflagration by Laka, the woman 
Hopoe wreathed with flowers of lehua, 

Stringing the pandanus fruit. 

Screw-palms that clash in Pan-ewa — 

Pan-ewa, whose groves of lehua 
Are nourished by lava shag, 

Lehua that bourgeons with flame. 

Night, it is night 
O’er Puna and Hilo! 

Night from the smoke of my land! 
For the people salvation! 

But the land is on fire! 

XVI 

Hawaii 

The Land Is Parched and Burning 

The land is parched and burning, 

The land is parched and burning; 
Going and looking about me 
A narrow strip of green I see 

Yet I do not know surely, 

Yet I do not know surely: 

The harlot is here among us — 

I go away toward the west. 

The shadow of crooked mountain, 

The curved and pointed shadow, 

’Twas there that I heard the singing, 
Heard the songs that harmed my heart. 

224 PRIMITIVE MAN AS PHILOSOPHER 

The light glow of the evening, 

The light glow of the evening 
Comes, as the quails fly slowly, 

And it settles on the young. 

Pima, Arizona 

XVII 

The Bright Dawn Appears in the Heavens 

The bright dawn appears in the heavens, 

The bright dawn appears in the heavens; 

And the paling pleiades grow dim, 

The moon is lost in the rising sun. 

With the women bluebird came running, 

With the women bluebird came running. 

All came carrying clouds on their heads 
And these were seen shaking as they danced. 

See there the gray spider magician, 

See there the gray spider magician; 

Who ties the sun while the moon rolls on. 

Turn back, the green staff raising higher. 

Pima, Arizona 

XVIII 

The Wild Ginger Plant 

Its stem bends as its leaves shoot up, 

Down to its root it bencls and sways, 

Bends and sways in diverse ways; 

Its leaves are chafed and lose their stiffness: 
On craggy Inas it is blown about, 

On craggy Inas which is our home. 

Blown about in the light breeze, 

MYSTICISM AND SYMBOLISM 225 

Blown about with the mist, blown about with the haze, 
Blown about are its shoots, 

Blown about in the haze of the mountain, 

Blown about in the light breeze. 

It nods and nods upon the mountains, 

Mountains of Beching, mountains of Inas, 

Mountains of Malau, mountains of Kuwi, 

Mountains of Mantan, mountains of Lumu, 

On every mountain which is our home. 

Negrito, Malay Peninsula 

XIX 

Farewell to Our Land 

Introduction 

Weep for the mountains, O Teivirau! 
For friends left behind in the land. 

Oh, tliose pleasant hills — 

The long range of mountains at home. 

Foimdation 

Lights are seen by Teivi’ o'er the white-crested waves, 
Intended for thy guidance. 

Why venture so far out to sea? 

The island is lessening in the distance. 

Darkness o’erspreads the ocean. 

The king is lost to sight in the waves! 

First Offshoot 

Weep for the well-known mountain tops, 

Now hidden by the swelling waves; — 

Though hidden they are covered with verdure, 
Pouekakeariki is lost to view; 

Stretching towards the east, 

226 PRIMITIVE MAN /IS PHILOSOPHER 

With a smooth summit and coconut tree. 

Oh, those pleasant hills, 

The long range of mountains at homel 

Second Offshoot 

How lofty those distant hills, 

Lying piled one above another 1 
How vast are they! 

Weep for the sight of Tongarei, 

And its precipitous sides. 

Oh, those pleasant hills on the west, 

The long range of mountains at home! 

Third. Offshoot 

Smoke is rising from the hills; 

The mountain ranges are on fire! 

The fierce heat is felt on the ocean; 

The blaze is extending all around: 

All Mangaia is on flames! 

Oh, those pleasant hills on the south, 

The long range of mountains at home! 

Fourth Offshoot 

Taa has gained the shore in the dark. 

In the starless night he was preserved. 

The “shark-god” was his protector, 

And Kereteki too, to save him from 

All monsters of the deep, and to bring him to shore. 

Oh, the far-extending reef at our home! 

Finale 

At e ruaoo el E rangai e! 

Mangaia, Polynesia 

PART TWO 

THE HIGHER ASPECTS OF 
PRIMITIVE THOUGHT 

CHAPTER XIII 

ANALYSIS OF REALITY AND THE EXTERNAL WORLD 

I N the first part of this book we were primarily con- 
cerned with the general attitude of primitive man 
toward life and society. More particularly we were 
interested in his conception of the nature of man’s 
relation to man, of his relation to the social world 
in which he lived and to the external world around 
him. We could only incidentally touch upon two pre- 
liminary problems, his analysis of the world and his 
analysis of human personality. Though we were able 
to show that he was able, when called upon, to form- 
ulate an ethical theory in fairly abstract terms, we have 
as yet had no occasion to broach the larger and more 
important question as to whether he ever speculated on 
the major problems of philosophy, and whether this 
•speculation could justifiably be considered to spring 
from the same motives that presumably ours does, 
namely, an interest in knowledge and speculation for 
its own sake. This is what we shall attempt to do in 
part here, although we shall have to confine ourselves 
to only a few of the numerous questions that arise. 

No notion of primitive man’s concept of the external 
world, his analysis of himself, of the nature of the 
godhead, etc., is possible unless it be recognized that, 

229 

230 PRIMITIVE MAN AS PHILOSOPHER 

as among us, there exist, roughly speaking, two general 
types of temperament: the man of action and the 
thinker, the type which lives fairly exclusively on what 
might be called a motor level and the type that de- 
mands explanations and derives pleasure from some 
form of speculative thinking. I would like to stress 
this point particularly although I am well aware that 
most ethnologists have always worked on this assump- 
tion, because there still exists a very marked tendency 
both among laymen and scholars in general to deny 
any such differentiation for primitive man. This denial 
has, indeed, received a classical expression in the fa- 
mous work of the French philosopher Levy-Bruhl en- 
titled Les Fonctions Mentales dans les Sociites In- 
ftrieures. 

In this lucid and remarkable work M. Levy-Bruhl 
contends that no primitive man can properly distin- 
guish between subject and object, that the relation be- 
tween them predicated by him does not constitute what 
we would call a logical relation, but rather one which 
can be best described by a term he has introduced into 
anthropological literature, participation mystique. 
Primitive man, according to Levy-Bruhl, never in his 
thinking reaches the logical stage at all. His mentality 
is always prelogical. If this were true, then of course 
we should not expect to find the differentiation that I 
have predicated but we ought to find instead a type of 
man, or types of men who were almost exclusively men 
of action with logically undifferentiated thinking 
powers. 

REALITY AND THE EXTERNAL WORLD 231 

There is, however, no warrant for M. Levy-Bruhl’s 
contention. For its refutation the reader will not have 
to rely upon either my word or that of any other eth- 
nologist or observer, but on the ample and incontro- 
vertible evidence that primitive man can himself fur- 
nish and part of which will be found in the ensuing 
pages. 

With this fundamental division into two contrasting 
types of temperament we must then begin. As among 
ourselves the man of action predominates overwhelm- 
ingly. But this predomination carries with it a far 
greater significance among primitive people than among 
us for the very simple reason that the population in 
any specific group is so small. Barring some of the 
African tribes and the ancient civilizations of Mexico, 
Central America, and Peru, it is and was exceedingly 
rare to have any tribe numbering 100,000. With the 
same type of distribution holding for them that holds 
for us, it would be ridiculous to expect a large per- 
centage of thinkers. And to this we must add the well- 
known fact that neither the man of action nor the 
thinker has much understanding of and still less sym- 
pathy for the other, for which the reasons are per- 
fectly transparent. 

Let me, however, describe more accurately what I 
understand by these types. The man of action, 
broadly characterized, is oriented toward the object, 
interested primarily in practical results, and indifferent 
to the claims and stirrings of his inner self. He recog- 
nizes them but he dismisses them shortly, granting 

232 PRIMITIVE MAN /IS PHILOSOPHER 

them no validity either in influencing his actions or in 
explaining them. The thinker, on the other hand, 
although he, too, is definitely desirous of practical re- 
sults — and for cultural reasons this holds to a far more 
marked extent among primitive people than among 
us — is nevertheless impelled by his whole nature to 
spend a considerable time in analyzing his subjective 
states and attaches great importance both to their 
influence upon his actions and to the explanations he 
has developed. 

The former is satisfied that the world exists and that 
things happen. Explanations are of secondary conse- 
quence. He is ready to accept the first one that comes 
to hand. At bottom it is a matter of utter indifference. 
He does, however, show a predilection for one type of 
explanation as opposed to another. He prefers an 
explanation in which the purely mechanical relation 
between a series of events is specifically stressed. His 
mental rhythm — if I may be permitted to use this 
term — is characterized by a demand for endless repeti- 
tion of the same event or, at best, of events all of 
which are on the same general level. Change for him 
means essentially some abrupt transformation. Mo- 
notony holds no terrors for him. Among primitive 
people his mentality is indelibly written over the vast 
majority of myths and magical incantations. Indeed it 
is because of its great prominence in myths and in- 
cantations that many observers have, not altogether 
unjustly, regarded his mental rhythm as the character- 
istic feature of primitive culture. 

REALITY AND THE EXTERNAL WORLD 233 

Now the rhythm of the thinker is quite different. 
The postulation of a mechanical relation between 
events does not suffice. He insists on a description 
couched either in terms of a gradual progress and 
evolution from one to many and from simple to com- 
plex, or on the postulation of a cause and effect rela- 
tion. In other words some type of coordination is 
imperatively demanded. 

To illustrate the two types of rhythm I shall select 
portions of a number of myths, the first representing 
that of the man of action and the others that of the 
thinker. The first myth runs as follows: 

A man once lived together with his younger brother and 
one day he said to him, “Younger brother, you need never 
fear anything for I am the only holy being in existence 
and I am very powerful here on earth.” 

Shortly after this all the spirits held a council to deter- 
mine what was to be done with the one who had made this 
claim and it was decided that he was to be punished and 
that the water spirits were to mete out the punishment. The 
older brother, Holy-One, knew nothing about this. 

One day his younger brother did not return home and 
Holy-One waited and waited but he did not appear. So 
he went in search of him. During his search he wept and 
wherever he stopped to weep a great lake was formed from 
his tears. Whenever he sobbed the hills tumbled down and 
became valleys. 

In his search he came across the wolf. Said he to the 
wolf, “Little brother, do you happen to know anything 

234 PRIMITIVE MAN AS PHILOSOPHER 

about my brother who is lost?” The wolf answered, 
“Brother, I have heard nothing about him although I travel 
all over the earth.” “Ah well, ah well,” said Holy-One and 
started to walk away. Then the wolf said, “Holy-One, it 
is not my business to look after your brother.” “Oh,” said 
Holy-One, “that’s it, is it?” and he raced after him. Holy- 
One soon overtook him, broke open his jaws with his bow 
and killed him, saying, “I suppose you too took part in the 
conspiracy against me.” Then he hung him on a tree and 
walked on. 

As he walked along he came across the fox and addressed 
him as follows: “Little brother, I feel that something has 
befallen my brother. Now you are a cunning fellow, per- 
haps you know something of his whereabouts.” And the fox 
replied, “Brother, I go all over the earth but I have not 
heard anything about your brother.” Then Holy-One 
started to walk away, but just then the fox said, “Holy- 
One, I am not supposed to be the guardian of your 
brother!” and ran away. “Ah, so that is it, is it?” said 
Holy-One. “I suppose you too are one of those who con- 
spired against me.” Then he ran after him and although 
the fox ran with all his speed he overtook him, broke his 
jaws open, and killed him. Then he hung his body on a 
tree. 

Thus he went encountering different animals. The next 
one he met was the raven and he addressed him as follows: 
“Little brother, you are a cunning fellow. I feel that some- 
thing has happened to my brother.” “Brother,” answered 
the raven, “I roam all over the earth and the heavens but 
yet I have not seen your brother.” Then as Holy-One was 

REALITY AND THE EXTERNAL WORLD 235 

about to start the raven said, “Holy-One, I am not supposed 
to look after your brother.” “Ah,” said Holy-One, “you 
little rascal, I suppose even such as you were present at 
the conspiracy against me,” and he knocked him down 
just as he was about to fly. He pulled open his jaws and 
hung him on a tree . 1 

In this myth we have all the traits mentioned pre- 
viously as distinctive of the psychic rhythm of the man 
of action, the endless repetition of events of the same 
general level, the same questions, the same answers, 
the same procedure. The only idea of progress dealt 
with is that of transformation; dry land becomes water 
and hills become valleys. Compare this with the fol- 
lowing origin myth of one of the Winnebago clans and 
we immediately realize that we are in the presence of 
an entirely different type of mentality: 

In the beginning Earthmaker was sitting in space. When 
he came to consciousness nothing was there anywhere. He 
began to think of what he should do and finally he began to 
cry and tears flowed from his eyes and fell below him. 
After a while he looked below him and saw something bright. 
The bright object below him represented his tears. As they 
fell they formed the present waters. When the tears flowed 
below they became the seas as they are now. Earthmaker 
began to think again. He thought, “It is thus: If I wish 
anything it will become as I wish, just as my tears have 
become seas.” Thus he thought. So he wished for light 

J Paul Radin, unpublished manuscript. 

236 PRIMITIVE MAN AS PHILOSOPHER 

and it became light. Then he thought: “It is as I thought, 
the things that I wished for have come into existence as I 
desired.” Then again he thought and wished for the earth 
and this earth came into existence. Earthmaker looked at 
the earth and he liked it; but it was not quiet. It moved 
about as do the waters of the sea. Then he made the trees 
and he liked them but they did not make the earth quiet. 
Then he made some grass but it likewise did not cause the 
earth to become quiet. Then he made rocks and stones but 
still the earth was not quiet. It was however almost quiet. 
Then he made the four directions and the four winds. At 
the four corners of the earth he placed them as great and 
powerful people, to act as island-weights. Yet still the 
earth was not quiet. Then he made four large beings and 
threw them down toward the earth and they pierced through 
the earth with their heads eastward. They were snakes. 
Then the earth became very still and quiet. Then he 
looked at the earth and he liked it. 

Then again he thought of how it was that things came 
into being just as he desired. Then for the first time he 
began to talk and he said, “As things are just as I wish 
them I shall make a being in my own likeness.” So he 
took a piece of clay and made it like himself. Then he 
talked to what he had created but it did not answer. He 
looked at it and saw that it had no mind or thought. So he 
made a mind for it. Again he talked to it but it did not 
answer. So he looked at it again and saw that it had no 
tongue. Then he made it a tongue. Then he spoke to it 
but still it did not answer. He looked at it and saw that it 
had no soul. So he made it a soul. Then he talked to it 

REALITY AND THE EXTERNAL WORLD 237 

again and it very nearly said something, but it could not 
make itself intelligible. So Earthmaker breathed into its 
mouth and then talked to it and it answered . 2 

Now this is obviously the expression of a tempera- 
ment craving for a logical coordination and integration 
of events. The creation of the earth is pictured as a 
physical accident. Once in existence, however, the 
deity infers that it came into being through his thought 
and thereupon he creates everything else. Explanation 
and progress there must be and the explanation must be 
in terms of a gradual progression. In the case of 
the shaping of our present world it is in terms of the 
evolution from motion to rest, from instability to sta- 
bility and fixity; in the case of the development of hu- 
man consciousness it is in terms of a specific endow- 
ment of newly created man first with thought, then 
with the mechanism for speech, with the soul, and 
finally with intelligence. 

How very far the thinker among primitive people 
can push this urge toward analysis and synthesis is 
reflected in the following remarkable poem of the 
Maori. It is an account of the creation of life: 

Seeking, earnestly seeking in the gloom. Searching — yes 
on the coast line — on the bounds of night and day; looking 
into night. Night had conceived the seed of night. The 
heart, the foundation of night, had stood forth self-existing 
even in the gloom. It grows in gloom — the sap and succu- 

2 Paul Radin, 37th Report of the Bureau of American Ethnology, 
p. 212. 

238 PRIMITIVE MAN AS PHILOSOPHER 

lent parts, the life pulsating, and the cup of life. The 
shadows screen the faintest ray of light. The procreative 
power, the ecstasy of life first known, and joy of issuing 
forth from silence into sound. Thus the progeny of the 
Great-Extending filled the heaven’s expanse; the chorus 
of life rose and swelled into ecstasy, then rested in bliss of 
calm and quiet . 3 

I must even at the risk of over stressing my point 
give an explanation of what represents, to all intents 
and purposes, a compromise between the thinker’s and 
the man of action’s temperament, but a compromise 
that is exceedingly frequent, selecting for this purpose 
the creation legend of the Maidu: 

When this world was filled with water, Earthmaker 
floated upon it, kept floating about. Nowhere in the world 
could he see even a tiny bit of earth. No persons of any 
kind flew about. He went about in this world, the world 
itself being invisible, transparent like the sky. 

He was troubled. “I wonder how, I wonder where, I 
wonder in what place, in what country, we shall find a 
world!” he said. “You are a very strong man, to be think- 
ing of this world,” said Coyote. “I am guessing in what 
direction the world is, then to that distant land let us 
float!” said Earthmaker. 

In this world they kept floating along, hungry, having 
nothing to eat. “You will die of hunger,” said Coyote. 
Then he thought. “No, I cannot think of anything,” he 

3 J. C. Anderson, Maori Life in Aotea, p. 150. 

REALITY AND THE EXTERNAL WORLD 239 

said. “Well,” said Earthmaker, “the world is large, a great 
world. If somewhere I find a tiny world, I can fix it up.” 

Then he sang, “Where, little world, art thou?” It is 
said he sang, kept singing, sang all the time. “Enough! ” he 
said, and stopped singing. “Well, I don’t know many 
songs,” he said. Then Coyote sang again, kept singing, 
asking for the world, singing, “Where, O world, art thou?” 
He sang, kept singing, then “Enough,” he said, “I am tired. 
You try again.” 

So Earthmaker sang. “Where are you, my great moun- 
tains?” he said. “You try also,” he said. Coyote tried, 
kept singing, “My foggy mountains, where one goes about,” 
he said. “Well, we shall see nothing at all. I guess there 
never was a world anywhere,” said he. “I think if we find 
a little world, I can fix it very well,” said Earthmaker. 

As they floated along, they saw something like a bird’s 
nest. “Well, that is very small,” said Earthmaker. “It is 
small. If it were larger, I could fix it. But it is too small. 
I wonder how I can stretch it a little!” “What is the best 
way? How shall I make it larger?” So saying, he pre- 
pared it. 

When all (the ropes) were stretched, he said, “Well, 
sing, you who were the finder of this earth, this mud! ‘In 
the long, long ago, Robin-Man made the world, stuck earth 
together, making this world.’ ” Then Robin sang and his 
world-making song sounded sweet. After the ropes were 
all stretched, he kept singing; then, after a time, he ceased. 

Then Earthmaker spoke to Coyote also. “Do you sing 
too,” he said. So he sang, singing, “My world, where one 
travels by the valley edge ; my world of many foggy moun- 

240 PRIMITIVE MAN AS PHILOSOPHER 

tains; my world, where one goes zigzagging hither and 
thither, range after range,” he said. “I sing of the country 
I shall travel in. In such a world I shall wander.” 

Then Earthmaker sang — sang of the world he had made, 
kept singing, until by and by he ceased. “Now,” he said, 
“it would be well if the world were a little larger. Let us 
stretch it!” — “Stop!” said Coyote. “I speak wisely. This 
world ought to be painted with something, so that it may 
look pretty. What do ye two think?” 

Then Robin-Man said, “I am one who knows nothing. 
Ye two are clever men, making the world, talking it over; 
if ye find anything evil, ye will make it good.” “Very 
well,” said Coyote, “I shall paint it with blood. There 
shall be blood in the world; and people shall be born there 
having blood. There shall be birds born who shall have 
blood. Everything shall have blood that is to be created 
in this world. And in another place, making it red, there 
shall be red rocks. It will be as if blood were mixed up 
with the world, and thus the world will be beautiful,” he 
said. “What do you think about it?” “Your words are 
good,” he said, “I know nothing.” So Robin-Man went 
off. As he went he said, “I shall be a person who travels 
only in this way,” and he flew away . 4 

The same contrast in viewpoint is visible in the 
domain of religious beliefs. There we find the thought 
of the man of action concrete and unintegrated, that 
of the thinker coordinated, unified, and at times ab- 

* Roland B. Dixon, Maidu Texts (American Ethnological Society), 

IV.pp. 4 tf. 

REALITY AND THE EXTERNAL WORLD 241 

stract. Thus among the Winnebago the sun is re- 
garded by the man of action as composed of a number 
of separate entities — the disk, the heat, the rays, the 
corona; for the thinker these are all aspects of one and 
the same thing. Similarly in the same tribe the clan 
ancestors were regarded by the man of action as either 
animals or as vague spirit-animals who had become 
transformed into human beings at one time, whereas 
the thinker postulated a generalized spirit-animal to 
whom the Winnebago are related through the inter- 
mediation of animals sent by them. Among the Da- 
kota Indians the contrast is pushed much farther. 
What the ordinary man regards as eight distinct dei- 
ties, the priest and thinker takes to be aspects of one 
and the same deity. 

If consequently we wish adequately to understand 
primitive man’s concept of the external world we must 
bear in mind carefully the existence of these two 
temperaments, for the external world will be described 
differently depending upon the person from whom our 
information has been obtained. And these differences 
are fundamental for they concern the concept of the 
actual nature of the external world, its form, configura- 
tion, appearance, its origin, the proofs of its existence, 
and its relation to us. Throughout these pages I shall 
therefore, as far as the evidence permits, try to keep 
the testimony of these two contrasting temperaments 
distinct. Let us first examine the viewpoint of the 
man of action. 

In one sense it is quite erroneous to speak of the 

242 PRIMITIVE MAN AS PHILOSOPHER 

concept of the external world of the man of action if 
we mean to imply thereby that it is ever made the ob- 
ject of his conscious thought. Strictly speaking he 
has none. In the main he unhesitatingly accepts the 
form which the thinker has given to ideas. This holds 
more particularly for all those questions connected with 
the shape, configuration, and origin of the world around 
him. The man of action follows the lead of the 
thinker or at least repeats somewhat mechanically what 
the thinker has to say on these matters because his 
interests are centered not upon the analysis of reality 
but upon the orientation of reality and the proofs for 
its existence. Much of the indefiniteness, the vague- 
ness, and the inconsistency in his characterization of 
the phenomenal world, can be safely ascribed to this 
type of interest on his part. Among the Winnebago 
the sun is represented either by rays of light, a disk, 
or as some vague anthropomorphic being; the thunder- 
bird as an eagle, a mythical bird, or as a bald-headed 
man wearing a circlet of cedar leaves. Similarly among 
the Ewe of West Africa the various spirits grouped 
under the generic name of tro are vaguely described as 
invisible but yet as having hands and feet resembling 
human beings, etc. Their shape is continually chang- 
ing. In the Banks’ Islands, again, the natives told 
Bishop Codrington that the spirits called vui, live, 
think, have more intelligence than man, have no form 
to be seen and have no soul. 

When we try to discover what are the connotations 
for the man of action, of such simple things as a tree, 

REALITY AND THE EXTERNAL WORLD 243 

a mountain, a lake, etc., similar difficulties immediately 
arise. The first positive fact that emerges when we 
attempt to make such an inquiry is that an object is 
not thought of as the sum of all the sense data con- 
nected with it. A mountain is not thought of as a 
unified whole. It is neither static nor is it a series of 
inherently connected impressions. It is a continually 
changing entity from which one is repeatedly subtract- 
ing and to which one is repeatedly adding. In the case 
of the idea of a tree this lack of unification is of course 
even more marked. To talk of a tree being the same 
when it is constantly undergoing transformations is 
based on an assumption which the man of action simply 
does not make. We may, in fact, even go farther and 
claim that he does not in the least see the absolute 
necessity, for instance, of assuming that an acorn con- 
tains all the potentialities of an oak, or that the shape 
and appearance of some specific object, even granted 
that it retains this shape and appearance more or less 
permanently, is inevitably and indubitably its ultimate 
form. He conceives the possibility of imagining it hav- 
ing an entirely different appearance on the following 
day. 

As far as we can judge, therefore, for the man of 
action in a primitive community, the external world 
is dynamic and ever changing. So much his experi- 
ence tells him. He refuses to state categorically or to 
assume even provisionally that it is permanent merely 
because his past and his present experience have shown 
it to be so. Since he sees the same objects changing 

244 PRIMITIVE MAN ^5 PHILOSOPHER 

in appearance day after day he regards this as defi- 
nitely depriving them of immutability and permanence. 
Now this is really tantamount to saying that all the 
attributes of an object are not outside of the perceiver, 
that the object cannot be adequately defined in terms 
of sense data alone. However, as soon as an object is 
regarded as a dynamic entity, then analysis and defini- 
tion become both difficult and unsatisfactory. Think- 
ing is under such circumstances well-nigh impossible 
for most people. To think at all logically, no matter 
how concretistic the thought may be, there must be 
some static point. Where, now, are we to look for this 
point? The man of action answers, in its effect. Then 
an object becomes completely separated, even though 
it be only for a short time, from all other objective 
elements as well as from the perceiving self. A deity, 
for example, is his effect, an object is essentially its 
relation to man. Reality, in other words, is pragmatic. 
That the above analysis is not an imaginary one of my 
own the following examples will prove: “The god 
of whom I speak is dead,” said a Maori witness in a 
native land court of New Zealand. The court replied, 
“Gods do not die.” “You are mistaken,” continued the 
witness, “Gods do die unless there are tohungas 
(priests) to keep them alive.” 5 And in one of the 
Maori myths one deity is represented as addressing an- 
other deity in the following fashion: “When men no 
longer believe in us, we are dead.” A Fiji Islander 
told an investigator that “a thing has mana when it 

6 J. Gudgeon, Journal of the Polynesian Society, XV, pp. 27#. 

REALITY AND THE EXTERNAL WORLD 245 

works; it has not mana when it doesn’t work.” In 
Eddystone Island it was said of a certain native that 
he was a spirit, a deity, when he said, “Go, for you will 
catch fish,” and he caught fish. Then he possessed 
mana. But if he was not successful then he had no 
mana. Perhaps the most convincing proof is given by 
the example quoted on page 30. 

What functions, therefore, is true and what functions 
exists. Yet, what are we to understand by functioning, 
by a happening? I feel certain that our man of action 
would not deny that events take place between two 
objects outside of him and which in no way affect him, 
but it is a matter that hardly interests him. An event 
means essentially something that transpires between 
an object and himself. We have therefore to ask our- 
selves, how can he recognize an event? 

Now we are accustomed to derive all our proof for 
the existence of a thing from the evidence of our senses. 
The cultured man of Western Europe is, in the main, 
as we all know, visual-minded. That some inward 
feeling or stirring, some sudden and vague sensation or 
intuition, might be taken as real proof for the existence 
of an event would not occur to him. Not that any one 
to-day seriously denies the reality of such inward ex- 
periences. We all know that certain religions take the 
presence of an inward response as proving the existence 
of God and of specific dogmas. But no one of us, 
as far as I am aware, would seriously contend that 
an inward experience — the presence of an inward thrill 
— could establish the reality of the whole cultural back- 

246 PRIMITIVE MAN AS PHILOSOPHER 

ground. Yet this is precisely what does happen in 
primitive culture, for the man of action. Why, so he 
would contend, should something affect him in this way, 
if it were not true — an argument well known, of course, 
among us. This is to him as much of a real proof as 
anything happening outside of him. 

It can, therefore, be said that primitive man feels 
that reality is given to him in a threefold fashion. He 
is bom into it; it is proved by external effects; and it 
is proved by internal effects. He is thus literally living 
in a blaze of reality. This is more particularly true of 
the man of action. An aura envelops every object in 
the external world due to the projection of this inward 
thrill upon it. It is difficult for one brought up in the 
scientific extemalism of the natural sciences of the 
nineteenth century to visualize or appreciate this 
heightened atmosphere in which primitive man works. 
Perhaps the best he can do is to follow a philosopher 
like Levy-Bruhl, and develop a theory of prelogical 
mentality and mystic participation. Yet both of these 
conceptions are, I feel, far from the mark. Primitive 
man in no sense merges himself with the object. He 
distinguishes subject and object quite definitely. In 
fact the man of action spends a good part of his time in 
attempting to coerce the object. What he says is 
simply this: not all the reality of an object resides in 
our external perception of it. There is an internal 
side and there are also effects, constraints, from sub- 
happens must happen and in happening proves itself to 
ject to object and from object to subject. Whatever 

REALITY AND THE EXTERNAL WORLD 247 

be a reality; not the only reality necessarily, but the 
only one with which the man of action has any imme- 
diate concern. 

After this long and rather difficult analysis of the 
nature of reality and the external world, as understood 
by the man of action, and one which is never well 
formulated because it is that of the man of action, let 
us turn to the analysis made by the thinker, remember- 
ing always that he shares many of the basic views of 
the man of action. 

The first point to be emphasized is that the stresses 
are all different. From the man of action’s viewpoint, 
a fact has no symbolic or static value. He predicates 
no unity beyond that of the certainty of continuous 
change and transformation. For him a double distor- 
tion is involved in investing the transitory and cease- 
lessly changing object with a symbolic, idealistic, or 
static significance; first, because we then remove it 
farther from reality; and second, because in thus sep- 
arating the perceiving self from the object, we really 
render both of them meaningless. Now it goes without 
saying that in order to think systematically facts must 
have some degree of symbolic meaning; they must be 
static and there must be a fairly clear-cut distinction 
between the ego and the external object. Every thinker 
must, in other words, study the subject and the object 
as though they were isolated units. 

The thinker, like the man of action, accepts both the 
ego and the external world — the phenomenal as well 
as the social — as to a very marked extent self-condi- 

248 PRIMITIVE MAN AS PHILOSOPHER 

tioned. But he is not interested merely in the fact 
that the world exists and that it has a definite effect 
upon him; he is impelled by his whole nature, by the 
innate orientation of his mind, to try to discover the 
reason why there is an effect, what is the nature of 
the relation between the ego and the world, and what 
part exactly the perceiving self plays therein. Like all 
philosophers, he is interested in the subject as such, the 
object as such, and the relations between them. In 
the external world, as within himself, he is aware of 
movement and the shifting forms of things. He is as 
much impressed by this as is the man of action. But 
the world must first be static and objects must first 
take on a permanent or, at least, a stable form before 
one can deal with them systematically. Both these 
tasks he therefore sets out to achieve. The attempts 
of these primitive thinkers are embodied in numerous 
creation myths, examples of which are given on pages 
354$. There we see that the task is always the 
same — an original, moving, shapeless or undifferenti- 
ated world must be brought to rest and given stable 
form. This unstable and undifferentiated primal con- 
dition is remarkably well formulated in the cosmologi- 
cal myths of the Polynesians. Let me mention but 
one of variant versions of the Maori creation myth. 
There, for example, we find described six aeons of 
darkness: 

1. Te Po-tamaku (the age smoothed off). 

2. Te Po-kakarauri (the age of extreme darkness). 

REALITY AND THE EXTERNAL WORLD 249 

3. Te Po-aoao-nui (the age of great dawn). 

4. Te Po-uriuri (the age of deep black darkness). 

5. Te Po-kerikeri (the age of darkness). 

6. Te Po-tiwhatiwha (the age of gloom). 6 

And surely the following is a perfect description of 
instability: 

Because Rangi-nui overlaid and completely covered Papa- 
tua-nuku, the growth of all things could not mature, nor 
could anything bear fruit; they were in an unstable condi- 
tion, floating about the world of darkness. And this was 
their appearance: some were crawling after the manner of 
lizards, some were upright with the arms held up, some 
were lying with the knees partly drawn up, some lying on 
their sides, some were lying stretched out at full length, some 
on their backs, some were stooping, some with their heads 
bent down, some with their legs drawn up, some embracing, 
some kicking out with legs and arms, some kneeling, some 
standing, some inhaling deep breaths, some with exhausted 
breath, some crawling, some walking, some feeling about in 
the dark, some arising, some gazing, some sitting still, and 
in many other attitudes — they were all within the embrace 
of Rangi-nui and Papa. T 

But having made the world static and given objects 
a form is not enough. This form must be made reason- 
ably permanent. This problem likewise our primitive 

*S. Percy Smith, “The Lore of the Whare-Wananga,” Memoirs of 
the Polynesian Society, III, pp. 99-100. 

7 Ibid., pp. 117-118. 

250 PRIMITIVE MAN AS PHILOSOPHER 

philosophers attacked. I shall illustrate the nature of 
their attempts at solution by examples taken from two 
tribes, the Winnebago and the Maori. 

According to the Winnebago no organic objects had 
any permanent form originally. They were all a sort 
of tertium quid, neutral beings, that could at will trans- 
form themselves into human beings or spirit-animals. 
At one particular period in the history of the world 
these neutral beings decided to use all this unlimited 
power of transformation in order to change themselves 
definitely into either animals or human beings. That 
accordingly happened and since then animals have 
remained animals and human beings human beings, 
except that there are a few human beings who still 
possess the power of transforming themselves, for short 
periods of time, into animals. 

The Maori solution is quite different. The capacity 
for unlimited transformation credited to objects among 
the Winnebago was an unknown concept to the Maori, 
but they in their turn raised an entirely different 
problem. All things* they insisted, contain within 
themselves elements of both good and evil and it is es- 
sential to have some control over them lest in their 
mutual reactions they nullify each other. Good and 
evil are here thought of in the most general way, in 
the sense of predicating for each thing inherent proper 
and positive qualities. In order to achieve this con- 
trol, certain supernatural beings called guardians were 
appointed. They were to watch over everything, pre- 
vent quarrels and all interferences, and confine each 

REALITY AND THE EXTERNAL WORLD 251 

thing to its own proper activities. There were eleven 
of such guardians whose functions may be described 
as follows: 

1. Those who controlled the place where the souls of the 
dead congregated. 

2. Those who controlled the suspension of the heavenly 
bodies, the leading stars of the various realms, and 
the stars of the Milky Way. 

3. Those whose duty it was to maintain the arrangement 
of all ocean currents and other things connected with 
the sea. 

4. Those who arranged and controlled the movements 
of the winds, of the snow, of rain, of the clouds, of 
mists, lightning, and thunder, lest they contend 
against each other or turn on the Earth Mother and 
work evil in this world. 

5. Those whose duty it was to control the ravages of 
disease, sickness, etc. 

6. Those who were to regulate the seasons of summer 
and winter, lest either be prolonged so as to cause 
continual summer or continual winter. 

7. Those who were appointed to control the violent 
contentions of certain deities. 

8. Those who were appointed to be the preservers of 
all occult knowledge pertaining to the realms of 
heaven and earth, etc. 

9. Those who were appointed to preserve unity and 
peace among themselves, to confine each to the 
proper duties assigned to him, etc. 

252 PRIMITIVE MAN AS PHILOSOPHER 

10. Those who were appointed to preserve the welfare 
of all things pertaining to Punihoniho-o-tau, lest trees, 
herbage, vegetation, lose their vitality, their fruitful- 
ness and deteriorate and decay, or become infertile or 
incapable of assimilating nourishment, or seedless; 
lest fish, insects, etc., become infertile. 

11. Those who were appointed to protect the powers of 
tapu in respect to places where religious ceremonies 
were performed, etc. ; to protect and cherish all occult 
arts, declining, arranging, or supporting the attitude, 
acts, and position of all things as planned. 8 

There exist, however, many things that manifestly 
do not have permanence of form and do look different 
at different times. Philosophers have always given the 
same answer to this problem and predicated a unity 
behind these changing aspects and forms. Primitive 
philosophers are at one with their European and 
Asiatic brothers here. Among the Winnebago, accord- 
ing to some individuals, the clan animal is a spirit 
whom you never see except in his manifestations as 
a real animal, or some object he has bestowed upon 
you, or some stirring within you, etc. Among the 
Dakota the priests taught that one can never see the 
real sky but merely one aspect of him, the blue 
heavens. Similarly they claimed that we never see 
the real earth and rock but only their tonwanpi, i.e. 
(as nearly as one can translate the word), their divine 

'Elsdon Best, “Maori Religion and Mythology,” 10th Bulletin of 
the Dominion Museum (New Zealand), I, pp. 65-66. 

REALITY AND THE EXTERNAL WORLD 253 

semblance. Among the Maori we find the same 
philosophy. Many of the deities cannot really be 
seen. All we see of them is their aria, i.e., their reflec- 
tions. What enables us to see a stone and what gives 
it shape is not the physical stone but the soul of the 
stone. The well-known authority on the Maoris, Els- 
don E. Best, tells the following remarkable story: “A 
missionary speaking to an old man remarked, ‘Your re- 
ligion is false; it teaches that all things possess a souk’ 
The Maori answered, ‘Were a thing not possessed of 
the wairua of an atua, then that thing could not possess 
form,’ ” i.e., it could not have form unless it possessed 
the soul of a god. The further discussion of this unify- 
ing abstract principle must be relegated to the chapter 
on monotheism, pages 342 ff. 

The thinker, we have thus seen, is forced in the 
interests of his analysis to differentiate sharply between 
the subject and the object, and their respective relation 
to each other. Just as the man of action is primarily 
interested in the object, so is the thinker in the subject. 
The clashing of the two views is brought out most beau- 
tifully in connection with one of the most famous 
aspects of primitive religion, the belief in mana or 
magical power. Here, too, I think we can find an ad- 
mirable example of how the thinker’s formulation is 
more or less mechanically accepted by the others and 
how its failure to merge with the man of action’s atti- 
tude leads to endless contradiction and confusion. 

Every discussion of mana must necessarily go back 
to the famous definition of Codrington: “ Mana is a 

254 PRIMITIVE MAN / 4 S PHILOSOPHER 

force altogether distinct from physical power which 
acts in all kinds of ways for good and evil and which 
it is of the greatest advantage to possess and con- 
trol . . . (and which) shows itself in physical force or 
in any kind of power or excellence which a man pos- 
sesses .” 9 This has been the generally accepted view 
since Codrington’s time. Now quite apart from the 
fact, as some investigators have already pointed out, 
that Codrington’s actual material contradicts such an 
interpretation, it must be borne in mind that this defini- 
tion of Codrington is not one given to him by a native. 
It represents, on the contrary, his own interpretation of 
a number of facts. He was a very keen thinker and 
he is here giving us a thinker’s attitude. I believe it 
is also the thinker’s attitude among the Melanesians, 
although we have no definite proof of this. 

The thinker’s viewpoint on mana comes out clearly 
among the Dakota and the Maori. A Dakota priest 
told Mr. James Walker the following: “All the gods 
have ton. Ton is the power to do supernatural 
things.” 10 This the native expressly states is the 
priest’s interpretation. “When the people say ton,” he 
continued, “they mean something that comes from a 
living thing, such as the birth of anything or the dis- 
charge from a wound or a sore or the growth from a 
seed.” Here, therefore, the two views are neatly con- 

® The Melanesians , pp. 118-119. 

10 “The Sun Dance of the Oglala Division of the Dakota,” Anthro'- 
pological Papers of the American Museum of Natural History, XVI, 
Part II, pp. 152 ff t 

REALITY AND THE EXTERNAL WORLD 255 

trasted. But what is the essence of the priest’s, the 
thinker’s view? Here, likewise, the Dakota material 
comes to our aid. According to one of the priests, any- 
thing that acquires ton is wakan because it is the power 
of the spirit or the quality that has been put into it. 
“Every object in the world has a spirit and that spirit 
is wakan.” But where does wakan come from? 
“Wakan comes from the wakan beings. These wakan 
beings are greater than mankind in the same way that 
mankind is greater than animals. They are never bom 
and they never die.” 11 

This same concept of the divine in objects and in 
man we find also among the Maori. It will be dis- 
cussed in greater detail in another part of the book. 
All I wish to point out here is that according to the 
Maori every sentient being — and therein he includes 
the whole phenomenal world — possesses a toiora, i.e. 
“the soul of God, of Io.” This it is that gives him 
power and prestige. 

To bring this very cursory discussion of mana to a 
close, I think we are amply justified in saying that the 
two interpretations of mana which we seem to find cut- 
ting across each other everywhere, represent respec- 
tively the view of the thinker and of the man of action. 
To the thinker it is the generalized essence of a deity 
residing in an object or in man, and to the man of 
action it is that which works, has activity, is an effect. 

The clash of the two temperaments which we see 
manifesting themselves so clearly in the mam concept 

11 Ibid., pp. IS3-IS4- 

256 PRIMITIVE MAN 4 S PHILOSOPHER 

is even more pronounced when we attempt to study the 
theories postulated as to the interrelationship of the ex- 
ternal world and man. Two entirely different ideas of 
the nature of this relation and of the reaction of the 
one upon the other have been developed. These will be 
touched upon in the following chapters. But before 
we can really properly understand or appreciate these 
ideas, it is essential to obtain some notion of the con- 
cept of the ego, of the perceiving self, as held by the 
thinker. 

CHAPTER XIV 

THE NATURE OF THE EGO AND OF HUMAN 
PERSONALITY 

I T may be confidently assumed that just as there are 
differences between the man of action and the 
thinker in his attitude toward the external world and 
his concept of reality, so there must be a marked con- 
trast between their respective ideas concerning the 
nature of the Ego and of human personality. In the 
present condition of our sources it is impossible, except 
in the most general way, to keep the two apart con- 
sistently. I think we are on fairly safe ground, however, 
in assuming that none of the very remarkable formula- 
tions with which we will specifically deal in this chapter 
— those of the Maori of New Zealand, the Oglala Sioux, 
and the Batak of Sumatra — are the work of the man 
of action or that such a man, if questioned, would be 
able to give us an account even remotely as unified 
and consistent as these in question. Many of the ideas 
centering around personality and human relations and 
involving magic are obviously shared by the man of 
action and the thinker. But the thinker gives them a 
specific orientation and a definite formulation which is 
then inconsistently adopted by the man of action. This 
seems to me to be clearly illustrated by many of the 

257 

258 PRIMITIVE MAN PHILOSOPHER 

“theories” of disease, of death, of the soul, of the 
nature of human attraction, etc., current among all 
tribes. In general it may be claimed that the thinker 
employs the vast mass of folkloristic and magical be- 
liefs clustering around the Ego and personality, to de- 
velop a more or less definite system of psychotherapy. 
Let me give a number of examples to make clear what 
I mean by this very important function of the thinker, 
a function that shows itself in connection with many 
aspects of primitive culture but which is perhaps best 
seen here. 

Among the Maori a charm is recited over the corpse 
prior to burial in order to dispatch the soul to spirit 
land and to prevent it from remaining in the world to 
annoy and frighten the living. Practices of this nature 
are to be found among all peoples. What interests us, 
in this particular case, however, are the actual words 
of the charm. These run as follows: “Farewell, O 
my child! Do not grieve; do not weep; do not love; 
do not yearn for your parent left by you in the world. 
Go ye for ever. Farewell for ever.” 1 

Here what in origin was a mere magical incantation 
to assure the definite and complete separation of the 
dead from the living has been invested with a psychi- 
cal side. In other words, the mere physical separation 
that presumably was attained by the simple recitation 
of a charm did not satisfy every one. A psychical sepa- 
ration had likewise to be provided, and this we may 

1 Elsdon Best, “Spiritual and Mental Concepts of the Maori,” 
Dominion Museum Monograph No. 2 (New Zealand), p. 12. 

THE EGO AND HUMAN PERSONALITY 259 

infer was the work of the thinker. This psychothera- 
peutic side to magic has been overlooked by most stu- 
dents of ethnology and yet it could be easily demon- 
strated that not to recognize it means a failure to un- 
derstand certain fundamental aspects of the primitive 
psyche. Another example, also taken from the Maori, 
brings out even more strikingly what I have in mind. 

Among the Maori divorce consists of two parts, the 
external ritual, a kind of legal pronouncement that the 
two people concerned are no longer man and wife, and 
a second part which has as its object the obliteration 
of the sympathy and affection that once bound these 
two together. As the Maori priest told Mr. Best, our 
informant, “The priest effaced the affections — that is, 
he cleansed or washed away the semblance of such; 
he abolished it.” 2 

But to return to our main problem: how does primi- 
tive man regard the Ego? It may at once be said that 
one thing he has never done: he has never fallen into 
the error of thinking of it as a unified whole or of 
regarding it as static. For him it has always been a 
dynamic entity, possessed of so many constituents that 
even the thinker has been unable to fuse them into one 
unit. If what we have said about the unusual knowl- 
edge and intuition of character possessed by primitive 
people is true, then we might have assumed, even in the 
absence of available data, that he would attempt fairly 
elaborate analyses of the Ego. Fortunately we have 
the facts and from their study it is quite clear that 

2 Ibid., p. 21. 

260 PRIMITIVE MAN AS PHILOSOPHER 

the Maori and the Dakota — to select only those for 
whom our material is exceptionally good — look upon 
the Ego as composed of two parts, a body which is rela- 
tively unimportant, and an unsubstantial element made 
up, in its turn, of three constituents. Some such gen- 
eral formula will, I think, turn out to hold true for 
all primitive peoples. 

In the descriptions of primitive man’s analysis of the 
Ego which I shall now attempt, certain difficulties con- 
front us. Few ethnologists have ever attempted to 
obtain from a native any systematized account of their 
own theory. It has, in fact, been generally contended 
that they have none. As a result our material con- 
sists of isolated statements on different aspects of the 
Ego and we are perforce compelled to weld them into 
a consistent or inconsistent whole — as the case may be 
— in order to see their complete bearings. This, unfor- 
tunately, cannot be helped. I have tried, however, to 
adhere rigorously to the facts and to let the native 
speak for himself wherever that is possible. 

The procedure I shall follow is a very simple one: 
I shall analyze the concept of the Ego and of per- 
sonality of three tribes — the Maori, the Oglala Sioux, 
and the Batak, and regard them as fairly representative 
of that of all primitive peoples. 

The Maori analysis is very complex and unusually 
profound. According to them man and every sentient 
thing, that is, every thing conceived of as living, con- 
sists of an eternal element, an Ego which disappears 
after death, a ghost shadow, and a body. The eternal 

THE EGO AND HUMAN PERSONALITY 261 

element is, as we have already mentioned, the soul of 
God in man. It is called toiora. Some notion of what 
is understood by this term is given by an incident in 
the myth of Hine, the Earth-formed Maid. In this 
myth, when she is about to acquire mortal life, we 
find the sentence, “At that juncture Hine brought 
herself to the world of life and also attained mortal life 
with the toiora of the enduring world.” 3 

The Ego proper consists of three things: the dy- 
namic element, the life-essence or personality, and the 
physiological element. The first is named mauri and 
appears in two forms, an immaterial and a material. 
The material mauri is the active life principle itself 
whereas the immaterial mauri is its symbol. The ma- 
terial mauri might be practically any object. Mr. 
Best tells us that in the north of New Zealand a tree 
was sometimes planted at the birth of a child and this 
tree was then regarded as the child’s material mauri. 

The same division into immaterial and material held 
for the life-essence, the hau, and apparently also for 
the third constituent of the Ego, the physiological as- 
pect, called manawa ora. This was translated as 
breath, and breath of life, the first connoting more the 
spiritual and the second the purely physical breath of 
life. 

In the ghost shadow, the wairua, we are dealing with 
the soul strictly speaking. It is partially visible but 
does not properly possess a material form until it ap- 
pears in the underworld. Wairua is the ingredient 

8 Ibid. , pp. 10-11. 

262 PRIMITIVE MAN AS PHILOSOPHER 

which mediates us to the external world; we would be 
lifeless and would decay without it. We might possess 
the life-principle and form but we could not be seen. 
In the same way it is the wairua that enables us to give 
form to things, to actually accomplish them. A Maori 
remarked to Best, “My wairua is very intent on this 
work that it may be well done.” 4 It is well to remem- 
ber this, to realize that it is not simply with our senses 
that we see and touch and think. “Be of good cheer,” 
a woman was told, “although we are afar off, yet our 
wairua are ever with you.” And it is in the same strain 
that an old Maori wrote to Best, “We have long been 
parted and may not meet again in the world of life. 
We can no longer see each other with our eyes, only 
our wairua see each other, as also our friendship.” 

Although the wairua could not be destroyed, a person 
could be killed through his wairua. It was easily af- 
fected by magical spells. It was the wairua that was 
affected when a man found himself afflicted with fear 
of coming evil, with a dread of impending danger, or 
if he polluted his tapu. 

The wairua is thus the integrating mechanism within 
us and it is exceedingly suggestive that it should be 
viewed as nonaggressive. 

The fundamental distinction between immaterial and 

material is also illustrated by the Maori philosopher’s 

interpretation of the body. It is viewed from two 

aspects: first, as an integrated whole, the resting place 

of the toiora, wairua, mauri and manawa ora with all 
_______ — ~ 

THE EGO AND HUMAN PERSONALITY 263 

that this implies; and second, as composed of distinct 
organs, the bowels, the heart, the stomach, the liver, 
etc. Looked upon as a material entity it may have an 
immaterial form and regarded as an immaterial entity 
it may possess a material form. In other words it 
possessed as an integrated unit both form and sub- 
stance. The first the Maori called ahua and the second 
aria. Best gives as examples of the latter two greetings 
addressed to him, “Greeting to you, the ahua of your 
grandchild Marewa” and “Greeting to you, the ahua 
of the men of yore.” As an example of the contrast 
in meaning, Best quotes a Maori as follows: “I saw 
clearly his bodily form ( ahua ); it is not the case that 
I saw him distinctly (aria)." 5 In the one case we are 
dealing with the material, in the other with the imma- 
terial representation. 

We now come to the specifically organic aspect of the 
body. The Maori had a very good knowledge of inter- 
nal anatomy. Like most primitive people, however, 
they did not associate the organs of the body with 
physiological but rather with psychical functions. The 
viscera were the seat of thought, of the mind, and of 
conscience; the heart, of feelings, desires, and inclina- 
tions; and the stomach, of feelings, memory, etc. In 
other words the traits that we associate with person- 
ality are all regarded as located in definite organs. 

Such is the picture the Maori draw of the Ego. Its 
most salient feature is the insistence upon multiple per- 
sonality and its extension into the past and future. 

* Ibid., pp. 16-20. 

264 PRIMITIVE MAN AS PHILOSOPHER 

Although no attempt has been made here to fuse these 
various constituents into one organic whole, this does 
not mean that all are not necessary before there is a 
true Ego which can function. What it does signify, 
however, is that these various elements can become 
dissociated temporarily from the body and enter into 
relation with the dissociated elements of other indi- 
viduals. The nature of the impingement of individual 
upon individual and of the individual upon the external 
world is thus utterly different from anything that a 
Western European can possibly imagine. The medley 
of combinations and permutations it would permit is 
quite bewildering. What prevents anarchy is that all 
these constituents, independent as they are, neverthe- 
less fall into a definite configuration within each man’s 
Ego. The error the Maori make lies, of course, in their 
concretization of ideas. Yet as an attempted solution 
of the problem of substance and form it should rank 
very high. To have recognized in man the physiologi- 
cal, the vital essence and the functioning of these two 
in a temporal body, and to have split up the body itself 
into form, substance, and “resting place,” represents 
an unusual achievement. The recognition of multiple 
personality, which happens to be in consonance with the, 
very latest results of psychological and psychiatric re- 
search is, on the other hand, not due to any conscious 
thought, intuitive or otherwise, but is the direct conse- 
quence of primitive man’s unconquerable and unsenti- 
mental realism and his refusal to assume fictitious and 
artificial unities. 

THE EGO AND HUMAN PERSONALITY 265 

Many of the salient traits of the Maori analysis of 
personality are to be found in the next system to be 
discussed, that of the Oglala Dakota, although the 
emphasis is naturally enough quite different. As 
among the Maori there are two external elements, the 
divine in man and the soul that begins its existence 
after death, and last a mortal soul. In formulating 
their analysis, however, the Oglala proceeded from 
another angle. Their interest was not so much cen- 
tered upon characterizing the various constituents, the 
diverse souls that went into the making of the Ego, as 
in determining the relation of these souls to the various 
aspects of personality. It is from this point of view 
that I shall present the facts. The important elements 
of the Ego, according to the Dakota, are courage and 
fortitude, general disposition, the power to influence 
others and of forewarning oneself of good and evil, 
unusual actions, and finally negative elements such as 
jealousy, maliciousness, etc. 

Courage and fortitude come from the sicun. The 
sicun is given a man by Wakan Tanka, the supreme 
spirit, at birth. A sicun is the ton (divine essence) of 
a deity. Perhaps I had better quote Mr. James Walk- 
er’s description: 

The sicun is an immaterial God whose substance is never 
visible. It is the potency of mankind and the emitted 
potency of the Gods. Considered relative to mankind it is 
many, but apart from mankind it is one. Skan (the supreme 
deity) imparts a sicun to each of mankind at birth. It 

266 PRIMITIVE MAN AS PHILOSOPHER 

remains with the person until death when it returns whence 
it came. Its functions are to enable the possessor to do 
those things which the beasts cannot do and to give courage 
and fortitude. It may be pleased or displeased with its 
possessor and may be operative or inoperative according to 
its pleasure. It may be invoked by ceremony or prayer, but 
it cannot be imparted to any other person or thing. Most 
of the Gods can emit their potencies and when so emitted 
their potencies become sicunpi. Such a sicun can be im- 
parted to material things by a proper ceremony correctly 
performed by a shaman. 6 

The general disposition of a man comes from the 
nagi. The nagi, like the sicun, is immaterial and is be- 
stowed upon man by the supreme deity at birth. Its 
substance, however, is visible at will and can com- 
municate with mankind either directly or through a 
shaman. The nagi stays with a man until he dies. 

The power to influence others, to forewarn of good 
and evil, to cause vitality, comes from the niya. It is 
immaterial but its substance is visible whenever it so 
wills. It, too, is imparted by the Supreme Deity to 
man but it does not reside in the body as do the sicun 
and the nagi but abides with it like a shadow. Upon 
death it goes to the supreme deity to testify regarding 
the conduct of the Ego to which it belonged. When it 
leaves the body, this means death. 

‘“The Sun Dance of the Oglala Division of the Dakota,” Anthro - 
pological Papers of the American Museum of Natural History , XVI, 
Part II, p. 87. See also pp. 78-94 and 132-161. 

THE EGO AND HUMAN PERSONALITY 267 

It is the niya that causes life, i.e., life from the phy- 
siological side, although just as among the Maori there 
is strictly speaking nothing in life that is purely physio- 
logical. A native described it as follows: “A man’s 
tti is his life. It is the same as his breath and that 
which gives him his strength. It is the ni which keeps 
the inside of a man clean. If the ni is weak he cannot 
perform this office and if it goes away the man dies. 
Niya is the ghost or spirit which is given to a man at 
birth and which causes the ni. The Lakota have 
a ceremony which they call the inipi (sweat bath). 
The idea of the Lakota is that the inipi makes man’s 
spirit strong so that it may cleanse all within 
the body, and so that the ni may drive from his body 
all that makes him tired or that causes him to have 
evil thoughts.” 7 

Certain peculiar actions, such as a man behaving in 
a non-human way and acting, for instance, as though 
he possessed a bear nature, are caused by the nagiya. 
This is one of the most difficult things in Dakota 
philosophy to understand properly. The nagiya is 
apparently some immaterial essence whose substance 
may appear in any form it chooses. It is never im- 
parted to man by the supreme deity but it is bestowed 
by the supreme deity upon every material object save 
man, at its beginning. It may possess any other thing. 
For instance, the nagiya of a wolf may possess a tree 
and then the tree will have the nature of a wolf. It 
is in this connection that it affects man, for the nagiya 

’ Ibid p. 156. 

268 PRIMITIVE MAN AS PHILOSOPHER 

of any animal may possess a man and then he will act 
in a manner suggestive of that animal. 

Jealousy, maliciousness, etc., are not conceived of as 
caused by any soul or entity residing within but are 
regarded as due to discarnate sicun. If the nagi after 
death is adjudged unworthy to go on the spirit trail 
it becomes a wandering sicun. Such a sicun can com- 
municate with mankind but its communications are 
uncertain and not to be relied upon. It is a sicun 
of this type that causes jealousy, etc. 

The fate of the three cardinal constituents of the 
Ego is extremely suggestive. The sicun goes to the 
deity to which it belongs, for it is but the divine essence 
temporarily implanted in man; the nagi goes to spirit 
land and lives there, and the niya apparently disap- 
pears into the universe. 

The body itself is merely an envelope which, after 
death, rots and becomes nothing. 

The marked difference between the Maori and the 
Dakota conception is that the latter throws infinitely 
more of the responsibility for our actions upon the gods. 
We might therefore have expected that most of the 
expressions of the Ego would be regarded as prede- 
termined. But this is not true except for two things, 
the power to influence others and the instincts. Apart 
from this there is complete free will and personal 
responsibility, just as their ethical system clearly im- 
plies. 

Among the Dakota we pointed out that a consider- 
able degree of responsibility for one’s actions was 

THE EGO AND HUMAN PERSONALITY 269 

theoretically thrown upon the gods. In the next theory 
of the Ego to be discussed, that of the Batak of the 
East Indian Archipelago, this responsibility of the 
gods becomes complete, leading to a peculiar kind of 
dualism in each Ego and, theoretically at least, to a 
rigid fatalism. 

According to the Batak the Ego consists of the body, 
of the Ego consciousness ( roha ), the ghost ( begu ), and 
the soul ( tondi). 6 In the tondi we have the divine in 
man but in a sense different from what we have found 
to be the case among the Maori and the Dakota. The 
tondi is divine only because it is bestowed by the 
deities. It does not apparently partake of the divine 
itself. The tondi of man is an individualized piece of 
the soul-substance existing in the universe and of which 
everything partakes. The tondi is, so to speak, a man 
within a man and with its own will and desires which 
do not always correspond to those of the Ego, i.e., 
the roha. Yet it is the tondi that represents the true 
and fundamental part of every man’s consciousness 
because it is regarded as having of its own free will 
selected its fate from among a large number of others 
before its incarnation in some particular person. The 
tondi alone is held responsible if it has not chosen a 
good fate. 

Man is thus prejudged. This would imply that ac- 
cording to the Batak man has within him two voices, 
the true, essential and predetermined (the tondi), and 
the ephemeral (the roha). Although it is the latter 

' J. Wameck, Die Religion der Batak, pp. 8-24. 

270 PRIMITIVE MAN AS PHILOSOPHER 

which does the actual thinking, feeling, desiring, etc., 
it is the tondi that is responsible for our corporeal and 
our psychical well-being; and though the fate of each 
tondi has been predetermined, no one knows it except 
by his experience in life. 

The tondi is supposed to reside in all the parts of the 
human body but in addition it manifests itself in nu- 
merous other ways. First of all it becomes material- 
ized in the human shadow; second, in a man’s name; 
third, in the splendor that shines in the face of a happy 
man; and fourth, in the personal power he exercises 
over others. Indeed, as might have been expected, 
some native thinkers have found it necessary to break 
with this unity in the idea of one tondi and have postu- 
lated seven, although little seems to be known about 
them. 

How distinct from man the tondi is felt to be, in spite 
of its pervading the body, is shown by the worship 
accorded to it. We are in fact, notwithstanding cer- 
tain inconsistencies, dealing with a concept identical 
with that of the Dakota sicun and of the “Guardian 
Spirit” so common in North America. 

Perhaps the following quotation will do more than 
any discussion toward enabling us to understand both 
the nature of the tondi and the role it plays in the life 
of the Batak: 

There once lived a great prince beloved by all on account 
of his power and wealth. But he had no children. So one 
day he prayed to God, “0 Grandfather Mula Djadji, you 

THE EGO AND HUMAN PERSONALITY 271 

have given my brother seven children, give me at least one!” 
Shortly after his wife became pregnant and in due time a 
son was born to her. But when this child came into the 
world it was found to be but half of a human being; it had 
but one eye, one ear, one arm, one foot. For this reason it 
was called the “one-sided.” As the child grew up it natu- 
rally waxed more and more indignant at its hideous appear- 
ance and finally it decided to go to Mula Djadji himself 
and complain directly against the fate that had been allotted 
him. After many difficulties the boy arrived in the presence 
of God and to him he complained directly, “Grandfather, 
why did you make me so completely different in appearance 
from all other people? Give me at least a shape like theirs.” 
Then God answered him, “You must not find fault with 
me in this matter. I would like to bestow upon all people 
a nice shape, for that would redound to my credit. But is 
it my fault if a man’s tondi refuses to accept the lot I had 
predestined for him? To prove to you that I am telling 
you the truth, follow me to the sixth heaven and there you 
will be able to convince yourself that you have no cause 
for complaint against me.” Thereupon God showed the boy 
the mould of his father’s and mother’s fate and explained 
to him how beautiful had been the lot that he had destined 
for him too. “When you were born I showed you the fate 
that I had arranged for you, that would be yours on earth, 
but your tondi refused it saying it was too heavy for you. 
I told your tondi thereupon to select something that would 
fit you but it insisted that everything I showed it was un- 
suitable and too heavy, and told me to split the mould in 
two. ‘Good, I will do that for you,’ and it was done. You 

272 PRIMITIVE MAN AS PHILOSOPHER 

can see for yourself what the original mould was like. You 
see how it is the mould of a complete man. When I split 
it, of course, only half a man developed, for only that which 
a man selects for himself comes to fruition.” 

God, however, had pity on the poor half-man and spoke 
to him. “Good, I will cancel your fate and again give you 
a chance to select your destiny.” The cripple immediately 
set himself to the task of selection. He weighed all the 
moulds but everything was too heavy. Finally God asked 
him which he had chosen and the man answered, “I have 
tried them all but they are too heavy. O let me not diel 
Give me my old mould back again for only that one can I 
carry 1” “Well and good,” said God, “but do not complain 
again. I allow all people to choose the good, but if they 
refuse, then they must suffer the consequences.” 0 

Of the Ego proper from our point of view, the roha, 
very little is said except that it thinks, feels, etc. It is 
apparently regarded as of no consequence except when 
it comes into conflict with the tondi. With regard to 
the significance of the ghost ( begu ) there seem to be 
two contradictory theories. According to one the begu 
is the tondi after death; according to the other the begu 
constitutes all that is left of a man’s personality after 
the tondi has left him. The begu is thus not a separate 
entity to the living man as is the wairua of the Maori 
or the nagi of the Dakota. It is only potentially in 
him. After death, however, it attains an importance 
and significance a thousandfold greater than that of 

Ibid., pp. 50-51. 

THE EGO AND HUMAN PERSONALITY 273 

the wairua or nagi. It becomes associated with the 
dead, with ancestors, with all that is evil. 

In other words the cause of evil is sought outside of 
man although conceived of as emanating from some- 
thing that lies within him. This part of man’s person- 
ality is thus completely projected outside of himself 
and it is perhaps in consequence of this complete pro- 
jection upon the outside world, of evil and of misfor- 
tune, that the Batak live in an atmosphere apparently 
pervaded by terror. This is not true among either 
the Maori or the Dakota. 

Now what are the implications of such analyses of 
the Ego as these just described? It is clearly manifest 
that the dynamic principle is here fundamental. The 
static principle is definitely only the temporary shell, 
the body, doomed to early extinction and decay. Also, 
there is the inability to express the psychical in terms 
of the body; the psychical must be projected upon the 
external world. The Ego, in other words, cannot con- 
tain within itself both subject and object, although the 
object is definitely conditioned by and exists within 
the perceiving self. Thus we have an Ego consisting 
of subject-object, with the object only intelligible in 
terms of the external world and of other Egos. This 
does not in any sense, of course, interfere with the 
essential dualism of primitive thought but it does 
imply a tie between the Ego and the phenomenal 
world foreign to that which we assume. And this con- 
nection is very important, for it takes the form of an 
attraction, a compulsion. Nature cannot resist man, 

274 PRIMITIVE MAN AS PHILOSOPHER 

man cannot resist nature. A purely mechanistic con- 
ception of life is thus unthinkable. The parts of the 
body, the physiological functions of the organs, like 
the material form taken by objects in nature, are mere 
symbols, simulacra, for the essential psychical-spiritual 
entity that lies behind them. 

CHAPTER XV 

SPECULATION FOR ITS OWN SAKE 

T HE preceding chapters must have convinced even 
the most obdurate skeptic that some individuals 
in every primitive group are capable of something 
much higher than mere phantasy-thinking. But even 
these converts, I am inclined to believe, would shrink 
from admitting my next contention, that there exist 
certain individuals in each group who enjoy thinking 
for its own sake, that, in fact, a good deal of discussion 
takes place between the leaders of the different cere- 
monies — and it is these priests who are almost in- 
variably the thinkers — on questions which are of a 
purely speculative nature. It may seem trivial to us, 
for instance, whether the rock and the earth are to be 
regarded as married or not. Among the Dakota 
Indians, however, it is a question upon which a good 
deal of discussion has taken place and which looms as 
an important problem of theology. 

Now to obtain the requisite information on this 
aspect of speculation we must go to the thinker and 
philosopher when he is philosophizing, and that is not 
easy to do under the very best of circumstances. First 
of all there are extremely few philosophers in any 
primitive group and second, these have more important 

275 

276 PRIMITIVE MAN AS PHILOSOPHER 

things to do most of the time than to philosophize. 
The moment, however, a kind fate directs us to the 
philosopher of the group we discover evidence of a 
considerable degree of directed thought. For our 
purposes it is immaterial whether some of this specu- 
lation is connected with recent European influence or 
not since all I am desirous of proving is that a few 
individuals in every community indulge in speculation 
and enjoy it. Some of the examples I shall quote are 
definitely connected with recent Christian influence, 
but these are particularly instructive because the 
questions they develop are often quite new to Christian 
theology. 

As it is obviously impossible to do more than touch 
on so vast a subject in the space I wish to devote to 
it here, I shall arbitrarily select a number of the more 
important abstract questions upon which first-hand in- 
formation is available. Some of the problems of a 
speculative nature such as the theory of the soul and 
of human personality, the nature of the external world, 
etc., have already been discussed, others connected 
with the creation of the world and monotheism are 
to be reserved for a subsequent chapter. I shall there- 
fore confine myself here primarily to examples which 
I believe to be specifically representative of speculation 
for its own sake and to illustrations of religious- 
philosophical systematization. 

Let me begin with the Oglala Dakota who seem to 
exhibit an unusual penchant for abstract thinking. 
Our authority, Mr. James Walker, quotes the following 

SPECULATION FOR ITS OWN SAKE 277 

interesting discourse on the nature and significance of 
the circle: 

The Oglala believe the circle to be sacred because the 
great spirit caused everything in nature to be round except 
stone. Stone is the implement of destruction. The sun 
and the sky, the earth and the moon, are round like a shield, 
though the sky is deep like a bowl. Everything that 
breathes is round like the body of a man. Everything that 
grows from the ground is round like the stem of a plant. 
Since the great spirit has caused everything to be round 
mankind should look upon the circle as sacred, for it is the 
symbol of all things in nature except stone. It is also the 
symbol of the circle that marks the edge of the world and 
therefore of the four winds that travel there. Consequently 
it is also the symbol of the year. The day, the night, and 
the moon go in a circle above the sky. Therefore the circle 
is a symbol of these divisions of time and hence the symbol 
of all time. 

For these reasons the Oglala make their tipis circular, 
their camp-circle circular, and sit in a circle in all cere- 
monies. The circle is also the symbol of the tipi and of 
shelter. If one makes a circle for an ornament and it is not 
divided in any way, it should be understood as the symbol 
of the world and of time . 1 

Manifestly this is speculation for its own sake. 
It is obviously the attempt of some speculative mind 

la The Sun Dance of the Oglala Division of the Dakota,” Anthro- 
pological Papers of the American Museum of Natural History, XVI, 
Part II, p. 160. 

278 PRIMITIVE MAN AS PHILOSOPHER 

to explain the tremendous religious significance the 
circle has among the Oglala. Many — the vast majority 
— are content to accept the circle, or to feel satisfied 
with the religious thrill it arouses in them. This man 
was not. He shows this same philosophical tendency 
in his disquisition on the number four, the sacred num- 
ber of his tribe and, for that matter, of the vast ma- 
jority of tribes of North America. The ordinary man 
has no interest whatsoever in explaining why every- 
thing must be done four times. It is for them simply 
a fact. This particular individual, however, was inter- 
ested. Here is his speculation on the number four: 

In former times the Lakota grouped all their activities by 
fours. This was because they recognized four directions: 
the west, the north, the east, and the south; four divisions 
of time: the day, the night, the moon, and the year; four 
parts in everything that grows from the ground: the roots, 
the stem, the leaves, and the fruit ; four kinds of things that 
breathe: those that crawl, those that fly, those that walk on 
four legs, and those that walk on two legs; four things 
above the world: the sun, the moon, the sky, and the stars; 
four kinds of gods: the great, the associates of the great, the 
gods below them and the spiritkind ; four periods of human 
life: babyhood, childhood, adulthood, and old age; and 
finally, mankind has four fingers on each hand, four toes on 
each foot and the thumbs and the great toes taken together 
form four. Since the great spirit caused everything to be in 
fours, mankind should do everything possible in fours. 2 

* Ibid., p. 159. 

SPECULATION FOR ITS OWN SAKE 279 

Another Oglala philosopher gave Mr. Walker an ex- 
ceedingly interesting account of the invocation used 
by a shaman which ran as follows: 

Before a shaman can perform a ceremony in which 
mysterious beings or things have a part, he should fill 
and light a pipe and say: 

“Friend of Wakinyan, I pass the pipe to you first. Circling 
I pass to you who dwell with the father. Circling pass to 
beginning day. Circling pass to the beautiful one. Circling 
I complete the four quarters and the time. I pass the pipe 
to the father with the sky. I smoke with the great spirit. 
Let us have a blue day.” 

The pipe is used because the smoke from the pipe, smoked 
in communion, has the potency of the feminine god who 
mediates between godkind and mankind, and propitiates 
the godkind. When a shaman offers the pipe to a god, the 
god smokes it and is propitiated. In this invocation, when 
the shaman has filled and lighted the pipe, he should point 
the mouth toward the west and say, “Friend of Wakinyan, 
I pass the pipe to you first.” Thus he offers the pipe to the 
west wind, for the west wind dwells in the lodge of Wakin- 
yan and is his friend. The pipe should be offered to the 
west wind first, because the birthright of precedence of the 
oldest was taken from the first born, the north wind, and 
given to the second born, the west wind, and the gods are 
very jealous of the order of their precedence. 

When he has made this offering the shaman should move 
the pipe toward the right hand, the mouthpiece pointing 
toward the horizon, until it points toward the north. Then 

2$o PRIMITIVE MAN AS PHILOSOPHER 

he should say, “Circling, I pass to you who dwells with the 
grandfather.” Thus he offers the pipe to the north wind, for 
because of an offense against the feminine god, the great 
spirit condemned the north wind to dwell forever with his 
grandfather, who is Wazi, the wizard. Then the shaman 
should move the pipe in the same manner, until the mouth- 
piece points toward the east and say, “Circling, pass to be- 
ginning day.” This is an offering to the east wind, for his 
lodge is where the day begins and he may be addressed as 
the “beginning day.” Then the shaman should move the 
pipe in the same manner until the mouthpiece points toward 
the south, and say, “Circling, pass to the beautiful one.” 
This is an offering to the south wind, for the “beautiful one” 
is the feminine god who is the companion of the south wind 
and dwells in his lodge, which is under the sun at midday. 
It pleases the south wind to be addressed through his com- 
panion rather than directly. 

The four winds are the akicita or messengers of the gods 
and in all ceremonies they have precedence over all other 
gods and for this reason should be the first addressed. 

When the offering has been made to the south wind the 
shaman should move the pipe in the same manner until the 
mouthpiece again points toward the west, and say, “Circling, 
I complete the four quarters and the time.” He should do 
this because the four winds are the four quarters of the 
circle and mankind knows not where they may be or whence 
they may come and the pipe should be offered directly 
toward them. The four quarters embrace all that are in 
the world and all that are in the sky. Therefore, by 
circling the pipe, the offering is made to all the gods. The 

SPECULATION FOR ITS OWN SAKE 281 

circle is the symbol of time, for the daytime, the night time, 
and the moon time are circles above the world, and the year 
time is a circle around the border of the world. Therefore 
the lighted pipe moved in a complete circle is an offering 
to all the times.® 

In conclusion let me add a few more examples of 
speculation from the same tribe collected by another 
observer. Some of them may contain indications of 
Christian influence but this is really more apparent 
than actual. 

All living creatures and all plants derive their life from 
the sun. If it were not for the sun, there would be darkness 
and nothing could grow — the earth would be without life. 
Yet the sun must have the help of the earth. If the sun 
alone were to act upon animals and plants, the heat would 
be so great that they would die, but there are clouds that 
bring rain, and the action of the sun and earth together 
supply the moisture that is needed for life. The roots of 
a plant go down, and the deeper they go the more moisture 
they find. This is according to the laws of nature and is 
one of the evidences of the wisdom of Wakan tanka. Plants 
are sent by Wakan tanka and come from the ground at 
his command, the part to be affected by the sun and rain 
appearing above the ground and the roots pressing down- 
ward to find the moisture which is supplied for them. 
Animals and plants are taught by Wakan tanka what they 
are to do. Wakan tanka teaches the birds to make nests, 

* Ibid., p. 160. 

282 PRIMITIVE MAN AS PHILOSOPHER 

yet the nests of all birds are not alike. Wakan tanka 
gives them merely the outline. Some make better nests than 
others. In the same way some animals are satisfied with 
very rough dwellings, while others make attractive places 
in which to live. Some animals also take better care of 
their young than others. The forest is the home of many 
birds and other animals, and the water is the home of fish 
and reptiles. All birds, even those of the same species, are 
not alike, and it is the same with animals and with human 
beings. The reason Wakan tanka does not make two birds, 
or animals, or human beings exactly alike is because each 
is placed here by Wakan tanka to be an independent individ- 
uality and to rely on itself. Some animals are made to live 
in the ground. The stones and the minerals are placed in 
the ground by Wakan tanka, some stones being more ex- 
posed than others. When a medicine man says that he 
talks with the sacred stones, it is because of all the sub- 
stance in the ground these are the ones which most often 
appear in dreams and are able to communicate with men. 

All animals have not the same disposition. The horse, 
dog, bear, and buffalo all have their own characteristics. 
This is also true of the fowls of the air, the living creatures 
in the water, and even the insects; they all have their own 
ways. Thus a man may enjoy the singing of all the birds 
and yet have a preference for the melodies of certain kinds 
of birds. Or he may like all animals and yet have a favorite 
among them. 

From my boyhood I have observed leaves, trees, and 
grass, and I have never found two alike. They may have a 
general likeness, but on examination I have found that they 

SPECULATION FOR ITS OWN SAKE 283 

differ slightly. Plants are of different families, each being 
adapted to growth in a certain locality. It is the same with 
animals; they are widely scattered, and yet each will be 
found in the environment to which it is best adapted. It 
is the same with human beings; there is some place which 
is best adapted to each. The seeds of the plants are blown 
about by the wind until they reach the place where they 
will grow best — where the action of the sun and the pres- 
ence of moisture are most favorable to them, and there they 
take root and grow. All living creatures and all plants are 
a benefit to something. Certain animals fulfill their purpose 
by definite acts. The crows, buzzards, and flies are some- 
what similar in their use, and even the snakes have a pur- 
pose in being. In the early days the animals probably 
roamed over a very wide country until they found their 
proper place. An animal depends a great deal on the 
natural conditions around it. If the buffalo were here to- 
day, I think they would be different from the buffalo of the 
old days because all the natural conditions have changed. 
They would not find the same food, nor the same surround- 
ings. We see the change in our ponies. In the old days 
they could stand great hardship and travel long distances 
without water. They lived on certain kinds of food and 
drank pure water. Now our horses require a mixture of 
food; they have less endurance and must have constant care. 
It is the same with the Indians; they have less freedom 
and they fall an easy prey to disease. In the old days 
they were rugged and healthy, drinking pure water and 
eating the meat of the buffalo, which had a wide range, 
not being shut up like cattle of the present day. The water 

284 PRIMITIVE MAN AS PHILOSOPHER 

of the Missouri River is not pure, as it used to be, and many 
of the creeks are no longer good for us to drink. 

A man ought to desire that which is genuine instead of 
that which is artificial. Long ago there was no such thing as 
a mixture of earths to make paint. There were only three col- 
ors of native earth paint — red, white, and black. These could 
be obtained only in certain places. When other colors were 
desired, the Indians mixed the juices of plants, but it was 
found that these mixed colors faded and it could always be 
told when the red was genuine — the red made of burned clay. 

All classes of people know that when human power fails 
they must look to a higher power for the fulfillment of their 
desires. There are many ways in which the request for help 
from this higher power can be made. This depends on the 
person. Some like to be quiet, and others want to do every- 
thing in public. Some like to go alone, away from the 
crowd, to meditate upon many things. In order to secure 
a fulfillment of his desire a man must qualify himself to 
make his request. Lack of preparation would mean failure 
to secure a response to his petition. Therefore when a 
man makes up his mind to ask a favor of Wakan tanka he 
makes due preparation. It is not fitting that a man should 
suddenly go out and make a request of Wakan tanka. 
When a man shuts his eyes, he sees a great deal. He then 
enters his own mind, and things become clear to him, but 
objects passing before his eyes would distract him. For 
that reason a dreamer makes known his request through 
what he sees when his eyes are closed. It has long been his 
intention to make his request of Wakan tanka, and he 

SPECULATION FOR ITS OWN SAKE 285 

resolves to seek seclusion on the top of a butte or other high 
place. When at last he goes there he closes his eyes, and 
his mind is upon Wakan tanka and his work. The man 
who does this usually has in mind some animal which he 
would like for protection and help. No man can succeed in 
life alone, and he cannot get the help he wants from men; 
therefore he seeks help through some bird or animal which 
Wakan tanka sends for his assistance. Many animals have 
ways from which a man can learn a great deal, even from 
the fact that horses are restless before a storm. 

When I was 10 years of age I looked at the land and 
the rivers, the sky above, and the animals around me and 
could not fail to realize that they were made by some great 
power. I was so anxious to understand this power that I 
questioned the trees and the bushes. It seemed as though 
the flowers were staring at me, and I wanted to ask them 
“Who made you?” I looked at the moss-covered stones; 
some of them seemed to have the features of a man, but 
they could not answer me. Then I had a dream, and in my 
dream one of these small round stones appeared to me and 
told me that the maker of all was Wakan tanka, and that 
in order to honor him I must honor his works in nature. 
The stone said that by my search I had shown myself worthy 
of supernatural help. It said that if I were curing a sick 
person I might ask its assistance, and that all the forces of 
nature would help me work a cure. 

It is significant that certain stones are not found buried in 
the earth, but are on the top of high buttes. They are 

286 PRIMITIVE MAN AS PHILOSOPHER 

round, like the sun and moon, and we know that all things 
which are round are related to each other. Things which are 
alike in their nature grow to look like each other, and these 
stones have lain there a long time, looking at the sun. Many 
pebbles and stones have been shaped in the current of a 
stream, but these stones were found far from the water 
and have been exposed only to the sun and the wind. The 
earth contains many thousand such stones hidden beneath 
its surface. The thunderbird is said to be related to these 
stones, and when a man or an animal is to be punished, 
the thunderbird strikes the person, and if it were possible 
to follow the course of the lightning, one of these stones 
would be found embedded in the earth. Some believe that 
these stones descend with the lightning, but I believe they 
are on the ground and are projected downward by the bolt. 
In all my life I have been faithful to the sacred stones. I 
have lived according to their requirements, and they have 
helped me in all my troubles. I have tried to qualify 
myself as well as possible to handle these sacred stones, 
yet I know that I am not worthy to speak to Wakan tanka. 
I make my request of the stones and they are my interces- 
sors. 

Ever since I have known the old Indians and their cus- 
toms, I have seen that in any great undertaking it is not 
enough for a man to depend simply upon himself. Most 
people place their dependence on the medicine men, who 
understand this life and all its surroundings and are able 
to predict what will come to pass. They have the right 
to make these predictions. If as we sit here we should 
hear a voice speaking from above, it would be because we 

SPECULATION FOR ITS OWN SAKE 287 

had the right to hear what others could not hear, or we 
might see what others had not the right to see because they 
were not properly qualified. Such are some of the rights and 
privileges of the medicine men, and those who desire to 
know mysterious things must seek their aid. 

I have noticed in my life that all men have a liking for 
some special animal, or plant, or spot of earth. If men 
would pay more attention to these preferences and seek 
what is best to do in order to make themselves worthy 
of that toward which they are so attracted, they might have 
dreams which would purify their lives. Let a man decide 
upon his favorite animal and make a study of it, learning 
its ways. Let him learn to understand its sounds and 
motions. The animals want to communicate with man, but 
Wakan tanka does not intend they shall do so directly — 
man must do the greater part in securing an understanding. 4 

I pass now to an entirely different region, to the Ewe 
of West Africa. The German missionary Johann Spieth 
has published a number of so-called “Discourses on 
God” which show the same interest in speculation as 
those quoted from the Oglala. “We can never attain 
a knowledge such as God’s,” states the first of these 
discourses. “You saw me bring back a calabash and 
you now see me working on it. I have scraped it and 
in this fashion made a drinking vessel for myself. The 
seed that lay within it was exceedingly small, but I 
placed this seed in the ground and, as you now see, it 

‘Francis Densmore, Bulletin 61 of the Bureau of American Eth- 
nology, pp. 122, 172-173; 184; 208, 

288 PRIMITIVE MAN ^5 PHILOSOPHER 

has become a useful utensil. I (man) cannot do that; 
but the wisdom with which God made it, that, too, I do 
not understand. The child must not say to its father, 
‘I surpass you.’ ” 6 

But it is the third of the discourses that is most 
interesting. It deals with the world and God. 

“When night or day approach do we know what is 
going to happen to us on either occasion? But 
whether we are in a stream or whether it is night, we 
are everywhere still in the world. That is why we 
say that God is the world. Everything in the world 
is the creation of God: the fish in the water, men, good 
and evil, God has sent them all. The world is stronger 
than everything else and that is why we say that the 
world is God. You only know what you can know 
to-day, not that which is to take place in the future. 
God alone knows what will take place to-morrow. 
Mankind will never be able to comprehend God com- 
pletely and that is why we say the world is God. No 
one can know everything that happens in the world. 
If you go to one town you can learn what takes place 
in that town but you will not know what is taking 
place in another town.” 6 

As another example of this kind of speculative in- 
terest let me give the account of the various inferences 
by which a Winnebago informant identified himself 
successively with God, with his soul, and with his 
thought: “I prayed to Earthmaker (God). And as 

' Die Ewe Staemme, pp. 327-328. 
* Ibid., pp. 834-836. 

SPECULATION FOR ITS OWN SAKE 289 

I prayed I was aware of something above me and there 
he was! That which is called the soul, that is it, that 
is what one calls Earthmaker. Now this is what I felt 
and saw. All of us sitting together there, we had all 
together one spirit and I was their spirit or soul. I 
did not have to speak to them and get an answer to 
know what had been their thoughts. Then I thought 
of a certain place far away and immediately I was 
there; I was my thought. I would not need any more 
food for was I not my spirit? Nor would I have any 
more use of my body. My corporeal affairs are 
over.” 7 

The remarkable thing about the passage I have just 
quoted is its absolute originality. There is nothing in 
Winnebago theology to justify the identification of 
their supreme deity, Earthmaker, with the soul nor, 
as far as I am aware, is there any warrant for it in 
Christian theology. The quasi-pantheism developed 
in the sentences following whereby all the worshipers 
present were regarded as having one soul which was 
then identified with this man’s soul, that, too, is quite 
unique in Winnebago speculation. The belief in fore- 
knowledge and in thought-reading existed but never 
before had any speculative mind drawn the inference 
that because thought in the moment apparently en- 
abled you to be in a certain place far distant, therefore 
logically you must be your thought. 

To the same individual we owe a most interesting 

7 Crashing Thunder : the Autobiography of an American Indian , 
edited by Paul Radin, pp. 190- 192. 

290 PRIMITIVE MAN AS PHILOSOPHER 

disquisition on the Trinity. In a recent new religion 
to which many Winnebago became converted the 
Christian belief in the Trinity plays a minor role. 
Most of the members of the new sect give a lip service 
to this dogma and then pay no more attention to it. 
Our philosopher, however, could not refrain from ex- 
plaining and elaborating upon it. In fact he discovered 
what I feel confident is an absolutely new proof of the 
Trinity. Apparently the problem that exercised his 
mind was, very properly, how the Deity could be one 
and three at the same time. The customary Christian 
demonstrations of the Trinity he did not know and he 
would unquestionably neither have understood nor 
accepted them if he had known them, for nothing ever 
convinced this individual except some inward warrant 
or some definite concrete evidence. In this case it was 
concrete evidence that he obtained. He found the 
proof in an English word found in the Gospel of 
St. Matthew, in a passage that has played an enormous 
part in the history of Christianity, the famous nine- 
teenth verse of the sixteenth chapter of St. Matthew. 
There the word key is found and it is this word that 
led him to his extraordinary interpretation. But let 
me quote the passage in full for it is deeply interesting: 

My body told us how this new religion of ours was an 
affair of God’s and that even if one knew only one portion 
of it, one could still partake of God’s religion. 

Thus did my body speak. God, the Son of God, and His 
Holiness (the Holy Ghost), these are the three ways of 

SPECULATION FOR ITS OWN SAKE 291 

saying it. Even if you knew only one of these three, it 
means all. Every one here has the means of opening the 
road to God. It is given to you. With your belief only 
can you open this door to God. You cannot open it with 
knowledge alone. 

“How many letters are there to the key, i. e., the road to 
God?” “Three.” “What are they?” There were many 
educated people present but none of them said anything. 
“The first letter must be a K, so that if a person said K, 
that would be the whole of it. But let me look in the book 
(the Bible) and see what that means,” said the body. Then 
the body took the Bible and began to turn the leaves. The 
body did not know where it (the passage sought) was 
itself, for it was not learned in books. Finally in Matthew, 
in chapter 16, it stopped. In that chapter this K is men- 
tioned for it says, “Peter did not give himself up.” For a 
long time he could not give up his own knowledge. There 
in that passage you will find the word key? 

In other words the word key fulfills the conditions, 
for the first letter k is pronounced like the whole word 
key. Here certainly we have true subtlety and a 
praiseworthy philosophical and theological striving. 

' Ibid., p. 200. 

CHAPTER XVI 

THE SYSTEMATIZATION OF IDEAS 

F ROM speculative discussion for its own sake we 
shall now turn to the more usual subjects of 
philosophical interest, the systematization of the va- 
rious ideas concerning the origin of the world, and the 
nature of things. Some of the concepts underlying 
these attempts at systematization have already been 
discussed before, others such as those embodied in the 
creation myths of various tribes we must postpone to 
the chapter on monotheism. In this chapter we will 
limit ourselves exclusively to the definite philosophical 
implications found in certain cosmological myths and 
related material, and still further circumscribe our in- 
quiry by discussing only Polynesian data. I do not 
feel that any objection can legitimately be advanced 
against thus limiting ourselves to a very restricted 
ethnological province, for in a tentative work like the 
present, our object must be to demonstrate the exist- 
ence, among peoples customarily regarded as primi- 
tive, of certain intellectual tendencies and accomplish- 
ments. The question of their universality, while im- 
portant, can for the time being be relegated to the 
background. 

The Polynesians have long been known for their 

292 

THE SYSTEMATIZATION OF IDEAS 293 

unusually elaborate cosmological chants. In these 
chants, many of them possessing a beauty of thought 
and expression that can be still felt in the translation, 
a complete cosmogony is outlined containing not only 
an account of the origin of the world and the earth but 
what is to all appearances a fairly definite theory of 
the origin of consciousness. I say this advisedly for 
I can find no other interpretation for the first five lines 
of the following Maori chant. The story of creation 
is divided into four large periods, each one showing 
within itself a secondary and progressive evolution. 
The first period, which as I said contains a theory of 
the development of consciousness, is as follows: 

From the conception the increase, 

From the increase the swelling, 

From the swelling the thought, 

From the thought the remembrance, 

From the remembrance, the desire . 1 

It is only after the development of physical and 
psychical differentiation and of personal consciousness 
— so we must interpret these lines — that an external 
world can be apprehended. This is the first period. 
It is with this external world, or better with what is 
outside of the perceiving self, that the second period 
is concerned. One is naturally inquisitive about the 
transition between the two periods and here our un- 
known Maori philosopher is both stimulating and sug- 

1 Richard Taylor, Te Ika A Maid. 

294 PRIMITIVE MAN AS PHILOSOPHER 

gestive. He does not apparently regard the external 
world as having been created from, or as responding to, 
what he has predicated as the last stage of the first 
period, namely, desire; but he assumes that the second 
period was created by the word. Is it too far-fetched 
to see herein an attempt to obviate the necessity of 
ascribing the existence of the external world to thought 
or will, by the predication of a mediating principle, the 
word; that is, by what represents the first articulate 
and external expression of thought, remembrance, and 
desire? I do not think so. To people more qualified 
than myself, however, do I leave the task of interpret- 
ing the following lines, which give the account of the 
second cosmic period. The problem of the origin of 
matter is here most skillfully dodged — or shall I say 
delayed — in the most approved manner of the early 
evolutionists: 

The word became fruitful; 

It dwelt with the feeble glimmering; 

It brought forth night: 

The great night, the long night, 

The lowest night, the loftiest night, 

The thick night to be felt, 

The night to be touched, the night unseen. 

The night following on, 

The night ending in death. 2 

Here we have evolutionism in excelsis. The absolute 
consistency and inevitableness of this thinking — call it 
intuitive or definitely rational as you wish — is simply 

2 Journal of the Polynesian Society, XVI, p. 113. 

THE SYSTEMATIZATION OF IDEAS 295 

appalling. From desire came the word. But this first 
phase of articulateness creates nothing. It merely 
dwells with the feeble glimmering. Is this feeble 
glimmering to be construed as the dawn between non- 
consciousness and consciousness? Our Maori phi- 
losopher leaves this unresolved. Then follows the de- 
scription of the absoluteness of night, perfect in its 
kind; the night that can be touched but is yet unseen, 
the lowest yet the highest, the night that follows on, 
but ends in death. Yet this night has one distinctive 
quality which philosophically is fundamental — it can 
be apprehended, and thus becomes quite different from 
that night which the Maori describe as existing when, 
unborn, they dwelt within the womb of their mother, 
the earth. 

The third period represents the genealogical history 
of matter. It is strictly parallel to the account given 
in the first period of the origin of consciousness. 

From the nothing the begetting, 

From the nothing the increase, 

From the nothing the abundance, 

The power of increasing, the living breath; 

It dwelt with the empty space, 

It produced the atmosphere which is above us. 

As compared with the first period there is a flaw in 
the evolutionary account. Nothing leads to begetting, 
increase, abundance and the power of increasing, the 
living breath. Apparently our ancient philosophic 
friend, after having delayed the vexatious problem of 

296 PRIMITIVE MAN AS PHILOSOPHER 

how something could have arisen out of nothing, 
throws all logic and caution to the winds and hurdles 
over the question. Let us not throw stones; he has 
some illustrious successors. 

The fourth period is philosophically not so interest- 
ing. Light is about to appear and with it our problems 
become dissipated. 

The atmosphere which floats above the earth, 

The great firmament above us, the spread-out space 
dwelt with the early dawn, 

Then the moon sprang forth ; 

The atmosphere above dwelt with the glowing sky. 
Forthwith was produced the sun; 

They were thrown up above as the chief eyes of heaven; 
Then the heavens became light, 

The early dawn, the early day, 

The midday. The blaze of day from the sky. 

Where such remarkable chants are developed one 
naturally expects that the philosophy in one version 
may be better or worse than in another. I wish to 
quote one such version which logically is better, al- 
though the Maori philosopher simplified his problem 
and instead of positing the question of mind and mat- 
ter, frankly assumed both from the very beginning. 
He still further simplified the problem of the origin 
of the mind by assuming a divine mind, the deity Io. 
Although everything superficially comes into existence 
as the fiat of Io, this version contains in reality a pro- 
founder understanding of development than did our 
first: 

THE SYSTEMATIZATION OF IDEAS 297 

Io dwelt within the breathing-space of immensity. 

The universe was in darkness, with water everywhere. 
There was no glimmer of dawn, no clearness, no light. 
And he began by saying these words, 

That he might cease remaining inactive. 

“Darkness, become a light-possessing darkness.” 

(He) then repeated these selfsame words in this manner, 
That he might cease remaining inactive. 

“Light, become a darkness-possessing light.” 

And again an intense darkness supervened. 

Then a third time he spake saying: 

“Let there be darkness above, 

Let there be one darkness below (alternate), 

Let there be darkness unto Tupua, 

Let there be darkness unto Tawhito, 

A dominion of light, 

A bright light.” 

And now a great light prevailed. 

(Io) then looked to the waters which compassed him 
about and spoke a fourth time saying, 

“Ye waters of Tai-kama, be ye separate, 

Heaven be formed.” Then the sky became suspended. 
“Bring forth, thou Tupua-hono-nuku.” 

And at once the moving earth lay stretched abroad. 8 

Even at the risk of wearying the reader I cannot 
refrain from giving one more chant, a Tahitian crea- 
tion hymn, in its entirety. Much of its content is 
contained in the two chants already quoted but this 
third chant has some new features, new subtleties, and 
bears the impress of a different type of temperament 
and personality: 

8 Journal of the Polynesian Society, XVI, p. 113. 

2q3 PRIMITIVE MAN AS PHILOSOPHER 

He abides — Taaroa by name — 

In the immensity of space. 

There was no earth, there was no heaven, 

There was no sea, there was no mankind; 

Taaroa calls on high; 

He changed himself fully. 

Taaroa is the root; 

The rocks (or foundations) ; 

Taaroa is the sands; 

Taaroa stretches out the branches (is wide-spreading). 
Taaroa is the light; 

Taaroa is within. 

Taaroa is below; 

Taaroa is enduring; 

Taaroa is wise; 

He created the land of Hawaii ; 

Hawaii great and sacred, 

As a cruse (or shell) for Taaroa. 

The earth is dancing (moving). 

O foundations, O rocks, 

O sands! Here, here. 

Brought hither, press together the earth, 

Press, press again! 

Stretch out the seven heavens, let ignorance cease. 

Create the heavens, let darkness cease. 

Let anxiety cease within. 

It is the time of the speaker. 

Fill up (complete) the foundations. 

Fill up the rocks, 

Fill up the sands. 4 

Finally let me quote a theory of the origin of night 
which developed among the Hawaiians and which is 
directly opposed to the notions expounded in the first 

*}. Fomander, The Polynesian Race, I, pp. 221 ff. 

THE SYSTEMATIZATION OF IDEAS 299 

two Maori chants. As far as I can make out, in this 
account heat and light preceded night, and night came 
into being at midwinter when the light of the sun was 
“subdued.” Its evolution is extremely interesting — 
slime, earth, deepest darkness, night. Whether the 
mysticism here is more apparent than real, I have no 
means of telling. The chant follows : 

At the time that turned the heat of the earth, 

At the time when the heavens turned and changed, 

At the time when the light of the sun was subdued 
To cause light to break forth, 

At the time of the night of winter, 

Then began the slime which established the earth, 

The source of deepest darkness; 

Of the depth of the darkness, of the depth of the dark- 
ness, 

Of the darkness of the sun, in the depth of night; 

It is night: 

Thus was night born.® 

All this evolution is admirably summed up in the 
preamble to a well-known Maori lament: 

For thee, O whai, my love is ever great. 

From germ of life sprang thought, 

And god’s own medium came: 

Then bird and bloom ; and life in space 
Produced the worlds of night — 

The worlds where bowing knee 
And form in abject crouching lost, 

Are lost — for ever lost. 

And never now return ye 

5 Journal of the Polynesian Society, IX, pp. 39#. 

3 oo PRIMITIVE MAN AS PHILOSOPHER 

From those worlds of gloom. 

’Twas nothing that begot 
The nothing unpossessed 
And nothing without charm. 

’Twas Rangi who with Atu-tahi 
Brought forth the moon. 

And Rangi Wero-wero took 
And, yet unseen, the sun produced. 

He, silent, skimmed the space above, 

And then burst forth the glowing eye of heaven 
To give thee light, O man! 

To wage thy war on fellow-man. 

Turn and look this way. 

On Tara-rua’s distant peak now 
Shines the light of coming day — 

The dawn of eating-man and feats of war. 1 2 3 4 5 6 

All the speculations so far quoted have been couched 
in fairly abstract terms. But there was another kind 
of cosmological speculation not uncommon among the 
Polynesians where the ideas were drawn primarily 
from the domain of plant life. Thus among the Maori 
we have the following periods: 

1. TePu (origin, source, root, base, foundation). 

2. Te More (tap-root; figuratively, cause). 

3. Te Weu (rootlet, fibers). 

4. Te Aka (long, thin roots; stem of climbing plant). 

5. Te Rea (growth). 

6. Te Wao-nui (primeval forest). 

'John White, The Ancient History of the Maori, I, pp. 7-8. 

THE SYSTEMATIZATION OF IDEAS 301 

Here the plant analogies stop and we find 

7. Te Kune (pregnancy, conception, form acquired). 

8. Te Whe (sound, as of creaking of tree branches). 

9. Te Kore (non-existence). 

10. Te Po (night). 

From night then came the Sky-father and the Earth- 
mother; from them, in turn, the god Tane and from 
him finally man. 7 

We have in our discussion of the Polynesian material 
so far been carried only to the period of the creation 
of the sky and the earth. Naturally speculation did 
not stop there. The same feeling for an evolutionary 
systematization which we saw evinced for the develop- 
ment of the cosmos is shown for the period subsequent 
to the appearance of the sky and earth and for the 
origin of man himself. The order of creation among 
the Maori ran as follows: 

1. The waters of ocean that are in the world, these were 
all created by the waters; and then grew out of them 
the land, the earth, which on maturity was taken to 
wife by the Sky-father. 

2. Next were created the trees of all kinds, to clothe the 
skin of the earth which had heretofore been naked. 

3. Next were created the minor vegetation growing each 
after its own kind. 

4. Next were created the reptiles and insects of every 
kind. 

f Journal of the Polynesian Society, III, p. 158. 

302 PRIMITIVE MAN AS PHILOSOPHER 

5. Next were created the animals, dogs of every species. 

6. Next were created the birds of different kinds to dwell 
on the plains and in the woods of the earth and on 
lady-ocean also. 

7. Next were created the moon, the sun, and all the 
stars. When this had been accomplished, the “world 
of light” became permanent. 

8. Next and finally were created the first woman and her 
daughter, from whom sprang mankind. 8 

The Maori informant added the following character- 
istic note: “Each one of these, from the very first 
down to the creation of man, mentioned each in his 
own period, growing up in its own time, increasing in 
its own period, living in its own period, endowed after 
its own manner and time. Each had its own time of 
conception or sprouting. We now understand that this 
was the nature of all things, that each thing has its 
female counterpart through which it conceives.” 

For the origin of man the Maori developed a type of 
speculation whose counterpart I have yet to find. Now 
as a rule, in creation myths, the creation of man is 
comparatively simple. He is generally created directly 
by the deity either out of nothing, out of a portion of 
the deity, or out of the cosmic material that already 
exists. Here nothing of the kind occurs. From the 
very beginning it is assumed that man can arise only 
in the proper biological manner, from a female. The 

8 S. Percy Smith, “The Lore of the Whare-Wananga,” Memoirs of 
the Polynesian Society , III, pp. 135-137. 

THE SYSTEMATIZATION OF IDEAS 303 

problem that then confronts the gods is to discover 
the appropriate female. This is not so easy to deter- 
mine, because the Maori gods were sharp logicians in 
whom Anatole France would have taken keen delight. 
They argued that their own kind must be excluded, 
for from gods only gods can be born. They soon 
realized that the type of female required would have to 
be created dc novo and they proceeded to create her, 
after having first agreed that the mammalian method 
of reproduction was to be followed, that of reptiles 
and birds having been examined and found wanting. 
The myth follows: 

Then Tane and his elder brother asked one another, “By 
what means shall we raise up descendants to ourselves in 
the world of light?” Their elder brother said, “Let us seek 
a female that may take on our likeness and raise up off- 
spring for us in the world of light.” Some suggested they 
should fetch some of the female Apas (divine messengers) of 
the twelve heavens. But the older brother replied, “If we 
fetch our females from there, then all our descendants will 
be gods like ourselves. Rather let us take of the earth, 
that it may be said they are the descendants of the earth.” 
Hereupon it was agreed to search for such a female. 

The family of gods now dispersed by two and two to 
search for the female. Every place was sought out but 
not one single thing was found suitable to take on the 
functions of a female similar to the female Apas of the 
conjoint heavens. All assembled again — none had found 
anything. 

304 PRIMITIVE MAN AS PHILOSOPHER 

It was then decided by the gods to ascertain or no 
whether the female was to be found in any of the living 
beings that had been appointed to dwell in the world (i. e., 
the animals, insects, etc.). For all females of living things 
conceive. An examination of the offspring was made. Some 
were found partly appropriate, some not. The reptiles have 
their particular issue in the form of eggs; they were not 
found suitable on examination and so were discarded. It 
was considered better that something which produced after 
its own kind or bodily shape should be adopted — and hence 
offspring by eggs was assigned to birds. It was now obvious 
that the kind of female required from which the iho-tangata 
(the form or likeness and attributes of man) could be born, 
was not to be found. 

So the gods all assembled again to declare their various 
ideas. And then spoke Ro-iho, Ro-ake, and Hae-puru to 
Tane. “O Tane, what is it ye are seeking?” Tane re- 
plied, “We are searching the way to the female.” The 
three then said, “Try the earth at Kura-waka and com- 
mence your operations there for in that place is the female 
in a state of virginity and potentiality; she is sacred for 
she contains the likeness of man.” 

The gods then went off to seek the earth at Kura-waka. 
Here they formed a body in the likeness of a woman and 
completed the arrangements of the head, the arms, the bust, 
the legs, the back, and the front; and then the bones. 
Here ended the work of the elder brethren. Then followed 
the arrangements of the flesh, the muscles, the blood, and 
the fat. On the completion of these parts the breath of 
life was assigned to Tane to place in the nostrils, the 

THE SYSTEMATIZATION OF IDEAS 305 

mouth, and the ears. That was done. Then for the first 
time the breath of man came forth — the eyelids opened, the 
pupils saw, and the hot breath of the mouth burst forth, 
the nose sneezed. After this the body was taken to the 
altar at Muritakina where all the proceedings were voided 
(i. e., where all evil influence of earthly origin was removed 
and the first woman became a fitting recipient of the germ 
of life). 

The parts were at first all made separately in different 
places but afterwards gathered and joined together and on 
completion, it was said to be a human body. It was Io and 
one of his messengers who implanted the thoughts and the 
living spirit. 8 

The creation myth of the Maori is so remarkable 
in many ways and shows in its elaboration and sequence 
so clearly the hand of the thinker and the systematize^ 
that in spite of its length it merits quotation in full: 

Introduction 

The Rangi-nui, Great Sky, which stands above, felt a de- 
sire towards Papa-tua-nuku, the Earth, whose belly was 
turned up towards him; he desired her as a wife. So Rangi 
came down to Papa. In that period the amount of light 
was nil; absolute and complete darkness prevailed; there 
was no sun, no moon, no stars, no clouds, no light, no mist — 
no ripples stirred the surface of ocean; no breath of air, a 
complete and absolute stillness. 

And so Rangi-nui dwelt with Papa-tua-nuku as his wife; 

9 Ibid., pp. 138-141. 

3 o6 PRIMITIVE MAN AS PHILOSOPHER 

and then he set plants to cover the nakedness of Papa; for 
her armpits, her head, and the body; and after that, the 
smaller trees to clothe them both, for the body of the earth 
was naked. Subsequently he placed the upstanding trees of 
the forest, and now Papa felt a great warmth which was 
all-embracing. After this were placed the insects of all 
kinds, the ancestors of tuatara, the great lizard, appropriate 
to the recesses of the smaller vegetation, the clumps of 
smaller trees, and the great forests whose heads reach the 
skies. Then the crabs, the larger species of univalves, the 
bivalves, the ngakihi, the mussel, the haliotis, and similar 
things which have shells, were assigned to their places to 
animate the earth and the waters thereof. 

Creation of the Gods 

After the last of all these things had been planted by 
Rangi-nui and Papa, they then created their proper off- 
spring, i. e., the gods; the eyes were made first, and then 
the “house” to hold them, i. e., the head. After the head, 
the bust and body and the bones of the legs, according to 
their growth (shapes ). 10 

The Ages of Darkness; of Chaos 

It was after this manner that they dwelt in the ages of 
darkness, within the space included in the embrace of their 
parents. It was very long that condition of affairs existed; 
until at last a faint glimmering of light, a scintillation like 
the light of a star was seen, or like the will-o’-the-wisp at 

“The nature of the existence of the gods was such as has been 
explained (cf. pp. 249/.). 

THE SYSTEMATIZATION OF IDEAS 307 

night. And now commenced a desire on the part of the 
family of gods to go forth from between their parents to 
follow the faint appearance of light. Some of the gods 
consented, some did not; and thus it became a matter of 
strife between them. Tane, Tupai, and others said, “Let us 
seek a means by which we may go forth.” The matter was 
then assented to. Now Uru-te-ngangana, the eldest of the 
family, had been persuaded by Whiro-te-tipua’s arguments 
against going forth, and hence they remained until the last. 

The Gods Go Forth to the World of Light 

Now, at a certain time after, Ue-poto went to bathe and 
wash away the clammy feeling arising through the warmth 
of their dwelling-place (within the embrace of their par- 
ents). He was carried outside away on the current of his 
mother’s urine and found himself outside in a gentle cooling 
breeze which was sweet-scented in the nostrils of Ue-poto. 
He thought this is the best place, here outside. So he called 
out under the sides of his parents: “O Sirs! Come outside, 
for this is a pleasant place for us.” 

When the menstruous time of their mother Earth came, 
then Tane came forth. This was in the seventh Po, or age 
of their desire to search for the “way of the female” in 
order to go forth. On reaching the outside world they then 
saw that it was indeed a pleasant place for them to dwell. 
There was, however, a drawback; for the different kinds of 
the cold of heaven (or space) there spread out their intense 
cold. Hence did Rangi and Papa closely embrace to ex- 
clude the cold from their offspring and hence also originated 
the “goose-flesh” and trembling through cold. These are 

3 o8 PRIMITIVE MAN AS PHILOSOPHER 

the enemies that afflicted the family of their father. In con- 
sequence of this they sheltered under the sides of their 
mother, where they found warmth which they named 
shelter-by-the-side, which name has come down to us and is 
applied to a warm and pleasant place where no winds blow. 

After this when the ninth and tenth ages had come, 
Uru-te-ngangana and others came forth — they formed the 
second party; and then Whiro-te-tipua and his friends were 
urged to come forth. He did so in anger and afflicted some 
of the other gods with baldness on the top of the head and 
the same on the forehead, the eyelashes, and the eyebrows. 
Great indeed was the wrath of Whiro at Tane because of 
his inducing them to come forth from the shelter of their 
parents to be “bitten” by the cold of space — that was the 
cause of his anger. 

The Separation of Heaven and Earth 

Some time after the foregoing events Tane said, “Let us 
now separate our parents that Rangi and Papa may occupy 
different places.” Whiro would not consent to this proposi- 
tion and there was much strife in consequence. But Tane- 
nui-a-rangi became more urgent; and then Tangaroa, Tu- 
mata-uenga, and Tawhiri-matea finally agreed. And now 
Rangi-nui was propped up into the position he now holds. 
In the propping up by Tane with the four props, one was 
placed at the head, one on each side, and one at the legs, 
making the four that separated Rangi from Papa. But 
as the props were lifted and Rangi was still suspended in 
space, one at the legs and one at the head slipped. Tane 
called out to Paia, “0 Pai!” Paia replied, “Here am I.” 

THE SYSTEMATIZATION OF IDEAS 309 

Tane said, “Raise him up above.” In this uplifting and 
raising in order that Rangi-nui might float above, he did 
not quite rise to the position required, because the arms of 
both Rangi and Papa grasped one another and held fast. 
Then Tane called out to Tu-mata-kaka and Tu-mata-uenga 
telling them to get an axe to cut the arms of their parents. 
Tu-mata-kaka cried out, “O Tane, where is the source of 
axes to be found?” Tane said, “Fetch one from the pillow 
of our elder brother, Uru-te-ngangana, to cut them with. 
Fetch a handle from Tua-matua who will put a keen edge 
on the axe and fasten it to a handle.” The two axes named 
Te-Ahwio-rangi and Te Whiro-nui were then fetched, and 
then the arms of Rangi-nui and Papa-tua-nuku were severed 
and they were completely separated. At that time Paia 
cut off from the neck of Rangi-nui the ahi-tapu or sacred 
fire, which he subsequently used to make fire with, using 
his karakia (incantation) in doing so. 

Now when Rangi-nui had been properly placed in posi- 
tion as is now to be seen, the blood from the arms dripped 
down on to Papa and hence is the red oxide of iron and the 
blue phosphate of iron, that his descendants in this world 
use in painting. And hence also is the red appearance 
that inflames the skies at sunrise or sunset — that is the 
blood of Rangi’s arms. 

Now at this time the family of gods proceeded to arrange 
the knowledge of things celestial and terrestrial of Rangi- 
nui; that is, to direct matters so that they might be able to 
adopt a course leading to their benefit. But they were not 
able to accomplish it, for they were confused about the 
direction of earthly things — they could not manage it. 

3 io PRIMITIVE MAN /IS PHILOSOPHER 

The Separation of the Dwellings of the Gods 

They now decided to have separate dwelling places. 
Whiro-te-tipua, Uru-te-ngangana, and their immediate 
friends dwelt in Tu-te-aniwaniwa (Where-stands-the-rain- 
bow) — that was their house, and the place where they lived. 

Tane, Paia, and others dwelt in Huaki-pouri with their 
friends. 

Thus it was that the family dwelt separately; an envious 
heart was the reason and the following were the causes of 
this ill feeling: 

1. On account of the persistence of Tane that they should 
go forth from the embrace of their parents. 

2. The “biting” of the cold of space, the cold of the 
waters, the extreme cold and the excessive cold. 

3. The persistence of Tane, Tupai, and their faction that 
their parents Rangi and Papa should be separated. 

4. The “evil heart” of Tane, Tupai, and others in de- 
ciding to cut off the arms of their parents with the two 
axes. 

5. The presumption of Tane and his faction in under- 
taking these works. If it had been the seniors of the 
family, Whiro* would have consented. 

6. The conceit of Tane in declaring that he could ascend 
the sacred winds of a conjoint heavens that stand above. 
Rather should Whiro himself have accomplished the journey 
to the highest heaven. 

The Sanctification of Tane 

Now at this time, Io-matua, the Supreme God, said unto 
Rua-matua and Rehua, two of the guardians of the heavenly 

THE SYSTEMATIZATION OF IDEAS 31 1 

treasures, “Go ye down to the earth and on Maunga-nui, 
the great mountain, command Tane and Tupai to ascend 
to ye up the mountain. You will there purify them and 
baptize them in the ‘waters of Rongo’ on that mountain, 
and then return.” These were the sons of the family. 

So these two messengers descended to the summit of 
Maunga-nui and commanded Tane and Tupai to climb up to 
them. The two gods did so and on reaching Rua-tau and 
Rehua they were taken to the “waters of Rongo” and 
baptized. Thus were they purified; and now for the first 
time did Tane receive his full name of Tane-nui-a-rangi, 
the Great Tane of the heavens, whilst Tupai received that of 
Tupai-a-tau. After this the two messengers ascended to the 
uppermost heavens to Io-the-hidden-faced and Tane and 
Tupai returned to their dwelling-place at Huaki-pouri. 

7. This was the seventh cause of Whiro-te-tipua’s ill 
feeling; the sanctification, and the baptism of those new 
names for Tane and Tupai. 

After these events Io-the-origin-of-all-things said to his 
two messengers, “Go! Ask of the family of Rangi-nui 
which single one of them will be able to ascend the Ascend- 
ing Clouds of the heavens to Tikitiki-o-rangi, the upper- 
most heavens, to meet me at Matangi-reia (the sun’s path 
in the heavens, the home of lo). Then these two descended 
to Tu-te-aniwaniwa (one of the separate houses in which 
the gods dwelt after coming forth from the parental em- 
brace) and laid their mission before Uru-te-ngangana and 
Whiro and their faction. 

Whiro informed them that he could climb up by the 
winds of heaven and bring back the wananga (all knowl- 

312 PRIMITIVE MAN /4S PHILOSOPHER 

edge, etc.). Rua-tau asked, “By what way wilt thou climb, 
O Whiro?” The latter answered, “By the Taepatanga 
(where the sky hangs down) of the heavens will I ascend.” 
“You will not succeed for the winds of the conjoint heavens 
are difficult to overcome.” 

The two gods then went to Whare-kura (another of the 
houses of the gods) and Rua-tau asked, “Which of you is 
able to ascend the conjoint heavens to Io-the-origin-of-all- 
things?” Rongo-marae-roa and his faction replied that 
Tane-nui-a-rangi could accomplish it. The two messengers 
then went to Huaki-pouri (Tane’s house) and asked them, 
“Which of you will be able to climb by the winds of the 
conjoint heavens to Io-the-origin- of-all-things, at Matangi- 
reia in its beauty and expanse?” Tane replied to this, “I 
can do it!” Then said Rua-tau, “By which way will you 
ascend?” Tane replied, “I 'will ascend by the Ara-tiatia, 
the Toi-hua-rewa (two names for the ascent) of the family 
of my elder brother, the god of winds, who dwells above in 
the third heaven.” Rau-tau and Pawa then said, “Enough! 
Ascend to Pumotomoto (entrance to) Tikitiki-o-rangi (high- 
est heaven), to Tawhiri-rangi (guard-house of) Te Toi-o- 
nga-rangi-tuhaha (summit of all the heavens).” After that 
Rua-tau and Aitu-pawa returned. 

Hearing of this Whiro said unto his elder brethren, 
“I intend to go and fetch the wananga (knowledge) at the 
Summit of the heavens.” Uru-te-ngangana and others 
said, “Leave our younger brother to fetch it — he who has 
ascended Maunga-nui and Maunga-roa and been conse- 
crated to the Three Currents of Death.” Whiro was 
very wroth at this and said, “Who, indeed, has said that 

THE SYSTEMATIZATION OF IDEAS 313 

he, a younger son, will ascend above through all the 
heavens?” 

The First Temple Is Built on Earth 

Tane-nui-a-rangi now urged his brethren saying, “Tama- 
kaka, Tupai-a-tau, etc., let us all go to Rangi-tamaku (the 
eleventh heaven from the summit) and obtain the design 
of Whare-kura and build a similar one here on earth; in 
which to deposit the tahu (i.e., the origin, the very com- 
mencement of all knowledge) of the wananga of the 
heavens.” Tawhire-matea consented to this. When they 
reached Rangi-tamaku, they carefully copied the design of 
the temple. 

Tane Ascends to the Uppermost Heaven 

After the events described above, the ascent of Tane 
to the Uppermost Heaven was considered by the Gods. 
Whiro-te-tipua was most urgent that he should go on before; 
so he proceeded by way of the Taepatanga (edge of the 
sky) of the heavens to climb up above. Whiro had pro- 
ceeded on his way for a long distance when Tane told 
his elder brethren that they ought to start. So they went 
aided by the family of Para-wera-nui (a mighty southerly 
tempest) who carried them along. That family is as fol- 
lows: the black whirlwind, the ascending whirlwind, the 
great windy whirlwind, the whirlwind ascending to heaven. 
These then were the families of Tawhiri-matea who carried 
Tane to the entrance of the guardhouse to the uppermost 
heaven. His companions accompanied Tane to the third 
heaven to Kautu and Tapuhi-kura who were the spirits 

314 PRIMITIVE MAN / 4 S PHILOSOPHER 

whose duty it was to take Tane to the entrance into the 
third heaven where Tane was purified by Kautu and 
Tapuhikura. (Some of his companions) returned from 
here to Earth whilst (others) carried Tane to the heaven 
below the summit. 

In the meantime Whiro had ascended to the two lowest 
heavens where he learnt that Tane had passed on before 
him; he followed to the tenth heaven in descent but did 
not overtake him. Here his son-in-law said to him, “Go 
backl You cannot succeed for that man Tane has been 
consecrated above on Maunga-nui by Rua-tau and Rehua.” 
At this Whiro was very distressed and wrathy; he ordered 
the Tini-o-Poto to follow in pursuit of Tane. They are 
the mosquito, the ant, the centipede, prionoplus, daddy-long- 
legs, the great parrot, the hawk, the sparrow-hawk, the bat, 
and the owl. This was the war party of Whiro which he 
sent to follow Tane, to peck and draw his blood — to kill 
him. The war party went on and ascended the horizon 
of the first-heaven-below-the-summit; and there attacked 
Tane. But they could not approach near him — they were 
whirled away by the great gales. They could not get 
near him. 

Tane now reached the guardhouse of the uppermost 
heaven and there entered the house where were Rua-tau 
and many other of the guardian-gods of the supreme god, Io. 
Two of his companions returned from here to the first- 
heaven-below-the-summit to await Tane’s return. 

And, also, the war party of Whiro returned to the third 
heaven to await Tane on his return. 

THE SYSTEMATIZATION OF IDEAS 315 

Tane Receives New Names 

Now when Tane entered the guardhouse he had arrived 
at the summit-of-the-heaven. He was then taken by Rua- 
tau to the waters of Rongo and there again purified and 
the following additional names were given him: Great- 
Tane-of-the-heaven, Tane-the-parent-of-mankind, Tane-who- 
brought-knowledge-from-heaven, Tane-the-salvation, etc. 

These are the names then given him; but the first one he 
had already received from Rua-tau when he was sanctified 
on Mount Maunga-nui. 

Tane and Io 

After the above occurrence, Tane was conducted into 
Matangi-reia, the house of Io, the sun’s path in the heavens, 
where Io was awaiting him. On his arrival Io asked him: 

“By whom are we?” 

“By the Sky-father and the Earth-mother is thy child, 
0 Io-the-father!” 

“Who is thy companion?” 

“My elder brother, Whiro-te-tipua. He went by way of 
the Taepatanga of the heavens to ascend.” 

“Thy elder brother will not succeed; the winds of the 
conjoint heavens blow too strongly.” Io added, “What is 
thy reason for ascending here?” 

“The sacred contents of the ‘baskets’ pertaining to the 
Sky-father and Earth-mother to obtain; hence have I 
ascended up to thee, 0 Io!” 

Io then said, “Let us go to the Rauroha” (the space out- 
side Io’s dwelling). When they got there then for the first 

3 i6 PRIMITIVE MAN AS PHILOSOPHER 

time was seen how numerous were the male guardian-gods 
and the female guardian-gods staying there. Tane was 
again purified in Rauroha and after this had been accom- 
plished they entered the temple treasure house. It was 
here that the guardian-gods gave into Tane’s charge the 
three baskets and the two sacred stones. They were “god- 
stones” (i.e., endowed with miraculous powers). 

The Three Baskets and Two Stones 

These are the names of the three baskets and two stones: 

1. The kete-uruuru-matua, of peace, of all goodness, of 
love. 

2. The kete-uruuru-rangi, of all prayers, incantations, 
ritual, used by mankind. 

3. The ket&-uruuru-tau, of the wars of mankind, agricul- 
ture, tree or woodwork, stonework, earthwork — of all things 
that tend to well-being, life, of whatsoever kind. 

(Te Matorohanga held that the original teaching of this 
branch was derived from the first created thoughts, which 
were good alone; it was afterwards that evil thoughts came 
into being. The Creator first gave man eyes in order to 
distinguish good from evil and then the heart, to hold such 
knowledge.) 

1. Te Whata-kura, i.e., foam-of-the-ocean. 

2. Te Whatu-kura, i.e., white-sea-mist. 

These stones are both white in color, like sea-foam, that 
is, they were white according to description handed down; 
they are stones that may indicate either good or evil accord- 
ing to man’s desire. They are sacred stones and are used 
at the termination of the session of teaching, that is, the 

THE SYSTEMATIZATION OF IDEAS 317 

pupils are placed thereon when the classes break up. After 
the proper ritual of karakia, the stones are touched by the 
mouths of the pupils and then the classes break up for 
the season. 

Tane Returns to Earth 

Now after three baskets of the wananga (knowledge) and 
the two stones had been acquired, the guardian-gods escorted 
Tane and his properties to the next lower heaven. Tane 
and his companions descended until they reached the fourth- 
heaven-from-the-summit where they were attacked by the 
war party of Whiro-te-tipua. 

As soon as the war party was discovered it was assaulted 
by the company of Tane. The war party of Whiro was de- 
feated at Te Rangi-haupapa and the following brought 
down to earth as prisoners: the hawk, the sparrow-hawk, 
the crane, the great parrot, the night parrot, the bat, the 
owl, and the parrokeet. 

The grandchildren of the hawk were taken prisoners. 
They are: the mosquito, the little sandfly, the sandfly, the 
ant, the wingless locust, the butterfly, the blowfly, and the 
grasshopper. 

And now the face of the sky above flashed forth in bril- 
liant red. Hence did Tupai, etc., know that the wananga 
had been acquired by Tane-matua. Great was the joy and 
the rejoicing of the family of gods, even including those 
at the dwelling place of Whiro. But Whiro alone was not 
glad; he was continuously angry and jealous on account of 
the exceeding mana (prestige) that had accrued to Tane- 
matua. And now Uru-ao and Tupai took their trumpets and 
sounded a fanfare. They were named the Arch-of-heaven 

3 i8 PRIMITIVE MAN 4S PHILOSOPHER 

and Trumpet-sounding-in-heaven. The whole of the family 
of gods heard the trumpet blasts and knew thereby that 
Tane-matua had succeeded in his quest. 

When the party arrived at the first temple built on earth, 
and after the purification ceremony, they entered the temple 
and there suspended the three wananga at the back of the 
temple, where also the two stones were deposited. Whiro 
demanded that the baskets and stones should be delivered 
up to him. Tane said to him, “Where are others to be 
found if we agree to that? It is sufficient that you have 
some of our elder brethren with you; the baskets must be 
left with these members of our elder and younger brethren.” 
Whiro was very angry at this and returned to his home with 
two of the stones. 

The Guardian-Gods Are Appointed 

Now, at this period the attention of Tane-matua and his 
elder and younger brethren was turned to the separation 
of the guardian-gods to their different spheres of action in 
their separate places, by twos and threes, to each plane of 
the earth, the heavens and even the ocean. Thus was 
the work directed and the valuable contents of the three 
baskets were distributed. 

The Wars of the Gods 

At this time the hatred and jealousy of Whiro and his 
faction became permanent, (finally) leading to actual war. 
Whiro was defeated (in a series of twenty-one battles) 
and that was the reason he descended to Raro-henga. 
Hence is that fatal descent of his named the-eternal-fall. 

THE SYSTEMATIZATION OF IDEAS 319 

The Overturning of Mother-Earth 

Before Tane ascended to the summit-of-the-heaven and 
after the Sky-father and Earth-mother had been separated, 
the face of their mother had been overturned so that she 
faced Raro-henga. The youngest child of these parents 
was at that time a child at the breast. They left this child 
as a comfort to their mother. Now hence are the earth- 
quakes and volcanic phenomena that constantly war against 
us in every age. 

The reason why the gods overturned the Earth to face 
downwards to Raro-henga was because she continually 
lamented for the Sky-father and because the Sky-father 
constantly lamented over her; that is, this was the nature 
of their lamenting, she continuously closed the avenues of 
light by means of clouds and mists whilst the Sky-father 
constantly obscured things by his tears, both day and night; 
that is, the rain was constant, never ceasing, as was the 
snow, the black frost, the driving snow. The family of 
gods were perishing with the rain and the snow, and hence 
did they overturn their mother to face downwards to Raro- 
henga. After this their condition was much ameliorated. 
But they still dwelt in a faint light like the moonlight of this 
earth, because neither stars, the moon, nor the sun had been 
placed in position. 

The name given by Rua-tau, a messenger of Io, to this 
world was this: He said to the Sky-father and the Earth- 
mother, “Let your offspring go forth and dwell. Leave them 
to move about on you two.” He added, “Do not continue 
to enclose them between your bodies. Let them go forth 

320 PRIMITIVE MAN AS PHILOSOPHER 

to the great-wide-open-space and therein move about.” 
Hence we learn the name given by Rua-tau to this world, 
the-great-spread-out-space-of-Rua-tau. It was Hine-titama 
that gave the commonly used name (of the world), the- 
enduring-light. It was thus that her relative Te Kuwata- 
wata spoke to her, saying, “O Lady! Return hence! 
Here ceases the world of light. Beyond me is darkness- 
ever-present.” Hine-titama replied to him, “Let me remain 
there that I may catch the living spirit of my descendants 
(mankind) in the world-of-everlasting-light.” 11 

From this consistent evolutionism and preoccupation 
with problems of origin, which the thinkers among the 
Polynesians have carried to its highest point among so- 
called primitive people but which the thinkers in all 
groups shared with them, we will now turn to the 
attempts made to develop some systematized theory 
of the nature of things. That speculation on the na- 
ture of reality and of the external world existed we 
have given adequate proof in a former chapter. We 
saw there that both among the Maori and the Oglala 
Dakota, thinkers had begun to wrestle with some of 
the eternal problems of philosophy; what it is we per- 
ceive when we see an object; what it is that bestows 
form upon an object; and finally, what it is that gives 
the gods reality. But the answers given to these ques- 
tions might all conceivably be interpreted as isolated 
intuitions, valuable and instructive, it is true, but not 

“S. Percy Smith, op. cit., pp. tiq ff. For the order of creation 
see pp. 301 ff. of the present book. 

THE SYSTEMATIZATION OF IDEAS 321 

definitely proving that the problems involved had been 
objectively visualized. The skeptically inclined lay- 
man has the right to demand a fairly elaborate and 
systematized body of thought before allowing himself 
to be convinced. 

Fortunately that is to be found among the Maori. 
Among the latter there are, in fact, different schools of 
thought. The knowledge imparted to the priests was, 
for instance, definitely classified. There were two 
branches called respectively the upper-jaw and the 
lower-jaw. The first branch contained everything per- 
taining to the gods, the heavens, the origin of things, the 
creation of man, the science of astronomy, the record 
of time, etc., and the second dealt with the history of 
the people, their genealogies, migrations, terrestrial 
things, etc. According to the Maori scribe from whom 
our best knowledge of this subject has been obtained, 
no one universal system of teaching was taught, but 
each Maori tribe had its own priests, its own places of 
instruction, and its own methods. The teaching was 
often diverted from the true doctrine, this man insists, 
by the self-conceit of the priests who inculcated it. 
The scribe himself admits the possibility of deviation 
and divergence of opinion, although he postulates 
vaguely one correct system. “The omissions in my 
teaching,” he says, “the innovations, variations, inter- 
ruptions, or divergence from the main argument or 
true story, they (certain sages present) will be able 
to supply.” Yet this “true story” was more in the 
nature of a devout wish than an actual fact, for he 

322 PRIMITIVE MAN AS PHILOSOPHER 

himself adds: “My wish was, had Te Ura consented, 
that there should have been only one house of teaching 
for all of us together. In that case there would have 
been no trouble, for one of us would have laid down 
the main line of teaching, whilst two would have 
listened in case of divergence and one would have 
supplemented or, in the case of ‘the solution of con- 
tinuity,’ the other would have caused the discourse to' 
flow again and become reafflxed to the root of the 
subject, or supply any omissions.” 12 
Here we have a clear-cut recognition of the pursuit 
of knowledge for its own sake. It differs only in degree 
from that search for knowledge for its own sake that 
characterizes the philosophic systems of our own 
thinkers. One fundamental difference it has, which is 
certainly to be reckoned to its merit : It is not divorced 
from life, from the immediate interests of the present, 
in the same degree that most philosophies since Plato 
have been. This connection with the world of ordinary 
experience is shown in a multitude of ways, perhaps 
nowhere so well as in the somewhat ironical fact that a 
fairly abstract discourse on the nature of things is 
prefaced by a hymn to knowledge that has come to be 
a magical incantation. This hymn must be recited 
without a break to take breath, otherwise its efficacy is 
destroyed. Herein it is possibly not so different from 
the preamble to later philosophies. But let me quote 
this apostrophe to divine knowledge: 

“ Ibid., pp. 84-85. 

THE SYSTEMATIZATION OF IDEAS 323 

Cause to descend, outside, beyond, 

Cause to enter into these offspring, these sons, 

The ancient prized knowledge, the esoteric learning, 0 Iol 

Be received, be possessed, be it affixed, 

This esoteric knowledge; be firm in thy thoughts, nor 
deviate, 

From the powerful, the ancient, the god-like knowledge, 

Be fixed in thy root and origin; affixed thy constant 
attention, 

Firm be thy inspiration, thy ardent desire, 

Within the roots and rootlets of thy thoughts. 

May it grow, the fullness of this knowledge — 

This ancient knowledge, this original learning, 

And be like thine, O Io-omnierudite! 

Let ardent desire direct from thee, 0 Io-all-knowing! Be 
his. 

May thy inspiration grow equal to thine, O Rua-tau-e! 

And to that of Tane and of Paia-who-acquired-all-knowl- 
edge, 

And to Tangaroa (god of ocean) and Tawhiri-matea (god 
of strong winds) 

In the beating and the trembling of the heart. 

Hold firm forever, with desire towards the ways of Tu 
(god of war). 

May he draw forth the abundant knowledge. 

And entwine in his desires, the ways of Rongo (god of 
peace). 

Let them combine with matured inspiration. 

Be effective, the sanctifying meal of Tu-horo-mata, 

And full advantage be taken of the teaching, by these sons, 
For they are thy offspring, that desire thee, O Io-the-all- 
father! 18 

“ Ibid,, p. 95. 

324 PRIMITIVE MAN PHILOSOPHER 

Can a finer hymn to knowledge in all its fullness and 
in all its implications possibly be penned? For what 
does it say? Let thy knowledge be like Io-the- 
omnierudite, thy inspiration like Ruatau, the guardian 
of the heavenly treasures, thy foresight like that of 
Tane, the Polynesian Prometheus, the trembling of 
thy heart like that of the god of the ocean and of the 
wind; may thy desire for the god of war give thee 
knowledge for the ways of the god of peace, and may 
these combine with matured inspiration! Nothing 
is here omitted. 

The extreme richness of the Maori data is such that 
it is at times very difficult to escape the temptation of 
going into bypaths. The hymn to knowledge given 
above is, as I have said, merely a preamble to a dis- 
course on the nature of matter. The theory of matter 
there expounded is essentially a philosophy of rela- 
tivity, and is definitely nonegocentric. Matter con- 
sists of four fundamental ingredients — earth, water, 
fire, and air. Each one of these elements as such, 
however, has neither life nor form. Air is the com- 
plement of all things or, as the Maori scribe says, “that 
which continues or holds the life of all things.” But 
although none of these four primordial ingredients 
exist except when they are combined, each one then 
not only possesses individuality but this individuality 
in each case is sui generis. This essential uniqueness 
is extended to everything, in fact, in the world. We 
cannot, therefore, predicate anything about the nature 
of the “life” of water from what we know about “fire,” 

THE SYSTEMATIZATION OF IDEAS 325 

or say anything about plants from what we know about 
animals. This universe of nonrelated monads is 
given unity by the postulation of a cosmic deity, Io. 
Io is not only the creator of all things but, while it is 
apparently implied that he has no longer the power 
to draw back to himself certain aspects that belong 
to the external world, he has retained to himself three 
things — the spirit, the life, and the form. Everything 
is gathered in his presence; proceeds from him. There 
is nothing outside or beyond him — life, death, divinity. 
Obedience to his commands is life; disobedience, death. 
Indeed death is defined as something which does not 
proceed from Io. By death here we must, however, 
understand nothingness, i.e., what is not capable of 
having spirit, life, or form, and therefore not capable 
of being apprehended by us. Death, in the sense of 
its proceeding from Io, on the other hand, simply 
means the preordained termination which Io has given 
to all things that exist. One great and all-embracing 
ethical postulate flows from this conception of Io, 
known under the epithet of he-in-whose-presence-all- 
things-are-combined. Since everything emanates from 
him, since he appoints each thing to its proper place, 
then everything must have a function by which 
it fulfills itself. And this we do indeed find. “Each 
thing has its own function,” our discourse says, 
“even the smallest particle, such as grains of dust or 
pebbles.” 

Because of its significance and inaccessibility I shall 
quote the whole discourse: 

326 PRIMITIVE MAN AS PHILOSOPHER 

Now let it be clearly understood about the-great-sun, the 
sun, and the waxing moon and their younger brethren the 
stars. All of these are worlds with their earth, waters, rocks, 
trees, mountains, open places, and plains. On this earth 
the ocean and the rivers made the plains and open places 
which we see. It was the gods Mataaho and Whakaru-au- 
moko that changed the surface of the earth and caused the 
present ill condition of the plains and rivers. 

This is to be clearly understood: All things have their 
being through water and fire. If there were soil alone, the 
land would be dead without water and fire; water without 
land and fire would be dead; fire without water and land 
would be dead. Hence, these three things combined give 
life to the land, and to each other, and to all things that 
grow and live and have their own forms, whether trees, 
rocks, birds, reptiles, fish, animals, or men. It is these 
three things that give life to them all. It is the same with 
the sun, the moon, and the stars; they are worlds; earth, 
water, and fire give them their form; and the same actuate 
all things. 

Now, the air is the complement of all things, whether 
of the earth or the heavens, the sun, the moon, or the stars. 
It is this that continues, or holds, the life of all things — 
hence are there four in all. If there were the earth, the 
ocean, fire, or air alone, nothing would exist, nor have 
shape, or growth — nothing would have life. Hence be ye 
clear it is through the earth, water, fire, and air combined 
that all things have form and life. 

It is the same with Rangi-tu-haha (the whole of the 
heavens), including the Toi-o-nga-rangi (the uppermost 

THE SYSTEMATIZATION OF IDEAS 327 

heaven, the abode of Io), each has its own form of every- 
thing within them; with its own form of life suited to each. 
The earth has its own form of life, as has the water, fire, 
trees, rocks; all plants of every description have their own 
particular form of life. The air, the moon, the sun, the 
stars, have their own form of life; everything, also, that has 
been mentioned above has its spirit ( wairus , spirit, soul) 
of its own, similar to its self. 

Io-te-wananga (Io-the-omnierudite) of the heavens is the 
origin of all things. These are the things that Io-mata-ngaro 
(Io-the-unseen-face) retained to himself; the spirit and the 
life and the form; it is by these that all things have form 
according to their kind. 

You must also be clear on this point: There is nothing 
made by the god Io that has not an end; everything has a 
termination, whether it be a draught, burning by fire, injury 
by water, by the wind, excepting always those forms that the 
god himself decreed should have an end in this world, or 
other worlds. 

All things were subservient to Io-the-great-one, and hence 
the truth of the names of Io : 

Io-the-great-god-over-all, Io-the-enduring (or everlasting), 
Io-the-all-parent, Io-of-all-knowledge, Io-the-origin-of-all- 
things (the one true god), lo-the-immutable, Io-the-summit- 
of-heaven, Io-the-god-of-one-command, Io-the-hidden-face, 
Io-only-seen-in-a-flash-of-light, Io-presiding-in-alTheavens, 
Io-the-exalted-of -heaven, Io-the-parentless (self created), 
Io-the-life-giving, Io-who-renders-not-to-man-that-which-he- 
withholds. . . . 

Now, it is clear that all things, the worlds and their be- 

328 PRIMITIVE MAN 4 S PHILOSOPHER 

longings, all gods of mankind, his own gods, all are gathered 
in his presence (i.e., proceed from him). There is nothing 
outside or beyond him; with him is the power of life, of 
death, of godship. Everything that proceeds from other 
than Io and his commands, death is the collector of those. 
If all his commands are obeyed and fulfilled by everyone, 
safety and well-being result therefrom. 

Now, it is obvious that all things of life and death are 
combined in the presence of (or are due to) Io-the-hidden- 
face; there is nothing outside or beyond him. All godships 
are in him and he appoints them their places; the gods of 
the dead and the gods of the living. All things are named 
(i.e., created) by the god of the worlds, in the heavens, the 
planes and the water, each has its own function. Even 
the smallest atom, such as grains of dust, or pebbles, has its 
place — to hold the boundaries of the ocean or the waters. 14 

** Ibid., pp. 105-107. 

CHAPTER XVII 

THE NATURE OF GOD 

S O elaborate a philosophy as that recorded in 
Chapter XVI we find nowhere else among present 
primitive peoples, although I feel quite confident that 
comparable ones are to be found in Africa and in parts 
of North America. The data in our possession to-day, 
where they at all deal with attempts at unification of 
knowledge, are strictly confined to the realm of reli- 
gion. Theological systems are not Uncommon. I 
shall discuss only two of them in any detail, that of 
the Oglala Dakota and that of the Bavili of West 
Africa. Among the Oglala this systematization is 
definitely and consciously confined to the priests and is 
clothed in a ceremonial language known only to them. 
The following are among the doctrines they inculcate: 

The great mysterious, Wakan Tanka, is one although 
he has four individualities — the chief god, the great 
spirit, the creator, and the executive. 

The chief god is composed of four individuals but 
they are to be considered as one. They are the sun, 
the moon, the buffalo, and the spirit. 

The great spirit also consists of four individuals to 
be considered as one — the sky, the wind, the bear, and 
the ghost. 

329 

330 PRIMITIVE MAN AS PHILOSOPHER 

The creator-god also consists of four individuals to 
be considered as one — the earth, the feminine, the four 
winds, and the spirit-like. 

Finally we have the executive god. He, too, has four 
individuals who are as one — the rock, the winged, the 
whirlwind, and the potency. 1 

But Wakan Tanka can also be separated in another 
manner into benevolent and malevolent gods. The 
benevolent gods are of two kinds, the gods and the gods’ 
kindred. The gods in their turn can be further sub- 
divided into the superior gods and the associate gods. 
The gods’ kindred in their turn are subdivided into 
the subordinate gods and the god-like. Each of these 
four classes consists of four individuals. The indi- 
viduals of the superior gods are the sun, who is the 
chief of the gods; the sky who is the great spirit, the 
earth who is the all-mother, and the rock who is the 
all-father. The individuals of the associate gods are 
the moon, the associate of the sun; the wind, the asso- 
ciate of the sky; the feminine, the associate of the 
earth; and the winged god, the associate of the rock. 
The individuals of the subordinate gods are the buffalo 
god, the bear god, the four winds, and the whirlwind. 
The individuals of the god-like are the spirit, the 
ghost, the spirit-like, and imparted supernatural 
potency. 

All these individualities of the great mysterious have 

1 James Walker, “The Sun Dance of the Oglala Division of the 
Dakota,” Anthropological Papers of the American Museum of 
Natural History, XVI, Part II, pp. 72-92. 

THE NATURE OF GOD 331 

the following properties : with the exception of the four 
winds they had no beginning though some existed be- 
fore the others and some bear the relation of parent 
and offspring to one another. No person can under- 
stand this contradiction for it is akan, a mystery. All 
these individualities, it is contended, will likewise have 
no end. 

That a godhead with sixteen aspects, each one of 
which is a different individual, is a conscious priestly 
construction, needs no demonstration. The various 
persons in the Wakan Tanka are, for the most part, 
simply the deities of the tribe still worshiped by the 
lay population and the majority of the priests. The 
task of unification must, in fact, have been extremely 
difficult and it is therefore not to be wondered at if 
some of the statements made about the more important 
deities such as the sun, the sky, the rock, and the four 
winds contain a few inconsistencies. The sun, for in- 
stance, is described as a “material god’s and ranks first 
among the superior gods though the other three were 
before him. He may be addressed as the great one, 
the revered one, or our father. His domain is the 
spirit-world and the regions under the world. The sky 
gave him his power and can withhold it, but he is more 
powerful than the sky. 2 Now if we compare this 
description with the following one about the sky, con- 
tradictions emerge immediately: “The sky is an im- 
material god whose substance is never visible. His 
titles given by the people are taku skan-skan and 

Ibid., p. 81. 

332 PRIMITIVE MAN AS PHILOSOPHER 

nagi tanka or the great spirit, and those given by the 
priests are skan and to, blue. The concept expressed 
by the term taku skan-skan is that which gives motion 
to anything that moves. That expressed by the 
shamans by the word skan is a vague concept of force 
or energy and by the word to is the immaterial blue of 
the sky which symbolizes the presence of the great 
spirit. His domain is all above the world, beginning 
at the ground. He is the source of all power and 
motion and is the patron of directions and trails and 
of encampment. He imparts to each of mankind at 
birth a spirit, a ghost, and a sicun and at the death of 
each of mankind he hears the testimony of the ghost 
and adjudges the spirit. He may sit in judgment on 
other gods. His word is unalterable except by him- 
self. He alone can undo that which is done. His peo- 
ple are the stars and the feminine is his daughter.” 3 
The problem becomes still more complicated when 
we are told that the rock, although ranking fourth 
among the superior gods, existed first of all, that he 
is addressed as the all-father and considered the an- 
cestor of all things and of all the gods. Although he 
is associated with the all-mother, the earth, they are 
not related as husband and wife nor has either a child 
by the other. The rock, however, has children. In 
one case the other parent is the winged god and in the 
other the water spirit. A few words about the four 
winds are also necessary in this connection. They are 
regarded as one god with four aspects, each one pos- 

* Ibid., pp. 81-82. 

THE NATURE OF GOD 

333 

sessing definite individuality and appearing as a god; 
he (the four winds) is immaterial and his substance 
is never visible. In ceremonies he, the four winds, 
has precedence over all the gods except wohpe, the 
feminine. 

What is significant in all these inconsistencies and 
contradictions is the manner in which the priests har- 
monized them by predicating, as in the case of a god 
like the four winds, that he may be one yet have four 
appearances or, as in the case of Wakan Tanka, that 
he may be one and have sixteen appearances, and that 
this double nature is intelligible to the shamans, but 
akan and therefore incomprehensible to the layman. 

To reenforce what I have said I shall quote part of 
a disquisition on Wakan Tanka dictated by an Oglala 
priest to Mr. Walker: 

The shaman addresses Wakan Tanka as tobtob kin. 
This is part of the secret language of the shamans. Tobtob 
kin are four times four gods, while tob kin is only the four 
winds. The four times four are the sun, the sky, the 
earth, the rock, the moon, the wind, the feminine, the 
winged god, the buffalo god, the bear god, the four winds, 
the whirlwind, the spirit, the ghost, the spirit-like, and the 
imparted supernatural potency. 

Wakan Tanka is like sixteen different persons; but each 
person is kan. Therefore they are all only the same as one. 
All the god persons have ton. Ton is the power to do super- 
natural things. Half of the good gods are ton ton (have 
physical properties) and half are ton ton sni (have no 

334 PRIMITIVE MAN AS PHILOSOPHER 

physical properties). Half of those who are ton ton are 
ton ton yan (visible) and half of those who are ton ton sni 
are ton ton yan sni (invisible). All the other gods are 
visible or invisible as they choose to be. All the evil gods 
are visible or invisible as they choose to be. The invisible 
gods never appear in a vision to anyone except a shaman. 
Except for the sun dance the ceremonies for the visible and 
the invisible gods differ. The sun dance is a ceremony the 
same as if the sun were both visible and invisible . 4 

Let us now proceed to another tribe. 

Among the Bavilis, R. E. Dennett 5 found existing 
alongside of the fetishism of the people at large a 
definitely monistic viewpoint resulting apparently from 
the same tendency toward unification which we have 
just pointed out among the Oglala Dakota. Nzambi, 
the supreme god of the Bavili, is regarded by some as 
an abstract entity from which proceed three elements 
designated by Dennett as the maternal or passive prin- 
ciple, the paternal or active principle and ju, properly 
speaking, habit or sequence . 6 The name Nzambi 
itself means literally imbi, personal essence and zia or 
za, of the fours or four. The fours are the groups, 
each of four powers called bacici bad, i.e., the sacred 

*Ibtd., p. 153. 

6 At the Back of the Black Man's Mind , Chaps. X and XVI. Den- 
nett’s manner of presentation is unfortunately unduly obscure. His 
contentions seem, however, to be borne out by the facts. 

6 Ibid., p. 165. Dennett adds, “We may perhaps express it in one 
word by evolution, understanding thereby rather the process by which 
the individual is produced rather than the life history of a species. 
In another sense it may almost be said to be the individual himself.” 

THE NATURE OF GOD 

335 

symbols. Each group is composed of (i) a cause; 
(2) a male part; (3) a female part; (4) an effect. 
Nzambi itself may be said to have four parts, viz., 
Nzambi, the abstract idea, the cause; Nzambi 
Mpungu, god almighty, the father god who dwells in 
the heavens and is the guardian of the fire; Nzambi ci, 
god the essence, god on earth, the great princess, the 
mother of all animals; and kici, the mysterious in- 
herent quality in things that causes the Bavili to fear 
and respect. 

The unification and mysticism encountered here are 
obviously quite different from that of the Oglala and 
are far more closely allied to the abstractions and the 
different appellations given to the supreme deity, Io, 
of the Maori (see pages 321 ff.). 

The last example, that from the Batak, is of a far 
simpler nature, representing a unification possibly in 
its first stages. There we find four distinct and indi- 
vidualized deities, also known under a collective name, 
Asiasi. Whenever Asiasi is prayed to he is never 
thought of as a separate deity but always as the sum 
of the other four. Asiasi can thus be said to have four 
aspects or, to be more accurate, to consist of four 
individuals. 7 

From our examination of the philosophic and reli- 
gious systems we can now turn to the primitive think- 
er’s attempts at defining the nature and attributes of 
god. In part this has been discussed before. I am 
taking it up here as a separate topic because I wish to 

T J. Warneck, Die Religion der Batak, p. a 8. 

336 PRIMITIVE MAN AS PHILOSOPHER 

show that in some instances these attempts took the 
form of a series of postulates or elaborate epithets. 
For illustration I shall select a very interesting dis- 
course about God from the Batak, epithets applied to 
Io, the supreme deity among the Maori, and those ap- 
plied to Leza, the supreme deity among the Ba-ila of 
Rhodesia. 

The Batak discourse about God states very suc- 
cinctly the complete religio-ethical system of these 
people. To them he is essentially the final judge and 
arbiter to whom everything is possible and who deter- 
mines our destiny. The discourse contains eighteen 
postulates: 

1. Earth-betel, planted in the market-place; 

May God aid us, may he increase our knowledge. 

2. Where situngguk exists, there also plants are to be 
found. 

3. Two follows one in counting. 

There are long things and short things 
Just as God created them in this world. 

4. God is an adequate judge. 

5. To supply the needy, to take from the overabundant, 
All that lies within God’s power. 

6. Plants grow in rows. 

If God aids 

Then a dewdrop may be converted into food. 

7. The felled tree still stands, held upright by creepers. 
God stands and looks down upon conquered man. 

8. What God has done, man may not alter. 

THE NATURE OF GOD 

337 

9. Take not devious paths; 

God is the master of riches. 

10. May God aid; may he give craftiness. 

11. May our worship of God make the slender stout. 

12. Even though it be little that we eat, 

God aid us that we fatten thereon. 

13. However great be your desire to cheat me, 

God, our grandfather, is there to exercise compassion. 

14. With rice iron is bought. 

The word of the master, may the tondi recollect it. 

15. If God helps, the old will become rejuvenated. 

16. If God blesses, then barren soil will become fertile. 

17. God is sanctified. 

He takes care of all our tondi. 

18. God has so arranged it 

That there be people whom we must honor. 8 

The epithets applied to the supreme deity of the 
Maori are, as we might have expected, of an entirely 
different order. They are concerned exclusively with 
trying to define his transcendent power and describe 
his attributes: 

10. The core of all gods; none excel him. 

Io-nui. He is greater than all other gods. 

Io-roa. His life is everlasting; he knows not death. 
Io-the-parent. He is the parent of the heavens and of 

their different realms, of the worlds, of clouds, of insects, of 
birds, of rats, of fish, of moons, of stars, of lightning, of 
winds, of waters, of trees, of all plant life, of the land, the 

* Ibid. 

338 PRIMITIVE MAN AS PHILOSOPHER 

sea and the streams, as also of all other things. There is 
no single thing that does not come under his control. He is 
the parent of all things — of man and of the lesser gods under 
him. He is truly the parent of all. 

Io-the-parentless. He has no parents; no mother, no elder 
or younger brothers or sisters. He is nothing but himself. 

Io-taketake. This denotes the permanence of himself and 
all his acts, his thoughts, and his governments. All are 
enduring, are firm, complete, and immovable. 

Io-te-pukenga. He is the source of all thought, reflection, 
memories, of all things planned by him to possess form, 
growth, life, thought, strength. There is nothing outside 
his jurisdiction; all things are his and with him alone rests 
the matter of possession or non-possession. 

Io-te-wanaga. He is the source of all knowledge whether 
pertaining to life or to death, to evil or to good, to dissen- 
sions or to lack of such, to peace making or to failure to 
make peace. Nought is there outside his influence. 

Io-the-crown-of -heaven. He is the god of the uppermost 
of all the heavens. There is no heaven beyond that one 
which is known to him. 

Io-the-large- (many-) eyed. No place is hidden from 
his eyes and thoughts, whether in the heavens or the various 
realms, the worlds, the waters or the depths of the beds of 
the rivers, or the clouds. All things are gathered together 
in his eyes. 

Io-the-hidden-face or the-unseen-face. He is unseen 
by all things in the heavens, in the world, and various 
divisions of the heavens or worlds. No matter what it be 
he is not seen. Only when he intends to be seen can he be 

THE NATURE OF GOD 

339 

seen by any being. He is unseen by all beings of the 
heavens, of the divisions of the worlds, of the waters, of 
the clouds, of vegetation, insects, supernatural beings; only 
when he wills that they see him can they do so. 

Io-mataaho. His appearance as he moves about is as 
that of radiant light only; he is not clearly seen by any 
being of the heavens, of the worlds or divisions thereof. 

Io-te-whiwhia. This denotes that nothing can possess 
anything of its own volition; by his intention only can it 
possess aught or not so possess it, no matter who or what it 
be — persons or supernatural beings, heavens or the divisions 
of such, moons or suns, stars or waters, wind or rain. 

Io-urutapu. He is more tapu than all other gods, than 
all other things of the heavens, of the realms or divisions 
of space, of the sun, of the moon, of the stars and depths. 9 

The last of the series of epithets to be mentioned is 
that applied to the supreme deity of the Ba-ila. The 
philosophy they suggest is in its constructive aspect 
altogether on a much lower plane than that of the 
Oglala and the Maori. It shows a very marked ten- 
dency, however, toward pessimism, doubt, and critique. 
Finally, it is fairly definitely egocentric or, at best, 
earth-centric. Epithets applied to him can be divided 
into three classes, the first consisting of the generic 
epithets in common use; second, those called by the 
natives the praise-names ; and third, a small group of 
miscellaneous names, all showing the limits to the 

•Elsdon Best, “Maori Religion and Mythology,” ioth Bulletin of 
the Dominion Museum (New Zealand) , pp. 89-90. 

340 PRIMITIVE MAN AS PHILOSOPHER 

deity’s power. 10 Let us begin with the first. There 
are four: 

1. He who besets anyone or persecutes with unremitting 
attentions. 

2. He who stirs up to do good or bad by repeated 
solicitation. 

3. He who trades on a person’s good name; he who 
asks things which he has no title to ask for. 

4. He who is changeable in speech. 

The first of these is the most common name applied 
to him. Taken in conjunction with the others it seems 
to indicate that for the Ba-ila, God has become identi- 
fied with the impulse that prompts us to our actions, 
good or bad. He is the great reality which constrains 
us. We have neither to expect much nor little from 
him but merely accept him as patiently as we can. In 
a Ba-ila story which I have already quoted, an old 
woman who has spent all her life seeking for Leza in 
order that she might complain to him is answered by 
the old men to whom she pours out her story, “In what 
do you differ from others? The Besetting-One sits on 
the back of every one of us and we cannot shake 
him off!” 

To offset these four generic epithets we have a large 
series of “praise-names” in which Leza’s attributes of 
creator, controller, and determiner are extolled. Thus 
he is the creator, the molder, the constructor, the 

” E. W. Smith and A. M. Dak, The Ila-Speaking Peoples of North- 
ern Rhodesia , II, pp. 197 ff . 

THE NATURE OF GOD 

34i 

everlasting and omnipresent, he-from-whom-all-things- 
come, the guardian, the giver, he-who-gives-and-causes- 
to-rot, the flooder, the rain-giver, the water-giver, 
he-of-the-suns, deliverer-of-those-in-trouble, he-who- 
cuts-down-and-destroys, he-who-takes-away-till-there- 
is-only-one-left, the leader. 

Finally we have a number of critical names, where 
rebellion breaks out into open flame: 

1. Dissolver of ant heaps but the maumbuswa ant heaps 
are too much for him. 

2. He can fill up all the great pits of various kinds but 
the little foot print of the Oribi he cannot fill. 

3. The giver who gives also what cannot be eaten. 

Never surely was a more mordant and utterly de- 
structive criticism passed upon a god. 

CHAPTER XVIII 

MONOTHEISTIC TENDENCIES 

I N' the preceding chapter we passed through the 
whole gamut of attitudes toward God, from the 
philosophic reverence of the Maori to the trenchant 
criticism of the Ba-ila. We have still to discuss one 
other aspect and one that is so significant that I shall 
devote a whole chapter to it, namely, monotheism and 
monotheistic tendencies. 

To most men monotheism is intimately bound up 
with the Hebrew Scriptures and with those religions 
manifestly built upon its foundation — Judaism, Chris- 
tianity, and Mohammedanism. Because of the definite 
association with these three great historic faiths of the 
last three thousand years, and of the integral part it 
plays in those civilizations which, rightly or wrongly, 
we regard in many ways as representing the highest 
cultural expressions to which mankind has hitherto 
attained, monotheism has come to have a very 
specific meaning and has been given a special evalu- 
ation. 

To the average man it signifies the belief in an un- 
created, supreme deity, wholly beneficent, omnipotent, 
omniscient, and omnipresent; it demands the complete 
exclusion of all other gods. The world in its most 

342 

MONOTHEISTIC TENDENCIES 

343 

minute details is regarded as his work, as having been 
created out of nothing in response to his wish. To 
presuppose the existence of anything prior to him is 
to deny his most salient attribute. He it is who inter- 
venes in the affairs of man and any assumption that 
he can act through the intermediation of other deities 
is idolatry by implication, even though he has expressly 
given these deities their forms, their attributes, and 
their powers. It is never pure monotheism. 

It is perhaps only natural that with so sharp and 
clear-cut a definition of the deity there should have 
arisen the feeling that such a monotheism represents 
the highest attainable type of religious expression. 
Nations without it, however high their contributions 
to the world’s progress in other directions may be, are 
looked upon unconsciously as inferior. Yet it would 
be unfair to state that it was merely this vague and 
unconscious estimate that lay at the basis of man’s 
evaluation of the significance of monotheism. A cur- 
sory glance at the history of religious thought of the 
so-called primitive peoples or at the religious evolution 
of civilized nations before the advent of Christianity — 
the Jews alone excepted — did seem to indicate the 
existence of a number of distinct phases through which 
religion had progressively passed. The earliest stage, 
it seemed, was to be found among primitive peoples. 
There we find a religion characterized by a faith in 
innumerable, often indefinite, spirits, a belief in the 
general animation of nature — animism, in short. All 
the great historical religions show, it is now generally 

344 PRIMITIVE MAN AS PHILOSOPHER 

admitted, definite indications of having passed through 
such a period. 

This seemed to be followed by a second and much 
later stage in which the worship of definite mainly an- 
thropomorphic deities prevailed; the polytheism of the 
ancient Egyptians, Babylonians, Greeks, and Romans. 

It is the prevalent view to-day that where animism or 
polytheism prevails monotheism is excluded, and where 
monotheism prevails animism and polytheism are in 
the main absent; that as we pass from animism to 
polytheism, from dualism to monotheism, we are pro- 
ceeding from a belief in a multiplicity of spirits devoid 
of special attributes to a belief first in two deities and 
then to a belief in a single god — a god endowed with 
the highest ethical attributes. The evolution of reli- 
gion thus manifests, it would seem, a definite tendency 
toward an integration of our mental and emotional 
life, a tendency toward the development of an exalted 
and positive ethical ideal. Both, it can be claimed, 
imply progress, one in the realm of the intellect and 
the other in that of morality. It is not astonishing, 
therefore, that even to many nonreligious individuals 
pure monotheism should consequently connote the 
highest form of religious experience. And yet it is 
perhaps not amiss to point out that in a development 
such as that just outlined we are basing our evolution 
on factors that, in large measure, are essentially non- 
religious. 

Be this as it may, certainty no one would seriously 
deny that it is the intellectual and ethical estimate of 

MONOTHEISTIC TENDENCIES 

345 

pure monotheism that has colored the attitude of most 
people toward nonmonotheistic and nonethical faiths, 
and no fact could perhaps have demonstrated this so 
clearly as the reception accorded to the famous book 
written by that most courageous thinker, Andrew Lang. 
In 1898, he published The Making of Religion, in 
which he claimed that the evolutionary school in eth- 
nology was hopelessly wrong in one of its fundamental 
assumptions, namely, that belief in a supreme deity 
did not now and never had existed among so-called 
primitive tribes. He contended that ethnologists, mis- 
led by certain preconceptions, had misinterpreted those 
indications pointing in such a direction, crediting to 
Christian influences those definite instances where the 
facts could not possibly be denied. 

It might have been surmised that such a theory 
would have been hailed with delight by the layman. 
Yet this was not the case. The layman indeed seemed 
to feel a certain resentment at having mere “savages” 
anticipate a supposedly exalted religious faith. That 
the professional ethnologist and ethnological theorist 
should have scouted the idea is natural enough, con- 
sidering the ascendency of the evolutionary theory at 
the time. To have admitted among primitive peoples 
the existence of monotheism in any form would have 
been equivalent to abandoning their whole doctrine of 
evolutionary stages. And this they were not prepared 
to do nor did the facts at the time definitely warrant it. 
No one, for instance, would have contended that the 
vast majority of the members of those tribes, among 

346 PRIMITIVE MAN AS PHILOSOPHER 

whom the belief in a supreme deity had been found, 
shared this belief except perhaps in the vaguest degree, 
and it seemed apparent that even the few to whom it 
was in appearance an active faith found no difficulty in 
worshiping other deities as well. It might, in fact, have 
been said that actual worship was the precise thing 
the supreme deity did not receive. So attenuated and 
functionless a concept, known to a selected few in 
each community, could assuredly, the critics insisted, 
be best explained as due to Christian influence. 

Twenty-five years have elapsed since Lang wrote 
his book and his intuitive insight has been abundantly 
corroborated. The ethnologists were quite wrong. 
Accurate data obtained by trained specialists have re- 
placed his rather vague examples. That many primi- 
tive peoples have a belief in a supreme creator no one 
to-day seriously denies. For the notion, however, as 
held by Lang, that it represents a degeneration from a 
higher and purer faith, there is not the slightest justi- 
fication; nor is there any adequate reason for believing 
that the specific forms which it has assumed, the “con- 
taminations” to which it has been subjected, or the 
inconsistencies in which it has been involved, have ever 
been different. 

It was one of Lang’s great merits that he recognized 
some of the salient features of this belief in a supreme 
deity of the aborigines. Such a deity had no cults; 
prayers were only infrequently directed to him and he 
rarely intervened directly in the affairs of mankind. 
As we shall see, these statements are only partially 

MONOTHEISTIC TENDENCIES 347 

true and, at best, hold for only the first of the two 
general groups into which creative deities can be 
divided. The second group embraces those where 
the supreme deity is represented as only partially a 
creator, and where he has become fused with mytho- 
logical heroes — with the sun or the moon, with animals, 
or with anthropomorphic and, occasionally, indefinite 
spirits. The main character with which he became 
most frequently amalgamated was one who is the domi- 
nant actor in the mythologies of practically all primi- 
tive peoples. He is known in ethnological literature 
as the Transformer, Culture-hero, Trickster. The first 
term owes its origin to the fact that it is his role to 
transform the world into its present shape and to be- 
stow upon mankind all the various elements of culture. 
We thus have two concepts: the supreme deity, creator 
of all things, beneficent and ethical, unapproachable 
directly and taking but little interest in the world after 
he has created it; and the Transformer, the establisher 
of the present order of things, utterly nonethical, only 
incidentally and inconsistently beneficent, approach- 
able, and directly intervening in a very human way in 
the affairs of the world. 

These two figures represent two contrasting and 
antithetic modes of thought, two completely opposed 
temperaments continually in conflict. All that has been 
called contamination and degeneration is but the pro- 
jection of the image of the Transformer upon that of a 
supreme creator and vice versa. Indeed, it is only thus 
that certain inconsistencies in the portrayal of either 

348 PRIMITIVE MAN AS PHILOSOPHER 

can be understood. If, as we shall see, it is true that 
the Transformer has introduced certain human-heroic, 
occasionally but extremely rarely, even gross features, 
into the otherwise elevated concept of the supreme 
deity, it is equally true that wherever the belief in a 
supreme deity has prevailed he has in large measure 
been purged of his nonmoral character and become 
invested with many of the attributes of a purposive 
and benevolent creator. It will be best to give a num- 
ber of concrete examples, however; first, of a creator 
who in varying degrees partakes of the attributes of a 
transformer and culture-hero; and second, of a creator 
quite freed from such accretions. 

Among the Crow Indians of Montana the Sun is the 
supreme deity, but he has in the minds of many become 
so definitely merged with the Transformer, in this 
particular instance the Coyote, that the two cannot be 
kept apart. “Long ago,” so the myth runs, “there was 
no earth, only water. The only creatures in the world 
were the ducks and Old Man (Sun, Coyote). He came 
down to meet the ducks and said to them, ‘My broth- 
ers, there is earth below us. It is not good for us to 
be alone.’ ” He thereupon makes them dive and one 
of them reappears with some mud in its webbed feet. 
Out of this he creates the earth and when he has made 
it he exclaims, “Now that we have made the earth there 
are others who wish to be animate.” Immediately a 
wolf is heard howling in the east. In this manner 
everything in the world is created. 

Not a very exalted type of creator, one will justly 

MONOTHEISTIC TENDENCIES 

349 

exclaim. But he is a creator none the less in two 
essential respects: first, in that practically nothing 
exists until he creates it; and second, in that all his 
creative acts are the results of his expressed will and 
that they are beneficent. Let me point out one other 
fact — the new ethical reevaluation of the Sun-Coyote. 
In the cycle connected with him as a Transformer he 
possesses hardly one redeeming feature. He is obscene, 
a fool, a coward, and utterly lacking in self-control. 
Yet the moment he becomes associated with the cre- 
ative deity all this disappears . 1 

Let us take another example. Among the Thompson 
River Indians of British Columbia the concept of a 
creator is still vague, but the creator himself is defi- 
nitely dissociated from the Coyote. “Having finished 
his work on earth and having put all things to rights, 
the time came that the Coyote should meet the Old 
Man. When he met him he did not know that he was 
the ‘Great Chief’ or ‘Mystery,’ because he did not ap- 
pear to be different from any other old man. The 
Coyote thought, ‘This old man does not know who I 
am. I will astonish him. He knows nothing of my 
great powers.’ After saluting each other the Old Man 
derided the Coyote as a person possessed of small 
powers: the latter consequently felt annoyed and began 
to boast of the many wonders he had performed. ‘If 
you are he (Coyote) and so powerful as you say, re- 

1 Robert H. Lowie, “Myths and Traditions of the Crow Indians,” 
Anthropological Papers of the American Museum of Natural History, 
XXV, Part I, pp. 14#. 

350 PRIMITIVE MAN AS PHILOSOPHER 

move that river and make it run yonder.’ This the 
Coyote did. ‘Bring it back.’ The Coyote did so. 
‘Place that high mountain on the plain.’ The Coyote 
did so. ‘Replace it where it was’ ; but this the Coyote 
could not do because the Old Man, being the superior 
in magic of the two, willed otherwise. The Old Man 
then asked Coyote why he could not replace it and the 
latter answered, ‘I don’t know. I suppose you are 
greater than I in magic, and make my efforts fruit- 
less.’ The Old Man then made the mountain go back 
to its place.” 

After declaring himself as the Great Chief, the Old 
Man addresses Coyote as follows: “Now you have 
been a long time on earth; and since the world, mostly 
through your instrumentality, has been put right, you 
have nothing more to do. Soon I am going to leave 
the earth. You will not return again until I myself 
do so. You shall then accompany me and bring back 
the dead to the land of the living.” 2 

Often enough we are told very little about the cre- 
ation of the world itself and we first meet the creator 
in a fully formed world of his own. His task then 
becomes that of creating the present universe. This is 
the case, for instance, with an interesting figure of the 
Wintun Indians of Northern California, called Olelbis, 
“he who dwells on high.” “The first that we know of 
Olelbis,” the natives claim, “is that he was in Olepanti. 
Whether he lived in another place is not known, but 

2 James Teit, Traditions of the Thompson River Indians of British 
Columbia , p. 48. 

MONOTHEISTIC TENDENCIES 351 

in the beginning he was in Olepanti, the highest place. 
He was there before there was any one here on earth 
and two old women always with him.” What interests 
us in Olelbis is that, although presumably only a 
creator of the universe in a very partial sense and 
although he subsequently creates the world in which 
we live, human beings, etc., and behaves very much 
as a normal culture-hero, he possesses no traces what- 
soever of the attributes generally associated with such 
an individual. He is a highly ethical, beneficent deity 
concerned only with the welfare of mankind. 3 

If we turn to the famous “Supreme Beings” of the 
Australian aborigines the picture again changes. They 
are generally, though not always, complete creators, 
but it is their culture-hero and transformer aspects that 
dominate. They are, for instance, married and have 
children. Yet in spite of all this they differ from the 
Transformer in one important respect, in being highly 
ethical and beneficent. 4 

Strictly speaking, the example to which I shall now 
turn does not belong to the above type at all. But as 
the supreme deity in this case has been affected by the 
dominant faith of the people, namely, ancestor-worship, 
it seems best to include it here. I refer to the very 
marked monotheism of the Amazulus of South Africa 
as described by Bishop Callaway. “Unkulunkulu,” so 

* Jeremiah Curtin, Creation Myths of Primitive America, pp. 3 ff. 

* For an excellent discussion of the conditions found in aboriginal 
Australia, see the well-known work p f W. Schmidt, Der Ursprung der 
Gottesidee . 

352 PRIMITIVE MAN AS PHILOSOPHER 

their creation-account runs, “is no longer known 
(i.e., no memory of him exists). It is he who was the 
first being; he broke off in the beginning (i.e., sprang 
from something). We do not know his wife and the 
ancients do not tell us that he had a wife. Unkulun- 
kulu gave men the spirits of the dead; he gave them 
doctors for treating disease, and diviners. The old men 
say Unkulunkulu is (i.e., was a reality); he made the 
first men, the ancients of long ago.” 

There are a number of suggestive features about this 
Unkulunkulu. The name itself means the “old-old 
one” and his other designations imply priority and po- 
tential source of existence. But what is his relation 
to mankind? There the versions differ, some regarding 
him as having created men, others as having begotten 
them. It is likewise quite difficult to decide often 
whether he is regarded as the direct ancestor of man or 
as a true creator. What has happened seems clear. 
The Amazulus are ancestor-worshipers, worship the 
spirits of the departed, and this has influenced their 
conception of the supreme being to the extent of trans- 
forming him into the mythical ancestor of his race. 
Something of the irresponsible Transformer still clings 
to him at times as the following story indicates. He 
sends a chameleon to say, “Let not men die,” but the 
chameleon lingers along the road and he then dis- 
patches a lizard to say, “Let men die.” Thus it is 
that death came into the world. But such traits are 
unimportant. When, indeed, it is recalled that the spirit 
of the deceased ancestor is predominantly evil and has 

MONOTHEISTIC TENDENCIES 353 

to be propitiated, the fact that the partial transforma- 
tion of Unkulunkulu into an ancestor has in no way 
affected his ethical and benevolent activities lends ad- 
ditional corroboration to the well-nigh universal moral 
nature of the supreme being among primitive peoples. 
Whatever else may happen his ethical nature appar- 
ently can in no way be contaminated . 5 

As we pointed out previously, all these creators have 
some of the features of the Transformer, and yet it 
seems obvious that they cannot be explained as gradual 
developments from the latter. They are manifestly 
quite independent and if consequently we find a su- 
preme deity with the attributes of a culture-hero, this 
is to be regarded as secondary, as an accretion which 
I cannot help feeling represents an attempt to bring 
him nearer to man. It failed, we may surmise, because 
of the strength of other religious currents and because 
of the absence of a cult in his honor. 

In the second class of supreme deities, that group 
where we find only a faint admixture of the attributes 
of the Transformer, all doubt as to the deity’s creative 
role and complete lack of intimate relation with man- 
kind is removed. Intermediate divinities carry out 
his commands and it is to them that man must pray. 
These two new factors have led to a strengthening of 
his former traits. His character becomes correspond- 
ingly ennobled and to his ethical attributes are added 
omnipotence and omniscience. Yet as he becomes 
further removed from men, though reverence and awe 

'Bishop Callaway, The Religious System of the Amazulu, pp. iff. 

354 PRIMITIVE MAN AS PHILOSOPHER 

may increase, he becomes of less interest to the ordi- 
nary individual, for the latter is naturally concerned 
only with those deities associated with his daily needs, 
i.e., with the minor gods. The supreme being thus 
develops into what has been admirably described as 
an otiose deity, one resting on his laurels after the 
creation of the world and leaving it entirely to its own 
devices. 

Such an otiose deity is found, for instance, among 
the Wichita of Texas. “In the times of the beginning 
there was no sun, no stars nor anything else as it is 
now. Time passed on. Man-never-known-on-earth 
was the only man that existed, and he it was who 
created all things. When the earth was created it was 
composed of land and water, but they were not yet 
separated. The land was floating on the water and 
darkness was everywhere. After the earth was formed, 
Man-never-known-on-earth made a woman whose name 
was Bright-shining-woman. After the man and woman 
were made they dreamed that things were made for 
them and when they awoke they had the things of 
which they had dreamed. Thus they received every- 
thing they needed. Still they were in darkness not 
knowing what was better than darkness.” 

Here we have most emphatically an otiose deity. 
Apart from the creation of the earth and man he be- 
stows, so to speak, only the potentiality of things. It 
is this first man who causes the sun and moon to 
appear and who creates day and night, but only in 
obedience to an impulse, be it remembered, which 

MONOTHEISTIC TENDENCIES 

355 

Man-never-known-on-earth has implanted within him. 
“The man that creates things is about to improve our 
condition,” he is informed later on. “Villages shall 
spring up and more people will exist, and you will have 
power to teach the people how to do things before 
unknown to them.” Throughout the story of creation 
this divine impulse is expressed by a voice directing 
the activities of the hero . 6 

At times fortunately the creation is described at 
greater length. Thus among the Uitoto of Colombia, 
South America, we find the following poetic account: 
“In the beginning there was nothing but mere appear- 
ance, nothing really existed. It was a phantasm, an 
illusion that our father touched ; something mysterious 
it was that he grasped. Nothing existed. Through 
the agency of a dream our father, He-who-is-appear- 
ance-only, Nainema, pressed the phantasm to his 
breast and then was sunk in thought. 

“Not even a tree existed that might have supported 
this phantasm and only through his breath did 
Nainema hold this illusion attached to the thread 
of a dream. He tried to discover what was at the 
bottom of it, but he found nothing. ‘I have attached 
that which was non-existent/ he said. There was 
nothing. 

“Then our father tried again and investigated the 
bottom of this something and his fingers sought the 
empty phantasm. He tied the emptiness to the dream- 
thread and pressed the magical glue-substance upon it. 

e George A. Dorsey, The Mythology of the Wichita , pp. 2$ff. 

356 PRIMITIVE MAN AS PHILOSOPHER 

Thus by means of his dream did he hold it like the 
fluff of raw cotton. 

“He seized the bottom of the phantasm and stamped 
upon it repeatedly, allowing himself finally to rest 
upon the earth of which he had dreamt. 

“The earth-phantasm was now his. Then he spat 
out saliva repeatedly so that the forests might arise. 
He lay upon the earth and set the covering of heaven 
above it. He drew from the earth the blue and white 
heavens and placed them above.” 7 

The creation of all the various animals and plants 
then follows. We hear no more of him thereafter. 

What are we to make of this wonderful bit of 
imagery? Surely there can be little doubt but that it 
represents an attempt to solve the riddle of creation 
by postulating something that existed before the be- 
ginning, and our primitive philosopher and theologian 
has quite logically assumed that the appearance of 
things preceded their actual existence. In the evolu- 
tion of reality, according to him, three stages may be 
said to exist: nothing, the appearance of reality, 
reality. It is an admirable solution of the much vexed 
question of how a creator can create something out of 
nothing. There are other solutions conceivable and one 
of them is found among these very people; namely, 
the creation of the world out of the one thing that 
existed, the body of the creator himself. 

But the speculation of the Uitoto monotheist has 

7 Karl T. Preuss, “Die hoechste Gottheit bei den Kulturarmen 
Voelkern,” Psychologische Forschmg, II, p. 182. 

MONOTHEISTIC TENDENCIES 

357 

gone much farther than this. In one myth we are told 
that “when in the beginning of things nothing existed, 
our father created words and gave us these words from 
the Juka tree. Nofugeri and our ancestors brought 
these words to the earth. After he had brought these 
words to the earth in consequence of a dream, our 
ancestors gave us the words that our father had 
created.” 8 

In another instance the formulation is even more 
specific: “In the beginning the word gave origin to 
our father.” 

These are, of course, all interpretations of the reli- 
gious man. The nonreligious man, the realist, has 
had comparatively little influence upon the figure of 
the creator except in one important respect, namely, 
in the strenuous efforts he has made to equate him 
with the ancestor of man, for the Uitoto are ancestor- 
worshipers. But even he never went to the point of 
representing these ancestors as directly begotten of 
the creator as we saw the Amazulu in part do. 

Not far from the above-mentioned tribe we find the 
Kagaba, among whom we encounter a female supreme 
deity and a profession of faith that should satisfy even 
the most exacting monotheist. 

“The mother of our songs, the mother of all our 
seed, bore us in the beginning of things and she is the 
mother of all types of men, the mother of all nations. 
She is the mother of the thunder, the mother of the 

8 Karl T. Preuss, Religion und Mythotogie der Uitoto, I, pp. 165- 

358 PRIMITIVE MAN AS PHILOSOPHER 

streams, the mother of trees and of all things. She is 
the mother of the world and of the older brothers, 
the stone-people. She is the mother of the fruits of 
the earth and of all things. She is the mother of our 
younger brothers, the French, and the strangers. She 
is the mother of our dance paraphernalia, of all our 
temples and she is the only mother we possess. She 
alone is the mother of the fire and the Sun and the 
Milky Way. She is the mother of the rain and the 
only mother we possess. And she has left us a token in 
all the temples, — a token in the form of songs and 
dances.” 9 

She has no cult, and no prayers are really directed 
to her, but when the fields are sown and the priests 
chant their incantations the Kagaba say, “And then 
we think of the one and only mother of the growing 
things, of the mother of all things.” One prayer was 
recorded. “Our mother of the growing fields, our 
mother of the streams, will have pity upon us. For 
to whom do we belong? Whose seeds are we? To 
our mother alone do we belong.” 10 

Here we have pure pantheism and the recorder of 
the above data may perhaps be quite right when he 
insists that we can hardly expect an origin myth, for 
the All-Mother is obviously nature personified. I am 
not quite so convinced of this, but it is a fact that no 
creation myth has been recorded. 

If there are traces, however faint they may be, of 

* Ibid., p. 169. 

10 Ibid., p. 170. 

MONOTHEISTIC TENDENCIES 

359 

a direct intervention of the All-Mother of the Kagaba 
in the ordinary affairs of man, there are absolutely 
none in the cases now to be cited, the Tirawa of the 
Pawnee of Oklahoma and the Earthmaker of the 
Winnebago of Wisconsin. 

In the Pawnee pantheon Tirawa reigned supreme. 
To him the lesser gods, both of the heavens and of the 
earth, as well as the people themselves acknowledged 
authority. Tirawa rules from his position beyond the 
clouds and has both created and governs the universe 
by means of commands executed by lesser gods who 
are subject to him. 11 

The two temperaments which we see clashing in- 
cessantly in the interpretation of the supreme deity, 
that of the permanently devout man and the idealist, 
and that of the intermittently devout, the practical 
man, the realist, are transparently reflected among the 
Pawnee. The supremacy of Tirawa is never ques- 
tioned by the latter, but something of his role as 
creator of all things is taken from him. The sun, 
moon, and stars are not mentioned as specifically 
formed by him. They are merely given their proper 
places and functions, i.e., Tirawa, somewhat like the 
culture-heroes, transforms things. The following is 
assuredly the account of the realist: “In the beginning 
was Tirawahut (the Universe-and-Everything-Inside) ; 
and chief in Tirawahut was Tirawa, the all-powerful, 

“ George A. Dorsey, Traditions of the Skidi Pawnee (see Introduc- 
tion), and Alice C. Fletcher, “The Hako, a Pawnee Ceremony,” 22d 
Report of the Bureau of American Ethnology. 

360 PRIMITIVE MAN 4 S PHILOSOPHER 

and his spouse was Atira (Vault-of-the-sky). Around 
them sat the gods in council. Then Tirawa told them 
where they should stand. And at this time the heavens 
did not touch the earth. Tirawa spoke to the gods 
and said, ‘Each of you gods I am to station in the 
heavens; and each of you shall receive certain powers 
from me, for I am about to create people who shall be 
like myself. They shall be under my care. I will give 
them your land to live upon, and with your assistance 
they shall be cared for. You, sun, shall stand in the 
east. You shall give light and warmth to all beings 
and to earth. You, moon, shall stand in the west to 
give light when darkness comes. You, evening star, 
shall stand in the west. You shall be known as Mother 
of all things; for through you all things shall be 
created.’ ” 12 

It is the same realist who in the following litany 
converts him merely into the most potent of gods: 

We heed as unto thee we call I 

Oh send to us thy potent aid! 

Help us, oh, holy place above! 

We heed as unto thee we call; 

Oh send to us thy potent aid! 

Help us, Hotoru, giver of breath! 18 

And it is unquestionably the idealist who speaks in 
the following. It is a final profession of faith. 

” George A. Dorsey, op. cit., pp. 3-4. 
” Alice C. Fletcher, op. cit., p. 285. 

MONOTHEISTIC TENDENCIES 361 

I know not if the voice of man can reach the sky; 

I know not if the mighty one will hear as I pray; 

I know not if the gifts I ask will all granted be; 

I know not if the word of old we truly can hear; 

I know not what will come to pass in our future days; 

I hope that only good will come, my children, to you. 

I now know that the voice of man can reach to the sky; 
I now know that the mighty one has heard as I prayed; 

I now know that the gifts I asked have all granted been; 
I now know that the word of old we truly have heard; 

I now know that Tirawa hearkens unto man’s prayer; 

I know that only good has come, my children, to you . 14 

There is no doubt whatsoever in the minds of the 
Pawnee that Tirawa reigns supreme and that the minor 
gods are his ministers only. In one of their prayers he 
is invoked in the following manner: 

Father, unto thee we cry! 

Father thou of gods and men; 

Father thou of all we hear; 

Father thou of all we see — 

Father, unto thee we cry! 15 

His unapproachability and the realization that only 
through his ministers, the lesser gods, can man be 
brought into relation with him is forcibly brought out 
in such an invocation as this: 

Father, thou above, father of the gods, 

They who can come near and touch us, 

“Ibid., pp. 343 ff. 
“ Ibid p. 3x4. 

362 PRIMITIVE MAN AS PHILOSOPHER 

Do thou bid them bring us help. 

Help we need. Father, hear usl 16 

In the account of origins given by the Uitoto we 
saw the problem of the creation of the world out of 
nothing solved in a very ingenious manner. But no 
attempt was there made to create the creator. Yet 
this is precisely what the Winnebago essayed. 

Their theory was not so different after all from that 
of the Uitoto. The creator is represented as being born 
and coming into consciousness. Water is formed from 
his tears. But this does not take place as the result 
of a conscious wish. It is only after he has recognized 
the water and inferred that it had originated from his 
tears that he realizes his powers and begins to create 
at first gropingly and then confidently and intelligently. 

Earthmaker like the Tirawa of the Pawnee never 
holds direct communion with men. He acts only 
through his intermediaries, the deities and the culture- 
heroes he has created. At times, however, a daring 
realist will attempt to establish such a direct com- 
munion. I know of one instance where a man argued 
that if Earthmaker had created all the deities from 
whom we derive our powers, and if it is Earthmaker 
who bestowed them upon the deities, then he himself 
must possess even greater powers. Why not then 
supplicate Earthmaker directly; see him face to face, 
as one does the spirits? The man gives up everything 
— happiness, the goods of the world, lastly his own 

19 Ibid. 

MONOTHEISTIC TENDENCIES 363 

child, and finally he hears a voice from above saying, 
“My son, for your sake I shall come to earth.” The 
man turns in the direction of the voice, perceives a 
ray of light extending from the heavens to his camp 
and a voice again speaking: “Only thus can you see 
me, my son. What you ask of me, to see me face to 
face, I cannot grant.” 17 So not even the realist can 
alter him profoundly; he is a deity unapproachable 
and invisible. 

In one of the cults, practically a feast to all the gods 
and a plea for victory in war, a further attempt has 
been made to convert him into a god of the general 
type: 

“Hearken, Earthmaker, our father, I am about to 
offer you tobacco. My ancestor concentrated his 
thoughts upon you. The blessings you bestowed upon 
him, those I ask of you directly (i.e., and not through 
the customary intermediation of other spirits). Also 
that I may have no troubles in life.” 18 

Or we get an even more definite attempt at trans- 
formation into a cult deity: 

“Hearken, Father who dwells above, all things you 
have created. Yet if we were to offer you some to- 
bacco you would thankfully accept it, you said. I am 
about to offer you a handful of tobacco and a buckskin 
for moccasins and a white-haired animal to be cooked 
so that you may have a holy feast. If you accept 

17 Paul Radin in 37th Report of the Bureau of American Ethnology , 
pp. 291-293. 

18 Ibid., p. 447. 

364 PRIMITIVE MAN AS PHILOSOPHER 

them, the first thing I ask of you will be the honor of 
killing an enemy in full sight of the people, of leading 
war paths.” 19 

From the enumeration of these examples let us re- 
turn to the general discussion. 

If, then, as most ethnologists and unbiased students 
would now admit, the possibility of interpreting 
monotheism as part of a general intellectual and 
ethical progress must be abandoned and if social causa- 
tions hardly touch the fundamental problem involved, 
only two alternatives remain open to us. We may 
either regard such a belief as innate in the theological 
sense or as the expression of a certain temperament. 
The first lies quite outside my province. The second 
will, I think, be found nearer the true solution — 
monotheism; its origin and development will seem to 
be bound up most intimately with the factor of man’s 
temperament. 

It is a matter of common experience that in any 
randomly selected group of individuals we may expect 
to find, on the whole, the same distribution of tem- 
perament and ability. Such a view, I know, has certain 
terrors because of national and class prejudices but I 
do not think it can be really seriously questioned. 
Primitive people are, we have seen, quite as logical as 
ourselves and have perhaps an even truer sense of 
reality. There is not the slightest indication of the 
existence of any fundamental difference in their emo- 
tional nature as compared with ours. I think we may 

“Ibid., p. 455- 

MONOTHEISTIC TENDENCIES 365 

confidently assume that the same distribution of ability 
and temperament holds for them that holds for us. 
Indeed, I think there is ample reason for believing, 
granted that chance mating has existed since man’s 
first appearance on earth, that the distribution of 
ability and temperament never has been appreciably 
different. What has differed is the size of population 
with its corollary of a larger proportion of men of a 
certain type of ability and temperament. We must 
bear this in mind in estimating the culture of primi- 
tive peoples. 

If we are right in assuming the same more or less 
fixed distribution of ability and temperament in every 
group of approximately the same size, it would follow 
that no type has ever been totally absent. I feel quite 
convinced that the idealist and the materialist, the 
dreamer and the realist, the introspective and the non- 
introspective man have always been with us. And the 
same would hold for the different grades of religious 
temperament, the devoutly religious, the intermittently, 
the indifferently religious man. If individuals with 
specific temperaments, for instance the religious- 
sesthetic, have always existed we should expect to find 
them expressing themselves in much the same way at 
all times. And this, it seems to me, is exactly what we 
do find. The pagan polytheistic religions are replete 
with instances of men — poets, philosophers, priests — 
who have given utterance to definitely monotheistic 
beliefs. It is the characteristic of such individuals, I 
contend, always to picture the world as a unified whole, 

366 PRIMITIVE MAN AS PHILOSOPHER 

always to postulate some first cause. No evolution 
from animism to monotheism was ever necessary in 
their case. What was required were individuals of a 
certain type. Alongside of them and vastly in the 
majority have always been found others with a tem- 
perament fundamentally distinct, to whom the world 
has never appeared as a unified whole and who have 
never evinced any marked curiosity as to its origin. 

Such, too, is the situation among primitive peoples. 
If anything, the opposition of the two types is much 
clearer. All the monotheists, it is my claim, have 
sprung from the ranks of the eminently religious indi- 
viduals. Its precise formulation is due to those spe- 
cifically religious individuals who happened to be 
thinkers at the same time. It is in the ritualistic ver- 
sion of the original myth, for example, that Earthmaker 
is depicted as a supreme deity who definitely creates 
the other deities and the culture-heroes; it is in the 
ritualistic version of the culture-hero cycle again that a 
nonmoral, buffoon-like hero, whose acts are only inci- 
dentally beneficial to mankind, is transformed into an 
ethical, intelligent, beneficent creator. No other ex- 
planation for the characteristics of the supreme dei- 
ties, as I have attempted to sketch them, is indeed 
conceivable except upon the assumption that they 
reflect a definite type of temperament, examples of 
which we know actually exist in every primitive group. 
Such people are admittedly few in number, for the 
overwhelming mass belong to the indifferently religious 
group, are materialists, realists, to whom a god, be he 

MONOTHEISTIC TENDENCIES 367 

supreme (deity or not, is simply to be regarded as a 
source of power. If men of this type accept such a 
god, he is immediately equated with the more concrete 
deities who enter into direct relations with man, and 
as a result contamination ensues. It is thus that that 
particular type of creator arose, where a marked ad- 
mixture of attributes belonging to the culture-hero and 
transformer was manifest. 

On such an hypothesis a really satisfactory explana- 
tion of the existence and of the dominant traits of the 
monotheism among primitive peoples can be given. 
Monotheism would then have to be taken as funda- 
mentally an intellectual-religious expression of a very 
special type of temperament and emotion. Hence the 
absence of cults, for instance, the unapproachability of 
the supreme being, his vagueness of outline, and his 
essential lack of function. Whatever dynamic force 
he possesses for the community is that with which the 
realists invested him. In so doing they frequently 
converted him into a cult deity, into a creator of gods; 
made him but one among many. This is merely 
monolatry if you wish, but this in no way detracts 
from the possibility that the faith of the religious man 
himself may have been different, may have been essen- 
tially explicit monotheism. Yet even if we should not 
care to press this claim, the existence of monolatry and 
implicit monotheism must constitute a definite chal- 
lenge to the views still current as to the development 
of the concept of a supreme creator. 

The view still held both by the ethnological theorist 

368 PRIMITIVE MAN AS PHILOSOPHER 

and the student of comparative religion is frankly evo- 
lutionary. Only recently in a remarkably lucid ad- 
dress by the late Dr. C. Buchanan Gray, three stages 
in the development of Hebrew monotheism are as- 
sumed, the earliest extending perhaps even beyond the 
Exile, in which the Jews were divided into two groups, 
one, apparently the large majority, worshiping Jahveh 
and other deities at the same time, and the other wor- 
shiping only Jahveh but yet not denying the efficacy 
of other gods for the people. The second is repre- 
sented by the belief of the prophets of the eighth cen- 
tury and after, where Jahveh is thought of as con- 
trolling the destinies of all nations but where, at the 
same time, it is not definitely asserted that no other 
gods exist. The last stage, that of Deutero-Isaiah, 
gives us the definite formulation that there is no god 
but one. Dr. Gray goes on to say, “The existence of 
this third type of belief in Israel cannot be definitely 
traced back beyond the sixth century. Implicit mono- 
theism might, according to the judgment passed on the 
age and meaning of certain passages, be traced per- 
haps somewhat earlier than the eighth century; but 
wherever and so soon as we find the first type of be- 
lief, monotheism, whether implicit or explicit, is ex- 
cluded.” 20 

This is quite definitely in line with the orthodox evo- 
lutionary theory. The cardinal error is and always 
has been the assumption that every element in culture 

"“Hebrew Monotheism,” Abstract of Proceedings for the Year 
1Q22-1Q23 (Oxford Society of Historical Theology) . 

MONOTHEISTIC TENDENCIES 369 

must have had an evolution and one generally compar- 
able to that which exists in the animal world. But it is 
precisely in its application to culture, to thought, and 
to temperament that the evolutionary theory even in 
its heyday proved so unsatisfactory and even harmful. 
It requires no long preparatory stages for an indi- 
vidual with inborn artistic abilities to draw figures both 
correctly and with a remarkable feeling for line, and 
there is* no reason whatsoever for supposing that cer- 
tain concepts require a long period to evolve. What, 
concretely speaking, did Dr. Gray imagine had hap- 
pened in Israel between the first and the third stages 
of monotheism? Apparently an increase in intelligence 
and in the capacity for abstract thought. This is but 
the old unconscious assumption that progress must 
make equal strides along the whole line. The general 
acceptance of explicit monotheism at one stage (if in- 
deed there ever has been or could be such a general 
acceptance) and its apparent absence in the two earlier 
stages is taken to mean that it did not exist before. 
The existence of two varying attitudes toward God at 
one and the same time, as in the previously cited case 
of Hebrew monolatry, is regarded as somehow implying 
that explicit monotheism was absent. Dr. Gray him- 
self partially realized the force of this criticism, for 
he says further on: “We may admit the possibility in 
the abstract that even before the eighth century there 
may have been individual Hebrew monotheists of 
whom no trace has survived; but the religion of the 
people as a whole — of the teachers, prophets, priests, 

370 PRIMITIVE MAN AS PHILOSOPHER 

as well as the mass of the people — was not monothe- 
istic.” 21 To Dr. Gray the existence of such a mono- 
theist was a bare possibility because at bottom he could 
not think of explicit or implicit monotheism except as 
the result of a gradual evolution and, I surmise, be- 
cause he would have seen no way in which to explain 
it if it had actually been found. 

Another theologian and historian of religion, the very 
stimulating Archbishop of Upsala, Dr. N. Soderblom, 
is also definitely evolutionistic in his interpretation. 
Instead of simply beginning with animism or pre- 
animism, however, he begins with three factors: ani- 
mism, the belief in supernatural power, i.e., mana, and 
the belief in culture-hero creators (Urheber). He does 
not deny the existence of the all-father or creator con- 
cept but assumes it as something shadowy and vague 
among primitive peoples and in his opinion utterly dis- 
tinct from real monotheism in any form. He, like so 
many people, can explain the marked resemblances of 
so many supreme creators to the culture-heroes in 
but one way, namely, that the latter have largely con- 
tributed toward the formation of the former. To ex- 
plain the third, i.e., the mystical aspect, he has recourse 
to the mana concept. This in itself is exceedingly sug- 
gestive, especially if we take the belief in culture- 
heroes and the mana concept as being in the nature of 
psychological tendencies, but unfortunately Dr. Soder- 
blom does not confine himself to this aspect of the 
question but predicates an evolutionary development 

“ Ibid., pp. 8-13. 

MONOTHEISTIC TENDENCIES 

37i 

for both concepts . 22 For, like the most orthodox of 
evolutionists, he cannot bring himself to believe that 
the mentality of primitive people is not essentially 
different in kind from our own. He has been led 
astray, if I may say so, by the data he selected. He 
practically bases his analysis on the somewhat anti- 
quated instances found in Lang, i.e., on the ridicu- 
lously inadequate and unsatisfactory material from 
Australia and the vague statements found in early ac- 
counts of the American Indians. But the real criticism 
of Dr. Soderblom’s position is that just indicated, 
that to him explicit and implicit monotheism must 
represent the last phases of a long and gradual de- 
velopment. 

Explicit monotheism, it is true, is rare among primi- 
tive peoples, but it is possibly not quite so uncommon 
as the literal reading of the facts might seem to indi- 
cate. Knowing the tremendous part symbolism plays 
in the interpretation of religious phenomena, particu- 
larly the godhead in our own civilizations, what right 
have we to assume that it played an inferior role in 
avowedly similar temperaments among primitive peo- 
ples, especially when it is universally admitted that 
symbolism permeates every aspect of primitive man’s 
culture? What the facts really are it is admittedly 
difficult to ascertain, but from my own experience I 
am inclined to assume that a limited number of explicit 
monotheists are to be found in every primitive tribe 
that has at all developed the concept of a supreme 

Das Werden des Gotterglmbens. 

372 PRIMITIVE MAN AS PHILOSOPHER 

creator. And if this is true we can safely assume that 
they existed in Israel even at a time when the mass of 
the people were monolatrists. 

The problem that confronts us is not, as has always 
been erroneously assumed, the origin of monotheism. 
That, I should say, antedates even Neanderthal man. 
The historical problem connected with monotheism, 
implicit and explicit, is, as I see it, not how monothe- 
ism arose but what made it the prevailing and exclu- 
sive official religion of a particular people. This we 
must assume to have been largely in the nature of an 
historical accident. The Jews and Mohammedans, the 
adherents of the purest form of monotheism known 
to-day, are certainly not innately gifted in this regard. 
It is true that the factors concerned in the complete 
credal triumph of monotheism in Judaism, Christian- 
ity, and Mohammedanism have never been satisfac- 
torily explained, but they are emphatically of an indi- 
vidual, historical, and psychological nature. For 
myself, I am inclined to believe that the spread of mo- 
notheism is far more definitely a reflection of certain 
facts of a general sociological order than has hitherto 
been recognized. Certainly it has not been the triumph 
of the unifying principle over the disruptive, of ab- 
stract over concrete thought. Yet, on the other hand, 
there must be something subtly appealing in mono- 
theism, for wherever it is found a definite influence is 
seen to be exercised over the thought of those who are 
stubborn polytheists and animists. Nowhere, indeed, 
has it ever been completely submerged once it has made 

MONOTHEISTIC TENDENCIES 373 

its appearance, no matter how great the mass of foreign 
accretions piled upon it. 

Most of us have been brought up in or influenced 
by the tenets of orthodox ethnology and this was 
largely an enthusiastic and quite uncritical attempt to 
apply the Darwinian theory of evolution to the facts of 
social experience. Many ethnologists, sociologists, and 
psychologists still persist in this endeavor. No prog- 
ress will ever be achieved, however, until scholars rid 
themselves, once and for all, of the curious notion that 
everything possesses an evolutionary' history; until 
they realize that certain ideas and certain concepts 
are as ultimate for man as a social being as specific 
physiological reactions are for him as a biological 1 
entity. Both doubtless have a history; but in the one 
case its roots lie in presocial man and in the other in 
the lower organisms. It must be explicitly recognized 
that in temperament and in capacity for logical and 
symbolical thought, there is no difference between 
civilized and primitive man. A difference exists — and 
one that profoundly colors primitive man’s mental and 
possibly his emotional life; but that is to be explained 
by the nature of the knowledge the primitive man pos- 
sessed, by the limited distribution of individuals of 
certain specific temperaments and abilities and all that 
this implied in cultural elaboration. 

In no way, however, does this affect the question of 
the existence among primitive people of monotheism 
in all its different varieties. Such a belief, I cannot 
too often repeat, is dependent not upon the extent of 

374 PRIMITIVE MAN AS PHILOSOPHER 

knowledge nor upon the elaboration of a certain type 
of knowledge, but solely upon the existence of a special 
kind of temperament. When once this has been 
grasped, much of the amazement and incredulity one 
inevitably experiences at the clear-cut monotheism of 
so many primitive peoples will vanish, and we shall 
recognize it for what it is — the purposive functioning 
of an inherent type of thought and emotion — and this 
inherent type of thought and emotion has received 
expression among many primitive tribes, sometimes 
more, sometimes less elaborate, as the examples in this 
and other chapters amply demonstrate. 

CHAPTER XIX 

SKEPTICISM AND CRITIQUE 

T HE critical attitude assumed by some of the 
Ba-ila thinkers toward their supreme deity 
brings us to the whole subject of philosophical and 
scientific critique. Were there, for instance, any true 
skeptics among primitive people? Were they, or at 
least were some of them, capable of subjecting their 
beliefs to consistent criticism, capable of weighing 
their merits and demerits? I shall let the facts speak 
for me. 

First let us turn to the out-and-out skeptics. Every 
ethnologist has encountered them. I will give one 
example in detail, one already mentioned. 

Among the Winnebago it is narrated that there was 
once a man who doubted the powers of the most feared 
of Winnebago deities. The deity in question was 
named Disease-Giver. His was an open rebellion. 
“Why,” he said, “do you always make offerings and 
feasts to Disease-Giver? What benefit has he ever 
been to you? If I were ever to see him I would kick 
him off the earth. The only thing he can give you is 
disease.” Time passed, but in the fall of the year he 
saw a man coming toward him who proved to be the 
much slandered Disease-Giver. Disease-Giver dis- 

375 

376 PRIMITIVE MAN AS PHILOSOPHER 

closed himself and when he asked the man whether he 
still believed he could carry out his threat, the latter 
defiantly answered yes. Thereupon Disease-Giver 
pointed his deadly finger at him, straight at his heart. 
The man did not budge. And then we come to the 
complete depreciation of the god. The deity pleads 
with the man to die, at least for a short time, so that 
people might not say that he, Disease-Giver, had 
failed in his mission! 1 It is true that in the end the 
skeptic is punished but this in no way detracts from 
the skepticism, of course. 

Skepticism and doubt, fear and bewilderment, mingle 
with acceptance and gratitude in the following dis- 
courses on the nature of the Ba-ila Leza. Something, 
indeed, of the atmosphere of the Goetterdaemmerung 
pervades their attitude. 

Long ago the Ba-ila did not know Leza as regards his 
affairs — no, all that they knew about him was that he 
created us and also his unweariedness in doing things. 
As at present when the rainy season is annoying and he does 
not fall, why then they ask of Leza different things; they 
say now, “Leza annoys us by not falling”; then later when 
he falls heavily they say, “Leza falls too much.” All the 
same, Leza, as he is the compassionate, that is to say, as he 
is the merciful, he does not get angry. He doesn’t give up 
falling, he doesn’t give up doing them all good — no, whether 
they mock him, whether they grumble at him, he does 

1 Paul Radin in 37th Report of the Bureau of American Ethnology, 
pp. 309-310. 

SKEPTICISM AND CRITIQUE 377 

good to all at all times. That is how they trust him always. 
But as for seeing always his affairs, no, the Ba-ila do not 
know. All they say is: Leza is the good natured one. 

Today Leza has turned over and abandoned his old ways. 
Today he is not the same, he is altogether different, for 
he is not as he was in distant years before the white chiefs 
came. At that time he was truly the water giver and all 
things were still sufficient on earth as they had been estab- 
lished from the beginning. Then Leza was still young. 
Today Leza has grown old, he has become the ancient one 
of long ago. That is what we suppose, because the water 
which he rains down is supposed to be like tears from the 
eyes of men when they weep. So it is when one becomes 
aged. When he weeps tears he lets tears dribble down his 
chest — that is how we judge Leza to be. He is the-owner- 
of-his-things: all things are his. He cannot be charged with 
an offense, cannot be accused, cannot be questioned, cannot 
be claimed from: none of the things can be done to him 
which we do to our fellow-men on earth. He gives and 
rots. Vengeance is his own. There is no flood today — no 
great giver of floods. This is how he is judged of; today 
Leza is not as he is wanted to be. Long ago he was the 
one who could be urged to do well, but today he has left 
off being so . 2 

In the following example taken from a discourse on 
God of the Ewe of West Africa, we have a dispas- 
sionate presentation first of the good qualities of God 
and then of his inconsistency and rank injustice: 

* E. W. Smith and A. M. Dale, The Ila-Speaking Peoples of North- 
ern Rhodesia, II, pp. 200-201. 

378 PRIMITIVE MAN AS PHILOSOPHER 

God made everything in the world. He alone has been 
great from the beginning of time. God made all men. 
When he is ready to send a person into the world he gives 
him some occupation by means of which he can earn his 
living. God is wise for he has created everything on the 
earth and accompanies men and animals everywhere. He 
made the high mountains and the woods that grow on them 
and he made the rivers. No person can understand his 
wisdom. He sent us Ewe here and he therefore consoles 
us and gives us food so that we may live for a certain 
span. He himself made the good and the bad people. He 
is compassionate but he does not always know how to act 
justly for he gave us death. 

God acts unjustly for he made some people good and 
others bad. I and my companions work together in the 
fields; the crops of one prosper and those of others fail. 
This proves that God is unjust and treats men unequally. 
God treats us, our children and our wives who perish, un- 
kindly. If men behaved like that we say nothing, but 
when God acts thus it hurts us. From this we are right in 
inferring that God is unjust. 3 

From ethico-philosophical critique of this kind it is 
but a step to definitely scientific or objective criticism, 
and I cannot do better than to begin by giving an in- 
stance of what is properly speaking the very highest 
type of scientific control. My example comes from 
the Maori. 

In the early days of Christian influence the Maori 
’Johann Spieth, Die Ewe Staemme, pp. 834-836. 

SKEPTICISM AND CRITIQUE 

379 

were very much impressed by many aspects of Euro- 
pean civilization. While not accepting them they yet 
believed them to be true. One thing, however, so the 
missionary who relates the following incident tells us, 
they did not believe and that was that a person could 
convey his thoughts to another person, separated many 
hundreds of miles, by writing. This a chief told the 
missionary he would believe only if all possibility of 
trickery and magic were definitely excluded. The 
chief thereupon proposed the following test. A white 
man was to write something on a piece of paper in his 
presence and the contents communicated to him alone. 
This was then to be taken by a Maori whose move- 
ments were under control, to a white man living many 
miles distant and who had had no communication with 
the sender of the message. If this white man could 
read the message correctly then he, the Maori, would 
accept this as proof. By one of those delightful ironies 
which fill the annals of our contact with primitive 
peoples, the missionary in question cites this incident 
to illustrate the ridiculous naivete of savages and it 
was subsequently quoted in a paper entitled Maori 
Beliefs and Superstitions . 4 

But in critical caution and critical doubt the Maoris 
were excelled by many other peoples, particularly by 
the African Negroes. Take for example the following 
disquisition on Unkulunkulu, the supreme deity of the 
Amazulu of East Africa: 

4 Authority of Elsdon Best. 

380 PRIMITIVE MAN AS PHILOSOPHER 

When black men say Unkulunkulu or Uthlana or the 
Creator they mean one and the same thing. But what they 
say has no point; it is altogether blunt. For there is not 
one among black men, not even the chiefs themselves, who 
can so interpret such accounts as those about Unkulunkulu 
as to bring about the truth, that others too may under- 
stand what the truth of the matter really is. But our knowl- 
edge does not urge us to search out the roots of it; we do not 
try to see them; if anyone thinks ever so little he soon 
gives it up and passes on to what he sees with his eyes 
and he does not understand the real state of what he sees. 
Such then is the real fact as regards what we know about 
Unkulunkulu, of which we speak. We say we know what 
we see with our eyes, but if there are any who see with 
their hearts they can at once make manifest our ignorance 
of that which we say we see with our eyes and under- 
stand too. 

As to our primitive condition and what was done by 
Unkulunkulu we cannot connect them with the course of 
life on which we entered when he ceased to be. The path 
of Unkulunkulu through our wandering has not, as it were, 
come down to us; it goes yonder whither we know not. 

But for my part I should say, if there be anyone who 
says he can understand the matters about Unkulunkulu, 
that he knows them just as we know him, to wit, that he 
gave us all things. But so far as we see, there is no con- 
nection between his gift and the things we now possess. 

I say then that there is not one amongst us who can say 
that he knows all about Unkulunkulu. For we say, “Truly 
we know nothing but his name; but we no longer see his 

SKEPTICISM AND CRITIQUE 381 

path which he made for us to walk in. All that remains is 
mere thought about the things we like. It is difficult to 
separate ourselves from these things and we make him a 
liar. For that evil which we like of our own accord, we 
adhere to with the utmost tenacity. If anyone says, “It 
is not proper for you to do that; if you do it you will 
disgrace yourself,” yet we do it saying, “Since it was made 
by Unkulunkulu where is the evil of it?” B 

The same Amazulu informant told Canon Callaway, 
our main authority on this tribe, the following: 

The old men say, “Unkulunkulu came into being and 
gave being to man. He came out of the bed of reeds; he 
broke off from a bed of reeds.” We children ask, “Where 
is the bed of reeds out of which Unkulunkulu came? Since 
you say there is a bed of reeds in what country is it? For 
men have now gone into every country. In which of them 
is the bed of reeds from which Unkulunkulu broke off?” 
They say in answer, “Neither do we know and there were 
other old men before us who said that neither did they 
know the bed of reeds from which broke off Unkulunkulu.” 
They say they speak the truth in saying there is a bed of 
reeds. But we say there is no bed of reeds, for we do not 
know the land in which it is, of which they can say it is in 
such and such a country.® 

But it is not merely the vague Unkulunkulu on 
whom the Amazulu exercise their very great critical 

"Bishop Callaway, The Religious System of the Amazulu, pp. 22-24. 

* Ibid., pp. 31-32. 

382 PRIMITIVE MAN < 4 S PHILOSOPHER 

acumen and their half-ironical skepticism. Everything 
in their life is subjected to it, their ancestors, the nature 
of ecstasy, dreams, etc. In the following discourse on 
the amatongo, i.e., the ancestor-gods of the Amazulu, 
nothing escapes their boring inquiry — the ridiculous- 
ness of gods who are capricious without cause, and the 
fatuity of men who insist that their gods have been 
with them because they have, through some unforeseen 
chance, escaped destruction! 

Men say they possessed amatongo as soon as they came 
into being. When they came into being men spoke already 
of there being amatongo and hence they too knew that they 
existed. It is not something which as soon as they were 
born they saw to be amatongo. 

So all nations used to think when they were about to 
attack an army, that they should be assisted by the itongo 
(ancestors) ; and although they were killed by the army 
the friends of those who were killed said, “The itongo of our 
people has turned its back on us." They asked, “How is it 
that all our people have at length come to an end and not 
one man come back from the army?” 

If there is one who has escaped he says, “As for me I 
escaped, I know not how. The amatongo had decreed that 
we should all die; one man would not assent. When we 
were destroyed by the enemy where was he, I wonder? I 
escaped I know not how; I no longer expected to be saved 
when I saw all our people destroyed.” 

At first the people say, “The amatongo of our people are 
good for nothing! Why has the whole village perished? 

SKEPTICISM AND CRITIQUE 383 

How is it that they never mentioned anything to us that we 
might understand why they were angry? Where had the 
itongo of so-and-so gone? Why was he not among the other 
amatongo? Those who weep for the dead say thus. 

“And those who escaped say, ‘We have been saved by 
the amahlosi of our people.’ ” 7 

Again what better recognition of the difference be- 
tween our normal waking state and ecstasy can be 
demanded than this definition: “Ecstasy is a state in 
which a man becomes slightly insensible. He is awake 
but he still sees things which he would not see if he 
were not in a state of ecstasy.” 

As a final example I give the following Amazulu 
inquiry into the meaning of dreams: 

Among black men the real meaning of dreams is not 
known. For some dreams have every appearance of reality 
but they are not true; others again point out something 
which is about to happen. For among black men it is sup- 
posed that if a man dream of a great assembly where they 
are dancing, if there is anyone ill, we have no confidence 
that he will get well, but immediately the man who dreamt 
of the dance is much alarmed. 

But a dream which produces confidence among black 
men, when one is ill, is one in which they dream that some- 
one is dead. 

We do not understand how this happens. For as regards 
living and dying, it would appear proper that he who is 

1 Ibid., p. 129. 

384 PRIMITIVE MAN ^5 PHILOSOPHER 

about to die should die, if when he is ill people dream he 
is dead; and he who is about to live should live if people 
dream that he is well. But in truth I have seen both. 8 

We have now passed through the whole gamut of 
speculative philosophy and critical approach as 
vouched for among representative primitive people. 
In the face of this remarkable evidence which probably 
represents only a small portion of what is still to be 
obtained, it is manifestly unfair to contend that primi- 
tive people are deficient either in the power of abstract 
thought or in the power of arranging these thoughts in 
a systematic order, or, finally, of subjecting them and 
their whole environment to an objective critique. 

8 Ibid pp. 129-133. 

CHAPTER XX 

CONCLUSION 

I N our introduction, we pointed out that certain of 
the assumptions current in anthropological litera- 
ture to-day were arrived at more than fifty years ago, at 
a time when the older conception of the evolutionary 
process was making its triumphant procession through 
the intellectual world, and when our knowledge of 
primitive people was meager, one-sided, and largely 
erroneous. Within the last thirty years our material 
has increased to such a bulk that a new appraisal is 
not only urgent but obligatory. And this has been 
attempted from many sides. The foregoing chapters 
represent such an attempt made from a particular 
angle unusual in anthropology perhaps, but familiar 
enough to students of history and philosophy — the 
nature and the role of the intellectual in the 
community. 

No qualified observer of the customs of primitive 
man has ever denied the existence of thinkers among 
them. He may have discounted their views and dis- 
missed them as of no consequence, as having no per- 
ceptible influence on the attitude of the majority, but 
he has never denied their presence. Yet the preced- 
ing chapters will, I feel certain, convince even the most 

385 

$86 PRIMITIVE MAN AS PHILOSOPHER 

skeptical that to underestimate the contribution of 
these thinkers is a serious error, likely to distort our 
whole picture of the mentality of primitive man. Nor 
is this the only error arising from so superficial an atti- 
tude toward the culture of primitive peoples. A far 
larger question is involved. How are we ever to trace 
properly the development of thought and, more specifi- 
cally, that of our fundamental philosophical notions 
if we begin with false premises? If it can be shown 
that the thinkers among primitive peoples envisage life 
in philosophical terms, that human experience and the 
world around them have become subjects for reflection, 
that these ponderings and searchings have become em- 
bodied in literature and ritual, then obviously our cus- 
tomary treatment of cultural history, not to mention 
that of philosophical speculation, must be completely 
revised. 

Whether I have proved my contentions must be left 
for the reader to decide. There is not the slightest 
doubt in my own mind. It is not conceivable nor rea- 
sonable to suppose that material obtained in the origi- 
nal and translated by competent scholars is likely to 
be wrong, particularly when it is corroborated by 
statements contained in the ritual and the literature of 
primitive peoples. To those who would contend that 
the systematized philosophy found simply represents 
the influence of contact with Europeans and Oriental 
peoples during the last five hundred years, I would 
answer that this can, in many cases, be definitely dis- 
proved, and that even were it true, it would no more 

CONCLUSION 

387 

affect the real problem involved than the fact that 
Greek civilization influenced the rest of Western 
Europe. Indeed, it is from instances where we know 
European and Christian influence to have been defi- 
nitely present that our best evidence for the existence 
of thinkers, and for the philosophical quality of their 
thoughts, can be derived. In no Christian creed of 
which I am aware — certainly in none with which 
American Indians ever came in contact — has God, for 
instance, become equated with the soul, or has the 
doctrine of a pantheistic soul been evolved, or has 
Man become synonymous with his Thought. Yet, as 
we have seen in the preceding pages, such was the 
philosophy elaborated by a Winnebago Indian after 
his conversion to a semi-Christian religion. 

As we have stated the material must speak for itself. 
We must not, likewise, forget that our present data 
obviously represent only a fraction of what once ex- 
isted, or of what could still be obtained if attention 
were specifically directed to the subject. Only when 
we have obtained this will we realize completely how 
erroneous has been the older contention so unfortu- 
nately revived by Professor Levy-Bruhl’s well known 
but completely misleading work Les Fonctions Men- 
tales dans les SociStSs InfMeures, that the mentality 
of primitive man differs intrinsically from our own, 
and only then will we fully understand that what 
differentiates us from him is the written word and the 
technique of thinking elaborated on its basis. 

In conclusion, lest I be misunderstood, let me again 

388 PRIMITIVE MAN AS PHILOSOPHER 

emphasize the fact that it is not contended for one 
moment that what is contained in this book represents 
the viewpoint of the average man, or that of the over- 
whelming majority in any given primitive community. 
It is the thinker we have been describing and pre- 
dominatingly the thinker. 

APPENDIX 

THE SOURCES OF THE POEMS QUOTED 

All the poems quoted in this book represent accurate trans- 
lations from the original. With the exception of the cases 
indicated below the originals are also available. 

Page 103 

I. American Indian Lije, edited by E. C. Parsons and A. 
L. Kroeber, p. 19. Not available in original. 

II. Frances Densmore, Bulletin 53, Bureau American 
Ethnology, p. 89 

III. Ibid., p. 1 14 

IV. Johann Spieth, Die Religion der Eweer, p. 237 

Page 104 

V. John White, The Ancient History of the Maori, Vol. 
I, P- 35 

I. H. A. Junod, Les Chants et les Contes des Ba-Ronga, 
p. 51. Translated from French. 

II. Bureau of American Ethnology, 35th Report, p. 1292 

Page 106 

I. J. White, op. cit., Vol. I, p. 7 
Page 107 

II. W. W. Gill, Myths and Tales from the South Pacific, 
pp. 281-282 

III. J. Spieth, op. cit., p. 237 

Page 108 

IV. W. W. Gill, Darkness and Light in Polynesia, p. 220 

389 

390 

APPENDIX 

Page 110 

I. Edward Tregear, The Maori Race , p. 73 

II. J. C. Andersen, Maori Life in Aotea , pp. 61-62 

All the references used from this book represent 
quotations that Andersen has taken from the older 
sources, where they are either given in the original 
Maori or in translations by scholars who knew Maori 
very well. 

Page 112 

III. E. Tregear, op. cit., p. 75 
Page 116 

I. Edward Shortland, Traditions and Superstitions of the 
New Zealanders , pp. 178-181 

Page 117 

II. E. Shortland, op. cit., pp. 1 70-1 71 

III. Ibid., p. 1 71 

Page 118 

IV. Henry Rink, Tales and Traditions of the Eskimo, 

p. 67 

I. E. Shortland, op. cit., pp. 178-179 
Page 119 

II. Nathaniel B. Emerson, Bulletin 38, Bureau of Ameri- 
can Ethnology, p. 49 

III. Journal of the Polynesian Society, Vol. II, pp. 35-37 

Page 121 

IV. J. Wameck, Die Religion der Batak, pp. 69-70 

Translated from German. Not available in original. 

Page 122 

V. loid., p. 69. Translated from German. Not available 
in original. 

Page 123 

VI. J. C. Andersen, op. cit., p. 461 

APPENDIX 

39i 

Page 124 

VII. E. Shortland, op. tit., p. 184 
Page 125 

VIII. J. C. Andersen, op. tit., p. 116 
Page 126 

IX. J. White, op. tit., Vol. I, p. 178 
X. Ibid,., pp. 33-34 

XI. N. B. Emerson, op. tit., pp. 133-134 
Page 127 

XII. Ibid., p. 83 

Page 128 

XIII. J. R. Swanton, Bulletin 39, Bureau of American Eth- 

nology, p. 415 

XIV. Ibid., p. 415 

XV. F. Densmore, Bulletin 45, Bureau of American Eth- 

nology, p. 89 

XVI. E. Shortland, op. tit., p. 178 

Page 129 

XVII. Ibid., p. 180 

XVIII. F. Densmore, op. tit., pp. 151-152 

Page 130 

XIX. Ibid., p. 154 
XX. Ibid., p. 184 
XXI. E. Tregear, op. tit., p. 75 

Page 131 

XXII. N. B. Emerson, op. tit., p. 260 
XXIII. W. W. Gill, Myths and Songs of the South Pacific, 
p. 104 

Page 132 

XXIV. Ibid., p. 142 
XXV. Ibid., pp. 179-180 

Page 133 

XXVI. Smith and Dale, The Ila-Speaking Peoples of North- 
ern Rhodesia, Vol. II, p. 276 

392 

APPENDIX 

Page 134 

XXVII. Bureau of American Ethnology, 35th Report, p. 1306 
XXVIII. Journal of American Folklore, Vol. XVI, p. 205 
XXIX. Natalie Curtis, The Indian Book, p. 56 

Page 135 

I. H. Rink, op. cit., pp. 67-68 
Page 136 

II. Ibid., 68-69 

III. Journal of American Folklore, Vol. I, pp. 210-211 

IV. H. Junod, op. cit., p. 64. Translated from French. 

Page 137 

V. F. Boas, The Lkungen, British Association for the 
Advancement of Science, 1890 

VI. Richard Thurnwald, Forschungen auf den Salomo 
Inseln, p. 216. Translated from German. 

VII. Ibid., pp. 150-151 

Page 138 

I. E. Shortland, op. cit., p. 62 
Page 139 

II. J. C. Andersen, op. cit., p. 500 

III. E. Tregear, op. cit., p. 76 

Page 140 

I. Journal of American Folklore, Vol. XVI, pp. 205 ff. 

Not available in original. 

II. N. Curtis, op. cit., pp. 224 ff. 

III. Ibid., pp. 224#. 

Page 141 

IV. Ibid., p. 431 

V. Bulletin 45, Bureau of American Ethnology, p. 303 

VI. Bureau of American Ethnology, 35th Report, p. 1315 

Page 142 

VII. Ibid., p. 1315 

VIII. N. Curtis, op. cit., p. 104 

IX. Bureau of American Ethnology, 35th Report, p. 1311 

APPENDIX 

393 

Page 143 

X. J. R. Swanton, American Ethnological Society, Vol. 

HI, p. 5 

XI. Ibid., p. 27 

I. N. Curtis, op. cit., p. 50 

II. F. Densntore, op. cit., p. 120 

Page 144 

III. Ibid., p. 185 

IV. Ibid., p. 185 

V. J. Spieth, op. cit., p. 287 

VI. Ibid., p. 287 

Page 145 

VII. Ibid., p. 287 
V T II. N. Curtis, op. cit., p. 50 

IX. H. Junod, op. cit., p. 39. Translated from French. 

Page 146 

X. R. Thurnwald, op. cit., p. 37 
Page 147 

XI. Ibid., pp. 221-224 

XII. Bureau of American Ethnology, 35th Report, pp. 
1298 ff. 

Page 149 

XIII. Ibid., pp. 1301 ff. 

Page 212 

I. N. B. Emerson, op. cit., pp. 43-44 
Page 214 

II. F. Russell, Bureau of American Ethnology, 23rd Re- 
port, p. 294 

III. Ibid., p. 299 

Page 215 

IV. Ibid., p. 302 

V. Ibid., p. 307 

VI. Ibid., p. 292 

394 

APPENDIX 
Page 216 

Vtl. Ibid., p. 317 

VIII. Ibid., p. 319 

Page 217 

IX. N. B. Emerson, op. cit., pp. 43-44 

X. Ibid., pp. 45-46 

Page 218 

XI. Frank La Flesche, Bureau of American Ethnology, 
39th Report, pp. 74-79 

Page 220 

XII. S. Percy Smith, “The Lore of the Whare Wanaga,” 
Memoirs of the Polynesian Society, Vol. Ill, pp. 
93-94 

Page 221 

XIII. F. Densmore, Bulletin 53, Bureau of American Eth- 

nology, p. 254 

Page 222 

XIV. N. Curtis, op. cit., p. 304 

XV. N. B. Emerson, op. cit., p. 89 

Page 223 

XVI. F. Russell, op. cit., p. 322 
Page 224 

XVII. Ibid., p. 284 

XVIII. W. Skeat and C. Blagden, The Pagan Tribes of the 
Malay Peninsula, Vol. II, p. 129 

Page 225 

XIX. W. W. Gill, Darkness and Light in Polynesia, p. 129 

INDEX 

“ Absent One, The,” 134 
Action, primitive man of, 230 
Activities, practical, primitive 
life envisaged as, 18 
Alphabet, effect of absence of, 
on primitive man, 60-62 
Animism, 343 
“Anxiety,” 1 22-1 23 
Aphorisms on life and man, 
152-169 . 

Arizona, Pima Indians of, 24- 
27 

Baganda, proverbs of, 155-157 
Ba-ila, Southeastern Africa, 
poems of, 133; proverbs of, 
IS3-IS5; supreme deity of, 
339-341 

Balengi, Central Africa, poems 
of, 140 

Ba-Ronga, Southeastern Af- 
rica, poems of, 104, 136, 
145 

Batak, Sumatra, poems of, 
121-122, 122-123 
Best, Elsdon E., no, 113, 253 
Body, interpretation of, 262- 
264 

“Bright Dawn Appears in the 
Heavens, The,” 224 
Buin, Melanesia, poems of, 
137, 138, 146, 147 

Callaway, Bishop, 351 - 354 , 
381 

Causes, predication of, by 
primitive man, 30 
Chanson de Roland , 173, 174 
“Chant of the Symbolic Col- 
ors, The,” 218-220 
Cid, El, 173, 174 
Codrington, 253-254 
Coercion of world, 19-40 
Concentration, religions, 85, 
86 

Conclusion, 385-388 
Conservatism and plasticity, 
41-52 

Cosmogony, primitive, 293 
Crashing Thunder, 65-67, 86- 
89 

Creation, order of, 301-302; 

primitive theory of, 356 
Creator, The, 347 ff. 

Critics, absence of, in primi- 
tive tribes, 43-46 

395 

396 

INDEX 

Critique and skepticism, 375^- 
3 8 4 

Crow, Montana, poems of, 
103, 142 

Culture, types of activity in, 

13 

Dead, land of, 113 

Death, 97-114; life after, 113; 

poems of, 103-113 
Deity, otiose, 354 
Dennett, R. E., 334 
“Deserted Husband, The,” 
119-121 

Direct question, value of, in 
ethnological investigations, 
15, 16 

“Discourses on God,” 287 
Disease-Giver, 51 
Doom, contrasted with trag- 
edy, 175-176; primitive 
conception of, 207 
Dualism, 344 

Earthmaker, 362-364 
Ecstasy, definition of, 383 
Ego, constituents of, 261; 
definition of, 269-273; na- 
ture of, 257-264; place of 
in primitive life, 259-262; 
primitive picture of, 263- 
264; relation of to world, 
248 

“Envy,” 145 
Epic myths, 173 ff. 
Epicureanism, 109 

Eskimo, poems of, 118, 135, 
136 

Ethics, primitive, based on 
behavior, 72, 73 

Ethnological data, how dealt 
with, 3 

Ethnologists, false assump- 
tions of, 47, 48, 57; quali- 
fications of, 11 

Ethnology, status of, as a sci- 
ence, 2 

Evolution, religious, 367-370 

Evolutionism, primitive, 294- 
295, 320 

Ewe, Western Africa, poems 
of, 103, 106, 107, 108, 144, 
145 

Explicit monotheism, rarity 
among primitive peoples, 
37i 

External world and analysis of 
reality, 229-256 

“Farewell Forever!” 1 23-1 24 
“Farewell to Life,” 104 
“Farewell to My Native 
Land,” 1 24-1 25 

“Farewell to Our Land,” 225- 
226 

“Faster,” Winnebago tale of, 
178, 194, 203-205 
Fasting, among Winnebago, 
9 X "93 

Fatalism, Malay, 99 
Fate, 97-114 

Flirtation, poems of, 116-118 
“Forever Severed Is Our 
Love,” 125 

INDEX 

397 

Freedom of thought, 53-62; 
significance of among primi- 
tive peoples, 58 
“Friendship,” 145 

God, nature of, 329 ff.; primi- 
tive definition of, 335-341 
Gossip, innocuousness of, 78 
Gossips, primitive peoples as, 
77 

Gray, C. Buchanan, 368 
“Great Magician, The,” 144 
Group, attitude of primitive 
tribe toward, 42, 43, 46; 
beliefs in ethnology, 4; 
mind of, 36; tyranny of, 35, 
36 

“Habits of Woman, The,” 
117 

Haida, British Columbia, 
poems of, 143 

Happiness, attainment of, 
90 

Hatred, poems of, 138-140 

Hawaii, creation chant of, 
298-300; poems of, 1 1 9, 
126-128, 131, 212-214, 216- 
218, 222-223; proverbs of, 
164-166 

Higher aspects of primitive 
thought, 229 ft. 

Hopi, Arizona, poem of, 222 

Human nature, knowledge of, 
32 

Humility, importance of, 84, 
85 

Ideal man, the, 76-96 
Ideas, systematization of, 292- 
328 

Identification, absence of, 79 
Iliad, 173, 174, 196 
Immutability, theory of, 48, 
49; and magical rites, 49 
Individual differences among 
primitive peoples, 4, 5 
Individuality, of primitive 
man, 37, 38; respect for, 
79-81 

Individuation, outer and in- 
ner, 34 

Integration, 40; in primitive 
culture, 52 

Intellectual class among prim- 
itive peoples, 5 
Introduction, 1-7 
Investigators, errors of, 63 
Inward purification, 82, 83 

Jung, Carl G., 39, 63 

Kiowa, Oklahoma, poems of, 
140 

Kwakiutl, British Columbia, 
poems of, 105, 13a 141, 

142, 147-151 

“Lament, A,” 131-132 
“Lament for a Child,” 133 
“Land Is on Fire, The,” 222- 
223 

“Land Is Parched and Burn- 
ing, The,” 223-224 

39 » 

INDEX 

Lang, Andrew, 345, 346, 371 
Latins, feeling toward, 13 
Levy-Bruhl, 28, 29, 230, 231, 
246, 387 

Life, aphorisms on, 152-161; 
Ba-ila definition of, 99-101; 
Ewe definition of, 101, 102; 
philosophy of, 97-1 14 ; primi- 
tive view of, 11-18; tragic 
sense of, 170-207; Winne- 
bago definition of, 102 
Lkungen, British Columbia, 
poems of, 137 

Love, degree of insisted on, 
73, 74; poems of, 118-134 
“Love Song of Taskedek,” 
149; answers to, 149-151 
“Love Song of the Dead,” 
134 

Lullabies, 140-143 
“Lullaby,” 130 

Magic, therapeutic side to, 
2S9 

Maidu, creation legend of, 
238-240 

Man, aphorisms on, 152-161; 
as automaton, 41, 42; ideal, 
the, 76-96; of action, primi- 
tive, 230 ff. ; mental rhythm 
of, 233; myth of, 233-235; 
predominance of, 231; reli- 
gious beliefs of, 240-241; 
task of, 248; viewpoint of, 
241-247 

Mangaia, Polynesia, poems of, 
107, 108, 109, 131-132, 132- 
1 33, 225-226 

Maori, New Zealand, creation 
myth of, 303-320; creation 
story of, 293-297; poems of, 
104, 106, 110-113, 116, 117, 
118, 119, 123-126, 128-129, 
130, 138-140, 171-172, 220- 
221; proverbs of, 166-168 
Masai, proverbs of, 157-158 
Matter, theory of, 324-325 
Medicine Dance, Winnebago, 
86-89, 94, 207 
Medicines, use of, 76, 77 
Men, and women, 115-151 
Mental rhythm, of man of 
action, 232; of thinker, 233 
Mentality, prelogical, 230, 
246; primitive, 148. 
Modern Aztec, Mexico, poems 

of, 134 

Mohammedanism, 99 
Monolatry, 367 
Monotheism, definition of, 
342-343; interpretation of, 
364; primitive, 342-374 
Monotheistic tendencies, 342- 
374 

Monotheists, 366 
Mysticism, 208-226; signifi- 
cance of, 208; overempha- 
sis upon by theorists, 209- 
212 

Nature, of ego and of human 
personality, 257-264; of 
God, 329-341 

Negrito, Malay Peninsula, 
poem of, 224-225 
Nibelungenlied, 173, 174, 196 

INDEX 

399 

“No One Desires You,” 136 
Northerner and southerner, 
opposition of, 14 

Objective world, sense of, 31 
Oglala, Sioux, poems of, 134, 
143 , 145 

Ojibwa, poems of, 103, 128, 
129, 130, 141, 143, 144, 221 
“Old Love,” 131 
“Old Warrior, The,” 143 
Osage, Oklahoma, poem of, 
218-220 

Overfasting, 177 

Pantheism, 358 

Participation mystique , 230, 
246 

Pawnee, creation poems of, 
360-362 

“People Always Call Me, 
The,” 145 

“Persistent Wooer, The,” 147 

Personalism, 38, 53 

Personality, nature of, 257- 
264; recognition of, 59 

Philosophers, primitive, 248, 
249, 252; scarcity of, 275- 
276 

Philosophy of Life, 97-114 

Pima, Arizona, poems of, 214- 
216, 223-224 

Plasticity and conservatism, 
41-52 

Poems, miscellaneous, 143- 
151; sources of, 389-394 

Polytheism, 344 

Power, magical, 253-256 
“Prayer to Kane, A,” 217-218 
Prelogical mentality, 18 
Prestige hunting, 33, 34, 50, 
173; primitive devotion to, 
48 

“Priest’s Prayer to Pupil 
about to be Admitted to In- 
struction,” 220-221 
Primitive absorption in sensa- 
tions, 11, 12, 19 
Primitive attitude toward 
group, 42, 43 

Primitive life, importance of 
religion in, 28; psychologi- 
cal orientation of, 23, 29 
Primitive man, ability of to 
formulate ethical creed, 69, 
70 ; accountability for harm- 
ful actions, 32, 33; emo- 
tional nature of, 364-365; 
sense of reality of, 19, 21, 
27, 31; viewpoint of, 34, 
35 

Primitive mentality, 14 ff. 
Primitive peoples, difficulty of 
study of, 3, 14; individual 
differences among, 4, 5; in- 
tellectual class among, 5 ; 
introduction to study of, 
1-7; study of, by amateurs, 1 
Primitive thought, dualism of, 
273; higher aspects of, 
229 ff. 

Primitive view of life, 11-18 
Ponka, Nebraska, poems of, 
136 

Proportion, sense of, 90, 91, 
93, 177 

400 

INDEX 

Proverbs, Baganda, 155-157; 
Ba-ila, 153-155; Hawaiian, 
164-166; Maori, 166-168; 
Masai, 157-158; Samoan, 
159-164; significance of 
among primitive thinkers, 
169 

Psychotherapy, 258, 259 
Purification, inward, 82, 83 

Qualifications of ethnologists 
and scholars, 11 
Question, direct, value of in 
ethnological investigations, 
15, 16 

Reality, 60 ff.; analysis of and 
external world, 229-256; as 
defined by primitive man of 
action, 246; conception of 
as pragmatic, 35; orienta- 
tion of, 242; pragmatic, 29, 
244; primitive analysis of, 
229-256; sense of in primi- 
tive man, 19, 21, 27, 31; 
social, of primitive man, 37 
Religion, evolution of, 344 ; 
of Bavili, 334-335; of Og- 
lala Dakota, 329-334; sig- 
nificance of magical power 
in, 253-256 
Resignation, 97-114 
Revolt against society, non- 
existence of in primitive 
life, 43-46 

Rhythm, mental, of man of 
action, 232; of thinker, 233 

Ridicule, fear of, 49, 50, 51, 

77 

Right and wrong, 63-75 
Russell, Frank, 24-27 

Samoa, proverbs of, 159-164 
Satire, poems of, 135-138 
Scholars, qualifications of, 11 
“Seer,” Winnebago tale of, 
178, 194, 196-199, 206; 
analysis of, 199-203 
Self-assertion, 35 
Self-control, 64, 94-96 
Self-discipline, 64 
Sensations, primitive absorp- 
tion in, 11, 12, 19 
Sense of life, tragic, 170-207 
“She and He,” 117 
Skepticism and critique, 375- 

384 

Soderblom, N., 370 
“Song Written by a Man Who 
Was Jilted by a Young 
Woman,” 147-148; retort 
to, 148 

Sources, of poems quoted, 
389-394 

Southerner and northerner, 
opposition of, 14 
Speculation, and originality, 
289; for its own sake, 275- 
291; influence of Christian- 
ity on, 276, 281 
Spieth, Johann, 287 
“Strife of Savadlak and Pu- 
langitsissok, The,” 135 
Sun, as supreme deity, 348 
Supreme deity, female, 357 

INDEX 

401 

Symbolism, 208-226, 371; 

overemphasis upon by theo- 
rists, 209-212 ; significance 
of, 208 

Symbols, bodily organs as, 274 
Systematization of ideas, 292- 
328 

Tahiti, creation chant of, 297- 
298 

Temperaments, two general 
types of, 230, 241 
“Temptress, The,” 146 
Theories, tribal, 258 
“There Are Plenty of Men,” 
137 

Things, nature of, 320; primi- 
tive theory of, 321-324 
Thinker, primitive, 230 ff. ; 
mental rhythm of, 233; 
myth of, 235-237; poem of, 
237-238; religious beliefs 
of, 240-241; task of, 248; 
urge of toward analysis, 
237; viewpoint of, 247 ff. 
“Thou Hast Deserted Me, My 
Prince,” 121-122 
Thought, among primitive 
people, 58, 59; concretiza- 
tion of, 61; deification of, 
59; freedom of, 53-62 
Tlingit, Alaska, poems of, 128 
Tonga, Polynesia, poems of, 
119-121 

Tough-mindedness, 19, 20, 21 
Tragedy, ascribed to inner 
conflict, 1 74-1 76 ; concep- 
tion of by primitive man, 

207; contrasted with doom, 
175-176 

Tragic sense of life, 170-207; 
revealed in myths, 1728. 

Transformer, The, 347 ff. 

“Traveller” tale of Winneba- 
go, 174, 179-185, 200, 206; 
analysis of, 185-195; hero 
of, 178; theme of, 176; 
tragic ending of inevitable, 
194 

Trinity, disquisition on, 289- 
291 

“Twins,” Winnebago myth of, 
177, 192 

Unamuno, Miguel de, 171 

Variants, attribute of group 
toward, 54; significance of, 
S 3 

Vikaukam, 25 

Wakan Tanka, 329-334 
Walker, James, 254, 265, 276- 
277, 279 

“Water of Kane, The,” 212- 
214 

“We Must Part,” 134 
“Whither Has She Gone?” 

132-133 

“Wild Gingerplant, The,” 224- 
225 

Will-to-power, 34 
Winnebago, 64, 81, 82; ethi- 
cal creed of, 199, 200, 207; 

402 

INDEX 

“Faster” tale of, 178, 194. 
203-205 ; Medicine Dance 
of, 207; myths of, 171^-; 
passages from texts of, 65, 
66; secession among, 44, 
45; “Seer” tale of, 178, 194, 
196-203, 206; “Traveller” 
tale of, 174, 176, 178, 179- 
195, 200, 206; “Twins” 

myth of, 177, 192 
Women, and men, 115-151 
Word, written, 59 

World, external, and analysis 
of reality, 229-256 
World, coercion of, 19-40 
Written word, 59 
Wrong and right, 63-75 

“Yellow Butterflies,” 222 

Zuni, New Mexico, poems of, 
141
